•.  '/;• 


X 


■\  ^-. 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses    of   the    Bible 


v 
Rev.  JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


THE  PSALMS.     Vol.  I. 


1 

[y^^V^^^'^ 


-Af-' 


v^%((;a!Sj52i^ 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming   H.    Revell   Company 

LoNDOIf     AND     EorrrBURGH 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PSALMS. 

TiTvaa.—Book  of  Praise:— I.  The  Hebrew  title  is  "Tehillim"  (plnral  of 
"Tehillab,"  praise  or  hymn),  Praises  or  Songs  of  Praise;  or  "Sepher  Tehillim," 
Book  of  Praise,  expressive  of  the  character  and  object  of  the  book,  namely,  "to 
declare  the  Glory  of  God."  2,  The  title  given  in  New  Testament  (Luke  xx.  42; 
Acta  i.  20)  is  "Book  of  Psalms,"  and  in  all  Christian  versions  it  is  the  same,  <x 
collectively  "The  Psalter,"  a  name  derived  from  a  musical  stringed  instrument 
(1  Kings  X.  12)  made  of  wood,  in  the  style  of  a  harp  and  in  shape  like  a  Greek  delta. 
{E.  J.  Boyce.)  Prayers: — Another  name,  given  not  to  the  whole  Psalter,  but  to 
a  portion  of  it,  is  "Tephilloth,"  Prayers.  At  the  end  of  Psalm  Ixxii.  there  is 
appended  a  notice,  which  applies  probably  to  the  whole  collection  up  to  that  point, 
"The  Prayers  of  David,  the  son  of  Jesse,  are  ended"  ;  and  in  the  later  Books  a  few 
other  Psalms  (Ixxxvi.,  xc,  cii.,  cxlii.)  are  entitled  "  Prayers."  The  title  is  justified 
by  the  contents  of  most  of  the  Psalms.  Psalms,  it  is  true,  like  i.,  ii.,  xxxiii., 
xxxvii.,  contain  no  address  to  God  ;  and  many  others,  which  contain  petitions  and 
supplications,  are  not  throughout  in  the  form  of  prayers.  And  yet,  if  prayer  be  the 
eye  of  the  heart  turned  towards  God,  then  each  Psalm  is  a  prayer.  Thus  the  very 
names  of  the  Psalms,  "Praises  and  Prayers,"  not  only  tell  us  what  they  are,  but 
remind  us  "in  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  to  make 
known  our  requests  unto  God."    {Bishop  Peronme. ) 

Divisions. — We  are  accustomed  to  speak  as  if  the  Psalter  were  a  single  book ; 
but,  accurately,  it  is  five  books  drawn  up  at  different  times  and  placed  aide  by  side. 
In  Revised  Version  this  division  is  rightly  maintained,  and  even  in  Authorised 
Version  it  may  be  traced  by  means  of  the  doxology  with  which  each  book  closes. 
Book  I.  comprises  Psalms  i.-xli. ;  Book  II.,  xlii.-lxxii. ;  Book  III.,  IxxiiL-lxxxix. ; 
Book  IV,,  xc.-cvi.  ;  Book  V.,  cvii.-cl.  There  is  some  reason  to  believe,  however, 
that  originally  the  books  were  three,  and  that  they  were  altered  into  five  in 
imitation  of  the  Pentateuch;  the  original  divisions  being — (1)  i.-xli.,  (2)  xlii.-lxxxix., 
(3)  xc.-cl.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  books  were  compiled  in  the  order  in 
which  they  come  down  to  us ;  yet  we  are  not  to  imagine  that  all  the  early  Psalma 
were  comprised  in  the  first  book,  and  none  but  late  Psalms  in  the  fifth.  An  analogy 
with  "Hymns  Ancient  and  Modern"  may  help  us  here,  A  few  years  ago  an 
appendix  was  issued,  and  this  contains  many  hymns  written  since  the  first  edition 
was  published  ;  but  also  it  goes  over  exactly  the  same  ground  as  the  original  edition, 
and  contains  a  sprinkling  of  ancient  hymns.  It  is  tolerably  certain  that  originally 
the  compilations  were  distinct,  and  that  the  various  editors  worked  quite  inde- 
pendently. This  is  shown  by  the  remarkable  fact  that  the  same  Psalms,  with  slight 
variations,  occur  more  than  once,  just  as  nowadays  we  may  find  the  same  hymn, 
with  or  without  a  slight  change,  in,  say,  "Hymns  Ancient  and  Modem"  and  "The 
Hymnal  Companion,"  Thus  Psalm  liii,  in  Book  II.  is  the  same  as  Psabn  xiv,  in 
Book  I.,  and  Psalm  Ixx.  the  same  as  vers.  13-17  of  Psalm  xl.  And  in  Book  V. 
Psalm  cviii.  consists  of  five  verses  of  Psalm  Ivii,,  added  to  six  verses  of  Psalm  Ix., 
these  verses,  of  course,  belonging  to  Book  II.  Clearly,  if  the  compilers  of  the  later 
books  were  endeavouring  merely  to  supplement  the  earlier  they  would  never  have 
incorporated  into  their  collections  Psalms  which  they  knew  had  already  appeared. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PSALMS, 


Another  proof  of  the  independence  of  the  various  compilations  is  found  in  the  fact  of 
the  varying  use  of  the  two  names  of  God — Jehovah  and  Elohim.  It  would  appear 
that  there  were  periods  when  one  name  was  customarily  in  use,  and  periods  when 
opinion  favoured  the  other  name.  Thus  in  Book  I.  Jehovah  occurs  nearly  twenty 
times  as  often  as  Elohim ;  in  Book  II.  Elohim  five  times  as  often  as  Jehovah ;  in 
Books  IV.  and  V.  the  name  Jehovah  alone  occurs.  And  the  curious  thing  is,  that  if 
the  Elohim  editor  incorporated  any  Psalm  or  part  of  a  Psalm  from  a  book  which 
prefers  to  speak  of  God  as  Jehovah,  he  deliberately  changes  the  name  to  Elohim. 
These  facts  help  us  to  see  clearly  what  the  history  of  the  Psalms  has  been.  The 
several  books  were  plainly  quite  independent  collections  of  praise-songs,  made  at 
different  periods,  and  based  upon  a  still  larger  number  of  compilations.  About 
150  B.C.  an  editor  placed  the  five  books  side  by  side,  and  perhaps  added  Psalm  cL 
as  a  kind  of  final  doxology.     {A.  M.  Mackay,  B.A.) 

Age  and  Atjthokship. — A  large  proportion  of  the  Psalms  are  connected,  in  the 
titles  prefixed,  with  the  names  of  various  individuals,  namely,  Moses  (1),  David 
(73),  Solomon  (2),  the  sons  of  Korah  (11,  including  one  to  which  the  name  of 
Heman  is  also  attached),  Asaph  (12),  and  Ethan  (1)  ;  whilst  of  the  Psalms  bearing 
the  name  of  David,  some  are  associated  with  particular  incidents  in  his  lifetime. 
But  the  contents  of  many  of  these  last  are  inconsistent  with  the  statements  in  the 
titles.  In  V.  7,  xxvii.  4,  and  Ixv.  4  the  allusion  to  a  temple  does  not  suit  David's 
reign.  In  li.,  which  in  the  title  is  brought  into  relation  with  David's  intrigue  with 
Bathsheba,  the  writer  is  conscious  (ver.  4)  of  sin  against  God  only  (not  man),  and 
the  closing  verses  are  a  prayer  for  the  building  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  Psalm 
zzxiv.,  assigned  to  the  time  when  David  feigned  madness  at  the  court  of  Gath 
(1  Sam.  xxi.  13),  is  avowedly  intended  to  give  instruction  "in  the  fear  of  Jehovah." 
In  lix.,  which  the  title  connects  with  Saul's  attempt  to  kill  David  at  his  own  house 
(1  Sam.  xix.  11),  the  prayer  to  God  to  arise  and  visit  the  nations  (vers.  5,  8)  is 
inappropriate  to  the  supposed  situation.  In  these  cases  the  value  of  the  titles  is 
discredited,  and  doubt,  in  consequence,  is  cast  upon  others  which  are  not  so  obviously 
in  error.  The  internal  evidence,  however,  though  sufficing  to  disprove  many  of  the 
conclusions  expressed  in  the  titles,  is  for  the  most  part  too  vague  to  supply  others  as 
precise  but  more  correct.  Nevertheless,  there  is  great  probability  that  some  Psalms 
proceed  from  David,  though  much  uncertainty  as  to  which  they  are, — xviii.  and  xxiv. 
perhaps  having  as  good  a  claim  as  any  to  be  considered  his.  Others,  by  their 
allusions  to  the  king,  may  have  been  composed  at  any  time  within  the  period  of  the 
monarchy  (ii.,  xx.,  xxi.,  xlv.,  Ixi.,  Ixiii.,  Ixxii.);  and  to  these  should  be  added 
xlvii.-xlviii.,  Ixxv.,  Ixxvi.,  the  language  of  which,  though  more  or  less  suitable  to 
any  occasion  when  the  nation  had  experienced  a  great  deliverance,  is  peculiaily 
appropriate  to  the  time  of  Sennacherib's  overthrow  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah.  Many 
are  fixed,  by  their  allusions  to  the  captive  and  distressed  condition  of  the  people 
and  the  desolation  of  the  temple,  to  the  Exile,  or  to  some  later  calamity  like  the  per- 
secution by  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (168  B.C.),  which  roused  the  resistance  of  the 
Maccabees  (Ixxiv.,  Ixxix.,  Ixxx.,  Ixxxix.).  Psalm  cxxvi.  expresses  the  outburst  of 
joy  excited  by  the  return  from  captivity ;  whilst  Ixxxv.  seems  to  reflect  the  de- 
spondency which  afterwards  supervened.  A  certain  number  of  Psalms  are  liturgical 
in  character  (cxv.,  cxxxv.),  and  these  must  proceed  from  times  when  the  temple 
services  were  carefully  organised.  It  is  not,  however,  improbable  that  many  which 
exhibit  traces  of  late  origin  contain  an  earlier  nucleus,  old  material  having  been 
adapted  to  subsequent  needs.  The  alterations  and  combinations  to  which  writings 
of  this  kind  were  liable  is  clearly  evidenced  by  a  comparison  of  cviii.  with  Ivii.  and 
Ix.,  and  of  Lxx.  with  xl.  {Q.  W.  Wade,  D.D.)  Are  there  any  Davidic  Psalms? 
I  can  only  say  frankly  that  I  am  unable  to  answer  Yes,  and  am  not,  with  my  present 
light,  willing  to  say  No.  My  reluctance  is  not  due  to  hesitation  to  accept  the 
demonstrated  results  of  criticism,  but  to  my  uncertainty  whether  there  may  not  be 
Davidic  Psalms,  or  fragments,  in  the  collection  which  later  ages  looked  upon  as  so 
surely  a  production  of  the  Bethlehemite  king.  1.  The  earliest  germane  testimony  is 
in  Amos  vi.  5,  which  shows  that  David  was  famed  as  an  inventor  of  musical  in- 
struments ;  but  it  is  secular  music  which  is  referred  to,  and  the  devising  of  these 
instruments  is  mentioned  as  a  reproach.  2.  Ancient  testimony  shows  that  David 
was  a  skilled  player,  but  says  nothing  about  his  singing  or  composing  (1  Sam. 
xvi.  18).  3.  Nevertheless,  David  was  a  poet  (2  Sam.  i.  19-27,  iii.  38,  34).  4.  But 
the  Davidic  poetry  in  Samuel  is  altogether  unlike  the  poetiy  in  the  Psalms.  The 
lament  over  Saul  and  Jonathan  offered  a  fine  opportunity  for  the  expression  of 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PSALMS.  Tii 

religions  emotion,  but  the  poem  expresses  only  human  feelings.  The  assured 
Davidic  poetry  corresponds  to  nis  musical  instruments  in  its  secular  character.  This 
is  the  more  remarkable  because  David  was  intensely  religious.  5.  True,  David  is 
called  in  2  Sam.  xxiiL  1,  "  The  sweet  Psalmist  of  Israel " ;  but  the  passage  ia 
obscure  in  the  originaL  0.  It  is  difficult,  with  any  degree  of  confidence,  to  assign 
individoal  Psalms  to  David  ;  for  the  internal  evidence  rarely  agrees  with  his  date  or 
bia  Ufe.  Ewald  assigned  about  a  dozen  Psalms,  or  parts  of  Psalms,  to  David ;  but 
since  his  day  the  tendency  of  critical  opinion  has  steadily  been  growing  less  favour- 
able  to  the  theory  of  Davidio  authorship.  {L.  W.  Batten,  Ph.D. )  None  of  the 
extant  Psalms  are  the  genuine  work  of  David,  who  was  doubtless  a  gifted  musician 
and  poet,  but  whose  hymns  were  probably  too  little  in  accordance  with  later  ideas 
of  art  and  of  religion  to  escape  the  great  literary  as  weU  as  political  catastrophe  of 
the  Exile.  Contrast  the  life  of  David  in  the  Books  of  Samuel  with  the  character 
sketched,  evidently  from  life,  in  the  so-called  Davidic  Psalms.  Granting  that  David 
lived  in  the  service  of  an  ideal  which  he  sought,  but  often  failed,  to  realise,  could 
that  ideal  have  agreed  with  the  picture  presented  to  us  in  the  Psalter  ?  How  much 
is  there  in  the  tone  or  the  ideas  or  the  implied  circumstances  of  the  Psalms  which 
agrees  with  the  tone  or  ideas  of  the  traditional  speeches  of  David  and  with  his 
traditional  history  ?  Enough,  perhaps,  to  permit  us  to  regard  him  as  a  far-oflf 
adumbration  of  the  nobler  members  of  the  post-exilic  Church,  and  therefore  also  of 
Him  who  was  the  "root  and  offspring  of  David"  (Rev,  xxii.  16),  but  scarcely  more 
than  this.  David  was,  in  fact,  the  traditional  founder  of  psalmody,  and  to  some 
extent  a  precursor  of  the  religion  of  the  Psalter.  Perhaps,  too,  Psalms  which  David 
really  wrote  may  have  been  expanded  by  later  writers.  {T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.) 
In  my  judgment  the  evidence  of  tradition  forces  us  to  assign  to  David  an  important 
part  in  the  development  not  merely  of  secular,  but  also  of  religious  lyric  poetry, 
between  which  the  line  that  we  now  draw  did  not  exist  in  the  earlier  times.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  think  it  not  improbable  that  Davidic  Psalms  have  been  so  edited, 
adapted,  added  to,  and  subtracted  from  in  the  course  of  the  centuries  that  it  is 
doubtful  whether  we  can  hope  ever  certainly  to  identify  his  handiwork.  {J.  P. 
Peters,  D.D.)  That  some  of  the  Psalms  are  of  a  composite  character  is  certain, 

and  this  would,  in  any  case,  make  it  more  difficult  to  detect  the  authors.  Even  in 
"  Hymns  Ancient  and  Modern,"  if  we  look  at  the  list  of  writers,  we  find  some  hymns 
due  to  several  hands.  Thus  "  Oft  in  danger  "  is  by  Henry  Kirk  White,  F.  F. 
Maitland,  and  others  ;  "  Brightly  gleams  our  Banner  "  was  written  by  J.  T.  Potter, 
and  altered  by  an  unknown  hand  ;  several  hymns  have  been  changed  or  added  to  by 
the  compilers,  and  so  forth.  We  find  the  same  peculiarities  in  the  Psalter.  In  some 
oases  new  Psalms  have  been  composed  by  taking  verses  of  two  previous  compositions 
and  piecing  them  together.  Psalm  cviii.,  e.g.,  is  made  out  of  verses  from  Ivii.  and 
be.  Just  as  in  the  Borne  of  to-day  comparatively  modern  buildings  contain  stones 
which  may  have  formed  part  successively  of  the  Rome  of  the  ancient  EepubUc,  the 
Rome  of  the  Christian  emperors,  and  the  Rome  of  the  mediaeval  popes,  even  so 
verses  in  the  Psalms  have  been  embedded  in  successive  strata  of  Psalmody.  Thus 
Psalm  cxliv.  is  a  perfect  mosaic.  The  first  eleven  verses  contain  the  following 
quotations:  Psalm  xviii  1,  2,  34,  47,  viii.  4,  xviii.  9,  14,  15,  16,  50,  xxxix.  5,  6, 
lii.  2,  zxxiii.  2,  8  ;  in  fact,  there  is  hardly  a  word  that  is  not  borrowed  ;  then 
foUow  four  verses  which  form  in  reality  a  qvute  distinct  poem,  and  can  hardly  be 
made  to  blend  with  what  precedes  them  by  any  legerdemain, — indeed.  Bishop 
Perowne  abandons  the  attempt,  and  prints  these  verses  separately.  If  we  consider 
these  facts  we  see  how  hopeless  must  be  the  endeavour  to  discover  the  names  of 
authors.  And  it  is  just  as  well  that  the  Psalms  should  be  disconnected  from  names 
and  circumstances,  for  thus  we  learn  that  their  teaching  is  of  universal  application, 
and  that  they  express  the  aspirations  and  emotions  not  of  this  man  and  that  man, 
but  of  all  humanity.     (A.  M.  Mackay,  B.A.) 

HisTOBicAL  Inscriptions. — These  are  especially  frequent  in  the  first  half  of  the 
collection  designated  "Prayers  of  David"  (li.-lxxiiL).  An  examination  of  these 
headings  will  show  that  they  were  taken  from  the  historical  books,  and  that  the 
Psalms  bear  on  the  whole  no  relation  to  the  events  referred  to.  Apparently  the 
title  "Prayers  of  David"  suggested  to  some  Jewish  scholar,  who  understood  the 
title  literally,  to  connect  them  with  David's  history  as  related  in  the  books  of 
Samuel.  He  did  not  go  all  through  the  "  Prayers  of  David"  in  this  manner,  but 
only  through  the  first  half  (li.-lxiii.).  Afterwards  his  unfinished  work  found  admirers, 
and  his  proposed  identifications  were  placed  at  the  heads  of  the  Psalms  he  had 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  PSALMS. 


annotated.  In  the  first  Book  of  Psalms,  the  Psalter  of  David,  there  are  also  three 
Psalms  (iii.,  vii.,  xviii.)  with  historical  headings.  Psalm  xviii.  appears  again  in  the 
Book  of  Samuel,  and  its  position  there  explains  its  title.  Given  the  belief  that 
David  wrote  Psabn  iii.,  the  reason  of  the  present  heading  is  apparent.  Whence  the 
heading  of  Psalm  vii.  is  derived,  or  what  is  the  event  or  individual  referred  to,  has 
not  yet  been  made  out.  There  are,  further,  one  or  two  Psalms  near  the  close  of  the 
whole  collection  (cxxxix.,  cxl.,  cxlii.)  which  have  liturgical  directions  like  those  in 
the  first  part  of  the  Psalter.  These  belong  to  a  small  collection  of  late  date,  entitled 
"  Psalms  of  David,"  consisting  of  Psalms  cxxxviii.-cxlv.,  which  appear  to  have  been 
modelled  after  and  to  have  borrowed  their  headings,  already  unintelligible,  from  the 
"  Psalms  of  David  "  in  the  older  Psalter.  {J.  P.  Peters,  D.D.)  The  inscriptions 
of  the  Psalms  are  like  the  subscriptions  to  the  New  Testament  Epistles.  They  are 
not  of  any  necessary  authority,  and  their  value  must  be  weighed  and  tested  by  the 
usual  critical  processes.     {Bishop  Perowne. ) 

Musical  Inscriptions. — We  can  all  recollect  the  hymn-books  which  had  im- 
mediately after  the  nimiber  the  name  of  the  tune  to  which  it  should  be  sung.  The 
same  custom  prevailed  among  the  ancient  Jews,  and  this  is  the  explanation  of  some 
of  the  inscriptions  which  once  puzzled  commentators.  Thus  Psalm  xxii.  is  to  be 
sung  to  tune  ' '  The  Hind  of  the  Dawn  "  ;  Psalm  Ivi.  to  "  The  Silent  Dove  in  Far-off 
Lands";  Psalms  Ivii.,  lix.,  and  Ixxv.  to  "Destroy  Not";  Psalm  ix.  to  "The 
Death  of  the  Son "  ;  and  so  forth.  Comment  has  sometimes  been  made  on  the 
strangeness  of  those  titles,  but  the  New  Zealander  of  3000  A.D.  may  be  just  as 
puzzled  on  looking  over  the  tunes  which  head  the  words  in  some  of  our  hymn-books^ 
e.g.,  "Golden  Sheaves,"  "Old  Martyrs,"  "  Showers  of  Blessing,"  and  "St.  Joseph 
of  the  Studium. "  In  some  hymn-books  the  contents  are  distinguished  as  hymns, 
psalms,  paraphrases,  or  anthems.  The  Jews  similarly  discriminated.  The  inscrip- 
tion translated  "A  Song  "  meant  a  Psalm  to  be  sung  with  instrumental  accom- 
paniment;  "Shiggaion,"  an  irregular  ode;  "A  Song  of  Ascents,"  probably  a 
Psalm  to  be  sung  whilst  going  up  to  the  yearly  feasts  at  Jerusalem,  and  so  forth.  In 
some  of  our  hymns  we  have  verses  to  be  svmg  by  trebles  only,  others  by  men  only  : 
"Alemoth"  (after  the  manner  of  a  maiden)  probably  means  soprano  alone,  and 
"Sheminith"  (upon  the  octave  below),  men  alone.  Apparently  there  were  no 
elaborate  marks  of  expression  such  as  we  use  ;  the  oft-recurring  "Selah  "  probably 
meant  that  either  voices  or  instruments,  or  both,  were  to  be  raised,  and  if  so  it  was 
equivalent  to  our  forte.  {A.  M.  Mackay,  B.A.)  "Neginoth"  apparently  means 
"  with  string  music."  "  Mizmor  "  also  may  indicate  an  accompaniment  of  stringed 
instruments,  while  "  Nehiloth  "  appears  to  mean  "  with  wind  instruments."  {J.  P. 
Peters,  D.D.)  "To  the  Chief  Musician"  means,  probably,  "  For  the  Leader  of 

the  Choir, "  and  indicates  that  the  original  copy  of  the  Psalm  thus  inserted  in  the 
book  was  one  that  had  belonged  to  the  chorister  in  the  old  temple.  "  Muthlabben  " 
means  "arranged  for  training  the  soprano  voices."  Professor  Murray  supposes 
that  this  particular  Psalm  was  used  for  rehearsal  by  the  women  singers.  {W. 
Gladden,  D.D.) 

The  Poetry  of  the  Psalms. — ^The  poetry  of  the  Psalms  is  "a  poetry  of  Mend- 
ship  between  the  spirit  of  man  and  the  spirit  of  God  "  ;  a  poetry  apparently  ordained 
to  leaven  the  poetry  of  the  whole  world,  as  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament  to  be 
the  "sun  of  all  other  histories."  (John  Keble.)  Psalm  after  Psalm  is  a  mono- 
logue of  the  soul  with  God,  or  a  dialogue  between  it  and  God.  There  is  a  distinc- 
tion between  meditation,  however  devout,  and  real  prayer.  In  meditation  God  is 
present,  but,  so  to  speak,  in  the  third  person  only.  In  prayer  God  is  present,  but 
present  in  the  second  person,  the  personal  "Thou"  corresponding  to  the  personal 
"I."  Bishop  Ken's  line,  "And  thought  to  thought  with  Thee  converse,  is  the 
very  expression  of  the  spirit  of  the  Psauns.  Yet  they  are  filled  with  a  joy  which  is 
at  once  solemn  and  childlike.  In  spite  of  all  their  sighs  and  tears,  for  all  their 
tender  sympathy  with  the  Passion  of  Christ  and  the  sorrows  of  His  people,  "the 
power  of  light  lives  inexhaustibly  "  in  them.  One  only  (Ixxxviii. )  begins  and  ends 
with  a  sob.  In  all  the  rest  joy  sparkles,  if  not  on  the  crest  of  every  wave,  yet  along 
the  line  of  every  tide.  {Archbishop  Alexander.)  We  may  feel  the  pulses  of  our 
Psalmists'  passions  beating  in  their  ditties  if  we  would  lay  our  hearts  unto  them. 
As  ethnic  poets'  passions,  expressed  in  their  writings,  be'WTay  their  experience  in  such 
matters  as  they  write  of, — as  of  their  delight  in  love  enjoyed,  or  of  earthly  sorrow  for 
their  exile,  death  of  friends,  or  other  like  worldly  crosses, — so  do  these  sacred  ditties 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PSALMS. 


witness  their  penmen's  experience  in  such  matters  as  they  profess — as  of  spiritual  joy, 
comfort,  fear,  confidence,  or  any  other  affection.     {Dean  Jackson. ) 

HiSTOBiCAL  References. — How  great  is  the  history  of  the  Psalms  !  David 
sang  them,  and  Isaiah,  and  Jeremiah,  and  all  the  Prophets.  With  Psalms  Jeho- 
Bhaphat  and  Hezekiah  celebrated  their  victories.  Psalms  made  glad  the  heart  of  the 
exiles  who  returned  from  Babylon.  Psalms  gave  courage  and  strength  to  the  Mac- 
cabees in  their  brave  struggles  to  achieve  their  country's  independence,  and  were 
the  repeated  expression  of  their  thanksgivings.  The  Lord  of  Psalmists,  and  the  Son 
of  David,  by  the  words  of  a  Psalm,  proved  Himself  to  be  higher  than  David  ;  and 
sang  Psalms  with  His  Apostles  on  the  night  before  He  sufiered,  when  He  instituted 
the  Holy  Supper  of  His  love.  In  His  last  awful  hour  on  the  Cross  He  expressed,  in 
the  words  of  one  Psalm,  "His  fear  and  His  need  of  God,"  and  in  the  words  of 
another,  gave  up  His  spirit  to  His  Father.  With  Psalms  Paul  and  Silas  praised  God 
in  the  prison  at  midnight,  when  their  feet  were  made  fast  in  the  stocks,  and  sang  so 
loud  that  the  prisoners  heard  them.  And  after  his  own  example,  the  Apostle 
exhorts  the  Christians  at  Ephesus  and  Colossae  to  teach  and  admonish  one  another 
with  Psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs.  Jerome  tells  us  that  in  his  day  the 
Psalms  were  to  be  heard  in  the  fields  and  the  vineyards  of  Palestine,  and  that  they 
fell  sweetly  on  the  ear,  mingling  with  the  songs  of  birds  and  the  scent  of  flowers  in 
the  spring.  The  ploughman  as  he  guided  his  plough  chanted  the  Hallelujah,  and 
the  reaper,  the  vine-dresser,  and  the  shepherd  sang  the  songs  of  David.  "  These," 
he  says,  "are  our  love  songs,  these  the  insti-uments  of  our  agriculture."  SidoniuB 
Apollinaris  makes  his  boatmen,  as  they  urge  their  heavily  laden  barge  up  stream, 
sing  Psalms,  till  the  river-banks  echo  again  with  the  Hallelujah,  and  beautifully 
applies  the  custom,  in  a  figure,  to  the  voyage  of  the  Christian  life.  With  the  verse 
of  a  Psalm,  "Turn  again,  then,  unto  thy  rest,  0  my  soul,"  the  pious  Babylas, 
Bishop  of  Antioch,  comforted  himself  while  awaiting  his  martyrdom  in  the  Decian 
persecution,  saying,  "From  this  we  learn  that  our  soul  comes  to  rest  when  it  is 
removed  by  death  from  this  restless  world."  Paulla,  the  friend  of  Jerome,  was  seen 
by  those  who  were  gathered  around  her  in  her  last  hour  to  move  her  lips,  and  when 
they  stooped  to  listen  they  heard  the  words,  "How  lovely  are  Thy  tabernacles, 
O  Lord  of  Hosts."  A  Psalm  (iv.)  was  the  best  utterance  for  the  overaowing  joy  of 
Augustine's  heart  at  his  conversion,  and  a  Psalm  (xxxii.)  was  his  consolation  when 
he  lay  upon  his  deathbed.  With  the  words  of  Psalms,  Chrysostom  comforted  him- 
self in  his  exile,  writing  thus,  "  When  driven  from  the  city,  I  cared  nothing  for  it. 
But  I  said  to  myself.  If  the  empress  wishes  to  banish  me,  let  her  banish  me  ;  '  the 
earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof. ' "  And  again,  "  David  clothes  me  with 
armour,  saying,  '  I  will  speak  of  Thy  testimonies  before  kings,  and  will  not  be 
ashamed. '  "  With  the  words  of  a  Psalm,  holy  Bernard  expired.  With  the  words 
of  a  Psalm,  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague  gave  up  their  souls,  without  fear,  to  God, 
in  the  midst  of  the  fire.  Chanting  the  twelfth  verse  of  the  118th  Psalm  with  voices 
that  rose  high  above  the  din  of  battle,  the  Protestant  army  rushed  to  victory 
at  Courtras.  With  the  voice  of  a  Psahn,  Luther  entered  Worms,  singing  brave 
defiance  to  pope  and  cardinals,  and  all  the  gates  of  hell.  With  Psalms,  that  faithful 
servant  of  God,  Adolphe  Monod,  strengthened  himself  to  endure  the  agonies  of 
a  lingering  and  painful  disease.  In  the  biography  of  Bishop  Blomfield  no  page 
possesses  a  deeper  interest,  a  truer  pathos,  than  that  which  records  that  for  many 
years  before  his  death  the  51st  Psalm  had  been  his  nightly  prayer.  What  shall  I 
say  more  ?  The  history  of  the  Psalms  is  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  the  history 
of  every  heart  in  which  has  burned  the  love  of  God.  It  is  a  history  not  fully 
revealed  in  this  world,  but  one  which  is  written  in  heaven.  It  is  a  history  which, 
could  we  know  it,  might  teach  us  to  hush  many  an  angry  thought,  to  recall  many  a 
bitter,  hasty,  imcharitable  speech.  The  pages  of  that  book  have  often  been  blotted 
with  the  tears  of  those  whom  others  deemed  hard  and  cold,  and  whom  they  treated 
with  suspicion  or  contempt.  Those  words  have  gone  up  to  God,  mingled  with  the 
sighs  or  scarcely  uttered  in  the  heart-broken  anguish  of  those  whom  pharisees  called 
sinners,  of  those  whom  Christians  denounced  as  heretics  or  infidels,  but  who  loved 
God  and  truth  above  all  things  else.  Surely  it  is  holy  ground.  We  cannot  pray 
the  Psalms  without  realising  in  a  very  special  manner  the  communion  of  saints,  the 
oneness  of  the  Church  militant  and  the  Church  triumphant.  We  cannot  pray  the 
Psalms  without  having  our  hearts  opened,  our  aff"ections  enlarged,  our  thoughts 
drawn  heavenward.  He  who  can  pray  them  best  is  nearest  to  God,  knows  most  of 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  is  ripest  for  heaven.     {Bishop  Perowne. ) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

THE   PSALMS. 

PSALM  L 

YstM.  1-6.  Blessed  Is  tbe  man  tbat  walketh  not  In  the  eoTuuel  of  the  ungodly. 

— The  l$t  PscUm,  introductory: — This  Psalm  seems  to  have  been  placed  first  in 
the  collection  because,  from  its  general  character  and  subject,  it  formed  a  suitable 
introduction  to  the  rest.  It  treats  of  the  blessedness  of  the  righteous  and  the 
misery  of  the  wicked,  topics  which  constantly  recur  in  the  Psalms,  but  it  treats  of 
them  as  if  all  experience  pointed  only  in  one  direction.  The  moral  problem  which, 
in  other  Psalms,  troubles  the  ancient  poets  of  Israel,  when  they  see  the  evU  pros- 
pering and  the  good  oppressed,  has  here  no  place.  The  poet  rests  calmly  in  the 
truth  that  it  is  well  with  the  righteous.  He  is  not  vexed  with  those  passionate 
questionings  of  heart  which  meet  us  in  such  Psalms  as  the  37th  and  73rd.  Hence 
we  may  probably  conclude  that  his  lot  was  cast  in  happier  and  more  peaceful  times. 
The  close  of  the  Psalm  is,  however,  as  Ewald  remarks,  truly  prophetical,  perpetu- 
ally in  force,  and  consequently  descriptive  of  what  is  to  be  expected  at  all  times  in 
the  course  of  the  world's  history.  In  style  the  Psalm  is  simple  and  clear.  In  form 
it  is  little  more  than  the  expansion  of  a  proverb.  (J.  J.  Stewart  Perowne,  B.D.) 
The  felicity  of  the  godly  man,  a/nd  infelicity  of  the  tuicked: — Ver.  1.  Teacheth  a 
godly  man  1.  To  beware  of  the  ungodly  man's  persuasions ;  2.  Of  their  order  of 
life  ;  and  3.  Of  their  society  and  company  keeping.  Ver.  2.  Teacheth  him  by  the 
contrary  what  he  must  do.  1.  Take  delight  and  pleasure  in  God's  Word  ;  because 
we  do  hardly  profit  by  those  things  which  we  take  no  pleasure  in  ;  2.  Use  all 
the  means  whereby  we  may  be  buUded  up  in  knowledge  ;  for  so  generally  do  I  take 
these  words,  "meditate  day  and  night."  Ver.  3.  A  promise  annexed  for  our  better 
encouragement,  which  expresseth  God's  wonderful  goodness,  and  our  dolness  and 
heaviness,  that  have  need  of  such  spars.  By  which  also  we  may  see  the  right  use 
of  Qoi'n  promises,  namely,  to  provoke  ub  to  aU  well-doings  (1  Cor.  vii.  1).  Ver.  4. 
Doth  not  only  contain  judgments  against  the  wicked,  but  also  teacheth,  yea,  8pur« 
reth  forward  the  godly,  by  beholding  their  punishments,  to  more  heedy  walkuig ; 
and  whereas  the  Holy  Ghost  resembleth  the  wicked  to  chaff  tossed  before  the  wind, 
it  teaches  us,  that  though  the  wicked  think  themselves  glorious,  and  of  long  con< 
tinnance,  yet  they  are  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  Ver.  6.  Teacheth  that  God, 
with  His  fan,  will  make  a  separation  between  the  good  com  and  the  chaff  (Matt. 
iii.  12).  Ver.  6.  Teacheth  this,  that  God  is  the  only  judge  to  allow  and  disallow; 
men  must  not  therefore  stand  upon  themselves,  or  other  men's  judgments.  For 
what  are  we  that  condemn  another  man's  servant  1  He  standeth  or  falleth  to  his 
own  master.  (TJwmas  WUcocks.)  The  godly  man  happy: — ^The  Prophet  will 
maintain  a  godly  man,  against  aU  comers,  to  be  the  only  Jason,  for  winning  the 
golden  fleece  of  blessedness  ;  the  other,  that  he  will  make  it  good  upon  the  heads 
of  all  the  wicked  ;  that  howsoever  they  make  a  show  in  the  world  of  being  happy, 
yet  they  of  all  men  are  most  miserable.  (Sir  Richard  Baker. )  The  blessed  man .- 
— Happiness  is  our  nature's  end  and  aim,  and  David  tells  us  here  who  finds  it. 
He  describes  his  character — I.  Negatively.  But  all  this  is  negative  ;  and  in  a 
world  such  as  this,  and  with  a  nature  such  as  ours,  no  small  part  of  religion  con- 
sists in  avoiding  evil.  Still,  a  negative  religion  is  not  sufficient.  God's  Word  is, 
"Cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well."  A  man  may  "not  swear,"  but  does  he 
"jpray "  T  He  may  not  rob,  but  does  he  relieve  the  poor  t  Therefore  we  have  the 
I 


2  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psALM  I. 

blessed  man  described — II.  Positively.  "His  delight,"  &c.  It  is  so,  whether 
the  law  be  the  moral  law  or  the  Word  of  God.  Much  more  may  we  say  this  who 
have  the  complete  Bible.  Day  and  night,  our  thoughts  ever  follow  our  affections. 
( W.  Jay.)  The  true  Christian  : — 1.  He  is  set  forth  as  a  "man."  Sin  un-mans, 
reduces  the  volume  and  value  of  manhood,  until  it  brings  its  victim  to  a  revolting 
animalism.  The  Christian  is  restored  by  grace  to  true  manhood.  2.  Asa  "happy 
man."  Happiness  is  the  flower  and  fruit  of  piety.  Misery,  the  natural  child  of 
sin.  None  are  so  happy  as  those  whom  God  makes  happy.  3.  As  avoiding  unholy 
society.  As  oil  will  not  mix  with  water,  light  cannot  co-exist  with  darkness,  so 
piety  cannot  live  in  the  poisonous  atmosphere  of  evil-doers.  Where  there  is  no 
affinity  of  nature  there  can  be  no  sympathy  and  fellowship  of  spirit.  The  tropicai 
plant  will  quickly  die  at  the  roots  in  the  Arctic  region  ;  and  the  saint  cannot  pass 
over  to  the  frigid  zone  of  the  worldling's  society,  but  at  the  peril  of  his  sainthood — 
his  life.  4.  As  a  student  of  Divine  truth.  Religion  makes  men  thoughtful.  He 
is  a  glad  student.  "  His  delight  is  in  "  ;  a  diligent  student.  "  Day  and  night." 
It  is  not  a  nine  days'  spell  which  novelty  has  thrown  over  him.  He  meditates  in 
it  in  the  "day"  of  prosperity,  and  does  not  forget  to  do  so  in  the  "night "of 
adversity.  5.  Under  a  beautiful  and  suggestive  figure.  "  Like  a  tree."  He  does 
not  grow  up  a  Christian,  he  is  planted  as  such.  Religion  is  not  natural,  bat  en- 
gendered. He  is  well-positioned.  "By  the  rivers  of  water."  As  a  consequence 
he  is  "  fruitful."  No  fruit  in  the  life  is  a  proof  of  no  grace  in  the  heart.  He  is 
always  in  "season."  "There  are  special  times  for  the  manifestation  of  suitable 
graces.  Liberality  when  riches  increase.  Humility  when  cheered  by  others. 
Patience  in  suffering.  Resignation  in  bereavement.  Faith  in  trial."  He  is  "ever- 
green." "  His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither."  The  beauty  of  the  believer  is  holiness, 
the  communicated  "beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God."  The  sap  of  grace  is  always  in 
circulation,  hence  his  leaf  does  not  wither.  6.  Prosperous  in  all  his  undertakings. 
"There  is  no  lack  to  them  that  walk  uprightly."  "Godliness  is  great  gain." 
7.  As  divinely  known.  "  Knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous  "  (ver.  6).  His  know- 
ledge covers  the  minutiae  of  his  life  as  well  as  the  particulars  of  the  road.  This 
Divine  knowledge  is  comforting,  stimulating,  faith-embolding,  &c.  Such  is  the 
inspired  portrait  of  the  "happy"  or  godly  man.  In  contrast  we  have  the  "un- 
godly man. "  He  is  like  ' '  chaff, "  without  worth,  or  use,  or  root ;  the  sport  of  the 
ydnd  of  circumstances,  passions,  frivolities,  worldliness,  sensuality,  &c.,  devoid  of 
true  manliness,  decision  of  character,  &c.  Ver.  5  sets  him  forth  as  morally  inca- 
pacitated to  stand  in  the  Court  of  Justice  ;  and  also  as  morally  disqual&ed  to 
associate  with  the  holy.  Both  he  and  his  way  shall  perish.  {J.  0.  Keen,  D.  D. ) 
A  certain  prescription  for  happiness : — There  is  a  very  beautiful  story  told  of  a  king 
who,  when  he  came  to  his  throne  a  young  man,  had  a  silver  bell  made  and  placed 
in  a  high  tower  of  his  palace.  Then  the  announcement  was  set  forth  that  when- 
ever the  king  was  happy  his  subjects  would  know  it  by  the  ringing  of  this  bell. 
It  was  never  to  be  rung  except  when  the  king  was  perfectly  happy,  and  then  by  no 
hand  but  his  own.  Days  passed  into  weeks,  and  weeks  into  months,  and  the 
months  into  years  ;  but  no  sound  of  the  bell  rang  out  either  day  or  night  to  tell 
that  the  king  was  happy.  At  last  the  king,  grown  old  and  grey  in  his  palace,  lay 
on  his  death-bed.  His  weeping  subjects  gatliered  around  him,  and  he  learned  how 
through  all  the  years  his  people  had  loved  him ;  and  then  he  was  happy,  and  in 
his  joy,  with  dying  hands,  he  rang  out  the  silver  bell.  How  many  years  of  wasted 
happiness  because  the  king  did  not  come  to  know  and  appreciate  the  love  of  his 
people  1  The  little  story  may  suggest  to  us  a  still  greater  loss  in  ourselves.  Only 
the  consciousness  of  God's  love  can  make  us  perfectly  happy.  Many  people  go 
through  life  from  childhood  to  youth,  from  youth  to  manhood,  from  manhood  to 
age,  and  the  lines  of  care  deepen  in  their  faces,  and  the  silver  bell  of  happiness 
never  rings  out,  because  all  the  while  they  are  getting  further  from  God,  and  there 
is  no  consciousness  of  that  Divine  love  which  alone  can  give  perfect  happiness  and 
peace  to  the  human  heart.  We  have  in  this  Psalm  the  thought  of  a  keen-brained 
,  and  spiritually  instructed  man  as  to  what  is  required  to  make  a  happy  man.  We 
J  have  here  the  testimony  of  a  man  of  broad  experience.  David  sets  forth,  at  the 
beginning,  that  there  are  three  things  which  it  is  important  that  we  shall  not  do 
if  we  are  to  lead  happy  lives.  The  first  of  these  is  walking  in  the  counsel  of  the 
ungodly.  I  do  not  understand  that  he  intended  to  teach  t£at  to  come  under  thii 
head  it  is  necessary  for  a  man  to  seek  out  ungodly  people  and  ask  their  advice  as 
to  how  he  shall  live.  The  danger  is  far  more  insidious  than  that  The  trouble  is 
that  ungodly  people  are  always  ready  to  speak  their  oounBelB  of  evil  and  lead  othera 


PSALM  I.]  TEE  PSALMS.  3 

astray  by  them.  Eve  did  not  send  for  the  devil  to  come  and  advise  her,  but  he 
came  of  his  own  accord  and  spit  forth  his  lying  sophistries  about  the  Lord.  Many 
j'oung  men  and  women  come  to  the  city  from  Christian  homes,  expecting  to  live  a 
frank  Christian  life ;  but  in  the  boarding-house,  or  the  store  or  shop  where  they 
■work,  they  are  thrown  into  touch  with  ungodly  people,  who  are  ready  at  every  turn 
with  sceptical  and  insinuating  remarks  about  the  Church  and  about  Christianity. 
Their  counsels  are  for  laxity  of  faith  and  conduct.  Rev.  W.  L.  Watkinson,  in  a 
recent  sermon,  recalls  the  fact  that  while  we  are  careful  to  do  our  utmost  to  protect 
great  buildings  from  fire  and  tempest,  yet  all  the  while  those  buildings  are  liable  to 
another  peril,  certainly  not  less  severe — the  subtle  decay  of  the  very  framework  of 
the  structure  itself.  The  tissue  of  the  wood  silently  and  mysteriously  deteriorates, 
and  a  calamity  dire  as  a  conflagration  is  precipitated.  Many  people  think  they  are 
all  right  because  they  are  not  committing  outbreaking  sins,  while  the  counsels  to 
which  they  are  listening,  and  the  associations  to  which  they  are  lending  them- 
selves, are  really  undermining  all  their  spiritual  strength.  The  fibre  of  will  and 
conscience  and  feeling  is  secretly  eaten  away,  and  some  day  they  awake  to  find 
they  no  longer  possess  the  faith,  the  sensibility,  and  the  resolution  of  other  days. 
No  swift  and  violent  assault  of  world  or  flesh  or  devil  has  torn  or  stained  them,  but 
it  has  been  like  a  moth  fretting  a  garment.  In  the  physical  world  sunshine  is  the 
sure  antidote  to  the  dry  rot.  So  the  only  antidote  to  the  counsels  of  the  ungodly 
is  to  turn  from  them  to  the  beams  which  fall  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 
Happiness  does  not  lie  in  the  counsels  of  the  ungodly,  but  in  fellowship  with  "tha 
children  of  the  light."  Another  place  that  the  happy  man  must  avoid  is  "the 
way  of  sinners."  "The  way  of  sinners"  is  the  way  of  sorrow  and  unhappiness. 
Whatever  of  good  it  promises  it  is  a  false  way.  It  may  seem  attractive,  but  you 
may  be  sure  that  the  end  of  the  way  is  misery.  The  other  day  in  New  York  city 
there  was  an  auction  sale,  by  a  railroad  company,  of  a  quantity  of  unclaimed 
chests,  valises,  and  parcels.  Some  of  these  packages  brought  large  prices.  Many 
of  them  sold  for  a  great  many  times  their  worth.  The  fiercest  bidding  was  over  a 
prosperous-looking  trunk.  It  was  strongly  made,  and,  although  not  very  heavy, 
the  speculators  who  examined  its  exterior  concluded  that  it  contained  articles  of 
value.  One  of  them  finally  secured  it  for  fifty-five  dollars,  and  promptly  prised  it 
open,  when  he  found  within  it  only  a  disjointed  human  skeleton,  which  had 
probably  been  the  property  of  some  medical  studebt.  It  is  easy  to  understand  the 
chagrin  of  the  purchaser  who,  instead  of  gold  and  jewels,  found  only  those  relics 
of  death.  Multitudes  have  experienced  a  similar  disappointment,  but  one  in- 
finitely more  sorrowful,  when  they  have  discovered  the  real  nature  of  the  prizes 
which  they  gained  by  sin.  There  is  still  another  place  that  a  man  if  he 
will  be  really  happy  must  avoid,  and  that  is,  "the  seat  of  the  scornful."  God 
have  mercy  on  the  boy  who  has  gone  so  far  that  he  can  make  a  joke  of  his  mother's 
religion,  that  he  can  make  a  sneer  about  his  father's  God,  that  he  can  scorn  the 
voice  of  God's  Word  that  calls  him  to  repentance  !  The  sarcasm  and  cynicism  and 
scorn  of  a  sharp  wit  is  often  very  fascinating  to  young  people,  but  I  assure  you  that 
the  man  who  exercises  it  is  never  happy.  It  is  a  blossom  which  grows  on  a  tree 
that  is  bitter  at  the  heart.  I  have  seen  many  scornful  men  and  women,  but  I 
have  never  yet  seen  one  who  was  happy.  Well,  we  have  been  looking  at  some  of 
the  things  one  must  not  do  if  he  is  to  be  happy  ;  let  us  turn  to  the  brighter  side, 
and  see  what  one  may  do  to  ensure  happiness,  'The  prescription  is  given  here,  and 
is  very  plain,  "  But  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  ;  and  in  His  law  doth 
he  meditate  day  and  night."  But,  you  say,  "How  can  I  delight  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord,  and  how  can  I  begin  to  think  about  Him,  if  I  am  taken  up  with  other 
things  ? "  It  is  all  very  simple.  You  have  been  breaking  God's  law,  and  therefore 
you  cannot  delight  in  it.  Stop  breaking  it.  Turn  right  about  and  begin  to  obey 
the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  then  you  will  have  a  chance  to  delight  in  it.  God  has 
made  happiness  and  obedience  to  go  together.  As  you  obey  the  Lord,  and  as  you 
feel  the  warmth  of  His  smile  on  your  face,  you  will  take  delight  in  Him.  All  this 
is  perfectly  natural.  The  man  who  has  committed  a  crime,  and  has  broken  the 
law  of  the  land,  and  is  fleeing  from  justice  like  a  hunted  animal,  or  has  been  caught 
and  is  being  punished,  takes  no  delight  in  that  law.  But  the  man  who  obeys  the 
law  and  finds  its  strong  arm  of  protection  thrown  around  him,  and  rejoices  in  its 
security,  delights  in  it,  and  in  the  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  the  law  he  finds 
rest  and  peace.  And  what  a  glorious  result  is  assured  from  such  delight  in  the  law 
of  the  Lord  :  "  He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,"  &c.  What 
a  beautiful  picture  that  is  !     Ah,  but,  you  say,   "  Does  God  live  up  to  that  ?    Do 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

not  many  Christians  have  hard  experiences,  and  trying  difficulties  like  other 
people  ?  "  Certainly,  the  hot  sun  beats  down  on  the  tree  planted  by  the  river  just 
the  same  as  it  does  on  the  one  that  is  planted  on  the  gravelly,  sandy  uplanil.  But 
the  one  by  the  river  runs  its  roots  down  into  the  refreshing  streams  beneath,  and 
when  the  upland  tree  withers  and  turns  brown  the  tree  by  the  river  is  as  green  as 
ever.  Christians  meet  the  troubles  of  life  like  other  people,  but  if  they  give  them- 
selves up  whole-heartedly  to  do  God's  will,  and  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord, 
they  have  peace  and  content  in  the  midst  of  the  sorest  trouble.  You  want  happi- 
ness. There  is  only  one  certain  prescription  for  happiness,  and  that  is  to  obey  God. 
{L.  A.  Banks,   D.D.)  The  happy  man: — The  opening  words  of  this  Psalm 

furnish  its  title  Ashrey  ha-ish,  "  0  the  happiness  of  that  man  !  "  If  ever  a  man 
pursued  happiness  under  the  most  favourable  conditions,  it  was  King  Solomon  ;  yet 
this  was  his  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity." 
John  Trapp  said  quaintly,  "The  Psalmist  hath  said  here  more  to  the  point 
respecting  happiness  than  all  the  philosophers  ;  for  while  they  heat  the  bush,  he 
hath  put  the  bird  into  our  hand."  I.  As  to  the  character  of  this  happy  man. 
"  He  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly."  We  must  needs  be  in  the  world 
— not  dreamers  among  the  shadows,  but  men  among  men.  The  world  has  need  of 
us.  The  workshop  and  the  office  demand  us.  The  secular  cares  of  this  world  are,  of 
necessity,  upon  us.  But  the  secret  of  true  happiness  is  moral  non-conformity.  Being 
in  the  world,  we  should  not  be  of  it.  While  our  associations  must  needs  be  in  some 
measure  with  the  ungodly,  their  counsels,  their  ways,  their  seats  are  not  for  us. 
God's  people  go  to  their  offices  and  their  workshops  just  like  other  men,  but  their 
affections  are  not  set  upon  this  world  ;  they  are  ever  mindful  of  their  noble  birth,  / 
their  Divine  inheritance,  their  glorious  destiny.  II.  His  attitude  towards  th^ 
Divine  law.  The  "Law  of  the  Lord"  was  a  Jewish  phrase  for  the  Scriptures. 
The  happy  man  possesses  a  right  estimate  of  the  importance  of  the  Word  of  God. 
1.  He  is  a  reader  of  the  Scriptures.  Thomas  k  Kempis  said,  "  I  am  never  so  happy 
as  when  in  a  nook  with  the  Book."  2.  He  reads  "with  delight."  We  are  much 
given  in  these  times  to  a  critical  study  of  the  Word.  The  way  to  appreciate 
the  beauty  of  Murillo's  picture  of  the  Immaculate  Conception  is  not  to  approach  it 
with  spatula  and  ammonia  for  purposes  of  minute  analysis,  but  to  gaze  upon  it 
until  we  are  filled  with  the  mighty  thoughts  that  went  surging  through  the  soul  of 
the  master  genius  who  painted  it.  3.  He  meditates  in  them.  St.  Augustine 
renders  the  word  "  chattereth."  So  in  these  spring  days  we  hear  the  sparrows 
chattering  with  their  hearts  full  of  the  prophecy  of  bloom  and  fruitfulness.  So 
glad  and  happy  are  the  souls  that  meditate  with  delight  in  the  Divine  law. 
III.  The  outcome  OF  this  HAPPY  LIFE.  Fruitfulness.  "Like  a  tree."  This  life 
is  rooted  well.  Its  leaf  shall  not  wither.  The  leaf  shows  the  character  of  the  tree. 
The  man  whose  soul  is  full  of  truth  and  righteousness  need  not  be  saying  per- 
petually, "I  am  a  Christian,"  for  his  walk  and  conversation  declare  it.  He 
bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his  season.  We  shall  be  ever  doing  good  as  we  have  oppor- 
tunity. There  is  an  obverse  to  this  picture.  "  The  ungodly  are  not  so. "  1.  As 
to  his  life — it  is  chaff.  There  is  no  profit  in  it.  2,  As  to  his  death — it  is  like  a 
furrow  in  the  sea.  3.  After  death,  he  shall  "not  stand  in  judgment."  Most  of  us 
have  been  disappointed  in  our  pursuit  of  happiness.  There  is,  however,  a  right 
way  and   a  sure  way  to   pursue  it.      {D.   J.    Burrell,    D.D.)  The  way  of 

tlie  righteous :  —  I.  A  striking  description  of  the  character  of  the 
RIGHTEOUS.  Among  the  evil,  as  well  as  the  good,  there  are  classes  and  grada- 
tions. Here  we  have  forgetters  of  God,  overt  and  habitual  sinners,  and  settled 
scorners.  How  graphically  is  the  progressive  tendency  of  sin  here  exhibited ! 
Observe  the  indication  we  here  have  of  the  tendency  of  sin  to  fixedness.  Walking, 
standing,  sitting  ;  wrong  principles,  then  sinful  habits,  and  last  settled  scorn.  But 
the  righteous  man  is  not  simply  one  who  keeps  aloof  from  the  ways  described.  His 
character  has  its  positive  side.  It  is  needful  to  discriminate  with  respect  to  the  kind 
of  delight  the  righteous  man  takes  in  the  law.  How  much  there  is  in  the  Bible  of 
valuable  history  !  Its  truths  and  precepts  kindle  the  intellect,  feed  the  imagination, 
and  commend  themselves  to  man's  natural  sense  of  what  is  true  and  good.  The 
delight  of  the  Psalmist  is,  however,  something  deeper  and  other  than  this.  It  is 
delight  in  the  law  as  God's  law,  and  because  it  is  His.  It  is  the  delight  of  a  mind 
in  sympathetic  accord  with  it  and  with  its  Author.  Even  in  the  Old  Testament 
saint  there  was  much  of  this  spirit.  Here  is  the  difiference  between  a  truly  righteous 
man  and  one  who  is  only  outwardly  so.  The  latter  obeys  slavishly,  and  against  hia 
own  wUl.    The  former  serves  joyfully,  and  in  love.     The  interest  the  one  takes  iu 


MALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS. 


the  Bible  is  intellectual ;  that  of  the  other  is  also  practical  and  spiritual.     II.  A 

DELIGHTFUL  PICTURE  OF  THE  CONDITION  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS.       "  Like  a  tree."      The 

tree  draws  a  portion  of  its  nourishment  from  the  surrounding  atmosiihere,  but 
relatively  this  is  small.  Vastly  the  greater  portion  is  taken  up  with  the  moisture 
at  its  root.  Hence  where  there  is  little  moisture  the  life  of  the  tree  is  feeble,  its 
growth  is  slow,  its  fruit  is  uncertain,  its  leaf  withers.  So  it  is  doubtless  true  that 
the  godly  man  derives  material  for  growth,  usefulness,  enjoyment,  and  moral 
beauty  from  whatever  surrounds  him.  He  learns  from  nature,  society,  bo<  ks  ;  he 
derives  profit  and  adornment  from  studies,  companionship,  and  exjterience  ;  but  for 
that  which  is  highest  and  best,  whether  of  comfort,  attainment,  or  serviceableness 
to  his  generation,  he  is  indebted  to  revealed  truth.  It  is  this  which  sustains  his 
true  inner  life.  In  ver.  3  there  is  a  change  of  figure.  Of  the  righteous  it  is  said, 
"and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper."  The  meaning  doubtless  is  that  he  shall 
prosper  in  all  his  godly  doings  ;  in  the  things  to  which  the  Divine  will  and  word 
may  prompt  him  ;  in  those  righteous  undertakings  by  which  he  is  distinguished. 
In  other  ages,  if  not  now,  it  shall  appear  that  nought  of  such  labour  was  lost.  It 
•would  be  a  mistake  to  understand,  by  the  fruit  here  spoken  of,  external  works  only, 
or  chiefly.  The  fruit  of  the  spirit  is  "in  all  goodness,  and  righteousness,  and 
truth."  It  is  "love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance."  First  of  all,  it  is  inward,  then  outward.  It  would  be 
equally  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  leaf,  which  does  not  wither,  is  the  symbol 
only  of  the  honour  and  beauty  which  crown  the  character  of  the  godly.  Doubtless 
it  stands  for  this.  But  the  leaf  is  also  useful.  And  that,  too,  not  only  in  the 
pleasure  it  ministers  to  the  beholder's  eye,  or  the  shade  it  aff'ords  to  the  passing 
traveller.  Its  benefits  may  reach  very  far.  "The  fresh  air  we  quaff  from  the  hills 
has  been  purified  and  made  healthy  for  us  by  the  foliage  of  the  trees,  not  merely 
those  of  our  own  country,  but  even  the  pines  of  Norway  and  the  palms  of  India. " 
And  so  the  godly  man  is  blessed  in  what  he  is  and  >vhat  he  does.     III.  A  cheeking 

INTIMATION  OF  THE  HAPPY   END   WHICH   AWAITS   THE   RIGHTEOUS.       As   is   SO   often 

the  case  in  the  Bible,  thought  abruptly  passes  from  time  to  eternity.  Indeed,  to 
the  eye  of  faith,  these  are  one :  the  latter  is  but  the  continuation  of  the  former. 
Naturally,  therefore,  the  characters  contrasted  in  the  Psalm  are  now  made  to  appear 
for  judgment.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  blessed  vian's  liketuss: — Notes  on 
verses.  Ver.  1.  Ignorance  is  often  bliss.  All  the  characters  mentioned  here  may 
have  their  excellence.  The  ungodly  may  be  rich,  the  sinners  convivial,  the 
scornful  brilliant,  yet  blessed  is  the  man  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  them. 
Blessed  is  the  man  who  knows  not  the  language  or  the  masonry  of  the  wicked. 
Ver.  2.  The  idea  is  that  of  the  man  who  sees  the  law  of  the  Lord  in  all  nature, 
history,  and  life,  and  delights  to  trace  it  out.  The  "  Law  of  the  Lord "  is  not 
simply  so  much  letter-press,  it  is  a  life,  a  presence,  a  government.  Ver.  3.  Where 
God  is  there  is  no  famine.  The  likeness  to  a  tree  is  full  of  suggestion.  A  tree  is 
permanent,  fruitful,  beautiful ;  its  branches  are  for  refreshment,  its  shadow  is  for 
rest.  It  responds  to  the  sun  and  the  rain.  It  waits  for  God,  and  puts  forth  life  at 
His  bidding.  "Prosper."  In  no  mean  or  narrow  sense,  but  really  and  ultimately. 
If  you  say  that,  as  a  fact,  the  good  man  does  not  always  prosper,  remember  that  you 
may  say  the  same  thing  about  God  Himself.  Ver.  4.  Some  ungodly  men  seem  to  be 
well  established  ;  they  have  more  than  heart  can  wish.  But  these  are  appearances 
only.  At  a  distance  chaff  might  be  mistaken  for  wheat.  The  distinction  is  a  vital 
one.  To  know  where  the  wicked  are,  you  must  know  where  the  wind  is — the  wind 
of  popularity,  success.  Divine  visitation.  Ver.  5.  There  is  a  judgment,  a  true  and 
final  test  of  character.  Where  are  the  ungodly  of  the  last  generation  ?  Ver.  6. 
Mark  the  three  characters.  The  godly,  ungodly,  the  Lord.  The  question  is  not 
what  is  the  relation  of  the  godly  and  the  ungodly  to  each  other  ;  but  what  is  that 
of  each  to  the  Lord  ?  Are  you  blessed  ?  Are  you  merely  transiently  happy  ?  What 
is  your  frujt  ?  {Joseph  Parker,  D.  D. )  The  blessed  man : — 1 .  He  is  partly  described 
hy  negatives.  We  begin  with  children  by  teaching  them  what  they  must  not  do. 
The  man  who  "walketh  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly"  is  not  a  happy  man. 
Nowhere  in  the  devil's  territories  can  you  find  the  happy  man.  Men  who  have  run 
the  whole  round  of  so-called  enjoyment  unite  to  say,  "If  you  want  to  be  happy, 
avoid  our  footprints."  And  yet  it  seems  as  if  every  young  man  must  go  and  try  for 
himself.  He  will  not  take  the  experience  of  others  ;  or  follow  the  directions  of  the 
"caution-board."  2.  He  is  partly  described  by  what  he  should  do.  God  does  not 
destroy  our  powers,  but  turns  them  in  a  right  direction.  How  can  we  be  happy  ? 
Study.     He  who  thinks  grows.     Meditate  in  the  "Law  of  the  Lord."    We  are 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

not  a  Bible-reading  people.  The  old-fashioned  people  in  the  Church  were.  Note 
the  consequences  of  this  "delight  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord."  Beauty.  Righteous 
men  should  have  beauty  of  character.  "Whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper." 
When  we  fail  the  fault  is  ours,  or  if  it  be  not,  then  the  failure  is  for  the  sake  of 
the  success  it  shall  lead  to.  "The  ungodly  are  not  so."  The  sinner  has  a  brief 
day.  It  may  not  seem  so  now;  but  God  says,  he  is  "like  the  chaff."  But 
we  should  not  seek  happiness  as  an  end.  Seek  goodness,  and  the  happiness  will 
come.  {Ibid. )  The  character  of  the  pious  and  profane : — L  A  certain  cottbse 
DESCEIBED.  Here  is  a  twofold  gradation  implied,  the  one  relating  to  the  characters 
referred  to,  and  the  other  to  the  intercourse  maintained.  IL  A  sacred  exercisk 
DESCRIBED.  " In  His  law  doth  he  meditate."  The  godly  man  delights  in  the  Law 
of  the  Lord  for  many  reasons,  1.  Because  it  enriches  his  mind.  2.  It  cheers  his 
heart.  3.  It  sanctifies  his  nature.  III.  An  encouraging  assurance  given. 
"  He  shall  be  like  a  tree."  Note  the  connection  between  loving  the  Scriptures  and 
spiritual  prosperity.  IV.  A  solemn  contrast  drawn.  The  ungodly  are  like  the 
chaff.  Chaff  is  a  thing  that  is — 1.  Unsightly.  There  is  nothing  to  excite  pleasur- 
able emotions  in  the  ungodly.  2.  "Worthless.  Chaff  cannot  be  turned,  even  in  our 
inventive  age,  to  any  beneficial  purpose.  3.  Light  and  unsubstantial.  There  is  no 
stability  in  the  ungodly.  They  are  tossed  to  and  fro  with  every  wind  of  tempta- 
tion ;  and,  being  influenced  by  caprice  rather  than  principle,  no  confidence  can  be 
placed  in  them.  The  Psalmist  adds,  ' '  therefore  the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  the 
judgment."  To  "stand"  is  a  forensic  term,  and  denotes  "to  stand  acquitted, " and 
■with,  those  who  live  and  die  ungodly  such  cannot  be  the  case.  V.  A  conclusive 
REASON  ADDUCED.  "For  the  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous  ;  but  the  way 
of  the  ungodly  shall  perish. "  {Expository  Outlines.)  The  refusals  of  godliness: 
— But  negatives  in  this  case  could  not  be  denied  ;  for  if  he  had  left  out  negatives, 
he  had  left  out  a  great  part  of  the  worth  and  praise  of  godliness — for  a  godly  man 
cannot  always  run  in  smooth  ground — he  shall  sometimes  meet  with  rubs  ;  he 
cannot  always  breathe  in  sweet  airs — he  shall  sometimes  meet  with  ill  savours  ;  he 
cannot  always  sail  in  safe  seas — he  shall  sometimes  meet  with  rocks  ;  and  then  it  is 
his  praise  that  he  can  pass  over  those  rubs,  can  pass  through  those  savours,  can  pass 
by  those  rocks,  and  yet  keep  himself  upright  and  untainted,  and  untouched  of  them 
all.  Besides,  negative  precepts  are  in  some  cases  more  absolute  and  peremptory 
than  affirmatives  :  for  to  say,  " That  hath  walked  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly," 
might  not  be  sufficient ;  for  he  might  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  godly,  and  yet  walk 
in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly  too ;  not  both  indeed  at  once,  but  both  at  several 
times  ;  where  now  this  negative  clears  him  at  all  times.  And  may  it  not  also  be  a 
cause  of  using  negatives,  because  it  seems  an  easier  way  of  showing  what  a  thing  is, 
by  showing  what  it  is  not,  than  by  using  only  affirmative  marks  ;  especially  where 
a  perfect  induction  may  be  made.  {Sir  Richard  Baker.)  Things  marred  by  un- 
godliness : — We  must  yet  go  further,  and  the  next  word  we  come  to  is  ungodly,  and 
now  certainly  we  shall  have  a  full  negative,  for  ungodliness  is  the  herb  that  marreth 
all  the  broth,  it  poisons  all  the  company  that  it  comes  in, — not  only  walking,  a 
thing  in  itself  indifferent,  but  even  counsel,  a  thing  in  its  own  nature  most 
sovereign  :  they  are  both  marred  by  this  one  ingredient  of  ungodliness.  Walking 
in  counsel  had  been  a  safe  proceeding,  if  the  ungodly  had  not  given  it ;  standing  in 
the  way  had  been  a  lawful  calling,  if  sinners  had  not  made  it ;  sitting  in  a  chair  had 
been  an  easy  posture,  if  scorners  had  not  framed  it ;  but  if  the  ungodly,  or  sinners, 
or  scorners  have  any  hand  at  all  in  our  actions,  have  anything  to  do  in  our  doings, 
both  safety,  and  lawfulness,  and  ease,  and  all  are  utterly  overthrown.  {Ibid.) 
The  counsel  of  ungodly  men : — But  have,  then,  ungodly  men  counsel  ?  One  would 
think  it  were  want  of  counsel  that  makes  them  ungodly,  for  who  would  be  ungodly 
if  he  had  counsel  to  direct  him  ?  Certainly,  counsel  they  have,  and  wise  counsel 
too ;  that  is,  wise  in  the  eye  of  the  world,  and  wise  for  the  works  of  the  world  :  but 
wise  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  wise  for  the  works  of  godliness,  they  have  not ;  and  in 
that  kind  of  wisdom  ungodly  men  are  your  greatest  counsellors — greatest  in  the 
ability  of  counsel,  and  greatest  in  the  busying  themselves  with  counselling.  The 
poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips.  It  serves  not  their  turn  to  do  wickedly  in  their 
own  persons,  but  they  must  be  drawing  others  into  wickedness  by  poisoning  and 
infecting  them  with  wicked  counsel.  (Ibid.)  Stages  in  sin: — They  which  think 
it  an  ascent,  conceive  it  thus,  that  he  which  walketh  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly 
is  yet  but  wavering,  as  misled  by  opinion,  and  makes  but  an  error  ;  he  that  stands 
in  the  way  of  sinners,  stands  out  with  obstinacy,  and  makes  a  heresy  ;  but  he  that 
sits  in  the  chair  of  scorners  is  at  defiance  with  God,  and  makes  an  apostasy.      They 


PSALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS. 


who  think  it  a  descent  do  thus  conceive  it :  he  which  walks  in  the  counsel  of  the 
ungodly,  delights  and  takes  a  pleasure  in  his  sin  ;  he  which  stands  in  the  way  of 
sinners,  stands  in  doubt,  and  is  unresolved  in  his  sin  ;  but  he  who  sits  in  the  seat 
of  the  scornful,  sits  down  and  sins  but  for  his  ease,  as  being  unable  to  suffer 
persecution.  They  who  think  it  an  ascent,  conceive  that  the  ungodly  are  but 
beginners  in  ill ;  that  sinners  are  proficients  in  ill ;  but  the  scorners  are  graduates 
and  doctors  of  the  chair  in  ill.  They  who  think  it  a  descent,  conceive  that  the 
ungodly  are  opposite  to  the  godly,  and  offend  generally  ;  that  sinners  offend,  though 
actually,  yet  but  in  particulars  ;  that  scorners  might  be  sound  at  heart,  if  they  did 
not  set  themselves  to  sale,  and  sin  for  promotion.  The  ascent  may  be  briefly  thus : 
that  walking  expresseth  less  resolution  than  standing,  and  standing  than  sitting  ; 
but  in  sin,  the  more  resolute,  the  more  dissolute :  therefore  sitting  is  the  worst. 
The  descent  thus :  that  walking  expresseth  more  strength  than  standing,  and 
standing  than  sitting  ;  for  a  child  can  sit  when  he  cannot  stand,  and  stand  when  he 
cannot  walk  ;  but  the  stronger  in  sin,  the  worse ;  therefore  walking  is  the  worst. 
Many  such  ways  there  are  of  conceiving  diversity,  either  in  ascending  or  descending  ; 
but  it  needs  be  no  question  which  is  the  worse,  because,  without  question,  they  are 
all  stark  nought :  they  are  three  rocks,  whereof  the  least  is  enough  to  make  a  ship- 
wreck ;  they  are  three  pestilential  airs,  whereof  the  best  is  enough  to  poison  the 
heart.  This  only  may  be  observed,  that  howsoever  the  case  alter  with  Avalkers  and 
sitters,  yet  standers  in  the  way  of  sinners  keep  their  standing  still ;  and  whichso- 
ever is  first  or  last,  yet  they  are  sure  to  be  the  second.  But  is  it  not  that  we 
mistake  the  Prophet,  and  make  his  words  a  gradation,  when,  perhaps,  he  meant 
them  for  level  ground  ?  And  for  such,  indeed,  we  may  take  them,  and  do  as  well, 
and  then  there  wiU  not  be  either  ascent  or  descent  in  the  sins  themselves,  but  only 
a  diversity  in  their  causes ;  as  that  the  first  is  a  sin  caused  by  ill  counsel ;  the 
second,  a  sin  caused  by  ill  example  ;  the  third,  a  sin  caused  by  the  innate  corrup- 
tion of  our  own  hearts.  Or  is  it  that  the  Prophet  alludes  here  to  the  three  principal 
ages  of  our  life,  which  have  every  one  of  them  their  proper  vices,  as  it  were, 
retainers  to  them  ? — and  therefore  the  vices  of  youth,  which  is  the  vigour  of  life,  and 
delights  most  in  motion  and  society,  he  expresseth  by  walking  in  the  counsel  of  the 
ungodly  ;  the  vices  of  the  middle  age,  which  is  the  steadfast  age,  he  expresseth  by 
standing  in  the  way  of  sinners  ;  the  vices  of  old  age,  which,  being  weak  and  feeble,  is 
scarce  able  to  go,  he  expresseth  by  sitting  in  the  chair  of  scorners,  and  it  is  as  if  he  had 
said,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  hath  passed  through  all  the  ages  of  his  life,  and  hath 
kept  himself  untainted  of  the  vices  that  are  incident  unto  them. "  {Ihid. )  The  way 
of  sin  dangerous : — But  a  godly  man  is  wiser  than  so  ;  though  he  know  that  the  way 
is  large  and  broad,  yet  he  knows  also  that  the  press  is  great ;  a  man  cannot  stand  here, 
but  he  shall  be  shouldered  and  thrust  forward  in  sj^ite  of  his  teeth.  {Ihid. )  Walketh 
not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly. — Com2)anions : — We  are  all  of  us  naturally  of  such 
a  social  tendency  that  the  influence  of  companionship  is  necessarily  great.  And  this 
is  so  especially  in  youth.  Moralists,  like  Cicero,  have  made  friendship  the  theme 
of  some  of  their  purest  teaching  and  counsel.  Scripture  tells  us  of  Jonathan  and 
David,  and  this  Psalm  gives  a  hint  of  the  insidious  gradatiotts  by  which  companion- 
ship attains  its  mastery  over  habit  and  character.  Like  a  skilful  angler  ' '  playing  " 
a  fish,  so  does  a  congenial  associate  attach  us  to  his  company.  He  draws  the 
glamour  of  his  power  about  us,  till  we  become  wholly  his.  At  first  we  meet  him 
from  time  to  time,  "walking  in  his  counsels"  ;  then  we  protract  the  interview,  and 
invite  ascendency  as  we  "  stand  in  his  way  "  ;  and  at  length  we  capitulate  to  his 
domination  as  we  "  sit  down  in  his  seat."  Now,  if  it  be  good  to  resist  such  influence 
in  the  case  of  the  ungodly,  it  is  equally  good  to  yield  to  it  in  the  case  of  the 
upright.     Nothing  more  important  than  the  choice  of  associates.     Avoid  such  as — 

I.  Desire  you  kather  as  theik  pkev  than  their  friend.  They  protest 
vehement  friendship ;  there  is  nothing  they  will  not  do  for  ycu  ;  all  that  they 
have  is  at  your  service.     These  are  not  safe  men  who  overact  their  part  in  this  way. 

II.  The  fop  and  rou6.  The  plucking  of  pigeons  has  been  an  art  studied  and 
perfected  by  knaves  of  fashion  in  every  age,  and  has  flung  filth  upon  escutcheons 
which  had  known  no  shame,  and  blasted  many  a  prospect  of  a  noble  future. 

III.  The  extravagant.  We  find  it  easy  to  declare  that  poverty  is  no  disgrace  ; 
yet  it  is  rare  to  find  amongst  the  young  the  moral  hardihood  which  can  say,  "  I 
can't  afford  it. "  In  humbler  life  it  is  by  tens  of  thousands,  not  by  ones  or  twos, 
that  you  may  count  the  well  born  and  the  well  trained  who  have  fallen,  some  into 
suicide,  some  into  prisons,  some  to  the  gallows,  all  into  disgrace  by  becoming  com- 
panions of  those  who  have  tempted  them  into  extravagance.     IV.  Betting  men. 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  f psalm  i. 

The  slowly  rising  pittance  of  the  clerk  will  not  let  hiro  keep  pace  with  the  expensive 
pleasures  of  his  rich  associate,  and  fraud  and  forgery  are  led  up  to  by  the  sure  path- 
way of  the  betting  ring.  V.  The  flatterer,  the  sponge,  who  desires  only  to 
exhaust  your  purse.  The  cynic  too.  He  is  a  flatterer  who  has  established  his 
ascendency  so  completely  that  he  can  afford  to  be  rudf.  You  cannot  make  a  friend 
of  a  bully.     VI.  And  let  both  young  men  and  maidens  be  very  careful  of 

THE  COMPANIONSHIPS  WHICH   THEY   FORM,  ONE  WITH    THE   OTHER.       A   yoUng   man 

will  do  well  who  makes  an  honourable  union  the  goal  of  his  industry  ;  and  let  her 
whose  troth  is  challenged  have  nought  to  do  with  one  whose  life  is  stained  with  an 
unmanly  taint.  Choose  Christian  Iriendships,  for  companionship  is  the  leaven  of 
our  lives  and  solitude  their  bane.  ■■  But  there  is  no  solitude  to  him  who  has  learned 
to  cancel  it  With  pure  thought  and  spiritual  communion.  Healthy  liteniture,  taste, 
art,  music,  come  with  votive  offerings  to  him  who  lingers  by  their  chastened  altars. 
But  the  best  friendship  is  that  of  those  whose  Master  is  Christ.  Wlien  the  disciples 
were  let  go  they  went  to  their  own  company.  Go  you  to  yours,  and  let  it  be  the 
company  which  gathers  round  the  Lord.  {Arthur  Mursell.)  Avoiding  evil  doers : 
— Like  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  this  description  of  the  way  of  the  righteous  begins 
with  a  "blessed."  Those  who  go  down  into  the  busy  streets  day  by  day  are  in 
constant  contact  with  those  who  are  without  God  in  the  world.  Not  necessarily 
bad  men  in  the  common  phrase,  but  possibly  high-minded,  free-hearted,  companion- 
able men,  who  yet  have  left  God  out  of  their  lives.  They  do  nothing  to  please 
Him.  A  part  of  the  testing  of  our  characters  comes  out  in  the  fact  tiiat  we  do  not 
always  know  we  are  walking  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly  when  we  are  really  doing 
so.  It  is  a  hard  thing  not  to  adopt  the  way  in  which  people  around  us  look  at 
things,  and  the  way  of  looking  at  things  accounts  in  large  measure  for  what  we  do. 
An  atmosphere,  intangible  and  still  real,  is  thrown  around  all  characters,  and  the 
moment  we  come  into  this  atmosphere  it  affects  us.  If  it  is  the  atmosphere  of 
prayer,  and  faith,  and  high  endeavour,  we  feel  without  realising  it,  even  when 
nothing  is  said  to  show  the  trend  of  thought.  "Nor  standeth  in  the  way  of 
sinners."  We  note  the  advance  in  wrong.  "  Sinners  "  is  a  stronger  characterisation 
of  bad  associates  than  the  phrase  "ungodly,"  and  "standing"  is  a  more  thorough 
committal  to  them  than  "walking."  It  implies  more  deliberation.  Naturally,  he 
who  stands  with  sinners  and  gives  his  leisure  to  their  friendship  is  fast  reaching  the 
day  when  he  will  sit  with  the  scorners.  What  makes  the  scorner  the  worst  case  to 
reform  ?  It  is  because  a  radical  change  has  come  over  him,  and  evil  has  become  his 
good.  Embittered  against  the  way  which  he  has  lost,  he  makes  virtue  a  mockery. 
One  who  is  in  daily  association  with  evil  may  not  realise  the  loss  he  is  meeting, 
may  not  see  the  bloom  fade  from  the  ripe  peach,  or  from  the  hanging  cluster  of 
grapes,  but  the  scorner  is  in  a  hell  of  his  own.  He  has  lost  the  cliildhood  of  the 
heart  to  which  he  must  come  back  before  he  can  see  and  enter  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven.  Coming  to  the  positive  marks  of  the  way  of  the  righteous,  we  find  that  he 
delights  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  meditates  upon  it  day  and  night.  This  marks 
a  high  and  almost  perfect  stage  of  moral  attainment,  and  creates  a  certain  lovable- 
ness  in  its  possessor  which  a  mere  determination  to  do  right  never  can  do.  We  love 
those  who  love  to  do  right  and  sing  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  whose  moral  move- 
ments are  not  the  working  of  bands  and  pulleys,  but  the  curves  of  the  bird  in  the 
free  air  or  the  bending  of  the  tender  grasses  under  the  breeze.  Effort  pains  us,  but 
ease  charms  us.  What  a  rare  and  wonderful  thing  it  is  to  find  joy  in  a  rule — the 
law  of  God.  We  must  get  the  law  into  the  heart  and  say  it  without  thinking,  and 
live  it  by  a  second  nature.  And  never  since  the  Bible  was  given  to  men  has  there 
been  so  much  study  upon  its  form  and  details.  Is  there  a  corresponding  "  medita- 
tion "  upon  it  ?  Meditation  is  to  thought  and  study  what  autumn  is  to  summer — 
the  ripe  fruitage  of  past  toil.     [E.  N.  Packard.)         The  triads  of  transgression : — 

1.  Three  classes  of  transgressors.  Shun  them  !  1.  Ungodly. — Generally 
those  who  are  (a)  ignorant  of  God,  (6)  deny,  or  (c)  defy  God.  Here  means  restless 
people.  2.  Sinners. — The  restless  missing  his  way,  3.  Scorners. — Mockers,  pests, 
impostors  (Psa.  xxvi.  4-9).  II.  Three  inducements  to  transgress.  Resist 
them!     1.  Counsel. — Flattering  and  deceptive.     Satan  in  Eden  and  the  wilderness. 

2.  Way. — Broad  and  attractive  (Matt.  vii.  13,  14).  3.  Seat. — Boisterous  and 
popular.  "My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not."  III.  Threb 
degrees  of  transgression.  Avoid  them  !  1.  Walking. — Initiatory.  2.  Stand- 
ing.— Secondary.  3.  Sitting. — Grand  Lodge  degree  in  iniquity.  "The  way  of 
transgressors  is  hard  "  (Prov.  iv.  14-18).  "  Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them  " 
(2  Cor.  vi.  17).     {Homiletic  Review.)        Getting  used  to  an  ungodly  atmosphere: — 


PSALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS.  9 

To  make  my  meaning  clearer,  suppose  a  person  steps  out  of  pure  air  into  a  rather 
close  room  :  the  air  is  at  first  disagreeable  and  oppressive,  he  does  not  breathe  freely, 
but  in  a  little  while  he  gets  more  used  to  it,  and  after  a  while  he  hardly  is  aware 
that  the  room  is  close,  and  that  he  is  breathing  impure  air.  Suppose  also  that 
then  he  goes  into  another  room,  which  is  much  closer,  the  air  of  it  much  more 
impure  :  it  will  not  seem  to  him,  coming  as  he  does  from  the  first  room,  to  be  worse 
than  the  first  room  seemed  when  he  came  from  the  pure  air.  This  just  describes 
the  way  in  which  the  man  who  is  beginning  to  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly, 
allowing  himself  to  be  influenced  by  them,  soon  learns  to  breathe  at  ease  in  an 
ungodly  atmosphere.  Probably  his  conscience  is  uneasy  as  he  steps  from  his  place  of 
safety,  but  he  soon  accustoms  himself  to  his  new  position,  and  then  he  is  ready  for  the 
next  step,  and  there  is  every  prospect  of  his  taking  it.  Nor  standeth  in  the  way  of 
Binners. — Counsels  to  the  young : — I.  The  infectious  nature  of  sin,  and  the  danger 
of  walking  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly.  These  warnings  have  been  so  often  repeated 
and  are  now  commonplace,  not  because  they  are  unimportant,  but  because  the  good  and 
wise  of  all  ages  have  felt  the  necessity  of  them.  1.  We  are  all  prone  to  sin.  2.  And 
the  young  are  ignorant  and  unsuspicious,  3.  Vice  is  usually  baited  with  pleasure. 
4.  The  difficulty  of  bearing  ridicule,  which  in  corrupt  society  the  young  are  exposed 
to.  II.  The  hardening  nature  of  sin.  1.  Its  progress  is  gradual  and  insen- 
sible. 2.  The  strength  and  power  of  inveterate  habit.  III.  The  finishing  stage 
OF  wickedness.  To  be  of  the  scornful.  On  which  note — 1.  The  sin  and  danger 
of  it  to  the  scornful  themselves.  It  is  an  audacious  attack  upon  the  majesty  of  the 
living  God,  and  must  strike  every  thinking  person  with  horror.  And  this  is  not  a 
sudden  sin,  but  deliberate.  Such  contempt  of  sacred  things  shows  an  entire  victory 
over  conscience :  all  reluctance  is  gone.  Also,  over  shame,  and  they  design  to 
destroy  it  in  the  minds  of  others.  2.  Its  sad  influence.  For  it  is  public,  and 
intended  to  be  so.  It  is  an  open  advocacy  of  sin  and  an  endeavour  to  break  the 
restraints  of  conscience  in  others  as  well  as  themselves.  Its  malignant  influence  is 
seen  in  the  fear  that  most  persons  have  in  opposing  fashionable  crimes.  It  lays  hold 
on  some  human  weakness  that  has  been  accidentally  associated  with  religion,  and 
ridicules  religion  as  if  it  also  were  weak.  Socrates  was  certainly  the  wisest  and  best 
of  the  men  of  Greece.  His  behaviour  was  such  as  demanded  the  esteem  of  all  who 
knew  him  ;  yet  was  this  worthy  man  successfully  turned  into  ridicule  by  one  whose 
writings  are  to  the  last  degree  contemptible.  But  yet  this  ridicule  paved  the  way 
for  the  enmity  which  was  raised  against  him,  and  which  brought  him  to  death.  So 
ridicule  often  slays  religion  in  the  soul.  Therefore  let  the  young  beware  of  evil 
company.  Let  parents  strive  to  train  their  children  in  religion,  and  let  all  Christian 
men  stand  up  boldly  against  profanity  and  vice  and  deal  with  these  sins  as  they 
deserve.  {J.  Witherspoaii,  D.D.)  True  and  false  friendship : — False  friendship 
is  like  the  gaudy  but  scentless  sunflower,  that  will  bloom  only  in  the  sunshine  of 
prosperity.  True  friendship,  planted  in  mutual  love  and  nourished  by  Christian 
principles,  is  like  the  sweet  but  modest  violet  that  will  flourish  even  in  the  dark 
shade  of  adversity,  and  will  yield  only  fresh  odours  when  trampled  on  by  unkindly 
tread.  {R.  Venting.)  Association  with  sinners : — The  unhappy  bids  to  associate 
with  the  profane  arise  from  two  causes.  1.  That  rigorousness  and  austerity  which 
some  gloomy-minded  Christians  attach  to  their  religion.  God  and  nature  have 
established  no  connection  between  sanctity  of  character  and  severity  of  manners. 
To  rejoice  evermore  is  not  only  the  privilege,  it  is  also  the  duty  of  a  Christian. 
The  votaries  of  vice  put  on  the  mask  of  mirth,  they  counterfeit  gladness  amidst  the 
horrors  of  guilt.  2.  The  opinion  that  wickedness,  particularly  some  kinds  of  it, 
are  manly  and  becoming  ;  that  dissoluteness,  infidelity,  and  blasphemy  are  indica- 
tions of  a  sprightly  and  a  strong  mind.  Those  who  have  shone  in  all  ages  as  the 
lights  of  the  world,  with  a  few  exceptions,  have  been  uniformly  on  the  side  of 
goodness,  and  have  been  as  distinguished  in  the  temple  of  virtue  as  they  were 
illustrious  in  the  temple  of  fame.  {J.  Logan.)  Nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of 
the  BComfuL — A  happy  retrospect : — Sir  Waller  Scott  near  the  end  of  his  life 
said,  "  I  have  been  the  most  voluminous  author  of  the  day.  It  is  a  comfort  to 
me  to  think  that  I  have  tried  to  unsettle  no  man's  faith,  to  corrupt  no  man's 
principles."  {Quiver.)  The  fear  of  ridicule : — As  the  crackling  of  thorns  under 
a  pot,  so  is  the  laughter  of  a  fool,  and  he  is  a  poor  invertebrate  creature  who 
allows  himself  to  be  laughed  down  when  he  attempts  to  stick  to  his  principles 
and  tries  to  do  what  he  believes  to  be  right.  "Learn  from  the  earliest  days," 
Bays  Sydney  Smith,  "to  insure  your  principles  against  the  perils  of  ridicule ;  you 
can  no  more  exercise  your  reason  if  yon  live  in  the  constant  dread  of  laughter, 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

than  you  can  enjoy  your  life  if  you  are  in  constant  terror  of  death.     No  coward  is 
greater  than  he  who  dares  not  to  be  wise  because  fools  will  laugh  at  him. "     {Ibid. ) 

Ver.  2.  But  Ms  delight  is  in  tlie  law  of  the  Lord. — The  law  of  the  Lord: — We 
should  all  like  to  be  blessed,  and  here  is  the  way — delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
I.  What  is  this  law  ?  Not  the  Mosaic,  not  the  ceremonial  law,  for  which  God 
often  cared  nothing ;  but  the  law  according  to  which  the  Lord  hath  ordered  all 
things.  This  is  the  law  which  God  says  He  will  put  into  our  hearts  and  write  oa 
our  minds.  This  is  that  true  and  eternal  law  of  which  Solomon  speaks  in  his 
Proverbs  as  the  Wisdom  by  which  God  made  the  heavens  :  and  he  tells  us  that  that 
Wisdom  is  a  tree  of  life  to  all  who  lay  hold  on  her.  This  is  that  law  which  the 
inspired  philosopher — for  philosopher  he  was  indeed — who  wrote  that  119th  Psalm, 
continually  prayed  and  strove  to  learn.  Christ  perfectly  fulfilled  it.  He  said,  with 
His  whole  heart,  "I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  My  God."  The  will  of  God,  for  this 
law  is  nothing  else.  By  keeping  it  we  are  blessed.  What  God  has  willed  we  should 
be  and  do.  But  if  so,  it  is  plain  we  must  heed  the  warnings  of  the  first  verse.  For 
no  one  will  learn  God's  will  if  he  takes  counsel  from  the  ungodly  ;  or  if  he  stand 
in  the  way  of  profligate  and  dishonest  men.  If  he  do  this,  all  he  will  learn  of  God's 
law  is  the  dreadful  part  of  it  told  of  in  the  2nd  Psalm.  God  will  "rule  him  with 
a  rod  of  iron,  and  break,"  &c.  But  there  is  more  hope  for  him — if  he  repent — than 
if  he  sits  in  the  seat  of  the  scomers — the  sneering,  the  frivolous,  the  unbelieving, 
who  laugh  down  religion  as  enthusiasm  and  worse.  When  the  greatest  poet  of  our 
days  tried  to  picture  his  idea  of  a  fiend  tempting  man  to  ruin,  he  gave  him  just 
such  a  character  as  this :  a  very  clever,  agreeable,  courteous  man  of  the  world, 
and  yet  a  being  who  could  not  love  any  one,  and  believed  not  in  any  one ;  who 
mocked  at  both  man  and  God,  and  who  tempted  and  ruined  men  in  mere  sport  as  a 
cruel  child  may  torment  a  fly.  Such  was  Mephistopheles.  Beware,  therefore,  of 
the  scornful  as  well  as  of  the  openly  sinful.  And  remember — IL  This  law  is  the 
LAW  OF  THE  LoRD — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Who  can  stand  with  Him  ?  "  Why  do 
the  heathen  rage,"  &c.  Men  will  not  believe  in  this  law.  But  sooner  or  later 
they  have  to,  and  often  in  terrible  ways  they  find  out  their  mistake.  "  He  that 
sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh. "  For  Christ  is  on  the  throne  of  the  universe. 
And  His  might  and  power  are  continually  being  made  known.  Even  now  He 
bruises  His  enemies  as  Avith  a  rod  of  iron.  It  is  of  no  use  to  talk  about  the  goodness 
of  God  and  of  the  gentleness  of  Christ.  We  flatter  ourselves  that  if  gen  tip.  He  may 
be  also  indulgent  and  weak.  But  there  is  an  awful  side  to  His  character.  Think 
of  these  things.  You  are  kings — at  least  over  yourselves  ;  and  judges — at  least  of 
your  own  conduct.  Therefore  let  each  and  all  of  us,  high  and  low,  take  the 
warning  and  love  law — for  that  is  the  true  meaning — before  the  Son  of  God,  as 
subjects  before  an  absolute  monarch,  because  His  will  is  only  and  always  a  good 
will.  {Charles  Kingsley.)  The  good  man's  delight:  —  I.  Such  delight  is 
NECESSARY.  By  "the  law  of  the  Lord"  we  mean  religion  both  experimental  and 
practical.  Now  such  delight  in  it  is  necessary  for  a  Christian  man,  because — 
1.  Without  it  there  is  no  heart  in  religion.  But  the  very  essence  of  religion  lies  in 
the  heart.  2.  Works  and  acts  acceptable  to  God  will  not  be  produced.  But  it  is 
for  these  that  religion  is  designed.  3.  A  man  cannot  be  a  true  Christian  and  under- 
stand the  true  gospel  without  feeling  a  delight  in  it.  The  true  gospel,  mark  you, 
for  there  are  gospels  preached  by  some  men  that  no  man  can  delight  in.  But  the 
trae  gospel  must  make  the  heart  happy.  II.  The  manifestations  of  this 
DELIGHT.  1.  He  will  continually  think  of  the  law  of  the  Lord.  2.  He  will  be 
sure  to  speak  of  it.  There  is  too  little  conversation  now  about  Christ.  I  suppose 
it  is  with  some  Christians  as  the  sailor  said  it  was  with  the  parrot.  He  had  a 
remarkable  parrot  which  he  sold  to  a  good  woman,  telling  her  it  could  talk  no  end 
of  things.  After  she  had  kept  it  a  week  and  it  had  said  nothing,  she  took  it  back 
to  the  sailor.  "  Well,  ma'am,"  said  he,  "I  dare  say  it  has  not  said  much,  but  it 
has  thought  the  more."  And  there  are  people  like  that  parrot.  Like  it,  too,  in 
that  the  parrot  did  not  think,  though  the  sailor  said  it  did.  Nor  do  they,  or  else 
if  they  had  thought  they  would  have  spoken.  What  is  in  the  well  will  come  up  in 
the  bucket.  3.  Endeavours  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  it.  4.  And  will  not  rest 
until  he  has  brought  others  to  delight  in  it  also.  III.  The  happy  effects  of  this 
DELIGHT.  1.  It  will  make  a  man  bold.  2.  Very  calm  and  quiet  in  the  day  of 
affliction.  3.  It  will  prepare  him  for  heaven.  To  you  who  have  no  such  delight, 
this  law  of  the  Lord,  which  was  designed  to  be  your  delight,  will  become  your 
scourge.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        A  meditative  life : — I.  This  psalm  is  not  a  com- 


MALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS.  11 

MENDATiON  OF  A  MEDITATIVE  LIFE  ONLY.  We  cannot  in  this  world  of  imperative  / 
"work  live  such  a  life.  Those  in  cloisters  and  convents  have  tried  and  failed.  As  I 
when  we  fix  the  eyes  on  one  object  only,  they  get  weary,  filmy,  dull.  But  rightly 
understood,  our  life  is  to  be  far  more  than  meditation.  It  is  to  be  like  a  tree  planted 
and  bringing  forth  fruit.  The  man  is  to  be  a  doer,  and  what  he  does  is  to  prosper. 
The  law  on  which  he  meditates  is  specially  related  to  men's  active  life.  It  is  not 
merely  to  be  thought  about,  but  practically  obeyed.  Merely  to  meditate  on  it 
would  be  as  if  a  soldier,  having  received  from  the  general's  hand  the  order  book, 
were  to  take  that  book  to  his  tent  and  were  to  sit  down  and  spend  all  the  hours  oi 
the  day  admiring  his  general's  skill  and  the  grasp  of  his  mind  instead  of  proceeding 
to  obey  the  orders  and  to  prepare  the  army  for  the  impending  battle.     II.  Thb 

MEDITATION   HEEE  COMMENDED  IS  ONE  THOROUGHLY  CONSISTENT  WITH  WORKING, 

ACTIVE  LIFE  ;  indeed,  is  for  this  very  thing.     And  the  happy  man  is  he  who    i 
through  meditation  on  God's  law  comes  to  live  the  life  of  holy  service.     He  is  to  be    1 
"like  a  tree"  as  contrasted  with  "the  chaff."     Our  lives  must  be  as  one  or  the     ' 
other.     III.  Note  the  force  of  the  image  employed.     For  a  tree  vividly  sets 
forth  the  connection  between  thinking  and  working ;  between  the  roots  and  the 
fruit  of  conduct.     Strong  characters  are  produced  only  by  strong  thinking.     Occa- 
sional, weak,  fugitive  thinking,  even  on  good  things,  may  exist — too  often  does — 
with  evil  lives.     Thoughts  must  be  deep,  and  go  down  to  the  roots  of  the  soul  and 
take  possession  of  it.     The  ungodly  man  is  he  who  does  not  take  God  into  accountj^ 
He  acts  upon  expediency.     Hence  he  is  like  the  chaff.     There  are  different  sorts  of' 
trees,  but  any  tree  is  better  than  the  chaff.    But  seek  to  be  like  the  tree  told  of  here. 
IV.  How?     You  must  be  "planted,"  that  is,  "transplanted."     The  tree  has  been 
j)ut  where  it  is  designedly.     And  this  is  what  meditation  means.     It  is  the  self- 
planting  of  the  man  by  the  rivers  of  waters  God  has  caused  to  flow  forth  for  us  from 
His  Word.     The  rivers  told  of  are  not  natural  rivers,  but  artificial  streams  made 
for  the  purpose  of  irrigation.     Solomon  made  many  such  in  his  day.     And  Heze- 
,kiah  also.     The  Turkish  Government  has  let  them   fall  into  decay,  and  hence 
Palestine  is  now  nearly  desert.     Lord  Lawrence  made  such  streams  for  North-West 
India,  to  its  vast  advantage.     Merv  in  Central  Asia  is  an  oasis  in  the  desert,  for 
the  Turcomans  have  dammed  up  the  streams  that  flow  down  from  the  Afghan 
mountains  and  led  their  waters  along  artificial  canals,    and   so   the  country  is 
watered  and  reclaimed.     Day  and  night  the  dam  is  watched  by  Turcoman  sentinels,    j 
for  if  it  were  once  destroyed  the  country  would  again  become  desert.     But  the  * 
herbs  and  the  trees  will  never  lack  for  water  while  these  streams  are  preserved,  and  \ 
as  long  as  the  snows  abide  on  the  hills  which  lift  their  white  peaks  against  the    \ 
distant  sky.     What  a  parable  all  this  is  !     If  we  would  toil  so  to  bring  the  living     '[ 
waters  of  God's  Word  into  the  moral  desert  of  our  souls,  what  a  reclamation  of  waste 
places  there  would  be,  what  lives  like  trees  bearing  fruit !     Missions,  churches, 
worship  are  all  such  endeavours.     And  what  a  channel  for  such  streams  is  a  godly,     I 
consistent  life  !     Such  lives  are  ever  a  blessing.     As  a  tree  is  a  thing  both  of  beauty 
and  of  use,  so  are  they.     And  every  God-filled  man  and  woman  is  such  a  tree. 
-~Thi3  is  the  secret  of  the  happy  life.     (  J.  Vincent  Tymms.)        The  godly  man's 
pleasure : — Note  the  Christian  duty  and  holy  practice  of  a  godly  man.     He  is  much, 
and  often  in   serious  and   Christian  meditation.     He  is  conversant  with   Holy 
■  Scriptures  ;  his  meditation  is  concerning  the  "law,"  that  is,  the  heavenly  doctrine "^ 
which  shows  the  will  of  God  and  His  worship,  what  man  must  and  ought  to  believe  J 
and  do  to  gain  eternal  life.     It  is  his  daily  study  and  continual  exercise.     Not  that 
he  doth  nothing  else  ;  the  meaning  is,  he  setteth  some  time  apart  daily  to  serve  God^— 
The  godly  man,  who  is  truly  blessed  and  happy,  doth  wonderfully  love,  and  is 
greatly  affected  with  the  Word  of  Almighty  God,  and  hath  exceeding  delight  and 
joy  in  the  doctrine  of  God,  because  there  is  revealed  the  will  of  God,  whereunto 
men  must  be  careful  to  frame  and  conform  all  their  desires,  thoughts,  words,  and 
deeds,  because  herein  is  chalked  out  and  declared  the  very  highway  of  eternal  life 
and  salvation.     It  is   a  special   note  and  property  of  a  godly  man   to   perform 
■Christian  duties  to  God  willingly  and  cheerfully,  and  to  make  them  his  delight  and  joy. 
{Samuel  Smith.)        Blessed  Bible  reading : — I.  Its  characteristics.     It  is  read — 
1.  Independently.    2.  Thoughtfully.     3.  Frequently.    4.  Submissively.     5.  Gladly. 
6.  Prayerfully.      II.  The  results  of  such  reading.      1.  Stability  of  Christian 
character.     2.     Frtiitfulness.     3.     Freslmess   and   beauty.     4.    Success   in   all   his 
:righteous  undertakings.     {J.  Morgan.)         The  good  vian  in  relation  to  the  Word  of 
'God: — I.   His  practice.     "His  delight  is  in,"  &c.     How  does  he  use  the  Bible? 
1.    He    studies  it  independently.      2.    Deeply.      3.    Sympathetically.      II.    His 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psALM  I. 

PLEASURE.     "  His  delight  is  in,"  &c.      1.  He  enjoys  the  pleasure  of  congeniality. 
2.  Novelty.      3.  Profit.      III.   His  prosperity.     1.    He  is  stable.      2.  Fair  and 
fruitful.      3.  Successful.     {/.    Spencer  Hill.)         The   belieuer's  delight:  —  1.  The 
feeling  with  which  the  believer  views  the  Holy  Scriptures.     2.  Some  of  the  grounds 
which  give  rise  to  this  delight  in  the  heart  of  the  believer.     Its  own  intrinsic  worth 
(and  excellence.     He  know-s  by  experience  its  quickening  and  converting  power,  n 
^Tt  has  given  and  still  gives  the  believer  light.     In  the  Word  of  God  he  has  foundr^ 
fceace.     The  Word  gives  the  believer  freedom.     It  consoles  and  supports  the  true 
*eliever  in   distress   and   temptation.      3.  What   is  the   result   of    this    delight? 
What    effect    does    this    feeling    produce    upon    the    believer's    practice  t      He 
"meditates"   on  the  law  of  the  Lord  "day  and  night."     (C.   R.   Hay,   M.A.) 
The  saints'  spiritual  delight : — I.  The  godly  man  is  described  by  way  of  negation, 
in  three  particulars.     "Sitting"  implies  a  habit  in  sin,  familiarity  with  sinners. 
Diamonds  and  stones  may  lie  together,  but  they  will  not  solder  or  cement.     II.  By 
way  of  POSITION.     The  not  being  scandalous  will  no  more  make  a  good  Christian 
than  a  cipher  will  make  a  sum.     It  is  not  enough  for  the  servant  of  the  vineyard 
Ji  tliat  he  doth  no  hurt  there,  he  doth  not  break  the  trees  or  destroy  the  hedges  ;  if 
ijj  he  doth  not  work  in  the  vineyard  he  loseth  his  pay.     1.  You  may  not  be  out- 
M  wardly  bad,  and  yet  not  inwardly  good.      Though  you  do  not  hang  out  your  bush, 
1  yet  you  may  secretly  vend  your  commodity  ;  a  tree  may  be  full  of  vermin,  yet  the 
fair  leaves  may  cover  them  that  they  are  not  seen.      2.  If  you  are  only  negatively 
good,  God  makes  no  reckoning  of  you,  you  are  as  so  many  ciphers  in  God's  arithmetic, 
and  He  writes  down  no  ciphers  in  the  book  of  life.     3.  A  man  may  as  well  go  to 
hell  for  not  doing  good  as  for  doing  evil.    One  may  as  well  die  with  not  eating  food 
as  with  poison.     A  ground  may  as  well  be  spoiled  for  want  of  good  seed  as  with 
Qiaving  tares  sown  in  it.     A  twofold  description  of  a  godly  man.     III.  He  de- 
lights IN  God's  law.      A  man  may  work  in  his  trade  and  not  delight  in  it,  bat 
a  godly  man  serves  God  with  delight.     What  is  meant  by  the  Law  ?    Take  the 

Cword  more  strictly  and  it  means  the  Decalogue,  or  Ten  Commandments.  Take  it 
more  largely,  it  is  the  whole  written  Word  of  God  ;  those  truths  deducted  from  the 
Word  ;  the  whole  business  of  religion.  The  word  is  a  setting  forth,  and  religion  a 
showing  forth,  of  God  and  Law.  What  is  meant  by  "delight  in  the  law"? 
Heb.  and  Sept.  render,  "his  will  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,"  ;md  that  which  is 
voluntary  is  delightful.  A  child  of  God,  though  he  cannot  serve  the  Lord  per- 
fectly, yet  serves  Him  willingly.  He  is  not  a  pressed  soldier,  but  a  volunteer.  The 
saints'  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  proceeds  from — 1,  Soundness  of  judgment. 
The  mind  apprehends  a  beauty  in  God's  law,  now  the  judgment  draws  the  affec- 
tions, like  so  many  orbs,  after  it.  2.  From  the  predominancy  of  grace.  When 
grace  comes  with  authority  and  majesty  upon  the  heart  it  fills  it  with  delight. 
Grace  puts  a  new  bias  into  the  will,  it  works  a  spontaneity  and  cheerfulness  in- 
God's  service.  3.  From  the  sweetness  of  the  end.  Well  may  we  with  cheerfulness 
let  down  the  net  of  our  endeavour  when  we  have  so  excellent  a  draught.  Heaven 
at  the  end  of  duty  causeth  delight  in  the  way  of  duty.  Two  cases  to  be  put. 
1.  Whether  a  regenerate  person  may  not  serve  God  with  weariness.  Yes  ;  but  this 
lassitude  may  arise  from  the  inbeing  of  corruption  (Rom.  vii.  24).  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, habitual,  and  it  is  involuntary.  He  is  troubled  by  it.  He  is  weary  of  his 
weariness.  2.  Whether  a  hypocrite  may  not  serve  God  with  delight  ?  He  may, 
but  his  delight  is  carnal.  How  may  this  spiritual  delight  be  known  T  He  that 
delights  in  God's  law  is  often  thinking  of  it.  If  we  delight  in  religion  there  is 
nothing  can  keep  us  from  it,  but  we  will  be  conversant  in  Word,  prayer,  sacra- 
ments. He  that  loves  gold  will  trade  for  it.  Those  that  delight  in  religion  are 
often  speaking  of  it.  He  that  delights  in  God  will  give  Him  the  best  in  every 
service.  And  he  doth  not  much  delight  in  anything  else  but  God.  True  delight 
■  is  constant.  Hypocrites  have  their  pangs  of  desire,  and  flashes  of  joy  which  are 
soon  over.  Delight  in  religion  crowns  all  our  services,  evidenceth  grace,  will 
make  the  business  of  religion  more  facile  to  us.  All  the  duties  of  religion  are  for 
our  good.  Delight  in  God's  service  makes  us  resemble  the  angels  in  heaven. 
Delight  in  God's  law  will  not  breed  surfeit.  Carnal  objects  do  oft  cause  a  loathing 
and  nauseating.  We  soon  grow  weary  of  our  delights.  For  the  attaining  of  this 
delight  set  a  high  estimate  upon  the  Word.     Pray  for  a  spiritual  heart.    Purge  out 

(the  delight  of  sin.  {T.  Watson.)  Meditative  Bible  reading: — "  He  shall  be  like 
a  tree  planted  by  rivers  of  water. "  Who  shall?  He  whose  delight  is  in  the  law 
of  the  Lord.  His  life  shall  be  rooted  in  the  richest  of  soils ;  he  shall  never  lack 
resources;  his  soul  shall  delight  itself  in  fatness.     But  what  is  "the  law  of  the 


PSALM  I.]  lllE  PSALMS.  13 

Lord  "  ?    The  laws  of  the  Lord  are  scattered  over  this  book  with  almost  bewildering  / 

Slentitude  and  variety.  They  are  almost  as  thick  as  autumn  leaves.  The 
Orientalist  takes  great  masses  of  rose  leaves,  and  from  them  distils  that  precious 
essence  we  call  otto  of  roses.  Can  any  one  take  these  scattered  leaves  of  law,  mass 
them  together,  and  give  us  the  essence  of  all  law  ?  Can  any  one  take  these  almost  / 
uiimanageable  quantities,  and  return  them  to  us  in  a  small  phial,  which  can  be  i 
carried  in  the  hand  of  a  little  child  ?  Yes,  Jesus  Christ  has  done  it.  "  All  the  law  i 
_j.a.Julfilled  in  one  word^ — thou  shalt  love.",  Love  is  the  essence  of  law,  He  who 
deliglrts'in  love  and  loving  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  rivers  of  water.  Now  we 
are  permitted  to  look  into  "the  mind  of  Christ,"  into  love's  great  laboratory  and 
see  the  great  Lover  at  work.  (Love  is  the  only  element  in  which  He  works,  but  it  is 
prepared  in  different  ways.")  At  one  time  love  is  very  tender,  to  woo  a  tender  blade ; 
again  it  is  very  fierce,  to  burn  a  stubborn  weed.)  It  reveals  itself  in  different  ways 
to  suit  men's  different  needs.  <  If,  then,  I  would  know  how  love  should  work  I  must 
study  the  mind  of  Christ,  an5  meditate  thereon  both  night  and  day."^/  To  delight  \ 
in  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  to  live  as  devoted  students  in  the  mind  of  Clirist.  That  1 
mind  is  opened  out  for  us  in  the  gospel.  All  the  dispositions  of  Jesus  are  laid  bare. 
It  is  revealed  to  us  how  His  love  disposed  itself  in  very  varied  circumstances  and  to 
very  different  needs.  If  we  would  be  planted  in  a  rich  soil,  and  have  a  fruitful  and 
luxuriant  life,  we  must  be  rooted  in  the  mind  of  Christ,  delight  ourselves  in  the 
mind  of  Christ.  Now  the  mind  of  Christ  cannot  be  known  at  a  glance.  It 
demands  earnest  and  persistent  study.  We  shall  have  to  meditate  in  it  day  and 
night.  The  word  "meditation"  has  an  antique,  old-world  flavour  about  it,  as 
though  it  belongs  to  an  age  when  men  took  slow,  measured  strides,  and  the  wheels 
of  time  moved  leisurely.  How  many  of  us  meditate,  hold  the  mind  before  a  subject 
tmtil  it  becomes  steeped  in  it,  saturated  with  it,  through  and  through  ?  We  live  in 
&n  age  of  mental  haste  and  gallop.  Impressions  are  abundant ;  convictions  are 
scarce.  Go  to  the  academy  in  any  of  the  summer  months,  and  see  how  the  crowds 
gallop  round  the  galleries,  hastily  glancing  at  the  hundreds  of  pictures  which  adorn 
the  walls,  with  the  result  that  the  memory  retains  nothing  in  distinction,  but  only 
a  recollection  of  masses  of  colour  in  endless  confusion.  How  is  it  with  the  art 
^student  ?  He  goes  early  in  the  morning.  He  selects  his  picture.  He  sits  down 
before  it.  He  studies  it — its  perspective,  its  grouping,  its  colouring,  the  artist's 
mannerisms,  every  line,  every  light  and  shade.  He  meditates  upon  it.  The 
picture  becomes  imprinted  upon  his  mind  and  educates  his  taste.  It  steeps  into 
his  own  soul,  and  afterwards  imperceptibly  influences  his  own  pencil  and  brush, 
and  becomes  part  of  the  man  for  ever.  Well,  in  the  four  Gospels  we  have  four  I 
picture  galleries,  and  the  different  pictures  are  different  phases  of  the  mind  of  ^ 
Christ.  Christ  is  depicted  in  different  attitudes  and  conditions  :  alone  on  a  moun'^^ 
,tain  at  prayer ;  in  the  midst  of  a  vast  inquisitive  multitude ;  in  the  severities  of 
temptation  in  a  wilderness  ;  in  a  quiet  home  at  Bethany ;  facing  the  Cross ;  the 
triumph  of  Calvary.  The  real  student,  the  real  disciple  of  the  Master,  wants  to 
know  the  mind  of  his  Master,  and  he  sits  down  before  one  picture  at  a  time,  and 
lingers  before  it,  and  studies  every  line  and  feature  of  it,  and  beauty  after  beauty 
breaks  upon  his  delighted  vision.  He  meditates  upon  it,  and  the  beauty  of  the 
picture  steeps  into  his  soul,  refines  his  moral  taste,  influences  his  hand  and  heart, 
and  becomes  part  of  himself  for  ever.  I  tell  you,  we  know  almost  nothing  of  the 
moral  and  spiritual  loveliness  of  our  Jesus,  almost  nothing  of  the  mind  of  Christ, 
because  we  do  not  hold  ourselves  before  it  in  lingering  meditation.  Why  don't  we  ? 
Why  are  we  not  devoted  students  of  these  pictures  of  the  mind  of  Christ  ?  Let  us 
be  frank  with  ourselves.  Is  not  Bible-studying  wearying  and  wearisome  ?  To  how 
many  of  us  is  it  a  delight  ?  It  is  because  so  many  put  the  virtue  in  the  reading 
itself.  We  think  when  we  have  read  a  chapter  we  have  discharged  a  duty.  People 
open  their  Bibles,  and  read  a  few  verses,  and  close  them,  and  think  that  by  their 
reading  they  have  pleased  God.  You  may  have  displeased  Him  !  Some  people, 
think  that  when  they  read  the  Bible  the  very  act  of  reading  is  a  kind  of  talisman 
to  hedge  about  their  lives  with  increased  security.  Oh  no,  it  may  be  that  you  are 
falling  into  the  very  snare  of  the  tempter !  John  Ruskin  says  there  is  nothing^ 
which  so  tends  to  destroy  the  accuracy  of  the  artistic  eye  as  a  hurried  gallop  round  i 
an  art  gallery,  even  though  it  contains  the  works  of  the  most  eminent  masters.  \ 
May  not  that  be  equally  true  of  this  gospel  gallery,  where  the  mind  of  the  great 
Master  is  exhibited  in  a  hundred  different  ways ;  a  hurried  and  half-indifferent 
gallop  may  only  destroy  the  accuraoy  of  the  moral  eye,  and  impair  rather  than 
strengthen  your  spiritual  yision !    Bible  reading  is  virtuous  when  it  leads  to  virtue. 


V 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

My  text  declares  that  those  who  thus  live  in  continual  meditation  npon  the  ways 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  in  a  rich  rootage.  They  shall  be  like  trees  planted  by  riyera 
«f  water.  They  shall  have  vast  resources.  Are  we  all  planted  there  ?  If  we  are 
rooted  elsewhere  our  life  will  be  stunted  and  unhealthy.  "His  leaf  shall  not 
wither."  The  leaf  is  the  thing  of  the  spring-time.  It  is  the  first  thing  that  comes. 
Well,  in  the  Christian  life  spring  leaf  shall  ever  remain.  The  spring  greenness  of 
life  shall  not  wither  as  the  years  roll  by.  The  beauties  of  the  spring-time  shall 
continue  through  all  the  seventy  years.  The  beauties  of  early  life,  of  young  life, 
the  beauties  of  childhood  shall  never  be  destroyed.  "  His  leaf  shall  not  wither." 
His  childlikeness,  the  glory  of  the  spring-time  of  life,  shall  always  be  fresh  and 
beautiful ;  it  shall  never  wither  away.  There  shall  be  other  developments.  Life 
shall  grow.  It  shall  increase  in  knowledge.  It  shall  broaden  in  experience.  It 
shall  open  out  large  capacities  and  powers.  But,  amid  all  the  developments,  the 
beauties  of  childlikeness  shall  remain  ;  his  spring  leaf  shall  not  wither  ;  the  glory 
of  the  spring-time  shall  never  be  lost.  {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Meditation: — 
Grace  breeds  delight  in  God,  and  delight  breeds  meditation.  Meditation  is  like  the 
watering  of  the  seed,  it  makes  the  fruits  of  grace  to  flourish.  If  it  be  required  to 
show  what  meditation  is,  I  answer — 1.  It  is  the  soul's  retiring  of  itself.  A  Chris- 
tian, when  he  goes  to  meditate,  must  lock  himself  up  from  the  world.  The  world 
spoils  meditation.  2.  It  is  a  serious  and  solemn  thinking  upon  God  (Heb. ),  with 
intentness  to  recollect  and  gather  together  the  thoughts.  Meditation  is  not  a 
cursory  work.  A  carnal,  flitting  Christian  is  like  the  traveller,  his  thoughts  ride 
post,  he  minds  nothing  of  God.  A  wise  Christian  is  like  the  artist,  he  views  with 
seriousness  and  ponders  the  things  of  religion.  3.  It  is  the  raising  of  the  heart  to 
holy  affections.  Meditation  is  a  duty  imposed.  The  same  God  who  hath  bid  us 
believe  hath  bid  us  meditate.  It  is  a  duty  opposed.  We  may  conclude  it  is  a 
good  duty,  because  it  is  against  the  stream  of  corrupt  nature.  As  it  is  said,  "You 
may  know  that  religion  is  right  which  Nero  persecutes."  The  meditation  of  a 
thing  hath  more  sweetness  in  it  than  the  bare  remembrance.  The  remembrance  of 
a  truth  without  the  serious  meditation  of  it  will  but  create  matter  of  sorrow  another 
day.  A  sermon  remembered,  but  not  ruminated,  will  only  serve  to  increase  our 
condemnation.  Meditation  and  study  differ  in  three  ways.  In  their  nature — 
Study  is  the  work  of  the  brain,  meditation  of  the  heart.  In  their  design — ^The 
design  of  study  is  notion,  the  design  of  meditation  is  piety.  In  their  issue  and 
result — Study  leaves  a  man  never  a  whit  the  better  ;  it  is  like  a  winter  sun  that 
hath  little  warmth  and  influence.  Meditation  leaves  one  in  a  more  holy  frame. 
It  melts  the  heart  when  it  is  frozen,  and  makes  it  drop  into  tears  of  love.  There  are 
things  in  the  law  of  God  which  we  should  principally  meditate  upon.  His  attri- 
butes. His  promises  of  remission,  sanctification,  remuneration.  Meditate  upon 
the  love  of  Christ ;  upon  sin  ;  upon  the  vanity  of  the  creature  ;  upon  the  excellency 
of  grace  ;  upon  the  state  of  your  souls  ;  upon  your  experiences.  The  necessity  of 
meditation  will  appear  in  three  particulars.  1.  The  end  why  God  has  given  us  His 
Word,  written  and  preached,  is  not  only  to  know  it,  but  that  we  should  meditate  in 
.it.  Without  meditation  we  never  can  be  good  Christians.  The  truths  of  God  will 
[not  stay  with  us.  Meditation  imprints  and  fastens  a  truth  in  the  mind.  Without 
meditation  the  truths  which  we  know  will  never  affect  our  hearts.  And  we  make 
ourselves  guilty  of  slighting  God  and  His  Word.  If  a  man  lets  a  thing  lie  by,  and 
never  minds  it,  it  is  a  sign  he  slights  it.  Answers  to  objections — 1,  I  have  so 
much  business  in  the  world  that  I  have  no  time  to  meditate.  The  business  of  a 
Christian  is  meditation,  just  as  the  business  of  the  husbandman  is  ploughing  and 
sowing.  2.  This  duty  of  meditation  is  hard.  The  price  that  God  hath  set  heaven 
is  labour.  We  do  not  argue  so  in  other  things.  Entering  into  meditation  may  be 
hard,  but  once  entered  it  is  sweet  and  pleasant.  As  to  rules  about  meditation — 
Be  very  serious  about  the  work.  Read  before  you  meditate.  Do  not  multiply  the 
subjects  of  meditation.  To  meditation  join  examination.  Shut  up  meditation  with 
prayer,  and  pray  over  your  meditations.  Reduce  it  to  practice.  Live  over  your 
meditation.  {T.  Watson.)  A  man  known  by  his  delight: — And  he  seems  to 
frame  his  process  in  this  manner :  a  man  is  known  what  he  is  by  his  delight ;  for 
such  as  a  man's  delight  is,  such  a  man  himself  is ;  and  therefore  a  godly  man 
delights  not  to  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  nor  to  stand  in  the  way  of 
sinners,  nor  to  sit  in  the  chair  of  scorners,  for  these  are  all  lawless  delights — at 
least,  delights  of  that  law  of  which  St.  Paul  saith,  "  I  find  another  law  in  my  mem- 
bers "  :  they  agree  not  with  a  godly  man's  nature,  and  though  a  delight  there  must 
be,  there  is  not  living  without  it ;  yet  a  godly  man  will  rather  want  it  than  take 


P8A1M  I.]  TEE  PSALMS.  1* 

it  up  in  such  commodities.  The  godly  man  begins  to  appear  in  his  likeness  ;  for 
this  delighting  in  the  law  of  Hod  is  so  essential  to  godliness  that  it  even  constitutes 
a  godly  man  and  gives  him  his  being.  For  what  is  godliness  but  the  love  of  God  ? 
and  what  in  love  without  delight  1  that  we  may  see  what  a  sovereign  thing  godli- 
ness is,  which  not  only  brings  us  delight  when  we  come  to  blessedness,  but  brings 
us  to  blessedness  by  a  way  of  delighting.  For  the  Prophet  requires  not  a  godliness 
tli".t  bars  us  of  delight ;  he  requires  only  a  godliness  that  rectifies  our  delight ;  for 
as  the  wrong  placing  our  delight  is  the  cause  of  all  our  miseries,  so  the  right 
placing  it  is  the  cause  of  all  our  happiness  ;  and  what  righter  placing  it  than  to 
place  it  in  the  right  ?  and  what  is  the  right  but  only  the  law  ?  But  is  there  delight, 
then,  in  the  law  of  God  ?  Is  it  not  a  thing  rather  that  will  make  us  melancholy  ? 
and  doth  it  not  mortify  in  us  the  life  of  all  joy  ?  It  mortifies  indeed  the  life  of 
carnal  delights,  but  it  quickens  in  us  another  delight,  as  much  better  than  those 
as  heaven  is  above  the  earth.  For  there  is  no  true  delight  which  delights  not  as 
much  to  be  remembered  as  to  be  felt ;  which  pleaseth  not  as  well  the  memory  as 
the  sense ;  and  takes  not  as  much  joy  to  think  of  it  being  done  as  when  it  was 
a-doing.  For  is  it  not  a  miserable  delight  when  it  may  be  threatened  with  this  ? 
You  will  one  day  remember  this  with  pain.  Is  it  not  a  doleful  delight,  when  grief 
besets  the  borders  of  gladness — when  sorrow  follows  it  at  the  heels  ?  Is  it  not  a 
fearful  delight  when,  like  a  magician's  rod,  it  is  instantly  turned  into  a  serpent  ? 
{Sir  Richard  Baker. )  Delight  in  the  Divine  law : — And  as  in  this  study  of  the 
law  of  God  there  is  no  fear  of  melancholy,  bo  in  the  delight  that  is  taken  in  it  there 
is  no  fear  of  satiety ;  all  other  delights  must  have  change,  or  else  they  cloy  us ; 
must  have  cessation,  or  else  they  tire  us  ;  must  have  moderation,  or  else  they  waste 
us  :  this  only  delight  is  that  of  which  we  can  never  take  enough — we  can  never  be 
80  full,  but  we  shall  leave  with  an  appetite,  or  rather  never  leave,  because  ever  in 
an  appetite.  It  is  but  one,  yet  is  still  fresh ;  it  is  always  enjoyed,  yet  always 
desired ;  or,  rather,  the  more  it  is  enjoyed,  the  more  it  is  desired.  All  other 
delights  may  be  barred  from  us,  may  be  hindered  to  us  ;  this  only  delight  is  free  in 
prison,  is  at  ease  in  torments,  is  alive  in  death  ;  and  indeed  there  is  no  delight  that 
keeps  us  company  in  our  death -beds,  but  only  this.  All  other  delights  are  then 
ashamed  of  us,  and  we  of  them ;  this  only  sits  by  us  in  all  extremities,  and  gives 
us  a  cordial  when  physic  and  friends  forsake„us.  (Ibid.)  Delight  in  the  law  of 
God:  —  Many  delight  in  the  law,  because  it  teacheth  many  hidden  and  secret 
mysteries  ;  but  these  arc  vain  men,  and  delight  not  in  the  law,  but  in  superfluous 
knowledge.  {Ibid. )  The  law  of  God  the  chief  joy  of  the  believer : — And'  how, 
then,  shall  we  come  to  know  the  delighting  which  is  true  and  perfect  from  that 
which  is  counterfeit  and  defective  ?  Shall  we  say,  it  must  be  a  delighting  only,  or 
but  only  chiefly  ?  Not  only,  for  so  we  should  delight  in  nothing  else ;  and  who 
doubts  but  there  are  many  other  delights  which  both  Nature  requires  and  God 
allows  ?  therefore,  not  only,  but  chiefly  ;  yet  so  chiefly  as  in  a  manner  only ;  for 
chiefly  is  properly  where  there  may  be  comparison  ;  but  this  is  so  chiefly  as 
admits  of  no  comparison.  In  presence  of  this,  all  other  delights  do  lose  their  light ; 
in  balance  with  this,  all  other  delights  are  found  to  be  light.  {Ibid.)  A  constant 
delight  in  the  Divine  law : — For  as  it  is  but  a  dead  faith  that  brings  not  forth  the 
fruit  of  good  works,  so  it  is  but  a  feigned  delight  that  brings  not  forth  the  work  of 
exercising  ;  and  as  it  is  but  an  unsound  faith  that  works  but  intermittingly  and  by 
fits,  so  it  is  but  an  aguish  delighting  that  hath  its  heat  but  at  turns  and  seasons  ; 
but  where  we  see  a  constancy  of  good  works,  as  we  may  be  bold  to  say  there  is 
a  lively  and  sound  faith,  so  where  we  see  a  continual  exercising,  we  may  be  confi- 
dent to  say  there  is  a  true  delighting.  The  working  shows  a  life  of  faith ;  the 
constancy  of  working,  a  true  temper  of  that  life.  The  exercising  shows  a  delight- 
ing ;  the  continuance  of  exercising,  a  sincerity  of  that  delighting.  (Ibid.)  Doing 
the  Divine  law : — Contemplation  brings  us  but  to, "  I  see  and  approve  the  better  "  ;  and 
if  "  I  pursue  the  worse  "  do  follow,  then  godliness  is  stopped  in  her  race  at  the  very 
goal :  the  building  is  left  imperfect  when  it  is  come  to  the  roof.  We  cannot  make 
a  demonstration  of  true  godliness  out  of  all  the  premises,  unless  that  be  added 
which  follows,  "  And  in  His  law  he  will  exercise  himself  day  and  night "  ;  but  if 
this  be  added,  then  the  roof  of  the  house  is  set  on,  and  then  the  goal  of  godliness 
is  won.  And  though  it  may  seem  a  wearisome  thing,  summer  and  winter,  day  and 
night,  all  a  man's  life  long,  to  do  nothing  else  but  always  one  thing,  yet  this  is  the 
godly  man's  task  ;  he  must  do  so,  or  he  cannot  be  the  man  we  take  him  for.  For 
to  be  godly  but  sometimes  is  to  be  ungodly  always  ;  and  no  man  is  so  wicked  but 
he  maj  sometimes  have  good  thoughts,  and  do  good  works.     But  this  serves  not 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [mjllk  I. 

our  godly  man's  turn  ;  his  sun  must  neyer  set,  for  if  he  erer  be  in  darkness  he 
shall  ever  be  in  darkness ;  at  least,  he  shall  find  it  more  work  to  kindle  his  fire 
anew  than  to  have  kept  it  still  burning.  Or  if  he  should  bestow  the  whole  day  in 
the  exercise  of  godliness,  and  yet  at  night  return  to  his  vomit,  that  man  woula  be 
but  as  a  half-moon — bright  on  one  side,  and  horrid  blackness  on  the  other.  For 
godliness  is  a  thing  entire  ;  it  cannot  be  had  in  pieces.  {Ibid.)  Doing  the  law 
day  and  night : — He  will  do  it  in  the  day,  that  men,  seeing  his  good  works,  may 
glorify  his  Father  which  is  in  heaven  ;  and  he  will  do  it  in  the  night,  that  he  may 
not  be  seen  of  men,  and  that  his  left  hand  may  not  know  what  his  right  hand 
doeth.  He  will  do  it  in  the  day,  to  show  he  is  none  of  those  who  shun  the  light ; 
and  he  will  do  it  in  the  night,  to  show  that  he  is  one  of  those  who  when  in  dark- 
ness shine.  He  will  do  it  in  the  daytime,  because  the  day  is  the  time  of  doing,  as 
St.  Peter  [the  Lord]  saith,  "  Work  whilst  it  is  day  "  ;  and  he  will  do  it  in  the  night, 
lest  his  Master  should  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night  and  find  him  idle.  {Ibid. )  Medi- 
tation : — A  fragment  of  spar  at  first  seems  lustreless  and  unattractive,  but  as  you  turn 
it  in  your  hand  and  let  the  light  strike  it  at  a  certain  angle  it  reveals  beautiful  radiance 
and  even  prismatic  colours.  A  fragment  of  Scripture  which  is  comparatively  lifeless 
to  a  superlicial  reader  becomes  to  the  real  student  a  marvel  of  beauty.  He  turns  it 
round,  views  it  at  every  angle  till  he  sees  the  light  of  God  break  through  it,  and  it 
shines  with  the  sevenfold  beauty  of  the  Divine  attributes.  The  true  beauty  of  Scrip- 
ture does  not  lie  on  the  surface,  or  reveal  itself  to  the  careless  eye.  As  we  reflect  one 
truth  is  obvious.  The  principal  lesson  of  the  Bible  is  Christ.  He  is  the  light  and 
lustre  of  each  part.  Faith  cannot  look  but  some,  new  beauty  of  the  Lord  appears, 
j  {R.  Venting.)  Impressions Jixed  by  meditation  .--^The  photographer  at  the  first  has 
I  no  security  of  the  picture  which  he  has  taken.  He  cannot  be  said,  in  any  true  sense, 
to  possess  it.  It  is  true,  the  impression  is  made  upon  the  sensitive  plate,  but  in  its 
first  condition,  for  all  practical  purposes,  it  is  useless.  The  slightest  exposure  to 
the  light  would  mar  it  hopelessly.  It  must  be  taken  into  the  darkened  room,  and 
there,  by  being  immersed  in  chemical  solutions,  it  becomes  fixed  and  assumes  a 
permanent  form.  Just  so  is  it  with  the  thoughts  which  enter  the  mind.  They 
are  volatile  and  fugitive  unless  permanently  fixed  in  the  chambers  of  the  mind  by 
^  steadfast  meditationr)  {Charles  Deal.) 

Ver.  3.  He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  waters. — The  tree 
similitude : — A  beautiful  illustration  of  the  perpetual  verdure  and  fruitfulness  of 
the  piety  deriving  its  origin  and  sustenance  from  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  compared 
to  a  tree  whose  roots  are  refreshed  by  never- failing  streams  of  living  water,  and 
whose  every  part  is  instinct  with  the  life  flovring  from  its  roots.  It  is  the  same 
with  the  piety  nourished  by  the  Word  of  God.  As  the  sap  of  the  tree  imparts 
life  not  only  to  its  roots,  and  trunk,  and  larger  branches,  but  also  to  the  remotest 
twig  and  leaf,  and  to  the  very  down  upon  the  leaf,  so  the  truly  godly  man's  piety 
pervades  his  whole  life,  imparting  its  spirit  and  character  and  beauty  to  everything 
he  does.  He  is  not  a  religious  man  in  one  or  two  departments  of  life,  but  he  is  a 
religious  man  everywhere.  His  religion  is  a  mental  habit — a  habit  of  thought,  of 
feeling,  of  purpose,  of  action,  of  which  he  never  for  a  moment  divests  himself.  He 
aims  that  not  so  much  as  a  leaf  on  his  tree  of  righteous  living  shall  show  signs  of 
decay.  The  same  spirit  that  actuates  him  in  the  largest,  actuates  him  also  in  the 
least  transaction  of  his  life.  His  religion  is  not  a  thing  that  is  put  on, — it  is  the 
man  himself — the  man  in  the  man.  Consequently  the  storm  that  bows  mock  trees 
of  righteousness  to  the  earth,  leaves  him  still  standing ;  the  drought  that  dries 
up  their  streams  of  life,  leaves  his  still  full,  fresh,  and  flowing.  Vigour,  verdure,  and 
fniitfulness  are  his  evermore.  His  source  of  strength  can  never  fail.  It  is  the 
river  of  life  flowing  from  the  throne  of  God  and  ot  the  Lamb,  reaching  his  soul 
through  the  law  of  the  Lord,  wherein  is  his  delight  and  unceasing  meditation. 
{David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  Amongst  the  trees  of  the  wood: — The  blessed  man  is  like 
a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  waters.  1.  Its  blessedness  does  not  depend  upon  its 
kind.  It  is  not  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  of  which  David  is  thinking,  but  any  tree.  It 
is  not  the  tree,  but  the  planting  and  the  place,  that  constitute  the  blessedness. 
We  need  not  think  that  we  are  the  wrong  sort.  Two  kinds  of  religious  people  in 
the  world.  There  are  those  who  always  want  to  be  somebody  else :  and  there  are 
those  who  want  everybody  else  to  be  exactly  what  they  themselves  are.  Now  the 
woods  need  all  the  kinds  of  trees  that  God  has  made  ;  and  tlie  world  wants  all  the 
kinds  of  people  that  God  has  sent  into  it.  Some  people  are  perhaps  very  different 
from  what  God  made  them,  but  He  wants  us  to  be  every  one  after  his  kind.     2.  We 


PSALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS.  17 

can  none  of  us  afford  to  make  much  of  ourselves,  but  we  can  all  of  us  afford  to 
be  ourselves.  I  am  not  much  at  the  best ;  but  I  am  best  when  I  am  myself.  Now, 
timid  soul,  the  heavenly  Father  has  room  for  you.  3.  Notice  that  the  tree  is 
planted.  It  did  not  plant  itself.  It  surrendered  itself  wholly  and  utterly  to  the 
husbandman.  He  took  it  in  hand  and  dealt  with  it,  and  that  was  the  beginning  of 
its  prosperity.  This  utter  and  whole-hearted  surrender  of  ourselves  to  the  Lord  is 
the  first  sign  of  the  blessed  life.  The  husbandman  must  have  possession  before  he 
can  do  any  planting.  Planted,  the  tree  begins  to  put  forth  at  the  one  end  the 
roots  that  go  out  and  clasp  the  rocks,  and  at  the  other  end  the  branches  spread 
and  leaves  unfold,  and  it  drinks  in  the  rain  and  sunshine  of  heaven.  It  is  the  fair 
emblem  of  the  man  of  God,  rooted  in  obedience,  rising  to  communion.  There  is 
the  man  of  God  ;  the  law  of  his  God  is  an  authority  supreme,  that  knows  no 
argument,  no  exception,  no  choice.  I  must  and  I  will  grip  the  law  of  God.  Here 
is  stability.  You  know  where  to  have  that  man.  Right  is  might  with  him.  But 
a  tree  is  not  all  root.  Here,  laughing  in  the  sunshine,  sporting  in  the  breeze, 
dripping  with  the  shower,  is  the  branch  that  pushes  out  over  earth  and  up  into 
heaven.  The  emblem  of  freedom.  But  the  branch  is  always  in  proportion  to  the 
root.  The  obedience  and  the  communion  keep  pace.  4.  It  is  a  tree  planted  by  the 
rivers  of  water.  There  is  not  only  a  rock  to  hold  on  to,  but  there  is  the  river  to 
refresh  it.  Rock  and  river,  river  and  rock,  this  is  what  the  law  of  God  becomes. 
They  who  do  not  know  think  of  the  law  of  God  as  the  hard  stern  voice  of  thunder, 
with  its  "Thou  shalt."  But  they  who  do  know  cry,  "  Great  peace  have  they  that 
keep  Thy  law."  It  is  rivers  of  waters,  sweet,  refreshing,  quickening.  So,  rooted  in 
obedience  and  stretching  up  into  communion,  the  blessed  man  comes  to  be  like 
a  tree  ;  there  is  stability,  and  steadfastness.  He  knows  whom  he  has  believed,  and 
is  persuaded  that  that  will  hold  though  winds  may  blow  and  rains  may  beat. 
He  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season.  He  hath  the  real  spirit  for  the  hour ; 
the  very  occasion  seems  to  bring  the  grace  he  needs.  {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  The 
supre'/aely  hap])y  man : — We  are  here  introduced  to  one  who  is  said  to  be  very 
happy.  "Oh,  the  happinesses  of  the  man"  would  be  a  literal  translation  of  the 
Psalmist's  words ;  and  the  expression  is  one  indicating  fulness  of  happiness — more 
than  ordinary  joy.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  the  happiness  of  the  man  is  the  first 
thing  to  which  the  inspired  writer  refers,  and  that  circumstance  is  indicative  of  the 
truth  stated,  that  man's  happiness  is  so  great  and  so  excellent  that  it  must  have 
the  first  place.  The  springs  of  joy  from  which  he  drinks  are  sweeter  far  than 
the  sweetest  of  those  from  which  others  drink.  The  flowers  in  his  garden  have  a 
loveliness  and  fragrance  the  flowers  in  other  gardens  never  have.  The  paths  of 
other  men  may  seem  brighter  and  smoother,  but  this  is  only  in  appearance.  Every 
diflSculty  overcome  is  a  victory  won,  and  adds  to  his  happiness.  In  what  does  this 
man's  happiness  consist  ?  To  know  the  various  elements  of  his  blessedness  we  must 
study  the  picture — carefully  note  its  several  distinctive  points.     I.  OuB  attentiok 

IS    DIRECTED    TO    THE    FACT    THAT    THE    TREE    IS    ONE    CAREFULLY    "PLANTED." 

The  word  used  by  the  Psalmist  is  not  the  ordinary  term  meaning  to  sow  or  plant, 
but  the  poetical  and  much  rarer  word.  The  .same  is  found  in  Psa.  xcii.  13 — "Those 
that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our  God," 
The  trees  planted  within  the  temple  enclosures  would  be  planted  with  skill  and 
care.  This  tree  also  is  planted  in  a  choice  spot,  and  would  therefor?  be  planted 
well.  It  has  sprung  from  no  stray  seed  which  the  wind  may  have  wafted  hither,  or 
some  bird  carried  and  dropped  where  grows  the  tree.  And  such  is  true  of  the  man 
who  is  really  happy  and  most  happy.  He  is  a  tree  ' '  of  the  Lord's  right  hand 
planting."  He  is  the  offspring  of  wisdom  that  is  perfect  and  care  that  is  infinite. 
And  this  fact  constitutes  part  of  his  joy.  II.  The  situation  of  the  tree  must 
HAVE  our  attention.  The  tree  grows  not  on  some  barren  waste,  but  "  upon  the 
rivers  of  water."  By  these  rivers  I  understand  the  multitudinous  and  various 
overflowings  of  the  Divine  grace — the  rivers  of  pardon,  peace,  comfort,  teaching, 
sanctification,  &c.  1.  The  plural  term  indicates  also  fulness  as  well  as  variety 
of  blessing  in  constant  circulation  round  about  the  roots  of  the  Christian's  life. 
2.  There  is  also  in  it  the  promise  of  continuance.  If  one  stream  dries  up  there  are 
other  streams  to  draw  from.  3.  Another  thought  is  expressed,  namely,  freshness. 
"The  rivers"  are  running  streams.  Here  there  is  another  element  of  the  good 
man's  happiness.  He  is  felicitously  situated.  III.  The  fruitfulness  of  the 
TREE  MUST  next  BE  CONSIDERED.  As  might  be  expected,  the  tree  bears  fruit.  By 
this  we  are  to  understand  the  man's  habit  of  doing  good.  The  pronouns  are  to  be 
noted.  1.  It  is  not  said  he  brings  forth  fruit,  but  "his  fruit."  Christian  activity 
2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

takes  many  forms,  and  a  man  will  do  most  good  and  do  it  best  who  is  no  servile 
imitator  of  another,  but  who  works  in  his  own  groove,  and  in  the  way  most  natural 
to  himself.  And  there  is  a  beauty  and  gracefulness  about  work  done  after  this 
manner  that  always  adds  to  its  value.  The  tree  brings  forth  his  own  fruit,  and  the 
happy  Christian  does  his  own  work.  The  Master  gives  to  every  one  his  work. 
2.  Again,  the  tree  brings  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season.  Seasonableness  is  itself  a  virtue. 
Work  done  opportunely  is  the  only  work  done  rightly.  Here  we  touch  a  leading 
difficulty  in  some  earnest  lives.  The  question  as  to  when  this  should  be  done,  and 
when  that,  is  the  perplexing  point.  He  is  therefore  a  man  led  of  God's  Spirit,  and 
this  leading  saves  him  from  the  painful  perplexity  of  not  knowing  what  he  should 
first  do  and  what  next.  By  this  means  his  work  is  simplified.  His  duties  come  to 
him  in  natural  order — one  at  a  time.  God  shows  him  not  only  what  he  must  do, 
but  how,  and  when.  Here  is  another  element  of  happiness.  A  fruitful  life  is  a 
happy  one.  IV.  From  looking  at  the  fruit  of  the  tree  we  turn  to  its 
FOLIAGE.  This  is  beautiful,  and  always  so.  "His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither."  Now 
if  by  the  fruit  we  understand  a  man's  works,  by  the  "leaf"  it  will  be  natural  to 
regard  his  words.  What  a  man  does  and  says  constitutes  his  character.  Works 
have  a  great  importance,  but  so  also  have  words.  "By  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned."  "His  leaf  shall  not 
wither" — his  words  shall  not  die.  "He  being  dead,  yet  speaketh."  Another 
element  of  happiness  in  the  good  man.  The  words  of  his  mouth  shall  be  established, 
and  their  influence  shall  be  felt  for  ever.  The  tongue  is  a  little  member,  but  how 
great  is  the  happiness  it  may  secure  for  the  good  man  who  uses  it  aright.  And  in 
making  others  happy  one  makes  himself  most  happy.  "And  all  that  he  does 
shall  prosper. "  Here  the  works  and  words  are  interwoven.  It  is  when  the  two  do 
interweave  and  harmonise  that  there  is  prosperity.  Note,  it  is  not  all  he  attempts 
or  carries  forward  so  far  and  there  stops  that  shall  prosper,  but  "all  that  he 
doeth."  And  this  is  happiness  supreme — doing  good — by  work  or  word — crowned 
with  prosperity.  {Adam  Scott. )  Aspects  of  a  godly  life : — Three  aspects  of  godly 
character.  I.  Its  variety.  The  figure  leaves  room  for  the  development  of 
varieties  of  goodness.  True  godliness  does  not  reduce  men  to  a  dead  level.  The 
variety  which  God  stamps  upon  nature  He  means  to  have  reproduced  in  character. 
It  is  often  supposed  that,  by  becoming  a  servant  of  God,  a  man  loses  all  his  dis- 
tinctiveness, sacrifices  many  of  his  peculiar  modes  of  power,  and  shuts  himself  up 
to  a  comparatively  narrow  range  of  activity  ;  whereas  the  truth  is,  that  no  man 
ever  finds  out  the  variety  of  uses  to  which  the  human  talent  and  power  can  be  put 
until  he  begins  to  work  under  God's  direction.  II.  Its  Divine  culture.  The 
godly  man  is  not  like  a  tree  that  grows  wild.  He  is  like  a  tree  planted,  and  that 
in  a  place  which  will  best  promote  its  growth.  Godly  character  is  developed  under 
God's  special  supervision,  and  with  God's  own  appliances.  Has  God  no  other  means 
of  revealing  His  will  but  through  a  burning  bush  or  a  stunning  shock  ?  His  modes 
of  revelation  are  as  many  as  the  characters  and  circumstances  of  men,  and  as  varied  ; 
and  He  does  not  mean  that  His  lowliest  servant  shall  work  under  the  shadow  of  a 
doubt,  whether  he  is  in  his  place  or  not.  He  may  make  circumstances,  or  con- 
scientious judgment,  or  special  dispensations  His  messengers,  but  whatever  be  the 
messenger,  the  message  shall  be  clear  to  the  open  eye  and  the  obedient  spirit — "  I 
have  planted  you."  And  if  a  man  is  working  and  growing  where  God  sets  him,  he 
is  always  within'reach  of  the  means  necessary  for  his  growth  and  fruitfulness.  He 
is  always  planted  by  rivers  of  water.  Men  find  these  channels  in  the  most  unlikely 
places,  in  the  most  unpromising  parts  of  God's  garden.  In  their  very  work  they 
find  something  to  engage  their  energy,  quicken  their  enthusiasm,  and  develop 
their  power.  This  is  a  mystery  to  men  of  the  world.  They  look  at  the  places  in 
which  some  of  God's  servants  are  planted,  and  say  it  is  impossible  they  should  bear 
fruit  there.  Circumstances  are  all  against  them.  There  are  no  capabilities  in  the 
place.  And  yet,  amid  sickness,  bereavement,  scant  opportunities,  hatred,  scorn, 
they  not  only  live,  but  grow,  and  have  something  to  spare  for  other  lives ;  yea, 
minister  to  them  most  richly  and  eflFectively.  What  is  more,  they  themselves  are 
cheerful  and  strong,  and  grow  in  sweetness  no  less  than  in  power.  III.  Its  fruit- 
fulness.  God's  tree  by  God's  river  must  be  a  fruitful  tree.  Note  1.  It  is  "  His 
fruit,"  not  any  other  tree's  fruit.  God  gives  the  tree  its  nature,  and  plants  it 
where  it  can  best  develop  its  nature,  and  looks  for  fruit  according  to  its  nature 
and  place.  You  are  not  to  waste  time  in  admiring  or  envying  other  men's  modes 
of  power,  but  to  give  your  whole  energy  to  the  development  of  your  own  mode  of 
power.     And  if  your  best  is  only  a  single  fruit  you  can  say,  God  plauited  me  that 


TSALM  1.]  TEE  PSALMS.  19 

1  might  do  that  one  thing.  2.  The  words  "in  his  season."  The  seasons  are 
different  for  different  fruits.  Some  are  early,  some  are  late.  Moral  growths  do 
not  all  fructify  at  the  same  time  or  rate.  The  latest  fruit  is  usually  the  best. 
But,  early  or  late,  the  fruit  of  godly  character  is  seasonable.  It  will  be  found  that 
God  nourishes  His  men  as  He  does  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  to  meet  the  demands  of 
special  seasons ;  and  that  in  each  individual  character  Divine  graces  fructify  as  the 
occasion  demands  :  courage  for  seasons  of  danger,  patience  for  seasons  of  suffering, 
strength  for  seasons  of  trial,  wisdom  for  seasons  of  difficulty  ;  in  short,  the  beautiful 
fitness  of  godliness  is  no  less  remarkable  than  its  fruitfulness.  "Shall  prosper." 
This  suggests  the  standard  of  prosperity.  It  must  be  measured  by  God's  rule, 
not  man's.  I  stood  last  summer  in  a  magnificent  hothouse,  where  the  luscious 
clusters  of  grapes  were  all  around  and  above,  and  the  owner  said,  "When  my  new 
gardener  came  he  said  he  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  these  vines  unless  he 
could  cut  them  clear  down  to  the  stock  ;  and  he  did,  and  we  had  no  grapes  for  two 
years:  but  this  is  the  result."  It  did  not  look  much  like  fruit  when  the  stock 
stood  bare,  and  the  floor  was  heaped  with  cuttings  ;  but  the  gardener  looked  over 
the  two  years,  and  saw  what  we  were  seeing  and  tasting.  (M.  R.  Vincent,  D.  D. ) 
A  tree  sermon  to  children : — Six  characteristics  of  trees.  1.  Contentment.  I  never 
heard  of  a  tree  complaining.  They  are  perfectly  contented  with  their  lot.  Did 
you  ever  hear  of  a  maple  wishing  it  were  an  oak  ?  They  have  not  so  much  to 
make  them  contented  as  we  have.  The  Christ-Spirit  in  us  will  make  us  happy 
and  contented.  2.  Health.  How  many  of  you  have  seen  an  unhealthy  tree  ?  The 
perfect  boy  or  girl  is  the  one  who,  like  the  tree,  is  healthy.  "We  should  attend  to 
these  bodies  of  ours.  We  should  be  careful  to  eat  and  drink  those  things  which 
will  give  us  sound  bodies.  We  need  to  keep  our  minds,  bodies,  and  souls  healthy. 
3.  Roots.  A  great  part  of  a  tree  is  underground.  Two  reasons  for  this — to  hold 
the  tree  in  its  place,  and  to  nourish  the  tree.  A  perfect  man,  a  perfect  woman, 
boy,  or  girl  is  one  who  is  well-rooted.  Among  the  roots  which  hold  us  stable 
and  keep  us  from  falling  are — (1)  Good  habits  formed  early  in  life  ;  (2)  good  com- 
panions ;  (3)  good  books.  4.  Importance.  Trees  are  used  in  building,  furniture, 
ships,  and  as  medicine.  Their  fruit  is  important.  The  perfect  man  is  important 
to  society,  to  home,  to  national  life.  What  should  we  do  without  the  ideal  man 
and  woman?  5.  Symmetry.  The  word  means  "perfectly  balanced  in  all  its 
parts."  Some  trees  have  perfect  proportions.  There  are  men  who  have  only 
attended  to  physical  development ;  others  only  to  intellectual  development.  The 
symmetrical  man  is  one  who  has  attended  to  the  development  of  the  mind,  body, 
and  spirit.  6.  Trial.  A  mighty  oak  is  perfect,  because  it  has  been  tried.  Tempests 
have  swept  over  it,  but  still  it  stands.  The.  perfect  man,  woman,  boy,  or  girl 
is  the  one  who,  when  tempted  and  tried,  comes  off  the  victor.  Tried,  weighed, 
and  not  found  wanting.  Tried  and  found  to  be  sound.  (Frank  S.  Rowland.) 
A  sermon  on  trees  (to  children) : — 1.  One  of  the  most  wonderful  things  about  the 
trees  is  the  way  in  which  they  breathe.  Does  it  make  you  smile  to  think  of  a  tree 
breathing  1  Do  you  say,  "  Well,  I  never  thought  of  that  before  !  I  didn't  know  a 
tree  could  breathe."  But  they  do,  if  it  does  surprise  you,  and  they  could  no  more 
live  without  breathing  than  could  you  or  I.  If  it  was  not  for  the  trees  and  other 
plants  breathing  the  air  would  soon  become  filled  with  poisonous  gas  which  would 
make  every  one  sick,  and  soon  cause  us  all  to  die.  On  the  under  side  of  every  leaf 
of  every  tree,  or  shrub,  or  other  plant  there  are  thousands  of  little  breathing  holes 
or  mouths.  There  are  some  also  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  leaf.  These  are  small 
openings  through  the  outer  skin  of  the  leaf  into  the  air  chambers  within,  making  a 
direct  communication  between  the  whole  interior  of  the  leaf  and  the  air  outside. 
You  cannot  see  these  little  mouths  with  the  naked  eye.  You  have  to  use  a  micro- 
scope or  magnifying  glass,  and  then  you  can  see  them.  The  famous  botanist. 
Professor  Asa  Gray,  tells  us  that  in  the  white  lily,  when  they  are  unusually  large, 
there  are  about  sixty  thousand  of  them  to  the  square  inch  on  the  lower  surface  of 
the  leaf,  and  about  three  thousatid  in  the  same  space  of  the  upper  surface  ;  and 
that  in  the  apple  tree,  where  they  are  under  the  average  as  to  number,  there 
are  about  twenty-four  thousand  to  the  square  inch  of  the  lower  surface  ;  so  that 
each  leaf  has  not  far  from  one  hundred  thousand  of  these  mouths.  The  trees  are 
made  by  God  to  take  out  of  the  air  a  gas  which  would  kill  us  all  in  a  very  little 
while  if  it  were  allowed  to  remain  ;  and  having  taken  it  into  their  trunks  they  split 
it  up  into  two  parts,  oxygen  and  carbon,  and  give  us  back  the  former  that  we  may 
breathe  it  and  live  ;  whDe  the  latter  they  make  into  charcoal,  which  is  used  in  a 
thousand  ways  for  our  comfort,  convenience,   and   health.      So  kind  is  God  in 


20  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

making  all  things  work  together  for  good  unto  us  whom  He  so  dearly  loves. 
2.  Another  great  use  of  the  trees  is,  as  we  all  know,  to  furnish  food  for  man.  Just 
think  of  all  the  things  we  get  from  them,  and  from  other  plants  !  Not  only 
delicious  oranges,  and  apples,  and  pears,  and  peaches,  and  all  other  nice  fruits  ; 
but  also  starch,  sugar,  spices,  oil,  tea,  coffee,  flour,  and  grain.  All  these  things  are 
prepared  by  the  plants  out  of  the  elements  which  they  take  in  from  the  earth  and 
air.  They  have  been  so  made  by  God  that  they  have  the  power  to  produce  subtle 
chemical  changes  in  these  unpalatable  materials,  which  they  thus  transform  into 
delicious  food  for  man.  Says  the  same  botanist  above  quoted,  ' '  Animals  depend 
absolutely  upon  vegetables  for  their  being."  The  great  object  for  which  the  all-wise 
Creator  established  the  vegetable  kingdom  evidently  is,  that  the  plant  might  stand 
on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  between  the  animal  and  mineral  creations,  and  organise 
portions  of  the  former  for  the  sustenance  of  the  latter.  We  must  indeed  see  the 
goodness  and  the  love  of  God  in  the  goodly  fruits  of  the  trees.  3.  Another  very 
interesting  branch  of  our  subject  is  in  regard  to  the  habits  or  instincts  of  the  trees. 
Wherever  a  tree  may  be  growing,  if  there  is  a  stream  or  pool  of  water  anywhere 
near  it,  or  a  damp  piece  of  ground,  it  will  always  push  its  roots  eagerly  toward  that. 
It  wants  the  hydrogen  and  oxygen  which  the  water  can  furnish,  and  it  will  have 
them  if  it  can  possibly  get  them.  In  other  words,  it  is  thirsty,  just  as  we  are 
thirsty,  and  it  eagerly  seeks  for  water  to  drink.  For  example,  I  have  read  (Horace 
Bushnell's  lecture  on  Life)  of  a  man  named  Madison,  who  had  an  aqueduct — that 
is,  a  sort  of  trough  made  of  logs — which  in  reaching  his  house  passed  by  a  tree 
which  was  especially  fond  of  water,  at  a  considerable  distance  from  it.  Opposite 
to  where  the  tree  stood  there  was  an  auger  hole  in  the  log  that  had  been  filled  with 
a  plug  of  soft  wood.  Exactly  to  that  spot  the  tree  sent  off  a  long  stretch  of  roots, 
which  forced  their  way  through  this  soft  wood  plug,  choking  up  the  passage  ;  "and 
there, "says  the  account,  "they  were  found  drinking,  like  so  many  thirsty  animals." 
The  same  writer  who  tells  this  incident,  says  ' '  that  a  strawberry  planted  in  sand, 
wdth  good  earth  a  little  way  off,  will  turn  its  runners  all  toward  that.  But  if  the 
good  earth  is  too  far  away  to  be  reached,  it  will  make  no  effort  on  that  side  more 
than  on  the  others."  You  can  try  this  experiment  if  you  want  to,  and  see  if  it  is 
not  so.  4.  Then  it  is  wonderful  to  see  a  tree  exerting  its  mighty  strength.  For  in 
every  tree  in  your  garden  at  home,  and  in  every  one  that  you  can  see  from  these 
windows,  and  in  all  the  trees  of  the  forests  and  on  the  hills,  there  is  a  life-principle, 
the  strength  of  which  is  as  great  as,  or  greater  than,  that  of  the  largest  steam-engine 
you  ever  saw.  Why,  in  the  commonest  garden  vegetable  there  is  a  force  capable  of 
lifting  an  enormous  weight.  And  if  you  go  down  here  on  the  road  a  little  way, 
some  time,  you  can  see  a  huge  rock  that  has  been  broken  right  in  two  by  the 
strength  of  a  little  tree  not  much  larger  round  than  my  arm.  Some  time,  years  ago, 
a  little  cone  lodged  in  the  crevice  of  that  rock,  and  pretty  soon  the  rains  and  the 
warm  sun  caused  one  of  the  little  seeds  in  the  cone  to  germinate  and  grow.  A  little 
root  ran  out  and  down  into  the  crevice,  and  began  growing.  Soon  it  had  got  as 
large  as  the  crevice,  and  touched  the  hard  rock  on  each  side.  And  no  doubt  the 
grim  old  rock  would  have  laughed,  if  rocks  could  laugh,  and  would  have  said  to  the 
tiny  little  pine  tree,  "You  insignificant  little  sprout,  you  can't  grow  here,  for  I 
won't  let  you,  so  you  may  as  well  not  try."  But  the  little  tree  kept  growing,  and 
pretty  soon  began  to  press  hard  on  the  sides  of  the  crevice  ;  harder  and  harder  it 
pushed,  and  twisted  round  to  get  a  good  hold,  filling  up  the  whole  space  with  its 
insinuating  roots.  And  the  rock  hung  together,  and  braced  itself,  and  tried  its  best 
not  to  give  way.  But  at  last  one  dark  night  ckack  it  went,  and  broke  in  two  right 
in  the  middle.  And  all  because  of  the  little  tree,  which  it  had  thought  so  weak 
and  small.  A  tree  has  in  it  this  wonderful  power  of  growth  and  enlargement.  It 
is  always  growing,  running  up  taller  and  taller,  and  getting  larger  and  larger  every 
year.  And  if  it  is  broken  by  storms  or  felled  to  the  ground  it  often  reconstructs 
its  building,  and  rears  itself  again  with  all  its  wonderful  ducts,  and  tissues,  and 
breathing-pores,  like  to  the  pattern  which  it  bore  before.  And  all  the  trees,  so 
many  kinds  of  which  we  can  see  around  us  in  the  forests,  though  they  have  different 
forms  and  characteristics,  and  are  put  to  different  uses,  still  contribute,  each  its 
share,  to  fulfilling  the  plans  and  perfecting  the  work  which  God  gave  them  to  do 
upon  the  earth.  There  is  no  confusion.  Each  has  its  law  within  itself,  and  fills 
the  sphere  which  God  intended  it  to  fill.  {F.  H.  Palmer.)  The  fruit  tree  and 
the  chaff :— The  1st  Psalm  strikes  the  keynote  of  those  statutes  of  God  which  are 
the  songs  of  His  people  in  their  pilgrimage.  Like  an  illuminated  initial  letter,  it 
presents  a  graphic  picture  of  the  contrast  between  the  blessedness  of  the  righteous 


PSALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS.  21 

and  the  misery  of  the  wicked  under  the  emblems  of  a  fruit  tree  flourishing  beside 
a  river  and  of  a  handful  of  chaff  winnowed  by  the  wind.  Let  us  look  at  the  picture 
presented.  I.  The  fruit  tree.  This  suggests — 1.  Stability.  It  is  firmly  rooted 
in  the  soil.  Thus  it  tells  of  the  stability  of  the  righteous.  2.  Access  to  a  perennial 
mine  of  nourishment  and  refreshment :  "by  the  rivers  of  waters."  A  river  in  the 
East  is  an  artery  of  life.  A  tree,  therefore,  with  its  head  in  the  torrid  sunshine,  and 
its  feet  laved  by  a  perpetual  stream  flowing  down  from  some  far-up  snowy  mountain, 
is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  images  of  a  righteous  man.  3.  It  yields  its  fruit  in  its 
season.  Fruit  is  that  part  of  the  tree  which  belongs  not  to  the  individual,  but  to 
the  race.  In  the  fruit  the  tree  sacrifices  its  own  life  for  the  life  that  is  to  spring 
from  it ;  converts  branch  and  foliage  that  would  have  remained  and  ministered  to 
its  own  beauty,  into  blossom  and  fruit  that  fall  off  and  minister  to  the  good  of 
others.  In  no  case  does  the  fruit  benefit  the  tree,  but,  on  the  contrary,  burdens 
and  exhausts  it,  as  is  clearly  proved  by  the  shorter  lives  of  fruit  than  of  other 
trees.  So  the  distinguishing  peculiarity  of  the  righteous  is  self-sacrifice.  They  have 
truly  learned  that  first  lesson  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  They,  as  He,  come  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister  and  to  give  their  life  for  others.  4.  Its  leaf  shall  not 
wither.  This  is  a  remarkable  feature.  It  is  the  old  idea  of  the  bush  burning  and 
not  consumed.  In  nature  it  is  only  through  the  fading  of  the  leaf  that  the  fruit 
ripens.  The  yellowing  autumnal  foliage  accompanies  the  development  of  the  fruit. 
By  the  leaf  the  tree  breathes  and  forms  its  wood  from  air  and  sunshine.  It  is 
its  strength,  yea  is  itself ;  for  the  whole  tree  is  simply  a  modification  and  develop- 
ment of  the  leaf,  as  it  is  most  certainly  the  creation  of  the  leaf.  The  leaf,  therefore, 
represents  the  righteous  man's  life.  Not  only  does  he  do  good  to  others,  but  he 
gets  good  to  himself.  Godliness  is  to  a  man's  nature  what  sunlight  is  to  a  plant. 
It  imparts  living  greenness  and  fadeless  vigour.  II.  The  chaff.  This  is  a 
complete  contrast.  1.  Chaff  is  a  dead  leaf  that  was  once  green  and  flourishing  and 
full  of  sap  and  life.  It  once  performed  an  important  part  in  the  growth  of  the 
plant.  But  now  it  is  effete  and  has  no  vital  connection  with  the  plant.  How 
worthless  does  a  human  being  become  who  has  lost  his  true  life  by  sin.  2.  It  is 
driven  away.  It  has  fallen  from  the  higher  powers  of  the  organic  world  and  it 
comes  under  the  power  of  the  inorganic.  And  so  with  the  ungodly  man.  That 
which  separated  him  from  the  mass  of  creation — the  Divine  image — he  has  lost. 
But  losing  this  he  becomes  a  mere  part  of  the  creation,  instead  of  having  personal 
relations  with  the  personal  God.  The  ungodly  have  no  individuality  ;  they  live, 
move,  and  act  in  the  mass.  The  statistics  of  wrong-doing  illustrate  this.  You  can 
calculate  the  average  of  crimes  ;  the  number  of  paupers,  suicides,  and  criminals 
there  will  be.  The  evil  passions  of  men  may  be  known  as  we  know  the  coming  of 
an  eclipse.  And  thus  the  awful  lesson  is  read  to  us  that  individuals  when  they 
have  sold  themselves  to  sin  and  so  lose  the  spiritual  life  that  bound  them  to  God 
come  to  be  controlled,  notwithstanding  all  their  waywardness,  by  laws  which  apply 
to  mere  things  in  which  there  is  no  power  to  resist.  They  pass  beyond  the  sphere  of 
the  grace  of  God  into  the  passive  realms  of  matter.  3.  All  things  become  hostile  to  it. 
What  ministers  life  to  the  living  tree  ministers  morg/rapid  decay  to  the  chaflF.  Which 
are  we?  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  A  tree  by  the  river : — It  is  deeply  interesting,  in 
counting  the  circles  of  a  section  of  some  old  tree,  to  note  the  variations,  some  circles 
being  almost  imperceptible  for  narrowness,  and  some  so  broad  that  you  fear  almost 
to  have  counted  two  as  one.  As  you  count  the  outer  circles,  your  memory,  reaching 
back  to  those  years,  can  show  a  cause  for  this  diff'erence.  "rhe  years  of  drought  are 
the  years  of  little  growth.  For  the  tree,  as  for  our  spirits,  it  holds  true  that  a  man 
can  receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven.  There  are  surely  seasons 
when  one  can  make  little  increase  save  under  exceptional  circumstances,  such  as 
those  of  a  tree  by  the  river  side,  which  shows  little  variation.  It  drew  supplies 
from  an  abiding  source.  Precisely  this  sweet  secret  it  is  that  finds  expression  in  the 
1st  Psalm,  "He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water."  They  who 
live  near  the  Lord,  who  delight  themselves  in  His  law  and  meditate  on  it  day  and 
night,  are  ever  growing  and  fruitful,  {Sarah  Smiley. )  The  oleander  : — There 
is  one  tree,  only  to  be  found  in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  but  too  beautiful  to  be 
entirely  passed  over ;  the  oleander,  with  its  bright  blossoms  and  dark  green  leaves,  « 

giving  the  aspect  of  a  rich  garden  to  any  spot  where  it  grows.     It  is  rarely,  if  ever,  ,  ' 

alluded  to  in  the  Scriptures.     But  it  may  be  the  tree  planted  by  the  streams  of      \\y'*\f 
water  which  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  due  season,  and  "whose  leaf  shall  not  wither. '"^i-*^^/^ 
{A.  P,  Stanley,  D.D.)        A  believer  like  a  tree: — Dr.  John  Paton,  speaking  of 
Namakei,  his  first  convert  on  the  island  of  Aniwa,  says,   ' '  He  went  in  and  out 


22  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  i. 

tlie  meeting  with  intense  joy.  When  he  heard  of  the  prosperity  of  the  Lord's  work, 
and  how  island  after  island  was  learning  to  sing  the  praise  of  Jesus,  his  heart 
glowed,  and  he  said,  '  Missi,  I  am  lifting  up  my  head  like  a  tree  ;  I  am  growing 
tall  with  joy."  Constancy  in  religion : — I  have  read  of  a  waterfall  in  a  nobleman's 
garden,  beautiful  in  its  construction,  but  the  water  was  never  turned  on  unless  his 
lordship  was  there.  That  is  like  much  of  the  religion  existing  in  the  present  age. 
It  is  only  turned  on  when  there  is  some  one  to  see  and  applaud.  Our  service  must 
not  be  kept  for  mere  effect  and  display.  {R.  Venting.)  That  bringeth  forth 
Ms  fruit  in  his  season. — Christian  developTnent : — This  reference  to  the  tree  as 
the  image  of  the  good  man's  life,  this  garden  which  is  thus  summoned  up  before  our 
minds,  harmonises  with  almost  all  the  early,  and  certainly  with  the  closing,  scenes 
in  our  Bibles,  It  is  significant  that  the  image  which  is  chosen  is  not  a  tree  of  the 
forest,  but  a  tree  specifically  planted  by  the  water  side.  The  image  of  the  tree  of 
nature — of  the  tree  in  its  wild  un  tended  state — has  been  freely  used  by  a  school  of 
thinkers  as  against  any  doctrine  of  human  education  whatever.  But  vegetable  life 
may,  under  certain  circumstances,  gain  very  considerably  by  cultivation.  Cultiva- 
tion develops  latent  properties,  latent  powers.  It  prevents  a  waste  of  life,  it 
economises  time  in  growth.  Man  is  not  a  tree,  but  he  is  like  a  tree.  He  has 
qualities  and  characteristics  peculiar  to  himself.  He  has  intelligence,  and  no 
doctrine  of  human  improvement  would  be  complete  which  did  not  provide  for  the 
development  of  his  understanding.  He  is  morally  free,  he  is  social ;  in  these  things 
there  must  be  development.  He  is  depraved,  and  if  a  man  is  left  to  himself  he 
will  grow  in  his  depravity.  Therefore  man  must  be  checked,  reproved,  chastised. 
There  are  points  of  similarity  between  hvmaan  nature  and  vegetable  growth. 
I.  Each  is  gradual.  The  growth  of  the  spiritual  life  is  in  the  nature  of  the 
case  slow,  because  it  consists  chiefly  in  the  formation  of  habits  of  faith,  hope,  love, 
prayer,  inward  conformity  of  the  soul  to  the  will  of  Almighty  God.  II.  Each  is 
MYSTEKious.  We  cannot  understand  the  mysterious  processes  which  pass  within 
the  soul ;  we  can  only  see  the  outer  life,  the  words  and  the  actions,  which  are  the 
products  of  the  feelings  engendered  by  grace.  As  a  tree  requires  soil,  sunlight, 
moisture,  and  space  for  its  proper  growth,  so  the  human  soul  requires  certain 
ascertainable  conditions,  without  which  growth  and  development  are  impossible. 
I  will  mention  three.  1.  The  life  of  the  soul  should  be  based  upon  principles. 
They  are  the  soil  of  the  soul.  Sentiments,  opinions,  and  views  belong  to  quite  a 
different  strata  of  mental  life  from  the  possession  of  principles.  Principles — what 
are  they  ?  They  are  the  basis  of  truth  on  which  the  understanding  must  lean  if 
man  is  to  rise  to  the  destined  tether  of  his  greatness.  The  understanding  is  the 
baais  faculty  of  the  character,  but  the  understanding  itself  must  rest  on  something. 
And  what  is  it  to  rest  on  if  not  on  sound  principles  ?  This  is  true  in  science,  in  art, 
in  speculation,  and  in  religion.  Some  principles  are  natural.  Seeing  the  difference 
between  right  and  wrong  ;  recognising  the  eternal  law  of  justice  and  righteousness, 
these  are  natural  principles.  Some  belong  to  grace,  they  are  revealed,  such  as  that 
Jesus  is  God  equal  to  the  Father,  and  that  Jesus  is  our  Judge.  Sooner  or  later  a 
principle  brings  forth  its  fruit  in  due  season.  But  you  may  have  long  to  wait  for 
it.  III.  Christianity  must  expand.  It  must  expand  by  love.  The  heart  is 
the  centre  of  life.  The  heart  may  be  corrupted  through  being  fixed  on  false 
objects,  or  it  may  be  closeted  up.  Either  of  them  is  a  misfortune  so  great  that  we 
can  scarcely  think  less  of  it  than  that  it  is  very  ruining  to  character.  Ascertain 
the  object  on  which  the  heart  is  fixed  and  you  have  ascertained  the  direction  in 
which  moral  and  spiritual  life  is  moving.  One  condition  of  the  development  of  the 
soul  is  the  discipline  of  the  wilL  The  will  is  the  summit  of  the  character,  just 
as  the  heart  is  at  its  centre,  just  as  the  understanding  is  at  its  base.  {Carum 
Liddon,  D.  D. )  Fruit  in  his  season : — Solomon  uttered  an  axiom  when  he  said, 
"To  everything  there  is  a  season."  The  truth  is  applicable  to  all  God  does.  As 
in  creation  its  mode  and  time  were  not  anyhow  but  appointed.  And  what  is  true 
on  the  larger  scale  is  also  true  on  the  smaller.  And  to  every  individual.  Your 
birth  and  death  are  appointed  by  God.  To  you  there  is  a  season.  I.  There 
IS  fruit  appropriate  to  each  season.  This  not  only  in  the  physical  world 
but  in  the  moral.  1.  Childhood  has  its  fruits.  Like  the  holy  child  Jesus  you  are 
to  bear  fruit  by  loving,  trusting,  and  imitating  Him.  In  your  baptism  you  have 
been  given  to  Christ  and  are  His.  He  expects  you  to  bear  fruit.  2.  Youth  has  its 
fruit.  St.  John  speaks  of  "little  children,  young  men,  fathers."  You  occupy  the 
middle  position.  "I  have  written  to  you,"  says  the  apostle.  Young  men  and 
maidens,  be  sober  minded  and  strong  minded  too.     3.    Old  age  has  its   finiits. 


MALM  1.]  THE  PSALMS.  23 

Wten  the  spring  is  gone,  the  summer  vanished,  how  varied  and  multiplied  the  fruit 
of  autumn.  And  there  are  fruits  not  only  of  season,  but  4.  Of  time.  Our 
Sabbaths,  for  example,  and  working  days  and  days  of  relaxation  also  should  have 
their  fruit.  And  there  are — 5.  Moral  seasons.  Conviction — how  important  this 
is.  It  is  a  solemn  season  when  God  comes  near  the  soul.  And  the  time  of  spiritual 
quickening  when  the  soul  longs  for  more  of  God.  Seasons  of  sorrow,  of  joy,  and  of 
temptation,  these  all  have  their  appropriate  fruit.      II.  It  is  most  important 

THAT   the    fruit   APPROPRIATE   SHOULD   BE    BOUNE   IN   ITS   SEASON.        For    then    it 

is  best.  1.  Your  lifetime — if  it  bear  not  its  fruit  it  will  never  bear  it  at  all.  How 
are  you  spending  it?  2.  Religious  impression — if  that  pass  away,  "a  more  con- 
venient season  "  you  will  never  have.  III.  For  this  suitable  means  must  bb 
EMPLO  VED.  It  is  the  result  of  previously  fulfilled  conditions.  1.  Separation  from  the 
ungodly  is  one  of  them.  2.  Meditation  on  God's  Word.  3.  Hidden  supplies  of  God's 
grace,  like  the  water  at  the  roots  of  the  tree.  They  flow  along  the  channels  of  Divine 
ordinances,  prayers,  worship,  sacraments.  So  will  you  bear  fruit.  {Josiah  Viney.) 
The  timeliness  of  fruitage  : — A  very  practical  lesson  arises  from  these  words.  We  are 
not  to  look  even  in  Christian  life  for  what  is  ordinarily  understood  by  "  fruit  "  all 
the  year  round.  Upon  this  point  many  Christians  disquiet  themselves  unneces- 
sarily. There  is  a  time  for  rest,  for  recruital,  and  time  spent  in  legitimate  sleep  is 
time  made  for  larger  and  harder  work.  Let  the  tree  be  the  symbol  and  image  of 
our  life.  It  has  its  season  of  fruitfulness,  but  not  of  fruitlessness  in  any  blame- 
worthy sense.  The  tree  is  part  of  the  great  course  of  things — a  speck  in  an  infinite 
system,  and  it  keeps  all  the  time  and  law  of  the  stupendous  universe.  So  it  is 
with  the  Christian  heart.  There  are  times  of  abundant  labour,  of  almost  excessive 
joy,  of  hope  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun,  and  of  realisations  which  transform 
the  earth  into  heaven.  There  are  times  when  our  energy  seems  to  be  more  than 
equal  to  all  the  exigencies  of  life  ;  we  can  work  without  weariness,  we  can  suffer 
without  complaining ;  we  are  quite  sure  that  the  morning  draweth  nigh,  and  that 
in  the  end  the  victory  will  be  with  God.  At  other  times  there  are  seasons  of 
depression,  almost  intolerable  weariness,  somewhat  indeed  of  sickness  of  heart,  as 
if  a  great  pain  had  fixed  itself  vnthin  us  ;  at  other  times  we  know  that  we  are  not 
bringing  forth  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God  or  for  the  use  of  man,  and  in  such  times  we 
call  ourselves  cumberers  of  the  ground,  and  urge  our  idleness  against  ourselves 
with  all  the  force  of  a  criminal  accusation.  The  Christian  should  deal  with  himself 
reasonably  in  all  these  things.  The  year  is  not  one  season,  nor  is  human  life  one 
monotonous  experience.  We  are  not  to  be  judged  by  this  or  that  one  day  or  season, 
but  by  the  whole  scope  and  circumference  of  life.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
Whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper. —  The  influence  of  religion  upon  prosperity : — 
1.  Piety  and  gratitude  to  God  contribute  in  a  high  degree  to  enliven  prosperity. 
Gratitude  is  a  pleasing  emotion.  The  sense  of  beiug  distinguished  by  the  kindness 
of  another  gladdens  the  heart,  warms  it  with  reciprocal  affection,  and  gives  to  any 
possession,  which  is  agreeable  in  itself,  a  double  relish,  from  its  laeing  the  gift  of  a 
friend.  Not  only  gratitude  for  the  past,  but  a  cheering  sense  of  God's  favour  at  the 
present,  enter  into  the  pious  emotion.  2.  Religion  affords  to  good  men  peculiar 
security  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  prosperity.  By  worldly  assistance  it  is  vain  to 
think  of  providing  any  effectual  defence,  seeing  the  world's  mutability  is  tlie  very 
cause  of  our  terror.  3.  Religion  forms  good  men  to  the  most  proper  ttemper  for  the 
enjoyment  of  prosperity.  A  little  reflection  may  satisfy  us  that  mere  possession, 
even  granting  it  to  be  secure,  does  not  constitute  enjoyment.  We  all  know  the 
effects  which  any  indisposition  of  the  body,  even  though  slight,  produces  on 
external  prosperity.  The  corrupted  temper  and  the  guilty  passions  of  the  bad 
frustrate  the  efl'ect  of  every  advantage  which  the  world  confers  on  them.  None  but 
the  temperate,  the  regular,  and  the  virtuous  know  how  to  enjoy  prosperity.  Pros- 
perity is  redoubled  to  a  good  man  by  his  generous  use  of  it.  It  is  reflected  back 
upon  him  from  every  one  whom  he  makes  happy.  4.  Religion  heightens  the 
prosperity  of  good  men  by  the  prospect  which  it  affords  them  of  greater  happiness  to 
come  in  another  world.  What  is  present  is  never  sufficient  to  give  us  full  satisfac- 
tion. To  the  present  we  must  always  join  some  agreeable  anticipations  of  futurity 
in  order  to  complete  our  pleasure.  Let  this  be  our  conclusion,  that,  both  in  pros- 
perity and  in  adversity,  religion  is  the  safest  guide  of  human  life.  Conducted  by 
its  light,  we  reap  the  pleasures  and,  at  the  same  time,  escape  the  dangers  of  a 
prosperous  state.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  The  song  of  the  prosper  out  life  : — I.  Thb 
tsosferous  lifb  is  a  lifb  madb  pbospbbous  bt  refusal.  1.  l^e  nuin  will 
refuse  to  think  wrongly.    Counsel — that  is,  the  thought  or  creed  of  the  ungodly. 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  I. 

Non-use  of  thought  in  certain  directions  results  in  inability  of  thought  toward  those 
directions.  Mr.  Darwin  confessed  himself  "atrophied"  toward  music,  painting, 
poetry,  &c.,  through  the  so  constant  using  of  himself  in  ways  simply  scientific. 
This  atrophy  of  thought  is  just  as  possible  in  religious  directions.  A  man  who 
"will  not"  take  counsel  toward  God  "cannot"  at  last.  The  man  of  the  really 
prosperous  life  will  not  walk  in  such  counsel  of  the  ungodly  ;  he  will  think  toward 
God.  2.  He  will  refuse  to  practise  wrongly,  "  way  of  sinners."  At  the  battle  of 
Alma,  in  the  Crimean  War,  one  of  the  ensigns  stood  his  ground  when  the  regiment 
retreated.  The  captain  shouted  to  him  to  bring  back  the  colours  ;  but  the  ensign 
replied,  "Bring  the  men  up  to  the  colours."  So  this  man  of  the  prosperous  life 
will  maintain  high  and  brave  practice  of  the  right,  whoever  may  retreat  from  it. 
8.  Will  refuse  to  speak  wrongly,  "  seat  of  the  scornful."  Into  their  sort  of  speech  he 
will  not  enter.  II.  By  reception.  1.  He  will  receive  all  ennobling  and  uplifting 
objects  of  affection  ;  but  his  delight  is  in  the  "law  of  the  Lord."  The  controlling 
thing  in  a  man  is  his  topmost  love.  2.  This  man  loves  to  think  of  what  he  loves. 
"Meditate  day  and  night."  "Hang  this  upon  the  wall  of  your  room,"  said  a  wise 
picture-dealer  to  an  Oxford  under-graduate,  as  he  handed  him  the  engraving  of  a 
Madonna  of  Raphael,  "and  then  all  the  pictures  of  jockeys  and  ballet  girls  will 
disappear."  III.  Results.  Noble  growth.  Propitious  placing.  Sustenance. 
Fruitfulness.     Beauty  of  character.     Real  prosperity.     (Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.) 

Yer.  4.  The  ungodly  are  not  bo,  but  are  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind 
driveth  away. — The  chaff  driven  away  : — Who  are  the  ungodly  ?  Are  they  open 
and  wilful  sinners  ?  Certainly  these  are  included,  but  not  mainly  intended.  Are 
they  the  atheists,  scoffers,  and  those  who  make  a  ribald  jest  of  all  sacred  things  ? 
Yes,  but  not  they  alone.  For  the  godly  man  is  he  who  has  a  constant  eye  to  God, 
recognises  Him  in  all  things,  trusts  Him,  loves  and  serves  Him.  The  ungodly  man 
is  he  who  lives  in  the  world  as  if  there  were  no  God  ;  he  may  be  religious,  but  that 
is  not  enough.  He  attends  to  outward  forms,  but  the  heart  of  them  he  does  not 
perceive.  How  many  there  are  in  all  our  congregations,  therefore,  who  are  ungodly. 
They  do  not  love  the  Lord,  or  delight  in  communion  with  Him,  or  desire  to  be  like 
Him.  They  are  ungodly.  Now  concerning  all  such,  the  text  utters — I.  A 
FEARFUL  NEGATIVE.  "The  ungodly  are  not  so."  For  1.  They  are  not  "like 
a  tree  planted."  The  Christian  is  so.  The  tree  planted  is  visited  and  in  every  way 
cared  for  by  the  husbandman.  But  the  wild  tree  in  the  forest,  the  tree  self-sown 
upon  the  plain,  no  one  owns,  no  one  watches  over  it.  2.  Not  like  a  tree  planted  by 
the  rivers  of  waters.  The  believer  is.  He  is  planted  not  by  banks  which  may  soon 
dry  up,  far  less  in  a  desert  ;  but  by  the  rivers  of  waters.  And  is  it  not  so  ?  We 
know  what  it  is  to  drink  of  the  rivers  of  Christ's  fulness.  But  "not  so  the 
ungodly."  Days  of  drought  will  come  for  them.  3.  Does  not  bring  forth  his 
fiuit  in  his  season.  The  righteous  does  so.  If  the  ungodly  have  here  and  there  a 
shrivelled  grape  it  is  brought  forth  in  the  wrong  season.  Many  think  that  so  long 
as  they  don't  do  wrong  it  is  as  if  they  did  right.  But  mere  negative  goodness  will 
not  suffice.  The  curse  on  Meroz  was  for  not  coming  to  the  help  of  the  Lord. 
They  did  not  oppress,  only  did  not  help.  4.  His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither.  Not 
80  the  ungodly.  And  5.  Whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper.  Yes,  though  the 
righteous  may  suffer  much  earthly  loss.  They  have  an  inward  prosperity  even 
when  the  outward  one  is  wanting.  No  so  the  ungodly.  Is  he  really  happy  now  ? 
To  him  there  is  nothing  good  in  this  life.  That  which  looketh  fair  is  but  as  the 
paint  upon  the  harlot's  face.  II.  A  terrible  comparison.  "  Like  the  chaff" — so 
useless,  so  light  and  unstable,  so  worthless.  III.  An  awful  prophecy.  How 
near  the  chaff  is  to  the  grain.  As  yon  godless  parent  of  a  Christian  child.  As  yon 
helpers  in  various  forms  of  Christian  work  ;  sitting  side  by  side  with  the  godly. 
Close  to  the  grain,  and  yet  only  chaff.  And  to  be  driven  away — Where,  where  ? 
Jesus  Christ  has  said,  "  He  shall  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  iire." 
Who  here  is  prepared  to  make  his  bed  in  hell  ?  I  beseech  you  by  the  living  God, 
tremble  and  repent.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  gate  to  the  threshing -Jiwr : — "Not 
so  !  "  The  Psalmist  does  not  dwell  upon  the  details  of  their  ungodliness.  As  in 
the  case  of  the  righteous,  he  confines  himself  to  indicating  the  sources  of  their  life. 
The  great  object  of  this  Psalm  is  to  show  us  the  "fountain  heads"  of  moral 
character.  The  character  that  is  "not  so"  is  set  forth  by  a  figure.  We  leave 
now  the  garden  gate,  and  not  far  off  behold  a  raised  platform  of  earth  beaten  hard. 
It  is  the  threshing-floor.  Here  stand  the  workmen  with  their  earthen  vessels, 
and  scooping  up  the  threshed  grain,  mingled  with  chaff,  throw  it  up  into  the  air 


PSALM  I.]  THE  PSALMS.  25 

or  let  it  fall  in  a  stream  from  the  uplifted  jar  ;  and  the  wind,  with  its  whirling 
gusts,  which  arise  so  suddenly  on  the  plains,  catches  the  chalf  and  drives  it  away 
before  it.  "  The  ungodly  are  like  the  chaff" — light,  shifting,  worthless.  Here  are 
three  aspects  of  the  ungodly  character — its  instability  ;  its  worthlessness  ;  its 
insecurity.  One  of  the  happiest  phases  of  goodness  is  its  fixedness.  A  life  rooted 
in  God,  based  on  settled  conviction,  has  a  single  aim,  a  uniform  tendency,  and  a 
permanent  result.  In  these  particulars  the  opposite  character  fails.  Take  a  life 
away  from  God,  and  you  take  from  it  unity  of  impulse.  Passion,  pride,  selfishness 
drive  it  hither  and  thither  as  the  winds  drive  the  dismantled  ship.  Nowhere  but 
in  God  does  man  find  a  consistent  law.  The  second  phase  of  this  character  is  its 
worthlessness.  The  wind  drives  it  away,  and  the  husbandman  is  glad  to  have  it 
driven  away.  Here  we  find  ourselves  in  the  track  of  gospel  thought.  An  ungodly 
life  is  not  used  under  God's  direction  and  for  God's  uses.  The  present  age  is  very 
susceptible  to  this  fallacy — the  identification  of  activity  with  usefulness.  But  we 
ask,  under  whose  direction  ?  For  what  ?  For  whom  ?  We  call  that  man  useful 
who  works  on  God's  lines,  in  God's  ways,  and  for  God's  ends.  It  is  the  unchanging 
law  of  God,  that  the  life  which  gives  nothing  has  no  place  in  His  Divine  order. 
The  chaff,  which  only  lives  by  the  grain,  which  feeds  no  one,  which  has  no  power 
of  reproduction,  is  driven  away.  The  third  phase  of  this  character  is  its  insecurity. 
The  contrast  is  between  the  fixed  tree  and  the  shifting  chaff.  How  safe  is  the  man 
who  abides  in  God,  while  he  who  puts  himself  outside  of  the  restraints  of  Divine 
law  forfeits  likewise  its  protection.  The  weakness  and  instability  of  the  character 
which  is  not  founded  in  God's  law  shall  finally  be  made  manifest.  The  whole 
current  of  the  Psalms  moves  in  the  direction  of  a  day  of  final  tests  which  shall  lay 
bare  the  foundations  of  character.  It  is  only  in  romances  that  virtue  always 
triumphs  and  vice  always  goes  under.  But  our  Psalm  does  not  leave  us  here.  It 
carries  us  over  this  time  of  the  growing  together  of  wheat  and  tares,  to  the  time  of 
separation.  There  is  coming  a  day  of  judgment,  whose  searching  tests  shall  resolve 
the  confusion,  and  make  clearly  manifest  to  the  world  what  is  weak  and  what  is 
strong  ;  what  is  solid  and  what  is  superficial  ;  what  is  wheat  and  what  is  chaff. 
(Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.  D. )  Tlie  chaff  in  the  wind  : — My  heart  aches  when  I 
begin  a  sermon  on  a  theme  like  this.  But  what  makes  my  heart  ache  is  that  a 
man  or  a  woman  born  so  high  should  sink  so  low.  That  one  who  had  the 
possibility  of  being  the  good  grain  in  God's  field,  that  might  have  been  useful  and 
happy,  should  have  so  resisted  the  gracious  influence  of  God's  husbandry  as  at 
last  to  have  become  of  no  value,  and  only  to  be  compared  to  the  chaff  which  the 
wind  driveth  away.  Importance  hinges  on  the  word  "ungodly."  Who  are  the 
ungodly  ?  I  do  not  understand  that  it  meanB,  necessarily,  that  a  man  is  out- 
breakingly  and  viciously  wicked.  The  ungodly  man  or  woman  is  simply  a  person 
who  does  not  live  in  the  way  that  God  demands  ;  one  whose  thoughts  and  purposes 
and  conduct  are  not  in  harmony  with  God's  laws  ;  who  does  not  please  God.  What  a 
graphic  suggestion  is  here  of  the  vanity  of  a  sinful  life  !  The  man  who  loves  and 
serves  God  is  building  up  a  character  which  is  abiding  like  a  great  tree.  He  is 
gathering  many  treasures  of  character  and  personality  that  can  never  be  taken  from 
him.  Truth,  and  integrity,  and  love,  and  faith,  and  hope,  and  patience,  and 
gentleness,  these  great  spiritual  qualities  in  which  God  develops  the  Christian, 
are  qualities  that  cannot  be  taken  away  from  us  by  any  disaster  that  can  come. 
Money,  and  honour,  and  friends,  and  health,  and  life  itself  may  go,  and  all  these 
qualities  remain  in  their  full  measure  ;  but  a  sinful  life,  a  life  that  resists  God's 
grace,  has  nothing  left  that  is  substantial.  If  a  man  gives  himself  up  to  worldliness 
he  may  be  ever  so  successful  in  his  ambitions,  but  there  is  nothing  about  it  that 
will  last.  A  rich  man  goes  out  of  the  world  as  poor  as  when  he  came  into  it. 
His  wealth  fails,  and  is  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away  Physical 
strength  is  fragile  in  the  same  way  ;  often  a  man  rejoices  in  his  strength  one  week 
and  the  next  he  is  in  his  grave.  But  if  he  lives  to  be  an  old  man,  with  trembling 
hands  and  tottering  footsteps,  his  physical  strength  fails  him  at  last  and  is  like 
the  chaff  in  the  wind.  The  same  is  true  of  physical  beauty  and  all  the  attractive- 
ness of  physical  life.  Many  people  who  do  not  obey  God  are  nevertheless 
very  ambitious  to  make .  themselves  of  some  account  in  the  world  ;  but  one's 
work  must  be  like  the  chaff  if  it  is  not  in  harmony  with  God.  God  could 
not  be  the  good  God  that  you  dream  of  if  He  did  not  make  a  difference  between 
chaff  and  wheat.  It  is  not  that  God  is  not  good,  but  that  the  ungodly 
man  has  failed  to  avail  himself  of  God's  goodness,  has  sinned  against  God's  good- 
Bess  and  mercy,  and  has  brought  ruin  upon  himself.     You  say  that  the  chaff 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  I. 

cannot  help  being  chaff ;  yes,  but  the  man  can.  You  will  not  be  chaff  unless  you 
choose  to  be  chaff.  God  did  not  make  you  to  be  chaff ;  He  made  you  in  His 
own  likeness  and  image,  and  when  you  had  wandered  from  Him  by  wicked  ways 
Jesus  Christ  wrought  out  your  salvation  on  the  Cross.  {L.  A.  Banks,  D.D.) 
The  fruitless  life : — The  second  half  of  the  Psalm  gives  the  dark  contrast  of  the 
fruitless,  rootless  life.  The  Hebrew  flashes  the  whole  dread  antithesis  on  the  view 
at  once  by  its  first  word,  "  Not  so,"  a  universal  negative  which  reverses  every  part 
of  the  preceding  picture.  The  remainder  of  the  Psalm  has  three  thoughts — the 
real  nullity  of  such  lives,  their  consequent  disappearance  in  "the  judgment,"  and 
the  ground  of  both  the  blessedness  of  the  one  type  of  character  and  the  vanishing 
of  the  other  in  the  diverse  attitude  of  God  to  each.  Nothing  could  more  vividly 
suggest  the  essential  nothingaess  of  the  "  wicked  "  than  the  contrast  of  the  leafy 
beauty  of  the  fruit-laden  tree,  and  the  chaff,  rootless,  fruitless,  lifeless,  light,  and 
therefore  the  sport  of  every  puff  of  wind  that  blows  across  the  elevated  and  open 
threshing-floor.  Such  is  indeed  a  true  picture  of  every  life  not  rooted  in  God  and 
drawing  fertility  from  Him.  It  is  rootless,  for  what  holdfast  is  there  but  in  Him  ! 
or  where  shall  the  heart  twine  its  tendrils  if  not  round  God's  stable  throne  ?  or 
what  basis  do  fleeting  objects  supply  for  him  who  builds  elsewhere  than  on  tha 
enduring  Rock  1  Chaff  is  fruitless  because  lifeless.  Its  disappearance  in  tho 
Trinnowing  wind  is  the  consequence  and  manifestation  of  its  essential  nullity. 
Just  as  the  winnower  throws  up  his  shovelful  into  the  breeze,  and  the  chaff 
goes  fluttering  out  of  the  floor  because  it  is  light,  while  the  wheat  falls  on  the  heap 
because  it  is  solid,  so  the  wind  of  judgment  will  one  day  blow,  and  deal  with  each 
man  according  to  his  own  nature.  It  will  separate  them,  whirling  away  the  one 
and  not  the  other.  The  ground  of  these  diverse  fates  is  the  different  attitude  of 
God  to  each  life.  Each  clause  of  the  last  verse  really  involves  two  ideas,  but  tha 
pregnant  brevity  of  style  states  only  half  of  the  antithesis  in  each,  suppressing  the 
second  member  in  the  first  clause,  and  the  first  member  in  the  second  clause,  and 
so  making  the  contrast  the  more  striking  by  emphasising  the  cause  of  an  unspoken 
consequence  in  the  former,  and  the  opposite  consequence  of  an  unspoken  cause  in  tha 
latter.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous  "  (therefore  it  shall  last).  The 
Lord  knoweth  not  the  way  of  the  wicked  (therefore  it  shall  perish).  The  way  or 
course  of  life  which  God  does  not  know  perishes.  A  path  perishes  when,  like  some 
dim  forest  track,  it  dies  out,  leaving  the  traveller  bewildered  amid  impenetrable 
forests;  or  when,  like  some  treacherous  Alpine  track  among  rotten  rocks,  it 
crumbles  beneath  the  tread.  Every  course  of  life  but  that  of  the  man  who  delights 
in  and  keeps  the  law  of  the  Lord  comes  to  a  fatal  end,  and  leads  to  the  brink  of  a 
precipice  over  which  the  impetus  of  descent  carries  the  reluctant  foot.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  The   wicked  compared  to  chaff : — Natural   chaff  is  light  and 

unprofitable.  It  is  light,  containing  in  it  no  solid  or  weighty  matter,  but  a  very 
slight  and  frotliy  substance,  subject  to  many  alterations ;  even  so  the  wicked  are 
not  solid  in  their  purposes  and  enterprises,  and  weighty  in  their  carriage  and 
courses,  but  as  chaff,  light,  easily  tossed  and  blown  away.  They  are  light  in  their 
words  and  light  in  their  minds.  They  are  unprofitable  in  two  ways.  In  matters 
temporal,  concerning  this  life,  wherein,  though  they  have  ability,  they  want  tha 
will  to  do  good  with  the  same.  In  matters  spiritual,  wherein,  though  they  have  a 
will,  yet  they  want  ability.  In  that  the  Spirit  of  God  compares  all  wicked  men 
to  chaff,  we  learn  that  the  estate  and  condition  of  wicked  men  is  exceedingly 
inconstant,  void,  uncertain,  mutable,  and  changeable.  They  have  no  certain  stay, 
no  sure  and  settled  estate  in  this  world.  Whether  we  consider  the  matters  of 
religion  and  God's  worship,  or  the  things  of  the  world,  we  shall  see  them  like  unto 
chaff — vain,  vile,  uncertain,  mutable.  {Samioel  Smith. )  The  ungodly  described : 
— Where,  first,  we  may  observe  that  the  prophet  observes  here  a  different  course  in 
handling  of  this  proposition  from  that  he  held  in  handling  the  former ;  for  there 
he  only  described  a  godly  man,  but  named  him  not ;  here,  he  only  names  the 
wicked,  but  describes  them  not ;  and,  indeed,  it  needed  not,  for  Rectum  est  index 
sui  et  ohliqui  [Justice  defines  both  the  just  and  the  unjust] ;  by  telling  what  a 
godly  man  is  he  tells,  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  contraries,  what  the  wicked  arc,  for 
if  that  be  affirmed  of  a  wicked  man  which  was  denied  of  a  godly,  and  that  denied 
which  was  affirmed,  the  description  is  made  ready  to  your  hand,  and  you  have  him 
deciphered  in  his  fulness.  And  yet  we  may  take  notice  of  a  further  reason,  for 
godliness  is  subject  to  many  falsifications  ;  it  may  suffer  much  alloy  by  mixture  of 
base  metals,  and  there  is  need  of  a  touchstone  to  try  whether  it  be  right  or  no. 
Many  colours  may  be  laid  upon  wickedness,  to  make  it  seem  godliness,  as  Satan  can 


PSALM  1.]  THE  PSALMS,  27 

transform  himself  into  an  angel  of  light  (2  Cor.  xi.  14)  ;  and  then  there  is  need  of 
marks  to  know  whether  it  be  a  good  angel,  whether  it  be  true  godline.-^s  or  no  ;  but 
in  the  case  of  wickedness  it  is  not  so  ;  there  is  no  need  of  any  such  marks,  for  there 
cannot  a  worse  vizard  be  put  upon  wickedness  than  its  own  face,  there  is  no  baser 
metal  to  be  mingled  with  it ;  and  though  a  wicked  man  will  be  counterfeiting  to  be 
godly,  yet  it  was  never  known  that  a  godly  man  would  counterfeit  to  be  wicked  ; 
and  therefore  the  prophet,  who  is  no  waster  of  words  in  vain,  would  not  give  marks 
where  they  needed  none,  but  left  wickedness  to  be  known  by  its  own  ill  face,  which 
is   seen  plainly  enough  by  the   law  of  contraries.     {Sir  Richard  Baker.)  The 

vncked  as  chaff: — But  may  we  not  make  a  stand  here,  and  question  the  prophet 
about  his  similitude  ?  for  look  upon  the  wicked,  do  they  look  like  chaff  ?  One 
would  think  them  rather,  in  all  appearance,  to  be  clean  wheat,  and  the  best  wheat 
too,  for  they  only  are  flourishing — they  only  carry  the  price  in  all  markets.  But 
the  prophet  speaks  not  how  they  look,  but  what  they  are  ;  he  saith  not,  They  look 
like  chaff,  but,  They  are  like  chaff ;  and  before  he  hath  done,  for  all  their  appear- 
ance, he  will  make  it  appear  they  are  like  chaff,  and  chaff  they  are  like  to  have  for 
their  similitude.  Well,  be  it  so :  let  the  prophet  have  his  will,  and  let  them  be 
like  chaff ;  what  hurt  take  they  by  this  ?  for  doth  not  the  chaff  grow  up,  and  is  it 
not  brought  up  with  the  wheat  ?  and  when  harvest  comes,  are  they  not  both  reaped 
together,  and  both  together  laid  up  in  the  barn  ?  and  what  more  misery  in  all  this 
to  the  chaff  than  to  the  wheat  itself?  All  this  is  true  ;  the  prophet  sees  it  well 
enough,  and  therefore  stays  not  here  neither  ;  he  ends  not  with  saying,  They  are  like 
to  chaff,  but.  They  are  like  to  chaff  which  the  wind  scatters.  For  this  is  that  wliich 
perfects  the  similitude  ;  and  now  let  any  man  except  against  it  if  he  can.  {Ihid. ) 
The  wicked  as  chaff : — And  such  is  the  condition  of  the  wicked  ;  a  gale  of  prosperity 
hoisted  them  up,  that  they  neither  know  themselves,  nor  where  they  are ;  a  blast 
of  adversity  blows  them  down,  and  makes  them  tear  the  heavens  with  murmuring, 
and  themselves  with  impatience.  No  state,  no  time,  no  place  contents  them. 
{Ibid.)  The  wind  within: — The  chaff  hath  the  wind  without  it  that  disquiets 
it,  but  a  wicked  man  hath  the  wind  within  him  (his  own  passions)  that  disquiets 
him.     {Ibid. ) 

Ver.  5.  The  ungodly  shall  not  stand  In  the  Judgment — The  day  of  judgment :  — 
1.  None  will  deny  that  the  law  of  God,  which  is  holy,  just,  and  good,  explicitly 
condemns  the  sinner,  and  consigns  him  to  the  second  death.  By  the  law  can  no 
man  be  justified.  It  contains  no  provision  for  pardon.  2.  He  will  not  be  able  to 
stand  in  the  last  trial,  because  all  the  witnesses  will  be  against  him.  His  com- 
panions in  sin  will  testify  against  him.  The  example  of  the  righteous  will  testify 
against  the  impenitent.  The  sinner's  own  awakened  conscience  and  memory  will 
testify  against  him.  So  will  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The 
eternal  Judge  will  be  inflexibly  strict  in  interpreting  and  upholding  the  law.  And 
4.  The  impenitent  sinner  at  God's  bar  will  have  no  advocate.  {A.  Dickinsmi.) 
The  ungodly  rising  to  judgment : — They  shall  not  rise  in  the  judgment,  this  is  more 
than  St.  Paul  would  have  said  himself  if  he  had  been  in  the  prophet's  jilace,  for 
who  ever  thought  the  ungodly  should  rise  in  the  judgment,  who  are  sure  to  fall  in 
the  judgment,  seeing  their  judgment  shall  be  to  condemnation  and  not  to  deliver- 
ance !  To  rise  to  the  judgment  is  to  be  brought  to  public  trial,  and  this  is  the 
general  resurrection  that  we  believe  ;  but  to  rise  in  the  judgment  is  upon  trial  to 
come  off  with  credit,  and,  by  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  not  only  to  be  justified, 
but  advanced.  And  who  ever  believed  this  rising  to  belong  to  the  wicked  ?  {Sir 
Richard  Baker. )  A  congregation  in  which  sinners  cannot  stand : — And  as  there 
shall  be  a  general  judgment,  in  which  the  ungodly  shall  not  rise,  so,  after  the 
judgment,  there  shall  be  a  particular  congregation  of  the  righteous,  in  which 
sinners  shall  not  stand.  And,  indeed,  what  society  can  there  be  between  a  tree  and 
chaff  t  or  who  can  think  it  fit  that  trees  and  chaff  should  be  made  companions  ? 
And  as  there  is  no  reason  that  the  ungodly,  having  made  others  by  their  counsel  to 
&11  here,  should  rise  themselves  in  judgment  hereafter,  so  there  is  no  reason,  seeii;g 
the  righteous  could  not  be  suffered  to  stand  here  in  the  way  of  sinners,  that  sinners 
should  be  suffered  to  stand  hereafter  in  the  congregation  of  the  righteous.  And 
here  now  a  multitude  of  reasons  seem  assembled,  as  it  were,  to  make  it  good,  tliat 
sinners  neither  can  nor  ought  to  stand  in  this  assembly.  It  is  a  congregation  w  hiuh 
none  can  make  but  the  righteous :  for  sinners  are  all  rebels,  and  would  make  it  a 
rout.  It  is  a  court  where  all  must  be  neat  and  clean  ;  and  so  are  none  but  the 
righteous  ;  for  sinners  are  all  lepers,  and  would  make  it  a  spital.     It  is  a  company 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  I. 

that  makes  a  communion,  and  that  can  none  do  but  saints,  for  sinners  seek  every 
one  their  own,  and  are  all  for  themselves.  They  must  be  all  God's  friends ;  at 
least,  such  as  He  knows ;  and  such  are  only  the  righteous,  for  sinners  are  all  merfr 
strangers  and  aliens  from  God.  {Ibid.)  Failure  in  judgment : — And  now  let  the 
great  men  of  the  world  please  themselves,  and  think  it  a  happiness  that  they  can 
rise  in  honours,  can  rise  in  riches  and  estimation  in  the  world  ;  yet,  alas  !  what  i& 
all  this,  if  they  fail  of  rising  in  the  judgment  to  come  1     {Ibid. ) 

Ver.  6.  The  Lord  knowetli  tlie  way  of  the  rig^hteous. — The  way  of  the  righteous  r 
— I.  Contrasted  pictures  of  life. — 1.  That  of  the  happy  man  illustrated  by 
the  law  of  attraction  and  repulsion.  See  the  sentiments,  habits,  and  disposition  (i)  or 
the  evil  he  is  led  to  repel  (ver.  1)  ;  (ii)  of  the  good  to  which  he  is  attracted  (ver.  2). 
Delighting  and  meditating  upon  God's  Word.  2.  By  the  law  of  vegetable  life  (ver.  3). 
The  happy  life  of  the  good,  like  a  fruit  tree,  is  (i)  one  of  ceaseless  appropriation  and; 
transformation,  (ii)  of  seasonable  fruit-bearing,  (iii)  of  prosperity  under  all  circum- 
stances. 3.  With  all  this  the  life  of  the  ungodly  is  contrasted  (vers.  4-6) :  (i)  As- 
shown  in  the  reason  of  the  contrast.  The  character  of  the  ungodly  is  self-evolved 
from  their  own  nature.  That  of  the  good,  from  God.  (ii)  In  the  result  of  the- 
contrast.  The  ungodly  having  no  solidity,  nothing  substantial  in  themselves,  are- 
compared  to  "chaflF,"  which  is  light  and  empty  and  easily  carried  away.  And 
having  no  foundation,  they  cannot  "stand  in  the  judgment."  And  having  nothing 
to  support  them,  must  perish  while  the  good  shall  prosper  evermore.  II.  Lessons 
FROM  these  contrasted  PICTURES. — 1.  That  true  happiness  is  not  the  result  of 
chance,  but  of  law — fundamental,  immutable.  Divine.  This  law  may  be  thus 
stated  :  Every  effect  must  have  an  adequate  cause.  An  uprooted  tree  cannot  bear 
fruit ;  so  a  soul  whose  faith  and  love  are  torn  away  from  God  cannot  be  happy  or 
prosperous.  The  specific  law  of  spiritual  good  is  this :  Character  determines 
destiny.  2.  That  God  has  so  graciously  arranged  the  conditions  of  happiness  or- 
misery  that  it  is  dependent  upon  each  one's  personal  choice.  {D.  C.  Hughes,  A.M.) 
The  Divine  observation : — The  question  is  not  whether  the  righteous  is  apparently 
stronger  than  the  ungodly,  but  what  is  the  relation  of  the  Lord  to  them  both.  The 
final  award  is  not  with  man  but  with  God.  The  destiny  of  the  righteous  and  the 
ungodly  is  as  distinct  as  their  character.  There  is  no  blending  of  one  into  the 
other — the  one  lives,  the  other  perishes.  Consistently  throughout  the  Bible  life  is 
always  associated  with  obedience  or  righteousness,  and  death  with  disobedience  or 
unrighteousness.  Great  value  attaches  to  a  consistency  of  this  kind.  It  has  a. 
bearing  upon  the  character  of  God  Himself.  It  is  because  He  never  changes  in  Hi& 
own  moral  quality  that  He  never  changes  in  relation  to  the  actions  of  men.  That 
"the  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous"  is  the  good  man's  supreme  comfort. 
Not  that  the  good  man  challenges  the  Divine  scrutiny  in  the  matter  of  his  actions, 
but  that  he  is  able  to  invite  the  Lord  to  look  into  the  secret  purpose  of  his  heart 
and  understand  what  is  the  supreme  wish  of  his  life.  To  know  that  the  motive  is 
right  is  to  know  that  the  end  must  be  good.  What  we  have  to  be  supremely 
anxious  about  is  the  main  purpose  or  desire  of  life  ;  that  being  right,  actions  will 
adjust  themselves  accordingly,  and,  notwithstanding  innumerable  mistakes,  the 
substance  of  the  character  shall  be  good,  and  a  crown  of  glory  shall  be  granted  to 
the  faithful  servant.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  way  of  the  righteous: — Oris 
it  that  the  prophet  saith  not,  God  knoweth  the  righteous,  but  the  way  of  the 
righteous  ;  perhaps  lest  men,  for  doing  one  or  two  good  deeds  in  all  their  life,  should 
claim  to  be  righteous,  and  for  such  righteousness  claim  acquaintance  witli  God  ; 
and  so  indeed  God  might  have  acquaintance  enough,  seeing  no  man  is  so  wicked  but 
he  may  sometimes  have  good  thoughts  and  do  good  deeds  ;  but  this  will  not  serve  : 
it  must  be  a  way  of  righteousness  before  God  will  know  it.  {Sir  Richard  Baker. )  • 
Resolute  righteousness  safe : — And  here  the  godly  may  take  his  comfort  by  the  way, 
that  it  is  not  their  slippings  or  treading  awry,  which  may  be  by  ignorance,  or- 
infirmity,  that  can  make,  with  God,  this  shipwreck  of  perishing  ;  it  must  be  a  way 
of  ungodliness,  which  is  not  usually  made  without  much  walking  and  exercising, 
without  resolute  intentions  and  endeavours,  without  set  purposes  and  persistings, 
that  if  a  man  be  sure  he  is  free  from  these,  he  may  then  be  confident  ho  is  safe  fromi 
perishing.     {Ibid.) 


MALM  n.]  TEE  PSALMS.  29 


PSALM  II. 

Vees.  1-12.  Wliy  do  the  heathen  rage  ? — TJupropJutieal  element  in  the  Psalm : — 

But  though  the  poem  was  occasioned  by  some  national  event,  we  must  not  confine 
its  application  to  that  event,  nor  need  we  even  suppose  that  the  singer  himself  did 
not  feel  that  his  words  went  beyond  their  first  occasion.  He  begins  to  speak  of  an 
earthly  king,  and  his  wars  with  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  but  his  words  are  too 
great  to  have  all  their  meaning  exhausted  in  David,  or  Solomon,  or  Ahaz,  or  any 
Jewish  monarch.  Or  ever  he  is  aware,  the  local  and  the  temporal  are  swallowed  up 
in  the  universal  and  the  eternal.  The  king  who  sits  on  David's  throne  has  become 
glorified  and  transfigured  in  the  light  of  the  promise.  The  picture  is  half-ideal  and 
half-actual.  It  concerns  itself  with  the  present,  but  with  that  only  so  far  as  it  is 
typical  of  greater  things  to  come.  The  true  King  who,  to  the  prophet's  mind,  is 
to  fulfil  all  his  largest  hopes,  has  taken  the  place  of  the  visible  and  earthly  king. 
The  nations  are  not  merely  those  who  are  now  mustering  for  the  battle,  but  what- 
soever opposeth  and  exalteth  its«lf  against  Jehovah  and  His  anointed.  Hence 
the  Psalm  is  in  the  nature  of  a  prophecy,  and  still  waits  for  its  final  accomplishment. 
It  had  a  real  fulfilment,  no  doubt,  in  the  banding  together  of  Herod  and  Pontius 
Pilate  against  Christ  (Acts  iv.  25-27).  But  this  was  not  a  literal  one.  It  may  be 
said  to  have  an  ever-repeated  fulfilment  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  which  is  a 
history  of  God's  kingdom  upon  earth,  a  kingdom  which  in  all  ages  has  the  powers 
of  the  world  arrayed  against  it,  and  in  all  ages  the  same  disastrous  result  to  those 
who  have  risen  "  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  anointed."  And  so  it  shall  be 
to  the  end,  when,  perhaps,  that  hostility  will  be  manifested  in  some  yet  deadlier 
form,  only  to  be  overthrown  for  ever,  that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  may  become 
the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  His  Christ.  (J.  J.  S.  Perovme.)  A  magnificent 
lyric: — The  true  basis  of  this  Psalm  is  not  some  petty  revolt  of  subject  tribes,  but 
Nathan's  prophecy  in  2  Sam.  vii.,  which  sets  forth  the  dignity  and  dominion  of  the 
King  of  Israel  as  God's  son  and  representative.  This  grand  poem  may  be  called  an 
idealising  of  the  monarch  of  Israel,  but  it  is  an  idealising  with  expected  realisation. 
The  Psalm  is  prophecy  as  well  as  poetry  ;  and  whether  it  had  contemporaneous 
persons  and  events  as  a  starting-point  or  not,  its  theme  is  a  real  person,  fully 
possessing  the  prerogatives  and  wielding  the  dominion  which  Nathan  had  declared 
to  be  God's  gift  to  the  King  of  IsraeL  The  Psalm  falls  into  four  strophes  of  three 
Terses  each,  in  the  first  three  of  which  the  reader  is  made  spectator  and  auditor  of 
vividly  painted  scenes,  while,  in  the  last,  the  Psalmist  exhorts  the  rebels  to  return 
to  allegiance.  In  the  first  strophe  (vers.  1-3)  the  conspiracy  of  banded  rebels  is  set 
before  us  with  extraordinary  force.  All  classes  and  orders  are  united  in  revolt,  and 
hurry  and  eagerness  mark  their  action,  and  throb  in  their  words.  Vers.  4-6 
change  the  scene  to  heaven.  The  lower  half  of  the  picture  is  all  eager  motion  and 
strained  effort ;  the  upper  is  fall  of  Divine  calm,  God  needs  not  to  rise  from  His 
throned  tranquillity,  but  regards,  undisturbed,  the  disturbances  of  earth.  What 
•hall  we  say  of  that  daring  and  awful  image  of  the  laughter  of  God  ?  The  attribu- 
tion of  such  action  to  Him  is  so  bold  that  no  danger  of  misunderstanding  it  is 
possible.  It  sends  us  at  once  to  look  for  its  translation,  which  probably  lies  in  the 
thought  of  the  essential  ludicrousness  of  opposition,  which  is  discerned  in  heaven  to 
be  80  utterly  groundless  and  hopeless  as  to  be  absurd.  Another  speaker  is  now 
heard,  the  anointed  king,  who  in  the  third  strophe  (vers.  7-9)  bears  witness  to 
himself,  and  claims  universal  dominion  as  his  by  a  Divine  decree.  In  vers.  10-12 
the  poet  speaks  in  solemn  exhortation.  The  kings  addressed  are  the  rebel  monarchs 
whose  power  seemed  so  puny  when  measured  against  that  of  "my  King."  But  all 
possessors  of  power  and  influence  are  addressed.  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  holy 
tear: — A  vivid  picture  of  the  revolt  against  Messiah.  I.  The  extent  of  the 
EETOLT.  "Nations,"  "  People,"  "  Kings,"  "  Rulers."  Christ  has  encountered  this 
opposition — 1.  In  all  nations.  2.  In  all  ranks.  3.  In  aU  generations.  Christ  was 
rejected  by  His  own  age  (Acts  iv.  27).  II.  The  DETERMiKATioy  by  which  this 
EETOLT  WAS  CHAEACTEP.I!^ED.  It  is — 1.  Deliberate.  2.  Combined.  3.  Resolute. 
III.  The  secret  CArsE  of  this  revolt.  They  rebel  against  the  laws  of  God  in 
Christ.  IV.  The  vanity  of  this  OPPOsiTioy  to  Christ.  1.  The  unreasonable- 
ness of  it,  "Why  do  the  heathen  rage?"  No  satisfactory  answer  can  be  given. 
2.  The  nseles.-ntss  of  it.  It  is  "  vain,"  because  useless.  V.  The  concli'siok. 
The  Psalmist  give.* — 1.  An  admonition  :  "  Be  wi.se  now."  2.  Adir-ction:  "  ."^erve 
the   Lord."     Do   Him   homage.     {fV.   L.    Waikinson.)         The  Messiah  King: — 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ii. 

I,  The  Eik6  (vera.  6-7).  1.  Divinely  appointed.  "  I  have  set."  The  Father 
speaking.  2.  Divinely  anointed.  The  name  Christ  or  Messiah  signifies  anointed. 
3.  Assured  of  universal  rule  (ver.  8).  The  world  belongs  to  Him.  He  has  created 
it.  He  has  redeemed  it.  He  shall  ultimately  possess  it.  II.  Messiah's  foes 
(vers.  1,  2,  3).  The  citadel  assailed  because  of  its  Sovereign  ;  the  Church  the  target 
of  malice  and  mischief  because  of  the  kingly  Christ.  Crowned  heads  in  general 
have  been  sworn  enemies  of  the  Lord's  anointed.  The  hostility  of  these  foes  is — 
1.  Deliberate.  They  "imagine,"  rather  "meditate."  2.  Combined.  "They  take 
counsel  together."  3.  Determined.  They  "set  themselves,"  as  fuUy  resolved  t« 
accomplish  their  object.  4.  Violent.  They  "rage."  Nothing  has  ever  excited  so 
much  hostility  as  Christ  and  His  Church.  III.  Messiah's  victory  (vers.  4,  5). 
Fourth  verse  is  strikingly  metaphorical.  The  Victor  is  in  the  heavens — watching 
the  plots,  reading  the  thoughts,  hearing  the  decisions  of  His  enemies,  and  He 
"  sittfth  "  there,  serene  as  the  march  of  stars  and  suns,  calm  as  the  glassy  lake  locked 
in  the  embrace  of  summer  moruing.  Shall  "have  them  in  derision."  Their  efforts 
shall  result  in  self-defeat  and  self-destruction,  and  help  to  the  realisation  of  God's 
own  pui-poses.  The  devil  and  his  agents  often  outwit  themselves  ;  they  mean 
extinction,  but  God  overrules  it  for  permanent  extension.  No  decree  of  the  Divine 
government  can  be  frustrated.  Truth  must  prevail.  He  shall  "speak  in  wrath." 
His  wrath  is  not  vindictiveness,  but  the  recoil  of  His  love  ;  not  revenge,  but 
retribution.  IV.  Messiah's  message  (vers.  10-12).  This  is  a  call  to — 1.  Teach- 
ableness. "  Be  instructed. "  Learn  your  folly  in  opposing  the  Lord.  2.  Service. 
"Serve  the  Lord."  Do  His  bidding.  Be  governed  by  His  laws.  3.  Homage. 
"Kiss  the  Son."  The  Eastern  mode  of  showing  homage  to  a  king.  4.  A  call 
backed  by  the  most  weighty  reasons:  "lest  He  be  angry."  {J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.) 
The  Kiiig  in  Zion: — Two  contrasted  topics,  the  King  and  the  rebellion  of  His 
subjects.  I.  The  King.  1.  The  dignity  of  His  person.  Not  a  King,  or  the  King, 
but  "my  King."  One  able  and  worthy  to  represent  me.  2.  The  extent  of  His 
dominion.  The  nations  of  men  measure  not  the  realm  of  Christ.  All  grades  of 
intelligences  throughout  the  universe  owe  Him  allegiance.  3.  The  greatness  of  His 
power.  Wide  as  is  His  kingdom.  His  power  is  adequate  to  hold  and  govern  it. 
Spiritual  supremacy  involves  supremacy  of  every  name.  To  secure  it,  upheavals 
and  overturnings  are  inevitable.  Under  the  pressure  of  spiritual  forces,  all  other 
forces  must  give  way.  4.  The  blessedness  of  His  sway.  The  prophetic  representa- 
tions of  the  Messiah's  reign  are  glorious  and  happy.  All  blessings  come  down  upon 
the  people.  II.  The  rebellion  of  His  subjects.  1.  Its  universality.  2.  Its 
wickedness.  Men's  treatment  of  Christ  is  more  gratuitously  wicked  than  anything 
else.  He  came,  self-moved,  to  do  them  infinite  good.  3.  Its  impotence.  4.  Its 
folly.  This  rebellion  is  misery  in  its  progress,  and  ruin  in  its  res;ilt.  It  fills  the 
soul  with  wretchedness  and  fear  in  time,  and  leaves  it  under  the  wrath  of  God  in 
eternity.  {Monday  Club  Sermtms.)  Messiah's  rule: — I.  The  determined  hate 
of  the  people  (vers.  1-3).  The  word  "  rage  "  suggests  the  idea  of  Oriental  frenzy 
and  excitement  of  a  tumultuous  concourse  of  crowds  of  people,  all  wildly  angry. 
"Imagine  "is  the  same  word  as  is  rendered  "meditate"  in  Psalm  i.  2.  While 
the  godly  meditate  on  God's  law,  the  ungodly  meditate  a  project  which  is  rain. 
Let  us  not  be  in  league  with  the  world,  for  its  drift  is  against  the  Lord.  II.  The 
Divine  tranquillity  (vers.  4-6).  The  scene  shifts  to  heaven  ;  God  is  ever  undis- 
mayed. III.  Messiah's  manifesto  (vers.  7-9).  Standing  forth.  He  produces 
and  recites  one  of  the  eternal  decrees.  Before  time  was.  He  was  the  only -begotten 
of  the  Father.  The  world  is  His  heritage,  but  the  gift  is  conditional  on  prayer. 
For  this  He  pleads,  and  let  us  plead  with  Him.  The  pastoral  staff  for  the  sheep  ; 
the  "iron  rod"  for  those  who  oppose.  IV.  Overtures  and  counsels  of  peaob 
(vers.  10-12).  "Kiss,"  the  expression  of  homage  (1  Sam.  x.  1).  {F.  B.  Meyer, 
B.A.)  The  reign  of  Christ: — The  Psalm  is  full  of  Christ.  It  is  referred  to  six 
times  by  New  Testament  writers,  and  applied  to  Christ.  It  is  a  beautiful  dramatic 
prophecy,  in  which  several  personages  alternately  speak  momentous  truths,  to 
animate  the  Church  of  God  in  her  conflict  with  sin  and  the  powers  of  hell.  The 
two  leading  thoughts  are — the  powerful  opposition,  but  total  discomfiture  of  Christ's 
enemies  ;  the  certainty,  universality,  and  blessedness  of  His  reign.  1.  The  opposi- 
tion would  be  universal,  and  characterise  all  classes  of  men.  2.  It  is  intense.  The 
heathen  "rage."  3.  It  is  organised.  They  consult  to  find  pretexts  to  justify  their 
hostility.  It  is  violent  and  aggressive.  The  restraints  of  the  gospel  are  irksome 
and  hateful.  When  argument  and  oratory  failed,  force  was  employed.  It  was 
foretold  that  all  the  crafty  counsel  and  all  the  violent  opposition  should  fail.     Vain 


PSALM  n.]  THE  PSALMS.  31 

to  imagine  that  human  craft  can  contravene  omniscience,  or  human  power  overcome 
omnipotence.  It  is  the  potsherd  striving  with  his  Maker.  If  God's  exp*  stulation 
be  disregarded,  then  He  speaketh  in  judgment.  While  adverse  nations  perish,  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  shall  continue  and  become  universal.  When  the  Son  says,  "I 
will  declare  the  decree,"  He  has  respect  to  future  revelations  as  well  as  to  the  one 
then  announced.  He  intimates  that  henceforth  there  shall  be  brighter  and  more 
ample  discoveries  of  the  Divine  purpose.  And  the  promise  was  verified  by  fact. 
The  decree  is  not  only  declared,  it  is  confirmed  by  the  resurrection,  the  intercession 
and  the  enthronement  of  Messiah.  The  universality  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  is 
certain,  but  do  existing  facts  look  towards  its  consummation  ?  Wonderful  prepara- 
tions are  indicative  of  this.  The  great  programmes  of  discovery  and  of  instrument- 
ality are  nearly  complete.  The  great  programme  of  prophecy  is  nearly  accomplished. 
{IV.  Cooke,  D.D.)  A  great  vatumal  hope: — This  Psalm  belongs  to  the  class 
called  Messianic.  It  is  full  of  that  great  national  hope  of  the  Jews  concerning  Him 
who  was  to  come.  A  nation  without  hope  is  like  a  man  without  hope.  Cut  off  hope 
from  any  man,  or  any  group  of  men,  and  at  once  you  paralyse  the  worth  of  every- 
thing. The  Jewish  nation  was  full  of  vitality.  The  noblest  kind  of  national 
hope,  the  highest  idea  of  "  manifest  destiny,"  is  not  simply  a  great  event,  but* 
great  character.  It  is  the  ideal  of  a  great  character  that  is  to  come  to  them,  and 
then  to  create  great  character  throughout  all  the  people.  The  hope  of  the  coming 
of  such  a  being  was  the  ruling  idea  of  the  Jewish  people.  A  character  is  always 
nobler  than  any  event  that  is  going  to  happen.  A  great  nature  remains  as  a 
perpetual  inspiration.  Every  Jewish  child  that  was  born  might  be  the  Messiah  ; 
every  king  might  hold  in  his  hand  the  Messianic  sceptre.  Through  all  their  life 
there  ran  this  great  anticipation,  this  inextinguishable  hope.  We  do  not  know  of 
whom  this  second  Psalm  was  written  ;  we  do  not  even  know  by  whom  it  was 
written.  What  is  the  philosophy  of  the  Messianic  Psalms  ?  Shall  we  say  that  back 
in  those  distant  days  men  anticipated  just  what  was  going  to  come  when  Jesus  was 
born  in  Bethlehem,  and  did  His  work  in  Galilee  ?  There  was  nothing  so  monstrous 
as  that.  The  whole  of  the  Bible  is  much  more  natural  than  we  are  apt  to  make  it. 
This  Messianic  Psalm  was  taken  and  applied  in  its  completeness  to  the  Messiah,  who 
had  really  revealed  Himself  at  last.  The  words  then  found  a  kingship  worthy  of 
them,  and  were  sung  of  Christ.  There  are  three  speakers,  or  series  of  utterances. 
The  first  is  the  writer  of  the  Psalm,  who  stands,  as  it  were,  to  call  the  attention  of 
the  people  to  the  two  great  speakers.  These  are  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and  the  Coming 
One,  the  Anointed,  the  King,  the  Messiah  Himself.  The  writer  stands  as  the 
chorus  in  the  great  tragedy.  It  is  a  great  cry  of  astonishment  from  one  who  sees  a 
great  mercy  coming  to  the  world  of  guilt,  bringing  in  redemption  to  the  world,  and 
the  world  setting  itself  against  it.  It  is  the  everlasting  wonder  of  the  soul  that 
knows  Jesus  Christ,  that  this  world,  with  Jesus  Christ  waiting  at  its  doors  to  save 
it,  can  set  itself  against  Him,  and  not  let  Him  in.  But  God's  great  purpose  of 
making  Jesus  King  of  the  world  is  unchanged  and  unchangeable.  Whether  the 
world  will  have  Him  or  not,  Christ  is  to  be  King  of  the.,  world.  The  world  has 
heard  that,  and  it  has  brought  a  certain  deep  peace  into  the  soul  of  mankind.  The 
third  speaker  is  Christ BHmself.  He  says,  "  I  will  declare  the  decree."  Christ  is 
in  the  world,  and  He  is  sure  of  the  world.  Sitting  upon  the  throne,  recognising 
clearly  who  set  Him  there,  He  will  never  leave  it  until  all  the  nations  shall  be  His 
nations.  Among  the  wonders  of  these  last  nineteen  centuries  has  been  the  quiet 
certain  confidence  of  Christianity.  It  cannot  be  crowded  out  and  lost  among  the 
multitudes  of  mankind  who  are  careless  or  hostile.  It  possesses  Divine  grace,  which 
some  day  will  be  sufficient  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  At  the  close  we  come 
back  to  the  writer  of  the  chorus  that  tells  us  what  the  meaning  of  it  all  is.  The 
Messianic  Psalm  presses  itself  into  the  lives  we  are  living,  and  declares  that  if  we 
are  wicked  we  shall  be  powerless.  If  the  most  humble  man  puts  himself  upon  the 
side  of  righteousness  in  company  with  Christ,  if  in  his  own  little  lot  he  does  things 
pure  and  good  and  kind,  he  shall  have  a  part  with  Christ  in  His  great  cnnque^st  of 
the  world.  He  whom  we  worship  as  Christ  is  the  centre  of  the  world.  Everything 
is  verging  to  Him.  All  the  past,  however  unconsciously,  is  ruled  by  Him  ;  and  all 
the  future,  however  little  it  may  now  know  its  Master,  will  ultimately  recognise 
Him.  He  who  \&  everything,  sanctification,  redemption,  in  the  fortunes  of  the 
individual  soul,  is  the  world's  redemption.  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  Imagine 
a  vain  thing. — The  opposition  to  God  and  His  Christ : — The  Psalm  opens  abruptly.- 
Here  is  no  prelude  ;  it  is  an  utterance  of  amazement,  begotten  in  the  soul,  and  break- 
ing from  the  lips  of  one  who  looks  out  upon  the  nations  and  generations  of  man. 


32  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ll. 

He  discerns,  in  all  tlie  widespread  view,  one  perpetual  restlessness,  one  ceaseless 
movement  of  discontent,  the  throbbing  of  a  rebellion  that  cannot  be  appeased,  of  a 
vain,  bitter,  and  ceaseless  revolt.  It  is  a  revolt  against  God  and  His  Christ  running 
through  the  centuries,  underlying  human  history,  breaking  out  in  fresh  manifesta- 
tions age  after  age,  finding  new  utterance  from  the  kings  and  rulers  and  wise  men 
of  this  world.  Why  does  the  world  fret  against  the  government  of  God  ?  Why 
does  the  world  resent  and  resist  the  rule  of  the  righteous  God,  and  of  the  redeeming 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Whether  it  be  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  one  city  that  come 
within  your  range  ;  whether  it  be  the  notes  and  tones  of  the  very  last  phase  and 
stage  of  philosophic  speculation  ;  whether  it  be  the  problems  that  vex  and  chafe  and 
worry  the  civilised  world  ;  whether  the  spectacle  of  our  exaggerated,  over-developed 
militaryism,  under  which  the  whole  continent  of  Europe  groans  and  bleeds  ;  or 
whether  the  vexed  problems  that  lie  in  our  own  streets  and  houses,  alike  the 
question  arises — Why  does  the  world,  in  things  great  and  small,  chafe  against  the 
rule  of  God— God  the  Source  of  wisdom,  the  Giver  of  all  good  ?  against  Christ,  the 
Redeemer  of  human  nature  !  against  Christ,  man's  true  King,  Leader  and  Guide  and 
Friend  and  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls?  "Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the 
people  imagine  a  vain  thing?"  {F.  W.  Macdonald,  M.A.)  Authorship  and 
meaning  of  the  Psalm : — The  thoughts  of  the  Psalm  are  so  fresh  and  bold,  and  the 
poetical  elevation  so  great,  that  the  thoughts  here  seem  to  have  for  the  first  time 
taken  hold  of  the  writer,  who  is  one  whom  they  directly  concern.  1.  Some  young 
king,  entering  upon  the  rule  of  God's  Kingdom,  has  borne  in  upon  his  mind,  from 
Ms  very  position,  those  strange  and  unprecedented  words  of  Nathan — words  of  in- 
exhaustible meaning,  and  yet  quite  fresh  from  their  novelty — and  entering  into  their 
spirit  as,  to  a  pure  and  thoughtful  mind,  they  opened  up  regions  of  contemplation 
interminable  in  extent  and  full  of  wonders,  and  combining  them  perhaps  with  some 
show  of  opposition  to  his  rule  at  home,  or  some  threatened  defection  from  his 
authority  by  tribes  abroad, — the  young  king  cast  his  thoughts  and  as  |  mirations  into 
this  hymn.  2.  And  what  young  monarch  was  in  such  a  condition  except  Solomon  ? 
Every  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  problem  suits  him.  He  was  the  seed  of  David, 
and  therefore  the  son  of  God.  He  was  appointed  king  on  Ziou  Hill.  His  rule 
tended  to  universality,  and  his  aspirations,  being  those  of  a  profound  intellect  and, 
at  the  same  time,  of  an  imcorrupted  youth,  must  have  aimed  at  conferring  on  all 
peoples  the  blessings  of  God's  Kingdom.  3.  If  we  could  realise  to  ourselves  the 
thoughts  and  emotions  of  those  early  Davidic  kings — standing,  as  all  of  them  did,  to 
Jehovah  as  His  anointed,  bearing  all  of  them  the  title  of  His  Son,  and  pointing 
forward  to  such  a  heritage,  even  all  peoples  ;  and  yet  so  surrounded  with  darkness, 
and  having  but  such  imperfect  instnmients  in  their  hands  wherewith  to  realise  their 
ideal,  and  so  circumscribed  on  every  side — what  aspirations  must  have  filled  their 
hearts  as  they  stood  thus  before  so  high  a  destiny  !  And  yet,  as  all  things  seemed 
to  make  it  impossible  for  them  to  reach  it,  what  perplexities  must  have  tormented 
them  tLll,'^liiM'ied  out  by  the  riddles  of  their  position,  some  of  them  turned  wilfully 
aside  .fe>jiljihl  true  pgife  !  4H£ut  if  we  can  n^fathjjji  the  thoughts  of  these  great 
creative  minds,  how  much  less  tnose  of  the  true  theocratfc  King,  the  true  Messiah  ad^*' 
Son  of  God,  when  entering  upon  His  kingdom,  and^t^ilil^gi^t  its  threshold  with  all* 
the  possibilities  of  it  clear  before  Him,  and  the  way  needful  to  be  trod  to  reach  it  alSb' 
clear  !  We  know  that  He  was  sometimes  troubled  in  spirit,  and  sometimes  rejoiced 
greatly,  alternating  between  a  gloom  more  dark  than  falls  on  any  son  of  man  and  a 
brightness  more  luminous  than  created  light.  But  with  full  view  of  His  work  He 
entered  on  it,  and  with  full  view  of  the  glory  He  prosecuted  it  to  the  end.  5.  The 
Psalm,  if  a  typical  Psahn  in  the  mind  of  its  human  author,  referred  to  the  installa- 
tion of  the  theocratic  king  on  Zion,  who  took  God's  place  over  His  kingdom,  and 
stood  to  Him  in  all  the  endearing  relations  expressed  by  the  name  of  Son.  The 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  finds  in  it  the  statement  of  the  manifestation  of  the  true 
theocratic  King  and  Son  in  power  from  His  resurrection  and  ascension ;  and  His 
principle  is  just.  The  one  was  a  rehearsal  of  the  other.  All  this  Old  Testament 
machinery,  and  this  calling  one  who  was  king  by  the  name  Son,  and  the  like,  would 
never  have  been  but  for  the  other ;  it  was  only  in  order  to  suggest  the  other  and 
prepare  for  it.  It  was  a  prophecy  of  the  other.  It  contained  the  same  ideas.  And 
its  having  been  imperfect,  as  it  was,  implied  that  the  other — that  which  was  perfect 
^should  also  be.  Only,  that  which  the  Old  Testament  writer  had  not  yet  foreseen 
•  had  now  taken  place  ;  the  material  embodiment  of  the  ideas  of  the  kingdom  had 
passed  away,  and  all  things  had  become  spiritual  in  Christ.  {Professor  A.  B. 
Davidson.) 


MALM  11.]  THE  PSALMS.  33 

Ver,  2.  Against  the  Lord,  and  against  His  anointed. —  Taking  counsel  against 
Christ: — Anointed  heie  means  the  same  as  Messiah,  and  both  words  the  same  as 
Christ  in  the  New  Testament.  How  literally  were  the  words  of  this  verse  fulfilled, 
when  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  and  the  rulers  of  the  Jews  combined  together  to 
put  Jesus  to  death  !  How  cordially  they  hated  each  other  ;  and  yet  how  cordially 
they  united  in  persecuting  Jesus  !  This  has  been  the  history  of  our  religion  from 
the  beginning.  Men  who  would  take  counsel  together  in  nothing  else  have  taken 
counsel  together  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  anointed.  Christianity  has 
been  opposed  by  every  form  of  religion  beneath  the  sun.  The  civil  ruler  has 
opposed  it  with  the  sword  ;  the  bigot  with  the  screw,  the  wheel,  and  the  stake  ; 
the  philosopher  with  sophistry  and  derision  ;  and  the  multitude  with  lawless 
violence.  All  have  been  alike  eager  to  nail  it  to  the  cross,  thrust  a  spear  into  its 
side,  and  place  upon  its  head  a  crown  of  thorns.  And  when  asked  to  spare  it  the 
language  of  all  has  been,  "Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas  !  "  This  feature  of  hetero- 
geneous opposition  to  our  religion  is  conspicuous  in  all  modern  and  liberal  and  infidel 
conventions,  where  men  of  all  beliefs  and  of  no  belief,  ignoring  for  the  time  being 
all  their  differences,  unite  heart  and  soul  in  a  crusade  against  the  Word  of  God. 
They  care  little  what  stars  occupy  a  place  in  the  religious  heavens  of  the  world, 
provided  the  Star  of  Bethlehem  be  not  of  the  number.  They  will  tolerate  any 
other  form  of  religion  sooner  than  the  religion  of  the  Lord  and  of  His  anointed. 
{David  Caldwell,  A.M.) 

Yer.  3.  Let  us  break  their  hands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us. — 

Sinners  vainly  attempt  to  dissolve  their  obligations : — I.  The  obligations  sinners 
ARE  UNDER  TO  GoD.  1.  Natural  obligations.  Their  nature,  as  dependent  crea- 
tures, forms  an  intimate  connection  between  them  and  their  Maker.  They  cannot 
exist  a  moment  without  the  immediate  exertion  of  Divine  power.  Their  depend- 
ence is  absolute  and  universal.  It  respects  all  their  natural  powers  and  faculties, 
whether  corporeal  or  mental.  They  are  not  suflBcient  to  think,  or  speak,  or  act  of 
themselves,  independently  of  the  presence  and  eflBciency  of  God.  2.  Moral  obliga- 
tions. God  is  a  Being  possessed  of  every  natural  and  moral  excellence.  He  will 
never  do  anything  contrary  to  the  perfect  benevolence  of  His  heart.  Every  sinner  is 
capable  of  knowing  that  God  is  perfectly  good,  so  he  is  under  moral  obligation  to 
love  Him  for  His  goodness.  3.  Legal  obligation.  God's  absolute  supremacy  gives 
Him  an  independent  right  to  assume  the  character  of  a  law-giver.  It  properly 
belongs  to  Him  to  give  law  to  all  His  intelligent  creatures.  II.  Sinners  en- 
deavour  TO   FREE   THEMSELVES   FROM   ALL   THE    OBLIGATIONS  WHICH   THEY   ARE 

UNDER  TO  God.  They  wish  and  endeavour  to  break  His  bands,  and  cast  away 
His  cords.  1.  This  appears  by  their  mode  of  speaking  upon  this  subject.  2.  By 
their  mode  of  reasoning  as  well  as  speaking.  They  endeavour  to  reason  away  all 
their  obligations  to  God.  3.  It  appears  from  their  mode  of  acting,  also,  that  they 
desire  and  endeavour  to  free  themselves  from  all  obligations  to  become  reconciled 
and  obedient  to  God.  III.  All  their  endeavours  to  get  loose  from  their 
OBLIGATIONS  TO  GoD  WILL  BE  IN  VAIN.  1.  They  cannot  destroy  the  existence  of 
God.  2.  Or  their  own  existence.  Improvement.  (1)  "We  may  see  what  is  the 
great  subject  of  controversy  between  them  and  their  Creator.  (2)  Though  sinners  are 
naturally  disposed  to  free  themselves  from  their  obligations  to  God,  yet  they  are 
not  always  sensible  of  it.  They  commonly  think  that  they  have  no  such  disposi- 
tion to  complain  of  the  bands  and  cords  by  which  they  are  bound  to  God,  and 
to  desire  and  endeavour  to  break  and  cast  them  away.  (3)  We  see  why  sinners 
are  the  most  opposed  to  the  most  essential  and  important  doctrines  of  the  gospel. 
(4)  If  they  endeavour  to  free  themselves  from  their  obligations,  then  they  always 
endeavour  to  stifle  convictions.  (5)  If  sinners  are  under  such  natural,  moral, 
and  legal  obligations  to  God  as  have  been  mentioned,  then  He  can  awalien  and 
convince  them  at  any  time  He  pleases.  (6)  Sinners  are  extremely  averse  from 
prayer.  (7)  AH  sinners,  without  exception,  are  bound  to  be  religious  or  to  fulfil 
their  obligations  to  their  Maker,  who  has  niade  them  rational,  immortal,  and 
accountable  creatures.  (8)  If  sinners  are  bound  to  God  by  bands  and  cords  which 
they  cannot  break  nor  cast  away,  then  it  is  their  immediate  and  imperious  duty  to 
cease  from  contending  with  their  Maker,  and  to  become  cordially  reconciled  to  the 
bands  and  cords  by  which  He  has  bound  them  to  Himself.  (i\^.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
Tenderuiy  of  the  young  to  infidelity  :—\.  From  their  limited  views.  A  little  know- 
ledge is  a  dangerous  thing,  as  it  too  often  encourages  self-conceit  and  lays  the 
foundation  for  many  a  hasty  conclusion.     A  slight  and  imperfect  riew  of  the 

3 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [paiJ,i£  ii. 

subject  is  taken  as  the  whole.  Judgment  is  rendered  without  even  hearing  the 
CTidence.  A  few  second-hand  objections  are  suffered  to  cover  the  whole  ground. 
Bacon  says,  "It  is  true  that  a  little  philosophy  inclineth  man's  mind  to  atheism, 
but  depth  in  philosophy  bringeth  men^  minds  back  to  religion ; — for  while  the  mind 
of  man  looketh  upon  second  causes  scattered,  it  may  sometimes  rest  in  them,  and 
go  no  farther ;  but  when  it  beholdeth  the  chain  of  them,  confederate  and  linked 
together,  it  must  needs  fly  to  Providence  and  Deity,"  2.  From  their  defective 
training.  In  the  religious  education  of  youth  the  principal  things  have  not  always 
been  made  prominent.  The  youth  perhaps  knows  no  other  Christianity  than  that 
which  belongs  to  his  own  denomination,  or  some  idle  ceremony  or  some  doubtful 
tenet  has  been  inculcated  with  all  the  solemnity  of  religion  and  all  the  sanctions 
of  eternity.  The  result  is  a  narrow-minded,  bitter  bigotry.  When  the  charm  is 
broken,  and  its  influence  destroyed,  the  mind,  left  loose,  too  often  swings  at  once  t6 
infidelity.  The  training  is  often  defective  in  another  way.  That  the  mind  may  be 
free  from  unfounded  prejudice  and  sectarian  predilections,  nothing  is  taught.  To 
escape  one  evil  they  mn  into  another  and  more  fatal  one.  The  native  soil  brings 
forth  thorns  and  briars.  3.  Another  source  of  infidelity  is  the  conduct  of  too  many 
called  Christians.  4.  Another  is  an  uneasiness  of  restraint.  The  spirit  of  wildness 
and  wilfulness  is  manifest  in  the  first  dawn  of  intellect.  The  earliest  period  of 
childhood  shows  restlessness  and  hatred  of  restraint.  Thousands  are  infidels 
because  they  dread  the  insiiection  of  God  and  hate  the  restraints  of  religion.  Their 
lives  require  such  an  opiate  to  their  fears.  5.  A  love  of  distinction — an  ambition 
to  appear  above  the  vulgar.  Young  men  and  boys  affect  infidelity  for  the  same 
reason  that  they  learn  to  swear  or  to  chew  tobacco.  It  gives  an  air  of  spirit  and 
independence  that  spurns  old  traditions  and  vulgar  prejudices.  6.  Some  are 
infidels  in  self-defence.  They  were  once,  perhaps,  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of 
God — it  may  be,  deemed  themselves  citizens  of  that  kingdom.  But  the  world 
spread  its  charms  before  them.  And  they  have  found  shelter  from  scorn  and 
reproach  in  blank  infidelity.  Combine  all  these  causes  which  are  continually  at 
work  and  is  it  wonderful  that  in  the  face  of  all  the  light  of  truth  there  should  still 
be  infidels?  (Z>.  Merrill.)  Bands  that  cannot  be  broken: — The  yoke  that  our 
Saviour  would  lay  on  this  world  is  not  a  galling  and  exasperating  code  of  laws,  but 
a  yoke  in  which  humanity  would  be  renewed,  transformed,  uplifted  to  the  highest 
and  eternal  joy.  It  is  of  that  "yoke  and  burden"  that  the  world's  proud  captains 
say,  "Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us." 
Bands  and  cords  !  It  is  an  invidious  description  of  "  the  yoke  that  is  easy  and  the 
burden  that  is  light."  What  can  bo  the  issue  of  the  effort  to  break  the  bands  and 
cords  of  the  Almighty  ?  What  can  come  of  it  ?  "He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens 
shall  laugh  :  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision."  The  Psalmist  is  very  bold : 
the  laughter  of  God  !  the  derision  of  the  Most  High  !  What  a  figure  to  use  !  It  is 
a  poet's  phrase,  but  it  is  a  prophet's  truth.  There  is  a  spendthrift  who  is  resent- 
ing the  bands  of  economics  and  arithmetic ;  who  says  in  regard  to  a  plain  and 
accurate  cash  statement,  "I  will  break  these  bands  asunder,"  and  in  his  foolish- 
ness he  makes  the  attempt ;  but  he  cannot  divert  from  their  inflexible  proportions  the 
laws  of  parts  and  quantities,  of  plus  and  minus  considerations.  He  may  wish  that 
ten  and  ten  should  make  twenty-five,  but  they  will  not.  "He  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens"  !  Great  fixed  proportions  ! — they  won't  bend  to  amuse  a  prodigal ;  they 
won't  break  to  gratify  a  spendthrift.  They  claim  their  value  and  issue  their  writ, 
and  the  man  who  has  lived  and  spent  as  though  two  and  two  made  fifty  is  the 
object  of  the  laughter  of  arithmetical  law,  and  is  by  it  had  in  derision.  {F.  W. 
Macdonald.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  .  .  .  and  vex  them  in  His 
sore  displeasure. — First  a  laugh  then  a  smite: — The  heathen  and  the  people,  the 
kings  and  the  rulers  are  answered  with  contempt,  they  are  laughed  at  and  derided  ; 
and  if  this  be  not  enough  to  change  their  spirit  and  their  purpose,  they  will  be 
spoken  to  in  wrath,  and  vexed  in  sore  displeasure.  It  is  interesting  and  instructive 
to  remark  how  creation  first  laughs  at  and  derides  men  who  oppose  it,  and  how  in 
the  next  place  it  avenges  the  insults  that  are  offered  to  its  laws.  When  Canute  re- 
buked the  waves  the  sea  laughed  at  him,  and  the  waves  had  him  in  derision  ;  had 
he  remained  upon  the  position  he  had  chosen,  laughter  and  derision  would  have 
been  changed  for  vengeance  and  overthrow.  Let  a  man  attempt  to  put  down  the 
wind,  and  the  only  possible  answer  is  derision  ;  let  him  attempt  to  defy  the  light- 
ning, and  he  may  perish  under  its  stroke.     There  is  but  a  short  distance  between 


PSALM  11.]  TEE  PSALMS.  35 

the  derision  of  nature  and  its  penal  judgments.  So  every  attempt  to  revile  the 
power  of  God  is  contemned,  and  every  insult  offered  to  His  holiness  is  avenged. 
A  very  curious  process  is  indicated  by  these  two  verses.  The  laughter  is  expressive 
of  an  eternal  law  ;  things  are  not  so  constituted  that  they  can  be  turned  about  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  wicked,  nor  is  the  purpose  of  the  universe  so  fickle  that  the 
wrath  of  man  can  affect  its  fulfilment ;  great  strength  can  afford  to  deride  ;  infinite 
power  can  best  express  its  own  consciousness  of  almightiness  by  smiling  upon  all 
the  hosts  which  array  themselves  against  it.  But  this  answer  of  contemptuous 
laughter  must  not  be  the  only  reply,  for  contempt  can  seldom  have  any  moral  issue 
of  a  really  substantial  and  blessed  kind  ;  there  must  come  a  time  when  law  must 
avenge  itself  upon  those  who  would  insult  its  majesty  or  mock  its  power.  First, 
laughter,  as  a  proof  of  the  utter  impossibility  of  injuriously  affecting  the  standards 
and  purposes  of  God  ;  after  laughter  must  come  the  judgment,  which  shows  how 
dangerous  it  is  to  trifle  with  fire,  and  how  awful  a  thing  it  is  to  defy  the  wrath  of 
righteousness.  It  is  for  every  man  to  consider  under  what  particular  phase  of  the 
Divine  regard  he  is  now  living.  For  a  period  he  may  be  amused,  as  it  were,  at 
certain  phases  of  the  opposition  of  nature,  or  the  awkwardness  of  life  ;  but  let  him 
not  suppose  that  he  sees  the  whole  of  the  case  :  such  opposition  and  awkwardness 
may  suddenly  be  displaced  by  judgment,  and  vengeance,  and  destiny  irrevocable. 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  laughter  of  God  : — They  scoff  at  us.  God  laughs  at 
them.  Severe  Cato  thought  that  laughter  did  not  become  the  gravity  of  Roman 
consuls,  and  is  it  attributed  to  the  majesty  of  heaven  .  .  .  Pharaoh  imagined  that 
by  drowning  the  Israelite  males  he  had  found  a  way  to  root  their  name  from  the 
earth,  but  when  at  the  same  time  his  own  daughter  in  his  own  court  gave  princely 
education  to  Moses,  their  deliverer,  did  not  God  laugh  ?  Is  Dagon  put  up  in  his 
place  again  ?  God's  smile  shall  take  off  his  head  and  his  hands  and  leave  him 
neither  wit  to  guide  nor  power  to  subsist.  ...  He  permitted  His  temple  to  be 
sacked  and  rifled,  the  holy  vessels  to  be  profaned  and  caroused  in ;  but  did  not 
God's  smile  make  Belshazzar  to  tremble  ?  Oh,  what  are  His  frowns  if  His  smiles 
be  so  terrible  ?    ( Thomas  Adams, ) 

Ver.  6.  Yet  have  I  set  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion. — The  sovereignty 
of  Zion's  King : — Christ  is  King  in  Zion,  the  alone  Sovereign  of  His  Church  by 
His  Father's  appointment  and  ordination.  I.  This  sovereign  Prince.  The 
sovereignty  and  royalty  appears — 1.  From  Scripture  prophecy.  2.  From  types. 
3.  From  titles.  4.  From  the  concurring  testimony  of  enemies  and  strangers. 
6.  From  the  badges  of  sovereignty  everywhere  ascribed  to  Him.  See  what  happy 
persons  the  true  and  loyal  subjecte  of  Christ  are.  See  the  dangerous  risk  they  run 
that  invade  His  government  and  contemn  His  authority.  Who  are  these  ?  They 
that  turn  the  authority  derived  from  Him,  to  the  hurt  and  prejudice  of  His  kingdom 
and  interest.  They  who  venture  to  model  His  visible  kingdom  in  the  world  after 
their  own  fancy.  They  who  walk  willingly  after  the  commandments  of  men,  in 
opposition  to  the  commands  of  Christ.  They  will  be  found  equally  guilty  who 
stand  by  and  see  those  injuries  done  to  the  King  of  Zion  by  others,  and  are  silent 
•without  witnessing  against  those  things.  II.  This  kingdom,  and  the  administra- 
tion OF  IT.  The  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  God  is  twofold  :  it  is  either  essential  or 
personal.  His  essential  kingdom  belongs  to  Him  as  to  His  Divine  nature.  His 
personal  or  mediatory  kingdom  belongs  to  Him  as  Immanuel,  God-man.  In  this 
He  acts  by  a  delegate  authority  or  a  power  committed  by  the  Father  for  the 
salvation  of  the  elect  that  were  given  Him.  The  mediatory  kingdom  is  either  more 
general  or  special.  His  general  mediatory  kingdom  extends  itself  over  heaven, 
earth,  and  hell.  The  kingdom  or  Church  of  Christ  is  sometimes  called  His  ' '  body  " 
and  His  "flock."  This  Church  is  either  militant  on  earth  or  trinmpliant  in 
heaven.  Why  is  this  Church  called  the  "  holy  hill  of  Zion  "  ?  The  literal  Mount 
Zion  had  two  heads,  one  called  "Moriah,"  the  other  "the  City  of  David."  Zion 
was  the  place  of  public  worship.  All  the  sacred  things  of  God  were  kept  there.  In 
Scripture  an  opposition  is  stated  between  Mount  Zion  and  Mount  Sinai.  Consider 
some  of  the  properties  of  Christ's  kingdom.  1.  It  is  spiritual.  2.  Of  large  extent. 
3.  Not  populous.  It  is— 4.  A  kingdom  of  light.  5.  A  heavenly  kingdom.  6.  A 
regular  and  well-governed  kingdom.  7.  Much  hated  by  the  devil  and  the  world, 
8.  A  stable,  firm,  and  everlasting  kingdom.  9.  A  holy  kingdom.  Consider  the 
actual  execution  and  administration  of  this  kingdom.  By  the  royal  authority  of 
Zion's  King  He  overrules  and  governs  all  creatures  and  all  their  actions,  yea,  the 
most  dark  and  cloudy  dispensations  for  His  own  and  His  Father's  glory.   With  respect 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ll. 

to  His  invisible  kingdom  of  believers,  there  are  these  acts  of  His  royal  power  that  He 
puts  forth.  1,  He  subdues  them  to  Himself.  2.  He  writes  His  law  on  their 
hearts.  3.  He  enforces  subjection  to  His  laws.  4.  He  casts  a  copy  of  obedience 
unto  all  His  subjects,  and  calls  them  to  imitate  Him.  5.  He  actuates  and  excites 
all  His  subjects  to  obedience  to  Him  by  His  own  spirit.  6.  He  meekens  the  hearts 
of  His  subjects  to  a  due  regard  to  all  the  intimations  of  His  mind  and  will.  7.  He 
corrects  and  chastens  His  subjects.  8.  He  commands  peace,  quiet,  comfort,  and 
deliverance  to  them.  Prove  that  Christ  has  a  visible  Church  from  these  considera- 
tions. He  Himself  is  visible  as  to  His  human  nature.  The  laws,  ordinances,  and 
officers  of  Christ  are  all  visible.  There  is  a  visible  difference  between  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  and  the  kingdom  of  the  devil.  The  charge  that  is  given  to  ministers  in 
the  dispensation  of  the  solemn  ordinances  of  the  New  Testament  proves  that  Christ 
has  a  visible  Church,  And  there  is  a  visible  and  open  war  betwixt  the  seed  of  the 
woman  and  the  serpent.  Notice  some  acts  of  the  royal  authority  of  Christ  in  His 
visible  kingdom.  Giving  the  lively  oracles  of  His  Word  to  His  visible  Church. 
Appointing  the  form  of  its  government.  Appointing  its  officers,  and  the  way  in 
which  they  are  to  be  chosen.  Appointing  ordinances,  such  as  preaching.  Appoint- 
ing censures  for  good  discipline  and  order  in  His  kingdom.  Authorising  the  officers 
to  meet  in  a  judicative  capacity  in  His  name  for  the  better  and  joint  regulating  of 
the  affairs  of  His  kingdom.  Bounding  and  limiting  all  the  courts  and  officers  of 
His  kingdom  to  govern  His  subjects,  and  to  teach  them  no  other  thing  than  He  has 
commanded.  Giving  express  orders  unto  all  His  subjects  to  examine  all  spirits, 
doctrines,  laws,  impositions  at  the  bar  of  the  Word,  and  to  contend  earnestly  for  the 
purity  of  His  truth  and  worship,  ordinances  and  institutions.  III.  Why  has  God 
THE  Father  set  and  obdained  Him  to  bk  Kino  in  Zion  ?  This  flows  originally 
from  the  sovereign  love  and  good  pleasure  of  God.  It  was  for  the  Father's  glory 
and  honour  to  set  Him  upon  the  throne.  It  was  that  He  might  bring  about 
salvation  to  His  mystical  body,  the  Church.  Because  His  shoulders  alone  were  able 
to  bear  the  weight  of  the  government.  Seeing  Christ  bought  the  Church  to  Himself 
with  the  price  of  His  blood,  it  was  fit  that  the  government  of  the  Church  should  be 
committed  to  Him.  Application — (1)  Words  of  exhortation  to  all  those  who 
profess  themselves  the  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Imitate  your  King.  Trust 
Him  at  all  times.  Be  much  at  your  King's  throne  as  supplicants.  Obey  your 
King's  laws.  Keep  His  ordinances  of  worship.  Stand  up  for  the  honour  of  your 
King.  (2)  Words  of  exhortation  to  you  who  are  yet  strangers  to  Zion's  King,  or 
«nemies  to  His  kingdom  and  government.  Surrender  your  rebellious  arms,  and 
submit  unto  His  royal  authority.  {E.  Erskine. )  The  royalty  of  the  Son  of  Ood : — 
I  should  question  whether  there  could  be  produced  from  either  sacred  or  profane 
literature  a  more  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of  putting  a  great  deal  into  a  few 
words  than  this  Psalm.  Its  theme  is  "the  glory  of  the  Son  of  God."  But  that  is 
not  set  forth  in  abstract  sentences  that  would  be  crude.  This  is  a  great  poem,  and 
the  theme  is  painted  pictorially.  There  is  not  one  picture,  but  four.  They  are 
different,  yet  all  closely  connected,  and  at  the  end  are  brought  together  into 
dramatic  unity.  The  artistic  balance  is  perfectly  kept,  the  same  number  of  words 
being  given  to  each  picture.  There  is  no  hurry  or  overcrowding.  Every  picture  is 
painted  broadly  and  freely,  and  even  with  a  great  deal  of  elaboration,  and  yet  the 
whole  Psalm  only  contains  twelve  verses.  Look  at  the  four  pictures.  I.  Revolt. 
Painted  in  the  first  three  verses.  The  nations  crowded  about  the  Holy  Land  have 
become  restive  under  the  yoke ;  a  spirit  of  disaffection  has  spread.  The  movement 
has  come  to  a  head,  and  there  has  been  effected  an  immense  combination  of  in- 
surgent states.  The  second  verse  takes  us  into  the  council-tent.  At  last  they  come 
to  a  unanimous  resolution  (ver.  3),  "  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder."  That  was 
the  form  of  the  truth  ;  but  the  truth  itself  is  perfectly  modern.  It  is  the  resistance 
of  the  world  to  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  it  is  the  attempt  of  the  persecutor  and  the 
traditionalist  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  light  and  love ;  it  is  the 
natural  enmity  of  your  heart  and  mind  to  God  and  His  Christ.  II.  Debision.  At 
this  point  the  poetic  originality  of  this  Psalm  reaches  its  climax.  This  second  scene 
is  in  heaven.  Up  in  heaven  there  is  seated  One  who  is  observing  all  this  which  is 
going  on  on  earth.  It  is  a  very  bold  stroke  of  imagination  to  represent  the  Deity  as 
laughing.  It  is  not,  however,  unexampled.  I  want  to  say  that  we  do  not  laugh 
enough  ;  we  do  not  sympathise  enough  with  God's  laughter  :  we  take  some  things 
too  seriously,  we  tremble  too  much  for  the  ark  of  God.  When  some  one  begins 
vainly  to  give  us  his  opinions  about  religion,  of  which  he  has  no  experience,  we 
ought  to  see  the  ludicrous  side  of  the  matter ;  w«  should  not  become  too  angry  about 


PSALM  II.]  THE  PSALMS.  37 

it.  III.  Intekpretation.  At  this  point  the  words  of  the  poet  become  most 
preguant  and  sliort-hand,  so  to  speak.  The  scene  is  again  changed.  We  are  not  in 
heaven  now.  Not  among  the  insurgents,  but  in  the  opposite  camp,  because  it  is  the 
Anointed,  the  Leader  of  the  army,  who  is  the  speaker.  He  says,  ' '  I  will  declare 
the  decree,"  and  then  He  begins  not  to  repeat  it  in  the  exact  words,  but  to  give  the 
drift  of  it  and  its  meaning  both  to  it  and  to  them.  "  It  means  this,"  He  says, 
"The  Lord  hath  said  unto  Me,  Thou  art  My  Son  ;  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee." 
Among  the  Hebrews  the  reigning  sovereign  was  sometimes  called  God's  son.  No 
doubt  all  this  referred  originally  to  some  Hebrew  king  and  some  crisis  in  his 
history.  But  beneath  the  words  is  a  far  more  comprehensive  reference  to  another. 
The  reign  of  Christ  is  a  reigii  of  love.  His  kingdom  is  set  up  not  upon  the  bodies, 
but  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  yet  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  must  bow. 
IV.  Admonition.  Who  is  speaking  now  ?  Probably  the  poet  himself  Like  the 
chorus  in  a  Greek  play,  he  draws  the  moral  of  the  whole.  He  urges  the  leaders  of 
the  insurgents  to  pause  and  be  admonished.  They  can  see  themselves  that  this 
enterprise  of  theirs  is  hopeless,  and  that  it  may  be  fatal  to  themselves.  Therefore  it 
pleases  them  to  kiss  the  Son,  that  is,  to  give  Him  the  sign  of  allegiance.  It  should 
be,  *'  for  His  wrath  is  kindled  at  a  little.  '  It  is  kindled  by  the  affront  shown  to  His 
Son;  that  He  will  always  terribly  avenge.  {James  Stalker,  D.D.)  Christ's  kingly 
office: — I.  Christ  la  a  King.  1.  He  was  prophesied  of  in  the  Old  Testament  under 
this  character  (Gen.  xlix.  10  ;  Isa.  xi.  1,  2,  3).  2.  He  was  of  old  promised  to  His 
people  under  this  notion.  3.  He  has  all  the  ensigns  of  royalty.  Sword,  Sceptre, 
Crown,  Escutcheon  (Rev.  v.  5),  Throne.  4.  He  sealed  this  truth  with  His  precious 
blood.  II.  The  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Christ  has  a  twofold  kingdom. 
An  essential  kingdom,  and  an  economical  or  mediatory  kingdom.  The  administra- 
tion is  either  external  (general  or  particular)  or  internal  in  the  hearts  of  His  people. 

III.  The  acts  of  Christ's  kingly  office.  Subduing  sinners  to  Himself,  ruling 
and  governing  them,  defending  and  protecting  them,  restraining  His  own  and  their 
enemies,  and  conquering  them.  Christ  exercises  His  kinLiiy  office  in  ruling  and 
governing  His  subjects:  both  externally,  by  laws,  officers,  .md  discipline;  and 
internally,  writing  His  law  in  their  hearts,  and  persuading  them  by  His  spirit. 

IV.  Properties  or  qualities  of  Zion's  King.  He  is  of  ancient,  glorious,  and 
honourable  extract.  He  is  an  absolute  King,  who  makes  laws  for  His  subjects,  but 
is  not  bound  by  any  Himself.  His  will  is  His  law.  He  is  a  wise,  powerful,  just, 
merciful,  meek  and  patient,  beautiful,  opulent,  everlasting  King.  Improvement. 
1.  The  kings  of  the  earth  have  no  ground  to  grudge  the  kingdom  of  Christ  its 
freedom  in  their  dominions,  seeing  it  is  a  spiritual  kingdom.  2.  There  is  a  govern- 
ment of  the  Church  distinct  from  and  independent  of  the  civil  government.  3.  The 
government  of  the  Church  is  not  alterable  by  any  power  on  earth,  civil  and 
ecclesiastical.  4.  The  Church  shall  ride  out  all  the  storms  that  can  blow  upon  her, 
whether  from  earth  or  hell.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Christ,  King  of  Zivix : — Christ  as 
Redeemer  executes  the  offices  of  prophet,  priest  and  king.  As  a  king  He  applies 
the  redemption  He  has  purchased  so  as  to  secure  the  full  and  eternal  blessedness  of 
those  for  whom  it  was  designed.  There  is  a  principle  of  aversion  to  the  trutli  tliat 
Christ  is  king  in  the  heart  of  every  regenerate  man — a  dislike  of  Christ's  spiritual 
authority.  I.  The  kingdom  described  as  God's  holy  hill  of  Zion.  Zion  was 
one  of  the  hUls  on  which  Jerusalem  was  built.  The  name  came  to  be  appropriated 
to  the  temple  and  its  courts.  It  is  also  applied  to  the  worshippers  in  the  temple  if 
not  to  the  whole  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  used  to  signify  the  Church  of  God. 
Sometimes  it  is  applied  to  the  visible  Church,  sometimes  to  the  invisible,  as  Heb. 
xii.  22.  In  the  text  the  whole  Church  is  to  be  understood.  The  visible  Church  is 
as  much  Christ's  Church  as  the  invisible.  It  owes  its  existence  to  Him.  Christ  is 
King  of  Zion,  and  as  King  of  Zion  He  is  head  over  all — exalted  above  all  principality, 
and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion.  II.  The  title  by  which  He  holds  the 
KINGDOM.  He  reigns  by  the  Father's  appointment.  His  dominion  as  King  of  Zion 
is  delegated  and  official.  It  is  not  the  dominion  that  belongs  to  Him  essentially  as 
God  that  is  here  spoken  of,  but  the  power  with  which  He  is  officially  invested  as 
Mediator  by  the  act  of  the  Father.  His  dominion  in  this  respect  is  the  Father's 
gift ;  bestowed  on  Him  in  fulfilment  of  the  conditions  of  the  everlasting  covenant, 
as  the  recompense  of  His  obedience  and  sufferings,  as  His  reward  for  finishing  the 
work  which  His  Father  gave  Him  to  do.  The  dominion  with  which  He  is  entrusted 
supposes  His  essential  dignity  as  a  Divine  Person  ;  for  we  cannot  imagine  that  such 
dominion  would  ever  have  been  committed  to  a  mere  creature.  His  appointment  to 
His  mediatorial  throne  was  fonnallj  made  when  the  covenant  of  grace  was  entered 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ll. 

into  in  the  counsels  of  eternity.  It  was  not  till  His  resurrection  and  ascension  to 
lieaven  that  His  claim  to  royal  dignity  was  fully  recognised.  But  He  exercised  this 
authority  from  the  beginning  of  time,  in  virtue  of  that  atonement  which  He  was  to 
oifer  for  the  sins  of  men.  III.  The  administbation  of  the  kingdom.  This  may 
be  viewed,  either  in  reference  to  the  outward  organisation  and  arrangements  of  His 
Church  or  in  reference  to  that  spiritual  power — that  Divine  resistless  energy,  by 
which  He  effectually  accomplishes  the  great  ends  for  which  His  kingdom  has  been 
set  up,  and  is  maintained  in  the  world.  Christ  prescribes  the  laws  and  institutions 
of  His  Church,  and  appoints  its  office-bearers.  But  outward  arrangements  would  be 
ineffectual  without  a  Divine  efficacy — without  the  power  of  that  Spirit  who  is  sent 
by  Christ,  and  acts  in  accordance  with  Christ's  commission.  IV.  The  peculiar 
PROPERTIES  OF  THIS  KINGDOM.  1.  It  is  a  Spiritual  kingdom.  The  great  design 
and  purpose  for  which  it  has  been  erected  is  spiritual  aud  heavenly.  Human 
government  views  man  in  connection  with  this  world.  The  kingdom  of  Christ 
views  Him  in  connection  with  eternity.  Its  ultimate  end  is  the  advancement  of  the 
glory  of  God ;  its  immediate  end  is  the  salvation  of  sinners.  2.  It  is  destined  to 
be  universal.  All  adverse  power  and  authority  will  be  overthrown,  all  enemies 
vanquished,  and  nothing  left  which  is  not  put  under  Him.  3.  It  shall  last  for  ever. 
It  will  not  only  continue  while  the  earth  exists  ;  it  will  last  through  the  endless  ages 
of  eternity.  {James  Ewing.)  Christ,  the  King  of  nations : — I.  Christ  as  King  of 
KINGS,  AND  Lord  of  lords  (Rev.  xix.  16).  In  these  words  we  have  an  important 
part  of  Christ's  mediatorial  character  brought  before  us.  When  this  name  is 
applied  to  Christ  we  are  to  understand  that  power  which  Christ,  as  King  and  Head 
of  Zion,  has  acquired  over  the  nations  and  kingdoms  of  this  world.  The  Church 
and  the  State  being  distinct  institutions — the  one  being  positive,  expressly  revealed, 
and  exhibited  in  the  Word  of  God  ;  the  other  being  founded  on  natural  principles, 
and  not  on  scriptural  revelation — it  is  evident  that  as  the  rulers  in  the  one  hold 
their  appointment  directly  from  Christ  as  Mediator,  so  the  kings  and  rulers  in  the 
other  hold  their  appointment  primarily  from  God  as  the  Moral  Governor  of  the 
world.  But,  whilst  recognising  this  distinction,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  powers 
which  be  and  are  ordained  of  God  have  no  relation  whatever  to  Christ  as  Mediator. 
Christ  not  merely  the  King  and  Head  of  Zion,  but  Christ  the  King  of  nations,  by 
virtue  of  that  power  with  which  He  is  invested  by  the  Father.  Thus  it  is  written, 
"The  Father  hath  put  all  things  under  His  feet,  aud  gave  Him  to  be  Head  over  all 
things  to  the  Church."  Christ  has  power  over  all  things.  He  has  power  and 
authority  over  societies  and  communities,  and  also  over  nations,  which  occupy  so 
important  a  position  in  the  social  scale.  Thus  kings  and  rulers  are  spoken  of  as 
holding  their  appointment  from  the  Father,  but  in  subordination  to  Christ  the 
Mediator,  and  subject  to  His  control — "  By  Me  kings  reign  and  princes  decree 
justice"  (Eph.  i.  20,  21).  It  is  true  that  Christ,  in  a  very  special  sense,  is  the 
King  and  Head  of  Zion,  but  it  is  no  less  true  that,  in  a  very  important  sense,  He  is 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  Standing  in  so  important  a  relation  to  the 
Church,  it  is  on  her  behalf  that  He  takes  to  Himself  this  universal  power  and 
reigns.  Holding  this  appointment  from  the  Father,  Christ  is  now  exalted  to  the . 
right  hand  of  glorious  power  and  majesty  in  the  heavens.  There  He  is  seated  on 
the  throne,  and  wears  the  crown  and  sways  the  sceptre  of  universal  dominion,  and 
we  are  assured  that  all  kings  shall  yet  fall  down  before  Him,  and  all  nations  shall 
serve  Him.  But  where,  it  is  asked,  is  the  practical  importance  or  application  of 
this  truth  ?  We  look  abroad  upon  the  world,  and  we  see  many  nations  and  peoples 
who  have  never  been  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  who  are  therefore 
ignorant  of  the  homage  which  they  owe  to  Christ.  We  still  say  the  truth  is  here, 
and  must  remain  for  ever.  It  remains  not  only  an  unchanging  truth  in  the  Word, 
but  shall  yet  become  an  accomplished  fact  in  the  history  of  every  nation.  What  a 
blessed  theme  is  here  set  before  us  for  our  contemplation  1  The  kings  of  earth  no 
naore  combining  and  conspiring  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed,  but  coming  with 
Christian  loyalty  to  pay  their  toibute  at  the  feet  of  King  Jesus  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  The 
fulfilment  of  these  words  may  be  in  the  far  distant  future,  but  of  their  certainty  we 
are  assured  by  prophecy  already  fulfilled  in  the  history  of  those  nations  that  had  to 
make  way  for  the  coming  of  Christ.  II.  Duties  devolving  on  nations  under 
the  kingship  of  Christ.  1.  Christian  nations  are  bound  to  frame  their  laws  in 
accordance  with  the  Word  of  God.  Every  nation  ought  to  act  according  to  that 
degree  of  religious  knowledge  which  it  may  possess.  The  very  claims  of  morality 
and  justice,  the  best  interests  of  society,  the  welfare  of  kings  and  rulers  and  of  all 
classes  of  their  subjects,  and  the  claims  of  God,  the  Moral  Governor,  demand  that 


PSALM  11.]  THE  PSALMS.  89 

the  laws  of  nations  should  be  regulated  by  the  Word.  Was  the  law  to  be  honoured 
under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  by  one  solitary  nation  under  a  theocratic 
government,  much  more  shall  it  be  honoured  under  the  New,  by  many  nations  under 
many  fonns  of  civil  government,  but  all  subordinate  to  Christ,  the  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords.  By  obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  King  eternal  shall  righteousness 
be  promoted,  and  righteousness  exalteth  a  nation.  2.  Christian  nations  are  to  be 
interested  in  the  advancement  of  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom.      III.  By  way  op 

IMPEOVEMENT   OF   THE   SUBJECT,  LET   TJS   SEE   ITS   GREAT   IMPORTANCE.       1.  It  is   of 

the  highest  importance,  because  it  is  frequently  and  clearly  revealed  in  the  Word. 
Its  certainty  does  not  rest  on  a  few  solitary  passages  of  Scripture,  but  large  and  con- 
secutive portions  are  employed  to  describe  the  power  and  glory  of  Christ,  the  King 
of  nations.  2.  It  has  been  important  in  the  past  history  and  contendings  of 
the  Church.  3.  Nor  is  the  truth  of  less  importance  in  the  present  day.  The 
Kingship  of  Christ  over  the  nations  has  become  a  present  truth.  There  is  un- 
doubtedly a  spirit  abroad  in  the  land  in  opposition  to  it.  Men  in  Church  and 
State  have  condemned  the  very  principle.  4.  But  in  a  word,  it  is  of  growing 
importance.  It  will  become  still  more  important  when  its  certainty  has  been 
established  and  its  application  fully  and  gloriously  carried  out.  As  we  have 
already  seen,  it  is  frequently  the  theme  of  prophecy.  And  so,  fathers  and 
brethren,  believing  as  we  do  in  the  faithfulness  of  God  and  in  the  fulfilment  of 
His  Word,  we  must  believe  His  own  prediction — "In  His  times  He  shall  show 
who  is  blessed  and  only  potentate,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  The 
works  of  nature,  the  discoveries  of  science,  the  nchievements  of  art,  the  eflforts  of 
earth's  mightiest  nations  and  of  the  Church  universal,  shall  yet  combine  to  promote 
the  interests  of  King  Jesus.  And  in  prospect  of  this  happy  period,  shall  we 
say  the  subject  is  of  no  importance  ?  If  we  are  to  be  indifferent  to  it,  what  is 
to  become  of  the  Church's  prayer,  "Thy  kingdom  comej"  I  (0.  S.  Findlay.) 
Christ's  kingly  office : — I.  The  nature  of  Christ's  kingly  office.  1.  It  is  not 
simply  as  God,  but  as  Mediator — as  God-man — that  Christ  executes  the  kingly  office, 
and  exercises  supreme  dominion,  and  is  entitled  to  the  profoundest  homage  and  the 
most  implicit  submission.  Christ's  kingship  as  Mediator  is  different  from  His  eternal 
and  unchangeable  dominion  as  God,  and  rests  upon  a  different  foundation.  We  are 
to  regard  Christ's  kingly  office  as  properly  and  fully  developed  at  the  time  when 
God  raised  Him  up,  and  gave  Him  glory,  and  seated  Him  at  His  own  right  hand. 
Christ  has  been  invested  with  the  uncontrolled  administration  of  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  the  world.  He  exerts  and  displays  His  kingly  power — (1)  by  subduing  His 
people  unto  Himself;  (2)  by  ruling  and  defending  them  ;  (3)  by  restraining  and  con- 
fining their  enemies,  who  set  themselves  in  opposition  to  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purposes.  II.  Practical  application.  To  receive  Christ  in  His  different  oflSces 
IS  just  to  act  in  the  manner  in  which  the  contemplation  of  Him  in  His  different 
characters  is  fitted  to  lead  us  to  adopt.  Advert  to  the  encouraging  and  consolatory 
reflections  which  the  contemplation  of  Christ's  supreme  dominion  is  fitted  to  call 
forth  with  reference  to  the  general  state  of  His  visible  Church,  and  the  interests  of 
religion  in  the  world.  {  W.  Cunningham,  D.D.)  The  King  and  the  kingdom: — 
I.  "The  character  of  this  Kino,  1.  His  sovereignty  ;  as  appears  from  prophecy, 
types,  titles,  enemies,  and  strangers.  2.  His  attestations  of  royalty  ;  His  enthrone- 
ment, throne,  coronation,  sceptre,  laws,  courts,  officers,  power,  and  His  universal 
sway.  3.  His  characters  and  qualifications.  An  ancient,  wise,  righteous,  gracious, 
sympathising,  rich,  present,  invisible  and  immortal,  independent,  warlike,  glorious 
King.  II.  The  kingdom.  "My  holy  hill  of  Zion."  It  denotes  a  place  of  safety ; 
a  place  of  society,  of  unity,  of  commerce  ;  a  free,  orderly,  peaceable,  warlike,  beauti- 
ful kingdom.  It  is  called  Christ's  kingdom,  because  He  dwells  there  ;  He  built  it ; 
He  governs  it ;  it  is  His  property,  and  the  inhabitants  are  His.  III.  Why  the 
Father  constituted  Christ  the  Kino  of  His  Zion.  This  springs  out  of  Hia 
sovereign  love  to  Him  ;  to  advance  His  own  glory  ;  to  save  His  own  people.  Be- 
cause Christ  could  sustain  it,  and  when  lost  He  redeemed  it.  IV.  The  improvb- 
MENT  intended.  1.  To  the  inhabitants.  Follow  the  example  of  your  Princfc. 
Trust  your  all  in  His  care.  Constantly  surround  His  throne.  Rejoice  in  Hia 
presence.  Obey  His  commandments  ;  and  rest  always  in  His  love.  2.  To  His 
enemies.  You  oppose  Him,  but  He  will  subdue  you.  You  reject  Him  and  He  will 
reject  you.  You  are  miserable  in  this  life,  and  will  be  in  the  next,  unless  His  Spirit 
gain  tlie  victory  over  you.  {T.  B.  Baker.)  Christ's  kingdom: — Jesus  is  King  as 
well  as  Saviour.  He  requires  subjects,  "rhey  must  know  something  of  the  nature, 
as  well  as  the  duties,  of  His  kingdom.     Two  important  questions  oafi  for  considera- 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  n. 

tion :  What  are  the  characteriBtics  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  what  relation  do  we 
indiyidually  sustain  toward  it  ?  I.  Christ's  kingdom  ekjoys  thk  approval  and 
SANCTION  OF  GoD.  He  declares,  "Yet  have  I  set  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill 
of  Zion."  Jesus  comes  to  the  throne  in  an  orderly  way.  He  is  no  usurper.  He 
rules  in  harmony  with  the  will,  and  by  "the  decree"  of  Him  who  is  Lord  of  alL 
II.  Christ  IS  King  by  inhkritanoe.  He  is  God's  "Son,"  His  " only  begotten 
Son,"  and  so  is  entitled  to  rule.  III.  Christ,  as  King,  proclaims  His  authority  : 
"The  Lord  hath  said."  He  administers  the  affairs  of  government  aa  one  divinely 
endowed.  He  is  Divine,  and  so  possessed  of  omniscience  and  omnipotence.  IV.  His 
18  AN  extensive  KINGDOM :  "The  heathen,"  or  the  nations,  "are  given  Him  for 
an  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  a  possession. "  V.  His  is  A 
JUDICIAL,  AS  WELL  AS  A  SAVING,  KINGDOM  :  His  enemies  shall  be  broken  with  "a 
rod  of  iron,"  and  dashed  "to  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel,"  which,  made  of  clay, 
cannot  withstand  forced  contact  with  the  hard  ground.  VI.  Earth's  forces 
ANTAGONISE  Christ's  KINGDOM.  1.  The  heathen  rise  up  in  opposition  to  it.  2.  It 
is  subject  to  popular  machinations  for  its  overthrow.  3.  Men  in  high  station  and 
leaders  in  pul)lic  opinion  conspire  against  it.  VII.  Chrlst's  is  a  victorious 
KINGDOM.  "The  Lord  "and  His  "anointed,"  or  the  Messiah,  are  independent  of 
hostile  agencies.  "He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  have  them  in  derision." 
He,  however,  gives  them  reminders  of  His  presence  and  power,  speaking  at  times 
to  "them  in  His  wrath,"  and  at  other  times  vexing  "them  in  His  sore  dis- 
pleasvire."  A  kingdom  so  Divine,  so  potential,  so  extensive,  and  so  gracious  is  not 
to  be  treated  with  indifference.  It  bears  upon  every  person  in  the  wide  universe 
of  God.  It  concerns  man's  weal  or  woe.  Its  proper  consideration  demands  of  us 
personally — 1.  Wise  action.  2.  Due  enlightenment.  8.  Judicious  service.  4.  Con- 
siderate delight.  5.  Timely  subjection.  6.  Implicit  trustfulness.  {H.  M.  PcUter- 
8o»,,  D.D.)  The  King  in  Zion: — The  following  points  determine  the  principal 
features  of  the  picture  which  the  Psalmist  draws  for  us.  In  the  centre  is  the  King 
of  Zion.  All  around  Him  is  the  raging  crowd  of  rebels  and  conspirators,  who  have 
set  themselves  against  high  heaven,  and  who  will  overturn  His  throne  if  they  can  do 
it.  In  His  struggle  with  these  enemies  of  righteousness  He  is  to  exercise  a  double 
power :  a  power  of  blessing  and  a  power  of  condemnation.  By  the  exercise  of  this 
dual  power  He  is  at  length  to  conquer  completely.  It  does  not  require  a  very  vivid 
imagination  to  find  in  the  history  of  the  past  eighteen  hundred  years  the  colours  and 
the  figures  which  are  wanting  to  fill  out,  in  part  at  least,  this  prophetic  sketch  of 
the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  here  upon  earth.  Take,  for  example,  the  conflict 
which  Christ  has  been  waging  against  evil.  It  is  evident  that  the  Church  has 
emerged  from  her  darkest  days  into  the  first  clear  shining  of  her  millennial  glory. 
How  has  the  King  in  Zion  achieved  His  triumph  ?  He  was  endowed  at  the  outset 
with  a  power  to  bless  and  a  power  to  destroy.  His  oflBce  was  to  be  not  only  that 
of  a  Saviour  King,  but  a  kingly  Judge.  This  is  the  dual  character  in  which  they 
who  look  for  His  second  coming  have  always  expected  He  would  appear.  With 
Christ  came  a  new  sense  of  sin  and  evil.  Christ  flashes  His  light  into  the  soul, 
and  there  comes  the  discrimination  between  the  good  the  bad.  We  are  receiv- 
ing approval  or  condemnation  for  every  act  done  in  the  body  now.  The  parable 
of  the  sheep  and  the  goats  is  being  enacted  now,  every  day.  Judgment  is  one  of 
the  most  solemn  facts  of  this  present  life.  (C.  A.  Dickinson.)  The  enemies  of 
Christ: — I.  The  enemies  of  Christ.  Great  men  described  here  partly  from  their 
wickedness,  and  partly  from  their  weakness.  They  imagine  vain  things,  but  cannot 
carry  them  out.  II.  Christ  the  Lord.  The  prophet  brings  in  God  the  Father 
speaking,  and  the  Son  answering.  The  words  of  the  Father  are,  "  I  have  set  My 
King"  ;  where  we  have  the  inauguration  of  Christ,  or  His  calling  to  the  crown  :  the 
answer  of  the  Son,  "I  will  preach  the  law,"  which  sets  forth  His  willing  obedience 
to  publish  and  proclaim  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  :  the  reply  of  the  Father,  con- 
taining the  reward  that  Christ  was  to  have  upon  the  publication  of  the  gospel ; 
which  was  an  addition  to  His  empire,  by  the  conversion  and  access  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  confusion  of  His  enemies.  III.  Admonition  to  the  princes  and  judges 
of  the  earth.  What  are  they  taught  ?  To  know  their  duty,  and  to  do  it.  And 
the  time  for  doing  it  is  now.  The  reason  is  double,  drawn  from  His  wi-ath  and  the 
consequent  punishment,  and  from  the  happy  condition  of  those  who  learn  to  know 
Him,  and  fear,  and  serve,  and  adore  Him.  {William  Nicholson.)  Christ  the 
fulfilment  of  'prophecy : — On  an  artist's  table  some  colours  are  lying.  You  glance  at 
them,  and  that  is  all,  for  to  you  they  have  no  nienning.  A  month  after  you  come 
in,  and  you  are  attracted  by  a  beautiful  picture.     The  picture  has  been  painted  with 


?BALM  n.]  THE  F8ALMS.  41 

the  colours  yon  saw  before,  but  how  different  it  is  now  when  they  are  harmoniously 
blended.  So  Jesus  Christ  gathers  into  harmony  in  Himself  the  before  ill  understood 
prophecies  and  types  of  the  Old  Testament ;  only  then  we  see  what  they  fully  mean. 
Christ  the  King : — Dean  Stubbs  says,  "When  I  was  in  Florence  a  year  or  two  ago 
I  saw  on  the  outside  of  the  town  hall  the  sacred  monogram,  marking  the  spot  where 
in  former  days  were  the  words,  '  Jesus  Christ,  appointed  by  the  Senate  the  King  of 
the  Florentines.'  And  on  the  battlements  of  the  tower  I  could  still  read  the  Latin 
inscription  referring  to  the  same  event,  '  Jesus  Christ,  the  King  of  Glory  ;  He 
conquers.  He  reigns,  He  rules.'"  By  a  solemn  civic  act  the  old  Florentines  chose 
Christ  as  the  King  of  their  city,  and  we  shall  never  know  personal,  social,  or  civic 
progress  until  we  too  give  Him  the  pre-eminence. 

Vcr.  7.  I  will  declaxe  the  decree. — TTu  Lord's  decree: — There  is  nothing  in  the 
economy  of  life  and  civilisation  that  is  haphazard.  Before  all  things  and  round 
about  them  as  a  glory  and  defence  is  the  Lord's  "decree."  Under  all  disorder  is 
law.  The  law  is  first  beneficent,  and  then  retributive.  It  is  beneficent  because  it 
contemplates  the  recoverj'  and  sanctification  of  the  heathen  and  the  uttermost  parts 
of  the  earth.  It  is  retributive  because  if  this  offer  of  enclosure  and  honour  is  rejected, 
those  who  despise  it  shall  be  broken  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  dashed  to  pieces  like  a 
potter's  vessel.  In  the  study  of  the  world's  constitution  and  movement,  look  first 
of  all  at  the  Lord's  "decree,"  the  Lord's  idea  and  purpose.  Settle  it  that  the 
decree  is  good,  merciful,  redemptive,  and  then  judge  everything  in  the  light  of  that 
fact.  If  you  were  judging  of  a  national  constitution  you  would  not  pronounce  it 
bad  because  of  its  prisons  ;  you  would,  on  the  contrary,  pronounce  it  good  for  that 
very  reason.  You  would  know  that  there  was  a  stron"  authority  in  that  land,  and 
that  the  authority  was  good,  because  it  imprisoned  and  rebuked  the  workers  of  evil. 
So  the  rod  of  iron  attests  the  holiness  of  God,  and  hell  itself  shows  that  virtue  is 
honoured  of  heaven.  {Joseph  Parker ,  D.D.)  The  Lord  hath  said  unto  Me,  Thou 
art  My  Son. — Demonstration  of  sonship: — At  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  Psalms 
God  ^ave  to  the  Church  a  vision  of  the  triumphs  of  Messiah  before  that  of  His 
sufferings  and  death.  The  prospect  cheers  as  we  enter  the  gloom.  "My  King" 
was  also  "  My  Son."  This  was  determined  by  the  resurrection,  as  the  crowning  act 
of  redemption.  It  was  the  resurrection  which  made  manifest  to  the  world  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Eternal  Son  of  Jehovah.  I.  The  resurrection  of  the 
BLESSED  Lord  was  the  final  attestation  of  his  Divine  mission,  and  in  one 
BENSE  THE  STRONGEST.  Proof  after  proof  was  afforded  that  He  was  the  Son  of 
God  ;  but  without  the  resurrection  the  chain  of  evidence  was  not  complete.  The 
life  was  restored,  not  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  prophet,  but  because  He  was 
the  Son  of  God.  II.  The  kestjehection  is  the  life  of  the  Church.  The 
disciples  were  scattered  by  the  storm  of  the  crucifixion.  The  dispersion  would  have 
been  final  had  it  not  been  for  the  word  He  had  said,  "The  third  day  He  shall  rise 
again."  A  new  departure  was  taken  at  the  sight  of  the  living  Lord.  The  commis- 
sion of  the  apostles  was  given  in  the  light  of  the  resurrection.  They  were  to  be  accom- 
panied by  both  His  power  and  His  presence.  There  must  be  the  living  Christ  in 
the  sermon,  to  make  the  truth  effectual ;  in  the  ordinances,  to  render  them  spiritual ; 
in  the  services,  to  inspire  them  into  life  ;  and  in  the  conduct,  to  cause  its  light  to 
shine  on  a  dark  world.  III.  The  resurrection  of  the  blessed  Lord  is  the 
Christian's  strength  and  hope.  A  very  exalted  conception  of  redemption  should 
be  entertained.  It  is  the  gift  of  God  to  the  Eternal  Son.  When  the  living  Saviour 
is  at  our  side  we  have  power  to  carry  our  burdens,  and  to  resist  the  devil.  (  Weekly 
Pulpit.)  Preaching  the  law : — I.  The  general  matter  of  the  sermon.  It  is  a 
law.  What  manner  of  law  ?  A  law  to  be  preached,  as  other  laws  used  not  to  be. 
A  law  concerning  what  God  said.  Which  is  the  reason  why  it  is  to  be  preached. 
Not  a  law  at  large,  but  a  statute  law  (Elcliok),  whicli  but  by  publishing  none 
can  take  notice  of.  II.  The  text  itself.  Or  the  body  of  the  law.  In  these 
words,  "Thou  art  My  Son,  tliis  day  have  I  begotten  Thee."  The  points  in 
it  are  five.  Of  a  son.  Of  My  Son,  (that  is)  the  Son  of  God.  Genui,  the 
Son  of  God  begotten.  Hodie,  the  Son  of  God  this  day  begotten.  And  "dixit 
genui,"  (that  is)  "dicendo  genuit,"  begotten  only  by  saying.  Only  said  the 
word  and  it  was  done,  and  the  word  became  flesh.  III.  How  can  this  (Thou 
ART  My  Son)  be  called  a  law  ?  It  does  not  look  like  one.  There  be  but  two 
laws — 1.  Lex  fidei ;  a  law  limiting  what  to  believe  of  Him:  of  His  person.  His 
nature,  and  His  offices.  2.  Lex  factorum  ;  setting  out  first,  what  He  doth  for 
us ;  and  then,  what  we  are  to  do  for  Him.     What  He  doth  for  us  is,  convey  all  filial 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ir. 

rights.     What  we  are  to  do  for  Him  is,  return  to  Him  all  filial  duties.     {Bishop 
Andre  wes.) 

Yer.  8.  Ask  of  Me,  and  I  shall  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Thine  inheritance. — 

The  Church  armised  to  the  missionary  %vork : — 1.  The  Lord's  intercession,  in 
BEFERENCK  TO  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE.  The  great  object  of  missionary  enterprise 
is  the  subject  of  our  Saviour's  intercession.  The  object  is  the  diffusion  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christianity  throughout  the  world  ;  that  by  means  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christianity,  accompanied  by  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  mankind 
of  all  nations  may  be  converted  to  the  faith  and  obedience  of  Christ,  and  be  made 
wise,  and  happy,  and  good  through  Him.  It  is  but  natural  to  suppose  that  what 
was  the  leading  design  of  our  Lord  in  becoming  incarnate,  and  suffering,  and  dyin" 
should  be  a  subject  of  His  intercessory  prayers.  Missionary  enterprise,  in  the  grand 
means  by  which  these  objects  are  to  be  effected,  is  one  of  the  principal  subjects  of 
our  Lord's  intercessions.  Secondary  means  are  varied  ;  the  primary  means  is  the 
Divine  influence.  In  proportion  to  the  degree  in  which  this  is  communicated, 
missionary  enterprise  is  prosperous ;  in  proportion  to  the  degree  in  which  it  is 
withheld,  it  languishes.  And  the  communication  of  Divine  influence  was  a  leading 
object  of  our  Lord's  atonement,  and  must  be  a  leading  subject  of  His  intercession. 
IL  The  dignity  and  importance  of  missionary  enterprise.  It  is  a  clear 
proof  of  the  estimation  in  which  our  Lord  holds  missionary  enterprise,  that  it  is  the 
subject  of  constant  intercession  with  His  Father.  In  endeavouring  to  promote 
missionary  enterprise  we  are  doing  something  that  is  very  pleasing  to  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.  We  may  be  sure  that  we  shall  have  all  the  assistance  that  is  necessary  in 
order  to  perform  our  duty  in  reference  to  this  undertaking.  And  the  fact  of  our 
Lord's  intercession  gives  us  the  most  abundant  assurance  that  this  undertaking  will 
ultimately  be  completely  successful.  {John  Brovm,  A.M.)  Prayer  glorified  by 
Christ's  example: — It  became  Jesus  to  ask.  Though  He  was  a  Son,  yet  learned  He 
obedience.  Many  objections  are  made  to  prayer.  Some  of  them  are  specious,  but 
all  are  founded  on  ignorance.  The  best  way  to  meet  them  is  to  take  our  stand  on 
the  Scriptures.  God  did  not  dispense  with  prayer,  even  in  the  case  of  His  Son. 
Therefore,  how  much  more  not  with  us.  But  how  was  He  to  ask  ?  On  earth  He 
prayed  like  us.  In  heaven  He  continues  His  prayer.  And  here,  through  His  people. 
He  prays.  And  His  prayers  and  ours  rest  on  His  atonement.  Therefore  He  asks 
in  His  own  name,  and  we  in  His.  Let  us  be  encouraged  to  pray.  But  let  our  prayers 
lead  us  to  active  endeavour.  We  cannot  labour  in  vain.  (  W.  Jay. )  The  heathen 
Jot  Christ : — Here  is  a  wonderful  donation.  The  giver  is  Jehovah,  the  receiver  is 
the  world's  Redeemer,  and  the  gift  is  the  heathen  world — mighty  populations  lying 
outside  of  the  Judsean  realm.  What  an  inheritance  is  this,  and  it  is  given  to 
Christ !  I.  This  vast  inheritance  is  given  Him  to  cultivate.  1.  This  inheritance 
is  worth  cultivation.  It  is  most  prolific,  its  potential  value  is  immense.  It  will 
grow  the  highest  wisdom  and  the  noblest  virtues.  Sages,  poets,  orators,  apostles 
lie  there  by  millions.  2.  The  cultivation  of  this  inheritance  has  been  sadly  neglected. 
The  fences  are  destroyed,  the  surface  is  crusted  and  overrun  with  thorns  and  thistles 
and  noxious  weeds.  3.  Christ  alone  is  able  to  cultivate  it.  Others  have  tried,  but 
failed.  Christ  gives  to  the  soul  of  heathendom  that  which  it  wants,  and  that  which 
none  other  can  give — 1.  A  Deity  in  which  all  hearts  can  unite  in  supreme  love. 
2.  A  creed  in  which  all  intellects  can  repose  with  unwavering  confidence.  3.  A  law 
which  all  consciences  can  approve  without  suspicion.  4.  An  enterprise  in  which  all 
souls  can  work  without  hesitancy  or  lack  of  interest.  II.  This  vast  inheritance  is 
given  Him  to  enjoy.  It  is  a  possession  of  immense  value.  It  will  be  His  as  the 
reward  of  His  mediatorial  work.  When  its  vast  wildernesses  will  bloom  as  Edens, 
"  He  will  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied."  What  a  joy  will  be  His  ! 
Think  of  the  joy  of  the  husbandman  surveying  in  autumn  his  fields  bearing  the 
richest  crops  of  golden  grain.  Think  of  the  joy  of  the  patriot  when  he  beholds  the 
rebellious  provinces  bowing  again  in  loyalty  to  the  sovereignty  of  his  country. 
Think  of  the  joy  of  the  philanthropist  in  seeing  his  benevolent  efforts  crowned  with 
success  in  the  rerar  val  of  diseases  that  afflict  the  body  or  tyrannies  that  crush  the 
man.  {Horailist. )  Christ's  inheritance : — I.  Christ  is  decreed  to  be  the  Son 
OF  Jehovah.  As  such  He  is  both  Priest  and  King.  "Christ  toward  us,"  says 
Gurnall,  "acts  as  a  King,  but  toward  His  Father  as  a  Priest."  II.  As  the  Son  Hb 
IS  PROMISED  an  inheritance.  This  inheritance  includes  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  III.  But  though  He  is  a  King  and  has  a  promised  inheritance,  YET  Hia 
government  IS  to  be  ESTABLISHED  BY  THE  USE  OF  MEANS.     1.  These  means  are 


MALM  n.]  THE  PSALMS.  43 

the  means  of  grace.  2.  These  are  to  be  offered  to  every  creature  on  the  earth. 
3.  We  live  in  that  epoch  of  the  world's  history  when  the  Chwrch  is  actively  engaged  in 
having  all  men  reconciled  to  the  Son  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.     IV.  The 

TIME    WILL     COME    WHKN     HiS     ENEMIKS     WILL     BE     SUBDUED.        1.     The    Church, 

therefore,  should  be  diligent  in  the  performances  of  its  present  duties.  2.  The 
world  should  heed  the  offers  of  grace  ere  it  be  too  late.  3.  Blessed  are  all  they  that 
put  their  trust  in  Him.  4.  Let  us  wait  upon  God  in  prayer  for  the  fulfilment  of 
His  promise  to  give  the  Son  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance.  {L.  O.  Thompson.) 
The  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  Thy  possession. — Fi-nal  triumjih  of  Christian- 
ity : — This  assured — I.  By  the  promises  of  the  Bible,  which  are  many,  explicit, 
positive,  and  world-embracing,  II.  By  the  Divine  origin  and  character  of 
Christianity.  Christianity  is  on  trial ;  if  it  fails  to  fulfil  its  promises,  then  it 
wiU  be  demonstrated  that  it  is  not  of  God.  III.  By  the  measure  of  success 
which  it  has  already  achieved.  There  is  nothing  comparable  with  it.  It 
saves  "the  chief  of  sinners."  It  transforms  savages,  demons,  into  saints.  Christi- 
anity thus  stands  committed  to  the  achievement  of  universal  dominion.  {J.  M. 
Sherwood,  D.D.)  Prayer  for  missions:—!  believe  I  am  speaking  to  the  right 
people  when  I  ask  you  to  pray.  Unprayed  for,  I  feel  very  much  as  if  a  diver  were 
sent  down  to  the  bottom  of  a  river  with  no  air  to  breathe,  or  as  if  a  fireman  were 
sent  up  to  a  blazing  building  and  held  an  empty  hose  ;  I  feel  very  much  as  a  soldier 
who  is  firing  blank  cartridge  at  an  enemy,  and  so  I  ask  you  earnestly  to  pray  that 
the  gospel  may  take  saving  and  working  effect  on  the  minds  of  those  men  to  whose 
notice  it  has  been  introduced  by  us.  {Jaines  Oilmour.)  Universal  dominion  of 
Christ : — The  boldest  thought  ever  suggested  to  the  human  mind  is  Christ's  pro- 
position to  convert  this  world  to  Himself.  For  originality  of  conception,  simplicity 
of  method,  and  certainty  of  result  it  has  no  parallel  in  the  world  of  thought. 
Bolder  than  the  dream  of  the  Macedonian  to  conquer  all  kingdoms  by  his  sword, 
than  the  purpose  of  the  Roman  to  unify  all  governments  into  one,  than  the  hope  of 
Leibnitz  to  create  a  universal  language  for  this  our  babbling  race,  it  stands  forth 
sublime  in  its  isolation,  to  excite  our  admiration,  inflame  our  zeal,  invite  our 
co-operation,  and  inspire  our  faith  in  the  future  of  mankind.     {J.  P,  Newman.) 

Ver.  9.  Break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron. — Jehovah'^s  iron  rod : — This  cannot  mean 
that  Messiah's  sway  is  a  kingdom  of  force,  but  only  that  His  enemies  can  no  more 
withstand  His  power  than  an  earthen  vessel  can  withstand  the  blows  of  an  iron  rod. 
His  only  weapons  of  assault  are  truth  and  love  ;  and  if  human  power  and  institutions 
crumble  at  their  touch  and  pass  away,  it  is  because  there  is  something  radically  evil 
and  defective  in  them.  The  northern  oceans  are  often  filled  with  mountains  of  ice, 
reaching  not  only  far  down  into  the  deep,  but  towering  also  to  the  very  clouds,  and 
threatening  to  crush  to  atoms  everything  with  whifh  they  come  into  collision. 
Nevertheless,  how  soon  do  a  few  days  of  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun  rob  them  of 
their  strength,  leaving  the  frailest  barque  to  speed  on  its  way  over  unobstructed 
waters !  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  operates.  By  light  and 
heat  and  truth  and  love  He  clears  the  way  over  the  frozen  oceans  of  human  life, 
for  the  onward  progress  of  the  ark  of  His  salvation  to  the  haven  where  it  would  be. 
The  only  way  in  which  Messiah  can  be  said  to  break  His  enemies  with  a  rod  of  iron, 
and  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel,  is  His  leaving  them  to  the  natural  and 
fearful  destruction  that  flows  from  resisting  truth  and  love,  the  two  great  laws  of 
His  kingdom,  and  indeed  the  two  great  laws  of  all  well-being.  {David  Caldwell, 
A.M.)  Thou  Shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel. — The  power  and 
triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ ; — All  things  are  at  God's  disposal — all  nations, 
all  men,  collectively  and  individually.  It  is  God  who  plants  and  destroys  ;  it  is  He 
who  builds  up  and  pulls  down.  We  learn  from  the  Psalm  that  all  things  are  at  the 
disposal  of  God  the  Son.  God  the  Father  has  given  to  Him  the  heathen  for  His 
inheritance,  .  .  .  and  He  shall  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron,  He  shall  dash  them 
in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel.  In  Isaiah  it  is  said  (chap.  Ix.  12),  "  For  the  nation 
and  kingdom  that  shall  not  serve  Thee  shall  perish  ;  yea,  those  nations  shall  be 
utterly  wasted."  The  Canaanites,  the  Egyptians,  the  Babylonians,  the  Persians, 
the  Greeks,  the  Romans  would  not  serve  God,  and  they  have  perished.  Kingdoms 
which  wiU  not  serve  Christ  must  be  destroyed  to  make  way  for  those  who  will  serve 
Him.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  will,  sooner  or  later,  swallow  up  all  other  kingdoms. 
The  power  of  Christ's  kingdom,  the  power  of  His  Word,  is  in  a  measure  conferred 
upon  His  believing  people.  Christ  has  given  to  His  believing  people  great  power 
and  influence  in  the  earth.     The  Word  of  God  is  powerful ;  it  is  irresistible.     If  the 


44  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [rsALM  ii. 

Word  of  God  be  once  deeply  rooted  in  the  hearts  of  a  people  it  there  abideth  for 
ever.  God  has  wonderfully  shielded  England  from  danger  ever  since  His  Word 
l;ecame  deeply  rooted  in  the  land.  God  breaks  the  power  of  ungodly  nations  that 
He  may  break  men's  hearts  of  stone.  He  destroys  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  in 
order  to  establish  and  enlarge  the  kingdom  of  His  dear  Son.  To  change  the  heart 
is  the  work  of  God.  He  must  go  with  the  missionaries.  But  much  depends  on 
our  faith — our  faith  in  God's  promises.  {R.  Bickerdike,  M.A.)  The  powers  of  evU 
broken : — Rods  of  iron  crashing  down  upon  the  heads  of  men,  dashing  them  in  pieces 
like  a  potter's  vessel,  are  figures  of  speech  that  seem  to  be  very  unlike  the  merciful 
methods  of  entreaty  and  persuasion  by  which  Christ's  kingdom  is  advanced  on  the 
earth  ;  but  we  have  need  to  remember  that  the  Saviour  is  also  the  Judge.  Not 
only  in  the  future  world,  but  also  in  this,  history  shows  that  the  fate  of  nations  has 
been  determined  by  their  attitude  to  Christ.  While  with  individuals  force  is  never 
to  be  employed  as  an  instrument  to  conquer  opposition,  it  is  equally  certain  that  in 
the  providence  of  God  antagonism  to  God's  will  inevitably  leads  a  nation  ultimately 
to  its  destruction.  Though  the  hand  that  smites  it  is  hidden  behind  political 
movements,  in  which  perhaps  nothing  can  be  seen  save  the  passions  of  men  urging 
them  into  conflict,  yet  when  the  smoke  of  the  battlefield  has  rolled  away,  and  the 
strife  has  ended,  there  stands  out  this  great  truth  :  ' '  Thou  dashest  them  in  pieces 
like  a  potter's  vessel."  Nothing  that  sets  itself  against  the  Christ  of  God  can  ever 
last.     (£.  £,  Barrett,  B.J.) 

Ver.  10.  Be  wis©  now  therefore,  0  ye  kings. — Heavenly  wisdom: — ^Wisdom  is 
the  mind's  eye,  by  which  she  pryeth  into  all  the  secrets  of  nature  and  mysteries  of 
State,  and  discerneth  between  good  and  evil,  and  prudently  guideth  all  the  affairs 
of  life,  as  the  helm  doth  a  ship.  She  is  the  chief  of  the  four  cardinal  virtues  ;  and 
may  rightly  be  termed  the  hinge  that  turns  them  all  about.  There  are  these  four 
virtues — wisdom  to  direct,  justice  to  correct,  temperance  to  abstain,  fortitude  to 
sustain.  Wisdom  giveth  a  good  relish  to  virtue.  Discretion  is  the  salt  of  all  our 
actions,  without  which  nothing  that  is  done  or  spoken  is  savoury.  What  doth 
pregnancy  of  wit,  or  maturity  of  judgment,  or  felicity  of  memory,  or  variety  of 
reading,  or  multiplicity  of  observation,  or  gracefulness  of  delivery,  speed  a  man  that 
wanteth  wisdom  and  discretion  to  use  them  ?  In  Scriptures  a  tburfold  wisdom  is 
mentioned.  Godly  wisdom  is  piety.  Worldly  wisdom  is  policy.  Fleshly  wisdom 
is  sensuality.  Devilish  wisdom  is  mischievous  subtlety.  Of  tliis  leavenly  light, 
this  godly  wisdom,  we  will  display  four  beams — 1.  To  begiu  with  our  cud,  and  to 
provide  for  our  eternal  estate  after  this  life,  in  the  first  place.  2.  To  inform  our- 
selves certainly  how  we  stand  in  the  court  of  heaven :  whether  God's  Ovjuntenance 
shine  upon  us,  or  there  be  a  cloud  betwixt  it  and  us.  3.  To  consider  what  infir- 
mities or  maladies  of  mind  our  natural  constitution,  state,  place,  or  profession, 
or  course  of  life  maketh  us  most  subject  unto,  and  to  furnish  ourselves  with  store 
of  remedies  against  them.  To  mark  where  we  lie  most  open  to  temptation,  and 
there  to  have  our  watch  ready.  4.  To  observe  the  carriage  of  all  affairs  in  this  great 
city  of  the  world,  and  to  set  a  mark  upon  God's  wonderful  protection  and  care  over 
the  godly,  and  His  fearful  judgments  upon  the  wicked.     {D.  Featley,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling. — Antagonistic 
forces: — The  scientist  tells  us  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  arranged  on  the  principle 
of  antagonistic  forces  ;  and  it  is  somewhat  thus  with  the  laws  of  the  Christian  life. 
I.  The  two  states  of  feeling  referred  to.  1.  Fear.  There  are  two  kinds,  servile 
and  filial.  The  latter  is  indicated  here.  A  noble  sensitiveness,  an  anxious  conscious- 
ness, a  salutary  apprehensiveness.  2.  "And  rejoice  with  trembling,"  that  is,  with 
diffidence.  II.  These  two  states  of  feeling  are  not  incompatible.  They 
are  only  apparently  so.  How  often  in  nature  contradictory  materials  and  forces 
blend — hydrogen  and  oxygen,  nitrogen  and  oxygen.  Attraction  and  repulsion  are 
really  complementary,  and  not  contradictory.  III.  They  are  essential  to  thb 
SECURITY  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  They  not  Only  may,  but 
ought,  to  exist  together.  1.  We  ought  to  fear.  The  brighter  the  star  the  more  it 
trembles.  2.  And  we  ought  to  rejoice.  "Fear  without  joy  is  torment,  and  joy 
without  holy  fear  would  be  presumption."  {W.  L.  WatkiTison.)  The  reverence 
due  to  Divine  Providence: — Fear,  very  necessary  for  us  all.  Yet  not  inordinate 
fear.  Religion  regulates  it  and  God's  Word  cautions  us  against  superstitious  terrors 
(Jer.  X.  2,  3).  But  we  are  to  take  notice  of  what  He  does  and  learn  His  will 
thereby.     Many  fail  to  do  this  by  the  common  events  of  His  providence ;  hence 


P8ALH  II.]  THE  PSALMS.  4S 

special  and  extraordinary  ones  are,  at  times,  sent  to  us.  Men  avoid  the  lessons  of 
them.  They  say,  "They  did  not  do  us  harm."  But  others  may  come  and  destroy 
you.  And  is  not  the  fact  of  such  forbearance  a  reason  for  not  despising  them  ? 
"  But  they  are  natural,"  say  others.  And  are  not  life  and  death  natural  1  Terror 
alone  is  of  no  use,  but  generally  the  first  motive  of  reformation.  "  But  our  dangers 
do  not  proceed  from  our  sins  :  we  are  no  worse  than  others  " — so  speak  some.  Are 
we  sure  that  we  are  not  greater  sinners  than  others  ?  Think  of  our  national  sins. 
Some  would  fly  away  from  God's  judgments.  Fly  from  your  iniquities  if  you  would 
be  safe.  Some  are  afraid  to  express  their  convictions  lest  the  world  despise  them. 
But  take  care  lest  our  Lord's  words  concerning  them  who  deny  Him  before  men 
apply  to  you.  You  are  not  called  to  forsake  your  proper  duties,  nor  even  relaxa- 
tions, but  your  absorption  ia  these  things.  Fear  not  man.  The  good  will  not 
shun  you.  Let  the  rest  do  so.  Examine  your  state  of  heart.  All  is  well  if  that 
be  right  with  God.  If  not,  humble  yourself  before  Him.  {T.  Seeker.)  Divine 
service: — L  The  imiVERSAL  obligation.  "No  man  liveth  to  himself,  and  no 
man  dieth  to  himself."  We  cannot  even  die  without  affecting  others,  much  less 
can  we  live  without  influencing  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  the  condition  and 
character  of  those  by  whom  we  are  surrounded.  This  is  not  merely  a  fact,  it  is  a 
law.  There  may  be  individual  unwillingness,  as  in  the  case  of  a  miser ;  or  the 
principle  may  be  socially  counter-wrought.  All  classes  imite  in  working  for  the 
common  good ;  knowing  it  or  not,  whether  they  be  willing  or  not,  all  serve  the 
state-unity  which  they  compose.  In  the  language  of  the  text,  the  business  of  all 
created  life  is  to  "serve  the  Lord."  II.  Partictjlab  obedience.  1.  To  serve 
God  consciously.  2.  To  serve  God  reverently.  Think  how  great  and  how  good  a 
Master  !  Our  particular  place  and  work  may  be  humble  ;  yet  the  whole  is  sublime. 
Angels,  free  from  all  distraction  in  the  sinless  world,  are  working  at  the  grander 
parts ;  our  work  and  theirs  are  yet  to  be  brought  together.  Ours,  therefore,  must  be 
our  very  best,  or  better  be  left  undone.  3.  To  serve  God  fearfully.  As  having 
failed,  and  yet  having  been  forgiven.  As  having  promised  better  things,  and  yet  as 
knowing  ourselves  weak  ;  and  finally,  as  bearing  in  mind  the  testing- time.  {J.  M.  Stott, 
M,A.)  Christian  reverence : — In  a  Christian  s  course  fear  and  love  must  go  together. 
In  heaven,  love  will  absorb  fear.  No  one  now  can  love  God  aright  without  fearing 
Him.  Self-confident  men,  who  do  not  know  their  own  hearts,  or  the  reasons  they 
have  for  being  dissatisfied  with  themselves,  do  not  fear  God,  and  they  think  this 
bold  freedom  is  to  love  Him.  Deliberate  sinners  fear,  but  cannot  love  Him.  But 
devotion  to  Him  consists  in  love  and  fear,  as  we  may  understand  from  our  ordinary 
attachment  to  each  other.  No  one  really  loves  another  who  does  not  feel  a  certain 
reverence  towards  him.  It  is  mutual  respect  which  makes  friendship  lasting.  So 
again  in  the  feelings  of  inferiors  towards  superiors.  Fear  must  go  before  love. 
TOl  he  who  has  authority  shows  he  has  it  and  can  use  it,  his  forbearance  wOl  not 
be  valued  truly :  his  kindness  will  look  like  weakness.  We  learn  to  contemn 
what  we  do  not  fear,  and  we  cannot  love  what  we  contemn.  So  in  religion  also. 
We  cannot  understand  Christ's  mercies  till  we  understand  His  power,  His  glory. 
His  unspeakable  holiness,  and  our  demerits  ;  that  is,  until  we  first  fear  Him.  Not 
that  fear  comes  first,  and  then  love  ;  for  the  most  part  they  will  proceed  together. 
Fear  is  allayed  by  the  love  of  Him,  and  our  love  sobered  by  our  fear  of  Hini. 
Thus  He  draws  us  on  with  encouraging  voice  amid  the  terrors  of  His  threatenings. 
Are  we  in  danger  of  speaking  or  thinking  of  Christ  irreverently  ?  We  may  not  be  in 
danger  of  deliberate  profaneness,  but  we  are  in  danger  of  this,  namely,  of  allowing  our- 
selves to  appear  profane,  and  of  graduallj-  becoming  irreverent  while  we  are  pretending 
to  be  80.  Careless  language  cannot  be  continued  without  its  affecting  the  heart  at  last. 
Men  become  the  cold,  indifferent,  profane  characters  they  professed  themselves  to  be. 
(J.  H.  Newman,  B.D.)  Eejoice  with  trembling. — The  mixture  of  joy  and  fear  in 
religion : — Joy  and  fear  are  two  great  springs  of  human  action.  The  mixed  condition 
of  this  world  gives  scope  for  both.  Each  of  them  possesses  a  proper  place  in  religion. 
Under  the  present  imperfection  of  human  nature  each  of  these  principles  may  be  carried 
to  a  dangerous  extreme.  When  the  whole  of  religion  is  placed  in  joy  it  is  in  hazard 
of  rising  into  unwarrantable  rapture.  When  it  rests  altogether  on  fear  it  degenerates 
into  superstitious  servility.  Joy  tempered  with  fear  is  the  proper  disposition  of 
a  good  man.  I,  Joy  is  essential  to  bblioion.  Beligion  inspires  joy.  It  con- 
fers the  two  most  material  requisites  of  joy,  a  favourable  situation  of  things  with- 
out and  a  proper  disposition  of  mind  within.  It  inAises  those  mild  and  gentle 
dispoBitions  whose  natural  effect  is  to  smooth  the  temper  of  the  soul.  Benevolence 
and  candour,  moderation  and  temperance,  wherever  they  reign,  produce  cheerfulness 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ii. 

and  serenity.  The  consciousness  of  integrity  gives  ease  and  freedom  to  the  mind. 
As  religion  inspires  joy,  so  what  it  inspires  it  commands  us  to  cherish.  Religious 
obedience,  destitute  of  joy,  is  not  genuine  in  its  principle.  We  serve  with  pleasurs 
the  benefactor  whom  we  love.  Exclude  joy  from  religion  and  you  leave  no  other 
motives  to  it,  except  compulsion  and  interest.  As  religion  destitute  of  joy  ia 
imperfect  in  its  principle,  so  in  practice  it  must  be  unstable.  In  vain  you 
endeavour  to  fix  any  man  to  the  regular  performance  of  that  in  which  he  finds  no 
pleasure.  Bind  him  ever  so  fast  by  interest  or  fear,  he  will  contrive  some  method 
of  eluding  the  obligation.  Estimate,  therefore,  the  genuineness  of  your  religious 
principles  ;  estimate  the  degree  of  your  stability  in  religious  practice,  by  the  degree 
of  your  satisfaction  in  piety  and  virtue.  II.  When  we  rejoice  wb  should 
REJOICE  WITH  tbemblikg.  1.  Bccausc  all  the  objects  of  religion  which  afford 
ground  for  joy  tend  to  inspire,  at  the  same  time,  reverence  and  fear.  2.  As  joy, 
tempered  by  fear,  suits  the  nature  of  religion,  so  it  is  requisite  for  the  proper 
regulation  of  the  conduct  of  man.  Let  his  joy  flow  from  the  best  and  purest  source, 
yet,  if  it  remain  long  unmixed,  it  is  apt  to  become  dangerous  to  virtue.  It  is  wisely 
ordered  in  our  present  state  that  joy  and  fear,  hope  and  grief  should  act  alternately 
as  checks  and  balances  upon  each  other,  in  order  to  prevent  all  excess  in  any  of 
them  which  our  nature  could  not  bear.  3.  The  unstable  condition  of  all  human 
beings,  naturally  inspires  fear  in  the  midst  of  joy.  Vicissitudes  of  good  and  evil,  of 
trials  and  consolations,  fill  up  man's  life.  Whether  we  consider  life  or  death,  time 
or  eternity,  all  things  appear  to  concur  in  giving  to  man  th«  admonition  of  the 
text,  "rejoice  with  trembling."     {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry. — The  symbol  of  the  kiss: — I.  Oub 
DUTY.  "  Kiss  the  Son,"  An  expression  of  love.  To  whom  ?  The  Son  of  God. 
The  testimony  of  our  love  to  this  person  is  the  kiss.  This  oi;tward  act  has  been 
diversely  depraved  and  vitiated  amongst  men.  It  hath  been  ill-used.  See  cases  of 
Joab  with  Amasa,  and  Judas  with  Christ.  Treachery  often,  but  licentiousness  more, 
hath  depraved  this  seal  of  love  ;  and  yet  God  stoops  even  to  the  words  of  our  foul 
and  unchaste  love,  that  thereby  He  might  raise  us  to  the  heavenly  love  of  Himself 
and  His  Son.  In  innocent  and  harmless  times  persons  near  in  blood  did  kiss  one 
another.  There  is  no  person  so  near  of  kin  to  thee  as  Jesus  Christ.  The  kiss  was 
also  in  use  as  a  recognition  of  sovereignty  and  power.  There  is  the  kiss  of  recon- 
ciliation. They  kissed  in  reverence,  in  the  olden  times,  even  false  gods.  II.  Oub 
FEAR.  "Lest  He  be  angry."  Anger  and  love,  in  God,  are  not  incompatible. 
Anger  consists  with  love.  If  God  gave  me  nothing  for  my  love  I  should  not  love 
Him,  nor  fear  Him  if  He  were  not  angry  at  my  displeasing  Him.  Even  the  Son, 
whom  we  may  kiss,  may  be  angry.  {John  Borme. )  An  earnest  invitation : — I.  Thb 
COMMAND.  A  kiss  has  divers  meanings  in  it,  progressive  meanings — 1.  It  is  a 
kiss  of  reconciliation,  a  sign  of  enmity  removed  and  of  peace  established.  2.  A 
kiss  of  allegiance  and  homage.  It  is  an  Eastern  custom  for  subjects  to  kiss  the  feet 
of  the  king.  Christ  requires  of  every  man  who  would  be  saved  that  he  shall  yield 
to  His  government  and  rule.  Salvation  cannot  be  cut  in  twain.  If  you  would 
have  justification  you  must  have  sanctification  too.  If  your  sins  are  pardoned  they 
must  be  abhorred.  You  must  give  Him  the  kiss  of  fealty,  of  homage,  and  loyalty, 
and  take  Him  to  be  your  King.  3.  It  is  the  kiss  of  worship.  It  was  the  custom  foy 
idolaters  to  kiss  the  god  which  they  foolishly  adored.  The  commandment  is  that 
we  should  give  to  Christ  Divine  worship.  4.  There  is  another  meaning  which  is  the 
sweetest  of  all.  It  is  the  kiss  of  penitent  love ;  of  deep  and  sincere  afiFection. 
II.  The  argument.  "Lest  He  be  angry,"  &c.  When  He  is  angry  it  is  anger 
that  none  can  match.  What  a  fearful  conjunction  of  terms — "the  wrath  of  the 
Lamb."  III.  The  benediction.  "Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in 
Him."  1.  They  are  really  blessed.  It  is  no  fiction,  no  imaginary  blessing.  It  is  a 
blessing  that  will  stand  the  test  of  consideration,  the  test  of  life  and  the  trial  of 
death.  2.  They  have  a  conscious  blessedness.  They  know  what  it  is  to  be  blessed 
in  their  troubles,  for  they  are  in  their  trials  comforted  ;  and  they  are  blest  in  their 
joys,  for  their  joys  are  sanctified.  3.  They  are  increasingly  blessed.  Their  bles- 
sedness grows.  They  are  blessed  the  more  their  experience  widens,  and  their  know- 
ledge deepens,  and  their  love  increases.  They  are  blessed  in  the  hour  of  death,  and 
best  of  all  their  blessedness  increases  to  eternal  blessedness — the  perfection  of  the 
saints  at  the  right  hand  of  God.      (C.  H.  Spuvjeon. )  A  timely  remonstra'nce : 

— The  words  were  spoken  to  those  who  had  wilfully  opposed  the  reign  of  our  Saviour, 
the  Son  of  God,  the  Lord's  anointed.     They  had  d.etermined  to  reject  Him.     Hence 


PSALM  II.]  TEE  PSALMS.  47 

the  warning — "Be  wise  now,  therefore;  be  instructed;  do  listen  a  little."     Every 
wise  man,  before  he  commits  himself  to  defend  or  withstand  a  policy,  would  make 

auite  sure,  as  far  as  human  judgment  can,  whether  it  be  right  or  wrong ;  to  be 
esired  or  to  be  deprecated.  These  words  were  spoken  to  those  who  ought  to  have  been 
wise — to  kings  and  judges  of  the  earth.  We  are  none  of  us  so  wise  but  we  may 
profit  by  a  little  more  instruction.  He  that  cannot  learn  from  a  fool  is  a  fool  him- 
self. The  text  has  an  especial  reference  to  those  who  are  thoughtless  and  careless 
about  their  best  interests.  People  do  not  think.  Some  of  them  hold  to  the  religion 
of  their  ancestors,  whatever  that  may  be.  Not  conviction,  but  tradition  shai)es  their 
ends.  Others  are  of  the  religion  of  the  circle  in  which  they  live.  Man  seems  to 
think  of  everything  but  of  his  God,  to  read  everything  but  his  Bible.  Oh,  when  will 
men  consider?  The  advice  given  in  the  text  is — "rebel  no  more  against  God." 
You  have  done  so  some  of  you,  actively  and  wilfully,  others  of  you  by  ignoring  His 
claims  and  utterly  neglecting  His  will.  It  is  not  right  to  continue  in  this  rebellious 
state.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Here  is  the  pith  of 
the  advice — "  Kiss  the  Son,  pay  Him  homage  ;  yield  the  affectionate  fealty  of  your 
hearts  to  the  Son  of  God."  Between  you  and  the  great  King  there  is  an  awful 
breach.  God  will  deal  with  you  through  His  Son.  You  must  have  an  advocate. 
This  advice  is  urgent.  How  is  this  advice  pressed  home  upon  us  !  The 
vanity  of  any  other  course  is  made  palpable.  The  claims  of  the  Son  are 
presented.  The  exhortation  is  backed  up  with  bright  and  beautiful  con- 
gratulations for  those  who  yield  to  it.  "  Blessed  are  all  they  who  put  their  trust 
in  Him."    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  soul's  kiss  (to  children): — The  first  three 

verses  give  a  life-like  picture  of  a  great  mob  or  riot.  The  kings  of  the  earth  become 
unkindly,  and  join  the  rabble  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed.  From  the  tenth 
verse  Jehovah  gives  advice  to  all  on  the  earth.  I.  What  it  is  to  kiss  the  Sok. 
When  you  kiss  your  mother  it  is  a  sign  of  love.  When  a  friend  brings  you  a  present, 
you  speak  your  thanks  with  a  kiss.  A  kiss,  then,  is  a  sign  of  grateful  love.  A  kiss 
is  in  some  countries  a  sign  of  loyalty.  In  England  the  hand  of  the  sovereign 
is  kissed.  To  kiss  the  Son  means  much.  You  thereby  give  Him  your  all,  and  get 
it  back  with  His  goodwill.  True  loyalty  is  without  selfishness,  and  without  stint. 
Loyalty  never  means,  how  little  can  I  do  for  my  king  ?  It  asks  only  how  much  ? 
II.  Why  you  should  kiss  the  Son.  Because  Christ's  foes  are  under  God's  wrath.  In 
this  Psalm  David  shows  us  the  terrors  of  God,  so  that  fear  may  drive  us  to  Him.  And 
because  Christ's  friends  are  blessed.  Blessed  every  way  and  blessed  always.  It  is  as 
plain  as  day  that  if  all  kissed  the  Son  the  most  of  our  miseries  would  straightway  cease. 
Count  up  all  the  ills  of  life,  and  then  ask  how  many  of  them  could  continue  if  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  ruled  in  every  heart.  But  the  true  subjects  of  the  King  are  not  all 
blessed  in  the  same  way.  God  does  promise  that,  come  what  may,  all  who  kiss  the 
Son  shall  be  blessed.  The  curse  and  the  blessing  unite  to  add  force  to  the  appeal, 
"  Kiss  the  Son."  {James  Wells,  M.A.)  Christ's  wrath  kindled: — You  have 
heard  of  the  prairie  burning.  The  traveller  has  lit  his  fire  and  dropped  a  spark — 
the  fire  is  kindled  but  a  little,  and  a  small  circle  of  flame  is  formed.  You  cannot 
judge  what  will  be  the  mighty  catastrophe,  when  the  sheet  of  flame  shall  cover  half 
the  continent.  But  mark  that  when  it  is  kindled  "but  a  little,"  it  is  enough  to 
utterly  destroy,  for  they  shall  perish  from  the  way.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Blessed 
are  all  they  who  put  their  trust  in  Him. — The  blessedTiess  of  trustiv^  in  God: — 
Whether  this  Psalm  has  a  primary  respect  to  David,  and  the  establishment  of  his 
kingdom  on  Mount  Zion,  or  should  be  entirely  referred  to  Messiah,  is  a  point  on 
which  expositors  are  not  agreed.  The  passage  is  quoted  and  expressly  applied  to 
Christ  by  the  whole  college  of  apostles,  after  they  had  received  the  plenary  inspira- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  act  of  trust  is  so  familiar  to  all  that  it  requires  no 
explanation,  "rwo  things  are  implied  in  trusting.  A  conviction  of  need  and  a  sense 
of  dependence.  A  persuasion  of  the  goodwill,  ability,  and  fidelity  of  the  person  in 
whom  we  trust.  The  exercise  of  a  saving  faith  is  not  more  frequently  expressed  by 
any  term  than  by  trust.  Man  is  so  dependent  on  Providence  for  the  common  bless- 
ings of  this  life  that  trust  in  God  for  these  is  the  state  of  mind  which  is  becoming. 
In  regard  to  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings,  our  dependence  is  still  greater  ;  for  man 
has  already  lost  the  favour  of  God,  and  has  fallen  under  His  dreadful  curse.  Tlie 
inability  of  his  heart  and  will,  so  far  from  furnishing  any  excuse  to  the  sinner,  is  the 
'  chief  ground  of  his  criminality.  A  threefold  misery  is  common  to  all  the  children 
of  Adam — blindness,  deadness,  guilt.  To  qualify  himself  as  a  physician  to  cure  the 
threefold  malady,  Christ  has  assumed  as  Mediator  a  threefold  office,  namely — of  a 
prophet,  priest,  and  king ;    and  in  this  threefold  office  the  siimer  must  trust  in 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  hi. 

Him  for  salvation.  All  men  need  a  refuge  to  which  they  may  flee  for  safety  ;  aud 
happy  are  they  who  have  been  so  made  sensible  of  their  danger  and  misery  that  they 
are  anxiously  seekiug  a  place  of  safety.  They  cannot  escape  by  their  own  wisdom  or 
power,  and  no  other  creature  has  ability  to  rescue  them  from  ruin.  Whither,  then, 
shall  they  turn  ?  There  is  no  hope  but  in  the  gospel  of  salvation.  Sin  cannot  escape 
punishment  in  the  just  government  of  a  holy  God.  But  sin  may  be  punished  in  au 
adequate  substitute.  It  has  been  punished  in  our  Divine  Surety.  The  satisfaction  is 
complete.  Trust  in  the  Redeemer  supposes  that  He  has  manifested  in  some  way  a 
willingness  to  save  us.  In  order  that  trust  have  a  firm  foundation  it  is  requisite 
that  there  should  be  explicit  promises  of  relief.  Such  promises  are  especially  neces- 
sary  in  the  case  of  the  sinner.  We  find  the  gospel  full  of  kind  invitations  and 
gracious  promises  to  all  who  will  come  and  receive  salvation  as  a  free  gift.  The  first 
views  of  faith  are  not  always  clear  ;  commonly  the  first  light  is  like  that  of  the  dawn, 
which  gradually  increases.  They  who  have  once  found  Christ,  and  trusted  in  Him, 
however  they  may  be  tossed  with  temptations  or  distressed  by  doubts  of  their  accept- 
ance, never  think  of  any  refuge  but  Christ ;  they  never  attempt  to  build  on  another 
foundation.  The  believer  also  trusts  in  Christ  for  future  help  and  future  good.  As 
to  the  blessedness  of  those  who  trust  in  the  Redeemer,  we  note — 1.  They  have 
received  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  2.  They  have  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
3.  They  are  the  special  care  of  Divine  Providence.  4.  They  enjoy  inward  peace. 
5.  When  they  leave  the  world  they  shall  be  blessed  in  the  open  vision  of  God's  glory. 
They  shall  be  perfectly  cleansed  from  the  pollutions  of  sin,  and  when  they  shall  see 
their  Saviour  they  shall  be  like  Him,  for  they  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  {A.  Alex- 
ander, D.D.) 


PSALM  III. 

Vers.  1-8.  Lord,  how  are  they  increased  that  trouble  me. — Morning  thoughts : 
With  returning  day  there  comes  back  on  the  monarch's  heart  the  recollection  of  the 
enemies  who  threaten  him,  a  nation  up  in  arms  against  him  ;  his  own  son  heading 
the  rebellion,  his  wisest  and  most  trusted  counsellor  in  the  ranks  of  his  foes 
(2  Sam.  xv.-rvii.).  Never,  not  even  when  hunted  by  Saul,  had  he  found  his  posi- 
tion one  of  greater  danger.  The  odds  are  overwhelmingly  against  him.  This  is  a 
fact  which  he  does  not  attempt  to  hide  from  himself:  "How  many  are  mine 
enemies."  Meanwhile,  where  are  his  friends,  his  army,  his  counsellors?  Not  a 
word  of  allusion  to  any  of  them  in  the  Psalm.  Yet  he  is  not  crushed,  he  is  not  de- 
sponding. Enemies  may  be  as  thick  as  leaves  of  the  forest,  and  earthly  friends  may 
be  few,  or  uncertain,  or  far  off.  But  there  is  one  Friend  who  cannot  fail  him,  and  to 
Him  David  turns  with  a  confidence  and  an  affection  which  lift  him  above  all  his 
fears.  Never  had  he  been  more  sensible  of  the  reality  and  preciousness  of  the 
Divine  protection.  If  he  was  surrounded  by  enemies,  Jehovah  was  his  shield.  If 
Shimei  and  his  crew  turned  his  glory  into  shame,  Jehovah  was  his  glory ;  if  they 
sought  to  revile  and  degrade  him,  Jehovah  was  the  lifter-up  of  his  head.  Nor  did 
the  mere  fact  of  distance  from  Jerusalem  separate  between  him  and  his  God.  He 
had  sent  back  the  ark  and  the  priests,  for  he  knew  that  God  could  still  hear  him 
from  "His  holy  mountain"  (iii.  4),  could  still  lift  up  the  light  of  His  countenance 
upon  him,  and  put  gladness  in  his  heart  (iv.  6,  7).  Sustained  by  Jehovah,  he  had 
lain  him  down  and  slept  in  safety ;  trusting  in  the  same  mighty  protection,  he 
would  lie  down  again  to  rest.  Enemies  might  taunt,  and  friends  might  fail  him,  but 
the  victory  was  Jehovah's,  and  He  could  break  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly  (iii.  7,  8). 
{J.  J.  S.  Perowne.)  A  morning  hymn: — The  Psalm  falls  into  four  strophes; 
three  of  which  are  marked  by  "  Selah."  1.  Vers.  1,  2  :  The  Psalmist  recounts  his 
enemies.  As  a  morning  Psalm  this  is  touchingly  true  to  experience.  The  first 
waking  thought  is  often  a  renewed  inrush  of  the  trouble  which  sleep  had  for  a  time 
dammed  back.  His  enemies  are  many,  and  they  taunt  him  as  forsaken  of  God. 
The  Psalmist  is  finding  refuge  from  feara  and  foes,  even  in  telling  how  many  there 
are,  since  he  begins  his  complaint  with  "Jehovah."  Without  that  word  the  ex- 
clamations of  his  first  strophe  are  the  voice  of  cowardice  or  despair.  With  it  they 
are  calmed  into  the  appeal  of  trust.  The  Selah  here  is  probably  a  direction  for  an 
instrumental  interlude  while  the  singer  pauses.  2.  Vers.  3,  4  :  The  utterance  of 
faith,  based  on  experience,  laying  hold  of  Jehovah  as  defence.     By  an  efifort  of  will 


PSALM  HI.]  THE  PSALMS.  49 

the  Psalmist  rises  from  the  contemplation  of  surrounding  enemies  to  that  of  the 
encircling  Jehovah.  This  harassed  man  flings  himself  out  of  the  coil  of  troubles  round 
about  him,  and  looks  up  to  God.  He  sees  in  Him  precisely  what  he  needs  at  the 
moment,  for  in  that  infinite  nature  is  fulness  corresponding  to  all  emptiness  of  ours. 
How  comes  this  sudden  burst  of  confidence  to  lighten  the  complaining  soul  t  Ver.  4 
tells.  Experience  has  taught  him  that  as  often  as  he  cries  to  Jehovah  he  is  heard. 
The  tenses  in  ver.  4  express  a  habitual  act  and  a  constant  result.  8.  Vers.  5,  6 
beautifully  express  the  tranquil  courage  that  comes  from  trust.  ' '  Surrounded  by 
enemies,  he  was  quite  safe  under  God's  protection,  and  exposed  to  no  peril  even  in 
the  night."  This  suits  the  situation  pointed  to  in  the  superscription  of  the 
Psalm.  4.  Vers.  7,  8  give  the  culmination  of  faith  in  prayer.  "Arise,  Jehovah" 
is  quoted  from  the  ancient  invocation  (Num.  x.  35),  and  expresses  in  strongly 
anthropomorphic  form  the  desire  for  some  interposition  of  Divine  power.  Fearless- 
ness is  not  so  complete  that  the  Psalmist  is  beyond  the  need  of  praying.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.  D. )  The  number  of  a  man!  s  foes  : — Wh  en  a  man's  enemies  increase  in 
number  the  man  should  bethink  himself,  for  surely  they  will  not  increase  without 
reason.  This  is  a  matter  which  cannot  be  decided  ^vithout  careful  consideration. 
It  is  no  argument  against  a  man  that  his  enemies  are  millions  strong,  nor  is  it  any 
argument  in  favour  of  a  man  that  his  friends  are  at  least  equal  in  number.  At  the 
same  time,  it  may  be  spiritually  educative  and  useful  to  consider  why  there  are  so 
many  enemies.  Enmity  may  be  founded  on  jealousy,  or  envy,  or  opposition  of  con- 
viction ;  or  upon  assurance  that  the  individual  against  whom  the  enmity  is  directed 
is  pursuing  a  mischievous  course.  It  is  for  the  man  himself  to  retire  within  the 
sanctuary  of  his  own  conscience,  to  discover  his  moral  purpose  in  everything,  and, 
according  as  his  integrity  can  be  proved  to  stand  fast  even  in  solitude  and  desolation. 
But  there  is  a  self-analysis  that  is  irreligious.  It  is  conducted  upon  wrong  prin- 
ciples, and  the  conductor  of  it  is  resolved  upon  self- vindication,  rather  than  upon  an 
absolute  discovery  of  truth,  be  it  on  which  side  it  may.  It  should  be  remembered, 
too,  that  there  are  some  questions  which  cannot  be  decided  in  solitude,  the  help  of 
social  influence  is  necessary  to  modify  the  judgment  and  chasten  the  feeling  of  the 
inquirer.  A  second  thought  arising  in  this  connection  is  that  the  very  fact  of  the 
enemies  being  all  but  countless  in  number  may  be  a  tribute  to  a  man's  greatness. 
Armies  are  not  sent  to  cut  down  mushrooms  or  bulrushes.  The  very  magnitude  of 
the  host  encamped  against  a  man  may  say  without  words  how  great  the  man  is  and 
mighty,  and  how  worthy  of  being  attacked.  To  leave  some  men  alone  is  to  with- 
hold from  them  every  moral  and  intellectual  tribute.  The  numbers  of  a  man's 
enemies  may  be  a  tribute  to  the  very  greatness  which  they  desire  to  modify  or  over- 
throw. {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  A  soul's  complaint  to  God: — I.  An  enumera- 
tion OF  TROUBLE  (1,  2).  Though  God  knows  all,  it  relieves  the  surcharged  heart 
to  tell  all  unto  Him.  'The  foes  were  "many."  They  quoted  his  sin  as  a  reason  for 
supposing  that  God  had  forsaken  him  (2  Sam.  xvi.  7,  8).  The  word  "help"  is 
"  salvation,"  which  belongs  only  unto  God.  II.  An  expression  of  unfaltering 
TBT7ST  (3,  4).  God  our  shield  (Gen.  xv.  1).  It  is  a  good  thing  to  use  the  voice 
in  prayer  as  our  Lord  did.  Words  keep  the  heart  awake  (Heb.  v.  7).  III.  An 
acknowledgment  of  mercy  (5,  6).  It  was  the  perfection  of  trust  to  be  able  to 
sleep  under  such  circumstances.  But  it  is  possible  (Mark  iv.  38  ;  Acts  xii.  6).  If 
we  are  where  we  should  be  God  will  save  us,  if  not  from,  then  in  our  troubk.i.  IV.  An 
URGENT  entreaty.  He  counts  his  foes  as  wild  beasts,  harmless  because  their 
jaws  are  broken  and  their  teeth  dashed  out.  They  may  prowl  around,  but  they  can- 
not hurt  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  great  triaU  of  life : — I.  A  good  man  under 
GREAT  trial.  1.  It  involved  great  dangers :  the  danger  of  losing  his  palace, 
throne,  reputation,  life.  2.  It  came  from  an  unlikely  source.  From  his  own  and 
favourite  son.  3.  It  was  morally  deserved.  He  had  committed  heinous  crimes. 
His  guilty  conscience  added  much  to  the  weight  of  the  trial  which  now  befell  him. 
II.  An  all-sufficient  Friend  under  great  trial.  Here  Jehovah  is  presented 
as — 1.  A  protecting  ;  2.  A  glorifying ;  3.  A  restoring  ;  4.  A  prayer-hearing ;  5.  A 
life-sustaining  friend.  III.  A  right  moral  temper  under  great  trial.  Two 
characteristics  in  David's  temper  at  this  time — (1)  courage  ;  (2)  prayerfulness.  David's 
whole  sonl  seems  to  have  gone  out  in  this  prayer,  and  in  truth  all  true  prayer  is 
earnest.  "As  a  painted  fire,"  says  a  brilliant  old  writer,  "is  no  fire,  a  dead  man 
no  man,  so  cold  prayer  is  no  prayer.  In  a  painted  fire  there  is  no  heat,  in  a 
dead  man  there  is  no  life  ;  so  in  a  cold  prayer  there  is  no  oninipotency,  no 
devotion,  no  blessing.  Cold  prayers  are  as  arrows  without  heads,  as  swords 
without  edges,    as  birds  without  wings.      Cold  prayers  always  freeze  before  they 

4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  m. 

reach  heaven.  As  a  body  without  a  soul,  much  wood  without  fire,  a  bullet  in  a  gun 
without  powder,  so  are  words  in  prayer  without  fervency  of  spirit."  {Homilist.) 
The  via  dolorosa : — The  title  is,  "  A  Psalm  of  David  when  he  fled  from  Absalom,  his 
son"  (2  Sam.  xv.-xviii.).  I.  None  are  exempt  fbom  trouble.  The  man  who 
sorrows  is  a  king,  even  David.  All  meet  together  in  sorrow,  for  it  is  the  lot  of  all. 
II.  Troubles  often  come  in  troops.  "How  are  they  increased  that  trouble  me." 
So  was  it  here  with  David,  and  so  was  it  with  Job.  All  sorrows  are  akin,  and 
hence  they  come  in  crowds.  III.  Our  trouble  may  be  our  sin  finding  us  out. 
It  was  so  with  David  here.  "  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled  with  his 
own  ways."  IV.  Trouble  is  apt  to  stagger  our  faith  in  God.  The  enemy 
took  advantage  of  David's  troubles,  and  said  to  him,  "God  hath  forsaken  thee,  and 
left  thee."  Men  in  trouble  are  prone  to  run  into  one  of  two  extremes — despair  or 
indiflference.  We  are  not  to  steel  our  hearts  against  chastening,  for  God  means 
that  we  should  feel  it ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  are  we  to  faint.  Doubt  God's  very 
existence  sooner  than  His  mercy.      Plato  defines  suicide  to  be  "  a  desertion  of  our 

Eost. "      We  are  to  be  like  that  Roman  soldier  who  stood  to  his  post  in  the  sentry- 
ox  at  Pompeii,  when  the  scoriae  of  Mount  Vesuvius  buried  it  with  the  city.    V.  The 

POWER   of   sustaining   GRACE   UNDER   AFFLICTION    IS    HERB   SEEN.      "I    laid   me 

down  and  slept."  There  are  myriads  to-day  who  are  able  to  testify  of  **  the  peace 
of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding."  David  in  flight  finds  God  his  Shield 
and  high  Tower,  though  he  has  but  six  hundred  men.  Ahithophel  at  court,  backed 
by  an  army  of  twelve  thousand  troops,  is  in  despair,  and  hangs  himself.  God  keep 
us  from  unsanctified  aflBiction.  (E.  S.  Prout.)  The  harassed  man: — 1.  One 
element  of  the  harassment  is  multitudinousness  of  trouble.  A  characteristic 
feature  of  the  trouble-time  with  Absalom.  2.  Another  element  is  unkind  and 
taunting  speech.  The  cruel  scoff — "  no  help  for  him  in  God  " — cuts  like  a  knife  to 
the  very  centre  of  his  personality.  3.  Another  element  is  a  kind  of  internal 
despair.  It  sounds  in  the  first  sentences  of  the  Psalm.  What  are  the  resources 
of  the  harassed  man  ?  Turning  Godward.  He  flings  himself  out  of  the  coil  oi 
troubles  round  about  him,  and  looks  up  to  God.  The  thought  of  God  as  possessing 
precisely  what  he,  amid  his  harassments,  needs.  God  is  the  three  things  he  needs 
— "  shield,"  or  defence  ;  "  my  glory  "  ;  and  the  "  lifter  up  of  my  head,"  for  God  can 
both  cheer  the  harassed  man's  spirit,  and  restore  to  him  the  consciousness  of  his  own 
real  dignity,  notwithstanding  his  trials.  I  came  upon  the  most  beautiful  illustration 
of  all  this  the  other  day.  One  of  those  spiritual  Christians,  a  Stundist  as  they  call 
them  in  Russia,  was  standing  amidst  a  lot  of  Russian  criminals  in  the  courtyard  of 
a  Russian  prison,  chained  with  them,  and  sentenced  with  them  to  Siberia  for  his 
faith's  sake.  His  fellow- prisoners  were  jeering  at  him.  "But  you're  no  better  off 
than  we  are.  You  are  wearing  the  bracelets,  as  we  do  ;  if  your  God  is  of  any  use 
to  you,  why  doesn't  He  knock  off  your  chains  and  set  you  free  ? "  The  man  replied 
reverently:  "If  the  Lord  will,  He  can  set  me  free  even  now;  and  though  my 
hands  are  chained,  my  heart  is  free."  He  was  freed.  But  though  he  had  been 
obliged  to  trudge  the  weary  way  to  Siberia,  for  his  free  heart  God  would  still  have 
been  shield,  glory,  the  lifter  up  of  the  head.  Calmness  and  courage  can  come  to 
the  harassed  man.  There  is  this  possible  mood  for  the  harassed  man- — confident 
expectation.  Salvation  belongeth  unto  God  ;  Thy  blessing  is  upon  Thy  people." 
(Romiletic  Review.)  Many  are  Uieytliat  rise  up  agrainstme. — The  Psalmist's 
complaitit : — The  superscription  of  the  Psalm  indicates  the  occasion  of  its  composi- 
tion (2  Sam.  XV.).  I.  The  magnitude  of  his  complaint.  It  proceeds  from  a 
heart  at  once  oppressed  by  the  grievousness  of  its  sorrows,  and  terrified  at  the 
number  of  its  enemies.  The  severity  of  the  trial  is  evident  from  its  progressive 
character.  He  has  adversaries  who  even  blaspheme  God,  and  insultingly  say  of 
His  servant,  "  There  is  no  help  for  him  in  God."  The  best  men  have  many  faults, 
and  sin  often  appears  sweet  to  them.  So  God  suffers  them  to  taste  the  unpalatable 
fruit  of  transgression  ;  but  He  even  extracts  sweetness  from  its  very  bitterness, 
educing  from  chastisement  amendment  of  life,  and  help  heavenward.  Good  men 
flee  to  their  heavenly  Father  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  this  fact  shows  that  the 
very  nature  of  punishment  is  transformed.  II.  The  nature  of  his  trial.  The 
Psalmist  sighs  over  the  extreme  severity  of  his  trials.  But  God  never  lays  more 
upon  His  own  children  than  they  are  able  to  bear.  The  sense  of  gracious  support 
in  the  hour  of  trial  is  an  evidence  that  God  is  assuaging  grief  and  providing  a  way 
of  escape  from  it.  When  the  wicked  are  punished  there  is  no  such  alleviatinn,  nor 
any  access  to  God.  III.  The  source  of  his  complaint.  It  does  not  proceed  from 
mere  human  nature.     The  complaint  originates  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  with 


PSALM  III.]  TffJS  PSALMS.  51 

that  spirit  of  adoption  which  He  sheds  abroad  in  the  heart.  The  son,  conscious  of 
his  father's  afiFection,  expostulates  in  the  midst  of  his  chastisement.  He  even  feels 
that  God  suffers  with  him,  and  is  deeply  affected  by  the  trials  which  He  Himself 
sends.  We  shall  do  well  to  imitate  David's  complaint  in  our  time  of  trouble,  ever 
seeking  profoundly  to  realise  God's  love  in  Christ  Jesus.     {Bobert  Bollocks.) 

Ver.  2.  There  is  no  help  for  him  in  God. — Help  in  God : — David  had  grieved  God, 
and  God  had  threatened  to  "  raise  up  evil  against  him  out  of  his  own  house."  The 
threatening  was  fulfilled  in  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  Then  he  seemed  so  helpless 
that,  in  the  language  of  mockery  and  exultation,  his  enemies  said,  "  There  is  no  help 
for  him  in  God."  But  Davia  was  not  altogether  cast  down.  He  did  not  give 
way  to  despondency  ;  he  placed  his  confidence  and  found  his  refuge  in  the  protec- 
tion of  Almighty  God.  From  all  he  had  been  taught  to  believe,  and  from  all  tliat 
he  had  been  pi-ivileged  to  feel  respecting  the  ways  of  His  providence,  he  was  fully 
persuaded  that  light  would  rise  out  of  darkness,  and  order  out  of  confusion,  and 
safety  out  of  peril.  Thus  it  should  be  with  all  who  have  that  deep  and  enlighteneil 
piety  by  which  David  was  distinguished.  The  time  of  affiiction  is  the  time  for 
trying  faith  and  patience,  for  manifesting  the  energy  and  perfection  which  belong 
to  them,  and  for  enjoying  the  consolation  which  they  are  so  well  fitted  to  impart.  It 
matters  not  what  your  trials  and  your  sorrows  be  ;  your  support  and  your  solacement 
remain  unchangeably  the  same.  The  larger  sorrows  are  as  much  within  the  reach 
of  God's  sovereign  and  absolute  control  as  is  the  most  inconsiderable  evil  that  can 
possibly  befall  you.  Suppose  your  distresses  are  the  result  of  your  transgression, 
still  do  not  despond,  or  allow  your  confidence  in  God  as  your  God  to  be  impaired. 
You  would  have  cause  for  despair  if  you  hardened  yourselves  against  Him,  but  none 
if  you  are  penitent.  He  is  neither  vindictive  nor  relentless.  Beholding  you  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ,  He  becomes  your  Father,  your  Protector,  and  your  Friend.  Amidst 
all  his  sins  and  sufferings  the  Psalmist  had  recourse  to  the  exercises  of  devotion. 
He  retired  into  his  secret  chambers,  or  he  went  into  the  public  sanctuary  and 
addressed  himself  to  God  in  prayer  and  supplication.  To  be  successful  in  prayer 
we  must  seek  in  the  appointed  way,  "out  of  His  holy  hill."  Whatever  be  the  evils 
we  suffer,  let  this  great  truth  be  firmly  believed  in  and  constantly  remembered — 
"Salvation  belongeth  unto  the  Lord."  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Selah.  Vers.  2, 
4,  8.  Stop  a}id  think : — That  seems  to  sum  up  the  several  meanings  of  the  word 
"Selah."  Some  say  it  is  a  direction  to  the  musicians  to  pla}' an  interlude  while 
the  singers  ceased ;  some  regard  it  as  a  direction  to  the  players  to  stop  and  tune 
their  instruments.  Others  see  an  injunction  to  raise  heart  and  voice,  harp  and 
organ,  to  their  fullest  capacity.  Others  see  a  reference  to  eternity,  as  if  one  inter- 
posed, "World  without  end,  Amen!"  Many  regard  the  word  as  equivalent  to 
certain  well-known  signs  in  music,  bidding  you  turn  back  and  repeat.  In  any 
case,  it  is  as  if  a  solemn  rock  ("sela")  stood  right  across  our  path,  bidding  us 
"stop  and  think."  On  the  ground  of  this  injunction  meet  all  meanings,  however 
divergent  they  seem.  "No  help  for  him  in  God."  Stop  and  think.  Selah  looks 
forward  as  well  as  back.  God  has  been  a  shield  for  David  ;  He  can  also  lift  up  his 
head  once  more,  and  invest  him  with  glory,  the  sunshine  of  the  Divine  counten- 
ance. For  us  who  conduct  the  services  of  God's  house,  "  Selah  "  has  a  message.  It 
bids  the  preacher  rightly  divide  the  word  of  truth.  It  bids  him  compare  truth  with 
truth,  bringing  out  things  new  and  old,  and  fixing  each  in  its  most  telling  place. 
It  says — tune  your  hearts,  voices,  instruments.  Seek  inspiration,  do  justice  to  the 
Divine  message  and  the  gospel  song,  so  that  with  holy  passion,  and  sacred  em- 
phasis, and  heart-felt  pathos  you  shall  lead  our  hearts  to  God,  and  incite  our  minds 
to  things  eternal.     (Michael  Eastwood.) 

Vers.  3-5.  But  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  a  shield  for  me. — A  man's  best  confidence  in 
trial : — These  verses'show  how  much  a  man  may  have  in  reality  when  he  seems  to  have 
absolutely  nothing  in  appearance.  David  has  described  his  estate  as  one  of  loneliness, 
amounting  almost  to  utter  desolation,  so  far  as  social  relationships  are  concerned. 
He  seems  to  be  alone  in  the  very  midst  of  threatening  and  desperate  enemies.  His 
soul  is  mocked  and  his  prayers  are  blown  aside  by  the  furious  opposition  of  his 
pursuers.  What,  then,  has  David  even  in  the  midst  of  all  this  loss  and  peril 
and  fear?  He  himself  seems  to  give  an  inventory  of  his  riches.  1.  He  has  a 
sense  of  security.  "Thou  art  a  shield  for  me."  "The  image  of  Divine  protection 
under  the  type  of  a  shield  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Scripture.  2.  He  has  a 
sense  of  prayer.     He  describes  God  as  the  lifter  up  of  his  head  :  the  meaning  is, 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  hi. 

that  though  sore  driven  he  could  still  turn  his  eyes  towards  heaven,  expectant  of 
spiritual  deliverance  and  benediction,  and  that  even  when  his  enemies  were  most 
heavily  pressing  upon  him  he  was  lifted  up  higher  than  any  of  them — a  target  to 
l)e  shot  at ;  but  he  knew  that  no  arrow  of  the  enemy  could  strike  the  head  that  was 
divinely  sustained.  3.  Then  David  points  out  the  fact  of  his  own  enjoyment  of  the 
quietness  and  refreshment  of  sleep, — "I  laid  me  down  and  slept,"  An  eye  so 
critical  as  this  could  never  be  without  an  object  of  Divine  care  upon  which  to  rest. 
We  are  too  prone  to  think  of  God  as  only  at  the  head  of  battles,  and  as  leading  great 
hosts  in  orderly  procession  ;  we  forget  that  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep,  that  He 
dries  the  tears  of  sorrow,  and  that  He  does  about  us  the  work  of  a  servant,  ministering 
to  our  life  in  patience  and  tenderness,  and  all  bountifulness  of  love.  The  warrior 
Mho  talks  about  a  shield,  and  who  rejoices  in  the  lifting  up  of  his  head,  recognises 
in  sleep  the  benediction  of  God.  God  will  never  allow  Himself  to  be  excluded 
from  what  may  be  termed  the  more  quiet  and  domestic  spheres  of  life.  {Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.)  My  shield  and  my  glory: — This  is  a  sweet  song,  and  all  the 
sweeter  when  we  note  the  estate  of  the  songster.  Some  circumstances  set  the 
sweetness  of  music  in  pronounced  relief.  It  is  the  song  that  rises  out  of  dreariness 
that  exercises  such  a  fascinating  ministry.  Look  at  the  outside  of  the  Psalmist's 
life.  His  external  comfort  was  disturbed.  His  piety  was  questioned,  and  his 
fellows!iip  with  the  Divine  was  denied.  Man  fails  him.  He  retired  more  entirely 
upon  God.  In  God  he  found  that  which  transcended  comfort,  he  found  peace.  In 
God  he  found  that  which  transcended  success,  he  found  glory.  In  God  he  found 
that  which  transcended  human  regard,  he  found  the  approbation  of  the  Divine. 
The  figure  of  the  shield  is  a  beautiful  one.  It  suggests  the  all-sufBcient  protection 
which  comes  from  the  companionship  of  God.  The  Lord  will  not  permit  my 
external  circumstances  to  injure  my  spirit.  The  Lord  will  also  be  a  shield  against 
the  foe  within.  When  the  circumstances  are  unfriendly,  man  is  apt  to  become 
embittered.  The  hostility  may  nourish  revenge.  Failure  may  make  a  cynic.  The 
wiuter-time  may  breed  envy,  malice,  and  uncharitableness.  I  need  some  defence 
against  these  foes  within.  "Man  needs  re-enforcing  against  his  worse  self."  I 
claim  all  the  real  protections  as  the  ministry  of  the  king.  "  My  glory."  In  the 
approbation  of  God  I  find  my  honour.  The  crown  that  man  can  give  me,  man  can 
take  away.  God's  crowns  are  worn  not  as  external  dignities,  but  as  spiritual  dignities 
which  adorn  the  soul.  .  .  .  Men  were  unfriendly,  circumstances  were  unsymjiathetic  ; 
this  man  "  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  heard  him. "  There  was  a  constant  festival  of 
fellowship,  of  fruitful  responsiveness  between  man  and  his  God.  {J.  H.  Jowett,  ALA.) 
Uod  a  shield  : — "  Often,"  says  John  Paton,  during  his  early  days  on  the  island  of 
Taima,  "  often  have  I  had  to  run  into  the  arms  of  some  savage  when  his  club  was 
swung,  or  musket  levelled  at  my  head,  and  so  clung  round  him  that  he  could 
neither  strike  nor  shoot  until  his  wrath  had  cooled  down."  One  day,  while  toiling 
away  at  his  house,  the  war  chief  and  a  large  party  of  armed  men  surrounded  the 
plot  where  he  was  working.  They  all  had  muskets  besides  other  weapons.  They 
watched  him  for  some  time  in  silence,  and  then  every  one  levelled  his  weapon  at  his 
head.  Escape  was  impossible,  speech  useless.  His  eyesight  went  and  came  in  a 
moment.  He  could  do  nothing  but  pray,  and  the  text  came  into  his  mind,  "  What- 
soever ye  shall  ask,"  &c.  The  natives  retired  a  little  to  another  position,  and  they 
all  levelled  their  muskets  again,  and  urged  one  another  to  shoot,  and  ultimately 
withdrew.  Once  again  was  he  saved  as  a  bird  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler.  God 
a  helper  in  time  of  trouble : — Gerhardt  was  exiled  from  Brandenburg  by  the  Grand 
Elector  in  1659.  The  said  Grand  Elector  wished  to  *'  tune  his  pulpits."  Gerhardt 
refused  to  preach  save  what  he  found  in  God's  Word.  Notice  to  quit  was  thereupon 
promptly  served  upon  the  intrepid  preacher ;  he  tramped  forth  a  homeless  exile, 
accompanied  by  his  wife  and  children.  Wife  and  weans  at  night,  wearied  and 
weeping,  souglit  refuge  in  a  wayside  inn  ;  Gerhardt,  unable  to  comfort  them,  went  out 
into  a  wood  to  pray.  As  he  prayed,  the  text,  "Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord, 
trust  also  in  Him  and  He  shall  bring  it  to  pass, "  recurred  to  his  mind,  and  comforted 
hiu)  so  amazingly  that  he  paced  to  and  fro  under  the  forest  trees,  and  began  com- 
posing a  hymn,  Englishised  by  John  Wesley,  beginning  with  the  verse — 

"Give  to  the  winds  thy  fears. 
Hope  and  be  undismayed  : 
God  hears  thy  sighs  and  counts  thy  tears ; 
God  shall  lift  up  thy  head." 

Returning  to  the  inn,  he  cheered   his  wife  with   the   text  and  the  hymn,  and 


PSALM  III.]  THE  PSALMS.  53 

they  went  to  bed  rejoicing  in  the  confident  hope  that  God  would  take  care  of 
them.  They  had  hardly  retired  before  a  thunderous  knocking  at  the  door 
aroused  them  all.  It  was  a  mounted  messenger  from  Duke  Christian  Meresberg, 
offering  him  "Church,  people,  home,  and  livelihood."  So,  adds  the  Chronicle, 
the  Lord  took  care  of  His  servant.  {W.  T.  Stead.)  The  Lifter  up  of  my 
bead.  —  Revival :  —  This  verse  is  the  triumphal  shout  of  David  when  under 
peculiarly  trying  circumstances.  Happy  is  the  man  who  makes  God's  ordered  and 
sure  covenant  all  his  salvation  and  all  his  desire.  Three  things  in  the  passage. 
I.  Favouk.  For  Jehovah  to  become  our  "shield."  If  your  religion  is  not  opposed, 
it  is  not  worth  your  having.  Real  godliness,  real  Christianity,  cannot  exist  without 
being  opposed.  Sin  is  always  opposed  to  grace.  We  are  opposed  on  our  journey 
heavenwards  by  ourselves.  The  Father  shields  us  with  His  fixed  decrees.  The  Son 
shields  us  with  His  imputed  righteousness.  The  Holy  Ghost  shields  us  by  His 
operations  in  the  soul.  II.  Our  orthodoxy.  "  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  my  glory." 
Theology  may  be  brought  into  a  very  narrow  compass ;  here  it  is  in  two  words, 
"my  glory."  Every  doctrine,  every  privilege,  and  every  practice  must  glorify 
Him.  The  words  ' '  my  glory "  contain  the  idea  of  fixedness,  in  opposition  to 
fickleness.  III.  The  revival.  "The  lifter  up  of  my  head."  In  times  of  experi- 
mental depression.  From  nature's  ruin  and  degradation.  This  work  is  carried  on 
by  the  Comforter's  ministration.     (Joseph  Irons.) 

Ver.  4.  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice. — Turning  to  God  in  prayer : — 
I.  The  Psalmist's  exultation.  "But  Thou,  0  Lord."  The  second  part  of  the 
Psalm  shows  how  David's  sense  of  the  Divine  presence  and  protection  impelled  him 
to  rejoice,  as  if  he  were  delivered  from  trial,  although  not  yet  actually  set  free.  No 
sooner  does  he  complain  to  God  than  he  begins  to  experience  consolation,  for  never 
does  any  one  flee  to  the  Saviour  for  refuge  in  vain.  But  to  particularise  :  what 
kind  of  help  does  the  Psalmist  receive  when  he  seeks  Divine  aid  ?  He  fled  from 
Absalom  defenceless,  and  God,  like  a  shield,  completely  protects  him  :  he  was 
in  disgrace,  God  becomes  his  glory  ;  prostrate,  and  God  lifts  up  his  head.  In  a 
word,  Jehovah  supplements  every  deficiency.  'This  is  ever  true.  Dost  thou  desire 
wisdom  ?  He  will  be  thy  wisdom.  Glory  ?  He  will  be  thy  glory.  Riches  ? 
He  will  be  thy  wealth.  Yea,  He  Himself  will  be  all  that  thou  cravest.  The 
sweet  sense  of  Divine  compassion  cannot  be  repressed,  but  will  find  vent  in  con- 
fession. Thus  God  is  glorified,  and  the  consciousness  of  His  favour  is  increased 
by  the  very  act  of  acknowledgment.  II.  Method  of  gaining  deliverance. 
The  Psalmist  therefore  unfolds  the  method  which  he  had  adopted — turning  to  God 
in  prayer — "I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice."  For  let  no  man  think  that 
God  bestows  His  grace  on  those  who  do  not  seek  it,  or  opens  the  heavenly  door  to 
those  who  do  not  knock,  still  less  to  those  who  despise  and  refuse  His  proffered 
mercy.  In  this  way  He  disciplines  our  faith,  although  He  never  grants  the  least 
favour  because  there  is  anything  meritorious  in  our  prayers.  III.  The  Divine 
RESPONSE.  "  And  He  heard  me '  — from  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  and  also  from  the 
earthly  tabernacle  then  radiant  with  the  Divine  presence.  This  is  added  so  that 
all  may  know  that  God  answers  supplications,  in  harmony  with  His  vrill,  as  quickly 
as  we  offer  them,  and  thus  causes  success  in  prayer  to  stir  us  up  to  renewed  petitions. 
The  answer  which  was  vouchsafed  to  David — God  replying  by  deeds  rather  than  by 
words — is  specified  at  the  end  of  the  next  verse,  "  the  Lord  sustained  me."  What 
he  had  stated  before  in  several  words,  "Thou  art  a  shield  for  me,  my  glory,  and 
the  lifter  up  of  my  head,"  he  afterwards  expresses  in  a  single  phrase,  "the  Lord 
sustained  me,"  thereby  indicating  his  sense  of  Divine  protection  in  the  very 
midst  of  persecution.  [Robert  Rollocks. )  Prayer  ansvxred  : — John  Rutledge, 
of  Buffalo,  a  godly  sailor,  was  used  very  much  in  winning  his  swearing,  licen- 
tious fellows  for  the  Saviour.  They  had  left  Buffalo  when  the  lake  was  still 
dangerous  with  floating  ice,  and  they  had  accomplished  three-quarters  of  their 
way,  when  one  morning,  to  the  great  alarm  of  crew  and  skipper,  they  saw  the  ice 
closing  upon  them.  There  was  just  a  narrow  passage  straight  ahead,  and  it  was 
fast  closing.  If  the  ice  close  it  will  crush  the  ship  to  pieces  like  a  tinder-box,  and 
they  will  all  be  lost.  The  men's  faces  grew  white,  for  the  wind  ceased  and  the 
cahn  came,  as  if  to  let  the  ice  nip  them  and  grip  them  to  destruction.  John 
Rutledge  asked  the  skipper's  leave  to  go  down  to  his  cabin  and  pray.  The  captain 
was  a  godless  man,  but  eternity  was  nigh,  and  he  believed  in  John  Rutledge.  He 
had  sailed  with  John  for  many  a  voyage  ;  and  the  Christian  had  commended 
Christ  by  his  life.     Happy  soul  when  the  man  that  works  by  you, — when  your 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  in. 

comrades,  at  any  rate,  acknowledge  your  fidelity  to  Jesus.  They  may  not  like  yon, 
but  yet  they  believe  in  you  up  to  the  hilt ;  and  they  trust  in  you  even  when 
they  profess  to  despise  you.  John  Rutledge  got  the  skipper's  leave  to  go  down 
to  the  cabin  and  pray.  As  he  was  there  on  his  knees  a  few  of  the  men  gathered 
with  him,  and  amongst  them  the  captain.  Rutledge  prayed  that  God  would  guide 
the  vessel,  that  God  would  steer  the  craft,  that  God  would  deliver  them.  The  men 
heard,  and  listened  attentively.  As  they  returned  to  deck,  the  man  at  the  wheel 
.i^reeted  them  with,  "There  is  hope. — The  wind  is  nor'-nor'-east."  The  wind 
began  to  "  sough  "  and  sigh  and  fill  the  sails,  and  the  ice  began  to  part  ;  and  the 
men  said  to  the  captain,  "Shall  we  spread  more  canvas?"  "No,"  he  replied, 
"not  a  stitch.  Somebody  else  is  guiding  this  ship.  Let  her  alone. "  A  happy  life 
is  that  when  difiiculties  come,  when  rebellions  arise,  when  doubts  all  drop  upon 
deck,  for  the  man  to  be  able  to  say,  "Let  her  drive;  there  is  Someone  else 
controlling  and  guiding." 

Yer.  5.     I  laid  me  down  and  slept ;  I  awaked ;  for  the  Lord  sustained  me. — 

Crod's  'protection  of  the  helpless : — The  reason  why  we  sleep  in  peace  and  rise  up  in 
safety  is,  "the  Lord  sustained  me."  This  is  one  of  those  truths,  long  familiar  and 
unrealised,  which  later  on  in  our  spiritual  life  may  become  to  us  fresh  discoveries. 
Underneath  the  beating  of  every  heart,  and  underneath  the  whole  order  of  human 
things,  and  underneath  the  world  and  aU  worlds,  there  is  for  ever  a  present  active 
sustaining  power  from  one  generation  to  another,  and  that  power  is  the  power 
of  God.  The  same  truth  is  equally  true  if  stated  more  widely.  Whether  we  take 
as  our  measure  the  short  time  of  the  earth  turning  on  itself,  or  the  longer  time  of 
the  earth  travelling  round ;  whether  we  speak  of  the  day  or  of  the  sum  of  all  the 
year,  with  its  multitude  of  thoughts,  its  complexity  of  circumstances,  its  frequent 
risks  and  incessant  occurrence  of  events ; — still  there  is  always  abiding  over  us  the 
same  Divine  protection,  never  tired,  never  slackening.  Some  people  are  so  situated 
in  life  that  they  have  but  very  little  pressure  and  very  few  cares.  All  along  the 
path  of  life  seems  smooth  to  them.  That  is  but  a  tame  life,  and  unless  we  have  the 
nerve  to  make  ourselves  useiful  in  some  way,  time  so  passed  is  a  yoke  which  soon 
sits  uueasy  on  the  shoulder.  Days  wasted  are  a  bad  investment  of  life,  and  a  dark 
account  to  be  laying  up.  But  the  many  are  blessed  with  the  pressure  of  responsi- 
bilities, and  obliged  to  take  up  the  happy  burden  of  usefulness.  All  Christian 
burden-bearers  have  laid  them  down  to  sleep,  and  risen  again  feeling  that  a  benefit 
has  been  conferred  on  them,  a  sustaining  hand  has  been  bearing  them  up,  and 
their  good  God  has  been  giving  to  the  human  trial  the  promise  He  speaks  of,  "  As 
thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  The  Hebrew  word  translated  "sustained  " 
means  to  place  the  open  hand  under  a  thing  to  support  it.  The  Sept.  renders 
by  a  word  meaning  ' '  to  take  hold  of  one  another  by  the  hand,  the  weaker 
being  so  supported."  How  does  the  kindness  of  God  support  the  weakness  of  all 
Christians  ?  He  tells  His  own  secret  in  Col.  i.  It  is  done  by  His  Christ  and  our 
Christ.  There  He  says  how  He  has  qualified  us  to  partake  of  the  portion  of  the 
saints  in  light ;  how  He  has  rescued  us  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  translated 
us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  His  love.  It  is  in  Him,  He  says,  we  have 
redemption  through  His  blood,  even  the  remission  of  sins.  Let  us  count  up, 
discover,  and  consider  these  many  mercies  until  our  heart  warms  into  some  honour- 
able and  loving  recognition  of  this  care,  which  is  never  tired  of  us  and  never  leaves 
us.  We  may  feel  confident  from  the  past  that  God  will  take  care  of  us  in  the 
future.  {T.  F.  Crosse,  D.C.L.)  Sleeping  and  waking: — One  of  the  mysteries  of 
life  of  which  men  hardly  think  at  all  is  the  mystery  of  sleep.  "  Death's  twin  sister," 
it  has  been  called.  Into  its  secrets  the  cleverest  man  cannot  pierce,  though  all  men 
share  its  blessings.  See  the  tired  man  worn  out  after  a  heavy  day's  work,  or 
burdened  with  care.  He  flings  himself  on  his  bed,  his  day's  work  or  his  day's 
trouble,  his  foremost,  ever-present  thought.  Kind  sleep  touches  his  eyes.  His 
fatigue  is  forgotten,  his  cares  are  gone.  What  thought  strikes  us  most  forcibly  as 
we  look  on  the  picture  of  the  sleeper  ?  Surely  the  thought  of  helplessness.  The 
strongest  man  asleep  cannot  defend  himself  or  help  himself.  And  yet  the  millions 
of  mankind  daily  lie  down  to  sleep,  and  daily  rise  again,  safely  and  in  peace. 
Why  ?  We  know  why,  though  we  so  often  carelessly  forget  it.  Because  God  is 
with  us  always,  never  leaving  us  for  an  instant  to  ourselves  ;  about  our  path  and 
about  our  bed  ;  the  Almighty  Father,  with  more  than  a  mother's  love  and 
tenderness.  Ought  we  not  to  have,  at  least,  David's  faith?  I  say  "at  least" 
because  we  know  so  much  more  of  God's  truth  than  he  did,  have  so  much  more 


PSALM  III.]  THE  PSALMS.  65 

light  upon  our  path  than  he  had.  We  know  our  weakness  and  helplessness,  but  we 
know  our  Helper.  If  we  will  only  love  and  serve  God  in  Christ,  and  consecrate 
oor  lives  to  Him,  we  are  safe.  [Samuel  Jascoe.)  A  trustful  sleeper: — Luther 
noticed  one  evening  a  bird  quietly  settling  down  for  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and 
he  exclaimed,  "That  little  fellow  preaches  faith  to  us  all  !  He  takes  hold  of  his 
twig,  tucks  his  head  under  his  wing,  and  goes  to  sleep,  leaving  God  to  think  for 
him."  Preserved  amidst  the  dangers  of  the  night: — In  Mongolia  we  had   one 

rather  serious  adventure.  The  south  edge  of  the  plain  is  famed  for  storms, 
and  the  night  we  camped  there,  just  after  dark,  began  one  of  the  fiercest 
thunderstorms  I  can  remember  having  seen.  The  wind  roared,  the  rain  dashed, 
the  tent  quivered  ;  the  thunder  rattled  with  a  metallic  ring,  like  shafts  of  iron 
dashing  against  each  other,  as  it  darted  along  a  sheet-iron  sky  ;  the  water  rose  in 
the  tent  till  part  of  our  bed  was  afloat.  It  was  hardly  possible  to  hear  each  other 
speak  ;  but  amid  and  above  all  the  din  of  the  tempest  lose  one  sound  not  to  be 
mistaken,  the  roar  of  rushing  water.  There  was  a  river  to  right  of  us,  bat  the 
sound  came  more  from  the  left.  Venturing  out,  I  found  there  was  a  great  swift- 
flowing  river  on  both  sides  of  us  ;  that  we  could  not  move  from  the  little  piece  of 
elevated  land  plain  on  which  we  had  our  tent ;  and  that  a  few  inches  more  water, 
or  an  obstacle  getting  into  the  path  of  the  upper  river,  would  send  the  full  force  of 
the  current  down  on  our  tents.  Flocks,  herds,  men  are  said  to  be  swept  away  now 
and  again  in  Mongolia,  and  for  an  hour  our  case  seemed  doubtful ;  but  about 
11  p.m.  the  storm  ceased  and  the  danger  was  over,  and,  though  we  had  hardly 
anything  left,  we  went  to  sleep,  thanking  God  for  His  preserving  mercy.  {James 
Gilmour.)  And  rose  up  again. — Christian  uprising : — The  whole  world  is  full  of 
Divine  tokens.  Everything  should  put  us  in  mind,  more  or  less  directly,  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour.  The  sun  rising  m  the  east  is  nature's  token,  to  remind  us  of 
Christmas  Day  ;  and  here  in  the  text  we  find  a  no  less  clear  token  of  the  mysteries 
of  Easter,  our  Lord  dying  and  rising  again.  It  is  not  anything  new  to  have  such 
a  verse  applied  to  the  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  The  old  fathers 
and  bishops  so  explained  it  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  Church.  We  do  well  to 
connect  this  mystery  with  our  own  lying  down  and  rising  up  as  often  as  night 
and  morning  return.  Sleep  is  an  image  of  death.  To  a  Christian  it  is  an  image 
of  the  death  of  Christ.  Our  daily  lying  down  and  rising  up  is  given  us  for  a 
sacramental  sign  and  pledge  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection,  and  of  our  own. 
Our  falling  asleep  is  a  mystery,  a  thing  which  takes  place  we  know  not  how, 
a  thing  out  of  our  power,  as  much  so  as  death  itself.  What  becomes  of  us  during 
our  sleep  ?  That  longer  sleep  which  we  call  death  may  come  on  us  we  know 
not  how,  and  leave  our  bodies  without  power  or  thought  for  awhile,  our  souls 
in  the  meantime  departing  we  know  not  where,  and  employed  we  know  not 
how.  There  is  a  still  higher  and  more  awful  depth  of  mystery  in  the  Psalmist's 
words,  spoken  as  they  are  in  His  person,  who  is  both  God  and  man.  It  is  as 
if  we  heard  Christ  Himself,  risen  from  the  tomb,  and  saying,  "  I  laid  Me  down 
and  slept,  and  rose  up  again,  for  the  Lord  sustained  Me."  The  Lord,  the  most 
high  and  glorious  God-head,  still  in  our  Saviour's  Person,  inseparably  joined 
to  His  human  soul  and  body,  even  while  the  one  was  in  the  grave  and  the  other  in 
Paradise,  or  elsewhere  in  the  regions  of  the  dead, — He  still  continued  the  same 
Christ,  very  God  and  very  man,  and  by  virtue  of  that  Eternal  Spirit  He  raised 
Himself  from  the  dead  when  His  time  was  come.  Notice  what  gracious  help  is 
afforded  to  those  who  are  willing  so  to  lift  up  their  hearts,  by  Christ's  making  so 
common  a  matter  as  our  daily  sleep  and  awakening  a  token  and  sign  of  this  most 
awful  mystery.  Christ,  even  now  abiding  in  His  people,  makes  them  already  in 
this  world  partakers  of  a  heavenly  and  Divine  life.  He  sustains  them,  sleeping  and 
waking,  in  life  and  in  death,  in  their  beds  and  in  their  graves  ;  for  in  both  con- 
ditions they  are  alike  members  of  Him.  But  all  this  depends  upon  our  keeping 
our  baptismal  vows.  One  or  two  rules  of  recovery  and  perseverance — 1.  Since  it  is 
Christ  only  who  sustains  us,  when  in  our  lying  down,  or  sleeping,  or  rising  up, 
how  dare  any  of  us  lie  down  or  rise  up  without  solemnly  committing  himself  to 
Christ  on  his  knees  in  devout  prayer  ?  Private  devotion  must  be  one  great 
help  towards  saving  and  recovering  the  heavenly  life  which  our  Lord  offers 
to  sustain  in  us.  2.  The  Holy  Communion  of  the  Body  and  the  Blood.  This  is 
the  sacrament  of  perseverance  and  gi-owth  in  grace,  as  baptism  is  of  repentance  and 
regeneration.  The  heavenly  life  which  Christ  has  begun  in  us  can  be  sustained  in 
no  other  way  besides  that  which  He  has  appointed.  Prayer,  then,  and  Holy 
Communion,  are  necessary  to  all.    {Plain  Semums  by  Contributora  to  "  Tracts  for  ths 


5«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ppatm  ni. 

Times. ")  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands  of  people,  that  have  set  them- 
selves against  me. — Faith  stronger  than  fear : — It  is  said  that  the  Romans  were 
accustomed  only  to  inquire  where  the  enemies  were,  and  not  after  their  numbers. 
Faith  revived  and  invigorated  by  prayer  and  fixed  on  God  alone  is  a  stranger  to 
fear  in  the  worst  of  times.     {Bp.  Home.) 

Ver.  7.  Thou  hast  smitten  all  mine  enemies  upon  the  cheek  bone. — The  secret 
of  David's  confdeiice  : — This  shows  that  David's  expectation  of  victory  was  not  in 
himself,  in  his  personal  prowess  as  a  warrior,  hut  in  the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord 
his  God.  Hence  his  impassioned  cry,  "Arise,  0  Lord  !  save  me,  0  my  God  !  " 
It  is  tnie  that  David  marshalled  his  forces  as  a  skilful  and  experienced  general 
should,  and  as  carefully  as  if  everything  in  the  battle  to  ensue  was  to  be  accom- 
plished by  the  sword  alone  ; — and  yet  he  still  looked  to  God  alone  for  success. 
And  to  inspire  himself  with  confidence  that  God  would  give  success,  he  refers  to  the 
victories  He  had  given  him  in  times  past,  saying,  "Thou  hast  smitten  all  mine 
enemies  upon  the  cheek  bone  ;  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly." 
This  imagery  of  breaking  the  cheek  bone  and  teeth  of  enemies  is  likening  them  to 
wild  beasts  whose  great  power  is  in  their  jaws  and  teeth,  so  that  when  their  jaws 
and  teeth  are  broken  their  power  to  injure  is  gone.  The  imagery,  then,  indicates 
that  the  Lord  had  always  destroyed  the  power  of  David's  enemies  to  injure  him. 
And  as  the  Lord  had  subdued  his  enemies  before  him  hitherto,  David  could  not  but 
believe  that  He  would  subdue  them  still.  This,  his  belief,  was  not  in  vain,  as  the 
speedy  winding  up  of  Absalom's  rebellion  showed  ;  for  Absalom's  forces,  though 
outnumbering  his  father's  probably  more  than  ten  to  one,  were  utterly  routed 
and  dispersed,  and  himself  slain,  in  the  first  and  only  battle  fought.  The  battle 
was  the  Lord's,  the  victory  His,  and  to  Him  David  ascribes  it.  (David 
Caldwell,  A.M.) 

Ver.  8.  Salvation  belongeth  unto  the  Lord. — Thanksgiving  after  peace : — I.  The 
MEANING  OF  THIS  SENTIMENT.  The  words  Carry  a  general  confession  of  the  influ- 
ence of  Divine  Providence  upon  every  event,  and  in  particular  with  respect  to 
salvation,  or  deliverance  from  imi  ending  danger.     The  words  imply  three  things. 

I.  All  confidence  in  man  stands  opposed  to  the  sentiment.  It  is  not  opposed  to  the 
use  of  means,  but  to  an  excessive  reliance  on  second  causes  of  any  kind.  Success  in 
any  attempt  is  to  be  ultimately  attributed  to  God.  2.  The  Psalmist  had  in  view 
the  omnipotence  of  Providence.  God  has  not  only  the  direction  and  government  of 
means  and  second  causes,  but  is  Himself  superior  to  all  means.  Salvation  signifies 
a  great  and  distinguished  deliverance.  3.  The  sentiment  has  respect  to  the  mercy  and 
g.iodness  of  God,  or  His  readiness  to  hear  the  cry  of  the  oppressed  and  send  deliver- 
ance to  His  people.  Power  and  wisdom  alone  give  an  imperfect  display  of  the 
Divine  character.  II.  Divine  Providence  in  dealing  with  the  United  States 
OF  America.  In  conclusion,  some  practical  improvement  of  the  subject.  1.  It  is 
our  duty  to  give  praise  to  God  for  the  present  happy  and  promising  state  of  public 
affairs.  2.  We  should  testify  our  gratitude  to  God  by  living  in  His  fear,  and  by  a 
conversation  such  as  becometh  the  gospel.  3.  And  by  usefulness  in  our  several 
stations.  Let  us  guard  against  using  our  liberty  as  a  cloak  for  licentiousness,  and 
thus  poisoning  the  blessing  after  we  have  attained  it.  {T.  JVithers-poon,  D.D.) 
God  the  Author  of  salvation : — This  will  be  seen  if  we  consider — I.  The  work  of 
the  Father  in  devising  it.  1.  Adam  fell  by  his  own  sin,  and  so  involved 
all  posterity.     2.  Thus  all  needed  salvation ;  and  3.  God's  free  grace  devised  it. 

II.  The  incarnation  and  atonement  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  which 
executed  it.  III.  The  work  of  the  Holt  Ghost  in  applying  it.  For  of 
ourselves  we  cannot  repent  and  believe.  And  yet  unless  we  do  we  are  lost.  It  is 
the  Holy  Spirit  that  brings  us  into  a  state  of  grace.  (T.  Myers,  A.M.)  Thy 
blessing  is  upon  Thy  people. — Blessings : — At  the  Mint  a  piece  of  gold  is  put  under 
the  stamp,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  the  machine  descends  and  the  gold 
becomes  a  sovereign.  So  when  we  see  that  God  is  our  Father,  and  that  He  in 
Christ  died  for  us,  then  in  a  moment,  like  the  stamp  on  the  gold,  we  receive  the 
witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  gold  bears  the  stamp  of  the  King  ;  but  our  hearts 
the  image  and  blessing  of  God.  I.  What  is  a  blessing  ?  Not  merely  when  we 
have  what  we  wish,  but  far  more  when  we  do  not  wish  what  we  have  not.  II.  The 
greatest  blessing  is  to  know  that  we  have  the  Lord  for  oitr  Father. 

III.  It  is  a  great  blessing  when  we  can  live  temperately.  What  a  curse 
is  drunkenness.     IV.  Is  not  the  Bible  a  blessing  ?    An  infidel  said  one  day. 


PSALM  in,]  THE  PSALMS.  67 

"There  is  only  one  thing  that  troubles  me  :  I  am  afraid  the  Bible  is  true."  But 
what  a  blessing  that  it  is  so.  "When  Sir  Walter  Scott  lay  dying  he  requested  a 
friend  to  help  him  into  his  library,  so  that  he  could  look  out  from  the  window  on 
the  river  Tweed.  Then  he  asked  for  something  to  be  read  to  him.  His  friend 
said,  "  What  book  shall  I  select?"  Sir  Walter  replied,  "Can  you  ask?  There  is 
but  one — the  Bible."  Is  this  book  a  blessing  to  you?  V.  The  Loed  gives  His 
PEOPLE  THE  BLESSING  OF  BEING  ABLE  TO  TRUST  HiM.  In  the  darkness  of  night  you 
may  strike  a  match  and  try  to  light  the  candle,  but  you  must  first  take  off  the 
extinguisher.  And  so  you  cannot  feel  happy  while  you  keep  on  the  extinguisher  of 
doubt  over  your  heart.  How  blessed  it  is  to  trust  in  God.  VI.  What  a  blessing 
TO  KNOW  THAT  Jesus  DIED  FOE  US.  (  William  jBirch.)  God's  blessing,  arid  the 
way  to  gain  it: — I,  What  is  God's  blessing  ?  Given  an  occasion  upon  which  we 
are  called  upon  to  write  on  paper  our  idea  of  the  Divine  blessing :  hand  me  the 
papers  and  1  will  examine  them  :  shall  I  find  in  a  thousand  instances  upwards  of 
nine  hundred  that  will  run  after  this  fashion  ? — God's  blessing  is  sunshine,  music, 
prosperity,  deliverance  from  all  affliction,  distress,  fear ;  God's  blessing  is  on  the 
house  where  there  is  no  vacant  chair,  upon  the  fold  where  there  is  no  dead  lamb, 
upon  the  estate  where  there  is  no  covered  grave.  So  your  papers  would  read,  and 
so  would  they  be  wrong.  God's  blessing  may  be  upon  a  man  without  any  sense  of 
external  sunshine.  The  clouds  do  not  alter  the  month.  There  may  be  dark  clouds 
upon  a  June  noonday,  but  it  is  still  June,  the  sun  is  still  warm,  summer  is  still  on 
the  eve  of  coming  upon  us,  with  all  its  countless  flowers  and  all  its  ineffable  music. 
God's  blessing  does  not  mean  exemption  from  pain  ;  nor  does  God's  discipline  mean 
mere  penalty.  God's  blessing  is  not  a  sleeping  draught  but  an  inspiration.  If  you 
are  asleep  when  you  ought  to  be  awake  do  not  say,  This  is  the  blessing  of  God. 
God's  blessing,  I  repeat,  is  not  an  opiate  ;  it  is  an  inspiration,  an  excitement,  a  voice 
in  the  soul  that  says,  Onward  !  II.  How  aee  we  to  know  that  the  blessing  is 
on  us  ?  Easily  ;  there  need  be  no  difficulty  about  that.  When  you  feel  that  you 
must  do  more  work,  God's  blessing  is  upon  you.  Be  sure  of  that  confidence. 
When  you  want  to  be  idle,  God  has  withdrawn  from  you  because  you  have  withdrawn 
from  Him.  When  are  we  to  know  that  God's  blessing  is  upon  us  ?  I  will  tell  you  : 
when  you  feel  that  you  must  help  other  people  more  liberally  than  you  have  ever 
done  ;  not  when  you  tie  your  purse-strings,  but  when  you  open  them  is  God's 
blessing  on  you.  You  have  done  nothing  yet ;  I  have  done  nothing  yet.  It  is  the 
crime  of  the  Church  that  it  has  played  with  its  responsibilities.  We  are  always 
compounding  with  God,  we  are  always  filing  our  bill  in  the  chancery-court  of 
heaven,  and  asking  God  to  accept  a  penny  in  the  pound.  Do  not  close  your  eyes 
under  such  circumstances  and  say.  This  is  the  comfort  of  grace.  When  you  feel 
that  you  must  go  four-aud-twenty  hours  in  the  day  in  doing  good,  God's  blessing  is 
upon  you.  Of  course,  nature  will  say,  Lie  down,  poor  child,  and  rest  awhile, 
because  time  spent  in  sleep  is  time  spent  in  true  labour  ;  thou  shalt  in  sleep  recover 
thine  energy,  and  do  tenfold  more  because  of  a  good  night's  rest.  But  when  the 
first  thought  is  work,  and  the  middle  thought  is  work,  and  the  last  thought  is  work, 
then  say.  Thy  blessing  is  upon  Thy  people  ;  this  is  no  longer  an  inspiration  but  a 
fact  accomplished.  III.  We  cannot  aeeange  foe  the  Divine  blessing.  Do 
not  accept  the  sophism  that  the  Divine  blessing  can  be  used  as  an  element  in 
speculation  or  investment.  The  Divine  blessing  comes  as  the  wheat  comes :  it 
comes  after  ripping  up  the  earth,  sowing  it,  preparing  it,  and  after  a  long  process, 
it  may  be,  of  waiting  ;  so  it  comes  not  by  itself  but  as  the  final  mark  in  a  series,  as 
the  blessing  upon  a  process.  When  the  golden  wheat  swings  in  the  autumnal  wind 
and  throws  back  the  autumnal  sunlight,  all  the  seasons  of  the  year  seem  to  culminate 
in  that  one  motion.  Winter  is  there,  because  winter  gave  the  earth  its  hospitality 
of  sleep  ;  spring  is  there,  and  summer  is  there,  and  autumn  is  there  :  in  that  golden 
wheat  the  four  seasons  of  the  year  hold  harmonious  festival.  Some  have  not  begun 
yet  to  do  anything.  When  the  lists  are  made  out  our  names  will  not  be  upon  them. 
The  first  shall  be  last  and  the  last  shall  be  first.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
blessing  of  God: — I.  God's  special  relation  in  the  world.  "Thy  people." 
The  king  of  a  nation  and  the  father  of  a  family  hold  peculiar  relations.  II.  From 
God's  special  relation  spring  special  benefits.  "  Thy  blessing. "  The  ruler 
of  a  people,  from  his  position  and  power,  holds  in  his  hands  benefits  which  are  for 
his  nation  alone.  A  loving  father  has  a  peculiar  regard  for  the  welfare  of  his  own 
family.  Israel  enjoyed  benefits  that  were  not  extended  to  other  nations.  III.  The 
benefits  spkinging  feom  the  special  eelation  must  be  sought  by  peayee. 
Spiritual  blessings  are  obtained  only  by  prayer.      The  Apostles  had  a  definite 


68  THE  BIBLIQAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  in. 

promise  given  to  them  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet  they  were  commaDded  to  pray  for 
His  descent  (Acts  i.  4-14).  So  in  the  individual  life  (Luke  xi.  13).  {W'illiam 
Harris.)  The  best  inJieritance : — This  was  the  confidence  and  comfort  of  the 
Psalmist  when  deprived  of  earthly  friends  and  earthly  comforts.  The  more  we 
know  of  the  power  of  sin,  the  more  we  shall  prize  the  sovereignty  of  God.     I.  The 

NATURE  OF  THIS  BLESSING  WHICH  IS  UPON  THE   PEOPLE  OF   GOD.      All  the  blessed- 

ness  they  have  is  by  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  ;  and  to  understand  the  blessing  we  must 
look  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  As  there  was  a  fourfold  curse  pronounced  upon  the 
serpent,  you  will  find  the  very  reverse  relative  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
people.  1.  The  serpent  was  to  "go  upon  his  belly."  While  the  enemy  is  con- 
demned in  all  that  he  does,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  justified  in  all  that  He  does. 
The  Lord  Jesus  felt  that  all  He  thought,  and  aU  He  did,  and  all  He  said  was  right. 
He  felt  that  He  had  no  sin  of  His  own.  He  enjoys  the  consciousness  that  all  He 
has  done  and  does  is  right,  and  we  in  Him  get  rid  of  all  our  sins,  guilt,  and  fears, 
and  re«t  not  in  a  consciousness  of  our  fleshly,  personal,  legal  right,  but  in  a 
consciousness  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  the  efl5cacy  of  His  great  salvation,  the 
eternity  of  His  glory.  Draw  a  line  of  distinction  between  a  moral  reality  and  a 
spiritual  reality.  Moral  reality  is  good,  and  a  good  principle  to  act  upon  among 
men  ;  but  if  I  go  to  eternal  things  I  must  go  beyond  this — I  must  come  to  the 
reality  of  atoning  blood,  I  must  come  to  the  reality  of  saving  grace.  2.  The  enemy 
was  "to  eat  dust."  This  is  to  be  understood  figuratively.  As  for  the  enemy,  and 
all  that  are  with  him,  their  attainments  shall  be  all  perishable — shall  be  but  dust. 
Was  the  Lord  Jesus  to  feed  upon  perishable  things  *  No.  His  meat.  His  attain- 
ments are  imperishable,  His  honours  incorruptible,  His  glories  inimitable,  His 
grandeur  indescribable.  While  He  lived  in  this  world  He  lived  upon  immortal 
things.  He  is  with  us  in  these  infinite  provisions,  in  opposition  to  that  destitution, 
that  famine,  that  state  of  misery  which  we  deserve.  The  "blessing"  overcomes  a 
great  curse.  While  dust  shall  be  the  serpent's  meat,  our  bread  shall  be  royal 
dainties.  3.  The  serpent  was  to  be  cast  out.  There  was  to  be  enmity  between  him 
and  the  woman,  and  between  his  seed  and  her  seed.  They  should  come  together, 
and  one  or  the  other  must  prevail.  "The  prince  of  this  world  is  cast  out."  4.  The 
serpent's  head  should  be  bruised.  Here  is  the  confusion,  the  defeat,  of  all  his 
plans.  But  can  confusion  ever  reach  the  infinite  mind  of  Jehovah-Jesus  ?  IL  The 
PBOQRESSION  OF  THIS  BLESSING.  It  has  been  progressive  from  age  to  age  ;  and 
nothing  has  met  with  so  much  opposition.  Look  at  some  typical  circumstances  and 
watch  the  progression.  Cases  of  Joseph,  David,  Mordecai,  the  Redeemer  Himself. 
See  the  progress  in  two  individual  cases,  that  of  Jeremiah  and  that  of  Paul.  There 
is  this  difference  between  providence  and  grace.  Grace  is  progressive,  but  providence 
is  retrogressive.  The  fruit  we  had  last  year  is  gone,  but  the  grace  we  had  when  the 
world  was  created  we  have  now.  None  of  it  passes  away.  III.  The  continuation 
OF  the  bi.kssing.  This  originates  chiefly  in  the  manner  of  it.  There  is  no  way  in 
which  auyUiiiig  contrary  to  it  can  enter  into  the  vitals  of  this  blessing,  or  into  the 
union  wliiuli  the  people  have  with  Christ,  to  affect  that  union.  If  you  look  behind 
them  there  is  mercy  behind  them  from  everlasting.  If  you  look  at  what  is  before 
them,  it  is  eternal  life,  eternal  salvation,  eternal  glory.  So  that  from  the  very 
manner  of  this  blessing  no  curse  can  come  in,  {Javies  Wells.)  The  people  of 
Ood: — I,  The  people.  The  children  of  Israel  were,  in  a  national  sense,  the  people 
of  God.  But  were  they  so  individually  ?  It  is  not  the  name  of  Christian  that  can 
stamp  us  the  people  of  God.  It  is  in  a  personal,  and  not  merely  in  a  national  or 
ecclesiastical  sense,  that  God's  people  are  an  elect  people.  II.  This  people  abe  a 
PUBCHASKD  PEOPLE.  What  shall  be  the  price  paid  down  for  that  spiritual  people, 
the  Church  of  the  first-born  1  We  are  redeemed,  not  with  con-uiitible  things,  such 
as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  blood  of  Christ.  III.  The  people  are  a  voluntary 
PEOPLE.  They  do  not  follow  God  reluctantly,  as  did  the  literal  Israel.  Every  one 
can  say  with  David,  I  have  "chosen"  the  way  of  truth.  IV.  A  HOLY  people 
(Deut.  xiv.  2).  The  sanctity  of  Israel  was  only  external  and  relative  ;  only  a  type  of 
the  purity  of  the  invisible  Church.  The  whole  body  of  the  people  of  whom  we 
speak  are  holy  in  an  internal  and  personal  sense  (John  i.  13  ;  1  John  iii.  24).  V.  A 
people  valued  and  beloved.  We  value  the  objects  of  our  choice  because  wa 
have  chosen  them.  God's  blessing  is  on  the  people  themselves,  and  on  their  allot- 
ments, enjoyments,  and  even  their  afilictions,  and  their  labours  and  connections. 
(T,  Kennion,  M.A.)  Trust  in  GocTs  over-rule: — Dr.  Stewart  of  Moulin  said,  "I 
remember  an  old  pious  very  recluse  minister  whom  I  used  to  meet  once  a  year.  He 
scarcely  ever  looked  at  a  newspaper.     When  others  were  talking  about  the  French 


PSALM  IV,]  THE  PSALMS.  59 

Revolution  he  showed  no  concern  or  curiosity  about  it.  He  said  he  knew  from  the 
Bible  how  it  would  all  end,  better  than  the  most  sagacious  politician  :  that  the  Lord 
reigns ;  that  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  His  glory  ;  that  the  gospel  should  be 
preached  to  all  nations  ;  that  all  subordinate  events  are  working  out  these  great  ends. 
This  was  enough  for  him,  and  he  gave  himself  no  concern  about  the  news  or  events 
of  the  day,  only  saying,  "  It  will  be  well  with  the  righteous." 


PSALM  IV. 

Vem.  1-8.  Hear  me  when  I  call,  0  God  of  my  righteousness. — A  gentle  remon- 
ttranee : — This  Psalm  is  mainly  a  gentle,  earnest  remonstrance  with  antagonists, 
seeking  to  win  them  to  a  better  mind.  The  cry  for  an  answer  by  deed  is  based  on 
the  name  and  on  the  past  acts  of  God.  The  pronoun  "my"  is  best  attached  to 
"righteousness,"  as  the  consideration  that  God  is  righteous  is  less  relevant  than 
that  He  is  the  source  of  the  Psalmist's  righteousness.  Since  He  is  so.  He  may  be 
expected  to  vindicate  it  by  answering  prayer  with  deliverance.  He  who  feels  that 
all  good  in  himself  comes  from  God  may  be  quite  sure  that,  sooner  or  later,  and  by 
some  means  or  other,  God  will  witness  to  His  own  work.  The  strophe  division 
keeps  together  the  prayer  and  the  beginning  of  the  remonstrance  to  opponents,  and 
does  so  in  order  to  emphasise  the  eloquent,  sharp  juxtaposition  of  God  and  the 
"sons  of  men."  Ver.  6  may  be  the  continuance  of  the  address  to  the  enemies, 
carrying  on  the  exhortation  to  trust.  Vers.  7  and  8  are  separated  from  ver.  6  by 
their  purely  personal  reference.  The  Psalmist  returns  to  the  tone  of  his  prayer  in 
ver.  1  ;  only,  that  petition  has  given  place,  as  it  should  do,  to  possession  and  confi- 
dent thankfulness.  The  Psalmist  here  touches  the  bottom,  the  foundation  fact  on 
which  every  life  that  is  not  vanity  must  be  based,  and  which  verifies  itself  in  every 
life  that  is  so  based.  The  glad  heart  possessing  Jehovah  can  lay  itself  down  and 
sleep,  though  foes  stand  round.  The  last  words  of  the  Psalm  flow  restfully  like  a 
lullaby,  (a.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  great  trials  of  life: — I.  Peaying.  1.  A 
recognition  of  God's  righteousness.  He  might  have  thought  upon  God  now  as  the 
"  author  "  of  his  righteousness,  and  felt  that  all  that  was  righteous  in  his  own  heart 
and  life  came  from  God  ;  or  as  the  vindicator  of  his  righteousness  who  alone  was  able 
to  defend  his  righteous  cause  ;  or  as  the  administrator  of  righteousness,  conducting 
His  government  upon  righteous  principles  and  bringing  even  upon  him  only  the  suffer- 
ings he  justly  deserved.  There  is  something  deep  in  the  soul  of  man  which  leads  him 
to  appeal  to  the  righteous  God  when  he  feels  himself  to  be  the  victim  of  fraud  or 
violence.  Even  Christ  Himself  did  so.  2.  A  remembrance  of  God's  goodness.  "Thou 
hast  enlarged  me  when  I  was  in  distress. "  The  reference  is  to  some  deliverance  which 
he  had  experienced.  He  remembered,  perhaps,  the  goodness  of  God  to  him  when,  in 
the  field  guarding  his  father's  flocks,  he  was  delivered  out  of  the  paw  of  the  lion  and 
out  of  the  paw  of  the  bear  ;  or  His  goodness  to  him  in  delivering  him  from  the 
giant  of  Philistia.  The  memory  of  God's  past  mercies  to  him  gave  courage  to  his 
heart  and  an  argument  in  his  prayer  now,  Because  God  has  helped  us  we  expect 
Him  to  help  us  again,  and  thus  we  plead.  Not  so  with  man.  The  more  our  fellow- 
being  has  helped  us  the  less  reason  we  have  to  expect  His  aid.  Man's  capacity  for 
help  is  limited.  The  capability  of  God  is  unbounded.  3-  An  invocation  of  God's 
favour.  "...  Have  mercy  upon  me  and  hear  my  prayer."  Mercy  is  what  we 
want.  Mercy  to  forgive,  to  renovate,  to  strengthen  the  soul,  to  labour  and  to  wait. 
II.  Rebuking.  David  having  addressed  the  righteous  God  in  prayer,  hurls  his 
rebuke  at  his  enemies.  His  rebuke  is  marked — 1.  By  boldness.  "...  0  ye  sons 
of  men" — ye  great  men  of  the  land — ".  .  .  0  how  long  will  ye  turn  my  glory  into 
shame,  how  long  will  ye  love  vanity  and  seek  after  leasing  ? "  In  this  appeal  the 
speaker's  sense  of  honour,  justice,  truth  seems  to  have  run  into  a  passion  that  fired 
and  flooded  his  whole  being.  2.  By  alarm.  "...  Know  that  the  Lord  hath  set 
apart  him  that  is  godly  for  Himself :  the  Lord  will  hear  when  I  call  unto  Him, " 
which  means,  ' '  Know  this,  the  Lord  will  take  care  of  me  whom  He  has  elected 
King  to  serve  Himself,  and  He  will  hear  when  I  call  upon  Him."  Your  opposition 
la  futile.  Beware,  you  are  rebelling  not  merely  against  me,  but  against  Omnipo- 
tence itself.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  oppress  or  injure  God's  elected  ones.  3.  By 
authority.     "...  Stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not,  commune  with  your  own  heart  on 


eO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  IT. 

your  bed,  and  be  still.  Selah." — Mind  this.  This  command  includes  three  things. 
(1)  Cease  from  your  rage.  Let  your  insurrectionary  passion  be  hushed.  The  soul 
tinder  wrong  passions  is  like  a  rudderless  bark  driven  by  the  tempest ;  shipwreck  is 
all  but  inevitable.  (2)  Retire  to  thoughtfulness.  ' '  Commune  with  your  own  heart 
npon  your  bed,  and  be  still."  It  is  in  man's  own  soul  that  God  meets  with  him, 
and  commtines  with  him  as  He  did  of  old  before  the  mercy-seat.  (3)  Practise 
religion.  "...  Offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  and  put  your  trust  in  the 
Lord."  What  is  righteous  sacrifice  ?  The  consecration  of  our  energies,  our  self, 
our  all,  to  the  service  of  justice,  truth,  and  God.  "...  The  sacrifices  of  God 
are  a  broken  spirit,  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart  Thou  wilt  not  despise." 
III.  Teaching.  "There  be  many  that  say,  who  wiU  show  us  any  good?  Lord 
lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us."  1.  The  universal  craving  of 
humanity.  "  .  .  .  .  There  are  many  that  say  unto  us,"  &c.  Men  are  everywhere 
craving  for  happiness.  From  shops  and  sanctuaries,  from  the  peasant's  cot  and  the 
prince's  castle,  from  the  bush  of  savages  and  the  bench  of  senators,  from  all  lands 
and  lips  the  cry  is  heard,  "Who  will  show  us  any  goodi"  We  are  children 
walking  in  the  dark,  who  will  show  us  the  way  ;  we  are  dying  with  thirst,  who  will 
moisten  our  fevered  lips  ;  we  are  starving  with  hunger,  who  will  give  us  any  bread  % 
Man,  the  world  over,  feels  that  he  has  not  what  he  wants.  2.  The  only  satisfaction 
of  humanity.  What  is  it  ?  Fame,  wealth,  sensual  pleasure,  superstitious  obser- 
vances ?  No,  these  have  been  tried  a  thousand  times,  and  failed.  Here  it  is : 
"  Lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy  countenance,"  which  means  the  conscious  presence 
and  favour  of  God.  IV.  Exulting.  "...  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart 
more  than  in  the  time  that  their  com  and  their  wine  increased. "  Some  render  this 
from  the  time  in  which  their  corn  aud  wine  increased,  supposing  David  to  refer  to 
the  hour  when  abundant  supplies  began  to  come  into  him,  an  exile  at  Mahanaim 
(2  Sam.  xvi.  1,  xvii.  28).  This  may  be  the  correct  version.  The  language  in, 
either  version  expresses  the  feelings  of  a  soul  happy  in  God.  1.  God  made  him 
inwardly  happy,  even  in  his  poverty.  He  had  lost  for  a  time  his  palace  and  his 
kingdom,  and  was  dependent  upon  the  supplies  of  friends.  Yet  he  was  happy,  and 
who  made  him  happy  ?  "...  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart."  God  alone 
can  make  us  happy  anywhere  and  anywhen.  "...  Although  the  fig  tree  shall 
not  blossom,"  &c.  (Hab.  iii.  17).  What  does  Paul  say?  "...  I  glory  in  tribu- 
lation." Martyrs  have  sung  in  dungeons,  and  triumphed  in  flames.  2.  God  made 
him  consciously  secure.  His  enemies  counted  their  millions.  His  death  they 
desired.  Yet  what  does  he  say? — ".  .  .  I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and 
sleep."  God  was  his  refuge  and  strength,  &c.  " .  .  .  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us  ? "  Learn  from  this  poem  where  happiness  alone  can  be  found.  It  is  in 
God.  An  ancient  Italian  author,  in  one  of  his  romantic  legends,  tells  us  of  a  tree, 
many  branched,  and  covered  apparently  with  delectable  bunches  of  fruit ;  but  whoso 
shook  that  tree  in  order  to  possess  the  fruit,  found,  too  late,  that  not  fruit,  but 
stones  of  crushing  weight  came  down  upon  his  head.  An  emblem  this  of  the  tree  of 
imholy  pleasure.  It  is  many-branched,  it  is  attractive  in  aspect,  its  boughs  bend 
with  rich  clusters  of  what  seems  to  be  delicious  fruit,  the  millions  of  the  world 
gather  round  it,  and,  with  eager  hands,  shake  it  in  order  if  possible  to  taste  the 
luscious  fruit.  But  what  is  the  result  of  their  efforts  ?  Stones  come  tumbling  down 
that  paralyse  the  soul.  "What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now 
ashamed ;  for  the  end  of  those  things  is  death. "  {Homilist. )  An  appeal  for  mercy 
to  the  God  of  righteousness : — I.  The  Psalmist's  appeal.  This  book  is  full  of  such 
appeals.  It  is  remarkable  that  there  has  come  down  to  us  a  book  full  of  the  most 
confidingly,  reverent,  pleading  utterances,  addressed  to  the  unseen  and  eternal  God. 
There  are  not  many  petitions  in  this  Psalm.  "Hear  me  when  I  call" — only 
"hear  me,"  that  is  enough.  Is  there  no  heart  to  respond  to  us?  Yes,  He  is 
hearing,  that  is  enough.  II.  The  grounds  of  the  appeal.  Two  considerations 
on  which  the  appeal  is  founded.  1.  The  character  of  God.  Not  simply  "my 
righteous  God,"  but  "God,  the  author  of  my  righteousness,  from  Whom  all  that  is 
true  and  right  in  me  has  come."  2.  And  the  goodness  already  experienced. 
"Thou  hast  enlarged  me."  It  was  not  untiied  mercy.  No  one  looks  to  history 
for  a  message  of  despair — at  any  rate,  no  good  man — for  he  always  finds  that  the 
storm  ends  in  calm,  that  the  darkest  hour  precedes  the  dawn,  that  the  struggles 
result  in  progress.  Let  us  also  appeal  for  mercy  to  the  God  of  righteousness,  and 
take  tlie  past  as  an  argument.  There  has  been  care  in  the  past ;  there  has  been 
goodness  in  the  past :  Gethsemane  is  in  the  past ;  Calvary  is  in  the  past.  Plead 
the  past.      {James  Owen.)        Thou  hast  enlarged  me. — Prayer  and  answer  to 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  61 

prayer: — I.  David's  prayer  for  mercy  desired.  1.  The  title  which  David 
here  puts  upon  God.  "God  of  my  righteousness."  That  is,  the  God  who  makes 
me  to  be  righteous :  the  Author  of  it.  Better  here,  the  God  that  shows  me  to  be 
righteous,  that  maintains  my  righteous  cause.  Look  at  this — (1)  Directly  in  itself. 
God  does  own  the  righteousness  of  those  who  are  His  servants.  This  is  grounded  on 
His  nature.  His  atiection  and  His  relation  carries  Him  to  it  likewise.  He  is  my 
God,  and  therefore  the  God  of  my  righteousness.  There  is  also  His  covenant  and 
interest.  In  two  ways  God  owns  our  righteousness.  In  clearing  it  and  in  avenging 
it.  (2)  Reflexively,  as  coining  from  David  ;  who,  having  riglitcousness  and  equity  on 
his  side,  does  now  with  a  great  deal  of  boldness  and  confidence  take  liimself  to  (Jod 
for  redress.  Whence  we  see  what  is  to  be  practised  by  every  one  else.  2.  The 
request  itself.  "Hear  me  when  I  call"  has  respect  to  David's  compLiint  in  ca.sc  of 
injury.  "Hear  my  prayer,"  that  is,  grant  me  that  particular  request  wliich  I 
desire  of  Thee.  See  nis  desire  of  being  heard  in  his  performance,  "when  I  call." 
Attention  must  be  given  to  the  matter  of  prayer,  that  it  be  such  as  is  according  to 
God's  will ;  the  manner  of  prayer,  that  it  be  with  zeal,  fervency,  and  intention  ;  the 
principle  of  prayer,  that  it  be  done  in  faith.  There  should  also  be  the  ordering  of 
ourselves  in  other  things  suitable  hereunto,  as  their  hearing  of  God  Himself.  Hearing 
of  others  in  their  necessities  :  abstaining  from  all  kinds  of  sin  whatsoever.  3.  The 
terms  whereupon  he  deals  with  Him.  On  account  of  mercy,  grace,  and  favour.  We 
must  have  recourse  to  His  mercy,  and  urge  upon  Him  this  cousideration  above  all 
others.  Let  us  make  much  of  this  attribute  of  mercy,  and  improve  it  to  our  own 
comfort  and  advantage.  II.  David's  acknowledgment  of  mercy  received. 
God  loves  to  manifest  His  power  in  deliverance.  He  brings  into  distress,  and  so 
from  thence  takes  occasion  to  enlarge.  There  is  a  double  enlargement,  one  of  state 
and  condition  ;  the  other  of  heart  and  affection.  There  is  a  double  enlargement  of 
spirit,  the  one  is  in  order  to  duty,  the  other  in  order  to  comfort.  {Thomas  Horton, 
D.D.)  Spiritual  enlargement : — This  enlargement  is  the  great  thing  to  be  desired 
and  sought  after  in  all  our  histories.  Sin  dwarfs  us — it  lowers  us  alike  in  the  scale 
of  creation  and  in  the  scope  of  our  immortal  being.  So  possible  is  it  for  all  true 
spiritual  life  to  be  crushed,  all  inward  growth  and  spiritual  development  to  be 
repressed,  by  worldliness  of  heart  and  aim.  The  contrast  therefore  is  a  study  ; 
enlargement  of  estate,  or  enlargement  of  soul.  "Thou  hast  enlarged  yne."  Here 
is  a  beautiful  consciousness.  I.  The  cause  revealed.  "  When  I  was  in  distress." 
Distress  had  driven  me  to  Him  Who  revealed  me  to  myself.  He  diminished  my 
estate  and  my  health  ;  but  He  enlarged  me.  II.  The  question  suggested. 
Why  ?  Because  I  am  a  man  capable  of  enlargement.  You  cannot  enlarge  the 
merely  finite  like  this.  Every  spiritual  advance  is  only  a  step  upward  and  onward 
in  the  immortal  ascent,  every  enlargement  is  only  a  prophecy  of  yet  wider  range. 
Not  one  word  can  be  said  too  much  of  the  majesty  of  the  soul.  Standing  on  the 
verge  of  eternity  after  long  years  of  life,  the  soul  is  yet  young,  and  feels  the 
immortal  pulses.  It  is  just  beginning  to  know.  Unless  we  grow  in  grace  we  may 
question  if  we  are  Christians  at  all,  for  life  means  growth,  and  the  knowleilge  of 
God  is  the  infinite  study  of  eternity.  III.  The  influence  created.  An 
enlarged  man  has  a  glorious  might  of  personal  influence  ;  such  a  man  elevates  social 
intercourse  as  he  moves  among  his  fellows,  and  treats  their  interests  in  the  light  of 
their  larger  being.  The  enlarged  man  seeks  to  have  part  in  the  kingdom  which 
brings  life  and  peace  to  all  his  brethren  in  Christ.  IV.  The  expectation  enjoyed. 
For  what  is  all  this  enlargement  given  ?  Surely  the  Divine  ministries  have  a  worthy 
end  and  aim,  or  else  we  have  a  mystery  in  man  which  we  have  in  no  other  sphere  of 
use  or  adaptation.  The  soul  implies  Divine  training  and  immortal  rest.  Heaven  is 
the  corollary  of  soul  life.  Faint  not  under  the  good  hand  of  God,  for  He  will  exalt 
you  in  good  time.  The  enlarged  life  will  have  a  sphere,  where  it  can  enjoy  and 
serve  God,  for  ever  and  for  evermore.  Thus,  too,  may  we  bear  distress  aright. 
( W.  M.  Statham. )  Enlargement  in  distress : — This  Psalm  and  the  previous  one 
are  Psalms  of  distress,  utterances  of  a  soul  that  is  crying  to  God  out  of  the  depths  ; 
yet,  none  the  less,  they  are  songs  of  faith,  hope,  rest  in  God.  In  the  text  we 
see  that  gladness  comes  out  of  the  sorrow,  and  light  shines  out  of  the  darkness. 
I.  Through  distress  there  comes  an  enlargement  of  personal  character. 
1.  Suffering  strengthens  character;  brings  to  light  the  hidden  qualities  of  a  man, 
and  teaches  him  courage,  endurance,  and  self-reliance.  I  have  read  of  a  great 
botanist  who  was  exiled  from  his  native  land,  and  had  obtained  employment  as  an 
under-gardener  in  a  nobleman's  service,  that  while  in  this  situation  his  master 
received  the  present  of  a  valuable  plant,  the  nature  and  habits  of  which  were  quite 


«2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  iv. 

unkoown  to  Mm.  It  was  given  to  the  care  of  the  head-gardener,  and  he,  supposing 
it  to  be  of  tropical  growth,  put  it  into  a  hothouse,  and  treated  it  like  other  hothouse 
plants.  Under  this  treatment  the  plant  began  to  wither  and  die.  One  day  the 
under-gardener  asked  permission  to  examine  it,  and  as  soon  as  he  had  done  so  ha 
said,  "This  is  an  Arctic  plant,  and  you  are  killing  it  with  this  hothouse  treatment." 
So  he  took  it  oat  to  the  open  air,  and  heaped  ice  round  it,  to  the  great  astonishment 
of  the  head-gardener.  The  result  justified  his  wisdom ;  for  the  plant  was  soon 
perfectly  healthy  and  strong.  This  story  is  a  parable  of  human  character.  It  is 
ease,  not  difficulty,  that  is  dangerous.  Put  a  man  under  hothouse  treatment, 
surround  him  with  luxury,  hedge  him  in  from  opposition  ;  and  you  take  the  surest 
means  of  sapping  him  of  fife  and  power.  Teach  him  to  suffer ;  and  you  teach  him  to 
be  strong.  2.  But  in  a  large  character,  sympathy  must  be  present  as  well  as 
strength.  Without  sympathy  no  character  can  possess  that  breadth  which  is  so 
essential  to  its  perfecting ;  and  there  is  no  such  teacher  of  sympathy  as  suffering. 
II.  Think  of  the  larger  and  surer  place  which  suffering  gives  us  in  the 
WORLD  OF  MEN.  There  is  something  in  the  experience  of  suffering  which  enhances  a 
man's  social  influence.  In  every  walk  of  life  the  men  of  sorrows  are  the  men  of 
power.  We  may  not  be  able  fully  to  explain  why  this  is  so ;  but  we  know  quite 
well  that  the  very  fact  of  suffering  gives  a  man  a  claim  upon  us,  and  a  hold  over  us, 
which  nothing  else  can  give.  " Under  our  present  conditions, "  says  one,  "there  is 
something  in  the  very  expansiveness  of  joy  which  dissociates,  while  sorrow  seems  to 
weld  us  together,  like  hammer-strokes  on  steel."  Do  we  not  find  that  the  influence 
which  Jesus  exerts  is  an  emanation  from  His  Cross  ?  He  was  made  ' '  perfect  through 
sufferings  " — not  perfect  in  His  own  nature,  for  that  was  perfect  already,  but  perfect 
in  His  power  to  touch  and  save  and  bless  ;  and  so  His  dominion  was  enlarged 
through  His  distress.  III.  No  doubt  David  was  thinking  most  of  all  of  a  religious 
enlargement — an  enlargement  of  his  heart  towards  God,  and  an  knlargb- 
MENT  OF  God's  mercy  towards  him.  1 .  Men  are  enlarged  through  their  distress. 
Their  horizon  grows  wider  and  deeper.  The  sunlight  fades,  the  night  falls ;  but  in 
the  darkness  a  gieater  and  more  glorious  world  appears  ;  for  the  stars  shine  out  from 
the  immeasurable  depths — those  "street  lamps  of  the  City  of  God."  2.  Our  enlarge- 
ment in  distress  does  not  lie  only  in  our  new  thoughts  about  God,  but  in  God's  new 
mercies  towards  us.  The  Lord  has  special  mercies  for  His  children  in  distress,  as  a 
mother  has  kisses  and  fond  soothing  words  for  her  little  child  who  has  hurt  himself 
by  a  fall.  Did  you  ever  consider  this,  that  there  are  stores  of  blessing  held  in  reserve 
within  the  eternal  treasuries,  the  fulness  of  which  you  can  only  know  in  the  day  of 
trial  ?  3.  In  one  of  two  ways  distress  works — it  makes  a  man  either  better  or  worse. 
We  have  seen  it  making  people  narrower  and  more  selfish  and  more  sullen.  We  have 
also  seen  it  making  them  broader  and  more  sympathetic,  more  considerate  and  more 
gracious.  All  depends  upon  their  way  of  meeting  it.  Meet  it  in  the  Psalmist's  faith, 
nope,  and  patience.     {J.  C.  Lambert,  B.D.) 

Yer.  3.  Him  tliat  is  godly.  — The  godly  TTian.— "The  godly."  They  are 
evidently  a  distinguished,  a  peculiar  people.  They  have  undergone  a  process  of 
change.  There  may  be  a  very  exalted  scale  of  morals  observed  by  men,  but  still  it 
amounts  not  to  the  scriptural  idea  of  godliness,  for  all  that  comes  within  the  range 
of  moral  observance  may  be  entirely  without  reference  to  God.  Godliness  is  a  state 
of  mind  and  heart  which  is  derived  from  a  source  higher  than  man.  I.  The  source 
OF  GODLINESS.  It  must  be  God  Himself ;  Almighty  power,  acting  out  the  dictates 
of  Almighty  grace  and  love,  can  alone  bring  a  sinner,  from  his  state  of  abject 
degradation,  near  to  God,  and  pour  into  his  nature  the  renovating  spirit  that  shall 
bring  upon  him  the  lineaments  of  that  perfection  in  which  he  was  at  first  created. 
If  God  "sets  apart"  or  "chooses"  a  sinner,  therefore,  it  is  in  order  that  there  may 
be  produced  in  him  affinity  to  Christ,  likeness  to  Christ — likeness  to  Christ  in 
principle,  in  desire  and  intention,  in  motive,  in  affections,  in  actions.  Incidental  to 
this,  and  essential  to  it,  is  the  conviction  of  sin  which  the  Spirit  of  God  creates  in 
the  heart.  It  includes  also  a  closing  with  the  terms  of  salvation,  on  the  part  of  the 
sinner — the  laying  aside  of  sin  in  the  act,  though  he  cannot  lay  it  aside,  m  his  own 
will,  in  its  inward  power  and  principle — the  laying  aside  of  sin  in  the  act,  and 
looking  for  grace  that  shall  subdue  sin  in  its  power.  It  includes  also  the  acceptance 
of  a  free  pardon  of  all  past  sin — an  assurance  of  the  imputation  of  all  sin  to  the 
Saviour,  in  order  to  its  expiation,  and  the  impartation  of  the  Saviour's  righteousness 
to  the  sinner,  in  order  to  his  justification.  It  includes  that  simple  exercise  of  faith 
which  la  of  God's  bestowment.     II.  The  end  proposed.     "  The  Lord  hath  set  apart 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  63 

him  that  is  godly  for  Himself. "  He  is  brought  into  a  state  of  sonship  with  God. 
He  may  not  at  first  have,  but  he  expects  to  have,  the  witnessing  of  the  Spirit. 
God  has  created  all  things  in  the  universe  f«r  His  own  glory.  We  may  at  first, 
while  contemplating  the  great  purposes  of  the  gospel,  imagine  that  God's  primary 
end  was  to  rescue  the  lost  and  to  pardon  the  guilty.  But  by  man's  creation  God 
glorified  Himself,  and  by  man's  fall  He  acquired  glory,  inasmuch  as  in  the  recovery 
of  man  was  brought  into  exercise  that  bright  and  blessed  attribute  of  mercy  which 
could  not  otherwise  have  been  manifested.  III.  The  privileges  connected 
WITH  A  STATE  OF  GODLINESS.  "The  Lord  will  hear  when  I  call  unto  Him." 
How  foil  of  privilege  is  this  avowal  and  assurance  !  It  implies  that — 1,  The  godly 
man  has  the  privilege  of  access,  when  he  will,  to  "the  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords."  The  presence-chamber  is  never  closed.  The  believer  has  a  kind  of 
precedence  of  others  into  the  presence  of  the  Sovereign.  2,  The  godly  man  has  a 
claim  upon  God  ;  and  this  we  would  put  in  the  strongest  terms.  At  first  he  has  no 
claims  on  God  ;  but  being  conformed  to  the  image  of  Christ,  or  even  beginning  to  be 
conformed,  he  immediately  has  a  claim  on  Him — a  claim  based  on  God's  paternity. 
3.  To  "hear"  in  Scripture  language  means  to  "answer."  The  Lord  wUl  hear  on 
account  of  the  agreement  there  is  between  the  Spirit  that  animates  the  believing 
heart  and  his  own  mind  and  intention.  Tell  me  what  is  in  the  vdde  world,  for 
which  men  are  bartering  such  blessed  prospects  for  eternity,  worth  a  moment's 
notice,  when  godliness,  with  all  its  happy  privileges,  is  fully  set  before  you  at  the 
foot  of  the  Cross  of  the  Redeemer  f    {George  Fisk,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Stand  in  awe. — Awe  of  Ood: — All  sin  is  an  ofience  against  God,  and 
nothing  tends  more  powerfully  to  correct  it  than  worthy  thoughts  of  God,  and  of  our 
relation  to  Him.  'They  who  have  no  habitual  thought  of  God,  who  set  Him  not 
before  them  in  their  daily  walk,  find  no  principle  and  no  power  present  with  them 
to  prevent  the  admission  and  indulgence  of  evil.  If  you  would  cease  from  sinning, 
stand  in  awe.  Let  there  be  a  fear  and  dread  upon  your  mind,  arising  from  a 
sense  of  the  power,  and  holiness,  and  justice,  and  presence  of  the  Almighty.  There 
is  nothing  wliich  can  enable  us  to  stand  firm  and  upright  in  the  presence  of  evil,  but 
a  due  sense  of  the  presence  of  Almighty  God,  and  of  the  relation  which  we  bear  to 
Him  under  the  gospel  covenant.  If  the  aweful  feeling,  the  sense  which  is  due 
from  every  rational  creature  to  the  Creator,  were  formed,  and  cherished,  and  carried 
into  the  scenes  of  daily  life  it  would  become  a  powerful  preservative  from  sin.  To 
impress  our  hearts  deeply  consideration  should  be  had  of  those  declarations  of  holy 
writ  which  assure  us  that  the  necessity  of  a  pious  awe  is  by  no  means  done  awaj' 
under  the  covenant  of  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy.  {J.  Slade,  M.A.)  The 
duty  of  reverence: — 1.  The  advantages  of  maintaining  seriousness  and 
DEVOUTNESS  OF  MIND.  The  greatest  of  happiness  consists  in  regulating,  with 
propriety,  the  various  ofiices  of  human  life.  Every  department  of  life  is  beautiful  in 
its  season.  There  is  a  time  to  be  cheerful,  and  a  time  to  be  serious :  an  hour  for 
solitude,  and  an  hour  for  society.  A  serious  frame  of  mind  is  the  guardian  and  the 
protector  of  religion,  and  it  also  associates  with  other  virtues  which  belong  to  the 
Christian  character.  This  serious  frame  of  mind  cherishes  those  higher  virtues  of 
the  soul  which  are  called  "  the  armour  of  God."  In  the  solemn  silence  of  the  mind 
are  formed  those  great  resolutions  which  decide  the  fate  of  men.  This  temper  is  no 
less  favourable  to  the  milder  virtues  of  humanity.  A  serious  mind  is  the  companion 
of  a  feeling  heart.  II.  The  suitableness  of  this  temper  of  mind  to  our 
PRESENT  STATE.  1.  It  is  Suited  to  that  dark  and  uncertain  state  of  being  in  which 
we  now  live.  Human  life  is  not  formed  to  answer  those  high  expectations  which,  in 
the  era  of  youth  and  imagination,  we  are  apt  to  entertain.  2.  The  propriety  of  this 
temper  will  appear  if  we  consider  the  scene  that  soon  awaits  us,  and  the  awful 
change  of  being  that  we  have  to  undergo.  3.  This  frame  of  mind  is  peculiarly 
proper  for  you  now,  as  a  preparation  for  holy  communion.  (/.  Logan,  F.R.S.E.) 
Awe  and  trust : — Words  like  awe,  fear,  trembling  appear  to  be  almost  obsolete 
now.  Our  speech  finds  its  emphasis  in  such  words  as  happiness,  joy,  peace,  comfort. 
The  Psalmist  throws  us  back  to  quite  a  different  plane.  This  man  had  a  vision  of 
the  great  White  Throne.  He  had  been  contemplating  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  His 
levity  is  changed  into  trembling ;  his  indifference  is  broken  up  in  awe.  Why  is 
there  so  little  awe  in  our  religious  lives  to-day  ?  Is  it  because  we  have  lost  the  Face 
of  God  ?  We  gather  up  all  the  gracious  promises.  We  lift  them  out  of  their  context 
Promises  gathered  in  their  relationship  to  warnings  will  tend  to  our  good.  We  sea 
the  same  tendency  in  our  choice  of  hymns.    We  do  not  like  the  hymns  in  which  the 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  iv. 

whirlwind  sweeps  and  drives.  We  prefer  the  hymns  that  are  just  filled  with  iioney. 
Many  of  us  have  lost  the  severities  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is  because  these 
terrors  are  left  out  in  our  religious  conceptions,  and  in  our  preaching,  that  the 
frivolity  of  men  is  gratified  and  coddled  by  illegitimate  sweetness.  We  must 
re-proclaim  the  elements  of  severity  which  minister  to  a  bracing  holiness.  Men  do 
not  feel  the  power  of  the  gospel  when  in  Christ  they  discern  nothing  to  fear. 
Thomas  Boston  said  that  the  net  of  the  gospel  needed  to  be  weighted  with  the  leads 
of  the  terrors  of  the  law,  or  it  would  lightly  float  on  the  surface  and  no  fish 
be  caught.  We  must  steadily  keep  in  view  the  sterner  patches  of  the  New  Testament 
teaching.  We  must  contemplate  the  whiteness  of  the  Eternal,  and  stand  in  awe, 
"  and  put  your  trust  in  the  Lord."  How  graciously  the  passage  closes  !  The  awe 
and  the  trembling  converge  in  fruitful  trust !  The  discovery  of  the  holy  Sovereignty, 
the  discovery  of  personal  defilement,  the  discovery  of  a  Redeemer,  are  consummated 
in  the  discovery  of  rest.  When  I  have  found  my  "righteousness"  my  part  is  now 
to  trust.  The  awe,  the  purity  of  the  holy  Sovereignty  wiU  become  mine.  Trust 
keeps  open  the  line  of  communication  between  the  soul  and  God.  Along  that  line 
convoys  of  blessedness  are  brought  into  the  heart ;  manifold  gifts  of  grace  for  the 
weak  and  defenceless  spirit.  When  I  trust  I  keep  open  the  "highway  of  the  Lord," 
and  along  that  road  there  come  to  me  from  the  Eternal  my  bread,  my  water,  my 
instructions,  my  powers  of  defence.  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who 
strengtheneth  me."  I  can  "work  out  my  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling." 
{J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Reverence: — The  most  prominent  sin  of  this  age  is 
flippancy.  Familiarity  breeds  contempt.  In  many  instances  knowledge  only  leads 
men  to  treat  law  as  a  light  thing,  and  its  operations  with  thoughtless  neglect. 
How  can  this  evil  be  overcome  ?  The  answer  is  not  far  to  seek  ;  it  is  by  fostering 
in  men  the  principle  of  awe  that  David  here  enjoins.  I.  We  should  stand  in  awe 
BEFORE  NATURE.  The  stupendous  magnificence  and  mysterious  changefulness  of 
nature  appeal  to  even  the  most  apathetic  and  thoughtless.  No  part  of  nature  and  of 
human  life  is  free  from  the  dominion  of  law.  Everything  has  its  own  peculiar  laws. 
II.  We  should  stand  in  awe  before  conscience.  The  knowledge  of  right 
and  wrong  is  co-extensive  with  the  existence  of  humanity.  It  is  the  essential  basis 
of  society,  and  of  all  mutual  intercourse  of  men.  Under  the  shadow  of  this  great 
possession  all  men  meet  as  brothers.  We  realise  the  influence  of  conscience  first  as 
our  teacher.  III.  We  should  stand  in  awe  before  experience.  Instinct  is 
the  stronger  force  in  the  animal  life,  and  reason  the  stronger  in  human  life. 
Experience  is  peculiarly  the  guide  and  teacher  of  humanity,  and  he  who  cannot 
profit  by  its  teaching  fails  to  progress  as  a  man  should.  Experience  is  one  long 
series  of  revelations  to  a  man.  No  one  can  stand  before  the  revelations  of 
experience  without  feeling  awed.  If  we  reach  a  definite  realisation  of  the  magnifi- 
cence of  human  life,  the  majesty  of  man,  and  the  God-like  powers,  high  purposes,  and 
glorious  destiny  that,  as  Christ  shows,  are  ours,  we  will  be  so  filled  with  awe  that 
sin  will  become  an  abhorrent  thing  to  us.  If  we  stand  in  awe  we  cannot  sin. 
(D.  L.  Francis,  M.A.)  And  sin  not. — The  nature  and  consequences  of  sin: — In 
uttering  the  word  ' '  sin "  how  few  are  there  amongst  men,  even  though  serious 
minded,  who  connect  with  it  sentiments  and  feelings  corresponding  to  its  own  true 
force  and  significance  !  Yet  this  is  a  word  pregnant  with  all  the  terrible  calamities 
which  flesh  is  heir  to.  I.  The  nature  of  sin.  1.  Sin  is  a  gathering  evil.  Its  first 
indulgence  ends  not  in  itself,  but  the  gratification  strengthens  the  desire.  The  first 
act  of  sin  will  often  make  a  second  necessary,  by  placing  us  in  situations  which  wo 
had  not  contemplated.  2.  Sin  is  a  deceiving  power.  It  always  wears  a  mask.  It 
allures  under  the  semblance  of  beauty,  hiding  its  serpent  length  among  the  roses. 
3.  Sin  is  a  gradual  hardening  of  the  heart.  Every  fresh  act  of  sin  is  the  shutting 
up  of  some  pore  of  moral  sensibility.  4.  Sin  is  ineff"aceable.  The  action  that  is 
done  cannot  be  undone.  5,  Sin  is  a  contagious  evil.  It  affects  those  about  us, 
II.  The  consequences  of  sin.  Generally  the  loss  of  health,  life,  reputation, 
friends,  the  loss  of  fortitude  under  trials,  consolation  in  suff"ering,  the  loss  of  peace 
in  a  world  of  strife,  the  loss  of  hope  in  nature's  most  despairing  hour,  the  loss  of  a 
calm  assurance  at  the  last.  Ponder  the  recorded  judgments  of  God,  this  will 
strengthen  your  fear  of  sin.  And  remember  against  whom  you  sin.  A  God,  a 
7iiercitul  God,  a  Father,  a  King :  against  your  Redeemer,  and  the  interests  of  your 
immortal  souls.  {T.  J.  Judkin,  A.M.)  Plain  directions  to  those  who  would  be 
saved  from  sin : — I.  Feel  reverent  awk.  "Stand  in  awe."  Tremble,  and  sin 
not.  Awe  is  not  a  comm-m  emotion  nowadays.  Men  are  triflers  rather  than 
tremblers.     True  religion  must  have  a  savour  of  awe  about  it,  for — 1.  There  is  a 


PSALM  IV,]  THE  PSALMS.  65 

God,  and  He  is  our  judge.  2.  There  is  a  life  to  come.  Behold  that  day  of  wrath 
when  justice  will  sit  upon  the  throne  !  II.  Thoughtful  self-examination. 
1.  Think  of  the  state  of  your  heart.  Are  you  right  with  God?  2.  Commune  with 
your  heart  in  loneliness  and  quiet.  3.  Think  for  yourself.  4.  Keep  on  thinking, 
tiU  you  come  to  be  still.  III.  Appkoach  unto  God  aright.  "Offer  the 
sacrifices  of  righteousness."  Interpret  thus,  come  to  God  in  His  own  way,  as  Israel 
came  bringing  their  sacrifices.  They  first  made  confession  of  sin.  Bring  the 
offering  which  God  has  divinely  appointed  and  provided.  Come  to  God  by  faith  in 
Christ ;  plead  His  precious  blood.  IV.  Exercise  faith.  "  Put  your  trust  in  the 
Lord."  As  willing  to  receive  you.  As  He  reveals  Himself  in  Christ.  For  His 
Holy  Spirit  to  renew  you.  For  everything.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  The  duties  of 
religion  : — Religion  is  to  be  improved  by  exercise  and  application  of  mind.  There 
is  a  certain  art  of  virtue.  In  this  art  no  man  was  ever  so  well  accomplished  as  the 
Psalmist.  Here  he  discovers  to  us  the  gradual  progress  which  a  good  man  makes 
in  this  art.  I.  The  great  business  of  religion  is  to  teach  us  not  to  sin. 
To  subdue  our  unruly  lusts,  and  reduce  our  troublesome  affections,  and  to  bring 
every  rebellious  thought  into  subjection  to  the  will  of  God  ;  to  restore  virtue  to  its 
proper  place,  and  reason  to  its  due  command ;  and  to  recover  the  natural  freedom  of 
our  will  from  the  tyranny  of  our  passions,  and  the  usurpation  of  vice.  There  is 
nothing  of  greater  moment  to  us  than  to  form  our  minds  aright,  to  keep  a  strict  hand 
upon  our  manners,  and  critically  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  paths  of  life.  To 
correct  our  extravagance,  and  to  keep  us  within  the  bounds  of  wisdom,  is  the  proper 
work  of  religion.  In  our  miserable  lost  estate,  whilst  we  were  tied  and  bound  with 
the  chain  of  our  sins,  God  in  His  mercy  instituted  a  holy  religion  to  set  us  free,  and 
restore  us  to  that  paradise  of  innocency  from  which  we  fell.  II.  The  way  not  to 
SIN  is  to  "stand  in  awe."  There  is  nothing  but  an  awful  regard  for  God,  and 
a  just  respect  for  His  holy  attributes,  that  can  effectually  put  a  restraint  upon  us, 
and  overrule  the  violence  of  our  paasions.  What  other  design  had  God  in  imposing 
religious  worship  on  us,  but  that  it  might  bring  us  to  a  religious  awe,  that  having 
God  more  immediately  in  our  thoughts,  and  all  His  holy  attributes  before  our  eyes, 
we  might  learn  to  purify  ourselves  even  as  He  is  pure,  and  to  abhor  those  sins  of 
ours  that  make  us  unworthy  of  His  Presence.  Fear  is  now  become  a  necessary 
qualification  in  man,  not  only  to  preserve  his  virtue,  but  to  accomplish  his  nature 
too.  III.  This  religious  awe  is  to  be  wrought  in  us  by  "communing  with 
our  own  hearts."  It  is  a  great  art  and  excellence  in  man  to  know  how  to  think  ; 
to  look  into  the  nature  of  human  actions  ;  to  weigh  well  the  causes  and  compare  the 
consequence  of  things.  When  God  reckons  with  the  world  for  sin,  ignorance  may 
be  some  excuse,  but  inconsiderateness  is  none  at  all.  Whensoever  we  find  ourselves 
tempted  into  sin,  and  see  our  virtue  strongly  beset  from  without,  let  us  retire  within 
our  own  souls,  and  see  what  assistance  we  can  fetch  from  thence.  But  we  may 
think  we  have  no  leisure  for  such  inqvuries.  Nothing  is  so  apt  to  fill  as  vanity,  and 
no  man  is  more  busy  than  he  that  has  least  to  do.  IV.  If  we  would  have  this 
"communion  with  our  own  hearts"  to  be  effectual  we  must  "  retire  into 
OUR  chamber  and  be  still,"  There  we  may  learn  to  compose  our  thoughts,  and 
bring  ourselves  to  a  better  temper ;  give  our  passions  time  to  cool,  and  then  our 
affections  quickly  will  be  changed.  There  is  nothing  like  solitude  and  retirement  to 
recollect  our  thoughts  and  make  us  come  unto  ourselves,  after  we  have  been  reduced 
by  conversation  and  enchanted  by  the  multitude.  It  is  a  shameful  thing  to  think 
how  long  some  men  can  live  and  yet  never  know  themselves.  When  we  have  pre- 
pared and  qualified  ourselves  in  private,  then  W*  may  expect  that  our  public 
devotion  shall  be  effectual.  {Charles  Eickmon,  D.  0.)  Commune  with  your  own 
heaxt  upon  your  bed,  and  be  stilL — Meditation : — David  seems  to  have  possessed  in 
a  remarkable  degree  both  the  qualifications  for  public  and  the  virtues  of  private  life. 
Vigorous  in  action,  he  loved  repose.  We  need  seasons  of  retirement  to  restore  the 
balance  of  things  and  put  the  claims  of  heaven  in  their  right  order,  I.  The  nature 
OF  GODLY  meditation.  We  need  not  identify  the  exercise  with  religious  contempla- 
tion, that  higher  form  of  intellectual  homage  which  the  mind,  when  elevated  above  the 
level  of  earthly  things,  pays  to  the  wisdom  of  God.  Meditation  is  contemplation  turned 
within.  Meditation  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  reading.  In  meditation  we  are 
not  learning  truths,  but  applying  them.  Distinguish  also  from  the  ordinary  act  of 
prayer.  It  is  the  handmaid  to  prayer.  It  is  not  so  much  a  religious  act  in  itself  as 
a  preparation  for  all  other  religious  acts.  Meditation  is  not  an  act  to  be  learned,  but 
a  habit  to  be  formed.  We  attain  expertness  by  diligent  and  persevering  practice. 
Much  depends  on  power  to  govern  our  thoughts.      II.  David  intimates  the 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  iv. 

DESIRABLENESS  OF  SECURING  AN  OUTWARD   SOLEMNITY  AND  SERIOUSNESS   IN  THIS 

EXERCISE.  The  entire  seclusion  from  all  human  friendships,  the  hushing  of  all 
voices,  both  from  within  and  from  without,  that  we  may  be  quite  alone  with  God. 
There  is  a  sort  of  holiness  in  silence.  Meditation,  to  be  profitable,  must  be 
conducted  with  a  fixed  and  holy  intentness  of  mind,  A  close  self-scrutiny  also  is 
enjoined  in  the  words,  "  Commune  with  your  own  hearts."  {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.) 
Self-communion : — Fond  of  conversation  as  we  are,  few  of  us  converse  with  our  own 
selves.  Men  are  glad  of  anything — pleasures,  cares,  occupations,  employments  of 
whatever  kinds,  that  will  but  step  in  between  them  and  an  uneasy  conscience. 
I.  What  is  it  to  commune  with  our  own  hearts?  It  is  "to  examine  our 
lives  and  conversations  by  the  rule  of  God's  commandments,"  that  we  may  perceive 
"  wherein  we  have  offended,  either  by  will,  word,  or  deed."  From  day  to  day,  and 
more  especially  in  his  private  and  solitary  moments,  the  serious  man  "  searches  and 
tries  his  ways,"  and  makes  himself  to  render  in  a  serious  account  of  his  tempers, 
feelings,  and  atlections.  II.  Uses  and  benefits  of  this  self-examination. 
By  this  means  a  man  arrives  at  a  knowledge  of  his  own  character.  By  this  means 
we  attain  to  a  better  knowledge  of  the  Saviour — of  the  preciousness  of  His  salvation. 
Who  can  be  aware  of  the  value  of  Christ  crucified  whilst  he  conceives  he  has  few 
sins  to  be  forgiven  ?  Equally  does  that  man  rejoice  in  the  blessed  offices  of  God  the 
Holy  Spirit,  by  whose  holy  inspiration  the  thoughts  of  a  vile  heart  are  cleansed. 
Another  use  of  a  man's  talking  with  his  heart  is,  that  it  puts  him  upon  prayer.  It 
is  the  parent,  too,  of  self-distrust.  Such  a  man  may  also  derive  from  heart- 
examination  an  assurance  of  sincerity,  and  that  he  is  indeed  a  subject  of  the  grace  of 
God.  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  On  self-examination: — Self-communing  will  produce 
two  most  happy  effects.  1.  It  will  enable  us  to  judge  aright  concerning  our  chief 
good,  and  the  true  character  and  conduct  which  we  ought  to  maintain.  As  perfect 
goodness  is  the  great  original  of  which  every  good  man's  life  is  a  copy,  so  we  cannot 
judge  of  the  resemblance  of  the  copy  without  a  just  apprehension  of  the  original 
We  must  know  all  the  features  of  a  right  mind  that,  upon  comparison,  we  may  dis- 
cover if  those  of  our  own  mind  bear  a  likeness  to  them,  or  are  in  any  part  distorted 
or  unlike,  and  to  what  degree  this  distortion  or  want  of  resemblance  prevails.  To 
know  this  we  must  "  commune  with  our  own  hearts."  God  has  furnished  the  heart 
of  man  with  a  teacher  and  judge  of  what  is  right  and  good  for  him,  and  ' '  to  commune 
with  our  own  hearts  "  is  to  consult  this  inward  instructor  and  judge.  All  revelations 
from  heaven  are  intended  to  enlighten  this  internal  judge  and  monitor.  2.  It  will 
most  effectually  direct  and  assist  us  in  discovering  our  defects  and  vices,  and  in 
adjusting  our  dispositions  and  actions  to  the  right  judgment  it  has  enabled  us  to 
form.  We  must  not  take  it  for  granted  that  we  are  free  from  faults.  But  what 
they  precisely  are,  we  cannot  know  till  we  have  carefully  considered  our  actions,  and 
compared  them  with  the  rule  of  righteousness  prescribed  by  the  Almighty,  and 
approved  by  our  own  minds.  The  fear  of  making  mortifying  discoveries  restrains 
men  from  communing  with  their  own  hearts,  and  keeps  them  unacquainted  with 
their  defects,  whatever  they  may  be.  When  we  are  employed  in  searching  out  our 
vices,  there  are  some  of  such  a  nature  that  we  cannot  be  deceived  in  them,  if  they 
really  do  belong  to  us.  It  is  well  to  consider  what  are  the  parts  of  our  character 
which  we  wish  to  conceal  from  all  the  world.  Thus  we  shall  discover  our  real 
faults.  Every  action  of  a  suspicious  nature, — every  action  which  we  are  afraid  to  let 
the  world  know,  ought  to  undergo  the  most  accurate  review.  The  other  things  to 
be  brought  under  review,  when  communing  with  our  own  hearts,  are  our  supposed 
virtues.  Many  men  are  chiefly  concerned  to  gain  the  reputation  of  virtue.  The 
favourable  opinion  of  the  world,  reflected  back  upon  their  own  minds,  establishes  in 
them  the  imagination  that  they  are  really  virtuous.  Thus  their  self-deceit  becomes 
more  fixed,  and  harder  to  be  cured.  But  a  mistake  here  must  have  a  fatal  influence 
on  our  integrity.  ,  ,  .  Without  knowing  ourselves,  we  cannot  correct  our  errors,  or 
become  wise,  or  good,  or  happy.  {J.  Drysdale,  D.D.)  Self-eocamination : — When 
David  said  to  his  enemies,  ' '  Commune  with  your  own  heart, "  he  seemed  to  refer 
them  to  their  better  judgment,  when  their  temper  was  unruffled  and  their  passions 
not  excited.  Without  supposing  any  of  you  under  the  influence  of  a  hateful, 
persecuting  spirit  against  true  godliness,  it  may  yet,  suitably  and  profitably,  be  said 
to  every  one  of  you,  "  Commune  with  your  own  heart."  The  exhortation  might  be 
addressed  to  each  distinct  class  of  men.  I.  The  unconverted.  Why  are  you 
unwilling  to  be  called  unconverted  sinners  ?  What  is  the  reason  you  are  displeased  ? 
Be  candid  with  yourself.  Does  not  your  displeasure  arise  from  a  secret  consciousness 
that  the  charge  is  true,  and  a  dislike  to  be  reminded  of  it  ?    Let  me  exhort  you  to 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  67 

"  commune  with  your  own  heart."  Take  counsel  now  within,  and  consider  with 
yourselves  what  is  the  use  of  performing  a  service  which  God  does  not  accept,  nay, 
that  is  really  offensive  to  Him  ;  for  "the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  abomination  unto 
the  Lord  "  ?  II.  The  converted.  You  that  know  the  truth,  and  serve  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Some  considerations  render  such  an  exhortation  peculiarly  suitable  at  the 
present  time.  1.  The  remarkable  character  of  the  religion  of  the  present  day.  It 
is  an  age  of  energy  and  activity,  of  zeal  and  excitement.  2.  Satan  is  ever  on  the 
watch  to  do  us  harm.  Another  reason  why  it  is  seasonable  to  exhort  you  to 
"  commune  with  your  own  hearts."  You  have  been  invited  to  receive  the  sacra- 
ment. Self-examination  is  the  constant  habit  of  every  Christian.  But  before  we 
come  to  that  holy  feast,  we  have  more  than  ordinary  need  to  examine  ourselves. 
{R.  W.  Dibdin,  M.A. )  Self -communing : — Communing  has  been  defined  as  talking- 
together  familiarly.  Retirement  is  much  more  common  than  self-communion. 
You  may  go  apart  from  the  crowd,  and  yet  never  speak  to  your  own  heart.  1.  The 
familiar  maxim,  "Know  thyself,"  shows  that  self-knowledge  has  for  ages  been 
deemed  desirable.  In  the  ethical  codes  of  the  wiser  moralists  of  the  ancient  world, 
the  duty  of  self-analysis  was  prominent.  But  it  is  with  the  heart  in  its  relation  to 
things  unseen  and  eternal  that  we  are  to  commune.  This  communing  must  be 
marked  by  uncompromising  fidelity.  Honesty  and  impartiality  should  characterise 
our  inquiries.  In  our  self-communings  Scripture  should  be  our  guide.  When  we 
attempt  to  explore  our  vain  and  wicked  hearts,  we  find  that  a  manual  is  indispens- 
able to  success.  That  is  to  be  found  in  the  Bible  alone.  2.  The  effect  of  self- 
communion.  The  Psalm  is  an  appeal  to  God  against  the  misapprehensions  of  the 
"sons  of  men"  who  love  vanity.  Their  behaviour  is  founded  on  a  miserable 
delusion.  Some  aspects  of  the  stillness  to  which  communion  leads.  (1)  It  is  the 
stillness  of  settled  conviction.  (2)  Of  steady  growth.  (3)  Of  assured  peace.  But 
some  men  carry  these  self-communings  so  far  as  to  destroy  the  peace  they  ought  to 
create.  They  are  the  victims  of  an  ill-regulated  self-analysis.  How  does  this 
perversion  of  a  devout  habit  arise  ?  It  comes  of  neglecting  to  take  with  us  God's 
own  Word,  and  His  Son.  Do  not  neglect  this  duty  of  self-communing  because 
you  think  you  have  no  time  for  it.  "  Commune — upon  your  bed  "  means,  do  it 
anywhere,  at  any  time,  in  any  place,  only  do  it.  The  heart  is  a  book  which  you 
can  always  read.  Let  us  not  be  without  some  places  and  some  seasons  at  which 
we  commime  with  our  own  heart  specially,  some  spot,  some  hour,  in  which 
we  can  say,  "I  am  alone  with  God  and  with  myself."  (A.  MacEwen,  D.D.) 
On  religious  retirement : — Though  entire  retreat  would  lay  us  aside  from  the  part 
for  which  Providence  chiefly  intended  us,  it  is  certain  that,  without  occasional 
retreat,  we  must  act  that  part  very  ill.  There  will  neither  be  consistency  in  the 
conduct,  nor  dignity  in  the  character,  of  one  who  sets  apart  no  share  of  his  time 
for  meditation  and  reflection.  As  he  who  is  unacquainted  with  retreat,  cannot 
sustain  any  character  with  propriety,  so  neither  can  he  enjoy  the  world  with  any 
advantage.  If  uninterrupted  intercourse  with  the  world  wear  out  the  man  of 
pleasure,  it  no  less  oppresses  the  man  of  business  and  ambition.  The  strongest 
spirits  must  at  length  sink  under  it.  Let  him  who  wishes  for  an  eff"ectual  cure  to 
all  the  wounds  which  the  world  can  inflict,  retire  from  intercourse  with  men  to 
intercourse  with  God.  Religious  retirement  is  also  necessary,  in  order  to  prepare 
us  for  the  life  to  come.  He  who  lives  always  in  public,  cannot  live  to  his  own 
soul.  Our  conversation  and  intercourse  with  the  world  is,  in  several  respects,  an 
education  for  vice.  Breathing  habitually  a  contagious  air,  how  certain  is  our  ruin, 
unless  we  sometimes  retreat  from  this  pestilential  region,  and  seek  for  proper  cor- 
rectives of  the  disorders  which  are  contracted  there  ?  The  acts  of  prayer  and 
devotion,  the  exercises  of  faith  and  repentance,  all  the  great  and  peculiar  duties  of 
the  religion  of  Christ,  necessarily  suppose  retirement  from  the  world.  Solitude  is 
the  hallowed  ground  which  religion  hath,  in  every  age,  chosen  for  her  own.  There 
her  inspiration  is  felt,  and  her  secret  mysteries  elevate  the  soul.  The  great  and 
worthy,  the  pious  and  virtuous,  have  ever  been  addicted  to  serious  retirement.  It 
is  the  characteristic  of  little  and  frivolous  minds  to  be  wholly  occupied  with  the 
vulgar  objects  of  life.  A  more  refined  and  enlarged  mind  leaves  the  world  behind 
it,  feels  a  call  for  higher  pleasures,  and  seeks  them  in  retreat.  Consider  some  of 
those  great  objects  which  in  retirement  should  employ  our  thoughts.  1.  Com- 
mune with  your  own  hearts  concerning  God.  Impressions  of  Deity,  besides  their 
being  the  principle  of  what  is  strictly  termed  religion,  are  the  great  support  of  all 
moral  sentiment  and  virtuous  conduct  among  men.  Impress  deeply  on  your  mind 
this  important  truth,  that  there  is,  undoubtedly,  a  Supreme  Governor,  who  presides 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [psalm  iv. 

over  the  universe.  To  commune  with  ourselves,  to  any  useful  purpose,  is  not  to 
speculate  about  what  is  mysterious  in  the  Divine  essence,  but  to  contemplate  what 
is  displayed  by  His  perfections  ;  to  bring  home  to  the  soul  the  internal,  authorita- 
tive sense  of  God,  as  a  Sovereign  and  a  Father.  Him  you  are  never  to  confound 
with  the  works  of  His  hands.  The  pious  man  walks  among  the  various  scenes  of 
nature,  as  within  the  precincts  of  a  great  temple,  in  the  habitual  exercise  of  devo- 
tion. 2.  Concerning  the  world.  The  world  is  the  great  deceiver,  whose  fallacious 
arts  it  highly  imports  us  to  detect.  But,  in  the  midst  of  its  pleasures  and  pursuits, 
the  detection  is  impossible.  It  is  only  in  retreat  that  the  charm  can  be  broken. 
Will  you  commune  with  your  heart  concerning  what  the  world  now  is,  consider 
also  what  it  will  one  day  appear  to  be  ?  Contemplate  the  world  as  subject  to  the 
Divine  dominion.  3.  Concerning  yourselves,  and  your  real  character.  Men  are 
generally  unwilling  to  see  their  own  imperfections  ;  and  when  they  are  willing  to 
inquire  into  them,  their  self-love  imposes  on  their  judgment.  It  is  said  that  there 
are  three  characters  which  every  man  sustains,  and  these  differ  from  one  another. 
One  which  he  possesses  in  his  own  opinion  ;  one  which  he  carries  in  the  estimation 
of  the  world  ;  and  a  third  which  he  bears  in  the  judgment  of  God.  It  is  only  the 
last  which  ascertains  what  he  really  is.  Whether  the  character  which  the  world 
forms  of  you  be  above  or  below  the  truth,  it  imports  you  not  much  to  know.  But 
it  is  of  eternal  consequence  that  the  character  which  you  possess  in  your  own 
eyes,  be  formed  upon  that  which  you  bear  in  the  sight  of  God.  (Hugh  Blair,  D.D.) 
Self-examination: — As  long  as  people  are  going  on  in  a  gay,  thoughtless,  easy 
way,  in  good  health  and  spirits,  and  their  minds  fully  occupied,  it  is  next  to  im- 
possible that  religion  should  gain  any  solid  and  lasting  hold  on  their  affections. 
People  go  from  youth  to  old  age  with  a  shallow,  external  service,  which  passes  for 
religion,  but  which  really  has  nothing  of  it  but  the  name.  When  careless, 
thoughtless  persons  are  brought  to  a  deep  sense  of  the  importance  of  Christian 
doctrine,  they  are  often  inwardly  alarmed,  but  will  not  confess  it  even  to  them- 
selves. They  try  to  fly  from  it  by  avoiding  serious  reflections.  But  in  running 
from  these  reflections,  they  are  rejecting  the  healing  medicine  afiforded  by  the 
heavenly  Physician.  They  are  advised  not  to  trouble  themselves  with  deep  and 
high  speculative  questions  ;  to  set  thought  on  two  things — their  own  sinfulness 
and  the  Divine  mercy.  Concerning  the  divinely  consolatory  warning.  1.  You 
cannot  but  observe  how  plain,  simple,  and  unimpassioned,  how  far  from  all  per- 
plexing notions,  and  from  all  rapturous  heights  and  flights  of  feeling,  is  the 
description  here  given  of  the  repenting  convert,  the  accepted  child  of  God. 
2.  Notice  in  what  a  tone  of  solemn  warning  this  passage  is  delivered.  "  Stand  in 
awe,  and  sin  not."  In  these  words  is  clearly  implied  the  greatness  of  our  danger, 
and  of  our  again  drawing  back  to  sin.  3.  How  soothing  and  consoling  is  the  view 
here  presented  to  us  of  our  religious  state  and  duties.  We  are  not  to  harass  our- 
selves with  perplexing  doubts  about  our  final  acceptance,  to  seek  after  any  special 
inward  convictions,  as  they  are  called,  of  feeling ;  these,  whether  right  or  wrong, 
are  plainly  not  necessary  ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  we  stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not, 
and  offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness  ;  then,  and  not  otherwise,  we  may  with 
cheerful,  though  chastened  hope,  put  our  trust  in  the  Lord.  {Contributors  to 
"  Tracts  for  the  Times.")         On  commumng  with  the  heart: — I.  Consider  the 

OBLIGATIONS   WE  AKE   UNDEK   TO   CONVERSE    WITH   OUR  OWN    HEART   IN    SECRET. 

1.  Because  we  are  rational  creatures  capable  of  thought  and  reflection,  and  the  only 
creatures  upon  earth  capable  of  religion.  Without  self-examination,  we  cannot 
possibly  know  ourselves,  or  what  manner  of  spirit  we  are  of.  If  we  do  not  know 
ourselves,  we  can  have  no  fixed  or  determined  character,  but  must  remain  the 
sport  of  our  own  passions,  or  of  those  of  other  men,  unconscious  of  the  great  end  of 
our  existence,  and  incapable  of  acting  up  to  it.  2,  Retirement  is  indispensably 
necessary  for  the  improvement  of  our  minds  in  useful  knowledge,  and  in  that 
knowledge  especially  which  relates  to  the  life  to  come.  It  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  we  cultivate  retirement,  in  order  to  acquire  a  taste  and  a  relish  for  those 
sublime  truths  which  will  hereafter  occupy  our  attention,  and  delight  our  minds 
for  ever.  II.  Consider  advantages  attending  the  faithful  discharge  of 
THIS  DUTY.  1.  In  regard  to  our  happiness  in  this  world.  Retirement  furnishes  an 
asylum  ;  it  draws  a  wall  of  separation  between  us  and  the  scenes  without,  and  hides 
from  our  eyes  the  fashion  of  a  world  that  passeth  away.  It  is  in  retirement  that 
we  view  things  as  they  really  are.  2.  The  chief  advantage  of  religious  retirement 
consists  in  its  loosening  our  attachment  to  the  objects  of  sense,  and  in  raising  our 
desires  to  the  things  that  are  above,  and  thereby  assimilating  our  souls  to  the 


PSALM  IV.]  TEE  PSALMS.  69 

delightful  employment  and  happiness  of  the  heavenly  world.  This  subject  will 
fttrnish  us  with  a  very  easy  and  a  very  certain  criterion  by  which  we  may  ascertain 
the  state  of  our  hearts  towards  God.  {James  Boss,  D.D.)  Self -fellowship  : — 
Three  thoughts  are  suggested.  I.  Man  has  a  spiritual  natuiie.  It  is  here 
called  a  "heart."  It  stands  for  our  whole  spiritual  being.  1.  "We  have  more 
proof  that  the  soul  is  than  that  the  body  is.  2.  We  have  an  intuitive  belief  in  the 
existence  of  the  soul ;  and  3.  The  Bible  most  unmistakably  reveals  it.  II.  Man  has 
A  CAPACITY  TO  COMMUNE  WITH  HIS  SPIRITUAL  NATURE.  1.  He  can  observe  all 
its  phenomena ;  and  2.  Trace  them  to  their  causative  principles.  III.  He  is 
BIDDEN  EXERCISE  THIS  CAPACITY.  Would  he  Understand  his  own  nature,  let  him 
do  this.     But  yet  more  for  moral  purposes.     For  1.  We  know  not  how  evil  we  are. 

2.  We  must  know  this  ere  we  can  seek  that  correction  which  is  indispensable. 

3.  The  correction  must  take  place  here  and  now.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Know 
thyself: — I.  What  should  we  commune  about  ?  1.  Our  sins.  2.  Our  relation 
to  God.  8.  Our  principles.  4.  Our  pleasures.  II.  How  ?  1.  With  dependence 
upon  God.  2.  With  reference  to  His  Word.  III.  Its  advantages.  1.  Assist- 
ance in  the  performance  of  religious  duties.  2.  Direction  in  the  use  of  the  means 
of  grace.  3.  Power  over  temptations.  {W.  W.  JVytTie.)  On  self -communion  : 
— I  would  introduce,  must  I  say,  a  stranger  ?  to  your  acquaintance  ;  one  whom  it 
infinitely  concerns  you  to  know,  and  to  be  intimate  with.  Our  text  will  tell  you 
his  name — "commune  with  your  own  heart."  I.  What  it  is  to  commune  with 
our  own  HEART.  Communication  supposes  two  persons,  but  here  a  man's  own 
heart  must  supply  the  place  of  both.  It  is  what  we  call  soliloquy.  It  is  the  soul's 
inqiury  into  and  of  itself.  And  it  may  be  either — 1.  Direct:  we  can  bid  our  soul 
ponder  our  ways.  2.  By  way  of  reflection.  And  this  should  be  ordinary  with  ue  ; 
the  soul  should  talk  over  every  occurrence  with  itself.  But  sometimes,  when  there 
is  a  more  than  common  call  for  self-consultation,  it  should  be  extraordinary. 
II.  What  should  we  thus  commune  about  ?  1.  About  our  state  ;  our  former 
state — what  we  were  ;  and  of  our  present  state — what  we  are.  Our  first  salutation  to 
one  another  when  we  meet  is,  ' '  How  d'ye  do  ? " — let  this  be  every  man's  first  address 
to  himself,  "Heart,  how  dost  thou  ? "  Especially  if  you  are  living  in  sin,  or  walking 
inconsistently  with  your  Christian  profession.  And  we  should  converse  also  about 
our  future — what  we  are  likely  to  be.  Have  we  a  good  hope,  or  are  we  in  danger 
of  hell  ?  2.  About  sin.  3.  Duty.  III.  When  should  we  commune  with  our 
OWN  hearts?  When  should  we  not?  We  cannot  do  it  too  often.  But  more 
especially — 1.  When  we  are  most  at  leisure.  2.  When  the  conscience  is  in  any  way 
awakened.  3.  When  we  are  under  any  particular  trouble.  ' '  In  the  day  of  adversity 
consider"  (Eccles.  vii.  14).  4.  When  we  engage  in  the  solemn  duties  of  religion. 
5.  The  Lord's  day.  6.  When  we  are  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  death.  IV.  Why 
SHOULD  WK  DO  THIS?  Because — 1.  God  commands  it.  A  good  man  who  had  a 
wild  and  wicked  son,  whom  neither  tears  nor  entreaties  nor  threatenings  could 
reclaim,  left  it  as  his  dying  charge  to  his  son,  and  gave  him  an  estate  expressly 
upon  this  condition,  that  he  should  spend  half  an  hour  every  day  alone.  The  good 
man  died  ;  and  the  next  day,  the  young  prodigal,  rather  than  lose  his  fortune,  shuts 
himself  up.  But  what  an  age  did  the  first  half-hour  seem  !  How  impatiently  did 
he  count  the  slow-moving  minutes  ;  and,  as  soon  as  ever  they  had  gone,  joyfully 
haste  away  to  his  gay  companions.  Sometimes  he  would  spend  the  time  in  fretting 
at  or  ridiculing  this  odd  command  of  his  father.  "  What  could  he  mean  by  it  ? " 
(at  length  he  began  to  think) ;  "  he  was  always  kind,  and  could  never  design  to 
vex  me.  And  yet  what  good  can  I  get  by  sitting  here  moping  and  musing! 
I  begin  to  grow  melancholy  already."  However,  he  persevered,  in  obedience  to 
the  will ;  and  at  length  it  pleased  God  to  give  his  mind  such  a  thoughtful  turn, 
that  he  came  to  long  for  the  half-hour  as  much  as  formerly  he  dreaded  it.  He  was 
led  on  from  step  to  step,  until  he  became  a  serious  and  exemplary  Christian.  Now 
God  hath  as  positively  enjoined  on  us  this  duty  (2  Cor.  xiii.  6  ;  Gal.  vi.  4).  Then, 
think — 2.  The  thing  itself  is  reasonable.  What  should  we  think  of  a  man  who  was 
hardly  ever  at  home,  sauntering  up  and  down  all  the  day  long,  and  letting  his  own 
afi'airs  be  neglected  1  3.  And  it  is  useful  also.  It  prevents  waste  of  time.  Helps 
to  improve  ends  of  time.     Saves  from  many  snares.      Makes  us  thrive  in  grace. 

4.  And  necessary.  V.  How  must  we  thus  commune?  1.  Seriously.  2.  Par- 
ticularly. 3.  Resolutely.  4.  Rightly — do  not  judge  yourself  by  a  false  measure. 
Weigh  your  actions  and  thoughts  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary  (2  Cor.  x.  12,  18). 
But  some  of  you  will  not  do  this,  and  the  reason  is — you  are  afraid.  And  yet  you 
must  die.     Is  it  not  better,  then,  to  obey,  and  hear  what  your  heart  will  say  1 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  IV. 

{G.  Lavington. )  And  be  still. — The  excitements  of  the  age  as  they  affect  religion : — 
"We  live  in  an  age  of  excitement  and  unrest.  How  often  brain  and  heart  alike  give 
way  in  the  midday  !  It  very  naturally  lollows  that  these  dancing  waves  of  excite- 
ment break  into  the  sacred  quietudes  of  religion.  Reverence  is  not  superstition. 
As  Creator,  we  know  by  faith  that  God  made  the  worlds  ;  and,  as  Redeemer,  we 
know,  by  faith  too,  that  the  Christ  works  within  us,  as  the  Absolver  from  guilt,  and 
the  Saviour  from  sin.  We  thus  revere  God,  and  such  reverence  is  the  root  of  all 
religion.  Our  Saviour,  in  His  human  experience,  knew  much  of  solitude,  and 
quiet,  and  worship.  There  is  less  of  holy  meditation  and  calm,  thoughtful  worship, 
than  in  the  old  times  before  us.  And,  consequently,  our  religious  life  must  lose 
that  mellowness  which  comes  from  the  quiet  touch  of  the  sunbeam,  and  the  stUl  air 
of  the  garden.  The  text  suggests — I.  How  little  we  know  of  ourselves.  We 
have  been  surfeited  with  counsels  concerning  the  dangers  of  introspection.  But 
there  is  still  need  to  "  watch  and  pray,"  to  "  look  to  ourselves,"  to  "  examine  our- 
selves." This  no  one  can  do  for  us.  We  may  become  morbid  analysts  of  moods 
and  experiences.  But  how  seldom  do  we  even  seek  to  become,  in  any  true  sense, 
acquainted  with  ourselves.  There  is  no  unexplored  continent  less  known  to  us 
than  the  wonderful  land  within  us.  By  "commune  with  your  own  hearts"  is 
meant,  make  inquiry  concerning  its  health  and  its  energy,  its  growth  and  its  god- 
liness. II.  How  much  we  need  solitude.  "Upon  your  bed."  There,  where 
you  are  removed  from  the  garish  light  of  day.  Upon  our  bed  we  have  seen  visions 
of  ourselves  and  God  which  have  melted  us  to  gratitude,  and  moved  us  to  tears  of 
penitence  and  joy.  There  are  places  in  men's  hearts  "  which  only  hear  the  foot  of 
conscience  at  the  dead  of  night."  III.  How  much  we  need  stillness.  This 
brings  us  to  the  centre  of  our  subject.  We  need  quiet  hours.  We  are  too  much 
in  society.  In  still  hours  we  learn  what  cowards  we  really  are  ;  how  often  we  are 
afraid  to  be  ourselves,  and  to  speak  and  act  out  the  truth  that  is  in  us.  In  still 
hours  we  learn  how  much  Christ  is  to  us.  In  still  hours  we  learn  how  little  any- 
thing outward  can  really  affect  us.  We  live  more  and  more  in  what  we  are.  In  still 
hours  we  learn  the  value  of  true  friends.  We  see  that  the  Christlike  in  men  is  that 
which  alone  is  truly  to  be  loved  and  honoured.  Still  hours !  How  seldom  they 
come  to  us  !  Should  we  not  seek  to  have  more  ?  And  should  not  our  religious 
service  itself  be  characterised  by  a  greater  devoutness  and  reverence  ?  {W.  M. 
Statham. )  Alone  with  God : — There  is  no  religion,  no  praise,  no  worship,  but 
of  the  individual.  The  text  is  what  must  be  said  to  every  single,  solitary  person. 
It  addresses  him  in  the  most  solitary,  silent  time — when  his  day's  work  is  done, 
and  he  is  going  to  sleep.  God  spreads  the  curtain  of  darkness  round  about  us,  just 
that  He  may  shut  Himself  in  with  His  child.  It  is  not  bodily  stillness  alone.  That 
is  compelled.  You  cannot  help  going  to  sleep,  God  makes  you.  If  it  were  not  for 
this  bodily  sleep,  we  should  all  go  mad.  If  there  never  be  a  silence  in  the  soul, 
and  a  man  goes  on  always  with  his  own  thoughts  and  schemes  and  endeavours, 
it  brings  about  a  moral  and  spiritual  madness.  It  is  not  in  the  midst  of  the  tumult 
of  life  that  a  man  first  of  all  is  able  to  hear  God.  We  have  not  got  up  to  Jesus 
Christ  yet  ;  God  was  always  with  Him.  So  Ho  is  with  us,  but  Jesus  knew  it  and 
felt.  But  even  He  went  out  to  the  mountains  at  night,  that  there  might  be  noth- 
ing between  Him  and  God.  I  think  God  has  sometimes  great  trouble  in  separating 
us  far  enough  from  Himself  that  He  can  look  round  and  know  us.  It  is  the  most 
natural  thing  that  God  and  man  should  meet,  and  know  and  understand  each 
other,  that  there  should  be  the  meeting  together  of  the  thought  of  the  One  with 
the  thought  of  the  other.  If  we  do  not  do  the  will  of  God  in  the  day,  it  is  not 
likely  that  we  will  be  still  upon  our  beds  that  He  may  come  and  visit  us.  We  need 
not  be  without  Him  during  the  day.  Let  us  be  jealous  over  ourselves.  God 
will  be  readier  to  come  to  His  child  the  next  night  if,  during  the  day,  he  has  been 
living  childlike,  walking  in  the  steps  of  his  Father,  holding  fast  by  Him.  The  one 
eternal,  original,  infinite  blessing  of  the  human  soul  is  when  in  stillness  the  Father 
comes  and  says,  "My  child,  I  am  here."  {George  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  Solitary 
reflection : — I.  Explain  meaning  of  text.  It  is  to  ponder  the  matter  over  with 
ourselves.  The  wicked  love  not  to  do  this.  Note  the  place — your  bed ;  the  time 
— at  night,  when  all  is  still.  It  is  well  to  examine  our  actions,  but  best,  the 
heart.  Ask  of  it  such  questions  as  these  :  1.  Does  it  choose  and  follow  after  these 
things  which  conscience  tells  me  to  be  right  ?  2.  Is  my  conscience  instructed  and 
informed  by  the  Word  of  God  ?  3.  Have  any  of,  or  all  of,  my  pursuits  ever  yet 
afforded  me  satisfaction  ?  4.  Will  the  course  I  am  in  do  to  die  with  ?  5.  If  I 
should  die  in  an  unconverted  state,  can  I  endure  the  wrath  of  an  offended  God  ? 


MALM  IT.]  THE  PSALMS.  71 

II.  Enforcb  its  exhortatiox.  Because — 1.  There  are  things  you  have  doubted, 
but  which,  if  you  would  commune  with  your  own  heart,  you  would  find  to  be  true, 

2.  Things  which  you  hare  objected  to,  which  you  would  see  to  be  unobjectionable. 

3.  One  reason  why  you  know  so  little  of  your  heart  sins  is  that  you  commune  with  it 
so  little.  4.  There  are  things  which  you  value  much  which  you  would  see  to  be 
worthless.     {Andrew  Fuller.) 

Yer.  5.  Offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  and  put  jronr  trust  in  the  Lord. — 
Sacrifice  and  trust: — What  are  we  to  understand  by  this  expression,  "The  sacri- 
fices of  righteousness "  ?  1.  By  way  of  specification.  The  sacrifices  of  righteous- 
ness are  righteous  sacrifices,  sacrifices  and  oblations  under  the  law.  The  sacrifice  of 
contrition  and  humiliation.  The  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving.  Tlie 
sacrifice  of  alms  and  charitable  contributions.  The  exercise  and  practice  of 
righteousness.  To  oSor  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness  is  to  be  abundant  in  acts  of 
justice  and  equity,  and  righteousness  betwixt  man  and  man.  2.  By  way  of  modifi- 
cation or  qualification,  as  to  the  manner  of  performance.  In  a  righteous  manner  ; 
from  a  righteous  principle,  to  a  righteous  end.  In  faith,  in  obedience,  in  buniilitj. 
Notice  the  privilege  of  all  true  Christians  under  the  gospel.  Sacrifice  is  not  now 
confined  to  any  particular  place.  It  is  performed  with  less  difficulty.  The 
Christian  sacrifices  are  sanctified  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  who  has  offered  Himself 
up  for  us.  Take  the  second  sentence  of  the  text,  "  Put  your  trust  in  the  Lord." 
This  is  a  duty  by  itself.  Faith  in  God  is  required,  together  with  righteousness  to 
men.  Look  at  this  duty  in  its  connection  with  the  first  sentence,  "Otter  the 
sacrifices."  A  double  force  in  this — as  the  sacrifices  are  preparatory,  and  disposing 
to  this  trust ;  and  as  this  trust  qualifies  and  regulates  those  sacrifices.  The  best 
groimd  of  our  trust  is  the  free  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  {T.  Hortoji,  D.D.)  The 
sacrifices  of  righteousiiess : — Taking  the  language  of  the  text  in  its  most  rij,'id 
meaning,  estimating  our  sacrifices  of  righteousness  by  the  perfect  rule  originally 
given  to  us, — and  remembering  that  God  cannot  receive  anything  less  valuable 
without  violating  the  faithfulness,  and  compromising  the  purity  of  His  character, — we 
have  no  sacrifices  to  offer  to  Him  which  will  justify  us  in  expecting  that,  for  the  sake 
of  these,  we  shall  regain  and  enjoy  any  of  those  blessings  which  His  goodness  ever 
prompts  Him  to  bestow  upon  His  rational  offspring,  as  constituting  at  once  their 
honour  and  their  happiness.  Still,  we  are  commanded  to  offer  the  sacrifices  of 
righteousness,  and  we  are  encouraged  to  trust  in  the  Lord.  The  two  things  must 
be  consistent.  It  must  be  practicable  for  us,  fallen  though  we  be,  to  do  both  the 
one  and  the  other.  1.  Offer  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  by  cherishing  those 
sentiments  of  humility  and  sorrow  which  become  creatures  who  have  lost  their 
righteousness  ;  and  trust  in  the  Lord,  that  if  you  do  so,  He  will  comfort  you,  and  lift 
you  up.  Humility  and  sorrow,  it  is  true,  cannot  compensate  for  the  want  of 
righteousness.  They  amount  to  a  recognition  of  that  want.  Humility  and  sorrow 
answer  the  purpose  assigned  them,  as  being  a  heartfelt  testimony  on  the  part  of  the 
transgressor  to  the  infinite  excellence  of  God's  law,  and  to  the  fitness  and  import- 
ance, and  necessity,  of  that  obedience  which  it  demands.  In  this  there  is  a  tribute 
paid  to  the  authority  of  God.  Presenting  this  sacrifice  of  righteousness,  you  need 
not  be  afraid  of  your  offering  being  rejected  or  disdained.  2.  By  a  believing 
application  to  the  obedience  of  Christ,  as  constituting  that  righteousness  for  the 
sake  of  which  God  justifies  the  ungodly.  Our  humility,  however  deep,  and  our 
sorrow,  however  sincere,  come  far  short  of  what  God's  law  requires  of  us.  And  so 
must  all  the  best  affections,  and  all  the  worthiest  doings,  of  which  we  are  capable. 
It  is  the  grand  object  of  the  gospel  dispensation  to  provide  for  us  that  righteous- 
ness of  which  we  are  naturally  destitute,  but  which,  nevertheless,  the  holiness  and 
immutability  of  God's  law  render  absolutely  necessary.  This  provision  has  been 
made  by  appointing  Christ  as  our  surety  and  substitute.  In  what  manner  does  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  become  ours,  so  that  we  may  offer  it  as  a  sacrifice  to  God, 
and  trust  in  Him,  that,  for  its  sake.  He  will  forgive  and  bless  us  ?  It  is  appro- 
pi-iated  by  faith,  by  that  faith  which  implies  a  renunciation  of  all  dependence  on 
our  own  inherent  righteousness  as  the  instituted  method  of  justification.  "We 
offer  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  this  righteousness  when  we  direct  our  views  to  it,  and 
place  our  confidence  in  it.  3.  By  an  earnest  desire  and  uniform  endeavour  to  be 
adorned  with  the  graces  of  personal  righteousness.  Personal  righteousness  is 
absolutely,  and  in  every  case,  indispensable.  Strive  and  pray  that  your  offering 
may  be  cheerful,  unreserved,  and  constant.  Thus  offering  the  sacrifices  of 
righteousness,  you  may  trust  in  the  Lord  that  your  offering  shall  not  be  in  rain. 


72  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  rv. 

4.  By  striving  to  promote  the  interests  of  righteousness  among  your  fellow-men. 
No  doubt  our  principal  concern  is  to  be  holy  ourselves.  But  if  we  are  sincere  in 
that  work,  we  will  be  anxious  that  our  neighbours  shall  be  holy  in  the  same 
manner,  and  to  the  same  extent,  and  will  make  every  exertion  that  may  be 
requisite  for  attaining  that  end.  And  explicit  obligation  is  laid  upon  us  to  aim  at 
the  suppression  of  sin,  and  at  the  prosperity  of  virtue  among  our  fellow-creatures. 
As  to  the  means  by  which  you  are  to  promote  this  object,  it  must  strike  you  at 
once  that  the  grand  and  eflBcient  means  of  dififusing  righteousness  is  to  be  found  in 
the  diffusion  of  Christianity.  Christianity  is  a  system  of  righteousneas.  If  you 
would  secure  for  Christianity  its  purifying  eflFects  in  their  best  style,  and  in  their 
fullest  measure,  you  must  present  it  to  men  in  its  true  and  native  character,  as  it 
has  been  set  forth  by  God  Himself.  And  you  must  exhibit  its  purifying  influence 
on  your  own  deportment.     {^A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  There  be  many  that  say,  Who  will  show  us  any  gooi^'i— Seeking  for 
good : — Truth  and  happiness  go  together,  like  light  and  heat  in  the  sun.  God  is 
the  fountain  of  blessedness,  because  He  is  the  Father  of  lights  ;  so  that  the  only 

? roper  answer  to  the  question,  "Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  is,  "Lord,  lift 
hou  up  the  light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us."  I.  Thk  question.  They  who 
ask  such  a  question  are  not  happy.  They  have  some  secret  cause  of  dissatis- 
faction and  disquietude.  There  is  a  great  blank  in  their  moral  life  ;  a  part  of  their 
very  nature  is  left  unprovided  for.  But  they  want  somethiug  shown  to  them, 
something  that  their  senses  can  appreciate.  Yet  they  neglect  to  seek  good  in  God. 
What  is  the  true  good,  and  who  can  show  it  to  us  ?  What  is  the  true  good  with 
regard  to  our  present  happiness  ?  One  seeks  it  in  the  pleasures  of  the  mind  ; 
another  in  the  honours,  dignities,  and  applause  of  bis  fellow-men ;  others  in 
wealth,  ease,  and  competence,  in  prosperous  schemes,  and  golden  harvests,  and 
plenteous  stores.  But  these,  in  themselves,  prove  disappointing.  What  is  the 
good  which  God  shows  us  ?  The  light  of  His  countenance,  so  that  heart  to  heart, 
and  face  to  face,  we  may  continue  with  the  invisible  God.  How  is  this  true  good  to 
be  obtained  ?  II.  The  implied  answer  to  the  question.  The  good  man  will 
not  be  satisfied  with  "any"  good  ;  he  must  have  the  chief  good,  the  best  good — 
living  water,  not  water  from  the  cistern.  A  sense  of  reconciliation  with  God,  of  a 
granted  pardon  from  Him,  of  a  realised  covenant  engagement  with  Him.  The 
chief  good  is  thus  described,  to  "do  justly,"  "to  love  mercy,"  "to  walk  humbly 
with  thy  God."  {Daniel  Moore,  Af.A.)  The  natural  man's  choice  : — No  natural 
or  unregenerate  man  can  lift  up  his  heart  any  higher  than  unto  a  worldly  happiness, 
and  content  in  the  creature.  When  you  have,  in  the  most  powerful  and  moving 
manner,  discovered  spiritual  duties,  and  the  necessity  of  conversion  to  God,  yet  they 
matter  it  not ;  they  will  say,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ? "  To  bring  this  coal 
of  fire  into  your  bosom,  consider  several  propositions.  1.  Herein  lieth  the  general 
character  of  these  two  citizens — one  builds  up  Babylon,  the  other  builds  up 
Jerusalem.  The  whole  world  consists  of  two  sorts  of  men — the  one  who  are  of  the 
world  ;  the  other,  though  in  the  world,  yet  not  of  it.  Every  wicked  man  makes 
some  creature  or  other  to  be  as  a  God,  and  so  the  ultimate  end,  to  him.  To  clear 
the  heinousness  of  this  wretched  temper,  consider,  2.  That  all  the  good  things 
which  the  creatures  do  afford  unto  us,  they  are  but  as  means  to  carry  us  to  a 
further  end.  They  are  but  as  the  rounds  of  a  ladder,  not  to  stand  upon,  but 
thereby  to  ascend  higher,  even  to  heaven.  3.  Take  notice  that  there  is  a  higher  and 
grosser  sort  of  unregenerate  men  than  happily  this  expression  will  comprehend,  and 
that  is  those  who  make  such  things  as  are  formally  and  expressly  evil  the  good 
things  they  would  have  showed  to  them.  Such  are  all  gross  and  profane  sinners, 
who  live  in  the  daily  practice  of  some  loathsome  sin.  4.  The  schoolmen  do  well  to 
place  in  every  sin  a  twofold  respect ;  there  is  the  aversion  from  God,  and  the  con- 
version to  the  creature.  5.  It  is  acknowledged  by  all  that  there  is  inbred  in  a  man 
an  appetite  or  desire  after  felicity  and  happiness.  There  were  above  a  hundred 
opinions  amongst  the  heathen  in  what  true  felicity  consists  :  but  though  some  were 
not  so  gross  as  others,  yet  all  come  short  of  the  true  end.  6.  The  persuasion  of 
what  is  the  best  good,  and  which  is  chiefly  to  be  desired,  is  wonderfully  diversified, 
according  to  the  several  inclinations,  humours,  and  conditions  of  men.  7.  The  prefer- 
ring of  the  creature  above  Grod,  though  it  be  the  sin  of  all  mankind,  and  as  large  as 
original  sin  itself,  yet,  like  that,  is  hardly  disoemed  and  discovered.  Antidotes 
and  means  against  this  creature-affection.  (1)  You  cannot  addiess  yourselves  unto 
God  in  prayer  while  your  heart  is  not  above  the  world.      (2)  Thy  heart ;   it  i$ 


FBALM IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  73 

the  choicest  and  chiefest  treasure  about  thee ;  it  is  too  noble  for  any  creature. 
(3)  Meditate  on  this — that  all  those  who  ever  loved  the  creature  immoderately,  have 
at  last  found  the  vanity  and  unprofitableness  of  it.  (4)  God  hath  mingled  gall 
with  the  honey  of  every  creature,  and  therefore  it  is  that  everything  is  obtained 
•with  diflSculty,  and  possessed  with  cares,  so  that  we  might  not  rest  in  the  creature. 
(5)  These  creatures,  whatever  they  are  for  comfort,  they  are  not  originally  and  of 
themselves  so,  but  are  only  instruments  and  conduit  pipes.  They  are  defective  in 
these  particulars.  They  cannot  give  any  comfort  or  content  of  themselves.  They 
cannot  fill  themselves  with  any  comfort  objectively,  any  further  than  God  puts  into 
them.  They  are  streams  that  have  water  no  longer  than  the  spring  filleth  them. 
The  creature,  in  being  but  an  instrument,  and  having  all  from  God,  doth  thereby 
demonstrate  how  much  blessedness  is  in  enjoying  God  Himself.  (6)  Lay  this  to 
heart,  heaven  and  glory  cannot  be  obtained  without  a  pre-eminent  and  transcendent 
affection  to  all  other  things.  (7)  Neglect  not  this  meditation — what  heathen  and 
superstitious  persons  have  done  in  a  misgnided  way  for  some  notable  end.  (8)  If 
Christ  hath  reproved  those  who  were  godly  for  their  external  cares,  how  much 
rather  will  He  condemn  those  who  are  immoderately  addicted  to  these  things  ? 
{Anthony  Burgess.)  The    different    language    of  the    godly  and  the    ungodly 

descriptive  of  their  different  characters : — Scripture  divides  mankind  into  two 
classes,  godly  and  ungodly.  They  differ  as  to  their  actual  state  in  relation  to  the 
law  and  favour  of  God,  and  in  their  real  character  in  the  dispositions  and  affections 
of  the  soul.  In  this  text  we  see  how  different  are  the  prevailing  desires  of  godly 
and  ungodly  men.  I.  The  language  of  worldly  and  unconverted  men. 
"Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "  All  pursue  the  object  which  appears  to  them  good. 
But  it  is  only  some  worldly  good.  "Com  and  wine."  In  their  search,  of  whom 
do  they  seek  information  ?  Only  of  men  like  themselves  ;  of  men  who  are  following 
worldly  objects.  Many  of  the  things  after  which  worldly  men  inquire  are  lawful. 
The  degree  in  which  it  is  done  often  makes  the  inquiry  unlawful.  They  pursue  it 
inordinately.  This  is  the  circumstance  which  clearly  marks  their  characters,  and 
decidedly  proves  them  to  be  worldly.  II.  The  language  of  the  people  of  God. 
The  very  form  which  the  language  takes  points  out  a  marked  distinction.  It  is  a 
prayer,  not  a  question.  This  has  always  been  a  marked  feature  in  the  people  of 
God.  They  are  a  people  who  pray.  They  attempt  nothing  and  desire  nothing, 
apart  from  prayer.  Here,  for  what  objects  do  they  pray  ?  1.  For  the  Lord's 
countenance ;  for  His  special  approbation  and  love.  2.  For  the  light  of  His 
countenance.  Not  only  the  possession  of  God's  favour,  but  the  enjoyment  of  it. 
Conclusion:  1.  You  who  are  walking  "in  the  light  of  His  countenance,"  be 
thankful  for  the  great  mercy  vouchsafed  to  you.  2.  Be  watohful.  "Let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall.  '  (E.  Cooper. )  The  cry  of  the  many, 
and  the  prayer  of  the  few : — I.  The  cry  of  the  many.  Humanity  is  little 
changed  in  its  characteristics  from  what  it  was  in  David's  days.  1.  This  is  the 
cry  of  destitution.  2.  Of  bitter  disappointment.  3.  Of  sensuousness.  4.  Of 
recklessness.  5.  Of  despair.  II.  The  prayer  of  the  few.  1.  It  is  directed 
to  the  proper  source.  2.  It  supplicates  the  highest  blessing.  Show  us  Thy  favour. 
Regard  us  with  approval  and  complacency.  Let  us  know  ourselves  the  objects  of 
Thy  love.  (C.  if.  Merry.)  TJu  inquirer  after  happiness  guided : — All  seek  after 
happiness  of  some  kind  or  other.  Yet  there  is  nothing  in  which  men  more 
generally  fail.  There  must  then  be  an  error  somewhere.  I.  The  language  of 
THE  world,  as  expressed  IN  THIS  TEXT.  There  are  in  the  world  mistaken 
inquirers  after  happiness,  and  they  are  many.  More  seek  it  in  the  wrong  way  than 
in  the  right.  These  wrong  inquirers  are  all  dissatisfied  —  Solomon,  Colonel 
Gardiner,  Lord  Byron,  Cardinal  Wolsey.  These  inquirers  after  happiness  are 
ignorant  of  the  only  real  source  of  joy.  "They  never  seek  it  where  it  can  be  found. 
"They  will  not  seek  their  happiness  in  God.  The  happiness  of  these  men  is 
evanescent.  Supposing  that  they  are  happy,  their  happiness  does  not  last. 
II.  The  CONTRAST  between  the  state  of  the  worldly  man,  and  the  state 
of  the  Christian.  The  Christian's  joy  is  a  specific  joy  ;  it  is  a  joy  immediately 
and  directly  derived  from  God.  It  is  a  satisfying  joy.  It  is  unaffected  by  external 
circumstances.  It  is  an  everlasting  joy.  {George  Weight,  B, A.)  The  v)ifluence 
of  Christianity  in  the  heart,  in  the  home,  and  in  society  : — It  may  be  asked  whether 
the  truth  of  Christianity  necessarily  follows  from  its  joy-giving  power.  Such  a 
proof  is  only  a  part  of  the  cumulative  evidence  whereupon  Christianity  is  built. 
There  is  a  further  and  more  serious  objection.  Are  you  not,  by  showing  that 
religion  promotes  joy,  appealing  to  motives  of  abject  fear  and  personal  profit  t 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  it. 

Morality,  not  pleasure,  should  be  the  true  end  of  religion.  But  it  is  just  because 
Christianity  has  holiness  for  its  object  that  it  is  able  to  promise  the  happiness 
which  holiness  involves.  It  does  indeed  appeal  to  hope  and  fear  ;  but  the  fear  and 
the  hope  which  it  invokes  are  not  selfish ;  not,  certainly,  in  that  invidious  sense 
which  implies  the  wrong  or  the  neglect  of  others.  Nor  can  it  be  said  for  a  moment 
that  the  Christian's  fear  or  joy  ignores  the  claims  of  morality.  Why,  the  very 
conviction  of  sin  upon  which  such  a  fear  is  based  recognises  the  breach  of  a  moral 
law.  That  same  fear  becomes  ennobled  in  its  onward  course,  being  daily  trans- 
figured from  the  dread  of  offending  a  righteous  judge  into  the  filial  fear  of  offending 
a  loving  Father.  And  as  with  the  Christian's  fear,  so  with  his  joy  and  his  hope. 
Even  in  its  beginning,  it  involves  a  recognition  of  moral  law,  and  it  daily  tends  to 
further  holiness.  Both  the  Christian's  fear  and  joy  are  essentially  moral  in  their 
character.  But  it  may  be  asked — Is  this  joy  really  attainable  ?  and  if  attainable, 
is  it  of  any  value?  "Is  life  worth  living?"  Christless  pessimism  is  a  natural 
oscillation  from  a  Christless  optimism  :  in  other  words,  to  look  for  true  joy  in  the 
heart,  the  home,  or  society,  except  as  the  outcome  of  true  religion,  is  to  build  up 
hopes  that  can  only  end  in  despair.  What  has  Christianity  to  offer  in  the  place  of 
Christless  optimism  !  What  are  the  virtues  and  the  accompanying  joys  to  which  it 
invites  us  ?  It  would  be  untrue  to  assert  that  morality  and  happiness  cannot  exist 
in  any  degree  apart  from  Christianity.  And  we  must  not  assume  that  Christianity 
has  promised  to  bring  about,  in  this  dispensation  at  least,  universal  goodness, 
or  universal  happiness.  Let  us  not  look  for  more  than  has  been  promised.  Take 
1.  The  heart-joys  of  the  individual  Christian.  Christianity  intensifies  the  joys 
that  are  common  to  all ;  there  are  some  joys  that  are  peculiarly  her  own.  Such  as, 
the  power  to  dispel  those  foul  vapours  which,  as  our  Lord  tells  us,  come  naturally 
from  within,  and  which  are  necessarily  destructive  of  all  inward  joy.  True  religion 
also  offers  the  joy  of  pardon.  But  the  heart-joy  of  the  Christian  does  not  end  with 
pardon.  There  is  the  still  greater  and  holier  joy  which  he  feels  in  the  consciousness 
of  being  an  object  of  love  and  care  to  a  heavenly  Father,  a  sympathising  Saviour, 
an  abiding  Comforter.  2.  The  home-joys  of  the  Christian.  In  the  eyes  of  the 
Christian  the  very  idea  of  home  has  a  holy  and  Divine  meaning  that  reaches  far 
beyond  its  earthly  significance.  He  has  before  his  eyes  the  revelation  of  an  Eternal 
Father  and  a  Divine  Son.  True  religion  enjoins,  with  a  terrible  earnestness,  those 
sacred  obligations  on  the  observance  of  which  the  happiness  of  home  depends  ;  and 
true  religion  provides  a  further  home-joy  in  its  truth  of  resurrection.  3.  The 
society -joys  of  the  Christian.  True  religion  tends  to  promote  joy  in  society.  The 
chief  source  of  happiness  in  a  community  is  liberty,  and  a  chief  friend  of  liberty  is 
true  religion.  What  are  the  features  which  give  special  peace  and  happiness  to  the 
social  circle  ?  Are  they  not  courtesy  and  unselfishness  ?  Are  not  these  Christian 
virtues?  In  conclusion,  face  this  question.  If  Christianity  be  a  failure,  what  do 
you  propose  to  put  in  its  place  ?  [Archbishop  Plunket,  D.D.)  The  Gyni£s  query 
answered : — The  Cynics  were  a  sect  of  Greek  philosophers  founded  by  Antisthenes. 
He  was  a  proud,  stern,  and  unfeeling  man,  of  such  a  snarling  temper  as  to  be  named 
"dog,"  kunos,  and  his  school,  "the  dog  school."  He  appeared  in  threadbare 
attire  and  was  reproved  by  Socrates,  who  told  him  that  his  pride  spoke  through  the 
holes  of  his  clothes.  His  follower,  Diogenes,  outdistanced  him,  and  appeared  at 
noonday  with  a  lantern,  seeking,  as  he  pretended,  to  find  a  man.  When  Alex- 
ander compassionately  asked  him  on  one  occasion,  "What  can  I  do  for  you?  "he 
replied,  '"Stand  out  of  my  sunlight."  He  was  an  incarnate  sneer.  "Who  will 
show  us  any  good  ?  Is  there  any  good  ?  Are  we  not  all  dupes  of  delusions  ? " 
The  text  answers  the  scorner's  query — "Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy 
countenance  upon  us."  We  learn  that  there  is  good.  It  can  be  unfolded  and 
recognised.  God  is  its  root,  blossom,  and  fruit.  The  Cynic  is  silenced,  batire  has 
its  place  and  function.  It  may  cut  to  cure,  may  lacerate  yet  heal,  may  lash 
popular  vices  and  effect  good.  But  satire  is  earnest,  while  cynicism  is  not.  Let 
us,  therefore,  look  at  this  good  which  may  be  defended.  Life  is  not  a  blunder. 
It  is  not  a  mirage,  a  stream  that  runs  on  only  to  be  buried  in  sand.  Good  we  can 
define  and  know  it  sharply.  It  can  be  made  a  part  of  ourselves,  and  we  thereby  be 
maile  rich  and  strong.  We  are  not  drifting  clouds  floating  away  to  melt  into 
nothingness.  Human  life  may  be  opulent,  and  human  destiny  glorious.  I.  This 
GOOD  WK  ARE  TO  THINK  ABOUT  IS  PERSONAI-.  It  is  Something  realisable,  actual,  to 
be  recognised  by  us  all.  The  genesis  of  ic  is  in  God.  God  is  the  Saxon  word  for 
good.  It  is  in  the  light  of  His  countenance  that  we  are  to  realise  the  possession  of 
genuine  good.     God  does  not  throw  at  us  as  a  king  in  his  chariot  may  fling  coin  to 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  75 

the  crowd  about  him,  but  enriches  us  by  reaaon  of  our  likeness  and  affinities  with 
Him.  We  are  His  children.  The  paternity  of  God  broods  over  each  life  and 
blesses  it.  Supposing  on  one  of  these  spring  days  there  was  held  a  council  of  the 
trees  and  grasses,  and  each  leafless  tree  and  spire  of  grass  should  say,  "We  must 
have  the  sun,  the  dewfall  and  the  rain  if  we  are  to  live.  We  must  have  not  one 
•warm  shower,  but  many,  if  we  are  to  lead  on  the  beauty  and  bounty  of  summer. 
Are  we  certain  of  these  things?"  The  sun  whispers  to  each,  "I  will  not  forget 
you,  but  speak  the  word  to  the  sea,  which  shall  give  of  its  waters  to  the  cloud,  and 
the  cloud  shall  drop  the  rain.  The  dew  shall  also  come,  and  I,  the  sun,  the  father 
of  the  earth,  will  shine  upon  you.  Fear  not,  I  will  care  for  you."  But  is  not  God 
the  primal  force,  the  unseen  Creator  ?  He  speaks  by  sun  and  sea,  by  cloud  and 
<iew.  So  in  the  moral  world  He  is  the  atmosphere  in  which  we  are  to  live, 
"Wanned  by  His  light  we  »hall  rejoice  and  bring  forth  fruit.  II.  Notice  thk 
FORM  WHICH  THIS  GOOD  HAS  TAKEN.  God's  beneficence  is  incarnated.  Its  con- 
Crete  form  is  the  living  Christ.  He  is  the  answer  to  the  query,  "  Who  will  show  ua 
any  good  ? "  He,  the  express  image  of  God,  meets  man's  spiritual  nature  perfectly, 
«hining  into  and  enriching  it  as  the  sun  vitalises  and  fructifies  the  earth.  This 
higher  nature  needs  Divine  ennobling.  We  live  in  the  lower  too  much.  We 
materialise  ourselves  too  much  and  forget  our  spiritual  selfhood  to  which  the 
abiding  good  must  minister.  He  comes,  not  as  a  transient,  but  perennial  supply  ; 
not  to  a  transient  need,  but  to  our  permanent  wants  as  immortal  beings.  It  is  not 
food  or  raiment  which  we  most  neea.  Christ  gives  character.  If  that  be  built  up 
in  man  he  is  a  recognised  child  of  God.  It  is  not  an  easy  work,  the  toil  of  a  day, 
but  that  which  requires  earnest  endeavour  so  long  as  life  shall  last.  There  are 
endless  possibilities  in  each  of  us.  What  possibilities  with  God  indwelling  !  A 
good  man  is  a  God-man.  This  is  the  grand  outcome.  He  dwelleth  in  us.  When 
then  the  peering,  muttering  cynic  comes  groping  round  with  his  lantern  asking, 
"  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ? "  our  answer  is,  A  good  man  !  III.  How  is  such 
A  goodness  built  ?  Only  through  the  same  line  that  Christ  passed  Himself. 
Every  noble  soul  grows  into  other  lives.  Goodness  grows  by  giving  itself 
away.  A  good  life  is  a  great  argument.  As  the  sun  streams  into  a  dark 
cloud  and  washes  out  its  gloom,  clothing  it  with  splendour,  so  does  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  shine  into  a  human  life  and  make  it  glorious  with  the 
Divine  lustre  of  the    heavenly  life.      IV.    God    in    Christ    takes    hold    op 

THE  WHOLE  OF  US,  AND  THE  POSSESSION  IS  PERPETUAL.      {J.    Wesley  Duvis,  D.D.) 

The  quest  for  good : — The  quest  for  good  is  a  perplexing  one.  Its  sources,  like  the 
Nile's,  ai-e  not  easily  found.  "There  be  many  that  say,  Who  will  show  us  any 
good  ? "  Good  in  the  highest  sense  is  not  the  natural  heritage  of  man.  Youth  with 
its  brightness  is  a  very  short  season  ;  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  come  very 
soon  ;  old  age  with  its  decrepitude  and  weakness  hovers  not  far  off.  Even  the  best 
«arthly  lot  does  not  satisfy,  I.  There  is  dissatisfaction  and  inquiry.  Alone 
of  all  the  creatures,  man  seems  to  have  an  ill-fitting  lot ;  and  alone  of  all  the 
•creatures,  he  is  conscious  of  his  misery.  Very  wretched  according  to  our  standard 
is  the  life  of  the  worm  that  crawls  in  the  damp  earth,  or  the  mole  that  burrows 
blind  and  cold  in  the  ground ;  still  more  wretched  are  the  lives  of  those  aiiimala 
that  riot  in  putridity  and  fatten  on  corruption  :  but  whatever  their  lot  may  appear 
to  us,  they  are  conscious  of  no  want,  and  may  quite  contentedly  fulfil  the  ends  of 
their  being.  It  is  otherwise  with  man.  He  is  not  in  his  right  place  ;  he  is  not  "in 
harmony  with  his  surroundings "  ;  he  was  meant  to  be  happier.  The  bee  is  quite 
satisfied  gathering  its  honey  ;  the  sheep  is  quite  pleased  nibbling  the  green  meadow  ; 
the  swallow  desiies  nothing  better  than  to  skim  the  summer  air,  and  build  its  nest 
and  rear  its  young  under  the  eaves  of  the  old  castle,  and  be  off  again  in  winter  to 
the  sunny  south.  Of  all  creatures,  man  alone  feels  that  his  lot  is  not  satisfactory. 
In  his  nature  alone  there  is  an  unsatisfied  longing.  He  is  ever  on  the  alert  to  hear 
of  "  good,"  in  case  it  bo  the  thing  that  will  allay  his  craving.  But  commonly  he 
looks  in  tbc  wrong  direction.  Ai-e  there  any  instances  of  true  repose  and  satisfaction 
of  soul  obtained  from  the  broken  cisterns  ?  It  is  not  on  what  men  Tiave,  but  on 
what  they  are,  that  their  true  happiness  depends.  And  men  cannot  be  what  they 
should  be  till  they  come  to  Christ.  ' '  I  am  the  Bread  of  Life  :  he  that  cometh  to  Me 
shall  never  hunger  ;  and  he  that  believeth  ou  Me  shall  never  thirst!  "  II.  Therk 
ARE  various  answers.  How  poor  and  unsatisfying  are  the  answers  often  given 
'to  the  quest  for  good  !  "I  have  been  reading  such  an  amusing  book,"  says  one, 
"a  very  delightful  tale  ;  do  get  hold  of  it,  you  will  enjoy  it  so  much."  "  Hare 
•you  been  to  such  and  such  an  entertainment  ? "  asks  another ;  "  it  is  so  superior  to 


7«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  IT. 

anything  of  the  kind."  Or,  taking  some  of  the  answers  given  in  a  somewhat 
different  sphere  of  life — one  tells  of  a  market  where  commodities  are  got  cheap ; 
another  of  an  improvement  in  the  management  of  his  business  ;  and  another  of  a 
way  of  making  the  house  more  snug,  or  the  person  more  comfortable  or  more  comely. 
The  advertisements  of  the  newspapers,  the  prospectuses  of  new  companies,  the 
circulars  of  tradesmen,  the  critiques  of  reviewers,  the  arguments  of  politicians,  are 
all  in  their  way  answers  to  the  question,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  1 "  All  very 
well  in  their  way  and  in  their  place  ;  but  very  miserable  surely  if  there  is  no  higher 
level  of  good — no  higher  region  to  which  the  soul  may  aspire.  III.  Ths  tkue 
ANSWER.  The  Psalmist  tacitly  puts  all  these  aside ;  one  blessing,  and  one  only, 
fills  his  eye  and  his  heart ;  and  it  deserves  our  best  attention — "  Lord,  lift  Thou  up 
the  light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us."  It  was  common  among  the  Hebrews  to 
speak  of  a  person's  countenance  as  low  or  fallen  when  he  was  grieved  or  angry,  and 
as  lifted  up  when  he  was  pleased  and  happy.  We  hold  down  our  face  when  we  are 
dejected,  we  hold  it  up  when  we  are  glad.  So,  also,  a  radiant  or  shining  coun- 
tenance stands  opposed  to  a  dark  or  gloomy  one.  The  lights  of  the  countenance, 
the  eyes,  sparkle  in  the  one  case,  and  are  dull  in  the  other.  The  two  emblems  are 
combined  in  the  request  to  God  to  lift  up  the  light  of  His  countenance  on  us.  The 
thought  is,  "Look  on  us  with  a  happy,  shining  face — with  the  happy,  shining  face 
with  which  Thou  didst  look  on  our  Elder  Brother,  when  Thy  voice  was  heard  from 
the  clouds,  'This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased.'  Transfer  to  us 
the  satisfaction  which  Thou  hast  for  Him  ;  accept  us  in  the  Beloved.  Transform 
our  hearts  into  His  image  ;  make  us  to  resemble  Him,  '  the  firstborn  among  many 
brethren.'  "  If  only  we  are  in  a  right  relation  to  the  Son  of  God,  the  countenance 
of  the  Father  is  sure  to  be  lifted  up.  Has  the  light  of  God's  countenance  never  yet 
been  lifted  up  on  some  one  ?  W^hy  should  it  not  ?  ' '  God  is  in  Christ,  reconciling 
the  world  to  Himself,  not  imputing  unto  them  their  trespasses."  We  are  His 
ambassadors  entreating  you  to  be  reconciled  !  And  the  way  to  all  good  is  so  open 
and  so  glorious.  i^W.  O.  Blaikie,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  The  itiquirers  after  good: — 
Various  as  are  the  tastes  and  pursuits  of  mankind,  all  are  pursuing  one  object — to 
be  happy.  But  what  is  true  happiness,  and  where  is  it  to  be  found  I  There  are 
two  classes  of  mankind.  I.  The  class  mentioned  in  the  text.  1.  They  are 
numerous.  Not  confined  to  persons  of  any  particular  age  or  station.  2.  The 
nature  of  this  restless  inquiry  is  shown  in  the  question  itself.  The  question  is 
thrown  out  to  the  whole  world,  to  the  good  and  the  bad,  to  the  wise  and  the 
ignorant,  that  each  may  answer  it  as  he  sees  fit.  How  various  and  inconsistent  are 
the  answers  made  !  3.  Not  only  are  persons  thus  restlessly  inquiring,  but  their 
expectations  of  finding  satisfaction  in  it  are  constantly  disappointed.  They  are 
perpetually  trying  new  experiments,  but  always  with  the  same  result.  II.  Can  any 
satisfying  good  be  found  ?  Our  text  furnishes  the  answer.  God's  favour,  the  light 
of  His  countenance.  His  presence,  His  protection,  these  are  satisfying  good.  God  is 
indeed  the  source  of  all  good.  Then  why  do  not  all  men  seek  happiness  in  God  ? 
The  temptations  to  make  the  world  our  portion  are  ever  at  hand,  and  press  upon  us  ; 
they  appeal  to  our  senses  and  appetites  ;  they  present  themselves  according  to  our 
ages  and  circumstances  in  life,  in  the  various  forms  of  profit,  pleasure,  or  worldly 
distinction,  and  exhibit  innumerable  allurements  adapted  to  every  taste.  Mankind, 
having  forsaken  God,  find  a  painful  void  which  the  manifestations  of  His  favour 
alone  can  fill.  {^Christian  Observer.)  T?ie  open  secret,  or  the  worlSs  cry  and 
Heaven's  ansvxr : — I.  The  world's  cry.  With  the  question,  as  such,  no  fault  is 
to  be  found,  seeing  it  is  natural  to  man.  But  the  questioners  are  of  varied  type. 
1.  The  unrestrained  sensualist.  2.  The  orderly,  selfish,  even  tempered,  moral, 
prudential  worldling,  against  whom  society  can  bring  no  positive  charge,  but  from 
whom  it  can  expect  no  conscious  benefit.  3.  The  striving  and  ambitious,  whose 
ruling  passion  is  acquisitiveness.  4.  The  recluse  student,  calculator,  book-worm, 
who  gives  his  life  to  the  pursuit  of  knowledge.  Many  of  them  are  martyrs  of 
science.  "Oh,"  cried  one,  "  for  a  century  to  study  a  graiu  of  sand,  or  a  blade  of 
grass!"  "More  light!"  exclaimed  the  dying  Goethe.  But  many  and  potent  as 
are  the  charms  of  science,  if  pursued  as  a  chief  aim,  it  can  only  end  in  disappoint- 
ment. 5.  There  is  the  agnostic,  and  the  insatiable  man  of  action,  whose  delight  is 
in  adventure,  discovery,  heroic  achievement,  social  influence.  6.  There  is  the  type 
aesthetic,  the  worshipper  of  the  beautiful  in  literature  and  art.  But  the  beautiful 
alone  can  never  satisfy.  II.  Heaven's  answer.  It  is  the  light  of  God's  coun- 
tenance that  will  fill  our  hearts  with  gladness  and  peace.  This  "good"  is — 
1.  Universally  accessible  to  the  earnest  seeker.     A  certain  writer  speaks  of  "youtli 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  77 

as  a  blunder,  manhood  a  labour,  and  old  age  a  regret."  God  could  not  have  meant 
that  they  should  be  so.  2.  Enduring.  3.  Adequate.  4.  Without  it  nothing  else 
can  be  of  real  use  to  us.  Classical  story  tells  of  a  philosopher,  who  was  admitted 
to  a  grand  merry-making  of  the  Celestials.  He  was  informed  that,  among  the  noble 
and  majestic  forms  around  him,  there  was  one,  and  only  one,  earth-born  like  him- 
self. He  was  asked  whether,  looking  at  them  in  all  the  pomp  of  royalty,  he  could 
pick  out  his  fellow-mortal.  Contrary  to  expectation,  there  was  not  the  slightest 
difficulty.  Though  enthroned  among  gods,  and  though,  like  them,  he  carried  a 
sceptre,  and  wore  golden  sandals,  and  a  purple  fillet,  and  talked  and  nodded  as 
divinely,  the  man  was  instantly  and  unmistakably  detected  by  the  restlessness 
of  his  eye.  That  is  a  profoundly  melancholy,  and  yet  a  triumphantly  suggestive 
allegory.  "Rest!"  exclaimed  Peter  of  Russia  to  his  jaded  soldiers;  "you  will 
have  rest  enough  in  the  grave."  Is  that  all?  Have  we  no  "parish  rights"  any- 
where in  the  universe  ?  Yes,  there  is  a  love  if  you  will  but  accept  it,  a  power 
which,  if  you  yield  to  it,  will  make  this  earth  the  very  gate  of  heaven.  {R.  Griffith, 
F.O.S.)  The  difference  between  worldly  and  godly  men: — I.  Thk  itneenewed 
MEN  SEEK  FOR  HAPPINESS  IN  vtroBLDLY  ENJOYMENTS.  1.  The  frequency  of  this 
conduct.  The  disposition  of  mind,  expressed  in  this  inquiry,  belongs  to  every  man 
until,  by  renewing  grace,  he  ia  enabled  to  set  his  affection  on  things  above.  It  is 
the  language  of  their  hearts,  their  lips,  and  their  actions.  There  is,  indeed,  a  great 
variety  of  objects  that  engage  their  attention  and  pursuit.  2.  Tlie  foolishness  of 
their  conduct.  Though  desirous  to  enjoy  good,  they  apply  not  to  God,  who  alone 
can  give  that  which  is  good.  Thus  they  show  that  they  are  under  the  influence  of 
corrupt  passions,  and  wish  to  live,  if  it  were  possible,  independent  of  God.  3.  The 
dangerousness  of  their  conduct.  The  creatures  are  unable  to  help  you  in  your 
greatest  extremities  when  you  most  need  assistance.  This  practice  entails  upon 
them  that  follow  it  certain  misery  and  woe.  It  gives  to  the  creatures  the  glory  and 
honour  which  is  due  to  the  Creator.  II.  The  gracious,  godly  man  esteems 
THE  favour  of  GOD  ABOVE  EVERY  EARTHLY  ENJOYMENT.  When  men  are  reconciled 
to  other  men,  they  view  them  with  complacency  and  delight.  Any  good  will  not 
satisfy  the  godly  man's  desires  ;  the  wealth  of  the  world  cannot  make  a  portion  for 
his  immortal  soul.  The  "light  of  (Jod's  countenance  "  includes — 1.  God's  reconciled 
favour  and  love.  2.  A  sense  of  its  excellence  and  sweetness.  3.  Experience  of  its 
joyful  fruits  and  effects.  All  the  temporal  and  spiritual  mercies  proceed  from 
God's  favour  and  goodwill.  ( W.  M'Culloch. )  Of  the  nature  and  pursuit  of 
good : — This  question  forms  the  complaint  of  many  sinful,  or  mistaken  men.  1.  It 
may  be  asked  by  the  misanthropist.  Whatever  such  persons  contemplate  is  viewed, 
not  only  with  an  expectation,  but  an  intention,  to  spy  out  imperfection  or  deformity. 
Habits  of  moroseness  and  suspicion  will  contaminate  the  purest  actions.  2.  Another 
vain  inquirer  after  good  is  the  sceptic,  and  minute  philosopher.  Surrounded  with 
mists,  or  dazzled  with  excess  of  light,  they  can  never  see  their  way  clearly.  Every 
question  begets  a  string  of  possibilities.  Such  persons  often  enter  into  tedious  and 
perplexed  labyrinths  of  thought,  which  terminate  in  no  practical  result.  3.  Another 
is  the  voluptuary,  and  the  mere  man  of  the  world.  Those  who,  at  their  first  outset, 
80  far  mistake  the  road,  as  to  suppose  that  the  gratifications  of  sense,  or  the  vanities 
of  ambition,  can  constitute  the  happiness  of  a  creature  that  was  formed  for  im- 
mortality, must,  in  a  short  time,  expect  t©  be  disappointed.  The  pleasures  of 
novelty  soon  grow  familiar,  and  those  of  appetite  are  quickly  cloyed.  4.  The 
melancholy  inquiry  may  express  the  desponding  complaint  of  those  who  have 
suffered  much,  and  who  seem  to  sorrow  without  hope.  We  are  all  children  of 
discipline,  passing  through  this  land  of  shadows  into  a  state  of  immortality,  in 
which  we  must  give  account  of  the  things  done  in  the  body.  Let  me  advise  every- 
body, who  feels  this  evil  doubt  and  despondency  gathering  round  his  mind,  to 
approach  the  throne  of  grace  with  the  short  but  energetic  prayer  of  the  holy 
Psalmist,  "  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us."  (J.  Hewlett, 
JS.D.)  The  cry  of  (he  heart : — Life  is  not  all  a  thing  of  beauty.  If  we  listen  to  a 
Psalm,  it  may  have  as  many  hearse-like  harmonies  as  notes  of  gladness.  The  minor 
rapidly  succeeds  the  major.  Weariness  is  implied  in  this  cry  of  the  human  heart. 
There  is  social,  political,  religious  unrest.  But  let  us  thank  God  that  it  is  as  it  is. 
This  despair,  this  conflict  between  right  and  wrong,  this  struggle  after  the  true 
way,  all  these  tell  of  the  grandeur  and  nobility  of  our  nature.  These  very  longings 
carry  along  with  them  assurances  of  satisfaction  ;  these  desires  prophesy  fruition. 
They  tell  the  story  of  the  soul's  fatherhood, — it  was  made  for  God ;  and  He  who  formed 
the  soul  alone  can  fill  it     ThuB  we  have  reached  back  to  the  Infinite  at  last. 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  lY. 

Oh,  that  I  knew  wlicre  I  might  find  rest !  Oh,  for  a  living,  loving,  personal  God  ! 
The  heart  must  have  something  to  love  ;  something  whereon  to  rest ;  something 
in  which  to  trust.  God  is  not  an  aV«straction,  but  a  very  present  Help.  Not  afar 
otf,  but  close  at  hand.  Not  merely  love,  but  the  Loving  One.  Not  cold  Omnipo- 
tence, but  the  Helping  One.  A  being  who  rewards  personal  longings  with  personal 
gifts  ;  personal  cravings  with  personal  sympathy.  All  this  we  find  in  the  dear 
Christ  of  the  Cross.  He  will  show  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good.  Trouble  may  now 
and  then  ruffle  the  fringes  of  your  outer  life,  but  the  life  hidden  with  Chru»t  in 
God  shall  never  be  stirred  by  the  winds  and  waves  of  earthly  care.  Founded  upon 
the  Kock,  you  shall  never,  never  be  moved.  {John  HemphUl.)  The  general 
depression :  —  Beneath  the  conventional  smiles  and  cheerful  salutations  of  society 
there  lie  heavy  burdens  on  many  hearts,  and  there  may  be  heard  "groanings  which 
cannot  be  nttered."  There  is  on  every  side  a  great  deal  of  care  amounting  to 
anxiety,  and  of  depression  bordering  on  melancholy.  At  present,  the  troubles  of 
our  fellow-men  are  heavy  indeed,  through  the  mere  struggle  for  existence.  Another 
cause  of  the  general  depression  is  the  sickness  which  abounds.  This  has  been  s 
very  unhealthy  season.  Another  great  sorrow  is  the  perpetual  exile  of  grown-up 
sons  into  distant  lands.  Add  the  trouble  endured  through  domestic  servants,  and 
through  bad  children.  There  are  unhappy  souls  who  live  in  a  perpetual  atmospher* 
of  melancholy,  who,  whatever  be  their  circumstances,  habitually  look  only  on  the 
dark  side  of  things,  and  seem  unable  to  do  otherwise.  See  the  exquisite  beauty,  and 
simplicity,  and  reasonableness  of  the  remedy  for  trouble  which  the  Psalmist  recom- 
mends. His  remedy  is  prayer.  But  prayer  for  what  I  He  does  not  pray  for  th« 
removal  of  one  of  life's  burdens,  for  the  reversal  of  one  of  God's  decrees,  or  for  th« 
smallest  interference  on  God's  part  with  the  conditions  in  which  we  find  ourselves. 
It  is  a  prayer  only  for  the  light  of  God's  countenance  to  shine  upon  our  souls. 
That  is  the  only  good  worth  showing  or  giving.  That  is  the  panacea  for  all  life's 
ills.  That  gives  strength  to  carry  the  burden,  instead  of  taking  the  burden  away. 
That  gives  courage  to  face  our  danger,  instead  of  taking  the  danger  out  of  our  path. 
That  is  the  only  cure  in  heaven  or  earth  for  depression  of  mind.  "The  light  of 
God's  countenance  "  is  a  way  of  expressing  the  soul's  vision  of  God — seeing  Him, 
and  knowing  that  He  sees  us.  Some  of  us  may  drill  ourselves  into  a  hardened 
stoicism.  That  is  not  happiness,  it  is  death.  Many  think  to  be  happy  by  the 
removal  of  their  present  troubles.  It  is  a  mistake.  In  trouble  man  learns  that  he 
needs  God.  In  his  darkest  hours  man  has  seen  the  brightest  visions  of  the  ineffable 
glory.  (Charles  Voysey.)  A  restless  quest  of  satisfaction: — There  is  said  to  be  a 
strange  plant  in  South  America  which  finds  a  moist  place  and  sends  its  roots  down 
and  becomes  green  for  a  little  while  until  the  place  becomes  dry,  when  it  draws 
itself  out  and  rolls  itself  up  and  is  blown  along  by  the  wind  until  it  comes  to 
another  moist  place,  where  it  repeats  the  same  process.  On  and  on  the  plant  goes, 
stopping  wherever  it  finds  a  little  water,  until  the  spot  is  dry  ;  then  in  the  end,  after 
all  its  wanderings,  it  is  nothing  but  a  bundle  of  dry  roots  and  leaves.  It  is  the 
same  with  those  who  drink  only  of  this  world's  springs.  They  drink  and  thirst 
again,  blown  by  the  winds  of  passion  and  desire,  and  at  last  their  souls  are  nothing 
but  a  bundle  of  unsatisfied  desires  and  burning  thirsts.  We  must  find  something 
better  than  this,  or  perish  for  ever.  Summum  honum : — 1.  In  the  histoiy  of 
ancient  Greece  we  read  of  two  sages — the  Weeping  and  the  Laughing  Philosopher. 
The  one  saw  nothing  but  the  dark  side ;  the  other  looked  always  at  the  bright. 
We  all  know  people  belonging  to  both  of  these  schools.  It  depends  very 
largely  on  natural  temperament  to  which  of  the  two  any  person  belongs  ;  for 
some  are  naturally  melancholy,  others  sanguine.  Partly,  too,  it  may  depend 
on  fortune ;  an  early  disappointment  or  the  treachery  of  a  supposed  friend  may 
poison  a  man's  mind  to  all  healthy  influences ;  whereas  those  into  whose  som 
the  iron  has  never  entered  are  disposed  to  think  lightly  of  the  sufferings  of 
others.  2.  Somewhat  analogous  to  this  division  of  mankind  is  that  in  the  text ; 
only,  it  goes  far  deeper.  It  speaks  of  a  dissatisfaction  with  life  which  is  con- 
sistent with  much  surface  gaiety,  and  of  a  satisfaction  which  may  be  felt  amid 
misfortune.  I.  The  restless  humak  heart.  You  may  have  seen  a  picture  called 
The  Pursuit  of  Pleasure,  in  which  pleasure  is  represented  as  an  airy  winged  figure  of 
dazzling  beauty,  floating  just  above  the  ground,  turning  her  enchanting  face  towarda 
those  who  are  in  pursuit  of  her ;  but  stiU  retreating  from  them,  as  she  draws  them 
on.  In  the  forefront  of  her  pursuers  are  the  young,  with  flushed  faces  and  confident 
eyes,  almost  touching  with  their  outstretched  hands  the  fringes  of  her  robo.  Farther 
behind  are  those  who  have  been  longer  in  pursuit ;  they  are  falling  back  in  the  race, 


rsALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  7» 

and  there  is  the  dread  of  disappointment  in  their  eyes  ;  but  their  determination  is  all 
the  stronger  not  to  miss  the  prize.  In  the  rear  are  those  following  in  despair  ;  and 
Bome  have  stumbled  and  fallen,  and  are  being  trodden  upon  as  the  mad  pursuit 
rushes  by.  Is  it  not  t©o  true  ?  Who  can  say,  My  desires  are  fulfilled,  and  I  am 
satisfied  ?  If  the  blinds  were  drawn  up  from  the  windows  of  our  hearts,  what  would 
be  seen  within  ?  The  pain  of  desires  which  have  found  no  fulfilment,  the  disappoint- 
ment of  hopes  once  cherished  but  abandoned  now,  the  dread  of  coming  change,  whic  h 
may  strew  the  giound  with  the  fair  fabric  of  our  prosperity.  So  difficult  is  it  to 
catch  the  butterfly  of  happiness,  and  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  keep  it.  The  men  of 
thought  and  the  men  of  action  and  the  men  of  leisure  arrive  by  different  ways  at  the 
same  result.  They  are  seeking  some  great  good  which  will  satisfy  the  heart,  but 
they  have  not  found  it ;  and  they  are  going  about  asking.  Who  will  show  us  it  ? 
And  then  life  is  so  short.  Now  or  never  you  must  find  the  secret.  Are  we  to  live 
and  die  without  once  clasping  our  fingers  over  the  prize,  without  once  getting  our 
hearts  filled  to  the  brim  ?  II.  The  heart  at  kest.  "Lord,  lift  upon  us  the  light 
of  Thy  countenance."  He  is  not  asking,  "Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  for  he 
knows  the  secret,  he  has  found  the  supreme  good,  and  he  has  nothixig  else  to  desire 
but  this — that  more  and  more  God  would  lift  on  him  and  those  for  whom  he  speaks 
the  light  of  His  countenance.  What  does  it  mean  ?  The  phrase  is  a  very  Oriental 
one.  It  is  derived  from  the  experience  of  an  Eastern  court.  The  light  of  the 
countenance  is  the  expression  which  it  wears  when  it  is  pleased.  We  know  on  what 
conditions  God  is  now  well  pleased  with  the  children  of  men.  He  is  always  well 
pleased  with  Christ,  and  with  all  whom  He  sees  in  Christ.  This,  therefore,  in  the 
language  of  Christian  experience,  is  the  solution  of  the  problem — to  have  Christ,  and 
ever  more  of  Christ.  How  is  this  the  solution  ?  How,  in  other  words,  does  Christ 
give  the  heart  rest  ?  1.  He  does  so  by  taking  it  off  itself.  When  the  kindness  and 
love  of  God  are  revealed  to  the  heart,  when  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ  becomes  the 
great  theme  of  our  joy  and  hope,  a  similar  disposition  is  begotten  in  us  :  we  love  all 
those  whom  God  loves  and  for  whom  Christ  died,  and  we  are  ready  to  serve  them, 
because  Christ  has  said.  Inasmuch  as  ye  do  it  to  the  least  of  these,  ye  do  it  unto  Me. 
You  cannot  help  thinking  well  of  mankind  when  you  are  trying  to  do  them  good, 
and  you  can  never  despise  any  soul  if  you  believe  Christ  has  esteemed  it  worthy  of 
His  life.  2.  Not  only  does  Christ  draw  the  heart  off  itself,  but  He  also  gives  it  an 
object  large  enough  to  satisfy  its  desires.  It  possesses  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Who  can  estimate  all  that  this  implies  ?  How  can  any  one  with  such 
a  heritage  go  about  moaning,  "  Who  can  show  us  any  good  ? "  No,  "the  voice  of 
rejoicing  and  salvation  is  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous  "  ;  "  the  shout  of  a  King 
is  in  their  midst."  The  human  heart  is  large  and  hungry ;  but  Christ  can  fill  it,  and 
He  can  keep  it  full.  3.  This  is  a  satisfaction  which  will  never  fail,  but  become 
deeper  and  more  precious  at  the  very  stage  when  all  other  satisfactions  are  failing. 
It  is  not  a  wise  view  of  religion  which  represents  it  as  a  substitute  for  all  the  good 
things  by  which  life  is  enlarged  and  enriched — such  as  knowledge,  love,  health, 
work,  and  success.  Rather  is  religion  the  sunny  atmosphere  in  which  all  these 
things  are  to  be  eiyoyed.  {J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  Heavenly  salis/action  best: — 
"The  old  Rabbis  say  that  when  the  famine  came  on  in  Egypt  and  the  store- 
houses were  opened,  that  Joseph  threw  the  chaff  of  the  grain  upon  the  Nile,  that  it 
might  float  down  the  river  and  show  those  who  lived  below  that  there  was  abun- 
dance. So  the  blessings  of  this  life  are  nothing  more  than  the  husks  of  God's  bounty, 
compared  with  spiritual  joys  and  heaven."  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy 
countenance  upon  us. — The  light  of  God's  countenatice : — I.  What  is  the  light  of 
God's  countenance  ?  1.  That  we  are  noticed  by  the  Divine  Being.  He  takes 
cognisance  of  your  affairs.  2.  That  He  is  interested  in  us,  as  a  father  in  the  doings 
of  his  children.  3.  That  we  are  the  objects  and  recipients  of  His  favours.  He  favours 
our  undertakings,  circumstances,  and  conditions.  4.  That  He  approves  of  our  acts — 
accepts  and  fills  us  with  peace.  5.  That  He  helps  us.  God's  favour  is  no  empty 
pretence — His  aid  comes  timely.  6.  That  He  blesses  us.  His  benediction  conveys 
the  good.  II.  The  RESULTS.  It  puts  "gladness  into  the  heart."  Why?  Because — 
1.  It  is  the  countenance  of  a  powerful,  wise,  omnipotent  Being.  2.  It  is  the 
exuberant  gladness  —  overflowing  joy  —  beyond  any  worldling's  mirth  —  unend- 
ing. How  disquieted  should  those  be  from  whom  God's  face  is  averted  and  for 
whom  there  is  on  His  countenance  a  frown!  {William  Lcmdels,  D.D.)  TJ^e 
godly  man's  choice: — 1.  A  gracious  heart  doth  more  esteem  the  favour  of  God, 
and  the  light  of  His  countenance,  than  any  earthly  thing  whatsoever.  What  <Joes 
the  phrase  "the  light  of  Thy  countenance"  express!     It  supposes  that  all  our 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  iv. 

iniquities  and  sins  are  pardoned  and  blotted  out.  So  long  as  our  guilt  is  upon  us. 
and  God  seeth  that,  He  turneth  His  face  from  us.  There  is  implied,  God's  favour 
and  love  toward  us.  The  original  and  cause  of  all  God's  gracious  mercies  in  time. 
That  God  hath  a  peculiar  respect  unto  His  children.  The  efficacy  and  powerful 
effects  thereof ;  for  as  the  sun  by  its  beams  doth  enlighten  the  whole  earth,  and  give 
life  and  motion  to  everything,  thus  also  doth  God  where  He  favours.  This  acting 
of  God's  face  in  reference  to  the  godly,  emptieth  itself  in  two  ways,  in  respect  of 
outward  and  temporal  mercies ;  and  in  respect  of  spiritual  mercies.  2.  The 
qualifications  or  characters  of  those  who  do  value  and  desire  God's  favour  above 
everything  else.  They  are  such  as  have  a  deep  and  true  sense  of  the  guilt  of  their 
sins.  Such  are  often  afflicted,  persecuted,  and  of  great  exercises  in  this  world. 
They  who  renounce  their  own  righteousness.  They  who  are  spiritually-minded. 
They  who  live  by  faith,  and  are  affected  with  things  as  revealed  by  the  Scripture. 
They  can  esteem  the  favour  of  God,  who  have  had  experience  of  the  sweetness  and 
excellence  of  it.  They  who  have  the  Spirit  of  God  working  in  them.  They  who 
walk  closely  with  God.  {Anthony  Burgess. )  The  chief  Tiappiness  of  man  is  found, 
in  the  enjoyrnejU  of  Ood : — All  the  various  pleasures  which  this  world  affords  are 
unsatisfying  in  their  nature,  and  transitory  in  their  duration.  Happiness  is  the  one 
object  in  pursuit  of  which  all  men  are  engaged.  1.  True  and  satisfying  enjoyment 
is  not  to  be  found  in  the  pursuit  or  possession  of  the  things  of  time.  There  is  an 
obvious  and  acknowledged  disparity  between  all  the  objects  and  pursuits  of  time, 
and  the  capacity  of  that  being  which  was  formed  after  the  image  of  God.  Various 
are  the  expedients  which  the  wise  men  have  recommended  for  the  attainment  of 
happiness.  2.  The  chief  end  of  man,  in  so  far  as  happiness  is  concerned,  is  the 
enjoyment  of  God  Himself.  Jehovah  is  the  infinite  source  of  all  good.  If  a  con- 
sciousness of  His  favour  and  love  can  be  acquired,  this  will  give  the  assurance  of 
every  blessing.  The  very  conviction  that  God  is,  is  a  source  of  joy  unspeakable. 
The  contemplation  of  the  relations  in  which  the  eternal  God  stands  to  us,  is  the 
source  of  His  highest  enjoyment.  Above  all,  it  is  the  knowledge  of  God  as  in  Jesus, 
his  reconciled  Father,  his  covenant  God,  that  gives  him  peace,  and  confidence,  and 
joy.  It  is  thus  that,  even  now,  Jehovah  is  enjoyed  by  all  His  believing  people. 
{Alexander  Turner.)  The  source  of  the  Christian's  jot/ : — I.  What  are  we  to 
UNDERSTAND  BY  THE  LIGHT  OF  God's  COUNTENANCE  ?  The  light  of  oue's  Counten- 
ance denotes  that  peculiar  aspect  which  bespeaks  affection  and  favour.  By  the 
light  of  God's  countenance  we  understand  that  clear  and  full  manifestation  of  God 
to  the  soul,  which  assures  it  of  an  interest  in  His  favour.  There  is  a  manifestation 
of  God  to  the  soul  of  the  Christian,  which  is  not  enjoyed  by  other  men,  even  with 
the  Bible  in  their  hands,  nor  always  by  the  Christian  himself.  Though  he  does 
not  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  the  written  revelation,  yet  he  sees  in  a  peculiar 
manner  what  lies  within  its  limits.  He  sees  God,  the  great  object  of  this  revela- 
tion, in  the  light  and  radiance  of  reality.  This  manifestation  of  God  is  made  to  the 
Christian  in  the  exercise  of  holy  affections,  and  he  is  therefore  assured  of  the  Divine 
favour  through  the  promises.  In  proportion  to  the  strength  and  intenseness  of 
holy  affections,  the  misgivings  of  doubt,  and  fluctuations  of  faith,  vanish.  The 
assurance  consequent  on  this  manifestation  of  God  to  the  soul  is  through  the 
medium  of  the  Divine  promises.  Whether  God  has  promised— whether  God  is 
faithful,  is  not  a  matter  of  doubt  to  the  Christian's  mind.     II.   Why  the  Christian 

DESIRES   the   light   OF   God'S   COUNTENANCE   ABOVE   ALL   EARTHLY   GOOD.       1.    He 

thus  values  and  desires  it,  as  it  removes  a  sense  of  guilt  from  his  mind.  2.  He 
desires  it  for  its  own  inherent  consolation.  This  state  of  mind  implies  the  serenity 
of  unreserved  confidence.  Confidence  in  God,  under  a  full  manifestation  of  God. 
In  this  state  there  is  a  peculiar  manifestation  of  God's  love  to  the  Christian.  There 
is,  also,  between  the  soul  and  God,  a  delightful  fellowship  of  affection  and  of 
interests.  3.  He  desires  it,  a»  it  gives  assurance  of  those  future  blessings  which  are 
the  objects  of  hope.  Thus  we  see  why  Christians  so  often  mourn  the  hidings  of 
God's  face.  The  subject  addresses  those  who  have  been  taught  to  value  and  desire 
the  light  of  God's  countenance  above  all  things.  (iV.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Men's 
true  happiness  c&yisists  in  the  favour  of  God : — 1.  There  is  necessarily  implanted  in 
the  very  nature  of  man  a  desire  of  promoting  his  own  happiness.  This  is  a  self- 
evident  truth,  and  needs  no  proof.  The  only  difference  in  men  lies  in  determining 
wherein  their  true  happiness  consists,  and  by  what  methods  it  may  best  be 
attained.  True  religion  is  so  far  from  discouraging  men  in  their  search  after 
happiness  that  it  forbids  not  the  enjoyment  of  any  one  temporal  blessing  which  God 
has  created  for  the  use  of  man,   but  only  disorderly  instances  and  unreasonable 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  81 

excesses.  2,  "Wicked  and  corrupt  men  seek  this  happiness  in  the  sinful  enjoyments 
of  the  present  life  ;  and  their  choosing  to  do  so  is  their  great  error  and  folly.  The 
enjoyments  of  this  world  are  ranked  by  St.  John  uuder  three  heads,  "the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life"  :  that  is,  pleasure,  riches,  and 
honour.  Every  one  of  these  has  a  great  mixture  of  evil  attending  it,  has  at  best 
much  emptiness  and  imperfection  in  it,  and  has  much  unsatisfactoriness  and  dis- 
appointment going  along  with  it.  They  are  not  at  best  complete  enough  to  satisfy 
the  mind  of  man  ;  and  if  they  were,  they  cannot  continue  long  enough  to  maintain 
and  preserve  its  happiness.  Whatever  will  make  the  mind  of  man  happy,  must  be 
able  to  satisfy  it  both  in  its  whole  capacity  and  in  its  whole  duration.  Whatever  is 
not  sufficient  to  effect  this,  cannot  be  man's  chief  and  final  happiness.  3.  Virtuous 
and  good  men  place  their  chief  happiness  in  the  knowledge  and  favour  of  God,  in 
the  practice  of  virtue  and  true  religion  ;  and  their  acting  according  to  this  principle 
is  the  greatest  and  indeed  the  only  true  wisdom.  (1)  Wherein  does  this  true 
happiness  consist?  Partly  in  their  contemplating  with  delight,  and  meditating 
with  pleasure,  on  the  perfections  of  God  the  supreme  good.  Partly  in  the  sense  of 
God's  present  favour  to  them,  arising  from  the  consciousness  of  their  agreeableness  and 
conformity  to  His  holy  and  Divine  will.  They  know  that  God's  favour  and  protec- 
tion always  accompanies  righteous  and  just  men.  The  favour  God  bears  to  virtuous 
and  ^ood  men,  they  find  belongs  to  themselves  ;  and  this  affords  them  at  all  times 
and  in  all  cases,  a  solid  and  rational  satisfaction.  Partly  in  the  expectation  of 
eternal  rewards,  with  which  hope  they  are  supported  here,  and  the  actual  possession 
of  them,  which  they  shall  enjoy  hereafter.  (2)  In  what  respect  it  excels  the 
happiness  of  sensual  and  corrupt  minds.  I  shall  only  observe  that  this  happiness, 
which  is  the  reward  of  virtue,  exceeds  all  other  pleasures  infinitely  in  the  two  fore- 
mentioned  qualifications  of  happiness,  namely,  perfection  in  degree,  and  continu- 
ance of  duration  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  {S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  great  desire  of  the 
saints: — However  all  men  have  a  common  nature,  yet  grace  makes  a  vast  difference 
among  them.  As  it  makes  difference  in  their  understandings,  so  in  their  wills.  In 
this  text  the  world  is  divided  into  two  parties.  In  some  things  they  agree  ;  as  in 
the  sense  of  defects ;  and  in  their  desire  of  supplies.  There  are  some  things  in 
which  they  differ,  as  the  object  of  their  desires  ;  the  ways  they  take  for  accomplish- 
ing their  desires ;  the  success  of  their  desires.  Doctrine  :  It  is  a  great  desire  of 
gracious  souls  to  have  the  light  of  the  Lord's  countenance  lifted  up  upon  them. 
I.  Spkak  to  the  case  heke  supposed.  The  saint,  the  child  of  light,  may  some- 
times sit  in  darkness.  How  far  may  this  darkness  proceed  ?  It  may  go  so  far  that 
they  cannot  see  to  read  their  evidences  for  heaven  ;  they  cannot  see  above  them, 
nor  look  up  to  heaven.  The  very  thing  that  was  their  light  before  may  be  as 
darkness  to  them.  They  may  be  unable  to  discern  their  best  friend  from  their  foe. 
They  may  lose  sight  of  their  guide,  and  of  their  way-marks.  They  may  be  weary 
of  their  very  lives.  II.  The  desike  of  the  gracious  soul.  To  have  the  light  of 
God's  countenance  implies  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  God  ;  the  Lord's  laying 
aside  any  special  controversy  with  the  soul ;  a  communication  of  gracious  influences, 
and  an  intimation  of  God's  love  to  the  soSL  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  blessed 
man : — Here  we  are  taught  how  to  carry  and  behave  ourselves  in  times  of  danger. 

I.    A  DISPOSITION  IN  ALL  MEN  TO  SEEK  AFTER  SOMETHING  THAT  MAY   MAKE  THEM 

HAPPY.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  naturally  men  do  not  distinctly  k^W  wherein 
their  happiness  lies ;  but,  as  Aquinas  observes,  there  is  a  general  kiTJfwledge  of 
happiness,  and  there  is  a  distinct  and  right  understanding  of  it.  Now  though  all 
men  have  not  this  distinct  knowledge  of  our  happiuess,  yet  all  men  have  a  special 
knowledge  of  it,  and  they  know  that  it  is  good  ibr  them  to  be  happy ;  surely, 
therefore,  there  is  a  disposition  in  all  the  children  of  men  to  seek  after  something 
that  may  make  them  happy.  II.  Men  are  generally  mistaken  in  the  matter 
OF  their  happiness.  Is  not  he  mistaken  herein  that  doth  bless  himself  in  the  way 
of  his  sin  ;  or  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  creature  ?  Some  place  their  happiness  in 
pleasure,  or  riches,  or  honour,  or  power,  or  health,  strength,  and  beauty  of  Dody,  or 
knowledge,  wit,  and  learning,  or  in  moral  civil  life.  But  what  creature  excellency 
is  there  that  can  give  happiness  to  the  sons  of  men  t  Certainly  none.  How  comes 
it  to  pass  that  men  are  thus  mistaken  I  Sometimes  the  mistake  arises  from  ignor- 
ance of  the  right  and  true  notion  of  happiness ;  or  from  the  misapplication 
of  the  true  notion  of  happiness ;  or  because  men  measure  their  happiness  by 
their  present  want ;  or  because  they  do  not  hearken  to  and  consider  what 
is  spoken  to  them  about  true  happiness.  III.  There  is  a  generation  of  men 
WHO  HAVE  found  THIS  BLESSEDNESS.  They  are  blessed  because  their  sins  are 
6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  it. 

forgiven :  when  the  Lord  teaches  them  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom.  They  are 
blessed  who  wait  at  the  posts  of  wisdom,  and  are  made  wise  thereby  ;  they  who  are 
meek  ;  they  who  know  and  do  the  work  of  their  place  and  office  ;  they  who  wait  for 
the  coming  of  Christ ;  they  who  die  in  the  Lord.  IV.  Whekein  doth  this  tefb 
HAPPINESS  CONSIST  ?  In  the  shine  of  God's  face.  The  face  of  God  is  His  favour. 
If  God  hath  ever  blessed  you  in  truth,  then  hath  His  face  shined  upon  you. 
(W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  True  haiypiness  fornid  in  GocCs  favour  only: — In  this  text 
two  different  and  opposite  characters  are  introduced.  The  true  Christian  differs 
widely  from  all  others,  with  respect  to  the  ultimate  object  of  his  desires  and 
pursuits.  His  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and  there  his  heart  is  also.  He  draws  all  his 
hope  and  happiness  from  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  enjoyment  of  His  love.  I.  The 
DISPOSITION  OF  UNEEGENEEATE  MEN,  as  represented  in  this  text.  "Who  will 
make  us  to  see  good  ? "  To  see  good  is  an  expression  which  denotes  the  enjoyment 
of  it.  This  desire,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  expressed,  imply — 1.  A  departure 
from  the  original  constitution  of  human  nature.  Man  was  a  creature  framed  to 
derive  all  his  happiness  from  intercourse  with  his  Maker.  While  he  continued  in  a 
state  of  rectitude,  he  enjoyed  consummate  blessedness.  Man,  in  innocence,  found 
in  the  Divine  favour  and  fellowship  a  source  of  happiness  pure  and  inexhaustible. 
What  a  melancholy  change  sin  produced.  Communion  with  God  was  whoUy 
interrupted.  Man  came  to  ask  for  "any  good,"  any  present,  sensible,  worldly 
good.  2.  An  idolatrous  attachment  to  the  world.  Fallen  man  having  cast  off  God, 
exalts  the  world  into  His  throne.  All  natural  men  set  their  hearts  on  some  created 
good,  from  which  they  expect  their  best  happiness.  Whatever  draws  the  heart 
away  from  God,  and  occupies  BDis  room  in  the  affections,  is  a  sin  of  the  deepest  dye, 
it  is  the  vilest  idolatry.  3.  A  disposition  strictly  to  examine  all  the  sources  of 
worldly  bliss.  Every  object  that  promises  entertainment  is  greedily  embraced. 
4.  The  question  is  expressive  of  the  oissatisfaction  attendant  on  all  earthly  pursuits. 
Many  are  the  expedients  which  are  devised  by  the  lovers  of  this  world  to  obtain  the 
"good  "  which  they  do  ardently  pant  after,  but  they  all  fail  of  success.  The  world, 
with  all  its  splendid  ornaments,  is  a  mere  picture  of  felicity,  and  ever  disappoints 
and  deceives  its  votaries.  True  peace  and  rest  they  never  find.  5.  A  disposition  to 
renew  the  pursuit  after  worldly  happiness,  notwithstanding  repeated  disappoint- 
ments. II.  CONTEAST  THE  DISPOSITION  OF  THESE  WITH  THAT  OF  EENEWED  AND 
SANCTIFIED  SOULS.  The  text  gives  the  breathings  of  their  hearts.  The  terms  used 
are  figurative,  but  highly  significant.  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  therefore  hath  no  bodOy 
members.  He  is  pleased  to  address  men  in  their  own  language.  Men  express 
favour  or  displeasure  by  the  different  appearances  of  countenance  which  they 
assume.  The  "light  of  God's  countenance"  denotes  a  sense  of  His  love  as  a 
reconciled  Father  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  ardent  desire  to  enjoy  the  smiles  of  God's 
benign  countenance  includes  in  it — 1.  Some  knowledge  and  experience  of  the 
condescension  and  grace  of  God  in  accepting  sinners  through  Christ  Jesus.  God  has 
manifested  His  love  in  providing  a  Saviour  for  us  exactly  suited  to  our  wants. 
2.  This  prayer  is  expressive  of  supreme  delight  in  communion  with  God.  Nothing 
is  more  characteiistic  of  a  Christian  than  this.  He  pants  after  the  Divine  fellowship, 
as  the  principle  of  aU  his  enjoyment,  the  very  happiness  of  his  being.  3.  Cordially 
to  join  in  this  prayer  of  the  Psalmist,  supposes  the  high  value  and  diligent  use  of 
every  means  of  Divine  institution  where  God  has  promised  to  meet  with  His  people. 
4.  It  also  implies  a  longing  desire  for  the  full  enjoyment  of  God  in  heaven.  Con- 
clusion :  (1)  Let  every  one  here  inquire  what  is  the  temper  of  his  mind  and  the 
tendency  of  his  heart.  (2)  See  the  extreme  folly  of  those  who  yield  themselves  to 
this  world's  influence  for  the  attainment  of  happiness.  {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
The  hindrances  to  our  living  in  the  light  of  God^s  countenance : — What  David  here 
speaks  of  was  not  a  glowing  and  happy  state  of  feeling  exercised  upon  spiritual  sub- 
jects, but  something  more  substantial  and  real.  Feelings  are  ever  varying  in  their 
clearness  and  amount.  It  was  not  of  so  uncertain  a  thing  as  the  ebb  and  flow  of 
this  changing  tide  of  emotion.  That  of  which  he  spoke  was  the  practical  carrying 
out  into  the  events  of  daily  life  of  that  great  truth  which  lies  near  to  the  foundation 
of  all  religion — that  it  is  the  very  condition  of  our  individual  and  eternal  being  and 
consciousness  that  we  should  be  really  nearer  at  all  times  to  the  great  God  than  we 
can  be  to  any  other  being.  1.  The  first  hindrance  Christians  find  i»,  allowing 
themselves  in  a  formal  and  indevout  character  of  sernce.  If  we  rest  in  the  acts  of 
worship  or  devotion,  we  lose  that  which  is  their  chief  benefit,  communion  with  God. 
The  same  loss  is  incurred  by  making  religion  to  consist  in  "feelings "  of  devotion. 
2.  Christian  men  form  too  low  a  notion  of  the  holiness  which  God  has  put  within 


rsALM  IV.]  TBS  PSALMS.  83 

their  reaoh.  They  are  too  &pt  to  think  of  holiness  as  mainly  valnable  because  it  is 
an  evidence  of  faith.  Hence,  when  they  are  satisfied  about  their  faith,  they  are  in 
danger  of  becoming  somewhat  languid  in  seeking  after  holiness.  3.  Another 
hindrance  is  a  multitude  of  worldly  cares.  There  is  such  a  natural  agreement 
between  our  heart  and  earthly  things,  that  they  are  apt  to  lay  hold  again  and  again 
of  those  affections  which  we  perhaps  had  hoped  were  truly  weaned  from  them,  and 
set  upon  things  above.  Two  chief  means  by  which  the  power  of  the  world  may  be 
resisted  are,  first,  on  the  appearance  of  the  danger,  honestly  examine  whether  you 
are  not  multiplying  cares  which  you  are  not  really  called  upon  to  meet,  and  which 
therefore  are  more  than  you  can  bear.  And,  secondly,  do  all  this  worldly  business 
as  unto  the  Lord  ;  endeavour  to  bring  the  presence  of  God  into  it  all.  4.  The  want 
of  earnestness  is  a  hindrance.  This  is  seen  in  many  ways — in  the  evident  coldness 
of  prayer ;  in  frequent  absence  from  some  among  the  means  of  grace  ;  or  in  a 
careless  walk,  and  remissness  in  resistance  of  temptation  ;  and  in  their  being  ready 
to  acquiesce  in  such  a  state  as  that  in  which  they  must  continue.  The  want  of 
earnestness  may  spring  from  different  causes.  It  may  be  the  effect  of  a  lurking 
infidelity.  Another  cause  of  this  inaction  is  a  secret  hope  that  some  time  or  other 
you  will  find  it  easier  to  turn  to  God,  to  serve  Him  heartily.  Sometimes  it  pleases 
God  to  withhold  spiritual  comforts,  and  the  sense  of  His  gracious  presence  from  the 
soul,  even  when  we  cannot  find  any  cause  of  carelessness  in  the  believer.  This  is, 
when  it  happens,  a  fearful  part  of  the  believer's  discipline.  Doubtless  it  is  sent 
to  work  some  blessed  end.  {Bishop  Wilber/orce.)  A  satisfying  view  of  Christ: 
— An  earnest  Christian  woman  lay  upon  her  deathbed  in  a  Boston  hospital.  She 
had  devoted  herself  to  an  unselfish  life,  and  contracted  the  disease  tliat  caused 
her  death,  in  spending  her  life  for  others.  The  night  she  died  she  said  to  her 
attendants,  "Please  raise  the  curtain."  There,  on  a  great  church  opposite  the 
hospital,  flooded  by  moonlight,  stood  Thorwaldsen's  statue  of  the  Master.  Long 
and  silently  she  gazed  upon  it.  "Don't  drop  the  curtain,"  she  pleaded.  "I  want 
to  look  at  Christ."  Our  doubts,  our  sins,  our  troubles,  our  perplexities,  are  all 
curtains  that  fall  between  us  and  the  true  meaning  of  a  simple  Christian  life.  Raise 
them  and  look  at  Him.  Happiness  in  God's  favour  .—Four  things  briefly  put 
about  the  happiness  that  comes  of  God's  smile.  1.  It  goes  to  heighten  other  joys 
where  they  are  possessed.  There  are  such  joys,  sources  of  satisfaction  for  the 
intellect,  for  the  social  heart,  for  every  want  of  man  except  that  of  the  soul.  Let 
this  deepest  need  of  man  be  met,  and  all  other  things  will  yield  more  good. 
2.  Further,  true  happiness  remains  when  other  sources  of  joy  have  passed  away. 
Failures,  reverses,  losses,  are  always  saddening ;  but  have  we  not  known  men  in 
whose  heart  happiness  has  held  its  seat  even  amidst  the  wreck  of  their  fortunes  t 
Yet  again,  the  joy  of  God  dwells  within  the  soul  of  many  a  man  who  never  had 
many  other  sources  of  comfort.  God's  poor  are  gladdened  by  the  light  of  His 
countenance.  3.  Lastly,  this  happiness  will  be  enjoyed  in  proportion  as  we  are 
seeking  it.  The  Christian  living  beneath  the  sunlight  is  the  happy  Christian. 
The  Christian  who  often  lives  without  seekiag  it,  lacks  the  joy.  So,  then,  here  is 
the  secret  of  a  happy  life — it  is  with  God.  It  is  living  in  friendship  and  fellowship 
with  Grod ;  it  lies  in  the  consciousness  of  His  favour  and  love.  'The  one  spot  on 
earth  where  happiness  is  to  be  found  is  the  heart  of  a  good  man.     {J.  B.  French.) 

Yer.  7.  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart,  more  than  in  the  time  that  their 
com  and  their  wine  increased. — Huinksgiving  for  harvest : — 1.  The  joy  in  harvest 
is  based  on  the  successful  result  of  labour.  Labour  is  God's  law,  and  obedience  to 
it  secures  a  result  corresponding  to  the  means  used,  and  that  result  is  a  real  blessing 
in  the  ratio  in  which  God  is  recognised  and  honoured,  by  obeying  Him  in  the  law 
which  He  has  enjoined.  Spiritual  blessings  are  only  attained  through  spiritual 
means.  How  few  men  recognise,  in  God's  ministration  of  natural  plenty,  a  silent 
sermon  on  the  passage,  "He  giveth  all  things  richly  to  enjoy."  A  Christian  looks 
upon  a  plentiful  harvest,  not  simply  as  a  pledge  of  cheaper  bread,  but  as  a  mark 
of  God's  approval  of  the  industry  which  wrought  for  this  end.  All  industrious 
nations  are  thriving,  though  all  are  not  God-fearing  nations.  2.  Joy  in  harvest 
commemorates  the  termination  of  solicitude,  in  reference  to  a  favourable  season  for 
ripening  and  gathering  in  the  crops.  Scripture  alludes  to  many  of  the  trials  and 
disappointments  of  the  husbandman.  There  is  a  proverbial  impatience  and  mur- 
muring among  tillers  of  the  soil.  A  like  impatience  is  not  rare  among  some 
Christians.  The  harvest,  as  an  annual  ripening  and  realising  of  profit,  should 
suggest  annual  inquiry  into  our  own  scale  of  personal  maturity  in  the  things  of 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  it. 

God.  Has  the  past  year  yielded  s  good  spiritual  return  for  mental  toil,  and 
thought,  and  prayer,  and  the  means  of  grace  1  3.  The  joy  of  harvest  reasonably 
includes  the  prospect  of  an  adequate  supply  for  our  own  and  others'  necessities. 
There  is  danger,  as  well  as  misery,  in  a  public  deficiency  of  the  necessaries  of  life. 
The  law  and  the  loaf  flourish  best  together.  4.  The  joy  of  an  abundant  harvest 
should  stimulate  us  to  renewed  and  enhanced  confidence  in  God.  If  He  thus  blesses 
the  labour  of  the  field,  doubt  not  He  will  bless  every  believer  in  his  personal 
calling.  {Joseph  B.  Oiren,  M.A.)  Plus  gladness: — Christianity  is  a  religion  of 
gladness.  You  cannot  have  one  Divine  idea  in  you  without  being  glad.  You 
cannot  have  any  Divine  ideas  so  long  as  you  are  unpardoned.  It  is  the  distinction 
of  the  gospel  to  proclaim  possible  forgiveness,  and  when  forgiveness  has  taken 
effect  then  joy  begins  ;  on  every  bough  of  every  tree  there  is  a  singing  bird.  But 
until  we  are  pardoned,  and  pardoned  at  the  Cross,  we  cannot  admit  God  the  Father, 
God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost  into  our  hearts  to  abide  with  us  and  sup 
with  us  and  manifest  themselves  to  us,  and  therefore  we  cannot  have  this  simple, 
pure,  celestial,  inexhaustible  joy.  Christianity  gives  joy  unspeakable,  joy  unutter- 
able. Joy  has  no  words ;  joy  takes  up  all  our  little  words,  and  uses  them,  and 
then  says,  I  want  more,  more,  another  language,  and  because  it  has  no  more 
articulation  it  bursts  forth  into  songs  without  words,  it  mingles  with  the  melody  of 
the  spheres.  To  that  high  festival  we  are  called  !  But  is  not  the  religion  of  Christ 
a  religion  of  melancholy?  No.  It  has  in  it  the  deepest  melancholy  ever  known, 
but  one  thing  is  so  often  forgotten  by  Christian  evangelists  :  Christ  died  only  once. 
They  will  not  think  of  that — only  once.  He  did  die — died  as  never  man  died ; 
He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men.  He  gave  His  back  to  the  smiters  and  Hia 
cheeks  to  them  that  pluck  oflF  the  hair  ;  but  He  died  only  once.  He  lives  for 
evermore.  Why  do  we  not  at  our  Eastertides  remember  this? — the  death  for  a 
moment,  the  life  for  ever  I  So  we  come  up  out  of  darkness  to  sing  of  light ;  we 
leave  the  desert,  one  little  mile  long,  and  enter  upon  the  boundless  paradise  of 
Ood.  Do  not  condemn  yourselves  because  you  have  not  a  continual  consciousness 
of  this  joy.  Much  of  that  want  of  consciousness  may  be  due  to  physical  infirmity ; 
■we  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made ;  the  body  may  be  having  the  upper  hand 
for  a  time.  Then  some  men's  self  lies  such  a  long  way  within  themselves  they 
have  to  shed  off  coat  after  coat,  to  slough  off  bad  skin  after  bad  skin  a  thousand  in 
number,  before  they  get  at  their  real  Ego,  their  real  I,  their  real  and  divinest  self. 
Some  of  us  have  a  hard  fight.  Some  of  you  think  you  are  going  to  lose.  Hear 
me:  you  are  not.  "Gad,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him,  but  he  shall  overcome  at 
the  last."  For  the  moment  he  is  down,  but  God  is  in  him,  and  he  will  spring  from 
the  dust,  and  at  the  last  even  the  poor  tribe  called  Gad  shall  sing  of  victory,  sit 
down  with  conquerors!  [Joseph Parker,  D.D.)  The  duty,  method,  and  import- 
ance of  being  happy: — There  are  wants  of  the  soul  which  no  earthly  good  can 
satisfy.  The  happiness  to  meet  these  wants  consists  in  a  calm,  cheerful,  submissive, 
contented  frame  of  mind.  I.  This  happiness  is  not  only  a  privilege,  it  is  x  sacred  and 
MOST  important  CHRISTIAN  DUTY.  1.  By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  unhappinesa 
which  people  complain  of,  is  of  their  own  procuring,  and  is  to  be  set  down  as 
resiilting,  not  from  any  unavoidable  necessity,  either  in  nature  or  circumstances, 
but  from  a  perverted  free  agency,  from  violating  some  of  the  laws  of  our  being, 
from  voluntary  indiscretions,  errors,  and  sins.  Remove  the  sources  of  unhappiness, 
and  little  comparatively  would  remain  to  embitter  the  cup  of  life,  or  make  us 
unhappy.  If  the  unhappiness  is  caused  by  ourselves,  then  it  is  our  "duty"  to 
cease  from  so  profitless,  so  bad  a  work.  2.  It  is  our  duty  to  be  happy,  because  it  ia 
our  duty  to  be  right — right  in  our  feelings,  principles,  habits,  and  aims  ;  and  just  so 
far  as  we  are  so,  we  must,  and  we  shall  be  happy.  The  happiness  of  which  I  speak  is 
in  the  state  of  the  mind,  and  independent,  in  great  measure,  of  outward  circumstances. 
3.  God  wishes  us  to  be  happy.  This  cannot  be  doubted  by  any  who  believe  that 
God  is  a  Being  of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness.  True,  in  our  present  state,  there 
are  many  things  within  and  without,  which  tend  to  perplex  and  try  us,  and,  in 
point  of  fact,  do  often  greatly  interrupt  and  disturb  our  happiness.  These,  we 
have  seen,  are  partly  our  own  procuring.  So  far  as  they  come  in  the  course  of 
Divine  Providence,  they  are  means  designed  of  our  Father  in  heaven  to  promote 
our  present  and  fiiture  happiness.  They  are  among  the  "all  things  that  work 
together  for  good."  4.  Look  at  the  constitution  of  man  as  made  in  the  image 
of  God,  and  formed  to  share,  in  his  measure,  in  the  happiness  of  God.  A  law 
pervades  your  whole  mental  constitution,  making  it  certain  that  the  right  normal 
exercise  of  your  powers  and  affections  can  result  only  in  making  you  happy. 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  85 

6.  From  the  abundant  means  God  has  provided  to  render  you  happy.  He  who  made 
you,  and  made  you  to  be  happy,  has  provided  means  adapted  to  gratify  all  your 
desires  and  aspirations,  so  far  as  they  are  right  and  proper.  The  means  God  has 
provided  for  our  happiness  do  not  stop  in  the  things  of  earth  and  time.  II.  The 
METHOD  OE  WAY  TO  BE  HAPPT.  1.  We  must  leave  ofF  making  ourselves  Unhappy. 
Turn  out  all  those  consumers  of  happiness  which  are  so  apt  to  find  a  home  in  the 
bosom.  Their  name  is  legion,  and  by  many  they  are  indulged  and  nursed  to  the 
overthrow  of  all  internal  peace  and  comfort.  2.  Cultivate  kind  and  benevolent 
affections — love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  meekness,  goodness,  truth. 
These  virtues,  in  habitual  exercise,  as  they  are  required  to  be,  cannot  fail  to  diffuse 
sunshine  and  pleasantness  over  the  whole  mind  and  life.  3.  Note  the  Saviour's 
prescription  for  being  happy,  as  contained  in  the  opening  of  His  Sermon  on  the 
Mount.  "Blessed  are  they,"  &c.  What  is  the  principle,  the  source,  of  the  blessed- 
ness expressed  in  these  different  terms  ?  Plainly  it  is  internal ;  it  springs  from  the 
affections.  III.  The  importancb  of  being  happy.  It  is  not  necessary  to  dwell 
on  this.  It  is  not,  however,  common  for  happiness  to  be  inculcated  as  a  duty.  It  is 
usually  regarded  as  a  matter  which  every  one  must  be  left  to  dispose  of  as  he  chooses, 
without  incurring  any  moral  responsibility.  {J.  Hawes,  D.D. )  Religion  no  enemy 
to  joy : — Joy  and  pleasure  are  things  so  truly  desired  by  all  mankind,  that  religion 
suffers  by  being  thought  an  enemy  to  them.  Religion  restrains  us  from  nothing, 
but  what  our  own  reason  and  interest  should  restrain  us  from.  In  all  harmless  and 
innocent  satisfactions,  that  neither  intrench  upon  the  honour  of  God,  nor  the  rights 
of  others,  nor  our  own  peace  and  quiet,  we  have  leave  to  pick  and  choose.  I.  The 
KATUKE  OF  THIS  INWARD  JOY  AND  PLEASURE.  Not  a  natural  gaiety  and  cheer- 
fulness of  humour,  or  a  few  light  and  transient  fits  of  mirth,  nor  yet  any  strong  and 
confident  presumptions  of  God's  love  and  favour,  or  any  rapturous  transports,  and 
sensible  ravishments  of  joy.  That  which  I  intend  is,  a  solid  and  rational  satis- 
faction of  mind,  in  the  goodness  and  soundness  of  a  man's  estate  towards  God,  and 
flows  usually  from  these  two  things — from  a  sincere  and  regular  discharge  of  our 
duty,  which  brings  its  own  comfort  and  tranquillity  along  with  it.  And  from  a 
cheerful  reiiection  upon  a  man's  innocency,  and  the  integrity  of  his  actions,  when 
a  man  dares  look  back  upon  what  he  has  done,  and  knows  that  he  has  the  testimony 
and  approbation  of  heaven  on  his  side,  bearing  witness  to  the  vote  and  suffrage  of 
his  own  conscience.  II.  What  influence  religion  has  upon  the  joy  and 
pleasure  of  a  man's  mind.  1.  Religion  restores  a  man  to  the  grace  and  favour 
of  God,  and  assures  him  that  his  sins  are  pardoned,  and  his  peace  made  with 
heaven.  2.  A  course  of  virtue  and  religion  subdues  our  inordinate  appetites  and 
vicious  inclinations,  which  are  the  great  fountains  of  inquietude  and  trouble. 
Religion  circulates  through  all  our  powers,  disposes  every  faculty  to  act  in  its  due 
place  and  ordei-,  and  determines  every  affection  to  its  peculiar  object.  3.  A  pious 
and  religious  life  secures  to  a  man  the  peculiar  care  and  protection  of  the  Divine 
Providence,  than  which  there  cannot  be  a  stronger  support  and  comfort  to  the  mind 
of  a  wise  and  good  man.  4.  Religion  refreshes  the  mind  of  a  good  man  with 
a  joyful  assurance  of  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  the  other  world.      III.  The 

EXCELLENCY    OF    THE    PLEASURES    OF    RELIGION,    ABOVE    ALL    THE    DELIGHTS    AND 

PLEASURES  OF  THIS  WORLD.  "More  than  when  the  com  and  the  wine  increases." 
1.  The  delights  of  this  world  are  gross  and  corporeal,  and  affect  only  the  external 
senses,  and  are  the  pleasures  of  the  brute,  rather  than  of  the  man.  2.  The  pleasures 
of  religion  are  more  solid  and  satisfying  than  anything  this  world  can  afford. 
They  fill  our  appetites,  and  fix  our  desires,  and  settle  the  soul  upon  the  right  basis 
and  temper.  3.  Religious  pleasures  are  more  large  and  comprehensive,  they  take 
in  a  vaster  compass,  the  delights  both  of  this  and  of  the  other  world.  4.  The 
pleasures  of  religion  have  infinitely  the  advantage  of  all  others  in  point  of  duration 
and  continuance.  They  abide  with  us  when  other  comforts  fly,  or  are  rifled  away  I 
from  us.  The  sum  is  this — "the  work  of  righteousness  is  peace,  and  the  effect  of  / 
righteousness  is  quietness  and  assurance  forever."  {William  Cave,  D.D.)  The 
saint's  gladness: — The  chief  distinction  between  a  child  of  God  and  a  man  of  the 
world  lies  in  the  prevailing  tendency  of  their  desires.  1.  The  Psalmist's  description 
of  opposite  characters.  See  the  description  of  worldly  men,  in  ver.  6.  It  is  obvious — 
(1)  "That  this  question  betrays  a  great  degree  of  inward  dissatisfaction  and  perplexity. 
They  say  "any  good,"  anything  to  fill  up  the  craving  vacuity  of  our  minds.  At 
the  time  of  the  question  they  cannot  find  anything  in  their  lot  that  deserves  the 
name  of  good.  (2)  The  only  good  they  inquire  for  is  some  present  sensible  enjoy- 
ment, which  may  be  pointed  out  to  the  eye  of  sense.    They  look  not  "at  the 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  IV. 

things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal."  (3)  They  make  no  discrimination  of  the 
objects  which  they  seek  after.  (4)  They  do  not  turn  their  thoughts  at  all  to  God. 
They  seek  counsel  from  others,  but  none  from  Him.  Turn  to  consider  the  temper  of 
a  child  of  God.  He  too  seeks  "good"  ;  but  (i)  It  is  not  "any"  good  that  will 
satisfy  him.  He  cannot  feed  upon  husks.  He  seeks  the  "chief  good."  (ii)  He 
knows  where  that  good  is  to  be  found.  The  favour  of  God,  and  the  sense  of  His 
loving-kindness,  are  the  only  sources  of  true  happiness.  The  worldly  mind  is  in  a 
state  of  perpetual  fluctuation,  (iii)  The  child  of  God  goes  directly  to  God  Himself, 
and  begs  the  blessing  from  Him.  (iv)  The  Psalmist,  in  the  name  of  the  godly,  uses 
this  prayer  in  direct  opposition  to  the  carnal  language  of  worldly  men.  Intimating 
to  us,  that  a  child  of  God  can  relish  no  sweetness  in  any  inferior  good,  till  he  be 
assured  of  the  Divine  favour.  2.  The  propositions  which  arise  from  this  comparison. 
(1)  Worldly  men  have  little  cause  to  rejoice  in  the  temporal  advantages  which  they 
possess.  These  outward  things  may  consist  with  the  present  misery  of  the  person 
who  possesses  them.  Indeed,  these  things  are  frequently  the  means  of  making  men 
miserable,  and  of  fixing  them  in  that  deplorable  state.  These  things  may  end  in 
misery,  and  leave  the  owner  in  everlasting  woe.  (2)  Consider  those  solid  grounds 
of  joy  which  belong  to  the  people  of  God.  He  is  possessed  of  the  joy  which  results 
from  comparing  his  present  and  happy  condition  with  the  misery  in  which  he  was 
once  involved.  Source  of  joy  to  a  child  of  God,  also  consists  in  the  actual  honours 
and  privileges  conferred  upon  him.  He  is  advanced  to  the  dearest  and  most  intimate 
relation  to  God,  adopted  into  His  family,  and  invested  with  all  the  rights  of  a  son. 
The  joy  of  a  saint  also  proceeds  from  the  contemplation  of  those  future  blessings 
which  are  yet  only  the  objects  of  hope.  These  sources  of  joy  are  of  such  a  nature  as 
that  no  outward  distress  or  calamity  can  take  them  away.  Improvement  of  this  sub- 
ject. 1.  Inquire  which  of  the  characters  described  by  the  Psalmist  belongs  to  us. 
2.  I  exhort  those  of  you  who  are  yet  carnally-minded,  to  think  seriously  of  your  con- 
dition. 3.  Let  those  who  have  been  taught  to  value  the  light  of  God's  countenance 
above  all  things,  learn  to  be  humble  and  thankful.  {R.  Walker.)  Christians 
should  reflect  on  their  felicity : — "Living  in  Kome,  a  famous  antiquarian  and  artist 
(Winkelman)  tells  how  he  gave  himself  half  an  hour  every  day  to  meditate  on  his 
Italian  happiness.  Thousands  have  lived  in  Rome  with  the  same  pure  sky  smiling 
over  them,  and  the  same  articulate  antiquity  on  every  side  accosting  them,  and 
never  been  aware  of  their  felicity."  And  is  it  not  thus  with  the  average  Christian 
life  ?  For  the  want  of  reflection  and  a  calm  survey  of  our  standing  and  inheritance 
in  Jesus  Christ,  our  joy  and  gladness  are  intermittent  instead  of  perennial  and 
abiding.  (James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Happy  without  a  fortune : — Recovering  from 
an  illness,  Mr.  Wilberforce  remarked,  "I  can  scarcely  understand  why  my  life  is 
spared  so  long,  except  it  be  to  show  them  a  man  can  be  as  happy  without  a  fortune 
as  with  one."  A  Jiappy  life: — Now,  as  they  were  going  along  and  talking,  they 
espied  a  boy  feeding  his  father's  sheep.  The  boy  was  in  very  mean  clothes,  but  of 
a  very  fresh  and  well-favoured  countenance,  and  as  he  sat  by  himself  he  sang-.— 

•'He  that  is  down  needs  fear  no  fall; 
He  that  is  low  no  pride  ; 
He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  guide. 

I  am  content  with  what  I  have, 

Little  be  it  or  much ; 
And,  Lord,  contentment  still  I  crava^ 

Because  Thou  savest  such. 

Fulness  to  such  a  burden  is, 

That  go  on  pilgrimage : 
Here  little,  and  hereafter  bliss, 

Is  best  from  age  to  age." 

Then  said  their  guide,  "Do  you  hear  him?"  "I  will  dare  to  say  that  this  boy 
lives  a  merrier  life,  and  wears  more  of  that  herb  called  heart's  ease  in  his  bosom, 
than  he  that  is  clad  in  silk  and  velvet."     (John  Bunyan.) 

Yer.  8.  I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  sleep :  for  Thon,  Lord,  only  makest 
me  dwell  in  safety.  —Signs  of  a  qviet  spirit : — In  the  text  are  two  subjects.     David's 


PSALM  IV.]  THE  PSALMS.  87 

privilege  or  happiness  itself.  The  ground  or  foundation  of  this  his  happiness.  In 
the  letter  and  proposition  of  it,  we  have  the  comfortableness  and  advantage  of 
natural  rest.  In  the  scope  and  drift  of  it,  we  have  the  comfortableness  and 
advantage  of  God's  favour.  The  security  and  fearlessness  of  a  godly  person,  who 
is  in  the  love  and  favour  of  God,  and  hath  this  evidenced  and  made  good  to  his 
soul.  He  is  one  that  is  free  from  all  inordinate  disturbance,  and  discjuietness  of 
spirit.  Those  who  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  in  His  love,  have  privileges  beyond 
others,  so  as  "in  patience  to  possess  their  souls,"  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest 
outward  trouble.  This  is  grounded  upon  that  persuasion  which  they  have  of  God 
Himself,  and  of  His  affections  towards  them.  It  is  implied,  that  none  can  well 
thus  compose  themselves,  but  those  which  are  thus  affected.  None  can  lie  down ; 
in  peace  and  sleep  securely,  but  those  who  have  made  their  peace  with  God,  and ' 
are  in  favour  with  Him.  A  guilty  conscience  can  never  lie  down  in  quiet.  Great 
estates  in  the  world  are,  for  the  most  part,  occasions  of  great  distraction  and 
disquietness  of  spirit,  and  such  as  are  subject  to  break  men  of  their  natural  rest. 
Why  could  David  sleep  with  his  estate,  rather  than  his  enemies  with  theirs  ? 
Because  his  was  sanctified  and  sweetened  to  him  by  the  love  of  God.  Note  the 
ground  of  the  godly  man's  composure.  "Thou,  Lord,  only  makest  me  dwell  in 
safety."  The  blessing  itself — a  safe  and  secure  habitation.  As  we  desire  to  dwell 
safely,  let  us  be  careful  to  dwell  holily  :  and  that  includes  piety  and  religion  ; 
justice,  honesty,  and  righteousness  ;  peace,  friendship,  love  and  quietness  of  spirit ; 
charity  and  giving  to  the  poor.  This  blessing  flows  from  God  Himself.  It  is  not  a 
business  of  mere  casualty,  there's  a  providence  in  it.  Not  a  business  of  mere 
endeavour,  it  comes  by  the  blessing  of  God.  {T.  Horton,  D.D.)  How  to  dose 
the  day  with  Ood : — This  may  be  understood,  either  figuratively,  of  the  repose  of 
the  soul,  in  the  assurance  of  God's  grace,  or  literally,  of  the  repose  of  the  body, 
under  the  protection  of  His  providence.  The  Psalmist  having  given  the  preference 
to  God's  favour  above  any  good,  having  chosen  that,  and  portioned  himself  in  that, 
here  expresses  his  great  complacency  in  the  choice  he  had  made.  Those  who  have 
the  assurances  of  God's  favour  toward  them,  may  enjoy,  and  should  labour  after, 
a  holy  serenity  and  security  of  mind.  It  is  the  privilege  of  good  people  that  they 
may  be  thus  easy  and  satisfied  ;  and  it  is  their  duty  to  use  the  means  appointed  for 
the  obtaining  it.  The  Psalmist,  after  an  anxious  day,  now  retires  to  his  chamber 
with  the  words,  "  I  will  lay  me  down  in  pe£ice,  and  sleep."  Here  we  have  David's 
pious  thoughts  when  he  was  going  to  bed.  Observe  his  confidence  in  God,  his 
composedness  in  himself.  Doctrine :  As  we  must  begin  the  day  with  God,  and 
wait  upon  Him  all  the  day,  so  we  must  endeavour  to  close  it  with  Him.  Let  us 
retire  to  lay  us  down.  Some  sit  up  to  do  mischief  to  their  neighbours ;  others  sit  up 
in  pursuit  of  the  world  and  the  wealth  of  it ;  others  sit  up  in  the  indulgence  of 
their  pleasures.  But  let  us  lay  down  with  thankfulness  to  God,  and  with  thoughts 
of  dying  ;  with  penitent  reflections  upon  the  sins  of  the  day,  and  with  humble 
supplications  for  the  mercies  of  the  night.  We  should  be  convinced  of  it  that  we 
are  still  contracting  guilt.  We  should  examine  our  consciences,  that  we  may  find 
out  our  particular  transgressions  of  the  day  past.  We  should  renew  our  repentanc, 
for  whatever  we  find  has  been  amiss  in  us.  We  should  make  a  fresh  application  of 
the  blood  of  Christ  to  our  souls,  for  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  the  gracious 
acceptance  of  our  repentance.  We  should  apply  ourselves  to  the  throne  of  grace  for 
peace  and  pardon.  Let  us  also  lie  down  with  humble  supplication  for  the  mercies 
of  the  night.  We  must  pray,  that  our  outward  man  may  be  under  the  care  of  God's 
holy  angels,  who  are  the  ministers  of  His  providence.  We  must  pray,  that  our 
inward  man  may  be  under  the  influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  author  and 
fountain  of  His  grace.  And  when  we  lay  down,  our  care  and  endeavour  must  be 
to  lay  us  down  in  peace.  Let  us  lie  down  in  peace  with  God  ;  for  without  this  there 
can  be  no  peace  at  all.  Let  us  lie  down  in  peace  with  all  men  :  we  are  concerned  to 
go  to  sleep,  as  well  as  to  die,  in  charity.  Let  us  lie  down  at  peace  with  ourselves. 
But  when  may  we  lie  down  in  peace  at  night  ?  If  we  have,  by  the  grace  of  God, 
in  some  measure  done  the  work  of  the  day,  »nd  filled  it  up  with  duty.  If  we  have 
by  faith,  and  patience,  and  submission  to  the  Divine  will,  reconciled  ourselves  to 
ail  the  events  of  the  day  so  as  to  be  uneasy  at  nothing  that  God  has  done.  If  we 
have  renewed  our  repentance  for  sin.     If  we  have  put  ourselves  under  the  Divins  . 

Erotection.  If  we  have  cast  all  our  cares  for  the  day  following  upon  God.  Having 
lid  ourselves  down  in  peace,  we  must  compose  ourselves  to  sleep.  It  is  by  the 
power  of  God's  providence  that  we  are  kept  safe  in  the  night.  {Matthew  Henry. ) 
Sleep : — Sleep  is  the  image  of  death.    Jesus  Christ  abolished  the  terrors  of  the  first 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  iv. 

death,  the  death  of  the  body.  In  the  text  is  not  a  prayer  of  David,  but  a  deter- 
mination on  his  part.  To  a  certain  extent,  peaceful  sleep  depends  upon  ourselves. 
A  peaceful  state  of  mind  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  power  of  enjoying  God's 
gift  of  sleep.  And,  similarly,  a  peaceful  death  depends  on  ourselves.  There  is  such 
a  thing  as  the  quietness  of  a  stupefied  conscience.  How  may  we,  as  far  as  conscience 
is  concerned,  carry  out  the  resolution  that  we  will  lie  down  in  peace?  1.  By  doing 
all  that  in  us  lies  to  preserve  a  peaceful  conscience  during  the  day.  Begin  the  day 
with  earnest  prayer.  Our  morning  prayers  may  show  us  what  we  wish  to  be,  but 
the  temptations  of  the  day  show  us  what  we  are.  Our  consciences  cannot  but  be 
injured,  if  we  are  guilty  of  faults  and  errors  during  the  day,  and  take  no  account  of 
them  at  the  close  of  the  day.  Self-examination  gives  an  earnestness  and  a  reality 
to  the  prayer  for  pardon.  If  it  be  true  that  the  last  sleep  of  all  makes  the  sleep  of 
each  night  more  solemn,  it  is  also  true  that  each  night's  sleep  makes  the  last  sleep 
of  all  less  strange.  What  is  each  day  but  a  picture  of  the  whole  life,  and  each  night 
but  a  picture  of  death  ?  Then  we  must  do  all  that  in  us  lies  to  preserve  a  peaceful 
conscience  during  the  years  of  life.     {W.  H.  Ranken,   M.A.)  Hie  Christian 

good-night : — This  is  one  of  the  many  verses  in  the  Bible,  especially  in  the  Psalms, 
which  must  come  home  to  every  heart  of  man,  if  read  with  any  degree  of  simple 
faith.  It  sets  full  before  us  the  most  comfortable  and  refreshing  picture  of  a 
devout,  sober,  honest  person,  after  his  day's  work  is  ended,  his  passions  kept  in  order, 
his  sins  repented  of,  and  his  prayers  seriously  said,  laying  himself  down  to  his 
night's  rest,  in  the  full  consciousness  that  he  is  neither  alone  nor  unguarded  ;  that 
as  there  has  been  a  merciful  Eye  watching  over  him,  a  mighty  Hand  stretched  out 
to  guard  him.  through  the  dangers  and  temptations  of  the  day,  so  it  will  be  with 
^  him  in  the  night  also.  This  entire  rest  and  tranquillity  of  God's  faithful  servants, 
when  they  lay  them  down  on  their  bed  at  night,  is  beautifully  expressed  in  the 
text,  "I  will  lay  me  down  'all  together'"  ;  all  my  powers  of  mind  and  body 
agreeing,  as  it  were,  one  with  another  ;  not  torn  by  violent  passions,  by  desire  on  the 
one  hand,  and  remorse  on  the  other.  How  catholic,  how  universal  is  the  thought 
expressed  by  the  Psalmist.  There  is  no  one  condition  of  life  that  it  suits  better 
than  another.  The  need  of  taking  rest  is  an  universal  law  of  God's  providence  over 
men  here  in  this  lower  world.  As  death,  so  sleep  may  be  truly  called  a  great 
leveller.  As  sleep  is  the  image  of  death,  and  as  the  slumber  of  every  night  is  a 
kind  of  sacramental  token  of  that  last  long  sleep,  these  words  may  be  used  for  a 
dying  Christian  also.  Only  a  Christian  has  a  warrant  from  Holy  Scripture  to 
regard  death  as  no  more  than  a  quiet  sleep.  The  Father,  acknowledging  them  as 
His  children,  receives  them  at  their  death  into  the  everlasting  arms.  As  all  the 
blessings  which  we  have  or  hope  for  depend  on  the  Passion  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
so  this  blessing  of  taking  our  rest,  whether  in  our  bed  or  in  the  grave,  seems  to 
bear  an  especial  relation  to  the  mystery  of  the  burial  of  Jesus  Christ.  Our  warrant 
for  our  hope  is  that  the  Son  of  God  died  for  us,  bought  us  to  be  His  own  in  such 
sort,  that  we  should  be  really  joined  to  Him,  mystically  made  members  of  His 
body.  As  members,  inseparable  members,  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  we  hope  to 
have  our  bodies  buried  with  Him  ;  and  for  our  souls,  our  true  selves,  we  hope  that 
when  they  pass  away  from  our  bodies  they  may  be  with  Him  that  day  in  Paradise. 
Except  we  have  this  hope  in  us,  we  cannot  apply  to  ourselves  the  comfortable 
words  of  this  Psalm.  How  is  it  that  in  sleep,  and  still  more  in  death,  Christian 
men  may  humbly  depend  on  a  peculiar  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  guard 
them  ?  1.  Because  He  is  King,  who  has  promised,  "He  that  keepeth  thee  will  not 
sleep."  2.  In  this  act  of  lying  down  comes  in  the  remembrance  and  the  power  of 
our  Lord's  sacrifice.  That  deep  sleep  of  His,  on  the  Cross  and  in  the  grave,  has 
sanctified  and  blessed  the  sleep  of  all  penitent  Christians  for  all  time  to  come, 
whether  in  their  beds  or  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth.  Sin  and  its  punishment, 
disease  and  misery,  is  the  great  disturber  of  sleep.  Then  to  have  a  reasonable  hope, 
grounded  on  a  good  conscience,  that  blemished  as  you  are  with  many  infirmities, 
you  have  not  forfeited  the  blessing  of  Christ's  death  ;  this  is  the  secret  of  good 
nights,  and  a  comfortable  death-time.  Again,  we  are  taught  in  Holy  Scripture  to 
regard  the  Holy  Sacrament  of  the  Body  and  Bloo't  of  Christ  as  one  very  especial 
safeguard  for  the  sleeping,  until  they  wake,  and  for  the  dead,  until  they  rise  again. 
(Contributors  to   "  Traj:ts  for  the  Times.")  A  good  night   watchman: — I   have 

noticed  in  the  books  of  travellers,  this  observation,  "We  found  it  exceedingly 
difficult  to  obtain  a  tent-kee{>er  who  could  keep  awake  at  night."  One  gentleman 
speaks  of  discovering  a  thief  in  his  tent,  and  when  he  went  outside  to  call  the 
watchman  he  found  that  the  man  had  gone  so  soundly  to  sleep  that  he  could  only 


PSALM  v.]  THE  PSALMS.  89 

be  aroused  by  one  or  two  gentle  kicks.  When  a  man  has  been  travelling  with  you 
all  day,  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  keep  awake  through  the  night  to  take 
care  of  you.  Hence  the  beauty  of  the  words,  "  Behold  He  that  keepeth  Israel,"  &c. 
((7.  H.  Sjpurgeon.) 


PSALM  V. 

Veks.  1-12.  Give  ear  to  my  words,  0  Lord. — The  inward  cmd  outioard  sides  of 
the  Divine  life : — The  Psalm  falls  into  two  main  parts — vers.  1-7,  and  vers.  8-12. 
The  inward  comes  first ;  for  communion  with  God  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most 
High  must  precede  all  walking  in  His  way,  and  all  blessed  experience  of  His 
protection,  with  the  joy  that  springs  from  it.  The  Psalm  is  a  prayerful  meditation 
on  the  inexhaustible  theme  of  the  contrasted  blessedness  of  the  righteous,  and 
misery  of  the  sinner,  as  shown  in  the  two  great  halves  of  life  :  the  inward  of  com- 
munion, and  the  outward  of  action.  A  Psalmist  who  has  grasped  the  idea  that  the 
true  sacrifice  is  prayer,  is  not  likely  to  have  missed  the  cognate  thought  that  the 
"house  of  the  Lord,"  of  which  he  will  presently  speak,  is  something  other  than  any 
material  shrine.  But  to  offer  sacrifice  is  not  all  which  he  rejoices  to  resolve.  He 
will  ' '  keep  watch  "  ;  that  can  only  mean  that  he  will  be  on  the  outlook  for  the 
answer  to  his  prayer,  or,  if  we  may  retain  the  allusion  to  sacrifice,  for  the  down- 
ward flash  of  the  Divine  fire,  which  tells  his  prayer's  acceptance.  The  confidence 
and  resolve  ground  themselves  on  God's  holiness,  through  which  the  nece.-sary 
condition  of  approach  to  Him  comes  to  be  purity.  God's  holiness  shuts  out  the 
impure.  The  Psalmist's  vocabulary  is  full  of  synonyms  for  sin,  which  witness  to 
the  profound  consciousness  of  it  that  law  and  ritual  had  evoked  in  devout  hearts. 
In  ver.  7  the  Psalmist  comes  back  to  the  personal  reference,  contrasting  his  own 
access  to  God  with  the  separation  of  evil-doers  from  His  presence.  But  he  does  not 
assert  that  he  lias  the  right  of  entrance  because  he  is  pure.  The  second  part  may 
be  taken  as  his  prayer  when  in  the  temple,  whether  that  be  the  outward  sanctuary 
or  no.  The  whole  of  the  devout  man's  desires  for  himself  are  summed  up  in  the 
prayer  for  guidance.  He  breaks  into  prayer  which  is  also  prophecy.  We  come 
into  the  sunshine  again  at  the  close  of  the  Psalm,  and  hear  the  contrasted  prayer, 
which  thrills  with  gladness  and  hope.  (A.  Maelarcn,  D.D.)  Prayer  to  God: — 
This  Psalm  hath  two  parts — 1.  The  prophet  prayeth  the  Lord  to  hear  his  prayer  ; 
which  thing  the  wicked  cannot,  or  may  not  hope  for.  2.  He  beseecheth  the  Lord 
to  direct  him,  that  the  enemies  might  take  no  advantage  of  him  ;  whose  nature  he 
describeth,  praying  God  to  overthrow  them  ;  comforting,  on  the  other  side,  the 
godly  with  excellent  promises.  Vm-.  1  teacheth  that  God's  children  many  times 
use  words  in  their  prayers,  many  times  not.  So  did  Moses,  and  Anna  the  mother 
of  Samuel.  God's  children  should  strive  to  earnestness  in  prayer,  and  should  pray 
unto  none  but  to  Him  alone.  Ver.  8  teacheth  that  we  should  break  our  sleep  in 
the  morning,  to  the  end  we  might  pray  unto  the  Lord.  Seeing  God  cannot  away 
with  wickedness,  His  children  should  abhor  it  likewise.  In  ver.  6  are  compre- 
prehended  judgments  against  the  ungodly,  namely,  against  liars,  cruel  persons,  and 
deceitful  men.  We  may  not  appear  before  God  in  the  trust  of  our  own  merits, 
which  indeed  we  have  not,  but  of  His  mercies  only.  Also  that  with  reverence  we 
should  repair  to  the  places  of  God's  service,  and  reverently  also  there  behave 
ourselves.  Unless  God  guide  us,  we  shall  go  out  of  the  way  ;  the  strength  of  our 
corrupted  nature  carrying  us  headlong  thereto.  Also  we  should  pray  for  a  holy 
life,  and  to  this  end,  that  the  mouths  of  our  enemies  may  be  stopped  from  evil 
speech,  Ver.  9  is  a  lively  description  of  the  qualities  of  the  ungodly :  they  are 
inconstant,  they  imagine  mischief,  they  are  given  to  cruelty  and  to  flattery.  It  is 
lawful  to  pray  against  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  that  their  counsels  and  desires 
may  be  scattored.  The  faithful  may  rejoice  at  the  overthrow  of  God's  enemies. 
From  ver.  12  we  learn  in  what  assuredness  they  are,  whom  the  Lord  defendeth  ; 
those  who  repose  themselves  upon  the  rock  of  His  almighty  protection  cannot 
miscarry.  {Thomas  Wilcocks.)  Daind's  state  of  mind  in  relation  to  God  and 
society: — I.  In  relation  to  God.  Here  are  revealed — 1.  His  beliefs  of  God.  In 
His  omniscience  the  Eternal  knows  our  "meditation."  In  God's  moral  holiness, 
God's  being  is  the  foundation,  God's  will  the  standard,  and  God's  influence  the 
fountain,  of  all  moral  excellence  in  the  universe.     In  the  administrative  rectitude  of 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  r. 

God.  The  holy  God  must  punish  unrepenting  sinners,  wherever  they  are  found. 
There  is  administrative  justice  in  the  universe  which  will  righteously  balance  the 
affairs  of  humanity  one  day.  2.  His  feelings  towards  God.  The  feeling  of 
personal  interest.  "My  King."  He  felt  that  the  Guardian  of  the  universe  was 
in  a  high  sense  his  ;  his  Guardian,  his  Father,  and  his  Friend.  A  feeling  of  earnest 
supplication.  And  the  feeling  of  practical  expectancy.  David  "looked  up" 
expecting.  3.  His  purpose  in  relation  to  God.  He  purposed  early  prayer  ;  orderly 
prayer  j  there  is  a  becoming  order  in  worship.  II.  In  relation  to  society. 
1.  He  regards  all  who  are  his  enemies  as  enemies  to  God.  See  in  David's  conduct 
the  common  mistake  of  bigots,  and  the  persecuting  spirit  of  bigots.  2.  He  regards 
all  who  were  God's  friends  as  his  own.  God's  friends  should  be  our  friends,  His 
people    our    people.      {ffomilist. )  The  prayerful  and  uwprayerful : — I.    The 

ADDRESS  AND  MANNER  OF  PRAYER  (1-3).  Uttered  words  tell  not  all  the  heart 
meditates.  These  meditations  are  the  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,  but 
which  the  Spirit  understands  (Rom.  viiL  26,  27).  As  soon  as  we  awake  at  early 
dawn  let  us  speak  to  God,  "direct,"  set  in  order,  our  prayer.  We  are  not  to  pray 
without  method  ;  and  having  prayed,  look  out  for  the  answer  (Hab.  ii.  1).  We 
mias  many  answers,  because  we  get  tired  of  waiting  on  the  quays  for  the  returning 
ships.  II.  Contrasted  characters  (4-7).  There  are  here  severe  expressions  for 
the  ungodly.  They  may  not  even  "sojourn"  with  God,  as  a  wayfaring  man 
(2  John  10).  They  speak  leasing,  an  old  English  word  for  lying.  Not  in  the 
spirit  of  boasting,  but  of  humble  gratitude  does  David  turn'to  himself  (1  Cor.  xv.  10). 
"Thy  holy  temple"  (Dan.  vi.  10;  1  Sam.  i.  9,  iii.  3).  III.  The  prayeb 
(8-12).  We  may  appeal  to  God's  righteousness  to  vindicate  His  righteous  ones. 
Because  He  is  what  He  is,  we  may  count  on  Him  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9).  How  terrible 
is  the  description  of  the  ungodly  (9),  yet  it  is  almost  entirely  concerned  with  the  sina 
of  the  tongue.  Wicked  men  are  like  sepulchres,  fair  without,  corruption  within, 
and  exhaling  pestilential  vapours.  Ver.  11.  ""Trust,"  and  with  it  goes  joy  and 
love  (Deut.  ixxiii.  23).  {¥.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  oratory  gate : — This  Psalm  is  a 
prayer.  And  while  the  subject-matter  is  of  great  interest,  the  Psalm  is  peculiar  in 
setting  forth  the  characteristics  of  prayer  in  general.  1.  A  suggestion  of  the 
variety  of  prayer  (vers.  1,  2).  Prayer  is  a  provision  for  a  universal  need,  and 
must  therefore  be  capable  of  a  large  variety  of  adaptations.  If  a  man  is  to  pray 
without  ceasing,  he  must  pray  under  an  endless  variety  of  circumstances.  That  is 
prayer  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  "meditation  "  ;  that  which  lies  in  the  heart  as 
unexpressed  desire  or  aspiration  ;  which  indicates  a  state  or  habit  of  mind  quite  as 
much  as  an  act  "Meditation,"  says  Gurnall,  "is  prayer  in  bullion  ;  prayer  in  the 
ore — soon  melted  and  run  into  holy  desires."  The  soul's  unexpressed  aspiration  is 
often  more  truly  prayer  than  the  well-rounded  formula.  Distinguish  between  the 
spirit  and  the  habit  of  prayer.  The  spirit  can  be  the  result  only  of  the  life  of  God 
in  the  soul ;  the  habit  of  prayer  may  be  the  result  of  education  merely.  Another 
variety  of  prayer  is  suggested  by  the  word  "cry" — the  passionate  outburst  of  a 
soul  in  distress,  or  dejection,  or  danger  ;  throwing  out  a  pi'ayer  like  a  strongly-shot 
dart,  which  gives  to  such  prayer  the  name  of  "  ejaculatory. "  "  These  darts  may  be 
shot  to  heaven  without  using  the  tongue's  bow."  Such  prayer  as  this  links  itself 
closely  with  meditation.  Ver.  2  directs  thought  to  the  appropriating  power  of 
prayer.  God  is  addressed  as  "my  King,"  "my  God."  Our  Lord's  model  of 
prayer  strikes  at  all  unselfishness  in  our  petitions.     But  it  does  not  exclude  the 

fersonal  element.  Ver.  3  points  out  the  statedness  and  decency  of  prayer. 
t  is  well  that  prayer  should  be  spontaneous  ;  but  also  well  that  it  should  be 
properly  regulated.  A  rich  soil  is  a  good  thing ;  but  its  richness  is  no  reason  why 
its  fruits  and  gi-asses  should  be  allowed  to  grow  up  in  confusion.  The  suggestion 
of  decency  in  the  act  of  prayer  is  furnished  by  the  word  "direct."  The  original 
word  is  used  of  arranging  the  wood  and  the  sacrifice  upon  the  altar  day  by  day. 
Read,  "  I  wUl  pray,  setting  forth  my  supplication  in  order."  In  this  there  is 
nothing  to  repress  spontaneity  or  to  fetter  liberty.  It  merely  teaches  that  prayer 
should  be  decorous  and  well  pondered  and  marked  by  an  intelligent  purpose.  We 
should  do  well  to  cover  less  ground  in  our  prayers,  and  to  ponder  their  details 
more  carefuUy.  Ver.  3  gives  another  characteristic  of  prayer — expectancy.  "  I 
will  watch,  or  look  up.'  He  who  has  thoughtfully  and  reverently  set  forth  hi* 
prayer  before  God,  should  expect  the  answer.  Wa  are  to  watch  unto  prayer — with 
reference  to  prayer.  Some  one  has  pithily  aaid  that  the  man  who  does  not  look 
after  the  prayers  he  has  put  up,  is  like  the  ostrich,  which  lays  her  eggs  and  looks 
not  for   her    young.      Ver.   7    jdves  another  characteristic — confidinob.     Tho 


PSALM  T.]  THE  PSALMS,  '   91 

Psalmist  speaks  as  one  who  has  a  right  to  come  into  God's  house.  It  is  his  house 
because  it  is  God's.  This  confidence  by  no  means  excludes  humble  reverence.  It 
is  of  free  grace,  of  undeserved  compassion,  of  abounding  love,  that  I  am  permitted 
to  come.  And  such  an  approach  to  God  must  involve  the  last  element  of  prayer 
suggested  by  the  Psalm — joy.  On  earth,  the  intercourse  of  love  is  often  marred  by 
danger  ;  but  he  who  talks  with  God  in  His  own  house,  always  communes  in  safety. 
Thus  this  Psalm  is  a  great  lesson  on  prayer.  {Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  The 
poverty  of  speech  in  prayer : — "The  power  of  language  has  been  gradually  enlarging 
for  a  great  length  of  time,  and  I  venture  to  say  that  the  English  language  at  the 
present  time  can  express  more,  and  is  more  subtle,  flexible,  and  at  the  same  time 
vigorous,  than  any  of  which  we  possess  a  record."  So  writes  Richard  Jefferies  in  one 
of  his  latest  essays.  But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  he  recognises  that  we  have  still 
thought*  and  feelings  beyond  expression.  "How  many  have  said  of  the  sea," 
he  exclaims,  "it  makes  me  feel  something  I  cannot  say."  And  how  much  more 
does  this  feeling  possess  us  as  we  commune  with  Him  who  made  the  sea.  Words  fail 
to  express  the  thoughts,  and  thoughts  fail  to  fathom  the  truth.  Consider  my 
meditation. — The  unspoken  part  of  prayer : — And  not  only  must  his  tongue  be 
listened  to,  his  tlumght  must  be  interpreted  as  well.  He  implores,  "  Understand 
my  meditation."  This  is  the  old  Prayer- Book  rendering,  and  seems  to  come  nearest 
the  Hebrew  {bin).  A  parallel  pa.ssage  is,  "Thou  understandest  my  thought  afar  off ; 
for  there  is  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  but,  lo,  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest  it  altogether." 
The  petition  "Understand  my  meditation"  coming  after  "Give  ear  unto  my 
words  "  is  deeply  suggestive.  It  implies  that  there  was  a  voiceless  meaning  in  his 
prayer  which  was  not  only  more  than  he  could  express,  but  more  than  he  himself 
ooald,  even  to  himself,  perfectly  explain.  In  the  profoundest  prayer  not  only 
more  is  meant  than  meets  the  ear,  but  more  is  meant  than  the  mind  itself  can  quite 
decipher.  And  expansion  in  Rom.  viii.  is  very  wonderful,  very  touching,  and 
encouraging:  "We  know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought,  but  the  Spirit  Himself 
maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered.  And  He  that 
searcheth  the  heart  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit."    {B.  Gregory,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  For  unto  Thee  will  I  pray. — Prayer: — If  you  "restrain  prayer  before 
God  " — 1.  You  act  in  opposition  to  your  sense  and  confession  of  what  is  right.  You 
know  that  you  ought  to  pray.  How  can  you  repel  the  charge  of  inconsistency,  when 
prayer  is  excluded  from  your  practical  system  ?  2.  By  neglecting  prayer,  you  resist 
the  authority  of  God.  God  has  commanded  you  to  pray.  Can  you  venture  to  treat 
His  command  with  contempt,  and  yet  hope  to  prosper?  What  title  have  you  to 
expect  that,  in  this  particular  move  than  in  any  other,  you  can  disobey  God  with 
impunity  ?  3.  Without  prayer  vain  will  be  to  you  all  the  provisions  that  are  made 
in  the  gospel  for  your  deliverance  and  happiness.  The  gospel  is  a  dispensation  of 
Divine  wisdom  and  goodness.  It  proposes  to  bestow  on  men  the  benefits  of  salvation. 
But  it  proposes  to  bestow  them  in  a  certain  way,  and  according  to  a  certain  scheme. 
Do  you  know  any  ground  for  believing  that  these  benefits  can  ever  belong  to  those 
who  do  not  pray  for  them?  Lessons:  (1)  It  becomes  us  to  form  and  adopt  the 
purpose  of  the  Psalmist.  His  purpose  was  to  pray ;  and  that  purpose  should  be 
ours.  We  have  many  motives  and  inducements  to  engage  in  this  exercise.  (2)  It 
should  be  with  great  earnestness  that  we  pray  to  God.  Not  going  about  the  duty 
in  a  cold,  formal,  or  perfunctory  manner.  (3)  We  are  not  to  pray  as  if  God  were 
unwilling  to  hear  us,  and  to  bestow  the  blessings  which  we  need.  He  has  revealed 
Himself  as  the  hearer  of  prayer.  (4)  Do  not  forget  that  the  God  to  whom  you  pray 
is  a  holy  God.  Observe  that  the  Psalmist  did  not  satisfy  himself  with  private 
■prayer ;  he  also  resolved  to  engage  in  the  exercises  of  public  worship.  The  resolution 
of  the  Psalmist  should  be  ours.  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  directness  of  prayer : — 
No  priest  stands  between  the  worshipper  and  his  Lord.  Every  man  must  state  his 
own  case.  We  pray  for  one  another,  but  not  instead  of  one  another.  What  can  be 
more  beautiful  than  the  picture  which  is  thus  represented  ?  God  is  put  in  His  right 
place  as  the  throned  Father,  listening  to  each  of  His  subjects  as  the  subject  may 
reel  impelled  to  address  Him.  Every  word  is  charged  with  tremulous  Ufe.  No 
man  can  pray  for  another  in  the  same  exquisite  and  vital  sense  as  a  man  can  pray 
for  himself ;  there  are  always  circumstances  in  the  case  of  the  petitioner,  which  the 
petitioner  alone  knows,  and  even  though  he  cannot  throw  such  circumstances  into 
literal  expression  he  can  suggest  them  all  by  the  very  tones  of  his  voice.  Wa 
mistake  the  nature  of  prayer  if  we  think  it  can  be  limited  to  words.  Even  when 
we  use  the  words  of  another  in  our  devotional  exercises,  we  throw  into  their  expres- 


92  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  Y.. 

sion  accents  which  are  personal  and  incommunicable.     It  is  in  such  tones  and 
accents  that  the  true  quality  of  prayer  is  found.     If  prayer  consisted  only  in  the- 
utterance  of  certain  words,  then  the  wicked  might  pray,  and  pray  with  great  elocu- 
tionary effect ;  but  the  prayer  is  hardly  in  the  words  at  all,  it  is  a  subtle  fragrance  ■■ 
of  the  soul,  an  inexpressible  something  which  we  understand  most  nearly  by  the^ 
name  of  agony.     This  being  the  nature  of  prayer,  it  follows  that  whatever  priestly 
mediation  there  may  be  in  the  universe — and  that  there  is  such  mediation  no- 
student  of  the  Bible  can  deny — the  individual  himself  must  stand  in  a  direct  relation 
to  God,  receiving  help  from  the  priest,  but  not  in  any  degree  to  obliterate  his 
personality,  or  reduce  his  spiritual  enjoyment.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)        On  the 
advantages  of  prayer : — Prayer  is  the  pulse  of  the  soul.     To  be  prayerless,  or  little- 
inclined  to  pray,  is  the  most  dreadful  state  in  which  a  human  being  can  possibly  be. 
But  it  is  nearly  as  lamentable  to  pray  under  the  influence  of  improper  sentiments 
and  feelings,  as  not  to  pray  at  all.     It  is  by  no  means  the  province  of  prayer,  to- 
inform  the  Deity  of  what  we  need,  or  to  induce  Him  to  alter  His  purposes,  or  to 
prevail  upon  Him  to  bestow  upon  us  whatever  we  may  think  fit  to  solicit  from  Him. 
To  the  omniscient  God  all  our  wants  must  be  well  known  ;  even  better  than  they 
are  to  ourselves.     Nor  can  He  be  supposed,  in  consequence  of  our  prayers,  either  to- 
deviate  from  the  course  which  He  had  determined  to  pursue,  or  to  submit  the  dis- 
posal of  His  favours  to  our  direction.     The  advantages  of  prayer  must  be  considered, 
as  confined  to  ourselves  ;  and  we  have  only  to  reflect  for  a  moment  on  the  sfate  and 
temper  of  mind  which  it  is  instrumental  in  cherishing,  to  be  convinced  that  it  is- 
eminently  calculated  to  promote  our  real  improvement  and  happiness.     1.  Prayer, 
in  consequence  of  the  dispositions  which  it  excites  and  cherishes  in  the  mind  of  the 
suppliant,  is  well  calculated  to  produce  the  happiest  effects  upon  his  conduct  and 
condition.     There  is  not  an  error  in  the  understanding,  a  wrong  propensity  in  the 
will,  or  a  blemish  in  the  outward  conduct,  which  may  not,  either  directly  or  in- 
directly, be  traced  to  a  temper  of  mind,  the  reverse  of  th-)t  of  the  Christian  sup- 
pliant, and  which  a  similar  temper  to  his  would  not  tend  either  to  prevent  or- 
remove.     2.  Prayer  qualifies  the  suppliant  for  receiving  the  enlightening,  sanctify- 
ing, and  comforting  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit.     Tliat  the  Spirit  of  God  caa 
communicate  direction,  energy,  and  purity  to  the  soul  in  a  secret  and  incompre- 
hensible manner,  cannot  be  denied.     That  it  is  chiefly  by  means  of  prayer  such 
communication  is  made,  is  a  truth,  which  the  experience  of  every  genuine  Christian 
sufficiently  corroborates.     Prayer  is  the  means  God  has  appointed  to  be  usod  for 
obtaining  the  influences  of  the  Spirit,  and  for  cherishing  that  frame  and  temper  of" 
mind  which  peculiarly  qualify  him  for  receiving  them.     3.  Prayer  is  happily  fitted 
to  fortify  against  temptation.     Our  temptations  chiefly  arise  from  the  world,  and 
the  things  of  the  world.     The  influence  which  worldly  objects  produce  upon  the 
different  tempers  and  circumstances  of  men  is  so  great,  that  it  is  not  to  be  described. 
The  best  way  to  counteract  this  influence,  is  to  avert  the  mind  as  much  as  possible 
from  earthly  things,  and  in  the  frequent  exercise  of  prayer  to  lay  it  open  to  the 
impression  of  things  invisible  and  eternal.     Prayer  renders  us  independent  of  the 
world,  by  fixing  and  strengthening  our  dependence  upon  God.     4.   Prayer  imparts 
to  the  Christian  such  a  serenity,  strength,  and  stability,  as  fit  him  for  all  that  is 
truly  amiable,  and  great,  and  good.     It  renders  him  serene,  composed,  and  cheer- 
ful.    Seeing,  then,  that  prayer  is  attended  with  such  important  and  blessed  effects, 
how  gladly  ought  we  to  avail  ourselves  of  this  precious  privilege  !     {J.  Somerville, 
D.D/)        Objections  to  prayer  answered: — No  argument  has  ever  been  adduced, 
against  prayer,  which  may  not  be  traced  to  the  source  of  human  corruption.     Men 
disrelish  the  duty  of  prayer,  and  then  the  judgment  is  set  at  work  to  devise 
arguments  against  it.     Some  tell  us  that  they  see  little  or  no  necessity  for  prayer : 
that  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  will  bless  them,  whether  they  pray  or  not.     Many 
are  so  irregular  in  the  exercise  of  this  duty,  that  they  can  scarcely  be  said  to  pray 
at  all.     They  would  pray,  and  they  would  not.     Their  hearts  are  divided.     But . 
how  can  they  imagine  that  God  will  be  served  with  a  divided  heart  ?    Others  say, 
for  what  purpose  are  we  to  pray,  seeing  that  our  prayers  can  have  no  effect  upon 
God  to  dispose  Him  to  grant  us  what  we  need,  to  alter  His  purposes,  or  to  ward  off 
from  us  those  dangers  by  which  we  are  threatened  ?    Why  we  are  to  pray  for  quite 
another  reason  ;  namely,  to  produce  the  greatest  and  most  important,  and  most 
beneficial  effect  upon  ourselves.     The  purpose  of  prayer  is  answered,  when,  through 
the  Divine  blessing,  a  holy  frame  of  mind  is  thereby  wrought  in  us  ;  when  we  are 
brought  to  yield  to  the  impression  of  spiritual  things.     Some  well-disposed  persong 
allege  that  they  cannot  pray.     This  does  not  furnish  any  reasonable  objection  to< 


PSALM  v.]  THE  PSALMS.  93 

prayer.  Not  to  pray  at  all,  because  we  are  unable  to  pray  well,  is  as  absurd  as  it 
would  be  in  a  child  not  to  walk,  because  it  cannot  walk  with  the  elegance  and  grace 
of  a  full-grown  man.  Such  an  objection  is  too  likely  to  arise  from  indolence,  and 
the  want  of  a  real  disposition  to  pray.  It  is  not  the  manner  or  language  of  ]>rayer 
that  renders  it  acceptable  to  God,  but  the  temper  and  dispositions  with  which  it  is 
offered  up.  If  the  poor  afflicted  sinner  has  right  dispositions,  he  will  approach  the 
Lord,  though  in  the  most  imperfect  manner.  Some  sincere  Christians  say,  they  are 
conscious  of  so  much  sin  and  unworthiness,  so  much  weakness  and  depravity,  in 
the  sight  of  God,  that  they  dare  not  pray.  But  they  forget  the  great  Intercessor, 
standing  before  the  throne,  with  the  golden  censer  in  His  hand,  and  offering  up 
much  incense  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  By  this,  their  fiars  are  dissipated. 
Another  objection  to  prayer  is  apt  to  arise  in  the  minds  of  true  Christians.  How- 
ever earnest  and  sincere  they  may  have  been  in  the  performance  of  this  duty,  they 
have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  an  answer  to  their  prayers  has  ever  been  vouchsafed. 
This  objection  is  sometimes  made  when  prayers  have  been  answered,  but  not  in  the 
particular  form  desired.  God  may  have  reasons  for  delaying  or  withholding  answers. 
The  true  suppliant  does  not  immediately  cease  to  urge  his  suit,  when  he  thinks  that 
he  is  not  heard.  God  knows  both  what  is  good  for  the  Christian,  and  at  what  time, 
and  in  what  manner,  it  should  be  granted.  Therefore  it  becomes  the  Christian, 
instead  of  lessening  his  importunity  when  he  thinks  ho  is  not  heard,  to  wait  with 
patience,  and  a  renewed  earnestness,  till  God  be  pleased  to  vouchsafe  to  him  a 
gracious  answer.  {J.  Somerville,  D.D.)  On  the  nature  of  prayer: — Prayer  is 
well  defined  as  an  offering  up  of  our  desires  to  God,  for  things  agreeable  to  His  will, 
in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  confession  of  our  sins,  and  thankful  acknowleclgment  of 
His  mercies.  Prayer  may  be  considered  as  a  generic  term,  including  adoration, 
confession,  petition,  and  thanksgiving.  All  these  are  equally  the  result  of  a 
devotional  temper.  1.  The  true  suppliant  is  deeply  conscious  of  his  being  in  a  state 
of  dependence,  weakness,  ignorance,  and  inability  to  promote  his  own  happiness. 
Without  this,  there  may  be  a  form  of  prayer,  but  nothing  of  its  spirit.  2.  The  true 
suppliant  comes  to  God  in  the  firm  belief  of  His  existence,  and  with  a  confidential 
application  to  Him,  as  both  able  and  willing  to  help  all  who  put  their  trust  in  Him. 
Without  such  faith  and  confidence,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  prayer.  3.  The 
true  suppliant  draws  near  to  God,  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.  In  all  ages 
and  nations,  rites  of  purification  have  usually  preceded  the  immediate  approaches 
to  Deity.  If  we  "regard  iniquity  in  our  hearts,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  us."  But 
imperfection  cleaves  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  to  the  people  of  God  in  the  present 
life ;  and  as  they  are  deeply  conscious  of  this  being  the  case,  and  as  such  a  con- 
sciousness naturally  tends  to  weaken  their  confidence  in  God,  observe — 4.  That  the 
true  suppliant  draws  near  to  God,  through  the  mediation  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ. 
"Through  Him  we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  Nor  is  this  a 
recent  appointment.  6.  The  true  suppliant,  in  all  his  requests  at  the  throne  of 
grace,  is  regulated  by  the  word  and  will  of  God.  The  desires  of  mankind  are  as 
various  as  their  imaginary  wants.  The  will  of  God,  and  not  his  own  will,  is  the 
Christian's  guide  in  devotional  duty.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  glorious  privilege 
of  prayer  ;  a  privilege  so  great,  that  by  improving  it  aright,  dependent  and  sinful 
creatures  like  ourselves  may  lean  with  confidence  on  the  Rock  of  Ages  Himself.  But 
such  prayer  as  has  been  delineated  is  no  natural  attainment.  The  sentiments  and 
feelings  of  the  true  suppliant  are  the  produce  of  a  Divine  principle,  specially 
engendered  and  nourished  by  Him  who  is  denominated,  "the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
supplications."     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  In  the  xnomini^  will  I  direct  my  prayer  onto  Thee. — How  to  begin  every 
day  with  Ood: — I.  Thk  good  wokk  itsklf  that  we  are  to  do.  To  pray.  A 
duty  dictated  by  the  light  and  law  of  nature,  but  which  the  gospel  of  Christ  gives 
OS  better  instruction  in.  See  how  David  expresses  his  pious  resolutions.  1.  My 
Toice  shalt  Thou  hear.  Understand  as  promising  himself  a  gracious  acceptance  with 
God.  "Thou  wilt  hear."  It  is  the  language  of  his  faith,  grounded  upon  God's 
promise,  that  His  ear  shall  be  always  open  to  His  people's  cry.  Wherever  God  finds 
a  praying  heart,  He  will  be  found  a  prayer-hearing  God.  Understand  as  David's 
promising  God  a  constant  attendance  on  Him,  in  the  way  He  has  appointed.  God 
understands  the  language  of  the  heart,  and  that  is  the  language  in  which  we  must 
Bpeak  to  God.  We  must  see  to  it  that  God  hears  from  us  daily.  He  expects  and 
requires  it.  Tlius  He  will  keep  ap  His  authority  over  us  ;  and  testify  His  love  and 
compassion  towards  qb.    We  have  something  to  say  to  Grod  every  day :  as  to  a  Mend 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  v. 

we  love,  and  haye  freedom  with  ;  as  to  a  master  we  serve,  and  have  bnsiness  with. 
Our  happiness  is  bound  up  in  His  favour.  We  have  offended  Him,  and  are  daily 
contracting  guUt  We  have  daily  work  to  do  for  God  and  our  own  souls.  We  are 
continually  in  danger.  We  are  dying  daily.  We  are  members  of  that  body  whereof 
Christ  is  the  head,  and  are  concerned  to  approve  ourselves  living  members.  Lay  all 
this  together,  and  consider  whether  you  have  not  something  to  say  to  God  every 
day.  If  you  have  all  this  to  say  to  God,  what  should  hinder  you  from  saying  it  ? 
Let  not  distance,  or  fear,  hinder  you.  Let  not  His  knowing  wliat  your  business  is 
hinder  you.  Let  not  any  other  business  hinder  our  saying  what  we  have  to  say  to 
God.  IL  We  must  dieect  our  prayer  to  God.  We  must  with  deliberation  and 
design  address  ourselves  to  Him.  The  term  "  direct "  indicates  fixedness  of  thought, 
and  a  close  application  of  mind,  to  the  duty  of  prayer.  It  speaks  the  sincerity  of 
our  habitual  intention  in  prayer :  the  steadiness  of  our  actual  regard  to  God  in 
prayer.  III.  We  must  look  up.  We  must  look  up  in  our  prayers  ;  and  after  our 
prayers,  with  an  eye  of  satisfaction  and  pleasure  ;  with  an  eye  of  observation,  what 
returns  God  makes  to  our  prayers.  Let  us  be,  inward  with  God  in  every  duty,  to 
make  heart-work  of  it,  or  we  make  nothing  of  it.  The  particular  time  fixed  for  this 
good  work  is  the  morning.  Then  we  are  Iresh  and  lively.  Then  we  are  most  free 
from  company  and  business.  Then  we  have  received  fresh  mercies  from  God,  which 
we  are  concerned  to  acknowledge.  In  the  morning  we  have  fresh  matter  ministered 
to  us  for  the  adoration  of  the  greatness  and  glory  of  God.  In  the  morning  we  are 
addressing  ourselves  to  the  work  of  the  day,  and  therefore  are  concerned  by  prayer 
to  seek  unto  God  for  His  presence  and  blessing.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Morning 
prayer: — I.  The  Christian's  resolution.  To  pray.  1.  Prayer  is  a  duty  and  a 
privilege.  It  implies  spiritual  life — filial  relationship — fret-dom  of  access  to  God. 
The  spirit  of  prayer  must  be  earnestly  cultivated.  2.  God  is  the  supreme  and 
immediate  object  of  prayer.  "  I  will  direct  my  ])rayer  unto  Thee."  The  mediation 
of  priests  and  saints  or  of  the  Virgin  Mary  superfluous.  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day 
of  trouble,"  &c.  3.  Prayer  must  be  definite  in  its  aim.  "I  will  direct,"  &c.  A 
soul  soliloquy  is  not  prayer.  Nor  is  the  enumeration  of  the  Divine  attributes  hid. 
True  prayer  is  the  earnest  expression  of  the  deep  necessities  and  longings  of  the 
soul  in  the  simplest  language  possible.  The  grain  of  prayer  should  not  be  lost  in 
the  chaff  of  vague  generalities.  II.  The  best  time  for  private  prayer.  "In 
the  morning,"  &c.  1.  There  is  a  greater  freedom  from  the  distracting  cares  of  tha 
family,  business,  ic.  2.  We  should  seek  Divine  strength  in  anticipation  of  duties, 
trials,  temptations,  &c.  3.  A  day  begun  with  prayer,  generally  proves  a  happy  day. 
4.  The  most  eminent  Christians  have  devoted  the  early  morning  to  prayer.  Mention 
some.  III.  The  becoming  attitude  for  a  prayerful  soul.  "  I  will  look  up." 
Describe  watch-tower.  1.  We  should  not  be  satisfied  without  the  conviction  that 
our  prayers  have  been  heard  by  God.  Many  prayers  never  reach  the  goal  of  th« 
throne  of  grace.  2.  Our  prayers  should  not  be  forgotten,  but  an  answer  looked  for. 
It  will  be  so  if  our  eye  be  single  and  our  aim  definite.  3.  Such  an  attitude  prepares 
us  for  the  recognition  of  the  Divine  hand  in  answer  to  our  prayers.  {Homilist. ) 
Morning  devoti&n : — The  essence  of  real  religion  is  a  filial  disposition  of  heart  to- 
wards God.  1.  Morning  is  the  time  for  reflection.  It  seems  natural  to  think,  and 
to  be  quiet,  in  the  early  morning.     The  very  laws  of  our  physical  being  demand 

3uiet  in  the  morning.  2.  Morning  is  the  time  for  observation.  The  curtain  is 
rawn  aside,  and  we  look  upon  the  face  of  God's  creation.  3.  Morning  is  the  time 
for  purpose.  We  may  begin  again,  every  morning,  with  fresh  purposes,  that  will 
be  achieved  if  the  strength  of  God  is  made  perfect  in  our  weakness.  4.  Morning  is 
the  time  for  prayer.  As  the  morning  gives  wings  to  the  day,  so  prayer  gives  wings 
to  the  morning.  Wise  reflections  will  become  wiser  through  the  power  of  prayer, 
and  our  purposes  will  only  be  binding  on  the  conscience,  or  wrought  out  in  the  life, 
as  prayer  gives  them  their  character  of  sincerity  or  religiousness.  Mornings  are 
monitors,  text-books,  and  registers.  (  W.  O.  Barrett. )  The  protective  power  of 
prayer : — Among  the  elegant  forms  of  insect  life,  there  is  a  little  creature  known 
to  naturalists,  which  can  gather  round  it  a  sufficiency  of  atmospheric  air — and  so 
clothed  upon,  it  descends  into  the  bottom  of  the  pool,  and  you  may  see  the  little 
diver  moving  about  dry  and  at  his  ease,  protected  by  his  crystal  vesture,  though 
the  water  all  around  and  above  be  stagnant  and  bitter.  Prayer  is  such  a  protector 
— a  transparent  vesture,  the  world  sees  it  not — but  a  real  defence,  it  keeps  out  tha 
world.  By  means  of  it,  the  believer  can  gather  so  much  of  heaven's  atmosphere 
around  him,  and  with  it  descend  into  the  putrid  depths  of  this  contanainating  world, 
that  for  a  season  no  evil  will  touch  him  ;  and  he  knows  where  to  ascend  for  a  new 


PSALM  v.]  THE  PSALMS.  ^  95 

supply.  {James  Hamilton.)  Morning  prayer :  —  A  battle  is  every  morning 
fought  in  every  Christian's  closet.  The  morning  is  the  key  of  the  position.  The 
season  of  morning  prayer  is,  so  to  speak,  the  citadel,  the  Hougomont,  the  critical 
point  in  each  successive  day.  If  he  wins  those  morning  minutes,  the  devil  knows 
he  has  won  that  day.      {Hid.)  The    upward    look: — It   is    said    that    the 

monks  of  Mount  Athos  are  accustomed  to  hypnotise  themselves  into  trance 
conditions  by  gazing  at  their  own  bodies — no  very  ennobling  objective  if  true. 
In  some  of  the  Buddhist  monasteries  of  Eastern  Asia  devotees  are  pointed  out  who 
have  sat  facing  blank  walls  for  twenty  or  thirty  years  and  have  gazed  themselves 
into  mysterious  ecstasies.  In  the  modernised  Buadhism  of  London  and  New  York 
theosophy  the  same  virtue  is  ascribed  to  intense  and  sustained  contemplation. 
What  change,  think  you,  ought  to  effect  itself  within  us  if  with  the  same  stead- 
fastness we  contemplate  the  personality  of  Him  who  is  the  leader  and  consummator 
of  our  faith !    (Thomas  O.  Selhy.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Thou  art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness. — The  great 
matters  of  religion: — If  we  inquire  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  man  is  fallen  under 
God's  displeasure,  the  text  resolves  it  all  into  "wickedness."  This  is  that  which 
makes  all  the  breach  between  God  and  us.  This  is  that  which  hath  wrought  all  the 
mischief  and  disorder  that  ever  hath  been  in  the  creation  of  God  from  the  beginning. 
This  is  that  which  hath  so  sunk  and  debased  the  nature  of  man,  and  made  it  so 
unlike  the  Divine  nature.  Whosoever  is  in  love  with  evil,  cannot  be  in  love  with 
the  ways  of  goodness  and  righteousness.  Whosoever  consents  to  iniquity,  does 
voluntarily  part  with  God,  and  God  leaves  him.  Atheists  make  the  prosperity  of 
wicked  men  an  argument  against  Divine  Providence.  To  make  a  man  a  wicked 
person  in  the  sense  of  Scripture,  there  must  be  either  gross  carelessness  and  neglect 
of  God  and  religion :  voluntary  consent  to  known  iniquity,  known  hypocrisy, 
or  great  apostasy,  in  matters  of  doctrine,  or  in  matters  of  practice.  Those 
that  are  wicked  cannot  have  to  do  with  God  ;  they  stand  at  a  great  distance  from 
Him,  and  are  banished  from  His  throne.  We  best  know  God  by  imitation  and 
resemblance  of  Him.  We  cannot  build  upon  any  report  concerning  God,  which  a 
bad  man  makes ;  for  if  he  should  speak  right  of  God,  he  would  condemn  himself. 
Goodness,  which  is  God's  perfection,  and  wickedness,  which  is  man's  acquisition,  can 
no  more  consist  together  than  light  and  darkness,  health  and  sickness,  soundness 
and  rottenness.  Persons  of  naughty  minds  have  no  true  thoughts  either  of  God  or 
man.  What,  then,  are  the  great  matters  of  religion,  and  what  are  those  things  that 
will  consist  with  it  ?  To  reverence  and  acknowledge  the  Deity.  To  live  in  love, 
and  bear  goodwill  towards  one  another.  To  deal  justly,  equally,  and  fairly  in  all 
our  transactions  and  dealings  each  with  other.  To  use  moderation  and  government 
of  ourselves,  in  the  respect  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  this  state.  The 
following  things  are  matters  of  offence,  and  of  the  creature's  ruin.  Things  contrary 
to  the  due  respect  and  regard  which  we  ought  to  bear  towards  God.  Things  that 
are  contrary  to  the  general  love  and  goodwill  which  ought  to  run  through  the  whole 
creation  of  God.  Things  contrary  to  that  fairness,  justice,  righteousness,  and 
equal  dealing  which  ought  to  be  among  fellow-servants,  among  fellow-creatures. 
Things  contrary  to  the  sobriety,  chastity,  temperance,  and  due  moderation  of  our- 
selves. .  .  .  Two  things  concerning  repentance.  1.  It  doth  alter  the  very  temper 
of  the  sinner.  2.  It  is  a  motive  with  God,  and  doth  affect  Him.  It  doth  procura 
atonement  in  respect  of  God.  (B.  Whichcote,  D.D.)  God's  hatred  of  sin: — 
1.  Some  of  the  grounds  of  that  displeasure  which  God  cherishes  towards  sin.  The 
justice  of  God  must  lead  Him  to  view  with  displeasure  that  evil  and  abominable 
thing.  The  love — the  serinice  which  God  requires,  is  love  and  obedience.  To  with- 
hold this  service  is  to  act  unjustly  towards  Him.  The  benevolence  of  God  must 
ever  lead  Him  to  regard  sin  with  abhorrence.  What  is  sin  but  a  soul  going  away 
from  its  Maker,  from  the  great  Fountain  of  living  waters  *  As  the  great  Law-giver 
of  the  universe,  God  must  look  with  deep  displeasure  on  sin.  The  law  is  holy,  and 
just  and  good.  When  we  act  in  opposition  to  this  law,  we,  in  fact,  lift  up  our 
testimony  against  the  law.  Further,  God  is  the  Author  of  all  our  mercies,  and  as 
such  must  look  with  deep  displeasure  on  the  workers  of  iniquity.  How  great  is  the 
debt  and  obligation  under  which  we  are  laid  to  Him  by  the  loaid  of  His  providential 
bounty  !  There  has  not  been  a  moment  of  our  lives  in  which  the  God  who  made  us 
has  not  been  doing  something  for  us.  What  must  He  think  of  that  evil  thing  which 
leads  to  such  ingratitude  tor  these  blessings  ?  And  God  must  look  with  displeasure 
on  sin,  because  it  is  opposed  to  all  those  great  schemes,  all  those  grand  schemes, 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  y. 

which  we  read  in  the  Scriptures,  of  Jehovah  having  imparted  ;  such  as  creation, 
providence,  redemption.  2.  Manifestations  of  the  existence  and  the  extent  of  that 
hatred  of  iniquity  which  God  habitually  cherishes.  We  find  many  such  manifesta- 
tions. Illustration— Angels  that  lost  their  first  estate.  Loss  of  Eden.  Stoiy  of 
So:lom,  &c.  (James  Marshall,  A.M.)  Thou  liatest  all  workera  of  iniquity.— 
God's  hatred  of  sinners : — Here  is  a  plain  declaration.  I.  That  God  does  hatb 
THE  PEKSONS  OF  IMPENITENT  SINNERS.  It  is  often  Said  that  God  hates  sin,  but 
not  sinners.  The  point  now  to  prove  is,  that  God  hates  sinners  themselves,  as  vile 
and  odious  creatures.  It  is  allowed  that  God  loves  all  that  love  Him,  and  it  is 
equally  true  that  He  hates  those  who  hate  Him.  The  Old  Testament  abounds  with 
passages  in  which  God  expresses  His  displeasure.  His  wrath,  and  His  indignation 
towards  sinners.  II.  Why  does  God  uate  the  persons  of  sinners  ?  Many 
consider  sin  in  the  abstract,  and  God  as  hating  it  in  the  abstract.  But  who  can 
conceive  of  sin  without  a  sinner  ?  Or  of  sin  that  no  person  ever  committed  ?  Every 
sin  is  a  transgression  of  the  law,  and  renders  the  transgressor  both  criminal  and 
hateful.  The  transgression  cannot  be  separated  from  the  transgressor,  any  more 
than  his  reason,  or  conscience,  or  any  other  property  or  quality  of  his  mind  can  be 
separated  from  him.  The  apostle  represents  sin  as  corrupting  all  the  powers  and 
faculties  of  sinners.  This  moral  corruption  of  sinners  he  represents  as  rendering 
them  vile  and  hateful,  even  in  their  own  sight.  Their  evU  hearts  render  their 
persons  morally  evil  and  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  It  is  holiness  of  heart  that 
makes  saints  lovely,  and  the  reverse  is  equally  true  of  sinners.     III.  How  God's 

HATING  THE  PERSONS  OF  SINNERS   IS    CONSISTENT  WITH  HiS  LOVING  THEM.       Some 

have  attempted  to  evade  this  diflBculty  by  supposing  that  all  the  Scripture  saya 
about  the  displeasure,  the  hatred,  the  wrath  and  anger  of  God,  is  to  be  understood 
figuratively ;  and  that  no  such  exercises  or  emotions  of  heart  can  exist  in  the 
mind  of  an  absolutely  perfect  and  immutable  being.  But  to  suppose  that  God 
does  not  really  hate  sinners  is  evading  rather  than  solving  the  difficulty.  Others 
say  that  God  loves  sinners  themselves,  and  only  hates  their  sins.  But  it  is 
abundantly  evident  from  Scripture  that  God  does  really  and  literally  love  and 
hate  sinners  at  the  same  time.  What  kind  of  love  does  God  exercise  towards 
sinners  1  They  are  not  proper  objects  of  approbation  or  complacence,  but  of  dis- 
approbation and  hatred.  It  is  only  the  love  of  benevolence  that  God  exercises 
towards  totally  depraved  sinners.  He  loves  all  His  creatures,  whether  rational  or 
irrational.  If  He  loves  them  with  the  love  of  benevolence.  He  cannot  love  them 
with  the  love  of  complacence.  Benevolence  hates  selfish  and  sinful  creatures,  as 
much  as  it  loves  holy  and  virtuous  creatures.  Holiness  in  the  Deity  produces  love 
to  the  holy,  and  hatred  to  the  unholy.  There  are  two  things  in  sinners  which 
render  them  objects  of  both  love  and  hatred.  Their  capacity  to  enjoy  happiness 
and  suffer  misery  renders  them  proper  objects  of  benevolence,  and  their  sinful 
character  reuders  them  proper  objects  of  displeasure,  disapprobation,  and  hatred. 
God  views  them  in  both  lights.  His  love  towards  them  is  benevolent  love,  and  His 
hatred  towards  them  is  benevolent  hatred.  Improvement.  1.  If  God's  hatred  of 
impenitent  sinners  is  consistent  with  His  love  of  benevolence  towards  them,  then  it  is 
consistent  with  His  benevolence  to  hate  them  as  long  as  they  continue  impenitent. 
2.  If  God  loves  and  hates  sinners  in  this  world  at  all,  then  He  loves  and  hates  them 
more  than  any  other  being  does  in  the  universe.  3.  If  impenitent  sinners  them- 
selves are  as  much  the  objects  of  God's  hatred  as  of  His  love,  then  it  is  very 
important  that  they  should  be  made  sensible  of  it.  4.  If  it  be  consistent  with  the 
benevolence  of  God  towards  sinners  to  hate  them,  then  it  is  consistent  with  Hia 
benevolence  to  express  His  hatred  towards  them.  5.  If  God's  hatred  of  impenitent 
sinners  flows  from  His  benevolence,  then  His  punishing  them  must  flow  from  His 
benevolence.  6.  If  it  be  the  benevolence  of  God  that  disposes  Him  to  hate  and 
punish  impenitent  sinners  for  ever,  then  it  is  extremely  absurd  and  dangerous  for 
sinners  to  rely  on  His  mere  benevolence  to  save  them  in  the  eleventh  and  dying  hour. 
This  subject  calls  on  all  to  inquire  and  determine  whether  they  are  saints  or 
sinners,  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  relation  of  the  righteous  God  to  wicked  men : — 
In  the  second  century,  Celsus,  a  celebrated  adversary  of  Christianity,  distorting  our 
Lord's  words,  complained,  "Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  make  the  most 
horrible  and  dreadful  society  ;  for  He  calls  sinners  and  not  the  righteous  ;  so  that 
the  body  He  came  to  assemble  is  a  body  of  profligates,  separated  from  good  men, 
among  whom  they  before  were  mixed.  He  has  rejected  all  the  good  and  collected 
all  the  bad. "  " True, "  said  Origen  in  reply,  "our  Jesus  came  to  call  sinners — but 
— to  repentance.     He  assembled  the  wicked — but  to  convert  them  into  new  men,  or 


(PSAIM  v.]  THE  PSALMS.  97 

rather  to  change  them  into  angels.  We  come  to  Him  covetous,  He  makes  as 
liberal ;  lascivious,  He  makes  us  chaste ;  riolent,  He  makes  us  meek ;  impious,  He 
makes  us  religious." 

Yer.  7.  I  will   come   into   Thy  house   in  the  mnltitade   of  Thy  mercy. — 

Sanctuary  worship : — This  noble  resolution.  It  manifests — I.  An  independenob 
OF  CHABACTEB.  "As  for  me."  How  many  there  are  who  follow  the  crowd! 
Whether  for  evil  or  good,  where  the  multitude  go  they  will  go.  Hundreds  stay 
away  from  the  house  of  God  either  because  it  is  not  fashionable  to  go  there  or 
because  they  are  afraid  of  being  singular.  Such  was  not  David's  course.  II.  A 
NOBLE  DETEEMINATION.  "I  wiU  come  into  Thy  house."  Two  or  three  thoughts 
will  show  the  nature  of  the  act.  1.  David  was  a  king.  He  might  have  thought  it 
beneath  him  to  leave  his  throne  and  humble  himself  before  God  in  the  worship  of 
the  temple.  But  kings  as  well  as  subjects  need  the  pardon  of  their  sins,  the  help  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  Divine  favour.  And  no  king  could  do  a  more  noble  act 
than  show  an  example  of  pious  devotion.  2.  David  was  a  man  of  war.  He  was 
constantly  engaged  in  bitter  contests.  But  he  did  not,  therefore,  abstain  from 
attending  the  house  of  God.  3.  David  was  a  busy  man.  He  had  to  manage  the 
affairs  of  a  large  and  distracted  kingdom  ;  yet  he  still  found  time  for  attending  the 
house  of  God.  4.  David  was  a  clever  man.  He  was  also  a  good  man.  He  might 
have  said,  "What  good  can  I  get  from  the  temple?  I  know  the  services,"  &c. 
But  humility  always  attends  those  who  have  real  merit,  while  those  who  have  little 
to  boast  of  fail  to  avail  themselves  of  opportunities  of  improvement  because  of  their 
self-conceit.  A  real  Christian  feels  his  deficiencies.  III.  A  worthy  object.  "  I 
will  come  into  Thy  house."  Public  worship  is  the  most  important  part  of  Christian 
life,  1.  It  is  obeying  the  Divine  command.  The  duty  of  gathering  ourselves 
together  is  imposed  upon  us  in  many  parts  of  the  Scriptures.  Not  only  was  it 
insisted  upon  iu  the  Old  Testament,  but  it  is  still  more  urged  in  the  New.  2.  It  is 
the  means  of  developing  the  Christian  life.  In  the  assemblies  of  the  saints  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  given  at  first,  and  is  still  bestowed.  Here  spirituality  is  deepened  and 
the  work  of  conversion  carried  on.  3.  It  is  the  appointed  means  of  communing 
with  God.  We  can  pray  in  private  ;  but  we  have  particular  access  in  the  house  of 
prayer.  {Homilist.)  The  tribute  of  worship : — From  the  sense  the  Psalmist  had 
of  God's  manifold,  repeated  favours  to  him,  from  the  multitude  of  the  Divine 
mercies  towards  him,  he  would  be  always  glad  and  ready  to  resort  to  the  house 
of  God  ;  there  to  prostrate  himself  with  all  humble  reverence,  and  there  to  pay  Him 
the  tribute  of  a  public  and  solemn  worship.  I.  The  reasonableness  of  this 
RESOLUTION.  His  reason  in  this  instance  was  indeed  occasional  and  particular,  and 
but  one  of  the  many  motives  which  persuade  to  the  discharge  of  this  important 
duty.  Consider  well  the  intrinsic  grounds  of  that  fitness  which  it  is  so  generally 
agreed  there  is  in  the  worship  of  our  Maker.  Moral  duties  have,  besides  His  will 
and  pleasure,  reasons  of  their  own.  How  doth  the  relation  of  a  reasonable  creature 
to  an  all-perfect  Creator,  infinite  in  wisdom,  goodness,  and  power,  introduce  the 
fitness  of  any  application  from  the  one  to  the  other,  in  the  oflBces  of  religious 
worship  ?  How  should  it  appear,  if  God  had  not  commanded  it,  that  He  would 
either  expect  or  accept  such  a  service  from  us  ?  With  what  view  do  we  lay  our 
wants  before  Him  ?  Doth  He  not  know  them  beforehand  much  better  than  we  do  ? 
Or  doth  His  goodness  want  solicitation  to  induce  Him  to  be  yet  more  gracious  than 
He  is  1  Or  when  we  deprecate  the  punishment  of  our  sins,  and  implore  His  merciful 
pardon,  do  we  intend  to  make  our  impressions  upon  the  tenderness  of  His  nature  ? 
Or  when  we  approach  Him  with  the  charity  of  our  atercessions  for  His  mercies  and 
blessings  to  our  fellow-creatures,  is  it  that  we  are  better  than  they  ?  Are  we  more 
mindful  of  their  interests  than  He  is  ?  Or  when  we  praise  Him  for  His  benefits  with 
joyful  lips,  do  we  mean  by  the  pleasing  sound  of  our  eucharistical  oblations  to  engage 
His  goodness  in  the  more  and  further  largesses  of  His  favour  ?  If  these  are  improper 
regards,  what  more  proper  reason  will  be  left  for  the  support  of  our  worship  ?  Why 
are  we  commanded  to  pray  ?  Because  prayer  recognises  and  settles  upon  our  minds 
a  sense  of  those  several  attributes  and  perfections  in  God,  the  dutiful  and  cordial 
acknowledgment  whereof  is  most  likely  to  maintain  and  preserve  us  in  the  state  of 
dependence  and  subjection  we  were  made  for.  When  we  approach  God  in  the 
humble  strains  of  penitential  sorrow,  what  a  scene  of  melting  and  moving  considera- 
tions must  open  to  our  minds  !  What  indignation  that  we  have  not  yet  approved, 
what  fear  that  we  may  not,  what  vehement  desire  that  we  may  approve  our  hearts 
before  Him  iu  all  holy  obedience.      Do  we  engage  in  the  charitable  office  of 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  v. 

intercession  for  others  ?  The  seeds  of  mutual  benevolence  are  fostered  hereby  and 
greatly  cultivated.  We  cannot  ask  with  any  decency  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins 
at  the  hands  of  God,  whose  trespasses  against  ourselves  we  should  not  be  willing  to 
remit  or  pardon.  Finally,  the  offices  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  add  the  motives  of 
gratitude  to  the  sense  of  our  dependence,  and  inspire  us  with  a  more  generous  and 
honourable  principle  of  obedience.  II.  The  fitness  of  the  place  he  chose  for  it. 
The  palace  of  God's  holiness  where  numbers  resorted  for  the  purposes  of  public 
prayer  and  thanksgiving.  An  appropriate  place  is  necessary  to  the  purposes  of 
public  worship.  III.  The  mannee  of  executing  the  pious  resolution.  In  the 
fear  of  God  with  an  awful  sense  of  His  wisdom,  goodness,  and  power.  With 
reverence  ami  godly  fear.  This  every  attribute  of  God,  when  duly  improved  to  us 
by  proper  reflections,  may  help  to  enforce  and  to  inculcate.  Even  the  forgiveness 
that  there  is  with  Him,  by  the  manner  and  method  wherein  we  partake  of  it,  was, 
with  our  holy  Psalmist,  a  motive  to  the  fear  of  Him.  {N,  Marshall,  D.D.)  In 
Thy  fear  will  I  worship  toward  Thy  holy  temple. — The  Christian  worshipping  in 
God's  temple: — Two  qualifications  of  a  right  worshipper  of  Jehovah  are  here  set 
before  us.  1.  "  I  will  come  into  Thy  house  in  the  multitude  of  Thy  mercy."  He 
seems  to  trace  all  the  multitudinous  streams  of  the  Divine  goodness  to  one  great 
fountain,  and  then  as  he  looks  at  that  fountain  overflowing  on  every  side,  and 
pouring  out  its  waters  in  those  numberless  streams,  he  calls  it  a  multitudinous 
fountain  ;  he  says,  "The  multitude  of  Thy  mercy."  He  will  go  to  God's  house — 
(1)  With  a  thankful  remembrance  of  the  Lord's  great  mercies  past.  (2)  With  a 
lively  sense  of  God's  great  mercy  now.  And  (3)  With  great  expectations  from  His 
mercy.  2.  "In  Thy  fear  will  I  worship."  Fear,  as  we  generally  experience  it,  is  a 
humiliating  and  painful  feeling.  We  suflfer  under  it,  and  are  ashamed  of  it.  And 
because  of  this,  we  cannot  disconnect  the  ideas  of  pain  and  humiliation  from  it. 
But  fear  is  not  necessarily  a  painful  thing.  Eeal  godliness  is  called  a  "  holy  fear  of 
God."  Perfect  love  does  indeed  cast  out  fear  ;  but  what  fear?  Only  the  fear  that 
hath  torment ;  servile  fear.  The  fear  David  means  here,  is  that  feeling  which 
naturally  arises  in  the  human  mind  from  the  contemplation  of  any  object  immensely 
superior  to  ourselves.  It  is  made  up  of  admiration,  awe,  and  reverence.  The 
phrase  "  worship  toward  His  holy  temple,"  is  taken  from  a  custom  among  the  Jews 
of  always  turning  towards  the  temple  or  tabernacle  when  they  prayed.  3.  See 
these  two  things  conjoined.  They  may  be  conjoined ;  and  it  is  good  for  us  to 
have  these  two  things  conjoined.  The  union  qualifies  us  for  the  service  and 
worship  of  God  in  His  house.  And  these  feelings  must  correspond  with  God's 
character.  Let  us  all,  then,  seek  to  cultivate  these  holy  feelings.  (C.  Bradley.) 
Worship,  a  sight  of  God : — Belief  in  God  is  the  great  regenerating  force  of  the  world. 
The  loss  which  the  unbeliever  suffers  is  enormous.  For  it  does  matter  what  God 
a  mau  believes  in,  for  his  character  will  be  as  his  faith.  Darwin  says,  "That 
with  the  existence  of  the  more  civilised  races  the  conviction  of  the  existence  of  an 
all-seeing  Deity  has  had  a  potent  influence  in  the  advancement  of  morality. "  But 
morality  means  the  highest  welfare  of  mankind.  Faith  in  God  depends  upon 
culture  :  we  are  not  bom  believers.  There  are  races  who  seem  to  have  no  such 
faith  ;  and  there  seems,  alas,  in  too  many  Christian  countries,  a  tendency  to  revert  to 
primitive  barbarism  in  this  respect !  Its  beginning  may  be  detected  in  the  neglect 
of  public  religious  service.  When  a  man  begins  to  neglect  his  church,  he  loses  one 
of  the  things  which  keep  faith  in  God  alive  within  him.  But  if  such  faith  is  to  be 
a  power,  it  must  have  some  finer  education  than  can  be  had  from  mere  formal 
attendance  at  church  ;  it  must,  in  fact,  be  a  sight  of  God.  This  is  the  highest  act 
of  religious  service,  it  is  the  act  and  state  of  worship.  What  is  worship  ?  It  does 
not  mean  all  sorts  of  religious  services,  but  it  is  one  particular  state  of  mind.  And 
this  not  a  self-regarding  one.  It  seeks  not  to  get  something  for  itself,  though  indeed 
it  gains  much.  But  that  is  not  its  object,  which  is  the  looking  upon  that  which 
attracts  the  mind  by  its  own  intrinsic  worth  or  worthiness.  This  is  the  real  meaning 
of  the  word  "worship."  Of  the  self- regarding  states  are  our  appetites  and  passions. 
They  are  for  self.  And  prayer,  whilst  it  looks  to  God,  is  yet  that  it  may  gain  for 
self.  Its  two  great  words  are,  Give  and  Forgive.  But  there  are  states  of  mind  which 
look  quite  away  from  self.  Nature,  in  her  highest  moods,  and  Art,  in  some  of  its 
^andest  expressions,  are  able  to  thus  absorb  us  and  hold  us  spellbound.  The  mind 
IS  taken  out  of  itself  and  placed  in  a  strange  mysterious  atmosphere.  And  so 
worship  is  the  mind  entranced,  fascinated,  spellbound  by  the  sight  of  what  God  is 
in  Himself.  Thus  worship  implies  a  sight  of  God.  But  not  any  sight.  Some 
views  of  God  are  so  oppressive  and  terrifying  as  to  palsy  the  mind  with  fear.     For 


rsALM  v.]  THE  PSALMS. 


many  practically  hold  God  to  be  the  author  of  evil  rather  than  of  good,  and  think 
of  Him  only  to  find  out  how  they  may  appease  Him.  They  come  before  Him  in 
awful  dread.  But  the  highest  form  of  religious  service — seen  with  such  lofty  pathos 
in  the  worship  of  our  Loid  and  Master,  and  presented  to  us  as  the  absorbing  occupa- 
tion of  heaven — is  the  beatific  vision  of  God  and  the  dwelling  upon  Him  until 
earthly  pains  and  sorrows  and  sins  fall  off  from  us  and  all  is  tranquil  as  a  dreamless 
sleep. 

"  In  such  access  of  mind,  in  such  high  hour 

Of  visitation  from  the  living  God, 

Thought  was  not ;  in  enjoyment  it  expired. 

No  thanks  he  breathed,  he  proffered  no  request, 

Rapt  into  still  communion  that  transcends 

The  imperfect  offices  of  prayer  and  praise." 

Now  we  might  and  should  have  more  of  this  Divine  elevation  in  our  religious 
services.  If  there  were  there  would  be  no  fear  of  the  neglect  of  public  worship. 
But  for  this  we  must  prepare  ourselves.  Like  David  we  should  sit  still  for  a  while. 
We  should  come  as  he  says,  here  in  the  text,  that  he  will  come.  In  praise  we 
have  the  best  opportunity  of  rising  to  adoration,  as  in  the  "Te  Deum"  aud  in  the 
"Gloria  in  Excelsis."  But  we  cannot  drop  into  a  grand  view  of  God  as  we  drop 
into  our  seats  at  church.  To  such  an  elevation  we  must  climb.  This  is  the  ideal  after 
which  we  should  reach.  It  is  no  sterile  contemplation.  It  gives  tone  to  the  character, 
and  dignity  to  the  life.      ( W.  Page  Roberts. )        The  solemn  service  of  Ood  : — 

1.  The  motives  we  have  to  join  in  the  solemn  service  of  God.  One 
leading  object  which  we  ought  to  have  in  view  is  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  by 
the  conversion  or  confirmation  of  others ;  but  still  it  is  in  consideration  of  His 
mercy  that  we  magnify  Jehovah  in  His  other  attributes.  The  Psalmist  considered 
it  to  be  an  invaluable  privilege  that  he  was  permitted  to  take  part  in  the  solemn 
and  public  worship  of  God.  He  knew  the  comfort  and  benefit  which  flowed  from 
that  privilege.  II.  The  dispositions  to  be  acquired  in  order  that  it  may 
be  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  The  value  to  ourselves  depends  on  the  use  we  make 
of  it,  and  on  the  state  of  our  own  hearts.  The  true  worshipper  is  studious.  1.  To 
bring  into  the  sanctuary  a  purified  heart,  at  least  a  heart  that  seeks  to  be  purified  ; 
and  to  experience,  in  the  serious  and  faithful  use  of  the  appointed  means  of  grace, 
the  renewing  and  refreshing  influences  of  that  Spirit  who  helpeth  our  infirmities. 

2.  The  spirit  of  purity  requires  a  spirit  of  fear.  "In  Thy  fear  will  I  worship." 
We  are  invited,  by  the  Sabbath  bell,  to  an  act  of  solemn  and  direct  intercourse  w  ith 
our  Maker,  our  Redeemer,  our  Sanctifier,  and  our  Judge.  Is  that  an  employment 
which  we  can  presume  to  take  in  hand  without  the  most  serious  consideration,  the 
most  entire  coUectedness  of  thought,  the  warm  glow  of  thankfulness  and  love? 

3.  The  worship  must  be  attended  with  faith  and  hope.  The  experience  of  mercies 
past,  and  the  sure  promise  of  their  continuance,  the  gracious  invitations  and 
affectionate  expostulations  of  Him  who  has  described  Himself  as  hearing  and 
answering  prayer,  should  fill  us  with  the  spirit  of  supplication.  God  loves  to 
listen  to  the  united  praises  of  those  who  are  met  together  in  His  name.  {Bishop 
BloomJUld.) 

Ver.  8.  Lead  me,  0  Lord,  In  Thy  righteousness. — A  resolve  and  a  jyrayer : — 
God  is  addressed  as  a  friend.  Three  things  in  David's  prayer.  1.  What  is 
the  rule  according  to  which  he  looks  for  this  Divine  guidance?  "Lead  me  in 
Thy  righteousness."  The  righteousness  here  is  God's  faithfulness.  All  God's 
dealings  with  His  people  have  been  faithful.  2.  Why  he  wishes  this  leading. 
It  is  that  he  may  be  divinely  instructed  in  the  right  path.  The  Christian  may 
sometimes  be  in  a  state  of  great  perplexity  as  to  the  way  he  should  go.  He 
desires  Divine  guidance  in  the  path  of  Christian  experience,  in  the  path  of  practice, 
and  in  the  path  of  precept.  3.  The  motive  he  pleads  to  enforce  it  with  God.  The 
margin  reads — "Because  of  my  observers. "  Who  are  our  observers?  The  world, 
fellow-Christians,  ministers,  angels,  and  God.  ( William  Jay. )  Make  Thy  way 
straight  before  my  face. — Practical  paths : — Two  men  aspire  to  be  inventors  of  first- 
rate  rank.  The  one  spends  all  his  life  in  study  and  experiment,  aud  lights  upon 
nothing  new  ;  but  the  other  has  some  surprising  discovery  to  put  before  the  public 
every  year  or  two.  How  do  we  explain  the  difference !  Is  it  luck  and  nothing  more  ? 
The  unsuccessful  inventor,  with  perhaps  equal  ingenuity,  is  following  impracticable 
and  unremunerative  paths  for  a  lifetime.    The  successful  inventor  Knows  in  what 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vi. 

direction  others  have  toiled  without  profit,  and  scarcely  ever  spends  a  week  on  a  mis- 
leading scent.  His  shrewd  despair  of  finding  anything  new  or  remunerative  in  certain 
directions  shuts  him  up  to  one  golden  path  of  fruitful  research.     [Thomas  G.  ^elby.) 

Ver.  11.  Because  Thou  defendest  them.— 0«r  Protector: — I.  The  Lord  is 
OUR  GOOD  Protector.  1.  A  sympathising  Protector.  He  that  toucheth  you 
toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye.  2.  A  sure  Protector.  He  will  save  us  with  His 
right  hand.  3.  A  personal  Protector.  He  does  not  deal  with  the  mass,  but  with 
the  individual.  4.  An  everlasting  Protector.  Underneath  us  are  the  everlasting 
arms.  5.  A  loving  Protector.  The  most  endearing  Images  are  used  in  the  Bible  to 
tell  us  of  the  love  of  our  God.  II.  The  condition  required.  They  who  would 
be  protected  must  trust  themselves  in  His  care  and  be  guided  by  His  wishes.  Is  it 
not  easy  to  trust  in  Him  when  we  remember  His  almighty  power,  His  perfect 
wisdom,  and  that  He  is  our  loving  Father?  III.  The  protection  He  affords 
TO  His  trusting  people.  He  protects  ua — 1.  From  the  slavery  of  sin.  2.  From 
the  penalty  of  transgression.  3.  From  the  penalty  which  our  sin  leaves  on  ua. 
4.  From  the  despair  of  failure.  (  W.  Birch. )  Trust  and  joy  in  Ood : — At  an  early 
period  of  his  life  Mozart,  the  composer,  gave  his  heart  to  God.  When  he  was  twenty- 
one  years  of  age  he  wrote,  "I  have  God  always  before  me.  Whatever  is  according 
to  £Ua  will  is  according  to  mine,  therefore  I  cannot  fail  to  be  happy  and  contented. 


PSALM  VI. 

Vers.  1-10.  0  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  Thine  anger. — A  song  of  sorrow : — It  it 
needless  to  look  for  a  historical  occasion  of  the  Psalm  ;  but  to  an  ear  that  knows  the 
tones  of  sorrow,  or  to  a  heart  that  has  itself  uttered  them,  the  supposition  that  in 
these  pathetic  cries  we  hear  only  a  representative  Israelite  bewailing  the  national 
rain  soiinds  singularly  artificial.  If  ever  the  throb  of  personal  anguish  found  tears 
and  a  voice,  it  does  so  in  this  Psalm.  Whoever  wrote  it  wrote  with  his  blood. 
There  are  in  it  no  obvious  references  to  events  in  the  recorded  life  of  David,  and 
hence  the  ascription  of  it  to  him  must  rest  on  something  else  than  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Psalm.  The  worth  of  this  little  plaintive  cry  depends  on  quite  other 
considerations  than  the  discovery  of  the  name  of  the  singer,  or  the  nature  of  his 
sorrow.  It  is  a  transcript  of  a  perennial  experience,  a  guide  for  a  road  which  all 
feet  have  to  travel.  Its  stream  runs  turbid  and  broken  at  first,  but  calms  and 
clears  as  it  flows.  It  has  four  curves  or  windings,  which  can  scarcely  be  called 
strophes  without  making  too  artificial  a  framework  for  such  a  simple  and  spon- 
taneous gush  of  feeling.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  cry  of  the  penitent: — The 
strains  of  this  Psalm  are  two — vers.  1-7,  the  petition  to  God  for  himself ;  and  vers. 
8-10,  an  insultation  over  his  enemies.  L  The  petition.  1.  A  deprecation  of 
evil.  He  prays  God  to  avert  His  wrath.  2.  A  petition  of  good.  He  entreats  to 
be  partaker  of  God's  favour,  both  to  his  body  and  to  his  soul.  The  petition  he 
enforceth  upon  divers  and  weighty  reasons  :  from  the  quantity  and  degrees  of  his 
calamity ;  from  the  continuance  of  it ;  from  the  consequences  that  were  like  to 
follow.  That  he  was  brought  to  death's  door  is  seen  by  three  symptoms,  sighs  and 
groans,  tears,  eyes  melted  away.  Moreover,  he  had  many  ill-willers.  II.  The 
insultation.  At  last,  receiving  joy  and  comfort  from  his  penitential  tears,  he 
begins  to  look  up,  and  from  his  complaint  he  turns  upon  his  enemies,  who  gaped 
after  his  death,  and  over  them  he  insults  (an  old  word  for  "he  glories").  He 
rejects  these  reprobates  from  him  with  scorn  and  indignation.  He  assigns  the  cause 
in  efifect,  because  God  had  been  moved  by  his  prayer  to  reject  them.  Then  follows 
his  imprecation  ;  made  up  of  three  ingredients,  which  he  prays  may  light  on  them 
— shame  and  confusion,  vexation,  eversion.  "These  two  last  he  aggravates  by  the 
weight  and  speed.  He  desires  that  their  vexation  should  be  nor  easy,  nor  mild, 
but  very  sore  ;  and  that  their  shame  and  overthrow  linger  not,  but  be  present,  hasty, 
and  sudden.  ( William  Nicholson,  D.D.)  TTie penitent  suppliant  .-—Though  God 
will  be  no  example  of  upbraiding  or  reproaching  repented  sins,  when  God  hath  so 
far  expressed  His  love  as  to  bring  that  sinner  to  that  repentance,  and  so  to  mercy, 
yet,  that  He  may  perfect  His  own  care,  He  exercises  that  repentant  sinner  with  such 
medicinal  corrections  as  may  enable  him  to  stand  upright  for  the  future.     I.  Thk 


rsAUC  VI.]  THE  PSALMS.  101 

?BR80N  TTPON  WHOM  DAVID  TURNED  FOB  STTCCOITK.  His  first  access  is  tO  God 
ODly.  It  is  to  God  by  name,  not  to  any  universal  God.  That  name  in  which  he 
comes  to  Him  here  is  the  name  Jehovah,  His  radical,  fundamental,  primary, 
essential  name.  II.  For  what  he  supplicates.  His  prayer  is  but  deprecatory  ; 
he  does  but  pray  that  God  would  forbear  him.  He  pretends  no  error,  he  enterprises 
no  reversing  of  judgment ;  at  first  he  dares  not  sue  for  pardon,  he  only  desires  a 
reprieve,  a  reepite  of  execution,  and  that  not  absolutely  either ;  but  he  would  not 
be  executed  in  hot  blood,  not  in  God's  anger,  not  in  His  hot  displeasure.  To  be 
rebuked  was  but  to  be  chidden,  to  be  chastened,  to  be  beaten  ;  and  yet  David  was 
heartily  afraid  of  the  first,  of  the  least  of  them,  when  it  was  done  to  him  in  anger. 
"  Rebuke  "  here  means  reprove,  convince  by  way  of  argument  and  disputation.  What 
David  deprecates  is  not  the  disputing,  impleading,  correcting,  but  that  anger  which 
might  change  the  nature  of  all  and  make  the  physic  poison.  When  there  was  no 
anger  in  the  case  David  was  a  forward  scholar  to  hearken  to  God's  reasoning. 
Both  these  words  "chasten"  and  "hot  displeasure"  are  words  of  a  heavy,  vehe- 
ment significance.  David  foresees  that  if  God  rebuke  in  anger  it  will  come  to 
chastening  in  hot  displeasure.  [John  Donne.)  The  prayer  of  the  afflicted  soul : — 
1.  In  our  afflictions  we  must  look  to  God,  and  not  to  secondary  causes.  2.  To  go  to 
God  for  help  in  our  distresses.  When,  then,  we  are  wounded,  we  must  go  to  one  who 
can  cure  us,  even  Him  who  hath  heaved  us  up,  and  cast  us  down  again,  and  will 
again  raise  us  up.  3.  Prayer  is  our  wings  to  fly  to  God  in  our  aflliction.  4.  Means  by 
which  God  brings  us  to  obedience.  (1)  His  Word.  (2)  His  rod.  If  we  refuse  to 
be  ruled  by  God's  Word,  then  God  will  not  fail  to  correct  us  with  His  rod.  {A. 
Symson.)  Rebuke  needed: — As  I  deserve  it  for  my  sin,  so  I  need  it  for  my 
amendment,  for  without  rebuking  what  amending  ?  —  what  amending,  indeed, 
without  Thy  rebuking  ?  for,  alas  !  the  flesh  flatters  me,  the  world  abuseth  me,  Satan 
deludes  me  ;  and  now,  0  God,  if  Thou  also  shouldst  hold  Thy  peace  and  wink  at 
my  follies,  whom  should  I  have — alas  !  whom  could  I  have — to  make  me  sensible 
of  their  foulness  ?  If  Thou  shouldst  not  tell  me,  and  tell  me  roundly,  I  went 
astray,  how  should  I  ever — alas !  how  could  I  ever — be  brought  to  return  into  the 
right  way  ?  To  Thy  rebuking,  therefore,  I  humbly  submit  myself.  I  know  Thou 
intendest  it  for  my  amendment,  and  not  for  my  confusion  ;  for  my  conversion,  and 
not  for  my  subversion.  It  may  be  bitter  in  the  tasting,  but  is  most  comfortable 
in  the  working  ;  hard,  perhaps,  to  digest,  but  most  sovereign  being  digested.  Yet 
I  cannot  endure  Thou  shouldst  rebuke  me  in  anger  ;  I  cannot  endure  it  in  afl'ection, 
but  I  can  less  endure  it  in  ability.  When  I  consider  with  myself  the  many  favours 
— undeserved  favours — Thou  hast  vouchsafed  unto  me,  and  consider  withal  how 
little  use,  how  ill  use  I  have  made  of  them  all,  though  I  know  I  have  justly 
deserved  Thy  rebuking,  yet  my  hope  is  still  Thou  wilt  add  this  favour  also,  not  to 
rebuke  me  in  Thine  anger.  {Sir  Richard  Baker. )  Angry  chastening  deprecated : — 
If  Thy  chastening  be  intended  for  reforming  or  for  polishing,  what  wouldst  Thou  do 
with  indignation,  that  tends  to  abolishing?  {Ibid.)  Rebuke  combined  with 
anger : — Thy  rebuking,  0  God,  is  to  me  as  thunder,  but  Thine  anger  is  as  lightning  ; 
and  is  it  not  enough  that  Thou  terrify  my  soul  with  the  thunder  of  Thy  rebuking, 
but  Thou  wilt  also  set  this  flax  of  my  flesh  on  fire  with  the  lightning  of  Thine 
anger  ?  Thy  rebuking  of  itself  is  a  precious  balm,  but  mixed  with  anger  turns  to 
a  corrosive.  {Ibid. )  Ood's  anger  terrible : — A  certain  king,  being  once  very  sad, 
his  brother  asked  what  ailed  him.  "Oh,  brother,"  he  said,  "I  have  been  a  great 
sinner,  and  am  afraid  to  die  and  appear  before  God  in  judgment."  His  brother 
only  laughed  at  him  for  his  melancholy  thoughts.  The  king  said  nothing,  but  in 
the  dead  of  night  sent  the  executioner  to  sound  his  trumpet  before  his  brother's 
door,  that  being  the  signal  for  a  man  to  be  led  out  to  execution.  Pale  and 
trembling,  his  brother  came  in  haste  to  the  king  and  asked  to  know  his  crime. 
"Oh,  brother,"  said  the  king,  "you  have  never  ofi'ended  against  me;  but  if  the 
sight  of  the  executioner  be  so  dreadful,  shall  not  I,  who  have  grievously  ofi'ended 
God,  fear  to  be  brought  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Jesus  Christ  ? "  Anger- 
less  reproof  often  most  effective: — There  was  a  boy  at  Norfolk  Island  who  had 
been  brought  from  one  of  the  rougher  and  wilder  islands,  and  was  consequently 
rebellious  and  difficult  to  manage.  One  day  Mr.  Selwyn  spoke  to  him  about  some- 
thing ho  had  refused  to  do,  and  the  lad,  flying  into  a  passion,  struck  him  in  the 
face.  This  was  an  unheard  of  thing  for  a  Melanesian  to  do.  Mr.  Selwyn,  not 
trusting  himself  to  speak,  turned  on  his  heel  and  walked  away.  The  boy  was 
punished  for  the  off'ence  ;  and,  being  still  unsatisfactory,  was  sent  back  to  his  own 
island  without  being  baptized,  and  there  relapsed  into  heathen  ways.      Many  years 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vi. 

afterwards  Mr.  Bice,  the  missionary  who  worked  on  that  island,  was  sent  for  to  a 
sick  person  who  wanted  him.  He  found  this  very  man  in  a  dying  state,  and 
begging  to  be  baptized.  He  told  Mr.  Bice  how  often  he  thought  of  the  teaching 
on  Norfolk  Island  ;  and  when  the  latter  askfd  him  by  what  name  he  should 
baptize  him,  he  said,  "Call  me  John  Selwyn,  because  he  taught  me  what  Christ 
was  like  that  day  when  I  struck  him  ;  and  I  saw  the  colour  mount  in  his  face,  but 
he  never  said  a  word  except  of  love  afterwards."  Mr.  Bice  then  baptized  him,  and 
he  died  soon  after.  {Life  of  Bishop  John  Sclioyn.)  The  difference  hetvxen  a  cross 
and  a  curse : — David  deprecates  not  God's  rebukes  or  corrections,  but  that  He 
would  not  rebuke  him  in  His  anger.  It  is  true  there  is  a  great  similitude  between 
a  curse  and  a  cross,  and  oftentimes  God's  children  have  been  deceived  thereby,  and 
through  His  hard  handling  of  them  have  judged  Him  to  have  become  their 
enemy ;  but  indeed  there  is  a  great  difference.  And  to  the  end  ye  may  know 
whether  they  come  from  the  hands  of  a  loving  God  or  no,  cousider  these  marks  and 
tokens.  1.  If  they  lead  thee  to  a  consideration  of  thy  sin,  wliich  is  the  ground 
and  cause  of  them,  so  that  thou  lookest  not  to  the  instrumental  or  second  cause,  but 
to  thyself,  the  cause  of  all,  they  come  from  the  hand  of  a  loving  God.  2.  If  they 
make  thee  leave  oflf  to  sin  and  reject  it,  they  come  from  a  loving  God.  3.  If  under 
thy  cross  thou  run  unto  God,  whom  thou  hast  pierced,  that  He  may  deliver  tliee, 
and  not  say  with  that  godless  King  Jehoram,  Why  should  I  attend  any  more  upon 
the  Lord  ?  they  come  from  a  loving  God.  4.  The  Cross  worketh  in  the  godly  a 
wonderful  humility  and  patience,  so  that  they  submit  themselves  under  the  hand 
of  the  living  God,  that  they  under  it  may  be  tamed,  and  from  lions  be  made  lambs. 
The  wicked  either  howl  (as  do  dogs  that  are  beaten)  through  sense  of  their  present 
stroke,  or  if  they  be  humbled  and  seem  patient,  it  is  perforce  as  a  lion  which  is 
caged  and  cannot  stir.  {A,  Symson.)  The  anger  of  God  as  pure  as  His  mercy : — 
But  alas,  those  persons  did  not  consider  the  diflference  betwixt  the  qualities  that  are 
in  our  sinful  nature,  and  the  essential  properties  which  are  in  God  ;  for  He  is  angry 
and  sins  not.  His  anger  is  as  pure  as  His  mercy,  for  His  justice  is  His  anger,  but 
our  anger  is  mixed  with  sin,  and  therefore  evil.  {Ibid. )  Ood's  anger  against 
sin : — God  will  be  angry  at  nothing  in  His  creatures,  but  only  sin,  which  bringeth 
man  to  destruction  ;  for  as  if  a  father  saw  a  serpent  in  his  child's  bosom,  he  would 
hate  the  serpent  notwithstanding  his  love  to  the  boy :  so  we  are  God's  children. 
He  loves  that  which  He  made  of  us,  our  body  and  soul,  and  hates  that  which  the 
devil  hath  put  in  us,  our  sin.  {Ibid.)  Neither  cixasten  me  in  Thy  hot  dis- 
pleasure.— A  revengeful  God  the  creation  of  a  guilty  conscience: — There  are  two 
knowledges  of  God  ;  the  one  is  the  absolute,  the  other  is  the  relative.  The  former 
comprehends  God  as  He  is,  embraces  the  Infinite  ;  the  other  comprehends  only 
glances  of  Him,  as  He  appears  to  the  mind  of  the  observer.  There  is  but  one  being 
in  tfie  universe  who  has  the  former  knowledge,  and  that  is  Christ.  ' '  No  man 
hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  Only  Begotten,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
hath  declared  Him."  David's  idea  of  God  here  was  relative.  He  represents  the 
Eternal  as  He  appeared  to  him  in  the  particular  state  of  mind  which  he  experienced. 
We  make  two  remarks  on  his  idea  of  God's  "  hot  displeasure."    I.  It  was  geneb- 

ATED    IN   A   GUILTY   CONSCIENCE   BY  GREAT   SUFFERING.        The  Writer  of  this  Psalm 

was  involved  in  the  greatest  distress  both  in  body  and  in  mind.  1.  That  he  was 
conscious  of  having  wronged  his  Maker.  His  conscience  robes  infinite  love  with 
vengeance.  2.  He  was  conscious  of  having  deserved  God's  displeasure.  He  felt 
that  the  sufferings  he  was  enduring  were  penal  inflictions,  and  he  justly  de- 
served them.  Had  his  conscience  been  appeased  by  atoning  love,  the  very 
sufferings  he  was  enduring  would  have  led  him  to  regard  the  great  God  as  a  loving 
Father  disciplining  him  for  a  higher  life,  and  not  as  a  wrathful  God  visiting  him 
in  His  hot  displeasure.     God  is  to  you  according  to  your  moral  state.      II.  It  was 

REMOVED  FROM  HIS  GUILTY  CONSCIENCE    BY  EARNEST    PRAYER.        His  prayer  for 

mercy  is  intensely  importunate.  "O  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  Thine  anger,"  &c. 
"Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Lord."  "O  Lord,  heal  me,"  "0  Lord,  deliver  my 
soul,"  &c.  What  is  the  result  of  his  prayer  t  "  Depart  from  me  all  ye  workers  of 
iniquity,  for  the  Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  weeping,"  &c.  True  prayer 
does  two  things.  1.  Modifies  for  the  better  the  mind  of  the  suppliant.  It  tends  to 
quicken,  to  calm,  to  elevate  the  soul.  2.  Secures  the  necessary  assistance  of  the 
God  of  love.  One  great  truth  that  comes  up  from  the  whole  of  these  remarks  is 
that  man's  destiny  depends  upon  his  moral  state,  and  that  no  system  can  effectually 
help  him,  that  does  not  bring  his  heart  into  a  right  relation  with  God.  So  long  as 
God  appears  to  him  burning  with  "hot  displeasure  "  he  must  be  ia  an  agony  Hke 


MALM  VI.]  THE  PSALMS.  103 

that  which  the  Psalmist  here  describes.     The  mission  of  Christianity  is  to  bring 
men  into  this  happy  relation.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  2.  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Lord,  for  I  am  weak. — Cure  for  the  soul's  xoeakness : 
— There  is  a  very  immediate  connection  between  soul-sickness  and  bodily  ailments. 
The  material  affects  the  mental,  and  presently  the  mental  affects  the  soul.  When 
David  was  weak  in  body  he  became  more  than  ever  conscious  of  his  sinful  condi- 
tion before  God.  And  the  enemy  took  advantage  of  his  weakness,  and  oppressed 
him  when  his  heart  was  sore  sick.  The  saint  s  extremity  becomes  the  devil's 
opportunity  to  annoy  and  to  distress  him.  But  he  was  by  no  means  forsaken  of  his 
God.  I.  The  complaint — soul  weakness.  It  is  not  a  disease  exactly,  and  yet  there 
are  points  about  it  which  make  it  very  much  like  a  disease.  Many  persons  cannot 
aay  they  are  ill,  but  there  is  a  lack  of  physical  force,  a  lack  of  stamina.  They  are 
the  weaklings  of  the  flock  ;  and  it  is  so  in  Christian  experience.  There  are  Chris- 
tians lacking  that  power  which  makes  a  man  act  like  a  man,  and  speak  like  a  man, 
and  think  with  vigour  and  purpose.  Next  to  listlessness,  there  is  with  these 
invalids  a  sort  of  fretfulness.  Everything — even  the  grasshopper — becomes  a  burden 
to  them.  Then  there  comes  to  these  poor  sick  souls  a  sort  of  fearfulness,  their 
nervous  force  has  gone.  These  people  are  very  retiring  in  dis^wsition — nervous,  and 
bashful,  and  hesitating,  very  timid  and  timorous.  What  are  the  causes  of  this 
spiritual  disease  ?  Some  are  born  frail.  But  the  weakness  is  often  due  to  the 
disease  of  harbouring  unkind  thoughts  about  anybody.  An  unhealthy  climate  ia 
often  the  reason,  physically  speaking,  for  weakness  of  health.  Weakness  may  be 
due  to  unwholesomeness  of  food.  II.  The  pbescription.  "Have  mercy  upon 
me,  O  Lord."  God's  mercy  must  be  the  antidote  for  my  misery.  This  is  the  only 
remedy  for  spiritual  weakness.  If  I  go  to  the  physician  and  complain  of  weakness 
he  will  probably  give  me  some  medicine  which  may  not  be  very  palatable.  Well, 
then,  take  the  medicine.  (Thomas  Spurgcon.)  The  cry  for  mercy: — To  fly  and 
escape  the  anger  of  God,  he  sees  no  means  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  and  therefore  he 
retires  himself  to  God,  even  to  Him  who  wounded  him,  that  He  might  heal  him. 
He  flies  not  with  Adam  to  the  bush,  nor  with  Saul  to  the  witch,  nor  with  Jonas  to 
Tarshish,  but  he  appeals  from  an  angry  and  just  God  to  a  merciful  God.  Next, 
observe  what  David  craves — mercy  ;  whereby  we  may  perceive  that  he  was  brought 
to  a  consideration  of  his  own  misery,  or  else  he  needed  not  to  have  asked  for  mercy. 
Then  it  is  necessary,  that  to  the  end  we  may  more  effectually  crave  pardon,  every 
one  of  us  first  have  a  sense  and  feeling  of  our  own  sin  and  misery.  Moreover,  see 
that  David  doth  not  present  his  merits,  whereby  to  redeem  the  filthiness  of  his  sins, 
neither  yet  prayers,  praises,  alnisdeeds,  victory  over  God's  foes,  wherein  he  was 
frequent,  but  he  leaveth  them  all  as  a  broken  reed,  to  the  which  he  could  not  well 
lean  iu  the  day  of  his  spiritual  temptation,  and  hath  his  only  refuge  in  God's 
mercy.  The  merits  of  men  (alas  !)  what  are  they  ?  The  best  works  we  do  are  so 
full  of  imperfections  that  there  is  more  dross  than  gold  in  them.  What  man 
would  be  content  for  good  gold  to  receive  such  coin  as  is  near-by  altogether  dross  ? 
And  think  ye  God  for  His  perfect  law,  which  He  gave  us  to  observe  and  do,  will 
receive  our  imperfect  works  ?  David,  under  the  name  of  mercy,  includeth  all 
things,  according  to  that  of  Jacob  to  his  brother  Esau,  ' '  I  have  gotten  mercy,  and 
therefore  I  have  gotten  all  things."  Desirest  thou  anything  at  God's  hands  ?  Cry 
for  mercy,  out  of  which  fountain  all  good  things  will  spring  to  thee.  The  blind 
men,  seeking  their  sight,  cried,  "Have  mercy  upon  us.  Thou  Son  of  David."  The 
Canaanite,  who  had  her  daughter  possessed,  cried,  "Have  mercy  upon  me."  If  ye 
have  purchased  the  King's  pardon,  then  ye  may  enjoy  the  privileges  of  His 
kingdom  ;  if  ye  have  mercy,  ye  have  all  that  God  can  give  you,  ye  have  title  to 
Christ,  to  heaven,  to  all  the  creatures,  ye  are  freed  and  delivered  from  the  prison 
of  liell.  {A.  Symson.)  A  good  -plea  for  the,  penitent : — But  is  this  not  a  weak 
plea,  to  allege  weakness  for  a  plea  ?  weak  indeed  with  men  who  commonly  tread 
hardest  upon  the  weakest,  and  are  ever  going  over  where  the  hedge  is  lowest ;  but 
no  weak  plea  with  God,  whose  mercy  is  ever  ready  upon  all  occasions,  and  then 
most  when  there  is  most  need  ;  and  seeing  there  is  greatest  need  where  there  is 
greatest  weakness,  therefore  no  plea  with  God  so  strong  as  this.  Have  mercy  upon 
me,  0  God,  for  I  am  weak.  But  why  should  David  pray  for  mercy  to  help  his 
weakness  ?  for  what  can  mercy  do  ?  Mercy  can  but  pity  his  weakness  ;  it  is 
strength  that  must  relieve  it.  But  is  it  not  that  mercy,  I  may  say,  is  as  the 
steward  of  God's  house,  and  hath  the  command  of  all  He  hath  ;  that  if  wisdom  be 
wanting  for  direction,  mercy  can  procure  it ;   if  justice  be  wanting  for  defence, 


104  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [tsKus.  vi. 

mercy  can  obtain  it ;  if  strength  be  wanting  for  support,  mercy  can  command  it ; 
and  therefore  no  plea  so  perfect  to  be  urged  with  God  as  this,  Have  mercy  upon  me, 
O  God,  for  I  am  weak  ?  But  why  should  David  make  his  weakness  a  motive  to  God 
for  mercy  ?  for  is  not  weakness  an  effect  of  sin  ?  and  can  God  love  the  effect  when 
He  hates  the  cause  ?  But  it  is  not  the  weakness  in  David  that  God  loves,  but  the 
acknowledging  of  his  weakness ;  for  what  is  this  but  the  true  humility !  and  who 
knows  not  in  how  high  account  such  humility  is  with  God,  seeing  it  is  indeed  of 
this  wonderful  condition,  that  though  nothing  be  so  low,  yet  nothing  reacheth  so 
high,  and  therefore  no  motive  so  fit  to  move  God  as  this,  Have  mercy  upon  me, 
O  God,  for  I  am  weak.  Mercy,  indeed,  looks  down  upon  no  object  so  directly  as 
upon  weakness,  and  weakness  looks  up  to  no  object  so  directly  as  to  mercy ;  and 
therefore  they  cannot  choose  but  meet,  aud  meeting,  not  choose  but  embrace  each 
other :  mercy,  weakness  as  her  client ;  weakness,  mercy  as  her  patron ;  that  no 
plea  can  be  so  strong  with  God  as  this.  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  God,  for  I  am 
weak.  {Sir  Richard  Baker.)  An  argument  taken  from  weakness: — But  behold 
what  rhetoric  he  trieth  to  more  God  to  cure  him :  "I  am  weak"  ;  an  argument 
taken  from  his  weakness  ;  which  indeed  were  a  weak  argument  to  move  anjr  man 
to  show  his  favour,  but  is  a  strong  argument  to  prevail  with  God.  If  a  diseased 
person  would  come  to  a  physician,  and  only  lament  the  heaviness  of  his  sickness, 
he  would  say,  "God  help  thee"  ;  or  an  oppressed  person  come  to  a  lawyer,  and 
show  him  the  estate  of  his  action  and  ask  his  advice,  he  would  answer,  "That  is 
a  golden  question "  ;  or  to  a  merchant  to  crave  raiment,  he  will  either  have 
present  money  or  a  surety  ;  or  a  courtier  for  favour,  you  must  have  your  rewai-d 
ready  in  your  hand.  But  coming  before  God,  the  most  forcible  argument  ye  can 
use  is  your  necessity,  poverty,  tears,  misery,  unworthiness,  and  confessing  them  to 
Him,  it  shall  be  an  open  door  to  furnish  you  with  all  things  that  He  hath.  {A. 
Symsoii,  B.D.)  A  forcible  plea : — The  tears  of  our  misery  are  forcible  arrows 
to  pierce  the  heart  of  our  heavenly  Father,  to  deliver  us  and  pity  our  hard  case. 
The  beggars  lay  open  their  sores  to  the  view  of  the  world,  that  the  more  they 
may  move  men  to  pity  them.  So  let  us  deplore  our  miseries  to  God,  that  He, 
with  the  pitiful  Samaritan,  at  the  sight  of  our  wounds  may  help  us  in  due  time. 
(Ibid.)  0  Lord,  heal  me. — Healing: — There  is  something  very  soothing,  very 
beautiful  in  that  word  "Heal."  It  seems  so  full  of  beneficence,  so  full  of  restora- 
tion, so  full  of  balm.  "Heal,"  so  near  "Health" — it  is  a  beautiful  word.  The 
healing  is  found  in  Him.  There  are  some  medicines  which  are  called  polychrists, 
they  heal  so  many  diseases.  Heaven  knows  but  one  Polychrist.  It  is  one  to  heal 
not  only  many  diseases,  but  all,  and  that  one  is  the  touch  of  Christ.  (P.  B.  Power, 
M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  My  soul  is  sore  vexed. — Toke-fellowa  in  sin,  yoke-fellows  in  punishmeTU : 
— Yoke-fellows  in  sin  are  yoke-fellows  in  pain  ;  the  soul  is  punished  for  informing, 
the  body  for  performing,  and  as  both  the  informer  and  performer,  the  cause  and 
the  instrument,  so  shall  the  stirrer  up  of  sin  and  executor  be  punished.  (A. 
Symson,  B.D.)  But  Then,  0  Lord,  how  long? — The  delays  of  God: — 1.  That 
there  is  an  appointed  time,  which  God  hath  measured,  for  the  crosses  of  all  His 
children,  before  which  time  they  shall  not  be  delivered,  and  for  which  they  must 
patiently  attend,  not  thinking  to  prescribe  time  to  God  for  their  delivery  or  limit 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  The  Israelites  remained  in  Egypt  tUl  the  complete 
number  of  430  years  were  accomplished.  Joseph  was  three  years  and  more  in  the 
prison  till  the  appointed  time  of  his  delivery  came.  The  Jews  remained  70 
years  in  Babylon.  So  that  as  the  physician  appointeth  certain  times  to  the  patient, 
both  wherein  he  must  fast  and  be  dieted,  and  wherein  he  must  take  recreation  :  so 
God  knoweth  the  convenient  times  both  of  our  humiliation  and  exaltation.  2.  See 
the  impatiency  of  our  natures  in  our  miseries,  our  flesh  still  rebelling  against  the 
Spirit,  which  oftentimes  forgetteth  itself  so  far  that  it  will  enter  into  reasoning 
with  God,  and  quarrelling  with  Him,  as  we  may  read  of  Job,  Jonas,  &c.,  and  here 
also  of  David.  3.  Albeit  the  Lord  delay  His  coming  to  relieve  His  saints,  yet  He 
hath  great  cause  if  we  ponder  it ;  for,  when  we  were  in  the  heat  of  our  sins,  many 
times  He  cried  by  the  mouth  of  His  prophets,  "0  fools,  how  long  will  you  continue 
in  your  folly  ? "  and  we  would  not  hear.  And  therefore,  when  we  are  in  the 
heat  of  our  pains,  thinking  long,  yea,  every  day  a  year  till  we  are  delivered,  no 
wonder  it  is  if  God  will  not  hear.  Let  us  consider  with  ourselves  the  just  dealing 
of  God  with  us,  that  as  He  cried,  and  we  would  not  hear  ;  so  now  we  cry,  and  He 
will  not  hear.     (Ibid.)         Broken  prayers:—!.  An  IKstance  of  what  may  be 


PSALM  VI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  105 

CALLED  A  BBOKBK  PRATEE.  Dr.  Maclaren  calls  it  "daring  and  pregnant  in  its 
incompleteness."  Is  it  not  natural  that  prayer  •hould  often  be  incomplete?  The 
man  who  has  never  broken  down  in  his  prayer  has  hardly  yet  learned  to  pray. 
1.  Prayer  must  be  broken  at  times,  because  some  petitions  we  would  offer  we  may 
not.  Prayer  has  sometimes  to  be  restrained.  2.  Because  we  cannot  tell  how  to 
pray.  True  piety  has  its  dilemmas.  What  may  precisely  meet  our  need  cannot 
always  be  defined.  3.  Because  words  cannot  compass  our  desires.  The  intensest 
feelings  of  our  hearts  cannot  find  adequate  expression.  II.  Broken  prayers  may 
BE  THE  MOST  EARNEST  EXPRESSIONS  OF  THE  SOUL.  The  Psalmist's  Very  eamestness 
brings  him  to  a  standstill.  Such  a  break  is  the  safety-valve  of  the  impassioned 
soul.  Prayer  is  often  most  sincere  when  it  is  least  eloquent.  A  sob  may  be  a  real 
prayer.  III.  That  prayers  are  broken  does  not  prevent  them  from  being 
HEARD  AND  ANSWERED.  If  this  Psalm  opcns  amid  the  thick  gloom  of  troublous 
misgiving,  it  does  not  close  till  a  new  light  has  chased  these  shadows  away.  How- 
ever poor  and  faltering  our  own  words,  we  shall  not  be  disappointed  about  an 
answer.  God  can  interpret  the  prayer  that  has  never  even  found  utterance. 
When  a  man  begins  to  pray,  however  brokenly,  light  is  not  far  oflF.  {6.  EdvMrd 
Young.) 

Ver.  4.  Retnm,  0  Lord,  deliver  my  soul. — A  postulaiory  prayer: — "O  Lord, 
return"  implies  a  former  presence,  a  present  absence,  and  a  confidence  for  the 
future.  This  is  God's  return  to  us,  in  a  general  apprehension.  After  He  hatli 
made  us,  and  blest  us  in  our  nature  and  by  His  natural  means.  He  returns  to  make 
us  again,  to  make  us  better,  first  by  His  preventing  grace  and  then  by  a  succession 
of  His  particular  graces.  In  Scripture  there  are  three  significations  of  the  word 
translated  "return."  1.  To  return  to  that  place  to  which  a  thing  is  naturally 
affected.  So  heavy  things  return  to  the  centre,  and  light  things  to  the  expansion. 
The  Church  is  God's  place,  God's  centre,  to  which  He  is  naturally  affected.  2.  The 
word  is  also  referred  to  the  passion  of  God,  to  the  anger  of  God  ;  and  so  the 
returning  of  God — that  is,  of  God's  anger — is  the  allaying,  the  becalming,  the 
departing  of  His  anger.  When  God  returns,  God  stays ;  His  anger  is  returned 
from  us,  but  God  is  still  with  us.  3.  The  word  applies  to  our  returning  to  Him. 
There  goes  no  more  to  salvation  but  such  a  turning.  So  that  this  returning  of  the 
Lord  is  an  operative,  an  effectual  returning,  that  tunes  our  hearts,  and  eyes,  and 
hands,  and  feet  to  the  ways  of  God,  and  produces  in  us  repentance  and  obedience  ; 
for  these  be  the  two  legs  which  our  conversion  to  God  stands  upon.  When  the 
Lord  comes  to  us  by  any  way,  though  He  come  in  corrections,  in  chastisements,  not 
to  turn  to  Him  is  an  irreverent  and  unrespective  negligence.  .  .  .  We  come  now 
to  the  reasons  of  these  petitions  in  David's  prayer.  His  first  reason  is  grounded  on 
God  Himself.  "Do  it  for  Thy  mercy's  sake."  And  in  his  second  reason,  though 
David  himself  and  all  men  with  him  seem  to  have  a  part,  yet  at  last  we  shall  see  the 
reason  itself  to  determine  wholly  or  entirely  in  God,  too,  and  in  His  glory.  "  Do 
it,  Lord,  for  in  death  there  is  no  remembrance  of  Thee."  {John  Donne.)  The 
obscured  presence  of  God : — As  the  sun  goeth  not  out  of  Thee,  though  it  may  be 
obscured  by  overcasting  clouds,  or  some  other  natural  impediments,  so,  albeit  the 
clouds  of  our  sins  and  miseries  hide  the  fair,  shining  face  of  God  from  us,  yet  He 
■will  pierce  through  and  dissipate  those  clouds,  and  shine  clearly  npon  us  in  His 
own  appointed  time.  God  is  said  to  "return  to  us,"  not  by  change  of  place,  for  He 
is  in  all  places,  but  by  the  dispensation  of  His  gracious  providence,  and  declaration 
of  His  new  mercies  and  benefits  to  us.  (A.  Syvison.)  For  the  sake  of  mercy  : — 
Indeed,  this  motive,  for  His  mercy's  sake,  is  the  first  mover  of  all  motives  to  God 
for  showing  His  favour.  He  had  never  delivered  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt  but 
for  His  mercy's  sake  ;  He  had  never  saved  Noah  in  the  ark  but  for  His  mercy's 
sake ;  but,  above  all,  He  had  never  sent  His  Son  to  save  the  world  but  for  His 
mercy's  sake.  And  how,  then,  can  I  doubt,  and  not  rather  be  confident,  that  for 
His  mercy's  sake  He  will  also  deliver  my  soul  and  save  me  ?  Never,  there!bre,  my 
soul,  look  after  any  further  motives  ;  for  upon  this  motive  will  I  set  up  my  rest. 
His  mercy  shall  be  both  my  anchor  and  my  harbour  ;  it  shall  be  both  my  armour 
and  my  fortress  ;  it  shall  be  both  my  ransom  and  my  garland  ;  it  shall  be  both  my 
deliverance  and  my  salvation.     (Sir  Eichard  Baker.) 

Ver.  5.  In  death  there  is  no  remembrance  of  Thee.— Z?o«»  eonsci'ousness  cease 
with  death  f — There  is  some  obscurity  in  these  words,  literally  understood.  They  at 
least  seem  to  teach  that  all  thought  and  consciousness  ceaseu  with  man  at  his  death. 


10«  TEL  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vi. 

If  that  be  their  meaning,  they  certainly  show  that  David's  views  of  a  future  life  wera 
quite  defective.  If  that  be  their  meaning,  we  may  well  say,  he  that  is  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he.  We  can  hardly  believe,  however,  that  David 
meant  to  teach  that  thought  and  consciousness  ceased  with  man  at  death.  The 
death  here  intended  is  probably  the  second  death,  and  the  grave  intended  the  prison 
of  the  lost :  that  is  the  "death,"  and  that  the  "grave,"  from  which  David  prays  to 
be  saved — the  death  and  the  grave  of  "  both  body  and  soul  in  hell."  And  surely 
there  is  no  grateful  remembrance  of,  and  giving  thanks  to,  God  there.  On  the  con- 
trary, all  who  have  experienced  that  death,  and  descended  into  that  grave,  gnaw 
their  tongues  for  pain,  and  blaspheme  the  God  of  heaven.  In  view  of  such  an  issue, 
well  might  David  pray,  "Return,  O  Lord,  deliver  my  soul ;  O  save  me  for  Thy 
mercies*  sake."  For  surely  a  more  terrific  thought  cannot  be  presented  to  the 
human  soul,  than  the  thought  that  it  must  remain  a  pining  and  suffering  creature 
for  ever,  a  moral  blot  on  every  part  of  the  universe  to  which  it  may  flee  ;  hateful  in 
its  own  eyes,  and  hateful  in  the  eyes  of  God.  {David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  In  the 
grave  who  shall  give  Thee  thanks  ? — Death  makes  life  important: — This  Psalm  is  the 
first  of  those  called  penitential,  and  composed  in  confession  of  sin.  From  considera- 
tion of  birth-sin  the  writer  turns  to  the  littleness  of  man,  and  the  shortness  of  life 
compared  with  God's  greatness  and  goodness.  As  references  to  the  silence  of  the 
grave  and  the  departure  of  the  dead  occur  frequently,  we  may  ask  in  what  sense  we 
are  to  take  such  words.  David  evidently  understood  that  this  life  is  our  only  period 
of  probation.  He  had  apprehensions  of  a  judgment-day.  David  felt  that,  whatever 
he  was  to  be,  to  become,  to  receive,  or  to  suffer,  in  the  state  beyond  the  grave,  was 
all  to  be  begun  while  he  was  in  the  flesh.  David  felt  how  essential  to  his  happiness 
it  was  to  obtain  God's  favour,  and  that  at  once,  without  delay.  All  our  hopes 
beyond  the  grave  rest  on  our  few  years'  passage  through  this  life.  There  is  no  pre- 
paration after  it.  We  are  hastening  on  to  the  unalterable  state,  where  we  shall 
praise  God  for  ever,  or  never.  We  are  like  the  sculptor,  chiselling  an  inscription 
upon  marble.  Well  done  or  badly  done,  clearly  engraved  or  badly  formed,  or 
wrongly  spelt,  still  those  letters  remain  in  imperishable  characters.  The  sculptor's 
success,  or  his  mistakes,  both  remain  ;  no  time  will  fade,  no  water  will  wash  away, 
what  is  engraved  in  stone.  So  with  our  heavenly  and  eternal  work,  ' '  the  time  is 
short";  but  its  records  and  its  effects  are  lasting ;  they  endure  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion. Let  us  be  stirred  up  by  such  thoughts  to  engrave  for  ourselves  in  the  imperish- 
able records  of  the  Book  of  Life  the  record  of  a  life  spent  by  us,  through  God's  grace, 
to  His  honour  and  in  His  service.  ( W.  J.  Stracey,  M.A.)  The  Psalmist's  Sheol: — 
The  second  plea  is  striking  both  in  its  view  of  the  condition  of  the  dead,  and  in  its 
use  of  that  view  as  an  argument  with  God.  Like  many  other  psalmists,  the  writer 
thinks  of  Sheol  as  the  common  gathering-place  of  the  departed,  a  dim  region  where 
they  live  a  poor  shadowy  life,  inactive,  joyless,  and  all  but  godless,  inasmuch  as 
praise,  fellowship,  and  service  with  Him  have  ceased.  That  view  is  equally  com- 
patible with  the  belief  in  a  resurrection,  and  the  denial  of  it,  for  it  assumes  con- 
tinued individual  consciousness.  It  is  the  prevailing  tone  in  the  Psalter,  and  in 
Job  and  Ecclesiastes.  But  in  some  Psalms  which  embody  the  highest  rapture  of 
inward  and  musical  devotion  the  sense  of  present  union  with  God  bears  up  the 
Psalmist  into  the  sunlight  of  the  assurance  that  against  such  a  union  death  can  have 
no  power,  and  we  see  the  hope  of  immortality  in  the  very  act  of  dawning  on  the 
devout  soul.  May  we  not  say  that  the  subjective  experience  of  the  reality  of  com- 
munion with  God  now  is  still  the  path  by  which  the  certainty  of  its  perpetuity  in 
a  future  life  is  reached  ?  The  objective  proof  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
verified  by  this  experience.  The  psalmists  had  not  the  former,  but,  having  the 
latter,  they  attained  to  at  all  events  occasional  confidence  in  a  blessed  life  beyond. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  flea  for  continued  life: — 1.  Concerning  death,  consider 
first,  that  there  is  a  necessity  of  death  laid  upon  all  flesh,  wise  men  and  fools,  king 
and  prophet,  &c.,  neither  the  grandeur  of  the  king  nor  holiness  of  the  prophet  can 
exempt  them  from  death.  2.  Next,  that  it  interrupts  the  service  and  praise  of  God, 
as  it  destroys  man's  nature,  albeit  it  interrupteth  it  only  for  a  time,  and  in  a  part ; 
the  soul  in  the  meantime  praising  God  under  the  altar,  till  that  both  soul  and  body 
meet  together  and  praise  Him  world  without  end.  3.  That  it  is  lawful  to  crave  the 
continuance  of  our  life,  to  the  end  that  we  may  praise  God.  Woiild  we  desire  the 
continuance  of  our  life,  that  we  may  continue  in  sin  ?  God  forbid.  Likewise  we 
may  desire  death,  not  for  being  weary  of  temporal  pain,  or  fear  of  shame  :  but  with 
the  apostle,  that  we  may  be  dissolved  and  be  with  Christ,  and  be  freed  of  the  burthen 
of  sin  by  oxu:  death,  yet  in  both  our  desires  let  us  submit  ourselves  to  the  good 


PSALM  vi:]  THE  PSALMS.  107 

?leasure  of  God,  and  say  with  our  Saviour,  Thy  will  be  done,  not  as  I  will,  but  u 
'hou  wilt.  4.  We  see  in  his  sickness  he  seeks  the  continuation  of  his  life  at  God's 
hands,  who  hath  the  issues  of  death  in  His  will,  thereby  teaching  us,  neither  with 
Asa  to  put  our  trust  in  the  physicians,  neither  with  Ahaziah  to  go  ask  counsel  at 
Beelzebub  ;  but  with  good  Hezekiah  turn  to  the  wall,  and  with  David  here  beg  the 
prorogation  of  our  lives  from  God.  5.  Observe  the  difference  between  the  godly 
and  the  wicked,  in  their  contrary  desires  of  the  continuation  of  their  lives :  for 
the  wicked,  being  tied  to  the  bed  of  sickness,  crave  longer  life,  to  the  end  they 
may  enjoy  their  riches  longer,  and  use,  or  rather  abuse  them  ;  in  the  meantime 
never  conceiving  or  nourishing  an  hope  of  celestial  good  things.  But  the  godly, 
that  they  may  record  fruitfully  the  praises  of  God  in  the  congregation  of  the 
righteous  ;  besides,  the  fear  of  death  in  the  reprobate,  is  because  they  see  by  it  an 
end  put  to  all  their  earthly  felicities.     {A.  Symson,  B.D.) 

"Vers.  6,  7.  I  am  weary  with  my  groaning. — The  penitent's  sorrow  .—The  peni- 
tent here  expresses  the  effects  which  his  sorrow  had  upon  him  in  its  outward  mani- 
festations.  His  eye  was  consumed  because  of  grief,  and  he  was  weary  with  his 
^oaning.  An  impression  now  seems  generally  to  prevail  that  outward  manifesta- 
tions of  feeling  in  matters  of  religion,  instead  of  being  proofs  that  the  feeling  is 
sound,  are  ratner  proofs  that  it  is  otherwise.  Certainly,  in  themselves  they  are  no 
unequivocal  evidence  of  sincere  and  deep  feeling  ;  and  in  assemblies  of  God's  people 
it  is  better  in  general  that  they  should  be  repressed  than  indulged  in.  But  where 
such  feelings  exist  they  must  in  some  way  or  other  be  expressed:  "I  am  weary 
with  my  crying,"  says  the  Psalmist;  "my  throat  is  dried;  mine  eyes  fail,  when 
they  wait  for  my  God.  They  mourn  by  reason  of  affliction.  I  have  stretched  out 
my  hands  daily  unto  Thee.  Tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  night."  And  we 
can  see  no  reason  in  the  nature  of  things  why  euch  strong  feelings  of  grief  should 
be  absent  in  religion.  Surely,  if  the  prospect  of  losing  an  earthly  friend — a  hus- 
'band  or  a  brother — causes  the  eye  to  run  down  with  tears,  the  breast  to  heave  and 
be  convulsed  with  sobs,  and  the  heart  to  be  poured  out  like  water  before  God — the 
prospect  of  losing  eternal  life  may  be  no  less  overpowering.  Assuredly,  if  a  fall 
from  riches  to  poverty,  from  circumstances  of  comfort  to  a  condition  of  wretched- 
ness, has  shaken  men  of  firm  nerves — the  prospect  of  an  eternity  spent  in  incon- 
ceivable misery,  with  the  worm  that  dieth  not,  and  in  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched, 
may  appal  the  stoutest  heart.  We  should  therefore  be  surprised  to  meet  with  one 
who  had  passed  from  death  to  life  through  the  terrors  of  the  law,  and  yet  was 
wholly  a  stranger  to  such  feelings.  We  should  regard  him  as  a  man  of  more  than 
mortal  mould.  But  let  us  observe,  that  true  grief  is  unobtrusive.  It  seeks  retire- 
ment. It  is  in  the  night  that  the  Psalmist  makes  his  bed  to  swim.  He  speaks  not 
of  his  tears  shed  in  the  assemblies  of  God's  people.  The  great  question  is.  What 
are  your  feelings  towards  Him  in  private  ?  Can  the  watches  of  the  night  bear  witness 
to  your  meditating  on  His  death  and  atoning  sacrifice,  and  of  your  vows  to  be  His, 
and  His  alone  ?  Such  was  the  Psalmist's  experience  ;  and  light  arose  on  his  dark- 
ness. The  day-spring  of  hope  and  gladness  broke  forth  on  him.  Suddenly  he 
changes  the  notes  of  woe  for  those  of  exultation,  "  Depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers 
of  iniquity ;  for  the  Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  wee})ing.  The  Lord  hath 
"heard  my  supplication  ;  the  Lord  will  receive  my  prayer.  Let  all  mine  enemies  be 
ashamed  and  sore  vexed.  Let  them  return  and  be  ashamed  suddenly."  {G.  Innes.) 
I  water  my  coucli  witli  my  tears. — David's  sorrow : — These  strong  expressions  imply 
a  sorrow  so  deep,  unusual,  and  excessive  as  to  provoke  the  inquiry,  what  could  poss- 
ibly occasion  and  justify  them  ?  From  vers.  7-10  we  conclude  that  the  sufferer  is 
brought  into  great  and  grievous  peril  by  the  arts  of  malicious  enemies.  But  we 
may  better  seek  the  origin  of  his  distress  in  influences  of  a  more  inward  and  spiritual 
character.  While  our  affairs  are  prosperous,  nothing  is  so  common  as  a  condition  of 
spiritual  heedlessness  and  self-satisfaction.  Let  God  make  a  breach  upon  us,  so 
that  suddenly  riches  depart  and  enemies  rejoice  and  friends  begin  to  look  cold,  and 
then  not  uncommonly  our  conscience  awakes  from  its  long  slumber  and  brings 
against  us  grievous  accusations.  The  feeling  that  he  is  suffering  God's  rebuke, 
smarting  under  God's  correction,  is  at  once  a  comfort  and  a  grief  to  the  Psalmist :  a 
comfort  when  he  remembered  the  loving  wisdom  that  corrected  him  ;  a  grief  when 
he  called  to  mind  the  sinful  ingratitude  that  needed  correction.  How  can  we 
wonder  at  the  depth  and  extent  of  his  grief  ?  It  is  by  the  depth  and  reality,  yea, 
the  passion  and  abandon  with  which  he  utters  the  profoundest  feelings  of  the  pious 
lieart,  that  David  has  moved  so  mightily  the  soul  and  spirit  of  the  world.     It  i» 


108  TSE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  vi. 

impossible  to  withhold  our  deep  respect  from  the  stoic,  seeing  that  hiB  endurftnce  of 
the  ills  of  life  implies  a  control  and  self-denial  almost,  if  not  altogether,  sublime. 
If  sorrow,  when  viewed  in  relation  to  its  uses,  is  a  good,  how  can  we  best  apply  it 
to  those  uses  ?  By  acknowledging  its  existence.  Its  right  to  exist,  as  long  as  there 
is  sin  in  our  hearts  or  suffering  in  the  world.  Sorrow  is  but  the  normal  e-xpression 
of  a  holy  sensibility  when  excited  by  the  contemplation  of  suflFering  or  sin  ;  and  it  is 
not  therefore  sorrow  in  itself,  but  only  the  excess  and  selfishness  of  it,  that  is  to  be 
restricted  and  overcome.  {J.  Moorhouse,  M.A.)  Repentance  in  time  vrill  be  re- 
membered  when  repentanceis  impossible : — Oh,  let  my  remembering  Thee  in  life  supply 
the  place  of  my  forgetting  Thee  in  death  ;  and  when  I  lie  in  my  grave  senseless  and 
silent,  be  pleased  to  remember  how  I  have  lain  in  my  bed  sighing  and  weeping.  {Sir 
Richard  Baker.)  Mourning  for  sin : — First,  he  sighed  and  sobbed  for  his  sin,  and 
now  he  mourneth  for  the  same.  Look  whereunto  our  follies  tend  !  The  pleasures 
of  sin  ever  end  in  displeasure,  for  which  either  we  must  of  necessity  mourn  in  this 
life,  or  eternally  in  the  life  to  come.  The  measure  of  his  mourning  is  expressed  by 
the  washing  and  swimming  of  his  bed  with  tears,  which  indeed  is  an  hyperbolic 
speech,  and  doth  express  unto  the  vehemency  and  greatness  of  his  grief,  and  that  he 
^d  not  esteem  light  of  his  sin,  yea,  I  may  affirm  never  had  man  gi-eater  displeasure 
for  so  short  a  pleasure  as  had  David  :  neither  was  he  in  worse  case  with  God,  but 
rather  the  multitude  of  his  tears  were  as  many  seals  of  God's  favour  towards  him, 
and  of  the  remission  of  his  sins  :  showers  be  better  than  dews,  yet  it  is  sufficient  if 
God  at  least  hath  bedewed  our  hearts,  and  hath  given  us  some  signs  of  a  penitent 
heart :  if  we  have  not  rivers  of  waters  to  pour  forth  with  David,  neither  fountains 
flowing  with  Mary  Magdalene,  nor  as  Jeremiah,  desire  to  have  a  fountain  in  our  head 
to  weep  day  and  night,  nor  with  Peter  weep  bitterly,  yet  if  we  lament  that  we  can- 
not lament ;  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  mourn  ;  yea,  if  we  have  the  smallest  sobs 
of  sorrow  and  tears  of  compunction,  if  they  be  true  and  not  counterfeit,  they  will 
make  us  acceptable  to  God  :  for  as  the  woman  with  the  bloody  issue  that  touched 
the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  was  no  less  welcome  to  Christ  than  Thomas,  who  put 
his  fingers  in  the  print  of  the  nails,  so  God  looketh  not  at  the  quantity,  but  the 
sincerity  of  our  repentance.  "My  bed."  The  place  of  his  sin  is  the  plaoe  of  his 
repentance,  and  so  it  should  be,  yea,  when  we  behold  the  place  whei-e  we  have 
offended  we  should  be  pricked  in  the  heart,  and  there  again  crave  Him  pardon. 
Sanctify  by  tears  every  place  which  ye  have  polluted  by  sin.  "  Every  night."  So, 
one  hour's  sin  may  bring  many  nights'  pain,  and  it  may  be  done  in  one  hour  which 
cannot  be  amended  in  our  life.  Learn,  therefore,  in  time  to  be  careful,  and  fall  not  into 
that  ditch,  out  of  which  hardly  can  ye  be  freed.  How  easy  is  it  for  a  man  to  fall 
into  a  pit,  but  with  what  difficulty  is  he  delivered  therefrom  !  As  the  night  is 
secret,  so  should  the  work  of  thy  repentance  be  ;  repent  thou  secretly,  that  the  Lord 
may  reward  thee  openly.  Mark  here  that  repentance  should  be  constant,  not  one 
night,  but  every  night.  It  is  not  seemly  to  a  king  to  weep  for  his  own  private 
calamities,  lest  he  might  seem  to  be  cast  down  from  his  courage  ;  but  nothing  more 
royal  than  to  mourn  for  the  ofifence  committed  against  the  King  of  kings.  Finally, 
mark  what  force  tears  have  with  God,  that  they  can  blot  out  the  multitude  of 
iniquities  :  be  true  and  not  counterfeit,  they  will  make  us  acceptable  to  God.  God 
looketh  not  on  the  quantity,  but  the  sincerity  of  our  repentance.  [A,  Symson, 
B.D. )  The  righteous  man's  assault  by  his  enemies : — The  pirates,  seeing  an  empty 
bark,  pass  by  it ;  but  if  she  be  loaded  with  precious  wares,  then  they  will  assault 
her.  So,  if  a  man  have  no  grace  within  him,  Satan  passeth  by  him,  as  not  a  con- 
venient prey  for  him,  but  being  loaded  with  graces,  as  the  love  of  God,  his  fear,  and 
such  other  spiritual  virtues,  let  him  be  persuaded  that  according  as  he  knows  what 
stuff  is  in  him,  so  will  he  not  fail  to  rob  him  of  them,  if  in  any  case  he  may. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  The  Lord  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  weeping. — A  change  from  sorrou) 

to  hope : — I.  Grateful  acknowledgment  of  mercy.  The  expressions  of  the  Psalm 
indicate  sorrow  of  no  ordinary  kind.  Much  of  this  sorrow  caused  by  a  sense  of  the 
indignation  of  God  against  sin  (ver.  1).  What  he  pleads  for  is  the  pardon  of  sin, 
the  lestoration  of  the  light  of  the  Divine  countenance.  His  plea  is  God's  mercy  and 
God's  glory.  II.  Holy  determination  to  forsake  sin.  "  Depart  from  me  all 
ye  workers  of  iniquity."  Those  who  have  experienced  God's  pardoning  mercy  will 
never  be  content  to  continue  in  sin.  III.  Humble  confidknoe.  The  Lord 
will  receive  my  prayer.  When  under  the  pressure  of  different  causes  of  sorrow 
the  believer  may  take  confidence  from  former  deliverances.     {J.  D.  Lane,  M.A.) 


PSALM  VI.]  THE  PSALMS.  109 

Sorrow  and  deliverance : — The  earlier  verses  of  this  Psalm  are  a  wail,  but  it  ends  in 
song.  It  is  like  a  day  of  rain  which  clears  at  evening.  I.  The  elements  of  the 
Psalmist's  sorrow  (1-7).  There  was  the  pressure  of  Divine  displeasure  on  account 
of  sin  (1,  2),  combined  with  soul-anguish  (3,  4),  perhaps  accompanied  with  sickness, 
bringing  nigh  unto  death  (4,  5),  whilst  enemies  add  their  hate  (6,  7).  II.  The 
certainty  of  the  Psalmist's  deliverance  (8-10).  The  prayer  is  no  sooner  uttered 
than  answered.  The  consciousness  of  having  been  heard  steals  over  the  weary  soul 
like  a  glint  of  light  on  to  a  bed  in  the  hospital  ward.  Weeping  has  a  voice  for  the 
ear  of  God.  The  Revised  Version  reads  the  imprecations  of  verse  10  as  future  tenses 
— "  they  shall  be  ashamed  and  turn  back."  When  God  returns,  our  enemies  turn 
back.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Sin  pleasant  to  begin  ixrith,  hut  painful  to  end  with: 

— The  work  of  sin  seems  pleasant  and  gainful ;  but  in  the  end  ye  shall  find  it  both 
unpleasant  and  painful  when  you  get  your  wages  payed  you  from  your  master,  the 
devil,  you  shall  know  the  truth  of  the  saying  of  the  apostle,  "  the  reward  of  sin  is 
death."  {A.  Symson,  B.D.)  Workers  of  iniquity: — Let  us  refuse,  therefore,  to 
work  any  longer  task  unto  Satan,  and  betake  us  to  a  better  Master  and  better 
service,  and  work  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  {Ihid. )  The  voice  of  toeepin<f  • — As 
David's  prayers  were  not  dumb,  but  had  a  voice,  so  they  are  not  dry  but  full  of 
tears :  those  sappy  prayers  be  acceptable  to  God,  which  proceed  not  from  a  banen 
and  dry  heart,  but  from  a  heart  well  watered  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  hearts 
planted  at  the  Rivers  of  waters  which  we  should  all  pray  for.  Think  ye  not  that 
a  mother  will  discern  the  voice,  but  much  more  the  weeping  of  her  own  child,  and 
the  ewe  discern  the  bleating  of  her  own  Iamb  among  a  thousand ;  and  will  not 
God  regard  the  prayer  of  His  own  child  being  in  afiSiction  ?    {Ibid,) 

Yer.  10.  Let  all  mine  enemies  be  ashamed  and  sore  vexed. — The  tolerance  and 
intolerance  of  the  gospel : — A  difficulty  is  often  felt  in  reading  or  repeating  these  im- 
precations. These  denunciations  are  appalling,  withering.  Are  they  not  essentially 
personal,  the  breathing  of  a  Jewish  spirit  of  revenge,  and  in  no  sense  Christian  and 
universal  ?  1.  I  can  find  no  difficulty  in  granting  that  the  Old  Testament  spirit  Mas 
a  harder  and  a  sterner  spirit  than  that  of  the  New.  The  emblem  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  the  cross,  which  signifies  passive  endurance.  The  emblem  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment is  the  sword.  As  the  Spirit  of  God  freely  uses  individual  thought,  style  and 
expression,  overruling  them  so  as  to  bring  out  His  own  higher  meaning,  I  should 
not  be  surprised  to  find  occasional  phrases  of  a  fiercer  and  an  angrier  complexion 
than  any  which  occur  in  the  New  Testament,  and  which  I  should  interpret  w  ith  a 
different  signification  from  that  which  their  utterer  designed.  We  need  not  consider 
these  imprecatory  Psalms  as  the  utterance  of  David's  longing  for  personal  revenge. 
It  is  very  singular  that  each  of  the  Psalms  in  which  the  strongest  imprecatory  pas- 
sages are  found  contains  also  gentle  undertones,  breathings  of  beneficent  love. 
2.  When  under  the  old  covenant,  earthly  prosperity  was  the  portion  of  the  wicked, 
and  earthly  adversity  of  the  pious,  the  whole  moral  government  of  God  seemed  to  be 
veiled  in  clouds  and  darkness.  2^ow,  when  all  seems  troubled,  we  can  look  up  and 
behold  by  faith  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed.  "God  is  patient  because  He  is 
eternal."  Man  is  impatient  when  he  is  not  assured  of  his  immortality.  3.  We  must 
interpret  every  book  by  the  mind  of  the  author.  If  so,  we  must  apply  this  to  the 
Bible  and  to  the  Psalms.  The  real  author  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  "The  prophet  seiins 
to  speak  as  if  in  prayer — when  he  sees  that  which  will  certainly  come— showing  that 
the  Known  counsel  of  God,  which  He  has  firmly  and  immutably  fixed,  should  not 
displease  us."  Conceive  a  created  spirit  enlarged  so  as  to  embrace  the  will 
of  God  in  relation  to  all  the  children  of  men — a  spirit  looking  from  the  margin  of 
an  eternal  world  upon  the  petty  histories  of  the  past,  purified  from  personal  l.atred, 
partiality,  and  prejudice,  measuring  all  things  by  the  counsels  of  God,  such  a 
spirit  could  say  without  a  taint  of  personal  revenge,  "let  all  mine  enemies  be 
ashamed."  Turn  to  two  passages  of  tiie  New  Testament  (Luke  ix.  49,  and  sequel). 
We  think  of  St.  John  as  a  man  of  angelic,  or  at  least  of  feminine,  gentleness.  But  in 
his  nature,  as  in  the  blue  sky  of  his  native  Galilee,  there  were  sudden  storms  and 
fierce  lightning  flashes.  As  yet  the  brothers  knew  not  Jesus  thoroughly.  They 
would  build  up  by  force  the  kingdom  whose  walls  are  cemented,  not  by  "blood  and 
iron,"  but  by  love.  Such  ia  the  spirit  of  intolerance,  which  would  in  one  age  offer  to 
God  the  hideous  thing  called  by  a  fearful  profanation  an  aato-da-f6 ;  which  in 
another  would  rivet  the  chains  of  penal  laws  upon  a  population  ;  in  another,  with 
the  cant  of  toleration  upon  its  lips,  stamp  out  an  onpopoiar  minority  by  rubrics  and 
definitions.     I«  there  any  intolerance  in  the  gospel  1    for  answer  see  2  John  ver  10. 


110  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vn. 

To  deny  that  Jesus  was  the  God-Man  was  to  question  His  legitimacy  and  impugn 
His  truth.  Pagan  toleration  has  been  invidiously  compared  with  Christian  intoler- 
ance. But  pagan  toleration  is  a  conclusion  drawn  from  the  false  premises  that  all 
religions  are  about  equaJIy  true  !  while  Christian  persecution  is  a  conclusion  falsely 
drawn  from  the  true  principle  of  the  exclusiveness  of  true  religion.  Commend  the 
spirit  of  tolerance  to  all  whom  our  Church  tolerates.  Amidst  much  that  is  depressing 
there  is  one  happy  sign  of  our  times.  There  are  tokens  that  Churches  sundered 
hitherto  are  yearning  to  be  one.  A  day  is  coming,  even  on  the  earth,  when  the  in- 
ward unity  of  Christ's  redeemed  shall  manifest  itself  outwardly  ;  when  the  prayer 
of  our  High-Priest  shall  b«  fulfilled,  "  that  they  all  may  be  one."  ( W.  Alexander, 
D.D.) 


PSALM    VII. 

Vers.  1-17.  0  Lord  my  (Sod,  in  Thee  do  I  put  my  trust— ^»  appeal  from  the  slan- 
dered:— I.  The  appeal  (vers.  1,  2,  6).  A  petition  for  freedom  and  deliverance 
from  his  persecutors,  in  which  he  desires  God  to  be  attentive  to  him,  because  of  the 
relation  between  them,  and  because  he  trusted  in  Him  :  and  he  also  desires  God  to  be 
benevolent,  because  he  was  in  danger  of  death,  having  many  enemies.  II.  His 
REASONS.  He  makes  protestation  of  his  innocency,  and  appeals  to  God's  justice. 
He  wants  God  to  do  justice  both  to  him  and  to  the  wicked.  The  close  of  the  Psalm  is 
a  doiology,  — thanks  that  a  true,  just,  and  merciful  God  would  judge  for  the  righteous, 
save  those  who  are  true  of  heart,  establish  the  just,  and  take  revenge  upon  the 
wicked;  for  this,  says  David,  "I  will  praise  the  Lord  according  to  His  righteous- 
ness." {Williajn  Nicholson,  D.D.)  David  and  his  enemies: — This  Psalm  con« 
sisteth  principally  of  three  parts.  In  the  first  part  he  prayeth  for  deliverance  from 
his  enemies,  setting  out  his  innocence  and  upright  dealing  toward  them  (vers.  1-5). 
In  the  second  he  prayeth  against  his  enemies,  declaring  what  good  shall  come  to  his 
children  by  the  overthrow  of  the  wicked  (vers.  6-10).  In  the  third  he  pronounceth 
God's  judgment  against  the  ungodly,  which,  being  once  manifested,  he  promises  to 
yield  hearty  thanks  unto  the  Lord  (vers.  11-17).  Learn  that  trust  and  confidence 
in  God  is  always  necessary  to  them  that  pray  to  Him  ;  for  otherwise  all  our  suppli- 
cations are  but  lip-labour,  and  lost.  Also,  we  learn  to  jtray  for  deliverance  from  our 
persecutors,  or  else  we  might  justly  be  accounted  betrayers  of  ourselves.  Many  of 
God's  children  may  stand  upon  their  innocency  to  men-ward,  and  say  in  their 
measure — which  of  you  can  convict  me  of  sin,  but  not  before  God.  We  may  some- 
times pray  against  some  enemies  of  the  Church,  but  we  should  make  God's  pro- 
mises (general  or  particular)  the  ground  of  our  prayers.  When  men  will  not  judge 
rightly  we  may  by  prayer  refer  our  causes  to  Him  who  hath  no  respect  of  persons. 
Vers.  12,  13  declare  what  mischievous  minds  the  wicked  carry  toward  the  godly, 
and  what  means  they  will  work  to  accomplish  their  naughtiness  ;  and  that  should 
teach  us  wisdom  and  circumspection,  that  we  fall  not  into  their  nets.  (Thomcu 
Wilcocks.)  The  ferocity  of  persecutors: — It  is  reported  of  tigers  that  they  enter 
into  a  rage  on  the  scent  of  fragrant  spices  :  so  do  ungodly  men  at  the  blessed  savour 
of  godliness.  I  have  read  of  some  barbarous  nations,  who  when  the  sun  shines  hot 
upon  them,  they  shoot  up  their  arrows  against  it :  so  do  wicked  men  at  the  light 
and  heat  of  godliness.  There  is  a  natural  antipathy  between  the  spirits  of  godly  men 
and  the  wicked  (Gen.  iii.  15).  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Exemplary  conduct  under 
social  trial: — David's  conduct  indicates  three  things.  I.  Earnest  application.  In 
the  midst  of  his  trial  he  looks  to  heaven.  In  his  supplication,  see — 1.  A  strong  confi- 
dence in  God  as  ever  accessible  ;  equal  to  all  emergencies  ;  large  enough  to  receive  all 
sufferers  ;  immutable  amidst  the  revolution  of  ages.  2.  A  terrible  sense  of  danger. 
"Lest  he  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion."  3.  A  deep  consciousness  of  innocence.  "If 
there  be  iniquity  in  my  hands."  4.  An  earnest  invocation  for  help.  "Arise,  O 
Lord,  lift  up  Thyself."  His  ideas  of  God  throughout  this  Psalm  are  very  anthropo- 
morphic. In  this  invocation  he  has  respect  for  three  things — (1)  The  spiritual  good 
of  his  country ;  (2)  the  administrative  justice  of  God  ;  (3)  the  universal  extension 
of  wickedness.  II,  Devout  meditations  (vers.  10-16).  1.  On  the  character  of 
God  ;  as  a  friend  of  the  just ;  an  enemy  of  the  wicked,  whose  opposition  is  constant,^ 
terrible,  and  avoidable.  2.  On  the  condition  of  sinners.  He  regards  his  position 
as  (1)  painfully  laborious ;   (2)  abortively  laborious  ;  (3)  self-ruinously  laborious. 


PSALM  Til.]  THE  PSALMS.  Ill 

III.  Revkeknt  adoration.  Note — 1.  The  character  in  which  he  worships  the 
Almighty.  As  righteous  and  as  supreme.  2.  The  spirit  with  which  he  worships 
the  Almighty.  "I  will  sing  praise."  Song  is  the  language  of  happiness.  True 
worship  is  haj)piness.  All  happy  spirits  worship,  and  worship  is  song.  (Homilist.) 
Turning  to  God  in  time  of  need  : — I.  Prayer  (1,  2).  If  David  desired  deliverance 
from  his  foes,  how  much  more  do  we  need  deliverance  from  our  arch-enemy  (1  Pet. 
V.  8,  9).  II.  Protestation  (3-5).  (1  Sara,  xxiv.,  xxvi.).  So  far  had  he  been 
from  the  otfence  they  charged  him  with.  III.  An  appeal  (6-9).  By  a  bold  meta- 
phor he  attributes  the  success  of  his  foes  to  some  temporary  abdication  on  God's  part 
of  His  throne,  and  he  entreats  Him  to  reassume  His  throne  and  give  His  decisions,  as 
Ea-stei  n  judges  are  wont  to  do,  in  the  midst  of  the  people  standing  around.  IV.  Prk- 
ncTioN  (10-16).  Evil  recoils  like  a  boomerang  on  those  who  set  it  in  motion. 
Ralph  the  Rover  perished  at  the  Inchcape  Rock.  The  huntsman  at  even-tide  falls 
into  the  pit  prepared  in  the  morning  for  his  prey.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Trwst  in 
God: — I.  The  conditions  of  trust  in  God.  1.  We  must  lay  to  heart  the  glorious 
truth  of  the  everlasting  love  of  God  towards  us,  and  realise  that  He  is  our  reconciled 
Father  in  Christ.  2.  We  must  ever  seek  to  do  His  will.  We  cannot  ' '  reat  in  the 
calm  sun-glow  of  His  face  "  if  we  are  not  earnestly  seeking  to  do  the  things  that 
please  Him.  3.  We  must  not  trust  in  ourselves.  The  pride  of  the  human  heart  is 
great,  hence  we  are  unwilling  to  confess  our  inability  to  keep  God's  commandments. 
4.  We  must  not  trust  in  others.  Asa's  end  a  warning  against  trusting  in  an  arm  of 
flesh  (2  Chron.  xvi.  12, 13).  II.  We  ought  to  trust  in  God.  1.  In  times  of  loneli- 
ness and  depression  (John  xvi.  32  ;  Psa.  Ivi.  3).  2.  Times  of  danger,  difficulty,  and 
temptation.  God  is  our  refuge  (Psa.  Ivii.  1)  ;  our  guide  (Psa.  xlviii.  14)  ;  God  is  faith- 
ful (1  Cor.  X.  13).  III.  The  result  of  trust  in  God.  1.  Blessedness  (Ixxxiv.  12). 
2.  Perfect  peace  (Isa.  xxvi.  3).     {J.  P.  Wright.) 

Yer.  2.  WWle  there  is  none  to  deliver. — Tiines  when  there  mtist  be  a  God: — Why 
pray  so  loudly,  clearly,  and  distinctly  ?  Because  the  enemy  is  mighty,  and  he  may 
"  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion  .  .  .  while  there  is  none  to  deliver."  If  it  be  a  question 
between  man  and  man,  woe  betide  the  weak  !  If  the  great  battles  of  human  exist- 
ence are  to  be  measured  by  the  strength  of  the  contending  parties,  virtue  will  be 
thrown  down,  discrowned,  destroyed.  But  there  are  times  when  there  must  be  a 
God  :  controversy  would  be  intolerable,  doubt  would  be  out  of  place — not  blasphemy 
against  heaven,  but  blasphemy  against  the  agonised  heart.  In  these  dark  times  we 
may  be  said  to  create  a  God.  Judge  these  questions  in  your  high  moods  ;  there  is 
no  intellectual  ladder  that  you  can  set  up  against  this  mystery,  and  by  which  you 
can  climb  your  way  into  the  presence  of  the  throne  :  the  heart  can  ily  nil  the 
distance,  counting  the  separate  constellations  nothing  in  the  exercise  of  its  infinite 
strength,  created  by  infinite  trust.  What  we  have  lost  in  all  these  matters  may  be 
described  as  the  Divine  fire.  We  have  thought  to  beat  cold  iron  into  shape.  Iron 
will  only  obey  the  hammer  and  the  hand  when  fire  has  undertaken  to  do  the  inter- 
mediate work  ;  it  is  when  the  soul  is  on  fire  that  we  have  no  doubt  about  God. 
When  we  are  prosperous,  too  highly  indulged,  even  sated  with  luxury  and  plenty, 
we  play  the  agnostic,  the  atheist,  the  speculative  thinker  ;  but  when  circumstances 
change,  when  the  floor  gives  way,  when  the  earth  rocks,  when  the  sun  sinks,  as  if 
in  mortal  fear,  and  shuts  out  the  day  ;  when  the  child  dies,  and  when  all  nature 
seems  to  be  set  in  array  against  the  processes  of  life — then  the  real  man  within  us 
will  talk.  When  agony  is  stinging  the  soul,  and  darkness  is  accumulating  itself 
upon  the  life  like  a  burden,  then  let  man  say  whether  he  is  imbecile,  whether  he  is 
unworthy  of  the  related  condition  of  things,  and  of  the  sovereignty  which  over-rules 
and  guides  and  crowns  them  aU.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-5.  0  Lord  my  God,  if  I  have  done  this;  if  there  be  iniquity  in  my 
hands. — The  appeal  of  conscious  integrity  : — When  near  his  end  Mahomet  made  an 
effort  to  obtain  himself  the  peace  and  pardon  of  the  living  before  presenting  himself 
before  his  Judge.  Sustained  beneath  the  arms  by  his  two  cherished  disciples, 
Abubeker  and  Ali,  he  trailed  himself  along  to  the  pulpit  of  the  mosque,  and  said, 
with  a  feeble  voice,  "  Mussulmans  1  if  I  have  ever  maltreated  any  among  you,  let 
him  now  come  and  strike  me  in  turn.  If  I  have  offended  any  of  you  by  word,  let 
him  return  insult  for  insult.  If  I  have  taken  from  any  his  property,  let  him  take 
all  I  possess  upon  the  earth.  And  these  are  not  vain  words  ;  let  no  one,  in  doing 
himself  justice,  apprehend  my  resentment.  Resentment  and  anger  are  not  in  my 
character,"    A  man  dared  to  step  bom  the  crowd  and  claim  of  him  a  concealed 


112  TffE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRdTOR  [psalm  vii. 

debt.  "Help  thyself,"  said  the  prophet ;  "it  is  better  to  blash  in  this  life  befor« 
men,  for  one's  iigostice,  than  to  blush  in  the  other  world  before  God."  {Lamartine't 
Twrkey.) 

Yer.  8.  Arise,  0  Lord,  In  Thine  anger:  lift  up  Thyself  because  of  the  rage  of 
mine  enemies.  —Hu  first  of  the  imprecatory  Psalms : — Commiuations  are  present  in 
vers.  11-17,  and  imprecations  upon  the  writer  himself  (under  certain  contingencies) 
in  yer.  6.  I.  The  Psalm  is  not  vindiotivb.  1.  It  is  certainly  David's  composi- 
tion, and  by  his  twice  sparing  Saul  we  know  this  was  not  his  character.  Cush  the 
Bei\jamite  was  some  follower  of  Saul  who  had  plotted  against  David.  It  is  prob- 
able that  in  1  Sam.  xxiv.  we  have  the  historic  setting  of  the  Psalm.  The  points  of 
contact  between  the  two  are  many.  2.  And  Cush  was  flagrantly  an  evil-doer 
(vers.  2,  3,  4,  14,  15).  Hence  these  denunciations  are  uttered.  II.  See  what  he 
PKATS  FOK.  It  is  simply  that  God  will  awake.  III.  What  he  predicts.  That 
the  Lord  will  whet  His  sword,  &c.  Neither  in  prayer  nor  prediction  is  there  any 
disproportion  between  the  sin  and  its  punishment.  It  is  less  than  what  God  had 
Himself  said  He  would  do  (Deut.  xxxii.  23,42).  IV,  Why  he  thus  denounces. 
Not  because  although  he  had  spared  his  enemy,  yet  in  his  heart  he  was  thirsting  for 
revenge.  If  he  had  wanted  revenge  he  could  have  taken  it.  But — 1.  From  the 
instinct  of  self-preservation.  2.  Desire  for  the  repression  of  crime.  3.  For 
the  glory  of  God.  We  deny,  therefore,  that  the  Psalm  is  vindictive.  (Joseph 
Hammond.) 

Ver.  7.  For  their  saKes,  therefore,  return  Thou  on  liigh..— David's  strong 
language: — David  had  no  difficulty  in  iuvoking  a  tremendous  punishment  upon  his 
enemies.  But  the  language  must  be  judged  by  the  times  in  which  it  was  employed. 
Not  only  so,  but  every  man  has  his  own  language.  In  a  sense  there  is  a  private 
and  individual  tongue.  You  must  know  the  speaker  before  you  can  understand  the 
speech.  The  man  explains  the  mystery  that  is  round  about  him.  David's  language 
was  very  strong  ;  but  David  was  a  poet,  and  a  Hebrew  poet,  a  poet  of  poets.  All 
the  poetry  that  had  gone  before  him  was  but  as  a  pedestal,  on  which  he  stood  to 
lift  himself  and  his  art  into  a  nobler  elevation.  We  must  not,  therefore,  judge 
David's  language,  especially  when  it  is  imprecatory,  with  our  critical  notions  of 
propriety  and  measure.  No  other  terms  would  have  expressed  his  then  feeling. 
Were  he  with  us  now,  none  would  be  so  sweet  in  song,  none  so  tender  in  prayer. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  Judge  me,  0  Lord,  according  to  my  righteousness,  and  according  to  mine 
integrity  that  is  in  me. — Integrity  and  peace : — A  truly  noble  confidence  !  and  yet 
many  of  our  time  would  call  the  language  very  dangerous,  if  it  were  spoken  by  any 
but  one  of  the  Scripture  saints.  Some,  on  the  other  hand,  charge  it  as  a  fault  in 
our  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace,  that  it  lets  down  even  the  standards  of  our 
morality  itself ;  because  it  is  a  part  of  our  merit,  under  grace,  to  have  no  merit. 
Let  us  see  if  we  can  find  the  true  place  for  integrity  under  the  Christian  salvation 
by  noting — I.  How  the  Scbiptuees  speak  of  integrity.  The  text  cited  does 
not  stand  alone.  David  says  again,  "Judge  me,  0  Lord;  for  I  have  walked  in 
mine  integrity."  Good  men  are  called  "upright,"  "just,"  "righteous,"  and 
"right."  It  is  even  declared  that  they  "shall  deliver  their  own  souls  by  their 
righteousness. "  The  Christian  disciples  of  the  New  Testament  dare  to  say  that  they 
have  a  conscience  void  of  offence.  They  exhort  others  to  walk  so  as  they  have  them 
for  examples.  Making  the  strongest  confessions  of  ill-desert,  and  resting  their 
salvation  on  the  justifying  grace  of  God,  they  are  still  able  to  be  free  in  professing 
their  own  conscious  integrity  in  their  discipleship.  The  explanation  is  not  difficult 
if  we  consider — II.  What  integrity  means.  As  an  integer  is  a  whole,  in  distinc- 
tion from  a  fraction,  which  is  only  a  part,  so  a  man  of  integrity  is  a  man  whose  aim 
in  the  right  is  a  whole  aim,  in  distinction  from  one  whose  aim  is  divided,  partial, 
or  unstable.  It  does  not  mean  that  he  has  never  been  a  sinner,  or  that  he  is  not 
now,  but  simply  that  the  intent  of  his  soul  is  to  do  and  be  wholly  right  with  God 
and  man.  Distinguish  between  commercial  integrity  and  the  higher  iute^^rity  of 
religion.  What  does  it  signify  that  a  man  ^ives  men  their  due,  and  will  not  give 
God  His  ?  God  is  a  person  as  truly  as  men  are,  more  closely  related  to  us,  a  better 
friend,  one  who  has  claims  of  right  more  sacred.  Does  it  entitle  one  to  the  name  of 
a  just  man  that  he  is  honest  with  men  of  one  colour  and  not  with  those  of  another  * 
What,  then,  shall  we  think  of  mere  commercial  integi-ity  taken  by  itself?    Real 


PSALM  Til.]  TEE  PSALMS.  113 

integrity,  ready  to  do  right  to  God  as  to  men,  to  men  as  to  God,  mnst  be  the  con- 
dition of  Christian  character  itself.  Let  us  inquire — III.  In  what  manner  ?  If 
Christ  saves  men,  not  by  their  merit,  or  on  terms  of  justioe  or  reward,  but  by 
purely  gratuitous  favour,  what  place  have  we  for  insisting  on  the  need  of  integrity 
at  all  ?  It  seems  to  be  the  comfort  of  what  some  call  their  piety,  that  God  is  going 
to  dispense  with  all  merit  in  them,  which  they  take  to  mean  all  sound  reality  of 
character, — all  exactness  of  principle  and  conduct.  Integrity  is  wholeness  of  aim 
or  intent ;  but  mere  intent  does  not  make  a  character.  Yet  it  is  just  that  by  which 
all  evil  will  be  vanquished,  under  Christ  and  by  grace,  because  it  puts  a  man  at  the 
very  gate  of  faith,  where  all  God's  helps  are  waiting  for  Him.  His  new  and  better 
aim  is  his  way  of  coming  into  the  righteousness  of  God.  The  Scripture  conditions 
all  help  on  the  integrity  of  the  soul.  "  Ye  shall  seek  and  find  Me,  if  ye  search  for 
Me  with  all  your  heart."  Let  us  note,  in  conclusion — 1.  What  it  is  that  gives  such 
peace  and  loftiness  of  bearing  to  the  life  of  a  truly  righteous  man.  Storms  of 
detraction  and  malignant  conspiracies  against  his  character  may  drive  their  clouds 
about  Him,  but  he  sits  above  with  his  God,  and  they  all  sail  under,  "The  work 
of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and  the  effects  of  righteousness,  quietness  and 
assurance  for  ever."  Here,  too — 2.  Is  the  ground  of  all  failures,  and  all  highest 
successes  in  the  Christian  life.  Only  to  be  an  honest  man,  in  this  genuinely 
Christian  sense,  signifies  a  great  deal  more  than  most  of  us  ever  conceive.  Little 
do  we  realise  how  honest  a  man  must  be  to  pray,  how  heartily,  simply,  totally  he 
must  mean  what  he  prays  for.  Perhaps  he  prays  much,  and  has  it  for  a  continual 
wonder  that  God  does  not  answer  his  prayers.  Perhaps  he  has  conceived  a  higher 
standing  in  religion,  and  has  tried  long  to  reach  it,  and  finds  it  not.  Strange  as  it 
may  seem,  here  is  the  root  of  the  difficulty — that  his  projected  attainments  are 
clear  ahead  of  his  integrity.  Some  traitor  is  hid  in  his  soul's  chambers,  that  is 
kept  there,  and  carefully  fed.  Success  is  the  fixed  destiny  of  any  soul  that  has  once 
reached  the  point  of  whole  intent.  I  note — 3.  Avery  important  deduction,  namely, 
— that  every  man  who  comes  into  a  state  of  right  intent  will  forthwith  also  be  a 
Christian.  Whoever  is  willing  to  be  carried  just  where  it  will  carry  him,  cost  him 
what  it  may,  in  that  man  the  spirit  of  all  sin  is  broken,  and  his  mind  is  in  a  state 
to  lay  hold  of  Christ  and  be  laid  hold  of  by  Him.  "  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run 
to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth,  to  show  Himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of  them 
whose  heart  is  perfect  towards  Him."  God  is  on  the  look-out  always  for  an  honest 
man — him  to  help  and  with  him,  and  for  him,  to  be  strong.  And  if  there  be  one, 
God  will  not  miss  him  ;  for  His  desiring,  all-searching  eyes  are  running  the  world 
through  always  to  find  him.  {Horace  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Self-respect  and  self- 
righteousness: — Is  this  speech  self-righteous?  If  so  it  is  s  bad  speech;  for  self- 
righteousness  is  a  bad  temper  of  mind  ;  few  are  worse.  But  there  is  another  temper 
of  mind  which  looks  like  it  at  first,  but  is  not  so,  and  which  is  right  in  its  way. 
I  mean  the  temper  of  Job  when  his  friends  tried  to  make  him  out  a  bad  man.  He 
declared  he  would  tell  no  lies  about  himself.  "Till  I  die  I  will  not  remove  mine 
integrity  from  me.  I  have,  on  the  whole,  tried  to  be  a  good  man,  and  I  will  not 
make  myself  out  a  bad  one."  St.  John  said,  "If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  we 
deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  I.  But  we  may  misuse  that 
DOCTRINE.  Many  do.  1.  Some  people  try  to  confess  as  many  sins  as  possible. 
They  do  not  go  and  commit  them,  but  they  fancy  themselves  guilty  of  them.  This 
is  all  too  common.  It  is  ruinous  oftentimes  to  the  body  ;  I  have  seen  people  kill 
their  own  bodies  and  die  early  by  this  folly.  And  they  kill  their  souls  too,  and 
enter  into  strong  delusions  and  believe  lies.  And  yt-t  one  pities  them  more  than  we 
can  be  angry  with  them,  and  all  the  more  because  they  are  generally  the  most 
innocent,  and  who  have  least  to  confess.  We  should  pray  for  them.  2.  But  there 
is  a  worse  misuse  of  St.  John's  doctrine  than  this.  A  man  may  be  proud  of  calling 
himself  a  miserable  sinner,  and  of  confessing  his  sins.  But  if  he  really  knew  the 
misery  of  sin  he  would  not  talk  so  much  about  it.  His  talk  is  only  another  way 
of  saying,  "I  am  a  better  man  than  you.  I  confess  my  sins,  and  you  do  not." 
II.  But  WHAT  IS  the  right  use  of  the  doctrine  ?  If  you  refuse,  like  Job,  to 
own  yourself  guilty  of  what  you  know  you  are  not  guilty  of,  such  a  man  will  tell 
you  that  you  are  ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of  the  gospel.  You  are  building 
integrity  and  morality.  Now,  he  is  partly  right,  and  so  are  you.  St.  Paul  will 
help  us,  for  he  said,  "I  judge  not  mine  own  self;  for  I  know  nothing  against 
myself,  yet  am  I  not  hereby  justified  ;  but  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord."  Now, 
no  man  was  ever  less  self-righteous  than  Paul,  and  yet  he  says,  "I  know  nothing 
against  myself. "    Then,  here  is  the  rule.    If  you  have  done  wrong,  confess  that ;  if  you 

8 


lU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vii. 

have  done  right,  be  not  afraid  to  say  you  have.  And  to  keep  up  self-respect,  <i;o  on 
trying  to  do  right.  Wrong  no  man,  least  of  all,  a  woman.  But,  mind,  your  right- 
doing  will  not  justify  you,  for  we  all  have  sinned.  III.  Remember  the  Lord  will 
JUDGE  YOU.  Be  glad  of  this,  as  David  was,  for  he  knew  that  the  Lord  would  bring 
him  out  of  his  sin.  You  must  not  think  of  God  as  hard,  or  you  will  fret  and  not 
fight.  But  if  you  believe  Him  good  you  will  fight  and  not  fret.  And  you  will  be 
able  to  leave  yourself  in  His  hands.     ( Charles  Kingsley. ) 

Vers.  9-16.  Let  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  come  to  an  end. — The  self -destroy- 
ing power  of  wickedness : — The  accents  require  ver.  9  to  be  rendered,  "Let  wicked- 
ness make  an  end  of  the  wicked,"  but  tliat  introduces  an  irrelevant  thought  of 
the  suicidal  nature  of  evil.  It  may  be  significant  that  the  Psalmist's  prayer  is 
not  for  the  destruction  of  the  wicked,  but  of  their  wickedness.  Such  annihilation 
of  evil  is  the  great  end  of  God's  judgment,  and  its  consequence  will  be  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  righteous.  Again,  the  prayer  strengthens  itself  by  the  thought  of 
God  as  righteous,  and  as  trying  the  hearts  and  reins  (the  seat  of  feeling).  In  the 
presence  of  rampant,  and  all  but  triumphant  evil,  a  man  needs  to  feed  hopes  of  its 
overthrow,  that  would  else  seem  vainest  dreams,  by  gazing  on  the  righteousness 
and  searching  power  of  God.  .  .  .  The  last  section  is  a  vision  of  the  judgment  prayed 
for,  and  may  be  supposed  to  be  addressed  to  the  enemy.  If  so,  the  hunted  man 
towers  above  them,  and  becomes  a  rebuker.  The  character  of  God  underlies  the 
fact  of  judgment,  as  it  had  encouraged  the  prayer  for  it.  "What  he  had  said  to 
himself  when  his  head  drooped  he  now,  as  a  prophet,  peals  out  to  men  as  making 
retribution  sure:  "God  is  a  righteous  judge,  yea,  a  God  that  hath  indignation 
every  day."  The  absence  of  an  object  specified  for  the  indignation  makes  its 
inevitable  flow  wherever  there  is  evil  the  more  vividly  certain.  If  He  is  such,  then 
of  course  follows  the  destniction  of  every  one  who  turns  not.  Retribution  is  set 
forth  with  solemn  vigour  under  four  figures.  1.  God  is  as  an  armed  enemy  sharpen- 
ing His  sword  in  preparation  for  action,  a  work  of  time  which  in  the  Hebrew  is 
represented  as  in  process,  and  bending  His  bow,  which  is  represented  as  a  com- 
pleted act.  Another  second  and  the  arrow  will  whizz.  So  the  stem  picture 
is  drawn  of  God  as  in  the  moment  before  the  outburst  of  His  punitive  energy — 
the  sword  sharpened,  the  bow  bent,  the  arrows  fitted,  the  burning  atuflf  being 
smeared  on  their  tips.  What  will  happen  when  all  this  preparation  blazes  into 
action?  2.  Ver.  14:  A  figure  of  the  automatic  action  of  evil  in  bringing  punish- 
ment. It  is  the  Old  Testament  version  of  "Sin  when  it  is  finished  bringeth  forth 
death."  The  evil-doer  is  boldly  represented  as  "travailing  with  iniquity,"  and 
that  metaphor  is  broken  up  into  two  parts,  "He  hath  conceived  mischief,"  and 
*' He  hath  brought  forth  falsehood."  The  "falsehood,"  which  is  the  thing  actually 
produced,  is  so  called,  not  because  it  deceives  others,  but  because  it  mocks  its 
producer  with  false  hopes,  and  never  fulfils  his  purposes.  This  is  but  the  highly 
metaphorical  way  of  saying  that  a  sinner  never  does  what  he  means  to  do,  but  that 
the  end  of  all  his  plans  is  disappointment.  The  law  of  the  universe  condemns 
him  to  feed  on  ashes,  and  to  make  and  trust  in  lies.  3.  The  idea  in  "falsehood," 
namely,  the  failure  of  evil  to  accomplish  its  doer's  purpose.  Crafty  attempts  to 
trap  others  have  an  ugly  habit  of  snaring  the  contriver.  The  irony  of  fortune 
tumbles  the  hunter  into  the  pitfall  dug  by  him  for  his  prey.  4.  Ver.  16  :  The 
incidence  of  his  evil  on  the  evil-doer  as  being  certain  as  the  fall  of  a  stone 
thrown  straight  up,  which  will  infallibly  come  back  in  the  line  of  its  ascent. 
Retribution  is  as  sure  as  gravitation,  especially  if  there  is  an  Unseen  Hand  above, 
which  adds  impetus  and  direction  to  the  falling  weight.  All  these  metaphors, 
dealing  with  the  "  natural "  consequences  of  evil,  are  adduced  as  guarantees  of 
God's  judgment,  whence  it  is  clear  both  that  the  Psalmist  is  thinking  not  of 
some  final  future  judgment,  but  of  the  continuous  one  of  daily  providence, 
and  that  he  made  no  sharp  line  of  demarcation  between  the  supernatural  and 
the  natural.  The  qualities  of  things  and  the  play  of  natural  events  are  God's 
working.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  prayer  for  the  ending  of  wickedness: — 
I.  Thk  wickedness  of  the  wicked.  1.  It  is  the  genuine  fruit  of  a  depraved 
nature.  2.  It  displays  itself  in  various  forms.  3.  It  presses  into  its  service  the 
whole  man.  4.  It  has  abounded  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  II.  When  may  this 
wickedness  comb  to  an  end?  The  end  of  a  thing  is  its  termination.  1.  It 
comes  to  an  end  partially  in  the  individual  conversion  of  sinners  to  God.  2,  It 
will  come  to  an  end  generally  by  the  conversion  of  the  world  to  God.  III.  This 
IS  A  MOST  DESIRABLE  OBJECT.     1.  On  God's  account     2.  On  our  own  account. 


PSAIM  vn.]  TEE  PSALMS.  115 

3.  On  acconnt  of  those  who  are  tlie  immediate  subjects  of  this  wickedness. 
VI.  What  means  can  be  adopted  to  put  an  end  to  it  t  1.  Give  no  countenance 
to  wickedness.  2.  Warn  the  wicked  of  their  danger.  3.  Pray  that  their  wicked- 
ness may  come  to  an  end.  Wrestle  with  God  in  their  behalf.  {Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.)  Prayer  for  the  termination  of  sin: — Our  text  is  a  prayer, 
and  teaches  us — 1.  To  pray  against  all  sin  ;  to  pray  it,  if  possible,  out  of  the  world. 
2.  To  pray  for  all  saints,  for  all  good  people.  If  we  would  be  on  the  Lord's  side  in 
the  day  of  inquiry,  we  must  by  our  prayers  act  in  concert  with  the  just.  I.  What 
WE  ABE  TO  DESIKE  AND  PEAT  FOE.  1.  That  wickedness  may  come  to  an  end. 
That  wicked  principles  may  be  exploded  and  abandoned.  That  wicked  practices 
may  be  prevented  and  restrained ;  that  though  Balaam  be  still  the  same,  yet  he 
may  not  be  suflfered  to  curse  Israel ;  though  Sennacherib  has  still  an  inveterate 
rage  against  God,  yet  he  may  be  made  to  feel  that  God  has  a  hook  in  his  nose 
and  a  bridle  in  his  jaws.  Thus  let  wickedness  be  ashamed  and  hide  itself,  and 
that  it  may  not  be  propagated  and  spread  so  as  to  infect  others.  2.  That  God 
would  establish  the  just  in  their  integrity  and  retain  them  in  it,  is  their  comfort 
and  hope.  In  their  undertaking  against  wickedness :  that  they  may  not  be 
shaken  by  any  discouragements  they  meet  with.  II.  Why  this  is  and  ought  to 
BE  THE  DESIRE  OF  ALL  GOOD  PEOPLE.  Because — 1.  Such  have  concern  for  the 
honour  of  God  ;  and  2.  They  have  tender  love  to  the  souls  of  men.  3.  They  have 
great  value  for  the  grace  of  God,  for  what  it  has  done  and  is  promised  to  do  ; 
and  4.  They  are  hearty  well-wishers  to  their  native  land.  III.  For  applicaiiox 
OF  WHAT  HAS  BEEN  SAID.  1.  Let  US  address  ourselves  to  God  in  prayer  that  He 
would  further  the  reformation  of  manners  in  our  land.  Let  ministers  thus  pray, 
and  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  societies  for  reformation  support  their  under- 
takings by  their  prayers.  2.  And  let  us  follow  prayer  with  endeavour.  You  who 
are  rich  and  of  station  in  the  world  be  favoured  to  appear  in  person  to  uphold  this 
work.  Your  influence  is  a  talent  you  must  account  for.  Assure  yourselves  that 
the  cause  of  religion  and  piety  is  the  cause  of  God  and  must  prevail.  {Matthew 
Henry.)  For  the  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts  and  reins. —  The  searching 
Divine  test: — The  one  thought  of  God's  judgment  seems  to  run  through  the  Psalm. 
To  understand  the  Psalm  aright  we  must  refer  it  altogether  to  the  assurance  that 
God  will  ultimately  clear  those  who  are  falsely  accused  of  anything  in  this  world, 
which  they  feel  and  know  that  they  have  never  committed.  Often  evil  does  seem  to 
prevail  over  good.  In  the  end  God  will  justify  the  righteous,  and  condemn  the 
wicked.  This  assurance  may  uphold  faithful  men  in  all  times  of  difSculty,  trial, 
and  persecution.  Oftentimes  God  brings  it  to  pass  upon  wicked  men  that  they 
perish  by  the  very  way  and  means  they  designed  for  the  destruction  of  the  right- 
eous. It  is  not  merely  that  God  knows  every  way  of  all  men  ;  it  is  not  merely  that 
His  eye  readeth,  as  it  does,  the  very  thoughts  and  intents  of  every  heart  amongst 
us  :  it  is  that  He  trieth  each  separate  thought  and  intent  of  that  heart :  He  weighs 
every  word ;  He  marks  every  little  variation  and  complexion  of  man's  thoughts, 
and  words,  and  works,  and  intents.  He  registers  it  all,  because  He  will  one  day 
"judge  the  world  in  righteousness."  To  say  to  ourselves,  "The  righteous  God 
trieth  the  very  heart  and  reins,"  will  make  us  think  more  of  what  we  call  "little" 
sins,  and  it  will  make  us  value  more  and  more  every  greater  or  less  opportunity  of 
receiving  grace  or  of  doing  good.  It  will  make  us  also  watch  more  carefully  the 
springs  and  intents  of  our  hearts.     (  W.  J.  Stracey,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  My  defence  is  of  God,  which  saveth  the  upright  in  heart. — God,  the 
shield-hearer  of  the  U2)right : — Lit. :  God  is  my  shield-bearer.  Fig. :  I  hang  my  shield 
upon  God.  The  idea  is  that  of  going  to  war,  and  having  God  as  the  carrier,  the 
bearer,  of  our  shield,  so  that  before  we  can  be  struck  dowu,  God  Himself  must  be 
wounded  and  overpowered.  "My  defence  is  of  God."  There  are  times  when  we 
need  great  defences.  There  arise  in  life  crises,  points  of  agony,  when  we  can  only 
be  silent,  having  first  said  to  God,  "Undertake  for  me."  There  are  times  when 
it  seems  to  us  but  a  small  thing,  or  a  course  quite  natural,  to  claim  all  heaven  as 
our  defence.  These  are  supreme  moments.  The  bulk  of  life  is  commonplace, 
lived  on  an  ordinary  level,  requiring  the  discharge  of  common  duties.  There  are 
times  when  the  whole  heaven  is  no  longer  a  defence,  but  an  accusation.  These  are 
the  terrible  moments  of  life.  Where,  then,  is  man's  defence  ?  Let  man  in  such 
moments  look  within  ;  let  him  trace  the  course  of  his  own  spirit  and  action  ;  and 
if  he  can  find  in  that  action  reasons  for  self-condemnation,  then  let  him  be  penitent 
and  broken-hearted ;  let  him  find  God  through  his  tears.     The  tears  must  not  be 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  yii. 

selfish  :  no  man  must  make  an  investment  of  his  broken-heartedness.  Eepentauce 
must  be  perfect,  vital,  sincere,  all-inclusive.  He  does  not  repent  who  cries  simply 
because  the  consequences  are  painful.  Contrition  has  nothing  to  do  with  coiise- 
quences.  God  may  be  both  accuser  and  defender.  He  prefers  the  accusation  with 
the  reluctance  of  wounded  love  ;  through  the  accusation  He  causes  to  shine  the 
light  of  the  prepared  defence  :  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  He  is  the  defender  of 
the  sinner,  when  the  offender  falls  down  in  contrition  and  self-examination.  The 
Psalmist  falls  back  upon  the  vital  element  of  character.  "Saveth  the  upright 
in  heart."  Is  God,  then,  only  the  defender  of  the  righteous,  who  have  never 
sinned?  No  such  meaning  is  here.  "The  upright  in  heart"  may  not  always  be 
the  up'ight  in  conduct.  Men  cannot  go  beyond  conduct ;  God  goes  into  motive, 
purpose,  secret  thought.  May  there,  then,  be  broken  conduct  and  yet  a  heart  truly 
upright  before  God  ?  There  may  be,  and  that  is  our  hope.  God  does  not  look  upon 
us  as  we  are,  but  upon  what  we  would  be  if  we  could.  Where  there  is  this  integrity 
or  uprightness  of  heart,  all  the  rest  will  be  well.  When  you  have  the  upright  heart 
all  needful  consistency  will  be  guaranteed.  A  growing  life  is  never  a  literally  con- 
sistent one.  Many  a  man  is  mechanically  consistent  who  is  spiritually  self-con- 
tradictory. Do  we  want  to  be  upright  in  heart  ?  There  is  but  one  gospel  way. 
The  grace  of  God  alone  can  make  the  heart  true  and  new  and  beautiful.  We 
cannot  give  ourselves  uprightness  of  heart.  It  is  not  in  man  to  make  himself 
clean.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  upright  in  heart: — I.  A  character  de- 
scribed. The  upright  in  heart.  Now  it  includes  inward  principle  as  the  wheel 
which  puts  the  whole  machine  in  action  ;  and  outward  conduct  is  the  result  of  it. 
Take  as  example — 1.  Nathaniel.  He  was  a  man  whose  outward  character  corre- 
sponded with  the  promptings  of  his  heart.  2.  Remember  there  may  be  uprightness 
of  heart  with  many  failings.  God  looks  at  the  intents  of  the  heart.  Only  they 
must  be  sincere.  II.  The  privilege  of  this  character.  1.  God's  defence. 
We  see  how  God  defends  the  tender  plants  from  winter's  cold  and  summer's  heat. 
But  yet  more  does  He  protect  His  children.  For  His  love  is  deeper,  stronger,  and 
more  lasting  than  that  of  a  mother.  2.  God's  salvation.  "  God  raiseth  the  upright 
in  heart."  But  our  salvation  is  in  Christ,  there  is  none  out  of  Him.  {W.  D, 
Howard. ) 

Ver.  11.  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day. — God's  anger  against  the 
wicked: — I.  Who  ARE  the  "wicked"  in  the  Scripture  sense  of  the  term? 
The  Bible  divides  all  the  human  race  into  two  classes  only — the  righteous  and  the 
wicked.  Those  are  righteous  who  have  true  faith  in  Christ,  whose  spirit  is  con- 
secrated to  God,  who  live  a  heavenly  life  on  earth,  and  who  have  been  renewed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Their  original  selfishness  is  subdued  and  slain,  and  they  live  a 
new  life  through  the  ever-present  grace  of  Christ  Jesus.  Eight  over  against  them 
in  character  are  the  wicked,  who  have  not  been  renewed  in  heart;  who  live  in 
selfishness,  under  the  dominion  of  appetite  in  some  of  its  forms, — and  it  matters 
not  in  which,  out  of  all  possible  forms,  ii  may  be,  but  self  is  the  great  and  only 
ultimate  end  of  their  life.  II.  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked.  This  is  the 
testimony  of  God  Himself.  This  truth  is  also  taught  by  reason.  If  God  were  not 
opposed  to  the  wicked.  He  would  be  wicked  Himself  for  not  opposing  them.  Sinners 
know  that  God  is  angry  with  them,  and  ought  to  be.  Else,  why  are  they  afraid  to 
die?  III.  The  nature  of  this  anger.  1.  It  is  not  a  malicious  anger.  God 
never  has  a  disposition  to  do  any  wrong  in  any  way  to  any  being.  2.  His  anger  is 
not  passion  in  the  sense  in  which  men  are  wont  to  exhibit  passion  in  anger.  Reason 
for  the  time  is  displaced,  and  passion  reigns.  3.  God's  anger  cannot  be  in  any 
sense  a  selfish  anger ;  for  God  is  not  selfish  in  the  leastj  degree.  Positively,  His 
anger  against  the  wicked  implies — (1)  An  entire  disapprobation  of  their  conduct  and 
character.  He  loathes  the  wicked  with  infinite  loathing.  (2)  He  feels  the  strongest 
opposition  of  will  to  their  character,  as  opposed  to  His  own  character.  (3)  Strong 
opposition  of  feeling  against  sinners.  In  our  attempts  to  conceive  of  the  mental 
faculties  of  the  Divine  mind,  we  are  under  a  sort  of  necessity  of  reasoning  analogic- 
ally from  our  own  minds.  As  we  have  intellect,  sensibility,  and  will,  so  has  God. 
From  our  own  minds  we  infer  not  only  what  the  faculties  of  the  Divine  mind  are, 
but  also  the  laws  under  which  they  act.  (4)  God  is  not  angry  merely  against  the 
sin  abstracted  from  the  sinner,  but  against  the  sinner  himself.  The  sin  has  no 
moral  character  apart  from  the  sinner.  It  grieves  and  displeases  God  that  a 
rational  moral  agent,  under  His  government,  should  array  himself  against  his  own 
God  and  Father,  against  all  that  is  right  and  juat  in  the  oulTerse.    (5)  The  anger 


PSALM  VII.]  THE  PSALMS.  117 

of  God  against  the  wicked  implies  all  that  properly  belongs  to  anger  when  it  exists 
with  good  reason.  IV.  The  reasons  of  God's  angeb.  Causeless  anger  is  always 
sinful.  God  never  Himself  violates  His  own  laws — founded  as  they  are  in  infinite 
right  and  justice.  1.  Wicked  men  are  entirely  unreasonable.  God  has  given  them 
intelligence  and  conscience ;  but  they  act  in  opposition  to  both.  God  has  given 
them  a  pure  and  good  law,  yet  this  they  recklessly  violate.  AVe  know  that,  by  a 
fixed  law  of  our  being,  nothing  can  be  a  greater  temptation  to  anger  than  to  see 
persons  act  unreasonably.  So  when  God  looks  at  the  unreasonable  conduct  of 
sinners,  He  feels  the  strongest  indignation  and  displeasure.  2.  The  course  of  the 
wicked  is  utterly  ruinous.  No  thanks  to  the  sinner  if  his  influence  does  not  ruin 
the  whole  world.  By  the  very  laws  of  mind,  the  sin  of  any  one  man  tends  to 
influence  other  men  to  sin,  and  they  spread  far  and  wide  the  dreadful  contagion  of 
his  example.  What  influence  can  be  more  potent  than  that  of  example  ?  3.  God 
is  so  good  and  sinners  are  so  wicked.  He  cannot  help  being  angry  at  them.  Since,  in 
His  wisdom  and  knowledge,  He  knows  more  fully  than  they  do  the  great  evil  of  sin, 
by  so  much  the  more  is  He  under  obligation  to  be  displeased  with  sin  and  angry  at 
the  sinner.  V.  The  degree  of  God's  anger  against  sin.  It  ought  to  be  equal  to 
the  degree  of  their  wickedness,  and  must  be  if  God  is  what  He  should  be.  We  judge  of 
men's  guilt  by  their  light,  and  by  their  capacity  for  governing  themselves  by  light  and 
reason.  God's  anger  against  sin  is  in  proportion  to  the  sinner's  guilt,  estimated  in 
view  of  the  light  he  enjoys  and  sins  against.  VI.  The  duration  of  God's  anger. 
It  must  continue  as  long  as  the  wickedness  itself  continues.  If  they  turn  not, 
there  can  be  no  abatement,  no  cessation  of  His  anger.  VII.  The  terrible  condi- 
tion OF  the  sinner  against  vi^HOM  GoD  IS  ANGRY.  Look  at  the  attributes  of 
God.  Think  of  the  case  of  the  sinner's  exposing  himself  to  the  indignation  of  the 
great  and  dreadful  God.  Look  at  His  natural  attributes.  Power.  Omniscience. 
Look  at  His  holiness,  and  His  mercy.  Such  is  His  nature,  and  such  His  character, 
that  you  have  nothing  to  hope,  but  everything  to  fear.  His  dreadful  anger  against 
you  must  be  expressed.  Remarks  :  1.  God  is  much  more  opposed  to  sinners  than 
Satan  is.  2.  If  God  were  not  angry  with  sinners.  He  would  not  be  worthy  of  confid- 
ence. 3.  God's  anger  with  sinners  is  not  inconsistent  with  His  happiness.  4.  God's 
opposition  to  sinners  is  His  glory.  5.  Saints  love  God  for  His  opposition  to  sinners,  not 
excepting  even  His  opposition  to  their  own  sins.  This  text  is  to  be  understood  as  it 
reads.  Some  have  supposed  that  God  is  not  really  angry  with  sinners,  but  uses 
this  language  in  accommodation  to  our  understandings.  This  is  an  unwarrantable 
latitude  of  interpretation.  In  God  there  is  a  fixed  eternal  displeasure  and  opposi- 
tion against  all  sinners  because  of  their  great  guilt.  7.  God's  anger  against  the 
sinner  does  not  exclude  love — real  compassionate  love,  the  love  of  well-wishing  and 
good-willing.  8.  It  is  plain  that  sinners  do  not  realise  God's  anger,  though  they 
know  it.  If  they  do  both  know  and  realise  it,  they  manifest  a  degree  of  hardihood 
in  iniquity  which  is  dreadful.  But  the  fact  is,  they  keep  the  thought  of  God's 
anger  from  their  minds.  (C.  G.  Finney. )  God's  anger  ivith  the  wicked : — Many 
think  that  God,  in  order  to  be  perfectly  benevolent,  ought  not  to  be  angry  at 
anything.  But  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Ruler,  who  would  not  be  displeased  when- 
ever wrong  is  done,  would  be  the  most  frightful  idea  that  ever  could  pass  through 
the  minds  of  any  creatures  whatever.  This  is  certain,  the  God  of  this  Bible  is  a 
God  that  hateth  iniquity.  What  is  the  anger  of  God  that  rests  upon  the  head  of  a 
sinning  man  ?  It  is  not  hatred.  It  is  not  revenge,  which  implies  a  sense  of  injury 
and  a  feeling  of  ill-will.  It  is  not  implacable  offence.  What  is  it  ?  It  is  hatred 
of  a  bad  action,  with  displeasure  against  him  who  does  that  action.  You  can 
separate  the  doer  from  the  action,  so  tar  that  while  you  hate  the  action  you  shall 
not  hate  him  that  does  it.  But  you  cannot  separate  the  doer  so  far,  that  if  the 
action  is  a  hateful  one,  and  you  feel  rightly,  you  can  hate  the  action,  and  yet  feel 
favour  towards  him  that  does  it.  God's  displeasure  against  sin  is  the  simple  and 
inevitable  result  of  God's  purity  and  God's  goodness,  and  is  in  itself  the  strict 
expression  of  justice.  But  it  is  a  forbearing  auger,  and  always  ready  to  forgive. 
It  is  no  dead  sentiment  that  will  be  inactive  always.  What  duty,  then,  does  this 
truth  devolve  on  you  and  me  ?  Repent ;  and  cease  to  do  evil ;  and  turn  unto  thy 
God,  saying,  "  Hide  Tliy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  mine  iniquities. 
( JV.  Arthur.)  Gcul  angry  vnth  the  wicked  : — Were  any  one  of  us  to  be  completely 
in  the  power  of  some  niyhterious  stiangei ,  and  did  we  know  that  we  had  done  that 
which  would  arouse  his  auger,  how  anxious  we  should  be  to  know  his  purposes 
towards  us.  But  men  do  not  feel  like  this  in  regard  lo  Gud,  against  whom  they 
have  sinned  and  in  whose  power  they  know  they  are.     They  are  careless  and  con- 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vil. 

fident  as  if  all  was  well  with  them.  But  Scripture  gives  them  no  encouragement. 
Consider  our  text  and  think — I.  Of  what  the  angek  of  God  is.  Anger  is  only 
right  where  there  is  that  which  can  properly  arouse  it.  Human  anger  is,  generally, 
only  selfish,  and  therefore  sinful.  But  the  anger  of  God  is  only  that  indignation 
which  benevolence  itself  must  feel  toward  the  enemies  of  all  good.  II.  And  this 
ANGEii  IS  ON  THE  WICKED  EVERY  DAY.  1.  Scripture  aflBrms  this.  2.  The  holi- 
ness of  God  necessitates  it.  "  The  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness  "  ;  He, 
therefore,  must  have  anger  towards  its  opposite :  else  He  would  be  as  desti- 
tute of  affections  as  a  statue.  Holiness  is  repugnance  to  all  moral  impurity  and 
deformity.  3.  The  justice  of  God  and  the  tendency  of  sin.  For  the  justice 
of  God  is  His  moral  perfection  directed  to  uphold  His  moral  government.  It  is 
in  this  character  that  He  is  "a  jealous  God."  III.  Conclusion.  1.  How 
false  and  dangerous  to  deny  the  reality  of  the  Divine  anger.  Many  do.  2.  The 
wicked  cannot  have  God's  favour  while  they  continue  in  sin.  3.  How  changed 
the  condition  of  the  righteous.  4.  How  awful  the  situation  of  the  stupid  sinner, 
(if.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Yer.  12.  If  he  turn  not,  He  will  whet  His  sword;  He  hath  bent  His  how, 
and  made  it  ready.  Turn  or  bum : — So,  then,  God  has  a  sword,  and  He  will 
punish  man  on  account  of  iniquity.  This  evil  generation  hath  sought  to  take  away 
fit)m  God  the  sword  of  His  justice.  Perhaps  the  Puritans  insisted  too  much  on  the 
wrath  of  God,  but  our  age  seeks  to  forget  that  wrath  altogether.  I.  What  is  the 
TITRNLNG  HEBE  MEANT  ?  1.  It  is  actual,  not  fictitious  ;  not  one  that  stops  with 
vows  and  promises.  2.  It  must  be  entire.  Many  will  give  up  many  sins,  but  not 
all :  there  are  certain  darling  lusts  which  they  will  keep  and  hold.  Remember  that 
one  lust,  like  one  leak  in  a  ship,  will  sink  a  soul.  3.  And  it  must  be  immediate. 
There  must  be  no  procrastination.  ' '  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice. "  4.  And 
hearty — no  pretended  repentance.  5.  And  perpetual :  it  must  not  be  transitory  or 
superficial.  In  old  times  when  rich  and  generous  monarchs  came  to  their  cities 
they  made  the  fountains  run  with  wine.  But  to-morrow  it  ran  with  water  as 
before.  It  is  hard  to  distinguish  between  legal  repentance  and  evangelical  repent- 
ance. Legal  repentance  is  a  fear  of  damning  ;  evangelical,  of  sinning.  And  this  is 
far  deeper  than  the  other  :  the  man  feels  that  only  by  sovereign  grace  can  his  sin  be 
put  away,  that  no  mere  course  of  holy  living  can  blot  it  out.  Christ  alone  can  dig 
its  grave.  II.  The  necessity  that  God  should  whet  His  sword  and 
PUNISH  MEN  IF  THEY  WILL  NOT  TURN.  Richard  Baxter  used  to  say,  "Sinner! 
turn  or  burn  :  it  is  thine  only  alternative."  And  it  is  so  ;  for — 1.  God  cannot  suffer 
sin  to  go  unpunished.  How  could  He  govern  men  if  He  had  no  justice?  2.  The 
Scriptures  are  full  of  declarations  of  this  truth,  3.  All  which  conscience  confirms. 
You  may  say  you  have  no  such  belief.  I  did  not  say  you  had,  but  I  say  that  your 
conscience  tells  you  so.  As  John  Bunyan  said,  Mr.  Conscience  had  a  very  loud 
voice,  and  though  Mr.  Understanding  shut  himself  up  in  a  dark  room,  where  he 
could  not  see,  yet  he  used  to  thunder  out  so  mightily  in  the  streets  that  Mr.  Under- 
standing used  to  shake  in  his  house  through  what  Mr.  Conscience  said.  But 
I  am  tired  of  this  terrible  work  of  proving  that  God  must  punish  sin.  However, 
I  should  like  to  act  as  if  there  were  a  hell,  even  if  there  is  no  such  place  ;  for  as  a 
poor  and  pious  man  once  said  to  an  unbeliever,  ' '  Sir,  I  like  to  have  two  strings  to 
my  bow.  If  there  should  be  no  hell,  I  shall  be  as  well  off  as  you  will ;  but  if  there 
should,  it  will  go  hard  with  you."  But  why  say  "if"?  You  know  there  is. 
III.  Now  WHAT  ARE  THE  MEANS  OF  REPENTANCE  ?  You  Cannot  repent  of  yourself. 
But  Christ  is  exalted  "to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sin."  Then  if  you 
feel  that  you  are  a  sinner,  ask  Him  to  give  you  repentance.  Many  a  man 
says  he  cannot  repent  while  he  is  repenting.  Keep  on  with  that  till  you  feel 
you  have  repented,  then  believe  and  be  saved.  (C  ff.  Spurgeon.)  The  Divine 
anger  an  everlasting  principle: — Polarity,  as  it  is  called,  exhibits  both  attrac- 
tion and  repulsion,  and  at  the  same  pole  attraction  and  repulsion,  and  by  the 
same  law,  at  the  same  pole,  attraction  and  repulsion.  At  the  same  pole  the 
magnet  attracts  and  repels.  And  Divine  benevolence  has  polarity.  At  the 
same  pole  it  attracts  and  repels.  By  the  same  law  it  attracts  and  repels.  By 
the  same  eternal.  Divine  necessity  it  attracts  and  repels.  With  the  same  Divine 
force  it  attracts  and  repels.  Its  attraction  is  love,  its  repulsion  is  wrath ;  but 
wrath  is  love  turned  roimd,  and  both  wrath  and  love  are  the  opposing  poles  of 
that  one  attribute.  Hence  it  is  the  more  to  be  regretted,  and  the  more  to  be 
lamented,  that  so  many  ministers  of  Christ,  not  to  say  members  of  the  Church 


PSALM  VII.]  THE  PSALMS.  119 

of  God,  haye  wrong  conceptions  of  the  wrath  of  God.  Watta  was  wrong  when  ho 
made  the  Psalm  to  say  of  God — 

"Whose  anger  is  so  slow  to  rise, 
So  ready  to  abate." 

The  fact  is,  God's  anger  never  rises,  and  it  never  abates.  It  is  always  at  flood  tide, 
at  the  flood  mark  ;  and  that  is  the  mark  of  infinite  perfection.  It  does  not  go  up 
and  down,  like  the  impulsive,  impetuous,  and  capricious  passions  of  men.  It  is  an 
everlasting  principle,  not  a  passion  at  all — an  everlasting  principle — eternal  love  of 
righteousness,  eternal  detestation  of  unrighteousness.     (A,  F.  Pierson.) 

Yer.  13.  He  ordainetli  His  arrows  against  the  persecntors. — Ood^s  arrows: — 
Mercy  and  love  often  lurk  in  the  meanings  of  these  Psalms,  which  on  their  surface 
seem,  like  Saul  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  to  breathe  threatenings  and  slaughter. 
David  thought  only  of  the  arrows  of  God's  judgments  ;  the  Christian  loves  to  think 
of  these  arrows  of  conviction  and  of  love  which  God  hath  often  di.scharged  against 
the  persecutors  of  His  Church,  such  as  Saul  was.  See  this  in  his  conversion.  The 
disciples  awaited  his  coming  to  Damascus  in  fear  and  trembling.  But  God's  arrow 
was  ready  against  him,  had  been  "ordained"  long  ago.  It  was  of  God,  of  Christ. 
For  of  Him  it  is  said:  "Thine  arrows  are  very  sharp;  and  the  people  shall  be 
subdued  unto  Thee,  even  in  the  midst  among  the  King's  enemies."  Such  were  the 
Pharisees,  of  whom  Saul  was  one.  When  Jesus  appeared  to  Saul  He  spoke  not  of 
arrows,  but  of  goads — the  ox-goads,  which  when  the  oxen  lash  out  against  them 
only  wound  themselves  the  more.  Conscience  had  been  such  a  goad  to  Saul.  The 
influence  of  Stephen's  death  ;  the  calm  patience  of  those  whom  he  had  cruelly 
persecuted — all  this  must  have  made  hira  feel  as  every  persecutor,  down  to  the 
inquisitors  of  later  days,  must  have  felt,  that  he  was  doing  the  devil's  work. 
Yet  he  hardened  himself  and  kicked  out  against  the  goads  of  conscience  and  went 
on  madly  persecuting  Jesus.  But  this  arrow  was  too  much  for  him  ;  it  was 
altogether  too  sharp.  The  great  lesson,  then,  of  our  text  is  that  no  persecutor  will 
be  allowed  to  proceed  too  far.  If  the  arrows  of  conviction  will  not  serve,  then  God 
"will  whet  His  sword."  As  with  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  Such  an  one  most 
strikingly  was  that  Julian  the  Apostate,  who  was  perhaps  more  dangerous  to  the 
Church  than  any  Nero  or  Decius,  because  he  knew  her  weak  points,  and  because  he 
mingled  so  much  craft  with  his  violence.  It  was  in  very  sooth  an  arrow — a 
Parthian  arrow,  shot  at  random  in  some  paltry  skirmish — which  laid  that  perse- 
cutor low,  for  God  had  ordained  it  against  him  of  old.  He  himself  would  seem  to 
have  been  aware  whence  that  arrow  came,  and  who  it  was  whom  he  had  been  so 
bitterly  persecuting,  for  it  is  said  that  when  he  perceived  his  wound  to  be  mortal,  he 
threw  some  of  his  blood  up  into  the  air  (after  the  manner  of  dying  gladiators)  and 
exclaimed,  "Thou  hast  conquered,  0  Nazarene  ! "  [R.  Winteriotham.)  God's 
arrows  not  shot  at  random : — It  is  said  that  God  hath  ordained  His  arrows  against 
the  persecutors  ;  the  word  signifies  such  as  burn  in  anger  and  malice  against  the 
godly;  and  the  word  translated  "ordained,"  signifies  God  hath  wrought  His 
arrows ;  He  doth  not  shoot  them  at  random,  but  He  works  them  against  the 
wicked.  Illiricus  hath  a  story  which  may  weU  be  a  commentary  upon  this  text  in 
both  the  parts  of  it.  One  Felix,  Earl  of  Wartenburg,  one  of  the  captains  of  the 
Emperor  Charles  V.,  swore  in  the  presence  of  divers  at  supper,  that  before  he  died 
he  would  ride  up  to  the  spurs  in  the  blood  of  the  Lutherans.  Here  was  one  that 
burned  in  malice,  but  behold  how  God  works  His  arrows  against  him  :  that  very 
night  the  hand  of  God  so  struck  him,  that  he  was  strangled  and  choked  in  his  own 
blood  ;  so  he  rode  not,  but  bathed  himself,  not  up  to  the  spurs,  but  up  to  the 
throat,  not  in  the  blood  of  the  Lutherans,  but  in  his  own  blood  before  he  died. 
{Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 

Vers.  14-16.  Behold,  he  travaileth  with  iniquity. — Tlie  enemies  of  the  Church : — 
1.  That  all  the  labour  of  wicked  men  against  the  Church  is  but  labour  in  vain  in  re- 
spect of  tlieir  own  intent  and  expectation.  2.  That  the  labour  ol  wicked  men  is  turned 
clean  contrary  to  their  own  intent  and  expectation.  These  things  are  set  down  in 
metaphor  and  in  express  speech.  Doctrine  :  The  wicked  counsels  and  enterprises 
of  the  enemies  of  the  Church  are  not  only  vain  in  respect  of  others,  but  mischievous 
against  themselves.  God  scattereth  the  devices  of  the  crafty,  so  as  they  cannot 
accomplish  what  they  enterprise.  The  misery  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church  may  be 
seen  in  four  particulars.     1.  All  their  pain  and  labour  is  for  their  own  destruction. 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vii. 

2.  That  they  live  in  perpetual  peril  of  destruction.  3.  That  unexpected  destruction 
comes  when  they  expect  the  sweet  fruit  of  all  their  labour.  4.  That  the  mischief 
plotted  against  the  greatest  enemies  recoils  upon  themselves,  as  a  gun  overcharged 
and  recoiling.  There  is  little  cause  why  God's  people  should  envy  the  prosperity  of 
their  enemies,  or  study  for  revenge.  They  should  rather  pity  them,  and  pray  for 
them,  so  many  as  are  curable,  for  their  last  dish  will  mar  all  the  feast.  Little  do 
they  know  what  they  are  doing.  They  are  twisting  a  cord  to  hang  themselves. 
They  are  digging  a  pit,  but  the  earth  falls  on  them,  and  smashes  them  to  pieces. 
(T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  saint's  safety  in  evil  times: — These  words  express  the 
conception,  birth,  carriage,  and  miscarriage  of  a  plot  against  David.  In  which 
consider— I.  What  his  enemies  did.  This  is  likened  to  a  bodily  conception,  for 
the  mind  hath  such  as  well  as  the  body.  The  seed  of  it  was  some  wicked  thought 
cast  in  by  Satan,  the  understanding  was  the  womb  to  conceive,  the  will  to  consent. 
From  first  to  last,  from  the  conception  to  the  bringing  forth,  they  intended  the 
destruction  of  David,  but  brought  forth  their  own  ruin.  1,  And  how  great  was 
their  sin  ?  It  was  voluntary  and  with  delight,  and  it  was  spiritual  and  artificial — 
there  was  much  art  and  cunning  in  it :  they  were  very  diligent  in  it,  for  it  was  a 
curious  web.  Judas  is  awake  when  Peter  is  asleep.  And,  which  is  worst  of  all, 
they  were  so  well  pleased  with  the  bent  of  their  own  brain  that  they  travailed  of  it. 
The  more  the  soul  dwells  on  any  sinful  plot,  the  more  estrangement  there  is  from 
God.  The  more  deliberate  in  sin,  the  more  the  soul  is  pleased  with  it.  Many  seek 
out  the  delight  of  sin  before  they  act,  as  Esau  pleased  himself  by  thinking,  "the 
day  of  mourning  for  his  father  would  come,  wherein  he  might  be  revenged  of  his 
brother."  2.  But  by  whom  and  against  whom  was  this  plotting?  By  children  of 
the  Church,  not  uncircumcised  Philistines  ;  and  that  opposition  is  the  bitterest  of 
all,  3.  And  it  was  against  David,  a  man  after  God's  own  heart.  Envy  hath  an  ill 
eye.  It  cannot  look  on  goodness  without  grief.  And  this  plot  was  cunningly 
carried.  First,  they  kill  his  good  name,  that  so  slander  may  make  way  for  violence. 
Satan  is  a  liar  first,  and  then  a  murderer.  See  what  David  did.  Innocency  was  his 
best  apology.  He  saw  God  in  the  wrongs  he  suffered.  We  need  not  be  ashamed 
to  learn  some  things  of  our  very  enemies.  If  they  be  so  set  on  evil,  why  not  we  on 
good  ?  I  am  sure  we  serve  a  better  Master.  True  love  is  full  of  inventions  ;  it  will 
be  devising  of  good  things.  II.  What  God  did.  Now  I  come  to  their  miscarriage. 
They  brought  forth  a  lie,  God  defeated  them.  1.  How  this  was  done.  By  dis- 
appointing them.  They  fell  into  danger  of  their  own  contriving,  and  into  the  same 
danger  that  they  plotted  for  another.  Compare  the  history  of  Haman  and  Mordecai. 
Why  does  God  do  this  ?  First,  in  regard  to  Himself.  He  will  be  known  to  be 
God  only  wise.  Se<;ondly,  in  regard  of  His  tender  care  over  His  children,  who  are 
the  apple  of  His  eye.  Another  reason  is,  the  virulence  of  the  enemies  whose 
fierceness  turns  to  God's  praise  (Psa.  ix.  16).  And  God's  childi'en  will  give  Him  no 
rest.  They  prevail  on  Him  by  importunity.  3.  But  it  will  be  objected  that  wicked 
men  do  prevail  over  the  children  of  God.  TuUy  could  say,  "Tlie  gods  show  how 
much  they  esteem  the  Jewish  nation,  by  suffering  them  so  often  to  be  conquered." 
Where,  then,  is  the  bringing  forth  of  a  lie  ?  I  answer,  when  they  do  prevail  it  is 
but  one  part  only,  not  the  whole.  Over  men's  lives,  but  not  their  spirits.  A  true 
Christian  conquers  when  he  is  conquered.  Our  enemies  shall  do  no  more  nor  less 
than  God  wills  :  their  mischievous  attempts  fail  in  the  end  ;  for  did  ever  any  harden 
themselves  against  God  and  prosper  long  ?  The  greatest  torment  of  the  damned 
spirit  is  that  God  turns  all  his  plots  for  the  good  of  those  he  hates  most. 
III.  What  we  all  should  do.  We  are  bidden  "behold."  1.  The  subtlety, 
malice,  and  restless  endeavour  of  the  enemies  of  goodness,  and  their  bootless  enter- 
prise, they  bring  forth  a  lie.  2.  But  especially  the  mercy  of  God  to  His  children, 
and  how  He  confounds  their  enemies.     {R.  Sibbes. ) 

Ver.  15.  He  made  a  pit,  and  digged  it^  and  is  fallen  into  the  ditch  which  he 
made. — Social  sappers : — There  is  much  among  men  of  the  particular  sin  rebuked  in 
this  text.  I.  How  this  pit-diggino  may  be  done.  It  may^  be  done  by  attempt- 
ing to  lower  a  man's  reputation.  We  are  often  guilty  of  talking  in  such  a  way  that 
we  "lower"  people.  The  society  papers  live  on  this  sort  of  thing.  Scandal  is  a 
most  prominent  form  of  the  pit-digging  business.  It  may  be  done  by  sapping  a 
man's  business.  We  have  a  general  idea  of  what  is  fair  and  unfair  within  the  world 
of  trade.  Now,  some  men  steadily  set  themselves  to  ruin  their  neighbour's  busi- 
ness, thinking  this  essential  to  their  own  aggrandisement.  You  may  do  it  by  your 
capital,  by  your  tongue,  by  your  influence.     Men  sometimes  seek  to  entice  their 


PSALM  VII.]  THE  PSALMS.  121 

neighbours  into  plausible  and  ruinous  speculations.  It  may  be  done  by  endangering 
a  man's  character.  Men  will  knowingly  and  designingly  ruin  their  brother  ;  they 
"let  them  in  "  to  some  sin  or  other.  They  will  do  this  for  the  sake  of  gain,  for  a 
companionship  in  guilt,  and  sometimes  out  of  a  mere  delight  in  iniquity.  Some- 
times we  dig  a  pit  for  others  when  we  do  not  think  of  all  that  we  are  doing.  We 
have  no  right  to  lay  snares,  nor  to  put  an  occasion  of  stumbling  in  our  brother's 
way.  If  our  brother  shows  a  tendency  to  slide  we  must  not  grease  his  path. 
II.  Characterise  this  work  of  pit-digging.  1.  It  is  dark  work  ;  it  has  to  be 
done  secretly,  under  cover  of  night :  to  be  done  softly,  to  be  wrapped  up.  Let  us 
decline  all  that  kind  of  work  in  which  we  should  be  ashamed  for  society  to  see  us. 
The  great  motto  of  Positivism  is,  "Live  without  concealment."  So  live  that  you 
would  not  care  if  your  house  were  glass.  Let  us  decline  all  that  work  we  should 
shrink  from  bringing  under  the  eye  of  God.  2.  It  is  dirty  work,  ignoble,  base, 
disgraceful.  Whatever  aims  to  lower  men  is  of  this  character.  Such  conduct 
involves  only  base  qualities.  Sometimes  it  is  prompted  by  covetousness.  Or  it 
springs  from  envy  or  from  revenge  ;  or  from  mere  levity.  Pit-diggers  may  be  well 
dressed,  but  their  work  is  of  a  far  dirtier  kind  than  that  of  the  delver  in  the  earth. 

3.  It  is  dismal  work.  All  the  true  work  of  life  has  a  joy  in  it,  but  there  is  no 
brightness  or  blessing  in  letting  people  down.  It  is  a  joyless  thing  to  be  a  grave- 
digger  among  living  men  :  to  dig  graves  for  men's  reputations.  Lighthouse  build- 
ing is  better  than  pit-sinking.     Let  our  Kfe  be  devoted  to  the  uplifting  of  men. 

4.  It  is  degrading  work.  As  soon  as  you  begin  to  dig  you  stoop,  and  whatever 
progress  you  make  you  sink  with  your  work.  All  true  work  resembles  the  work  of 
the  builder.  If  in  conversation  we  talk  down  others,  if  that  is  our  habit  and 
pleasure,  we  talk  ourselves  down  at  the  same  time,  whether  we  know  it  or  not.  Aa 
George  Sand  says,  *'  Insults,  harsh  words,  detractive  utterances,  kill  morally  those 
who  give  expression  to  them."  You  narrow  and  debase  your  own  thought  and 
feeling,  you  wrong  your  own  soul.  If  the  spirit  of  our  life  is  sympathy,  and  if  we 
find  readily  and  praise  readily  whatever  is  good,  beautiful,  clever,  successful  in  the 
work  of  our  fellows,  we  are  really  nourishing  and  promoting  our  intellect  in  an 
eminent  degree.  And  so  in  our  business  life.  It  was  said  to  me  concerning  one  of 
the  richest  men  in  Bradford,  "He  has  made  more  gentlemen  than  any  man  in 
Bradford."  That  is  the  way,  so  to  rise  that  you  lift  others  up  with  you.  The 
whole  idea  of  the  New  Testament  is,  that  a  noble  life  is  devoted  to  raising  one's 
fellow-men.  This  was  the  grand  task  of  the  Master.  He  was  constantly  raising 
what  was  fallen.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  The  self-avenging  power  of  sin: — The 
man  that  travaileth  with  iniquity,  who  is  big  with  thoughts  and  purposes  of  evil, 
shall  experience,  as  the  issue  of  his  birth-throes,  nothing  but  mischief  and  false- 
hood, misery  and  disappointment.  Sin  is  a  thing  that  recoils  upon  its  perpetrator, 
and  inflicts  its  heaviest  blows  upon  the  soul  conceiving  it,  intending  it,  and  giving  it 
life  and  form.  It  was  in  accordance  with  this  self-avenging  power  of  sin  that  Saul 
was  slain  by  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  2-4),  whom  he  had  designed  to  be  slayers 
of  David  (1  Sam.  xviii.  21,  25)  ;  that  Haman  was  hanged  upon  the  gallows  he  had 
erected  for  another  (Esth.  vii.  10) ;  and  that  the  Jews  themselves  were  destroyed  by 
the  Romans,  whose  aid  they  had  invoked  and  received  to  crucify  their  Messiah. 
This  recoiling,  self-avenging  power  of  sin  is  conclusive  proof  that  a  holy,  just,  and 
living  God  is  moving  everywhere  in  nature,  and  in  the  aff"airs  of  men,  to  paralyse 
the  arm  of  the  evil-doer,  and  to  make  man  feel  in  every  blow  that  he  inflicts  upon 
truth  and  right,  upon  innocence  and  virtue,  a  counter- blow  of  overwhelming  force. 
It  is  the  conviction  of  this  great  truth,  as  a  principle  permeating  the  government 
of  God,  that  makes  David  speak  of  the  discomfiture  of  his  enemies  as  a  thing 
already  accomplished.  He  sees  every  blow  aimed  at  him  recoiling  upon  tliemselves  ; 
every  machination  concocted  for  his  overthrow,  rendering  their  owti  still  more 
inevitable.  A  fearful  thought  this,  to  the  wicked,  that  "his  own  evU  shall  slay 
him  "  ;  and  yet,  to  others,  a  thought  full  of  hope,  that  God  has  so  i .  Jered  things  in 
His  universe  that  evil  must  destroy  itself.  {David  CaZdwell,  A.M.)  Retribution: 
— The  story  of  Phalaris's  bull,  invented  for  the  torment  of  others,  and  serving 
afterwards  for  himself,  is  notorious  in  heathen  story.  ...  It  was  a  voluntary 
judgment  which  Archbishop  Cranmer  inflicted  on  himself  when  he  thrust  that  very 
hand  into  the  fire,  and  burnt  it,  with  which  he  had  signed  to  the  popish  articles, 
crying  out,  "Oh,  my  unworthy  right  hand  ! "  but  who  will  deny  that  the  hand  of 
the  .Mmighty  was  also  concerned  in  it  t    (  William  Turner.) 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 


PSALM  VIII. 

Yebs.  1-9.  How  excellent  is  Thy  name  In  all  the  earth ! — David's  poetical  sensitive' 
ness : — In  all  probability  this  Psalm  is  the  first,  or  at  all  events  one  of  the  very  first, 
David  ever  wrote.  It  breathes  the  spirit  of  those  lonely  nights  which  he  most  so 
often  have  passed  keeping  watch  over  his  father's  sheep  on  the  wild  hills  of 
Bethlehem.  To  a  lad  of  his  strong  poetical  temperament,  the  glory  of  the  Syrian 
sunset,  the  gradual  assembling  of  the  stars,  as  of  an  innumerable  fiock  in  the 
silent  pastures  overhead  ;  the  moon,  "like  a  fair  shepherdess,"  walking  in  her 
beauty  ;  and,  as  night  began  to  wane,  "  the  bright  and  morning  star,"  flashing  over 
the  hills  of  Moab,  must  have  spoken  in  a  language  which  he  was  inspired  to  under- 
stand of  the  excellence  of  the  great  Creator  of  all — of  the  nothingness,  yet  at  the 
same  time  the  dignity,  of  man.  In  after  life  how  often  had  he  to  "  tune  his  harp  to 
notes  of  woe "  ?  but  its  first  recorded  strains  are  those  of  adoring  praise.  David 
appears  to  me  to  stand  out  eminently  from  other  men,  as  hearing  a  voice  in  the 
phenomena  of  nature.  I  account  him  as  the  first  of  the  prophets  of  nature,  of 
whom,  in  some  sense,  Wordsworth  was  the  last.  The  lessons  once  learned  have 
become  obvious  ;  but  to  utter  them  for  the  first  time  required  inspiration.  {Henry 
Housman.)  The  excellence  of  the  Divine  name  and  nature  universal: — Joshua 
Reynolds  closing  his  lecture  on  art  said,  "And  now,  gentlemen,  there  is  but  one 
name  which  I  bring  to  your  attention,  it  is  the  name  of  Michael  Angelo."  And  so 
in  all  the  spheres  of  art,  science,  and  discovery,  there  are  names  which  rise  peerless 
above  all  others.  But  names  which  are  known  in  one  land  are  unknown  in 
another,  or  their  right  to  distinction  is  often  disputed.  You  would  not  get 
universal  unanimity  about  any  one  celebrity,  however  wortliy.  Only  concerning 
Christ  can  it  be  said,  "  How  excellent  is  Thy  name  in  all  tJie  earth."  The  glory 

of  God  in  His  works: — The  glory  of  God  in  His  creatures,  rightly  considered, 
should,  for  the  excellency  of  the  work,  strike  an  astonishment  into  us  on  the  one 
side,  and  inforce  us  on  the  other  to  be  thankful  unto  Him,  that  maketh  His  power 
and  providence  appear  so  clearly  in  them,  and  that  not  only  for  His  glory,  but  for 
our  good.  God's  power  and  providence  seen  in  His  creatures  serveth  for  a  double 
end — the  comfort  of  His  children,  and  the  terror  and  confusion  of  the  wicked.  Ver.  4 
serveth  to  humble  man,  and  to  beat  him  down  ;  for  if  he  be  compared  with  other 
creatures,  there  is  no  such  excellency  and  durableness  in  him  as  in  them  ;  neither 
yet  such  as  he  himself  imagineth  to  be  in  himself.  Vers.  5-8  set  forth  the  graces 
and  blessings  that  God  hath  bestowed  upon  man,  not  to  the  end  that  man  thereby 
should  wax  proud,  and  swell  above  measure,  but  to  inforce  him — 1.  To  thankfulness 
to  the  giver  ;  2.  To  a  right  use  of  them  ia  himself  and  for  others ;  3.  The  more 
and  more  to  humble  him.  Let  man  consider  what  excellency  he  hath  lost  through 
Adam's  fall,  and  bewail  his  misery  ;  and,  let  him,  on  the  other  side,  well  weigh  the 
grace  bestowed  on  him  in  Christ,  and  be  joyful  and  thankful  for  mercy :  knowing 
this,  that  if  the  creatures  be  not  now  subject  to  us,  it  is  by  reason  of  the  body  and 
relics  of  sin  which  yet  remain  in  us  ;  and  that  therefore,  if  we  would  have  a  con- 
quest over  the  creatures,  we  must  begin  first  to  get  a  victory  upon  sin,  or  else  we 
shall  never  profit  or  prevail  that  way.  If  any  man  will  object  and  say  that  many 
creatures  are  subdued  to  many  people  that  are  without  a  God  in  the  world,  and 
which  notwithstanding  remain  in  their  sin,  I  answer,  that  God's  dispensing  in 
mercy  with  our  iniquity,  or  other  men's,  is  no  impeachment  of  the  truth  of  this 
doctrine ;  nay  rather,  it  should  the  more  further  us,  not  only  in  thankfulness  to 
Him  for  His  goodness,  but  in  valiancy  and  courage  to  combat  against  iniquity,  and 
that  imto  blood,  because  we  already  have  half  a  victory,  and  may  be  sure  of  all 
needful  supply  in  order  to  complete  the  victory.  {Thomas  Wilcocks.)  The 
supremely  excellent  name: — Was  "Gittith"  a  tune  or  instrument  brought  from 
Gath  ?  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  2.)  This  exquisite  ode,  which  can  only  reach  its  fulfilment 
in  Christ  (Heb.  ii.  6-9),  was  evidently  composed  at  night.  It  probably  dates  from 
the  early  shepherd  days,  when  wild  creatures  crept  around  the  fold,  and  night- 
birds  screamed,  reminding  the  singer  of  the  animal  world,  as  constituting  the 
human  kingdom.  L  The  inscription  (ver.  1).  Jehovah  our  Lord.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  is  here.  II.  Thk  ascription  (vers.  1,  2).  His  name  excellent,  and  so 
mighty  that  His  strength  communicated  to  babes  is  more  than  enough  to  vanquish 
and  silence  His  foes  (1  Cor.  i.  25  ;  Matt.  xxL  16).  III.  The  compakison 
(vers.  3,  4).  At  first  sight  there  is  a  great  descent  from  the  glory  of  the  heavens  to 
frail  man.     But  we  may  not  confound  size  and  greatness.    There  are  as  many 


PSALM  viii.]  THE  PSALMS.  123 

worlds  of  wonder  too  minute  for  our  vision  as  there  are  which  are  too  great  for  our 
understanding.  IV.  The  compensation  (vers.  5-8).  Man,  though  so  seemingly 
insignificant,  was  only  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  is  invested  with  the  vice- 
gereucy  of  the  lower  orders  of  creation  (Gen.  i.  26).  As  yet  the  Psalm  is  fulfilled 
only  in  Jesus.  But  it  shall  be  restored  to  man  (Isa.  xi.  6-9).  [F.  B.  Meyer,  B. A.) 
Goodreasonsfor ])raising  God:— I.  As  filling  the  universe  with  His  glory. — 
1.  His  excellence  fills  the  earth — in  its  natural  constitution,  in  its  human  history, 
and  in  its  redemptive  economy.  2.  His  excellency  is  above  the  heavens.  How 
high  are  the  heavens !  II.  As  honouring  the  feeblest  instrumentality. 
He  does  not  depend,  like  human  sovereigns,  on  the  great  and  mighty.  History 
abounds  with  examples  of  God  accomplishing  great  ends  by  feeble  means — such  as, 
the  exodus  of  the  Jews  by  Moses,  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  Christ,  the  propa- 
gation of  the  gospel  by  feeble  men.  This  truth  serves  to  check  an  unholy  humility, 
and  also  an  unholy  pride.  III.  As  cre.\ting  the  wonders  of  the  stellar 
HEAVENS.  Here  is  a  figurative  mode  of  representing  the  skill  and  delicacy  of  the 
work — "the  work  of  Thy  fingers."  How  does  the  study  of  the  heavens  impress 
man  with  the  glory  of  God  !  IV.  As  eeoardino  mankind  with  His  special 
favour.  The  Psalmist  seems  to  be  impressed  with  God's  infinite  goodness  to  man 
in  three  respects.  1.  In  the  greatness  of  the  attention  He  pays  him.  2.  In  the 
greatness  of  the  nature  He  has  given  him.  3.  In  the  greatness  of  the  authority  He 
intrusts  to  him.  This  Psalm  reminds  us  of  our  heavenly  origin,  wonderful 
natures,    and    sublime    destinies.      {Homilist.)  The  excellency  of  the  Divine 

name : — How  affecting  to  the  mind  is  the  traditional  and  immemorial  suppression 
of  the  name  "Jehovah."  Though  false  in  principle  and  destitute  of  Scripture 
authority,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  this  reticence  has  something  almost  sublime 
about  it,  and  is  far  better  than  the  frivolous  levity  with  which  God's  holy  name  is 
tossed  from  mouth  to  mouth,  not  only  in  profane  discussion,  but  even  in  courts  of 
justice,  not  to  say  in  the  pulpit  and  in  ordinary  religious  speech.  Religious  awe 
was  no  doubt  indicated  by  the  suppression  of  this  name,  and  could  not  have  been 
associated  with  a  more  legitimate  or  worthy  object  than  that  pregnant  tetragram- 
maton,  in  the  four  characters  of  which,  as  in  a  sacramental  symbol,  is  wrapped  up 
the  germ,  or  rather  the  quintessence,  of  that  wonderful  preparatory  system  which 
excited  and  sustained  the  expectation  of  the  Saviour  until  He  came.  We  cannot  tell 
all  the  reasons  for  the  use  of  the  two  principal  Divine  names  by  the  sacred  writers 
in  specific  cases,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Jehovah  is  distinguished  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  from  all  other  names  of  the  Godhead  as  the  name  of  the  God  of 
Israel,  His  Church,  His  chosen  people.  Elohim  was  a  generic  name  which  was 
common  to  the  true  God  with  all  others,  but  Jehovah  was  the  name  of  God  as  in 
especial  covenant  with  His  people.  It  suggested  no  vague  idea  of  divinity,  but  was 
a  much  warmer  name,  telling  of  God  as  making  Himself  known  to  and  dwelling  in 
the  midst  of  them.  But  the  name  itself  does  not  signify  anything  of  this  singular 
relation,  it  suggests  nothing  of  a  local  or  national  kind,  but  only  tells  of  God  as  the 
self-existent,  independent,  and  eternal  essence,  "I  am  what  I  am."  This  may 
have  been  in  order  to  remind  Israel  that  He  was  not  a  God  distinct  from  the 
Creator  of  the  universe,  but  the  one  sole  self-existent  one.  And  there  was  need  for 
such  precaution,  for  never  was  a  people  more  prone  to  arrogate  to  themselves 
exclusive  possession  in  God.  They  would  not  allow  that  He  was  the  God  of  the 
Gentiles  also,  and  from  this  the  fatal  step  was  almost  unavoidable  to  the  conclusion 
that  their  God  was  not  the  God  of  nature  or  the  universe,  but  either  the 
antagonistic  principle  in  some  monstrous  scheme  of  dualism,  or  an  inferior  Deity 
restricted  to  the  Holy  Land.  And  so  the  Greeks  and  Romans  learned  to  sneer  at 
the  provincial  God  of  Palestine.  The  Scriptures  contain  the  clearest  exposition  of 
the  true  sense  of  the  name  Jehovah,  and  declare  His  name  glorious  in  all  the  earth. 
They  describe  the  heavens  as  the  work  of  Hia  fingers.  Hence,  as  men  saw  His 
glory  they  saw  too  their  own  littleness,  and  wondered  that  God  should  remember 
man.  It  is  not,  however,  before  their  material  works  that  man  is  called  to  bow, 
for  matter  is  no  more  above  mind  on  a  large  scale  than  on  a  smaller  one,  no  more 
in  the  earth  than  in  a  clod,  in  a  sea  than  in  a  drop.  Mind  is  ever  superior  to 
matter.  Hence  the  Psalm  boldly  declares  of  man,  "Thou  hast  made  him  to  lack 
little  of  divinity  "—for  so  the  words  aflSrm, — "  Thou  hast  crowned  him  with  glory  and 
honour."  And  yet  more  because  of  man's  moral  resemblance  to  God.  But  though 
unfallen  man  might  have  triumphed  in  this  blessed  likeness,  how  can  we  who  have 
fallen  away  from  it  so  terribly  ?  How,  then,  could  David  so  speak  of  man  ?  He  could 
not  had  he  deemed  that  likeness  irrevocably  lost.     He  contemplates  man  as  saved  in 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viiu 

CJhrist,  not  only  reinstated,  but  exalted  higher — "The  first  man  is  of  the  earth, 
earthy,  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven."  Contemplate,  then,  the  glorious 
face  of  nature,  and  remember  what  man  once  was,  what  he  is,  and  what  he  yet  shall 
be.  Then  shall  we,  as  Stephen,  exclaim,  "  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and 
the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  Read,  then,  the  name  of  God 
our  King  and  Saviour  traced  in  letters  of  light  upon  the  whole  material  universe. 
{J.  Addison  Alexander,  D.D.)  Religious  affections  in  their  objective  ground: — 
Gracious  affections  spring  from  the  beauty  and  excellence  of  Divine  things. 
"Christian  love  is  the  fountain  of  all  gracious  affections.  The  Divine  excellency 
and  glory  of  God  and  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Word  of  God,  the  works  of  (}od  and  the 
ways  of  God,  are  the  primary  reasons  why  a  true  saint  loves  these  things  ;  and  not 
any  supposed  interest  that  he  has  in  them,  or  any  conceived  benefit  that  he  has 
received  from  them.  Self-love  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  the  first  foundation  of 
his  love  to  these  things."  I.  The  world's  people.  1.  Self-love  is  a  principle  that 
is  entirely  natural,  and  hence  cannot  be  the  foundation  of  what  is  gracious  or 
spiritual  (Luke  vi.  32).  2.  Self-love  is  also  the  foundation  of  gratitude  in  the 
world's  people.  3.  Self-love  may  give  rise  to  a  sort  of  love  to  God.  False  educa- 
tion will  make  men  grateful  to  a  God  of  their  own  imagination.  Insensibility  to 
the  heinousness  of  sin  may  move  the  natural  affections  toward  a  being  they  imagine- 
to  be  like  themselves.  IL  The  hypocrite.  The  genesis  of  their  affections  follows 
much  the  order  of  the  world's  people.  1.  They  rejoice  in  themselves.  2.  They 
secondarily  rejoice  in  God  because  He  is  so  good  to  them,  and  has  made  so  much  or 
them.  3.  They  rejoice  in  their  own  experiences.  4.  Their  affections  are  moved  by 
impulses,  pride,  conceit,  and  selfish  considerations.  5.  They  are  great  talkers- 
about  themselves.  If  we  will  believe  them,  they  are  no  ordinary  saints.  III.  God's 
people.  1.  They  contemplate  and  adore  the  matchless  perfections  of  God,  the 
beauty  of  Christ,  the  sweetness  of  grace,  the  wisdom  of  redemption,  the  complete- 
ness of  God's  law,  and  the  like.  A  natural  affection  does  not  have  its  chief  roots  in 
such  a  soil  as  this.  2.  Secondarily,  they  rejoice  that  so  glorious  a  Being  is  theirs. 
3.  Then  they  love  God  because  of  His  marvellous  kindness  and  unparalleled  con- 
descension (rsa.  cxvi.  1).  4.  In  God's  goodness  they  see  a  mirror  that  reflects  the 
beauty,  the  grace  and  the  perfection  of  His  being  and  attributes,  and  from  hence  are 
begotten  a  holy  gratitude  and  a  heavenly  love.  5.  "  The  saints'  love  to  God  is  the 
fruit  of  God's  love  to  them,  as  it  is  the  gift  of  that  love."  6.  As  is  the  genesis  of 
love,  80  is  the  genesis  of  spiritual  joy,  delight,  and  pleasure  :  "  All  my  springs  are 
in  Thee"  (Psa.  IxxxviL  7).  {L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  excellent  Name: — I.  This 
Psalm  is — 1.  A  hymn  of  praise  to  the  Creator,  giving  glory  to  "Jehovah  our 
Lord."  By  His  "Name"  we  understand  His  revealed  nature,  as  made  manifest  in 
His — (1)  works  of  creation  (vers.  3,  6,  7,  8) ;  (2)  acts  of  salvation  (vers.  4,  5).  2.  A 
Messianic  hymn — (1)  referred  by  Christ  to  Himself  (Matt.  xxi.  16)  ;  (2)  quoted  of 
Him  (Heb.  ii.  6-9  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  27).  3.  A  hymn  of  the  Ascension.  This  seems  the 
special  thought  (Heb.  ii.  9,  where  ver.  5  is  alluded  to,  and  Acts  ii.  33).     II.  The 

TEXT  IN  PARTICULAR  IS  EXPRESSIVE  OF  THE  GREAT  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ASCENSION. 

1.  "Our  Lord"  Jesus  Christ  is  "the  Lord,"  i.e.  Jehovah.  His  "Name"  is 
indeed  the  Divine  Name,  for  Jesus  signifies  "Jehovah-Saviour"  (Heb.  i,  4  ;  see 
its  lengthened  form  in  Num.  xiii.  16).  2.  "The  earth"  is  the  sphere  in  which 
the  "excellence"  of  His  Name  is  manifested.  (1)  In  the  past,  by  the  marvellous 
revelation  of  His  sinless  human  life,  by  His  mighty  words  and  works,  by  His 
sacrifice  for  sin,  and  by  His  "glorious  resurrection  and  ascension."  (2)  In  the 
present,  by  the  power  of  His  gospel,  subduing,  as  it  is,  all  things  under  His  feet." 
3.  "All  the  earth"  shall  one  day  be  brought  to  own  that  His  "Name"  is 
"excellent."  4.  Yet  His  chiefest  "glory"  is  now  "set"  "above  the  heavens,"  to 
be  revealed  in  its  full  excellence  only  when  He  shall  come  again  to  take  to  Him  His 
power  and  reign.  III.  The  "Name  "  of  Jesus  should  be  proved  " excellent " 
IN  OUR  experience.  1.  As  a  power  to  salvation  (Acts  iv.  12).  He  is  ascended 
up  on  high  to  perpetually  plead  the  merits  of  His  saving  Name.  And  it  is 
in  that  Name  aloue  that  there  is  hope  for  sinners.  That  Name,  "Jehovah- 
Saviour,"  means  one  able  and  willing  to  save  ;  and  it  is  the  only  "excellent"  one- 
to  which  all  must  look  (Isa.  xlv.  22).  2.  As  a  power  to  holiness  (Acts  ii.  33). 
The  ascended  Saviour  has  given  to  the  Church  the  grace  of  His  Holy  Spirit, 
to  be  implored  in  His  "Name,"  and  sent  forth  in  His  "Name"  (John  xiv.  26, 
xvi.  24).  The  Holy  Ghost  teaches  us  the  "things  of  Christ,"  and  makes  us  so 
realise  the  excellence  of  His  name,  that  for  it  we  "count  all  things  but  loss."* 
^T.  B.  Barnctt.) 


PSALM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  125 

Yer.  2.  Out  of  the  moutli  of  babes  and  sncklingrs  hast  Thou  ordained  strength. — 

jTTkj  strength  of  feeble  instrumentalities  : — The  sudden  drop  from  the  glories  of  the 
heavens  to  the  babble  and  prattle  of  infancy  and  childhood  is  most  impressive,  and 
gives  extraordinary  force  to  the  paradox  that  the  latter's  witness  is  more  powerful 
to  silence  gainsayers  than  that  of  the  former.  This  conviction  is  expressed  in 
a  noble  metaphor,  which  is  blurred  by  the  rendering  "strength."  The  word  here 
rather  means  ' '  a  strength, "  in  the  old  use  of  the  term — that  is,  a  stronghold  or 
fortress  ;  and  the  image,  somewhat  more  daring  than  cold  western  taste  finds  per- 
missible, is  that  out  of  such  frail  material  as  children's  speech,  God  builds  a  tower 
of  strength,  which,  like  some  border  castle,  will  bridle  and  still  the  restless  enemy. 
There  seems  no  sufficient  reason  for  taking  "children  and  sucklings"  in  any  but 
its  natural  meaning,  however  the  reference  to  lowly  believers  may  accord  with  the 
spirit  of  the  Psalm.  The  children's  voices  are  taken  as  a  type  of  feeble  instruments, 
which  are  yet  strong  enough  to  silence  the  enemy.  Childhood,  "with  no  language 
but  a  cry,"  is,  if  rightly  regarded  in  its  source,  its  budding  possibilities,  its  deijend- 
ence,  its  growth,  a  more  potent  witness  to  a  more  wondrous  name  than  are  all  the 
stars.  In  like  manner,  man  is  man's  clearest  revelation  of  God.  The  more  lowly 
he  is,  the  more  lofty  his  testimony.  What  are  all  His  servants'  words  but  the 
babbling  of  children  who  "  do  not  know  half  the  deep  things  they  speak  "  ?  God's 
strongest  fortress  is  built  of  weakest  stones.  ...  If  the  two  parts  of  the  Psalm 
are  to  be  kept  together,  the  theme  of  the  compendious  first  portion  must  be  the 
same  as  that  of  the  second,  namely,  the  glory  of  God  as  revealed  by  nature  and 
man,  but  most  chiefly  by  the  latter,  notwithstanding  and  even  by  his  comparative 
feebleness.      {A.   Maclaren,  D.D.)  Ood  glorified  by  children's  nunUhs: — This 

Psalm  sings  of  the  grandeur  of  God  as  seen  in  creation.  Our  subject  is  His  power 
displayed  in  human  weakness.  I.  There  is  a  conflict.  Our  text  speaks  of 
enemies.  We  know  who  they  are — the  seed  of  the  serpent.  We  know  how  it 
began,  and  it  goes  on,  on  the  enemy's  part,  in  the  same  fashion.  God  uses 
weapons,  mainly,  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  sort.  He  has  used,  and  He  can  and  will, 
when  needful,  use  others.  II.  In  this  conflict  the  weapons  are  very  sing- 
ular. "Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes,"  kc.  Bring  hither  that  sweet  babe.  See  that 
little  mouth — it  challenges  a  kiss :  and  note  with  joy  that  God  may  use  that  little 
mouth  as  His  conquering  weapon  against  the  devil.  I  have  seen  many  an  ancient 
cannon  upon  which  were  moulded  in  bronze  the  words,  "  The  last  argument  of 
kings. "  Yes,  but  the  gracious  arguments  of  the  King  of  kings  are  sent  home  by  a 
human  mouth,  and  that  of  a  little  child.  How  Satan  must  be  angered  that  his 
craft  is  not  met  by  craft.  Already  the  testimony  of  feeble  men  has  been  used  as 
the  great  power  of  God.  How  are  these  weapons  used  ?  These  strangely  soft,  yet 
sharp,  feeble,  yet  mighty  weapons — how  are  they  used  ?  1.  They  smite  by  prayer. 
Children  pray,  and  they  are  heard.  2.  By  praise,  which  lowers  the  pride  of  His 
adversaries,  while  they  cry  "  Hosannah  !  '  and  sing  the  praise  of  Jesus'  name. 
3.  And  by  testimony.  We  never  know  what  one  child's  mouth  can  do.  Christ  is 
the  Word,  but  these  mouths  supply  the  voices  by  which  it  is  sounded  forth.  The 
Hebrew  reads,  "hast  Thou  founded  strength,"  as  if  the  very  foundation  of  the 
Church's  strength  lay  in  the  mouths  that  God  moves  to  speak.  III.  The  warriors 
in  this  warfare  are  very  special.  "Babes  and  sucklings"  (Matt.  xi.  25; 
1  Cor.  i.).  Such  are  those  who  proclaim  Christ  in  the  world.  Our  Lord  would 
get  little  honour  from  our  race  if  all  children's  voices  were  hushed,  and  all  child- 
like spirits  with  them.  Scribes  and  Pharisees  never  cry  "  Hosannah  !  "  they  are 
so  busy  binding  on  their  phylacteries,  washing  their  hands,  and  devouring  widows' 
houses.  The  first  to  cry  "Hosannah!"  are  the  children,  and  the  next  are  those 
who  are  like  them.  Some  say,  "To  shout  and  sing  is  children's  work"  ;  so  it  is, 
and  it  is  ours  because  we  are  children  too.  Now,  note  lY.  That  the  qualifica- 
tion of  these  warriors  lies  in  their  weak  side.  If  it  lay  on  the  strong  side, 
we  should  read,  "Out  of  the  mouth  of  men  of  middle  age,  in  the  prime  of 
life  ;  of  wise  old  men,  who  have  had  long  experience,  God  ordaineth  strength."  But 
no,  it  is  "Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes,"  &c.  Thus  the  Lord  puts  the  adversary 
to  a  perpetual  reproach.  He  puts  a  child  against  His  giant  foe,  and  overcomes  him. 
Our  power  to  serve  God  lies  on  our  weak  side.  He  uses  not  our  greatness,  but  our 
littleness.  You  know  what  the  learned  men  say  is  the  weak  part  of  some  of  us — 
tiey  put  it  something  like  this :  "  We  regret  the  preacher's  total  inability  to  keep 
abreast  of  the  times ;  his  incapacity  for  modern  thought ;  and  his  want  of  affection 
for  the  higher  colture."  That  is  our  weakness.  Yes,  and  our  strength,  and  there- 
fore we  glorj in  it.     "I  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  you  save  Jesus 


12«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

Christ  and  Him  crucified."  If  all  God's  servants  will  come  to  this,  they  will  do  far 
more  good  than  by  the  so-called  "culture,"  which  is  nothing  but  the  science 
of  growing  more  weeds  than  usual.  I  have  desired  to  be  a  little  child  again, 
and  wished  that  I  had  never  heard  of  the  existence  of  a  quibbler.  "We  hear  now- 
a-days  much  of  "  great  thinkers "  ;  we  prefer  to  be  great  believers.  When  the 
Church  gets  back  to  her  simple  faith  in  Jesus,  she  shall  be  qualified  for  victory. 
She  shall  vanquish  the  world.  When  she  has  thrown  aside  the  wooden  sword 
of  oamal  reason  and  has  taken  up  the  true  Jerusalem  blade  of  faith  in  God. 
Then  because  of  all  this,  let  me  plead — V.  Foe  a  loving  bevekence  fob  child- 
hood. It  seems  to  me  that  in  the  Lord's  battle  there  is  always  a  babe  in  the  fore- 
front. The  child  found  in  the  ark  of  bulrushes  crushes  the  power  of  Pharaoh ; 
the  boy  David,  Goliath  ;  and  the  still  loftier  story  of  the  battle  of  the  Lamb  opens 
in  like  manner,  "Unto  us  a  Child  is  born,"  &c.  Never  doubt  the  possibility  of 
children's  conversions.  Never  despise  them.  Do  not  say,  "Oh,  they  are  only  a 
parcel  of  boys  and  girls  ! "  What  if  they  are  ?  May  they  not  be  a  better  parcel 
than  some  of  you  ?  If  we  could  get  the  simple  trustfulness  of  childhood  back 
again,  it  would  be  a  great  gain.  Let  us  not  undervalue  the  praises  or  the  service  of 
children.  That  is  a  sweet  vein.  ' '  And  Samuel  ministered  before  the  Lord,  being 
a  child."  In  the  victory  of  the  Church  it  is  written,  "A  little  child  shall  lead 
them."  This  city  of  ours  is  better  evangelised  by  our  Sunday  schools  than  by  all 
the  rest  of  us  put  together.  Little  Mary  and  Tommy  come  back  from  school,  and 
they  find  that  father  is  hardly  dressed  ;  he  has  not  been  to  a  place  of  worship,  but 
reading  the  Sunday  paper  ;  he  don't  want  any  of  your  singing  and  preaching. 
But  the  children  begin  to  sing,  and  when  dinner  is  over,  they  talk  about  what 
teacher  said,  and  perhaps  say  something  about  the  sermon.  And  so  the  father  gets 
more  singing  and  preaching  than  he  bargained  for.  When  they  go  to  bed,  they 
clasp  their  little  hands  and  pray  for  their  father,  and  he  is  obliged  to  hear  them. 
Thus  he  gets  praying  as  well  as  singing.  The  children  are  missionaries.  They 
enter  where  others  cannot.  Tommy  and  Mary  can't  be  shut  out.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Little  children  God's  stronghold  for  troubled  men  : — The  common  interpretation  is, 
that  God  uses  men  who  are,  for  weakness  and  insuflBciency,  as  babes.  Not  that  He 
literally  uses  "babes  and  sucklings."  This  interpretation,  so  common  in  the  Church, 
has  never  found  favour  in  the  synagogue.  The  Rabbis  have  a  surprising  love  for 
children.  They  apply  to  children  and  schools  all  the  Scripture  verses  that  speak  of 
flowers  and  gardens.  The  Talmud  is  full  of  stories  which  indicate  this  love  for  the 
little  ones — e.g.  "There  was  once  a  great  drought,  and  the  most  pious  men  wept 
and  prayed  for  rain,  but  none  came.  At  length  an  insignificant  person  prayed,  and 
instantly  the  heavens  covered  themselves  with  clouds,  and  the  rain  fell.  '  Who 
are  you,'  they  cried,  '  whose  prayers  have  alone  prevailed  1 '  And  he  answered,  '  I 
am  a  teacher  of  little  children.'"  Again,  "When  God  was  about  to  give  His  law 
to  His  people,  He  asked  them  whom  they  would  offer  as  guarantees  that  they  would 
keep  it  holy,  and  they  said,  'Abraham.'  God  said,  'Abraham  has  sinned  ;  Isaac, 
Jacob,  Moees  himself,  they  have  all  sinned  ;  I  cannot  accept  them. '  Then  they 
said,  '  May  our  children  be  witnesses  and  our  guarantees  f '  And  God  accepted 
them,  even  as  it  is  written.  '  From  the  mouth  of  the  little  babes  has  He  preached 
His  empire.' "  The  literal  rendering  is  to  be  preferred.  This  verse  is  quoted  in  the 
Gospel  by  Matthew  in  a  way  which  is  quite  decisive  of  the  meaning.  That  we 
should  thus  understand  them  is  shown — 1.  From  the  general  drift  of  the  Psalm. 
The  little  children  trust  and  love  and  are  at  peace,  though  men  be  so  different. 
2.  From  sympathy  and  agreement  in  this  truth,  which  we  find  in  other  great 
poets,  such  as  Wordsworth,  "Trailing  clouds  of  glory,"  &c.  3.  From  our  own 
experience,  children  suggest  helpful,  restful  thoughts.  If  in  his  origin  man  is  so 
pure  and  so  divine,  must  he  not  be  capable  of  a  Divine  strength  and  blessedness  ? 
{Samuel  Cox,  D.D.)  The  useful  ministry  of  children: — In  the  Middle  Ages  lived 
the  great  theologian,  the  great  Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Paris,  Jean  Gerson, 
whose  whole  life  was  spent  in  storms  of  political  struggle  and  religious  strife,  and 
when,  after  his  long  years  of  turbulent  battle  to  beard  popes  and  burn  heretics,  he  took 
refuge  in  the  silence  and  solitude  of  a  monastic  cell,  his  one  joy  was  to  gather  the 
little  children  round  his  bed  and  bid  them  pray,  "Lord,  have  mercy  on  Tliy  poor 
servant,  Jean  Gerson";  and  even  the  strong  comlative  soul  of  Luther  melted  to 
tenderness  in  the  presence  of  little  ones  ;  and  it  was  the  voice  of  a  little  girl  sing- 
ing a  hymn  on  a  doorstep  at  Weimar  that  dis]>elled  the  heartache  of  Philip 
Melanchihon  ;  and  the  agonies  of  the  Scotch  martyr  Wishart  were  soothed  when, 
to  the  taunt  that  he  had  a  devil,  the  voice  of  a  little  child  was  heard  replying, 


PSALM  viii.]  THE  PSALMS.  127 

"  Yon  man  does  not  speak  like  a  man  that  hath  a  devil "  ;  and  George  Whitfield 
•was  cheered  and  encouraged  when  he  saw  the  little  boys  and  girls  who  had  gathered 
around  his  pulpit  lifting  to  him  in  pity  their  tearful  faces  when  the  mobs  pelted 
him  with  stones  and  dirt.  And  thus  to  these  saints,  and  many  more,  has  the 
trustfulness  and  simplicity  of  little  children  been,  as  it  was  to  the  heart  of  David, 
a  strength  made  perfect  in  weakness  to  still  their  own  enemies  and  the  enemies  of 
God.  And  which  of  us  personally  has  not  felt  from  the  reminiscences  of  his  own 
childhood,  if,  indeed,  a  pang  of  shame  to  think  that  we  are  in  some  things  farther 
from  heaven  than  then,  yet  also  an  inspiration  of  hope  and  strength  ?  {Dean 
Farrar,  D.D.)  A  jyrophecy  of  the  Incarnation  : — These  words  are  alleged  by  our 
blessed  Saviour  (Matt.  xxi.  16),  to  prove  that  Christ  must  reign  till  He  has  sub- 
dued all  His  enemies  under  His  feet.  He  that  reads  this  whole  Psalm  would  think 
it  were  nothing  else  but  a  description  of  man's  excellency,  whom  God  had  made 
next  to  the  angels  in  dignity,  and  given  him  dominion  over  all  things  He  had  made. 
How  is  that  which  is  a  description  of  mankind  in  general,  a  prophecy  of  Christ  in 
special  ?  The  key  of  the  interpretation  of  this  Psalm  is  to  be  sought  in  the  words, 
"  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings,"  &c.  1.  The  meaning  of  the  words 
as  they  stand  in  the  Psalm.  The  whole  drift  of  the  Psalm  is  to  praise  and 
glorify  God  for  the  dignity  wherewith  He  hath  invested  man.  This  glory  and 
honour  is  seen  in  two  particulars.  (1)  In  that  God  hath  ordained  that  weak  and 
feeble  creature  man  to  subdue  and  conquer  His  enemies.  (2)  In  that  He  hath  made 
man  the  lord  of  all  His  creatures.  2.  The  purport  of  these  words  was  fulfilled  in 
our  blessed  Saviour's  incarnation.  The  devil  by  sin  brought  mankind  into  thral- 
dom, and  became  the  prince  of  this  world,  himself  with  his  angels  being  wor- 
shipped and  served  everywhere  as  gods.  To  vanquish  and  exterminate  this  enemy, 
and  redeem  the  world  from  this  miserable  thraldom,  the  Son  of  God  took  on  Him, 
not  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  nature  of  weak  and  despicable  man,  that  grows 
from  a  babe  and  suckling.  And  the  Son  of  Man  enables  also  other  sons  of  men, 
His  disciples  and  ministers,  to  do  the  like  in  His  name.  3.  This  victory,  as  for  the 
event,  so  for  the  manner  of  achieving  it,  is  agreeable  to  our  prophecy.  Forasmuch 
as  Christ  our  General  nor  fights,  nor  conquers  by  force  of  arms,  but  by  the  power 
of  His  Word  and  Spirit,  which  is  "the  power  of  His  mouth,"  according  to  the 
text,  "Out  of  the  mouth,"  &c.     (Joseph  Mede,  B.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  When  I  consider  Tliy  heavens. — Considering: — That  is  what  people 
will  not  do.  They  are  thoughtless,  superficial,  frivolous  ;  they  do  not  sit  down 
and  put  things  together  and  add  them  up,  and  ask  the  meaning  of  the  poetry 
of  the  total.  1.  "When  I  consider" — I  become  a  new  man,  much  larger,  nobler, 
saintlier.  What  does  consider  mean  ?  I  wonder  if  any  six  men  in  any  audience 
could  tell  the  meaning,  etymological  and  historical  and  parabolical,  of  consider. 
It  is  a  word  which  everybody  knows.  It  is  two  words,  it  is  two  Latin  words ; 
it  is  con  or  cum,  with,  together  :  sider — what  is  there  in  the  word  aider  ?  Nothing. 
Take  care  !  Sider  comes  a  long  way  up  the  track  of  language ;  it  was  bom 
sidus.  That  is  what  you  say  when  you  write  your  married  name ;  under  it 
you  put  ne'e,  born — another  name,  your  father's  name,  which  you  have  relin- 
quished in  favour  of  another  name.  Sidus  means  star ;  it  is  the  root  of  siderial 
heavens,  the  starry  heavens,  the  stellar  universe,  and  the  like.  Con-siderealise — 
when  we  star  together — put  the  planets  into  syllables  and  words  and  paragraphs  ; 
when  I  considerealise,  make  a  lesson-book  of  the  stars  ;  when  I  punctuate  my  dis- 
course with  millenniums,  then  I  pray.  If  men  would  do  this  they  would  be 
religious,  but  they  are  frivolous — "What  is  in  the  paper  this  morning?"  Ah  me  ! 
'tis  hideous  and  disheartening.  When  I,  said  the  Psalmist,  who  kept  his  shepherd's 
crook  in  the  belt  of  Orion,  when  I  considerealise,  talk  in  stars  and  think  in  planets 
and  pray  in  constellations — .  Reverence  is  the  basis  of  true  character.  Little 
subjects  will  make  little  men  ;  gossip  will  dethrone  an  Aristotle.  2.  How  this 
considerealising  of  things  changes  their  whole  aspect,  their  entire  value,  relation, 
and  meaning.  We  do  not  loop  our  subjects  on  to  the  great  cars,  so  we  perform 
little  journeys,  and  we  are  no  sooner  out  of  the  house  than  we  are  in  it  again.  We 
do  not  outrun  the  height  of  the  planets  ;  we  are  so  easily  excited  by  subjects  that 
really  have  nothing  in  them.  Who  would  speak  of  a  great  earthquake !  There 
never  was  such  a  thing,  except  within  the  limits  of  the  little  earth  itself ;  then  it 
was  very  great,  it  almost  shook  down  the  chest  of  drawers  in  my  house  !  For  a 
time  I  thought  the  bookcase  was  going  to  fall  over  me ;  it  was  a  great  earthquake ! 
No,  a  spasm  not  worth  talking  about ;  if  the  earth  had  quaked  itself  oat  of  existence 


128  \TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

it  wonld  not  have  deserved  the  epithet  great.  God  is  great,  and  His  heavens  are  as 
nothing  before  Him,  and  the  universe  is  to  Him  like  a  dewdrop  trembling  on  the 
leaf  of  a  flower.  3.  We  must  therefore  get  into  the  right  way  of  thinking  about 
things  ;  we  must  consider,  we  must  read  much  in  starlight ;  we  must  bring  the  right 
scale  to  bear  upon  the  events  which  disturb  us  so  much,  and  then  they  will  disturb 
us  no  longer.  The  Psalmist  says,  "When  I  consider  Thy  heavens,  the  moon,  and 
the  stars,  which  Thou  hast  ordained,"  then  I  get  the  right  view  of  everything  else. 
We  must  get  back  to  the  geometric  measurements,  to  the  stellar  spaces,  to  the  all- 
quieting  immensities  ;  then  we  shall  be  great,  because  we  shall  be  in  our  measure 
like  God.  4.  And  when  I  thus  consider,  my  spirit  is  tranquillised  ;  a  great  peace 
steals  over  my  soul.  When  I  look  at  death  I  am  disquieted  and  overborne  and  im- 
poverished ;  when  I  look  at  immortality  I  am  young,  I  come  out  of  my  chamber 
as  a  bridegroom  ready  to  run  a  race,  like  a  giant  that  cannot  be  tired.  Thus  there 
are  two  views  of  life,  the  detranquillising  view  and  the  all-tranquillising  view.  We 
may  spend  so  much  time  with  death  as  to  think  the  universe  is  but  a  ghostly  shadow. 
Why  art  thou  disquieted  in  me  ?  hope  thou  in  God,  count  His  stars,  be  familiar 
with  His  heavens ;  hear  the  man  of  science  who  tells  thee  that,  having  seen  the 
night-glory,  the  telescope  has  found  forty  thousand  galleries  such  as  the  gallery 
wMch  is  visible  to  the  poor  struggling  astronomical  instrument ;  and  when  thou 
dost  bathe  thyself  in  the  rivers  of  the  stars  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  as  the  flesh  of 
a  little  chUd,  and  thou  shalt  begin  to  praise  God  in  a  new  sweet  hymn.  5.  "  When 
I  consider,"  I  find  that  things  are  not  so  roughly  related  and  antagonised  as 
at  first  they  seemed  to  be.  I  was  not  looking  from  the  right  point  of  view,  I 
did  not  get  far  enough  away  from  my  subject,  I  was  in  the  thick  of  the  battle,  in 
the  very  midst  of  the  storm  of  dust,  I  could  not  see  things  in  their  right  relation  and 
proportion  ;  but  when  I  climbed  the  stairway  of  the  stars  and  looked  down  upon  the 
earth  and  time  and  measurable  space  I  said,  All  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God.  6.  "  When  I  consider,"  consideiealise,  put  the  stars  together, 
I  get  time  drawn  into  its  right  relation  or  driven  off  into  its  right  prospective,  I 
punctuate  the  literature  of  Providence  properly.  Consideration,  properly  defined,  is 
a  reUgious  duty.  In  1  Samuel  xii.  24  you  have  exactly  what  I  mean — "Consider 
how  great  things  He  hath  done  for  you."  Job  says  the  same  thing  in  his  own  grand 
way,  "Stand  still  and  consider  the  wondrous  works  of  God"  (xxxvii.  14).  Put 
things  together ;  give  God  time.  You  are  impatient  because  you  are  little  poor 
fussy  fools ;  give  Him  time.  Consideration  is  a  great  element  in  wisdom  and 
practical  prudence.  Sometimes  men  cannot  go  to  the  stars,  so  God  has  made  some 
little  stars  for  them  to  look  at.  How  kind  He  is,  and  condescending  !  He  says,  in 
effect.  The  stars  are  too  many  for  you,  you  feel  a  noise  in  your  little  heads,  and  it  is 
not  good  for  you  to  look  at  the  Milky  Way  and  the  Great  Bear  and  the  gleaming 
Orion  and  the  beauteous  Venus  ;  so  I  wiU  make  some  starlets  for  you,  little  living 
stars,  asteroids.  How  sweet !  Hear  His  voice  through  the  medium  of  His  prophet, 
"Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard  ;  consider" — the  same  word,  with  all  its  stars  and 
Milky  Ways — "consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise"  (Prov.  vl.  6).  So  you  can  get 
the  lesson  reduced  as  to  mere  size  ;  you  can  have  a  universe  in  a  microcosm,  you  can 
have  all  creation  reduced  to  a  minimum,  so  that  you  can  see  God's  meaning  and 
learn  God's  philosophy.  Consideration  is  the  only  profitable  use  of  history.  We  find, 
then,  in  Isaiah  xliii.  18,  "Remember  ye  not  the  former  things,  neither  consider 
the  things  of  old."  That  is  the  reason  why  you  are  so  poor,  and  why  you  are  so 
easily  driven  about.  You  might  be  rich  in  history,  you  might  be  millionaires 
in  retrospect.  Consideration  is  the  best  use  of  nature.  Consider  the  lilies,  how  they 
grow :  connect  them  with  the  stars.  And  consideration  is  the  greatest  impidse  to 
true  piety,  as  we  are  taught  in  Hebrews  xii.  3,  "Consider  Him  that  endured  such 
contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself."  Consideration  is  the  greatest  guarantee 
of  self-control.  "  Consider  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted."  Stars  have  fallen, 
angels  have  dropped  out  of  line  ;  consider  thyself.  Solitude  is  often  necessary  to 
true  consideration.  God  said  to  the  prophet,  "Go  forth  into  the  plain,  and  I  will 
there  talk  with  thee"  (Ezek.  iii.  22).  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  revelation  of  God 
iri  His  loorks: — I.  All  THE  DiviSE  works  express  the  Divine  character. 
Long  after  Niebuhr  had  ended  his  eastern  travels,  when  he  had  become  blind  and 
debilitated  by  old  age,  he  beguiled  his  weary  hours  "in  recalling  the  aspect  of  the 
oriental  heavens.  As  he  lay  in  his  bed,  the  glittering  splendour  of  the  nocturnal 
Asiatic  sky,  on  which  he  had  so  often  gazed,  or  its  lofty  vault  and  azure  by  day, 
imaged  themselves  to  his  mind  in  the  hour  of  stillness,  and  ministered  to  him  his 
sweetest  enjoyment."     Not  the  heavens  alone,  but  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  its 


tt-SALM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  129 

Maker's  glory.  He  said,  "Let  the  earth  bring  forth  its  plants."  And  it  did  so. 
He  said  this  in  willing  it.  His  act  of  choosing  is  virtually  His  act  of  speaking  ;  and 
as  a  I'rinted  word  is  a  jjermanent  memorial  of  the  speaker's  thought,  so  the  plants 
yielding  seed  are  perennial  mementoes  of  their  Author's  mind.  And  God  said,  "  Let 
the  earth  bring  forth  its  living  creatures."  It  was  so;  and  these  living  creatures 
are  the  published  words  of  Him  who  spake,  and  it  was  done.  There  are  forces  in  matter 
and  in  mind.  These  forces  are  preserved,  as  they  were  originated,  by  the  positive 
act  of  God.  This  act  is  His  speech.  IL  Thk  methods  in  m^hich  the  Divine 
CHARACTEE  IS  BEVEALED  BY  THE  DiviNE  OPERATIONS.  1.  One  of  these  methods 
is  the  use  of  signs,  which  are  fitted  in  their  very  nature  to  suggest  the  truth  pertain- 
ing to  God.  There  is  a  natural  language  for  exjressing  spiritual  ideas.  The 
proverb  is,  that  actions  speak  louder  than  words.  The  tear  makes  known  what 
the  tongue  conceals.  The  sigh,  the  groan,  the  blush,  the  drooping  head  expose 
the  secrets  which  no  words  can  tell.  Now,  if  an  elevated  gesture  of  man  have  a 
fitness  to  express  a  lofty  thought,  much  more  has  the  expanse  of  the  firmament,  or 
some  mountain  of  the  Lord,  a  fitness  to  suggest  an  idea  of  His  exaltation.  The 
works  of  God  are  adapted  to  an  end  ;  this  adaptedness  is  an  effect,  and  therefore 
a  sign  of  His  skill.  His  works  are  fitted  to  a  good  end  ;  this  fitness  is  a  result,  and 
thus  an  exponent  of  His  wisdom.  His  works  are  so  adjusted  as  to  awaken  the  hope 
of  a  reward  for  well-doing,  or  the  fear  of  a  penalty  for  ill-doing ;  this  adjustment 
is  an  effect,  and  thus  a  declaration  of  His  purpose  to  remunerate  the  good  and 
to  punish  the  bad.  If  any  object  be  suited  in  its  structure  to  impress  the  mind  of 
man,  this  very  suitableness  is  an  expression  of  the  mind  of  God.  Whoever  attends 
to  the  teaching  of  nature  listens  to  the  conversation  of  Him  who  speaks  through  all 
nature.  The  laws  of  health  are  prescriptions  from  the  great  Physician.  The  inward 
structure  of  things  will  sometimes  awaken  in  the  most  atheistic  mind  a  fear  of  that 
mysterious  Agent  who  "maketh  darkness  His  pavilion  round  about  Him,"  and 
"gathereth  the  winds  in  His  fists."  Nor  is  the  natural  language  in  which  God 
reveals  His  attributes  limited  to  external  symbols.  2.  We  feel  the  internal  signs  of 
His  character  and  plans.  The  approval  of  a  good  man's  conscience  has  a  meaning 
higher  than  that  of  a  mere  human  phenomenon.  It  is  an  expression  of  the  Divine 
justice.  It  is  a  smile  of  God  alluring  us  to  persevere  in  well-doing.  The  remorse 
of  conscience  is  also  an  alphabetic  sign  in  the  book  of  nature  that  God  is  just.  Their 
sensibilities,  more  than  the  stars  of  heaven,  declare  the  glory  of  God  ;  and  their 
intellect,  more  than  the  firmament,  showeth  His  wisdom.  3.  Another  method  in 
which  the  works  of  Jehovah  express  His  character  is  the  use  of  signs  which  have  a 
conventional  fitness  to  suggest  ideas.  He  has  superadded  arbitrary  to  natural 
language  in  the  communication  of  His  truth.  The  rainbow  has  nothing  in  its 
structiu'e  adapted  to  reveal  a  Divine  promise  respecting  another  flood  ;  but  the 
Author  of  it  gave  it  a  meaning,  and  made  it,  as  it  were,  an  epistle  printed  on  the 
clouds  and  recording  a  Divine  purpose.  The  articulate  speech  of  men  also  is,  not 
less  really  than  the  earth  itself,  a  work  of  God.  He  inserted  within  us  the  tendency 
to  use  arbitrary  language.  These  influences  of  speech  "declare  the  glory  of  God." 
But  more  than  this.  He  uses  our  words  as  His  own  vocabulary.  He  employed 
arbitrary  language  in  conversing  with  Adam,  Abraham,  Moses.  He  adopted  Hebrew, 
Chaldaic,  Greek,  Aramaean  sentences  in  communicating  His  truth  through  pi-ophets 
and  apostles.  He  now  instructs  men  in  the  words  of  His  ministers.  David  ex- 
claims, "  0  Lord,  our  Lord,  who  hast  set  Thy  glory  above  the  heavens, — out  of  the 
mouth  of  children  Thou  hast  prepared  for  Thyself  a  power  that  shall  overcome  the 
enemy  ";  and  if  the  voice  of  babes  "declare  the  glury  of  God,"  then  much  more  do 
the  lips  of  His  evangelists  "show  His  handy  work.  "     III.  Consider  some  of  the 

REASONS     WHY     JeHOVAH     UNFOLDS    HiS     CHARACTER     IN     HiS    Vl^ORKS.      1.  One 

obvious  reason  is,  that  the  manifestation  of  His  attributes  is  inseparable  from  the 
exercise  of  them.  If  He  act  at  all.  He  must  act  out  the  principles  of  His  being ; 
and  to  act  them  out  is  to  make  them  known.  When  He  governs  the  world  He 
puts  forth  His  attributes  ;  in  putting  them  forth  He  exposes,  expresses  them.  He 
exerts  His  wisdom  in  giving  to  the  mind  an  impulse  to  infer  the  nature  of  the  cause 
from  the  nature  of  the  effect.  In  exerting  this  wisdom  He  exhibits  it ;  for  it  is  this 
wisdom,  as  the  cause,  to  which  the  mind  reasons  from  itself  as  the  effect.  He 
cannot  form  an  image  of  Himself  without  disclosing  the  original  excellence  which 
is  imaged  forth.  How  can  He  let  His  benevolence  have  its  free  scope  unless  He 
form  sentient  beings  able  to  enjoy  His  benevolence  ;  and  how  can  they  fully  enjoy 
it  unless  they  perceive  it ;  and  how  can  they  perceive  it  unless  He  show  it  unto 
them  ;  and  how  can  He  show  it  unto  them  clearly  unless  it  appear  in  His  deeds  ?     If 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viir. 

He  exercise  His  mercy  toward  men,  He  mast  relieve  the  suffering  ;  if  He  do  give 
this  relief,  He  must  therein  manifest  the  mercy  which  He  feels.  It  is  necessary  for 
Him  either  to  repress  His  love  or  to  express  it.  Why  should  He  repress  it  ?  Why 
close  the  gates  through  which  His  benignant  favours  flow  forth  as  a  stream  ? 
2.  Another  reason  why  Jehovah  makes  use  of  His  works  as  a  language  revealing  His 
attributes  is,  that  He  promotes  the  welfare  of  His  offspring  by  the  revelation.  The 
Father  pleases  His  children  by  appearing  to  them.  The  disciples  were  troubled  until 
they  heard  the  cheering  voice,  "It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  The  Psalmist,  in  our 
context,  was  triumphant  when  he  beheld  the  sun  coming  as  a  bridegroom  out  of  his 
chamber,  and  rejoicing  as  a  hero  to  run  a  race.  Other  men  are  often  in  solitude  ; 
or  if  in  society,  they  have  no  friends.  But  the  child  of  God,  wherever  he  moves, 
is  near  to  his  Maker.  Under  the  venerable  oak,  or  on  the  skirts  of  the  deep  sea, 
or  in  the  pure  air  of  the  mountain-top,  he  talks  with  the  Great  Spirit.  The  laws  of 
his  own  mind  are  the  words  of  his  Friend  whispering  within  him.  In  the  constitu- 
tional workings  of  the  soul  God  does  manifest  Himself  to  it.  An  author  of  an  effect 
must  be  some  free  will.  But  many  effects  without  us  and  within  us  are  not  pro- 
duced by  a  created  free  will ;  then  they  are  produced  by  the  Uncreated.  They 
make  known  God's  laws.  They  disclose  His  feelings.  The  acts  of  conscience  testify 
of  His  purposes.  The  decisions  of  the  reason  speak  His  counsel.  The  necessary 
beliefs  of  men  are  His  teachings.  All  ethical  axioms  are  His  revelation.  The 
moral  freedom  of  men  is  His  express  summons  to  a  right  preference.  Their  innocent 
joys  are  His  words  of  good  cheer.  Perhaps  it  is  impossible  for  any  power  to  impress 
on  the  mind  anv  truth,  by  mere  words,  so  deeply  as  by  acts,  which  are  emphatic 
words.  3.  Another  reason  why  Jehovah  reveals  His  excellence  through  His  works 
is,  that  He  promotes  His  own  blessedness  by  the  revelation.  He  might,  in  merely 
written  syllables,  inform  us  that  He  is  omnipotent ;  but  as  a  Sovereign  He  chooses 
to  speak  to  us  by  the  globes  of  heaven,  which  declare  Him  to  be  Almighty.  He 
might,  in  a  merely  artificial  language,  indicate  His  benevolence;  but  He  prefers  to 
address  us  in  our  own  joys  and  hopes,  which  rehearse  His  loving-kindness.  But 
why  do  we  presume  that  the  blessedness  of  the  Most  High  is  promoted  by  His 
development  of  His  excellence  ?  So  far  as  we  have  learned,  it  is  the  law  of  all 
sentient  beings  to  express  themselves.  Even  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills,  the 
birds  of  the  air,  have  an  irrepressible  longing  to  make  known  what  they  feel.  It  is 
the  law  of  all  mind,  above  all  a  pure  mind,  of  course  then  an  infinite  mind,  to  bring 
itself  out  to  the  light.  Why  then  should  not  the  Being  of  whom  we  are  the  image 
feel  an  immeasurable  bliss  in  gratifying  His  desire  to  manifest,  in  the  view  of 
others,  what  He  enjoys  Himself  ?  But  He  has  more  than  this  constitutional  tendency 
to  develop  His  character.  This  character  is  a  good  in  itself,  and  deserves  His  own 
as  well  as  our  supreme  love  ;  delighting  in  it.  He  must  be  happy  in  the  radiating 
of  it  upon  His  offspring.  The  exercise  of  His  attributes  is  a  source  of  bliss,  and  we 
have  seen  that  He  cannot  exercise  them  in  their  normal  way  without  manifesting 
them  ;  He  must  therefore  rejoice  in  their  manifestation.  He  cannot  raise  men  to 
their  destined  thrones  without  illustrating  His  own  mercy  in  their  exaltation  :  why 
should  He  hide  that  mercy  ?  These  things,  such  things,  are  not  done  in  a  corner. 
A  fountain  does  not  keep  itself  compressed  in  a  ball  of  ice.  The  sun  does  not  bind 
its  rays  to  and  within  itself.  From  within,  outward,  all  affections  flow  forth.  From 
the  recesses  of  the  soul  to  the  well-being  of  the  universe  all  right  affections  move 
forward.  The  diffusing  of  its  own  joy  is  the  law  of  a  loving  heart,  and  only  in  the 
diffusing  of  it  is  the  full  development  of  it,  and  only  in  its  development  is  the  con- 
summating of  its  rest.  IV.  Remakks  which  are  suggested  by  this  theme. 
1.  The  reasonableness  of  Jehovah  in  His  retributive  administration.  He  loves 
virtue.  His  constitutional  desire  is  to  manifest  His  love.  Why  should  He  restrain 
this  desire  ?  But  if  He  express  it  His  nature  prompts  Him  to  express  it  by  act. 
And  the  act  by  which  He  will  make  known  His  love  of  virtue, — known  thoroughly 
by  being  felt  deeply, — is  the  exciting  of  the  moral  sensibility  of  virtuous  agente  in 
favour  of  their  own  rectitude.  Their  complacency  of  conscience,  and  many  of  its 
preliminary  and  consequent  joys,  will  be  their  reward.  The  reward  is  worked  out 
according  to  the  laws  of  their  constitution.  But  these  laws  are  the  work,  and 
therefore  the  word  of  God.  They  express  His  remunerative  justice.  He  will  reveal 
His  loving  approval  in  our  moral  judgments  ;  these  will  be  the  heavens  declaring 
the  ^lory  of  God.  And  is  it  not  reasonable  that  He  should  honestly  express  what 
He  inwardly  feels  ?  This  disposition  to  express  His  delight  in  the  pure  of  heart, 
and  to  make  them  blissful  in  receiving  the  expression,  is  His  remunerative  justice 
to  them.     Equally  reasonable  is  the  punitive  justice  of  the  Most  High.     He  abhors 


PSALM  VIII.]  TEE  PSALMS.  131 

sin.  No  finite  mind  can  ever  fatliom  tbe  depth  of  His  displeasure  toward  one 
solitary  transgression.  Shall  He  conceal  His  displeasure  ?  His  abhorrence  of  sin  is 
nothing  dislionourable,  nothing  wrong.  Why  should  He  hesitate  to  express  it  ?  It 
is  what  it  ought  to  be,  noble,  magnanimous.  Why  shall  He  not  be  honest  in 
revealing  it  ?  And  if  He  do  reveal  it,  why  shall  He  not  adopt  the  method  which  He 
prefers  in  His  ordinary  disjiensations  ;  the  method  which  the  law  of  His  being  has 
prescribed  ;  the  method  of  action,  the  emphatic,  the  Divine  speech  ?  The  punish- 
ment is  worked  out  according  to  the  laws  of  their  constitution.  But  these  laws  are 
the  device  of  God.  They  express  what  He  feels.  The  upbraidings  of  conscience 
are  the  declarations  of  His  punitive  justice.  And  is  it  not  a  punishment  from 
Jehovah  ? — what  can  be  a  severer  recompense  than  for  us,  if  we  are  left  incorrigible, 
to  have  the  inward  assurance  that  our  Friend,  our  best  Friend,  is  ever  near  us,  frowning 
upon  us, — our  compunction  being  His  frown  ; — not  because  He  is  indifferent  to  our 
persons,  but  because  He  loves  them,  and  therefore  abhors  our  suicidal  crimes,  and 
exposes  His  abhorrence,  not  in  artificial  forms  of  speech,  but  in  our  own  reason,  in 
our  moral  judgment,  in  all  the  pains  by  which  He  awakens  our  displacency,  and 
which  He  appends  to  it.  2.  The  consistency  of  the  atonement  with  other  parts  of 
the  Divine  Jidministration.  As  the  Most  High  loves  to  express  Himself  in  the 
material  world,  so  He  loves  to  express  Himself  in  the  phenomena  of  the  mind  and 
heart.  As  He  chooses  to  disclose  His  attributes  in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked, 
■when  this  punishment  is  needful  for  the  common  welfare,  so  He  chooses  to  dispense 
■with  punishment  when  He  can  disclose  the  same  attributes,  and  impress  the  same 
truths,  and  promote  the  same  well-being  in  some  equivalent  way.  The  power 
of  any  language  to  suggest  ideas  and  excite  emotions  is  mysterious.  Articulate 
speech  is  a  wonder.  The  significance  of  penal  suffering  is  felt  more  clearly  than  it 
can  be  described.  But  the  fulness  and  variety  and  intensity  of  meaning  and  of 
impression  in  the  atonement  are  what  even  the  angels  desire  to  look  into.  3.  A 
third  remark,  suggested  by  our  theme,  is  on  the  harmony  of  both  the  visible  and 
invisible  works  of  God  with  the  feelings  of  a  devout  man.  He  keeps  his  ear  attent 
to  the  sounds  of  the  land,  air,  sea,  and  therefore  they  express  to  him  rich  truths. 
Ebal  shouts  to  Gerizim,  and  Gerizim  shouts  back  to  Ebal  the  words  of  the  Lord. 
He  draws  nigh  to  them  who  seek  Him  in  His  works,  and  He  hides  Himself  from 
them  who  care  not  to  listen  for  His  voice.  The  longer  we  listen  to  a  distant  sound, 
so  much  the  more  distinctly  do  we  hear  it ;  for  the  atmosphere  becomes  wonted  to 
it,  and  our  minds  become  expert  by  discipline  in  detecting  the  auricular  vibrations. 
So  the  longer  we  listen  to  the  voices  of  nature,  they  become  the  more  full  and  rich 
in  their  expression  of  Divine  truth.  Old  age  refines  the  spiritual  ear  ;  and  as  the 
body  decays  the  soul  becomes  more  and  more  sensitive  to  the  undulations  of  the 
spiritual  atmosphere.  And  as  century  after  century  rolls  by,  the  whisperings  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  will  be  more  and  more  clearly  recognised,  and  that  volume  of  sound 
which  came  to  the  ear  of  David  from  the  skies  by  daj'  and  by  night  will  be  gaining 
new  emphasis  and  new  power,  until,  at  the  inillennium,  the  heavens  will  declare  the 
glory  of  God,  so  that  all  men  shall  hear,  "as  it  were,  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude, 
and  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  many  thunderings,  saying  : 
AUelujah,  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth."  4.  The  Christian  preacher  is  an 
interpreter  both  of  nature  and  of  revelation.  One  spirit  reigns  in  both.  The  truths 
of  the  Bible  are  illustrated  by  the  phenomena  of  life,  and  the  phenomena  of  life  are 
explained  by  the  truths  of  the  Bible.  The  analogies  between  the  two  are  needed 
for  comprehending  the  two.  The  prophets  and  apostles  vivified  their  discourses  with 
these  analogies.  Thus  is  all  nature  alive  and  vocal,  when  the  prophets  describe  it. 
More  than  one  folio  volume  has  been  filled  with  comments  on  the  suggestions  which 
have  been  gathered  from  the  myrtle,  cedar,  olive,  willow,  palm,  and  all  trees  ;  from 
the  eagle,  dove,  sparrow,  lion,  viper,  dragon,  leviathan,  and  all  animals ;  from  the 
silver,  pearl,  jewel,  ruby,  and  all  manner  of  precious  stones  ;  from  the  wells  without 
water,  clouds  without  rain,  floods,  winds,  flaming  fire — all  of  them  ministers  of 
God  ;  from  children,  fathers,  ambassadors,  rulers,  shepherds,  trumpeters,  soldiers, 
captains  ;  things  in  heaven  and  on  earth  and  under  the  earth,  all  laid  under  con- 
tribution,— the  grave  itself  forced  to  give  up  its  dead  men's  hones,  to  express  and  to 
impress  some  truth  which  men  would  overlook  if  they  were  not  startled  into  an 
attentive  mood.  And  since  the  day  when  men  spake  with  tongues  of  fire  from 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Chrysostoms  and  the  Bernards  and  the  Jeremy  Taylors  and 
the  Whitefields  of  the  Church  have  lifted  up  the  clarion  of  the  Gospel,  and  waked  the 
echoes  from  the  woodland  and  the  mountain,  and  have  made  the  rocks  and  the 
streams  resonant  with  the  voiqe  of  God.    Now,  as  of  old,  it  is  tie  hj^h  oflSoe  of  every 


182  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vin. 

minister  to  gather  into  his  own  mind,  that  he  may  diffuse  through  the  mind 
of  his  people,  instructions  from  the  sea  and  the  field,  fiom  science  and  from 
history,  from  the  arts  and  the  aims  of  men.  He  should  make  all  the  events 
of  life  pay  tribute  to  Him  who  governs,  as  He  created,  the  world  for  the  Church. 
{E.  A.  Park,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  and  the  magnitvde  of  creation: — Some  persons 
object  to  the  inaccurate  language  of  Scripture  in  regard  to  the  sun's  rising 
and  setting,  and  other  truths  established  by  modem  astronomy.  But  the 
Scriptures  were  given  to  man  to  lead  his  soul  back  to  God,  and  to  do  this  in 
a  way  suited  to  every  stage  of  man's  progress.  Therefore  it  was  the  common 
language  of  men,  and  not  of  the  science  of  the  schools.  But  there  is  another  objec- 
tion deeper  than  this.  It  is,  that  the  Gospel  revelation  is  out  of  proportion  to  the 
magnitude  of  creation.  This  difficulty  arises  from  the  view  of  the  universe  given  to 
us  by  astronomical  science.  Our  earth  is  very  small  compared  with  other  planets 
revolving  round  the  sun,  and  with  the  sun  itself.  And  the  sun  is  but  one  centre 
amongst  myriads  more.  But  coming  more  directly  to  the  objection  that  is  urged, 
we  note  that  it  takes  one  of  two  forms.     I.  That  man,  looked  at  in  the  light 

OF  SUCH  A  MATEKIAL  UNIVERSE,  IS   TOO   INSIGNIFICANT  FOR  SUCH   INTERPOSITION 

AS  THAT  OF  WHICH  THE  GosPEL  TELLS.  But  1.  The  aim  of  the  Gospel  is  spiritual, 
to  save  men  from  sin,  and  hence  moves  in  a  sphere  entirely  distinct  from  that  of 
astronomy.  Moreover,  2.  |It  is  the  presence  of  intelligent  life  which  gives  signifi- 
cance to  creation.  What  were  the  Alps  and  Andes  ;  what  Niagara,  what  the  ocean, 
but  for  the  thoughts  they  suggest  ?  The  real  grandeur  of  the  world  is  the  soul  which 
looks  on  it.  Mind  breathes  into  matter  the  breath  of  life,  and  so  it  becomes  a  living 
soul.  " Man, "  says  Pascal,  "is  a  feeble  reed  trembling  in  the  midst  of  creation; 
but  then,  he  is  endowed  with  thought. "  The  very  discoveries  of  astronomy  attest 
the  greatness  of  man's  mind,  for  the  discoverer  is  ever  above  the  discovery. 
3.  Then  think  of  man's  moral  capacity.  He  can  think  the  material  universe  out 
of  being,  and  we  believe  that  once  it  did  not  exist ;  but  moral  ideas — truth,  right, 
goodness — these  are  eternal  both  in  faith  and  thought.  4.  And  mind  is  immortal. 
The  material  universe  changes,  but  mind  lives  on  in  conscious  identity.  If  in 
matter  there  is  infinite  space,  in  mind  there  is  infinite  time.  5.  And  if  it  was  befit- 
ting of  God  to  create  the  world  and  man,  then  it  is  befitting  of  Him  to  care  for  what  He 
has  made.  Is  it  a  worthy  idea  of  God  to  think  that  He  abandons  things  to  chance- 
hazard  here  ?  that  the  highest  part  of  man's  nature  will  be  left  to  neglect  ?  And 
if  the  supernatural  interposed  to  create,  might  it  not  interpose  to  save  ?  6.  And  the 
argument  from  astronomy  helps  rather  than  hinders  faith.  For  if  God  has  lavished 
80  much  pains  upon  the  material  universe,  will  He  not  do  as  much  for  the  moral  and 
spiritual  for  whom  He  has  made  the  material  ?  And  if  it  be  asked,  why  should  God 
do  so  much  for  mind  here  and  not  elsewhere  ?  Why  here  alone  ?  How  do  we  know 
He  has  not  ?  It  is  to  be  expected  that  in  other  worlds  He  reveals  Himself  in  in- 
finitely varied  modes,  according  to  the  need  of  each.  II.  God  is  too  exalted 
FOE  us  to  expect  SUCH  AN  INTERPOSITION.  This  is  the  second  form  of  the  objection 
— it  brings  God  too  low.  1.  But  if  we  allow  Him  a  free  hand  in  His  works  ofpower 
and  wisdom, — which  we  all  confess  are  infinite, — are  we  to  deny  Him  like  freedom  in 
His  display  of  goodness  and  mercy  ?  2.  Can  we  say  that  because  He  is  so  great  in 
the  heavens,  therefore  He  cannot  be  great  in  stooping  down  to  our  sin  and  misery  ? 
Such  is  not  our  standard  even  for  men  ;  how  much  less  for  God  !  No,  "  As  high  as 
the  heaven  is  above  the  earth,  so  great  is  Hia  mercy  to  them  that  fear  Him."  His 
greatness  is  the  measure,  not  of  His  distance  from  us,  but  of  His  nearness  to  us. 
3.  Further,  the  balance  of  qualities  which  we  require  in  a  perfect  character,  supports 
the  teaching  of  the  Gospel.  Pascal  has  finely  said,  "  I  do  not  admire  in  a  man  the 
extreme  of  one  virtue,  as  of  valour,  if  I  do  not  see  at  the  same  time  the  extreme  of 
the  opposite  virtue."  Therefore  in  God,  may  we  not  expect  that  if  we  see,  as  we  do, 
the  extreme  of  power,  there  shall  be  also  corresponding  love  ?  Is  God's  character  ill- 
balanced  ?  And  power  and  genius  are  never  so  great  as  when  they  stoop  to  lift  the 
fallen  and  the  lost.  And  if  God  gave  us  this  instinct,  must  not  His  own  character 
be  in  harmony  therewith  ?  Could  we  reverence  in  God  that  which  we  cannot 
respect  in  man  ?  He,  therefore,  is  far  more  than  mere  power — infinite  in  goodness  and 
in  truth.  It  is  to  the  glory  of  the  Gospel  that  it  has  given  us  this  view  of  God,  and 
reveals  Him  crowned  with  loving -kindness  and  tender  mercy.  {John  Ker,  D.  D. ) 
A  sketch  of  the  modern  astronomy  .-—St.  Paul  was  wont  to  avail  himself  of  all  common 
ground  between  himself  and  his  hearers,  whatever  it  might  be.  And  douV)tless  he 
would  do  the  like  to-day,  though,  in  so  doing,  he  might  soar  above  the  understand- 
ing of  many  amongst  us.     Hence  I  Lave  attempted  to  meet  the  men  of  science  on 


PSALM  viii.]  THE  PSALMS.  133 

their  own  gi'ound,  though,  in  so  doing,  many  a  humble  Christian  will  find  little  for 
his  own  edification.  But  if  those  whose  welfare  is  contemplated  can  be  won  to  the 
Gospel,  surely  then  others  can  only,  and  will  only,  rejoice.  It  is  right  to  appeal  to 
the  works  of  nature.  Our  Lord  did  so,  and  the  Psalmist  here  takes  a  lofty  flight. 
He  contemplates— it  was  probably  a  meditation  born  of  the  night— the  starry 
heavens.  There  is  much  in  such  a  scene  to  elevate  the  soul.  But  what  are  these 
.starry  lights  that  we  behold  t  Their  distances  and  their  magnitudes  have  been  cal- 
culated, and  vast  numbers  of  them  have  been  observed.  But  when  we  see  how 
small  a  spot  this  earth  of  ours  is  in  the  immensity  which  surrounds  it,  can  we  think 
that  here  only  is  the  exclusive  abode  of  life  and  of  intelligence  ?  Are  these  other 
far  vaster  worlds,  which  roll  in  other  parts  of  creation,  not  also  worlds  both  in  use 
and  dignity  ?  Why  should  the  Great  Architect  call  these  stately  mansions  into 
existence  and  leave  them  unoccupied  ?  And  in  confirmation  of  this  we  observe  that 
they  are  formed  upon  a  system  similar  to  our  own.  They  have  their  revolutions 
round  the  sun  and  their  succession  of  day  and  night.  And  future  ages  will  prob- 
ably make  yet  more  discoveries  concerning  them.  And  we  know  that  beyond  the 
boundary  of  the  planetary  system  there  is  a  multitude  of  other  lights  which  sparkle 
in  our  firmament  and  fill  the  whole  concave  of  heaven  with  innumerable  splendours. 
These  fixed  stars  are  at  an  immeasurable  distance  from  us,  but  they  are  not  shined 
upon  by  our  sun  ;  their  light  is  self-derived,  they  are  so  many  suns.  And  they,  too, 
resemble  our  sun,  in  its  revolution,  and  their  number  is  simply  incalculable.  Where, 
then,  can  we  limit  the  Almighty,  or  cease  to  trace  His  footsteps '  And  how  vast 
are  the  movements  of  our  sun  and  its  planetary  system.  Not  only  does  it  revolve, 
but  it  goes  forward  through  space,  and  carrying  along  with  it  all  its  planets  and 
their  secondaries  with  them.  And  since  our  sun  may  only  be  one  member  of  a 
family,  taking  his  part  along  with  millions  of  others  in  their  mighty  movement  for 
which  there  is  ample  space  in  immensity,  how  insignificant  does  our  world  appear. 
Think  of  the  nebulae  also.  Are  all  these  worlds  unpeopled  ?  Does  God  care  only 
for  us?    {Thomas  Chalmers,  D.D.)        Results  of  contemplation: — I.  We  are  im- 

PEESSED  WITH  God'S  INFINITE  INDEPENDENCE  OF  HUMAN  HELP.       We  Cannot  tOUch 

one  of  His  stars  ;  we  cannot  control  their  courses ;  we  cannot  increase  or  diminish 
their  light.  Yonder  they  shine,  away  from  our  poor  patronage,  indifferent  to  our 
powerless  opinion.  When,  then,  God  asks  our  help  in  anything,  He  does  so  for 
our  good,  and  never  to  fill  up  the  circle  of  His  own  ability.  How  these  star-lit 
heavens  rebuke  my  ofBciousness !  II,  We  see  that  creation  is  established 
UPON  A  BASIS  OF  ORDER.  There  is  no  controversy  in  all  those  heavenly  spaces  ! 
The  stars  are  quiet.  There  is  no  collision  of  orbits.  Everywhere  there  is  sovereign 
law.  The  moral  significance  of  this  is  plain.  See  what  God  would  have  in  the 
moral  universe  !  In  the  individual  heart ;  in  families  ;  in  churches  ;  in  nations. 
God  is  the  God  of  order,  and  order  is  peace.  III.  We  see  the  infinite  suffi- 
ciency OF  GOD  TO  PRESERVE  ALL  THE  INTERESTS  WE  COMMIT  TO  HiM.  If  He  can 
sustain  that  firmament  of  worlds,  can  He  not  sustain  our  little  life  ?  Can  He  who 
numbers  the  stars  not  also  number  the  hairs  of  our  head  ?  Is  our  house  greater  than 
God's  heavens,  that  He  cannot  be  trusted  with  it?  "Commit  thy  way  unto  the 
Lord,  trust  also  in  Him,  and  He  shall  bring  it  to  pass."  Does  His  work  in  the 
starry  creation  ever  fail  ?  Does  the  starlight  waste  because  of  the  insufficiency  of 
God's  glory  ?  0  Thou  who  carriest  the  worlds  in  Thine  hands,  carry,  too,  my  poor 
life  !  IV.  We  see  the  essential  difference  between  physical  sovereignty 
AND  MORAL  CONTROL,  The  weakest  man  is  greater  than  the  most  magnificent  star  ! 
God  has  made  man  greater  than  the  heavens,  though  physically  he  dwindles  into 
nothingness  in  presence  of  their  vastness  and  glory.  In  what  does  his  superiority  con- 
sist? Inallthat  is  implied  in  the  term  "wUl."  Man  can  say  "  No  "  to  God.  Physical 
f[overnment  is  an  act  of  sovereignty,  but  moral  control  involves  the  consent  of  the 
ife  that  is  governed.  The  house  cannot  be  shaken,  but  the  tenant  may  spend  his 
days  in  controversy  and  bitterness  against  the  builder.  Why  cannot  human  life  be 
as  peaceful  as  the  quiet  heavens  ?  Because  human  life  has  a  will  of  its  own.  God 
seeks  by  all  the  tender  persuasiveness  of  His  love,  as  shown  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  bring 
that  will  into  harmony  with  His  own  ; — when  that  is  done,  there  will  be  a  great 
calm.  A  consideration  so  conducted  will  (1)  Enlarge  and  strengthen  the  mind. 
(2)  Show  contrastively  the  power  and  weakness  of  man.  (3)  Excite  the  highest  hopes 
regarding  human  destiny.  (4)  Tranquillise  the  impatience  and  fretfulness  incident 
to  an  incomplete  life.  [Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Contemplations  on  the  starry  sky : 
— There  is  nothing  of  all  that  we  can  behold  that  more  elevates  the  mind,  or  per- 
vades it  with  more  and  grander  thoughts  and  emotions,  than  the  view  of  the  starry 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

Bky.  The  starry  sky  says  to  lis — 1.  Adore  the  greatness  and  glory  of  God.  How 
eouldst  thou  fail  of  perceiving  Him,  the  Eternal,  the  Infinite,  the  Almighty,  the 
Supremely-wise,  the  All-gracious,  in  these  His  works  ?  Endeavour  to  form  a  con- 
ception of  the  whole  of  this  infinite  system  of  suns  and  worlds,  and  then  raise  thy 
mind  to  Him  who  made  and  preserves  them  all.  How  great,  how  inconceivably 
great,  must  He  be,  the  Creator  and  Father  of  all  worlds,  the  primordial  source  of 
energy  and  motion,  the  first,  eternal  cause  of  all  things,  &c.  Then  be  absorbed  in 
devotion,  in  adoration,  O  man,  when  thou  contemplatest  this  theatre  of  the  marvels 
of  thy  God.  2.  Be  sensible  also  of  thy  insignificance,  and  learn  humility.  Thou 
oughtest  not  to  be  proud,  but  neither  shouldst  thou  be  of  an  abject  mind.  3.  Have 
a  proper  sense  of  thy  dignity,  and  learn  to  think  generously  and  nobly.  4.  Presage 
thy  future  perfection  and  happiness,  and  get  a  foretaste  of  them  !  {G.  J.  Zollikofer.) 
Two  voices  of  nature : — The  poet  first  looks  out  upon  nature,  and  feels  his  littleness  ; 
then  he  thinks  further,  and  sees  his  greatness.  He  knew  very  little  of  the  universe 
compared  with  what  we  know.  We  look  upon  the  earth,  these  rivers,  these  moun- 
tains, this  ocean,  we  look  back  historically  upon  the  tremendous  forces  which  have 
pushed  these  continents  up,  and  are  pushing  them,  so  that  it  is  estimated  that  within 
the  last  five  yesvrs  Scandinavia  has  been  pushed  up  over  three  hundred  feet  into  the 
air  from  the  ocean  bed  ;  we  look  upon  the  starry  firmament  with  these  immensities 
of  space,  and  it  will  be  very  strange  if  we  are  not  inclined  to  say,  "  What  are  we  ? 
Insects  on  a  globe  of  sand  ;  the  world  an  ant-hill,  and  we  but  ants  upon  it."  "  Who 
&m  I,  that  I  should  think  the  Creator  of  these  blazing  orbs,  the  forth-putter  of  this 
tremendous  power,  the  wisdom  that  has  planned  and  keeps  in  order  this  marvellous 
mechanism — that  He  should  count  the  hairs  of  my  head,  or  think  of  me  as  His  son  ? " 
Yet,  if  we  think  deeply,  we  shall  come  also  to  the  thought  of  the  Psalmist,  and  see 
in  the  very  grandeur  of  nature  a  testimony  to  the  grandeur  of  man.  If  we  have 
learned  something  which  the  Psalmist  never  knew  respecting  the  greatness  of  nature, 
we  have  learned  something  also  which  the  Psalmist  never  knew  concerning  the 
greatness  of  man,  for  whom  the  world  has  been  made.  Not  only  has  this  wonderful 
world  been  given  to  us,  not  only  has  this  wonderful  world  been  mastered  by  us,  but 
it  has  been  given  to  us  to  find  the  way  to  the  mastery  of  it  ourselves.  If  you  con- 
sider that  this  world  is  a  university.  All  its  powers  are  hidden  from  us  until  by  our 
own  energy  we  have  discovered  them,  mastering  us  until  by  our  own  supremacy  we 
have  dominion  over  them ;  if  you  consider  that  all  this  has  been  given  to  us  to 
make  "character" — does  it  seem  so  strange  that  this  world  should  be  also  the 
theatre  of  a  more  Divine  redemption,  the  place  whereon  a  greater  service  to  character 
has  been  wrought  than  can  be  wrought  by  cloud,  or  tree,  or  mountain  stream,  or 
ocean  ?  This  world  is  not  an  ant-hill.  It  is  God's  house  ;  it  is  man's  house  ;  God- 
given  for  man's  use  and  man's  supremacy.  (Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  Man  and 
the  universe : — It  is  possible  to  measure  man  against  the  universe  on  more  than  one 
scale,  and  the  result  will  be  strikingly  different  according  to  the  scale  which  we 
use.  1.  The  scale  of  space  and  time.  How  instantaneously,  how  inexpressibly,  are 
we  dwarfed  by  the  result !  What  are  we  but  microscopical  insects,  crawling  in 
indistinguishable  multitude  upon  the  face  of  a  planet,  which,  in  comparison  with  the 
countless  orbs  of  space,  is  itself  no  more  than  a  grain  of  star-dust  ?  We  can  reduce 
astronomical  results  to  figures,  but  to  all  this  the  mind  responds  by  no  adequate 
effort  of  conception.  So  also  it  is  with  periods  of  time.  I  am  not  sure  that  we  do  not 
feel  our  littleness  more  when  we  think  of  the  thousand  millions  of  living  beings  on 
the  earth  now,  and  of  the  thousand  times  a  thousand  millions  who  have  mouldered 
into  its  elemental  dust.  We  may  heap  figure  upon  figure  to  express  our  physical 
insignificance,  and  we  shall  not  find  the  level  of  our  nothingness.  2.  There  is  a 
radical  distinction  between  man  and  the  universe.  It  is  a  necessity  of  man's  nature  to 
divide  the  whole  vast  sum  of  things  into  two  marvellously  unequal  parts — himself, 
and  all  that  is  not  himself.  The  sense  of  personality,  this  discrimination  between 
the  I  and  the  not  I,  is  so  strong  and  fundamental,  that  it  requires,  in  most  of  us, 
an  effort  to  take  the  other  view,  and  to  consider  ourselves  as  a  minute  and  undivided 
part  of  the  whole.  The  moment  you  introduce  the  ideas  of  personality  and  con- 
sciousness, it  becomes  necessary  to  measure  the  relations  between  man  and  the 
universe  on  quite  a  new  scale.  Thought  has  no  magnitude.  When  we  apply  the 
words  greater  and  less  to  feeling,  it  is  only  by  way  of  metaphor.  Whatever  lives 
the  life  of  consciousness  and  reflection,  though  never  so  feebly,  is  separated  by  an 
immeasurable  gulf  from  that  which  simply  exists,  unwitting  of  its  own  existence. 
This  fact  of  reflective  consciousness  would  seem  strange  and  significant  enough,  if 
it  implied  no  more  than  the  power  of  simply  cutting  ourselves  off  from  the  universe, 


PSALM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  135 

and  80  recognising  otrselves.  But  it  becomes  stranger  and  more  significant  still, 
when  it  is  seen  to  involve  the  power  of  setting  up  the  "  I  "  over  against  the  "All," 
and,  weak,  ignorant,  transitory,  as  each  one  of  us  is,  of  distinctly  comprehending 
the  vast  and  complex  totality  of  which  we  form  a  most  minute  and  undistinguished 
part.  Compare  me  with  the  universe  on  the  physical  side,  and  words  are  utterly 
powerless  to  express  the  inconceivable  contrast  of  greatness  and  litthness.  But 
think  of  one  philosopher  bringing  into  correlation  to  the  same  law  the  falling  apple 
and  the  revolving  worlds,  and  another  reducing  to  theoretic  uniformity  the  speed 
at  which  the  planets  circle  in  their  courses,  and  a  third  demonstrating,  with  glass 
of  new  magic,  the  constituents  of  the  solar  atmosphere,  and  you  will  se«  how  there 
can  be  no  comparison  between  that  which  thinks  and  that  which  simply  is.  If,  on 
the  one  hand,  nature  is  our  irresponsible  tyrant,  on  the  other,  we  are  masters  of 
nature.  This  is  much  more  the  case  when  we  bring  within  our  survey  the  moral 
element.  How  decisively  this  moral  element  differentiates  man  from  nature.  Take 
humanity  out  of  the  universe,  and  it  is  neither  moral  nor  immoral,  it  is  simply 
natural.  The  world  of  morals  is  emphatically  human,  and  as  emphatically  Twt 
material.  It  is  in  connection  with  human  morality  alone  that  what  I  may  call  the 
moral  indifference  of  nature  receives  some  measure  of  explanation.  There  is  a 
further  sense,  in  which  both  man  and  the  universe  may  be  said  to  receive  and  reflect 
God,  and  so  in  this  highest  capacity  of  being  to  b*  again  at  one.  And  yet  while 
this  is  so,  at  no  point  is  the  difference  between  them  more  radical ;  for  the  reflection 
of  mind  in  matter  is  another  and  less  thing  than  the  reflection  of  mind  in  mind. 
The  world  reveals  God  without  knowing  Him  :  but  man  consciously  receives  God  as 
a  Divine  guest,  and  feels  His  vivifying  and  purifying  presence.  The  pure  heart  sees, 
and  knows,  and  welcomes  God.  The  keen  conscience  leaps  up  to  answer  His  least 
command.  The  disciplined  will  submits,  and  rejoices  in  submission.  The  fine 
life  lives  in  the  Divine  and  eternal  life,  and  is  unspeakably  content.  (C.  Beard,  B.A.) 
The  greatness  and  littleness  of  man :  —  I.  The  estimate  \ve  make  of  mam's 
PLACE  IN  God's  universe  depends  upon  the  cbitekion  by  which  wb 
JUDGE.  There  is  a  sense  in  which,  viewed  as  a  physical  force  in  the  world  of 
matter,  man  is  nothing.  II.  It  becomes  necessary,  therefore,  to  measueb 
man's  place  and  importance  in  God's  universe  by  altogether  other 
standards.  1.  If  we  contemplate  man  simply  as  a  being  of  intelligence,  the  scale 
begins  to  turn.  The  fact  of  a  thinking  mind  in  man  puts  him  above  sun  and  moon 
and  stars.  Mind  is  above  matter,  intelligence  above  force.  2.  The  importance  of 
man  in  the  universe  is  greatly  heightened  when  we  advance  from  the  mental  to  the 
moral.  "Two  objects,"  said  Kant,  "fill  my  soul  with  ever-increasing  admiration 
and  respect — above  us  the  starry  heavens,  within  us  the  moral  law.  '  Man  is  a 
member  of  the  kingdom  of  spirits.  He  is  capable  of  virtue  and  of  sin.  He  is  a  free 
being,  capable  of  self-improvement  and  self-destruction.  He  can  contend  with  his 
Maker.  3.  Man  as  a  sinner  is  of  special  importance.  A  creature  who  sins  always 
makes  himself  of  importance.  An  offending  member  of  a  family  assumes  a  signifi- 
cance he  did  not  have  before.  Viewed  siinjily  as  a  sinner,  man  looms  up  in  the 
Divine  government  above  the  stars.  4.  A  sufferer  is  a  being  of  importance  in  God's 
universe.  He  is  worthy  of  God's  thought  and  visitation.  However  feeble,  and 
obscure  in  rank,  if  he  suffers,  and  is  liable  to  suffer  for  ever,  he  becomes  of  import- 
ance in  the  Divine  government.  5.  The  crowning  proof  of  man's  greatness  and 
worth  must  be  taken  from  God's  own  estimate.  That  is  found  in  the  sacrifice  that 
God  has  made  to  restore  man  to  the  high  place  from  which  he  has  fallen.  The 
moon  and  the  stars  cost  nothing — the  redemption  of  the  soul  cost  God's  Only 
Begotten  Son.  Inferences  :  1,  "The  reasonableness  of  the  fact  that  God  is  mindful 
of  us.  2.  The  real  greatness  of  man  as  a  sinner  lies  in  his  penitence,  contrition,  con- 
fession. 3.  If  a  man  is  worth  so  much  to  God,  he  surely  ought  to  be  of  great  value 
to  himself.  4.  If  man  is  so  important  a  creature  as  a  sinner  and  a  sufferer,  how 
much  more  so  as  a  Christian  !  {James  Brand,  D.D.)  Vastness  of  the  material 
universe : — The  contemplation  of  this  must  have  immense  power  over  the  mind. 
The  nightly  vision  of  the  starry  heavens  has  three  daughters.  Religion,  Superstition, 
Atheism.  It  is  very  important  that  believers  in  God  should  reason  rightly.  For 
Atheism  is  hastening  to  occupy  the  ground  which  Superstition  long  ago  filled.  If 
the  mind  of  man  were  in  unimpaired  simplicity,  the  spectacle  of  the  universe  would 
teach  him  piety  ;  but,  being  as  he  is,  piety  must  be  first  imparted  by  other  means. 
But  being  imparted,  this  vision  of  the  heavens  will  be  one  chief  means  for  aiding 
both  his  reason  and  imagination.  For  the  heavens  display  the  infinitude  of  GoC^ 
and  that  infinitude  filled  with  existence.    They  symbolise  and  demonstrate  Hie 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

Divine  attributes  by  the  vastness  and  richness  of  His  visible  universe.  Such  is  the 
doctrine  of  mind-reason.  But  if  reason  be  corrupted,  there  follows  Superstition,  as 
in  the  East ;  or  Atheism,  as  amongst  modern  scientific  men.  Bacon,  who  originated 
our  modern  philosophy,  and  Newton,  who  verified  it, — the  two  minds  who  more 
than  any  other  have  ruled  the  world  of  mind,— both  believed  in  the  Supreme 
Intelligence  which  the  material  universe  demonstrated.  But  it  is  otherwise  with 
their  successors.  And  that  men  of  science  should  doubt  disturbs  many  who  cannot 
bear  to  think  that  the  Divine  existence  should  be  called  in  question.  They  forget 
that  all  arguments  other  than  those  of  the  mathematician  can  be  assailed  again  and 
again,  and  are  always  open  to  question.  Only  mathematical  argument  excludes,  or 
can  exclude,  controversy.  Further,  it  should  be  remembered  that  these  men  of 
science  have  elevated  their  abstract  laws  to  the  position  of  effectual  causes  of  things, 
and  so  have  set  aside  the  first  great  Cause,  and,  in  their  minds,  supplanted  the 
higher  truth.  But  tht'i  e  is  another  and  more  modest  form  of  this  same  impiety, 
and  which  is  derived  from  the  contemplation  of  the  vastness  of  the  universe.  This 
world  and  man  are  so  insignificant  that  it  is  incredible  that  God  should  be  mindful 
of  him.  But  this  false  modesty  will  be  confuted  if  we  remember  that  the  universe 
is  composed  of  separate  parts,  and  that  the  whole  is  but  the  vastness  of  accumula- 
tion. Our  argument  is  briefly  this :  The  material  system,  so  far  as  it  is  open  to 
our  knowledge,  surpasses  all  power  of  conception.  Yet  this  immensity  is  but  the 
immensity  of  matter  ;  and  we  know  by  consciousness  of  an  order  of  existence  in- 
comparably more  excellent  than  matter,  even  in  its  most  admirable  combinations. 
It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  this  higher  order  of  existence  actually  spreads  itself 
over  the  entire  surface  of  the  material  system,  and  is  developing  itself  in  some 
manner  proportionate  to  its  superior  dignity.  Hence  the  material  universe,  great 
as  it  is,  may  be  nothing  more  than  a  stage  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  destinies 
of  this  higher  order  of  existence.  And  concerning  these  destinies,  we  mav  infer  from 
the  ease  and  tranquillity  of  the  messengers  of  heaven  that  all  is  well,  if  looked  upon 
from  a  point  sufficiently  high.  Just  as  when  a  father,  stationed  on  an  eminence, 
is  watching  the  progress  of  his  sons  through  a  labyrinth,  they  may  confidently 
presume  that  their  course  is  the  right  one,  so  long  as  they  see  a  cheerful  smile  on 
his  face.  And  are  we  not  taught  modesty  by  this  very  vastness  of  the  universe  ? 
What  is  our  knowledge  but  that  of  a  single  spot  ?     {Isaac  Taylor.)  Wonders  of 

grace  in  the  height  and  in  the  depth :  —  It  is  charged  against  earnest  Christians 
that  they  are  unable  to  see  the  wonders  of  God  in  the  world  ;  that  from  holding  so 
rigidly  to  the  letter  of  the  Scripture,  the  taste  has  been  lost  for  the  Divine  displays 
in  the  firmament  and  in  the  glory  of  earthly  nature.  It  may  be  true  of  some,  but 
where  this  is  so  it  is  opposed  to  Holy  Scripture  and  to  Christ  Himself.  Nowhere 
shall  we  find  any  hymns  in  which  the  glories  of  God  in  nature  are  more  tenderly 
and  devoutly  celebrated  than  they  are  in  these  Psalms.  So,  then,  let  us  meditate 
—  I.  On  the  wonders  of  Divine  geace  in  the  heights  above.  This 
Psalm  is  a  night  Psalm,  called  forth  by  the  contemplation  of  the  glory  of  the  starry 
heavens.  Wonderful  is  the  scene  which  is  opened  to  the  eye  when  it  looks  from 
earth  to  heaven.  Men  need  such  a  view.  They  would  not  then  be  quiet  in  having 
no  certainty  on  earth  concerning  heavenly  and  eternal  things.  What  wonders  fill 
the  heart  when  we  look  up  into  those  distances  of  light.  How  free,  how  calm,  how 
regular  they  are  as  they  float  in  wide  space — how  innumerable.  And  are  they 
empty,  and  what  is  their  destiny  ?  But  if  I  have  no  other  theatre  of  His  grace  than 
that  one  so  infinite  I  can  call  Him  the  Infinite,  but  the  name  of  Father  dies  away 
on  my  lips.  What  is  man  when  compared  with  immensity  ?  The  greatness  of  God 
crushes  our  hearts  if  we  look  only  at  the  wonders  in  the  heights  above,  and  the 
expression  of  amazed  and  humble  thanksgiving  is  also  the  language  of  doubt. 
"  What  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him  ? "  Let  us,  then,  hasten  on,  that  in 
the  infinite  we  may  see  the  Father,  to  consider — II.  The  works  of  God's  grace 
IN  the  depths  below.  They  throw  light  upon  His  works  of  grace  in  the  heights 
above.  There  are  two  kingdoms  in  which  our  Lord  and  God  reigns  upon  earth  : 
1.  The  kingdom  of  nature.  Now,  would  it  not  take  away  from  His  glory  if  His 
creative  power  had  called  forth  so  many  worlds  in  the  immensity  above  us,  but  His 
preserving  and  sustaining  power  could  not  keep  pace  with  it  1  If  the  eye  which 
guides  the  four  thousand  nebulae  could  not  see  the  falling  tear  which  is  wept  upon 
this  little  earth  ?  But  it  is  not  so.  The  microscope,  when  the  telescope  was  dis- 
covered to  support  human  doubt,  seems  to  have  come  into  existence  to  meet  that 
doubt.  And  by  its  means  we  find  the  infinitude  of  God  in  every  flying  straw  and 
in  the  smallest  grain.     None  can  say  where  God  is  greater,  in  the  great  or  in  the 


PSALM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS,  137 

little,  in  the  immensity  on  earth  or  in  the  infinity  in  heaven.  But  if  the  flying 
straw  and  gnat  display  His  wonderful  works,  what  will  He  not  have  done  in  and 
for  man  ?  Alan  has  a  spirit  which  can  think  and  soar  and  worship.  But  though  it 
can  soar  to  heaven,  it  brings  down  no  certain  news.  I  see  the  heavens  full  of  stars, 
and  man's  heart  of  anticipations  and  forebodings.  Yes,  these  are  the  only  relics 
which  man  has  rescued  from  the  Fall.  And  no  philosopher  can  still  those  longings 
and  forebodings.  But  are  they  for  ever  to  remain  unsatisfied  ?  No,  for  see — 
2.  The  kingdom  of  grace.  Man,  without  Christ,  might  have  expected  that  the 
Divine  wonder-working  power  would  show  itself  in  and  for  his  spirit  more  than  in 
the  flowers  of  the  field.  He  needs  it  so  much,  but  knows  not  the  way  of  life.  God, 
who  feeds  the  ravens  and  gives  food  to  the  young  eagles,  was  He  not  to  have  taken 
care  to  feed  man's  heart  ?  Yes,  for  the  Saviour  came,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
And  the  angels  sang,  "Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  &c.  So  on  the  whole  earth 
weary,  heavy-laden  men  have  ever  since  drunk  of  the  water  of  life  which  quenches 
the  thirst  for  ever.  {J.  TJwluck.)  Night  thoughts  : — How  cometh  he  to  mention 
the  moon  and  the  stars,  and  omit  the  sun?  the  other  being  but  his  pensioners, 
shining  with  that  exhibition  of  light  which  the  bounty  of  the  sun  allots  them.  It 
is  answered,  this  was  David's  night  meditation,  when  the  sun,  departing  to  the 
other  world,  left  the  lesser  lights  only  visible  in  the  heavens  ;  and  as  the  sky  is 
best  beheld  by  day  in  the  glory  thereof,  so,  too,  it  is  best  surveyed  by  night  in  the 
Y»riety  of  the  same.  Night  was  made  for  man  to  rest  in.  But  when  I  cannot 
sleep  may  I,  with  the  Psalmist,  entertain  my  waking  with  good  thoughts. 
{Thomas  Fuller.)  God's  sfurs  and  their  message : — An  atheistic  leader  of  the 
French  Revolution  said  one  day  to  a  Christian  villager,  "We  are  going  to  pull 
down  your  church  tower,  so  that  you  may  have  nothing  left  to  remind  you  of  God 
or  religion."  "You  will  not  only  have  to  pull  down  the  church  tower,"  said  the 
man,  "you  will  also  have  to  blot  out  the  stars,  before  you  can  destroy  all  that 
reminds  us  of  God  ;  they  speak  to  us  of  Him."     ( tV.  Walters.)  Work  of  God's 

fingers : — This  is  most  elaborate  and  accurate  ;  a  metaphor  from  embroiderers,  or 
from  them  that  make  tapestry.  {John  Trapp. )  Wliat  is  man,  that  Thou  art 
mindful  of  liim? — What  is  man? — The  influence  on  religious  faith  and  hope  of 
what  we  call  "nature" — of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  mountains,  and 
the  seas — varies  with  different  men,  and  varies  with  the  varying  temper  and  mood 
of  the  same  man  at  different  times.  There  are  some  aspects  of  nature  which  some- 
times make  it  difficult  to  believe  that  there  can  be  any  real  communion  between  the 
Creator  and  ourselves.  Those  of  us  who  live  in  great  cities  are  perhaps  especially 
sensitive  to  the  austere  influences  of  the  material  universe.  If  we  perished,  what 
difference  would  it  make  to  this  stupendous  universe  ?  Ages  ago  David  felt  the 
insignificance  of  man  when  compared  with  the  greatness  of  Gods  material  works, 
and  expressed  it  in  the  words  of  our  text.  Our  humiliation  is  deepened  by  the  dis- 
covery that  our  own  life  is  kin  to  the  inferior  forms  of  ITfe  around  us.  In  the  very 
highest  there  still  survive  affinities  with  the  lowest.  What  right  have  I  to  claim  a 
different  rank  ?  The  Most  High  appears  to  take  no  heed  of  the  moral  qualities  of 
men,  or  of  their  weakness  and  helplessness.  What  right,  it  may  be  urged,  have  we 
to  claim  any  special  remembrance  from  Him  ?  This  is  the  gospel  of  science.  Is  it 
true,  or  is  it  false  ?  The  truth  in  it  David  had  a  glimpse  of.  But  instead  of  yield- 
ing to  the  grovelling  fear,  David  triumphed  over  it,  turning  with  exulting  confi- 
dence to  his  assurance  that,  after  all,  God  is  mindful  of  us,  that  God  doth  visit  us. 
What  are  these  pleas  worth  I  1.  We  are  told  the  whole  world  in  which  we  live  is 
a  mere  speck  in  the  universe,  and  it  is  incredible  that  God  can  have  a  special  care 
for  it.  But  there  is  a  certain  intellectual  and  moral  vulgarity  in  attaching  such 
importance  to  mere  material  magnitude.  2.  The  life  of  man  is  too  brief  and 
momentary  compared  with  the  ages  during  which  the  universe  has  existed.  But 
science  itself  contains  the  reply  to  this  argument.  All  these  ages  have  been 
necessary  in  order  to  render  it  possible  for  a  creature  like  man  to  come  into  exist- 
ence. 8.  We  are  encompassed  by  laws  which  take  no  heed  of  the  personal  differ- 
ences of  men,  of  the  varieties  of  their  character,  or  of  the  vicissitudes  of  their  con- 
dition. To  ask  God  to  deal  with  us  separately  and  apart  is  to  forget  that  He 
fiides  the  whole  universe  by  laws  which  are  fixed,  irreversible,  and  irresistible, 
ut  this  too  is  a  fact,  I  am  conscious  of  a  power  of  choice — of  moral  freedom. 
That  must  be  taken  into  the  account.  You  tell  me  of  law,  but  there  is  another 
law,  the  law  of  my  moral  nature.  I  am  not  absolutely  bound  by  the  chains  of 
necessity  in  my  moral  life.  In  the  centre  and  heart  of  my  being  I  am  free. 
Separated  from  nature,  I  may  be  akin  to  God.     As  for  those  modem  thinkers 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

who  deny  the  moral  freedom  of  man,  they  are  engaged  in  a  hopeless  straggle. 
Their  controversy  is  not  with  philosophy  or  with  religion,  it  is  with  the  human 
race.  The  whole  history  of  mankind  is  the  proof  of  man's  consciousness.  So  long 
as  in  our  moral  life  we  know  that  we  are  free  we  can  look  up  into  the  face  of  the 
living  God  with  the  hope  that  He  will  deal  with  us  separately  and  apart,  that  He 
Himself  will  care  for  us,  and  that  there  may  be  direct  communion  between  us  and  Him. 
{R.  JV.  Dale,  M.A.)  Man,  what  is  he? — This  language  of  the  Psalmist  shows 
that  there  were  two  facts  in  his  mind  that  had  settled  down  as  undebatable  convic- 
tions. The  first  is,  that  God  is  the  Creator  and  Proprietor  of  the  heavens.  "Thy 
heavens,  the  work  of  Thy  fingers."  He  was  neither  Atheist,  Polytheist,  nor  Pan- 
theist. The  second  is,  that  God  pays  special  regard  to  His  creature  man.  "  Thou 
art  mindful  of  him,"  4;c.  Now  with  these  two  facts  in  his  mind,  he  studied  ; 
"considered"  the  heavens.  A  wonderful  study  are  these  heavens!  Who  can. 
compute  the  number  of  yon  flaming  orbs?  Think  of  their  infinite  variety.  No 
two  alike.  Think  of  the  swiftness  and  regularity  of  their  revolutions.  What  is 
man  ?  I.  Negatively.  He  does  not  mean  to  imply  that  man  constitutionally  is 
a  contemptible  being — a  creature  too  insignificant  for  notice.  The  very  next  verse 
shows  that  he  could  not  mean  that,  for  he  says.  Thou  hast  made  him  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  &c.  Man  is  an  immortal  intelligence,  and  therefore  great. 
He  does  not  mean  that  man  is  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  heavens.  The 
heavens  are  incapable  of  studying  their  Maker  ;  man  can.  The  heavens  have  no 
power  of  self-modification — they  cannot  move  slower  or  faster,  grow  brighter  or 
dimmer,  of  their  own  accord ;  man  can.  The  heavens  will  not  continue  their 
identity  for  ever.  "  The  stars  shall  fade  awav,"&c.;  but  man  will  abide.  3.  He 
does  not  mean  to  imply  that  there  is  a  probability  of  man  being  overlooked  amidst 
the  immensity  of  God's  works.  4.  He  does  not  mean  that  it  is  essentially  incon- 
sistent with  God's  greatness  for  Him  to  notice  man.  This  cannot  be  entertained. 
Great  and  small  are  relative  terms  to  creatures  only.  To  the  Infinite  they  have  no 
meaning.  II.  Positively.  What,  then,  does  he  mean?  1.  The  great  sentiment  in 
his  mind  at  the  time  was  undoubtedly  the  infinite  condescension  of  the  great 
Creator  and  Proprietor  of  the  heavens.  This  condescension  would  impress  him 
as  he  thought  of  man  as  a  spiritual  creature.  2.  Tliis  condescension  would 
impress  him  much  more  as  he  thought  upon  him  as  a  mortal  creature,  a 
creature  only  of  a  day,  "who  cometh  forth  m  a  flower  and  is  cut  down,"  Ac. 
3.  This  condescension  would  impress  him  most  of  all  as  he  thought  upon 
man  as  a  sinful  creature  —  ungrateful,  disobedient,  rebellious.  (Uomilist.) 
The  subject  of  religion — the  soul: — Religion  is  the  maintenance  of  a  real  bond 
between  God  and  the  individual  man.  Its  object  is  God,  but  its  subject  is  the 
soul.  I.  What  is  the  soul  ?  Man  is  not  his  accidents  ;  not  those  things 
with  which  we  associate  him  when  we  speak  of  any  one  man.  But  he  is  a  person 
— something  separate  and  distinct  from  all  others,  and  whose  identity  can  be 
traced,  year  after  year,  all  through  life.  And  of  all  this  we  are  conscious.  The 
lower  animals  do  not  possess  this  sense  of  personality.  But  man  is  a  personal 
spirit,  separate  from  all  others.  Now,  this  consciousness  is  not  the  result  of  our 
physical  constitution.  Thought,  after  all,  is  not  merely  phosphorus.  But  we  are 
conscious  of  the  spirituality  of  the  soul.  The  Bible  takes  it  for  granted,  and 
appeals  to  it.  Christ  cares  not  for  the  outward,  but  for  the  spirit  of  a  man.  And 
because  we  have  this  soul  we  are  capable  of  religion.  But — II.  Whence  comes 
THIS  SOUL?  There  are  the  ideas — 1.  Of  the  East,  which  tell  of  the  transmigration 
of  souls.  2.  Of  the  West — especially  of  Plato — which  teach  that  the  soul  has  had 
a  former  existence,  and  is  here  as  a  penalty  for  former  sin.  This  doctrine  travelled 
to  Alexandria,  is  found  in  Philo,  and  in  the  Talmud,  and  in  the  Gnostics.  3.  The 
Church  opposed  it,  for  it  has  no  basis  in  Scripture ;  it  contradicts  the  doctrine  of 
original  sin,  which  tells  that  its  consequences  devolve  on  those  who  had  not  sinned 
as  Adam  had.  And  it  is  equally  at  variance  with  the  account  of  the  Creation, 
which  teaches  the  simultaneous  creation  of  both  soul  and  body.  And  experience 
is  against  it.  We  have  no  memory  of  such  pre-existence.  4.  Whence,  then, 
came  the  soul  ?  Is  it  begotten  by  the  parents  ?  TertuUian  and  Augustine  leant 
to  this  view,  the  latter  finding  in  it  explanation  of  the  transmission  of  sin.  But 
when  Lactantius  asked,  "From  which  parent  came  the  soul,  or  was  it  from  both ?" 
no  answer  could  be  found.  And,  as  a  fact,  the  child  resembles  the  parent  in 
temperament,  that  which  is  of  the  body,  but  not  in  genius  or  will.  Is  the  soul, 
then,  created  by  an  immediate  act  of  God  ?  In  favour  of  this  is  the  consideratioa 
that  so  the  truth  of  the  snirituality  of  the  soul  is  maintained,  and  of  the  simul- 


PSALK  viii.]  TEE  PSALMS.  139 

taneous  creation  of  both.  But  against  it  it  is  urged — (i)  That  God  ceased  creation 
on  the  seventh  day.  But,  in  reply,  we  have  new  species  of  animals,  (ii)  That 
it  binds  the  Creator  to  create  a  human  soul  at  the  will  of  man,  perhaps  an 
adulterer.  But  man  cannot  sin  without  Divine  assistance.  He  is  dependent  for 
everything.  (iii)  That  there  can  be  no  transmission  of  sin.  But  sin  is  a  defect  of 
the  soul  rather  than  a  positive  quality.  Therefore,  on  the  whole,  the  creative 
theory  is  to  be  preferred.  And  it  agrees  emphatically  with  the  Scripture  distinc- 
tion between  the  "fathers  of  our  flesh"  and  the  "Father  of  our  spirits."  But 
both  teach  that  God  creates  the  soul.  Then — III.  What  is  the  destiny  of  the 
soiTL?  Some  say,  "We  cannot  tell;  the  dead  return  not."  But  when  death 
comes  near  us  this  reply  will  not  serve.  We  cannot  believe  that  our  loved  ones 
cease  to  be.  The  moral  argument  is,  after  all,  the  strongest.  Justice  demands  a 
future  state.  Is  the  soul's  growth  to  stop  ?  The  Bible  takes  the  truth  for  gi-anted. 
The  doctrine  of  Sheol,  the  sayings  of  the  prophets,  the  heroism  of  the  Maccabees 
all  countenance  this  truth.  We  have  the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  the  great  argu- 
ment for  the  resurrection  of  the  body  as  well  as  of  the  soul.  Both  are  necessary  to 
-complete  life.  IV.  Religion  is  based  on  the  sense  of  immortality.  It  is 
impossible  without  it.  Suicide  would  be  reasonable,  and,  indeed,  has  been  advo- 
cated as  wise.  Seneca  contends  for  it,  but  the  Church  by  her  teaching  of  the 
value  of  each  soul  counteracted  all  such  views.  Our  main  business,  therefore,  is 
to  save  our  soul.  {H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.)  Immortality  : — The  Psalm  reveals  not 
the  littleness,  but  the  greatness  of  man.  One  of  the  most  plausible  of  the  objec- 
tions of  unbelief  has  been  the  attempt  to  prove  fallacious  the  prospects  which 
Christianity  offers  to  men  beyond  this  world.  Consider,  then,  the  Christian  idea  of 
an  immortal  and  heavenly  life  hereafter.  It  is  this  which  is  imperilled.  I  take 
the  Psalm  before  us  as  furnishing  a  triumphant  and  lasting  reply  to  the  kind  of 
unbelief  in  question.  In  nature,  first,  God  shows  us  His  estimate  of  man.  The 
ascent  is  easy  from  nature  to  grace,  in  which  the  Divine  estimate  is  raised  to  its 
highest  point.  Was  not  everything  the  earth  contains  made  for  our  use  and 
■  enjoyment,  in  measure  increasing  with  every  new  discovery  ?  We  are  invited  to 
look  still  further  afield.  This  world,  which  is  made  for  us,  is  not  independent  or 
alone.  It  is  in  no  sense  self-sustained.  It  is  part  of  a  wonderful  and  incompre- 
hensible whole.  Other  great  creations  concur  in  its  maintenance.  The  whole  host 
•  of  heaven  has  been  brought  into  co-ordinate  and  helpful  relation  to  it — yes,  it, 
the  world,  exists  for  us  !  When  I  consider  the  manifold  bearings  of  Thy  universe 
upon  man — what  is  man  t  We  do  not  say  that  we  are  the  only  moral  and  spiritual 
beings  in  the  midst  of  so  many  worlds.  But  we  do  say — and  science  combines  with 
Scripture  to  compel  us  to  say — that  these  worlds  have  been  in  part  created  for  us, 
just  as  our  world  has  been  in  part  created  for  them.  So  much,  then,  for  what 
nature  teaches.  The  first  step  being  taken,  another  follows.  Man  is  an  object  of 
the  manifold  agencies  of  myriads  of  worlds.  He  is  so  as  man  ;  and  the  relative 
position  he  holds,  intellectually,  morally,  or  socially,  to  his  fellow-men  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  fact.  Nature  ministers  to  the  Cafl"re  and  the  Hottentot  as  truly  as 
to  the  man  of  most  advanced  civilisation.  Why,  then,  should  man  refuse  to 
believe  that  he  is  an  object  of  solicitous  love  to  that  God  who  created  him,  who 
made  him  what  he  is,  and  who  thus  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honour  ?  The 
prospect  of  human  destiny  as  opened  up  by  Christianity  is  grand ;  but  not  too 
grand  to  be  ascribed  to  Him  who  created  the  universe,  and  so  arranged  it  that  it 
should  constitute  one  vast  system  of  ministration  to  us.  Try  from  the  greatness  of 
man  to  estimate  the  greatness  of  the  end.  Is  eternal  life  too  much  for  a  being 
whom  the  worlds  combine  to  sustain,  to  feed,  and  to  bless  ?  Is  a  heaven  of  holi- 
ness and  of  love  too  much  for  a  being  whom  angels  are  delighted  to  protect  ?  It 
may  be  objected  that  this  is  a  low  and  selfish  view  to  take  of  the  matter.  But 
remember  that  the  grandeur  of  our  destiny  is  not  determined  and  measured  by  our 
merits,  but  by  the  immensity  of  the  Divine  goodness.  The  eternal  and  blessed 
life  which  we  anticipate  is  not  of  reward,  but  of  grace  ;  not  a  payment,  but  a  gift. 
{Clement  Bailhache.)  The  end  of  man: — This  text  teaches  more  than  the  con- 
descension of  God.  The  Psalmist  has  been  contemplating  the  starry  heavens.  Now 
he  turns  his  observation  on  himself,  ajiparently  mean  and  insignificant,  and  per- 
ceives that  he  is  the  object  of  God's  special  and  distinguishing  care.  What  is  man, 
for  what  jiurpose  is  he  intended,  that  he  fills  so  large  a  space  in  the  Divine  regard  ? 
I.  The  katuke  of  the  Divine  government.  God  never  acts  without  a  purpose. 
His  great  purpose  is  His  own  glory.  The  Divine  care  of  man  exhibits  His  good- 
ijxess ;  but  even  Divine  goodness  is  not  without  a  purpose,  for  it  ia  a  form  of  the 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vrii. 

Divine  wisdom.  The  universe  is  one.  One  law  governs  and  unites  all,  and  each 
is  contributive  to  it.  The  earth  is  part  of  a  system  of  worlds.  Though  each  part 
is  necessary  to  the  whole,  there  are  those  which  occupy  more  important  places  in 
the  great  economy,  not,  doubtless,  from  any  intrinsic  excellence  in  themselves,  but 
the  ordination  of  God.  In  God's  moral  universe  His  higher  glories  are  displayed, 
because  there  He  manifests  His  moral  attributes.  The  character  of  individuals  not 
only  makes  up  the  aggregate  character  of  a  nation  and  the  world,  but  they  affect 
each  other  ;  while  each  is  employed  and  controlled  for  the  one  grand  purpose  of 
created  beings.  The  moral  kingdom  of  God  is  extensive.  There  are  intelligent 
beings  peopling  other  worlds  than  this.  There  must  be,  in  the  moral  government 
of  God,  the  same  certainty  and  universality  of  principles,  and  a  harmony  and  con- 
nection of  the  various  portions,  all  being  controlled  to  effect  the  one  purpose  of 
the  glory  of  God.  There  must  be,  in  this  moral  universe,  influences  more  powerful 
than  others,  and  objects  which  attract  in  an  especial  manner  the  notice  and  con- 
templation of  the  rest.  What  these  are  we  may  infer  from  the  manner  in  which 
God  regards  them.  II.  The  dealings  of  God  towards  man.  Mark  the  circum- 
stances of  his  creation.  With  what  pomp  and  circumstance  is  he  ushered  into  the 
world.  But  what  are  the  wonders  of  his  creation  compared  with  the  glories  of  his 
redemption  ?  Man  is  the  occasion  and  object  of  an  attribute  whose  blessing  the 
fallen  angel  never  enjoyed,  and  which  the  holy  angel  had  never  before  beheld 
exhibited,  the  Divine  mercy.  For  his  complete  redemption  the  wonderful  means  of 
grace  are  instituted,  and  made  effectual  by  the  vivifying  and  resistless  energies  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  subject  of  man's  redemption  is  that  into  which  the  angels 
desire  to  look.  There  is  much  taught  us  in  this  brief  expression.  Those  angelic 
students  have  large  experience  in  the  investigation  of  the  Divine  glory.  Again  we 
ask.  What  is  man  ?  It  is  the  purpose  of  God  to  display  in  him  His  chiefest  glory. 
Therefore  man  holds  a  place  of  so  great  importance  in  the  universe  of  God. 
Application  :   1.  How  grateful  should  we  be  for  this  distinguishing  grace  of  God. 

2.  What  manner  of  persons  should  we  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness  ! 

3.  How  certain  is  the  triumph  of  the  Church.  4.  Impenitent  man,  God  is  mindful 
of  you.  {The  Evangelist.)  The  meanness  and  the  greatness  of  man : — Could  any 
paradox  be  imagined  greater  than  this — this  contrast  between  the  insignificance  of 
man's  self  and  the  pre-eminence  of  man's  destiny  ?  No  interval  of  time  or  trans- 
ference of  scene,  no  contrast  of  persons  or  of  circumstances,  has  tarnished  its  fresh- 
ness or  robbed  it  of  its  power.  Nay,  must  we  not  rather  confess  that,  as  the  world 
has  grown  older,  the  chasm  between  the  greatness  and  the  meanness  of  man  has 
widened,  and  the  paradox  has  increased  from  age  to  age  ?  I.  Each  nbw  dis- 
covery HAS  depressed  THE  RELATIVE  IMPORTANCE  OF  MAN  IN  THE  MATERIAL 
UNIVERSE.  1.  Astronomy  has  taught  us  our  insignificance  in  space.  2.  Geology 
teaches  us  our  insignificance  in  time.  3.  The  microscope  discovers  to  us  miniature 
worlds,  crowding  under  our  eyes,  countless  in  number,  and  each  thronged  with  a 
dense  population  of  its  own.  4.  The  anatomist  dissects  and  the  chemist  analyses 
the  human  body.  Man  is  found  to  be  compounded  of  just  such  substances  as  the  brute, 
the  tree,  the  stone.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  besides.  5.  If  there  is  nothing  in 
the  component  elements  of  the  human  frame  which  accounts  for  the  pre-eminence 
of  man,  we  may  at  all  events  look  for  an  explanation  in  some  peculiarities  of 
structure.  But  the  naturalist  will  tell  us  that  all  attempts  at  classification  with  a 
view  to  separating  man  oflf  by  a  broad  line  from  the  lower  creation  fail  signally. 
II.  The  MATERIALIST  WILL  BB  CONTENT  TO  6AY,  " What  IS  MAN?  An  insig- 
nificant atom  in  time  and  space.  And  the  son  of  man  ?  An  organism  like  other 
organisms."  But  the  believer  is  constrained  to  add,  "Lord,  that  Thou  art  mind- 
ful of  him  !  Lord,  that  Thou  visitest  him  !  "  1.  The  believer  may  boldly  claim 
science  herself  as  his  teacher,  for  it  has  accumulated  evidence  at  every  step  that,  as 
a  thinking,  hoping,  aspiring,  progressive  being  he  is  quite  unique  in  God's  creation. 
The  Psalmist  thought  of  man's  dominion  over  the  beasts,  birds,  fishes  of  the  sea. 
We  have  lived  to  witness  his  sovereignty  over  the  elemental  powers  of  nature — he 
can  order  the  lightning,  weigh  the  sun,  make  the  vapour  his  slave.  2.  Yet  this 
subjugation  of  the  powers  of  nature  is  only  the  earnest  of  greater  things  to  come. 
Apostles  and  evangelists  saw  the  true  fulfilment  of  the  Psalmist's  prophetic  saying 
in  the  ultimate  and  supreme  destiny  of  mankind,  as  realised  in  the  person  and 
work  of  the  one  representative  Man.  The  song  of  the  Psalmist  falls  ou  the  ears  of 
Christians  now  with  a  fuller  cadence,  swelled  with  the  experience  of  nearly  thirty 
centuries,  and  prolonged  into  the  hopes  of  eternity.  (Bishop  Lightfoot. )  Man's 
study  of  himself:  —  I.  Fine  aitimal  OReXNlBM.      Perfect  machine;  erwy  part 


PSALM  Tin.]  THE  PSALMS.  141 

adapted  ;  power  to  repair  itself,  and  reproduce  its  kind.  "Fearfully  and  wonder- 
fully made."  II,  Intellectual  being.  Animal  organism  of  little  value  aside 
from  this.  To  answer  text,  see  intellectual  giants :  Paul,  Csesar,  Shakespeare, 
Newton.  III.  Spiritual  being.  Man  created  after  grand  plan :  "  Let  us  make 
man  in  our  own  image."  Traces  of  grandeur  in  fallen  man.  IV.  Immortal 
BEING.  This  soul,  in  glorified  body,  shall  go  on  for  ever.  Were  death  the  end, 
life  would  be  onexplainable.  V.  Responsible  being.  Life  is  not  chance ;  nor 
is  the  hereafter.  We  give  account  of  our  powers.  We  shall  face  our  Maker.  To- 
morrow is  the  judgment.  These  facts  should  not  oppress  us,  but  lead  us,  by  God's 
help,  to  make  our  lives  the  best  answer  to  the  text.  {HomUetic  Review.)  God's 
idea  of  man : — CJonsidered  as  part  of  nature,  man  is  insignificant.  As  a  product  of 
nature,  man  seems  to  possess  a  higher  dignity.  He  is  the  last  result  of  the  vast 
system  of  forces  that  play  about  him.  Apart  from  man,  apart  from  the  conscious- 
ness and  reason  that  are  his  attributes,  the  glory  of  the  visible  universe  has  little 
meaning.  Yet  man  must  still  seem  insignificant  when  measured  by  the  highest 
standard.  Man's  opinion  of  his  own  importance  and  inherent  dignity  has 
fluctuated,  because  he  is  moved  by  feeling.  His  thought  has  ever  vibrated  between 
two  opposite  conceptions  of  himself.  To-day,  in  the  fulness  of  his  energy,  he 
fancies  himself  the  noblest  of  beings  and  the  measure  of  all  things.  To-morrow,  in 
a  moment  of  weakness  and  humiliation,  he  becomes  conscious  of  the  hollowness  of 
this  high  pretence,  and  confesses  to  himself  his  utter  incapacity  to  comprehend  the 
simplest  facts  of  his  own  being.  I.  God  has  revealed  that  man  is  the  result 
OF  A  SPECIAL  creation.  There  are  two  processes  by  which  finite  existences  come 
to  be.  One  is  that  of  evolution  ;  the  other  is  that  of  creation.  The  Biblical 
description  of  man's  origin  plainly  teaches  that  man  was  created,  not  evolved.  The 
interval  between  the  highest  brute  intelligence  and  the  rational  soul  of  the  lowest 
man  is  so  wide  and  impassable  a  gulf  that  all  but  the  most  extreme  and  im- 
moderate theorists  find  need  to  suppose  the  intervention  of  a  sublime  life-giving 
power  that  transcended  all  previously  existing  natures  in  bestowing  upon  man  a 
rational  soul.  II.  God  has  revealed  that  man  is  a  spiritual  being.  We 
have,  in  consciousness,  a  witness  that  helps  us  to  comprehend  the  conception  of 
man  as  a  spiritual  being.  We  find  in  the  animals  a  consciousness  of  feeling,  but 
not  a  consciousness  of  self.  Not  one  of  them  gives  evidence  of  this  knowledge  of 
personality  which  we  all  possess.  From  it  our  actions  radiate,  and  for  our  actions 
we  are  justly  held  responsible.  III.  God  has  revealed  that  man  was  created 
in  His  image.  God  is  a  person.  God  is  free  ;  and  it  is  in  the  possession  of  freedom 
that  man  is  in  His  image — after  His  likeness.  The  image  of  God  which  men  now 
possess  is  an  imperfect  one.  By  the  image  of  God  a  "  vital  "  likeness  is  intended  ; 
a  likeness  that  has  its  source  in  a  community  of  life.  Man  is  God's  image,  and 
God  would  not  have  His  image  marred.  {David  J.  Hill,  LL.D.)  Man's  dignity : 
— We  regard  the  entire  Psalm  as  descriptive  of  man's  dignity  and  importance,  which 
is  at  once  seen  in  the  exalted  position  he  occupies  in  the  realm  of  nature,  and  in  the 
Divine  system  of  revelation  with  which  God  in  His  love  has  blessed  him.  I.  His 
dignity  appears  from  the  home  in  which  he  dwells.  As  we  look  upon  this 
great  world  in  which  we  live,  upon  the  heavens  robed  in  majesty  and  glory,  we 
cannot  but  recognise  man's  superior  excellence  and  importance.  We  may  well 
exclaim,  "Whence  all  this  weight  of  magnificence — this  perfect  arrangement  and 
adaptation  ?  Whence  this  fulness  of  provision,  and  this  unbounded  wealth  of 
beauty  and  of  blessing  1 "  The  world,  with  all  its  immense  surroundings,  finds  its 
only  explanation  for  its  existence,  and  the  realisation  of  its  loftiest  designs,  in  the 
presence  and  requirements  of  man.  II.  Man's  dignity  is  further  manifested 
from  a  survey  of  his  physical  nature.  As  we  glance  at  the  construction  of 
the  human  frame  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  the  amazing  wisdom  and  power  therein 
displayed.  It  teems  with  marks  of  purpose  and  intelligent  design.  There  is 
nothing  like  it  in  all  the  variations  in  the  material  world.  It  is  the  crown  and 
coronation  of  all  the  physical  creations,  and  the  masterpiece  of  Divine  wisdom  and 
skill.  The  make-up  of  the  human  body  has  ever  been  a  matter  of  wonder  to  the 
thoughtful  mind.  Science  also  tells  us  that  influences  from  the  vast  regions  of 
outlying  space  are  ever  playing  upon  man,  and  affecting  him  physically,  more  or  less, 
continually.  III.  When  we  pass  from  man's  outward  nature  to  his  intel- 
lectual, his  superiority  is  more  fully  seen.  Man  is  distinguished  in  the 
scale  of  being  by  thought.  It  is  this  which  lifts  him  above  the  brute  creation,  and 
constitutes  him  an  active,  intelligent,  and  responsible  agent.  It  is  the  possession 
of  this  princely  power  to  think  that  places  him  on  the  very  throne  of  material 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viir. 

beings,  in  his  hand  the  sceptre  of  dominion  and  on  his  brow  the  crown  of  a  possible 
and  glorious  destiny.  Man  can  comprehend  many  of  the  mighty  laws  which  are 
ever  operiting  in  tlie  vast  realms  of  matter  and  of  mind.  Think  for  a  moment  of 
the  rajjidity  of  thought :  time  and  space  are  both  annihil>iteil  by  it.  Consider  the 
amazing  power  of  thought :  man,  by  the  exerci.se  of  his  thinking  faculty,  is  trans- 
forming the  entire  face  of  nature,  and  emancipating  her  mighty  and  long-kept 
secrtts.  By  the  application  and  exercise  of  his  thought  man  is  becoming  the 
perfect  master  of  the  world  in  which  he  lives.  Never  did  mind  wield  such  a  kingly 
power  over   matter   as   at   present.        IV.  It  is,    howkver,    ik   his  moral  and 

SPIRITUAL    NATURK   WHERE   HIS    IMPORTANCE    IS    MOST    FULLY    DISPLAYED.       It  WaS 

in  this  respect,  chiefly,  that  man  was  created  in  the  image  of  his  Maker.  It  is  the 
soul  that  makes  man  the  most  jjrecious  being  in  this  lower  world.  V.  What 
God  has  done  for  him.  When  we  look  at  this  we  feel  as  if  our  former  remarks 
have  only  led  us  to  the  threshold  of  this  theme.  In  the  Bible  all  the  possi- 
bilities of  man's  being  arc  foreseen,  and  all  his  wants  and  actualities  are  fully  pro- 
vided for,  ( W.  Harrison.)  Man's  kinship  to  God : — The  Psalmist  reminds  us  that, 
although  little  in  himself,  he  is  Divine  in  his  origin,  and  though  weak  and  frail  in 
his  present  life,  he  is  capable  of  a  glorious  future,  and  that  future  God  has  in  store 
for  him.  ' '  Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  crowncdst  him  with 
glory  and  worship."  The  literal  meaning  of  the  words  is  still  more  striking.  Thou 
madest  him  a  little  lower — or  a  little  less — than  God.  He  does  not  answer  his 
own  question,  but  he  reminds  us  of  this  important  factor  in  the  inquiry,  which 
must  not  be  left  out  of  view.  It  is  this  fact  in  our  history  which  it  is  so  needful  to 
remember,  and  yet  so  easy  to  forget,  amid  the  din  and  strain  of  our  daily  life.  It 
is  hardly  possible  for  us  to  escape  from  the  remembrance  of  our  littleness  and  our 
weakness.  In  the  straitened  condition  of  this  mortal  life,  both  as  regards  our 
physical  powers  and  our  intellectual  attainments,  how  little,  after  all,  we  can  do, 
how  little,  after  all,  we  can  know  !  But  how  easy  it  is  to  forget  that  we  are  made 
a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  a  little  less  than  God,  to  live  unmindful  of  our  high 
calling  as  the  children  of  God,  unmindful  of  the  splendid  destiny  which  lies  within 
our  reach.  Yet  it  is  in  the  remembrance  of  this  fact  that  oar  moral  strength  can 
alone  be  found.  The  contemplation  of  our  weakness  and  our  littleness,  the  frailty 
of  the  perishing  body,  the  instability  of  the  mental  powers,  the  fewness  of  our 
passing  years,  the  shortcomings  of  our  best  endeavours,  the  insufficiency  of  what 
we  accomplish  compared  with  what  we  purpose  and  desire, — all  this  might  well 
suggest  to  us  a  philosophy  of  despair.  But  the  thought  of  our  high  origin  and  our 
glorious  destiny  awakens  and  fosters  in  us  the  religion  of  hope.  And  so  the 
Psalmist  asks.  What  is  man  ?  Thou  madest  him  a  little  less  than  God.  It  is  this 
which  the  record  of  creation  tells  us  in  another  form,  that  God  made  man  in  His 
own  image.  It  is  perhaps  impossible  for  us  fully  to  understand  the  scope  and 
meaning  of  these  wonderful  words,  "made  in  God's  image,"  "a  little  less  than 
God."  The  greatest  of  our  theologians  have  given  to  them  very  dirforent  interpre- 
tations, as  they  have  sought  to  discover  and  to  define  those  powers  and  faculties  in 
man  which  appear  to  reveal  in  him  the  traces  of  the  Divine  image.  But  whatever 
else  the  words  may  mean,  they  clearly  assure  us  that  there  is  in  every  man  some- 
thing that  is  akin  to  God,  something  which  separates  him  from  all  other  creatures 
on  the  face  of  the  earth,  something  which  makes  it  possible  for  him  to  think  of 
God,  to  know  God,  and  to  love  God.  In  this,  at  least,  we  find  the  special  preroga- 
tive of  humanity,  that  which  distinguishes  and  differentiates  man  from  all  the 
lower  orders  of  creation.  The  patient  labours  of  science  are  unfolding  to  us  day  by 
day  new  and  beautiful  mysteries  in  the  world  of  nature,  with  fuller  knowledge  of 
the  marvels  of  animal  life,  and  of  seeming  intelligence  even  in  the  tiniest  of  God's 
creatures  ;  but  no  trace  is  found  of  anything  akin  to  this  capacity  of  man,  this 
high  endowment  of  humanity — the  power  to  know  his  Maker  and  to  do  that  Maker's 
will.  These  are  the  highest  capacities  which  belong  to  human  nature,  even  in 
their  possession,  but  still  more  in  their  use.  It  is  in  these  unparalleled  gifts  that 
man's  true  greatness  lies.  There  is  nothing  more  great,  nothing  more  noble, 
nothing  more  beautiful  within  the  reach  of  humanity  than  to  know  with  a  personal 
affection  the  Being  to  whom  we  owe  our  existence,  to  be  able  to  understand  some- 
thing of  the  working  of  His  Divine  power  and  love,  to  sympathise  with  the  holiness 
and  purity  of  His  nature,  still  more  to  make  efforts  after  attaining  to  some  measures 
of  that  purity  and  that  holiness  in  ourselves.  These  are  at  once  the  privileges  and 
the  responsibilities  that  belong  to  our  humanity,  the  outcome  of  that  love  of  God 
which  breathed  into  us  something  of  His  own  Divine  nature,  and  gave  U8  the  germ 


PSJILM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  US 

of  a  Divine  life.     It  is  true,  as  the  Psalmist  reminds  us,  that  man  is  like  a  thing  of 
naught,  that  his  time  passeth  away  as  a  shade.     It  is  not  less  true  that  He  who  made 
us  made  us  in  His  own  image,  a  little  less  than  Himself,  to  crown  us  with  glory 
and  worship.    This  is  the  paradox  of  humanity — man's  high  origin,  and  man's  humble 
estate.    So  Pascal  exclaims,  "Oh,  the  grandeur  and  the  littleness,  the  excellency  and 
the  corruption,  the  majesty  and  the  meanness  of  man."     [Archhishop   Thompson.} 
What  is  man  ? — Is  he  but  a  bodily  organism  1     Is  he  a  duality,  body  and  mind 
united  together  ?     Is  he  a  trinity  in  unity,  having  a  material  frame,  a  connecting 
life  principle,  and  an  immortal  spirit?      We  know  nothiiig  of  mind-force  except 
through  its  material  manifestations.     Voltaire  said,   "  The  welfare  of  a  nation  often 
depends  on  the  good  or  bad  digestion  of  its  prime  minister  "  ;  and  Mr.  Motley  avers 
that  "The  gout  of  Charles  V.  may  have  changed  the  destinies  of  mankind."     Our 
mental  and  emotional  states  rise  and  fall  with  our  bodily  conditions,  as  the  tidea 
with   the  moon.     How  often  does  bodily  decay  seem   to  be  mental  decay.     In 
answer  to  the   question.  What  is  man  ?   the   materialistic   and  semi-materialistic 
schools  give  vaiious  answers.      "Man  is  but  a  thinking  machine,"  says  one. 
Feuerbach  declares  that  "  The  soul  is  but  the  sum-total  of  nervous  processes."     In 
another  place  he  says,  "It  is  but  a  dust  heap,  to  be  dispersed  as  it  was  swept 
together.       Zoust  asserts  that  "Man's  acts  are  the  result  of  his  organisation," 
Another  maintains  that  "The  brain  secretes  thought  as  the  liver  secretes  bile." 
Moleschoff  avers  that  "Thought  is  a  motion  of  matter."    Biichner,  that  "Mental 
activity  is  a  function  of  the  cerebral  substance.     It  is  emitted  by  the  brain   a« 
thoughts  are  by  the  mouth,  as  music  by  the  organ."    There  is,  however,  one  truth 
we  must  face  ;  there  is  a  will  constituting  the  self-hood  of  each  person,  absolutely 
uncontrolled,   but  controlling  all  bodily  conditions.     It  is  a  will   separable  in 
thought  and  fact  from  the  material  organism  in  which  it  finds  its  play  'and 
manifestation.     I  find  no  better  answer  to  the  question.  What  is  man  ?  than  that 
contained  in  Scripture,   "And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground, 
and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  soul." 
(Samuel  Fellows,' D.D.)        The  greatness  of  man: — Man  seems  to  occupy  a  middle 
position  in  the  universe.     If  in  respect  of  his  physical  organisation  he  resembles  the 
lower  animals,   over  whom  he  undoubtedly    wields  a  superior  force,   in  respect 
of  his  moral  and  rational  nature  he  resembles  God,  the  crown  and  summit  of  all 
being.     One  of  the  special  characteristics  of  man  is  self-consciousness.     Attribute  as 
you  like  all  individual  acts  to  some  chemical  or  physiological  causes,  how  do  you 
account  for  the  fact  that  at  the  bottom  of  all  these  individual  acts  a  man  is 
conscious  of  himself  as  centre  and  bond  of  union  of  all  these  acts  ?    What  is  it 
which  each  one  of  us  means  when  he  says  "I"?    We  mean  something  utterly 
distinct  from  all  that  is  not  I,  something  which  is  profoundly  conscious  of  this 
deep  distinctness.     I  think,  and  I  know  that  it  is  only  I  who  think.     I  think  about 
myself,  and  I  know  that  it  is  myself  only  about  whom  I  am  thinking.      I  am 
conscious  of  my  own  identity  and  of  my  utter  separateness  from  all  besides.     I  trace 
and  assert  this  separateness  and  personal  identity  for  any  long  period  of  years. 
When  the  outward  circumstances  of  my  life  were  quite  different  from  what  they  are 
now,  when  my  bodily  shape  and  form  were  so  different  that  none  who  had  known 
me  earlier  could  recognise  me  now,  when  I  had   completely  other  thoughts  and 
feelings  and  pursuits  than  I  have  now  ;  when  I  was  a  little  child  and  a  schoolboy  I 
was  essentially  the  same  as  I  am  now.     The  thoughts  of  my  mind  are  my  thoughts  ; 
the  acts  of  my  will  are  my  will.     I  am  the  ruler  who  disposes  all  other  manifold 
instruments  of  my  nature.     This  reflective  self-conscious  faculty  is  wanting  in  the 
beast.     Traces  of  a  faculty  like  memory  are  indeed  found  in  the  beast,  formed  by  a 
repetition  of  sensations,  but  this  does  not  ascend  to  the  higher  human  faculty  of 
forming  an  objective  notion  of  sensations  and  feelings,  and  therefore  the  beast  has 
no  language,  properly  so  called.     He  can  utter  inarticulate  sounds,  expressive  of 
pleasure  and^  pain  ;  he  cannot,  like  man,  compare  and  generalise,  and  communicate 
rational  thought  by  the  vehicle  of  speech.     What  a  paradox  to  put  man  on  a  level 
with  the  brute  !     What  is  the  value  and  dignity  of  all  the  knowledge  which  has 
been  acquired  by  the  animal  portion  of  the  universe  since  it  first  came  into  distinct 
being  ?    Where  is  it  treasured  up  ?    What  improvements  has  it  undergone  ?    What 
ameliorations  of  condition  has  it  caused  ?    But  compare  this  weakness  and  non- 
progressiveness  with  man  as  the  interpreter  of  nature,  and  its  lord  by  knowledge 
and   power.      Consider  even  the  present  grandeur  of  human  knowledge.      Man 
penetrates  into  the  nature  of  things,  and  investigates  their  hidden  causes.     He 
transposes  into  mental  images  the  things  perceived  by  the  senses  :  he  passes  beyond 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  vni. 

the  limits  of  sensuous  impressions  into  the  world  of  rational  thought,  and  thus 
grasps  the  eternal  truth  underlying  the  perishable.  His  knowledge  here  indeed  is 
but  partial,  but  it  contains  within  itself  a  prophecy  of  future  perfection.  Think, 
moreover,  how  the  whole  world  without  man  is  reflected  in  man,  and  is  reproduced 
by  the  various  forms  of  art  in  painting,  music,  poetry,  sculpture — illuminated, 
beautified,  spiritualised,  transfigured.  Man's  imitative  art  is  a  resemblance  of 
the  Creator's  power.  It  has  been  irreverently  asserted  by  an  atheistic  writer  that 
the  heavens  no  longer  declare  the  glory  of  God,  but  of  Newton  and  Laplace.  The 
glory  of  the  astronomer  who  can  measure  the  courses  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and 
calculate  the  forces  of  the  universe  is  really  only  another  witness  to  the  glory  of  the 
Creator,  for  He  who  framed  the  heavens  framed  also  the  understanding  of  the 
philosophic  man,  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  ascertain  the  laws  regulating  their 
motions.  To  man  belong  also — if  we  may  trust  the  verdict  of  a  psychology  grounded 
upon  actual  facts  of  consciousness — personality  and  free  will.  He  is  not  a  mere 
automaton  pushed  and  pulled  by  external  forces  over  which  he  exercises  no  control. 
All  sense  of  moral  obligation  demands  as  a  postulate  free  will — all  praise  or  blame 
of  others  are  based  upon  the  same  hypothesis.  The  universal  testimony  of  mankind, 
when  not  biassed  by  the  desire  of  conforming  to  any  paradoxical  theory,  would 
declare  that  we  do  not  call  a  man  good  or  bad  in  the  same  way  as  we  should  a  tree, 
or  a  plant,  or  a  dog.  Man  we  believe  to  be  himself  a  cause  of  action.  The  motives 
by  which  man  acts  are,  after  all,  only  influences,  not  compulsions.  We  »r« 
conscious  that  there  is  a  wide  distinction  between  the  influence  of  a  motive,  and 
anything  which  might  be  fairly  called  restraint.  We  know  within  ourselves  that  in 
yielding  to  a  motive,  that  is  to  say,  in  resolving  in  conformity  with  it,  we  are  able  to 
refrain  from  forming  this  resolve.  We  are  free  to  be  fools  and  to  be  vicious,  only  we 
prefer  to  be  rational  and  to  be  virtuous.  {W.  Ince,  M.A.)  Science  humiliating 
man  : — The  view  which  glorifies  the  dignity  and  value  of  human  nature  and  points 
its  aspirations  forward  is  challenged  in  our  time  by  an  important  school  of  thinkers. 
Science,  whose  moral  characteristics  have  often  been  reproached  as  pride  and  self- 
conceit,  preaches  aloud  from  professorial  chairs  the  lesson  of  humility,  and,  echoing 
the  precept  "Know  thyself,"  bids  man  lay  aside  as  a  false  illusion  the  fond 
imagination  that  he  has  a  place  in  creation  superior  to  the  brute.  Man  is  re- 
presented as  an  improved  animal  or  vegetable,  differentiated  in  the  long  course  of 
ages  from  earlier  forms  of  life  by  a  more  perfect  organisation  and  a  more  complete 
adaptation  to  his  surroundings,  but  not  superior  in  essence  or  endowed  with  higher 
hopes  than  the  rudimentary  organised  beings  who  have  preceded  him  in  the  gradual 
development  of  the  universe.  The  accurate  observations  of  physiology  and  biology 
have  traced  out  numerous  marks  of  likeness  of  organs  between  man  and  these 
earlier  organisms,  which  we  have  been  accustomed  to  call  lower.  Rudimentary 
inchoate  forms  of  the  mechanism  of  the  human  body  have  been  noticed  in  the 
irrational  beings,  and  man  is  pronounced  to  diff'er  from  the  despised  ape  not 
more  than  the  cultivated  European  of  our  day  from  the  barbarous  native  of 
the  Admiralty  Islands.  On  observed  facts  a  theory  is  based,  claiming  to  be 
covered  by  the  facts  in  accordance  with  the  strictest  methods  of  induction,  that 
there  has  been  going  on  through  countless  ages  of  the  universe  a  development 
from  one  primordial  seed  of  insect,  and  animal,  and  man,  through  endless  varieties 
of  sub-species,  each  slightly  deviating  from  and  improving  upon  its  predecessor 
in  the  series,  until  man,  the  latest  result  of  evolution,  appeared  upon  the  earth. 
The  old  theory  of  final  causes  and  foreseen  adaptations  of  organs  to  their  purposes 
we  are  told  must  be  abandoned,  and  a  doctrine  of  types  of  form  must  be  substituted 
for  a  wise  and  benevolent  will  underlying  the  material  universe.  We  may  fear 
lest  imagination  should  carry  us  into  inferences  which  the  organs  of  experience 
cannot  verify.  We  may  listen  respectfully  to  all  the  analogies  and  homologies 
revealed  to  us  by  the  biologist,  and  yet  pause  in  the  immediate  acceptance  of  a 
provisional  hypothesis  of  one  uninterrupted  evolution  exclusive  of  any  specific  acts  of 
creation,  when  the  geologist  tells  us  that  he  can  discover  few  (if  any)  traces  of 
these  thousands  upon  thousands  of  varieties  and  sub-species  which  the  hypothesis 
postulates,  and  we  may  feel  a  natural  difficulty  in  understanding  how  the  present 
phenomena  of  life  have  been  produced  by  the  survival  of  the  fittest  in  the  struggle 
for  existence,  when  we  observe  that  the  alleged  earlier  and  lower  types  still  exist 
side  by  side  with  the  later  and  higher.  If  man,  to  use  the  poet's  metaphor,  is  in 
his  moral  progress  still  working  out  the  tiger  and  the  ape,  the  tiger  and  the  ape 
still  hold  their  place  in  the  animjJ  world,  and  are  not  extinct  species.  Man  has 
not  survived,  but  is  contemporary  with  them.     A  layman  also  may  be  at  liberty  to 


P8ALH  Tin.]  THE  PSALMS,  145 

note  that  natural  science  does  not  speak  with  unanimous  voice  either  on  the  facta 
or  tlie  speculative  theories  of  the  origin  of  man.  Great  names  are  ranged  on  either 
side  of  the  controversy.  Biology  cannot  claim  a  monopoly  and  exclusive  privilege 
in  the  discussion  of  the  great  problems  of  anthropology,  psychology,  and  theology  ; 
history  and  philosophy  are  entitled  to  be  heard.  They  maintain  that  there  are 
moral  and  spiritual  facts  in  man's  nature  over  and  beyond  those  physical  facts 
which  fall  within  the  range  of  natural  science,  and  these  cannot  be  overlooked,  but 
must  be  fully  taken  into  account  if  we  would  attempt  an  adequate  answer  to  the 
question.  What  is  man  ?  {Ihid. )  The  Jeicish  and  the  Christian  thought  of  man : 
— I  The  Jewish  conception  of  man.  It  involved — 1.  Similarity  of  nature  to 
that  of  God  Himself.  He  must  have  understood  that  man  finds  his  true  and 
proper  life,  his  human  heritage — even  as  God  does — in  the  thoughts  which  visit  his 
mind,  in  the  choices  which  proceed  from  his  will,  in  the  feelings  which  glow  within 
his  heart,  in  moral  activities  and  spiritual  enjoyment.  2.  Likeness  of  character  to 
the  Divine.  The  Jew  held  that  man  had  once  walked  with  God  on  noble  heights 
of  wisdom  and  righteousness,  and  that,  having  fallen  from  these,  it  was  his  true 
aspiration  to  regain  those  spiritual  levels,  and  live  again  the  life  which  is  pure, 
holy,  heavenly,  Divine.  3.  A  share  in  Divine  authority.  God  has  given  to  His 
human  children  a  share  in  His  wide  rule.  4.  Divine  interest  and  attention.  To 
the  lowly  it  is  much  to  enjoy  the  notice  of  the  strong  and  high.  5.  Privilege  of 
approach  to  the  Most  High.  Man  la  one  who  might  "walk  with  God,"  as  did 
Enoch  ;  be  the  "friend  of  God,"  as  was  Abraham.  Having  this  thought  of  the 
dignity  of  man,  the  Jew  had  an  equally  clear  view  of — 6.  His  real  degradation  and 
misery.  For  the  two  truths  stand  or  fall  together.  The  Jew,  recognising  man's 
moral  freedom  and  spiritual  obligation,  saw  clearly  and  felt  keenly  the  character  of 
his  low  estate  ;  he  knew  the  touch  and  smarted  under  the  sting  of  sin.  II.  The 
DISTINCTIVELY  Cheistian  VIEW.  What  has  Christ  added  to  our  thought  about 
ourselves?  1.  He  has  led  us  to  take  the  highest  view  of  our  spiritual  nature.  Man, 
like  God,  is  a  spirit ;  his  corporeal  frame  being  only  a  frame.  2.  He  has  drawn 
aside  the  veil  from  the  future,  and  made  that  long  life  and  that  large  world  our  own. 
The  Jew  hardly  knew  what  to  think  about  the  future.  3.  He  taught  us  to  think  of 
ourselves  as  sinners  who  may  have  a  full  restoration  to  their  high  estate.  By  His 
words  of  love  and  by  His  work  of  mercy  He  summons  us  to  return,  to  believe,  to 
rejoice  ;  to  walk  in  the  favour,  to  live  in  the  love,  to  dwell  in  the  home,  to  be  trans- 
formed into  the  likeness  of  the  Father  of  our  spirits.  {William  Clarkson,  B.A.) 
On  the  condescension  and  goodness  of  God  to  man  : — 1.  The  meanness  of  man,  and 
his  unworthiness  of  the  regard  and  affection  of  the  Most  High  God.  Whenever 
man  singles  out  one  of  his  fellow-creatures  with  peculiar  regard,  it  is  on  account  of 
some  amiable  or  useful  quality  he  supposes  him  to  possess  ;  his  powers  to  entertain 
and  communicate  pleasure,  his  benevolence  of  disposition,  his  strict  integrity,  or  his 
ability  to  grant  protection  and  to  confer  benefits.  These  form  the  ordinary  basis 
upon  which  esteem  is  built.  There  must  be  suitableness  and  correspondence 
between  the  persons  allied  in  friendship.  In  vain,  however,  shall  we  look  to  these 
several  sources  of  esteem  to  account  for  that  regard  which  God  has  been  pleased  to 
entertain  for  man.  When  we  survey  man,  and  compare  him  with  the  Divine 
Being,  there  appears  everything  which  would  tend  to  break  the  bonds  of  union.  I 
do  not  here  set  before  you  the  intellectual  meanness  of  man,  or  the  scanty  and 
limited  nature  of  his  powers  and  faculties  ;  though  these  might  seem  an  insur- 
mountable obstacle  to  union.  There  are  more  serious  obstacles  to  an  union  between 
him  and  a  Holy  God.  Man  is  a  depraved  and  sinful  as  well  as  a  weak  creature. 
There  prevails  in  him  not  merely  a  darkness  with  respect  to  spiritual  things,  but 
a  dislike  to  them.  It  must  be  admitted,  indeed,  that  there  are  remains  of  dignity 
in  man  which  sometimes  break  forth  and  show  his  original.  To  know  what  man 
is,  we  ought  not  to  consider  of  what  he  is  capable  under  circumstances  peculiarly 
favourable,  but  to  look  at  him  as  he  generally  is.  2.  Contemplate  the  nature  of  the 
great  and  glorious  God,  and  judge  how  unlikely  it  is  that  He  should  be  ' '  mindful 
of  man,"  or  visit  him.  How  little  are  we  acquainted  with  the  Divine  nature. 
Though  we  cannot  tell  what  He  is,  we  can  say  what  He  is  not.  Consider  a  Being 
who,  full  and  complete  in  Himself,  needs  no  addition,  and  feels  no  want,  a  Being 
who  knows  all  things,  embraces  the  past,  the  present,  the  future,  in  one  com- 
prehensive glance.  All  nations  before  Him  are  nothing.  "  Wherein,  then,  is  man 
to  be  aooounted  of?"  Then  the  peculiar  attribute  of  God  is  holiness.  How 
abominable,  then,  is  man,  who  "drinkoth  in  iniquity  like  water"  !  God  is  just. 
Will  not  this  form  an  eternal  separation  between  man  and  God  ?    True,  when  wo 

10 


146  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

consider  God  only  in  the  light  of  the  most  benevolent  of  beings,  and  man  in  the 
character  of  the  most  wretched,  we  may  discover  some  reason  why  God  should  thus 
regard  and  visit  His  creatures  ;  for  there  is  an  attraction  between  benevolence  and 
misery.  But  then  mere  benevolence  could  be  supposed  to  extend  only  to  the  relief 
of  absolute  necessity,  or  deliverance  from  immediate  danger.  No  principles  of 
common  benevolence  are  sufficient  to  explain  the  gracious  acts  of  God  to  man. 
Consider,  then,  the  nature  of  God's  benevolence.  1.  "Mindful  of  him"  is  not 
merely  opposed  to  "forgetting  him."  God  cannot  forget  any  of  His  creatures. 
The  word  means,  God  keeps  man  constantly  in  view,  ever  watching  over  him,  and 
never  ceasing  to  do  him  good.  2.  "Visit  him."  This  expression  supposes  more  than 
mere  care  or  providence.  It  implies  a  degree  of  union  and  regard  which  may  well 
excite  our  surprise.  A  man  is  said  to  visit  another  when  he  conies  to  him  in  order 
to  cultivate  friendship  and  love.  Illustrate  by  God's  coming  to  dwell  in  the  Temple 
at  Jerusalem  ;  by  the  incarnation  of  the  Only-begotten  Son ;  by  the  providential 
dispensations  of  God  ;  by  gracious  support  and  comforting  in  the  trying  seasons  of 
life.  {John  Venn,  M.A.)  The  contradictions  in  human  ruUure : — In  unfolding 
the  contradictions  of  our  nature  we  shall  speak  of  man  as  a  being  endowed  with 
reason,  a  moral  being,  a  being  impelled  by  longings  for  happiness.  In  these  three 
particulars  we  shall  discover  in  him,  side  by  side,  the  granaeur  and  the  meanness  of 
nis  nature.  1.  How  great  is  man  in  his  intellectual  powers,  in  his  capacity  to 
know,  to  do,  to  design,  and  carry  out  a  purpose  !  He  understands  and  fulfils  the 
will  of  God,  which  calls  him  to  life  in  society.  The  tie  of  kindred  not  only  binds 
together  a  few  in  smaller  circles,  but  nations  shape  themselves  into  one  grander 
whole,  a  great  and  glorious  combination  in  which  the  individual  serves  the  whole, 
and  the  whole  the  individual.  From  wise  deliberation  result  laws,  which  are 
administered  with  wisdom  and  authority,  establishing  domestic  and  foreign  safety, 
protecting  life,  property,  and  reputation,  and  promoting  whatever  tends  to  the 
well-being  and  improvement  of  those  who  are  fellow-citizens.  Art  sets  up  its 
barriers  against  the  forces  of  nature,  which  often  assault  us  as  a  foe,  or  constrains 
her  to  submit  to  man  and  to  accomplish  his  designs.  Though  separated  by  the 
abyss  of  the  ocean,  nations  bind  themselves  to  the  exchange  of  mutual  obligations. 
Man  has  lifted  his  eyes  to  the  stars.  What  is  transpiring  there  in  those  vast 
distances,  whose  very  magnitude  oppresses  him,  escapes  not  his  penetrating  glance. 
He  descries  the  mysterious  movements  of  the  Almighty,  guiding  the  heavenly 
bodies  on  their  way,  prescribing  to  them  where  they  shall  shine,  and  when  they 
shall  disappear.  He  penetrates  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  brings  up  to  glisten  in 
the  sunlight  that  which  lay  hid  in  the  darkness  of  her  depths.  He  does  more  than 
this  in  his  own  bosom — an  abyss  not  less  deep  and  dark.  And  while  he  thinks 
and  feels,  he  observes  the  laws  of  his  own  thoughts  and  feelings.  He  lifts  up  his 
thoughts  higher  than  the  sun,  higher  than  the  most  distant  stars  ;  he  lifts  them 
up  to  God  Himself,  and  bows  in  the  dust  before  Him.  In  what  of  glory  or 
grandeur  can  he  be  wanting  who  is  capable  of  knowing  and  worshipping  God  ? 
Little  or  nothing  could  be  lacking  to  man  were  not  this  power  abruptly  checked  ; 
or,  which  is  still  worse,  were  it  not  frightfully  abused.  What  could  restrain  this 
man  with  his  skill  in  reasoning  out  the  sublimest  and  most  difficult  problems,  were 
not  this  power  associated  with  the  necessity  of  labour  and  the  liability  to  mistakes  ? 
An  outside  impression  has  struck  him  ;  all  his  thoughts  are  scattered.  A  disorder 
attacks  some  portion  of  his  body,  whose  co-operation  with  the  mind  is  needful, 
and  all  his  thoughts  swim  about  chaotic  and  in  disorder.  A  somewhat  inferior 
check,  by  which  God  humbles  our  pride,  springs  from  man's  mistakes  in  judgment. 
Even  that  power  by  which  man  discerns  the  truth  he  employs  to  hurl  truth  from 
the  throne,  and  to  set  up  error  in  truth's  stead  ;  squandering  upon  it  the  enthusiasm 
which  only  the  truth  should  inspire.  Through  reason  man  is  capable  of  living  in 
weU-ordered  society.  But  are  not  the  perverse  principles  which  result  in  the 
overthrow  of  all  social  order,  of  all  human  well-being,  taught  and  propagated  by  a 
reason  degenerate  ?  Through  reason  man  is  able  to  distinguish  between  his 
immortal  soul  and  his  perishable  body.  But  has  not  the  same  reason  sought 
to  obliterate  this  distinction,  leaving  him  in  frightful  confusion?  As  though 
his  very  being  itself,  with  all  its  noblest  faculties,  were  a  contribution  of  his 
physical  development !  Through  reason  he  is  capable  of  investigating  the  powers 
of  nature,  and  tracing  them  to  their  Creator.  But  has  not  this  reason  also 
presumed  to  assign  to  things  themselves  their  own  origin,  their  own  preservation, 
their  own  destruction?  Has  it  not  arrayed  in  open  opposition  a  Nature  idolised 
and  a  God  betrayed  ?    2.  Just  as  emphatic  are  the  contradictions  which  we  discern 


PSALM  viii.]  THE  PSALMS.  147 

in  man's  moral  nature.  Does  he  not,  in  this  respect  also,  sometimes  exhibit  a 
grandeur  and  sublimity  in  which  we  recognise  traces  of  the  Divine  image  in  which 
he  was  created  ?  As  God  Himself  has  prescribed  the  law  of  love,  which  He  displays 
toward  His  Son,  begotten  of  Him  from  all  eternity,  and  toward  all  beings  created 
anew  through  the  blood  of  His  Son  ;  so,  also,  is  the  same  law  engraven  in  the  soul 
of  man,  and  he  finds  rest  only  in  the  consciousness  that  through  love  and  the 
manifestations  of  love  is  he  one  with  the  whole  kingdom  of  God.  This  command- 
ment is  not  easily  fulfilled.  For  the  world  without  and  the  love  of  the  world 
within  present  to  it  a  fearful  obstacle.  Yet  just  as  mighty  as  is  the  foe,  so  glorious 
is  the  victory.  And  how  many  examples  of  these  hard-fought  victories  has  the 
history  of  the  world  recorded  !  Aud  how  many  names  distinguished  for  virtue 
shine  in  all  the  ages  !  A  great  and  noble  army  of  God's  champions,  who  not  only 
overcome  their  forbidden  tendency  to  evil,  but  who  also  sacrifice  time's  noble 
things  for  something  nobler :  things  seen,  and  even  life  itself,  for  things  not  seen, 
and  who,  by  freeing  themselves  from  all  things  earthly,  have  discovered  to  the 
world  a  freedom  like  that  of  God,  to  whom  all  things  are  subject.  Not,  indeed, 
without  God's  help.  Yet  is  that  a  trifling  glory — to  ascribe  this  to  Himself,  and 
to  regard  all  our  actions  as  emanating  from  God  ?  Not — and  this  is  the  greatest 
glory  of  all — not  for  their  own  glory  did  they  accomplish  this.  Yet  what  glory  is 
greater  than  to  seek  only  the  glory  of  God  ;  to  cast  our  hard-won  palms  at  His  feet, 
and  confess  that  He  has  done  it,  and  not  we  ourselves.  And  not  only  from  you,  ye 
heroes  in  virtue,  but  from  those  also  who  inflict  upon  themselves  painful  austerities, 
do  we  recognise  the  sublimity  of  our  nature.  Yes,  this  also  is  beautiful,  to  weep 
and  mourn,  not  for  an  earthly  happiness,  which  we  have  lost,  but  for  happiness 
spiritual  ;  because  we  have  not  kept  a  commandment  engraven  on  the  heart.  For  this 
proves  that  spiritual  things  are  recognised  as  our  highest  good.  {F.  Thereemin,  D.D.) 
Man  and  the  universe : — The  Psalmist  has  been  contemplating  the  clear  midnight 
sky,  and  there  strikes  into  his  soul  that  old,  that  unchanging  sensation  by  contrast 
to  the  vastness  of  man's  littleness.  Everything  that  has  happened  in  the  way  of 
advancing  our  knowledge  of  the  world  has  gone  to  augment  this  consciousness  of  man's 
physical  littleness.  Astronomy  has  shown  that  this  planet  is  not  the  centre  of  any 
system  at  all.  Geology  took  up  the  tale  where  astronomy  had  left  it ;  and  man,  the 
speck  in  space,  becomes  but  as  a  moment  in  time.  Biology  took  up  the  story  where 
geology  left  it ;  and  man,  the  speck  in  space,  the  moment  in  time,  becomes  now  just  as 
one  of  the  changing  phases  in  the  ever-running  river  of  life.  True,  there  is  a  sense 
in  which  science  gives  back  to  us  with  its  left  hand  what  it  has  taken  away  with  its 
right.  Still,  man  feels  his  littleness  as  he  never  felt  it  before  in  the  vastness,  the 
inconceivable  vastness,  of  the  system  of  nature.  When  you  look  at  man  in  history 
there  again  the  same  sensation  is  borne  in  upon  your  mind.  Man  in  history  appears 
as  moving  under  the  impulse  of  vast  forces  which  he  cannot  control.  Men  are 
dispirited,  embittered,  crushed  by  the  sense  of  their  own  failure,  by  the  sense  that 
they  are  infinitely  weak,  and  circumstances  infinitely  strong.  The  individual 
life  seems  just  but  as  a  spark  that  can  be  snuffled  out,  puflfed  out,  just  by  the  breath 
and  the  wind  of  circumstance.  Among  great  men  there  is  no  one  to  whom  the 
sense  of  man's  littleness  has  presented  itself  with  such  overwhelming  force  as  to 
Pascal.  It  is  when  we  pass  from  the  intellect  to  the  moral  faculties  that  we  first 
begin  to  gain  reassurance.  There  is  in  man,  who  can  resist  and  can  impress  a 
spiritual  and  moral  meaning  on  his  circumstances,  something  greater  than  there  is 
in  all  the  universe  beside.  There  is  in  all  of  us,  whatever  we  may  have  been, 
something  which  rises  in  us  and  tells  us  what  we  are  meant  to  do  and  to  be, 
some  sense  of  duty,  some  inherent  conviction,  that  what  we  ought  to  be  is  assuredly 
in  the  long  run  what  we  can  be.  And  this  conscience  forces  us  to  believe,  that 
there  is  a  moral  purpose  in  this  world,  which  must  at  last  be  vindicated  as  supreme. 
All  the  vague  mass  of  emotion  and  feeling  of  this  sort  comes  to  its  centre,  and  finds 
its  realisation  in  the  victory  and  the  ascension  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  It  is  the 
glory  of  the  Christian  faith  that  for  us  who  believe  in  Jesus,  and  know  the  record 
of  His  life,  all  the  dim  faith  in  the  supremacy  of  goodness  has  reached  a  point  of 
primary  realisation.  Sovereignty,  supreme  and  absolute,  is  in  the  case  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  the  goal  and  climax  of  all  moral  efl!"ort.  The  exaltation  of  Jesus  is  not 
His  own  personal  supremacy  merely  ;  it  is  the  hope  and  encouragement  of  the  whole 
race.  To  us  Christians  the  ascension,  the  glorification  of  our  Lord,  His  triumph  as 
prophet,  priest,  and  king,  ought  to  be  a  thought  both  of  continual  power  and  con- 
tinual inspiration.  ...  In  the  moral  world,  ay,  in  the  world  of  matter  as  well  as 
of  spirit,  there  is  nothing  ultimately  strong  but  that  cause,  that  cause  of  thorough- 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viir. 

going  holiness,  truth,  and  love,  which  is  for  ever  embodied  in  Jesus  our  Lord. 
{Bishop  Gore.)        The  glory  of  manhood: — "  What  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful 
of  him?  and  the  son  of  man,  that  Thou  visitest  him?"     (Psa.  viii,  4.)     It  was  a 
contemplation  of  the  vastness  and  the  beauty  and  the  glory  of  the  universe  that 
caused  David  to  ask  this  question  in  wondering  awe.     David  reasons  with  himself 
that  here  is  the  Great  Being  who  fills  the  midnight  sky  with  suns  and  moons  and 
planets  and  worlds,  like  shining  jewels,  and  yet  cares  so  much  about  man,  who  is 
physically  so  insignificant  when  compared  to  these  creations,  that  He  visits  him 
and  holds  communion  with  him  in  loving  tenderness.     It  would  be  inconceivable 
if  man  were  only  an  animal ;  it  is  not  the  outward  man  which  can  be  seen  with 
the  eye,  but  the  inward  man,  the  unseen,  the  spiritual  personality,  which  chooses 
and  decides,  which  forms  purposes  and  devises  schemes  to  carry  them  out, — that  is 
the  man  whom   God  visits,  and  whose  prosperity  is  important.     There  could  be 
no  greater  folly  than  for  men  or  women  to  treat  themselves  as  though  the  physical 
life,  wliich  needs  to  have  clothing  of  more  or  less  fashionable  cut,  and  food  that 
may  please  the  palate  or  nourish  the  body,  were  the  real  man  or  woman  whose 
comfort  is  to  indicate  the  decisions  of  life.     The  folly  is  evident  when  we  consider 
that  this  outward,  physical  life  is  a  very  fragile  and  temporary  affair,  which  has 
no  certain  lease  of  existence,   and   is   liable   to   be  pulled  down   at   any  time, 
liable  to   be  snuffed  out  like  a  candle,    while  the  inner  spiritual   personality  is 
to  go  on  living  for  ever.      {L.   A.   Banks,   D.D.)         That  Thou  art  mindful 
of  him. — God  mindful  of  man : — At  times   the  thought  comes  to  all   thinking 
men  that    it  is  presumption    to  think  that  God  cares    for   us.      Webster  was 
kept  back  from  Christianity   for  a  long  time  by  this  thought.      Look  at  proof 
of  the  mindfulness  of  God  outside  the  Bible.     We  learn  from  our  own  hearts  and 
from  nature — 1.  That  it  is  wrong  for  parents  to  bring  children  into  the   world 
and  not  care  for  them.     Are  we  to  suppose  that  God  would  enact  in  heaven  what 
our  sense  of  justice  and  charity  will  not  allow  on  earth — that  the  superior  can 
be  unmindful  of  the  inferior  ?      2.  It  seems  natural  for  any  one  to  think  most 
of  his  best  workmanship.      Napoleon  thought  most  of  Austerlitz,  Wellington  of 
Waterloo,   Morse  of  the  telegraph,    Lincoln  of  the   Emancipation   proclamation. 
Man  is  God's  best  workmanship.     Man  is  capable  of  wonderful  growth.     I  am 
sorry  we  have  sinned  ;  but  we  are  wonderfully  constructed.     It  can  never  be  that 
God  is  unmindful  of  such  workmanship.     God  sees  in  man  what  is  like  Himself,  the 
sense  of  justice,  hatred  of  cruelty,  unselfishness.      To  say  that  God  is  unmindful  of 
ns,  that  we  cannot  add  to  or  take  from  His  glory,  is  to  say  that  I  am  a  better 
l)eing  than  He  is,  for  I  do  care  for  them  that  are  lower  down  than  I  am.     What 
tenderness   we    find    in   the  human   heart !      I   read  what  that  most    wretched 
father,  the  father  of  Charley  Ross,  said  in  Boston  some  time  ago,   "I  will  search 
for  my  lost  boy  while  life  lasts  ;  I  will  go  up  and  down  the  earth,  and  look  into 
the  face  of  this  child,  and  then  of  that,  to  see  if  it  is  my  lost  boy."     What !  has  God 
placed  such  love  in  man  for  his  lost  child,  and  will  not  He  care  for  His  children,  lost 
children  though  they  be  ?    (if.  M.  Gallaher,  D.  D. )        God  mindful  of  man  .-—These 
words  furnish  no  reasonable  ground  for  a  doubt  as  to  the  possibility  of  God's  exercis- 
ing a  sustaining  providence  in  favour  of  such  a  creature  as  man.     They  express  a 
conviction  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all  natural  as  well  as  all  revealed  religion. 
The  root  and  ground-work  of  all  religion  is  the  impulse  which  leads  men  to  pray. 
Man's  relation  to  God  as  a  person  ;  man's  dependence  on  God  ;  man's  power  to  ask, 
and  God's  power  to  give  such  things  as  that  dependence  makes  necessary.     We 
pervert  this  conviction  when  we  represent  God  under  a  form  which  makes  provid- 
ence a  fiction  and  prayer  a  delusion,  as  an  impersonal  principle,  as  an  immovable 
intelligence,  as  an  inexorable  fate,  as  a  being  who  has  no  feeling  for  the  wants  of 
man,  and  is  inaccessible  to  his  prayers.     The  very  conception  of  universal  law  and 
order,  which  science  discloses  as  pervading  the  material  world,  is  liable,  if  con- 
templated in  an  irreligious  spirit,  to  lead  our  thoughts  away  from  God,  who  is 
mindful  of  man  and  visits  him,  to  represent  to  us  a  God  of  science,  who  is  not  a 
God  of  worship,  to  set  before  us  an  intelligence,  it  may  be,  manifested  in  the  grand 
scheme  of  the  universe,  but  to  hide  from  us  the  personal  God  of  each  one  of  us, 
our  Father  who  is  in  heaven.      The  first  duty  of  man  is  enjoined  upon  him  as 
the  command  of  God.      The  first  sin  of  man  is  disobedience  against  God.     The  first 
dim  shadowing  forth  of  man's  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin  is  the  redemption 
provided  by  God.     We  are  not  told  that  man  transgressed  against  the  moral  order 
of  things  ;  we  are  not  told  that  he  disobeyed  the  dictates  of  his  own  reason  ;  we 
are  not  told  that  he  felt  the  reproofs  of  an  accusing  conscience.     We  are  not  told 


PSALM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  149 

that  man  was  created  as  a  part  of  the  world,  ard  under  the  general  law  of  the 
world  ;  that  his  creation  was  a  step  in  the  development  of  forces  acting  under 
some  natural  and  necessary  impulse  ;  that  his  fall  was  but  a  further  continuation  of 
that  development,  a  stage  in  the  course  of  progress  which  was  determined  for  all 
things  from  the  beginning.  The  opening  of  Scripture  brings  before  us  man  in  his 
religious  nature,  as  a  being  created  by  and  dependent  upon  God.  This  is  the  first 
teaching  of  Scripture,  and  it  is  also  the  last.  Man,  in  the  progress  of  his  know- 
ledge, is  ever  striving  after  unity,  ever  seeking  to  reduce  many  phenomena  to  one 
general  principle.  To  reduce  many  effects  to  one  cause,  many  phenomena  to  one  law  ; 
to  this  tendency  are  due  all  the  grander  triumphs  of  science  within  her  proper  field, 
but  to  this  also  are  due  the  most  pernicious  errors  of  a  false  science,  striving  to 
establish  herself  in  a  field  which  is  not  her  own.  The  boundaries  of  the  one  and  of 
the  other  are  clearly  marked  out  alike  by  the  consciousness  of  man  and  by  the 
Word  of  God.  Obliterate  distinctions,  frame  general  laws  as  we  will,  there  is  one 
distinction  which  stands  out  marked  and  prominent  as  the  basis  of  all  philosophy 
and  all  religion,  a  distinction  which  neither  philosophy  nor  religion  can  set  aside 
without  destroying  themselves  at  the  same  time  :  the  distinction  between  mind  and 
its  objects,  between  moral  and  physical  law,  between  liberty  and  necessity,  in  one 
word,  between  person  and  things.  Man,  like  the  natural  world,  is  the  work  of  God ; 
but  man,  unlike  the  material  world,  can  know  that  he  is  the  work  of  God,  and  can 
worship  the  God  who  made  him.  And  man  too,  unlike  the  material  world,  can 
obey  or  disobey  the  law  which  God  has  given  him.  Modern  sophistry  either  regards 
man  and  the  laws  of  man's  conduct  as  but  a  part  of  the  course  of  nature,  or  talks 
of  necessary  determinations  and  invariable  antecedents  of  the  human  will.  Against 
both  perversions  the  language  of  Scripture  furnishes  a  standing  protest,  and  if  read 
aright  a  safeguard.  From  the  very  beginning  of  the  world  man  stands  out  apart 
and  distinct  from  the  rest  of  God's  creation,  alone  made  in  the  image  of  God,  alone 
subject  to  a  moral  law,  alone  capable  of  obedience  or  disobedience  to  that  law.  God 
is  revealed  in  relation  to  man  as  He  is  revealed  in  relation  to  no  other  of  His  visible  i.jy 
creatures — the  personal  God  of  His  personal  creatures.  (Dean  Mansel.)  God's^ 
care  of  men : — When  we  consider  the  care  of  Providence  over  the  children  of  men, 
whether  manifested  in  the  works  of  nature  or  of  grace,  we  naturally  fall  into  the 
reflection  of  the  text,  and  wonder  to  see  so  much  done  for  men,  who  seem  to  have 
no  merit  or  desert  equal  thereto.  And  if  we  go  from  the  works  of  nature  to  those 
of  grace,  the  same  reflection  will  pursue  us  still.  One  would  think  that  men, 
owing  so  much  to  God,  would  be  careful  to  serve  and  obey  Him.  But  the  very 
contrary  is  the  truth.  They  made  gods  of  brutes,  and  became  brutes  themselves. 
For  why  should  he  not  turn  brute  himself  who  has  one  for  his  god  ?  But  the 
wonder  is  that  God  should  care  for  such  creatures,  that  He  should  be  willing  to 
forgive  them,  and  to  send  His  Son  into  the  world  to  die  for  them.  Now  all  this 
should  lead  men  to  adore  and  give  thanks  to  God  for  His  grace  and  favour.  But 
often  it  has  the  opposite  effect.  For  when  men  consider  that  God  does  nothing 
without  reason,  and  at  the  same  time  see  so  little  reason  why  God  should  do  so 
much  for  them,  they  begin  to  suspect  whether  He  has  done  it  or  no,  and  to  imagine 
that  the  whole  history  of  the  redemption  is  a  cunningly  devised  fable.  The 
wonders  of  grace — the  incarnation  and  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God  —  are  so 
tremendous,  whilst  there  is  nothing  in  man  that  bears  any  proportion  to  such 
concern  for  him.  Now  this  reasoning  is  plausible  ;  it  does  justice  to  the  wisdom  of 
God,  and  no  injustice  to  man.  But  this  prejudice  lies  as  much  against  the  works 
of  nature  as  against  those  of  grace.  For  who  would  have  dreamt  that  there  should 
be  such  a  glorious  world  for  such  a  creature  as  man  ?  It  is  therefore  but  a  like 
wonder  that  God  should  send  His  Son  to  redeem  us.  If  He  created  them,  surely  He 
may  redeem  them.  But  in  reply  to  all  such  reasoning  let  us — I.  Ask  oukselves 
WHETHER  WE  ARE  PROPER  JUDGES  IN  THIS  MATTER  ?  Who  are  we,  to  judge  of  what 
it  is  wise  for  God  to  do  ?  In  human  affairs  we  pretty  well  know  and  are  able  to 
jMge,  of  the  powers,  abilities,  and  ends  of  men,  and  of  their  wisdom.  In  judging  of 
a  house  you  do  not  think  merely  of  the  man  who  is  to  live  in  it,  but  of  the  power, 
station,  wealth,  and  so  on  of  the  builder,  and  then  you  judge  whether  or  no  too 
much  has  been  lavished  upon  it.  So  in  regard  to  this  earth.  True,  it  is  for  man  to 
inhabit,  but  we  are  not  to  think  of  him  only,  but  of  the  great  Builder  and  Maker, 
who  is  God.  And  as  He  has  infinite  power,  who  are  we  that  we  should  say  that 
He  has  spent  too  much  ?  II.  And  do  we  comprehend  fully  the  end  proposed  ? 
If  you  see  a  great  building,  but  know  not  for  what  use  it  is  intended,  how  can 
you  say  whether  it  be  too  large  or  small,  or  aught  else  about  it  ?    III.  And  this 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

EEASONING  APPLIES  ALSO  TO  THE  WORKS  OF  GRACE.  It  is  indeed  wondsrful  that 
the  Son  of  God  should  be  born  of  a  virgin,  and  suffer  and  die  for  our  redemption. 
But  why  should  we  object  ?  Do  we  know  that  the  end  proposed  could  have  been 
gained  in  any  other  way  ?  And  what  is  there  wonderful,  other  than  being  unusual, 
ill  that  Christ  should  be  born  of  a  virgin?  And  why  should  not  God  dwell  here,  if 
He  see  fit  ?  And  we  are  not  told  that  we  are  the  only  persons  concerned  in  the 
work  of  redemption.  Redemption  has  far-reaching  purposes.  Who  are  we,  then, 
to  judge  of  it  as  some  do  ?  And  if  we  find,  as  we  do,  that  God  has  taken  such  care 
for  our  present  life,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  He  will  also  care  for  our 
spirits  ?  In  both  nature  and  grace,  the  works  of  God  are  indeed  wonderful,  and 
we  unworthy  of  the  least  of  them.  And  we  may  justly  say  of  both  :  Lord,  what  is 
man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?     {Thomas  Sherlock,  D.D.)  God  mindful  of 

man  : — Look  at  these  words  in  reference — I.  To  David.  He  wrote  the  Psalm.  It 
expresses — 1.  Wonder — that  God  should  have  chosen  him.  God  acts  as  a  sovereign, 
choosing  whom  He  will.  2.  Care — for  God  had  been  very  mindful  of  him.  II.  To 
Christ.  He  is  the  grand  sum  and  substance  of  the  Psalms.  And  here  we  have — 
1.  Wonder  ;  for  how  wonderful  is  Christ.  2.  Care — God  took  care  of  Him.  III.  To 
SAINTS.  This  their  language.  It  is  that  of — 1.  Depreciation  ;  for  how  little 
and  how  unworthy  are  they.  2.  Acknowledgment ;  for  God  hath  been  mindful  of 
His  people.  3.  Observation  :  What  is  God  in  His  nature,  covenant,  person  ?  And 
what  is  man,  by  nature,  fallen,  renewed  ?  4.  Inference :  That  as  God  is  mindful 
of  you,  you  are  to  be  mindful  of  God.  Be  consoled.  Maintain  communion.  Look 
on  to  the  eternal  future.  {Edward  Andrews,  LL.D.)  God  mindful  of  man: — 
Christianity  viewed  as  a  system  is  seen  to  be  sublime,  when  we  consider  the  oneness 
and  harmony  of  its  grand  design.  But  infidelity  is  not  so  ;  it  is  inconsistent  with 
itself.  Some  say  that  human  nature  can  regenerate,  can  perfect  itself ;  that  it  has 
in  it  a  principle  inherently  good,  and  needs  no  Gospel  to  lead  it  into  the  way  of 
truth.  Others  say,  man  is  so  insignificant  that  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  he  can 
be  brought  into  contact  with  God  ;  he  is  but  dust,  and  as  such  is  born  and  dies. 
They  quote  our  text  in  a  sense  the  opposite  of  that  in  which  it  is  meant.  But  it 
meets  both  objections.  The  first — that  man  can  perfect  himself.  For  the  Psalm 
evidently  expresses  astonishment  at  the  condescension  of  God  in  visiting  creatures 
so  unworthy  of  His  regard.  Then  people,  in  their  pride,  think  that  God  has  not 
visited  man  at  all,  nor  do  they  desire  that  He  should.  Man  does  not  need  it. 
Thus  they  set  aside  the  whole  government  of  God,  and  turn  the  world  into  a 
desolate  wilderness,  and  make  the  humau  race  orphans,  with  no  Father  to  guide,  to 
help,  to  save.  And  then  the  second  objection — that  we  are  too  insignificant  for 
God  to  notice.  This  is  a  more  natural  thought  than  the  former  one,  but  it  is, 
nevertheless,  a  very  hurtful  one.  It  resolves  iteelf,  really,  into  an  infirmity  of  our 
perceptive  faculties.  It  dethrones  God,  for  it  makes  Him  like  ourselves.  We,  no 
doubt,  are  confined  and  baffled  in  the  presence  of  a  multitude  of  objects.  But  God 
is  not  as  we  are.  He  does  care  for  the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest.  The  creation 
that  is  lower  than  ourselves  refutes  the  objection  ;  for  if  God  care  not  for  us,  still 
less  will  He  care  for  them.  I.  How  God  is  mindful  of  man.  1.  He  is  so  always, 
from  the  earliest  hour  of  our  infancy.  2.  He  has  provided  all  things  necessary  for 
our  existence.  3.  And  for  our  happiness.  He  has  given  us  the  pleasures  of  sense, 
of  imagination,  of  friendship,  of  memory  ;  above  all,  the  pleasure  of  holiness. 
How  monstrous,  then,  the  thought  that  God  has  left  the  world  to  shift  for  itself, 
that  He  is  far  off  and  takes  no  notice  of  us.  4.  Read  also  the  Scripture  histories 
for  further  proof.  See  how  God  visited  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,  and  others.  How 
He  became  incarnate  in  Christ,  whose  whole  life  showed  how  God  was  mindful  of 
man.  And  especially  it  was  a  visit  of  atonement.  And  now  it  is  by  His  Spirit, 
who  strives  with  each  man's  soul  ;  who  meets  us  in  prayer,  and  in  our  worship  in 
God's  house.  5.  And  He  is  mindful  of  us  in  His  providence.  Even  our  afflictions 
are  all  for  our  good.  II.  But  why  is  He  thus  mindful  of  us  ?  We  may  well 
wonder  why.  True,  man  is  endowed  with  mind  capable  of  understanding  truth, 
but  the  chief  reason  is.  For  God  so  loved  the  world,  &c.  III.  Then,  should  we 
NOT  BE  mindful  OF  HiM  ?  {W.  M.  Puv^hon.)  The  Divine  regard  to  man: — 
I,  A  SUMMARY  SURVEY  OF  God's  REGARD  TO  MAN.  In  all  the  helpless  years  of 
infancy  and  childhood.  In  all  the  dangers  and  snares  of  youth.  In  all  the  concerns 
of  manhood.  In  all  the  infirmity  and  decrepitude  of  old  age.  He  is  mindful  of  us 
in  providing  "all  things  needful" — laying  the  whole  creation  under  contribution 
towards  our  benefit,  and  also  by  a  constant  inspection  of  our  heart  and  our  ways. 
He  visits  man — 1.  By  visible  manifestations  of  His  presence.     2.  By  the  incarnation 


PSALM  vin.]  THE  PSALMS.  151 

of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  By  the  influences  of  His  Spirit.  4.  By  the  dis- 
pensations of  His  providence.  II.  On  what  ground  we  may  justify  this 
PROFUSION  OF  BOUNTY  AND  REGARD  TO  MAN.  What  is  man  viewed  as  a  material 
beiug,  and  an  inhabitant  of  the  present  world  only  ?  In  point  of  magnitude, 
splendour  and  magnificence,  or  duration.  Looking  at  man  in  this  light  only,  the 
Divine  conduct  towards  him  is  more  mysterious  than  ever.  What  is  man,  con- 
side  led  as  an  intelligent  being,  and  destined  to  be  the  inhabitant  of  an  eternal 
world  ?  Here  the  clouds  will  begin  to  disperse,  and  we  shall  see  the  wisdom  as  well 
as  goodness  of  God  towards  men.  What  is  man,  considered  as  a  spiritual  being,  and 
capable  of  redemption  ?  {Delta  in  "  Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.")  How 
and  why  God  is  mindful  of  man: — I.  How.  1.  Satisfying  his  mental  aspira- 
tions. Though  each  occupies  but  an  infinitesimal  space  on  the  globe,  yet  in 
every  breast  there  is  a  yearning  after  the  boundless  and  infinite.  The  child  is 
ambitious  to  climb  the  heap  of  soil  in  the  field  ;  the  youth  must  scale  mountain 
peaks  to  view  landscape  and  sea ;  the  man  must  leave  native  lands  to  conquer 
forests  of  unexplored  continents  ;  the  sailor  yearns  to  reach  the  poles  ;  and  then, 
after  navigating  the  globe  and  bringing  up  from  its  heart  unnumbered  treasures,  the 
play  of  human  ambitions  is  not  finished.  But  a  moment  comes  when  mere 
materialistic  investigations  and  discoveries  do  not  satisfy.  Our  very  knowledge  of 
the  universe  at  last  causes  us  to  recede  into  our  inner  self,  and  we  become  absorbed 
in  the  mystery  of  our  own  being.  Then  are  we  tempted  to  cry  out  in  awestruck 
wonder,  "0  Lord,  who  am  I  that  Thy  Eternal  Mind  should  be  full  of  meV 
Christ  alone  gives  the  satisfying  answer.  We  were  created  to  grow  up  into  His 
stature.  2.  Satisfying  his  spiritual  needs.  When  sordid  ambition  has  spent  its 
life  ;  when  the  hand  has  gripped  its  last  possession,  then  memory  awakes  either  as 
a  mocking  spectre  or  as  an  angel  of  peace.  Starving  souls,  come  to  Jesus.  He 
shall  feed  you  with  the  living  bread.  We  are  children  of  eternity.  3.  In  every 
circumstance  of  temporal  existence  God  rides  the  whirlwind  and  rules  the  storm. 
If  we  could  see  deep  enough,  we  should  recognise  that  "Whatever  is,  is  in  its 
causes  just."  Yet,  while  the  future  remains  a  dim,  unknown  quantity  to  our 
reason,  and  shadows  flit  across  the  canvas  of  our  daily  life,  it  is  hard  to  beUeve  that 
God  stands  within  the  shadow  keeping  watch  over  His  own.  What  we  now  call 
"  Discord "  is  really  "Harmony  not  understood."  II.  Why.  1.  Because  He  loves 
us.  God  cannot,  by  His  very  nature,  by  all  His  covenants  of  grace  and  mercy, 
leave  His  own.  But  we  can  leave  Him.  We  can  wander  from  the  Father's  house. 
2.  Because  He  desires  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should  return 
unto  Him  and  live.  Sin  is  a  gigantic  failure.  George  Eliot  says,  "  I  could  not 
live  in  peace  if  I  put  the  shadow  of  a  wilful  sin  between  myself  and  God."  It  is 
human  to  err  ;  but  fiendish  to  dwell  in  guilt.  But  Christ  died  for  sin.  Fill  your 
soul  with  the  Divine  anger  against  your  own  sin  ;  leave  it  now,  and  fly  to  the  Father 
of  lights.  (  W.  Wynn.)  That  Thou  visitest  him. — Some  crises  of  human  life 
and  their  moral  lessons: — "What  is  man?"  The  child  of  circumstance,  yet 
endowed  with  freedom  of  moral  choice,  and  weighted  with  the  responsibility 
which  that  freedom  brings.  All  creation  waited  for  the  coming  of  man,  who 
was  to  be  to  all  things,  animate  and  inanimate,  master  and  lord.  This  dominion, 
whence  was  it  ?  It  lies  not  in  superior  strength,  powers  of  endurance,  or  length 
of  days,  but  in  that  mysterious  relation  to  the  Maker  of  all.  His  likeness.  His 
image,  in  which  man  alone  of  all  God's  works  was  made.  He  is  the  being 
whom  God  made  for  this  one  beneficent  purpose,  to  be  the  recipient  of  His 
visitation,  the  object  of  His  Divine  regard.  This  visitation  is  no  accidental  feature 
introduced  to  repair  the  catastrophe  of  the  fall,  but  an  integral  part  of  God's 
original  design.  Man  was  made — each  man  is  made — to  be  the  companion,  the 
friend,  of  God  !  1.  Trace  God's  visitations  to  His  intelligent  creatures  upon  earth, 
as  Bible  history  unfolds  them  to  us.  Holy  Scripture  is  one  continuous  record 
of  God's  effort  to  catch  the  attention  of  human  ears,  and  to  win  the  afi'ection 
of  human  hearts.  If  we  had  ever  any  doubt  of  man's  destiny,  and  the  purpose 
of  his  creation,  surely  the  incarnation  of  God  has  removed  it.  2.  God  visits 
us  all  and  each.  There  are  those  general  visitations  in  which  God  has  dr&wn 
near  to  us  collectively.  When  the  history  of  this  century  is  written  no  fact  will 
stand  out  more  conspicuously  than  this,  that  it  has  witnessed  an  extraordinary  visi- 
tation of  God  in  the  revival  of  Christain  faith,  Christian  worship,  and  Christian 
practice.  There  is  another  and  very  different  form  of  visitation  that  is  quite  as 
truly  of  God.  That  large  knowledge  of  the  natural  world,  its  forces  and  their 
application,  to  which  modem  science  has  advanced  with  such  splended  strides. 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

"Never  before  have  the  aspects  of  this  natural  world  been  so  curiously,  sensitively, 
and  lovingly  watched  as  now."  How  do  we  receive  this  visitation  ?  Has  the  issue 
of  it  been,  "that  the  invisible  things  of  God  are  more  clearly  seen,"  or  has  it  been 
this, — "We  have  swept  the  heavens  with  our  telescope,  and  have  found  no  God  "  ? 
Or  are  we  afraid  of  science  altogether,  with  a  foolish,  faithless  fear,  refusing  to 
believe  that  by  its  means  God  is  drawing  nearer  to  our  souls  ?  But  there  are  also 
individual  visitations  in  which  God  makes  Himself  felt  in  every  human  life  ;  some 
of  these  are  so  striking  and  significant  that  even  the  most  careless  soul  can  only  put 
them  away  by  an  effort ;  some  of  them  so  quiet  and  commonplace  that  only  the 
spiritually  minded  will  see  God's  hand  in  them  at  all.  Shall  we  not,  then,  make  it 
our  prayer  and  our  endeavour  to  keep  alive  and  awake  within  our  souls  that 
heavenly  faculty  whereby  we  can  recognise  our  God  when  He  draws  near  in  what- 
ever way  He  please  to  visit  us?  {E.  J.  Gough,  M.A.)  The  royal  visit  and  Us 
object : — When  the  Prince  of  Wales  visited  America,  people  were  very  anxious  to 
know  what  he  came  for.  Had  he  come  to  look  into  the  principles  and  results  of  the 
Republican  Government — our  form  of  government  ?  Had  he  come  for  his  health, 
or  did  he  come  to  remain  ?  He  did  not  tell  us.  We  were  none  the  wiser  after  he 
left  us.  But  when  the  Prince  of  Heaven  came  He  did  not  come  on  any  secret 
mission.  He  told  us  He  came  that  He  might  bind  up  the  broken-hearted  ;  that  He 
might  give  liberty  to  the  captives ;  that  He  might  give  sight  to  the  blind  ;  that  He 
migtit  seek  and  save  that  which  was  lost,  and  to  strengthen  the  weak.  He  came 
to  heal ;  He  came  to  lift  up  ;  He  came  to  bless.  He  did  not  come  to  destroy  men's 
lives,  but  to  give  life.  He  did  not  come  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world 
tluuugh  Him  might  be  saved.  He  said  that  the  Father  sent  Him  that  He  might 
save  the  world.     {D.  L.  Moody.) 

Ver.  5.  For  Thou  hast  made  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels. — Man  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels : — While  the  Psalmist  refers  primarily  to  man,  we  learn  from 
St.  Paul  that  the  text  has  a  further  reference  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  The 
Ti;xT,  AS  SPOKEN  OF  MEN.  Periiaps  it  was  not  so  much  in  nature  as  in  position 
that  man,  as  first  formed,  was  inferior  to  the  angels.  Nothing  higher  could  be 
allirmed  of  the  angels  than  that  they  were  made  in  the  image  of  God.  If,  then,  they 
had  originally  superiority  over  man,  it  must  have  been  in  the  degree  of  resemblance. 
The  angel  was  made  immortal,  intellectual,  holy,  powerful,  glorious,  and  in  these 
properties  lay  their  likeness  to  the  Creator.  But  were  not  these  properties  also 
given  to  man  ?  Whatever  originally  the  relative  position  of  the  angel  and  the  man, 
we  cannot  question  that  since  the  fall  man  has  been  fearfully  inferior  to  the  angels. 
The  effect  of  transgression  has  been  to  debase  all  his  powers  ;  but,  however  degraded 
and  sunken,  he  still  retains  the  capacities  of  his  original  formation,  and  they  may 
be  so  purged  and  enlarged  as  to  produce,  if  we  may  not  say  to  restore,  the  equality. 
Take  the  intellect  of  man  ;  there  is  no  limit  to  its  progress.  Use  the  like  reasoning 
in  regard  to  power,  or  holiness,  or  dignity.  The  Bible  teems  with  notices,  that  so 
far  from  being  by  their  nature  higher  than  men,  angels  even  now  possess  not  an 
importance  which  belongs  to  our  race.  It  is  a  mysterioun  thing,  and  one  to  which 
we  scarcely  dare  allude,  that  there  has  arisen  a  Redeemer  of  fallen  men,  but  not  of 
fallen  angels.  And  angels  are  represented  as  "  ministering  spirits. "  Believers,  as 
the  children  of  God,  are  attended  and  waited  on  by  angels.  Then,  while  human 
nature  is  still  walled  ofiF  from  every  other  in  its  special  properties,  risen  spirits  may 
stand  on  a  par  with  the  very  noblest-created  intelligence,  glowing  with  the  same 
holiness,  arrayed  in  the  same  panoply,  and  gathering  in  from  all  the  works  of  God 
the  same  immenseness  of  knowledge  and  the  same  material  of  ecstasy.  II.  The 
TEXT,  AS  SPOKEN  OF  OUR  LoRD  Jestjs  Christ.  His  being  made  "a  little  lower 
than  the  angels  "  is  represented  ns  with  a  view  to  the  glory  which  was  to  be  the 
recompense  for  His  sufferings.  This  is  a  very  important  representation,  and  from 
it  may  be  drawn  a  strong  and  clear  argument  for  the  divinity  of  Christ.  We  could 
never  see  how  it  could  be  humility  in  any  creature,  whatever  the  dignity  of  his 
condition,  to  assume  the  office  of  a  Mediator,  and  to  work  out  our  reconciliation,  if  an 
unmeasured  exaltation  was  to  be  the  Mediator's  reward.  A  being  who  knew  that 
he  should  be  immeasurably  elevated  if  he  did  a  certain  thing,  can  hardly  be  com- 
mended for  the  greatness  of  his  humility  in  doing  that  thing.  He  must  be  the 
king  alre:.dy,  ere  his  entering  the  state  of  slavery  can  furnish  an  examjile  of  humility. 
And  yet  in  consenting  to  be  "made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels"  our  blessed 
Redeemer  actually  humbled  Himself.  Who,  then,  can  this  man  have  been  befnre 
becoming  man  ?     We  cannot  sujipose  that  the  attributes  or  properties  of  Godhead 


PSALM  VIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  153 

were  capable  of  being  laid  aside  or  suspended.  Shrouded  and  hidden,  but  not  laid 
aside,  was  the  divinity  of  Christ.  If  He  could  not  lay  aside  the  perfections.  He 
could  lay  aside  the  glories  of  Deity.  Every  outward  mark  of  miijesty  and  gi'eatness 
might  be  laid  aside.  He  passes  from  the  form  of  God  to  the  likeness  of  men.  It  is 
not  in  the  power  of  language  to  describe  either  the  humility  or  the  compassion  thus 
displayed.  It  was  literally  the  emptying  Himself,  the  making  Himself  poor,  "that 
we  through  His  poverty  might  be  made  rich."  {Henry  Melvtll,  B.D.)  Man  and 
angel : — ^I.  Man  lower  than  thk  angels.  1.  By  creation  the  angel  is  the  "  elder 
brother  "  of  the  two,  for  he  was  created  first.  Angels'  songs  always  bear  some  refer- 
ence to  man  ;  something  pertaining  to  man  invariably  forms  part  of  their  theme. 
Not  only  in  time  is  man  lower  than  the  angels,  he  is  so — 2.  In  the  substance  from 
which  he  is  formed.  Angels  are  pure  spirits,  but  one  part  of  man  is  formed  out  uf 
the  clay.  3.  In  his  habitation.  God  gave  heaven  for  an  abode  unto  the  anj,el.s, 
but  "the  earth  hath  He  given  to  the  children  of  men."  4.  In  his  powers.  Angels 
"excel  in  strength."  "Man  that  is  a  worm,  and  the  son  of  man  that  is  a  worm." 
5.  In  his  character.  Man  was  not  made  as  he  is,  but  he  has  made  himself  so,  by 
his  sin.  II.  Man  equal  to  the  angels.  1.  Although  not  in  the  same  workroom, 
they  are  in  the  same  service.  The  king's  livery  is  worn  by  the  humblest  guard  of 
the  mail,  as  well  as  by  the  highest  officers  of  the  household.  The  angel  said  to 
John  in  Patmos,  "I  am  thy  fellow-servant."  2.  They  are  equal  in  rights  and 
privileges.  The  godly  man  is  as  sure  of  heaven  as  any  of  the  angels  who  are  now 
there  :  only  as  yet  he  is  not  made  meet  for  it.  3.  In  kindred,  for  n)an,  too,  is  a 
child  of  God.  4.  In  duration  of  existence.  Every  man  is  to  exist  for  ever. 
"Neither  can  they  die  anymore."  III.  Man  higher  than  the  angels.  That 
is,  in  his  glorified  state.  1.  He  shall  have  a  better  feast.  There  will  be  dishes  on 
man's  table  that  angels  can  never  taste.  2.  Better  apparel.  Man's  garments  will 
be  the  workmanship  of  "grace."  They  are  more  expensive.  Angels'  garments 
cost  only  a  word  ;  but  blood  was  essential  to  wash  the  robes  of  the  saints  and  to 
make  them  white.  3.  A  better  song.  Saints  have  themes  the  angels  cannot  think 
upon,  and  strains  which  they  can  never  reach.  4.  A  better  position,  and  superior 
privileges.  Angels  shall  approach  very  near  the  throne  ;  but  they  shall  never  sit 
upon  it.  {David  Roberts,  D.D.)  God's  idea  of  man : — What  is  the  "  little  "  which 
marks  man's  inferiority?  It  is  mainly  that  the  spirit,  which  is  God's  image,  is 
confined  in  and  limited  by  flesh,  and  subject  to  death.  The  distance  from  the  apex 
of  creation  to  the  Creator  must  ever  be  infinite  ;  but  man  is  so  far  above  the  non- 
sentient,  though  mighty,  stars  and  the  creatures  that  share  earth  with  him,  by 
reason  of  his  being  made  in  the  Divine  image — i.e.  having  consciousness,  will,  and 
reason — that  the  distance  is  foreshortened.  The  gulf  between  man  and  matter  is 
greater  than  that  between  man  and  God.  The  moral  separation  caused  by  sin  is 
not  in  the  Psalmist's  mind.  Thus  man  is  invested  with  some  reflection  of  God's 
glory,  and  wears  this  as  a  crown.  He  is  king  on  earth.  .  .  .  Such  then  is  man, 
as  God  meant  him  to  be.  Such  a  being  is  a  more  glorious  revelation  of  the  Name 
than  all  stars  and  systems.  Looked  at  in  regard  to  his  duration,  his  years  are  a 
handbreadth  before  these  shining  ancients  of  days  that  have  seen  his  generations 
fret  their  little  hour  and  sink  into  silence  ;  looked  at  in  contrast  with  their  magni- 
tude and  numbers,  numberless,  he  is  but  an  atom,  and  his  dwelling-place  a  S2)eek. 
Science  increases  the  knowledge  of  his  insignificance,  but  perhaps  not  the  impression 
of  it  made  on  a  quiet  heart  by  the  simple  sight  of  the  heavens.  But  besides  the 
merely  scientific  view,  and  the  merely  poetic,  and  the  grimly  agnostic,  there  is  the 
other,  the  religious,  and  it  is  as  valid  to-day  as  ever.  To  it  the  heavens  are  the 
work  of  God's  finger,  and  their  glories  are  His,  set  there  by  Him.  That  being  so, 
man's  littleness  magnifies  the  Name,  because  it  enhances  the  condescending  love  of 
God,  which  has  greatened  the  littleness  by  such  nearness  of  care,  and  such  gifts  of 
dignity.  The  reflection  of  His  glory  which  blazes  in  the  lieavens  is  less  bright  than 
that  which  gleams  in  the  crown  of  glory  and  honour  on  man's  lowly  yet  lofty  head. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  dignity  of  man — his  restlessness : — "  But  little  lower 
than  God  "  (R.  V.).  It  seems  as  though  man  were  born  with  the  rndiii;ents  of  omui- 
science,  and  was  therefore  bound  to  be  made  impatient  by  the  discovered  presence 
of  anything  that  declined  to  be  known  ;  and  born,  likewise,  with  the  rudiments  of 
omnipresence,  and  therefore  bound  to  be  disquieted  by  the  sight  of  any  frontier  not 
yet  transcended.  That  is  one  of  the  startling  proofs  of  the  impatient  in  our  nature. 
Put  a  man  in  a  room,  and,  no  matter  how  large  the  room,  he  wants  the  window  up  ; 
every  place  crowds  and  we  want  to  move  out.  From  the  time  when  Abraham 
crossed  the  Euphrates  and  Joshua  went  over  the  Jordan,  mankind  has  been  wanting 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  viii. 

to  get  out  and  over  the  river.  We  do  not  know  all  the  lakes  in  Africa  yet,  but 
some  of  us  are  a  good  deal  more  interested  over  the  imagined  discovery  of  canals  in 
the  planet  Mars  than  we  are  over  the  seas  and  waterways  of  the  distant  parts  of  our 
own  globe.  No  pasture  is  so  large  but  we  want  to  get  over  the  fence  and  crop  the 
grass  on  the  other  side.  Not  only  are  we  irritated  by  limitations  of  place,  and  try 
to  be  ubiquitous,  but  are  similarly  annoyed  by  limitations  of  time,  and  attempt 
to  explore  and  map  the  centuries  that  preface  recorded  history,  and  even  the  ages 
that  are  the  threshold  of  the  present  history  of  the  earth  and  heavens.  We  are  so 
accustomed  to  this  habitual  intrusion  into  untraversed  domains  that  it  can  easily 
escape  us  what  a  certain  irrepressibleness  moving  within  us  all  this  betokens  ;  and 
this  sailiug  out  among  the  stars  and  then  coming  home,  for  a  little  while,  to  make 
a  book  of  what  we  have  seen  there,  what  the  stars  are  made  of,  how  large  they  are, 
how  much  they  weigh,  whether  they  are  young  or  old,  infant,  middle-aged,  grey- 
haired,  or  imbecile,  and  this  groping  back  into  the  old  years  of  our  universe, 
towards  the  primeval  days,  tracking  the  progress  of  events,  or  tiying  to  decipher 
the  wheel-marks  made  in  the  old  strata  or  on  the  cosmic  star-mist  by  the  giant  car 
of  onward  movement  when  creation's  springtide  was  yet  on,  and.  then  coming 
quietly  back  to  to-day,  and  in  an  easy-chair  by  the  fire  complacently  pencilling 
aiary  notes  of  the  world's  babyhood,  and  with  no  feeling  at  all  but  that  it  is  the 
thing  for  a  man  to  do,  that  the  universe  is  to  be  known,  and  that  man  is  here  to 
know  it — well,  there  is  a  Titanic  audacity  about  it  all  that  is  to  me  superbly  up- 
lifting. Man  may  have  failed  in  a  good  deal  that  he  attempts,  a  good  many  diary 
memoranda  he  may  have  entered  under  the  wrong  day  of  the  month  or  even  under 
the  wrong  month,  but  there  is  a  hugeness  in  the  very  venture  that  betrays  Titanic 
fibre.  There  are  certain  heights  of  audacity  that  the  fool  may  essay  to  scale,  but 
there  are  cloud- piercing  pinnacles  of  audacity  that  there  is  not  room  in  a  fool's  mind 
to  even  conceive  or  tension  to  adventure.  But  not  only  can  man  stand  up  in  the 
face  of  nature  and  cross-question  it  and  compel  it  to  testify  too,  but  he  can  exercise 
upon  nature  a  volitional  as  well  as  an  intellectual  mastery,  and  can  harness  it  to 
his  own  purposes.  We  are  not  afraid  of  the  World  any  more,  in  the  old  way  in 
which  men  used  to  be,  partly  because  we  know  her  way.  We  know  how  to  take 
her.  We  have  a  presentiment  of  what  she  is  plotting  before  she  does  it,  and  so  not 
likely,  as  once,  to  be  caught  napping.  The  forces  that  used  to  play  about  us  with 
all  the  untrained  friskiness  of  wild  horses,  prancing  and  cantering  over  the  plain, 
we  have  caught,  some  of  them,  and  have  put  a  collar  about  their  necks  and  bits  in 
their  mouths,  and,  by  means  of  a  good  deal  of  draft-tackle  that  we  have  rather 
ingeniously  devised,  have  set  them  drawing  our  loads,  turning  our  wheels,  working 
our  machinery,  and  running  all  our  errands.  And,  now,  what  we  call  Civilisation 
is,  a  good  deal  of  it,  simply  a  matter  of  the  success  with  which  we  make  nature  do 
our  work.  We  are  not,  of  course,  claiming  for  man  that  he  has  completely  subjected 
the  world's  wide  energy.  Storm  and  steam  have  still  to  be  dealt  with  warily — 
a  thunderbolt  is  still  hot  if  handled  carelessly ;  but  the  entire  attitude  of  man 
towards  all  these  things  is  changed.  A  lion  is  stronger  than  a  man,  and  if  the  two 
meet  on  brute  ground  the  lion  will  always  be  a  good  deal  more  than  a  match  for 
him  ;  but  man  is  a  good  deal  smarter  than  the  lion,  and  if  the  two  meet  on  an 
intelligent  ground,  the  lion  will  be  driven  to  the  wall.  So  in  regard  to  the  raw 
energies  of  the  material  world,  if  man  undertakes  to  wrestle  with  nature  on  material 
ground,  man  will  invariably  be  whipped,  and  the  bit  of  lightning  would  be  just  as 
demoralising  to  a  Socrates  as  to  a  mule  or  pony,  providing  the  encounter  take  place 
on  territory  that  is  distinctively  the  liglitning's  own.  But  let  a  man  take  that 
same  bit  of  lightning  on  to  ground  that  is  distinctively  his  own,  and  he  will  file  its 
teeth  and  put  a  muzzle  over  its  nose,  and  tie  a  string  around  its  neck  and  attach  a 
letter  to  that  string  and  send  the  little  amphibious  streak  either  under  the  water  to 
Loudon  or  overland  to  San  Francisco,  and  all  over  so  quickly  that  you  see  his 
muzzle  on  the  return  trip  almost  before  you  had  time  to  know  that  he  was  fully 
off.  That  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  man  is  when  he  steps  off  from  the  ground  of 
materiality  or  of  brutality  and  gathers  himself  together  on  the  imperial  platform 
of  his  own  God-imitating  personality  ;  and  there  is  where  he  wants  to  keep  him- 
self in  all  this  matter  of  trying  to  appreciate  his  true  and  genuine  denotement. 
Damaging  and  discouraging  suspicions  of  diminutiveness  are  never  going  to  insinuate 
themselves  and  get  the  better  of  us  till  we  have  been  allowing  our  measure  to  bo 
calculated  on  some  other  basis  than  that  of  what  we  distinctly  are  as  personal 
beings.  That  is  why  David  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  very  Psalm  was  oppressed  by 
thoughts  of  man's  littleness ;  he  undertook  to  compute  human  greatness  with  an 


PSALM  vin.]  THE  PSALMS.  155 

astronomical  tape-line  ;  he  was  distressed  by  the  small  figure  he  made  as  seen 
against  the  vastness  of  the  stellar  sky  taken  as  a  background.  But  the  mere 
arithmetic  immensity  of  the  heavens  has  properly  nothing  to  do  with  it ;  yardsticks 
are  utterly  foreign  to  the  account.  It  was  a  far  greater  thing  to  be  David  con- 
templating the  heavens  than  it  was  to  be  the  heavens  making  eyes  at  David.  It  is 
a  greater  thing  to  be  able  to  think  the  heavens  than  it  is  to  be  the  heavens. 
(Charles  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Man's  glory — its  loss  and  recovery : — In  the  apse  of 
St.  Sophia's,  Constantinople,  the  guide  points  out  a  place  where  there  is  a  hidden 
face  of  Christ  portrayed  by  some  early  Christian  artist.  When  the  Mohammedan 
conqueror  possessed  himself  of  that  noble  Christian  temple  he  ordered  all  Christian 
symbols  to  be  effaced.  This  beautiful  head  of  Christ  was  covered  over  with  canvas. 
when  the  Christian  conqueror  again  enters  the  gates  of  Constantinople  the  canvas 
will  doubtless  be  torn  away  and  this  bit  of  early  Christian  art  be  brought  to  light 
and  restored  ;  and  let  but  the  gates  of  the  city  of  man's  soul  be  opened  to  the  con- 
quering King,  and  his  Lord  shall  strip  away  the  sins  that  hide  God's  glory  in  these 
fleshly  temples,  and  the  resplendent  image  of  God  shall  be  seen  in  men  once  more. 

Ver.  6.  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion. — Man's  dominion : — Dominion  is  a 
far-reaching  word.  We  have  not  yet  thrown  our  measuring-line  upon  it,  and 
realised  all  its  suggestions  and  inspiration.  Is  there  not  a  stirring  sometimes  in  the 
heart,  which  means  :  I  was  meant  to  be  a  king  ;  I  was  meant  to  be  master  ;  I  was 
meant  to  exercise  dominion — dominion  over  the  enticements  of  matter  ;  it  was 
intended  that  I  should  be  able  to  say  to  the  most  fascinating  spectacles  that  could 
appeal  to  me — Stand  back  !  Man  was  meant  to  have  dominion  over  the  satisfactions 
of  sense.  Is  it  not  quite  heroic,  in  some  small  way  at  least,  that  a  man  shall  be  able 
to  say  to  a  habit,  I  have  done  with  thee  ;  you  do  not  leave  this  day  fortnight — you 
leave  now !  That  is  what  God  means  man  to  be  and  to  do  in  regard  to  everything 
that  is  not  of  the  nature  of  God  Himself.  It  is  well  to  put  our  very  habits  through 
a  process  of  discipline,  supposing  the  habit  to  be  not  altogether  wicked.  Is  it  worth 
while  that  we  should  be  able  to  hold  things  in  dominion  if  we  cannot  hold  ourselves 
in  check  1  The  great  aim  of  every  life  should  bo  self-control,  dominion  over  self. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7,  8.  Thou  hast  put  all  thingps  under  his  feet,  &c. — Cruelty  to  animals: — 
If  the  lower  creation  were  not  too  insignificant  or  worthless  to  contribute  to  the 
glory  of  Jeslis,  they  cannot  be  deemed  too  insignificant  for  Him  to  care  for,  and  for 
us  to  protect  and  honour.  We  know  it  is  said  of  His  saints  that  ' '  he  that  toucheth 
them,  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."  In  other  words,  He  feels  what  is  done  to 
His  people  as  sensitively  as  if  it  had  been  done  to  Himself.  And,  of  course,  while 
there  is  a  sense  in  which,  using  human  language.  He  must  be  jealous  of  them,  as  He 
is  in  regard  to  no  other  (they  being  emphatically  the  fruit  of  the  travail  of  His  soul), 
yet  if  all  creatures  have  been  intrusted  to  His  sovereignty,  and  are  the  subjects  of 
His  sway,  He  must  regard  any  wanton  injustice  or  cruelty  inflicted  on  the  meanest 
and  the  lowliest  as  an  unwarranted  aggression  on  what  the  old  divines  call  His 
"rectorial  rights."  It  may  seem  to  some  an  unnecessary  straining  of  the  subject : 
that  it  would  be  better  to  rest  and  vindicate  it  on  principles  of  ordinary  benevolence. 
It  is  well,  indeed,  that  we  can  take  up  the  lower  ground  too,  and,  for  those  who  would 
scorn  the  appeal  to  gospel  motive,  address  ourselves  to  the  claims  and  sympathies 
of  our  common  humanity.  But  I  do  confess  it  seems  to  me  that  this  theme  secures 
a  far  more  commanding  demonstration  when  we  see  the  lower  animals,  whose 
oppression  we  are  called  to  denounce,  placed  under  the  especial  care  and  authority  of 
the  Redeemer ;  that  as  the  living  creatures  were  brought  one  by  one  to  the  first 
Adam  to  be  named  and  placed  under  his  protection,  so  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord 
from  heaven,  who  is  to  restore  in  every  respect  what  the  other  forfeited,  has  had 
among  the  "all  things  put  under  His  feet,"  "all  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  whatsoever 
passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  sea."  Though  the  members  of  the  lowlier  creation 
are  represented  in  the  text  as  subjected  to  the  rule  of  Christ,  they  have  been 
subordinated  by  Him  to  the  care  of  man.  To  man,  as  high  priest  of  creation,  they 
have  been  made  over  at  once  for  his  use,  and  to  secure  his  protection  and  kindness. 
In  thus  consigning  them  to  his  custody,  this  great  Lord  of  nature  has  given 
significant  intimation  of  the  treatment  He  Himself  designs  them  to  receive  at  the 
hands  of  their  deputed  governor.  He  has  manifested  on  every  side  a  desire  for  the 
happiness  of  His  creatures.     Pain  is  in  no  instance  the  law  or  condition  of  their 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  VIII. 

being.  The  sport  of  the  insect,  the  carol  of  the  lark,  the  gambols  of  the  quadruped, 
the  gush  of  summer  song  in  the  groves  and  woods,  all  read  the  design  and  intention 
of  a  bountiful,  beneficent,  and  benevolent  Ruler.  And  if  man,  therefore,  abuse  his 
delegated  authority,  and  instead  of  the  merciful  guardian  and  friend  of  the  helpless, 
become  the  rigorous  tyrant  and  torturer,  does  he  not  thereby  set  himself  up  in 
guilty  defiance  of  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty,  and  do  what  he  can  to  abridge  the 
happiness  he  was  commissioned  to  provide  and  promote  ?  We  shall  proceed  to 
enforce,  from  a  few  brief  considerations,  the  duty  of  abstaining  from  the  infliction 
of  pain  on  the  inferior  creation,  and  their  paramount  claims  on  man's  sympathy, 
protection,  and  kindness.  Let  us  advert,  at  the  outset,  to  a  lurking  and  widely 
accepted  fallacy  with  regard  to  the  lower  animals  having  a  comparative  insensibility 
to  pain.  That  they  are  capable  of  a  certain  amount  of  suff"ering  none  dare  dispute, 
but  we  question  if  there  be  not  at  the  root  of  much  of  that  reckless  torture  of  which 
they  are  the  subjects,  an  impression  that  their  wild  and  untamed  habits  of  life  and 
their  iron  frames  make  them  proof  against  the  physical  anguish  of  which  the  human 
being  is  susceptible.  I  would  ask  what  in  anatomy,  what  in  physiology  is  there  to 
bear  out  such  an  hypothesis  ?  How  can  I  more  befittingly  sum  up  this  subject  than 
by  a  closing  reference  and  reply  ?  Some  have  ventured  to  assert  that  the  lower 
animals,  being  infinitely  beneath  us  in  the  scale  of  being,  are  unfit  subjects  and 
objects  for  any  such  special  and  exceptional  tenderness  as  that  for  which  we  plead. 
I  ask.  Where  should  we  have  been  at  this  moment  if  this  were  a  recognised  and 
universally-acted-upon  law  in  the  government  of  God  —  that  a  being,  because 
superior  in  the  scale  of  existence ,  should  refuse  to  bestow  regard  or  interest  on  those 
who  are  some  degrees  beneath  him  ?  Is  not  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  one 
marvellous  display  of  the  condescension  and  kindness  of  one  Being  to  those  im- 
measurably below  Him  ?  Man's  condescension  to  the  lower  animals  !  What  is  this 
in  comparison  with  God's  regardfulness  of  man  ?  The  former  is  but  the  attention 
and  kindness  of  one  creature  to  another,  both  springing  from  earth,  both  hastening 
to  dissolution.  But  the  kindness  of  God  to  the  human  offspring  is  that  of  the 
Infinite  to  the  finite,  Almightiness  to  nothingness.  Deity  to  dust !  Oh,  if  God, 
the  great  God  Almighty,  thus  visits  the  guilty  with  tenderness,  shall  we  visit 
the  innocent  and  unoffending  with  cruelty  and  oppression  ?  when  He  has  thrown  the 
shield  of  His  merciful,  but  unmerited,  protection  over  us,  shall  we  thus  requite  His 
kindness  by  acting  toward  the  humbler  creatures  of  His  hands  with  contempt  and 
disdainful  neglect  ?  No  !  as  we  behold  His  kingdom  stretching  downwards  from  the 
pinnacles  of  glory  to  every  living  thing  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth,  where 
from  the  beginning  His  delights  have  been,  let  us  recognise  the  beauty  and  profound 
meaning  of  that  magnificent  vision  which  burst  on  the  prophet  by  the  river  Chebar 
— significant  exposition  of  the  Mediator's  sovereignty  :  the  fourfold  resemblances  or 
images  of  creature-forms,  of  which  only  one  was  human,  and  the  other  three  of  the 
lower  animals — the  lion,  the  ox,  and  the  eagle;  while  over  all,  in  the  sapphire 
firmament,  we  read,  was  "the  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  a  man."  It  was  the 
very  truth  and  language  of  our  text  embodied  and  symbolised  :  the  all-glorious  and 
glorified  Mediator  presiding  over  the  Kingdom  of  Providence,  and  demonstrating  in 
the  most  extensive  sense  "His  Kingdom  ruleth  over  all"  !  Seeing,  then,  that  all 
creatures  thus  wait  upon  Him,  that  He  gives  them  their  meat  in  due  season,  let  the 
topic  of  our  meditation  (pleading,  and  pleading  all  the  more  earnestly  for  those  who 
cannot  plead  for  themselves)  receive  the  loftiest  enforcement  by  joining  in  with  the 
loyal  ascription  of  the  Psalmist — "Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet." 
{J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The  supreme  rule  of  Christ : — This  Psalm  is  stamped  with 
a  world-wide  breadth  ;  it  is  of  no  nation,  it  is  of  all  time  ;  it  shines  with  a  light 
transcending  that  of  mere  human  genius.  We  are  brought  face  to  face  with  these 
three — nature,  man,  and  God.  Here  is  no  picture  drawn  from  nature.  This 
description — "Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet" — does  not,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  describe  man's  present  position  on  the  globe.  All  things  are  not  put  under 
him.  He  does  not  reign  over  nature,  he  wrestles  with  nature.  The  Psalmist  is 
not  using  here  the  language  of  prophetic  inspiration.  He  is  looking  back  to  the 
primitive  glory,  the  primeval  character  of  man  as  it  is  written  upon  the  very  first 
page  of  this  book.  The  Bible  grasps  so  firmly  the  unseen  future,  just  because  it 
plants  its  foot  so  strongly  upon  the  past.  Human  nature  did  not  crawl  up  from 
sentient  slime ;  man  was  bom  with  the  likeness  of  his  Father  shining  out  from, 
his  very  countenance,  able  to  converse  with  God,  and  to  render  intelligent  and 
loving  obedience  to  God.  Turn  to  the  New  Testament  Scriptures.  A  new  light, 
a  new  glory,  suddenly  breaks  forth  from  them.     ' '  We  see  Jesus  .  .  .  crowned  with; 


PSALM  IX.]  THE  PSALMS.  157 

glory  and  honour."  In  Scripture  there  is  but  one  Divine  right,  and  that  is  God's 
own  right.  "His  Kingdom  ruleth  over  all."  This  authority  is  the  inherent, 
eternal  right  of  God  in  the  very  nature  of  things.  Is  it  impossible  to  transfer  it  ? 
Is  it  conceivable  that  the  Almighty  God  should  give  His  glory  to  another  ?  Jesus 
said,  "All  authority  is  given  to  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  In  the  days  of  His 
humiliation,  our  Saviour  constantly  exercised  four  kinds  of  authority — the  authority 
to  forgive  sin  ;  the  authority  to  declare  truth  ;  the  authority  to  rule  nature  ;  and 
the  authority  over  human  hearts  and  consciences  —  the  claim  of  universal  and 
absolute  obedience  and  faith.  These  four  are  in  close  and  inseparable  moral  unity. 
(E.  B.  Conder,  D.D.) 


PSALM   IX. 

V«RS.  1-20.  Iwill  praise  Thee,  0  Lord. — Praise,  trust,  and  prayer : — In  the  Scptua- 
gint,  this  Psalm  refers  to  the  death  of  the  Divine  Son,  and  recites  His  victory  over 
death,  the  grave,  and  all  our  foes.  I.  Theke  is  a  PREnoMiNANT  note  of  peaisk. 
(Vers.  1-6,  11,  12,  14.)  Let  us  not  praise  with  a  divided,  but  a  whole  heart.  It  is 
incited  by  recounting  all  God's  works.  Let  memory  heap  fuel  on  the  altar  of  praise. 
II.  There  is  an  assertion  of  trust.  (Vers.  7-12,  18.)  The  oppressed,  the  humble, 
the  needy,  and  the  poor  have  strong  encouragement.  Calamity  drives  them  to  God, 
and  so  they  come  to  know  Him,  and  then  the  more  they  trust  Him.  Doubt  is  born 
of  ignorance.  Leave  God  to  vindicate  you;  He  will  not  forget.  III.  There  is 
A  petition  for  further  help.  (Vers.  13,  19,  20.)  What  a  contrast  between  the 
gates  of  death  (ver.  13),  and  the  gates  of  the  Holy  City  (ver.  14) !  See  Haman  as 
illustrating  ver.  15.  He  who  lifts  the  righteous,  hurls  down  the  wicked.  It  is  a 
sin  to  forget  God  (ver.  17).  [F.  B.  Meytr,  B.A.)  The  ministry  of  praise : — "  I 
will  praise  Thee."  That  is  the  note  that  is  too  commonly  silent  in  our  religious  life. 
We  rarely  gather  together  for  the  supremely  exhilarating  business  of  praise.  In  the 
Psalm  is  a  man  who  sets  himself  to  the  business  of  praise,  as  though  he  were  about 
to  engage  in  a  great  matter.  He  sets  about  it  with  undivided  attention — "with  my 
whole  heart."  The  word  "heart"  is  a  spacious  word.  It  includes  all  the  interior 
things,  all  the  central  things ;  when  a  man  comes  to  praise,  will,  intellect,  and 
imagination  must  all  be  active.  He  must  bring  to  the  ministry  of  praise  the  worshi[) 
of  his  feelings.  Come  will,  and  make  my  praise  forceful.  Come  intellect,  and  make 
it  enlightened.  Come  feeling,  and  make  it  affectionate.  In  the  words,  "  I  will 
■how  forth,"  is  suggested  that  he  will  score  it  as  with  a  mark,  he  will  not  allow  it 
to  slip  by  unrecorded.  He  will  keep  a  journal  of  mercies.  He  will  not  only  register 
the  ' '  marvellous  works, "  he  will  publish  them.  The  word  is  suggestive  not  only  of 
a  notebook,  but  of  a  proclamation.  "  I  will  rejoice,"  the  word  is  suggestive  of  the 
exulting  bubbling  of  the  spring.  The  two  words,  "glad,"  "rejoice,"  together  give 
us  the  image  of  the  leaping  waters  with  the  sunshine  on  them.  And  such  is  always 
the  joy  of  the  Lord.  It  is  fresh  as  the  spring,  and  warm  and  cheering  as  the  sun- 
light. {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  A  praiseful  heart: — We  should  praise  God  more, 
and  thank  Him  more  often  for  His  ceaseless  goodness.  How  can  we  forget  His 
countless  benefits?  Dean  Alford  said,  "It  seems  to  me  that  five  minutes  of  real 
thanksgiving  for  the  love  of  our  dear  Saviour  is  worth  a  year  of  hard  reasoning  on 
the  hidden  parts  of  our  redemption."  Of  the  last  days  of  the  Venerable  Bede,  his 
disciple  Cuthbert  wrote,  "He  was  much  troubled  with  shortness  of  breath,  yet  with- 
out pain,  before  the  day  of  our  Lord's  resurrection,  that  is,  for  about  a  fortnight,  and 
thus  he  afterwards  passed  his  life  cheerful  and  rejoicing,  giving  thanks  to  Almighty 
God  every  day  and  night,  nay,  every  hour,  till  the  day  of  our  Lord's  ascension.  He 
also  passed  all  the  night  awake  in  joy  and  thanksgiving,  unless  a  short  sleep  pre- 
vented it,  in  which  case  he  no  sooner  awoke  than  he  presently  repeated  his  wonted 
eu'ercises,  and  ceased  not  to  give  thanks  to  God  with  uplifted  bauds.  I  declare  with 
truth  that  I  have  never  seen  with  my  eyes,  or  heard  with  my  ears,  any  man  so 
earnest  in  giving  thanks  to  the  living  God." 

Ver.  4.  Thou  hast  maintained  my  right.  Thou  satest  in  the  throne  judging: 
right. — Mans  rvjht,  and  God's  righi  : — The  first  part  of  the  fourth  verse  seems  to  be 
merely  personal,  but  the  second  clause  of  the  verse  is  universal.  In  the  first  clause 
we  may  put  so  much  emphasis  upon  the  personal  pronoun  as  to  make  tliis  a  merely 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ix. 

individual  instance,  as  if  God  had  specialised  one  man  as  against  many  men,  without 
inquiring  into  the  merits  of  the  case.  The  second  clause  reads,  "Thou  satest  in 
the  throne  judging  right."  That  is  the  universal  tone.  Not — God  sitting  in  the 
throne  selecting  favourites,  distributing  prizes  and  rewards  according  to  some 
arbitrary  law,  but  God  sitting  in  the  throne  judging  right,  whoever  was  u[)on  one 
side  or  the  other  in  the  controversy.  The  whole  encounter  is  delivered  from  the 
narrow  limitation  of  personal  misunderstanding  and  individual  conduct,  and  is  m^de 
one  of  rectitude,  and  God  is  indicated  as  taking  part  with  the  right.  This  is  com- 
foi't ;  this,  in  fact,  is  the  only  true  and  lasting  solace.  If  there  were  anything 
narrow,  in  the  merely  personal  sense,  in  the  government  and  providence  of  God,  we 
should  be  thrown  into  unrest  and  faithlessness,  or  the  most  humiliating  fear  ;  but 
make  the  providence  of  God  turn  upon  right,  and  then  every  man  who  does  right,  or 
who  wishes  to  be  right  and  to  do  right,  may  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven  and  say  :  My 
help  cometh  from  the  everlasting  hills  ;  I  \vill  bear  all  difficulties  bravely,  with  a 
really  manful  and  sweet  patience,  because  in  the  end  right  will  be  vindicated  and 
crowned.  Right  is  not  with  any  set  of  persons,  right  is  not  a  possession  guaranteed 
to  any  one  kind  of  office  in  the  Church  :  it  is  a  universal  term  ;  it  rises  like  a 
univei-sal  altar,  within  whose  shadow  poor  men  and  needy  men,  as  well  as  rich 
and  mighty  men,  may  be  gathered  in  the  security  of  prayer,  and  in  the  gladnesa 
of  assured  hope.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever. — The  abiding  God : — David  here  draws 
a  contrast  between  changing  man  and  the  unchanging  God  ;  between  evermore 
vanishing  thrones  and  the  throne  of  God,  high  and  lifted  up — His  throne  of  judg- 
ment— a  throne  erected  to  try  and  determine  the  cause,  not  of  David  only,  nor  of 
his  people  only,  but  all  men — to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  He  teaches  that 
right  and  wrong  everywhere  are  objects  of  the  Divine  regard,  and  will  be  through 
all  time,  and  will  be  when  time  shall  be  no  more  ;  that  the  Divine  judgment,  like  the 
Divine  Omnipresence,  embraces  every  creature  in  the  vastness  of  its  range.  In  this 
way  David  ascends  in  his  reasoning  from  the  particular  to  the  general,  and  from  the 
general  to  the  universal,  making  the  Lord's  dealing  with  him,  and  His  people  Israel, 
the  basis  of  the  conclusion,  that  so  He  will  deal  with  all  men.  He  thus  encourages 
all  men  everywhere  to  pursue  the  right,  assuring  them  that,  in  pursuing  it,  the  God 
of  all  righteousness  is  with  them,  and  will  in  due  time  decide  it  in  their  favour. 
{David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  And  He  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.— ^A* 
witness  of  conscience  to  righteous7iess : — Corwin,  the  great  orator  and  humorist,  was 
once  talking  with  several  gentlemen.  The  conversation,  which  had  been  witty  and 
epigrammatic,  became  grave  and  serious.  One  of  the  company  made  a  remark  about 
the  unknown  future.  Corwin  took  it  up,  and  said,  ' '  When  I  reflect  that  I  am  to 
be  judged  by  a  righteous  and  omnipotent  God,  I  nearly  go  mad."  So  it  is  that  the 
conscience  within  bears  unequivocal  testimony  to  our  responsibility,  not  to  a  Some- 
thing, of  which  we  can  form  no  conception,  but  to  a  Personal  Being,  who  is  the 
"  righteous  and  omnipotent  God,"  whose  "  offspring  "  we  are  as  a  Father,  and  whose 
subjects  we  are  as  Sovereign  Lord  Supreme. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  Lord  also  will  be  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed. — The  refuge  of  the 
oppressed: — I.  The  Lord  also  will  be  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed.  1.  What 
is  a  refuge  ?  Shelter — in  the  cities  of  refuge  ;  strongholds  (2  Sam.  xxii.  23) ;  a 
harbour  of  refuge,  as  on  a  rocky,  dangerous  coast.  Thus  the  leading  idea  is  shelter. 
Now  the  Lord  Jehovah  as  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  is  such  refuge.  2.  But  who 
are  the  oppressed  ?  Not  only  those  who  are  oppressed  in  natural  things,  as  many 
are  ;  but  in  things  spiritual.  The  heavy  burden  of  sin.  By  Satan.  Daily  conflict 
with  sin.  Now  the  Lord  is  a  refuge  for  such.  II.  A  refuge  in  times  of  trouble. 
The  Scriptures  always  put  together  the  malady  and  the  remedy.  As  to  these  times 
of  trouble,  they  are  sometimes — 1.  Seasons  of  temporal  trouble ;  2.  Of  spiritual 
trouble.  These  make  us  know  that  the  Lord  is  our  refuge,  for  we  can  find  none 
elsewhere.  There  is  no  definition  of  what  troubles,  so  that  in  all  trouble  we  may 
claim  this  promise.  III.  And  they  that  know  Thy  name  will  put  theie 
trust  in  Thee.  The  name  means  the  revealed  perfections  of  God.  His  eternal 
faithfulness.  His  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy.  His  infinite  wisdom.  But 
who  are  they  that  know  His  name  ?  They  to  whom  the  name  of  God  has  been 
revealed  to  their  consciences.  It  is  an  experimental  knowledge,  and  here  is  the 
grand  line  betwixt  life  and  death.  IV,  For  Thou,  Lord,  hast  not  forsaken 
THEM  that  seek  Thee.     This  takes  in  the  poor,  the  halt,  the  lame,  the  little  ones 


PSALM  IX.]  THE  PSALMS.  159 

of  God's  family.  In  order  to  seeking  God — 1.  We  must  have  a  desire  to  iind  some- 
thing ;  and  then,  2.  Know  that  God,  from  whom  we  seek  what  we  would  find.  [J.  C. 
Philpot. )  The  Lord  our  refuge  : — It  is  reported  of  the  Egyptians  that,  living  in  the 
fens,  and  being  vexed  with  gnats,  they  used  to  sleep  in  high  towers,  whereby,  these 
creatures  not  being  able  to  soar  so  high,  they  were  delivered  from  the  biting  of  them. 
So  would  it  be  with  us  when  bitten  with  cares  and  fear,  did  we  but  run  to  God  for 
lefuge,  and  rest  confident  of  His  help.  (John  Trap}}.)  A  free  refuge: — The 
Hospice  of  St.  Bernard,  and  the  wild  scenery  surrounding  it.  The  place  is  so  cold 
that  fish  will  not  live  in  the  lake,  and  we  have  seen  the  snow  lying  knee-deep  at 
mid-summer.  The  Hospice  is  a  refuge  from  the  storm  in  which  many  travellers 
have  rested  securely,  who  otherwise  might  have  been  lost  in  the  snow.  This  noble 
institution  receives  all  passers  freely,  whoever  they  may  be,  without  money  and 
without  price  ;  and  in  this  respect  it  is  like  the  salvation  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  for 
Jesus  gives  freely  of  His  grace  to  those  who  have  nothing  to  offer  in  return. 

Ver.  10.  They  that  know  Thy  name  will  put  their  trust  in  Thee. — The  name  of 
God  : — Know  Thy  name  !  What  does  that  imply,  but  to  know  all  that  ia  included 
in  the  revelation  of  the  nature  and  attributes  of  Almighty  God  ?  Every  reader  of 
Scripture  is  well  aware  of  the  infinite  importance  which  it  attaches  to  the  word 
Name  in  speaking  of  God.  It  signifies  not  merely  a  designation,  however  expressive 
and  full  of  meaning,  but  a  manifestation  of  the  Eternal  Deity.  The  trust  of  His 
rational  creatures  in  Him  is  commensurate  with  their  knowledge  of  all  that  is 
involved  in  the  name.  The  early  patriarchs  knew  Him  by  the  name  Elohim,  a 
marvellous  name,  containing  implicitly  the  mystery  hereafter  to  be  revealed  of 
a  plurality  of  persons  in  the  unity  of  the  Divine  nature.  They  knew  Him  so  far, 
and  adored  Him  with  deep  awe  and  absolute  trust  in  His  power,  righteousness, 
and  goodwill.  That  name  raised  them  out  of  earthly  and  debasing  associations, 
delivered  them  from  the  fetichism  of  idolatry,  and  brought  them  into  near  contact 
with  the  spiritual  world  ;  they  trusted  in  Him  according  to  the  measure  of  their 
knowledge,  and  were  saved  by  their  faith.  A  further  disclosure  of  the  Divine 
goodness  and  love  was  made  by  the  revelation  of  the  name  Jehovah,  when  the  Lord 
made  all  His  goodness  pass  before  Moses,  and  proclaimed,  "Jehovah,  Jehovah 
Elohim,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and 
truth."  With  that  revelation  was  associated  an  entire  system  of  typical  institu- 
tions, preparing  the  way  for  a  still  more  perfect  discovery,  at  once  quickening  the 
conscience,  making  it  sensible  of  the  extent  of  human  sinfulness,  and  indicating  the 
conditions  and  principles  of  a  future  atonement.  The  forms  of  the  living  Word,  of 
the  living  Spirit  gradually  disclosed  themselves  to  the  prophetic  vision,  never  fully 
revealed,  yet  ever  approaching  nearer  to  a  personal  manifestation.  But  the  Name 
itself  in  its  highest  sense  was  first  suggested,  then  declared,  by  the  voices  which 
heralded  the  incarnation,  and  by  the  utterances  of  the  incarnate  Word.  The  full 
meaning  of  the  words  of  angelic  adoration,  "Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts  !  " 
flashed  upon  the  spirit  of  man  when  the  Saviour  commanded  the  initiatory  rite, 
the  pledge  and  condition  of  a  new  life,  to  be  administered  "in  the  Name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  To  the  exposition  of  that  mean- 
ing the  purest  and  highest  intellects  of  Christendom  have  devoted  themselves  from 
the  beginning  ;  and  if  the  forms  in  which  their  exposition  has  been  accepted  by  the 
Church  are  true  and  scriptural,  can  it  be  questioned  that  they  involve  issues  of 
infinite  importance  to  our  souls  ?  Can  it  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  us  whether 
any  one  of  the  leading  propositions  in  such  a  confession  is  true  or  not  ?  can  it  be  a 
matter  on  which  we  can  err  in  wilfulness  or  negligence  without  peril  ?  We  are 
responsible  indeed  only  for  so  much  truth  as  we  have  the  means  of  knowing. 
Every  man  is  judged  "according  to  that  he  hath,  not  according  to  that  he  hath 
not "  ;  but  for  so  much  as  we  have  received  we  are,  and  must  be,  responsible.  The 
warmth  and  earnestness  of  our  devotions,  of  our  endeavours  to  do  God's  work,  will 
be  proportionate  to  the  sincerity  and  good  faith  with  which  we  receive  into  our 
hearts  that  truth  which  the  Eternal  Father  has  communicated  to  us  through  the 
Son  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Our  salvation  from  evil  here,  and  from  the  penalties 
of  evil  hereafter,  can  only  be  secured  by  the  access  which  God  the  Holy  Spirit 
opens  through  the  Son  to  the  Father — an  access  of  which  the  conditions  vary 
according  to  circumstances  known  only  to  our  Judge,  but  of  which  the  certain 
assurance  is  inseparably  bound  up  with  knowledge  of  the  Name  by  which  the 
Church  adores  the  Triune  Jehovah,  three  Persons,  one  God — Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost.     {Carum  F.  C.  Cook.)        Trusting  in  God: — Few  words  are  more 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ix. 

frequently  used  in  the  Bible  than  the  word  faith,  and  the  thing  which  it  is  intended 
to  describe  is  of  prime  importance.  The  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
devotes  an  entire  chapter  to  showing  its  majesty  and  weight.  In  the  Epistle  to 
the  Romans  the  word  faith  plays  a  leading  part,  but  the  word  is  not  defined.  Still, 
the  woril  is  not  always  used  in  the  same  sense.  Sometimes  it  is  applied  to  what  a 
man  believes,  the  body  of  doctrine  which  constitutes  the  Divine  deposit  of  the 
Church.  Sometimes  the  word  is  used  to  describe  the  firmness  of  a  man's  personal 
convictions,  or  the  consistency  of  his  conduct,  as  when  it  is  said  that  whatever  is 
not  of  faith  is  sin.  In  the  great  majority  of  instances,  however,  faith  describes  a 
personal  relation  of  unqualified  confidence  between  man  and  God.  This  is  the 
simple  root  from  which  the  other  forms  of  faith  grow.  Faith  is  trust,  a  trust 
without  suspicion  or  fear,  trust  passing  into  glad  and  habitual  surrender,  so  that 
He  in  whom  we  trust  becomes  our  teacher,  guide,  and  master.  Such  trust,  if 
intelligently  exercised,  promotes  fixedness  of  conviction  and  steadiness  of  moral 
purpose — it  issues  in  deliberate  fidelity  and  loyalty.  And  when  this  trust  is 
challenged  by  the  reason,  either  the  reason  in  me,  or  the  reason  in  others,  the 
answer  forms  a  body  of  truth  which  takes  the  name  of  "faith,"  because  it  repre- 
sents the  rational  basis  of  trust  or  conviction.  Faith  as  a  system  of  doctrine  simply 
states  what  I  believe,  or  why  I  trust.  Faith  as  fixedness  of  personal  conviction 
simply  describes  trust  as  perfect  and  habitual.  Primarily,  therefore,  faith  is  neither 
a  body  of  doctrine  nor  a  mental  and  moral  quality,  but  a  purely  personal  relation 
between  myself  and  another,  the  relation  of  trust  on  the  part  of  man  in  God. 
Saving  faith  is  just  this,  confidence  in  God  issuing  in  consecration.  For  it  is  plain 
that  I  can  neither  trust  nor  distrust  an  imaginary  being,  a  being  of  whose  existence 
I  have  no  evidence.  To  trust  in  God  is  to  affirm  that  He  is.  Still,  that  alone  does 
not  provoke  confidence  and  surrender.  We  do  not  trust  all  whom  we  know.  Know- 
ledge of  another  may  prevent  confidence,  as  well  as  provoke  it.  His  character  may 
be  such  that  we  are  repelled  from  him,  instead  of  being  attracted  to  him.  They  in 
whom  we  trust  must  be  trustworthy.  It  depends  altogether,  therefore,  upon  what 
God  really  is,  whether  the  knowledge  of  Him  is  fitted  to  provoke  our  trust.  It  is 
plain,  therefore,  that  the  statement  of  the  Psalmist  must  not  be  made  to  mean  that 
all  men  will  put  their  trust  in  God  when  they  come  to  have  a  right  knowledge 
of  Him.  Ignorance  is  not  the  sole  cause  of  unbelief  and  sin.  The  real  thought  is 
this,  that  wherever  men  come  to  put  their  trust  in  God,  it  will  be  because  they 
have  come  to  know  what  God  really  is.  Knowledge  may  not  issue  in  trust,  but 
without  knowledge  trust  cannot  be.  There  is  notliing  magical  about  it.  Faith, 
or  trust,  is  not  a  supernatural  gift  of  God,  bestowed  or  withheld  at  His  pleasure  ;  it 
is  His  gift  only  so  far  as  His  enlightened  Spirit  is  His  gift,  only  so  far  as  a  true 
knowledge  of  what  God  is  is  the  gift  of  God.  Three  conceptions  of  God  we  can 
trace  in  the  history  of  the  world  ;  but  of  these  three  there  is  only  one,  the  Christian 
conception,  which  provokes  to  sweet  and  sunny  trust.  We  may  think  of  God  as 
the  embodiment  of  almighty  power,  personally  indifferent  whether  He  creates  or 
destroys,  with  countenance  as  cold,  as  impassive,  as  that  of  the  Egyptian  Sphinx, 
eternally  rigid  in  His  will,  eternally  frigid  in  His  emotions,  without  either  smiles  or 
tears,  without  hate  and  without  love.  Or  we  may  think  of  Him  as  the  embodiment  of 
almighty  energy,  rooted  in  and  confluent  witli  eternal  reason  and  absolute  justice,  never 
Himself  guilty  of  folly  or  of  wrong,  keeping  Himself  beyond  the  reach  of  deserved 
reproach,  but  enforcing  His  law  with  pitiless  severity,  claiming  His  pound  of  flesh, 
whether  the  surgery  kills  or  cures,  exacting  the  debt  to  the  last  farthing,  deaf  to  all 
entreaty,  granting  no  reprieve,  proffering  no  help.  Or,  we  may  think  of  Him  as  in 
Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,  as  righteousness  and  love  incarnate.  The 
first  repels  ;  the  second  chills  ;  the  third  alone  attracts  and  warms.  The  first  is  a 
monster  of  cruelty  ;  the  second  is  an  iceberg  ;  the  third  alone  is  a  life-giving  sun. 
The  first  deifies  power  ;  the  second  deifies  reason  ;  the  third  deifies  love,  love  carry- 
ing the  cross  in  its  heart,  and  which  is  indifferent  to  none.  The  gods  of  paganism 
simply  represented  superior  power  and  cunning.  They  were  greater  than  men,  but 
they  were  no  better  than  men.  Faith  in  the  gods  there  was  uone,  and  there  could 
not  be.  And  it  is  not  otherwise  with  that  more  refined  conception  of  God  which 
identifies  Him  with  force,  the  energy  by  which  all  things  are  constituted,  without 
personal  consciousness  and  without  moral  qualities,  without  either  love  or  hate, 
without  either  vice  or  virtue,  hearing  no  prayer,  rewarding  no  obedience,  punishing 
no  disobedience.  Such  a  god  is  only  a  god  in  name.  He  does  not  care  for  me  ;  He 
does  not  know  what  care  is,  and  how  then  can  I  care  for  Him ;  how  can  I  bring 
myself  to  trust  in  Him  ?    Nor  is  the  case  much  better  with  that  truer  and  deeper 


PSALM  IX. ]  THE  PSALMS.  161 

conception  of  God  which  identifies  Him  with  the  absolute  reason  and  the  moral 
order  of  the  universe.  It  was  impossible  for  thoughtful  men  to  rest  in  a  conception 
of  God  which  robbed  Him  of  thought  and  character.  The  law  of  cause  and  effect 
asserted  itself.  The  ground  of  the  universe  must  be  possessed  of  all  that  appears  in 
the  universe.  But  there  is  thought,  at  least  in  me,  and  there  is  conscience,  at  least 
in  me.  And  if  these  be  in  me,  they  must  be  in  the  First  and  Universal  Cause  of 
all  things,  whether  that  cause  be  regarded  as  distinct  from  the  universe  or  not. 
And  so,  even  the  ancients  came  to  look  upon  the  universe  as  embodied  reason  and 
justice.  Things  were  not  loose  and  disjointed  ;  they  were  compact  and  ordered. 
Plato  regarded  the  Idea  as  formative  and  eternal  energy.  Aristotle  dilates  at  length, 
and  with  warmth  of  eloquence,  upon  the  universal  presence  of  design.  Science 
has  itself  dug  the  grave  of  vulgar  materialism.  A  rational  origin  and  a  moral  end 
of  the  universe  are  everywhere  recognised.  The  very  word  "evolution"  is  a  con- 
fession of  universal  reason  and  of  orderly  movement.  Neither  the  old  nor  the  new 
philosophical  theism  can  produce  faith.  It  is  like  an  iceberg,  majestic  and  impos- 
ing, but  chilling  the  air.  It  may  produce,  it  has  produced,  moral  awe  and  resigna- 
tion to  one's  lot ;  but  it  has  not  produced,  and  it  cannot  produce,  trust — with  the 
quiet  heart  and  the  radiant  face  and  the  laughing,  singing  lips.  It  may  produce 
Ecclesiastes,  but  it  cannot  write  Psalm  xxiii.  For  in  all  this  reign  of  reason  it  dis- 
covers no  indulgence  for  ignorance  ;  in  all  this  reign  of  justice  it  hears  no  gospel  of 
mercy  for  the  sinner.  There  is  no  pity  for  the  weak  and  the  wicked.  The  name 
of  God  is  not  unconscious  and  unfeeling  energy,  from  which  we  shrink ;  nor  is  it 
crystallised  and  crystallising  reason  and  justice,  before  which  we  are  self- condemned 
and  dumb  ;  but  it  is  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  The 
omnipotence  of  God  does  not  make  Him  attractive  to  me.  The  omniscience  of  God 
sounds  the  death-knell  of  my  hope.  The  justice  of  God  thrusts  me  into  the  dungeon 
of  despair.  In  such  an  atmosphere  there  cannot  be  the  first  breath  of  faith.  But 
when  you  make  it  clear  to  me  that  this  omnipotent,  omniscient,  holy  God  is  also 
infinite  in  His  tenderness,  that  He  loves  me  and  wants  me,  that  He  is  my  Father, 
and  that  in  Christ  His  Fatherhood  has  become  Incarnate,  so  that  when  I  see  Him  I 
see  the  Father,  my  faith  is  kindled  and  my  trust  knows  no  misgiving.  "Perfect 
love  casteth  out  fear."  But  perfect  love  in  you  and  in  me  is  the  response  to  perfect 
love  in  God  for  you  and  for  me.  So  faith  will  be  perfect,  trust  in  God  will  be 
fearless  and  sunny  only  as  we  know  God's  name,  and  hide  ourselves  beneath  its 
sheltering  wings.  Here  is  the  secret  of  peace ;  all  is  well,  because  God  loves  me. 
{A.  J.  F.  Behrcnds,  D.D.)  The  knowledge  of  God  essential  to  trust  in  Him: — 
The  secret  of  all  holy  living  is  trust  in  God.  The  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews  is 
the  great  Bible  proof  of  this.  But  how  to  obtain  this  faith  ?  that  is  the  question. 
For  nothing  is  harder  to  a  human  soul.  Diverse  answers  might  be  given.  1.  Ask  it 
of  God,  for  faith  is  His  gift.  But  our  text  tells  another  way.  2.  Know  God  better. 
"They  that  know  Thy  name  will,"  &c.  In  earthly  affairs  we  do  not  confide  where 
we  do  not  know.  And  so  if  God  be  unknown  by  us  we  shall  not  trust  Him. 
Abraham  was  called  the  friend  of  God — he  knew  God  so  well,  and  so  he  got  another 
name — the  "Father  of  the  faithful,"  because  he  so  trusted  in  God.  Now  this  know- 
ledge must  not  be  merely  theoretical,  but  that  of  the  heart.  Then  such  "will" 
trust  in  Him  ;  they  cannot  help  it.  (C.  M.  Merry.)  Trust  in  God: — The  Psalm 
expresses  the  confidence  of  Israel  in  Jehovah.  Some  say  that  these  Psalms  are  only 
patriotic  odes,  and  that  we  have  no  right  to  draw  inferences  from  them  in  regard  to 
spiritual  religion.  Now,  no  doubt,  many  have  read  into  these  Psalms  ideas  and 
feelings  that  are  not  and  could  not  be  there,  for  they  are  Christian  in  their  origin. 
But  still  we  are  justified  in  using  them  so  as  to  n,,iintain  our  own  faith.  For  the 
religion  of  the  Old  Testament  (compare  the  old  Roman  law)  had  a  wonderful  ex- 
pansiveness.  No  doubt  the  trust  told  of  here  meant  Israel's  confidence  that  when 
they  went  into  battle  Jehovah  would  be  with  them.  Now  consider — 1.  The  con- 
dition OF  THIS  TRUST.  Knowledge  of  Jehovah's  name,  true  heartfelt  and  experi- 
mental knowledge.  II.  The  trust  itself — a  confidence  not  for  infallible  success, 
but  that  life  could  not  be  in  vain.  III.  The  reason  for  this  trust.  "Thou 
hast  not  forsaken,"  &c.  Experience  proves  this  true.  {J.  A.  Picton.)  Con- 
fidence : — Names  in  Scripture  are  descriptive  of  character  in  those  to  whom  they 
are  given.  I.  The  name  of  God  therefore  tells  of  His  character.  The  declaration 
of  God's  name  (Ex.  xxxiv.).  Now  this  name  of  God  is  different  from  our  concep- 
tions. Some  rob  Him  altogether  of  the  awful  features  of  His  chnracter,  and  others 
of  His  goodness.  All  the  attributes  of  Jehovah  have  met  in  Christ.  Love,  justice — 
^ee  Gethsemane  and  the  Cross  as  showing  God's  hatred  of  sin.  II.  The  knowledge 
II 


162  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ix. 

OF  THIS  NAME.  It  means  the  knowledge  of  approval,  of  heart  assent  to  what  he 
finds  in  God.  If  we  wanted  to  get  a  child  to  trust  his  parent,  we  would  speak  not 
so  much  of  the  child's  duty  as  of  the  parent's  character.  Hence,  to  awaken  trust 
in  God,  we  are  to  show  the  excellence  and  beauty  of  the  character  of  God. 
{J.  Blundell.)  Vital  knowledge  necessary  to  real  peace: — At  many  a  martyr's 
stake,  at  many  a  dying  bed,  in  many  a  scene  of  trial,  these  words  have  been  proved 
true.  His  people  have  felt  God  near  to  them  at  these  times,  and  this  is  the  God  in 
whom  we  must  all  trust.  And  this  ti'ust  is  through  knowledge.  1.  It  is  not  a 
commonplace  possession  of  every  man.  Far  from  it.  What  is  it  ?  It  is  not  mere 
hearsay  nor  any  theoretical  knowledge  of  God.  2.  But  it  is  the  knowledge  of  love. 
Love  gains  knowledge  as  nothing  else  can.  The  world  does  not  love,  and  so  does 
not  know  God.  3.  And  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  convictions  of  the  understanding. 
4.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  experience,  resulting  from  holding  communion  with  God. 
Love  leads  to  such  communion,  and  that  to  experience.  We  learn  by  experience 
the  delicate  excellencies  of  a  character,  which  we  could  never  have  seen  by  a 
momentary  glance  ;  we  understand  its  harmonious  proportions  which  a  cursory  look 
would  never  have  shown  us.  The  man  that  loves  to  hear  the  ocean  breaking  on  the 
shore,  will  detect  harmonies  in  what  is  monotonous  to  every  one  beside.  Now  this 
knowledge  of  experience  or  of  communion  is  what  God's  people  have  of  Him.  But 
you  must  make  real  effort  to  know  His  name.  The  mere  repetition  of  Lord,  Lord, 
will  do  but  little.  But  to  utter  His  name  in  the  fulness  of  knowledge  is  to  uncurtain 
heaven,  and  see  its  glories  once.  But  if  we  will  not  know  God  as  we  should,  then 
we  are  sure  to  misjudge  Him.  A  guilty  conscience  makes  every  one  suppose  that 
God  is  nothing  but  severe.  And  then  you  cannot  trust.  Look  again  ;  would  you 
"  see  Him  as  He  is  "  ?  See  Him  in  His  love,  in  His  sacrifice  for  you,  and  then  you 
will  learn  to  trust  Him.  And  this  is  most  important,  for  there  is  no  shelter  but  in 
Him,  and  unless  we  trust  Him  we  cannot  enter  that  shelter.  And  that  means 
death.  Oh,  then,  may  God  give  us  to  know  His  name.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.) 
The  name  of  God : — The  name  of  God  is  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  perfections, 
through  His  works  and  Word.  He  is — I.  A  just  God  and  a  Saviour.  Much 
was  said  in  words  and  by  promises  under  the  old  dispensation  bearing  witness  to 
this  name.  The  sacrifices  did  the  same.  But  Christ  was  the  great  witness  of  this 
name.  The  servants  of  Ben-hadad  believed  in  the  name  the  kings  of  Israel  had 
for  mercy,  and  therefore  submitted  themselves.  And  the  Publican  believed  in  God 
as  merciful,  and  therefore  appealed  to  Him.  Thus  the  Lord  proclaimed  His  name 
to  Moses.  And  at  last  that  mercy  of  God  appeared  in  Christ.  All  His  works  while 
on  earth  confirmed  it.  And  He  was  made  perfect  through  suffering,  made  perfect  in 
mercy  thereby.  II.  As  Almighty.  That  name  is  impressed  upon  creation,  but  is 
seen  most  in  Christ  in  delivering  His  Church.  And  in  His  resurrection  and  His 
dominion  over  the  empire  of  death,  and  His  upholding  of  His  kingdom  in  the  world, 
and  giving  success  to  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  III.  As  righteousness.  This 
is  seen  in  His  atonement,  whereby  God's  righteousness  is  declared,  so  that  He  can 
"be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  Jesus."  IV.  As  wisdom. 
This  seen  in  creation,  but  yet  more  in  redemption.  For  in  it  the  law  and  its 
transgressor  are  exalted  together.  Once  the  law  might  have  said,  "To  spare 
him  will  be  my  disgrace  "  ;  but  th«3  wisdom  of  God  appointed  that  to  spare  him 
would  be  its  highest  honour.  The  person  of  Christ  is  the  chief  wonder  of  this 
wisdom.  This  is  the  treasury  of  the  Divine  name.  In  Him  all  fulness  dwells. 
V.  And  this  name  will  be  trusted  by  all  who  know  it.  Many  have  heard  of 
it  who  do  not  know  it  The  way  to  know  it  is  to  read  it  in  Christ.  (Z).  Charles.) 
The  effect  of  knowing  God: — By  those  who  know  God's  name,  are  meant  those 
who  know  God  Himself  and  His  nature.  Trusting  in  God,  does  very  naturally 
take  in  all  the  expectations  we  have  of  what  He  hath  promised,  and  knowing  His 
name  is  a  raising  our  minds  to  a  just  sense  of  His  nature,  by  the  contemplation  of 
His  works  of  creation  and  providence.  Apply  to  three  points — I.  The  immortality 
of  man.  Men  stumble  at  this,  that  our  weak  race,  which  is  hasting  to  a  change 
that  hath  all  the  appearance  of  ending,  should  not  really  die,  but  live  on,  and 
have  their  share  in  all  the  revolutions  which  the  world  is  to  undergo,  as  long  as 
God  Himself  shall  have  His  being.  Consider  what  we  have  in  the  knowledge  of 
God,  and  His  works,  which  may  further  us  in  the  belief  of  it.  There  must  be  an 
eternity  of  time  and  duration.  Through  it  God  must  surely  preserve  His  being, 
and  He  surely  will  preserve  a  world.  He  will  always  have  creatures  before  Him. 
Is  it  most  likely  that  God  should  choose  to  continue  creatures  before  Him,  by 
giving  eternity  to  the  souls  of  men :  or  by  letting  these  die,  and  end  as  they  do 


PSALM  IX.]  THE  PSALMS.  163 

in  appearance,  and  by  raising  up  other  new  ones  in  their  places  ?  If  the  souls  of 
men  are  really  abolished,  and  end  at  death,  I  do  not  know  ;  but  we  may  say  that 
they  are  the  only  substances  in  the  whole  compass  of  beings  that  are  so.  If  the 
eternal  duration  be  granted,  there  is — II.  The  greatness  of  the  glory  and 
REWARD.  Descriptions  of  heaven  are  but  borrowed  expressions  from  such  things 
as  we  understand,  but  the  happiness  itself  is  something  that  is  greater  than  we  can 
yet  conceive.  The  fabric  of  the  world,  wonderful  as  it  is,  is  really  a  thousand  times 
greater,  and  more  wonderful  in  itself  than  it  is  in  our  thoughts.  For  we  only  behold 
creation  through  a  perspective.  III.  The  punishments  of  the  other  world. 
To  their  fears  of  these,  unbelieving  men  oppose  the  great  goodness  of  God.  But 
consider  God's  providences  and  judgments  upon  us  now.  Evidently,  we  ought  not  to 
argue  that  God's  goodness  will  not  suffer  Him  to  punish,  for  it  does.  (Frauds 
Hutchinson,  D.D.)  Tliou,  Lord,  hast  not  forsaken  them  that  seek  Thee. — 
Dilemma  and  deliverance : — Let  us  note — I.  A  fiery  dart  of  satan  constantly 
shot  at  the  people  of  God.  It  is  the  suggestion  that  God  has  forsaken  us.  Of 
all  the  arrows  of  hell  it  is  the  most  sharp,  the  most  poisonous,  the  most  deadly.  It 
is  sent  against  us — 1.  When  we  have  fallen  into  sin.  Then  comes  the  suggestion, 
this  fiery  dart,  "Ah,  wretch  that  you  are,  God  vnll  never  forgive  that  sin  ;  you 
have  been  so  ungrateful,  such  a  hypocrite,  such  a  liar, "  2.  In  time  of  great  trouble. 
The  deep  waters  are  around  and  almost  overflow  you  ;  just  then,  when  in  the  very 
deepest  part  of  the  stream,  Satan  sends  this  suggestion  into  your  very  soul — thy  God 
hath  forsaken  thee.  3.  In  prospect  of  some  great  toil  and  enterprise.  When  the 
trumpet  is  sounded  for  some  dreadful  battle,  when  there  is  a  deep  soil  to  be 
ploughed,  there  comes  this  dark  thought.  And  this  arrow  is  most  grievous,  and 
most  dangerous  ;  and  it  bears  the  full  impress  of  its  Satanic  maker,    II.  The  Divine 

BTTCKLER  WHICH  GOD  HAS  PROVIDED  AGAINST  THIS  FIERY  DART.      It    is   the   fact 

that  God  hath  not,  no  never,  forsaken  them  that  fear  Him.  How  dreadful  to  think 
that  the  child  of  God  might  fall  and  perish.  What  witnesses  these  are  to  the  truth 
of  the  text.  From  Abraham  down  to  Paul.  And  your  own  experience,  if  you  will 
be  honest  with  yourself,  will  prove  it  yet  again.  And  look  at  the  teachings  of 
nature  as  to  the  fidelity  of  God.  We  believe  in  the  truth  and  love  of  earthly  friends. 
Shall  we  not  believe  in  God  ?  III.  Let  trs  wear  this  buckler,  and  so  use  our 
precious  privilege  to  seek  God  in  the  day  of  trouble.  You,  afflicted  ones,  you 
oppressed  with  the  sense  of  sin.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  13-20.  Consider  my  trouble.—^  note  of  trouble  in  a  triumj>h  Psalm : — The 
second  part  of  the  Psalm  begins  with  ver.  13.  The  prayer  in  that  verse  is  the  only 
trace  of  trouble  in  the  Psalm.  The  rest  is  triumph  and  exaltation.  This,  at  first 
discordant,  note  has  sorely  exercised  commentators  ;  and  the  violent  solution  that 
the  whole  of  the  Cheth  stanza  (vers.  13,  14)  should  be  regarded  as  "the  cry  of  the 
meek, "  quoted  by  the  Psalmist,  and  therefore  be  put  in  inverted  commas  (though 
adopted  by  Delitzsch  and  Cheyne),  is  artificial  and  cold.  There  is  little  difficulty 
in  the  connection.  The  victory  has  been  completed  over  certain  enemies,  but  there 
remain  others  ;  and  the  time  for  praise  unmingled  with  petition  has  not  yet  come 
for  the  Psalmist,  as  it  never  comes  for  any  of  us  in  this  life.  Quatre  Bras  is  won, 
but  Waterloo  has  to  be  fought  to-morrow.  The  prayer  takes  account  of  the  dangers 
still  threatening,  but  it  only  glances  at  these,  and  then  once  more  turns  to  look 
with  hope  on  the  accomplished  deliverance.  The  thought  of  how  God  had  lifted 
the  suppliant  up  from  the  very  gates  of  death  heartens  him  to  pray  for  all  further 
mercy  needed.  Death  is  the  lord  of  a  gloomy  prison-house,  the  gates  of  which  open 
inwards  only,  and  permit  no  egress.  On  its  very  threshold  the  Psalmist  stood. 
But  God  had  lifted  him  thence,  and  the  remembrance  wings  his  prayer.  The 
"gates  of  the  daughter  of  Zion"  are  in  sharp,  happy  contrast  with  the  frowning 
portals  of  death,  A  city's  gates  are  the  place  of  cheery  life,  stir,  gossip,  business. 
Anything  proclaimed  there  flies  far.  There  the  Psalmist  resolves  that  he  will  tell 
his  story  of  rescue,  which  he  believes  was  granted  that  it  might  be  told.  God's 
end  is  the  spread  of  His  name,  not  for  any  good  to  Him,  but  because  to  know  it  is 
life  to  us.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Yet.  16.  With  long  life  will  1  satisfy  him.  —  Healthy  religion  .—Through  the 
mistake  of  its  friends  religion  has  been  chiefly  associated  with  sickbeds  and  grave- 
yards. It  is  high  time  this  thing  were  changed,  and  that  religion,  instead  of  being 
represented  as  a  hearse  to  cany  out  the  dead,  should  be  represented  as  a  chariot  in 
which  the  living  are  to  triumph.     Beligion,  so  far  from  subtracting  from  one's 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ix. 

vitality,  is  a  glorious  addition.  It  is  sanatire,  curative,  hygienic.  It  is  good  for 
every  part  of  man.  Religion  has  only  just  touched  our  world.  Give  it  full  power 
for  a  few  centuries,  and  who  can  tell  what  will  be  the  strength  of  man,  and  the 
beauty  of  woman,  and  the  longevity  of  all !  Practical  religion  is  ever  the  friend  of 
longevity.  I.  It  makes  the  care  of  OUR  health  a  positive  Christian  duty. 
Whether  we  shall  keep  early  or  late  hours,  take  food  digestible  or  indigestible,  &c., 
is  often  referred  to  the  realm  of  whimsicality ;  but  the  Christian  man  lifts  this 
whole  problem  of  health  into  the  accountable  and  the  Divine.  The  body  is  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  deface  its  altars,  or  mar  its  walls,  or  crumble  its 
pillars,  is  a  God-defying  sacrilege.  II.  It  is  a  protest  against  dissipations 
WHICH  INJURE  AND  DESTROY  THE  HEALTH.  Bad  men  and  women  live  very  short 
lives.  Their  sins  kill  them.  There  are  many  aged  ones  who  would  have  been  dead 
twenty-five  years  ago  but  for  the  defences  and  equipoise  of  religion.  III.  It  takes 
THE  WORRY  OUT  OF  OUR  TEMPORALITIES.  It  is  not  work  but  worry  that  kills  men. 
When  a  man  becomes  a  Christian  he  makes  over  to  God  not  only  his  affections  but 
his  family,  his  business,  his  reputation,  his  body,  his  mind,  his  soul — everything. 
He  gives  God  the  management  of  his  affairs.  If  the  nervous  and  feverish  people  of 
the  world  would  try  this  almighty  sedative,  they  would  live  twenty-five  years  longer 
under  its  soothing  power.  It  is  not  chloral  or  morphine  that  they  want ;  it  is  more 
of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  IV.  It  removes  all  corroding  care  about  a  future 
EXISTENCE.  Every  one  wants  to  know  what  is  to  become  of  him.  There  are  people 
who  fret  themselves  to  death  for  fear  of  dying.  The  Gospel  offers  you  perfect  peace 
now  and  hereafter.  What  do  you  want  in  the  future  ?  This  is  the  robust,  healthy 
religion  that  will  tend  to  make  you  live  long  in  this  world,  and  in  the  world  to 
come  give  you  eternal  life.     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,D,D.) 

Ver.  17.  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell. — A  descriiMon  of  the  wicked: — 
I.  The  characters  specified.  1.  All  those  who  wilfully  violate  the  plain  and 
positive  precepts  of  God.  Drinkers.  Profane  peraons.  Those  who  dishonour  God's 
holy  day.  The  dishonest.  2.  All  the  persecutors  of  the  people  of  God.  3.  All 
hypocrites  and  impostors  in  religion.  4.  All  must  be  denominated  wicked  who  are 
unregenerate.  Wickedness  is  not  a  superficial  defect,  but  a  profound  radical  prin- 
ciple, deeply  rooted  in  the  heart  of  man.  The  "nations  that  forget  God"  refers  to 
heathen  nations  whose  gods  were  idols.  The  wicked  are  described  as  they  who 
' '  forget  God  " — in  His  character  as  Benefactor  and  as  Sovereign.  He  forgets  the 
all-prevailing  presence  of  God,  and  he  forgets  the  Word  of  God.  II.  The  affirma- 
tion made  concerning  him.  "Turned  into  hell."  Note,  the  place  into  which 
they  shall  be  turned  ;  the  manner  how  it  will  be  done  ;  and  the  certainty  of  the 
affirmation.  "Hell"  describes — 1.  A  place  of  punishment ;  2.  The  nature  of  the 
punishment ;  3.  The  exquisite  sense  of  punishment  the  wicked  will  feel ;  4.  The 
companions  of  their  punishment ;  5.  The  perpetuity  of  it.  "The  wicked  shall  be 
turned  into  hell."  This  shall  be  done  unexpectedly,  suddenly,  irresistibly.  The 
certainty  of  the  affirmation  in  the  text  may  be  inferred — 1.  From  the  general  con- 
sent of  mankind  ;  2.  From  the  justice  of  the  moral  governor  of  the  universe  ; 
3.  From  the  moral  unfitness  of  the  wicked  for  any  other  situation  ;  4.  And  from  the 
testimony  of  Holy  Scripture.  {Sketches  of  Four  Rundred  Sermons. )  Sell  for  (h« 
yxicked : — I.  The  place,  or  state,  here  mentioned.  ' '  Sheol "  is  often  put  for 
"  the  grave."  Not  to  be  so  understood  in  the  text,  because  hell  is  here  peculiar  to 
the  wicked,  and  the  grave  is  common  to  good  and  bad.  It  signifies  the  place  or 
state  of  the  lost.  It  has  two  branches.  The  punishment  of  loss,  and  the  punish- 
ment of  sense.  An  eternal  privation  of  the  blessed  and  glorious  presence  of  God, 
and  all  the  joy,  comfort,  and  happiness  that  is  attending  thereupon.  The  punish- 
ment of  loss  is  further  aggravated  from  a  threefold  consideration.  1.  The  possi- 
bility of  preventing  it,  if  there  had  been  care  taken  about  it.  2.  The  occasion  of 
this  loss,  aud  the  way  of  falling  into  it.  3.  The  beholding  of  others  to  enjoy  that 
happiness  which  themselves  are  deprived  of.  The  punishment  of  sense ;  which 
consists  in  the  unspeakable  torments  inflicted  upon  soul  and  body  for  ever  and  ever. 
Set  forth  by  "unquenchable  fire,"  because  fire  being  one  of  those  things  which  is 
most  grievous  to  corporal  sense,  is  therefore  fittest  to  express  this  condition  to 
us,  II.  The  persons  adjudged.  1.  The  comprehensive  representation  in  the 
word  "wicked."  A  word  of  great  latitude  and  extent,  including  all  open  and 
notorious  sinners.  All  close  and  reserved  hypocrites.  All  carnal  and  unregenerate 
persons  whatsoever.  2.  The  emphatic  representation.  ' '  All  the  nations  that  forget 
God."    The  subjects  of  the  punishment  are  "all  the  nations,"  all  that  prove  to  be 


PSALM  IX.]  THE  PSALMS.  165 

wicked.  There  is  ground  for  this  in  God's  power  and  omnipotency.  The  impor- 
tunity of  sin  and  guilt  makes  for  this  likewise.  The  guilt  fastened  upon  these 
subjects.  Thatis,  forgetting  of  God.  Apply  to  the  essence  of  God  ;  the  nature  of  God  ; 
the  Word  of  God  ;  the  providence  of  God.  Consider  then,  the  doom  and  sentence 
passed  upon  all  such  persons  as  described  ;  and  use  the  passage  as  a  caution  and  admoni- 
tion. Look  at  our  general  state  and  condition  in  grace.  Look  to  our  paiticular  life 
and  conveisation.  {T.  Horton,  D.D.)  The  history  of  ungodliness : — L  lis  germ. 
Forgetruhiess  of  God.  This  is  common.  "Nations."  Contrary  to  man's  true 
nature,  obligations,  and  circumstances.  IL  Its  development.  It  leads  to  all 
kind  of  wickedness.  Both  Scripture  and  experience  prove  this.  To  forget  God  is 
to  sin  without  restraint,  without  remorse,  and  without  bounds.  III.  Its  con- 
summation. It  is  "Hell."  This  is  inevitable  and  certain.  There  the  wicked  are 
abandoned  by  God,  without  excuse,  without  resource,  without  hope,  for  ever. 
Consider  this  ye  that  forget  God.  (  W.  Forsyth,  M.A.)  The  sure  hell: — Heaven 
and  hell  are  opposite  states  of  being  or  conditions  of  humanity.  Heaven  is  a 
present  possession,  not  a  mere  future  blessedness  ;  a  temper  of  mind  and  heart 
rather  than  a  special  locality.  Hell  is  the  opposite  of  heaven.  Does  heaven  mean 
the  service  and  consciousness  of  the  love  of  God  ?  Then  hell  will  prove  the  selfish- 
ness and  degradation  of  separation  from  God.  If  we  say  that  heaven  is  inward 
happiness  and  peace,  we  must  also  say  that  hell  is  dissatisfaction  and  unrest. 
Character  is  the  standard  which  determines  whether  a  man  is  in  heaven  or  in  hell. 
Theories  (concerning  hell)  once  held  by  almost  the  entire  Church  of  Christ  are 
honeycombed  with  doubt  and  disbelief,  and,  to  a  large  extent,  the  very  idea  of  a 
future  punishment  of  the  wicked  is  regarded  as  but  little  more  than  a  delusion  of 
superstitious  fancy.  What  has  brought  about  such  a  revolution  of  sentiment? 
Probably  the  frightful  and  unworthy  distortions  of  the  doctrine,  as  proclaimed  by 
the  various  creeds  and  churches.  In  Scripture  we  find  no  sure  ground  for  any 
belief  in  a  material  hell,  but  a  distinct  and  unmistakable  enunciation  of  the  fact 
of  a  natural  hell  of  cause  and  effect.  That  wilful  wrong-doing  will  inevitably  be 
followed  by  its  just  punishment  is  the  teaching  of  every  Bible  reference  to  the  fact. 
Evil  deserves,  and  calls  for,  punishment.  And  death  does  not  change  character. 
After  death  we  shall  be  as  we  were  before  death,  or  the  future  can  have  no  possible 
meaning  for  us.  The  irresistible  laws  of  the  moral  world  steadily  bring  the  punish- 
ment. I  make  no  absolute  statement  concerning  the  great  problem  of  retribution  ; 
I  formulate  no  theory  ;  but  it  seems  to  me  there  is  a  truer  and  nobler  satisfaction 
to  Divine  justice  than  the  tortures  of  the  damned.  I  believe  evil  will  be  followed 
by  fearful  penalty,  for  every  principle  of  right  and  law  of  God  demands  that  it 
should.  Further  I  may  not  go  ;  for  justice  there  can  be  none,  where  mercy  is  not. 
What  God  is  I  know.  He  is  wise,  and  sees  the  best.  I  can,  I  will  trust  Him. 
{George  Bainton.)  Awful  words : — Yes,  so  awful  that  it  seems  almost  pre- 
sumption to  preach  on  them.  But  woe  is  unto  us  if  we  do  not  warn  the  sinner. 
The  words  show  that  God  doth  regard  (Psa.  xciv.  17).  I.  The  charactees 
DESCRIBED.  1.  The  wicked.  This  means  not  all  mankind,  though  all  are  wicked, 
but  gross  transgressors.  2.  The  nations  that  forget  God.  Practical  atheists.  How 
many  do  this?  II.  The  future  portion  decreed  them.  They  "shall  be 
turned  into  hell."  There  will  be — 1.  Tormenting  pains.  2.  A  sleepless  conscience. 
3.  Mutual  reproaches.  4.  Unrestrained  and  full-grown  passions.  5.  The  certainty 
of  eternal  despair.  Then  come  this  very  hour  to  Jesus.  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The 
existence,    punishment,   and    duration  of  hell: — I.    Let    vs    meet   some  false 

OPINIONS    CONCERNING    HELL    AND    ESTABLISH    ITS    REAL  EXISTENCE.      The    Bible 

maintains  it.  But  consider — 1.  The  ancient  belief  is  found  both  in  sacred  and 
profane  writers.  We  read  of  it  in  the  Old  Testament.  Moses  tells  of  the  anger 
of  God  burning  "unto  the  lowest  hell."  Homer  speaks  of  Ajax  sending  men 
to  hell.  And  other  passages  show  that  the  ancients  believed  in  hell.  2.  Some 
deny  the  existence  of  any  hell  beyond  the  bounds  of  time,  and  assert  that  through 
God's  love  all  mankind  shall  be  saved.  But  this  contradicts  Scripture,  and  con- 
founds the  distinctions  between  right  and  wrong.  3.  Others  say  that  hell  is  here 
in  our  present  sufferings  and  that  there  is  no  other,  but  that  beyond  the  grave 
mankind  will  be  glorified.  But  then,  why  should  Christ  die  ?  What  pardon  do 
we  need  if  we  suffer  all  the  penalty  of  our  sin  here  ?  And  our  sufferings  would  be 
the  cause  of  our  salvation.  4.  Some  assert  that  conscience  is  hell.  But  conscience 
was  not  designed  to  be  either  man's  full  reward  or  penalty,  but  only  his  guide.  It 
is  a  witness,  a  judge,  and  to  some  extent  an  executioner.  5.  Others,  that  the 
grave  is  the  only  hell  the  Bible  speaks  of,  and  that  there  is  no  future  punishment. 


]66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  ix. 

But  only  in  1  Cor.  xv.  55  can  "hades"  be  consistently  translated  "grave."  In  all 
other  places  it  means  hell.  II.  The  duration  of  hell  eternal.  Some  say  that 
after  a  while  the  torments  of  the  damned  will  be  terminated,  and  the  damned  will 
tiien  be  saved.  But  this  is  to  make  hell  the  Saviour,  and  not  Christ.  And  the 
word  "everlasting"  is  the  true  rendering  of  Aionios.  And  how  can  a  man  b© 
legenerated  in  hell ;  but  unless  he  be  born  again  he  cannot  enter  the  Kingdom  of 
God  ?  And  for  the  protection  of  the  righteous  the  wicked  shall  be  shut  off  from 
them.  III.  In  what  the  punishment  of  hell  consists.  1.  The  loss  of  all 
worldly  good.  2.  The  society  the  lost  will  find  there.  Vile  men  and  devils.  3.  The 
lake  of  Fire.  If  this  be  figurative,  then  how  awful  must  be  the  punishment 
which  requires  such  a  figure.  4.  The  loss  of  the  glories  of  heaven.  5.  And  chief 
of  all,  of  God  Himself.  ( W.  Bams. )  Hell  God's  cemetery  for  the  corrupt : — 
"  Does  it  not  seem  cruel  to  put  a  loved  form  in  the  grave  damp  and  cold  ?  A  wife, 
for  instance,  who  has  been  shielded  from  every  breath  one  week,  the  next  she  is 
left  here  in  the  rain  and  exposure."  So  we  queried,  and  the  answer  taught  us  a 
lesson.  "  It  is  necessary  to  do  so,  for  the  good  of  the  family  and  the  community  ; 
it  does  seem  cruel,  and  death,  as  it  is  the  consequence  of  sin  is  always  cruel,  yet 
the  putting  away  of  the  dead  is  kindness.  Hell  is  God's  cemetery  for  dead  and 
corrupt  men  ;  it  is  for  souls  what  graveyards  are  for  bodies.  It  may  seem  cruel  of 
God  to  put  souls  away,  but  being  dead  it  is  necessary,  indeed  it  is  kindness  to  the 
living  members  of  His  family."  (W.  Luff.)  The  end  of  the  wicked: — "All 
wickedness  came  originally  with  the  wicked  one  from  hell ;  thither  it  will  be  again 
remitted,  and  they  who  hold  on  its  side  must  accompany  it  on  its  return  to  that 
place  of  torment,  there  to  be  shut  up  for  ever.  The  true  state,  both  of  nations 
and  the  individuals  of  which  they  are  composed,  is  to  be  estimated  from  one  single 
circumstance,  namely,  whether  in  their  doings  they  remember  or  forget  God. 
Remembrance  of  Him  is  the  well-spring  of  virtue  ;  forgetfulness  of  Him,  the  fountain 
of  vice.  {George  Home,  D.D.)  And  all  the  nations  that  forget  God. — The 
hopeless  state  of  the  heathen: — The  time  was  when  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
knew,  and  acknowledged,  the  only  living  and  true  God.  This  time,  however,  was 
of  short  duration.  Soon  after  their  separation  from  each  other,  they  lost  their 
religious  traditions,  grew  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  degenerated  into  all  kinds 
of  idolatry.  As  the  king  of  God's  peculiar  people,  David  viewed  all  the  heathen 
nations  as  his  personal  enemies  ;  and  as  a  prophet  of  the  true  Church,  he  viewed  all 
the  heathen  nations  as  enemies  to  the  true  God  and  the  true  religion.  Hence  it  is, 
that  he  so  often  blends  his  enemies  with  the  enemies  of  God,  and  speaks  of  both  as 
exposed  to  both  temporal  and  eternal  ruin.  The  text  is  a  description  of  all  the 
heathen  world,  who  are  destitute  of  Divine  revelation.  To  make  it  appear  that  the 
heathen  will  be  finally  lost,  observe — 1.  That  God,  many  years  ago,  gave  them  up  to 
judicial  bUndness  and  hardness  of  heart.  Paul,  speaking  of  the  heathen,  says, 
"God  gave  them  up  to  a  reprobate  mind."  2.  When  God  formed  the  seed  of 
Abraham  into  a  distinct  national  and  visible  Church,  He  shut  the  door  against  the 
heathen  nations.  The  present  heathen  nations  are  as  ignorant  and  wicked  as  the 
ancient  heathen  nations  were.  3.  When  God  sent  Christ  into  the  world  to  bring 
life  and  immortality  to  light,  He  directed  Him  to  preach  to  the  Jews,  and  not  to  the 
Gentiles.  4.  When  God  sent  the  apostles  to  preach  to  heathens,  He  sent  them  to 
turn  them  from  heathenism  to  Christianity.  5.  God  has  told  us  that  He  intends  to 
convert  all  the  heathen  nations,  and  that  He  intends  to  do  it  by  the  instrumentality 
of  the  Gospel.  Improvement.  (1)  If  God  will  not  save  the  heathen  who  are 
destitute  of  the  Gospel,  then  we  have  no  reason  to  think  He  will  save  the  Jews, 
while  they  disbelieve  the  Gospel.  (2)  If  God  will  not  save  the  heathen,  then  we 
have  no  reason  to  believe  He  will  save  atheists,  deists,  and  those  who  deny  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  Christianity.  (3)  He  will  not  save  any,  under  the  Gospel,  on 
the  ground  of  their  external  obtdience,  morality,  or  virtue.  It  appears,  from  what 
has  been  said,  that  the  heathen  are  in  a  deplorable  and  perishing  condition. 
(N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Wliat  are  our  meiiwries? — That  we  forget  is  our  commonest 
excuse  for  any  omission,  in  gi-eat  matters  or  in  small.  The  excuse  is  put  forward, 
not  only  as  sufiicient  ground  for  pardon  of  our  omission,  but  as  one  saving  the  credit 
of  our  intentions.  In  the  text  and  elsewhere  the  people  of  God  are  warned  that 
they  will  be  held  closely  and  severely  responsible  for  forgetting  God.  There  is  no  part 
of  our  mind's  powers  which  we  reckon  to  be  less  undur  our  control  than  our 
memories.  It  does  not  follow  because  we  have  not  the  command,  that  therefore 
we  might  not,  and  ought  not,  to  have  it.  What  are  our  memories  ?  The  recalling 
of  things  that  have  made  an  impression  on  us.     The  impression  may  be  made  tis 


PSALM  IX.]  THE  PSALMS.  167 

once  by  some  striking  circumstance,  or  it  may  be  the  result  of  frequent  and  diligent 
attention  to  some  particular  object.  The  ministering  of  our  memory  to  our 
thoughts  will  depend,  therefore,  upon  what  the  character  of  our  interests  has  been 
in  the  different  stages  of  our  life,  for  according  to  this  will  be  the  character  of  our 
impressions.  It  must  be  one  of  the  trials  of  those  who  have  lived  sinful  lives,  and 
after  turned  to  God,  that  their  memories  will  recall  to  their  involuntary  thoughts 
the  scenes  and  works  of  other  days,  and  contaminate  with  them  their  after 
endeavours  after  holier  reflections.  The  memory  must  and  will  bo  occupied. 
"What  is  the  great  conclusion  ?  That  if  our  memories  depend  on  our  impressions, 
and  we  have  not  remembered  the  Lord  our  God,  then  we  have  not  been  impressed 
by  deep  thought  of  Him.  The  utter  confusion  of  such  a  sentence  comes  upon  us  if 
we  consider  it  more  piecemeal.  It  means  this,  that  upon  each  opportunity  of  becom- 
ing deeply  impressed  by  the  thoughts  of  God,  we  have  remainea  unimpressed,  and, 
therefore,  forgetful  of  His  greatness.  Time  would  fail  us,  if  we  were  to  attempt  to 
show  how  the  sinful  nature  of  man  resists  the  varied  impressions  he  might  receive 
through  the  innumerable  manifestations  of  the  attributes  of  our  Almighty  Father. 
Memory  is  a  minister  of  good  to  the  good,  of  evil  to  the  evil,  for  it  is  our  former 
selves  waiting  upon  us.  {Archdeacon  Mildmay.)  Forgetfulness  of  God: — 
Familiarity  with  the  words  of  the  Bible  makes  them  lose  their  force  to  us.  The  Lord's 
Prayer,  the  Liturgy  generally.  But  this  is  no  argument  against  a  form  of  prayer. 
If  we  are  to  give  up  a  form  because  of  this  danger,  then  we  may  give  up  reading  the 
Bible  for  the  same  reason.  But  formalism  is  our  fault,  not  that  of  the  form  we  use. 
And  this  familiarity  tells  upon  the  truth  taught  in  text.  I.  ME^;'s  fokgetfulness 
OF  God.  And  yet  we  ought  to  fear,  for  if  in  David's  day,  when  men  were  under 
the  law,  our  text  was  true,  how  much  more  now  in  our  state  of  greater  privilege. 
See  how  we  ward  off  the  blow  threatened  by  the  idea  that  we  are  not  of  the  number 
of  those  who  forget  God.  This  is  tnae  in  a  sense,  for  no  one  can  quite  forget  God. 
Conscience  will  not  let  him.  Not  the  infidel  even,  still  less  the  profligate.  The 
text,  therefore,  tells  of  something  short  of  total  forgetfulness.  Who,  then,  are  they 
who  forget  God  ?  1.  Those  who  do  not  habitually  remember  Him.  Such  p«rson3 
may  l!)e  respectable  before  men.  2.  Those  who  are  afraid  to  do  right  because  of  the 
ridicule  of  the  world.  3.  Those  who  think  that  He  will  not  punish  sin.  II.  This 
DANGER  OF  FORGETFULNESS  presscs  ou  US  all.  Aud  it  is  worse  in  us  than  in  David, 
tor  we  have  the  Holy  Spirit  given  us  in  our  baptism.  If  we  call  on  Him  He  will 
help  us  to  resist  temptation.  Pleading  forgetfulness  only  adds  to  our  fault  if  we 
fall.  Therefore  let  us  seek  to  remember  God.  {F.  E.  Paget,  M.A.)  Tender 
words  of  terrible  apprehension: — Many  ministers  of  Christ  have  been  accused  of 
taking  pleasure  in  preaching  upon  this  terrible  subject  of  "  the  wrath  to  come."  It 
were  strange,  indeed,  if  it  were  so.  To  preach  Christ  is  our  delight,  the  joy  of  our 
heart ;  but  while  it  is  hard  to  preach  the  terrors  of  the  law,  it  were  harder  still  to 
bear  the  doom  which  must  rest  upon  the  silent  minister,  the  unfaithful  watchman 
who  did  not  warn  the  sinner,  and  whose  blood  must  therefore  be  required  at  the 
watchman's  hands.  None  ever  spoke  as  did  Jesus  on  this  terrible  theme ;  no 
preacher  ever  used  figures  of  such  glaring  horror  as  did  He.  Upon  such  a  subject 
we  cannot  afford  to  trifle.  Must  the  eternal  and  holy  Son  of  Goa  ofi"er  up  His  life 
for  us,  and  is  the  world  to  come  a  thing  about  which  men  can  idly  sport  or  dream  T 
But  this  forgetting  of  God.  I.  Let  me  charge  this  sin  upon  you.  Gross  sinners 
will  receive  their  doom.  God  will  not  treat  them  with  leniency  ;  He  will  not  wink 
at  their  follies,  "  the  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell."  But  observe  their  com- 
panions— "those  who  forget  God."  Now  I  charge  this  sin  upon  many.  Sinner, 
thou  forgettest — 1.  God's  infinite  majesty  ;  2.  His  mercies  ;  3.  His  laws ;  4.  His 
presence  ;  5.  His  justice.  II.  The  reason  of  this  forgetfulness.  1.  It  is 
because  the  thought  of  Him  makes  the  sinner  afraid.  The  guilty  man  always  dreads 
the  eye  of  the  judge.  2.  It  is  irksome  to  thee.  Thy  heart  revolts.  Thou  sayest, 
"Why  should  I  think  of  God?"  3.  Such  thinking  and  going  on  in  sin  are 
incompatible,  and  thou  preferrest  thy  sins.  Sin  loved,  God  is  ablioned.  III.  Your 
excuses  for  it.  You  say — 1.  A  man  is  excusable  if  he  has  not  had  enough  in  early 
youth  to  impress  God  upon  his  memory.  You,  who  have  been  trained  by  godly 
parents,  cannot  say  that.  2.  To  think  of  God  always  is  very  hard.  Haye  you  ever 
made  the  attempt  ?  How,  then,  do  you  know  it  is  hard  work  ?  Your  forgetting 
never  caused  you  to  weep.  If  it  were  not  wilful  and  wicked  forgetting  you  would 
repent  of  it.  Everything  around  you  reminds  you  of  God,  and  what  warnings  many 
of  you  have  had.  IV.  I  would  persuade  you  to  repentance.  I  would  plead^ 
relying  on  the  Holy  Ghost.     1.  By  the  terrors  of  the  law.     In  hell  the  thought  of 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  X. 

God  shall  be  as  a  dagger  in  your  soul.  "Son,  remember,"  that  was  the  word  of 
Abraham  to  Dives  in  hell,  and  an  awful  word  it  was.  But  2.  By  the  mercies  of 
God.  Hesaith,  "As  I  live,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but 
had  rather  that  he  should  turn  unto  Me  and  live."  There  is  hope  for  thee  in 
Christ  Jesus.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  18.  For  tlie  needy  shall  not  alwajB  be  forgotten :  the  expectation  of  the 
poor  shall  not  perish  for  ever.— ffood  cheer  for  the  needy: — The  value  of  a  text 
depends  very  much  upon  the  man  to  whom  it  comes.  The  song  of  the  troubadour 
was  very  chainiiiig  to  Richard,  because  he  knew  the  responsive  versos.  The  trail 
is  full  of  meaning  to  the  Indian,  for  his  quick  eye  knows  how  to  follow  it.  So  will 
those  who  are  spiritually  poor  and  needy  eagerly  lay  hold  on  this  promise.  It  is 
literally  true  that  the  needy  are  remembered  of  God.  In  bitter  times  He  will  so 
order  governments  that  they  shall  look  with  peculiar  interest  upon  the  poor.  In 
text  we  have — I.  Two  bitter  expeeiknces  ended.  1.  The  needy  shall  not  always 
be  forgotten  by  former  friends  and  admirers  ;  in  arrangements  made  and  plans  pro- 
jected ;  in  judgments  formed  and  in  praises  distributed  ;  in  help  estimated  and 
reliance  expressed.  Such  are  usually  left  out  of  our  calculation,  forgotten  as  a  dead 
man  out  of  mind.  But  this  will  not  be  always  so.  2.  ' '  The  expectation  of  the 
poor  shall  not  perish  for  ever."  You  have  been  disappointed,  in  your  natural 
expectation  from  justice,  gratitude,  relationship,  age,  sympathy,  charity,  &c.  ;  in 
your  confidence  in  man;  m  your  judgments  of  yourself ;  in  your  expectations  of 
providence.  II.  Two  sad  fears  removed.  1.  Not  for  ever  shall  you  be  forgotten. 
You  shall  not  meet  with  final  forgetftilness.  Nor  in  the  day  of  severe  trouble.  In 
the  night  of  grief  and  alarm  for  sin.  In  the  hour  of  death.  2.  Nor  shall  your 
expectation  perish.  Your  weakness  shall  not  frustrate  the  power  of  God,  nor  your 
sin  dry  up  the  grace  of  God.  Your  constitutional  infirmities  shall  not  cause  your 
overthrow.  III.  Two  sweet  promises  given.  1.  You  shall  not  be  overlooked 
by  the  Father,  Son,  or  Holy  Ghost.  2.  You  shall  not  be  disappointed.  Peace  shall 
visit  your  heart,  sin  vanquished,  and  an  abundant  entrance  into  glorj.  Then,  hope 
in  God.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 


PSALM  X. 

Vebs.  1-18.  Why  standest  Thon  afar  off,  0  Lord  ? — A  theological  difficulty,  a  haugMy 
impiety,  an  earnest  prayer:—!.  A  theological  difficulty. — "Why  standest 
Thou  afar  off,  0  Lord  ? "  Some  great  enormity  was  now  under  the  eyes  of  David. 
We  know  not  what.  He  had  witnessed  many  such  scenes.  They  have  a  tendency 
to  suggest  that  God  is  indifferent.  Even  Christ  felt  this.  "Why  hast  Thou  for- 
saken Me  ?"  Why  does  not  God  interfere  ?  We  cannot  fully  answer  the  question, 
but  we  may  consider — 1.  That  God  respects  that  freedom  of  action  with  which  He 
has  endowed  man.  2.  The  sufferings  which  the  wicked  inflict  upon  the  good  are 
often  disciplinary.  Faith  rests  itself  deeper.  3.  There  will  be  a  period  of  retribu- 
tion, "For  all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment,"  II.  A  haughty 
impiety.  "  The  wicked  in  his  pride  doth  persecute  the  poor.  See  this  impiety — 
1.  In  its  conduct  towards  men.  It  is  cruel — "persecutes."  It  is  fraudulent — "his 
mouth  is  full  of  deceit  and  fraud,"  both  in  speech — "under  his  tongue,"  &c,,  and 
practice — "he  sitteth  in  the  lurking  places,  '  &c.  2.  In  its  conduct  towards  God. 
There  is  here — 1.  An  expressed  contempt  for  the  EternaL  "  For  the  wicked  boasteth 
of  his  heart's  desire,"  &c,  2.  A  practical  disregard  for  the  Eternal,  "  God  is  not  in 
all  his  thoughts. "  He  is  without  God.  3.  An  awful  calumny  on  the  Eternal.  ' '  He 
hath  said  in  his  heart,  God  hath  forgottenjme."  Haughty  impiety  indeed.  III,  An 
EARNEST  prayer.  "  Arise,  O  Lord  ;  0  God,  lift  up  Thine  hand."  He  desires — 
1.  A  merciful  interposition  on  behalf  of  the  good,  "  Forget  not  the  humble."  Piety 
ever  breathes  its  prayers  to  heaven  for  such.  2.  A  righteous  interposition  against 
the  wicked.  ' '  Break  Thou  the  arm, "  &c.  "  Seek  out  his  wickedness, "  &c.  We  cannot 
justify  this  part  of  David's  prayers,  which  were  often  as  imperfect  as  many  parts  of 
his  conduct.  IV,  An  exultant  faith.  "The  Lord  is  King  for  ever  and  ever." 
David  believed — 1.  In  the  perpetuity  of  God's  Kingdom,  2,  In  His  attention  to 
human  entreaties,     "  Lord,  Thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  humble,"    3.  In  His 


PSALK  X.]  THE  PSALMS.  169 

vindication  of  the  right.  "  To  judge  the  fatherless,"  &c.  The  wicked  man  is  in  an 
especial  sense  "the  man  of  the  earth."  Sprung  from,  living  by  and  for  it,  and 
it  only.  {D,  Thomas,  D.D.)  Ma/ii's  cry  for  a  solution  of  the  felt  distance  of  his 
Maker : — There  are  many  other  passages  which  express  the  same  seiitiment  (Jer. 
xiv.  8).  This  cry  implies — 1.  That  the  distance  is  unnatural  ;  and  2.  Undesirable. 
Hence  the  queslion,  How  can  this  distance  be  explained  ?  There  are  three  sources 
to  which  alone  we  can  look  for  light.  I.  Human  philosophy.  It  may  theorise 
thus — 1.  That  God  is  too  great  to  allow  of  close  connection  with  Him.  This  is  the 
Epicurean  view.  But  no  true  thinker  can  accept  it.  2.  That  the  cause  of  the  felt 
distance  is  God's  method  of  agency.  This  is  mediatory  and  uniform  ;  not  direct, 
but  indirect.  He  stands  concealed  behind  the  machinery  of  the  universe.  But 
this  no  satisfactory  explanation.  He  acts  mediatorially  in  heaven,  and  yet  all 
there  feel  His  presence.  And  there  is  uniformity  in  heaven  also,  but  neither  does 
that  hinder  the  realisation  of  His  presence.  II.  Speculative  theology.  This 
says  that  man  by  sin  has  offended  God,  and  hence  God  has  in  anger  withdrawn  from 
men,  and  will  not  return  until  His  wrath  is  appeased  by  sacrifice.  But  this  explan- 
ation fails — 1.  Because  inconsistent  with  the  immutability  of  the  Divine  character. 
He  cannot  pass  from  love  to  anger,  from  the  placid  to  the  furious.  It  is  impossible. 
2.  And  inconsistent  also  with  we  moral  excellence  of  God.  Can  what  is  unamiable 
with  man  be  right  with  God  ?  I  trow  not.  III.  Divine  bevelation.  It  teaches 
that  we  by  our  sin  have  departed  from  God.  The  sinner  is  the  prodigal  son.  Now, 
1.  This  is  a  satisfactory  solution.  When  we  have  sinned  we  feel  God  distant  from 
ns,  and,  moreover,  indignant  with  us.  So  He  appears  to  the  sinful  mind.  In  reality 
God  IB  near  him  and  loves  him  infinitely.  But  the  Bible  often  presents  God  as  He 
appears  to  the  mind,  as  it  speaks  of  natural  objects  as  they  appear  to  our  senses. 
And  2.  It  is  a  vital  solution.  Knowing  the  cause  is  indispensable  to  its  removal. 
And  this  the  Bible  teaches.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Tbe  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance,  will  not  seek  after 
Ood. — The  wicked,  from  pride,  refuse  to  seek  Ood : — In  this  Psalm  we  have  a  full- 
length  portrait  of  a  careless,  unawakened  sinner,  drawn  by  the  unerring  pencil  of 
truth.  Two  of  the  features  which  compose  this  portrait  are  delineated  in  our  text. 
1.  An  unwillingness  to  seek  after  God.     2.  Pride,  which  causes  that  unwillingness. 

1.  The  wicked  will  not  seek  after  God.  They  do  not,  because  they  will  not. 
To  this  purpose  they  obstinately  and  unalterably  adhere,  unless  their  wills  are 
subdued  by  Divine  giace.  1.  The  wicked  will  not  seek  after  the  knowledge  of  God. 
This  is  evident  from  Scripture  statement,  and  from  the  experience  of  all  ages.  The 
wicked  will  not  pray  for  the  knowledge  of  God,  nor  improve  their  opportunities  for 
acquiring  the  knowledge  of  God.  2.  The  wicked  will  not  seek  the  favour  of  God. 
Knowing  nothing  experimentally  of  His  excellence  and  perfections,  and  ignorant  of 
their  entire  dependence  on  Him  for  happiness,  they  cannot  of  course  realise  that 
the  favour  of  God  is  life,  and  His  lovmg-kindness  is  better  than  life.  3.  The 
wicked  will  not  seek  after  the  likeness  of  God.  That  they  do  not  at  all  resemble 
Him  is  certain.  They  do  not  wish  or  endeavour  to  resemble  Him.  There  is,  indeed, 
in  their  view,  no  reason  why  they  should.  There  are  but  two  motives  which  can 
make  any  being  wish  to  resemble  another.  A  wish  to  obtain  the  approbation  of  the 
person  imitated  ;  or  admiration  of  something  in  his  character,  and  a  consequent 
desire  to  inscribe  it  into  our  own.  But  the  wicked  can  be  influenced  by  neither  of 
these  motives  to  seek  after  conformity  to  God.  4.  The  wicked  will  not  seek  after 
communion  with  God.  Communion  supposes  some  degree  of  resemblance  to  the 
being  whose  communion  is  sought,  and  a  participation  of  the  same  nature,  views, 
and  feelings.  II.  The  reason  why  the  wicked  will  not  seek  God.  1.  Pride 
renders  God  a  disagreeable  object  of  contemplation  to  the  wicked,  and  a  knowledge 
of  Him  as  undesirable.  Pride  consists  in  an  unduly  exalted  opinion  of  one's  self. 
It  is  therefore  impatient  of  a  rival,  hates  a  superior,  and  cannot  endure  a  master. 

2.  The  pride  of  the  wicked  prevents  them  from  seeking  the  knowledge  of  God,  by 
rendering  them  unwilling  to  be  taught.  Pride  is  almost  as  impatient  of  a  teacher 
as  of  a  master.  3.  Pride  renders  the  wicked  nnwilling  to  use  the  means  by  which 
alone  the  knowledge  of  God  can  be  acquired.  It  renders  them  unwilling  to  study 
the  Bible  in  a  proper  manner.  Pride  also  renders  the  man  unwilling  to  pray.  And 
it  prevents  him  from  improving  public  and  private  opportunities  for  acquiring 
religious  instruction.  The  pride  of  the  wicked  will  not  allow  them  to  seek  after 
the  favour  or  the  likeness  of  God.  It  makes  them  unwilling  to  seek  after  com- 
munion with  God.     Reflections — 1.  How  evident  it  is  that  salvation  is  wholly  of 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  X. 

trace,  and  that  all  the  wicked,  if  left  to  themselves,  wiU  certainly  perish.  2.  How 
epraved,  how  infatuated,  how  unreasonable  do  the  wicked  appear!  3,  How 
foolish,  absurd,  ruinous,  blindly  destructive  of  its  own  object  does  pride  appear  ! 
The  subject  maybe  applied  for  purposes  of  self-examination.  (E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
The  pride  of  man  restrains  seeking  after  God : — Christianity  made  but  few  con- 
verts amongst  the  disciples  of  Zeno.  Why  should  it  have  been  so  ?  With  their 
simple  and  self-denying  habits,  why  were  they  not  attracted  by  the  purer  morals  of 
the  Gospel  ?  and  with  their  superiority  to  the  surrounding  superstitions,  why  did 
they  not  hail  that  unknown  God  whom  Cleanthus  had  sung,  and  whom  Paul  now 
preached  ?  The  answer  we  fear  is  to  be  found  in  that  little  word  pride — that  little 
word  which  is  still  so  great  a  hindrance  to  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh.  Amongst 
the  Greeks  and  Romans  the  Stoics  occupied  the  same  place  as  the  Pharisees  amongst 
the  Jews.  The  very  foundation  of  their  theory  was  to  make  the  virtuous  man 
self-sufficing,  and  usually  they  got  so  far  as  to  make  him  self-sufficient.  In 
cutting  off  all  other  vices  the  Stoic,  like  the  cynic  before  him,  fostered  to  enor- 
mous magnitude  pride  or  self-complacency,  and,  as  Archer  Butler  says  in  his 
Ancient  Philosojjhy,  sought  not  so  much  to  please  the  Deity  as  to  be  His 
equal.  (/.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  God  is  not  in  all  Ms  thoughts. — The  sinf illness  of 
forgetting  God : — A  characteristic  mark  of  the  ungodly  man.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is 
the  concealed  spring  from  which  the  evil  and  bitter  streams  of  outward  wickedness 
derive  their  origin.  I.  What  is  intended  by  having  God  in  all  ottr  thoughts? 
It  is  not  meant  that  we  should  have  our  meditations  constantly  and  invariably 
fixed  upon  God.  Nor  that  the  most  pious  and  spiritual  state  of  mind  will  dis- 
qualify a  man  for  transacting  the  proper  business  of  his  station.  We  are  here 
reminded  of  the  necessity  of  an  abiding  and  habitual  impression  of  our  obligations 
and  accountableness  to  God.  The  text  implies  that  we  should  take  God  as  our 
portion,  and  expect  our  highest  and  best  haj)piness  from  Him.  Whatever  it  be 
from  which  a  man  expects  his  chief  good,  to  that  his  thoughts  naturally  revert 
whenever  he  is  not  compelled  to  fix  them  upon  some  other  object.  It  will  be  the 
favourite  topic  of  his  meditations.  II.  The  consequence  of  the  want  of  this 
principle.  The  man  described  here  is  one  who  lives  in  a  state  of  habitual  forget- 
fulness of  God  ;  acts  without  an  abiding  sense  of  his  obligation  and  accountableness 
to  Him  ;  lives  to  please  himself,  rather  than  Him  who  made  him.  This  state  of 
mind  is  the  very  thing  that  leads  to  every  act  of  gross  outward  sin.     Conclusion  : 

1.  Learn  not  to  be  satisfied  with  ourselves,  because  men  approve  of  us.  They 
cannot  at  all  look  at  our  motives.  2.  If,  in  order  to  our  being  approved  of  God,  it 
is  necessary  that  we  should  have  such  a  constant  regard  to  Him,  is  it  not  clear  that 
the  retrospect  of  our  lives  will  show  us  that  we  have  been  lamentably  defective  in 
His  sight !  Our  subject  may  remind  us  of  our  exceeding  sinfulness,  and  of  our 
need  of  the  mercy  and  grace  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  {T. 
Scott,  M,A.)  Who  are  the  wicked? — ^The  text  says  that  God  is  not  in  their 
thoughts.  1.  This  is  because  of  practical  atheism.  God  is  put  out  of  the  way  by 
various  theories.  One  makes  the  world  ten  thousand  years  old,  and  another  ten 
million.  The  Bible  is  sneered  at  as  an  old,  antiquated  book.  2.  Ignorance  of  God's 
character  is  another  reason  why  God  is  not  in  men's  thoughts.  We,  as  sinful  and 
blinded  creatures,  cannot  justly  comprehend  a  holy  God.  Even  Christ's  disciples 
but  poorly  comprehended  God's  character  as  revealed  in  Christ.  Much  more  in  the 
case  of  the  sinner  is  it  true  that  God  is  not  in  his  thoughts  on  account  of  the 
blindness  of  sin.  Justice  and  holiness  are  obscured.  3.  A  misconception  of  their 
own  moral  condition  follows.  They  lose  sight  of  God  because  they  are  not  awake 
to  their  own  ill-desert.  4.  Another  reason  why  God  is  not  in  the  wicked  man's 
thought  is  because  of  absorption  in  the  things  of  the  world.  The  demands  of 
business  should  be  met,  but  those  of  God  are  not  to  be  forgotten.  Men  know  that 
there  is  a  future  life,  though  some  may  argue  against  it.  The  Sabbath  is  given  as 
one  preparative.  {J.  H.  Hamilton,  M.  D. )  The  place  where  God  is  not : — God  is 
everywhere,  and  yet  the  verse  tells  us  win  re  He  is  not — in  the  thoughts  of  wicked 
men.     This  is — 1.  A  notorious  fact.     Millions  live  day  by  day  as  if  God  were  not. 

2.  An  astounding  fact.  It  is  unnatural,  impious,  calamitous.  Why,  then,  is  God 
not  in  their  thoughts  ?  I.  Negatively.  1.  It  is  not  because  there  can  be  any 
doubt  as  to  the  importance  of  thinking  of  God.  2.  Nor  because  there  is  any  lack 
of  means  to  remind  men  of  Him.  All  things  are  full  of  Him.  3.  Nor  because  of 
the  unbroken  regularity  of  the  material  world.  In  heaven,  where  there  is  the  same 
regularity,  their  minds  ever  delight  in  Him.  4.  Nor  because  man  has  no  conscious- 
ness of  restraint  in  action.     But  all  holy  souls  are  equally  free.     II.  Positively. 


PSALM  X.]  TEE  PSALMS.  171 

The  cause  is  in  the  heart.  1.  Fear — the  guilty  conscience.  2.  Dislike  ;  hence  men 
exclude  God  from  their  thoughts.  Learn,  the  appalling  wickedness  of  man,  and 
his  need  of  Christ.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  searchitig  description  of  the  wicked : — 
The  heart  of  the  wicked  is  the  only  place  in  the  creation  of  God  whence,  if  we  may 
ao  speak,  the  Creator  is  banished.  Inquire — I.  Into  the  causes  of  such  a  state 
OF  MIND.  They  penetrate  deeper  than  may  at  first  sight  appear.  It  is  nothing 
temporary  or  accidental  that  causes  the  forgetfulness  of  which  the  Psalmist  com- 
plains ;  the  evil  is  general  and  radical.  It  has  its  source  in  our  original  apostasy  ; 
it  extends  to  us  all  by  nature  ;  no  man  is  free  from  its  influence.  Subordinate  to 
this  primary  and  leading  cause  there  are  individual  causes  which,  though  but 
results  of  the  former,  become  in  their  turn  new  and  fruitful  causes  of  the  same 
effect.  The  constant  pressure  of  worldly  concerns,  even  when  lawful,  tends  to  banish 
Ood  from  our  thoughts.  But  mere  inattention  is  not  the  whole  cause  why  God  is 
not  more  in  the  hearts  of  men.  They  wilfully  and  deliberately  banish  Him  from 
their  thoughts.  They  are  anxious  to  forget  Him.  And  the  reason  is  that  they  do 
not  truly  love  God.  What  we  love  is  always  welcome  to  our  thoughts.  II.  Into 
THE  EVILS  RESULTING  THEREFKOM.  In  fact,  all  the  vice  that  exists  among  man- 
kind arises  from  their  not  having  God  in  their  thoughts.  Did  men  seriously  think 
upon  God  they  would  not  dare  to  sin  as  they  too  often  do.  III.  Into  the  method 
OF  OVERCOMING  THIS  UNHAPPY  STATE  OF  CHARACTER.  1.  Learn  to  contemplate 
the  Almighty  in  the  magnitude  of  His  terrors.  2.  Let  us  view  God  in  the  abund- 
ance of  His  love.  {Christian  Observer.)  A  discourse  mi  habitual  devotion: — It 
is  characteristic  of  a  good  man  that  he  "  sets  the  Lord  always  before  him,"  whereas 
it  is  said  of  the  wicked,  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."  This  seems  to  furnish 
a  pretty  good  test  of  the  state  of  a  man's  mind  with  respect  to  virtue  and  vice. 
The  wicked  man  is  a  practical  atheist.  The  good  man  sees  God  in  everything,  and 
everything  in  God.  An  habitual  regard  of  God  is  the  most  effectual  means  of 
advancing  us  from  the  more  imperfect  to  the  more  perfect  state.  Recommend  this 
duty  by  an  enumeration  of  its  happy  effects.  1.  An  habitual  regard  to  God  in  our 
•actions  tends  greatly  to  keep  us  firm  in  our  adherence  to  our  duty.  It  has  pleased 
Divine  Providence  to  place  man  in  a  state  of  trial  and  probation.  This  world  is 
.strictly  such.  God  has  placed  us  under  laws.  We  are  certainly  less  liable  to  forget 
these  laws,  and  our  obligation  to  observe  them,  when  we  keep  up  an  habitual  regard 
to  our  great  Lawgiver  and  Judge,  when  we  consider  Him  as  present  with  us.  2.  An 
habitual  regard  to  God  promotes  an  uniform  cheerfulness  of  mind.  It  tends  to 
dissipate  melancholy  and  anxiety.  3.  Fits  a  man  for  the  business  of  this  life, 
giving  a  peculiar  presence  and  intrepidity  of  mind,  and  is  therefore  the  best 
support  in  diflScult  enterprises  of  any  kind.  Consider  the  most  proper  and  effectual 
metnods  of  promoting  this  temper  of  mind.  (1)  Endeavour  to  divest  your  minds 
of  too  great  a  multiplicity  of  the  cares  of  this  world  ;  (2)  Do  not  omit  stated  times  of 
worshipping  God  by  prayer,  public  and  private  ;  (3)  Omit  no  opportunity  of  turn- 
ing your  thoughts  to  God  ;  (4)  Never  fail  to  have  recourse  to  God  upon  every  occa- 
sion of  strong  emotion  of  mind  ;  (5)  Labour  to  free  your  minds  of  all  consciousness 
of  guilt  and  self-reproach ;  (6)  Cultivate  in  your  minds  just  ideas  of  God.  {J. 
Priestley,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Thy  judgments  are  far  above,  out  of  his  sight. — Man's  judgmerd  at 
variance  with  God's : — There  is  an  obtuseness  and  impenetrability  that  attach  to  the 
mind  of  man  respecting  the  character  of  moral  obligation  that  prove  absolutely 
invincible  to  all  his  powers  of  meditation  and  research.  This  inability  is  of  a 
moral,  not  of  a  natural  kind,  having  its  origin  not  in  his  natural  constitution, 
but  in  his  adventitious  circumstances.  The  powers  of  the  human  mind  receive 
a  wrong  direction.  Reason  turns  renegade,  and  to  escape  a  hated  conclusion 
flings  itself  incontinently  into  the  arms  of  delusion.  It  is  thus  that  the  stoutest 
intellect  becomes  the  most  impregnable.  Numberless  are  the  subterfuges,  specu- 
lative as  well  as  practical,  that  are  continually  held  in  play  by  the  human  mind 
in  order  to  elude  the  embarrassment  of  its  untoward  circumstances ;  for  there  is  no 
middle  road  to  peace  once  the  soul  has  begun  to  grapjile  with  the  momentous 
investigMtion.  This  obliquity  of  mind,  that  likes  not  to  retain  the  knowledge  of 
God,  is  the  tnie  and  only  source  of  all  the  difficulty  that  attaches  to  the  reception 
•of  religious  truth.  Truth  of  this  description  lies  no  way  more  remote  from  our 
apprehension  than  any  truth  of  natural  science,  till  it  begins  to  molest  us  with 
the  sense  of  moral  obligation,  and  to  make  its  demands  on  our  acquiescence  in 
rthe  form  of  duty.     Men  have  not  generally  disputed  much  about  what  is  virtue, 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psai,m  x. 

their  approbation  of  it  being  required  only  in  the  form  of  encomium.  They 
willingly  unite  in  applauding  exemplary  specimens  of  justice,  disinterestedness, 
and  generosity,  and  in  the  condemnation  of  their  contraries.  .  .  .  Our  consciences 
ought  not  to  sit  so  easy  under  the  sins  of  our  country,  or  even  of  mankind.  That 
character  in  man  which  separates  betwixt  him  and  his  Maker,  and  provokes  the 
Divine  judgment,  also  renders  the  Divine  proceeding  in  judgment  more  obscure 
and  uniiite;ligible  to  him.  Conclusion  :  See  the  indubitable  equity,  harmony, 
and  consistency  of  the  Divine  administration  in  judgment.  (H.  Grey,  M.A.) 
The  unseen  avengers  : — On  the  whole  and  in  the  rough,  unquestionably  sin  in  this 
world  does  not  remain  unavenged.  This  is  true  when  society  is  looked  at  in 
the  mass  ;  yet  in  the  history  of  individuals  it  is  constantly  found  that  no  such 
obvious  sequence  of  crime  and  punishment  can  be  traced.  There  are  plenty  of 
cases  in  which  offenders  against  the  moral  law  have  seemed  to  get  off  scot-free. 
It  even  almost  appears  at  times  as  if  they  were  specially  favoured  in  the  struggle 
for  existence.  Is  there  some  hidden  explanation  of  cases  of  this  kind  *  The  text 
says,  "Thy  judgments  are  far  above."  They  are  there,  unerring  in  their  action, 
unslumbering  in  their  determination,  but  they  are  too  great,  too  solemn  and  awful 
for  the  Psalmist's  sin-dulled  eyes  to  behold.  God  has  many  ways  of  avenging  sin. 
It  may  in  reality  be  far  worse  for  a  man  when  he  is  left  for  a  long  while  to  delight 
in  his  sins,  when  they  grow  round  him  and  in  him,  like  some  choking  creeper, 
some  deathly  parasite  that  sucks  out  the  vitality  from  that  which  it  encircles, 
leaving  at  last  only  the  mere  semblance  of  life.  Trace  the  action  of  these  unseen 
avengers.  I.  After  the  commission  of  downeight,  unmistakable  sin. 
There  are  many  sins  of  the  flesh  that  ought  to  meet  with  open  punishment  from  the 
Divine  laws  which  they  violate.  Yet  obviously  ill  deeds  are  often  not  so  chastised. 
Take  the  case  of  secret  drinking.  There  may  be  exposure.  Or  the  habit  grows 
more  dominant.  Even  if  its  physical  consequences  are  delayed,  a  degeneration 
of  spiritual  faculties  sets  in.  It  becomes  increasingly  difficult  for  such  persons 
to  see  any  goodness  in  their  fellow-creatures.  Tell  me  not  that  sin  ia  unavenged 
when  the  whole  character  becomes  deteriorated,  when  the  will  becomes  paralysed, 
when  all  impulses  for  good  are  rendered  impotent  and  sterile,  when  blindness 
has  come  upon  the  eyes  to  all  that  is  fair  and  glorious  and  uplifting  in  the 
world.  II.  Take  another  instance,  that  of  hypocrisy.  The  Chadbands 
and  Pecksniffs  of  humanity,  the  religious  and  moral  humbugs  of  the  world,  how  do 
they  fare  ?  Are  tliey  always  discovered  ?  Hypocrisy  is  of  various  degrees.  It 
commences  in  the  bud  by  timid  fear  of  speaking  the  truth,  and  it  ends  in  the 
full-blown  flower  of  brazen  dishonesty  and  imposture.  In  this  necessary  develop- 
ment it  is  ever  finding  its  dreadful  reward.  Here,  again,  the  sinner  may  be  unable 
to  understand  the  doom  which  has  fallen  upon  him.  It  is  supposed  that  in  past 
generations  the  blind  fishes  of  subterranean  lakes  in  America  found  their  organs  of 
sight  not  required,  so  nature  dropped  them  out.  They  may  be  happy  in  their 
blindness,  but  who  would  exchange  conditions  with  them  ?  We  cannot  be  untrue 
to  what  we  know  to  be  right  without  bringing  upon  ourselves  a  like  Nemesis. 
The  inevitable  punishment  of  doing  a  false  action  is  the  increased  difficulty  of  either 
doing  or  seeing  what  is  true.  III.  Worldliness,  For  the  most  part  the  conse- 
quences are  obvious  enough  of  devotion  to  the  fancies  and  fashions  of  a  luxurious, 
indolent  society.  Folk  become  weary  and  jaded.  The  upper-class  world  has,  too, 
its  seamy  side.  There  are  not  often  open  exposures.  The  decorum  of  advancing 
age  smooths  over  everything.  In  those  cynical  words,  "  We  are  all  respectable  after 
seventy. "  The  wrong  is  not  done  with  when  forgotten.  What  if  the  fires  of  passion 
and  emulation  are  only  banked  in  temporarily  by  the  worn-out  crust  of  mortality  t 
They  may  be  ready  to  flare  up  in  another  world.  Anyway,  their  effects  ever 
remain.  All  that  might  have  been — all  wasted,  misused,  handed  over  to  the 
powers  of  evil !  How  terrible  would  these  pitiable  failures  show  if  seen  by  eyes 
purged  to  discover  things  in  their  true  reality  !  Worse  thought  still,  may  not  this 
deplorable  vision  of  life's  wasted  opportunities  be  forced,  branded  upon  the  soul  for 
ever  hereafter  ?  (ff.  Gardner,  M.A.)  Jvdgvients  of  life:— In  this  Psalm  David 
gives  one  of  his  emphatic  descriptions  of  the  wicked  man,  and  the  fate  that  awaits 
him.  We  in  our  day  are  apt  to  think  of  every  bad  man  as  partly  good,  and  of  every 
good  man  as  partly  bad  ;  that  character  is  always  mingled.  Hence  good  and  bad 
characters  do  not  stand  out  so  clearly  before  us  as  they  did  before  David  and,  I  think 
I  may  say,  as  they  stood  out  before  Christ.  But  whilst  our  perception  of  the  weak- 
ness in  every  man's  character  is  very  good,  David's  thought  is,  no  doubt,  the  true  one 
— that  there  is,  after  all,  in  every  character  determination  for  right  or  wrong.     The 


PSALM  X.]  THE  PSALMS.  173 

wicked  man  is  he  whose  face  is  not  away  from  righteousness  and  is  content  with 
unrighteousness.  Now  one  thing  about  this  man  David  affirms.  Ver.  5:  "Thy 
judgments  are  far  above,  out  of  his  sight."  It  is  so.  There  are  regions  of  which 
men  never  think,  in  which  they  are  being  judged  every  day.  A  man  s  life  depends 
much  upon  the  judgments  passed  upon  him.  And  if  he  be  content  with  the  lower 
judgments  relating  to  his  earthly  condition,  he  will  pass  by  all  the  higher  ones,  and 
which  are  judging  all  his  life.  In  the  heavens  there  is  a  long  series  of  thrones, 
growing  whiter  and  whiter,  until  the  great  white  throne  stands  above  them  all. 
And  the  richness  and  sacred  ness  of  a  man's  life  depend  on  his  consciousness  of  these 
judgments.  The  condemnation  of  the  wicked  is  that  he  has  no  such  consciousness 
that  God's  judgments  are  *'  out  of  his  sight."  How  many  of  us  live  in  the  lower 
judgments — that  of  pleasure,  or  profit,  or  reputation.  And  all  the  time  there 
tower  above  us  these  great  judgment-seats  of  God.  Think  of  some  of  them. 
I.  Thb  xjniveksk.  As  to  whether  we  have  found  or  are  finding  our  own  true 
place  in  it.  There  is  such  place.  Are  we  filling  it  ?  II.  Absolute  rightkous- 
NE88.  That  calm  abstraction  which  we  call  the  right,  which  makes  itself  known  so 
really  in  all  the  operations  of  the  world.  It  casts  us  aside  for  our  perversity  or  it 
takes  us  into  its  embrace.  III.  All  the  puke  and  noble  men.  They  are 
for  ever  judging  us,  not  malignantly  condemning  us,  but  deciding  as  each  one  of 
us  comes  into  their  presence,  whether  there  is  any  use  in  us.  And  above  all  there 
is — IV.  The  judgment  of  God.  He,  knowing  us  altogether,  is  judging  whether 
we  are  capable  of  receiving  Him.  He  ever  seeking  us,  and  we  ever  either  inviting 
or  rejecting  His  love.  That  love  which  beats  at  the  door  of  our  nature  is  judging 
us,  the  judgment  of  the  soul  being  in  the  refusal  of  the  offer  of  God.  How  dreadful, 
then,  to  live  with  all  these  judgments  "out  of  our  sight."  Sometimes  you  see  a 
man,  once  content,  now  full  of  discontent.  The  world  satisfies  him  no  more.  He 
is  seeking  the  higher  judgments.  Jesus  ever  sought  the  judgment  of  God — to 
please  Him.     {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Ttie  wicked  hath  said  in  his  heart,  I  shall  not  he  moved. — Godless 
confidence — its  mad  arrogance : — The  wicked  man  said  a  good  many  wrong  things 
"in  his  heart."  The  tacit  assumptions  on  which  a  life  is  based,  though  they  may 
never  come  to  consciousness,  and  still  less  to  utterance,  are  the  really  important 
things.  I  daresay  this  "  wicked  man"  with  his  lips  was  a  good  Jew,  and  said  his 
prayers  all  properly,  but  in  his  heart  he  had  two  working  beliefs.  One  is  thus 
expressed,  "  As  for  all  his  enemies,  he  pufTeth  at  them.  He  hath  said  in  his  heart, 
I  shall  not  be  moved."  The  other  is  put  into  words  thus,  "He  hath  said  in  his 
heart,  God  hath  forgotten.  He  hideth  His  face.  He  will  never  see  it."  That  is  to 
say,  the  only  explanation  of  a  godless  life,  unless  the  man  is  an  idiot,  is  that  there 
lie  beneath  it,  as  formative  principles  and  unspoken  assumptions,  guiding  and 
shaping  it,  one  or  both  of  these  two  thoughts — either  "There  is  no  GcS,"  or  "He 
does  not  care  what  I  do,  and  I  am  safe  to  go  on  for  evermore  in  the  present  fashion." 
It  might  seem  as  if  a  man,  with  the  facts  of  human  life  before  him,  could  not,  even 
in  the  insanest  arrogance,  say,  "  I  shall  not  be  moved,  for  I  shall  never  be  in 
adversity."  But  we  have  an  awful  power — and  the  fact  that  we  exercise,  and 
choose  to  exercise,  it  is  one  of  the  strange  riddles  of  our  enigmatical  existence  and 
characters — of  ignoring  unwelcome  facts,  and  going  cheerily  on  as  though  we  had 
annihilated  them,  because  we  do  not  reflect  upon  them.  So  this  man,  in  the  midst 
of  a  world  in  which  there  is  no  stay,  and  whilst  he  saw  all  around  him  the  most 
startling  and  tragical  instances  of  sudden  change  and  complete  collapse,  stands 
quietly  and  says,  "Ah!  I  shall  never  be  moved";  "God  doth  not  require  it." 
That  absurdity  is  the  basis  of  every  life  that  is  not  a  life  of  consecration  and 
devotion — so  far  as  it  has  a  basis  of  conviction  at  all.  The  "wicked  "  man's  true 
faith  is  this,  absurd  as  it  may  sound  when  you  drag  it  out  into  clear  distinct 
utterance,  whatever  may  be  his  professions.  I  wonder  if  there  are  any  of  us  whose 
life  can  only  be  acquitted  of  being  utterly  unreasonable  and  ridiculous,  by  the 
assumption,  "  I  shall  never  be  moved."  Have  you  a  lease  of  your  goods  ?  Do  you 
think  you  are  tenants  at  will,  or  owners  ?  Which  ?  Is  there  any  reason  why  any 
of  us  should  escape,  as  some  of  us  live  as  if  we  believed  we  should  escape,  the  certain 
fate  of  all  others?  If  there  is  not,  what  about  the  sanity  of  the  man  whose  whole 
life  is  built  upon  a  blunder  ?  He  is  convicted  of  the  grossest  folly,  unless  he  be 
assured  that  either  there  is  no  God,  or  that  He  does  not  care  one  rush  about  what 
we  do,  and  that  consequently  we  are  certain  of  a  continuance  in  our  present  state. 
Do  you  say  in  your   heart,    "I   shall   never   be   moved"?     Then   you  must   be 


174  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  x. 

strong  enough  to  resist  every  tempest  that  beats  against  you.  Is  that  so?  "I 
shall  never  be  moved."  Then  nothing  that  contributes  to  your  well-being  will  ever 
slip  from  your  grasp,  but  you  will  be  able  to  hold  it  tight.  Is  that  so  ?  "I  shall 
never  be  moved. "  Then  there  is  no  grave  waiting  for  you.  Is  that  so  ?  Unless 
these  three  assumptions  be  warranted,  every  godless  man  is  making  a  hideous 
blunder,  and  his  character  is  the  sentence  pronounced  by  the  loving  lips  of  incarnate 
truth  on  the  rich  man  who  thought  that  he  had  "much  good'  ^aid  up  for  many 
years,"  and  had  only  to  be  merry — "Thou  fool!  Thou  fool!  If  an  engineer 
builds  a  bridge  across  a  river  without  duje  calculation  of  the  force  of  the  winds  that 
blow  down  the  gorge,  the  bridge  will  be  at  the  bottom  of  the  stream  some  stormy 
night,  and  the  train  piled  on  the  fragments  of  it  in  hideous  ruin.  And  with  equal 
certainty  the  end  of  the  first  utterer  of  this  speech  can  be  calculated,  and  is  foretold 
in  this  Psalm,  ' '  The  Lord  is  King  for  ever  and  ever.  .  .  .  The  godless  are  perished 
out  of  the  land."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  false  security  of  the  wicked: — 
Carnal  security  opens  the  door  for  all  impiety  to  enter  into  the  soul.  Pompey, 
when  he  had  in  vain  assaulted  a  city  and  could  not  take  it  by  force,  devised  this 
stratagem  in  way  of  agreement ;  he  told  them  he  would  leave  the  siege  and  make 
peace  with  them,  upon  condition  that  they  would  let  in  a  few  weak,  sick,  and 
wounded  soldiers  among  them  to  be  cured.  They  let  in  the  soldiers,  and  when  the 
city  was  secure  the  soldiers  let  in  Pompey's  army.  A  carnal  settled  security  will 
let  in  a  whole  army  of  lusts  into  the  soul.     {Thomas  Brooks.) 

Vers.  7-18.  His  month  is  full  of  cursing. — Black  arts : — A  missionary  from 
Polynesia  brought  home  a  "  soul  trap."  It  was  a  series  of  rings  twisted  in  cocoa- 
nut  fibre.  If  a  native  should  commit  a  great  offence,  or  offend  a  sorcerer,  he 
proceeds  to  make  a  new  ring  in  his  chain,  so  as  to  form  a  trap  to  catch  the  poor 
man's  spirit.  Soon  the  sorcerer  asserts  that  the  soul  of  the  culprit,  assuming  this 
form,  has  passed  into  the  trap.  It  is  immediately  known  throughout  the  tribe  that 
a  certain  man  has  lost  his  soul.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  invariably  happens  that  the 
soulless  man  shortly  afterwards  dies,  of  course  through  sheer  mental  distress  at 
having  had  his  soul  thus  entrapped.  We  smile  at  such  traps,  but  we  are  all 
familiar  with  soul-traps  of  a  far  more  subtle  and  dangerous  character.  In  the  verses 
before  us  the  Psalmist  vividly  pictures  the  crafty  schemes  of  the  wicked  in  order  to 
entrap  their  victims.  They  seek  by  most  subtle  arts  to  entangle  and  destroy. 
I.  It  is  thus  that  selfish  men  set  traps  for  the  youno  and  inkxperi- 
ENCED.  With  lies  and  enticements  the  covetous  seek  to  entrap  and  destroy  the 
young.  Soul-traps  for  the  young !  How  numerous  they  are !  How  cleveily 
contrived  !  The  utmost  artifice  and  plausibility.  How  successful  they  are  (ver.  10). 
"Crouching  down  as  low  as  possible,  he  lies  on  the  watch,  and  the  feeble  and 
defenceless  fall  into  his  strong  ones,  i.e.  claws." — Delitzsch.  How  many  thus  fall  I 
Our  cities  are  full  of  fallen  young  men  and  women.  We  have  thousands  of  heartless 
men  in  society  answering  to  the  vile  robber  pictured  in  these  verses.  For  the  sake 
of  gain  they  set  traps  in  which  the  health,  honour,  happiness,  soul  of  the  youthful 
perish.  The  whole  civilised  world  was  shocked  the  other  day  by  the  discovery  that, 
by  means  of  an  infernal  machine,  a  villain  sent  ships  and  their  crews  to  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  for  the  sake  of  the  insurance  money  ;  but  thousands  of  atheistical, 
covetous  men,  for  the  sake  of  gain,  are  ingeniously  seeking  to  sink  the  souls  of  the 
people  in  the  gulf  of  hell.  II.  It  is  thus  that  the  world  contrives  traps 
FOR  the  godly.  The  world  does  not  like  the  godly,  and  in  various  subtle  methods 
it  seeks  to  worst  them.  1.  It  has  traps  for  their  reputation.  "  His  mouth  is  full 
of  perjury  and  deceit."  He  sets  a  net  of  cunningly  devised  speech,  that  he  may  be 
able  to  bring  their  good  name  into  discredit.  2.  It  has  traps  for  their  fortune. 
It  will  ' '  privily  seek  "  to  damage  their  circumstances.  It  will  adroitly  circulate 
reports,  frame  laws,  to  bring  them  into  financial  trouble.  3.  It  has  traps  for  their 
character.  They  know  the  natural  weaknesses  of  a  Christian,  and  they  bait  their 
hook,  set  their  net,  accordingly.  He  is  short-tempered,  and  they  contrive  to  put  in 
his  way  occasions  of  anger  ;  he  is  given  to  levity,  and  they  provoke  his  mirtn  ;  he 
has  strong  appetites,  and  they  put  drink  to  his  lips  ;  he  is  feeble  in  faith,  and  they 
press  him  with  scepticisms.  The  world  hates  the  righteous,  and  when  it  cannot 
injure  them  openly  it  will  secretly.  The  devil  is  a  wuy  destroyer,  and  his  children 
imitate  his  tactics  and  seek  "to  murder  the  innocent."  III.  It  is  thus  that 
Satan  sets  traps  for  us  all.  He  is  the  great  bandit  pictured  in  the  text ;  he 
is  the  great  sorcerer  whose  soul-traps  beset  us  at  every  turn.  What  a  clever 
fowler  is  he !  what  a  politic  huntsman !  what  a  subtle  angler !    The  devil  hides 


PSALM  X.]  THE  PSALMS.  175 

himself,  he  disguises  his  movements,  and  in  an  evil  hour  men  are  drawn  "  into  the 
net."  Here  he  betrays  by  pleasure.  Bates  tells  us  of  a  spider  in  South  America 
which  looks  like  a  blossom,  and  insects  alighting  on  it  for  sweetness  find  death. 
So  the  great  foe,  under  the  aspect  of  pleasure,  betrays  thousands.  Here  he  betrays 
by  honour.  One  of  the  Roman  emperors  used  to  fish  with  a  net  of  purple  and 
gold  ;  the  devil  has  used  this  net  largely  and  taken  great  prey.  And  by  many 
other  devices  does  he  destroy  the  unwary.  Beware  !  Beware  of  those  soul-traps 
made  of  flowers,  called  pleasure  ;  of  those  purple-lined  ones  called  greatness ;  of 
tliose  gay-painted  ones  called  fashion  ;  of  those  scientific  ones  called  philosophy  ;  of 
those  jewelled  ones  called  honour ;  of  those  golden  ones  called  wealth  ;  of  those 
most  plausible  ones  called  morality.  "Satan  himself  is  ti-ansformed  into  an  angel 
of  light."  The  devil  will  lie,  fawn,  flatter,  and  do  this  patiently  for  years  to  ruin 
ns.  1.  Let  the  innocent  put  their  trust  in  God,  and  walk  circumspectly.  "  The 
aflBicted  committeth  himself  unto  Thee  ;  Thou  art  the  helper  of  the  fatherless " 
(ver.  14),  Alas  for  us  if  we  attempt  to  stand  in  our  own  strength,  and  take  our 
defence  into  our  own  hands  !  "  He  that  takes  himself  out  of  God's  hands  into  his 
own,  by  and  by  will  not  know  what  to  do  with  himself." — Whichcote.  And  in  our 
darkest  hours  of  temptation  and  trial  we  may  have  the  fullest  assurance  that  God 
has  not  forgotten  us.  The  wicked  say,  "  God  will  never  see  it"  (ver.  11).  But  the 
Psalmist  replies,  "Thou  hast  seen  it;  for  Thou  beholdest  mischief  and  spite  to 
requite  it  with  Thy  hand  "  (ver.  14).  "The  Psalmist  means  to  say,  so  far  from  the 
assertion  of  the  wicked  man  being  true,  that  God  is  forgetful  of  the  poor.  He  is,  on 
the  contrary,  observant  of  their  trouble  and  vexation  ;  and  in  order  not  to  forget 
their  calamities  He  places  a  memorial  of  them  on  His  hands"  (Isa.  xlix.  26). 
2.  L«t  the  wicked  be  assured  that  God's  eye  is  upon  them,  and  that  justice  must 
overtake  them  (ver.  15).  "Because  the  Lord  continues  to  spare  them,  therefore 
they  go  on  to  provoke  Him.  As  He  adds  to  their  lives,  so  they  add  to  their  lusts. 
Because  justice  seems  to  wink,  men  suppose  her  blind  ;  because  she  delays  punish- 
ment, they  imagine  she  denies  to  punish  them  ;  because  she  does  not  always  reprovo 
them  for  their  sins,  they  suppose  she  always  approves  of  their  sins.  But  let  such 
know  that  the  silent  arrow  can  destroy  as  well  as  the  roaring  cannon.  Though  the 
patience  of  God  be  lasting,  yet  it  is  not  everlasting. " — Spurgeon.  ( W.  L. 
Watkinson.)  Opjjression  turns  princes  into  roaring  lions,  and  judges  into  ravening 
wolves.  It  is  an  unnatural  sin,  against  the  light  of  nature.  No  creatures  do 
oppress  them  of  their  own  kind.  Look  upon  the  birds  of  prey  as  upon  eagles, 
vultures,  hawks,  and  you  shall  never  find  them  preying  upon  their  own  kind. 
Look  upon  the  beasts  of  the  forest  as  upon  the  lion,  the  tiger,  the  wolf,  the  bear, 
and  you  shall  ever  find  them  favourable  to  their  own  kind  ;  and  yet  men 
unnaturally  prey  upon  one  another,  like  the  fish  in  the  sea,  the  great  swallowing, 
up  the  small.     {Thomas  Brooks.) 

Ver.  13.  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  contemn  God? — On  the  unprincipled  contempt 
of  religion  : — How  astonishing  that  any  should  be  guilty  of  this.  Excellence  and 
station  and  authority  shield  men  from  contempt.  But  yet  the  wicked  contemn 
God.  Notwithstanding  He  is  unspeakably  glorious  and  great,  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate  possessing  vast  dominions,  sustaining  His  creatures  and  glorified  in  all 
His  works.  And  all  things  depend  upon  Him.  Some,  allured  by  His  grace,  with 
cheerfulness  adore  Him  ;  others,  constrained  by  His  power,  reluctantly  submit ;  but 
others  are  wicked  enough  to  contemn  Him.  Their  conduct  and  temper — L  Toward 
Him  show  this.  They  have  no  delight  in  Him,  they  put  the  world  far  before  Him, 
they  deliberately  disobey  Him.  IL  Towards  things  relating  to  Him.  His 
ordinances  they  count  weariness.  His  word  they  disregard,  His  people  they  scorn. 
His  ministers  they  despise,  His  day  they  neglect.  IIL  Why  do  they  thus  act  ? 
Not  from  superior  wisdom,  but  from  depravity  of  the  will,  and  encouraged  by 
inconsistent  Christians  and  by  the  strifes  amongst  such.  But  what  an  awful  sin 
it  is.  Amazing  madness!  {John  Erskine,  D.D.)  The  wicked  contemners  of 
God : — Let  us  examine  our  hearts,  our  lives,  and  the  Scriptures  of  truth.  1.  Look 
at  your  mind  and  you  will  be  forced  to  acknowledge  that  you  seldom  think  of  God. 
2.  Pass  to  an  examination  of  your  words.  3.  Consider  your  actions.  4.  The 
manner  in  which  you  treat  the  threatenings  of  God.  5.  The  regard  you  pay  to  the 
promises  of  God.  6.  Your  contempt  of  God  is  manifested  in  your  disobedience  to 
His  commandments.  7.  The  declarations  of  One  who  perfectly  knows  you  place 
this  matter  beyond  a  doubt.  {H.  Rollock,  D.D.)  Expostulation  with  contemners 
ef  God : — 1.  A  question  propounded.     1.  Somewhat  is  here  implied,  something  is 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  x. 

laid  as  a  charge.  The  wicked  does  contemn  God.  Take  the  word  "wicked" 
collectively.  Three  ways  wherein  wicked  men  may  be  said  to  contemn  God  :  In 
His  cmiinancee,  in  His  providences,  in  His  servants.  Whence  does  this  proceed 
from  them  1  Partly  from  pride,  partly  from  ignorance.  2.  Somewhat  is  expressed. 
The  absurdity  of  such  a  temper  is  seen  in  this,  that  no  good  account  can  be  given  of 
it.  See  the  inequality  of  it  in  reference  to  God.  He  does  not  deserve  it.  See  the 
danger  of  it.  Those  that  contemn  Him,  He  will  contemn  them  again.  And  His 
contemning  is  followed  by  His  condemning ;  those  whom  He  despises.  He  destroys. 
II.  The  gkound  or  occasion  of  this  question.  "  He  hath  said  in  his  heart, 
Thou  wilt  not  require  it."  According  to  the  absolute  sense,  this  is  a  declaration  of 
the  temper  of  wicked  men.  According  to  the  relative  sense  of  them,  they  seem  to 
be  either  a  proof  or  an  account  of  what  was  said  before  concerning  such  persons,  as 
to  their  contemning  of  God.  This  is  a  proof  that  they  do  so,  and  this  is  a  reason 
also  why  they  do  so.  "They  say  in  their  heart,  God  will  not  require  it." 
{T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Retribution — the  world's  old  age  in  sin: — It  has  been  « 
puzzle  to  some  good  men,  and  a  pretext  for  unbelief  to  many  wicked  men,  that  the 
sinner,  a  moral  and  responsible  being,  could  rest  unconcerned  in  his  sins.  Why  do 
not  wicked  men  repent  ?  This  can  only  be  resolved  on  the  ground  suggested  in  the 
text,  the  practical  infidelity  of  wicked  men.  They  do  not  believe  in  God  as  a  just 
and  inflexible  moral  governor.  They  do  not  accept  the  ideal  of  an  exact  and  certain 
retribution.  A  carelessness  of  retribution.  Moral  law  is  held  as  an  abstraction, 
and  the  reality,  the  extent,  the  terribleness  of  its  sanctions  are  actually  forgotten. 
Till  this  general  sen,se  of  security  be  assailed,  till  this  general  indifference  be  shown 
to  be  causeless,  the  instances  of  awakening  and  conversion  among  sinners  will  be 
few.  I.  Explain  and  illustrate  the  carelessness  of  retribution  pre- 
valent IN  the  world.  1.  The  world's  old  age  in  sin.  Sin  has  been  producing 
its  appropriate  results,  modified  mainly,  and  almost  alone,  by  the  fact  that  men 
exist  in  successive  generations,  and  not  in  an  uninterrupted,  individual  life.  But 
as  the  generations  of  men  all  overlap  each  other,  so  that  every  one  includes  some 
members  both  of  preceding  and  succeeding  ones,  it  follows  that  each  new  generation 
is  not  cast  entirely  back  to  the  starting-point  of  its  predecessor,  but  gains  a  little 
upon  it.  It  will  be  found  that  whatever  has  characterised  one  age  morally, 
intellectually,  or  socially,  also  has  characterised  in  a  less  or  greater  degree  the 
following  one.  Sin  is  not  an  institution  peculiar  to  any  age  or  country.  The  same 
corrupt  principle  is  more  corrupt  in  the  sons  than  it  was  in  the  fathers.  Is  not  the 
world  wicked  now  as  it  never  has  been  before  ?  II.  The  world's  prosperity  in 
SIN.  Existence  is  in  itself  a  blessing,  and  an  element  of  prosperity.  Man's 
existence  at  every  period  has  had  much  to  make  it  pleasant  and  desirable.  God,  as 
Sovereign  and  Judge,  has  benefited  the  subject  and  sinner.  In  this  age  the  world 
still  sins  and  prospers.  Everybody,  almost  everybody,  boasts  of  a  prosperous 
world.  But  the  world  sins  as  well  as  prospers.  Is  not  the  world,  with  all  its 
pomp  and  pride,  a  wicked  world  ?  Individualise  the  sinner.  He  has,  in  these 
days,  so  high  an  idea  of  personal  dignity  and  independence  and  irresponsibility  to 
any  power  that  is  not  a  reflection  of  his  own  will,  as  to  have  become  very  thought- 
less of  the  Divine  law,  and  very  careless  of  its  sanctions.  We  ma^  examine  the 
growth  of  this  idea,  and  illustrate  its  prevalence.  When  the  sinner  is  thus 
indlviduadised  and  made  to  think  so  much  of  his  own  happiness  and  rights,  is  he 
not  apt  to  forget  God  ?  Consider  now  the  judicial  hardening  of  the  world.  The 
powers  of  darkness  and  the  powers  of  holiness  are  at  enmity  with  each  other  by 
Divine  appointment.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  judicial  permission  and  even 
encouragement  to  wickedness,  whereby  God  asserts  His  sovereignty  over  free  moral 
agents,  and  makes  them  ready,  and  makes  all  things  ready,  for  the  final  mani- 
festation of  His  glory  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  One  great  reason  why  the  world 
is  so  careless  of  approaching  retribution  is,  that  it  is  judicially  hardened,  rendered 
insensible  to  the  proofs  of  its  coming,  and  the  fear  that  ought  thereby  to  be 
awakened.      {John  H.   Lord. )  The    day  of  no  jvdgTneiU  dreaded  .-—Because 

sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons 
of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil.  Pitt  said,  "  I  have  no  fear  for  England  ; 
she  will  stand  till  the  day  of  judgment."  Burke  answered,  "It  is  the  day  of  no 
judgment  that  I  dread. "  ( The  Quiver. )  The  reckoning  will  come  to  the  sinner : — 
The  wicked  contemn  God.  Why?  "Because  they  say  He  will  not  require  it." 
Ah  !  They  forget  that  it  is  as  true  of  God's  threatenings  as  of  His  promises,  that 
although  He  delays  He  does  not  deny  them.  A  reprieve  is  not  a  pardon.  It  defers 
the  execution,  but  does  not  necessarily  cancel  the  sentence.     And  how  many  men  in 


PSALM  X.]  THE  PSALMS.  177 

business,  hard  pressed  for  money  and  tottering  on  the  edge  of  bankruptcy,  have 
known  too  well  that  the  bill  wmch  they  had  got  the  money-lender  to  renew  was 
not  thereby  paid  ;  that,  howerer  often  renewed,  it  has  still  to  be  paid,  and  that 
the  oftener,  indeed,  it  is  renewed  with  interest  added  to  the  capital  the  debt  but 
grows  the  larger,  the  payment  the  heavier.  Just  so  will  it  be  with  you  if  you 
persist  in  rejecting  the  Saviour.  Every  day  of  mercy  here  will  but  aggravate  the 
misery  of  hereafter,  and  the  reckoning,  by  being  long  of  coming,  will  be  the  more 
terrible  when  it  comes — as  that  storm  roars  with  the  loudest  thunder  which  has 
been  the  longest  gathering.     {T.  Ovihrie.) 

Yer.  16.  The  heathen  are  periflhed  out  of  His  land. — An  encouragement  to 
prayer: — Does  this  sentence  point  back  to  the  great  instance  of  exterminating  justice 
in  the  destruction  of  the  Canaanite  ?  It  may  do  so,  but  it  is  rather  to  be  taken  as 
referring  to  the  victories  celebrated  in  the  previous  and  companion  Psalm.  Note 
the  recurrence  of  the  words  "nations"  and  "perished,"  which  are  drawn  from  it. 
The  connection  between  the  two  Psalms  is  thus  witnessed,  and  the  deliverance  from 
foreign  enemies,  which  is  the  theme  of  Psalm  ix. ,  is  urged  as  a  plea  with  God,  and 
taken  as  a  ground  of  confidence  by  the  Psalmist  himself  for  the  completion  of  the 
deliverance  by  making  domestic  oppressors  powerless.  This  lofty  heiglit  of  faith  is 
preserved  in  the  closing  stanza,  in  which  the  agitation  of  the  first  part  and  the 
yearning  of  the  second  are  calmed  into  serene  assurance  that  the  Ecclesia  pressa  has 
not  cried,  and  never  can  cry,  in  vain.  Into  the  praying,  trusting  heart  "the  peace 
of  God  which  passeth  understanding  "  steals,  and  the  answer  is  certified  to  faith  long 
before  it  is  manifest  to  sense.  To  pray  and  immediately  to  feel  the  thrilling  con- 
sciousness "Thou  hast  heard,"  is  given  to  those  who  pray  in  faith.  The  wicked 
makes  a  boast  of  his  "  desire  "  ;  the  humble  makes  a  prayer  of  it,  and  so  has  it  ful- 
filled. Desires  which  can  be  translated  into  petitions  will  be  converted  into  fruition. 
.  .  .  The  prayer  of  the  humble,  like  a  whisper  amid  the  avalanches,  has  power  to 
start  the  swift,  white  destruction  on  its  downward  path ;  and  when  once  that 
gliding  mass  has  way  on  it,  nothing  which  it  smites  can  stand.    (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  humble. — The  desire  of  the  humble 
encouraged : — I.  The  characters  heke  spoken  of.  Though  there  be  great  differ- 
ence between  man  and  man  with  regard  to  natural  character,  yet  the  truly  humble 
before  God  are  those  only  whom  He  has  humbled.  The  humble  are  those  whom 
God  doth  teach  the  plague  of  their  own  hearts.  He  humbles  them  by  discoveries  of 
themselves.  I  II.  The  desires  herb  spoken  of.  The  soul  of  man  is  a  restless 
principle.  The  souls  of  the  humble  ones  do  desire.  The  humble  soul  wants  a  clearer 
inward  witness  of  his  adoption  ;  a  renewed  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  his 
conscienoe  ;  a  deeper  sense  of  his  acceptance  in  the  Beloved  ;  a  closer  walk  with  God. 
III.  The  encouragements  here  spoken  of.  Three  expressed  in  the  text — 
1.  "  Thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  humble. "  2.  "  Thou  wilt  prepare  their  heart. " 
3.  "Thou  wilt  cause  Thine  ear  to  hear,"  (J.  Evans.)  The  desire  of  the  humble: 
— I.  Here  is  a  character  described — "  the  humble."  It  is  a  characteristic  of 
all  Christians.  Humility  befits  us  if  we  regard — 1.  The  meanness  of  our  origin — 
"dust."  2.  Our  sinfulness.  3.  That  pride  is  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  What 
evil  it  has  wrought ;  how  unwarrantable  it  is.  4.  But  God  hears  the  desire  of  the 
humble.  What  is  that  desire  ?  It  is  to  know  the  want  of  Himself.  To  have  an 
interest  in  Christ.  To  think  highly  of  others.  To  adore  the  goodness  of  God,  and 
to  be  obedient  to  His  will.  II.  God  prepares  such  a  heart.  1.  By  giving  con- 
viction of  sin.  2.  By  encouraging  trust  in  Christ.  3.  By  giving  desire  after 
holiness.  4.  By  emptying  him  of  self.  III.  God  hears  and  answers  prayer. 
1.  Because  they  come  in  Christ's  name.  Because — 2.  He  is  their  Father.  3.  He 
Himself  has  bidden  us  pray  ;  and  4.  Prepared  their  hearts  to  do  so.  He  who  will 
not  pray  has  no  excuse.  ( T.  Scott,  M.A.)  Thought-reading  extraordinary : — I.  The 
lowliest  form  of  prater  may  be  most  true  and  acceptable.  "The  desire  of 
the  humble."  It  is  only  a  desire.  It  may  not  be  uttered.  Many  prayers  are  very 
prettily  expressed,  in  fact,  so  grandly  that  their  tawdry  fineries  will  not  be  tolerated 
in  heaven.  God  will  say,  "They  were  meant  for  men,  let  men  hear  them."  The 
desire  of  the  humble  may  not  be  recommended  by  any  conscious  attainments.  If 
your  stock-in-trade  is  made  up  of  empty  vessels,  and  little  else,  the  Lord  can  deal 
with  you  as  He  did  with  the  prophet's  widow,  "  who  had  empty  vessels  not  a  few." 
Your  little  oil  of  grace  He  can  multiply  till  every  vessel  is  filled  ;  and  you  may  have 
no  confident  expectation.     I  would  chide  your  unbelief,  but  I  would  encourage  your 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xi. 

desires,  for  that  desire  which  God  hears  is  not  to  be  despised.  Note  that  it  is  "the 
desire  of  the  humble."  It  has  this  advantage  about  it  that  it  is  free  from  pride. 
Now,  to  be  humble  is  a  sweet  thing ;  there  is  no  lovelier  spot  on  the  road  to  the 
Celestial  City  than  the  Valley  of  Humiliation  :  he  that  dwells  in  it  dwells  among 
flowers  and  birds,  and  may  sing  all  day  long.  The  desire  of  the  humble  is  saturated 
with  a  gospel  spirit,  and  therefore  is  acceptable  to  God.  II.  And  He  is  quick  to 
HEAR  IT.  ' '  Thou  hast  heard  the  desire. "  This  must  be  a  Divine  science.  We  hear 
much  about  thought-reading  now.  Whatever  this  may  be,  here  is  a  wonderful 
instance  of  it  with  the  Lord.  It  is  an  act  which  God  has  exercised  in  all  ages. 
"Thou  hast  heard,"  &c.  It  is  a  matter  of  frequent  fact,  the  record  of  a  deed. 
III.  The  heart  is  the  main  matter  in  prater.  Desires  are  the  fruit  of  the  heart. 
"  Thou  wilt  prepare  their  heart. "  When  a  fair  wind  fills  the  sails  of  desire,  then 
make  aU  possible  headway.  IV.  Gob  Himself  prepares  the  hearts  of  His 
PEOPLE.  "Thou  wilt  prepare  their  heart."  I  am  rejoiced  at  this  statement,  because 
preparation  is  such  an  important  business.  And  it  is  often  difficult  as  it  is  impor- 
tant. Surely  none  but  the  Lord  can  prepare  the  heart  for  prayer.  One  old  writer 
says  it  is  far  harder  work  to  raise  the  big  bell  into  the  steeple  than  to  ring  it  when 
it  is  there.  This  witness  is  true.  In  that  uplifting  of  the  heart  lies  the  work  and 
the  labour.  Now,  God  prepares  the  heart  by  restraining  wandering  thought,  by 
giving  us  deep  sense  of  need,  and  by  working  in  us  strong  faith.  V.  Prayer  from 
PREPARED  hearts  MUST  BE  HEARD.  "  Thou  wilt  cause  Thine  ear  to  hear."  He  will, 
for  if  God  had  love  enough  to  prepare  your  heart  He  has  grace  enough  to  give  you 
the  blessing.  His  goodness  and  faithfulness  ensure  that  He  will.  Where  God  leads 
you  to  pray.  He  means  you  to  receive.  Be  comforted,  therefore,  you  beginners  in 
prayer.  God  is  inclining  His  ear  to  catch  the  faintest  moan  of  your  spirit.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  gracious  desires  and  prayers  of  the  humble  : — Lord  Bolingbroke 

once  asked  Lady  Huntingdon  how  she  reconciled  prayer  to  God  for  particular  bless- 
ings with  absolute  resignation  to  the  Divine  will.  "Very  easy,"  answered  her 
ladyship  ;  "just  as  if  I  were  to  oflFer  a  petition  to  a  monarch  of  whose  kindness  and 
wisdom  I  have  the  highest  opinion.  In  such  a  case  my  language  would  be,  '  I  wish 
you  to  bestow  on  me  such  a  favour  ;  but  your  majesty  knows  better  than  I  how  far 
it  would  be  agreeable  to  you  or  right  in  itself  to  grant  my  desire.  I  therefore  con- 
tent myself  with  humbly  presenting  my  petition,  and  leave  the  event  of  it  entirely 
to  you.'" 


PSALM    XL 

Vers.  1-7.  In  the  Lord  put  1  my  trust. — Jehovah  the  Protector  and  Avenger  of  the 
persecuted  saint : — The  Psalmist,  beset  by  malicious  foes,  is  warned  by  some  of  his 
adherents  to  seek  refuge  in  flight.  The  Psalm  is  his  response  to  this  suggestion.  In 
Jehovah,  he  says,  is  his  trust,  and  there  is  no  need  for  him  to  fear ;  Jehorah  is 
watching  all  human  actions  from  His  heavenly  sanctuary,  and  it  is  certain  that  He 
will  eventually  whelm  the  ungodly  in  a  terrible  ruin,  and  cheer  with  the  light  of 
His  countenance  the  righteous  whom  He  has  proved  in  the  furnace  of  adversity.  The 
Psalm  is  Davidic  by  title,  and  may  perhaps  be  assigned  to  the  period  when  David's 
life  was  imperiUed  by  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  {A.  C.  Jennings  and  W.  H. 
Lowe.)  Safety  in  God : — The  singer  is  in  danger  of  his  life,  and  timorous  and  faint- 
hearted counsellors  would  fain  persuade  him  to  seek  safety  in  flight.  But  full  of 
unshaken  faith  in  God,  he  rejects  their  counsel,  believing  that  Jehovah,  the  right- 
eous King,  though  He  tries  His  servants,  does  not  forsake  them.  Not  the  righteous, 
but  the  wicked  have  need  to  fear.  The  Psalm  is  so  short  and  so  general  in  its  char- 
acter that  it  is  not  easy  to  say  to  what  circumstances  in  David's  life  it  should  be 
referred.  The  choice  seems,  however,  to  lie  between  his  persecution  by  Saul  and  the 
rebellion  of  his  son  Absalom.  Delitzsch  decides  for  the  last,  and  thinks  the  counsel 
(ver.  1),  "  Flee  to  your  mountain,"  comes  from  the  mouth  of  friends,  who  were 
anxious  to  persuade  the  king  to  betake  himself,  as  he  had  before  done  when  hunted  by 
Saul,  to  the  "rocks  of  the  Avild  goats."  The  expression  (ver.  3),  "When  the  foundations 
are  destroyed, "  points  to  a  time  when  lawful  authority  was  subverted.  (/.  J.  Stewart 
Perovme,  B.D.)  Faith's  answer  to  timid  counsellors : — The  structure  of  the  Psalm 
is  simple  and  striking.  There  are  two  vividly  contrasted  halves  :  the  first  gives  the 
suggestions  of  timid  counsellors,  who  see  only  along  the  low  levels  of  earth  ;  the 


rsALM  XI.]  THE  F8ALMS,  179 

second,  the  brave  answer  of  faith  which  looks  up  into  heaven.  Vers.  1-3.  The 
Psalmist  begins  with  an  utterance  of  faith,  which  makes  him  recoil  with  wonder  and 
aversion  from  the  cowardly,  well-meant  counsels  of  his  friends.  The  metaphor  of 
flight  to  a  stronghold,  which  is  in  the  word  for  trust,  obviously  colours  the  context, 
for  what  can  be  more  absurd  than  that  he  who  has  sought  and  found  shelter  in  God 
Himself  should  listen  to  the  whisperings  of  his  own  heart,  or  to  the  advice  of  friends, 
and  hurry  to  some  other  hiding-place  ?  Safe  in  God,  the  Psalmist  wonders  why  such 
advice  should  be  given,  and  his  question  expresses  its  irrationality,  and  his  rejec- 
tion of  it.  Have  we  here  a  good  man's  dialogue  with  himself?  Were  there  no 
voices  in  him :  the  voice  of  sense  which  spoke  to  the  soul,  and  that  of  the  soul 
which  spoke  authoritatively  to  the  sense  ?  .  .  .  The  timid  counsel  is  enforced  by  two 
considerations :  the  danger  of  remaining  a  mark  for  the  stealthy  foe,  and  the  nobler 
thought  of  the  hopelessness  of  resistance,  and  therefore  the  quixotism  of  sacrificing 
one's  self  in  a  prolongation  of  it.  Prudent  advice,  when  the  prudence  is  only  inspired 
by  sense,  is  generally  foolish ;  and  the  only  reasonable  attitude  is  obstinate  hopeful- 
ness and  brave  adherence  to  duty.  In  the  second  part  the  poet  opposes  to  the 
picture  drawn  by  fear  the  vision  of  the  opened  heaven  and  the  throned  Jehovah.  To 
the  eyes  that  have  seen  that  vision,  and  before  which  it  ever  burns,  all  earthly  sor- 
rows and  dangers  seem  small.  There  is  necessarily  in  the  Divine  nature  an  aversion 
to  evil,  and  to  the  man  who  has  so  completely  given  himself  over  to  it  as  to  "  love  " 
it.  Retribution,  not  forgiveness,  is  here  the  conception  of  the  relations  between 
man  and  God.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Moral  courage  : — We  have  in  this  Psalm  a 
striking  instance  of  Christian  heroism.  The  Psalmist  is  found  in  circumstances  of 
great  moral  perplexity  and  personal  danger,  but  he  stands  his  ground,  trusting  in 
God.  I.  The  SEVEKITY  OF  HIS  TRIAL.  David's  timid  Counsellors  bring  before  Mm 
several  pressing  reasons  why  he  should  despair  of  his  cause,  and  retire  from  the 
scene  of  conflict.  1.  The  desperate  designs  of  his  enemies.  2.  Their  perfidious 
policy.  3.  Their  successful  action,  II.  The  constancy  of  the  teied.  What 
were  the  sources  of  this  sublime  courage  ?  1.  The  presence  of  God.  2.  The  majesty 
of  God.  3.  The  knowledge  of  God.  4.  The  righteousness  of  God.  Here  the 
Psalmist  rested,  and  here  may  we  rest.  God  loveth  the  wise,  the  just,  the  good, 
and  in  Him  may  we  rest.  III.  The  certainty  of  the  triumph.  1.  All  God's 
people  may  expect  to  be  thus  tried.  At  one  time  or  other  our  faith,  principle, 
hope  will  be  thus  severely  tested,  2.  Let  us  at  such  times  beware  of  the  temporising 
policy  of  faint-hearted  men.  It  is  often  a  sorer  trial  for  faith  to  withstand  the  plead- 
ings of  well-meaning  friends  than  to  arm  itself  against  open  enemies.  3.  Let  us 
trust  confidently  in  God,  and  He  shall  make  us  to  triumph.  (  W.  L.  WatMnson. ) 
"  Courage,"  says  Webster,  "  is  that  quality  of  mind  which  enables  men  to  encounter 
danger  and  difiiculties  with  firmness,  or  without  any  fear  or  depression  of  spirits." 
I.  Genuine  moral  courage  tested.  By  the  alarming  intelligence  and  cowardly 
counsels,  not  of  enemies  but  of  friends.  They  presented  to  his  mind  two  facts  to 
prompt  him  to  a  cowardly  flight.  1.  The  imminence  of  his  danger.  2.  The  useless- 
ness  of  religion.  II.  Genuine  moral  courage  explained.  All  this  did  not 
intimidate  David.  On  the  contrary,  it  reinspired  him.  What  was  the  very  spirit  of 
his  courage  ?  Trust  in  an  all-sufficient  Helper.  "In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust." 
To  show  that  He  in  whom  he  trusted  was  sufficient  to  help  him,  he  refers  to  four 
things.  1.  God's  authority.  "The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple,  the  Lord's  throne 
is  in  heaven."  He  is  the  King  of  the  universe,  and  is  able  to  control  the  events  that 
are  transpiring.  2.  God's  knowledge.  "  His  eyes  behold.  His  eyelids  try  the  chil- 
dren of  men."  He  is  not  ignorant  of  what  is  going  on,  nor  is  He  a  mere  spectator. 
He  examines  the  motives  of  every  actor  in  the  scene.  3.  God's  feeling.  "The 
Lord  trieththe  righteous;  but  the  wicked,  and  him  that  loveth  violence,  His  soul 
hateth."  He  not  only  superintends  and  sees  all  that  is  going  on,  but  He  has  a 
heart  in  the  matter.  His  feelings  are  interested.  He  loves  the  good  ;  He  loathes 
the  wicked.  4.  God's  retribution.  "Upon  the  wicked  He  shall  rain  snares, "  Ac. 
Such  is  the  God  he  trusted  in.  One  who  has  moral  feelings,  who  recoils  from  the 
wrong  and  sympathises  with  the  right.  One  who  wiU  exercise  a  righteous  retribu- 
tion. Who  that  trusts  in  such  a  God  as  this  need  fear  ?  (Homilist. )  A  song  in 
the  night : — The  environment  of  the  Ps&lm  is  stormy.  The  singer  is  a  soul  in  diffi- 
culty. He  is  the  victim  of  relentless  antagonists.  It  is  a  song  in  the  night.  I.  In- 
adequate resources.  The  Psalmist  hears  the  voices  of  counsellors.  They  are 
urging  him  to  get  away  from  the  exposed  plains  to  the  strongholds.  But  to  the 
Psalmist  the  suggested  defences  are  inadequate.  The  enemy  can  reach  him  there. 
Against  these  imperfect  defences  the  Psalmist  proclaims  his  own  confident  boast,  "  In 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xi. 

the  Lord  pwt  I  my  trust."  Look  at  some  of  onr  suggested  refuges.  Take  up 
Jiterature,  music,  science,  or  art.  All  such  suggested  strongholds  are  inadnquate. 
IL  Thk  all-sufficien  r  Security.  Ujion  what,  then,  shall  the  driven  soul  depend  ? 
"In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust."  The  Psalmist  enumerates  some  of  the  founda- 
tions upon  which  his  joyful  confidence  is  built.  See  some  stones  of  the  grand 
foundation — the  Lord's  immanence,  the  Lord's  sovereignty,  the  Lord's  discern- 
ments, the  Lord's  repulsions,  the  Lord's  purposes.  {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.  A.) 
Trust  in  the  Lord : — Birds  of  high  flight  and  of  great  strength  make  their 
nests  in  mountains.  When  these  creatures  are  alarmed  and  desire  a  place 
■of  refuge  you  find  them  flying  not  to  the  valley,  but  to  the  mountain. 
Every  man  is  liable  to  fearfulness  and  alarm.  And  every  man  has  his  mountain 
— wealth,  friends,  patronage.  The  man  of  God  has  his  mountain  in  God. 
Many  a  good  man  forgets  this,  and  advises  others  by  his  fears  rather  than  by  his 
faith.     David  is  speaking  of  such  people,   for  such  have  given  him  bad  advice. 

1.  The  proper  influence  of  trusting  in  God.  It  should  give  you  a  firm 
adherence  to  that  which  you  feel  to  be  right.  The  man  who  trusts  in  God  keeps 
from  doing  anything  until  he  sees  the  right  thing  to  be  done.  The  effect  of  this  is 
the  production  of  peace  of  mind — calmness  of  spirit.  IL  Gor  does  not  disturb 
this  quietness,  but  there  are  those  who  do.  Not  Satan  and  his  angels  only, 
but  also  your  fellow-men.  Do  not  put  the  blame  of  every  mischief  on  Satan.  We 
are  our  own  satans  very  frequently.  Whatever  use  a  man  may  make  of  friends, 
neighbours,  and  religious  advisers  he  will  take  care  that  they  never  come  between  him 
and  God.  III.  Infer  YOUR  duty  FROM  your  principles.  Whatever  is  consistent 
with  trust  you  may  do.  The  application  of  the  principle  of  trust  will  keep  you  con- 
sistent, and  will  settle  ten  thousand  matters  that  otherwise  would  perplex  you. 
{Sarmiel  Martin. )  The  secret  of  faith's  victory : — The  exercise  of  genuine  faith  is 
frequently  involved  in  a  conflict  with  unbelief ;  and  they  not  seldom  get  entangled 
one  with  the  other,  like  wrestlers,  so  that  they  can  scarce  be  distinguished.  Just 
such  a  struggle  is  set  forth  in  this  Psalm.  It  tells  of  David's  experience  as  a 
believer  assaulted  by  suspicions  and  fears  and  perplexities  prompted  within  him  by 
unbelief.  I.  The  manner  in  which  the  assault  was  made  (vers.  1-3).  We 
cannot  tell  the  circumstances  which  occasioned  their  suggestions.  But  the  dangei 
represented  was  well-nigh  desperate.  The  very  foundations  of  his  safety  were 
threatened.  Then  it  was  said  to  him,  "Flee,  flee  as  a  bird  to  your  mountain."  The 
suggestion  was  insidious  in  form,  of  a  prudent  and  very  practical  hint  for  self-preser- 
vation. And  yet  it  was  alien  to  his  faith.  That  was  not  disturbed  in  its  depths 
where  it  was  anchored  on  the  Lord.  Their  suggestions  did  indeed  ruffle  his  feelings, 
but  did  not  make  him  doubt  the  truths  of  his  faith.  Hence  he  avows  his  trust. 
"  In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust,"  "  How  dare  ye  say  to  my  soul,  flee  ? "  II.  How 
he  met  the  assaults  of  unbelief.  By  turning  his  gaze  outwards  and  upwards  to 
the  Lord.  From  Him  he  derived  all  the  power  wherewith  to  meet  their  assaults. 
III.  The  Psalm  may  be  taken  as  a  dialogue.  1.  The  suggestion  to  "flee"  is 
met  by  asking  how  they  dare  to  say  that  when  "the  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple." 

2.  That  "  the  wicked  bend  their  bow  "  is  met  by  the  thought,  "  His  eyes  behold. 
His  eyelids  try  the  children  of  men."  As  if  He  could  not  see  !  3.  "  That  the  foun- 
dations were  destroyed,"  by  the  thought  that  if  they  were  the  Lord  was  dealing  with 
him  ;  "the  Lord  trieth  the  righteous"  ;  and  "  I  put  my  trust  in  Him,"  "who  of 
old  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,"  in  Him  the  Eternal.  Then,  should  such  a 
man  as  I  flee  ?  IV.  Lessons.  1.  Dread  and  resist  the  faintest  whisper  of  retreat, 
whatever  be  the  troubles  and  dangers  of  your  course.  2.  Live  much  aloft  in  com- 
munion with  the  Divine  object  of  a  victorious  faith.  {Robert  R.  Muir.)  Confid- 
ence in  God : — The  utter  helplessness  in  which  David's  soul  was  plunged  may  be 
inferred  from  the  advice  which  his  friends  had  kindly,  yet  foolishly,  tendered  to 
him.  They  had  advised  him  to  flee  as  a  bird  to  the  mountains;  in  other  words,  they 
had  advised  flight  from  trouble, — the  coward's  cure  for  the  distresses  of  life.  The 
quality  of  David's  spirit  is  seen  from  the  answer  which  he  returned  to  this  mean 
counsel.  It  was  absolutely  intolerable  to  him,  creating  in  him  a  sense  of  revulsion 
and  utter  disdain.  There  is  only  one  flight  possible  to  the  tmly  good  man,  and  that 
is  a  flight  towards  the  Lord,  his  Infinite  Deliverer.  "The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong 
tower  ;  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe. "  The  suggestion  made  by  the 
friends  of  David  shows  their  own  irreligiousness,  and  shows  indeed  all  that  the  world 
has  to  off'er  to  the  soul  when  it  is  in  its  last  extremity.  In  the  case  of  the  Christian 
there  is  no  need  to  invent  any  religious  alleviation  of  trouble,  for  that  alleviation  is 
abundantly  supplied  by  the  promises  of  God,   which  are  exceedingly  great  and 


PSALM  XI.]  THE  PSALMS.  ^81 

precious,  never  so  great  as  when  greatly  needed,  and  never  so  precious  as  when  every 
other  voice  is  silenced,  and  all  the  world  confesses  itself  to  be  unable  to  touch  effectu- 
ally the  tremendous  agony.  It  is  beautiful  to  notice  how  an  assault  of  this  kind 
is  repelled  by  the  very  character  of  David.  "  In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust."  That 
was  the  solidity  of  his  character.  Outwardly  he  was  troubled  enough  ;  waves  and 
billows  were  rushing  upon  him  in  great  storms,  so  rapidly  that  he  had  not  time  to 
lift  up  his  head  and  open  his  eyes  upon  the  fair  scene  that  was  above  ;  but  inwardly 
there  was  a  religious  trust  which  made  him  what  he  was — a  secret,  unfailing,  abound- 
ing confidence  in  the  living  God  ;  all  this  confidence  seemed  to  the  outward  observer 
to  be  eclipsed  and  indeed  destroyed,  but  it  was  still  there,  making  David's  heart 
strong  amidst  all  the  temptation  and  wrath  which  turned  his  life  into  daily  suffer- 
ing. [Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  mission  of  trial : — It  is  very  remarkable  that 
this  world  has  always  hated  the  good  and  loved  the  evil ;  but  it  has  always  been  so. 
The  world  and  the  Church  are  perpetual  and  eternal  enemies.  Darkness  and  light 
continually  are  opposed  to  one  another.  If  we  look  down  the  list  of  God's  servants 
from  the  first,  we  find  it  as  an  invariable  rule  that  the  world  has  ever  hated  them  in 
their  generation.  Men  cast  them  out  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy.  Still,  they 
all  maintained  their  faith  in  God  ;  each  could  say  with  the  Psalmist,  to  the  close  of  his 
life,  "  In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust."  And  God  has  never  forsaken  them  that  trust  in 
Him.  Sorrows  may  fall  thick  around  tl.em  at  times,  trials  grievous  to  be  borne,  and 
divers  temptations  may  come  upon  them  ;  but  all  these  things  tend  only  to  strengthen 
faith  in  them  that  are  saved.  If  a  man  enjoys  all  good  things  on  earth — great  pros- 
perity, continual  ease,  nothing  to  vex  him — then  it  needs,  we  know  not  what  an 
amount  of  grace,  and  what  years  of  careful  training  in  himself,  and  of  prayer  and 
watchfulness,  to  keep  that  man  from  falling  away.  There  are  so  few  of  us  who 
would  really  love  and  serve  God  if  we  met  with  no  trials  in  life,  that  in  His  great 
mercy  God  sends  these  things,  first  upon  one,  and  then  upon  another  amongst  us.  It 
is  out  of  love  to  us  He  does  so.  No  less  true  is  this  principle  of  faith,  and  trust,  and 
security  as  applied  to  a  nation,  as  it  is  to  a  church,  or  to  each  individual  Christian 
among  us.  It  is  the  secret  of  all  national  security,  and  prosperity,  and  peace. 
(  W.  J.  Straccy,  M.A. )  Flee  as  a  bird  to  your  mountain. — Times  for  flic/ht : — It 
is  by  no  means  always  an  easy  question  for  the  good  man  to  decide  when  he  shall 
flee,  and  when  resist,  the  storm  of  immorality  and  irreligion  that  may  be  prevailing 
in  the  community  to  which  he  belongs.  He  may  err  as  widely  in  precipitating  the 
time  for  doing  a  thing  as  he  can  in  allowing  the  time  to  pass  by  unimproved.  It  is 
as  much  the  part  of  a  good  general  to  know  when  to  halt  as  when  to  advance  ;  when 
to  retreat  as  when  to  attack  ;  when  to  save  life  as  when  to  cast  it  away.  The  only 
question  for  him  to  settle  is,  which  course  for  the  time  being  will,  in  the  end,  best 
promote  the  cause  he  has  in  hand.  Our  Lord  both  spoke  and  acted  on  this  principle, 
counselling  His  disciples  at  one  time  to  save  themselves  by  flight,  at  another  to  re- 
main at  their  post,  even  at  the  cost  of  their  lives.  He  counselled  them  to  determine 
their  line  of  conduct,  not  by  its  consequences  to  themselves,  but  by  its  consequences 
to  the  cause  in  which  they  were  identified.  If  flight  would  best  promote  its  interests, 
they  were  to  flee ;  if  remaining  at  their  posts,  they  were  to  remain ;  and,  if  needs 
be,  die  there.  Many  a  bishop  in  the  primitive  Church  did  this ;  fleeing,  so  long  as 
flight  could  best  serve  their  Master's  cause  ;  but  when  it  demanded  the  surrender  of 
their  lives,  giving  themselves  up  freely  to  martyrdom.  David,  for  years  after  he  had 
been  divinely  designated  to  the  throne  of  Israel,  fled  before  his  persecutors  like  a 
terrified  bird.  In  this  Psalm  his  afi'airs  are  no  longer  as  they  have  been.  The  time 
has  come  when  the  cause  with  which  he  has  identified  himself  can  no  longer  be  pro- 
moted by  his  flight.  It  demands  champions  and  defenders,  and  it  may  be  martyrs. 
{David  Caldwell,  A.M.) 

"Vers.  3,  4.  If  the  foundations  be  destroyed,  what  can  the  righteous  do  1— Chris- 
tian  firmness  in  evil  times : — We  have  here  a  description  of  a  faithful  heart  in  time 
of  trial  declaring  itself  resolved  to  trust  on  God  alone,  when  some  would  advise  it 
to  fly  or  to  draw  back.  No  man  need  despair  ;  but  still,  when  the  foundations  are 
assailed,  and  perhaps  (humanly  speaking)  destroyed,  it  is  the  plain  duty  of  believers 
to  consider  what  they  ought  to  do  ;  to  consider  how  they  may  most  effectually, 
under  God's  blessing,  join  hnnds  with  Him  in  maintaining,  against  the  world,  the 
cause  of  iau  religion  in  His  Church  and  household.  If  our  lot  is  cast  in  times'  and 
1  laces  when  and  Avlieie  tho  truth  as  such  is  sliglited  and  set  aside,  it  is  easy  to  see 
that,  so  far  as  such  ojiinioris  prevail,  the  foundations  are  destroyed.  If  men  come 
to  think  it  of  small  consequence  whether  or  not  tney  embrace  and  hold  fast  Divine 


182  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xi. 

truth,  they  will,  by  degrees,  go  on  to  doubt  whether  there  is  any  such  thing  as 
Dirine  truth  at  all ;  and  so,  beginning  with  what  they  were  pleased  to  call  Christian 
liberty,  they  will  end  in  unbelief.  If  men  should  be  led  to  encourage  the  opinion 
that  God's  most  holy  Bible  is  to  be  handled,  judged,  criticised,  praised  or  blamed 
like  other  books,  then,  beyond  all  doubt,  however  human  reason  may  triumph, 
Divine  faith  will  be  undermined,  and  by  degrees  will  be  destroyed  from  its  founda- 
tion. The  thoughts  of  serious  Church  people  are  now  directed  to  inquiry  into  the 
nature  of  the  Christian  Church  and  the  duty  of  cleaving  fast  to  it,  more  and  more, 
as  the  world  seeks  to  destroy  its  foundations.  Some  persons  think  the  Church 
means  anything,  and  some  think  it  means  nothing,  but,  at  all  events,  it  is  of  no 
great  consequence  what  it  means.  Another  danger  is  that  of  mistaking  or  slighting 
the  great  Christian  doctrine  of  Divine  grace.  Whatever  concerns  the  foundations  of 
belief  or  practice  concerns  all  Christian  people  as  Christians.  {Contribviors  to  the 
"Tracts  for  the  Tivus")  The  foundations  of  the  true  faith  indestructible: — The 
Christian's  would-be  friends  are  often  his  worst  enemies.  Instead  of  strengthening 
his  faith  when  he  is  in  difficulties,  they  counsel  him  to  fly.  Thus  was  David  tempted 
by  the  feeble  faith  of  well-meaning  friends.  He  was  sure  that  the  foundations  of 
his  faith  could  never  be  destroyed,  because — 1.  God  is  present  in  His  Church.  Ever 
present  to  preserve,  revive,  and  defend  it.  2.  Because  the  Lord's  throne  is  in 
heaven.  By  His  throne  we  understand  His  authority.  Not  human  laws,  not 
Church  authority,  not  creeds,  which  are  fences  rather  than  foundations.  3.  Because 
His  design  is  to  try  His  people.  Hence  all  these  alarms  and  trials.  Then  we  should 
have  stability  in  our  faith.  Distaste  for  profitless  controversy.  Patience  in  well-doing. 
{Stephen  Jenner,  M.A.)  An  immovable  foundation  .-—The  "  if  "  comes  suddenly 
upon  us.  1.  Consider  this  "if"  as  being  nothing  but  an  " if. "  There  are  certain 
spiritual  foundations  which  never  can  be  removed.  (1)  There  is  the  foundation  book. 
(2)  The  foundation  doctrine — justification  by  faith.  (3)  The  foundation  fact 
— "God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."  (4)  The  foundation 
work — the  blood  of  Jesus  applied  by  the  Spirit  of  Divine  grace.  (5)  The  founda- 
tion hope — the  blessed  hope  of  eternal  life  with  Christ.  These  foundations 
can  never  be  moved.  2.  Take  this  "if"  as  being  something  more  than  an  "if." 
The  foundations  of  many  things  may  be  removed — of  civil  government,  of  commerce, 
of  one's  estates,  of  all  trust  between  man  and  man.  Now  suppose  them  removed, 
what  should  the  righteous  do  ?  If  the  worst  come  to  the  worst — (1)  He  can  bear  it 
with  a  holy  equanimity.  (2)  Hope  for  the  best  cheerfully.  (3)  Do  right.  Be 
upright,  whether  he  fail  or  not.  (4)  If  we  have  a  hand  to  spare  we  will  help  a 
comrade  up.  (5)  He  can  trust  in  God  that  it  will  be  well  in  the  end.  And  (6)  "rhe 
righteous  can  commune  with  Christ  therein.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Lost  founda- 
tions:— Here  is  the  expression  of  a  mortal  fear.  The  idea  occurred  to  the  mind  of 
the  Psalmist  that  the  very  foundations  of  law  and  order  may  be  destroyed.  This 
is  the  most  disastrous  temptation  that  can  assail  the  human  mind.  Immediately 
following  it  are  all  the  consequences  of  a  panic.  So  long  as  evils  seem  to  be  open 
to  the  restraints  of  civilisation  and  the  penadties  of  righteous  law,  society  retains  ft 
considerable  sense  of  security,  notwithstanding  occasional  and  even  violent  outrage. 
In  this  case,  however,  the  idea  has  occurred  that  the  very  foundations  of  law, 
justice,  and  equity  might  be  ploughed  up  and  utterly  destroyed.  Then  the  question 
arises,  What  will  the  righteous  do  ?  All  life  that  is  to  be  solid  and  lasting  is  really 
a  question  of  "foundations."  Our  inquiry  should  be  into  basis,  principles,  original 
necessities,  the  eternal  fitness  of  things,  the  harmony  that  is  based  upon  the  very 
nature  of  God.  Whatever  errors  there  may  be  in  the  superstructure  of  society, 
there  should  be  no  doubt  about  the  solidity  of  the  corner-stones  upon  which  the 
building  is  set.  The  great  necessity  of  Christian  civilisation  is  to  have  a  solid 
basis,  to  lay  down  principles  which  do  not  admit  of  disputation,  and  to  secure 
assent  to  laws  which  express  the  spirit  of  eternal  righteousness.  Hence  the  work 
of  Christianity  is  profound.  It  is  the  honour  of  Christianity  that  it  alone  is  pro- 
foundly careful  concerning  the  bases  of  society  and  the  bases  of  the  individual  life. 
It  insists  upon  the  foundation  being  Divine,  not  human.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
Disturbances  in  nations  :  —  All  disturbances  in  nations  are  but  appointed  dispensa- 
tions marked  out  on  the  plan  of  God.  We  may  safely  trust  God  to  reign  in  a 
manner  worthy  of  Him.  Do  you  ask  why  God's  purposes  cannot  be  fulfilled  with- 
out all  this  earthly  trouble  ?  They  would  have  been,  if  sin  had  no  dominion  on 
earth.  But  man  being  sinful,  the  way  of  suff"ering  is  the  only  way  for  him  to 
pursue.  Often  have  men  thought  that  the  foundations  were  destroyed.  They 
thought  so  in  David's  time.     But  the  greater  the  activity  and  apparent  disorder  of 


MAIM  XI.]  THE  PSALMS.  183 

the  hive,  the  more  does  the  fruit  of  the  honeycomb  abound  ;  the  more  the  threads 
which  cross  and  appear  to  confuse  with  each  other  on  the  loom,  the  richer  and 
purer  is  the  damask.  See  what  days  of  blessing  have  followed  days  of  adversity 
and  trial.  ...  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  see  which  of  two  courses  of  action 
should  be  chosen.  Weakness  submits  to  evil  circumstances ;  decision  overcomes 
evil  with  good.  Hanani  grieves  over  the  condition  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  Nehemiah 
resolves  to  amend  it.  Erasmus  denounced  with  his  pen  the  evil  in  the  Church  of 
his  day,  but  kept  aloof  from  the  work  of  reformation.  Luther  nerved  himself  for 
battle.  When  political  troubles  threaten,  what  are  we  to  do  ?  Some  Christians 
refuse  to  take  action.  But  political  action  may  be  requisite,  and  if  a  man  can  see 
a  plain  way  of  duty  he  should  follow  that  way.  Whatever  may  be  the  disturb- 
ances of  the  foundations  of  society,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  trust.  There 
have  also  been  ecclesiastical  disturbances,  but  let  us  be  sure  that  God  will  bring 
good  out  of  them.  Let  our  ruling  aim  be  to  nourish  in  ourselves  the  life  hidden 
with  Christ  in  God.     {John  Jessop,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  The  Lord  is  In  His  holy  temple. — Hie  earthly  temple : — How  are  we  to  be 
assured  of  the  truth  that  the  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple  1  We  have  no  visible  sign  ; 
but  He  reveals  Himself  in  our  hearts,  and  requires  that  we  should  know  and  feel 
His  presence  there.  How,  then,  are  we  to  meet  Him  in  the  temple  ?  1.  We  come 
as  created  beings  to  offer  a  tribute  of  gratitude.  Are  any  so  worn  with  trouble  as 
to  think  the  gift  of  existence  not  worth  the  expression  of  gratitude  ?  Let  such 
remember  that  here  we  are  but  preparing  for  a  blessed  immortality,  and  that  our 
trials,  well  endured,  will  add  to  the  measure  of  our  bliss  hereafter.  2.  We  are 
dependent  creatures.  Then  we  should  offer  our  thanks  for  the  past,  and  supplica- 
tions for  the  future.  3.  We  are  sinful  creatures.  Then  we  should  make  confession 
to  our  God,  whom  we  have  so  often  and  deeply  offended.  4.  We  are  accountable 
creatures.  Then  we  should  come  here  to  learn  His  holy  will,  and  of  our  obedience 
to  it  exact  account  will  be  required.  5.  We  are  social  creatures.  Then  we  should 
ask  blessings,  not  for  ourselves  only,  but  also  for  others.  The  sinner,  the  penitent, 
the  believer,  the  sorrowful,  the  sufferer — all  are  remembered  in  our  prayers.  Learn 
so  to  worship  that  you  may  ever  feel  that  you  have  indeed  been  with  the  Lord  in  His 
holy  temple.     {Edward  Rice,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  The  Lord  trieih  the  righteons. — The  godly  discipline: — I.  The  chah« 
ACTEBS  TKIED  —  the  righteous.  This  word  righteous  is  used  for  two  reasons. 
1.  Because  in  God's  sight  they  are  such.  2.  Because  they  are  such  in  the  sight 
of  men.  IL  The  vakious  ways  in  which  the  righteous  are  tried.  They 
have  their  natmal  dispositions  even  as  other  men.  Though  trials  come  to  all,  they 
differ  in  character,  and  are  proportioned  in  degree.  Christians  are  tried  when— 
1.  They  are  led  to  investigate  the  character  and  tendency  of  their  life.  2.  When 
special  and  direct  afflictions  are  sent.  3.  When  alterations  and  changes  in  our 
family  circumstances  occur.  4.  When  temptations  of  a  trying  character  are  per- 
mitted to  come  in  their  way.  IlL  The  ends  that  are  to  be  answered  by 
these  trials.  There  is  nothing  purposeless  in  the  plans  of  God.  We  are  tried 
— 1.  That  we  may  be  corrected.      2.  That  we  may  be  proved.      3.  That  we  may  be 

Enrified.  Learn  to  recognise  the  Lord's  hand  in  our  trials,  and  to  distinguish 
etween  the  results  of  our  own  folly  and  God's  chastisements.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the 
anticipation  of  a  world  without  sorrow,  the  "unsuffering  kingdom"  of  our  Lord. 
{W.  Gf.  Barrett.)  Trials  and  their  lessons: — David  was  living  at  the  court  of 
Saul,  and  many  were  plotting  for  his  destruction.  But  his  support  was  that  God 
would  permit  no  real  harm  to  come  to  him,  and  that  his  trial  was  from  God.  They 
wanted  David  to  flee  away.  They  said,  the  foundations  were  broken  up,  and  what 
could  the  righteous  do  ?  You  never  know  what  you  can  do  when  God  helps  you. 
1.  Believers  are  righteous — by  the  pardon  of  the  past,  which  conceals  it  as  if  it  had 
never  been.     Because  God  puts  within  them  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit.     And 

f Tactically,  by  fulfilling  God's  commandments.  2.  Righteous  people  are  tried, 
n  one  sense  the  probation  of  the  wicked  is  over.  Believing  people  are  on  trial. 
You  have  accepted  mercy — and  your  trial  is  whether  you  will  be  faithful  to  the 
grace  given,  whether  you  will  persevere  to  the  end.  The  truth  that  there  is  a 
possibility  of  your  falling  away  has  its  practical  value.  It  ought  to  lead  you  to 
caution,  vigilance,  and  self-denial.  3.  It  is  the  Lord  who  tries  you.  Then  you 
will  not  be  tried  too  much.  The  Lord  has  the  control  of  all  your  trials,  whether 
they  come  through  prosperity,  adversity,  bereavements,  persecutions,  or  the  suffer- 


1S4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xi.  . 

ings  of  others.  4.  Why  does  the  Lord  try  the  righteous  ?  That  they  may  know 
themselves,  to  train  and  discipline  character,  to  make  us  more  useful,  and  to  ad- 
vance His  own  glory.  It  is  God's  opportunity  of  showing  the  truth  of  His  promise 
to  help.  You  ought  to  learn  to  get  good  out  of  your  trials.  "Glory  in  tribulations 
r.lso,"  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  you.  {Samuel  Coley.)  The  mission 
of  trial :  —  He  tries  them  for  their  own  good,  that  they  may  know  themselves.  . 
He  tries  them  for  the  good  of  others,  that  the  world  may  learn  how  powerful  a 
thing  faith  in  God  is,  when  it  has  once  laid  fast  hold  of  His  promises.  It  was  for 
this  purpose  that  He  tested  Abraham  when  He  commanded  him  to  offer  up  his  son 
Isaac,  with  his  own  hand,  a  burnt-offering  unto  the  Lord.  The  trial  taught  Abraham 
— what  he  could  never  h:ive  known  of  himself  without  it — the  character  of  true 
evangelical  obedience,  that  it  falters  at  no  sacrifice  known  to  be  required  by  the  will 
of  God.  It  is  these  testing  trials  of  the  righteous  that  bring  out  their  graces, 
develop  and  perfect  their  virtues.  The  hand  of  God  is  in  them  all,  seeking  higher 
praise  for  Himself,  and  working  out  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory  for  the  believer.  "The  Lord  trieth  the  righteous"  ;  only,  however,  to  con- 
sume their  dross  and  refine  their  gold.  The  wicked  have  no  just  cause  for 
triumphing  over  him,  when  they  see  the  righteous  man  in  affliction.  The  hand  of 
God  is  thus  upon  him  only  for  his  good.  His  trials  are  no  evidence  that  the  fact 
is  otherwise.  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  by  no  means  indicative  of  the  Divine 
approbation.  {David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  The  testing  of  the  perfect : — Pure  gold  may 
remain  in  the  fire  a  thousand  years  without  loss  of  substance,  without  contract- 
ing a  single  stain  or  losing  an  atom  of  its  weight.  The  fire  that  burns  the  oak . 
into  ashes,  marble  into  dust,  iron  into  rust,  has  no  power  to  destroy  or  even  injure 
a  metal  that  shines  but  the  brighter  for  the  glowing  flame.  Gold  is  therefore 
called  in  the  language  of  metallurgy — a  perfect  metal ;  and  were  we  perfect,  perfect 
in  holiness,  the  only  effect  of  fiery  trials  would  be,  not  to  burn  up,  but  to  brighten 
God's  image.  {Tluymas  Guthrie.)  The  test  of  trial : — The  sword  is  not  tested 
until  the  battle  rages,  the  ship  is  not  proved  until  the  storm  blows,  even  diamonds 
are  now  so  wondrously  imitated  that  the  best  judges  can  only  tell  them  by  putting 
the  steel  file  to  their  facets — that  does  no  mischief  except  to  shams  ;  the  genuine  fear 
nothing,  fire  only  purifies  the  real  gold.  So  trial  will  show  the  real  value  of  Chris- 
tian character.  The  general  is  best  estimated  in  the  battle,  the  skill  of  the 
physician  in  the  sick-room.     {R.  Venting. ) 

Ver.  6.  Upon  the  wicked  He  shall  rain  snares. — Divine  rectitude  in  punishing 
sin: — I.  Hell  is  not  annihilation.  Many  would  wish  it  were.  God's  plans 
and  purposes  are  not  to  be  affected  by  what  men  wish.  II.  Hkll  is  an  abode  of 
MISERY.  1.  Possibly  physical  suffering.  It  is  called  "everlasting  fire,"  outer 
darkness.  2.  Spiritual  misery.  It  is  spoken  of  as  a  prison,  the  blackness  of 
despair.  3.  Wretched  reflections.  "Son,  remember."  III.  Hell  is  of  eternal 
duration.  "Its  worm  dieth  not,  and  its  fire  is  not  quenched."  If  hell  could 
change  we  might  justly  judge  that  heaven  also  might  change.  IV.  Hkll  is  con- 
sistent WITH  Divine  attributes.  Nay,  more  than  that,  it  is  a  very  necessity 
of  His  existence.  "Upon  the  wicked  He  shall  rain  snares,  for  the  righteous  Lord 
loveth  righteousness."  God  does  not  punish  men  from  passion  —  passion  passes 
away  ;  but  He  punishes  from  fixed,  unalterable  principle.  Neither  does  He  punish 
from  pleasure  (Ezek.  iviii.  23).     He  is  essentially  benevolent.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  7.  The  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness. — The  righteous  God  and 
righteousness: — "Righteousness"  maybe  taken  as  but  another  word  for  "  right  "- 
ness,  equity,  justice,  the  being  and  rendering  what  is  right.  Here  it  describes  God. 
It  is  the  quality  which  binds  and  blends  into  a  perfect  unity  all  His  Divine  perfec- 
tions. We  feel  instinctively  that  righteousness  is  essential  to  Divine  perfection. 
Show  how  this  statement  that  God  is  a  righteous  God  bears  on  matters  of  faith  and 
practice.  God,  because  He  is  the  righteous  Lord,  loveth  righteousness.  1.  This 
will  explain  a  peculiarity  in  the  redemption  accomplished  for  ns  through  the 
atoning  death  of  Christ.  The  problem  to  be  solved  was,  how  can  the  love  of  God 
be  manifested,  and  righteousness  be  at  the  same  time  upheld  in  all  the  majesty  of 
its  eternal  rectitude  ?  2.  There  is  much  which  is  mysterious,  perplexing,  and  inex- 
plicable in  God's  providential  dealings.  But  throw  on  all  these  mysterious  provi- 
dences the  light  of  this  statement,  that  "the  Lord  is  righteous  and  loveth  righteous- 
ness," and  you  calm  the  troubled  spirit  to  patience  and  submission.  Then  with 
entire  trustfulness  you  would  leave  yourselves  in  God's  hands.    In  the  conviction 


PSAiM  xn.]  TEE  PSALMS.  185 

of  His  righteousness,  let  us  face  the  problems  and  perplexities  which  confront  us  in 
the  world.  Now  see  how  this  statement  bears  on  all  the  business  of  life  between 
man  and  man.  "  His  countenance  doth  behold  the  upright":  beholds  them,  that 
is,  with  special  favour  and  approval,  because  He  sees  reflected  in  them,  however 
imperfectly,  the  lineaments  of  His  own  Divine  image.     (J?.  Allen,  M.A.) 


PSALM      II. 

Vers.  1-8.  Help,  Lord ;  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth. — This,  according  to  the  title,  is 
one  of  David's  Psalms  ;  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  circumstances,  so  far  as  we  know 
them,  of  his  history,  which  can  lead  us  to  associate  the  Psalm  with  any  particular 
period.  Tholuck  thinks  it  is  aimed  at  persons  by  whom  David  was  surrounded  in 
the  court  of  Saul,  Others  suppose  that  it  was  occasioned  by  the  treachery  of  the 
Ziphites  (1  Jas.  xvii.  23),  or  the  treachery  of  Ahithophel,  in  Absalom's  rebellion. 
But  it  is  not  one  or  two  prominent  individuals  whose  conduct  forms  the  burden  of 
the  Psalmist's  complaint.  He  is  evidently  smarting  from  the  falseness  and  hypo- 
crisy of  the  time.  The  defection  which  he  deplores  is  a  national  defection.  Like 
Elijah  in  the  desert,  he  feels  himself  alone.  A  taint  has  spread  through  society. 
Falsehood  is  everywhere,  truth  nowhere.  The  heart  of  man  is  double  ;  their  lips 
are  flattering  lips  (ver.  3).  And  whilst  they  utter  slander,  hypocrisy,  and  lies,  they 
boast  of  their  power  ;  and  not  only  give  their  tongues  licence,  but  justify  the  licence  : 
"Our  lips  are  our  own;  who  is  Lord  over  us?"  Now  this  utter  hollowness  and 
insincerity  are  very  hard  to  bear.  The  few  who,  in  the  midst  of  general  corruption, 
still  retain  their  integrity  are  persecuted,  and  sigh  for  deliverance.  This  deliver- 
ance is  promised  them  in  the  form  of  the  Divine  interposition.  The  singer,  filled 
with  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  consoles  himself,  and  those  aflBicted  like  himself,  not  in 
his  own  words  but  in  the  words  of  God  (ver.  6).  And  then,  remembering  how  pure 
those  words  are,  how  unalterably  true, — not  like  the  words  of  men,  which  seem  so 
fair,  but  are  false, — he  feels  that  there  he  can  rest,  calm  in  the  conviction  that, 
though  the  wicked  walk  on  every  side,  Jehovah  will  save  them  that  love  Him  from 
all  their  machinations  (ver.  8).  The  Psalm  consists  of  two  principal  divisions. 
I.  A  COMPLAINT  (vers.  1-4).  1.  The  cry  for  help,  because  good  men  are  nowhere 
to  be  found  ;  and  lies,  and  flattery,  and  insincerity  prevail.  2.  The  prayer  that 
flatterers  and  liars  may  be  destroyed  (vers.  3,  4).  II.  The  answer  to  that  com- 
plaint (vers.  5-7).  Including  God's  promise  of  help  in  answer  to  the  cry  for  help, 
and  the  Psalmist's  Amen,  and  the  assurance  and  hope  built  upon  the  promise 
(vers.  7,  8).  {J.  J.  Steioart  Perovme,  B.D.)  A  prayer  of  David  to  God,  to  save  and 
help  him,  and  keep  him  from  the  deceits  and  contagion  of  the  wicked,  of  which  the 
world  is  too  full.  1.  A  prayer,  and  the  reasons  of  it  (vers.  1,  2).  The  petition  is 
brief  and  jaculatory,  for  he  breaks  upon  God  with  one  word — Help,  or  Save.  Of 
which  he  gives  two  reasons — (1)  The  penury  and  scarcity  of  good  men.  (2)  The 
great  abundance  of  the  wicked,  and  the  licentious  times.  2.  A  prophecy  of  the  fall 
of  the  wicked,  whose  arrogance  he  describes  (ver.  4).  The  prophecy  shows  what 
shall  be  the  end  of  their  dissembling.  3.  God's  answer  to  David's  petition.  Is  it 
so  that  the  wicked  are  thus  numerous,  thus  tyrannous,  so  proud,  so  arrogant,  then 
' '  I  will  arise  "  ;  "  I  will  not  delay  "  ;  "I  will  set  him  in  safely. "  That  which  moveth 
Me  is  his  pitiful  condition,  his  sighs  and  groans.  Of  this  let  no  man  doubt.  In  God's 
words  there  is  no  fallacy.  4.  A  petitory  conclusion,  "Keep  them,  O  Lord," 
Without  God  keep  them,  they  will  be  infected.  Keep  them  from  this  generation. 
For  there  be  a  generation  of  vipers.  And  ever  make  them  persevere  ;  for  without 
Thy  aid  they  will  fall.    ( William  Nicholson,  D.D.)        Dark  ages : — I.  The  golden 

AGE  OF  A  COUNTRY   MAT   BE  A  DARK   AGE  IN  THE  ESTIMATE  OF  THE  SAINT.      The 

true  glory  of  a  country  is  moral,  and  where  the  moral  element  is  wanting  all  other 
glories  are  dim.  Philosophers,  poets,  commanders,  artists,  orators,  statesmen, 
millionaires,  do  not  make  a  "  Golden  Age,"  but  the  presence  of  many  virtuous  and 
godly  men.  II.  The  faults  with  which  a  splendid  civilisation  mat  be 
CHARGEABLE.  1.  Lack of faithfulness.  2.  Untruthfulness.  3.  Pride.  "Talking 
big."  4.  Boasting.  5.  Goodness  is  treated  with  contempt.  III.  The  duty  of 
THE  Christian  patriot.  1.  To  cry  mightily  to  God  against  the  prevailing 
wickedness.     2.  To  protest  by  word  and  act  against  this  iniquity.     3.  To  rest,  in 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR..  [psalm  xn. 

days  of  triumphant  wickedness,  in  the  word  and  power  of  God.  4.  To  claim  God's 
promise,  and  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world.  ( W.  L.  Watkinson. ) 
The  moral  degeneracy  of  society : — The  poem  is  a  picture  of  a  morally  rotten  age. 
The  devout  author  felt  himself  living  in  corrupt  times.  Hence  he  notes  this 
degeneracy — I.  As  A  fact  for  devout  lamentation.  He  mourns  because  of 
three  things — 1.  The  absence  of  the  true.  "The  godly  man  ceaseth."  2.  The 
presence  of  the  false,  vain  man, — "  they  speak  vanity."  Obsequious  men — 
"  flattering  lips."  .  Insincere — "a  double  heart."  They  spoke  one  thing  and  meant 
another.  Proud — they  spoke  "proud  things."  Cruel — "the  oppression  of  the 
poor."  What  a  spectacle  for  a  devout  eye.  3.  The  exaltation  of  the  vile.  "The 
vilest  men  are  exalted."  II.  As  A  reason  for  Divine  interposition.  1.  "Help, 
Lord."  So  he  prayed.  2.  Divinely  promised.  "Now  will  I  arise,  saith  the  Lord." 
This  comes  as  an  answer  to  the  prayer.  "Before  they  call  I  will  answer," 
3.  Heartily  expected.  "Thou  shalt  keep  them,  0  Lord."  III.  As  suggesting  by 
CONTRAST  the  EXCELLENCY  OF  God's  Word.  "The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure 
words."  They  are  so  for — 1.  They  are  unmixed  with  falsehood  ;  and  2.  They  havo 
been  thoroughly  tested.  "As  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth,"  &c.  How 
thoroughly  it  has  been  tried  these  six  thousand  years,  by  persecution,  by  hostile 
criticism,  by  the  profoundest  experience  of  the  good  in  all  ages.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  degeneracy  of  a  soul: — "Help,  Lord  !  "  This  is  the  wailing  supplication  of  a 
soul  oppressed  with  the  degeneracy  of  society.  It  is  a  cry  for  security  amid  ftn  evil 
epidemic.  This  Psalm  marks  off  the  steps  of  social  degradation.  We  can  see  the 
progressive  descents  from  the  worship  of  God  to  the  exaltation  of  vileness.  Regard 
these  stages  of  decline  in  their  relationship  to  the  individual.  Society  only  reflects 
the  individual  man.  Regard  the  passage  as  a  vivid  description  of  the  degeneracy  of 
a  soul.  1.  The  decay  of  the  sense  of  reverence.  The  beginning  of  degeneracy  is  to 
lose  touch  with  God.  We  lose  our  touch  with  God  when  we  cease  to  feel  after 
Him.  It  is  the  eSbrt  to  feel  that  preserves  the  sensitive  touch.  2.  The  decay 
of  the  sense  of  honour.  Faithfulness  faileth,  the  dependableness  of  character  is 
impaired.  When  reverence  is  benumbed,  trustfulness  is  broken.  3.  The  decay  of 
the  sense  of  responsibility.  "Our  lips  are  our  own  ;  who  is  Lord  over  us?"  The 
perversion  of  honour  destroys  the  sense  of  responsibility.  Men  become  self-centred, 
and  therefore  blinded.  4.  The  decay  of  the  sense  of  humanity.  "The  spoiling  of 
the  poor,  the  sighing  of  the  needy."  Where  irresponsibility  reigns,  cruelty  abounds. 
The  birth  of  cruelty  synchronises  with  the  death  of  reverence.  5.  The  decay  of  the 
sense  of  right.  "VUeness  is  exalted."  This  is  the  last  stage  of  the  appalling 
degradation.  Evil  at  length  becomes  man's  good.  He  has  lost  his  moral  discern- 
ment. How  can  we  be  saved  from  this  perilous  decline  ?  The  wish  to  be  saved  is 
the  beginning  of  salvation.  Exercise  thyself  in  feeling,  and  thou  shalt  become 
expert  in  touching.  Everywhere  and  at  all  times  be  reaching  out  for  God.  Pray 
for  Him  everywhere.  The  good  Lord  is  dependable  ;  He  is  better  than  His  word. 
{J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  departure  of  spiritual  worth  lamented: — This  text  is 
the  language  of  feeling.  But  thought  and  feeling  should  not  be  placed  in  opposi- 
tion to  each  other.  They  are  mutually  dependent.  Thought  without  feeling 
would  be  powerless ;  feeling  without  thought  would  be  wild,  turbulent,  and  reckless. 
I.  Spiritual  worth.  The  two  words  "godly"  and  "faithful"  express  this. 
They  correspond  with  other  Bible  words,  such  as  "devout"  and  "just."  They 
cover  the  two  branches  of  human  holiness,  piety  and  morality.  In  what  does 
spiritual  worth  consist  ?  Every  man  sustains  two  fundamental  relations  :  the  one 
connecting  him  with  God,  the  other  with  society.  The  individual  man  lives  in  the 
social.  In  the  spiritual  constitution  of  man  there  are  two  controlling  tendencies 
corresponding  to  these  relationships.  These  tendencies  are  designated  the  religious 
and  social  affections.  The  religious  element  is  the  soul  of  man's  soul ;  its  perversion 
has  been  his  degradation,  and  its  right  development  is  essential  to  his  true  eleva- 
tion. The  very  constitution  of  the  soul  is  theistic,  the  being  of  a  God  is  implied 
in  its  structure,  laws,  and  operations.  The  right  state  of  these  controlling  tend- 
encies constitutes  spiritual  worth.  The  right  state  of  both  is  a  state  of  love. 
Social  morality  springs  out  of  piety.  This  worth  enriches  a  man.  It  is  valuable 
for  its  own  sake.  It  is  absolute  worth.  How  is  man  to  come  into  possession  of 
it  ?  This  is  the  problem  of  life.  All  spiritual  power  we  trace  to  the  gospel.  We 
would  not  depreciate  other  influences  of  spiritual  culture.  II.  Spiritual  worth 
DEPARTED.  Various  ways  in  which  spiritual  worth  departs  from  a  community. 
Change  of  locality.  Change  of  character.  Change  of  worlds.  What  principles 
wiU  regulate  the  circumstances  of  death  in  the  case  of  individuals  ?    1,  That  death 


PSALM  xii.]  THE  PSALMS.  187 

would  be  always  peaceful  in  proportion  to  a  man's  goodness.  2.  That  death  would 
be  postponed  in  proportion  to  a  man's  usefulness.  Actual  experience  controverts 
both  these  anticipations.  III.  The  departure  of  spiritual  worth  lamented. 
It  is  the  language  of  lamentation,  "Help,  Lord."  1.  Their  departure  is  a  great 
loss.  Has  death  terminated  their  existence  ?  2.  It  is  a  loss  to  society.  8.  The 
loss  requires  the  interposition  of  God.  The  separation  is  material,  not  spiritual — 
accidental,  not  essential.  The  mental  bond  is  closer  through  the  dissolution  of  the 
bodily.      (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  death  of  the  godly  an  iiicentive  to  prayer: — 

I.  Because  there  are  so  few  of  them  in  the  world.  Such  men  are  the  salt 
of  the  earth.      God  teaches  us  their  worth  by  removing  them  from  this  world. 

II.  ThIIR  presence  and  service  HEBE  SEEM   ESSENTIAL  TO  THE  CAUSE  OF  GOD. 

1.  On  account  of  their  example.     2.  Their  influence  and  usefulness.     III.  Because 

IT  IS  SO  DIFFICULT  TO   FILL  UP  THEIR  PLACES.      IV.    ThE  GRACE  AND  PROVIDENCE 

OF  God  SUGGEST  THE  ONLY  REMEDY — prayer.  "Help,  Lord,"  &c.  {Anon.) 
The  loss  of  godly  men : — The  Psalm  appears  to  have  been  composed  in  a  time  of 
great  degeneracy  and  corruption  of  manners.  I.  The  important,  useful,  and 
AMIABLE  CHARACTERS  HERE  SPECIFIED.  Godly  and  faithful.  The  word  "  godly  " 
is  sometimes  translated  "merciful."  1.  Consider  godliness  as  a  principle  that 
comes  from  God,  not  in  a  natural  but  supernatural  way.  Holiness  is  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  No  man  is  godly  but  he  in  whom  God  has  wrought  a  saving 
change,  whose  heart  is  turned  from  sin  to  God,  from  self  to  Christ,  from  earth  to 
heaven.  Wherein  does  godliness  consist  ?  Godliness  is  God's  likeness.  Wher- 
ever that  is,  there  is  a  supreme  love  to  God.  Every  godly  man  loves  God,  not  only 
because  God  is  kind  and  bountiful  to  him,  but  because  God  is  holy  in  Himself. 
He  is  a  godly  man  who  is  a  sincere  and  a  constant  worshipper  of  God.  The  love 
of  a  child  to  a  parent  is  exemplified  by  his  obedience.  A  child  of  God  obeys  his 
heavenly  Father  from  love.  Every  godly  man  worships  God  in  secret.  Every  one 
who  is  godly  professes  a  regard  for  the  public  worship  of  God,  and  makes  conscience 
of  attending  it.  A  godly  man  is  not  free  from  frailties  and  infirmities.  But  his 
heart  is  habitually  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  his  way  of  life  prevailingly  cor- 
responds with  his  religious  profession.  Consider — 2.  The  other  branch  of  the  word 
godly,  namely,  merciful.  (Isa.  Ivii.  1.)  Merciful  men  are  "men  of  kindness," 
such  as  show  kindness.  As  they  fear  God,  so  they  regard  man.  Happy  for  society 
when  these  two  things  are  conjoined,  a  ready  heart  and  a  bountiful  hand.  3.  The 
faithful.  The  truly  godly  are  faithful  to  God  ;  and  also  faithful  to  men.  Where 
godliness  is,  there  will  be  honesty.  II.  The  great  cause  we  have  to  deplore 
THE  loss  of  such  PERSONS.  When  David  wrote,  it  was  a  time  of  abounding 
iniquity  among  all  degrees  of  people,  and  there  were  very  few  to  be  found  who 
preserved  these  characters.  The  ceasing  and  the  failing  of  them  is  to  be  considered 
also  descriptive  of  their  dissolution.  When  the  judgments  of  God  are  abroad  in 
the  earth,  and  a  dark  cloud  hangs  over  a  sinful  kingdom,  is  there  not  cause  to 
bewail  the  departure  of  such  as  were  men  of  prayer  and  of  a  public  spirit  ?    III.  The 

DUTY  OF  crying  TO  GOD  FOR  HELP  WHEN  SUCH  CHARACTERS  FAIL.      Vain  is  the 

help  of  man.  Our  help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  1.  Let  us  pray  that  the  Lord 
would  help  us  to  attend  to  such  a  speaking  providence,  and  improve  it  to  our 
spiritual  advantage.  2.  That  the  Lord  would  so  help  in  the  present  exigence  and 
trial  as  to  raise  up  others  to  supply  the  place  of  such  useful  men.  {Richard 
Winter.)  Times  of  spiritual  dearth  and  solitvde: — In  the  days  of  Savonarola, 
Italy  was  abandoned  to  its  passions,  its  corruptions,  and  its  vices.  The  rich  tyran- 
nised over  the  poor,  and  the  poor  were  miserable,  helpless,  and  abandoned.  The 
zealous  monk  found  himself  at  war  with  the  world  and  the  Church,  and  was  shocked 
by  the  profanations  that  existed  around  him.  "  There  is  no  one, "  he  said,  ' '  not  even 
one  remaining,  who  desires  that  which  is  good  ;  we  must  learn  from  children  and 
women  of  low  estate,  for  in  them  only  yet  remains  any  shadow  of  innocence.  The 
good  are  oppressed,  and  the  people  of  Italy  are  become  like  the  Egyptians  who  held 
God's  people  in  bondage."  Good  men  taken  frovn  the  evil  to  come: — Even  as  a 
careful  mother,  seeing  lier  child  in  the  way  when  a  coniiiany  of  unruly  horses  run 
through  the  streets  in  full  career,  presently  whips  up  her  child  in  her  arms  and 
taketh  him  home  ;  or  as  the  hen,  seeing  the  ravenous  kite  over  her  head,  clucks  and 
gathers  her  chickens  under  her  wings  ;  even  so  when  God  hath  a  purpose  to  bring  a 
heavy  calamity  upon  a  land,  it  hath  been  usual  with  Him  to  call  and  cull  out  to 
Himself  such  as  are  His  dearly  beloved.  He  takes  His  choice  servants  from  the  evil 
to  come.  Thus  was  Augustine  removed  a  little  before  Hippo  (wherein  he  dwelt) 
was  taken ;  Parceus  died  before  Heidelburg  was  sacked  ;  and  Luther  was  taken  off 


188  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xii. 

before  Germany  was  overrun  with  war  and  bloodshed.  {E.  Dunsterville. )  The 
faithful  fail  from  among  the  children  of  men. — Our  imperfect  estimates : — We  must 
not  accept  the  words  of  this  Psalm  as  true  because  they  happen  to  be  written  here 
or  anywhere.  It  is  perfectly  possible  for  us  to  take  an  unwise  and  incorrect  view 
of  social  conditions.  David  did  not  keep  a  register  of  all  the  "godly"  and  all  the 
"faithful."  Another  prophet  said  that  he  alone  was  left ;  the  Lord  corrected  his; 
estimate,  and  said,  No,  not  alone  ;  I  have  seven  thousand  who  have  never  kissed 
the  lips  of  Baal.  It  is  unwise  to  take  the  opinion  of  dejectedness  and  forsakenness 
upon  any  topic.  When  we  are  in  extreme  positions,  either  of  joy  or  of  sadness,  we 
are  not  qualified  to  pronounce  broadly  and  correctly  upon  the  whole  scope  of 
Divine  Providence.  In  high  joy,  the  glee  that  all  but  dances  in  the  sanctuary,  for 
very  ecstasy  of  heart,  we  may  think  all  men  good,  all  causes  excellent,  all  the 
features  of  the  times  beautiful.  In  dejection,  despondency,  orphanhood  of  heart, 
we  may  think  we  alone  are  left,  and  that  the  gift  of  prayer  will  perish  with  our- 
breath.  All  things  wear  a  sombre  aspect ;  the  whole  year  is  one  long  November  ;. 
the  very  music  of  childhood  is  but  an  aggravation  of  our  suffering.  That  opinion 
must  not  be  taken.  Within  the  limits  of  the  man's  own  personality  it  is  quite' 
true,  but  no  great  generalisation  must  be  built  upon  it.  David  did  not  know  how 
many  godly  men  there  were  in  the  world,  nor  how  many  faithful ;  but  his  experi- 
ence is  valuable  up  to  this  point,  namely,  that  he  felt  everything  of  the  nature- 
of  trust,  confidence,  progress  depended  upon  the  presence  of  godly  and  faithful 
elements  in  the  world.  That  the  population  of  the  globe  had  increased  was  nothing 
to  David,  if  the  godliness  and  faithfulness  of  the  community  had  gone  down. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  No  trusting  in  men: — To  one  reflecting  that  God's; 
kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness  in  the  earth  is  to  be  maintained  through 
human  agencies,  it  is  a  saddening  sight  to  see  one  after  another  of  its  champions 
and  defenders  disappearing  from  the  conflict.  The  sight  often  smites  the  heart  of" 
the  survivor,  as  it  would  have  smitten  the  heart  of  the  Israelite  to  have  seen  David 
fall  in  his  combat  with  Goliath.  Few,  indeed,  are  the  communities,  whether  civil 
or  ecclesiastical,  whose  histories  do  not  exhibit  epochs  and  crises  in  which  their 
whole  future  well-being  seemed  to  depend  upon  the  life  of  a  single  man,  or  at  most, 
upon  the  lives  of  a  very  small  band.  And  when  such  men  fall  in  the  conflict,  or 
depart  hence  in  the  course  of  nature,  good  men  feel  that  society  has  suff"ered  a  loss; 
that  cannot  be  easily  repaired.  But  how  much  more  severely  is  the  blow  felt  when 
the  champions  of  a  cause  are  lost  to  it,  not  by  death,  but  by  turning  traitors  ;.. 
when  a  Judas  betrays  the  Church,  and  an  Arnold  the  State.  Now  it  is  in  this 
latter  sense  that  we  are  to  understand  David's  words,  "the  godly  man  ceaseth,"  &c. 
It  was  not  by  the  sword  of  an  enemy,  nor  by  natural  death,  that  they  had  been  lost, 
to  the  cause  of  law  and  order,  truth  and  right,  but  by  betraying  it,  and  fighting 
against  it.  David's  own  son,  and  subjects,  and  generals,  and  ministers  had  con- 
spired to  overthrow  the  cause  they  had  sworn  to  defend ;  and  thus  situated,  he 
appeals  to  the  only  power  that  can  now  avail  him,  saying,  "Help,  Lord,  man  has 
failed  me;  Thou  alone  canst   now  deliver."      {David   Caldwell, A.M.)  Trust- 

worthiness : — He  is  a  faithful  man  who  keeps  faith.     Faith  is  the  equivalent  of 
fidelity,  and  fidelity  is  what  we  mean  by  trustworthiness.     We  are  growing.     Modern 
civilisation  is  not  a  failure.     But  it  may  be  a  question,  whether  we  are  keeping  pace 
by  moral  growth  with  our  intellectual  and  physical  development.       All  signs  of 
material  advancement  are  of  little  account,  if  the  ethical  power  of  the  Gospel  is 
left  out.     Without  fidelity  to  all  the  duties  of  a  true  man  in  society  there  can  be 
no  religion  which  is  of  any  value.     It  is  quite  possible  for  men  to  make  religious 
sensibilities  and  religious  experiences  a  substitute  for  ethical  integrity.      It  is  a. 
growing  impression  that  men  are  becoming  more  and  more  untrustworthy.     One  of" 
the  features   of  our  times  is  a  growing  looseness  in  fidelity.     Consiaer  this  in 
regard  to  truth,  which  is  the  central  trunk  of  trustworthiness.     Men  in  ordinary  con- 
versation are  not  as  careful  of  truth  as  they  should  be.     I  refer  to  carelessness  of 
truth,  to  heedless  and  rash  statements.     There  is  a  low  sense  or  tone  of  conscience . 
in  regard  to  accuracy  and  fidelity  on  the  subject  of  truth-speaking.     Truth  is  the 
backbone  of  honour,  and  indeed  of  manhood  itself.     In  the  rivalry  and  pressure  of 
affairs  there  is  a  growing  tendency  to  misrepresent  the  truth.     Men  really  trap  each 
other  by  half-truths.      Half-truths  are  the  devil's  whole  lies.      Promises  are  not 
now  kept  as  they  should  be.      Unless  men  put  their  word  into  legal  form,  it  is  not. 
generally  considered  that  their  promises  are  worth  much.     Trustworthiness,  also, 
under  assumed  obligations,  seems  to  me  to  be  relaxing.     It  seems  to  me  that  the 
sentiment  of  service  is  becoming  very  much  enfeebled.     Now  human  society  cannot: 


PSALM  xii.]  THE  PSALMS.  189 

cohere  where  a  man  cannot  trust  his  fellow-man.  You  cannot  discharge  your 
duties  to  humanity  without  being  in  subordination  one  to  another.  Society 
organises  itself  by  relative  superiorities  and  inferiorities.  It  is  a  constant  com- 
plaint that  it  is  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world  to  find  competent  young  men  who 
can  be  trusted.  ...  I  like  to  hear  of  eminent  Christian  experiences.  Change  of 
heart  is  good,  but  change  of  life  is  better.  It  would  at  least  be  more  agreeable  to 
one's  neighbours.  How  is  it  in  this  matter  ?  Is  there  anything  in  religious 
doctrine  that  is  an  equivalent  for  ethical  Christianity  ?  Is  there  anything  that  is 
a  substitute  for  fidelity  between  man  and  man  ?  {H.  Ward  Bcccher.)  Godly  and 
faithful: — A  prayer  of  David's  to  God  for  help  on  this  ground — that  there  was 
little  or  no  religion,  or  honesty  left  among  men  ;  and  that  therefore  he  had  no 
reason  to  trust  tliem,  or  to  expect  a  blessing  on  such  instruments.     I.  The  import- 

AKCK    OF   THE    TWO    CHARACTERS — GODLY    AND    FAITHFUL.        "  Godly  "    imports    a 

benign,  gentle,  and  good-natured  man,  but  this  has  such  a  relation  to  religion,  and 
is  such  a  disposition  to  it,  that  among  the  Jews  the  word  was  in  common  use 
extended  to  a  man  that  was  exact  to  all  the  duties  of  religion,  and  strict  in  the  per- 
formance of  them.  A  godly  man  is  not  one  that  places  his  religion  in  many  assumed 
practices,  that  do  not  tend  to  make  him  better.  Nor  he  that  understands  his 
religion  well.  Nor  he  that  is  very  regular  in  all  outward  rules  and  matters 
of  form.  The  truly  godly  man  has  an  inward  sense  of  a  supreme  power  that 
is  over  him,  and  endeavours  to  resemble  this  being,  and  to  govern  all  his 
actions  in  conformity  to  the  will  and  laws  of  God.  He  believes  that  God,  by  His 
providence,  watches  over  all  things,  and  consequently  resigns  himself  up  to  His  will, 
and  submits  to  everything  that  comes  to  him  from  that  hand.  A  godly  man  is  a 
faithful  man.  He  that  has  a  true  sense  of  religion  knows  that  God  is  true,  and  so 
he  always  speaks  the  truth.  He  is  severe  in  matters  of  truth.  He  is  raised  to  such 
a  pitch  of  candour  and  sincerity  that  every  man  who  has  any  concerns  with  him 
will  soon  see  what  he  is  to  trust  to,  or  to  depend  upon.  A  faithful  man  is  he 
that  hates  both  lies  and  liars.  He  is  true  in  his  actions  as  well  as  in  his 
words.  II.  David's  COMPLAINT.  "The  godly  ceased."  On  what  grounds  did  he 
make  this  complaint?  III.  The  dangerous  and  desperate  state  of  a  nation, 
IN  which  godly  and  faithful  men  do  fail.  Dangerous  by  reason  of  the 
natural  effects  that  follow,  and  by  reason  of  the  judgments  of  God.  IV.  The  only 
REMEDY  for  ALL  THIS.  Which  is  an  earnest  prayer  to  God  for  help.  (Gilbert 
Burnet,  D.D.)  Zion  bereaved  of  the  faithful: — I.  The  fact.  But  who  are 
faithful  ?  1.  They  who  are  faithful  to  themselves  will  not  deceive  themselves  as  to 
their  state  before  God.  2.  To  God.  Maintaining  His  truth.  3.  To  the  Church, 
the  election  of  grace.  Declaring  to  them  positive  truth,  resting  on  the  covenant, 
tracing  all  blessing  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  II.  The  exclamation.  "The  faithful 
fail."  It  is — 1.  The  voice  of  mourning.  2.  Of  appeal  to  God  to  raise  up  others. 
3.  Of  the  soul  that  cares  for  Zion.  4.  Craving  further  nourishment.  III.  The 
WARNING — that  when  the  Lord  has  taken  home  a  few  more  of  His  faithful,  then  a 
storm  of  persecution  will  burst  forth  upon  His  Church.  The  night  is  approaching. 
Make  sure  work  of  your  own  salvation.  {Joseph  Irons. )  A  touching  j->lea : — We 
feel  that  we  cannot  well  spare  the  good  from  this  earth  in  its  present  demoralised 
condition,  because — I,  We  need  their  example.  Example  is  both  (a)  Demon- 
strative, and  {b)  Educational.  II.  We  need  their  influence.  It  is  the  good  of 
this  world  who  preserve  it  from  total  moral  corruption.  III.  We  need  their 
counsels.  But  God's  dispensations  are  all  right.  He  makes  no  mistakes.  ( W. 
H.  Luekenbach,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  i.  The  Lord  shall  cut  off  all  flattering  lips. — The  lawlessness  of  the  tongue: 
— The  language  of  agitators  is  indicated  in  this  text,  of  men  who  think  to  carry 
everything  by  free  speech,  a  free  press,  and  a  free  pulpit.  God  forbid  that  we 
should  ever  see  the  day  when  either  of  these  three  great  agencies  for  enlightening, 
exciting,  and  directing  human  thought  shall  not  be  free.  However  much  they  may 
be  abused,  they  are  still  the  chief  glory  of  a  country.  It  is  not  to  be  denied, 
however,  that  they  are  abused.  Instead  of  being  used  only  for  the  defence  of  truth 
and  right,  they  are  often  prostituted  to  stirring  up  the  most  fearful  passions  that 
can  agitate  the  human  breast ;  to  array  brother  against  brother,  citizen  against 
citizen,  section  against  section,  and  Church  against  Church.  You  may  remonstrate 
•with  the  men  so  engaged,  but  the  only  answer  you  can  obtain  from  them  is  likely 
to  be,  "  With  our  tongue  will  we  prevail ;  our  lips  are  our  own  ;  who  is  lord  over 
us  t "    They  act  as  if  freedom  of  speech  implied  the  right  to  say  whatever  fancy 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xii. 

may  dictate,  where  it  may  dictate,  when  it  may  dictate,  and  as  it  may  dictate. 
Hence  the  recklessness  with  which  not  only  opinions,  but  characters  and  motives, 
are  assailed.  The  right  of  free  discussion  is  often  indulged  by  its  advocates,  till 
they  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  men  have  any  other  rights.  Nor  is  this  lawless- 
ness of  tongue  confined  to  partisan  leaders,  and  to  those  in  authority  ;  it  pervades 
and  embitters  private  life.  We  meet,  in  every  walk  of  society,  persons  who  pride 
themselves  on  their  fearlessness  of  speech,  and  who,  in  sheer  wantonness,  inflict 
wounds  upon  the  characters  and  feelings  of  others  that  time  can  never  heal. 
(David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  Flattery  dangerous: — The  philosopher  Bion,  being 
asked  what  animal  he  thought  the  most  hurtful,  replied,  "That  of  wild  creatures  a 
tyrant,  and  of  tame  ones  a  flatterer."  The  flatterer  is  the  most  dangerous  enemy 
we  can  have.  Raleigh,  himself  a  courtier,  and  therefore  initiated  into  the  whole  art 
of  flattery,  who  discovered  in  his  own  career  and  fate  its  dangerous  and  deceptive 
power,  its  deep  artifice  and  deeper  falsehood,  says,  ' '  A  flatterer  is  said  to  be  a  beast 
that  biteth  smiling.  But  it  is  hard  to  know  them  from  friends— they  are  so 
obsequious  and  full  of  protestations  ;  for  as  a  wolf  resembles  a  dog,  so  doth  a 
flatterer  a  friend."  {The  Book  of  Symbols.)  Our  lips  are  our  own.— Conversa- 
tion : — Thoughts,  words,  actions  :  these  are  the  three  activities  in  which  our  life  ia 
spent.  The  first  and  the  last,  as  representing  the  inner  and  the  outer  life,  are 
constant  topics  of  religious  teaching  ;  but  perhaps  words,  on  account  of  their 
ambiguous  character,  as  midway  between  thought  and  actions,  have  not  received 
equal  attention.  To  the  thoughtless  a  word  appears  the  most  trivial  of  all  things  ; 
what  is  it  but  a  breath  carried  away  on  the  air  to  be  immediately  extinguished  ?  Yet, 
in  truth,  this  activity  is  one  of  the  great  sides  of  life,  in  which  we  may  either 
honour  or  dishonour  God,  in  which  we  must  display  our  own  worth  or  unworth,  and 
for  which  we  shall  at  the  last  be  either  approved  or  rejected.  Our  conversation, 
indeed,  is  even  more  than  this  :  it  is  a  kind  of  index  or  epitome  of  our  whole  life  ; 
what  we  are  in  it,  the  same  shall  we  be  found  to  be  in  every  other  respect.  It  is  to 
this  eSect  that  St.  James  says,  "If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a 
perfect  man,  and  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body "  ;  and  our  Lord,  still  more 
solemnly,  "  By  thy  words  shalt  thou  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be 
condemned,"  as  if  nothing  else  required  to  be  considered  even  at  the  final  tribunal. 
Conversation  is  a  daily,  an  hourly  thing  ;  it  is  continued  from  week's  end  to  week's 
end,  and  from  year's  end  to  year's  end  ;  it  goes  on  throughout  life,  from  the  time 
when  the  tongue  of  the  child  learns  to  babble  the  first  words  till  the  time  when  the 
old  man  eloquent  is  celebrating  the  days  when  he  was  young.  It  takes  place  in  the 
house  and  by  the  way,  where  two  or  three  are  met  together,  and  where  crowds 
exchange  their  fleeting  salutations.  It  passes  between  friend  and  friend,  and  between 
friend  and  foe,  between  neighbours  and  between  strangers.  There  is  no  limit  to  the 
subjects  which  it  may  embrace.  It  takes  in  both  the  objects  which  present  them- 
selves to  our  observation  in  the  places  where  we  live,  and  those  which  are  brought 
us  by  report  from  a  distance.  It  ranges  over  the  world  invisible  of  thoughts  and 
feelings,  as  well  as  the  visible  world  of  things  and  men.  It  moves  easily  from  topic 
to  topic,  and  may  in  an  hour  traverse  a  hundred  subjects,  passing  from  land  to  land 
in  space,  and  from  age  to  age  in  time.  If  the  amount  of  our  conversation  could  be 
represented  to  us  visually  it  would  astonish  us.  If  it  were  printed,  for  instance, 
how  many  pages  would  an  average  talker  fill  in  a  single  day  ?  In  a  year  it  would 
amount  to  as  many  volumes  as  the  collected  works  of  a  great  author.  In  a  lifetime 
it  would  fill  a  library.  The  mere  bulk  of  this  activity  shows  how  momentous  it  is. 
But  there  are  weightier  considerations  than  this.  Conversation  is  a  forth-putting  of 
the  strength  of  the  soul  to  produce  an  efl'ect.  It  may  be  an  efi'ort  of  stupendous 
strength,  or  it  may  have  no  more  force  than  the  fall  of  a  feather  ;  for  conversation, 
as  an  instrument  of  the  mind,  may  be  compared  to  those  steam-hammers  which  can 
be  worked  either  with  such  force  as  to  grind  an  iron  bar  to  powder,  or  with  such 
gentleness  as  only  to  chip  the  shell  of  an  egg.  But  whether  the  efi'ort  be  great  or 
small,  that  which  it  always  aims  at  is  an  impression  on  another  mind.  Conversa- 
tion is  not  the  affair  of  one  person,  but  always  of,  at  least,  two.  It  ia  perhaps  the 
most  direct  and  powerful  means  we  have  of  influencing  our  fellow-men.  I  put 
forth  my  hand  and  lay  it  on  my  neighbour's  person  ;  but  in  so  doing  I  am  not 
touching  him  so  closely  as  if  I  speak  a  sentence  in  his  hearing.  In  the  one  case 
only  our  bodies  toiich  ;  but  in  the  other  our  souls  touch.  Conversation  ia  the 
touching  of  souls.  Souls  never  touch  each  other  except  for  weal  or  woe.  Every 
touch  leaves  a  mark,  which  may  be  either  a  black  mark  or  a  point  of  splendour. 
No  doubt  the  impressions  made  by  courersation  are  generally  minute.     But  all  the 


PSALM  XII.]  THE  PSALMS.  191 

impressions  which  we  make  in  this  way  on  different  persons,  when  added  together, 
amount  to  a  great  influence  ;  and  to  those  who  for  years  are  constantly  hearing  us 
speak  we  cannot  but  be  doing  much  good  or  harm.  One  snow-flake  is  nothing  ;  it 
melts  away  on  the  outstretched  hand  in  a  moment ;  but,  flake  bv  flake,  the  snow 
accumulates  till  it  is  the  only  thing  visible  in  the  landscape,  and  even  boughs  of 
the  oak  crack  beneath  its  weight.  And  such  is  the  cumulative  influence  of  the 
conversation  of  a  lifetime.  {James  Stalker,  D.D.)  Who  is  Lord  over  us? — The 
ideal  Christianity : — When  we  mistake  our  proprietorship  we  cease  to  be  religious, 
and  we  give  up  the  possibility  of  being  religious.  What  is  the  first  lesson  in  true 
Christian  religion  ?  The  first  lesson  is  that  we  are  not  our  own,  have  no  right, 
title,  or  claim  to  ourselves  ;  we  are  branded  ;  we  have  the  burnt-in  mark  upon  us 
that  we  belong  to  Christ  Jesus,  that  we  are  blood-bought,  that  we  are  not  our 
own ;  we  have  not  a  moment  of  time,  not  a  single  thought,  energy,  wish,  will, 
desire,  that  is  our  own.  That  is  the  ideal  Christianity,  the  very  purpose  and  con- 
summation of  Christ's  priesthood,  the  true  meaning — that  is,  the  large  and  com- 
plete meaning — of  self-denial,  saying  No  when  anything  within  us  claims  to  have 
an  existence  or  right  of  its  own.  So  long  as  we  think  that  our  lips  are  our  own  we 
shall  speak  what  we  please  ;  when  we  begin  to  learn  that  our  lips  are  not  our  own, 
nor  our  hands,  nor  feet,  nor  head,  nor  heart,  we  shall  have  but  one  question  :  "  Lord, 
what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  Tell  me,  and  give  me  strength  to  do  it."  That 
will  be  the  day  of  jubilee,  the  morning  of  coronation.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  5.  For  tlie  oppression  of  the  poor,  for  the  sighing  of  the  needy,  now  will 
I  arise,  with  the  Lord ;  I  will  set  him  in  safety  Arom  him  that  puffeth  at  Mm  — 

The  poor  set  in  safety  : — God's  family  in  all  ages  have  resembled  each  other.  Hence 
the  Word  of  God  is  rich  in  consolation.  I.  God's  Wokd  deals  with  and  is 
ADDRESSED  TO  CHARACTERS.  Two  such  are  named.  1.  The  poor — the  poor  in 
spirit,  conscious  that  they  have  no  good  in  themselves.  God  brings  all  His  people 
to  this  state.  2.  The  oppression  of  the  poor.  Poverty  gives  room  for  oppression. 
The  rich  are  not  oppressed.  And  so  it  is  spiritually.  Hezekiah,  near  to  death, 
cries  out,  "  Lord,  I  am  oppressed  ;  undertake  for  me."  The  law  on  a  man's 
conscience  does  this.  ' '  It  strikes  the  dying  dead. "  Thus  the  Lord  deals  with  His 
people  to  bring  them  down.  But  their  sighing  is  a  sign  of  life.  The  dead  in  sin 
feel  nothing.  They  may  have  alarming  fears  of  hell,  but  no  trouble  of  conscience  ; 
they,  as  Isaiah  says,  may  "cry  for  sorrow  of  heart  and  howl  for  vexation  of  spirit," 
but  "  they  do  not  cry  unto  God  with  their  heart  when  they  howl  upon  their  beds." 
IL  For  the  sighing  of  the  needy.  A  man  may  be  poor  without  being  needy, 
without  having  any  desire  for  what  he  does  not  possess  ;  he  may  be  content  with  his 
poverty.  1.  But  the  needy  are  they  who  are  not  content,  who  feel  and  utter  their 
need.  This  is  true  of  spiritual  things.  He  is  full  of  needs.  He  wants  more  and 
more  of  the  grace  of  Jesus.  2.  He  sighs.  He  is  sighing  after  God,  sighing  unto 
the  Lord  under  the  burden  of  his  sins ;  he  wants  the  light,  life,  liberty,  peace  of 
the  Gospel  of  God.  IIL  The  answer  to  these  cries.  1.  "Now  will  I  arise." 
As  if  the  Lord  had  been  looking  on  but  sitting  still ;  as  a  father  may  watch  his 
child  at  play,  but  let  him  perceive  the  child  in  danger,  then  will  he  start  up  and 
rush  to  the  rescue.  It  is  this  sitting  still  of  the  Lord  that  so  puzzles  and  perplexes 
God's  family  ;  that  He  should  seem  to  take  no  notice  of  them.  But  He  will  not  be 
always  so.  A  time  is  fixed  when  He  will  arise.  2.  "  I  will  set  him  in  safety,  .  .  , 
puff"eth  at  him."  Then  poor  people  are  pufi'ed  at,  not  only  poor  and  oppressed. 
Yes,  for  Satan  is  one  that  puflTs  at  them.  Sinners  do  also.  And  saints  can  do  it  too. 
Then  much  of  pride  and  annoyance  are  to  be  found  in  God's  children.  But  the 
Lord  will  set  them  in  safety.  Not,  perhaps,  deliver  them,  but  set  them  in  Himself, 
a  safe  spot  indeed.  And  there  is  the  puff  of  flattery,  and  of  enmity.  Through 
much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the  Kingdom.  But  thither  we  shall  be  brought. 
{J.  C.  Philpot. )  Divine  interposition  in  time  of  great  peril : — On  one  occasion, 
being  driven  from  my  station,  two  teachers  and  myself  escaped  for  our  lives  to 
another  missionary  station  at  the  other  end  of  the  island.  We  remained  there  for 
some  time,  and  one  afternoon,  tired  with  watching  (for  the  savages  were  constantly 
trying  to  take  our  lives)  I  fell  fast  asleep.  About  nine  at  night  a  retriever  dog, 
that  had  been  trained  to  warn  me  of  approaching  danger,  sprang  upon  me  and 
awakened  me.  I  jumped  up  and  saw  a  number  of  savages  approaching  ;  they  went 
to  the  beautiful  new  church  and  set  it  on  fire.  I  called  the  other  missionary,  and 
told  him  that  in  a  few  moments  our  house  would  be  in  flames.  He  suggested  that 
we  should  prepare  for  the  great  change,  for  that  night  we  would  be  with  Jesus.     He 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xii. 

prayed  to  God  to  have  mercy  upon  us.  I  went  out  and  pulled  the  fence  down  that 
joined  the  church  to  the  house.  I  was  quickly^  surrounded  by  the  savages,  who 
lifted  their  clubs  to  strike  me.  Jesus  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  no  blow 
could  be  struck  without  His  permission.  *'  I  defy  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  !  "  I 
shouted;  "you  think  I  am  alone,  but  my  God  is  here.  He  will  protect  me.  I 
defy  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  !  "  Just  as  I  uttered  those  words  a  tornado  burst 
upon  us.  The  wind  blew  the  flames  from  our  house,  and  the  rain  soon  extinguished 
the  fire.  The  savages  were  affrighted.  They  said,  "Jehovah  God  is  fighting  for 
them,"  and  then  disappeared  into  the  neighbouring  wood.  The  age  of  miracles 
has  passed,  but  the  God  of  miracles  still  lives  and  reigns.  I  firmly  believe  that 
in  answer  to  prayer  God  sent  that  tornado.     (/.  Baton. ) 

Yer.  6.  Tlie  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words :  as  silver  tried  In  a  furnace 
of  earth,  purified  seven  times. — The  excellence  of  the  Holy  Scriptures: — I.  The 

HOLY  DESCRIPTION   OF   THE  SACRED  WRITINGS  HERE   GIVEN.       It  tells   of — 1.    Their 

high  authority.  The  men  who  wrote  these  books  say,  "The  Spirit  of  God  spoke 
by  me,  and  His  Word  was  upon  my  tongue,"  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  and  so  on. 
Thus  they  claim  high  authority.  But  you  may  ask,  "  How  are  we  to  know  it  ?  " 
Therefore  note — 2.  Their  iuherent  sanctity.  "The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure 
words."  And  are  they  not  so  ?  Some  say  the  book  is  immoral  because  it  records 
immoral  actions.  But  could  the  Scriptures  have  given  a  faithful  account  of  human 
nature  without  such  records  ?  Those  who  study  the  Bible  most  are  those  who  most 
of  all  live  and  practise  all  the  public  and  social  virtues.  Modern  infidels  are  not 
so  candid  as  those  of  the  former  century.  Rousseau  could  say,  "  I  will  confess  that 
the  majority  of  the  Scriptures  strike  me  with  admiration,  as  the  purity  of  the 
Gospel  hath  its  influence  on  my  heart.  Peruse  the  works  of  our  philosophers,  with 
all  their  pomp  of  diction  :  how  mean,  how  contemptible  are  they  compared  with  the 
Scriptures !  Is  it  possible  that  a  book  at  once  so  simple  and  sublime  should  be 
merely  the  work  of  man  ? "  3.  Their  intrinsic  worth.  In  our  text  they  are  com- 
pared to  the  finest  silver  and  gold.  And  in  Psalm  cxix.  And  this  eulogy  is 
deserved,  because  they  speak  of  God  and  man  reasonably  and  in  harmony  with  our 
experience.  They  satisfy  man  upon  the  most  anxious  questions.  II.  The  scrutiny 
THEY  HAVE  ENDURED.  "Tried  in  the  furnace,  purified  seven  times."  The  re- 
ference is  to  the  searching  process  of  the  refiner,  by  which  he  detects  the  presence  of 
any  alloy  and  removes  it.  And  the  Word  of  God  has  passed  under  a  scrutiny  like 
that  of  fire.  It  is  not  accepted  on  mere  hearsay  and  because  of  the  teachings  of 
priests.  1.  It  has  been  thoroughly  investigated.  Josephus  gives  his  testimony  to  the 
sacred  books  of  the  Jews.  Hence  the  Old  Testament  is  evidently  not  a  book  of 
yesterday.  And  from  the  testimony  of  the  Fathers  we  know  that  the  books  of  the 
New  Testament  have  existed  from  the  time  they  profess.  The  ancient  versions  con- 
firm this.  The  entire  New  Testament  might  be  collated  out  of  the  quotations  made 
by  the  Fathers.  2.  Then  there  has  been  antiquarian  and  scientific  research.  And 
these  do  homage  to  the  testimony  of  revelation.  3.  Philosophical  and  moral 
discoveries  likewise  bear  their  testimony.  All  the  philosophies  of  China  and  India, 
and  yet  others,  have  been  searched,  and  they  have  been  found  poor  and  unsatis- 
factory, like  the  glimmer  of  gas  lights  at  noonday,  compared  with  the  Scriptures. 
That  eminent  Oriental  scholar.  Sir  William  Jones,  says,  "The  Scriptures  contain, 
independently  of  a  Divine  origin,  more  true  sublimity,  more  exquisite  beauty,  purer 
morality,  more  important  history,  and  finer  strains,  both  of  poetry  and  eloquence, 
than  could  be  collected  within  the  same  compass  from  all  other  books  that  were 
ever  composed  in  any  age  or  in  any  tongue."  Now  these  are  not  the  testimonies  of 
priests,  but  of  laymen,  learned,  travelled,  and  who  have  become  acquainted  with  the 
literature  of  all  nations.  And  should  any  be  disposed  to  trifle  with  the  Bible,  let 
me  quote  to  him  two  lines  from  a  poem  penned  by  one  of  the  greatest  geniuses 
that  has  ever  adorned  our  empire,  and  whose  intellectual  light  has  been  just  lost 
to  us — 

"Better  he  had  ne'er  been  boi'n 
Who  reads  to  doubt,  who  reads  to  scorn."      {J.  Blackburn.) 

Testing  the  truth : — The  Ps  ilmist  is  telling  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  contrasting  it 
with  the  words  of  men.  He  tells  of  those  who  speak  vanity.  "  With  flattering  li^js 
and  a  double  heart  do  they  speak."  He  wants  something  better,  and  finds  it  in  the 
Word  of  the  Lord.  For  in  contrast  with  man's  weakness  and  falsehood  there  was 
the  Divine  promise  immediately  made,  "For  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  for  the 


PSALM  xiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  193 

sighing  of  the  needy,  now, "  &c.  May  that  be  depended  upon  ?  May  we  take 
heart  ?  Yes,  "  For  the  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words,"  &c.  So  then,  we  may 
apply  this  text  to  the  Bible.  I.  By  the  prolonged  and  severe  conflict  it  has 
HAD  WITH  all  THE  EVIL  OF  OUR  WORLD.  There  are  two  great  forces  in  the  moral 
world,  that  of  evil — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  that  of  good — in  truth, 
in  holiness,  and  in  love.  And  God  is  the  source  of  all  this  good.  Now,  if  the 
words  are  of  God  they  will  be  like  Him  ;  which  is  just  what  they  are.  And  they 
will  occupy  His  place,  bitter  against  nothing  but  evil,  enamoured  of  nothing  but 
good.  And  they  will  do  His  work.  So  they  do,  have  done  everywhere  and 
always,  under  all  circumstances  and  amid  all  condttions.  II.  By  all  the  con- 
tradictions of  UNBELIEF.  Concerning  Him  it  is  said,  "  He  endured  the  contra- 
diction of  sinners  against  Himself."  Just  so  it  has  been  with  the  Word  of  God,  and 
is  so  now.  They  have  heated  the  furnace  to  the  intensest  heat,  and  cast  the  Bible 
in,  and  the  result  is  that  it  has  lost  nothing  but  the  tinsel  of  man's  folly  or  the 
bonds  wherewith  men's  authority  sought  to  bind  it.  III.  By  the  evil  conse- 
quences OF  THE  conduct  OF  FALSE  PROFESSORS.  We  Complain  of  the  unfair 
dealing  of  unbelief.  Naturally.  But  there  are  others  who  deserve  our  indignation 
far  more,  and  these  are  those  who  profess  to  be,  but  are  not,  friends  of  the  Gospel 
or  of  the  words  of  God.  Worldly  men,  who  have  determined  to  make  it  a  political 
engine.  Hence  it  has  been  encumbered  with  ceremonies  and  dogmas ;  kept  back 
from  the  people  ;  man's  own  interpretations  fastened  upon  it,  as  if  they  were  the 
words  of  God  Himself.  IV.  The  infirmities  and  inconsistencies  of  its  real 
FRIENDS.  Many  of  you  here  profess  to  be  its  real  friends.  Some  of  you  hold 
prominent  positions,  and,  like  Peter  and  John,  you  bid  men  look  on  you  and  see 
what  your  religion  can  do.  And  men  do  look  on  you  and  judge  the  Word  of  God 
by  you.  And  they  see  very  soon  where  there  are  inconsistencies  in  you  ;  whilst,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  so  awes  the  world  as  the  spirituality,  unselfishness, 
and  devotedness  of  earnest  holiness-.  But  who  of  us  can  profess  fitly  to  represent 
the  Word  of  God  ?  How  imperfect  are  the  best  of  men.  V.  By  the  spiritual 
DISCERNMENT  OF  ALL  SANCTIFIED  MEN.  In  One  sense  the  Word  of  God  tries  a 
man,  for  according  as  he  acts  towards  it  so  does  he  reveal  his  spiritual  state.  On 
the  other  hand,  all  holy  souls  test  the  living  Word.  "My  sheep  hear  My  voice," 
said  the  Saviour,  "but  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow."     VI.  By  the  personal 

EXPERIENCE  OF  BOTH  SAINTS  AND  SINNERS.  VII.  By  THOSE,  MOST  OF  ALL,  WHO 
HAVE  MOST  THOROUGHLY  LIVED  IN   IT  AND   WORKED   HARDEST   FOR  IT.      If  I  want 

to  know  the  sustaining  qualities  of  any  particular  kind  of  food  I  observe  those  who 
live  most  on  it,  yet  do  the  greatest  amount  of  work,  and  with  the  greatest  ease, 
and,  nevertheless,  show  the  most  robust  health.  And  so,  would  I  know  what  the 
Word  of  God  can  do,  I  turn  to  those  who  are  such  as  I  have  described.  See  Paul. 
Hear  him  say,  ' '  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ,  who  strengthened  me. "  All  of 
you  who  hear  the  Word,  bind  it  to  your  hearts,  and  let  it  be  your  holy  resolve,  God 
helping  you,  to  live  as  well  as  speak  His  Word.  {John  Aldis.)  The  Word  of 
God  tested  and  proven : — The  fable  that  there  were  animals  that  lived  in  the  fire, 
called  Salamanders,  came  from  the  glowing  brilliance  of  some  metals  that,  when 
they  are  heated  to  a  white  heat,  acquire  a  supernatural  splendour,  and  apparently  a 
new  and  mysterious  life.  The  metal  seems  now  to  live,  breathe,  heave,  move  at 
every  new  expansion  and  contraction  ;  a  hundred  hues,  indescribably  brilliant  and 
radiant,  play  around  the  molten  surface.  Of  all  books,  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
only  one  with  Salamander  qualities.  The  flames  of  persecution  and  hostile 
criticism,  instead  of  efl'ecting  its  destruction,  have  but  added  to  its  lustre  and 
strengthened  its  claims  to  be  indeed  "the  Word  of  the  Lord  that  endureth  for 
ever."    {A.  T.  Fierson^  D.D.) 


PSALM  XIII. 

Vers.  1-8.  How  long  wilt  Thou  forget  me,  0  Lord  "i— Distress  and  cmfdence : — 
This  little  Psalm  begins  in  agitation  and  ends  in  calm.  However  true  it  is  that 
sorrow  is  "but  for  a  moment,"  it  seems  to  last  for  an  eternity.  Sad  hours  are 
leaden-footed  and  joyful  ones  winged.  That  "How  long,"  reiterated,  betrays  how 
weary  it  was  to  the  Psalmist.     Very  significant  is  the  progress  of  thought  in  the 

>3 


194  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xin. 

fourfold  questioning  plaint,  which  turns  first  to  God,  then  to  himself,  then  to  the 
enemy.  The  root  of  his  sorrow  is  that  God  seems  to  have  forgotten  him  ;  therefore 
his  soul  is  full  of  plans  for  relief,  and  the  enemy  seems  to  be  lifted  up  above  him. 
Left  alone,  without  God's  help,  what  can  a  man  do  but  think  and  plan  and  scheme 
to  weariness  all  night,  and  carry  a  heavy  heart,  as  he  sees  by  daylight  how  futile 
his  plans  are  ?  The  agitation  of  the  first  strophe  is  somewhat  stilled  in  the  second, 
in  which  the  stream  of  prayer  runs  clear  without  such  foam  as  the  impatient 
questions  of  the  first  part.  The  storm  has  all  rolled  away  in  the  third  strophe,  in 
which  faith  has  triumphed  over  doubt  and  anticipates  the  fulfilment  of  its  prayer. 
The  sad  minor  of  "  How  long  ? "  if  coming  from  faithful  lips,  passes  into  a  jubilant 
key  which  heralds  the  full  gladness  of  the  yet  future  songs  of  deliverance.  {A. 
Madaren,  D.  D. )  Sorrow  lingers : — That  which  the  French  proverb  hath  of  sickness 
is  true  of  all  evils,  that  they  come  on  horseback  and  go  away  on  foot;  we  have  often 
seen  that  a  sudden  fall,  or  one  meal's  surfeit,  has  stuck  by  many  to  their  graves  ; 
whereas  pleasures  come  like  oxen,  slow  and  heavily,  and  go  away  like  post-horses, 
upon  the  spur.  Sorrows,  because  they  are  lingering  guests,  I  will  entertain  but 
moderately,  knowing  that  the  more  they  are  made  of  the  longer  they  will  continue  ; 
and  for  pleasures,  because  they  stay  not,  and  do  but  call  to  drink  at  my  door,  I 
will  use  them  as  passengers  with  slight  respect.  He  is  his  own  best  friend  that 
makes  the  least  of  both  of  them.     {Joseph  Hall. )  The  relative  changes  of  th« 

immutable  God: — He  is  unchangeable.  Job  says,  "He  is  in  one  mind,"  James, 
"With  Him  there  is  no  variableness."  And  He  Himself  says,  "I  am  the  Lord,  I 
change  not."  In  reality  He  is  thus,  but  relatively  He  seems  to  change.  L  God 
AS  LOOKED  AT  THROUGH  THE  SOUL  IN  TROUBLE.  He  Seemed  to  be — ^1.  Forgetful. 
"How  long  wilt  Thou  forget  me  ?"  2.  As  unkind.  "How  long  wilt  Thou  hide 
Thy  face  from  me  ? "  To  turn  away  the  face  was  the  sign  of  aversion  and  dis- 
pleasure. 3.  As  utterly  neglectful.  "How  long?"  Four  times  he  repeats  this. 
As  if  God  was  utterly  regardless  of  him.  So  it  seemed  to  him.  II.  God  as 
LOOKED  AT  THROUGH  THE  SOUL  IN  DEVOTION.  In  the  midst  of  his  troubles  he 
prays,  "  Consider  and  hear  me,  0  Lord,  my  God  :  lighten  mine  eyes,"  &c.  As  he 
prays  the  cloud  withdraws,  and  he  cries,  "My  heart  shall  rejoice  in  Thy  salva- 
tion." Prayer  changes  the  night  of  the  soul  into  inorning,  its  discords  into  music, 
its  dark  and  chilly  November  into  a  suimy  and  life-giving  May.  III.  Conclusion. 
1.  The  power  of  circumstances  to  disturb  the  soul.  While  no  man  need  be  their 
creature,  it  is  impossible  for  him  not  to  feel  their  influence.  2.  The  rapid  changes 
which  occur  in  the  mood  of  the  soul.  The  Psalm  begins  in  gloom  and  ends  in  sun- 
shine. 3.  The  influence  of  prayer  to  elevate  the  soul.  Prayer  is  the  power  that 
changes  the  whole  horizon  of  our  spiritual  nature.  (Z>.  ThoTnas,  D.D.)  WTuU 
total  desertion  by  God  would  mean : — When  the  king  removes,  the  court  and  all  the 
carriages  follow  after  ;  and  when  they  are  gone,  the  hangings  are  taken  down,  nothing 
is  left  behind  but  bare  walls,  dust,  and  rubbish.  So  if  God  removes  from  a  man  or 
a  nation  where  He  kept  His  court,  His  graces  will  not  stay  long  behind  ;  and  if  they 
be  gone,  farewell  peace,  farewell  comfort ;  down  go  the  hangings  of  all  prosperity, 
nothing  is  left  behind  but  confusion  and  disorder.  {J.  Staughton.)  Soul  edipses : 
— I.  The  nature  of  such  eclipses.  It  is  quite  true  that  God  never  ceases  to 
love  His  children,  but  still  the  people  of  Grod  are  sensible  of  eclipses  of  the  soul 
such  as  the  Psalmist  describes  in  this  Psalm.  God  has  not  really  deserted  His 
children,  but  it  seems  as  if  He  had.  In  providential  matters  they  fail  to  recognise 
His  hand  ;  His  consolations  cease  in  their  spirits,  and  they  are  full  of  darkness 
and  bitterness.  II.  The  causes  of  these  eclipses.  1.  Why  does  God  thus 
appear  to  desert  His  people  at  aU  ?  The  end  of  God's  discipline  is  to  make  His 
people  feel  their  absolute  dependence  upon  Himself.  These  eclipses  teach  us — 
1.  That  God  is  the  source  of  happiness  ;  2.  The  source  of  wisdom  ;  3.  The  source 
of  strength  ;  and  4.  The  source  of  life.  Why  does  God  hide  His  face  so  long  ? 
Simply  because  we  are  so  slow  to  learn  the  great  truths  which  He  designs  to  teach. 
III.  The  duty  of  the  saints  in  thesr  hours  of  darkness.  Not  discontent, 
and  not  despair.  1.  Wait  in  faith.  2.  Wait  in  prayer.  3.  Wait  in  hope.  When 
the  trial  is  over  your  soul  shall  be  deeper,  brighter,  and  more  fruitful.  ( W,  L. 
Watkiiison.)  A  sigh  and  a  song : — The  "salute"  of  this  Psalm  is  a  sigh,  the 
"adieu"  is  a  song.  We  sight  the  Psalmist  prostrate  before  the  mercy  throne, 
wrapped  in  grim  shadows  of  gloom,  bowed  in  soul  by  the  weight  of  a  great  sorrow, 
and  howling  "How  long?"  We  leave  him  sitting  in  the  stillness  of  a  new  con- 
fidence, enwreathed  with  sunbeams  of  gladness,  pealing  forth  from  harp  and  lip  an 
exultant  Te  Deum  !     I.  Earnest  inquiry  (vers.  1,  2).     A  fourfold  inquiry.     Can 


PSALM  xiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  195 

God  forget  ?  He  hides  His  face,  not  willingly,  but  of  necessity,  that  we  may  seek 
His  face.  And  the  longer,  that  we  may  seek  it  the  more  earnestly.  II.  Devout 
AND  FERVENT  ENTREATY  (vers.  3,  4).  Trouble  gives  point,  pathos,  and  power  to 
prayer.  Genuine  entreaty  comes  from  a  soul  that  has — 1.  A  clear  recognition  of  its 
personal  relationship  to  God.  2.  It  is  definite  in  request.  It  knows  what  it  wants, 
and  asks  for  it.  Entreaty  has  aim,  directness,  special  need  ;  hence  is  definite  in 
request — e.g,,  Jacob,  Jabez,  &c.  Here  it  seeks  the  Divine  attention.  The  Divine 
illumination.  3.  Genuine  entreaty  has  powerful  reasons  for  what  it  requests. 
"Lest  I  sleep,"  &c.  This  is  from  the  self-side.  "  Lest  mine  enemy  say,"  &c.  This 
is  from  the  God-side.  Prevailing  against  him  would  be  injurious  to  the  truth. 
III.  Entreaty  rising  into  triumphant  assurance  and  praise.  Here  we 
have  trustfulness— 1.  Well  located ;  2.  Triumphant ;  3.  Exultant.  {J.  0.  Keen, 
D.D.)  God^s  forgettings: — It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  point  thus  :  "How  long 
wilt  Thou  forget  me  ? — For  ever  ? "  as  if  there  were  two  distinct  questions.  It  is 
natural  to  a  perturbed  and  doubting  heart  thus  to  express  itself  in  a  confused 
and  almost  contradictory  manner.  In  its  despair  it  thinks,  ' '  God  hath  forgotten 
me "  ;  and  yet  out  of  the  very  midst  of  its  despair  there  rises  up  the  conviction, 
"  No,  not  for  ever"  ;  and  then  its  hopelessness  is  changed  to  expostulation,  "  How 
long  wilt  Thou  forget  me?"  We  may,  if  we  choose  it,  paraphrase,  "How  long 
wilt  Thou  make  as  if  Thou  wouldest  forget  me  for  ever  ? "  God's  anger,  the 
hiding  of  His  countenance,  as  Delitzsch  observes,  cannot  but  seem  eternal  to  the 
soul  which  is  conscious  of  it.  Nevertheless,  Faith  still  cleaves  to  the  Love  which 
hides  itself  under  the  disguise  of  severity,  and  exclaims,  "Though  He  slay  me,  yet 
will  I  trust  in  Him."  "When  we  have  long  been  crushed  by  sufferings,  and  no 
sign  appears  that  God  will  succour  us,  the  thought  will  force  itself  upon  us,  God 
hath  forgotten  me.  For  by  nature  we  do  not  acknowledge  that  God  cares  for  us 
in  our  afflictions  ;  but  by  faith  we  lay  hold  of  His  invisible  providence.  So  David, 
so  far  as  he  could  judge  from  the  actual  state  in  which  he  was,  seemed  to  himself 
forsaken  of  God.  But  at  the  same  time,  because  the  Light  of  Faith  was  his  guide, 
he,  with  the  eyes  of  his  mind,  looked  through  and  beyond  all  else  to  the  grace  of 
God,  far  as  it  might  seem  hidden  from  his  sight." — Calvin.  "Does  he  not  por- 
tray in  fitting  words  that  most  bitter  anguish  of  spirit,  which  feels  that  it  has  to 
do  with  a  God  alienated,  hostile,  implacable,  inexorable,  whose  wrath  is,  like 
Himself,  eternal  ?  This  is  a  state  in  which  hope  despairs,  and  yet  despair  hopes  at 
the  same  time.  This  no  one  understands  who  has  not  tasted  it." — Luther.  (J.  J. 
Stetoart  Perovme,  B.D.)  The  continuance  of  trial: — In  laying  forth  his  grief  he 
beginneth  at  his  apparent  desertion  ;  then  speaketh  of  the  perplexity  of  mind 
arising  herefrom  ;  and,  last  of  all,  he  mentioneth  the  continuance  of  his  outward 
trouble  from  his  enemies.  Whence  learn  —  1.  Trouble  outward  and  inward  of 
body  and  spirit,  fightings  without  and  terrors  within,  vexations  from  heaven  and 
earth,  from  God  deserting  and  men  pursuing,  may  fall  upon  a  child  of  God  at  one 
time,  and  continue  for  a  long  time  enough,  as  here.  "  How  long  wilt  Thou  forget 
me ;  how  long  shall  mine  enemy  be  exalted  over  me  ? "  2.  When  trouble  is  con- 
tinued, and  appearance  of  delivery  is  not,  and  God  withholdeth  inward  and  out- 
ward help,  sense  calleth  this  the  Lord's  forgetting  and  hiding  of  His  face.  "How 
long  wilt  Thou  forget  me,  and  hide  Thy  face  ? "  3.  The  Lord's  children,  in  their 
resolution  for  faith  and  patience,  do  set  to  themselves  a  shorter  period  usually  than 
the  Lord  doth  for  making  them  have  their  perfect  work  ;  therefore,  when  their  hope 
is  deferred,  it  makes  their  heart  sick,  and  to  cry  out,  "How  long?"  4.  When 
comfort  trysteth  not  with  our  time,  fear  of  eternid  off-casting  may  readily  slide  in  ; 
and  this  fear  a  soul  acquainted  with  God,  or  that  loveth  Him  in  any  measure, 
cannot  endure.  "  Wilt  Thou  forget  me  for  ever  ? "  saith  he.  5.  Whatsoever  sense 
do  speak,  or  suggested  temptations  do  speak,  faith  will  relate  the  business  to  the 
Lord,  and  expect  a  better  speech  from  Him.  For  in  this  condition  the  Prophet 
goeth  to  God,  saying,  "  How  long,  0  Lord  ?"  6.  A  soul  finding  desertion  nuilti- 
plieth  consultations,  falleth  in  perplexity,  changcth  conclusions,  as  a  sick  man  doth 
his  bed  ;  falleth  in  grief,  and  cannot  endure  to  live  by  its  own  finding,  but  run- 
neth upon  God  for  direction,  as  here  we  see  it.  "  How  long  shall  I  tu,ke  counsel  in 
my  soul,  having  sorrow  in  my  heart  daily  ? "  7.  The  enemies  taking  advantage  (by 
the  continuance  of  trouble  upon  the  godly),  against  his  cause  and  religion  auvi 
against  God,  doth  augment  both  the  grief  and  temptati-in  of  the  godly.  "How 
long  shall  mine  enemies  be  exalttd  over  me  ? "     {David  Dickaon.) 

Ver,  2.  Eow  long  sliall  I  taie  coiiasel  la  my  soul  1— Plan-making  .-—The  literal 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xiir. 

rendering  of  this  verse  brings  before  xis  the  folly  of  mere  plan-making.  David  is 
taking  counsel  in  his  own  soul  :  inventing  plans  of  self-deliverance  ;  making  up 
schemes  of  daily  life  and  programmes  of  service  and  progress.  He  no  sooner  makes 
one  plan  than  it  is  displaced  by  another.  His  schemes  follow  in  quick  succession, 
but  the  second  always  amends  the  first,  and  both  give  way  to  the  third,  and  he 
finds  that  in  much  scheming  is  much  disappointment  ;  it  brin;<s  sorrow  into  his 
heart  daily.  By  day  he  is  mocked  by  harassing  thoughts  ;  by  night  he  reverses  all 
his  plans  in  dreams  ;  and  in  the  morning  he  awakes  to  forget  both  day  and  night 
in  some  new  vision  of  possible  self-deliverance.  Thus  the  mind,  left  to  itself,  is 
self-tormented  ;  being  limited  in  range,  it  is  continually  checking  its  own  conclu- 
sions, and  hesitating  as  to  its  own  purjwses.  How  true  it  is,  "  Without  Me  ye  can 
do  nothing."  This  is  what  Jesus  Christ  said  to  His  disciples,  and  we  feel  it  to  be 
true  in  our  own  souls  when  we  endeavour  to  invent  plans  for  ourselves,  and  to 
make  our  will  into  a  kind  of  divinity.  It  is  curious  to  observe,  too,  how  the 
Psalmist  continually  mixes  up  the  right  view  and  the  wrong  one,  and  how  he  is 
certain  to  fall  into  the  wrong  view  the  moment  he  turns  away  his  complete  atten- 
tion from  the  living  God.  In  this  verse  he  occupies  the  wrong  standpoint  when  he 
is  wondering  how  long  his  enemy  is  to  be  exalted  over  him.  When  a  man  is  truly 
living  in  God  he  has  no  time  to  think  about  his  enemy,  nor  any  disposition  to 
consider  what  that  enemy  will  do.  God  occupies  the  whole  soul  with  equal  vivid- 
ness at  every  point,  and  dominates  in  gracious  sovereignty  over  every  beating  pulse 
and  living  thought.  (^Joseph  Parker,  v.  D. )  Having  sorrow  In  my  heart  daily. 
— Sorrows : — Can  this  be  a  common  experience  ?  Many  of  us  would  say  so.  Sorrow 
is  an  excellent  discipline,  and  a  healing  medicine.  Let  us  notice  a  few  of  our 
sorrows.  I.  Theee  is  that  of  oitb  lonely  path.  Many  people  find  a  friend, 
husband,  wife,  business,  pleasure  on  which  they  can  lean,  but  there  comes  a  time 
when  you  feel  helpless.  Sometimes  you  say,  ' '  There  is  nobody  who  has  to  walk  in 
a  path  like  mine. "  This  is  true,  but  then  we  all  feel  the  same.  Let  our  loneliness 
teach  us  to  seek  the  presence  of  .God.  You  will  always  be  disappointed  until 
you  feel  the  touch  of  God.  II.  That  which  is  too  painful  to  keceivb 
SYMPATHY  IN  WORDS.  See  the  history  of  Job,  when  his  three  friends  came  to 
mourn  with  him.  "  None  spake  a  word  unto  him  ;  for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was 
very  great."  None  but  God  can  comfort  you.  III.  That  which  arises  from 
DOUBT.  Satan  said  to  our  Lord,  "  Ti^Thou  be  the  Son  of  God."  So  we  all  feel  at 
times,  and  we  say,  "  Is  there  really  a  God ? "  "Can  He  care  for  me?"  "No," 
seems  the  answer  to  everything  at  times.  You  may  have  a  medicine  chest  in  your 
house,  which  may  help  you  in  slight  disorders ;  but  there  may  come  a  time  when 
it  fails,  and  you  look  for  other  help.  And  so,  at  times,  the  Bible,  the  Church, 
and  the  minister  are  like  that  medicine  chest,  and  you  turn  from  each,  saying,  "1 
cannot  obtain  any  relief  there. "  At  such  time  go  into  your  room,  shut  your  door, 
and  speak  to  God  Himself.  It  is  a  sin  to  doubt  if  you  make  it  despair.  Last 
night,  when  I  went  up  to  bed,  my  little  child  called  out,  "Papa,  I  am  so  afraid  ! " 
I  comforted  her,  and  said,  "  Don't  be  afraid,  dear  !  "  She  whispered,  "Papa,  leave 
your  door  wide  open,  and  then  I  can  go  to  sleep,"  I  went  to  my  room,  and  let  the 
door  bang  against  the  chair,  to  let  the  little  one  hear  that  it  was  wide  open.  The 
thought  that  my  door  was  wide  open,  and  that  my  care  reached  her  from  my  room 
to  hers  rested  her  little,  anxious  heart,  and  she  slept  the  sleep  of  the  innocent. 
In  your  doubts  and  fears  keep  fast  hold  on  this  fact — that  Jesus  Christ  is  God's  door, 
wide  open  for  you.  IV.  That  from  temporal  losses.  A  ruined  merchant  came 
home  one  afternoon  earlier  than  usual,  and,  sitting  in  his  chair,  buried  his  face  in 
his  hands.  When  his  wife  touched  him  on  the  shoulder  he  exclaimed,  in  a  groan 
like  as  from  a  man  who  is  being  buried  alive,  "  Mary,  I  have  lost  all  !  I  am 
ruined  !  "  She  said,  "But,  James,  you  have  not  lost  me  !  "  Then  a  sweet  child 
came  up,  saying,  "  Father,  you  haven't  lost  me  either  1  "  One  of  his  daughters  said, 
"Father,  have  you  lost  God  ? "  Another  asked,  "Father,  have  you  lost  heaven  ? " 
Stupid  man,  he  said  he  was  ruined!  Fancy  a  man  saying  he  has  lost  "all" 
when  he  has  at  least  one  or  two  kind  friends,  and  also  a  loving  God  and  a  blessed 
heaven  !  V.  That  from  sin.  There  is  great  sorrow  in  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  and 
it  is  well  to  be  so.  It  would  be  a  calamity  else.  The  wages  of  sin  is  the  death  of 
happiness,  but  the  life  of  misery.  VI.  That  from  bereavement.  Some  of  you 
keep  relics  of  your  departed  ones.  The  boy's  rusty  knife,  with  only  one  blade,  and 
that  broken  ;  but  how  the  eyes  of  the  mother  glisten  when  she  looks  on  that  old  knife. 
Here  is  a  toy  soldier,  without  a  head  ;  but  see  the  tear  of  that  strong  man  drop 
thereon.     Ah,  your  children  who  have  gone  from  you  !     Are  they  not  the  Lord  s 


PSALM  xiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  197 


magnets  to  draw  you  up  to  heaven  ?  (  William  Birch. )  Advice  to  the.  dejected : — 
To  "commune  with"  our  own  hearts  and  to  "  take  counsel,"  as  is  meant  here,  are 
not  the  same  things.  We  may  pore  over  our  guilt  and  wretchedness,  and  overlook 
our  highest  mercies.  Such,  for  a  time,  was  the  case  with  David,  and  there  are 
many  who  still  do  the  same.  I.  The  disconsolate  sitxtation,  with  the  remedy 
TO  WHICH  HE  REPAIRED  UNDER  IT.  1.  He  was  sorely  persecuted.  2.  The  Lord 
seemed  to  prosper  his  persecutors  and  not  him,  3.  His  most  intimate  acquaintance 
seemed  to  have  forsaken  him.  4.  And  there  were  spiritual  distresses  beside.  The 
Lord  "  hid  His  face."  5.  And  for  a  long  time.  "  How  long,"  &c.  Now  concerning 
all  this  load  of  trouble,  he  is  said  to  have  taken  "  counsel  in  his  soul."  He  was  in 
much  perplexity  and  distress.  It  did  not  last  long,  however,  for,  he  says,  "  I  have 
trusted  in  Thy  mercy."  What  cannot  Divine  mercy  effect  ?  II.  Those  who  are 
LIKE  David,  and  need  the  same  help.  Such  are — 1.  Those  who  sink  into 
despondency  under  the  adverse  providences  of  God.  2.  Those  who  at  the  outset  of 
their  religious  concern  are  encompassed  with  darkness  and  long-continued  dejection. 
Various  are  the  causes  of  this.  Circumstances  without  them.  False  ideas  as  to 
election.  Something  within  them,  as  a  propensity  to  take  unfavourable  views  of 
themselves  ;  or  a  species  of  self-righteousness.  3.  Those  who  dm-ing  the  most  part 
of  their  Christian  profession  live  under  habitual  fear  lest  they  should  pi-ove  reprobate 
at  last.  Now  if  we  would  wish  to  discover  whether  there  were  any  particles  of  steel 
in  a  heap  of  rubbish,  the  best  way  would  not  be  to  search  for  them,  but  to  hold  a 
large  and  powerful  magnet  over  it.  And  this,  if  it  be  there,  is  the  way  to  discover 
true  religion  in  our  souls.  Hold  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  over  them  and  this  will 
draw  it  forth.  (Andrew  Fuller.)  Sources  and  rernedies  of  disquietude  : — Pre- 
sumption and  despair  are  the  two  fatal  rocks  on  which  we  are  in  danger  of  making 
shipwreck  of  faith  and  of  a  good  conscience.  A  vain  conceit  of  our  own  righteous- 
ness and  strength  exposes  to  the  one  ;  sad  and  gloomy  reflections  on  our  own  sin 
and  corruptions,  as  if  they  exceeded  the  mercies  of  God  and  excluded  us  from  the 
hope  of  forgiveness,  plunge  us  into  the  other.  There  is  a  godly  jealousy  of  ourselves 
which  is  highly  proper  and  necessary,  as  it  leads  to  watchfulness  and  circumspection 
and  a  constant  dependence  upon  Divine  strength.  But  this  jealousy  may,  like  zeal, 
be  without  knowledge,  and  may  exceed  its  just  and  proper  limits.  Point  out  some 
of  those  things  on  account  of  which  good  men  take  counsel  in  their  souls  and  have 
sorrow  in  their  heart  daily.  1.  Many  humble  and  sincere  Christians  are  apt  to  com- 
plain of  irregular  and  wandering  thoughts,  in  prayer  and  other  religious  duties. 
Whence  they  conclude  that  their  minds  are  not  duly  impressed  with  a  sense  of 
Divine  things.  Doubts  and  fears  of  this  nature  constitute  the  grand  distinction 
between  man,  as  a  being  capable  of  religion,  and  the  inferior  creatures.  In  every- 
thing we  attempt  we  are  interrupted  with  various  impressions  and  distractions  of 
mind.  There  are  many  who  cannot  attend  upon  any  religious  duty  with  that 
steadiness  and  alacrity  which  they  discover  in  their  secular  employments.  Others, 
more  deserving  of  our  sympathy,  both  desire  and  endeavour  to  have  their  minds 
composed  when  engaged  in  devotional  duties  ;  but,  to  their  sorrow  of  heart,  they  fall 
short  of  their  wishes  and  fail  in  their  attempts.  The  best  of  men  are  not  wholly 
exempted  from  these  wanderings  of  heart.  It  may  be  asked,  how  are  we  to  dis- 
tinguish the  suggestions  and  temptations  of  Satan  from  those  that  arise  from  the 
remains  of  sin  and  corruption  in  the  renewed  heart  1  We  may  distinguish  them  by 
the  welcome  reception  we  give  them  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  the  pain  and  vmeasi- 
ness  they  give  us  on  the  other.  Do  you  abhor  the  evil  thoughts  and  suggestions 
you  complain  of?  In  that  case  you  have  no  reason  to  be  cast  down  or  discouraged. 
His  grace  will  be  sufficient  for  you.  It  is  the  consent  of  the  will  that  constitutes 
the  criminality  of  any  action  whatever  ;  and,  while  it  is  our  daily  struggle  to  with- 
hold this,  and  we  are,  by  Divine  grace,  enabled  to  withhold  it,  we  have  no  reason  to 
be  cast  down  or  disquieted.  2.  Another  source  of  inward  disquietude  arises  from 
the  defects  and  imperfections  that  attend  our  best  services.  There  is  not  a  just 
man  that  liveth  and  sinneth  not,  is  the  language  of  Scripture  and  of  universal 
experience.  But  this  consideration,  though  it  ought  to  humble,  need  not  discourage 
us  in  our  Christian  warfare.  Though  we  cannot  hope  wholly  to  eradicate  our  sins 
and  corruptions,  it  is  our  duty  to  resist  and  oppose  them  by  our  constant 
endeavours  and  fervent  prayers.  Those  who  imagine  that  they  have  arrived  at 
sinless  perfection  must  be  unacquainted  with  the  spirituality  of  the  Divine  law,  and 
with  the  extent  of  its  obligations.  This  is  our  encouragement,  that  if  any  man  sin 
we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father.  With  regard  to  those  who  have  fallen  into 
grievous  sins  after  the  most  solemn  engagements,  their  case  requires  to  be  treated 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xiil. 

with  the  utmost  caution.  A  good  man  may  be  "  overtaken  in  a  fault."  Such  are 
fit  objects  of  Christian  compassion,  and  stand  in  need  of  all  that  comfort  which 
the  nature  of  the  Gospel  covenant,  rightly  understood,  abundantly  administers. 
3.  Another  source  of  disquietude  arises  from  the  outward  troubles  and  afflictions 
of  life.  When  these  overtake  the  Christian  he  naturally  looks  up  to  God  for  relief. 
But  guilt  is  suspicious,  and  there  is  sin  enough  in  the  best  of  men  to  justify  the 
severest  trials  with  which  they  may  be  visited  in  this  world.  When  affliction 
brings  the  sins  of  men  of  distinguished  piety  to  their  remembrance  the  recollection 
of  them  is  accompanied  with  many  aggravating  circumstances.  In  all  the  trying 
circumstances  of  this  changeful  life  the  Christian  has  an  anchor  of  hope  sure  and 
steadfast.  4.  Another  source  of  disquietude  is  seen  in  the  case  of  David — "The 
Lord  hid  His  face  from  him."  He  walked  in  darkness.  This  is  not  peculiar  to  the 
case  of  David.  The  exercised  Christian  knows  what  is  meant  by  it,  and  has  felt  it 
in  his  painful  experience.  Job  experienced  the  same.  David  says,  "  I  have  trusted 
in  Thy  mercy  ;  my  heart  shall  rejoice  in  Thy  salvation."  This  remedy  will  be  found 
effectual  in  every  similar  case.  We  shall  not  pretend  to  state  all  the  reasons  why 
God  permits  some  of  His  dearest  children  to  lose  their  spiritual  comfort.  One  reason 
may  be,  that  they  are  apt  to  build  too  much  on  their  frames  and  feelings.  Practical 
reflections — (1)  If  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  and  the  actions  of  our  lives  have  so 
great  an  influence  on  our  present  peace  and  future  happiness,  we  ought  constantly 
to  observe  and  duly  to  regulate  them.  (2)  Religion  is  intended  to  regulate  our 
practice,  as  well  aa  to  soothe  and  elevate  our  minds.  As  in  the  natural,  so  in  the 
spiritual  life,  activity  and  enjoyment  are  essentially  connected  with  one  another  ; 
and  the  more  we  attend  to  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  the  more  will  our 
comforts  abound.     {James  Boss,  D.D.) 

Yen.  3.  Lighten  mine  eyes,  lest  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  death. — Moral  and  spiritual 
death : — The  Psalmist's  cry  was  for  a  physical  deliverance  from  mortal  danger — 
probably  from  a  violent  death  at  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  With  little  or  no 
straining  of  the  words  they  may  be  turned  into  a  prayer  against  the  peril  of  moral 
and  spiritual  death.  Under  the  emblem  of  death,  virtuous  and  pious  souls  in  all 
ages  have  been  wont  to  depict  a  torpor,  coldness,  and  inactivity  of  the  moral  and 
spiritual  faculties.  We  dare  not  affirm  that  spiritual  death  is,  like  physical 
death,  a  final  condition.  1.  Moral  death.  The  main  point  in  bringing  up  children 
is  to  give  moral  life,  so  that  at  maturity  conscience  may  be  in  them  a  living  power. 
You  must  not  only  give  your  child  rules  of  conduct,  you  must  teach  him  likewise  to 
hate  evil  and  to  love  goodness.  For  moral  death  in  the  young  man  or  woman  there 
is  but  one  remedy — the  opening,  lightening  of  the  eyes.  Another  form  of  moral 
death  is  discoverable  in  those  of  maturer  years,  whose  whole  mor.dity  consists  in 
simple  imitation  of  others  by  habit,  and  in  ruling  the  life  by  the  ordinary  customs 
and  opinions  of  one's  own  little  circle.  Hundreds  and  thousands  of  quite  respectable 
people  are  destitute  of  moral  life.  The  essential  conditions  of  moral  life  are  absent. 
Such  temptations  as  may  come  to  them  are  resisted  from  motives  of  self-indulgence 
rather  than  of  self-denial  and  self-conquest.  The  worship  of  ease  and  respectability 
has  gradually  brought  tiiem  into  a  state  ofjmoral  torpor,  indifference,  and  inactivity 
— hiis  brought  upon  tlnni,  in  fact,  the  sleep  of  death.  Close  akin  to  this  is  another 
form  of  moral  death,  into  which  some  sink  who  once  knew  the  nobility  and  the 
blessedness  of  the  moral  life.  They  began  their  worldly  career  not  only  innocent, 
but  good,  longing  and  striving  to  be  good ;  but  through  adverse  circumstances, 
through  the  pressure  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  they  have  been  led  to  follow  the 
evil  example  of  the  multitude,  to  copy  their  small  dishonesties  and  their  petty 
deceits  in  the  matter  of  business,  and  to  cease  to  have  scruples  in  doing  things  ana 
conniving  at  things  which  in  their  early  days  they  shrank  from  as  wicked.  They 
become  morally  weaker  from  day  to  day,  and  at  last  the  sleep  of  death  comes  over 
their  hearts  and  consciences,  and  moral  activity  or  heroic  virtue  is  for  them  no 
longer  possible.  It  is  forgetfulness  of  God  that  most  of  all  brings  on  this  dreadful 
torpor.  For  the  great  mass  of  people,  as  they  are,  I  can  affirm,  without  fear  of 
contradiction,  that  a  religious  life,  a  life  of  earnest  prayer  to  God,  is  absolutely 
indispensable  to  a  life  of  true  and  lofty  morality.  2.  Spiritual  death.  Moral  death 
is  widespread,  even  among  respectable  citizens.  Spiritual  death  is  equally  prevalent 
among  professedly  religious  people.  Torpor,  indifference,  and  inactivity  of  soul 
towards  God  is,  I  fear,  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception.  And  this  is  due  to 
ignorance  rather  than  to  baseness,  to  a  darkness  which  only  the  light  of  God  can 
dispel.     Spiritual  death  may  be  brought  on  by  such  means  as  these  :  by  falseness 


P3AtM  xiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  199 

in  the  creed  detected,  but  not  rejected  ;  by  superstition  ;  by  an  unfounded  fear  of 
God  ;  by  undue  regard  for  the  mere  externals  of  religious  observances  ;  by  ignorance 
of  what  is  really  essential  to  true  religion.  These  maybe  called  the  intellectual 
agents  of  spiritual  disease  and  death.  But  there  are  other  agents  which  are  prac- 
tical, such  as  being  over-engrossed  in  worldly  pursuits,  giving  up  regular  habits  of 
prayer,  seeking  too  eagerly  the  pleasures  and  indulgences  of  the  flesh.  We  need  a 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  which  only  God  can  give  us,  and  which  is  much  more  than 
intellectual  accuracy  and  consistency  in  our  creed.  The  sleep  of  death  may  creep 
over  us  when  exhausted  by  the  eternal  problems  which  we  make  for  ourselves,  or 
find  alreadymade  in  our  search  after  God.  {diaries  Voysey,  M.A.)  Death  in  the 
midst  of  life : — David  was  under  no  ordinary  distress  of  mind,  arising  from  some 
adversity  into  which  he  had  fallen  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  fellow-mortal. 
David  knew  that  adversity  is  uniformly  attended  with  one  of  two  results  :  either  a 
serious  consideration  of  the  causes  which  have  brought  down  these  inflictions  and 
a  consequent  turning  to  God,  or  a  reckless  inattention  to  and  a  hardened  disregard 
of  the  dealings  of  God's  providence,  which  eventually  lead  to  an  utter  disregard  of 
Him  here,  and  an  eternal  separation  from  His  favour  and  presence  hereafter.  In 
the  text  we  have  three  petitions — 1.  That  the  Lord  would  condescend  to  make  him 
the  object  of  His  most  gracious  consideration.  He  grounds  his  plea  upon  a  sense  of 
utter  helplessness  in  the  sight  of  God.  How  blessed  are  days  of  adversity,  when 
they  bring  with  them  such  distrust  in  ourselves,  and  such  unshaken  confidence  in 
the  protection  of  God  !  2.  That  the  eyes  of  his  spiritual  understanding  might  be 
lightened.  3.  That  he  might  not  be  permitted  to  sleep  the  sleep  of  death.  By 
death  the  Psalmist  does  not  exclusively  mean  the  separation  of  soul  and  body.  "VVe 
are  inclined  to  think  he  is  praying  for  deliverance  from  that  spiritual  death  in  which 
all,  though  naturally  alive,  are  involved,  on  whose  heart  the  spirit  of  the  living  God 
has  not  wrought  a  saving  work.  {James  Robertson,  A.M.)  Letting  in  the  Vght : 
— A  passer-by  one  day  asked  of  an  Irishman,  whom  he  observed  breaking  a  large 
hole  in  the  wall  of  an  old  cellar,  what  he  was  doing.  The  answer  of  Barney  was 
prompt,  "  Shure,  an'  I'm  lettin'  out  the  dark."  We  spend  much  time  and  energy 
in  the  same  foolish  idea  ;  we  attack  the  dark,  instead  of  putting  all  our  powers  into 
the  glorious  work  of  letting  in  the  light.  Whether  the  darkness  be  that  of  uncivil- 
ised ignorance,  or  infidel  prejudice,  let  us  shine  in  the  light  of  the  glorious  Gosj>el, 
and  the  darkness  will  fly.     ( W.  Luff.) 

Ver.  5.  But  I  have  trusted  in  Thy  mercy.— Ow  the  mercy  of  God : — I.  What  ts 
MEANT  BY  THE  MERCY  OF  GoD  ?  Mcrcy  differs  from  goodness  in  that  it  supposes 
guUt.  Without  the  fall  of  man  there  could  have  been  no  occasion  for  his  redemp- 
tion ;  and  without  the  plan  of  redemjition  it  does  not  appear  that  we  could  have 
formed  any  opinion  of  the  Divine  mercy.  II.  How  does  it  remedy  man's 
MISERY  ?  "The  two  evils  to  which  man  is  exposed  are  sin  and  death.  Yet  they  diff"er 
only  as  cause  and  effect.  Sin  is  the  distemper,  and  death  the  issue  of  it.  Against 
sin  God  hath  provided  by  giving  us  the  light  of  Scripture  ;  against  death  by  the 
new  principle  of  life  infused  into  the  Christian  from  the  time  of  his  baptismal 
regeneration.  III.  What  is  it  to  trust  in  this  mercy  ?  We  cannot  do  so  till 
we  know  what  we  have  to  fear.  But  men  are  insensible  of  this,  because  self-satisfied 
and  resting  in  a  mistaken  confidence.  To  trust  in  God  is  to  renounce  all  self-con- 
fidence, and  to  rely  on  the  mercy  of  God.  Do  not  mistake  presumption  for  trust. 
They  who  do,  think  that  God's  mercy  is  only  to  deliver  from  punishment.  It  is  to 
deliver  from  sin.  IV.  The  joy  and  comfort  following.  "My  heart  shall 
rejoice  in  Thy  salvation."  {A.  Jones,  M.A.)  Mercy  and  joy : — The  minister  of 
the  Gospel  is  to  proclaim  free  grace  everywhere.  But  the  heart  must  be  awakened 
ere  it  can  receive  the  truth  of  God's  grace.  I.  The  experimental  statement  of 
David.  "  I  have  trusted  in  Thy  mercy."  He  was  a  sinner,  but  here  was  all  liis 
hope.  This  the  test  of  true  discipleship,  whether  we  have  come  to  trust  as  David 
did,  and  to  hope  in  the  mercy  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  And  he  knew  this 
experimentally.  Dry  doctrines  will  not  suffice  alone.  They  would  starve  a  soul. 
There  must  be  experience.  David  here  tells  out  his  sorrow.  He  mourns  God's 
delays.  But  he  trusts  in  God.  II.  His  experience.  "My  heart  shall  rejoice  in 
Thy  salvation."  He  had  trusted,  and  he  anticipates  rejoicing.  Here  was  the 
shelter,  the  anchor  of  his  soul.  The  Church  and  the  Christian  can  never  be  ship- 
wrecked, for  the  anchor  holds.  He  speaks  of  a  heart  joy.  No  one  can  know  any- 
thing about  heart-rejoicing  but  those  who  have  been  heart-achers.  "  Blessed  are 
they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."    How  blessed  it  is  to  experience  the 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [maim  xiy. 

stillness  and  the  quietness  of  the  peace  of  God.  Compared  with  this,  what  is  the 
world  worth?  {J.  J.  West,  M.A.)  My  heart  shall  rejoice  la  Thy  salvation. — 
A  renovation  of  heart  essential  to  a  state  of  salvation : — 1.  Without  the  renovation  of 
the  heart  there  can  be  no  distinct  knowledge  of  the  Gospel.  The  natural  mind 
cannot  receive  the  things  of  God  ;  they  are  spiritually  discerned.  The  mind  must 
be  renewed,  that  the  man  may  become  spiritual.  2.  Nor  can  there  be  a  new  nature. 
This  is  essential  to  the  enjoyment  of  salvation.  For  how  can  we  enjoy  that  which 
is  opposed  to  our  feelings,  desires,  habits !  We  have  no  enjoyment  in  the  society  of 
those  who  are  the  objects  of  our  aversion.  The  "enmity"  of  the  mind  must  be 
"slain  "  by  the  constraining  power  of  the  love  of  Christ ;  but  this  involves  renova- 
tion. 3.  Unless  the  heart  is  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  there  is  no  possibility  of 
accounting  for  the  discovery  and  preparation  of  a  plan  of  redemption  at  all.  Was 
it  worthy  of  the  Divinity  to  do  all  that  He  has  done  in  redemption  for  the  sake  of 
saving  those  He  never  intended  to  change  and  purify  ?  4.  This  renovation  of  heart 
is  essential  to  the  enjoyment  of  heaven.  Take  an  individual  from  the  lowest  ranks 
of  society,  and  place  him  in  the  midst  of  the  high-born,  the  educated,  the  refined ; 
where  will  be  his  enjoyment?  The  unrenewed  man',  set  in  the  midst  of  those  who 
have  their  "conversation  in  heaven,"  has  no  relish  for  the  company,  and  gladly 
turns  from  it.  The  reason  for  finding  no  interest  in  heaven  is — unrenewedness  of 
heart.     {J.  Burnet.) 

Ver.  6.  I  will  sing  tmto  the  Lord. — The  passing  of  morhid  states  of  mind  : — Much 
spiritual  darkness  is  no  doubt  caused  by  the  mind's  sympathising  with  a  morbid 
condition  of  the  body,  a  condition  not  always  known  to  the  sufferer,  and  often  not 
even  suspected.  Nevertheless,  the  morbid  condition  exists,  and  prevents  the  mind 
from  rightly  estimating  the  evidences  of  its  conversion.  No  sooner,  however,  is  the 
believer's  health  restored  than  he  finds  himself  in  a  new  world  of  religious  hope  and 
feeling,  and  yet  without  a  single  new  evidence  of  his  being  a  child  of  God.  His 
repentance  is  not  more  sincere,  his  faith  more  entire,  nor  his  purpose  to  serve  God 
more  determined.  His  restoration  to  health  alone  has  invested  his  evidences  of 
conversion  to  God  with  pleasurable  emotions.  He  has,  of  course,  more  enjoyment 
in  his  religion,  but  not  an  iota  more  of  genuineness  and  safety  in  it  than  there  was 
before.  {David  Caldtoell,  A.M.)  Joy  in  God's  ways  vrith  us : — This  Psalm,  like 
many  others,  begins  in  sorrow,  but  ends  in  joy.  In  all  (Jod's  works  there  is  a  great 
likeness  running  throughout — a  change  from  bad  to  good,  from  hope  deferred  to  real 
enjoyment ;  as  the  proverb  has  it,  "  No  cross,  no  crown."  Thus  it  is  that  daylight 
succeeds  the  darkness  of  ni^ht,  and  disperses  it.  Health  and  strength  follow  so 
often  after  a  bed  of  sickness,  inward  joy  after  a  long  period  of  outward  sorrow.  Our 
Lord  Himself  "  went  not  after  joy  ;  but  first  He  suffered  pain."  And  such  is  the 
life's  history  of  all  God's  most  chosen  saints.  How  differently  a  man  goes  through 
the  world  who  dwells  upon  the  blessings  he  has  received  more  than  the  sorrows  and 
trials  he  may  have  undergone,  who  tries  to  see  in  all  circumstances  of  his  life  God's 
goodness  towards  himself,  instead  of  repining  continually  in  discontent  at  everything 
which  crosses  his  will  or  his  hopes.  It  is  in  this  way  that  God  so  often  draws  the 
hearts  of  men  to  Himself,  weans  them  from  the  love  of  this  world,  makes  them  to 
love  Him  supremeljjr  before  all  else,  and  thus  sows  the  seed  of  eternal  life  in  their 
hearts.  We  are  all  surrounded  by  a  thousand  blessings,  of  which  we  take  little  or 
no  account.  These  words  of  the  text  contain  a  direct  expression  of  our  own 
individual  blessings  and  mercies.  It  is  the  work  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  in  us  to  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  the  love  of  God.  And  when  we  love  God  we  love  all  that 
l>elongs  to  God.  Let  this  be  one  object  of  our  daily  life,  to  see  more  and  more  God's 
love  towards  us.     ( W.  J.  Stracey,  M.A.) 


PSALM  XIV. 

Vers.  1-7.  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God. — The  practical 
denial  of  God  the  root  of  all  evil : — The  heavy  fact  of  widespread  corruption  presses 
on  the  Psalmist,  and  starts  a  train  of  thought  which  begins  with  a  sad  picture  of  the 
deluge  of  evil,  rises  to  a  vision  of  God's  judgment  of  and  on  it,  triumphs  in  the 
prospect  of  the  sudden  panic  which  shall  shake  the  souls  of  all  the  "workers  of 


MAIM  xrv.]  THE  PSALMS,  201 

iniquity,"  when  they  see  that  God  is  with  the  righteous,  and  ends  with  a  sigh  for 
the  coming  of  that  time.  The  staple  of  the  poem  is  but  the  familiar  contrast  of  • 
corrupt  world  and  a  righteous  judge  who  judges,  but  it  is  cast  in  very  dramatic  and 
vivid  form  here.  We  listen  first  to  the  Psalmist's  judgment  of  his  generation.  Eras 
of  great  culture  and  material  prosperity  may  have  a  very  seamy  side,  which  eyes 
accustomed  to  the  light  of  God  cannot  fail  to  see.  The  root  of  the  evil  lay,  as  the 
Psalmist  believed,  in  a  practical  denial  of  God,  and  whoever  thus  denied  Him  wa« 
a  "fool."  Practical  denial  or  neglect  of  His  working  in  the  world,  rather  than  a 
creed  of  negation,  is  in  the  Psalmist's  mind.  The  biblical  conception  of  folly  is 
moral  perversity  rather  than  intellectual  feebleness,  and  whoever  is  morally  and 
religiously  wrong  cannot  be  in  reality  intellectually  right.  The  practical  denial  of 
God  lies  at  the  root  of  two  forms  of  evil.  Positively,  "they  have  made  their  doings 
corrupt  and  abominable" — rotten  in  themselves  and  sickening  and  loathsome  to 
pure  hearts  and  to  God.  Negatively,  they  do  no  good  things.  The  next  wave  of 
thought  (ver.  2)  brings  into  his  consciousness  the  solemn  contrast  between  the 
godless  noise  and  activity  of  earth  and  the  silent  gaze  of  God  that  marks  it  all. 
The  purpose  of  the  Divine  Guest  is  set  forth  with  deep  insight  as  being  the  finding 
of  even  one  good,  devout  man.  Other  Scriptures  present  the  gaze  of  God  as  for  other 
reasons,  this  one  in  the  midst  of  its  solemnity  is  gracious  with  revelation  of  Divine 
desires.  What  is  to  be  the  issue  of  the  strongly  contrasted  situation  in  these  two 
verses  :  beneath,  a  world  full  of  godless  lawlessness  ;  above,  a  fixed  eye  piercing  to 
the  discernment  of  the  inmost  nature  of  actions  and  characters  ?  Ver.  3  answers. 
Th«  Psalmist's  sad  estimate  is  repeated  as  the  result  of  the  Divine  search.  But  it  is 
also  increased  in  emphasis  and  in  compass.  This  stern  indictment  is  quoted  by  St. 
Paul  in  "Romans,"  as  confirmation  of  his  thesis  of  universal  sinfulness.  But  this 
baffled  quest  cannot  be  the  end.  If  Jehovah  seeks  in  vain  for  goodness  on  earth, 
earth  cannot  go  on  for  ever  in  godless  riot.  Therefore,  with  eloquent  abruptness 
the  voice  from  heaven  crashes  in  upon  the  "fools"  in  the  full  career  of  their  folly. 
The  thunder  rolls  from  a  clear  sky.  .  .  .  Finally,  the  whole  course  of  thought 
gathers  itself  up  in  the  prayer  that  the  salvation  of  Israel — the  true  Israel, 
apparently — were  come  out  of  Zion,  God's  dwelling,  from  which  He  comes  forth  in 
His  delivering  power.  The  voice  of  the  oppressed  handful  of  good  men  in  an  evil 
generation  is  heard  in  this  closing  prayer.  It  is  encouraged  by  the  visions  which 
have  passed  before  the  Psalmist.  The  assurance  that  God  will  intervene  is  the  very 
life-breath  of  the  cry  to  Him  that  He  would.  Because  we  know  that  He  will  deliver, 
therefore  we  find  it  in  our  hearts  to  pray  that  He  would  deliver.  {A.  Maelaren, 
D.D.)  The  practical  atheist: — Thus  the  Bible  ever  speaks  of  those  who  have 
cast  off  the  fear  of  God.  They  are  those  whose  understanding  is  darkened,  who, 
professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  become  fools.  Such  men,  who  make  a  boast  of 
their  reason,  and  would  fain  walk  by  the  light  of  their  reason,  prove  how  little  their 
reason  is  worth.  The  epithet  is  the  more  cutting  becausepersons  of  this  kind 
generally  lay  claim  to  more  than  ordinary  discernment.  There  is  here  rather  a 
practical  than  a  theoretical  atheism  ;  not  so  much  a  denial  of  the  being  of  a  God  as 
a  denial  of  His  moral  government  of  the  world  (cf.  x.  5) ;  and  this  evinced  in  their 
actions  rather  than  in  their  words.  Their  lives  show  what  the  thought  of  their 
hearts  is.  The  "fool"  is  not  the  philosophic  atheist  with  his  arguments  ("subducta 
ratione  vel  formatis  syllogismis " — Calvin) ;  but  the  man  who  by  the  practice  of 
wickedness  so  stifles  and  corrupts  within  him  the  knowledge  of  God  that  he 
virtually  acknowledges  no  God.  South,  in  his  sermon  on  this  verse,  lays  a  stress  on 
these  words,  as  implying  that  the  atheist  dare  not  avow  his  atheism,  but  only 
cherishes  it  within.  But  the  occurrence  of  the  phrase  elsewhere — e.g.  x.  6,  10,  13 — 
does  not  justify  this  stress.  {J.  J.  Stetoart  Perovme,  B.D.)  The  character, 
reasonings,  aiui  folly  of  the  fool: — I.  The  character.  The  "fool"  in  Scripture 
is  the  man  who  makes  a  wrong  choice  of  good  ;  who,  when  two  objects  are  placed 
before  him,  one  a  lesser  good  and  one  a  greater  good,  chooses  the  lesser  in  preference 
to  the  greater.  Preferring  the  future  life  to  the  present  is  wisdom,  preferring  the 
present  life  to  the  future  is  folly.  Why  must  the  poor  fool  say  in  his  heart — "No 
God.  I  wish  there  were  no  God  "  ?  The  reason  is,  that  when  a  man  makes  the  wrong 
choice,  his  heart  is  miserable  within  him.  The  world  cannot  make  him  happy. 
The  soul  is  immortal,  and  nothing  short  of  immortality  can  content  it.  The  soul  is 
spiritual,  and  nothing  but  a.  spiritual  God  can  bless  it.  The  soul  i*!  sinful,  and 
nothing  but  a  Saviour  can  give  it  peace.  The  fool  knows  all  this,  yet  will  not  come 
to  God  that  he  may  have  peace.  So  he  says  in  his  heart,  "Oh,  th.xt  there  were  no 
Crod  to  judge  me  !  "     II.  The  reasonings.     The  reasonings  of  the  spiritual  fool! 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalv  xiv. 

Alas  I  there  can  be  none.  There  is  no  infidelity  in  the  world  but  that  wliich 
proceeds  from  ignorance  or  from  sin.  If  you  are  the  character  described  you  have 
no  reasoiiin^is  by  which  to  justify  yourself;  and  I  cannot  therefore  waste  your  time 
by  attempting  to  refute  what  does  not  exist.  III.  Folly.  The  wish  which  yon 
form  in  your  heart — the  wish  that  all  religion  were  false,  the  wish  th^t  there  were 
no  God  to  judge  you  at  the  last — is  utterly  and  totally  impossible.  Is  it  not  wisdom 
to  put  away  your  foolish  hope,  that  God  will  not  call  you  to  judgment,  and  to  turn 
to  God,  and  to  thank  Him  that  He  has  promised  forgiveness  of  sins  to  all  those  who, 
with  a  true  penitent  heart  and  lively  faith,  turn  to  Him  ?  {George  Townseiid,  M.A.) 
The  folly  and  ivretchedness  of  an  atheistical  inclination : — All  nature  so  clearly 
points  out,  and  so  loudly  proclaims,  a  Creator  of  infinite  power,  wisdom,  and 
goodness,  that  whoever  hears  not  its  voice  and  sees  not  its  proofs  may  well  be 
thought  wilfully  deaf  and  obstinately  blind.  Every  faculty,  every  object  of  every 
faculty,  demonstrates  a  Deity.  Can  a  man  possibly  conceive  that  such  wonderful 
order  and  perfect  beauty  should  be  ever  formed  by  the  fortuitous  operations  of 
unconscious,  unactive  particles  of  matter  1  The  expression  in  the  text  may  denote, 
not  the  man's  real  opinion  or  persuasion,  but  his  inclination  and  desire.  He 
secretly  wishes  that  there  were  no  God,  and  endeavours  to  draw  his  belief  that  way 
as  much  as  he  can  !  To  wish  against  tie  being  of  a  God  is  to  wish  mankind  the 
greatest  mischief  and  distress  that  can  possibly  be  conceived.  Were  there  no  awe  of 
a  supreme  Being,  no  terrors  of  a  future  judgment  to  restrain  us,  what  government 
on  earth  would  be  able  to  maintain  itself,  or  find  protection  for  its  subjects  t  What 
wise  man  would  choose,  or  dare  to  live  in  a  community  of  atheists,  if  such  a  one 
could  be  found  ?  Consider  how  the  minds  and  conditions  of  private  persons  would 
be  affected  by  the  supposition  of  a  forlorn  and  fatherless  world.  Under  the  tuition 
and  government  of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  everything  appears  with  a  com- 
fortable aspect.  Men  never  need  to  want  the  purest  com  torts  and  most  perfect 
satisfactions  while  God  is  their  portion.  On  tliis  account,  whether  the  world  frown 
or  smile,  the  wise  man  is  neither  highly  transported  nor  deej)ly  dejected.  What- 
ever be  his  lot,  the  peace  of  his  mind  is  secured,  and  his  heait  is  at  rest.  For  hia 
hopes  are  founded  on  a  rock,  and  his  treasure  fixed  -.vliere  nothing  can  touch  it. 
Without  a  God,  a  providence,  and  a  future  state  there  could  hn  no  such  thing  as 
prosperity,  no  satisfaction,  no  real  enjoyment  for  ration, d  beings ;  nor  even  any 
true  peace  or  tranquillity  of  mind.  What  dismal  e Heels  atheism  would  produce  in 
adversity.  How  inexcusably  foolish  and  criminal  are  those  men  who  believe  and 
acknowledge  a  God,  and  yet  live  as  if  there  were  none!  (/.  Balguy.)  The 
■withered  heart : — The  word  "  fool "  has  been  traced  to  a  term  which  signifies  the  act 
of  "withering."  The  sense  would  be  represented  by  the  expression — the  withered 
heart  hath  said  there  is  no  God.  Though  in  the  Scriptures  the  terra  "heart"  is 
often  employed  as  signifying  the  mind  or  judgment,  yet  in  this  case,  judging  by  the 
consequences  that  are  detailed,  the  reference  is  evidently  to  the  moral  nature.  A 
distinction  is  indeed  made  in  the  Old  Testament  between  "mind"  and  "heart,"  aa 
in  the  instance  of  the  first  and  greatest  commandment.  The  point  to  be  observed 
then  is,  that  the  ' '  heart "  or  moral  nature  has  in  this  instance  ' '  withered  "  ;  affec- 
tion is  blighted,  moral  instinct  is  perverted,  the  natural  and  noblest  aspirations  of 
life  are  utterly  extinct.  A  difference  is  to  be  marked  between  a  purely  intellectual 
scepticism  and  a  corrupt  moral  aversion.  There  are  speculative  agnostics  whose 
oirtward  life  may  be  unquestionable  as  to  honour  and  faithfulness  ;  but  there  are  also 
deniers  of  the  existence  of  God  whose  object  is  to  get  rid  of  responsibility  and  judgment. 
It  is  not  transgressing  the  lines  of  fact  and  observation  to  say  that  it  is  the  ' '  heart " 
which  first  and  most  truly  believes  in  God.  Where  the  "heart"  or  moral  purpose 
is  simple  and  constant,  intellectual  aberrations  will  certainly  be  rectified  or  rendered 
spiritually  harmless.  Everything  of  a  religious  nature  depends  upon  the  purpose 
and  faithfulness  of  the  moral  nature.  The  heart  feels  after  God.  The  heart  is  first 
conscious  of  the  Divine  absence.  The  heart  soon  becomes  a  medium  of  accusation 
through  which  the  whole  nature  is  assailed  with  just  and  destructive  reproach. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  A  fool  indeed : — What  does  he  say  ?  "There  is  no  God." 
Why,  everything  he  sees,  hears,  touches,  contradicts  him.  The  very  worm  he 
treads  on,  yea,  every  blade  of  grass,  affirms  ' '  There  is  a  God. "  We  are  all  ready  to 
admit  that  he  who  denies  this  is  a  fool.  But  stop  ;  observe  in  what  way  he  says  it. 
Not  with  his  lips,  but  in  his  heart.  How  many  things  are  said  there  but  never 
spoken  out,  God  and  ourselves  only  know.  And  it  is  not  the  mind  or  the  under- 
.standing  which  says  it,  but  the  heart,  the  affections.  His  understanding  may  not 
deny  but  his  heart  does.     In  his  affections,  his  desires,  his  thoughts,  his  life,  his 


PSALM  XIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  203 

conduct  are  all  as  if  there  were  no  God.  If  the  life  be  taken  as  proof,  how  many  of 
these  fools  there  are.  For  they  never  pray,  they  never  regard  God  as  the  orderer  of 
their  lives.  They  speak  of  cliance,  accident,  but  put  God  out  of  the  question.  And 
they  never  think  of  asking  His  direction  in  any  of  their  actions ;  His  hook  they 
throw  on  one  side,  and  scarce  ever  look  at  it.  They  deem  themselves  quite  able  to 
direct  their  own  steps.  And  they  say  the  same  who  secretly  sin,  and  think  none 
aeeth  them,  or  that  their  sin  will  never  find  them  out.  If  they  escape  human 
])unishnient  they  fear  no  other.  In  fact,  what  are  all  men  saying  who  live  after  the 
flesh,  or  who  neglect  the  gospel  of  Christ — but  that  "there  is  no  God"  1  "The 
fool "  told  of  here,  then,  is  not  so  uncommon  a  person  as  might  be  thought.  And 
is  he  not  a  fool  ?  Let  us  each  ask  ourselves  the  solemn  question  the  text  suggests, 
"Are  we  or  are  we  not  amongst  those  foolish  men  who  say  in  their  hearts  'There  is 
no  God '  ?"  If  we  are,  may  He  turn  us  from  darkness  to  light,  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 
The  folly  of  the  fool : — The  first  great  principle  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  the 
first  announced  fact  of  Divine  revelation,  is  the  being  of  God.  "We  have,  in  the  text, 
the  solution  of  all  practical  atheism  in  the  world.  Infidelity  is  the  root  form  of  sin. 
I.  The  bold  assertion.  "No  God."  Such  a  denial  involves  tremendous 
diflBculties.  There  are  physical  mysteries  to  be  accounted  for.  There  are  intellectual 
phenomena  to  be  explained.  There  are  moral  intuitions,  soul  out-reachings,  spiritual 
anstincts  and  aspirations  to  be  satisfactorily  interpreted.  The  universe  evidencing 
marks  of  intelligent  design,  traces  of  omnipotent  power,  infinite  skill,  beauty,  and 
beneficence  must  be  the  effect  of  an  adequate  cause — the  work  of  a  self-existent, 
independent,  infinitely  wise  God.  What  shall  we  say  of  man — physically,  mentally, 
morally  t  Can  such  marvellous  beings  have  been  raised  out  of  nothingness  by  the 
revolving  wheel  of  time,  until  its  revolution  shall  crush  them  into  nothingness 
Again?  This  bold  assertion  is  also  in  direct  antagonism  with  the  teachings  of 
revelation.  "In  the  beginning  God  created."  Blot  out  God  from  your  creed,  and 
the  Bible  becomes  at  once  a  useless  volume.  It  cannot  be  interpreted.  The  evid- 
ence of  the  genuineness  of  Divine  revelation  is  overwhelming.  It  rests  on  four  grand 
arguments,  namely,  the  miracles  it  records,  the  prophecies  it  contains,  the  goodness 
of  the  doctrine,  and  the  moral  character  of  the  penman.  II.  The  region  in  which 
THIS  assertion  IS  MADE.  "In  his  heart."  Man's  great  defect  is  a  corrupt  heart. 
It  is  the  fruitful  source  of  all  evil,  the  centre  of  all  impiety,  and  the  seat  of  foolish- 
ness and  infidelity.  The  atheism  of  the  times,  and  of  all  times,  has  been  and  still 
is  the  sad  effect  of  heart  derangement  rather  than  brain  disorder.  The  intellect 
has  often  been  blamed  when  it  should  have  been  the  heart.  It  better  suits  the 
promptings  and  desires  of  the  carnal  nature  to  negative  the  existence  of  a  Divine 
Ruler  than  to  admit  it.  Let  man  be  set  right  at  heart,  and  the  philosophy  of  fools 
■would  vanish  into  thin  air.  {J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.)  The  fool's  denial  of  God's  exist- 
ence : — The  folly  of  atheism  is  undeniable  when  we  remember — I.  That  the  thing 
so  ardently  vy^iSHED  FOR  IS  ABSOLUTELY  IMPOSSIBLE.  The  all-seeing  God  can  no 
more  shut  His  eyes  to  the  conduct  of  mortals  than  He  can  cease  to  exist.  As  His 
superintending  care  is  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  universe,  so  is  the 
constant  exercise  of  His  moral  government  required  for  the  vindication  of  His  own 
honour.  It  is  told  that  a  Frenchman  once  \'isited  a  castle  in  Germany  where  dwelt 
a  nobleman  who  had  a  good  and  devoted  son,  his  comfort  and  his  pride.  In  the 
course  of  conversation  the  Frenchman  spoke  in  such  unbecoming  terms  of  God  that 
the  baron  said,  "Are  you  not  afraid  of  offending  God  by  speaking  in  this  way?" 
The  foreigner  announced,  with  cool  indifference,  that  he  knew  nothing  about  God, 
for  he  had  never  seen  Him.  The  next  morning  the  baron  pointed  out  to  his  visitor 
a  beautiful  picture  on  the  wall,  and  said,  "My  son  painted  that."  "  He  must  be  a 
very  clever  youth,"  courteously  replied  the  Frenchman.  Later  on  the  baron  took 
Ms  visitor  over  his  gardens,  which  were  of  rare  beauty  and  contained  many  choicest 
plants.  On  being  asked  who  managed  the  garden,  he  replied,  "My  son,  and  he 
knows  almost  every  plant,  from  the  cedar  to  the  hyssop."  "What  a  happy  man 
you  must  be,"  said  the  Frenchman,  "  to  have  such  a  son  !  "  "  How  do  you  know  I 
have  a  son  ?"  asked  the  baron,  with  a  grave  face.  "Why,  because  I  have  seen  his 
works ;  and  I  am  sure  he  must  be  both  clever  and  good,  or  he  never  could  have  done 
all  you  have  shown  me,"  "But  you  have  never  seen  him!"  returned  the  baron, 
* '  No,  but  I  already  know  him  very  well,  because  I  can  form  a  just  estimate  of  him 
from  his  works."  "Well,  then,  if  you  are  able  to  judge  of  my  son's  good  character 
by  seeing  his  various  works,  how  does  it  happen  that  you  can  form  no  estimate  of 
God's  goodness  by  witnessing  such  proofs  of  His  handiwork  ? "  If  the  fool  could 
have  h^  way,  and  banish  the  Almighty  One  from  His  own  dominions,  it  would — 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xnr. 

II.  Be  an  unspeakable  damage  to  all  even  in  this  world.  If  men  would  put 
an  end  to  the  beneficent  rule  of  our  heavenly  Father,  what  would  they  offer  as 
compensation  for  so  irreparable  a  loss  ?  Should  any  have  reached  this  extreme  point 
in  foolishness  that  they  have  wished  there  were  no  God,  let  them  ponder  these 
thoughts.  1.  Before  you  are  again  drawn  so  far  within  the  dreary  region  of 
unbelief,  ask  this  question  :  Have  I  a  sincere  desire  to  know  the  truth  ?  I  put  the 
matter  in  this  shape,  because  thousands  have  really  hated  the  truth,  when  they 
fancied  that  they  loved  it.  2.  In  order  to  strengthen  your  feeble  faith,  make 
diligent  use  of  the  light  which  you  already  possess.  3.  Be  willing  to  ask  God,  in 
humble  prayer,  to  give  you  light,  and  to  guide  you  into  all  truth.  One  of  the 
fiercest  of  the  French  revolutionists  said  to  a  simple  peasant,  "I  will  have  all  your 
church  steeples  pulled  down,  that  you  may  no  longer  have  any  object  to  remind  you 
of  your  old  superstitions."  "But,"  returned  the  peasant,  with  an  air  of  triumph, 
"  you  cannot  help  leaving  us  the  stars."  Instead  of  the  blank,  cheerless  lot  of  such 
as  would  fain  believe  that  "there  is  no  God,"  the  wise  in  heart  will  rather  be 
disposed  to  adopt  the  language  of  the  great  philosopher,  Sir  Humphrey  Davy,  as 
their  own,  "  I  envy  no  qualities  of  the  mind  in  others — nor  genius,  nor  power,  wit, 
nor  fancy  ;  but  if  I  could  choose  what  would  be  most  useful  to  me,  I  should  prefer 
a  firm  religious  belief  to  every  other  blessing."  {John  N.  Norton.)  The  folly  and 
impiety  of  infidelity : — Consider  the  text — I.  As  AN  impious  wish.  This  is  what  he 
would  desire  :  it  would  gratify  and  gladden  his  heart  if  it  were  so.  II.  A.s  a  bold 
declaration.  This  goes  much  further.  He  has  come  to  this  pitch  of  daring,  to 
afl^rm  "There  is  no  God."  Not  believing  in  God,  he  does  not  believe  he  has  a 
soul  and  a  hereafter.  No  wonder  that  he  becomes  abominable.  True,  all  do  not  go 
to  such  lengths.  Some  would  only  say,  "There  is  no  such  a  God  as  people  who 
believe  the  Bible  say  there  is."  There  is  some  God,  but  He  either  takes  no  notice, 
or  He  is  far  too  good  to  punish  men  for  their  little  deviations  from  virtue  here.  This 
is  deism.  And  there  is  yet  another  kind  of  infidelity.  Men  who  will  not  go  so  far 
as  either  the  deist,  and  certainly  not  as  the  atheist,  yet  they  deny  that  God 
interferes  with  the  affairs  of  men,  or  that  He  has  given  us  in  the  Bible  a  guide  for  our 
conduct  and  a  measure  for  our  expectations.  At  the  judgment,  for  they  believe 
there  will  be  a  judgment,  they  say  that  men's  good  actions  will  be  founa  to  out- 
number their  bad  ones,  and  so  they  hope  to  escape.  Nor  docs  infidelity  atop  even 
here.  It  stalks  abroad  rmder  the  guise  of  liberality  of  sentiment,  or  the  dominion 
of  rationalism.  Truth  to  them  is  but  the  handmaid  of  reason,  and  no  one  is  bound 
to  believe  what  he  cannot  understand.  They  say  a  man  is  no  more  accountable  for 
his  faith  than  he  is  for  the  colour  of  his  skin  and  the  shape  of  his  body.  Let  a  man 
do  the  best  he  can,  let  him  live  up  to  the  light  of  nature,  and  let  him  never  fear  any 
hereafter.  These  are  the  most  dangerous  people  of  all,  for  whilst  many  would  shun 
an  atheist  or  deist  or  Socinian,  the  theologian  can  spread  his  sentiments,  like  a 
deadly  poison,  unchecked.  This  is  why  the  Gospel  is  so  scorned  and  neglected. 
Men  are  taught  that  they  can  do  without  the  Gospel,  they  do  not  want  a  Saviour. 

III.  But  the  Word  of  God  calls  all  these  men  "fools."  Think  of  their 
unutterable  folly.  For  see  the  evidence  of  creation — heavens,  earth,  man  in  body  and 
mind.  Does  not  reason  bid  them  believe  ?  And  if  there  be  no  God  to  whom  we 
must  answer,  whence  the  curse  that  is  upon  the  world  t  How  came  the  certain  fact  of 
the  universal  deluge  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  conscience  ?  Why  must  all  die  ? 
He  strikes,  too,  at  the  very  root  of  the  honour  of  God.  The  controversy  is  not  as  to 
whether  there  be  any  God,  but  who  shall  He  be  ?  "  Who  is  Lord  over  me  ? "  is  the 
principle  of  infidelity.  The  man  wishes  to  be  his  own  lord.  It  is  the  very  spirit  of 
devilism.  Reflect,  then,  what  a  horrible  creature  man  is.  How  needful  it  is  that 
man  should  learn  humility.  How  just  will  be  the  judgment  of  God  upon  all 
atheistical  and  unbelieving  sinners.  How  cheering  and  consoling  to  the  true 
Christian  are  the  very  truths  which  infidels  ridicule  and  scomers  denv.  {R. 
Shittler.)  The  heart-speech  of  a  fool : — The  Christian  faith,  like  the  Christian 
man,  has  to  pass  through  many  a  conflict.  In  every  age  of  its  existence  it  has  had 
to  fight,  not  only  for  its  final  developments,  but  also  for  its  first  principles.  The 
Bible  is  not  passive  in  this  conflict.  It  strikes  as  well  as  bears — assails  as  well  as 
defends.  And  when  scepticism  has  run  its  usual  course  to  atheism,  and  the  man 
who  began  with  doubting  Revelation  goes  on  to  deny  the  Revealer,  it  comes  forth 
with  the  lofty  sarcasnj — "The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God." 
Observe  the  scope  of  the  utterance.  I.  As  to  its  matter.  The  Bible  all  through 
tells  us  of  God.  "In  the  beginning  God."  And  it  tells  of  Him  as  a  Personal 
Being  of  the  highest  attributes.     But  the  "  fool "  denies  it.     II.  The  manner  of 


PSALM  XIV.]  TEE  PSALMS.  205 

THE  TTTTERANCK.  It  is  private  rather  than  public  :  he  eaith  "in  his  heart,"  that  is, 
when  alone.  It  may  be  the  breathing  of  a  wish  rather  than  a  conviction.  III.  Thk 
CAUSES  OF  THE  UTTERANCE.  We  shall  find  them  in  our  hearts.  1.  We  do  not 
like  the  mystery  of  God.  It  is  so  humbling  to  us  to  believe  in  a  being  whom  we  ar« 
utterly  unable  to  understand.  2.  We  do  not  like  the  authority  of  God.  Now  we 
come  nearer  home.  We  could  bear  with  the  mystery  if  it  had  nothing  to  do  with 
ns.  But  the  claims  of  God  upon  us  are  infinite  and  endless.  His  hand  is  ever  upon 
OS.  It  is  as  much  as  I  can  do  to  submit  to  the  ordinary  laws  of  social  life  ;  but  « 
law  that  pursues  me  everywhere  and  always,  and  sends  its  mandates  into  the  secrecy 
of  my  mind  and  heart — that  is  more  than  I  can  bear.  I  wish  there  were  no  such  law. 
3.  We  do  not  like  the  prospect  of  meeting  Him.  To  most  men  it  is  most  unwelcome. 
IV.  The  character  of  such  an  utterance.  It  is  the  fool  that  says  it.  See 
how  gross  his  folly.  {F.  Tucker,  B.A.)  Atheism: — The  Bible  never  attempts  to 
prove  the  existence  of  God.  Atheism,  which  is  the  denial  of  Him,  is  either  practical 
or  spiritual.  The  former  has  always  and  everywhere  been.  But  speculative  atheists 
are  fewer  in  number.  "  I  had  rather,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "believe  all  the  fables  in 
the  Legend,  and  the  Talmud,  and  the  Alcoras,  than  that  this  universal  frame  was 
without  a  mind."    The  burden  of  proof  rests  with  the  atheist.     I.  His  folly  mat 

BE  SEEN  BY  OLANOINO  AT  THB  TTNANSWERABLE  ARGUMENT  FROM  EXISTING  OBJECTS. 

See  all  the  phenomena  of  nature.  And  there  is  the  moral  evidence.  II.  By  its 
ntWABRANTABLE  AsauMPTlOKS.  How  can  a  man  know  that  there  is  no  God ! 
III.  By  its  INJURIOUS  character.  "No  atheist,  aB  such,  can  be  a  true  friend, 
an  affectionate  friend,  or  a  loyal  sobject."  See  what  came  of  it  in  the  French 
Revolution.  IV.  By  its  inadequacy  to  encoxtntkb  the  hours  of  trial 
AND  OF  DEATH.  In  an  Alpine  village  is  the  peaceful  grave  of  one  who  died  upon 
the  Riffel-hom :  over  his  grave  is  the  significant  inscription,  "It  is  I,  be  not 
afraid."  The  good  man,  and  only  he,  is  not  afraid.  (J.  H.  Hitchens,  D.D.) 
The  being  of  a  Chd : — I.  General  evidences  for  the  being  of  a  God,  inde- 
pendent OF  Scripture.  1.  That  it  has  been  acknowledged  by  all  nations  in  all 
ages.  Polytheism  does  not  deny  but  confirm  the  truth.  Only  individuals,  never 
nations,  have  denied  it.  And  the  lives  and  the  end  vf  these  men  show  that  their 
opinion  has  often  been  shaken.  Hobbes,  one  of  the  chief  of  them,  said  that  he 
eould  not  bear  to  be  left  for  a  moment  in  the  dark  ;  and  just  before  he  died  he  told 
the  spectators  that  he  was  about  to  take  a  leap  in  the  dark  !  So  it  was  indeed.  A 
few  such  individuals,  rejecting  an  important  doctrine,  can  form  no  argument  against 
tLe  doctrine  itself.  And  even  of  these,  some  have,  at  particular  seasons,  confessed 
their  folly.  Thus  Volney,  in  a  storm  at  sea,  called  upon  the  very  God  whose  exist- 
ence he  had  denied.  Thus  Voltaire,  when  dying,  confessed  the  Christian  religion 
to  be  true,  and  had  the  audacity  to  partake  of  the  Christian  sacrament  as  a  sort  of 
passport  to  heaven.  2.  All  creatures  manifest  and  declare  it.  Look  at  their  pro- 
duction, their  preservation,  their  adaptation.  Look  at  the  nature  of  man  also,  body 
and  soul.  3.  The  extraordinary  occurrences  that  have  taken  place.  II.  The 
Scripture  name  of  those  who  deny  this  truth.  III.  Practical  improve- 
ments OF  THE  doctrine.  But  we  must  know  God  in  the  heart.  {T.  Mortimer.) 
Th^  folly  of  atheism.: — That  any  should  say  this,  is  not  easy  to  imagine  were  we  not 
forced  to  believe  it  possible.  History  tells  us  of  such,  and  we  have  no  cause  to  have 
80  much  better  opinion  of  the  modern  age  as  to  doubt  that  it  has  those  who  tjn 
ready  enough  to  vent  the  same  impiety.  I.  The  assertion  made.  "There  is  no 
God."  By  which — 1.  We  may  understand  absolute  denial  of  His  existence  or  a 
denial  of  God's  providence.  Epicurus  was  of  this  opinion.  He  confessed  there  was 
a  God,  but  as  for  His  interposing  and  oonceming  Himself  in  our  affairs,  this  he 
utterly  denied  ;  and  the  reason  he  gave  was  that  such  superintendence  would 
interfere  with  the  Divine  ease  and  felicity.  We  take  the  text  in  both  these  senses. 
2.  The  manner  of  the  assertion,  "said  in  his  heart."  It  wears  the  badge  of  guilt, 
privacy,  and  darkness  ;  and  as  if  it  were  sensible  of  the  treason  it  carries  in  its  own 
bonds.  The  atheist  will  not  speak  out,  but  in  his  heart  he  can  and  does  say  what 
he  likes.  3.  What  is  implied  in  this  saying.  An  inward  wish  that  there  were  no 
God.  His  seeking  out  arguments  to  persuade  himself  it  is  true.  A  readiness  to 
acquiesce  in  such  arguments.  It  is  a  sign  that  a  man  is  falling  when  he  catches  at 
straws.  For  why  should  there  not  be  spiritual  substances  t  And  if  there  be  dis- 
order and  seeming  chance  now,  do  we  not  look  for  a  day  of  retribution  ?  The  man's 
{)lacing  his  trust  and  dependence  for  his  good  on  other  things  than  God.  This  is  a 
ond  denial  of  God.  It  may  not  be  a  verbal  denial,  but  it  is  no  less  real.  II.  Thb 
AUTHOR  OF  THIS  AMSBTiON.     "The  fool."    For — 1.  He  contradicts  the  general 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xiv. 

judgment  of  mankind.  The  notion  of  God  is  one  that  a  man  is  not  catechised  but 
bom  into  ;  his  mother's  womb  was  the  school  he  learned  it  in.  Now  it  is  morally 
impossible  for  any  falsity  to  be  universally  received  and  blessed,  both  as  to  all 
times  and  places.  2.  He  lays  aside  a  principle  that  is  reasonable,  for  one  strange, 
harsh,  and,  at  best,  highly  improbable.  3.  His  motives  show  his  folly.  These  are, 
great  impiety  and  great  ignorance.  4.  From  their  instability.  They  will  not 
stand  to  them  in  time  of  great  danger,  or  when  death  draws  near.  AflFectation 
expires  upon  the  death-bed.  It  is  not  in  any  man's  power  to  extinguish  the  witness 
for  God  in  himself.  But  they  may  do  so  for  a  while.  Great  and  crying  sins  such 
as  waste  the  conscience — sensuality  and  discontent  with  God's  providence — lead 
to  this.  Therefore,  beware  of  them.  (i?.  South,  D.D.)  The  existence  of  God: — 
The  Psalm  describes  the  deplorable  corruption  of  universal  human  nature.  It 
begins  by  declaring  that  the  faculties  of  the  soul  are  corrupt.  "The  fool  hath  said 
in  his  heart,"  and  then  it  goes  on  to  show  the  evil  streams  thence  issuing — 
"abominable  works."  " The  fool "  signifies  a  vicious  person,  a  wicked  man.  "The 
speaking  in  the  heart  means  his  thoughts.  "There  is  no  God"  does  not  so  much 
deny  His  existence,  though  it  amounts  to  that,  as  deny  that  there  is  any  living 
ruler  and  governor  of  the  world.  This  is  to  strip  God  of  all  His  glory.  And  th« 
motive  of  them  who  make  the  denial  is  evil — that  they  may  be  the  more  free  to  sin. 
Now,  it  is  a  great  folly  to  deny  the  existence  of  God.  For  he  denies  what  is 
attested  on  every  hand,  and  what  is  made  clearly  known.  Of  old,  men  had  many 
gods,  now  they  say  there  is  none.  But  the  existence  of  God  is  the  foundation  of  all 
religion.  And  it  is  well  to  be  able  to  give  reason  for  our  belief,  and  to  put  down 
that  secret  atheism  which  lurks  in  us  all,  and  to  confirm  in  the  faith  those  that 
love  God.     But,   more  particularly,  note  the  atheist's  folly.     I.  He  denies  the 

SENTIMENT    OF  ALL    NATIONS    BOTH    IN    THEIB    JUDGMENT    AND    PRACTICE.       1.    No 

nation  has  been  without  this  belief.  Idolatry,  the  worship  of  many  gods,  does  not 
weaken  this  argument,  but  rather  confirms  it.  The  existence  of  God  was  never 
disputed,  though  nearly  all  things  else  were.  2.  And  it  hath  been  a  constant  and 
uninterrupted  consent ;  for — (i)  In  all  the  changes  and  vicissitudes  of  govern- 
ments, states,  and  modes  of  worship  this  has  been  maintained,  (ii)  Men  s  fears 
and  anxieties  would  have  led  them  to  destroy  it  if  possible  ;  there  has  been  no  want 
of  will  to  do  so.  (iii)  The  devil  deems  it  impossible  to  destroy  it.  When  ho 
tempted  Adam,  it  was  not  to  deny  God  but  to  become  as  God.  3.  Such  senti- 
ment is  natural  and  innate.  For — (i)  It  could  not  be  by  mere  tradition.  For  then 
we  should  have  had  told  us  not  only  the  existence  of  God,  but  the  right  mode  in  which 
to  worship  Him.  Why  have  men  remembered  this  if  it  were  tradition,  and  for- 
gotten all  the  rest  ?  But  even  if  it  were,  it  was  not  an  invention  of  the  first  man. 
If  it  had  been,  hie  posterity  would  soon  have  found  it  out.  And  why  should  h« 
Iiave  invented  it?  (ii)  Neither  was  it  by  agreement  and  consent  amongst  the 
rulers  of  men.  Why  should  they  do  so  ?  How  could  they  so  long  maintain  th« 
imposture  ?  (iii)  Nor  was  it  man's  fear  that  first  introduced  it.  His  fear  did  not 
create  God,  but  God  was  the  cause  of  his  fear.  II.  He  denies  that  which  all 
THINGS  IN  THE  WORLD  MANIFEST.  The  Scriptiires  assert  this  (Rom,  i.  19,  20). 
St.  Paul  does  not  say  "are  believed,"  but  are  "clearly  seen."  The  world  is  like  a 
large  mirror  which  reflects  the  image  of  God  (Psa.  viii.  1,  xix.  1,  2),  &c.  Now,  the 
world  does  manifest  God.  1.  In  the  production  of  the  creatures  it  contains  (Is*. 
xl.  12-19).  They  could  never  have  been  their  own  cause.  The  world  and  every 
creature  had  a  beginning  (Heb.  xi.  3).  The  matter  of  the  world  cannot  be  eternal. 
Nor  time  ;  for  all  motion  hath  beginning,  therefore  the  revolutions  of  our  earth.  Nor 
the  generations  of  men  and  other  creatures  ;  for  no  creature  can  make  itself. 
Nothing  can  act  before  it  be.  That  which  doth  not  understand  itself  nor  order  itself 
could  not  make  itself.  If  the  first  man  made  himself,  why  did  he  not  make  himself 
better  I  why  is  he  so  limited  and  faulty  ?  If  we  made  ourselves  we  can  preserve 
ourselves,  which  we  know  we  cannot.  And  why  did  not  man  create  himself  earlier, 
if  he  did  so  at  all  ?  Therefore  we  accept  the  Scripture  as  giving  us  the  most  rational 
account  of  the  matter.  Then,  further,  no  creature  could  make  the  world,  no 
creature  can  create  another.  For  if  it  create  of  nothing,  then  it  is  omnipotent  and 
not  a  creature.  If  of  matter,  who  formed  the  matter  ?  We  are  com  jelled  to  go  back  to 
a  first  Great  Cause.  Man  cannot  create  man.  If  he  could  he  would  understand  him, 
which  he  does  not.  There  is,  therefore,  a  first  cause  of  things,  which  we  call  God. 
And  this  first  cause  must  necessarily  exist,  and  be  infinitely  i)erfect.  III.  He  dkniks 
THAT  WHICH  man's  OWN  NATURE  ATTESTS.  1.  His  bodily  nature  does.  For  see 
the  order.  fitneaSj  and  usefulness  of  every  part — heart  and  mouth  and  brain,  ear 


PSALM  XIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  207 

and  eye  and  tongne.  And  see,  too,  the  admirable  differences  in  the  features  of 
men.  No  two  are  alike.  What  vast  advantage  comes  from  this  ?  2.  His  soul 
does.  For  consider  the  vastness  of  its  capacity,  the  quickness  of  its  motions,  its 
union  with  the  body,  and  the  operations  of  conscience.  But  all  this  proves  the 
existence  of  God.  The  vastness  of  the  desires  in  man  is  in  evidence.  For  the 
desires  of  other  creatures  are  fulfilled.  "  They  are  filled  with  good."  Then  shall  man 
not  be  ?    IV.  They  deny  what  is  witnessed  by  exteaordinary  occurrences. 

1.  Judgments  (Psa.  ix.  16 ;  Acts  xii.  21),  which  occurrence  Josephus  also  relates. 

2.  Miracles  (Psa.  Ixx.  11,  18).  "Who  only  doeth  wondrous  things."  The  truth  of 
the  Scriptures  stands  or  falls  with  the  miracles  of  which  it  tells.  They  must  have 
been,  or  else  the  records  are  a  pack  of  lies.  8.  Accomplishment  of  prophecies  (Isa. 
xli.  23,  xlvi.  10).  V.  Uses  ok  above  argument.  1.  If  atheism  be  a  folly  it  is 
a  pernicious  one ;  for  it  would  root  out  the  foundations  of  all  government  and 
introduce  all  evil  and  villainy.  The  two  ever  go  together  (Jer.  iii.  21  ;  Ezek.  ixii. 
12).  To  the  atheist  himself  (Job  xviii.  7  to  the  end).  2.  How  lamentable  that 
atheism  should  be  so  common.  But  since  all  are  tempted  to  it,  let  them  remember 
— (i)  It  is  impassible  to  prove  that  there  is  no  God.  (ii)  Whosoever  doubts  of  it 
makes  himself  a  mark  against  which  all  creatures  fight.  All  things  condemn  him. 
(iii)  Atheists  have  been  sometimes  much  afraid  they  were  wrong.  (iv)  The 
motives  of  atheism  are  bad  and  vicious,  (v)  How  unreasonable  to  run  such  risk, 
(vi)  Have  we  done  all  we  can  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  God  ?  3.  Let  it  be  our 
wisdom  to  be  settled  in  this  truth.  Therefore  study  God  in  His  creatures  as  well 
as  in  His  Word,  and  view  Him  in  your  own  experience  of  Him.  4.  If  we  believe,  then 
worship  Him  and  often  think  of  Him.  {^S.  Cha,rnock,  B.D.)  PracticcU  atheism  : — 
Unfold  the  conception  which  you  have  formed  of  the  existence  and  attributes  of 
God.  1.  We  all  involve  in  our  conception  of  God  the  idea  of  personality.  2.  To 
this  Infinite  Being  we  involuntarily  ascribe  self-existence.  3.  Both  reason  and 
revelation  teach  us  to  ascribe  eternity  to  the  Deity.  4.  We  ascribe  to  Him  infinite 
and  absolute  power.  5.  And  omniscient  wisdom.  6.  And  every  moral  attribute 
in  infinite  perfection.  7.  He  is  revealed  as  the  Father  of  the  creatures  He  has  made. 
The  most  astonishing  manifestation  of  the  goodness  of  God  is  made  to  us  in  the 
remedial  dispensation.  Evidently  the  existence  of  God,  and  especially  of  such  a 
God  as  the  Scriptures  reveal,  is  by  far  the  most  practical  truth  of  which  we  can 
possibly  conceive.  What,  then,  must  be  the  condition  of  a  man  who  believes  in 
the  existence  of  such  a  God,  and  yet  suffers  not  this  belief  to  exert  any  practical 
influence  upon  his  conduct  ?  (F.  Wayland. )  Practical  atheism : — This  is  natural 
to  man  in  his  depraved  state.  Not  natural  to  him  as  created,  but  as  corrupt.  And 
it  is  universal  (Psa.  Iviii.  2  ;  Rom.  iii.  9-12).  For  the  proof  that  atheism  is  natural 
to  man  we  note — I.  That  man  would  set  himself  up  as  his  own  rule  instead 
OF^GoD.  For — 1.  He  naturally  disowns  the  rule  God  sets  him.  Every  man  naturally 
is  a  son  of  Belial.  He  would  be  without  any  law.  Hence  he  desires  not  to  know 
God's  law.  The  purity  of  the  Divine  rule  renders  it  nauseous  to  him ;  so  impure 
is  man's  heart,  and  therefore  atheistic  likewise.  Hence  he  neglects  the  means  of 
knowledge,  or  endeavours  to  shake  off  as  much  as  he  has  (Rom.  i.  28).  Or  if  he 
cannot  do  this  he  will  not  think  of  it,  and  his  heart  rises  against  God  both  in- 
wardly and  in  outward  art  (ver.  4).  What  knowledge  they  seek  for  they  desire 
only  from  impure  motives.  What  they  have  they  hold  very  loosely.  One  day  it 
is  "Hosannah,"  the  next  "Crucify  Him."  Some  try  to  wrest  their  knowledge  of 
God's  truth  to  encourage  their  sin  (2  Pet.  iii.  16).  But  all  this  dislike  to  God's 
truth  is  a  disowning  of  God  as  our  rule.  God's  law  cast  against  a  hard  heart 
is  like  a  ball  thrown  against  a  stone  wall,  by  reason  of  the  resistance  bounding 
farther  from  it.  They  show  their  contempt  by  their  presumptuous  transgression 
of  the  law,  by  their  natural  aversion  to  the  declaration  of  God's  will.  That 
will  they  dislike  and  turn  from.  And  this  the  more  His  will  tends  to  His 
honour.  2.  Man  naturally  owns  any  other  rule  rather  than  that  of  God. 
"They  are  lovers  of  pleasure  rather  than  lovers  of  God"  (2  Tim.  iii.  4).  They 
will  prefer  the  rule  of  Satan.  Or  of  the  world,  for  this  is  evident  from  their 
regarding  more  the  dictates  of  men  than  of  God  ;  and  what  regard  they  have  for 
God's  will,  it  is  only  because  it  is  the  world's  will  also,  which  they  ever  put  before 
the  will  of  God.  But  especially  they  prefer  their  own  self-will.  Self  is  the  great 
opponent  of  God,  the  great  Antichrist.  3.  Man  would  make  himself  the  rule  for 
God,  and  ^ve  God  law.  We  are  willing  He  should  be  our  Benefactor,  but  not  our 
Ruler.  This  mind  is  seen  in  our  striving  against  His  law.  In  our  disapproving 
the  methods  of  His  government.     In  iopatience  in  regard  to  our  own  particular 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xnr. 

concerns.  Because  Job  did  not  do  this  he  is  commended  (i.  22).  In  envying  the  gifts 
and  prosperities  of  others.  In  praying  importunately  for  things  which  we  do  not 
know  will  please  God  (Prov.  vii.  14),  or  which  we  do  know  are  contrary  to  His 
declared  will.  As  when  men  pray  to  be  saved,  but  neglect  the  means  of  salvation. 
Or  when  we  try  to  bend  God  to  our  own  will.  In  all  these  ways,  and  yet  others, 
man  shows  that  he  would  have  God  take  rule  from  him,  and  not  he  from  God. 

II.    As   MAN    WOULD   BE  A  LAW  TO  HIMSELF,  SO  ALSO   WOULD   HE   BE   HIS   OWN   END 

AND  HAPFiNESS.  1.  For  proof  see  his  frequent  self-applause  (Rom.  xii.  3,  4).  His 
ascribing  to  himself  the  glory  of  every  success.  His  deaire  to  have  self-pleasing 
doctrines.  His  concern  if  he  is  injured,  but  not  if  God  is  wronged.  His  self-trust. 
All  this  is  a  usurping  of  God's  prerogatives,  and  a  vilifying  of  God  and  destroying 
Him  so  far  as  man  can.  2.  Man  would  make  anything  his  end  rather  than  God. 
3.  Man  would  make  himself  the  end  of  all  creatures  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  2).  4.  Man 
would  make  himself  the  end  of  God.  He  does  so  when  he  loves  God  only  because 
God  sends  him  good  things,  but  would  not  if  God  sent  him  evil  things.  When  he 
abstains  from  sin  for  his  own  sake,  not  because  of  God.  When  he  renders  duties  for 
a  mere  selfish  interest  (Gen.  xxxiv.  21,  22),  which  is  evident  from  his  reluctance  to 
religion  when  self  is  not  concerned  (Job  xxi.  15,  xxxv.  3).  And  man's  practical 
atheism  is  further  shown  in  his  unworthy  imaginations  of  God,  from  which  spring 
all  idolatry,  superstition,  and  presumption.  And  in  his  desire  to  be  distant  from 
God.  Naturally  we  have  no  desire  either  to  remember,  converse  with,  return  to, 
or  imitate  God.  5.  The  uses  of  the  foregoing  truths.  They  are — (i)  For  information, 
for  they  give  us  occasion  to  admire  Grod's  mercy,  and  justify  His  vengeance  ;  they 
show  our  need  of  a  new  nature,  how  diflBcult  conversion  is.  Also,  the  cause  of 
unbelief  in  the  Author  of  all  grace ;  that  there  can  be  no  justification  by 
works,  and  the  excellence  of  the  Gospel.  (ii)  Exhortation :  to  labour,  to  be 
sensible  of  this  lurking  atheism,  and  watch  against  it.  (jS^.  Charnock,  B.D.) 
Theoretical  atheism  : — The  denial  of  the  existence  of  God  may  be  either  theoretical 
or  practical.  It  is  theoretical  when  we  affirm  that  no  such  being  as  God  exists. 
It  is  practical  when,  professing  to  believe  that  He  exists,  we  act  in  all  respects  as 
though  we  believed  that  He  does  not  exist.  Theoretical  folly  may  manifest  itself 
in  two  forms,  either  in  that  of  absurd  credulity,  or  of  absurd  incredulity.  1.  It  is 
an  evidence  of  absurd  credulity  to  believe  an  assertion,  respecting  any  subject 
whatever,  when  no  evidence  \a  brought  forward  to  sustain  it,  and  when,  from  the 
nature  of  the  case,  the  evidence,  if  it  did  exist,  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human 
understanding.  Any  one  who  reflects  upon  the  fewness  and  feebleness  of  the 
faculties  of  man,  and  then  upon  the  boundlessness  of  the  universe,  must  be  convinced 
that  the  assertion  that  God  does  not  exist  involves  within  itself  all  the  elements  of 
the  most  revolting  absurdity.  2.  Atheism  is  equally  absurd  in  its  unbelief.  It 
disbelieves  a  proposition  of  which  the  evidence  is  interwoven  with  the  very 
structure  of  the  human  understanding.  (1)  The  idea  of  power,  of  cause  and  effect, 
is  the  universal  and  spontaneous  suggestion  of  the  human  intelligence.  It  springs 
up  unbidden  and  irrepressible  from  the  first  perception  of  a  change.  (2)  The 
mind  not  only  asks  for  a  cause,  but  for  a  sufficient  cause.  (3)  If  we  arrive  at  the 
notion  of  underived  causation,  may  not  several  independent  causes  originate  the 
changes  which  are  taking  place  around  us  ?  Everything  that  we  behola  is  mani- 
festly a  part  of  one  universal  whole.  The  cause  of  causes  is  everywhere  one  and  the 
same.  (4)  When  we  reflect  upon  human  conduct  we  find  that  we  always  connect 
the  outward  act  with  the  spiritual  disposition,  or  intention,  from  which  it  proceeds. 
In  every  action  we  perceive  the  quality  of  right  or  virtue,  or  of  its  opposite,  wrong 
or  vice.  As  the  characteristics  are  universally  the  same  there  must  be  a  single  and 
universal  standard.  We  see  the  perpetual  acting  of  the  Almighty  and  learn  the 
moral  attributes  that  compose  His  character.  {F.  Wayland. )  Belief  in  the  being 
of  God : — A  belief  in  God  as  a  self-existent,  intelligent,  and  infinitely  perfect 
Being  is  the  basis  of  all  religion.  In  what  manner  and  through  what  means  do  we 
come  by  this  conviction  t  Some  have  maintained  the  idea  of  God  to  be  innate. 
Others  assert  the  Divine  existence  to  be  an  intuition — an  immediate  perception  of 
the  reason,  independently  of  any  suggestion,  argument,  or  evidence.  By  others  it 
has  been  attempted  to  establish  it  by  the  rigid  steps  of  mathematical  demonstration. 
Kant,  and  those  who  follow  him,  insist  that  the  moral  nature  of  man — his 
conscience  and  sense  of  moral  obligation — affords  conclusive  proof  of  the  being 
and  moral  government  of  God.  We  believe  the  true  statement  of  the  matter  to  be 
this  :  That  the  human  mind  is  constitutionally  fitted  to  know  God,  so  that  the 
notioii  of  Him  and  a  persuasion  of  His  existence  necessarily  arise  within  the  soul 


MALM  XIV.]  THE  PSALMS,  209 

•whenever  the  faculties  are  in  any  good  degree  developed  ;  and  that  in  its  own 
moral  consciousness  and  in  the  great  variety  of  facts  and  phenomena  external  to 
itself  it  finds,  on  reflection,  proofs  that  He  does  exist,  proofs  of  a  moral  nature, 
yet  sufficient  to  establish  the  fact  as  an  absolute  certainty,  in  the  view  of  the 
understanding.  1.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  idea  of  God  and  of  spiritual 
existence  is,  and  always  has  been,  nearly  or  quite  universal  among  mankind. 
2.  A  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  God  has  always  been  found  exceedingly  diflB- 
cult  to  be  eradicated.  3.  The  more  thoughtful,  and  especially  the  more  virtuous, 
men  are,  the  more,  as  a  general  rule,  they  are  disposed  to  cherish  the  idea  of  a 
Supreme  Being.  4.  The  atheistical  idea,  when  fully  and  distinctly  placed  before 
the  mind,  is  abhorrent  to  the  moial  feelings  of  the  soul.  5.  A  belief  in  the  existence 
of  one  supreme  and  perfect  God  is  in  a  high  degree  elevating  and  happy  in  the 
influence  which  it  exerts  on  the  mind  and  heart  of  man,  while  the  views  of  atheism 
have  tended  only  to  demoralisation  and  debasement.  There  is  a  God  ;  it  is  only 
the  fool  who  denies  it  in  his  heart.  {R.  Palmer,  D.D.)  Practical  atheism: — This  is 
God's  world,  and  yet  how  godless.  God  made  it  and  the  men  in  it,  and  yet  "  in  all 
their  thoughts  God  is  not."  The  origin  of  this  alienation  is  in  the  heart,  and  the 
subject  of  it  is  pronounced  a  fool.  His  heart  is  just  what  it  would  be  were  there  no 
God.  Inquire— I.  To  v?hom  this  charge  may  be  applied.  1.  To  the  avowed 
atheist.  He  who  sees  the  proofs  of  God  in  creation  and  can  yet  deny  Him,  can 
neither  love  nor  fear  Him.  2.  To  those  who  entertain  false  views  of  His  character. 
They  deny  that  He  is  the  righteous  Governor  of  the  moral  world.  But  this  is  much 
the  same  as  to  say,  "  There  is  no  God."  3.  To  those  who  deny  or  disregard  the 
providential  government  of  God.  He  lives  without  God  in  the  world.  4.  To  those 
who  supremely  love  the  world.     Is  this  treating  God  as  He  ought  to  be  treated  ? 

5.  Who  have  no  delight  in  the  worship  of  God.     They  act  the  part  of  atheism. 

6.  Or  who  live  in  disobedience  to  God.  They  act  upon  a  principle  which  subverts 
the  sovereignty  of  God.  7.  All  who  reject  the  Gospel.  By  his  unbelief  the  man 
makes  God  a  liar.  What  more  could  the  avowed  atheist  do  ?  And  there  are  yet 
other  characteristics.  But  note — II.  The  folly  of  these  men.  This  appears — 
1.  From  the  fact  that  there  may  be  a  God.  No  man,  unless  he  himself  is  omni- 
present and  omniscient,  can  know  that  there  is  not  somewhere  some  other  being  to 
whom  these  attributes  belong.  If  there  be  no  God,  the  believer  suffers  no  loss  ;  but 
if  there  be,  then  the  atheist  is  undone.  2.  His  belief  is  contrary  to  the  fullest 
evidence.  He  shuts  his  eyes  and  stops  his  ears.  3.  They  deprive  themselves  of  all 
real  good.  For  without  faith  in  God  there  can  be  no  rational  enjoyment  of  the 
world.  Nor  can  there  be  true  excellence  of  character.  For  he  places  himself 
beyond  the  reach  of  every  motive  which  ennobles  character  and  elevates  man  to  the 
end  of  his  being.  Without  God  there  is  no  rule  of  action,  no  accountability,  no 
futurity,  no  retribution,  no  influence  to  operate  on  man  for  his  spiritual  good. 
And  he  must  become  supremely  selfish.  The  spirit  may  be  concealed  in  its 
true  nature  and  tendency.  But  take  oflf  the  garb,  let  the  real  selfish  heart  be 
uncovered,  let  it  be  seen  in  its  true  character,  and  we  abhor  it.  And  he  has 
no  support  under  affliction  or  support  on  the  bed  of  death.  But  believe  in 
God  and  how  altered  affliction  and  death  become.  A  man  may  have  lived  an 
infidel,  but  for  the  most  part  he  dies  a  terrified  believer.  How  must  he  feel, 
when  death  comes,  who  admits  that  there  is  a  God,  and  yet  that  he  has  lived 
as  if  there  were  none  ?  Beware  of  that  eternity  which  is  opening  on  you,  {N.  W. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Religion  and  materialism: — In  David's  time  it  was  "the 
fool "  who  said  there  was  no  God ;  in  ours,  it  is  the  philosopher  who  proclaims 
it  upon  the  housetop,  and  invites  us  all  to  bask  in  the  mild  light  of  the  science 
which  has  made  this  as  its  last  and  highest  discovery.  Some  may  think  it  out  of 
our  way  to  advert  to  discussions  which  touch  the  very  foundations  of  our  faith  and 
of  all  religious  belief  whatsoever,  because  we  feel  our  faith  to  be  too  firmly  fixed 
that  we  should  be  perplexed  by  any  such  questions.  But  we  can  never  tell  how 
near  us  these  questions  may  come,  or  in  what  shape  we  may  find  them  meeting  us. 
You  may  have  seen  a  coat  and  hat  which  at  their  beginning  were  articles  of  hand- 
some clothing,  and  were  worn  on  Sundays  and  in  good  society,  descending  through 
various  vicissitudes,  until  at  last,  perched  on  a  stick  in  a  turnip  field,  they  performed 
the  disingenuous  function  of  a  scarecrow  ;  and  just  so  an  opinion  or  a  theory  which 
was  at  first  started  on  a  solemn  occasion,  and  by  a  philosopher,  may  filter  down 
through  minds  of  less  intelligence  until,  half  understood  and  misapplied,  it  serves 
only  to  mislead,  and  fulfils  purposes  altogether  different  from  those  which  it  served 
originally.      I  have  found  far  down  in  the  ranks  of  society  such  distortions  of 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  XIV. 

opinions  and  speculations  which  were  safe  enough  in  learned  hands,  hut  full  of 
practical  mischief  in  those  that  are  unlearned.  Now  it  is  religion  that  is  at  stake 
iu  this  question  of  modern  materialism  ;  religion  not  only  as  a  faith  hut  as  a 
morality.  If  it  be  true,  all  religions  are  mere  impostures.  Note  its  theory  of  the 
origin  of  life.  You  know  the  theory  the  Bible  teaches,  that  God  is  the  Lord 
ana  giver  of  life.  And  it  would  not  he  essentially  contradicted  even  were  the 
theory  of  development  fully  proved,  as  it  is  not  yet.  Suppose  that  man  is  developed 
from  a  baboon,  and  differs  from  it  not  in  kind  but  only  in  degree.  Yet  you  could 
not  mark  the  stage  at  which  the  spirit  of  God  was  inbreathed.  But  that  makes  all 
the  difference.  Tliere  may  have  been  inferior  types  before  man's  outward  organism 
was  complete,  before  God  said,  "  Let  us  make  man."  Development  does  not  deny 
Scripture  truth.  But  the  new  theory  is  different.  It  ascribes  all  to  "matter," 
aflSrms  that  it  contains  within  itself  ' '  the  promise  and  the  potency  "  of  all  life,  and 
that  it  is  eternal ;  that  there  is,  in  fact,  no  such  thing  as  an  eternal  mind  but  that 
which  we  call  "matter,"  which  we  can  see,  handle,  weigh,  analyse,  is  that  and 
that  only  which  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  and  is  Divine  if  anything  is  to  be 
so  called.  They  who  say  all  this  set  aside  Scripture  as  incredible  and  irrelevant, 
for  they  do  not  believe  in  God  and  a  spiritual  world  ;  nor  in  anything  which  their 
scales  cannot  weigh,  their  process  analyse,  their  figures  calculate.  "  But,"  we 
ask,  "  why  is  eternal  matter  more  credible  than  an  eternal  mind?"  Both  cannot 
be,  but  why  should  we  be  shut  up  to  the  materialist's  creed  ?  We  find  it  easier  and 
better  to  believe  in  an  eternal  and  Holy  Spirit  which  devised  all  the  forms  and  laws 
of  life  than  in  an  eternity  of  senseless  atoms,  without  spirit,  without  intelligence, 
without  life,  coming  together  somehow,  and  somehow  forming  this  world  and  all 
things  we  see.  And  it  and  it  only  provides  a  basis  for  religious  life.  Materialism  is 
the  death  of  morality.  For  it  gets  rid  of  the  idea  of  God,  and  so  of  His  judgment  to 
which  I  am  accountable,  of  conscience  and  my  spiritual  nature  by  which  I  was  in 
some  sense  a  law  to  myself.  Farewell  to  all  dreams  of  a  higher  life,  to  all 
aspirations  after  the  Divine.  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for,"  &c.  This  the  natural 
conclusion.  All  our  Christian  ideas  are  fictions,  "the  baseless  fabric  of  arision" 
which  ought  to  and  which  will  fade  utterly  away.  It  is  easy  for  a  man,  a  man 
possibly  of  dull  spiritual  perceptions,  standing  amid  all  the  light  of  revelation  and 
on  the  safe  and  serene  height  of  Christian  civilisation,  to  follow  out  physical 
investigations  to  the  point  to  which  his  knowledge  can  conduct  him,  and  then  to 
turn  round  and  say,  "I  have  tracked  life  almost  within  sight  of  its  very  source, 
and  I  see  no  hand  of  any  God  in  it,  and  no  indication  of  any  spirit ;  but  let  ns 
pursue  our  researches  in  a  pure  and  just  temper,  and  let  us  strive  to  elevate  our  life 
and  to  live  nobly  "  ;  but  he  forgets  that,  but  for  the  revelation  of  that  God  whose 
existence  he  denies,  purity  and  justice  would  be  as  little  known  among  men  as 
among  the  lion  and  the  tiger,  and  the  higher  life  as  impossible  an  idea  to  a  human 
creature  as  to  an  ostrich  or  an  ape.  But  the  history  of  man  shows  that  the  elevating 
power  has  been  the  spiritual,  and  that  his  belief  in  the  unseen  has  been  the  parent 
of  the  noblest  achievements  of  his  life.  Take  these  away  and  he  sinks  at  once. 
Ponder,  therefore,  much  ere  you  abandon  the  Bible  for  the  teachings  of  this  new 
science.  {R.  N.  Storey,  D.D.)  The  creed  of  atheism  : — The  creed  is  one  of  the 
briefest  ever  penned — "  No  God."  Its  practical  result  is  the  saddest  ever  recorded 
— "  No  hope  "  (Eph.  ii.  10).  Deprive  us  of  a  personal  God  and  you  render  life  an 
enigma,  begun  without  an  author,  pursued  without  a  motive,  and  ending  without  a 
hope.  Are  there  any  who  hold  such  a  gloomy  creed  ?  Arrange  them  into  four 
classes — 1.  The  heathen,  who  are  ignorant  of  God.  They  acknowledge  not  one  God, 
but  many.  To  them  every  department  of  nature  has  its  presiding  deity,  to  whom 
homage  is  paid.  They  have  not  been  enlightened  by  the  beams  of  revelation. 
How  far  are  the  heathen  to  blame  for  continuing  in  their  ignorance  1  How  far  are 
the  works  of  creation  a  guide  to  men  in  finding  out  God  ?  There  is  wrapped  up  in 
nature  a  Divine  revelation,  which  mankind  may  read  by  exercising  their  faculties. 
2.  Atheists,  who  deny  the  existence  of  God,  They  assume  towards  Divine  things 
an  attitude  of  active  antagonism.  Not  liking  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge, 
they  wilfully  give  themselves  over  to  conduct  in  defiance  of  His  laws.  Their 
conduct  springs  from  wish  rather  than  conviction.  You  may  shut  your  eyes  to  the 
sunlight,  but  the  sun  still  shines  ;  you  may  deny  God's  existence,  but  God  remains. 
It  may  be  doubted  whether  there  is  such  a  person  as  a  positive  denier  of  God,  an 
atheist  from  intellectual  conviction.  To  say  "There  is  no  God  "  necessitates  a  claim 
too  sweeping  for  a  reasonable  man  to  make,  for  it  implies  that  he  who  makes  it  has 
himself  been  in  every  comer  of  the  universe  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  failed 


PSALM  xrv.]  THE  PSALMS.  211 

to  discover  the  Divine  Being.  Is  any  one  prepared  to  make  such  a  claim  ? 
3.  Agnostics,  who  say  we  have  no  knowledge  of  God.  A  numerous  class.  Their 
creed  is  a  negative  one.  They  differ  from  atheists  in  this,  that  while  the  creed  of 
pure  atheism  is  positive  denial  of  God,  agnosticism  consists,  roughly  speaking, 
in  making  no  assertion,  positive  or  negative,  respecting  the  Divine  existence,  but 
merely  in  taking  up  a  position  of  passive  intellectual  inditference.  He  simply 
"does  not  know";  God  has  not  made  Himself  known  with  sufficient  clearness. 
The  agnostic  creed  resolves  itself  into  an  attempt  to  trace  everything  to  natural 
causes,  and  thus  dispense  with  the  supernatural,  and  that  is  virtually  to  banish 
God  from  the  universe.  The  senses  are  proposed  as  the  test  of  truth.  But  to 
say  that  all  our  knowledge  comes  through  the  senses  is  not  sound  philosophy. 
Is  there  no  such  thing  as  intuitive  knowledge,  knowledge  that  comes  to  us  neither 
through  experience  nor  through  proof  ?  It  is  idle  for  the  sceptic  to  talk  of  the 
inadequacy  of  evidence.  What  he  wants  is  the  disposition  to  weigh  the  evidence 
he  has  got,  4.  Nominal  Christians,  who  disregard  the  claims  of  God.  A  sound 
creed  is  no  sure  guarantee  for  upright  conduct.  There  are  sham  professors. 
Among  professing  Christians  there  is  an  alarming  amount  of  practical  atheism. 
A  man's  denial  of  God  may  assume  a  variety  of  forms.  Application,  applying 
equally  to  the  four  classes.  (1)  They  have  no  guide  in  life.  (2)  They  have  no 
hope  in  death.  We  decline  to  accept  a  gospel  of  despair.  (Z).  Merson,  M.A.) 
Atheisms  and  atheisms: — This  text  is  much  misunderstood;  but  some  people 
take  a  wilful  delight  in  using  it.  To  tell  every  one  who  does  not  believe  in  God 
that  he  is  a  fool  is  charming,  it  saves  all  argument ;  after  that  assertion  argument 
is  useless.  But  there  are  atheisms  and  atheisms.  They  differ  widely  in  character, 
and  the  atheism  of  one  man  may  be  better  than  the  theism  of  another.  Belief 
in  what  men  have  called  God,  and  enthusiasm  for  what  men  have  called  religion, 
have  more  embittered  the  human  heart,  have  caused  more  bloodshed,  and  nave 
damned  more  hopes  than  all  the  atheisms  the  world  has  seen.  The  atheistical  tree 
has  grown  no  more  folly  than  the  papistical  tree.  Do  you  think  there  is  any  other 
atheism  than  the  one  of  which  you  and  I  are  constantly  guilty — the  atheism  of 
living  without  God  in  the  world  ?  Is  it  a  thing  to  be  angry  at  that  a  brother  has 
lost  the  hope  and  love  and  faith  which  are  so  sweet  to  us  ?  Should  we  not  grieve 
for  such  a  man  according  to  the  largeness  of  the  faith  we  hold  ?  The  very  fulness 
of  our  blessing  should  be  the  measure  of  our  pity.  I  can  find  no  scorn  for  him  who 
has  lost  the  basis  of  faith,  the  occasion  of  hope,  the  consolation  of  sorrow.  Another 
gracious  theological  business  is  to  tell  every  man  who  says  he  does  not  believe  in 
God  that  he  wants  no  God,  that  he  elects  to  live  in  darkness  rather  than  light 
because  his  deeds  are  evU.  I  need  not  go  abroad  to  learn  that  evil  living  dims 
faith  ;  but  to  say  that  it  is  not  possible  for  any  man  to  come  to  this  conclusion 
without  being  an  evil  liver  is  to  tell  a  simple  lie.  Cannot  you  see  the  unspeakable 
difficulty  of  reconciling  all  we  see  and  know  with  theological  belief?  The  man  who 
thinks  may  never  fail  to  find  the  grief  which  underlies  all  things,  but  may  sadly 
fail  to  find  the  master  hand  that  guides  the  whole.  Without  faith  what  can  man  do 
in  such  a  world  ?  The  God  our  theologians  show  us  is  fearful,  incomprehensible, 
and  only  to  be  wondered  at.  {George  Dawson,  M.A.)  Is  there  a  God? — I.  God 
IS  PROVABLE  BY  NATURE.  The  Very  commonness  of  nature  causes  us  to  regard  it  as 
a  thing  of  course,  rather  than  a  thing  of  God.  Nature,  no  doubt,  is  a  great 
mystery  ;  and  man,  even  when  developed  into  a  philosopher,  is  a  very  small  affair. 
But  we  are  so  constituted  that  we  cannot  help  believing  nature  to  be  an  outflow  and 
effect  of  a  Divine  cause,  whatever  opinion  we  may  hold  of  the  design  argument. 
Our  instincts  are  stronger  than  our  logic,  and  our  intuitions  than  our  metaphysics. 
Let  the  heart  say  there  is  no  God,  and  the  head  will  give  it  the  lie  ;  or  let  the  head 
say  there  is  no  God,  and  in  wrath  the  heart  stands  upland  says,  "There  is." 
II.  God  is  provable  from  history.  Do  not  nations  know,  do  not  individuals 
know,  do  not  you  and  I  know,  that  man  proposes,  but  God  disposes  ?  Whilst  the 
world  was  drowning,  and  Noah  was  floating,  was  a  God  not  ruling  ?  A  God,  you 
may  seek  Him  among  the  stars,  but  you  will  find  Him  best  among  the  incidents  of 
your  own  life.  Circumstances  reign,  but  God  rules.  III.  God  is  provable  from 
THE  SOUL.  A  world  long  lacking  its  man  would  not  be  a  God's  world.  God  has 
moved,  a  soul  has  been  created,  an  image  has  been  stamped,  and  there  is  a  man. 
Mind  only  could  produce  mind — a  living  God  only  could  produce  a  living  man. 
Therefore,  having  man  and  his  attributes  before  us,  we  must  admit  a  God.  Man 
shows  forth  God.  A  soul  without  a  God  is  an  impossibility.  IV.  God  is  provable 
FROM  CONSCIENCE.     The  wonderful  moral  faculty  of  the  soul.     It  is  a  marvellous 


212  THE  BIBLIGAL  ILLUSTRATOIL  [psalm  xiy. 

thing  to  see  a  Newton  soaring  among  the  stars  ;  but  it  is  a  more  marvellous  thing 
to  see  a  wayfaring  man  tremble  under  a  sense  of  sin.  Conscience  makes  cowards  of 
us  all  by  morally  demonstrating  that  there  is  a  God  to  punish  and  a  hell  to  be  punished 
in.  V.  God  is  pbovable  from  bevelation.  Amid  the  variety  of  circumstances 
which  tell  us  of  a  God,  revelation  stands  out  in  marked  prominence  as  a  mora 
excellent  way.  From  other  sources  we  get,  as  it  were,  the  pure  white  light  of 
Deity  ;  but  from  the  revelation  source  we  get  the  bright  rays  themselves.  (  W.  R. 
Graham.)  Chi  the  atheism  of  the  heart : — The  term  *'  fool "  is  not  to  be  confined  to 
one  who  is  really  deprived  of  the  exercise  of  reason.  We  must  understand  it  of  the 
sinner ;  not  merely  of  him  who  is  addicted  to  the  habits  of  vice  and  to  a  life  of  gross 
impiety,  but  of  every  one  who  is  under  the  power  of  the  natural  wickedness  of  his 
heart,  under  the  dominion  of  sin,  or  in  an  unrenewed  state,  although  his  life  should 
be  externally  sober  and  blameless.  It  is  declared  of  the  spiritual  fool  that  he  hath 
said  in  his  heart  "  There  is  no  God."  These  words  do  not  express  the  persuasion  of 
the  sinner,  but  his  affection  and  desire.  He  is  not  convinced  that  there  is  no  God, 
but  he  wishes  that  there  were  none.  I.  Some  general  observations  on  the 
SUBJECT.  There  cannot  be  a  speculative  atheist  in  the  world.  By  a  speculative 
atheist  is  meant  one  who  is  firmly  convinced  in  his  mind  that  there  is  no  God.  The 
works  of  creation  contain  so  powerful  a  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  the 
Supreme  Being  that  a  man  must  wilfully  shut  his  eyes  ere  he  can  presume  to  deny 
it.  This  tmth  is  further  demonstrated  by  the  tendency  of  all  earthly  things  to 
destniction.  The  dictates  of  conscience  afl"ord  the  same  testimony.  There  have 
been,  and  there  are,  many  heart-atheists  ;  those  who,  although  they  do  not  in  their 
judgments  disbelieve  this  fundamental  doctrine,  yet  ardently  wish  in  their  hearts 
that  they  had  no  ground  to  believe  it.  There  are  many  practical  atheists  ;  men 
who,  although  they  believe  the  being  of  God,  live  as  if  there  was  none.  Their  life  is 
a  practical  denial  of  His  being,  because  it  is  a  life  of  impiety.  Every  man  is 
naturally  an  atheist  in  heart.  The  natural  atheism  of  the  heart  is  greatly  confirmed 
and  increased  by  continuance  in  sin.  There  is  even  atheism  in  the  heart  of  every 
believer,  II.  Every  natural  man  is  under  the  po^ver  of  heart-atheism. 
1.  This  appears  from  his  neglect  of  religious  duties.  2.  The  power  of  heart- 
atheism  appears  by  hypocrisy.  3.  This  corruption  of  the  heart  breaks  out  in  the 
profanity  and  sensuality  of  the  life.  4.  By  perjury.  5.  Sinners  discover  the 
-atheism  of  their  hearts  by  the  false  apprehensions  they  entertain  of  the  justice  and 
mercy  of  God.  6.  And  by  not  being  influenced  in  their  conduct  by  an  impression 
of  the  Divine  omnipresence  and  omniscience.  7.  By  their  disregard  of  God's 
threatening  law.  8.  By  their  rejection  of  the  Gospel.  9.  By  their  contempt  of  the 
godly.  III.  The  consequences  of  heart-atheism.  It  tends— 1.  To  apostasy 
from  the  true  faith.  The  ground  of  faith  in  the  doctrines  of  Holy  Scripture,  in 
opposition  to  those  of  error,  must  be  the  authority  and  faithfulness  of  God  speaking 
in  His  Word.  2.  To  produce  an  apprehension  that  there  is  no  truth  in  Divine 
revelation,  and  that  all  religion  is  a  human  device.  3.  To  give  loose  rein  to  all 
manner  of  iniquity.  4.  To  produce  unreasonable  and  ill-grounded  fears.  5.  To 
drive  to  despair.  It  is  the  atheism  of  the  heart,  taken  in  one  point  of  view,  that 
makes  the  sinner  imagine  there  is  no  mercy  for  him.  6.  To  hurry  men  into  eternal 
perdition.  Exhort  (1)  those  who  are  freed  from  the  dominion  of  this  corruption  to 
pray  earnestly  for  deliverance  from  its  remaining  power.  (2)  Strive  to  resist 
atheistical  thoughts.  (3)  Beware  of  indulging  secret  sins.  (4)  Implore  a  continued 
sense  of  the  presence  of  God  on  your  mind.  (J.  Jamieson,  M.A,)  The  unreason- 
dbleness  and  mischief  of  atheism : — Whether  a  man  be  convinced  or  not  of  the  being 
of  a  God,  of  a  Providence,  and  future  judgment,  yet  not  to  believe  them  with  the 
heart  so  as  to  practise  and  live  according  to  such  a  belief,  is  a  very  great  folly. 
1.  It  is  a  great  folly  not  to  believe  practically  in  the  things  above  specified.  2.  It 
is  a  great  folly  to  say  there  are  no  such  things,  and  to  endeavour  to  persuade  others 
so.  {W.  Talbot,  D.D.)  Infidelity  illogicaj, : — "If  you  meet  with  an  atheist," 
.says  Dr.  Farrar,  "do  not  let  him  entangle  you  into  the  discussion  of  side-issues. 
As  to  many  points  which  he  raises  you  must  make  the  Rabbi's  answer,  '  I  do  not 
know.'  But  ask  him  these  seven  questions — 1.  Ask  him,  what  did  matter  come 
from  1  Can  a  dead  thing  create  itself  ?  2.  Ask  him,  where  did  motion  come  from  ? 
3.  Ask  him,  where  life  came  from  save  the  fingers-tips  of  Omnipotence  ?  4.  Ask 
him,  whence  came  the  exquisite  order  and  design  in  nature  ?  If  one  told  you  that 
millions  of  printer's  types  should  fortuitously  shape  themselves  into  the  Di%ane 
comedy  of  Dante  or  the  plays  of  Shakespeare,  would  you  think  him  a  madman  ? 
5,  Ask  him,  whence  came  consciousness  ?    6.  Ask  him,  who  gave  you  free  will  * 


PSALM  XIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  213 

7.  Ask  him,  whence  came  conscience  ?  He  who  says  there  is  no  God  in  the  face  of 
these  questions  talks  simply  stupendous  nonsense.  This,  then,  is  one  of  the  things 
which  cannot  be  shaken,  and  remain.  From  this  belief  in  God  follow  the  belief  in 
God's  providence,  the  belief  that  we  are  His  people,  the  sheep  of  His  pasture." 
{The  Young  Man.)  An  infidel  silenced: — A  London  clergj'^man  met  with  an 
infidel  who  wished  all  the  churches  were  swept  from  the  land,  beginning  with 
Spurgeon's.  "Then  which  of  your  infidels  will  be  the  first  to  take  upon  himself 
the  responsibility  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  orphanage  ? "  was  the  clergyman's  reply.  The 
silence  following  the  question  was  very  expressive.  {A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  They 
are  corrupt. — The  moral  condition  of  mankind: — I.  As  lamentably  depraved. 
1.  A  negative  description  of  depravity.  It  is  godless.  All  sinners  are  practical 
atheists.  Practical  atheism  is  a  thousand  times  worse  than  theoretical.  It  is 
worthless.  The  essence  of  a  good  work  lies  in  its  motive  ;  where  God  is  not  there  is 
not,  there  cannot  be,  any  virtuous  motive.  It  is  thoughtless.  They  do  not  think 
of  the  right  subjects  in  the  right  way.  It  is  prayerless.  How  should  they  call 
upon  Him  whose  existence  they  practically  deny  1  True  prayer  is  a  soul  habitude, 
and  thus  the  wicked  never  pray.  2.  A  positive  description  of  it — Foolish.  Sin 
and  folly  are  convertible  terms  ;  what  is  morally  wrong  in  principle  must  always  be 
inexpedient  in  action.  Widespread.  The  prevalence,  but  not  absolute  universality 
of  depravity  is  implied.  Undoubtedly  real.  Depravity  is  not  a  theological  fiction, 
not  a  mere  hypothesis,  but  a  fact  attested  by  Omniscience.  Transgression.  The 
depraved  are  called  "workers  of  iniquity."  They  work  at  it  habitually.  Putres- 
cent. The  sinner  is  frequently  represented  in  the  Bible  as  dead.  II.  As  peos- 
PECTIVELY  HOPEFUL.  Deliverance  was  to  come.  There  is  a  deliverance  planned 
for  the  world.  It  will  be — 1.  Like  an  emancipation.  2.  This  deliverance  is 
intensely  desired.  3.  It  comes  from  God.  4.  It  will  be  the  occasion  of  universal 
joy.     {Homilist. ) 

Ver.  3.  Tliey  are  all  gone  aside. — Man  falls  lower  and  lower : — The  mind  and 
heart  having  gone  astray — having  been  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow, — nothing 
became  easier  than  to  sink  into  ever-deepening  abysses  of  iniquity  ;  the  case  is  put 
also  negatively,  so  as  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  the  great  accusation,  "  There  is  none 
that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one."  Man  cannot  stop  in  a  morally  negative  condition. 
Again  and  again  this  solemn  lesson  has  been  forced  upon  us  by  the  whole  current  of 
history,  and  yet  an  insidious  temptation  assails  the  heart  with  the  tliought  that  it 
is  still  possible  to  forsake  religious  convictions  and  professions,  and  yet  to  preserve  a 
pure  and  noble  life.  The  backslider  and  the  truth-seeker  must  never  be  regarded  as 
one  and  the  same  person.  God  having  been  surrendered  as  the  supreme  thought 
of  the  mind  and  the  supreme  rule  of  con(1uct,  a  scene  of  infinite  confusion  presented 
itself:  workers  of  iniquity  carried  on  their  evil  service  as  if  in  darkness;  their 
mouths  were  opened  in  cruelty  upon  any  who  feared  and  worshipped  God  ;  the 
counsel  of  the  poor  was  treated  with  contempt,  and  the  poor  themselves  were 
devoured  rapaciously.  Where  reverence  has  been  abandoned  it  has  been  impossible 
to  sustain  true  and  self-sacrificing  philanthropy.  In  this  case  reverence  has  been 
formally  given  up,  and  so  a  great  act  of  moral  spoliation  has  been  accomplished. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one. — Man  fallen 
and  depraved : — I.  The  inborn  depravity  of  our  nature.  1.  What  saith  the 
Scripture  ?  2.  The  records  of  human  experience  are  to  the  same  effect.  See  the 
moral  misery  of  the  world.  Look  at  the  evidence  of  our  inborn  depravity  in  the 
manifold  outbreakings  of  wickedness  in  every  age  and  circumstance  of  life.  Notice 
also  the  corruption  and  infirmity  which  is  found  remaining  even  in  good  men.  We 
cannot  read  the  sins  of  Abraham,  and  David,  and  Peter,  and  Moses  without  many 
painful  and  humiliating  thoughts.     Who  can  stand  if  they  fell  ?     II.  In  what 

DOES  this    original   DEPRAVITY  OF    OUR   NATURE   CHIEFLY    CONSIST  1      1.    In  the 

depravation  of  our  intellectual  faculties.  The  mind  of  our  race  has  become  blinded. 
Civilisation  gives  no  Divine  knowledge.  2.  In  the  perversion  and  rebellion  of  the 
will.  By  the  will  we  understand  the  commanding  faculty  of  the  soul  by  which  it 
chooses  or  rejects  anything  that  may  be  offered  to  it.  3.  In  our  disordered  and 
alienated  affections.  Such  a  threefold  cord  against  God  and  holiness  we  might  well 
fear  could  not  be  broken.  But  thanks  be  to  God,  there  is  one  who  can  break  it. 
"Thanks  be  unto  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
{D.  Moore,  M.A.) 

Yers.  4-6.  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniqni^  no  knowledge  ?—C'(m9a«n(^  .*— 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv. 

I.  Conscience  infoemed.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  workers  of  iniquity  seem  like 
brute  beasts,  as  if  they  had  no  common  sense,  no  conscience  ;  but  they  had  these 
gifts,  and  it  is  this  fact  which  renders  their  conscience  so  dark.  1 .  We  sin  against 
our  understanding.  Our  reason  protests  against  sin.  2.  We  sin  against  conscience. 
Our  moral  sense  echoes  the  words  and  thunders  of  Sinai,  and  protests  against  trans- 
gression. 3.  We  sin  against  experience.  Our  history  shows  how  all  that  is 
desirable  and  honourable  lies  in  the  path  of  obedience,  and  how  paths  of  trans- 
gression are  paths  of  misery  and  shame.  Sin  is  not  a  mistake  or  a  misfortune,  but 
a  crime.  II.  Conscience  asleep.  1.  Asleep  as  to  men  (ver.  4).  2.  Asleep  as  to 
God.  "Call  not  upon  the  Lord."  Thus  men  stifle  their  moral  sense,  and  live 
neither  fearing  God  nor  regarding  man.  III.  Conscience  aroused  (ver.  5).  Men 
awake  to  find  that  "God  is  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous."  All  is  true  that 
the  righteous  held,  and  the  angry  God  is  ready  to  avenge  Himself  on  the  proud 
sinner.     ( W.  L,  Watkinson.) 


PSALM  XV. 

Vers.  1-5.  Lord,  wlio  shall  abide  in  TOy  tabernacle  1 — An  ideal  worshipper : — 
The  ideal  worshipper  of  Jehovah  is  painted  in  this  Psalm  in  a  few  broad  outlines. 
The  tone  of  the  Psalm  accords  with  the  circumstances  of  the  time  when  David 
brought  the  ark  to  Jerusalem.  The  two  main  points  are  :  the  conception  of  the 
guests  of  Jehovah,  and  the  statement  of  the  ethical  qualifications  of  these.  The 
J'salmist  consults  the  Master  of  the  House  as  to  the  terms  on  which  He  extends 
hosjiitality,  which  terms  it  is  His  right  to  prescribe.  The  character  of  the  God 
determines  the  character  of  the  worshipper.  The  roots  of  ethics  are  in  religion. 
The  Old  Testament  ideal  of  the  righteous  man  flows  from  its  revelation  of  the 
righteous  God.  Not  men's  own  fancies,  but  insight  gained  by  communion  with 
God,  and  docile  inquiry  of  Him  will  reliably  tell  what  manner  of  men  they  are 
who  can  abide  in  His  light.  Ver.  2  sums  up  the  qualifications  of  Jehovah's  guest  in 
one  comprehensive  demand,  that  he  should  walk  upii^'htly,  and  then  analyses  that 
requirement  into  the  two  of  righteous  deeds  and  truthful  speech.  True,  the  ideal 
here  is  not  the  full  Christian  one.  It  is  too  merely  negative  for  that,  and  too 
entirely  concerned  with  acts.  Therein  it  reproduces  the  limitation  of  the  earliest 
revelation.  .  .  .  Usury  and  bribery  were  common  sins,  as  they  still  are  in  com- 
munities on  the  same  industrial  and  judicial  level  as  that  mirrored  in  the  Psalm. 
The  Psalmist,  in  the  last  verse,  clearly  recognises  that  such  a  character  as  he  has 
outlined  not  only  dwells  in  Jehovah's  tent,  but  will  stand  unmoved  though  all  the 
world  should  rock.  Righteousness  is  the  one  stable  thing  in  the  universe.  {A, 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  good  citizen : — The  qualities  which  are  required  of  one,  not 
who  visits  the  tabernacle  merely,  but  who  dwells  in  it, — not  who  ascends  the  hill 
only,  but  rests  on  it, — are  those  of  an  ordinary  citizen,  those  without  which  a  man 
cannot  fulfil  any  of  his  common  duties  in  the  world.  Nay,  the  qualities  are  chiefly 
negative.  It  is  not  said  that  he  must  be  brave,  magnanimous,  ready  to  sacrifice 
himself.  He  is  not  to  be  corrupt  in  his  life,  not  to  take  reward  against  the 
innocent,  not  to  lie.  One  of  the  conditions  reads  as  if  it  were  drawn  merely  from 
the  civil  code  of  the  nation.  We  have  talked  as  if  people  might  be  very  good  in  all 
relations  with  their  neighbours,  and  yet  not  be  servants  of  God.  They  must  be 
something  over  and  above  true  citizens  for  this.  But  the  Old  Testament  books 
never  teach  this.  They  say  boldly,  "You  are  not  honest  and  straightforward 
in  your  dealings,  and  so  you  think  God  is  the  same  with  you.  You  do  not  trust 
Him.  You  do  not  confess  your  sins  to  Him,  nor  draw  nigh  to  His  holy  hill."  And 
has  the  New  Testament  altered  this  ?  Does  it  teach  another  lesson  ?  No  doubt 
there  is  this,  that  it  teaches  more  perfectly  how  we  may  rise  up  out  of  our  old  evil 
habits  ;  how  God  has  revealed  His  righteousness  in  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins. 
But  He  has  revealed  His  righteousness,  and  no  unrighteousness  can  have  fellowship 
with  Him.  Christ  is  our  help  to  this  righteousness,  that  we  may  share  His  nature. 
Now,  do  we  agree  to  this  1  Then  l^t  us  rejoice  and  sing  ;  for  Christ  has  ascended  on 
high,  that  we  might  be  Helivered  from  our  old  evil  life,  and  that  we  might  possess  a 
righteous  life  in  Him.  But  if  this  is  not  wliat  we  want,  if  we  wunt  a  religion  that 
will   make  us  easy  and  comfortable  in  the  frauds  which  belong  to  our  different 


PSALM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  215 

crafts  and  professions, — if  the  shopkeeper  lifts  up  his  voice  loudly  in  the  denuncia- 
tion of  Popery  or  some  unpopular  opinion,  that  he  may  more  securely  and  with  less 
sense  of  self-reproach  adulterate  his  goods,  and  use  the  false  weight  and  the 
deceitful  balances  which  are  abominable, — then  we  ought  to  be  told,  one  and  all  of 
us,  that  the  hill  of  Sinai,  with  all  its  thunders,  is  not  more  terrible  than  the  Zion  on 
which  God  dwells  ;  that  the  New  Testament  is  not  more  but  less  tolerant  of  such 
practices  than  the  Old,  and  that  God  will  appear  as  a  swift  witness  against  our 
criiues  and  falsehoods.  And  this  not  because  we  are  wanting  in  some  transcendent 
qualities  which  men  have  dreamed  of  as  befitting  a  Church,  but  because  we  have 
those  qualities  which  are  the  death  of  nations.  But  many  look  upon  the  nation  and 
the  Church  as  scarcely  compatible,  indeed,  as  mostly  the  opposites  of  each  other. 
No  doubt  that  with  the  theory  of  some  in  regard  to  the  Church  they  are  opposites. 
But  a  nation  is  pledged  to  maintain  a  wholesome,  practical,  manly  morality, 
entirely  opposed  to  that  morality  of  "  touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not "  which  a 
Church  such  as  I  have  described  must  by  its  nature  favour,  and  has  always  favoured 
in  fact,  — a  morality  consistent  with  the  grossest  deviations  from  common  truth  and 
honesty.  And  I  solemnly  conjure  Protestant  assertors  of  individual  holiness  to  see 
well  to  it  that  by  their  teaching  they  are  not  hindering  the  great  protest  against 
idolatry  which  is  involved  in  the  very  existence  of  a  nation  ;  whether  they  are  not 
aubstituting  certain  capricious  and  artificial  maxims  for  the  homely  morality  of  the 
Bible,  and  whether  thus  they  may  not  be  preparing  their  sons  for  that  very  system 
which  they  most  dread.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  would  maintain  that  a  holy 
Catholic  Church,  in  its  truest,  widest,  deepest  sense,  does  lie  beneath  the  holy  and 
righteous  nation  ;  that  they  are  not  contraries,  but  that  one  is  the  vestibule  to  the 
other ;  that  each  is  the  support  of  the  other ;  that  this  Church  is  no  imaginary  utopiau 
society,  no  artificial  society,  but  a  real  society  constituted  in  Christ  our  ascended 
Lord.  Thus  the  ascension  of  Christ  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  that  He  might 
fill  all  things,  is  the  meeting-point  between  these  two  Divine  principles,  these  two 
human  societies.  In  it  we  find  the  consummation  of  all  the  expectations  and  hopes  of 
the  old  world,  that  in  it  we  might  find  the  beginning  of  all  that  is  purest  and  holiest 
in  the  new.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  Who  shall  abide  with  God! — Religious 
people  are  concerned  to  know,  for  their  own  comfort,  whom  God  will  receive  at  last 
into  His  own  tabernacle  above.  I.  Abiding  in  God's  tabeenacle.  Or,  dwelling 
upon  His  holy  hill.  We  understand  these  expressions  as  meaning  God's  residence 
in  heaven.  Who,  then,  shall  dwell  with  God  in  glory  everlasting  ?  Let  us  take 
heed  to  our  ways,  and  walk  with  care  and  endeavour,  by  God's  grace,  to  make  our 
calling  and  selection  sure,  that  so  an  entrance  may  be  ministered  unto  us  abun- 
dantly into  the  everlasting  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ. 
IL  The  answer  to  this  eabnest  inquiry.  Those  who  walk  uprightly,  and 
work  righteousness,  and  speak  the  truth  in  their  hearts.  An  heir  of  heaven  walks 
with  God  as  reconciled  to  Him,  and  walks  uprightly,  i.e.  sincerely  and  honestly. 
If  we  work  righteousness  we  must  have  a  principle  of  righteousness  implanted  in 
U3  by  the  saving  grace  of  God.  The  expression,  "  speaking  the  truth  in  the  heart,"  • 
is  strikingly  singular.  It  shows  that  people  may  speak  the  truth,  and  yet  the 
heart  not  love  it ;  but  all  Christian  believers  are  inwardly  what  they  appear 
outwardly.  {R.  Horsfall. )  The  Church  militant : — This  is  a  question  by  David 
propounded.  Consider — 1.  Who  demandeth,  David,  the  man  of  God,  seeing  the 
wonderful  hypocrisy  of  men  in  frequenting  the  holy  assemblies,  and  making  a 
pretence  of  religion,  being  stirred  up  with  singular  love  to  true  religion,  inflamed 
with  a  fervent  zeal  to  God's  glory,  burning  with  earnest  desire  to  know  the  true 
saints  from  dissembling  hypocrites,  and  demanded  this  question — "  Lord,  who  shall 
dwell  in  Thy  tabernacle,  who  shall  rest  in  Thy  holy  hill  ? "  2.  Of  whom  he 
demandeth.  He  flieth  unto  God,  because  it  passeth  the  knowledge  of  men,  who 
only  look  into  the  things  apparent  and  outward.  The  Lord  alone  can  sunder  the 
wheat  from  the  chafi",  the  tares  from  the  wheat,  the  grain  from  the  cockle  and 
darnel.  It  is  the  Lord  who  is  Father  of  all  the  whole  family,  which  is  named  either 
on  heaven  or  on  earth,  which  is  His  Church  ;  it  is  the  Lord  that  is  the  chief 
Governor  and  Ruler  of  His  house,  which  are  His  subjects ;  it  is  God  alone  who 
keepeth  the  Book  of  Life  in  the  closet  of  His  own  heart,  wherein  He  hath  registered 
all  His  saints.  It  is  the  Lord,  and  not  men,  which  pitched  the  tabema«le  aad 
testimony  of  His  presence.  It  is  the  Lord  whose  property  and  prerogative  it  is  by 
right  to  Know  the  heart.  It  is  the  Lord  whose  eyes  are  upon  all  His  creature*. 
3,  What  is  demanded.  By  "tabernacle"  here  some  understand  the  Church 
militant.     By  the  "hill  of  God"  they  understand  the  Church  triumphant.    TIm 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv. 

question  tlien  is,  "Who  shall  I  make  some  reckoning  of,  to  be  Thy  Church  visible 
and  militant  1 "  The  Church  of  God  militant  here  on  earth  is  compared  to  the 
tabernacle,  and  to  the  holy  hill  of  God.  1.  To  the  tabernacle.  This  Moses  reared.  As 
the  tabernacle  was  pitched  here  and  there,  and  removed  from  place  to  place,  so  the 
Church  militant  hath  no  certain  rest  in  any  appointed  place,  but  is  now  in  this 
place,  now  in  that,  at  the  appointment  of  the  Lord.  As  in  the  time  of  the 
ark  and  tabernacle,  God  there  showeth  Himself  and  His  glory  unto  the  people, 
so  doth  the  Lord  reveal  Himself  in  the  Church  and  Assembly  of  His  saints, 
there  declaring  His  glory.  As  the  Lord  promised  by  Moses  to  dwell  in  the  taber- 
nacle, and  there  to  walk  and  be  conversant  with  Israel  His  people,  so  does  Almighty 
God  the  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  our  Saviour,  dwell  in  the  Church  which 
is  His  immaterial  tabernacle.  The  Church  and  Assembly  of  God's  saints  is  called 
the  House  of  God,  because  He  dwelleth  therein.  The  Church  militant  is  also  com- 
pared unto  a  hill  or  mountain.  1.  For  the  allusion  that  it  hath  unto  Mount  Zion, 
in  Jerusalem,  being  Mount  Moriah,  where  Abraham  would  have  sacrificed  his  son 
Isaac.  This  hill  was  a  type  of  the  true  Church,  among  whom  God  dwelleth  for 
ever.  2.  The  Church  may  be  called  a  hill  or  mountain,  for  the  height,  altitude, 
and  lifting  up  thereof.  3.  And  for  the  open  sight  thereof.  4.  In  regard  of  the 
strength  and  stayedness,  the  Church  may  be  called  a  mountain,  for  the  hilly  and 
high  places  are  most  strong  and  most  impregnable.  The  Church  is  called  a  ' '  holy 
hill,"  becatise  God  hath  sanctified  it  and  made  it  holy  for  Himself,  because  in  the 
Church  the  Lord  giveth  manifold  testimonies  and  signs  of  His  holiness,  and 
because  the  Lord  taketh  the  defence  of  His  Church  into  His  own  hands.  Doctrines 
— 1.  See  how  great  the  hypocrisy  of  man  oftentimes  is  in  the  pretence  of  godliness. 
2.  The  prophet  flieth  unto  God  in  the  discerning  of  the  true  saints  from  hypocrites. 
However  apparent  things  may  be  known  unto  men,  hidden  things  belong  only 
unto  the  Lord.  3.  Learn  not  to  play  the  hypocrite.  4.  When  we  lack  wisdom  we 
should  flee  unto  God  for  instruction.  5.  Learn  the  state  and  condition  of  the 
militant  Church.  It  is  but  as  a  tabernacle.  6.  In  this  world  the  saints  must  not 
look  for  any  rest,  continuance,  or  certain  abode.  7.  We  must  not  forsake  the 
Church  of  God  because  of  afflictions  and  troubles.  8.  Who  shall  rest  in  the  holy 
hill  of  God  ?  The  Church  militant  rejoices  in  the  hope  of  happiness  to  come. 
9.  There  is  no  tnie  and  sound  rest  save  in  the  holy  hill  of  God.  {R.  Tumbull.) 
Earth  as  seen  from,  the  holy  hill  of  communion  with  God: — Unto  this  mountain,  if 
wo  should  ascend  but  in  thought,  as  Scipio  once  did  in  his  dream,  and  from  thence 
should  behold  the  earth,  we  should  easily  contemn  this  inferior  world  with  the 
desires  thereof.  For  the  whole  globe  of  the  earth,  together  with  the  water,  which 
seemeth  now  so  great  unto  us,  if  we  could  see  it  from  the  highest  heavens,  would 
appear  unto  us  like  a  mote  in  the  sun.  But  if  withal  we  felt  the  unspeakable  joys 
of  heaven,  and  from  thence  should  cast  down  our  eyes  unto  this  valley  of  tears, 
there  to  behold  the  vanity  of  vanities,  as  Solomon  saith,  it  cannot  be  expressed 
with  how  fervent  a  desire  we  should  be  inflamed  to  have  our  habitation  in  heaven. 
Peter,  when  as  he  was  present  in  the  transfiguration  of  Christ  in  the  Mount  Thabor, 
and  had  a  taste  of  the  heavenly  glory,  he  was  straightway  ravished  therewith,  and 
desired  greatly  to  remain  there.  "  Ix)rd,"  saith  he,  "  it  is  good  being  here,  let  us 
make  three  tabernacles,"  &c.  ((?.  Dovmame.)  Dwelling  on  the  holy  hill: — Our 
abode  in  the  mountain  of  God  is  expressed  in  the  word  "dwelling,"  whereby  two 
things  are  signified,  perpetuity  and  rest.  Perpetuity,  for  there  the  children  of  God 
remain  not  as  pilgrims  for  a  time,  but  as  citizens  and  heirs  for  ever.  Whereupon 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  also  called  an  heavenly  inheritance,  wherein  are  ever- 
lasting habitations,  and  an  inheritance  immortal  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not 
away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  us.  Again,  the  word  "dwelling"  importeth  rest. 
For  there  the  children  of  God  do  not  wander  as  pilgrims,  neither  are  subject  to  any 
molestations,  but  do  wholly  rest  from  their  labours.  And  for  that  cause  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  called  the  rest  of  God,  and  as  it  were  an  eternal  Sabbath.  In 
respect  whereof  the  land  of  Canaan  was  a  type  of  our  heavenly  country.  {Ibid. ) 
The  sovZ  of  Tnan  turiied  towards  heaven : — Man  is  a  mirror,  and  it  is  an  all-important 
matter  which  way  the  mirror  is  turned.  If  downwards,  it  can  reflect  only  earthly 
things, — the  mire,  the  dirt,  the  filth  of  the  earth  ;  if  turned  upward,  it  may  reflect 
the  heavens,  with  all  its  glory  of  sun,  inoon,  aTid  stars.  The  mirror  turned  down- 
ward is  the  carnal  mind,  the  mirror  turned  upward  is  the  spiritual  mind.  Some- 
times in  an  instant  of  time  the  inversion  is  accomplished,  and  he  who  before  was 
of  the  earth  earthy,  comes  to  discern  and  reflect  the  things  of  God  and  heaven. 
{A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)         A  question  and  an  answer : — Question  :  Who  is  the  man 


PSAXM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  217 

who  would  be  able  to  ascend  unto  that  hill  of  God  where  the  highest  visions  of  the 
Almighty  may  be  perceived  ?  The  answer  is  :  The  man  whose  life  is  blameless. 
All  that  follows  is  a  description  of  the  moral  qualifications  of  such  a  man.  What  is 
striking  in  the  Psalm  is  the  moral  principle  which  seems  to  underlie  it.  There  are 
laws  in  the  spiritual  kingdom,  and  the  Psalmist  gets  a  glimpse  of  these  spiritual 
laws,  and  he  makes  them  the  subject  of  his  poem.  The  law  here  is  this,  that  the 
condition  of  power  in  life,  and  the  condition  of  the  vision  of  the  Almighty,  is  to  be 
found  in  the  ethical  or  moral  considerations.  It  is  the  man  whose  life  is  blame- 
less, the  man  whose  character  will  bear  investigation,  the  man  whose  whole  being 
and  nature  are  animated  by  a  strict  regard  of  what  is  morally  right  and  true,  that 
comes  by  degrees  to  this  possession  of  strong  invincible  character,  and  that  capacity 
for  seeiug  the  highest  things  of  God.     There  is  no  idea  here  that  the  Psalmist  can 

I  purchase  the  vision  of  God  by  the  payment  of  so  much  good  done.     To  do  that 

\  would  have  been  to  vitiate  the  whole  moral  basis  of  the  idea  ;  for  if  a  man  seeks 
heaven  for  profit  he  is  not,  of  course,  a  heavenly-minded  person.  Morality  and 
spirituality  must  be  genuine  and  sincere  if  they  are  to  be  moial  or  spiritual  things 
at  all.  What  the  Psalmist  does  set  forth  is  this,  that  the  conditions  of  this  insight 
and  power  of  life  lie,  not  so  much  in  the  possession  of  intellectual  force  as  in  the 
possession  of  moral  capacities.  There  is  a  constant  tendency  to  confuse  religion 
with  theology.  Theology  is  only  the  scientific  expression  of  the  ideas  which  are 
incorporated  in  religion.  Religion  itself  is  quite  different.  A  man  may  be  religious 
who  has  very  small  theological  opinions.  Our  power  of  seeing  Divine  things  does  not 
depend  so  much  upon  our  moral  integrity  as  upon  our  spiritual  devotion.  Religion  is 
a  moral  sympathy  between  the  soul  of  the  creature  and  the  spirit  of  the  Creator.  It 
is  the  moral  sympathy  between  you  and  me  in  this  world  and  the  great  God  who 
put  us  into  this  world.  Tliat  is  what  is  said  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  "  If  any 
man  will  do  His  will," — if  a  man  has  a  moral  desire  to  follow  out  the  Divine  ideal  in 
his  life,  if  his  soul  is  in  sympathy  with  the  Divine  moral  earnestness,  then  he  shall 
be  able  to  understand  ;  he  will  gain  a  perception  of  the  meaning  of  God's  action,  and 
the  vision  of  God  which  would  otherwise  be  denied  him.  Observe  the  wonderful 
way  in  which  the  same  thought  underlies  the  great  creation  of  the  Italian  poet. 
This  Psalm  is  a  sort  of  "Divine  Comedy"  in  miniature,  for  it  exactly  expresses 
the  thought  which  Dante  had  in  his  mind.  What  are  the  conditions,  according  to 
Dante,  in  which  a  man  can  enter  into  the  vision  of  the  great  paradise  over  his  head  ? 
He  must  have  understood  evil,  and  seen  it  in  all  its  hideousness,  and  must  have 
overcome  and  climbed  that  steep  of  purgatory,  disciplining  by  degrees  the  moral 
defects  in  him,  until  at  last,  when  he  climbs  to  the  summit  of  the  mount  of 
purgatory,  he  is  the  immovable  man,  the  man  who  is  crowned  with  crown  and 
mitre,  as  god  over  himself.  And  only  when  that  is  achieved,  when  that  moral 
sincerity  is  at  last  made  a  real  thing  in  him,  is  he  capable  of  ascending  under  the 
guidance  of  Divine  truth  into  the  lofty  regions  of  paradise.  This  is  exactly  the 
same  thought.  What  an  enormous  source  of  joy  that  ought  to  be  to  the  human 
heart.  Let  us  remember  that  we  have  within  us  a  Divine  Spirit  that  is  constantly 
prompting  us  to  higher  things.  {W.  Boyd  Carpenter,  D.D.)  Practical  Chris- 
tianity : — Religion  is  not  a  far-off,  bnt  a  pressing  and  everyday  affair.     The  very 

I   humblest  of  mankind  may  be  the  greatest  saint  of  God.     It  is  only  small  and 

ignorant  natures  which  shrink  from  lowly  tasks.     Nothing  can  be  ignoble  which  a 

noble  purpose  glorifies.     In  this  Psalm  yon  have  the  things  necessary  for  the  man 

who  may  claim  the  high  blessing  of  God.     What  are  they  ?    Strange  to  say,  they 

!  are  precisely  those  things  that  we  should  demand  of  the  ordinary  English  gentle- 

■  man,  of  the  ordinary  English  tradesman,  of  the  ordinary  English  working  man. 
Mere  morality,  you  may  say,  and  for  the  most  part,  negative  morality.     David  does 

;  not  say  he  was  to  be  brave,  magnanimous,  self-sacrificing.  He  only  says  that  he 
must  not  be  a  liar  or  a  slanderer,  or  one  who  wrongs  others,  or  takes  rewards  against 
the  innocent.  You  may  be  t"nipted  to  say,  surely  David  puts  the  scale  too  low  ! 
Had,  then,  David  a  less  overwhelming  sense  than  we  have  of  the  High  and  Holy  One 
who  inhabiteth  eternity  ?  If  you  think  in  that  way  to  get  over  the  difficulty  you 
are  mistaken.  But  is  it  really  so  small  a  thing  to  keep  innocency  and  do  the  thing 
which  is  right  ?  The  New  Testiinicnt  speaks,  over  and  over  again,  identically  the 
-  same  language.  David's  truth,  and  the  truth  of  Christ  Himself,  is,  that  those  who 
desire  to  be  one  with  God,  every  one  who  nameth  the  nixme  of  Christ,  must,  as  the 
first  essential,  depart  from  iiiii(uity.  You  cannot  escape  tLe.se  conclusions  by  saying, 
"Yes,  Christ  spake  thesr  things  before,  and  not  after,  His  great  work  was  finished, 
and  would  have  preached  otherwise  if  He  had  preached  alter  His  resurrection."     If 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv. 

you  make  that  answer  you  subject  yourselves  to  the  overwhelming  refutation  of 
Scripture.  See  the  Epistle  of  James,  the  Lord's  brother.  See  also  the  loftiest  and 
most  spiritual  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  that  to  the  Ephesians.  If  you  would  rest  in 
God's  holy  hill  this  is  quite  certain,  you  must  keep  innocency,  and  do  the  things 
that  are  right.  [Dean  Farrar.)  The  diizen  of  Zion  described: — The  Psalm  ^ 
consists  of  a  question  and  an  answer,  David  asks  the  question.  He  was  a  good  x^ 
man,  concerned  for  his  own  soul.  He  asks  it  of  the  Lord,  for  He  is  the  infallible 
Teacher  and  Law-giver.  He  asks  it  in  Old  Testament  terms,  speaking  of  the  tabernacle 
and  the  holy  hill  of  Mount  Zion.  The  doctrine  arising  from  the  words  is  this — It 
challengeth  every  one's  most  serious  consideration  what  sort  of  persons,  sojourning 
with  oSi  here,  shall  be  inhabitants  of  heaven  hereafter.  Therefore  let  us — 1.  Show 
WHAT  IS  IMPLIED  IN  THIS  CONSIDERATION.  1.  That  all  shall  not  be  inhabitants  of  '-^ 
heaven  ;  some  will  perish.  For  all  the  sons  of  men  will  not  be  saints  in  heaven. 
-There  will  be  a  great  company  on  Christ's  left  hand  at  the  great  day,  doomed  to 
everlasting  fire  (Matt,  xxv,  41).  -And  many  of  those  who  are  now  about  the  taber- 
nacle will  be  amissing  in  heaven  (Matt,  vii.  21-23),  To  see  those  who  had  not  the 
tabernacle  of  God  among  them  fall  short  of  heaven  is  not  strange  ;  but  many  who  in 
external  privileges  have  been  exalted  to  heaven  will  be  brought  down  to  hell 
(Psa.  cxxv.,  ult.).  .'2.  They  are  persons  of  a  distinguished  character  now  who  shall 
be  inhabitants  of  heaven  hereafter.  Not  of  the  common  gang  of  the  world,  nor  of 
professors  either.  Many  professors  are  foolish  virgins,  that  will  get  heaven's  door 
cast  in  their  face  (Matt,  xxv,  2-4),  3.  In  this  world  they  sojourn  with  God  in  His 
tabernacle  who  shall  be  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  hereafter.  The  world  is  no  more 
their  home.  They  are  in  a  peculiar  manner  consecrated  to  God  and  His  service 
(Rom.  xii.  1).  All  Israel  had  access  to  the  outer  courts  of  the  tabernacle,  but  the 
priests  only  to  the  tabernacle  itself.  They  are  admitted  to  communion  with  God  in 
ordinances.   And  they  will  enter  heaven  because  they  are  bom  from  above.    II.  Thb 

BBAS0N8  WHEREFORE  WE  SHOULD  THUS  SERIOUSLY  CONSIDER   WHO  SHALL  BE  THB 

INHABITANTS  OF  HEAVEN.  1.  Because  there  is  a  heaven  and  a  hell,  and  all  must 
land  in  one  or  the  other.  2.  And  the  laws  of  heaven  admit  only  such  as  are 
qualified  for  it.  3.  None  who  are  capable  of  such  considerations  will  ever  see 
heaven  without  it.  The  work  of  gi'ace  begins  here  (Lam.  iii.  40).  4.  If  we  misS 
heaven  we  are  ruined  eternally.  III.  Application  of  the  subject.  1.  Consider 
of  it  fixedly  and  solemnly.  2.  With  application  to  yourselves,  3,  And  practically 
that  you  may  set  yourselves  to  strive  for  heaven.  4.  Divinely,  as  in  the  sight  of 
heaven.  For  remember,  heaven  is  not  plenished  but  with  chosen  people  (2  Cor.  vi. 
17,  18).  Hell  receives  all  comers,  but  not  so  heaven.  None  can  come  there  but 
sealed  ones,  such  as  God  has  marked  for  Himself  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  And  separated  ones 
from  the  sinful  world  (1  Cor.  vi.  11  ;  Matt.  xxv.  32),  As  your  life  is  here,  so  will  it 
be  there.     (T.  BosUm,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2,  He  that  walketli  uprightly, — The  model  church  member : — The  visible 
Zion  was  typical  of  the  Invisible  Church.  In  the  "holy  hill "  God  dwelt  in  symbol, 
in  the  Universal  Church  He  dwells  in  viewless  spiritual  realness.  Spiritual  citizen- 
ship is  the  common  privilege  and  honour  of  all  who  in  moral  character  are  abreast 
of  the  standard  fixed  in  this  Psalm.  Who  is  a  Christian,  or  a  worthy  member 
of  Christ's  Church,  is  here  perfectly  outlined  by  the  infallible  pen  of  inspiration. 
I.  What  he  is,  in  word,  deed,  life.  He  only  abides  in  God's  tabernacle  who 
I  abides  in  God,  and  God  in  him.  1.  His  walk  is  in  uprightness.  This  implies 
^  spiiitual  life,  exercise,  health,  progress.  2.  His  work  is  in  righteousness.  This 
implies  activity,  beneficent  activity,  the  holiest  activity ;  righteous  in  its  motive, 
method,  and  results.  3.  His  words  in  truth  and  love :  this  implies  conversation 
and  testimony.  Invisible  truth  shrines  itself  in  holy  words,  holy  works,  a  holy 
walk.  Being  upright,  the  Christian  cannot  be  crooked  ;  being  righteous,  he  cannot 
be  a  hypocrite  ;  being  truthful  in  his  heart,  he  cannot  be  false  in  his  conversation 
and  deportment,  II.  What  he  is  not  (vers.  3,  5).  1.  No  backbiter.  2.  No  evil- 
doer. 3.  No  receiver  of  slander.  Were  there  no  ears  to  receive  scandal  there  would 
soon  be  no  tongues  to  speak  it.  The  receiver  of  such  pernicious  goods  is  as  vile  as 
the  trader  in  them.  4.  No  usurer.  5.  No  patron  of  bribery.  He  daily  endeavours 
to  maintain  a  pure  hand,  a  pure  purse,  a  pure  ear,  a  pure  heart,  and  a  pure  tongue. 
He  will  contemn  evil  wherever  found ;  honour  holiness  however  manifest ;  swerve 
not  from  his  word  when  given,  though  to  personal  injury,  and  be  permanently 
^  steadfast  in  his  work  of  faith  and  life  of  love.  {J.  0.  Keen,  D.  D. )  Life,  a  walk : —  v 
/   Now,  if  we  be  travellers  or  way-faring  men  we  are  to  be  careful  of  three  things.    I 


PSALM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  219 

1.  That  we  go  in  the  right  way  ;  for  if  we  go  out  of  our  way,  the  farther  we  go  the 
farther  we  shall  be  from  our  journey's  end.  This  way  is  the  true  religion  of  Christ, 
V,  which  in  the  Scriptures  is  called  the  way,  the  way  of  life,  the  way  of  peace.  2.  The 
next  thing  whereof  we  must  be  careful  is,  that  being  set  in  the  right  way  we  go 
forward  therein,  proceeding  from  faith  to  faith,  and  from  a  less  measure  of  grace 
unto  a  greater.  For  neither  must  we  stand  still  in  this  way,  neither  must  we  go 
back  ;  for  if  we  do  so,  how  shall  we  come  to  our  journey's  end  ?  We  must  take  heed 
therefore  lest  we  be  non-proficients,  and  let  us  fear  lest  when  we  cease  to  be  better 
we  begin  to  be  worse.  3.  The  third  thing  is,  that  we  be  upright  in  the  way,  neither 
treading  awry  by  secret  dissembling,  nor  halting  downright  betwixt  God  and 
Mammon.  {G.  Downame.)  The  God-approved  man : — The  man  with  whom  God 
will  hold  communion  is  described.  I.  As  TO  what  he  is.  1.  He  is  a  man  of  whole 
heart  and  life  ;  who  does  the  will  of  God,  and  speaks  the  truth  because  he  loves  it : 
it  dwells  in  his  heart,  and  he  speaks  it  there  first,  before  he  speaks  it  with  his  tongue. 
Luther  says,  "  It  is  a  beautiful  order.  First,  the  person  must  be  acceptable  by  clean- 
ness (alluding  to  the  Vulgate  translation, — qui  ingreditur  sine  macula) ;  then  the 
work  by  righteousness  ;  then  the  word  by  truth.  So  God  has  regard  to  Abel  (him- 
self) first,  and  then  to  his  gifts."  2.  He  is  not  one  who  injures  others,  either  by 
worid  or  by  deed  or  by  listening  and  propagating  slander.  Tliis  is  the  meaning  of 
the  last  clause.  It  may  be  rendered  either:  "hath  not  received  (i.e.  from  others) 
a  reproach,"  &c.,  or,  "  hath  not  taken  up,"  i.e.  has  not  stooped  so  as  to  pick  up  dirt 
out  of  the  dunghill,  that  he  may  cast  it  at  his  neighbour  ;  or,  "  hath  not  lifted  up," 
i.e.  so  as  to  place  it  like  a  burden  upon  his  neighbour.  II.  As  to  what  hk  is  not. 
1.  He  is  one  who  turns  away  from  the  evil  and  honours  the  good,  who  regards  as 
inviolable  the  sanctity  of  an  oath  (not  a  casuist  who  sets  himself  a  pretext  for 
breaking  his  word  when  it  is  inconvenient  to  keep  it).  2.  He  is  not  one  who  loves 
usury  or  takes  bribes.  The  taking  of  usury  is  strictly  forbidden  in  the  law,  and 
denounced  by  the  prophets.  Kimchi's  casuistic  distinction,  that  it  is  lawful  for  the 
Jew  to  take  usury  of  strangers,  but  not  of  his  own  people,  is  very  significant ;  and, 
like  too  many  Christian  as  well  as  Jewish  interpretations  of  Scripture,  framed  to 
support  a  convenient  and  profitable  practice.  Thus  in  heart,  in  tongue,  in  actions, 
in  conduct,  as  a  member  of  society,  he  is  alike  free  from  reproach.  Such  is  the 
figure  of  stainless  honour  drawn  by  the  pen  of  a  Jewish  poet.  Christian  chivalry 
has  not  dreamed  of  a  brighter.  We  have  need  often  and  seriously  to  ponder  it.  For 
it  shows  us  that  faith  in  God,  and  spotless  integi-ity,  may  not  be  sundered ;  that 
religion  does  not  veil  or  excuse  petty  dishonesties ;  that  love  to  God  is  only  then 
worthy  the  name  when  it  is  the  life  and  bond  of  every  social  virtue.  Each  line  is, 
as  it  were,  a  touchstone  to  which  we  should  bring  ourselves.  To  speak  truth  in  the 
heart — to  take  up  no  reproach  against  a  neighbour — would  not  the  Christian  man 
be  perfect  (teleios)  of  whom  this  could  be  said  ?  And  that  other  trait  in  this  Divine 
character,  "  who  honoureth  them  that  fear  the  Lord," — is  there  a  surer  test  of  our 
spiritual  condition  than  this,  that  we  love  and  honour  men  because  they  love  Christ  ? 
(j.  J.  Stewart  Perowne,  B.D.)  Uprightness  of  character : — "He  that  walketh  up- 
rightly." Let  us  mark  the  strong,  masculine  beginning  of  this  description  of  the 
man  who  is  privileged  to  be  familiar  with  the  Lord.  He  is  "upright"!  He  is 
characterised  by  backbone.  There  is  nothing  crooked,  wriggling,  or  soft  about  his 
temperament.  There  is  a  certain  straightness  and  rigidity  which,  in  all  his  relation- 
ships, is  never  absent.  And  mark  where  this  fine  masculinity  begins.  He 
"  walketh  "  uprightly  !  The  word  is  descriptive  of  the  movements  or  motions  of 
life.  Now  our  motions  are  determined  by  our  motives.  Our  motives  are  our  motors. 
To  understand,  therefore,  the  inner  content  of  the  Psalmist's  words,  we  must 
get  away  into  the  inward  parts,  into  the  secret  places  of  the  life.  Our  motives  must 
be  strong  and  upright,  "rhere  must  be  nothing  limp  and  compromising  about  them. 
"Strength  and  beauty"  must  be  in  our  sanctuary.  {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The 
citizen  of  Zion  an  upright  walker: — I.  Unfold  this  character  ok  walkino 
UPRIGHTLY.  1.  It  is  union  in  the  frame  and  disposition  of  his  heart  (Psa.  cxxv.  4). 
There  cannot  be  uprightness  of  life  without  uprightness  of  heart.  If  the  cripple  is 
made  to  go  straight  his  legs  must  have  a  new  set  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  37).  2.  He  walks 
entirely  in  the  interests  of  religion  (Gen.  ivii.  1).  3.  He  walks  uniformly,  his 
religion  is  of  a  piece  (Col.  iv.  12).  As  John  the  Baptist  (Luke  vii.  24).  4.  He  walks 
in  the  way  of  all  known  duty,  as  thus  told  in  Luke  i.  6.  And  as  David  (Acts  liii. 
22),  Hence  he  will  be  free  from  gross  pollution  of  the  outward  man  (Psa.  cxix.  1). 
The  upright  want  not  their  spots,  sins  of  daily  infirmity, — but  they  will  not  wallow 
in  the  mire.     Nor  will  he  allow  himself  in  any  known  sin,  seen  or  unseen  of  man. 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv.. 

5.  He  walks  as  under  the  eye  of  God  (Psa.  xvi.  8).  6.  And  singly  (2  Cor.  L  12). 
As  opposed  to  the  "double-minded  man."  And  to  the  deceitful  (Col.  iii.  22).  And, 
the  selfish  (Eph.  vi.  5).  7.  And  he  walks  constantly  in  uprightness  (John  viii.  31). 
He  perseveres  in  the  Lord's  ways.  II.  Those  who  so  walk  shall  dwell  in 
HEAVKN.  For — 1.  Heaven  is  the  land  of  uprightness  (Psa.  cxliii.  10,  cxl. ,  ult. ).  2.  The- 
new  birth  which  is  from  heaven  makes  them  meet  for  heaven.  3.  An  upright  walk 
is  the  saint's  walk,  in  which  they  make  forward  to  the  kingdom  (1  Kings  iii.  6).  The- 
contrary  way  is  the  way  of  the  wicked  (Prov.  ii.  15).  4.  The  Lord  hath  in  His- 
Word  determined  this  (Prov.  xxviii.  18).  III.  Application.  This  truth  shows 
that  there  are  few  of  this  generation  that  will  dwell  in  heaven  if  they  turn  not  over- 
a  new  leaf.  For  men  do  cling  to  some  beloved  lust  or  other,  so  that  neither  the 
word,  nor  conscience,  nor  providence  can  make  them  part  with  it.  And  they  care- 
far  more  for  the  eye  of  man  than  for  the  eye  of  God  ;  and  are  impatient  of  reproof.. 
Contrary  to  Psa.  cxli.  5.  And  they  labour  not  to  approve  themselves  to  God  in 
their  dealings  ;  but  are  altogether  selfish,  considering  nothing  but  their  own  profit. 
( T.  Boston,  D.  D. )  The  marks  of  the  saints : — ' '  Thamim  "  therefore  we  may  rightly 
interpret  upright,  that  is,  void  of  dissimulation  ;  and  it  may  be  two  ways  considered  : 
(1)  as  referred  to  God,  and  so  it  signifieth  sincere,  or  void  of  hypocrisy  ;  (2)  as 
referred  towards  men,  and  so  it  signifieth  simple  or  void  of  guile.  So  that  he  iii% 
this  place  is  said  to  be  upright  who  is  void  of  hypocrisy  towards  God,  and  free  from 
guile  towards  men.  And  first  we  are  to  speak  of  uprightness  in  respect  of  God,  in 
handling  whereof  I  purpose  to  observe  this  order.  First,  to  show  what  it  is. 
Secondly,  that  it  is,  as  here  it  is  made,  a  note  proper  to  the  children  of  God.  Andi 
thirdly,  because  we  are  not  to  be  idle  hearers  of  this  discourse,  we  are  to  try  and 
examine  ourselves  whether  this  note  agreeth  unto  us  or  not.  And  fourthly,  if  we' 
do  find  our  defectiveness  therein,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  we  are  by  certain 
forcible  arguments  to  be  stirred  up  to  embrace  it.  And  lastly,  we  are  to  show  the 
means  whereby  to  obtain  it.  {O.  Doioname.)  What  uprightness  is: — I.  To- 
wards God.  1.  For  first,  to  be  upright,  it  is  to  walk  with  God,  or  before  God 
(as  the  Lord  saith  to  Abraham,  walk  before  Me  and  be  upright.  Gen.  rvii.  1),  that 
is,  so  to  lead  our  lives  as  in  the  sight  and  presence  of  God,  who  seeth  the  hearts 
and  searcheth  the  reins  of  men.  2.  Again,  to  be  upright  is  to  walk  with  a  right 
foot,  neither  covertly  treading  awry  with  Peter  (Gal.  ii. ),  nor  openly  halting  with 
the  Israelites  (1  Kings  xviii.  21).  3.  It  is  also  to  be  void  of  hypocrisy  and  doubling, 
not  to  have  an  heart  and  an  heart,  or  to  be  double  minded,  but  to  be  single  hearted. 
4.  Lastly,  this  virtue  of  uprightness  is  commended  unto  us  under  other  names, 
namely,  sincerity  and  truth,  sincerity  being  opposed  to  mixture,  and  truth  to  false- 
hood, both  which  hypocrisy  is.  II.  Now  that  ttpkightness  is  a  proper  note 
TO  the  citizens  of  heaven,  it  may  easily  appear  by  the  reciprocal  conversion  which 
is  betwixt  them.  For  if  all  the  citizens  of  heaven  be  upright,  and  all  that  be  up- 
right are  citizens  of  heaven,  then  is  it  manifest  that  uprightness  agreeth  to  all  that 
be  the  sons  and  heirs  of  God,  and  to  them  alone.     III.  It  behoveth  us  diligently 

to  try  and  examine  ourselves,  whether  this  note  doth  belong  unto  us  OR' 

not.  For  unless  we  be  upright  we  shall  not  rest  in  God's  holy  mountain,  but  must 
look  to  have  our  portion  with  hypocrites.  1.  And  first,  the  study  and  eudeavour  of 
the  upright  is  to  approve  himself  to  God.  2.  It  is  the  property  of  upright  men  to 
yield  simple  and  al.solute  obedience  to  the  "Word  of  God,  denying  themselves,  their 
own  affections  and  reason.  3.  A  third  sign  of  an  upright  man  is,  so  to  contemn  the 
world,  and  to  be  weaned  from  worldly  desire,  as  that  he  preferreth  the  keeping  of  a. 
good  conscience.  4.  The  property  of  an  upright  man  is  to  hate  sin  as  well  in  him- 
self as  in  others,  and  to  be  exercised  in  judging  himself.  5.  The  upright  man 
repenteth  of  all  sin,  having  an  unfeigned  purpose  and  resolution  to  abstain  from  all. 
sin,  and  not  to  retain  any  one,  howsoever  besides  and  contrary  to  his  purpose  he 
may  fail  in  some  particulars.  But  the  hypocrite,  howsoever  he  may  be  brought  to- 
abstain  from  diverse  sins  whereunto  he  is  not  so  much  addicted,  yet  he  will  be  sure 
to  cherish  and  retain  some  sin  or  sins  that  are  more  dear  unto  him.  6.  It  is  the 
property  of  the  upright  to  love  and  reverence  the  good  and  godly  for  their  godliness 
sake,  and  to  contemn  and  despise  the  wicked,  though  mighty  in  the  world,  because 
of  their  wickedness.  7.  It  is  the  property  of  the  upright  to  prefer  the  greater  and 
weightier  duties  before  the  less,  the  substance  before  circumstances,  the  works  either 
of  piety  or  mercy  before  ceremonies.  8.  Another  note  of  an  upright  man  is- 
humility.  As  contrariwise,  pride  is  the  companion  of  hypocrisy.  9.  Again, 
the  upright  man,  being  imbued  with  a  good  conscience,  is  confident  in  good 
causes  and  courageous  in  time  of  peril ;  ae  Solomon  saith,   "  He  that  walketht 


PSALM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  221 

uprightly  walketh  boldly"  (Prov.  x.  9,  xxviii.  1).  And  again,  "The  righteous 
are  bold  as  a  lion."  10.  It  is  the  privilege  of  an  upright  man  to  be  constant 
in  good  things  and  to  persevere  to  the  end,  keeping  also  a  continued  course  of 
piety  ;  for  the  upright  man  is  he  which  hath  built  upon  the  rock,  and  therefore 
cannot  utterly  be  overthrown  by  any  blasts  or  tempeste  of  temptations.     IV.  To 

CONSIDER  BY  WHAT  AKGUMENT  WE  MAY  BE  STIBEED  TIP  TO  EMBRACE  THIS  VIRTUE 
IF  WE  WANT   IT,  OR  TO   CONTINUE   AND   INCREASE  THEREIN    IF  WE   HAVE  IT.      Th» 

argument  may  be  reduced  to  three  heads,  the  excellency,  the  profit,  the  necessity  of 
uprightness.  But  if  neither  the  golden  reason  of  excellency  can  move  us,  nor  the 
silver  reason  of  profit  allure  us,  then  must  the  iron  reason  of  necessity  enforce  us  to 
integrity  and  uprightness  of  heart.  For  first,  such  is  the  necessity  thereof,  that 
without  integrity  the  best  graces  we  seem  to  have  are  counterfeit,  and  therefore  but 
glorious  sins,  the  best  worship  we  can  perform  is  but  hypocrisy,  and  therefore 
abominable  in  God's  sight.  For  uprightness  is  the  soundness  of  all  grace  and  virtues, 
as  also  of  all  religion  and  worship  of  God,  without  which  they  are  unsound  and 
nothing  worth.  Wherefore  in  the  Scriptures  it  is  required  that  our  faith  should  be 
unfeigned,  that  is,  such  a  faith  as  inwardly  purifieth  the  heart,  and  outwardly 
worketh  by  love ;  otherwise  it  is  not  a  true  and  a  lively,  but  a  counterfeit  and  dead 
faith.  Likewise  our  love  must  be  unfeigned,  that  is,  as  John  saith,  we  must  not 
love  in  speech  and  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  truth  ;  or  as  Paul  speaketh,  our  love 
must  proceed  from  a  pure  heart,  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  unfeigned.  Our  wisdom 
also  must  be  without  dissimulation.  Lastly,  our  repentance  and  conversion  unto 
God  must  be  unfeigned  and  from  our  whole  heart.  As  of  prayer :  to  the  acceptable 
performance  whereof  there  is  required  uprightness,  not  only  in  the  action  itself,  but 
also  in  the  life  of  him  that  prayeth.  V.  Let  us  observe  these  few  rules.  1.  Let 
us,  according  to  the  example  of  David,  learn  to  set  God  always  before  our  eyes, 
and  ourselves  in  the  sight  and  presence  of  God.  And  to  this  end  let  us  meditate  on 
His  omnipresence  and  omniscience.  2.  To  meditation  on  His  omnipresence  and 
omniscience,  let  us  add  the  consideration  of  His  omnisufficiency,  remembering,  as 
the  prophet  Hanani  said  to  Asa,  that  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  behold  all  the  earth, 
to  show  Himself  strong  with  them  that  are  of  an  upright  heart  towards  Him. 
3.  Thirdly,  to  the  former  let  us  join  a  serious  meditation  of  the  just  judgment. 
Hitherto  we  have  spoken  of  integrity,  as  it  is  referred  unto  God  ;  it  followeth  now 
that  we  should  entreat  thereof  as  it  hath  reference  unto  men.  For  as  we  must 
walk  before  God  in  truth  and  sincerity  without  hypocrisy,  so  must  we  have  our 
conversation  among  men  in  simplicity  and  singleness  of  heart,  without  dissembling 
or  guile.  To  conclude,  therefore,  this  first  note  :  seeing  uprightness  is  made  a  proper 
mark  of  the  true  child  of  God  and  citizen  of  heaven,  wliereas  contrariwise  dissimu- 
lation and  deceit  are  the  brands  of  the  wicked  :  it  behoveth  every  one  to  apply  this 
note  to  himself.  Dost  thou  walk  uprightly  without  hypocrisy  towards  God,  with- 
out guile  towards  man !  happy  and  blessed  art  thou,  for  thou  shalt  see  God,  and  as 
thou  art  now  a  sound  member  of  the  Church  militant,  so  shalt  thou  be  an  inheritor 
of  glory  in  the  triumphant.  Dost  thou  not  walk  in  sincerity  towards  God,  and 
simplicity  towards  men,  but  in  hypocrisy  and  dissimulation?  then  most  fearful 
is  tnine  estate,  unless  thou  repent,  for  thou  hast  no  part  or  fellowship  in  the 
doctrine  of  salvation,  or  in  the  communion  of  saints,  but  thy  portion  shall 
be  assigned  thee  with  hypocrites,  where  is  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 
{O.  Dovmame.)  The  marks  of  the  saints: — 1.  The  first  virtue  and  mark  to 
know  the  true  sainta  of  God  is  innocency  of  life.  By  "walking,"  in  Holy 
Scripture,  conversation  and  living  is  usually  understood.  Men  call  them  innocent  ~ 
whose  life  is  hurtless  and  harmless,  neither  stained  nor  defiled  with  iniquity 
or  gross  sins.  The  honest  conversation  of  the  saints,  confirmed  with  imdoubted 
testimony  of  a  good  conscience,  is  the  harmless,  hurtless,  simple,  innocent, 
and  upright  life,  in  this  place  required.  In  which  virtue  excelled  Abel,  Noah, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph,  Job,  Moses,  David,  and  the  prophets,  Paul,  Peter, 
and  the  Apostles.  Righteousness,  doing  good,  and  performing  of  Christian  duties  to 
all  men  is  often  in  Holy  Scripture  commended  unto  the  saints  and  lively  members 
of  God's  Church,  and  the  doctrine  thereof  is  large  and  ample  in  the  Sacnd  Word. 
2.  The  second  thing  wherein  the  people's  duty  consisteth  is  to  give  the  labourer  his 
wages,  the  workman  his  hire.  There  is  righteousness  of  parents,  of  cluhlren,  of 
servants,  of  the  hirer  and  the  hired.  3.  The  third  virtue  in  God's  .saints  is 
truth  in  tongue  and  talk.  The  tongue  is  a  necessary  instrument  in  our  comnioii  life. 
Truth  is  required  both  in  our  private  and  in  our  public  life.  To  this  there  are 
sundry  motives  and  things  to  stir  us.     The  commandment  of  Almighty  God.     The 


222  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xr. 

example  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Gospel  which  we  profess  is  truth,  and  the  word  of 
truth.  We  are  inspired  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whose  temples  we  are.  The 
Spirit  is  called  the  Spirit  of  truth,  who  "leadeth  into  all  truth."  To  speak  the 
truth  from  the  heart  is  a  mark  of  them  which  shall  dwell  in  God's  tabernacle. 
Doctrines :  1.  Hypocrites,  by  their  external  life,  are  easily  descried.  2.  Religion 
and  faith  are  showed  by  works  of  the  second  table.  3.  Sacrifices  without  works  of 
mercy  are  rejected.  4.  We  need  not  divide  ourselves  from  the  Church  because  there 
are  some  hypocrites  in  it.  5.  There  is  no  sound  rest  in  the  Church  for  any  but  those 
who  desire  to  live  honestly.  {R.  Tumbull.)  Practical  piety : — St.  Anthony,  the 
first  hermit,  lived  a  hard  and  strait  life  in  the  wilderness,  praying  constantly  and 
meditating  on  the  things  of  God.  There  is  a  story  that  a  voice  came  to  him  from 
heaven,  saying,  "  Anthony,  thou  art  not  so  perfect  as  is  a  cobbler  who  dwells  at 
Alexandria."  Anthony,  hearing  this,  rose  up  forthwith  and  took  his  staff,  and 
went  on  his  journey  till  he  came  to  Alexandria,  where  he  found  the  cobbler.  The 
cobbler  was  astonished  to  see  so  great  a  saint  come  to  his  house.  Then  Anthony 
said  to  him,  ' '  Come,  tell  me  thy  whole  manner  of  life,  and  how  thou  spendest  thy 
time."  "Sir,"  said  the  cobbler,  "  talents  I  have  few,  and  good  works  have  I  none, 
for  my  life  is  but  simple,  for  I  am  but  a  poor  cobbler.  In  the  morning,  when  I 
rise,  I  pray  for  the  whole  city  wherein  I  dwell,  especially  for  all  such  neighbours 
and  poor  fnends  as  I  have  ;  after  that  I  set  to  my  work,  in  which  I  spend  the  whole 
day  to  get  my  living  ;  and  I  keep  from  all  falsehood,  for  I  hate  all  manner  of  deceit ; 
wherefore,  when  I  make  any  man  a  promise  I  keep  it  and  perform  it  truly.  In  the 
evening  1  teach  and  instruct  my  children,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  serves  me,  to  fear 
God  and  do  His  will.  And  this  is  the  sum  of  my  simple  life."  In  this  story  wa 
see  how  God  loves  those  that  follow  their  calling  and  use  His  gifts  as  best  they  can. 
Allied  virtxtes : — The  virtues  all  lock  into  each  other.  They  cannot  stand  alone. 
Like  the  stones  of  an  arch,  no  one  of  them  can  be  wanting  without  making  all  the 
rest  insecure.  That  character  alone  is  trustworthy  in  which  each  virtue  takes  its 
relative  position,  and  all  are  held  in  place  and  confirmed  by  the  keystone  of  a  living 
faith  in  the  great  central  fact,  that  there  is  a  God  of  infinite  goodness  and  truth, 
whose  commandments  are  the  law  of  life  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come. 
Worketh  righteousness. — A  mark  of  Zicn  citizejiship : — The  favoured  citizen  is  a 
man  who  is  industrious  in  goodness.  Righteousness  is  not  to  him  a  mere  depart- 
ment of  moral  philosophy  upon  which  he  has  to  speculate  or  theorise,  nor  is  it  satis- 
fied with  the  delineations  wrought  out  in  language  by  heroic  poets  ;  it  is  a  condition 
of  spirit  and  heart  before  God  admitting  of  culture  within  and  sanctified  expression 
without.  The  good  man  may  be  described  as  building  a  life-temple  of  righteous- 
ness ;  he  is  continually  looking  around  for  material  which  he  can  put  into  his 
building,  and  his  satisfaction  is  in  proportion  to  the  largeness  and  beauty  of  the 
edifice.  Those  who  are  addicted  to  iniquity  are  described  as  "workers  "  ;  they  are 
not  ashamed  of  their  wicked  profession,  nor  is  their  service  marked  by  self-indulged 
lethargy.  The  sojourner  in  the  holy  city  is  not  only  to  do  a  better  work,  he  is  to 
do  it  with  more  serious  determination  and  industry.  He  is  not  to  be  silent  in  the 
presence  of  unrighteousness,  but  is  at  all  costs  to  speak  out  in  favour  of  true  justice 
and  virtue.  In  his  circle  he  is  to  be  known  as  a  man  who  will  spare,  no  effort  to 
advance  righteousness,  whether  found  in  the  claims  of  an  individual,  the  necessitiee 
of  an  institution,  or  the  policy  of  a  nation.  Suspect  any  form  of  so-called  righteous- 
ness that  can  be  silent  in  the  presence  of  oppression,  and  that  can  let  wickedness 
pass  by  without  indignant  repudiation.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Righteousness  in 
character: — "And  worketh  righteousness."  There  is  not  only  backbone  but 
energy.  And  the  energy  is  of  a  special  and  peculiar  kind.  It  maketh  ever  for 
righteousness.  It  is  not  only  that  the  issues  of  life  are  just  and  equitable  ;  the 
equity  is  found  in  their  very  birth.  The  word  "worketh"  might  be  equally  well 
translated  ' '  ordaineth. "  The  friend  of  God  inspects  the  wishes  and  purposes  and 
ambitions  which  appear  in  his  life.  He  marks  their  tendency  and  their  aim.  Some 
of  these  wishes  and  ambitions  he  sui)presses  and  rejects  ;  others  he  selects  and  wel- 
comes. He  discriminates  among  his  allurements.  He  "  ordains"  the  purposes  that 
make  for  righteousness,  and  labours  for  their  judgment.  So  that  the  companion  of 
God  is  holding  in  his  secret  place  a  perpetual  ordination  service.  The  righteous 
suggestion  and  aspiration  are  being  continually  approved  aad  ordained  to  the  min- 
istry of  actual  life  and  service.  {J.  H.  Jmoett,  M.A.)  The  transcendent  importance 
of  social  morality : — It  is  time  to  preach  the  doctrine  of  this  Psalm — that  there  ia 
no  true  religion  apart  from  social  morality.  I.  An  abiding  friendship  with 
God  is  essential  to  the  happiness  of  man.      The  idea  in  ver.   1  is,    "Who 


JBALM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  223 

shall  have  permanent  friendship  with  Thee  ? "  This  is  the  cardinal  want  of 
humanity.  That  an  abiding  friendship  with  God  is  essential  to  man's  happiness 
may  be  argued  from  two  things.  1.  From  what  is  in  the  human  soul.  There  is  a 
trusting  tendency,  an  infinite  craving,  a  sense  of  guilt.  2.  From  what  is  in  the 
Divine  Word.  Nothing  is  more  clearly  taught  in  the  New  Testament  than  this. 
II.  Social  morality  is  essential  to  an  abiding  friendship  with  God. 
Look  at  social  morality  in  two  aspects.  1.  As  described.  (1)  Honest,  (2)  truthful, 
(3)  unmalicious,  (4)  character-regarding,  (5)  rigorous  fidelity,  (6)  unextortionate, 
(7)  incorruptibly  just.  2.  As  necessary.  Our  conduct  towards  man  determines  our 
relation  to  God,  and  our  destiny  too.  True  social  morality  always  implies  true  love 
to  God.  It  is  the  practical  expression  of  true  religion.  Then  true  social  morality 
is  the  best  means  of  promoting  genuine  Christianity.  That  man  does  most  to  spread 
the  religion  of  Jesus  who,  in  all  his  connections  with  his  fellow-men,  does  the  ju3t 
and  the  generous,  the  merciful  and  the  Christ-like.  {Homilist.)  The  citizen  of 
Zion  a  worker  of  righteousness : — It  is  he  that  worketh  righteousness  now  shall 
dwell  in  heaven.  I.  Unfold  the  character.  1.  He  is  a  believer  in  Christ,  and 
righteous  by  faith.  He  that  does  not  work  faith  works  no  righteousness  at  all 
(John  vi.  29).  For  a  man  must  first  be  righteous  before  he  can  work  it.  A  soul  not 
united  to  Christ  cannot  do  this  (John  xv.  5).  All  life  and  strength  spiritual  is  in 
Christ  (1  John  v.  11,  12).  Until  the  conscience  be  purged  from  dead  works  ho 
cannot  work  righteousness  (Heb.  ir.  14).  Truth  is  the  spring  of  all  good  works 
(1  Tim.  i.  6  ;  1  John  iii.  12  ;  Heb.  xi.  4).  Therefore,  let  men  work  as  they  will, 
until  they  be  true  believers  in  Christ  they  cannot  work  righteousness.  Works 
without  faith  ruin  the  soul.  See  the  Pharisee  (Luke  xviii.  11,  12).  But  the  citizen 
of  Zion  is  a  believer.  Also  faith  without  works  ruins  a  man,  for  it  is  but  a  dead 
faith  (James  ii.  11,  14).  2.  He  worketh  righteousness  towards  God.  He  seeks  to 
give  God  His  due  (Matt.  ixii.  21  ;  Isa.  Ixiv.  6  ;  Actsx.  85).  3.  He  worketh  righteous- 
ness towards  man.  He  will  wrong  no  man.  He  will  be  blameless  and  harmless 
(Phil.  ii.  15).  He  seeks  to  do  as  he  would  be  done  to  (Matt.  vii.  12).  And  makes 
conscience  of  giving  every  one  their  due  (Rom,  xiii.  7).  Not  that  they  are  perfect. 
Good  Asa  was  not  (2  Cnron.  xvi.  10,  and  in  Gen.  ix.  9).  But  their  sins  are  not 
deliberate  and  of  set  purpose.  He  is  a  sincere  worker  of  righteousness  towards  man. 
Hence  in  his  particular  relations,  in  the  special  duties  of  such  relation  as  husband, 
wife,  parent,  master,  &c.  In  a  word,  he  is  conscientiously  righteous  in  all  things 
that  concern  his  neighbour  (Mic.  vi.  3).  II.  Confirm  this  doctrine.  Consider — 
1.  God  is  a  righteous  God.  2.  It  is  the  great  end  of  redemption  that  Christ's 
people  may  be  righteous  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  3.  And  judgment  will  be  according  to 
works.  Then  be  workers  of  righteousness.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  And  speaketli 
the  truth  in  his  heart. — The  citizen  of  Zion  a  speaker  of  truth  in  his  heart : — This  is 
the  third  character  of  the  citizen  of  Zion.  Not  only  does  he  speak  truth,  but  he 
speaks  it  in  his  heart ;  that  is,  his  thoughts  and  reasonings  are  consistent  with 
truth.  The  doctrines  that  are  deducible  from  the  text  are,  that  those  that  shall  be 
inhabitants  of  heaven  speak  the  truth  here,  and  that  they  speak  it  in  their  hearts 
as  well  as  to  others.  As  to  the  first  of  these.  I.  Explain  the  character  or 
PART  of  the  character  OF  A  CITIZEN  OF  ZiON.  Therefore  inquire — 1.  What 
is  truth  ?  Pilate  asked  this  question,  but  stayed  not  for  the  answer.  Truth  is  a 
sacred  harmony  or  agreement  of  things.  Anatomists  have  observed  that  the  tongue 
in  man  is  tied  with  a  double  string  to  the  heart.  And  so  in  truth  spoken  there  is 
necessary  a  double  agreement  of  our  words  with  our  hearts — that  we  say  what  we 
think ;  and  with  the  thing  itself,  that  it  be  as  you  say.  2.  What  is  it  to  be  a 
speaker  of  truth !  He  makes  conscience  to  speak  out  the  truth  seasonably  (John 
xviii.  37).  We  are  to  remember  (Eccles.  iii.  7,  and  Prov.  xxix.  11).  This  was  Doeg's 
sin  (Psa.  Iii. ).  Those  whose  tongues  are  like  a  loose  window  in  wind,  ever  clattering, 
have  little  wit  or  grace.  Talkativeness  is  both  a  sign  of  little  awe  of  Grod  and  is 
the  badge  of  a  fool  (Eccles.  v.  3  ;  Prov.  xiv.  33).  But  the  citizen  of  Zion  speaks  the 
truth  seasonably,  that  is,  when  called  of  Grod  to  speak  it.  This  call  may  be  private 
and  providential,  or  public  and  authoritative,  as  in  the  courts  of  justice.  When  thus 
called  he  will  speak  fully,  freely,  clearly,  and  sincerely  (2  Chron.  xix.  9  ;  2  Cor.  ii. 
17).  3.  And  of  speaking  nothing  but  the  truth  (Isa.  Ixiii.  8  ;  2  Cor.  xiii,  8).  We 
are  never  to  lie  (Job  xiii.  7,  8).  Let  us  heed  this  both  in  speaking  to  God  (Psa.  Ixviii. 
36)  and  to  men  (Eph.  iv.  25).  II.  Confirm  the  doctrine.  It  is  evident,  for 
— 1.  In  the  saints  the  image  of  Satan  is  defaced  (Rev.  xxi.,  ult.).  But  2.  The  image 
of  God  is  repaired  in  them,  and  truth  is  a  shining  lineament  is  it  (Eph.  iv.  24  ; 
Tit.  i.  2 ;  Numb,  xxiii.  19).     And  3.   The  Christian  life  is  a  walking  in  truth 


224  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv. 

(3  John  3).  There  is  truth  of  heart  in  true  Christians,  and  that  makes  truth  of 
conversation.  4.  And  the  Lord  has  expressly  declared  that  liars  shall  inhabit  hell, 
not  heaven,  for  God  is  the  God  of  truth.  III.  Application.  1.  This  doctrine 
writes  death  on  the  faces  of  two  sorts  of  people — those  who  are  concealers  of  the 
truth  which  God  calls  them  to  speak  out,  and  all  liars.  This  sin  is  a  common  vice  ; 
hut  it  is  the  black  brand  of  one  who  shall  never  see  heaven.  They  are  barred  out 
of  heaven  thereby,  whether  they  be  jesting  liars,  who  lie  to  make  others  merry 
(Hos.vii.  3  ;  Prov.  xxvi.  18,  19),  or  officious  liars,  who  will  lie  to  do  themselves  or 
others  a  good  turn.  Or  pernicious  liars,  whose  motive  is  mischief  (Prov.  vi.  17). 
Or  covetous  liars,  who  lie  to  get  gain  (Prov,  xx.  14),  Or  proud,  boasting  liars,  who 
lie  to  raise  others'  esteem  of  them  (Prov.  xxv.  14).  Or  flattering  liars,  who  lie  to 
curry  favour  with  those  they  flatter  (Psa.  xii.  2,  3  ;  Prov.  xxvi.  28,  xxix.  5).  Or 
fearful  liars,  who,  for  fear  of  others,  make  lies  their  refuge,  as  children  often  do 
(Psa.  Iviii.  3) ;  and  others,  too,  who  are  but  children  in  courage  (Prov.  xxix.  25  ; 
Rev.  xxi.  8).  Or  talkative  liars  (Prov.  x.  19).  Those  who  are  given  to  much  talking 
will  hardly  be  found  regardful  of  truth.  Or  rash  liars,  who  lie  through  inadvert- 
ency and  customary  looseness  as  to  their  words  (2  Sam.  xiii.  30).  Much  sin  is  con- 
tracted this  way.  2.  Speak  the  truth  and  keep  from  lying,  for  God  is  the  God  of 
truth  (Deut.  xxxii.  4  ;  Tit.  i.  2),  but  the  devil  is  the  author  and  father  of  lies  (John 
viii.  44).  He  ruined  the  world  at  first  with  a  lie  (Gen.  iii.  4,  5).  Lying,  too,  is 
the  bane  of  human  society,  and  a  mean,  base,  and  contemptible  thing,  the  native 
product  of  the  corruption  of  nature,  the  spawn  of  the  old  serpent  left  in  men's 
hearts  (Psa.  Iviii.  3),  and  is  an  abomination  to  God  (Prov.  vi.  17-19,  xii.  22),  and 
will  ruin  your  souls  for  evermore.  Check  it  in  the  young,  as  ye  love  their  souls. 
{Ibid.)  On  truth: — David  begins  this  short  but  beautiful  Psalm  with  a  warmth 
of  devotion  peculiar  to  himself.  Among  other  essential  requisites  that  entitle  a 
human  being  to  the  distinguished  honour  of  dwelling  on  the  Lord's  holy  hill,  truth 
and  sincerity  are  particularly  noticed.  Some  of  the  obligations  that  the  religion  of 
Christ  inculcates  are  limited  by  circumstances  and  will  admit  of  being  modified  by 
diff'erent  causes.  But  the  great  virtue  of  truth  is  necessary  at  all  times,  and  binding 
under  all  the  relations  of  life.  It  is  never  a  mere  ornament  of  the  mind,  or  a  virtue 
of  the  middle  order  whose  absence  may  be  excused.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  all 
virtue  ;  it  is  the  broad  basis  on  which  they  all  rest.  I  would,  then,  impress  upon 
you  its  sacred  obligations  and  guard  you  against  the  shame,  the  guilt,  and  degrada- 
tion of  falsehood.  There  is  nothing  which  is  a  greater  recommendation  of  character. 
It  at  all  times  inspires  confidence  and  ensures  respect.  It  is  a  proof  of  innocence 
and  fortitude  combined.  As  charity  is  said  "to  cover  a  multitude  of  sins,"  so  an 
inviolable  habit  of  truth  will  atone  for  many  imperfections.  But  its  loveliness  is 
never  more  conspicuous  than  when  contrasted  with  falsehood.  There  is  nothing  that 
men  more  complain  of  than  of  being  mistaken.  Treachery  and  hypocrisy  are  by  no 
means  unusual ;  but  duplicity,  equivocation,  and  behaviour  that  has  a  tendency  to 
deceive  are  amongst  the  commonest  breaches  of  truth,  and  are  the  causes  that  daily 
increase  the  mortifications  and  disappointments  of  the  young,  while  they  confirm 
the  selfishness  and  suspicion  of  the  aged.  The  violator  of  truth,  therefore,  is  the 
great  coiTupter  of  the  world.  Those  whom  nature  intended  to  be  open,  confidential, 
and  aS'ectionate,  freeze  into  misanthropy,  or  else  become  uncandid,  suspicious,  and 
deceitful.  But  the  liar  is  soon  caught  in  his  own  snares.  He  will  not  be  believed 
even  when  he  speaks  the  truth,  and  gains  no  credit  even  when  he  deserves  it. 
Whatever  other  good  qualities  he  may  have,  the  vice  of  falsehood  poisons  the  whole. 
He  can  do  no  good  to  others,  for  no  one  will  confide  in  him.  If  we  inquire  why 
men  violate  truth,  we  shall  find  that  their  motives  are  often  vanity,  or  fear  and 
imbecility.  Some  are  so  greedy  of  a  name  that  they  care  not  how  they  violate 
truth  if  they  can  gain  belief.  Who  will  deny  that  the  vanity  of  giving  men 
information  has  often  polluted  the  pages  of  history,  degraded  philosophy  almost  to 
imposture,  and  inspired  even  sceptics  with  something  more  than  the  credulity  of 
ignorance  ?  But  truth  is  yet  more  violated  from  fear  and  imbecility.  Where  this 
is  so  our  pity  and  indulgence  are  appealed  to.  Children  are  often  led  to  transgress 
truth  for  the  sake  of  some  trifling  gratification  before  they  can  be  aware  of  the 
depravity  of  falsehood.  They  think  it  the  nearest  way  to  enjoyment,  and  an  easy 
and  effectual  method  to  escape  detection.  It  is  difficult  to  correct  this  when  it  pro- 
ceeds from  fear,  for  it  often  requires  much  fortitude  to  speak  the  truth.  Men  feel 
this  ;  how  much  more  children.  They  should  be  taught  in  their  earliest  years  that 
there  is  no  fault  ao  great  as  falseho<)d.  Needless  severity  or  a  capricious  kind  of 
alternating  tyranny  and  indulgence  terribly  foster  this  yice.     And  nothing  but 


TBXLU  XV.]  THE  FSALMS.  226 

religion  will  help  ns  herein.  God  is  the  Ood  of  truth.  His  works  and  His  Word 
alike  declare  that  "Goil  is  truth."  {J.  Hmvlett,  B.D.)  Truth  in  the  heart: — 
"And  speaketh  the  truth  in  his  heart."  When  a  man  speaks  the  truth  to  himself 
he  will  speak  it  to  his  neighbour.  The  beginning  of  all  sincerity  is  to  be  sincere  in 
one's  self-communings.  No  man  will  be  guilty  of  equivocation  who  does  not  first 
deceive  himself.  The  companion  of  God  is  absolutely  frank  and  candid  with  him- 
self. In  his  heart  is  to  be  found  the  fair  angel  of  truth,  and  he  does  not  defile  her 
garments  by  any  ill  doctrine  of  reserve  or  self-evasion.  [J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Speech  spoilt  by  the  underlying  evil  of  a  corrupt  heart : — A  lady  who  had  lost  a  little 
daughter  took  a  photograph  and  painted  it  with  rare  skill  and  laid  it  in  a  drawer, 
and  was  grieved  to  find  that  soon  afterwards  it  was  covered  with  ugly  blotches. 
She  painted  it  again,  and  it  was  again  marred.  There  was  something  wrong  with 
the  paper,  some  chemical  ingredients  in  undue  proportions.  No  matter  how  beauti- 
ful the  picture  made  on  its  surface,  up  ever  out  of  the  heart  of  the  paper  would 
come  the  ooze  of  decay.  So  with  human  life,  the  heart  being  wrong  spoils  all. 
(J.  E.  Miller.) 

Ver.  3.  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his  tongue.  — Row  may  detraction  be  best  lyre- 
vented  or  cured?— T\i6  abuses  of  the  tongue  are  many,  one  whereof  is  the  malignity 
of  it.  A  man  can  scarce  come  into  any  company  but  his  ears  shall  be  filled  with 
censures,  detractions,  reproaches ;  party  against  party,  person  against  person. 
Doctrine  :  It  is  the  duty,  and  must  be  the  care,  of  every  true  Christian  not  to  take 
up  a  reproach  against  his  neighbour.  I.  Explain  the  point.  1.  Who  is  my 
neighbour  ?  It  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  Gospel  that  every  man  is  made  my  neigh- 
bour. Augustine  says,  "Every  man  is  a  neighbour  to  any  other  man."  Kimchi 
says,  "  He  is  called  my  neighbour  with  whom  I  have  any  business."  2.  What  is  a 
reproach?  (1)  It  is  nothing  else  but  an  evil  report,  or  an  evil  speech,  unduly 
uttered  concerning  another.  A  report  is  evil  in  two  ways — when  it  is  evil  in  itself, 
a  false  report,  and  when  it  is  evil  to  a  man's  neighbour,  when  your  speech  tends  to 
your  neighbour's  disparagement  and  defamation.  (2)  When  a  man  publisheth  a 
neighbour's  secret  infirmities  or  sins.  (3)  When  a  man  aggravates  the  real  or  sup- 
posed faults  of  his  neighbour  either  in  opinion  or  practice.  Men  often  censure  others 
for  things  indifferent  and  of  small  moment,  as,  for  example,  in  their  habits  and 
garbs.  3.  What  is  it  to  take  up  a  reproach  against  a  man's  neighbour  ?  It  is  a 
defective  manner  of  expression,  and  therefore  is  diversely  supplied,  but  especially 
and  most  reasonably  two  ways — when  he  takes  it  up  into  his  mouth,  and  is  the  first 
raiser  of  the  reproach,  or  the  spreader  and  promoter  of  it ;  and  when  he  takes  it  into 
his  ear.  This  he  may  do  when  he  quietly  permits  it,  and  gives  no  check  to  it ;  when 
he  hears  a  reproach  greedily,  and  with  delight ;  and  when  he  easily  believes  a 
reproach.  11.  The  proof  of  the  doctrine.  This  shall  consist  in  the  represen- 
tation of  the  sinfulness  and  injury  of  this  practice  of  censuring,  backbiting,  and 
reproaching  of  others.  1.  It  is  injurious  to  God.  As  an  invasion  of  God's  preroga- 
tive :  a  manifest  breach  of  His  laws.  It  is  against  particular  and  express  Scriptures  ; 
against  the  fundamental  law  of  love  and  charity;  against  the  "royal  law"  of 
Christ ;  against  the  great  law  of  maintaining  peace  among  men  ;  against  the  great 
command  laid  upon  all  Christians,  of  excelling  other  men  :  it  is  a  sin  against  the 
whole  design  and  scope  of  the  Scriptures  ;  it  is  a  great  injury  to  God,  because  it  is  a 
confederacy  with  God's  greatest  enemy,  the  devil.  2.  It  is  an  injury  done  to  thy- 
self. Hereby  thou  dost  contract  guilt,  the  worst  of  all  evils.  Hereby  thou  dost  expel 
or  weaken  that  excellent  grace  of  love,  that  necessiiry  and  fundamental  grace,  that 
sweet  and  amiable  grace.  Hereby  thou  dost  lay  a  f  undation  for  thy  own  reproach. 
3.  It  is  a  great  injury  to  the  person  whom  thou  dost  censure  and  reproach.  Thou 
dost  rob  him  of  the  best  treasure  he  hath  in  the  world.  Hereby  thou  dost  disenable 
him  from  getting  good,  both  as  to  his  outward  and  as  to  his  inward  man.  Hereby 
thou  dost  hinder  him  from  doing  of  good  in  the  world.  4.  It  is  a  great  injury  to 
other  men.  Thou  corruptest  others  by  thy  example.  Thou  art  a  disturber  of 
human  society.  Thou  art  a  great  enemy  to  the  Church  of  God.  Two  questions — 
1.  May  I  not  speak  evil  of  another  person  when  It  is  true  ?  A  man  may  be  faulty  in  so 
doing.  A  man  may  speak  evil  of  another  person  when  necessity  requires  it.  If  you 
will  speak  evil  of  others,  do  it  in  the  right  method.  In  doubtful  cases  silence  is  the 
safest  way.  2.  If  the  man  I  speak  against  is  an  enemy  of  God  and  His  people? 
Well  to  remember  there  is  much  sinful  zeal  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church.  Con- 
sider how  easy  a  mistake  is  in  this  case,  and  how  dangerous.  And  you  must  not  go 
out  of  your  way  to  meet  with  God's  enemies.     Application  :  1.  Lamentation  for  the 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv. 

gross  neglect  of  this  duty,  or  the  frequent  commission  of  this  sin.  2.  Take  heed 
that  you  be  not  found  guilty  of  this  sin.  3.  Avoid  the  causes  of  this  sin.  Take 
heed  of  uncharitableness,  in  all  its  kinds  and  degrees.  Take  heed  of  loquacity  and 
multitude  of  words.  Take  heed  of  pragmaticalness,  which  is  when  men  are  inquis- 
itive and  busy  about  other  men's  matters.  Take  heed  of  man- pleasing.  4.  Learn  the 
government  of  your  tongues.  {Matthew  Poole,  A.M.)  The  good  man  no  back- 
biter: — "He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his  tongue."  That  is  an  extraordinary 
expression  !  To  bite  with  the  tongue  !  But  the  word  is  even  more  expressive  still. 
The  backbiter  is  one  who  walks  along  the  way  for  the  purpose  of  spying  out 
another's  defects.  He  then  takes  the  products  of  his  ugly  search  and  presses  them 
into  his  social  intercourse,  and  endows  his  words  with  teeth  that  are  coated  with 
venom.  The  companion  of  the  Lord  paces  the  common  way  with  quite  a  different 
purpose.  He,  too,  spies  about,  but  not  with  the  eyes  of  the  cynic,  but  with  the 
eyes  of  a  friend,  and  "his  words  are  a  fountain  of  life."  {J.  R,  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Venomous  speech  : — "We  saw  in  the  museum  at  Venice  an  instrument  with  which  one 
of  the  old  Italian  tyrants  was  accustomed  to  shoot  poisoned  needles  at  the  objects  of 
his  wanton  malignity  ;  we  thought  of  gossips,  backbiters,  and  secret  slanderers,  and 
wished  that  their  mischievous  devices  might  come  to  a  speedy  end.  Their  weapons 
of  innuendo,  shrug,  and  whisper  appear  to  be  as  insignificant  as  needles,  but  the 
venom  which  they  instil  is  deadly  to  many  a  reputation.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 
Slander  avoided: — 1.  Slander.  All  reproachful,  opprobrious,  and  vile  speech  of 
or  to  our  brethren  is  condemned  ;  and  that  speech  which,  uttered  in  their  absence, 
tendeth  to  their  disgrace,  discredit,  or  defamation.  This  evil  is  against  the  law  of 
charity.  Satan  is  the  author  of  slander.  See  his  words  to  Eve.  St.  James,  speak- 
ing of  slander,  said  the  tongue  was  full  of  deadly  poison.  This  sin  is  in  sundry 
ways  committed.  Diogenes,  being  asked,  what  beast  bit  sorest,  answereo, 
' '  Among  wild  beasts,  the  slanderer ;  but  among  tame  beasts,  the  flatterer. 
(1)  When  anything  iu  falsely  said  of  us,  and  we  are  charged  with  matters  that  are 
untrue.  (2)  When  men,  by  vehemency  of  words,  aggravate  and  amplify  the 
infirmities  and  light  offences  of  men.  (3)  When  men  blaze  abroad  the  secret  sins 
and  infirmities  of  their  brethren.  (4)  When  we  deprave  the  good  deeds  and  well- 
doing of  men.  (5)  When,  by  our  manner  of  speaking,  we  leave  a  surmise  and 
suspicion  in  the  hearts  of  the  hearers.  (6)  When  we  report  truly  the  faults  of  men, 
yet  not  for  love  to  the  truth,  but  for  envy  to  the  persons.  The  chief  causes  of 
slandering  seem  to  be  these :  Love  of  yourselves.  Malice  towards  others.  Desire  of 
revenge.  Hope  of  commodity.  Study  to  please.  2.  Injury.  Men  do  injury  and 
evil  unto  other  men  chiefly  in  four  ways  :  in  body,  in  goods,  in  rights  and  privileges, 
in  name  and  estimation.  3.  Receiving  and  believing  false  reports  against  brethren. 
Men  should  not  be  too  light  of  belief.  They  are  often  even  pleased  with  false 
reports.  4.  Flattering  the  wicked.  To  hate  the  wicked  and  favour  the  just  is  a 
point  of  equity.  5.  Breaking  promises.  This  is  usual  in  the  wicked.  (iJ.  Turn- 
bull.)  The  backbiter : — The  backbiter  is  so  called  because,  like  the  dog,  he  steals 
behind  those  in  whom  he  wishes  to  flesh  his  teeth,  deals  in  innuendoes,  insinuations, 
evil  surmisings,  significant  shrugs  and  looks,  words  meaning  one  thing  in 
their  literal  sense  and  altogether  another  thing  from  the  tone  in  which  they  are 
uttered,  and  so  destroys  a  good  name  that  no  open  assault  could  have  afifected. 
In  this  way  the  weak  often  overwhelm  the  strong  ;  the  vilest  the  most  pure.  The 
blow  from  behind  and  in  the  dark  accomplishes  its  work  of  ruin  before  danger  is 
even  suspected.  The  truly  good  man,  however,  will  assail  no  man's  good  name.  If 
he  cannot  speak  good  of  another  he  will  say  nothing.  He  thinks,  and  justly  too, 
that  he  has  no  more  right  to  injure  another's  character,  than  he  has  to  injure  his 
health  ;  to  destroy  another's  good  name,  than  he  has  to  destroy  his  life.  If  he  dis- 
cover a  neighbour's  faults  he  does  not  noise  them  abroad,  but  tries  to  conceal  them ; 
and  so,  if  he  discovers  his  neighbour's  necessities,  he  does  what  he  can  to  relieve 
them.  Moreover,  he  taketh  not  "  up  a  reproach  against  his  neighbour  "  ;  that  is, 
either  he  will  not  originate  a  reproach,  or  he  will  not  listen  to  one.  The  willing 
listener  is  as  bad  as  the  tale-bearer.  If  there  were  none  to  listen  to  the  tale  of 
scandal,  there  would  be  none  to  start  it,  and  none  to  repeat  it ;  the  slanderous  ear  is 
as  detestable  as  the  slanderous  tongue.  {David  Caidwell,  A.M.)  Nor  doetli  eyU. 
to  Ma  neighbour. — The  good  man  no  evil-doer: — "  Nor  doeth  evil  to  his  neighbour." 
I  think  we  are  still  in  the  region  of  speech,  and  the  Psalmist  is  still  describing  the 
influence  of  destructive  conversation.  To  do  evil  in  one's  speech  is  to  spoil  one's 
neighbour  ;  to  break  him  to  pieces.  We  have  preserved  the  equivalent  of  the 
Psalmist's  phrase  down  to  our  own  time.     We  still  speak  of  "picking  a  person  to 


PSALM  XT.]  THE  PSALMS.  227 

pieces."  This  is  precisely  the  significance  of  the  original  word.  There  ia  a  con- 
versation which  mercilessly  engages  in  the  exercise  of  spoliation  ;  breaking  up  the 
reputation  of  another,  and  leaving  it  like  the  bones  of  some  poor  bird  which  has  been 
picked  to  pieces  by  a  destructive  hawk.  The  speech  of  the  companion  of  the  Lord 
ia  quite  otherwise.  It  ever  seeks  to  construct  and  strengthen.  "  Let  no  speech  pro- 
ceed out  of  your  mouth  but  what  is  edifying."  {J.  H.  Jowetty  M.A.)  Detraction: 
— From  the  day  that  Adam  fell,  thorns  and  thistles,  with  other  noxious  plants,  have 
sprung  up  to  vex  and  molest  the  sinner.  As  travellers  wending  their  way  through 
some  dismal  swamp,  let  us  pause  a  moment  on  the  way  and  pull  up  one  of  these 
weeds  and  examine  it  for  our  instruction.  We  may  have  it  in  our  own  garden  plot  ; 
who  knows  ?  The  weed  we  speak  of  is — Detraction.  L  It  is  okk  of  a  class  of 
SINS.  There  are  many  of  them,  such  as  slander,  calumny,  defamation,  revilings, 
aspersions,  vilifications,  and  libel.  All  these  are  worse  in  some  respects  than  detrac- 
tion ;  they  are  coarser,  uglier,  bigger  weeds.  Calumny  involves  deliberate  false 
statement.  The  defamer  publishes  his  unfriendly  message  to  the  world.  The 
libeller  writes  down  and  prints,  and  so  puts  before  the  eyes  of  a  thousand  readers  in 
lasting  form,  the  expressions  of  his  malignity.  And  they  who  revile  and  asperse 
give  us  the  idea  of  common  scolds  and  scatterers  of  mud  and  offal,  and  show  meanly 
themselves  for  the  very  manner  of  their  work.  But  the  act  of  the  detractor  is 
different  from  all  these.     It  needs  not  lies  nor  aught  which  is  essential  to  the  others. 

II.  What,  then,  is  it  ?  It  is  a  taking  something  away,  a  kind  of  petty  minute 
robbery.  It  consists  in  depreciating  and  disparaging  others.  It  is  made  up  of  slurs 
and  innuendoes,  of  hints  and  gestures  ;  and  is  often  clad  in  graceful  and  witty  garb. 
But  it  is  very  villainous.  For  with  all  our  weakness  and  faults  there  is  some  good 
in  everybody  which  is  very  precious  to  its  possessor.  Now  the  Lord  sees  this,  how- 
ever little  it  be,  and  makes  the  most  of  it.    But  detraction  makes  the  least  of  it  it  can. 

III.  The  causes  of  this  sin.  1.  Personal  interest.  People  think  there  is  some- 
thing to  be  gained  by  it.  2.  Envy.  They  cannot  endure  the  prosperity  or  happi- 
ness of  others.  What  evil  it  works  in  all  public  affairs.  It  is  the  crying  scandal  of 
our  day.  And  in  business,  men  use  it  to  supplant  their  rivals  and  to  advance  them- 
selves. The  envious  detractor  is  moved  thereto  by  his  bad  temper  and  also  by  the 
pleasure,  which  he  ought  to  be  ashamed  of, — the  pleasure  which  people  take  in  hearing 
of  the  misfortunes  of  others.  Who  is  not  conscious  of  this  pleasure,  vile  as  it  is  I 
But  3.  Vanity  is  the  chief  motive  of  detraction.  Reputation  for  wit  is  gained  in  such 
easy  way  by  it,  and  a  vain,  weak  person  cannot  resist  the  temj^tation.  Nobody 
would  listen  to  him  on  any  other  subject,  but  let  him  open  his  lips  with  some 
wretched  gossip  or  scandal,  and  all  listen.  What  punishment  is  too  severe  for  this  ? 
It  is  the  pest  of  society ;  but  as  for  reform,  it  is  all  but  impossible.  Habit,  and 
rivalry,  and  lack  of  high  aim  maintain  it.  But  we  have  need  greatly  to  fear  if  we 
be  guilty  of  it.  {Morgan  Dix. )  Nor  taketh  up  a  reproacli  against  his  neigh- 
bour.— Evil  speaking  not  to  be  listened  to : — "  Nor  taketh  up  a  reproach  against  his 
neighbour."  Then  we  are  not  only  forbidden  to  speak  evil,  we  are  forbidden  to 
listen  to  it.  We  are  not  only  forbidden  to  cast  a  slander,  we  are  forbidden  to  take  it 
np  when  another  has  hurled  it.  To  repeat  a  thing  is  to  incur  guilt  quite  as  much  as 
if  we  originated  it.  I  think  that  one  of  the  great  needs  of  our  day  is  the  grace  of 
sanctified  hearing.  How  much  the  Master  made  of  the  responsibility  of  possessing 
ears  !  "He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  "Take  heed  how  ye  hear.  ' 
There  is  a  discriminating  way  of  listening.  There  is  a  listening  which  encourages 
the  speaker  of  slander,  and  there  is  a  closing  of  the  ears  which  rwluces  the  slanderer 
to  silence.  There  would  be  much  less  evil  speaking  if  there  was  much  less  evil 
listening.  The  evil  speaker  yearns  for  the  reward  of  attention  and  applause.  If 
these  are  withheld  he  will  soon  tire  of  his  nefarious  trade.  The  companion  of  the 
Lord  listens  for  commendations,  eulogies,  and  repeats  them  to  others.  He  likes  to 
hear  a  good  thing  of  somebody,  and  he  sings  it  again  into  the  ears  of  somebody  else. 
(J.  H.  Jowetl,  M.A.)  The  law  of  the  Up: — I.  The  nature  of  slander.  1.  The 
origination  of  an  evil  report  concerning  our  neighbour.  2.  The  circulation  of  an 
evil  report  invented  by  otliers.  3.  The  listening  to  such  a  report.  Giving  it  the 
sanction  of  our  ear.  II.  TiiE  evil  of  slander.  What  migbty  unhappiness  it 
causeth.  1.  It  demoralises  the  slanderer.  2.  It  demoralises  the  person  to  whom 
the  slander  is  related.  3.  It  ^vrongs  the  party  slandered.  III.  The  cure  for 
SLANDER.  It  is  a  most  difficult  thing  to  rule  the  tongue,  and  refrain  from  evil- 
speaking.  What  is  the  grand  cure  for  all  sins  of  the  lip  ?  He  "  speaketh  the  truth 
in  his  heart."  The  heart  must  be  changed,  enlightened,  exalted.  Out  of  a  pure 
fountain  flows  a  pure  strea,m.     (  W.  L.  Watkinson.) 


228  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xv. 

Ver.  4.  In  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  contemned.  — Sound  moral  appreciations : 
— "In  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  contemned  ;  but  he  honoureth  them  that  fear  the 
Lord."  Then  he  is  a  man  of  sound  moral  appreciations.  He  does  not  pay  respect 
where  no  respect  is  deserved.  He  does  not  withhold  respect  where  it  is  merited. 
Says  an  old  Puritan,  "We  must  be  as  honest  in  paying  respect  as  in  paying  our 
bills."  But  let  us  pay  them  in  the  right  quarter.  Do  not  let  us  call  the  vile  person 
honourable  because  he  is  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fareth  sumptuously 
every  day.  And  do  not  let  us  esteem  the  honourable  man  as  vile  because  his 
equipage  is  poor  and  his  nobility  is  clothed  in  rags.  Let  us  call  villainy  vile  wher- 
ever we  find  it,  and  let  us  esteem  nobility  as  noble  in  whatever  guise  it  may  appear. 
This  is  one  of  the  great  characteristics  of  the  friend  of  God  ;  to  whom  the  sweet  is 
sweet  and  the  sour  is  sour ;  evil  is  evil  and  good  is  good.  Nothing  is  allowed  to 
interfere  with  the  soundness  and  sobriety  of  his  judgment,  and  no  verbal  jugglery  is 
permitted  to  destroy  the  healthiness  of  his  discriminating  vocabulary.  He  knows  the 
superlative,  and  loves  it !  "As  for  the  saints  that  are  in  the  earth,  they  are  the 
excellent  in  whom  is  all  My  delight."  {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  believer's 
regard  for  those  who  fear  God : — Mr.  Fox  being  asked  whether  he  remembered  not 
such  a  poor  servant  of  God  who  had  received  succour  from  him  in  time  of  trouble 
answered,  "  I  remember  him  well ;  I  tell  you,  I  forget  the  lords  and  ladies  to  remem- 
ber such."  {John  Trapp.)  He  that  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt,  and  changeth  not. 
— The  obligation  of  an  oath  : — Among  the  duties  mentioned  in  this  Psalm  we  find 
this  of  constancy  and  faithfulness  in  keeping  those  promises  which  we  have  confirmed 
by  an  oath.  Because  the  greatest  temptation  to  the  breaking  of  oaths  proceeds  from 
fear  of  some  temporal  damage,  or  prospect  of  some  worldly  advantage,  therefore  it  is 
said,  "  He  that  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt,  and  changeth  not."  L  In  what  cases  an 
OATH  DOTH  OBLIGE.  No  oath  Can  oblige  to  that  which  is  impossible  ;  or  to  that 
which  is  unlawful  ;  for  justice  requires  that  we  do  not  invade  the  rights  and 
privileges  of  other  men.  Oaths  contrary  to  charity  or  mercy  or  humanity  are  void. 
No  oath  can  oblige  when  it  hinders  a  greater  good.  What  if  the  matter  be  purely 
indifferent  ?  There  can  be  here  no  occasion  of  difficulty,  except  the  matter  be  also 
of  no  moment.  He  is  undoubtedly  guilty  of  great  irreverence  towards  God,  that  will 
cite  His  name  to  a  trifle.  If  the  matter  of  the  oath  be  such  as  causeth  a  man 
to  doubt  whether  it  be  lawful  or  no,  in  that  case  he  had  better  perform  it.  There 
are  cases  relating  to  the  person  that  swears.  Here,  whensoever  we  shall  determine 
that  an  oath  doth  not  bind,  it  will  be  for  the  want  of  the  person's  rightly  understand- 
ing that  he  made  one.  A  man  may  not  know  what  an  oath  is  ;  or  he  may  swear 
when  affected  by  anger,  or  by  drink,  or  by  fear  ;  or  by  any  other  passion  ;  or  if  a 
man  swears  to  save  his  life,  as  from  robbers.  II.  In  what  sense  an  oath  ottght 
TO  BE  TAKEN.  That  sense  is  to  be  taken  which  is  most  suitable  to  the  business  men 
are  about.  We  may  not  precisely,  without  limitation,  accept  the  sense  of  the 
swearer,  or  of  the  imposer,  or  that  which  the  words  of  the  oath  will  bear.  The 
swearer  may  equivocate,  or  use  mental  reservations.  What  if  a  man  swears  and  doth 
not  intend  to  swear  ?  Something  of  intention  is  always  required  to  an  oath.  It 
would  be  a  frivolous  excuse  for  a  man  to  say,  he  intended  to  swear,  but  did  not 
intend  to  be  obliged.  III.  Hovr  gkeat  the  obligation  of  an  oath  is.  It  is  a  solemn 
invocation  of  God  to  witness  what  we  say,  by  His  favour  and  mercy  to  us,  if  it  be 
true  ;  or  by  His  vengeance  upon  us  if  it  be  false.  It  is  a  high  advantage  and 
privilege  which  God  vouchsafeth  to  us,  in  that  He  gives  us  leave,  upon  urgent  and 
weighty  causes,  to  make  use  of  His  glorious  Name  as  a  seal  to  confirm  the  truth  of 
what  we  assent.  If,  therefore,  we  take  it  up  to  avouch  a  falsehood,  we  are  exceedingly 
ungrateful,  we  falsify  that  seal,  we  profane  that  dreadful  name,  we  apply  that  which 
is  most  sacred  to  the  worst  of  uses.  .  .  .  For  these  and  the  like  causes  an  oath  hath 
generally  been  looked  upon  as  a  sufficient  assurance  and  confirmation  of  the  truth  of 
any  matter.  He  that  seriously  considers  what  an  oath  is  cannot  surely  believe  that 
any  man  is  above  the  obligation  of  it.  And  as  no  man  can  be  too  gi-eat  for  such  an 
obligation  himself,  so  neither  can  he  dispense  with  it  in  others.  (Henry  Hellier, 
M.A.)  Immutable  in  covenant: — "He  that  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt,  and 
changeth  not."  Then  he  is  immutable  in  covenant.  His  word  is  his  bond.  He  is 
dependable.  When  he  promises  he  redeems.  And  he  does  it  even  to  his  own  hurt  ! 
If  it  necessitates  bleeding,  he  still  redeems  it.  He  is  "faithful  even  unto  death." 
He  is  grandly  consistent,  consistent  not  in  the  sense  of  never  changing  his  opinion, 
but  in  the  grander  sense  of  never  altering  his  loyalty  to  truth  and  his  relationship  to 
God.  His  word  is  a  tower  in  which  the  weak  and  defenceless  have  a  strong  defence. 
(/.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.] 


PSALM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  229 

Ver.  5.  He  that  putteth  not  out  his  money  to  uanry. — Unclean  money  eschevxd: — 
"He  that  putteth  not  out  his  money  to  usury,  nor  taketh  reward  against  the 
innocent."  The  companion  of  the  Lord  rejects  the  fruits  of  oppression.  He  will 
have  no  money  that  bears  the  marks  of  blood.  Nothing  imclean  will  he  take  into 
the  building  of  his  estate.  In  earning  his  bread  he  will  never  use  a  sting ;  in 
labouring  be  will  never  bite.  He  will  never  allow  himself  to  gain  an  advantage 
by  illegitimate  means.  He  will  accept  no  bribe,  nor  give  any.  "  Better  is  a  little 
with  righteousness  than  great  revenues  without  right."  {J.  H.  Jotuett,  M.A.)  The 
examinaiion  of  usury : — I.  Define  what  usury  is.  It  is  that  gain  which  is 
gotten  by  lending,  covenanting  before  with  the  borrower  to  receive  more  than  was 
borrowed.  Some  one,  defining  usury,  calls  it  the  contrary  to  charity;  for  "love 
seeketh  not  her  own,"  but  usury  seeks  another's  that  is  not  her  own.  Then  it  is 
far  from  love  ;  but  God  is  love  ;  so  usury  is  far  from  God.  Usury  has  her  name  of 
biting  (nesher),  and  she  may  well  signify  it ;  therefore  St.  Paul  saith  (Gal.  v.  15), 
"If  you  bite  one  another,  take  heed,"  &c.  II.  Its  unlawfulness.  1.  It  is 
against  the  law  of  charity.  2.  Against  the  law  of  nations.  For  all  nations  have 
laws  against  usury,  and  some  restraints  against  it.  3.  Against  the  law  of  nature, 
that  is,  against  the  natural  compassion  which  should  be  among  men.  4.  Against 
the  law  of  God  (Exod.  xxii.  25  ;  Lev.  xxv.  37  ;  Deut.  xxiii.  19).  It  is  a  miserable 
occupation  to  live  by  sin,  and  a  great  comfort  when  a  man  can  feel,  of  his  gold  and 
silver,  that  it  is  all  well  gotten,  and  that  he  leaves  of  his  own  to  his  children.  The 
usurer  loveth  the  borrower  as  the  ivy  loveth  the  oak,  to  grow  up  by  it ;  the  usurer 
would  grow  rich  by  the  borrower.  The  ivy  claspeth  the  oak  like  a  lover,  but  it 
claspeth  out  all  the  juice  and  sap,  that  the  oak  cannot  thrive  after  it.  So  the 
usurer  claspeth  the  borrower  with  such  bonds  that  he  ever  after  grows  poor  as 
others  grow  rich.  Christ  bids  us  lend  freely.  God  bade  Adam  live  by  the  sweat  of 
his  brow  (face),  his  own,  not  that  of  another,  which  usurers  live  by.  David  says, 
"A  good  man  is  merciful  and  lendeth,"  and  then  he  adds,  "he  shall  never  be 
moved."  In  Exod.  xxiii.  it  is  said,  "Lend  unto  him  which  wanteth  without 
usury,  that  the  Lord  may  bless  thee."  III.  The  different  kinds  of  usury. 
There  be  more  sorts  of  it  than  there  are  tricks  at  cards.  1 .  Some  will  not  take 
usury,  but  will  have  the  use  of  your  land  or  your  cattle,  and  so  get  even  more  than 
by  usury.  2.  Others  will  take  plates,  bedding,  and  other  household  stuff,  to  use 
or  wear,  (Amos  ii.)  "They  lie  down  upon  the  clothes  which  are  laid  to  pledge." 
3.  Others  will  take  a  pawn,  which  is  better  than  the  money  they  lend,  and  if  the 
money  be  not  returned  by  a  certain  day,  they  keep  the  pawn.  5.  Others  will  buy 
goods  at  a  small  price,  and  then  covenant  that  the  borrowers  buy  them  back  at 
the  same  price  on  s\ich  a  day,  or  else  the  goods  will  be  theirs  (1  Thess.  iv.  6). 
IV.  The  arguments  by  which  usury  is  defended.  There  be  three  opinions. 
Some  say,  like  God,  "Thou  shalt  die."  They  think  that  usury  is  utterly  unlawful, 
because  God  hath  forbidden  it.  Some  say,  like  the  woman,  "  Peradventure  thou 
shalt  die  "  ;  they  doubt  whether  usury  be  utterly  unlawful  or  no,  because  it  is  so 
much  tolerated.  Some  say  like  the  serpent,  "Thou  shalt  not  die"  ;  they  think 
usury  lawful,  because  it  is  gainful,  as  Saul  thought  that  the  idolaters'  beasts 
should  not  be  killed,  because  they  were  fat  (1  Sam.  xv.  9).  The  arguments  for 
usury  which  are  pleaded  are — 1.  God  doth  allow  some  kind  of  usury  (see  Deut.  xxiii.). 
"Of  a  stranger  thou  mayest  take  usury."  But  a  stranger  signifies  an  enemy  such 
as  they  were  commanded  to  destroy  ;  only  to  such  might  they  be  usurers.  But  men 
take  usury  of  their  brother.  2.  'They  say  they  lend  for  compassion.  But  how  so 
when  you  partake  not  of  your  brother's  losses  but  his  gains  ?  3.  They  say.  If  he 
gain,  and  I  gain  too,  is  not  this  well  ?  Should  he  not  be  thankful  ?  Yes,  if  he 
hath  received  a  good  turn  from  you.  But  you  bind  him  to  requite  it.  4.  It  is 
necessary  for  orphans,  widows,  and  such  like,  which  have  no  other  way  of  getting 
their  living.  But  how  did  the  Jews  do  without  it  ?  If  it  was  good  for  them  not  to 
have,  is  it  good  for  us  that  we  should  have  usurers  ?  5.  They  say,  "  If  I  may  not 
gain  by  the  money  which  I  lend,  I  will  keep  it  to  myself."  But  you  must  not  do 
that  (Matt.  v.  42  ;  Ezek.  xviii.).  6.  It  is  only  the  biting  usury  which  is  forbidden. 
But  all  usury  is  that.  7.  They  allege  the  law  of  the  land,  which  allows  it.  But  if 
God's  law  forbid  thee,  can  man's  law  excuse  thee  ?  It  did  not  serve  Adam  to  say, 
"The  woman  gave  me."  And  furthermore,  the  law  only  restrains.  No  man  is  to 
take  more  than  ten  in  the  hundred  ;  if  he  do  he  shall  be  punished.  The  law  doth 
not  sanction  any  usury,  but  only  holds  back  the  usurer.  V.  The  usurer's 
punishment.  1.  Not  only  God's  law,  but  the  canon  law  doth  condemn  the 
usurer.     It  doth  excommunicate  him,  as  having  no  communion  with  saints.     2.  It 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  XV. 

doth  detain  him  from  the  sacramunts,  as  having  no  communion  with  Christ. 
3.  Will  not  suffer  him  to  be  buried,  as  if  he  were  only  worthy  to  lie  in  hell.  4.  It 
treats  his  will  as  no  will.  But  hear  the  judgment  of  God's  law.  The  usurer  doth 
receive  two  incomes,  one  of  the  borrower,  and  another  of  the  revenger.  The  first 
is  gain,  the  other  punishment.  All  the  Scripture  prophesieth  evil  unto  him. 
Solomon  saith  (Prov.  xxviii.  8),  "  He  which  increaseth  his  riches  by  usury,  gathereth 
for  them  which  will  be  merciful  to  the  poor."  God  saith  that  He  will  smite  the  usurer 
with  His  fist  (Ezek.  xxii.  13).  As  his  hands  were  shut  against  the  poor,  so  shall 
God's  hands  be  against  him.  And  here  David  saith,  "they  shall  not  dwell  in  God's 
temple,  nor  rest  in  His  holy  mountain."  But  this  punishment  is  all  punishments. 
Yes,  usury  signifieth  biting,  for  when  it  has  bitten  others  it  shall  bite  the  usurer 
too,  and  never  cease.  If,  therefore,  Christ  be  come  to  your  hearts,  as  He  came  to 
ZacchsBUs'  house,  restore  now,  as  he  did,  and  escape  this  judgment.  VI.  The 
oiviNO  OF  USURY.  Is  this  lawful  ?  Jeremiah  says  he  never  gave  nor  took  (xv.  10). 
But  he  meant  he  was  no  meddler  with  the  world,  whereby  they  should  envy  him 
as  usurers  were  most  of  all  envied.  But  many  will  borrow  who  will  never  lend  ;  and 
it  is  said,  if  there  were  no  borrowers  there  would  be  no  lenders,  if  no  bribe-givers 
there  would  be  no  bribe-takers.  And  there  is  as  much  difference  between  the  two 
men  as  between  covetousness  and  necessity,  for  he  which  borroweth  upon  usury 
borroweth  for  necessity.  But  for  this  God  has  allowed  many  things — Adam's  sons 
to  macry  with  Adam's  daughters ;  and  David  to  eat  the  shewbread  (Luke  vi.  4). 
And  so  when  immediate  help  is  needed  to  prevent  a  great  mischief,  many  think 
that  it  is  lawful  to  resort  to  the  usurer.  But  if  some  may  borrow  upon  usury  it 
does  not  follow  that  all  may.  Yet  many  borrow  who  have  no  need.  They  borrow 
because  they  reckon  that  they  can  get  more  by  the  money  than  the  money  they 
pay  for  it.  Hence  it  is  that  goods  are  so  dear.  And  there  are  some  who  borrow 
because  they  want  to  make  their  creditors  think  they  are  bare  of  money.  These 
are  like  foxes,  and  I  doubt  not  there  be  more  sorts  than  I  know.  VII.  What 
SHOULD  THBT  DO  WHO  HAVE  GOT  THEIR  MONEY  BY  USURY  T  Restore  it  again.  If 
you  cannot  say  as  Samuel  said,  "  Whose  goods  have  I  taken  t"  then  you  must  say 
as  Zacchaeus  said.  Whose  goods  have  I  kept  ?  The  best  thing  is  to  do  no  man 
wrong,  the  next  best  is  to  make  amends.  For  as  humility  is  the  repentance  of 
pride,  and  abstinence  of  surfeit,  and  alms  of  covetousness,  and  forgiveness  of  malice, 
so  restitution  is  the  repentance  of  usury.  As  a  camel  when  he  comes  home  casteth 
off  his  burden  at  the  door,  that  he  may  enter  into  his  stable ;  so  they  which  are  laden 
with  other  men's  goods,  when  they  go  to  heaven,  must  leave  their  burden  where 
they  had  it,  lest  they  be  too  gross  to  enter  in  at  the  narrow  gate ;  therefore  that 
you  may  not  die  in  your  sins,  make  restitution  (2  Sam.  ii.  26),  so  do  you  remember 
whether  this  course  will  be  sweet  or  bitter  in  the  end.  Now,  seeing  that  you  may 
not  be  usurers  to  men,  be  usurers  to  God  (Matt.  xix.  29).  {H.  Smith.)  The  sins 
of  usury  and  bribe  : — By  usury  understand — that  gain  which,  by  composition,  com- 
pact,  and  agreement  going  before,  is  taken  for  the  duty  of  lending  above  the  prin- 
cipal. It  is  nothing  prejudicial  to  the  dangerous  adventures  of  lawful  merchants ; 
neither  condemneth  it  tolerable  gains  in  the  retailer.  But  when,  for  very  lending, 
without  labour,  without  danger  undertaken  by  transporting  goods,  or  otherwise, 
there  riseth  commodity  and  gain,  the  principal  returning,  there  is  usury.  Usury 
is  against  God's  law.  The  Roman  Commonwealth  decayed  after  usury  was  therein 
entertained.  Usury  is  condemned  by  the  general  consent  of  the  Church  and  the 
Fathers.  The  wise  men  among  the  heathen  condemned  it.  The  usurer  is  an 
idolater,  for  he  is  covetous.  The  last  forbidden  evil  is  corruption  and  bribery. 
The  taking  of  rewards  whereby  justice  is  perverted,  and  the  innocent  oppressed. 
{R.  Tumbull.)  The  lawfulness  of  usury  considered: — The  Rev.  W.  J.  Dawson, 
replying  to  the  question  "Is  usury  right?"  says:  "John  Ruskin  replies,  No. 
His  contention  is  that  if  a  man  has  £15,000  it  is  his  duty  to  spend  his  principal 

rmnd  by  pound,  but  to  put  it  to  usury,  that  is  to  interest,  is  a  sin  against  society, 
confess  I  have  never  been  able  to  accept  this  doctrine.  When  we  talk  of  £15,000 
it  is  one  thing  ;  but  apply  it  to  £1000,  which  we  will  say  is  the  entire  fortune  of  a 
widow.  If  she  spends  it  pound  by  pound  she  will  soon  came  to  beggary.  If  it  be 
wisely  invested,  some  one  else  has  the  use  of  it  in  the  promotion  of  business,  and 
she  has  a  small  annual  income,  which  is  the  barrier  between  her  and  want.  I  do  not 
understand  Christ  as  denouncing  usury.  What  the  whole  spirit  of  the  Bible  de- 
nounces is  excessive  usury."  {The  Young  Man.)  He  that  doeth  these  things 
■hall  never  be  moved. — On  tranquillity  of  mind : — Inquire  whether  any  line  of 
conduct  can  be  pointed  out  which,  independent  of  external  situation  in  the  world, 


PSALM  XV.]  THE  PSALMS.  231 

shall  tend  to  make  us  easy  in  mind  ;  shall  either  bestow  or  aid  that  tranquillity 
which  all  men  desire.  Direction :  1.  That  we  imitate  the  character  of  the  man 
who  is  described  in  this  Psalm  ;  that  we  study  to  preserve  a  clear  conscience,  and 
to  lead  a  virtuous  and  honourable,  at  least  an  inoffensive  and  innocent,  life.  So 
great  is  the  power  of  conscience  over  every  human  being  that  the  remembrance  of 
crimes  never  fails  to  overthrow  tranquillity  of  mind.  Let  him  therefore,  who 
wishes  to  enjoy  tranquillity,  study,  above  all  things,  to  act  an  irreproachable  part. 
2.  Join  humble  trust  in  the  favour  of  God.  As,  after  the  best  endeavours  we  can 
use,  no  man's  behaviour  will  be  entirely  faultless,  it  is  essential  to  peace  of  mind 
that  we  have  some  ground  of  hope  in  the  Divine  mercy,  that  through  the  merits 
of  Jesus  Christ  our  defects  shall  be  forgiven,  and  grace  be  shown  us  by  heaven.  But 
s  man  may  be  both  pious  and  virtuous  and  yet,  through  some  defects  in  the 
management  of  his  mind  and  temper,  may  not  possess  that  happy  serenity  and  self- 
enjoyment  which  ought  to  be  the  portion  of  virtue  and  piety.  There  is  therefore 
some  discipline  to  be  studied ;  there  are  some  subsidiary  parts  of  character  to  be 
iittended  to,  in  order  to  give  piety  and  virtue  their  full  effect  for  conferring  tran- 
quillity. 3.  Attend  to  the  culture  and  improvement  of  your  minds.  A  fund  of  useful 
knowledge  and  a  stock  of  ideas  afford  much  advantage  for  the  enjoyment  of  tran- 
quillity. In  a  mind  absolutely  vacant,  tranquillity  is  seldom  found.  The  vacancy 
will  too  often  be  filled  up  by  bad  desires  and  passions.  4.  Be  always  careful  to 
provide  proper  employment  of  our  time.  Regular  industry  and  labour,  with  in- 
tervals of  ease,  is  perhaps  the  state  most  conducive  of  any  to  tranquillity.  But  if 
relaxation  degenerate  into  total  idleness  it  becomes  in  a  high  degree  adverse  to 
tranquillity.  5.  Learn  to  govern  our  passions.  These  are  the  frequent  disturbers 
of  our  peace.  Such  of  them  as  belong  to  the  malignant  and  imsocial  class  evidently 
tend  to  promote  vexation  and  disquiet.  If  those  which  are  accounted  of  an  in- 
nocent nature  obtain  the  entire  mastery  of  our  minds,  they  are  suflBcient  to  over- 
throw the  tranquillity  of  life.  This  self-command  is  particularly  necessary  in  all 
that  relates  to  habitual  temper :  t\iose  slight  emotions  which  ruffle  or  sour  the 
temper  are  sufficient,  by  their  frequent  recurrence,  to  poison  all  self-enjoyment. 
He  who  would  possess  a  tranquil  state  must  cultivate  calmness  and  gentleness  of 
disposition.  6.  Never  expect  too  much  from  the  world.  High  hopes  and  florid 
views  are  great  enemies  to  tranquillity.  When  rashly  indulged  they  are  constantly 
producing  disappointments.  One  of  the  first  lessons,  both  of  religion  and  wisdom, 
is  to  moderate  our  expectations  and  hopes.  It  is  a  middle  region  which  is  the 
native  station  of  tranquillity.  Do  not  form  too  high  expectations  from  the  char- 
acter of  those  who  are  in  social  or  domestic  relations  with  you.  7.  Mix  retreat 
with  the  active  business  of  the  world,  and  cultivate  habits  of  serious  thought  and 
recollection.  Reflection  and  meditation  allay  the  workings  of  many  imquiet  passions, 
and  place  us  at  a  distance  from  the  tumults  of  the  world.  The  three  great  enemies 
to  tranquillity  are  vice,  superstition,  and  idleness.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  A  man 
unmoved: — "  He  that  doeth  these  things  shall  never  be  moved."  How  glorious  is 
the  assurance  !  The  companion  of  the  Lord  shall  never  slip.  When  he  is  walking 
over  the  enchanted  ground  he  shall  be  preserved  wakeful  and  vigilant.  He  shaU 
know  where  the  slippery  places  are,  and  where  the  traps  are  hid,  and  he  shall  cross 
the  devil-hauated  ground  in  security.  He  shall  not  be  carried  away  by  the  storm. 
He  shall  be  unmoved  in  the  blast  of  adversity.  When  death  comes  he  shall  still 
stand  !  The  Lord  is  his  keeper,  the  Lord  is  at  his  right  hand,  disaster  shall  only 
strengthen  him.  "All  things  shall  work  together  for  his  good."  Such  is  the  com- 
panion of  God.  Into  that  fellowship  we  are  all  called.  What  God  wishes  us  to  be 
He  is  prepared  to  make  us.  His  ideals  are  His  promises.  His  commandments  are 
invitations.  His  high  callings  are  gracious  evangels.  "  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God." 
{J.  H.  Jowett,  if. A.)  The  fixedness  and  safety  of  the  ungodly: — A  ship's  com- 
pass is  so  adjusted  as  to  keep  its  level  amidst  all  the  heavings  of  the  sea.  Though 
forming  part  of  a  structure  that  feels  every  motion  of  the  restless  waves,  it  has  an 
arrangement  of  its  own  that  keeps  it  always  in  place,  and  in  working  order.  Look 
at  it  when  you  will,  it  is  pointing,  trembling  perhaps,  but  truly,  to  the  pole.  So 
each  soul  in  this  life  needs  an  adjustment  of  its  own,  that  amid  the  fluctuations  of 
the  "  earthen  vessel "  it  may  be  kept  ever  in  a  position  to  feel  the  power  of  its  great 
attraction  in  the  skies.  {A  Farso^is  Penn.)  Of  false  pretences  to  godlineu: — 
Religion  consists  in  action;  the  truth  and  power  of  piety  lie  in  practice.  "He 
that  DOTH  these  things."  Prove — (1)  From  the  subject  of  religion,  the  mind,  heart, 
soul  of  man.  Actions  are  the  best  expressers  of  the  mind.  (2)  From  the  nature  of 
the  covenant  betwixt  God  and  us.    Action  is  the  condition  on  our  part.    (3)  From 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

the  manner  of  procedure  on  the  great  day  of  accounts,  when  the  eternal  retri- 
butions shall  be  adjusted  to  men  according  to  their  works.  It  is  not  a  bare 
external  profession  which  many  poor  ignorant  souls  content  themselves  with  that 
will  serve  the  turn.  A  Christian  profession,  without  a  life  answerable,  will  be  so 
far  from  saving  any  one  that  it  will  highly  aggravate  his  condemnation.  There 
are  those  who  think  it  enough  barely  to  believe,  and  take  faith  alone  to  be  the  only 
Gospel  term,  and  of  itself  all  sufficient  for  salvation.  Faith  is,  however,  not  a 
strong  fancy  or  a  rash  presumption.     Faith  is  no  unactive  principle,  but  a  stirring 

face  that  purges  and  purifies  the  heart,  the  source  of  actions  and  works  by  love, 
e  that  would  be  sure  of  his  justification  by  faith  must  first  be  sure  to  justify  his 
faith  by  his  works.  If  faith  will  not  do,  much  less  can  opinion.  It  cannot  be 
imagined  that  any  system  of  notions  swimming  in  the  brain  should  bear  ua  out,  and 
help  us  to  attain  our  end.  What  shall  we  say  of  those  whose  whole  religion  is  built 
upon  uncertainty,  and  whose  main  principle  is  irresolution  ?  Neither  can  I  approve 
the  ordinary  mode  of  some  that  pretend  to  more  than  ordinary  piety,  to  place  all 
religion  in  the  ear,  that  take  up  so  much  of  their  time  in  hearing  that  they  have 
scarce  leisure  to  practise.  It  is  not  lining  the  ears,  nor  tipping  the  tongue  with 
religious  discourses  that  will  do  the  business.  Neither  preaching  nor  prayer  of 
themselves  will  do.  We  must  work  as  well  as  pray.  A  word  must  be  said  of  the 
"  well-wishers,"  who  rest  upon  their  good  intentions,  and  take  it  for  a  sufficient 
ground  for  them  to  hope  well  because  they  mean  well.  This  harmless  "meaning 
well "  is  not  enough  to  approve  a  man's  spiritual  state,  or  acquit  his  obligations. 
{Adam  LiUleton,  D.D.) 


PSALM  XVI. 

Vers.  1-11.  PreMxre  me,  0  God :  for  in  Thee  do  I  put  my  trust. — FaUK  in  (hs 

presence  of  God : — This  term  suggests  that  the  Psalm  is  one  of  strongly  marked, 
incisive  thought.  It  is  a  Psalm  doubly  notable — 1 .  Because  it  contains  one  of  the 
brightest  and  most  unhesitating  expressions  of  faith  in  the  presence  of  God,  as 
extending  through  and  beyond  death,  and  preserving  the  life  both  of  soul  and 
body.  It  therefore  stands  in  marked  contrast  with  the  desponding  doubts  of  such 
passages  as  Psa.  Ixixviii. — basing  itself  on  the  conviction,  which  our  Lord  declared 
to  underlie  the  whole  covenant,  that  "God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 
living."  2.  Because  it  is  quoted  most  explicitly  in  the  New  Testament  as  » 
Messianic  prophecy,  an  inspired  utterance,  which  was  no  doubt  in  some  degree 
applied  by  the  Psalmist  to  himself  as  having  unity  with  God,  and  therefore  defying 
death,  but  which  could  be  in  its  full  meaning  spoken  of  the  Messiah  alone  (Acts  ii. 
25-31,  xiii.  35).  For  in  Him  alone  was  the  unity  with  God  to  be  perfect — so  that 
He  should  be  at  once  "the  son  of  David,"  and  yet  "God  with  us" — therefore  in 
Him  alone  was  it  impossible  that  humanity  could  be  "holden  of  death,"  either  in 
the  "prison  "  of  Hades  (1  Pet.  iii.  19)  or  the  "corruption"  of  the  grave.  {Alfred 
Barry,  D.D.)  Jehovah,  the  believer' s  chief  good : — This  poem  naturally  falls  into 
three  strophes.  1.  The  writer's  utterances  to  God,  and  God's  people  of  his  supreme 
delight  in  Jehovah  (vers.  1-4).  2.  The  direct  statement  of  the  blessedness  of  such 
a  lot  (vers.  5-8).  3.  The  assurance  that  it  would  prevail  over  death  and  the  grave 
(vers.  9-11).  Cheyne  says,  the  Psalmist  assumes  successively  the  tone  of  profession, 
of  description,  and  of  prophecy.  I.  The  profession.  In  view  of  the  fluctuations 
and  uncertainties  of  the  world,  the  writer  invokes  God's  preserving  care,  for  the 
reason  that  this  is  his  habitual  resort.  He  neither  has  nor  wishes  any  other.  But 
this  absolute  dependence  on  the  Most  High  is  very  far  from  being  servile  or  con- 
strained. It  is  spontaneous  and  joyous.  He  knows  no  fountain  of  true  happiness 
save  Jehovah.  The  love  of  saints  and  the  abhorrence  of  idolatrous  apostates  go 
together.  II.  The  dkscription  (vers.  5-8).  Here  is  an  emphatic  statement  of  the 
fact  that  nothing  earthly,  visible,  material  is  what  satisfies  the  Psalmist,  but  only 
Jehovah  Himself.  It  is  the  Giver,  not  His  gifts,  that  meets  his  wants.  The 
happiness  of  such  a  condition  is  insisted  on.  In  David's  eyes  God  is  no  abstraction, 
but  a  person  real,  living,  walking  by  his  side.  Hence  his  abiding  confidence.  The 
whole  utterance  is  one  of  strong  triumyihant  faith.  III.  The  prophecy  (vers.  9-11). 
Here  the  description  of  the  present  passes  into  a  forecast  of  the  future.     Some  of  the 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  283 

terms  are  peculiar.  "Glory"  probably  means  "tongue."  "  Sheol  "  is  the  place  of 
departed  spirits.  "Corruption  "  may  mean  "the  pit."  The  poet  is  taking  a  calm 
outlook  upon  death  and  the  grave  as  they  lie  before  every  man  in  the  natural 
course  of  events.  Shall  this  be  the  end  of  his  career  ?  Nay,  heart  and  flesh  alike 
»re  safe.  David  will  not  be  abandoned  to  the  dismal  shades,  nor  will  his  bodily 
frame  perish  irrecoverably.  The  Psalm  as  a  whole  is  a  remarkable  exhibition  of 
Old  Testament  piety.  {Talbot  W.  Chambers,  D.D.)  A  good  hope: — The  heading 
of  this  Psalm,  and  of  Psa.  Ivi.-lx.,  "Michtam,"  may  mean  "Golden  Psalm,"  or 
"  Sculpture  Psalm,"  this  latter  term  indicating  a  Psalm  of  strong  incisive  thought. 
The  Psalm  seems,  "by  its  tone  of  fresh,  joyous  confidence,  to  belong  to  the  early 
part  of  David's  career."  It  may  have  been  written  when  David  was  in  the  wilder- 
ness of  Ziph  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  19).  The  Psalm  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the  following 
points  :  1.  Only  out  of  an  experience  of  God's  gracious  dealings  can  a  full  trust  in 
God  be  gained.  David  had  known  God  from  his  early  shepherd  life.  2.  The 
uncertainty  of  all  things  on  which  men  rely ;  men  change  or  fail ;  riches  take  wings  ; 
of  many  possessions  we  tire,  but  trust  in  God  never  disappoints.  He  is  the  one 
satisfying  good.  3.  Those  who  have  God  at  all  must  have  Him  for  all  in  all.  No 
idols  must  draw  us  away.  Self-seeking  and  world-seeking  pleasures  may  be  our 
idols.  4.  Keeping  close  to  God  is  security  for  this  world,  and  for  the  world  to  come. 
Really  right  is  right  with  God,  and  whoever  is  really  right  is  right  for  ever.  The 
joy  we  have  in  God,  neither  time,  nor  change,  nor  death  can  end.  The  following 
subjects  are  treated :  Soul-joy  in  God.  Soul-joy  in  the  godly.  Soul-fear  of  the 
ungodly.  Soul-confidence  in  the  present.  Soul-purpose  to  maintain  the  godly  life. 
Soul-assurance  that  God  will  maintain  loving  relations  with  the  godly  for  ever. 
{Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  good  man's  plea: — The  Psalmist  entreats  Divine  pro- 
tection, rejoices  in  his  religious  privileges,  and  expresses  unbounded  confidence  in 
God.  I.  A  GOOD  man's  cry  for  Divine  protection.  Whether  his  peril  arose 
from  the  idolatrous  heathen  or  from  domestic  enemies,  we  cannot  say  ;  but  it  was 
sufficiently  urgent  to  drive  him  to  God  for  shelter.  Is  not  this  one  of  the  chief  uses 
of  earthly  trials  ?  II.  A  good  man's  arguments  for  a  Divine  response.  1.  He 
pleads  his  faith  in  God.  2.  He  pleads  his  own  moral  value  (vers.  4-6).  A  holy 
exultation  now  thrills  the  Psalmist's  heart.  There  are  two  sources  of  his  joy. 
1.  The  sight  of  the  misery  of  idolaters.  2.  The  contemplation  of  his  own  blessed- 
ness. The  figurative  language  of  ver.  6  is  derived  from  the  division  of  the  land  of 
Canaan  amidst  the  tribes  of  Israel.  Precious  truths  underlie  it.  (1)  The  nature  of 
his  inheritance.  (2)  The  certainty  of  his  inheritance.  (3)  The  pleasantness  of  his 
inheritance.  {Robert  Rollocks. )  The  Divine  preservation : — The  Psalmist  will  be 
"preserved";  he  will  not  only  be  created.  There  is  a  cold  deism  which  says, 
"Having  been  created,  that  is  enough  ;  the  rest  belongs  to  myself;  I  must  attend 
to  the  details  of  life ;  creation  may  have  been  a  Divine  act,  but  all  education, 
culture,  progress,  preservation  must  fall  under  my  own  personal  care."  The 
Psalmist  begins  in  another  tone.  He  opens  his  Psalm  with  the  great  word 
"preserve" — equal  to.  Attend  to  all  my  cares  and  wants;  pity  my  feebleness; 
take  hold  of  my  right  hand,  and  of  my  left  hand,  and  be  round  about  me,  and  never 
leave  me  for  one  moment  to  myself.  That  is  true  worship.  Only  a  sense  of  the 
Divine  nearness  of  that  kind  can  adequately  sustain  a  noble  and  growing  religion. 
We  need  a  daily  prayer  ;  we  die  for  want  of  daily  food  ;  every  morning  must  be  a 
revelation  in  light,  every  night  must  be  a  revelation  in  rest.  This  is  not  a  selfish 
preservation,  a  preservation  from  evil,  or  danger,  or  suffering  only,  but  the  kind  of 
preservation  that  is  necessary  to  growth.  Who  has  not  seen  the  guards  round  the 
trees,  especially  the  little  trees,  the  young  growths,  so  that  they  may  have  a  chance 
of  taking  hold  of  the  earth,  and  lifting  themselves  up  to  the  sun,  and  bringing  out 
of  themselves  all  the  secret  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  their  creation  ?  A  selfish 
preservation  would  be  an  impious  desire,  but  the  preservation  being  asked  for  as  an 
opportunity  of  growth  is  a  preservation  for  which  the  noblest  souls  may  daily  pray. 
It  is,  then,  not  enough  to  have  been  created  ;  even  that  Divine  act  becomes 
deteriorated  and  spoiled,  impoverished,  utterly  depleted  of  all  ennobling  purpose  and 
inspiration,  unless  it  be  followed  by  continual  husbandry  or  shepherdliness,  nursing 
or  culture  — for  the  figure  admits  of  every  variety  of  change  ;  the  end  being  gi'owth, 
strength,  fniitfulness.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  portrait  of  a  God-trusting 
soul: — Such  soul  is  represented  in  two  aspects.  I.  His  experience  ttndf.r  the 
influence  of  the  present.  He  has — 1.  A  profound  consciousness  of  his  de[tend- 
cnce  for  safety  and  for  good.  "  My  goodness  extendeth  not  to  Thee."  That  is,  my 
happiness  ie  not  independent  of  Thee.     2.  A  delight  in  the  fellowship  of  the  good. 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

"The  saints,  the  excellent,  in  whom  is  all  my  delight."  3.  An  abhorrence  of  the 
practices  of  the  wicked.  "Their  drink-offering  of  blood  will  I  not  offer."  4.  An 
exultation  in  the  Lord  as  his  portion.  5.  A  high  satisfaction  with  providential 
arrangements.  "The  lines  have  fallen  to  me,"  &c.  II.  In  reference  to  thk 
FUTURE.  He  is — 1.  Thankful.  "I  will  bless  the  Lord."  2.  Thoughtful.  "My 
reins  also,"  &c.  3.  Calm.  "I  shall  not  be  moved."  4.  Happy.  "My  heart  is 
glad."  5.  Trustful.  "  My  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope  " — (i)  Of  restoration  to  life. 
"Thou  wilt  not  leave,"  &c.  (ii)  Of  happiness.  "The  path  of  life."  (iii)  Of 
fulness  of  joy  in  God's  presence.  (Z),  Thomas,  D.  D, )  The  plea  of  our  trustful- 
ness : — The  first  thing  David  does  is  to  commend  himself  to  the  protection  of  God, 
as  the  God  in  whom  he  had  placed  his  confidence.  This  is  what  all  of  us  will  do 
who  are  living  under  the  influence  of  vital  and  experimental  religion.  If  we  be 
among  the  number  of  His  people,  we  may  confide  in  Him  with  our  whole  heart,  for 
every  communication  of  His  grace,  and  for  every  exercise  of  His  power,  which  our 
varied  circumstances  may  require.  This  trust  we  will  constantly  repose  in  God, 
because  He  is  constantly  deserving  of  it,  and  because  it  is  constantly  demanded  for 
our  personal  comfort  and  stability.  It  will  be  especially  active  and  vigorous  when 
we  are  exposed  to  those  peculiar  difiiculties  and  dangers  by  which  every  Christian 
is  beset  in  the  course  of  nis  pilgrimage.  We  may  not  rest  satisfied  with  a  mere 
consciousness  of  unlimited  reliance  on  God ;  we  may  give  it  free  expression  in  the 
language  of  devout  and  fervent  supplication.  We  have  found  in  God  an  all-sufficient 
refuge.  This  Psalm  intimates  that  he  had  taken  the  Lord  to  be  his  Lord  ;  and  it  is 
impossible  for  any  of  us,  who  are  acquainted  with  our  duty  and  our  interest,  to  make 
a  better  or  a  different  choice.  He  is  entitled  to  the  supremacy  over  us  in  every 
respect  in  which  that  supremacy  can  be  either  exercised  by  Him  or  acknowledged  by 
us.  It  is  not  only  our  duty,  it  is  also  our  interest,  to  take  the  Lord  for  our  Lord. 
In  this  dedication  of  ourselves  to  God  it  is  necessary  that  the  heart  be  really  and 
chiefly  concerned.  It  is  the  soul  that  must  say  to  Him,  "Thou  art  my  Lord." 
Aware  of  our  aptness  to  forget  what  we  have  resolved  and  promised  in  reference  to 
God,  we  must  frequently  remind  our  souls,  as  it  were,  of  the  ties  by  which  they  are 
voluntarily  and  solemnly  bound  to  Him,  and  of  the  consequent  obligations  which 
they  have  to  fulfil.  We  are  not  our  own,  but  His.  We  cannot  be  too  careful  to 
prevent  this  impression  from  being  impaired.  Another  evil  is  to  be  guarded  against : 
the  Pharisaical  idea  is  apt  to  steal  upon  us,  that  we  have  something  to  boast  of, 
that  our  labours  may  be  beneficial  to  Him  to  whom  they  are  rendered,  and  that  on 
account  of  these  we  are  entitled  to  His  favour  and  protection.  There  cannot  be  a 
greater  or  more  pernicious  mistake.  While  our  goodness  extendeth  not  to  God,  so 
as  that  it  can  be  useful  to  Him  or  meritorious  in  His  sight,  the  Psalmist  says,  "  It 
extendeth  to  the  saints  that  are  in  the  earth."  There  are  saints  in  the  earth. 
But  their  holiness  has  much  imperfection  mixed  with  it,  and  comes  far  short  of 
what  the  Divine  law  requires  of  them.  It  exists  in  their  principles,  in  their  desires, 
in  their  endeavours,  and  in  their  actual  acquirements.  Being  thus  "saints,"  they 
are  "excellent."  God  is  the  standard  of  excellence,  and  they  are  like  God.  The 
Psalmist  not  only  asserts  the  excellence  of  the  saints,  but  declares  that  in  them  was 
"all  his  delight."  And  such  will  be  the  case  with  us  if  our  minds  are  actuated 
and  governed  by  right  sentiments.  We  shall  delight  in  God  as  the  centre  of  all 
perfection,  and  as  the  fountain  of  all  good.  We  shall  delight  in  such  of  His 
creatures  as  are  entitled  to  our  complacency  from  the  resemblance  which  they  bear  to 
Him.  It  is  to  the  saints,  who  are  thus  excellent,  and  in  whom  we  take  delight, 
that  onr  goodness  extends ;  we  do  them  good  according  to  our  ability.  Between 
them  and  us  there  is  a  spiritual  and  intimate  relationship.  And  we  are  especially 
careful  to  let  our  goodness  extend  to  them  when  they  are  suffering  persecution  on 
account  of  their  marked  separation  from  the  world,  and  their  faithful  adherence  to 
the  cause  of  truth  and  duty.     {A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  0  my  soul,  thou  hast  said  unto  the  Lord,  Thoa  art  my  Lord. — Dedication 
to  Qod : — The  Most  High  is  a  God  of  truth  and  faithfulness.  The  text  alludes  to 
David's  dedication  of  himself  to  God,  and  implies  that  he  had  done  so  deliberately 
and  sincerely.  1.  Apply  the  words  for  admonition.  Remember  that  it  were  better 
not  to  vow  than,  after  having  vowed,  not  to  pay.  A  dedication  is  one  of  the  best 
preservatives  against  temptation  and  sin.  2.  Apply  for  instruction.  They  teach 
us  what  David  thought  of  God.  They  teach  that  his  dedication  was  deliberate  and 
sincere.  3.  Apply  for  comfort  and  encouragement.  If  you  have  thus  dedicated 
yourself,  then  to  you  the  promises  and  consolations  of  the  Gospel  belong.   Keflectiona 


MALM  XVI.  3  THE  PSALMS.  235 

by  way  of  improvement — (1)  Abide  in  Christ.  (2)  Do  much  for  Him  to  whom  you 
owe  so  much.  (3)  Be  assured  that  God  will  do  much  for  you.  {John  Ramsay,  M.A.) 
The  advantages  of  a  Christian  reviewing  his  dedicatio^i  to  God  : — I  wish  I  could  hare 
heard  what  you  said  to  yourselves  when  I  read  these  words.  I  could  guess  the 
language  of  some  of  you.  You  thought,  "  I  never  said  anything  to  the  Lord,  except 
it  was — Depart  from  me."  Others  of  you,  perhaps,  said,  "I  believe  that  I  did 
once  say  so  to  the  Lord,  but  it  was  so  long  ago  that  I  had  forgotten  it.  It  must 
have  been  when  I  was  in  trouble.  But  I  cannot  say  it  now."  Others  said,  "Yes, 
I  have  said  that,  and  often,  and  I  am  glad  to  say  it  again."  Good  men  are  excellent 
company  for  th<-mselves,  for  they  can  converse  with  their  souls.  David  is  doing  so 
here.  He  is  telling  of  his  dedication  to  God,  and  reviewing  what  he  then  said. 
Now  this  is  a  good  thing  to  do.  I.  It  is  useful  in  the  hour  of  temptation. 
It  will  not  prevent,  necessarily,  the  assaults  of  sin,  nor  our  being  overcome  by  them. 
The  eleven  disciples  forsook  Christ,  though  they  had  solemnly  engaged  not  to  do  so. 
But  it  is  a  help  against  such  temptations  to  be  often  reviewing  our  vows  to  God.  It 
arms  us  against  sin.  II.  As  a  bond  of  diligence  and  consistency  in  duty. 
Many  also  would  stand  back  from  wilful  sins  and  grosser  vices,  yet  grow  remiss  in 
their  duty  and  become  less  circujnspect.  Now  against  this  it  is  well  to  preserve  a 
remembrance  of  our  covenant  engagements.  III.  To  affokd  oeeat  belief  in 
distress.  The  believer  may  be  subject  to  great  spiritual  distress.  The  light  of 
God's  countenance  may  be  withheld,  and  giace  be  very  feeble.  Then  such  com- 
monion  with  our  own  souls  and  with  the  Lord,  as  is  indicated  here,  does  help  us 
much.  Tell  Him  how  we  desire  to  stand  to  our  engagements,  and  to  be  His  for  ever. 
So  our  hearts  will  brighten  even  in  the  midst  of  flowing  tears.     IV.  As  a  support 

AND  encouragement  IN  THE  IMMEDIATE  PROSPECT  OF  DEATH.      Nothing,  then,  but 

what  is  real  and  substantial  will  serve.  Death  is  rapidly  approaching.  "So  let  it," 
cries  the  devoted  servant  of  God  ;  "  the  sooner  it  comes  the  better.  The  God  whom 
I  have  served  is  able  to  deliver  me  ;  and  He  will  deliver  me  from  thy  sting,  0  death, 
and  from  all  the  power  of  the  grave.  Many  years  ago  I  said  to  the  Lord,  Thou  art 
my  Lord,  and  He  honoured  me  with  a  place  among  His  servants ;  and  now  I  feel 
Thee,  blessed  Savour,  to  be  the  strength  of  my  heart ;  and  I  depend  upon  Thee  as 
my  portion  for  ever.  Into  Thine  hand  I  commit  my  spirit ;  for  Thou  hast  redeemed 
me,  0  Lord  God  of  truth."  Well,  then,  do  you  not  think  that  happy  is  the  people 
whose  God  is  the  Lord  ?  But  I  want  more  than  your  approval.  I  want  to  knew  if 
yon  have  said  to  the  Lord,  "Thou  art  my  Lord."  Let  me  ask — 1.  Have  you  ever 
felt  the  misery  of  being  without  God  ?  2.  Have  you  ever  given  time  for  serious 
thought  on  this  question  ?  How  solemn  is  your  condition  who  live  all  your  days  in 
a  hurry  of  business  or  thoughtless  dissipation  !  But  you  who  have  taken  the  Lord 
to  be  your  God,  I  would  say  to  you  :  Cleave  to  God  with  purpose  of  heart.  This  is 
the  bond  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord.  "  I,  such  an  one,  whose  name  is  hereunto 
subscribed,  do  hereby  reu  ounce  all  other  masters  which  have  had  dominion  over  me, 
and  bind  myself  to  the  Lord,  to  serve  Him  in  holiness  and  righteousness  all  the 
days  of  my  life  :  So  help  me  God."  And  do  much  for  Him.  Also  expect  much  from 
Him ;  you  shall  not  be  disappointed.  And  finally,  you  shall  receive  a  crown  of 
life.  None  ever  served  God  for  nought.  {S.  Laxnngton.)  A  sacramental  medita- 
tion : — 1.  Before  partaking.  It  was  David's  wont,  when  in  distress  and  ready  to 
doubt  whether  he  had  really  dedicated  himself  to  God,  to  remind  himself  of  the 
solemn  transactions  which  had  passed  between  him  and  God.  1.  Let  us  consider  the 
meaning  and  import  of  these  words.  He  acknowledges  God's  property  in  him,  and 
claim  upon  him.  And  that  he  desires  to  be  the  Lord's  ;  that  he  prefers  God  to  all 
else.  He  had  chosen  and  acknowledged  God  as  his  God.  And  now,  in  distress,  he 
repeats  all  this.  2.  Let  us  remember  what  professions  we  have  made.  It  is  reason- 
able that  we  should  ;  for  we  are  in  danger  of  forgetting.  The  world  wears  out  the 
memory  of  them  ;  and  our  afflictions  tempt  us  to  doubt  that  Jehovah  is  our  Lord. 
Therefore  it  is  good  to  renew  our  covenant.  And  it  wiU  help  us  to  be  more  sensible 
of  our  duty,  and  will  animate  us  under  every  suffering.  And  as  we  thus  renew  our 
vows  we  shall  see  such  excellence  in  them  as  will  engage  us  to  fulfil  them  with 
diligence.  3.  And  there  is  no  more  fit  time  for  this  than  at  the  Lord's  table.  We 
commemorate  the  everlasting  covenant.  We  profess  our  faith  in  Christ's  sacrifice. 
By  His  blood,  which  the  wine  represents,  we  are  brought  nigh  to  God  and  admitted 
into  endearing  relation  to  Him.  Therefore  let  us,  &c.  II.  After  partaking. 
Let  us  take  review  of  what  we  have  done,  and  each  adopt  the  language  of  David, 
"O  my  soul,"  A;c.  This  means,  "I  entirely  approve,  and  give  thanks  for  being 
inclined  to  say  this. "    And  acknowledge  past  unworthy  behaviour.     Failure  in  love 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  rvi. 

to  Him,  and  in  faithfulness.  But  "I  desire  that  I  may  not  again  neglect  my  duty, 
that  I  may  not  yield  to  temptation,  nor  follow  the  world  too  eagerly,  nor  say  to  it 
what  I  had  said  to  the  Lord."  Are  we  in  affliction  ?  That  is  a  time  to  repeat  the 
acknowledgnieat.  "  Thou  hast  said  to  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  Lord :  in  Thee  I 
have  all  things.  Thou  canst  and  wilt  support  and  comfort  me  ;  make  up  my  earthly 
losses,  and  teach  me  to  glory  in  tribulation. "  Finally,  do  we  feel  the  sentence  of 
death  in  ourselves  ?  There  is  no  time  more  proper  to  repeat  the  acknowledgment, 
' '  Thou  hast  said  unto  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  Lord  ;  my  God,  whom  I  have  sincerely 
loved  and  served  ;  to  whom  I  have  often  committed  my  soul  through  Christ  ;  and  I 
would  do  it  again  with  gratitude,  hope  and  joy,  when  flesh  and  heart  are  failing." 
Let  us  thus,  in  every  circumstance  of  life  and  death,  remember  our  covenant 
transactions.  If  you  have  sincerely  said,  and  are  saying  to  the  Lord,  "Thou  art  my 
Lord,"  let  this  be  your  comfort,  that  "He  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor 
forsake  thee."    {J.  OrUm.) 

Yer.  8.  All  my  deligbt  is  npon  tbe  saizits  that  are  in  the  earth,  and  npoa  sach 
as  excel  in  virtue  (P.B.  V.). — Divine  love  for  the  saints  of  God : — On  All  Saints'  Day 
our  mind  seems  almost  to  sink  beneath  the  great  and  holy  thoughts  which  come 
crowding  in  upon  it,  when  we  think  of  that  vast  multitude  which  no  man  can 
number,  of  all  ages,  of  all  nations,  of  all  ranks  of  life,  of  all  mental  and  bodily 
endowments,  who,  having  come  out  of  great  tribulation,  now  rejoice  in  the  presence 
of  Him  whom  on  earth  they  loved.  The  Church  to-day  is  proclaiming  the  truth  of 
the  words  of  our  text.  But  it  is  not  the  Church  alone,  our  Lord  Himself  shares  in 
this  delight.  He  beholds  the  beautiful  things  that  He  has  made  ;  but  the  King  of 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem  has  fairer  prospects  than  these.  There  is  something  on 
earth  which  He  sees  and  values.  The  saints  for  the  most  part  live  a  hidden  life  ; 
the  world  despises  their  aims,  perhaps  laughs  at  their  frailties.  They  pass  away, 
and  their  names  are  forgotten,  or  live  only  in  the  memory  of  the  Church,  but  the 
Lord  makes  them  the  sum  and  centre  of  His  care  and  love.  He  greatly  rejoices  in 
the  work  of  His  grace,  as  it  displays  itself  in  His  elect.  Their  shortest  prayer,  their 
slightest  act  of  self-denial  He  notices.  He  gathers  them,  one  by  one,  out  of  the 
ruined  mass  of  humanity,  to  be  jewels  in  His  heavenly  diadem.  (.S^.  IV.  Skeffi/ngton, 
M.A.)  The  saint's  ministry  to  his  brethren: — God's  goodness  should  make  us 
merciful  to  others.  It  were  strange  indeed  a  soul  should  come  out  of  His  tender 
bosom  with  a  hard  uncharitable  heart.  Some  children  do  not,  indeed,  take  after 
their  earthly  parents,  as  Cicero's  son,  who  had  nothing  of  his  father  but  his  name  ; 
but  God's  children  all  partake  of  their  heavenly  Father's  nature.  Philosophy  tells  us 
that  there  is  no  reaction  from  the  earth  to  the  heavens  ;  they,  indeed,  shed  their 
influences  upon  the  lower  world,  which  quicken  and  fructify  it,  but  the  earth  returns 
none  back  to  make  the  sun  shine  the  better.  Daviil  knew  that  his  goodness 
extended  not  unto  God,  but  this  made  him  reach  it  forth  to  his  brethren.  Indeed, 
God  has  left  His  poor  saints  to  receive  the  rents  we  owe  unto  Him  for  His  mercies.  An 
ingenuous  guest,  though  his  friend  will  take  nothing  for  his  entertainment,  yet,  to 
show  his  thankfulness,  will  give  something  to  his  servants.  (fFiWiom  Ghimall.) 
Moral  distinctions : — Is  this  an  arbitrary  and  invidious  distinction  ?  We  read  of  the 
"saints,"  and  the  "excellent."  Are  there,  then,  some  people  who  are  not  saints, 
and  some  saints  who  are  not  excellent  ?  The  Bible  does  not  create  distinctions.  If 
there  were  no  Bible  the  earth  would  still  be  distributed  into  qualities,  orders, 
classes,  and  the  like.  The  Bible  proceeds  to  a  finer  discrimination.  It  analyses 
honesty,  it  puts  wisdom  to  the  test,  it  searches  into  the  credentials  of  faithfulness. 
The  Bible  asks.  What  is  the  motive  underlying  character  ?  By  "  saints  "  under- 
stand separated  men.  The  word  "  saint  "  is  simply  a  moral  or  spiritual  distinction. 
It  involves  more  than  is  commonly  understood  by  an  honest  man,  or  a  good  man, 
or  a  well-living  man.  It  indicates  of  necessity  a  connection  with  the  ineffably  holy, 
the  perfect,  the  Divine.  It  means,  at  least,  an  inspiration  eternal,  rising  towards 
the  eternity  inaccessible — that  is,  the  supreme  life — that  is,  the  life  Divine.  The 
terms  "saints,"  "excellent"  are  of  a  universal  quality.  The  reference  is  to  char- 
acter, not  to  opinion,  nor  to  varied  ways  of  looking  at  things  which  cannot  be 
positively  settled.  The  Psalmist  dwells  upon  the  eternal  quantity — character, 
holiness,  excellence,  purenese ;  these  speak  all  languages,  assume  the  hues  of  all  climes, 
and  under  manifold  outward  diversity  conceal  an  agreement  subtle  and  indefinable 
as  life  itself.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  saints  of  God: — Since  the  seventh 
century  the  first  day  of  November  has  always  been  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  All 
Saints.     Such  a  day  suggests  thoughts  as  solemn  and  as  needfvd  as  any  wkicli  could 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  237 

be  presented  to  us.  We  watch  the  procession  of  mankind  as  it  winds  through  the 
long  centuries  of  history,  and  we  note  its  most  striking  figures.  The  vast  mass 
consists  of  a  nameless  throng.  To  our  eye*  mankind  is  mainly  divided  into  the 
eminent  and  the  obscure,  the  known  and  the  unknown.  But  to  the  eye  of  God,  to 
the  eyes  of  all  spirits,  it  may  be,  the  aspect  of  that  procession  is  very  different.  To 
them  the  inch-high  differences  of  human  rank  have  simply  no  existence  ;  for  them 
the  thistles  of  human  loftiness  have  no  elevation,  and  the  paltry  mole-hills  cast  no 
shadow.  For  they  know  but  one  distinction,  that  of  the  evil  and  the  good.  We 
can  see,  on  the  whole,  that  some  men  have  dared  to  be  eminently  good,  and 
that  others  have  been  conspicuously,  infamously  bad.  With  unspeakable  relief  we 
turn  from  them  to  the  saints  of  God.  "  In  them  is  the  healing  of  the  world."  Do 
not  think  of  the  mere  title  "saints"  ;  it  has  been  given  to  some,  at  least,  who  have 
no  claim  to  it,  and  it  has  been  denied  to  many  more  who  have  been  consummately 
worthy  of  it.  On  All  Souls'  Day  we  may  think  not  only  of  those  whom  the  Church 
has  called  saints,  but  also  of  the  long  line  of  heroes  of  the  faith  in  olden  times  who 
are  not  called  saints — of  the  patriarchs,  of  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  and  many 
more ;  of  brave  judges,  glorious  prophets,  patriot  warriors,  toiling  apostles  ;  of  the 
many  martyrs  who  would  rather  die  than  live  ;  of  hermits  who  fled  from  the  guilt 
and  turmoil  of  life  ;  of  the  missionaries,  Paul,  Columba,  Benedict,  Xavier,  Schwartz, 
and  a  long  roll-call  of  others.  Of  reformers,  of  wise  rulers,  of  the  writers  of  holy 
books,  of  the  slayers  of  monstrous  abuses  ;  of  good  bishops,  good  pastors  ;  of  all 
true  poets,  whether  sweet  and  holy,  or  great  and  mighty  like  Dante  and  Milton. 
These  are  but  a  few  of  those  who  have  reflected  the  glory  of  their  Master,  Christ, 
and  who  walk  with  Him  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy.  If  we  would  comfort  our 
hearts,  strengthen  good  resolutions,  and  retain  that  high  estimate  of  human  nature 
which  it  is  such  a  misfortune  to  lose,  and  which  so  often  threatens  to  succumb,  let 
us  in  days  like  these  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  Christian  history  and  bio- 
graphy as  the  antidote  to  the  degeneracy  of  these  worldly  and  evil  days.  From 
earth's  mire  and  darkness  lift  up  your  eyes  to  this  galaxy  of  great  examples.  We 
need  something  to  keep  alive  our  faith  in  the  dignity  of  man.  I,  for  one,  find  that 
something,  most  of  all,  in  dwelling  in  the  life  and  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  next, 
in  considering  the  blessed  example  of  those  who  have  followed  Him,  each  bearing  his 
own  cross.  They  will  help  us  by  furnishing  gleaming  instances  of  pure  and  poss- 
ible human  goodness  ;  they  show  us  how,  by  true  faith  in  Christ,  men  just  as  weak 
as  we  are,  tempted  as  we  are,  yet  did  gloriously  and  conspicuously  triumph  over 
sin,  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  thereby  proved  to  us  that  we  can  do 
the  same.  See  how  the  universal  idol,  selfishness,  has  been  gloriously  overcome. 
Pride,  too,  has  been  subdued.  St.  Thomas,  of  Aquino,  was  by  far  the  greatest 
man  of  his  age.  One  day  at  Bologna,  a  stranger  arriving  at  his  monastery  asked  the 
prior  for  some  one  to  help  him  to  get  provisions  and  carry  his  basket.  "  Tell  the 
first  brother  you  meet,"  said  the  prior.  St.  Thomas  was  walking  in  meditation  in  the 
cloister,  and,  not  knowing  him  by  sight,  the  stranger  said  to  him,  "Your  prior  bids 
you  to  follow  me."  Without  a  word  the  greatest  teacher  of  his  age,  the  "Doctor 
Angelicus" — the  angel  of  the  schools,  as  he  was  called  by  the  affection  of  his 
admirers — bowed  his  head,  took  the  basket,  and  followed.  But  he  was  suffering 
from  lameness,  and  since  he  was  unable  to  keep  up  with  the  pace,  the  stranger 
rebuked  him  soundly  as  a  lazy,  good-for-nothing  fellow,  who  ought  to  show  more 
zeal  in  religious  obedience.  The  saint  meekly  bore  the  unjust  reproaches,  and 
answered  never  a  word.  "Do  you  know  to  whom  you  are  speaking,  who  you  are 
treating  in  this  rude  way  I "  said  the  indignant  citizens  of  Bologna,  who  had  wit- 
nessed the  scene.  "That  is  Brother  Thomas,  of  Aquino."  "Brother  Thomas,  of 
Aquino  ? "  said  the  stranger,  and  immediately  throwing  himself  upon  his  knees,  he 
begged  to  be  forgiven.  "  Nay,"  said  St.  Thomas,  "it  is  I  who  should  ask  forgive- 
ness, since  I  have  not  been  so  active  as  I  should  have  been."  And  this  humility,  so 
rare  in  little  men,  was  the  chief  characteristic  of  this  great  man.  From  that  dis- 
ciplined and  noble  spirit  of  the  first  man  of  his  age  all  pride  had  been  expelled. 
"Give  me,  0  Lord," — this  was  his  daily  prayer,  —  "a  noble  heart  which  no  earthly 
affection  may  diag  down."  What  more  would  we  have  if,  even  through  so  deep  a 
valley  of  humiliation,  there  still  lies  the  path  to  heaven?  You  see  a  life  si)ent  in 
brushing  clothes,  and  washing  crockery,  and  sweeping  floors,  a  life  which  the  proud 
of  the  earth  would  have  regarded  as  the  very  dust  beneath  their  feet,  a  life  spent  at 
a  clerk's  desk,  a  life  sptent  at  a  tradesman's  counter,  a  life  spent  in  a  labourer's  hut, 
may  yet  be  so  ennobled  by  God's  mercy  that  for  the  sake  of  it  a  king  may  gladly 
yield  his  crown.     Thank  God  there  have  been  and  are  tens  of  thousands  of  holy  and 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xri. 

faithful,  and  therefore  happy,  soula,  full  of  inward  peace.  Will  you  be  one  of  their 
number  I  {Dean  Farrar.)  In  whom  is  all  my  delight. — The  moral  force  in  the 
world  of  God's  elect : — The  history  of  mankind,  whether  secular  or  religious,  resolves 
itself  ultimately  into  the  history  of  a  few  individuals.  For  though  the  masses  live, 
yet  it  is  these  few  who  determine  the  direction  and  shape  the  spirit  of  the  age. 
The  rest  die  and  are  forgotten  ;  one  epitaph  would  do  for  them  all,  except  for  two 
or  three  out  of  the  million.  Another  fact,  and  a  sadder  one,  is  that  tne  human 
race  seems  to  tend  downwards.  The  old  Greek  proverb  says,  and  truly,  "the 
majority  are  evil."  The  few  only  are  saints,  the  few  only  are  heroes.  There  is 
.bitter  truth  in  David's  saying,  "All  men  are  liars"  ;  and  in  Carlyle's,  that  "the 
world  is  peopled  by  a  thousand  millions,  mostly  fools."  How  dreadful,  then,  would 
the  condition  of  the  world  be  were  it  not  for  God's  elect  few.  The  deliverance  of 
man  has  never  been  wrought  by  the  multitude,  but  by  the  individual.  See  this 
illustrated  in  poetry,  in  philosophy,  in  art,  in  science  ;  the  leaders  are  a  few,  all 
the  rest  follow.  But  art  and  the  rest  will  not  alone  save  a  people.  History  shows 
how  along  with  them  nations  have  sunk  into  the  abyss  of  degradation.  So  will 
England,  so  will  every  nation,  if  she  refuse  the  message  of  God.  Of  what  use  would 
the  spangles  of  art  and  science  be  upon  the  funeral  pall  of  the  dying  race  if  death 
were  the  end  of  all  ?  The  hope  of  the  world  lies  in  the  recognition  of,  and  in 
obedience  to,  the  Word  of  God  as  uttered  by  His  special  messengers  ;  and  by  so 
listening  as  to  reflect  in  myriads  of  gleams,  and  to  reverberate  in  millions  of  echoes, 
the  light  and  the  voice  of  inspiration.  In  illustration  of  all  this  glance  at  the  moral 
history  of  the  world.  What  drear  darkness  in  the  main  prevailed  from  Adam  to 
Abraham,  that  great  hero  of  the  faith.  After  him  darkness  again  until  Moses. 
After  him  till  Samuel  and  the  prophetic  order.  After  them  till  Christ  and  the 
apostles.  After  Him  and  them  the  world  gradually  grew  worse  ;  Christianity  itself 
became  corrupted  till  St.  Anthony,  forsaking  all,  made  his  home  in  the  lonely 
desert,  to  convince  his  generation  of  the  infinite  v^ue  of  every  human  soul.  And 
from  his  day,  now  and  again,  great  saints  were  inspired  of  God  from  time  to  time, — 
such  as  Benedict  I.,  Gregory  VII.,  Francis  of  Assisi,  until  in  the  midst  of  another 
dark  period  the  lion-hearted  Luther  shook  the  world.  It  is  by  such  men  the  world 
has  been  kept  from  moral  death ;  such  seems  to  be  the  method  of  God's  working. 
Now  let  us  note  some  of  the  lessons  of  this  Divine  method.  I.  What  is  the  secret, 
THE  SOLE  secret  OF  MORAL  POWER  ?  Who  that  reads  the  signs  of  these  times  can 
fail  to  see  how  much  this  age  needs  that  secret !  What  was  it  that  again  and  again 
overcame  the  world  ?  Was  it  not  faith  showing  itself  by  self-sacrifice  ?  See  it  in 
Abraham,  Moses,  Samuel,  and  all  else.  II.  That  the  work  of  these  saints  is 
never  permanent.  There  is  infinite  pathoe  in  the  failures  of  men  and  of  institutions. 
Their  work  has  perpetually  to  be  renewed.  Abraham  died,  and  ere  a  century  had 
elapsed  his  children  were  slaves.  And  so  with  all  the  reat.  III.  Apparent 
FAILURES  WERE  NEVER  ABSOLUTE  FAILURES.  No  good  man  ever  lives  in  vain. 
Each  saint  has  his  own  Calvary.  St.  Telemachus  was  butchered  in  the  arena,  but 
because  of  his  death  an  end  was  put  to  gladiatorial  games.  What  a  candle  did 
Latimer  and  Ridley  light  in  England  through  their  martyrdom,  and  its  light  glows 
still.  Then  let  man  think,  however  discouraged  he  may  be  at  the  moral  aspect  of 
men,  that  a  holy  Christian  life  can  never  be  in  vain,     (ibid.) 

Yer.  4.  Their  sozrowg  shall  be  multiplied  that  hasten  after  another  God.— 7^ 

sorrows  of  idolaters : — There  is  no  other  fact  more  incontrovertibly  established  than 
the  fact  that  idolatry  of  every  sort  is  a  system  of  sorrows.  Forsaking  the  one 
living  and  true  God  to  serve  other  gods  has  written  the  scroll  of  human  history, 
within  and  without,  with  mourning  and  lamentation  and  woe.  The  command, 
"Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods,  but  Me,"  is  a  command  grounded  in  the  nature  of 
things,  and  the  necessities  of  the  human  soul.  The  human  soul  eannot  have  any 
other  god  without  piercing  itself  through  with  many  sorrows.  The  moment  it 
adopts,  as  the  object  of  its  supreme  love  and  adoration,  any  other  being  than  the 
Lord  God  it  begins  to  degenerate.  The  result  is  the  same  degeneracy  where  the 
attempt  is  made  even  to  blend  with  the  worship  of  the  true  God  the  worship  of 
other  beings.  Saint  worship  has  proved  as  disastrous  to  humnn  progress  as  the 
worship  of  pagan  gods  and  heroes.  Italy  has  been  as  sadly  degradea  ])y  jiapal  as  it 
ever  was  by  pagan  Rome.  Jupiter,  and  Venus,  and  Bacchus,  and  Mars  have  only 
been  displaced  by  saints  as  little  entitled  to  our  respect.  It  is  only  as  the  soul 
chooses  for  its  worship  an  object  of  supreme  excellence  that  it  rises  in  the  scale  of 
moral  and  intellectual  dignity.     Such  an  object  David's  soul  had  chosen  as  the  God 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  239 

of  its  worship:  "Their  drink  offerings  of  blood  will  I  not  offer,  nor  take  up  their 
names  into  my  lips."  Drink  offerings  of  wine  were  offered  by  the  Israelites  ;  but 
all  such  offerings  of  blood  were  forbidden  them  (Lev.  xvii.  9-14).  The  heathen, 
however,  in  their  worship,  both  drank  and  offered  blood.  It  will  be  recollected  by 
the  reader  of  history  that  Catiline  pledged  his  accomplices  in  a  goblet  of  blood, 
binding  them  by  fearful  oaths  to  the  performance  of  fearful  deeds,  previous  to 
fxplaining  to  them  his  plan  for  the  massacre  of  the  Roman  senate  and  people. 
Hannibal,  too,  is  said  to  have  made  a  blood-drinking  vow.  We  have  read  also  of  a 
tyrant  who,  piercing  his  enemies  with  hot  irons,  and  gathering  the  blood  in  a  cup 
as  it  flowed,  drank  one  half  of  it,  and  offered  up  the  other  half  to  his  god.  These 
illustrations  go  to  prove  that  worshipping  other  gods  than  the  true  God  degrades 
men  more  and  more,  until  the  words  "  brute  "  and  "  fiend  "  are  the  only  words  that 
accurately  describe  him.  {David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  The  misery  of  idolatry : — The 
Psalmist  here  introduces  the  subject  of  idolatry,  and  forms  respecting  it  a  worthy 
and  decided  resolution.  He  speaks  of  the  misery  »f  such  as  attach  themselves  to 
the  worship  and  service  of  false  gods.  Not  only  shall  they  be  subjected  to  calamity, 
but  their  calamities  shall  be  manifold.  This  arises  from  two  causes.  The  gods  in 
whom  they  have  placed  their  confidence  are  mere  imaginary  beings.  And  hy  for- 
saking the  true  God  they  have  forfeited  all  the  advantages  which  trust  in  Hira 
and  obedience  to  Him  would  have  certainly  produced.  On  account  of  the  sinfulness 
and  misery  of  such  conduct  the  Psalmist  determined  that  he  should  not  be  charge- 
able with  it.  True,  we  are  not  in  danger  of  becoming  idolaters  in  the  literal  and 
original  sense  of  the  word.  But  the  substance  of  the  crime  is  contained  in  your 
feeling  and  showing  a  stronger  attachment  to  some  other  being  than  to  the  Supreme 
Being.  It  is  of  no  consequence  what  it  is  to  which  you  thus  pay  the  homage  and 
give  the  glory  which  are  due  to  God  alone.  Idolatry  is  to  serve  the  creature  more 
than  the  Creator.  Beware  of  the  guilt  of  idolatry,  and  of  the  vengeance  which 
impends  over  those  who  indulge  in  it.  The  Psalmist  goes  on  to  say,  "The  Lord  is 
the  portion  of  mine  inheritance. "  This  refers  both  to  the  future  life  and  to  the 
present,  ' '  the  life  that  now  is. "  In  all  that  happens  to  lis  we  will  recognise  the 
operation  of  His  combined  mercy  and  wisdom  and  faithfulness.  Then  our  "lines 
will  have  fallen  in  pleasant  places. "  But  our  principal  concern  is  with  our  spiritual 
circumstances.     (A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Tlie  Lord  ia  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance  and  of  my  cnp. — Man's 

true  treasure  in  God: — I.  All  true  religion  consists  in  deliberately  choos- 
ing God  as  my  supreme  good.  Now,  how  do  we  possess  God  ?  We  possess  things 
in  one  fashion  and  persons  in  another.  The  lowest  and  most  imperfect  form  of 
possession  is  that  by  which  a  man  simply  keeps  other  people  off  material  good,  and 
asserts  the  right  of  disposal  of  it  as  he  thinks  proper.  A  blind  man  may  have  the 
finest  picture  that  ever  was  painted  ;  he  may  call  it  his,  that  is  to  say,  nobody  else 
can  sell  it,  but  what  good  is  it  to  him  ?  A  lunatic  may  own  a  library  as  big  as 
a  Bodleian,  but  what  use  is  it  to  him  ?  Does  the  man  that  draws  the  rents  of  a 
mountain-side,  or  the  poet  or  painter  to  whom  its  cliffs  and  heather  speak  far- 
reaching  thoughts,  most  truly  possess  it  ?  The  highest  form  of  possession,  even  of 
creatures,  is  wnen  they  minister  to  our  thought,  to  our  emotion,  to  our  moral  and 
intellectual  growth.  We  possess  even  things,  really,  according  as  we  know  them 
and  hold  communion  with  them.  And  when  we  get  up  into  the  region  of  persons 
we  possess  people  in  the  measure  in  which  we  understand  them,  and  sympathise 
with  them,  and  love  them.  A  man  that  gets  the  thoughts  of  a  great  teacher  into 
his  mind,  and  has  his  whole  being  saturated  by  them,  may  be  said  to  have  made  the 
teacher  his  own.  A  friend  or  a  lover  owns  the  heart  that  he  or  she  loves,  and  which 
loves  back  again  ;  and  not  otherwise  do  we  possess  God.  And  the  ownership  must 
be,  from  its  very  nature,  reciprocal.  And  so  we  read  in  the  Bible,  with  equal  fre- 
quency :  the  Lord  is  the  "inheritance  of  His  people,  and  the  people  are  the  inheritance 
of  the  Lord. "  He  possesses  me,  and  I  possess  Him,  with  reverence  be  it  spoken,  by 
the  very  same  tenure,  for  whoso  loves  God  has  Him,  and  whom  He  loves  He  owns. 
We  have  God  for  ours  in  the  measure  in  which  our  minds  are  actively  occupied  with 
thoughts  of  Him.  We  know  Him.  There  is  a  real,  adequate  knowledge  of  Him 
in  Jesus  Christ ;  we  know  God,  His  character,  His  heart.  His  relations  to  us,  His 
thoughts  of  good  oonoeming  us  sufficiently  for  all  intellectual  and  for  all  practical 
purposes.  I  wish  to  ask  you  a  plain  question.  Do  you  ever  think  about  Him  ? 
There  is  only  one  way  of  getting  God  for  yours,  and  that  is  by  the  road  of  bringing 
Him  into  yonr  life  by  frequent  meditation  upon  His  sweetness,  and  upon  the  truths 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xri. 

that  yon  know  about  Him.  There  is  no  other  way  by  which  a  spirit  can  possess  a 
spirit  that  is  not  cognisable  by  sense,  except  only  by  the  way  of  thinking  about 
Hiru  to  begin  with.  All  else  follows  that.  That  is  how  you  hold  yoiir  dear  ones 
when  they  go  to  the  other  side  of  the  world.  II.  This  possession  is  made  as 
SURE  as  God  can  make  it.  "Thou  maintainest  my  lot."  The  land,  the  partition 
of  which  amongst  the  tribes  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  illusive  metaphor  of  my  text, 
was  given  to  them  under  the  sanction  of  a  supernatural  defence ;  and  the  law  of 
their  continuance  in  it  was  that  they  should  trust  and  serve  the  unseen  King.  It 
was  He,  according  to  the  theocratic  theory  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  not  chariots 
and  horses,  their  own  arm  and  their  own  sword,  that  kept  them  safe,  though  the 
enemies  on  the  north  and  the  enemies  on  the  soutli  were  big  enough  to  swallow  up 
the  little  kingdom  at  a  mouthful.  And  so,  says  the  Psalmist  allusively,  in  a 
similar  manner  the  Divine  Power  surrounds  the  man  who  takes  God  for  his  heritage, 
and  nothing  shall  take  that  heritage  from  him.  The  lower  forms  of  possession,  by 
which  men  are  called  the  owners  of  material  possessions,  are  imperfect,  because  they 
are  all  precarious  and  temporary.  Nothing  really  belongs  to  a  man  if  it  can  be 
taken  from  him.  "What  we  may  lose  we  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have.  They  are 
mine,  they  were  yours,  they  will  be  somebody's  else  to-morrow.  Whilst  we  have 
them  we  uo  not  have  them  in  any  deep  sense  ;  we  cannot  retain  them,  they  are  not 
really  ours  at  all.  The  only  thing  that  is  worth  calling  mine  is  something  that  so 
passes  into  and  saturates  the  very  substance  of  my  soul,  that,  like  a  piece  of  cloth 
dyed  in  the  grain,  as  long  as  two  threads  hold  together  the  tint  will  be  there. 
That  is  how  God  gives  us  Himself,  and  nothing  can  take  that  out  of  a  man's  soul. 
He,  in  the  sweetness  of  His  grace,  bestows  Himself  upon  man,  and  guards  His  own 
gift,  which  is  Himself,  in  the  heart.  He  who  dwells  in  God  and  God  in  him  lives 
as  in  the  inmost  keep  and  citadel.  The  noise  of  battle  may  rage  around  the  walls, 
but  deep  silence  and  peace  are  within.  The  storm  may  rage  round  the  coasts,  but  he 
who  has  God  for  his  portion  dwells  in  a  quiet  inland  valley  where  the  tempests  never 
come.  No  outer  changes  can  touch  our  possession  of  God.  They  belong  to  another 
region  altogether.  Other  goods  may  go,  but  this  is  held  by  different  tenure.  Root 
yourselves  in  God,  making  Him  your  truest  treasure,  and  nothing  can  rob  you  of 
your  wealth.  We  here  in  this  commercial  community  see  plenty  of  examples  of 
great  fortunes  and  great  businesses  melting  away  like  yesterday's  snow.  Then,  too, 
there  is  the  other  thought.  He  will  help  us  so  that  no  temptations  shall  have 
power  to  make  us  rob  ourselves  of  our  treasure.  None  can  take  it  from  us  but 
ourselves,  but  we  are  so  weak  and  surrounded  by  temptations  so  strong  that  we 
need  Him  to  aid  us  if  we  are  not  to  be  beguiled  by  our  own  treacherous  hearts  into 
parting  with  our  treasure.  A  handful  of  feeble  Jews  were  nothing  against  the 
gigantic  might  of  Assyria,  or  against  the  compacted  strength  of  civilised  Egy^it,  but 
there  they  stood,  on  their  rocky  mountains,  defended  not  by  their  own  strength  but 
by  the  might  of  a  present  God.  And  so,  unfit  to  cope  with  the  temptations  that 
are  round  about  us  as  we  are,  if  we  cast  ourselves  upon  His  power  and  make  Him 
our  supreme  delight,  nothing  shall  be  able  to  rob  us  of  that  possession  and  that 
sweetness.  III.  He  who  thus  elects  to  find  his  treasure  and  delight  in 
God  is  satisfied  with  his  choice.  "The  lines" — the  measuring  cords  by  which 
the  estate  was  parted  off  and  determined — "the  lines  are  fallen,"  because  they 
would  be  thrown,  "in  pleasant  places  ;  yea  !  "  not  as  our  Bible  has  it,  merely,  "  I 
have  a  goodly  heritage,"  putting  emphasis  on  the  fact  of  possession,  but  "the 
heritage  is  goodly  to  me,"  putting  emphasis  on  the  fact  of  subjective  satisfaction 
with  the  inheritance  that  he  is  to  receive.  No  man  that  makes  the  worse  choice  of 
earth  instead  of  God  ever,  in  the  retrospect,  said,  "I  have  a  goodly  heritage.' 
One  of  the  later  Roman  emperors,  who  was  one  of  the  best  of  them,  said,  when  he 
was  dying,  "  I  have  been  everything,  and  it  profits  me  nothing."  No  creature 
can  satisfy  your  whole  nature.  Portions  of  it  may  be  fed  with  their  appropriate 
satisfaction,  but  as  long  as  we  feed  on  the  things  of  earth  there  will  always  be  part 
of  our  nature,  like  an  unfed  tiger  in  a  menagerie,  growling  and  grumbling  for  its 
prey,  whilst  its  fellows  are  satisfied  for  the  moment.  No  man  that  takes  the  world 
for  his  portion  ever  said,  "The  lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  pleasant  places."  For  the 
make  of  your  soul  as  plainly  cries  out  "God  !  "  as  a  fish's  fins  declare  that  the  sea 
is  its  element,  or  a  bird's  wings  mark  it  out  as  meant  to  soar.  Man  and  God  fit 
each  other  like  the  two  halves  of  a  tally.  You  will  never  get  rest  nor  satisfaction, 
and  you  will  never  be  able  to  look  to  the  past  with  thankfulness,  nor  into  the 
present  with  repose,  nor  into  the  future  with  hope,  unless  you  can  say,  "  God  is  the 
strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever."     But  oh  I  if  you  do,  then  yon  have 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  241 

a  goodly  heritage,  a  heritage  of  quiet  repose,  a  heritage  of  still  satisfaction,  a 
heritage  which  suits,  and  gratifies,  and  expands  all  the  powers  of  a  man's  nature, 
and  makes  him  ever  capable  of  larger  and  larger  possessions,  of  a  God  who  ever 
gives  more  than  we  can  receive,  that  the  overplus  may  draw  us  to  further  desire, 
and  the  further  desire  may  more  fully  be  satisfied.  The  one  true,  pure,  abiding  joy 
is  to  hold  fellowship  with  God  and  to  live  in  His  love.  The  secret  of  all  our  unrest 
is  the  going  out  of  our  desires  after  earthly  things.  They  fly  forth  from  our  hearts 
like  Noah's  dove,  and  nowhere  amid  all  the  weltering  flood  can  find  a  resting-place. 
The  secret  of  satisfied  repose  is  to  set  our  afi'ections  thoroughly  on  God.  Then  our 
wearied  hearts,  like  Noah's  dove,  will  fold  their  wings  and  build,  and  nestle  fast  by 
the  throne  of  God.  "All  the  happiness  of  this  life,"  said  William  Law,  "is  but 
trying  to  quench  thirst  out  of  golden  empty  cups."  But  if  we  will  take  the  Lord 
for  the  "portion  of  our  cup  "  we  shall  never  thirst.     {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The 

Lord  the  portion  of  His  people : — There  are  two  things  intimately  connected  with 
each  other,  and  bearing  much  upon  ourselves,  which  can  neither  be  expressed  nor 
conceived — the  extent  of  human  misery,  and  the  depth  of  human  sin.  But  our 
text  calls  us  not  to  measure  the  extent  of  human  misery,  so  much  as  to  look  at  the 
mercy  of  God  to  all  them  who  fear  Him  ;  not  to  let  down  line  and  plummet  into  the 
abyss  of  himian  depravity,  but  to  look  upon  an  exhaustless  spring  of  consolation — 
the  river  that  maketh  glad  the  city  of  God,  and  of  which  we  may  drink  for  ever. 
We  have  not  to  listen  to  the  self-upbraidings  of  those  who  have  chosen  wrong  ;  but  to 
describe  the  happy  condition  of  those  who  have  chosen  right.  We  fearlessly  assert 
that  they  only  are  happy  who  can  say,  "The  Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine  inherit- 
ance," &c.  L  The  character  here  described.  1.  To  such  a  man  God  is 
recognised  in  His  real  character,  sovereign  and  supreme,  the  Source  of  all  that  is 
enjoyed  here  or  expected  hereafter.  Here  is  the  difference  between  those  who 
serve  the  Lord  and  those  who  serve  Him  not.  There  is  nothing  of  good  in  this 
world  which  is  not  open  to  the  believer  as  much  as  to  any  one  else  ;  all  instruments 
and  appliances  of  happiness  are  bestowed  on  him  as  well  as  on  them.  But  besides 
all  thi»he  can  say,  "The  Lord  is  the  portion,"  &c.  How  wretched  they  who  have 
only  this  world.  2.  But  is  God  your  portion  ?  that  is  the  great  question.  Do  you 
know  of  any  sinking  into  the  grave  without  God,  who  have  turned  away  from 
opportunities  which  will  never  return  ?  Think  of  them,  and  resolve  never  to  be  as 
they.  IL  The  distinctive  feature  of  the  blessing, — perpetuity.  The 
"lot"  of  the  believer  is  to  be  "maintained,"  no  matter  how  terrible  and  distressing 
his  circumstances  may  be.  And  it  is  so.  But  this  cannot  be  said  of  any  worldly 
lot.  Solomon  had  the  world's  best,  yet  his  heart  took  no  rest.  "Vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit "  is  his  verdict  upon  it  all.  But  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God 
uphold  the  "lot"  in  which  the  believer  rejoices.  And  this  is  not  all  a  matter  of 
opinion  and  faith.  For  the  life  of  the  godless  will  not  bear  reflection.  Hence  they 
hate  solitude.  But  the  believer  when  alone  can  say,  "I  am  not  alone,  for  the 
Father  is  with  me. "  And  death  has  lost  its  sting,  and  the  future  brings  no  fear, 
for  he  knows  that  God  will  ever  maintain  his  "lot."  (T  Dale,  M.A.)  How  to 
use  God:  —  When  the  soul  of  man  is  bom  at  the  Cross-foot  it  is  bom  into  the 
inheritance  of  God  ;  but  no  soul  of  man  in  that  first  moment  of  rapture  realises  all 
its  inheritance,  or  comprehends  what  is  meant  by  that  gift.  But  as  the  years  go 
on,  amid  the  varied  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  strain  of  daily  life,  the 
soul  begins  to  press  its  fence-work  out,  and  more  and  more  to  see  God,  until  in  hoary 
hairs  the  aged  saint,  upon  the  very  brink  of  the  other  world,  is  able  to  feel  that 
though  he  had  all  of  God  in  the  first  moment  of  his  conversion,  he  never  knew  how 
much  God  could  be  as  when  the  vision  of  the  otl  er  world  is  breaking  upon  his 
sight.  I  want  to  speak  upon  how  the  whole  of  God  is  yours,  and  to  teach  you  how 
to  use  God,  how  to  raise  harvests  from  God's  nature  for  your  daily  wants,  how  to 
find  in  God  the  harvests  and  the  vintage  and  the  ore,  the  jewels,  the  gold,  and  all 
the  buried  treasures  of  His  nature,  and  how  to  take  these  things  wliich  are  yours 
by  right,  and  to  make  them  living,  permanent,  and  blessed  realities  in  your  daily 
experience  and  life.  1.  God  is  the  true  portion  of  the  soul.  The  inheritance  is  ours 
by  gift.  The  sun  gives  itself  to  the  flower  to  nourish  it,  and  paint  it,  and  feed  it ; 
and  so  the  great  God,  in  all  the  extent  of  His  infinite  nature,  gives  Himself  to  every 
soul  of  man,  to  become  his  portion,  his  inheritance.  He  gives  Himself,  but  the  gift 
is  through  birth.  When  you  are  regenerate,  when  you  are  bora  again,  by  the  very 
fact  of  that  supernatural  act  which  lias  been  wrought  within  your  soul  you  become 
an  heir  of  God  and  a  joint  heir  with  His  Son.  But  it  is  not  only  yours  by  gift  and 
by  birth,  it  is  yours  through  Christ.  And  it  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Notice  how 
i6 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

goodly  a  heritage  it  is.  Because  it  is  so  perfectly  adapted  to  us.  Have  you  ever 
thought  of  the  perfect  adaptation  of  this  earth  to  man  ?  The  macrocosm  tallies  with 
the  microcosm,  the  outward  with  the  inward.  As  the  whole  nature  of  man  is  fitted 
to  the  world  where  God  has  put  him,  so  is  the  spirit  of  man  fitted  for  God,  and  God 
for  it.  Even  if  there  were  no  revelation  of  God,  hy  a  study  of  the  yearnings  of  the 
heart  of  man,  as  the  heart  cries  for  God,  you  might  formulate  the  essential  features 
of  the  being  of  God :  there  is  such  a  perfect  adaptation  between  nature  and  the 
external  world,  and  there  is  such  a  perfect  adaptation  between  the  soul  and  God. 
It  is  a  goodly  portion,  because  it  satisfies  us.  The  unrest  of  life  comes  in  because 
you  let  your  desires  wander  hither  and  thither  like  bees  over  a  flower-garden.  If 
you  would  only  let  God  be  your  portion  you  would  find  that  rest  would  hush  your 
Boul,  and  the  peace  that  passeth  understanding  would  settle  down  upon  your  life. 
And  it  is  inexhaustible.  There  shall  never  come  a  time  when  you  and  I  shall  have 
reached  the  limit  of  the  fulness  of  God.  And  it  is  secure.  The  soul  that  has  made 
God  its  portion  can  look  upon  the  unrest  of  the  political  world,  the  strife  of  man 
about  money,  the  shattering  of  colossal  fortunes,  and  the  breaking  up  of  great 
societies  secure,  because  it  has  found  its  pasture-land,  its  harvest,  its  vintage,  its 
ore,  in  God's  nature,  friendship,  and  presence.  2.  How  to  use  it — (1)  Choose  it. 
(2)  Put  away  out  of  your  life  everything  that  interferes  with  your  enjoyment  of 
God.  (3)  Meditate  on  God.  (4)  Appropriate  Him.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The 
Lord  the  believer  s  portion : — It  was  the  speech  of  Paulinus,  when  his  city  was  taken 
by  the  barbarians,  "  Domine  ne  excrucier  ob  aurum  et  argentum," — Lord,  let  me  not 
be  troubled  for  my  silver  and  gold  which  I  have  lost,  for  Thou  art  all  things.  As 
Noah,  when  the  whole  world  was  overwhelmed  with  water,  had  a  fair  epitome  of  it 
in  the  ark,  having  all  sorts  of  beasts  and  fowls  there  ;  so  he  that  in  a  deluge  hath  God 
to  be  his  God  hath  the  original  of  all  mercies.  He  that  enjoyeth  the  ocean  may  rejoice 
though  some  drops  are  taken  from  him.  {Oeorge  Swinnock.)  God  the  only  happy 
portion :— Some  years  ago  an  eminent  English  noblewoman  was  studying  at  our 
Bible  Institute  in  Chicago.  I  remember  the  day  she  left  us.  She  told  these  two 
incidents.  She  said,  ' '  One  day,  over  in  the  home  country,  I  had  a  letter  from  a 
dear  friend  of  mine,  a  lady,  asking  me  to  go  at  once  and  see  her.  I  hurried  to  her 
home,  and  as  I  went  up  the  elegant  marble  stairway,  and  saw  the  costly  paintings 
which  lined  the  walls,  I  said  to  myself,  *  I  wonder  whether  all  this  splendour  and 
wealth  make  my  friend  happy.'  I  did  not  have  to  wait  long  to  find  out.  The  lady 
came  rushing  into  the  room,  dropped  into  a  seat  by  my  side,  and  told  me  the 
misery  of  her  heart.  All  the  honours,  all  the  dignity  of  her  position  did  not  give  her 
joy.  A  time  after  this  I  went  to  visit  a  blind  woman.  She  lived  in  a  very  poor 
cottage.  It  was  a  rainy  day,  and  the  water  was  dripping  through  the  thatch  over 
her  head  and  gathering  in  a  little  pool  at  her  feet.  As  I  went  in  there,  and  saw  the 
poverty  and  the  blind  eyes,  I  was  driven  to  turn  to  the  woman  and  say,  '  Maggie, 
are  you  not  miserable  I '  She  turned  those  sightless  eyes  upon  me,  and  said,  '  What, 
lady, — I  miserable  1  I,  the  child  of  a  King,  inheritor  of  the  mansion  He  has  gone  to 
prepare  for  me — I  miserable  ?  No,  lady  ;  I  am  happy. ' "  Wealth  had  not  brought 
joy  to  the  one ;  a  living  faith  had  brought  joy  to  the  other  in  the  midst  of  her 
poverty  and  misfortune.     {R.  A.  Torrey,  D.D.) 

Yer.  6.  The  lines  are  fallen  nnto  me  in  pleasant  places. —  We  ought  to  he  content 
with  providence : — You  have  so  many  accommodations  on  the  road  of  life  that 
nothing  but  ignorance  and  ingratituae  can  make  you  discontented.  Consider  the 
age  of  the  world  in  which  you  live.  What  conveniences  of  life  we  have  now. 
Consider  the  country  which  you  inhabit.  If  you  could  see  all  other  countries  you 
would  prefer  this.  Especially  notice  the  civil  liberty  which  we  enjoy.  Consider  the 
religion  of  this  country.  You  have  the  Scriptures  in  your  own  tongue.  To  people 
under  affliction  I  would  give  four  words  of  advice — 1.  Observe  the  false  principle  on 
which  you  have  founded  your  discontent.  You  have  laid  it  down  as  a  principle, 
that  you  ought  to  be  free  from  all  trouble  in  this  present  life.  This  is  a  bold  step. 
2.  Observe  the  sufferings  of  others,  and  compare  conditions.  3.  Note  the  benefits 
you  derive  from  afflictions.  4.  Consider  afflictions  in  the  light  of  preparations  for 
glory.  Christians,  of  all  men,  should  be  least  ]irone  to  discontent.  {Anon. )  The 
inheritance  of  the  people  of  God : — The  allusion  in  the  text  is  to  the  measuring  of 
land  by  lines,  and  appropriating  each  part  to  the  proper  owners.  It  may  be  under- 
stood of  the  great  salvation  and  large  inheritance  which  the  people  of  God  have  in 
Christ.  I.  The  locality  descriied.  1.  Pleasant  places  are  rich  and  weiilthy 
places.     2.  Places  of  security.     3.  Places  of  rest.     4.   Hiding  places.     5.  Places  of 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  243 

provision.  6.  High  places.  (Isa,  Iviii.  14.)  II.  The  nature  of  the  vouch- 
SAFEMENT.  "The  lines."  The  expression  may  remind  us  of  the  enclosures  or 
spiritual  blessings  which  we  have  in  Christ.  1.  By  lines  may  be  meant  the  truths 
of  the  Gospel.  2.  The  line  of  everlasting  love.  3.  The  line  of  redeeming  grace. 
4.  The  line  of  justifying  righteousness.  5.  The  line  of  renewing  grace.  {T.  B. 
Baker. )  The  heritage  of  the  saints : — What  can  we  wish  for  in  an  heritage  that  is 
not  to  be  found  in  God  1  Would  we  have  large  possessions  ?  He  is  immensity. 
Would  we  have  a  sure  estate  ?  He  is  immutability.  Would  we  have  a  term  of  long 
continuance?  He  is  eternity  itself.  {W.  Arrowsmith.)  The  hajipy  lot  oj  the 
godly : — We  may  put  this  acknowledgment  into  the  mouth  of — I.  An  indulged 
CHILD  OF  PROVIDENCE.  There  are  many  such  ;  their  cup  runneth  over.  But  let 
them  remember  their  peril,  which  is  that  they  should  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  and 
make  the  creature  a  substitute  for  the  Creator.  The  writer,  some  years  ago,  in  a 
neighbouring  city,  received  in  the  pulpit  the  following  note,  "The  prayers  of  this 
congregation  are  earnestly  desired  for  a  man  who  is  prospering  in  his  worldly 
concerns."  If  he  did  this  sincerely  he  did  well,  for  such  men  need  prayer.  Yet 
these  things  are  good  in  themselves,  and  show  the  bounty  of  God.  What  must  that 
80ul  be  who  never  owns,  "The  lines  are  fallen,"  Ac.  All  cannot  use  this  language, 
for  all  are  not  thus  indulged.  Yet  more  might  and  would  did  they  but  think  how 
much  brighter  is  their  lot,  though  they  murmur  at  it,  than  that  of  so  many  others. 
Let  them  look  at  this  brighter  side.  II.  An  inhabitant  of  this  favoured 
COUNTRY.  It  is  natural  for  men  to  love  their  native  country  though  it  be  but  a  poor 
one.  But  our  lot — how  favoured.  III.  A  Christian  with  regard  to  his 
SPIRITUAL  CONDITION.  "The  Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance."  God  has 
made  over  Himself  to  His  people  with  all  He  is  and  all  He  has — to  pardon,  to  sanctify, 
to  support,  and  to  receive  them  to  eternal  glory.  {William  Jay.)  Our  goodly 
heritage : — I.  The  goodly  land.  The  dominant  expression  of  the  Psalms  is  joy  in 
God  :  entire  trust,  perfect  hope,  therefore  abounding  joy.  There  is  something  of 
childlike  gladness  in  the  songs  of  the  Hebrew  people  mingled  with  the  deep  moans 
of  life's  sadness.  Still,  the  joy  is  dominant ;  and  it  meant  that  deep  down,  under 
all  man's  sense  of  strain  and  struggle,  there  is  an  abiding  belief  in  his  heart  that, 
through  Christ,  the  order  of  things  in  the  universe  is  good  ;  that  the  world  is  good  ; 
that  life  is  good  ;  that  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth  everywhere  and 
always.  Now,  I  want  that  we  should  make  the  language  of  the  text  our  own,  and 
so  I  would  dwell  on  some  of  the  more  prominent  features  of  the  "goodly  heritage" 
which  we  all  enjoy.  And  we  shall  speak  of  the  goodly  land.  The  goodly  land  in 
which  God  planted  His  people,  the  goodly  land  in  which  He  has  planted  us. 
I,  Palestine  is  the  England  of  the  East.  I  think  it  is  Miss  Martineau  who 
says  that  nothing  which  she  had  seen  about  the  world  so  reminded  her  of  the 
rolling  Yorkshire  moors  as  the  approach  to  Palestine  by  Hebron.  God  planted  His 
people  in  a  country  singularly  fair,  glad,  fertile,  and  homelike  ;  where  men  could 
pass  from  under  the  shadow  of  the  turn  of  nature,  could  lie  in  her  lap  and  bask  in 
her  smile.  Think  of  its  physical  condition  (Deut.  viii.  7-10  and  xi.  10-12).  It  was 
in  strong  contrast  to  the  monotonous  regions  around,  a  land  of  rich  variety,  of 
marked  feature  and  animation.  There  is  this  sympathy  between  man  and  nature. 
Egypt  and  Mesopotamia  are  sympathetic  with  despotism  ;  their  rich,  fat  plains,  vast 
and  monotonous,  have  possessed  little  to  occupy  the  imagination.  They  nurtured 
great  herds  of  men,  but  there  was  little  for  men  to  cling  to,  to  cherish,  to  fight  and 
die  for.  Egypt  was  a  long  monotonous  tract  where  life  was  lavish,  especially  in  its 
baser  and  uglier  forms,  in  the  rich  soft  alluvial  mud.  Melons,  onions,  garlic,  fish 
in  abundance,  in  over-abundance.  Cats  and  crocodiles  were  promoted  to  the 
temples ;  while  the  people,  like  the  Egyptian  fellahs  to  this  day — the  men  who 
made  the  Suez  Canal — were  the  helpless  herds  of  weary  workmen  who  built  the 
Pyramids  for  the  Pharaohs,  and  were  content  to  drag  on  a  duU,  dreary,  hopeless 
existence.  And  with  Mesopotamia  it  was  much  the  same.  But  pass  into  Palestine 
and  you  have  at  once  a  new  world.  Moses  speaks  with  contempt  of  the  agriculture 
of  Egypt,  where  the  land  was  watered  with  the  foot,  "as  a  garden  of  herbs."  The 
country,  as  it  were,  tilled  itself.  Not  so  Palestine.  Like  the  Rhineland  or  Switzer- 
land, it  was  a  matter  of  constant  care.  To  live  in  it,  as  compared  with  Egypt  or 
Babylonia,  was  an  education.  "  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  My  Son."  Palestine 
not  Egypt,  was  their  goodly  home.  II.  And  then,  our  ov?n  land,  England' 
the  Canaan  to  which  in  the  early  morning  twilight  of  Christendom  God  led  His  sons. 
Yea,  we  have  a  goodly  heritage.  It  is  a  land  that  demands  but  repays  toil,  is  full 
of  beauty,  of  fair  skies,  with  sweet  fruits  and  strong  herbs,  and  where  all  the 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

products  of  tlie  world  are  accessible.  No  doubt  there  is  a  dark  side  as  well  as  a  bright 
one.  But  marred  ms  it  is  by  sin,  still,  "Behold,  it  is  very  good."  Seek  by  your 
prayers  to  draw  it  closer  to  Chri.st.  III.  The  goodly  fellowship.  A  goodly  laud 
u;ui  help  us  but  little  without  goodly  human  fellowships  to  iuhabit  it.  Here  in 
England  the  human  element  has  ahvaj^a  betn  in  full  force.  The  nature  of  the 
people  is  strong,  somewhat  coarse  in  the  grain  perhaps,  but,  like  the  rude  granite, 
capable  of  exquisite  polish,  and  with  a  giandeur  all  its  own  into  whatever  form  it 
may  be  wi'ought.  And  it  has  had  a  strong  development.  Are  there  anywhere 
stronger  and  deeper  affections  than  there  are  in  England  ?  Love  is  that  which  binds, 
that  seeketh  not  her  own.  Nowhere  on  earth  has  the  battle  of  life  been  fought  more 
sternly,  with  a  result  in  individual  character  and  energy  which  places  us  amongst  the 
strongest  and  most  masterful  races  of  the  world.  Ana  the  fellowship  of  such  a  race 
has  borne  very  rich  and  noble  fruit.  The  men  whom  we  have  produced  hold  their 
own  in  comparison  with  any  others,  whether  in  the  intellectual,  political,  or  military 
world.  When  I  number  up  my  mercies  I  count  it  among  the  chief  that  I  am  bom 
an  Englishman.  And  God  designed  the  ministry  of  human  fellowship  for  the 
development  of  our  nature  (Gen.  iii.  14-19).  It  is  all  there,  in  all  its  sadness  and 
in  all  its  gladness,  its  blessings  and  its  pain.  Our  life  was  meant,  from  the  first,  to 
be  one  of  close  association.  That  of  the  Jews  was.  It  was,  like  ours,  a  rich, 
stin-ing,  closely  knit  social  and  political  life.  They  were  shut  up  with  and  to  each 
other  during  their  best  years.  And  so  was  it  with  our  own  people.  Men  like  King 
David  came  out  of  the  one  ;  men  like  King  Alfred  came  out  of  the  other.  God's 
idea  of  man's  life  is  not  that  of  the  ascetic  who  flies  into  the  lonely  desert  from  all 
human  associations,  but  that  by  their  associations  and  activities  his  higher  life  is  to 
be  saved.  The  Jewish  state  was  distinctly  built  on  the  family.  The  woman  had 
honour  there  such  as  she  has  in  Christian  England  at  this  day — nay,  a  deeper 
honour.  At  the  root  of  all  human  relations  lie  self-control  and  self-denial ;  not  self- 
assertion.  But  the  whole  education  of  a  man  under  the  influence  of  society  is  an 
education  in  self-control  and  self-denial.  It  begins  early  with  the  mother.  And 
yet  how  the  mother  loves  her  burden  of  children's  cares.  And  the  father  takes  up 
the  burden  and  denies  himself  for  his  children.  The  success  of  Scotch  lads  is  largely 
owing  to  the  lessons  of  self-denial  which  they  have  seen  practised,  and  so  have  learnt 
in  their  own  homes.  They  have  seen  how  their  parents  sacrificed  themselves  for  their 
children.  And  such  spirit  is  the  principle  of  order,  growth,  and  true  prosperity. 
"I  desire  not  this  power,"  said  King  Alfred  of  his  kingship  ;  "but  that  I  might 
leave  behind  me  a  memory  of  good  works."  IV.  Our  goodly  tasks.  For  these 
ivre  by  no  means  the  least  precious  part  of  the  goodly  heritage.  The  fundamental 
part  of  man's  being  is  not  with  things,  but  with  beings  ;  not  with  the  creation,  but 
with  his  fellow-man  and  God.  It  is  said  that  the  totally  blind  are  as  a  rule  more 
serene  and  cheerful  than  the  totally  deaf.  That  means,  that  man  belongs  to  his 
fellows  by  a  closer  and  dearer  bond  than  any  which  binds  him  to  nature :  he  can 
better  spare  the  vision  of  the  whole  universe  than  the  voice  of  human  sympathy 
and  tenderness.  So  needful  is  human  association  and  fellowship.  But  another 
ordinance  of  heaven  for  our  good  is  our  work.  "In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt 
thou  eat  bread."  It  looks  hard  and  stern,  yet  it  is  most  benignant.  Hard  toil 
under  a  fatherly  discipline  is  reforming,  and  so  heaven  established  it  as  the  condi- 
tion of  our  sinful  lives.  The  sentence  from  a  father's  lips  made  the  wilderness  a 
goodly  heritage  for  the  exiles  from  Eden.  Nature  became  a  monitress  rather  than  a 
mistress,  urging  him  to  toil,  rather  than  wooing  him  to  rest  and  play.  But,  we 
say,  the  tasks  are  goodly  tasks,  and  you  are  bound  to  praise  the  Lord  for  them. 
The  popular  philosophy  of  the  day  denies  this,  though  not  in  this  country,  where 
we  seem  to  take  more  kindly  to  toil  than  do  those  under  more  sunny  skies.  "  It  is 
a  hard  world,"  you  say,  "a  hard  lot,  a  hard  Grod."  The  Bible  answers,  "It  is  all 
ordained  by  a  God  who  loves  you  and  cares  for  you  and  who  gave  His  Son  to  die  for 
you.  Of  all  the  loving  things  which  He  has  done  for  you,  there  is  none  more  loving 
than  this. "  Consider — 1.  The  necessity  of  toil,  hard  and  constant.  It  is  connected, 
like  death,  with  sin  (G«n.  iii.  17) ;  teaches  that  the  conditions  of  life  are  harder 
for  us  than  the  Creator  designed  for  the  man  whom  He  made  in  His  own  image. 
The  life  of  a  pure  and  happy  being  is  symbolised  in  Eden.  We  need  not  trouble 
about  its  historic  verity  :  of  its  spiritual  verity  there  is  no  doubt  at  all.  But  for  sin 
there  would  be  only  labour,  not  toil, — the  bitter  element  is  bom  of  transgression. 
2.  Note  the  fundamental  principle  of  this  ordinance  of  toU.  It  is  to  restore  man  to 
right  relations  to  the  things  around  him.  Transgression  had  put  him  in  a  false 
relation,  though  the  tempter  told  him  it  would  be  far  otherwise :  he  would  win  all 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  245 

he  could  desire  at  once  (Gen.  iii.  1-6).  "Ye  shall  be  as  gods."  The  sentence  of 
toil  fell  on  man  as  a  disenchantment.  Sin  had  brought  him  into  collision  with  the 
higher  will,  which  orders  the  whole  system  of  things,  a  collision  which  will  bruise 
and  crush  him  until  he  learns  to  obey.  Hence  toil  is  hard  that  we  may  learn  this. 
And  the  ordinance  has  been  effectual.  They  who  have  lived  the  life  of  toil  have 
been  ever  those  nearest  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  V.  The  goodly  discipline.  It 
is  the  supreme  exercise  of  faith  to  believe  in  its  goodness,  to  accept  it  as  a  part  of 
the  heritage  of  benediction.  It  is  hard  to  praise  when  the  fibres  of  the  soul  are 
throbbing  with  anguish,  and  the  heart  reels  under  a  pressure  which  it  can  no  longer 
endure.  Are  there  not  nights  too  dark  for  even  heaven  to  expect  a  song  ?  And  God 
is  compassionate  and  gentle.  But  yet  there  is  no  depth  of  misery  out  of  which 
praise  may  not  come.  Read  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8,  16,  17.  The  gladdest  songs  have  gone 
up  from  the  profoundest  depths.  True  joy  springs  from  communion  with  those 
whom  you  most  love,  and  that,  no  calamity  can  rid  you  of.  Christ's  presence,  and 
smile,  and  tender  touch  and  tone,  no  glooms,  no  depths  can  obscure.  Nay,  the 
darkness  but  makes  the  presence  more  luminous,  and  charged  with  richer  benediction. 
Much  of  the  complaints  of  our  spirits  God  interprets  as  compassionately  as  in 
the  passionate  outbursts  of  a  child  in  pain.  God  looks  at  the  heart,  not  at  the 
maddened  utterances  which  the  torture  of  pain  produces.  There  are  passages 
of  human  experience  which  hardly  come  within  the  pale  of  that  goodly  heritage 
of  discipline  for  which  I  bid  you  praise.  You  cannot  sing  in  them.  "  I  was  dumb 
because  Thou  didst  it,"  is  the  most  that  we  can  say.  But  not  of  these  depths,  but 
of  the  ordinary  discipline  of  life,  do  I  speak, — the  fact  that  life  is  a  discipline,  that 
we  have  not  only  to  toil  but  to  suffer.  It  is  a  school  of  culture,  not  a  home,  a  rest. 
It  would  be  very  terrible  for  sinful  man  if  he  could  command  the  stones  to  be  made 
bread — that  is,  if  he  could  make  things  obey  him  instead  of  God.  What  a  hell  he 
would  make  out  of  life.  But  the  pain  of  life  throws  a  man's  thought  back  on  his 
sin,  shows  him  that  in  all  its  forms  it  is  armed  with  scourges  to  smite  him,  and  that 
his  flesh  shall  quiver  and  the  thongs  shall  be  stained  with  his  blood,  ere  he  shall 
live  on  in  the  dream  that  the  way  of  transgressors  is  peace.  So  would  God  wean  us 
from  sin  and  vice  and  folly.  And  when  we  learn  the  lesson,  and  are  led  to  self- 
control  and  self-denial,  the  pain  ceases  and  peace  descends.  But  another  and  yet 
higher  end  of  discipline  than  even  conversion  is  to  elevate,  purify,  and  conform  us 
to  the  image  of  God.  VI.  The  goodly  hope.  This  is  the  last  feature  which  I 
dwell  upon.  It  completes  and  crowns  the  whole.  Without  the  hope  man's  lot  is  a 
heritage  which  a  brute  might  shrink  from.  For  the  broad  fact  of  man's  history  is, 
that  "he  is  born  to  trouble."  It  is  written  everywhere,  it  is  the  burden  of  life  to 
us  all.  Nor  is  it  the  weakest  and  poorest  in  nature  who  are  pressed  most  heavily, 
but  the  strongest,  the  bravest,  the  noblest,  and  the  most  faithful  souls.  Job  was 
the  righteous  man  of  his  era,  and  yet  his  life  was  an  unspeakable  curse  till  he 
remembered  his  hope,  "I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  But  if  these  things  be 
so,  you  may  ask — What  is  the  use  of  talking  about  the  goodly  heritage  ?  How  can 
men  praise  for  such  a  life  as  this  ?  And  it  would  be  mockery  thus  to  speak  but  for 
th«  hope,  the  "good  hope  through  grace."  A  few  days  ago  I  was  talking  with  one 
of  our  ablest  and  most  eminent  writers  in  his  department  of  literature,  and  he  said, 
"  I  have  absolutely  no  hope.  God,  Christ,  immortality,  I  have  no  hold  of;  they  are 
nought  to  me.  All  is  darkness  !  "  It  was  not  said  in  bravado,  not  even  in  bitterness. 
But  profound  sadness  was  on  him  as  he  said  it.  No  hope,  because  no  Christ.  AU 
dark,  because  no  hope.  Now,  the  broad  fundamental  principle  which  lies  at  the 
root  of  this  portion  of  our  subject  is,  that  man  is  here  on  earth  not  a  settler  but  a 
pilgrim.  The  patriarchs  of  Israel  are  the  true  patriarchs  of  our  race.  As  they 
dwelt  in  Canaan,  man  dwells  in  this  world.  But  they  were  kept  constantly  moving  ; 
no  place  was  suffered  to  be  as  home  to  them.  Long  ages  of  training  had  to  be 
endured,  as  our  long  years  of  discipline,  before  they  entered  the  goodly  land  into 
which  the  Lord  had  brought  them,  and  could  call  it  home.  Now,  behind  this 
condition  of  pilgrimage  lies  the  blessed  fact  that  man  is  made  on  too  large  a  scale, 
with  too  vast  capacities,  for  this  world  to  be  enough  for  him.  God  has  made  rs 
for  eternity  and  for  such  a  world  as  heaven.  And  so  man  is  born  to  trouble 
precisely  as  a  schoolboy  is  born  to  tasks  and  toils.  "The  heir  differeth  nothing 
from  a  servant,  though  he  be  lord  of  all."  Were  man  only  of  this  earth,  how  much 
would  be  his  imagining  and  longing  for  beauty  and  goodness  more  than  this  world 
can  ever  give.  But  all  goo(iliness  that  is  here  is  suggestive  to  them  of  a  higher  kind 
yonder.  Fellowship  is  blessed.  Yet  without  the  hope,  how  terrilde  the  breaking  up 
of  our  earthly  associations  by  death  would  be.     But  with  the  hope  they  are  blessed. 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvr. 

And  the  tasks  are  good,  but  what  drudgery  they  would  be  were  there  no  hope  to 
irradiate  them.  And  so,  too,  of  our  disciplines.  But  to  what  end  they,  and  the 
Cross,  the  symbol  of  them  all,  if  hope  is  but  a  dancing  marsh  fire,  and  "glory, 
honour,  and  immortality"  but  a  brilliant  dream  ?  If  the  highest  outcome  of  life  is 
that  scene  inGethsemane  and  Calvary,  and  for  Christ,  and  for  those  like  Him,  there 
was  and  is  nothing  beyond,  what  words  can  curse  with  sufficient  emphasis  the  whole 
order  of  the  universe  ?    No,  rather  than  believe  that,  may — 

"Thy  hand,  great  Anarch,  let  the  curtain  fall, 
And  universal  darkness  bury  all." 

But  how  is  this  hope  assured  ? — (1)  By  the  revelation  which  is  afforded  to  us  of  the 
essential  nature  of  God  and  His  revelation  to  the  world  ;  and  (2)  By  the  light  which 
the  Incarnation,  the  Resurrection,  and  the  Ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  casts  upon 
life  and  its  destinies.  "We  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables."  The 
Gospel  story  is  one  of  solid  historic  truth,  and  our  hope  is  the  anchor  of  our  soul. 
{J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  The  quietude  of  true  pleasure: — Christian  pleasure 
contrasts  strongly  with  that  of  sin.  For — I.  Christian  pleasure  is  an  in- 
EXHAtrsTiBLE  FORCE.  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  for  a  season.  Permanency  is  the 
true  need  of  life,  but  the  pleasures  of  sin  burn  up  the  nature,  they  exhaust.  Now, 
to  some  extent  when  you  get  intellect  you  get  permanence  ;  iDut  in  animalism,  only 
impermanence.  But  those  which  are  filled  with  the  mind,  the  heart,  the  spirit  are 
fresh,  and  they  do  not  exhaust.  And  the  pleasure  of  the  spirit  in  God  is  the  true  joy 
of  the  soul.  It  is  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.  II.  Christian  pleasure  is 
NOT  a  deteriorating  POWER.  It  never  debilitates  our  nobility  and  manhood, 
it  never  lets  us  drown.  But  how  much  pleasure  there  is  of  which  this  cannot  be 
said.  III.  Christian  pleasure  is  not  a  noisy  thing.  If  I  were  asked  what  we 
have  too  much  of,  I  should  say,  "Noise."  We  hear  the  blare  of  trumpets,  and 
everything  is  loud.  How  quiet  the  old  meeting-houses  were.  The  Quaker  quiet — 
how  pleasant  it  is.  IV.  Christian  pleasure  is  not  a  dangerous  power. 
You  cannot  have  too  much  of  it.  Some  pleasures,  even  innocent  ones,  are 
dangerous  ;  they  tend  to  preoccupy  the  mind.  You  let  them  in  as  guests,  and 
by  and  by  you  find  they  have  taken  up  all  the  house.  V.  Christian  pleasure  is 
not  a  selfish  pleasure.  We  should  prove  this  question  on  ourselves  as  to  our 
pleasures,  whether  they  are  in  the  main  unselfish.  Pleasure  will  not  come  if  you 
seek  it,  but  if  you  pursue  duty  pleasure  will  be  found.  Religious  ways  are  ways  of 
pleasantness.  The  quiet  Christian  life  which  many  have  led  has  had  in  it  more  of 
charm  than  any  other.  ( W.  M.  Statham. )  The  sainVs  goodly  heritage : — This 
expression  is  the  language  of  the  highest  contentment,  of  holy  exultation,  of  the 
most  superlative  satisfaction.  I.  A  scriptural  drawing  of  this  goodly 
heritage.  The  saint's  heritage  is  comprehensive  of  all  the  blessings  of  grace  and 
glory.  It  must  be  good  if  these  be  its  contents.  This  goodly  heritage  knows  no 
bounds  or  limits.  Appeal  to  the  saint's  charter.  The  saint  is  an  heir  of  righteous- 
ness, of  salvation,  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  of  all  things  ;  an  heir  of  God  Himself. 
Have  the  saints  such  a  goodly  heritage,  then  see  cause  : — II.  To  contemplate  and 

ADORE   the   unbounded   GENEROSITY   OF   THE   MOST    BLESSED    GOD.      The   thought 

of  this  threw  the  Apostle  John  into  an  ecstasy.  We  are  not  to  estimate  the  saint's 
wealth  or  grandeur  from  what  he  possesses  in  this  world.  Poverty  is  often  their  lot 
on  earth.  (  W.  Taylor.)  The  goodly  heritage  : — How  little  does  the  infant,  over 
whose  cradle  glistens  the  coronet  first  won  by  the  stout  arm  of  a  soldier  ancestor, 
understand  of  the  inheritance  to  which  he  has  been  born.  The  ancestral  home,  the 
far- spread  lands,  the  noble  rank,  the  prestige  of  an  ancient  and  lofty  lineage — all 
these  are  his  ;  but  years  will  pass  ere  they  can  be  fully  realised  or  appreciated.  It 
is  impossible  for  the  saint  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  inheritance  purchased  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  which  soon  he  will  possess.     {R.   Venting. ) 

Vers.  7,  8.  I  will  bless  the  Lord  who  hath  given  me  counsel :  my  reins  also 
instruct  me  in  the  night  seasons. — The  night  counsels  of  the  Lord: — Under 
whatever  circumstances  the  Lord  gives  His  people  counsel,  they  will  find  reason  to 
bless  His  holy  name.  Well  does  this  Psalm  bear  the  title  of  Michtam— that  is,  a 
'golden  Psalm  Note — I.  The  kind  of  counsel  given  to  the  believer.  It 
was,  that  by  no  arguments,  however  specious  or  however  backed  by  circumstances, 
should  he  be  diverted  from  faithful  allegiance  to  God.  There  were  many  such 
arguments.     Saul  tried  to  draw  him  ofif  from  God.      David  tells  how  "they  have 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  247 

driven  me  out  this  day  from  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord,  saying,  '  Go  serve  other 
gods.'  "  But  the  Lord's  counsel  was,  "  Wait  on  the  Lord  and  be  of  good  courage, 
and  He  shall  strengthen  thine  heart."  Now,  the  Lord  gives  similar  counsel  to  all 
His  people.  David  was  a  representative  man.  The  transcript  of  his  feelings  forms 
a  commonplace  book  for  all  God's  servants  in  which  they  may  find  a  counterpart  of 
their  own.  As  David  was,  so  are  they,  anointed  of  the  Lord.  As  Saul  persecuted 
David,  so  Satan  persecutes  them,  and  seeks  to  make  them  "  do  despite  to  the  Spirit 
of  grace."  II.  Thk  times  and  circumstances  under  which  this  counsel  is 
FREQUENTLY  SOUGHT  AND  OBTAINED.  It  is  night  Counsel,  "  My  reins  (thoughts) 
also  instruct  me  in,"  &c.  The  night  seems  to  be  no  uncommon  time  for  com- 
munications to  pass  between  God  and  His  people,  David  seems  to  have  had 
frequent  experience  of  this.  "I  remembered  Thee  upon  my  bed,"  &c.  When  tlie 
sense  of  responsibility  comes  upon  a  young  man  and  the  weiglit  of  care  is  felt,  often, 
though  fatigued  with  the  toil  of  the  day,  will  he  at  night  tliink  seriously  and  long 
over  his  position  and  its  needs.  Sometimes  he  can  say,  as  in  Psa.  Ixxvii.,  "Thou 
boldest  mine  eyes  waking ;  I  am  so  troubled  that  I  cannot  sleep,"  &c.  And  often 
his  meditations  are  very  gloomy — "  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever,  and  will  He  bo 
favourable  no  more  ?  "  And  after  more  of  this  there  comes  the  telling  of  the  Lord's 
sympathy,  ' '  I  said  this  is  mine  infirmity,  but  I  will  remember, "  &c.  He  says 
again  and  again,  "  I  will,  I  will  remember,  I  will  meditate."  It  was  difficult,  but 
he  was  determined.  And  here  he  says,  "  I  will  thank  the  Lord,  who  hath  given  me 
counsel."  And  our  blessed  Lord  had  His  night  conflicts — "  He  was  in  all  points 
made  like  unto  His  brethren. "  And  "He  was  heard  in  that  He  feared."  Let  us 
copy  His  example — do  what  He  did,  and  you,  too,  shall  find  counsel.  {T.  E. 
Bankinson,  M.A.) 

Yer.  7.  My  reins  also  instrnct  me  in  the  night  seasons.— Jlfan  taking  counsel 
of  his  reins : — The  ancients  regarded  the  reins,  or  kidneys,  located  in  a  retired 
part  of  the  body,  as  the  seat  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  sentiments,  especially  of  the 
intuitional  convictions,  in  distinction  from  those  which  have  been  acquired  from 
philosophy  or  the  experience  of  others.  To  be  instructed  by  one's  reins  is  there- 
fore to  give  heed  to  the  voice  of  the  soul  itself.  1.  The  soul  articulates  itself  in 
conscience,  which  gives  wiser  counsel  regarding  duty  than  any  ' '  court  of  casuistry  " ; 
in  the  sense  of  God,  which  men  cannot  divest  themselves  of,  as  even  Rousseau 
confesses,  "  Keep  your  life  such  as  would  lead  you  to  desire  that  there  should  be  a 
just  God,  and  you  will  have  no  doubt  of  His  existence  "  ;  in  the  vital  instinct,  which 
predicts  immortality,  &c.  Infidelity  would  be  impossible  if  men  would  take  the 
counsel  of  their  own  "reins."  In  the  silent  depths  of  the  soul  the  echoes  of  God's 
voice  are  always  sounding.  2.  We  will  hear  these  echoes  best  when  all  is  quiet 
about  us — the  jauglings  of  the  busy  day  ceased.  The  soul  expands  towards  the 
infinite  when  the  narrow  arena  of  earthly  competitions  disappears,  as  the  stars  show 
themselves  when  darkness  has  blotted  out  the  scenes  on  earth.  3.  The  best 
interpreter  of  the  counsel  of  the  reins  is  the  Word  of  God.  It  reveals  us  to 
ourselves.  Of  Jesus  it  was  said  that  "He  knew  what  was  in  man."  Francis 
Quarles  (1644)  represents  God  as  saying — 

I,  that  alone  am  Infinite,  can  try 

How  deep  within  itself  thine  heart  doth  lie  ; 

Thy  seaman's  plummet  can  but  reach  the  ground — 

I  find  that  which  thy  heart  itself  ne'er  found. "     {Homiletie  Review.) 

Ver.  8.  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me. — Facing  God : — Convictions  are  of 
two  kinds.  They  are  born  of  emergencies  and  experience.  The  former  are  instinc- 
tive, springing  into  life  full  grown.  The  latter  mature  slowly.  A  ship  strikes  a  rock 
and  begins  to  sink.  The  conviction  of  danger,  and  of  possible  destruction,  takes 
shape  at  once  in  the  minds  of  all  on  board.  This  is  the  conviction  of  emergency. 
But  the  conviction  of  a  man's  worth  must  come  by  experience,  and  must  wait  long  for 
its  maturity.  Belief  is  not  conviction,  but  only  its  germ.  Conviction  is  faith  in 
fruition,  which  takes  time.  The  text  is  the  utterance  of  such  conviction,  and 
it  is  the  keynote  of  the  whole  Psalm.  I.  It  is  op  the  greatest  importancb 
■WHAT  that  is  which  IS  CONTINUALLY  BEFORE  US.  That  which  is  constantly  in  a 
man's  eye  must  help  very  largely  to  shape  him.  I  have  heard  a  very  significant 
criticism  on  a  certain  picture,  to  the  effect  that,  though  it  was  a  good  piece  of 
artistic  work,  it  was  not  a  good  picture  to  live  with.      You  would  not  wish  to  have 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

hanging  up  in  your  sitting-room,  and  constantly  in  sight  of  your  children,  a  picture 
of  Herodias  \vith  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist,  or  of  a  crazed  mother  in  the  act  of 
murdering  her  babe.  You  try  to  keep  pictures  of  wholesome  subjects  as  well  as  of 
beautiful  forms  before  your  children  s  eyes  ;  because  you  know  that  they  are  in- 
sensibly educated  by  familiarity  with  such  things.  In  an  age  of  few  books,  men  and 
women  learned  mostly  by  the  eye.  It  was  not  wholly  nor  mostly  idolatry  which 
filled  the  old  churches  up  with  pictures.  The  visitor  to  St.  Mark's,  in  Venice,  may 
follow  for  himself  the  footsteps  of  the  earlier  catechumen  ;  passing  into  the  Christian 
temple  through  a  vestibule  of  Old  Testament  history  wrought  in  mosaic  pictures,  and 
then  reading  on  the  walls  and  domes  within  the  truths  of  crucifixion,  resurrection, 
the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  judgment, — all  arranged  in 
the  order  of  Christian  thought.  The  peasant  who  passed  ovwr  the  old  wooden  bridge 
over  the  torrent  at  Lucerne  had  daily  before  him,  in  the  painted  compartments  of 
the  bridge,  a  reminder  of  that  other  stream  which  all  must  cross  sooner  or  later. 
Nature  seta  her  mark  on  character.  If  her  surroundings  are  gloomy  and  savage, 
they  impart  a  sombre  tone  to  the  men  who  live  among  them.  Men  tend  to  be 
narrowed  or  broadened  by  their  daily  task.  The  man  who  has  columns  of  figures  for 
ever  before  him  may  easily  degenerate  into  a  mere  calculating  machine.  If  the 
thing  which  is  constantly  before  ua  is  larger  and  better  than  ourselves,  its  hourly 
presence  rebukes  our  littleness  and  our  badness,  and  works  to  assimilate  us  to  itself. 
If  it  is  worse  than  ourselves  it  draws  downwar^l.  There  was  philosophy  as  well  as 
enthusiasm  in  the  apostle's  exhortation  to  run,  looking  unto  Jesus,  and  in  Paul 
keeping  his  eye  on  the  prize  of  his  high  calling,  and  reaching  forth  to  that  which  is 
before.  II.  BoT  it  may  bb  askkd,  is  not  God  always  before  us  ?  Can  we  help 
its  being  so  ?  Assuredly  we  can.  David  does  not  say,  "The  Lord  is  always,"  &c.  ; 
but,  "  I  have  set  Him  always,"  &c.  His  own  will  and  act  have  had  something  to 
do  with  the  matter.  He  has  been  at  pains  to  bring  God  into  the  foreground,  and  to 
keep  Him  there.  Because  God  is  ever  manifesting  Himself,  because  every  common 
bush  is  afire  with  Him,  it  does  not  follow  that  men  recognise  the  fact.  They  do  not. 
There  is  abundance  of  sweet  music,  but  there  are  multitudes  of  people  to  whom  it 
means  no  more  than  the  rumble  of  the  carts  in  the  streets.     III.  Thus,  then,  God 

WILL  NOT  be  in  ANY  TRUE   SENSE    BEFORE   OUR  FACE   UNLESS  WE  SET  HiM  THERE. 

It  needs  special  training,  determination,  and  practice.  There  is  a  spiritual  inertia 
to  be  overcome,  and  a  perverse  tendency.  The  bar  of  steel  does  not  point  naturally 
to  the  pole,  but  anywhere.  It  must  be  acted  on  from  without,  must  have  magnetic 
virtue  imparted  to  it.  And  persistency  is  needed.  I  have  set  the  Lord  "always" 
before  me.  It  was  not  enough  that  once  or  twice  God  was  in  the  line  of  vision,  He 
was  to  be  kept  there.  A  compass  needle  would  be  to  a  sailor  of  no  more  account 
than  a  knitting  needle,  if  only  by  some  shock  it  were  made  to  point  northwards.  It 
is  the  fact  of  its  always  pointing  there  that  gives  it  its  value.  And  it  is  this  fact  of 
l)ersistence  which  gives  value  to  David's  saying.  When  a  man  has  shut  himself  up 
to  one  thing  as  the  source  and  strength  of  his  happiness  he  will  find  out  a  great 
deal  about  that  one  thing.  Thus  did  Robinson  Crusoe,  when  he  found  out  that  he 
should  have  to  live  on  his  island.      And  so  is  it  with  men  and  God.      IV.  Many 

ARE  THE  DISCOVERIES  WHICH    THE   MAN  WHO    SETS  THE  LORD  ALWAYS  BEFORE  HIM 

WILL  MAKE.  1.  He  finds  Him  self-revealed.  In  the  Shinto  temples  in  Japan  the 
shrines  contain  no  altars,  pulpits,  or  pictures,  but  only  a  circular  steel  mirror.  What 
it  means  is  not  known.  But  it  would  be  an  appropriate  symbol  for  a  Christian 
shrine.  James  draws  a  picture  of  a  man  beholding  his  natural  face  in  a  glass.  The 
man  who  studies  God  studies  self  at  the  same  time.  2.  It  carries  with  it  a  power  of 
growth.  For  God  is  ever  going  before  ua  and  beckoning  us  on.  A  mountain  is  a 
constant  temptation  to  climb,  and  when  we  find  yet  higher  summits  beyond  we  want 
to  climb  them  also.  And  so  is  it  in  learning  of  God.  3.  It  engenders  hope.  Amid 
the  darkness  and  vagueness  of  the  Old  Testament  future,  this  Psalm  is  like  a  sweet 
flute  note  amid  the  crash  and  discord  of  a  vast  orchestra.  I  know  of  nothing  more 
soothing  than  these  verses.  "  I  shall  not  be  moved  "  ;  all  is  well,  "  because  He  is  at 
my  right  hand."     (Marvin  Vincent,  D.D.)  The  earthly  and  Iieavenly  forms  of 

companionship  with  God: — Now,  the  two  expressions,  "before  me"  and  "  in  Thy 
presence,"  are  substantially  synonymous  and  convertible.  Notice  the  other  clause. 
''  He  is  at  my  right  hand. "  "At  Thy  right  hand  are  pleasures  for  evermore. "  God 
before  my  face,  and  I  before  God's  face  ;  God  at  my  right  hand,  and  I  glad  at  His. 

I.    If  WB  TURN   OUR  FACES   TO  GOD   HERE   HiS  FACE  WILL  SHINE  ON   US  YONDER. 

"  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  my  eyes."  "  Before  Thy  face  ia  fulness  of  joy." 
The  one  is  the  summing  up  of  the  devout  man's  life  on  earth.     What  can  the  other 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  249 

be  but  the  prophecy  of  the  devout  man's  life  in  heaven  ?  Observe  how  for  us,  here 
and  now,  circumstanced  and  occupied  and  distiactt'd  as  we  are,  that  clear  conscious- 
ness of  God's  presence  will  inevitably  fade  and  sliatter  unless  we  are  careful  to  pre- 
serve it.  "I  have  set  the  Lord," — that  implies  a  great  deal  of  definite  eflfort,  of 
fixed  will,  of  stern  resistance  to  and  rejection  of  hindrances  and  things  that  come 
between.  God's  presence  cannot  be  proved.  The  consciousness  of  it  depends  upon 
our  whole  nature.  It  is  what  people  call  a  moral  thing  ;  and  it  rises  and  falls  like 
a  sensitive  thermometer,  if  a  cloud  comes  between  the  bulb  and  the  sun.  You  can 
crowd  Him  out  of  your  minds  by  plunging  yourselves  fiercely  into  your  daily  duties, 
however  sacred  and  elevated  these  may  be.  No  more  than  the  sunshine  can  be 
flashed  back  from  a  tarnished  steel  mirror,  can  the  consciousness  of  God's  presence 
live  in  an  impure  soul.  And  the  heart  must  be  kept  still,  free  from  agitation,  from 
the  storms  of  passion  and  the  tyranny  of  eager  desires.  A  catspaw  that  ruffles  the 
surface  of  the  lake  shatters  the  image  ;  and  unless  our  liearts  are  quieted  from  earth 
they  will  never  mirror  heaven.  "  Walk  thou  before  Me,  and  be  perfect,"  is  at  once 
a  commandment  and  a  promise.  And  they  only  are  wise  who  answer,  "  I  will  walk 
before  the  Lord  in  the  land,  and  the  light  of  the  living."  As  I  have  already  said, 
this  thrilling  and  continual  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence  is  the  surest  basis 
for  the  expectation  of  immortal  life.  It  is  too  precious  to  die  ;  it  is  too  great  and 
pure  and  noble  to  have  anything  to  fear  from  the  accident  of  corporal  death.  So  we 
come  to  consider  that  higher  form  of  the  Divine  presence  which  is  suggested  by  the 
contrast  in  my  second  text.  ' '  In  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy. "  But  that  presence 
is  not  secured  by  the  individual's  efforts,  bat  is  poured  upon  him  in  its  effulgence 
from  the  throne  itself.  If  I  try  to  keep  God  in  sight  here,  yonder  He  reveals  Him- 
self in  all  His  greatness.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  that  future  vision  which  is 
»11  expressed  in  these  words  of  my  second  text — "before  Thee" — consists  in  any 
measure  which  is  analogous  to  the  sight  of  the  body.  Nor  are  we,  I  suppose,  to 
understand  that  then,  any  more  than  now,  we  are  able  to  comprehend  the  incompre- 
hensible and  infinite.  "The  face  of  God"  is  the  Scriptural  expression  for  that  side 
of  the  Divine  nature  which  is  capable  of  being  manifested  by  Him,  and  apprehended 
by  us  ;  and  Jesus  Christ  is  the  face  of  God.  Yonder  it  is  that  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is  ;  and  yonder  it  is  the  Christ  whom,  having  not  seen  we  '  *  love, "  and  whom 
seeing  we  shall  see  the  Father.  There  will  be,  as  I  suppose,  new  and  unim- 
aginable modes  of  manifestation,  about  which  the  less  that  we  say  the  wiser  we  are. 
For  if  our  experience  here  on  earth  teaches  us  anything,  it  teaches  us  that  the  body 
shuts  us  off  from  as  much  as  it  brings  us  into  contact  with ;  and  that  our  senses  are 
but  like  little  slits  in  some  grim  old  fortress,  only  wide  enough  to  let  in  the 
requisite  light  and  air,  and  that  beyond  their  limits  in  both  directions  there  are 
notes  of  which  the  vibrations  are  too  numerous,  or  too  few,  in  a  given  time  to  be 
apprehended  by  our  ears  ;  and  rays  in  the  spectrum  at  either  end,  which  the  human 
eye  cannot  see.  So  that,  with  new  modes  of  manifestation  and  new  capacities  of 
apprehension,  we  shall  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  sun  that  we  beheld  here  shining 
through  the  mists  and  the  clouds.  If  we,  amidst  the  shows  and  gauds  of  time  and 
the  crowds  of  thronging  men  and  the  distractions  of  our  daily  occupations,  stead- 
fastly seek  and  see  the  Lord,  and  have  beams  coming  from  Him,  as  a  light  shining 
in  a  dark  place,  He  will  lift  us  yonder,  and  turn  the  whole  benediction  of  the  sunlight 
of  His  face  upon  us,  and,  saturated  with  the  brightness,  we  shall  walk  in  the  light  of 
His  countenance  and  be  amongst  the  people  of  the  blessed.  II.  If  we  keep  thk 
Lord  at  our  right  hand  He  will  set  us  at  His  right  hand.  The  emblem 
of  the  "right  hand"  has  a  double  meaning  in  Scripture,  one  part  of  which  applies 
more  to  our  present  and  the  other  to  our  future.  When  we  speak  of  having  at  our 
right  hand  any  one,  we  mean  as  counsellor,  companion,  strengthener,  ally  ;  as  fellow- 
fighter,  guide,  and  defender.  And  it  is  in  that  capacity  that  we  have  to  set  the  Lord 
at  our  right  hand.  If  we  have  Him  by  our  sides  we  are  never  alone.  I  suppose  that 
the  saddest  fate  for  a  man  is  to  live  solitary.  I  suppose  that  we  mortal  millions  live 
alone  after  all  companionship  ;  like  islands  in  a  waste  of  ocean,  with  no  communica- 
tions. Ah  !  How  many  of  us  have  known  what  it  is  for  the  one  that  stood  at  our 
right  hand  to  vanish,  to  change.  If  we  live  so  companioned,  counselled,  championed, 
by  a  God  made  present,  not  by  His  omnipresence  but  by  our  consciousness  of  it, 
then  be  sure  of  this,  that  the  time  will  come  when  He  who  came  to  earth,  as  it  were, 
and  stood  at  our  right  hand,  will  lift  us  to  the  heavens,  and  plant  us  at  His.  I  at 
His  right  hand.  What  does  that  mean?  Let  me  quote  you  two  or  three  plain 
words.  "The  sheep  at  His  right  hand ;  the  goats  at  His  left."  It  means  that.  It 
means  favour,  acceptance  in  that  great  day  of  account.     "And  he  called  his  name 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

Benjamin  : — the  son  of  his  right  hand."  It  means  that;  paternal  love,  a  yearning 
heart,  a  longing  to  pour  all  a  Father's  blessing  on  the  child.  And  it  means  that 
the  man,  thus  acquitted  and  taken  to  the  Father's  heart,  is  distinguished  and 
honoured — "grant  that  these,  my  two  sons,  may  sit,  the  one  at  Thy  right  hand,  the 
other  at  Thy  left."  Nor  must  we  forget  that  there  is  still  a  loftier  conception 
attached  to  this  emblem  of  "the  right  hand,"  which  was  not  within  the  horizon  of 
the  Psalmist,  but  is  within  ours.  Jesus  Christ  our  Brother  has  been  exalted  to  that 
session  at  God's  right  hand,  which  indicates  indisturbance,  completed  work,  royalty 
and  power.  And  He  hath  said,  "I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  that  where  I  am 
there  ye  may  be  also."  So  if  He  is  at  my  right  hand,  as  champion,  I  shall  be  at  His 
right  hand  and  share  in  His  dominion.      III.  If  we  stay  ourselves  on  God, 

AMIDST  STRUGGLE  AND  CHANGE  HERE,  He  WILL  GLADDEN  US  YONDER  WITH  PER- 
PETUAL JOYS.  "Because  He  is  at  my  right  hand  I  shall  not  be  moved."  A  very 
humble  result  to  be  accomplished  by  so  great  a  thing  as  the  actual  presence  of  God 
at  a  man's  side.  Only  this,  that  I  will  be  able  to  keep  my  place,  and  stand  stead- 
fast. And  there  is  only  one  thing  that  will  make  us  steadfast,  and  that  is  that  we 
should  be,  if  I  might  use  such  a  figure,  bolted  and  lashed  on  to,  or  rather  incor- 
porated into,  the  changeless  steadfastness  of  the  unmoved  God.  God  comes  to  us 
here,  and  is  sword  and  shield  ;  yonder  He  will  be  palm  and  crown.  ' '  In  Thy  pre- 
sence is  fulness  of  joy."  Every  faculty  and  capacity  will  be  satisfied,  every  yearning 
met,  and  nothing  left  to  desire  but  the  continuance  which  is  guaranteed,  and  the 
increase  as  capacity  increases,  which  is  as  certain.  Here  there  is  always  something 
lacking;  yonder  there  is  fulness  of  joy  and  no  satiety.  "  Pleasures  for  evermore" — 
both  because  there  is  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  such — like  the  ripples  upon  a 
sunlit  sea,  that  all  day  long  come  rolling  to  the  beach  and  break  in  music  and 
sparkles  of  light ;  and  because  each  pleasure  is  in  itself  perpetual,  seeing  that  there 
is  no  possibility  of  these  delights  becoming  stale  and  common.  Thus  begin  with 
realising  the  Divine  presence.  We  must  begin  all  this  on  earth.  The  seed  of  heaven 
is  sown  in  the  furrows  of  this  world.  Philosophers  talk  to  us  about  the  law  of  con- 
tinuity. That  applies  in  regard  to  the  life  here  and  the  life  hereafter.  If  you  ever 
are  to  come  into  the  blessedness  of  the  life  yonder,  you  must  begin  Avith  the  life  of 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  here  and  now.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  God  as  a  dominant 
idea  : — Dissipation  is  the  parent  of  mediocrity.  Because  there  is  neither  government 
nor  concentration  nor  dominant  idea  in  men's  lives,  they  never  do  much,  never 
grow  any  size.  The  subject  before  us  is  self-government  by  means  of  a  dominant 
idea.  A  dominant  idea  is  an  idea  which  mixes  itself  with  all  other  ideas,  giving 
them  its  own  colour  and  character  ;  so  that  you  cannot  take  out  any  thought  from  a 
mind  in  which  a  dominant  idea  exists  and  analyse  it,  but  you  shall  find  traces  of  this 
one  idea.  Constantly  we  meet  with  men  who  have  one  thought  by  which  they 
explain  everything,  and  they  infect  us  with  a  dominant  feeling  that  they  are  very 
tiresome.  Restraining,  ruling  ideas  spring  up  naturally.  The  emotions  are  the  first 
parents  of  ideas.  Primitive  man  hears  a  voice  rebuking  mere  animal  desire,  which 
says,  ' '  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it, "  and  the  moment  that  voice  is  heard  a  moral  nature 
has  arisen  and  heaven  becomes  possible.  The  great  majority  of  men  allow  their  lives, 
as  they  do  their  beliefs,  to  go  anyhow.  They  have  never  formed  a  distinct  opinion 
as  to  the  shape  their  life  is  to  take.  It  is  in  our  power  to  choose  what  idea  we  shall 
be  ruled  by,  and,  having  chosen,  it  is  in  our  power  to  make  the  idea  a  ruling  one. 
We  must  determine  to  associate  our  idea  with  all  our  pleasures  and  labours ;  to  bring 
it  before  our  mind  every  day.  And  what  shall  be  our  dominant  idea?  The  idea 
of  God  is  our  birthright.  The  idea  of  God  stands  upon  exactly  the  same  ground  as 
all  our  other  intuitions.  Clifford  says,  "  Belief  in  God  and  in  a  future  life  is  a  source 
of  refined  and  elevated  pleasure  to  those  who  can  hold  it."  Here  is  the  idea  ready  to 
our  hand.  The  idea  is  your  birtliright,  but  you  have  to  make  it  dominant.  (  W.  Page 
Roberts,  M.A.)  The}wa,ct%ce  of  the  presence  of  God : — God  always  sees  us,  whetherwe 
think  of  it  or  not.  It  makes  no  difference  as  to  the  fact  whether  we  believe  it  or  not. 
But  it  makes  all  the  difference  to  ourselves.  It  makes  just  the  difference  between  a 
godly  man  and  an  vmgodly  man.  The  truly  religious  man  is  he  who  has  formed  the 
habit  of  living  under  the  influence  of  the  thought  of  the  presence  of  God.  To  set  the 
Lord  always  before  us  is  the  secret  of  good  living,  is  the  true  preparation  for  heaven. 
This  is  one  reason  why  regular  habits  of  prayer,  of  worship,  of  reading  God's  Word, 
of  Holy  Communion  are  so  helpful  and  cannot  safely  be  neglected.  They  are  means 
of  drawing  near  to  God,  of  coming  into  His  presence.  If  we  are  doing  anything, 
whether  work  or  amusement,  in  which  we  could  not  bear  to  think  of  God,  we  may  be 
sure  that  work  or  amusement  is  wrong.     There  is  a  beautiful  custom  in  some 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  251 

countries.  Sacred  pictures  are  placed  at  intervals  by  the  wayside,  among  the 
mountains  and  woods,  in  the  streets  of  villages  and  towns.  They  are  roughly  made, 
badly  painted  and  tinselly,  but  for  all  that  they  are  reminders  to  people  of  holy 
thoughts  ;  they  are  meant  to  call  the  mind  of  the  passers-by  in  the  midst  of  work  or 
amusement  to  God.  And  how  are  we  to  set  Him  before  us  ?  How  are  we  to  think 
of  Him?  We  may  set  Him  before  us  in  the  completeness  of  His  Divine  Being — God 
the  Father,  the  Son,  the  Spirit.  Try  to  form  the  habit  of  setting  the  Lord  always 
before  you  ;  for  if  He  is  at  your  right  hand  you  shall  never  fall.  Always  in  earnest 
prayer  at  the  beginning  of  every  day.  Always  when  things  go  well  with  you,  and  in 
trouble,  turning  to  Him  as  the  one  trusted  help  and  refuge.  (/.  E.  Vernon,  M.A.) 
The  setting  of  the  Lord  before  us : — This  and  the  follo\ving  verses  are  quoted  by  Peter 
in  his  sermon  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  1.  Those  who  set  the  Lord  always  before 
them  have  an  habitual  impression  of  His  all-seeing  eye  and  immediate  presence. 
David,  we  know,  had  this  habitual  impression.  He  was  aware  how  highly  important 
to  him  was  this  near  presence  of  the  Almighty,  and  what  a  beneficial  influence  it 
shed  over  all  his  prospects.  2.  It  implies  an  habitual  regard  to  the  Lord's  will  as  the 
rule  of  our  actions.  Faithful  Christians  must  make  it  their  constant  study  to  ascer- 
tain what  is  the  will  of  God  respecting  themselves,  and  then  set  this  will  before  them 
as  the  rule  of  their  life.  It  should  not  only  be  a  consideration  with  them,  but  their 
chief  consideration.  Those  who  make  the  will  of  God  their  rule  cannot  err.  They 
look  at  it  as  sailors  to  the  pole  star,  in  order  that  they  may  direct  their  course 
thereby.  3.  It  implies  making  the  Lord's  glory  the  end  of  all  our  aims.  The  glory 
of  the  Lord  is  that  one  object  of  surpassing  importance  which  absorbs  all  other  con- 
siderations. To  set  the  Lord  always  before  us  is  to  keep  this  end  always  in  view. 
4.  It  implies  making  Him  the  object  of  our  trust  and  dependence  in  all  circum- 
stances. 1.  The  practice  of  setting  the  Lord  always  before  us  is  a  bright  evidence  of 
the  sincerity  of  our  faith.  Faith  is  a  living  and  abiding  principle,  constantly  in 
operation.  Faith  is  that  principle  within  the  man  which  realises  and  embodies 
everything  which  is  spiritual.  2.  A  constant  sense  of  the  presence  of  God  is  a  sure 
means  of  counteracting  the  influence  of  the  fear  of  man,  which  bringeth  a  snare. 
3.  A  sense  of  the  Lord's  constant  presence  would  be  a  spur  to  our  diligence  and 
activity  in  endeavouring  to  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  A 
persuasion  that  the  eye  of  the  Lord  is  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good, 
would  have  a  wonderful  effect  in  exciting  the  runners  of  the  Christian  race  to  put 
forth  their  utmost  powers  to  strain  every  nerve,  that  they  may  come  in  first  to  the 
goal.  Now  see  a  few  lights  in  which  you  should  make  it  your  habit  to  set  the  Lord 
always  before  you — (1)  You  are  directed  to  set  before  yourselves  the  Lord  as  your 
chief  good,  the  highest  object  of  your  aims.  (2)  We  are  to  look  upon  God,  in  Christ, 
as  our  owner.  God  possesses  a  right  over  us  as  our  Maker  and  Preserver.  (3)  We 
are  to  set  the  Lord  Jesus  before  us  as  a  Judge.  We  should  not  merely  give  a  general 
assent  to  the  truth  of  the  judgment  Avhich  will  hereafter  take  place,  and  that  Christ 
will  occupy  the  throne  then,  but  we  are  to  consider  Him  as  seated  now  upon  the  tri- 
bunal, and  taking  cognisance  of  all  our  transactions.  ( T.  Chambers,  M.A.)  Things 
that  intercept  the  Divine  presence  : — There  are  three  things  that,  taken  together,  build 
up  for  us  a  very  thick  triple  wall  between  us  and  God.  There  is  sense,  and  all  that 
it  reveals  to  us  ;  there  are  duties,  necessary,  possibly  blessed,  but  actually  often  dis- 
turbing and  limiting  ;  and  the  thickest  and  most  opaque  of  the  three  screens,  there 
are  the  sins  which  dim  our  capacity,  and  check  our  inclination  of  realising  the  Divine 
presence.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Thought  must  concentrate  itself  upon  God: — 
That  needs  that  we  shall  shut  out  a  great  deal  besides,  as  a  man  that  wants  to  see 
something  on  the  horizon  will  hold  his  palm  above  his  eyes  to  exclude  nearer 
objects  and  the  glare  that  dazzles.  It  needs  that  we  shall  resolutely  concentrate  our 
thoughts  upon  Him.  We  have  to  be  ignorant  of  a  great  deal  if  we  would  know  any 
of  the  sciences,  or  of  the  practical  arts.  And  we  have  to  shear  off  not  less  if  we 
would  know  the  best  knowledge,  and  be  experts  in  the  highest  art  in  life,  {/bid.) 
God  near  and  yet  afar: — There  may  as  well  be  no  God,  as  far  as  a  great  many  of  us 
are  concerned,  in  the  most  important  matters  of  our  lives,  as  a  God  that  we  never 
think  about.  He  is  not  far  from  "  every  one  of  us"  ;  but  we  may  be  very  far  from 
Him,  and  we  are  very  far  from  Him  unless  by  effort  we  set  Him  before  us.  {Ibid. ) 
The  stability  of  the  good  man : — The  presumptuous  man  in  one  of  the  Psalms  speaks 
thus  :  "In  my  prosperity  I  said,  I  shall  not  be  moved."  But  when  prosperity  fled 
self-confidence  fled  with  it,  and  at  length  he  learned  to  say,  as  he  goes  on  to  tell  us, 
■'by  Thy  favour  Thou  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand  strong.  Thou  didst  hide 
Thy  face,  and  I  was  troubled."    Ah !  think  of  the  instability  of  our  resolutions, 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

think  of  the  fluctuations  of  our  thoughts,  think  of  the  surges  of  our  emotions,  think 
of  the  changes  that  by  subtle  degrees  pass  over  us  all,  so  as  that  the  old  man's  grey 
hair  and  bowed  form  is  less  unlike  his  childish  buoyancy  and  clustering  ringlets  than 
are  his  senile  thoughts  and  memories  to  his  juvenile  expectations.  And  think  of  the 
forces  that  are  brought  to  bear  upon  us,  the  shocks  of  calamity  and  sorrow  by  which 
•we  are  beaten  and  battered,  the  blasts  of  temptation  by  which  we  are  sometimes  all 
but  overthrown,  the  floods  that  come  and  beat  upon  our  house.  {Ibid. )  Stead- 
fastness:— That  steadfastness  will  come  to  us  by  the  actual  communication  of 
strength,  and  it  will  come  to  us  because  in  the  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence 
there  lies  a  charm  that  takes  the  glamour  out  of  temptation  and  the  pain  out  of  all 
•wounds.  He  being  with  us,  the  dazzling,  treacherous  brilliancies  of  earth  cease  to 
dazzle  and  betray.  He  being  with  us,  sorrow  itself  and  pain  and  all  the  ills  that 
flesh  is  heir  to  have  little  power  to  shake  the  soul.  (Ibid. )  Pleasure  for  evermore : 
— That  presence  which  amidst  strife,  -warfare,  weakness,  and  mutability  manifested 
itself  in  its  gift  of  steadfastness  will  then,  amidst  the  tranquillity  of  heaven,  manifest 
itself  in  a  joy  unlike  all  earthly  joy,  in  that  it  is  full ;  and  yet  more  unlike,  if  I  may  say 
so,  all  earthly  joy  in  that  it  is  perpetual.  Here  there  is  ever  something  lacking  in  all 
our  gladness,  some  guest  at  the  table  that  sulks  and  will  not  partake  and  rejoice,  some 
unlit  window  in  the  illumination,  some  limitation  in  the  gladness  ;  yonder  it  shall  be 
fuU.  "I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  in  Thy  likeness."  Here,  thank  God!  we 
have  brooks  by  the  way ;  there  we  shall  stoop  down  and  drink  from  the  fountain,  the 
ocean  of  joy.  And  the  gladness  is  perpetual,  in  that,  having  nothing  to  do  with  phy- 
sical causes  or  externals,  there  is  no  cause  of  change  and  no  certainty  of  reaction.  {Ibid. ) 
The  habitual  recognition  of  God : — If  we  observe  the  pursuits  of  men  of  the  world 
we  see  how  they  set  their  object,  be  it  what  it  may,  always  before  them.  Success 
cannot  be  had  without  this.  The  same  necessity  exists  in  religion.  If  we  would 
desire  any  real  help  now,  and  promised  blessings  hereafter,  God  must  be  to  us  ever 
present.     Such  piety  is  attended  with   God's  constant  protection  and  friendship. 

I.  What  it  is  to  set  the  Lord  al^ways  before  us.  It  is  to  maintain  a 
supreme  and  habitual  regard  for  God,  according  to  the  relations  which  He  sustains 
towards  us.  In  the  world,  if  a  man  has  fixed  his  supreme  regard  on  wealth,  though 
he  may  often  think  and  talk  on  other  subjects,  yet  he  never  forgets  this  one.  Let 
anything  occur  that  -will  aff"ect  it,  and  you  will  always  find  that  his  object  is  before 
him.  Now,  it  is  in  the  same  way  that  we  set  the  Lord  always  before  us.  We  shall 
always  regard  Him  as  infinitely  perfect — as  our  Lawgiver  and  Sovereign  ;  as  our 
Creator,  Preserver,  and  Benefactor  ;  as  our  Redeemer  and  Sanctifier  ;  as  a  covenant 
God  ;  as  our  Judge  and  Rewarder.  Now,  so  to  habitually  regard  God  as  to  secure 
the  practical  influence  of  all  these  perfections  and  relations  of  God  upon  us  is  to  set 
the  Lord  always  before  us.  II.  The  advantage  of  so  doing,  1.  In  the  daily 
business  of  our  life — to  keep  us  diligent,  just  in  our  dealings,  and  honest  in  all  our 
transactions.  2.  In  the  more  unimportant  and  ordinary  occurrences  of  life  —  to 
keep  us  faithful  in  life's  little  things,  contented,  cheerful,  patient,  devout.  3.  In 
temptation  we  shall  not  be  moved.  It  guards  the  heart  against  the  world  and 
Satan.  4.  In  holy  obedience  we  shall  be  steadfast  therein.  5.  Preparation  for  all 
the  scenes  of  life,  for  death  and  heaven.  In  prosperity  he  will  remember  God  ;  in 
adversity  he  will  trust  God  ;  in  death  he  will  be  without  fear  ;  in  the  judgment  day 
he  will  have  confidence.  And  we  can  thus  set  God  always  before  us.  Is  it  safe  or 
wise  ever  to  forget  Him  ?  Do  we  thus  set  God  always  before  us  ?  What  will  they 
do  from  whose  thoughts  God  is  habitually  excluded,  when  He  shall  be  revealed  in 
the  clear  light  of  eternity  ?  {M.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Our  great  Example :— The 
terms  of  this  portion  of  the  Psalm  show  distinctly  that  it  is  prophetic  of  the 
Messiah.  I.  The  first  prediction  is  that  Christ,  when  He  should  come, 
WOULD  "  SET  Jehovah  continually  before  Him,"  i.e.  He  would  live  on  earth 
realising  by  faith  the  presence  of  an  unseen  God,  to  dweU  continually  in  His  sight. 
Our  Lord  did  this.     He  said,  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me." 

II.  Jehovah  would  be  at  His  right  hand.  We  find  our  Lord  continually 
sustaining  Himself  by  the  consoling  presence  of  His  Father.  And  all  who  tread 
in  His  steps  may  share  in  His  consolation.  III.  His  heart  would  be  glad. 
How  could  He  be  otherwise,  when  He  knew  the  resources  of  the  Father  ?  Our  Lord 
walked  with  God  on  earth,  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  that  should  be  revealed. 
So  also  may  we,  and  do  we  ?  IV.  His  flesh  should  rest  in  hope.  This  implies 
—1.  His  death.  His  death  was  predicted  no  lees  than  His  triumph.  He  looked 
forward  to  His  death,  and  repeatedly  foretold  it.  And  He  resolutely  met  it.  Let 
as  ask  for  grace  to  enter  into  His  spirit.     2.  The  limitation  of  death's  dominion. 


ISALM  XVI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  253 

"  I  have  power,"  said  He,  "to  lay  it  (My  life)  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it 
again. "  "I  lay  it  down  of  Myself. "  He  did  as  He  had  said.  He  took  again  that 
dishonoured  body,  to  be  dishonoured  no  more.  V.  God  would  gtjidk  Him  to  the 
PATH  OF  LIFE.  "  Thou  wilt  show  Me,"  &c.  The  way  of  the  grave  did  not  seem  the 
gate  of  life,  but  in  reality  it  was  so.  Conclusion  :  He  will  bring  us  there.  Decide 
for  Him  now.  Sympathise  with  Him  in  His  glory.  {Baptist  W.  Noel.)  The 
habitual  thought  of  Qod: — David  could  only  do  this  mentally.  "No  man  hath 
seen  God  at  any  time."  And  when  he  says  "always"  he  does  not  mean  that  he 
was  always  actually  thinking  of  Him.  We  cannot  do  this.  We  are  not  to  be 
slothful  in  business.  Yet  David  means  that  he  believed  and  felt  God  to  be  near 
him,  and  that  he  would  frequently  hold  communion  with  God.  This  leads  to  a 
state  of  mind  in  which  we  can  readily  recur  to  God  in  our  thoughts.  Let  us  do 
this,  setting  the  Lord  always  before  us.  I.  As  our  Protector.  Our  religious 
course  is  a  constant  warfare.  We  need  the  courage  which  only  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  can  impart.  IL  As  our  Leader.  IIL  As  oub  Example.  IV.  As  oue 
Observer.  Nothing  escapes  His  notice.  A  heathen  philosopher  admonished  his 
disciples  to  imagine  that  the  eye  of  some  illustrious  personage  was  always  upon 
them.  But  what  is  the  eye  of  Plato  to  that  of  God  ?  What  stimulus  this  to  zeal. 
{JFilliam  Jay.)  On  habitual  remembrance  of  Ood: — Our  text  directs  our 
thoughts  to  the  greatest  of  all  Beings,  the  source  of  all  happiness.  I.  What  it  is 
TO  SET  God  always  before  us.  Represent  to  yourself  the  proceedings  of  men, 
who  have  proposed  to  themselves  as  their  main  pursuit  the  possession  of  some 
worldly  attainment.  Observe  in  what  manner  they  set  their  object,  be  it  what  it 
may,  always  before  their  eyes.  Contemplate  the  votary  of  science.  Behold  him 
absorbed  in  laborious  researches  :  in  the  investigation  of  causes  and  effects  ;  in  the 
construction  of  theories,  and  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  nature.  Behold 
him  day  after  day  bending  all  the  powers  of  his  mind  to  the  invention  and 
application  of  mechanism  ;  to  the  arrangement  and  superintendence  of  experiments  ; 
to  the  development  and  illustration  of  philosophical  truth.  At  home  and  abroad, 
in  cities  and  in  the  fields,  in  solitude  and  in  society,  behold  him  steadily  bearing 
in  mind  the  object  to  which  he  has  dedicated  his  life.  Survey  the  votary  of 
ambition.  Behold  every  nerve,  every  faculty,  upon  the  stretch  to  supplant,  to 
undermine,  or  to  surpass  his  rivals,  and  to  attain  the  dizzy  pre-eminence  to  which 
he  aspires.  Receive  then  a  lesson  from  the  children  of  this  world  (Luke  xvi.  8). 
Then  wilt  thou  discern  what  it  is  to  set  the  Lord  thy  God  always  before  thee. 
IL  The  different  characters  under  which  it  is  our  duty  to  do  this. 
1.  Regard  Him  as  Creator.  If  you  deem  life  a  blessing,  remember  Him — 2.  As 
your  Preserver.  3.  As  your  Redeemer  and  Sanctifier.  4.  As  your  Sovereign  and  your 
Judge.     See  then  that  you  obey  Him,  lest  you  be  destroyed  for  ever.     III.  Give 

EXAMPLES    OF    THE    DUTY     OF    THUS    SETTING    THE    LORD    ALWAYS     BEFORE    YOU. 

1.  In  prosperity— by  being  grateful  to  Him.  2.  In  adversity,  sickness,  and  death 
— by  trusting  Him,  submitting  to  Him  patiently,  remembering  how  little  your 
sufferings  in  comparison  with  your  sins.  Look  up  to  Him  and  be  comforted.  3.  In 
youth — by  not  withholding  from  the  planter  the  prime  of  the  fruit.  When  wilt 
thou  serve  thy  God  if  not  now  T  4.  In  age — by  remembering  that  the  night  oometh  ; 
work,  while  it  is  called  to-day  ;  seek  mercy  while  yet  it  may  be  found.  5.  Under 
all  circumstances,  in  common  duties,  as  well  as  in  specially  religious  acts.  If  you 
are  cultivating  your  farm  ;  if  you  are  selling  vour  articles  in  the  market  or  in  a 
shop ;  if  you  are  serving  a  master  in  your  daily  labour  ;  if  you  are  managing  the 
concerns  of  your  friend  or  of  your  coimtry :  remember  that  God  is  contemplating  all 
your  motives,  all  your  thoughts,  all  your  words,  all  your  actions ;  and  that  for  all 
your  motives  and  thoughts  and  words  and  actions  you  will  have  to  render  an  aocoimt 
at  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  (Rev.  xx.  12).  IV.  The  recompense.  The  Lord 
is  at  their  right  hand ;  they  shall  not  be  moved  (1  Sam.  ii.  30  ;  John  xiv.  23). 
(T.  Oisbome,  M.A.)  The  secret  of  a  happy  life: — In  the  preceding  verses  we 
read,  "The  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places,  yea,  I  have,  '  &c.  The 
speaker,  therefore,  is  a  very  contented  and  happy  man.  How  is  it  that  he  is  able  to 
feel  so  happy  ?  Let  us  seek  out  the  way.  Perhaps  his  road  may  fit  our  feet.  But 
who  is  the  person  who  is  thus  singularly  content  ?  It  is  the  Lorn  Jesus  Christ.  It 
is  He  who  by  the  Spirit  here  speaks.  AH  this  is  so  much  the  more  encouraging  to 
tis  because  if  He,  the  "Man  of  Sorrows,"  was  nevertheless  able  to  possess  so  sweet 
content,  it  must  be  possible  for  us,  whose  lot  is  not  so  bitter.  We  are  not  sent  to 
make  atonement  for  sin,  and  hence  our  sorrows  are  few  compared  with  our  Lord's. 
Our  text  clearlj  imparta  to  us  the  secret  of  this  peace.     It  is — I.  Living  in  the 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

Lord's  pbesencb  always.  "I  have  set  .  .  .  always  before  me,"  Now,  thia 
means — 1.  That  we  should  make  the  Lord's  presence  the  greatest  of  all  facts  to  us. 
Jesus  did  so.  He  saw  God  everywhere.  From  morning  to  evening,  until  you  fall 
asleep  "as  in  the  embraces  of  your  God,"  see  Him  eyerywhere.  This  is  happy 
living.  2.  The  making  of  God's  glory  the  one  object  of  our  lives.  3.  So  to  live 
that  the  presence  of  God  shall  be  the  rule  and  support  of  our  obedience.  So  Jesus 
did.  The  Master's  eye  is  to  many  servants  most  important,  to  make  them  careful 
and  diligent.  For  many  are  eye-servers  and  men-pleasers.  But  how  should  we 
live  if  God  were  seen  looking  on  ?  He  is  looking  on.  4.  As  the  source  from  which 
we  are  to  derive  solace  and  comfort  under  every  trial.  This  it  was  that  made  Him 
suffer  and  never  complain.  5.  That  we  are  to  hold  perpetual  communion  with  God. 
He  was  always  in  converse  with  the  Father,  and  He  could  say,  *'  I  knew  that  Thou 
hearest  Me  always."  6.  We  must  follow  this  life,  because  of  our  delight  and  joy 
in  it.  Such  a  life  cannot  be  lived  in  any  other  manner.  If  you  find  walking  with 
God  dull,  then  you  have  not  the  first  essentials  of  such  a  life.  You  must  be  bom 
again.  If  you  are  the  Lord's  you  will  delight  in  living  near  to  Him.  You  may 
lose  your  roll,  like  Christian  in  the  arbour,  and  you  may  go  back  again  and  find  it, 
but  it  is  very  hard  going  back  over  the  same  ground.  The  hardest  part  of  the  road 
to  heaven  is  that  which  has  to  be  traversed  three  times  :  once  when  you  go  over 
it  at  first,  a  second  time  when  you  have  to  return  with  weeping  to  find  your  lost 
evidences,  and  then  again  when  you  have  to  make  up  for  lost  time.  Abiding  with 
God  creates  peace  like  a  river.  II.  Trusting  always  in  the  Lord's  presence. 
"Because  He  is  at  my  right  hand  I  shall  not  be  moved."  1.  With  any  regret  or 
remorse  as  to  the  past.  Christ  had  many  sorrows  but  no  regrets.  2.  From  our 
consistency  in  the  way  of  true  religion.  3.  With  terror.  4.  By  temptation,  so  as 
to  be  swept  into  surprising  sin.  5.  So  as  to  fail  at  last.  Conclusion :  1.  You  who 
are  not  Christians,  you  are  not  happy.  Set  the  Lord  before  you.  2.  You  who  are 
not  Christians,  but  think  yourselves  happy.  How  frail  the  pillar  on  which  your 
happiness  rests.  3.  You  Christians  who  are  not  happy ;  here  is  counsel  for  you. 
4,  You  happy  Christians,  you  can  be  happier  still  by  coming  nearer  to  God.  This 
is  heaven  below.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Because  He  is  at  my  right  hand,  I  shall 
not  he  moved. —  The  faithful  heart,  and  the  present  God : — This  Psalm  touches  the 
high-water  mark  of  the  religious  life  in  two  aspects — its  ardent  devotion,  and  its 
clear  certainty  of  eternal  blessedness  beyond  the  grave.  These  two  are  connected 
as  cause  and  efi"ect.  I.  The  effort  of  faith.  "I  have  set  the  Lord  always 
before  me."  It  took  a  dead  lift  of  conscious  effort  for  the  Psalmist  to  keep  himself 
continually  in  touch  with  that  unseen  God.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  true  religion. 
Mark  how  the  Psalmist  came  to  this  effort.  It  was  because  his  whole  soul  clave 
to  God,  with  the  intelligent  and  reasonable  conviction  and  apprehension  that  in 
God  alone  was  all  he  needed.  If  a  man  does  not  think  about  God  and  His  love  it 
is  all  one  as  if  he  had  not  Him  and  it.  II.  The  ally  of  faith.  The  second 
portion  of  the  text  is  to  be  interpreted  as  the  consequence  of  the  effort.  "He  is  at 
my  right  hand."  Tlie  Psalmist  means  that  by  the  turning  of  his  thoughts  to  God 
and  the  effort  he  makes — the  effort  of  faith,  imagination,  love,  and  desire — to  bring 
himself  as  close  as  he  can  to  the  great  heart  of  the  Father,  he  realises  that  presence 
at  his  side  in  an  altogether  different  manner  from  that  in  which  it  is  given  to  stones 
and  rocks  and  birds  and  beasts  and  godless  men.  That  Divine  Presence  is  the 
source  of  all  strength  and  blessedness.  "At  my  right  hand  "  ;  then  I  stand  at  His 
left,  and  close  under  the  arm  that  carries  the  shield  ;  and  close  by  my  instrument 
of  activity,  to  direct  my  work ;  my  Protector,  my  Ally,  my  Director.  III.  The 
COURAGEOUS  STABILITY  OF  FAITH.  "  Not  be  moved."  That  is  true  all  round,  in 
regard  of  all  the  things  which  may  move  and  shake  a  man.  The  secret  of  a  quiet 
heart  is  to  keep  ever  near  God,  We  shall  not  be  moved  by  circumstances.  How 
quietly  we  may  live  above  the  storms  if  we  only  live  in  God,  The  Psalmist  feels 
that  the  great  change  from  life  to  death  will  not  move  him,  in  so  far  as  his  union 
with  God  is  concerned.  A  realisation  of  true  communion  with  God  is  the  guarantee 
that  the  man  who  has  it  shall  never  die.     (A.  Maelaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9,  10,  Therefore  my  heart  is  glad. — Christ  joyful  in  tuffering: — ^The 
remainder  of  this  Psalm  we  are  to  consider  as  spoken  by  David  in  reference  to  the 
Messiah,  of  whom  he  was  both  a  prophet  and  a  type,  I,  This  passage  reminds 
us  OF  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Old  Testament  types,  promises,  and  predictions 
describe  Christ  as  a  suffering  Saviour.  The  view  of  Him  thus  given  through  the 
medium  of  prophecy  is  completely  realised  in  His  actual  history.     Well  may  such 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  255 

an  emphasis  be  laid  on  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ ;  for  this  was  the  instituted 
method  of  redemption.  II.  This  passage  affikms  the  constancy  and  cheee- 
FULNESS  with  WHICH  Christ  WAS  TO  BEAR  His  SORROWS.  "  My  heart  is  glad, 
and  my  glory,"  that  is,  my  tongue,  "rejoiceth."  So  said  David,  personating  the 
Messiah  ;  and  all  this  was  realised  in  Messiah's  actual  deportment.  Remarkable 
was  the  constancy  and  cheerfulness  with  which  our  blessed  Saviour  bore  His  suffer- 
ings. And  we  cannot  but  admire  the  character  in  which  this  excellence  was  so 
conspicuously  displayed.  To  our  admiration  of  His  unequalled  magnanimity  we 
must  add  the  more  valuable  tribute  of  our  gratitude  ;  for  it  was  in  love  to  our  souls 
that  His  engagement  to  suffer  and  to  die  had  its  origin.  If  we  ought  to  love  Him, 
because  He  so  loved  us,  oh  how  deep-seated  should  our  affection  be !  III.  What 
WAS  it  supported  and  cheered  our  Saviour  in  the  midst  of  His  sufferings  ? 
1.  He  "set  the  Lord  always  before  Him,"  as  the  great  object  of  His  regard.  2.  He 
was  cheered  by  the  assurance  that  ' '  God  was  at  His  right  hand. "  The  arm  of 
Jehovah  was  stretched  out  for  His  stay  and  deliverance.  3.  He  was  supported  by 
the  hope  of  a  resurrection  of  life  and  blessedness.  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  My  flesh 
also  shall  rest  in  hope. — Dying  well  and  comfwtahly : — Doctrine :  That  it  is  a 
sweet,  desirable,  and  Christlike  way  of  dying,  to  be  inwardly  willing  and  joyful, 
and  outwardly  triumphing  and  praising  God,  from  a  confidence  and  hope  of  His 
promises.  I.  Groujsds  of  comfort.  1.  Your  God  will  be  with  you,  and  at  your 
right  hand,  that  you  shall  not  be  moved.  2.  Death  is  your  friend,  to  bring  you 
to  rest.  Jesus  has,  by  His  death,  removed  everything  from  your  death  that  is 
legally  penal  and  a  curse.  3.  You  shall  be  raised  again  to  everlasting  glory  and 
happiness.  4.  Your  Lord  after  the  judgment  will  present  you  faultless  before 
the  presence  of  His  glory.  II.  The  foundations  upon  which  these  consola- 
tions AGAINST  death  ARE  BUILT.  1.  The  Psalmist  looks  to  the  acts  of  Christ's 
mediation  as  the  foundation  of  all  His  consolations  against  death.  2.  These  con- 
solations are  certain  in  themselves,  and  to  you,  from  the  promises  of  the  covenant 
of  grace,  and  are  founded  on  them.     III.  You  must  do  your  part,  that  you 

MAY    BE    COMFORTED,   REJOICE    AND    TRIUMPH    WHEN   YOU    COME    TO    DIE.       1.    YoU 

must  have  faith  to  believe  these  reasons  of  comfort.  2.  You  must  have  a  lively 
hope  in  exercise.  What  must  you  do  ? — (1)  Come  speedily  out  of  a  state  of  nature 
into  a  state  of  grace.  (2)  Im]>artially  and  accurately  examine  your  state,  whether 
in  Christ  or  not.  (3)  Live  a  life  of  faith.  (4)  Keep  your  consciences  pure  and  void 
of  offence,  both  towards  God  and  man,  and  labour  to  be  holy  in  your  lives  and 
conversations.  (5)  Be  much  in  the  exercise  of  love.  (6)  Live  with  your  hearts 
weaned  from  a  present  world.  (7)  Carry  well  towards  the  Spirit  of  joy  and  comfort, 
and  keep  communion  with  Him.  He  is  the  Comforter.  (8)  Be  frequent  in  actual  pre- 
paration for  death — promises  ready,  evidences  ready,  experiences  ready.  {James 
Robe,  M.A.)  Immortality : — This  is  an  idea  which  has  been  growing  in  the  Old 
Testament.  Now  and  again  some  word  has  been  interjected  into  the  story  that 
did  not  seem  to  belong  to  it,  or  was  of  another  quality — a  word  with  a  colour,  a 
flush,  as  if  light  from  an  unknown  source  had  struck  upon  it  and  lighted  it  up  into 
new  beauty.  Job  had  said  one  or  two  words  for  the  explanation  of  which  we  must 
wait ;  the  Psalmist  now  speaks  of  his  flesh  resting  in  hope,  of  his  soul  not  being 
left  in  an  unseen  place,  and  of  the  Holy  One  not  seeing  corruption.  ...  To  impair 
the  doctrine  of  immortality  is  to  strike  at  the  goodness  of  God.  In  denying  immor- 
tality we  may  be  said  to  deny  the  Creator.  We  cannot  treat  immortality  as  a 
doctrine  only  ;  it  is  really  part  of  the  Divine  nature.  Given  God,  and  immortality 
in  some  form  is  a  necessity.  Has  He  created  us  simply  to  let  us  die  ?  Has  He  given 
us  all  these  gifts  merely  to  mock  us  at  the  last,  by  allowing  us  to  drop  into  oblivion 
and  nothingness  ?  Does  He  permit  us  to  climb  to  the  very  door  of  heaven,  and  to 
hear  the  songs  that  are  sung  inside,  simply  that  He  may  thunder  to  us  —  You 
cannot  have  part  or  lot  in  this  inheritance  ;  your  destiny  is  obliteration  ?  Some 
argument  must  be  founded  upon  instinct,  impulse,  yearning,  longing,  speechless 
unconsciousness.  When  we  are  all,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  lifting  ourselves  up  to 
Him,  is  it  like  Him  to  deny  the  aspiration  ?  Or  like  Him  to  give  us  that  further 
movement  which  will  connect  us  consciously  with  His  own  eternity  ?  To  this  latter 
faith  I  incline.  God  has  not  created  aspiration  which  He  cannot  satisfy.  There  is 
more  in  us  than  we  can  tell,  and  to  these  wordless  impulses  God  sends  this  revela- 
tion of  immortality.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  flesh  and  its  three  states : — We 
would  speak  on  the  fortunes  of  the  flesh  in  its  three  stages  of  existence.  I.  On 
THIS  SIDE  THE  GRAVE.  Note  the  word  "also."  It  carries  our  thought  back  to 
the  higher  joy  of  the  soul.     Neither  the  essence  of  sin  nor  of  glory  is  in  the  flesh 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

at  all.  We  therefore  do  not  exclude  the  soul,  but  rather  make  it  the  great  centre 
of  all,  though  we  speak  more  of  the  flesh.  The  Redeemer  shall  satisfy  our  whole 
nature.  There  is  no  danger,  ordinarily,  of  our  forgetting  the  flesh.  It  makes  its 
presence  predominant  enough.  Nothing  but  the  regenerated  spirit  can  keep  it 
under.  How  we  admire  the  heroic  deeds  of  those  who  in  some  holy  struggle  for 
liberty  or  for  love  assert  the  superiority  of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh.  They  can  die, 
die  in  torture,  and  that  gladly,  by  the  power  of  the  spirit  within  them.  But  yet 
the  Gospel  does  not  forget  even  the  flesh.  How  all  the  natural  feelings  are  deeply 
touched.  This  is  an  argument  for  the  after  life  of  the  body.  How  close  is  the  link 
between  the  soul  and  the  body.  How  they  act  and  react  on  one  another.  It, 
therefore,  can  never  be  a  matter  of  indiff'erence  to  the  soul  what  becomes  of  the 
body.  And  our  Lord  became  flesh,  was  incarnate,  flBd  He  has  taken  it,  now  glorified, 
permanently  into  union  with  His  Godhead.  We  have  no  hint  that  He  will  ever  put 
it  oflF.  It  is  the  same  human  body  which  was  nursed  at  the  heart  of  an  earthly 
mother,  and  which  hung  upon  the  Cross  in  death.  Therefore,  how  can  we  despise 
the  body  ?  And  the  hope  of  the  flesh  is  bound  up  even  with  the  glory  of  God  Him- 
self. For  He  did  not,  at  first,  mean  those  bodies  to  die.  There  was  no  death  in 
His  counsels.  That  came  by  sin.  Thus  the  Divine  will  was  contradicted  by  Satan. 
But  redemption  was  to  undo  Satan's  work.  Yes,  each  one  may  cry  out  in  joy, 
"My  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope."  II.  In  the  6rave.  It  is  a  state  of  rest. 
The  word  implies  both  labours  past  and  repose  present.  Hence  "sleep"  is  the 
condition  in  which  faith  loves  to  regard  the  body  in  the  grave.  And  like  as  in 
sleep,  the  body  in  the  grave  is  free  from  pain  and  toil,  from  sin  and  suff'ering,  from 
want  and  weariness  and  all  pining.  And  it  is  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  so  far  as 
the  flesh  is  concerned,  an  unconsciousness  of  the  very  state  in  which  it  lies.  The 
resurrection  wiU  appear  to  follow  instantaneously  upon  death,  as  our  awaking  after 
deep  sleep  seems  to  follow  close  upon  our  falling  asleep.  And  like  sleep,  it  is  but 
for  a  while  ;  there  will  be  an  awakening.  The  principle  of  life  is  held  in  abeyance  : 
in  sleep,  by  a  natural  change  ;  in  death,  by  the  imm^iate  will  of  Him  who  has  all 
life  to  give  and  withhold  as  He  wills.  What  a  holy  and  loving  charm  do  these 
thoughts  throw  around  even  the  decaying  flesh  :  what  a  light  upon  the  grave. 
III.  Beyond  the  grave.  It  is  far  more  easy  to  realise  with  something  like  pre- 
cision the  future  glory  of  the  flesh  than  that  of  the  spirit.  And  yet  even  the 
body's  glory  is  far  more  than  we  can  conceive,  because  we  have  no  experience  of  a 
body  free  from  the  penalties  of  sin.  But  we  have  known,  at  times,  fulness  of  life,  of 
buoyant  vigour,  and  of  such  pleasure  in  movement  and  living  that  we  have  been 
filled  with  delight.  Imagine  that  eternal.  And  add  new  capacities  and  powers. 
{^Edward  Garbitt,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  Thou  wUt  not  leave  my  aotil  in  hell — Christ's  descent  into  hell  .-—The 
afflictions  and  calamities  which  fall  upon  many  men  in  this  present  state  are  such 
that,  were  it  not  for  the  hope  which  they  have  in  God,  their  only  comfort  would  be 
that  expectation  of  death  which  Job  expresses  (iii.  17).  But  true  religion  aff'ords 
virtuous  and  good  men  a  very  different  prospect ;  and  teaches  them  to  expect,  that  if 
God  does  not  think  fit  to  deliver  them  out  of  their  troubles  here,  yet  even  the  grave 
puts  not  an  end  to  His  power  of  redeeming  them.  They  may  look  upon  death  itself, 
not  barely  as  a  putting  £in  end  to  their  present  afflictions,  but  as  a  passage  to  a  glorious 
and  immortal  state.  In  its  real  and  most  proper  sense  the  text  is  not  applicable  to 
the  Psalmist  himself,  but  to  Him  of  whom  David  was  both  a  prophet  and  a  type. 
The  word  "hell"  now  signifies  "the  state  of  the  damned,"  but  David  was  not  con- 
demned to  that  place  of  torment,  nor  did  Jesus  descend  there.  Hell  frequently 
means  "the  state  of  the  dead"  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  ;  Prov.  xxvii.  20,  xxx.  15).  In  the 
New  Testament  it  means  the  same,  but  at  times,  also,  the  place  api>ointed  for  the 
punishment  of  the  wicked.  But  this  ambiguity  is  in  our  own  language  only,  and 
not  in  the  original.  There  the  place  of  torment  is  always  Gehenna.  The  Scrip- 
tures nowhere  teach  that  Christ  ever  entered  the  place  of  the  damned.  Nor  is  there 
any  reason  why  He  should.  The  satisfaction  of  Christ  does  not  depend  on  the 
sameness  of  His  sufferiuf^s  with  ours,  but  on  the  good  pleasure  of  God.  If  He  had 
entered  the  place  of  the  damned,  Christ  could  not  have  known  the  sting  of  their 
punishment,  the  wovni  that  never  dies,  the  endless  despair  of  the  favour  of  God. 
Some  say  Christ  went  there  to  rescue  those  wlio  were  there.  Others  say  He  went  in 
order  to  triumph  over  Satan  in  his  own  kingdom.  But  our  Lord  triumphs  over  him 
by  converting  men  from  tbeir  siii.s  and  debaucheries,  from  their  unrighteousness  and 
iniquities,  which  are  the  works  of  the  devil ;  to  the  practice  of  virtue,  justice,  good- 


PSALM  XVI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  257 

ness,  temperance,  charity,  and  truth,  which  are  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom 
of  God  upon  earth.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  there  is  no  sufficient  foundation, 
either  in  the  reason  of  the  tiling  or  in  the  declarations  of  Scripture,  to  suppose  that 
our  Lord  ever  descended  at  all  into  the  place  of  torment,  into  the  place  appointed  for 
the  final  punishment  of  the  Avicked.  But  the  full  meaning  of  the  text  is,  that  our 
Lord  continued  in  the  state  of  the  dead,  in  the  invisible  state  of  departed  souls, 
during  the  time  appointed  ;  but  that,  it  not  being  possible  for  Him  to  be  holden  of 
death.  He  was  raised  again  without  seeing  corruption.  {Samuel  Parker,  D.D.) 
He  descended  into  hell : — Our  Lord  had  not  only  a  human  body,  but  likewise  a 
human  soul.  His  body  was  laid  in  the  grave,  but  His  soul  departed  from  the  body. 
What  is  meant  by  "descending  into  hell  "  ?  Some  say  "  hell "  signifies  the  place  of 
spirits  and  eternal  woe.  Others  think  it  does  not  signify  a  place  of  torment,  but 
the  place  of  departed  souls  ;  that  unseen  world  into  which  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
are  received  when  released  from  the  body.  Some  suppose  that  there  was  a  great 
object  in  the  salvation  of  mankind,  which  our  Lord  wrought  in  going  down  to  hell, 
or  the  place  of  the  departed  ;  that  He  there  preached  to  the  dead.  And  no  doubt 
His  soul's  departing  into  hell  was  for  our  sakes,  to  carry  even  there,  also,  an  atone- 
ment for  us  ;  to  carry  with  Him  some  inconceivable  blessing  and  benefit  for  us  into 
that  place  also.  As  everything  that  our  Lord  underwent  for  our  sakes  appears  to 
have  been  set  forth,  and  typified  beforehand,  in  His  law,  so  also  was  this  descent  into 
hell.  Illustration :  Scapegoat  of  the  day  of  atonement.  The  departure  of  the  soul  from 
the  body  into  the  unknown  land  of  spirits  is,  of  itself,  so  awful  a  thought,  even  to 
the  good  man,  that  this  article  of  the  creed  may  be  a  point  of  great  consolation  to 
him.  For  a  Christian  to  die,  even  before  the  day  of  judgment,  is  to  be  with  Christ, 
and  to  be  released  from  life  as  from  a  burden,  and  to  be  in  joy.  It  is  the  great  day 
of  judgment  which  the  Bible  is  ever  setting  before  us.  Yet  the  little  that  is  told  us 
of  the  state  of  our  souls  before  the  day  of  judgment,  and  immediately  when  they 
depart  from  the  body,  is  of  itself  very  deeply  affecting,  awful,  and  concerning.  It 
may  be  profitable  to  dwell  upon  these  two,  what  are  called  intermediate,  states  :  our 
condition  between  death  and  judgment ;  the  states  in  which  our  friends  are  now, 
and  we  shall  soon  be.  When  work  is  done,  then  is  the  time  for  contemplation  and 
reflection  ;  and  then,  when  our  labours  are  all  over  and  we  are  waiting  for  our  judge 
to  pronounce  sentence  upon  them,  we  shall  no  doubt  form  a  far  more  correct  judg- 
ment of  them  than  now  we  do.  Even  if  we  had  been  told  nothing  of  the  state  of 
the  departed,  we  might  have  supposed  that  to  be  waiting  for  the  judgment,  and  to 
be  removed  from  all  things  here  in  which  the  soul  can  take  delight,  must  be  awful 
beyond  all  description.  We  may  see  how  much  of  mercy  and  goodness,  and  how  much 
benefit  to  us,  may  be  contained  in  this  one  article  of  the  creed,  that  Christ  descended 
into  the  place  of  the  dead.  By  going  there  Himself,  after  tasting  of  the  bitterness 
of  death.  He  seems  to  say  to  His  faithful  followers,  "Come,  My  people,  enter  thou 
into  thy  chambers"  (Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21).  It  is  good  for  us  that  we  should  think 
often  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  of  "just  men  made  perfect,"  of  them  who  are 
released  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  and  are  waiting  in  awful  and  blissful  silence 
for  the  revelation  of  the  great  day.  By  His  descent  into  hell  Jesus  has  sanctified 
and  blessed  the  place  of  our  souls.  {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  "  Tracts  for  the 
Times.")  Our  Lord  in  the  intermediate  state : — Stress  is  laid  on  the  fact  that  our 
Lord's  blessed  body  saw  no  corruption.  It  lay  not  long  enough  in  the  grave  for 
that  change  to  have  taken  place  in  it  which  we  know  to  be  the  lot  of  all  human  bodies 
when  they  have  been  any  while  dead.  He  had  not  been  dead  more  than  thirty-six 
hours.  There  seems  a  special  propriety  in  its  being  ordered  that  the  only  body 
which  was  never  stained  by  sin  should  also  be  tl.j  only  one  exempt,  though  not 
from  the  pains,  yet  from  the  loathsomeness  of  death.  It  was  a  way  of  giving  the 
whole  world,  angels  and  men,  clearly  to  understand  that,  although  God  had  laid 
on  Him  the  punishment  due  to  sinful  men,  yet  He  never  ceased  for  a  moment  to  be 
the  only  beloved  of  His  Father.  1.  This  text  proves  the  truth  of  our  Saviour's 
human  soul  and  body  ;  proves  that  He  took  on  Himself,  really  and  truly,  the  sub- 
stance of  our  nature  in  the  womb  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  and  lived  and  died  in  all 
respects  a  man,  sin  only  and  sinful  infirmity  excepted  ;  so  also,  in  the  unseen  state. 
He  continued  to  be  a  man  among  men.  Here  is  a  token  and  earnest  that  our 
merciful  God  sympathises  with  our  natural  care  and  anxiety  as  to  what  shall  become 
both  of  our  friends  and  ourselves  during  that  awful  interval  which  is  to  come  between 
death  and  resurrection.  Souls  departed  and  bodies  in  the  grave  are  within  the 
merciful  care  of  Him  who  is  both  God  and  aan.  2.  Observe  the  difference  between 
the  language  of  the  Old  Testament,  even  the  most  evangelical  portions  of  it,  where 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xvi. 

they  speak  of  the  state  of  the  dead,  and  the  language  of  the  blessed  Gospel  Itself 
relating  to  the  same  subject,  3.  How  happy  and  comfoitable  soever  the  Paradise 
of  the  dead  may  be,  it  is  not  a  place  of  final  perfection,  but  a  place  of  waiting  for 
something  better ;  a  region  not  of  full  enjoyment,  but  of  assured  peace  and  hope. 
So  much  is  hinted,  in  that  God  is  thanked  and  glorified  for  not  leaving  our  Saviour's 
soul  in  that  place.  Here  is  something  very  apt  to  raise  in  us  high  and  noble 
thoughts  of  that  which,  in  one  way  or  another,  we  are  shamefully  used  to  undervalue 
— the  mortal  body  of  man.  4.  What  does  the  prophet  teach  concerning  our  Saviour's 
body  ?  Our  Saviour's  Person  was  holy  because  of  His  most  high  Godhead.  And  the 
same  name,  "Holy  One,"  is  ascribed  to  His  sacred  body  as  it  lay  in  the  grave, 
three  days  and  three  nights,  separate  from  His  soul.  It  was  still  holy,  still  united 
in  a  mysterious  but  real  manner  to  the  Eternal  Word.  5.  Seeing  that,  even  in  the 
grave,  the  Godhead  of  the  Lord  Christ  still  abode  with  His  blessed  body,  seeing  that 
body  was  still  God's  Holy  One,  it  could  not  be  suffered  to  see  corruption.  And  to 
whomsoever  He  has  given  power  to  become  adopted  sons  of  God  He  gives  some- 
thing glorious  and  immortal,  a  seed  of  a  heavenly  life  which  can  never  decay. 
Living  or  dying,  nothing  shall  separate  them  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  nothing  but  their  own  wilful  unworthiness.  {Plain  Sermons 
by  Contributors  to  ' '  Tracts  for  the  Times")  On  the  descent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
into  hell : — Doctrine :  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  blessed  and  Holy  One  of  God, 
was  deeply  humbled  by  His  entrance  into,  and  continuing  in,  the  state  of  the  dead 
for  a  time.  L  Premise  bomb  things.  1.  That  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  not  only 
endured,  in  His  last  passion,  most  painful  sufferings  in  His  body,  but  also  most 
grievous  torments  immediately  in  His  soul.  Many  great  divines  understand  by  the 
words,  "He  descended  into  hell,"  these  soul  sufferings  of  Jesus,  2.  The  Son  of 
God  willingly  laid  down  His  life  ;  yielded  to  the  power  of  death.  3.  Though  death 
made  a  separation  of  His  soul  from  His  body,  yet  His  soul  and  body  retained  their 
union  with  the  Divine  nature,  subsisting  in  the  Person  of  the  Son  of  God.  II.  How 
Jesus  was  humbled  by  being  in  the  state  of  the  dead  fob  a  time.  Death 
exercised  its  dominion  over  Him,  as  far  as  it  could  in  law.  1.  Death  continued  its 
power  and  dominion  over  Him  for  a  time.  2.  While  in  the  state  of  the  dead  He 
was  cut  off  from  the  comforts  of  this  life.  3.  Men  took  occasion  to  give  Him  over 
for  lost,  and  to  judge  Him  as  one  totally  vanquished  by  death,  and  without  any 
help  or  hope.  4.  He  was  further  humbled  by  His  soul  entering  into  heaven  as  the 
soul  of  a  dead  man.  5.  In  regard  that  His  blessed  body  was  buried  and  laid  in  the 
grave.  6.  In  regard  that  His  dead  body  was  in  the  power  of  His  enemies  for  a  time. 
III.  How  long  did  our  Saviour  continue  in  the  state  of  the  dead  ?  Three 
incomplete  days  and  nights  in  the  territories  of  death,  and  land  of  darkness  and 
forget  fulness.  IV.  Why  did  the  Lord  Jesus  continue  in  the  state  of  the 
dead  for  a  time  ?  That  He  might  conquer  death  and  the  grave  in  their  own 
territories.  Use  for  consolation.  Against  all  challenges  for  guilt  from  the  law  and 
justice  of  God,  from  Satan,  or  your  own  consciences.  Use  for  exhortation.  Labour 
to  have  an  interest  in  the  death  of  Christ.  {James  Robe,  M.A.)  Neither  wilt 
Thou  suffer  Thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption. — The  devout  heart  defying  death  : — 
I.  The  ground  of  this  triumphant  confidence.  The  text  begins  with  a 
"  therefore,"  and  that  sends  us  back  to  what  has  preceded.  The  realisation  by  faith 
of  the  presence  of  God,  and  of  the  calm  blessedness  and  stability  of  continual  com- 
munion with  Him.  The  religious  experiences  of  the  devout  life  are  of  such  a  nature 
as  to  bring  with  them  the  calm,  sweet  assurance  of  their  own  immortality.  The 
capacity  for  communion  with  God  surely  bears  witness  that  the  man  who  has  it  is 
not  bom  for  death.  Though  we  have  the  objective  proof  of  a  future  life,  in  the  fact  of 
the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  though  that  historical  fact  is  the 
illuminating  fact  which  brings  life  and  immortality  to  light,  there  is  needed  for  the 
conversion  of  intellectual  belief  into  living  confidence  the  witness  of  our  own  per- 
sonal enjoyment  of  God  and  His  sweetness,  here  and  now,  which  will  bring  to  us,  as 
nothing  else  will,  the  calm  assurance  wherein  our  hearts  may  be  glad,  our  spirits 
may  rejoice,  and  our  very  flesh  may  rest  safely.  If  you  would  be  sure  of  a  blessed 
future,  make  sure  of  a  God -filled  present  II.  The  contents  of  the  Psalmist's 
TRIUMPHANT  CONFIDENCE.  The  expression  "leave  in  "  should  be  "leave  to";  it 
does  not  express  the  notion  of  a  permission  to  descend  for  a  time  into  Sheol,  then  to 
be  recalled  thence,  but  it  expresses  the  idea  of  not  being  delivered  at  all  to  the 
power  of  that  dark  world.  The  Psalmist  is  not  thinking  about  any  resurrection  of 
the  body,  but  is  thinking  that  for  him,  by  reason  of  his  communion  with  God, 
death  has  really  been  abolished  and  become  non-existent.    The  threatening  shadow 


PSALM  XVI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  259 

is  swept  clean  out  of  his  path.  Could  any  man,  knowing  the  facts  of  human  life, 
ever  cherish  such  an  expectation  as  that?  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  dis- 
tinguishing between  essence  and  form.  The  essence  of  the  Psalmist's  conviction  was, 
that  his  communion  with  God  was  unbroken  and  unbreakable,  and  in  the  light  of 
that  great  hope  the  grim  figure  that  stood  before  him  thinned  itself  away  to  a  lilm, 
through  which  the  hope  shone  like  a  star  through  the  cloud.  Whatsoever  may 
have  been  the  obscurity  that  lay  over  his  conceptions  of  his  own  future,  this  was 
clear  to  him,^and  this  was  the  all-sufScient  thing,— that  the  content,  the  stability, 
the  immobility  which  he  enjoyed  in  his  communion  with  God  had  nothing  in  them 
that  death  could  touch,  and  would  run  on  unbroken  for  evermore.  The  text  does 
not  contemplate  resurrection  as  an  article  of  belief,  but  resurrection  is  a  logical 
result  of  the  Psalmist's  way  of  thinking.  For,  says  he,  "  My  flesh  also  shall  rest 
secure."  The  over-strained  spiritualism  which  pays  no  attention  to  the  body,  except 
as  the  clog  and  prison-house  of  the  soul,  baa  no  footing  in  Scripture  representations. 
The  perfection  of  humanity  is  to  be  found  in  the  rising  up  of  a  perfected  spirit,  and 
the  investing  of  it  with  a  body  of  glory, — its  fitting  instrument,  its  joyous  friend. 
Turn  to  the  positive  side  of  this  triumphant  confidence.  "Thou  wilt  show  me  the 
path  of  life."  That  means  a  road  which  is  life  all  the  way  along,  and  leads  to 
a  more  perfect  and  ultimate  form  thereof.  The  Psalmist  is  sure  that  when 
the  path  dips  down  into  any  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  it  is  still  a  path  to 
life.  Mark  the  other  portions  of  this  triumphant  positive  confidence.  Communion 
of  earth,  imperfect  as  it  is,  yields  analogiOvS,  by  the  heightening  and  purifying  of 
which  we  may  construct  for  ourselves  some  dim,  indeed,  but  reliable,  visions 
of  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  The  enlargement  and  perfecting  of  this  earthly 
experience  is  to  be  looked  for  in  two  directions.  "The  fulness  of  joy"  is  "in 
Thy  presence."  And  "at  Thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 
III.  The  fulfilment  of  this  triumphant  confidence.  The  Psalmist  died. 
The  essence  of  his  hope  was  fulfilled  ;  the  form  was  not.  The  words  point  to 
an  ideal  which  the  Psalmist  strained  after,  and  did  not  realise.  In  Christ 
alone  was  realised,  in  its  completeness,  that  life  of  communion  which  delivers 
from  death.  Though  there  still  remains  the  physical  fact,  all  that  makes  it 
"death "  is  gone  for  him  who  trusts  in  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Joy 
in  Christ's  resurrection : — We  are  warranted  in  taking  this  Psalm  to  ourselves, 
inasmuch  as  the  first  verses  of  it  plainly  belong  to  David  as  well  as  to  Christ. 
Every  part  of  the  Psalm  may  be  applied  to  David  in  some  sense,  except  that  one 
clause  in  which  our  Lord  only  can  be  meant,  ' '  Thou  wilt  not  suffer  Thine  Holy 
One  to  see  corruption."  See  what  consolation  devout  persons  had,  even  under  the 
Old  Testament :  they  did,  as  it  were,  keep  a  kind  of  Easter  beforehand.  Observe 
what  use  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  made  of  his  nightly  pain  and  sickness.  As 
he  lay  awake  he  practised  himself  in  heavenly  contemplations.  In  what  he  says  he 
could  not  mean  less  than  this  :  that  he  had  a  fair  and  reasonable  hope  of  being  some- 
how delivered  from  the  power  of  death,  and  made  partaker  of  heavenly  joys  in  the 
more  immediate  presence  of  God.  Yet  even  the  greatest  of  the  old  fathers  only  saw 
through  a  glass  darkly  the  things  which  Christians  see  face  to  face.  Such  as  desire 
to  offer  to  God  thanksgivings  worthy  of  His  Gospel  will  find  it  no  small  help  to 
know  that  their  unworthy  thanksgivings  are  very  far  from  being  single  and  alune. 
The  saints  before  Christ  partake  of  our  devout  joy  and  hope  of  immortality.  1.  See 
what  kind  of  persons  may  reasonably  hope  to  persevere  in  well-doing  and  in 
God's  favour  ;  namely,  those  who  make  it  a  rule  to  live  always  as  in  God's  especial 
presence.  If  you  want  to  have  a  cheerful  and  rational  dependence  on  your  continu- 
ance in  well-doing,  this  one  thing  you  must  do,  you  must  set  God  always  before 
you.  You  must  never  act  as  if  you  were  alone  in  the  world.  This  is  the  only 
' '  assurance  "  of  salvation  that  can  be  reasonably  depended  on  by  any  man  in  his 
own  case  ;  namely,  the  sober  yet  cheerful  hope  which  arises  from  a  pure  conscience, 
from  long-continued  habits  of  real  piety  and  goodness.  All  assurance  besides  this 
is  more  or  less  fanciful  and  dangerous.  If  a  man  is  endeavouring  to  keep  on  this 
safe  ground  of  assurance  he  may,  without  presumption,  look  for  the  other  comforts 
mentioned  in  the  Psalm.  He  may  indulge  in  a  calm  and  reverential  joy  of  heart. 
The  Psalmist  notices,  as  another,  the  greatest  of  all  fruits  of  holy  trust  in  the 
Almighty,  that  it  causes  our  very  "flesh,"  that  is,  our  mortal  body,  to  "rest  in 
hope  "  ;  it  makes  sleep  quiet  and  secure,  and  it  takes  out  the  sting  of  death.  The 
chiefest  of  all  privileges  is  to  have  hope  in  the  grave  ;  hope  that  through  Him,  to 
whom  alone  these  sacred  promises  belong  of  right,  our  souls  shall  not  be  left  in 
hell, — in  that  dark,  unknown  condition  to  which,  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  the 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

name  of  Hell  was  usually  given.  There  need  not  now  to  be  anything  forlorn  or 
desolate  in  our  meditations  on  our  departed  friends,  or  on  the  condition  to  which  we 
are  ourselves  approaching.  The  unseen  region  where  the  soul  is  to  lodge  is  the 
place  where  once  the  Spirit  of  our  Saviour  abode,  and  is  therefore  under  Hi.s  especial 
protecti(m,  even  more  than  any  church  or  place  that  is  most  sacied  on  earth.  {Plain 
Sermons  by  Contribidors  to  ' '  Tracts  for  the  Tiines. ")  Christ  contemplating  His  future 
blessedness  ■ — We  must  consider  these  words  as  our  blessed  Master's  own  words,  as 
much  so  as  though  they  came  from  His  own  lips.  They  describe  the  feelings  of  His 
human  soul  while  dwelling  in  a  human  body  in  our  world.  And  this  gives  them  a 
very  high  interest.  We  liave  here  some  of  the  outpourings  of  His  soul  before  His 
Father.  I.  The  title  He  applies  to  Himself.  1.  He  calls  Himself  God's 
"Holy  One."  It  tells  how  eminently,  conspicuously  holy  He  was.  2.  His  applica- 
tion of  this  title  to  Himself  shows  us  that  He  deemed  it  an  honourable  title.  He 
delights  in  it,  more  than  in  anything  besides.  II.  His  prospect  of  His  resur- 
rection. We  learn — 1.  That  our  holy  Lord  was,  as  we  are,  made  up  of  both  body 
and  soul.  He  speaks  of  both :  "My  soul,"  and  of  His  body  in  referring  to  the 
"corruption, "  which  it  should  not  see.  2.  At  His  crucifixion  these  two  parte  of  Him 
were  separated.  A  real  dissolution  took  place.  The  flesh  and  the  spirit  were  rent 
asunder,  and  the  soul  took  its  flight  into  what  He  calls  "  hell "  ;  that  is,  some  part 
of  the  unseen  world  inhabited  by  disembodied  spirits.  The  body  sank  down  to  the 
earth,  a  soulless,  forsaken  tenement  of  clay.  Thus  far  we  all  resemble  Him,  but 
now  comes  something  peculiar  to  Him.  3.  His  human  frame  was  saved  from  cor« 
ruption.  The  least  taint  never  touched  it.  We  are  familiar  with  death,  and  there- 
fore the  corruption  of  death  does  not  make  us  shudder.  But  if  we  saw  it  for  the 
first  time  we  should  abhor  it,  we  should  look  on  it  as  a  token  of  God's  disgust  with 
us,  a  fixed  purpose  on  His  part  to  degrade  and  punish  us  to  the  utmost  for  our 
transgressions.  4.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  consisted  mainly  in  a  reunion  of  His 
body  and  soul.  It  is  implied  in  the  words,  "Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life." 
And  here  comes  out  that  wonderful  truth,  the  eternal  manhood  of  the  Divine 
Saviour.  Death  made  no  essential  change  in  Him.  He  is  not  a  stranger  to  us. 
"He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  '  Wonderful  condescension  !  III.  The 
viEw^  He  had  of  His  heavenly  blessedness.  Heaven  is  meant,  we  cannot 
doubt,  in  the  last  verse  of  this  Psalm.  And  we  observe — 1.  How  our  Lord  tells  of 
nothing  in  it  peculiar  to  Himself.  He  places  Himself  on  a  level  with  His  people. 
2.  See  the  nature  of  this  blessedness.  It  is  "joy,"  and  not  one  only,  but 
•"pleasures."  3.  And  perfect,  for  it  is  "fulness  of  joy."  4.  And  permanent, 
•"for  evermore."  5.  And  the  source  of  it — God.  It  is  at  God's  right  hand.  St. 
Peter  quotes  the  passage  thus  :  "Thou  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  with  Thy  counten- 
ance." 6.  We  and  our  blessed  Lord  shall  be  sharers  together  in  the  same  happi- 
ness in  His  kingdom.  IV.  The  effects  •which  His  anticipation  of  this 
BLESSEDNESS  PRODUCED  IN  HiM.  1.  Joj,  gladucss  of  heart.  True,  He  was  the 
Man  of  sorrows,  but  they  were  not  unmingled.  Many  a  gleam  of  light  pierced 
through  the  darkness.  And  His  joy  burst  forth  in  exultation  and  praise. 
Luke  (chap,  x.)  tells  us  how  "  He  rejoiced  in  spirit."  And  He  left  the  world  with 
something  like  a  conqueror's  shout.  2.  Hope.  It  reconciled  Him  to  death.  It 
was  but  as  a  sleep  to  Him.  (C.  Bradley.)  Christ's  being  the  Holy  One  of  God: — 
Jesus  Christ  is  that  Holy  One  of  God,  as — 1.  All  the  holiness  of  God  is  in  Him. 
2.  In  the  special  peculiar  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  God.  3.  He  has  more  of  the 
holiness  of  God  communicated  to  Him  than  all  other  creatures.  4.  The  holiness 
of  God  is  more  manifested  in  and  by  Him  than  in  any  other  way.  5.  He  is  set 
apart  in  a  peculiar  maimer  for  the  bringing  about  God's  great  design  of  glorifying 
Himself,  in  putting  an  end  to  sin,  and  making  an  elect  world  of  mankind  sinners 
holy.     {James  Robe,  M.A.) 

Ver.  11.  Thou  •wilt  shofr  me  the  path  of  'Oli.— The  path  of  life: — Not  merely, 
that  is,  the  life  of  the  body.  This  is  shown  by  the  pleasure  and  joy  spoken  of 
afterwards,  which  are  to  be  found  in  God's  presence,  and  in  communion  with  Him. 
"Life,"  in  the  only  true  sense,  is  union  with  God,  and  from  that  springs,  of  neces- 
sity, the  idea  of  immortality.  It  seems  impossible  to  suppose  that  Da'vid,  who 
here  expresses  such  a  fulness  of  confidence  in  God,  such  a  living  personal  relation- 
ship to  Him,  could  have  dreamed  that  such  a  relationship  would  end  •with  death. 
In  this  Psalm,  and  in  the  next,  there  shines  forth  the  bright  hope  of  everlasting 
life.  Why  should  man  question  this  ?  Even  the  heathen  struggled  to  believe  that 
tliey  should  abide  after  deatii.     Would  they  to  whom  God  had  revealed  Himself, 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  261 

and  who  were  bound  to  Him  in  a  personal  covenant,  be  left  in  greater  darknese  ? 
Impossible !  The  argument  which  our  Lord  used  with  the  Sadducees  applies  here 
with  special  force — God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.  They  to  whom 
God  has  made  Himself  known,  they  who  are  one  with  Him,  cannot  lose  that  Divine 
life  of  which  they  are  made  partakers.  Immortality  (and  a  resurrection,  Psa.  xvii. 
15)  follow*  from  the  life  of  the  spirit.  And  though  probably  there  would  be  many 
fluctuations  of  belief,  though  the  spiritual  eye  would  not  always  be  clear,  it  seems 
impossible  to  doubt,  when  we  read  passages  such  as  this,  that  there  were  times  at 
least  when  the  hope  of  life  beyond  the  grave  did  become  distinct  and  palpable.  At 
the  same  time,  in  the  utterance  of  this  confident  persuasion  and  hope  David 
was  carrifd  beyond  himself.  {J.  J.  Stewart  Perowne,  B.D.)  The  two  ways : — 
(Taken  with  Pro  v.  xiv.  12.)  There  is  such  a  thing  in  this  dying  world  as  a  "  path 
of  life."  This  is  represented  as  leading  into  fellowship  with  Him,  in  whose  presence 
there  is  fulness  of  joy.  "At  Thy  right  hand,"  and  thither  the  path  leads,  "there 
are  pleasures  for  evermore."  There  are  two  distinct  and  contrasted  ways  or  linee  of 
life.  The  one  is  called  "  the  way  of  Ufe,"  the  other  is  "the  way  that  seemeth  right 
unto  a  man."  Set  the  two  ways  before  you,  and  ask  a  deliberate  choice.  The  first 
thing  in  journeying  is  to  know  where  you  are  going.  The  one  is  the  way  of  life, 
because  it  is  a  way  which  can  only  be  traversed  by  those  who  live  in  the  full  sense 
of  the  word.  The  highest  faculty  of  our  nature  is  that  spiritual  capacity  which 
enables  us  to  hold  communion  with  God.  And  also  because  it  is  the  way  in  which 
alone  life  can  be  sustained.  And  further,  because  it  leads  to  life.  Look  at  the 
other  way.  It  "seemeth  right  unto  a  man."  Only  "seemeth."  But  it  is  not 
what  it  seems.  It  is  very  popular.  Everybody  takes  it.  That  does  not  make  its 
character  good,  or  its  end  desirable.  {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  desire  for 
life : — Beyond  the  fact  that  this  Psalm  was  written  by  David,  we  know  nothing  of  the 
circumstances  of  its  authorship.  It  is  evidently  called  forth  by  some  signal  display 
of  the  Divine  goodness.  The  Psalmist  felt  round  about  him  the  strengthening  sense 
of  that  protecting  power  and  presence  of  God  which  filled  his  heart  with  confidence 
and  made  his  cup  to  overflow  with  the  wine  of  joy.  I.  Every  tkub  religious 
SENTIMENT  MEETS  WITH  TJNivERSAL  RESPONSE.  Like  as  the  Ksthetic  Sentiments 
of  mankind,  our  best  feelings  of  the  beautiful  in  art  and  music,  were  given  to  the 
Greeks  to  preserve  and  develop  ;  so  the  religious  sentiments  of  mankind,  our  feel- 
ings of  the  Divine  and  spiritual,  seem  to  have  been  the  especial  care  and  heritage  of 
the  Jewish  race.  And  as  our  feelings  of  beauty  are  eternal,  so  that  Greek  art  and 
poetry  will  never  be  unappreciated,  so  are  our  intuitions  of  righteousness,  our 
yearnings  for  the  Divine  eternal,  and  hence  the  Bible  will  never  die,  its  perennial 
fountain  will  never  dry  up.  II.  Life  is  universally  desired.  Else  why  the 
frantic  struggles  to  maintain  it,  even  in  its  most  wretched  conditions.  Only  when 
reason  has  lost  her  sway  does  the  suicide  do  his  work.  III.  But  none  can  say 
WHAT  LIFE  is,  any  more  than  we  can  say  what  electricity  is,  what  gravitation  is. 
We  see  it,  we  feel  it,  we  are  conscious  of  it ;  but  that  is  all.  We  know  it  only 
by  its  manifestations,  and  if  we  can  see  in  what  these  agree,  what  they  have  in 
common,  our  text  will  have  much  meaning.  The  exotic  cannot  bear  frost,  the 
camellia  from  the  hothouse  perishes  before  it.  The  luxuriously  reared  child  sud- 
denly flung  into  poverty  and  want  would  probably  die.  Now,  in  all  these  cases 
there  has  been  change  in  the  surroundings  ;  but  if,  with  the  changed  outward 
conditions  in  each  case,  the  inward  conditions  as  well  could  have  been  changed, 
the  mischief  in  each  case  would  not  have  happened.  But  they  were  not  so 
changed,  and  so  there  was  either  death  or  else  a  diminution  of  the  powers  of  living. 
For  fife,  then,  there  is  needed  the  complete  correspondence  between  the  inward 
nature  and  the  outward  surroundings,  harmony  between  them  and  our  nature. 
Apply  all  this  to  the  spiritual  life.  For  this  life  also  there  must  be  harmony 
between  itself  and  its  surroundings.  What  are  these,  what  its  soil,  atmosphere, 
elements  of  growth,  its  habitat  or  dwelling-place  1  God  —  is  the  answer ; 
there  is  none  other.  God  revealed  as  our  spiritual  Father  is  the  spirit's 
fit  outward  surroundings,  its  external  relations.  Hence,  would  we  live  the 
true  spiritual  life  we  must  be  in  harmony  with  God,  our  environment.  The 
low,  sensual,  selfish  life  kills  the  spiritual  life,  as  the  frost  killed  the 
flower.  But  where,  as  in  Christ  supremely,  there  is  harmony  between 
God  and  the  soul,  there  is  the  true  life.  Christ  is  the  way,  because  He 
is  the  revelation  of  God.  {H.  Varley,  JS.A.)  The  path  of  life: — 1.  It  is 
THE  path,  because  while  all  other  paths  end  at  death,  this  begins  there. 
2.  Christ  took  the  first  step  in  this  path.     Some  one  must  lead  in  it,  and  He 


262  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  m. 

did,  and  now  says,  "Follow  Me."  3.  It  is  a  customary  road;  a  path  is  so. 
There  never  was  another  than  this,  and  never  will  be.  4.  Every  one  who  walks  in 
it  makes  it  plainer  and  easier.  We  help  others  to  walk  in  it  by  walking  in  it 
ourselves.  5.  Beware,  as  we  go  through  life,  of  diverging  paths  that  lead  astray  to 
death.  6.  The  Bible  is  the  lamp  in  our  path.  7.  We  are  always  walking  in  some 
path — either  of  life  or  death.  We  cannot  stand  still.  8.  To  walk  in  a  path  we 
must  put  forth  energy  and  activity.  We  must  not  only  know  it  but  walk  in  it. 
9.  The  path  of  life,  to  those  who  walk  in  it,  grows  brighter  and  brighter  unto  the 
perfect  day.  10.  Divine  guidance  is  necessary  and  promised.  "Thou  wilt  show 
me  the  path  of  life."  "He  will  direct  thy  paths."  11.  Am  I  walking  in  it? 
{J.  Stanford  Holme,  D.D.)  The  path  of  life: — The  whole  passage  primarily  refers 
to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  meaning  is — My  heart  is  glad,  &c.,  for  Thou  wilt 
show  me  the  path  of  life,  or.  Thou  hast  shown  me.  But  we  may  apply  the  words 
to  all  who  are  Christ's,  who  may  be  considered  here — I.  As  kejoicing  in  the 
LIFK  OF  ORACK.  God  qulckencd  in  them  this  life  (Eph.  ii.  1) ;  for  they  were 
spiritually  dead.  Not  Scripture  alone  teaches  this,  but  observation  and  experience. 
Religious  things  make  no  more  impression  on  the  spiritually  dead  than  sunbeams  on 
a  rock.  But  God's  mercy  comes  in  conversion,  which  is  the  quickening  spoken  of. 
Then  are  we  born  again,  and  begin  really  to  live.  II.  They  rejoice,  also,  in  the 
ASSURANCE  OF  BEING  CONDUCTED  SAFE  TO  GLORY.  How  else  should  a  dying  saint 
have  any  comfort  at  all  ?  How  shall  a  poor  stranger  in  such  a  dark  abyss  find  the 
path  of  life  ?  Then — 1.  How  thankful  should  we  be  for  the  Gospel.  Reason  may 
argue  in  favour  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  could  never  show  that  such  sinful 
creatures  as  we  are  should  be  admitted  into  the  presence  of  God.  2.  How  sharply 
to  be  reproved  and  greatly  to  be  pitied  are  they  who  will  not  walk  in  the  path  of 
life.  {Samuel  Lavington.)  The  path  of  life: — I.  Thoughts  suggested  by  the 
METAPHOR.  A  path.  The  believer's  life  is  a  journey  —  a  walk  (Gen.  xvii.  1, 
V.  24  ;  Isa.  xxx.  21  ;  Eph.  iv.  1).  We  need  both  a  door  and  a  path.  An  entrance 
into  life,  and  a  pathway  in  it.  II.  The  teaching  contained  in  the  passage. 
The  Psalm  is  prophetic  of  Christ,  To  Him  "the  path  of  life"  was  first  opened. 
Lost  man  had  no  way  to  God.  The  path  to  life  was  from  the  manger  to  the  Cross. 
The  path  of  life  is  from  the  Cross  to  glory.  Adam  through  sin  had  forfeited  his 
right  of  access  into  the  presence  of  God.  Through  Christ  the  way  to  paradise  is 
opened.  III.  Lessons.  Man  cannot  make  his  own  way  to  God.  It  is  a  path 
already  opened  for  us.  We  need  God  to  reveal  it  to  us.  We  must  be  brought  to  its 
true  starting-point.  The  path  brings  us  into  the  presence  and  puts  before  us  a 
prospect.  The  path  brightens  as  we  advance.  {E.  H.  Hopkins, )  The  path  of 
life : — I.  An  encouraging  promise  of  Divine  direction.  Consider  the  text  in 
reference  to  God's  answer  to  prayer.  Has  not  every  one  the  greatest  need  of  Divine 
direction  and  heavenly  illumination  in  his  passage  through  life  I  What  untiring 
diligence,  unceasing  watchfulness,  and  persevering  prayer  is  every  Christian 
constrained  to  use  in  his  hourly  converse  with  the  world  !  How  solicitous  should 
every  Christian  be  that,  as  every  step  of  his  life  is  leading  to  the  path  of  death,  he 
may  be  so  guided  by  Divine  counsel  as  to  be  directed  to  the  path  of  life,  to  the  path 
of  glory,  honour,  and  immortality,  even  eternal  life.  II.  The  happy  and  blessed 
results  arising  from  attention  to  this  direction.  An  admission  into  His 
presence,  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy.  It  is  the  presence  of  God,  our  heaverJy 
Father,  which  constitutes  this  fulness  of  joy.  Fulness  of  joy  can  only  be  consum- 
mated in  the  other  world.  But  what  tongue  can  unfold  the  felicity  of  that  state  ? 
III.  The  eternal  duration  of  the  heavenly  glory.  This  it  is  which  invests 
the  subject  with  the  most  momentous  and  overwhelming  magnitude.  {Nat.  Metres, 
B.  D. )  The  assurance  of  our  2yersonal  immortality,  and  what  it  involves : — Annihila- 
tion of  man,  or  even  of  an  atom,  is  unknown  in  God's  universe  ;  while  the  grave  is 
the  place  in  which  is  covered  what  would  otherwise  be  painful,  offensive,  and 
injurious  to  survivors.  We  know  life  is  uncertain  ;  but  we  practically  regard  it  as 
certain,  at  least  for  a  few  years.  There  is  in  all  of  us  faith  in  a  future  life,  and  hope 
and  desire  that  in  that  life  our  merciful  Creator  will  perfect  our  nature,  and  confer 
upon  us  a  painless  and  unbroken  happiness.  The  immortality  of  our  race  is  deeply 
interesting,  but  our  individual  immortality,  and  what  it  involves,  should  be  to  us  a 
matter  of  practical  and  daily  concern.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  men  discover  their 
value  in  the  scale  of  being.  They  learn  that  they  have  not  only  a  body  but  a  soul, 
that  not  only  must  the  wants  of  the  body  be  supplied,  but  the  mind  must  be 
trained,  and  the  soul  kept  under  God's  government,  for  its  present  health  and 
future  bliss.     There  are  three  states  of  man's  reasoning  mind  which  no  instinct  of 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  263 

the  lower  animals  that  we  are  acquainted  with  has  ever  suggested — 1.  We  have  no 
evidence  that  any  creature  except  man  expects  death,  or  lias  any  knowledge  of  it. 
2.  The  idea  of  a  future  life  cannot  be  entertained  by  the  horse  or  the  elephant,  by 
the  ant  or  the  bee.  3.  As  little  capacity  have  they  for  the  desire  of  it.  The 
instincts  of  brutes  concern  their  present  wants  ;  but  man,  by  his  superior  endowment, 
ranges  over  the  present  and  the  future,  over  what  is  near  and  far  distant,  and  by  th« 
high  faculty  of  reason  can  awake  to  a  consciousness  of  God,  and  of  his  own  peraonal 
immortality.  Christianity  has  given  to  man  a  familiarity  with  pure  religion  for  the 
soul,  for  moral  and  holy  discipline,  and  for  appreciating  his  destiny,  which  none  of 
the  old  philosophies  had  the  power  to  give  or  to  enforce.  We  are  now  assured  by 
Jesus  that  we  shall  live  for  ever,  and,  assuming  this,  it  should  involve  hopes  and 
duties  in  relation  to  ourselves  and  others  of  high  and  practical  import.  1.  It  should 
involve  sacred  regard  for  our  own  life,  and  for  that  of  others.  The  sacredness  and 
value  of  our  own  life,  and  of  that  of  others,  should  ever  be  a  practical  lesson 
inwrought  daily  with  our  very  being,  whether  on  the  smallest  or  largest  soak. 
Crime  against  the  person  cannot  cease  unless  humanity  is  respected.  Tht-re  can  be 
no  respect  for  it  where  there  are  no  just  views  of  its  dignity,  worth,  and  moral  and 
religious  power ;  and  the  way  to  elevate  it  is  not  by  depreciating  and  debasing  it, 
nor  by  discouraging  or  damning  it ;  but  by  loving  efforts  for  its  recovery,  by 
purifying  the  sources  of  temptation  to  crime,  Ac.  It  also  demands  on  our  part 
sacreu  regard  for  the  life  of  others.  A  hope  of  immortality  also  involves  a  sacred 
regard  to  our  personal  virtue,  and  to  that  of  others.  Whatever  will  purify  our 
nature,  control  our  passions,  convince  us  of  the  evil  and  bitterness  of  sin,  elevate 
our  thoughts  and  affections,  and  help  us  onward  in  our  Christian  course,  we  should 
seek  more  perfectly  to  possess  in  the  prospect  of  an  immortal  life.  2.  If  we  had  not 
the  immortal  life  before  us  we  should  think  of  death  as  our  end.  In  the  prospect 
of  our  immortal  life  it  must  be  wise,  and  every  way  worthy  of  us,  to  form  the 
purest,  most  holy,  and  most  just  conceptions  of  the  blessed  God.  But  how  can  this 
personal  immortality  be  assured  !  We  have  a  soul ;  it  implies  immortality.  The 
inequalities  of  the  present  state  of  man  imply  a  sphere  of  re-adjustment  We  desire 
immortality.  The  Bible  declares  it.  These  grounds  of  assurance  with  our 
individual  consciousness,  desire,  and  hope,  are  what  men  rest  upon  in  relation 
to  their  immortality.  It  cannot  be  mathematically,  philosophically,  or  logically 
demonstrated.  {R.  Ainslie.)  In  Thy  presence  ia  fulness  of  joy. — The  bliss  of 
the  Divive  presence : — Heaven  is  often  described  by  negatives,  but  here  we  have 

rsitive  statement  as  to  that  in  which  it  consists.  Therefore  consider  its  perfection. 
In  extent.  The  state  contemplated  will  be  after  the  resurrection,  as  it  was  for 
our  Lord  after  His  resurrection.  Hence  St.  Paul  says,  "Our  conversation  is  in 
heaven."  And  he  tells  us  also  of  the  "glorious  body,"  the  "spiritual  bodv"  which 
shall  be  ours  then  (1  Cor.  xv.  44).  And  the  mind  also  will  partake  in  this  glory, 
this  fulness  of  joy.  How  much  will  result  from  memory.  Also  from  survey  of  the 
present — the  heavenly  city,  the  glory  of  God,  the  Saviour.  And  the  future,  too, 
will  minister  to  this  joy.  And  the  affections  likewise,  profound  admiration, 
ardent  gratitude,  entire  confidence,  perfect  love.  II.  Its  degree.  This,  too, 
will  be  perfect.  There  will  be  difference  of  capacity,  and  so  of  degree,  which 
will  be  determined  mainly  by  character.  All  that  hinders  full  excellence  here 
will  be  absent  there.  III.  In  duration.  It  will  be  endless,  and  therefore 
perfect.  "These  are  pleasures  for  evermore."  Without  this  we  could  not  be 
satisfied.  "A  perpetuity  of  bliss  is  bliss."  Could  we  fear  an  end  to  it,  it 
would  wither.  Many  have  denied  eternal  punishment,  but  none  eternal  bliss. 
Remember  its  spirituality  and  purity,  and  anticipate  it  with  joy.  {J.  Kay.) 
God' s presence  manifested  in  heaven: — The  manifestation  of  God  to  man,  which  was 
begun  in  paradise,  is  to  be  continued  through  eternity.  It  has  been  maintained  by 
some  that  the  soul  of  man  ceases  to  exist  at  the  death  of  the  body,  and  that  there  is 
an  actual  hiatus  in  man's  being  from  the  moment  of  death  to  the  period  of  the 
resurrection.  Others,  while  admitting  the  continued  existence  of  the  soul,  divest  it 
of  all  consciousness,  and  suppose  it  to  pass  into  a  state  of  torpor,  until  awaked  on 
the  morning  of  the  resurrection.  In  the  dissolution  of  man  we  see  these  two 
distinct  substances,  body  and  soul,  separated  one  from  the  other,  and  each  consigned 
to  a  widely  different  destiny,  the  body  to  the  earth  from  which  it  was  taken,  and 
the  soul  to  a  continued  existence  in  the  spiritual  world  (Elccles.  xii.  7  ;  Matt.  x.  28). 
Here  it  is  evidently  taught,  such  is  the  vitality  of  the  soul,  that  no  power  can 
annihilate  it  but  the  omnipotence  of  that  Being  who  brought  it  into  existence  ;  and 
therefore  to  deny  its  immortality  is  to  contradict  the  plainest  testimony  of  God 


264  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  rvr. 

Himself.  Equally  opposed  to  the  authority  of  Holy  Scripture  is  the  theory  which 
teaches  that,  at  death,  the  soul  passes  into  a  state  of  unconsciousness  until  the 
resurrection  Our  Lord,  when  confuting  the  materialists  of  His  day,  who  cavilled  at 
His  doctrine,  asserted  the  actual  conscious  existence  of  the  Jewish  patriarchs,  though 
at  that  time  the  latest  of  them  had  been  dead  nearly  two  thousand  years.  When 
the  Saviour  was  about  to  expire  as  our  atoning  victim  He  said  to  the  thief,  who  was 
dying  by  His  side  as  a  penitent  malefactor,  "  Verily,  to-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me 
in  paradise."  When  Lazarus  died,  angels  carried  him  into  Abraham's  bosom  ;  and 
when  the  rich  man  died,  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments.  Now,  had 
the  souls  of  men  passed  at  death  into  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  the  condition  of 
Lazarus  and  of  the  rich  man  would  have  been  perfectly  alike  ;  but  here  their  state  is 
that  of  awful  contrast,  the  one  of  blessedness,  the  other  of  torment.  In  conformity 
with  these  representations  the  apostle  Paul  speaks  of  death  as  being  preferable  to 
life.  But  why  preferable  ?  Because,  aa  he  affirms,  to  die  was  gain.  Yet  to  pass 
into  a  state  of  unconsciousness  would  be  to  suffer  loss — the  loss  of  all  the  enjoyments 
and  privileges  of  life  {Phil.  i.  21-23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  6-8).  While  these  passages 
decide  the  question  as  to  the  continued  existence  and  consciousness  of  the  soul,  they 
also  unfold  the  grand  cause  of  its  blessedness — it  is  in  the  soul's  being  with  Christ. 
The  promise  to  the  dying  thief  was,  not  only  that  he  should  be  in  paradise,  but 
■^oith  Christ  in  paradise.  The  blessedness  anticipated  by  St.  Paul  consisted  in  his 
being  with  Christ.  ' '  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again, 
and  receive  you  unto  Myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  Thus  these 
two  ideas — the  presence  and  manifestation  of  God  to  man — belong  to  the  dispensa- 
tion of  eternity  as  well  as  time,  and  constitute  the  blessedness  of  heaven  as  well  as 
of  earth.  The  soul  was  made  for  God,  and  can  find  neither  happiness  nor  satisfac- 
tion without  Him.  This  is  a  law  of  our  being,  and  is  as  applicable  to  the  future  as 
it  is  to  the  present  life.  Gravitation  is  not  a  more  universal  and  imperative  law  in 
the  physical  universe  than  is  this  law  of  dependence  on  God  in  the  spiritual  world. 
Let  us  notice  some  of  the  conditions  which  render  heaven  an  advanced  dispensation 
for  the  realisation  of  the  presence  and  manifestation  of  God  to  the  human  soul.  1.  In 
heaven  there  will  be  perfect  freedom  from  all  the  evils,  sufferings,  and  dangers  of  the 
present  state  of  being.  Ever  since  man  fell  from  God  he  has  been  subject  to  the 
evils  and  sorrows  of  a  fallen  state  ;  and  though  religion  greatly  mitigates  the  suffer- 
ings of  humanity,  and  supports  us  under  them,  yet  ih,  highest  attainments  cannot 
remove  them.  The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  are  antagonistic  to  our  spiritual 
welfare,  and  the  Christian  life  is  an  athletic  struggle — a  warfare  against  active  foes 
and  evil  influences,  which  beset  us  at  every  step.  We  inherit  diseases,  afflictions, 
and  death.  Though  such  a  state  of  things  may  suit  a  period  of  discipline  and  pro- 
bation, it  is  not  compatible  with  a  state  of  absolute  safety  and  perfect  enjoyment. 
The  battlefield  may  develop  the  courage  and  valour  of  the  warrior,  but  the  tranquil 
bower  suits  the  contemplation  of  the  philosopher.  The  storms  of  winter  may  cause 
to  strike  deeper  the  roots  of  the  tree,  but  the  calm  sunshine  of  summer  is  required 
to  develop  its  foliage  and  ripen  its  fruit.  The  struggles  and  tears  of  a  probationary 
life  may  give  nerve  and  athletic  vigour  to  the  Christian,  but  the  calm  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  is  the  state  better  suited  to  the  contemplation  of  tb« 
Divine  perfections  and  the  deep  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence.  2.  In  heaven 
the  powers  of  the  soul  will  be  quickened  and  ite  capacities  enlarged.  In  the  present 
state  the  soul,  being  united  to  a  material  fabric,  performs  many  of  ite  acta  through 
a  material  organisation.  A  large  proportion  of  ite  ideas  are  received  through  the 
medium  of  the  senses.  There  is,  however,  as  clear  a  distinction  between  the 
faculties  of  the  soul  and  the  material  organs  through  which  it  acts,  as  there  is 
between  the  soul  iteelf  and  the  fabric  in  which  it  resides.  It  is  the  soul  that  sees 
and  hears,  and  the  eye  is  merely  the  optical  instrument  through  which  it  sees  ;  and 
the  ear  is  but  the  acoustic  apparatus  by  which  it  perceives  the  various  sounds,  harsh 
or  harmonious,  which  are  made  by  the  vibrations  of  the  atmosphere.  The  same 
principle  applies  to  the  other  material  organs,  through  which  the  soul  receives 
impressions  and  performs  its  various  operations.  Besides,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  the  Holy  Sjnrit  has  the  power  of  communicating,  and  the  soul  the  capability  of 
receiving,  ideas  and  impressions  by  direct  and  immediate  contact,  without  the  inter- 
position of  the  bodily  senses.  Hence  the  inspiration  of  prophets,  and  the  Divine 
illumination  and  spiritual  emotions  of  believers.  The  mind  can  abstract,  compound, 
reason,  imagine,  cherish  principles,  and  experience  emotions  of  deepest  joy  or 
anguish,  by  ite  own  internal  operations,  even  when  some  of  the  organs  of  sense  are 
destroyed.     What  visions  of  beauty  and  grandeur  did  the  mind  of  Milton  create 


MALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  265 

after  his  eyeballs  had  ceased  to  admit  a  ray  of  material  light !  But  in  this  case  the 
mind  is  already  furnished,  all  its  faculties  stimulated  by  exercise,  refined  and 
expanded  by  knowledge,  and  its  emotions  excited  by  experience.  Let  us  then 
suppose  such  a  mind,  during  the  life  of  the  body,  bereft  not  only  of  one,  two,  or 
three,  but  of  all  the  five  senses  :  what  then  wotild  be  its  state  1  True,  it  would  be 
cut  ofif  from  all  further  communication  with  the  external  world  ;  but  it  would  still 
have  a  world  within  itself — a  world  of  thought,  reasoning,  and  imagination,  equally 
capacious,  and  of  emotion  far  more  intense  than  it  had  before.  If  such,  in  truth, 
would  be  the  state  of  a  soul  deprived  of  the  organs  of  sense,  but  still  linked  to  the 
living  material  fabric,  what  should  hinder  it  from  possessing  and  exercising  the  same 
powers  and  realising  the  same  state  when  the  body  ceases  to  breathe  ?  Death  is 
nothing  more  than  the  dissolution  of  the  material  fabric — the  understanding,  the 
memory,  the  judgment,  the  conscience,  the  powers  of  volition  and  emotion  are  still 
inherent,  as  essential  properties  of  its  nature,  and  must  remain  with  it  for  ever  ;  but 
vastly  increased  in  their  activity  and  intensity,  in  consequence  of  their  separation 
from  the  earthly  tabernacle  in  which  they  had  resided.  AH  the  representations  of 
Holy  Scripture  sustain  these  views  of  the  soul  in  the  separate  state.  The  soul  of  the 
rich  man  in  hell  was  in  a  state  of  vivid  consciousness,  having  a  clear  knowledge  of 
the  present,  with  a  full  recollection  of  the  past,  a  keen  susceptibility  of  suffering. 
That  the  faculties  of  the  soul  in  the  separate  state  are  more  vigorous  and  capacious, 
and  therefore  better  adapted  for  receiving  the  manifestation  of  God,  than  while  in 
this  mortal  body,  may  be  further  argued  on  various  grounds.  The  body  has  many 
wants  of  its  own  which,  though  inferior,  are  imperative  in  their  demands,  and  retard 
the  development  of  mind.  But  on  the  soul's  dismissal  from  the  body  these  wants 
all  cease,  together  with  all  the  cares  and  toils  they  occasioned,  leaving  the  soul 
unbroken  leisure  for  contemplations  and  pursuits  congenial  to  its  nature,  and  exer- 
cises adapted  to  accelerate  ite  highest  attainments  in  knowledge,  holiness,  and  bliss. 
While  united  to  the  body  in  its  present  state,  the  soul  is  located  to  a  confined  and 
narrow  spot  of  Jehovah's  dominions,  and  cannot  explore  those  displays  of  the  Divine 
perfections  which  are  presented  in  other  and  brighter  regions  of  the  universe.  Nor 
IS  a  world  abounding  with  error  the  most  fitted  for  the  peiception  of  truth  ;  nor  a 
world  of  sin  the  best  adapted  to  the  growth  of  moral  excellence.  Even  now,  the 
mind  borrows  from  art  means  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  its  own  material  organs  : 
the  microscope  to  magnify  the  diminutive,  the  telescope  to  discover  the  remote,  and 
the  acoustic  tube  to  convey  distant  sounds,  because  the  eye  and  the  ear  are  not  fully 
adequate  to  the  mind's  investigations.  Hence  our  best  perceptions  are  but  limited 
»nd  obscure.  The  narrow  grating  of  a  dungeon  admits  a  portion  of  the  light  of 
heaven,  but  let  the  incarcerated  captive  emerge  from  his  cell  and  he  beholds  the 
whole  hemisphere  beaming  with  light,  and  an  extended  prospect  filled  with  ten 
thousand  beauties  unknown  before.  So  may  the  soul  on  passing  from  the  body, 
■which  now  limits  its  operations.  Besides,  this  material  fabric  is  too  frail  for  the  full 
exertion  of  mental  power.  Intense  thinking  softens  the  brain,  and  intense  feeling, 
whether  joyous  or  painful,  soon  exhausts  the  nervous  energy.  Progiess  is  the  law  of 
mind,  but  decay  the  law  of  matter  ;  and,  within  a  very  few  years,  the  body  becomes 
incapacitated  as  the  medium  for  mental  attainment  and  progress.  So  that  were  not 
death  to  relieve  the  soul  from  the  restraints  of  physical  weakness  and  the  decay  of 
age,  the  development  of  mind  must  be  arrested  and  its  noble  powers  be  doomed  to 
stop  in  their  progress,  just  at  a  point  when  most  fitted  to  make  the  greatest  advance- 
ment and  to  realise  the  highest  joys.  But  the  soul,  on  emerging  from  the  body, 
escapes  from  these  restraints  ;  it  breaks  its  fetters  and  enters  upon  a  state  in  which 
it  may  exert  its  vigorous  powers  unhindered  by  weakness,  imarrested  by  decay,  and 
expand  its  capacities  without  limit  and  without  end.  In  such  a  state  how  adapted 
the  soul  to  drink  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  to  receive  the  disclosures  of  Jehovah's 
perfections,  to  enjoy  the  manifestations  of  His  presence,  and  to  sustain  an  exceeding 
great  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  The.  sublime  mysteries  of  creation,  providence, 
and  redemption,  continually  unfolding  new  glories,  will  astonish  and  delight  the 
mind  for  ever.  .3.  As  another  facility  for  the  manifestation  of  God,  the  soul  shall  be 
admitted  into  His  immediate  presence.  Heaven  is  a  place  as  well  as  a  state  of  being. 
It  is  said  that  spirit  has  no  relation  to  place,  but  we  confess  to  the  ^^llgar  conception 
that  if  a  spirit  exist  it  must  be  either  everywhere  or  somewhere  ;  that  unless  it  be 
ubiquitous  it  must  have  a  limited  jiresence.  And,  as  in  the  present  life,  the  human 
spirit  is  located  in  the  human  body,  so  in  eternity  it  must  have  a  location.  As 
there  was  a  locality  for  the  Shekinah,  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence,  so 
there  is  a  sacred  place,  a  distinct  region,  where  the  personal  presence  of  Jehovah  is 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

manifested  and  displayed.  To  determine  the  particular  locality  where  heaven  is,  no 
man  is  able.  As  to  the  description  of  this  glorious  place,  language  fails  to  set  forth 
its  beauty.  In  every  inspired  description  of  heaven  the  Shekinah,  or  the  visible 
presence  of  God,  is  made  prominent.  The  earthly  temple,  while  forming  a  shrine 
for  the  Shekinah,  was  a  mode  of  its  concealment  from  the  ordinary  view  of  the 
people.  The  glory  was  curtained  off  and  shut  in,  so  that  the  radiant  symbol  was 
enthroned  in  solitary  majesty  in  the  most  holy  place.  But  in  the  New  Jerusalem 
no  temple  is  seen,  for  no  external  shade  is  reqiured  ;  and  in  the  brightness  of  a  better 
dispensation,  concealment  and  restriction  have  disappeared.  Here,  then,  is  the  first 
consummation  of  the  believer's  aspirations  and  hopes.  At  last  the  wilderness  is  left, 
and  the  promised  paradise  is  gained  ;  the  weary  pilgrim  has  arrived  at  home  ;  the 
absent  son  and  heir  has  entered  his  Father's  house.  The  journey  of  faith  ends  in 
realising  vision  and  actual  possession.  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee  ?  And 
there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  Thee. "  But  love  longs  for  the  sight 
and  presence  of  its  object.  But  while  the  promises,  which  speak  of  our  seeing  God, 
imply  an  optical  vision  of  the  Deity,  they  imply  also  a  more  enlarged,  comprehen- 
sive, and  profound  knowledge  of  His  character  and  perfections  ;  for  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Deity,  in  order  to  our  enjoyment  of  Him,  is  the  end  of  aU  Hia 
dispensations,  and  applies  to  heaven  as  well  as  earth.  Hitherto  we  have  seen  a 
gradual  brightening  of  this  manifestation,  as  one  economy  has  succeeded  another ; 
and  the  manifestation  in  heaven  shall  be  brighter  than  all  its  predecessors.  More- 
over, as  the  perfection  of  our  vision  always  depends  upon  the  perfection  of  the  visual 
organ,  and  its  proper  adjustment  to  the  object  beheld,  as  well  as  upon  the  degree  of 
lignt  thrown  ujwn  it,  so  does  the  perfection  of  the  soul's  knowledge  of  God  depend 
upon  its  moral  state,  as  well  as  upon  the  increased  light  which  will  beam  upon  it  in 
eternity.  So  the  untutored  savage  and  the  sensualist  perceive  but  little,  though 
they  see  much,  for  a  brutish  man  knoweth  not  these  things.  Hence  there  is  an 
amazing  difference  between  men's  power  of  perception  and  appreciation,  arising  from 
the  difference  in  their  mental  state,  their  eaucation  and  liabits  of  life  ;  and  often  as 
great  a  difference  between  the  same  men  in  different  [leriods  of  their  own  history  ! 
But  the  pure  in  heart  see  God.  Their  eye  is  open  to  perceive  Him  ;  their  affections 
are  sanctified  to  appreciate  Him,  and  their  aspirations  are  spiritual  to  enjoy  the  Holy 
One  ;  and  thus  men  see  God  just  in  proportion  to  their  personal  purity  and  their 
resemblance  to  Him.  Here,  then,  we  perceive  important  reasons  which  account  for 
a  deeper,  a  richer,  a  sublimer  manifestation  of  God  to  the  soul  in  heaven.  All  the 
conditions  of  the  mind  will  favour  this  development.  While  absent  from  a  world  of 
illusion,  while  free  from  the  restraints  of  a  weak  and  decaying  body,  it  is  free  from 
every  vestige  of  sin  ;  while  dwelling  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  presence,  it  is  capaci- 
tated by  a  state  of  perfect  holiness  for  seeing  and  appreciating  the  beauty  of  the 
Lord.  There  sin  shall  no  more  avert  the  eye  from  God,  nor  blur  its  perception  of 
His  glory.  4.  In  heaven  the  disposition  for  communion  will  be  perfectly  developed, 
affording  the  highest  and  most  perfect  gi-atification  of  that  social  principle  which  God 
has  implanted  in  our  nature.  Man  was  formed  for  society.  Yet  society,  as  it  exists  in 
this  world,  is  confessedly  imperfect.  Sin  has  infused  its  poison  into  this,  as  well  as  into 
every  other  cup  of  earthly  happiness.  There  is  a  want  of  confidence,  of  disinterested 
affection,  of  eomitancy  and  fidelity.  But  in  heaven  this  defect  shall  be  supplied.  For 
there  angels  and  archangels,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect — all  beings  of 
unspotted  holiness  and  full  of  love — will  be  our  companions  and  our  friends.  "la 
this  world  the  possession  of  a  few  friends,  nay,  even  of  one  friend,  is  justly  deemed 
an  invaluable  treasure,  but  what  will  be  our  blessedness  in  that  world  where  all  are 
our  friends,  and  where  the  soul,  like  the  region  where  it  dwells,  will  be  capacious 
enough  to  admit  them  all  ? "  No  rival  interests,  no  conflicting  aims,  no  jarring 
passions,  no  malign  or  discordant  tempers  disturb  the  society  of  heaven.  This  holy 
fellowship  of  heaven  will  contribute,  in  no  small  degree,  to  the  grand  purpose  of  a 
further  manifestation  of  God  to  His  intelligent  creatures.  In  such  a  state  of  being, 
and  favoured  with  such  society,  how  rapidly  must  the  soul  grow  in  the  knowledge 
of  God  !  What  are  earthly  teachers,  however  erudite,  eloquent,  and  profound,  com- 
pared with  our  instructors  in  heaven  f  What  are  our  learned  libraries  here 
compared  with  the  accumulated  treasures  of  heavenly  wisdom  and  knowledge  there  ? 
What,  indeed,  are  our  present  revelations,  conveyed  as  they  are  through  the 
imperfect  medium  of  human  speech,  and  received  by  minds  so  auU  in  their  appre- 
hensions? 5.  In  heaven  there  shall  also  be  the  most  intimate,  delightful,  and 
ennobling  commonion  with  God.  The  disposition  for  communion  dwells  in  the 
Deity  Himself    and  ere  a  solitary  creature  existed  it  was  reciprocally  exercised 


MALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  267 

between  the  persons  of  the  Godhead — the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit.  Man  being 
fonned  in  God's  image  and  likeness,  this  disposition  for  communion  was  implanted 
in  his  nature  ;  and  while  it  gives  man  delight  in  the  society  of  his  fellow-man,  and 
makes  the  communication  of  thought  and  affection  a  source  of  happiness,  it  finds  its 
highest  gratification  and  development  in  fellowship  with  God.  There  the  soul, 
dwelling  in  the  immediate  presence  of  Deity,  and  disengaged  from  the  absorbing 
cares  and  distractions  of  a  secular  state  of  being,  will  realise  the  most  intimate  and 
uninterrupted  fellowship  with  God.  It  will  not,  indeed,  as  the  oriental  philosophy 
teaches,  be  absorbed  into  the  Deity,  and,  losing  its  personal  consciousness,  be 
swallowed  up  in  the  abyss  of  the  Godhead ;  but  with  its  identity  preserved,  as 
distinct  and  personal  as  it  is  in  this  inferior  state,  it  will  realise  a  union  with  God  so 
perfect  in  the  aspirations  of  its  desires,  in  the  intercommunion  of  its  thoughts  and 
affections,  that  it  will  live  in  God  and  God  in  it.  We  know  a  man  best,  not  by 
seeing  his  picture  or  reading  his  history,  but  by  personal  intercourse  and  communion. 
Thus  two  congenial  minds  penetrate  into  each  other's  thoughts,  and  reciprocate  each 
other's  dispositions  ;  they  see  as  they  are  seen,  and  know  as  they  are  known.  And 
thus  it  is  (let  us  reverently  speak  it)  that  the  soul  knows  the  great  and  eternal  God 
— not  merely  intellectually,  as  His  perfections  are  displayed  in  His  works  and  His 
character  unfolded  in  progressive  dispensations,  but  in  the  deep  personal  conscious- 
ness of  our  union  with  Deity.  In  this  manifestation  of  the  Deity  the  Holy  Spirit 
will  operate  in  heaven  as  He  does  on  earth,  but  with  an  augmented  power  propor- 
tioned to  the  sui)erior  state  and  capacity  of  disembodied  souls.  Searching,  as  He 
does,  the  deep  things  of  God,  He  will  reveal  them  to  the  blessed,  with  whom  He 
will  abide  for  ever,  6.  In  heaven  the  saints  will  be  engaged  in  the  most  ennobling 
employments.  7.  There  is  one  word  uttered  by  an  inspired  apostle  which  is  more 
pregnant  with  meaning  as  to  the  manifestation  of  God  to  the  soul  in  the  spiritual 
world,  and  of  the  eternal  happiness  flowing  from  it,  than  could  be  expressed  by  a 
thousand  volumes.  It  is  the  single  declaration  that  we  "are  heirs  of  God."  'The 
•postle  says  the  believer  is  an  heir— not  of  the  material  universe,  for  that  is  poor 
compared  with  the  treasure  named— not  of  heaven,  for  that  is  not  expressive  of  the 
opulence  intended  ;  but  he  is  an  heir  of  the  God  of  the  universe,  of  Him  whose 
presence  makes  heaven  what  it  is — an  heir  of  the  Deity  Himself.  As  the  mind  has 
no  limit  to  its  development,  nothing  but  the  infinite  can  suffice  for  it ;  and  there  is 
nothing  infinite  but  God.  Of  God  Himself,  then,  the  believer  is  now  an  heir;  in 
eternity  he  enters  into  his  possession  and  enjoyment,  with  free  and  full  access  to  the 
fountain  of  eternal  blessedness.  All  there  is  in  God  is  his  :  his  to  know,  so  far  as 
his  understanding  can  comprehend  ;  his  to  enjoy,  so  far  as  his  capacity  can  contain  ; 
and  eternity  itself  is  designed  to  yield  successive  developments  of  the  infinite  fulness 
there  is  in  God.  8.  The  state  of  the  soul  in  heaven  is  one  of  further  expectation. 
No  dispensation  which  God  has  given  to  man  in  the  present  world  has  been  a  com- 
plete and  ultimate  good,  but  an  instalment  of  some  greater  good  to  come.  Promise 
and  prophecy  have  ever  led  the  mind  onward  and  upward.  Indeed,  the  exercise  of 
faith  and  hope  has  been  a  prominent  and  indispensable  element  in  that  educational 
process  by  which  the  great  Teacher  has  trained  and  developed  the  human  mind  in 
every  age.  Hence  the  progressive  development  of  the  Gospel  plan,  from  the  first 
promise  of  a  Saviour  through  the  successive  stages  of  the  Divine  economy.  Hence, 
too,  the  transition  from  the  cloudy  symbol  of  the  temple  to  the  personal  manifesta- 
tion of  the  incarnate  God.  Thus  faith  and  hope  live  in  heaven  as  well  as  on  earth  ; 
and  though  much  once  promised  is  now  realised,  yet  from  the  elevation  to  which  he 
is  exalted  he  beholds  a  wider  horizon  of  truth  and  a  brighter  prospect  of  future 
blessedness ;  and  faith  in  the  promise  and  hope  of  the  expected  good  are  elements 
of  his  present  enjoyment.  Having  noticed  the  various  elements  of  the  happiness 
of  heaven,  we  ought  here  to  remark  that  the  essential  qualification  for  this 
blessedness  is  holiness.  We  cannot  conclude  without  adverting  to  the  awful 
contrast  presented  in  the  condition  of  the  wicked  after  death.  They  have 
the     same     nature,    but    a    different     doom.     ( W.   Cooke,    D.  D. )  Heavenly 

/elicily:—!.  The  natuke  of  heavenly  felicity.  It  is  living  in  the  presence 
of  God.  It  is  living  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  is,  in  a  state  of  exalta- 
tion, dignity,  and  glory.  It  is  a  state  of  joy.  It  is  a  state  of  pleasure.  II.  The 
PLENITUDE  OF  HEAVENLY  FELICITY.  Expressed  by  the  word  "  fulness."  Here  our 
enjoyments,  even  our  religious  enjoyments,  are  accompanied  by  fear,  mixed  with 
sorrow,  frequently  interrupted,  at  best  but  partial,  and  at  most  but  small.  There 
wiU  be  fulness,  what  is  pure,  without  any  alloy;  perjietual,  without  any  inter- 
ruption;  and  what  is  enough,   without  any  satiety.      III.   The  duration  of 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvi. 

HEAVENLY  FELICITY  WILL  BE  FOR  EVERMORE.  "Evermore  "  is  one  of  the  scriptural 
expressions  denoting  interminable  duration.  (Sketches  of  Four  Hu7idred  Servtmis.) 
The  power  of  a  presence : — Not  necessarily  a  spoken  word  or  an  act  performed — 
simply  a  presence.  There  is  a  Divine  presence,  distinct  from  any  word,  or  act,  or 
exercise  of  Divine  power  ;  the  charm  is  found  in  this,  that  God  is  there  ;  it  is  what 
He  is,  not  what  He  does  or  says,  which  His  presence  emphasises.  The  use  of  worship 
is  partly  this,  that  it  makes  His  invisible  presence  a  reality.  The  more  forms  and 
ceremonies  corrupt  the  simplicity  of  worship,  the  more  is  attention  diverted  front 
God  as  a  spirit.  Closet  prayer  is  especially  helpful,  if  not  hurried  and  sin>erficial. 
To  wait  until  a  proper  conception  of  God's  presence  impresses  the  soul  makes  prayer 
of  vastly  more  service  to  the  suppliant.  Every  human  being  has  a  presence.  It 
used  to  be  said  of  Lord  Chatham,  that  in  the  man  was  something  finer  than  in  any- 
thing he  said.  We  bear  with  us  a  power  that  for  good  or  evil  is  greater  than 
any  influence  exerted  by  our  deliberate  acts  or  words.  Swedenborg  called  it  an 
"atmosphere."  It  is  as  inseparable  from  the  person  as  the  fragrance  from  the 
flower.  It  is  the  unconscious  reflection  and  transmission  of  character.  It  sometimes 
contradicts  the  words  and  studied  externals ;  and  it  sometimes  coincides  with  and 
confirms  their  witness.  That  atmosphere  makes  the  home  and  the  Church  and 
.society  more  than  all  else.  Negatively,  a  good  "presence"  restrains,  and  posi- 
tively, it  inspires.  To  stay  in  F^nelon's  society,  an  infidel  said,  would  compel  him 
to  be  a  Christian.  "While  we  emphasise  the  deliberate  and  voluntary  part  of  our 
lives,  God  doubtless  sees  that  the  most  potent,  for  good  or  evil,  are  the  influences 
which  silently  and  unconsciously  go  out  from  us,  like  the  savour  of  salt  and  the 
radiance  of  light.  {Romiletic  Review.)  True  ha^ypiness : — I.  True  happiness 
IS  NOT  TO  BE  EXPECTED  HERB.  This  is  implied  in  the  text.  The  world  is  not  our 
home.  This  life  is  but  a  small  part  of  our  existence.  Take  a  general  survey  of  the 
condition  of  human  life.  How  weak  and  helpless  is  infancy !  Childhood  and  youth 
are  vanity  !  How  many  dangers  always  attend  us  !  Who  is  secure  ?  Changes  of 
condition  and  circumstances  are  many  times  as  sudden  as  they  are  sad.  God  is  good 
and  wise,  as  well  as  great.  His  benevolence  is  as  unbounded  as  His  power.  Joys 
are  mingled  with  our  sorrows.  Religion  does  not  undertake  to  preserve  its  frienda 
from  affliction,  but  forewarns  them  of  it,  that  they  may  be  prepared  to  meet  it.  And 
it  is  a  mighty  support  and  cordial  under  it.  Moreover,  we  have  never  found  in  the 
world  as  much  as  corresponds  with  all  the  capacities,  and  fully  answers  aU  the 
expectations,   and  gratifies  all  the  desires  of  our  souls.      II.  Where  shall  wb 

PARTAKE  OF  THAT  HAPPINESS  OF  WHICH  OUR  NATURE   RENDERS  US  CAPABLE  ?      We 

must  die  before  we  can  thus  live.  Death  v 'll  transmit  the  children  of  God  to 
the  glorious  presence  of  their  heavenly  Father,  and  there  shall  they  bo  blessed. 

III.    The  PROPERTIES  AND  EXCELLENCIKS  OF  OUR  FUTURE    BLESSEDNESS.       1.  As   tO 

the  degree — perfection.  Nothing  is  wanting  to  render  f  he  joy  complete.  2.  As  to 
the  duration — perpetuity.  The  joys  are  for  evermore.  God  is  the  fountain ;  and 
pleasures  flow  at  His  right  hand  in  an  endless  stream.  Eeflections.  (1)  Give  not  up 
your  prospects  and  hopes  of  heavenly  pleasures,  perfect  and  perpetual  as  they  are, 
for  the  sake  of  any  worldly  profits  or  sinful  pleasures.  (2)  To  be  without  God's 
gracious  presence  with  us  upon  earth  is  very  grievous  ;  and  with  that  we  ought  to 
give  no  place  to  fear  and  dejection,  fear  of  evils  that  may  happen  to  us,  or  dejection 
under  such  as  have  already  overtaken  us.  {E.  Sandercock,  D.D.)  The  hajypiness 
of  the  saints: — Joy  is  the  soul's  rest  and  satisfaction  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  suitable 
good.  1.  The  character  of  those  who  shall  have  fulness  of  joy.  Such  as  repent  of 
their  sins  ;  believe  in  Christ,  are  upright  in  their  profession,  and  follow  the  example 
of  Christ.  2.  Wherein  this  blessedness  consists.  The  presence  of  God  is  the  pre- 
sence of  His  glory ;  the  presence  of  His  face,  without  a  veil ;  His  immediate 
presence,  without  obscuring  mediums  ;  His  countenancing  j)resence,  as  a  pleased 
friend  and  father  ;  His  fixed  and  abiding  presence,  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  Him  ; 
His  influxive  and  efficacious  presence,  a  glimpse  of  which  made  Moses'  face  to  shine. 
Their  happiness  is  also  occasioned  by  those  joys  and  pleasures  which  are  at  God's 
right  hand.  The  joy  and  pleasures  of  the  heavenly  world  are  spiritual  and  heavenly, 
not  carnal  and  earthly.  Pure  without  mixture.  A  multitude  without  number. 
Full  without  any  want.  Constant,  without  diminution  or  interruption.  Perpetual. 
Improvement :  1.  Hence  see  the  folly  and  madness  of  those  who  seek  their  portion  in 
this  life.  2.  Let  such  glorious  views  and  expectations  comfort  the  heirs  of  glory  in 
the  midst  of  all  their  tribulations.  3.  Let  it  excite  all  such  to  diligence  and  activity 
in  the  ways  of  God.  {T.  ffamiam.)  The  emotioTis  of  a  sahit  just  arrived  in 
Juaven : — Fulness  of  joy  is  a  most  comprehensive  expression.      It  implies  the  per- 


PSALM  XVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  269 

fection  of  enjoyment  in  all  the  faculties  of  being.  That  joy  which  is  destined  to 
ultimate  extinguishment  cannot  be  said  to  be  perfect  joy.  The  expression  ' '  fulness 
of  joy  "  cannot  have  relation  to  this  world.  It  must  stand  related  to  some  other  and 
higher  sphere.  Hearen  is  the  goal  of  the  Christian's  race.  1.  The  glorified  Chris- 
tian will  feel  that  he  has  been  the  subject  of  a  change  which  affects  everything  con- 
nected with  him  save  his  identity.  One  source  of  singular  emotions  is  the  absence  of 
the  body,  the  former  inlet  of  physical  pain,  and  of  general  suffering.  2.  Another 
source  of  new  and  joyful  emotions  springs  from  the  unencumbered  action  of  the 
spirit,  and  its  unconstrained  inspiration  in  the  air  of  heaven.  3.  Another  source  of 
happiness  is  the  fact  that  the  believer  has  now  entered  into  more  exalted  society  than 
he  enjoyed  on  earth.  4.  The  friendships  of  heaven  will  bo  of  a  higher  order  than 
those  of  earth.  5.  Another  element  will  be  the  clear  light  which  will  then  be  shed 
upon  all  God's  dealings  with  the  believer  while  he  was  upon  earth.  6.  That  which 
will  give  fulness  of  joy  to  the  glorified  believer  will  be  the  unutterable  privilege  of 
standing  in  the  presence  of  his  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  S.  Gfardner.)  The 
jpresence  of  Ood: — I.  What  wb  are  to  understand  by  the  presence  of  God 
HERE.  God  is  present  everywhere  by  His  infinite  knowledge  and  almighty  energy. 
He  fills  universal  nature.  But  the  Psalmist  speaks  of  a  more  gracious  presence,  tho6a 
peculiar  manifestations  of  Himself  with  which  He  delights  His  believing  and 
obedient  people,  and  which  He  affords  them  through  His  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  only  in  Jesus  Christ  that  we,  sinful  creatures,  can  see  or  think  of  a  holy 
and  just  God  with  any  comfort.  II.  How  does  it  appear  that  in  this  pre- 
sence there  is  fulness  of  JOYf  Consider  this  presence  as  it  is  known  in — 
1.  This  world.  Here  the  enjoyment  of  it  first  begins.  To  the  good  man  the  Divine 
presence  gives  a  peculiar  and  most  lively  relish  to  every  enjoyment  here.  Tha 
creatures  around  us,  the  beauties  of  nature  and  art,  the  social  connections  in  life,  tha 
Divine  Word,  and  all  means  of  grace,  arc  all  more  desirable  and  delightful  as  tokens 
of  the  Divine  presence  are  found  in  them.  We  are  all  exposed  to  afifliction,  trials, 
perils  and  death,  and  our  consolation  in  all  oomes  from  the  presence  of  God.  2,  Tha 
world  to  come.  There  our  joy  will  be  full  indeed,  because — (1)  It  will  be  absolutely 
pure  and  unmixed.  It  will  be  all  joy,  without  any  alloy  of  sorrow  ;  without  even 
the  fear  of  it.  (2)  It  answers  to  every  want  and  desire  of  our  nature.  It  includes 
every  possible  delight,  and  will  leave  no  desire  unsatisfied.  (3)  It  will  be  full  in 
point  of  duration.  It  will  fill  even  the  endless  ages  of  eternity  itself.  (4)  It  is  all 
derived  from,  and  supported  by,  the  fulness  of  Christ.  Improvement :  1.  How 
mean  the  sentiments  and  pursuits  of  the  bulk  of  mankind  appear  in  view  of  this 
truth.  2.  There  must  be  some  very  great  change  wrought  in  us,  before  we  can  so 
enjoy  the  Divine  presence  as  to  find  our  happiness  there.  3.  How  invaluable  a 
blessing  the  Gospel  is.  {Daniel  Turner.)  The  presence  of  God,  as  it  is  the  heaven 
and  happiness  of  the  saints : — The  presence  of  God  maketh  heaven,  and  the  perfect 
happiness  to  be  enjoyed  there.     I.  The  characters  of  those  who   shall   bx 

BLESSED    BY   BEING   IN    THK    PRESENCE   OF   GOD   FOR   EVER.       1.  ThoSe   who    belieVC 

npon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  a  Divine,  practical,  heart- purifying,  and  life- 
sanctifying  faith.  2.  You  who  are  upright  in  a  good  profession.  3.  You  who  are 
Christ's  honest  servants.  II.  What  presence  of  God  makes  heaven  unto  the 
SAINTS.  The  presence  of  His  essence  is  as  really  on  earth  as  in  heaven.  1.  The  pre- 
sence of  God  that  makes  happy  in  heaven  is  the  presence  of  His  glory.  2.  It  is  tha 
presence  of  His  face  ;  in  the  glory  of  the  Mediator.  3.  His  immediate  presence,  mani- 
fested no  longer  through  obscuring  mediums.  4.  His  countenancing  presence.  5.  His 
fixed  and  abiding  presence.  6.  His  eflBcacious  and  influiive  presence.  [James Robe, 
M.A.)  "  Fulness  of  joy"  to  come  : — There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  their  primary 

application  these  words  bear  reference  to  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  for  of  Him  only  could  it  m 
said,  "Thou  wilt  not  suffer  Thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption."  But  while  we  thus 
believe  that  the  Psalmist  is  writing  chiefly  about  Jesus,  we  at  the  same  time  feel 
that,  He  being  the  Head  of  the  body,  the  Church,  these  verses  may  for  the  most  part 
be  applied  to  all  those  who  are  made  living  members  of  His  body  by  the  mighty 
operation  of  the  Lord  the  Spirit.  The  text  speaks  of  a  "  fulness  of  joy,"  and  tells 
US  where  it  is  to  ba  had.  Jesus  always  intended  His  people  to  be  happy.  One  of 
His  sweetest  discourses  closes  with  tha  words,  "these  things  have  I  spoken  onto 
you,  that  My  joy  might  remain  in  you  and  your  joy  might  be  full.  But  tha 
believer  has  to  confess,  notwithstanding  all  the  blessed  promises  of  God's  Word, 
that  his  joy  is  not  full.  He  has  real  joy,  spiritual  joy,  springing  from  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  love  of  God  ;  and  this  joy  is  a  great  help  to  him.  But  he  wants 
more.    Kow,  aaaoa^st  tha  things  which  interrupt  the  fulness  of  our  joy  on  earth  is— 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvr. 

I.  The  weakness  of  our  faith.  There  are  very  few,  even  of  the  most  advanced 
Christians,  who  do  not  mouni  over  weakness  of  faith.  Abraham  himself  failed  once 
and  again.  "We  walk  by  sight  overmuch,  or  at  least  desire  to.  II.  The  slowness 
OF  HIS  GROWTH  IN  GRACE.  He  longs  to  love  God  with  all  his  heart  and  soul  and 
strength  ;  to  be  holy  even  as  Christ  is  holy,  perfect  even  as  his  Father  in  heaven  is 
perfect.  But  when  he  sits  down  to  examine  himself,  and  weighs  his  thoughts,  his 
words,  his  deeds,  in  the  scales  of  the  sanctuary,  he  finds  so  much  of  worldly  con- 
formity, 80  much  cleaving  to  the  earth,  so  little  rising  in  thought  and  spirit  to 
heaven,  that  he  rises  from  the  examination  with  a  drooping  spirit  and  an  aching 
heart.  III.  The  power  and  ascendency  of  besetting  sin.  Whether  it  be 
pride,  or  covetousness,  or  envy,  ill-temper  or  uncharitableness,  whatever  it  be,  we 
have  all  of  us  some  sin  which  has  a  greater  power  over  us  than  others.  It  may  be 
we  fondly  deemed  we  had  wholly  subdued  it.  But  in  a  little  while  some 
trifling  temptation  is  laid  in  our  way  ;  it  looks  enticing,  fascinating,  profitable ; 
away  go  all  our  good  resolutions,  and  we  are  betiayed  into  the  commission 
of  that  very  sin  against  which  we  had  prayed  so  earnestly,  and  whose  power 
we  thought  we  had  broken.  IV,  Seasons  of  spiritual  desertion.  He 
has  been  walking  for  some  time  in  the  li^ht  of  God's  countenance,  rejoicing 
ever  to  look  up  and  see  a  Father's  smiling  face.  But  things  are  sadly 
altered  now.  Prayer  goes  up,  but  the  answer  comes  not.  DiflBculties  encompass 
him  on  every  side ;  his  enemies  are  many  and  mighty,  yea,  they  come  in  like 
a  flood ;  he  cries  aloud,  but  his  Father  makes  as  though  He  heard  not ; 
distress,  tribulation,  anguish  come  upon  him.  Again  he  well-nigh  sinks  in  despair. 
V.  Garb  concerning  provision  for  the  future.  You,  my  poorer  brethren,  will 
understand  what  we  mean.  Most,  if  not  all  of  you,  have  to  earn  your  bread  by  the 
sweat  of  your  brow.  We  meet  you  looking  careworn,  anxious,  depressed  ;  joy  has 
departed  from  you,  and  trial  wears  you  down.  Very  many,  we  fear  most  of  you, 
increase  these  cares  and  troubles  by  carrying  them  yourself  instead  of  casting  them 
on  Jesus  ;  and  you  lose  much  of  the  joy  that  religion  affords,  because  you  refuse  to 
see  a  Father's  hand  in  all  that  befalls  you.  But  to  you,  who  are  the  Lord's  own  dear 
people,  we  say,  yet  a  little  while  and  these  cares  shall  be  over,  VI.  The  loss  of 
THE  near  and  the  DEAR.  But  look  on  to  blessed  reunion  in  Christ.  {Henry  J. 
Berguer.)  At  Thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  eveimore. — Heaven: — 
Two  ideas  are  here  brought  together, — fulness  of  joy,  and  the  presence  of  God.  Joy 
is  the  realisation  of  God's  presence  in  heaven.  This  absolute  neces-sity  for  some  dis- 
tinct and  uniform  characteristic  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of  heaven  seems  to  be 
very  generally  forgotten.  The  general  idea  is  that  every  one  is  to  be  perfectly 
happy  there,  according  to  his  own  inclinations.  Heaven  is  not  a  place  in  which 
the  evil  disposed  could  find  pleasure  if  they  were  put  there.  Consider  what  is 
happiness.  On  what  it  depends.  Happiness  is  a  relative  term.  In  circum- 
stances precisely  the  same,  one  man  would  be  happy  and  another  miserable.  To 
produce  happiness,  circumstances  and  character — position  and  disposition — must 
agree,  and  if  they  do  not,  either  must  change  so  as  to  become  suited  to  the  other. 
If  a  man  who  is  now  wicked  would  be  happy  in  heaven,  his  character  must  become 
changed  to  suit  his  circumstances.  Our  Lord  Jesus  has  secured  for  all  who  believe 
on  Him  the  fiee  pardon  of  all  sins.  He  has  opened  to  all  a  heaven  which  they 
never  could  have  earned  by  their  own  acts.  But  He  has  never  abolished  the 
necessary  qualification  for  actual  admittance  there.  {J.  0.  Coghlan,  D.D.)  On 
the  presence  of  Ood  in  a  future  state : — In  the  early  age  of  the  world  those  explicit 
discoveries  of  a  state  of  immortality  which  we  enjoy  had  not  yet  been  given  to 
mankind.  But  in  every  age  God  has  permitted  such  hopes  to  afford  consolation 
and  support  to  those  who  served  Him.  I.  The  hope  of  the  Psalmist  in  his 
PRESENT  STATE.  ' '  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life. "  There  are  different  paths 
or  courses  of  conduct,  which  may  be  pursucKi  by  men  in  this  world  ;  a  path  which 
leads  to  life  and  happiness,  and  a  path  which  issues  in  death  and  destruction.  These 
opposite  lines  of  conduct  are  determined  by  the  choice  which  men  make  of  virtue 
or  of  vice ;  and  hence  men  are  divided  into  two  great  classes,  according  as  their 
inclinations  lead  them  to  good  or  to  evil.  The  path  of  life  is  often  a  rough  and 
difficult  path,  and  it  conducts  us  up  a  steep  ascent.  The  hope  that  good  men 
entertain  is,  that  this  path  of  life  shall  be  shown  them  by  God  ;  that,  when  their 
intentions  are  upright,  God  will  both  instruct  them  concerning  the  road  which 
leads  to  true  happiness,  and  will  assist  them  to  pursue  it  suoceesfully.  In  all 
revelation  there  is  no  doctrine  more  comfortable  than  this,  that  good  men  are 
pursuing  a  path  which  God  has  discovered  and  pointed  out  to  them.     Every  path 


PSALM  XVI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  271 

in  which  He  is  the  conductor  must  be  honourable,  must  be  safe,  must  bring  them 
in  the  end  to  felicity.  The  Divine  Being  will  never  desert  those  who  are  endeavour- 
ing to  follow  out  the  path  which  He  has  shown  them.  With  Him  there  is  no  oblique 
purpose  to  turn  Him  aside  from  favouring  the  cause  of  goodness.  No  promise  that 
He  has  made  shall  be  allowed  to  fail.  II.  The  termination  of  these  hoi'Es  in 
A  FUTURE  STATE.  All  happincss  assuredly  dwells  with  God.  The  "fountain  of 
life  "  is  justly  said  to  be  with  Him.  Whatever  gladdens  the  hearts  of  men  or  angels 
with  any  real  and  satisfactory  joy  comes  from  heaven.  Every  a2)proach  to  God  must 
be  an  approach  to  felicity.  The  enjoyment  of  His  immediate  presence  must  be  the 
consummation  of  felicity.  The  whole  of  what  is  implied  in  arriving  at  the  presence 
of  the  Divinity  we  cannot  expect  to  comprehend.  Surrounded  now  with  obscurity, 
no  hope  more  transporting  can  be  opened  to  a  good  man  than  that  a  period  is  to 
come  when  he  shall  be  allowed  to  draw  nearer  to  the  Author  of  his  existence,  and 
to  enjoy  the  sense  of  His  presence.  In  order  to  convey  some  idea  of  that  future 
bliss,  by  such  an  image  as  we  can  now  employ,  let  the  image  be  taken  from  the 
most  glorious  representative  of  the  Supreme  Being,  the  sun  in  the  heavens.  There 
are  two  sublime  and  expressive  views  of  the  Divine  Essence  given  us  in  Scripture, 
on  which  it  may  be  edifying  that  our  thoughts  should  rest  for  a  little — (1)  God  is 
Light.  The  revelation  of  His  presence  infers  a  complete  diffusion  of  light  and 
knowledge  among  all  who  partake  of  that  presence.  This  forma  a  primary  in- 
gredient of  happiness.  Ignorance,  or  the  want  of  light,  is  the  source  of  all  our 
present  misconduct,  and  of  all  our  misfortunes.  The  light  of  God's  presence  not 
only  banishes  the  miseries  which  were  the  effects  of  former  darkness,  but  also  con- 
fers the  most  exquisite  enjoyment.  (2)  God  is  Love.  His  presence  must,  of  course, 
diffuse  love.  Heaven  implies  a  society,  and  the  felicity  of  that  society  is  constituted 
by  the  perfection  of  love  and  goodness  flowing  from  the  presence  of  the  God  of  love. 
Hence  follows  the  entu-e  purification  of  human  nature  from  all  those  malevolent 
passions  which  have  so  long  rendered  our  abode  on  earth  the  abode  of  misery. 
Considering  God  under  these  two  illustrious  characters,  which  are  given  of  Him  in 
Scripture  as  Light  and  as  Love,  it  follows  that  in  His  presence  there  must  be  fulness 
of  joy.  Remember  that,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  presence  of  God,  the  path  of  life 
must  previously  be  shown  to  us  by  Him,  and  in  this  path  we  must  persevere  to  the 
end.  These  two  things  cannot  be  disjoined,  a  virtuous  life  and  a  happy  eternity. 
{Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  Heaven: — I.  Our  ikuest  notions  of  heaven  are  de- 
rived FROM  considerations  RATHER  OF  WHAT  IT  IS  NOT  THAN  OF  WHAT  IT  IS. 
How  glorious  a  liberty  it  will  be  to  attain  "the  redemption  of  our  body."  Think 
of  the  toil  it  has  to  undergo,  the  distempers  and  pains  to  which  it  is  subject.  But 
then,  we  shall  be  out  of  the  reach  of  these.  There  will  be  no  sickness,  no  withering 
old  age  ;  no  poor  shall  cry  for  bread,  none  shall  thirst  or  hunger  any  more.  And 
there  will  "be  no  more  death."  No,  not  of  the  irrational  creation  ;  the  sheep  and 
cattle  will  be  slaughtered  no  more.  And  there  will  be  no  more  sin.  Then  the 
nations  learn  war  no  more.  Sin  is  the  root  of  all  our  miseries.  But  days  of 
innocence  that  we  cannot  know  here  will  be  realised  there.  Such  are  some  of  its 
negative  blessings.  II.  Let  us  consider  some  of  its  positive  blessings.  The 
happiness  of  heaven  is  occasionally  described  under  the  most  captivating  forms  of 
rural  pleasure.  We  read  of  its  green  pastures,  its  clear  fountains,  its  rivers  of 
pleasures.  When  I  sometimes  walk  in  a  garden,  amidst  fruits  and  flowers,  and 
birds  that  sing  among  the  branches,  I  feel  relieved  in  turning  to  those  promises 
which  hold  out  to  us,  as  it  were,  a  renewal  and  restoration  of  these  calm  delights, 
in  an  unchangeable  world,  in  the  paradise  of  God.  And  sometimes  the  state  of 
blessedness  is  likened  to  a  city  ;  and  its  brilliancy  and  magnificence  are  described. 
See  the  description,  in  the  Revelation,  of  the  holy  city,  the  new  Jerusalem.  Such 
is  the  residence  which  God  has  prepared  for  His  people.  There  they  will  pass,  not 
a  solitary  existence,  but  will  form  a  united  and  happy  society  together.  All  jarring 
interests,  all  selfish  and  discordant  passions  unknown.  And  then  we  shall  meet 
the  holy  and  illustrious  dead  :  all  who  have  walked  with  God  on  earth,  or  sufi"ered 
for  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  To  see  there,  perhaps,  those  who  led  us  to  Christ,  and 
our  parents  who  watched  and  wept  and  prayed  over  our  souls,  and  the  children 
who  followed  their  good  example.  Above  all,  we  shall  meet  the  Lord  Jesus  there. 
He  has  promised  this  to  all  His  faithful  ones.  The  evil  hearts  of  men  are  made 
known  by  their  desertion  of  God,  but  so  are  also  all  faithful  souls  which  confess 
Him  when  all  the  world  is  against  Him.  How  will  His  faithful  flock  hail  their 
triumphant  Shepherd,  when  He  appears  in  glory  !  And  then,  there  is  the  beatific 
vision  of  God — Himself  unveiled  without  a  cloud.     But  we  have  not  now  faculties 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvri. 

for  so  high  a  theme.  And  these  joys  are  for  all  who  will  accept  Christ.  We  could 
never  reach  them  by  ourselves.  Receive  the  Gospel  in  its  fulness  and  it  will  prepare 
you  for  them.  We,  then,  pray  you,  "Be  reconciled  to  God."  {H.  Woodward, 
A.M.)  The  future  happiness  of  God's  people  set  before  the  unconverted: — God 
appeals  to  us  by  various  motives.  Amongst  others  this,  which  is  addressed  to  our 
natural  desire  for  happiness, — the  blessedness  of  the  children  of  God  in  another 
world.  In  the  hope  that  some  may  be  constrained  thereby  to  seek  Christ,  we  would 
consider  the  words  before  us.  Now  were  the  promises  of  our  text  to  be  realised, 
then,  what  in  a  few  years  would  be  our  happiness  ?  I.  It  would  be  complete. 
"Fulness  of  joy"  is  there.  No  more  evil.  Especially  no  more  sin.  Therein 
"dwelleth  righteousness."  It  may  be  a  far  more  glorious  earth  than  ours,  but  this 
is  not  the  substance  of  our  hope.  That  hope  id  for  freedom  from  sin  ;  no  more 
tormenting  passions,  no  more  envy,  or  anger,  or  tyrannical  appetites.  And  there 
will  be  no  more  sight  of  evil  in  others.  And  no  more  temptations  of  Satan.  And 
no  more  exposure  to  the  wrath  of  God,  for  there  shall  be  "no  more  curse."  And 
death  and  sickness  and  pain  shall  be  no  more.  Nor  toil,  nor  weariness,  nor  want, 
for  the  Lord  is  our  Shepherd  and  we  shall  not  want.  And  then  we  shall  see  His 
glory  and  His  bliss.  And  all  this  will  make  us  like  Him.  Our  body  shall  be 
changed  ' '  like  unto  His  glorious  body. "  That  was  revealed,  in  fact,  at  the  Trans- 
figuration. And  what  is  better,  we  shall  be  like  Him  in  mind  as  well  as  form. 
When  we  see  His  wisdom,  goodness,  holiness,  truth  and  love,  then  shall  we  contract 
something  of  the  same  glory.  And  we  shall  share  in  His  glorious  bliss.  It  will  be 
"  falnesa  of  joy."  Each  as  happy  as  his  soul  can  be.  II.  Then  joys  will  be  A3 
ETEBNAL  AS  THEY  ARE  COMPLETE.  Death  shall  not  take  them  from  us,  nor  will 
they  be  liable  to  decay.  It  is  an  inheritance  "incorruptible"  and  that  "fadeth 
not  away."  And  yet  many  "make  light"  of  these  promises.  They  have  no  heart 
for  such  a  heaven.  May  God  change  their  heart.  You,  whose  hope  this  is,  live  as 
those  who  look  for  such  a  heaven.  {Baptist  W.  Noel,  if. A.)  Nature  and  excel- 
lencies of  the  happiTiess  of  heaven : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  joy  and  pleasukes 
AT  God's  right  hand.  1.  There  are  pleasures  in  heaven  capable  of  giving  joy  and 
satisfaction.  2.  There  is  a  communication  of  these  pleasures  unto  them  who  are  in 
the  immediate  presence  of  God.  3.  The  saints  have  joy  in  the  vision  of  God,  the 
immediate  fruition  of  Him  and  their  likeness  to  Him.  II.  The  excellencies  of 
these  joys  as  expressed  in  the  text.  They  are  spiritual  and  heavenly,  pure 
without  mixture  ;  a  multitude  without  number ;  a  fulness  of  them  without 
want ;  a  constancy  without  interruption  or  diminution,  and  a  perpetuity  with- 
out end.  (James  Robe,  M.A.)  Little  joy  to  be  found  on  earth: — The  ancient 
Thracians  used  to  keep  a  box  in  their  houses  into  which  they  dropped  a  white  stone 
to  mark  the  day  when  they  were  happy,  as  it  was  an  event  which  so  seldom 
occurred.  Lord  Nelson  wrote  to  a  friend,  "I  am  persuaded  there  is  no  true 
haj)piness  in  this  present  state."  Such  was  the  mournful  experience  of  one  of  the 
world's  heroes,  on  whom  plenty,  pleasures  and  glory  combined  to  wait  and  minister. 
Lord  Byrou  writes  to  the  poet  Moore,  ' '  I  have  been  counting  over  the  days  when 
I  was  happy  since  I  was  a  boy,  and  cannot  make  them  more  than  eleven.  I  wonder 
if  I  shall  be  able  to  make  them  a  dozen  before  I  die. " 


PSALM   XVIL 

Yek.  1.  Hear  the  rigbt,  0  Lord,  attend  nnto  mj  cry,    .    .    .    that  goeth  not 

out  of  iuigned  lips. — Conscious  sincerity : — The  Psalmist  is  quite  sure  that  he  himself 
irf  sincere.  The  verses  which  follow  seem  to  be  a  kind  of  anticipation  of  the  Phari- 
see's self-satisfied  prayer  ;  but  they  are  nothing  of  the  kind.  The  reference  is  not  to 
sinlessness,  but  to  sincerity.  The  Psalmist  does  not  say,  I  am  a  pure  man,  without 
a  stain  upon  the  heart  or  hand.  He  says,  I  am  a  sincere  man,  the  general  purpose 
I  have  haA  in  view  is  a  purpose  marked  by  honesty.  He  does  not  represent  himself  as 
pure  snow  in  the  face  of  heaven,  but  as  a  man  whose  supreme  motive  has  been  a 
motive  of  honesty  and  general  truthfulness.  Sincerity  can  appeal  to  the  right.  We 
draw  our  prayer  out  of  our  own  character.  This  suppliant  is  so  sure  of  his  own  honesty 
that  he  says,  Let  the  whole  case  be  settled  honestly.  At  other  times,  when  he  knows 
there  is  not  a  clean  spot  upon  his  whole  constitution — one  sound  healthy  spot^ 


WALK  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  273 

he  falls  right  down  before  God  and  weeps  out  his  soul  in  penitence.  .  .  .  We 
should  be  sure  of  our  motive  before  we  invoke  the  doing  of  right.  It  is  better  for  us 
to  invoke  the  exercise  of  mercy.  Most  men  will  get  more  from  pity  than  they  ever 
can  get  from  righteousness.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Prayer  out  offeign-ed  lips  : 
— It  is  observable  that  the  eagle  soareth  on  high,  little  intending  to  fly  to  heaven, 
but  to  gain  her  prey  ;  and  so  it  is  that  many  do  carry  a  great  deal  of  seeming  devo- 
tion in  lifting  up  their  eyes  towards  heaven  ;  but  they  do  it  only  to  accomplish  with 
more  ease,  safety,  and  applause  their  wicked  designs  here  on  earth  ;  such  as  without 
are  Catos,  within  Neros  ;  hear  them,  no  man  better  ;  search  and  try  them,  no  man 
worse ;  they  have  Jacob's  voice,  but  Esau's  hands ;  they  profess  like  saints,  but 

{)ractise  like  Satans  ;  they  have  their  long  prayers,  but  short  prayings ;  they  are 
ike  apothecaries'  gallipots — having  without  the  title  of  some  excellent  preservative, 
but  within  they  are  full  of  deadly  poison  ;  counterfeit  holiness  is  their  cloak  for  all 
manner  of  villanies,  and  the  midwife  to  bring  forth  all  their  devilish  designs.  (Peter 
Bales.)  Justice,  mercy,  avd perfection : — I.  A  cry  foe  justice  (vers.  1-7).  Things 
in  the  mind  of  David.  — 1.  A  sense  of  truthfvdness.  He  was  conscious  that  there  was 
no  discrepancy  between  his  speech  and  his  spirit.  The  man,  unless  he  feels  that  he 
is  sincere,  will  never  dare  to  appeal  to  heaven  for  justice.  Virtuous  sincerity 
requires  that  there  should  be  not  only  an  exact  correspondence  between  the  speech 
and  spirit,  but  also  between  the  spirit  and  eternal  realities.  2.  A  desire  for  the 
Divine  verdict.  "Let  my  sentence  come  forth  from  Thy  presence."  The  human 
soul  everywhere  holds  that  there  is  justice  at  the  head  of  the  universe,  and  that  it 
will  sooner  or  later  vindicate  the  right.  3.  A  consciousness  of  a  Divine  searching. 
"  Thou  hast  proved  mine  heart."  A  man  may  be  deeply  conscious  of  his  imperfection 
before  God,  and  yet  conscious  of  his  innocence  of  the  charges  brought  against  him 
by  man,  4.  A  determination  to  be  blameless  in  his  speech.  "I  am  purposed  that 
my  mouth  shall  not  transgress. "  What  he  means  is,  I  will  utter  nothing  wi-ong 
concerning  mine  enemies,  nothing  that  can  justify  their  harsh  and  cruel  conduct. 
5.  An  assurance  of  Divine  protection.  He  was  protected  from  ruin.  Protected  by 
God.  And  protected  in  connection  with  his  own  agency.  God's  agency  in  connec- 
tion with  man's  deliverance  neither  supersedes  the  necessity  nor  interferes  with  the 
freedom  of  human  effort.  6.  A  dread  of  falling  from  rectitude.  ' '  Hold  up  my 
goings  in  Thy  paths."  This  means — I  am  right  as  far  as  mine  enemies  are  concerned 
at  present.  I  am  conscious  of  no  wrong.  I  am  anxious  to  retain  my  blamelessness. 
To  retain  my  blamelessness  I  need  Divine  help.  7.  A  confidence  that  God  will 
attend  to  his  prayer.  The  meaning  is — I  have  invoked  Thee  heretofore,  and  do  so 
still,  because  I  know  that  Thou  wilt  hear.  II.  Here  is  a  cry  for  mercy.  "  Show 
Thy  marvellous  loving -kindness."  A  prayer  for  protection  from  enemies.  Note 
the  character  in  which  he  appeals  to  God  for  protection.  He  appeals  to  Him  as  a 
mighty  Saviour.  The  manner  in  which  he  desired  protection.  The  enemies  from 
whom  he  sought  protection.  The  cry  for  mercy  is  as  deep  and  universal  as  that  for 
justice.  III.  Here  is  a  cry  for  perfection.  Three  facts  deduce  from  the  words. 
1.  That  the  death  of  a  good  man  is  an  awaking  from  sleep.  There  is  much  spiritual 
torpor  and  spiritual  dreaming  even  in  the  best.  2.  In  this  awaking  at  death  there 
will  be  the  complete  assimilation  of  the  soul  to  God.  3.  In  this  assimilation  will 
consist  the  everlasting  satisfaction  of  our  nature.  There  is  no  satisfaction  without 
this.  The  spiritual  powers  will  not  work  harmoniously  under  the  dominion  of  any 
other  disposition.  The  conscience  will  frown  upon  any  other  state  of  mind.  The 
Great  One  will  not  bless  with  His  friendship  any  other  state  of  mind  in  His  creatures. 
Likeness  to  God  is  likeness  to  His  controlling  disposition.  His  controlling 
disposition  is  disinterested  love,  and  this  is  that  wel.  which  springs  up  to  everlasting 
life.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  8.  Tliou  hast  ylsited  me  In  the  night. — God's  visitations  in  the  night: — 
God  has  two  daily  messengers  of  His  love  for  men,  bringing  to  them  His  gifts  of  love 
— Day  and  Night.  Let  us  think  of  His  visitations  to  us  by  night,  when  we  are  still 
and  when  He  would  have  us  reflect.  The  Psalm  is  evidently  an  evening  Psalm. 
I.  How  well  it  is  that  the  day  should  close  with  keflection,  that  God 
should  visit  us  thus.  Rest  alone  would  be  a  visitation  from  God,  His  gift.  But 
sleep  is  the  better  when  we  pass  to  it  from  prayer.  If  a  knock  comes  to  the  door  at 
night  when  all  is  quiet  how  it  startles  us.  In  the  day  we  should  not  notice  it,  but 
at  night  we  needs  must.  And  Christ  may  say,  "  I  came  in  the  day  but  was  not 
heard  ;  behold,  I  now  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."  It  is  well  to  reflect  at  the  close 
of  each  day  on  each  day.  In  the  bustle  of  business  we  do  not  understand  the  mean- 
i8 


274  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xvii. 

ing  of  our  life.  Perhaps  we  never  shall  till  the  bustle  of  all  life's  days  is  done  and 
we  stand  on  "the  safe  and  quiet  shore  of  eternity."  There  are,  too,  our  own  ways 
that  need  to  be  understood.  Conscience  needs  to  be  quickened,  and  one  day  it  will 
be.  Just  as  the  manipulations  of  the  photographer  in  the  dark  chamber  bring  forth 
a  picture  which  has  been  burnt  into  the  plate  by  rays  of  light  before,  that  when  com- 
pleted it  may  be  brought  to  light  again,  and  men  may  see  what  manner  of  men  they 
were  ;  so  in  the  dark  chambers  of  the  dead,  in  the  hidden  spirit  world,  there  shall 
be  a  quickening  of  conscience.  And  God  has  given  to  us  the  darkness  of  night  in 
which,  away  from  busy  life,  we  may  bring  forth  the  pictures  of  the  day  that  are 
imprinted  on  conscience.  Cultivate  this  photography  of  life.  II,  And  there  is 
THE  NIGHT  OF  TROUBLE,  God  visits  thosc  who  trust  Him  then.  Let  there  be  also 
in  this  night  reflection,  review.  Memory  is  given  us  that  we  may  not  depend  for 
happiness  on  the  present.  And  review  in  this  night  your  conduct  in  your  joys.  Ah, 
who  is  worthy  of  their  joy  1  Be  willing  then  to  bear  the  night.  "God's  blessings 
come  in  the  night,"  so  says  a  German  proverb.  There  is  no  night  in  which  God  is  not 
near  us.  No,  not  the  last  eventide,  the  darkest  of  all.  In  Christ  we  need  not  fear. 
( T.  Oasquoine,  B.A.)  The  religious  aspects  of  night : — ^There  is  no  necessary  contrast 
between  what  are  called  the  scientific  and  the  religious  aspects  of  nature.  Science 
keeps  its  eye  upon  the  facts  of  nature,  carefully  verifies  and  measures  them,  and  seeks 
to  discover  their  exact  relations  to  each  other.  Religion,  too,  is  interested  in  nature, 
and  behind  each  natiiral  fact  sees  chiefly  Him  to  whom  both  effect  and  cause  are 
traceable.  Religion  is  more  necessary  to  us  men  than  science,  and  therefore  God  has 
taught  us  religion  first  of  all.  The  succession  of  day  and  night  will  illustrate  what  I 
am  saying.  We  know  the  physical  causes  of  night,  but  it  has  another  and  a  higher 
meaning,  and  this  is  hinted  at  in  our  text.  The  religious  aspects  of  night  are  many. 
It  strikes  us  first  of  aU — I.  As  an  interruption.  It  breaks  in  upon  and  suspends 
all  human  occupation.  At  the  very  least  eight  hours  in  the  twenty-four,  a  quarter  of  a 
century  in  the  life  of  a  man  of  seventy-five,  are  withdrawn  from  the  demands  of  labour. 
And  as  each  day  the  shadow  of  night  creeping  around  the  world  advances,  millions  of 
human  workers  hail  the  approaching  pause  in  toil  which  is  thus  mercifully  imposed 
upon  them.  Man  might  have  been  so  fashioned  as  not  to  need  this,  but  this  enforced 
suspension  of  activity  cannot  but  suggest  a  meaning.  It  suggests  not  merely  the 
limited  stock  of  strength  at  our  disposal  which  needs  thus  often  to  be  refreshed  and 
replenished,  but  it  also  reminds  us  that  we  have  a  higher  life  than  that  of  the 
activity  of  the  day,  and  which  shall  last  when  all  belonging  to  this  shall  have  passed 
away.  II.  Night  suggests  danger.  The  daylight  is  of  itself  protection.  When 
it  is  withdrawn  much  becomes  possible  which  it  forbids.  Night  is  the  opportunity 
of  wild  beasts  and  of  evil  men.  They  ply  their  trade  during  its  dark  and  silent  hours. 
And  thus  St.  Paul  describes  the  workers  of  darkness  as  "unfruitful."  Our  Lord 
compares  the  unexpectedness  of  His  second  coming  "  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  If,  in- 
deed, St.  Paul  were  to  visit  London  on  the  afternoon  of  a  bank  holiday,  it  is  to  be  feared 
that  he  would  have  to  reconsider  his  remark  that  "they  that  be  drunken  are  drunken 
in  the  night."  Still,  on  the  whole,  the  night  is  the  season  of  peril  and  disaster. 
We  yet  need  to  pray  God  that  He  would  "  protect  us  from  all  perils  and  dangers  of 
this  night."  For  notwithstanding  brilliantly  lighted  streets  and  well  organised 
ipolice  there  are  yet  special  perils — such  as  those  of  fire  in  our  large  and  lofty  houses, 
from  which  the  tenants  of  rude  huts  and  shepherds'  cabins  would  find  ready  escape. 
It  is  with  civilised  as  with  savage  man,  God  is,  in  the  last  resort,  our  only  Protector. 
III.  Night  is  a  time  during  which  God  often  speaks  to  the  soul  of  man.  No 
believer  in  God's  existence  can  reasonably  deny  that  He  can  communicate  with  the 
mind  of  man.  We  think  sleeplessness  a  great  misfortune,  but  it  may  be  a  gi'eat 
blessing.  For  never  does  God  speak  more  solenmly,  more  persuasively  to  the  human 
soul,  than  in  the  waking  hours  of  night.  Then  conscience  has  a  chance ;  we 
listen  and  hear  no  other  voice.  Conscience  revives  the  past,  and  the  eye  of  sense 
rests  upon  no  object  which  can  compete  with  and  efface  the  awful  impression.  Then 
religion  asserts  its  empire,  and  we  acknowledge  to  ourselves  with  sorrow  how  nnich 
we  have  forgotten  or  despised  that  had  the  first  of  all  claims  upon  us.  See  the 
many  references  in  the  Psalms  to  these  holy  uses  of  the  night.  One  practical  lesson, 
at  least,  we  may  remember  as  bearing  upon  this  subject—  the  duty  of  storing  the  mind 
while  we  are  yet  comparatively  young  and  strong  with  that  which  in  the 
hom's  of  sleeplessness  and  pain  will  enable  us  to  rise  up  to  God.  A  nund  thus 
well  stored  need  never  fear  that  the  waking  hours  of  night  are  lost.  {Canon  Liddon.) 
I  am  purposed  that  my  mouth  shall  not  transgress. — Restraining  the  tongue: — 
Such  was  the  pious  resolution  of  the  Psalmist  when  the  tongues  of  his  enemies  were 


rsALM  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  275 

transgressing  both  against  him  and  his  God.  Silence  would  produce  the  better 
effect,  both  on  his  own  mind  and  on  his  enemies.  I.  The  evil  which  the 
Psalmist  dreaded.  Transgressing  with  his  tongue.  The  tongue,  indeed,  is  only 
the  channel  through  which  the  depravity  of  the  heart  proceeds,  but  it  is  a  channel 
of  remarkable  facility.  It  is  liable  to  transgress — 1.  Against  God.  By  murmuring 
at  the  providence  of  God.  2.  Against  mankind.  There  are  cniel  expressions  of 
malice  and  revenge  sometimes  uttered  by  one  man  against  another  to  ruin  his 
character.  There  are  those  who  injure  religion  and  their  character  by  a  propensity 
to  speak  with  levity  or  bitterness.  There  are  those  who  transgress  by  flattery — 
an  evil  more  injurious  than  the  keenest  reproach  sometimes.  II.  The  best  means 
OF  AVOIDING  THIS  EVIL.  "If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect 
man."  What  does  this  purpose  imply?  1.  A  serious  regard  to  Divine  inspection 
and  authority.  2.  Attention  to  the  state  of  the  heart.  3.  We  should  aim  to 
cultivate  religious  knowledge,  and  promote,  at  every  proper  opportunity,  religious 
conversation.  The  most  likely  way  to  preserve  the  tongue  from  evil  is  to  employ 
it  in  what  is  valuable  and  useful.  Prepared  by  the  secret  exercises  of  piety  and 
devotion,  we  shall  enjoy  the  full  delights  of  domestic  and  social  life  without  injury 
and  without  remorse.  {HomilisL)  The  mouth  kept  from  transgression: — A 
friend  of  Archbishop  Leighton  said  that,  in  free  and  frequent  intercoui-se  with  him 
for  twenty-two  years,  "  I  never  knew  him  say  an  idle  word,  or  a  word  that  had  not 
a  direct  tendency  to  edification  ;  and  I  never  once  saw  him  in  any  other  temper  but 
that  I  wished  to  be  in  at  the  last  moment  of  my  life." 

Ver.  4.  Concerning  the  works  of  men,  by  the  word  of  Thy  llpg  I  have  kept  me 
from  the  paths  of  the  destroyer. —  Young  men  warned  against  unsound  prin/njjles : — 
Many  are  the  nets  that  are  spread  for  the  souls  of  men,  especially  of  young  men. 
By  means  of  evil  associations  and  unsound  or  unscriptural  principles.  Of  these  latter 
we  will  speak  now.  They  may  be  classified  under  three  heads.  I.  The  principle 
OF  expediency  or  compromise.  Things  are  done  to  serve  a  present  purpose 
without  regard  to  their  being  right  or  wrong,  or  whether  Christian  rectitude 
approve  or  condemn.  II.  Self-indulgence,  or  animal  gratification.  Here 
he  is  in  danger  of  being  misled  both  by  his  equals  and  by  himself.  It  is  said  that 
appetites  were  given,  not  to  be  crushed  but  gratified  ;  that  religious  requirements 
and  natural  tendencies,  emanating  both  from  God,  can  never  be  incompatible  with 
each  other,  and  that  asceticism  and  austerity  are  signs,  not  of  a  true  but  of  a  false 
religion.  But  in  this  case,  as  in  every  other,  he  who  proves  too  much  proves 
nothing.  The  natural  appetites  were  designed  not  merely  for  gratification,  but  for 
moral  discipline.  They  are  not  to  be  gratified  alone,  but  subordinated,  and  ilue 
subordination  is  not  asceticism,  nor  proper  control  of  the  affections,  austerity. 
Religious  requirements  harmonise  with  natural  tendencies,  in  that  they  impose  a 
restriction  at  the  very  point  where  satisfaction  terminates  and  excess  begins :  they 
apply  reasonable  and  salutary  restraints.  Regard  first  the  culture  of  the  soul  and 
you  Avill  never  compromise  the  welfare  of  the  body ;  preserve  only  what  is  due  to 
God  and  you  will  be  in  little  danger  of  withholding  what  is  due  to  man.  III.  The 
principle  of  false  appearances  or  false  assumptions.  For  it  adopts  a 
fallacious  standard,  superseding  God's  Word  by  popular  opinion.  It  is  peculiarly 
necessary  to  guard  against  this  in  an  age  where  names,  self-assumed,  are  a  prolific 
source  of  deception,  and  evil  often  puts  on  and  parades  the  semblance  of  good. 
It  is  the  way  of  the  world,  that  lives  without  and  forgets  Him.  It  is  the  way  of 
those  who  are  often  men  of  high  honour,  but  of  low  principle  ;  of  strict  uprightness, 
but  of  lax  morality  ;  men  of  reputable  conduct,  but  of  no  religion.  And  especially 
avoid  that  "path  of  the  destroyer"  amidst  the  works  of  men,  and  of  which 
Solomon  says,  "Let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  ways."  The  number  and 
effrontery  of  those  who  yield  to  this  temptation  make  it  peculiarly  subtle  and 
fatal.  The  young  man,  new  to  the  world,  sees  what  others  do,  and  that  they  are 
not  the  worse  thought  of  for  it,  nor  think  at  all  worse  of  themselves  ;  he  hears 
some  avowing  it  and  others  vindicating  it — how  shall  he  escape  ?  Only  ' '  by  the 
word  of  Thy  lips"  :  that  word  "hid  in  the  heart,"  and  its  principles  known  and 
embraced.  So  shall  you  be  enabled  to  stand  in  the  evil  day.  (^Thomas  Dale, 
M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  Hold  np  my  goings  in  Thy  paths,  that  my  footsteps  slip  not. — Slippery 
places  : — The  blessing  of  sanctified  affliction  is  that  we  are  made  to  see  our  weakness. 
David  here  seems  as  a  little  child,  ready  to  fall,  stretching  out  its  hand  and  crying 


27«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psAtM  xvii. 

to  its  Father,  "Hold  up  my  goings,"  &c.  I.  The  believer's  positiox  is  often" 
A  VERY  slippery  ONE.  Christ  told  us,  "  in  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation, " 
and  this  is  part  of  it.  We  are  sent  into  the  world  to  glorify  God's  holy  law.  And 
this  we  do  by  a  life  of  simple  faith  in  Jesus.  II.  It  is  so  even  in  the  paths  of 
God.  Even  in  His  very  paths.  Liberty  may  degenerate  into  licence  ;  holy  caution 
into  legalism  ;  activity  into  neglect  of  communion  with  God,  and  that  into  neglect 
of  service.  Reliance  in  Christ  to  forgetfulness  of  the  Siiirit  of  Christ ;  and  even 
joy  in  affliction  to  an  overlooking  of  our  sin,  which  is  the  cause  of  it.  III.  The 
petition.  "Hold  up  my  goings,"  &c.  1.  It  is  the  very  picture  of  helplessness. 
"I  can  do  nothing,  cannot  stir  a  step,  without  Thee."  Oh  !  to  be  brought  here. 
The  omnipotence  of  weakness.  2.  It  is  the  language  of  faith.  In  ver.  6  he  says, 
"I  know  that  Thou  wilt  hear  me."  How  simple  but  how  strong  this  faith. 
3.  There  is  also  the  testimony  of  an  upright  conscience.  4.  The  memory  of  God's 
past  dealings  with  him.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Tlie  Christian  praying  to  he 
upheld: — We  cannot  ascertain  at  what  period  of  his  life  David  wrote  this  prayer. 
It  was  probably  before  his  lamentable  fall.  If  so,  we  are  ready  to  say  he  must  have 
forgotten  it  after  he  had  written  it,  for  otherwise  his  fall  could  not  have  happened. 
But  let  us  make  this  prayer  our  own.  I.  True  RELiGio>f  is  A  walking  oe 
going  on  in  God's  paths.  Think  of  a  country  with  many  tracks  in  it  perhaps, 
but  without  any  marked  roads  or  paths ;  a  country  like  one  immense  down  or 
waste,  where  in  the  main  men  go  hither  and  thither  just  as  they  will.  Now  this  is 
how  most  men  regard  the  world  and  their  own  condition  in  it.  But  God  appears 
and  marks  out  certain  ways  or  paths  in  this  world,  and  bids  us  inquire  for  them 
and  keep  to  them.  And  this  is  true  religion — obedience  to  this  Divine  call.  It  is 
a  ceasing  to  live  at  random,  to  live  as  God  dictates.  II.  The  prayer  we  have  to 
consider.  It  Implies — 1.  A  lively  apprehension  of  the  evil  consequences  of  falling. 
An  ordinary  man  does  not  care,  he  knows  nothing  of  the  malignity  of  sin.  If  for 
a  moment  sin  has  disturbed  him  by  reason  of  some  unusual  transgression,  the  efifect 
has  been  very  shallow,  very  transient.  Not  so  is  it  with  the  traveller  in  God's 
ways.  He  knows  how  evU  and  bitter  a  thing  sin  is.  2.  A  consciousness  of  his 
proneness  to  fall.  Liability  is  not  a  word  strong  enough.  All,  even  the  holiest 
creatures,  are  liable  to  fall — witness  Adam  and  the  once  holy  angels — and  even  in 
the  holiest  places.  But  in  us  there  is  a  direct  tendency  to  fall.  3.  A  belief  in  the 
ability  and  willingness  of  God  to  thus  hold  us  up.  "Thou  wilt  hear  me,  0  God," 
so  he  says  in  the  next  verse.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  dwelling,  if  not  too 
frequently,  yet  too  exclusively  on  our  weakness  and  danger.  This  is  better  than 
ignorance  of  them,  and  much  better  than  knowing  them,  to  be  careless  about  them  ; 
but  it  comes  far  short  of  the  perfection  or  completeness  of  true  religion.  That  sees 
not  alone  the  evil  in  us,  but  also  the  fulness  of  help  for  us  which  there  is  in  God. 
Let  us  think  much  of  the  helping  hand  of  God.  III.  The  manner  in  which  we 
may  expect  such  a  prayer  as  this  to  be  answered.  1.  By  mercifully  removing 
occasions  of  falling  out  of  our  way.  2.  By  calling  the  sustaining  graces  of  His 
servants  into  exercise.  This  a  more  honourable  way  for  us.  3.  By  sending  such 
afflictions  as  are  calculated  to  keep  them  from  falling.  4.  By  keeping  alive  a  spirit 
of  prayer  within  us  for  His  upholding.  As  long  as  God  keeps  you  prayerful, 
humbly  and  earnestly  prayerful,  be  the  ground  what  it  may  that  you  go  over,  you 
are  safe.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  religious  course  of  life  sustained: — Religion 
is  intercourse  maintained  between  God  and  us.  What  condescension  on  the  part  of 
God.  They  lose  much  who  are  strangers  to  Him.  Let  us  observe  David,  and  learn 
to  pray  as  he  prayed.  I.  See  his  course.  "My  goings."  Religion  does  not 
allow  a  man  to  sit  still.  All  religion  is  vain  unless  he  is,  so  to  speak,  set  a-going — 
unless  he  says,  "I  will  walk  in  Thy  truth."  His  goings  are  in  God's  paths. 
1.  Those  of  His  commands.  2.  Of  His  ordinances.  3.  Of  His  dispensations.  II.  His 
CONCBRN  respecting  THIS  COURSE.  "Hold  up  my  goings,"  &c.  It  is  the 
language — 1.  Of  conviction.  He  knew  the  injury  that  would  result  from  a  fall  or 
even  a  slip  in  religion.  2.  Of  apprehension,  for  he  knew  his  footsteps  were  prone 
to  slide.  3.  And  of  weakness ;  he  knew  he  could  not  keep  himself.  4.  Of  confidence, 
for  he  was  sure  that  God  could  and  would  hold  him  up.  ( W.  Jay. )  How  to 
walk  without  slipping : — In  considering  the  feelings  that  breathe  in  this  prayer  we 
note  that  they  express — I.  A  vehement  desire  to  walk  in  God's  ways.  There 
is  a  sense  in  which  all  men  desire  to  walk  in  God's  ways.  For  they  know  the 
consequences  of  disobedience,  how  it  provokes  His  anger  and  involves  punishment. 
They  dislike  obedience,  but  they  desire  its  rewards.  Like  a  hireling,  they  labour  at 
their  task,  but  only  for  its  promised  hire.     Could  they  only  be  assured  that  they 


PSALM  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  277 

could  get  the  wages  without  the  work  they  would  gladly  leave  it  alone.  But  those 
who  have  been  iiardoned  through  the  blood  of  Jesus,  though  they  have  no  fear  of 
punishment,  yet  desire  to  walk  in  all  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  doing  what 
is  well-pleasing  in  His  sight.  II.  A  distressing  sense  of  vi'eakness  is  dis- 
covered AND  liKMOANED  IN  HIMSELF.  It  is  "when  he  would  do  good,"  i.e.  when 
he  desires,  and  in  proportion  as  he  desires,  to  do  good  that  he  is  conscious  of  the 
evil  present  with  him.  If  he  does  not  much  desire  to  walk  in  God's  ways  he  will 
not  be  much  distressed  at  his  failures.  But  if  his  desire  be  vehement  it  is  far 
otherwise  with  him.  III.  The  cry  of  one  who  believes  that  the  Lord  is 
ABLE  and  willing  TO  HOLD  HIM  UP.  It  is  the  cry  of  faith,  not  alone  of  desire. 
And  the  lesson  of  the  whole  is,  that  would  we  be  upheld,  our  cry  must  be  of 
vehement  desire,  of  deep  sense  of  need,  and  of  firm  faith.     ( W.  Grant.) 

Ver.  8.  Keep  me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye.— The  plea  for  Divine  protection : — The 
world  is  no  friend  to  righteousuess  ;  its  spirit  cannot  endure  the  restraints  that  holi- 
ness imposes  upon  its  workings.  Hence  the  world's  hostility  to  all  those  who  live 
truly  godly  lives.  To  understand  the  full  force  of  keeping  one  as  the  apple  of  the 
eye  it  is  necessary  to  consider  first,  how  the  whole  eye  is  protected,  sheltered  by 
bones  and  sinews,  opening  and  closing  doors,  light-softening  and  dust-excluding 
curtains,  and  then,  that  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  located  farther  in,  is  protected  by 
guardians  equally  wonderful  and  peculiarly  its  own.  There  is  no  other  part  of  the 
human  body  so  wonderfully  protected,  and  no  other  part  that,  when  endangered, 
we  so  instinctively  try  to  shelter  from  harm.  And  bo  God  guards  His  people  as 
tenderly  as  we  guard  the  pupil  of  our  eye  ;  yea,  as  tenderly  as  He  guards  the  pupil 
of  His  own  eye.  {David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  The  eye,  a  similitvde: — The  man 
knows  something  of  himself  who  sincerely  offers  this  plaintive  petition,  "  Keep 
me."  Is  there  not  a  sorrowful  confession  implied  ?  But  it  implies  knowledge  of 
God  too.  "What  He  is  and  will  do.  The  keeping  desired  is  that  with  whicl\  men 
guard  the  eye.  It  means,  therefore — I.  Keep  me  with  many  guards  and  pro- 
tections. The  eye  is  kept  by  eye  bones,  eyelashes,  eyelids,  which  serve  as  out- 
works, fences  and  barricades  to  protect  the  pupU  of  the  eye.  God  has  bestowed 
extraordinary  pains  upon  all  that  concerns  the  eye.  Sentries  keep  ward  lest  it 
should  be  imperilled.  "Whenever  it  is  threatened,  with  agility  so  brisk  that  it  seems 
almost  involuntary,  the  arm  is  lifted  up  and  the  hand  is  raised  to  screen  it.  All 
the  members  of  the  body  may  be  regarded  as  a  patrol  for  the  wardsliip  of  the  eye. 
So  should  we  pray  to  be  kept  with  many  protections — providence,  grace,  ordinances, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  angels.  II.  With  constancy,  unintermitting  continuance. 
The  eye  is  always  guarded.  Without  our  thinking  of  it.  If  a  grain  of  dust  enter, 
forthwith  a  watery  humour  is  exuded  to  carry  it  away  or  to  dissolve  it.  The  pain 
is  a  mercy,  for  it  makes  you  restless  until  you  get  relief.  "When  you  fall  asleep  the 
curtains  fall,  the  blinds,  as  it  were,  drop  down,  and  the  windows  are  shut  up 
securely  with  lash  and  lid.  So,  and  in  yet  other  ways,  doth  the  parable  of  the  eye 
suggest  the  prayer  of  the  text.  Evermore,  0  Lord,  watch  over  me.  Remark  here, 
that  at  no  season  is  a  Christian  more  in  danger  than  when  he  has  just  been  in  com- 
munion with  God.  The  footpads  in  olden  time  did  not  meddle  with  the  farmers  as 
they  went  to  market ;  it  was  when  they  were  coming  home,  and  bringing  back  their 
money  bags  full.  Our  ships  of  war  attacked  the  Spanish  galleons  not  on  their  way 
to  but  from  America,  when  they  knew  them  to  be  laden  to  the  water's  edge  with 
silver  and  gold.  You  need  keeping,  then,  always.  III.  From  little  evils,  the 
DUST  AND  GRIT  OF  THIS  WORLD.  Your  eye  needs  not  to  be  guarded  so  much  from 
beams  as  motes.  Be  this  your  prayer,  "Keep  me  from  what  the  world  calls  little 
sins."  To  one,  a  Puritan,  who  was  offered  great  preferment  if  he  would  but  comply 
with  the  government  demands,  it  was  said,  "  Others  have  made  long  gashes  in  their 
consciences  :  could  not  you  make  a  little  nick  in  yours ? "  But  those  "little  nicks " 
swiftly  run  to  the  rending  of  the  conscience  from  top  to  bottom.  There  was  an 
oflScer  who  kept  in  his  house  a  tame  leopard  which  had  been  born  in  the  house.  It 
had  grown  up  as  harmless  as  a  domestic  cat.  But  one  day  when  its  master  was 
asleep  it  gently  licked  his  hand.  The  creature's  tongue  passed  over  a  slight  but 
recent  wound.  A  little  blood  oozed  out.  The  taste  roused  the  demon  spirit  of  the 
beast  at  once,  and  had  it  not  been  promptly  shot  its  master's  life  would  have  been 
its  victim.  When  the  thief  cannot  break  in  at  the  door  himself  he  puts  a  boy 
through  the  window,  and  then  the  great  door  is  speedily  opened.  I'V".  Sensitive, 
tender  in  heart,  as  the  apple  OF  THE  EYE,  God  has  made  it  thus  sensitive  for 
its  own  protection.    The  conscience  should  be  a  real  indicator :  if  in  good  keeping 


278  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvil. 

it  would  be  a  wonderful  tell-tale.  It  will  startle  you  from  your  lethargy,  it  will 
arouse  you  as  with  an  alarm.  V.  As  the  eye  ought  to  be  kept.  It  should  be 
"  single,"  clear,  far-seeing.  As  an  ornament,  for  the  beauty  of  the  countenance  is 
in  the  eye.  So  should  wo  "adorn  the  doctrine"  and  the  Church  of  God.  Useful, 
a.  genuine  Christian  will  pray  to  be  useful,  not  like  a  glass  eye,  a  mere  counterfeit. 
And  then,  though  the  remark  may  seem  strange  and  quaint,  I  would  entreat  the 
Lord  to  keep  me  in  the  head.  Solomon  has  made  the  shrewd  remark,  "The  wise 
man's  eyes  are  in  his  head,  but  the  fool  walketh  in  darkness."  I  would  give  this  a 
spiritual  turn,  and  ask  to  be  kept  in  Christ  Jesus.  Of  what  use  were  the  eye  of  a 
man  if  not  in  the  head  ?  And  what  we,  apart  from  Christ  ?  There  are  some  to  whom 
this  prayer  is  nothing,  for  they  are  not  Christ's.  Let  your  prayer  be,  ' '  Lord,  save  me, 
or  I  perish."  Once  saved,  you  may  pray  to  be  kept.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Two 
Bible  emblems : — God's  Word  and  works,  the  two  great  sources  of  our  knowledge  of 
God.  When  we  want  to  get  clear  and  vivid  conception  of  any  truth  we  employ 
analogy  and  institute  comparison,  and  say  it  is  "as"  or  "like"  some  objectin  nature. 
Text  an  illustration  of  this.  It  means — I.  That  the  royal  Psalmist  prays  to  be 
DIVINELY  PROTECTED.  He  did  not  possess  all  our  modern  knowledge  of  the  anatomy 
of  the  eye,  but  he  must  have  known  much  or  he  could  not  have  penned  this  prayer. 
Of  all  the  organs  of  the  body  the  eye  is  the  most  delicate  and  precious,  and  is  protected 
by  the  most  wonderful  and  elaborate  contrivances.  The  eyes  are  the  sentinels  of 
the  body,  and  keep  constant  guard  over  it.  They  are  the  windows  through  which 
the  soul  looks  out  upon  all  things  within  its  range.  They  are  closely  connected 
with  the  brain,  and  by  a  mysterious  telegraphy  of  nerves  convey  to  the  brain  know- 
ledge of  what  is  passing  in  the  outer  world.  The  eyes  are  like  citizens  within  the 
entrenchments  of  a  fortified  town,  surrounded  by  outworks,  fences,  and  barricades. 
And  the  arms  are  like  two  warders  to  defend  them.  Note  some  of  their  protections. 
A  protruding  socket,  like  a  wall  around  it :  with  overhanging  brow  to  carry  off 
drops  of  perspiration  ;  with  eyelashes  to  guard  against  dust  and  insects  ;  with  lids 
that  automatically  close  at  the  approach  of  danger  ;  with  glands  which  secrete  tears 
that  clean  and  lubricate  the  ball  of  the  eye  ;  with  beds,  cushion  like  for  their 
softness,  upon  which  they  repose  and  revolve  with  safety.  All  these  and  many 
more  show  how  carefully  God  keeps  the  apple  of  the  eye,  and  help  us  to  see  how 
David  desired  that  God  would  keep  him.  II.  And  he  would  be  divinely  pre- 
served. "Hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings."  This  emblem,  like  the 
former,  is  exceedingly  suggestive.  There  may  be  reference  to  the  wings  of  the 
cherubim  which  were  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  in  the  tabernacle  of  old. 
David  had  ardent  love  for  the  house  of  God,  he  even  envied  the  sparrows  that  built 
their  nests  near  God's  altar.  In  the  time  of  trouble  he  would  be  hidden  in  God's 
pavilion,  in  the  secret  place  of  the  tabernacle  ;  and  there,  hiding  as  under  the  wings 
of  the  cherubim,  he  would  find  a  shelter  and  a  home.     {F.  W.  Broum.) 

Ver.  10.  They  are  inclosed  in  their  own  fat. — A  figure  for  self-complacency : — 
To  be  inclosed  in  one's  own  fat  means,  to  be  wrapped  up  in  pride  and  self- 
complacency,  the  effect  upon  weak  and  ignoble  minds  of  worldly  prosperity. 
It  is  said  that  the  purely  fatty  part  of  the  human  body,  having  no  nerves  of 
sensation,  can  be  cut  and  pierced  without  experiencing  any  feeling  of  pain. 
Hence,  in  Scripture  phraseology,  to  say  that  one's  heart  is  fat  is  equivalent  to 
saying  that  it  is  hard  and  insensible,  void  of  moral  and  sympathetic  feeling,  and 
not  to  be  affected  by  any  appeal  made  to  its  pity  or  sense  of  right.  It  indicates  a 
haughtiness  and  insolence  of  bearing  towards  others  that  is  hard  to  be  borne  by 
them.  Alas !  how  a  little  worldly  elevation  sometimes  changes  the  best  character 
into  the  worst !  How  it  renders  the  man  proud  who  before  was  humble ;  the 
heart  hard  that  before  was  tender !  To  be  delivered  from  the  tender  mercies  of 
mindless  wealth,  of  heartless  prosperity,  is  a  prayer  that  others  besides  David  have 
breathed  into  the  ear  of  Divine  mercy.  It  was  not  the  poor,  but  the  proud,  the 
prosperous,  the  high  in  station  and  authority,  that  chased  the  Son  of  God  to  the 
Cross,  and  reviled  Him  there.     {David  Caldvxll,  A.M.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  Which  have  their  portion  in  this  life. — The  uncertainty  of  worldly 
prosperity : — Like  many  other  passages  (such  as  Job  xxi.  7-13  ;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  12),  these 
verses  clearly  show  how  little  "  the  old  Fathers  looked,"  or  indeed  could  have  looked, 
"  only  for  transitory  promises."  While  they  held,  and  rightly  held,  that  under  the 
general  law  of  God's  providence  happiness  should  follow  obedience  to  the  will  of  Him 
who  made  and  guides  all  things,  they  yet  recognised  the  disturbing  influence  of  evil 


P8AI,M  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  279 

in  the  world,  through  which  the  unrighteous  prosper,  having  to  the  full  the  only 
portion  they  care  for  (comp.  Matt.  vi.  2-5  ;  Luke  xvi.  25),  leaving  wealth  ana 
fame  to  their  children.  At  times  this  was  to  them  a  sore  trial  of  faith  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  3), 
sorer  than  to  us  who  have  the  clear  vision  of  the  future  life.  But  they  felt  that  far 
above  this  outward  prosperity  was  that  which  the  worldly  cannot  have,  the  com- 
munion with  God,  in  itself  the  eternal  life  of  the  souL  The  sense  of  ver.  15  cannot 
be  doubtful.  David  knows  that  now  "  he  shall  behold  the  presence  of  God  in 
righteousness,"  and  in  it  have  the  higher  spiritual  life.  Therefore  (as  in  Psa.  xvi. 
9,  10)  he  draws  the  inference  which  our  Lord  Himself  justifies,  that  death  cannot 
break  the  tie  of  this  communion;  therefore  that  he  shall  awake  in  the  image  of  God, 
and,  so  awaking,  shall  be  "satisfied  with  it,"  possessing  it  in  the  fulness  which  on 
earth  he  can  only  desire  and  long  for  (comp.  1  John  iii.  1,  2).  All  other  explana- 
tions than  this  sin  against  the  whole  spirit  of  the  passage,  and  could  never  have  been 
thought  of  except  to  support  the  false  conclusion  that,  because  the  knowledge  of  a 
future  life  in  heaven  was  not  unchequered  by  doubt  in  the  saints  of  old,  therefore  it 
had  no  flashes  of  brightness  and  reality.  {Alfred  Barry,  D.D.)  llie  worldly 
mem' s portion: — The  world  is  at  total  enmity  with  God.  Its  spirit,  maxims,  and 
pursuits  are  at  utter  variance  with  the  laws  and  spirit  of  God.  I.  Desckibe  the 
CHABACTER.  Among  the  signs  and  marks  is — 1.  tJnregeneracy.  2.  They  are  dis- 
tinguished for  worldly  principles.  3.  Their  maxims  are  worldly.  4.  They  are 
distinguished  by  their  associations  ;  5.  By  the  unvarying  tenor  of  their  pursuits  ; 
6.  By  their  worldly  afi'ections  and  delights.  II.  The  portion  the  world  confers 
TJPON  J  HEM,  They  do  not  serve  the  world  for  nought.  The  chief  reason  why  it 
does  not  satisfy  is — 1.  Because  it  is  unsuitable.  The  ethereal  mind  must  have 
ethereal  enjoyments.  The  soul  was  made  for  God  and  spiritual  things.  2.  This  por- 
tion is  only  a  present  one.  3.  It  is  uncertain.  4.  It  is  a  ruinous  portion.  If  a  man 
will  make  the  world  his  portion  he  cannot  have  Christ's  salvation,  God's  favour,  or 
eternal  life.  (J.  Bums,  D.  D. )  Men  who  flourish  on  carrion  .—There  was  a  famine  in 
the  land.  All  birds  and  beasts,  with  the  exception  of  the  crows  and  vultures,  and  a  few 
others  of  a  similar  species,  looked  ravenous  and  emaciated.  Even  the  lion  lay  before 
his  den  so  reduced  by  starvation  as  to  be  unable  to  hunt.  A  giraffe  with  drooping 
head  ventured  to  approach  him.  "Sire,"  said  he,  "have  you  observed  the  full 
crops  and  plump  appearance  of  yonder  vultures  ?  Can  you  tell  us  the  secret  of  their 
prosperity  in  these  hard  times?"  The  lion  groaned,  "It  is  as  great  a  mystery  to 
me  as  to  you.  But  see  !  an  eagle  approaches  this  way,  pray  ask  his  opinion."  The 
eagle  willingly  stopped  in  his  weary  flight.  And  in  reply  to  their  question  simply 
said,  "  I  know  their  secret,  but  I  mistake  you,  indeed,  if  you  will  be  the  happier  for 
hearing  it.  If  you  would  flourish  as  they  flourish,  you  must  bring  your  mind  to  eat 
carrion,  and  plenty  of  it. "  {Andrew  Oriffen.)  Men  who  have  their  portion  in  this 
life : — I  have  seen  men  so  carried  away  with  the  game  of  chance  into  which  they 
have  plunged  on  ship-^oard  that  they  quite  forgot  the  goal  for  which  the  ship  was 
shaping.  They  would  scarcely  lift  their  head  a  moment  to  look  for  land  and  port 
and  home.  Never  suffer  yourself  to  be  swept  along  the  tide  of  rushing  years  like  the 
dumb  creatures  packed  into  cattle  ships.  Some  men  are  hurried  on  to  the  goal 
without  any  thought  or  care  for  what  is  before  them,  and  land  upon  an  anathema 
which  can  never  be  reversed.  {T.  O.  Sclhy.)  The  disappointment  of  men  who 
seek  satisfaction  in  earthly  treasure : — Meditating  at  a  window,  in  a  sort  of  day- 
dream, a  fly  continued  to  pass  before  me.  Mechanically  I  sought  to  catch  it.  I 
put  my  finger  quickly  to  the  pane,  but  the  fly  was  gone.  I  followed  it  and  clapped 
my  hand  on  the  very  spot  it  occupied,  but  I  had  not  taken  it.  Yet  there  it  was 
just  under  my  hand.  "Why  had  I  failed  ?  Excellent  reason,  the  insect  was  on  the 
other  side  of  the  glass.  Ye  sons  of  men  who  seek  pleasure  in  the  things  of  this 
world,  ye  must  miss  it ;  even  when  it  seems  within  your  grasp  ye  cannot  reach  it. 
Happiness  is  not  to  be  found  on  your  side  of  Christ  and  the  new  birth,  except  in 
seeming.  Ye  are  victims  of  a  delusion,  your  chase  is  vanity,  your  end  will  be  dis- 
ai»poiutment.  (C.  IT.  Spurgeon.)  The  city  youth: — To  every  young  man  there 
comes  sooner  or  later  the  brief  but  startling  message,  "  Get  tliee  out  of  thy  country, 
and  from  thy  kindred,  and  fioni  thy  father's  house,  uiiti>  a  land  that  I  will  sliow 
thee."  You  cannot  always  abide  in  thi-  house  of  your  cliildhood.  But  such  a  call 
to  go  forth  is  very  serious.  A  thoughtlul  j'oung  fellow,  who  is  in  a  liouse  f;f 
business  in  the  city,  comes  to  me  for  a  little  conversation  ;  he  tells  me  of  his 
religious  difiiculties,  of  his  i»i\sa!d  confiicts  and  his  desire  to  live  a  Christian  life  ; 
and  ere  we  part  I  say  to  him,  "Now,  how  many  in  your  establishment  seem  to  beat 
all  seriously  inclined  ? "     How  many  in  that  huge  drapery  business  ?    How  many  in 


280  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvn. 

that  bank  ?    How  many  in  that  workshop  ?    Ten  to  one  his  reply  is,  "  There  is  just 
one  I  know  of  that  is  a  real  Christian"  ;  or,   "Just  two  or  three  that  take  any 
interest  in  these  things."     It  is  the  old  story,  "Few  there  be  that  find  it."    Now 
I  ask  you,  "To  which  group  do  you  wish  to  belong  ? "    If  to  the  men  of  the  world,  I 
don't  know  what  brought  you  here,  nor  have  I  any  message  for  you  ;  but  if  to  the 
men  of  God,  then  I  want  to  speak  to  you.     Now,  by  "the  men  of  the  world  "  is  not 
meant  merely  a  shrewd,  sagacious  person,  but  one  who  is  a  mere  earthworm,  sinful, 
sordid,  and  gi'eedy  of  gain,  whose  only  thought  is  to  make  money  and  feather  his 
nest  weU.     Think — I.  Of  these  men  of  the  world  and  theie  portion.     It  is  a 
great  mistake  to  think  that  as  soon  as  you  are  purse  rich  you  will  be  heart  rich. 
There  is  many  a  Midas  in  this  city  to-day,  at  whose  touch  everything  seems  to  turn 
into  gold,  who  would  frankly  tell  you  he  had  a  far  lighter  heart  when,  as  a  young 
clerk,  he  was  earning  £60  or  £80  a  year.      The  wealthy  Sir  Charles  Flower  only 
spoke  for  many  a  rich  man  like  himself  when,  to  a  beggar  who  asked  him  for 
money  to  get  a  piece  of  bread,  he  said,  "  I  would  gladly  give  you  a  sovereign  if  you 
would  give  me  your  appetite."    Riches  do  make  happy  ;  but  it  is  not  the  riches  of 
the  pocket,  but  the  riches  of  the  mind  and  heart.      The  riches  of  taste,  of  culture, 
of  affection,  and,   above  all,  the  riches  of  God's  grace.     But  men  do  not  believe 
this.     They  hear  it  said,  and  then  seek  after  riches  as  if  riches  were  everything  and 
the  Bible  aU  untrue.    But  let  such  remember  that  after  all,  let  them  gain  what  they 
may,  it  is  only  "a  portion  for  this  life."    Not  a  farthing  can  you  take  to  the  other 
side  of  the  grave.     It  will  be  with  you  as  with  the  partridge  (J erem.  xvii.  11).    Men 
of  the  world,  go  you  over  your  portion  and  tick  off  each  particular,  and  say,  "This, 
this,  this,  must  be  left  behind."     Lord  Chesterfield  said,   "  I  have  run  the  siUy 
rounds  of  business  and  of  pleasure,  and  I  have  done  with  them  all.    I  look  back  on  all 
that  is  past  as  one  of  those  romantic  dreams  which  opium  produces,  and  I  have  no 
wish  to  repeat  the  nauseous  dose."    Yes,  "a  portion  in  this  life"  is  but  a  poor 
unsatisfying  portion  at  the  best.     II.  The  contrast  :  the  man  of  God  and  his 
portion.     "As  for  me,"  says  David  in  the  next  verse,  "I  wiU  behold  Thy  face," 
&c.    He  speaks  of  himself  as  quite  an  exception,  a  rare  case  amid  the  common  throng. 
But  these  are  the  happiest  men  after  all.     David's  heart  was  set  on  God.     "The 
Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance.     I  have  a  goodly  heritage."    He  meant 
that  not  one  of  them  was  so  happy  as  he.     See  David's  secret  of  happiness.     1.  "  I 
will  behold  Thy  face  in  righteousness."     Yes,  the  first  secret  of  a  happy  life  is  to 
get  right  with  God.    I  know  many  of  you  feel  this  to  be  true.    Then  surrender 
yourselves  to  Him  now.     It  will  introduce  us  to  a  new  and  most  blessed  experience. 
As  that  thoughtful  and  devout  French  believer,  Lacordaire,  wrote,  speaking  of  his 
own  convei-sion,  "He  who  has  never  known  such  a  time  has  not  fully  realised  life. 
Once  a  real  Christian,  the  world  did  not  vanish  before  my  eyes  ;  it  rather  assumed 
nobler  proportions,  as  I  myself  did.     I  began  to  see  therein  a  sufferer  needing  help  ; 
a  mighty  misfortune  resulting  from  all  the  sorrows  of  ages  past  and  to  come  :  and  I 
could  imagine  nothing  comparable  to  the  happiness  of  ministering  to  it,  with  the 
help  of  the  Cross  and  the  Gospel  of  Christ."     2.  "I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake, 
with  Thy  likeness."     No  doubt  the  morning  of  the  resurrection  is  mainly  meant 
here.      But  we  may  take  the  awaking  as  telling  of  each  morning's  awakening, 
and  of  a  prospect  which  will  satisfy  your  soul.     Oh,  tell  me,  have  your  eyelids  ever 
opened  with  the  earthly  dawn,  and  found  you  saying,  with  the  first  moments  of 
returning  consciousness,  "I  am  satisfied"?    Rather,  have  not  care,  and  depression, 
and  a  feeling  of  life's  monotony  weighed  down  your  own  spirit,  as  another  day  called 
you  forth  to  its  duty  and  routine  ?     Ah,  you  want  something  nobler  than  the 
prospect  of  gain  to  give  a  sparkle  and  a  beauty  to  life,  and  to  make  the  heart  truly 
glad ;  and  that  nobler  thing  is  the  prospect  of  being  like  God.     This  is  the  prospect 
that  cheers  a  true  Christian,  ' '  We  know  that  when  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like 
Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."    {J.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)        Men  of  the 
world  : — David  prays  to  be  delivered  from  the  wicked,  that  he  might  not  fall  under 
their  power,  nor  be  numbered  with  them  as  "  men  of  the  world  which  have, "  &e.    Now 
note — I.  Wicked  men  may  have  a  large  portion  in  this  life.     God  deals  thus 
with  them — 1.  To  prove  the  extent  and  kindness  of  His  providence ;  2.  And  that 
judgment  is  His  strange  work,  and  how  disingenuous  is  the  conduct  of  the  wicked 
whom  He  daily  loadeth  with  benefits.     3.  Wicked  men,  in  the  hand  of  Providence, 
may  do  some  services  for  God  or  His  people,  and  for  this  He  will  bless  them  (Ezek. 
xxix.  18,  19  ;  2  Kings  x.  30).     4.  Because  they  choose  their  portion  here  and  He  lets 
them  take  it,  and  therein  all  they  shall  have.     5.  For  judgment,  since  wealth  will 
surely  corrupt  them  yet  more.     6.  To  instruct  the  righteous — (1)  In  the  evil  of  their 


PSALM  xvii.]  TEE  PSALMS,  281 

own  hearts,  that  they  cannot  trust  them :  they  will  promise  and  vow  what  they 
will  do  if  they  become  rich,  but  they  never  do  it.  (2)  How  little  value  the  things 
of  the  world  are  in  God's  sight,  for  God  gives  them  often  plentifully  to  His  enemies. 
(3)  That  our  present  condition  is  no  true  prophecy  of  our  future.  Neither  when  we 
are  rich  or  poor.  (4)  That  there  is  something  far  better  for  them.  They  "shall 
behold  God's  face, "  &c.  (5)  That  they  must  be  Mke  God,  who  does  good  to  His  enemies 
and  them  that  hate  Him  (Matt.  v.  44,  45).  II.  Living  and  dying,  what  the 
WICKED  HAVE  HERE  IS  THEIR  ALL.  1.  By  their  choice,  they  think  this  world  best. 
2.  Their  names  are  therefore  written  in  earth  as  limited  to  it.  3.  They  are  only  fit 
for  a  portion  in  this  life  ;  and  4.  They  have  abused  their  portion  here,  and  shall  never 
be  tried  with  any  other.  5.  They  are  not  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ 
6.  Having  desired  no  more  than  the  world,  there  is  no  more  for  them  :  only  misery. 
III.  Upon  what  AccotrNTs  their  condition  may  be  said  to  be  miserable.  It 
is  so  because — 1.  They  hold  their  portion  by  so  imcertain  a  tenure.  2.  Without 
the  added  joy  of  the  love  of  God.  3.  And  without  Christ.  4.  "Without  foundation 
for  solid  peace  and  comfort.  For  their  sins  are  unpardoned  ;  conscience  alarms ; 
the  secret  arm  of  God  is  on  them  (Deut.  xxviii.  17).  Then  5.  Their  prosperity 
tends  to  their  destruction,  leading  them  to  forgetfulness  both  of  God  and  heaven. 
6.  And  will  be  succeeded  by  such  awful  misery.  IV.  Whence  is  it  that  saints 
beckon  it  to  be  so  ?  Because — 1.  They  have  found  the  world  to  be  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit.  2.  And  they  see  the  end  of  all  things  approaching.  But  3.  They 
look  by  faith  to  another  and  ever-enduring  world.  Application :  1.  With  what 
certainty  may  we  infer  a  day  of  judgment  from  the  wicked  having  now  so  large  a 
share  of'^outward  good,  whilst  some  of  the  heirs  of  heaven  have  scarce  where  to  lay 
their  heads.  2.  They  reckon  without  looking  to  the  end  who  envy  the  men  of  the 
world  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  18).  8.  What  reason  have  we  to  pity  those  on  whom  Christ's 
words  will  fall  in  their  full  weight  (Luke  vi.  24).     {D.  Wilcox.) 

Ver.  15.  I  •will  behold  Thy  face  In  righteousness.  —  TJue  vision  of  the  face: — 
I.  The  vision  of  the  face  of  God.  1.  The  object  of  this  vision  :  "Thy  face." 
(1)  A  sensible  glory :  such  a  glory  was  seen  by  Moses  at  Sinai,  afterwards  in  the 
tabernacle,  and  at  the  transfiguration.  (2)  An  intellectual  glory  :  glory  is  resplendent 
excellency,  real  worth  made  conspicuous.  This  glory  is  the  conspicuous  lustre  of 
Divine  perfections.  2.  The  act  of  beholding :  glory  has  a  peculiar  respect  to  the 
power  of  seeing.  Sight  is  the  most  perfect  sense  :  noble,  comprehensive,  quick  and 
sprightly.  The  act  of  the  mind  is  called  seeing.  The  blessed  shall  have  the  glory 
of  God  so  presented  as  "to  know  as  they  are  known."  II.  The  soul's  participa- 
tion OF  His  likeness.  How  strange  an  errand  hath  the  Gospel  in  the  world,  to 
transform  men  and  make  them  like  God.  1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  cannot 
be  like  God.  God  will  endure  no  such  imitation  of  Him  as  to  be  rivalled  in  the 
point  of  His  Godhead  (Ezek.  xxviii.  6-10).  2.  There  is  a  just  and  laudable 
imitation  of  God  :  we  are  to  be  imitators  of  God  (Eph.  v.  1).  3.  Man  has  already 
a  likeness  to  God  :  the  material  world  represents  Him,  as  a  house  the  builder  ; 
spiritual  beings,  as  a  child  the  father :  others  carry  His  footsteps,  these  His  image. 
4.  There  is  a  natural  image  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man,  inseparable  from  it,  its 
spiritual  immortal  nature,  its  intellectual  and  elective  powers  are  the  image  of  the 
same  powers  in  God.  There  is  also  a  moral  likeness,  wisdom,  mercy,  truth,  right- 
eousness, holiness.  5.  Assimilation  to  God  in  moral  perfections  conduces  to  the 
soul's  satisfaction  and  blessedness:  "We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him 
as  He  is. "  How  great  a  hope  is  this  !  Were  the  dust  of  the  earth  turned  into 
stars  in  the  firmament,  what  could  equal  the  greatness  and  wonder  of  this  mighty 
change.  III.  The  resulting  satisfaction  :  the  soul's  rest  in  God,  its  perfect 
enjoyment  of  the  most  perfect  good,  the  perfecting  of  its  desires  in  delight  or  joy. 
Desire  is  love  in  motion,  delight  love  in  rest.  It  is  a  rational,  voluntarj',  pleasant, 
active  rest :  action  about  the  end  shall  be  perpetuated,  though  action  towards  it 
ceases.  It  is  the  rest  of  hope  perfected  in  fruition.  {John  Howe.)  Who  has  the 
best  of  Ut — This  Psalm  is  called  a  prayer,  and  how  appropriately.  It  is  such  as 
comes  only  out  of  a  sufferer's  heart.  We  owe  our  whole  salvation  to  Christ,  but, 
secondarily,  we  receiv*  much  through  the  sufi'erings  of  men.  The  world  will  never 
know,  till  its  whole  history  is  reviewed  and  aU  its  mysteries  explained,  how  much 
instruction,  comfort,  incitement  have  flowed  from  the  trials  ana  suflFerings  of  this 
one  man.  In  this  respect  David  and  Paul  have  done  more  for  the  race  than  perhaps 
any  two  men  who  ever  lived.  Their  great  souls  were  often  and  heavily  pressed  by 
adversities  and  afflictions,  in  order  that  sweet  wine  of  comfort  and  strength  to  others 


282  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvii. 

might  flow  from  them.  I.  This  versk  is  the  mount  of  victory.  The  dust  of 
the  battle  plain  is  passed  over,  the  perplexities  of  life  left,  and  here  we  have  a  clear 
prevision  of  a  perfect  solution,  and  some  realisation  of  it  also.  The  verse  does  not 
refer  exclusively  to  the  awaking  from  the  sleep  of  death  at  the  resurrection  ;  nor 
to  the  perfect  moral  likeness  of  God  and  the  beatific  vision  which  we  shall  then 
enjoy.  This  is  not  the  first  interpretation  that  suggests  itself,  and  ought  not,  how- 
ever true,  to  be  taken  as  its  exclusive  meaning.  II.  What,  then,  is  thb  case  ? 
The  nature  of  it  is  sounded  out  in  the  very  first  words  of  the  Psalm.  "  Hear  the  right, 
O  Lord  ! "  It  is  a  case  of  conflict  as  between  him  and  other  men.  It  is  the  great 
struggle  of  this  life  in  which  many  are  engaged  ;  in  which,  if  we  judge  simply  by 
outward  appearances,  some  gain  a  very  considerable  and  striking  advantage  over 
others.  They  seem  to  have  the  best  of  it.  To  David  the  conflict  at  this  time  was 
hot  and  searching,  with  a  great  deal  of  personality  in  it.  He  speaks  of  "the 
wicked  that  oppress"  ;  of  "deadly  enemies  compassing  him  about"  ;  of  men  who 
"spoke  proudly  with  their  mouth  ' ;  of  men  "inclosed  in  their  own  fat" — so  well- 
fed,  so  prosperous,  so  like  prize  men  were  they  ; — of  others  ' '  lurking  like  the  young 
lion  in  secret  places,  greedy  for  the  prey" — ready  to  grasp  advantage,  ready  to 
spring  on  him  with  their  teeth.  Then  he  describes  their  character  generally,  in 
tne  fourteenth  verse,  in  language  which  applies  to  one  age  almost  as  much  as  to 
another.  He  calls  them  "  men  of  the  world,  which  have  their  portion  in  this  life  : 
whose  belly  is  filled  with  hid  treasure  " — with  the  things  they  gather,  and  hoard, 
and  store  away.  Men,  too,  who  keep  and  bequeath  to  their  children  what  they 
have  gathered.  These  were  the  men  against  whom  David  felt  himself  striving ;  he 
felt  that  if  they  were  right  and  happy,  he  must  be  wrong  and  miserable,  and  vice 
versd.  But  he  was  quite  sure  that  he  was  right  and  not  they,  and  that  their  misery 
was  coming.  Hence  he  says,  "As  for  me,  I  shall  be  satisfied, "  &c.  He  woula 
awake  day  by  day,  when  the  present  sorrow  had  passed,  as  he  knew  it  would,  to  see 
God's  beautiful  likeness  and  to  have  it  in  a  measure  in  himself.  With  this  he  would 
be  satisfied.  This  would  be  victory  even  now.  To  be  made  and  kept  righteous,  to 
see  God  in  my  life.  His  face  in  my  prayers,  and  to  watch  His  image  forming  in  my 
soul :  this  is  to  win  the  battle.  I  will  complain  no  more  !  I  am  satisfied  !  Now, 
this  is  just — III.  The  judgment  we  ought  to  form  in  our  own  case.  It  is  a 
question  always  on  trial,  and  always  coming  to  some  settlement — How  is  the  best  of 
life  to  be  found  ?  How  shall  we  taste  the  sweetness,  and  gather  the  flower,  and  wear 
the  crown,  and  say  with  joy,  self-respect,  and  full  conviction,  "This  it  is  to  be  a 
man  "  ?  Here,  on  the  one  hand,  are  "  the  men  of  the  world. "  David  tells  us,  and  we 
know,  what  they  are  in  their  aims,  motives,  and  ways,  and  in  their  successes.  They 
get  wealth,  position,  name,  influence,  and  some  of  them  a  considerable  measure  of 
low  happiness  and  contentment.  See,  this  is  the  man,  coming  out  of  his  chamber 
in  the  morning  after  sound  sleep,  radiant  and  healthy.  And  these  are  his  children, 
to  not  one  of  whom  he  has  ever  named  seriously  the  name  of  God,  but  to  each  of 
whom  he  will  probably  leave  a  good  deal  of  money.  And  these  are  his  gardens 
and  parks,  fair  to  the  eye,  and  fruitful  in  their  season.  And  this  is  his  chariot, 
with  the  swift  horses  to  bear  him  to  the  city.  And  in  the  city,  when  he  comes,  see 
how  he  is  received,  and  what  a  power  he  is  !  How  with  his  pen  he  can  remove 
ships  to  the  far  ocean,  and  open  railways  on  the  land  !  And  he  can  speak,  and 
"make  the  worse  appear  the  better  reason"  ;  and,  as  with  magician's  wand,  raise 
success  out  of  failure  itself.  Now  take  a  simple  Christian  man,  who  just  has  enough 
and  little  over,  who  has  no  name  in  the  public,  who  is  known  but  to  a  small  circle, 
who  can  cheer  a  fellow-pilgrim  here  and  there,  and  off"er  a  prayer  at  a  sick  bed. 
How  small  he  seems  in  the  common  estimation  beside  this  great  "man  of  the  world." 
"The  simple  man  is  very  well  in  his  own  place  and  way,  and  it  is  a  good  thing  for 
him  that  he  has  the  consolations  of  religion  and  the  hopes  of  the  future  life  to  cheer 
him  amid  the  struggles  and  hardships  of  his  lot.  But  it  cannot  be  said  that  his  lot, 
even  with  these  consolations,  is  at  all  to  be  compared  with  that  of  the  other  man  iu 
this  life.  After  this  life  is  over  his  lot  will  be  better,  but  here  it  is  worse."  "  No," 
says  the  text ;  "  it  is  better  now,  and  here.  He  is  the  great  man  who  is  good.  He 
is  the  happy  man  who  sees  the  face  of  Goi).  He  is  the  noble  man  wlio  strives  after 
righteousness,  and  who  satisfies  himself  with  the  Divine  likeness  in  his  soul."    IV.  It 

CONCERNS   us   MUCH   TO   GET    AND    KKKP   THIS   JUD'JMKNT   OK  THINGS.       It   UCeds   an 

effort.  It  is  an  advanced  lesson  in  Christian  living.  Peo2)le  stop  short  of  it,  and 
many  miss  it  habitually.  As  when  they  conjecture  that  v  oiLlly  men  Lave  a  great 
deal  of  inward  misery  which  they  never  tell — fear,  gu'lt,  and  apjirehension  of  danger 
haunting  them  like  ghosts.     Nom',  this  may  be  true  of  some,  but  certainly  not  of 


PSALM  xvii.]  THE  PSALMS.  283 

all,  nor  most.  They  are  well  satisfied,  and  have  no  misgivings.  But  what  then  ? 
Are  tliey  who  nre  thus  satisfied  better  off  than  the  devout,  struggling,  praying 
servant  of  God  ?  How  menu  of  us  to  think  so.  In  reality  there  is  no  comparison 
between  the  two.  The  tried  Christian  in  full  view  of  the  prosperous  and  happy 
nian  of  tlie  world  can  say,  "As  for  me,  I  behold  Thy  face  in  righteousness  I  am 
satisfied  with  Tliy  likeness."  Then,  again,  we  say  th.at  "compensation  is  coming — 
that  the  next  li^e  will  rectify  all."  That  also  is  true.  But  that  is  not  "  the  present 
truth."  The  present  truth  is,  that  we  have  the  advantage  now;  that  we  do  not 
need  to  wait  for  the  compensation  ;  that  godliness  is  better  than  ungodliness  all  the 
world  over  ;  that  the  face  of  God  shining  down  ujion  a  man  is  the  supreme  felicity 
and  the  last  ideal ;  and  that  to  awake  morning  by  morning  and  realise  the  growing 
likeness  of  God  in  our  spirits  is  joy  like  that  of  heaven.  But  if  a  man  send  his 
heart  hankering  after  the  joys  of  a  life  to  come  because  he  thinks  he  has  not 
his  due  here,  and  that  then  and  there  it  will  be  made  up  to  him,  what  is  thia 
but  worldliness  after  all  ?  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  any  man  loves  the  light  of 
God's  face  more  than  every  visible  creature  and  thing,  and  strives  after  His 
righteousness  by  the  aids  of  His  grace,  and  puts  on  His  likeness  as  dress  and 
beauty,  and  * '  awakes "  in  it  now  and  again  to  his  thankful  joy  and  satisfaction, 
saying,  "  This  it  is  to  live  !  let  this  blessed  experience  grow  in  me  until  it  blooms 
and  brightens  into  heaven  " — then  he  may  take  a  text  like  this  and  follow  its  most 
spiritual  suggestions,  and  lift  it  to  its  last  and  highest  applications,  make  it  speak 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  the  appearance  in  heaven,  the  immortal  life.  {Anon.) 
The  vision  of  visions : — The  mind  of  man  is  invisible,  yet  its  workings  are  often 
evident  in  the  changes  of  the  countenance.  Thus  the  playful  smile  indicates 
pleasure ;  the  clouded  brow,  wrath.  In  like  manner,  though  the  mind  of  God  is 
invisible,  yet  are  His  attributes  variously  manifested.  I.  The  face  of  God  is 
AKY  EXPRESSION  OF  His  CHARACTER.  1.  The  Shekinah,  therefore,  is  styled  His 
face,  (1)  Thus  Moses  is  said  to  have  entreated  the  face  of  Jehovah  when  he  inter- 
ceded for  Israel  amid  the  storm  and  flame  in  which  God  descended  upon  Sinai 
(Exod.  xxxii.  11,  marg ;  see  also  xxxiii.  11).  (2)  So  Aaron,  after  gazing  upon 
those  awful  involutions  of  the  glory  between  the  cherubim,  came  forth  and  blessed 
the  people,  invoking  for  them  the  spiritual  reality  of  what  he  had  seen  in  symbol 
(Numb.  vi.  24-26),  (3)  The  invocations,  "Lit1;  up  Thy  countenance,"  "Cause  Thy 
face  to  shine,"  and  such  like,  of  frequent  occurrence,  allude  to  the  cloud  of  glory. 
2.  Christ  is  pre-eminently  the  face  of  Jehovah.  (1)  Within  the  cloud  there  was  a 
radiant  human  form  which  is  distinguished  as  the  "Similitude  of  the  Lord" 
(Numb.  xii.  8  ;  Ezek.  i.  26).  This  adumbrated  the  taking  up  of  the  manhood  into 
the  Godhead  in  the  Incarnation.  (2)  Christ  is  anticipated  in  prophecy  as  the 
"Glory  of  the  Lord  to  be  revealed,"  and  in  the  fulfilment  He  is  described  as  the 
"Face  of  the  Lord"  (Isa.  xl.  1-3;  Luke  i.  76).  (3)  Christ  is  pre-eminently  the 
face  or  expression  of  the  character  of  God  as  His  most  perfect  Revealer  (John 
xiv.  9  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4  ;  Col.  i.  15  ;  Heb.  i.  3).  II.  Righteousness  is  our  quali- 
fication FOR  beholding  THE  FACE  OF  GoD.  1.  God  requires  in  us  this 
?[ualification.  No  wonder,  seeing  the  mire  of  worldliness  clings  to  us,  that  we 
ail  to  experience  as  we  might  the  spiritual  manifestations  of  the  Son  of  God 
(John  xiv.  21  ;  Eph.  i.  17,  18).  Divine  manifestations  are  terrible  to  the  un- 
righteous. When  God  "looked  out"  from  the  cloud  upon  the  Egyptians,  that 
was  the  signal  for  their  destruction.  "The  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  the 
judgment"  (Psa.  i.  4-6;  Rev.  ri.  16,  17).  2.  Righteousness  is  attainable  through 
faith.  (1)  Of  this  we  have  a  notable  illustration  in  the  history  of  the  first  family. 
Cain  laments  his  excommunication  from  the  place  of  the  Presence — "From  Thy 
face  shall  I  be  hid"  (Gen.  iii.  24,  iv.  3-14).  (2)  The  history  of  Jacob  wrestling 
ig  an  example  no  less  appropriate  (Gen.  xxxii.  24-30).  He  called  the  place  of 
his  triumph  Peniel,  or  the  Face  of  God.  III.  Fruition  will  be  perfected  in 
HEAVEN.  1.  The  soul  cannot  be  satisfied  on  earth.  2.  Satisfaction  is  promised  in 
the  resurrection.  {J.  A.  Afacdonald.)  The  vision  of  the  face: — The  opening 
phrase  of  this  verse  is  expressive  of  a  noble  singularity.  "As  for  me."  It  is  the 
utterance  of  moral  manhood.  The  Psalmist  has  been  speaking  of  those  who  have 
their  portion  in  this  life,  and  he  says,  "Be  the  animals  that  you  are  !  As  for  me, 
I  will  seek  higher  things.  As  a  being  made  in  the  image  of  God,  I  will  find  my 
satisfactions  in  contemplation  of  and  assimilation  to  that  image. "  "As  for  me "  la 
the  language  of  true  soul  nobility.  And  there  are  times  when  we  too  must  dare  to 
utter  it,  if  we  would  be  true  to  our  higher  nature  and  count  for  anything  in  the 
world.    The  men  of  the  period  when  this  Psalm  was  written  had  very  dim  and 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvil. 

vague  notions  of  immortality.  With  them  a  life  beyond  the  grave  was  but  a  fitful 
hope  or  a  sublime  perad venture,  and  expressions  such  as  this  are  to  be  interpreted 
of  the  present  life  and  experience,  and  not  of  the  heavenly  state.  The  vision  of  the 
Divine  face  here  anticipated  is  not  the  beatific  vision  after  death,  or  that  only  in  a 
very  secondary  and  shadowy  sense,  but  the  daily  experience  of  the  earthly  life. 
The  Psalm  is  poetry,  couched  in  poetical  imagery.  Life  to  the  Psalmist  would  be 
worth  living  just  in  the  proportion  in  which  he  could  have  the  sight  of  God.  What, 
then,  did  he  mean  by  the  Divine  face  ?  The  more  enlightened  prophets  and  law- 
givers of  old  had  a  profound  sense  of  the  danger  of  thinking  of  God  otherwise  than 
in  His  spiritual  relations  to  men.  Hence  the  prohibition  to  make  any  pictorial 
image  or  statuesque  representation  of  Deity.  Yet  there  is  a  very  real  meaning  in 
this  expression,  "the  face  of  God,"  and  it  may  be  a  very  real  vision  to  us  all.  In 
the  face,  character  is  pre-eminently  revealed.  The  face  is  the  man.  Look  into  the 
face  and  you  read  the  soul.  The  play  of  all  the  affections  is  there.  There  are  faces 
that  are  the  rendezvous  of  all  the  virtues.  The  face  of  God  then  stands  for  the 
nature  of  God ;  and  the  Psalmist's  anticipation  of  beholding  that  face  meant  the 
prospect  of  his  happy  realisation  of  the  Divine  gentleness,  strength,  and  righteous-- 
ness.  It  is  men's  faces  that  are  the  face  of  God.  As  His  spiritual  qualities  are 
bodied  forth  in  men's  lives,  so  may  we  see  Divine  lineaments  in  the  features  of  men. 
We  are  taught  to  behold  "  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  true 
glory  of  God  is  in  His  moral  attributes,  and  Christ  incarnated  those  Divine 
qualities  in  His  nature.  Whoso  looked  up  into  His  face  saw  there  the  glory  and 
the  beauty  of  the  Ineffable ;  and  so  many  a  human  countenance,  if  not  the  face, 
is  a  face  of  God  :  for  the  radiance  of  a  Divine  love,  the  lustre  of  a  Divine  purity, 
the  patience  of  a  Divine  charity,  the  tenderness  of  a  Divine  sympathy  is  there. 
Each  of  these  is  a  lineament  of  Deity.  The  dying  Bunsen,  as  he  looked  up  into  the 
eyes  of  his  wife  bending  over  him,  said,  ' '  In  thy  face  have  I  seen  the  EternaL " 
Few  artists  have  dared  to  essay  the  Divine  form  and  features.  But  I  once  saw  in 
the  gallery  at  Florence  a  picture  which  very  much  struck  me,  and  the  memory  of  it 
has  been  with  me  ever  since.  It  was  by  Carlo  Dolci,  and  entitled  "  L'Etemo 
Padre,"  —  the  Eternal  Father.  It  was  a  bold  and  unconventional  conception. 
There  was  no  attempt  to  deify  the  figure.  It  was  just  a  man's  form  and  face,  and 
not  only  that,  but  the  face  was  full  of  human  grief  and  misery.  An  aspect  of 
ineffable  sadness  was  in  the  eyes,  and  the  whole  countenance  wore  an  expression 
of  infinite  sorrow  and  solicitude.  And  surely  there  must  be  an  unutterable  sorrow 
at  the  heart  of  the  world  !  This  vision  of  the  face,  then — when  are  we  to  see  itt 
To-morrow.  "I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake" — that  is,  to-morrow  morning, 
every  morning,  this  morning.  Include  in  the  Psalmist's  expression  the  conception 
of  the  Divine  nearness.  To  see  a  face,  you  must  be  near  the  person.  Near,  to 
faith's  apprehension,  is  the  Divine  presence.  Something  more  than  vicinity  is 
meant.  Intimacy  of  fellowship  is  implied.  Familiar  interchange  of  thought  and 
affection.  There  is  another  thought  hinted  by  the  figure  of  the  face,  namely, 
propitiousness.  When  he  speaks  of  beholding  the  face  of  God,  it  is  in  the  con- 
fidence that  God  is  his  friend  and  not  his  enemy.  Oriental  monarchs  only  showed 
the  face  to  those  to  whom  they  intended  to  be  clement  and  gracious.  The  Psalmist 
was  happy  in  the  conviction  that,  humbly  endeavouring  to  walk  in  the  ways  of 
righteousness,  he  could  look  even  God  in  the  face,  and  that  His  face  would  not  be 
turned  away.  .  .  .  There  are  two  elements  in  this  satisfaction.  1.  The  perception 
of  the  Divine  image.  2.  The  assimilation  to  that  image.  In  contemplating  that 
likeness    we    grow    into    it.      {J.    Halsey.)  The    Christian's    prospect: — "A 

Christian  is  the  highest  style  of  man,"  and  the  noblest  work  of  God.  The  text 
tells  of  his  high  and  exalted  state  of  happiness  which  he  shall  obtain  in  the 
heavenly  world.  It  consists  in— I.  The  full  vision  of  the  Divine  glort. 
Note — 1.  The  grandeur  of  the  vision.  2.  The  manner  of  it.  "  In  righteousness," 
that  is,  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  3.  The  certainty  of  it.  Scripture  and  ex- 
perience assure  us  of  it.  II.  The  complete  resemblance  to  the  Divine  image. 
1.  The  glorious  expectation — to  be  like  our  Saviour  and  our  God.  2.  The  period  of 
accomplishnent.  "When  I  awake,"  that  is,  on  the  resurrection  morn.  3.  The 
satisfaction  obtained.  Conclusion  :  See  1.  The  value  of  the  soul.  2.  The  vanity  of 
the  world.  3.  The  excellence  of  religion.  {Ebenezer  Temple. )  Beholding  God! a 
face : — This  is  the  language — 1.  Of  a  man  whose  mind  is  made  up,  who  has  decided 
for  himself.  "As  for  me" — let  others  do  as  they  wUl.  2.  Of  a  man  rising  in  life, 
and  with  great  prospects  before  him.  He  had  looked  beyond  this  world,  though  he 
was  to  rise  therein.     3.  Of  a  Jew.     For  in  Jndah  was  God  known ;  His  name  was 


PSAlM  xvii.]  THE  PSALMS.  285 

great  in  Israel.  And  though  their  knowledge  was  dim,  it  was  real ;  and  here  is  an 
onlook  to  thp  blessed  future  life.  I.  The  bkkolding  of  God's  face  meant  the 
ENJOYMENT  OF  His  FAVOUR.  TMs  its  Constant  meaning.  And  in  heaven  "They 
shall  see  His  face."  All  that  means  we  cannot  know  now,  but  this  one  thing  we 
know— II.  How  IT  WILL  be  kealised.  It  will  be  in  and  through  righteousness. 
For  meiit  and  meetness  this  is  needed.  Our  title  to  behold  God's  face  must  be 
righteousness,  and  tliat  we  have  in  Christ  Our  meetness  and  preparedness  for  it 
is  righteousness,  anil  this  the  Holy  Spirit  will  work  in  us.  Xo  one  longs  for  the 
Christian  heaven  but  the  Christian  soul.  {William  Jay.)  The  believer's  vision  : 
—I.  What  the  Psalmist  means  by  "in  righteousness."  1.  Speak  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  involves  everything  in  it  necessary  to 
deliver  and  to  save  man  for  ever  and  ever.  The  passive  obedience  closed  the  gates 
of  hell ;  his  active  obedience  opened  those  of  heaven.  Connected  with  this 
righteousness  there  must  necessarily  be  another.  Rectitude  of  principle.  If  ever 
we  behold  the  face  of  God,  either  here  or  hereafter,  in  triumph,  we  must  behold  it 
in  the  image  as  well  as  in  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.  II.  The  believer's 
vision  of  Deity.  God  intended  we  should,  even  in  this  life,  have  very  glorious 
views  of  His  perfections.  The  face  is  frequently  an  index  to  the  bosom.  By  the 
face  is  sometimes  meant  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  III.  The  believer's 
PROSPECTIVE  view.  He  is  now  fully  satisfied  with  his  God,  but  dissatisfied  with 
Ms  little  knowledge  of  Him  and  his  little  love  to  Him.  The  discipline  of  life  is  to 
end  in  fixing  the  full  face  of  His  child  on  Himself.  Application  :  1.  We  must  have 
righteousness  in  principle  as  well  as  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  Are  there  any  who  are  satisfied  with  the  creature  ?  3.  Are  there  any  who  would 
make  the  creature  their  portion  for  ever  ?  4.  Address  those  who  have  God  for  their 
portion.  {W.  ffowels.)  The  hope  of  fufnire  bliss : — It  would  be  difficult  to  say 
to  which  the  Gospel  owes  most,  to  its  friends  or  to  its  enemies.  For  when  they  have 
persecuted  Christ's  servants  they  have  scattered  them  abroad,  so  that  they  have 
gone  everywhere  preaching  the  Word.  Jesus  Christ  would  never  have  preached 
many  of  His  discourses  had  not  His  foes  compelled  Him  to  answer  them.  So  with 
the  Book  of  Psalms.  Had  not  David  been  sorely  tried,  we  should  have  missed  very 
many  of  these  holy  songs.  This  Psalm  is  one  of  those  which  hsui  never  been 
written  but  for  his  great  trouble.  Our  text  tells  of  his  consolation  in  the  hope  of 
future  bliss.  We  note — I.  The  spirit  of  the  text.  It  breathes  the  spirit  of 
one  who  is — 1.  Entirely  free  from  envy.  The  wicked  may  do  as  they  will,  but  I 
envy  them  not.  "As  for  me,  I,"  &c.  2.  Looking  into  the  future.  "I  shall  be 
satisfied."  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  present.  He  looks  beyond  the  grave  to 
another  world.  He  who  lives  in  the  present  is  a  fool ;  but  wise  men  are  content 
to  look  after  future  things.  When  Milton  wrote  his  Paradise  Lost  he  might  know, 
perhaps,  that  he  should  have  little  fame  in  his  lifetime ;  but  he  said,  "I  shall  be 
honoured  when  my  head  shall  sleep  in  the  grave."  There  are  many  things  that  we 
never  hope  to  be  rewarded  for  here,  but  we  shall  be  by  and  by.  Christian,  live  in 
the  future.  3.  Full  of  faith.  There  is  no  "perhaps"  about  his  words.  "I  will 
behold  "  ;  "I  shall  be  satisfied."  And  there  are  many  of  God's  people  who  can  say 
the  like.  But  such  must  expect  to  have  trouble,  for  God  never  gives  strong  faith 
without  fiery  trial.  He  will  not  make  you  a  mighty  warrior  if  He  does  not  intend 
to  try  your  skill  in  battle.  God's  swords  must  be  used.  The  old  Toledo  blades 
of  heaven  must  be  smitten  against  the  armour  of  the  evil  one,  and  yet  they  shall  not 
break.  II.  The  matter  of  this  passage.  1.  David  expected  to  behold  God'» 
face.  We  have  seen  His  hand  in  both  awful  and  gentle  forms.  And  we  have 
heard  God's  voice ;  but  the  vision  of  God,  what  must  that  be  ?  It  is  said  of  the 
temple  of  Diana,  that  it  was  so  splendidly  decorated  with  gold,  and  so  bright  and 
shining,  that  a  porter  at  the  door  always  said  to  every  one  that  entered,  "Take 
heed  to  your  eyes  ;  you  will  be  struck  with  blindness  unless  you  take  heed  to  your 
eyes."  But,  oh  I  that  view  of  glory.  Who  can  know  what  it  is  to  see  God's  face  ? 
2.  There  was  a  peculiar  sweetness  mixed  with  this  joy.  For  he  should  behold 
God's  face  "in  righteousness."  How  our  sins  have  dimmed  our  sight,  that  we  could 
not  get  a  clear  prospect  of  Jesus.  But  yonder  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  3.  And 
there  will  be  sat^fiaction.  "I  shall  be  satisfied."  Imagination,  intellect, 
memory,  hope — all  will  be  satisfied.  4.  But  when  shall  this  satisfaction  bo  I 
"When  I  awake  in  Thy  likeness."  Not  till  then.  On  the  resurrection  morn,  when 
complete  in  soul  and  body,  they  will  awake.  Their  bodies  tiU  then  are  in  their 
graves.  But  then  they  shaU  be  restored.  When  a  Roman  conqueror  had  been  at 
war,  and  won  great  victories,  he  would  very  likely  come  back  with  his  soldiers,  enter 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psai.m  xvii. 

into  his  house  and  enjoy  himself  till  the  next  day,  when  he  wouM  go  out  of  tho 
city  and  then  come  in  again  in  triumph.  Now  the  saints,  as  it  weie,  steal  into 
heiven  witliout  t'ueir  bodies  ;  but  on  the  last  day,  when  their  bodies  wake  up,  they 
will  enter  in  their  triumphal  chariots  ;  and  the  body  is  to  be  in  tlie  likeness  of 
Christ.  The  spirit  already  is.  III.  Heke  is  a  vkry  sad  contrast  implied.  We 
are  all  togetlier  now,  undivided  ;  but  the  ,i,Teat  dividing  day  will  come  when  Christ,  tho 
Judge,  shall  welcome  His  own  people,  but  with  lifted  sword  shall  sweep  the  wicked 
into  the  bottomless  pit.  But  now,  whosoever  will  may  be  saved.  (C  H.  Sjninjeon. ) 
I  shall  be  satisfied. —  The  satisfaction  of  the  future: — -I.  The  satisfaction  of  the 

FUTURE    IS    often    THE    SUPPORT    OF   THE    CHRISTIAN    IN    THE    PRESENT.       1.    Tllis 

fact  explains  the  anomaly  of  the  Christian's  earthly  experience.  The  Christian  expe- 
rience is  not  to  be  ascertained  by  outward  circumstances  and  conditions.  2.  This 
fact  reveals  the   secret  of  the   Christian's  strength.      II.  The   satisfaction  of 

THE    FUTURE    CONSISTS    IN    A    PARTICIPATION    IN    THE   DiVINE    LIKENESS.       1.    The 

original  type  of  the  soul  is  to  be  found  in  God.  Had  we  retained  our  i)ristine  glory 
■we  should  not  have  had  to  mourn  the  misery  and  emptiness  of  earth.  It  is  the  loss 
of  purity  that  has  reduced  us  so  low,  and  made  us  so  degraded.  The  soul  can  never 
be  satisfied  but  in  the  complete  restoration  of  the  Divine  likeness.  The  true 
Christian's  most  exalted  desire  is,  to  resemble  Christ  in  moral  character  here,  and 
to  be  like  Him  in  heaven.  III.  The  Divine  likeness  is  communicated  to  thk 
SOUL  through  the  vision  of  Christ.  By  contemplating  the  glory  of  Christ's 
character  we  become  changed -into  His  image.  1.  The  Divine  vision  assimilates 
to  the  Divine  likeness.  2.  When  the  Divine  vision  is  perfect  the  Christian's  happi- 
ness will  be  complete.  {Eomiliat. )  Satisfaction : — This  Psalm  is  called  simply  <s 
prayer,  which  is  the  oldest  and  most  comprehensive  name  of  the  Psalms.  But  it  is 
the  prayer  of  one  who  is  in  trouble.  Men  never  pray  so  frequently  and  so  fervently 
as  then.  Doubtless  it  is  David  who  thus  prays,  and  the  Psalm  agrees,  almost  lina 
for  line,  with  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed  when  pnrsued  by  Saul  in  the 
■wilderness  of  Maon  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  25).  I.  That  there  is  no  satisfaction  in 
THE  things  of  THIS  WORLD.  Men  there  were  who  had  their  portion  in  this  life  ; 
but  David  did  not  covet  their  portion,  for  he  knew  that  they  were  not  really  satis- 
fied. There  are  such  men  still,  but  that  they  are  not  satisfied  is  certain.  1.  From 
the  nature  of  the  world  itself.  For  what  is  it  apart  from  God  ?  It  is  a  vain 
delusion,  an  empty  show,  a  shadow  that  passes  quickly  away  (Eccles.  vi.  1-12). 
Momentary  pleasure  it  gives,  but  not  satisfaction,  not  contentment,  not  repose.  The 
eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  with  hearing,  and  hence  men  flit  about 
from  one  object  to  another,  never  resting  anywhere  long,  and  always  desiring  some- 
thing which  they  do  not  possess.  Bitter  disappointment  is  the  lot  of  all  who  seek 
satisfaction  in  merely  temporal  things.  2.  From  the  nature  of  the  human  mind. 
God  has  made  us  for  Himself.  Our  capacities  are  large  almost  to  infinity.  We 
aspire  after  the  highest  good.  How,  then,  can  we  be  satisfied  with  things  temporal 
and  vain  ?  II.  Satisfaction  is  realised  in  the  service  of  God  and  in  thk 
POSSESSION  OF  TRUE  RELIGION.  1.  Religion  satisfies  the  intellect.  Man  is  a  creature 
of  mind.  He  can  think,  reflect,  and  reason  ;  and  in  the  exercise  of  his  mental 
powers  he  finds  some  of  his  richest  pleasures.  But  where  will  he  find  subjects  for 
thought  so  noble  and  so  elevating  as  in  the  mysteries  of  revelation  ?  Nature, 
science,  philosophy  will  no  doubt  furnish  him  with  many  such  subjects  ;  but  unless 
his  mind  is  a  strong  and  vigorous  one  they  will  often  prove  too  difficult  for  him  to 
understand.  In  Divine  revelation,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  shallows  in  which 
a  child  may  wade,  whilst  there  are  depths  in  which  a  philosopher  may  swim. 
2.  Religion  satisfies  the  conscience.  Man  is  a  moral  and  responsible  being  ;  but  he 
knows  that  he  is  a  guilty  one,  and  the  monitor  within  condemns  him  for  his  viola- 
tions of  the  law  of  God.  What  can  calm  it  ?  what  can  satisfy  it  T  Here  the  world  is 
utterly  powerless.  3.  Religion  satisfies  the  heart.  Man  is  an  emotional  being.  Ha 
is  not  a  statue,  or  «n  automaton,  or  a  curious  piece  of  mechanism.  He  is  not  a 
cold  intellectual  being  incapable  of  feeling,  incapable  of  love.  He  is  possessed  of 
affections  of  the  noblest  kind,  and  he  can  only  be  happy  where  they  are  in  active 
play.  But  on  what  object  can  he  place  them  ?  He  may  love,  and  ought  to  love, 
his  friends,  his  kindred,  and  his  fellow-men ;  but  any  one  of  these  may  be 
torn  from  his  embrace,  and  then  how  ;  lonely  does  his  heart  become.  Divine 
revelation  points  to  another  object  of  afl'ection — to  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  and 
when  the  heart  reposes  in  Him  it  is  satisfied  indeed  (Sol.  Song  i.  14-16  ;  Eph. 
iii.   17-19).      III.  But  our  text  goes  further,   and  we   observe  that  full  satis- 

yACTION   WILL   BB   aSALISKD   WHBN  WK  AWAKK   WITH  God's  LIKiKBSS!      The   eye 


PSALM  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  287 

will  be  satisfied  with  seeing,  for  it  will  see  the  King  in  His  glory  (Isa.  xxxiii.  17  ; 
1  John  ii.  2).  The  ear  will  be  satisfied  with  hearing,  for  it  will  hear  the  music 
of  the  heavenly  choir  (Rev.  v.  11-14,  xiv.  2,  xv.  2,  3).  The  intellect  will  be 
satisfied  in  knowing,  for  it  will  comprehend  the  grandest  mysteries  of  nature, 
providence,  and  grace.  The  soul — the  whole  being — will  be  satisfied  with  what  it 
feels  and  loves.  It  will  love  throughout  eternity  the  Triune  God.  (Thomley 
Smith.)  Satisfaction : — Two  kinds  of  satisfaction  are  brought  to  view  in  this  verse. 
I.  The  natural  satisfaction.  The  aim,  the  current  of  desires  is  limited  to 
things  of  this  life.  There  is  danger  of  mistaking  dissatisfaction  with  our  earthly 
lot  for  genuine  repentance.  Looking  for  a  good  time  in  heaven,  one  may  overlook 
the  indispensable  preparation.  II.  The  spiritual  satisfaction.  Dr.  Bushnell 
says,  "If  your  feeling  reaches  after  heaven,  and  your  longings  are  thitherward  ;  if 
you  love  and  long  for  it,  because  chiefly  of  its  purity;  loosened  from  this  world,  not 
by  your  weariness  and  disgusts,  which  all  men  suffer,  but  by  the  positive  affinities 
of  your  heart  for  what  is  best  and  purest  above,  this  also  is  a  powerful  token  of 
growing  purification."  Compare  the  two  satisfactions  ;  how  do  they  look  ?  Compare 
Byron's  "canker  and  the  grief"  with  Paul's  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight  .  .  . 
henceforth,"  &c.  This  deep  satisfaction  made  it  possible  for  the  once  timid  Peter 
to  take  the  lead  in  the  warfare  in  behalf  of  this  spiritual  kingdom  that  now 
extends  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  It  gave  him,  and  all  martyrs  since,  that  sublime 
patience  whose  persistence  no  dungeon  walls,  nor  rack,  nor  faggot  could  subdue.  It 
is  a  peace  the  world  cannot  give  nor  take  away.  (C.  M.  Jones.)  The  Christian's 
completed  life : — Men  often  speak  and  live  better  than  they  know.  The  text  is  pro- 
phetic and  far-reaching  in  significance.  It  suggests — I.  The  power  and  nature 
OF  Christian  contentment.  Soul-rest  comes  from  God  alone.  Nothing  can 
afford  the  soul  repose  save  its  union  with  Christ  in  God.  In  vain  do  we  look  to  the 
world  for  satisfaction.  How  transitory  and  unsatisfying  are  all  worldly  pleasures 
and  pursuits.  Whoever  depends  upon  them  for  real  happiness  will  be  bitterly  dis- 
appointed. Enjoy  God  rather  than  His  creatures.  II.  The  Christian  should 
NOT  EXPECT  perfect  SATISFACTION  IN  THIS  LIFE.  Not  that  the  Christian  religion 
does  not  do  all  that  it  promises  to  do  in  this  world.  The  work  of  this  life  is  only 
preparatory,  and  therefore  incomplete.  Imperfection  is  the  just  characterisation  of 
this  world.  The  Christian  constantly  finds  himself  enveloped  in  mystery  and  dark- 
ness. And  his  surroundings  are  unfavourable.  Sin  is  in  this  world.  Here  he  is 
contented,  though  not  fully  satisfied.  III.  In  the  Christian's  completed  life 
HEAVEN  WILL  AFFORD  PERFECT  SATISFACTION.  1.  The  Christian  will  be  satisfied 
with  heaven  as  a  place.  2.  The  Christian  will  be  satisfied  with  the  society  of 
heaven.  3.  We  shall  be  satisfied  with  our  own  condition.  We  shall  carry  our 
intellect  and  our  memories  with  us.  Think  of  the  joy  that  shall  fill  our  souls  when 
we  arrive  at  the  eternal  home,  enter  our  Father's  house,  and  behold  His  face  in 
righteousness,  and  by  the  power  of  His  infinite  tenderness  and  love  be  drawn  into 
such  nearness  with  Him  as  to  repose  on  His  bosom  with  infinite  satisfaction  and 
delight.  (O.  M.  Mathews.)  Satis/action: — The  Lord's  people  are  not  strangers 
to  satisfaction  now.  They  are  satisfied  early  with  His  favour,  with  His  goodness, 
with  the  fatness  of  His  house.  They  have  found  the  supreme  good.  But  they 
desire  more  of  it.  Hence  David  speaks  of  his  satisfaction  as  future.  "  I  shall  be 
satisfied  when,"  &o.  So,  then,  see  here — I.  The  insatiable  ambition  religion 
INSPIRES.  We  have  witnessed  this  grandeur  and  elevation  of  soul  even  in  the 
humblest  walks  of  pious  life.  How  poor  the  aims  of  the  worldly  hero  compared 
with  this.  II.  The  excellency  of  the  soul.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  many  only 
to  be  capable  of  such  sublime  satisfaction.  Other  creatures  have  a  food  suited  to 
their  nature,  partake  of  it  and  are  satisfied.  But  man  is  not,  cannot  be,  with 
aught  he  finds  here.  III.  What  a  blessedness  that  must  be  that  can  and 
WILL  satisfy  every  LONGING  OF  THE  SOUL.  Yes,  though  it  be  tlie  soul  of  a  Newton 
or  Bacon.  Then  make  this  prospect  sure  ;  keep  it  clear  ;  bring  it  near  Use  it 
daily,  in  religion,  in  trials,  when  you  come  to  die  The  old  and  fictitious  idea,  that 
if  a  man  travelled  with  a  myrtle  wand  in  his  hand  he  would  feel  no  fainting  or 
weariness,  is  realised  here  in  this  ble.ssed  hope.  {William  Jay.)  The  saint's 
saiisfa^ion  : — We  may  here  observe — I.  The  genuine  temper  of  a  gracious  sotl 
as  dlstinguished  from  THE  WORLD— to  be  taken  up  with  God  as  his  chief  good. 
And  this  is  so  with  him.  1.  From  a  settled  conviction  of  emptiness  and  insuffi- 
ciency of  any  created  good  to  be  to  them  instead  of  God.  2.  Ther..-  is  everything  in 
God  that  may  commend  and  endear  Him  to  His  people.  3.  'Tis  the  property  of 
grace  to  carry  His  people  to  Him  as  their  chief  good.     4.  Gracious  souls  have  all 


288  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvii, 

fonnd  that  rest,  and  some  of  them  that  joy  in  God,  that  nothing  in  the  world 
besides  can  give,  and  which  they  would  not  exchange  for  anything  it  can  offer. 
But — II.  What  it  is,  with  eeference  to  God,  that  sums  vp  His  peoplb's 
HAPPINESS.  It  is  the  beholding  His  face,  and  the  satisfaction  that  results.  Mora 
especially  the  likeness  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  Or  the  likeness  may  mean  that  which 
is  impressed  upon  the  soul,  a  resemblance  of  the  Divine  glory.  Oh,  happy  they 
who,  from  seeing  God's  back  parts,  are  thus  gone  to  see  Him  face  to  face.  III.  Who- 
ever IS  admitted  to  behold  God's  face,   it  must  be  in  righteousness. 

1.  Righteousness  imputed.  Jesus  said,  "I  am  the  way."  2.  Righteousness 
inherent.  And  this  is  necessary  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  (2  Cor.  vi,  14). 
What  would  sinners   do    in  the  presence    of  God?      IV.  However    much  wb 

MAT  enjoy  of  heaven  HERE,  THERE  IS  MUCH  MORE  RESERVED  ABOVE  WHICH 

THEY  SHALL  AT  LAST  OBTAIN.  1.  God's  people  do  have  much  of  happi- 
ness or  heaven,   begun  through  God    graciously    showing    Himself   unto    them. 

2.  But  much  more  of  heaven  is  yet  reserved.  And  this  is  in  order  to  wean  them 
from  the  present  world,  and  that  they  may  have  the  quicker  relish  of  their  final 
blessedness.  And,  3.  This  is  what  they  are  aspiring  to,  and  shall  at  length 
obtain.  V.  There  is  a  fixed  and  proper  season  for  the  saints'  satisfac- 
tion. 1.  The  soul  awakes  when  it  is  set  free  from  the  body.  It  does  not  descend 
into  the  grave  with  the  body,  but  ascends  to  behold  God's  face.  How  calmly,  then, 
should  we  contemplate  death.  2.  Both  soul  and  body  awake  at  the  resurrection. 
The  body  is  sown  in  corruption,  but  it  shall  be  raised  in  incorniptioa.  (Z>.  Wilcox. ) 
The  believer's  present  standing  and  assured  anticipation: — What  a  contrast  do  these 
words  form  with  what  goes  before.  The  men  of  the  world  and  Himself;  their 
satisfaction  and  His.  This  Psabn  not  to  be  applied  exclusively  to  Christ.  Much 
tells  of  HinQ,  but  much  also  of  ourselves  to-day.  Note — I.  The  high  attainment 
OF  the  real  child  of  God.  He  gets  it  now ;  now  he  beholds  God's  face  in 
righteousness.  Christ's  righteousness,  not  his  own,  even  the  best  of  it.  And  we 
behold  God's  face  thus  when  we  appropriate  for  ourselves  what  Christ  has  done. 
If  we  have  done  this  we  shall  live  holUy,  because  under  the  influence  of  Christ. 

II.  The  interesting  expectation.  "I  shall  be  satisfied."  How  much  of  that 
likeness  have  I  now  ?  Ask  yourselves  that.  The  awaking,  it  includes  both 
transformation  and  translation.      Holiness  and  eternal  life  at  the  Resurrection. 

III.  The  solemn  assurance.  "  I  will  behold  " — very  bold  :  "I  shall  be  satisfied." 
" I  hope  and  trust " — seems  kicked  out  of  doors.  "I  will,"  and  " I  shall."  Now, 
intimacy  with  God,  personal  intimacy  with  God,  is  the  only  thing  that  can  warrant 
such  an  assxurance.  Whatever  you  may  know  of  doctrine,  and  whatever  your  walk 
may  be  with  regard  to  morality  (the  more  of  it  the  better),  I  tell  you,  in  the  name 
of  the  living  God,  that  you  cannot — must  not — dare  not — claim  this  "will"  and 
"  shall "  unless  you  know  something  about  intimacy  with  God.  Believe  me,  beloved, 
in  that  which  I  have  often  stated  to  you — this  is  the  vitality  of  religion.  {Joseph 
Irons.)  The  satisfaction  of  the  righteous  man : — Every  man  is  conscious  of  desires 
that  find  here  no  befitting  object.  Nothing  here  comes  up  to  the  full  aspirations  of 
the  soul.  It  is,  and  has  been,  the  design  of  providence  to  teach  men  by  example 
that  a  finite  world  is  incompetent  to  fill  out  the  demands  of  an  immortal  mind.  I 
can  never  expect  to  be  satisfied  on  this  earth.  Here  tlie  stupor  of  sleep  is  upon  me. 
But  not  always  shall  I  sleep.  I  shall  awake.  I  shall  behold  the  face  of  God  in 
righteousness.  In  the  future  there  are  two  periods  when  the  righteous  will  have 
two  reasons  for  exulting  in  their  Maker.  The  Christian  looks  forward  with  the 
brightest  hope  to  one  or  other  of  these  two  periods.  So  soon  as  his  soul  is  released 
from  the  body  it  will  rise  as  on  the  wings  of  an  eagle  to  new  knowledge  and  new 
bliss.  Then  is  the  eye  of  the  intellect  opened.  Then  the  mental  ear  is  made 
sensitive  to  every  word  of  God  as  no  uncertain  sound.  At  death  we  pass  into 
intimate  contact  with  Him  who  keepeth  all  created  minds  vigilant  in  their  measure 
like  Himself.  When  the  Christian  repeats  the  words  of  the  text  he  often  alludes 
to  the  breaking  up  of  his  spiritual  slumber,  and  says  that  the  present  world  is  a 
dream,  and  the  bright  world  to  which  he  goes  is  one  of  wakeful  joy.  But  he  often 
alludes  to  a  richer  scene  than  this.  In  some  aspects  he  looks  to  the  end  of  life  as 
the  end  of  trouble,  and  looks  at  death  as  a  state  of  rest,  of  sleep  in  Jesus.  A 
devout  heart  is  a  prophecy  of  ultimate  enjoyment.  We  are  sure  of  a  holy  peace  if 
we  have  a  holy  appetence  for  it.  1.  The  righteous  man  will  be  satisfied  with  the 
Divine  intellect.  It  is  in  compliance  with  the  imperfect  language  of  men  that  we 
speak  of  their  Maker's  intellect.  This  is  His  power  to  perceive  all  truth — all  facts 
and  all  possibilities.     Heaven  is  the  abode  of  minds  bearing  His  intellectual  image. 


PSALM  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  289 

2.  The  righteous  man  will  be  satisfied  with  the  Divine  sensibilities.     He  will  be 
satisfied  with  God  as  the  Spirit  all  whose  involuntary  emotions  are  exactly  appi"©- 

Sriate  to  their  objects.  3.  The  righteous  man  wiU  be  satisfied  with  the  hoUness  of 
■od.  He  glorifies  his  intellect  and  sensibility  with  perfect  benevolence.  Moral 
rectitude  is  benevolence.  Moral  rectitude  is  moral  beauty.  The  Christian  also 
hopes  to  be  satisfied  in  having  a  form  like  that  which  he  adores  :  in  possessing,  so 
far  as  a  creature  is  able  to  possess,  the  likeness  of  the  Creator.  It  is  said,  "  I  shall 
be  satisfied."  He  is  to  awake  suddenly.  As  the  commencement  of  this  joy  is 
sudden,  so  the  date  of  it  is  uncertain.  And  if  we  are  to  be  in  this  image,  then  we 
must  cheerfully  submit  to  all  the  influences  needed  for  our  transformation.  {E.  A. 
Park,  D.D.)  The  threefold  hope  of  the  Christian: — I.  Fok  the  righteous 
THERE  IS  A  GLORIOUS  HOPE.  This  Creed  concerning  the  futuie  has  three  clauses : 
"I  shall  awake  ;  I  shall  be  like  Christ,  when  I  awake  ;  when  I  awake  like  Christ, 
I  shall  be  satisfied."  Simple  and  deep,  as  the  very  purposes  of  God  !  1.  "I  shall 
awake."  Tired  eyes  fall  asleep,  tired  feet  rest ;  but  after  God's  beautiful  ordinance 
of  sleep  is  fulfilled  we  shall  awake  rested,  refreshed,  re-invigorated.  What  was  it 
that  David  believed  would  wake  up  ?  What  was  it  that  David  believed  went  to 
sleep  ?  There  is  more  than  a  little  obscurity  on  this  point.  More  than  one  modem 
writer  speaks  as  if  the  soul  were  asleep.  That  we  cannot  think.  We  must  apply 
sleeping  and  waking  to  that  part  of  us  to  which  it  belongs.  We  jmt  the  body  to 
sleep  ;  we  lay  it  in  its  narrow  grave.  We  do  not  know  what  the  Divine  alchemy 
may  do  for  these  bodies  of  ours.  2.  I  shall  be  like  Christ  when  I  awake.  Our  bodies 
will  be  like  Christ's  body.  The  bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  glorified  bodies,  like 
the  body  of  the  Son  of  Man.  And  I  feel  glad  that  He  lived  a  little  while  after  the 
resurrection.  3.  I  shall  be  satisfied.  (1)  We  shall  be  satisfied  with  ourselves.  (2)  We 
shall  be  satisfied  with  our  homes.  (3)  We  shall  be  satisfied  with  Christ.  II.  The 
GLORIOUS  hope  BELONGS  ONLY  TO  THE  RIGHTEOUS.  The  first  clause  indicates 
those  who  will  certainly  enjoy  this  blessed  hope.  Those  who  can  say,  ' '  As  for  me, 
I  will  behold  Thy  face  in  righteousness."  You  cannot  see  His  face  at  all,  if 
you  do  not  see  it  that  way.  Righteousness  as  a  state  we  call  holiness.  He  who  by 
faith  in  Jesus  has  righteousness  as  a  standing  will,  also  by  faith,  receive  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  shall  save  him  from  sin  and  all  uncleanness.  We  shall 
never  be  able  to  say,  with  any  firmness  of  tone,  "  I  shall  be  satisfied,"  imtU  we  can 
also  add,  "Not  in  my  own  righteousness,  but  in  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God 
in  Christ. "  But  that  will  lead  to  the  other  inevitably.  {John  Bradford. )  The 
man  of  the  Bible : — We  have  in  Scripture  a  revelation  of  God,  but  we  have  also  a 
revelation  of  man.  This  revelation  of  man,  this  that  we  call  the  human  element 
mingling  with  the  Divine  in  the  Bible,  is  what  makes  it  come  home  to  our  feelings, 
our  conscience,  our  bosom,  in  a  way  that  a  simple  revelation  of  the  Divine  thought 
by  itself  could  never  have  done.  We  have  much  to  be  thankful  for  that  God  has 
given  us  the  revelation  of  Himself  through  men.  In  this  Book  of  Psalms  it  is  men 
that  speak  to  us  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  Look  at  this  Psalm  as  repre- 
senting to  us  the  man  of  the  Bible.  1.  This  man  has  a  consciousness  of  a  religious, 
Divine  life  in  Him.  It  is  a  humble,  thankful,  moral,  spiritual  consciousness  that 
this  man,  believing  in  God,  loves  Him,  has  communion  with  Him,  and,  under  the 
influence  of  that  Divine  faith,  keeps  himself  from  the  path  of  the  destroyer,  from 
the  works  and  the  society  of  the  wicked.  2.  This  Divine  faith,  this  religious  con- 
sciousness in  the  man,  develops  and  expands  until  it  culminates  in  the  persuasion  of 
a  future  life,  and  an  expectation  of  being  with  God  and  beholding  Him.  Men  say 
there  is  nothing  in  the  books  of  the  law  about  a  future  life.  But  the  Hebrews  had 
a  religion  before  they  had  the  law.  There  was  the  patriarchal  faith,  the  faith  of 
Abraham  and  Jacob,  and  there  was  hope  of  the  future  in  it.  3.  This  man  anticipates 
a  waking  up, — that  there  will  be  something  like  an  abruptness,  something  like 
suddenness  in  the  crisis  ;  that  all  at  once  he  will  come  face  to  face  with  God,  into  a 
fulness  of  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  countenance,  and  a  conformity  to  His  image. 
His  words  may  have  been  uttered  by  David  without  his  understanding  distinctly 
what  was  in  them,  but  feeling  that  there  was  some  great  idea  suggested  to  him  by 
that  condition  of  his  Divine  life  under  which  the  Spirit  was  then  influencing  him. 
The  idea  of  a  future  life  among  the  Hebrew  people  gradually  expanded  until  it 
took  the  form  of  a  resurrection.  Our  Lord  did  not  bring  life  and  immortality  to 
light  as  a  new  thing  ;  He  took  it  as  a  thing  existing  in  the  Hebrew  mind,  existing 
imperfectly  and  indistinctly,  and  He  threw  light  upon  it,  brought  it  out  in  all 
fulness  and  completeness  and  perfection.  4.  This  man  will  be  ])erfectly  satisfied. 
If  God  has  created  a  species  of  beings  with  spiritual  and  religious  faculty  ;  then  the 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvn. 

infusion  into  the  spirit  a  participation  in  the  Divine  blessedness  must  be  satisfaction  ; 
all  the  faculties  regaled,  every  want  met.  5.  The  man  expects  all  this  through 
righteousness — "in  righteousness" — that  is,  as  the  outcome  and  end  of  a  righteous 
li^,  heroic  in  its  contest  with  evil,  grand  in  its  development  of  obedience  and  duty. 
That  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  from  beginning  to  end.  That  is,  then,  the  idea  of 
the  man  of  the  Bible  ;  believing  in  God,  he  lives  near  Him  and  with  Him,  and  has 
a  consciousness  of  a  spiritual  and  religious  life,  that  expands  into  the  anticipation 
of  a  future  life  ;  that  takes  the  particular  form  of  rising  from  the  lowest  at  one  step 
to  the  highest  face  to  face  with  God,  with  something  of  suddenness.  And  with 
that  he  expects  an  ultimate  and  perfect  satisfaction,  and  he  expects  it  in  the  way  of 
righteousness.  Now,  what  do  you  think  of  that  man  ?  We  are  quite  capable  of 
forming  a  moral  judgment.  Take  this  man,  then,  weigh  him,  measure  him,  judge 
him,  what  sort  of  man  is  he  ?  1.  The  foundation  thought  of  this  man  must  be 
approved  and  justified.  If  there  be  a  God,  can  anything  be  more  right  or  justifiable 
than  that  an  individual  with  the  capacity  of  religion,  the  power  of  faith,  should 
pray  to,  worship,  and  trust  God,  believe  in  his  Fatherhood,  and  seek  to  have  spiritual, 
religious  communion  with  Him  ?  2.  Then  take  the  next  idea — that  this  religious  faith 
expands  into  the  anticipation  of  a  future  life.  There  are  grounds  and  reasons  on 
which  common  sense  would  say,  "The  man  is  right,  the  man  is  reasonable."  He 
belongs  to  a  system  in  which  what  we  call  nature  wastes  nothing.  Nature  is  the 
most  thrifty  thing  you  can  imagine.  There  is  not  a  single  atom  of  matter  anni- 
hilated. It  changes  its  form,  it  takes  another  position,  but  it  is  there.  Are  all 
minds  to  be  wasted  ?  Is  she  to  be  extravagant  just  here  ?  Nature  never  deceives. 
All  the  instincts,  all  the  faculties,  which  are  in  any  of  its  creatures,  there  is  always 
something  to  meet  them.  Is  nature  to  play  loose  with  the  moral  aspirations  of 
man,  the  spiritual  instincts,  the  irrepressible  anticipations  of  which  he  is  capable ! 
3.  Take  the  other  idea.  He  anticipates  a  kind  of  abrupt,  sudden  rise.  You  will 
say,  How  can  that  be  justified?  Would  not  gradual  successive  steps  be  more 
reasonable  ?  But  the  religion  of  the  Bible  gives  us  the  idea  of  a  terrible  catastrophe 
that  happened  to  humanity.  Humanity  is  in  an  unnatural  condition,  and  therefore 
there  comes  down  the  supernatural.  There  is  the  supernatural  revelation  of  a 
Mediator  and  redemption,  therefore  the  process  is  altogether  changed.  It  seems  to  be 
more  consistent  under  the  new  circumstances  that  a  man  should  awake  and  suddenly 
find  himself  at  home  with  God.  And  there  will  be  a  likeness,  an  awaking  in  His 
image.  This  man  anticipates  it,  and  he  will  be  satisfied  with  it.  (Thomas  Binney.) 
Satisfied: — The  Psalmist  has  a  morning  in  his  view  unspeakably  desirable  and 
glorious.  How  are  we  to  understand  his  words  of  mystic  devotion,  and  ecstasy,  and 
hope  ?  Not,  surely,  of  the  following  morning  in  the  Psalmist's  life.  The  singer 
does  not  merely  look  forward  to  a  deliverance  from  his  present  sorrows  and  sufferings. 
That  is  John  Calvin's  interpretation.  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  find  a  worthy 
meaning,  unless  we  think  of  the  sleep  of  death  and  the  radiant  morning  of  eternity 
which  is  to  follow.  It  may  seem  strange  to  listen  to  so  definite  a  statement  of  the 
everlasting  future  at  so  early  a  stage  in  the  revelation.  But  a  devout  man  who  is  in 
communion  with  God,  and  who  knows  the  delights  of  that  matchless  friendship, 
will  reach  up  now  and  then  to  the  conclusion  that  the  communion  and  friendship 
are  destined  to  survive  the  present  world.  Let  us  single  out  some  of  the  elements 
of  this  blessedness,  this  satisfaction.  I.  Thbbe  is  the  beatitude  of  the  senses. 
We  may  believe  that  there  is  aggrandisement,  expansion,  growth  in  store  for  our 
senses.  Have  we  not  hints  of  it  already  ?  In  the  Christian  life  on  earth  these 
bodily  faculties  are  sometimes  marvellously  quickened  and  sharpened.  II.  Theke 
IS  THE  BEATITUDE  OF  THE  MIND.  We  think  ;  we  study  ;  we  seek  after  truth,  and 
find  it.  It  is  one  of  the  highest  glories  of  our  manhood  that  it  is  so  governed  by 
the  passion  for  knowledge,  and  so  resolved  to  grow  in  wisdom.  Our  minds,  once 
we  have  learned  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  are  admitted  to  new  marvels  and 
delights.  We  are  scholars  in  the  most  blessed  school.  We  grow  not  only  in 
knowledge,  but  in  holiness  and  trust  and  love.  But  much  continues  to  be  veiled 
and  covered  even  from  the  sanctified  intellect.  In  the  hereafter  we  shall  under- 
stand. What  an  awakening  it  will  be  for  our  intellect !  III.  There  I8 
THE  BEATITUDE  OF  THE  MEMORY.  Such  a  weird  »nd  tremendous  power  is  our 
memory.  It  retains  our  past,  storing  up  our  experience,  letting  nothing  slip  out  of 
its  tenacious  grasp.  And  it  reproduces  our  past,  summoning  it  all  back  again  when 
it  chooses,  to  scourge  as  it  did  Manasseh,  to  solace  and  strengthen  us  as  it  did 
St.  Paul.  Memory  can  never  be  the  bringer  only  of  good  tidings  to  God's  people 
in  this  life.     Memory  is  too  precious  a  chamber  of  the  soul  to  be  scattered  and 


PSALM  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  291 

destroyed.  What  will  make  its  words  only  good  and  comfortable  in  heaven  is,  that 
it  will  live  there  in  the  perpetual  presence  of  Christ.  IV.  There  is  the  beatitudb 
OF  THE  CONSCIENCE.  We  carry  about  with  us  a  faculty  which  is  at  once  a  mirror 
of  right  and  wrong,  and  a  law  enacting  royally  the  path  in  which  we  ought  to  go, 
and  a  tribunal  condemning  us  sternly  and  terribly  for  our  wandering  from  the 
straight  road,  and  a  voice  of  God  Himself  within  our  breast.  A  priceless  and 
momentous  possession  indeed,  but  an  exceedingly  troublesome  one  to  many  of  us, 
V.  There  is  the  beatitude  of  the  heart.  It  is  the  heart  which  loves.  But 
what  heart  has  gained  its  end  and  arrived  at  its  goal  ?  There  is  no  satisfied  heart. 
In  the  city  of  God  all  hearts  are  satisfied.  Heaven  is  the  heart's  harbour  made 
after  the  weary  and  stormy  sea.  {A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  The  Christian's  future 
likeness  to  Christ : — David  and  Paul  and  John  looked  for  the  same  blessed  consumma- 
tion of  their  happiness  for  eternity,  in  being  like  their  Lord.  I.  The  assured 
HOPE  OF  satisfaction  AT  A  FUTURE  TIME.  The  cause  of  his  satisfaction  is  the 
likeness  of  God.  We  to  whom  the  New  Testament  is  given  know  what  that 
likeness  is,  for  to  that  end  is  the  history  of  Jesus  Christ  given  us.  David  could 
only  have  had  a  vague  and  indistinct  idea  ;  but  still  it  had  a  practical  hold  on  his 
mind,  and  influenced  his  character.  David's  was  a  personal  God,  a  living  person, 
to  whom  like  a  child  to  its  parent  he  could  run  and  take  refuge.  And  therefore, 
as  his  hope  here  was  clear  and  well  defined,  so  was  his  hope  hereafter.  They 
always  go  together  in  this.  II.  The  subject-matter  of  his  satisfaction. 
Satisfied  expresses  more  than  joy.  It  is  the  fulness  of  joy.  The  idea  is  purposely 
contrasted  with  the  state  of  things  around  him,  in  which,  at  the  best  of  times,  there 
was  always  something  wanting.  He  will  be  satisfied.  There  will  be  nothing  left 
to  wish  and  long  for,  and  it  will  be  all  comprised  and  contained  in  that  one 
absorbing  brilliance  of  his  hope,  the  likeness  of  his  Lord.  Break  this  up  into  some 
of  its  particulars.  1.  There  are  the  real  pleasures  of  life,  such  as  do  contribute  to 
man's  happiness,  and  to  the  well-being  of  the  world.  And  life  has  such  pleasures, 
and  many  of  them.  But  there  are  cares.  There  is  no  satisfying  portion  in  our 
pleasures.  There  is,  and  ever  will  be,  much  that  is  hollow.  Not  so  when  we 
wake  up  after  the  Saviour's  likeness.  We  shall  have  attained  to  the  Saviour's 
likeness,  and  that  admits  of  nothing  higher  that  we  can  attain.  2.  Look  for  a 
moment  at  the  body.  The  body  is  a  wonderful  instrument.  The  body  is  not  a 
thing  to  be  cried  down  and  despised,  as  we  shall  know  full  well  when  we  have  it  in 
the  Saviour's  likeness.  3.  It  is  the  same  with  the  mind  or  intelligence.  The  mind 
presents  the  same  absence  of  a  satisfying  fulness,  that  its  lower  companion,  the 
body,  does.  4.  Paul  hints  that  it  is  thus  with  what  even  now  is  really  good. 
5.  Look  at  that  which  is  beyond  yourself.  It  is  the  same  with  the  society  you 
must  mingle  with.  III.  The  time  specified.  "When  I  awake."  On  the 
morning  of  the  resurrection.  David,  under  all  the  cares  of  government,  in  all 
the  discomforts  and  troubles  of  his  family  and  his  position,  turned  for  consolation 
to  that  bright  hope  which  gilds  the  horizon  of  the  waiting  Christian.  {O.  Deans, 
M.A.)  Wlien  I  awake. — The  dream  and  its  awakening: — How  does  our  life 
show  itself,  to  the  devout  and  reflective  mind,  as  little  better  than  a  vision  of 
the  night !  Think  what  dreams  are  in  themselves,  taking  them  generally,  and 
then  think  what  any  devout  man's  life,  or  any  man's  life,  appears  when  he  comes 
to  look  back  upon  it  from  old  age,  and  you  will  have  no  great  difiiculty  in 
answering  this  question.  There  is  an  absence  of  method  in  dreams.  They  are 
incongruous,  incoherent,  disconnected,  confused.  Our  dreams  come  like  shadows, 
and  80  depart.  In  all  this  the  devout  mind  finds  resemblance  to  its  own  history. 
Biany  thoughts  and  feelings  of  a  better  kind  have  been  stirring  within  us.  But 
there  is  no  order,  no  properly  connecting  link.  Perhaps  we  should  find  it  diflBcult 
to  put  anything  like  order  into  our  present  spiritual  state  and  feeling,  to  say 
nothing  about  the  past.  There  is  a  lack  of  any  right  measurement  of  time  in  dreams. 
In  a  single  moment  of  sleep  we  may  seem  to  live  through  weeks,  and  even  months 
and  years.  There  is  no  real  time  in  sleep.  All  is  illusive.  We  are  equally  at 
fault  in  our  attempts  to  estimate  our  life.  Bliss  lessens  it,  sorrow  lengthens  it  out. 
The  past  takes  its  tinge  from  our  present  condition.  Surprises  are  rare  in  dreams. 
We  may  meet  our  own  funeral  procession,  but  we  feel  no  surprise.  Here  the 
likeness  holds  good  of  other  things.  There  is  enough  of  the  wonderful  in  our  lives, 
and  in  the  lives  of  those  around  us,  if  only  we  could  see  it,  if  only  we  were  awake. 
Tliere  is  in  dreams  an  indistinctness  and  lialjility  to  fade.  We  see,  and  yet  we  do 
not  see.  There  is  a  blurred  image  of  something.  We  are  like  men  attempting  to 
catch  a  shadow.     An  old  feeling  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  things  to  recall,  because 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvii. 

it  was  dependent  upon  mucli  that  was  temporary  ;  and  some  thoughts  are  lite 
feelings.  But  this  fleetingness  and  indistinctness  in  our  life  is  brought  more  vividly 
before  us  as  all  other  impressions  fade.  The  memory  decays,  or  seems  to  decay. 
We  find  it  hard  to  recall  names.  Perhaps  also  our  perception  appears  to  decline, 
through  the  failing  of  the  body.  Life  is  slipping  away  ;  and  life  seems  then  little 
better  than  a  dream.  Now  look  at  the  other  side.  If  life  is  as  a  dream,  death  is 
the  awakening  from  it.  Some  refer  the  Psalm  to  awakening  from  simple  sleep. 
We  regard  them  as  distinctly  referring  to  the  resurrection.  There  is  a  certainty 
about  this  awakening.  The  evidence  of  the  resurrection  is  strong  and  manifold. 
See  that  supplied  by  Christian  literature  ;  by  religious  observances ;  by  Christian 
character  and  life.  As  death  is  certain,  so  is  the  awakening  after  death.  If  our 
life  be  as  a  dream,  our  death  will  be  as  the  light  of  morning  awakening  us 
from  a  sleep.  Consider  the  attractions  of  this  awakening.  There  is  the  Divine 
resemblance  which  will  be  enjoyed  by  us  in  it.  Death  does  not  possess  any 
regenerative  power  ;  but  there  is  nevertheless  the  promise  of  completeness  to  the 
believer  in  the  world  beyond  the  grave.  There  is  full  contentment  in  that  other 
world.  We  never  get  this  out  of  anything  here.  However  we  plan  and  forearrange, 
we  are  always  stumbling  upon  something  which  brings  disappointment.  But  there, 
no  bitter  disappointment  ever  comes.  In  that  fair  clime  there  is  no  tempter,  no 
doubt,  no  sin.  Should  not  the  thought  of  this  better  life  also  check  undue 
expectations  as  to  the  present  ?  {J.  Jackson  Ooadhy. )  The  future  of  the  believer : — 
I.  The  state  to  vs^hich  bt  implication  David  intimates  that  hk  should  bb 
EEDTJCED.  "  When  I  awake."  From  what  ?  Sleep  ;  but  not  nightly  sleep,  rather 
the  sleep  of  death.  In  assimilating  death  to  sleep  David  gives  utterance  to  no 
fiction.  In  many  respects  they  differ  ;  yet  sleep  is  an  impressive  picture  of  death. 
David  does  not  mean  to  assert,  that  when  the  body  sleeps  in  death  the  soul  sleeps 
also.  The  soul  is  not  inactive  in  ordinary  bodily  sleep.  The  death  of  the  body  is 
no  more  the  death  than  it  is  the  sleep  of  the  soul,  but  simply  a  giving  up  the 
ghost, — a  passing  of  the  soul  from  a  relationship  that  is  seen  to  a  relationship  that 
is  unseen.  The  analogy  of  death  and  sleep  holds  equally  in  the  case  of  good  and  of 
bad  men.  II.  The  change  which  David  affirms  that  he  should  undergo. 
He  says  that  from  the  sleep  of  death  he  should  awake.  When,  he  did  not  know,  but  of 
the  certainty  of  his  awaking,  of  the  nature  of  his  appearance,  and  of  the  recognisable- 
ness  of  his  personality  when  awakened  he  does  speak.  In  the  creed  of  David  the 
awakening  of  his  body  from  the  sleep  of  death — its  living  reunion  with  his  soul,  was 
a  fact — not  a  matter  of  doubt,  but  a  matter  of  certainty.  To  this  doctrine  many 
cannot  subscribe.  But  because  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  power  that  is  finite,  does 
this  prove  that  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  that  power  that  is  infinite  ?  Consider  the 
nature  of  his  appearance  when  awakened.  "  With  Thy  likeness."  The  likeness  of 
Christ's  resurrection  body.  III.  The  felicity  of  which  David  declares  that  hk 
should  participate.  "  I  shall  be  satisfied."  It  was  not  with  David  a  problemat- 
ical thing,  but  a  thing  of  which  he  was  sure.  The  felicity  of  the  glorified  consists  in 
their  seeing  and  resembling  Him  in  whose  likeness  they  shall  awake.  {A.  Jack,  D.D.) 
The  Christians  awakening: — In  the  words  of  the  text  is  an  implied  contrast  between 
the  present  and  the  future  condition  of  God's  people,  in  three  particulars.  1.  The 
present  state  is  figuratively  exhibited  as  one  of  sleep.  He  that  wakes  must  have  been 
asleep.  David  regarded  this  life  as  little  better  than  an  unquiet  sleep.  At  times 
we  are  ready  to  doubt  whether  anything  about  us  is  real,  and  to  suspect  that  we  are 
the  dupes  all  along  of  deceitful  impressions.  Moreover,  the  Christian  wayfarer  is 
painfully  conscious  of  deficiency  in  that  lively  wakefulness  which  is  most  important 
to  his  spiritual  progress.  How,  then,  can  he  fail  to  desire  earnestly  the  time  of 
awaking  ?  2.  The  unsatisfactory  nature  of  all  things  here  below  was  another  fact 
that  pressed  on  David's  mind.  In  saying  '*  I  shall  be  satisfied,"  he  as  good  as  says 
"  I  am  not  satisfied."  What  meagre  fare  to  a  spiritual  man  must  that  be  which  even 
a  natural  man  finds  deficient.  3.  Here,  again,  the  Psalmist  encounters  one  of  those 
great  evils,  perfect  deliverance  from  which  is  reserved  to  another  state  of  being. 
That  evil  is  the  loss  of  God's  image.  That  loss  is  only  partially  repaired  in  any 
renewed  soul.  It  is  the  heartfelt  complaint  of  every  pious  person,  that  his  resem- 
blance to  God  is  so  faint  and  obscure.  What  is  the  aim,  or  substance,  of  religion  f 
It  is  to  know,  to  love,  to  imitate  God,  as  He  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  face  of 
Immanuel.  We  are  religiously  happy,  just  in  proportion  as  the  moral  character  of 
God  is  transfused  into  our  souls.  This,  then,  is  the  fulness  of  joy  to  an  immortal 
and  sanctified  being— we  shall  "be  like  Him."  {J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.)  The  great 
awakening : — A  good  man's  consolation  in  a  time  of  severe  distress.     He  contrasts 


PSALM  xvii.]  THE  PSALMS.  293 

his  enemies'  condition  and  his  own.  They  had  their  portion  in  this  life.  He  looked 
for  his  in  the  life  to  come.  I.  The  awakening.  According  to  the  ideas  commonly 
entertained  with  regard  to  our  state  now  and  liereafter,  we  are  awake  in  this  life, 
and  we  sleep  at  death.  The  text  suggests  another  thought,  namely,  that  in  this  life 
we  are  asleep,  and  at  death  we  wake  out  of  sleep.  Before  conversion  men  may 
certainly  be  said  to  be  asleep.  Sin  acts  as  a  sedative.  But  that  is  not  the  thought 
here.  The  Psalmist  was  a  godly  man,  and  yet,  comparing  his  present  condition 
with  the  future,  he  regarded  himself  as  asleep.  We,  too,  have  felt  at  times  that  the 
best  known  and  most  active  of  our  powers  are  comparatively  dormant.  And  it  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  there  are  other  faculties  and  powers  within  us  at  present 
slumbering,  of  whose  existence  we  have  no  consciousness,  and  for  which  we  have  no 
name.  II.  The  sight  which  he  would  witness.  "I  shall  behold  Thy  face  in 
righteousness."  The  face  of  a  familiar  friend  is  welcome.  The  very  sight  of  him 
sometimes  does  good.     God's  face  is  invisible  at  present.     "Now  we  see  through  a 

flass  darkly."  How  dim  is  the  outline  of  His  character !  Many  call  God  their 
'ather  who  would  be  ashamed  to  exhibit  the  qualities  which  they  attribute  to  Him. 
Sometimes  God's  face  does  seem  averted  or  disguised.  "Clouds  and  darkness  are 
round  about  Him."  The  sight  of  God's  face  will  not  afford  delight  to  everyone. 
In  some  it  will  awaken  terror  ;  in  others  shame.  III.  The  satisfaction  which 
the  sight  will  afford.  "  I  shall  be  satisfied."  The  worldling  is  not  satisfied, 
and  cannot  be.  The  Christian  cannot  find  satisfaction  in  anything  that  the  world 
offers.  (F.  J.  Austin.)  The  dream,  the  awakening,  and  the  transforviation : — 
I.  Man's  life  is  a  dream.  In  what  respect  is  it  like  a  dream  ?  1.  It  is  unreal.  A 
dream  is  a  mere  phantom  of  the  brain,  an  &vrv  fiction ;  what  the  mind  sees  and 
hears  is  mere  semblance,  not  substance.  So  is  life.  Every  man  walketh  in  a  vain 
show.  We  live  amongst  shadows,  not  substances.  2.  It  is  disorderly.  Dreams 
seem  to  have  no  method,  no  law  of  succession  ;  they  are  a  jumble  of  incoherences  and 
incongruities.  How  disorderly  is  our  life,  our  plans  and  theories  are  conflicting  and 
shifting.  3.  It  is  fleeting.  We  can  dream  a  poem,  a  history  in  a  minute  or  two  ; 
dreams  take  no  note  of  time.  So  with  life  :  how  fleet  and  fluctuating.  It  is  forget- 
able.  How  soon  is  a  dream  forgotten  !  The  grandest  vision  of  the  night  often 
dissolves  into  forgetfulness  at  the  break  of  day.  What  a  tendency  in  this  life  there 
is  to  forget  our  best  impressions  and  holiest  resolves.  Truly,  life  is  a  dream.  We 
are  often  but  the  creatures  of  imagination,  uncontrolled  either  by  judgment  or  con- 
science. II.  Man's  death  is  an  awakening.  In  that  dread  moment  when  the 
soul  quits  the  body  it  wakes  up  to  the  realities  of  existence.  The  markets,  govern- 
ments, trades,  professions,  pleasures,  and  pursuits  of  the  world  fade  as  a  baseless 
vision  of  the  night  the  moment  the  soul  opens  its  eye  in  eternity.  The  man  is 
brought,  not  only  into  a  life  of  realities,  but  into  conscious  contact  with  these 
realities — Law,  Spirit,  God.  Death,  instead  of  being  the  extinction  of  being,  is 
the  awakening  of  it  out  of  sleep.  III.  Man's  satisfaction  is  God's  likeness. 
"Then  shall  I  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake,  with  Thy  likeness."  In  what  respect  ? 
Not  in  the  respect  of  might,  or  wisdom,  or  ubiquity.  But  in  the  sense  of  moral 
character,  and  the  essence  of  that  character  is  love.  "God  is  love."  Man's  satis- 
faction is  where  ?  In  love.  ' '  God  is  love,  and  he  that  dwell eth  in  love  dwelleth  in 
God."  "We  all,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  image  of  God,  are 
changed  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ."  (Homilist.)  The 
destiny  of  the  good : — I.  The  death  of  the  good  is  an  awaking  from  sleep. 
The  best  of  men  are  scarcely  awake  here.  The  apostle  felt  this  when  he  said,  "  It  is 
high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep."  He  was  speaking  to  Christians.  1.  "There  is 
much  spiritual  torpor  even  in  the  best.  Where  is  that  earnest  activity  which  we 
feel  is  the  right  thing  for  us? — the  activity  which  Christ  had  when  He  said,  "I 
must  work,"  &c.  What  Paul  had,  who  said,  "I  count  not  my  life  dear,"  &c. 
"  I  press  towards  the  mark,"  &c.  2.  There  is  much  spiritual  dreaming  in  the  best. 
Oar  views  of  Divine  things  are  often  only  as  the  incoherent  visions  of  a  dream.  At 
death  the  soul  wakes  up.  It  is  a  morning  to  it, — a  bright,  joyous,  stirring  morn- 
ing. Do  not  be  afraid  of  death,  then.  II.  In  this  awaking  at  death  there 
WILL  BE  the  complete  ASSIMILATION  OF  THE  SOTJL  TO  GoD.  "When  I  awake, 
with  Thy  likeness."  What  is  this  likeness?  Not  a  resemblance  to  His  wisdom, 
power,  or  sovereignty,  but  a  resemblance  to  His  governing  disposition  : — love. 
Moral  likeness  to  a  being  consists  in  a  likeness  to  His  ruling  disposition.  Variety  in 
material  objects  and  mental  characteristics  is  the  glory  of  the  creation.  But 
similarity  in  moral  disposition  is  what  heaven  demands  as  the  essence  of  virtue  and 
the  conditicHi  of  bliss.     All  can  love,  and  to  love  is  to  be  like  God.     At  death  thia 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xvil. 

in  the  good  becomes  perfect.  Our  sympathies  will  then  flow  entirely  with  His , 
our  wills  will  then  go  entirely  within  the  circle  of  His.     III.  In  this  assimilation 

WILL    CONSIST    THE    EVERLASTING    SATISFACTION    OF    OUE    NATURE.       "  I   shall   be 

satisfied."  There  is  no  satisfaction  without  this.  1.  The  spiritual  powers  will  not 
work  harmoniously  under  the  dominion  of  any  other  disposition.  2.  The  conscience 
will  frown  upon  any  other  state  of  mind.  3.  The  Great  One  will  not  bless  with  His 
friendship  any  other  state  of  mind  in  His  creatures.  (Homilist.)  The  awakening 
of  man: — David  therefore  expected  to  live  after  death, — he  should  awake,  and 
awake  in  God's  likeness.  I.  At  death  the  soul  of  the  believer  thus  awakes. 
The  remains  of  sin  are  done  away,  and  nothing  left  but  the  image  of  God.  II.  Our 
PRESENT  STATE  IS  A  KIND  OF  NIGHT  SCENE.  As  dreams,  and  like  the  vagaries  of 
sleep.  Only  that  is  solid  and  valuable  which  has  been  connected  with  God.  How 
short  are  waking  intervals.  Natural  men  are  entirely  asleep,  but  Christians  cannot 
sleep,  "as  do  others."  Yet  they  are  often  drowsy  and  insensible.  Hence  Paul 
says,  "  It  is  high  time  to  wake  out  of  sleep."  And  at  death  they  will  wake  out  of 
sleep.  III.  The  body  likewise  shall  awake.  For  the  body  is  an  essential 
part  of  human  nature.  But  it  is  lying  under  the  incapacities  and  dishonours  of 
mortality.  Therefore  the  intermediate  state  is  necessarily  an  imperfect  one.  But 
the  purchase  of  the  Saviour  will  be  reclaimed.  "We  wait  for  the  Saviour,  who 
shall  change  our  vile  body  that,"  &c,  (  William  Jay.)  The  final  awakening  of 
the  saint : — Among  the  beautiful  epitaphs,  of  which  the  world  is  full,  the  following 
may  be  mentioned  :  Near  Marshfield,  the  famous  country  home  of  Daniel  Webster, 
is  a  lonely  little  graveyard  where  the  great  statesman  lies  buried.  Beside  him  is 
the  grave  of  his  wife,  and  traced  on  the  tombstone  is  this  exquisite  inscription, 
"Let  me  go,  the  day  is  breaking."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  time  for  satit- 
J'action : — Who  has  not  misread  this  verse,  by  not  perceiving  the  punctuation  T 
How  often  has  the  comma  after  "awake"  been  struck  out,  and  thus  the  whole 
sense  of  the  passage  lost !  It  has  been  read,  "  When  I  awake  with  Thy  likeness  "  ; 
being  so  read  it  has  been  violated.  Observe  the  punctuation,  and  further  comment 
is  needless.  We  might  turn  it  round  thus,  "  I  shall  be  satisfied  with  Thy  likeness 
when  I  awake."  The  man  does  not  awake  with  the  likeness  ;  he  is  satisfied  with 
the  likeness   when  he  awakes.      {Joseph  Parker,    D.D.)  The  two  awakenings 

(with  Psa.  Ixxiii.  20) : — Both  these  Psalms  are  occupied  with  that  standing  puzzle 
to  Old  Testament  worthies  —  the  good  fortune  of  bad  men,  and  the  bad  fortune 
of  good  ones.  The  former  tells  of  the  calamities  of  David  ;  the  latter,  of  the 
perplexity  of  Asaph  "when  he  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked."  And  as  the 
problem  is  the  same,  so  is  the  solution.  David  and  Asaph  both  point  on  to  a 
period  when  such  perplexities  shall  not  be.  David  thinks  of  it  in  regard  to  himself; 
Asaph,  in  regard  to  the  wicked.  And  both  describe  that  future  period  as  an 
awakening  :  David  as  his  own  ;  Asaph,  as  that  of  God.  What  they  meant  is  not 
absolutely  clear.  Some  would  bring  the  words  well  within  the  limits  of  the  present 
life  ;  others  see  in  them  what  tells  of  the  future  life  that  stretches  beyond  the  grave. 
But  inasmuch  as  David  contrasts  his  awaking  with  the  death  of  "the  men  of  this 
world,"  it  would  seem  that  he  points  on,  however  dimly,  to  that  which  is  "within 
the  veil. "  And  as  for  Asaph,  the  awaking  he  tells  of  may  refer  to  some  act  of 
judgment  in  this  life.  But  the  strong  words  in  which  the  context  describes  this 
awaking  as  the  "destruction"  and  "the  end"  of  the  godless  tell  rather  of  life's 
final  close.  The  doctrine  of  the  future  life  was  never  clear  to  Israel  as  to  us.  Hence 
there  are  great  tracts  of  the  Old  Testament  where  it  never  appears  at  all.  This 
very  difficulty  about  "  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  "  would  not  have  arisen  had 
they  known  what  we  do.  But  in  these  Psalms  we  see  men  being  taught  of  God  the 
clearer  hope  which  alone  could  sustain  them.  Regarding,  then,  the  end  of  life  as 
told  of  in  both  these  Psalms,  we  note— I.  That  to  all  men  the  end  of  lifb 
IS  AN  AWAKENING.  We  call  death,  sleep,  but  we  use  the  word  as  a  euphemism  to 
veil  the  form  and  deformity  of  the  ugly  thing,  death.  But  this  name  we  give  to 
death  tells  of  our  weariness  of  life,  and  how  blessed  we  think  it  will  be  to  be  still 
at  last  with  folded  hands  and  shut  eyes.  But  the  emblem  is  but  half  the  truth. 
For,  "  what  dreams  may  come  !  "  And  we  shall  wake  too.  The  spirit  shall  spring 
into  greater  intensity  of  action.  To  our  true  selves  and  to  God  we  shall  awake. 
Here  we  are  like  men  asleep  in  some  chamber  that  looks  towards  the  eastern  sky. 
Morning  by  morning  comes  sunrise,  with  the  tender  glory  of  its  rosy  light  and 
blushing  heavens,  and  the  heavy  eyes  are  closed  to  it  all.  Here  and  there  some 
light  sleeper,  with  thinner  eyelids  or  face  turned  to  the  sun,  is  half-conscious  of  a 
vague  brightness,  and  feels  the  Light,  though  he  sees  not  the  colour  of  the  sky  nor 


PSALM  XVII.]  THE  PSALMS.  295 

the  forms  of  the  filmy  clouds.  Such  souls  are  our  saints  and  prophets,  but  most 
of  us  sleep  on  unconscious.  But  to  us  all  the  moment  of  awaking  will  coma 
What  shall  it  be  to  us  ?  II.  Death  is  to  some  men  the  awaking  of  God. 
"When  Thou  awakest,  Thou  shalt  despise  their  image."  The  metaphor  is  a 
common  one.  God  awakes  when  He  arises  to  judge  a  nation.  But  the  word  here 
points  on  to  the  future.  The  present  life  is  the  time  of  God's  forbearance,  the  field 
for  the  manifestation  of  patient  love,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  Here  and 
now  His  judgment,  for  the  most  part,  slumbers.  But  He  will  awake.  "The  day 
of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night,"  and  the  wicked  will  have  to  confront 
"the  terror  of  the  Lord."  For  sixty  times  sixty  slow,  throbbing  seconds,  the 
silent  hand  creeps  unnoticed  round  the  dial,  and  then,  with  whirr  and  clang,  the 
bell  rings  out,  and  another  hour  of  the  world's  secular  day  is  gone.  All  present 
judgments — epochs  of  convulsion  and  ruin — are  but  precursors  of  the  day  when  God 
awakes.  III.  Death  is  the  annihilation  of  the  vain  show  of  worldly 
LIFE.  Things  here  are  non-substantial — shadows — and  non-permanent.  IV.  Death 
18  to  some  men  such  annihilation  in  order  to  reveal  the  great  reality. 
"  Thy  likeness."  "  Form,"  the  word  really  means.  Hence  the  "likeness"  means, 
not  conformity  to  the  Divine  character,  but  the  beholding  of  His  self-manifestation. 
Seeing  God  we  shall  be  satisfied.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  With  Tliy  llkeneaa. — 
Hapj)ine3s  of  saints  in  heaven : — I.  There  ib  such  a  place  as  heaven.  Some 
imagine  that  heaven  is  a  state  rather  than  a  place  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  conceive  of 
this  distinction.  The  idea  of  locality  atteuds  all  our  ideas  of  created  objects,  whether 
spiiitual  or  corporeal.  The  idea  of  place  accompanies  our  idea  of  angels.  Whatever 
changes  pass  upon  glorified  bodies,  they  must  still  be  material,  and  have  a  local 
existence.  II.  God  manifests  His  peculiar  presence  in  heaven.  David 
expected  to  behold  the  face  of  God  in  some  peculiar  manner  when  he  should  awake  in 
the  world  of  light.  In  some  unusual  manner  God  manifests  His  presence  in  heaven. 
III.  When  the  saints  arrive  in  heaven  they  will  be  completely  satis- 
fied AND  happy  there.  They  will  enjoy  all  that  felicity  which  David  antici- 
pated. If  there  be  perfect  happiness  anywhere  in  the  universe  it  is  to  be  expected 
in  heaven,  where  God  is,  and  Christ  is,  and  where  all  the  holy  beings  are  collected, 
and  united  in  their  views  and  aflfections.  Consider  the  various  species  of  happiness 
in  heaven — 1.  They  wUl  enjoy  all  the  happiness  which  can  flow  from  the  free  and 
full  exercise  of  all  their  intellectual  powers  and  faculties.  2.  They  will  enjoy  the 
pleasures  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  those  of  the  understanding.  These  are  the  most 
refined  pleasures  of  the  soul.  3.  They  shall  enjoy  the  pleasmes  of  the  heart  in  the 
richest  variety.  4.  They  will  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  society,  as  well  as  of  devotion. 
5.  They  will  have  ineffable  pleasure  from  the  expressions  of  the  peculiar  love  and 
approbation  of  God.  6.  That  which  will  carry  celestial  blessedness  to  the  highest 
degree  of  perfection  is  the  pleasure  of  anticipation — the  prospect  of  appearing  before 
God,  and  beholding  His  face  in  righteousness.  All  the  redeemed  will  joyfully 
anticipate  their  perpetual  felicity,  and  rising  glory  to  all  eternity.  {N.  Lmrrums, 
D.D. )  The  likeness  perfected : — Dr.  Lyman  Abbott  says,  ' '  The  artist  stands  at  his 
easel  painting  the  portrait  of  one  before  him  ;  and  I  go  and  look  at  it,  and  scowl  and 
shrug  my  shoulders,  and  say,  '  It  is  not  like  him  ;  I  can  see  the  ghoet  of  an  appear- 
ance looking  out  through  the  lustreless  eyes  and  the  untrue  features,  but  it  is  not 
my  friend.'  And  the  artist  says,  'Wait!  when  I  have  finished  the  picture,  and 
put  the  purpose — the  soul — into  it,  then  judge,  not  before.'  So  Christ  sits  for  His 
portrait,  and  God  takes  me  as  a  canvas,  and  paints,  and  ever  and  anon  I  grow 
foolish  enough  to  look  at  myself,  and  shake  my  head  in  despair,  and  say,  '  That 
will  never  be  a  portrait.'  Then  I  come  back  to  His  promise  :  '  You  shall  be  satis- 
fied when  you  awake  in  His  likeness,' and  I  am  satisfied  beforehand  in  this  hope 
that  He  gives  mc."  Human  ca2)acilyfor  God  .—I  was  very  much  impressed  some 
time  ago  by  hearing  one  of  our  missionaries  from  Ceylon  tell  of  the  death  of  a  poor 
Cingalese  woman,  a  convert  to  Christ,  who  exclaimed  with  her  last  breath,  "Oh, 
how  beautiful  God  is  !  "  You  will  remember  that  those  were  among  the  lait  words 
of  a  very  different  person,  the  sweet-souled,  highly  cultured  Charles  Kingsley,  and 
you  will  see,  I  doubt  not,  in  the  coincidence  of  thought  at  the  supreme  moment  of 
life  between  that  poor  Cingalese  woman,  who  had  long  looked  for  God  by  the  dim 
light  of  her  pagan  faith,  and  that  cultured  Englishman,  who  had  walked  in  the 
broad  noonday  of  truth  with  all  the  windows  of  his  being  open  to  the  sun,  a  parable 
of  how  God,  the  great  Father  of  spirits,  can  bring  from  very  different  points,  and 
by  very  diverse  paths,  the  alien,  huugering  heart  of  man  to  the  enjoyment  of  Hku- 
•elfl     In  Cliarles  Kingsley  and  in  his  Cingalese  sister  there  was  the  capacity  for  the 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvn. 

same  thine,  the  enjoyment  of  God ;  and  I  believe,  and  you  believe,  tkat  wherever 
a  human  lieart  beats  under  God's  great  sky  that  capacity  exists.  Christianity  does 
not  necessarily  create  it ;  Christ  finds  it,  and  fathoms  it  and  fills  it.  {R.  iVright 
Hay.)  The  likeness  of  God: — I.  What  is  the  natubk  of  this  likeness  to 
God  ?  It  is  a  spiritual  likeness,  an  enstamping  the  Divine  image  upon  the  soul, 
a  moulding  the  soul  into  the  Divine  similitude.  The  likeness  of  which  the  Psalmist 
speaks  is  a  conformity  of  soul  to  God,  In  order  to  this  we  must  undergo  a 
great  change.  That  likeness  to  God  of  which  the  righteous  shall  partake  will  con- 
sist in  a  similarity  between  the  qualities  of  their  souls  and  the  attributes  of  the 
Divine  nature.  But  some  of  the  Divine  attributes  are  incommunicable.  The 
likeness  wiU  consist — 1.  In  knowledge.  Our  knowledge  must  ever  be  derived  and 
dependent.  The  righteous  may  resemble  God  in  the  certainty  of  their  knowledge, 
and  in  its  clearness  and  distinctness.  The  knowledge  of  glorified  saints,  compared 
with  what  they  now  possess,  may  very  properly  be  said  to  resemble  the  Divine 
knowledge  in  extent.  Doubtless  the  powers  of  the  soul  will  greatly  expand.  2.  The 
future  likeness  of  the  saints  to  God  will  consist  in  holiness.  The  moral  image  of 
God  is  defaced  and  destroyed  in  apostate  man.  But  in  Christ  Jesus  the  glory 
of  our  nature  is  restored.  Tlie  restoration  is  only  partial  in  this  present  life.  But 
the  whole  body  of  believers  shall,  ere  long,  be  made  perfect  in  holiness.  In  the 
immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  God,  faith  and  hope  shall  attain  perfection. 
3.  The  righteous  shall  be  like  God  in  blessedness.  This  necessarily  results  from  the 
two  last.     And  the  blessedness  will  be,  like  God's,  eternal.     II.  The  feelings  of 

THE   BLESSED,    WHEN   THEY   ENTER  UPON    THIS    POETION.      They   wiU    feel   that    all 

their  most  enlarged  desires  have  been  fulfilled.  It  will  satisfy  the  pious  soul  by 
filling  up  its  capacities  and  wishes.  Let  afflicted  Christians  learn  patie»ce  and  find 
consolation.  {W.  J.  Armstrong,  D.D.)  The  revelation  of  God  in  man: — Man 
is  capable  of  discovering,  and  has  actually  discovered,  some  true  knowledge  of  God. 
The  best  answer  we  can  make  to  the  unbeliever  in  an  objective  revelation  will  be  to 
say — 1.  The  religion  which  you  accept  on  an  external  authority  had  for  its  origin 
nothing  else  in  the  world  than  the  human  consciousness  which  you  now  despise. 
Place  all  the  religions  of  the  world  in  their  chronological  order,  and  you  will  find 
that  each  one  is  the  revolt  of  independent  thought  against  the  authority  of  the 
religion  which  preceded  it.  2.  At  all  events,  we  cannot  any  longer  abide  by  your 
revelation,  for  we  have  discovered  error  in  it.  To  our  minds  it  represents  God  in 
an  unworthy  and  even  in  a  degraded  aspect.  3.  We  will  tell  you  how  our  con- 
ceptions of  God  are  determined  in  the  first  instance,  how  they  are  sustained,  and 
how  they  can  be  corrected  and  improved.  We  look  at  man,  we  examine  ourselves. 
In  relation  to  puzzling  problems  and  analogies  in  the  outer  world  we  feel  the 
necessity  for  faith  and  patience  towards  God,  such  as  our  children  have  to  exercise 
towards  the  most  loving  parents.  The  reverence  for  goodness  as  goodness  is  uni- 
versal in  man,  differing  only  in  degree  in  proportion  as  different  men  have  higher 
or  lower  conceptions  of  what  goodness  is.  The  verdict  of  humanity  has  long  been 
passed,  that  morality,  justice,  love,  righteousness,  goodness,  call  it  what  you  will, 
is  the  best  and  highest  in  man,  and  the  most  righteous  man,  or  most  loving  man, 
is  the  noblest.  From  this  we  rise  by  one  step  into  a  conception  of  God's  moral 
attributes.  God  must  be,  at  least,  as  good  as  the  noblest  of  men.  We  cannot 
accept  as  a  God  one  whose  moral  principles  are  below  those  of  his  own  finite  creatures. 
Mankind  itself  is  the  ever-expanding  bible  in  which  the  Divine  revelation  is  being 
written.  Every  religion  in  the  days  of  its  youth  was  the  immediate  result  of  some 
previous  progress  in  human  morality.  If  you  want  proof  that  the  real  origin  of 
religious  belief  is  the  reverence  of  human  goodness,  take  not  the  mere  creed  of 
Christendom,  but  the  cherished  belief  of  its  heart.  Why  do  Christians  worship 
Christ  as  God?  Certainly  not  because  it  was  said  that  He  was  God,  t>ut  because 
they  believed  Him  to  be  a  perfect  man.  They  first  admired  and  loved  Him  for  His 
gsodness,  and  then  they  made  Him  Divine,  and  robed  Him  in  all  the  splendours  of 
heavenly  royalty  out  of  gratitude  for  His  human  love.  To  those,  then,  who  are 
really  Christians,  and  really  religious,  we  come  on  their  own  ground,  and  say.  If 
it  is  human  goodness  you  really  worship,  we  can  show  you  plenty  of  that,  equal  to 
Christ's,  and  even  better  still.  We  can  show  you  at  least  the  same  thing  free  from 
some  of  His  personal  errors.  In  almosr  every  particular  the  conceptions  which  we 
have  of  God  are  more  exalted  and  puie  than  any  which  have  gone  before  it.  They 
are  attained,  as  all  other  conceptions  are,  namely,  by  the  gradual  advance  in  the 
moral  and  intellectual  nature  of  man.  Our  faith  is  nobler  than  yours,  because  we 
have  allowed  ourselves  to  be  taught  by  the  moral  progress  of  our  own  times,  and  by 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  297 

the  highest  instincts  of  our  souls.  To  our  moral  instincts  and  onr  attainment  of  the 
knowledge  of  goodness  we  must  add  our  own  deep  and  earnest  aspirations,  as 
witnesses  of  what  God  really  is.  No  words  so  well  express  the  possession  of  soul  by 
the  Divine  presence  and  its  loftiest  aspirations  as  those  of  the  text,  "As  for  me, 
I  will  behold  Thy  face  in  righteousness ;  and  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake, 
with  Thy  likeness."    {Charles  Voysey.) 


PSALM  XVIII. 

Vbbs.  1-8.  l^irlll  lore  Thee,  0  Lard,  my  Btrengrth. — The  tale  of  a  life:— In  this 
magnificent  hymn  the  royal  poet  sketches,  in  a  few  grand  outlines,  the  tale  of 
his  life — the  record  of  his  marvellous  deliverances,  and  of  the  victories  which 
Jehovah  had  given  him — the  record,  too,  of  his  own  heart,  the  truth  of  its  affection 
towards  God,  and  the  integrity  of  purpose  by  which  it  had  ever  been  influenced. 
Throughout  that  singularly  chequered  life,  hunted  as  he  had  been  by  Saul  before  he 
came  to  the  throne,  and  harassed  perpetually  after  he  became  king  by  rivals,  who 
disputed  his  authority  and  endeavoured  to  steal  away  the  hearts  of  his  people — 
compelled  to  fly  for  his  life  before  his  own  son,  and  engaged  afterwards  in  long  and 
fierce  wars  with  foreign  nations — one  thing  had  never  forsaken  him,  the  love  and 
presence  of  Jehovah.  By  His  help  he  had  subdued  every  enemy,  and  now,  in  his 
old  age,  looking  back  with  devout  thankfulness  on  the  past,  he  sings  this  great 
song  of  praise  to  the  God  of  his  life.  With  a  heart  full  of  love  he  wall  tell  how 
Jehovah  delivered  him,  and  then  there  rises  before  the  eyes  of  his  mind  the  whole 
force  and  magnitude  of  the  peril  from  which  he  had  escaped.  So  much  the  more 
wonderful  appears  the  deliverance  which  accordingly  he  represents  in  a  bold 
poetical  figure,  as  a  stooping  of  the  Most  High  from  heaven  to  save  him — who 
comes,  as  He  came  of  old  to  Sinai,  with  all  the  terror  and  gloom  of  earthquake, 
and  tempest,  and  thick  darkness.  But  God  delivers  those  only  who  trust  in  Him 
and  who  are  like  Him.  There  must  be  an  inner  life  of  communion  with  God,  if 
man  will  know  His  mercy.  Hence  David  passes  on  to  that  covenant  relationship 
in  which  he  had  stood  to  God.  He  had  ever  been  a  true  Israelite,  and  therefore 
God,  the  true  God  of  Israel,  had  dealt  with  him  accordingly.  And  thus  it  is  at  the 
last  that  the  servant  of  Jehovah  finds  his  reward.  {J.  J.  Stewart  Perovnie,  B.D.) 
Have  we  permission  to  love  Godt — It  will  awaken  surprise  in  you  to  hear  this 
question,  yet  it  cannot  exceed  mine  on  hearing  it,  as  I  once  did,  from  a  distinguished 
man  whom  I  had  long  regarded  as  truly  devout.  Being  together  at  the  house  of  his 
relative,  this  man,  of  world-wide  reputation  as  a  man  of  genius,  astonished  me  with 
this  question,  "  What  do  you  understand  by  love  to  God  ?"  I  looked  at  him  with 
Burprise ;  but  before  I  could  speak  he  added,  ' '  I  know  what  fear  of  God  means  ; 
but  I  do  not  understand  what  is  meant  when  I  am  called  upon  to  love  God. "  Had 
I  uttered  the  thought  which  arose  in  my  mind  I  should  have  said,  "  I  always 
supposed  you  to  be  a  Christian ;  can  it  be  possible  that  you  have  need  that  one 
should  teach  you  the  alphabet  of  religious  experience?"  But  I  put  questions  to 
him,  encouraged  by  his  frank  nature,  and  I  now  discovered  that  his  difficulty  was 
this,  that  loving  God  implied  a  degree  of  familiarity  which  seemed  to  him  unsuit- 
able in  a  finite  creature  when  approaching  his  Creator.  He  acknowledged  that 
the  language  of  the  Bible  encouraged  the  idea  of  familiarity  in  our  intercourse  with 
God  ;  still,  he  preferred  to  explain  all  such  permission  by  what  he  called  Oriental- 
ism. In  vain  was  it  urged  in  reply  that  Orientalism  rather  forbade  than  encouraged 
liberty  in  approaching  Majesty  ;  prostration,  even  to  abjectness,  was  enjoined  on 
ministers  of  state,  as  well  as  menial  servants.  Hence  there  are  two  extremes 
against  which  we  have  need  to  be  on  our  guard.  One  is  familiarity  ;  the  other  is 
stoicisM.  The  apostles  maintain  a  just  medium  between  these  extremes.  The 
question  which  I  have  already  mentioned  as  put  to  me  by  a  man  of  distinguished 
genius  was  also  expressed  by  a  plain  man,  a  mechanic.  He  was  in  the  last  stages 
of  a  decline,  but  in  full  possession  of  liis  faculties.  Once  as  I  was  leaving  his  betl- 
side  he  said,  "One  thing  more  I  wish  to  ask  :  I  lie  here  and  talk  with  God  in  a 
way  which  startles  me.  I  use  expressions  of  endearment,  address  Him  by 
affectionate  names,  make  requests  as  a  child  to  a  parent,  indulge  in  words  of 
adoration  ;  all  of  which,  on  second  thought,  seem  to  me  too  free  for  a  mortal  to  use 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

in  his  intercourse  with  his  Master.  Yet  my  feelings  are  so  strong  that  I  cannot 
restrain  myself."  I  said  to  him,  "You  ask,  May  you  love  God  thus?  The 
Saviour  says,  quoting  the  Old  Testament,  '  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  th^ 
mind.'  Do  you  ever  exceed  this!"  An  expression  of  satisfaction  came  over  hia 
face.  The  next  day  he  had  gone  to  see  Him  "whom  not  having  seen "  he  "loved." 
;  The  words  of  the  text  leave  no  room  to  question  that  the  predominant  feeling  of 
David  was  this,  "I  will  love  Thee,  0  Lord,  my  strength."  Then  he  proceeds  to 
heap  up  epithets  of  love  to  God.  He  draws  them  from  his  experience  in  wilder- 
nesses and  caves.  Had  he  been  a  seafaring  man  we  doubtless  should  have  had  him 
saying,  "Thou  art  my  lighthouse,  my  pUot,  my  harbour;  to  Thee  I  am  home- 
ward bound ;  with  Thee  I  am  safe  home."  How  enthusiastic  in  passionate  ex- 
I  pression  of  love  to  God  is  all  true  religious  poetry.  And  when  a  man  is  converted, 
'  how  his  heart  goes  out  in  love  to  God.  See  this  in  Paul.  And  here  is  one  instance 
from  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  there  are  scores  of  such.  A  man  was  riding 
home  on  horseback  after  evening  service,  meditating  on  what  he  had  heard.  Ha 
was  secretly  persuaded  to  yield  himself  up  to  God,  when  all  at  once  light  from 
heaven  broke  upon  his  mind,  revealiug  to  him  the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ  with 
a  sense  of  peace  with  God  and  the  joy  of  pardoned  sin  ;  so  that  he  found  liimself 
in  a  new  world.  Unable  to  contain  his  joy  at  the  discovery,  haviug  no  one  at 
home  who  could  enter  into  his  feelings,  turning  his  horse's  head,  he  rode  back  three 
miles  to  the  minister's  house,  and  called  him  to  the  door.  Taking  both  of  the 
minister's  hands  in  his,  he  cried  out,  "  Oh,  sir  !  what  a  God  we  have  !  "  which  was 
the  substance  of  all  that  he  said,  for  it  was  impossible  for  words  to  express  his 
emotions,  and  he  mounted  and  rode  home,  singing  and  praying.  No  one  would 
have  found  it  more  impossible  than  he  to  answer  the  question,  "  What  do  you 
understand  by  loving  God  ? " — he  whose  whole  being  was  at  that  hour  flooded  with 
it  could  have  found  no  words  to  define  his  emotions.  Does  any  one  say,  ' '  Of  what 
value  can  such  emotions  be  to  God  ? "  We  might  answer  him,  Of  what  value  is 
anything  to  God  ?  He  wUl  one  day  give  up  this  globe  to  fire.  'There  is  nothing  of 
any  value  to  God  except  love.  The  whole  object  of  God  in  the  Bible  seems  every- 
where  to  have  been  to  make  men  love  Him.  L  The  experience  of  men  in  the 
Bible  shows  us  that  the  sum  of  human  duty  is  to  love  God.  See  the  Book 
of  Deuteronomy,  to  which  our  Lord  so  often  referred.  It  is  full  of  expostulations  to 
urge  Israel  to  love  God.  Joshua,  too,  does  not  bid  them  tremble,  as  he  well  might, 
in  view  of  their  stupendous  history,  but  ' '  love  the  Lord."  Some  will  say  this  seems 
very  strange.  Let  such  consider  that  there  is  no  way  in  which,  on  account  of  the 
hardness  of  our  hearts,  God  brings  us  to  love  Him  more  effectually  than  by  His 
terrible  dispensations.  W^hen  night  comes  down  in  the  Azores  the  lavender  beds 
yield  perfumes  which  all  day  long  the  hot  sun  had  consumed.  After  a  storm 
we  look  for  sea  mosses  and  pebbles  which  the  working  of  the  sea  has  brought  on 
shore.  "The  Lord  hath  said  that  He  will  dwell  in  the  thick  darkness" — so  spoke 
Solomon,  and  it  is  true.  If  God  desires  to  draw  a  Christian  very  near  to  Himself, 
He  will  almost  always  send  a  heavy  trial  upon  him.  David  said,  "  When  He  hath 
tried  me  I  shall  come  forth  as  gold."  We  see  Christians  who  have  been  grievously 
afilicted,  cleaving  to  God  the  more  that  He  smites  them.  If  God  has  set  His  love  on 
a  man  He  may  honour  him  by  great  trials.  He  cannot  trust  all  to  bear  great 
trials.  He  said  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  ' '  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  must 
suffer  for  My  sake."  Probably  there  is  nothing  which  excites  the  admiration  of 
angels  more  than  to  see  us  loving  God  the  more  that  He  aSiicts  us.  Then  they  sea 
the  power  ^  faith  ;  how  it  makes  a  man  endure  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible. 
II.  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  Divine  testimony  to  man,  not  only  that  he 
MAY  but  that  he  MUST  LOVE  GoD.  See  how  John  in  his  epistles  insists  on  this, 
that  God  is  Love.  The  governing  principle  in  God  is  love.  Otlier  attributes 
belong  to  Him,  but  He  is  none  ol'  them.  "God  is  Love."  Therefore  He  must 
desire  the  love  of  His  people.  They  are  born  of  the  Spirit.  Shall  man.  His  new 
creation,  be  a  cold,  phlegmatic,  intellectual  being  ?  May  we  be  able  to  comprehend 
witli  all  saints  what  is  the  breadth  and  length  and  depth  and  height;  and  to 
know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge,  that  we  may  be  filled  with  all 
the  fulness  of  God.  {N.  Adams,  D.D.)  A  text  thai  looks  two  ways: — I.  Back- 
ward, UPON  THE  MERCIES  AND  DELIVERANCES  OF  GoD.  These  are  expressed  in 
the  titles  used  —  strength,  rock,  fortress,  &c.  These  are  synonymous  phrases, 
signifying  one  and  the  same  thing.  There  is  not  here  merely  the  exuberance 
of  a  poetical  style.     The  apparent  exaggeration  in  David's  hymn  flows  from  the 


PSALM  xvin.]  THE  PSALMS.  299 

abundance  of  a  devout  and  grateful  heart  labouring  to  empty  and  discharge  its 
fulness.  How  well  such  a  full  acknowledgment  would  become  us  !  II,  Forward, 
IN  THE  RETURNS  OF  DUTY,  to  which  he  engageth  himself.  1.  Of  love 
(ver.  1).  2.  Of  trust  (ver.  1).  3.  Of  praise  and  prayer  (ver.  3).  We  are  to  love 
God  for  His  own  excellencies,  because  He  requires  it,  and  in  response  to  His 
love.  Trust  is  an  act  of  friendship,  and  the  greatest  fruit  it  yields,  mutual 
confidence,  springing  naturally  from  mutual  affection.  {J.  Dolhen,  D.D.) 
A  song  of  thanksgiving  in  review  of  a  troublous  life : — This  Psalm  is  a  fervent  out- 
pouring of  gratitude,  not  for  any  single  deliverance,  but  for  all  the  deliverances  of 
his  tried  and  stormy  life.  I.  A  life  greatly  troubled.  Four  facts  concerning 
"ungodly  men."  They  were  worthless,  numerous,  violent,  and  indefatigable. 
And  our  sufferings,  as  David's,  grow  out  of  our  physical  constitution,  our  social 
relationships,  our  moral  delinquencies  and  remorses.  II,  A  God  equal  to  all 
EMERGENCIES.  God  appears  to  David  in  his  trials  in  a  twofold  aspect — passive 
and  active :  resting  as  a  rock,  and  moving  as  a  thunderstorm.  1.  God  appeared  to 
him  as  his  all-suflBcient  protector.  A  refuge  impregnable,  ever  accessible,  and  ever- 
lasting. 2.  God  appeared  as  his  triumphant  deliverer.  The  description  of  God 
moving  for  his  deliverance  is  grandly  poetic.  This  poetic  description  is  both 
natural  and  religious.  Three  observations  are  suggested — (1)  It  is  a  movement  in 
answer  to  prayer.  (2)  It  is  a  movement  sublimely  grand.  (3)  It  is  a  movement 
completely  effective.  III.  A  soul  alive  w^ith  true  sentiments.  1.  Love.  Love 
to  God  is  the  essence  of  goodness,  and  the  sum-total  of  man's  obligation.  2.  Trust. 
This  is  connected  with  love.  True  love  has  respect  to  excellence,  and  will  ever  lead 
to  trusting.  3.  Praise.  "  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised." 
Worship  is  heaven.  {Homilist.)  Love  to  God  possible: — "I  cannot  love  God," 
said  a  thoughtless  man,  "  for  I  have  never  seen  Him."  "  Canst  thou  not  ?  "  replied 
his  companion.  "Then  thou  canst  do  less  than  the  little  blind  girl  who  sits  under 
the  shade  of  the  chestnut  tree  on  the  village  green.  She'  can  love  her  father  and 
mother,  though  she  has  never  seen  them,  and  will  never  see  them  till  the  latest 
hour  of  her  life."  Jesus  is  my  love : — The  Lollards'  Tower  in  London,  constructed 
by  Chicheley,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  his  palace  at  Lambeth,  at  the  cost  of 
six  hundred  pounds,  was  often  filled  with  persons  accused  of  heresy.  The  walls  of 
this  dungeon  still  bear  witness  to  the  sorrows  and  hopes  of  those  who  suffered  in 
this  place.  The  words  "Jesus  amor  wieus"  (Jesus  is  my  Love),  written  by  some 
poor  martyr,  may  still  be  seen  upon  the  wall  in  the  Lollards'  Tower.  David's 
thanksgiving  for  his  deliverance : — Many  songs  of  thanksgiving  were  composed  by 
David.  Perhaps  it  would  be  too  bold  for  us  to  say  that  this  Psalm  excels  them 
all ;  but  we  may  say  without  hesitation,  that  none  of  them  excels  this.  I.  Of 
David's  deliverance  from  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  In  the  early  part  of 
David's  life  he  obtained  signal  instances  of  God's  preserving  mercy.  A  lion  and  a 
bear  came  to  destroy  a  lamb  of  his  fold  ;  David  had  the  courage  to  attack  both  these 
fierce  animals  in  defence  of  the  young  of  his  flock,  and  the  Lord  delivered  him.  A 
great  deliverance  was  granted  to  himself,  and  through  him  to  his  people,  when  the 
Lord  delivered  into  his  hand  the  terrible  giant  of  Gath.  Many  and  wonderful  were 
the  deliverances  which  he  obtained  from  Saul.  David  sometimes  thought  it 
necessary  for  himself  to  leave  the  Lord's  land  and  to  seek  refuge  among  strangers, 
who  were  not  such  heathens  as  many  of  his  own  people.     Among  them,  too,  he  found 

Erotection  and  obtained  great  deliverances.  The  king  of  Moab  behaved  to  him  with 
indness,  so  far  as  we  know.  Among  the  Philistines  he  was  more  than  once  in 
extreme  danger.  But  th*  Lord  was  still  his  stay  and  his  helper.  When  the  Philis- 
tines were  brought  low  by  many  terrible  engagements,  David  was  still  exposed  to 
great  perils,  but  the  Lord  preserved  him  whithersoever  he  went.  Neither  Moabites, 
nor  Ammonites,  nor  Syrians  of  different  kingdoms  could  stand  before  him,  either 
singly  or  in  conjunction,  for  the  Lord  taught  his  hands  to  war  and  his  fingers  to 
fight.  But  when  the  Lord  had  given  him  rest  from  his  enemies  round  about,  evil 
rose  up  against  him  out  of  his  own  kingdom  and  out  of  his  own  house.  Sheba  rose 
up  after  Absalom  to  seek  his  life,  but  he  soon  lost  his  own,  as  his  predecessor  in 
wickedness  had  done.  These  were  some  of  David's  deliverances  from  his  many 
visible  enemies ;  and  they  were  attended  and  sweetened  by  other  deliverances,  not 
less,  but  still  more  important.  He  was  sometimes  almost  overwhelmed  by  fear 
and  dejection  of  spirit.  He  was  often  in  great  bodily  distress ;  but  he  cried  unto 
the  Lord  and  was  healed  (Psa.  xxx.).  But  the  most  dangerous  of  his  troubles  were 
those  which  he  suffered  from  the  law  in  his  members  warring  against  the  law  in  his 
mind,  and  bringing  him  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  was  in  his  members. 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [tSAi.u.  xviiL 

II.  Of  God  as  the  Deliveber  of  David.  "Salvation  is  of  tlie  Lord  "  (Psa.  iii  8). 
Everywhere  we  find  him  giving  to  the  Lord  the  glory  of  the  salvation  wrought  for 
him.  "The  Lord  is  my  rock,  and  my  fortress,  and  my  deliverer.  The  God  of  my 
rock,  in  Him  will  I  trust :  He  is  my  shield  and  the  horn  of  my  salvation  ;  my  high 
tower  and  my  refuge,  my  Saviour,  Thou  savest  me  from  violence  "  (2  Sam.  xxii. 
2,  3).  "For  who  is  God  save  the  Lord  ?  Who  is  a  rock  save  our  God  ? "  (2  Sam. 
xxii.  32).  We  know  that  there  were  many  heroes  who  obtained  a  just  and  glorious 
name  for  the  valiant  exploits  which  they  performed  in  the  defence  of  their  king  and 
country.  One  of  them  had  the  honour  of  preserving  the  life  of  David  when  the 
hand  of  a  terrible  giant  was  lifted  up  against  him.  And  there  were  many  besides 
his  mighty  men  to  whom  he  was  greatly  indebted  for  signal  service.  His  life  was  at 
one  time  saved  by  the  kindness  and  wit  of  his  wife  Michal,  at  another  time  by  the 
good  offices  of  Jonathan,  and  even  the  Philistines  were  at  one  time  made  the 
instruments  of  preserving  the  life  of  that  champion  of  Israel  who  was  to  be  the 
destroyer  of  their  power.  But  we  never  find  David  employing  his  fine  genius  in 
celebrating  the  exploits  of  these  heroes  to  whom  he  was  so  greatly  indebted.  God 
is  pleased  for  the  most  part  to  employ  means  and  instruments  in  His  works  of 
mercy  or  of  vengeance.  But  they  do  neither  less  nor  more  than  God  kas  intended 
to  accomplish  by  them.  It  was  God  who  made  use  of  the  Philistines  for  the 
salvation  of  David  at  Selah-hammah-lekoth.  They  were  far  from  meaning  so, 
neither  did  their  heart  think  so.  God  employed  not  only  men  on  earth,  but  the 
angels  of  heaven,  for  the  deliverance  of  David  from  his  enemies,  and  ther«fore,  in 
his  commendations  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  himself,  he  assures  us  that  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  encamps  round  about  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  and  delivers  them. 
"Let  their  way  be  dark  and  slippery,  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  persecute 
them  "  (Psa.  xixv. ).  Whatever  were  the  means  employed  for  the  deliverances  of 
David,  no  doubt  was  left  in  the  mind  of  any  reasonable  man  concerning  the  great 
Author  of  his  salvation.  The  Lord  gave  us  sensible  proofs  of  His  preaenoe  with 
David  and  of  His  indignation  against  his  enemies,  as  if  He  had  in  the  literal  sense 
bowed  the  heavens  and  come  down.  Had  we  hearts  like  David  we  would  often 
be  rejoicing  in  God,  and  singing  His  praises,  when  our  corrupt  dispositions  prompt 
us  to  utter  complaints  as  if  God  had  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  because  He  will  not 
resign  the  management  of  all  our  affairs  into  our  own  hands.  III.  Of  this 
Psalm  of  thanksgivikg  to  God  for  all  His  deliverances.  In  this  Psalm 
we  find  David  expressing — 1.  The  ardour  of  his  love  to  that  God  who  had 
blessed  him  with  so  many  and  such  wonderful  deliverances.  Dearly  he  loved 
the  God  of  his  salvation,  before  he  needed  any  of  the  deliverances  which 
gave  occasion  to  this  Psalm.  But  every  new  deliverance  increased  the  ardour  of 
his  love.  2.  We  find  him  expressing  his  firm  reliance  on  God  as  the  God  of  his 
salvation.  His  faith  was  powerfully  invigorated  by  every  new  deliverance.  And 
would  we  not  greatly  dishonour  Him  if  we  withheld  from  Him  our  confidence  after 
a  thousand  proofs  of  His  special  favour  ?  (Psa.  xviii.  2,  3).  3.  He  expatiates  on  the 
greatness,  on  the  grace,  on  the  glory  of  these  salvations  which  had  been  wrought 
for  him.  He  illustrates  the  greatness  of  the  salvations  by  representing  the  dread- 
ful danger  from  which  he  was  delivered.  The  terrors  of  death  had  fallen  upon 
him.  He  was  like  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning,  or  like  a  man  raised  out  of 
the  grave.  His  deliverance  was  the  answer  of  fervent  cries  addressed  to  God  from 
the  depths  into  which  he  was  cast.  We  are  too  much  disposed  to  look  with  a 
careless  eye  on  the  great  works  of  God.  4.  He  celebrates  the  excellency  of  those 
Divine  perfections  which  were  manifested  in  his  deliverance.  He  shews  forth  the 
glory  of  that  righteousness  which  appeared  in  the  gracious  rewards  bestowed  on 
himself,  and  the  vengeance  inflicted  on  his  wicked  enemies.  He  shows  forth  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  as  the  God  of  salvation,  who  had  given  striking  and  incontestable 
proofs  of  His  saving  power  and  grace  in  the  salvations  wrought  for  him.  None  of 
the  gods  of  the  nations  had  ever  given  any  proofs  of  their  power  to  save  their 
worshippers  that  trusted  in  them.  Great  things  God  had  done  for  David.  David 
had  himself  performed  wonderful  things,  and  achieved  victories  that  were  to  make 
him  famous  through  all  generations.  But  not  to  himself,  but  to  his  (Jod  was  the 
praise  due.  5.  He  praises  God,  and  expresses  his  unshaken  confidence  in  Him  for 
the  great  things  that  were  yet  to  be  done  for  him,  and  for  his  seed  after  him-  On 
the  whole,  we  are  taught  by  this  Psalm  what  improvement  we  ought  to  make  of  the 
great  works  of  God,  recorded  in  His  Word.  If  David  saw  and  admired  and  celebrated 
in  such  strains  of  rapture  his  deliverance  from  the  hand  of  his  enemies,  oan  we 
sufficiently  admire  the  glory  that  shines  forth  in  the  whole  train  of  prorideatial 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  801 

administration  recorded  in  the  volume  of  inspiration  ?  Manifold  were  the  salvations 
wrought  by  God  for  Abraham  and  Jacob,  for  Moses  and  the  people  of  Israel.  Nor 
ought  we  to  forget  any  of  God's  deliverances  wrought  for  ourselves.  Nor  ought  we 
to  forget  the  obligations  that  lie  upon  us  to  praise  God  for  our  friends  and  brethren. 
{G.  Lawson.)  Tht  Lord  is  my  rock,  and  my  fortress,  and  my  deliverer. — 
Shutting  the  gates  of  Derry : — In  token  of  his  gratitude  to  Jehovah  for  deliverance 
from  Saul's  malevolence,  David  wrote  this  Psalm,  a  glowing  composition,  in  which 
martial  similes  abound.  Thanksgiving  is  not  only  a  national,  but  an  individual 
duty.  There  are  few  to-day  who  seem  to  apprehend  this  obligation.  With  simple 
truthfulness  it  might  be  affirmed  of  most  of  us — "  Prayers  are  many,  thanks  are 
rare.  How  many  of  us  who,  in  critical  moments  and  in  sad  emergencies,  resorted 
to  our  God  for  deliverance  and  protection,  sought  His  presence  again  when  He 
heard  our  prayer  and  saw  our  tears  ? "  Not  without  deep  meaning  and  subtle 
experience  of  human  perversity  did  David  write,  "  I  will  pay  Thee  my  vows  which 
I  spake  with  my  mouth  when  I  was  in  trouble."  {M.  B.  Hogg,  B.A.)  The  horn 
of  my  salvation. — "  The  horn  of  my  salvation"  : — The  allusion  here  is  doubtful. 
Some  have  8upi>osed  the  reference  to  be  to  the  horns  of  animals,  by  which  they 
defend  themselves  and  attack  their  enemies.  "God  is  to  me,  does  for  me,  what 
their  horns  do  for  them."  Others  consider  it  as  referring  to  the  well-established 
fact,  that  warriors  were  accustomed  to  place  horns,  or  ornaments  like  horns,  on 
their  helmets.  The  horn  stands  for  the  helmet;  and  "the  helmet  of  salvation" 
is  an  expression  equivalent  to  "a  saving,  a  protecting  helmet."  Others  consider 
the  reference  as  to  the  corners  or  handles  of  the  altar  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle 
or  temple,  which  are  called  its  horns.  Others  suppose  the  reference  to  be  to  the 
highest  point  of  a  lofty  and  precipitous  mountain,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  call 
its  peak.  No  doubt,  in  the  Hebrew  language,  horn  is  used  for  mountain,  as  in 
Isaiah  v.  1.  A  very  fertile  mountain  is  called  a  horn  of  oil.  The  sense  is  sub- 
stantially the  same  whichever  of  these  views  we  take  ;  though,  from  the  connection 
with  "shield"  or  "buckler,"  I  am  induced  to  consider  the  second  of  these  views 
as  the  most  probable.  It  seems  the  same  idea  as  that  expressed  (Psa.  cxl.  7), 
" Thou  hast  covered,"  and  Thou  wilt  cover  "my  head  in  the  day  of  battle."  {JoJin 
Brown.) 

Yer.  8.  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised.— 7A«  object, 
nature,  a/nd  effect  of  prayer : — Few  men  have  known  more  of  the  variegated  scenes  of 
human  life  than  David.  I.  David's  ptjepose.  "  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,"  Here 
we  have  what  he  declares  concerning  the  Lord — that  He  is  "worthy  to  be  praised." 
By  considering  why  we  praise  men  we  may  be  furnished  with  reasons  why  God  is 
worthy  to  be  praised.  1.  We  praise  men  for  the  beauty  of  their  persons.  2.  For 
the  largeness  of  their  minds.  But  what  are  all  the  intellectual  attainments  of 
mortals  compared  with  the  infinite  mind  of  God  ?  3.  For  the  benevolence  of  their 
hearts  ;  for  their  tender  sympathetic  feelings  towards  the  objects  of  distress.  Then 
how  much  does  God  deserve  our  praise  for  His  benevolence  ?  This  in  God  is 
nniverstJ,  absolute,  wonderful,  ano  perpetual.  "His  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 
4.  For  the  liberality  of  their  actions.  God  scatters  His  gifts  with  a  most  liberal 
hand.  That  we  may  conceive  how  worthy  God  is  to  be  praised,  consider  Him  not 
only  in  His  absolute,  but  also  in  His  relative  character.  As  a  friend,  a  king,  a 
father.  Man's  excellency  is  derived,  God's  attributes  and  perfections  are  essentially 
His  own.  II.  David's  confidence.  Or  what  he  asserts  relative  to  himself. 
His  purpose  was  pious,  rational,  scriptural,  necessary,  and  beneficial.  He  says, 
"  I  shall  be  saved  from  mine  enemies."  This  supposes — 1.  That  he  had  enemies. 
2.  That  he  was  in  danger  from  his  enemies.  And  3.  That  he  had  no  expectation 
of  saving  himself.     {Sketches  of  Four  Huvdred  Sermons.) 

Vers.  4-6.  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me. — Estimating  our  sorrows: — 
No  attempt  is  here  made  to  diminish  the  severity  of  the  crisis.  Often  when  a  great 
agony  is  overpast,  the  sufferer  himself  forgets  its  intensity  and  is  inclined  to  think 
that  it  might  have  been  cured  by  less  ostentatious  means  than  had  been  adopted 
for  its  pacification.  We  are  seldom  critically  correct  in  the  recollection  of  our 
sorrows.  We  either  unduly  magnify  them,  or  we  so  far  modify  their  intensity  as 
to  make  any  remedial  measures  look  as  simple  and  superficial  as  possible.  David 
vividly  remembered  all  his  afflictive  experience.  He  does  not  hesitate  to  speak  of 
that  experience  in  woitis  which  are  metaphorical,  if  not  romantic,  without  at  all 
affecting  the  reality  of  the  trouble  through  which  he  had  passed.     He  says,  "  the 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

sorrows  of  death  compassed  "  him.  Some  have  interpreted  this  expression  as  birth- 
pangs  ;  others,  again,  have  used  the  word  cords.  It  has  been  thought  that  the 
figure  of  the  hunter  in  the  next  verse,  in  which  we  read  of  the  "  snares  of  death," 
fixes  the  meaning  there  to  be  cords.  In  Samuel,  David  represents  himself  as  sub- 
merged or  overwhelmed  by  the  progress  or  waves  of  the  trouble  which  had  been 
made  to  pass  over  him.  Sometimes,  indeed,  we  do  not  know  what  real  trouble  w« 
have  been  in  until  we  have  been  removed  from  it  for  some  distance,  and  thus  enabled 
to  contemplate  it  in  its  totality.  Again  and  again  the  mind  exclaims  concerning 
the  impossibility  that  such  and  such  trouble  can  really  have  been  survived.  W» 
are  familiar  with  the  experience  which  declares  that  certain  afflictions  could  not 
possibly  be  borne  a  second  time.  It  is  well  to  bear  in  memory  our  greatest  sorrows, 
that  we  may  also  recollect  our  greatest  deliverances.  There  is  no  true  piety  in 
undervaluing  the  darkness  and  the  horror  through  which  the  soul  has  passed. 
Instead  of  making  light  of  the  most  tragical  experiences  of  life,  we  should  rather 
accumulate  them,  that  we  may  see  how  wondrous  has  been  the  interposition  of  the 
Divine  hand,  and  how  adequate  are  the  resources  of  heaven  to  all  the  necessities  of 
this  mortal  condition.  Even  admitting  the  words  to  be  metaphorical,  they  present 
a  vivid  picture  of  what  human  sorrow  may  be,  — whatever  may  be  rationally  imagined 
may  be  actually  undergone  ;  as  to  David's  consciousness,  what  is  here  stated  was  a 
matter  of  the  sternest  reality.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  too,  that  trouble  is  a 
different  thing  to  different  men,  even  when  it  comes  in  the  same  guise  and  quantity. 
Much  must  depend  upon  temperament.  Things  animate  suffer  ;  things  inanimate 
do  not  respond  to  the  blow  with  which  they  are  struck.  The  poetic  temperament 
is  the  most  suffering  of  all.  According  to  the  sensitiveness  of  the  nature  is  the 
terribleness  of  the  stroke  which  falls  upon  it.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.  D. )  David's 
afflictions  and  fears: — We  never  can  be  duly  thankful  to  God  if  we  forget  the 
troubles  which  we  have  suffered,  and  the  distress  of  our  souls  when  they  were 
pressing  us  down.  "The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and  the  floods  of  ungodly 
men  made  me  afraid."  When  Paul  speaks  of  a  great  deliverance  bestowed  upon 
him  in  Asia,  he  says  that  God  had  delivered  him  from  so  great  a  death.  In  another 
passage  he  protests  that  he  died  daily.  I.  Of  the  great  distresses  and  dangers 
OF  David.  David  probably  enjoyed  such  happiness  and  tranquillity  as  this  evil 
world  can  afford  before  he  was  anointed  by  Samuel  to  be  king  over  Israel  ;  but 
almost  from  that  time,  whilst  he  was  yet  in  early  youth,  his  troubles  commenced. 
His  sore  distresses  were  not  at  an  end  when  he  was  advanced  to  the  throne.  But  the 
greatest  of  all  his  dangers  after  his  advancement  to  the  kingdom  was  that  to  which 
he  was  exposed  by  his  unnatural  son  Absalom,  and  his  treacherous  counsellor 
Ahithophel.  II.  The  consideration  of  the  state  of  his  mind  under  his 
TROUBLES.  1.  Great  sorrow  often  obtained  possession  of  his  soul.  "  My  soul  is 
exceeding  sorrowful,"  or  encompassed  with  sorrow  even  unto  death.  And  as  David 
was  an  eminent  type  of  that  blessed  person,  his  sorrows  may  be  considered  as  an 
emblem  of  those  unequalled  sorrows  which  seized  on  our  Redeemer  when  He  was 
bearing  our  iniquities.  Poverty,  exile,  reproach,  and  danger  of  life  are  evils  which 
make  a  deep  impression  of  grief  upon  the  minds  of  most  men,  especially  when  they 
meet  together  ;  and  David,  though  a  wise  and  an  holy  man,  was  not  exempt  from 
the  feelings  of  human  nature.  But  David  was  often  compelled  to  dwell  amongst 
men  who  without  cause  were  his  enemies  (Psa.  Ivi.).  And  his  friends  were  afraid 
to  perform  the  offices  of  friendship.  But  exile  is  more  distressing  to  a  lover  of  his 
country  than  poverty.  It  was  peculiarly  distressing  to  an  Israelite  indeed,  who 
could  not  leave  his  country  without  leaving  behind  him  the  sanctuary  of  his  God. 
"  They  have  driven  me  out  this  day  from  abiding  in  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord, 
saying,  Go  serve  other  gods.  Woe  is  me  that  I  dwell  in  Meshech,  and  sojourn  in 
the  tents  of  Kedar."  His  heart  was  broken  with  reproach  whilst  he  heard  the 
slanders  of  many.  Continual  dangers  to  himself  and  to  his  adherents  could  not 
fail  to  fill  his  mind  with  great  uneasiness.  He  had  indeed  promises  which  assured 
him  of  a  happy  event  to  himself,  but  there  is  no  wonder  that  his  faith  of  these 
promises  was  sometimes  shaken.  But  to  his  grief  for  himself,  and  for  his  friends, 
let  us  add  what  he  felt  for  his  country,  for  the  indignities  done  to  his  God,  and 
even  for  the  guilt  and  misery  which  his  enemies  were  bringing  upon  themselves, 
and  we  shall  see  that  he  drunk  deeper  than  most  other  men  have  done  in  any  age 
of  the  cup  of  affliction.  He  hated  and  abhorred  every  false  way,  and  therefore  he 
was  pierced  with  grief  at  the  sight  and  hearing  of  that  wickedness  which  every- 
where aboundi'd.  2.  Great  fear  often  seized  upon  him.  The  floods  of  ungodly  men 
maiJe  him  afraid.     But  of  whom  wixs  he  afraid  ?     Did  he  think  that  the  Lord  had 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  303 


forgotten  to  he  gracious,  and  had  in  anger  shut  up  His  tender  mercies  ?  Surely  he 
was  a  firm  believer  in  the  mercy  and  faithfulness  of  God.  And  yet  his  faith  had  a 
great  fight  to  endure.  It  was  sore  tried  by  many  enemies  and  by  hard  dispensa- 
tions of  providence.  In  days  of  great  temptation  it  is  very  difficult  to  restrain 
those  corrupt  reasonings  by  which  faith  is  embarrassed.  What  if  he  had  made  God 
his  enemy?  Ho  surely  deserved  to  be  rebuked  in  God's  indignation,  and  chastised 
in  His  sore  displeasure.  God  was  true  to  His  word,  but  His  faithfulness  was  not 
sullied  by  destroying  in  the  desert  that  generation  which  He  brought  out  of  Egypt, 
although  they  had  the  promise  of  entering  into  God's  rest,  which  would  have  been 
fulfilled  to  them  if  they  had  not  come  short  of  it  through  their  own  unbelief. 
Such  might  be  the  workings  of  David's  mind  at  the  times  when  a  deep  conscious- 
ness of  guilt,  and  a  terrifying  sense  of  Divine  displeasure  discomposed  his  mind, 
although  during  the  great  r  part  even  of  the  clays  of  tribulation  he  could  glorify 
God  by  an  unshaken  confidence.  No  man  is  always  himself.  David  could  often 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation  ;  whom  shall  I  fear  ?  the  strength  of 
my  life  ;  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ? "  But  at  other  times  he  cried  out  in  the  agony 
of  his  soul,  ' '  I  am  cut  off  from  Thine  eyes  ;  I  am  poor  and  needy,  and  my  heart  is 
wounded  within  me  ;  I  am  gone  like  the  shadow  when  it  declineth  ;  I  am  tossed 
up  and  down  as  the  locust."  III.  Why  God  suffered  the  holy  man  to  bb 
BROUGHT  INTO  SUCH  CALAMITOUS  SITUATIONS.  May  We  not  reasonably  hope,  that 
those  men  whom  God  blesses  with  His  special  favour  will  be  preserved  from  those 
sorrows  and  fears  which  are  the  just  portion  of  the  wicked  ?  Can  He  not  by  His 
Divine  power,  by  which  He  rules  over  the  world,  set  them  high  above  all  their 
enemies,  and  fill  their  mouths  at  all  times  with  songs  of  triumph !  Undoubtedly 
He  can,  and  undoubtedly  He  would  do  it  if  He  saw  that  it  would  tend  to  their 
best  advantage.  1.  His  faith  was  tried  and  approved.  We  are  called  to  count  it 
all  joy  when  we  fall  into  divers  temptations,  knowing  this,  that  the  trying  of  our 
faith  worketh  patience.  Some  remains  of  unbelief  were  found  in  David  when  his 
faith  was  tried  as  it  were  by  fire  (Psa.  ixvii.  13,  14,  cxviii,).  2.  His  sore  afflictions 
were  means  for  quickening  his  devotions.  Never  was  there  a  more  fervent  sup- 
plicant at  the  throne  of  grace.  3.  He  learned  from  his  sore  adversities  the  value  of 
the  Word  of  God.  He  learned  the  value  of  its  promises,  its  precepts,  its  warning, 
its  histories.  4.  Those  graces  were  improved  in  him  by  his  afflictions,  to  the 
exercise  of  which  he  was  to  be  called  in  the  days  of  his  prosperity — his  humility, 
his  meekness,  his  humanity  and  tenderness  of  heart  to  the  poor  and  afflicted. 
David  would  not  have  been  such  an  excellent  model  for  kings  as  he  was  if  he  had 
obtained  the  throne  like  his  successors,  by  hereditary  right,  without  passing  to  it 
through  a  great  fight  of  afflictions.  The  experience  of  misery  taught  him  to  pity 
and  succour  the  miserable.  5.  His  great  and  sore  afflictions  prepared  the  way  for 
those  marvellous  loving-kindnesses  which  inspired  him  with  joy  and  praise.  He 
would  not  have  spoken  so  rapturously  on  many  occasions  of  the  salvations  wrought 
for  him  by  the  God  of  his  salvation  if  he  ha!d  not  tasted  the  bitter  dregs  of  the 
cup  of  affliction.  6.  He  was  designed  to  be  an  eminent  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  his  sufferings  and  in  his  exaltation.  Many  of  his  Psalms  speak  of  the 
sufferings  and  glory  of  Christ  under  the  figure  of  his  own  sufferings  and  glory. 
7.  The  Church  in  every  age  was  to  derive  unspeakable  benefit  from  David's  suffer- 
ings. Improvement — 1.  Think  it  not  strange  that  you  must  endure  many  chastise- 
ments and  trials  in  the  world.  Are  your  afflictions  equal  in  number  or  greatness  to 
David's  ?  2.  Admire  the  providence  of  God.  He  knows  how  to  execute  His  pur- 
poses by  means  which  seem  calculated  to  defeat  them.  3.  Be  ready  to  meet  with 
every  occurrence  in  the  course  of  your  lives.  You  do  not  know  what  evil  shall 
befall  you  ;  but  you  know  that  man  is  bom  to  trouble.  Whilst  you  enjoy  peace 
and  quietness,  be  thankful  but  not  secure.  {G.  Lawson.)  Tbe  floods  of  imgodly 
men  made  me  afraid. — Excessive  wickedness  destructive  to  a  nation : — By  the  over- 
flowing of  ungodliness  the  holy  writer  may  be  presumed  to  mean  an  uncommon 
prevalence  of  wickedness  exceeding  its  ordinary  measure  and  proportion  in  the 
world.  The  image  represents  to  us  impiety  grown  to  the  height  of  insolence, 
regardless  of  all  rules  and  unrestrained  by  discipline.  1.  Ungodliness  may  rise  to 
such  a  pitch  of  insolence  as  to  be  without  restraint  from  laws  or  authority.  The 
truth  of  fact  is  apparent  from  all  histories ;  and  it  cannot  be  wondered  at  that, 
when  the  fear  of  G<)d  and  the  remonstrances  of  conscience  have  lost  their  force,  all 
human  authority  proves  weak  and  ineffectual.  Civil  government  is  ordained  for 
the  punishment  of  evil-doers,  and  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well,  and  whenever 
it  is  duly  executed  it  promotes  and  secures  the  happiness  of  society ;  but  unless  it 


304  TffB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvnr. 

be  assisted,  supported,  and  conducted  by  religion,  all  its  strength  will  be  but 
■weakness,  and  all  its  wisdom  folly.  If  the  magistrate  be  without  any  restraint 
from  conscience  and  religion,  the  provision  of  laws  will  become  of  little  efiFect. 
And  if  the  subjects  of  any  community  are  without  any  sense  of  the  obligations  of 
conscience  and  unrestrained  by  religion,  human  laws  will  be  found  but  a  weak 
provision  for  peace  and  justice  among  them.  2.  Whenever  this  is  the  case  there  ia 
reason  to  apprehend  the  greatest  evils  in  consequence  of  it.  Consider  the  miserable 
consequences  which  even  naturally  must  attend  it.  When  all  the  wild  lusts  and 
passions  of  corrupt  nature  are  let  loose  to  their  several  pursuits,  unrestrained  by 
Divine  and  human  laws,  no  person  is  secured  from  injury,  no  property  from  fraud 
or  rapine.  Consider  such  a  land  as  exposed  to  the  vengeance  of  an  offended  God. 
The  natural  effects  of  prevailing  impiety  are  indeed  properly  inflictions  of  God, 
they  execute  an  established  rule  and  constitution  of  providence,  by  which  it  is 
ordained  that  all  sin  should  be  attended  with  some  immediate  punishment.  But 
the  justice  of  God  often  visits  the  wicked  with  some  more  signal  and  extraordinary 
inflictions.  3.  What  conduct  is  in  duty  and  prudence  required  from  all  who  are 
in  view  of  such  a  danger.  (1)  The  ministers  of  God  are  by  a  peculiar  call  and  obliga- 
tion required  to  lift  up  their  voice  and  cry  aloud,  to  warn  the  people  of  their 
transgressions.  They  are  placed  as  watchmen,  and  as  they  that  must  give  account. 
Besides  the  special  duties  of  those  who  are  distinguished  by  a  public  character, 
every  private  subject  who  has  any  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God,  or  any  concern  for  the 
welfare  of  his  country,  must  labour  together  with  them,  and  according  to  his 
station  and  capacities  endeavour  to  dispel  the  cloud  and  divert  the  impending  ruin. 
(2)  By  a  resolute  application  of  private  reproof  and  admonition,  by  a  just  and  open 
detestation  of  impiety,  and  by  a  vigorous  assistance  to  the  magistrate  in  the 
assertion  of  his  authority,  and  the  execution  of  all  good  laws,  to  repress  the  insol- 
ence of  wicked  men,  and  make  the  workers  of  iniquity  ashamed.  (3)  Upon  the 
whole,  every  one  who  fears  God  will  under  so  just  an  apprehension  of  His  judgments 
set  himself  with  all  his  strength  and  with  all  his  might  to  reduce  within  bounds  the 
overflowing  of  ungodliness,  and  recall  the  spirit  and  practice  of  religion.  If  this  happy 
effect  can  be  obtained  by  the  united  labours  and  prayers  of  good  men,  God  will  be 
entreated  for  the  land  and  turn  away  His  anger  from  it.     {J.  Rogers,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Then  the  earth  shook  and  trembled. — Earthquakes,  their  moral  sugges- 
tions : — It  is  not  for  us  to  speculate  concerning  the  physical  causes  of  earthquakes. 
With  the  Bible  in  our  hands  we  are  privileged  to  regard  the  mightiest  and  the 
most,  destructive  forces  of  nature  as  the  ministers  of  His  will  "  who  is  wise 
in  counsel,  benevolent  in  purpose,  and  almighty  in  power."  I.  The  perilous 
CONDITION  OF  OUE  EAKTHLY  EXISTENCE.  Deep  is  the  Sense  of  insecurity  which  the 
earthquake  strikes  to  our  inward  souls.  But  this  is  only  one  out  of  many  perils 
that  every  moment  threaten  our  destruction.  This  insecurity  shows — 1.  The 
absurdity  of  setting  our  affections  on  material  good.  Set  your  affection  on  things 
above.  2.  The  folly  of  postponing  the  preparation  for  eternity.  How  absurd  to 
presume  one  minute  upon  the  future,  when  every  minute  is  uncertain.     II.  Thb 

PROBABILITY    OF   A    COMING    CRISIS    IN   THE    HISTORY    OF    OUR   PLANET.      Geology 

teaches  that  the  subterraneous  forces  of  the  earth  have  effected  wonderful  crises  in 
its  history.  It  is  only  natural  to  suppose  that  the  forces  which  swept  away  races 
that  preceded  them  will  one  day  sweep  man  from  its  sphere,  and  make  the  earth  the 
habitation  of  other  races  of  existences  yet  to  be  created.  Science  gives  a  testimony 
concerning  a  coming  crisis  that  is  positive  and  satisfactory.  The  Bible  assures  us 
that  a  crisis  awaits  the  world  (2  Pet.  iii.).  III.  The  element  of  severity  in 
THE  Divine  government.  Storms,  pestilences,  famines,  and  earthquakes  attest 
severity  in  the  government  of  God.  1.  The  sinner  deserves  the  severity.  2.  The 
sinner  requires  the  severity.  IV.  The  wisdom  of  seeking  the  Divine  protection. 
1.  That  protection  can  be  obtained  through  a  practical  reliance  on  the  mediation 
of  Christ  for  acceptance.  2.  The  protection  has  been  obtained.  The  ancient 
believers  enjoyed  it.  3.  The  protection  secures  from  all  danger.  Then  is  God  your 
protector  ?    {Homilist. ) 

Ver.  11.  His  pavilions  round  about  Him  were  .  .  .  thick  clouds  of  the  skies. — 

The  ministry  of  the  cloud: — His  pavilions  are  thick  clouds !  Then  the  cloud  is  not  a  de- 
structive libertine,  some  stray,  haphazard,  lawless  force,  the  grim  parent  of  shadow  and 
chill  and  tempest !  "  His  pavilions  are  thick  clouds."  The  clouds  are  the  dwelling- 
places  of  God.     He  lives  in  them  ;  He  moves  through  them ;  He  pervades  them 


PSALM  iviii.]  THE  PSALMS.  805 

with  the  gentle  ministries  of  grace  and  love.  "The  clouds  drop  down  their  dew/" 
Then  the  cUuds  are  more  than  shutters ;  they  are  springs.  They  do  more  than 
exclude  the  sunlight ;  they  are  the  parents  of  the  fertilising  rains,  and  the  drenching 
mists  and  dews.  It  is  something  of  a  triumph  when  we  have  got  thus  far  in  our 
religious  faith.  The  cloud  may  hide  the  light ;  it  does  not  destroy  it.  The  cloud 
does  not  disprove  the  light ;  it  is  really  the  proof  of  the  light.  Without  the  warm 
and  genial  light  there  could  be  no  cloud  ;  the  cloud  is  the  creation  of  light.  When, 
therefore,  the  cloud  is  forming,  it  means  the  sun  is  working.  Raindrops  can  be 
traced  to  sunbeams.  Love  yearns  to  send  a  gentle  rain,  and  so  love  prepares  a  cloud. 
So,  the  cloud  is  part  of  the  answer  to  our  prayer  for  dew.  If,  therefore,  I  have  been 
asking  my  God  for  a  softening,  fertilising  rain,  I  must  not  be  discomfited  by  the 
appearance  of  a  chilling  and  darkening  cloud.  If  I  have  been  asking  for  a  drenching 
baptism  of  dew,  I  must  not  lose  my  heart  when  there  comes  a  confusing  mist.  We 
asked  the  Lord  to  bless  our  nation  ;  there  came  a  chilling  disappointment ;  the 
answer  was  in  a  cloud  !  Have  you  ever  noticed  how  many  of  the  dispositions  of 
the  perfected  life  can  only  be  richly  gained  in  the  baptism  of  shadow  and  tears  1 
And  when  I  contemplate  the  dispositions  which  are  the  creations  of  the  Spirit  I 
feel  that  for  their  perfect  nourishing  something  ia  needed  of  moistness  and  of  shade. 
Here  is  a  short  list  of  the  beautiful  things:  "Love,  joy,  peace,  ]ong-«iffenng, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance."  I  am  more  inclined  to  call 
them  ferns  than  flowers  !  I  don't  think  they  would  come  to  any  luxurious  pro- 
fusion and  beauty  if  they  were  grown  in  the  prolonged  and  cloudless  glare  !  Here 
is  an  exquisite  fern — "gentleness."  Where  will  you  find  it  growing  in  richest 
profusion  f  You  will  find  it  growing  in  the  life  that  has  known  the  shadow  and 
the  tear.  There  is  no  touch  so  tenderly  gentle  as  the  touch  of  the  wounded  hand. 
There  is  no  speech  so  insinuatingly  sympathetic  as  the  speech  of  those  who  have 
been  folded  about  by  the  garment  of  night.  Gentleness  is  a  fern,  and  it  requires 
the  ministry  of  the  cloud.  Here  is  another  rare  and  beautiful  fern — "  long-sufifer- 
ing."  How  can  you  grow  that  in  the  "  garish  day  "  ?  "  Long-suffering  is  a  fern, 
and  it  needs  the  ministry  of  the  cloud.  And  is  it  otherwise  with  the  ferns  of 
"  goodness  "  and  "love"?  How  this  love-fern  expands  when  life  passes  into  the 
shadow  ;  when  husband  or  child  is  laid  low,  how  love  puts  on  strength  and  beauty, 
whether  the  lover  be  peasant-wife  or  queen !  Now,  I  do  not  think  we  have  any 
difficulty  in  perceiving  the  influence  of  the  cloud  in  the  individual  life.  "  In  my 
distress  Thou  hast  enlarged  me."  Enlarged!  It  is  a  very  spacious  word,  ana 
includes  the  complementary  meanings  of  broadening  and  enrichment.  "  In  my 
cloud-experience  Thou  hast  enriched  me  ! "  A  man  goes  into  the  cloud  rough  and 
boorish,  and  full  of  domineering  aggression,  and  he  emerges  from  its  ministry 
strangely  softened  and  refined  !  He  entered  the  cloud  hard  and  dry  as  a  pavement ; 
he  emerges  with  disposition  suggestive  of  the  fernery.  "  In  my  distress  Thou  hast 
enriched  me  !  "  But  the  cloud  experience  is  not  only  the  minister  of  enrichment, 
but  also  of  enlargement !  It  is  in  the  cloud  that  men  grow  the  fern  of  a  spacious 
tolerance.  Narrowness  is  transfoimed  to  breadth.  In  the  personal  life,  if  it  were 
not  for  the  cloud  we  should  become  and  remain  dry  and  infertile  as  Sahara  ;  it  is 
the  providential  cloud  that  calls  forth  the  hidden  growth,  the  sleeping  ferns,  and 
transforms  the  dustheap  into  a  thing  of  grace  and  beauty.  It  is  not  otherwise  with 
the  ministry  of  the  cloud  in  the  sphere  of  the  home.  There  is  many  a  family 
which  never  realises  its  unity  until  it  is  enveloped  in  the  folds  of  a  chilling  cloud. 
Health  and  luxury  are  too  often  divisive ;  sickness  and  sorrow  are  wondrous 
cements.  Luxury  nourishes  a  thoughtless  individualism  ;  adversity  discovers 
hidden  and  profounder  kinships.  "We  shall  know  each  other  better  when  the 
mists  have  rolled  away  !  "  Ah  1  but  we  sometimes  never  know  each  other  until  wo 
meet  together  in  the  mist  1  It  is  in  the  common  cloud  that  the  family  finds  its 
kinship.  It  is  in  our  sorrow  that  deep  calleth  unto  deep,  and  our  communion  is 
revealed.  Is  it  otherwise  in  the  larger  life  and  family  of  the  nations  ?  Does  the 
cloud-ministry  exercise  its  influence  in  the  State  ?  Surely  we  may  say  that  the 
common  life  of  a  people  is  deepened  and  enriched  by  the  ministry  of  the  shade. 
A  people  is  not  consolidated  by  common  material  interests  and  aims.  It  is  not  by 
free  trade  or  by  reciprocity  that  we  shall  forge  the  links  of  enduring  fellowships. 
Juxtaposition  is  not  fellowship.  It  is  not  the  prosperous  glare  that  makes  us  one. 
We  fall  apart  in  the  noontide  ;  we  draw  closer  to  each  other  in  the  night.  It  is  in 
the  national  clouds  and  shadows,  and  in  the  nation's  tears  that  you  will  find  the 
forces  of  a  true  consolidation.  The  clouds,  in  their  courses,  have  been  the  frienda 
of  the  national  life.     (/.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

Ver.  13.  The  Lord  also  thundered  in  the  heavens. — The  terrors  of  an  Eastern 
thunderstorm: — There  is  said  to  be  something  peculiarly  terrific  in  an  Oriental 
thunderstorm.  Its  vivid  lightning  and  intense  darkness,  succeeding  each  other 
with  startling  rapidity,  are  appalling.  This  is  indicated  in  the  words,  "at  the 
brightness  that  was  before  Him,  His  thick  clouds  passed  "  ;  that  is,  passed  away. 
So  intense  is  the  light  of  the  lightning's  flash  that  the  whole  mass  of  dark  clouds 
seems  to  pass  away,  and  their  place  to  be  occupied  for  an  instant  by  a  mass  of  solid 
light,  shedding  its  beams  over  everything  upon  the  earth  like  a  midday  sun.  The 
light,  however,  is  only  for  an  instant — and  then  a  darkness,  that  may  be  felt,  shuts 
up  the  whole  from  every  vision  but  His,  to  whom  the  darkness  and  the  light  are 
both  alike.  Meanwhile  the  roar  of  the  thunder,  the  voice  of  the  Most  High  in  the 
clouds,  is  incessant ;  the  lightnings  flashing  from  cloud  to  cloud,  from  the  clouds 
to  the  earth,  and  from  the  earth  back  again  to  the  clouds.  Moreover,  it  seems  as  if 
He  who  measureth  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand  had  poured  them  out,  for 
the  rain  descends  in  torrents,  mingled  at  times  with  destractive  hail,  while  coals 
of  fire — balls  of  meteoric  flame — run  along  the  ground  (Exod.  ix.  23).  {David 
Caldwell,  A.M.) 

Ver.  16.  He  sent  from  above,  He  took  me,  He  drew  me  out  of  many  waters. — 

Divine  iiiterpositions : — We  are  not  as  those  who  believe  in  two  co-existent  forces, 
each  supreme,  one  of  whom  shall  create  disasters,  and  the  other  distribute  blessings. 
The  prince  of  evil  is,  according  to  our  faith,  subordinate  to  the  great  Lord  of  all. 
Everywhere  is  God,  and  in  all  things  His  hand  is  present ;  in  the  things  which  seem 
to  us  evil,  as  well  as  in  the  events  which  appear  to  us  good,  God  is  at  work.  We 
freely  admit  that  we  do  not  understand  this,  and  therefore  we  do  not  attemjpt  to 
explain  it ;  but  we  believe  and  adore.  We  need  not  try  to  justify  the  ways  of  God 
with  men,  for  He  asks  no  defence  at  our  hands.  If  there  is  a  providence,  why  are 
such  terrible  evils  permitted  ?  I.  Miraculous  interpositions  in  the  calamities 
OF  THIS  LIFE  ARE  NOT  TO  BE  EXPECTED.  1.  Such  interpositions  would  change  the 
whole  arrangement  of  the  world.  2.  If  interpositions  were  given  to  save  the  lives 
of  godly  men  alone,  as  some  would  have  it,  then  this  world  would  become  the  place 
of  judgment,  which  it  is  not  intended  to  be.  3.  If  God  were  to  interpose  in  the 
case  of  all  calamities  it  would  involve  many  evils.  It  would  encourage  idleness, 
neglect  of  sanitary  laws,  carelessness,  &c.  4.  Divine  interpositions  of  a  miraculous 
sort  would  not  be  attended  with  the  advantage  to  the  ungodly  which  we  might 
suppose,  because  if  there  were  miracles  of  mercy  on  the  behalf  of  God's  people  to 
snatch  them  from  a  watery  grave  or  other  perils,  then  we  might  expect  to  have, 
and  naturally  should  have,  miracles  of  judgment  too.  II.  Providential  intee- 
POsiTiONS  ARE  FREQUENT  AMONG  God's  PEOPLE.  They  come  in  the  way  of  deliver- 
ance from  floods  of  trouble.  "  He  took  me,  He  drew  me  out  of  many  waters."  He 
does  this  not  by  miracles.  He  violates  no  law  of  nature,  but  yet  delivers  in  a 
marvellous  way .  He  does  not  quench  the  violence  of  the  flame,  yet  a  precious  life 
is  saved  from  a  burning  building.  The  Lord  allows  all  the  forces  of  nature  to  drive 
on  in  their  ordinary  course,  and  yet  the  outcome  of  it  all  is,  that  His  servant  is 
delivered  and  his  prayers  are  answered.  This  He  does  in  various  ways.  The  sick  are 
restored  to  health.  Business  is  made  to  prosper.  Enemies  are  turned  to  friends, 
or  they  die,  like  Haman.  Then  believe  in  the  unexpected.  Believe  that  God  will 
do  for  you  something  which  you  know  nothing  about.  The  Lord  always  has 
a  plan  in  reserve.  (C.  H,  Sturgeon.)  Deliverance  out  of  deep  waters: — The 
testimonies  of  experience  are  always  welcome  to  us.  In  sickness,  those  of  the 
experienced  physician.  In  battle,  those  of  the  proved  commander.  This  Psalm 
seems  to  be  a  leaf  taken  out  of  David's  private  diary.  I.  Let  us  inquire 
VFHENCK  IT  WAS  THAT  GoD  TOOK  David.  "He  Sent  from  above.  He  took  me, 
He  drew  me  out  of  many  waters."  The  term  "waters"  is  used  in  the  Scriptures 
to  express  a  state  of  trouble  and  mental  disquietude.  Apart  from  the  naturalness 
of  the  image  as  descriptive  of  something  which  overwhelms,  and  desolates,  and 
lays  waste,  to  an  Eastern  mind  this  image  would  have  a  peculiar  force  and  beauty  ; 
for  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Judea,  even  as  in  Switzerland  to  this  very  day, 
the  people  were  liable  to  sudden  inundations,  which  would  sweep  away  flocks  and 
herds,  towns  and  villages,  in  their  disastrous  and  overwhelming  torrent.  Well, 
David  says,  "God  drew  me  out  of  many  waters";  intimating,  first,  his  deliver- 
ance from  the  depths  of  outward  danger.  And  as  from  many  dangers,  so  from 
many  sorrows  had  God  taken  David  out.  Think  of  the  sorrow  of  his  exile,  the 
sorrows  so  many  and  terrible  that  came  ujwn  him  through  his  great  sin.     And  yet 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  807 

God  took  him  out  of  them  all.  But  sickness,  bereavement,  exile  were  not  David's 
deepest  waters  ;  but  sin,  the  displeasure  of  God,  merited  condemnation  for  his 
ofTeuces,  who  could  hold  up  the  head  in  such  waters  ?  "A  wounded  spirit  who  can 
bear '  "  The  image  in  the  text  is  commonly  used  in  connection  with  David's  sins. 
The  penitential  Psalms  will  be  found  to  abound  with  such  allusions.  "Out  of  the 
depths  have  I  cried,"  &c.  "I  am  come  unto  deep  waters."  "Thou  hast  afiQicted 
me  with  all  Thy  waves. "  His  sins  had  plunged  him  into  many  deep  waters.  And 
as  with  sorrows,  so  with  sins,  have  we  not  known  a  like  experience  to  that  of 
David  ?  May  not  the  same  confession  of  misery  which  they  caused  us,  and  of  God's 
gracious  deliverance  out  of  them,  come  truly  from  our  lips  ?  "God,"  says  Bunyan, 
"will  sometimes  cleave  a  saint  with  a  wedge  of  his  own  timber,"  that  is,  He  will 
make  him  feel  the  consequences  of  his  own  sin,  in  order  that  the  bitterness  of  his 
distress  may  draw  him  to  a  better  choice.  But  to  draw  a  struggling  man  out  of  the 
waters  and  to  take  no  further  care  of  him — to  leave  him  on  the  brink  of  the  same 
pit,  and  liable  again  to  make  shipwreck  in  the  same  sea,  this  is  not  the  way  of  Him 
"whose  work  is  perfect"  ;  and  therefore  we  inquire,  not  only  whence  God  took 
David,  but — II.  Whither  He  took  him.  This  David  beautifully  expresses  in  the 
40th  Psalm.  "  He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay, 
and  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  established  my  goings."  Here,  then,  we  have 
the  deliverance  perfected.  Not  only  is  he  raised  from  the  depths,  but  he  is 
exalted  to  the  heights  ;  not  only  is  he  drawn  out  of  the  waters,  but  he  is  set  upon 
a  rock.  Fear  is  superseded  by  the  tranquillities  of  the  promise  ;  a  calm  conscience 
stills  the  agitations  of  despair.  In  all  your  afflictions,  therefore,  whether  of 
"mind,  body,  or  estate,"  trust  to  the  arm  which  once  drew  you  out  of  the  waters. 
You  are  safe  where  He  would  draw  you  ;  it  is  even  to  the  rock  of  His  protection,  to 
the  secret  of  His  pavilion,  to  the  covering  of  His  arm,  to  the  tower  of  His  great 
name.  And  so  your  comfort  is,  that  if  the  waters  be  many,  the  succours  shall  be 
many.  God  will  "  send  from  above  "  ;  grace  from  above  to  deliver  you,  promises 
from  above  to  cheer  you,  a  Spirit  from  above  to  guide  you,  a  Saviour  from 
above  to  defend  and  bless  you.  When  your  race  is  over,  when  your  struggles 
are  finished,  and  when  you  are  landed  safely  on  the  eternal  shores,  then  to  the  God 
of  all  grace  shall  you  sing  this  song  of  praise  :  "  He  sent  from  above,  He  took  me. 
He  drew  me  out  of  many  waters."  {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.)  Saved  from  the  depths: 
— Jewels  long  hidden  under  the  lava  flood  at  Pompeii  have  been  recovered  un- 
dimmed,  and  divers  have  recently  been  searching  for  valuable  gems  lost  in  the  sea 
near  Trieste  in  1822.  When  the  river  overflowed  the  summer  palace  of  the  Shah  of 
Persia  at  Lar  he  fled  in  such  haste  that  his  jewels  were  forgotten.  An  astute  officer 
of  the  court  gave  orders  that  the  banks  of  the  river  were  to  be  searched  when  the 
flood  had  subsided,  and  by  this  means  he  restored  the  jewels  to  his  master,  and  was 
rewarded  by  being  promoted  to  high  rank.     (  W,  Y.  Fullerton.) 

Vers.  20-27.  The  Lord  reward  me  according  to  my  righteousness. — Of  the  justice 
of  David's  behaviour : — I.  David's  eighteousness.  Righteousness  consists  in  render- 
ing to  all  their  due,  and  the  revealed  will  of  God  is  the  standard  of  it  (Deut.  vi.  25). 
As  we  are  under  infinitely  greater  obligations  to  perform  our  duty  to  God  than  we 
can  be  under  to  perform  any  services  to  our  fellow-men,  righteousness  includes  in  it 
that  piety  which  has  God  for  its  object,  as  well  as  the  performance  of  those  duties 
to  which  our  neighbours  have  a  right.  Yet  it  is  not  seldom  used  to  denote  the 
rectitude  of  our  dispositions  and  conduct  to  our  fellow-men,  as  godliness  denotes 
right  tempers  and  behaviour  towards  God.  David  laid  it  down  as  his  settled 
purpose  to  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  the  great  standard  of  righteousness,  and 
through  Divine  mercy  he  was  enabled  to  keep  his  resolution  inviolable  through  the 
course  of  his  life.  He  did  not  pretend  to  perfection.  He  referred  all  his  actions  to 
the  glory  of  God  ;  he  loved  His  testimonies  with  his  whole  heart,  and  took  pleasure 
in  the  habitation  of  His  house.  He  made  use  of  all  his  power  to  advance  the  honour 
of  his  God.  1.  He  behaved  righteously  towards  King  Saul,  his  first  and  great 
enemy.  He  was  just  to  all  his  fellow-subjects  whilst  he  lived  under  the  govern- 
ment of  Saul.  He  acquired  a  high  reputation  for  the  prudence  with  which  he 
managed  all  his  aff'airs,  and  he  would  not  have  attained  this  honest  fame  if  he  had 
not  abstained  from  all  appearance  of  evil.  We  have  no  reason  to  form  the  least 
doubt  of  the  care  that  David  took,  when  he  was  an  outlaw  and  a  fugitive,  to  keep 
his  followers  from  using  any  unwarrantable  means  for  the  supply  of  their  wants, 
although  they  must  often  have  been  in  extreme  poverty.  We  have  a  testimonial 
from  Nabal's  servants  of  the  honesty  of  David's  men,  and  even  of  their  generous 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

care  of  Nabal's  substance,  at  a  time  when  the  good  man  was  almost  reluced 
to  beggary.  We  have  no  reason  to  doubt  of  David's  rectitude  of  behaviour  in  all 
the  dealings  that  he  had  with  strangers.  He  had  transactions  in  the  time  of  his 
troubles  with  the  king  of  Moab,  to  whom  he  committed  the  care  of  his  father  and 
mother  when  tht-y  could  no  longer  dwell  with  safety  at  Bethlehem.  We  have  no 
further  account  of  any  dealings  with  that  prince,  although  we  afterwards  find  him 
carrying  on  a  bloody  war  with  the  Moabites.  We  have  not  the  means  of  knowing 
whether  the  king  of  Moab  had  provoked  this  war  by  cruelty  to  David's  father  and 
mother ;  but  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  the  cause  of  the  war  was  just  on  David's 
part.  After  the  kind  treatment  which  he  received  from  the  king  of  Gath,  he  took 
Gath  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  but  the  Philistines  themselves  were  the 
authors  of  the  war.  David  in  his  government  was  a  man  of  blood,  but  in  his 
disposition  he  was  a  man  of  peace.  A  necessity  was  laid  upon  him  to  fight  the 
battles  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  people  of  the  Lora.  When  he  was  advanced  to  the 
throne  of  Israel  it  is  testified  of  him  that  he  did  justice  and  judgment  to  all  his 
people.  He  tells  us  (Psa.  Ixxv.,  ci. )  how  he  intended  to  govern  his  family  and 
his  kingdom,  and  doubtless,  as  far  as  human  infirmity  would  permit,  he  kept  his 
resolution.  Gratitude  may  well  be  considered  as  an  ingredient  of  justice.  We  owe 
returns  of  love  and  of  the  proper  fruits  of  it  to  friends  who  love  us,  and  who  are 
glad  to  serve  us  according  to  the  best  of  their  abilities.  David's  gratitude  to  his 
benefactors  was  a  remarkable  part  of  his  character.  We  find  him  sending  presents 
of  the  spoils  gained  in  battle  to  those  places  where  he  and  his  men  were  accustomed 
to  haunt.  When  Saul  was  dead  he  was  so  far  from  expressing  resentment  against 
him,  that  he  inquired  whether  there  were  any  left  of  his  family,  that  he  might 
show  them  the  kindness  of  God  for  Jonathan's  sake.  And  many  years  afterwards 
he  showed  that  Jonathan  was  not  forgotten  by  him,  when  he  took  care  to  secure 
Mephibosheth  from  the  destruction  brought  upon  the  family  of  Saul,  at  the 
requisition  of  the  Gibeonites.  He  was  grateful  for  favours  even  to  those  heathens 
from  whom  he  received  any  kindness.  Nahash,  king  of  the  Ammonites,  showed 
kindness  on  some  occasions  to  David,  perhaps  rather  from  hatred  to  Saul  than  good- 
will to  the  poor  man  whom  Saul  oijpressed.  Yet  David  showed  kindness  unto 
Hanun,  the  son  of  Nahash,  for  his  father's  sake.  Righteousness  in  a  king  will 
dispose  him  to  an  impartial  execution  of  the  laws  against  criminals.  A  wise  king 
crusheth  the  wicked,  and  bringeth  the  wheel  over  them.  But  how  was  this  con- 
sistent with  the  favour  showed  to  Joab  and  to  Absalom  ?  Did  he  not  know  that 
God  had  forbidden  any  satisfaction  to  be  taken  for  the  life  of  a  murderer  ?  Yes,  he 
knew  it  very  well,  and  took  measures  even  when  he  was  dying  that  Joab's  grey 
hairs  should  not  come  down  to  the  grave  without  blood.  It  is  perhaps  impossible 
entirely  to  justify  him  for  suffering  that  bloody  man  to  live  so  long  above  the 
ground.  Yet  never  was  lenity  to  a  criminal  more  excusable.  Seldom  has  a  prince 
or  a  nation  been  more  indebted  to  a  subject  than  David  and  his  people  were  to  Joab 
for  brilliant  services.  And  it  appears  to  have  been  almost  impracticable  to  bring  to 
condign  punishment  a  man  so  popular,  and  of  such  power  in  the  army  as  Joab. 
David  himself  made  this  excuse  for  himself  when  he  said,  "These  men,  the  sons  of 
Zeruiah,  are  too  strong  for  me."  We  may  observe  likewise  that  David  was  once 
indebted  for  his  own  life  to  Abishai,  the  brother  of  Joab,  who  seems  to  have  had 
some  share  in  the  blood  of  Abner.  He  might  with  some  appearance  of  reason  think 
that  he  owed  a  life  to  the  family  of  his  sister  Zeruiah,  or  that  at  least  he  might 
incline  to  the  favourable  side  when  plausible  rea,sons  could  be  advanced  for  their 
exculpation.  We  cannot  pretend  to  vindicate  his  behaviour  in  the  case  of  Uriah. 
But  we  cannot  reprobate  that  part  of  his  conduct  in  stronger  language  than  David 
himself  did.  We  may  make  the  same  observation  concerning  another  instance  of 
David's  procedure,  which  has  given  occasion  to  animadversions  on  his  conduct ;  I 
mean  the  charge  given  to  Solomon  concerning  Shimei.  "Behold  thou  hast  with 
thee  Shimei  the  son  of  Gera,  a  Benjamite  of  Bahurim,  which  cursed  me  with  a 
grievous  curse  in  the  day  when  I  went  to  Mahanaim  ;  but  he  came  down  to  meet  me 
at  Jordan,  and  I  sware  to  him  by  the  Lord,  saying,  I  will  not  put  thee  to  death 
with  the  sword.  Now,  therefore,  hold  him  not  guiltless,  for  thou  art  a  wise  man, 
and  knowest  what  thou  oughtest  to  do  unto  him,  but  his  hoary  head  bring  thou 
down  to  the  grave  with  blood."  We  might  have  observed  that  fidelity  in  perform- 
ing engagements  is  an  essential  part  of  justice  in  which  it  cannot  be  supposed  that 
David  would  be  deficient.  But  how  could  David  observe  his  promise  and  oath  to 
Shimei  if  he  brought  down  the  hairs  of  Shimei  with  blood  to  the  grave  by  the 
hands  of  Solomon  ?    A  man  is  no  less  accountable  for  what  he  commands  to  be 


MALM  xvin.]  THE  PSALMS.  309 

done,  than  for  what  he  does  with  his  own  hands.  Can  we  reasonably  suppose  that 
David  on  liis  deathbi-d  would  commit  an  act  of  wickedness  for  which  his  memory 
might  be  detested  by  all  who  feared  an  oath  ?  In  fact,  we  find  that  the  crime  of 
cursing  David  at  Mahanaim  was  not  the  ground  of  the  sentence  against  Shimei, 
although  the  reason  he  had  given  by  that  crime  to  suspect  his  loyalty  was  the  cause 
why  he  was  laid  under  a  prohibition  of  leaving  Jerusalem  under  pain  of  death. 
But  there  is  another  reading  of  the  last  part  of  the  charge  equally  agreeable  to  the 
words  of  the  original,  which  clears  the  character  of  David  from  all  blame.  Neither 
bring  down  his  grey  hairs  to  the  grave  with  blood  ;  keep  a  strict  eye  over  him  as  a 
man  disafifected  to  my  family  ;  punish  him  for  any  new  crime  by  which  he  may 
merit  punishment,  but  let  my  oath  be  sacred,  and  bring  not  do^vn  his  grey  hairs  to 
the  grave  with  blood,  for  that  crime  which  I  svvare  by  the  Lord  not  to  punish  with 
death.  Charity  is  essential  to  justice.  There  are  duties  which  we  owe  to  all  men, 
by  the  second  great  commandment  of  the  law,  the  commandment  to  love  our 
neighbour  as  ourselves.  If  David  had  not  conscientiously  observed  this  precept  he 
could  not  have  so  often  appealed  to  God,  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  as  the  witness  of  his 
inviolable  regard  to  these  Divine  testimonies,  which  were  the  light  to  his  path  and 
the  lamp  by  which  his  feet  were  guided  in  the  way  of  peace.  II.  God's  regard 
TO  David's  righteoitsness  in  the  deliverances  granted  to  him  from  his 
ENEMIES.  Without  all  doubt,  David  ascribed  all  the  rich  favours  he  received  from 
God  to  that  sovereign  and  free  mercy  to  which  every  saint  of  God  must  be  infinitely 
indebted  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  11,  cxvi.  4,  5).  He  was  sensible,  like  his  father  Jacob,  that 
he  was  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  God's  mercies,  and  that  there  was  no  merit  in  the 
least  of  his  works  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  2,  3).  But  he  knew  at  the  same  time  that, 
through  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  the  good  works  of  His  people  are  accepted  and 
rewarded  by  Him  (Psa.  xi.  6).  Mercy  and  truth  meet  together  in  God,  righteous- 
ness and  peace  kiss  each  other,  and  display  their  united  glories  in  the  administra- 
tions of  His  providence  to  His  people.  The  Lord  shows  forth  the  exceeding  riches  of 
His  grace  in  making  them  righteous,  and  when  they  are  made  righteous  He  shows 
both  His  grace  and  His  justice  in  rewarding  them  according  to  their  righteousness. 
There  is  so  much  sin  mingled  even  with  their  good  works  that,  if  they  were  still 
under  the  law,  they  could  not  escape  the  condemnation  at  once  of  all  their  works, 
and  of  their  persons  likewise.  But  all  their  iniquities,  and  amongst  other 
iniquities  those  which  cleave  to  their  holy  things,  are  covered  from  God's  sight. 
Their  good  works,  therefore,  cannot  but  be  well-pleasing  to  God,  and  richly 
rewarded  by  Him.  He  will  never  be  unrigliteous  to  forget  any  of  their  works  or 
labours  of  love,  and  therefore  those  who  follow  after  righteousness  shall  have  a  sure 
reward.  But  did  not  David  glory  in  himself  rather  than  in  the  Lord  when  he 
spoke  of  his  own  righteousness  in  such  high  terms  ?  This  question  leads  us — III.  To 
consider  David's  consciousness  of  his  ovpn  righteousness.  He  speaks  with 
perfect  assurance  concerning  the  regard  which  God  expressed  to  his  righteousness. 
Is  this  the  language  of  humility  ?  It  would  indeed  be  very  presumptuous  to  form 
and  to  express  such  a  judgment  concerning  ourselves  without  searching  our  own 
hearts,  without  comparing  them  with  the  law  of  God,  and  without  fiuding  good 
evidence  that  our  hearts  are  sound  in  God's  statutes.  But  in  none  of  these 
particulars  had  David  been  negligent.  1.  He  had  searched  his  heart  as  well  as  his 
ways.  "I  thought,"  he  says,  "upon  my  ways,  and  turned  my  feet  unto  Thy 
testimonies."  He  was  far  from  thinking  that  his  ways  could  be  right  unless  his 
heart  was  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  His  standard  by  which  he  tried  himself 
was  the  law  of  his  God.  He  was  fully  sensible  of  the  folly  of  trying  himself  by  any 
other  standard.  3.  He  found  in  his  heart  and  ways  an  habitual  conformity  to  the 
law  of  God.  He  was  indeed  constrained  to  acknowledge  that  in  many  things  he  had 
offended  God.  When  he  meditated  on  the  admirable  purity  of  the  law  he  cried, 
"Who  can  understand  his  errors?  cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults."  Yet  he 
could  with  confidence  say  that  he  had  hoped  for  God's  salvation,  and  done  His 
commandments.  This  conclusion  he  did  not  rashly  form  from  the  consideration  of 
a  few  of  his  actions,  or  of  the  frame  of  his  heart  at  some  particular  periods  of  his 
life.  Many  deceive  themselves  by  forming  a  hasty  judgment  of  themselves, 
founded  on  temporary  impressions  made  upon  their  minds  in  some  moments  of 
seriousness,  excited  by  some  particular  circumstance  of  providence,  or  by  the 
transient  influence  of  some  Divine  truths.  He  knew  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart 
of  man,  and  that  without  Divine  illumination  he  might  easily  deceive  himself.  He 
therefore  referred  himself  to  God,  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  to  preserve  him  from  enter- 
taining any  false  hopes  of  the  goodness  of  his  own  condition  (Psa.  cxzxiz.  23,  24). 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

IV.  The  assurance  which  David  had  of  God's  bespect  to  his  own  kiohteous- 

NESS  IN  the  deliverances  GKANTED  TO  HIM  BY  HiS  GRACIOUS  PROVIDENCE.      We 

umst  not  place  humility  in  an  affected  ignorance  of  what  is  true,  either  concerning 
our  own  personal  righteousness  or  concerning  God's  acceptance  of  it.  Nothing 
could  be  more  dangerous  than  the  presumption  that  God  is  well  pleased  with  us  if 
our  way  or  our  heart  is  perverse  before  Him  (Mic.  iii.  10-12).  Nothing  could  be 
more  unbecoming  in  a  Christian  than  the  forgetfulness  of  his  infinite  obligations 
to  that  grace  which  has  blotted  out  his  innumerable  transgressions.  Yet  it  is 
desirable  for  every  child  of  God  to  be  well  assured  of  the  cleanness  of  his  hands  in 
God's  sight,  and  of  the  acceptance  of  his  works  as  well  as  of  his  person.  As  it  is 
our  duty  to  pray  to  God  for  the  acceptance  of  our  services,  it  must  be  our  duty 
likewise  humbly  and  thankfully  to  acknowledge  God's  righteousness  and  grace  in 
His  dealings  with  us.  The  riches  of  Divine  mercy  appear  in  the  acceptance  of  our 
works,  and  in  the  consequent  rewards  bestowed  on  them,  as  well  as  in  the  accept- 
ance of  our  persons.  Were  it  not  that  our  iniquities  are  hidden  from  God's  sight, 
such  works  as  even  David's  could  not  have  been  rewarded  by  that  God  who  is  of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil.  "Go  thy  way,"  says  Solomon,  "eat  thy  bread 
with  cheerfulness,  and  drink  thy  wine  with  a  merry  heart,  for  God  now  accepteth 
thy  works."  If  God  does  not  accept  our  works,  we  can  have  no  well-grounded 
pleasure  in  the  bounties  of  His  providence.  On  the  whole  learn — 1.  The  great 
advantage  of  walking  in  the  ways  of  God.  "  The  Lord  loveth  him  that  foUoweth 
after  righteousness.  Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  it  shall  be  well  with  him,"  What 
reason  have  we  to  adore  that  plan  of  mercy  which  allows  us  to  hope  for  Divine 
acceptance,  and  for  the  reward  of  our  works  done  to  please  God,  although  they  are 
so  imperfect  that  we  must  daily  seek  from  God  the  pardon  of  our  iniquities. 
2.  God's  people  ought  patiently  to  hold  on  in  the  way  of  righteousness  amidst 
the  most  discouraging  dispensations  of  providence.  David  had,  after  all  his 
dismal  days,  a  new  song  put  into  his  mouth  to  magnify  the  Lord.  3.  When 
we  obtain  deliverances  it  is  our  duty  to  consider  how  we  behaved  under  our 
troubles.  Yet  we  still  ought  to  bless  God  for  deliverances  from  trouble,  although 
we  should  not  dare  to  say  that  we  have  kept  the  way  of  God  when  we  are  under 
it.  4.  Let  us  give  praise  to  God  for  the  great  salvation  wrought  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  deliverances  of  David  were  salvations  to  all  Israel.  It  is  to  be  feared 
that  many  of  us  are  totally  destitute  of  righteousness.  ((?.  Lawson.)  Justifica- 
tion by  works: — Why  did  God  delight  in  David  ?  The  Psalmist  declares  that  the 
ultimate  reason  was  no  arbitrary  favouritism,  but  that  God  delighted  in  His  servant 
because  of  his  personal  faith  and  character.  David  asserts  the  sincerity  of  his  desire 
to  please  God ;  he  asserts  the  uprightness  of  his  conduct  before  God.  The 
spirit  of  this  appeal  is  far  removed  from  Pharisaism  ;  it  is  not  an  outburst  of  self- 
complacency  and  vaingloriousness,  but  the  legitimate  expression  of  conscious 
integrity.  If  the  grace  of  God  has  done  anything  for  us,  why  should  we  not  simply 
and  candidly  realise  and  express  the  fact  ?  Nothing  succeeds  like  success,  and  we 
are  ignoring  a  fountain  of  inspiration  when  we  timidly  shut  our  eyes  to  the  clear 
evidences  of  the  victories  of  the  inner  life.  To  the  glory  of  God's  grace  let  us 
honestly  acknowledge  to  ourselves  and  others  the  growing  dominion  of  righteousness 
in  our  soul.  1.  God  deals  with  us  as  we  deal  with  Him.  "  Therefore  hath  the  Lord 
recompensed  me."  God  had  dealt  with  him  bh  he  had  dealt  with  God.  He  trusted 
God,  and  God  delivered  him  ;  he  loved  God,  and  God  delighted  in  him ;  he  served 
God,  and  God  honoured  and  blessed  him.  This  is  ever  the  great  canon  of  the 
Divine  rule.  As  we  love  God,  He  will  love  us.  "We  love  God,  because  He  first 
loved  us "  ;  but  having  known  His  love,  there  is  a  very  true  sense  in  which  its 
proportion  is  henceforth  determined  by  the  measure  of  our  reciprocation.  As  we 
trust  God,  He  will  succour  us.  A  great  faith  sinks  Alpine  ranges  to  a  plain,  it 
crosses  Atlantic  depths  dryshod.  The  lack  of  such  faith  entangles  us  in  many 
embarrassments  and  miseries.  As  we  serve  God  He  will  requite  us.  According  to 
the  measure  of  our  love,  faith,  and  service  shall  be  our  safety,  strength,  and  bliss. 
Are  any  poor  in  joy,  grace,  power,  and  peace  ?  Let  them  act  more  generously 
towards  God.  2.  God  deals  with  us  as  we  deal  with  one  another  (see  vers.  26,  26). 
The  great  truth  taught  in  these  verses  is,  that  God's  dealing  with  us  is  regulated  by 
our  dealing  with  one  another.  This  is  the  clear,  full  teaching  of  the  whole  of 
revelation.  How  mistaken  are  those  who  imagine  spiritual  religion  to  be  anti-social. 
It  is  a  common  complaint  that  religious  faith  is  a  weakening,  impoverishing, 
disintegrating  influence  in  social  life :  the  love  given  to  God  is  supposed  to  be 
subtracted  from  our  love  to  humanity  ;  the  service  rendered  to  the  kingdom  of  God 


MALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  811 

ia  considered  as  so  much  filched  from  the  service  of  humanity.  No  mistake  could 
be  greater.  God  does  not  judge  us  apart  from  society,  but  strictly  in  and  through 
our  relation  to  it.  As  we  deal  with  our  brother  the  great  Father  deals  with  us. 
Some  people  are  religious  without  being  good  ;  that  is,  they  are  not  kind  to  their 
fellows,  just,  generous,  truthful,  helpful.  This  will  not  do.  A  true  Christian  is 
both  religious  and  good,  God  does  not  test  us  by  our  ecclesiastical  life,  but  by  our 
social,  human  life.  Social  duty  and  spiritual  prosperity  are  closely  related.  When 
we  suffer  stagnation  of  spiritual  life  we  search  for  the  reason  in  the  neglect  of 
Church  fellowship  or  worship,  the  reading  of  God's  Word,  or  of  the  sacraments  ;  but 
the  reason  will  just  as  often  be  found  in  our  failure  to  do  justly  and  to  love  mercy  in 
our  social  relation.  3.  God  deals  with  us  as  we  deal  with  ourselves.  "I  was  also 
upright  before  Him."  As  we  honour  ourselves  by  keeping  ourselves  pure,  God 
honours  us  by  abundance  of  grace  and  peace.  There  is  a  true  sense  in  which  He 
accepts  us  according  to  our  own  valuation.  If  we  reverence  our  body,  hallow  our 
gifts,  prize  our  fair  name,  esteem  our  time  and  influence  as  choice  treasure,  God 
follows  up  such  self-respect  by  great  spiritual  enrichment  and  blessing.  If  we 
would  realise  the  fulness  of  blessing  we  must  respect  ourselves  and  keep  from 
iniquity.  (  W.  L.  Watkinson. )  God's  interpositions : — I.  As  A  vindication  OB" 
HIS  OWN  CHARACTER.  1.  He — David — regarded  his  character  as  very  excellent. 
Of  that  excellency  he  speaks  in  terms  emphatic  and  strong.  Can  his  language  be 
justified  ?  Not  in  an  absolute  sense.  Morally,  in  the  sight  of  God,  David  was  very 
far  from  a  perfect  man.  It  can  be  justified  in  an  average  sense,  and  in  an  oflBcial 
sense.  2.  David  regarded  his  character  as  divinely  influential.  Was  he  right  in 
supposing  that  God  came  to  his  deliverance  on  account  of  what  he  was  in  himself, 
or  on  account  of  what  he  had  done  to  serve  Him  ?  1.  Individual  character  is  known 
to  God.  2.  Individual  character  is  interesting  to  God.  Nothing  in  the  universe 
touches  the  heart  of  the  Great  Father  so  much  as  the  moral  character  of  His 
children.  II.  As  an  illustration  of  God's  manifestation.  He  rises  to  a  view 
of  the  great  principle  with  which  God  deals  with  all  His  moral  creatures.  As  man 
is,  so  is  God  to  him.  This  is  true  in  two  respects.  1.  As  a  personal  power.  God 
treats  man  according  to  his  character.  2.  As  a  mental  conception.  Man's  idea  of 
God  is  his  God,  it  is  the  deity  he  worships.  Man  worships  the  God  he  has  imaged 
to  himself ;  and  men  have  different  images,  according  to  the  state  of  their  own 
hearts.  The  revengeful  man  has  a  God  of  vengeance,  the  sectarian  man  has  a  God  of 
sects,  the  capricious  man  has  a  capricious  God,  the  selfish  man  has  a  greedy  God, 
the  despotic  man  has  an  arbitrary  God,  and  the  loving  man  has  a  loving  God.  Our 
moral  nature  rises  and  falls  with  our  conception  of  God,  for  "man  must  need  assi- 
milate himself  to  what  he  worships.  "Every  man  copies  the  God  in  whom  he 
believes."    (ffomilist.) 

Ter.  28.  I  was  also  upright  before  Him,  and  kept  myself  from  mine  Iniquity. — 

The  upright  heart,  and  its  darling  sin : — Things  that  David  here  takes  notice  of. 
1.  The  greatness  of  the  danger  he  was  in.  2.  The  glory  of  his  deliverance,  regarded 
as  an  answer  to  prayer.  3.  The  fruit  of  it.  The  love  of  God  is  enlarged  and 
inflamed.  His  confidence  in  God  is  enlarged.  He  is  by  this  quickened  and 
encouraged  unto  prayer.  4.  The  grounds  of  all  these  mercies.  God's  free  grace.  In 
the  person  to  whom  the  mercy  is  bestowed  ;  for  as  God  stands  in  a  peculiar  covenant- 
relation  to  His  people,  so  He  hath  a  peculiar  providence  over  them.  God  is  with 
His  people  at  all  times,  but  He  is  nearest  to  them  in  the  worst  times.  David  shows 
wherein  his  sincerity  doth  appear.  "I  have  not  departed  from  God  wickedly." 
"  All  His  judgments  were  before  me."  "I  was  also  upright  before  Him,  and  I  kept 
me  from  mine  iniquity. "  A  sincere  heart  hath  the  most  serious  resolutious,  the  most 
unfeigned  detestations,  and  therefore  the  greatest  and  the  most  diligent  watchings 
against  his  own  iniquity,  that  sin  to  which  his  nature  is  most  prone,  and  wherein 
he  is  most  apt  to  be  ensnared.  In  the  text  are  two  things.  I.  David's  profession 
of  his  sincerity.  There  is  a  twofold  perfection.  A  legal  perfection,  which  is  a 
perfect  conformity  in  nature  and  in  life  to  the  law  of  God.  This  was  not  the 
perfection  that  David  here  spoke  of,  for  his  failings  were  known  and  confessed  by 
himself.  There  is  an  evangelical  perfection,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  second 
covenant,  and  this  is  twofold  :  a  perfection  of  justification,  and  a  perfection  of 
sanctification.  There  is  a  walking  with  God,  before  God,  and  after  God ;  that  is, 
in  reference  to  the  precepts  of  God,  the  providences  of  God,  and  the  pattern  and 
example  of  God  ;  and  these  three  expressions  set  forth  a  choice  perfection.  A  godly 
man  may  have  his  heart  upright  and  perfect,  even  in  the  imperfection  of  his  ways. 


812  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

A  man  that  is  sincere  is  in  God's  account  a  perfect  man  ;  sincerity  is  the  truth  of  all 
grace,  the  highest  pitch  that  is  to  be  attained  here.  Sincerity  of  heart  gives  a  man 
boldness,  even  in  the  presence  of  God,  notwithstanding  many  failings.  II.  The 
TESTIFICATION  OF  IT.  How  did  he  prove  this  perfection?  "I  have  kept  myself 
from  mine  iniquity."  He  refers  to  some  proper  and  peculiar  evil  and  way  of 
sinning  that  was  his  "special  darling"  ;  a  beloved  sin.  His  care  was  to  keep 
himselt  fioin  it.  A  man  cannot  keep  himself;  the  Lord  is  his  keeper.  But  the 
Lord  will  have  us  co-operate  with  Him.  When  we  perform  anything,  by  His  grace 
we  do  it.  So  we  are  said  to  "  cleanse  ourselves."  The  doctrine  is  this- -even  the  best 
and  dearest  of  God's  people  have  some  sins  that  they  are  more  prone  to  than  others, 
which  may  be  called  their  own  iniquity.  What  is  a  man's  own  iniquity  ?  In  every 
man  by  nature  sin  doth  reign,  and  a  man  is  in  just  judgment  given  up  unto  the 
power  of  it.  The  reign  of  sin  is  double,  virtual,  due  to  original  sin ;  and  actual, 
due  to  bias  of  will.  Actual  sin  is  that  way  of  sin  and  death  that  a  man  cliooseth  to 
himself,  he  having  looked  abroad  upon  all  the  contentments  of  the  world,  his  own 
corrupt  inclination  doth  choose  unto  himself  to  follow  with  greatest  sweetness,  and 
contentment,  and  delight,  as  that  wherein  the  happiness  of  his  life  consists.  What 
is  it  for  a  man  to  keep  himself  from  his  iniquity  ?  1.  He  takes  care  to  keep  the  evil 
of  that  sin  always  in  his  eye,  and  to  keep  himself  low  in  this  consideration,  that 
he  hath  been  guilty  of  it  in  times  past.  2,  There  is  no  sin  that  the  heart  of 
man  is  more  perfectly  against.  The  godly  man  hates  that  sin  most,  and  breaks 
out  against  it  with  the  greatest  detestation,  by  which  God  hath  been  most 
dishonoured,  and  whereby  his  conscience  hath  been  most  enslaved  in  times  past. 
3.  He  is  in  this,  above  all  other  sins,  most  jealous  of  his  heart ;  he  fears  it  in  respect 
of  every  occasion,  and  opportunity,  and  temptation.  4.  This  sin  ho  prays  most 
eigainst.  5.  He  turns  the  edge  of  the  threatening  against  this  sin.  6.  He 
endeavours  to  grow  up  in  the  contrary  grace,  and  strengthens  it  by  all  means. 
How  doth  this  prove  a  sincere  heart  ?  It  shows  a  man  to  be  truly  affected  by  God's 
dishonour.  It  shows  the  truth  of  a  man's  self-denial,  and  his  hatred  against  sin. 
It  shows  forth  the  sincerity  of  a  man's  love  for  God.  How  may  a  man  know  what 
his  ' '  darling  sin  "  is  ?  It  is  that  where  a  man's  treasure  is.  It  is  what  is  most  sweet 
to  him  ;  what  he  favours  most,  and  hides  most.  This  sin  makes  all  a  man's  lusts 
serviceable  to  it.  It  is  the  sin  that  most  interrupts  thee  in  holy  duties.  (  William 
StroTig.)  I  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity.  —  Ke'pt  from  iniquity:  —  I.  A 
PERSONAL  DANGEK.  "Mine  iniquity."  This  is  a  dreadful  possession  to  have  in 
the  house  :  a  man  had  better  have  a  cage  of  cobras  than  have  an  iniquity,  yet  we 
have  each  of  us  to  deal  at  home  with  some  spejial  form  of  sin.  Each  man  has  his 
own  way  of  sinning.  It  may  take  its  speciality  from  our  natural  constitution.  He 
who  judges  all  men  alike  does  them  an  injustice.  Our  tendency  is  to  decry  the 
particular  form  of  sin  that  we  find  in  others.  It  may  be  engendered  by  education. 
How  impressible  we  are  in  childhood  !  Certain  forms  of  iniquity  grow  out  of  our 
particular  condition.  Each  period  of  life  has  its  own  special  snare.  It  is  so  with 
the  condition  of  our  life  as  to  our  outward  circumstances.  The  rich  man  has  his 
temptations,  and  the  poor  has  his.  Iniquities  come  through  both  prosperity  and 
adversity.  Iniquities  surround  us  all  in  daily  life.  Your  iniquity  is  likely  to  be 
that  iniquity  which  thou  hast  oftenest  fallen  into  in  thy  previous  life.  And  that 
which  you  do  not  like  to  hear  condemned  is,  very  probably,  your  iniquity.  II.  A 
SPECIAL  GUARD.  "I  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity."  1.  You  must  find  out 
what  it  is.  You  must  get  a  clear  idea  of  your  own  iniquity.  Endeavour  to  get  a 
due  sense  of  its  foulness  and  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God.  Ask  the  Lord  to  make 
thee  hate  most  that  sin  to  which  thou  art  most  inclined.  2.  Be  resolved  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  this  particular  sin  shall  be  overcome.  There  is 
nothing  like  hanging  it  up  by  the  neck, — that  very  sin,  I  mean.  The  true  path  of 
safety  is  to  pray  and  believe  against  all  sin.  We  conquer  sin  by  faith  in  Christ. 
III.  A  HAPPY  RESULT.  If  we  do  keep  from  sin,  what  a  blessing  it  will  be  to  us. 
It  will  be  a  triumph  of  grace.  It  will  be  our  best  testimony  to  others.  And  what 
a  sweet  peace  this  will  give  to  the  conscience.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Resolute 
restraint  ■' — A  noted  characteristic  of  Mr.  Cecil  was  his  decision  of  character.  It  is 
said  that  he  had  studied  for  a  painter,  and  after  he  had  changed  his  object  he 
retained  a  fondness  and  taste  for  the  art.  He  was  once  called  to  visit  a  sick  lady, 
in  whose  room  there  was  a  painting  which  so  strongly  attracted  his  attention  tliat 
he  found  himself  diverted  from  the  sick  person  and  absorbed  by  the  painting. 
From  that  moment  he  formed  the  resolution  of  mortifying  a  taste  which  he  found  so 
intrusive  and  so  obstructive  to  his  nobler  pursuits,  and  determined  never  again  to 


rsALM  xvin.]  THE  PSALMS.  813 

frequent  the  exhibition.  Our  ovm  iniquity: — David  comforts  himself  in  his 
innocence  and  integiity,  but  ascribes  that  to  God's  restraining  and  assisting  grace, 
which  kept  him  back  from  tliat  iniquity  to  which  he  was  strongly  tempted.  What 
that  particular  sin  was  is  not  here  mentioned.  I.  There  is  some  pabticdlar 
SIN  WHICH  EACH  ONE  MAY  CALL  HIS  OWN  INIQUITY.  What  it  is  in  each  case  is 
certainly  known  to  God,  And  every  man  may  know  it  himself,  by  communing 
with  his  own  heart,  and  considering  his  ways  ;  by  laying  his  life  to  the  rule  of  his 
conscience,  and  measuring  his  conscience  by  the  rule  of  God's  law.  That  there  is 
greater  proclivity  in  every  one  to  some  peculiar  sins  is  sufficiently  evident  from 
every  man's  private  conscience.  1.  We  are  more  inclinable  to  some  sins  than  to 
others,  through  our  natural  tempers  and  complexions.  The  corruptible  body 
presseth  down  the  soul.  And  such  is  the  predominancy  of  some  elements  and 
humours,  to  which  the  naturalist  ascribes  the  diversity  of  constitutions,  that  from 
thence  also  the  moralist  derives  the  different  tempers  of  men's  minds  and  inclina- 
tions. Thus  the  sanguine  incline  most  to  lust  and  wantonness,  incontinence  and 
intemperance ;  the  choleric  to  anger  and  passion,  pride  and  contention ;  the 
melancholic  to  envy,  discontent,  distrust,  and  despair ;  the  phlegmatic  to  covetous- 
ness  and  idleness,  and  lukewarmness  in  religion.  So  that,  according  to  the 
different  constitutions  of  men's  bodies,  there  arise  different  inclinations  in  their 
aouls  and  minds  ;  and  as  it  is  the  proper  business  of  reason  to  find  out  and  restrain, 
so  it  is  the  great  work  of  grace  and  religion  to  subdue  and  mortify  the  predominant 
passion.  11.  At  some  certain  periods  of  our  lives  wb  are  more  inclinable 
TO  SOME  sins  than  OTHERS.  Every  age  of  human  life  haa  some  peculiar  darling 
that  commonly  bears  the  sway.  In  age,  men  are  prone  to  such  things  as  most 
conduce  to  their  temporal  advantage ;  they  hoard  up  riches.  In  youth,  men  are 
prone  to  such  things  as  most  gratify  their  sensual  appetites.     III.  We  are  more 

inclinable  TO   SOME  SINS  THAN  OTHERS,  BY  REASON   OF  OUK  EDUCATION   OR  OUR 

COMPANY.  By  these  things  men's  minds  and  manners  are  as  much,  if  not  more, 
fashioned  than  by  nature  itself.     IV.  We  are  prone  to  some  sins   through 

THE  SEVERAL  STATES  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  LIFE  INTO  WHICH  PROVIDENCE  BRINGS 

US.  When  we  are  healthy  and  strong  we  are  apt  to  forget  God.  Sickness  tempts 
us  to  be  impatient  towards  Him.  Prosperity  makes  men  proud,  and  abundance 
insolent  and  wanton.  Adversity  tempts  us  to  be  envious  and  querulous,  fraudulent 
and  pilfering.  There  are  more  temptations  to  some  sins  than  others,  from  the 
different  professions  or  courses  of  life  men  take  upon  themselves.     V.  There  are 

SOME   PARTICULAR  SINS   TO   WHICH    MEN   ARE    LIABLE   THROUGH  RELIGION  ITSELF. 

Many  men's  confidence  of  their  own  way  is  often  attended  with  great  censoriousness 
and  uncharitableness  towards  all  that  differ  from  them.  Observe  that  it  is  possible 
to  keep  ourselves  from  our  own  particular  sins,  as  David  did.  This  we  may  do  by 
cherishing  the  grace  that  is  freely  given  us  of  God,  and  remembering  the  vows  we 
have  so  often  made  Him.  What  helps  and  directions  are  needful  ?  1.  By  constant 
and  fervent  prayer  implore  the  Divine  aid.  2.  In  vain  may  we  expect  God's  help 
without  our  own  diligent  endeavours.  3.  Take  care  to  avoid  such  things  and 
decline  such  occasions  as  are  most  likely  to  ensnare  us.  4.  Never  think  the  evil  of 
sin  less  than  it  is.  5.  Be  tender  of  violating  your  consciences.  {Henry  Dove,  D.D.) 
I%6  Christian  successful  in  conquering  his  besetting  sins : — I.  Every  man  has  one 

OR  MORE  PARTICULAR  SINS  TO  WHICH  HE,  AS  AN  INDIVIDUAL,  IS  ESPECIALLY  PRONE. 

The  iniquity  is  emphatically  his  own.  Varied  and  numerous,  indeed,  are  the  sins  of 
the  human  heart,  against  which  the  Christian  must  guard  ;  but  every  man  has  some 
particular  sins  which  especially  cleave  to  him  (Heb.  xii.  1),  and  David  seems  to 
allude  to  such.  It  would  be  well  for  us  frequently  to  examine  our  own  hearts  for 
the  express  purpose  of  finding  out  our  besetting  sins.  1.  There  is  usually  a  consti- 
tutional propensity  to  the  sin.  2.  The  circumstances  in  which  the  individual  is 
J  laced  may  favour  the  indulgence  of  the  sin.  How  ill  would  it  have  been  for 
oseph,  had  he  been  of  profligate  nature,  that  he  was  placed  in  the  house  of 
Potiphar.  3.  And  Satan  is  particularly  busy  in  furnishing  temptations  to  the 
commission  of  the  darling  sin.  He  knows  too  well  the  evil  propensities  of  the 
human  heart,  and,  like  a  skilful  angler,  varies  his  baits  to  suit  the  tastes  of  his 
viotims.  When  he  saw  pride  working  in  the  heart  of  David  he  provoked  him  to 
number  Israel.      II.  Every  good  man,  conscious  that  he  is  prone  to  some 

PARTICULAR  'siNS,    WILL   DIRECT    HIS   PRINCIPAL   EFFORTS  AGAINST   THEM.      He  is 

anxious  to  keep  himself  from  his  own  iniquity.  His  efforts  proceed  on  enlight- 
ened principles.  The  good  man  does  not  presume  on  his  own  strength ;  he 
devoutly  prays  for  the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit     At  the  same  time,  he  is 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xvrri. 

persuaded  that  vigorous  efforts  on  his  part  are  indispensable,  in  the  order  of  means. 
True,  no  man,  strictly  speaking,  can  keep  himself.  David  could  not,  he  knew  he 
could  not ;  but  he  means  that  he  had  so  exerted  himself  that  God  had  given  him 
success.  How  to  secure  this  for  ourselves  I  urge — 1.  The  importance  of  acknow- 
ledging our  individual  sins  when  we  come  before  God.  Be  not  content  with  general 
confession.  For  sometimes,  when  the  conscience  prompts  to  minute  confession,  wa 
restrain  the  impulse,  through  a  secret  misgiving  that  if  cherished  it  would  either 

Srevent  the  gratification  of  our  favourite  lust,  or  at  least  augment  our  subsequent 
istress,  by  rendering  us  the  more  inexcusable  in  the  indulgence  of  it.  Guard 
against  this  delusion.  Go  and  spread  your  case,  with  all  its  aggravations,  before 
God,  and  cry  for  help  against  the  darling  sin.  2.  The  Christian  makes  it  his 
especial  business  to  mortify  the  sin  :  he  is  not  satisfied  with  merely  weakening  its 
power  ;  he  aims  at  its  destruction.  3.  He  forms  strong  resolutions  against  the  sin. 
All  the  powers  of  his  mind  are  in  exercise ;  he  deliberates  and  resolves  to  oppose 
his  iniquity.  His  vows  are  recorded  not  on  tables  of  stone,  but  in  the  fleshy  tables 
of  the  heart.  Aware  of  his  own  weakness,  this  is  his  determination — I  will  go 
forth  against  the  sin  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  4.  He  carefully  shuns 
everything  which  may  facilitate  the  indulgence  of  the  sin.  Is  intemperance  the 
favoTuite  propensity  ?  In  vain  do  former  jovial  companions  invite  him  to  partake 
of  the  intoxicating  cup.  The  Christian  will  not  go  in  the  way  of  evil  men.  When 
unavoidably  in  circumstances  of  danger  he  is  doubly  on  his  guard.  We  are,  at 
times,  thus  unavoidably  placed  in  such  positions.  5.  The  first  risings  of  the  siu  he 
quickly  and  stoutly  opposes.  Nothing  is  more  important  than  this.  It  is  the  part 
of  wisdom  to  commence  the  attack,  before  the  enemy  has  time  to  concentrate  his 
forces.  The  smallest  aperture  in  the  embankment  of  a  mighty  river  should  be 
stopped,  or  it  will  increase,  and  the  waters  deluge  the  surrounding  country,  in  spite 
of  all  resistance.  The  single  spark  must  be  extinguished,  or  a  general  conflagration 
may  ensue.  6.  The  Christian  furnishes  his  mind  with  cogent  arguments,  especially 
Soriptural  ones,  against  his  particular  sins.  If  the  prince  of  heathen  philosophers 
could  subdue  his  passionate  temper  by  considerations  derived  from  reason  only,  how 
much  more  may  be  expected  from  us  who  have  reason  and  revelation  both.  Let  the 
Psalmist  teach  us,  who  said,  "  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  not 
sin  against  Thee."  7.  He  will  carefully  cherish  the  opposite  graces.  The  timid 
child  we  stimulate  to  acts  of  bravery,  convinced  that  as  these  acts  increase  his 
timidity  will  decline.  It  is  thus  in  the  school  of  Christ ;  the  more  individual  graces 
are  cherished,  the  more  their  opposite  vices  will  diminish.  8.  He  vigorously  perse- 
veres, till  he  has  in  a  great  measure  gained  his  end.     III.  Success  in  his  efforts 

THE  GOOD  MAN  WILL  EVER  REGARD  A3  AN  INVALUABLE  BLESSING.      He  oan  scarcely 

find  language  suflBciently  elevated  to  express  his  feelings.  Oh,  success  in  these 
eflForts,  what  a  blessing  !  1.  It  is  a  signal  victory  :  a  powerful  enemy  is  subdued. 
Would  you  estimate  its  power  ?  How  difficult  victory  was.  How  many  have  fallen 
in  such  conflict.  2.  No  other  victory  can  equal  it.  He  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is 
better  than  he  that  taketh;  a  city.  3.  The  results  are  glorious.  For — (1)  Other 
conflicts  are  rendered  comparatively  easy.  The  soldier  who  has  stormed  the  strongly 
fortified  castle  has  no  difficulty  in  battering  down  the  mud  walls  of  a  cottage  ;  and 
the  Christian  who  has  subdued  his  reigning  sin  has  a  fair  prospect  of  overcoming 
his  other  iniquities.  (2)  It  affords  the  most  decisive  evidence  of  personal  piety. 
How  anxious  the  believer  is  to  make  his  calling  and  election  sure,  and  where  is  he  to 
look  for  decisive  evidence  ?  But  if  he  be  successful  in  the  subjection  of  reigning  lusts, 
his  conscience  assures  him  this  is  the  best  evidence.  (3)  It  enables  the  Christian  to 
discharge  the  duties,  and  realise  the  privileges  of  religion,  with  greater  spirit  and 
delight.  (4)  It  diffuses  a  sweet  calm  over  the  soul  and  imparts  solid  satisfaction. 
Suppose  the  reigniug  passion  indulged,  what  evil  consequences  ensue.  The  gratifi- 
cation, too,  is  but  momentary.  Soon  it  bitetli  like  a  serpent  and  stingeth  like  an 
adder.  How  delightful  the  feelings  of  David  when  Abigail  kept  him  from 
sheilding  the  blood  of  Nabal.  (5)  It  is  particularly  pleasing  to  God,  and  will  be 
honoured,  not  only  now  but  hereafter,  with  the  emphatic  marks  of  the  Divine 
approbation.  Oh,  ye  in  Avhose  hearts  sin  reigus  without  opposition,  beware  lest 
iniquity  be  your  ruin.  Take  refuge  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  Pray  for  the  Spirit  of 
God.  Christians,  if  the  subject  has  been  exemplified  in  your  happy  practice,  be 
humble,  be  grateful,  and  give  God  the  praise.  If  it  has  reproved  and  grieved 
you,  remember  it  is  designed  to  stimulate  and  profit  you.  Rely  upon  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  fear  not  to  say,  •'  I  wiU  keep  myself  from  mine  iniquity,"  {Essex 
Remevibraucer. ) 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  315 

Vers.  25,  26.  With  the  merciful  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  merciful. — Podic  justice 
actual  justice : — What  we  call  poetic  justice  pervades  the  whole  Bible.  We  feel  in 
the  advancing  civilisation  that  there  is  a  reaching  more  anel  more  to  a  realisation  of 
this  justice.  In  Job  we  have  its  full  exemplification.  There  the  latter  end  of  the 
history  of  the  man  vindicates  all.  It  is  a  dangerous  teaching  that  some  people  try 
to  wring  out  of  the  New'  Testament,  that  good  people  must  not  expect  success  in 
this  world;  that  only  the  children  of  this  world  are  wise  in  their  generation,  and 
can  secure  to  themselves  worldly  prosperity.  The  opposite  teaching  is  not  near  so 
dangerous,  and  not  so  wide  of  the  truth,  that  all  things  will  come  out  well  in  tiiis 
life  for  those  who  do  right.  It  does  not  always  so  turn  out,  but  this  is  the  ten- 
dency. We  do  not  believe  it  is  a  good  policy  even  in  the  material  world  to  be  bad. 
With  the  merciful  God  is  merciful,  and  with  the  pure  He  is  pure,  and  with  the  fro- 
ward  He  is  froward.  Let  us  go  beyond  the  physical  world  into  the  moral  world. 
God  is  present  with  His  world,  governing  it  constantly.  I  do  not  believe  that  He 
is  unknowable.  He  has  wrought  Himself  in  all  His  work,  and  is,  of  all  jiowers,  the 
most  perpetually  forced  upon  our  attention.  All  science,  all  art,  all  of  our  studies 
are  theological  studies.  Now,  God  reveals  Himself  as  always  on  the  side  of  riglit. 
In  the  moral  world  penalty  follows  wrong,  and  reward  follows  right  with  unfailing 
certainty.  There  is  no  confusion,  there  is  no  uncertainty  in  the  moral  world. 
Judgment  is  present  everywhere.  Of  all  scepticism,  that  is  the  most  dangerous  that 
questions  the  fundamental  difference  between  right  and  wrong  in  their  nature  and 
tendencies.  Plutarch  speaks  of  the  delay  of  judgment.  There  is  no  such  delay. 
It  comes,  and  comes  at  once.  There  are  various  elements  that  go  to  make  up  this 
penalty.  Remorse,  which  is  everywhere  present  in  greater  or  less  degree.  Various 
social  and  civil  penalties.  The  actual  loss  in  our  moral  natures.  Our  idea  of  God  is 
determined  largely  by  our  own  character.  The  vision  we  have  of  God  in  the  plain  of 
the  intellectual  perception  is  a  reflection  of  our  own  selves.  The  God  of  each  man 
is  different  from  the  God  of  other  men.  As  you  are,  so  is  your  God.  {John  W. 
Chadwick.)  God's  mercy  among  Christians: — It  is  only  in  a  rough  sort  of  w^y 
at  the  best,  as  far  as  observation  of  individuals  will  carry  us,  that  we  see  distinc- 
tion made  by  Providence  between  the  upright  and  the  froward.  But  as  no  one 
knew  better  than  the  author  of  this  Psalm,  it  is  not  to  the  fortunes  of  men,  but  to 
their  whole  experience  as  rational  and  spiritual  beings,  that  we  have  to  look  in 
order  to  see  how  true  it  is  that  God  shows  Himself  to  every  man  according  to  what 
every  man  is.  1.  In  the  first  place,  otjr  life  is  experiknce  of  God  ;  for  in  Him 
most  literally  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being.  If  we  find  that  this  set  of 
actions  has  one  result  and  that  set  has  another — this,  as  far  as  it  goes,  is  a  most 
authentic  revelation  to  us  of  God.  To  say,  therefore,  that  life  is  different  to  different 
men,  above  all  as  they  differ  in  point  of  spiritual  character,  is  to  say  that  God 
shows  Himself  to  them  as  so  many  different  gods.  To  an  honest  man  life  is 
different  from  what  it  is  to  a  rogue  ;  different  to  a  merciful  man  from  what  it  is  to 
a  churl  or  a  miser  ;  different  to  a  pure  man  from  what  it  is  to  a  sot  or  a  debauchee. 
To  take  the  illustration  which  is  nearest  at  hand — David  would  have  had  a  different 
experience  from  Saul  whether  he  had  or  had  not  got  Saul's  place.  The  one  man 
could  be  eminently  happy  with  a  shepherd's  crook,  and  it  mattered  little  to  either 
so  long  as  each  was  what  he  was  in  character.  No  two  men  could  have  had  a  more 
different  experience  in  their  lives  ;  but  the  difference,  such  as  it  was,  we  can  see, 
was  in  themselves — not  made  by  their  fortunes,  but  by  their  characters  ;  not  by  the 
events  of  peace  or  war,  but  by  the  quality  of  mercy  in  the  one  case  and  of  wilfulness 
in  the  other.  Thus  justice  is  done  between  man  and  man  where  justice  is  sure,  and 
where  it  is  perfect — in  themselves.  Many  good  people  at  the  present  time  are 
haunted  by  an  alarm  which  is  altogether  visionary.  Look,  they  say,  how  many 
who  live  vicious  lives  know  nothing  of  remorse  !  If  there  be  no  such  thing  as 
eternal  punishment  for  the  wicked,  then  there  is  no  punishment ;  if  there  be  no  hell, 
there  is  no  harm.  But  this  is  to  take  a  very  narrow  view  of  human  experience. 
There  is  much  more  remorse  in  people's  hearts  than  they  wear  upon  their  sleeves. 
Many  a  smiling  face,  if  you  could  get  behind  that  mask,  would  show  you  grim 
enough  features.  At  the  same  time,  I  grant  readily  that  if  remorse,  so  called,  wer« 
all  the  difference  between  man  and  man  on  the  score  of  character,  the  difference 
might  seem  to  be  trifling.  It  is  the  best  and  not  the  worst  natures  which  know 
most  of  remorse.  A  good  man  falls  into  sin,  and  be  knows  what  hell  is.  The 
wicked  have  no  bands  in  their  death.  Consciences,  which  ought  to  burn,  are 
seared  ;  they  should  be  live  coals,  and  they  are  white  cold  ashes.  I  grant  all  this. 
But  is  there  nothing  besides  remorse  in  question  as  between  life  and  Ufa!    For 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

apart  from  remorse  and  everything  like  it,  and  in  the  nature  of  things,  and  every- 
where and  always,  it  is  one  thing  to  be  upright  and  another  to  be  wilful,  it  is  one 
thing  to  be  a  kind  man  and  another  to  be  an  unkind,  one  thing  to  be  pure  and 
another  to  be  impure.  The  good  of  being  good  is  in  being  so,  and  not  in  having 
no  remorse  ;  and  the  evil  of  being  evil  is  in  being  so,  and  not  in  having  remorse. 
Why  will  people  so  constantly  forget  this  or  overlook  it  ?  It  is  not  that  these 
different  men  have  here  and  there,  at  odd  moments,  different  or  contrary  experi- 
ences, but  that  the  world  in  which  each  lives  is  a  wholly  different  world.  I  know, 
for  certain,  that  he  who  loves  righteousness  and  truth  and  goodness  would  think 
that  fate  the  cruellest  of  all  possible  which  condemned  him  to  be  a  rogue  or  a  hypo- 
crite. Thus,  in  the  first  place,  because  life  is  experience  of  God,  to  different  men 
God  is  different.     But  I  hasten  now  to  remark  tliat  to  different  men — II.  Hk  is 

ALSO  DIFFERENT  AS  AN  OBJECT  OF  STUDY  AND  REFLECTION.     On  many  other  subjects, 

or  rather  on  most,  if  people  agree  they  do  agree,  and  if  they  differ  they  differ,  and 
there  is  an  end  of  it.  But  it  is  different  with  regard  to  the  highest  object  of  human 
thought — God.  People  may  agree,  and  do  agree,  in  their  language  respecting  Him, 
who  have  little  or  nothing  in  common  in  their  thouglit  and  meaning.  In  point  of 
fact,  I  venture  to  say,  in  the  first  place,  among  us,  who  all  profess  the  same  creed, 
there  are  Gods  many  and  Lords  many.  Wesley,  it  is  said,  remonstrated  with  Whit- 
field as  to  his  ideas  of  God,  telling  him,  "your  God  is  my  devil."  And  is  it  not 
obvious  that  something  of  the  same  sort  might  be  said  by  sets  of  Christians  at  the 
present  day  to  other  sets  ?  It  is  not  what  you  read  in  sacred  books,  but  the  common 
notions  of  men  that  shape  the  common  beliefs  about  God.  Protestants  do  not 
believe  in  the  God  of  the  Romanist,  nor  he  in  heirs,  though  they  have  the  same  Bible 
and  the  same  great  articles  of  faith.  To  be  condemned  to  think  of  God,  as  some 
men  think  of  Him,  and  must  think  of  Him,  their  life  being  stronger  than  their 
creed,  not  as  a  being  to  be  loved,  but  as  one  to  be  feared  or  hated — this  is  punish- 
ment. If  the  light  that  is  in  you  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  ?  If  your 
religion  is  night,  where  is  your  day  ?  If  God  is  a  bugbear,  what  is  your  life  !  What 
other  gain,  or  reward,  or  happiness,  on  the  other  hand,  would  you  desire  than  the 
religion  of  Christ — to  love  righteousness  and  truth  and  goodness  with  all  your  heart 
and  soul  and  strength  and  mind,  and  to  believe  that  God,  who  is  over  all,  and  is 
the  Beginning  and  the  End  of  all,  is  all  that  you  love  ?  What  other  reward,  gain, 
happiness  would  you  have  than  that!  Christianity  is  a  sorry  gain,  I  admit,  to 
many  who  profess  it,  except  it  be  the  only  escape  from  the  bottomless  pit,  and  from 
the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.  It  is  a  sorry  gain  to  those,  and  they  are  many,  whose 
notion  is  that  something  which  God  can  give  them,  or  some  place  in  which  He  can  put 
them,  will  be  heaven.  But  that  which  makes  God  Himself  our  heaven  is  great  gain, 
without  reference  to  any  life  but  this.  With  this  a  man  might  live  and  die,  and  doubt 
if  he  is  to  live  again,  and  with  his  last  breath  bless  God — the  merciful  man's  God, 
and  his  exceeding  great  reward.  III.  I  have  but  to  add,  then,  last  of  all,  as  the 
PRACTICAL  LESSON  WHICH  WE  GET  FROM  ALL  THIS — a  man  may  change  his  Church 
and  his  creed  and  not  change  his  God ;  but  he  changes  his  God  when  he  changes 
his  life.  Let  us,  by  trying  to  do  the  will  of  God  in  our  daily  life,  learn  of  the  truth 
whether  it  be  of  God.  Otherwise  we  shall  never  learn  it.  (J.  Service.)  The 
cUtitude  of  God  towards  good  and  bad  men : — Even  as  the  sun,  which  unto  eyes  being 
sound  and  without  disease  is  very  pleasant  and  wholesome,  but  unto  the  same  eyes, 
when  they  are  feeble,  sore,  and  weak,  is  very  troublesome  and  hurtsome,  yet  the 
sun  is  ever  all  one  and  the  self  same  that  was  before ;  so  God  hath  ever  shown 
Himself  benign  and  bountiful  to  those  who  are  kind  and  tender-hearted  towards  His 
saints,  and  are  merciful  to  those  who  show  meicy.  But  unto  the  same  men,  when 
they  fall  into  wickedness,  and  grow  and  are  full  of  cruelty,  the  Lord  showeth  Him- 
self to  be  very  wrathful  and  angry,  and  yet  is  one  and  the  same  immutable  God  from 
everlasting  to  everlasting.     (Robert  Caiodray.) 

Ver.  28.  Thou  wilt  ligbt  my  candle.— ii^A^  candles  .-—In  the  East  the  poorest 
people  burnt  a  lamp  all  through  the  night  time,  for  they  dreaded  a  dark  house  as  a 
terrible  calamity.  When  they  had  light  they  were  happy,  and  in  some  degree 
prosperous.  David  says  that  God  will  light  his  home  lamp  for  him,  and  will  thus 
make  his  home  happy  for  him.  In  Prov.  xx.  27  we  find  this  stntence,  "The 
spirit  of  a  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord."  The  question  is,  are  we  lighted  candles  ? 
Away  in  the  north  there  is  a  lighthouse  that  has  no  light  at  all  in  it ;  but  yet  it 
shines,  because  a  light  that  burns  upon  the  shore  is  reflected  into  the  lantern  far 
out  at  sea.     All  very  well  for  the  lantern,  but  it  will  not  do  for  us  ;  we  must  have 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  817 

the  light  within  ourst-lvcs.  But  we  cannot  light  ourselves.  Jeaus  must  light  up 
our  souls  by  giving  us  His  Spirit,  and  when  He  does  this  then  we  can  give  light 
to  others  ami  get  more  light  from  Him.  If  He  does  this  for  us  we  must  continue 
burning.  Jesus  desires  tins,  and  also  that  we  should  burn  properly.  George 
Whitfield  suid  he  liopod  he  "should  die  blazing,  and  not  go  off  as  a  snuff."  And 
remember  that  our  lighted  candle  may  light  another  candle,  and  yet  have  as  much 
light  as  it  had  before.  God  uses  one  soul  to  help  and  bless  another  soul.  In  the 
diary  of  Thomas  Carlyle  there  was  a  sketch  of  a  candle  tliat  burned  as  it  wasted. 
Underneath  Carlyle  bad  written,  "May  I  be  wasted,  so  I  be  of  use."  {J.  J.  Ellis.) 
Lighting  our  candles  at  heaven's  torch: — That  which  makes  a  candle  what  it  is  is 
its  adaptation  to  receive  light,  and  by  burning  itself  to  transmit  that  light.  God 
is  the  great  Light  of  this  universe,  and  we  know  not  of  how  many  universes  besides. 
"  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all,"  That  is  the  one  great  central 
fact  which  keeps  mankind  from  despair, — the  assurance  that  at  its  heart  the 
universe  is  not  dark  but  bright  ;  it  is  bright  with  wisdom,  bright  with  power,  and 
bright  with  love.  It  is  man's  supreme  glory  that  he  has  this  kinship  with  God. 
However  dark  his  nature  may  have  become  through  sin,  it  is  of  such  a  kind  that  it 
ean  be  lighted  from  heaven's  torch.  There  has  never  yet  been  discovered  any  man 
or  any  tribe  of  men  who  did  not  have  this  power  or  capacity  to  receive  Divine 
illumination.  Kow,  there  is  one  thing  to  which  I  specially  desire  to  call  your 
attention,  and  that  is  that  the  candle,  in  order  to  receive  the  light  from  the  match 
or  the  taper  or  the  torch,  must  yield  itself  to  the  light.  There  is  no  way  to  shine 
•icept  by  burning  ourselvea.  Though  we  were  created  as  the  candles  of  the  Lord, 
we  nave  the  power  to  refuse  to  give  our  hearts  up  to  be  lighted  by  heaven's  fire. 
Indeed,  we  may,  if  we  are  foolish  and  wicked  enough  to  do  it,  lend  our  hearts  to  be 
lighted  by  the  devil's  fire,  and  give  forth  a  baleful  flame  that  will  make  the  darkness 
deeper  not  only  for  ourselves,  but  for  every  one  who  is  influenced  by  us.  God  will 
not  forcibly  take  our  candle  and  light  it  at  the  heavenly  fire.  We  must  yield  it  to 
His  hands  through  our  own  decision.  {L.  A.  Banks,  D.D.)  The  Lord  my  God 
sliall  make  my  darkness  to  be  light — Light  out  of  darkness : — David's  deliverance 
from  his  enemies  was  the  work  of  no  human  strength  or  skill,  but  of  the  unseen 
Master  whom  David  served,  and  therefore  he  is  so  buoyant  and  hopeful  as  he  looks 
forward  to  the  future.  The  future  had  troubles  in  store  for  David, — troubles  in  his 
family,  troubles  with  his  subjects,  and,  worst  of  all,  troubles  that  would  come  of 
his  own  misconduct.  But  be  the  future  what  it  may,  David  can  rest  upon  the 
moral  certainty  that  he  will  still  enjoy  that  illuminating  and  strengthening  presence 
of  which  he  has  had  experience  in  the  past.  This  confidence  in  a  light  that  will 
not  fail  in  the  dark  hours  of  life  is  eminently  Christian.  There  are  three  dark 
shadows  which  fall  across  every  human  life — the  shadow  of  sin,  the  shadow  of  pain, 
and  the  shadow  of  death.  I,  The  shadow  of  sin.  Sin  is  the  transgression  in 
will  or  in  fact  of  the  eternal  moral  law.  Sin  itself  is  the  contradiction  of  God,  it  is 
the  repudiation  of  God,  the  perverse  activity  of  the  created  will.  Sin  is  not  always 
an  act :  often  it  is  a  state  ;  it  is  an  attitude  of  the  will,  it  is  an  atmosphere  of 
mind  and  disposition  ;  it  pervades  thought,  it  insinuates  itself  into  the  springs 
of  resolve,  it  presides  over  life  where  there  is  no  conscious  or  deliberate  intention  of 
welcoming  it,  it  changes  its  form  again  and  again.  But  throughout  it  is  one  in 
root  and  principle,  the  resistance  of  the  created  will  to  the  will  of  God :  and  this 
resistance  means  darkness,  not  in  the  sky  above  our  heads,  but  far  worse — darkness 
in  the  moral  nature,  darkness  in  the  moral  intelligence,  darkness  at  the  centre  of 
the  soul.  This  darkness  was  felt  in  the  degree  possible  to  them  by  the  heathen. 
It  explains  the  vein  of  sadness  which  runs  through  the  highest  heathen  literature. 
For  us  Christians  the  sin  is  blacker,  and  the  shame  is  greater  in  proportion  to  our 
higher  knowledge  of  God  and  His  will.  In  order  to  escape  from  this  dark  shadow, 
men  have  tried  to  persuade  themselves  that  sin  is  not  what  we  know  it  to  be,  and 
the  conscience  which  reveals  it  to  us  is  only  prejudice,  or  a  bundle  of  prejudices 
accumulated  through  centuries  of  human  life.  But  the  shadow  of  sin  cannot  be 
conjured  away  ;  it  lies  thick  and  dark  upon  human  life.  Upon  us,  sitting  as  wa 
are  in  the  darkness  of  the  region  of  the  shadow  of  death,  there  shines  the  sun  of 
God's  pardoning  love,  and  He,  our  Lord  and  God,  in  very  deed  makes  our  darkness 
to  be  light,  II,  Thk  shadow  of  pain.  We  know  pain,  not  in  itself,  but  by  its 
presence,  by  its  eflfects.  The  problem  of  pain  is  a  distressing,  almost  overwhelming 
one.  It  is  pain  which  dogs  our  steps  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave.  It  is  not 
limited  to  man's  bodily  constitution  ;  the  mind  is  capable  of  sharper  pain  than  any 
that  can  be  eansed  by  a  diseased  or  wounded  body.     How  to  deal  with  pain  ;  how 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

to  alleviate  it ;  how  to  do  away  with  it — these  have  been  questions  which  men  havo 
discussed  for  thousands  of  years.  Pain,  on  the  whole,  remains  inaccessible  to 
human  treatment,  and  especially  does  it  resist  attempts  to  ignore  its  bitterness. 
Pain  in  the  world  of  men  is  the  consequence  of  wrong-doing,  but  our  Lord  did  no 
guile,  and  yet  He  was  a  sufiferer.  Man  suffers  more  than  the  animals,  the  higher 
races  of  men  suffer  more  than  the  lower.  As  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  our  Lord  showed 
that  pain  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  reasons  for  it  which  we  can  trace  in  nature  ; 
it  has  more  and  larger  purposes,  which  we  can  only  guess  at,  but  as  associated  with 
resignation,  love,  sanctity,  pain  is  most  assuredly  the  harbinger  of  peace  and  joy. 
On  the  Cross  its  triumph  was  unique  ;  it  availed  to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 
III.  The  shadow  of  dkath.  The  thought  that  death  must  come  at  last  casts 
over  thousands  of  lives  a  deep  gloom.  No  real  comfort  is  to  be  had  by  reflecting 
that  the  laws  of  nature  are  irresistible.  The  darkness  of  the  grave  is  not  less 
lightened  by  our  Lord  and  Saviour  than  is  the  darkness  of  sin  or  the  darkness  of 
pain.  He  has  entered  the  sphere  of  death,  and  with  Christians  death  is  no  longer 
dark.  That  our  Lord  makes  these  three  dark  shadows  to  be  light  is  the  experience 
in  all  ages  of  thousands  of  Christians.     {Canon  Liddon.) 

Vers.  29,  33,  34.  By  Tliee  have  I  nm  through  a  troop. — Surm&unting  imposnble 
difficulties : — This  is  a  poetical  way  of  representing  the  fact  that  impossibilities  have 
often  been  made  possible  in  our  own  experience.  Looking  back  upon  certain  com- 
binations of  circumstances,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  we  were  surrounded  by  great 
and  high  walls,  and  that  troops  of  dangers  thickened  around  us  in  deadly  array. 
Now  that  we  see  ourselves  in  a  "large  place,"  we  are  tempted  to  believe  that  we 
are  still  in  a  dream,  and  that  our  liberty  is  a  thing  which  we  hold  only  in  the 
uncertain  light  of  a  momentary  vision.  When  our  imagination  is  vexea  by  the 
cross  colours  which  make  up  the  panorama  of  life,  it  is  easy  to  persuade  us  that 
to-morrow  we  shall  be  back  again  in  chains,  for  we  have  enjoyed  but  an  imaginary 
liberty.  Then,  under  happier  circumstances,  we  see  how  the  miracle  is  a  simple 
reality, — that  we  have  in  very  deed  escaped  perils  which  at  one  time  seemed  to  be 
insurmountable,  and  that  our  escape  is  due  entirely  to  the  exercise  of  the  almighti- 
ness  of  God,  It  is  remarkable  how,  under  such  circumstances,  we  unconsciously 
magnify  our  own  importance  in  the  universe.  We  do  not  mean  to  be  ostentatious 
and  proud  when  we  declare  that  God  has  exerted  Himself  specially  on  our  behalf, 
and  has  indeed  Himself  been  disquieted  until  our  comfort  was  restored  and  estab- 
lished. The  Psalmist  speaks  here  as  if  he  were  the  sole  object  of  the  Lord's  care, 
and  as  if  the  Infinite  took  delight  only  in  his  well-being  and  prosperity.  (Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.)  Energy  put  into  a  man: — Sir  Alexander  Ball  was  one  of  those 
great  men  who  adorned  our  navy  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The 
following  anecdote  is  told  of  him  by  his  friend  the  poet  Coleridge.  "In  a  large 
party  at  Malta  I  had  observed  a  naval  officer  listening  to  Sir  A.  Ball  with  a  mixed 
expression  of  awe  and  affection  that  gave  a  more  than  common  interest  to  so  manly 
a  countenance.  This  officer  afterwards  told  me  that  he  considered  himself  indebted 
to  Sir  Alexander  for  tliat  which  was  dearer  to  him  than  his  life.  'When  he  was 
Lieutenant  Ball,'  said  he,  'he  was  the  officer  I  accompanied  in  my  first  boat  ex- 
pedition, being  then  a  midshipman,  and  only  in  my  fourteenth  year.  As  we  were 
rowing  up  to  the  vessel  which  we  were  to  attack,  amid  a  discharge  of  musketry,  I 
was  overpowered  by  fear,  and  seemed  on  the  point  of  fainting  away.  Lieutenant 
Ball,  who  saw  the  condition  I  was  in,  placed  himself  close  beside  me,  and  still 
keeping  his  countenance  directed  towards  the  enemy,  pressed  my  hand  in  the  most 
friendly  manner,  and  said  in  a  low  voice,  '  Courage,  my  dear  boy.  You  will  recover 
in  a  minute  or  so.  I  was  just  the  same  when  I  first  went  out  in  this  way.'  '  Sir,' 
added  the  officer  to  me,  '  it  was  just  as  if  an  angel  had  put  a  new  soul  into  me. 
With  the  feeling  I  was  not  yet  dishonoured,  the  whole  burden  of  agony  was  removed  ;> 
and  from  that  moment  I  was  as  fearless  and  forward  as  the  oldest  of  the  boat's  crew.'  " 
One  trophy  for  ttoo  exploits: — What  is  true  of  David  is  true  of  David's  Lord.  The 
Holy  Ghost  has  presunted  to  us  the  experience  of  Jesus  in  that  model  of  experience 
through  which  David  passed.  So  the  text  tells  both  of  Christ  and  the  believer 
also.  Let  us  speak  of  it.  I.  In  relation  to  Chbist.  And  1.  For  the  first 
sentence,  "  By  Thee  have  I  run  through  a  troop."  Christ's  enemies  were  as  a  troop 
for  number.  Who  can  count  them  1  But  also  for  their  discipline.  They  were 
marshalled  under  that  skilful  and  crafty  leader  Satan,  the  arch-fiend  and  Prince- 
of  Darkness.  And  his  servants  are  well  trained.  He  came  against  Jesus  with  his 
army,  in  settled  order.     It  was  no  wild  rush  of  some  Tartar  host,  but  a  well' 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  819 

arranged  and  well  regulated  attack.  Never  let  us  undervalue  the  strength  of 
Christ's  enemies.  Now,  this  sentence  has  been  read  in  varied  ways,  and  each  is 
very  suggestive.  One  reads  it,  ' '  By  Thee  have  I  run  to  a  troop "  ;  so  that  Jesus 
did  not  wait  for  the  attack,  but  made  it  Himself.  See  how  He  went  forth  to  meet 
Judas  and  the  armed  band  on  the  night  of  the  betrayal.  But  our  version  reads, 
"through  a  troop," and  this  is  also  accurate.  For  His  victory  was  complete.  They 
stood  firm  as  if  they  would  not  flinch,  they  thought  they  had  defeated  Him  ;  but 
His  Cross  was  the  very  symbol  of  His  omnipotence,  for  in  weakness  was  He  strong. 
See  Him  running  through  this  troop.  And  how  speedily.  His  sufiFerings  were  but 
short.  What  a  stride  was  that  which  Jesus  took  when  He  marched  right  through 
His  enemies,  and  laid  them  right  and  left  slain  before  Him.  There  is  yet  another 
version,  "By  Thee  have  I  run  after  a  troop."  As  if  he  would  say,  "  I  met  them, 
fought  them,  vanquished  them,  pursued  them  and  captured  them."  "He  led 
captivity  captive."  Note  the  words,  "By  Thee."  He  acted  as  the  servant  of  God. 
But  it  is  blessed  to  think  that  the  Father  as  well  as  the  Son,  yea,  the  whole  Trinity 
of  sacred  Persons,  is  engaged  for  our  redemption.  2.  The  second  sentence,  "By  my 
God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wall."  David  seems  to  be  describing  the  capture  of  some 
fortress,  such  as  Jebus,  afterwards  called  Jerusalem.  Now  Satan  had  shut  us  all  up 
in  a  mighty  fortress.  It  had  as  one  bulwark  the  strength  of  sin  and  the  law  ;  as 
another  the  suggestions  of  Satan  to  men's  hearts  ;  and  then  there  was  the  deep  ditch 
of  men's  sins,  and  the  mound  outside  of  Human  Depravity.  Now  Christ  comes,  and 
He  leaps  over  these  walls.  And  He  not  only  Himself  surmounted  these  walls,  but 
brought  all  His  people  on  His  shoulders,  as  ^neas  carried  off  his  old  father  Anchises. 
And  all  this  also  was  "by  my  God."  He  acted  as  Mediator.  Let  our  souls  medi- 
tate much  upon  Christ's  victories.  II.  To  the  believer.  He  has  his  troops  of 
enemies  and  his  imprisoning  wall.  But  sometimes  he  makes  the  mistake  of  trying 
to  climb  over  the  troop  when  he  should  break  through  them,  and  of  trying  to 
break  through  the  wall  which  he  should  climb  over.  Let  him  have  courage  for 
the  troop  to  run  through  them,  and  discretion  for  the  wall  to  climb  over  it.  And 
by  means  of  faith  he  can  do  this.  Luther  ofteu  used  to  defy  Satan  to  battle.  I 
care  not  to  do  that,  but  he  used  in  his  queer  quaint  way  to  say,  "I  often  laugh  at 
Satan,  and  there  is  nothing  makes  him  so  angry  as  when  I  attack  him  to  his  face, 
and  tell  him  that  through  God  I  am  more  than  a  match  for  him,  tell  him  to  do 
his  worst,  and  yet  I  will  beat  him  ;  and  tell  him  to  put  forth  his  fury,  and  yet  I 
will  overcome  him."  He  that  has  made  God  his  refuge  need  fear  no  storm. 
"Look,"  said  a  poor  woman  to  a  lady  who  called  to  see  her,  "Look,  ma'am,  I'll 
show  you  all  I'm  worth."  And  she  showed  her  her  cupboard  with  nothing  in  it 
but  a  dry  crust ;  and  a  chest,  but  it  was  empty.  "That  is  all  I  am  worth,  ma'am, 
but  I  have  not  a  doubt  or  fear  but  that  God  will  supply  my  need."  Now  that 
woman  had  learnt  how  to  run  through  a  troop  and  by  her  God  to  leap  over  a  wall. 
What  have  you  for  your  soul  like  that?    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  30.  As  for  God,  His  way  is  perfect. — GocTs  ministries  : — Many  mythologies 
have  told  how  the  gods  arm  their  champions,  but  the  Psalmist  reaches  a  loftier 
height  than  these.  He  ventures  to  think  of  God  as  doing  the  humble  oflSce  of 
bracing  on  his  girdle,  but  the  girdle  is  itself  strength.  God,  whose  own  "  way  is 
perfect,"  makes  His  servant's  way  in  some  measure  like  His  own  ;  and  though,  no 
doubt,  the  figure  must  be  interpreted  in  a  manner  congruous  with  the  context,  as 
chiefly  implying  "perfection"  in  regard  to  the  purpose  in  hand — namely,  warfare — 
we  need  not  miss  the  deeper  truth,  that  God's  soldiers  are  fitted  for  conflict  by  their 
"ways"  being  conformed  to  God's.  This  man's  "strength  was  as  the  strength  of 
ten,  because  his  heart  was  pure."  Strength  and  swiftness  are  the  two  character- 
istics of  antique  heroes,  and  God's  gift  bestowed  both  on  the  Psalmist.  Light  of 
foot  as  a  deer,  and  able  to  climb  to  the  robber  forts  perched  on  crags  as  a  chamois 
would,  his  hands  deft,  and  his  muscular  arms  strong  to  bend  the  bow  which  others 
could  not  use,  he  is  the  ideal  of  the  warrior  of  old ;  and  all  these  natural  poweis  he 
again  ascribes  to  God's  gift.  A  goddess  gave  Achilles  his  wondrous  shield,  but  what 
was  it  to  that  which  God  binds  on  this  warrior's  arm  ?  As  his  girdle  was  strength, 
and  not  merely  a  means  of  strength,  his  shield  is  salvation,  and  not  merely  a 
means  of  safety.  The  fact  that  God  purposes  to  save,  and  does  act  for  saving,  is 
the  defence  against  all  dangers  and  enemies.  It  is  the  same  deep  truth  as  the 
prophet  expresses  by  making  "salvation"  the  walls  and  bulwarks  of  the  strong 
city  where  the  righteous  nation  dwells  in  peace.  God  does  not  thus  ami  His 
Bervant  and  then  send  him  out  alone  to  fight  as  he  can,  but  "Thy  right  hand  holds 


/ 


l^ 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [psalm  xviir. 

me  up."  What  assailant  can  beat  him  down  if  that  Hand  is  under  his  armpit  to 
support  him  ?  The  beautiful  rendering  of  the  Authorised  Version,  ' '  I  hy  gentle- 
ness,"  scarcely  conveys  the  meaning,  and  weakens  the  antithesis  of  the  Psalmist's 
" greatness, "  which  is  brought  out  by  translating  "Thy  lowliness,"  or  even  more 
boldly,  "Thy  humility."  There  is  that  in  God  which  answers  to  the  peculiarly 
human  virtue  of  lowliness  ;  and  unless  there  were,  man  would  remain  small,  and 
unclothed  with  God -given  strength.  The  devout  soul  thrills  with  wonder  at  God's 
stooping  love,  which  it  discerns  to  be  the  foundation  of  all  His  gifts,  and  therefore 
of  its  blessedness.  The  Singer  saw  deep  into  the  heart  of  God,  and  anticipated  the 
great  word  of  the  one  Revealer,  "I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  {A.Maclaren,  D.D. ) 
The  perfection  of  providential  dispensations  : — Davi  I  had  by  this  time  followed  the 
Lord  thraugh  many  a  dark  step,  and  he  had  endun  d  various  troubles.  Now  he  is 
looking  back  and  giving  his  verdict  as  to  them  all.  There  is — 1.  A  magnificent 
preface — "As  for  God.  He  is  standing  np  for  God.  2.  What  of  God  he  com- 
mends— "  His  way,"  whether  it  be  that  in  which  men  walk  with  God,  personal 
holiness,  or  the  way  wherein  God  walks  with  men — the  way  of  His  providence.  His 
dispensations.  3.  The  commendation  is  perfect.  Now,  in  illustration  of  text — I.  To 
OUR  CORRUPT  EYES  God's  WAY  IS  NOT  ALWAYS  PERFECT.  Because — 1.  We  cannot 
always  see  the  reason  of  it  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  19).  The  Lord  leads  man  he  knows  not 
where.  We  have  to  wait  to  know  (Acts  x.  17  ;  John  xiii.  6,  7).  2.  It  sometimes 
seems  to  forget  the  promises.  We  are  ready  to  cry,  as  in  Jer.  iv.  18,  "  Wilt  Thou 
be  altogether  unto  me  as  a  liar  ?"  Abraham  went  in  to  Hagar  for  this  reason.  3.  It 
sometimes  goes  cross  to  the  promises,  as  when  Abraham  was  commanded  to  offer 
up  Isaac.  See  also  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviii.  1).  The  way  in  the  wilderness  is  often 
crooked.  4.  It  runs  at  times  seemingly  quite  contrary  to  the  design  of  Providence. 
The  Lord  designs  good,  but  disappointment  after  disappointment  cross  it  more  and 
more.  Thus  it  was  with  Joseph  when  cast  into  the  dungeon.  Oftentimes  Provi- 
dence reads  best  backwards  (Deut.  xxxii.  86).  Sometimes — 5.  It  lays  aside  the 
ost  likely  means  (1  Cor.  i.  23,  24  ;  2  Kings  v.  11  ;  John  xvi.  6,  7).  Sometimes — 
6.  It  falls  on  means  quite  contrary  to  its  design.  As  when  clay  was  used  to  cure  the 
blind.  When  the  Lord  heals  by  wounding  (Rom.  viii.  28).  Then — 7.  Providence 
smiles  though  wicked  men  get  the  sunny  side  of  the  brae  and  walk  contrary  to 
God.  This  made  Asaph  stammer  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  12-14,  and  Jer.  xii.  1,  2).  But 
there  is  no  fault  in  this  (Psa.  xcii.  7).  See  the  end  of  all  these  things.  8.  The 
good  troubled  (Eccles.  viii.  14).  Job.  But  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10.  And — 9.  Great  afflic- 
tions meeting  the  Lord's  people  in  the  way  of  duty.  This  often  Jacob's  case. 
II.  But  God's  way  is  perfect.  It  is  according  to  the  pattern  shown  in  the  Word. 
Is  suited  to  our  need  (Deut.  xxxii.  4).  Is  ever  suited  to  the  time.  Is  stable. 
{T.  Boston.  D.D.)  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  tried. — The  Bible  tested  and  trium- 
■phant : — Look  at  some  of  the  severe  tests  to  which  the  Bible  has  been  subjected, 
and  by  successfully  meeting  which  it  has  vindicated  its  claims  to  a  Divine 
origin,  and  to  universal  human  acceptance.  I.  The  Bible  has  stood  the  test 
OF  time.  /Since  the  Sacred  Canon  closed,  how  many  and  how  vast  are  the 
changes  which  have  gone  on  among  men.  Hardly  one  of  the  ancient  powers  is 
to-day  extant.  How  great  have  been  the  strides  of  human  progress  !  Yet  the 
science  ot  salvation,  as  taught  in  the  Bible,  has  needed  no  remodelling.  The  race 
does  not  outgrow  the  religion  of  the  Bible.  Compare  the  case  of  the  Bible  with  the 
poems  of  Homer.  The  two  works  are,  in  a  certain  sense,  corporaneous ;  critics 
have  denied  to  the  Bible  any  higher  inspiration  than  that  of  human  genius  ;  and 
Greek  poetry  held  among  that  ancient  people  very  much  the  same  place  as  did  the 
sacred  Scriptures  among  the  Jews.  Three  thousand  years  ago  the  two  works  stood 
before  the  world  on  a  comparative  equality.  How  stands  the  case  to-day  ?  Homer 
is  read  as  a  model  of  epic  verse  and  specimen  of  old  Ionic  Greek.  The  Bible  is  read 
everywhere  as  a  transcript  of  the  Eternal.  II.  The  test  of  criticism.  Criticism, 
the  most  searching  and  severe  to  which  any  work  has  ever  been  subjected.  A  criti- 
cism often  hostile.  But  the  old  Book  has  come  out  of  it  only  purified.  III.  The 
TEST  OF  practical  TRIAL.  In  the  patent  office  are  models  of  many  beautiful 
machines  that  could  not  be  worked.  The  Book  will  stand  every  practical  test. 
^It  gives  the  solution  of  the  great  enigmas  of  the  human  soul,  and  provides 
the  consolation  for  life's  dark  hours,  those  hours  of  disappointment,  adversity, 
sorrow,  and  bereavement  which  come  so  surely  to  us  all.  (B.  B.  Loomis,  Ph.D.) 
The  Word  of  the  Lord  commended  to  our  faith  hy  its  beiTig  a  tried  Word: — 
A  thing  that  has  been  tried  is  deemed  all  the  more  valuable  on  that  account.  A 
medicine  which  has  been  found  on  trial  to  be  a  sure  remedy  for  certain  kinds 


OTALM  XVill.]  THE  PSALMS.  321 

of  disease  is  held  in  high  estimation.  It  is  thus  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is 
commended  to  our  high  esteem.  It  is  a  tried  Word.  I.  Science  has  tried 
IT.  For  though  at  first  it  denied,  now  it  does  homage  to  the  Word  of 
God.  For  example — 1.  GeoloCT^.  In  its  early  development  many  facts  were 
brought  forward  that  seemed  to  oear  hard  on  Scripture  statements.  Several  years 
since  the  discovery  was  made,  or  was  thought  to  be  made,  by  perforating  tlie 
successive  lavas  formed  by  the  volcanic  overflowings  of  Mount  ^tna,  that  tlie  earth 
must  have  existed,  in  its  present  form,  at  least  fourteen  thousand  years.  The 
discovery  was  published  by  Brydone,  an  English  traveller  in  Sicily,  and  flew  like 
light  through  Europe,  and  was  seized  upon  by  multitudes  as  furnishing  complete 
evidence  that  the  chronology  of  the  Bible  is  false  and  the  Bible  itself  untrue.  But 
subsequent  investigation  has  proved  that  the  supposed  discovery  was  based  on  an 
entirely  false  view  of  facts.  At  a  later  period  the  astronomical  tables  of  India 
were  supposed  to  furnish  incontestable  proof  of  a  much  higher  antiquity  belonging 
to  our  globe  than  is  assigned  it  according  to  the  writings  of  Moses.  But  these  same 
astronomical  tables  were  afterwards  examined  by  the  great  French  philosopher 
Laplace,  and  were  demonstrated  to  be  of  comparatively  modern  date,  and  furnish 
not  the  slightest  evidence  against  the  Mosaic  chronology.  In  like  manner  the 
variety  of  languages,  and  the  diversity  of  colour  and  form  which  distinguish  the 
different  races  of  men,  have  often  been  urged  with  great  confidence  as  disproving 
the  account  given  in  Genesis  of  the  common  origin  of  mankind.  But  tlie  study  of 
ethnography,  or  the  classification  of  nations  by  a  comparison  of  their  languages, 
together  with  a  better  acquaintance  with  the  natural  history  of  man,  has  removed 
this  objection,  and  shown  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  most  competent  judges  that  the 
human  race  sprang  from  a  common  pair.  It  is  with  science  as  it  is  with  the  human 
mind  in  youth,  it  is  apt  to  be  self-conceited  and  sceptical ;  but  in  its  maturity 
it  becomes  humble,  modest,  and  reverent  of  God's  Word.  Hence,  as  Professor 
Hitchcock  of  Amherst  College  says  in  his  Religion  of  Geology,  "  Every  part  of 
science  which  has  been  supposed,  by  the  fears  of  friends  or  the  malice  of  foes,  to 
conflict  with  religion,  has  been  found  at  length,  when  fully  understood,  to  be  in 
perfect  harmony  with  its  principles,  and  even  to  illustrate  them."  II.  Time  has 
TRIED  IT.  It  is  with  the  Bible  as  it  is  with  its  Divine  Author :  "  One  day  is  as  a 
thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  III.  Friends  have  tried  it. 
For  they  have  been  all  made  such  by  the  transforming  and  subduing  power  of  the 
Word  itself.  Consider  their  numbers,  and  what  it  has  done  for  them,  and  the 
circumstances  under  which  they  have  made  trial  of  it  and  never  found  it  fail. 
IV.  Enemies  have  tried  it  :  by  persecution  ;  by  laws  directed  against  it ;  by 
ridicule  ;  by  philosophy,  and  by  every  means  left  at  their  command.  Still  the 
object  of  all  these  attacks  remains  uninjured,  while  one  army  of  its  enemies  after 
another  has  passed  away  in  defeat  and  dishonour.  Though  it  has  been  ridiculed 
more  bitterly,  misrepresented  more  grossly,  opposed  more  rancorously,  and  burnt 
more  frequently  than  any  other  book,  or  perhaps  than  all  other  books  united,  it 
ia  so  far  from  sinking  under  the  efforts  of  its  enemies  that  it  is  plainly  gathering 
fresh  strength  from  age  to  age,  and  the  probability  of  its  surviving  until  tlie 
consummation  of  all  things  is  now  far  greater  than  ever.  V.  It  has  been  tried 
IN  ITS  influence  ON  INDIVIDUAL  CHARACTER,  upon  Society,  and  all  the  best 
interests  of  man.  See  what  institutions  it  has  founded  for  human  good,  and 
maintains  them  still.  Hence  learn — 1.  There  is  no  fear  for  the  future.  As  nature's 
answers  are  ever  uniform  and  constant  and  true,  so  are  those  of  the  Word  of  the 
Lord.  2.  It  is  a  serious  matter  for  any  one  to  set  himself  against  it.  Voltaire  said, 
"It  has  been  the  boast  of  ages  that  twelve  men  estr,  l^ished  Christianity  in  the  world. 
I  will  show  the  world  that  one  man  can  destroy  it."  But  where  is  Voltaire,  or  what 
did  he  accomplish  of  his  impious  boast  ?  He  lived  long,  and  he  worked  hard  and 
went  down  to  the  grave,  cursing  the  horrid  work  in  which  he  had  spent  his  days. 
3.  Let  us  all  prepare  to  meet  the  scenes  which  it  tells  us  are  yet  before  us  :  death, 
judgment,  eternity.  Prepare  to  meet  your  God,  prepare,  through  His  mercy  in 
Christ,  to  meet  Him  in  peace.  For  the  time  is  at  hand  when  all  that  He  has  said 
in  His  Word  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  aad  of  heaven  and  hell,  will  be  matter 
of  experience,  of  personal  unchanging  experience  to  us  all.     {Joel  Hawes,  D.D.). 

Ver.  34.  He  teacheth  my  hands  to  war. — Diviiie  endovmient  for  service : — God 

raises  up  men  specially  qualified  to   meet  the  exigencies  of  human   society — the 

soldier,  the  statesman,  the  law-giver,  the  teacher  of  religion,  the  ready  writer,  the 

eloquent  man,  and  the  cunning  artificer.     He  had  need  of  a  soldier  to  accomplish 

21 


322  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

the  purposes  of  His  will,  and  He  qualified  David  for  the  work,  and  so  long  as  David 
prosecuted  his  wars,  free  of  ambitious  and  malevolent  feelings,  and  solely  with  the 
desire  of  accomplishing  the  will  of  God,  he  served  God  as  acceptably  in  the  field 
as  he  could  have  served  Him  in  His  temple.  Provided  his  cause  be  just,  and  he 
prosecute  it  with  right  motives,  the  patriot  soldier  is  engaged  on  as  holy  a  work  as 
the  priest  at  the  altar,  God  so  taught  David  the  art  of  war  that  "a  bow  of  steel 
was  broken  by  his  arms."  It  required  the  use  of  both  hands  and  feet  to  bend  the 
ancient  bow  of  steel ;  how  great,  then,  must  David's  strength  have  been  to  break  it 
with  his  arms.  This  verse  has,  of  course,  a  spiritual  application,  showing  how  easily 
God  can  clothe  with  overcoming  might  all  who  are  engaged  in  the  good  fight  of 
faith,  enabling  them  to  overcome,  with  a  moiety  of  their  strength,  the  strongest 
weapons  with  which  they  may  be  assailed.     {David  Caldwell,  A.M.) 

Ver.  35.  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great. — The  gentleness  of  God: — When 
the  coarse  mind  of  sin  makes  up  gods  by  its  own  natural  light,  those  gods  reveal  the 
coarseness  and  the  sin  together.  The  God  of  revelation  contrives  to  be  a  gentle 
being  ;  hiding  His  power  that  He  might  put  confidence  and  courage  in  the  feelings  of 
His  children,  I,  What  do  we  mean  by  gentleness  ?  God's  gentleness  lies  in  His 
consenting  to  the  use  of  indirection,  as  a  way  of  gaining  His  adversaries.  Instead  of 
coming  down  upon  man  in  a  manner  of  direct  onset,  to  carry  His  submission  by 
storm.  He  gently  lays  siege  to  him,  waiting  for  his  willing  consent.  It  is  the  very 
genius  of  Christianity  itself  to  bring  men  to  obedience  by  a  course  of  loving  indirec- 
tion from  what  is  revealed  in  that  wondrous  indirection  of  grace,  the  incarnate  life 
and  death  of  Jesus.  But  where  is  the  gentleness  of  God  in  those  inexorable  forces 
of  the  external  world  ?  Is  it  such  a  God  that  moves  by  indirection  f  Yes,  and  all 
the  more  properly,  because  these  terrible  forces  permit  Him  to  do  it.  He  can  hide 
His  omnipotence — can  set  His  will  behind  His  love  for  a  time,  because  He  has  these 
majestic  inexorabilities  for  the  rear-guard  of  His  mercies.     II.  The  end  God  has  in 

VIEW   IN   condescending  TO   THESE  GRACIOUS    METHODS, — TO    MAKE   US    GREAT. 

The  Christian  Gospel  is  a  plan  to  bring  down  the  loftiness  of  our  pride  and  the  wil- 
fulness of  our  rebellion,  but  to  make  us  loftier  in  capacity  and  power  and  personal 
majesty.  This  is  true  of  our  will  and  of  our  intellect.  Then,  how  perverse  are 
those  who  require  God  to  convert  them  by  force.  Let  us  adjust  our  conceptions  of 
the  true  scale  of  a  Christian  man  by  God's  careful  respect  for  our  liberty,  the  deten- 
tions of  His  violated  feeling,  the  sending  of  His  Son,  and  the  silent  intercession  of 
His  Spirit.  Be  it  ours  to  live  with  a  sense  of  our  high  calling  upon  us.  {Horace  Bush- 
nell,  D.D.)  The  Divine  gentleness: — The  idea  here  is,  goodness  manifested  in 
gentle  dealings,  in  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy — an  exhibition  of  the  goodness 
of  God  which  had  often  awakened  his  heart's  warmest  gratitude  and  led  him  to 
ascribe  praise  to  Jehovah.  The  idea  of  lowliness  enters  into  the  meaning  of  the 
word  gentleness  ;  it  is  indeed  essential  to  it.  Gentleness  is  put  in  contrast  with 
greatness.  There  is  iirst  God  stooping  down  to  that  which  is  lowly,  and  as  the 
result  of  this,  His  condescension,  we  have  the  gentle  tender  rule  of  His  loving 
administration.  I.  The  gentleness  of  our  Father's  rule.  It  was  due  to  the 
Father's  gentleness — 1.  That  we  were  brought  under  His  genial  sway.  2.  That  we 
have  been  kept  in  the  school  of  Christ.  There  He  conquers  our  dulness  and  wilful- 
ness by  His  gentleness.  3.  The  gentleness  of  the  Divine  rule  is  revealed  to  us  in  the 
experience  of  life.  Illustrate  from  our  days  of  sin,  days  of  punishment,  days  of 
affliction,  days  of  weariness,  and  the  hour  of  death.  II.  The  effects  which  this 
genial  sway  produces  in  us.  Sept.  reads,  "Thy  discipline."  The  Chaldee  para- 
phrase reads,  "Thy  word  hath  increased  me."  There  are  some  Christians  of  whom 
you  feel  that  their  humility — so  beautiful  and  sincere  and  unpretending  and 
unobtrusive — is  an  honour  to  them.  Do  you  know  the  secret  of  this  their  greatness  ? 
It  is  the  product  of  Divine  culture.  We  know  some  Christians  whose  zeal  for  God 
and  God's  house  is  such  that  they  are  made  honourable  by  it.  It  is  because  the 
Divine  gentleness  has  been  so  sweetly  realised  as  to  create  a  passionate  desire  to 
make  some  expression  of  its  gratitude.  Saviour  Divine  1  may  Thy  gentleness  make 
us  gentle — gentle  in  thought,  in  intent,  in  speech,  in  action, — that  we  may  live 
gentle  lives  of  loving  devotedness  to  the  God  whose  discipline  and  leadings  are  ever 
tender  and  kind!  {Edvxtrd  Leach.)  God's  gentleness  our  greatness: — It  is 
remarkable  that  the  Psalmist  should  speak  of  God  as  gentle,  and  of  himself  as  great, 
and  that  he  should  ascribe  his  own  greatness  to  God's  gentleness,  as  the  eflfect  to  the 
cause.  This  would  appear  to  reverse  the  natural  order  of  things.  The  greatness  of 
God  might  well  teach  us  a  lesson  of  gentleness.    I.  The  import  of  that  qkntlb- 


PSALM  xviii.]  THE  PSALMS.  323 

NESS  WHICH  IS  ASCEiBED  TO  GoD.  Contrast  it  with  His  infinite  power  and 
universal  sovereignty.  There  is  united  in  the  Divine  character  surpassing  gentle- 
ness and  transcendant  greatness.  To  what  but  the  Lord's  gentleness,  forbearance, 
long-suffering,  and  tender  mercy  is  it  owing  that  our  rebellious  and  guilty  race 
have  been  so  long  spared  and  so  graciously  dealt  with  ?  But  it  is  in  the  person  of 
His  well-beloved  Son,  the  meek  and  lowly  Saviour,  that  the  gentleness  of  God  is 
exhibited  to  us  in  a  visible  and  palpable  form.  Was  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
emphatically  one  of  gentleness  ?  Did  not  that  lovely  Spirit,  so  aptly  typified  by 
the  similitude  of  a  dove,  characterise  His  every  word  and  action  ?  Such  a  combina- 
tion of  gentleness  with  fortitude  ;  of  meekness  with  dignity ;  of  the  tenderest  love 
with  the  most  inflexible  firmness,  belongs  only  to  Immanuel.  The  delineation  of  the 
character  is  far  above  human  power.  II.  The  nature  of  the  greatness  which 
THE  Psalmist  affirms  to  be  the  effect  of  the  Divine  gentleness.  Is  it  the 
grandeur  of  wealth,  power,  fame,  or  royal  dignity  to  which  he  refers  ?  His  own 
testimony  negatives  the  supposition.  It  is  of  moral  greatness,  as  distinct  from 
earthly  grandeur, — greatness  of  principle,  of  soul,  of  destiny — that  greatness  which 
teaches  man  to  contemn  sensual  indulgences,  that  greatness  which  consists  in 
spiritual  endowments,  and  heavenly  relationships — this  is  the  only  greatness  which 
really  dignifies  and  ennobles  a  never-dying  spirit.  This  true  spiritual  greatness  is  at 
once  the  evidence  and  the  eff'ect  of  a  Divine  nature.  To  such  heavenly  greatness 
God's  gentleness  would  lead  us  by  Christ  Jesus.  The  one  subject  of  our  everlasting 
songs  will  be,  the  gentleness  of  God  in  Christ.  ( W.  F.  Vance,  M.A.)  The  genesis 
of  greatness: — Hengstenberg  calls  this  Psalm  the  great  hallelujah  of  David's  life, 
and  one  with  which  he  retires  from  the  theatre  of  action.  David  was  at  his  best 
when  he  wrote  these  words.  There  were  times  when  he  was  not  fitted  to  pen  such 
an  ode.  I.  The  character  of  true  greatness.  The  world  has  admired  and 
even  deified  the  human  earthward  side  of  greatness,  and  overlooked  the  spiritual, 
Godward  side.  Men  have  exalted  power,  wealth,  intellectual  superiority  above 
character  or  moral  greatness,  founded  in  faith,  purity,  and  trust  in  God.  Since 
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  has  prevailed,  men  are  beginning  to  put  character  in  the 
light  of  His  matchless  Excellence.  How  far  like  Him  is  any  admired  character  ? 
It  is  a  cheerful  sign  that  Christian  communities  demand  some  degree  of  moral  great- 
ness in  those  called  to  posts  of  power.  The  greatest  nations  of  the  globe  are 
Christian.  The  most  influential  statesmen  are  reverent  in  their  attitude,  if  not 
professedly  converted  men.  True  greatness  is  moral  goodness.  II.  The  source  of 
this  true  greatness.  David  is  here  reviewing  his  life.  He  is  getting  at  the 
force  that  wrought  in  all  these  years  and  led  him  safely  on  and  up,  that  has 
developed  an  inward  life  as  well  as  an  outward  opulence  and  power.  It  is  God. 
"  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great."  This  word  "gentleness  "  is  translated  con- 
descension or  benignity.  It  is  gracious  kindness  to  one's  inferior.  The  sun  pours 
its  fervid  rays  on  the  earth,  kissing  its  flowers  and  fruits  into  beauty,  and  ripening 
its  bounty  year  by  year.  So  the  face  of  God,  like  Divine  sunshine,  calls  out  of  you 
and  me  all  that  is  good  and  really  great.  We  realise  this  fact  as  we  muse  on  the 
Divine  love,  so  unwearied  and  continuous  through  our  lives.  Let  us  all  strive  to 
realise  that  God's  eye  of  love  rests  on  us.  He  sees  our  joy  and  grief,  our  loss  and 
gain,  our  sin  and  our  sorrow.  Let  us  ever  keep  the  windows  of  our  life  open  to  Him. 
God's  benignant  grace  makes  us  truly  great.  {George  E.  Reed,  D.D.)  The  gentle- 
ness of  God,  and  our  greatness : — The  gentleness  of  God — it  is  a  wonderful  word  :  a 
word  that  never  could  have  originated  with  man.  There  are  gods  of  might,  grim 
and  terrible.  Man  has  never  invented  a  god  of  gentleness.  Jove  is  but  a  hurler  of 
thunderbolts.  Unto  us  our  God  hath  revealed  Himself,  and  lo.  He  is  our  Father, 
Almighty  and  Everlasting,  yet  His  chosen  emblem  is  the  Breath,  the  Dew,  the 
Lamb,  the  Dove, — all  that  sets  forth  the  gentleness  of  our  God.  How  best  may  we 
get  hold  of  this  wondrous  truth  ?  Gentleness  is  many  sided.  The  word  is  rendered 
condescension,  goodness,  patience — but  gentleness  is  more  than  these,  or  less.  With 
us  it  may  be  but  a  lack  of  energy,  a  lack  of  decision.  What  passes  for  gentleness 
may  be  only  a  colourless  mixture  of  weakness  and  unconcern,  a  forbearance  that 
amiably  smiles  at  everything  and  everybody,  because  it  is  less  trouble  than  doing 
anything  else.  But  it  is  difiicult  to  think  of  gentleness  in  an  intense  nature.  How 
can  such  an  one  be  gentle  ?  It  is  David,  the  valiant  champion  and  captain  of 
Israel,  brave,  heroic,  chivalrous  David,  the  man,  too,  of  fierce  passions,  who  gives 
ns  this  experience.  He  knew  as  well  as  any  the  power  and  majesty  of  the  Most 
High.  And  yet  as  he  looks  back  upon  his  life  he  sees  that  the  greatness  of  it  has 
grown  up  out  of  the  gentleness  of  God.    We  see  the  gentleness  of  God  bearing  in  this 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

brave  soldier  its  own  fruit,  making  him  gracious  and  gentle  ;  and  at  such  times  it  is 
that  he  rises  to  his  highest  greatness.  For  myself  I  think  I  get  furthest  into  the 
heart  of  this  truth  when  I  think  of  gentleness  as  the  grace  of  one  who  puts  him- 
self in  our  place,  making  himself  so  one  with  us  that  he  understands  how  we  feel, 
taking  our  weakness  and  our  difficulty  and  doubt  and  fear  as  his  own.  God  is  our 
father  and  mother  too — setting  ever  before  Himself  the  loftiest  purpose  concerning 
us,  yet  ever  seeing  our  weakness,  feeling  it,  and  stooping  tenderly  to  help  us.  That 
is  the  gentleness  of  God.  If  I  am  to  think  of  God  as  the  sublime,  the  majestic  only, 
what  hope  have  I  ?  What  allowance  can  be  made  for  weakness,  for  ignorance,  for 
peculiar  difficulties  ?  But  if  the  infinite  love  and  gentleness  of  God  do  bring  Him 
down  to  be  one  with  me  in  my  very  flesh  and  blood,  one  with  me  in  all  the  round 
of  daily  life  and  circumstance,  then  I  may  set  out  with  confidence.  If  He  understand 
me  in  aU  my  peculiarities  and  needs,  and  be  ever  ready  to  help  me,  then  may  I 
triumph — His  gentleness  shall  make  me  great.  This  perfect  understanding  of  U3 
away  by  ourselves,  and  this  perfect  sympathy  with  us,  this  separate  love  and 
separate  help,  is  the  very  strength  and  sweetness  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  God  is  not 
consumed,  as  some  have  thought,  with  an  incessant  craving  for  His  own  glory. 
God  is  consumed  with  an  incessant  longing  for  the  welfare  and  blessedness  of  Hia 
children.  All  things  are  set  and  perfectly  adjusted  to  this  end.  You  to  whom  the 
beginnings  of  the  life  of  God  are  a  perplexity,  goodness  is  a  despair  —  He  calls 
you  to  Himself  that  His  gentleness  may  make  you  great.  His  purposes  concerning 
us  are  altogether  too  great  to  be  won  by  force  ;  they  can  only  be  fulfilled  by  His 
gentleness.  {Mark  Guy  Fearse.)  The  gentleness  of  God,  and  the  moral  greatness 
of  man : — I.  The  Gentleness  of  God.  1.  Not  a  quality  men  usually  ascribe  to 
God.  The  sense  of  sin  is  the  prime  cause  of  the  dread  of  God.  2.  Not  a  single,  but 
a  complex  attribute.  Its  base  is  goodness.  Its  aspects  and  operations  are  manifold. 
It  is  always  sympathetic,  but  it  is  not  mere  softness.  It  does  not  exclude  severity 
when  severity  is  demanded.  God  both  hurls  the  thunderbolt  and  distils  the  dew. 
II.  The  effect  op  God's  gentleness  on  the  moral  gkeatness  of  man.  The 
faculties  of  man  are  great,  his  destiny  is  great,  and  the  Gospel  of  his  salvation  is 
great.  The  character  and  conduct  of  man  are  often  little,  very  little  indeed ;  but  the 
powers  and  possibilities  of  his  nature  cannot  be  trivial.  The  Divine  gentleness  seen 
in — 1.  Convincing  of  sin.  2.  Prompting  to  a  better  life.  3.  Upholding  the  saint  in 
his  progress  toward  perfection.  The  after-life  of  the  believing  man  on  earth  needs 
the  ministry  of  God's  gentleness.  In  the  fight  with  evil  within,  the  soul  not 
infrequently  grows  sick  of  itself,  weary  of  its  own  infirmities,  and  loses  all  heart 
about  its  own  predicted  victories.  In  such  hours  the  experience  of  God's  great 
patience  with  us,  when  we  have  given  up  all  patience  with  ourselves,  is  of  priceless 
value.  III.  Conolxjsion.  1.  Other  attributes  besides  the  gentleness  ot  God  must 
contribute  to  the  moral  life  and  welfare  of  the  soul.  Rigour  and  tenderness  are  both 
requisite  to  the  moral  guidance  and  training  of  our  race.  2.  In  the  moral  develop- 
ment and  perfection  of  fallen  men  the  gentleness  of  God  discharges  the  highest 
function.  The  strong  hand  retains,  the  hand  of  gentleness  elicits  and  fosters. 
Authority  moulds  from  without ;  love  inspires  from  within.  3.  The  aim  of  the 
moral  activity  of  God  in  this  planet  is  to  ensure  the  moral  greatness  of  man.  4.  Let 
none  fail  to  weigh  the  condemning  power  of  God's  gentleness.  The  sufficiency  of  any 
moral  force  to  encourage,  inspire,  and  exalt  is  the  exact  measure  of  its  ability  to 
condemn.  {R.  Batchelor,  B.A.)  Great  lives: — Gentleness  is  love  in  action. 
Geologists  tell  us  that  the  silent  influences  of  the  atmosphere  are  far  more  powerful 
than  the  noisy  forces  of  nature  :  quiet  sunshine  than  thunder,  and  gentle  rain  than 
earthquake.  So  the  gentleness  of  God  is  His  grandest  excellence.  His  gentleness 
shows  itself  in  the  goodness  which  teaches  us  to  know  Him  and  inspires  us  to  become 
like  Him  ;  in  the  mercy  which,  remembering  that  we  are  but  dust,  forgives  our  sins 
and  blots  out  the  record  of  our  iniquity.  The  spirit  of  the  New  Testament  reveals 
the  gentleness  of  God  as  manifested  in  the  life  of  our  Saviour  ;  for  gentleness  was  the 
prevailing  disposition  of  Jesus.  Jesus  was  gentle  in  all  His  words,  and  meek  in  all 
His  actions.  In  His  disposition  you  have  a  picture  of  the  spirit  of  the  Almighty 
God.  And  His  object  is  ever  to  make  us  truly  great.  I.  The  gentleness  op  God 
IN  THE  INSPIRATION  OP  His  LOVE.  Love  is  the  strongest  force  we  know.  Impelled 
by  it,  the  wife  has  not  feared  to  suck  the  poison  from  the  wound  of  her  husband,  auid 
love  has  ever  been  willing  to  lay  down  its  life  to  save  its  beloved.  Love  is  refining  and 
elevating  in  proportion  to  its  purity  and  power.  Even  the  love  of  a  dog  makes  a  bad 
man  better  than  he  otherwise  would  be.  There  is  a  hunger  for  love  in  the  humaa 
heart.    The  pmoner  for  life  is  the  better  for  the  love  of  the  rat  who  creeps  about  hia 


PSALM  xviii.]  THE  PSALMS.  825 

dungeon.  One  of  the  worst  characters  portrayed  by  Charles  Dickens  is  that  of  Bill 
Sykes — a  creature  apparently  without  natural  aifection — yet  even  he  had  a  soft  place 
in  his  heart,  and  was  moved  with  pity  when  trying  to  drown  his  faithful  dog.  The 
most  helpless  being  in  this  world  is  a  new-born  child  ;  and  it  is  this  very  helpless- 
ness that  appeals  so  strongly  to  our  love.  But  when  you  realise  that  you  are 
loved  of  God,  it  makes  you  great  in  noble  deeds.  Love  calls  forth  love.  God's 
gentleness  is  known  by  its  record  in  the  Bible  and  by  its  inspiration  in  our 
hearts.  And  so  the  New  Testament  tells  me  of  a  fact — that  in  the  heart  of 
God  there  is  love  for  me.  But  what  should  be  the  result  when  we  know  that 
our  Saviour  laid  down  His  sacred  life  for  us  ?  Surely,  that  love,  when  it  is 
felt  in  our  heart,  shall  make  the  feeblest  man  great.  II.  Notice  His  gentleness  in 
THE  PLEADING  OF  His  SpiRiT  "WITH  EVEEY  MAN.  The  Holy  Spirit  pleads  with  every 
man ;  and  we  are  taught  not  to  grieve  God  by  resisting  that  hallowed  influence. 

III.  The   GENTLENESS  OF   GOD   IN    GIVING   US  THE   POWER   OF   THE   RISEN   LIFE   OF 

Jesus  Christ.  May  God  make  us  great — 1.  In  our  friendship  to  one  another. 
2.  In  our  obedience  to  God.  3.  In  our  actions.  4.  In  bearing  our  trials.  You  are 
one  of  God's  jewels.  But  the  polishing  on  the  wheel  must  be  if  it  is  to  shine 
brilliantly.  5.  In  our  homes.  Let  us  put  away  our  littleness  of  character,  and 
our  feebleness  in  charity,  and  all  that  makes  us  mean  and  unlovely.  We  should 
be  great  in  action  as  in  thought.  It  is  far  more  noble  to  be  great  than  to  be  a 
king.  Be  great  because  God  in  His  gentleness  intends  to  lead  you  to  paradise  to 
be  kings  and  priests.  Let  your  actions  be  worthy  of  your  high  destiny  ;  and  may 
the  gentleness  of  God  uplift  you  from  sin,  and  make  you  His  children,  whose  lives 
shall  adorn  the  Gospel  of  our  Saviour.  (  W.  Birch. )  The  Divine  gentleness : — 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  special  link  of  association  in  the  Psalmist's  mind 
between  the  dignity  to  which  he  had  himself  been  raised  and  the  condescension  of 
the  Most  High,  the  text  naturally  suggests  to  our  own  minds  the  connection  sub- 
sisting between  the  gentleness  of  God  and  the  true  greatness  of  man.  I.  Consider 
the  fact  of  the  Divine  gentleness.  Gentleness  is  more  than  kindness.  A 
man  may  be  benevolent,  and  yet  rude.  He  may  do  much  good  to  others,  and  yet 
his  well-doing  may  lack  tenderness,  and  even  his  condescension  may  be  a  phase  of 
his  pride.  But  when  we  speak  of  the  "gentleness"  of  any  man  or  woman  we 
speak  of  a  quality  into  which  enter  the  elements  of  humility,  sympathy,  simplicity, 
delicacy  of  feeling,  calmness  of  spirit,  patience,  and  long-suffering.  It  is  a  quality 
which  eludes  definition.  It  is  to  be  felt  rather  than  described.  Gentleness  is,  so 
to  speak,  an  "expression"  on  the  face  of  love,  the  power  of  which  may  be  realised 
in  a  moment,  but  the  characteristics  of  which  can  with  difficulty  be  transferred  to 
the  canvas.  Now,  when  we  speak  of  the  gentleness  of  God  we  speak  primarily  of 
a  quality  in  the  Divine  nature,  made  known  to  us,  as  it  could  only  be,  by  its 
manifestations,  by  the  revelation  of  an  actual  feeling  in  the  Divine  heart.  We 
know  how  the  gentleness  of  the  human  heart  expresses  itself, — in  smiles  which 
steal  their  way  into  the  soul  as  the  sunbeams  steal  into  forest  nooks ;  in  tones 
which  fall  upon  the  ear  as  dew  upon  the  grass,  or  as  "snowflake  upon  snowflake," 
And  so,  when  we  find  in  God's  works  and  ways  the  characteristics  of  lowliness  and 
tenderness,  we  ought  not  merely  to  say  that  God  acts  as  if  He  were  gentle,  but  we 
ought  to  trace  these  characteristics  upwards  to  an  actual  quality  in  the  Divine 
nature.  Carrying,  then,  this  principle  with  us,  let  us  look  at  some  of  the  modes 
in  which  the  Divine  gentleness  is  revealed.  And — 1.  The  very  language  which  I 
have  just  been  using  about  the  sunlight,  the  dew,  the  summer  breeze,  may  suggest 
to  us  that  God  manifests  His  gentleness  in  the  minuter  forms  and  quieter  aspects 
of  nature.  Creation  reveals  God  :  His  wisdom,  power,  glory,  but  also,  to  some 
extent.  His  character.  Not  all  things  in  nature  thus  reveal  His  character,  but 
most  do.  We  have  in  nature  that  which  tells  of  what  is  grand  and  awful  in  Him. 
The  vast  mountains,  with  their  wintry  summits  hidden  in  snow  and  mist ;  the 
ocean,  lashed  into  fury  by  the  tempest  which  strews  upon  its  waters  the  wrecks  of 
human  industry  ;  the  earthqiiake  and  volcano,  the  thunder-roar  and  lightning- 
flash  : — these  are  manifestations  of  a  majesty  which  is  almighty  to  create  or  to 
destroy.  But  when,  on  the  other  hand,  we  walk  out  into  the  fields  on  some 
fresh  spring  morning,  and  see  the  buds  opening  in  the  hedgerows  ;  or  when,  on  the 
quiet  summer  eve,  we  stroll  by  some  streamlet  and  hear  the  birds  sing  among  the 
leaves  which  are  gleaming  in  the  sunset,  then  God  seems  nearer  to  us  than  in 
thunder-roar  or  ocean  tempest.  Nearer  to  us,  because  the  nearness  is  one  which  we 
can  more  easily  bear — not  of  majestic  power,  but  of  quiet  gentleness.  How  this 
gentle  presence  steals  into  our  hearts  amid  the  flowers.    Yes ;  even  if  there  were 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xviii. 

nothing  else  to  testify  to  the  gentleness  of  God,  the  flowers  would  bear  their  silent 
witness.  Mere  power  could  manifest  itself  in  ten  thousand  other  and  grander  ways. 
What  must  be  the  nature  of  Him  who  finds  a  delight  in  thus  clothing  the  earth 
with  beauty  ?  Pluck  one  of  the  daisies  at  your  feet,  and  think — the  great  God  who 
made  the  worlds  has  made  this  little  flower  to  grow  !  Must  not  He  Himself,  then, 
be  gentle  and  lowly,  even  as  He  is  mighty?  "A  fevered  child  hushed  to  sleep  by 
its  mother  "  :  look  at  that  picture  for  a  moment.  2.  Another  mode  in  which  the 
Divine  gentleness  is  revealed — namely,  in  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  human 
aff"ection.  It  is  God  who  is  the  Inspirer  of  that  love  within  the  mother's  heart. 
He  it  is  who  has  constituted  those  relations  which  bind  us  to  one  another,  and 
which  tend  to  elicit  the  deepest  and  tenderest  aff'ection.  And  has  not  man  been 
created  in  the  Divine  image  ?  Would  he  have  been  constituted  with  these  capacities  of 
affection  unless  his  Maker  delighted  in  beholding  their  exercise  ?  How  near  God  draws 
to  us  in  the  gentle  courtesies  of  home  and  friendship  :  more  near  than  even  in  the  quiet 
scenes  of  nature.  How  often  does  some  daughter  within  a  household  become,  through 
her  loving  ways,  as  "  a  smile  of  God  "  to  her  parents  ;  and  the  cradle  of  a  sleeping 
infant,  as  another  "Bethel"  to  the  grateful  mother,  a  very  "gate  of  heaven"  to 
her  soul,  giving  her  new  glimpses  of  the  presence  and  tenderness  of  God.  Yes,  "  out 
of  the  mouth  even  of  babes  and  sucklings  God,"  &c.  And  in  friendship  too,  with 
its  tender  ministries  and  patient  loving  help — how  this  tells  of  the  Divine  sympathy, 
and  of  Him  who  "healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds." 
There  could  be  no  tenderness  at  all  in  us,  if  its  archetype  were  not  first  in  Him. 
3.  God  has  also  manifested  His  gentleness  in  the  gift  and  Person  of  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ.  Here,  indeed,  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  humility  reaches  its  climax. 
We  cannot  kneel  in  imagination  before  the  manger  of  Bethlehem  without  feeling 
how  real  is  the  lowliness  of  God.  The  incarnation  of  the  Divine  Son  was  itself  a 
humiliation.  And  this  incarnation,  remember,  was  the  answer  of  the  Creator  to 
the  sin  of  His  creatures.  Men  were  forgetting  and  forsaking  Him,  and  trampling 
His  laws  under  their  feet.  And  all  this  enmity  of  theirs  He  meets — not  with 
another  deluge,  not  with  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven  ;  but  with  the  gift  of  the 
only-begotten  Son,  to  take  upon  Him  their  nature,  that  the  Divine  Life  might  thus 
be  inwrought,  as  it  were,  into  the  very  texture  of  humanity,  and  that  the  world 
might  be  saved.  Oh,  what  patient  humility  is  here !  How  gently  did  the  great 
God  thus  steal  into  the  midst  of  the  human  family  in  the  form  of  this  Bethlehem 
Child.  And  how  all  through  His  life  on  earth  does  He  show  the  same  lowly  gentle- 
ness. I  might  speak  to  you  of  other  modes  in  which  God  manifests  His  gentleness. 
I  might  remind  you  how  tenderly  He  often  deals  with  us  in  His  providence — erect- 
ing barriers  of  cii'cumstance  which  help  to  keep  us  in  the  path  of  safety  ;  mingling 
mercy  also  even  with  His  chastisements  ;  laying  a  gentle  hand  on  the  wound  which 
must  be  probed,  and  sweetening  the  bitterness  of  the  cup  which  must  be  drunk. 
Think,  too,  of  the  gentleness  implied  in  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Comforter, 
who  wrestles  with  us  when  we  are  tempted  to  sin,  rebukes  our  transgressions  in 
deep  whispers  within  the  soul,  and  gives  us  peace  and  consolation  by  His  own 
indwelling  presence.  II.  The  effect  of  the  Divine  gentleness  upon  our- 
selves. It  ' '  makes  us  great. "  It  enlarges  our  being :  helps  us  to  the  attainment 
of  noble  spiritual  character.  And  He  does  this — 1.  By  raising  our  estimate  of  our 
own  nature.  So  long  as  we  think  only  of  the  greatness  of  God  and  of  His  holiness, 
our  own  weakness  and  sin  make  us  feel  almost  as  if  our  existence  were  a  worthless 
thing.  But  when  God  draws  near  to  us  in  His  gentleness,  and  calls  us  His 
"children,"  then  we  begin  to  be  conscious  of  the  dignity  of  our  being.  2.  The 
gentleness  of  God  "makes  us  great"  by  inspiring  us  with  faith  in  Himself. 
Humility,  not  pride,  is  the  godlike  attribute ;  and  faith  in  God  is  the  root  of  all 
the  highest  creature  greatness.  For  it  is  the  key  to  self-conquest ;  and  "he  who 
ruleth  his  own  spirit  is,"  &c.  What  has  not  faith  done  in  and  by  those  who  have 
been  inspired  with  its  might?  (Heb.  xi.)  Now,  as  faith  is  the  secret  of  all  this 
higher  spiritual  greatness,  so  the  gentleness  of  God  is  the  secret  of  this  faith.  We 
could  not  look  up  to  God  with  a  childlike  confidence  if  He  were  merely  in  our 
thoughts  "  the  Thunderer  of  Olympus."  But,  being  lowly  and  gracious  in  His  own 
nature.  He  so  manifests  His  fatherly  gentleness  as  to  win  our  trust.  And  thus  the 
Divine  gentleness  "makes  us  great,"  by  awakening  within  us  that  faith  which  is 
the  root  of  greatness.  3.  The  gentleness  of  God  "  makes  us  great,"  by  inducing  the 
development  of  all  our  highest  capacities.  It  has  been  remarked  that  civilisation 
has  proceeded  with  more  rapid  strides  and  has  reached  a  higher  stage  on  the  broader 
plains  of  earth,  amid  the  tamer  and  quieter  aspects  of  nature,  than  in  the  neighbour- 


PSALM  XVIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  827 

hood  of  the  loftiest  mountains  and  the  grander  features  of  our  world.  See  the 
contrast  between  the  populations  of  India  or  South  America  and  those  that  cover 
the  plains  of  Europe.  The  theory  is  that,  in  presence  of  the  more  sublime  pheno- 
mena of  nature,  the  spirit  of  man  is  awed  and  crushed,  so  that  his  development  is 
cramped  and  fettered ;  whereas,  on  the  broader  plains  of  the  world,  his  spirit 
becomes  freer,  and  he  learns  to  master  the  forces  of  nature,  instead  of  cringing 
before  her  like  a  slave.  But,  however  this  may  be,  we  know  from  our  own 
experience  that  men  who  are  greater,  wiser,  nobler  than  ourselves,  help  us  in  pro- 
portion as  they  stoop  to  us  and  identify  themselves  with  us.  To  be  met  with 
gentleness  is  to  be  mightily  helped,  if  it  be  only  the  gentleness  of  a  strength  which 
we  respect.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  Divine  gentleness  induces  the  development  of 
our  noblest  powers.  So  long  as  we  think  only  of  the  majesty  of  God  there  is  danger 
lest  terror  paralyse  our  souls.  But  it  is  far  otherwise  when  we  realise  the  Divine 
lowliness — when  we  feel  that  God  is  drawing  near  to  us  in  tender  sympathy,  and 
encouraging  us,  as  "  dear  children,"  to  do  our  best  for  Him.  Then  our  reverence  for 
His  greatness  only  makes  our  gratitude  for  His  condescension  the  more  intense  ;  and 
this  gratitude  is  a  stimulus  to  all  holy  energy.  Our  meditation  suggests  two  prac- 
tical lessons — (1)  Learn  how  you  may  yourselves  become  greater.  Your  whole  being 
will  shrivel  if  you  worship  a  colossal  fate  or  an  almighty  spectre.  The  devotees 
of  mere  power  grow  weak.  Let  awe  and  trust  blend  themselves  in  your  souls. 
(2)  Learn  how  you  may  help  others  to  become  greater.  Treat  them  with  gentleness, 
not  with  a  weak  softness — that  will  only  enervate.  Cultivate  robustness  of  character. 
But  see  to  it  that  you  cultivate  gentleness  also.  Has  some  poor  ship  dashed  itself  on 
the  rocky  coast,  and  would  you  save  the  crew  with  that  strong  thick  rope  of  yours  ? 
Then  attach  to  it  the  slender  cord,  and  throw  them  that ;  that  may  bring  them  the 
strong  rope,  which  will  prove  the  means  of  their  deliverance.  Would  you  save  men 
from  a  spiritual  shipwreck  ?  Would  you  strengthen  souls  in  the  hour  of  temptation  ? 
Then  the  stronger  your  own  character  is,  the  better;  but  let  your  strength  avail  itself 
of  gentleness,  and  it  will  become  the  mightier  to  protect  and  redeem.  Would  you 
make  men  wiser  ?  Then  the  wiser  you  yourselves  are,  the  better  ;  but  your  wisdom 
must  in  gentleness  stoop  to  their  ignorance,  if  you  would  educate  and  instruct  them. 
Would  you  make  men  purer  ?  Then  the  purer  your  own  heart  is,  the  better  ;  but 
your  purity  must  in  gentleness  bear  pityingly  and  patiently  with  them,  if  you  would 
arouse  them  to  a  truer  self-respect,  and  lead  them  into  a  higher  and  holier  life.  It 
is  the  gentleness  of  greatness  that  makes  men  great.  {T.  Campbell  Finlayson.) 
The  power  of  God's  gentleness : — No  one  can  glance,  even  in  the  most  hasty  manner, 
over  this  Divine  song  without  observing  the  recognition  of  God's  hand  in  all  things 
by  which  it  is  pervaded.  I.  And  at  the  very  outset  we  find  rising  out  of  these 
words  the  question,  What  is  that  greatness  which  in  the  Christian  is 
PEODTJCED  BY  God's  GENTLENESS  ?     Scarcely  two  individuals  have  the  same  idea  of 

freatness.  All,  indeed,  will  agree  that  it  denotes  pre-eminence,  but  each  will  have 
is  own  preference  as  to  the  department  in  which  that  is  to  be  manifested.  Some 
associate  it  with  the  deeds  of  the  warrior  on  the  battlefield,  others  with  the 
triumphs  of  the  orator,  or  the  achievements  of  the  artist,  the  poet,  the  philosopher, 
the  man  of  science  ;  others,  with  the  acquisition  of  rank  or  wealth  or  power.  But 
the  greatness  which  God's  gentleness  produces  may  co-exist  with  many  of  these,  but 
is  independent  of  them  all.  For  man  is  great  in  the  proportion  that  he  resembles 
the  holy  God  who  made  him.  Man's  greatness,  therefore,  is  greatness  in  holiness. 
It  is  a  moral  thing,  for  the  truest  manliness  and  the  highest  God-likeness  are 
convertible  terms.  Behold  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Is  there  any  one  who  imagines 
that  His  greatness  was  lessened  by  the  fact  that  He  laboured  at  the  carpenter's 
bench  and  was  one  of  the  poorest  of  the  people  ?  Not  among  warriors,  poets, 
artists,  statesmen,  or  the  like  do  we  name  Him  ;  yet  even  in  the  estimation  of  those 
who  deny  His  deity.  He  is  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  men.  Why  ?  Because  of  His 
pre-eminence  in  holiness.  Now,  true  greatness  in  man  is  precisely  what  it  was  in 
Him  who,  because  He  was  the  God-man,  was  the  archetypal  man.  It  is  moral 
excellence,  the  greatness  of  character,  pre-eminence  in  holiness,  and  is  such  that  no 
external  meanness  can  obscure  its  radiance,  and  no  blaze  of  earthly  glory  can 
outshine  its  brightness.  Thus,  whatever  our  outward  sphere  may  be,  to  be  truly 
great  we  must  have  an  inward  character  of  holiness  manifesting  itself  in  all  our 
actions  ;  and  he  will  be  the  greatest  who,  wherever  he  may  be,  is  likest  Christ. 
Some  years  ago  a  poor  Spanish  sailor  was  brought  into  a  Liverpool  hospital  to  die, 
and,  after  he  bad  breathed  his  last,  there  was  found  upon  his  breast  tattooed,  after 
the  manner  of  his  class,  a  representation  of  Christ  upon  the  Gross.    Ton  call  that 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  '[psalm  xvm. 

superstition,  and  perhaps  you  are  right ;  yet  there  was  beauty  in  it  too,  for  if  we 
could  have  in  our  hearts  what  that  poor  seaman  had  painfully,  and  with  the  needle 
point,  punctured  over  his,  we  should  be  great  indeed.  Is  not  this,  in  truth,  the 
open  secret  of  Paul's  pre-eminence?  for  he  thus  describes  himself:  "Always 
bearing  about  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus 
may  be  manifest  in  our  body."  The  manifestation  of  the  life  of  Jesus:  that  is 
greatness,  and  to  get  that  we  must  bear  about  in  the  body  "  the  dying  of  the 
Lord."  IL  But  HOW  DOES  God's  gentleness  make  us  great  ?  1.  It  is  because 
the  human  heart  is  always  more  deeply  affected  by  tenderness  than  sternness.  See 
this  in  the  reformation  of  criminals.  If  you  attempt  to  drag  a  man  by  force  his 
nature  is  to  resist  you  ;  but  if  you  attempt  to  attract  him  by  love,  it  is  equally  in 
his  nature  to  follow  you.  And  this  is  the  principle  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  God 
might  have  left  us  justly  to  our  sins  ;  but  He  would  make  us  great,  and  therefore 
Christ  died.  It  is  this  which  turns  the  heart  to  God  as  Sinai  could  never  do.  But 
the  manifestation  of  this  love  attracts  :  in  other  words.  His  gentleness  produces  in 
me  that  love  to  Him  which  is  the  source  and  inspiration  of  holiness.  But,  passing 
from  the  general  to  the  particular,  you  may  see  the  words  of  the  text  verified  in  the 
manner  in  which  God  receives  individuals  into  His  love,  and  so  begins  in  them  the 
greatness  of  holiness.  "The  bruised  reed  He  does  not  break  ;  the  smoking  flax  He 
does  not  quench"  ;  and  there  is  no  one  here  whom  He  will  not  willingly  and 
lovingly  receive.  Read  those  gentle  and  beneficent  words  which  fell  so  frequently 
from  His  lips.  Peruse  such  parables  as  that  of  the  lost  sheep,  or  that  of  the 
prodigal  son.  Ah  !  who  can  tell  how  many  have  been  encouraged  to  go  to  Him  by 
such  declarations  and  invitations  as  these  ?  And  now,  as  they  revert  to  the  first 
faint  stirrings  of  the  new  life  in  them  which  these  words  evoked,  they  can  say  with 
truth,  " Thy  gentleness  hath  made  us  great."  2.  See  this  also  in  the  manner  in 
which  God  in  Christ  Jesus  trains  His  people  after  they  have  come  to  Him.  He  does 
not  leave  them  to  themselves.  He  teaches  them  yet  more  and  more  of  His  grace  ; 
yet,  in  truest  tenderness,  He  teaches  them  as  they  are  able  to  bear  it.  3.  And  in 
His  dealings  with  His  people  now.  Terrible  are,  at  times,  their  trials,  but  "He 
stayeth  His  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  His  east  wind,"  and  if  the  thorn  of  trial  be 
not  extracted,  there  comes  the  precious  assurance,  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ; 
My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  The  subject  has  a  twofold  application. 
It  presents  Jehovah  to  the  sinner  in  a  very  affectionate  attitude.  Think  of  it,  my 
friend.  God  is  tender  toward  you.  How  often  you  have  provoked  Him  with  your 
iniquities,  your  ingratitude,  your  procrastination  !  Yet  He  has  not  cut  you  down. 
You  are  living  evidences  of  His  gentleness.  Finally,  this  subject  shows  the 
Christian  how  he  should  seek  to  bring  others  to  the  knowledge  of  Jesus.  The 
gentleness  of  God  should  be  repeated  and  reproduced  in  us,  and  we  should  deal 
with  others  with  the  same  tenderness  and  affection  as  God  hath  dealt  with  us. 
Parents,  seek  the  greatness  of  your  children,  that  is  their  godliness,  not  by 
rigorous,  unbending  sternness,  but  in  tender  forbearance.  You  have  heard  of  the 
mother  who,  as  she  was  sitting  on  the  brow  of  a  hill,  suffered  her  child  unnoticed  to 
wander  from  her  side,  until  he  stood  upon  the  very  edge  of  the  beetling  cliff.  She 
was  appalled  when  she  discovered  where  he  was,  but  her  maternal  instinct  would 
not  let  her  shriek.  All  she  did  was  to  open  her  arms  and  beckon  him  to  her 
embrace,  and  the  little  fellow,  unconscious  of  the  danger  iu  which  he  stood,  ran  to 
be  folded  to  her  bosom.  So  let  it  be  with  you.  "When  you  see  your  young  people 
standing  on  some  precipice  of  temptation,  do  not  scold  or  blame  or  cry  out  about 
it ;  that  will  only  push  them  over.  Rather  open  to  them  the  arms  of  your 
affection.  Make  home  to  them  more  attractive  than  aught  else.  Let  your  father- 
hood and  motherhood  become  more  to  them  than  ever,  and  by  your  very  gentleness 
you  will  make  them  great.  Sabbath-school  teacher,  this  text  speaks  to  you,  and 
bids  you,  in  your  eai'nest  efforts  for  your  scholars'  welfare,  show  to  them  the  same 
gentleness  that  Jesus  manifested  when  He  took  the  children  in  His  arms  and 
blessed  them.  Do  not  lose  your  temper  with  them,  but  be  gentle  with  them,  even 
as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you.     (  W.  N.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  36.  Tliou  hast  enlarged  my  steps  under  me,  that  my  feet  did  not  slip. — 

The  double  blessing  of  enlargement  and  safety.— A.  smooth  pathway  leading  to 
spacious  possessions  and  camping-grounds  had  been  opened  for  him.  Instead  of 
threading  the  narrow  mountain  path,  and  hiding  in  the  cracks  and  corners  of 
caverns,  he  was  able  to  traverse  the  plains  and  dwell  under  his  own  vine  and  fig 
tree.     It  is  no  small  mercy  to  be  brought  into  full  Christian  liberty  and  enlarge- 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  329 

ment,  but  it  is  a  greater  favour  still  to  be  enabled  to  walk  worthily  in  such  liberty, 
not  being  permitted  to  slip  with  our  feet.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  46.  The  Lord  liveth ;  and  blessed  be  my  Eock ;  and  let  the  God  of  my  sal- 
vation be  exalted. — The  Rock  of  salvation : — True  religion  has  nothing  in  itclo;idy, 
melancholy,  depressing.  It  is  in  itself  full  of  fire,  love,  light,  warmth.  Our  sad- 
ness arises  from  our  sin  and  sorrow,  but  in  God  there  is  that  to  iill  us  with  joy. 
Now  here  we  have — I.  A  LIVING  Lord.  It  is  a  living  Christ  that  sheds  a  glory 
around  Calvary,  and  around  the  tomb  in  which  His  body  was  laid.  What  would 
be  our  grief  if  He  were  not  living?  II.  A  solid  kock.  Christ  will  build  His 
Church  thereon.  And  it  is  a  rock  for  refuge.  III.  Its  exaltation.  He  is  exalted 
by  the  Father  ;  and  in  the  Bible  ;  and  in  the  contrite  believing  heart ;  and  in  the 
life  and  purpose  of  all  His  people.     Let  us  build  on  this  Eock,     {George  Merrell.) 

Ver.  49.  Therefore  will  I  give  thanks  unto  Thee  among  the  heathen. — David'' s 
deliverance  and  thanksgiving : — I.  Of  David  delivered.  The  wonder  is,  how  so 
good  a  man,  so  gracious  a  prince,  should  have  enemies  and  rebels  ;  should  fall  into 
such  dangers  and  afflictions  ;  should  need  so  many  deliverances.  But  even  in  the 
best  men  there  is  something  amiss.  All  saints  are  sinners,  and  sin  will  be  punished 
in  God's  children  soonest  of  all.  It  is  impossible  for  governors  to  escape  the  smart 
of  popular  murmurings,  tumults,  and  rebellions  ;  for  Moses  the  meekest,  David  the 
best,  and  Solomon  the  wisest  of  kings  did  not.  The  best  of  kings  may  be  under 
the  Cross,  and  need  deliverances.  II.  Of  God  his  Deliverer.  That  all  deliver- 
ance comes  from  the  Lord  needs  no  proof,  from  Scripture  or  reason.  Philosophers, 
poets,  historians  all  acknowledge  this  truth.  The  heathen  everywhei-e  ascribe  all 
good  successes  to  their  gods.  Among  us  there  are  some  who  will  not  allow  God  to 
govern  in  His  own  house,  but  deny  Him  any  care  of  things  below.  As  He  only 
brings  us  into  affliction,  so  He  only  can  remove  the  afflictions.  If  we  believe  this 
most  certain  truth,  that  all  deliverance  is  from  the  Lord,  we  must  show  the  fruits 
of  that  faith  when  in  distress.  III.  Of  David's  thankfulness  for  his  deliver- 
ance. Here  observe — 1.  The  person  performing  it.  That  is,  David.  "I  will  do 
it,"  saith  he.  2.  The  duty  itself.  That  is,  thanksgiving.  "I  will  give  thanks." 
3.  The  manner  how  he  will  do  it,  and  that  is — (1)  publicly,  (2)  cheerfully.  Gratitude 
is  not  the  business  of  a  year,  but  of  a  whole  life.     {Gilbert  Sheldmi,  D.D.) 

Ver.  50.  Great  deliverance  giveth  He  to  the  King. — Great  deliverances: — This 
is  Christ's  resurrection  Psalm.  It  is  a  Psalm  of  delivei'ance  or  salvation — the  two 
words  are  the  same.  This  deliverance  is  one  of  love,  power,  and  righteousness.  The 
whole  history  of  the  Bible  from  beginning  to  end  pertains  to  what  God  calls  deliver- 
ance. First  of  all,  we  have  King  David's  history,  the  history  of  deliverance. 
Secondly,  we  have  in  Israel's  history  a  history  of  deliverance.  Thirdly,  in  Messiah's 
history  we  have  a  history  of  deliverance.  Fourthly,  in  the  Church's  history  we 
have  a  history  of  deliverance.  And  lastly,  in  the  history  of  each  individual  man 
we  have  a  history  of  deliverance.     It  is  deliverance  from  first  to  last.    {A.  Bonar.) 


PSALM  XIX. 

Ver.  1.  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God. — The  glory  of  God: — Nature  exists 
not  for  a  merely  natural,  but  for  a  moral  end  ;  not  for  what  it  is,  but  for  what  it 
says  or  declares.  I.  What  nature  tells  us  to  think  of  God.  1.  Nature 
reveals  God.  The  race  as  a  whole  have  heard  the  declaration  of  His  eternal  power 
and  Godhead.  In  proportion  as  they  have  heard,  adoring,  they  have  risen  in  the 
scale  of  manhood.  2.  Nature  declares  the  knowledge  and  power  of  God.  The  marks 
of  mathematical  and  geometric  law  in  nature  are  consi^icuous.  The  more  we  explore 
the  different  departments  of  nature,  the  more  we  find  it  pervaded  by  strict  arith- 
metical and  dynamic  laws.  We  meet  "thought"  everywhere.  The  race  of  man, 
as  a  whole,  has  heard,  and  to  some  extent  understood,  the  testimony  of  nature  to 
infinite  thought  and  power.  3.  Nature  declares  that  God  is  just  and  good.  This 
has  been  called  in  question..  Nature  says  that  every  natural  law,  if  obej'ed,  tends 
to  happiness.     Nature's  laws  are  benevolent.     Men  have  not  fully  appreciated  this, 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psaim  xix. 

for  one  reason,  because  they  have  so  commonly  broken  those  laws  and  have  suffered. 
But  does  nature  in  any  wise  speak  of  the  Divine  mercy  ?  This  question  has  often 
been  wrongly  answered.  Listen  attentively,  and  you  will  hear  nature  say  that 
God  is  merciful.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  very  many,  if  not  all,  physical  penalties 
can  be  mitigated,  if  not  relieved,  by  some  counter  law,  some  curious  side-process  or 
arrangement.  God  has  so  made  nature  as  practically  to  encourage  self-sacrifice  for 
each  other.  Whenever  men  take  pains  for  each  other,  to  help  each  other  over  their 
faults  and  their  consequences,  there  is  an  illustration,  however  faint,  of  the  Divine 
principle  of  mercy.  Mercy  is  the  policy  of  the  Divine  government ;  it  is  the  character 
of  God  Himself.  II.  What  God  thinks  of  natuke.  1.  God  looks  upon  nature 
as  a  basis  of  language.  Let  the  heavenly  orbs  be  for  signs.  Signs  are  vehicles  of 
ideas.  Let  them  say  something ;  let  them  be  words.  The  universe  is  God's  tele- 
phone, God's  grand  signal  service  system  by  which  He  can  flash  messages  from  the 
heights  above  to  the  deepest  valleys  below.  The  material  system  is  God's  great 
instrument  of  conversation.  2.  God  tells  us  what  to  think  of  this  eloquent  material 
system.  It  is  God's  most  glorious  schoolroom  by  which  to  teach  us  reality, — above 
all,  to  teach  us  self-government,  and  painstaking  for  one  another.  Why  are  we  in 
such  a  world  ?  Because  we  needed  to  be.  We  need  what  we  get  here.  We  need 
that  knowledge  of  ourselves  which  nature  can  give.  We  need  to  be  where  we  are. 
We  need  just  the  restraints  and  the  liberties,  the  trials  and  the  triumphs,  the  joys 
and  the  sorrows,  the  smiles  and  the  tears,  the  bliss  and  the  anguish  of  this  strange 
life.  And  in  all,  and  through  all,  we  need  to  know  Him  who  placed  us  here,  and  is 
revealing  Himself  to  us  in  a  thousand  ways.  {Charles  Beecher.)  The  Biblical 
conception  of  nature : — The  whole  of  revelation  reposes  on  this  broad  platform  :  how 
God  and  nature  stand  to  one  another.  Now,  there  are  two  opposite  extremes  into 
which  our  conceptions  on  this  point  may  fall.  We  may  immerse  God  in  nature  ; 
or  we  may  isolate  nature  from  God.  1.  We  immerse  God  in  nature  if  we  treat 
nature  as  itself  possessed  of  properties  which  are  strictly  personal ;  as  when,  for 
example,  we  accustom  ourselves  to  think  of  it  as  originating  its  own  processes,  as 
intending  its  own  results,  or  as  conscious  of  its  own  plan.  Men  talk  of  nature  as 
though  it  were  aiming  at  certain  ends,  striving  to  accomplish  them,  adapting  itself 
to  new  conditions,  overcoming  fresh  obstacles,  and  so  forth.  The  corrective  lies  in 
the  scriptural  idea  of  creation  as  an  act  of  will  of  One  who  is  outside  of  material 
being.  Scripture  is  strictly  philosophical  when  it  traces  all  phenomena,  all  change, 
ultimately  to  a  will.  But  will  is  an  attribute  of  personality  ;  and  the  Pei"son  whose 
will  determines  that  nature  should  be  what  it  is  must  be  a  Person  not  Himself 
included  in  the  nature  which  He  wills  shall  be.  He  is  God.  Again— 2.  We  may 
unduly  isolate  nature  as  God's  workmanship  from  God  the  worker.  We  do  this,  e.g., 
when  we  conceive  of  the  universe  as  teaching  us  nothing  of  God,  being  only  a  whirl  of 
material  change  without  spiritual  meaning  ;  or  when  we  represent  it  as  a  machine 
which,  being  somehow  endued  with  a  given  stock  of  force,  must  go  on  so  long  as 
the  force  lasts,  like  a  watch  that  has  been  once  wound  up.  To  separate  the  work 
from  the  worker  after  this  sheer  and  mechanical  fashion  may  do  some  harm  to 
science,  and  it  leaves  hardly  any  foothold  for  religion.  Again,  the  spiritual  con- 
ception of  creation  will  furnish  the  corrective.  According  to  it,  God  is  personally 
separate  from  and  above  nature,  yet  for  all  that  He  has  put  into  His  handiwork  His 
own  thoughts.  We  may  fairly  say  that  both  sides  of  the  idea  lie  in  embryo  in  the 
solitary  phrase,  "  By  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made."  For  the  word 
of  any  person  serves  two  functions  :  it  is  the  organ  of  command,  conveying  an  act 
of  will ;  it  is  also  the  organ  of  expression,  revealing  the  speaker's  nature.  Stupendous 
conception  of  primary  force  !  The  force  of  personal  will,  resident  in  the  Super- 
natural Being,  in  the  one  sole  unmade,  unborn  Person,  who  is  that  He  is  ;  is,  and 
was,  and  is  to  come,  the  Almighty.  The  sole  cause  ;  sole  origin  of  being ;  sole 
efficient  factor  in  the  beginning  ;  is  this  act  of  volition  or  self-determination  of  an 
Infinite  Personal  Will.  "He  spake,  and  it  was  done  ;  He  commanded,  and  it  stood 
fast."  It  accords  with  experience  ;  it  satisfies  philosophy;  not  less  does  it  meet 
the  religious  necessities  of  the  spirit ;  for  if  I  am  to  worship  at  all,  where  shall  I 
find  a  nobler  object  of  worship  than  the  Person  who  will  give  being  to  all  beings 
but  Himself?  On  the  other  hand,  the  word  of  a  speaker  while  it  utters  his  will 
must  no  less  reflect,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  his  inner  self.  It  seems  to  me 
that  in  this  Biblical  conception  of  nature  as  the  revelation  of  its  Maker  we  find  the 
common  root  whence  have  grown  two  very  dissimilar  growths  of  the  ancient  and  of 
the  modern  world.  The  great  fact  of  the  whole  ancient  world  was  this,  that  ita 
moltiform  religions  started  from  a  nature  basis.     The  aun  and  stars,  the  repro- 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  331 

ductive  forces  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  the  decay  and  revival  of  the  year, 
the  wondrous  cycle,  in  short,  of  cosmic  change  through  which  nature  accom- 
plishes herself,  was  the  common  fact  which  very  early  riveted  the  attention 
of  primitive  man,  till  out  of  it  there  grew  up  in  many  lands,  under  many 
shapes,  a  system  of  religious  observance  everywhere  the  same  in  principle.  Being 
whose  thoughts  these  objects  revealed,  men  began  to  adore  the  symbol,  and  to 
forget  the  Invisible  Person  behind  it.  Easy  and  rapid  was  the  downward  plane 
to  idolatry  and  polytheism  and  gross  fetish-worship.  Yet  what  is  worth  noting  is, 
that  such  nature  religions  would  have  been  impossible  had  not  nature  really  spoken 
to  unsophisticated  men  a  Divine  message,  had  it  not  been  charged  to  their  souls 
from  the  iirst  with  Divine  ideas.  We  are  far  enough  removed  now  from  that  early 
stage  of  human  experience.  The  world  is  grown  aged,  and  the  work  of  its  age  is 
not  to  worship  nature,  but  to  master  it.  Yet  this  modern  science  which  leads  to 
the  utilisation  of  phyhical  forces  for  human  needs  is  not  less  an  outgrowth  from  the 
same  root.  For  all  our  power  over  nature  reposes  immediately  on  our  correct  read- 
ing of  natural  laws.  Observation  of  naked  facts  will  never  put  into  man's  hand  the 
sceptre  of  the  physical  world.  Nakt-d  facts  must  lead  on  to  the  discovery  of  law  ; 
and  law  is  the  Divine  idea  governing  the  facts  ;  and  when  man  has  discovered  and 
mastered  that  Divine  idea,  then  he  becomes  in  his  degree  a  divinity  on  earth,  a  lord 
over  matter,  a  maker  and  disposer  in  his  turn.  What  does  this  mean  but  that  we 
come  to  read  behind  phenomena  the  thought  and  will  of  One  whom,  because  He  is 
a  personal  Spirit  as  we  are,  we  can  comprehend  ?  We  reach  the  secret  principles  on 
which  He  makes,  not  made  merely  but  is  ever  making,  the  world  ;  and  when  we 
thus  know  His  mind,  or  on  what  lines  His  will  moves,  we  enter  upon  a  share  of  His 
dominion  ;  we  fall  in  with  His  working  plan  ;  we,  too,  govern  by  imitating  Him. 
I  have  cited  both  ancient  nature  worship  and  modern  nature  study  as  alike  depen- 
dent for  their  possibility  upon  the  same  truth  of  Scripture ;  this,  namely,  that 
nature,  being  made  by  God's  Word,  speaks  to  us  His  thoughts.  But  if  I  desired 
conclusive  evidence  how  insufficient  is  this  revelation  of  itself  to  guide  men  to 
friendly  communion  with  God,  where  could  I  find  any  more  conclusive  than  is  fur- 
nished by  the  history  both  of  ancient  nature  religions  and  of  modern  science  !  Of 
the  one  the  tendency  was  more  and  more  to  immerse  God  in  nature,  till  He  was 
wholly  lost  in  His  own  handiwork.  Of  the  latter — modern  science— the  tendency 
very  decidedly  is  to  isolate  nature  from  God,  as  a  wholly  separate  existence  whose 
relationship  to  its  Author  (if  any)  is  at  least  unknown.  This  moral  revelation, 
which  began  with  Abraham  and  culminated  in  Jesus  Christ,  admits  of  being  both 
compared  and  contrasted  with  the  older  nature  revelation.  1.  The  later  revelation 
starts  from  and  builds  upon  the  earlier  one.  It  is  not  so  often  recollected  as  it 
should  be,  but  once  seen  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  underneath  every  other  rela- 
tionship which  the  God  of  the  Bible  claims  to  sustain  to  us  as  Lawgiver,  Father, 
Redeemer,  Promiser,  Saviour  there  lies  this  broad,  original  relationship  of  all — 
that  He  is  our  Creator.  That  tie  to  Him,  which  we  share  wiih  even  the  dumb 
cattle  and  the  dead  earth,  bears  up  and  justifies  all  the  rest.  Man  is  a  portion  of 
the  created  universe,  and  its  Maker  must  be  his  Lord  and  King.  2.  It  must  be 
clear  that  such  a  revelation  as  we  actually  possess  in  the  Bible  is  only  possible  if 
God  be  (as  the  Bible  teaches)  at  once  above  nature,  and  yet  present,  self-revealed  in 
nature.  First  of  all,  we  are  ourselves  part  of  the  world,  and  if  we  are  to  receive 
communications  that  transcend  what  the  world  itself  can  tell  us,  then  He  who  gives 
them  must  stand  outside  of  and  above  the  world.  The  supernatural  is  impossible 
if  God  be  inseparable  from  nature  or  be  its  slave.  On  the  other  hand,  the  actual 
revelation  recorded  in  the  Bible  employed  nature  as  its  organ.  In  the  revelation 
of  new  truth  God  is  constantly  found  availing  Himself  of  the  old  creation. 
Dreams,  and  visions,  and  voices  to  the  ear,  the  thunder-cloud  on  Sinai,  the  cleft 
sea,  dearth  and  the  plague,  the  vicissitudes  of  war,  conquest,  and  revolt  were  all 
turned  into  vehicles  for  teaching  saving  lessons  to  mankind.  The  whole  of  Bible 
teaching,  too,  attaches  itself  to  the  parables  of  nature.  Above  all,  His  final  revela- 
tion of  Himself  is  in  the  life  of  a  Man,  a  true  natural  life  resting  on  the  physical 
basis  of  a  true  body,  ' '  born  of  a  woman  "  ;  so  that  the  highest  of  all  revelations  is 
in  appearance  the  most  human,  the  least  supernatural.  3.  The  voice  of  the  new 
revelation  agrees  with  the  voice  of  the  old.  To  develop  the  congruousness  of  the 
Divine  image  in  nature  with  the  Divine  image  in  Scripture  would  take  too  long  ; 
I  only  suggest  it  to  you.  The  absolute  unity  of  plan  which  strict  research  is 
daily  proving  more  and  more — a  unity  now  known  to  reach  as  far  as  the  planets  in 
their  spheres — attests  that  the  Creator  is  one.    And  Scripture  proceeds  on  the  unity 


332  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

of  God.  (6)  Throughout  all  nature  we  find  a  will  at  work  whose  method  is  to  bind 
itself  by  orderly  method  and  fixed  law.  This  reveals  a  mind  in  God  intolerant  of 
what  is  arbitrary,  eccentric,  or  illegal.  All  is  variety,  yet  all  is  system.  Now,  the 
revelation  of  the  Divine  will  in  Scripture  is  likewise  the  revelation  of  a  law,  and  its 
chief  end  is  the  reduction  of  moral  anarchy  to  moral  order,  (c)  Again,  we  are 
daily  learning  how  patiently,  and  through  what  long,  slow,  even  laborious  pro- 
cesses God  has  been  pleased  to  build  up  His  physical  universe,  as  though  a  thousand 
years  were  to  Him  of  no  more  account  than  a  single  day,  so  long  as  the  results  are 
wrought  by  growth  and  evolution,  rather  than  by  sudden  shocks  or  interventions. 
This  is  God's  way  in  nature,  and  it  has  been  His  way  in  grace,  {d)  Ouce  more,  the 
God  of  nature  avenges  the  transgression  of  every  physical  law  by  a  sentient  creature. 
Scripture  discovers  precisely  the  same  features  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  rule  of  God. 
So  far  the  two  revelations  walk  abreast.  Thanks  be  to  God,  the  Gospel  continues 
its  parable  where  the  voice  of  nature  falters  and  grows  mute.  Of  law,  of  trans- 
gression, of  penalty  and  reward,  of  life  and  death,  nature  has  no  less  to  say  than 
the  Bible  has.  But  of  another  law  higher  than  that  of  penalty,  of  grace  which  tran- 
scends judgment,  of  the  spiritual  law  of  self-sacrifice,  of  redemption  of  life  by  life,  and 
giving  up  of  the  just  for  the  unjust,  and  forgiveness  of  sin  and  regeneration  of  the 
lapsed,  — the  physical  universe  is  wholly,  or  all  but  wholly,  silent,  (j.  0.  Dykes,  D.  D. ) 
God's  works  and  JFord : — Providence  is  the  best  schoolmaster.  This  Psalm  leads 
us,  and  is  designed  to  lead  us,  to  a  contemplation  of  nature.  Not  the  faintest 
apprehension  appears,  lest  contradictions  may  be  discovered  between  the  world-book 
and  the  word-book.  The  sympathy  with  nature  is  complete,  and  not  the  less  so 
because  the  poet  has  been  enabled  to  penetrate  the  closest  of  her  secrets.  "The 
wisest  of  men  are  those  who  with  pious  eagerness  trace  the  goings-forth  of  Jehovah 
as  well  in  creation  as  in  grace."  Just  that  is  the  wisdom  here.  The  study  is  a 
reverent  study.  God  is  seen  everywhere.  The  lines  are  saturated  with  theology. 
There  are,  however,  other  voices  of  praise.  While,  doubtless,  the  heavens  are  the 
work  of  God's  fingers  and  declare  His  glory,  His  Word  is  yet  "more  to  be  desired." 
Fascinated  as  David  has  been  with  the  contemplation  of  the  Creator's  works,  he 
does  not  make  the  blunder  of  despising  the  written  revelation.  Some  of  the  grounds 
for  a  conclusion  which  so  exalts  the  Word  above  the  works.  1.  A  comparison  of  the 
contents  of  the  two  revelations.  From  nature  we  may  learn  the  existence  of  an 
infinite  personal  God,  But  is  this  mighty  Author  of  the  universe  a  friend?  There 
throbs  the  tremendous  interrogation  concerning  which  the  heavens  make  to  the 
eager  shepherd  boy  no  answer.  With  regard  to  the  problems  which  most  deeply 
afl'ect  our  welfare,  nature  only  baffles  us.  The  Gospel  far  surpasses  all  that  nature 
can  be  made  to  teach,  2,  Not  only  in  its  contents,  but  in  the  proclamation  of 
them,  is  the  Word  magnified.  Consider  the  instrumentalities  selected  for  the 
utterance  of  the  Gospel.  Angels,  the  Son  of  God.  3.  Consider  by  what  enforce- 
ment of  his  Word  God  is  magnified.  In  nature  there  is  no  provision  for  effectively 
reaching  the  couscience  and  moving  the  will.  To  apply  to  us  the  redemption 
purchased  by  Christ,  the  Spirit  has  come.  4.  Observe  the  stupendous  effects  pro- 
duced by  God's  Word.  "Enlightening  the  eyes,"  "rejoicing  the  heart,"  "making 
wise  the  simple,"  "converting  the  soul,"  here  are  efleci,-  chiefly  wrought  by  God's 
Word,      {Ilanford  A.   Edson,   D.D.)  The    testimony  of  the    works   and  the 

Word: — Nature  is  the  volume  in  which  the  Godhead  of  the  Creator  is  plainly 
discoverable.  Scripture  is  the  volume  in  which  all  may  read  the  Divine  will 
concerning  men.  I.  NATtrRE's  testimony  to  the  existence  of  God.  Nature  is 
here  pictured  as  compi'ising  the  "heavens"  and  the  "firmament,"  together  with 
alternating  days  and  nights — these  sublime  works  witnessing  for  God.  David 
attempts  to  teach  no  lesson  in  astronomy.  He  imagines  an  observant  and  thought- 
ful man  opening  his  eyes  upward,  and  affirms  that  what  this  man  beholds  proves 
the  presence  and  power  of  God.  These  heavens  are  for  ever  telling  or  revealing  the 
presence,  power,  majesty,  supremacy  of  the  Infinite.  What  he  means  to  say  is, 
that  the  realm  of  nature,  beautiful  in  outline,  vast  in  proportions,  t;r.i  ■'■  in  order 
and  methods  of  movement,  illustrates  glorious  qualities  of  being  and  oi  character, 
and  that  in  this  creation  the  good  of  man  and  of  all  sentient  beings  has  been  so 
manifestly  sought  and  secured  that  God  therein  is  plainly  revealed  as  ever  present 
in  power  and  in  proclamation  of  Himself.  Here,  then,  is  not  astronomy,  but 
revelation.  A  scene  in  which  he  affirms  that  the  humblest  observer  may  be  con- 
vinced of  God's  existence  and  glory.  These  things  could  not  have  originated  in 
what  has  been  called  a  "casual  hit  of  atoms,"  they  must  have  had  a  Creator,  and 
the  Creator  can  be  no  other  than  an  infinite  and  eternal  God.     II.  The  revelation 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS. 


OF  God  in  Scripttjke.  Looking  first  at  the  stellar  world,  and  viewing  the 
splendour  of  a  solar  day,  David  confesses  his  vision  of  God  is  incomplete,  and  so 
he  affirms  the  Infinite  to  come  nearer  to  man  than  in  the  stars,  and  making  Him- 
self better  known  in  "the  law,"  "the  testimony,"  "the  statutes,"  "the  Com- 
mandments," and  in  the  providences  which  play  around  him.  The  term  "law" 
may  refer  to  the  "preceptive  portions  of  Scripture";  "testimonies"  may  mean 
doctrines;  "statutes,"  ordinances  and  forms  of  worship;  "commandments"  are 
directions  to  duty;  "fear"  indicates  anxiety  to  please  God;  and  "judgments" 
are  God's  record  or  declaration  of  the  results  of  unforgiven  sin.  But  all  these 
terms  may  be  gathered  up  as  referring  to  the  body  of  Scripture,  revelations  which 
have  been  made  either  by  voice,  or  vision,  or  inspiration  in  any  form.  The  writer's 
purpose  was  to  indicate  the  excellent  properties  and  purposes  of  Scripture,  including 
precept,  promise,  and  perfect  rules  of  life.  Calling  this  revelation  the  "statutes 
of  God,"  the  idea  evidently  is  of  something  binding  on  universal  man.  Calling  it 
"the  fear  of  the  Lord"  seems  to  refer  to  that  filial  affection  which  reigns  in  a 
human  heart,  making  man  ashamed  of  sin,  and  becoming  for  him  a  cleansing 
power.  "Judginents  of  the  Lord"  is  a  comprehensive  phrase,  summing  up  the 
substance  and  object  of  Scripture.  III.  The  law^,  testimony,  statutes,  command- 
ments, FEAR,  and  judgments  OF  THE  LORD  TESTED.  Put  them  to  the  test  of 
personal  experience.  This  shall  prove  whether  or  no  the  claim  of  the  Psalmist  has 
warrant  in  the  lives  of  men.  There  never  was  a  man  who  received  the  law  of  God 
into  his  heart  and  obeyed  it  who  did  not  become  a  "new  man,"  enriched  thereby 
beyond  all  measurement  or  estimate.  {Justin  E.  Twitchell. )  God's  glory  in  the 
skies: — The  immediate  outlook  upon  nature  is  independent  of  scientific  elaboration. 
It  is  unalterable  by  intellectual  mutations  and  advances ;  it  rests  on  those  per- 
manent relations  which  hold  between  the  soul  of  man  within  and  the  world  without. 
But  the  whole  stress  of  the  Psalm  is  laid  on  that  aspect  of  the  natural  world  which 
it  is  the  work  of  science  to  emphasise  and  to  extricate.  What  the  Psalmist  sees  is 
the  manifestation  of  law,  of  regularity,  of  reason.  There  is  about  it  all,  as  the 
mighty  drama  discloses  itself,  the  calmness,  the  majesty,  of  rational  knowledge. 
The  awful  silence  in  which  the  tremendous  scene  proceeds  is  more  eloquent  than 
words.  Dumb  in  the  vault,  yet  filled  with  voices  that  toll  in  our  ears,  voices  that 
cry  without  a  language,  and  assure  us  of  that  eternal  consciousness  which  possesses 
the  entire  round  of  tlxe  heavens,  whose  rule  and  line  goeth  out  throughout  all  the 
earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world.  Universal  law  acting  in  silence, 
with  absolute  security  of  rhythm.  The  mystic  eloquence  of  law.  That  is  the 
vision  which  overawes  the  Psalmist ;  and  is  not  that  the  very  essence  of  our 
scientific  presentation  of  nature  ?  Law  acting  in  silence,  that  is  nature  as  science 
discloses  it.  Silent  as  it  may  be,  this  perfect  law,  this  undeviating  order,  this 
calm  precision,  this  infinite  regularity  of  succession,  this  steady  certainty  of 
movement,  this  unbroken  universality,  these  disciplined  forces,  this  rhythmic 
harmony,  this  balance,  this  precaution,  this  response  of  day  to  night,  and  night  to 
night,  that  is  intelligence,  that  is  reason,  that  is  consciousness,  that  is  speech  ! 
No  one  can  face  it  in  its  wholeness,  part  answering  to  part,  and  each  to  all, 
without  becoming  aware  of  its  mystic  eloquence.  It  all  speaks,  speaks  as  it  works, 
speaks  without  a  language,  speaks  without  a  sound.  The  Psalmist  has  but  to 
lift  his  eyes,  and  then  above  it,  allied  to  it,  a  corresponding  world  opens  out, — 
a  world,  too,  of  law,  of  certainty,  of  regularity,  of  order,  no  less  than  the  world 
of  nature.  Here,  too,  all  is  sane,  rational,  secure,  quiet,  and  sure,  as  the  silent 
stars  in  the  night.  This  higher  order  of  life  moves  along  the  course  set  before  it, 
and  its  laws  never  flag  or  fail ;  no  chance  confuses  it,  and  no  unruly  accident  dis- 
turbs it.  This  world  is  the  world  of  consciousness,  the  world  of  the  moral  law,  the 
world  of  the  religious  spirit,  the  world  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Laws,  statutes, 
testimonies,  commandments, — no  physical  world  could  be  based  on  grounds  more 
fixed  and  uniform  and  sure.  Everywhere  precision,  everywhere  unalterable  rigour 
— that  is  what  delights  him.  Error,  wrong,  sin — these  may  be  on  his  own  side, 
but  this  does  not  shake  the  absolute  authority  of  this  reign  of  law  without  him. 
Only,  it  makes  him  tremble,  lest  even  unwittingly  he  may  have  introduced  any 
quiver  of  disturbance  into  this  fabric  of  exquisite  and  harmonious  order.  Who 
can  tell  how  oft  he  offendeth  ?  "Oh,  cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults."  Can  we 
recover  at  all  for  ourselves  this  mental  temper  of  the  Psalmist  ?  This  world  of 
which  he  is  speaking  is  what  we  name  spiritual,  religious,  supernatural,  and  as 
soon  as  we  have  touched  such  names  as  these  we  recall  something  wholly  unlike 
nature,   wholly  opposed  to  scientific    law    and    the    necessities  of  reason.     Yet 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

veracity,  regularity,  universality,  these  are  the  very  notes  of  the  Divine  action  in 
both  spheres,  and  in  both,  therefore,  there  is  the  same  ground  for  reason  to  work 
upon.  Nature  will  enable  us  to  understand  the  supernatural.  Our  faith  in.  Christ 
Jesus  lays  large  and  unfaltering  trust  in  the  veracity  of  human  faculties,  in  the 
solidity  of  knowledge,  iu  the  reality  of  an  instructed  and  intelligent  experience. 
Base  your  belief  in  Jesus  on  the  convictions  that  form  the  ground  of  your  con- 
fidence in  the  stability  and  reality  of  life.  {Canon  Scott  Holland.)  The  moral 
law  and  the  starry  heavens: — "Two  things,"  said  Kant,  "fill  the  soul  with  awe 
and  wonder  :  the  starry  heaven  above,  and  the  moral  law  within."  How  many  of 
us  have  felt  this  amazement  without  expressing  it !  Approach  man  from  a  material 
point  of  view,  and  he  is  utterly  insignificant ;  but  view  him  from  a  spiritual  point 
of  view,  and  how  wonderful  is  he  !  That  strange  faculty  within  him  which 
witnesses  to  a  law  above  himself,  which  speaks  to  him  of  the  right  even  when  he 
is  yielding  to  the  wrong,  which  enables  him  to  hold  communion  with  infinite 
perfection,  which  gives  meaning  to  such  words  as  "trust,"  "duty,"  "obedience," 
"religion,"  that  faculty  which  perpetuates  in  him  the  image  of  his  Maker  ;  whence 
did  it  come?  "Yes,"  said  Pascal,  "man  is  a  worm,  but  then  he  is  a  worm  that 
thinks."  This  is  exactly  the  mystery  which  filled  a  mind  so  powerful  as  that  of 
Kant.  To  see  no  mystery  in  man  and  his  spiritual  nature  is  a  sure  mark  of  a 
shallow  and  second-rate  mind.  What  is  the  thought  which  the  contemplation  of 
the  heavenly  bodies  presents  to  us  most  prominently  ?  Is  it  not  order  or  "law  "  ? 
But  how  about  the  spiritual  world  ?  Are  there  laws  for  mind  as  well  as  for  body  ? 
Is  there  not  an  order  in  moral  things  which  cannot  be  violated  with  impunity  ? 
The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  a  reign  of  law  too.  One  order  alike  for  the  material  and 
the  moral.  The  law  of  the  material  world  we  reach  through  observation  and 
generalisation  ;  the  law  of  the  soul  through  God's  revelations  of  Himself  to  man's 
spiritual  nature,  but  both  are  alike  of  God,  and  not  two  laws  but  one.  How  pure, 
elevating,  and  ennobling  was  the  writer's  conception  of  true  religion.  {J.  A. 
Jacob,  M.A.)  God's  works  and  Word: — Every  varying  mood  of  nature  is  an 
index  finger  to  the  power  and  glory  of  the  Creator.  His  works  lie  open  beside  His 
Word, — the  one  a  volume  of  illustrations,  the  other  a  book  of  inspired  principles. 
In  the  19th  Psalm  these  double  volumes  of  revelation  are  bound  together. 
There  is  both  a  world-book  and  a  word-book  in  the  Psalmist's  thought.  Both  are 
bearing  eternal  witness  to  the  Creator.  I.  The  witness  of  the  heavens.  In 
the  clear  dry  air  of  the  East  the  heavens  shine  with  a  strange  brilliancy.  To  the 
reverent  soul  of  David,  the  stars  in  their  courses  and  the  moon  in  her  phases  were 
nightly  lessons  of  wonder  and  of  God.  To  the  Psalmist's  eye  the  whole  firmament 
was  written  over,  and  the  whole  universe  was  resonant  to  his  ear  with  the  name  of 
God.  And  to  the  eyes  of  this  devout  shepherd,  this  witness  of  creation  to  its 
Creator  M'as  continuous.  And  yet  this  witness  of  the  heavens  is  silent.  It  is  their 
silence  which  puts  such  terrible  emphasis  upon  the  testimony  of  the  heavens  ;  for 
silence  is  the  great  law  of  the  universe.  This  witness  is  also  universal  in  its  reach 
and  influence.  The  stars  preach  a  gospel  of  Divine  law  and  power,  before  which 
worsliippers  of  all  races  and  generations  have  kneeled  in  reverence  and  awe.  But 
man,  maile  in  the  likeness  of  God,  is  not  measured  by  physical,  but  by  moral 
standards.  The  moral  law  written  upon  conscience  and  soul  has  brought  man  into 
fellowship  with  the  Infinite,  and  there  follows  that  sharp  transition  in  thought 
which  cuts  this  Psalm  like  the  keen  stroke  of  a  knife  when  David  remembers  the 
glory  of  God's  law.  Grander  than  that  of  the  heavens  is — II.  The  witness  of  the 
MOEAL  LAW.  In  this  sudden  rebound  from  the  glory  of  the  sun  to  the  greater 
glory  of  the  truth  the  Psalmist  seems  to  chide  himself  for  having  forgotten  the 
greater  in  the  less.  For  what  the  sun  is  in  the  natural  world,  bringing  light  and 
inspiring  growth,  the  law  of  God  is  in  the  spiritual,  revealing  moral  darkness  and 
quickening  the  life  of  souls.  Climbing  up  adjectives  of  admiring  descriptions, 
David  unfolds  the  nature  of  the  Word  of  Jehovah.  It  is  "perfect,"  with  a  com- 
pleteness which  fits  all  needs  and  encompasses  all  souls.  It  is  "sure," — an  eternal 
verity  to  which  men  may  anchor  and  never  drift.  It  is  "right,"  with  an  absolute 
rectitude  and  justice.  'This  Divine  law  not  only  reveals  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  but 
also — III.  It  reveals  the  heart  of  man.  Without  the  revelation  of  the  mirror 
man  is  a  stranger  to  his  own  face  ;  without  the  revelation  of  God's  law  we  were 
strangers  to  the  gnilt  of  sin.  For  the  law  lays  a  man  bare  to  himself.  Gather  up 
the  lesson  of  the  Psalm — 1.  That  there  is  no  conflict  between  God's  works  and  God's 
Word.  There  may  be  conflict  between  the  flippant  guesses  of  men  and  the  '"Thus 
saith  the  Lord  "  in  the  Book.     But  the  world-book  and  the  word-book  are  one  and 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  335 

the  same  tri:th.  2.  The  Psalm  reveals  the  vastness  and  variety  of  the  witnesses 
which  God  has  put  about  us.  The  heathen  of  all  lands  have  deified  the  forces  of 
nature  and  tlie  planets  of  the  sky,  and  worshipped.  Such  witness  is  ours,  but 
supplemented  by  the  written  Word,  the  enlightened  conscience,  the  civilised  state, 
and  the  Christian  Church.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  revelation  in  nature: 
— Modern  poets  are  never  tired  of  dwelling  on  the  beauties  of  nature.  The  Hebrew 
poet  perceived  these  just  as  keenly,  but  he  never  set  them  forth  for  their  own  sake. 
He  considered  them  only  as  they  bear  on  our  moral  and  spiritual  relations  with 
God,  or  as  they  illustrate  the  being  and  glory  of  the  Most  High.  So  it  is  here. 
The  first  line  sets  forth  the  continuous  action  of  the  transparent  vault  which  arches 
over  the  earth.  Its  order  and  beauty  and  splendour  are  not  the  work  of  chance  or 
the  product  of  blind  unconscious  forces,  but  bear  willing  witness  to  the  perfections 
of  the  one  Supreme  Creator.  He  made  them,  and  they  are  for  ever  telling  the  story 
of  His  unsearchable  riches.  There  is  no  pause,  no  interruption  in  the  testimony. 
Day  after  day,  night  after  night,  the  unbroken  succession  goes  on.  It  is  poured 
out  as  from  a  copious,  gushing  fountain.  The  sentiment  is  as  true  as  it  is  poetical. 
In  every  age  and  land  the  starry  heavens  have  proclaimed  to  the  thoughtful 
observer  :  "  It  is  He  that  hath  made  us."  The  fact  that  this  is  done  without  the 
use  of  articulate  language,  so  far  from  weakening  the  testimony  makes  it  stronger. 
A  modern  critic  coolly  expunges  this  couplet  on  the  ground  that  it  is  prosaic  and 
that  it  directly  contradicts  the  preceding  verse,  whereas  it  is  a  fine  statement  of  the 
fact  that  words  are  not  literally  used  ;  and  there  is  no  more  contradiction  in  it  than 
in  the  common  proverb,  "Actions  speak  louder  than  words."  The  heavens  "have 
a  voice,  but  it  is  one  that  speaks  not  to  the  ear  but  to  the  devout  and  understanding 
heart,"  as  Addison  has  well  expressed  it  in  the  well-known  stanzas,  according  to 
which  the  radiant  orbs,  though  they  move  in  solemn  silence,  still  in  reason's  ear 
rejoice.  In  the  next  couplet  the  poet  proceeds  further.  Not  only  is  the  testimony 
of  the  heavens  distinct  and  clear  and  unbroken,  but  it  is  also  universal.  Their 
"line"  means  their  measuring  line,  for  this  is  the  established  meaning  of  the 
word,  and  there  is  neither  need  nor  justification  for  changing  the  text.  The 
province  of  these  witnesses  for  God  is  co-extensive  with  the  earth.  Everywhere 
the  heavens  compass  the  globe,  and  "everywhere  they  preach  the  same  Divine 
sermon."  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (x.  18)  the  Apostle  employs  these  words  to 
express  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  Gospel  among  the  Gentiles,  and  its  freedom  from 
all  national  or  ecclesiastical  restrictions.  As  Hengstenberg  well  says,  ' '  The  uni- 
versal revelation  of  God  in  nature  was  a  providential  prediction  of  the  universal 
proclamation  of  the  Gospel."  The  Apostle  says  their  "sound"  instead  of  their 
"line,"  because  he  followed  the  Septuagint  version.  The  sense  is,  of  course,  the 
same.  In  Paul's  day  the  Gospel  occupied  the  central  position  in  the  Roman  world : 
it  is  for  Christians  now  to  make  it  actually  as  universal  as  the  witness  of  the 
heavens.  To  carry  still  further  forward  the  figure,  the  sun  is  introduced  because 
his  apparent  course  indicates  clearly  the  width  of  the  domain  covered  by  the  testi- 
mony of  the  heavens.  In  them  is  his  position.  All  talk  of  sun-gods  in  this 
connection  is  simple  folly.  David  is  not  reciting  mythology,  but  writing  poetry. 
In  this  view  he  compares  the  bright  re-appearance  of  the  morning  sun  to  that  of  a 
bridegroom  coming  forth  from  the  nuptial  apartment,  and  his  steady  ongoing 
through  the  skies  to  the  rapid  course  of  a  hero  on  his  joyful  way  to  the  goal  of 
victory.  Nothing  can  be  more  striking  than  these  figures.  The  king  of  day  starts 
from  one  end  of  heaven  and  never  pauses  till  he  reaches  the  other,  and  his  presence 
is  one  that  can  be  felt  as  well  as  seen,  for  nothing  can  hide  itself  from  his 
heat.  Here  comes  a  quick  transition  from  God's  revelation  of  Himself  in  nature  to 
the  similar  revelation  in  the  written  Word.  Its  abruptness  is  quite  excusable  in 
view  of  the  analogy,  the  law  being  in  the  spiritual  world  what  the  sun  is  in  the 
natural.  {Talbot  IV.  Chambers,  D.D.)  Ood's  works  and  Word: — The  Bible 
recognises  no  conflict  between  science  and  religion.  It  asserts  a  unity  of  origin  for 
the  Word  and  the  world.     Faith  takes  God's  word  ;  science  takes  man's.     But 

"  Science  walks  with  humble  feet 
To  seek  the  God  that  faith  has  found." 

I.  That  the  Bible  nowhere  contradicts  established  science. — This  is  an 
•mazing  statement,  for  the  Bible  was  written  by  unlearned  men.  Every  truth  of 
to-day  has  been  opposed  by  men,  not  by  Scripture.  No  doubt  the  Bible  often 
speaks  of  things  as  they  appear  to  the  eye,  as  sunrise  and  sunset.  But  these  are  not 
oontradictions  to  science.    II.  The  Bible  always  has  bun,  ksn  is  yet,  fab  in 


336  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

ADVANCE  OP  THE  DiscovEEiES  OF  SCIENCE.  Ere  Science  discovered  the  order  of 
progress  in  the  developed  world,  or  that  the  strata  of  the  earth  were  formed  by  the 
action  of  water,  and  that  the  mountains  were  once  under  the  sea ;  or  that  the  earth 
was  a  sphere  ;  or  that  the  earth  was  upheld  by  no  visible  support ;  or  that  the 
stars  were  innumerable  ;  or  that  light  makes  music  as  it  flies  ;  or  that  the  sun  had 
an  orbit  of  its  own — the  Bible  had  said  all  these  things.  The  Word  is  as  full  of 
undiscovered  wisdom  as  the  world.     III.  Very  few  scientific  men  recognisb 

ANY  ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN  THE  REVELATION  BY  "WOKD  AND  THAT  BY  WORKS.  The 

American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  embraces  the  great  names  in 
this  country.  At  its  last  meeting  it  was  found  that  seven-eighths  of  these  were  pro- 
fessing Christians.     The  greatest  of  them  see  God  in  nature  to-day.     IV.  Naturb 

IS  A  UNIVERSAL  REVELATION  OF  GOD,  BUT  OF  THE  LOWEST  KIND.      The  heavenS 

so  declare  the  glory  of  God  that  even  a  heathen  savage  is  without  excuse  if 
he  do  not  discern  God.  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  the  next  higher  revelation.  See 
what  is  here  said  of  it.  But  the  highest  revelation  is  Christ.  He  brings  life  and 
love  to  light ;  reveals  a  greater  power  in  spiritual  realms  than  gravitation  is  in 
material  realms.  But  all  revelations  are  one  and  of  one  God.  {Bishop  R.  W, 
Warren.)  The  revelation  of  the  prophecy  of  the  heavens: — I.  The  heavens  A 
REVELATION  OF  GoD.  They  show  God's  character,  as  all  works  show  character. 
The  fault  has  been  in  men  if  they  have  not  apprehended  the  declaration  of  the 
heavens.  Paul  said  it  could  be  "clearly  seen."  This  revelation  is — 1.  Ceaseless. 
2.  Wordless.  The  Hebrew  rightly  rendered  reads — "No  speech  nor  language  ;  their 
voice  is  not  heard."  That  is,  they  utter  no  articulate  words.  3.  Universal. 
"Their  line" — the  measuring  , line  used  for  the  determining  the  boundaries  of 
estates — takes  in  the  whole  earth  ;  throughout  this  vast  territory  the  signs  which 
proclaim  God  are  found.  II.  This  revelation  a  prophecy  of  that  of  the 
Gospel.  For  it  also  is  universal.  Hence  Paul  quotes  this  Psalm.  But  how  came 
Paul  to  see  this  meaning  in  David's  words  ?  Because  the  heavens  are  Christ's 
handiwork.  "Without  Him  was  nothing  made  that  was  made."  And  they 
manifest  and  declare  Him.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  if  He  thus  send  His  heavens 
to  proclaim  Him  through  all  lands,  and  to  sing  His  praise,  much  more  will  He 
desire  that  the  Gospel  of  His  grace  by  which  far  more  glory  will  be  His  should  be 
known  far  and  wide,  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  that  none  may  be  hid  from  its  saving 
light  and  heat.  What  a  teacher,  then,  we  have  in  the  heavens.  They  sing  to  us  of 
God,  and  of  God  in  Christ.  They  declare  the  glory  of  Him  whom  not  having  seen 
we  love.  {Samuel  Cox,  D.D.)  God's  two  great  preachers: — I.  Nature  as  A 
preacher.  It  continues  its  eloquent  discourse  from  age  to  age,  and  its  aim  in  all 
is  to  draw  the  mind  of  man  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  from  the  material  to  the 
spiritual,  from  itself  to  universal  being.  II.  The  Bible  as  a  preacher.  This 
preacher  is  called  by  different  names,  "law,"  "testimony,"  "statutes,"  "com- 
mandments," "fear  of  the  Lord,"  "judgments  of  the  Lord."  1.  The  character  of 
this  preacher.  Perfect,  established,  righteous,  holy,  thoroughly  sound,  precious. 
2.  The  work  of  this  preacher.  (1)  A  soul-restoring  work.  (2)  A  mind-enlighten- 
ing work.  (3)  A  heart-gladdening  work.  (4)  A  life-regulating  work.  (5)  A  sin- 
convincing  work.  (6)  A  prayer-exciting  work.  The  Psalmist  prays  against  sin, 
and  he  prays  for  holiness.  The  text  implies  three  facts  concerning  human  words 
and  thoughts — 1.  That  God  takes  cognisance  of  them.  2.  That  God  is  pleased  with 
right  words  and  thoughts.  3.  That  God  aids  man  in  the  promotion  of  right  words 
and  thoughts.  {Homilist.)  Nature  a  preacher: — Five  subjects  for  thought. 
I.  The  subject  of  the  discourse.  "The  glory  of  God."  Nature  proclaims  God's 
existence,  government,  and  attributes.  1.  The  fact  of  nature  reveals  the  being  of 
God.  2.  The  vastness  of  nature,  the  immensity  of  God.  3.  The  uniformity  of 
nature,  the  unity  of  God.  4.  The  regularity  of  nature,  the  unchangeableness  of 
God.  5.  The  arrangements  of  nature,  the  wisdom  of  God.  6.  The  happiness 
of  nature,  the  goodness  of  God.  7.  The  purity  of  nature,  the  holiness  of  God. 
8.  The  beauty  of  nature,  the  tastefulness  of  God.  9.  The  variety  of  nature,  the 
exhaustlessness  of  God.  II.  The  incessantness  of  its  delivery.  Nature  as  a 
preacher  never  tires,  never  pauses.  Wliilst  generations  come  and  go,  this  great 
preacher  continues  his  sublime  discourse  without  a  break  or  pause.  III.  The 
intelligibleness  of  its  language.  Its  language  is  that  of  symbol ;  the  easiest 
language  for  man  to  understand.  A  language  of  signs,  addressed  to  eye  and  heart. 
So  intelligible  is  the  language  that  there  is  no  excuse  for  ignorance  of  God. 
IV.  The  vastness  of  its  audience.  Their  "line" — that  is,  their  instruction. 
All  men  live  under  those  heavens,  all  of  which  are  vocal  with  discourse  of  God. 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  337 

V.  The  immensity  of  its  resources.  1.  The  gi-eatest  light  dwells  in  the  heart 
of  this  preacher.  2.  The  greatest  light  circulates  through  the  whole  being  of  this 
preacher.  From  the  subject  learn — (1)  Man's  capacity  to  study  and  to  worship  God. 
(2)  Man's  obligation  to  study  and  to  worship  God.  Study  nature  scientifically  and 
religiously.  {Homilist.)  Nature,  i%  Scripture: — The  scientific  contemplation  of 
nature  is  wholly  absent  from  Scripture,  and  the  picturesque  is  very  rare.  This 
Psalmist  knew  nothing  about  solar  spectra,  or  stellar  distances,  but  he  heard  a  voice 
from  out  of  the  else  waste  heavens  which  sounded  to  him  as  if  it  named  God.  Comte 
ventured  to  say  that  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  the  astronomer,  not  of  God  ; 
but  if  there  be  an  order  in  them,  which  it  is  a  man's  glory  to  discover,  must  there 
not  be  a  mind  behind  the  order,  and  must  not  the  Maker  have  more  glory  than  the 
investigator  ?  The  Psalmist  is  protesting  against  stellar  worship,  which  some  of  his 
neighbours  practised.  The  sun  was  a  creature,  not  a  god  ;  his  "race"  was  marked 
out  by  the  same  hand  which  in  depths  beyond  the  visible  heavens  had  pitched  a 
"tent"  foi  his  nightly  rest.  We  smile  at  the  simple  astronomy;  the  religious 
depth  is  as  deep  as  ever.  Dull  ears  do  not  hear  these  voices  ;  but  whether  they  are 
stopped  with  the  clay  of  earthly  tastes  and  occupations,  or  stuffed  with  scientific 
wadding  of  the  most  modern  kind,  the  ears  that  do  not  hear  God's  name  sounded 
from  the  abysses  above  have  failed  to  hear  the  only  word  which  can  make  man  feel 
at  home  in  nature.  Carlyle  said  that  the  sky  was  a  "  sad  sight."  The  sadness  and 
awfulness  are  taken  away  when  we  hear  the  heavens  telling  the  glory  of  God.  The 
unscientific  Psalmist  who  did  hear  them  was  nearer  the  very  heart  of  the  mystery 
than  the  scientist  who  knows  everything  else  about  them  but  that.  {A.  Madaren, 
D.JD.)  God  revealed  in  nature: — Is  the  picture  to  be  accepted  as  a  revelation  of 
the  artist's  genius  ?  Is  the  poem  to  be  regarded  as  a  test  of  the  poet's  mental 
power  ?  Then  carry  this  rule  with  you  in  all  your  contemplations  of  the  universe — 
as  you  walk  beneath  the  dome  of  heaven,  as  you  tremble  in  the  shadows  of  the  ever- 
lasting hills,  as  you  rise  into  rapture  while  gazing  on  the  swelling  grandeur  of  the 
great  deep  and  feel  yourself  wrapt  in  the  presence  of  God.  The  universe  is  the 
thought  of  God  made  visible.  {R.  Venting.)  God  seen  in  natiore : — The  immortal 
Newton  exclaimed,  "  Glory  to  God,  who  has  permitted  me  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the 
skirts  of  His  garments.  My  calculations  have  encountered  the  march  of  the  stars." 
So  sang  Copernicus,  Volta,  Galileo,  and  Kepler.  How  truly  did  Young  write,  "the 
undevout  astronomer  is  mad."  The  firmament  sheweth  His  handiwork. — The 
comet  And  its  teachings : — Not  often  during  the  lifetime  of  a  generation  does  a  comet 
present  itself.  Give  thought  to  the  bright  vision  which  no  doubt  engages  the 
attention  of  other  worlds  beside  our  own,  and  on  which  the  gaze  of  the  unfallen 
inhabitants  of  celestial  spheres  may  be  fixed  in  reverent  admiration.  1.  Notice  its 
beauty.  In  the  exhaustless  provision  which  God  has  made  for  our  love  of  the 
beautiful  we  recognise  an  assurance  that  He  regards  with  yet  tenderer  care  our  far 
deeper  longings,  the  moral  wants  of  our  souls.  2.  As  we  gain  from  science  a  know- 
ledge of  the  movements  of  the  comet  we  are  impressed  with  the  supremacy  of  law. 
No  portion  of  the  universe  is  more  completely  under  the  control  of  law  than  these 
comets,  which  were  once  supposed  to  be  so  erratic.  Whatever  is  within  the  attrac- 
tion of  the  sun  moves  upon  one  of  three  cui'ves.  As  soon  as  a  sufficient  portion  of 
the  course  of  any  body  is  known  its  whole  curve  can  be  ascertained.  It  is  to  the 
universal  supremacy  of  law  that  all  the  achievements  of  science  have  been  due.  The 
supremacy  of  physical  is  a  guarantee  for  the  authority  and  permanence  of  moral 
law.  The  same  Being  who  has  established  the  one  has  pledged  His  veracity  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  other.  3.  Further  knowledge  of  this  comet  impresses  us  with 
the  magnitude  of  the  universe.  How  numberless  are  the  bodies  inhabiting  the 
measm-eless  expanse.  Of  these  worlds,  is  it  likely  that  ours  alone  is  inhabited  ? 
4.  Viewed  in  the  light  of  these  considerations,  how  insignificant  does  the  world 
appear  !  And  how  insignificant  is  man  !  It  is  his  soul  alone  that  gives  him  dignity 
in  the  scale  of  being.  5.  What  a  conception  does  a  just  view  of  the  universe  give 
us  of  the  greatness  and  dignity  of  God  !  Who  can  escape  His  eye  ?  Who  can  defy 
His  power  ?  6.  How  great  is  the  Divine  condescension,  especially  as  manifested  in 
the  atonement !     {ff.  L.  Wayland. ) 

Yer.  2.  Day  tmto  day  nttereth  speech,  and  nigbt  nnto  night  sheweth  know- 
ledge.— Instruction  to  ie  derived  from  the  revolution  of  day  and  night: — I.  The 

ALMIGHTY  POWER  OF  THE  OeeATOR  AND  PeESERTER  OF  THE  UNIVERSE.      The  very 

act  of  creation,  or  the  producing  of  any  being  out  of  nothing,  gives  us  the  most 
enlarged  idea  of  Omnipotence.    The  Almighty  not  only  at  &8t  created,  but  oon- 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [psalm  xix. 

tinually  upholds,  the  work  of  His  hands.  His  mighty  energy  is  continually  dis- 
played in  the  preservation  of  all  the  creatures  He  hath  made.  II.  The  goodness 
OF  God.  Attend  particularly  to  man,  the  noblest  work  of  God.  Every  faculty  of 
our  nature  and  every  circumstance  of  our  condition  aflford  abundant  evidence  of 
the  goodness  of  God.  Through  the  faculty  of  reason  we  are  blessed  with  moral 
perception  :  we  know  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong.  The  exercise  of  our  mental 
powers  is  accompanied  with  pleasure.  In  the  scheme  of  redeeming  grace  unfolded 
in  the  Gospel  we  have  the  most  illustrious  display  of  the  Divine  benignity  which 
men  or  angels  have  ever  witnessed.  And  if  we  consider  ourselves  as  creatures  in 
a  state  of  trial  we  find  ourselves  furnished  with  all  the  direction,  assistance,  and 
encouragement  that  such  a  state  requires.  III.  The  wisdom  of  God.  Wisdom, 
whenever  it  is  employed,  must  have  happiness  for  its  object;  and  when  that  is 
promoted  by  fit  means,  wisdom  shows  itself  to  the  utmost  advantage.  Every  object 
that  contributes  to  our  happiness  is  admirably  contrived  for  that  end  ;  and  every 
evidence  of  Divine  goodness  brings  with  it  a  concomitant  proof  of  Divine  wisdom. 
The  body  and  the  mind  want  the  rest  of  night,  and  partake  of  this  refreshment. 
The  faculties  of  the  soul  cannot  long  bear  intense  application.  Attend  now  to  the 
religious  and  moral  instructions  which  this  subject  suggests.  1.  Let  every  revolu- 
tion of  day  and  night  raise  our  thoughts  to  God.  Let  us  attend  to  the  daily 
revolution,  not  with  the  coldness  of  a  philosophic  inquirer,  but  with  the  ardent 
piety  of  devout  worshippers  of  the  God  of  nature  and  grace.  But  it  is  in  the 
scheme  of  redemption,  unfolded  in  the  Gospel,  that  we  behold  the  Divine  perfections 
shining  with  the  most  resplendent  lustre.  The  light  of  the  sun  of  righteousness 
throws  new  beauty  upon  the  creation  of  God.  2,  Consider  the  experience  we  have 
had  of  the  power,  goodness,  wisdom,  and  mercy  of  God  in  the  by-past  of  our  life.  It 
were  endless  to  enumerate  the  instances  of  the  Divine  goodness  and  mercy  in  which 
we  have  shared.  3.  Every  revolving  year,  every  revolving  day,  tells  us  that  the 
period  of  our  probation  is  hastening  to  an  end.  Then  watch  against  a  worldly 
temper  and  disposition  of  mind.  Watch  against  building  our  hopes  on  general 
truths  and  promises,  without  any  evidence  of  our  interest  in  them.  {James  Boss, 
D.D.)  Silent  sounds: — It  sounds  rather  curious,  does  it  not,  to  hear  about  one 
day  speaking  to  another  ?  Though  you  have  listened  ever  so  hard,  yet  you  have 
not  been  able  to  hear  a  day  speaking.  That  is  true ;  and  David,  who  wrote  this 
Psalm,  knew  that  also,  for  he  says  in  the  very  next  verse,  "  No  speech,  no  language, 
their  voice  is  not  heard" — and  yet,  "day  unto  day  uttereth  speech"}  How  can 
that  be  ?  Because  there  are  more  ways  of  speaking  than  one.  There  is  the  way 
the  deaf  and  dumb  speak — on  their  fingers.  Their  voice  is  not  heard,  yet  they 
speak.  Then  a  book  speaks.  The  moment  it  is  open,  and  you  see  the  words,  you 
understand  what  they  mean — they  speak  to  you.  There  is  a  tribe  of  savage  people 
far  away,  and  what  do  you  think  is  the  name  they  give  to  a  book  I  They  call  it 
"the  whisperer."  But  it  does  not  whisper  ;  it  has  no  voice  nor  sound,  and  yet  it 
speaks.  Now,  how  do  you  come  to  understand  what  people  say  when  they  speak 
on  their  fingers  ?  or  how  do  you  ever  come  to  know  what  a  book  says  I  Isn't  it  by 
first  learning  how  to  understand  ?  And  you  carry  the  way  to  understand  inside 
yourself.  So  is  it  that  we  understand  thousands  of  things  round  about  us,  and  that 
tells  us  of  God.  The  way,  then,  to  understand  what  the  days  speak  is  to  get  much 
of  God's  spirit  into  our  hearts.  The  days  say — I.  There's  nothing  new  !  To-day 
is  just  like  yesterday.  Yesterday  came  up  beautiful,  became  brighter,  had  cloucu 
and  sunshine,  and  then  faded  away.  So  it  will  be  with  to-day.  Yesterday  carried 
away  on  its  white  wings  the  spirits  of  thousands  of  men  and  women,  and  wee,  wee 
children  too  ;  and  the  night  came,  and  covered  their  bodies,  and  they  were  seen  no 
more.  So  it  will  be  to-day.  There's  nothing  new.  But  as  you  listen  again  you 
hear  the  days  say — II.  Everything  is  new  !  There  is  nothing  new  about  the 
day,  but  everything  is  new  about  you.  The  temptations  you  will  have  to-day  won't 
be  the  same  that  you  had  yesterday  ;  the  night  has  come  like  a  black  wall  between 
you  and  yesterday,  and  to-day  you  get  a  fair  start  again  ;  and  to-day  you  may  do 
better  than  yesterday,  or  to-day  you  may  do  worse,  but  you  can't  blame  yesterday. 
It  is  gone  ;  this  is  a  new  day,  but,  take  care !  you  will  be  tempted  to-day  in  another 
way.  So,  you  can't  afford  to  forget  Jesus  :  a  new  day  means  a  new  way,  and  only 
Jesus  can  guide  you  rightly  upon  it.  But  this  also  the  days  say — III.  Time  tells 
OF  eternity  !  As  the  days  pass  away,  we  pass  away  with  them — passing  away,  out 
into  eternity.  When  you  are  in  a  train  or  a  tramcar  you  notice  that  all  the 
people  do  not  go  to  the  journey's  end.  Some  go  only  a  little  way,  others  go  farther, 
new  ones  come  in ;  perhaps  you  yourself  get  out  before  the  whole  journey  is  done. 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  339 

Anyway,  they  are  very  few  who  go  all  the  way.  It  is  just  the  same  with  our  lives. 
Some  only  go  a  short  distance  through  the  days — God  calls  them  away  when  they 
are  young.  Some  go  a  little  farther,  others  a  little  farther  still ;  but  they  are  very 
few  indeed  who  come  to  be  very  old.  Shouldn't  every  day,  then,  make  us  think  of 
what  is  to  be  the  end  of  all  ?  {J.  Reid  Howett. )  Night  unto  night  sheweth 
knowledge. — The  teaching  of  the  night: — God  divided  the  sovereignty  of  time 
between  day  and  night.  I.  Night  teaches  the  individuality  of  ouk  being. 
For  more  than  the  day,  it  shows  us  what  it  is  to  be  alone  with  ourselves  and  God. 
It  drives  all  the  faculties  and  sensibilities  of  the  soul  inward  upon  itself.  The 
hours  of  darkness  are  fearful  to  those  who  are  afraid  to  be  with  themselves  and 
God.  Jesus  used  to  retire  to  desert  places,  that  He  might,  during  the  night-time, 
be  alone  with  the  Father.  I  have  myself  spent  the  hours  of  night  alone  upon  high 
mountains.  A  solemn  experience.  II.  The  ketirement  of  the  soul,  in  which 
God's  presence  is  most  felt,  need  not  take  us  away  from  the  crowded 
PATHS  OF  LIFE.  Where  we  see  most  of  man,  there  we  can  see  most  of  God.  A 
spiritually  minded  man  once  said  that  he  felt  God's  presence  with  him  in  walking 
the  crowded  and  noisy  streets  of  New  York  as  really  as  he  did  in  the  sanctuary  or 
in  the  solemn  hour  of  devotion.     III.  The  night  of  the  natural  world  is  the 

SYMBOL  OF  THE  DEEPER  NIGHT   OF  SORROW  AND  DISAPPOINTMENT  THAT  SETTLES 

DOWN  UPON  THE  SOUL.  God  surrounds  us  with  both,  that  we  may  feel  for  His 
hand  in  the  darkness,  and  find  ourselves  safe  with  His  protection.  We  learn  from 
the  night  of  afifliction  and  trouble  many  lessons  which  we  could  never  master  in  the 
light  of  broad  day.  In  the  awful  night-hour  of  death  we  need  not  find  ourselves 
alone.  He  has  been  all  the  way  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and 
He  will  not  leave  us  to  grope  in  vain  for  His  hand.     {D.  Marsh,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  No  speech  nor  lang^iage ;  their  voice  cannot  he  heard. — Silent  voices: — 
The  Psalmist,  like  a  true  poet,  had  a  keen  eye  and  ear.  He  saw  in  the  firmament 
the  glory  of  God,  and  he  heard,  around  him  and  beneath,  a  chorus  of  praise  to  the 
Most  High.  Two  interpretations  have  been  put  upon  this  verse.  The  first,  that 
there  is  no  coxmtry  or  clime,  "no  speech  or  language,"  where  the  voice  of  the 
firmament,  &c.,  is  not  heard,  seeing  their  "line  "  or  instruction  "  is  gone  out  through 
all  the  earth,  and  their  words  to  the  end  of  the  world."  The  other  is,  that  there 
is  no  audible  voice,  no  sound  that  falls  upon  the  ear.  Addison  writes,  "What 
though  in  solemn  silence,"  &c.  I.  Silent  voices  have  often  a  most  powerful 
INFLUENCE.  1.  They  may  move  a  man  more  than  uttered  words.  The  voices  of 
nature,  the  music  of  the  spheres,  as  it  is  called,  is  silence.  Lectures  have  their 
place,  but  audible  voices  are  not  so  soul-stirring  as  voices  inaudible.  2.  The  spring, 
and  every  season  of  the  year,  brings  many  lessons,  and  yet  "there  is  no  speech  or 
language,  its  voice  is  not  heard."  No  man  ever  heard,  with  his  bodily  ear,  the 
language  of  either  day  or  night,  yet  every  day  speaks  of  God's  infinite  resources — 
of  His  goodness,  of  His  power  and  glory — more  articulate  than  any  man  could 
speak.  3.  Solitude  speaks  to  the  soul.  The  mountain  top,  the  dense  forest,  the 
restless  sea;  but  their  "voice  is  not  heard."  The  expression  of  human  feeling  is 
often  more  powerful  when  inarticulate.  II.  In  order  to  apprehend  silent 
VOICES  we  must  OURSELVES  BE  SILENT.  Put  away  distracting  thoughts,  and 
humbly  listen  only  to  God  as  He  speaks  to  the  soul  and  conscience.  Men  cannot 
even  hear  music  unless  they  ar^^ll,  silent,  and  undistracted.  With  the  soul  men 
hear  God,  and  not  with  the  f|Blcal  ear,  unless  they  are  still  and  undistracted. 
It  is  very  desirable  that  men  sIiBnd  commune  with  God  in  their  work,  and  be  still 
before  Him  with  their  souls,  and  not  with  their  intellects  only.  The  active  intellect 
is  more  often  used  against  God  than  for  Him.  But  God  cannot  be  reached  by 
intellectual  processes  any  more  than  love,  or  than  the  beauties  of  a  landscape  can  be 
explained  by  argument,  or  than  music  can  be  brought  home  to  the  soul  by  logical 
syllogism.  {James  S.  Swan.)  The  silent  testimony: — Language  is  always  a 
difficulty,  a  snare,  a  temptation,  an  inconvenient  convenience.  It  brings  us  into 
all  our  troubles  ;  it  is  when  we  speak  that  we  create  heterodoxies  ;  could  we  but 
be  silently  dumbly  good — could  we  look  our  prayers,  and  cause  our  face  to  shine 
with  our  benevolence,  and  our  hand  do  a  quiet  work  of  beneficence,  how  happy 
would  the  world  be  !  Words  do  not  mean  the  same  thing  to  any  two  men  ;  they  may 
be  accepted  for  momentary  uses  and  for  commercial  purposes,  but  when  it  becomes  a 
matter  of  life  and  death,  time  and  eternity,  truth  and  error,  words  are  base  counter- 
feits, that  should  be  nailed  to  the  counter  of  creation,  as  things  by  which  a  false 
commerce  has  been  kept  up  amongst  earnest  and  ardent  men.     Blessed  be  God  for 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

tlie  silent  testimony,  for  the  radiant  character,  for  the  eloquent  service.  All  history 
is  silent ;  it  is  only  the  immediate  day  that  chatters  and  talks  and  fusses  about  its 
little  affairs.  Yet  the  dead  centuries  are  eloquent :  the  characters  are  all  gone ; 
the  warriors  are  dead  and  buried,  the  orators  have  culminated  their  eloquence  in 
the  silence  of  death,  the  great  solemn  past  is  like  a  banquet  hall  deserted,  but  it  is 
eloquent,  instructive,  silently  monitorial.  Silent  history — great,  sad,  melancholy, 
impartial  history — the  spirit  of  the  past  should  govern  the  unrest  and  the  tumult 
of  the  present.     (Josejah  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Their  line  is  gone  out  througli  all  the  earth. — The  Christian  brotherhood 
the  support  of  Christian  missions : — All  tradition  has  interpreted  this  Psalm  of  the 
goings  forth  of  the  Spirit  in  the  everlasting  Gospel.  Nor  could  a  nobler  image  of 
the  diffusion,  the  all-pervading  and  all-penetrating  progress  of  the  Gospel  of  peace 
be  conceived  than  what  the  visible  heavens  present.  In  antiquity  there  was  no 
more  favourite  emblem  of  the  all-pervading  presence  of  Christ  than  the  sun,  which, 
set  in  heaven,  is  yet,  in  its  infinite  and  ceaseless  commimications  of  life,  present  on 
earth  also.  Nor  does  any  emblem  more  frequently  occur  in  Holy  Scripture  of  the 
bright  and  peaceful  outgoings  of  the  teachers  of  the  faith  than  the  stars  ;  nor  any  of 
the  streaming  in  of  Divine  grace  upon  the  souls  of  men,  in  their  onward  course,  than 
that  of  light.  The  Psalmist  expresses  the  view  of  the  Catholic  Church,  not  as  man 
has  marred  it,  but  as  existing  in  the  eternal  mind.  And,  indeed,  the  first  promise 
of  its  fulfilment  seemed  to  foreshow  such  an  end.  Who  would  not  have  expected 
from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  a  very  different  conclusion  from  what  we  now  see  ! 
Even  after  the  apostolic  age  there  seemed  no  check  in  the  wondrous  progress  of  the 
imearthly  faith.  If  the  united  voice  of  the  Church  Catholic,  with  one  undeviating 
witness  for  her  Lord,  had  sounded  out  unceasingly  during  the  fifteen  centuries  that 
have  since  passed,  would  not  the  full  scope  of  the  prophetic  vision  have  been 
fulfilled  ?  But  a  change  soon  came  over  the  Church's  course.  What  is  our 
prospect  now  ?  To  us — the  English  portion  of  the  Catholic  communion — a  wider 
field  has  been  opened  and  ampler  powers  given  for  our  extension,  than  ever 
since  the  days  when  the  Apostles  dispersed  themselves  from  Jerusalem,  have  fallen 
to  the  lot  of  any  single  people.  ,  .  .  We  are  comparatively  powerless  when  we  work 
alone.  We  are  bound  together  on  the  principle  that  mutual  intercessions  are 
the  strength  of  the  Church's  work.  But  all  efforts  fail  unless  Christ  be  within 
us  as  our  life  and  power.  How  can  we  move  onward  unless  He  go  forth  with 
us?  (T.  T.  Carter,  M.  A.)  The  being  of  God  proved  from  universal  coTisent : — 
David  does  in  this  place  affirm  the  universality  of  religion.  He  supposes  the 
heavens  to  speak  an  universal  language,  heard  and  understood  by  all.  Hence 
we  argue  the  existence  of  God,  The  argument  is,  according  to  Lactantius,  that 
universal  and  unanimous  testimony  of  people  and  nations,  through  all  courses  of 
time,  who,  otherwise  differing  in  language,  customs,  and  conceits,  only  have  agreed 
in  this  one  matter  of  opinion.  Opinion  of  Aristotle  as  to  degrees  of  probability : 
that  which  arises  from  this  source  approaches  near  to  demonstrable  truth.  Testi- 
monies of  ancient  philosophers  to  this  agreement,  as  well  as  to  its  force  and  efficacy. 
That  men  should  thus  conspire  in  opinion  must  needs  arise  either — 1.  From  a  natural 
light  implanted  in  man's  nature ;  or,  2.  From  a  common  inclination  in  his  soul ;  or, 
3.  From  some  prevalent  reason,  obvious  to  all  men ;  or,  4.  From  some  common 
fountain  of  instruction  or  primitive  tradition,  ^^d  from  any  one  of  these  ways 
being  allowed  our  argument  will  gain  weight  ai^^p-ce.  If  we  acknowledge  either 
of  the  two  first  we  do  in  effect  yield  the  quest^l^  if  nature  forcibly  drives  men 
into  this  persuasion,  how  extravagant  will  it  be  to  oppose  her  !  And  if  we  grant 
that  plain  reason,  apparent  to  the  generality  of  men,  hath  moved  them  to  this 
consent,  do  we  not,  by  dissenting  from  it,  renounce  common  sense  ?  But  if  we  say 
that  it  arose  in  the  last  manner,  from  a  common  instruction  or  primitive  tradition, 
we  shall  be  thereby  driven  to  inquire  who  that  common  master  or  author  of  the 
tradition  was  :  of  any  such  we  have  no  name  recorded  ;  we  find  no  time  designated 
when  it  began  to  arise.  Who,  then,  were  the  teachers,  but  the  first  parents  of 
mankind?  Thus  does  this  consideration  lead  to  another  very  advantageous  to 
our  purpose  :  first,  as  proving  the  generations  of  men  had  a  beginning  ;  secondly, 
as  affording  us  their  most  weighty  authority  for  the  doctrine  we  assert.  For — 
1.  Supposing  mankind  had  a  beginning  on  this  earth,  whence  could  it  proceed  but 
from  such  a  Being  as  we  describe  ?  2.  Supposing  this  notion  derived  from  the  Aral 
men,  who  instilled  it  into  them  ?  Why  should  they  conceive  themselves  to  come 
from  God  if  He  that  made  them  did  not  discover  Himself  to  them  t    Thna  do 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  341 

these  two  notions,  that  of  general  tradition  concerning  God,  and  that  concerning 
man's  origin  on  earth  from  one  stock,  mutually  support  each  other.  As  to  His 
eternity :  if  God  made  all  things,  He  could  not  receive  being  from  another  ;  and 
what  reason  is  there  to  suppose  that  He  should  ?  But  as  nothing  can  receive  a  being 
from  itself,  or  from  mere  nothing  spring  up  into  being,  therefore  the  Maker  of  the 
world  must  be  eternal.  Something  of  necessity  must  be  eternal,  otherwise  nothing 
could  have  been  at  all  ;  other  things  show  themselves  to  have  proceeded  from  the 
wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  One :  whence  that  One  is  eternal ;  and  so  all 
nations  have  consented  that  God  is.  That  He  is  immortal  and  immutable  doth 
also  follow  plainly :  for  He,  not  depending  for  His  being,  or  anything  thereto 
belonging,  or  any  other  thing,  neither  can  He  depend  for  His  continuance  or 
conservation ;  having  power  superior  to  all  things,  as  having  conferred  on  them 
whatever  of  power  they  have,  nothing  can  oppose  Him,  or  make  any  prevalent 
impression  on  Him,  so  as  to  destroy  or  alter  anything  in  Him.  Also,  from  His 
making,  His  upholding,  His  governing  all  things,  is  consequent,  that  He  was  ever 
and  is  everywhere  :  where  His  power  is,  there  His  hand  is  ;  for  every  action  with 
effect  requires  a  conjunction  of  the  agent  and  patient ;  nothing  can  act  on  what  is 
distant.  That  with  His  presence  and  power  He  doth  penetrate  all  things,  operating 
insensibly  and  imperceptibly,  doth  argue  the  spirituality  of  His  being ;  and  that 
He  doth  consist  of  such  matter  (so  extended,  so  divisible)  as  those  things  do,  which 
we  by  sense  perceive.  His  overreaching  wisdom  implies  Him  incapable  of  being 
deceived  ;  and  His  overbearing  power  signifies  that  He  doth  not  need  to  deceive ; 
and  His  transcendent  goodness  proves  Him  unwilling  to  deceive  :  the  like  we  may 
say  of  doing  wrong ;  whence  are  consequent  His  perfect  veracity  and  justice. 
Lastly,  the  excellency  of  His  nature,  the  eminency  of  His  wisdom  and  power,  the 
abundance  of  His  goodness  ;  as  also.  His  having  given  being,  then  preserving  it  to 
all  things,  do  infer  His  rightful  title  to  supreme  dominion  ;  and  accordingly,  that 
all  love,  all  obedience,  all  praise  and  veneration  are  due  to  Him  ;  according  to  the 
devout  acknowledgment  of  those  blessed  elders  :  ' '  Thou  art  worthy,  0  Lord,  to 
receive  the  glory  and  honour  and  power  (or  authority),  because  Thou  hast  made  all 
things;  and  for  Thy  will  they  are  and  were  created."  (/.  Barrow,  D.D.)  In 
them  hath  He  set  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun. — The  gifts  of  nature : — There  was  once 
a  time,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  when  it  was  the  strongest  possible  temptation 
to  mankind  to  worship  the  great  objects  of  nature,  but  especially  those  in  heaven, 
and  of  these  especially  the  sun.  In  those  countries  more  particularly  where  the  sun 
is  so  bright,  so  powerful,  so  omnipresent  throughout  the  year  the  temptation  was 
stronger  than  anywhere  else.  Wherever  in  the  Old  Testament  we  hear  of  the  worship 
of  Baal,  it  is  the  worship  of  the  sun  ;  and  of  all  the  temples  so  dedicated,  this  is  the 
most  splendid,  and  the  ancient  city  was  called  from  this  worship  "  Baalbec,"  or  "  the 
City  of  the  Sun."  We  know  from  the  Bible,  we  know  also  from  the  history  of  this 
very  temple,  that  this  worship  was  corrupted  into  the  most  shameful  sensuality  ;  so 
that,  to  the  Israelites  first,  and  to  Christians  afterwards,  it  became  a  duty  to  put  it 
down  altogether.  And  this  corruption  is  in  itself  instructive,  as  teaching  us  that 
the  highest  love  of  art  and  the  keenest  appreciation  of  what  is  beautiful,  if  left  to 
itself  without  some  purer  and  higher  principles,  may  and  will  degenerate  into  mere 
brutal  self-indulgence  and  cruelty.  But  it  is  always  better,  if  we  can,  to  see  what 
was  the  good  element  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  any  character  or  institution — 
what  there  was  in  the  thoughts  that  raised  these  solid  foundations  and  these 
towering  columns,  which  we  may  also  imitate  for  ourselves,  without  falling  into 
those  dark  errors  and  sins  with  which  they  were  once  connected.  Therefore  we 
could  have  chosen  no  more  fitting  text  than  the  one  read  to  you.  Its  words  tell  you 
of  the  genial  life-giving  power  of  the  great  light  of  day,  of  the  glory  of  his  rising, 
of  the  strength  of  his  rays,  of  the  regularity  of  his  course,  of  the  penetrating 
power  of  his  heat,  and  they  spring  from  a  feeling  common  to  the  Hebrew  Psalmist 
and  to  those  who  raised  this  heathen  temple.  What,  then,  are  the  good  points  in 
that  ancient  belief  which  the  true  religion  has  adopted  for  its  own  and  sifted  from 
the  surrounding  evil  ?  This  temple  itself  is  connected  with  the  history  and 
traditions  both  of  the  wisest  and  greatest  thoughts  of  ancient  times,  and  with  the 
basest  and  most  foolish.  Its  earliest  foundations  are  said  to  go  back  to  the  days  of 
Solomon,  the  wisest  of  men.  In  its  latest  times  it  had  for  its  High  Priest  the  most 
infamous  and  effeminate  of  all  the  Roman  emperors — the  miserable  Heliogabalus. 
Between  the  two  there  was  at  first  sight  but  little  in  common.  Little,  indeed,  there 
is ;  but  it  is  that  little  which  is  so  useful  to  consider.  I.  The  sense  of  deep 
THANKFULNESS  FOB  THE  oiFTS  OF  NATUBE.    Those  who  lived  in  old  time  expressed, 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

as  we  see,  their  gratitude  and  reverence  for  the  gifts  of  nature  by  this  magnificent 
temple.  Let  us  express  our  gratitude  and  reverence  in  the  offering  of  pure  hearts 
and  good  lives  to  Him  who  has  thus  graciously  guided  us  so  nearly  to  the  close  of 
our  pilgrimage.  II.  And  this  brings  me  to  the  second  truth  which  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  natural  world — of  the  sun  in  his  strength — suggested  to  the  Psalmist: 
The  ordek,  the  kegularity,  the  law  of  their  operations.  And  this  law 
immediately  recalled  his  mind  to  the  highest  example  of  all  law — the  unchangeable 
moral  law  of  God.  He  tells  us  how  the  law  of  God  (the  revealed  law  of  goodness, 
the  natural  law  of  conscience)  is  not  only  what  we  are  bound  to  follow  as  our  duty, 
but  is  the  surest  source  both  of  our  wisdom  and  our  happiness.  See  how  he 
expatiates  on  this  theme  in  the  remainder  of  the  Psalm.  (Dean  Stanley. )  The 
sun  of  righteousness : — There  is  no  doubt  that  this  verse  describes  the  nativity  of 
our  Lord.  The  sun,  that  we  see  in  the  east-em  heavens,  is  made  to  us  an  image  of 
our  incarnate  Lord  and  Saviour,  issuing  from  the  Virgin's  womb  to  be  the  light  and 
life  of  the  Church.  It  is  not  a  new  or  strange  thing  for  Holy  Scripture  to  give 
such  a  turn  as  this  to  the  works  of  nature,  the  things  which  we  see  daily.  Compare 
the  figure  in  Malachi.  "Unto  you  that  fear  My  name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
arise,  with  healing  in  His  wings."  And  the  figure  used  by  Zacharias,  "The  Day- 
spring  from  on  high  hath  visited  us."  1.  Every  one  may  understand  that  as  the 
sun  is  beyond  comparison  the  brightest  object  in  these  outward  and  visible  heavens, 
so  the  great  privilege  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  kingdom  and  Church  of  God's 
saints,  is  to  have  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  God-made  man,  especially  present, 
abiding  and  reigning  in  it.  The  same  is  true  of  every  soul  which  is  inwardly  and 
spiritually  conformed  to  God's  holy  Church.  It  is  full  of  Christ,  of  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  silently  and  mysteriously  coming  in  and  dwelling  there.  2.  As  Christ  is 
a  sun  to  his  Church  by  His  glorious  abiding  in  it,  so  the  manner  in  which  He  came 
to  be  so  is  likened  to  "a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber,"  a  figure  for 
Christ's  marrying  the  nature  of  God  to  the  nature  of  man,  by  taking  on  Him  our 
flesh.  Our  Saviour,  God  made  man  for  us,  born  for  us,  crucified  and  risen  again, 
fills  the  whole  Church  and  the  whole  world.  Christ  is  whole  in  His  whole  Church, 
and  in  every  part  and  member  of  it,  as  the  sun  in  the  firmament  shines  impartially 
on  the  whole  world  beneath  him,  and  in  his  circuit  visits  each  part  in  turn  with  his 
warming  and  life-giving  beams.  But  Christ's  faithful  people  are  more  particularly 
made  aware  of  His  presence  by  the  outward  means  of  grace  and  the  visible 
ordinances  of  His  holy  Catholic  Church.  {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  "  Tracts 
for  the  Times")  The  tabernacle  of  the  sun : — It  was  not  till  the  fourth  day  that 
God  gathered  the  light  together  into  the  sun,  and  set  the  sun  in  heaven  to  give  light 
upon  the  earth,  and  to  rule  the  day.  Like  to  this  was  the  course  which  the  same 
wisdom  of  God  took  in  manifesting  the  light  of  truth,  without  which  there  can  be 
no  spiritual  life  or  peace  or  joy.  Such  is  the  waywardness  of  man,  that  he  can 
turn  God's  choicest  blessings  into  curses.  The  darkness  was  fighting  against  the 
light,  his  sin  went  well-nigh  to  choking  it.  But,  in  the  fuluess  of  time,  God 
gathered  the  light  together,  as  with  the  natural  sun  at  the  creation,  and  in  His 
Son,  to  the  end  that  all  might  see  and  know  from  whence  and  from  whom  the  true 
spiritual  light  came.  ...  If  there  was  music  in  heaven  when  the  Eternal  Son  left 
His  throne,  and  departed  to  clothe  himself  in  the  weakness  of  humanity,  what  joy 
there  must  have  been  when  He  returned  as  conqueror.  It  was  in  the  heavens  that 
God  set  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun  ;  and  so  in  the  heaven  of  heavens  He  set  a 
tabernacle  for  His  only-begotten  Son.  The  Gospel,  which  till  His  ascension  had  been 
like  a  young  half-fledged  bird,  which  never  ventured  but  a  few  paces  from  its  nest, 
now  suddenly  put  forth  its  wings,  and  flew  to  and  fro  over  the  earth,  and  ever  and 
anon  returned  to  its  ark  with  an  olive-leaf  in  its  mouth,  telling  that  the  waters  oi 
sin  were  abating.  And  as  the  sun  gives  not  only  light  but  heat,  so  does  Christ 
soften,  melt,  and  warm  the  heart  by  His  grace.  .  .  .  There  are  eclipses  of  the  sun  ; 
the  shadow  of  the  moon  comes  between  the  earth  and  the  sun,  and  cuts  ofl"  its  light. 
This  is  like  the  reason  of  man.  It  was  intended  to  give  us  light,  but,  like  the  moon, 
it  can  only  give  light  as  it  reflects  light  from  the  sun,  Christ.  There  are  many 
things  by  which  the  light  of  Christ  may  be  eclipsed  from  us.  If  we  pray  to  Him 
diligently  and  heartily  be  assured  He  mil  not  leave  us  in  darkness.     {J.  C.  Hare.) 

Ver.  6.  There  is  uotbing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof.— T^  moral  uses  of  the 
vxather: — 1.  The  contrasts  and  the  changes  of  the  seasons.  What  a  picture  of  the 
vicissitudes  of  htunan  life  is  in  them !  The  experience  of  thousands  has  ranged  from 
the  extreme  seTerity  of  winter's  poverty  to  the  scorching  blaze  of  midsummer 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  343 

prosperity.  The  man  of  wealth  yesterday  has  become  the  beggar  of  to-day.  Such 
contrasts  and  changes  seem  to  have  been  far  more  numerous  of  late  years  than 
formerly.  2.  Doubtless  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  have  their  part  to  play  in  the 
beneficent  economy  of  nature  ;  yet  no  one  doubts  the  physical  evils  that  arise  from 
them.  To  some,  no  doubt,  the  cold  of  winter  seems  invigorating  and  bracing,  but 
to  multitudes  severity  means  death.  So,  too,  there  may  be  those  to  whom  poverty 
and  trial  are  stimulants  to  patient  endurance,  and  develop  some  of  the  nobler 
qualities  of  the  soul.  We  question,  however,  whether  those  are  not  the  exceptions 
rather  than  the  rule.  Many  of  those  around  us  are  what  they  are  largely  because  of 
their  surroundings.  When  a  man  loses  the  stimulus  of  hope  it  is  not  very  likely 
that  his  life  will  blossom  into  much  moral  beauty.  We  often  hear  it  said,  that 
prosperity  is  more  dangerous  to  a  man's  virtues  than  adversity  ;  but  we  question 
whether  there  is  not  far  more  moral  evil  traceable  to  human  poverty  than  many 
well-to-do  philosophers  are  apt  to  imagine.  3.  The  poets  have  been  influenced  by 
something  more  than  fancy  when  they  have  associated  the  ideas  of  cold  and  death, 
heat  and  life.  Cold  is  only  a  relative  term.  Heat  is  essential  to  life.  4.  The  sun 
is  the  chief  source  whence  heat  is  derived.  The  resistless  energies  of  this  omnipotent 
and  all-pervading  agent  are  in  constant  operation.  There  is  not  an  instant  of  time 
that  heat  is  not  performing  some  important  duty  in  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  pur- 
poses. 5.  How  dependent  we  are  upon  the  weather  for  a  bountiful  harvest !  Every 
summer  brings  us  within  a  measurable  distance  of  absolute  want.  The  harvest,  at 
best,  does  but  provide  for  the  wants  of  the  year.  It  is  seemly,  then,  that  we  should 
pray  to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  our  "garners  may  be  full."  Practical  lessons 
— (1)  Earthly  prosperity  may  be  a  legitimate  object  of  desire.  There  is  a  cheap 
afifectation  of  virtue  which  pretends  to  despise  wealth.  (2)  Do  not  overlook  the 
connection  between  circumstance  and  condition.  (3)  Recognise  the  lesson  that 
spiritual,  not  less  than  physical,  life,  is  dependent  upon  heat.  It  is  so  in  the 
individual  soul ;  it  is  so  in  the  Church.  Some  men  lament  their  own  spiritual  dead- 
ness,  yet  never  take  any  steps  to  increase  their  store  of  vital  heat.  Death  is  the 
absence  of  life  ;  cold  is  the  absence  of  heat.  Nothing  can  quicken  the  life  of  the 
soul,  or  produce  in  us  the  beauty  of  holiness,  but  the  direct  influence  of  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness.  Only  as  we  can  get  more  perfectly  into  the  presence  of  God,  and 
have  our  cold  natures  warmed  and  our  languid  pulses  quickened  by  His  life,  shall 
we  have  that  for  which  we  yearn.     {F.  Wagstaff.) 

Ver.  7.  The  law  of  tlie  Lord  is  perfect. — The  lest  look : — I  would  not  have  you 
forget  the  true  and  proper  mission  of  the  Bible, — to  reveal  saving  truth.  But  it  is 
well  to  remember  that,  even  as  a  classic,  no  book  equals  the  Word  of  God.  The 
Bible  has  exercised  a  remarkable  influence  in  the  department  of  literature.  "The 
English  tongue  would  lose  its  grandest  monument  if  the  works  which  the  Bible  has 
inspired  were  blotted  from  it."  Religious  books,  of  course,  get  everything  from 
the  Bible  ;  but  writers  with  no  distinctly  religious  object  are  enormously  beholden 
to  its  inspiration.  There  is  not  a  notable  book — a  book  of  transcendent  genius  or 
power — which  has  not  culled  from  the  Word  of  God  either  thought  or  illustration  or 
telling  phrase.  We  need  not,  even  in  an  age  of  advanced  education  and  culture,  be 
ashamed  of  the  Bible.  Its  study  will  confer  as  much  credit  on  our  intellect  as  on 
our  piety.  We  are  not  such  Bible  readers  as  were  our  fathers.  This  is  one  evil  of 
the  multiplication  of  books.  In  this  generation  we  are  better  educated,  we  know 
more  than  our  fathers.  But  have  we  the  same  robust  and  vigorous  intellects  ?  It 
seems  to  me  that  there  is  a  deterioration  in  this  respect  along  with  our  neglect  of 
Bible  study.  There  are  three  things  which  should  make  the  Bible  popular  among 
young  people — 1.  Its  fervid  style.  There  is  not  a  dull  passage,  if  we  except  a  few 
chronologies  and  such  like,  from  Genesis  to  Revelation.  2.  Its  exuberance  of  illus- 
tration. It  is  a  book  of  pictures.  3.  Its  practical  wisdom.  If  you  live  seventy 
years  you  will  not  have  gathered  all  the  practical  wisdom  you  may  learn  now  from 
studying  the  Bible.  Do  not  forget  that  you  may  find  in  the  Bible  eternal  life. 
{A.  F.  Forrest.)  The  Bible  a  book  for  all  nations : — Of  what  is  not  the  Bible  the 
foundation  and  the  inspiration  ?  To  what  interest  of  human  life  does  it  not  give  its 
great  benediction  1  The  system  of  doctrine  and  duty  which  the  Bible  contains  is  a 
fixed  final  system,  not  a  progressive  one,  and  one  introductory  to  a  higher,  and  the 
Bible  will  never  become  obsolete,  and  will  never  be  supplemented  by  any  other 
revelation.  This  proposition  has  been  most  flatly  contradicted.  It  is  argued  that  the 
Bible  has  accomplished  a  very  good  purpose  in  the  world,  but  it  cannot  long  satisfy 
the  world's  need,  because  it  does  not  keep  pace  with  the  world's  progress.     By  and 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

by  we  shall  need  a  broader  basis  on  which  to  construct  the  religion  of  the  /utiire. 
A  time,  it  is  said,  must  come  when  the  theological  will  be  too  narrow  in  its  range 
for  the  demands  of  the  race,  and  too  dogmatic  in  its  tone  for  the  more  libcial, 
general,  comprehensive  religion  of  the  future.  We  are  invited  to  mark  the  univer- 
sality of  this  beautil'ul  law  ot  progressive  development  in  nature,  in  literature,  in  the 
fine  and  iu  the  useful  arts,  in  human  laws  and  institutions.  But  those  who  reason 
thus  overlook  the  distinction  between  the  apparent  and  the  real  progiess  of  man. 
The  true  progress  of  man  is  the  progress  of  man's  self,  apart  from  all  organisation. 
Those  who  eulogise  modern  progiess  confine  their  attention  to  what  man  does  to  pro- 
mote his  convenience  and  comfort.  How  absurd  it  is  to  mark  the  progress  of  a  man 
by  that  which  a  man  manipulates  and  moulds  and  makes  subservient  to  his  use  ! 
The  Bible  is  the  book  for  the  soul,  and  God  put  into  it  exactly  those  truths  that  He 
knew  were  calculated  to  regenerate  the  soul.  Unless  the  soul  needs  to  be  made  over, 
and  given  new  facilities,  you  do  not  want  a  new  Bible,  or  any  annex  to  the  old  one. 
There  is  another  great  distinction  to  keep  in  mind.  While  the  Bible  is  fixed  and 
will  never  be  supplemented,  the  principles  contained  in  it  are  admissible  of  universal 
and  of  endless  application,  and  for  that  reason  the  Bible  will  never  need  to  be  sup- 
plemented. It  is  with  the  Bible  as  it  is  with  nature.  No  new  laws  have  been  given 
to  nature  from  the  beginning.  And  yet  how  constantly  are  men  discovering  laws 
that  for  long  ages  were  hidden  from  human  eyes  :  and  men  of  science  will  tell  you 
that  there  are  now  many  latent  forces  in  nature  awaiting  the  genius  of  the  occasion 
when  they  shall  be  discovered  and  applied  to  the  use  of  man.  What  the  world 
wants  is  not  a  new  Bible,  or  new  principles,  or  new  truths,  but  the  recognition  of 
the  old,  and  the  legitimate  application  of  the  old  to  the  purposes  for  which  they 
were  intended.  So  when  new  forms  of  old  errors  arise,  we  do  not  want  a  new  Bible 
to  find  new  truths  with  which  to  antagonise  these  old  errors.  The  fact  is,  there  are 
no  new  forms  of  scepticism.  We  do  not  need  any  other  Bible,  or  a  supplement  to 
the  old,  because  the  Bible  is  a  book  that  has  a  friendly  voice  and  a  helping  hand  to 
every  race.  Here  is  a  book  equally  adapted  to  the  Oriental  and  the  Occidental 
mind  ;  adapted  alike  to  the  Mongolian  and  the  Circassian  mind  ;  adapted  to  all  the 
different  divisions  into  which  society  is  divided.  The  Bible  is  sufficient  for  the 
world's  need,  because  it  goes  down  to  the  very  foundation  of  man's  mental  and  moral 
structure,  and  takes  hold  of  that  which  is  sinful  in  his  soul's  life.  As  long  as  sin  and 
sorrow  are  in  the  world,  so  long  will  this  book  take  hold  of  that  wiiich  is  dee})est, 
and  truest,  and  profoundest  in  the  soul's  immortal  life.  And  the  Bible  gives  us  a 
perfect  ideal  in  the  character  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  Moreover,  we  do  not  need  a 
new  Bible,  because  we  do  not  want  any  new  motives  to  the  practice  of  the  greatest 
virtue.  {Moses  T.  Hoge,  D.D.)  The  perfect  law : — "  The  law  of  the  Lord  "  is  the 
Bible  phrase  for  describing  the  duty  which  God  requires  of  man.  This  law 
embraces  all  those  principles  by  which  our  inward  life  of  disposition  and  desire  and 
our  outward  life  of  word  and  action  ought  to  be  guided.  It  is  an  expression  of  the 
Divine  will  respecting  human  conduct.  But  perhaps  the  most  correct  view  of  the 
Moral  Law  is  that  contained  in  a  sentence  which  has  often  been  used  in  the  pulpits 
of  Scotland,  "the  Law  is  a  transcript  of  the  character  of  God."  Justice  and  truth 
and  love  are  the  very  elements,  so  to  speak,  of  His  own  moral  being  ;  they  have  an 
inherent  rightness,  and  so,  while  it  is  true  that  they  are  right  because  He  wills  them, 
a  deeper  truth  is  that  He  wills  them  because  they  are  right.  In  other  words,  while 
the  authority  of  the  law  rests  upon  the  Divine  will,  the  law  itself  has  its  basis  in 
the  Divine  nature.  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  woven  into  the  very  nature  of  the 
universe.  It  is  graven  in  indelible  lines  on  the  conscience  of  man.  But  we  must 
turn  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  for  the  fullest  exhibition  of  the  Moral  Law.  The  Bible, 
however,  is  not  a  hand-book  of  morals  after  the  common  style.  We  do  not  find  in 
it  a  systematic  exposition  of  law  for  national  or  individual  life  ;  and  even  those  parts 
of  it  which,  to  some  extent,  have  this  appearance,  come  far  short  of  being  a  full 
expression  of  the  perfect  law.  The  Mosaic  economy,  for  example,  looked  at  in  the 
light  of  the  higher  attainments  and  the  wider  wants  of  Gospel  times,  is  admittedly 
an  imperfect  economy  on  its  moral  as  well  as  on  its  ceremonial  side.  No  one  would 
dream  of  introducing  into  modern  law  its  enactments  respecting  (to  take  a  case) 
usury  or  divorce.  In  the  same  way  the  moral  lessons  taught  by  those  histories  of 
nations  and  individuals  of  which  the  Bible  is  largely  composed  are  often  doubtful. 
All  this  impresses  us  with  the  necessity  of  some  guiding  principle  to  enable  us  to 
gather  from  the  rich  variety  of  Holy  Scripture  the  law  of  God — His  will  for  our 
guidance.  Where,  then,  shall  we  go  for  this  guiding  and  testing  principle  ?  We 
answer  without  hesitation — to  Jesus  Christ  Himself.     The  chief  corner-stone  of  the 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  845 

Church  is  also  the  chief  corner-stone  of  Christian  morality.  He  came  "to  show 
us  the  Father,"  and  so  in  Him,  in  His  own  character  and  conduct  and  teaching,  we 
have  the  clearest  and  most  authoritative  revelation  of  the  Father's  law.  We  cannot 
over-estimate  the  value  of  having  the  law  of  God  exhibited  in  a  life  as  opposed 
to  any  statement  of  it  in  words.  In  the  life  of  our  blessed  Lord,  as  recorded  in  Holy 
Scripture  and  interpreted  to  His  followers  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and  by  the  providence 
of  God,  we  have  the  final  standard  of  moral  theory  and  practice.  He  is  the 
incarnate  Law.  Having  defined  what  the  law  of  the  Loi'd  is,  we  pass  on  to  see 
wherein  its  perfection  lies,  and  for  one  thing,  it  exhibits  the  quality  of  harmony. 
Every  lover  of  art  knows  that  the  chief  excellence  of  a  painting  lies  in  the  con- 
sistency of  its  various  parts  and  their  subordination  to  the  main  design.  A  similar 
principle  applies  to  music.  What  is  true  of  beauty  presented  to  the  eye  or  ear  holds 
good  of  truth  and  righteousness,  the  beauty  which  the  mind  only  can  perceive. 
The  ultimate  test  of  any  new  doctrine  lies  in  its  harmony  with  those  Scripture- 
sustained  convictions  which  we  have  already  formed.  The  law  of  the  Lord  has  this 
crowning  element  of  perfection — it  is  a  harmonious  unity  whose  parts  never  jar  or 
clash.  Of  course,  we  are  quite  familiar  with  the  objection  that  one  precept  of  Holy 
Scripture  sometimes  comes  into  antagonism  with  other  precepts.  The  obedience 
which  a  child  owes  to  God,  for  example,  can  only  be  rendered  sometimes  by  dis- 
obedience to  a  parent  whom  God  has  commanded  the  child  to  obey.  We  revert  to 
our  definition  of  the  law,  and  reply  that  this  objection  confounds  the  law  which  is 
perfect  and  eternal  with  particular  commandments  which  are  from  the  nature  of  the 
case  inadequate  and  temporary  expressions  of  the  law.  The  commandment  may  be 
inadequate,  for  it  is  only  the  verbal  form  in  which  the  spiritual  principle  is  clothed, 
and  the  letter  can  never  exhaust  or  completely  unfold  the  spirit.  The  command- 
ment, moreover,  may  be  only  the  temporary  form  of  the  eternal  law.  The 
Decalogue  is  indispensable  on  earth,  but  how  many  of  the  relations  which  it  is 
intended  to  regulate  will  have  ceased  to  exist,  or  be  radically  changed,  in  heaven  ! 
Thus  the  particular  precepts  of  the  law  may  be  temporary,  but  the  law  of  the  Lord 
which  is  perfect  abides  in  all  its  force  wherever  intelligent  beings  are.  {D. 
M'Kinnon,  M.A.)  A  tribute  to  the  law  of  God : — The  law  is  characterised  by  six 
names  and  nine  epithets  and  by  nine  effects.  The  names  are  law,  testimony, 
statutes,  commandments,  fear,  judgments.  To  it  are  applied  nine  epithets, 
namely,  perfect,  sure,  right,  pure,  holy,  true,  righteous,  desiiable,  sweet.  To  it  are 
ascribed  nine  effects,  namely,  it  converts  the  soul,  makes  wise  the  simple,  rejoices 
the  heart,  enlightens  the  eyes,  endures  forever,  enriches  like  gold,  satisfies  like 
honey,  warns  against  sin,  rewards  the  obedient.  The  central  thought  or  conception 
about  which  all  gathers  is  that  of  law.  There  is  a  profound  philosophy  in  this 
passage.  It  presents  Jehovah  as  Lord,  i.e.  "  Law-ward, "  or  guardian  of  law.  We 
are  to  conceive  of  God's  law  as — 1.  A  perfect  rule  of  duty,  having  a  basis  of  common 
law  beneath  all  its  statutory  provisions,  an  eternal  basis  of  essential  right  and 
wrong.  "Thou  shalt "  and  "thou  shalt  not,"  based  upon  eternal  principles,  not 
upon  an  arbitrary  will.  We  are  to  think  of  this  fabric  of  law  as — 2.  Supported  like 
a  grand  arch,  upon  two  great  pillars  :  reward  and  penalty.  The  whole  passage  is 
therefore  a  challenge  to  our  adoring  homage  and  obedience.  1.  The  law  is  a  perfect 
product  of  infinite  wisdom  and  love,  (Rom.  vii.  12,  14)  "holy,  just,  good, 
spiritual."  2.  It  is  enforced  by  Divine  sanctions  of  reward  and  penalty,  and  these 
are  each  equally  necessary  to  sustain  the  law  and  government  of  God.  The  testi- 
monies and  the  judgment  are  equally  perfect.  The  love  that  rewards  and  the 
wrath  that  punishes  are  equally  beautiful  and  perfect.  The  transcendent  thought 
of  the  whole  passage  is  that  obedience  is  a  privilege.  1.  Law  is  the  voice  of  love, 
not  simply  of  authority,  therefore  only  love  can  truly  fulfil.  2.  Obedience  is  self- 
rewarding  and  disobedience  self-avenging.  The  general  thought  of  this  whole  pass- 
age is,  obedience  the  highest  privilege.  1.  The  law  is  the  expression  of  Divine 
perfection  ;  hence  leads  to  perfection.  2.  Of  the  highest  love  ;  hence  must  be  inter- 
preted by  love  and  fulfilled  by  love.  3.  Of  the  highest  bliss — key  to  blessing  ; 
hence  the  door  to  promises.  4.  "  Our  schoolmaster  to  lead  us  to  Christ."  Cannot 
justify,  but  only  conduct  to  the  obedient  One  who  can  justify.  {Eomiletic  Monthly. ) 
The  perfect  law  of  God : — By  the  law  we  may  understand  the  entire  written  Word. 
I.  The  chaeacter  of  the  law.  Perfect,  that  is,  complete  and  entire.  See  the 
testimony — 1.  Of  Moses  (Deut.  vi.  6-8).  2.  David,  throughout  the  Psalms,  as  here  in 
our  text.  3.  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God.  4.  Paul  (1  Tim.  iii.  14,  17).  5.  Peter.  II.  Its 
EFFECTS.  "  Converting  the  soul. "  Note  what  conversion  is,  the  great  spiidtual 
change  in  a  man's  heart.    III.  Peactical  lessons.    1.  That  it  is  not  enough  to  have 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

a  mere  intellectual  acquaintance  with  the  Word  of  God.  2.  The  vast  criminality  of 
those  who  would  withhold  the  Word  of  God  from  men.  3.  How  dangerous  and  wicked 
to  turn  from  it  to  the  lying  fables  of  deluded  or  designing  men.  {J.  Allport.) 
The  light  of  nature : — It  was  not  in  the  material  heavens,  which  with  all  their 
grandeur  the  Psalmist  had  been  contemplating,  that  he  found  the  lesson  of  per- 
fection. He  turned  from  them  to  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  there  he  found  it. 
With  all  that  the  contemplation  of  nature  is  able  to  do,  it  cannot  regenerate  the 
spirit.  Neither  poetry  nor  philosophy  can  help  man  in  the  great  exigencies  of  life. 
None  of  them  can  do  any  good  to  a  dying  man.  The  damps  of  the  sepulchre  put  out 
their  light.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at.  The  works  of  nature  were  not  made 
to  last ;  hence  how  can  they  teach  lessons  for  immortality  ?  They  may  serve  man 
in  many  ways  here,  and  aid  his  piety  too,  if  he  be  a  converted  man.  But  they 
will  never  convert  him.  Man  needs  the  Bible  to  convert  him  to  God  and  to  fit 
him  to  die.  This  truth  has  to  be  insisted  on  in  our  day  which  speaks  so  much  of 
"the  light  of  nature,"  and  which  subjects  the  Bible  to  its  pretended  discoveries. 
But  we  maintain  that  it  is  insuflficient,  and  for  proof  we  appeal— I.  To  fact — 
HISTORY.  Glance — 1.  At  the  heathen  world  —  the  people  are  in  gross  darkness, 
2.  At  antiquity — they  knew  nothing  of  immortality,  or  the  holiness  of  God.  They 
never  had  any  natural  religion  ;  what  they  had  was  all  unnatural,  monstrous. 
Keason  failed  them.  They  knew  nothing  certainly,  though  they  made  many  con- 
jectures ;  what  little  light  they  had  came  from  tradition  and  through  the  Jews. 
II.  The  Scriptures  themselves.  These  teach  that  the  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God,  but  they  do  not  say  that  man  was  ever  converted  thereby.  III.  The 
inconclusiveness  of  the  arguments  employed  by  the  disciples  of  nature. 
They  say,  nature  teaches  the  existence  of  one  God.  But  until  the  Bible  has  taught 
you  this  you  cannot  know  it.  What  we  see  would  rather  teach  that  there  are  two 
deities,  a  good  and  a  bad  one.  And,  in  fact,  without  the  Bible  men  never  did 
believe  in  the  unity  of  God.  And  so  of  the  Divine  attributes.  His  uncliangeable- 
ness  and  goodness,  His  spirituality  and  His  will,  the  sanctions  of  His  law  and 
the  immortality  of  the  soul.  The  real  utility  of  all  the  light  of  nature  on  the 
subject  of  religion  consists  in  this :  that  it  demonstrates  its  own  insufficiency  for 
teaching  us  a  single  important  truth,  and  thus  turns  us  over  to  the  Word  of  God  ; 
and  having  done  so,  shines  as  a  constant  witness,  and  everywhere,  to  impress  the 
lessons  of  Bible-teaching  upon  us.  It  strikes  the  infidel  dumb,  and  aids  the 
devotions  of  the  Christian,  living  or  dying.  But  alone  it  teaches  nothing.  God 
never  said  it  could.  And  its  reasonings,  proudly  called  in  the  schools  "science" 
and  "  philosophy,"  vanish  into  smoke  when  we  touch  them.  You  will  never  read 
God's  world  rightly  till  His  Word  teaches  you  how.  After  it  has  taught  you  you 
may  gather  proofs  of  religion  from  nature  which  you  could  not  gather  before. 
The  lesson  is  in  nature  ;  but  nature  is  a  sealed  book  to  a  sinner.  It  may  silence  a 
sceptic,  it  cannot  satisfy  a  soul.  She  has  no  Christ  to  tell  of,  no  atonement,  no 
pardon,  no  firm  foothold  on  immortal  work.  She  cannot  make  men  wise  or  good 
or  happy,  or  inspire  with  blessed  hope.  {T,  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  Converting  the 
soul. — The  restoration  of  the  soul: — I.  What  is  here  meant  by  conversion? 
In  margin  it  is  rendered  "restoring."  This  restoring  the  soul  is  from  its  fall  in 
Adam  to  its  salvation  in  Christ.  1.  From  the  darkness  of  ignorance  to  the  light  of 
Divine  knowledge.  Ignorance  is  general  where  the  means  of  knowledge  are  not 
realised.  The  light  of  Divine  knowledge,  employing  and  enriching  the  under- 
standing, is  essential  to  the  restoration  of  the  soul.  2.  From  the  oppressive  weight  of 
contracted  guilt  to  a  state  of  conscious  acceptance  with  God  (Rom.  v.  1).  3.  From 
inward  depravity,  derived  from  our  first  parents,  to  a  conformity  to  the  moral 
image  of  God.  The  removal  of  guilt  from  the  conscience,  and  the  being  "sanctified 
wholly,"  are  distinct  attainments  in  the  Christian  life.  4.  From  a  state  of  misery 
to  the  possession  of  real  happiness.  How  can  men  but  be  miserable  in  sin  !  II.  The 
MEANS  BY  WHICH  THIS  RESTORATION  IS  EFFECTED.  By  the  perfect  law  of  the 
Lord.  For  law  read  doctrine.  This  doctrine  is — 1.  Divine  in  its  origin.  2.  Pure 
in  the  means  of  its  communication.  3.  Harmonious,  and  well  adapted  to  the  con- 
dition of  man  in  all  its  parts.  4.  Energetic  in  its  operations.  Improvement, — 
ministers  must  understand  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord  before  they  can  make  it  kno\vn 
to  others.  (Sketches  of  Four  Sundred  Sermons.)  The  Word  of  God  converting 
the  soul : — The  text  might  be  read,  "The  doctrine  of  the  Lord  is  perfect  restoring 
the  soul."  I.  The  soul  of  man  in  its  natural  state  requires  to  be  con- 
verted OR  restored.  See  how  abundant  is  the  Scripture  testimony  to  this  truth. 
Even  the  best  men  have  confessed  their  need.     David  says  of  himself,  ' '  Behold,  I 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  347 

was  shapen  in  iniquity,"  &c.  There  has  been  but  one  bright  exception  amongst 
men,  and  that  is  "the  Man  Christ  Jesus."  He  alone  "knew  no  sin."  It  is  the 
exception  which  proves  the  rule.     II.  But  many  take  exception  to  this  bt 

DENYING  THE  FACT  OF  THE  PEKVEESION  OF  THE  HUMAN  SOUL.       "  As  for  God,  HiS 

way  is  perfect,"  as  may  be  clearly  seen  from  those  of  His  works  which  sin  has  not 
depraved.  But  as  for  man,  Scripture  and  experience  alike  attest  that  he  has 
"corrupted  his  way."  III.  By  denying  that  man's  recovery  is  possible. 
But  wherefore  ?  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  Cannot  He  who  at  first  made 
man  upright  remodel  him  after  His  own  image  ?  IV.  By  denying  the  adequacy 
OF  the  means  of  recovery.  It  is  said  the  "Word  of  God  is  not  an  adequate 
instrument.  But  experience  has  proved  the  contrary.  For  the  word,  or  doctrine, 
of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  complete.  It  will  never  fail  of  the  desired  issue  in  those  who 
come  to  the  study  of  it  in  a  right  spirit.  (Thomas  Dale,  M.A.)  The  excellency 
of  Holy  Scripture : — There  are  two  methods  which  God  has  taken  for  instructing 
mankind.  He  has  taught  them  by  the  glories  of  creation  and  by  the  words  of 
Holy  Scripture.  But  man  as  a  sinner  has  no  ear  to  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  His 
works.  It  is  only  by  the  revealed  works  of  Scripture  that  he  can  find  the  way  of 
pardon  and  holiness.  I.  The  excellent  properties  of  the  Word  of  God.  As 
a  law  it  is  perfect.  Nothing  can  be  added  to  it,  nothing  taken  from  it.  It  con- 
tains all  our  duty  and  all  our  consolation  ;  all  that  is  necessary  to  make  us  happy 
and  holy.  The  writings  of  the  heathen  philosophers  contain  a  few  mutilated 
principles  and  some  fine  sentiments,  but  they  are  not  directed  to  any  great  end, 
nor  are  they  complete  in  themselves.  As  a  testimony  the  Word  of  God  is  sure. 
Considered  as  the  solemn  witness  and  attestation  of  God  to  all  those  truths  which 
concern  man's  everlasting  salvation,  it  is  sure.  It  comes  with  a  force  and  authority 
to  the  conscience.  It  follows  that  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right.  The  equity 
and  holiness  of  them  equal  their  completeness  and  certainty.  They  are  in  all 
respects  true  and  just  and  excellent.  There  is  nothing  harsh,  nothing  defiling, 
nothing  erroneous,  nothing  arbitrary  in  them.  They  have  not  only  authority,  but 
goodness  on  their  side.  It  is  a  further  property  of  the  Word  of  God  that,  as  a 
commandment,  it  is  pure.  The  Bible  is  a  clear  and  perspicuous  rule  of  duty.  Its 
pure  light  has  no  need  of  proofs,  reasonings,  evidences,  or  study.  When  con- 
sidered as  producing  the  fear  of  the  Lord  it  is  eternal.  The  obligations  of  revealed 
truth  are  perpetual.  II.  The  surprising  effects  which  the  Word  of  God 
produces.  1.  It  converts  the  soul.  This  is  the  first  thing  the  fallen  creature 
needs.  Scripture  begins,  where  man's  necessities  begin,  with  the  heart.  It  unfolds 
the  depravity  of  our  nature.  It  exhibits  the  astonishing  scheme  of  redemption 
in  the  death  of  the  incai'nate  Saviour.  2.  After  conversion  follows  joy.  3.  The 
sincere  student  will  advance  in  knowledge.  4.  It  induces  a  holy,  reverential  fear  of 
God.  Impress  the  high  and  aff'ectionate  regard  which  we  should  pay  to  Holy  Scripture. 
{Daniel  Wilson,  M.A.)  Revelation  and  conversion: — Trees  are  known  by  their 
fruit,  and  books  by  their  eff'ect  upon  the  mind.  By  the  "law  of  the  Lord "  David 
means  the  whole  revelation  of  God,  so  far  as  it  had  been  given  in  his  day.  It  is 
equally  true  of  all  revelation  since.  We  may  judge  by  its  effects  upon  our  own 
selves.  I.  The  work  of  the  Word  of  God  in  conversion.  Not  apart  from 
the  Spirit,  but  as  it  is  used  by  the  Spirit,  it — 1.  Convinces  men  of  sin  :  they  see 
what  perfection  is,  that  God  demands  it  and  that  they  are  far  from  it.  2.  Drives 
them  from  false  methods  of  salvation  to  bring  them  to  self-despair,  and  to  shut 
them  up  to  God's  method  of  saving  them.  3.  Reveals  the  way  of  salvation  through 
Christ  by  faith.  4.  Enables  the  soul  to  embrace  Christ  as  its  all  in  all,  by  setting 
forth  promises  and  invitations  which  are  opened  up  to  the  understanding  and  sealed 
to  the  heart.  5.  Brings  the  heart  nearer  and  nearer  to  God,  by  awakening  love, 
desire  for  holiness,  &c.  6.  Restores  the  soul  when  it  has  wandered,  bringing  back 
the  tenderness,  hope,  love,  joy,  &c.,  which  it  had  lost.  7.  Perfects  the  nature. 
The  highest  flights  of  holy  enjoyment  are  not  above  or  beyond  the  Word.  II.  The 
excellence  of  this  work.  Its  operations  are  altogether  good,  timed  and 
balanced  with  infinite  discretion.  1.  It  removes  despair  without  quenching 
repentance.  2.  Gives  pardon,  but  does  not  create  presumption.  3.  Gives  rest,  but 
excites  the  soul  to  progress.  4.  Breathes  security,  but  engenders  watchfulness. 
5.  Bestows  strength  and  holiness,  but  begets  no  boasting.  6.  Gives  harmony  to 
duties,  emotions,  hopes,  and  enjoyments.  7.  Brings  the  man  to  live  for  God  and 
with  God,  and  yet  makes  him  none  the  less  fitted  for  the  daily  duties  of  life. 
III.  The  consequent  excellence  of  the  Word.  1.  We  need  not  add  to  it  to 
secure  conversion  in  any  case.     2.  We  need  not  keep  back  any  doctrine  for  fear  of 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

dampina;  the  flame  of  a  true  revival.  3.  We  need  not  extraordinary  gifts  to  preach 
it,  the  Word  will  do  its  own  work.  4.  We  have  but  to  follow  it  to  be  converted,  and 
to  keep  to  it  to  become  tiuly  wise.  It  fits  man's  needs  as  the  key  the  lock.  Cling 
to  it,  study  it,  use  it.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  8.  The  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart. — Joy  in  God's 
statutes : — Not  content  with  celebrating  the  eternal  fitness  and  rectitude  of  the 
Divine  statutes,  the  Psalmist  recommends  them  by  an  argument  of  a  less  abstract 
nature,  more  closely  adapted  to  our  feelings  and  interests,  by  adding  that  in  conse- 
quence of  their  inherent  rectitude  they  tend  to  rejoice  the  heart.  The  word 
' '  statutes  "  includes  the  whole  system  of  Divine  precepts  contained  in  the  Scriptures. 
Such  is  the  goodness  and  condescension  of  God,  that  with  our  duty  He  has  strictly 
connected  not  only  our  happiness  in  general,  but  even  our  present  pleasure.  Two 
things  are  necessary  in  order  to  produce  true  and  rational  joy  in  the  human  mind, 
namely,  objects  suited  to  its  faculties,  and  faculties  in  proper  disposition  to  receive 
impressions  from  them.  In  each  of  these  views  the  Holy  Scriptures,  as  they  con- 
tain the  Divine  laws,  are  calculated  to  produce  this  happy  temper.  What  has  here 
been  asserted  of  all  the  discoveries  and  demands  of  God  s  revealed  will  is  particularly 
applicable  to  its  perceptive  part,  which  has  a  tendency  to  rejoice  the  heart  of  the 
sincerely  pious,  in  theory,  in  practice,  and  on  reflection.  What  further  evinces  the 
excellence  of  the  Divine  statutes  is,  that  the  joy  they  inspire  is  pure  and  unmixed. 
The  religious  joy  which  arises  immediately  from  reflection  on  a  virtuous  practice 
increases  the  sublime  pleasure  which  springs  up  in  the  mind  of  a  good  man  when 
he  contemplates  his  relation  to  his  God  and  Saviour.  (P.  0.  Sowden.)  The 
Bible  right. — Old  books  go  out  of  date.  Whatever  they  were  about,  men  no  longer 
care  for  them.  Books  are  human  ;  they  have  a  time  to  be  born,  they  grow  in 
strength,  they  have  a  middle-life  of  usefulness,  then  comes  old  age,  they  totter  and 
they  die.  Many  of  the  national  libraries  are  merely  the  cemeteries  of  dead  books. 
Some  were  virtuous,  and  accomplished  a  glorious  mission.  Some  went  into  the  ashes 
through  inquisitorial  fires.  Not  so  with  one  old  book.  It  started  in  the  world's 
infancy.  It  grew  under  theocracy  and  monarchy.  It  withstood  the  storms  of  fire. 
It  grew  under  the  prophet's  mantle  and  under  the  fisherman's  coat  of  the  apostles. 
In  Rome,  and  Ephesus,  and  Jerusalem,  and  Patmos  tyranny  issued  edicts  against 
it,  and  infidelity  put  out  the  tongue,  and  the  papacy  from  its  monasteries,  and 
Mohammedanism  from  its  mosques,  hurled  their  anathemas  ;  but  the  old  Bible 
lived.  It  came  across  the  British  Channel  and  was  greeted  by  Wycliff'  and  James  I. 
It  came  across  the  Atlantic  and  struck  Plymouth  Rock,  until,  like  that  of  Horeb,  it 
gushed  with  blessedness.  Churches  and  asylums  have  gathered  all  along  its  way, 
ringing  their  bells,  and  stretching  out  their  hands  of  blessing.  But  it  will  not  have 
accomplished  its  mission  until  it  has  climbed  the  icy  mountains  of  Greenland, 
until  it  has  gone  over  the  granite  cliff's  of  China,  until  it  has  thrown  its  glow  amid 
the  Australian  mines,  until  it  has  scattered  its  gems  among  the  diamond  districts 
of  Brazil,  and  all  thrones  shall  be  gathered  into  one  throne,  and  all  crowns  by  the 
fires  of  revolution  shall  be  melted  into  one  crown,  and  this  Book  shall  at  the  very 
gate  of  heaven  have  waved  in  the  ransomed  empires — not  until  then  will  that 
glorious  Bible  have  accomplished  its  mission.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The 
Bible  right : — 1.  The  Bible  is  eight  in  its  authentication.  I  say,  if  the 
Bible  had  been  an  imposition  ;  if  it  had  not  been  written  by  the  men  who 
said  they  wrote  it  ;  if  it  had  been  a  mere  collection  of  falsehoods,  it  would 
have  been  scouted  by  everybody.  If  that  book  has  come  down  through  the 
centuries  without  a  scar,  it  is  because  there  is  nothing  in  it  disturbable.  When 
men  began  their  opposition  to  it  there  were  two  or  three  thousand  copies  ; 
now  there  are  two  hundred  millions,  so  far  as  I  can  calculate.  Would  that 
have  been  so  had  it  been  an  imposture  ?  Further,  suppose  there  was  a  great 
pestilence,  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  were  dying  of  that  pei^i'lonce,  and 
some  one  should  find  a  medicine  that  in  one  day  cured  ten  thou.-.;  '  people, 
would  not  all  men  say  that  was  a  good  medicine  ?  But  just  so  it  has  been  with  the 
Bible.  It  has  cured  men  of  the  Avorst  leprosy,  the  leprosy  of  sin.  Modern  dis- 
coveries in  Petra,  Nineveh,  Palestine  have  all  gone  to  prove  its  truth.  II.  The 
Bible  is  right  in  style.  I  know  there  are  a  great  many  people  who  think  it  is 
merely  a  collection  of  genealogical  tables  and  dry  facts.  That  is  because  they  do 
not  know  how  to  read  the  Book.  You  take  up  the  most  interesting  novel  that  was 
ever  written,  and  if  you  commence  at  the  four  hundredth  page  to-day,  and  to-morrow 
at  the  three  hundredth,  and  the  next  day  at  the  first  page,  how  much  sense  or 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  349 

interest  would  you  gather  from  it  ?  Yet  that  is  the  very  process  to  which  the 
Bible  is  subjected  every  day.  An  angel  from  heaven  reading  the  Bible  in  that  way 
could  not  understand  it.  The  Bible,  like  all  other  palaces,  has  a  door  by  which  to 
enter  and  a  door  by  which  to  go  out.  Genesis  is  the  door  to  go  in,  and  Revelation 
the  door  to  go  out.  These  Epistles  of  Paul  the  Apostle  are  merely  letters  written, 
folded  up,  and  sent  by  postmen  to  the  different  Churches.  Do  you  read  other 
letters  the  way  you  read  Paul's  letters  ?  Suppose  you  get  a  business  letter,  and  you 
know  that  in  it  there  are  important  financial  propositions,  do  you  read  the  last  page 
first  and  then  one  line  of  the  third  page,  and  another  of  the  second,  and  another  of 
the  first  ?  Besides  that,  people  read  the  Bible  when  they  cannot  do  anything  else. 
It  is  a  dark  day  and  they  do  not  feel  well,  and  they  do  not  go  to  business,  and  after 
lounging  about  awhile  they  pick  up  the  Bible — their  mind  refuses  to  enjoy  the 
truth.  Or  they  come  home  weary  from  the  store  or  shop,  and  they  feel,  if  they  do 
not  say,  it  is  a  dull  book.  While  the  Bible  is  to  be  read  on  stormy  days,  and  while 
your  head  aches,  it  is  also  to  be  read  in  the  sunshine  and  when  your  nerves,  like 
harp-strings,  thrum  the  song  of  health.  While  your  vision  is  clear,  walk  in  this 
paradise  of  truth  ;  and  while  your  mental  appetite  is  good,  pluck  these  clusters  of 
grace.  Note  its  conciseness.  Every  word  is  packed  full  of  truth.  Nine-tenths  of 
all  the  good  literature  of  this  age  is  merely  the  Bible  diluted.  See  also  its  variety  ; 
not  contradiction  or  collision,  but  variety.  Just  as  in  the  song,  you  have  the  basso 
and  alto,  and  soprano  and  tenor — they  are  not  in  collision  with  each  other,  but 
come  in  to  make  up  the  harmony — so  it  is  in  this  book,  there  are  different  parts  of 
this  great  song  of  redemption.  The  prophet  comes  and  takes  one  part,  and  the 
patriarch  another,  and  the  evangelist  another,  and  the  apostles  another,  and  yet 
they  all  come  into  the  grand  harmony — the  song  of  "  Moses  and  the  Lamb."  God 
prepared  it  for  all  zones — arctic  and  tropics,  as  well  as  the  temperate  zone.  The 
Arabian  would  read  it  on  his  dromedary,  and  the  Laplander  seated  on  the  swift 
sledge,  and  the  herdsman  of  Holland,  guarding  the  cattle  in  the  grass,  and  the 
Swiss  girl,  reclining  amid  Alpine  crags.  Thus  suited  to  all  is  it,  and  hence  I 
cannot  help  saying,  The  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right.  IIL  And  the  Bible  is 
KIGHT  IN  ITS  DOCTRINES.  Man,  a  sinner  ;  Christ,  a  Saviour — the  two  doctrines. 
All  the  mountains  of  the  Bible  bow  down  to  Calvary.  IV.  And  in  its 
EFFECTS.  I  do  not  care  where  you  put  the  Bible,  it  just  suits  the  place,  Whether 
in  the  hands  of  a  man  seeking  salvation,  or  one  discouraged,  or  one  in  trouble,  or 
one  bereaved — it  is  the  grand  catholicon  for  them  all.  Father  and  mother,  take 
down  that  long-neglected  Bible.  Where  is  it  now  ?  Is  it  in  the  trunk,  or  on  the 
upper  shelf,  or  is  it  in  the  room  in  the  house  where  you  seldom  go  save  when  you 
have  company,  and  then  not  to  read  the  Bible  ?  In  the  name  of  the  God  who  will 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  by  the  interests  of  your  immortal  soul  and  the 
souls  of  yoiu-  children,  I  charge  you  to-day  to  take  up  that  old  Bible,  open  it,  read 
for  your  own  life,  and  read  for  the  life  of  your  children.  How  can  you  go  out  on 
the  dark  mountains  of  death,  and  take  your  children  along  with  you,  when  you 
have  such  a  glorious  lamp  to  guide  you  ?  Put  that  Bible  on  every  rail-train,  until 
all  the  dark  places  of  our  land  are  illuminated  by  it.  Put  it  on  every  ship  that 
crosses  the  sea,  until  the  dark  homes  of  heathenism  get  the  light.  While  I  speak, 
there  comes  to  us  the  homd  yell  of  heathen  worship,  and  in  the  face  of  this  day's 
sun  gushed  the  blood  of  human  sacrifice.  Give  them  the  Bible.  Tell  them,  "God 
so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave,"  &c.  {T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  The  Word  of  God 
rejoicing  the  heart: — I.  The  statutes  of  God  are  the  first  principles  of 
RELIGIOUS  duty,  ot  the  means  of  grace.  They  are  rules  of  life  and  action  relating, 
first,  to  our  communion  with  God,  our  religious  service  ;  and  then,  to  our  intercourse 
with  one  another.  And  they  are  "right"  in  many  different  senses — counteracting 
the  tendency  of  man's  sinful  heart,  supplying  a  stimulant  to  duty  ;  right,  too,  in 
their  operation  and  in  their  consequences,  both  as  to  this  world  and  the  next. 
What  they  engage  to  do  they  accomplish.  Infidelity  can  make  no  such  boast. 
II.  They  rejoice  the  heart.  1.  What  is  rejoicing,  the  joy  of  the  heart  ?  We 
should  base  it  upon  natural  affection,  mutual  harmony  and  confidence,  rendering 
and  receiving  to  and  from  all  what  is  due.  It  operates  in  the  home,  and  amongst 
our  neighbours,  and  throughout  society.  Such  are  a  happy  people.  2.  And  the 
statutes  of  the  Lord  do  effect  this ;  hence  God's  statutes  have  been  our  songs  in  the 
house  of  our  pilgrimage.  (Thomas  Dale,  M.  A.)  The  Bible  always  right: — If  my 
compass  always  points  to  the  north  I  know  how  to  use  it  ;  but  if  it  veers  to  other 
points  of  the  compass,  and  I  am  to  judge  out  of  my  own  mind  whether  it  is  right  or 
not,  I  may  as  well  be  without  the  thing  as  with  it.     If  my  Bible  is  right  always,  it 


350  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xir. 

will  lead  me  right ;  and  as  I  believe  it  is,  so  I  shall  follow  it  and  find  the  truth. 
A  wrong  and  a  right  standard: — It  is  stated  that  when  the  United  States  Govern- 
ment's dock  at  Brooklyn  was  finished,  on  inspecting  it,  it  was  found  to  be  two  feet 
too  short  to  take  in  the  vessels  which  needed  repairs.  This  involved  a  reconstruction 
of  the  work  at  great  expense.  How  it  occurred  was  a  mystery,  but  it  appeared  on 
investigation  that  the  contractor,  in  making  his  measurements,  used  a  tape-line 
which  was  a  fraction  of  an  inch  too  short.  Either  it  had  shrunk,  or  it  was  imper- 
fectly made  at  first  ;  in  some  way  the  tape  was  too  short,  and  so  the  dock  was  too 
short  also.  The  importance  of  a  correct  standard  can  hardly  be  exaggerated. 
Whether  it  be  a  standard  of  weights,  measures,  values,  or  moral  qualities,  a  slight 
variation  from  that  which  is  right  and  true  produces  disastrous  results.  The 
Bible  right,  the  reader  may  he  wrong : — As  a  mirage  is  mistaken  for  a  reality,  because 
of  the  effect  of  the  sun's  rays  upon  the  organs  of  vision  ;  so  with  those  that  are 
detecting  flaws  in  the  Bible.  It  is  because  the  eye  is  diseased,  and  sees  double 
where  the  object  is  single.  The  fault  is  in  the  eye,  not  in  the  Bible.  The  com- 
mandment of  the  Lord  is  pure,  enlightening  the  eyes. — The  spiritual  nature  and 
enlightening  efficacy  of  the  moral  law  : — The  purity  of  the  law,  if  there  were  no  other 
evidence,  is  sufficient  to  establish  the  fact,  that  it  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord. 
We  wish  to  set  before  you  the  moral  law  in  its  essential  and  Divine  purity. 
During  the  patriarchal  ages  there  was  no  written  document  bearing  the  sanction 
of  a  Divine  moral  law.  Tradition,  so  long  as  man  is  either  fallible  or  fallacious, 
cannot  possibly,  for  any  length  of  time,  form  a  channel  for  truth.  By  and  by  it 
pleased  God  to  inscribe  with  His  own  finger  upon  tablets  of  stone  the  substance  of 
those  floating  intimations  which  He  had  made  from  time  to  time  to  His  servants  of 
old.  The  law  was  ordained  for  something  beyond  the  mere  curbing  of  transgressions  ; 
its  further  object  was  to  detect,  expose,  and  condemn  the  transgressing  principle  ; 
in  other  words,  by  the  purity  which  it  developed  and  enforced  to  enlighten  man's 
eyes  upon  the  character  of  God,  the  extent  of  his  own  moral  ruin,  and  the 
absolute  necessity  of  the  restoration  of  the  moral  principle.  The  human  soul  never 
was  sufl"ered  to  lose  an  intuitive  sense  of  the  simple  fact  that  there  is  a  God  ;  but 
having  assented  to  this  simple  fact,  the  human  mind,  by  its  own  light,  made  no 
further  progress  towards  the  discovery  of  the  Divine  character.  We  attribute  this 
failure  to  moral  rather  than  physical  causes.  The  intellect  was  not  so  much  in 
fault  as  the  heart.  Man's  favourite  sins  were  thought  by  him  not  only  to  experience 
the  Divine  toleration,  but  even  to  form  no  insignificant  elements  in  the  Divine 
character,  so  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  turn  over  the  records  of  the  pagan 
theology,  whensoever  he  wished  to  place  some  act  of  crime  under  the  protection  and 
the  patronage  of  the  god  of  lust,  or  fraud,  or  violence.  It  was  in  order  to  afford 
some  remedy  for  this  dreadful  evil — in  order  to  vindicate  His  own  character  as  well 
as  to  elevate  that  of  His  creatures,  that  God  published  His  moral  law.  The  tenor 
of  the  law  proclaimed  at  once  the  high  strain  of  moral  perfection  belonging  by  right 
of  nature  to  the  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  But  does  man  like  these  ordinances  ? 
Do  these  definitions  of  duty  suit  his  feelings  ?  If  he  confess  the  truth  he  will 
confess  that  he  hates  such  instruction.  Many,  however,  even  with  the  law  of  God 
in  their  hands,  are  never  brought  to  this  confession.  Tliey  have  not  been  led  to  see 
the  mighty  moral  difference  between  the  mind  that  originated  and  the  minds  that 
received  the  law.  This  comes  of  carelessness  and  prejudice.  Upon  the  careless 
generalising  of  human  with  Divine  systems  of  law  the  whole  mistake  hinges  about 
Christian  morals.  But  human  laws  only  touch  actions.  Divine  laws  touch  morals, 
that  is,  touch  motive  and  action  in  conjunction.  Therefore  I  am  a  transgressor  of 
Divine  laws  if  motive  as  well  as  action  do  not  tender  homage  and  obedience. 
Bring  human  perfection,  of  whatever  nature,  side  by  side  with  the  perfection  of  the 
moral  law,  and  of  the  first  the  end  appears  at  once.  The  law  shows  us  our  moral 
ruin,  our  spiritual  death.  But  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to 
every  one  that  believeth."     {T.  E.  Hankinson,  If. A.) 

Ver.  9.  The  feax  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  enduring  for  ever. — The  Word  of  God 
endnriiig  for  ever : — We  are  to  consider  the  abiding  and  habitual  effect  of  the  Word 
of  God  upon  believing  hearts.  And  this  effect  is  expressed  in  this  phrase,  "  the 
fear  of  the  Lord."  Note  what  is  said  of  it.  I.  It  is  clean — its  purity.  It  is  so, 
because  it  is  the  only  true  and  sound  basis  of  a  due  social  regard  to  man,  and  the 
only  valid  bond  of  union,  whether  domestic,  private,  or  public.  Every  believer 
ought  to  bear  witness  to  the  cleansing,  purifying  power  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 
II.  Its  perpetuity— "  enduring  for  ever.^'    This  tells  of  the  eff'ect  of  the  principle 


PSALM  xix]  THE  PSALMS.  351 

rather  than  of  the  principle  itself,  though  this  latter  is  not  to  be  omitted.  But  in 
its  effects  it  is  consistent,  unswerving,  abiding,  all-powerful.  It  enters  into  the 
man,  and  goes  with  him  wherever  he  goes.  He  cannot  and  would  not  shake  it  ofiF. 
And  its  effects  are  eternal,  they  can  never  pass  away.  And  all  may  possess  it, 
through  Christ.  It  shall  be  for  your  peace  here  and  happiness  hereafter.  {Thomas 
Dale,  M.A.)  The  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous  altogether. — 
The  Word  of  God  altogether  true  and  righteous: — I.  Consider  these  judgments  as 
MATTERS  OF  FACT.  Take — 1.  The  expulsion  of  our  first  parents  from  Eden.  None 
can  understand  why  God  created  man  capable  of  falling,  and  foreknowing  that  he 
would  fall.  But  this  does  not  say  that  God  made  him  on  purpose  that  he 
should  fall.  This  would  be  to  assume  that  we  know  all  God's  purpose  in  creating 
man,  which  we  do  not.  We  cannot  reconcile  the  supremacy  of  God  and  the  free 
agency  of  man.  It  is  of  no  use  to  attempt  to  be  "wise  above  what  is  written," 
but  our  duty  is  to  take  man  as  he  is — capable  of  understanding  and  obeying  God's 
command,  which  Adam  unquestionably  was.  There  was  in  him  no  moral  difficulty 
as  in  us,  since  the  imagination  of  his  heart  was  not,  as  ours,  "  evil  continually." 
We  must  deplore  the  instability  of  the  man,  but  we  cannot  on  that  account  take 
exception  to  the  judgments  of  the  Lord.  And  the  transmission  to  offspring  of  the 
properties  of  the  parent — this  law  had  been  ordained  before  this  fatal  event,  and 
what  right  have  we  to  think  that  He  who  made  all  things  "very  good"  should 
remodel  or  reverse  His  laws  in  consequence  of  that  event?  Hence,  although  "in 
Adam  all  die,"  was  it  unrighteous  in  God  to  act  in  accordance  with  His  own 
previously  established  law  ?  Adam  himself  caused,  of  his  own  choice,  that  it 
should  work  ill  to  him  and  his.  But  are  we  to  blame  God  for  that  ?  2.  The 
judgment  upon  Cain.  Surely  this  was  far  less  than  he  deserved.  And  the  gate  of 
mercy  and  of  grace  was  not  closed  upon  him.  3.  The  deluge,  the  overthrow  of 
Jerusalem,  and  many  others.  In  reference  to  each  of  these  we  might  prove  it  to  be 
"altogether  righteous."  For  by  righteous  we  understand  perfect  consistency  with 
previous  revelations  given  by  God — with  the  laws  enacted  and  bearing  on  each 
case,  and  with  the  penalties  threatened  by  God  and  consciously  incurred  by  man. 
And  when  men  object  to  these  judgments  they  do  not  attempt  to  justify  the  con- 
duct of  the  sinner,  but  only  to  condemn  the  law  under  which,  and  the  Judge  by 
whom,  he  was  condemned.  They  affirm  that  God  is  without  compassion  for  human 
frailty,  and  without  consideration  for  human  folly.  II.  As  matters  of  faith — 
they  are  altogether  true.  Necessarily,  many  of  the  judgments  of  God  are  matters 
of  faith.  For  the  interpositions  of  God,  though  sometimes  seen  in  the  crisis  and 
agony  of  nations,  are,  in  the  case  of  individuals,  scarcely,  if  at  all,  discernible. 
III.  In  their  bearing  upon  ourselves.  As  we  cannot  impeach  God's  righteous- 
ness in  His  judgments  in  the  past,  can  we,  in  what  we  expect  in  the  future,  doubt 
His  truth?  Meantime  "the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world  is  this,  even  our 
faith."     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  10.  More  to  be  desired  are  they  than  gold. — The  Holy  Scriptures: — 
I.  The  excellence  of  the  Holt  Scriptures.  None  are  ignorant  of  the  value 
of  money.  Money  gives  access  to  every  other  possession.  Point  out  the  vanity  of 
riches.  They  cannot  benefit  the  possessor  beyond  this  life.  They  are  unsatisfying 
in  their  nature.  The  attainment  of  them  is  only  within  the  reach  of  a  few  in 
every  community.  And  they  bring  temptations  to  sin.  Then,  is  not  the  Word 
of  God  more  to  be  desired  than  gold  ?  II.  The  way  to  know^  the  value  of 
Scripture,  and  to  taste  its  sweetness.  Many  are  but  formal  readers.  To 
read  aright,  you  must  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  minds.  There  must  be  a 
Divine  illumination.  Pray  more  for  the  Spirit's  influence.  If  we  would  under- 
stand the  value  of  the  Scriptures,  we  shall  find  it  useful  to  reflect  upon  their 
designs  and  our  circumstances.  And  we  must  read  them  with  patient  perseverance. 
(Carus  Wilson.)  The  Bible  valued  above  all  else : — On  yon  stormy  shore,  where, 
amid  the  wreck  the  night  had  wrought,  and  the  waves,  still  thundering  as  they 
sullenly  retire,  had  left  on  the  beach,  lies  the  naked  form  of  a  drowned  sailor  boy. 
He  had  stripped  for  one  last,  brave  fight  for  life,  and  wears  nought  but  a  handker- 
chief bound  round  his  cold  breast.  Insensible  to  pity,  and  unawed  by  the  presence 
of  death,  those  who  sought  the  wreck,  as  vultures  swoop  down  on  their  prey, 
rushed  on  the  body,  and  tore  away  the  handkerchief — tore  it  open,  certain  that  it 
held  within  its  folds  gold,  his  little  fortune,  something  very  valuable  for  a  man  in 
such  an  hour  to  say,  I'll  sink  or  swim  with  it.  They  were  right.  But  it  was  not 
gold.     It  was  the  poor  lad's  Bible — also  a  parting  gift,  and  the  more  precious  that 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  XIX. 

it  was  a  mother's.  The  priceless  worth  of  the  Bible : — A  Christian  soldier  told  us  of 
a  comrade  who  called  the  Bible  ' '  his  Klondyke, "  and,  as  samples  of  what  he  called 
"good  lumps  of  gold,"  gave  us  Psa.  xci.  15.  "I  will  answer  him.  I  will  be  with 
him  ...  I  will  deliver  him  .  .  .  satisfy  him,  aud  show  him  My  salvation."  Let 
us  put  in  for  a  claim  in  this  Klondyke,  aud  dig  for  its  hid  treasures.  The  excellenc* 
of  the  Scriptures : — I.  The  important  discoveries  which  the  Scriptures  con- 
tain. They  make  known  to  us  the  glory  of  the  invisible  God,  as  a  pure  and  perfect 
Spirit,  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  His  being,  wisdom,  power,  holiness, 
justice,  goodness,  and  truth.  An  explicit  revelation  of  His  will  to  man,  and  of  the 
manner  in  which  He  requires  to  be  worshipped  and  served.  Here  is  discovered  to 
us  our  once  innocent  and  exalted,  but  now  guilty  and  fallen,  state.  Here  is  made 
known  to  us  the  way  of  salvation,  by  which  we  may  be  restored  to  the  favour,  the 
image,  aud  the  enjoyment  of  God.  II.  The  effects  which  they  prodticb  upon 
the  condition  of  mankind.  Even  in  respect  of  outward  civilisation  much 
advantage  has  arisen  to  the  world  from  the  introduction  of  the  Scriptures.  Even 
where  they  are  not  attended  with  saving  efficacy  they  are  often  seen  to  produce  a 
considerable  influence  upon  the  external  manners,  and  sometimes  too  upon  the 
inward  dispositions  of  men.  But  the  transcendent  excellence  of  the  Scriptures  is 
peculiarly  manifested  in  their  efficacy,  when  accompanied  with  the  influence  of 
Divine  grace.  The  Scriptures  are  the  means  of  spiritual  illumination,  of  conversion 
and  regeneration,  of  sanctification  and  a  meetness  for  eternal  life.  III.  The 
admirable  adaption  of  the  Scriptures  to  the  various  circumstances  of 
MEN.  Here  is  something  suited  to  every  rank  and  every  age.  The  Scriptures  set 
forth  a  perfect  rule  of  duty,  with  which  no  system  of  heathen  morality  is  once  to  be 
compared,  and  they  exhibit  incitements  and  encouragements,  as  well  as  examples  of 
holiness,  which  are  nowhere  else  to  be  found.  Their  excellency  is  especially  seen 
in  their  tendency  and  efficacy  to  afford  consolation  in  time  of  trouble  and  in  the 
prospect  of  death.  Lessons — 1.  Admire  the  distinguishing  goodness  of  God  toward 
us.  2.  Diligently  use  God's  gift.  3.  Recognise  the  obligation  to  cii'culate  the 
Scriptures  among  our  fellow-men.  {D.  Dickson.)  Sweeter  also  than  honey  and 
the  honeycomb. — The  Bible  sweeter  than  honey : — Among  the  insects  which  subsist 
on  the  sweet  sap  of  flowers  there  are  two  very  diS'erent  classes.  One  is  remarkable 
for  its  imposing  plumage,  which  shows  in  the  sunbeams  like  the  dust  of  gems  ;  and 
as  you  watch  its  jaunty  gyrations  over  the  fields,  and  its  minuet  dance  from  flower 
to  flower,  you  cannot  help  admiring  its  graceful  activity.  In  the  same  field  there  is 
another  worker,  whose  brown  vest  and  straightforward  flight  may  not  have  arrested 
your  eye.  His  fluttering  neighbour  darts  down  here  and  there,  and  sips  elegantly 
wherever  he  can  find  a  drop  of  ready  nectar  ;  but  this  dingy  plodder  makes  a  point 
of  alighting  everywhere,  and  wherever  he  alights  he  either  finds  honey  or  makes  it. 
"What  is  the  end  ?  The  one  died  last  October  along  with  the  flower ;  the  other  is 
warm  in  his  hive  to-night,  amidst  the  fragrant  stores  which  he  gathered  beneath 
the  bright  beams  of  summer.  Honey  is  the  sweetest  of  all  substances,  and  the 
ancients,  who  were  unacquainted  with  sugar,  attached  even  more  importance  to  it 
than  we  do.  "A  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  "  presented  the  very  strongest 
attractions  to  the  Oriental  taste.  The  idea  conveyed  by  the  text  is  this :  that  the 
truth  of  God,  as  revealed  to  us  in  the  Bible,  affords  more  real  pleasure  to  the  soul 
than  that  which  epicures  consider  the  most  desirable  luxury  does  to  the  palate.  In 
that  remarkable  book.  The  Eclipse  of  Faith,  there  is  a  chapter  entitled  "The  Blank 
Bible,"  in  which  the  author  describes  a  dream,  wherein  he  fancied  that  on  taking 
up  his  Greek  Testament  one  morning,  to  read  his  accustomed  chapter,  the  old 
familiar  volume  seemed  to  be  a  total  blank.  Supposing  that  some  book  like  it  had, 
by  accident,  got  iato  its  place,  he  did  not  stop  to  hunt  it  up,  but  took  down  a  large 
copy  of  the  Bible,  and  this,  to  his  amazement,  proved  also  to  be  a  blank  from 
beginning  to  end.  While  musing  on  this  unaccountable  phenomenon,  his  servant 
came  in  and  said  that  thieves  must  have  been  in  the  house  during  the  night,  since 
her  Bible  had  been  carried  off,  and  another  volume  of  the  same  size,  but  containing 
but  blank  paper,  had  been  left  in  its  place.  The  dreamer  then  went  forth  into  the 
street,  and  lieard  a  similar  report  from  all  whom  he  met.  It  was  curious  to  observe 
the  different  effects  of  this  calamity  on  the  various  characters  whom  he  encountered. 
An  interest,  almost  universal,  was  now  felt  for  a  book  which  had  hitherto  been 
sadly  undervalued.  Some  to  whom  their  Bible  had  been  a  "blank"  book  for 
twenty  years,  and  who  would  never  have  known  whether  it  was  full  or  empty  bnt 
for  the  lamentations  of  their  neighbours,  were  among  the  loudest  in  their  expres- 
sions of  sorrow.     In  marked  contrast  with  these  was  the  sincere  regret  of  an  aged 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  353 

woman,  long  kept  a  prisoner  in  her  narrow  chamber  by  sickness,  and  to  whom  the 
Bible  had  been,  as  to  so  many  thousands  more,  her  faithful  companion  in  solitude. 
I  found  her  gazing  intently  on  the  blank  Bible  (says  our  author),  which  had  been 
80  recently  bright  to  her  with  the  lustre  of  immortal  hopes.  She  burst  into  tears 
as  she  saw  me.  "And  has  your  faith  left  you  too,  my  gentle  friend?"  said  I. 
"No,"  she  answered;  "and  I  trust  it  never  will.  He  who  has  taken  away  the 
Bible  has  not  taken  away  my  memory,  and  I  now  recall  all  that  is  most  precious  in 
that  book  which  has  so  long  been  my  meditation.  I  think  I  can  say  that  I  loved 
it  more  than  any  possession  on  earth,"  Even  the  warnings  of  the  Bible  are  whole- 
some for  us,  for  by  them  we  are  made  to  know  our  own  evil.  Merle  d'Aubigne, 
during  a  visit  to  England,  related  an  incident  which  happened  in  1855,  in  connec- 
tion with  the  circulation  of  the  Bible  among  soldiers.  A  colporteur  reached  Toulon 
just  as  the  French  troops  were  embarking  for  the  Crimea.  He  offered  a  Testament 
to  a  soldier,  who  asked  what  book  it  was.  "  The  Word  of  God,"  was  the  answer. 
"Let  me  have  it,  then,"  said  the  man  ;  and  when  he  had  received  it  he  added 
most  irreverently,  "it  will  do  very  well  to  light  my  pipe."  The  colporteur  felt 
sorry  that  a  book  which  might  have  been  of  service  to  somebody  had  been  thus 
thrown  away ;  but  there  was  no  help  for  it,  and  he  went  his  way.  About  a  year 
later  he  happened  to  be  in  the  interior  of  France,  and  took  lodging  at  an  inn, 
where  he  found  the  family  in  great  distress,  from  the  recent  death  of  a  son.  The 
poor  mother  explained  that  the  young  man  had  been  wounded  in  the  Crimean  War, 
and  had  only  been  able  to  reach  home  to  die.  "I  have  much  consolation, "  she 
added  ;  "  he  was  so  peaceful  and  happy,  and  he  brought  comfort  to  his  father  and 
to  me."  "  How  was  this  ? "  asked  the  colporteur.  "  Oh,"  she  said,  "  he  found  all 
his  comfort  in  one  little  book,  which  he  had  always  with  him."  So  saying,  she 
showed  him  a  soiled  copy  of  the  New  Testament  (the  very  one  which  he  himself  had 
given  to  the  reckless  young  soldier),  and  read  on  the  inside  of  the  cover,  "  Received 
at  Toulon  (with  the  date),  despised,  neglected,  read,  believed,  and  found  salvation." 
" Sweeter  than  honey  "  are  these  Divine  oracles  of  God,  and  "in  keeping  of  them 
there  is  great  reward."    {Anon.) 

Ver.  11.  By  tbem  is  Thy  servant  warned. — Scripture  warnings: — ^We  are  not  to 

confuse  the  imperfections  of  religious  professors  with  the  unchangeable  sovereignty 
of  the  Divine  laws.  I.  Call  attention  to  some  of  them  thus  connected  with 
OTTR  OWN  history,  and  the  warnings  they  give.  1.  Those  which  relate  to  the  heart 
of  man.  We  are  told  its  deceitful  character.  2.  Examples  in  human  character. 
They,  as  well  as  the  words  of  Scripture,  warn  us  against  sin.  3.  Those  that  come 
from  the  truth  of  eternity  and  of  judgment  to  come.  II.  The  eewaed  of  obedi- 
ence. 1.  It  is  present  in  the  conscience ;  and  2.  Prospective,  in  heaven.  8.  And 
it  is  great  in  comparison  with  our  deserts.  4.  And  in  obedience  itself  there  is  great 
reward.  {W.  D.  Horwood.)  Bible  warnings: — At  Tramore,  near  Waterford,  a 
place  where  the  Atlantic  breakers  dash  with  sublime  fury  against  the  rocks,  there 
are  on  the  headlands  three  towers,  and  on  the  middle  one  stands  what  is  called 
"The  Metal  Man."  This  is  a  figure  made  of  metal,  and  painted  to  resemble  a 
sailor.  With  his  finger  he  points  to  some  very  dangerous  rocks  that  are  to  be 
shunned.  There  are  rocks  in  life's  troublesome  sea  that  are  ready  to  shipwreck  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  the  young.  In  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  reward. — The 
reward  of  keeping  God's  commandments: — In  this  Psalm  David  speaks  of  the  two  great 
books  by  which  God  administers  instruction.  The  volume  of  nature.  The  volume 
of  inspiration.  Having  enlarged  on  the  excellent  properties  and  glorious  effects  of 
the  Divine  Word,  he  illustrates  its  value  by  a  comparison  with  the  things  of  this 
world,  by  the  results  of  his  experience,  and  the  infinite  advantage  connected  with 
the  observance  of  it.  David  possessed,  in  the  Scriptures  then  extant,  an  abstract 
of  all  those  glorious  truths  revealed  to  ourselves,  and  an  abstract  of  sufficient  clear- 
ness to  guide  him  to  God,  to  peace,  to  holiuess,  to  heaven.  The  possession  of  the 
Scriptures,  however,  is  not  sufficient  to  bring  the  soul  to  God.  These  statutes  must 
be  kept  as  well  as  possessed,  for  it  is  in  keeping  them  that  there  is  great  reward. 
The  book  not  only  supplies  ideas,  it  also  raises  the  character  of  the  humble  student. 
The  Scripture  is  a  book  of  privileges.  There  is  not  a  Christian  but  is  entitled  to 
all  the  clustering  promises  which  grow  on  this  tree  of  life.  Practice  is  necessary 
to  complete  our  duty  to  the  Scriptures.  All  religion  hinges  upon  this  point.  The 
Psalmist  says,  "In  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  reward."  Reward  is  that  which 
is  earned  by  an  equivalent,  or  that  which  is  a  suitable  recompense  for  the  action 
performed.     But  the  reward  of  observing  the  Word  of  God  is  not  merely  a  conse- 

23 


354  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  XIX. 

quence,  neither  is  it  earned  by  what  can  be  claimed  as  an  equivalent.  They  are 
rewards  of  grace,  both  in  this  life  and  in  the  future  life.  (T.  Kennion,  M.A.) 
The  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  •persons : — I.  Religion  condttceth  to  thb 
HAPPINESS  OF  THIS  LIFE.  1.  As  to  the  mind  ;  to  be  pious  and  religious  brings  a 
double  advantage  to  the  mind  of  man.  It  tends  to  the  improvement  of  our  under- 
standings. It  raises  and  enlarges  the  minds  of  men,  and  makes  them  more  capable 
of  true  knowledge.  It  improves  the  understandings  of  men  by  subduing  their 
lusts  and  moderating  their  passions.  Intemperance,  sensuality,  and  fleshly  lusts 
debase  men's  minds.  Religion  purifies  and  refines  our  spirits.  Freedom  from 
irregular  passions  doth  not  only  signify  that  a  man  is  wise,  but  really  contributes 
to  the  making  of  him  such.  Religion  also  tends  to  the  ease  and  pleasure,  the 
peace  and  tranquillity,  of  our  minds.  This  is  the  natural  fruit  of  a  religious  and 
virtuous  course  of  life.  Religion  contributes  to  our  peace,  by  allaying  those 
passions  which  are  apt  to  ruffle  and  discompose  our  spirits ;  and  by  freeing  uf 
from  the  anxieties  of  guilt  and  the  fears  of  Divine  wrath  and  displeasure.  2.  Reli- 
gion also  tends  to  the  happiness  of  the  outward  man.  The  blessings  of  this  kind 
respect  our  health,  or  estate,  or  reputation,  or  relations.     11.  Religion  condxtceth 

TO  THE   ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  AND  SALVATION  OF  MEN  IN  THE  OTHER  WORLD.      The 

consideration  of  future  happiness  is  our  most  powerful  motive.  How  religion  con- 
duces to  happiness  in  the  new  life  is  seen  from  —  1.  The  promises  of  God;  and 
2.  From  the  nature  of  the  thing.  It  is  a  necessary  disposition  and  preparation  of 
us  for  that  future  life.  When  all  is  done  there  is  no  man  can  serve  his  own  interest 
better  than  by  serving  God.  {J,  Tillotson,  D.D.)  On  the  pleasures  of  religion: — 
"What  is  the  chief  good  ? "  was  the  great  inquiry  of  the  ancient  schools ;  and  the 
different  answers  to  this  question  formed  the  principal  distinctions  amongst  the 
various  sects  of  philosophy.  Happiness  is  the  end  of  all  the  pursuits  of  men ;  it  is 
the  object  of  all  their  sighs.  Yet  are  they  almost  always  disappointed  in  the 
means  which  are  taken  to  obtain  it.  They  follow  the  dictates  of  their  passions. 
And  it  is  not  till  after  they  have  sought  it  in  vain  through  every  form  of  false 
pleasure  that  they  come  at  length  to  find  it,  where  alone  reason  and  religion  have 
concurred  to  place  it,  in  obedience  to  God  and  a  life  of  virtue.  Here  the  anxious 
mind  finds  a  calm  and  settled  peace  which  it  had  not  known,  and  which  it  could 
not  know  amid  the  agitations  of  the  world.  I  purpose,  in  this  discourse,  to  confine 
my  view  to  the  internal  comforts  that  flow  from  religion.  It  ofi"ers  the  highest 
satisfactions  to  the  mind ;  it  yields  the  purest  pleasures  to  the  heart ;  it  introduces 
serenity  aud  peace  into  the  breast;  and  finally,  it  aS'ords  a  source  of  happiness 
which  is  always  within  our  power,  which  is  secure  from  the  vicissitudes  of  life,  and 
which  shall  be  eternal.  {S.  S.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  advantages  of  a  religious  life: — 
Compare  this  text  with  the  saying  of  Paul,  "If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in 
Christ  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  Where,  then,  is  the  present  reward  of 
keeping  God's  commandments  ?  There  might  be  a  reward  hereafter ;  how  could 
there  be  one  now  ?  What  are  we  to  say  to  this  apparent  contradiction  ?  St.  Paul 
was  supposing  a  case  ;  we  must  ascertain  what  his  supposition  was  not,  and  what  it 
was.  Take  a  man  whose  whole  soul  was  in  his  religion,  who  upheld  himself  in 
every  trial  by  the  consolations  of  the  blessed  hope.  He  has  staked  everything  on 
the  truth,  and  having  surmounted  a  thousand  obstacles  and  made  his  way  through 
a  thousand  foes,  and  ofi"ered  his  body  on  the  altar  of  the  living  God,  he  is  pressing 
on  with  rejoicing  and  elevated  spirit.  Tell  him  that  there  is  no  resurrection,  and 
no  hope  in  Christ  for  an  after-state  of  being,  and  what  then  ?  That  man  would  be 
most  miserable  if  he  took  into  his  heart  your  message.  You  may  say  that  in 
shutting  out  the  future  we  still  leave  the  present;  but  the  present  is  the  foretaste 
of  the  future.  In  cutting  off  the  streams  you  destroy  the  fountain.  If  such  a  man 
were  told  that  after  fighting  through  life  he  would  be  vanquished  in  death,  what 
would  be  left  him  of  gladness  ?  Who,  then,  shall  rival  the  Christian  in  misery  if, 
after  setting  out  in  the  expectation  of  a  blessed  immortality,  he  discovers  that  only  in 
this  life  is  there  hope  in  Christ  ?  Our  object  has  been  to  show  that  there  is  nothing 
in  the  quoted  words  of  St.  Paul  which  militates  against  the  fact  alleged  in  our  text, 
and  in  other  parts  of  Scripture,  that,  in  respect  of  present  happiness — happiness  dur- 
ing this  life — the  godly  have  the  advantage  over  the  ungodly.  {Henry  Melvill,  B.  D. ) 
Immediate  revxird  of  obedience : — You  will  observe  the  Psalmist  does  not  say  after, 
but  in  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  there  is  great  reward.  That  reward  is 
the  pleasure  which  lies  in  God's  service  now,  not  in  the  payment  which  is  judicially 
made  for  it  afterwards  ;  just  as  the  eye  is  regaled  in  the  instant  by  sights  of  beauty, 
or  the  ear  by  the  melody  which  falls  upon  it.     I.  What  are  the  ingrbdients  o» 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  355 

THE  PRESENT  REWARD  1  1.  There  is  the  happiness  that  flows  direct  from  the  sense 
of  doing  or  having  done  what  is  right.  The  testimony  of  a  good  conscience.  There 
is  a  felt  and  present  solace  in  the  taste  of  that  hidden  manna  which  it  administers. 
2.  The  affections  of  the  heart  which  prompt  to  obedience.  For  love,  whether  it  be 
towards  God  or  towards  men,  is  blessed.  In  its  play  and  exercise  there  is  instan- 
taneous joy  ;  there  is  delight  in  the  original  conceptions  of  benevolence,  and  delight 
also  in  its  outgoings,  whilst  malignity,  envy,  and  anger  do  but  rankle  the  bosom. 
And  we  can  confidently  appeal,  even  to  ungodly  men,  for  the  truth  that  in  the 
grovelling  pursuits,  whether  of  sense  or  avarice,  they  never  experienced  so  true  a 
delight  as  in  those  moments  when  their  spirit  was  touched  into  sympathy  with 
other  spirits  than  their  own.  And  not  only  of  love,  but  of  all  the  other  virtues, 
the  same  can  be  said.  They  one  and  all  of  them  yield  an  immediate  satisfaction  to 
the  wearer.  The  moralities  of  the  human  character  are  what  make  up  the  happiness 
and  harmony  of  the  soul.  They  are  the  very  streams  of  that  well  which,  struck  out 
in  the  bosom  of  regenerated  man,  spring  up  there  into  life  everlasting.     II.  The 

ADVANTAGE   OF  THE  EEWAKD  BEING  IN,    AND  NOT  AFTER,    THE  KEEPING   OF   THE 

COMMANDMENTS.  Suppose  it  had  been  after,  and  quite  distinct  from  that  enjoyment 
of  which  we  have  spoken,  and  which  lies  directly  and  essentially  in  the  obedience 
itself.  This  can  easily  be  imagined — a  heaven  of  gratification  to  the  senses  as  a 
reward  for  holiness.  Virtue  then  would  be  so  much  work  for  so  much  wages  j 
heaven  would  not  be  looked  for  as  a  place  of  holiness,  but  as  the  price  that  is  given 
for  it.  The  candidates  of  immortality  would  be  so  many  labourers  for  hire.  And 
it  would  be  no  evidence  at  all  of  the  love  which  you  have  for  a  work,  that  you  have 
a  love  for  its  wages.  It  makes  all  the  difference  whether  or  no  we  love  our  work. 
Sordidness  and  sacredness  are  not  wider  apart.  This  is  so  in  common  and  ordinary 
work.  How  much  more  when  it  is  the  service  of  God  that  is  in  question  !  III.  How 
THE  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  affects  this  question.  1.  It  releases  you  altogether 
from  the  law  as  a  covenant.  It  tells  you  that  you  are  not  to  work  for  heaven, 
because  that  heaven  is  secured  to  you  in  another  way.  Eternal  life  is  the  gift  of 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  We  could  never  pay  for  it,  and  therefore  God 
gives  it  to  us.  And  how  blessed  this  is  even  for  our  characters  as  the  subject  of 
God's  will.  The  old  economy  of  "do  this  and  live"  makes  up  the  very  spirit  of 
bondage,  and  of  low  mercenary  bargaining.  With  the  fears  of  legality,  the  sordid- 
ness of  legality  is  sure  to  make  entrance  again  into  the  heart.  Hence  the  only 
access  to  a  sinner's  heart  for  the  love  of  holiness  in  itself  is  by  making  him  the  free 
offer  of  heaven  as  an  unconditional  gift,  and  at  the  same  time  making  him  under- 
stand that  it  is,  in  truth,  holiness  and  nothing  else  which  forms  the  very  essence  of 
heaven's  blessedness.  These  are  the  things  which  constitute  the  difference  between 
the  real  and  the  formal  Christian.  The  inferior  creatures  may  be  dealt  with  by 
terror  or  by  joy  as  well  as  he;  his  very  obedience  may  proceed  from  the  earthliness 
of  his  disposition.  Much  of  the  Christian  may  be  put  on  ;  but  the  question  is, 
if  you  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inner  man,  or  whether  you  obey  it  because 
of  consequences  ?  Whether  you  are  allured  to  holiness  by  the  beauty  of  its  graces, 
or  by  the  bribery  of  its  gains  ?  Surely  there  is  nothing  noble  in  him  who  labours 
for  the  reward  that  comes  after  keeping  the  commandments,  and  thinks  not  of  the 
"great  reward  "  that  comes  "in  keeping  the  commandments."     {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Who  can  understand  his  errors?  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults. — 

The  tenacity  and  sophistry  of  sin: — The  vulgar  vices  reappear  subtly  disguised  in 
cultured  circles.  The  grossness  of  the  vices  has  been  purged,  but  the  viciousness 
is  not  extinct.  Is  there  not  something  like  this  in  the  saintly  life  as  compared 
with  the  old  life  ?  All  the  vices  to  which  the  soul  is  heir  strive  to  reassert  them- 
selves in  the  Christian  believer,  and  too  often  succeed  in  disturbing  his  peace  and 
injuring  his  character.  They  are  not  now  gross,  offensive,  violent;  they  are  smooth  L^"' 
and  subtle,  filmy  and  tenuous ;  they  may  even  fail  to  provoke  the  notice  and 
criticism  of  those  who  know  us  best.  Yet  we  recognise  in  them,  through  their 
profoundest  disguises,  the  deadly  vices  which,  seen  in  their  nakedness,  all  men 
loathe.  All  the  bad  passions  insinuate  themselves  into  our  life  unless  we  steadily 
detect  and  reject  them.  Anger,  covetousness,  indulgence,  pride,  self-will,  vanity, 
all  these  motions  and  outgoings  of  unrighteousness  are  ever  striving  to  assert  them- 
selves in  the  Christian  soul  and  life.  The  tenacity  of  sin  is  marvellous,  so  is  its 
sophistry.  These  evil  thoughts  and  imaginations  of  the  saintly  heart  may  appear 
faint  and  inoffensive  sins  when  compared  with  the  crimson  transgressions  of  the  ^-^ 
actual  world  ;  but  the  true  disciple  will  not  think  so,  nor  will  he  treat  them  tenderly. 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

The  desires,  weaknesses,  and  sins  of  the  natural  life  are  greatly  diminished  in  the 
Bpiritoal  life ;  they  have  altogether  lost  their  alarming  aspect ;  their  capaciona 
jaws  seem  no  longer  fringed  with  teeth ;  but  they  are  none  the  less  of  the  breed  of 
monsters,  and  we  must  show  them  no  mercy.  ( W.  L.  WcUkinaon.)  Self-ignorcmce: 
— There  is  no  kind  of  knowledge  which  it  is  so  important  for  a  man  to  possess  as 
knowledge  of  himself.  No  man  can  be  blind  to  himself  without  sooner  or  later 
having  to  pay  serious  penalty  for  such  blinduess.  The  best  of  the  ancients 
regar(&d  self-knowledge  as  the  very  beginning  of  wisdom,  just  as  they  regarded  self- 
mastery  as  the  very  beginning  of  practical  virtue.  It  is  said  that  Socrates,  on  one 
occasion,  excused  himself  from  giving  attention  to  some  important  questions,  on 
the  ground  that  he  could  not  possibly  come  to  know  such  things,  as  he  had  not 
yet  been  able  to  know  himself.  There,  the  grand  old  heathen  felt,  was  the  true 
starting-place  of  all  true  knowledge.  Wisdom,  like  charity,  began  at  home. 
There  are  few  things,  judging  at  first  sight,  of  which  a  man  might  be  supposed 
to  have  fuller  and  more  accurate  knowledge, '  than  he  has  of  his  own  mind  and 
character.  The  subject  of  study  is  always  within  his  reach.  To  avoid  self-thought 
is  impossible.  To  the  great  majority  of  men  the  subject  is  one  of  perennial  and 
engrossing  interest.  Nature  has  so  ordained  it  that,  in  many  important  respects, 
the  object  of  greatest  concern  to  every  one  of  us  is  himself.  History  may  be  a 
blank  to  a  man,  science  a  name,  literature  and  art  dark  and  mysterious  as  the 

f'ave  ;  but  himself! — here  surely  the  man  is  at  home,  or  he  is  at  home  nowhere, 
he  Psalmist,  however,  is  of  a  widely  different  opinion.  Of  course,  a  certain 
Amount  of  self-knowledge  is  thrust  upon  us  all.  Much  ignorance  of  self,  too,  is 
corrected  by  our  contact  with  men  and  things.  Many  a  false  and  foolish  notion  is 
thus  ruthlessly  swept  away  as  the  years  pass  on.  Life  and  God  are  great  teachers ; 
and,  unless  a  man  be  a  hopeless  fool,  they  compel  him  to  learn  something  of  himself. 
Still,  the  exclamation  of  the  Psalmist  hits  off  an  universal  fact.  "Who  can  under- 
stand his  errors  ? "  There  is  a  touch  of  pensive  surprise  in  the  words,  as  if  he  had 
just  had  an  unwonted  revelation  of  himself,  as  if  he  had  just  made  discovery  of 
faults  and  sins  hitherto  hidden  from  him.  He  had  no  idea  that  there  was  so  much 
^lingering  mischief  within.  He  is  not  quite  sure  that  he  has  seen  the  worst  yet.  By 
"  secret  faults  "  the  Psalmist  does  not  mean  guilty  things,  that  is,  things  of  actual 
wickedness  done  in  secret.  Open  transgression  is  the  path  of  death.  Secret  trans- 
gression is  more  deadly  still.  By  "secret  faults  "  he  means  faults  hidden  away,  not 
from  others,  but  from  ourselves.  And  it  is  more  than  probable  that  such  "  faults  " 
exist  in  all  of  us.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  a  man  blind  as  a  bat  to  some 
infirmity  of  temper,  some  coarseness  of  manner,  some  infatuation  or  rooted  prejudice, 
conspicuous  as  the  sun  at  noonday  to  his  friends,  and  not  quite  so  pleasant !  Another 
evidence  of  this  lack  of  self-knowledge  is  to  be  found  in  the  grave  discoveries  we 
sometimes  make  of  our  actual  character  and  condition.  The  matter  is  sometimes 
brought  home  to  us  by  the  faithfulness  of  a  friend.  It  may  come  through  the  home- 
thrust  of  an  enemy.  Our  hope  is  in  God.  The  head  need  not  have  turned  grey  before 
we  discover  that,  in  a  world  like  this,  "it  is  not  in  man  to  order  his  steps  aright." 
Happy  he  who  once  and  forever  abandons  the  fruitless  task,  finds  his  way  to  a  Saviour's 
side,  shelters  beneath  the  Rock  that  is  higher  than  he.  {J.  Thew. )  The  difficulty 
of  UTiderstomding  our  errors: — At  this  point  the  Psalmist  pauses.  He  has  been  look- 
ing at  his  life  in  the  light  of  the  holy  law,  and,  realising  how  full  of  imperfection 
it  was,  he  resumes  again  in  a  penitential  strain,  "Who  can  understand  his  errors?" 
There  is  not  only  the  acknowledgment  that  life  is  full  of  error  ;  there  is  corruption 
at  the  very  spring  of  life.  He  also  acknowledges  the  difficulty  of  understanding 
our  errors.  Sin  destroys  the  power  by  which  we  detect  it.  It  creates  a  false 
standard,  by  which  we  judge  ourselves.  There  is  a  personal  touch  in  this  acknow- 
ledgment. "Who  can  understand  his  own  errors?"  The  sinner  is  sometimes  sharp 
in  discerning  the  errors  of  other  people,  although  blind  to  his  own.  Thus  it  was 
with  David  himself.  We  are  all  too  ready  to  acknowledge  sin  in  a  general  way,  with- 
out trying  to  note  the  particular  sins  we  are  most  guilty  of.  There  follows  the 
prayer,  "Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults."  These  include — 1.  Faults  unknown 
to  ourselves.  If  we  are  trying  to  follow  Christ,  and  live  a  straight  and  honest  and 
pure  life,  we  find  difficulties  at  every  turn.  Temptations  are  strewn  thickly  around 
on  every  path.  Unknown  sins  are  the  most  dangerous  to  the  soul.  Sins  noted 
and  marked  upon  our  memories  are  less  likely  to  be  ruinous  to  the  soul  than  those 
secret  sins  which  elude  the  observation.  2.  Faults  known  to  ourselves,  but  known 
only  to  ourselves.  Each  lives  three  lives  :  the  life  by  which  we  are  known  to  the 
world,  the  life  by  which  we  are  known  to  our  household,  and  the  life  known  only 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  357 

to  ourselves.  All  sins  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  presumptuous.  Sins  of  presumption, 
properly  speaking,  are  sins  of  will,  knowingly  and  wilfully  committed.  It  is  a  sin 
of  presumption  to  act  as  if  we  needed  no  mercy.  {T.  Somerville,  M.A.)  The 
deceitfiUness  of  sin  .—The  sense  of  sin,  the  joy  of  pardon,  and  the  yearning  for 
goodness  are  essential  features  in  the  religion  of  Christ.  If  the  sense  of  sin  gives 
the  deepest  pain,  the  joy  of  pardon  is  the  sweetest  joy.  The  thought  of  the 
Psalmist  in  this  passage  is  the  difficulty  for  each  man  of  understanding  his  sins. 
Error  means  straying,  wandering  from  the  path.  There  are  sins  of  ignorance  and 
of  infirmity,  unconsciously,  unintentionally  done  through  lack  of  self-knowledge, 
or  of  zealous  vigilance  against  the  deceits  of  the  world  and  the  snares  of  Satan.  There 
are  also  sins  of  presumption,  done  with  deliberateness  and  hardened  pride  and  a 
sort  of  insolence  against  God.  There  are  also  sins  which  do  not  usually  come 
earliest  in  the  moral  history,  but  which  are  the  inevitable  result  and  penalty  of 
sins  of  carelessness  and  infirmity;  and  which  imply,  nay,  sooner  or  later  create, 
that  awful  insensibility  which  is  the  sure  symptom  of  spiritual  death,  and  for 
which  no  forgiveness,  because  no  repentance,  is  possible.  The  sinfulness  of  sin 
consists  in  its  being  done  against  the  majesty  and  holiness,  and  authority  and  love, 
of  God.  The  more  we  know  of  God  the  more  shall  we  feel  the  depravity,  the 
wickedness  of  sin.  The  incessancy  of  it  is  a  very  painful  and  humbling,  but  incon- 
testable truth.  Our  sins  of  omission,  which  perhaps  come  most  home  to  us  in  the 
riper  years  of  the  Christian  life;  the  sins  of  commission,  in  which  we  actually 
violate  the  law  of  God — were  they  to  be  brought  up  against  us  at  the  end  of  a  single 
day,  might  turn  our  hair  white  with  shame  and  sorrow.  Its  deceitfulness  is  one  of 
its  most  malignant  and  dangerous  features.  To  call  good  evil  is  not  to  make  it  evil, 
and  to  call  evil  good  is  not  to  make  it  good.  Yet  we  love  to  have  it  so,  and  God 
answers  us  according  to  the  multitude  of  our  idols.  Nevertheless,  when  the  moral 
sense  is  darkened  it  is  on  the  way  to  be  extinguished.  How  then  shall  we  keep 
alive  in  our  hearts  the  instinct  of  righteousness,  and  the  sorrowful  consciousness  of 
having  come  short  of  it?  This  Psalm  shows  us  that  the  key  of  the  secret,  and  the 
instrument  for  each  of  us  to  use,  is  the  Word  of  God.  1.  Would  w«  feel  about  sin 
as  God  would  have  us  feel,  let  us  pray  earnestly  and  constantly  for  the  Holy 
Spirit.  2.  Let  us  be  on  our  guard  against  an  artificial,  hysterical,  self-inspecting, 
pusillanimous  remorse.  Let  penitence  come  rather  through  the  habitual  contem- 
plation of  God  in  Christ,  than  by  swelling  the  swamps  of  our  own  corrupt  nature. 
3.  The  sense  of  sin,  if  we  would  avoid  unreality  and  a  sort  of  complacency  in 
our  humbleness,  should  ever  be  accompanied  with  a  continuous  and  strenuous 
effort  to  overcome  it.  4.  St.  Paul  never  forgot  his  past.  We  need  not  forget 
that  we  have  sinned,  if  only  we  have  cause  to  believe  that  we  are  forgiven. 
We  may  be  perfectly  clean,  though  imperfectly  holy.  {Bishop  Thorold.)  A 
man's  errors : — 1.  Man's  ignorance  of  himself  is  the  result  of  man's  ignorance  of 
God ;  and  the  knowledge  of  God  comprehends  the  knowledge  of  man.  If  a  man 
would  "understand  his  errors,"  he  must  first  know  Him  who  can  forgive,  correct, 
and  prevent  them.  A  capacity  of  spiritual  discernment  is  essential  to  man's  know- 
ledge of  himself.  2.  Man's  knowledge  of  his  ignorance  is  the  first  stage  in  his 
educational  progress  towards  the  possession  of  wisdom,  and  the  first  expression  of 
that  knowledge  is  prayer.  3.  A  tendency  to  err  in  thought,  in  word,  and  in  action, 
combined  with  the  inherent  deceitfulness  of  sin,  is  the  secret  of  the  unfathomable 
mystery  of  human  error, — unfathomable,  that  is,  by  any  sounding-line  of  mere 
human  intellect  or  human  conscience.  A  tendency  to  err  produces  error.  A  biassed 
ball  cannot  run  straight.  The  deceitfulness  of  sin,  however,  rather  than  this 
tendency,  is  the  preponderating  element  in  the  unknowableness  of  one's  own  errors. 
Sin  usually  wears  a  disguise,  and  often  a  man  does  not  know  his  own  sin.  The  sinful 
heart  is  a  cunning  logician.  4.  To  "understand  one's  errors,"  one  must  know  the 
fact  of  the  universal  defilement  of  sin  consequent  upon  the  fall.  5.  The  "errors" 
of  a  man  include  " secret  faults  "  and  "presumptuous  sins."  To  sin  knowingly  is 
to  sin  presumptuously.  A  secret  fault  is  one  unknown  to  others  or  ourselves — to 
either  or  to  both.  It  is  a  mockery  for  a  man  who  has  not  searched  himself  to  ask 
God  to  search  him.  6.  All  true  wisdom,  possessed  or  attainable  by  any  one  of  the 
human  race  on  earth,  involves  constant  self-scrutiny  and  constant  prayer.  Men 
must  be  advised  to  look  both  within  and  without.  It  is  because  we  look  within 
that  we  also  look  without.  7.  All  true  wisdom  is  increasing  wisdom,  for  it  involves 
increasing  sanctification,  and  included  in  sanctification  is  the  joy  of  a  heavenly 
fellowship.  (T.  Easton.)  The  searching  power  of  QocPs  law:  —  Notice  David's 
holy  perplexi^.     1.  The  occasion  of  it.    David  iras  now  looking  into  tibe  law  of, 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

God,  and  a  beam  of  that  light  had  darted  into  his  conscience.  The  Word  of  God 
has  a  secret,  unavoidable  power  upon  the  soul  to  convince  it  of  sin.  In  the  Scrip- 
ture is  presented  a  transcendent  rule  of  holiness,  the  infinite  purity  and  sanctity 
which  is  in  God  Himself.  The  soul,  seeing  this,  is  at  once  convinced  of  infinite 
impurity.  In  Scripture  there  is  an  exact  rule  of  holiness  prescribed.  The  law 
forbids  all  sin,  and  enjoins  all  holiness.  It  is  a  spiritual  rule,  not  resting  only  in 
an  outward  conformity.  It  keeps  secret  thoughts  under  awe.  The  law  of  God  is 
operative,  not  as  a  dead  letter :  it  has  an  active  power  to  work  upon  the  heart. 
The  Spirit  of  God  goes  along  with  it,  and  makes  it  quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharp, 
and  mighty  in  operation.  As  to  the — 2.  Nature  and  purpose  of  David's  perplexity ; 
it  may  be  resolved  into  these  three  expressions.  (1)  It  is  the  speech  of  a  man  who 
confesses  his  ignorance ;  he  knows  not  his  errors.  (2)  It  is  the  speech  of  him  who 
sees  many  errors  in  himself,  and  suspects  more,  and  is  astonished  at  the  considera- 
tion of  them,  (3)  He  utters  his  thoughts  with  a  sighing  accent,  and  groans  within 
himself  at  the  sense  of  them.  As  to  the  matter  of  this  question,  take  it  thus — 
Who  tmderstands  the  nature  of  all  his  actions,  whether  they  be  erroneous  or  not  ? 
Or  thus — Who  ever  yet  kept  such  a  careful  account  in  his  conscience  as  to  register 
the  just  number  of  his  sins  ?  Or  thus — Who  understands  the  many  aggravations 
that  may  make  a  seemingly  small  sin  out  of  measure  sinful  ?  What  is  the  ground 
whence  arises  this  difficulty  of  discerning  errors  ?  Chiefly  from  these  three.  The 
Divine  excellency  of  the  law  of  God.  The  marvellous  subtlety  and  closeness  of  man's 
spirit.  The  falsehood  of  Satan,  his  depths  of  deceitfulness.  Use  the  subject  for 
conviction,  and  for  consolation.     [Bishop  Browning.)        Knowledge  of  one's  sins:— 

I.   To    ACQUIRE    A  KNOWLEDGE   OF  OUR  SINFULNESS  IS  EXCEEDINGLY  DIFFICULT. 

This  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  very  few  acquire  this  knowledge,  and  that 
none  acquire  it  perfectly.  We  learn,  both  from  observation  and  from  the  Scriptures, 
that  of  those  sins  of  the  heart,  in  which  men's  errors  or  sinfulness  principally  con-  ^^ 
sist  in  the  sight  of  God,  they  are  all  by  nature  entirely  ignorant.  Men  will  not- 
come  to  the  Saviour  because  they  do  not  feel  their  need  of  Him.  It  is  difiicult  to 
get  a  knowledge  of  our  sin,  for  the  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit  are  represented  as 
necessary  to  communicate  this  knowledge.  But  it  would  be  needless  to  convince 
men  of  sin  if  they  were  not  ignorant  of  their  sins.  Mankind  are  so  blind  to  their 
own  sinfulness,  so  ignorant  of  their  true  characters,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  can 
remove  this  blindness.  II.  Show  why  it  is  so.  1.  Because  men  are  ignorant  of 
the  Divine  law.  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  St.  John  says,  sin  is  a  devia- 
,  tion  from  the  law.  But  mankind  are  naturally  ignorant  of  the  Divine  law.  They 
are  alive  without  the  law.  He  who  would  understand  his  errors  must  understand  VV' 
the  Divine  law.  2.  Another  cause  is  the  nature  of  the  human  mind.  It  is  like  the  l-^ 
eye  which,  while  it  perceives  other  objects,  cannot  see  itself  (save  in  a  mirror). 
Men  find  it  difficult  to  examine  themselves.  3.  Another  cause  is  the  prevalence  \  V^ 
of  self-love.  Every  man  is  extremely  partial  in  judging  himself,  and  exceedingly 
unwilling  to  discover  his  own  faults.  4.  The  deceitfulness  of  sin  is  another  cause. 
5.  Another  is  the  eff'ects  which  sin  produces  upon  men's  understandings  and  con- 
sciences. These  faculties  are  the  eyes  of  the  soul,  without  which  he  can  discern 
nothing.  Just  so  far  as  sin  prevails  in  the  heart  and  life,  so  far  it  puts  out  or 
darkens  these  eyes  of  the  mind  with  respect  to  all  spiritual  objects  ;  so  that  the 
more  sinful  a  man  reaUy  is,  so  much  the  less  sinful  does  he  appear  to  himself  to  be. 
{£.  Payson,  D.D.)  Self-ignorance  : — It  is  no  supposition,  but  an  unquestionable 
fact,  that  to  not  a  few  of  us,  from  the  first  moment  of  existence,  there  has  been 
present,  not  beneath  the  roof  but  within  the  breast,  a  mysterious  resident,  an 
inseparable  companion,  nearer  to  us  than  friend  or  brother,  yet  of  whom,  after  all, 
we  know  little  or  nothing.  Many  are  the  reasons  why  we  should  be  acquainted 
with  our  moral  nature.  Other  portions  of  self-knowledge  we  may  with  comparative 
harmlessness  neglect,  but  to  neglect  this  is  full  of  peril.  And  we  can  never  depute 
the  work  to  another.  Unnoticed  error  in  the  heart,  unlike  intellectual  deficiencies, 
not  merely  affects  our  temporal  condition  or  our  social  reputation,  but  may  issue  in 
our  eternal  ruin.  Yet  a  man's  moral  defects  are  most  likely  to  elude  his  own  / 
scrutiny.  There  is  a  peculiar  secrecy,  an  inherent  inscrutability,  about  our  sins. 
It  is  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  moral  disease,  that  it  does  its  deadly  work  in 
secret.  Sin  is  a  malady  which  affects  the  very  organ  by  which  itself  is  detected. 
One  reason  why  the  sinful  man  does  not  understand  his  errors  is — I.  That  sin  can 
BE  TRULY  MEASURED  ONLY  WHEN  IT  IS  RESISTED.  So  long  as  evil  reigns  unopposed 
within  it  will  reign  in  a  great  degree  unobserved.  Resistance  is  the  best  measure 
of  force.     Sin's  power  is  revealed  only  in  the  act  of  resistance.     When  the  softening 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS  359 

principle  of  Divine  love  and  grace  begins  to  thaw  the  icy  coldness  of  a  godless  heart, 
then  it  is  that  the  soul  becomes  aware  of  the  deadly  strength  of  sin.  Then  comes 
the  feeling  of  an  hitherto  unrealised  burden.  II.  Sin  often  makes  a  man  afraid  i 
TO  KNOW  HIMSELF.  A  man  often  has  a  latent  misgiving  that  all  is  not  right  with 
his  soul,  yet,  fearing  to  know  the  whole  truth,  he  will  inquire  no  further.  Most 
men  prefer  the  delicious  tranquillity  of  ignorance  to  the  wholesome  pains  of  a 
self-revelation.  Easily  alarmed  in  other  cases,  men  become  strangely  incurious 
here.  With  many,  life  is  but  a  continuous  endeavour  to  forget  and  keep  out  of 
sight  their  true  selves.  III.  The  slow^  and  gradual  way  in  which,  in  most 
CASES,  sinful  habits  AND  DISPOSITIONS  ARE  ACQUIRED.  There  is  something  in 
the  mere  fact  of  the  gradual  and  insidious  way  in  which  changes  of  character  gener- 
ally take  place,  that  tends  to  blind  men  to  their  own  defects.  Every  one  knows 
how  unconscious  we  often  are  of  changes  that  occur  by  minute  and  slow  degrees,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  seasons.  How  imperceptibly  life's  advancing  stages  steal  upon 
us  !  Analogous  changes  equally  unnoted,  because  equally  slow  and  gradual,  may 
be  occurring  in  our  moral  nature,  in  the  state  of  our  souls  before  God.  Character 
is  a  thing  of  slow  formation.  Each  day  helps  to  mould  it.  In  a  thousand  insigni- 
ficant sacrifices  of  principle  to  passion,  of  duty  to  inclination,  a  man's  moral  being 
has  been  fashioned  into  the  shape  it  -mpars.      IV.   As   character   gradually 

DETERIORATES,  THERE  IS  A  PARALLEL  DETORIORATION  OF  THE  STANDARD  BY  WHICH 

"WE  JUDGE  IT.  As  sin  grows,  conscience  declines  in  vigour,  and  partakes  of  the 
general  injury  which  sin  inflicts  on  the  soul.  Sin,  in  many  of  its  forms,  has  an 
ugly  look  at  first,  but  its  repulsiveness  rapidly  wears  off  by  familiarity.  The 
danger  of  self-ignorance  is  not  less  than  its  guilt.  Of  all  evils  a  secret  evil  is  most 
to  be  deprecated, — of  all  enemies  a  concealed  enemy  is  the  worst.  However  alarm- 
ing, however  distressing  self-knowledge  may  be,  better  that  than  the  tremendous 
evils  of  self-ignorance.  {Frinciiml  Caird,  D.D.)  Sin  unmcasurahle : — What  we 
know  is  as  nothing  compared  with  what  we  do  not  know.  This  is  true  of  our 
errors.  I.  Explain  the  question.  We  all  own  that  we  have  errors,  but  who  of 
us  can  understand  them  ?  They  mingle  with  our  good,  and  we  cannot  detect  them 
so  as  to  separate  them.  And  this  not  only  in  our  feelings,  but  in  our  actions.  And 
their  number,  guilt,  aggravation — who  can  understand  this  ?  Let  each  one  think 
of  his  own  errors  and  their  peculiar  wickedness.  II.  Impress  it  on  the  heart. 
In  order  to  a  man's  understanding  his  errors  he  must  understand  the  mystery  of — 
1.  The  fall.  Here  is  a  piece  of  iron  laid  upon  the  anvil.  The  hammers  are  plied 
upon  it  lustily.  A  thousand  sparks  are  scattered  on  every  side.  Suppose  it  possible 
to  count  each  spark  as  it  falls  from  the  anvil  ;  yet  who  could  guess  the  number  of 
the  unborn  sparks  that  still  lie  latent  and  hidden  in  the  mass  of  iron  ?  Now  your 
sinful  nature  may  be  compared  to  that  heated  bar  of  iron.  Temptations  are  the 
hammers  ;  your  sins  the  sparks.  If  you  coxild  count  them  (which  you  cannot  do), 
yet  who  could  tell  the  multitude  of  unborn  iniquities — eggs  of  sin  that  lie  slumber- 
ing in  your  souls.  And  so  we  are  not  to  think  merely  of  the  sins  that  grow  on  the 
surface,  but  if  we  could  turn  our  heart  up  to  its  core  and  centre  we  should  find  it 
as  fully  permeated  with  sin  as  every  piece  of  putridity  is  with  worms  and  rottenness. 
The  fact  is,  that  man  is  a  reeking  mass  of  corruption.  His  whole  soul  is  by  nature 
so  debased  and  so  depraved  that  no  description  which  can  be  given  of  him  even  by 
inspired  tongues  can  fully  tell  how  base  and  vile  a  thing  he  is.  2.  God's  law 
especially  in  its  spiritual  application.  It  is  exceeding  broad.  3.  The  perfection  of  , 
God.  4.  Hell.  5.  The  Cross.  George  Herbert  saith  very  sweetly—"  He  that  would 
know  sin,  let  him  repair  to  Olivet,  and  he  shall  see  a  Man  so  wrung  with  pain  that 
all  His  head.  His  hair,  His  garments  bloody  be.  Sin  was  that  press  and  vice  which 
forced  pain  to  hunt  its  cruel  food  through  every  vein."  You  must  see  Christ  sweat- 
ing, as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood.  You  must  drink  of  the  cup  to  its  last  dregs, 
and  like  Jesus  cry — "It  is  finished,"  or  else  we  cannot  know  the  guilt  of  our  sin.\ 
III.  The  practical  application.  1.  The  folly  of  hoping  for  salvation  by  our'^ 
own  righteousness.  2.  Or  by  our  feelings.  3.  What  grace  is  this  which  pardons  / 
sin  !  Blessed  be  God,  the  spotless  flood  of  Jesus'  merit  is  deeper  than  the  height  of 
mine  iniquities.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  soul's  error: — " Error, "  what  a  word, 
what  a  thing  !  It  is  the  foundation-stone  of  Satan's  kingdom  in  the  world  ;  ay, 
and  by  it  he  builds  up  and  sustains  his  empire  in  the  world.  Two  things  are  sug- 
gested here  concerning  the  soul's  errors — I.  They  are  mysterious.  "Who  can 
understand  his  errors  ? "  1.  They  are  mysterious  in  their  origin.  Who  can  explain 
the  genesis  of  error  ?  2.  They  are  mysterious  in  their  number.  Who  can  count 
them  ?     They  baffle  all  human  arithmetic.     3.  They  are  mysterious  in  their  work- 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

ing.  How  wondrously  they  work !  4.  They  are  mysterious  in  their  influence. 
Who  shall  tell  the  influence  of  one  error,  on  one  individual,  on  society,  on  the 
universe?  II.  They  akb  polhttino.  "Cleanse  Thou  me."  Errors  stain  the  con- 
science and  the  heart,  they  are  moral  filth.  1.  The  cleansing  of  the  soul  from  error 
is  a  work  of  supreme  urgency.  "Cleanse  Thou  me."  "Without  this  cleansing  there 
can  be  no  true  liberty,  dignity,  or  happiness,  no  fellowship  with  God,  no  heaven. 
2.  The  cleansing  of  the  soul  from  error  is  the  work  of  God.  "  Cleanse  Thou  me." 
We  cannot  cleanse  ourselves,  though  our  agency  in  the  matter  is  indispensable. 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,  and  renew  aright  spirit  within  me."  {Homilist.)i 
The  difficidty  of  attaining  to  a  knowledge  of  our  sin : — We  have  here  a  question  put, 
and  a  prayer  offered.  But  the  implied  answer  to  the  question  must  be  taken  with 
some  limitations ;  for — I.  Some  knowledge  of  one's  ekroes  is  essential  to 
SALVATION.  Such  as — 1.  Will  awaken  the  soul  of  man.  2.  Drive  him  out  of  all 
the  refuges  of  lies  to  which  he  will  betake  himself  for  salvation.  3.  Convince  him 
that  he  is  utterly  helpless  and  deserves  to  perish.  4.  Make  him  come  to  Christ 
and  accept  the  Gospel.  But  ,when  men  are  brought  to  all  this,  then  they  ask — 
II.  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ?  For — 1.  He  cannot  understand  the  errors 
that  he  knows — their  nature,  their  variety,  their  number,  their  aggravation,  their 
demerit.  2.  Of  many  of  his  errors  he  has  no  knowledge  at  all.  See  how  long 
men  remain  in  sin  and  are  not  disturbed  by  it.  Conclusion :  How  humbled 
should  we  be.  How  forbearing  is  God.  How  precious  Christ's  redemption. 
How  mighty  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  How  thorough  in  its  working 
true  faith  is.  But  how  little  of  it  there  is.  (/.  R.  Anderson.)  Self-know' 
ledge: — The  foundation  of  all  spiritual  wisdom  must  be  laid  in  self-knowledge. 
Yet  men  neither  desire  nor  seek  such  knowledge.  There  is  nothing  that 
they  desire  less.  Yet  without  there  can  be  no  true  religion.  The  form  may 
be  maintained  but  the  power  will  be  unknown.  But  the  good  man  will  seek  this 
knowledge,  though  he  will  not  fully  attain  it.  I.  The  humiliating  confession 
IMPLIED  IN  THE  Psalmist's  QUESTION.  It  is  implied  that  no  man  can  understand 
his  errors.  And  reasons  for  this  are — 1.  The  infinite  purity  of  God's  law,  surpassing 
our  comprehension.  2.  Self-love,  which  makes  him  tender  and  partial  in  estimating 
his  own  faults.  3.  The  impossibility  of  recollecting  every  instance,  even  of  undoubted 
transgression.  They  are  so  many,  so  varied,  so  secret.  II.  The  humble  petition 
WHICH  follows  this  CONFESSION.  David  knew  that  none  of  his  sins  were  hidden 
from  God,  though  they  might  be  from  himself.  And  he  knew  that  they  defiled  and 
polluted  his  soiu.  Hence  his  prayer.  It  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  which  alone 
can  cleanse  us.  Turn,  therefore,  in  confession  and  penitence  to  Him.  {J.  Jowett, 
M.A.)  Difficulty  of  knowing  our  faults: — A  small  portion  of  light,  it  is  said, 
only  serves  to  render  darkness  more  visible  ;  so,  when  the  light  of  truth  begins  to 
penetrate  the  mind,  it  shows  that  there  is  within  us  a  dark  abyss  ;  and  every 
additional  ray  discovers  more  of  the  intricate  windings  of  the  human  heart.  For 
there  is  not  only  dense  darkness,  but  many  false  and  deceitful  appearances  which 
turn  out  upon  investigation  very  different  from  what  they  seemed  to  be.  David 
felt  this,  and  hence  our  text.  I.  Inquire  why  it  is  so  difficult  to  know  oub. 
OWN  FAULTS.  We  may  know  an  act  to  be  a  sin,  and  yet  not  know  all  the  moral 
evil  that  is  in  it.  But — 1.  One  reason  why  we  know  so  little  of  ourselves  is,  that  so 
few  reflect.  2.  Another  is,  our  thoughts  are  so  fugitive.  3.  Our  feelings  are  so 
mixed  as  to  their  character.  4.  Pride  and  self-love.  5.  Our  dislike  of  that  which 
excites,  as  our  sins  do — painful  feelings.  Remorse  is  an  intolerable  pain.  And  so 
is  the  "looking  for  of  judgment."  6.  We  judge  ourselves  by  the  flatteries  of 
others  ;  7.  And  by  the  ordinary  conduct  of  men.  8.  Failure  to  apply  to  ourselves 
the  true  standard  of  rectitude.  "I  was  alive  without  the  law  once."  How,  then, 
ought  we  to  watch  our  hearts  and  continually  seek  the  grace  of  God.  II.  The 
IMPORT  OF  this  PRAYER.  It  is  for  deliverance  not  only  from  known,  but  from 
hidden  sins  also.  And  there  is  a  twofold  cleansing — 1.  That  of  expiation. 
2.  That  of  sanctification.  Not  only  do  we  need  pardon,  but  the  continual 
purification  of  our  souls.  Conclusion — 1.  The  best  evidence  of  the  existence  of  & 
holy  nature  is  the  sincere  and  prevailing  desire  of  perfect  holiness.  A  gracious 
state  is  not  proved  by  the  persuasion  that  we  have  attained  it,  but  by  the  ardent, 
habitual  desire  after  it.  3.  When  on  account  of  sin  the  conscience  is  again 
burdened,  we  must  turn  again  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  4.  Remember  many  of  our 
sins  are  hidden,  but  they  lead  on  to  presumptuous  sins.  {A.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
The  heart's  ignoratux  of  itself: — I.  The  question.  "Who  can  understand  hia 
errors  ? "     "  Error  "  is  one  of  the  mildest  words  we  use  to  describe  wrong-doing.     Sin, 


rsAXM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  361 

guilt,  wickedness,  iniquity,  seem  to  be  terms  that  carry  heavy  blame  along  with 
them  ;  but  when  we  say  of  a  man  merely  that  he  is  "in  error,"  we  consider  we  are 
speaking  leniently.  And  yet  "error"  really  conveys,  perhaps,  a  clearer  idea  of 
what  sin  in  its  essence  is  than  any  of  the  other  words.  For  what  is  error  but  the 
straying  out  of  a  path,  the  wandering  from  a  way  ?  There  is  no  better  definition  of 
sin.  The  soul  has  a  way,  a  path,  designed  for  it,  just  as  s  planet  has  an  orbit. 
The  difference  between  the  star  and  the  soul  is,  that  the  one  keeps  to  its  appointed 
course  while  the  other  wanders  ;  but  when  we  ask  why  this  is  so,  when  we  try  to 
find  out  the  cause  of  such  unlikeness  of  behaviour,  we  touch  one  of  the  deepest 
senses  in  which  it  is  possible  to  ask  the  question,  Who  can  imderstand  his  errors  ? 
1.  Who  can  understand  error  as  such  ?  Why  should  that  be  true  of  the  human  soul 
which  is  true  of  nothing  else  that  is  or  lives,  so  far  as  we  know,  namely,  that  it  is 
able  to  break  the  law  ?  2.  Who  can  understand  his  errors,  in  the  sense  of  under- 
standing the  way  in  which  the  principle  of  sin  works  in  the  heart,  and  manifests 
itself  in  the  life  ?  (1)  How  often  men,  in  the  bitterness  of  their  souls,  cry.  What  ^ 
can  have  possessed  me  that  I  should  have  said  or  done  thus  or  so  ?  They  cannot 
imagine  their  true  selves  having  said  or  done  the  thing,  and  so  they  fall  back  upon 
the  fancy  that  some  other  being  came  in  and  took  unrightful  possession  of  the  con- 
science, usurped  it,  thus  making  possible  that  which  would  have  been  impossible 
had  the  lawful  sovereign  continued  on  the  throne.  But  this  only  shows  how  little 
we  know  ourselves,  how  hard  it  is  for  us  to  understand  our  errors.  (2)  When  we 
take  into  account  hereditary  tendencies  and  dispositions,  when  we  consider  how 
much  easier  it  is  for  one  person  to  resist  the  temptation  to  intemperance,  or  violence 
of  speech,  than  for  another,  the  problem  becomes  still  more  complicated.  (3)  Let- 
ting go  the  past  altogether,  when  we  try  to  distinguish  between  the  various  sources 
from  which,  and  channels  through  whicn,  our  temptations  approach  us,  how  embar- 
rassed we  find  ourselves.  We  are  conscious  that  some  of  our  temptations  come 
directly  through  the  channels  of  sense  ;  we  see  that  others,  such  as  the  allurements 
of  ambition  and  the  attractions  of  praise,  touch  us  from  the  side  of  "the  world," 
so-called,  or  society  ;  while  of  still  others  we  can  only  say  that  they  either  originate 
in  our  own  spirits  or  else  are  communicated  by  contact  with  other  spirits,  of  whose 
nearness  at  this  time  or  that  we  are  ignorant.  Yet  when  we  have  conceded  the 
justice  of  this  analysis,  it  remains  exceedingly  difficult  to  decide,  in  any  given 
instance,  from  which  one  of  the  three  possible  sources  the  temptation  which  happens 
for  the  moment  to  be  pressing  us  with  its  vehement  appeals  has  come.  It  is  a  point 
in  favour  of  a  beleaguered  army  if  the  general  in  command  only  knows  on  which  side 
to  anticipate  the  next  attack,  but  where  there  is  uncertainty  about  this,  or  what  is 
worse,  where  there  is  the  fear  that  the  assault  may  come  from  all  quarters  at  once, 
there  must  be  corresponding  loss  of  heart.  II.  The  prayer.  "  Cleanse  Thou  me," 
&c.  Here  is  the  help,  just  here.  Invite  the  Saviour  of  the  soul  to  enter  in  through 
the  gateway  of  the  soul,  and  to  take  up  His  dwelling  there.  There  is  no  one  who 
comprehends  a  piece  of  mechanism  so  well  as  the  inventor  and  the  maker  of  it.  You 
may  call  this  a  rough  figure  of  speech,  and  yet,  up  to  a  certain  point,  it  is  a  just  one. 
The  soul  is,  indeed,  something  much  better  than  a  watch  ;  but  still  the  watch  and 
the  soul  have  this  much  at  least  in  common  :  each  has  had  a  maker,  and  it  is  only 
reasonable  to  say  that  no  one  can  possibly  understand  the  thing  made  so  thoroughly 
as  the  one  who  made  it.  But  note  carefully  the  precise  point  where  the  soul  has  the 
advantage  of  the  watch.  It  is  here  ;  the  watchmaker  touches  the  wheels  and  springs 
from  without.  He  handles  them  with  most  marvellous  dexterity,  to  be  sure,  but 
still,  after  all,  it  is  only  handling.  The  Maker  of  the  soul  can  do  more  than 
handle  His  workmanship.  He  has  the  added  power  of  entering  in  and  dwelling 
within  it,  yes,  actually  within  it,  as  intimately  as  the  life-power  dwells  within  the 
very  juices  of  the  plant,  making  it  lily  or  carnation,  anemone  or  violet,  each  after  its 
kind.  Those  cures  are  the  most  effectual  that  heal  the  man  from  within.  Surface 
remedies  are  proverbially  disappointing.  Defects  of  constitution,  deeply  concealed 
flaws  of  nature,  yield  only  to  healing  forces  that,  like  an  atmosphere  breathed  in, 
penetrate  to  the  very  inmost  sources  of  life.  It  is  so  with  the  secret  faults,  the 
hidden  flecks,  the  unnoticed  weaknesses  which  mar  the  wholeness  and  sap  the  strength 
of  the  spiritual  man.  We  need  to  breathe  in  more  of  God  if  we  would  breathe 
out  more  of  goodness.  We  need  to  have  within  our  veins  and  bounding  in  our  pulses 
more  of  the  blood  of  Christ  if  we  would  have  the  blood  of  Christ  save  us  indeed, 
for  it  is  not  by  an  outward  washing  that  God  is  making  ready  a  people  for  Himself, 
but  by  that  inward  cleansing  which  begins  at  the  heart.  {  W,  R.  Huntington,  D.D.) 
Errors: — By  errors  he  means  his  unwitting  and  inconsiderate  mistakes.     There 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

are  sins,  some  wlticli  are  committed  when  the  sun  shines,  i.e.  with  light  and 
knowledge,  and  then,  as  it  is  with  colours  when  the  sun  shines,  you  may  see  them, 
so  these  a  man  can  see  and  know,  and  confess  them  particularly  to  be  transgressions  • 
there  are  other  sins,  which  are  committed  either  in  the  times  of  ignorance  or  else  (if 
there  be  knowledge)  yet  with  inobservance  :  either  of  these  may  be  so  heaped  up  in 
the  particular  number  of  them  that,  as  a  man  did  (when  he  did  commit  them),  take 
no  notice  of  them,  so  now  after  the  commission,  if  he  should  take  the  brightest  candle 
to  search  all  the  records  of  his  soul,  yet  many  of  them  would  escape  his  notice. 
And,  indeed,  this  is  a  great  part  of  our  misery,  that  we  cannot  understand  all  our 
debts  :  we  can  easily  see  too  many,  yet  many  more,  lie  as  it  were  dead,  and  out  of 
sight ;  to  sin  is  one  great  misery,  and  then  to  forget  our  sins  is  a  misery  too  :  if  in 
repentance  we  could  set  the  battle  in  array,  point  to  every  individual  sin,  in  the 
true  and  particular  times  of  acting  and  re-acting,  oh  how  would  our  hearts  be  more 
broken  with  shame  and  sorrow,  and  how  would  we  adore  the  richness  of  the  treasure 
of  mercy  which  must  have  a  multitude  in  it,  to  pardon  the  multitude  of  our  infinite 
errors  and  sins.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  Errors  discovered  to  the  heart: — 
Nevertheless,  though  David  saith.  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ?  as  the  prophet 
Jeremiah  spake  also.  The  heart  of  man  is  desperately  wicked,  who  can  know  it  ?  yet 
must  we  bestir  ourselves  at  heaven  to  get  more  and  more  heavenly  light  to  find  out 
more  and  more  of  our  sinnings  :  so  the  Lord  can  search  the  heart ;  and  though  we 
shall  never  be  able  to  find  out  all  our  sins  which  we  have  committed,  yet  it  is 
possible,  and  beneficial,  for  us  to  find  out  yet  more  sins  than  yet  we  do  know  :  and 
you  shall  find  these  in  your  own  experience,  that  as  soon  as  ever  grace  entered  your 
hearts  you  saw  sin  in  another  way  than  ever  you  saw  it  before,  yea,  and  the  more 
grace  hath  traversed  and  increased  in  the  soul,  the  more  full  discoveries  hath  it 
made  of  sins  :  it  hath  shewn  new  sins  as  it  were,  new  sins,  not  for  their  being,  not 
as  if  they  were  not  in  the  heart  and  life  before,  but  for  their  evidence,  and  our 
apprehension  and  feeling :  we  do  now  see  such  ways  and  such  inclinations  to  be 
sinful  which  we  did  not  think  to  be  so  before :  as  physic  brings  those  humours, 
which  had  their  residence  before,  now  more  to  the  sense  of  the  patient :  or  as  the 
sun  makes  open  the  motes  of  dust  which  were  in  the  room  before,  so  doth  the  light 
of  the  Word  discover  more  corruption.  {Ihid.)  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret 
fZMJAs.— Secret  faults : — Temptation  comes  to  all  men  everywhere,  and  St.  Bernard 
roundly  says,  "All  life  is  a  temptation,"  which  means  that  it  is  a  history  of  attacks 
and  resistances,  victories  and  defeats,  in  spiritual  things.  How  could  we  ever 
expect  to  hear  the  praise,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  if  we  had  gained 
no  victories  over  self  ?  And  how  shall  we  gain  them  without  effort  ?  Temptation 
has  various  sources — our  own  weakness,  Satan's  plots,  and  God's  purposes. 
Examination  shows  that  temptation  is  allowed  for  in  God's  plan.  Still,  we  are  not 
to  think  God  is  Himself  the  author  of  temptation.  The  fact  is,  temptation  has 
different  meanings  and  objects,  according  to  the  different  sources  from  which  it 
comes.  It  was  from  mere  malignity  Satan  tempted  Job.  It  was  from  party-spirit 
and  self-sufficiency  the  lawyers  questioned  Christ,  tempting  Him,  It  is  from 
coveting  that  those  who  would  be  rich  fall  into  temptations  ;  but  when  God  allows 
us  to  be  tempted.  His  trials  are  for  our  good,  to  disclose  our  weakness,  to  increase 
our  strength,  to  rebuke  our  waywardness,  or  bring  back  our  wandering  steps.  Even 
in  their  falls  God's  love  pursues  and  overtakes  His  children.  The  first  thing  for  us 
to  do  is  to  discover  what  is  our  temptation  and  our  tempter.  There  are  inveterate 
habits  of  thought,  speech,  and  conduct  which  are  chronic  temptations  one  has 
hardly  a  knowledge  of,  and  no  will  to  resist.  And  here,  in  these,  are  the  great 
battlefields  for  us ;  and  the  discovery  of  these  to  us  is  a  special  occasion  of  God's 
grace  to  us.  When  you  have  found  out  your  special  sin,  the  next  thing  is  to  enter 
the  lists  against  it  in  a  solemn  way,  a  solemn  and  prepared  way.  We  want  the 
Holy  Spirit's  help  to  know  what  cannot  otherwise  be  known,  the  sin  which  doth 
most  easily  beset  us.  This  is  to  be  prayed  for,  and  waited  for,  and  worked  for,  and 
part  of  the  prayer  must  be  the  attitude  of  the  praying  life,  a  watching  soul,  a 
secretly  self-questioning  soul,  a  retirement  into  a  sort  of  inner  oratory  in  one's  own 
self,  there  expecting  and  asking  that  God  may  show  us  ourselves,  and  enable  us  to 
discover,  judge,  and  disapprove  ourselves.  {T.  F.  Crosse,  D.C.L.)  Secret  sins : — 
In  the  Lateran  council  of  the  Church  of  Rome  a  decree  was  passed  that  every  true 
believer  must  confess  his  sins,  all  of  them,  once  a  year  to  the  priest,  and  they  affixed 
to  it  this  declaration,  that  there  is  no  hope,  else,  of  pardon  being  obtained.  How 
absurd.  Can  a  man  tell  his  sins  as  easily  as  he  can  count  his  fingers  ?  If  we  had 
eyes  like  those  of  God  we  should  think  very  differently  of  ourselves.     The  sins  that 


MALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  363 

we  see  and  confess  are  but  like  the  farmer's  small  samples  which  he  brings  to  market 
when  he  has  left  his  granary  full  at  home.  Let  all  know  that  sin  is  sin,  whether 
we  see  it  or  not :  though  secret  to  us,  it  is  as  truly  sin  as  if  we  had  known  it  to  be 
so,  though  not  so  great  as  a  presumptuous  sin.  But  we  want  to  speak  to  those 
whose  sins  are  not  unknown  to  themselves,  but  still  are  secret  from  their  fellow-men. 
Every  now  and  then  we  turn  up  a  fair  stone  which  lies  upon  the  green  mound  of  the 
professing  Church,  surrounded  with  the  verdure  of  apparent  goodness,  and  we  are 
astonished  to  find  beneath  it  all  kinds  of  filthy  insects  and  loathsome  reptiles. 
But  that  would  not  be  just.  Let  me  speak  to  you  who  break  God's  covenant  in  the 
dark  and  wear  a  mask  of  goodness  in  the  light,  who  shut  the  doors  and  sin  in 
secret.  I.  What  folly  you  are  guilty  of.  It  is  not  secret,  it  is  known.  God 
knows  it.  This  world  is  like  the  glass  hives  wherein  bees  sometimes  work  :  we  look 
down  upon  them,  and  we  see  all  the  operations  of  the  little  creatures.  So  God 
looketh  down  and  seeth  all.  IL  The  misery  of  secret  sins.  They  who  commit 
them  are  in  constant  fear  of  discovery.  If  I  must  be  a  wicked  man,  give  me  the  life 
of  a  roystering  sinner,  who  sins  before  the  face  of  day  :  let  me  not  act  as  a  hypocrite 
and  a  coward.  A  mere  profession  is  but  painted  pageantry  to  go  to  hell  in,  the 
funeral  array  of  dead  souls  ;  guilt  is  a  "grim  chamberlain,"  even  when  his  fingers 
are  not  bloody  red.  Secret  sins  bring  fevered  eyes  and  sleepless  nights.  Hypocrisy 
is  a  hard  game  to  play  at.  III.  Its  solemn  guilt.  You  do  not  think  there  is  any 
evil  in  a  thing  unless  somebody  sees  it,  do  you  ?  If  somebody  did  see,  then  there 
would  be  evil.  But  to  play  a  trick  and  never  be  discovered,  as  we  do  in  trade,  that 
is  all  fair.  I  do  not  believe  that.  A  railway  servant  puts  up  a  wrong  signal,  there 
is  an  accident,  the  man  is  tried  and  punished.  He  did  the  same  thing  the  day 
before,  but  there  was  no  accident,  and  so  no  one  accused  him.  But  it  was  just  the 
same  ;  the  accident  did  not  make  the  guilt,  but  the  deed.  It  was  his  business  to 
have  taken  care.  Secret  sin  is  the  worst  of  sin,  because  in  his  heart  the  man  is  an 
atheist.  IV.  The  danger  of  secret  sin.  It  will  grow  into  a  public  one.  You 
cannot  preserve  moderation  in  sin.  The  melting  of  the  lower  glacier  in  the  Alps 
is  always  followed  by  that  of  the  higher.  When  you  begin  to  sin  you  go  on. 
Christians,  you  dare  not  spare  these  secret  sins  ;  you  must  destroy  them.  "V.  I 
beseech  you  give  them  up.  You  who  are  almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian. 
Will  you  have  your  sin  and  go  to  hell,  or  leave  your  sin  and  go  to  heaven  ?  Some 
say,  "You  are  too  precise."  Will  you  say  that  to  God  at  the  last  ?  Secret  sinner, 
in  the  great  day  of  judgment  what  will  become  of  thee?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  cry  from  the  chasm  : — The  Tay  Bridge  fell  because  of  "secret  faults," — a  few 
little  blisters  on  a  girder  or  two.  David  fell  through  "  secret  faults. "  Three  lives 
we  live,  concentric  circles  they  are,  within  one  another,  connected  yet  separate. 
1.  The  outside  life,  in  society,  among  our  fellow-men.  This  outside  life,  comparing 
with  the  other  inner  lives,  is  lived  with  a  dangerous  facility.  Society  life  is  lived 
very  easily.  And  yet  it  may  bo  one  seething  mass  of  rottenness  and  hypocrisy. 
Yes,  this  outside  life  is  easily  lived,  profession  easily  made,  and  easily  and  spotlessly 
acted  up  to,  and  because  of  that  we  find  this  prayer  of  the  Psalmist  does  not  refer 
in  particular  to  this  outmost  circle,  although,  of  course,  to  this  outmost  circle  all  the 
eddying  movements  for  fouler  or  cleaner  must  in  time  extend.  2.  An  inner  life  we 
live  when  the  door  flings  to  its  hinges  on  the  world,  the  life  in  our  home-group,  in 
our  family  circle.  Here  we  manage  to  raise  a  little  the  society  mask  ;  we  can  almost 
lift  it  up  and  lay  it  down,  and  let  our  eyes  look  on  our  real  selves.  Our  surround- 
ings at  home  are  more  favourable  to  the  revealing  of  our  true  character.  The 
inspection  of  our  home  privacy  is  prejudiced  in  our  favour.  But  here  again  there 
is  a  Pinchbeck  imitation.  A  saint  abroad,  they  say,  may  be  a  devil  at  home  ;  true, 
but  a  devil  abroad  may  be  a  saint  at  home.  And  a  saint  abroad  and  a  saint  at 
home  too  may  be  a  devil  at  heart.  The  whole  role  of  the  saint  we  can  easily  act  to 
minutest  detail  as  a  member  or  ofiice-bearer  of  the  Church,  and  the  "  pious  fraud  " 
can  be  carried  through  without  a  hitch  in  our  home-circle.  The  imitation  may 
defy  detection  from  the  search  of  the  strongest  household  microscopes.  3.  The 
inmost  life,  the  region  of  David's  prayer  for  cleansing,  is  heart-life.  Into  thid 
privacy  not  another  being  is  admitted.  Here  is  solitude  unbroken.  If  unbosom  we 
would,  we  could  not.  God  has  walled  round  the  spirit-world  with  the  walls 
unclimbable  and  unwingable.  Nobody  knows  but  Jesus — the  battles  of  the  soul, 
the  halting,  the  stumbling,  the  fainting,  the  falling,  the  fleeing,  the  thoughts  hard, 
the  thoughts  bad,  the  thoughts  harsh  and  hateful,  the  temptings,  the  struggles,  the 
sins,  the  uncleanness — the  black  poisoned  streams  pouring  from  the  old  death-jets 
of  the  fountain  day  by  day.     Why  does  David  pray  for  cleansing  ?     What  is  prayer  ? 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  psalm  XIX. 

It  is  the  appeal  to  power  from  powerlessness,  the  strong  cry  from  helplessness  to- 
help.  Here  in  this  inmost  life  faults  are  truly  "secret" — secret  from  the  man 
himself.  That  is  the  hidden  plague-spot,  and  well  may  we  wince  when  we  touch 
the  place.  We  cannot  play  the  hypocrite  here.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart, 
so  is  he."  No  mask  here.  Entirely  helpless  ;  if  we  seek  cleansing,  we  must  get  it 
outside  ourselves.  For  it  we  must  pray  to  God.  Why,  O  burdened  psalmist  heart, 
needest  thou  pray  for  cleansing  of  secret  faults  ?  In  most  folk's  vocabulary  ' '  secret " 
is  comfortable,  quieting,  secure,  and  safe.  Well  dost  thou  know  that  faults  secret 
to  others,  and  secret  to  thee,  are  not  secret  to  God.  The  prayer  is  from  David's 
helplessness  before  the  secret  faults  of  his  own  soul ;  but  the  agonising  timbre  of  the 
petition  is  from  the  overpowering  sense  of  this  inward  depravity  and  corruption, 
secret  and  imknown  to  him,  yet  spread  out  in  a  terrible  roll  before  Him  wha 
cannot  look  upon  the  shadow  of  sin.  This  staggering  thought  is  one  reason  for 
the  earnestness  of  this  prayer,  (J.  Robertson.)  Secret  faults : — The  Psalmist  i» 
thinking  of  the  errors  that  we  don't  understand,  and  of  which  we  are  not  conscious. 
1.  There  are  faults  which  are  secret,  because  they  are  bound  up  with  our  disposi« 
tions  and  characters.  We  see  every  day  how  blind  men  become  to  their  own. 
habitual  faults,  2,  There  are  secret  faults  which  are  due  to  the  influence  of  our 
surroundings.  There  is  a  law  known  to  naturalists  as  the  law  of  protective 
colouring,  according  to  which  animals  grow  into  the  likeness  of  their  environment. 
There  is  such  a  law  in  society.  Human  beings  tend  to  assimilate  themselves  to  the 
customs  and  opinions  of  the  world  around  them.  In  the  business  world  men  do, 
without  hesitation,  what  they  could  not  do  if  they  applied  the  law  of  Christ  to  the 
regulation  of  their  daily  calling.  The  society  in  which  we  live  affects  us.  It  tends 
to  bring  us  down  to  its  level,  and  imbues  us  with  its  opinions.  3.  There  are  secret 
faults  which  consist  of  undeveloped  germs  and  possibilities  of  evil  that  lie  lurking, 
in  our  hearts.  How  are  we  to  be  delivered  from  these  secret  faults  ?  1.  Set  about 
the  work  of  self-examination.  Careful  and  judicious  self-examination  lies  at  the 
bottom  of  all  progressive  Christianity.  It  may  be  done  in  a  morbid,  introspective 
way,  but  it  need  not  be.  2.  We  must  apply  ourselves  to  the  study  of  the  Word  of 
God.  3.  We  should  bring  ourselves  into  the  holy  presence  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  We 
must  learn  to  pray  the  Psalmist's  prayer.  We  cannot  cleanse  ourselves,  we  need  to 
be  cleansed.  Christ  must  live  in  us  by  His  Holy  Spirit  if  we  are  to  be  cleansed 
from  our  secret  faults,  and  to  become  pure  even  as  He  is  pure.  {J.  C.  Lambert.) 
Secret  faults : — Unless  we  have  some  just  idea  of  our  hearts  and  of  sin  we  can  have 
no  right  idea  of  a  Moral  Governor,  a  Saviour,  or  a  Sanctifier.  Self-knowledge  is  at 
the  root  of  all  real  religious  knowledge.  Self-knowledge  admits  of  degrees.  No 
one,  perhaps,  is  entirely  ignorant  of  himself.  Most  men  are  contented  with  a  slight 
acquaintance  with  their  hearts,  and  therefore  a  superficial  faith.  Men  are  satisfied 
to  have  numberless  secret  faults.  They  do  not  think  about  them  either  as  sins  or 
as  obstacles  to  strength  of  faith,  and  live  on  as  if  they  had  nothing  to  learn.  1.  A 
ready  method  of  convincing  ourselves  of  the  existence  in  us  of  faults  unknown  to 
ourselves  is  to  consider  how  plainly  we  see  the  secret  faults  of  others.  2.  Now 
reflect  on  the  actual  disclosures  of  our  hidden  weakness,  which  accidents  occasion. 
Integrity  on  one  side  of  our  character  is  no  voucher  for  integrity  on  another.  We 
cannot  tell  how  we  should  act  if  brought  under  temptations  diff'erent  from  those 
which  we  have  hitherto  experienced,  3.  This  much  we  cannot  but  allow  ;  that  we 
do  not  know  ourselves  in  those  respects  in  which  we  have  not  been  tried.  But 
further  than  this :  What  if  we  do  not  know  ourselves  even  where  we  have  been 
tried,  and  found  faithful  ?  The  recorded  errors  of  Scripture  saints  occurred  in  those 
parts  of  their  duty  in  which  they  showed  obedience  most  perfect.  4.  Think  of  this 
too  :  No  one  begins  to  examine  himself,  and  to  pray  to  know  himself,  but  he  finds 
within  him  an  abundance  of  faults  which  before  were  either  entirely,  or  almost 
entirely,  unknown  to  him.  That  this  is  so  we  learn  from  the  written  lives  of  good 
men,  and  our  own  experience  of  others.  And  hence  it  is  that  our  best  men  are  ever 
the  most  humble.  5.  But  let  a  man  persevere  in  prayer  and  watchfulness  to  the 
day  of  his  death,  yet  he  vnll  never  get  to  the  bottom  of  his  heart.  Though  he  know 
more  and  more  of  himself  as  he  becomes  more  conscientious  and  earnest,  still  the 
full  manifestation  of  the  secrets  there  lodged  is  reserved  for  another  world.  Call 
to  mind  the  impediments  that  are  in  the  way  of  your  knowing  yourselves  or  feeling 
your  ignorance.  1.  Self-knowledge  does  not  come  as  a  matter  of  course  ;  it  implies 
an  effort  and  a  work.  The  very  effort  of  steadily  reflecting  is  painful  to  some  men, 
not  to  speak  of  the  difficulty  of  reflecting  correctly.  2.  Then  comes  in  our  self-love. 
We  hope  the  best ;  this  saves  us  the  trouble  of  examining.     Self-love  answers  for 


MALM  XXX.]  THE  PSALMS.  865 

our  safety.  3.  This  favourable  judgment  of  ourselves  will  especially  prevail  if  we 
have  the  misfortune  to  have  uninterrupted  health  and  high  spirits  and  domestic 
comfort.  4.  Next  consider  the  force  of  habit.  Conscience  at  first  warns  us  against 
sin  ;  but  if  we  disregard  it,  it  soon  ceases  to  upbraid  us  ;  and  thus  sins,  once  known, 
in  tune  become  secret  sins.  5.  To  the  force  of  habit  must  be  added  that  of  custom. 
Every  age  has  its  own  wrong  ways.  6.  What  is  our  chief  guide  amid  the  evil  and 
seducing  customs  of  the  world !  Obviously  the  Bible.  These  remarks  may  serve  to 
impress  upon  us  the  difficulty  of  knowing  ourselves  aright,  and  the  consequent 
danger  to  which  we  are  exposed  of  speaking  peace  to  our  souls  when  there  is  no 
peace.  "Without  self-knowledge  you  have  no  root  in  yourselves  personally ;  you 
may  endure  for  a  time,  but  under  affliction  or  persecution  your  faith  wUl  not  last. 
{J.  H.  Newman,  B.D.)  Concealing  faults : — Various  causes  contribute  to  conceal 
from  a  man  his  faults.  I.  A  defect  of  knowledge.  Many  sin  against  God 
without  being  conscious  of  it.  Where  ignorance  is  unavoidable  there  sin  may  be 
excusable ;  but  a  man  who  would  avail  himself  of  this  plea  must  make  it  appear 
that  his  ignorance  was  not  owing  to  any  want  of  care  on  his  part  to  find  out  the  law. 
One  principal  cause  that  our  sins  are  so  much  concealed  from  our  view  is,  that  we 
form  our  standard  of  what  is  right,  not  from  the  pure  and  holy  law  of  God,  but 
from  the  general  opinion  of  our  fellow-sinners.  The  custom  of  the  world  is  our 
guide.  II.  The  want  of  a  right  disposition  of  mind.  While  we  were  flattering 
our  pride  with  the  hope  of  having  done  everything  right,  we  may  have  deceived 
ourselves  in  the  very  idea  of  right.  The  want  of  right  dispositions  is  a  subject 
little  considered.  We  are  often  under  the  influence  of  desires  and  tempers  positively 
evil,  without  knowing  it,  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  and  of  our  own  hearts. 
Consider  this  subject  as  the  means  of  rendering  us  humble.  And  let  it  make  us 
watchful.  {Christian  Observer.)  Secret  faults : — Look  at  this  twofold  deliverance 
asked  for — grace  to  cleanse  from  secret  or  presumptuous  faults.  All  sins  come  under 
the  category  of  secret  sins,  or  those  of  presumption.  The  conscience  of  David  was 
becoming  more  sensitive  ;  secret  sins  could  be  secret  no  longer.  We  may  perhaps 
compare  that  development  of  moral  sensitiveness  which  the  law  is  always  promoting 
within  every  right-minded  man  with  those  advances  of  physical  science  by  which 
unknown  worlds  above  and  beneath  us  have  been  brought  into  view,  and  disease 
detected  in  stages  in  which  its  presence  was  unsuspected  by  our  forefathers.  A 
century  ago  man's  observations  had  not  got  very  far  beyond  the  range  of  his 
unassisted  senses.  Our  astronomers  have  scarcely  completed  the  sum  of  the  stars 
brought  into  view  by  the  newest  telescopes.  The  biologist  has  discovered  just  as 
many  new  worlds  as  the  student  of  the  heavens.  He  finds  sphere  of  marvellous  life 
within  sphere,  and  yet  other  spheres  more  deeply  hidden  within  these,  like  ball 
within  ivory  ball  in  Oriental  carving.  An  Italian  doctor  brings  his  microscope  to 
bear,  and,  floating  within  a  foot  of  the  soil  of  the  Campagna,  finds  the  malignant 
bacillus  which  is  at  the  root  of  the  malarial  fever  of  Rome.  Our  forefathers  knew 
only  the  superficial  facts  of  disease,  corruption,  decay.  The  biologist  brings  his 
concentrated  lenses  and  his  polarised  light  to  bear,  and  he  watches  every  movement 
of  the  tiny  armies  of  iconoclasts  as  they  undermine  and  break  up  the  structure  of 
the  body  at  points  where  the  ordinary  observer  did  not  suspect  their  presence.  He 
projects  an  electric  beam  through  tubes  filled  with  stifled  air,  and  the  air  is  found  to 
teem  with  spores  that  are  undeveloped  epidemics,  with  potentialities  of  world-wide 
disaster  in  them.  Within  recent  times  we  have  heard  of  the  elaboration  of  instru- 
ments that  may  reveal  new  worlds  of  sound  to  us,  as  marvellous  as  the  worlds 
of  form  revealed  by  the  microscope.  It  is  said  that  no  man  ever  knows 
what  his  own  voice  is  like  till  he  hears  it  in  Mr,  Edison's  phonograph.  We 
are  told  of  another  instrument  by  which  the  breathings  of  insects  are 
made  audible.  The  medical  expert  may  yet  be  able  to  detect  the  faintest 
murmur  of  abnormal  sound  in  the  system  that  indicates  the  approach  of  disease. 
And  in  the  same  way  there  must  be  the  growth  within  us  of  a  fine  moral  science, 
that  will  bring  home  to  our  apprehension  the  most  obscure  of  our  secret  faults. 
But  of  all  the  sciences  it  is  the  most  primitive  and  the  most  neglected.  All  that  we 
should  know  is  known  to  the  Searcher  of  our  heart  long  before  we  become  conscious 
of  it.  He  not  only  detects  the  flagrant  faults,  but  the  hidden  blight  that  poisons 
the  vitality  of  religion.  But  how  can  there  be  responsibility  for  sins  of  which  we 
are  ignorant  ?  And  how  can  there  be  guilt  without  responsibility  ?  If  ignorance  is 
fated  and  inevitable,  there  can  be  no  responsibility.  But  ignorance  is  often  self- 
caused.  Many  of  our  sins  are  secret  because  we  insist  upon  judging  ourselves  by 
human  rather  than  Divine  standards  of  life  and  righteousness.     Our  sins  assume 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

popular  forms  and  ramifications.  No  more  striking  illustration  of  what  the 
naturalists  call  the  "  law  of  protective  colouring  "  can  be  found  than  that  which 
presents  itself  in  the  realm  of  ethics.  You  know  what  that  law  is.  The  arctic  fox, 
it  is  said,  assumes  a  white  fur  in  the  winter  months,  so  that  it  may  pass  undetected 
over  the  snows.  When  the  spring  comes  and  the  brown  earth  reappears,  it  sheds 
those  white  hairs  and  assumes  a  fur  the  colour  of  the  earth  over  which  it  moves. 
Many  fishes  have  markings  that  resemble  the  sand  or  gravel  above  which  they  make 
their  haunts.  You  may  watch  for  hours,  and  till  they  move  you  are  unable  to 
recognise  their  presence.  The  bird  that  broods  on  an  exposed  nest  is  never  gaily 
coloured.  However  bright  the  plumage  of  its  mate,  it  is  always  attired  in  feathers 
that  match  its  surroundings,  if  it  has  to  fulfil  these  dangerous  domestic  duties. 
Large  numbers  of  insects  are  so  tinted  as  to  be  scarcely  distinguishable  from  the 
leaves  and  flowers  amidst  which  they  live.  One  insect  has  the  power  of  assuming 
the  appearance  of  a  dried  twig.  And  is  there  not  something  very  much  like 
this  ill  the  sphere  of  human  conduct  ?  Our  sins  blend  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the 
age  and  disguise  themselves.  Of  course,  we  do  not  sin  in  loud,  flashing  colours,  if 
we  make  any  pretension  to  piety  at  least.  Our  sins  always  perfectly  compose  with 
the  background  of  our  surroundings.  As  a  rule,  they  are  sins  into  which  we  fall  in 
common  with  men  we  esteem,  men  who  have  established  a  hold  upon  our  affections, 
men  whose  sagacity  we  trust,  and  who  by  their  excellence  in  some  things  lead  us  to 
think  very  lightly  of  the  moral  errors  they  illustrate  in  other  things.  Oh,  the 
blinding  tendency  of  this  judgment  by  popular  standards  to  which  we  are  so  prone  ! 
All  this  was  sure  to  be  illustrated  in  the  history  of  the  Psalmist.  In  the  rough  and 
tumble  of  his  wandering  life  and  coarse  associations  he  would  be  prone  to  forget  the 
inner  and  more  delicate  meanings  and  obligations  of  the  law.  The  moral  atmo- 
sphere pervading  the  Cave  of  Adullam  was  not  more  wholesome  than  that  pervading 
our  unreformed  bankruptcy  courts.  The  cave  was  not  the  best  possible  place  in 
which  to  school  a  man  in  the  finer  shades  of  right  and  wrong.  Most  of  David's 
sins  in  after  life  seem  to  have  been  lurid  reflections  of  the  brutality,  the  unthinking 
ruthlessness,  the  impetuous  animalisms  of  his  former  companions  in  arms.  He 
evidently  felt  the  danger  he  was  in  of  falling  to  the  level  of  his  surroundings  and  of 
forgetting  by  how  much  he  had  fallen.  Let  us  beware  of  gliding  into  an  uncon- 
fessed  habit  of  testing  ourselves  by  human  standards,  when  God  has  given  to  us 
higher  and  holier  standards  by  wliich  to  measure  ourselves.  It  is  said  that  all 
organic  germs  cease  a  few  miles  out  at  sea.  Air  taken  from  the  streets  or  the 
warehouses  of  the  city  yields  large  numbers  of  these  germs.  The  air  circulating 
through  the  ship  in  dock  is  charged  with  them.  After  the  shore  has  been  left 
behind  the  air  taken  from  the  deck  is  pure,  but  they  are  still  found  in  air  taken 
from  the  hold.  After  a  few  days  at  sea  the  air  on  deck  and  in  the  hold  alike  yields 
no  traces  of  these  microscopic  spores  that  are  closely  connected  with  disease.  Let 
us  be  ever  breathing  the  spirit  of  God's  love.  Let  us  get  away  from  the  din  and 
dust  and  turmoil  of  life,  out  upon  that  infinite  sea  of  love  that  is  without  length  or 
breadth  or  depth,  and  our  secret  faults  will  vanish  away  and  we  shall  by  and  by 
stand  without  offence  in  the  presence  of  God's  glory.  Passion,  prejudice,  ambition 
often  blind  men  to  their  faults.  When  great  passionate  forces  hurry  us  on  we  are 
not  more  apt  to  see  the  shortcomings  and  specks  of  corruption  in  the  motives  and 
actions  of  the  passing  moment,  than  the  traveller  by  a  racing  express  to  see  the 
little  ring  of  decay  in  the  lily  of  the  wayside  garden  past  which  he  is  flying. 
During  the  Franco-Prussian  War  a  regiment  of  Prussian  soldiers  was  deploying  from 
the  shelter  of  a  wood,  in  full  face  of  French  fire.  The  appearance  of  the  regiment 
as  seen  from  a  distance,  said  one  of  the  war  correspondents,  was  like  that  of  some 
dark  serpent  creeping  out  from  beneath  the  wood.  The  far-stretching  figure  seemed 
to  leave  a  dark  trail  in  its  path.  The  correspondent  looked  carefully  through  his 
glass,  and  this  trail  resolved  itself  under  close  inspection  into  patches  of  soldiers 
who  had  fallen  under  French  fire.  Some  of  them  were  seen  to  get  on  to  their  feet, 
stagger  on  a  few  paces,  and  fall  again.  The  passion  of  battle  was  upon  them,  and 
they  were  scarcely  conscious  of  their  wounds.  And  is  it  not  thus  with  us  ?  We 
are  intoxicated  by  the  passion  of  life's  battle,  the  battle  for  bread  and  place  and 
power  and  conquest  of  every  kind  ;  and  we  stagger  on,  unconscious  of  the  fact  that 
we  are  pierced  with  many  a  hidden  wound.  The  excitements  that  are  in  the  air 
whirl  us  along,  and  we  are  all  but  insensible  to  the  moral  disaster  He  sees  who 
watches  the  battle  from  afar.  Our  slowness  to  recognise  the  hurt  that  has  over- 
taken us  may  be  the  sign  that  the  pulse  of  vitality  is  fluttering  itself  out.  "Keep 
back  Thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins. "     It  is  restraint,  not  purification,  from 


PSALM  XIX.]  TEE  PSALMS.  867 

presumptuous  sin  that  the  Psalmist  asks  in  the  second  portion  of  his  prayer.  Pre- 
sumptuous sin  has  no  place  in  a  true  child  of  God.  "  He  that  is  born  of  God  doth 
not  commit  sin."  Cleansed  by  the  forgiving  grace  of  God,  we  ought  to  need  only 
deliverance  from  errors  of  inadvertence  and  infirmity.  "He  that  is  bathed  needeth 
not  save  to  wash  his  feet."  No  hallowing  process,  however  complete,  can  remove 
susceptibility  to  the  temptation  even  to  presumptuous  sins.  The  work  of  cleansing 
from  secret  fault  sometimes  creates  a  new  peril.  We  need  to  be  kept  back  from  it, 
as  the  restive  horse  needs  the  curb.  David  felt  this,  and  therefore  prayed  this  prayer. 
{Thomas  G.  Selby.)  On  the  duty  of  examining  into  our  secret  faults; — The 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  are  never  acknowledged  to  be  more  imperfect,  or  at 
least  more  inadequate,  to  the  object  proposed,  perhaps,  than  when  applied  to  estimate 
the  real  merit,  or  demerit,  of  men's  actions  ;  for,  in  order  to  form  an  opinion  on  this 
subject  that  might  have  the  sanction  of  strict  justice,  we  must  know  the  motives 
and  intentions  of  the  heart.  The  generality  of  men  divide  their  service  between 
two  masters,  and  hence  are  neither  wholly  good  nor  wholly  bad.  And  as  we  cannot 
fully  understand  or  appreciate  the  real  character  of  others,  so  neither  can  we  our 
own.  Hence  the  petition  before  us.  Yet  we  can  do  something  towards  the 
understanding  many  of  our  errors  and  secret  faults  ;  and  this  is  our  duty.  There- 
fore I  would— I.  Recommend  the  important  duty  of  examining  into  ottr 
l/ATENT  IMPEKFECTIONS.  And  this  becausc  the  growth  of  character  is  so  gradual. 
Not  all  at  once  do  we  become  vicious,  and  certainly  not  aU  at  once  do  we  attain 
the  summits  of  virtue.  We  are  in  a  great  measure  the  children  of  discipline,  and 
therefore  the  sooner  this  begins  the  better.  Our  great  perils  are  not  from  the 
temptations  of  the  open  day,  but  those  which  are  from  within.  These  are  the 
parents  of  almost  every  evil  deed.  How  important,  then,  to  attend  to  these  "  secret 
faults."  II.  Specify  some  of  those  secret  faults  to  which  we  are  apt 
TO  BE  inattentive.  They  assume  all  manner  of  disguises,  and  the  mind  will 
throw  false  glosses  over  its  own  deformity.  The  mean  rapacious  wretch  will  call  his 
conduct  prudence,  temperance,  and  provident  wisdom.  The  gloomy  bigot  vnll 
despise  the  warm,  steady  devotion  of  the  rational  Christian.  Pride  will  call  itself 
independence  of  spirit  ;  and  meekness  and  gentleness  will  be  branded  as  meanness 
and  pusillanimity.  But  above  all  things,  we  should  attend  to  the  nature  and  the 
grounds  of  our  satisfactions  and  pleasures,  our  griefs  and  vexations,  in  the  inter- 
course  we  carry  on  with  the  world.      III.  Point  out  secret  faults  which, 

THOUGH  conscious  OF  THEM  OURSELVES,  WE  INDUSTRIOUSLY  KEEP  FROM  THE  EYES 

OF  THE  WORLD.  There  is  hypocrisy  in  these,  and  hence  they  are  worse  than  others. 
As,  for  instance,  courtesy  in  order  to  deceive,  a  wicked  affectation  of  Christian 
gentleness.  These  are  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing.  Such  are  religious  from  mere 
worldly  motives.  They  are  hypocrites.  Yet  those  who  take  no  care  to  cleanse  them- 
selves from  errors  of  this  sort  must  live  and  act  under  a  state  of  the  most  wretched 
bondage  to  the  world.  All  is  sacrificed  to  appearance.  The  passions,  indeed,  may 
be  often  mortified  and  suppressed,  though  not  from  a  sense  of  religious  duty  (for 
then  it  would  be  virtue),  but  from  "respect  of  persons,"  or  the  fear  of  losing  some 
advantage.  Men  who  are  thus  wedded,  as  it  were,  to  sin  are  often  as  cruel  and 
oppressive  as  they  are  selfish  and  hypocritical.  Though  they  cringe  to  power,  and 
flatter  to  deceive  ;  yet  they  will  frequently  retire  from  the  insults  and  vexations  of 
the  world  within  the  circle  of  their  respective  authority,  and  there  vent  their  angry 
and  malignant  passions  with  redoubled  vehemence  and  malice.  IV.  The  correc- 
tion OF  THESE  evils.  Live  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  before  whom  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts  shall  be  disclosed.  We  may  deceive  men,  but  we  cannot  deceive  Him.  A 
time  will  shortly  come  when  we  shall  be  convinced  that  there  is  but  "one  things 
needful,"  which  is  the  mercy  and  protection  of  God,  through  the  merits  and  atone- 
ment of  Christ  our  Lord.  The  fashion  and  the  appearance  of  this  world  will  then 
he  so  strangely  reversed  that,  among  many  good  and  faithful  servants  who  are 
worthy  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord,  we  shall  see  some  whose  merits  we 
thought  highly  of  shrink  from  the  awful  trial  of  the  last  day,  and  vanish  like 
smoke  before  the  wind ;  while  the  meek  and  humble  virtues  of  those  whom  we 
might  have  overlooked  and  neglected,  or  perhaps  despised,  shall  shine  forth  like 
the  sun  in  His  kingdom.  {J.  Hewlett,  B.D.)  Secret  faults : — I.  What  are  they  ? 
— They  stand  opposed  to  open  and  presumptuous  sins.  They  relate  particularly — 
1.  To  the  secret  bias  of  the  heart  to  evil.  There  is  what  may  be  called  latent  guilt ; 
a  propensity  of  the  soul  never  yet  developed,  but  which  new  circumstances  may  call 
forth.  2.  To  unholy  thoughts  which  we  intend  no  other  person  shall  know.  3.  To 
those  sinful  emotions  and  affections  which  rise  up  in  the  best  hearts  almost 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

inroluntarily,  and  against  which  the  pure  mind  struggles.  Old  habits  of  evil  will 
torture  for  a  long  while  the  renewed  soul.  4.  To  these  plans  of  evil  which  are  not 
prosecuted  to  their  completion.  Providence  hinders  them,  or  else  they  would  be 
carried  out.  5.  Those  crimes  which  are  perpetrated  in  darkness  or  under  disguise. 
II.  Some  of  the  ways  in  which  sin  is  concealed.  I.  Men  design  to  conceal  them. 
And  we  have  the  power  to  conceal  our  purposes.  Society  could  not  exist  if  we  had 
not  such  power.  The  body  becomes  the  shield  of  the  soul,  to  guard  our  plans  from 
the  observation  of  all  other  minds  but  that  of  God.  But  this  power  of  concealment 
may  be  abused  for  purposes  of  evil,  and  often  is  so.  But  such  concealment  of  guilt 
is  difficult.  God  has  placed  in  the  human  frame  by  nature  certain  indications  of 
secret  guilt ;  and  He  meant  that  where  that  guilt  existed  it  should  betray  itself  for 
the  well-being  of  society.  He  designed  not  only  that  the  conscience  should  check 
the  offender,  but  He  implanted  in  the  frame  itself  certain  indications  of  guilt  which 
He  intended  also  to  be  a  safeguard  of  virtue.  Now,  one  great  art  in  this  world  is  to 
obliterate  the  natural  marks  of  guilt  from  the  human  frame,  and  to  counterfeit  the 
indications  of  innocence.  The  object  is  so  to  train  the  eye  that  it  will  not  reveal  the 
secret  conviction  of  crime  ;  so  to  discipline  the  cheek  that  it  will  not  betray  the 
guilty  by  a  sudden  rush  of  blood  there  ;  so  to  fortify  the  hand  and  the  frame 
that  they  will  not  by  trembling  disclose  the  purposes  of  the  soul.  But  he  drills  and 
disciplines  himself,  and  his  eye  ii  calm,  and  his  countenance  is  taught  to  be  composed, 
and  he  speaks  and  acts  as  if  he  were  an  innocent  man,  and  buries  the  consciousness 
of  the  crime  deep  in  the  recesses  of  the  soul.  Soon  the  brow  is  like  brass, 'and 
the  frame  is  schooled  not  to  betray,  and  the  living  indexes  of  guilt  which  God  had 
affixed  to  the  body  are  obliterated,  and  the  conscience  is  seared,  and  the  whole  man 
has  departed  from  the  beautiful  form  which  God  made,  and  has  become  an  artificial 
and  a  guilty  thing.  Again.  The  arts  of  polished  and  refined  life,  to  a  melan- 
choly extent,  have  the  same  object.  They  are  so  arranged  as  to  conceal  rancour, 
and  envy,  and  hatred,  and  the  desire  of  revenge.  They  aim  not  to  eradicate  them, 
but  to  conceal  them,  2,  Many  secret  sins  are  concealed  because  there  is  no  oppor- 
tunity of  carrying  the  purpose  into  execution.  3,  Others,  because  the  man  has 
never  yet  been  placed  in  circumstances  which  would  develop  his  character.  Were 
they  so  placed  it  would  be  seen  at  once  what  they  were.  Ill,  Some  keasons  why 
we  should  adopt  this  prayer.  1,  Because  we  specially  need  the  grace  of  God 
to  overcome  them.  If  only  by  the  grace  of  God  we  can  be  kept  in  the  paths  of 
external  morality,  what  protection  is  there  in  the  human  heart  against  secret  sins  ? 
2.  Such  secret  faults  are  peculiarly  offensive  to  God,  and  we  should  therefore  pray 
to  be  cleansed  from  them.  The  guilt  of  the  wicked  plan  is  not  annihilated  or 
diminished  in  the  view  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  because  He  chooses  to  arrest  it  by 
His  own  Providence  or  because  He  never  allows  the  sinner  the  opportunity  of 
accomplishing  it.  3.  And  I  add,  finally,  that  we  should  pray  for  this,  because  if 
secret  faults  are  indulged  they  will  sooner  or  later  break  out  like  smothered  fires, 
and  the  true  character  of  the  heart  will  be  developed.  Fires  uncap 'a  mountain, 
because  they  have  been  long  accumulating,  and  can  be  confined  no  longer,  A  judge 
on  the  bench,  like  Bacon,  shocks  the  world  by  the  undisputed  fact  that  he  has  been 
bribed.  The  community  is  horror-stricken,  and  we  feel  for  the  moment  like  distrust- 
ing every  man,  and  doubting  all  virtue  and  all  piety,  and  we  are  almost  led  to  con- 
clude that  all  our  estimates  of  human  character  on  which  we  have  heretofore  acted 
are  false,  and  we  begin  to  distrust  everybody.  But  such  painful  disclosures  are  not 
departures  from  the  great  principles  of  human  nature.  There  is  a  maxim  that  no 
one  suddenly  became  eminently  vile.  These  lapses  into  sin  are  but  the  exponents 
of  the  real  character  of  the  man,  the  regular  results  of  a  long  course  of  guilt.  And 
so  our  cherished  faults  will  one  day  manifest  themselves,  unless  they  are  checked 
and  removed  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the  blood  of  atonement.  IV.  In  conoltision. 
1.  Distrust  yourself,  for  "  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ?  "  2.  Be  humble.  Others 
have  fallen,  so  may  you.  3.  We  have  much  to  dread  at  the  revelations  of  the  day 
of  judgment.  With  no  consciousness  of  sinfulness  but  such  as  I  believe  conimon  to 
man,  with  the  recollection  of  the  general  aim  of  my  life  to  do  right,  with  great 
occasion  for  thanksgiving  that  I  have  been  preserved  from  the  open  vices  that  have 
?uined  so  many  who  began  the  career  of  life  with  me,  yet  I  confess  to  you  that  if 
there  is  anything  that  I  should  more  than  all  other  things  dread,  it  would 
be  that  the  record  of  all  my  thoughts  and  feelings  should  be  exhibited  to  the 
assembled  universe  in  the  last  day.  That  the  universe  would  acquiesce  in  my 
condemnation  on  such  a  revelation  I  have  no  manner  of  doubt.  And  if  there 
is  any  one  thing  for  which  I  desire  to  give  unfeigned  thanks  more  than  others. 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  369 

it  is  that  through  the  blood  of  Christ  those  sins  may  be  blotted  out ;  and 
that  through  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  the  secret  sins  of  which  I  am  conscious 
may  nevee — no  never — be  disclosed  to  assembled  worlds.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 
Secret  faults : — Jesus  Christ  when  on  earth  was  sneered  at  by  persons  who  considered 
themselves  highly  respectable,  and  on  the  whole  very  good  sort  of  people.  It  is  so 
now.  As  long  as  we  are  careless  and  well  pleased  with  ourselves,  so  long  must 
His  message  of  loving  forgiveness  appear  "  foolishness  "  unto  us.  We  cannot  greatly 
desire  to  have  the  burden  of  sin  taken  from  us  if  we  never  have  felt  it  at  all.  The 
first  thing  to  be  done  in  order  to  appreciate  the  message  of  forgiveness  of  sin  is  to 
try  and  understand  our  errors.  And  do  not  be  content  with  mere  general  con- 
fessions. It  is  easy  to  say  vaguely,  "I  am  a  miserable  sinner "  ;  it  is  not  quite  so 
easy  to  say,  "Last  Monday  I  told  that  lie,  on  Tuesday  I  was  guilty  of  that  mean 
action,  and  neglected  my  duty  on  this  or  that  occasion,"  and  so  on.  Those  who 
feel  most  free  from  secret  faults  are  just  those  who  have  most  of  them.  The  best 
men  are  the  most  humble.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  understand  our  errors,  and  to 
know  ourselves  even  as  other  men  know  us,  much  less  as  God  does.  How  clearly 
we  can  see  failings  in  others  which  they  do  not  see.  Be  sure  that  others  see  faults 
in  us  which  we  do  not  see.  Ah,  if  some  power  would  give  us  the  gift  of  seeing  our- 
selves as  others  see  us.  Help  herein  is  to  be  found  by  keeping  a  steady  eye  on  the 
suspicious  part  of  our  character.  Ask  yourself,  "  What  in  me  would  my  enemy  first 
fix  on  if  he  wished  to  abuse  me,  and  what  fault  would  my  neighbours  be  most  ready 
to  believe  that  I  had  ?  One  cannot  but  be  touched  by  that  story  which  some  wise 
sanitary  observer  made  known  to  the  public.  He  noticed  how  a  young  woman  who 
had  come  up  to  London  from  the  country,  and  was  living  in  some  miserable  court 
or  alley,  made  for  a  time  great  efi'orts  to  keep  that  court  or  alley  clean.  But  gradu- 
ally, day  by  day,  the  efforts  of  the  poor  woman  were  less  and  less  vigorous,  until 
in  a  few  weeks  she  became  accustomed  to,  and  contented  with,  the  state  of  filth 
which  surrounded  her,  and  made  no  further  efiforts  to  remove  it.  The  atmosphere 
she  lived  in  was  too  strong  for  her.  The  same  diflBculty  is  felt  in  resisting  our 
errors  and  secret  faults  ;  but  not  to  resist  is  fatal.  A  man  is  tempted  to  lie,  to  steal, 
to  wrong  his  neighbour,  to  indulge  some  bad  passion,  and  resolves  to  do  it  only 
once,  and  thinks  that  "just  once"  cannot  matter.  Oh,  pause!  That  one  sin  is 
the  trickling  rill  which  becomes  the  bounding  torrent,  the  broad  river,  the  waste, 
troubled,  discoloured  sea.  Frequently  during  Lent  we  should  ask  ourselves  what 
are  the  bad  habits  that  are  beginning  to  be  formed  in  us  ?  We  should  take  the 
different  spheres  of  life,  and  examine  our  conduct  as  regards  each  of  them.  Let  us 
judge  ourselves,  that  we  be  not  judged  of  the  Lord  in  reference  to  our  business,  ouj 
home,  our  pleasures.  Our  duty  to  God  and  our  neighbour  is  so  and  so,  how  have 
we  done  it  ?  Above  all,  do  we  think  of  Christ  as  our  King  and  personal  Saviour,  or 
is  all  we  really  know  of  Him  the  sound  of  His  name  and  the  words  about  Him  in  the 
Creeds  ?  But  some  will  ask,  Why  should  I  be  troubled  about  my  errors,  why  should 
I  seek  to  be  cleansed  from  my  secret  faults  ?  Such  thoughts  do  come  to  men.  Help 
against  them  will  be  found  in  these  facts — First,  you  have  not  to  fight  the  battle  alone. 
Christ  is  your  very  present  help.  Then  next,  struggle  after  self-improvement, 
because  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Our  future  destiny, 
our  eternal  life,  depends  on  what  we  do  now.  {E.  J.  Hardy,  M.A.)  Kinds  of 
sin  : — The  terms  used  in  the  Word  of  God  to  describe  the  life  of  the  Christian  believer 
show  that  it  is  not  a  path  of  ease,  nor  one  of  self-indulgence.  Gumall  says,  "The 
Christian's  work  is  too  delicate  and  too  curious  to  be  done  well  between  sleeping  and 
waking,  and  too  important  to  be  done  ill  and  clambered  over,  no  matter  how.  He 
had  need  to  be  awake  that  walks  upon  the  brink  of  a  deep  river,  or  that  treads  on 
the  brow  of  a  steep  hUl.  The  Christian's  path  is  so  narrow,  and  the  danger  is  so 
great,  that  it  calls  both  for  a  nimble  eye  to  discern  and  a  steady  eye  to  direct ;  but 
a  sleepy  eye  can  do  neither."  I.  Confession  of  sin.  There  are — 1.  Secret  faults. 
The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  :  who  can  know  it  ?  Amazed  at  the  inward 
corruptions  you  discover,  ^gain  and  again  in  wonder  you  well  may  ask,  "Who  can 
understand  his  errors  ? — who  can  count  the  number  of  the  one-fourth  part  of  his 
secret  faults  ? "  Some  persons  think  there  is  no  harm  in  what  they  in  their  ignor- 
ance call  "errors,"  or  "little  sins."  But  "little  sins,  suppose  them  to  be  so,  are 
very  dangerous.     A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.     A  little  staff  may  kill  a 

fiant.     A  little  leak  will  sink  a  man-of-war.     A  little  flaw  in  a  good  cause  mars  it. 
0  a  little  sin,  if  unforgiven,  will  bar  up  the  doors  of  heaven,  and  set  wide  open  the 
gtes  of  hell.    Though  the  scorpion  be  little,  it  will  sting  to  death  a  Hon  ;  and  so 
e  least  sin  will  destroy  you  for  ever,  if  not  pardoned  by  the  blood  of  Christ." 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

Watching,  therefore,  your  heart,  you  will  resist  every  kind  of  sin,  and  bring  it  into 
subjection  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  But  secret  faults,  if  indulged,  will  break 
forth  ere  long  into  open  sins.  These  are  what  David  here  confesses  as — 2.  Pre- 
sumptuous sins.  David  knew  what  he  said  when  he  thus  spake.  He  knew  that 
lust,  when  it  is  conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin,  and  that  sin,  when  it  is  finished, 
bringeth  forth  death.  David  had  not  forgotten  the  deceit,  the  lying,  the  murder, 
the  adultery,  most  awful  sins  of  presumption,  of  which  he  himself  had  been  guilty 
in  the  matter  of  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  Hittite.  II.  Supplication  of  paedon. 
He  prays  to  be  delivered — 1.  From  the  guilt  of  sin.  2.  The  power  of  sin.  "  Keep 
back  .  .  .  from  presumptuous  sins."  David  knew  that,  were  it  not  for  the  restrain- 
ing grace  of  God,  there  was  no  sin  which  he  might  not  be  tempted  to  commit.  Oh, 
■what  a  scene  of  sin  and  misery  this  fallen  world  of  ours  would  become  were  it  not 
for  this  preventing  power  of  God  !  See  the  case  of  Abimelech  in  regard  to  Sarah. 
Laban  in  regard  to  Jacob.  And  yet  more  does  He  hold  back  His  people  ;  David 
from  destroying  Nabal.  III.  Devotedness  of  life.  He  singles  out  two  things. 
1.  Edifying  discourse.  "Let  the  words  of  my  mouth, "&c.  2.  Devout  reflection. 
3.  He  recognises  the  mainspring  of  all  true  religion.  ' '  0  Lord,  my  strength  and 
my  Redeemer."  We  all  need  a  Redeemer.  [C.  Clayton,  M. A.)  On  insensibility 
to  offences : — These  words  express  a  rational  and  affecting  prayer  without  entering 
into  any  interpretation  of  them.     For  who  has  not  need  to  pray  against  his  sins  ? 

1.  "Seceet  faults,"  what  ake  they?  Not  those  which  are  concealed  from 
mankind,  but  those  which  are  secret  from  the  offender  himself.  That  these  are 
meant  is  evident  from  the  opening  of  the  verse,  ' '  Who  can  tell  how  oft  he  offendeth  ?" 
There  would  be  no  reason  in  the  question  if  the  sins  were  only  those  which  other 
people  did  not  know  of.  He  must  mean  those  which  he  himself  knew  not  of. 
Looking  back  upon  the  sins  of  his  past  life,  David  finds  himself,  as  many  of  us  must 
do,  lost  and  bewildered  in  their  number  and  frequency.  And  besides  these,  there  were 
many  which  were  unnoticed,  unreckoned,  and  unobserved.  Against  these  he  prays. 
II.  But  can  theee  be  any  such  secret  sins  ?  Yes,  because  habit  makes  us  so 
familiar  with  them  by  repetition,  that  we  think  nothing  at  all  of  them.  These  are 
not  notorious  crimes  but  ordinary  sins,  both  of  omission  and  of  commission.  We  may 
neglect  any  duty  till  we  forget  that  it  is  one.  And  so  with  sins  of  commission. 
Serious  minds  are  shocked  with  observing  with  what  complete  indifference  and 
unconcern  many  forbidden  things  are  practised .  I II.  But  aee  they  not, theeefore, 
SINS?  If  there  be  no  sense  and  perception  of  them,  are  they  yet  sins  ?  Ifit  be  denied 
that  they  are,  then  it  is  only  the  timorous  beginner  who  can  be  brought  to  account. 
It  is  not  that  the  reasons  against  the  sin  have  lessened  or  altered,  but  only  that 
they,  by  frequent  commission  of  the  sin,  have  become  insensible  of  it.  If  the  sense 
be  the  measure  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  then  the  hardened  sinner  is  well  off  indeed.  These 
secret  sins,  then,  are  sins.  Then — 1.  Let  us  join  in  this  prayer,  "Oh,  cleanse,"  &c. ;  and 

2.  See  the  exceeding  great  danger  of  evil  habits  of  all  kinds.  {Archdeacon  Foley,  D.  D. ) 
Secret  faults : — We  read  in  books  about  the  West  Indies  of  a  huge  bat  which  goes 
under  the  ugly  name  of  the  vampire  bat.  It  has  obtained  this  name,  sucking  as  it 
does  the  blood  of  sleepers,  even  as  the  vampire  is  fabled  to  do.  So  far,  indeed, 
there  can  be  no  doubt ;  but  it  is  further  reported,  whether  truly  or  not  I  wiU  not 
undertake  to  say,  to  fan  them  with  its  mighty  wings,  that  so  they  may  not  wake 
from  their  slumbers,  but  may  be  hushed  into  deeper  sleep  while  it  is  thus  draining 
away  the  blood  from  their  veins.  Sin  has  often  presented  itself  to  me  as  such  a 
vampire  bat,  possessing,  as  it  does,  the  same  fearful  power  to  lull  its  victims  into 
an  ever  deeper  slumber,  to  deceive  those  whom  it  is  also  destroying.  It  was,  no 
doubt,  out  of  a  sense  of  this  its  deceiving  power  that  the  royal  Psalmist  uttered 
those  memorable  words,  "Who  can  understand  his  errors?"  I.  How  is  it  that 
SIN  IS  able  to  exercise  this  cheating,  deluding  powee  upon  us  ?  Oftentimes 
great  faults  seem  small  faults,  not  sins  but  peccadilloes,  and  small  faults  seem  no 
faults  at  all  to  us ;  or,  worse  than  this,  that  men  walk  altogether  in  a  vain  show, 
totally  and  fatally  misapprehending  their  whole  spiritual  condition,  trusting  in 
themselves  that  they  are  righteous,  with  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  awaking  only 
when  it  is  too  late  to  the  discovery  that  they  have  fallen  short  altogether  of  the 
righteousness  of  God.  1.  Sin  derives  its  power  altogether  from  ourselves.  It  has 
a  friend  and  partisan  in  us  all.  Hence  we  are  only  too  ready  to  spare  it  and  to 
come  to  terms  with  it,  and  not  to  extirpate  it  root  and  branch  as  we  should.  Our 
love  of  ease  leads  to  this.  Obedience  is  often  hard  and  painful.  But  compliance 
with  sin  is  almost  always  easy.  Then,  again,  there  is  our  love  of  pleasure.  The 
Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  says,  Mortify  your  corrupt  aflfeotiona;  do  not  follow  nor 


rsALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  S71 

be  led  by  them.  They  war  against  the  soul ;  and  you  must  kill  them  or  they  will 
kill  you.  Hard  lesson  to  learn!  unwelcome  truth  to  accept!  And  then,  there  is 
our  pride.  Every  natural  man  has  a  certain  ideal  self  which  he  has  set  up,  whether 
he  knows  it  or  not,  in  the  profaned  temple  of  his  heart,  for  worship  there — some- 
thing which  he  believes  himself  to  be,  or  very  nearly  to  approach  to  being.  And 
this  ideal  self,  as  I  have  called  it,  is  something  which  he  can  regard  with  com- 
placency, with  self-satisfaction,  and,  on  the  whole,  with  admiration.  Will  a  man 
willingly  give  this  up,  and  abhor  himself  in  dust  and  ashes  ?  II.  How  shall  we 
DELIVER  OURSELVES  FROM  THESE  SORCERIES  OF  SIN,  these  delusions  about  ourselves  t 
1.  And  as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  any  such  endeavour,  I  would  say.  Grasp 
with  a  full  and  firm  faith  the  blessed  truth  of  the  one  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satis- 
faction made  for  your  sins.  You  will  never  dare  to  look  your  own  sins  full  in  the 
face  till  you  have  looked  up  to  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  seen  a  Saviour  crucified 
there  for  those  sins  of  yours.  Till  then  you  will  be  always  seeking  cloaks,  pallia- 
tions, excuses  for  sin,  playing  false  with  your  conscience,  and  putting  darkness  for 
light.  You  will  be  open  to  the  thousand  suggestions  that  it  is  not  that  horrible 
thing  which  indeed  in  God's  sight  it  is.  2.  Then  remember,  that  He  who  made  the 
atonement  for  your  sins,  the  same  is  also  the  giver  of  the  Spirit  which  convinces  of 
sin  and  of  righteousness  and  of  judgment.  Throw  open  the  doors  and  windows  of 
the  house  of  your  soul.  Let  the  light  of  God,  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  search 
every  nook,  penetrate  every  recess,  find  its  way  into  every  chamber.  Ask  of  God, 
ask  earnestly  and  continually,  for  this  convincing  Spirit.  There  is  nothing  else 
which  will  ever  show  us  to  ourselves  as  we  really  are.  Those  Pharisees  of  old 
whom  He  who  reads  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  denounced  as  whited  sepulchres,  do 
you  suppose  they  knew  themselves  to  be  hypocrites,  actors  of  a  part,  wearers  of  « 
mask,  wholly  different  in  the  sight  of  God  from  that  which  they  were  in  one 
another's  sight  and  in  the  sight  of  an  admiring  world?  Ah,  no  I  he  is  but  a  poor 
hypocrite  who  only  deceives  others  ;  the  true  hypocrite  has  managed  also,  and  first, 
to  deceive  himself.  So  it  was,  no  doubt,  with  those  whom  I  speak  of.  Probably 
nothing  seemed  more  unjust  to  them  than  this  charge  of  hypocrisy  which  the  Lord 
persisted  in  bringing  against  them ;  so  deceitful  and  desperately  wicked  are  these 
hearts  of  ours.  \R.  Chenevix  Trench,  D.D.)  Secret  sitis: — Self-examination  is 
most  necessary  to  the  knowledge  of  our  sins,  but  it  often  happens  that  with  all 
our  search  some  sins  may  escape  our  notice.  As  in  temporal  concerns,  men  often 
know  that  by  a  long  course  of  prodigality,  and  many  expensive  vanities,  they  have 
contracted  a  great  debt  upon  their  estates,  and  have  brought  themselves  to  the  very 
brink  of  poverty  and  distress,  and  yet,  when  they  try  to  consider  of  their  condition, 
find  themselves  utterly  unable  to  state  their  accounts,  or  to  set  forth  the  particulars 
of  the  debt  they  labour  under ;  but  the  more  they  endeavour  to  recollect,  the  more 
they  are  convinced  that  they  are  mere  strangers  at  home,  and  ignorant  of  their  own 
affairs.  So  in  spiritual  concerns  likewise.  Such  was  David's  feeling  as  expressed 
in  the  text.  Whenever  men  doubt  their  own  sincerity  and  due  performance  of 
religious  acts  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  reason  with  their  fears  and  scruples,  and 
to  dispossess  them  of  the  misapprehensions  they  have  of  their  own  state  and  con- 
dition. Such  suggestions  as  bring  ease  and  comfort  to  their  minds  come  suspected, 
as  proceeding  from  their  own  or  their  friends'  partiality;  and  they  are  afraid  to 
hope,  lest  even  to  hope  in  their  deplorable  condition,  should  prove  to  be  pre- 
sumption, and  assuming  to  themselves  more  than  in  reason  or  justice  belongs  to- 
them.  But  when  we  can  show  them  men  of  approved  virtue  and  holiness,  whose 
praise  is  in  the  Book  of  Life,  who  have  struggled  with  the  same  fears  and  waded 
through  even  the  worst  of  their  apprehensions  to  the  peaceful  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness, it  helps  to  quicken  both  their  spirits  ami  their  understanding,  and  at  once 
to  administer  knowledge  and  consolation.  And  for  this  reason  we  can  never 
sufficiently  admire  the  wisdom  of  God,  in  setting  before  us  the  examples  of  good 
men  in  their  lowest  and  most  imperfect  state.  Had  they  been  showu  to  us  only  in 
the  brightest  part  of  their  character,  despair  of  attaining  to  their  perfection  might- 
incline  us  to  give  over  the  pursuit,  by  throwing  a  damp  upon  our  best  resolutions. 
But  when  we  see  how  God  raised  them  up  from  their  low  estate,  then  heavenly  joy 
and  peace  often  spring  from  the  lowest  depth  of  sorrow  and  woe.  Now  let  us 
observe — I.  That  the  security  and  efficacy  of  repentance  do  not  depend 
■UPON  A  PARTICULAR  RECOLLECTION  OF  ALL  OUR  ERRORS.  What  are  Secret  sins  ? 
They  are — 1.  Negligences.  These  often  surprise  us  in  our  devotions,  for  we  find 
our  fervour  and  attention  gone.  We  are  not  consciouB  of  it  at  the  time  ;  the  fault 
is  secret  to  tub.    2.  Ignorances  also.    There  is  no  oonscious  intent,  as  in  sins  of 


872  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xnc 

presumption.  3.  But  our  sins  may  partake  of  the  malice  of  the  will,  and  yet 
escape  the  notice  of  the  understanding.  For  habit,  custom,  long  usage  in  sin  will 
so  deaden  conscience  that  we  lose  the  very  sense  and  feeling  of  sin.  4.  Being  par- 
takers in  other  men's  sins,  which  we  are  when  by  our  ill  example  they  have  been 
led  to  sin.  Then  we  share  with  them  in  the  guilt  of  their  iniquity.  How  far  our 
influence  spreads,  to  what  instances  and  what  degrees  of  vice,  how  many  we 
seduced  by  our  example,  or  hardened  by  our  encouragement,  is  more  than  we  can 
tell,  and  yet  not  more  than  we  shall  answer  for.  Those  who  are  thus  entered  in 
our  service,  and  sin  under  our  conduct,  are  but  our  factors.  They  trade  for  us,  as 
well  as  for  themselves ;  and  whatever  their  earnings  are,  we  shall  receive  our  due 
proportion  out  of  the  wages  of  their  sin.  This  is  a  guilt  which  steals  upon  us  with- 
out being  perceived ;  it  grows  whilst  we  sleep,  and  is  loading  our  account  even 
when  our  bodies  are  in  the  possession  of  the  grave.  The  higher  our  station  and 
the  greater  our  authority  the  more  reason  have  we  to  fear  being  involved  in  this 
kind  of  guilt;  because  in  proportion  to  our  authority  will  the  infection  of  our 
example  spread;  and  as  our  power  is  great,  our  encouragement  will  be  the  more 
eflfectual.  But  then,  on  the  other  side,  the  good  men  have  done  shall  Uve  after 
them,  and  be  placed  to  their  account.  It  shall  be  part  of  their  joy  to  see  how  others 
have  been  blessed  through  their  means.  II.  The  GTiiiiT  vte  contract  by  them. 
There  is  guilt,  else  David  had  not  prayed,  "Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults." 
They  are  sometimes  the  most  heinous  of  all.  The  guilt  of  sin  does  not  arise  from 
the  power  of  our  memory,  nor  is  it  extinguished  by  the  weakness  of  it.  The  con- 
sequence from  the  whole  is  this.  That  since  many  of  our  sins  are  secret  to  us,  they 
can  only  be  repented  of  in  general ;  and  since  many  of  our  secret  sins  are  very 
heinous,  they  must  seriously  and  solemnly  be  repented  of.  (T.  Sherlock,  D.D.) 
Secret  faults: — Undiscovered  sins.  The  Psalmist  is  thinking  that,  beyond  the 
range  of  conscience  and  consciousness,  there  are  evils  in  us  all.  I.  In  eveet  MAN 
AEE  SINS  OF  WHICH  THE  DOER  IS  UNAWARE.  Few  of  US  are  familiar  with  our  own 
appearance.  Our  portraits  surprise  us.  The  bulk  of  good  men  do  not  know  them- 
selves. Evil  has  the  strange  power  of  deceiving  us,  and  hiding  from  us  our  acts' 
real  character.  Conscience  is  loudest  where  it  is  least  needed,  and  most  silent  where 
most  required.  Conscience  wants  educating.  "We  bribe  our  consciences  as  well  as 
neglect  them.  Down  below  every  life  there  lies  a  great  dim  region  of  habits  and 
impulses  and  fleeting  emotions,  into  which  it  is  the  rarest  thing  for  a  man  to  go 
with  a  candle  in  his  hand,  to  see  what  it  is  like.  Ignorance  diminishes  criminality, 
but  ignorance  does  not  alter  the  nature  of  a  deed.  II.  The  special  perilousness 
OF  hidden  FAULTS.  As  with  a  blight  upon  a  rose-tree,  the  little  green  creatures 
lurk  on  the  under  side  of  the  leaves,  and  in  all  the  folds  of  the  buds,  and,  because 
unseen,  they  increase  with  alarming  rapidity.  The  very  fact  that  we  have  faults 
in  our  characters,  which  everybody  sees  but  ourselves,  makes  it  certain  that  they 
will  grow  unchecked,  and  so  will  prove  terribly  perilous.  Those  secret  faults  are 
like  a  fungus  that  has  grown  in  a  wine  cask ;  whose  presence  nobody  suspected. 
It  sucks  up  all  the  generous  liquor  to  feed  its  own  filthiness,  and  when  the  staves 
are  broken  there  is  no  wine  left,  nothing  but  the  foul  growth.  Many  a  Christian 
man  and  woman  has  the  whole  Christian  life  arrested,  and  all  but  annihilated,  by 
the  unsuspected  influence  of  a  secret  sin.  III.  The  discipline,  or  practical 
ISSUES,  TO  which  SUCH  CONSIDERATIONS  SHOULD  LEAD.  1.  They  ought  to  take 
down  our  self-complacency,  if  we  have  any.  It  should  give  us  a  low  estimate  of 
ourselves.  2.  It  should  lead  us  to  practise  rigid  self-inspection.  3.  "We  should 
diminish  as  much  as  possible  the  merely  mechanical  and  instinctive  part  of  our 
lives.  The  less  we  live  by  impulse  the  better.  A  man's  best  means  of  knowing 
what  he  is  is  to  take  stock  of  what  he  does.  If  you  will  put  your  conduct  through 
the  sieve  you  will  come  to  a  pretty  good  understanding  of  your  own  character. 
4.  One  of  the  surest  ways  of  making  conscience  more  sensitive  is  always  to  consnlfc 
it,  and  always  to  obey  it.  If  you  neglect  it,  and  let  it  prophesy  to  the  wind,  it 
will  stop  speaking  before  long.  5.  Compare  yourselves  constantly  with  your  model. 
Do  as  the  art-students  do  in  a  gallery — take  your  poor  daub  right  into  the  presence  of 
the  masterpiece,  and  go  over  it,  line  by  line  and  tint  by  tint.  Get  near  Jesus  Christ,  that 
you  may  learn  duty  from  Him,  and  you  will  find  out  many  of  the  secret  sins.  6.  Ask 
God  to  cleanse  us.  Revised  Version  has,  "  Clear  Thou  me  from  secret  faults."  And 
there  is  present  in  the  word,  if  not  exclusively,  yet  at  least  predominantly,  the  idea 
of  a  judicial  acquittal.  So  we  may  be  sure  that,  though  our  eye  does  not  go  down 
there  into  the  dark  depths,  God's  eye  goes  ;  and  that  where  He  looks  He  looks  tt 
pardon,  if  we  come  to  Him  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    {A.  Maclarm,  D.D.) 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  373 

The  anatomy  of  secret  sins : — I.  In  what  kespect  are  sins  called  secret  ?  For 
the  resolution  of  this  know  that  sins  hath  a  double  reference.  Either  to  God,  and 
so  really  no  sin  nor  manner  of  sinning  is  secret.  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places, 
that  I  shall  not  see  him  ?  saith  the  Lord ;  do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the  Lord 
(Jer.  xxiii.  24) ;  it  is  true,  that  wicked  men  with  an  atheistical  folly  imagine  to  hide 
themselves  and  their  sinful  ways  from  God,  they  seek  deep  to  hide  their  counsel  from 
the  Lord,  and  their  works  are  in  the  dark,  and  they  say.  Who  seeth  us  ?  and  who 
knoweth  us  ?  (Isa.  xxix.  15.)  But  really  it  is  not  so,  though  the  cloud  may  somewhat 
eclipse  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  though  the  dark  night  may  shut  it  forth  altogether, 
yet  there  stands  no  cloud,  nor  curtain,  nor  moment  of  darkness  or  secrecy  'twixt  the 
eyes  of  God  and  the  ways  of  man.  The  ways  of  a  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
and  He  pondereth  all  his  goings  (Prov.  v.  21).  Or  to  man,  and  thus  indeed  comes  in 
the  division  of  sin  into — 1.  Open  ;  and  2.  Secret.  Now,  in  this  respect  sin  may  be 
termed  secret  diversely — 1.  In  respect  of  the  person  sinning :  when  his  very  sinning 
is  (formally  considered)  hidden  from  himself ;  he  doth  a  thing  which  is  really  sinful, 
but  to  him  it  is  not  apprehensively  so.  What  outrages  did  Paul  breathe  out  against 
the  Church  in  times  of  his  ignorance  which  he  did  not  know  to  be  acts  of  sin.  2.  In 
respect  of  the  manner  of  sinning,  and  thus  sins  may  be  termed  secret.  (1)  When 
they  are  coloured  and  disguised,  though  they  do  fly  abroad,  yet  not  under  that  name, 
but  apparelled  with  some  semblances  of  virtues.  (2)  When  they  are  kept  ofi'  from 
the  stage  of  the  world  they  are  like  fire  in  the  chimney  ;  though  you  do  not  see  it, 
yet  it  burns  ;  just  as  'twixt  a  book  shut  and  a  book  opened,  that  which  is  shut  hath 
the  same  lines  and  words,  but  the  other  being  opened,  every  man  may  see  and  read 
them.  (3)  When  they  are  kept,  not  only  from  a  public  eye,  but  from  any  mortal 
eye.  But  what  were  those  secret  sins  from  which  David  desired  to  be  cleansed  ? 
Nay,  that  is  a  secret ;  he  doth  not  instance  in  any  one,  because  his  desire  is  to  be  freed 
from  every  one  ;  he  speaks  indefinitely.  II.  But  what  is  that  to  be  cleansed  ? 
There  be  two  expositions  of  it.  1.  One  is  that  he  desires  to  be  justified,  to  be 
pardoned  those  sins.  And  indeed,  the  blood  of  Christ  which  justifies  is  a  cleansing 
thing,  it  wipes  off  the  guilt.  2.  Another  is  that  he  desires  more  to  be  sanctified,  and 
that  inward  actings  or  motions  might  be  subdued.  And  observe,  he  doth  desire  to 
be  cleansed,  he  doth  not  desire  to  be  dipped  only  into  the  water,  or  sprinkled ;  he 
doth  not  desire  only  to  be  a  little  rinsed.  Where  observe  by  the  way  three  things. 
1.  First,  he  who  hath  received  true  grace  needs  more  grace  :  our  lives  need  to  be  still 
reformed,  and  our  hearts  still  to  be  cleansed.  2.  Again,  the  progress  and  perfection 
of  cleansing  the  soul  appertains  to  God  as  well  as  the  beginning.  The  physician 
must  go  through  with  his  cure,  or  else  the  patient  will  relapse.  3.  Lastly,  persons 
truly  holy  and  sensible  desire  yet  further  measures  of  holiness.  III.  But  why 
SHOULD  WE  DESIRE  TO  BE  CLEANSED  FROM  SECRET  SINS  ?  1.  Because  secret  sins  will 
become  public  sins  if  they  be  not  cleansed.  It  is  with  the  soul  as  it  is  with  the 
body,  wherein  diseases  are  first  bred  and  then  manifested  ;  and  if  you  suppress  them 
not  in  their  root,  you  shall  shortly  see  them  to  break  out  in  the  fruit :  or  as  it  is  with 
fire  catching  the  inside  of  the  house  first,  and  there  if  you  do  not  surprise  it,  it  will 
make  way  for  itself  to  get  to  the  outside.  Lust,  when  it  hath  conceived,  bringeth 
forth  sin  (James  i.  15).  But  when  they  come  to  public  and  visible  actings,  then  they 
are  a  copy,  they  are  exemplary  sins  ;  and  like  the  plague  Infecting  other  persons, 
others  are  capable  to  imitate  them,  and  so  more  souls  are  tainted,  and  God  now 
receives  a  common  dishonour.  2.  Secret  sins  are  apt  to  deceive  us  most,  and  there- 
fore cleanse  these.  (1)  Because  we  have  not  that  strict  and  spiritual  judgment  of 
the  inwards  of  sin,  as  of  the  outwards  ;  many  times  we  conceive  of  them  as  no  sins 
at  all.  (2)  And  because  most  men  decline  sin  upon  outward  respects,  which  do  not 
reach  the  actings  of  secret  sins ;  shame  and  fear,  and  observance  are  great,  and  the  only 
restraints  to  many.  They  do  not  live  in  and  visibly  commit  such  sins,  because  they 
like  not  shame  and  are  afraid  of  punishment.  (3)  The  strength  of  sin  is  inward, 
therefore  labour  to  be  cleansed  from  secret  sins.  The  strength  of  a  sin — 1.  Lies  in 
its  nearness  to  the  fountain,  from  whence  it  can  take  a  quick,  immediate,  and  con- 
tinual supply ;  and  so  do  our  secret  sins,  they  are  as  near  to  original  sin  as  the  first 
droppings  are  to  the  spring-head.  2.  It  lies  in  the  acceptance  of  the  aff'ections:  love 
and  liking  set  sin  upon  its  throne.  3.  It  lies  in  the  confidence  of  commission :  now 
a  man  doth  take  more  heart  and  boldness  to  commit  secret  sins  than  open.  4.  It 
lies  in  the  iteration  and  frequency  of  acting,  for  sin  often  repeated  and  acted  is  like 
a  cable  double  in  strength  by  the  manifold  twistings.  5.  The  principal  object  of 
God's  eye  is  the  inward  and  secret  frame  of  the  soul,  therefore  labour  to  be  cleansed 
from  secret  sins  (Psa.  Ixvi.  16).     If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart  the  Lord  will  not 


374  TffB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xrr. 

hear  me  (Psa.  li.  6).  Behold,  Thou  desirest  trnth  in  the  inward  parts.  (0.  Sedgtoids, 
B.D.)  True  holiness  hath  a  contrariety  to  all  sin : — 1.  That  true  holiness  hath  • 
repugnancy  and  a  contrariety  to  all  sins.  It  is  not  contrair  to  sin,  because  it  is  open 
and  manifest ;  nor  to  sin,  because  it  is  private  and  secret,  bat  to  sin  as  sin,  whether 
public  or  whether  private,  because  both  the  one  and  the  other  is  contrary  to  God's 
will  and  glory,  as  it  is  with  true  light,  though  it  be  but  a  beam,  yet  it  is  universally 
opposite  to  all  darkness  :  or  as  it  is  with  heat,  though  there  be  but  one  degree  of  it, 
yet  it  is  opposite  to  all  cold  ;  so  if  the  holiness  be  true  and  real,  it  cannot  comply 
with  any  known  sin  ;  you  can  never  reconcile  them  in  the  affection ;  they  may  have 
an  unwilling  consistence  in  the  person,  but  you  can  never  make  them  to  agree  in  the 
affection.  2.  That  sanctification  is  not  perfect  in  this  life  ;  he  who  hath  most  grace 
hath  yet  some  sin.  Grace,  though  it  may  be  sound  and  saving,  yet  is  it  not  absolute 
and  perfect.  3.  Here  you  may  understand  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  the  many 
troubles  and  heavy  complaints  of  Christians.  The  main  battle  of  a  Christian  is  not 
in  the  open  field  ;  his  quarrels  are  most  within,  and  his  enemies  are  in  his  own  breast. 
When  he  hath  reformed  an  ill  life,  yet  it  shall  cost  him  infinitely  much  more  to  reform 
an  ill  heart ;  he  may  receive  so  much  power  from  grace  at  the  beginning  as  in  a  short 
time  to  draw  off  from  most  of  the  former  gross  acts  of  sinnings,  but  it  will  be  a  work 
of  all  his  days  to  get  a  thorough  conquest  of  secret  corruptions.  4.  Then  all  the 
work  of  a  Christian  is  not  abroad,  if  there  be  secret  sins  to  be  cleansed.  There  are 
two  sorts  of  duties.  Some  are  direct,  which  are  working  duties  ;  they  are  the  colours 
of  grace  in  the  countenance  and  view  of  the  conversation,  setting  it  forth  with  all 
holy  evenness  and  fruitfulness  and  unblameableness.  Some  are  reflexive,  which 
are  searching  duties ;  they  appertain  to  the  inward  rooms,  to  the  beautifying  of 
them,  and  reforming  of  them  ;  for  not  only  the  life,  but  the  heart  also  is  the  subject 
of  our  care  and  study.  I  am  not  only  to  labour  that  I  do  no  evil,  but  also  that  I  be 
not  evil,  not  only  that  sin  do  not  distain  my  paths,  but  also  that  it  doth  not  defile 
my  intentions  :  not  only  that  my  clothes  be  handsome,  but  also  that  my  skin  be 
white,  my  inward  parts  be  as  acceptable  to  God  as  my  outward  frame  is  plausible 
with  man.  {Ibid.)  Sin  destroyed  in  the  cause : — Now,  as  a  man  may  deal  with  a 
tree,  so  he  may  deal  with  his  sins ;  the  axe  may  be  employed  only  to  lop  off  the 
branches,  which  yet  all  live  in  the  root,  and  he  may  apply  his  axe  to  the  very  root, 
to  the  cutting  of  it  up,  and  so  he  brings  an  universal  death  to  the  tree  :  so  it  is  poss- 
ible for  a  man  to  bestow  all  his  pains  to  lop  off  sin  only  in  the  visible  branches  in 
the  outward  limbs  of  it,  and  it  is  also  possible  for  a  man  to  be  crucifying  the  secret 
lust,  the  very  corrupt  nature  and  root  of  sinfulness.  Now,  this  I  say,  he  who 
bestows  his  study,  his  prayers,  his  tears,  his  cares,  his  watchings,  his  strength  to 
mortify  corruption  in  the  root,  in  the  nature,  in  the  cause,  how  unquestionable  is 
it  that  he  doth  desire  to  be  cleansed  from  secret  sins.  {Ibid. )  Beware  of  secret 
sins : — I.  Motives  to  enforce  oue  oaee.  There  be  many  arguments  which  may 
justly  stir  us  up  to  take  heed  of  and  to  cleanse  from  secret  sins.  1.  The  Lord 
knoweth  our  secret  sinnings  as  exactly  as  our  visible  sinnings  (Psa.  xliv.  21).  2.  The 
Lord  will  make  manifest  every  secret  thing  (Mark  iv.  22).  There  is  a  twofold 
breaking  out  of  a  secret  sin  or  manifestation  of  it.  One  is  natural :  the  soul  cannot 
long  be  in  secret  actings,  but  some  one  part  of  the  body  or  other  wUl  be  a  messenger 
thereof.  Another  is  judicial ;  as  when  the  judge  arraigns,  and  tries,  and  screws  out 
the  close  murder,  and  the  dark  thefts :  so  God  will  bring  to  light  the  most  hidden 
works  of  darkness.  3.  Thy  secrets  shall  not  only  be  manifested,  but  shall  also  be 
judged  by  God  (Rom.  ii.  16).  4.  Secret  sins  are  more  dangerous  to  the  person  in 
some  respects  than  open  sins.  For — 1.  A  man  doth  by  his  art  of  sinning  deprive 
himself  of  the  help  of  his  sinfulness  :  like  him  who  will  carry  his  wound  covered,  or 
who  bleeds  inwardly  ;  help  comes  not  in  because  the  danger  is  not  descried  nor  known. 
2.  If  a  man's  sin  breaks  out,  there  is  a  minister  at  hand,  a  friend  near,  and  others  to 
reprove,  to  warn,  to  direct.  II.  The  aggkavations  of  secret  sins.  1.  The  more 
foul  the  sin  naturally  is,  the  worse  is  the  secret  acting  of  it.  2.  The  more  relations 
are  broken  by  secret  sinning,  the  worse  they  are,  and  more  to  be  wared.  3.  The  more 
profession  a  man  makes,  the  worse  are  his  secret  sinnings  ;  forasmuch  as  he  carrieth 
not  only  a  badge,  but  also  a  judge  on  his  shoulders.  4.  The  more  light  a  man  hath 
meeting  him  in  the  dark,  and  secret  actings  of  sin,  the  more  abominable  is  the  sin. 
5.  The  more  frequent  a  man  is  in  secret  sinnings,  the  deeper  is  his  guilt;  when  he 
can  drive  a  trade  of  sin  within  doors :  when  it  is  not  a  slip,  but  a  course.  III.  The 
means  which  help  against  secret  sins.  1.  If  thou  hast  been  guUty  of  secret 
sins,  be  humbled  and  repent.  2.  Take  heed  of  secret  occasions  and  provocations. 
8.  Crush  the  temptations  which  come  from  the  roots.    4.  Get  an  hatred  of  sin,  which 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  375 


will  oppose  sin  in  all  kinds,  and  all  times,  and  in  aU  places.  5.  Get  the  &ar  of  God 
planted  in  thy  heart.  There  are  three  sorts  of  sins  which  this  fear  will  preserve  a 
man  against.  First,  pleasant  sins,  which  take  the  sense  with  delight.  Secondly, 
profitable  sins,  which  take  the  heart  with  gain,  but  what  shall  it  profit  me  to  win  the 
whole  world  and  to  lose  my  soul.  Thirdly,  secret  sins  of  either  sort.  6.  Believe 
God's  omniscience  and  omnipresence.  7.  Get  thy  heart  to  be  upright.  {Ibid,) 
The  peril  of  secret  sins : — In  some  waters  a  man  may  drive  strong  piles,  and  build 
his  warehouses  upon  them,  sure  that  the  waters  are  not  powerful  enough  to  under- 
mine his  foundations  ;  but  there  is  an  innumerable  army  of  minute  creatures  at  work 
beneath  the  water,  feeding  themselves  upon  those  strong  piles.  They  gnaw,  they 
bore,  they  cut,  they  dig  into  the  poled  wood,  and  at  last  a  child  might  overthrow 
those  foundations,  for  they  are  cut  through  and  eaten  to  a  honeycomb.  Thus  by 
avarice,  jealousy,  and  selfishness  men's  dispositions  are  often  cut  through,  and  they 
don't  know  it.     {H.  W.  JBeecher.) 

Ver.  13.  Keep  back  Thy  servant  also  firom  presmaptuons  sins. — A  conjunction 
of  requests  .—I.  There  may  and  should  be  a  conjunction,  even  of  qeeat 
PETITIONS  AND  REQUESTS  (at  once)  UNTO  GoD.  David  cuds  not  at  that  request 
(keep  me  from  secret  sins),  but  goes  on  also,  0  Lord,  keep  me  from  presumptuous 
sins ;  he  multiplies  his  suits  according  to  the  multiplicity  of  his  necessity  and 
exigence.  There  be  divers  qualities  about  our  prayers.  1.  One  is  an  urgent 
fervency.  2.  Importunity.  8.  Patient  perseverance.  4.  A  variety  or  multiplicity 
of  matter,  like  as  a  patient  who  comes  to  the  physician,  we  may  and  should  open 
not  only  one  want,  but  all  our  wants  ;  and  crave  help  not  in  one  thing,  but  in  every 
thing :  we  should  multiply  requests.  Seasons  hereof  are  these :  1.  God  can  hear 
«very  request  as  well  as  any  one.  A  multiplied  request  as  well  as  a  single  request : 
for  He  takes  not,  nor  observes  things  by  discourse,  where  one  notion  may  be  an  im- 
pediment to  the  apprehension  of  another,  but  all  things  (by  reason  of  His  omniscience) 
are  equally  at  once  present  unto  Him.  2.  Nay,  He  can  grant  many  and  great 
requests  as  easily  as  the  single  and  smallest  petition.  The  greatest  gift  comes  as 
freely  and  readily  out  of  His  hand  as  the  most  common  mercy.  3.  Christ  is  as 
ready  and  able  to  implead  many  and  great  requests  as  well  as  some  and  inferior. 
4.  God  hath  for  this  end  made  manifold  promises  ;  therefore  we  may  put  up  many 
and  great  requests  at  once.  5.  Lastly,  God  is  rich  in  mercy,  and  plenteous  in  com- 
passion ;  His  mercies  are  often  styled  manifold  mercies.  II.  That  even  a  good 
Christian  should  have  a  fear  of  great  sins  as  well  as  a  care  of  secret 
SINS.  "Keep  me  also  from  presumptuous  sins,"  Reasons  whereof  may  be  these. 
1.  The  latitude  of  original  sin,  which  as  it  is  yet  remaining  in  the  best,  so  it  is  in 
them  an  universal  fountain  naturally  apt  to  any  vile  inclination.  2.  The  instances 
of  great  transgressions :  even  those  saints  who  have  been  as  the  highest  stars  have 
left  behind  them  their  twinklings  and  sad  eclipses.  Now  when  cedars  fall,  should 
not  the  tender  plants  tremble  ?  if  the  sins  of  others  be  not  our  fear,  they  may  be 
our  practice  ;  what  the  best  have  done,  the  weakest  may  imitate  if  they  do  not  hear 
and  fear.  He  is  a  wise  and  sincere  Christian  who  resists  the  smallest,  and  fears  the 
greatest  sins  :  Keep  back  Thy  servant  from  presumptuous  sins.  I  observe  from  the 
words  absolutely  considered— III.  That  a  good  man  is  God's  servant.  "Thy 
servant,"  &c.     Servants,  not  of  force,  but  of  afi"ection.     IV.  That  we  are  God's 

SERVANTS,    SHOULD   BE   USED    TO    MOVE    THE    LORD    TO    HELP    US    AGAINST    SINS. 

V.  That  our  special  relations  to  God  should  be  special  reasons  to  work 
A  care  not  to  sin  AGAINST  GoD.  The  very  nature  of  sin  carries  along  with  it 
a  condemnation  of  sinning,  because  sin  formerly  is  a  transgression,  an  anomy,  and  a 
rebellion,  which  alone  is  an  inglorious  thing.  Again,  the  laws  and  threatenings  of 
God  should  be  as  forcible  cords  to  draw  off  the  heart  from  sin.  And  again,  all  the 
mercies  and  goodness  of  God  should  exasperate  the  heart  against  sin.  Again,  all  the 
attributes  of  God  might  hold  us.  Now,  with  these  this  also  may  come  in,  namely, 
the  specialty  of  our  relation  to  God,  that  we  are  His  children.  Reasons  whereof  are 
these — 1.  Admissions  of  sinnings  here  do  diffuse  a  greater  ingloriousness  to  God  : 
sin  is  more  darkening  in  a  white  cloud  than  in  a  black,  as  a  spot  is  more  eminently 
disgraceful  in  a  fair  than  in  a  foul  cloth.  2.  Their  great  sinnings  do  make  them 
the  sorer  wounds  and  work :  no  sinning  wounds  so  deep  as  such  which  have  more 
mercy  and  goodness  to  control  them.  Oh  then,  let  as  improve  oar  interest  in  oar 
God.  Shoald  such  a  man  as  I  flee,  said  Nehemiah ;  so  then,  should  snob  a  man  as 
I  sin  thus,  walk  thus,  live,  do  thus  ?  Why  ?  God  is  my  God,  He  is  my  Father ; 
I  am  His  child,  His  servant.    (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)       Presumjptiuou*  sm : — 1.  This 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

is  a  prayer  to  be  delivered  from  gross  and  undisguised  sins.  "Secret  sins"  are 
subtle  and  hidden  ;  presumptuous  sins  are  open,  glaring,  outrageous.  But  are  tbe 
people  of  God  in  any  danger  from  coarse  and  notorious  sins  ?  It  is  well  to  remind 
ourselves  tbat  there  is  no  temptation  we  can  treat  lightly.  The  world  to-day  is  full 
of  those  who  have  grievously  fallen.  2.  Another  act  of  presumption  against  which 
we  must  guard  is  the  unnecessary  exposure  of  ourselves  to  temptation  and  harm. 
The  foolhardiness  of  some  is  surprising.  They  expose  themselves  to  sceptical  influ- 
ences, to  worldly  entanglements,  to  animal  indulgences,  to  many  yawning  abysses 
which  threaten  body  and  soul.  Myriads  perish  through  standing  on  the  slippery 
places  and  dizzy  heights  of  temptation.  3.  A  branch  of  presumptuous  sin  is  to 
treat  negligently  our  secret  faults.  The  presumptuous  sin  is  often  first  one  of  those 
secret  faults  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse  ;  it  is  the  secret  fault  matured  and 
ripened.  The  mistake  is  that  we  are  not  sufficiently  impressed  by  the  faint,  hidden 
evil,  and  we  do  not  make  immediate  and  serious  efforts  to  deal  with  it.  It  is  thus 
that  our  faults  increase  in  magnitude  and  deepen  in  colour.  Safety  lies  in  dealing 
with  the  earliest  aberrations  of  our  mental,  emotional,  and  physical  nature,  and  not 
giving  them  opportunity  to  strengthen  and  display  themselves.  The  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  is  first  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  ;  but  we  forget  that  the  kingdom  of  hell 
in  its  beginnings  is  equally  microscopic.  A  medical  authority  has  recently  declared 
that  elephantiasis  is  often  occasioned  by  the  bite  of  the  mosquito.  4.  Another  sin 
of  presumption  is  to  face  the  natural  and  inevitable  perils  of  life  without  availing 
ourselves  of  every  possible  advantage  of  vigilance  and  defence.  The  diver  does  not 
descend  into  the  depth  without  being  sure  of  his  panoply.  Nothing  is  more  remark- 
able in  nature  than  the  way  in  which  animals  and  plants  are  armed  against  their 
enemies.  The  most  ferocious  thorns  and  spines  protect  cacti  from  destruction  by 
the  wild  quadrupeds  of  their  desert  home.  Protective  mechanics  of  a  most  com- 
plicated order  are  found  in  a  number  of  plants,  which  would  otherwise  be  endangered 
and  perhaps  entirely  destroyed  by  the  attacks  of  ravenous  snails.  And  God  has  not 
left  us  without  a  "whole  armour"  ;  it  would  be  very  unlike  Him  if  He  had.  But 
alas  !  we  often  neglect  to  fortify  ourselves  ;  we  go  into  a  dangerous  world  with 
sandals,  sword,  helmet,  and  breastplate  missing.  5.  It  is  essentially  an  act  of  moral 
presumption  to  live  in  a  low  state  of  spiritual  power.  There  is  no  presumption 
greater  than  to  live  with  a  cold  heart,  a  weak  faith,  a  vacillating  purpose.  We 
invite  failure  and  ruin.  We  are  free  from  harm  and  condemnation  as  we  live  full  of 
power  and  enthusiasm.  ( W.  L.  Watkinson. )  0/presumptuotis  sins ." — Everything 
evinceth  the  Almightiness  of  the  great  Creator.  Three  instances — 1.  The  glorious 
fabric  of  the  spangled  vault  above  us.  2.  The  vicissitude  of  day  and  night.  3.  The 
excellencies  of  that  great  minister  of  nature,  the  sun  ;  considered  in  the  comeliness 
and  beauty  of  his  person,  in  the  force  of  his  incredible  swiftness,  in  the  large- 
ness of  his  walk,  in  the  universality  of  his  influence.  The  Bible,  or  book  of  holy 
writ,  is  described  by  its  several  names  and  titles.  Note  the  terms  and  appellations, 
the  qualities  described,  and  the  effects  or  operations.  The  third  book  is  the  con- 
science. What  finds  he  there  ?  A  foul  blurred  copy,  that  he  is  puzzled  how  to 
read.  The  conscience  being  convicted  of  sin,  where  there  is  any  sense  of  true  piety, 
the  soul  will  address  itself  to  God  for  pardon,  that  it  may  be  cleansed  from  secret 
faults  ;  and  for  grace,  that  by  its  restraints  and  preventions  and  assistances  it  may 
be  kept  back  from  presumptuous  sins,  and,  if  unhappily  engaged,  that  it  may  be 
freed  at  last  from  the  dominion  of  them.  There  is  here  a  request,  and  the  ground  of 
it,  which  is  the  advantage  and  benefit  thence  arising.  Consider  two  propositions. 
1.  That  the  very  best  of  men,  without  Divine  restraints,  are  liable  to  the  worst  of 
miscarriages,  even  presumptuous  sins.  Secret  faults  are  such  as  hide  themselves, 
the  common  errors  and  frailties  of  our  life  :  sins  of  infirmity,  constitution,  and  temper  ; 
sins  of  surprise.  Deliberation  and  consent  make  any  sin  to  be  a  presumptuous  sin. 
The  course  of  sin  is,  the  iuvitation  of  the  sensual  appetite,  the  inclination  of  the  will, 
a  force  upon  the  judgment,  a  full  consent,  the  act  itself.  Tbis  is  aggravated  into 
presumption  when  the  daring  sin  gets  tbe  dominion  and  power  over  a  man.  From 
act  it  proceeds  to  delectation  ;  this  leads  to  new  acts,  and  at  last  objuration  and  final 
impenitence.  Note  the  ways  and  means  God  uses  either  to  restrain  and  keep  back 
men  from  committing  presumptuous  sins,  or  to  rescue  and  recover  them  from  under 
the  dominion  of  them.  These  are  partly  on  account  of  providence,  partly  from 
common  morality,  and  partly  from  special  grace.  The  bpst  of  men  are  still  men, 
partakers  of  the  same  common  nature  with  other  men.  They  have  the  same  affec- 
tions and  passions,  the  same  fleshly  appetites,  which  many  times  betray  them  into 
the  same  inconveniences.     2.  Presumptuous  sins,  even  in  the  servants  of  God  them- 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  FSALMS.  877 

selves,  are  offences  of  a  damnable  and  desperate  nature.  They  tincture  them  with  a 
deep  gmlt,  subvert  their  spiritual  state,  and  throw  them  out  of  God's  favour  into 
disgrace.  And  this  reasonably,  because  of  their  ingratitude  to  God,  and  the  great 
hurt  of  their  example,  as  a  scandal  to  religion,  by  the  hardening  of  wicked  men  and 
the  discouragement  of  the  pious.  {Adam  Ldttleton,  D.D.)  The  means  of  moral 
preservation : — What  is  it  to  sin  presumptuously  ?  The  word  means,  "with  a  high 
hand."  Then,  to  sin  presumptuously  is  to  sin  in  an  aggravated  degree.  1.  To  sin  in 
opposition  to  knowledge  is  to  sin  presumptuously.  This  is  not  characteristic  of  all 
sins.  Some  sins  are  products  of  ignorance.  2.  To  sin  in  contrariety  to  conscience  is 
to  sin  presumptuously.  3.  To  sin  in  defiance  of  the  common  operations  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  4.  To  sin  after  having  deliberated  about  the  commission  of  it.  5.  To  sin 
when  there  is  no  strong  temptation  to  the  commission  of  it.  6.  To  sin  notwithstand- 
ing adverse  dispensations  of  Divine  providence  are  loudly  calling  for  sin  to  be  abhorred 
and  avoided.  7.  To  sin  in  the  hope  of  ultimately  obtaining  mercy.  {A.  Jach,  D.D. ) 
The  nature  and  danger  of  presumptuous  sins  : — They  are  such  as  have  more  of  wilful- 
ness and  malice  prepense  than  of  ignorance  and  infirmity  in  them ;  when  a  man 
sins  with  a  high  hand  against  the  dictates  of  reason  and  the  checks  of  conscience, 
through  the  stubbornness  and  perverseness  of  a  depraved,  distorted  will.  Consider 
the  malignant  qualities  and  mischievous  effects  of  presumptuous  sinning.  1.  They 
spring  from  the  corruption  of  the  heart,  from  some  evil  lust  or  affection,  some  pre- 
dominancy of  pride,  avarice,  or  voluptuousness.  2.  After  sinning  in  this  manner 
it  is  very  hard  to  repent.  3.  Supposing  a  man  relents  soon  after,  and  is  disposed  to 
repent  heartily  and  turn  to  God ;  yet  it  will  be  difficult  for  him  so  to  heal  the 
breach  which  those  sins  have  made  as  to  come  with  delight  and  humble  confi- 
dence to  God  as  before.  Advice  and  directions  how  to  avoid  these  sins.  (1)  Be 
instant  in  prayers  to  Almighty  God  to  preserve  us  by  His  preventing  grace  from 
falling  into  them.  (2)  After  prayers  we  must  use  our  best  endeavours  to  help  our- 
selves. We  must  look  well  to  our  hearts,  that  they  maj'  be  set  right  and  kept  with 
all  diligence.  Sinning  presumptuously  is,  as  it  were,  revolting  from  God  and 
running  off  into  another  interest.  Our  hearts  are  not  whole  with  God  when  we  do 
it.  (3)  We  should  be  often  reflecting  upon  the  infinite  value  of  heavenly  things 
above  all  earthly  enjoyments.  (4)  Our  care  should  be  to  keep  out  of  temptations  as 
much  as  possible.  (5)  We  should  be  watchful  of  our  whole  conduct,  and  especially 
beware  of  the  beginnings  of  things.  (T.  Waterland.)  Avoiding 2}resumptuous 
sins: — 1.  Be  sure  never  to  do  anything  against  the  clear  light  of  thine  own 
conscience.  2.  Strive  to  be  master  of  thine  own  will.  We  count  our  horses  to  be 
unserviceable  until  they  be  broken.  It  is  a  great  point  in  the  art  of  education  for 
parents  betimes  to  break  their  children  of  their  wills.  3.  Beware  of  sinful  engage- 
ments. A  man  may  have  already  done  some  evil  from  which  he  cannot  handsomely 
acquit  himself,  but  to  his  loss  and  shame,  unless  he  either  cover  it  or  maintain  it  by 
laying  another  sin  upon  it.  Seldom  doth  a  man  fall  into  presumptuous  sin,  but 
where  the  devil  has  got  such  a  hank  over  him.  The  only  way  to  get  free  is  to 
break  out  of  the  engagement.  4.  Harden  thyself  with  a  holy  obstinacy  and  wilful- 
ness. {Bishop  Sanderson. )  Presumptuous  sins : — Some  sins  are  greater  than  . 
others.  Every  sin  has  in  it  the  very  venom  of  rebellion,  but  there  be  some  which 
have  in  them  a  greater  development  of  its  essential  mischief,  and  which  wear  upon 
their  faces,  as  do  presumptuous  sins,  more  of  the  brazen  pride  which  defies  the 
Most  High.  Though  under  the  Jewish  law  an  atonement  was  provided  for  every 
kind  of  sin,  there  was  none  for  this.  "The  soul  that  sinneth  presumptuously  sliaU 
have  no  atonement;  it  shall  be  cut  off."  Very  terrible,  then,  are  these  sins. 
I.  What  are  they  ?  1.  Those  that  are  committed  wilfully  against  manifest  light 
and  knowledge.  Conscience  furnishes  often  such  light ;  it  is  the  voice  of  God  in 
the  heart.  If  conscience  warn  you,  and  yet  you  sin,  that  is  presumption.  2.  Deli- 
beration is  another  characteristic  of  these  sins.  There  are  some  who  can  think 
upon  a  sin  for  weeks,  and  dote  upon  the  thought  of  it  and  plan  for  it,  and  then  when 
opportunity  comes,  go  and  commit  it.  3.  Long  continuance  in  it.  4.  Design. 
See  the  punishment  of  the  Sabbath -breaker  told  of  in  the  Book  of  Numbers.  He 
was  punished,  not  merely  because  he  gathered  the  sticks  on  the  Sabbath,  but 
because  the  law  had  just  been  proclaimed,  "In  it  (the  Sabbath)  thou  shait  do  no 
manuer  of  work."  5.  The  hardihood  born  of  fancied  strength  of  mind.  "  It  won't 
hurt  me,"  say  many.  But  they  find  that  they  are  hurt.  It  would  be  presumption 
for  any  man  to  climb  to  the  top  of  the  spire  of  a  church  and  stand  upon  his  head. 
"Well,  but  he  might  come  down  safe  if  he  were  skilled  in  it."  Yes,  but  it  is  pre- 
sumptuous.    You  have  heard  how  Dionysius  the  tyrant  punished  one  who  had 


S78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

displeased  him.  He  invited  him  to  a  noble  feast.  Rich  were  the  viands  that  were 
ypread  upon  the  table,  rare  the  wines  he  was  invited  to  drink.  But  he  was  utterly 
miserable,  he  sat  in  his  chair  in  agony.  For  over  his  head,  immediately  over  it, 
there  hung  a  sword,  bright  and  sharp,  suspended  by  a  single  hair,  and  he  had  to  sit 
all  the  time  with  this  sword  above  him.  He  could  not  escape,  he  must  sit  where 
he  was.  Conceive  the  poor  man's  misery.  But  you,  who  will  procrastinate,  are 
willingly  placing  yourself  in  a  position  as  full  of  peril,  and  yet  you  make  mirth. 
II.  The  sinfulness  of  these  sins.  It  is  because  they  are  against  light  and 
knowledge,  are  deliberate  and  wilfully  done.  III.  The  appropriateness  of  this 
PRAYER.  It  was  the  prayer  of  a  saint.  ' '  Hold  me  in.  Lord,  I  am  prone  to  these 
sins."  See  how  Paul  warns  saints  against  the  most  loathsome  sins.  There  is 
enough  tinder  in  the  heart  of  the  best  of  men  to  light  a  fire  that  shall  burn  to  the 
lowest  hell.  But  how  much  more  have  we  need  to  pray  this  prayer.  {C.  H. 
Sturgeon. )  The  anatomy  of  presumptuous  sins : — I.  What  presumptuoxts  sins 
ARE.  1.  That  presumptuous  sinnings  are  proud  adventurings  of  the  heart  upon 
sin ;  there  is  a  large  difference  'twixt  foilings  by  temptation  and  adventurings  by 
presumption.  Temptation  beats  down  that  actual  strength  of  grace  resisting  :  but 
presumption  tramples  down  the  light  of  the  Word  opposing.  A  man  doth  even  try 
it  out  with  God,  and  provokes  Him  to  His  face  ;  and  maintains  the  devices  of  his 
heart  against  the  purity  and  equity  of  Grod's  will.  2.  In  presumptuous  sinnings  a 
man  knows  the  thing  and  way  to  be  unlawful :  and  therefore  the  presumptuous 
sinner  is  opposed  to  the  ignorant  sinner ;  the  presumptuous  sinner  holds  a  candle 
in  one  hand,  and  draws  out  the  sword  with  the  other.  3.  The  presumptuous  sinner 
adventures  against  express  threatenings.  4.  Presumptuous  sins  do  arise  from  a 
false  confidence ;  there  are  two  things  upon  which  the  presuming  sinner  doth  em- 
bolden himself.  (1)  One  is  the  facility  of  mercy :  when  a  man  sets  mercy  against  sin, 
he  doth  weU ;  but  when  a  man  sets  mercy  against  justice,  now  he  ofiTends.  "  'Tia 
true,  this  is  a  sin,  and  Divine  justice  will  not  take  it  well,  but  I  will  adventure  on  it, 
hoping  that  Divine  mercy  will  pacify  the  rigour  of  the  threatening  ;  I  will  sin  and 
offend  justice,  but  then  I  will  decline  that  court  by  flying  to  the  mercy-seat "  (Deut. 
xxix.  19).  (2)  Another  is  the  self-possibility  and  strength  of  future  repentance  :  he 
is  one  of  the  worst  patients  in  a  way  of  sinning  who  is  confident  that  he  can  be  his 
own  physician  :  no  soul  wounds  itself  more  than  that  which  vainly  thinks  that  it 
can  presently  cure  them.  There  are  two  things  which  the  sinner  cannot  assure  him- 
self of.  One  is  the  lengthening  of  his  Ufe ;  for  this  candle  is  lighted  and  put  out, 
not  according  to  our  desires,  but  according  to  Divine  pleasure  :  all  life  has  its  limits 
from  the  Lord  of  life  and  death.  Another  is  the  returning  of  the  heart  from  sin. 
5.  In  many  presumptuous  sinnings  there  is  a  slighting  contempt  (Numb.  xv.  30,  31) : 
presumptuous  sinning  is  called  a  despising  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  6.  Lastly, 
presumptuous  sinning  may  rise  higher  than  all  this,  as  when  a  man  sins  not  only 
saiowingly  and  wilfully,  but  most  maliciously  and  despitefuUy  against  God  and  Christ 
(Heb.  X.  29,  vi.  6).  II.  What  that  strength  is  which  keeps  back  regenerate 
persons  from  presumptuous  sins  ;  and  what  difference  'twixt  the  restrainings  of 
evil  men  and  this  keeping  back  of  good  David.  1.  Restraint  is  any  kind  of  stop  'twixt 
the  inclination  and  the  object ;  when  the  nature  is  inclined  to  such  a  thing,  and  a 
bar  falls  in  to  keep  them  asunder,  this  is  restraint.  2.  Restraint  of  any  agent  ariseth 
from  a  greater  strength  of  a  superior  agent :  whatsoever  keeps  a  man  back  from  a 
sinful  acting,  it  is  (at  that  time)  whiles  a  restraint  of  more  actually  strong  force 
than  the  present  inclination  is  ;  as  in  the  stopping  of  a  stone  or  water,  that  which 
is  unequal  in  strength,  a  lesser  force  is  not  able  to  keep  in  the  stronger.  Though 
sinful  inclinations  be  strong,  yet  God  can  overrule  and  bound  and  bind  it  in. 

3.  All  restraint  presuppoaeth  an  aptness,  a  disposition  ready  to  run  and  get  out. 
The  child  whose  desire  is  to  lie  in  the  cradle  is  not  there  said  to  be  restrained ;  and 
the  tradesman  whose  shop  is  his  paradise  is  not  therefore  restrained  from  going 
abroad  ;  but  when  a  servant  would  be  gadding,  and  yet  is  kept  in,  this  is  restraint. 

4.  All  restraint  of  sin  is  from  God.  5.  All  em  men  are  not  equally  restrained  by 
God.  6.  The  restraining  of  any  sinner  is  an  act  of  a  merciful  Providence  unto  him. 
7.  God  doth  restrain  the  good  and  the  bad  from  sin.  8.  God  doth  diversely  keep 
back  or  restrain  men  from  particular  sins  and  sinnings:  sometimes  —  (1)  By 
enlivening  the  conscience.  (2)  By  self-reflecting  apprehensions.  (3)  By  legal 
inaprintings.  (4)  By  denying  and  crossing  opportunities.  (6)  By  denying  or 
•withholding  of  temptations.  (6)  By  causing  diversions,  which  may  call  aside  the 
employment  of  the  sinner  another  way.  (7)  Lastly,  by  beginning  and  supporting 
and  enlarging  the  principle  of  sanctificatioxu    9.  The  restrainings  of  good  men  are 


MAIM  MX.]  THE  PSALMS.  879 

exceedingly  different  from  thoae  of  eril  men.  The  restrainings  of  evil  men  are  but 
M  looks  upon  the  out-door  ;  and  the  keeping  baok  of  good  men  is  as  the  lock  upon 
the  closet.  One  is  an  impedite  to  the  actions,  the  other  is  an  impedite  to  the 
inclinations ;  one  is  a  bridle  upon  the  lips  and  hands,  the  other  is  a  bond  upon 
the  heart  and  disposition.  They  differ  in  their  efficacy :  restrainings  of  evil  men  do 
not  impair  the  state  of  sin,  no  more  than  chains  and  prisons  do  the  nature  of  the 
thief  or  lions.  Mere  restraints  do  not  deal  justly  with  sins,  they  make  a  stop  in 
one,  and  leave  open  a  gap  for  other  sins  :  like  a  vessel  of  many  holes,  though  the 
water  break  not  out  in  one  place,  because  it  is  stopt,  yet  it  freely  flies  out  in  the 
rest.  So  where  a  man  is  restrained  only,  though  that  sin  cannot  find  a  way  in  that 
vein,  yet  it  will  find  a  course  (like  the  water  which  is  hindered  under  ground) 
another  way.  But  the  holdings  back  by  renewing  grace  do  indispose  generally  and 
evenly.  They  differ  in  the  fulness  of  duration  ;  for  mere  restraints  hold  in  the 
nature  no  longer  than  the  things  remain  by  virtue  of  which  the  mind  was  re- 
strained. Let  the  fear  of  death  expire,  put  aside  the  edge  of  the  law,  be  sure  that 
shame  shall  not  follow,  and  the  only  restrained  sinner  breaks  open  school,  so  that 
he  goes  to  the  sin.  But  holdings  back  by  renewed  grace  are  cohibitions  of  the 
heart  upon  permanent  grounds,  namely,  the  perpetual  contrariety  'twixt  God  and 
sin,  'twixt  sin  and  His  will  and  holiness  and  goodness  and  honour.  They  differ  in 
this,  that  the  heart  of  a  man  only  restrained  doth,  being  at  liberty  (like  waters 
held  up),  pour  forth  itself  more  violently  and  greedily,  as  if  it  would  pay  use  for 
forbearance.  They  differ  thus.  An  evil  man  is  kept  back  as  a  prisoner  by  force 
against  his  will  ;  but  a  good  man  is  kept  back  as  a  petitioner.  It  is  bis  heart's 
desire.  Oh,  that  my  ways  were  so  directed  that  I  might  keep  Thy  statutes.  It  is 
an  evil  man's  cross  to  be  restrained,  and  a  good  man's  joy  to  be  kept  back  from  sin. 
Take  what  I  conceive,  briefly  thus  :  God  keeps  back  His  servants  from  sin — 1.  By 
preventing  grace,  which  is  by  infusing  such  a  nature,  which  is  like  a  bias  unto 
the  bowl,  drawing  it  aside  another  way.  2.  By  assisting  grace,  which  is  a  further 
strength  superadded  to  that  first  implanted  nature  of  holiness,  like  a  baud  upon  a 
child  holding  him  in.  3.  By  quickening  grace,  which  is,  when  God  doth  enliven 
our  graces  to  manifest  themselves  in  actual  opposition,  so  that  the  soul  shall  not 
yield,  but  keep  off  from  entertaining  the  sin  :  as  when  in  the  motions  of  sin  He 
inflames  the  heart  with  an  apprehension  of  His  own  love  in  Christ.  4.  By  directing 
grace,  which  is  when  God  confers  that  effectual  wisdom  to  the  mind,  tenderness  to 
the  conscience,  watchfulness  to  the  heart,  that  His  servants  become  greatly  solic- 
itous of  His  honotir,  scrupulously  jealous  of  their  own  strength,  and  justly  regardful 
of  the  honour  of  their  holy  profession.  5.  By  doing  grace,  which  is  when  God 
effectually  inclines  the  heart  of  His  servants  to  the  places  and  ways  of  their  refuge, 
safeties,  and  preservations  from  sin.  III.  What  causes  or  reasons  there  should 
Bs  which  might  move  David  to  put  up  this  prayer  :  "  Keep  back  Thy  servant 
from  presumptuous  sins."  1.  If  he  considered  himself,  there  were  sufficient  grounds  for 
such  a  petition,  because — (1)  His  aptness  by  virtue  of  original  corruptions,  even  to 
presumptuous  sins.  (2)  His  impotency  and  self-inability  to  keep  off  himsel  f  from  such 
sins.  2.  In  respect  of  the  sins  themselves.  Amongst  which  higher  ranks  of  iniquity 
are  presumptuous'sins  and  sinnings,  which  may  appear  thus — (1)  The  more  shining 
light  of  grace  is  trampled  over  for  to  act  the  sin,  the  viler  is  the  sinning.  (2)  The 
more  pride  of  heart  accompanies  any  kind  of  sinning,  this  makes  it  the  more 
vile.  (3)  The  more  impudency  and  boldness  attends  a  sinning,  the  worse  it  is. 
(4)  The  more  abuse  of  mercy  concurs  to  the  sinning,  the  more  heinous  it  raiseth 
the  sin.  3.  In  respect  of  others.  (1)  Such  sins  would  be  exemplary  and  noted. 
(2)     Such  sinnings  from  him  would  be  trophies  to  evil  men.     4.  In  respect  of  God. 

(1)  What  God  had  been  to  him  might  cause  him  to  pray  against  presumptuous  sins. 

(2)  What  he  was  to  God.  Why?  David  was  His  servant.  (O.  Sedgwick,  B.D.) 
Presumptuous  sins : — A  man  is  guilty  of  this  sin  when,  without  having  sufficient 
strength,  he  undertakes  to  do  something  of  himself ;  or,  without  warrant,  reckons  to 
receive  some  extraordinary  aid  from  the  mercy  or  power  of  God.  Over-valuing  of 
ourselves  as  to  our  own  strength,  as  Peter  did  ;  or  trusting  to  the  mercy  of  God 
without  the  warrant  of  a  promise,  as  did  the  sons  of  Sceva,  is  presumption.  Sins 
are  distributed  into  sins  of  ignorance,  of  infirmity,  and  of  presumption,  as  related  to 
the  understanding,  the  will,  and  the  sensual  appetite  or  affections.  If  the  fault 
lies  in  the  xmderstanding,  the  sin  may  be  a  sin  of  ignorance.  If  in  the  affections, 
the  sin  may  be  a  sin  of  infirmity.  Where  sin  has  none  of  these  excuses  it  is  a 
wilful,  that  is,  a  presumptuous,  sin.  See  the  sins  of  Paul  before  his  conversion,  of 
Peter  in  his  denial,  of  David  in  the  matter  of  Uriah.     Paul's  was  a  sin  of  ignor- 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

ance,  Peter's  a  sin  of  infirmity,  David's  a  sin  of  presumption.  Observe  how  great 
and  mischievous  presumptuous  sins  are.  They  originate  from  a  worse  cause  than 
other  sins,  and  thence  are  more  sinful ;  they  produce  worse  effects,  and  so  are  more 
dangerous.  They  harden  the  heart  They  abnost- annihilate  the  conscience.  Pre- 
sumptuous sins  cannot  be  removed  by  ordinary  humiliations.  A  more  solemn  and 
lasting  course  of  repentance  is  necessary.  These  sins  leave  scars  behind,  like  bad 
wounds,  when  healed,  leave  in  the  flesh.  1.  A  presumptuous  sinner  rarely  escapes 
•without  some  outward  affliction.  2.  Presumptuous  sins  are  often  scandalous,  leav- 
ing an  indelible  stain  on  the  offender.  3.  Presumptuous  sins  leave  a  sting  in  the 
conscience  of  the  sinner.  How  may  we  avoid  such  sins  ?  (1)  Never  do  anything 
against  the  clear  light  of  thine  own  conscience.  (2)  Strive  to  be  master  of  thine 
own  will.  (3)  Beware  of  engaging  thyself  to  sin.  As  in  the  case  of  Herod  with 
Herodias.  {Bishop  Sanderson.)  The  nature,  danger,  aggravations,  and  cure  of 
presumptuous  sin : — I.  "When  is  a  man  gttilty  of  this  sin  ?  1.  "When  sin  is  . 
committed  against  the  powerful  dictates  of  his  own  conscience  and  the  clear 
conviction  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  "When  sin  is  upon  long  deliberation  and  forecast, 
plotting  and  contriving  how  it  may  be  accomplished.  "When  the  affections  are 
calm  and  quiet,  no  hurrying  and  perturbation  of  passion  to  cause  the  sin.  4.  The 
temptations,  and  our  behaviour  under  them,  will  show  when  the  sin  is  presumptuous. 
Were  but  sinners  truly  apprehensive  of  their  wretched  estate,  how  they  stand  liable 
every  moment  to  the  stroke  of  Divine  justice,  how  that  there  is  nothing  that  inter- 
poseth  betwixt  tliem  and  helLbut  only  God's  temporary  forbearance  of  them,  truly  it 
were  utterly  impossible  to  keep  them  from  running  up  and  down  the  streets  like 
distracted  persons  crying  out  with  horror  of  soul,  "  Oh,  I  am  damned,  I  am 
damned"  ;  but  their  presumption  stupefies  them,  and  they  are  lulled  asleep  by  the 
devU  ;  and  though  they  live  in  sin,  yet  they  still  dream  of  salvation ;  and  thus 
their  presumption  flatters  them,  till  at  length  this  presumption  ends  then,  where  their 
damnation  begins,  and  never  before.  II.  Some  aggravating  considerations 
CONCERNING  THESE  SINS.  1.  They  do  exceedingly  harden  and  steel  the  heart  to 
go  on  in  them,  making  men  resolute  and  secure,  or  else  leaving  them  desperate. 
They  cry  out  with  Cain,  ' '  My  iniquity  is  greater  than  can  be  forgiven. "  Despair  of 
pardon  oftentimes  exasperates  to  more  and  greater  offences.  As  if  a  thief,  when  he 
is  robbing  of  a  man,  should  argue  with  himself,  "  If  I  am  detected  of  this  robbery 
it  will  cost  me  my  life  ;  and  if  I  murder  him  I  can  but  lose  my  life  "  ;  just  so  do 
many  argue  :  ' '  My  sins  are  already  so  many  and  so  great,  that  I  cannot  avoid  damna- 
tion for  them  ;  it  is  but  in  vain  for  me  to  struggle  against  my  own  fate  and  God's 
decrees.  It  is  too  nice  a  scruple,  since  God  hath  given  me  up  to  the  devil,  for  me 
not  to  give  up  myself  to  sin."  And  so  away  they  go  to  sin  ;  and  sin  at  random, 
desperately  and  resolvedly.  Oh,  horrid  hardness  !  2.  They  brazen  the  face  with 
most  shameless  impudency  (Isa.  iii.  9  ;  Jer.  vi.  15).  For  they  will  dare  to 
commit  foul  sins  publicly  and  knowingly.  Others  will  boast  and  glory  in  them, 
and  yet  others  will  boast  of  wickednesses  they  never  dared  to  commit.  As  cowards 
brag  of  their  exploits  in  such  and  such  a  combat  which  yet  they  never  durst 
engage  in,  so  there  are  a  generation  in  the  world  who  dare  not,  for  the  terror 
of  their  consciences,  commit  a  sin,  that  yet  will  boast  tl  ■  a  t  they  have  committed  it ; 
as  if  it  were  a  generous  and  honourable  thing  to  be  called  a  daring  sinner.  3.  "What 
if  God  should  cut  off  such  in  the  very  act  of  their  sin,  giving  them  no  space  for 
repentance  ?  4.  How  hard  it  is  to  bring  presumptuous  sinners  to  repentance 
and  reformation.  Certainly,  they  that  dare  sin  when  they  see  hell  before  them, 
there  is  no  hope  that  they  will  leave  sinning  till  they  see  hell  flaming  round 
about  them,  and  themselves  in  the  midst  of  it.  III.  The  best  Christians  are 
PRONE  TO  THEM.  This  We  may  learn  fiom — 1.  The  examples  of  others.  See  Noah, 
David,  &c.  2.  The  pressing  exhortations  against  them  in  the  Bible.  3.  The  irritating 
power  that  the  law  hath  (Rom.  vii.  6).  Our  corruptions  have  made  us  combustible 
matter,  that  there  is  scarce  a  dart  thrown  at  us  in  vain  ;  when  he  tenit  ts  us  it  is 
but  like  the  casting  of  fire  into  tinder,  that  presently  catcheth  ;  our  in  ,u  ts  kindle 
upon  the  least  spark  that  falls  ;  as  a  vessel,  that  is  brimful  of  water,  upon  the  least 
jog,  runs  over.  Satan  hath  got  a  strong  party  within  us,  that,  as  soon  as  he  knocks, 
opens  to  him  and  entertains  him.  And  hence  is  it  that  many  times  small  tempta- 
tions and  very  petty  occasion  draw  forth  great  corruptions  ;  as  a  vessel  that  is  full 
of  new  liquor,  upon  the  least  vent  given,  works  over  into  foam  and  froth  ;  so,  truly, 
our  hearts,  almost  upon  every  slight  and  trivial  temptation,  make  that  inbred 
corruption  that  lodgeth  there  swell  and  boil  and  run  over  into  abundance  of  scum 
and  filth  in  our  lives  and  conversations.     IV.  It  is  God's  power  only  that  can 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  FSALMS.  381 


PRESERVE  THE  CHRISTIAN  FROM   PEESUMPTUOTTS   SIN.       1.  We  should  have  thought 

that  such  dreadful  sins  would  be  easily  kept  at  arm's  length.  For  such  sins 
generally  give  notice  and  warning  to  prepare  for  resistance.  And  natural  conscience 
doth  especially  abhor  and  more  oppose  them.  And  the  fear  of  shame  and  infamy  in 
the  world  often  holds  men  back,  as  doth  often  the  fear  of  human  laws  and  penalties. 
And  yet — 2.  We  still  do  greatly  need  this  prayer,  "  Keep  back,"  &c.,  as  Scripture 
and  experience  alike  attest.  But — 3.  Some  may  object,  if  we  have  no  power  to  keep 
from  these  vices,  why  doth  God  complain  of  us  for  doing  what  we  cannot  help  doing, 
and  which  He  only  can  preserve  us  from  ?  But  we  say  that  a  man  has  power,  as,  for 
example,  to  rise  up  if  he  be  seated  ;  no  one  would  deny  such  power,  and  yet  he 
cannot  exercise  it  unless  God  excite  and  rouse  it  in  him,  for  "in  Him  we  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being."  All  our  powers  are  latent  and  sleepy  until  God  rouse 
them  up.  V.  How  God  keeps  men  back  from  presumptuous  sins.  1.  Fre- 
quently by  a  strong  hand  of  Providence  upon  them, — as  (i)  shortening  the  lives  of 
sinners  (Psa.  Ixiv.  6,  7  ;  Eccles.  viii.  13) ;  or  (ii)  by  cutting  short  their  power 
(Psa.  Ixxvi.  5  ;  John  vii.  30  ;  Hos.  ii.  6)  ;  or  (iii)  by  raising  up  opposition  to  them, 
as  when  Saul  would  have  put  Jonathan  to  death,  the  people  would  not  let  him  ;  or 
(iv)  by  diverting  men  from  their  purpose  (Dan.  xi.  30),  as  He  did  Joseph's  brethren 
from  killing  him.  (v)  By  removing  the  object  against  which  they  intended  it,  as 
Peter  from  Herod.  And  there  are  other  ways  still.  But  what  woeful  estate  wicked 
men  are  in  whom  not  grace  but  only  [Providence  restrains.  How  we  should  thank 
God  for  such  providences  for  others  and  for  ourselves.  But — 2.  God  keeps  men  back 
by  His  grace.  And  this  He  does  by  either  restraining  or  sanctifying  grace.  These 
differ — 1.  In  respect  of  the  subject.  Restraining  grace  is  common,  and  works  upon 
wicked  men  as  well  as  others.  As  in  Esau,  who  was  restrained  from  hurting  Jacob 
(Gen.  XX,  6).  But  none  but  the  children  of  God  have  sanctifying  grace.  2.  In  their 
nature  and  essence.  Sanctifying  grace  is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
(Jer.  xxxi.  33,  and  1  John  iii.  9  ;  Matt.  xii.  35).  But  restraining  grace  has  no 
such  habit  and  principle,  but  is  only  occasional  and  temporary.  3.  In  their  opera- 
tion. Sanctifying  grace  keeps  the  soul  from  sin  by  destroying  it  ;  restraining,  only 
by  imprisoning  it.  The  former  strikes  especially  at  the  sins  of  the  heart,  the  latter 
only  hinders  the  sins  of  the  life.  Sanctifying  grace  engages  the  will  against  sin  ; 
but  restraining  grace  only  rouses  up  the  conscience  against  it.  Now,  a  wicked  man 
may  sin  against  his  conscience  ;  but  it  is  impossible  that  he  should  ever  sin  against 
his  will.  That  is  continually  set  upon  sin  ;  and  were  it  not  that  God  sometimes 
raiseth  up  natural  conscience  in  him  to  oppose  his  corrupt  will,  he  would  every 
moment  rush  into  the  most  damning  impieties  without  any  of  the  least  regret  or 
sense  of  it.  When  the  devil  presents  a  sin  to  the  embraces  of  the  will,  and  when  the 
will  closes  with  it,  and  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul  are  ready  to  commit  it,  God 
sends  in  conscience  among  them.  "What,  Conscience,  art  thou  asleep!  Seest 
thou  not  how  the  devil  and  thine  own  devilish  heart  are  now  plotting  and  con- 
triving thine  eternal  ruin  ? "  This  rouses  conscience,  and  makes  it  storm  and 
threaten,  and  hurl  firebrands  into  the  face  of  sin,  while  it  lies  in  the  very  embraces 
of  the  will ;  and,  though  it  cannot  change  the  will  from  loving  it,  yet  it  frights 
the  will  from  committing  it.  This  is  the  most  usual  way  which  restraining  grace 
takes  for  the  prevention  of  sin,  by  sending  in  conscience  to  make  strong  and  vigorous 
oppositions  against  it.  VI.  Application  of  all  this.  1.  How  erroneous  to 
ascribe  our  preservation  not  to  the  grace  of  God,  but  to  our  own  will.  2.  How  we 
ought  to  praise  God  if  we  are  preserved  from  these  sins.  3.  How  we  should  guard 
against  provoking  God  to  withdraw  the  influence  of  His  grace  from  us.  He  will 
never  utterly  forsake  us  ;  but  yet  He  may  so  far  depart  from  us  as  that  we  may 
have  no  comfortable  sense  of  His  presence,  nor  any  visible  supports  from  His  grace. 
We  may  be  left  a  naked  and  destitute  prey  to  every  temptation  ;  and  fall  into  the 
commission  of  those  sins  out  of  which  we  may  never  be  able  to  recover  ourselves  to 
our  former  strength,  comfort,  and  stability.  We  may  fall,  to  the  breaking  of  our 
bones  ;  and  we  may  rise  again,  possibly,  but  it  will  be  to  the  breaking  of  our  hearts. 
{E.  Hopkins,  D.D.)  Intentional  sins : — These  stand  contrasted  with  unconscious 
sins,  or  those  committed  ignorantly.  See  Deut.  1.  43,  which  contains  a  direct  charge 
of  wilful  and  intentional  sins.  Sins  of  ignorance  are  told  of  in  Deut.  iv.  2.  But  we 
speak  of  the  former,  and  would  note — I.  Their  guilt.  For — 1.  They  are  the  embodi- 
ments of  forethought.  2.  Are  the  result  of  desire,  3.  Are  prompted  sometimes 
by  circumstances.     4.  Are  committed  with  the  hope  of  escaping  the  consequences  ; 

6.  And  against  the  voice  of  conscience.     6.  They  are  antagonistic  to  God  ;  and  are 

7.  The  greatest  of  all  sins.     II.  Their  restraints.     1.  Providence  (Gen.  xx.  6). 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

2.  Truth.  3.  Divine  influence.  4.  Mediation,  the  intercessory  life  of  Christ. 
III.  The  relation  of  prayer  to  these  restraints.  Prayer  is — 1.  Power. 
2.  The  greatest  power.  3.  It  is  exerted  in  harmony  with  a  preconcerted  plan  of 
salvation.     IV.  The  value  of  prayer  to  him  who   prays  against  tliese  sins. 

1.  Freedom — "  Let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  2.  Rectitude — "  I  shall  be 
innocent."  (/.  H.  Hill.)  Presumptuaus  sins  : — It  is  a  humiliating  thought 
that  even  good  men  are  prone  to  commit  sins  of  presumption.  Iniquity  is  of  a 
progressive  character,  a  growing  evil,  and  from  thoughtless  sin  we  advance  on 
until  we  come  to  these,  the  worst  of  all.  I.  What  are  we  to  understand  by 
"presumptuous  sins"?  1.  They  are  to  be  distinguished  (1)  from  the  imper- 
fections which  attach  to  the  obedience  of  good  men.  We  all  come  short 
of  the  Divine  glory.  Our  best  services  are  imperfect.  And  (2)  from  the  sins 
of  ignorance.  Scripture  admits  the  extenuating  power  of  ignorance.  And  (3)  from 
sins  of  infirmity  arising  from  the  depraved  condition  of  our  being.  To  ascertain 
the  presumptuous  character  of  a  sinful  action,  the  temptation  itself  must  be  con- 
sidered, and  the  way  in  which  it  assails  a  man.  If  the  adversary  comes  in  like  a 
flood,  and  carries  him  down  the  stream  before  he  has  time  to  reflect  on  his  position, 
the  guilt  is  less  than  when  he  has  deliberately  considered  the  evil  and  calmly 
decided  on  its  perpetration.  If  a  man  be  suddenly  provoked  and  conceives  an 
injurious  thought,  or  utters  a  passionate  exclamation ;  if  an  unlawful  or  impure 
desire  suddenly  starts  into  existence  in  the  soul,  which  the  man  shortly  represses, 
he  is  not  chargeable  with  a  sin  of  presumption,  but  with  a  sin  of  infirmity.  Let  no 
one,  however,  from  these  remarks,  seek  a  palliative  for  his  guilt.  Even  those  actions 
which  a  man  seeks  to  excuse  himself  for,  if  he  dwell  upon  all  the  extenuating 
circumstances  of  his  sin,  it  is  no  longer  his  infirmity  ;  it  is  a  cherished  evil,  and  the 
pains  he  takes  to  defend  it  to  his  own  mind  indicates  it  to  be  a  sin  which  he  has 
rolled  under  his  tongue  as  a  sweet  morsel.  Having  thus  cleared  the  way  by  these 
necessary  distinctions — 2.  Let  us  examine  more  particularly  what  are  presumptuous 
sins.  (1)  Presumption  is  unreasonable  confidence,  and,  applied  to  sin,  it  is  adven- 
turous daring  in  iniquity.  It  is  doing  that  which  we  know  to  be  wrong,  and  yet 
persuading  ourselves  that  we  shall  go  unpunished,  or  determining  to  venture  the 
risks  and  brave  all  hazards.  Scripture  speaks  of  it  in  the  strongest  terms  to  indicate 
its  foul  enormity.  Presumption  in  sin  is  sin  in  its  most  malignant  form.  But  we 
go  further,  and  say,  if  the  action  be  of  doubtful  character,  presumption  attaches  to 
it.  If  we  are  inclined  to  do  that  which  we  suspect  is  sinful,  about  which  we  doubt 
whether  it  be  lawful,  if  we  gratify  our  inclinations  while  our  suspicions  of  its  evil 
character  remain,  we  are  guilty  of  presumptuous  sin.  (2)  Deliberation  and  fore- 
thought greatly  increases  its  presumptuous  character.  Some  sins,  as  we  have  seen, 
come  suddenly  upon  a  man.  The  sin  of  Peter  was  of  this  kind  ;  he  had  no  intention 
of  denying  his  Master,  but  to  acknowledge  Him.  Though  his  sin  was  great,  it  was 
not  presumptuous  ;  but  when  a  man  considers  with  himself  whether  he  shall  sin  or 
no,  and  he  ponders  over  it,  looks  at  the  desired  object,  at  the  sin  which  is  in  his 
way  to  it,  at  the  sanctions  of  the  Divine  law  and  the  oflFence  it  will  be  to  God, 
weighs  each  in  his  mind,  and  at  length  determines  on  the  transgression,  then  that  is 
indeed  great  and  presumptuous  sin.  Do  not  imagine  this  is  too  great  an  evil  for  a 
Christian  to  commit.  (3)  So  also  does  defiance  of  conscience  and  the  strivings  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  with  the  soul.  (4)  All  perseverance  in  sin  deserves  this  dreadful 
character.  (5)  If  men  yield  to  slight  temptations.  11.  How  necessary  it  is  for  us 
to  be  kept  from  presumptuous  sins.  Because  of  its  virulence  it  is  greatly  to  be 
dreaded.  And  there  is  great  danger  even  of  Christians  falling  into  such  sin.  Man 
is  prone  to  self-confidence.  "Take  heed  to  yourselves,"  says  our  Lord.  One  sin 
allowed  brings  others.  Of  all  sins  this  is  most  difficult  to  cure.  For  it  benumbs 
the  conscience  and  perverts  the  judgment.  Cherish  a  deep  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of 
these  sins,  and  that  will  makeyou  sincere  and  earnest  in  your  prayer.  (E.  Summers.) 
Presumptuous  sinning : — I.  What  are  presumptuous  sins  ?  1.  Sins  committed 
against  the  light  of  our  understanding  and  the  plain  dictates  of  our  conscience. 

2.  When  committed  with  deliberate  contrivance — with  purpose  of  heart.  We  "  make 
provision  for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof."  3.  Sin  upon  slight  inducements 
and  small  provocations.  4.  Sin  in  spite  of  correction,  rebukes,  and  obstacles  which 
God  throws  in  their  path.  Balaam.  Ahaz.  6.  Systematic  sin,  by  an  abase  of 
God's  free  mercy  in  the  GospeL  These  are  the  worst  of  all.  II,  Good  men  are 
liable  to  these  sins.  This  is  David's  prayer.  He  knew  that  he  was  liable.  And 
so  are  all  good  men.  For — 1.  See  the  exhortations  addressed  to  them.  2.  Facts 
recorded  about  them.    3.  The  prayers  they  offer.     III.  How  Oos  answbss  THIS 


1 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  883 

PBAYEE.  1.  By  natural  means,  such  as  moral  and  religious  education — a  regard  to 
reputation.  Fear  of  public  punishment  and  disgrace.  2.  Providential  restraints. 
God  puts,  at  times,  obstacles  in  our  way  ;  or  diverts  the  mind  ;  or  renders  it  essen- 
tial to  us  to  practise  diligence  and  frugality ;  or  removes  the  object  of  temptation. 
A  wise  minister  used  often  to  say,  "  We  ought  to  be  thankful  for  the  graces  of 
providence  as  well  as  the  influences  of  grace."  3.  Spiritual  and  gracious  methods. 
Giving  the  new  heart  and  causing  us  to  delight  in  the  law  of  God.  (George  Clayton.) 
On  the  nature  of  presumptuous  sins: — I.  what  these  presumptuous  sins  ake. 
Three  parts  go  to  make  up  such  a  sin — 1.  That  a  man  undertake  an  action  known 
by  him  to  be  unlawful  or  at  least  doubtful.  2.  That,  notwithstanding,  he  promise 
to  himself  security  from  the  punishment  due  to  it.  3.  That  he  do  this  upon 
motives  utterly  groundless  and  unreasonable.  He  cannot  plead  ignorance  nor 
surprise.  II.  Instances  OF  such  siNS.  Of  the  most  notable  kind  are — 1.  To  sin 
against  the  goodness  of  God  manifesting  itself  to  a  man  in  great  prosperity.  What 
ingratitude  this.  2.  To  sin  when  God  is  judging  and  afflicting  us.  When  He  is 
trying  to  hold  us  back  from  our  sins.     What  is  this  but  to  wage  war  with  God  ? 

3.  To  sin  when  the  sin  is  clearly  discovered  to  us  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  when  God 
has  wrought  in  us  conviction  concerning  it.  4.  To  sin  when  God's  providence  is 
seeking  to  thwart  it  and,  as  it  were,  lies  cross  to  the  commission  of  it.  As  when 
Pharaoh  would  go  after  the  Israelites  notwithstanding  God  made  him  know  He 
would  not  have  him  do  so.  5.  When  conscience  has  checked,  warned,  and  remon- 
strated against  such  sin.  It  is  to  resist  God's  Spirit.  6.  When  we  know  that  by 
such  sin  we  destroy  all  our  joy  in  God,  and  all  our  happiness  and  power  in  serving 
Him.  7.  When  we  go  back  again  and  again  to  the  same  sin.  Flies  are  accounted 
bold  creatures,  for  drive  them  ofiF  from  a  place  as  often  as  you  will,  yet  presently 
they  will  be  there  again.  But  for  a  man  who  has  by  God's  grace  been  rescued  from 
some  gross  sin  to  go  back  to  it — what  hope  is  there  of  that  man's  being  saved  ? 
III.  Consider  some  remedies  against  these  sins.  1.  Try  to  get  deep  appre- 
hension and  persuasion  of  the  evil  of  sin  generally.  To  this  end  see  what  evil  sin 
hath  wrought.  2.  Then  let  a  man  reflect  seriously  upon  God's  justice.  8.  Think 
how  men  would  be  exasperated  if  we  were  to  deal  with  them  so.  IV.  Why  does 
David  thus  earnestly  pray  ?  He  prays  against  them  as  so  many  pests,  so  many 
direful  causes  of  God's  wrath,  so  many  devourers  of  souls.  And  he  thus  prayed 
because — 1.  Of  the  danger  of  falling  into  these  sins.  Our  nature  so  prone  to  them. 
Men  measure  their  beliefs  by  their  desires.  Most  men  are  of  a  debonnair,  sanguine, 
jolly  disposition,  so  that  where  despair  has  slain  its  thousands  presumption  has  slain 
its  ten  thousands.  And  the  greatness  of  the  mercy  of  God  leads  men  to  presume, 
for  it  is  more  manifest  than  His  anger,  and  Satan  is  ever  busy  to  put  men  in  such 
sins  (1  Ghron.  xxi.  1  ;  Luke  xxii.  3  ;  Acts  v.  3).  2,  The  sad  consequences  of  them. 
They  grow  by  indulgence.  They  waste  conscience  and  so  are  hard  to  cure.  They 
bring  down  greater  judgments  than  any  others.  They  are  big  with  confusion,  disaster, 
and  curse.  God  must  thus  confound  an  audacious  sinner  in  his  course.  (Robert 
South,  D.D.)  Let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me. —  What  dominion  of  sin 
doth  import : — Dominion  is  given  sometimes  to  God,  sometimes  to  Christ  as 
Mediator,  sometimes  to  man  over  man,  sometimes  to  Satan  over  man,  some- 
times to  death,  which  is  said  to  rule,  and  sometimes  to  sin,  when  it  is  betwixt 
sin  and  the  sinner,  as  betwixt  a  king  and  his  subjects.  As  a  reigning  king 
hath  dominion,  so  sin,  it  acts  in  all  things  like  a  king.  1.  It  hath  possession : 
original  sin  of  our  hearts  ;  actual  sin  of  our  lives.  2.  Hath  a  title,  our  forsaking 
of  God,  and   voluntary  election  and  compact.      3.    Hath   a  throne,  our  souls. 

4.  Hath  servants,  our  members.  5.  Hath  a  council,  our  carnal  wisdom  and  corrupt 
reasonings.  6.  Hath  power  to  give  laws,  and  see  them  executed.  Paul  speaks  of 
the  law  in  his  members,  and  the  law  of  sin  (Rom.  vii.  21,  22).  But  more  distinctly 
for  the  better  understanding  this,  observe  these  particulars — 1.  That  dominion 
properly  is  the  right  and  power  of  a  lord  over  a  servant ;  it  is  a  word  implying 
superiority  and  subjection,  one  who  hath  authority  to  command,  and  another  whose 
condition  is  obediential,  and  to  serve.  2.  Observe  that  dominion  is  twofold  :  it  is — 
(1)  Original  and  absolute,  and  this  is  when  the  Lord  hath  a  natural,  and  prime,  and 
irrespective  title.  (2)  Derivative,  and  depending,  and  limited  :  such  is  the  dominion 
which  God  hath  given  man  over  the  creatures.  8.  Observe  that  there  is  a  twofold 
dominion.  One  is  lawful,  such  a  dominion  and  subjection  which  the  Word  and  will 
of  God  doth  or  will  warrant.  Another  is  unlawful,  and  as  it  were  usurped.  4.  Con- 
sider that  the  dominion  of  sin  doth  imply  two  things.  (1)  One  is  singular  power, 
and  strength  joined  with  authority.    (2)  Another  is  quiet,  willing,  and  total  yielding 


384  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

of  subjection  to  that  authority,  law,  and  command  of  sin  :  when  a  man  is  as  cheer- 
fully prepared  to  obey  his  lusts,  as  any  subject  is  to  embrace  the  commands  of 
his  prince.  Sin  may  be  said  to  have  dominion — 1,  In  reflect  of  assent :  when  the 
understanding  subjects  itself  to  his  motions  a  man  may  apprehend  sin  as  working, 
and  yet  he  may  not  embrace,  but  resist  that  working  of  sin.  And  then  it  is  not  sin 
in  dominion,  but  subjection  puts  up  sin  into  the  throne.  And  here,  too,  we  must 
again  distinguish  of  that  subjection  of  assent  which  denominates  dominion,  that  it 
is  not  a  mere  passive  subjection  (as  when  a  man  is  taken  prisoner),  but  an  active 
subjection,  a  subjection  of  approbation,  as  when  a  servant  hears  the  will  of  hia 
master,  and  he  likes  it  so.  2.  In  respect  of  the  consent  of  the  will,  when  the  will 
declares  itself  expressly  as  a  party  for  sin.  Here  now  falls  in  a  subtle  and  deep 
inquiry  whether  aU  resistance  impairs  dominion,  and  no  resistance  doth  always 
infallibly  argue  it.  I  answer  briefly  to  the  first.  That  all  resistance  doth  not 
prejudice  dominion.  A  man  may  hold  a  firm  league  with  sin  in  his  heart,  though 
sometimes  in  some  particulars  he  may  skirmish  and  quarrel.  There  is  therefore  a 
double  resistance,  or  denying  with  sin.  One  is  collateral  and  accidental  ;  which 
doth  not  arise  from  an  immediate  contrariety  of  nature,  but  from  a  contrariety  of 
eff'ects.  Another  is  natural  and  immediate ;  which  depends  on  an  holy  nature 
implanted  in  the  soul,  which  opposeth  sin  as  a  thing  formally  evil  and  displeasing 
to  God.  This  resistance  doth  prejudice  sin  in  its  dominion,  but  the  former  doth 
not.  No  resistance  doth  imply  the  consent  to  be  plenary,  and  therefore  sin  to  be  in 
dominion  :  when  the  estate  of  the  soul  is  such,  that  no  contrary  quality  stands 
'twixt  the  command  of  sin  and  the  obedience  of  a  sinner,  it  is  easy  to  point  who  is 
lord  of  the  house  ;  and  indeed,  what  doth  more  palpably  demonstrate  dominion  than 
a  quiet  subjection  ?  2.  But  yet  another  question  is  raised,  whether  a  good  man,  in 
whom  sin  hath  not  dominion,  may  not  yield  a  plenary  consent  of  will :  which  if, 
then  plenary  consent  argues  not  dominion.  1.  It  is  possible  that  he  may  sin 
willingly.  2.  That  there  is  a  double  concourse  of  the  will's  consent  to  sin.  One  is 
real,  when  in  truth  the  whole  inclination  of  the  will  is  for  sin,  and  where  it  is  thns 
there  sin  is  in  dominion.  Another  is  sensible,  which  is  an  observed  acting  of  the 
will  as  embracing,  and  leaguing  it  with  sin  ;  when  all  is  a  corrupt  incliaation  and 
consent.  Now  here  I  conjecture,  that  possibly  sin  may  not  always  have  dominion, 
where  yet,  for  the  present,  and  for  a  particular,  the  whole  sensible  part  of  the  will 
seems  only  for  sin.  My  reason  is  this,  the  resistances  of  grace  are  secret  and 
more  hidden  ;  and  again,  when  the  soul  is  hurried  to  a  sin  in  the  heat  of  temptations 
and  passions,  it  is  not  easily  able  to  observe  every  secret  and  transient  regretting 
and  opposition.  3.  You  must  distinguish  'twixt  dominion  of  sin,  and  'twixt  a 
strong  inclination  to  sin  :  dominion  of  sin  is  a  thing  more  natural,  but  the  strong 
inclination  may  be  preternatural.  4.  Lastly,  you  must  distinguish  'twixt  facts,  and 
'twixt  courses  ;  and  'twixt  particular,  and  'twixt  general  intentions  ;  and  'twixt  too 
much  yielding,  and  a  plenary  yielding  and  resignation.  The  will  may  come  on  to 
sin  (where  it  hath  not  dominion)  in  respect  of  facts  ;  and  by  a  particular  intention, 
and  by  a  partial  yielding :  but  where  the  will  comes  on  as  to  a  course,  and  with  a 
general  intention,  and  with  a  plenary  yielding,  there  is  dominion.  Thus  of  the 
dominion  of  sin  in  respect  of  the  will.  The  dominion  of  sin  may  be  considered 
in  respect  of  the  work  or  service  ;  the  working  of  sin,  and  obedient  acting  of  it,  doth 
also  include  and  express  its  dominion  ;  hence  they,  in  whom  sin  hath  dominion,  are 
said  to  serve  sin,  and  they  are  said  to  obey  sin,  and  they  are  said  to  commit  sin,  and 
they  are  said  to  do  the  work  of  the  devil  (John  viii.  44).  Again,  we  must  distinguish 
of  obedience  to  the  commands  of  sin.  One  is  simple  and  absolute :  which  is  when  to 
sin,  though  it  be  not  every  particular  thing  which  a  man  doth,  yet  it  is  a  principal 
thing  unto  which  he  applies  himself :  as  that  is  a  man's  trade,  not  presently  which 
he  looks  upon  or  deals  in,  but  wherein  he  doth  principally  and  chiefly  deal  in, 
unto  which  he  applies  the  current  and  strength  of  his  stock.  Another  is  cursory  or 
transient :  as  a  bee  may  light  upon  a  thistle,  but  her  work  is  to  be  gathering  at 
flowers  :  or  a  sheep  may  be  in  the  dirt,  but  its  work  is  to  be  grazing  on  the  mountains, 
or  in  the  meadows  :  or  an  honest  traveller  may  be  beside  the  way  in  a  wood,  or  in  an 
house,  but  his  work  is  to  go  on  in  the  king's  road.  So  is  it  possible  for  a  man,  in 
whom  sin  hath  not  dominion  to  touch  upon  sinful  facts.  5.  I  conjecture  :  that  it  is 
fit  to  add  one  thing  more  in  the  general  about  the  dominion  of  sin,  as  respecting  its 
powerful  commands  that  it  is  either— (1)  Habitual,  where  sin  in  the  course  behaves 
itself  as  a  king,  it  rules,  and  commands,  and  disposeth  of  the  person  to  its  base 
services  and  lusts.  (2)  Actual,  and  this  is  not  properly  its  dominion,  though  it  be 
miscalled  so,  yet  to  give  a  little  scope  to  freeness  of  language,  I  will  call  it  an  actnal 


MALM  XIX.]  TEE  PSALMS.  385 

dominion,  which  is  rather  a  particular  prevalency  of  acts,  than  a  sovereignty  or 
dominion  in  the  nature,  when  though  the  heart  and  nature  have  surrendered  them« 
selves  to  Christ  as  the  only  Lord,  and  to  His  will  as  the  only  law,  yet  in  many 
particulars  sin  gets  the  better  over  grace,  though  it  cannot  be  said  to  nde,  yet  it 
may  be  said  to  conquer.  Against  which,  if  I  mistake  not,  David  doth  here  princi- 
pally bend  himself  when  he  prays  "  Let  not  them  have  dominion  over  me,"  that  is, 
not  only  let  them  not  rule,  but  which  is  beyond  that,  let  them  not  so  much  as 
prevail  over  me.  (0.  Sedgvnek,  B.D.)  Why  David  prays  against  sin  in  dominion  : 
— Remember  that  precedent  distinction  of  actual  dominion,  which  comprehended  a 
particular  prevalency  over  the  soul  for  particular  acts  of  sinning :  and  of  habitual 
dominion  which  intimated  the  full  resignation  of  the  heart  to  the  commands  of 
corruption.  In  both  respects  there  may  be  great  reasons  why  any  man  should  pray 
against  the  dominion  of  sin.  I.  Against  actual  dominion.  1.  Because  though 
actual  dominion  doth  not  infallibly  testify  the  person  to  be  bad  :  yet  it  is  ever  a 
breaking  forth  of  what  is  very  bad  ;  forasmuch  as  the  action  in  this  case  is  but  sin 
acted.  Now  consider — (l)That  every  sin  (as  acted)  is  therefore  the  worse:  you 
know  that  sin,  though  it  be  a  vile  thing,  yet  it  tends  towards  a  perfection  (in  its 
kind) ;  lust,  when  it  hath  conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin,  and  sin  when  it  is  finished, 
&c.  (James  i.  15).  (2)  That  the  acting  of  the  greater  sin  is  always  a  greater  kind  of 
sinning  :  I  mean,  if  things  be  equally  set  together.  A  high  sin,  a  presumptuous  sin 
in  temptation,  is  not  so  guilty  as  the  same  presumptuous  sin  in  dominion  ;  for  all 
sin  in  service  is  ever  worse  than  any  sin  in  conflict :  though  sin  may  trouble  a  man 
more  when  it  inclines  and  tempts,  yet  it  wounds  a  man  more  when  it  prevails  and 
overcomes.  2.  Actual  dominion,  though  it  doth  not  always  conclude  the  absence  of 
grace,  yet  it  always  impairs  and  weakens  the  strength  of  grace.  3.  Because  actual 
dominion,  though  it  doth  not  always  cut  off  the  union,  yet  it  may  and  doth  disperse 
and  check  the  comforts.  It  is  an  eclipse,  though  it  be  not  a  night.  4.  Because 
actual  dominion  (especially  of  great  sins,  and  over  a  David)  is  accompanied  with 
great  prejudice  to  Divine  glory  :  the  better  the  man  is,  the  more  dislionourably  foul 
his  oflFendings  are.  11.  Habitttal  dominion.  1.  Habitual  dominion  decides  the 
estate  :  the  question  of  a  man's  soul  is,  whose  servant  he  is,  whether  he  belong  to 
God  and  Christ,  or  to  sin  and  Satan.  Now,  particular  failings  do  not  determine  this, 
but  the  dominion  of  sin  doth,  his  servants  we  are  whom  we  obey.  2.  There  is  no 
dominion  in  all  the  world  so  vile :  whether  you  consider  it — 1.  In  the  commands 
of  sin  ;  or  2.  In  the  service  of  the  sinner.  The  commands  of  sin  are  the  vilest 
commands.  For — 1.  They  are  illegal.  2.  They  are  purely  sinful :  all  its  edicts  and 
desires  are  but  rebellions.  3.  They  are  extremely  unreasonable.  1.  The  service  of 
sin  :  it  is  the  most  disloyal  service  in  respect  of  God  renouncing  Him,  denying  Him 
His  due,  and  conferring  it  on  His  only  enemy.  2.  It  is  the  most  injurious  service  to 
our  souls.  8.  It  is  the  basest  service.  4.  It  is  the  drudgingest  service.  A  man  who 
is  a  servant  to  sin,  he  is  at  the  command  of  every  lust.  5.  It  is  a  most  unprofitable 
service.  Though  in  some  service  there  may  be  but  an  uncertain  gain,  yet  in  the 
service  of  sin  there  is  a  most  certain  and  great  loss  ;  what  profit  had  ye  in  those 
things  whereofye  are  now  ashamed  (Rom.  vi.  21).  6.  It  is  a  most  uncomfortable 
service.  How  oft  is  the  servant  of  sin  in  the  depths  of  fear  and  in  the  heights  of 
trouble  ;  his  very  sinnings  are  more  his  torments  than  his  joys.  {Hid. )  It  is  an 
hard  thing  to  get  off  the  dominion  of  sin.  Sin  is  a  strong  man,  it  hath  possession, 
and  goes  not  out  by  entreaty  or  bribe,  but  it  must  be  by  force,  by  one  that  is 
stronger.  I  assure  you,  that  the  almighty  God  must  reveal  His  own  arm,  and  He 
must  cast  down  strongholds,  He  must  work  a  kind  of  a  miracle,  or  else  sin  will  still 
be  a  lord,  and  the  sinner  will  be  a  servant  to  his  lusts.  A  man  may  change  any 
master  soever,  and  with  more  ease  than  sin.  (Ibid.)  A  man  may  deceive  Mm' 
self  about  the  dominion  of  sin: — There  are  many  erroneous  deceits.  1.  One  is  the 
unsensibleness  of  its  power :  when  a  man  feels  no  violence  of  sinful  inclination,  no 
stirrings,  no  opposition,  no  commands,  but  there  is  a  calm  and  quietness  in  his 
spirit  and  in  his  way,  which  could  not  be  as  he  thinks  if  sin  had  dominion  and  rule 
on  him.  Now,  this  is  a  deceit;  for— (1)  It  is  most  probable  that  sin  hath  the 
strongest  dominion  where  the  heart  is  most  unsensible  of  the  law  and  commands  of 
sin.  (2)  This  unsensibleness  and  quietness  may  arise,  partly  from  the  oneliness  of 
sin,  and  partly  frorn  the  ignorance  of  a  sinful  condition,  and  partly  from  the 
habitual  custom  of  sin.  Whether  the  sun  doth  shine  or  not,  there  are  as  many 
atoms  and  motes  flying  in  the  room,  there  they  are  really,  though  not  sensibly  till 
the  light  comes  in  to  manifest  them.  When  a  man  is  in  a  deadly  disease,  he  may 
be  void  of  all  sense  of  it.    Nay,  and  as  we  see  men  in  bondage  and  slavery,  when 

«s 


886  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xii. 

they  are  long  in  the  same,  grow  unsensible,  and  the  hand  which  is  used  to  iron  and 
nettles  is  not  sensible  of  them.  2.  Another  deceit  may  be  a  freedom  from  many 
courses  of  sinful  actings.  Though  a  man  doth  not  all  evil,  and  his  way  or  course 
is  not  universally  spreading  in  all  the  kinds  of  sinning,  yet  sin  may  rule  in  that 
man,  it  may  have  dominion  ;  forasmuch  as — (1)  Particular  subjection  is  sufficient 
to  set  up  dominion.  Though  a  servant  hath  but  one  master,  and  doth  not  serve 
every  man  in  the  parish,  yet  he  is  a  true  servant  in  respect  of  that  one  master ;  so 
though  the  sinner  is  not  at  the  command  of  every  lust,  yet  if  he  be  the  servant  of 
any  one  lust,  siu  hath  the  dominion  over  him  ;  for  it  is  not  the  multitude  of  sinB 
which  doth  absolutely  and  necessarily  concur  to  dominion,  but  a  subjection  to  the 
power  of  any  one.  (2)  A  man  may  do  all  that  service  to  one  sin,  which  others  do  to 
many  sins ;  he  may  devise,  and  study  to  fulfil  it,  he  may  cheerfully  and  greedily 
receive  its  commands ;  he  may  heartily  love  it,  and  go  on  in  it,  and  for  its  sake 
oppose  the  sceptre  and  dominion  of  Christ,  he  may  consecrate  all  his  strength  to  the 
obedience  of  it.  So  though  in  some  men  many  sins  do  rule,  and  in  others  some  one 
only,  if  the  heart  obeys  many  or  few,  or  one,  it  is  enough  to  declare  dominion. 
(3)  Yet  again,  another  deceit  may  be,  not  only  declination  of  some  sins,  but  also 
opposition ;  which  a  man  thinks  cannot  possibly  consist  with  dominion ;  for  a 
kingdom  is  not,  or  should  not  be,  divided  against  itself.  To  this  I  answer,  that 
there  may  be  notable  deceit  in  this  also  ;  forasmuch  as  to  that  of  exemption  from 
great  and  gross  sins :  it  is  not  the  greatness,  but  the  power  of  sin  which  makea 
it  reigning  ;  the  princes  in  Germany  have  dominion,  though  the  dominion  of  the 
emperor  be  more  large.  The  least  sin  acknowledged,  loved,  served,  sufficeth  to 
dominion  :  the  dominion  of  sin  is  most  within  the  heart.  {Ibid.)  No  dominion 
in  the  world  like  that  of  Christ : — 1.  None  so  holy.  2.  None  so  gracious  ;  He  doth 
not  exact  beyond  what  He  gives.  8.  None  so  peaceable  ;  His  very  service  is  a  kind 
of  wages  to  the  obedient.  4.  None  so  assisted ;  His  commands  are  accompanied 
with  strength  and  spirit.  5.  None  so  rewarded  ;  no  man  serves  Christ  too  much  or 
for  nought.  6.  Lastly,  be  thankful,  for  if  dominion  be  oflF,  then  damnation  is  off. 
There  is  no  condemnation  (saith  Paul).  (Ibid.)  Differences  'tivixt  the  dominion 
and  victory  of  sin: — First,  particular  victory  depends  upon  inequality  of  actual 
strength,  but  dominion  depends  upon  the  fulness  of  a  corrupt  nature.  Secondly, 
particular  victory  is  a  sudden  act,  but  dominion  is  a  more  sober  work.  Thirdly, 
where  the  sinning  owes  itself  not  to  dominion,  but  to  particular  victory,  or  tyranny, 
there  the  person,  when  he  comes  to  himself,  feels  the  yoke  and  would  shake  it  off. 
4.  Therefore  in  the  fourth  place,  if  it  be  but  victory,  tne  person  is  not  only  troubled 
at  his  fall,  not  only  loathing  of  his  actions,  but  he  is  actively  working,  he  is  using 
his  victorious  weapons  to  raise  up  himself,  to  free  himself  again  ;  he  is  grieved  at 
the  bondage,  desires  liberty,  and  will  fight  hard  for  it.  Lastly,  if  it  be  but  partic- 
ular victory,  the  soul  will  rise  again,  and  it  will  not  rise  without  revenge.  {Ibid. ) 
Differences  'twixt  acts  germinated  and  custom  in  sin: — 1.  Where  the  renewed  acts 
of  sin  owe  themselves  to  custom,  there  the  possession  is  both  strong  and  quiet. 
2.  Where  the  renewed  acts  are  acts  of  custom,  there  the  acting  is  natural  and  easy. 
8.  Where  the  renewed  acts  owe  themselves  to  custom,  there  a  man  is  not  easily  brought 
off.  {Ibid.)  How  to  be  kejd  from,  the  dominion  of  sin  : — 1.  For  the  first  let  us 
inquire  what  keeps  up  and  strengthens  the  natural  dominion  of  sin,  and  accordingly 
work  against  it.  There  are  four  things  which  do  it — (1)  One  is  ignorance.  The 
blindness  of  the  understanding  is  a  principal  guard  of  reigning  sin.  The  devil  is  a 
prince  of  darkness.  (2)  A  second  thing  which  keeps  up  the  natural  dominion  of  sin, 
is  a  violent  love  of  sin.  (3)  Another  thing  which  keeps  up  the  dominion  of  sin  is 
error  and  deceit ;  there  is  a  lie  in  every  sin.  (4)  A  fourth  thing  which  keeps  up 
dominion  is  custom.  2.  What  may  demolish  and  break  down  the  natural  dominion 
of  sin.  (1)  That  which  doth  this,  it  must  have  a  greater  power  than  sin,  for  natural 
dominion  goes  not  off  but  by  a  stronger  hand.  (2)  That  which  doth  this,  it  must  be 
a  contrary  nature  unto  sin.  (3)  Again,  it  must  be  something  which  may  gain  the 
affections.  (4)  Again,  it  must  be  something  which  may  breed  a  stiff  and  courageous 
resolution,  that  the  heart  will  not  serve  sin,  but  will  go  free.  And  hereupon,  against 
all  inward  and  outward  opposition,  breaks  forth  into  the  use  of  victorious  means. 
8.  Against  actual  dominion.  Thus  for  directions  against  the  natural  dominion  of 
sin.  Now  I  proceed  to  some  helps  against  actual  dominion,  which  is  the  particular 
prevalency  of  a  sin  into  act.  Let  me  premise  a  proposition  or  two,  and  then  you 
shall  have  the  special  directions  themselves.  (1)  Actual  dominion  (I  speak  in  respect 
of  gross  acts)  is  usually  in  respect  of  some  particular  lusts  :  which  works  with  more 
strength  in  the  soul  than  any  other  lusts.    (2)  Secondly,  actual  dominion  is  ordinarily 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  887 

by  such  a  sin  which  hath  the  advantage  of  a  natural  complexion,  and  outward 
condition,  and  occasions,  and  aflFections  ;  upon  these  doth  sin  set  the  temptation,  as 
an  engineer  doth  place  his  battery  upon  such  a  piece  of  groimd,  which  doth  best 
advantage  and  further  his  shot  against  a  city.  A  man's  natural  temper  and  com- 
plexion doth  mightily  facilitate  his  acts.  Now  I  come  unto  some  special  directions 
against  the  actual  dominion  of  a  particular  lust.  First,  preserve  in  thy  soul  a 
constant  and  humble  fear,  and  that  will  keep  off  the  actual  dominion  of  thy  sin 
(Prov.  xxviii.  14).  There  be  some  graces  which  are,  as  it  were,  the  guard  of  other 
graces :  look  as  faith  is  a  grace  which  feeds  all  the  rest :  so  fear  is  a  greice 
which  keeps  all  the  rest.  2.  Get  a  sound  and  uncorrupt  judgment :  there  be 
three  cases  in  which  a  man  is  apt  to  fall  under  the  actual  dominion  of 
sin.  One  is,  when  he  thinks  or  says  that  the  sin  is  little.  Another 
is,  when  he  saith  that  his  own  strength  is  great.  A  third  is,  when  he 
assures  himself  of  easy  pardon  and  recovery.  (Ibid.)  Then  shall  I  1)e 
upiight. — The  atiatomy  of  uprightness: — That  it  should  be  the  great  bent,  aim,  desire, 
and  endeavour  of  a  man  to  be  upright  (Gen.  xvii.  1),  I  am  the  Almighty  God, 
walk  before  Me  and  be  thou  upright.  I.  What  it  is  to  be  ttpkight.  The 
heart  is  upright  when  it  is  sincere,  and  then  it  is  sincere  when  it  is  unmingled : 
there  is  a  difference  'twixt  adherence  and  commixture.  To  the  purest  laTia  there  may 
adhere  seme  thread  or  spot  uncomely,  but  in  commixture  the  qualities  or  substances 
are  in  a  sort  mutually  confounded  ;  sin  adheres  or  cleaves  to  the  nature  of  the  most 
upright  person,  but  yet  it  mingles  not,  it  is  a  thing  which  the  renewed  heart  is 
thrusting  off ;  it  would  be  rid  of  it,  the  new  nature,  like  a  spring,  is  working  it  off, 
so  that  a  man  may  be  said  to  be  upright  whose  heart  will  not  suffer  any  sin  to 
incorporate  or  settle  itself.  Uprightness  is  a  sound  and  heavenly  frame  or  temper  of 
a  gracious  heart  or  spirit  given  by  God,  by  which  graces  are  acted,  sins  are  opposed, 
duties  are  performed  affectionately,  directly,  and  plainly,  in  reference  to  God,  and 
not  for  by-respects.  It  is  a  temper  or  frame  of  the  heart,  a  composition,  bs  it  were, 
in  which  methinks  two  things  may  be  observed.  One,  that  uprightness  is  not  a 
single  or  transparent  act  or  motion :  I  think  that  even  an  hypocrite,  whose  heart 
is  rotten,  abominable,  may  yet,  as  step  out  into  actions  materially  good,  so  feel 
motions  within  him  both  against  what  is  evil,  and  unto  what  is  good,  he  may  (either 
through  the  force  and  power  of  evidence  and  conviction  in  his  judgment,  or  through 
the  unresistible  actions  of  his  inlighted  and  stirred  conscience,  or  through  the  great 
desire  of  a  glorious  blessedness)  have  many  fits  and  inward  humours  of  being  good 
and  doing  good.  But  all  this  is  passion,  and  not  temper :  the  philosopher  in  his 
rhetorics  accurately  distinguishes  'twixt  the  readiness  which  springs  out  of  a  natural 
complexion,  and  that  which  ariseth  out  of  a  violent  anger  and  passion  which  soon 
fades  off,  being  not  rooted  in  nature,  but  in  distemper  :  so  is  it  with  the  hypocrite. 
But  uprightness  is  a  temper  and  frame,  like  an  instrument  well  tuned,  or  if  that  hit 
not  full,  like  a  complexion,  which  is  a  uniform  (if  not  principle  yet)  instrument  of 
actions.  It  is  like  that  leaven,  of  which  Christ  spake,  which  invades  the  whole 
lump,  it  sweetly  seasons  and  disposes  the  whole  man  for  God,  as  the  bent  of  the 
stone  is  to  the  centre,  and  of  the  fire  to  ascend.  Another,  that  unrighteousness  is 
rather  a  general  influence  in  the  graces  than  any  distinct  grace  :  I  will  not  make  this 
point  a  controversy,  only,  so  far  as  I  yet  apprehend,  uprightness  is  rather  the  temper 
of  a  grace,  than  the  grace  itself;  it  is  not  fear,  but  fear  rightly  tempered  and 
ordered  ;  it  is  not  love,  but  love  rightly  set ;  it  is  not  desire,  but  this  orderly  carried. 
It  is  a  sound  and  incorrupt  and  heavenly  frame  of  heart.  A  thing  may  be  termed 
soxmd  or  solid  either  when  it  is  real,  not  light,  slight,  superficial,  or  when  it  can 
abide  trial :  as  true  gold  is  really  so  and  not  in  colour  only,  and  if  you  reduce  it 
to  the  touchstone  you  shall  find  it  so  :  if  you  cast  it  into  the  fire,  &c.  The  last  thing 
which  I  would  observe  in  uprightness  is  its  end  and  scope.  I  pray  you  to  remember 
that  uprightness  causeth  a  threefold  reference  of  our  services  :  one  is  to  God's  pre- 
cept, that's  the  square  and  rule  and  compass  of  upright  motions.  Another  is 
to  God's  glory,  that's  the  spring  which  turns  the  wheels,  the  wind  which  blows  the 
sails  :  it  is  for  Christ's  sake,  said  Paul :  and  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 
God,  said  he  again.  A  third  is  to  God's  acceptance  and  approbation,  so  that  God 
wiU  accept,  and  commend  and  approve  (2  Cor.  v.  9) ;  we  labour  that,  whether  present 
or  absent,  we  may  be  accepted  of  Him  (2  Cor.  x.  18).  Now  I  proceed  to  a  second 
question,  why  we  should  strive  and  aim  at  (as  David  here  did)  and  endeavour  to  be 
npright  There  are  abundant  reasons  thereof ;  I  wUl  deliver  a  few  unto  you.  First, 
this  uprightness  is  the  great  thing  which  God  looks  for  (John  iv.  23).  Nay, 
secondly,  this  is  it  which  the  Lord  looks  at  (Jer.  y.  8).    Thirdly,  this  seems  to  be 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

the  only  tMng  that  God  expects  (1  Sam.  xii.  4) ;  only,  fear  the  Lord  and  serve  Him 
in  truth  with  all  yom*  heart  (Deut.  x.  12).  Fourth,  uprightness  doth  bring  the 
whole  man  unto  God  ;  it  is  that  which  commands  all,  and  carries  all  with  it. 
rifth,  God  judgeth  of  a  man  by  his  uprightness.  Would  you  be  paid  with  coimter- 
feit  gold  ?  doth  the  show  please  you  without  the  substance  ?  will  the  compliments 
of  men  satisfy  you  without  a  real  friendship  ?  will  a  gaudy  rotten  house  content 
you,  which  hath  no  solidity  and  goodness?  would  you  take  the  words  of  your 
servants,  and  their  legs  as  sufficient  ?  while  their  hearts  are  false  in  their  callings. 
Nay,  would  you  be  content  that  God  should  make  a  show  only,  a  pretence  that 
He  would  pardon  you,  and  help,  and  comfort,  and  save  you ;  and  yet  deny  you 
real  love,  real  mercy,  real  comfort,  real  help  and  salvation,  then  think  how  God 
should  take  shows  from  you  without  uprightness  of  heart.  Therefore  I  pray  you 
take  some  pains  with  your  hearts,  bring  them  to  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary,  weigh 
them  there,  reduce  them  to  the  rule,  try  them  there,  whether  they  be  upright  or  no. 
Let  me  premise  a  few  particulars  which  may  prepare  and  quicken  you  to  this  trial  for 
uprightness  of  heart.  First,  there  is  no  deceit  or  error  in  the  world  of  more  dangerous 
consequence  than  for  a  man  to  deceive  himself,  and  to  err  about  the  right  temper 
of  his  soul.  A  man  may  mistake  himself  in  the  depth  of  his  riches,  or  the  altitude 
of  worldly  friendship,  or  latitude  of  his  intellectual  qualifications  and  abilities ;  he 
may  think  himself  rich,  and  favoured,  and  learned  when  perhaps  he  is  not  so  ;  but 
these  mistakes  are  about  nostra,  not  about  nos ;  ours,  but  not  ourselves,  and  the 
danger  may  be  only  a  tempest,  but  not  a  shipwreck.  But  for  a  man  to  deceive 
himself  about  his  heart,  about  his  soul ;  why,  what  hath  he  more  ?  what  hath  he  like 
them  ?  They  are  fundamental  errors  ;  if  a  man  lays  a  rotten  fovmdation  instead  of 
a  sound,  all  his  building  at  length  sinks  to  the  ground.  If  a  man  sets  forth  in  a 
fair  ship,  whose  bottom  is  unsound  and  leaking,  he  loseth  himself  in  the  voyage. 
What  a  fearful  day  will  judgment  be  !  how  will  it  make  the  soul  to  tremble,  when 
it  hath  no  more  time  now  but  to  see,  and  eternally  bewail  its  own  errors  and  deceits  ! 

0  Lord,  saith  that  oppressed  man,  I  have  deceived  my  own  soul,  I  thought  myself 
thus  and  thus  ;  but  my  heart  hath  deceived  and  beguiled  me.  Thirdly,  an  hypocrite 
may  go  very  far,  and  therefore  the  more  reason  have  we  to  see  that  our  hearts  be 
upright.  Again  consider,  that  it  is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  be  upright :  though  it 
be  that  acceptable  frame  of  spirit  so  pleasing  to  God  and  so  comfortable  (as  we  may 
hear)  to  us,  yet  it  is  not  so  easy  to  be  upright,  whether  you  consider — 1.  That 
deceitfulness  which  is  in  man's  heart  (Jer.  xvii.  9),  q.d.  there  is  not  such^a  cunning 
thing  as  it,  not  a  thing  in  all  the  world  which  can  delude  us  so  easily.  Oh,  how 
difficult !  many  by  aims  and  indirect  ends  do  often  present  themselves,  that  it  is 
with  us  as  with  boys  in  writing,  we  draw  many  crooked  lines,  or  as  with  them  in 
archery,  we  shoot  by- hither  or  beyond  or  beside  the  mark  ;  it  is  not  easy  to  do 
good  because  God  commands  it,  or  only  because  He  may  be  glorified.  2.  That 
spiritualness  which  is  required  in  upright  motions ;  I  tell  you  that  the  very  soul 
must  act  itself,  if  the  heart  or  way  be  upright :  not  only  his  Ups,  but  his  spirit  must 
pray  ;  not  only  his  ear,  but  his  heart  must  hear ;  he  must  not  only  profess  against 
sin,  but  his  soul  must  hate  and  abhor  it.  Lastly,  to  be  upright  is  a  possible  thing, 
a  man  may  attain  unto  it.  But,  you  will  say,  if  the  case  be  so,  how  may  one  know 
that  he  is  indeed  upright  ?  There  are  many  discoveries  of  it ;  I  pray  you  to  observe 
them,  and  try  yourselves  by  them.  (1)  If  a  man  be  upright,  he  will  mostly  strive 
for  an  inward  reformation  of  his  heart.  (2)  If  a  man  be  upright,  then  a  little  holi- 
ness will  not  serve  his  turn.  (3)  If  a  man  be  upright,  then  a  man  will  walk  by  a 
right  rule.  (4)  A  person  may  know  whether  he  be  upright  or  no,  by  the  conscion- 
able  disposition  of  his  heart  about  all  sins.  David,  speaking  of  such  who  were 
undefiled  (Psa.  cxix.  1),  and  sought  the  Lord  with  their  whole  heart  (ver.  2),  he 
added  (ver.  3),  They  also  do  no  iniquity.  If  you  be  upright  you  will  make  con- 
science of  secret  as  well  as  open  sins.     You  will  make  conscience  of  the  least  sins. 

1  conceive  there  are  five  things  about  our  duties  and  services  which  may  manifest 
the  uprightness  of  our  hearts,  namely — (1)  Universality.  David  did  take  this  for  a 
special  testimony  of  his  uprightness  ;  that  he  had  respect  unto  all  God's  commands 
(Psa.  cxix.  6),  and  Paul  thought  it  so,  who  did  exercise  himself  to  have  always  a 
conscience  void  of  oflfence  towards  God  and  man  (Acts  xxiv.  16 ;  Heb.  xiii.  18). 
An  hypocrite's  obedience  cannot  be  universal.  (2)  Constancy  of  obedience.  (3)  Sim- 
plicity of  obedience.  The  unsound  heart  vsdll  square  out  his  work  according  to  the 
pay ;  his  eye  is  much  upon  this,  how  will  this  make  for  my  profit  ?  how  will  it  advanos 
my  pleasure,  my  credit?  these  things  fire  and  inflame  an  unsound  heart.  Foritii 
God's  express  will,  and  it  wiil  make  for  His  glory :  these  (alone)  are  cold  motivee^ 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  389 

and  weak  inducements  to  a  false-hearted  person.  But  come  and  say,  God  will  have 
you  to  do  it,  and  if  you  do  it  you  shall  be  highly  thought  on,  you  will  be  esteemed  for 
it,  you  shall  have  much  applause,  you  may  hap  to  get  well  by  it :  why,  now  the 
unsoxind  heart  stirs  as  the  ship,  which  hath  got  a  right  wind  to  drive  it,  and  carry 
it  on.  (4)  Spirituality  of  obedience.  An  hypocrite,  he  may  do  so  much  about 
duties  as  may  manifest  the  excellency  of  his  gifts,  but  he  doth  not  that  about  duties 
which  argues  the  eflScacy  of  grace.  But  an  upright  person,  there  is  fire  and  incense 
in  his  sacrifices  ;  he  must  present  living  and  reasonable  services  (1  Pet.  iv.  11  ;  1  Cor. 
ix.  17  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  4).  If  he  prays,  and  his  mind  be  drawn  aside  by  distractions, 
and  his  affections  work  not  with  sorrow,  hope,  with  earnest  desire,  and  some 
confidence,  he  accounts  that  the  work  is  not  done,  he  hath  said  something,  but 
he  thinks  he  hath  not  prayed.  (5)  Humility  of  obedience  ;  why,  this  doth  argue 
the  uprightness  of  a  person.  There  is  no  person  more  proud  of  his  work  than 
an  hypocrite.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  How  to  obtain  and  maintain  upright- 
ness.  I.  Motives  to  peksttade  us.  Means  to  direct  and  help  us.  1.  God 
regards  you  not,  if  you  be  not  upright  ;  His  eyes  are  upon  the  tenth.  2.  The 
Word  of  God  condemns  you ;  if  you  be  not  upright,  it  will  not  acquit  you. 
3.  Your  conscience  will  secretly  reproach  and  vex  you  in  the  day  of  your 
calamity.      II.    The  means  of  ttpeightness.      Directions  for  the  getting  of  it. 

1.  If  ever  you  would  have  upright  hearts,  you  must  theii  go  to  God  for  them. 

2.  If  you  would  find  uprightness  in  you,  then  get  an  exceeding  and  predominate 
love  of  God  and  His  waj's.  Love  is  of  great  force  and  influence  to  a  man's  ways  and 
actions,  is  like  the  rudder  which  doth  master  the  ship  in  the  motion,  it  can  turn 
and  wind  it  any  way ;  so  doth  love  prevail  with  the  soul;  it  hath  a  command  over 
it.  The  want  of  uprightness  comes  from  the  want  of  love ;  as  the  falseness  of  a 
woman  to  her  husband  grows  upon  want  of  conjugal  love ;  it  is  the  love  of  the 
world  which  draws  a  man  so  often  aside.  If  a  man  could  love  God  above  all,  hs 
would  delight  to  walk  with  Him,  he  would  be  careful  to  please  Him,  fearful  to 
offend  Him,  ready  to  obey  Him,  would  be  kept  in  for  God,  he  would  not  make  so 
many  strayings,  he  would  mind  God's  glory  more.  3.  Get  to  hate  sin ;  a  secret 
love  of  sin  will  draw  the  soul  aside.  For  the  second  which  respect  the  preserving 
means,  take  these  directions.  1.  First,  if  you  would  preserve  uprightness,  you 
must  preserve  an  holy  fear  of  God  ;  I  will  put  My  fear  into  their  hearts,  and  they 
shall  not  depart  from  Me  (Jer.  xxxii.).  2.  If  you  would  preserve  uprightness,  then 
you  must  get  and  preserve  humbleness  of  spirit.  3.  If  you  would  get  and  preserve 
uprightness,  then  get  your  hearts  to  be  crucified  to  the  world.  Hypocrisy  and 
worldliness  are  seldom  far  asunder.  4.  Now,  to  all  that  hath  been  said,  let  me  add 
a  few  daily  meditations,  which  may  be  of  great  force  to  keep  us  in  upright  walking. 
(1)  That  God  searcheth  my  heart,  and  still  looks  upon  my  ways.  Whither  shall  I 
go  from  Thy  presence  ?  said  David  (Psa.  cxxxix.).  (2)  That  I  must  one  day  appear 
before  God,  and  then  all  secrets  shall  be  disclosed.  (3)  A  little  unevenness  will  mar  the 
comfort  of  a  great  deal  of  uprightness.  There  are  two  sorts  of  unevenness  in  walk- 
ing. One  is  habitual  and  allowed,  which  mars  the  just  hopes  and  expectations  of 
glory.  Another  is  actual,  which  is  a  trip,  a  stumble,  an  out-stripping  in  the  course 
of  a  pious  walking.  I  confess  it  may  befall  the  best,  yet  it  will  embitter  our  souls. 
All  the  good  course  which  a  man  hath  led,  and  actions  which  he  hath  sincerely 
done,  cannot  so  much  comfort  him  as  many  particular  obliquities  and  unevenness 
may  sad  and  perplex  him.  As  in  a  wrench  of  the  foot,  the  present  pain  shuts  out 
the  sense  of  all  former  strength.  (4)  That  God  is  to  be  set  up  above  all.  It  is  an 
hard  thing  to  ascribe  unto  God  the  Original  of  excellencies,  that  He  is  God,  and 
that  power,  might,  and  glory,  and  obedience  belongs  unto  Him,  that  He  made  us, 
and  not  we  ourselves,  and  that  our  beings  as  they  are  depending  upon  His  power, 
so  our  ways  upon  His  rule  ;  and  He  is  Lord  of  lords,  all  are  under  Him,  and, 
being  the  universal  efficient,  He  ought  also  to  be  our  universal  end.  God  is  set  up 
above  all  other — (1)  When  His  rule  and  Word  sways  us  against  all  other.  (2)  When 
His  glory  is  singly  or  supremely  aimed  at  above  all  other  things,  and  both  these 
complete  uprightness.     {Aid. ) 

Vers.  14, 15.  The  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  meditation  of  my  heart. —  Words 

and  thoughts : — The  prayer  speaks  for  itself,  as  the  prayer  of  a  truly  righteous  man. 
One  might  almost  call  that  man  a  perfect  man  whose  whole  life  was  lived  in  perfect 
accord  with  it.  For  the  majority  of  us,  it  is  far  easier  to  control  one's  actions  than 
one's  words.  What  mischief  is  done  by  the  exaggerated  denunciations  of  violent 
language,  and  by  the  false  position  of  guilt  in  which  strong  epithets  and  expletives  are 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

usually  placed.  All  expressions  of  bad  feeling  are  wrong,  not  because  they  are  ex- 
pressions, but  because  they  spring  from  the  bad  feeling,  and  that  is  the  thing  of  which 
we  ought  to  be  ashamed  and  afraid.  The  use  of  expletives  has  been  put  on  a  false 
footing  altogether,  and  the  way  in  which  they  have  been  condemned  has  done  more 
to  increase  it  than  to  stop  it.  Tet  how  very  far  better  it  would  be  for  us  never  to 
use  rash  or  violent  or  misplaced  words.  All  habits  of  this  kind  are  bad.  What  a 
safeguard  the  prayer  of  the  text  is  against  all  corrupting  influences  of  the  tongue, 
and  against  lying.  By  the  words  of  our  mouth,  how  vast  is  the  influence  we  may 
exercise  for  good  or  evil !  Of  all  the  common  forms  of  sinning  with  the  tongue,  the 
most  common,  and  perhaps  the  worst,  is  the  sin  of  lying.  There  is  an  amazing 
amount  of  careless  falsehood  spoken.  What  gives  religion  its  pre-eminence  as  a 
moral  power  is  its  recognition  of  a  holy  God  who  looketh  on  the  heart,  and  in 
whose  sight  the  pious  soul  longs  to  be  wholly  and  alway  acceptable.  The  earnest 
desire  to  be  ripit  in  the  sight  of  God  would  give  an  immense  impulse  to  the 
instinctive  love  of  truth  which  belongs  to  our  nature.  The  most  vital  part  of 
religion  is,  intense  desire  to  be  made  righteous,  and  entire  trust  in  the  strength  and 
grace  of  God.  (Charles  Voysey.)  Acceptable  words: — Meditations  into  which  a 
man  puts  his  heart  will  surely  prove  the  spring  of  action.  The  depths  of  this 
prayer  are  reached  in  the  petition  concerning  the  meditations  of  the  heart. 
Meditation  is  only  unuttered  speech.  We  think  in  words.  Yet  the  words  we  utter 
have  a  separate  existence,  and  most  powerfully  affect  the  thoughts  of  our  mind. 
Language  has  a  reflex  influence  upon  our  thoughts.  Thought  is  revealed  in  speech, 
but  speech  reacts  upon  thought.  The  Bible  is  fully  alive  to  the  importance  of  right 
words.  Consider  some  of  the  essentials  of  acceptable  words.  1.  They  must  be 
truthful  words.  Our  words  must  be  in  harmony  with  our  thought.  Our  speech 
should  be  photographic  of  our  thought.  There  are  thoughts  which  seem  to  reach 
beyond  the  capacity  of  language.  Speech  is  the  clothing  of  thought,  and,  like 
clothing,  should  fit.  Right  thoughts  would  exclude — (1)  All  exaggerated  words. 
This  is  a  special  failing  of  our  own  day.  (2)  All  unreal  words.  (3)  All ^^flattering 
words.  2.  They  must  be  charitable  words.  There  are  men  who  have  an  instinct 
for  searching  out  evU,  just  as  hounds  have  for  scenting  out  their  prey.  Evil  ought 
so  to  sorrow  our  hearts  as  to  make  it  impossible  for  us  to  blazon  it  abroad.  Truth 
and  goodness  ought  to  be  so  attractive  to  us  as  to  lead  us  to  dwell  thereon  with 
delight  and  joy.  Oh,  that  we  had  greater  tenderness  for  sinful,  wandering  souls  ! 
3.  They  must  be  godly  words.  Earthly  speech  may  be  seasoned  with  godly 
thoughts.  Earthly  things  may  be  seen  in  a  heavenly  light.  The  spirit  of  a 
Christian  may  be  seen  in  common  ways,  in  ordinary  work,  in  earthly  speech. 
(W.  Garrett  Border.)  The  acceptableness  of  the  words  of  the  mouth  and  the 
meditation  of  the  heart  in  God's  sight : — It  is  a  strong  evidence  of  the  love  of  God 
towards  sinful  man,  that  any  thing  such  a  frail  and  erring  being  can  do  or  say  can 
be  acceptable  to  Him.  There  are  few  sins  which  can  be  less  excused,  or  which  are 
committed  with  less  temptation,  than  the  habit  of  uttering  improper  or  indecent 
language.  It  ia  our  duty  to  resist  such  temptations,  and  this  duty  is  to  be 
performed  by  making  the  meditations  of  our  hearts  acceptable  to  God.  To  this  end 
we  must  begin  with  striving  to  acquire,  and  with  earnestly  praying  for,  purity  of 
mind.  Our  minds  become  tainted  before  we  are  aware  of  the  importance  and  the 
value  of  cleanliness  of  thought.  The  voluntary  meditation  of  our  hearts  now  form 
an  image,  an  anticipated  representation  of  the  state  in  which  "we  shall  be." 
Whatever  gives  us  most  delight  and  heartfelt  pleasure  in  this  world  is  that  which 
will  give  us  strength  in  the  next.  {John  NaTice,  D.D.)  Consecration  of  word  and 
thought : — I.  The  utteeance  of  the  text  as  an  act  of  sacrifice.  A  dedication 
to  God  such  as  any  devout  man  may  make  both  of  words  and  thoughts.  1.  There  is 
nothing  so  much  in  our  power  as  are  our  words.  We  cannot  change  our  heart,  but 
we  can  our  speech.  Perhaps  some  man  exclaims  that  his  temper  has  overmastered 
him  ;  that  he  is  possessed  by  the  devil ;  that  he  cannot  govern  his  own  thoughts  ; 
that  volleys  of  wicked  words  issue  from  his  lips,  and  that  his  words  cannot  be 
acceptable-to  God.  I  reply,  as  far  as  "  words  "  are  concerned,  you  have  simply  and 
solely  yourself  to  blame.  However  hot  your  passion,  you  are  not  forced  to  speak  ;  for 
God  has  given  you  power  to  hold  your  tongue.  It  is  pure  absurdity  to  put  down 
those  curses  or  those  noisy  slanderous  words  of  yours  to  your  own  depravity,  or  to 
Adam,  or  to  the  devil.  You  have  only  your  present  self  to  blame,  and  neither 
Adam  nor  the  devil  will  bear  a  particle  of  the  responsibility.  There  are  certain 
devilish  words  that  even  you  would  not  utter  in  the  hearing  of  a  child ;  there  are 
others  that  you  would  repress  if  a  holy  man  were  standing  by  your  side  ;  there  are 


PSALM  XIX.]  THE  PSALMS.  391 

many  which  your  instinctive  reverence  for  the  sanctuary  would  have  the  power  to 
hush.  These  simple  facts  may  do  much  to  convince  you  that  dominion  over  the 
tongue  is  given  you,  and  that  it  is  within  your  power  to  present  to  God  even  words 
that  may  be  acceptable  to  Him.  The  Scriptures  contain  many  words  which  it  were 
acceptable  for  the  most  vile  to  speak  unto  God.  2.  The  meditations  of  our  hearts. 
These  may  seem  to  be  less  fitting  for  sacrifice  ;  but  they,  too,  can  largely  be  brought 
into  the  control  of  our  will ;  and  then  we  may  offer  them  to  God  on  the  altar  of 
spiritual  sacrifice.  II.  How  comprehensive  the  prayer.  "All  the  words  of  my 
mouth."  These  include — 1.  All  my  soliloquies,  my  unuttered  thinkings.  2.  All  my 
conversation,  all  my  speakings  whatsoever.  3.  All  I  say  unto  God,  in  praise  and 
prayer,  in  cries  and  ejaculations  of  gratitude  and  entreaty.  4.  The  meaitations  of 
the  heart  include  even  a  larger  share  of  human  existence  than  the  words  of  the 
mouth.  These  meditations  reveal  the  habitual  objects  of  reverence  or  distrust ;  the 
whole  empire  of  fear,  hope,  and  suspicion  ;  of  faith,  prayerfulnesa,  and  love.  Now, 
if  this  text  is  a  prayer  that  all  these  things  may  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God, 
it  sweeps  up  into  itself  a  large  portion  of  our  whole  being.  The  prayer  itself  is  a 
holy  prayer,  for  "this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  our  sanctification."  (Henry 
Beyiwlds,  D.D.)  The  meditation  of  my  heart — Mental  prayer : — ^There  are  four 
kinds  of  prayer,  distinguished  by  the  purposes  for  which  the  soul  approaches  God : 
namely,  to  praise  Him,  to  thank  Him,  to  propitiate  Him,  or  to  invoke  His  help. 
But  we  note  now  another  division  of  prayer.  That  which  we  have  referred  to 
depends  upon  the  motive  of  the  soul,  this  upon  the  manner  of  the  act  of  prayer 
itself.  The  Psalmist,  having  prayed  that  he  might  be  cleansed  from  sin,  and 
"innocent  from  the  gi-eat  transgression,"  proceeds  further  to  desire  that  he  may 
become  pleasing  to  God — "Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  meditation  of  my 
heart,  be  acceptable  in  Thy  sight."  In  these  words  he  provides  us  with  the  main 
division  of  prayer,  based  on  the  organ  or  faculty  which  is  employed  in  it :  by  "  the 
words  of  my  mouth,"  vocal  prayer  is  suggested ;  by  "  the  meditation  of  my  heart, " 
mental  prayer  is  described.  Mental  prayer  is  transacted  entirely  within  the  soul ; 
vocal  prayer  employs  the  ministry  of  the  tongue,  or  in  some  other  way  finds 
expression.  The  order  of  the  Psalmist  is  that  of  acquirement  and  attainment.  We 
learn  in  childhood  first  to  say  prayers,  afterwards  to  think  them :  we  govern  our 
words  first,  and  then  bring  under  subjection  our  thoughts.  All  prayer  is  either 
mental  or  vocal.  Mental  prayer  includes  meditation  and  contemplation.  Vocal  is 
such  as  is  used  in  the  services  of  the  Church.  I.  First,  we  will  deal  with  the 
PRACTICE  OF  KEDITATION,  and  consider — 1.  Its  authority,  which  is  derived  from  the 
Scriptures.  "We  have  instances  of  it  in  the  Old  Testament,  Enoch,  Noah,  Isaac,  of 
whom  it  is  first  expressly  spoken  (Gen.  xxiv.  63).  In  the  New  Testament  it  is 
twice  told  of  Mary  how  she  "pondered  in  her  heart"  the  things  that  were  told 
her.  Christ  Himself  gives  examples  of  this  kind  of  prayer  (John  xviii.  2  ;  Matt. 
xiv.  23  ;  Luke  vi.  12).  Mary  of  Bethany.  The  apostles  also  (Acts  i.  14 ;  1  Tim. 
ir.  15  ;  Gal  i.  17,  18).  And  so  in  the  writings  of  the  saints  we  have  constant 
reference  to  the  practice  of  meditation.  St.  Ambrose  bids  us  "exercise  ourselves 
in  meditation  before  conflict,  that  we  may  be  prepared  for  it,"  and  in  a  striking 
passage  describes  the  nutritive  efi'ects  of  meditation  ;  he  says,  "we  ought  for  a 
long  while  to  bruise  and  refine  the  utterances  of  the  heavenly  Scriptures,  exerting 
our  whole  mind  and  heart  upon  them,  that  the  sap  of  that  spiritual  food  may 
diffuse  itself  into  all  the  veins  of  our  soul,"  &c.  St.  Augustine  enumerates  the 
steps  which  lead  up  to  "  prayer," — "  meditation  begets  knowledge,  ki^.^wledge  com- 
punction, compunction  devotion,  and  devotion  perfects  prayer."  St.  Basil  enjoins 
mental  prayer  as  a  means  of  exercising  the  faculties  of  the  soul.  St.  Gregory 
mentions  the  morning  as  a  fitting  time  for  meditation  ;  he  says,  "as  the  morning  is 
the  first  part  of  the  day,  each  of  the  faithful  ought  at  that  moment  to  lay  aside  all 
thoughts  of  this  present  life,  in  order  to  reflect  upon  the  means  of  rekindling  the 
fire  of  charity."  St.  Bernard  represents  meditation  and  prayer  as  the  two  feet  of  the 
soul,  by  which  it  ascends.  St.  Ignatius,  in  his  Spiritual  Exerdte,  systematised 
it.  St.  Theresa  declares  it  "essential  to  the  Christian  life."  2.  Its  dignity.  It 
involves  a  continuing  in  communion  with  God  in  tender  and  afifeotionate  intercourse, 
growing  into  a  holy  familiarity  and  friendship.  St.  Augustine  in  his  confessions 
records  the  joy  which  he  experienced  when  his  soul  found  its  resting-place  in  God — 
"Sometimes  thou  bringest  me  to  certain  feelings  of  tenderness,  and  to  an  extra- 
ordinary sweetness,  which,  should  it  stiU  increase,  I  know  not  what  would  happen." 
Such  communion  is  surely  a  preparation  for  heaven  and  a  foretaste  of  beatitude. 
It  ia  said  of  St.  Francis  de  Sales,  that  one  day  when  he  was  in  retreat,  and  holding 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xix. 

continuous  and  close  communion  with  God,  he  became  so  overwhelmed  with  joy 
that  at  last  he  exclaimed,  "  Withdraw  Thyself,  0  Lord,  for  I  am  unable  any  longer 
to  bear  Thy  great  sweetness."  3.  Its  importance.  This  is  because  of  its  rich 
productiveness  in  the  fruits  of  prayer  ;  we  have  found  that,  whether  it  be  regarded 
as  a  good  work  which  stores  up  favour  with  God,  or  as  an  act  of  compensation  for 
past  neglect,  or  as  a  means  of  adding  force  to  our  petitions,  or  as  to  its  subjective 
effect  on  our  life  —  it  outstrips  other  kinds  of  prayer  in  the  number  and  quality 
of  its  effects.     4.  Its  nature  and  exercise.     There  are  preliminary  acts,  such  as — 

(1)  Adoration.  (2)  Preparatory  prayer  that  we  may  have  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
(3)  The  endeavour  to  picture  to  yourself  the  event  upon  which  you  are  to  meditate. 
Then  there  will  be  called  into  exercise :  memory,  that  you  may  have  the  subject 
of  meditation  before  the  mind  ;  understanding,  that  you  may  reflect  upon  it  and 
investigate  its  meaning ;  the  wiU,  for  we  have  to  stir  ourselves  up  to  this  exercise. 
The  will  acts  on  the  body,  by  causing  the  muscles  to  contract ;  on  the  mind, 
by  determining  what  trains  of  thought  it  shall  pursue  ;  on  the  spirit,  by  holy  resolve  : 
this  its  most  wonderful  power.  Such  resolve  must  be  definite,  and  its  execution 
not  delayed.  And  the  meditation  will  end  with  appropriate  devotions  and  inquiries. 
But  mental  prayer  includes  also — II.  Contemplation.  It  is  a  gift  which  is  very 
rarely  possessed.  It  is  said  that,  besides  a  peculiar  elevation  of  soul  towards  God 
and  Divine  things,  on  the  natural  side  contemplation  requires  certain  qualities  of 
mind  and  character,  and  is  seldom  attained  except  after  a  process  of  spiritual  trial 
and  purification  ;  so  that,  in  passing  from  the  consideration  of  meditation  to  that  of 
contemplation,  we  feel  that  we  are  going  off  the  thoroughfare  into  the  byways  of 
religion.  Some  of  its  special  features.  (1)  There  is  no  labour  in  it,  as  in  medita- 
tion, but  the  soul  beholds  truth  intuitively,  and  remains  gazing  upon  God.  The 
amazement  of  delight  fills  the  soul  as  it  beholds  the  things  of  God.     So  that  it  is 

(2)  a  foretaste  of  eternal  bliss,  like  to  that  which  St.  Peter  enjoyed  on  the  Mount 
of  Transfiguration.  (3)  Another  feature  is  repose.  It  is  restful  calm,  and  closes  the 
senses  to  the  external  world.  It  is  ever  associated  with  the  idea  of  rest.  Mary  sat 
at  Jesus'  feet  and  heard  His  word.  (4)  The  union  of  the  soul  with  God  is  another 
mark,  and  is  the  first  object  of  contemplative  prayer.  III.  A  difficulty  in  the 
USE  OF  this  mental  pkayek.  It  is  dryness  of  spirit.  1.  Its  causes  are — (1)  The 
condition  of  conscience, — some  sin,  perhaps  hidden,  may  have  come  between  the  soul 
and  God  ;  or  (2)  bodily  health  ;  or  (3)  the  providence  of  God.  He  sends  it  as  a 
spiritual  tiial,  and  this  form  of  it  is  the  most  severe.  (Job  xxix.  2-4  ;  Psa.  xxii.  1, 
xlii.  5,  cxliii.  7.)  If  we  find  no  sin  in  the  conscience,  after  diligent  search,  it  is 
best  to  leave  the  matter  in  the  hand  of  God.  Only,  never  let  dryness  of  spirit  cause 
us  to  give  up  mental  prayer.  Let  us  not  think  that  because  we  have  not  happy 
feeling  therefore  our  prayer  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God.  God  may  delight  in  that 
which  gives  us  no  delight.  As  when  the  moon  is  in  crescent,  there  are  a  few  bright 
points  still  visible  upon  its  unillumined  part ;  and  those  bright  points  are  supposed 
to  be  peaks  of  mountains  so  lofty  as  to  be  able  to  catch  the  sunlight ;  so  in  the 
darkness  of  the  soul,  the  withdrawal  of  grace  is  not  total,  but  there  are  still,  as  it 
Avere,  certain  eminences,  which  the  Sxm  of  Righteousness  now  and  then  touches  with 
His  glory.  But  whatever  the  dryness  or  the  darkness  be,  if  we  persevere,  the  light 
will  return  at  last.  {W.  H.  HutcMngs,  M.A.)  David's  desire: — All  wish  to 
please— 1.  Some  to  please  themselves.  "Whoever  is  offended,  they  must  be  indulged. 
2.  Some  to  please  men.  And  this  is  not  in  all  cases  improper.  "Let  every  one  of 
us  please  his  neighbour,"  but  it  must  be  "for  his  good  to  edification."  3.  Some 
endeavour  to  please  God.  Such  were  Paul  and  his  companions.  "We  labour  .  .  . 
to  be  accepted  of  Him."  And  such  was  David.  He  would  dedicate  all  his  powers  to 
God.  A  natural  man  cares  for  his  conduct  as  men  see  it.  But  he  makes  no 
conscience  of  his  speech,  or  of  his  thoughts.  I.  David's  prayer  shows  his 
HUMILITY,  he  asks  only  that  his  works  may  be  acceptable.  II.  His  affection. 
He  desires  only  to  please  Him.  III.  Consciousness  of  duty.  He  knew  that  he 
was  bound  to  seek  God's  favour.  IV.  Regard  to  self-inteeest.  It  could  not 
but  be  well  for  him  if  he  pleased  God.  Innumerable  are  the  benefits  of  pleasing 
God.  {William  Jay.)  Pious  desire: — In  these  words  we  are  taught — I.  The 
interestins  light  in  which  to  contemplate  the  character  of  God.  1.  God 
is  His  people's  strength.  Of  their  bodies  and  of  their  souls.  2.  Their  Redeemer. 
He  is  so  from  the  curse  of  the  law ;  from  sin ;  from  the  power  of  death  and  the 
grave.  And  at  what  cost  of  suffering  was  all  this  effected  I  3.  And  we  have 
individual  interest  in  God.  "My"  strength:  "My"  Redeemer.  II.  The  pious 
desire  of  those  that  fear  the  Lord.     1.  It  is  an  habitual  desire,  but  felt  more 


PSALM  XX.]  TEE  PSALMS, 


strongly  at  certain  seasons,  as  in  meditation.  2.  What  David  was  persuaded  of, 
that  to  the  Lord  everj-thing  was  perfectly  known.  3.  About  what  he  was  concerned, 
that  his  words  and  thoughts  might  "be  acceptable  in  Thy  sight."  God  delights  in 
such  meditation  of  His  people.     {Anon. ) 


PSALM  XX. 

Vers.  1-9.  The  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble. — A  laitle  prayer : — This, 
it  is  believed,  is  the  battle  prayer  or  litany  which  was  solemnly  chanted  in  the 
sanctuary  on  the  eve  of  the  great  expedition  to  crush  the  formidable  rebellion  of 
the  Ammonites  and  their  Syrian  allies  (2  Sam.  x. ),  and  which  was  also  used  in  after 
times  upon  similar  undertakings.  1.  To  enter  into  its  spirit  we  must  transport 
ourselves  in  imagination  to  the  old  temple  at  Jerusalem  while  the  special  service 
invoking  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  upon  the  intended  enterprise  is  in  progress.  The 
courts  are  thronged  with  enthusiastic  patriots,  each  eager  to  strengthen  with  his 
own  voice  the  chorus  of  supplication  for  Israel's  success.  The  king  in  his  robes  of 
royalty  is  standing  by  the  altar  in  the  sanctuary.  He  has  just  presented  his  gifts 
and  offered  his  sacrifice  ;  and  now  the  choir  and  the  whole  congregation  break  out 
into  this  mighty  hymn  on  his  behalf,  assuring  him  that  in  this  day  of  trouble, 
occasioned  by  the  revolt  of  his  subjects  or  the  invasion  of  strangers,  the  Lord  will 
hear  him,  will  defend  him,  will  send  him  help  from  the  sanctuary,  and  uphold 
him  out  of  Zion.  These  his  offerings  shall  be  remembered,  this  his  sacrifice  shall 
be  accepted ;  the  desire,  too,  of  his  heart — the  overthrow  of  the  enemy — shall  be 
granted.  2.  They  cease.  The  vast  multitude  stands  hushed,  while  one  voice  alone 
IS  heard  ;  it  is  that  of  the  king,  or  of  some  Levite  deputed  to  speak  as  his  representa- 
tive. In  a  strain  of  fullest  confidence  he  declares  the  petitions  on  his  behalf  have 
been  heard.  3.  As  the  king  ceases  the  choir  and  people  again  break  out  into 
chorus.  {Henry  Housman.)  The  day  of  troulle: — Have  we  heard  of  that  day? 
Is  it  a  day  in  some  exhausted  calendar  ?  Is  this  an  ancient  phrase  that  needs  to  be 
interpreted  to  us  by  men  cunning  in  the  use  of  language  and  in  the  history  of 
terms  ?  It  might  have  been  spoken  in  our  own  tongue  :  we  might  ourselves  have 
spoken  it.  So  criticism  has  no  place  here  ;  only  sympathy  has  a  right  to  utter  these 
words ;  they  would  perish  under  a  process  of  etymological  vivisection ;  they  bring 
Avith  them  healing,  comfort,  release,  and  contentment  when  spoken  by  the  voice  of 
sympathy.  Is  the  day  of  trouble  a  whole  day- — twelve  hours  long  ?  Is  it  a  day 
that  cannot  be  distinguished  from  night  ?  and  does  it  run  through  the  whole  circle 
of  the  twenty-four  hours  ?  Is  it  a  day  of  that  kind  at  all  ?  In  some  instances  is  it 
not  a  life-day,  beginning  with  the  first  cry  of  infancy,  concluding  with  the  last  sigh 
of  old  age  ?  Is  it  a  day  all  darkness,  without  any  rent  in  the  cloud,  without  any 
hint  of  light  beyond  the  infinite  burden  of  gloom  ?  Whatever  it  is,  it  is  provided 
for ;  it  is  recognised  as  a  solemn  fact  in  human  life,  and  it  is  provided  for  by  the 
grace  and  love  of  the  eternal  God.  He  knows  every  hour  of  the  day — precisely  how 
the  day  is  made  up ;  He  knows  the  pulse-beat  of  every  moment ;  He  is  a  God  nigh 
at  hand ;  so  that  we  have  no  sorrow  to  tell  Him  by  way  of  information,  but  only 
sorrow  to  relate  that  with  it  we  may  sing  some  hymn  to  His  grace.  The  whole 
world  is  made  kin  by  this  opening  expression.  There  is  no  human  face,  rightly 
lead,  that  has  not  in  it  lines  of  sorrow— peculiar,  mystic  writing  of  long  endurance, 
keen  disappointment,  hope  deferred,  mortification  of  soul  uniittered  in  speech,  but 
graved  as  with  an  iron  tool  upon  the  soul  and  the  countenance.  {Joseph  Parker, 
D.D.)  Defence  in  the  day  of  troulle : — Commentators  have  positively  perverted 
this  whole  Psalm.  They  have  put  it  all  down  to  David ;  but  it  is  a  beautiful 
dialogue  between  Christ  and  His  Church, — He  addressing  her  as  her  Advocate  and 
Intercessor  amid  all  her  troubles.  I.  Christ's  recognition  of  His  people  in  the 
DAT  OF  TROUBLE.  AU  have  to  bear  trouble,  but  the  believer  has  a  God  to  go  to. 
His  troubles  arise  from  his  inflexible  enemies,  the  world  and  its  children,  the  devil, 
the  flesh.  And  from  his  spiritual  conflicts  when  first  brought  to  conversion.  The 
thunders  of  Sinai,  the  Slough  of  Despond — these  are  some  of  his  troubles  at  such 
time.  And  when  he  is  pardoned  and  hugs  his  pardon  in  his  bosom,  there  are  some 
troubles  yet,  through  miserable  backslidings.  II.  The  excitement  which  our 
Intercessor  gives  us  to  prayer.     "The  Lord  hear  thee" ;  this  intimates  that  we 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xx. 

are  already  excited  to  earnest  prayer.     For  our  encouragement  let  ua  remember 
Christ's  constant  intercession  on  our  behalf  in  heaven.     III.  The  appkal  which 
THE  Intekcessor  MAKES  TO  ouE  COVENANT  Head.     "The  name  of  the  God  of 
Jacob  defend  thee."    Who  is  the  God  of  Jacob?    The  God  that  gave  him  the 
blessing  of  the  birthright,  though  he  was  the  junior  ;   the  God  that  aelirered  him 
from  the  murderous  hand  of  his  brother  in  the  day  of  his  trouble  ;  the  God  that 
enriched  him  with  Laban's  spoil,  and  gave  him  the  desire  of  his  heart ;  the  God 
that  protected  him,  and  manifested  Himself  to  him — his  covenant  God.     How  I  have 
been  delighted  with  the  thought  that  Jehovah  should  recognise  the  unregenerate 
name  ! — for  Jacob  was  the  name  of  the  patriarch  in  his  unregeneracy.     IV.  The 
DEMAND  FOR  OTJR  DEFENCE.     "The  name  of  the  God  of,"  &c.     But  you  say,  how 
will  "the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend"  me?    Try  it:  I  have  over  and  over 
again;  therefore  I  speak  what  I  do  know,  and  testify  what  I  have  seen.     "The 
name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee."    Get  encircled  with  covenant  engagements 
and  covenant  grace,  and  covenant  promises,  and  covenant  securities;  then  will 
"the  Lord  hear  you  in  the  time  of  taronble,  and  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  will 
defend  you."    {Joseph  Irons.)        The  war  spirit  of  the  Old  Testoument: — I.  Thk 
PROBABLE  TIME  AND  oooAsioN  OF  ITS  COMPOSITION.     They  are  related  in  2  Sam.  x. 
XL  Its  constrttction.     It  begins  with  an  address  to  the  monarch  under  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  exigency.     Then,  with  the  words,  "We  will  rejoice  in 
Thy  salvation,"  the  speakers  turn  from  prayer  to  the  avowal  of  their  confidence  and 
of  the  spirit  in  which  they  would  go  to  the  war.     Then  the  high  priest  might  add 
the  next  clause,  "The  Lord  fulfil  all  thy  petitions."    And  now  there  appears  to  be 
a  pause,  and  the  sacrifices  are  offered,  and  tne  priest,  catching  sight  of  the  auspicious 
omen,  exclaims,  "  Now  know  I "  (from  what  I  observe  of  the  indications  of  the  Divine 
acceptance  of  the  sacrifices — now  know  I)  "that  the  Lord  saveth  His  anointed,"  &o. 
Then  comes  a  response  from  the  people,  encouraged  by  what  they  have  heard. 
"Some  trust  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses" — the  veiy  preparations  that  had  been 
made  against  them,  "but  we  will,"  &c.     The  whole  closes  by  the  acclamations  of 
the  people.     '  The  Lord  save  the  king !     God  will  hear  us.     Save,  Lord ;  let  the 
king  hear  us  when  we  call " :  we  wUl  pray  for  the  ki»g,  we  will  call  upon  the  Lord, 
we  who  remain  at  home  when  the  army  advances  to  the  field.     This  reminds  us  of 
and  illustrates  a  passage  from  R.  Hall,  entitled  "Sentiments  Proper  to  the  Present 
Crisis,"  a  warlike,  though  at  first  sight  it  appears  not  a  very  Christian,  address, 
written  about  forty-four  years  ago,  at^the  time  of  the  threatened  invasion.    Address- 
ing a  company  of  volunteers,   he  introduces  a  sentiment  very  similar  to  that 
which  concludes  this  Psalm.     "Go,  then,  ye  defenders  of  your  country,  accom- 
panied with  every  auspicious  omen ;  advance  with  alacrity  into  the  field,  where  God 
Himself  musters  the  hosts  to  war.     Religion  is  too  much  interested  in  your  success 
not  to  lend  you  her  aid  ;  she  will  shed  over  this  enterprise  her  selected  influence. 
While  you  are  engaged  in  the  field,  many  will  repair  to  the  closet,  many  to  the 
sanctuary;  the  faithful  of  every  name  will  employ  that  prayer  which  has  power 
with  God ;  the  feeble  hands  which  are  unequal  to  any  other  weapon  will  grasp  the 
sword  of  the  spirit ;  and  from  myriads  of  humble,   contrite  hearts  the  voice  of 
intercession,  supplication,  and  weeping  will  mingle  with  the  shouts  of  battle  and  the 
shock  of  arms."    III.  Suggestions  from  this  review  of  the  Psalm.    1.  Although 
aU  this  is  very  imposing  and  grand,  yet  it  is  not  the  ideal  of  humanity.      We 
do  not  wish  such  scenes  to  be  permanent  or  universal.     It  was  all  very  well  for 
the  time,  but  it  is  not  well  now.    This  is  not  the  way  in  which  God  should  be 
worshipped,  nor  the  feeUnga  which  we  should  carry  away  from  His  altar.     The 
New  Testament  tells  us  again  and  again  that  its  aim  is  something  altogether 
different  from  this  "mustering  of  the  hosts  to  war" — this  "Go,  ye  defenders  of 
your  country  " — this  murdering  and  slaughtering.    War  may  be  brilliant,  but  it  is 
not  a  good  thing  for  the  world,  for  humanity.    2.  In  proportion  as  the  spirit  of 
the  Old  Testament  has  been  imbibed  by  nations,  they  hare  been  retarded  in  the 
development  of  national  character,  and  in  the  realisation  of  the  Christian  ideal. 
Ceremonies,  hierarchies,  ritual,   a  national  priesthood,   a  vicarious  religion,   an 
ecclesiastical  caste — a  special  class  of  men  being  set  apart  to  spend  their  nights  and 
days  in  praying  for  the  people — all  these  come  from  Judaisers.     And  so  again  with 
the  national  war  spirit,  the  military  art  regarded  as  a  profession,  the  consecration 
of  colours,  and  the  rest — these  are  Jewish,  not  Christian.     We  laugh  at  the  Cove- 
nanter and  the  Roundhead,  bat  where  they  were  wrong  was  in  imbibing  the  Old 
Testament  spirit.     8.  War  is  not  always  without  justification,  but  we  ought  to 
shrink  from  it  as  an  abhorred  thing.     4.  Let  the  Psalm  remind  yoa  of  King  Jesof, 


MAUI  XX.3  THE  PSALMS.  S96 

and  of  His  victory  and  our  own  through  Him.  {Tkomtts  Bvmiey.)  Help  in 
trouble: — A  sentinel  posted  on  the  walls,  when  he  sees  a  party  of  the  enemy 
advancing,  does  not  attempt  to  make  head  against  them  himself,  but  at  once  infonns 
his  commanding  officer  of  the  enemy's  approach,  and  awaits  his  word  as  to  how  the 
foe  is  to  be  met.  So  the  Christian  does  not  attempt  to  resist  temptation  in  his 
own  strength,  but  in  prayer  calls  upon  his  Captain  for  aid,  and  in  His  might  and 
His  Word  goes  forth  to  meet  it.  The  name  of  the  Ood  of  Jacob  defend  thee. — 
Hie  nanu  of  Jehovah: — I.  Thi  kame  of  Jehovah  a  consolation  in  teouble. 
No  character  is  exempt  from  the  ills  of  life.  The  highest  dignity  cannot  guard  oflF 
trouble ;  and  crowns  especially  are  often  lined  with  thorns.  Few  plants,  says  an 
old  writer,  have  both  the  morning  and  the  evening  sun  ;  and  an  older  than  he  has 
said,  Man  is  bom  to  trouble.  But  in  the  deepest,  darkest,  wildest  distress,  Jehovah 
is  the  refuge  of  His  people ;  and  His  name  soothes  the  keenest  anguish  and  lifts  up 
the  most  despairing.  II.  The  name  of  Jehovah  an  inspiring  battle-cry. 
"  In  the  name  of  our  God  will  we  set  up  our  banners  "  (ver.  5).  Banners  are  a  part 
of  our  military  equipage,  borne  in  times  of  war  to  assemble,  direct,  distinguish, 
and  inspirit  the  soldiers.  They  have  been  often  used  in  religious  ceremonies. 
It  is  the  practice  of  some  people  to  erect  a  banner  in  honour  of  their  deity. 
In  a  certain  part  of  Thibet  it  is  customary  for  a  priest  to  ascend  a  hill  every 
month  to  set  up  a  white  flag  and  perform  some  religious  ceremonies  to  con- 
ciliate the  favour  of  a  dewta,  or  invisible  being,  who  is  the  presiding  genius  of 
the  place.  The  Hindus  describe  Siva  the  Supreme  as  having  a  banner  in  the 
celestial  world.  The  militant  Church  goes  to  war  with  the  name  of  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  on  her  banner.  III.  The  name  of  Jehovah  is  the  strength  of  the 
MILITANT  Chtjech.  "  We  wiU  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God"  (ver.  7). 
The  world  trusts  in  the  material — in  rifles,  mitrailleuse,  turret-ships,  and  torpedoes  ; 
but  the  Church  is  taught  to  trust  in  the  spiritual — the  mysterious,  invisible,  but 
almighty  power  of  Jehovah.  The  material  fails,  the  spiritual  never.  When  the 
saint  relies  fully  on  Jehovah,  and  is  absorbed  in  His  holy  cause,  he  is  surrounded 
with  an  impenetrable  defence.      {W.   L.    Watkinson.)  The   Ood    of  Jacob: 

I.  Its  history.  The  character  of  Jacob  is  one  of  the  standing  difficulties  of  the 
Old  Testament,  because  of  the  interest  and  love  God  cherished  for  him.  David 
oflFers  to  us  much  the  same  difficulty  :  "the  man  after  God's  own  heart,"  and  yet 
so  base  and  vile  in  his  great  sin.  But  it  is  the  Bible  which  tells  us  what  these  men 
were.  Its  frankness  is  conspicuous.  But  David,  after  all,  does  not  puzzle  us  as 
Jacob  does.  There  is  a  vein  of  pure  nobility  and  of  splendid  genius  through  David's 
character  and  Ufe,  which  helps  us  to  underatand  the  relation  of  God  to  him.  But 
Jacob's  character  fails  to  kindle  a  corresponding  enthusiasm.  He  does  not  stand 
out  before  us  a  man  of  genius,  as  a  hearty  lover,  a  faithful  friend,  or  even  as  a  noble 
and  gallant  foe.  A  vein  of  trickery  and  treachery  runs  through  his  nature,  so 
unlike  David's  frank  and  self-forgetful  generosity.  Stratagems  are  his  delight ;  the 
easy  refuge  of  his  weakness.  And  when  we  find  through  life  the  same  tendency  to 
underhand  tricks  prevailing,  we  begin  to  wonder  what  Grod  could  see  in  the  man  to 
make  him  a  prince  in  the  heavenly  order,  and  why  throughout  the  Scripture  the 
name  God  of  Jacob,  God  of  Israel  is  the  name  in  which  He  especially  delights. 
It  seems  to  them  the  purest  exercise  of  the  Divine  sovereignty  on  record.  But  it 
is  sovereignty  of  the  same  order  as  that  which  moves  Him  to  elect  to  be  the 
Redeemer  of  the  world.  The  spring  of  that  redeeming  love  lies  within  His  own 
nature.  It  arose  out  of  the  depths  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  must  be  based,  we 
may  be  sure,  on  essential  reason.  God  chose  Jacob,  and  chooses  to  be  called  the 
Goa  of  Jacob,  just  because  he  was  a  man  so  full  of  human  infirmity  and  littleness, 
mingled  with  those  higher  and  nobler  qualities  without  which  the  spiritual  culture 
of  mankind  becomes  impossible.  Had  God  chosen  only  to  be  called  the  God  of 
Abraham  or  Moses,  and  to  take  supreme  interest  in  such  lofty  lives  alone,  alas  !  for 
you  and  for  me  and  for  mankind.  Jacob  is  more  within  our  sphere.  What  God 
was  to  him,  we  can  believe  that  He  may  be.  He  will  be,  to  us  ;  thus  the  name  "God 
of  Jacob  "  has  a  sound  full  of  comfort,  full  of  assurance  to  our  ears.  That  it  might 
be  so,  we  may  be  sure.  He  chose  it.  Now,  see  this  when  developed  in  history. 
God,  as  the  God  of  Jacob,  did  make  Himself  a  glorious  name  in  the  earth  (Deut.  ii. 
25  ;  Josh.  ii.  4-11).  Their  internal  organisation  under  the  constitution  which  God 
had  ordained  marked  them  out  as  a  favoured  people.  There  was  nothing  like  them 
in  the  wide  world,  until  the  German  races  appeared  and  brought  the  same  love  of 
freedom,  the  same  domestic  affiections,  the  same  noble  womanhood,  the  same 
essential  manliness,  to  build  on  the  foundation  of  Christian  society.     Again,  Israel 


896  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xx. 

was  the  only  nation  of  freemen,  in  the  largest  sense,  in  the  Old  World.  The  people 
were  knit  into  a  brotherhood  of  liberty,  with  special  safeguards  in  their  constitution 
as  a  nation  against  the  lapse  of  any  Jewish  freeman  into  serfdom,  or  even  into 
penury  (Deut.  xv.  ;  Lev.  xxv.  23-31).  They  were  facile  princeps  among  nations, 
witnessing  to  the  heathen  around  them  of  the  blessedness  of  obedience  to  God. 
And  what  men  they  produced  !  The  Greeks  are  their  only  rivals.  But  while 
Greece  produced  the  heroes  of  the  schools,  the  Jews  produced  the  heroes  of  the 
common  human  world.  Every  man  and  every  people  is  conscious  of  a  relation  to 
them,  such  as  he  sustains  to  no  other  race  which  has  played  its  part  in  history. 
The  lives  of  the  great  Hebrews  belong  to  us  as  no  Greek  belongs  to  us.  They  are 
literally  part  of  our  history.  How  few  know  Greek  ;  who  knows  not  the  histories  of 
the  Bible  ?  They  are  our  fathers  whose  lives  we  read  there,  our  history,  our  hymns. 
Man's  history  is  the  elucidation  of  this  title  ;  the  God  of  Jacob  has  written  for 
Himself  a  glorious  name  in  the  records  of  the  world.     II.  Its  work — the  ftjnc- 

TIONS  WHICH  THIS  NAME  FULFILS  IN   THE  CULTURE  OF  OUR  PERSONAL  SPIRITUAL 

LIFE.  1.  The  God  of  Jacob  tells  us,  by  the  very  name,  that  He  is  a  God  who  is  not 
deterred  by  a  great  transgression,  or  by  great  proneness  to  transgression,  from  con- 
stituting Himself  the  guide  of  oui-  pilgrim  life.  If  ever  your  heart  dies  down 
within  you  under  the  consciousness  of  an  inbred  sinfulness,  which  you  think  must 
alienate  you  from  God's  love  and  care,  let  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  reassure 
you.  "Long-suffering"  is  the  quality  which  the  name  of  "the  God  of  Jacob" 
seems  specially  to  suggest  to  us.  Jacob  was  a  man  of  many  and  grave  infir- 
mities. And  the  God  who  came  to  Adam  with  a  promise  which  implied  a  pardon 
came  also  to  Jacob,  and  comes  to  us  all.  God  undertook  the  guidance  of  that  man's 
pilgrimage,  because  he  was  a  sinful  man,  a  man  full  of  infirmities  and  treacheries, 
but  with  a  nobler  nature  beneath  and  behind  which  He  made  it  His  work  to  educate 
by  sufl'ering,  until  Jacob  the  supplanter  became  Israel  the  prince.  Jacob  was  as 
full  of  foUy,  falsity,  and  selfish  ambition  as  most  of  us  ;  but  he  had  an  instinct  and 
a  yearning  for  deliverance.  God's  promise  rang  full  sweetly  on  his  ear.  The  worm 
Jacob,  trained  to  be  a  prince,  is  full  of  precious  suggestions  to  us  all.  2.  The  God 
of  Jacob  must  be  a  God  who  can  bear  to  inflict  very  stern  chastisement  on  His 
children,  and  to  train  His  pilgrims  in  a  very  hard,  sharp  school  of  discipline,  with- 
out forfeiting  the  name  of  their  merciful  and  loving  God.  "  Few  and  evil  have  the 
days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been,"  said  the  aged  patriarch,  reviewing  his  life  course 
before  Pharaoh.  Why  ?  Because  through  life  he  had  been  under  the  hard,  stem 
discipline  of  the  hand  of  God.  And  so,  as  his  life  was  spent  in  learning,  it  was 
spent  in  suffering.  God  did  not  shrink  from  wielding  the  scourge  to  the  very  close. 
Then,  he  witnessed  a  sad  confession  before  Pharaoh,  such  as  Abraham  and  Isaac 
would  have  had  no  occasion  for ;  for  they  lived  better  and  happier  lives  than 
Jacob.  But  it  is  this  very  discipline  which  makes  Jacob's  life  so  instructive.  It 
teaches  us — (1)  The  thoroughness  of  the  Divine  method,  that  we  have  to  do  with 
One  who  will  sanctify  us  wholly  ;  will  search  out  the  very  root-fibres  of  evil  within 
US,  and  scathe  them,  whatever  may  be  the  cost.  (2)  Let  the  name  of  the  God  of 
Jacob  assure  you  that  there  is  no  extremity  in  which  you  have  a  right  to  cry,  "  The 
Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  my  God  hath  forgotten  me."  Jacob's  life  is  surely  the 
witness  that  the  veriest  exile  cannot  wander  beyond  the  shelter  of  the  Father's 
home  ;  the  most  utter  outcast  cannot  stray  beyond  the  shield  of  the  Father's  love. 
There  is  no  condition  of  darkness,  of  straits,  of  anguish,  inconsistent  with  your 
standing  as  a  son  and  God's  tenderness  as  a  Father.  For — (3)  The  God  of  Jacob  is 
the  God  who  will  bring  the  pilgrims  home.  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their 
Grod,  for  He  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city. "  Led  by  the  God  of  Jacob,  your  bones  can 
never  whiten  the  sands  of  the  desert ;  your  choking  cry  can  ever  be  heard  from 
the  waves  of  Jordan.  Mark  the  splendid  and  joyous  picture  of  the  end  of  all  our 
pilgrim  wanderings,  toils,  and  pains,  which  is  painted  there.  The  Angel  which 
redeemed  him  from  all  evil  is  redeeming  us  through  pain  as  shaip,  through  patience 
as  long,  through  discipline  as  stern.  And  He  has  caused  all  this  to  bu  written  for 
our  learning,  that  the  hope  of  a  final  and  eternal  triumph  over  evil  might  sustain 
us  through  the  conflict,  through  the  wanderings,  and  assure  us  that  in  His  good 
time  the  God  of  the  pilgrim  Jacob  wiU  bring  us  into  His  rest.  Weary,  worn,  with 
shattered  armour  and  dinted  shield,  we  may  struggle  on  to  the  shore  of  the  dark 
river.  A  moment,  a  gasp — ^and  there  is  a  white-robed  conqueror,  with  the  dew  of 
immortal  youth  upon  his  brow,  led  by  the  angels  before  the  Throne  of  God  and  of 
tbe  Lamb.     {J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 


PSALM  XX.]  THE  PSALMS.  397 

Ver.  2.  Send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary. — The  sanctuary : — I.  It  is  the  place 
WHERE  God's  honour  dwells.  When  Israel  would  have  the  help  and  guidance  of 
Jehovah,  they  made  application  at  the  temple  where  His  glory  was  seen  in  the  holy 
place,  and  where  He  had  appointed  to  respond  to  their  supplications.  II.  The 
HOUSE  OF  God  is  the  place  of  united  and  fervent  prayer.  The  increased 
eflBcacy  of  prayer  when  united  and  fervent,  and  the  assurance  that  it  will  have  unity 
and  fervency  in  the  sanctuary,  point  out  that  place  as  the  source  of  their  help  in  the 
hour  of  danger  and  of  suffering.  III.  The  house  of  God  is  the  radiant  point  of 
SANCTIFYING  TRUTH.  From  the  lips  of  the  living  preacher  go  out  those  doctrines 
that  operate  to  sanctify  the  hearts  of  men.  And  who  dare  hope  that  society  can 
prosper  where  no  hearts  are  sanctified  ?    VI.  The  instruction  of  God's  house  is 

THE  GRAND  AGENT  IN  THE  FORMATION  OF  PUBLIC  SENTIMENT.       An  influence   goes 

out  from  the  holy  place  to  affect  all  men,  whether  they  will  or  will  not  be  controlled 
by  the  influence.  To  the  ungodly,  public  sentiment  is  an  irresistible  law.  There  is 
no  means  powerful  like  the  house  of  God  in  the  formation  of  public  opinion  and  senti- 
ment. V.  The  house  of  God  sustains  all  the  other  civilising  and  health- 
ful INFLUENCES.  Identified  with  it  are  a  preached  Gospel  and  the  ministry  of 
reconciliation.  These  all  sustain  each  other.  VI.  From  the  house  of  God  aeb 
SELECTED  THE  SUBJECTS  OF  His  GRACE.  Thosc  Only  who  frequent  the  sanctuary  are 
at  all  likely  to  be  regenerated.  It  is  in  the  lips  of  a  living  ministry  that  God  has 
pledged  Himself  to  bless.  Men  bring  misery  on  themselves  when — 1.  There  is  a 
satiety  of  hearing  the  Word  of  God.  2.  When  the  spirit  of  decay  esteems  the  support 
of  Gospel  institutions  a  burden.  3.  When  there  is  a  disrespect  for  the  ministry  of  the 
reconciliation,  (i*.  A.  Clark.)  Help  from  the  sanctuary: — The  name  sanctuary 
means  the  holy  place,  and  sometimes  refers  only  to  that  which  was  the  most  holy 
place,  but  at  other  times  to  the  tabernacle  generally.  It  was  made  holy  by  God's 
dwelling  there,  and  specially  by  the  manifestation  of  His  grace  through  mediation 
and  sacrifice.  To  the  sanctuary  the  pious  Israelites  turned  when  in  trouble  and  in 
great  emergency,  specially  besought  the  Divine  protection  by  clinging  to  the  horns  of 
the  altar.  Something  of  the  same  kind  we  find  in  mediaeval  Christian  times  in  con- 
nection with  particular  churches.  In  the  Chapter  House  of  Westminster  there  is  a 
beautiful  picture  depicting  a  scene  which  was  often  witnessed  at  the  abbey  porch. 
The  venerable  abbot,  with  the  elevated  host  in  his  hand,  is  staying  the  progress  of  a 
strong  angry  warrior,  while  behind  him  a  woman  and  her  children,  with  terror  in 
their  faces,  are  clinging  to  his  vestments  and  claiming  his  protection.  But  we  take 
the  word  sanctuary  as  in  its  common  meaning  amongst  us  to-day  ;  as  the  house  of 
God,  the  place  of  worship.  Help  from  the  sanctuary,  therefore,  suggests  the  spiritual 
strength  obtained  through  the  observances  of  the  religious  ordinances  connected  with 
the  day  and  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Christ  blesses  us  through  them.  They  are  no 
charms  or  talisman,  but  simply  channels  of  His  blessing.  I.  We  all  need  help. 
Every  soul  has  its  own  sadness.  Some  spiritual,  through  the  conflict  with  sin. 
Others  temporal,  through  the  difficulties  of  Ufe.  II,  It  is  a  comfort  to  know  that 
there  is  help  from  the  sanctuary.  For  in  the  sanctuary  we  draw  near  to  God  as 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  we  appropriate  Him  to  ourselves  as  our 
own  God  we  find  ourselves  strengthened  and  encouraged.  We  are  in  our  lives  like 
a  schoolboy  learning  to  write,  and  every  week  is  a  page  in  our  copy-book,  and 
every  day  a  line.  On  the  first  line,  and  in  the  sanctuary,  Christ  has  set  before  us 
His  own  beautiful  example,  and  we  start  out  to  imitate  it.  But  as  we  go  down  line 
after  line  we  too  largely  lose  sight  of  that  which  He  has  written,  and  when  we  get 
to  the  bottom  our  work  is  all  irregular  and  blotted,  and  the  paper,  mayhap,  also 
blistered  with  our  tears.  Then  comes  the  first  day  of  the  week  again,  and  when  we 
enter  into  the  sanctuary  Jesus  speaks  to  us  words  of  cheer  and  sets  us  a  new  copy, 
and  so  we  begin  again.  Thus  page  after  page  is  covered.  It  is  poor  work  enough, 
but  it  improves  a  little  every  time,  and  it  is  much  better  at  the  end  of  the  book  than 
it  was  at  the  beginning,  for  at  the  bottom  of  the  last  page  the  Master  writes,  "  Well 
done  1 "  Thus  the  sanctuary  counteracts  the  evil  influences  of  the  week.  And 
there  have  been  special  blessings  coming  to  earnest  Christians  through  some  particular 
portion  of  the  service  of  God's  house.  The  Lord  guides  His  Word  to  the  hearts  of  His 
people.  He  knows  how  to  direct  the  minister  to  preach  aright.  See  how  minute 
are  the  directions  given  by  which  Cornelius  was  to  find  Peter  and  Ananias  to  find 
Saul  of  Tarsus  in  Damascus.  And  the  Holy  Spirit  acts  in  like  manner  still.  III.  To 
GET  THIS  HELP  WE  MUST  COME  TO  THE  SANCTUARY.  I  do  not  deny  that  we  Can 
get  to  God  in  Christ  anywhere.  But  a  particular  promise  is  made  in  connection 
with  the  sanctuary.     "Where  two  or  three,"  &c.     It  may  be  diflicult  to  analyse 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xx> 

this  special  blessing,  but  it  is  a  reality.  How  lamentable,  then,  that  so  many  stay 
away,  and  on  such  slight  pretexts.  IV.  If  he  would  be  tece  means  op  conveying 
THIS  HELP  the  MINISTER  MXTST  KEEP  CLOSE  TO  Cheist.  For  it  18  the  Christ  of  the 
sanctuary  that  constitutes  its  value,  and  if  he,  on  whom  most  of  all  the  character  and 
quality  of  the  services  depend,  loses  sight  of  Him,  then  the  Church  is  reduced  at 
once  to  the  level  of  the  Lyceum,  and  all  spiritual  power  is  gone.  The  soul  of  a  saint 
cannot  be  nourished  by  a  scientific  disquisition.  The  best  way  to  defend  the  truth 
is  to  expound  it.  Above  all,  must  they  know  Christ  experimentally.  ( W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Remember  all  thy  offerings. — Holy  offerings: — "What  shall  I  render 
unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  me  1 "  There  are  people  who  wLU  say  that 
we  can  give  nothing  to  God,  who  giveth  all.  These  are  the  selfish  folk,  who  really 
mean,  even  if  they  do  not  say  so,  "Get  all  you  can  from  God,  God  wants  no  return." 
Now,  the  Bible  says  just  the  opposite.  The  Bible  says,  ' '  Present  your  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God."  The  people  who  talk  about  "the  finished 
work  of  Christ,"  and  who  say  that  He  has  done  all,  and  that  therefore  there  is  nothing 
for  us  to  do,  forget  that  there  are  two  parts  in  the  scheme  of  salvation.  Jesus 
has  indeed  done  His  part,  but  He  bids  us  do  certain  things  also.  We  have  nothing 
to  pay.  But  would  it  not  be  base  ingratitude  if  some  one  had  been  good  and  kind  to 
you  in  trouble,  and  you  had  not  tried  to  make  some  return,  however  small  ?  Well 
then,  "how  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  ? "  Do  you  remember  what  the  Lord 
Jesus  paid  for  us  ?  Have  we  nothing  to  pay  or  to  give  to  Him  t  You  will  answer 
that  you  have  nothing  good  enough  to  give  to  Him.  But  you  have  ;  you  can  give 
Him  what  He  asks  for,  your  heart,  your  love.  How,  then,  can  we  show  our  love  to 
God,  what  offerings  can  we  present  to  Him  ?  In  a  word,  one  of  the  holiest  offerings 
we  can  present  to  God  is  worship.  And  to  do  this  should  be  our  chief  motive  for 
attending  church.  How  various  and  how  unworthy — some  of  them — are  the  motives 
which  govern  us  in  this.  The  common  notion  about  church-going  springs  from 
mere  selfishness.  The  question  is,  how  can  I  best  honour  Him  who  has  done  all  for 
me  ?  Above  all,  we  offer  an  holy  offering  of  praise  in  the  highest  act  of  worship,  in 
the  celebration  of  the  blessed  sacrament.  In  the  service  of  the  Holy  Communion 
we  take  part  with  the  saints  and  angels  in  heaven  in  worshipping  God.  Is  there, 
then,  nothing  to  pay  ?  Oh,  yes  !  a  life  of  devotion,  a  life  of  thanksgiving  ;  there  is 
everything  to  pay,  even  the  best  we  have.  "  I  will  pay  my  vows  now  in  the  pres- 
ence of  all  His  people,"  says  holy  David  ;  and  yet  there  are  some  who  tell  us  "  there 
is  nothing  to  pay."  Thus  far  we  have  seen  that  we  can  show  our  love  to  God  by 
giving  Him  the  offering  of  a  holy  worship.  Again,  we  can  make  an  offering  to  God  by 
giving  alms  to  His  Church.  God  gives  us  all  we  have,  our  money,  and  our  means  of 
making  money ;  and  we  are  bound  to  dedicate,  to  consecrate  a  part  of  what  we  have 
to  Him.  Again,  this  false  teaching  goes  on  to  tell  us  that  there  is  nothing  to  do, 
and  nothing  to  fear.  You  know  that  it  is  written,  "  without  holiness  no  man  can 
see  the  Lord."  Now,  do  you  think  that  you  have  nothing  to  do  ?  Do  you  find  it 
very  easy  to  lead  good  lives  ;  to  keep  yourselves  pure,  and  gentle,  and  patient,  and 
forgiving  ?  Do  you  find  nothing  to  do  in  resisting  temptation,  in  keeping  under 
your  temper,  in  checking  bad  thoughts  ?  But,  as  said  a  saint  of  old,  "  God,  who 
made  us  without  ourselves,  will  not  save  us  without  ourselves."  Jesus  has  done  His 
part,  but  He  nowhere  tells  you  that  you  have  nothing  to  do.  Often  when  people 
say,  "  I  belong  to  Jesus,  I  am  safe,"  they  are  simply  deceiving  themselves.  Some  of 
the  most  atrocious  criminals  have  talked  in  this  way.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them. "  If  you  do  really  love  the  Lord  Jesus  you  will  try  to  obey  Him.  There  is  yet 
another  offering  which  we  can  give  to  God,  the  sacrifice  of  self.  Every  act  of  self- 
denial,  every  pleasure  abandoned  for  the  sake  of  others,  will  be  accepted  by  Hini  who 
gave  up  all  for  us.     (JS.  J.  WUmot  Bvxton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5,  We  will  rejoice  In  Thy  salvation, — Joy  in  OocPs  salvation: — ^The  joy, 
the  gladness,  the  rhapsody,  the  exultation,  the  young  heaven  begun  in  the  heart  of 
the  new-bom  convert  is  the  nearest  thing  to  Paradise  that  earth  ever  saw.  On  the 
day  that  our  sins  are  pardoned  God  sets  all  the  bells  of  heaven  ringing,  and  then 
the  bells  of  our  heart  chime  in  melody.  On  the  day  when  God  is  pleased  to  blot  out 
our  sins.  He  hanp  every  lane  and  every  alley  of  Mansoul  with  splendid  flags  and 
colours,  and  gilded  lamps  and  bright  jewels  ;  then  He  bids  sweet  music  play  in  every 
part  of  the  city,  and  He  makes  the  fountains  run  with  wine.  (C.  H.  Spv/rgeon.) 
In  tlie  name  of  our  God  ve  will  set  np  our  baoners. — The  Icmnen  qf(he  Temperomet 


PSALM  XX.]  TEE  FSALMS.  889 

Reformation : — There  is  the  battle  of  life  and  its  hard  struggle,  with  which  we  are 
familiar.  And  there  is  that  other  battle  of  a  higher  kind — the  battle  of  salvation, 
in  which  we  have  to  carry  on  a  warfare  against  our  spiritual  foes.  And  every  great 
reform  has  been  of  the  nature  of  a  battle,  because  of  the  opposing  forces  arrayed  against 
it.  The  Temperance  Reformation  is  no  exception  to  this  rule.  Many  and  mighty 
are  the  forces  arrayed  against  it :  ignorance  and  appetite,  custom  and  &shion, 
prejudices  and  "vested  interests,"  and  yet  more.  This  is  the  battle  we  have  to 
wage.  But  we  survey  the  field  of  this  warfare  not  at  all  with  discouragement,  but 
rejoicing  in  the  salvation  which  God  has  wrought  by  the    temperance    cause. 

I.  Enumeeate  some  op  the  geeat  teuths  which  aee  the  bannees  of  the 
Tempeeance  Reformation.  "We  know  how  useful  signs,  banners,  and  such 
symbols  are  in  any  warfare.  What  great  service  they  render.  1.  Now,  amongst 
ours  are  abstinence  and  health.  No  one  imperils  their  health  by  joining  our  cause, 
though  some  think  they  will.  But  it  is  altogether  a  mistake.  There  is  no  need  for 
their  coming  as  martyrs,  for  no  one's  health  will  be  injured  by  abstinence.  And 
how  vastly  health  is  promoted  by  it  is  a  fact  becoming  more  recognised  day 
by  day.  2.  Temperance  and  safely.  Perfect  safety  is  not  the  lot  of  man,  but 
relative  safety  is  largely  within  our  own  power  ;  and  abstinence  from  all  intoxicat- 
ing drinks  is  one  great  aid  to  such  safety.  *'  Wine  is  a  mocker,"  and  the  victims  of 
its  deceptions  are  gathered  from  every  rank,  age,  and  calling,  the  most  sacred  not 
excepted.  Therefore  it  is  well  to  make  ourselves,  by  abstinence  from  strong  drink, 
as  safe  as  we  can  in  order  that  we  may  more  fully  execute  the  will  of  God  and  the 
work  of  life.  3.  Temperance  and  charity ;  that  is,  love  for  our  fellow-man.  For 
the  sake  of  others  we  should  keep  from  that  which  does  others  so  great  harm.  Love 
will  ever  swell  the  ranks  of  the  temperance  cause.  4.  Temperance  and  piety.  The 
one  does  not  involve  the  other,  but  it  is  a  great  helper  thereto.  A  practical  con- 
nection exists  between  them,  and  temperance  has  brought  multitudes  to  cast  in 
their  lot  with  the  godly,  and  to  walk  with  them  in  the  heavenly  way.  5.  Temper- 
ance and  prosperity.  What  hinders  national  and  individual  prosperity  so  much 
as  intoxicating  drink  ?      What,  then,  could  more  help  than  abstinence  from  it  ? 

II.  Exaltation  of  these  banners  is  binding  upon  us.  We  are  to  set  them 
up,  not  as  the  only  things  to  be  exalted,  but  yet  as  certainly  amongst  them. 
1.  Why  shall  we  set  them  up?  (1)  As  a  protest  against  prevailing  errors  and 
fallacies  which  still  are  held  by  multitudes  of  people.  (2)  For  publicity — that  all 
may  know  what  we  believe  and  teach.  (3)  For  the  sake  of  propagandism.  We 
want  these  truths  spread.  2.  Where  shall  we  set  them  up?  In  the  home,  the 
school,  the  church,  the  press,  the  legislature,  wherever,  indeed,  we  may.  3.  The 
means.  By  the  living  voice,  by  the  printing  press,  by  personal  example,  by  social 
influence,  by  the  franchise.  III.  The  Divine  sanction  under  v^hich  we  act. 
We  care  for  such  sanction  and  we  have  it.  His  authority,  honour,  service,  all 
sanction  our  efforts.  Let  us  all  be  of  those  who  take  oiu"  text  as  their  own  resolve. 
{J.  Dawson  Burns.)  A  holy  warfare : — I.  Publicly  declared.  A  "banner" 
is  a  military  ensign,  and  to  set  it  up  is  a  declaration  of  war.  To  * '  set  up  our 
banner  "  and  to  declare  a  moral  war  against  wrong  is  what  all  should  do.  It  is 
indispensable.  We  are  ruined  else.  1.  Righteous.  There  are  unrighteous  wars, 
but  this  is  not  one  of  them.  2.  Life  long.  It  will  not  end  until  ' '  the  last  enemy  " 
be  destroyed.  3.  Glorious.  It  has  a  glorious  Leader,  glorious  examples  and 
victories.  Unfurl  your  banner,  then.  It  should  be — 4.  Public.  Let  it  be  seen 
floating  over  the  scene  of  your  everyday  life.  11.  Its  animating  spirit.  "  In  the 
name  of  our  God."  This  may  imply — 1.  A  conscious  need  of  Divine  help. 
Jehoshaphat's  prayer  is  suited  to  us  (2  Chron.  xx.  12).  2.  A  determination  to  follow 
the  Divine  direction.  He  is  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  What  a  magnificent 
description  we  have  of  Him  as  a  Chiettain  in  Rev.  xix.  11-16.  (Z>.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  religious  banner : — A  banner  is  a  symbol.  Hence  its  significance  and  value. 
Every  country,  every  nationality  has  its  banner,  from  the  Roman  Empire  with  its 
eagles,  that  aspired  to  universal  dominion,  to  the  smallest  principality.  The  banner 
symbolises  what  is  dear  to  the  patriot  heart,  and  every  patriot  is  prompted  to  cling 
to  it.  Every  soldier  stands  by  his  colours.  Every  religious  body  has  its  banners. 
They  may  not  be  visible  flags ;  they  may  be  symbols  of  different  kinds.  The 
creeds  were  formerly  called  symbols.  Every  Church  has  a  creed  or  symbol  of  some 
kind.  Some  Chirrches  may  not  have  authoritative  statements  of  faith  and  opinion 
to  which  subscription  is  required  as  a  condition  of  membership,  but  every  Church, 
every  organisation,  has  its  controlling  thought,  its  characteristic  faith,  which  in 
some  form  or  other  it  expresses  and  makes  its  symbol  or  banner.     Such  banner 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xx. 

every  religious  body  ouglit  to  have,  and  it  should  set  it  up  in  the  name  of  its  God  ; 
that  is,  under  deep  conviction  that  its  banner  symbolises  and  sets  forth  truths, 
principles,  duties  accordant  with  the  will  of  God  and  helpful  to  man's  highest 
interest  and  truest  welfare — mental,  moral,  and  spiritual.  And  to  the  banner  thus 
set  up  it  should  be  unfalteringly  true.  It  should  stand  by  its  colours.  Better 
have  no  colours  than  to  have  them  without  the  manliness  to  stand  by  them. 
Neutrality,  where  important  principles  are  involved,  is  pitiable  ;  but  better  be 
neutral,  better  openly  declare  that  you  have  no  convictions,  than  not  to  have 
courage  to  maintain  those  you  profess  to  have.  If  you  have  a  faith,  never  be 
ashamed  of  it.  Be  ashamed  of  not  having  a  faith,  or  of  not  bravely  defending  the 
faith  you  have.     {J.  H.  Heywood.) 

Ver.  6.  Now  know  L — A  point  of  knowledge : — There  comes  a  point  of  knowledge 
in  the  spiritual  education  of  the  soul.  For  a  long  time  the  soul  knows  nothing,  can 
explain  nothing,  is  groping  after  everything,  but  is  quite  sure  that  it  is  groping  in 
the  right  direction.  Then  there  comes  a  point  of  positive  knowledge — a  birthday — 
a  day  never  to  be  forgotten.  Such  days  there  are  in  intellectual  illumination.  The 
scholar,  opening  his  book,  knows  nothing  ;  the  first  pages  are  weary  reading ;  he 
asks  if  he  may  not  omit  a  good  many  of  the  pages,  but  he  is  told  that  not  a  single 
word  is  to  be  omitted.  The  reward  is  not  on  the  first  page  ;  it  begins  about  the 
middle  of  the  book,  but  only  begins  to  those  who  have  read  carefully  every  word  up 
to  that  point ;  then  for  the  first  time  the  reader  sees  one  beam.  Now  his  interest  in 
the  book  deepens,  every  page  becomes  an  enjoyment,  and  he  is  only  regretful  when 
the  last  page  is  reached.  We  know  the  meaning  of  this  kind  of  illumination  in  the 
acquisition  of  languages.  For  a  long  time  we  seem  to  be  speaking  incoherently, 
even  foolishly  ;  the  sounds  are  so  unusual  to  our  own  ears  that  when  we  say  them 
aloud  to  any  listener  we  smile,  as  if  we  had  made  a  possible  mistake,  or  might  be 
mistaken  for  persons  who  had  altogether  misapprehended  their  natural  talent  and 
genius.  A  little  further  on  we  speak,  perhaps,  with  a  shade  less  hesitation  ;  then, 
mingling  with  people  who  are  always  speaking  the  language,  we  get  into  the  hum 
and  music  of  the  utterance,  and  then  venture  our  first  complete  sentence  ;  and  when 
it  is  answered  as  we  expect  it  to  be  answered,  a  great  satisfaction  comes  into  our 
sovd,  and  from  that  point  progress  is  comparatively  easy.  These  illustrations  all 
help  us  to  understand  something  about  the  religious  Ufe.  "When  a  man  first  hears 
his  own  voice  in  prayer  it  is  as  if  it  thundered.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  hear  the 
voice  the  first  time  in  prayer  to  those  who  are  naturally  timid  and  self-obliterating. 
But  there  is  a  point  of  knowledge.  The  Psalmist  reached  it  in  the  sixth  verse. 
He  felt  the  saving  hands  of  God  were  under  him  and  round  about  him,  and  his 
confidence  was  grand.  After  this,  what  would  he  do?  He  would  "set  up  his 
banners,"  that  is  to  say,  he  would  bear  public  testimony.  There  should  be  no 
doubt  about  which  side  of  the  war  he  was  on.  The  fact  of  our  having  a  banner  is 
nothing  ;  the  heathen  have  banners,  and  are  not  ashamed  of  them  ;  the  thing  to  be 
noted  is  the  name  in  which  the  banner  is  to  be  set  up  ;  they  are  our  banners,  but  it 
is  God's  name.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  That  the  Lord  saveth  His  anointed. — 
God  saved  the  king : — So  said  David,  for  he  was  the  Lord's  anointed.  ' '  The  Lord 
took  him  from  the  sheepfold,"  and  anointed  him  to  feed  Jacob  His  people,  and  Israel 
His  inheritance  (1  Sam.  xvi.).  Again  and  again  had  the  Lord  saved  David  ere  he 
came  to  the  throne,  and  afterwards  he  experienced  much  trouble,  so  that  he  knew 
and  confessed  his  need  of  the  Divine  protection.  Persons  are  not  less  exposed  by 
rising  in  life  and  spreading  abroad  in  the  world.  I.  The  saved.  God  is  "  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,"  but  "specially  of  them  that  believe."  Thus  He  is  called 
"the  Preserver  of  men"  ;  but  "great  deliverance  giveth  He  to  His  king,  and 
showeth  mercy  to  His  anointed,  and  to  His  seed  for  ever."  If,  therefore,  there  be 
(and  who  can  question  it  ?)  a  peculiar  providence,  no  wonder  that  it  watches  with  a 
special  care  over  those  in  whose  lives  so  many  destinies  are  bound  up,  and  on  whose 
welfare  the  welfare  of  so  many  thousands  depends.  II.  The  salvation.  All  are 
exposed  to  evil  and  danger.  And  only  see  now  what  a  salvation  God  has  wrought 
for  us.  Consider  the  gi-eatness  of  the  peril.  III.  The  Saviotje.  It  was  the  Lord, 
it  was  a  Divine  interposition,  and  undeserved  by  us  :  let  our  praise  be  sincere  and 
practical.    How  much  as  a  people  we  have  to  be  thankful  for.     ( W.  Jay.) 

Yer.  7.  Some  trust  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses :  but  we  will  remember 
the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God. — Remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  Ood: — ^By 
the  name  of  God  is  meant  the  various  properties  and  attributes  of  God.    Now,  whUst 


PSALM  XX.]  THE  PSALMS.  401 

Bome  trusted  in  earthly  power,  the  Psalmist  confides  in  "the  name  of  the  Lord  our 
God."  It  would  seem  to  an  ordinary  observer,  if  he  were  ignorant  of  the  Gospel, 
that  the  name  of  the  Lord  would  excite  terror  rather  than  confidence.  If  there  be 
good  in  the  moral  government  of  God,  how  much  of  suffering,  evil  and  sorrow  there 
are,  notwithstanding.  How  then  can  confidence  arise  from  remembering  the  Divine 
name  ?  We  distinctly  admit  that  there  are  attributes  of  God  which,  because  they 
seem  arrayed  against  sinful  beings,  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  be  subjects  of 
encouraging  remembrance.  *'  The  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  "  includes  justice  and 
holiness ;  and  these  are  qualities  from  which  we  seem  instinctively  to  shrink,  as 
though  we  felt  that  they  must  necessarily  be  opposed  to  rebellious  and  polluted 
creatares.  And  so  they  must  be.  If  there  be  certain  Divine  properties,  the 
remembering  of  which  might  be  comforting  even  to  the  disciple  of  natural  religion, 
undoubtedly  there  are  others  which  can  furnish  nothing  but  cause  of  disquietude, 
unless  there  be  lull  acquaintance  with  the  scheme  of  redemption.  It  is  in  respects 
such  as  these  that  natural  theology,  if  it  would  keep  its  disciples  at  peace,  must 
forbid  their  recollecting  the  name  of  the  Lord  their  God.  These  are  points  which 
must  be  slurred  over,  for  to  examine  them  deeply  would  be  to  destroy  all  foundation 
of  hope.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  disciple  of  revealed  religion.  "  Blessed  be  the 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  there  is  no  property  involved  in  the 
Divine  name  from  which  we  need  shrink,  none  which  is  not  actually  ranged  on  our 
aide,  if  we  believe  on  Him  who  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  the  world.  Did  you 
ever  consider  what  emphasis  there  is  in  St.  Paul's  answer  to  his  own  question, 
"Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?"  His  answer  is,  "It  is 
God  that  justifieth.'  What  is  there  in  the  fact  that  "  it  is  God  that  justifieth," 
which  proves  that  earth,  and  sea,  and  air  might  be  ransacked  for  an  accuser,  but 
that  none  could  be  found  who  could  make  good  any  charge  against ' '  God's  elect "  ? 
Is  it  not  because  God  is  the  justifying  agent ;  not  this  property,  not  that  attribute 
of  God,  but  God  Himself — God  the  combination  of  all  possible  perfections  ?  If  it  be 
God  that  justifieth,  the  justification  must  be  that  in  the  eflfecting  which  holiness  and 
justice  concur.  And  therefore  is  it  that  all  accusation  is  silenced  ;  for  if  the  satis- 
faction made  to  God  on  our  behalf  hath  met  every  attribute  of  God,  it  is  not  possible 
that  there  should  remain  place  for  any  charge.  Justice  as  well  as  love  demands  our 
acceptance.  Who  can  condemn  when  the  Divine  Judge  Himself  acquits,  nay, 
pronounces  approval  ?  You  should  not  fail  to  observe  that  our  text  furnishes  a 
great  criterion,  and  that  we  ought  to  test  by  it  our  spiritual  condition.  Is  it,  or  is 
it  not,  our  habit  to  "  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God,"  whilst  others,  either 
neglectful  of  religion  or  adopting  false  systems,  turn  bewildered  to  "chariots  and 
horses  "  ?  It  is,  if  with  David  we  have  "  entered  into  covenant  with  God,"  through 
the  Mediator :  it  cannot  be,  if  we  are  still  virtually  aliens,  living  in  the  darkness 
and  rebellion  of  nature.  Oh,  we  too  well  know  that  there  must  be  some  amongst 
you  whose  only  happiness  is  in  keeping  God  out  of  their  thoughts,  and  who  are 
glad  of  any  excuse  for  not  considering  His  nature  and  attributes.  Any  "chariot," 
any  "  horse,"  which  may  bear  them  away  from  the  contemplation  of  their  Maker  I 
What  a  state  I  To  be  afraid  of  meditating  on  that  Being  before  whom  they  must 
inevitably  appear,  and  who  "has  power  to  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell"  ! 
If  the  banishing  Him  from  your  thoughts  could  finally  keep  you  from  contact  with 
Him  in  His  awfulness  ;  if  there  were  a  "chariot,"  if  there  were  a  "horse,"  which 
would  bear  you  away  from  His  "  everlasting  wrath,"  we  might  not  wonder  at  your 
perseverance  in  forgetting  Him  to  the  utmost  of  your  power.  Try  for  one  hour  to 
"  remember  God's  name  " — "God's  name"  as  traced  by  natural  theology,  and  yet 
more  vividly  by  revealed.  I  know  that  you  will  be  disturbed  and  appalled,  I  know 
that  as  one  property  after  another  of  the  Divine  nature  passes  before  you,  you  will 
shrink  back,  and  be  tempted  to  exclaim — Oh  1  for  the  "chariot,"  oh!  for  the 
' '  horse,"  to  bear  us  away  from  this  terrible  God  !  But  this  is  what  we  wish.  We 
wish  you  to  see  in  God  "'a  consuming  fire," — a  Being  of  terrors,  and  those  terrors 
all  armed  to  strike  down  and  to  crush  you.  But  we  do  not  wish  you  to  be  left  in 
dismay  ;  neither  will  you  be.  Wben  " remembering  the  name  of  the  Lord"  has 
made  you  feel  yourselves  lost,  you  will  hear  with  unspeakable  gratitude  how  God 
laid  your  iniquities  on  His  own  well-beloved  Son.  If  God  out  of  Christ  appeared 
to  you  "a  consuming  fire,"  God  in  Christ  should  appear  to  you  as  a  "reconciled 
Father."      (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        Divine  and  human  trust  contrasted: — I.  Thb 

CHAEGE  BROXTGHT  AGAINST  THOSE  WHOSE  TETTST  IS  MEEBLY  HUMAN.      There  have 

been  such  always.     Now,  the  guilt  of  such  trust  lies  in  the  oversight  of  God, — 
legarding  chariots  and  horses  as  sufficient  in  themselves.     And  we  are  inezoosable 
26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psaim  xn. 

in  this,  because  God,  though  invisible,  is  ever  perceptible  to  the  understanding. 
And  all  such  trust  is  irrational.  It  has  no  solid  foundation  in  reason  or  conscience. 
II.  The  pukposb.  "  We  will  remember,"  &c.  The  trust  of  the  Christian  begins  in 
memory.  It  acts  as  a  stimulant  to  the  believer,  and  loosens  every  other  bond  and 
makes  it  easy  to  let  go  all  which  the  world  gives.  III.  The  conseqtjencbs. 
"They  are  brought  down,  .  .  .  but  we,"  &c.  Now,  the  results  of  trust  in  human 
power  are  sad  and  unexpected.  It  was  so  with  Pharaoh  and  his^army.  But  they  are 
in  accordance  with  the  natural  course  of  things.  If  we  sow  to  the  flesh  we  shall  of 
the  flesh  reap  corruption.  But  the  Christian  trust  issues  in  this — "  "We  are  risen, 
and  stand  upright."  ( W.  D.  fforwood.)  Chariots  and  horses : — I.  The  vanity 
AND  THE  VARIETY  OF  EABTHLY  DEPENDENCES.  "Some  trust  in  chaiiots  and 
horses."  They  were  the  appendages  of  war  ;  hence  were  forbidden  to  Israel,  for  war 
was  not  their  trade.  They  had  no  standing  army.  They  were  always  to  be  con- 
scious of  the  inadequacy  of  their  own  resources,  and  thus  to  be  taught  to  trust 
implicitly  in  God.  Nor  were  they  to  be  exposed  to  the  temptation  of  conquest. 
They  were  never  so  triumphant  as  when  trusting  in  God  alone.  But  the  text  points 
to  the  tendency  which  men  have  to  trust  in  the  creature  rather  than  in  the  Creator 
(Jer.  xvii.  5-8).  II.  The  foundation  of  Christian  peace  and  oouraoe. 
"But  we  wUl  remember,"  &c.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  perpetually  recurring  in 
Scripture  and  has  ever  a  deep  and  portentous  meaning.  The  name  of  Jesus  has 
now  the  same  energy.  "The  Lord  our  God  " — all  the  best  blessings  of  time  and 
eternity  belong  to  the  covenant  of  grace  which  is  in  Jesus.  Is  God  our  God  ?  Can 
we  adopt  the  words  of  the  text  ?  {W.  G.  Lewis. )  Trust  in  chaHots  omd  horses 
vain: — France,  in  the  Revolution,  hung  up  her  motto — "Liberty,  equality, 
fraternity."  Napoleon  changed  it  to  "Infantry,  cavalry,  artillery,"  says  Punch. 
Christian  loyaZty : — Every  good  Christian  is  necessarily  a  loyai  man.  The  subject 
now  considered  is,  the  insufficiency  of  all  human  expedients  to  secure  happiness 
for  a  people  unless  God  be  honoured  in  the  councils  of  their  rulers,  and  His  name 
be  remembered  by  themselves.  Human  policy,  if  separated  from  Divine  wisdom, 
leads  to  ruin  and  disgrace  ;  but  they  rise  and  stand  upright  who  "remember  the 
name  of  the  Lord  our  God."  In  what  manner  is  a  nation  called  upon  to  remember 
the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  ?  The  right  administration  of  justice  and  the  true 
worship  of  God  are  the  only  sufficient  securities  for  the  permanent  happiness  of  a 
state.  It  is  the  peculiar  province  of  the  law  of  God  to  instil  a  hatred  of  sin. 
Human  laws  may  bind  the  hand,  fetter  the  foot,  'and  imprison  the  body,  but  nothing 
can  control  the  heart,  and  curb  the  thoughts,  and  purify  the  motives  by  which  we 
are  influenced  except  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  alone  can  subjugate  the  whole  man. 
(^.  Watson,  M.A.) 


PSALM  XXL 


Yebs.  1-18.  The  Mn?  Bihall  Joy  in  Thy  strength,  0  Lord ;  and  In  Tby  salTft- 
tioix  how  gfreatly  shall  he  rejoice. — The  feelings  of  the  good  in  relation  to  the 
svil^ugation  of  evil : — Take  the  literal  view  of  this  Psalm  as  a  type  of  the  moral  one 
against  error  and  sin,  and  we  have — I.  Thanksgiving  for  victory.  Verses  1-7  are 
a  triumphant  declaration  of  some  victory.  "Thou  settest  a  crown  of  pure  gold 
upon  his  head."  Now — 1.  His  conquest  was  a  source  of  joy.  "The  king  shall 
joy,"  &c.  2.  His  conquest  was  of  Divine  mercy.  "Thou  hast  given  him,"  &c. 
That  mercy  went  before  him.  "Thou  preventest  him,"  &c.,  and  transcended  his 
progress.  "  He  asked  life  of  Thee,  and  Thou  ga vest  it  him,  even  length  of  days  for 
ever  and  ever."  3.  His  conquest  exalted  him  to  honour.  "His  glory  is  great," 
&c.  And — 4.  Was  connected  with  his  trust  in  God.  "  For  the  king  trusteth,"  &c. 
II.  Expectation  of  yet  further  victory.  "Thine  hand  shall  find  out  all 
Thine  enemies,"  &c.  In  moral  struggles,  past  victories  promise  future  ones. 
Because — 1.  The  opposition  is  weakened.  2.  The  weapons  cannot  be  injured.  The 
sword  of  the  Spirit  cannot  rest  nor  decay.  3.  The  resources  are  inexhaustible — 
God's  wisdom,  love,  and  power.  4.  The  enemies  already  overcome  are  as  great  as 
any  remaining ;  and  5.  Each  new  conquest  weakens  the  foe,  but  increases  the 
strength  of  the  conqueror.  III.  Desire  for  victory  over  all  enemies.  And 
this  shall  be.  "Be  Thou  exalted.  Lord,  in,"  &c.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Lord 
Protector  of  princes : — Here  is  God  assisting,  and  the  king  trusting  ;  God  saving, 


rsAlM  XXI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  403 

and  the  king  rejoicing  ;  the  king  desiring,  and  God  satisfying  his  desires  to  the  full. 
In  this  verse  are  three  remarkable  conjugations.  God  is  joined  with  the  king. 
Strength  with  confidence.  Salvation  with  exceeding  great  joy.  Thus  they  depend 
on  each  other.  The  king  on  God.  Confidence  on  strength.  Joy  of  salvation. 
God  exalteth  the  king.  Strength  begetteth  confidence.  Salvation  bringeth  with  it 
exceeding  joy.  God  is  above  the  king.  Salvation  is  above  strength.  Exceeding 
joy  above  confidence.  1.  The  only  security  of  princes  and  states  is  in  the  strength 
of  the  Almighty.  2.  God  holdeth  a  special  hand  over  sovereign  princes.  3.  Princes 
mightily  defended  and  safely  preserved  by  the  arm  of  God  must  thankfully 
acknowledge  this  singular  favour,  and  deliver  their  deliverances  to  after  ages,  that 
the  children  yet  unborn  may  praise  the  Lord  as  we  do  this  day.  (Z).  Featley,  D.  D. ) 
jRejoicing  in  the  strength  of  God  : — "  Oh,  it  is  good  rejoicing  in  the  strength  of  that 
arm  which  shall  never  wither,  and  in  the  shadow  of  those  wings  which  shall  never 
cast  their  feathers  !  In  Him  that  is  not  there  yesterday  and  here  to-day,  but  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever !  For  as  He  is,  so  shall  the  joy  be." 
{Launcelot  Andrews.)  In  Thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  he  rejoice.— T/te  joy 
of  the  heavenly  King: — I.  This  joy  arose  from  a  consciousness  of  newly- 
achieved  VICTORY.  1.  This  victory  was  achieved  by  supernatural  power.  Not  by 
the  ordinary  tactics  of  military  genius,  or  by  the  prowess  of  a  human  arm.  The 
salvation  of  humanity  is  a  Divine  work.  2.  This  victory  was  granted  in  answer  to 
earnest  prayer  (ver.  2).  The  agony  of  wrestling  prayer  is  often  turned  into  the 
rapture  of  success.  II.  This  joy  was  accelerated  by  possessing  an  affluence 
OF  Divine  blessing,  1.  He  was  surrounded  with  evidences  of  the  Divine 
beneficence.  God's  gifts  are  God's  love  embodied  and  expressed.  2.  He  was 
invested  with  the  most  illustrious  dignity  (vers.  3,  5).  Jesus  wore  a  thorn-crown, 
but  now  He  wears  the  glory-crown.  3.  He  enjoyed  the  consciousness  of  an 
imperishable  life  (ver.  4).  He  was  raised  from  the  dead  to  die  no  more.  4.  He 
became  the  source  of  endless  blessing  to  others  (ver.  6).  In  and  through  Him  all 
nations  of  the  earth  are  blessed.  5.  He  exults  in  the  Divine  favour  (ver.  6).  The 
countenance  of   God  makes  the  Prince   of   heaven  glad.      III.    This  joy  was 

INTENSIFIED    BY    THE    ASSURANCE    OF    THE    UNSHAKEABLE    PERMANENCY   OF    HiS 

GOVERNMENT.  1.  The  permanency  of  Messiah's  throne  is  secured  by  the  Divine 
mercy  (ver.  7).  He  who  is  most  high  in  every  sense  engages  all  His  infinite 
perfections  to  maintain  the  throne  of  grace  upon  which  our  King  in  Zion  reigns. 
2.  The  assurance  of  this  permanency  is  strengthened  by  Messiah's  confidence  in  God 
(ver.  7).  The  joy  and  confidence  of  Christ  our  King  is  the  ground  of  all  our  joy  and 
confidence,  and  the  pledge  of  final  conquest  over  all  our  foes.  {Homiletic  Com- 
mentary.) A  completed  salvation,  Messiah's  triumph  : — I.  Look  at  our  King  as 
HAVING  ACCOMPLISHED  SALVATION.  But  few  Christians  believe  in  a  salvation 
finished,  perfected.  The  salvation  in  Christ  Jesus  is  complete  ;  there  is  not  an  iota 
more  to  pay,  not  a  single  act  of  meritorious  obedience  left  to  perform,  and  not  an 
enemy  to  combat  but  He  has  engaged  to  vanquish.  Look  at  the  manner  in  which 
He  accomplishes  this  salvation.  1.  By  His  suretyship  and  substitution.  2.  By 
His  atonement.  3.  The  entire  labour  is  exclusively  His  own.  II.  Our  glorious 
King  invested  with  kingly  power  to  dispense  salvation.  1.  By  His 
victories.  2.  By  application.  III.  The  King  rejoicing  in  God's  salvation, 
seeing  the  trophies  of  it  brought  in  and  brought  home.  My  soul  seems 
in  an  ecstasy  of  thought  in  the  contemplation  of  this.  Precious  Christ !  It  is  all 
Thine  own — all  Thy  work  from  first  to  last.     {Joseph  Irons. ) 

Ver.  2.  Thou  hast  given  him  his  heart's  desire. — The  desire  granted: — In  thia 
Psalm  the  joy-bells  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  are  rung,  and  "  Te  Deum  laudamus  '" 
sang,  as  after  a  great  victory.  It  follows  close  on  Psa.  xx.,  celebrating  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  petitions  there  offered.  1,  We  are  reminded  of  the  connection  between 
desire  and  prayer.  Desire  is  the  mainspring  of  life.  Could  the  infinite  multitude 
of  desires  be  annihilated,  hope  and  effort  would  die,  and  the  busy  drama  of  life  come 
to  a  standstill.  Desire  is  therefore  the  test  of  character.  Not  what  a  man  does  or 
says,  but  what  he  desires,  marks  him  for  what  he  is,  and  makes  him  what  he  is. 
Desire,  therefore,  is  the  soul  of  prayer.  We  see  here,  perhaps,  the  deepest  reason 
why  God  has  ordained  prayer,  namely,  that  what  is  deepest,  most  dominant  in  man's 
nature,  should  be  consecrated  to  God,  and  supremely  refer  to  Him.  2.  The  whole 
invisible  world  of  human  desires  (never  the  same  two  moments)  lies  open  to  God's 
eye.  God  can,  if  He  sees  fit,  give  us  our  "heart's  desire."  No  lawful  desire  but 
He  has  created  the  means  of  its  satisfaction  ;  and  if  He  disappoints  it,  this  is  but 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxi. 

for  the  sake  of  some  nobler  end,  some  richer  blessing.  Unlawful  desires  are  for- 
bidden, not  because  He  grudges  our  joy,  but  because  their  fulfilment  would  be  our 
injury  and  ruin.  3.  We  have  a  practical  test  suggested  both  of  our  desires  and  of 
our  prayers.  (1)  Of  our  desires.  Are  they  such  as  we  can  put  into  prayer  ?  Are 
they  pure — such  as  God  can  approve  ;  reasonable — such  as  we  need  not  be  ashamed 
to  put  into  prayer ;  unselfish — such  as  consist  with  the  great  law  of  love  ;  unpre- 
sumptuous — within  the  scope  of  God's  promises?  (2)  Of  our  prayers.  Do  they 
indeed  express  the  desires  of  our  heart  ?  Prayer  without  desire  is  a  dead  form ; 
a  featherless,  pointless  arrow  that  will  reach  no  mark.     {E.  R.  Conder,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  For  Thou  preventest  him  with  the  hlesaings  of  goodness. — God  going 
before  us: — The  word  "prevent"  is  now  generally  used  to  represent  the  idea  of 
hindrance.  ' '  Thou  preventest  him "  would  mean  commonly,  ' '  Thou  hinderest 
him."  But  here  the  word  "  prevent  "  means,  to  go  before.  Thou  goest  before  him 
with  the  blessings  of  Thy  goodness  as  a  pioneer,  to  make  crooked  ways  straight  and 
rough  places  smooth;  or,  as  one  who  strews  flowers  in  the  path  of  another,  to 
render  the  way  beautiful  to  the  eye  and  pleasant  to  the  tread.  God's  anticipation 
of  our  necessities  by  His  merciful  dispensations.  The  leading  idea  of  the  text  h 
expressed  elsewhere.  In  Isaiah  lii.  12,  "The  Lord  will  go  before  you,  and  the 
God  of  Israel  shall  be  your  rereward."  Here  is  not  only  the  idea  of  God  following 
a  man  to  shelter  him  and  to  protect  him  ;  but  of  God  going  before  a  man  to  make 
what  preparation  is  necessary  for  his  safety  and  comfort.  God  prevents  us  with 
the  blessings  of  His  goodness — I.  When  we  come  into  the  woeld.  II.  When 
WE  become  personal  transgkessoes.  III.  When  we  enter  trpoN  the  duties 
AND  CARES  OF  MATURE  LIFE.  The  word  "providence"  seems  to  represent  some- 
thing more  passive  than  that  which  it  is  essential  God  should  be  to  us  and  do  for 
us.  For  example,  you  might  make  a  provision  for  another,  put  that  provision 
within  his  reach,  and  then  leave  both  him  and  the  provision  you  have  made — and 
that  would  be  providence.  But  that  is  not  God's  providence.  He  leaves  nothing. 
He  is  with  everything — with  things  great  and  with  things  small.  God  has  not,  you 
know,  constructed  this  world  as  a  clock-maker  constructs  a  clock — adapting  the 
machinery  to  work  rightly  without  his  oversight  or  his  interference,  but  only  need- 
ing a  little  attention  on  the  part  of  the  individual  who  owns  it.  God  has  not  put 
this  world  in  such  a  position  as  that.  Every  thing  that  acts,  moves,  and  works — 
acts,  moves,  and  works  under  the  direct  impulse  of  God.  I  know  that  men  try  to 
drive  God  away  from  His  world,  by  talking  of  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  the  powers 
and  resources  of  nature.  But  as  I  understand  the  laws  of  nature,  they  are  God's 
usual  mode  of  working.  He  does  a  particular  work  in  the  same  way,  month  after 
month,  and  year  after  year — that  is  a  law.  But  then,  the  law  is  nothing  in  itself — 
the  law  is  no  power  or  force  ;  it  is  only  God's  mode  of  doing  the  thing.  You  might 
as  well  talk  of  the  law  of  carpentering,  or  the  law  of  cabinet-making,  in  terms 
which  would  show  you  do  not  consider  the  presence  of  the  carpenter  or  the  cabinet- 
maker necessary  to  his  work.  There  are  rules  of  carpentering  and  rules  of  cabinet- 
making;  but  you  require  the  carpenter  and  the  cabinet-maker.  Just  so  with 
reference  to  God.  He  works  in  the  same  mode,  mouth  after  month,  and  year  after 
year ;  but  pray  do  not  put  the  mode,  the  method,  in  the  place  of  Himself,  and 
speak  of  the  mode  of  working  as  though  it  were  the  worker.  And  so  God  goes 
before  us.  He  has  been  busy  about  that  business  of  ours  which  we  have  just  taken 
up  as  our  occupation  through  life.  He  has  thought  of,  cared,  and  provided  for  us. 
IV.  When  we  enter  upon  new  paths.  V.  When  we  enter  the  dark  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death.  VI.  By  giving  us  many  mercies  without  ouk 
ASKING  FOR  THEM.  What  WTetched  beings  we  should  be  if  God  Limited  His  gifts 
to  our  prayers  !  I  know  that  sometimes  we  do  ask  great  things,  when  our  hearts 
are  enlarged  and  when  our  lips  are  open ;  but  I  know  that,  at  other  times,  we  ask 
God  nothing,  and  that  our  prayers  are  as  poor  as  ourselves ;  and  if  God  restrained 
His  giving  when  we  restrained  our  praying,  in  what  utter  destitution  we  should  be  1 

YII.  By  OPENING  to  us  the  path  OF  HEAVEN,  AND  BY  STORING  HEAVEN  WITH 

EVERY  PROVISION  FOR  OUR  BLESSEDNESS.  Then  let  US  praise  God  for  His  goodness, 
and  let  us  imitate  Him  by  seeking  to  prevent  others  in  like  manner.  {Samuel 
Martin. )  The  goodness  of  the  Creator  preceding  the  history  of  the  creature: — I.  IK 
THE  NATURAL  PROVISION  MADE  FOR  US  AS  MEN.  Let  US  look  &  little  at  this,  and 
see  how  goodness  went  before  us,  worked  for  us  ages  before  we  made  our  appearanoe 
on  the  stage  of  life.  1.  There  was  a  home  exactly  fitted  for  our  reception.  How 
ezq,uisitely  fitted  this  earth  ia  to  our  senses  and  our  wants  1   Do  we  crave  for  beauty  t 


fsALM  XXI.]  THE  PSALMS.  405 

What  a  gallery  of  magnificent  pictures  !  Have  we  an  instinct  for  music?  What  an 
orchestra,  redolent  with  every  variety  of  melodious  strains  !  Do  we  need  sustenance  ? 
What  a  rich  banquet  nature  spreads  before  us !  Do  we  crave  for  delicious  odours  ? 
The  air  is  laden  with  perfumes.  Do  we  need  facilities  of  transit?  There  is  the 
prancing  steed  ;  by  our  side  there  grows  the  timber  that  will  bear  us  over  oceans, 
and  there  are  the  elements  ready  to  our  call.  Goodness  made  everything  ready  here 
before  we  came.  2.  There  was  parental  love  to  welcome  us.  We  were  not  sent  into 
a  world  of  strangers  to  make  acquaintance  with  those  who  for  us  had  no  sympathy. 
3.  There  were  educational  elements  to  develop  our  powers.  Here  was  the  piece  of 
work  waiting  for  us  to  do  it.  Here  were  men  and  women  whose  knowledge  qualified 
them  to  instruct  us:  schools  were  here,  and  libraries.  4.  There  were  wholesome 
laws  to  guard  our  rights.  Goodness  went  before  us  and  made  this  government. 
II.  In  the  spiritual  provision  made  for  us  as  sinners.  Pardon  and  spiritual 
cleansing  were  here  awaiting  us.  Redemptive  agencies  were  at  full  work  all  about 
us  as  we  commenced  our  life.  III.  In  the  heavenly  provision  made  for  us  as 
DISCIPLES.  What  this  world  was  to  us  before  we  entered  it,  heaven  is  to  us  now. 
1.  This  world  was  unknown  to  us.  How  ignorant  is  the  unborn  child  of  the  home 
into  which  he  is  to  be  introduced  !  How  little  we  know  of  heaven  !  "Eye  hath 
not  seen,"  &c.     2.  This  world  was  exquisitely  fitted  for  us.     Its  soU,  climate, 

E reductions.     3.  This  world  has  infinitely  more  than  we  can  enjoy.     It  is  so  with 
eaven, — its  provisions  are  rich,  varied,  and  unbounded.     4.  This  world  welcomed 
our  existence  with  love,     (ffomilist.) 

Yer.  4.  He  asked  life  of  Thee,  and  Ihou  gavest  him  a  long  life,  even  for  ever 
and  ever. — Religion  a  life : — In  Christ  these  words  are  true  of  all  who  love  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  as  they  are  supremely  true  of  Him  who  is  the  fountain  of  life.  "He 
asked  life  of  Thee. "  Is  this  true  of  us  ?  That  depends  upon  what  meaning  we  attach 
to  the  petition,  "asking  Life."  What  we  should  ask  for  is  life  given  to  God  here,  in 
the  hope  of  life  to  be  received  from  God  hereafter.  We  may  put  out  of  all  hope  of 
this  life  eternal  all  who  openly  reject  it.  It  is  the  heart  given  to  God  which  God 
requires.  Religion  may  only  too  easily  be  in  any  man  like  the  clothes  which  he  so 
regularly  takes  off  at  night  and  puts  on  in  the  morning.  It  must  be  the  life,  the 
heart,  the  will,  the  whole  inner  man  given  to  God  here,  through  faith  and  hope  of 
that  eternal  life  which  He  will  bestow  upon  His  true  people  in  the  world  beyond 
the  grave.  Our  life  in  this  world  must  be,  as  far  as  we  can  make  it,  a  resemblance 
of  His  pure  and  blessed  life  while  He  was  on  earth,  the  perfect  example  of  what 
every  man  ought  to  be  who  is  made  in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God.  What  He 
was  perfectly  and  altogether,  that  we  must  be  in  part.  Then  shall  we  have  life  from 
His  life.  Do  not  suppose  that  any  Christian  can  obtain  that  life  without  com- 
munion with  Christ.  It  is  as  we  live  in  and  for  Christ  in  this  world  that  we 
shall  find  life — life  from  Him  here,  life  with  Him  hereafter.  (  W.  J.  Stracey,  M.A.) 
Life,  and  life  eternal: — There  is  an  evident  distinction  drawn  here  between  what  we 
may  term  natural  life  and  eternal  life ;  between  that  life  which  we  are  now  living 
outwardly  in  the  flesh,  and  that  life  which  is  of  inward  consciousness,  of  spiritual 
experience.  No  one  would  contend  that  by  "life  eternal"  is  meant  the  indefinite 
extension  and  prolonging  of  this  present  mode  of  existence.  The  very  term  or  con- 
dition "eternal"  precludes  the  idea  of  transitoriness  and  uncertainty.  In  what 
does  the  distinction  between  life  and  life  eternal  consist  ?  The  origin  of  life  is,  in  a 
philosophic  point  of  view,  involved  in  inscrutable  mystery.  Life  is  that  invisible, 
inscrutable,  mysterious,  subtle  essence  which  not  only  animates  solid  matter,  but 
from  the  moment  of  our  birth  to  the  day  of  our  death  is  definitely  apportioned  us 
by  God.  We  have  each  one  of  us  a  life-rent  of  this  world,  and  no  more.  And  this 
life  is  very  dear  to  us.  It  is  very  precious,  because  of  its  fond  aflfections,  close  friend- 
ships, many  interests,  enjoyments,  opportunities,  and,  to  some  minds,  certainties. 
Say  what  men  will  of  life  in  their  more  sad  and  desponding  moods,  we  do  cling 
tenaciously  to  life.  The  passion  for  life  is  the  strongest  of  all  our  instincts.  To 
ask  to  die  is  unnatural.  Physical  death  is  not  the  punishment  of  sin.  The  death 
to  which  Adam  was  sentenced  was  banishment  from  the  presence  of  God.  Viewing 
life  as  it  really  is,  immortality  here  on  earth,  and  an  immortality  of  this  life 
present,  would  be  a  curse  and  not  a  boon.  What,  then,  is  "  life  eternal,"  and  how  is 
it  to  be  obtained  ?  It  is  that  hidden,  inward,  spiritual  reality  which,  as  in  the  case 
of  natural  life,  finds  its  best  definition  in  the  language  of  Scripture — "This  is  life 
eternal,  that  they  may  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou 
hast  sent."    Eternal  life  is  to  believe  in  Jesus,  and  that  eternal  life  is  given  us 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xu. 

as  soon  as  we  do  believe.  Eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God  in  Christ,  given  for  the 
asking,  as  much,  as  truly,  as  consciously,  as  natural  life  is  given  or  restored.  It 
comes  by  faith,  and  that  faith  is  a  spiritual  gift.  I  do  not  know  that  language  can 
describe  what  eternal  life  is,  any  more  than  it  can  define  natural  life.  In  either 
case  it  is  a  matter  of  vivid  consciousness,  not  of  verbal  definition  or  analysis.  But 
eternal  life  is  of  present  experience.  "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  There  is 
a  present  pardon  of  sin,  a  present  sense  of  forgiveness,  a  present  joy  and  peace  in 
believing.  Possessed  of  this  eternal  life,  enjoyed  as  it  may  be  together  with  your 
natural  life,  it  will  sweeten  its  bitter  waters  with  its  own  healing.  It  will  ennoble, 
it  will  sanctify.  It  will  make  a  life  consecrated  to  God.  {Francis  Pigou,  M.A.) 
The  Gospel  promise  of  long  life : — Though  it  be  true  that  every  man  is  fond  of  life, 
yet  it  is  certain  that  very  few  appear  much  concerned  about  life  eternal.  The 
covetous  man  will  not  give,  though  it  be  but  a  small  portion  of  what  he  has,  to 
make  his  chance  better  of  coming  to  everlasting  life.  Persons  thus  fond  of  life  would 
have  their  expectations  raised  very  high  by  the  beginning  of  the  promise  in  the 
text.  ' '  Thou  gavest  him  a  long  life. "  But  when  these  persons  discovered  that  the 
promised  life  was  eternal  they  would  feel  disappointed.  This  sort  of  message 
would,  indeed,  be  disappointing  to  most  people ;  and  yet  this  would  be  only  grant- 
ing them  what  they  asked,  life,  in  much  greater  perfection  and  excellency  than  they 
asked  for  it.  Men  have  got  such  a  liking  for  the  pleasures  and  profits  of  this  bad 
world  that,  without  them,  the  thought  even  of  eternal  happiness  seems  dull  and 
tiresome.  How  many  are  there  among  ourselves  who,  if  they  should  speak  the 
truth,  must  needs  confess  that  they  care  more  for  the  shadows  of  enjoyment  on 
earth  than  for  the  substance  of  it  in  heaven !  No  man  in  good  earnest  cares  for 
heaven — has  any  taste  or  desire  for  it — except  so  far  as  he  has  a  taste  for  devotion, 
and  can  delight  in  the  thought  that  he  is  with  God,  and  God  with  him.  Now,  this 
is  what  no  one  can  do  whose  heart  is  set  upon  either  such  pleasure  or  such  profit 
as  are  to  be  had  on  this  side  the  grave.  {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  ' '  Tracts 
for  the  Times.")  Future  life: — When  Carlyle  and  Tennyson  were  once  together 
"  the  talk  turned  upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  Carlyle  said,  '  Eh,  old  Jewish 
rags  ;  you  must  clear  your  mind  of  all  that,'  and  likened  man's  sojourn  on  earth 
to  a  traveller's  rest  at  an  inn ;  whereupon  Tennyson  rejoined  that  the  traveller 
knew  whither  he  was  bound  and  where  he  would  sleep  on  the  night  following." 
The  future  life  was  a  most  interesting  and  most  firmly  held  article  of  faith  with 
Tennyson.    {Christian  Commonwealth.) 

Ver.  6.  His  glory  is  great  in  Thy  salvation. — The  glory  of  Ood: — In  this  Psalm 
the  poet  is  giving  thanks  for  victory.  The  soldiers  are  returning  from  war,  and  are 
met  by  a  chorus  of  maidens  shouting  praise  to  the  delivering  God.  The  poetry  is 
not  equal  to  the  moral  enthusiasm  of  the  occasion.  We  are  called  upon  to  contem- 
plate God's  glory  as  being  great  in  human  salvation.  We  thus  enjoy  the  basis  and 
the  application  of  the  thought.  It  would  seem  to  be  beneath  Almighty  God  to  care 
for  a  world  so  small  and  foolish  as  oui's.  It  is  not  for  us  to  estimate  even  our  own 
worth.  It  does  not  become  us  to  say  that  the  world  is  insignificant,  mean,  or 
worthless ;  it  is  the  work  of  God.  What  God  has  thought  it  worth  His  while  to 
make.  He  may  well  think  it  worth  His  while  to  redeem.  We  do  not  see  the  whole 
world,  nor  do  we  comprehend  all  the  issues  of  its  discipline  and  nurture.  When 
Jesus  sees  the  travail  of  His  soul  He  shall  be  satisfied.  To  save  one  soul  is  glory 
enough  for  any  mortal  man.  What  must  it  be  to  save  the  souls  of  all  men,  the 
souls  of  the  ages  and  centuries  incomputable  ?  It  is  the  delight  of  God  to  save,  to 
redeem,  to  construct ;  the  function  of  the  enemy  is  to  overthrow,  to  weaken,  to 
debase,  and  to  bring  all  life  into  dishonour.  The  course  which  the  enemy  has 
taken  is  the  easier,  since  it  is  always  easier  to  destroy  than  to  construct.  We 
glorify  God  by  our  goodness.  God  does  not  exist  to  be  glorified  in  any  sense  of 
being  merely  hailed  and  saluted  by  songs  and  rapturous  applause.  When  we  are 
most  quiet  we  are  most  really  glorifying  God.  By  meekness,  by  pureness,  by 
gentleness,  by  quiet  spiritual  wisdom,  by  accepting  the  lot  of  life  in  a  spirit  of  self- 
sacrifice,  we  may  be  bringing  true  glory  to  God.  Do  not  think  of  the  glory  of  God 
in  any  merely  magnificent  sense.  We  must  change  our  definition  of  magnificence. 
In  the  sight  of  heaven  it  may  be  magnificent  to  be  poor  in  spirit,  gentle,  and  meek ; 
and  it  may  be  mean  and  contemptible  to  own  estates  and  crowns  and  sceptres.  It  is 
upon  moral  emotion,  aspiration,  and  service  that  God  sets  His  seal  of  blessing. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 


PSALM  XXI.]  TEE  PSALMS.  407 

Yer.  6.  For  Thou  hast  made  him  most  blessed  for  ever :  Thou  hast  made  Ti^n^ 
exceeding  glad  with  Thy  coimtenance. — Exceeding  gladness : — You  have  heard  a 
great  many  sermons  upon  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  you  cannot  have  heard  too  many  ; 
but  probably  you  have  never  listened  to  a  discourse  upon  the  Man  of  Joys  !  I 
venture  thus  to  name  the  Christ  of  God.  We  do  not  meditate  enough  upon  the 
happiness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Remember,  it  was  for  the  joy  set  before  Him 
that  He  endured  the  Cross  ;  and  the  expectation  of  joy  is  joy.  The  light  of  that 
expectation  shone  on  His  daily  path.  Sin  is  the  mother  of  sorrow,  and  Jesus  knew 
no  sin.  He  was  the  Prince  of  Peace,  even  when  He  was  despised  of  men.  He  had 
the  joy  of  knowing  that  His  Father  heard  Him  always,  and  that  His  every  word 
and  act  'Were  blessings  to  fallen  men.  A  man  cannot  be  full  of  such  benevolence  as 
that  of  Christ  and  be  utterly  miserable.  Unselfishness  necessarily  brings  with  it  a 
measure  of  joy.  The  fountain  which  yields  such  streams  of  blessing  has  its  own 
flash  and  sparkle  ;  we  feel  sure  of  it.  As  pearls  may  lie  in  plenty  in  caverns  over 
which  there  rolls  a  dread  tempestuous  sea,  so  there  slept  in  the  heart  of  Jesus 
treasures  of  joy  even  when  the  ocean  of  His  holy  soul  was  lashed  with  hurricanes 
of  woe.  And  what  must  not  His  joy  be  now  in  heaven  !  To  this  the  text  and  the 
verses  preceding  primarily  refer.  As  God,  as  Mediator,  He  is  filled  with  joy  ; 
for  His  work  is  finished.  "Consummatum  est  "is  written  at  the  foot  of  His 
throne.  And  He  is  the  fountain  of  priceless,  numberless,  endless  blessings  to 
men.  "  Thou  hast  made  Him  blessings  for  ever,"  for  so  our  text  may  be  read.  It 
is  ever  good  to  be  the  channel  of  blessing  to  others  ;  what,  then,  must  be  the  joy  of 
Christ  ?  Think,  too,  of  His  joy  in  the  conversion,  the  comfort,  the  justification,  the 
salvation  of  every  soul  that  comes  to  Him.  We  read,  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence 
of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  Nearly  all  readers  take  this 
as  telling  of  the  angels'  joy.  And  no  doubt  they  do  rejoice.  But  the  Word  does 
not  say  so.  It  says,  "There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  "  ;  that  is  to  say, 
they  are  present  where  there  is  joy,  they  look  upon  the  face  of  Christ,  and  see  the 
joy  which  fills  His  heart.  And  He  has  joy  in  all  the  deeds  of  His  saved  people,  and 
in  their  patient  suS"ering,  and  especially  in  their  joy.  He  is  the  blessed  Leader  of  a 
blessed  company.  And  now,  turning  to  His  people — I.  That  gladness  is  the 
PECXJLiAB,  PRIVILEGE  OF  SAINTS.  Why  should  we  not  be  glad  ?  1.  It  is  all  right 
between  us  and  God.  There  is  no  quarrel  between  the  believing  soul  and  God. 
And — 2.  Many  are  their  present  solaces.  We  can  count  our  sorrows,  we  are  quite 
"  au  fait "  at  adding  them  up.  But  recapitulate  your  joys  with  equal  readiness. 
Why  not  ?  Review  the  shining  ranks  of  your  mercies.  Are  they  not  new  every 
morning  ?  I  heard  a  brother  in  a  prayer  meeting  say,  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  us,  whereof  we  desire  to  be  glad  "  ;  and  I  wanted  to  jump  down  that 
man's  throat,  and  pull  that  passage  back  again,  and  put  it  into  its  natural  shape. 
What  business  had  the  brother  to  mend  the  Bible  and  talk  such  wretched  stuff  ? 
"Whereof  we  desire  to  be  glad  "  !  Why,  if  the  Lord  has  done  great  things  for  us, 
we  are  glad.  3.  We  have  a  brilliant  future  before  us.  And — 4.  All  blessings 
secured  to  them.  In  the  parable  it  is  said,  "they  began  to  be  merry,"  and  it  is  not 
said  they  ever  left  off.  Let  us  also  begin.  II.  Theik  gladness  is  of  a  peculiar 
SORT.  1.  God  has  wrought  it.  2.  It  is  permanent.  3.  Exceeding.  Who  would 
think  it  to  see  many  Christians  ?  I  am  told  that  many  shopkeepers  are  so  poor 
that  they  put  the  most  of  their  goods  in  the  shop  window  ;  but  this  is  a  method 
which  few  Christians  follow,  for  the  opposite  is  the  fact ;  their  window  is  badly  set 
out,  and  yet  they  have  a  costly  stock  upon  their  shelves.  The  children  of  this 
world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  in  this  as  in  other  things.  I  would  recommend 
such  believers  to  dress  their  windows  a  little,  and  show  some  of  their  better  things. 
Put  your  ashes  into  the  backyard,  but  pour  out  the  oil  of  joy  in  the  parlour.  Let 
people  see  it.  4.  It  comes  to  us  in  one  way — "with  Thy  countenance."  Have 
you  not  sometimes  been  made  very  glad  with  the  look  of  a  friend's  face?  But 
what  must  the  countenance  of  God  be  to  us,  when  He  smiles  on  us  as  reconciled,  as 
approving  us,  when  listening  to  us  ?  5.  But  through  many  channels.  Read  the 
Psalm — "The King  shall  joy  in  Thy  strength,"  and  ' '  in  Thy  salvation."  Answers 
to  prayer  are  told  of.  Preventing  with  the  blessings  of  goodness,  giving  us  mercies 
before  we  seek  them.  Then,  be  glad  in  the  Lord,  as  we  are  bound  to  be. 
"  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ, 
Who  hath  blessed  us  with  such  blessings,  all  uncounted  and  unpriced ; 
Let  our  high  and  holy  calling,  and  our  strong  salvation  be 
Theme  of  never-ending  praises,  God  of  sovereign  grace,  to  Thee." 

(C  H.  Spurgeon.) 


408  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxi. 

The  light  of  God's  favour : — Flowers,  when  deprived  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  lose 
their  bright  colours,  and  become  pale  and  sickly.  This  is  generally  seen  in  the 
night-blossoming  plants,  which  are,  for  the  most  part,  pale  and  unattractive.  The 
soul  that  has  not  found  God  will  lose  all  joy,  and  the  beauty  of  life  will  fade  without 
the  presence  and  love  of  Christ.  If  it  is  to  flourish,  it  must  be  ever  basking  in 
the  healing  rays  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 

Vers.  8,  9.  Thine  hand  shall  find  out  all  Thine  enemies. — The  exposure  and 
punishment  of  sin:— 1.  The  exposure  of  sin  is  inevitable.  Iniquity  delights 
in  cunning,  and  is  itself  a  masterpiece  of  cunning.  It  may  succeed  in  deluding  its 
victims,  and  for  a  time  escape  detection.  But  there  is  One  to  whom  every  detail  of 
the  plot  is  fully  known.  Sin  is  often  its  own  detective.  An  imguarded  word,  a 
suspicious  sign,  an  unconscious  oversight,  will  unmask  the  most  skilfully  disguised 
plans,  and  lead  to  exposure  and  misery.  It  is  the  theme  of  many  a  ballad,  how 
the  cranes  aided  in  the  discovery  of  the  assassins  of  Idycus,  the  poet.  Recently 
the  house  of  the  Caliph  of  the  Ben  Oreazen  in  Algeria  was  entered  by  a  band  of 
robbers,  and  a  box  containing  25, 000  francs  stolen.  In  their  haste  to  escape  the 
thieves  left  behind  them  an  Arab  cake  bearing  a  particular  mark,  which  one  of  the 
bakers  of  the  town  recognised  as  the  sign  used  by  Ben  Xerafas,  it  being  the  custom 
for  each  family,  in  sending  their  bread  to  the  oven,  to  mark  it  so  as  to  distinguish 
the  loaves.  The  police  acted  on  the  information,  and,  descending  on  a  certain  hut, 
cauglit  the  robbers  asleep,  with  a  portion  of  the  plunder  still  in  their  possession. 
A  simple  Arab  cake  was  the  insignificant  agent  of  discovery  and  exposure.    II.  The 

EXPOSURE  OF  SIN  WILL  EXTEND  TO  THE  INMOST  FEELINGS  OF  THE  HEART.      "  Those 

that  hate  Thee."      That  sin  is  not  always  the  worst  which  is  most  apparent. 

III.  The  PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN   WILL   BE   TERRIBLE   AND   COMPLETE.      1.  It  will  be 

terrible.  The  sins  of  the  impenitent  wicked  wUl  supply  fuel  to  the  fire  of  their  own 
sufferings,  and  perhaps  be  used  as  an  instrument  for  punishing  others.  2.  It  will 
be  complete.  "  Swallow  them  up  in  His  wrath."  Nations  are  an  example — Ante- 
diluvians, Sodomites,  Jews.  Individuals  are  an  example — Korah,  Dathan,  Abiram, 
Saul,  and  Judas.  {Homiletic  Commentary.)  Enemies  found  out  hy  God : — Oh, 
what  a  wonderful  prophecy  that  is  !  Christ's  hand  shall  find  out  all  His  enemies. 
If  they  hide  themselves,  He  shall  discover  them.  If  they  cover  themselves  with 
chain  armour,  yet  still  His  hand  will  find  out  their  vulnerable  parts,  and  touch 
their  very  souls  until  they  melt  with  fear.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yet.  9.  Thou  Shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of  Thine  anger. — The 

deluge  of  fire : — How,  then,  shall  it  fare  with  sinners  when,  after  all,  shall  come  that 
general  fire  so  often  foretold,  which  shall  either  fall  from  heaven  or  ascend  out  of 
hell,  or  (according  to  Albertus  Magnus)  proceed  from  both,  and  shall  devour  and 
consume  all  it  meets  with  ?  Whither  shall  the  miserable  fly  when  that  river  of 
flames  or  (to  say  better)  that  inundation  and  deluge  of  fire  shall  so  encompass 
them,  as  no  place  of  surety  shall  be  left ;  where  nothing  can  avail  but  a  holy  life  ; 
when  all  besides  shall  perish  in  that  universal  ruin  of  the  whole  world  ?  What 
lamentations  were  in  Rome  when  it  burnt  for  seven  days  together  !  What  shrieks 
were  heard  in  Troy  when  it  was  wholly  consumed  with  flames  !  What  howling  and 
astonishment  in  Pentapolis  when  those  cities  were  destroyed  with  fire  from  heaven  ! 
What  weeping  was  there  in  Jerusalem  when  they  beheld  the  house  of  God,  the 
glory  of  their  kingdom,  the  wonder  of  the  world,  involved  in  fire  and  smoke  ! 
Imagine  what  these  people  felt ;  they  saw  their  houses  and  goods  on  fire,  and  no 
possibility  of  saving  them :  when  the  husband  heard  the  slirieks  and  cries  of  his 
dying  wife ;  the  father,  of  his  little  children,  and,  unawares,  perceived  himself  so 
encompassed  with  flames  that  he  could  neither  relieve  them  nor  free  himself. 
{Jeremy  Taylor.)  God's  anger  : — I  have  read  that  a  frown  of  Queen  Elizabeth 
killed  Sir  Christopher  Hatton,  the  Lord  Chancellor  of  England.  What,  then,  shall 
the  frowns  of  the  King  of  nations  do  ?  If  the  rocks  rend,  the  mountains  melt,  and 
the  foundations  of  the  earth  tremble  under  His  wrath,  how  will  the  ungodly  sinner 
appear  when  He  comes  in  all  His  royal  glory  to  take  vengeance  on  all  that  knew 
Him  not,  and  that  obeyed  not  His  glorious  Gospel  ?     {Charles  Bradbury.) 

"Ver.  11.  For  they  intended  evil  against  Thee,  .  .  .  which  they  are  not  able  to 
perform. — A  memorable  instance  of  intended  evil  that  the  wicked  were  not  aile  to 
perform : — At  Rome  the  news  of  this  great  blow  (given  by  the  massacre  on  St. 
Bartholomew's  Day)  was  hailed  with  extravagant  manifestations  of  joy  ;  the  Pope 


MAUI  xxn.]  TEE  PSALMS.  409 

(Gregory  XII.)  and  cardinals  went  in  state  to  return  thanks  to  heaven  for  this 
signal  mercy,  and  medals  were  struck  in  its  honour.  Philip  II.  extolled  it  as  one 
of  the  most  memorable  triumphs  of  Christianity,  compared  it  to  the  splendid 
victory  of  Lepanto,  and  boasted  that  the  total  ruin  of  Protestantism  was  now  finally 
assured.  Nevertheless,  this  great  wickedness,  like  all  state  crimes,  was  quite  in- 
effectual for  the  purpose  toward  which  it  was  directed.  The  Huguenots  had  lost 
their  ablest  leaders  :  they  were  stunned,  confounded,  scattered,  weakened,  but  they 
were  by  no  means  wholly  crushed.  As  soon  as  they  recovered  from  their  consterna- 
tion they  once  more  rushed  to  arms.  .  .  .  The  persecuted  party  once  more  raised 
their  heads,  and  within  a  year  from  the  date  of  the  great  massacre  were  in  a 
position  to  address  the  king  in  bolder  and  more  importunate  language  than  at  any 
former  period  of  the  contest.  .  .  .  The  full  and  public  exercise  of  the  reformed 
religion  was  authorised  throughout  the  kingdom  ;  the  parliaments  were  to  consist 
of  an  equal  number  of  Protestant  and  Catholic  judges  ;  all  sentences  passed  against 
the  Huguenots  were  annulled,  and  the  insurgents  were  pronounced  to  have  acted 
for  the  good  of  the  king  and  kingdom  ;  eight  towns  were  placed  in  their  hands  for 
an  unlimited  period  ;  and  the  States-General  were  to  be  convoked  within  six 
months.  Such  were  the  conditions  of  the  "  Peace  of  Monsieur,"  as  it  was  termed, 
which  was  signed  on  the  6th  of  May  1576 — less  than  four  years  after  that  frightful 
massacre  by  which  it  was  hoped  that  the  Huguenot  faction  would  be  finally  extir- 
pated from  France.     {^StuderUs'  France.) 


PSALM  XXII. 

Vees.  1-31.  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsOben  me  7 — The  prophedc 
image  of  the  Prince  of  sufferers : — Who  is  the  sufferer  whose  wail  is  the  very  voice 
of  desolation  and  despair,  and  who  yet  dares  to  believe  that  the  tale  of  his  sorrow 
will  be  a  gospel  for  the  world  ?  The  usual  answers  are  given.  The  title  ascribes  the 
authorship  to  David,  and  is  accepted  by  Delitzsch  and  others.  Hengstenberg  and 
his  followers  see  in  the  picture  the  ideal  righteous  man.  Others  think  of  Hezekiah 
or  Jeremiah,  with  whose  prophecies  and  history  there  are  many  points  of  connection. 
The  most  recent  critics  find  here  the  personalised  genius  of  Israel,  or  more  precisely, 
the  followers  of  Nehemiah,  including  the  large-hearted  Psalmist.  (Cheyne,  Orig. 
of  Psalt.,  264.)  On  any  theory  of  authorship  the  startling  correspondence  of  the 
details  of  the  Psalmist's  sufferings  with  those  of  the  Crucifixion  has  to  be  accounted 
for.  How  startling  that  correspondence  is,  both  in  the  number  and  minuteness  of 
its  points,  need  not  be  insisted  on.  The  recognition  of  these  points  in  the  Psalm  as 
prophecies  is  one  thing,  the  determination  of  their  relation  to  the  Psalmist's  own 
experience  is  quite  another.  It  is  taken  for  granted  in  many  quarters  that  every 
such  detail  in  prophecy  must  describe  the  writer's  own  circumstances,  and  the 
supposition  that  they  may  transcend  these  is  said  to  be  "  psychologically  imposs- 
ible." But  it  is  somewhat  hazardous  for  those  who  have  not  been  subjects  of 
prophetic  inspiration  to  lay  down  canons  of  what  is  possible  and  impossible  in  it,  and 
there  are  examples  enough  to  prove  that  the  relation  of  the  prophets'  speech  to  their 
consciousness  and  circimistances  was  singularly  complex,  and  not  to  be  unravelled 
by  any  such  oMter  dicta  as  to  psychological  possibilities.  They  were  recipients  of 
messages,  and  did  not  always  imderstand  what  the  "spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in 
them  did  signify."  Theories  which  neglect  that  aspect  of  the  case  do  not  front  all 
the  facts.  Certainty  as  to  the  authorship  of  this  Psalm  is  probably  imattainable. 
How  far  its  words  fitted  the  condition  of  the  singer  must  therefore  remain  unsettled. 
But  that  these  minute  and  numerous  correspondences  are  more  than  coincidences 
it  seems  perverse  to  deny.  The  present  writer,  for  one,  sees  shining  through  the 
shadowy  personality  of  the  Psalmist  the  figure  of  the  Prince  of  sufferers,  and  believes 
that  whether  the  former's  plaints  applied  in  all  their  particulars  to  him,  or  whether 
there  is  in  them  a  certain  "element  of  hyperbole"  which  becomes  simple  fact  in 
Jesus's  sufferings,  the  Psalm  is  a  prophecy  of  Him  and  them.  In  the  former  case 
the  Psalmist's  experience,  in  the  latter  case  his  utterances,  were  divinely  shaped  so 
as  to  prefigure  the  sacred  sorrows  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  To  a  reader  who  shares 
in  this  understanding  of  the  Psalm  it  must  be  holy  ground,  to  be  trodden  reverently 
and  with  thoughts  adoringly  fixed  on  Jesus.     Cold  analysis  is  out  of  place.    {A.  Mac- 


410  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

laren,  D.  D.)  Summary  of  contents : — ^The  exclamation  from  the  Cross — "  My  God, " 
Ac,  led  us  to  consider  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  Surety,  standing  at  His  Father's 
judgment-seat,  and,  conscious  of  innocence,  inquiring  what  new  charge  was  laid 
against  Him  to  cause  this  new  and  most  severe  atfliction,  the  hiding  of  His  Father's 
countenance.  "We  concluded  that  one  reason  why  our  Lord  so  earnestly  cried  to 
His  Father  was  that  He  might  ascribe  to  Him  the  glory  of  His  deliverance,  being 
unwilling  to  appropriate  it  to  Himself  by  any  exertion  of  His  own  power.  And  we 
found  that  the  whole  verse  comprised  three  inquiries,  to  which  we  conceived  these 
to  be  appropriate  answers — First,  Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  Because  Thou  art 
bearing  the  sins  of  the  world.  Second,  Why  art  Thou  so  far  from  helping  Me  ? 
That  the  victory  may  be  altogether  Thine  own.  And  third.  Why  art  Thou  so  far 
from  the  words  of  My  roaring  ?  That  Thou  mayest  learn  all  the  required  obedience 
by  the  things  which  Thou  art  suffering.  We  perceived  that  our  Lord,  in  continuing 
His  supplications,  complained  to  His  Father,  but  would  not  complain  against  Him  ; 
and  that  He  fully  acquitted  Him  of  unkindness  or  injustice,  by  subjoining  this  filial 
and  beautiful  acknowledgment,  "But  Thou  continuest  holy."  In  the  fulness  of 
His  sorrow  our  Lord  next  contrasted  His  own  experience  with  that  of  the  Father's, 
whose  prayers  were  heard,  and  whose  expectations  were  not  confounded.  He  denom- 
inated Himself  a  worm,  allied  by  His  human  nature  to  the  meanest  part  of  the 
creation — a  crimson-coloured  worm,  covered  with  the  imputed  guilt  of  men,  and 
He  regarded  Himself  as  "no  man";  neither  what  man  is  by  sin,  nor  what  man 
was  intended  to  be  by  his  Creator.  Our  Lord's  life  in  the  flesh,  we  saw,  might  be 
illustrated  by  the  heathen  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  ;  for  He  brought  the  recollec- 
tions of  the  world  of  glory  into  this  state  of  being  ;  and  therefore  human  life  must 
have  appeared,  to  His  eyes,  infinitely  more  mean,  wretched,  and  loathsome  than 
we  can  possibly  conceive.  We  were  next  led  to  contemplate  the  enumerated  mental 
sufferings  of  our  much-tried  Lord — the  reproaches  with  which  He  was  assailed,  the 
mockery  by  which  He  was  insulted,  and  the  taunts  which  wounded  His  spirit  to  the 
quick.  In  the  9th  and  10th  verses  we  considered  that  pathetic  and  touching 
appeal  which  our  dying  Redeemer  made  to  the  heart  of  His  Father,  arguing  from 
the  helplessness  of  His  infancy  to  the  helplessness  of  His  manhood  ;  and  casting  the 
latter  upon  that  paternal  care  which  had  provided  for  the  former.  We  perceived 
how  earnestly  our  Lord  followed  up  this  appeal  with  renewed  entreaty  for  His 
Father's  presence,  expressing  this  great  and  only  desire  of  His  heart  in  these  words, 
'*  Be  not  far  from  Me."  The  corporeal  sufferings  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  were  next 
brought  to  our  notice.  The  assault  and  encompassing  of  His  enemies  on  every  side 
was  the  first  particularised  ;  where  also  we  considered  the  assaults  of  Satanic  hosts 
upon  the  spirit  of  our  Lord.  Consequent  on  this  assault  succeeded  universal  faint- 
ness  over  His  frame,  complete  languor  and  an  extreme  exhaustion,  with  intense  and 
burning  thirst.  The  piercing  of  our  Lord's  sacred  body,  in  His  hands  and  feet,  was 
then  considered,  and  the  lingering  death  by  crucifixion  was  described.  Extended 
on  the  Cross,  the  emaciated  state  of  the  Saviour's  worn-out  frame  was  exposed  to 
view,  and  all  His  bones  might  be  told.  In  this  condition  He  was  subjected  to  the 
insulting  gaze  of  the  multitude.  The  soldiers  also  seized  every  article  of  His  cloth- 
ing ;  they  parted  His  garments  among  them,  and  cast  lots  upon  His  vesture.  Urged 
by  these  various  and  sore  afflictions,  and  desiring  with  intense  anxiety  to  enjoy  again 
before  He  died  the  light  and  peace  of  His  Father's  presence,  our  blessed  Saviour,  in 
i;he  next  three  verses,  prayed  with  the  most  vehement  importunity  for  a  speedy  and 
immediate  answer.  And  whilst  He  was  yet  praying  His  Father  granted  His  petition. 
Light  dawned  upon  His  soul.  Darkness  was  dispelled  from  the  face  of  nature,  and 
from  the  heart  of  the  Redeemer.  And,  as  though  issuing  from  a  kind  of  spiritual 
death,  and  enjoying  a  spiritual  resurrection,  our  Divine  Surety  exclaimed,  "Thou 
hast  heard  Me."  Importunity  prevailed  with  God.  The  whole  tone  of  feeling  and 
sentiment  in  the  Psakn  becomes  changed  from  this  verse.  Gratitude  and  thanks- 
giving occupy  all  the  remaining  portion.  The  Saviour,  as  it  were,  from  the  Cross, 
invited  the  members  of  His  Chui-ch  to  join  His  eucharistic  song.  .  .  .  He  prospect- 
ively beheld  the  conversion  of  the  world  and  the  establishment  of  His  own 
glorious  kingdom.  And  the  Psalm  represents  the  Saviour  as  solacing  His  dying 
spirit,  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  with  the  assurance  of  a  holy  and  numerous  seed, 
who  should  be  counted  to  Him  for  a  posterity.  He  heard,  as  it  were,  from  His 
Cross,  the  song  of  the  redeemed.  [John  Stevenson.)  The  great  Sufferer  and  His 
relief : — This  Psalm  sets  forth  the  last  extremity  of  human  suffering,  yet  without 
any  confession  of  sin,  and  closes  with  the  sure  hope  of  deliverance.  We  consider  it 
an  idealised  description  of  the  great  Sufferer.     I.  The  complaint  (vers.   1-10). 


P8AIU  xxn.]  THE  PSALMS.  411 

The  cry  witli  whicli  the  Psalm  opens  is  not  an  utterance  of  impatience  or  despair, 
but  of  grief  and  entreaty.  It  is  the  question  of  faith  as  well  as  of  anguish.  The 
second  line  suggests  the  great  chasm  between  His  outcry  and  the  help  He  implores. 
God  stands  afar  off,  i.e.  withholds  His  help.  In  the  olden  times  the  fathers  trusted, 
and  were  not  put  to  shame  ;  why  is  the  present  case  made  an  exception  ?  It  is  such, 
for  instead  of  being  helped  He  is  left  to  be  reproached  aud  despised  ;  all  the  spec- 
tators join  in  derision.  But  faith  turns  the  mockery  of  foes  into  an  argument  for 
deliverance.  II.  The  peayer  against  violence  (vers.  11-21).  Having  shown 
that  He  was  justified  in  expecting  Divine  aid,  He  now  shows  that  the  necessity 
for  it  exists.  It  was  no  time  for  God  to  be  far  off,  when  distress  was  so  near  and 
there  was  no  other  helper.  The  figures  that  follow  are  taken  from  pastoral  life. 
III.  The  expression  of  thanks  and  hope  (vers.  22-31).  The  Sufferer's  certainty 
of  deliverance  is  shown  by  His  intention  to  give  thanks  for  it.  This  will  be  done,  not 
in  private,  but  before  the  whole  nation,  .  .  .  The  experience  here  recorded,  alike 
of  sorrows  and  of  joy,  far  transcends  anything  which  we  have  reason  to  think  that 
David  passed  through.  {Talbot  W.  Chambers,  D.D.)  A  picture  of  suffering 
sainthood: — I.  The  peayer  of  such  strrFEREE.  In  Him  who  was  "the  Man  of 
Sorrows  "  it  finds  its  chief  fulfilment.  1.  The  sufferings  ;  they  are — (i)  Spiritual, 
through  feeling  of  God's  desertion  of  Him  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  In  regard  to  Christ, 
it  was  not  a  fact  that  God  had  deserted  Him,  but  He  felt  as  if  it  were  so.  And  of 
God's  disregard  of  His  prayer  (ver.  2).  (ii)  Social,  for  the  Sufferer  was  the  victim  of 
social  contempt  (ver.  6),  and  cruelty:  "they  pierced,"  &c.  (ver.  16),  and  He  tells 
of  the  physical  effect  of  all  this  (vers.  14,  17).  2.  The  supplications  ;  in  which  note 
— (i)  The  cliaracter  in  which  God  is  addressed — "holy  "  (ver.  3).  The  God  of  His 
"fathers"  (ver.  4),  and  of  His  earliest  life  (ver.  9).  (ii)  The  object  for  which  He 
is  addressed, — that  God  would  come  to  Him  (vers.  11,  19),  and  that  God  would 
deliver  Him  (ver.  20).  (iii)  The  earnestness  with  which  He  is  addressed  (vers. 
1,  2).  II.  The  relief  given.  See  this  set  forth  in  ver.  22  onwards.  Its  results 
were — 1.  The  celebration  of  the  Divine  goodness  (vers.  22,  24).  2.  The  con- 
version of  the  world  to  the  true  God  (ver.  27).  This  shall  be  through  (i)  men 
remembering  and  turning  unto  the  Lord.  And  (ii)  because  the  kingdom  is,  &c. 
(ver.  28).  And  (iii)  it  shall  be  complete,  including  all  nations,  classes,  and 
conditions.  3.  The  celebration  of  His  religion  to  the  end  of  time  (vers.  30,  31). 
Not  only  is  there  a  time  to  come  when  the  whole  generation  shall  be  converted, 
but  all  the  generations  following  shall  celebrate  His  praise.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  withdrawal  of  GocC s  sustaining 2>resence from  the  Divine  Son: — So  far,  in  this 
Psalm,  we  have  had  described  to  us  the  mental  sufferings  of  Christ  on  the  Cross  ;  His 
physical  sufferings  and  His  final  triumph  are  set  forth  in  the  portion  of  the  Psalm 
yet  to  be  explained.  His  mental  sufferings  were  caused  by  the  withdrawal  of  His 
Father's  sustaining  presence,  and  the  reproaches  of  His  enemies.  The  two  united 
pressed  His  spirit  with  a  weight  of  woe  such  as  none  besides  have  ever  experienced. 
Sustained  by  His  Father,  as  He  had  always  hitherto  been,  He  no  doubt  could  have 
endured  the  reproaches  of  men  without  complaint ;  but  when  His  Father  withdraws 
His  sustaining  presence  there  bursts  from  His  riven  heart  the  agonised  cry,  "My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ? "  Why  has  the  Father  Almighty  for- 
saken His  only  begotten  Son  ?  For  our  sakes.  For  no  sin  of  His  Son,  but  for  our 
sins  the  Father  forsook  Him.  It  was  as  our  surety  aud  substitute  that  Messiah  felt 
in  His  soul  the  wrath  of  God  against  sin.  He  had  taken  the  sinner's  place,  to 
endure  the  wrath  of  God  due  to  the  sinner's  sin  ;  and  the  Father  Almighty  could  not 
spare  His  Son  and  save  the  sinner.  One  or  the  other  must  die  ;  and  God  so  loved 
the  world  that  He  gave  His  Son.  He  forsook  His  Son  that  He  might  not  forsake 
us.  Again,  the  Father  Almighty  forsook  His  Son  that  the  Son's  victory  over  death 
and  hell  might  be  altogether  His  own  victory — His  own  as  man,  sustained  by  simple 
faith  in  God.  It  was  the  Father's  purpose  to  discomfit  Satan  by  the  very  same 
nature  over  which  he  had  triumphed  in  Eden.  Accordingly  a  holy  human  nature 
sustained  by  faith  in  God,  was  the  Saviour's  only  protection  and  defence  in  the  final 
conflict.  God  the  Father  has  left  Him,  God  the  Spirit  has  left  Him,  and  He  has 
also  renounced  all  reliance  on  His  own  God-like  power  to  aid  Him,  so  that  He  stands 
before  His  enemies  having,  as  His  only  weapon  of  defence,  what  Adam  had  in  Eden, 
a  holy  human  nature  to  be  sustained  by  simple  trust  in  God.  A  holy  human 
nature,  sustained  by  faith  alone,  was  the  weapon  with  which  the  first  Adam  should 
have  conquered  Satan  ;  a  holy  human  nature,  sustained  by  faith  alone,  was  the 
weapon  with  which  the  second  Adam  did  conquer  Satan.  He  used  no  other 
weapon  to  gain  Him  the  victory  on  Calvary,  than  that  which  Adam  had  in  Eden. 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

He  withstood  the  onset  made  upon  His  holy  will  and  nature,  only  because  His  faith 
in  God  was  steadfast  unto  the  end.  And  God  left  Him  to  Himself,  to  prove  to  Satan 
and  the  world  that  a  pure  heart,  sustained  by  an  uawavering  faith,  is  a  match,  and 
more  than  a  match,  for  every  assault  that  can  be  made  upon  it.  What  a  thought  is 
this  for  the  soul  to  rest  upon.  {David  Caldwell,  A.M.)  Christ  forsaken  of  His 
Father: — I.  How  are  we  to  interpket  these  awful  words  ?  1.  Not  the  cry  of 
a  mere  martyr.     2.  Not  wrung  from  Hun  by  agony  of  body,  but  by  anguish  of  soul. 

II.  Why  this  cry  of  angxtish  ?  1.  His  disciples  had  forsaken  Him,  but  it  was  not 
for  that.  God  had  forsaken  Him.  Christ  was  hanging  there  as  our  Surety  and 
Substitute.  2.  No  other  way  of  explaining  this  cry.  This  does  explain  it.  Con- 
flicting attributes  in  the  Godhead  to  be  harmonised  before  man  could  be  accepted  and 
forgiven.     God  found  a  way  to  reconcile  them  in  the  work  and  suffering  of  Christ. 

III.  Learn  from  this  cry — 1.  The  true  nature  of  Christ's  death — a  ransom,  an 
atonement.  2.  The  evil  of  sin,  and  how  God  abhors  it,  3.  The  greatness  of  God's 
love,  and  how  we  may  obtain  His  mercy.  {W.  Pakenham  Walsh,  D.D.)  The 
saint  forsaken — in  what  sense : — Sometimes  God  takes  away  from  a  Christian  His 
comforting  presence,  but  never  His  sustaining  presence.  You  know  the  dififer- 
ence  between  sunshine  and  daylight.  We  have  often  daylight  but  little  sun- 
light. A  Christian  has  God's  daylight  in  his  soul  when  he  may  not  have 
sunlight ;  that  is,  he  has  enough  to  light  him,  but  not  enough  to  cheer  and 
comfort  him.  Never  was  Jesus  so  forsaken  as  when  He  cried.  My  God,  My 
God,  kc,  and  yet  was  He  never  so  strengthened  by  God's  sustaining  presence, 
for  angels  were  at  His  service  to  minister  to  Him  if  He  needed  their  ministry. 
(i/".  Gumming.)  Forsaken  of  God,  but  not  finally: — Did  you  ever  read  that 
Christ  did  finally  forsake  a  man  in  whose  heart  and  soul  He  still  did  leave  His 
goods,  furniture,  and  spiritual  household  stuflf  ?  A  man  sometimes  goes  from  home,^ 
and  sometimes  he  does  not  quite  leave  his  home.  There  is  much  difiference  between 
these  two.  If  a  man  leave  his  home  and  come  no  more,  then  he  carries  away  all  his 
goods ;  and  when  you  see  them  carried  away  you  say,  ' '  This  man  will  come  no 
more."  But  though  a  man  ride  a  great  journey,  yet  he  may  come  again  ;  and  you 
say,  "Surely  he  will  come  again."  Why?  Because  still  his  goods,  wife,  and 
children  are  in  his  house  ;  so,  though  Christ  be  long  absent,  yet  if  His  household  stuflf 
abide  in  the  heart — if  there  be  the  same  desires  after  Him  and  delight  in  Him, 
you  may  say,  "  Surely  He  will  come  again."  When  did  Christ  ever  forsake  a  man  in 
whose  heart  He  left  this  spiritual  furniture  ?    {S.  Bridge. ) 

Yer.  2.  0  my  God,  I  cry  in  the  daytime,  but  Thou  hearest  not ;  and  in  the  night 
season,  and  am  not  silent. —  Why  so  many  prayers  are  unanswered  : — Our  prayers 
often  fail  of  success — I.  Because  of  want  of  faith.  There  are  a  multitude  of  prayers. 
oflTered  to  God  with  something  like  this  feeling  :  ' '  Well,  perhaps  God  will  hear  and 
answer  ;  perhaps  not.  At  any  rate,  I  may  as  well  pray  ;  and  if  the  answer  comes, 
well :  if  not,  I  at  least  have  done  my  duty."  Now,  such  a  feeling  as  this,  though  it 
be  not  positive  infidelity,  is  so  near  to  it  as  to  be  most  oflfensive  to  God,  and  can  only 
bring  forth  His  severe  displeasure.  The  matter  of  prayer  is  one  thing,  the  manner 
of  prayer  is  another.  If  the  manner  of  presenting  our  prayer  is  right,  and  the 
matter  wrong,  then,  of  course,  will  it  miscarry.  If  the  matter  is  right  and  the 
manner  wrong,  the  prayer  is  likewise  fruitless  of  good.  II.  Because  we  evince  a 
practical  unbelief  in  God's  ability  to  grant  us  our  requests.  We  act  as  if 
probabilities  affected  God  as  they  do  us  :  we  measure  His  ability  by  our  own.  We 
do  not  remember  that  "with  God  nothing  is  impossible."  III.  The  indulgence 
OF  SOME  one  or  MORE  KNOWN  SINS.  Do  we  not  read,  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my 
heart  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  To  pray,  and  yet  to  commit  wilful  sin,  or  still  to 
pursue  a  course  of  secret  or  open  iniquity,  is  not  only  mocking  God  with  lip  service, 
but  is  also  acting  with  hypocrisy,  professing  one  thing  but  doing  another.  A  pray- 
ing spirit  and  a  sinning  heart  cannot  dwell  together.  lY.  Remissness  in  the  per- 
formance OF  OUR  Christian  duty.  This  tendency  in  the  minds  of  many  ta 
divorce  prayer  from  all  the  instrumentalities  which  God  has  coimected  with  its  being 
answered  is  one  fruitful  source  of  evil,  and  a  cause  why  so  many  prayers  are  uttered 
in  vain.  To  illustrate  this  :  suppose  that  you  are  threatened  with  shipwreck — the 
storm  rages  fearfully,  the  vessel  is  dashed  upon  the  rocks  and  is  broken  up,  every 
hope  of  escape  seems  gone,  and  in  the  extremity  of  your  distress  you  cry  unto  God 
to  save  you  from  this  threatened  death  !  But  how  do  you  expect  He  will  save  you  ? 
— by  a  miracle  ? — by  bearing  you  through  the  air  ana  landing  you  safely  on  the 
shore  ?    Or  do  you  not  rather  look  for  an  answer  to  your  prayer  by  means  of  human 


FSAiM  xxil.]  THE  PSALMS.  413 

agency,  and  by  physical  and  natural  instrumentality  ? — by  a  life-boat,  by  a  cable 
fastened  to  the  rock,  by  the  buoying  up  of  some  part  of  the  wreck  until  it  is 
washed  upon  the  beach.  And  suppose  that,  having  prayed  to  God  for  succour,  you 
yet  refuse  to  use  the  instrumentality  which,  in  answer  to  your  prayer,  He  has  fur- 
nished for  your  safety.  You  decline  to  get  into  the  life-boat,  or  object  to  be  drawn 
ashore  by  a  rope,  or  will  not  commit  yourself  to  some  means  provided  for  your 
escape  :  can  you  be  saved  ?  God  answered  your  prayer,  not  by  giving  you  instan- 
taneously the  end  desired,  but  by  giving  you  means  adequate  to  secure  that  end ; 
and  if  you  refused  the  means  you  could  not  expect  the  end.  So  with  spiritual  bless- 
ings. God  answers  us  through  the  instrumentality  of  duties  ;  and  we  find  the  end 
we  desire  when  we  use  the  means  He  has  enjoined.  Another  reason  why  our 
prayers  are  not  answered  is — V.  Because  we  do  not  persevere  in  prayer.  One 
other  way  in  which  we  ask  and  receive  not,  because  we  ask  amiss,  is — VI.  By  asking 

THINGS   WHICH  DO  NOT   ACCORD   WITH  God'S   PURPOSES   OF   DISCIPLINE  OB  MKKCY. 

We  must  not  forget  the  great  truth,  that  God  uses  this  world  as  a  school  of  discip- 
line, to  fit  us  for  a  holier  state  above.  In  this  state  trials,  disappointments,  &c.,  are 
the  necessary  instruments  whereby  our  souls  are  purged  and  fitted  for  heaven.  Yet 
we  often  pray  that  God  would  relieve  us  from  this  trial,  that  He  would  exempt 
us  from  this  threatened  affliction  ;  but  in  His  infinite  wisdom  He  knows  that  to 
grant  these  requests  would  be  productive  of  evil  rather  than  good,  as  it  is  "in  the 
furnace  of  affliction  "  that  God  often  chooses  His  saints,  and  ' '  through  much  tribu- 
lation that  they  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  {Bishop  Stevens.)  Prayers 
which  are  not  answered: — They  that  have  conduit- water  come  into  their  houses,  if  no 
water  come  they  do  not  conclude  the  spring  to  be  dry,  but  the  pipes  to  be  stopped 
or  broken.  If  prayer  speed  not,  we  must  be  sure  that  the  fault  is  not  in  God,  but 
in  ourselves  ;  were  we  but  ripe  for  mercy,  He  is  ready  to  extend  it  to  us,  and  even 
waits  for  the  pm-pose.     (John  Trapp.) 

Yer.  3.   But  Thon  art  boly,  0  Tbou  that  inhabitest  the  praises  of  Israel — A 

habitation  of  God: — There  is  ordinarily  something  like  a  proportion  maintained 
between  the  power  of  a  monarch  and  the  splendour  of  his  palace.  If  you  visit 
countries  you  will  generally  find  that  the  mightier  the  king  and  the  more  extended 
his  sway  the  more  sumptuous  are  the  royal  residences.  And  the  criterion  is  alto- 
gether a  just  one  ;  for  we  have  a  full  right  to  expect  that  the  residence  of  the 
monarch  will  be  a  kind  of  index  of  his  might ;  that  in  proportion  to  the  largeness 
of  his  revenues  and  the  extent  of  his  dominion  will  be  the  magnificence  of  archi- 
tecture and  the  richness  of  decoration  which  distinguish  his  mansion  from  those  of 
his  subjects.  The  house  is,  indeed,  in  most  cases  throughout  society,  the  sign  of 
the  means  of  its  inhabitant ;  it  grows  loftier  than  before,  and  is  furnished  in  a  more 
costly  style  as  a  man  advances  in  the  world  and  gathers  to  himself  more  of  opul- 
ence and  influence.  There  will  be  exceptions  to  every  such  rule  ;  but  these  will 
ordinarily  be  in  cases  of  meanness  and  penuriousness.  But  there  is  a  King  whose 
empire  is  all  space,  and  whose  subjects  all  that  breathe.  What  shall  be  a  fitting  palace 
for  Him  ?  How  shall  the  rule  we  have  laid  down  be  proved  applicable  in  the  instance 
of  our  Maker  ?  It  must  fail,  because  nothing,  even  of  His  own  workmanship,  can 
bear  any  proportion  with  Him.  Solomon  said,  ' '  The  heaven,  even  the  heaven  of 
heavens,  cannot  contain  Thee."  And  when  we  go  on  to  speak  of  churches,  we  are 
compelled  to  finish  Solomon's  sentence  and  say,  "How  much  less  this  house  which 
I  have  built."  And  yet  as  that  temple,  so  churches  may  be  properly  styled — houses 
of  God.  He  abides  in  them  as  He  abides  not  in  any  other  structure.  And  they 
ought  to  be  beautiful.  It  is  no  good  sign  when  palaces  are  more  and  more  costly, 
and  churches  less  and  less  noble.  If  God  is  to  have  a  house  at  all,  that  house  should  be 
the  noblest  that  we  have  the  power  of  rearing  ;  bearing  such  proportion  as  our  ability 
can  efi'ectuate,  to  the  greatness  of  the  Being  who  is  to  show  Himself  within  its  walls. 
Otherwise,  if  our  churches  be  inferior  to  our  other  structures,  less  splendid  in  design, 
less  rich  in  architecture,  we  give  the  strongest  of  all  possible  proofs  that  we  are  less 
disposed  to  do  honour  to  God  than  to  ourselves  ;  that  we  think  the  "curtains"  good 
enough  for  the  ark,  and  reserve  the  "  cedar  "  for  our  own  habitation.  It  was  not 
thus  with  our  ancestors,  whom  we  are  ready  enough  to  accuse  of  superstition,  but 
in  whom  there  must  have  been  better  and  loftier  feelings.  Witness  the  cathedrals 
which  yet  crest  our  land  ;  mightier  and  more  sumptuous,  as  they  ought  to  be,  than 
even  our  palaces.  Tell  me  not  that  a  mere  dark  superstition  actuated  the  men  who 
designed  and  executed  these  sublime  edifices.  The  long-drawn  aisles,  the  fretted 
roofs,  the  dim  lecessea.  the  soaring  spires,  all  witness  that  the  architect  had  gnod 


414  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxil. 

thouglits  of  God,  and  strove  to  embody  them  in  combinations  of  the  wood  and  the 
stone,  even  as  the  poet  his  conceptions  in  the  melodies  of  verse,  or  the  orator  his  in 
the  majesty  of  eloquence.  It  is  a  cold  and  withered  piety  which  catches  no  inspira- 
tion from  the  structure.  And  there  must,  we  believe,  have  been  lofty  and  ardent 
piety  in  those  who  could  plan  structures  that  thus  seem  to  furnish  instances  of  their 
piety  to  successive  generations.  The  cathedral,  with  its  awe-inciting  vastness,  its 
storied  windows,  its  mellowed  light,  its  deepened  shadows,  appears  to  me  like  the 
rich  volume  of  some  old  divine :  I  gather  from  the  work  the  mind  of  the  author, 
and  it  is  a  mind  which  has  grown  great  in  musing  upon  God.  But  we  have 
another  cathedral  to  throw  open  before  you,  another  dwelling-place  of  Deity,  not 
builded  up  of  the  stars  which  God  originally  wrought  into  His  pavilion,  nor  yet 
of  the  marble  and  the  cedar,  which  we  ourselves  may  work  into  sumptuous  edifices. 
Listen  to  our  text.  How  is  God  therein  addressed?  "0  Thou,  that  inhabitest 
the  praises  of  Israel."  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  speaks,  and  He  it  is  who 
directs  attention  to  the  structure,  declaring  that  it  has  not  only  been  reared,  but  is 
actually  inhabited  by  God.  For  though  "  Israel  "  be  only  the  Church,  and  every 
member  of  that  Church  have  been  born  in  sin  and  "  shapen  in  iniquity,"  I  find  no 
less  a  Being  than  the  Redeemer  Himself,  and  that  too  in  His  last  moments,  when 
trial  was  before  Him  in  all  its  severity,  addressing  His  Father  as  "Thou  who 
inhabitest  the  praises  of  Israel."  Now,  is  there  any  proportion  here  between  the 
house  and  the  inhabitant  ?  Here  is  a  cathedral  built  of  human  praises.  Why  should 
it  be  a  cathedral  in  any  sense  worthy  of  God,  or  one  within  which  God  might  be 
expected  to  dwell  ?  You  tell  me  that  very  rich  and  acceptable  must  be  the  thanks- 
giving of  angels  ;  burning  and  beautiful  creatures,  who  spend  existence  in  magnify- 
ing the  Being  by  whom  it  was  bestowed.  Who  doubts  it  ?  But  they  have  only  to 
thank  God  for  creation.  Their  praise  must  be  like  that  of  Adam,  whilst  he  was  yet 
in  innocence,  and  paradise  in  loveliness ;  whose  morning  and  evening  hymn  spoke 
glowingly  of  a  glorious  Benefactor.  And  I  can  thank  God  for  creation.  The 
angel's  song  is  mine,  though  mine  belongs  not  to  the  angel.  But  I  have  to  thank 
God  for  more  than  creation,  for  more  than  life.  I  have  to  thank  Him  for  a  second 
creation,  for  life  out  of  death  ;  and  angels  must  yield  to  me  here.  If,  then,  sanc- 
tuaries are  to  be  builded  of  praise,  who  shall  be  the  architects  of  that  in  which  Deity 
may  be  most  expected  to  take  up  His  abode  ?  Behold  the  structures.  Yonder  is 
that  which  unfallen  creatures  are  rearing  ;  and  very  noble  and  brilliant  is  the  fabric. 
How  lofty  those  columns,  which  are  formed  out  of  anthems  that  commemorate  the 
inaccessible  majesties  of  Godhead  !  How  solemn  those  dim  recesses,  where  mention 
is  made  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  nature  !  How  rich  that  roof,  which  is 
wrought  out  of  melodies  which  hymn  the  goodness  of  the  universal  Parent  !  But 
now  turn  to  that  which  fallen  creatures  buUd.  It  is  based  on  the  "Rock  of  Ages"  ; 
the  sure  foundation-stone,  which  God  Himself  laid  in  Zion.  And  its  walls,  what 
are  they  but  the  celebration  of  attributes,  which  would  have  been  comparatively 
hidden  if  not  discovered  in  redemption  ?  Its  pillars,  what  but  song  upon  song,  each, 
witnessing  to  perfections  which  could  not  show  themselves  in  an  unstained  crea- 
tion ?  Its  aisles,  what  but  prolonged  choruses,  telling  out,  till  lost  in  the  depths  of 
eternity,  the  marvels  of  a  work  which  even  cherubim  and  seraphim  had  failed  to 
imagine  ?  And  what  its  domes,  its  pinnacles,  its  spires,  but  soaring  notes  which 
bear  aloft  the  stupendous  truth,  that  He  who. is  to  everlasting  could  die,  and  that 
He  who  was  from  everlasting  could  be  born  ;  that  God  became  man,  and  that  man 
may  now  rise  into  fellowship  with  God  !  Ah  !  this  is  the  cathedral.  This  could 
never  have  been  built  had  not  God  come  out  from  the  secrecies  of  His  magnificence, 
and  thrown  open  depths  in  Himself  which  the  most  penetrating  intelligence  could 
never  have  explored.  There  is  not  a  stone  in  this  which  may  not  be  said  to  have 
been  hewn  by  Himself  out  of  the  unfathomable  mine  of  His  perfections ;  there  is 
not  a  niche  which  is  not  filled  with  a  brighter  image  of  Deity  than  the  universe 
could  have  furnished  had  there  never  been  transgression  ;  there  is  not  an  altar 
on  which  burns  not  a  more  brilliant  fire  than  could  have  been  kindled  had  not  the 
flame  of  God's  wrath  against  sin  been  quenched  in  the  blood  of  God's  only  begotten 
Son.  And  Christ,  as  He  hung  upon  the  Cross  and  contemplated  the  effects  of  the 
work  which  He  was  then  bringing  to  a  close,  must  have  looked  on  wondrous  struc- 
tures, each  of  loftiest  architecture  and  splendid  ornament — the  regenerated  earth, 
the  universe  no  longer  defiled  by  one  dark  spot ;  but  He  knew  that  His  work  was 
to  be  pre-eminently  illustrious,  and  the  source  of  the  highest  glory  of  all  to  our 
Creator.  Upon  this,  therefore,  might  He  be  expected  to  fasten  ;  and  though  all 
orders  of  being  were  before  Him,  eager  to  build  their  Maker  a  house — angel  and 


PSALM  xxii.]  THE  PSALMS.  415 

archangel,  from  •whose  swelling  choir  started,  as  by  enchantment,  a  thousand 
ethereal  temples — who  shall  marvel  that  He  selected  us  the  feeble,  us  the  sinful, 
and  knowing  that  He  was  making  us  "heirs  of  God,"  yea,  "joint  heirs  with  Him- 
self," left  us  to  rear  a  sanctuary  which  should  be  more  honoured  than  any  other ; 
addressing  Himself  thus  with  His  dying  breath  to  His  Father — "  0  Thou  that 
inhabitest  the  praises  of  Israel "  ?    {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Our  fathers  trusted  In  Thae.—The  Ood  of  <mr  fathers. — A  sermon  to  young 
men : — The  age  in  which  we  live  is  an  enlightened  age.  And  no  man  is  bound  to 
be  religious  for  no  better  reason  than  that  his  father  was  religious  before  him. 
With  advancing  light  and  knowledge  great  changes  are  coming,  or  have  already 
come.  But  how  far  do  such  things  afifect  our  attitude  and  utterance  like  those  of 
the  text  ?  Offer  first  one  or  two  regulative  thoughts.  1.  It  is  only  right  and  fair 
to  remember  that  the  great  facts  of  human  nature  and  of  human  life  with  which 
religion  has  to  do  remain  substantially  the  same  throughout  the  ages.  In  the  great 
matters  of  essential  religion,  in  the  main,  no  one  age  is  more  favoured  than  another. 
"Our  fathers'"  disease  is  our  disease  ;  and  may  not  "our  fathers'"  cure  be  our 
cure  ?  2.  Scepticism  and  unbelief  are  not  new.  It  is  ignorance  of  the  history  of 
unbelief  that  makes  modern  unbelief,  to  many  minds,  so  formidable.  Scepticism 
may  change  its  form, — now  the  light  raillery  of  a  Voltaire,  now  the  learning  and 
logical  acumen  of  a  Hume,  now  the  bitter  wail  of  a  Mill, — but  it  is  one  thing,  one 
principle,  one  substance.  Every  age  has  its  sceptic,  or  its  sceptics.  It  looks  almost 
as  if  Almighty  God  permitted  them  that,  intellectually,  the  Church  might  be  kept 
from  going  to  sleep.  3.  Science  is  doing  grand  things  to-day.  Her  beneficent  step 
is  heard  almost  everywhere.  But  physical  science  is  comparatively  young.  And 
you  know  the  characteristic  defects  of  youth.  It  is  headstrong  and  impatient,  and 
often  irreverent.  It  is  sometimes  not  over  reticent,  even  on  matters  concerning 
which  it  cannot  form  reliable  judgments.  ...  I  now  speak  on  "the  claims  of  the 
religion  of  our  fathers."  1.  It  was  "  our  fathers'. "  That  the  sires  trusted  in  God 
is  a  very  suflBcient  reason  why  the  sons  should  hesitate,  and  hesitate  long,  before 
they  reach  the  grave  conclusion  that  there  is  no  God,  or  that  if  there  be  He  cannot 
be  trusted  because  He  cannot  be  known.  One  of  the  healthiest  facts  of  human 
nature  and  of  human  life  has  ever  been  that  spirit  of  reverence  for  the  past  which 
links  generation  to  generation,  and  practically  makes  the  race  one.  We  Englishmen 
are  by  no  means  destitute  of  this  fine  sentiment.  2.  Our  fathers  proved  it.  What 
is  the  testimony  borne  by  honest  men  who  have  preceded  us?  It  is  that  the 
religion  of  Jesus  is  a  grand  reality  and  not  a  human  dream  ;  that  the  Bible  contains 
a  Divine  and  all-satisfying  revelation  of  God  ;  that  it  is  not  a  fabrication  or  an 
imposture  ;  that  the  heart  of  man  is  weary  till  it  find  rest  in  Christ ;  that  there  is 
such  rest  in  Christ  ;  that  in  the  Cross  of  the  Crucified  One  there  is  hope  for  all, 
comfort  for  all,  heaven  for  all !  And  how  are  we  asked  to  receive  that  testimony  T 
Some  would  have  us  believe  that  it  is  untrustworthy.  Surely  "our  fathers"  were 
not  mere  intellectual  weaklings  ?  What  are  we  to  say  of  the  testimony  they  bore  ? 
We  will  go'long  before  we  speak  ill,  or  listen  with  patience  to  ill  spoken,  of  the 
bridge  which  bore  them  over  !  3.  They  died  in  the  faith  of  it.  For  me,  I  believe 
in  the  "God  of  my  fathers."  I  believe  in  the  religion  of  my  fathers.  I  will  take 
the  liberty  of  expressing  it  in  forms  suited  to  the  spirit  and  the  habits  of  thought  of 
the  age  in  which  we  live  ;  but  the  essential  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  I  keep.  (</'.  Thew.)  God's  faithfulness  to  ancient  saints  good  ground  for 
trust  and  hope  : — Those  who  look  upon  this  Psalm  as  having  a  primary  reference  to 
the  King  of  Israel  attribute  great  beauty  to  these  words,  from  the  very  pleasing 
conjecture  that  David  was,  at  the  time  of  composing  them,  sojourning  at  Mahanaim, 
where  Jacob,  in  his  distress,  wrestled  with  the  angel  and  obtained  such  signal 
blessings.  That,  in  a  place  so  greatly  hallowed  by  associations  of  the  past,  he 
should  make  his  appeal  to  the  God  of  his  fathers,  was  alike  the  dictate  of  patriarchal 
feeling  and  religion.  {John  Morison.)  Strong  warrant  for  trust: — Our  hope  is 
not  hung  upon  such  untwisted  thread  as  "  I  imagined  so  "  or  "it  is  likely,"  but  the 
cable,  the  strong  hope  of  our  fastened  anchor,  is  the  oath  and  promise  of  Him  who 
is  eternal  verity  ;  our  salvation  is  fastened  with  God's  own  hand  and  Christ's  own 
strength  to  the  strong  stake  of  God's  unchanging  nature.     {S.  Rutherford. ) 

Ver.  8.  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  He  would  deliver  him. — Faith  among 
mockers : — David  experienced  "  cruel  mockings."  The  flesh  may  not  be  cut,  but  the 
heart  may  be  torn.     But  text  tells  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     David  knew  reproach  but  in 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

small  measure  compared  with  Him.  It  is  the  common  heritage  of  the  godly.  But — 
I.  Their  tkust  in  God  is  known.  Hence  we  learn — 1.  Our  trust  in  God  should  be 
apparent,  manifest,  public.  That  in  Christ  which  revealed  it  was  His  wonderful 
calmness.  We  ought  distinctly  to  avow  our  trust.  No  man  has  a  right  to  be  a 
secret  believer.  2.  Our  general  conduct  should  reveal  our  faith.  If  I  trast  the 
Lord  about  my  soul  I  must  trust  Him  about  my  body,  wife,  children,  and  all  my 
affairs.  3.  This  trust  should  come  out  most  distinctly  in  times  of  trouble.  _  For 
then  it  is  our  adversaries  are  most  likely  to  notice  it.  In  bereavements,  business 
troubles.  Let  the  possession  of  godliness  tell  its  own  tale,  the  spikenard  its  own 
fragrance.  II.  The  wobld  does  not  understand  this  trust.  Our  Lord's 
enelnies  restricted  His  trust  to  the  point  of  His  being  delivered.  But— 1.  Our  faith 
is  not  confined  to  merely  receiving  from  God.  "We  must  not  live  and  wait  upon  God 
merely  with  a  cupboard  love.  2.  Nor  to  what  men  call  deliverance.  Our  Lord 
trusted  still,  though  the  cup  did  not  pass  from  Him.  The  blind  world  cannot 
understand  this.  They  say,  like  their  father,  "Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ?  " 
And— 3.  Our  faith  is  not  tied  to  time.  Christ's  enemies  thought  that  if  the  Lord 
did  not  deliver  Him  then.  His  trust  would  be  proved  a  folly.  But  it  is  not  so.  We 
may  not  be  delivered  from  our  distresses  to-night,  nor  to-morrow,  nor  next  month  ;  it 
may  be  for  years.  We  do  not  tie  God  down  to  conditions,  but  we  trust  Him  all  the 
same.  4.  Nor  will  it  judge  at  all  by  present  circumstances.  How  wrongly  the 
world  judged  of  Christ  when  it  judged  of  Him  by  His  sorrows.     III.  This  true 

FAITH  WILL,  IN  ALL  PBOBABILITT,  BE   MOCKED   AT  SOME  TIME  OR  OTHEE.      1.  Some 

men  scoff  at  faith  itself.  It  is  an  honour  to  have  one's  name  written  up  on  such  an 
Arch  of  Triumph  as  that  of  Heb.  xi.  But  many  think  it  no  honour  at  all.  They 
hold  faith  to  be  a  folly  of  weak  minds.  2.  Others,  at  the  very  idea  of  Divine 
interposition.  "Look,"  they  say,  "he  fancies  that  God  will  deliver  him;  as  if 
the  Creator  had  not  something  else  to  do  besides  looking  after  him,  poor  miserable 
that  he  is  !  "  They  believe  in  laws,  they  say,  irreversible,  immutable  laws,  that  grind 
in  like  the  great  cogs  of  a  machine  which,  when  once  they  are  set  in  motion,  tear 
everything  to  pieces  that  comes  in  their  way.  3.  And  some  mock  at  all  kinds  of 
faith  in  the  Divine  love.  How  the  world  rages  against  electing  love  !  The  heathen 
could  not  make  out  a  certain  brave  saint  because  he  called  himself  Theophorus,  or 
"  God-bearer"  ;  but  he  stuck  to  it  that  he  was  so,  though  they  hated  him  all  the 
more.  4.  Some  find  amusement  in  the  trials  involved  in  the  life  of  faith.  Their 
cry,  "  Let  Him  deliver  him,"  implies  that  their  victim  was  in  serious  difficulty,  but 
that  was  only  sport  to  them.  Such  mocking  is  a  part  of  the  covenanted  heritage. 
IV.  The  time  shall  come  when  our  trust  shall  bb  abundantly  justified. 
1.  It  is  no  small  thing  to  have  the  ungodly  bearing  witness.  "He  trusted  in  God." 
It  helps  one  to  believe  that  he  is  really  God's  child.  2.  Another  justification  will 
come  when  God  shall  deliver  His  people.  That  day  will  come.  Dives  sees  Lazarus 
in  Abraham's  bosom  :  what  a  sight  for  him.  At  the  last  great  day  ungodly  men 
will  witness  for  the  saints.  They  will  have  to  own,  "They  did  trust,  for  we  mocked 
them  for  it."     But  whether  men  mock  or  praise,  we  trust  in  God.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Thou  axt  He  that  to©k  me  out  of  the  womb. — David's  acknow- 
ledgment of  God's  goodness : — 1.  He  takes  notice  of  common  mercies.  Such  mercies 
as  most  men  are  partakers  of.  To  come  safe  and  sound  into  the  world,  and  to  be 
persuaded  and  sustained  in  it,  they  are  such  things  as  most  men  have  allotted  and 
vouchsafed  unto  them.  But  there  are  very  few  who  are  sensible  of  common  mercies, 
— such  is  the  corruption  of  our  nature  and  our  base  ingratitude.  2.  He  acknowledges 
ancient  mercies.  He  remembers  those  mercies  which  another  would  have  forgotten. 
The  mercies  of  his  infancy  and  childhood  and  yoimger  years.  We  should  remember 
both  temporal  and  spiritual  mercies.  3.  He  remembers  primitive  or  original  mercies. 
Those  mercies  which  he  had  at  first,  in  the  very  entrance  or  beginning  of  his  life 
when  he  first  came  into  the  world,  and  were  likewise  the  ground  and  foundation  of 
all  the  rest.  It  is  with  mercies  as  with  judgments,  one  makes  way  for  another,  and 
the  first  is  so  much  the  more  considerable  as  it  induces  and  brings  in  the  rest. 
4.  He  takes  notice  of  constant  mercies.  Those  which  were  continued  to  him  from 
the  first  moment  of  his  being  till  now,  through  the  whole  course  of  his  life  to  this 
present.  He  takes  notice  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  him  in  the  full  latitude  and 
extent  of  it.  See  now  the  specification  of  the  several  particulars.  (1)  The  blessings 
of  the  womb,  in  his  birth  and  first  coming  into  the  world.  (2)  The  blessings  of  the 
breast,  in  his  nursery  and  first  sustentation  in  the  world.  (3)  The  blessing  of  the 
cradle,  in  the  tutelary  care  of  his  orphanage  and  desolate  condition.     (4)  The 


rnJOM  xxn.]  TEE  PSALMS.  417 

blessings  of  the  covenant,  in  the  continued  and  mutnal  interest  which  he  had  in  God 
and  God  in  him.  {T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Thou  didst  make  me  hope  wlien  I  was 
upon  my  mother's  breasts. — On  the  nature  and  influence  of  hope: — To  a  con- 
templative mind  nothing  will  suggest  more  powerful  inducements,  perhaps,  for 
adoring  the  wisdom  and  the  goodness  of  God  than  a  distinct  consideration  of  the 
many  faculties,  passions,  and  propensities  with  which  a  human  creature  is  furnished. 
Exposed  to  various  evils ;  encompassed  with  manifold  infirmities ;  subject  to  pain 
and  labour,  to  poverty,  disease,  and  death,  we  might  soon  feel  life  a  burden  unless 
there  were  some  pervading  principle  which  seems  to  connect  us  with  futurity,  and 
bids  us  forget  our  past  calamities  and  our  present  sorrows  in  the  bright  prospects 
that  are  to  come.  Hence  by  the  goodness  of  God  we  are  all  possessed  of  that 
lasting  and  universal  passion,  Hope.  Now  let  us  consider — I.  Its  nattjee  and 
iNFLtJENCE.  It  enters  largely  into  every  man's  system  of  happiness,  whether  they 
be  prosperous  or  afflicted.  It  ia  the  spring  of  men's  conduct,  the  end  of  their  life. 
It  keeps  his  soul  alive  within  him,  invigorates  his  faculties,  purifies  his  passions, 
and  directs  the  exertions  both  of  his  mind  and  body  to  their  proper  objects.  II.  By 
"WHAT  PRINCIPLES  TO  REGULATE  IT.  A  passion  SO  general,  and  that  has  such  an 
influence  on  the  sum  of  life,  cannot  be  too  carefully  regulated  nor  disciplined  to  its 
proper  objects.  In  this,  as  in  most  other  cases  of  moral  and  religious  duty,  the 
folly  and  the  danger  of  extremes  should  be  avoided.  The  happy  medium,  which 
we  should  all  labour  to  attain  on  the  present  occasion,  lies  equally  remote  from  silly 
and  extravagant  expectations, — from  sluggish  indifference  and  helpless  despondency, 
or  the  dead  calm  of  insensibility.  The  one  is  apt  to  lead  to  every  kind  of  excess, 
and  to  end  in  misery  and  disappointment ;  the  other  disqualifies  us  for  fulfilling 
the  duties  of  life,  and  is,  in  fact,  the  destruction  or  subversion  of  every  virtue. 
III.  Tms  OBJECTS  TO  WHICH  IT  SHOULD  BE  DIEECTED.  These  are  to  be  found  in  the 
blessed  future  world.  {J.  Hewlett,  B.D.)  The  meaning  of  hope  as  an  instinct  of 
the  soul : — The  text  is  a  strong  figure  intended  to  express  the  idea  that  hope  is  an 
inbred  sentiment  of  the  soul.  The  body,  it  is  true,  may  exist  without  the  eye,  but 
in  a  very  incomplete  state.  And  there  are  emaciated  souls,  souls  with  deadened 
senses  and  broken  faculties.  But  hope  is  yet  an  instinct  keeping  the  face  of  the 
soul  ever  towards  the  future.  Now,  this  instinct — I.  Implies  the  goodness  of 
God  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature.  For  it  is  one  of  the  chief  blessings 
of  humanity.  1.  It  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  impulses  to  action,  2.  It  is  one 
of  the  chief  elements  of  support  under  trial.  Hope  buoys  us  up  beneath  the  load  ; 
gives  us  a  steady  anchorage  amid  the  fiercest  surgings  of  the  storm.  3,  It  is  a 
source  of  joy.  The  joys  of  memory  and  the  pleasures  of  the  passing  hour  are  not  to 
be  compared  with  the  joys  of  hope,  II.  Suggests  a  future  state  of  existence. 
It  may  not  prove  such  existence,  but  it  does  much  in  that  direction,     For^ 

1.  Analogy  supports  it.  All  our  senses  and  appetites  have  provision  made  for 
them — light  for  the  eye,  sounds  for  the  ear,  4c.     And  so  in  our  social  relations. 

2.  The  Divine  [goodness  leads  to  belief  in  it.  III.  Means  that  progress  in 
BLESSEDNESS  IS  THE  LAW  OF  OUR  BEING.  Hope  points  not  Only  to  the  future, 
but  to  good  in  the  future.  IV.  Shows  the  fitness  of  Christianity  to  human 
NATURE.  For — 1.  It  reveals  eternal  blessedness  ;  and — 2.  Supplies  means  of  its 
attainment  which  are  both  soul  pacifying  and  purifying.  V.  Indicates  the 
CONGRUITY  of  THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE  WITH  OUR  NATURE.  Therefore,  if  we  quench 
this  hope  midnight  reigns  ;  and  sin  tends  to  do  this.     (Z>.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  Be  not  far  from  me;  for  trouble  is  near;  for  there  is  none  to  help. — 

Help  in  trouble : — In  this  Psalm  ' '  a  greater  than  David  is  here, "  even  Christ.  You 
cannot  pay  a  visit  to  Calvary,  while  reading  this  Psalm,  without  being  struck  with 
the  record  as  giving  a  history  of  what  subsequently  took  place  in  the  suflferings  and 
agony  of  our  Lord.  I.  First  of  all,  let  us  look  at  the  principle  laid  down — a 
trouble  foreboded — "trouble  is  near."  Now,  it  is  certain  that  Christians  indulge  to 
a  sinful  extent  in  the  forebodings  of  trouble,  and  not  unfrequently  forebode  troubles 
that  never  come  to  pass.  We  look  at  them  in  the  distance  as  if  they  were 
mountains ;  yet  when  we  approach  them  we  find  them  to  be  mole-hills,  which  we 
can  easily  step  over  with  a  little  exercise  of  faith.  But  our  precious  Lord  foreboded 
nothing  but  what  He  knew  was  near  and  would  come  to  pass,  and  therefore  when 
He  cried  out,  "Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour,"  He  immediately  adds,  "For  this 
cause  came  I  to  this  hour  "  ;  as  if  He  withdrew  the  petition  and  would  not  escape 
the  sorrow.  But  mark  the  most  prominent  feature  of  His  distress  was  distress  of 
8ouL     When,  we  look  at  the  fact  that  Divine  wrath  lay  heavily  upon  His  soul  wo 

a; 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

wonder  not  that  He  cried  out,  "Now  am  I  troubled."  And  so  there  is  distress  of 
Boul  of  whicli  His  disciples  are  the  subjects.  1.  In  their  first  awakenings.  2.  In 
their  after  conflicts.  3.  But  it  is  never,  to  the  believer,  judicial  punishment  as  it 
was  with  Jesus.  It  was  Divine  wrath  that  lay  upon  Him.  4.  And  there  were 
external  assaults.  The  powers  of  darkness  were  let  loose.  His  Church  must  expect 
the  like.  The  world  and  the  Church  cannot  agree,  unless  the  Church  will  com- 
promise her  dignity,  her  purity,  her  spirituality,  and  cringe  to  the  world's  carnal 
pursuits  and  carnal  religion ;  then  they  may  go  on  pretty  well,  hand  in  hand  ;  but 
the  curse  of  God  will  rest  upon  them  both.  A  Christianity  that  brings  you  out 
from  the  world  will  be  sure  to  bring  upon  you  Satan's  rage  and  fiery  darts  and  the 
world's  scorn.  May  you  be  able  to  make  Moses'  choice,  and  choose  "rather  to 
snfier  aflfliction  with,"  &c.  Jesus  told  you  it  would  be  thus.  "Marvel  not  if  the 
world  hate  you."  5.  And  the  Church  has  yet  another  trouble  near.  II.  Thb 
APPALLING  FAOT.  "There  is  none  to  help."  Now  this,  so  far  as  Christ  is 
concerned,  is  a  peculiar  mercy.  For  if  any  had  been  with  Him  they  would  have 
shared  the  honour.  And  for  us,  too,  it  is  often  well  that  there  should  be  none  to 
help,  for  if  there  were  we  would  turn  to  them  and  not  to  God.  III.  The  oon- 
OENTRATION  OP  OUE  EXPECTATIONS.  For  when  all  help  is  gone  elsewhere  there 
comes  the  cry,  "Be  not  Thou  far  from  me."  Oh  !  we  live  too  low,  we  cleave  to 
earth  too  much  ;  but  when  we  can  soar,  and  mount  as  on  eagles'  wings,  gaze  on  the 
sun,  and  enjoy  the  smiling  countenance  of  our  covenant  God,  our  troubles  then  are 
mere  mole-hiUs  ;  if  we  look  down  on  them  at  all  we  can  hardly  see  them.  {Joseph 
Irons.) 

Vers.  14-18.  They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet.— Oitr  Lord^s  passion: — ^The 
great  mystery  of  the  passion  of  our  Lord  is  one  which  in  all  its  fulness  the  human 
mind  cannot  comprehend.  In  what  manner  His  sufferings  purchased  our  redemp- 
tion, and  what  was  the  precise  nature  of  those  sufferings,  are  points  which  we  shall 
in  vain  attempt  to  ascertain  or  demonstrate  by  words,  however  forcible ;  but  that 
Christ  died  for  our  sins,  and  that  we  are  redeemed  by  His  precious  blood,  are 
amongst  the  many  declarations  of  Scripture  which  place  beyond  all  doubt  the  truth 
that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  an  atonement  for  our  sin.  I.  The  suffeeings 
OF  Christ  as  man.  Every  kind  of  pain  tortured  His  body.  The  closing  scenes 
of  His  life  mark  Him  most  conspicuously  as  "the  Man  of  Sorrows."  II.  Thb 
SUFFEEINGS  WHICH  Cheist  ENDURED  AS  THE  SoN  OF  GoD.  The  sins  of  the  whole 
world  oppressed  Him.  Sin  when  duly  felt  is  a  heavy  burden.  How  heavy,  then, 
must  have  been  the  weight  of  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  1  How  wondrous  is  the 
outpouring  of  such  love  on  the  part  of  Jesus  and  of  God !  Let  the  memory  of  it 
guard  us  from  attempting  to  extenuate  sin,  or  in  any  way  making  light  of  it.  And 
when  we  are  called  upon  to  suffer,  let  the  example  of  our  Lord's  meekness  and 
humility  be  that  which  we  shall  follow.  {T.  R.  Redwar,  M.A-^  The  influence 
of  a  great  sacrifice : — It  is  strange  to  think  that  any  man  shoula  think  lightly  of  sin 
viewed  in  the  light  of  Calvary  Cross.  It  has  a  wonderful  power  and  influence  if  you 
would  view  it  aright.  One  day  a  little  girl,  sitting  by  her  mother's  side,  gazed  very 
intently  at  her  parent's  hand.  A  mere  stranger  would  have  said,  "What  a 
deformity  I "  as  the  hand  was  blurred  and  twisted.  The  girl  asked  her  mother  why 
the  hana  was  different  to  the  other.  The  mother  told  her  that  years  ago  when  her 
little  child  was  a  baby  the  cot  in  which  she  lay  caught  fire,  and  her  mother  in  her 
terror  and  anxiety  tore  off  the  curtains  to  stop  the  flames  and  wrap  the  child  in. 
In  doing  so  she  so  burned  her  hand  that  for  months  after  she  was  unable  to  use  it. 
You  can  think  how  the  child's  love  multiplied  beyond  all  words  as  she  heard  the 
story.  Her  future  delight  was  to  save  that  injured  hand  all  the  work  she  could 
possibly. 

Yer.  20.  Deliver  my  soul  £rom  the  sword ;  my  darling  £rom  the  power  of  the 
dog. — The  dog : — Dogs  in  the  East  are  not  much  thought  of,  and  never  properly 
treated.  The  varieties  with  which  we  are  familiar  they  knew  nothing  of.  The 
dogs  they  had  were  but  of  one  kind, — all  hungry,  half-starved,  savage,  cowardly, 
and  more  like  wolves  than  dogs.  But  with  us  the  dog  is  not  only  iiseful  and 
beloved,  but  often  displays  the  noblest  qualities.  For  instance — I.  Courage.  God 
expects  us  to  have  courage  (Deut.  xxxi.).  And  the  dog  sets  us  a  good  example  in 
this  respect.  Take  this  story  of  an  incident  which  took  place  in  the  town  of  New 
Brunswick,  New  Jersey.  A  horse  attached  to  a  waggon,  in  one  of  the  streets, 
became  frightened,   and  started  off  in  a  run.      The  owner  of  the  waggon  wai 


PSALM  XXII. J  THE  PSALMS.  419 

thrown  from  his  seat  as  the  horse  started,  and  was  left  lying  on  the  street.  The 
horse  went  galloping  along,  increasing  his  speed  every  moment,  till  he  reached  the 
corner  of  the  next  street.  There  a  large  Newfoundland  dog  made  his  appearance. 
He  looked  at  the  horse  for  a  moment,  and  then  sprang  out  into  the  street  and 
rushed  towards  the  horse's  head.  The  dog  made  repeated  efforts  hy  springing  up 
to  grasp  the  hridle  firmly  with  his  teeth.  But  he  failed  each  time  and  fell  to  the 
ground,  narrowly  escaping  injury  from  the  horse's  feet.  But  the  brave  dog  kept  on 
trying,  and  at  last,  making  an  extraordinary  spring  into  the  air,  he  grasped  the 
bridle  firmly  in  his  teeth  and,  pulling  down  the  horse's  head,  put  a  stop  to  his 
running  away.  As  soon  as  this  was  done  the  dog  turned  round  quietly  and  walked 
away.  But  the  people  standing  by,  who  had  witnessed  the  dog's  noble  action, 
when  they  thought  of  the  injury  which  might  have  been  done  by  the  runaway  horse, 
felt  disposed  to  praise  very  highly  the  conduct  of  the  dog  for  the  greatest  act  of 
courage  they  had  ever  seen  a  dumb  animal  perform.  The  next  lesson  we  may  learn 
from  the  dog  is — II.  Intelligence.  God  looks  for  intelligent  understanding  of  His 
will  in  us  all.  See  the  opening  verse  of  Prov.  ii.  And  the  dog  sets  us  a  good 
example  of  understanding  and  then  obeying  what  we  are  told  to  do.  A  gentleman 
connected  with  the  Newfoundland  fishery  had  a  dog  of  remarkable  intelligence  and 
fidelity.  On  one  occasion  a  boat's  crew  in  his  employ  were  seen  to  be  in  circum- 
stances of  great  danger.  They  were  near  a  line  of  breakers  outside  of  the  harbour 
over  which  the  waves  were  dashing  and  roaring  in  great  fury.  The  danger  of 
passing  those  breakers  was  so  great  that  the  men,  brave  as  they  were,  did  not  dare 
to  attempt  it.  A  crowd  of  people  stood  watching  them  on  the  shore  with  great 
anxiety,  but  could  do  nothing  to  help  them.  Much  time  had  passed,  and  the 
danger  was  increasing  every  moment.  Among  the  people  on  the  shore  was  the 
fishery  master's  great  Newfoundland  dog.  He  seemed  to  understand  what  the 
danger  was.  Presently  he  ran  to  the  water,  jumped  in,  and  swam  towards  the  boat. 
He  soon  made  his  way  through  the  surf,  and  the  men  in  the  boat  saw  him  coming 
near  to  them.  At  iirst  they  thought  he  wanted  to  get  into  the  boat,  but  it  soon 
became  evident  that  that  was  not  his  purpose.  He  did  not  come  near  the  boat,  but 
kept  swimming  round  it.  While  doing  this  he  looked  earnestly  at  the  men,  and 
would  whine  from  time  to  time.  The  men  wondered  what  he  wanted.  At  last  one 
of  them  cried  out,  "Give  him  a  rope;  that's  what  he  wants  !"  The  rope  was 
thrown  ;  the  dog  seized  the  end  of  it  with  his  mouth,  and  then  turned  round  and 
swam  towards  the  shore.  The  men  waiting  there  took  hold  of  it,  and  began  to  pull 
it,  and  in  a  short  time  the  boat  with  its  crew  was  hauled  through  the  dangerous  surf, 
and  the  men  on  board  of  it  were  landed  safely  on  the  shore.  And  so  the  lives  of 
that  boat's  crew  were  saved  by  the  intelligence  of  that  noble  dog.  III.  Affection. 
Love  brought  Jesus  to  die  for  us.  "God  so  loved  the  world  that,"  &c.  And  He 
desires  love  to  be  the  r\iling  principle  in  our  lives.  Even  dogs  have  shown  this  in 
remarkable  ways.  The  captain  of  the  artillery  company  of  South  Carolina  was 
killed  in  a  battle  in  Virginia  during  the  American  Civil  War.  His  body  was 
p.aoed  in  a  coffin,  which  was  put  into  a  strong  box  and  carried  to  the  home  of  his 
family  in  Columbia.  It  arrived  there  about  a  week  after  his  death.  On  his  arrival 
the  captain's  dog  that  he  had  reared  and  petted  during  his  lifetime  was  at  the  gate, 
and,  approaching  the  house,  began  to  smell  about  him,  with  a  good  deal  of  excite- 
Hient.  When  the  coflBn  was  taken  from  the  hearse  he  ran  under  it  and  followed  it 
to  the  house  between  the  pall-bearers.  Although  a  week  had  passed  by  since  his 
master's  death,  and  his  body  was  closely  fastened  up  in  the  coffin,  yet  by  the  sense 
of  smell  alone  the  dog  had  found  out  that  it  was  his  master's  body  which  was  in 
that  coffin,  and  this  stirred  up  all  his  afi"ection  for  him.  When  the  coffin  was 
put  on  the  table  in  the  parlour  the  dog  lay  down  under  the  table,  and  remained  there 
till  the  funeral  took  place  on  the  next  day.  Then  after  the  funeral  the  dog  took 
his  place  on  the  grave  of  his  old  master.  They  tried  to  coax  him  away,  but  in 
vain.  He  would  stay  there.  He  refused  to  eat  or  drink,  but  lay  moaning  there 
till  the  third  day  after  the  funeral,  when  he  died  on  his  master's  grave.  How  real 
and  genuine  that  dog's  affection  for  his  master  was  !  IV.  Fidelity.  This  is  a 
most  important  lesson.  Whatever  other  good  elements  of  character  we  may  have, 
they  will  aU  be  of  little  use  to  us  without  faithfulness.  The  want  of  it  is  like  a 
hole  in  a  purse,  which  lets  all  the  money  run  out  and  be  lost.  Now,  dogs  have 
often  been  noted  for  fidelity.  A  French  merchant  was  riding  home  on  horseback 
one  day.  He  had  a  large  bag  of  gold  with  him,  which  was  tied  to  the  saddle  in 
front  of  him,  and  was  accompanied  by  a  faithful  dog.  After  a  long  ride  he  stopped 
to  rest  himself,  and  eat  a  lunch  which  he  had  with  him.     He  alighted  from  the 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

horse  and  sat  down  under  a  shady  tree,  taking  the  bag  of  gold  and  laying  it  down 
by  his  side.  On  mounting  his  horse  again  he  forgot  to  take  his  bag  of  gold  with 
him.  The  dog  saw  the  mistake  his  master  had  made,  and  tried  to  take  the  bag  to 
him ;  but  it  was  too  heavy  for  him  to  drag  along.  Then  he  ran  after  his  master, 
and  tried  by  barking  to  remind  him  of  his  mistake.  But  the  merchant  did  not 
understand  what  the  dog  meant.  Then  the  dog  went  in  front  of  his  master  and 
kept  jumping  up  before  the  horse  and  barking  loudly.  The  merchant  called  to  him 
to  be  quiet  and  to  stop  that  jumping.  But  the  dog  wouldn't  stop.  Then  his 
master  was  alarmed.  He  began  to  think  that  the  dog  must  be  going  mad.  And  as 
the  dog  went  on  barking  and  jumping  with  increasing  violence,  the  merchant  felt 
sure  he  was  right.  He  said  to  himself,  ' '  He  may  bite  me,  or  some  one  else.  The 
only  safe  thing  will  be  to  kiU  him."  Then  he  took  a  pistol  from  his  pocket  and, 
pointing  it  to  the  dog,  fired  at  him.  The  poor  dog  fell  weltering  in  his  blood,  and 
his  master,  unable  to  bear  the  sight,  put  spurs  to  his  horse  and  went  on.  "  I  am 
very  unfortunate,"  he  said  to  himself  ;  "I  would  rather  have  lost  my  bag  of  money 
than  my  good  dog. "  Then  he  felt  for  his  bag,  but  it  was  not  there.  In  a  moment 
he  saw  what  it  all  meant.  The  dog  had  seen  that  he  had  left  his  bag  of  money 
behind  him,  and  was  trying  the  best  he  could  to  get  him  to  go  back  for  it  when  he 
shot  him  !  How  sorry  he  felt  I  Then  he  turned  his  horse,  and  rode  back  to  the 
place  where  he  had  left  his  money.  On  reaching  the  spot  he  found  the  dog  there. 
He  had  crawled  back,  all  bleeding  as  he  was,  and  had  lain  down  beside  his  master's 
money  to  protect  it.  This  brought  the  tears  into  the  merchant's  eyes.  He  kneeled 
down  by  his  dog,  petted  him,  and  spoke  kindly  to  him.  The  dog  looked  lovingly 
into  his  face,  licked  his  hand,  and  then  turned  over  and  died.  The  merchant  had 
the  body  of  the  dog  carried  home  and  buried  in  his  garden  ;  and  over  its  grave  he 
had  a  stone  slab  set  up,  and  with  these  words  engraved  on  it ;  "  In  Memory  of  a 
Faithful  Dog."  Such  are  some  of  the  lessons  we  may  learn  from  the  dog.  {Richard 
Newton,  D.D.)  The  power  of  the  dog  (Sermon  to  Children)  :— The  Bible  does  not 
generally  speak  well  of  dogs.  The  word  dog  in  the  Scriptures  often  means  a  wicked 
person.  When  he  says,  "Deliver  my  darling  from  the  power  of  the  dog,"  it  is  a 
prayer  that  God  would  deliver  His  only  Son  from  the  hands  of  wicked  men.  In 
Eastern  countries  dogs  are  reckoned  as  unclean  animals,  and  there  if  you  want  to 
give  a  man  a  bad  name  you  call  him  a  dog.  But  there  are  good  dogs  and  bad  dogs 
dogs  to  be  trusted  and  dogs  to  be  avoided.  Let  us  think  about  the  good  dogs  first. 
Most  .'of  you  have  read  the  beautiful  story  of  the  hound  Gelert.  And  in  Scott's 
beautiful  story  of  the  Talisman  there  is  a  story  of  Roswal,  a  noble  deer  hound 
who  kept  guard  over  the  English  standard.  And  there  are  the  dogs  of  St.  Bernard, 
who  go  out  in  the  snow  to  rescue  lost  travellers.  And  there  are  the  blind  men's 
dogs.  All  these  are  good  dogs.  But  there  are  bad  ones.  Here  are  the  names  of 
some  of  them.  First,  there  is  a  dog  called  Sulky,  a  black  dog.  I  remember  when 
I  was  a  little  boy  my  mother  used  to  tell  me  not  to  let  the  black  dog  get  on  my 
shoulder,  that  is,  not  to  be  sulky.  "When  a  child  is  bitten  by  that  black  dog  hia 
face  becomes  quite  changed.  All  his  beauty  goes  ;  and  his  character  is  altered  too. 
He  becomes  stubborn,  obstinate,  won't  work,  won't  play.  His  speech  is  altered  too  ; 
he  is  rude,  and  the  very  tone  of  his  voice  is  quite  different.  Beware  of  that  black 
dog.  Then  there  is  another  dog — a  red  one  this — and  he  is  called  Passion.  Yes,  a 
very  fiery  red  dog,  with  gleaming,  cruel  eyes  and  foaming  mouth.  If  he  bites  you 
he  sends  you  mad  for  a  time.  The  old  Romans  were  quite  right  when  they  called 
anger  a  short  madness.  If  you  see  a  child  with  a  very  red  face,  kicking  and  stamp- 
ing and  screaming,  you  may  be  sure  that  the  fierce  dog  Passion  has  bitten  him. 
Jiuius  Caesar,  when  he  was  provoked,  used  to  say  over  all  the  letters  of  the  Roman 
alphabet  before  he  gave  an  answer.  Beware,  then,  of  that  fierce  dog  Passion. 
There  is  another  dog  of  which  you  must  beware.  He  is  called  Idle.  You  never 
see  him  doing  anything  useful — carrying  a  basket  or  a  bundle,  as  some  dogs  will. 
He  lies  in  the  sun  sleeping,  almost  too  lazy  to  get  up  and  eat  his  food.  Don't  let 
him  bite  you.  If  he  bites  a  child  the  boy  or  girl  becomes  heavy  and  slow.  Instead 
of  getting  up  in  the  morning  fresh  and  bright,  with  plenty  of  tmie  to  say  his  prayers 
and  start  for  school  after  breakfast,  the  child  bitten  by  dog  Idle  gets  up  late,  and 
so  begins  the  day  badly.  The  only  thing  he  cares  for  is  play,  and  very  often  he  is 
too  idle  even  for  that.  There  is  another  dog  called  Mischief,  which  is  very 
dangerous.  You  must  not  think  that  I  am  speaking  of  Fun  and  Merriment, — they 
are  good  dogs,  which  skip  and  play  about,  and  do  good,  not  harm.  But  Mischief 
is  sly  and  secret,  he  goes  about  in  dark  places,  and  is  never  safe  to  meddle  with. 
When  a  child  is  bitten  by  dog  Mischief  no  one  can  tell  what  hann  he  may  do.     I 


PSALM  XXII.]  THE  PSALMS.  421 

know  a  poor  man  blind  for  life  through  a  stone  thrown  by  a  mischievous  boy. 
There  is  another  dog  of  which  you  must  beware.  His  name  is  Caeeless.  He  is  not 
so  bad  as  some  dogs, — at  times  we  can  scarcely  help  liking  him,  and  yet  he  does  much 
harm.  When  a  child  is  bitten  by  dog  Careless  things  go  badly  with  him.  Perhaps, 
in  school,  the  child  is  writing  a  copy,  suddenly  he  lets  a  great  drop  of  ink  fall  on 
his  copybook,  and  there  is  a  blot.  And  he  is  guilty  of  more  things  than  these. 
Be  on  your  guard  against  dog  Careless.  There  are  many  other  dogs  of  which  I 
could  warn  you,  but  I  will  only  speak  of  two.  There  is  dog  Selfish, — one  of  the 
worst  dogs  of  all.  When  we  get  a  bite  from  him  we  are  never  happy  ourselves, 
and  we  make  others  unhappy  too.  Then  there  is  another  dog  called  Gkeedy,  and 
he  is  a  very  near  relation  to  dog  Selfish.  Children  are  often  bitten  by  him,  and  they 
generally  suffer  ;  for  greedy  people  by  trying  to  get  too  much  often  lose  all.  There 
is  a  fable  which  tells  us  how  dog  Greedy  was  one  day  crossing  a  bridge  over  a  river, 
and  carrying  a  piece  of  meat  in  his  mouth.  As  he  looked  into  the  river  he  saw  his 
own  shadow.  Thinking  it  was  another  dog  who  carried  a  larger  piece  of  meat  than 
his  own,  dog  Greedy  flew  at  him  with  an  angry  bark,  and  as  he  opened  his  mouth 
the  meat  fell  into  the  river  and  was  lost.  So  it  is  often  with  greedy  people, 
because  they  are  not  contented  with  what  they  have  they  lose  it  altogether.  (^H.  J. 
Wilinot  Buxton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  In  the  midst  of  the  congregation  will  I  praise  Thee. — Jesus  the 
example  of  holy  praise: — I,  Our  Lord's  example.  He  renders  twofold  praise 
unto  the  eternal  Father.  1.  That  of  declaration.  He  did  this  in  His  teaching,  by 
His  acts,  but  most  of  all  in  His  death.  And  He  continued  to  declare  God's 
name  when  He  rose  from  the  dead.  Probably  He  does  this  still  in  heaven  to  the 
saints  there.  And  certainly,  by  the  spreading  of  His  Gospel  on  earth.  "In  the 
midst  of  the  congregation,"  &c.  When  His  people  here  on  earth  offer  praise  and 
prayer  He  is  united  with  them.  In  our  praise  He  is  the  great  singer,  rather  than 
we.  And  in  the  great  day  of  redemption,  when  all  shall  be  gathered  in,  it  will  be 
the  same.  Here  also  let  us  follow  His  example.  II.  The  Lord's  exhortation 
(ver.  23).  Praise  Him,  glorify,  fear  Him.  (C.  R.  Spurgeon.)  Public  worship  : 
— To  assemble  at  stated  seasons  for  the  pubhc  worship  of  their  gods  appears  to 
have  been  the  custom  in  all  ages  and  nations  of  the  world,  and  most  especially  of 
those  who  best  understood  the  nature  of  such  worship  and  the  perfections  of  that 
Almighty  Being  to  whom  all  worship  ought  to  be  addressed.  But  this  duty  is  sadly 
neglected,  so  we  consider  its  obligations  —  I.  The  explicit  command  of  God 
Himself.      The  institution  of  the  Sabbath  shows  His  will.      II.  The  advantage 

WHICH   we   expect   TO   DERIVE   FROM   THE   PERFORMANCE   OF   THIS   DUTY.       We  do 

not  come  to  church  to  hear  what  we  did  not  know  before.  Few  need  to  come 
Sv  such  reason.  But  discourses  from  the  pulpit  form  no  essential  part  of  Divine 
rforship.  A  sermon  is  not  a  prayer.  It  is  an  address  of  instruction  to  men, 
not  an  act  of  adoration  to  our  God.  It  is  when  we  enter  the  temple  of  the  Most 
High,  not  so  much  to  be  delighted  or  instructed  by  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher, 
as  to  humble  ourselves  before  our  God  in  penitence  or  prayer.  It  is  then  that  we 
shall  experience  the  first  advantage  of  public  worship,  and  lay  the  foundation  of  all 
the  rest.  We  shall  gain  help  to  make  us  a  clean  heart  and  to  renew  a  right  spirit 
within  us.  III.  Our  love  of  God  is  confirmed  and  increased,  and  our 
zeal  foe  His  honour  and  service.  How  sacred  and  helpful  are  the  feelings 
which  reverent  worship  of  God  in  His  temple  produces.  If  such  devotion  be 
regularly  continued  till  it  become  the  settled  temper  of  the  mind  it  will  not  fail 
at  length  to  produce  a  settled  habit  of  pious  and  virtuous  conduct ;  and  pious 
and  virtuous  conduct  is  the  greatest  blessing  which  in  his  present  state  man 
can  attain.  IV.  To  this  love  of  God  public  worship  tends  directly  to 
add  the  next  best  virtue  of  the  heart,  the  love  of  man.  In  public 
worship  we  are  surrounded  by  a  number  of  our  fellow-creatures,  oppressed  by  the 
same  wants,  petitioning  for  the  same  favours,  or  giving  thanks  for  the  same  bless 
ings,  labouring  under  the  same  infirmities,  confessing  the  same  offences,  and 
depending  upon  the  same  Saviour  for  pardon.  But  all  this  not  only  exalts  and 
animates  our  devotion  to  God,  but  excites  and  extends  our  humanity  to  our  fellow- 
men.  V.  Every  portion  of  our  worship  suggests  and  enforces  appropriate 
excellence  in  the  conduct  of  those  who  attend  it  in  a  right  spirit. 
VI.  For  the  sake  of  example.  The  young,  the  ignorant,  and  the  thoughtless 
are  the  most  efiectually  instructed  by  the  conduct  of  the  devout,  the  aged,  and  the 
wise.     The  corrupt  and  depraved  are  the  most  effectually  shamed  by  the  piety  and 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

virtue  of  the  just  and  good.  If,  on  the  contrary,  you  frequently  absent  yourself 
from  public  worship,  if  you  spend  the  Sabbath  in  idleness  at  home,  your  friends 
will  be  encouraged  in  the  same  criminal  neglect.     VII.  The  injury  to  our  own 

PBINCIPLES  AND  MORALS  WHICH   FOLLOWS   FROM  THE  NEGLECT  OF   IT.      YoU   will 

come  in  no  long  time  to  do  without  God  in  the  world,  without  the  hope  of  better 
things  to  come.  VIII.  Prayer  is  the  indispensable  condition  op  obtaining 
MANY  OF  the  BLESSINGS  OF  HEAVEN.  But  as  in  public  worship  we  are  greatly 
aided  in  prayer,  here  is  another  reason  wherefore  we  should  join  public  to  private 
devotion.  IX.  The  Redeemer  Himself  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the 
Sabbath  day:  and  shall  we  venture  to  be  absent?  Shall  we  presume  to 
expect  the  favour  of  Providence  if  we  think  it  not  worth  while  to  come  to  His 
temple  and  pray  for  it?  X.  The  day  will  come  when,  if  we  neglect  this 
DUTY  now,  we  shall  REGRET  IT  MUCH.  Youth  and  health  and  strength  cannot 
always  continue.  Evil  days  must  come.  Age  and  sickness  and  sorrow  must  over- 
take us.  And  where,  then,  shall  we  seek  the  consolation  which  we  shall  certainly 
want  ?  Happy  will  it  be  for  us  if  we  are  enabled  to  seek  it  where  only  it  can  m 
found, — in  the  remembrance  of  a  weU-spent  life,  in  that  purity  of  heart  which 
public  and  private  devotion  have  produced.     ( W.  Barrow. ) 

Yer.  26.  The  meek  ehaJl  eat  and  be  satisfied. — Feasting  on  the  sacrifice : — The 
custom  of  sacrificial  feasts  was  common  to  many  lands.  I.  The  world's  saobi- 
FTCIAL  feast.  The  Jewish  ritual,  and  that  of  many  other  nations,  provided  for  a 
uriBtal  meal  following  on,  and  consisting  of  the  material  of  the  sacrifice.  That 
which,  in  one  aspect,  is  a  peace  offering  reconciling  to  God,  in  another  aspect  is  the 
nourishment  and  joy  of  the  hearts  that  accept  it.  And  so  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ 
has  two  distinct  phases  of  application,  according  as  we  think  of  it  as  being  offered  to 
God  or  appropriated  by  man.  In  the  one  case  it  is  our  peace  ;  in  the  other  it  is  our 
food  and  our  life.  The  Christ  that  feeds  the  world  is  the  Christ  that  died  for  the 
world.  The  peace  offering  for  the  world  is  the  food  of  the  world.  We  see  hence  the 
connection  between  these  great  spiritual  ideas  and  the  central  act  of  Christian  wor- 
ship. The  Lord's  Supper  simply  says  by  act  what  the  text  says  in  words.  The 
translation  of  the  "eating"  into  spiritual  reality  is  simply  that  we  partake  of  the 
food  of  our  spirits  by  the  act  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Personal  appropriation  and 
making  the  world's  food  mine,  by  an  individual  act,  is  the  condition  on  which  alone 
I  get  any  good  from  it.  II.  The  rich  fruition  of  this  feast.  "Satisfied." 
Jesus  Christ,  in  the  facts  of  His  death  and  resurrection,  being  to  us  all  that  our  cir- 
cumstances, relationships,  and  inward  condition  can  require.  III.  The  guests.  It 
is  the  "meek"  who  eat.  Meek  usually  refers  to  men's  demeanour  to  one  another. 
The  expression  here  goes  deeper.  It  means  both  "afflicted"  and  "lowly," — the 
right  use  of  affliction  being  to  bow  men,  and  they  that  bow  themselves  are  those  who 
are  fit  to  come  to  Christ's  feast.  Men  are  shut  out  only  because  they  shut  them- 
selves out.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  recoonpense  of  piety : — In  genuine  religion 
there  is  great  reward.  Nothing  is  so  conducive  to  the  happiness  of  man,  nothing 
so  effectually  secures  it.  I.  The  temper  to  be  cherished.  Meekness,  lowliness 
of  mind,  which  so  becomes  us  as  sinners.  II.  The  conduct  to  be  pursued.  We 
should  seek  the  Lord.  This  supposes — 1.  That  we  have  suffered  loss.  We  do  not  seek 
what  we  have.  We  have  lost  the  knowledge,  favour,  image,  and  the  enjoyment  of 
God.  2.  That  this  loss  may  be  regained.  The  Gospel  shows  us  how.  3.  The  use 
of  proper  means  is  also  implied.  III.  The  blessings  which  shall  bb  secured. 
We  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied  ;  shall  praise  the  Lord,  and  live  for  ever.  {T.  Kidd.) 
They  shall  praise  the  Lord  that  seek  Him. — Chod  news  for  seekers: — These  are  the 
words  of  Jesus  on  the  Cross.  He  died  to  further  the  Father's  glory.  This  was  the 
object  He  sought,  and  He  solaces  Himself  with  the  thought  of  all  the  kindreds  of  the 
nations  turning  to  God,  and  that  they  who  seek  the  DDrd  shall  praise  Him.  The 
assurance  of  text  very  encouraging.  Note — I.  The  persons — the  seekers  of  the 
Lord.  These  are  they — 1.  Who  really  desire  to  commune  with  God.  Not  mere 
repeaters  of  a  prayer,  but  those  who  really  seek  the  Lord.  2.  Who  know  that  they 
are  at  a  distance  from  Him.  3.  But  are  anxious  that  that  distance  should  be  taken 
away.  4.  And  would  feel  themselves  to  be  the  friends  of  God.  5.  And  desire  all 
this  now.  All  this  prepares  the  man  to  praise  when  he  finds  the  Lord.  II.  Thb 
PROMISK.  "They  shall,"  &c.  1.  It  is  fulfilled  unconsciously  while  the  man  is 
seeking.  2.  The  praise  abounds  when  the  desire  is  granted.  You  who  seek,  you 
shall  surely  find  salvation,  and  that  ere  long.  God  may  try  you,  let  you  wait  a 
while  before  He  gives  you  the  joy  of  realised  pardon ;  but  seek  on  still.   3.  You  ahaU 


PSALM  xxii]  THE  PSALMS.  428 

go  on  seeking  and  go  on  praising.  III.  The  peaise.  It  will  be — 1.  Because  we 
Found  Him  as  we  did.  2.  That  we  found  such  a  Saviour.  3.  Because  of  our 
security.  4.  Because  we  ever  sought  the  Lord  at  all.  Conclusion :  Let  us  who 
have  sought  the  Lord  praise  Him.  Let  us  show  our  poor  friends  the  seekers  the  way. 
We  sought  and  we  found  ;  let  us  magnify  the  Lord  at  once.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 
Arduous  seeking  becomes  joyous  in  finding : — All  his  seeking,  I  say,  helps  him  to 
prize  Divine  mercy  when  he  receives  it,  and  trains  him  to  praise  God  according  to 
the  promise  of  our  text,  "They  shall  praise  the  Lord  that  seek  Him."  Never  is  a 
babe  so  dear  to  its  mother  as  when  it  has  just  been  restored  from  a  sickness  which 
threatened  his  life  ;  never  does  a  father  rejoice  over  his  little  child  so  much  as  when 
he  has  been  long  lost  in  the  woods,  and  after  a  weary  search  is  at  last  brought  home. 
No  gold  is  so  precious  to  a  man  as  that  which  he  has  earned  by  hard  labour  and  self- 
denial  :  the  harder  he  has  toiled  to  gain  it,  the  more  rejoiced  is  he  when  at  length  he 
has  enough  to  permit  him  to  rest.  No  freedom  is  so  precious  as  the  new  found 
liberty  of  a  slave,  no  enlargement  so  joyous  as  that  of  one  who  has  long  been  sitting 
in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  bound  in  affliction  and  iron.  No  return  to  a 
country  is  so  full  of  delight  as  that  of  sorrowful  exiles  who  come  back  from  cruel 
Babylon,  by  whose  waters  they  sat  and  wept,  yea,  wept  when  they  remembered 
Zion.  (ibid.)  Seekers  become  singers : — As  a  bird  lies  hidden  among  the  heather, 
but  is  seen  when  at  last  it  is  startled  and  made  to  take  to  the  wing,  so  doth  praise 
take  to  the  wing  and  display  itself  when  at  last  those  who  seek  the  Lord  are  per- 
mitted to  find  Him.  AVhat  thunderclaps  of  praise  come  from  poor  sinners  when 
they  have  just  found  their  all  in  all  in  God  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus.  Then 
their  joy  becomes  almost  too  much  for  them  to  hold,  vastly  too  much  for  them  to 
express.  Oh,  the  praises,  the  day  and  night  praises,  the  continuous  praises,  which 
rise  from  the  returning,  repenting  soul  which  has  at  last  felt  the  Father's  arms 
around  its  neck  and  the  Father's  warm  kisses  on  its  cheek,  and  is  sitting  down  at  the 
table  where  the  happy  household  eat  and  drink  and  are  merry.  Praising  time  has 
come  indeed  when  finding  time  has  arrived.  Happy  day  !  Happy  day  !  when  we 
meet  with  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Your  heart  shall  live  for  evei.—  The 
immortality  of  the  affections : — The  heart  has  been  employed  by  the  inspired  writers 
as  the  symbol  of  human  aifections.  So  the  heart  of  man  is  said  to  be  tried  by  God — 
to  be  opened,  established,  enlightened,  strengthened,  searched  by  God.  The  text 
asserts  the  absolute  indestructibility  of  our  religious  affections.  Work  up  to  this 
through  the  intervening  lessons.  1.  There  is  one  thing  in  this  fleeting  world  which 
is  immortal.  Man  wears  on  his  forehead  the  crown  of  his  regnant  majesty  ;  for  his 
nature  is  undying.  No  soul  has  ever  yet  passed  out  of  existence.  2.  The  text  draws 
a  distinction  between  life  and  mere  existence.  Into  this  word  "live"  we  must 
suffer  a  new  increment  of  meaning  to  enter.  These  hearts  of  ours  may  have  one  of 
two  moral  states.  Whichever  of  these  is  possessed  as  a  permanent  character  decides 
destiny.  The  heart  that  "  seeks  God  "  enters  immediately  into  the  nearness  of  God's 
presence,  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy.  The  heart  that  wilfully  refuses  to  "seek 
God  "  is  forced  into  the  darkness  of  utter  banishment  from  God  for  the  unending 
future.  The  first  of  these  conditions  is  "  life,"  the  second  is  "  death."  3.  The  text 
evidences  its  authority  by  language  peremptory  and  plain.  The  word  "  shall  "  is  of 
itself  sovereign  and  conclusive.  But  the  form  of  speech  employed  is  not  that  of  pre- 
diction so  much  as  that  of  promise.  There  are  also  three  fixed  laws  of  human 
nature  which,  fairly  working  together,  render  it  absolutely  certain  that  our  affec- 
tions will  survive  the  shock  of  death,  and  reassert  themselves  hereafter.  (1)  One  is 
the  law  of  habit.  The  pressure  of  such  a  law  holds  more  surely  in  our  mental  and 
moral  nature  than  in  our  physical.  Loves  are  stronger  and  hates  are  more 
inveterate  than  simple  habits  of  body  and  mind.  (2)  Another  law  is  that  of  exer- 
cise. ' '  Practice  makes  perfect. "  Under  this  law  the  memory  is  often  so  wonderfully 
strengthened  that  it  disdains  data  of  aid.  The  most  curious  working  of  this  law 
will  appear  in  the  fact  that  when  our  affections  are  wrought  upon  their  increase  is 
supreme.  One's  prejudices  become  his  master.  (3)  Then  there  is  the  law  of  associa- 
tion. Most  of  all,  this  is  subtle  and  forceful.  When  its  action  reaches  a  man's 
moral  and  mental  natures  working  together  it  seems  almost  irresistible.  These 
three  laws  actually  intertwine  themselves  together,  and  accelerate  the  action  of  each 
other.  4.  The  text  teaches  that  human  immortality  is  quite  independent  of  all 
accidents  and  surroundings.  Augustine  says,  "  Our  life  is  so  brief  and  insecure  that 
I  know  not  whether  to  call  it  a  dying  life  or  a  living  death."  It  is  not  in  the  body 
that  our  immortality  residrs.  Your  "heart"  is  yourself.  There  is  one  thing  in 
man,  only  one,  that  is  immortal — the  soul.     Human  affections  will  live  for  ever  in 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxu. 

the  line  of  their  "seeking."  The  heart  therefore  is  independeut  of  all  surround- 
ings. 5.  The  text  fixes  all  its  force  by  an  immediate  application  of  its  doctrine  to 
such  as  are  meek  enough  to  receive  it.  If  your  heart  is  to  live  for  ever,  then  much 
consideration  ought  to  be  given  to  your  aims  in  life,  for  they  are  fashioning  the 
heart  that  is  to  be  immortal.  And  our  companionships  ought  to  be  chosen  with  a 
view  to  the  far  future  which  is  coming.  If  our  hearts  are  to  live  for  ever,  then  some 
care  should  be  had  concerning  our  processes  of  education  by  which  our  affections  are 
trained.  And  if  our  hearts  are  to  live  for  ever,  then  surely  it  is  now  time  some 
hearts  were  changed  powerfully  by  the  Spirit  of  Divine  grace.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.  D. ) 
Immortality  of  the  affections : — Transient  and  occasional  bursts  of  inspiration  in  the 
Old  Testament  anticipate  what  Christianity  was  afterwards  to  teach.  They  seem 
like  lightning  flashes,  illuminating  the  deep  obscurity  for  a  moment.  How  much 
is  implied  in  these  words,  "Your  heart  shall  live  for  ever."  They  mean  that  the 
body  shall  not, — in  its  present  elements  it  shall  not ;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
life  immortal.  The  happiness  of  the  future  existence  shall  not  come  from  the  body, 
from  the  gratification  of  its  passions  nor  the  exercise  of  its  powers  ;  and  just  so  far 
as  a  man  depends  for  his  enjoyment  on  these  earthly  indulgences  he  is  unfit  for 
that  spiritual  state  to  which  death  will  soon  translate  us,  and  for  which  it  is  our 
wisdom  now  to  prepare.  These  words  of  the  text  also  imply  that  the  mind,  though 
it  shall  endure,  will  not  be  the  source  of  happiness  in  another  existence.  We  know 
too  little  of  its  nature  to  say  whether  death  will  change  it ;  but  certainly  it  will 
change  our  estimation  of  it ;  for  now,  in  this  world,  talent,  force  of  mind,  genius  are 
set  highest  among  the  gifts  of  God.  The  affections  (or  the  heart)  are  as  much 
above  the  understanding  as  the  mind  is  above  the  body.  It  is  in  the  affections  that 
the  elements  of  heavenly  happiness  are  to  be  found.  These  words  teach  us  what 
should  be  our  constant  object,  and  lead  us  also  to  consider  how  abundantly  God  has 
provided  for  it  on  every  side.  Consider — 1,  How  all  the  arrangements  of  this  life 
favour  the  growth  of  those  affections  which  are  the  elements  of  life  immortal.  The 
home,  requiring  of  each  within  it  to  suppress  those  selfish  passions  which  darken 
over  everything  which  they  touch,  and  making  it  manifest  that  all  the  sunshine  and 
comfort  of  the  dwelling  depend,  not  on  its  magnificence,  not  on  the  luxuries  within 
it,  but  simply  and  entirely  on  the  spirit  of  love  within.  And  the  circle  of  friend- 
ship carries  out  those  same  affections  into  wider  range.  That  these  are  Divine 
arrangements  may  be  seen  from  the  moral  and  spiritual  laws  which  run  through 
them — which  ordain  that  these  affections  shall  move  in  paths  of  duty.  But  these 
arrangements  of  life  for  a  certain  purpose  are  not  meant  to  effect  that  purpose  of 
themselves  ;  it  rests  with  us  to  trace  out,  to  follow,  and  improve  them.  The  first 
business  of  the  Christian  life  is  to  deny  ourselves,  which  means  not  to  deny  ourselves 
a  blessing  here  and  there,  but  to  resist  the  strong  selfish  tendency  of  our  nature,  to 
train  our  affections  in  the  right  way,  to  regard  them  as  the  beginnings  and  indica- 
tions of  our  future  destiny,  and  to  keep  our  heart  with  all  diligence,  since  out  of  it 
are  the  fountains  of  immortal  life.  Once  attach  this  thought  of  immortality  to  the 
affections,  and  how  mighty  and  solemn  those  interests  become  !  2.  All  the  arrange- 
ments of  death,  all  of  which  have  a  purpose  and  meaning,  are  even  more  fitted 
to  form  for  immortality  the  heart  which  is  to  live  for  ever.  The  world  is  changed 
by  the  presence  of  death  ;  wherever  it  comes  we  feel  that  a  new  influence  is  there,  a 
power  is  there  which  was  not  there  before.  Each  one  who  feels  at  all  feels  that 
something  is  meant  by  it,  that  it  is  a  communication  addressed  to  him.  Never  do  the 
affections  come  forth  in  purer  or  more  disinterested  action  than  in  the  presence  of 
death.  3.  The  arrangements  of  the  future  existence  are  also  of  a  kind  to  favour  the 
growth  of  the  affections.  The  foresight  of  the  future  state,  the  vision  of  it  which 
lies  before  us  in  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  must  necessarily  have  a  great  effect  on  the 
efforts  we  make  to  reach  it.  Awake,  then,  to  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  the  heart. 
See  how  all  your  welfare  for  this  world  and  the  other  depends  on  the  right  unfold- 
ing and  care  of  its  affections.     ( W.  B.  0.  Peabody,  D.D.) 

Ver.  27.  All  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord. — 

The  return  to  the  Father: — In  this  Psalm  the  utterance  of  the  believing  heart  in 
trial  and  in  deliverance  becomes,  at  various  points,  a  prophetic  anticipation  of  the 
experience  of  Christ.  In  one  verse  after  another  we  seem  to  hear  out  of  His  own 
mouth  the  sorrow  and  the  triumph  of  Christ.  Regarding  the  text  in  this  light,  as 
an  expectation  which  a  believer  might  naturally  express  in  the  hour  of  his  own 
enlargement,  it  brings  before  us  an  interesting  connection  of  thought.  A  believar 
who  has  been  brought  into  great  temptation  and  trouble,  and  whose  faith  has  been 


PSALM  xxn.]  THE  PSALMS.  425 

drawn  out  into  lirely  and  lowly  exercise,  when  the  deliverance  comes  will  be  aware 
of  something  more  than  the  worth  and  the  gladness  of  that  particular  deliverance. 
He  has  been  holding  converse  with  the  mercy  of  God  under  pressure.  There  comes 
afresh  into  his  heart  the  impression  of  the  love  of  God,  of  which  his  own  relief  is 
only  an  instance  and  expression.  So  God  teaches  him— forces  him  to  learn  afresh — 
what  a  blessedness  this  is  to  have  this  God  for  his  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Then 
how  naturally  he  may  go  on  to  such  an  anticipation  as  that  in  the  text.  He  has  a 
fresh  sense  of  that  in  God  which  saves  and  blesses.  How  natural  it  becomes  to 
cherish  even  so  great  an  expectation  as  that  the  ends  of  the  world  may  turn  to  the 
Lord  !  If  all  believers  had  the  fresh  sense  they  might  have  of  Divine  compassion 
there  would  be  less  uncertainty  about  the  prosperity  of  the  Gospel,  less  of  feeble 
and  dubious  effort.  And  we  may  also  hear  the  utterance  of  a  Saviour's  joy  and 
exultation  when  it  is  said,  "The  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember,  and  shall  turn 
to  the  Lord."  I.  The  prospect  fkom  the  Ceoss.  So  taken,  the  text  suggests  to 
us  our  Lord's  consciousness  of  the  virtue  that  lay  in  His  atoning  sacrifice.  The  life 
of  perfect  holiness  and  perfect  love  was  crowned  by  the  death  in  which  He  put  away 
sin.  Exceeding  glory  to  God  and  good  to  man  were  to  be  unfolded  from  it.  This 
lay  fully  before  our  Lord's  eye  from  the  first.  "What  He  saw  it  becomes  us  to 
believe — the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember,  and  turn  to  the  Lord.  H.  The 
soul's  avtakenino.  "They  shall  remember."  It  is  as  though  something  long 
forgotten  had  come  to  mind,  had  melted  their  hearts  within  them.  In  what  sense 
is  the  truth  in  Christ  new  ?  It  is  not  so  new  but  that  it  has  also  something  old 
in  it.  Just  this  lay  behind  many  a  transient  conviction,  many  a  vague  and  dim 
impression.  Whatever  of  new  has  come  has  put  unspeakable  meaning  into  all  the 
old.  III.  Man's  place  with  God.  This  is  not  so  only  with  those  for  whom 
conversion  comes  after  years  of  acquaintance  with  the  Christian  creed,  and  with  the 
form  of  Godliness.  It  holds  for  men  as  men.  The  God  who  in  Christ  becomes  ours 
is  the  very  God  for  whom  man  was  made.  This  is  the  meaning  of  man.  And  the 
blessedness  which  redemption  brings  is  for  the  heart  of  man,  as  man  was  planned 
and  made.  IV.  The  inevitable  rettten.  The  text  points  to  a  time  when  turn- 
ing to  God  shall  be  the  main  thing,  the  pr-3vailing  thing,  as  if  a  mighty  tide  setting 
that  way,  carried  all  before  it.  For  the  j  ^esent  we  do  not  see  this.  {Roher!  Rainy, 
D.D.)  Three  stages  in  religious  life:— I.  UziFjjY.crio^.  "Shall  remember."  We 
use  the  word  reflection  here  because  the  usual  Bible  significance  of  the  word  "remem- 
ber" is  not  simply  "recollect,"  but  meditate,  consider.  The  act  described  is  far 
more  than  one  of  memory  ;  witness  the  words,  "Remember  now  thy  Creator."  Here 
also  the  Psalmist  means  ' '  remember  (he  Lord. "  Thought  is  the  first  stage  in  true  life. 
Eight  thought  on  a  right  subjeci  is  essential  to  right  life.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his 
heart,  so  is  he."  1.  Think  about  God.  2.  Think  what  God's  ways  with  men  are. 
3. Think  of  your  relationship  to  God.  In  the  past;  now;  for  the  future.  II.Conveesion. 
"  Turn  unto  "  would  be  a  synonym  ;  or  "  return."  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye 
die  ? "  These  passages,  with  that  in  our  text,  remind  us — 1.  That  man  is  turned  away 
from  God.  There  is  aversion  and  alienation.  2.  Man  may  be  restored  to  God.  His  face 
may  yet  look  into  the  face  of  the  Father,  his  life  spent  in  Godward  sympathies  and 
activities.  3.  This  conversion,  i.e.  moral  turning  round,  implies  human  effort  and 
Divine  help.  Man  is  to  turn,  and  God  will  turn  him.  Then,  and  then  only,  will 
his  back  be  towards  vanities  and  sins,  and  his  face  towards  the  true  and  the  pure. 
More  than  passing  sentiment  is  needed.  There  must  be  the  putting  forth  of  all  the 
strongest  forces  of  manhood,  and  the  energising  grace  of  God.  III.  Adoea'iion. 
"Shall  worship."  This  is  the  climax.  It  is  the  fullest  development  of  the  higher 
life,  the  crown  of  human  destiny.  Adoration  of  God  is — 1.  The  instinct.  2.  The 
obligation.  3.  The  satisfaction  of  souls.  {TJ.  R.  Thomas.)  The  importance  of  true 
religion,  and  the  care  of  God  to  preserve  it: — I.  To  gloeift  and  enjoy  God  aee 
the  great  ends  of  oue  creation  and  eedemption.  This  is  the  great  and  funda- 
mental article  of  religion.  God's  design  in  the  creation  and  government  of  the 
world  must  have  been  the  manifestation  of  His  perfection,  and  the  conferring 
happiness  on  intelligent  creatures  in  proportion  to  their  capacities.  To  what  pur- 
pose hath  God  distinguished  man  with  a  rational  and  immortal  soul  resembling 
Himself,  but  to  make  him  capable  of  religion  and  eternal  life.  What  the  character 
of  God  and  the  nature  of  man  so  clearly  demonstrate  on  principles  of  reason,  God 
hath  expressly  declared  to  us  in  His  Word.  II.  God  has  given  men  peoper 
information  of  His  character,  will,  and  grace  as  their  rule  of  duty 
and  their  guide  to  happiness.  The  existence  of  the  creation  demonstrates  the 
existence  of  the   Creator;    its  greatness  proves   His  immensity;    its  order,   His 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

wisdom ;  and  the  provision  made  for  the  happiness  of  His  creatures,  His  boundless 
goodness.  In  every  state  of  man  the  only  perfect  rule  of  religion  is  Divine  revela- 
tion, which  confirms  all  the  principles  of  natural  religion,  and  informs  us  of  many 
things  necessary  to  be  known  which  our  own  reason  could  not  have  discovered. 
The  dispensations  of  God's  providence  subserved  the  design  of  Hia  revelations  for 

g reserving  religion  and  virtue  in  the  world.     III.  That  befoeb  the  coming  op 
HEIST  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  TRUE  GOD   SHOULD  BE  GENERALLY  FORGOTTEN  AND 

NEGLECTED  BY  MANKIND.  This  melancholy  truth  the  history  of  the  world  hath  but 
too  amply  verified.  True  religion  must  always  have  the  true  God  for  its  object,  and 
His  moral  character  and  revealed  will  for  its  rule.  False  religion  originates  in  a 
departure  from  the  worship  of  the  true  God  to  that  of  idols ;  either  as  objects  of 
religious  adoration  or  as  the  means  of  it.  To  this  cause  Moses  ascribed  the  idolatry 
of  Israel.  The  sun,  moon,  &c.,  from  being  worshipped  only  as  representations  of 
God,  came  to  be  considered  and  worshipped  as  so  many  distinct  deities.  As  the 
multitude  of  gods  worshipped  by  the  heathen  distracted  their  religion,  and  turned 
it  away  from  the  only  true  God,  so  their  mean  and  immoral  characters  shamefully 
debased  it.  Religion  is  the  chief  part  and  foundation  of  moral  righteousness.  As 
before  the  coming  of  Christ  the  Gentiles  had  grossly  departed  from  the  knowledge 
and  profession  of  the  true  religion,  so  the  Jews  had  greatly  degenerated  from  the 
sincere  belief  and  practice  of  it.     IV.  By  the  Gospel  and  the  grace  of  Christ 

ALL  NATIONS  SHOULD  BE  BROUGHT  TO  REMEMBER  AND  TURN  UNTO  THE  LORD.   The 

coming  of  the  Saviour  was  the  era  of  light,  reformation,  and  happiness  to  the 
world.  ...  As  to  the  proper  improvement  of  these  truths,  let  us  ever  live  under 
the  serious  belief  and  impression  that,  to  glorify  and  enjoy  God,  our  Creator  and 
Saviour,  are  the  great  ends  of  our  existence,  and  can  be  attained  only  by  the  know- 
ledge and  practice  of  true  religion.  {W.  Dalgleish,  D.D.)  Nature  and  extent 
of  true  conversion  under  Messiah's  reign: — I.  The  nature  of  true  conversion. 
I.  It  is  to  remember.  It  is  fitly  expressed  by  the  case  of  the  prodigal,  who  is  said 
to  have  "come  to  himself"  The  Holy  Spirit  is  ever  seeking  to  make  us  remember. 
Sometimes  by  adverse  providences,  as  with  Joseph's  brethren.  At  other  times  by 
His  Word.  Sometimes  it  is  without  any  apparent  cause.  "  I  thought  on  my  ways," 
says  David,  "and  turned  my  feet  unto  Thy  testimonies."  And  there  will,  how- 
ever brought,  be  many  ways  which  we  shall  remember  with  sorrow  and  shame.  As 
our  ways  of  open  immorality:  things  which  we  thought  were  no  harm,  since  other 
people  did  them;  and  ways  which  we  have  thought  nothing  about — sins  of  the 
heart.  And  ways,  too,  that  you  have  counted  good  you  will  thus  remember.  All 
your  religion  while  unconverted  will  appear  odious  to  you.  2.  It  is  turning  unto 
the  Lord.  This  is  very  important,  for  it  is  possible  to  remember  our  evil  ways  with- 
out turning  from  them.  And  it  is  possible  both  to  remember  and  turn,  and  yet  not 
to  turn  to  the  Lord.  And — 3.  There  wiU  be  "worship" — the  homage  of  the  heart 
presented  to  God  according  to  His  will.  II.  The  extent.  "All  the  ends  of  the 
world  " ;  "all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations,"  &c.  It  was  fit  that  the  accessions  of  the 
Gentiles  should  be  reserved  for  the  Gospel  day,  that  it  might  grace  the  triumph  of 
Christ  over  His  enemies.  And  the  good  work  then  begun  must  go  on,  no  longer  limited 
to  the  seed  of  Abraham.  But  the  time  will  come  when  our  text  will  be  abundantly 
fulfilled.  Nor  can  the  time  of  fulfilment  be  far  distant.  The  last  branch  of  the  last 
of  the  four  beasts  foretold  by  Daniel  is  now  in  its  dying  agonies.  But  while  we  are 
concerned  for  all  the  world,  let  us  not  forget  our  own  souls.  {Andrew  Fuller.) 
The  assistance  derived  by  Christianity  from  human  learning: — It  is  matter  of  doubt 
whether  there  is  real  improvement  in  the  world  in  morals  and  religion.  In  some 
parts  matters  seem  to  have  become  worse.  But  in  others,  our  own  country  especially, 
since  the  Reformation  there  has  been  improvement,  and  such  as  is  not  likely  to  be 
lost.  StiU,  we  are  far  enough  from  perfection.  For  that  we  must  look  on  to  the 
kingdom  of  God  yet  to  be  established,  but  meanwhile  we  must  help  it  forward  as  we 
best  can.  But  note — I.  What  are  the  causes  of  the  improvement  we  have 
noticed  ?  They  are — 1.  General  ex^^erience,  though  there  are  instances  in  which 
the  moral  and  religious  condition  of  the  people  are  no  better  now  than  they  were 
ages  ago.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  these  communities  have  possessed  no  literature, 
and^  hence  the  teachings  of  experience  have  been  lost  and  each  generation  has  to 
begin  anew.  2.  Letters  and  learning.  Hence  these  teachings  no  longer  die  with 
those  who  have  acquired  them,  but  are  handed  on  to  their  successors.  But  we  have 
instances  in  which — as  in  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome,  where  there  have  been  letters 
and  learning,  but  because  separated  from  true  religion — the  world  has  not  been 
morally  advanced  by  them.    The  experience  of  Fiance  in  the  eighteenth  century  is  in 


PSALM  XXII.]  THE  PSALMS.  427 

point  here,  3.  The  revelation  of  Christianity.  But  this  from  an  early  period 
down  to  the  time  of  the  Reformation  being  loaded  with  superstition,  the  moral  life 
of  men  was  but  little  benefited.  Hence  we  gather  that  there  must  be  the  union  of 
Learning  and  Christianity  if  any  real  progress  is  to  be  made.  II.  What  assistance 
Christianity  has  received  from  human  learning.  This  learning  may  be  dis- 
tinguished— 1.  As  the  study  of  ancient  languages  and  composition.  Hence  now  we 
have  the  Scriptures  translated,  and  this  learning  is  useful  not  only  to  translate  but 
to  teach  us  the  rules  of  interpretation,  and  of  just  criticism,  and  of  the  best  models 
of  composition,  and  to  give  freedom  and  strength  to  the  imagination.  Even  the 
elegance  of  ancient  writers,  though  often  considered  as  merely  ornamental,  is  not 
without  its  use  towards  the  perfection  of  Christian  morals.  There  is  a  connection 
and  a  sympathy  which,  though  they  do  not  always  appear,  have  yet  a  tendency  to 
prevail,  between  whatever  is  simple  and  elegant  in  the  arts,  and  a  simplicity  and 
elegance  of  manners.  By  this  connection  we  are  rendered  more  sensible  of  any 
thing  that  can  soften  the  human  mind,  can  heighten  the  enjoyment  of  social  life, 
or  prepare  us  for  that  Christian  charity  which  is  the  bond  of  peace  and  of  all 
virtue.  2.  The  study  of  philosophy,  which  is  not  merely  useful  in  the  discovery  of 
curious  and  useful  arts.  It  serves  a  much  nobler  and  more  generous  purpose,  that 
of  promoting  our  progress  towards  the  perfection  of  our  nature,  and  of  advancing 
the  interests  of  true  religion.  ( W.  Pearce,  D.D.)  The  triiomph  of  Christianity : — 
Some  regard  this  Psalm  as  our  Lord's  soliloquy  when  expiring  on  the  Cross.  It  may 
be  so.  Fitter  words  could  not  have  been  conceived.  The  mighty  hero  sees  the 
conflict  ended,  anticipates  the  victory,  and  begins  to  chant  the  conqueror's  paean. 
I.  The  conversion  of  the  nations  to  God  may  be  expected.  It  is  much  to  be 
desired.  But  the  battle  is  long  and  weary  and  the  end  is  not  yet.  Some  think  it 
is  not  to  be  looked  for.  But — 1.  Our  newborn  nature  craves  for  it ;  and — 2.  Is  it  not 
unlikely  that  on  this  earth  where  God  has  stood  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  that  evil, 
after  all,  should  vanquish  Him  ?  3.  And  see  the  promises  of  reward  made  to  our 
Eedeemer.  "He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied."  And 
the  Scriptures  are  full  of  such  promises,  in  the  Psalms  and  in  all  the  prophets.  It  is 
good  to  be  reminded  of  them,  for  we  shall  not  labour  well  if  we  do  not  labour  in 
hope.  And  as  yet  we  have  not  done  so  much  as  to  give  the  fragments  of  the  Gospel 
feast  to  the  nations.  "When  the  Church  is  ready  for  great  events  they  shall  occur 
to  her.  II.  Such  conversion  will  occur  in  the  usual  manner  of  other 
conversions.  "  The  nations,"  says  our  text,  "shall  remember,  and  shall  turn  unto 
the  Lord,  and  shall  worship  before  Him."  1.  They  shall  remember.  In  this  manner 
conversion  begins.  2.  They  shall  turn.  3.  They  shall  icorsMp.  III.  The  means 
TO  accomplish  this  result  are  to  be  found  at  Calvary.  This  is  a  Calvary 
Psalm;  its  connection  is  full  of  sacrificial  suffering.  Every  conversion  is  the  result 
of  Christ's  death.  And  His  death  is  our  motive  for  spreading  the  Gospel.  And 
it  is  the  security  of  future  triumph.  We  shall  conquer  the  world,  but  it  will  be  by 
the  Cross.  The  old  legend  of  Constantine,  "/w  hoc  signo  vinees,"  hath  truth  in  it 
for  us.  By  this  we  shall  conquer — by  the  Cross,  by  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(C.  K.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  28.  The  kingdom  is  tlie  Lord's. — An  universal  religion: — The  law  of 
Moses  was  confined,  by  the  terms  of  its  promulgation,  to  the  land  of  Judsea  :  and 
other  systems  which  have  been  embraced  as  Divine  attempted  to  ensure  their 
success  in  some  quarters  of  the  globe  by  an  accommodation  to  local  manners  which 
prevented  them  from  spreading  to  distant  regions.  But  the  religion  of  Christ  has 
all  the  internal  characters  of  an  universal  religion.  The  manner  in  which  the 
Gospel  was  introduced  corresponds  to  these  characters  of  an  universal  religion. 
Before  He  ascended  to  heaven  the  Founder  constituted  His  apostles  witnesses  to 
Him  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  and  sent  them  forth  to  make  disciples  of 
all  nations.  .  .  .  We  readily  recognise  in  Jesus  that  illustrious  descendant  promised 
to  Abraham,  "in  whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed"  ;  that 
Prince  of  Peace  whose  universal  dominion  the  prophets  have  painted  by  various 
imagery,  "  in  whose  reign  the  righteous  were  to  flourish,  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  was  to  cover  the  earth."  But  when  we  look  beyond  the  destruction  of  Jem- 
salem  these  bright  views  seem  to  vanish,  and  we  mark,  with  wonder  and  regret^ 
a  striking  inconsistency  between  the  earlier  and  later  history  of  the  Christian  Church. 
This  religion  was,  for  many  ages,  persecuted  and  despised  by  the  powers  of  the 
earth.  For  a  long  time  it  was  involved  in  the  superstition  and  barbarism  of  the  dark 
ages.     The  fact  is,  that,  after  seventeen  hundred  years  have  passed,  the  religion  of 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxii. 

Jesus  is  established  in  less  than  a  fifth  part  of  the  globe.  The  faith  of  Mahomet, 
which  has  been  permitted  to  overspread  a  larger  portion  of  the  earth,  retains 
undisputed  possession  of  its  conquests.  What  can  be  said  as  an  answer  to  the 
presumption,  drawn  from  present  appearances,  against  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of 
universality  for  Christianity  ?  1.  Though  the  Almighty  may  do  all  His  pleasure  by 
■flie  word  of  His  mouth.  He  generally  chooses  to  employ  means  in  accomplishing  His 
purposes,  and  the  operation  of  those  means  is  so  gradual  as  to  admit  of  a  progress 
in  which  one  thing  not  only  paves  the  way  for  another,  but  gives  notice  of  its 
approach.  We  are  not  warranted,  by  the  analogy  of  any  part  of  Divine  providence, 
to  expect,  in  the  communication  of  religious  instruction,  that  haste  which  to  our 
imaginations  may  appear  desiiable.  2.  As  in  natural  productions  there  is  a  time 
of  maturity  to  which  all  the  preparation  has  tended,  so  the  season  destined  for  the 
appearance  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  called  in  Scripture  "the  fulness  of  the  time," 
was  produced  by  a  preparation  of  four  thousand  years.  3.  The  partial  propagation 
of  Christianity  has  already  diffused  a  large  measure  of  religious  knowledge,  which 
concurs  with  other  circumstances  in  preparing  the  world  for  its  being  universally 
received.  4.  The  partiality,  the  delay,  and  the  imperfection  in  the  propagation  of 
Christianity  are  fully  accounted  for  by  the  nature  of  those  human  means  which, 
without  a  succession  of  miracles,  it  was  necessary  to  employ.  .  .  .  Presumption 
against  the  universal  propagation  of  Christianity,  which  has  been  drawn  from 
present  appearances,  is  contradicted  by  the  general  analogy  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, by  the  effects  already  produced,  and  the  forward  tendency  of  things.  {G. 
Hill,  D.D.)  The  oldest  kingdom  and  the  best  government : — What  can  be  a  more 
consoling  fact,  in  times  of  national  convulsion,  than  the  one  declared  here  ?  The 
Lord's  kingdom  is  distinct  from  all  otliers.  I.  The  greatest  kingdom  ever 
KNOWN.  My  text  says  the  Lord  is  the  governor.  I  much  question  if  He  has  a 
kingdom  for  His  own  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  now.  There  was  a  time 
when  He  appeared  signally  to  recognise  our  own  dear  old  England  distinctly  above 
all  other  nations  ;  but  now  it  has  gone  down,  in  some  instances,  to  downright 
infidelity,  or,  in  others,  perverted  to  gross  idolatry.  Whatever  He  may  please  to 
do  with  the  land  of  my  nativity,  I  shall  rejoice  to  know  we  have  in  it  yet  more  of 
His  own  kingdom  than  any  other  nation  upon  earth.  Of  the  Lord's  kingdom  we 
note — (1)  It  is  a  chosen  one :  men  enter  it  through  a  broken  and  contrite  spirit  ; 
others  who  have  not  known  this  are  not  in  the  kingdom.  (2)  Hence  it  is  His  by 
conquest  over  human  hearts.  He  has  subdued  them  unto  Himself.  (3)  It  is  under 
His  own  special  care.  And  (4)  He  peopled  it  with  the  precious  souls  that  He  had 
ordained  fi'om  everlasting.  (5)  And  He  dwells  and  abides  there.  (6)  Its  constitu- 
tion is  "righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit."  It  is  a  sacred  kingdom 
and  no  unclean  thing  shall  enter  it.  (7)  How  vast  are  its  treasures — grace  and  glory. 
11.  It  has  the  wisest,  holiest,  and  best  of  governors.  (1)  His  sovereignty 
is  absolute  over  all  nations  for  His  own  people  as  well  as  in  them.  (2)  It  is  exer- 
cised in  the  hearts  of  His  subjects.  Who  ever  heard  of  any  other  governor  who 
reigned  in  the  heart  of  every  one  of  his  subjects  ?  (3)  He  never  revokes  any  of  His 
decrees.  "  My  covenant  will  I  not  alter."  His  statutes  stand  for  ever,  those  in 
His  secret  statute  book  and  those  in  the  Scripture,  the  inspired  abstract  of  His  will. 
(Joseph  Irons.)  On  providence : — I.  Prove  the  doctrine.  That  God  presides 
in  every  department  of  nature,  and  exercises  a  superintending  care  over  the  works 
of  His  hand,  has  been  believed  in  every  nation  and  in  every  age.  The  cavils  of 
sceptical  men  are  not  to  be  considered  as  detracting  from  its  universality.  What  is 
providence  but  the  exercise  of  the  Divine  attributes  ?  Sound  philosophy  never 
supported  the  atheistical  system  which  would  exclude  the  Almighty  from  His 
kingdom,  and  surrender  to  blind  chance  the  government  of  the  universe.  The 
Divine  government  is  recognised  in  the  material  system,  but  it  is  not  confined  to 
that.  In  the  moral  as  in  the  natural  world  His  pervading  energy  appears.  What 
are  the  annals  of  nations  but  a  continued  detail  of  its  operation  ?  The  world  is  a 
great  scene,  where  from  age  to  age  a  series  of  providential  interpositions  has  been 
displayed.  Some  invisible  power  is  employed  in  over-ruling  human  affairs.  An 
infinite  mind  must  have  access,  though  we  cannot  perceive  it,  in  many  different 
ways,  to  the  human  heart.  But  man  is  conscious  all  the  while  that  no  violence 
is  offered  to  his  will,  that  he  is  acting  as  a  moral  agent,  without  any  infringement 
of  his  freedom.  II.  Recommend  a  becoming  trust  in  Divine  providence. 
His  perfections  demand  our  veneration  and  justify  our  confidence.  Infinite  good- 
ness, added  to  Almighty  power,  constitutes  the  very  character  which  claims  our 
dependence.     {T.  Lawric,  D.D.) 


PSALM  xxiii.]  TEE  PSALMS.  429 

Ver.  29.  None  can  keep  alive  his  own  soul. — Life's  need  and  maintenance: — 
Begin  by  noting  the  connection  ;  then  take  text  in  a  spiritual  meaning.  I.  The 
INNER  LIFE  MUST  BE  SUSTAINED  BY  GoD.  None  of  US  Can  make  his  own  soul  live, 
nor  can  we  keep  it  alive.  Old  Christians  cannot,  more  than  young  ones.  At  no 
time  or  place,  however  sacred,  can  we  do  this.  The  analogies  of  nature,  which  show 
that  repeated,  continued  help  must  be  given,  tell  us  of  our  constant  need  of  fresh 
grace.  Experience  asserts  the  same.  In  each  separate  act  of  the  Divine  life  we  need 
help.  Our  own  blunderings  and  failings  when  we  have  not  sought  renewed  help 
teach  the  same  lesson.  The  number  and  strength  of  our  adversaries  teach  it.  If 
we  could,  why  is  such  full  provision  made  in  the  Gospel  ?  II.  This  truth  brings 
GLOBT  to  Christ.  III.  Suggests  the  path  of  wisdom  for  ourselves.  We 
are  to  remember  that  we  want  not  only  grace  to  begin  with,  but  grace  to  abide  in 
Christ.  Diligently  use  all  means  of  grace.  Keep  clear  of  all  that  which  tends  to 
destroy  life.  A  sane  man  does  not  willingly  take  poison.  Look  to  Christ  day  by 
day  for  everything.  Do  not  become  self-satisfied.  Never  say,  ' '  Soul,  take  thine 
ease," — to  say  that  is  to  be  a  fool,  as  was  the  rich  man  who  first  said  it.  Day  by  da-y 
go  to  Christ.  IV.  This  subject  indicates  a  way  of  usefulness  for  all  God  s 
children.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  be  blessed  of  God,  to  turn  sinners  from  the  error 
of  their  ways ;  but  there  is  equally  good  work  to  be  done  by  helping  struggling 
saints.  The  old  Roman  said  he  thought  it  as  much  an  honour  to  preserve  a  Roman 
citizen  as  to  slay  an  enemy  of  his  country.  Let  us  watch  over  one  another  ;  be 
pastors  to  one  another.  Help  one  another.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Spiritual  life  not 
self-preserved : — Go,  young  man,  even  you  who  are  a  zealous  Christian,  go  without 
your  morning  prayer  into  the  house  of  business,  and  see  what  will  befall  you.  Ven- 
ture, my  sister,  down  into  your  little  family  without  having  called  upon  God  for 
guidance,  and  see  what  you  will  do.  Go  with  a  strong  resolve  that  you  will  never 
be  guilty  of  the  weakness  which  dishonoured  you  a  fcAV  days  ago,  and  depend  upon 
the  strength  of  your  own  will  and  the  firmness  of  your  own  purpose,  and  see  if  you 
do  not  ere  long  discover  to  your  shame  how  great  your  weakness  is.  Nay,  try  none 
of  these  experiments,  but  listen  to  the  Word  which  tells  you  "none  can  keep  alive 
Mb  own  soul. "    {Ibid. ) 

Ver.  30.  A  seed  shall  serve  Him. — Good  wen  as  seeds: — ^This  figurative  ex- 
pression signifies  Christ  and  His  people,  who  yield  true  obedience  to  God, — they  are 
called  by  this  name  in  a  spiritual  and  figurative,  but  most  appropriate  sense.  The 
idea  is  taken  from  the  operations  of  the  husbandman,  who  carefully  reserves  every 
year  a  portion  of  his  grain  for  seed.  Though  it  be  small,  compared  with  all  the 
produce  of  his  harvest,  yet  he  prizes  it  very  highly  and  estimates  it  by  the  value  of 
that  crop  which  it  may  yield  in  the  succeeding  autumn.  Nor  does  he  look  only  to 
the  quantity  ;  he  pays  particular  regard  to  the  quality  of  the  seed.  He  reserves  only 
the  best,  nay,  he  will  put  away  his  own  if  spoiled,  that  he  may  procure  better. 
The  very  smallest  quantity  of  really  good  seed  is,  to  him,  an  object  of  great  desire, 
and  if  by  grievous  failure  of  crops  he  should  not  be  able  to  procure  more  than  a 
single  grain,  yet  would  he  accept  it  thankfully,  preserve  it  carefully,  and  plant  it 
in  the  most  favourable  soil.  Such  is  the  source  from  which  the  metaphor  is  taken. 
{John  Stevenson. ) 

Yer.  31.  They  shall  come,  and  declare  His  righteousness  unto  a  people  that 
shall  he  bom,  that  He  hath  done  this. — The  dying  thoughts  of  Christ  .—1.  Jesus 
complains  that  God  had  deserted  Him.  Bearing  our  sins  caused  this  intoler- 
able suffering.  Yet  even  whilst  thus  suffering  He  adores  the  uprightness  of  God. 
2.  Jesus  turns  His  thoughts  back  to  the  past  history  of  the  people  of  God.  3.  The 
Father  at  length  heard  His  earnest,  importunate  entreaties.  4.  That  which  was  in 
our  Saviour's  mind  illustrates  St.  Paul's  meaning  when  he  tells  of  our  Lord,  that 
"for  the  joy  set  before  Him  He  endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame."  {Alex. 
Irwin,  M.A.) 


PSALM  XXIII. 

Vees.  1-6.  Tlie  Lord  Is  my  ShepheTA.— Exegesis  of  the  Psalm  .-—This  Psalm,  00 

personal  and  tender  in  its  tone,  may  be  called  a  lyric  ;  and  its  reference  to  shepherd 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxill. 

life  makes  it  a  pastoral ;  and  being  such,  it  becomes  by  its  brevity  and  finish  an 
idyll — an  idyll  excelling  in  naturalness  and  truth  any  that  Theocritus,  the  father 
of  idylls,  ever  wrote.  But  in  its  simplicity  it  sets  forth  the  weightiest  theme. 
Feeble  man  may  have  constant  companionship  with  the  mighty  and  everlasting  God,  A 
may  cast  all  his  anxiety  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  each  one  of  us.  The  Psalmist  J 
was  not  unacquainted  with  the  shepherd's  office  ;  for  he  had  fed  his  father's  sheep 
in  the  mountains  about  Bethlehem,  and  often  in  solitude  shut  up  to  their  lowly  and 
loving  companionship,  by  sympathising  in  their  wants,  he  had  loved  them  much, 
and  for  their  sake  had  struggled  hard  with  lion  and  bear.  Ver.  1.  The  Lord — 
Jehovah;  from  derivation,  the  "Everlasting  One" — the  "One  that  is."  Ver.  2. 
Lie  down — Applies  to  animals  that  lie  upon  the  breast  with  the  limbs  gathered 
under  them.  Pastures — The  place  where  one  settles  down.  It  can  stand  for  the 
dwellings  of  men,  for  dens  of  wild  beasts,  for  encampment  of  flocks.  Green — Imply- 
ing grass  in  its  early  growth.  Still  waters — or  waters  of  rest.  Ver.  3.  Soul — or 
spirit;  used  of  animals  as  well  as  men.  They  and  we  lose  spirit  by  exhaustion. 
We  lose  spirituality  by  sin.  Paths  of  righteousness — Not  only  a  right  course,  but 
one  which  ends  in  righteousness  or  safety.  Ver.  4.  Valley — Not  death,  but  a  deep 
ravine  overhung  with  rocks  or  trees,  and  full  of  gloom,  even  at  midday.  Rod  and 
staff' — In  the  Himalayas  the  shepherd  has  been  seen  using  his  crook  to  draw  a 
straying  sheep  from  the  brink  of  a  precipice.  Ver.  5.  Preparest — We  set  a  table, 
putting  all  upon  it  in  fit  order.  Runneth  over — Literally,  my  cup  (is)  abundance. 
Original  of  abundance  is  used  of  draught  that  satisfies  for  quantity.  Ver.  6. 
Follow — Its  original  is  often  used  of  the  eager  pursuit  of  enemies  and  persecutors. 
{T.  H.  Rich,  D.D.)  The  Psalm  of  faith: — This  has  sometimes  been  called  the 

Psalm  of  faith,  and  certainly  with  great  reason.  It  breathes  in  every  line  the  air 
of  serene  and  happy  confidence  undisturbed  by  a  single  doubt.  Nowhere  else  is  the 
absence  of  misgiving  or  anxiety  so  remarkable.  Yet  equally  noteworthy  is  the  con-  \ 
nection  of  this  state  of  safety,  rest,  and  peace  with  the  statement  made  in  the  open-  ', 
ing  words  ;  for  the  fact  that  Jehovah  condescended  to  be  the  writer's  shepherd  was 
the  underlying  basis  of  the  whole  experience.  The  representation  of  God  as  a  shep- 
herd is  found  first  in  Jacob's  blessing  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xlviii.  15),  "the  God  which 
fed  me," — literally,  who  was  my  shepherd.  It  was  afterwards  often  used  in  reference 
to  Israel  as  a  people,  and  in  the  New  Testament  is  applied  to  our  Lord  both  by 
Himself  and  by  His  disciples.  The  whole  tone  of  the  lyric  is  personal,  and  this  it 
is  that  makes  it  so  precious.  Jehovah  cares  for  the  flock  just  because  He  cares  for\ 
each  member  of  it.  The  believer  is  never  lost  in  a  crowd.  "I  shall  not  want. "  ) 
The  expression  is  absolute  and  unlimited.  Neither  food,  nor  protection,  nor  guid^ 
ance,  nor  loving  care  and  sympathy  shall  be  lacking.  The  believer  is  sure  not  only 
of  repose,  restoration,  and  guidance,  but  also  of  protection  and  deliverance  even  in  the 
most  trying  circumstances.  .  .  .  The  last  verse  of  the  Psalm  summarises  what  went 
before,  with  the  additional  thought  of  its  continuance,  "  Only  goodness  and  loving- 
kindness"  means  that  the  favour  bestowed  on  the  believer  is  unmixed,  or  that  the 
exceptions  are  so  few  as  to  be  unworthy  of  consideration.  Goodness  supplies  our 
needs,  and  mercy  blots  out  our  sins.  {Talbot  W.  Chavibers,  D.D.)  A  Psalm  of 
personal  trust  in  God  : — The  world  could  spare  many  a  large  book  better  than  this 
sunny  little  Psalm.  It  has  dried  many  tears,  and  supplied  the  mould  into  which 
many  hearts  have  poured  their  peaceful  faith.  To  suppose  that  the  speaker  is  the 
personified  nation  chills  the  whole.  The  tone  is  too  intense  not  to  be  the  outcome 
of  personal  experience,  however  admissible  the  application  to  the  nation  may  be 
as  secondary.  No  doubt  Jehovah  is  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  in  several  Asaphite 
Psalms  and  in  Jeremiah  ;  but  notwithstanding  great  authorities,  I  cannot  persuade 
myself  that  the  voice  which  comes  so  straight  to  the  heart  did  not  come  from  the 
heart  of  a  brother,  speaking  across  the  centiu-ies  his  own  personal  emotions,  which 
are  universal  because  they  are  individual.  It  is  the  pure  utterance  of  personal  trust 
in  Jehovah,  darkened  by  no  fears  or  complaints,  and  so  perfectly  at  rest  that  it  has 
nothing  more  to  ask.  For  the  time  desire  is  stilled  in  satisfaction.  One  tone,  and 
that  the  most  blessed  that  can  be  heard  in  a  life,  is  heard  through  the  whole.  It 
is  the  Psalm  of  quiet  trust,  undisturbed  even  by  its  joy,  which  is  quiet  too.  The 
fire  glows,  but  does  not  flame  or  crackle.  The  one  thought  is  expanded  in  two 
kindred  images,  that  of  the  shepherd  and  that  of  the  host.  The  same  ideas  are 
substantially  repeated  under  both  forms.  The  lovely  series  of  vivid  pictures,  each 
but  a  clause  long,  but  clear-cut  in  that  small  compass  like  the  fine  work  incised  on 
a  gem,  combines,  with  the  depth  and  simplicity  of  the  religious  emotion  expressed,  to 
lay  this  sweet  Psalm  on  all  hearts.     {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)        Serenity  of  soul : — la 


PSALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  481 

there  anything  in  the  religious  life  outside  of  Christianity  that  shows  such  trust 
in  God  as  this  Psalm  ?  There  are  psalms  of  the  pantheistic  religions  in  which  the 
soul  seems  to  lose  itself  in  the  great  current  of  the  Divine  Being,  and  become  but 
one  drop  in  the  ocean  of  universal  existence.  They  have  the  idea  of  rest  and  repose 
and  freedom  from  disturbance  and  trouble.  But  in  this  Psalm  there  is  something 
different.  There  is  indeed  the  individual  consciousness  of  love  resting  on  the  soul, 
that  still  has  its  own  right  to  live  and  to  know  its  past.  Every  religion  bears  its 
testimony  to  us  of  God  dwelling  in  human  nature.  I  do  not  know  of  a  religious 
yearning  of  mankind  in  any  part  of  his  spiritual  history  which  has  not  sought  to 
see  beyond  the  clouds  the  peace  of  God  resting  on  the  human  soul.  That  is  the 
great  mission  of  religion  in  the  human  souL  There  are  times  in  our  experience 
when  we  are  inclined  to  overstate  the  necessity  for  turmoil  in  the  soul.  The  soul  at 
times  needs  to  be  disturbed  and  broken-hearted  ;  but  always  in  anticipation  and 
preparation  for  the  calm  that  lies  beyond.  The  ultimate  condition  of  the  human 
soul  is  repose,  such  as  fills  the  sweet  rich  verses  of  this  Psalm  of  David.  It  is  a 
man  who  has  been  through  great  experiences  who  thus  lifts  up  his  voice  and  sings 
to  God  in  absolute  trust  in  the  Divine  goodness  and  strength.  This  Psalm  is  an 
outpouring  of  the  soul  to  God,  never  matched  in  all  the  riches  of  the  Christian  day. 
It  is  the  utterance  of  a  soul  absolutely  unshaken  and  perfectly  serene.  In  the  New 
Testament  many  of  the  expressions  of  deepest  faith  have  their  origin  in  this  Psalm. 
Jesus  said,  "lam  the  good  Shepherd,"  ...  "I  shall  not  want."  There  are  two 
ways  of  not  lacking  a  thing  in  this  world.  He  lacks  nothing  who  has  everything. 
The  better  way  is  for  a  man  to  look  up,  and  bring  his  desires  down  to  that  which  God 
sees  fit  to  give  him.  This  applies  emphatically  to  things  of  faith.  .  .  .  There  are 
two  ways  by  which  we  come  to  "green  pastures  and  still  waters."  God  had  led 
David  into  sweet  and  beautiful  circumstances,  where  it  was  easy  for  him  to  walk. 
But  a  place  is  not  simply  a  thing  of  the  outward  life.  It  is  a  thing  of  the  inward 
life.  To  go  with  calm  soul,  because  it  calmly  trusts  in  God  in  the  midst  of  tempests 
and  tumults,  and  say,  "  I  am  at  peace  and  rest," — that  is  the  triumph  of  the  Chris- 
tian state.  First  of  all  comes  a  peaceful  condition  within  the  soul,  and  by  and  by 
comes  the  kingdom  of  heaven  with  all  its  scenery.  .  .  .  "For  His  name's  sake." 
The  poor  soul  loves  to  think  that  God  is  taking  care  of  him  for  his  own  sake, 
because  it  is  precious  to  Himself.  Many  a  time  the  soul  has  to  flee  from  the  sense  of 
its  own  little  value  to  the  thought  that  God  values  it  because  it  is  dear  and  precious 
to  Him.  .  .  .  "  In  the  presence  of  mine  enemies. "  This  does  not  mean  separation 
from  our  enemies,  nor  driving  them  away.  God  gives  us  peaceful  moments  in  the 
midst  of  the  distress  and  struggle  of  our  lives.  .  .  .  Let  your  souls  rest  in  peace  on 
God.  Only,  be  sure  it  is  really  He  on  whom  you  rest.  He  is  continually  caring  for 
your  souls,  and  will  not  let  you  rest  in  absolute  torpor.  You  cannot  rest  too 
peacefully,  too  tenderly  on  the  love  of  God,  if  only  it  is  really  God's  love.  {Phillips 
jBrooks,  JD.  D. )  Religious  conceptions  coloured  by  secular  vocation : — This  Psalm  does 
not  provoke  our  thinking :  it  touches  us  away  down  below  our  philosophy  and  our 
theology ;  comes  to  us  rather  like  a  covert  from  the  heat,  a  refuge  from  weariness, 
a  shelter  from  the  rain,  and  folds  as  unthinkingly  into  the  creases  of  our  souls  as 
water  adapts  itself  to  the  thirsty.  The  longings  of  the  htmian  spirit  have  their 
own  beatitude,  and  better  than  any  other  interpreters  make  clear  the  meaning  of 
the  Holy  Word.  Round  this  oasis  of  truth,  this  23rd  Psalm,  tired,  hungry, 
erring,  and  anxious  men  and  women  have  gathered,  and  found  green  pasturage, 
still  waters,  recovery  from  their  wanderings,  and  gentle  light  to  guide  them  through 
the  valley  of  the  death-shadow.  This  Psalm  brings  us  not  only  near  to  God  and 
our  own  souls,  but  also  near  to  one  another.  It  is  a  great,  roomy  catholic  Psalm. 
The  things  which  the  Gospel  has  to  supply  are  the  great,  deep,  common  wants  of 
all  human  souls.  We  can  all  stand  up  in  front  of  this  Psalm,  and  feel  ourselves  so 
far  perfectly  "brothered"  in  each  other.  David  must  have  written  this  Psalm 
when  he  was  a  good  deal  more  than  a  youth.  It  is  not  dated,  yet  its  quality  is  its 
own  date,  as  the  wine-tester  finds  the  age  of  the  wine  in  the  flavour  of  the  wine. 
Time  is  a  factor  in  the  arithmetic  of  all  life  and  growth.  Experience  and  discern- 
ment ripen  much  in  the  same  way  as  com  and  wheat  ripen.  Ripeness  is  not  to  be 
extemporised,  nor  is  it  transferable.  Time  is  one  factor,  suffering  is  another.  The 
two  together  and  the  product  sanctified  is  Christian  maturity.  This  writer  had 
learned  the  lesson  of  weariness  ;  he  had  passed  under  the  discipline  of  sin.  He  had 
learned  to  know  himself  by  sinning,  and  learned  to  know  God  by  enjoying  the 
Divine  deliverance  and  recovery  from  sin.  He  had  tested  God,  and  found  Him 
faithful,  and  tested  Him  so  many  times  that  he  knew  He  would  adways  be  faithful. 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

The  imagery  of  the  Psalm  suggests  to  us  as  a  passing  lesson  that  every  man  paints 
religious  truth  in  the  colours  furnished  by  his  own  character  of  life  and  mode  of 
occupation.  Objects  and  relations  that  are  familiar  to  us  furnish  us  with  a 
vocabulary  whose  terms  even  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  will  have  to  use  if  He  is 
going  to  make  to  us  any  revelation.  A  shepherd,  familiar  only  with  pastoral  rela- 
tions, can  apprehend  the  bearing  of  God  toward  us  only  under  the  figure  of  a 
shepherd.  He  thinks  in  that  way.  The  one  impression  that  flows  from  oflF  this 
entire  Psalm  is  that  of  a  man  who  has  come  now  where  he  is  able  and  glad  simply 
to  trust  and  let  himself  be  taken  care  of;  and  that,  too,  is  a  long  and  very  slow 
lesson.  Faith  is  distilled  from  unquiet  experience.  We  have  to  learn  to  trust. 
{Charles  ff.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Sufficiency  in  God: — I.  The  great  name — Jehovah. 
In  Egypt  thousands  of  gods,  but  no  Jehovah.  II.  A  great  faith — "My  Shep- 
herd." III.  A  GREAT  SUFFICIENCY — "  I  shaU  not  Want."  The  insatiable  character 
of  man.  Life  a  hunger  and  thirst,  intellectual,  social,  emotional.  David's  content- 
ment arose  from  finding  sufficiency  was  in  God.  The  Lord  was  more  to  him  than 
the  manna,  or  the  stream  in  the  wilderness.  He  is  sufficing  beyond  all  thought, 
feeUng,  hope.  To  whom  is  He  thus?  To  the  weary,  troubled,  perplexed,  and 
penitent.  ((?.  S.  Reaney.)  The  shepherd  God  : — But  let  us  notice  the  result  in 
us.  1.  First,  there  is  the  banishment  of  want.  David  says,  "I  shall  not  want." 
2.  The  Good  Shepherd  banishes  fear.  David  says,  ' '  I  will  fear  no  evil. "  Perhaps 
there  is  no  blessing  so  great  for  the  happiness  of  the  soul  as  the  driving  away 
of  fear,  which  God  does  for  those  who  give  their  hearts  to  Him.  He  rescues 
us  from  the  fear  of  punishment.  He  takes  away  the  fear  of  the  judgment. 
The  man  who  has  received  a  pardon  from  the  President  of  the  United  States  has 
no  longer  any  fear  of  punishment  for  his  crime.  "What  a  blessed  relief  that  is ! 
God  takes  from  us  also  the  fear  of  death.  How  many  have  been  held  slaves  to  the 
fear  of  death.  Many  people  are  so  afraid  of  death  that  they  will  not  attend  a 
funeral  service.  3.  Finally,  what  a  beautiful  and  glorious  hope  the  shepherd  God 
holds  out  to  us  of  the  future  life,  toward  which  He  is  willing  to  lead  us  through  all 
our  life's  journey.  "I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  Our  Good 
Shepherd  said  to  His  friends  just  before  He  went  away,  ' '  In  My  Father's  house 
there  are  many  mansions.  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  {L.  A.  Banks,  D.D.) 
Personal  relationship  with  God: — "My  Shepherd."  Every  believer  is  not  only 
permitted  to  say,  but  has  that  within  him  which  constrains  him  to  say,  "0  God, 
Thou  art  my  God."  It  should  be  to  us  a  source  of  unfailing  comfort  to  know  that 
His  nature  undergoes  no  change  or  modification  when  it  is  directed  towards  ua  and 
the  exigencies  of  our  condition.  The  wisdom,  the  power,  the  goodness  with  which 
He  controls  the  affairs  of  the  imiverse  are  in  their  measure  available  for  our 
individual  needs.  And  as  the  shepherd  knows  each  sheep  of  the  flock,  and  calleth 
it  by  its  name,  so  God  knoweth  each  of  us,  and  gives  Himself  to  us  with  the  whole 
energy  and  atfectionateness  of  His  being.  There  exists  between  God  and  ourselves 
a  distinct  personal  relation.  He  recognises  the  individuality  of  every  human  soul, 
and  ascribes  to  it  a  separate  worth.  Bound  as  we  are  by  innumeraJble  ties  to  the 
great  brotherhood  of  men,  we  are,  in  the  deepest  centre  of  our  life,  isolated  from 
them,  and  stand  before  God  alone.  Under  many  current  systems  of  thought  this 
individuality  is  endangered.  Beyond  the  ken  of  an  omnipresent  spirit  and  the 
power  of  an  almighty  friend  we  cannot  go.  He  is  about  our  path  and  our  bed,  and 
the  secret  thoughts  and  desires  and  needs  of  all  hearts  are  open  to  Him.  We  may 
be  weak,  obscure,  despised,  but  He  thinks  of  us  with  as  special  a  care  and  as  devoted 
a  love  as  if  we  alone,  in  all  the  vast  universe  of  men,  were  dependent  upon  Him  and 
claimed  His  gracious  aid.  {James  Stuart.)  Confidence  in  the  Shepherd: — It  is 
not  as  a  literary  gem,  rich  and  rare  though  it  be  in  that  respect,  .that  its  chief 
attraction  lies.  What  renders  it  so  exceedingly  precious  to  the  experimental 
believer  are  the  blessedness  of  its  truths  and  the  sublimity  of  its  sentiments — the 
delightful  spirit  it  breathes  and  the  hallowed  impressions  it  produces.  By  it  the 
faith  of  God's  people  in  every  age  has  been  confirmed,  their  hearts  have  been 
gladdened,  their  hopes  elevated,  and  their  strength  renewed.  "The  Lord  is  My 
Shepherd."  Our  faith  is  greatly  lacking  as  respects  three  things — 1.  It  is  not 
sufficiently  confiding.  2.  It  is  not  sufficiently  realising.  "  Faith  is  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for."  3.  It  is  not  sufficiently  appropriating.  {Anon.)  A  deep 
consciousness  of  God: — I.  The  deep  conscioitsness  of  God  that  pervades  the 
Psalm.  Its  great  outstanding  thought  is  God.  And  God,  too,  present  to  the  mind 
and  heart  of  the  writer :  a  living,  personal  agent,  who  touches  his  life  at  every 
point,  and  with  whom  he  holds  conscious  and  happy  intercourse.     Here  we  have  a 


PSALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  433 

man  evidently  walking  not  by  sight  but  by  faith.  This  consciousness  of  God 
manifested  itself  in  two  ways.  1.  He  found  m  his  own  humble  employment  as  a 
shepherd  a  representation  of  God,  and  a  means  of  fellowship  with  Him.  By  the 
thoughtfulness,  tenderness,  sympathy,  and  care  he  exercised  in  his  shepherd  calling 
he  learned  and  realised  the  heart  and  character  of  God.  2.  His  daily  employment 
was  to  him  a  symbol  of  God,  and  of  God's  relation  to  him.  II.  The  kelation  of 
God  to  the  individual  life.  Nowhere  is  God  presented  in  such  close  relations 
with  individual  life  and  experience  as  in  the  Psalms  of  David.  We  have  here  the 
precious  scriptural  doctrine  of  a  special  providence.  It  is  objected  to  this  doctrine, 
that  it  is  derogatory  to  the  greatness  of  God  that  He  should  be  thought  of  as 
concernirg  Himself  with  the  minutiae  of  life.  But  "great"  and  "little"  are  only 
relative  terms.  It  enhances  His  greatness  that  He  can  comprehend  at  once  the  vast 
and  the  minute.  III.  The  happiness  of  the  man  whose  God  is  the  Lord.  /'^ 
One  characteristic  of  the  Psalm  is  its  repose,  its  serene  enjoyment.  IV.  The  man  ^ 
WHOSE  God  is  the  Lord  can  look  hopefully  into  the  future.  In  order  to 
do  this  he  must  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  regenerated  and  renewed  in  the  spirit  of 
His  mind,  {Alexander  Field.)  The  God  of  the  world  as  seen  by  the  good: — He 
appears  as  a  Shepherd  to  the  good.  Those  who  follow  this  Shepherd  are  truly 
blest.  1.  They  are  blest  with  deliverance  from  the  fear  of  want.  "  I  shall  not 
want,"  or  as  some  render  it,  "I  do  not  want."  The  fear  of  "want"  is  one  of  the 
most  disturbing  fiends  of  the  human  soul.  Men  are  everywhere  fearing  that  they 
shall  lack  a  something  which  they  regard  as  vital  to  their  interests.  Godliness 
expels  this  fear  from  the  human  heart  by  inspiring  unbounded  confidence  in  the 
bountihood  of  heaven.  2.  They  are  blest  with  the  enjoyment  of  satisfying  good. 
"He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures."  He  has  allayed  my  appetite, 
dispelled  my  anxieties,  satisfied  my  nature,  and  caused  me  to  ' '  lie  down  "  amidst 
the  affluence  of  His  love.  3.  They  are  blest  in  being  calmly  led  along  the  river 
of  life.  "He  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters."  4.  They  are  blest  with  the 
reinvigoration  of  soul.  "He  restoreth  my  soul."  There  is  a  wear  and  tear  of  soul 
as  well  as  of  body.  The  holiest  and  the  strongest  angel  would  soon  get  exhausted 
were  it  left  to  depend  upon  itself.  God  is  the  strength  of  all  finite  intelligences, 
however  pure  and  strong.  5.  They  are  blest  with  being  divinely  conducted  into  the 
paths  of  rectitude.  "  He  leadeth  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness."  There  are  as 
many  paths  of  life  as  there  are  men.  As  every  star  has  its  own  orbit,  so  every  man 
has  his  own  particular  path.  No  two  men  can  walk  in  exactly  the  same  way,  from 
the  diversity  of  their  faculty  and  their  training.  All  human  paths  are  of  two 
descriptions,  the  morally  right  and  the  morally  wrong.  The  good  man's  path, 
whether  it  be  that  of  a  labourer,  mechanic,  artist,  poet,  philosopher,  statesman, 
king,  or  preacher,  is  "a  path  of  righteousness. "  6.  They  are  blest  with  the  moral 
heroism  in  their  march  to  eternity.  "Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death  I  will  fear  no  evil."  {Homilist.)  The  life  of  faith: — 
I.  Faith's  recognition  (ver.  1).  "The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd."  A  spiritual 
recognition  made  through  the  medium  of  His  surroundings.  Faith  makes  the  same 
recognition  to-day.  It  is  an  old  recognition.  It  is  a  comforting  recognition. 
Recognising  God  as  our  Shepherd,  what  an  infinitude  of  tenderness,  watchfulness, 
love,  and  carefulness  that  recognition  involves  !  "  I  shall  not  want."  This  is  no 
guarantee  against  poverty ;  because  poverty  may  be,  in  the  Divine  estimation, 
better  for  us  than  riches.  It  is  no  warrant  for  indolence  or  thriftlessness.  Work 
and  diligence  in  it  are  again  and  again  commended.  No  want  would  be  universal 
were  it  not  for  these  two  widespread  evils  !  II.  Faith's  experience  (vers.  2,  3, 
5).  Ver.  2  expresses  repose  rather  than  feeding.  Repose  in  "pastures  of  tender 
grass,"  hard  by  the  "waters  of  quietness."  It  is  also  expressive  of  satisfaction. 
"  To  lie  down."  Sheep  stand  to  eat,  but  lie  when  filled.  Life  only  finds  satisfaction 
in  God  ;  the  world  is  too  small  to  fill  the  soul.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  alone 
can  meet  this  moral  necessity.  Ver.  3  sets  forth  restoration  and  guidance.  Leadeth, 
not  driveth.  Law  drives,  love  leads.  Example  is  more  forceful  than  command. 
Eternal  footprints  He  has  left  on  the  pathway  of  virtue,  patience,  purity,  self- 
sacrifice,  benevolence,  obedience,  that  we  may  plant  our  feet  in  them  and  be  as  He 
was  in  this  world.  A''er.  5  suggests  plenty  and  protection.  God  gives  banquets  in 
imlikely  places  and  at  unexpected  times.  III.  Faith's  prospect  (vers.  4,  6). 
1.  Celestial  attendants  all  the  days  of  life.  2.  Companionship  in  the  shadowed 
valley.  Inspiring  confidence  and  courage  ;  and  preventing  unrest  and  disquietude. 
(Jl  O.  Keen,  D.D.)  What  the  Lord  is  to  the  believer : — What  the  Lord  is  to  the 
believer  is  here  set  forth  in  a  poem  peculiarly  Oriental  in  imagery.  Two  figures  are 
28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

employed,  the  Shepherd  and  the  Host.  The  one  is  expressed,  the  other  is  implied. 
Two  figures  are  employed  because  either  alone  is  inadequate.  Each  is  complemental 
to  the  other.  The  second  uniformly  is  an  advance  upon  the  first.  Seven  suggestiona 
are  very  prominent.  1.  All  wants  are  met  in  God.  2.  All  energy  and  joy  are 
supplied  in  God.  3.  All  needed  guidance.  4.  All  blessed  companionship.  5.  All 
security.  6.  All  comfort  in  sorrow.  7.  An  abiding-place  for  homeless  souls.  All 
this  depends  on  our  faith,  whether  we  can  appropriate  God  and  truly  say,  "My 
Shepherd."  It  is  curious  to  notice  how  the  second  figure  is  left  to  be  inferred. 
"Why  did  not  David,  in  introducing  the  second  part,  say,  "Jehovah  is  my  Host"  T 
Perhaps  because  the  feelings  of  this  relationship  waited  to  be  revealed  (John  i.  11, 
12).  God  is  in  Christ  more  than  host,  and  we  are  more  than  guests.  He  is  onx 
Father,  and  we  are  His  sons  and  daughters.  Hence  our  welcome  home,  and  our 
dwelling-place  there.  He  is  ours  and  we  are  His,  and  all  that  is  His  is  ours.  To 
the  Jew  He  was  Shepherd,  to  the  Christian  believer  He  is  Father.  {Arthur  T. 
Herson,  D.D.)  The  Shepherd  figure  for  Jesus : — "Shepherd."  That  precious  word 
for  God  was  uttered  first  by  Jacob — himself  once  a  shepherd — as  he  lay  a-dying  in 
his  hieroglyphed  chamber ;  and  with  the  long  thoughts  of  old  age  went  back  to  the 
imagery  of  his  early  life,  speaking  of  God  as  having  ' '  shepherded  him  all  his  life 
long."  All  through  the  Bible  the  golden  thread  runs,  until  in  its  closing  pages  we 
read  of  the  Lamb  who  leads  His  flock  to  the  rivers  of  the  waters  of  life.  The  Eastern 
shepherd  occupied  quite  a  unique  position  towards  his  flock ;  and  a  friendship 
sprang  up  between  him  and  the  dumb  creatures  of  his  care  to  which  there  is  no 
counterpart  among  ourselves.  He  ccan  do  almost  as  he  wills  with  any  of  them, 
going  freely  in  and  out  amongst  them,  without  exciting  the  slightest  symptom  of 
alarm.  Now,  aU  this  is  true  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep. 
1.  He  has  a  shepherd's  heart,  beating  with  pure  and  generous  love  that  counted 
not  His  life-blood  too  dear  a  price  to  pay  down  as  our  ransom.  2.  He  has  a 
shepherd's  eye,  that  takes  in  the  whole  flock,  and  misses  not  even  the  poor  sheep 
wandering  away  on  the  mountains  cold.  3.  He  has  a  shepherd's  faithfulness,  which 
will  never  fail  nor  forsake,  nor  leave  us  comfortless,  nor  flee  when  He  seeth  the  wolf 
coming.  He  has  a  shepherd's  strength,  so  that  He  is  well  able  to  deliver  us  from 
the  jaw  of  the  lion  or  the  paw  of  the  bear.  4.  He  has  a  shepherd's  tenderness ;  no 
lamb  80  tiny  that  He  will  not  carry  it,  no  saint  so  weak  that  He  will  not  gently 
lead,  no  soul  so  faint  that  He  will  not  give  it  rest.  He  pities  as  a  father.  He 
comforts  as  a  mother.  His  gentleness  makes  great.  He  covers  us  with  His  feathers, 
soft,  warm,  and  downy,  and  under  His  wings  do  we  trust.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  pasture  gate : — If  David's  shepherd  life  had  furnished  nothing  else  than  the 
materials  for  this  wonderful  pastoral  ode  we  should  all  be  inclined  to  say  that  no 
period  of  David's  history  would  have  compensated  the  Church  for  the  loss  of  his 
shepherd  life.  Yet  the  Psalm  is  not  the  utterance  of  the  shepherd  days,  though  it 
perpetuates  their  memory.  This  peaceful  idyll  is  a  voice  out  of  the  maturer  life  of 
the  Psalmist ;  a  voice  that  tells  that  peace  and  rest  of  heart  depend  not  upon  the 
absence  of  life's  burdens,  nor  on  the  presence  of  nature's  tranquillising  scenes,  but 
solely  upon  the  shepherding  of  God.  The  keynote  of  the  whole  song  is — God's 
servant  finds  his  all  in  God.  He  wants  nothing.  All  needs  are  met  for  him  by  that 
one  fact — the  Lord  is  my  Shepherd.  The  problem  of  life  is  thus  reduced  to  its  very 
simplest  statement.  "But  one  thing  is  needful."  The  possession  of  all  gifts  is 
included  in  possessing  the  Father.  Then  the  true  end  of  every  man's  life  is  to 
become  one  of  God's  flock.  And  here  the  figure,  while  it  magnifies  the  wisdom  and 
tenderness  of  God,  correspondingly  depreciates  the  wisdom  of  man.  The  dependence 
of  man  upon  God  must  be  just  as  absolute  as  that  of  the  sheep  upon  the  shepherd. 
The  guidance  of  the  life  cannot  be  shared  between  God  and  man,  any  more  than 
between  the  shepherd  and  the  sheep.  There  is  a  comforting  assurance  in  the 
comparison  of  man  to  a  sheep.  A  sheep  is  not  a  wild  animal.  He  is  a  property. 
And  man  is  God's  valuable  property.  The  Spirit  leads  us  forth  into  the  pastures. 
1.  Provision  is  made  for  two  sides  of  man's  life  in  Ms  new  relation  to  God.  A  godly 
life,  if  it  be  healthful,  must  be  both  an  active  and  a  contemplative  life.  2.  Provision 
is  made  for  restoration.  "He  restoreth  my  soul."  Here  we  see  restoration  under 
three  phases.  (1)  Forgiveness.  (2)  Rest  and  refreshment.  (3)  Righteousness  or 
Tightness.  {Marvin  B.  VincerU,  D.D.)  The  Lord  a  Shepherd:—!.  God  gives 
His  people  nourishment.  One  of  the  first  duties  of  an  Eastern  shepherd  was  to 
provide  ample  pasture  for  the  flock,  to  lead  them  hither  and  thither  that  plenty 
might  be  found.  The  Lord,  as  David's  Shepherd,  would  make  provision  for  bu 
cecessitiea.    And  not  for  David  <m]^,  bat  for  ail  Hit  people  "the  Lord  will 


PBALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  435 


provide."  We  have  here — 1.  A  repudiation  of  naturalism.  The  advocates  of  this 
system  maintain  that  though  God  made  the  world  and  its  noblest  inhabitant — man, 
He  now  feels  no  interest  in  the  work  of  His  hands.  "He  is  so  gi-eat,"  say  they, 
"that  it  would  be  beneath  Him  to  notice  the  little  things  of  earth  or  the  concerns 
of  man."  The  love,  compassion,  and  Fatherly  goodness  of  God  are  here  ignored.  A 
meagi-e  view  of  the  Divine  character  is  this.  God  is  a  Shepherd,  and  will  never 
neglect  His  flock.  2.  A  truth  to  which  God  has  pledged  Himself.  God  cares  for 
less  important  creatures  than  man  :  the  blade  of  grass,  the  lily,  the  sparrow  (Matt.  vi. 
24-34).  II.  That  God  gives  His  people  protection.  It  was  as  really  the  duty 
of  the  shepherd  to  protect  his  flock  from  harm,  as  to  supply  them  with  food.  He 
would  even  expose  himself  to  danger  for  the  safety  of  his  flock.  David  did  when  he 
grappled  with  the  lion  and  the  bear.  God  protects  His  people.  1.  The  good  have 
enemies— (1)  Numerous.  (2)  Cunning.  (3)  Powerful.  2.  The  Great  Shepherd  is 
engaged  to  protect  them.  (1)  He  protects  their  bodies.  He  gives  "His  angela 
charge,"  &c.  (2)  He  gives  spiritual  protection.  He  is— to  change  the  figure — a 
"Shield,"  "a  wall  of  fire,"  &c.  God  is  "more  than  all"  who  are  against  His 
people.  III.  That  God  gives  His  people  rest.  God,  as  a  Shepherd,  will  give 
His  followers  rest.    1.  Here.    From  storm  within,  and  from  oppression,  &c.,  without. 

2.  Hereafter.  He  will  take  His  own  to  be  in  His  presence  for  ever.  Learn — 1.  The 
importance  of  being  "the  sheep  of  His  pasture."  Only  those  who  are  such  have 
any  claim  to  this  provision,  protection,  and  rest.  2.  The  value  of  trust  in  Him 
who  has  condescended  to  sustain  to  us  these  gracious  relationships.  {John  Hill.) 
The  Lord  our  Shepherd: — I.  How  He  reveals  Himself  to  the  sheep.  1.  As 
the  good  Shepherd  Love  (John  x.  11) — His  death.  2.  As  the  great  Shepherd  Power 
(Heb.  xiii.  20)— His  Resurrection.  3.  As  the  chief  Shepherd  Glory  (1  Pet.  v.  4) — 
Second  Advent.  II.  What  He  does  for  the  sheep.  Gives  His  life /or  them  and 
to  them  (Zech.  xiii.  7 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  31  ;  John  x.  11,  15,  28).  Seeks  them  out  and 
brings  them  home  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  12  ;  Luke  xv.  4,  5).  Gathers  them  and  heals  them 
(Isa.  xl.  11  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  4).      Guides  and  feeds  them  (Psa.  xxiii.  1-3  ;  John  x. 

3,  4,  9).  Protects  and  preserves  them  (Jer.  x:<:xi.  10  ;  John  x.  28).  III.  What 
He  expects  from  the  sheep.  That  they  should — 1.  Hear  His  voice  (John  x.  3). 
2.  Follow  His  leading  (John  x.  4  ;  Matt.  ix.  9  ;  John  xxi.  22).  3.  Rest  under  Hi& 
protection  (Psa.  xxiii.  1,  2).  {E.  H.  Hopkins.)  The  song  of  the  Jlock  :—Yiew 
it — I.  As  EXPRESSING  thankfulness  for  the  past.  Jehovah,  all-sufl^cieiit,  has 
been  my  Shepherd.  Many  there  are  who  can  see  no  better  law  or  principle  regulat- 
ing the  allotments  of  their  daily  life  than  accident  and  capricious  fortune.  They 
see  the  shuttles  of  apparent  chance  darting  hither  and  thither  in  the  loom  of  exist- 
ence. They  do  not  see  that  the  shuttle  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Great  Artificer. 
Life  is  not  a  mere  kaleidoscope.  II.  As  implying  confidence  in  the  present. 
Jesus,  all-sufiicient,  is  my  Shepherd.  How  blessed  tlms  to  repose  our  present  in 
God,  and  to  say,  "  Undertake  Thou  for  me."  He  does  not  consult  our  short-sighted 
wisdom  in  what  He  does.  A  necessary  result  of  this  confidence  in  the  wisdom  of 
God's  shepherd  dealings  will  be  contentment  with  our  lot,  whatever  it  is.  And  if 
we  thus  confide  in  God  He  will  confide  in  us.  III.  As  expressing  trust  for 
the  future.  Jehovah,  all-sufficient,  shall  be  my  Shepherd.  That  dark  future. 
How  many  are  speaking  of  it  as  such.  It  is  in  the  Shepherd's  keeping,  and  we 
may  well  leave  it  there.  Let  us  banish  all  unholy  distrust  of  the  future. 
{J.  H.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The  shepherd-king  of  Israel: — We  do  not_  know  at 
what  period  of  David's  life  this  Psalm  was  written,  but  it  sounds  as_  if  it  were 
the  work  of  his  later  years.  It  is  very  beautiful  to  see  the  old  king  looking 
back  with  such  vivid  and  loving  remembrance  to  his  childhood's  occupation,  and 
bringing  up  again  to  memory  in  his  palace  the  green  valleys,  the  gentle  streams, 
the  dark  glens  where  he  had  led  his  flocks  in  the  old  days.  The  faith  which 
looks  back  and  says.  It  is  all  very  good,  is  not  less  than  that  which  looks  forward 
and  says.  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life.  The 
train  of  thought  in  the  Psalm  is  clear  and  obvious.  The  Psalm  falls  into  two 
halves.  I.  The  Divine  Shepherd  and  His  leading  of  His  flock.  The  various 
methods  of  God's  leading  of  His  flock,  or  rather,  we  should  say,  the  various  regions 
into  which  He  leads  them,  are  described  in  order.  These  are  rest,  work,  sorrow. 
1.  God  leads  His  sheep  into  rest.  The  Psalm  puts  the  rest  and  refreshment  first, 
as  being  the  most  marked  characteristic  of  God's  dealings.  It  is  so.  The  years  are 
years  of  unbroken  continuity  of  outward  blessings.  The  reign  of  afflictions  is 
ordinarily  measured  by  days.  But  it  is  not  mainly  of  outward  blessings  that  the 
Psalmist  is  thinking.     They  are  precious  chiefly  as  emblems  of  the  better  spiritual 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [psalm  xxili. 

gifts.  The  image  describes  the  sweet  rest  of  the  soul  in  communion  with  God,  in 
whom  alone  the  hungry  heart  finds  food  that  satisfies.  This  rest  and  refreshment 
has  for  its  consequence  the  restoration  of  the  soul,  which  includes  in  it  both  the 
invigoration  of  the  natural  life  by  the  outward  sort  of  blessings,  and  the  quickening 
and  restoration  of  the  spiritual  life  by  the  inward  feeding  upon  God,  and  repose  in 
Him.  2.  God  guides  us  into  work.  The  quiet  mercies  are  not  in  themselves  the 
end  of  our  Shepherd's  guidance ;  they  are  means  to  an  end,  and  that  is — ^work.  Life 
is  not  a  fold  for  the  sheep  to  lie  down  in,  but  a  road  for  them  to  walk  on.  Rest  is  to 
fit  for  work,  work  is  to  sweeten  rest.  All  this  is  emphatically  true  of  the  spiritual 
life.  It  is  not  well  that  our  chief  object  should  be  to  enjoy  the  consolations  of 
religion  ;  it  is  better  to  seek  first  to  do  the  duties  enjoined  by  religion.  Joy  in 
God  is  the  strength  of  work  for  God,  but  work  for  God  is  the  perpetuation  of  joy 
in  God.  Here  is  the  figurative  expression  of  the  great  evangelical  principle,  that 
works  of  righteousness  must  follow,  not  precede,  the  restoration  of  the  soul.  "We 
are  justified,  not  by  works,  but  for  works.  The  basis  of  obedience  is  the  sense  of 
salvation.  3.  God  leads  His  people  through  sorrow.  The  "  valley  of  the  shadow" 
means  any  and  every  gloomy  valley  of  weeping  through  which  we  have  to  pass. 
Such  sunless  gorges  as  we  have  all  to  traverse  at  some  time  or  other.  It  is  never 
given  to  the  human  heart  to  meditate  of  the  future  without  some  foreboding. 
Some  evils  may  come  ;  some  will  probably  come  ;  one  at  least  is  sure  to  come.  So 
there  is  never  pure  hope  in  any  heart  that  wisely  considers  the  future.  But  to  the 
Christian  heart  there  may  be  this,  the  conviction  that  sorrow,  when  it  comes,  wiU 
not  be  evil,  because  God  wiU  be  with  us.  Strange  as  it  may  sound,  the  presence  of 
Him  who  sends  the  sorrow  is  the  best  help  to  bear  it.     II.  God  as  the  Host,  and 

trs  AS  THE  6TJESTS  AT  HiS  TABLE  AND   THE  DWELLERS  IN  HiS  HOUSE.       All  is  here 

intensified.  1.  God  supplies  our  wants  in  the  very  midst  of  strife.  The  mercy  is 
more  strikingly  portrayed  as  being  granted  not  only  before  toil,  but  in  warfare. 
Life  is  a  sore  fight ;  but  to  the  Christian  man,  in  spite  of  all  the  tumult,  life  is  a 
festal  banquet.  Always  the  foe  ;  always  the  table.  This  is  the  form  under  which 
experience  of  the  past  is  presented  in  the  second  portion — ^joy  in  conflict,  rest  and 
food  even  in  the  strife.  Upon  that  there  is  built  a  hope  which  transcends  that  in 
the  previous  portion  of  the  Psalm.  As  to  this  life,  ' '  goodness  and  mercy  shall 
foUowus."  Higher  than  all  rises  the  confidence  of  the  closing  words, — "  I  shall 
dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever. "  This  should  be  at  once  the  crown  of  all 
our  hopes  for  the  future,  and  the  one  great  lesson  taught  us  by  all  the  vicissitudes 
of  life.  Yonder  we  sit  down  with  the  Shepherd,  the  Master  of  the  house,  at  His 
table  in  His  kingdom.  Far  off,  and  lost  to  sight,  are  all  the  enemies.  We  fear  no 
change  ;  we  go  no  more  out.  {A.  Maelaren,  D.D.)  The  Shepherd-King  of  men: 
— I.  Knowledge  of  God.  David  believed  that  all  the  attributes  of  the  shepherd- 
relation  and  service  belonged  to  God.  1.  God's  intimate  acquaintance  with  us. 
'  2.  Intense  practical  sympathy.  Once  a  clergyman  told  the  wife  of  a  besotted 
drunkard  that  the  Lord  had  abandoned  her  husband  to  his  evil  habits.  Said  she, 
"  Do  you  say  that  God  has  abandoned  my  husband  to  his  sin  ?  Then  it  is  high  time 
I  should  stand  up  for  him,  and  see  him  through.  I  will  be  God  for  him  if  God  is 
of  your  mind."  It  was  a  noble  speech  from  a  noble-hearted  woman.  3.  Disinter- 
estedness. He  "giveth  His  life  for  the  sheep."  What  will  not  a  mother  do  for 
her  child  ?  At  its  service  she  puts  the  whole  store  of  her  being.  Carry  this 
thought  up,  as  Christ  taught  us,  into  the  sphere  of  the  infinite,  and  you  will  have 
gained  some  conception  of  the  disinterested  tenderness  and  unselfish  love  of  God. 
II.  Relationship  to  God.  "ilfj/ Shepherd."  He  appropriates  God.  Learn  to  use 
this  syllable  of  endearment,  and  the  blessedness  and  power  of  David's  Psalm  are  at 
once  felt.  III.  Confidence  in  God.  "I  shall  not  want."  If  we  believe  that 
God  is  the  Shepherd  of  His  people,  we  must  conclude  that  He  will  supply  all 
their  wants.  If  we  have  learnt  to  call  Him  "3Iy  Shepherd,"  then  we  shall 
confidently  add,  "I  shall  not  want."  {George  Bainton.)  The  Divine  Shep- 
herd : — What  with  post  and  rail  fences,  and  our  pride  in  Southdown,  Astrakhan, 
and  Flemish  varieties  of  sheep,  there  is  no  use  now  of  the  old-time  shepherd. 
Such  an  one  had  abundance  of  opportunity  of  becoming  a  poet,  being  out-of- 
doors  twelve  hours  the  day,  and  ofttimes  waking  up  in  the  night  on  the  hills. 
If  the  stars,  or  the  torrents,  or  the  sun,  or  the  flowers,  had  anything  to  say,  he 
was  very  apt  to  hear  it.  The  Ettrick  Shepherd  of  Scotland,  who  afterwards  took 
his  seat  in  the  brilliant  circle  of  Wilson  and  Lockhart,  got  his  wonderful  poetio 
inspiration  in  the  ten  years  in  which  he  was  watching  the  flocks  of  Mr.  LaidlaW. 
There  is  often  a  sweet  poetry  in  the  rugged  prose  of  the  Scotch  shepherd.    One  of 


PSAlM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  437 

these  Scotch  shepherds  lost  his  only  son,  and  he  knelt  down  in  prayer,  and  was 
overheard  to  say,  "  0  Lord,  it  has  seemed  good  in  Thy  providence  to  take  from  me 
the  staff  of  my  right  hand  at  the  time  when  to  us  sand-blind  mortals  I  seemed  to 
be  most  in  need  of  it ;  and  how  I  shall  climb  up  the  hill  of  sorrow  and  auld  age 
without  it  Thou  mayst  ken,  but  I  dinna."  I.  Of  the  Shepherd's  plaid.  No 
splendid  apparel,  but  rough  strong  apparel  fit  for  his  hard  work.  The  Lord  our 
Shepherd  coming  out  to  hunt  the  lost  sheep,  puts  on  no  regal  robe,  but  the  plain 
garment  of  humanity.  No  ;  in  the  wardrobe  of  heaven  He  left  the  sandals  of 
light,  the  girdles  of  beauty,  the  robes  of  power,  and  put  on  our  besoiled  and 
tattered  raiment.  The  work  of  saving  this  world  was  rough  work,  rugged  work, 
hard  work ;  and  Jesus  put  on  the  raiment,  the  plain  raiment,  of  our  flesh.  The 
storms  were  to  beat  Him,  the  crowds  were  to  jostle  Him,  the  dust  was  to  sprinkle 
Him,  the  mobs  were  to  pursue  Him.  0,  Shepherd  of  Israel !  leave  at  home  Thy 
bright  array.  For  Thee,  what  streams  to  ford,  what  nights  all  unsheltered  ! 
II.  The  Shepherd's  crook.  This  was  a  rod  with  a  curve  at  the  end  which,  when 
a  sheep  was  going  astray,  was  thrown  over  its  neck  ;  and  in  that  way  it  was  pulled 
back.  There  is  no  animal  that  struggles  more  violently  than  a  slieep  when  you 
comer  it  and  catch  hold  of  it.  Down  the  glen  I  see  a  group  of  men  around  a  lost 
sheep.  A  ploughman  comes  along  and  seizes  the  sheep,  and  tries  to  pacify  it ;  but 
it  is  more  frightened  than  ever.  A  miller  comes  along,  puts  down  his  grist,  and 
caresses  the  sheep,  and  it  seems  as  if  it  would  die  of  fright.  After  a  whUe  some 
one  breaks  through  the  thicket.  He  says,  "Let  me  have  the  poor  thing."  He 
comes  up  and  lays  his  arms  around  the  sheep,  and  it  is  immediately  quiet.  Who 
is  the  last  man  that  comes?  It  is  the  shepherd.  Ah,  be  not  afraid  of  the 
Shepherd's  crook.  It  is  never  used  on  you,  save  in  mercy,  to  pull  you  back.  The 
hard  cold  iceberg  of  trouble  will  melt  in  the  warm  Gulf  Stream  of  Divine 
sympathy.  III.  The  Shepherd's  dogs.  They  watch  the  straying  sheep,  and 
drive  them  back  again.  Every  shepherd  has  his  dog — from  the  nomads  of  the 
Bible  times,  down  to  the  Scotch  herdsman  watching  his  flocks  on  the  Grampian 
Hills.  Our  Shepherd  employs  the  criticisms  and  persecutions  of  the  world  as  His 
dogs.  There  are  those,  you  know,  whose  whole  work  it  is  to  watch  the  inconsist- 
ences of  Christians,  and  bark  at  them.  If  one  of  God's  sheep  gets  astray,  the 
world  howls.  It  ought  to  do  us  good  to  know  that  we  are  thus  watched.  It  ought 
to  put  us  on  our  guard.  They  cannot  bite  us  if  we  stay  near  the  Shepherd.  The 
more  dogs  take  after  you,  the  quicker  you  will  get  to  the  gate.  The  bloody 
muzzle  of  the  papacy  hounded  fifty  million  Protestants  into  glory.  IV.  The 
Shepherd's  pasture  grounds.  The  old  shepherds  used  to  take  the  sheep  upon 
the  mountains  in  the  summer,  and  dwell  in  the  valleys  in  the  winter.  It  was  well 
for  the  sheep  to  be  out  of  doors.  "Wells  were  dug  for  them,  and  the  shepherd  led 
his  flock  wherever  he  would  :  nobody  disputed  his  right.  So  the  Lord  our  Shepherd 
has  a  large  pasture-ground.  He  takes  us  in  the  summer  to  the  mountains,  and  in 
the  winter  to  the  valleys.  Warm  days  of  prosperity  come,  and  we  stand  on  sun- 
gilt  Sabbaths,  and  on  hills  of  transfiguration  ;  and  we  are  so  high  up  we  can  catch 
a  glimpse  of  the  pinnacles  of  the  heavenly  city.  Then  cold  wintry  days  of  trouble 
come,  and  we  go  down  into  the  valley  of  sickness,  want,  and  bereavement,  and  we 
say,  '*  Is  there  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow  ? "  But,  blessed  be  God,  the  Lord's 
sheep  can  find  pasture  anywhere.  V.  The  Shepherd's  fold.  At  shearing-time — 
a  very  joyful  time  to  all  the  country  round — the  sheep  were  put  in  a  walled 
enclosure,  where  they  could  easily  be  counted,  and  any  wanting  would  at  once  be 
missed.  This  was  the  sheep-fold.  {T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Jesus  as  "my" 
Shepherd: — Some  time  ago  a  gentleman  taking  holiday  in  a  rural  district  came 
across  a  little  boy  minding  sheep.  The  stranger  entered  into  conversation  with  the 
lad,  and  asked  him  if  he  knew  the  23rd  Psalm.  The  little  fellow  answered  "No." 
"Then  let  me  teach  you  the  first  sentence,"  said  the  gentleman.  "Say  these 
words  after  me,  '  The — Lord — is — my — Shepherd  ! ' "  The  boy  repeated  the  words. 
"Now  repeat  each  word  again,  and  count  a  finger  as  you  do  so;  in  this  way." 
And  he  told  off  a  finger  at  each  of  the  words.  "And  when  you  come  to  that 
word  my,  grip  your  fourth  finger  tightly  with  your  other  hand,  and  never  forget, 
my  lad,  that  the  Lord  is  not  only  a  Shepherd  but  your  Shepherd."  The  stranger 
went  his  way,  and  the  boy  told  his  parents  at  night  of  the  strange  gentleman  and 
his  lesson.  During  the  following  winter  the  snow  fell  heavily  in  that  district. 
One  day  the  boy  and  his  sheep  were  missed.  They  were  discovered  in  a  deep  drift. 
After  the  sheep  had  been  dug  out,  the  search-party  came  upon  the  dead  body  of  the 
boy — his  left  fourth  finger  tightly  grasped  in  his  right  hand.     Now  the  sequel.     A 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxin. 

distinguished  Baptist  minister  was  quite  recently  preaching  Sunday  school  anni- 
versary sermons  in  a  northern  town.  Not  far  from  the  chapel  lived  the  M.P.  for 
the  district.  He  was  rich  toward  man,  but  not  rich  toward  God.  He  had  a  great 
fondness  for  hearing  children's  voices ;  and  when  he  heard  of  the  anniversary 
services  he  decided  to  attend  the  afternoon  meeting  for  the  children.  The 
preacher  told  the  simple  story  given  above,  and  presently  the  service  ended. 
During  the  following  days  the  rich  man  was  taken  ill,  and  died  somewhat 
suddenly.  When  the  doctors  came  to  examine  him,  they  found  hira  already 
dead,  and  clasping  his  left  fourth  finger  with  his  right  hand.  Not  in  vain  did 
the  stranger  teach  the  shepherd  lad  ;  not  in  vain  did  the  preacher  tell  the  simple 
child's  story ;  not  in  vain  is  the  sequel  now  printed.  Let  every  one  who  reads 
this  remember  as  he  goes  through  life  that  "The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd." 
Jehovah : — This  name  Jehovah  is,  as  I  may  so  speak,  the  most  eminent  of  all  the 
names  of  God  ;  it  carries  that  in  it  which  is  all  in  all,  and,  as  it  were,  above  all ; 
namely,  the  verity  or  fidelity  of  God,  making  good  all  His  goodness  to  us.  The 
Hebrews  make  it  to  be  an  invariable  and  inefi'able  name,  and  it  hath  no  pronouns 
affixed  unto  it,  nor  doth  it  admit  any  demonstrating  article  before ^it,  and  it  wants 
the  number  of  multitude  ;  it  is  a  name  singxilar  and  proper  to  God.  (0.  Sedgvneky 
B.D.)  The  properties  of  a  good  shepherd: — 1.  One  is  science  :  I  am  the  Good 
Shepherd,  and  know  My  sheep,  saith  Christ  (John  x.  14).  A  skilful  knowledge,  by 
which  he  must  understand  how  to  handle  them  or  deal  with  them.  2.  A  second  is 
providence.  The  good  shepherd  provideth  pasture  and  water  for  the  sheep,  and 
always  that  which  is  wholesome,  lest  the  sheep  rot  and  die  ;  as  he  is  not  negligent 
that  the  sheep  want  feeding,  so  he  is  diligent  that  they  have  wholesome  feeding 
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  13).  The  Lord  will  provide  sufficient  pasture,  and  the  best  too. 
3.  A  third  is  guidance.  He  doth  not  leave  them  to  the  misguidance  of  sin  or  Satan, 
or  the  world,  or  their  own  hearts.  4.  A  fourth  is  vigilance.  The  sheep  are  weapon- 
less, weak,  unarmed  creatures,  and  they  have  many  and  strong  enemies,  as  the  lion  and 
the  wolf  and  the  dog.  Jacob  watched  night  and  day  (Gen.  xxxi.  40).  Such  a  Shepherd 
is  God  over  His  people  ;  His  eye  is  ever  over  them  (1  Pet.  iii.  12).  5.  To  which,  as 
a  part,  may  be  added  defence.  He  is  my  defence,  saith  David  (Psa.  lix.  9).  The 
Prophet  Zachary  calls  Him  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  His  people  (Zach.  ii.  5). 
6.  The  good  shepherd  does  not  only  provide  pasture  but  coverture  also  for  the 
sheep  :  he  hath  his  shady  places  from  the  sun,  and  retiring  places  from  the  storms, 
to  refresh,  as  well  as  to  flesh  the  sheep  (Psa.  cxxi.  5).  7.  A  seventh  property  of  a 
good  shepherd  is  tender  prudence,  for  in  a  flock  of  sheep  there  is  great  diversity : 
one  part  may  be  strong  sheep,  and  they  are  driven  ;  another  part  may  be  weak 
lambs,  and  they  are  sometimes  carried  by  the  shepherd.  Some  of  the  sheep  may  be 
sound  and  well,  others  may  be  diseased  ;  some  keep  in  better,  others  are  more  apt  to 
stray  (Isa.  xl.  11).  8.  Lastly,  diligence  and  care,  lest  any  one  sheep  be  lost  and 
perish.  The  good  shepherd  would  not  lose  any  of  the  least  of  all  the  flock.  {Ibid. ) 
Choice  properties  of  sheep: — 1.  One  property  in  them  (which  the  Scripture  doth 
express)  is  obedience  (John  x.  4).  2.  Another  property  of  sheep  is  meekness  and 
patience.  3.  A  third  property  of  sheep  is  usefulness.  4.  A  fourth  property  of 
sheep  is  unity  and  peaceableness.  {Ibid. )  The  chief  est  Shepherd  to  be  yours : — 
But  more  particularly  thus,  you  have — (1)  A  most  wise  Shepherd.  (2)  You  have  a 
most  tender  Shepherd  ;  and  as  He  is  tender  in  corrections,  so  in  His  directions 
(Gen.  xxxiii.  13).  (3)  You  have  a  most  faithful  Shepherd  ;  One  who  will  never 
intermit  His  care  over  you.  (4)  You  have  the  most  loving  Shepherd  ;  He  loves  you 
with  the  highest  degrees  of  love  in  all  kinds.  (5)  Lastly,  you  have  the  most 
rewardful  Shepherd.  Have  you  such  a  Shepherd  as  Jehovah  ?  Then  be  counselled 
in  a  few  particulars.  1.  Be  contented  with  His  pasture.  God  is  pleased  to  feed  us 
sometimes  in  the  valleys  with  much  plenty,  variety,  ease,  delight ;  and  sometimes, 
again.  He  is  pleased  to  drive  us  to  the  mountains,  to  a  shorter,  sharper  condi- 
tion of  life ;  if  we  be  His  sheep,  we  must  be  still  contented  with  His  pasture. 
2.  Carefully  regard  His  voice.  3.  Thrive  under  His  feedings.  4.  Cleave  together 
as  the  flock  of  one  shepherd.  The  wolf,  it  is  his  property  to  scatter  the 
flock,  and  then  to  make  a  prey  of  one  after  another.  6.  Lastly,  if  God  be 
your  Shepherd,  then  be  not  disquieted  at  His  dealings  with  you.  {Ibid.)  I  shall 
not  want. — A  trustful  confidence  : — The  confidence  was  well  grounded.  1.  You 
shall  not  want  a  guardian  ;  I  will  protect  you.  2.  You  shall  not  want  a  justifying 
righteousness,  by  which  you  may  have  a  good  right  and  title  to  a  place  in  My 
kingdom.  3.  You  shall  not  want  a  meetness  for  the  kingdom  of  glory.  I  will 
make  you  free  from  the  accursed  bonds  of  sio.     4.  You  shall  not  want  persevering 


PSALM  xxiii,]  THE  PSALMS.  439 

grace.  I,  who  have  "begun  a  good  work  in  you,  will  perfomi  it."  5.  You 
shall  not  want  spiritual  refreshment.  6.  You  shall  not  want  needful  support.  The 
world  shall  not  overcome  you.  You  shall  gain  the  victory  over  its  smiles  and 
frowns.  The  Great  Shepherd  will  crown  you  with  His  loving-kindness  for  ever. 
(/.  Jennings.)  The  Divine  supply  of  human  want : — Then  the  useful  application  of 
all  this  unto  ourselves.  I.  In  what  sense  the  assertion  is  to  be  understood. 
1.  There  are  two  sorts  of  things  :   some  which  do  conduce  to  make  the  condition 

food  and  happy  ;  others  which  do  serve  to  make  the  condition  smooth  and 
elightful.  As  about  an  house  there  are  pillars  and  rafters,  &c.,  which  are  the 
bones,  as  it  were,  and  absolute  ingredients  ;  and  there  are  the  varnishings  and 
paintings  which  do  set  forth  the  house.  Or,  as  in  a  garden,  there  are  profitable 
fruits,  and  there  are  pleasant  flowers  only  to  look  on  and  smell.  So  it  is  with  us  : 
there  are  some  things  which  make  our  hearts  truly  good,  and  tend  to  our  everlasting 
salvation  ;  there  are  other  things  which  do  only  serve  to  cheer  and  refresh  us  in  our 
passage.  Now,  when  David  saith,  I  shall  not  want,  they  conjecture  this  to  be  the 
sense  :  Nothing  shall  be  wanting  to  me  which  concerns  the  making  of  my  estate 
truly  happy  ;  though  delightfuls  may  be  wanting,  yet  principals  shall  not.  2.  Some 
things  are  (1)  redundant,  (2)  necessary.  Those  things  are  redundant  without  which 
a  man  may  well  pass  over  his  condition  of  life.  As  a  man  may  well  serve  God, 
though  he  have  not  an  estate  of  riches  or  honour  comparable  to  another,  or  always 
equal  to  itself.  Those  things  are  necessary  without  which  a  person  cannot  well 
serve  God,  as  our  daily  bread,  for  which  Christ  would  have  us  to  pray  :  our  bodies 
cannot  be  fitted  to  duty  without  these  external  necessary  supplies  of  food  and 
raiment.  Even  a  good  man,  a  David,  may  want  superfluities  ;  his  table  may  not  be 
variously  furnished,  nor  his  garments  gaudily  embroidered,  nor  his  coffers  excessively 
stuffed  and  piled.  But  yet  he  shall  not  want  necessaries,  though  he  be  not  sure  of 
plenty,  yet  of  enough  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16).  He  doth  not  say  his  wines  are  sure,  but  his 
waters  ;  and  he  doth  not  say  his  feast,  but  his  bread  shall  not  fail.  Though  he  hath 
not  always  what  he  needs  not,  yet  he  shall  have  always  what  is  needful.  Though 
he  hath  not  the  lace,  yet  he  hath  the  garment ;  though  he  hath  not  the  sauce,  yet 
he  hath  the  meat ;  though  he  hath  not  the  palace,  yet  he  hath  the  chamber  ; 
though  he  hath  not  the  softness,  yet  he  hath  the  bed  ;  though  he  hath  not  what 
he  may  spare,  yet  he  hath  what  he  may  use.  3.  Of  necessary  things,  some  are 
desirable,  and  some  seasonable.  Those  things  are  desirable  which  have  any  kind  of 
good  in  them  ;  those  things  are  seasonable  which  have  a  kind  of  conveniency  or 
fitness  in  them.  It  is  granted  that  there  are  many  desirable  goods  which  a  good 
man  hath  not  many  times.  Yet  no  seasonable  good  shall  he  want :  When  health  is 
good  for  him,  Hezekiah  shall  recover  ;  when  liberty  is  good  for  him,  Joseph  shall  be 
loosed  ;  when  favour  and  dignity  are  good  for  him,  then  David  shall  return  and  be 
settled.  It  is  good  for  me,  saith  David,  that  I  was  afHicted.  A  good  man  may 
want  this  thing  and  that  thing,  but  he  shall  not  want  anything  that  is  good,  nor 
when  it  may  be  good  for  him.  4.  Again,  divines  say  that  good  things  may  be  had 
two  ways,  either  explicitly,  when  a  person  enjoyeth  the  individual  or  particular  things 
(suppose  health,  strength,  liberty,  friends,  and  other  comforts) ;  interpretatively, 
when  a  person  enjoyeth  that  which  is  equivalent  to  those  things  (a  citizen  may  not 
have  a  garden,  a  farm,  sheep  or  oxen,  yet  he  hath  thousands  in  his  purse  which  are 
equivalent  to  all  these).  Thus  do  they  say  of  a  good  man,  that  either  he  enjoyeth 
the  very  particular  good  things  which  he  needs,  or  else  those  things  which  are 
equivalent  to  them,  nay,  far  exceeding  of  them.  Though  he  cannot  have  much 
lands,  yet  he  hath  many  gi'aces  ;  though  he  cannot  have  the  countenance  of  men, 
yet  he  hath  the  favour  of  God  ;  though  he  cannot  enjoy  quiet  abroad,  yet  he  settleth 
peace  within  his  conscience.  He  that  hath  but  one  diamond  may  have  far  more 
than  he  who  hath  a  thousand  stones  digged  out  of  the  quarry.  5.  You  must 
distinguish  'twixt  absence  and  'twixt  indigence.  Absence  is  when  something  is 
not  present ;  indigence  or  want  is  when  a  needful  good  is  not  present.  If  a  man 
were  to  walk,  and  had  not  a  staff,  here  were  something  absent ;  if  a  man  were  to 
walk,  and  had  but  one  leg,  here  were  something  whereof  he  were  indigent.  It  is 
confessed  that  there  are  many  good  things  which  are  absent  from  a  good  person,  but 
no  good  thing  which  he  wants  or  is  indigent  of.  If  the  good  be  ab.sent,  and  I  need 
it  not,  this  is  not  want ;  he  that  walks  without  his  cloak  walks  well  enough,  for  he 
needs  it  not.  6.  There  are  two  sorts  of  wants  :  in  some  part  of  the  condition,  in  the 
heart  and  affection  ;  as  a  man  may  abound  in  his  condition,  and  yet  want  in  that  of 
his  aflection.  He  may  have  abundance  in  honour,  in  estate,  in  wealth,  and  yet 
through   an  endless  covetoiisnLS>  tuid  vein   ilisi.'ontent  he   may  be  in  want,   still 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

complaining,  murmuring,  craving.  So  a  man  may  want  something  in  his  external 
condition,  and  yet  abound  and  not  want  in  that  of  his  inward  affection.  Though  he 
hath  not  the  outward  thing,  yet  he  wants  it  not,  for  he  is  contented  with  the 
absence  of  it.  7.  Lastly,  you  must  distinguish  'twixt  real  wants  and  imaginary 
wants, — a  want  to  the  person  and  a  want  to  the  corruption  :  a  child  is  sometimes 
clamorous  for  a  knife,  and  sometimes  he  cries  for  bread ;  when  he  cries  for  bread 
his  father  ariseth  and  fetcheth  the  loaf,  the  child  shall  not  want  bread  ;  but 
when  he  cries  for  the  knife  this  he  shall  not  have,  the  father  will  not  satisfy  his 
wantonness,  though  he  will  supply  his  wants.  Our  corruptions  are  still  craving, 
and  they  are  always  inordinate  ;  they  can  find  more  wants  than  God  needs  to 
supply.  God  will  see  that  His  people  shall  not  want,^but  withal  He  will  never 
engage  Himself  to  the  satisfying  of  their  corruptions,  though  He  doth  to  the  supply 
of  their  conditions.  It  is  one  thing  what  the  sick  man  wants,  another  what  his 
disease  wants.  Your  ignorance,  your  discontents,  your  pride,  your  unthankful 
hearts  may  make  you  to  believe  that  you  dwell  in  a  barren  land,  far  from  mercies 
(as  melancholy  makes  a  person  to  imagine  that  he  is  drowning,  or  killing,  &c.), 
whereas  if  God  did  open  your  eyes  as  He  did  Hagar's,  you  might  see  fountains  and 
streams,  mercies  and  blessings  sufiicient ;  though  not  many,  yet  enough  ;  though 
not  so  rich,  yet  proper  and  every  way  convenient  for  your  good  and  comfort.  How 
far  the  verity  of  this  assertion  extends,  whether  to  soul  and  body,  to  spirituals  and 
temporals.  I  answer  briefly,  it  holds  firm  of  both  ;  both  soul  and  body  are  the 
object  of  Divine  providence  and  of  Divine  love,  and  both  of  them  ai-e  serviceable  to 
Divine  glory.  1.  That  the  soul  shall  not  want,  the  Scriptures  are  abundant.  It 
shall  have  grace  and  glory  :  there  is  redemption  for  it,  righteousness  for  it,  sanctifica- 
tion  for  it,  and  salvation  ;  there  is  the  Word  to  help  it,  the  Sacraments  to  help  it, 
afflictions  to  help  it,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  still  to  help  it— (1)  to  justifying  grace, 
(2)  to  sanctifying  grace,  (3)  to  strengthening  and  assisting  grace,  (4)  to  comforting 
and  refreshing  grace  :  you  shall  never  want  proper  comforts,  nor  seasonable. 
2.  That  the  body  shall  not  want  in  respect  of  temporals ;  take  them  in  any  kind, 
and  as  suitable,  and  necessary,  and  seasonable.  How  it  may  appear  that  the  people 
of  God  shall  not  want,  and  why.  (1)  It  may  appear  by  a  series  of  experimental 
instances.  (2)  It  may  appear  by  the  wonderful  supplies  of  God  unto  His  people 
rather  than  they  should  want ;  sometimes  God  hath  created  helps  unto  them — 
manna  in  the  wilderness.  (3)  Shall  not  heaven  and  earth  pass  away  before 
any  one  word  of  God  doth  fail  ?  (4)  Fourthly,  consider  His  present  donations. 
(5)  His  special  affection  to  His  people.  (6)  His  singular  relations.  The  Lord  is  to 
His  people  as  a  father  to  his  children  (2  Cor.  vi.  18).  (7)  Lastly,  take  the  acquaint- 
ances and  acknowledgments  of  all  the  servants  of  God  that  they  have  made  unto 
the  Lord  and  delivered  under  their  own  hands  (Gen.  xxxii.  1).  But  now  it  is 
objected  against  all  this,  that  there  are  no  people  in  the  world  that  are  in  such  want 
as  the  people  of  God  for  outward  things.  You  know  that  all  these  outward  things 
are  promised  not  peremptorily,  but  (1)  with  condition,  if  good  for  them  ;  (2)  with 
exception  of  the  Cross.  Now  I  come  to  the  application  of  this  point  to  ourselves. 
Shall  not  the  flock  or  people  of  God  want  ?  Then  you  who  take  yourselves  to  be 
the  people  of  His  pasture,  give  ear  and  hearken  this  day  unto  two  things.  1.  Your 
sins  :  That  you  suffer  your  hearts  so  to  be  cracked  with  fears,  and  your  minds  to  be 
filled  with  cares.  Thou  hast  no  reason  at  all  to  conclude  that  thou  shalt  want. 
Consider,  what  hath  God  been  unto  thee  already  ?  What  is  the  nature  of  God  for 
the  present :  Is  He  like  man,  that  He  should  change  ?  Was  He  God  all-sufficient  ? 
is  He  not  so  still  ?  thy  loving  and  compassionate  God  ?  is  He  not  so  still  ?  thy 
almighty  God  ?  is  He  not  [so  still  ?  Is  He  deceitful  1  or  is  His  hand  shortened  ? 
Doth  He  cease  to  be  God,  or  to  be  thy  God  ?  If  the  fountain  still  lives  and  runs, 
why  shouldest  thou  imagine  to  die  by  thirst  ?  If  the  sun  still  shines,  why  shouldest 
thou  fancy  nothing  but  darkness  1  What  is  the  promise  of  God  for  the  future  ? 
Thou  hast  all  the  reason  in  the  world  to  conclude  that  thou  shalt  not  want,  when 
thou  considerest  that  fulness,  infinite  fulness  which  is  in  God.  But  Divine  good- 
ness is  such  a  common  as  cannot  be  overlaid :  though  there  be  not  water  enough  for 
a  few  ships  in  the  river,  yet  there  is  water  and  room  enough  for  all  the  ships  in  the 
world  on  the  sea.  That  great  God  who  feeds  a  whole  world  every  day,  He  is  able 
enough  to  sustain  thee  all  thy  days.  That  willingness  that  is  in  God  to  do  thee 
good.  2.  Your  duty :  To  be  humbled  for  vexatious  cares  and  fears,  and  then  to  cast 
your  care  on  God.  The  motives,  which  shall  be  drawn — From  the  evil  incon- 
veniences of  not  trusting  on  the  Lord  your  Shepherd  to  supply  your  wants.  They 
are  very  many.     It  is  a  dishonourable  thing  not  to  cast  your  care  on  the  Lord. 


PSALM  xxiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  441 

(1)  You  do  dishonour  to  God.  (2)  Your  holy  profession  :  how  apt  are  people  to  fasten 
all  miscarriages  of  godly  men  upon  godliness  itself.  (3)  It  is  an  unpeaceable  thing  : 
you  lose  all  your  peace  until  ye  can  rest  upon  God  by  faith  for  your  supplies.  (4)  It 
is  a  prejudicial  thing.  (5)  It  is  a  very  sinful  thing:  of  all  sins  unbelief  is  one 
of  the  greatest,  and  a  causeless  unbelief  is  the  greatest  of  all.  There  are  three 
things  in  God,  whereof  if  a  man  be  ignorant  he  will  be  much  in  cares  and  fears  of 
want.  1.  One  is  God's  fulness.  If  he  apprehends  not  a  fulness  in  all  and  every  of 
God's  attributes,  his  soul  will  fear  and  care.  If  I  conceive  that  God  is  fully  able  to 
supply  one  want,  and  not  many,  or  many  of  my  wants,  but  not  all,  or  all  my  per- 
sonal wants,  but  not  my  domestical  wants ;  all  my  wants  heretofore  when  I  was  a 
single  person,  but  not  all  now,  when  my  charge  increaseth  and  multiplies  by 
children  and  servants.  He  who  thus  conceives  of  God,  no  more  than  of  a  half  God, 
of  a  God  of  the  valleys  and  not  of  the  mountains,  one  who  can  supply  low  and 
mean,  but  not  high  and  great  wants  ;  few  and  not  many  wants,  former  wants,  but 
not  present,  present  but  not  future  wants,  extremely  mistakes  the  fountain  of  sup- 
plies, and  must  necessarily  be  tossed  and  crucified  with  perpetual  waves  and  darts 
of  rolling  fears  and  cutting  cares.  2.  God's  affectionateness.  3.  God's  immuta- 
bility or  unchangeableness.  David  reasoneth  so  in  this  place.  Jehovah  is  my 
Shepherd,  I  shall  not  want.  The  Lord  is  my  God,  He  hath  undertaken  for  me 
all  my  life,  therefore  I  am  not  solicitous.  Christians  are  exceeding  faulty  in  this, 
to  make  sure  of  God,  and  yet  it  is  the  way  to  make  sure  aU  His  mercies.  The 
mathematicians  must  have  some  principles  granted  unto  them,  and  if  once  you 
assent  unto  those  truths  they  will  thence  infer  many  infallible  and  undeniable  con- 
clusions. Among  Christians  this  should  be  a  principle  made  firm  that  God  is  their 
God,  and  then  they  may  quietly  sit  down,  and  confidently  conclude  all  comforts  for 
soul  and  body.  Be  diligent  in  your  callings.  He  who  eats  the  bread  of  idleness, 
may  well  resolve  to  drink  the  waters  of  carefulness.  (0.  SedgicicJc,  B.D.)  The 
Lord  our  Shepherd : — The  relations  subsisting  between  man  and  the  lower  animals 
play  no  insignificant  part  in  the  formation  of  human  character  and  the  discipline 
of  human  life.  No  relations  appeal  to  heart  and  imagination  more  than  those  of 
shepherd  and  sheep.  The  emblem  is  dear  to  us  yet,  even  to  the  dwellers  in  town 
and  city.  The  emblem  is  dearer  still,  because  it  has  been  confirmed  and  hallowed 
by  the  lips  of  One  greater  than  David.  I.  We  want  kourishment.  Body,  mind, 
spirit,  each  need  this.  II.  We  want  eefbeshment.  The  shepherd  brings  his 
flock  to  the  "waters."  As  pasturage  is  an  emblem  of  that  which  nourishes,  so 
water  is  an  emblem  of  all  that  refreshes.  The  difference  between  the  pleasures 
which  the  devil  gives  and  those  which  the  Lord  gives,  is  just  this — the  former 
intoxicate,  but  these  exhilarate.  Think  of  all  the  pleasure  of  simple,  innocent 
recreation — of  nature,  music,  poetry,  and  art ;  of  friendship  and  the  pure  affections 
of  the  home.  Let  us  never  forget  that  the  rapids  and  the  cataract  are  sometimes 
only  farther  down  in  the  very  same  stream,  beside  the  still  waters  of  which  the  Lord 
is  leading  His  people.  There  is  a  boundary  beyond  which  lawful  pleasure  passes 
into  lawless.  III.  We  want  rest.  The  shepherd  makes  the  flock  lie  down  in  some 
cool,  shady  place.  So  every  night  the  Lord  maketh  us  to  lie  down.  And  He  pro- 
vides rest  for  the  soul  also.  There  is  too  little  repose  in  the  life  of  most  of  us.  Too 
much  bustle,  too  much  impatience.  IV.  We  want  guidance.  Often  we  are 
perplexed  as  to  what  is  our  right  path  ;  and  when  we  have  found  it  we  are  liable  to 
go  astray.  V.  We  want  restoration.  From  sickness  and  from  wilfulness.  He 
restores  when  we  are  weak  and  weary.  VI.  We  want  the  comfort  of  protec- 
tion. Through  the  hilly  gorge — even  through  death.  {T.  Campbell  Finlayson.) 
David's  confidence  in  the  prospect  of  the  future : — The  grounds  of  David's  freedom 
from  anxiety  are — I.  The  relation  in  which  the  Lord  stands  to  him.  It  is 
not  the  mere  utterance  of  a  promise,  but  his  recollection  of  the  fact  that  the  Lord 
is  his  Shepherd.  Now,  in  order  to  see  God  sustaining  such  gracious  character 
towards  us,  we  need — 1.  A  view  of  God  as  a  gracious  God  ;  One  who  is  gracious  to 
sinners.  This  we  can  only  know  as  we  see  Him  in  Christ.  2.  And  we  must  know 
this  gracious  God  to  be  our  God.  II.  God's  presence  with  him.  "Thou  art 
with  me."  We  may  think  little  of  this  presence,  but  the  godly  man  thinks  much, 
and  has  habitually  this  recollection  in  his  mind.  III.  God's  present  mercies. 
Probably  David  was  thinking  more  of  spiritual  mercies  than  of  temporal.  He 
notices — 1.  Their  abundance.  2.  The  safety  with  which  he  enjoys  them.  3.  The 
strange  circumstances  under  which  these  mercies  were  enjoyed,  "  in  the  presence  of 
mine  enemies. "  4.  The  honour  which  the  Lord  puts  on  him  while  blessing  him, 
"Thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil."    After  having  reviewed  these  mercies  which 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiil, 

he  enjoys,  he  ends  by  making  the  inference  that  all  his  days  goodness  and  mercy 
shall  follow  him.  My  Shepherd  wUl  be  with  me  on  earth,  and  take  me  at  last  to 
heaven,     {fl,  Bradley,  M.A.) 

Yer.  2.  He  malceth  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures. — The  green  pastures: — 
The  image,  so  clear  and  beautiful  in  itself,  is  singularly  forcible  and  suggestive  in 
relation  to  our  inner  life.  Is  not  the  background  of  the  picture  true  to  the  facts 
which  we  everywhere  witness  around  us,  and  the  needs  and  aspirations  we  have 
felt  within  us  ?  How  much  there  is  in  life  to  remind  us  of  the  long  tracts  of  desert 
sand,  the  fierce  and  scorching  rays  of  the  sun,  the  lassitude  and  ennui  of  worn-out 
and  wearied  hearts.  Without  attempting  to  push  the  details  of  the  imagery  to  excess, 
we  may  assert  that  the  green  pastures  and  still  waters  find  their  counterpart  in  the 
truths  and  doctrines  of  Scripture,  in  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  means 
of  grace  established  for  our  sustenance  and  growth.  For  permanent  comfort  and 
strength  we  are  dependent  upon  the  revelations  of  the  Divine  Word.  God  Himself 
is  the  source  of  our  satisfaction  and  peace.  When  our  hearts,  "ceasing  from  self," 
can  stay  themselves  upon  Him,  and  find  in  their  obedience  to  His  will  the  great 
purpose,  and  in  their  consciousness  of  His  approval  the  gi-eat  reward,  of  their  life  ; 
when,  moreover,  we  can  look  forward  to  complete  assimilation  to,  and  eternal 
fellowship  with,  Him  in  heaven, — it  is  only  then  that  we  can  realise  the  expressive 
image  of  the  text,  and  "  lie  down  in  green  pastures,  and  beside  the  still  waters."  To 
these  resting-places  God  leads  us,  even  on  earth.  {James  Stuart. )  The  oases  of 
life : — These  sentences  do  not  describe  the  regular  and  uninterrupted  experience  of 
those  who  follow  the  Great  Shepherd.  They  are  by  no  means  always  reclining  in 
green  pastures,  nor  being  conducted  by  the  restful  waters.  Moreover,  life  after 
sucli  a  pattern  would  be  entirely  unsatisfactory  and  insufficient.  Green  pastures 
and  still  waters  would  prove  an  unspeakable  curse  if  life  contained  nothing  else  for 
us.  How  soon  we  should  grow  weak  and  indolent  and  useless.  The  text  refers  to 
the  occasional  privilege  rather  than  to  the  common  experience  of  the  sheep  of  His 
flock.  David  was  passing  through  a  time  of  sorrow,  want,  and  wandering.  And  if 
the  way  of  your  life  often  seems  to  lie  through  the  desert,  you  need  not  lose  heart 
and  hope.  Following  God's  guidance,  you  will  not  be  denied  needful  refreshment 
and  rest.  God  wUl  bring  you  to  the  oasis  where  the  quiet  waters  lie,  and  the  grass 
is  fresh  and  green.  He  will  discover  to  you  some  peaceful  hour,  some  shady  nook, 
some  prepared  table,  where  the  soul  may  be  refreshed  and  renewed.  It  would  be 
easy  to  enlarge  upon  the  many  privileged  occasions  which,  in  our  wilderness  life, 
answer  to  * '  green  pastures  and  stUl  waters. "  Everything  that  brings  relief  from 
the  ordinary  pressure  of  daily  life  and  revives  the  drooping  spirits  may  be  so 
regarded.  Music,  friendship,  and  religious  privileges  are  as  "still  waters."  And 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  overestimate  the  worth  of  a  wisely  sjjent  summer  holiday. 
As  far  as  in  us  lies,  and  especially  in  opportunities  afforded  by  the  summer  holiday, 
let  us  search  out  the  green  pastures  and  the  still  waters,  and  "reap  the  harvest  of 
a  quiet  eye."  (ff.  Edward  Young.)  Sjnritual  rest : — Three  things  are  needed  ere 
sheep  or  human  spirits  can  rest.  I.  A  consciousness  of  safety.  Who  can  rest 
so  long  as  eternal  destinies  lie  uncertainly  in  the  balance  ?  Against  this  our 
Shepherd  Jesus  has  provided.  He  has  Himself  met  the  great  adversary  of  our 
souls,  and  has  for  ever  broken  his  power.  II.  Sufficiency  of  food.  A  hungry 
sheep  will  not  lie  down.  The  shepherd  who  can  provide  it  vith  plenty  of  good 
pasturage  will  soon  bring  the  most  restless  animal  to  lie  contentedly.  We  can 
never  rest  so  long  as  the  hunger  of  the  spirit  is  unappeased  and  its  thirst  unslaked. 
There  is  no  answer  to  the  unrest  of  the  inward  man  until  the  voice  of  Jesus  is  heard 
saying,  "He  that  cometh  to  Me  shall  never  hunger."  The  Word  of  God  may  be 
compared  to  green  pastures.  There  are  many  spiritual  realities  corresponding  to 
the  waters  of  rest.  III.  Obedience  to  the  Shephekd's  lead.  The  tenderest 
shepherd  cannot  bring  the  flock  to  rest  unless  they  follow  him.  This  test  of 
following  the  Shepherd's  lead  is  most  important.  It  is  by  no  means  wonderful 
that  we  lose  our  rest  when  we  run  hither  and  thither,  following  the  devices  and 
desires  of  our  own  hearts.  We  substitute  our  plans  for  His.  We  do  not  look  up 
often  enough  to  see  which  way  He  is  going,  and  what  He  would  have  us  do.  And 
so  our  rest  is  broken.  We  must  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  {F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.  A.)  Green  pastures : — I.  Man's  want  OF  green  pastukes.  In  this 
bustling  world  it  is  difficult  to  enjoy  a  pleasant  repose.  The  hard-working  servant 
of  the  community,  whether  it  be  by  hands  or  hj  brain  that  he  chiefly  performs  his 
part,  is  apt  not  only  to  feel  a  strong  necessity  for  rest,  but  to  pant  and  sigh  for  a 


MALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  443 

more  retired  and  soothing  kind  of  rest  than  his  position  often  permits  him  to 
attain.  11.  The  discoveky  of  gbeen  pastures.  III.  The  experience  of 
GREEN  PASTURES.  It  is  One  thing  to  behold  the  picture  of  a  rich  and  fertile 
pastureland  ;  it  is  another  thing  to  be  in  actual  contact  with  richness  and  fertility 
in  the  locality  of  our  dwelling-place.  The  Psalmist  refers,  not  to  one  pasture  only, 
but  to  pastures.  The  field  of  enjoyment  to  which  Jesus  introduces  the  once 
wandering  soul  is  extensive.  The  provision  of  the  field  is  various.  When  brought 
to  be  at  peace  with  God,  through  the  blood  of  the  Cross,  the  soul  is  set  in  a  large 
place.  The  power,  the  wisdom,  and  the  goodness  of  the  Almighty  have  prepared 
innumerable  sources  of  pleasure  for  His  intelligent  creatures.  The  treasures 
furnished  by  Divine  loving-kindness  are  inexhaustible.     IV.  The  expectation  of 

GREEN   pastures   IN    GREATER   AND    MORE    ABUNDANT    MEASURE.      Experience   of 

past  love  is  the  strongest  foundation  for  the  anticipation  of  future  love.  He  that 
maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures  is  the  very  One  from  whose  power  I 
may  hereafter  expect  a  provision  of  green  pastures  in  larger  varieties  and  in 
greater  richness.  (JET.  Welhvood  Moncreiff,  D.D.)  The  Guardian  care  of  God : — 
I.  Divine  provision  for  needed  rest.  The  picture  presented  is  that  of  happy 
satisfaction  and  calm  delight.  Even  for  timid  sheep  all  sense  of  danger  is  gone, 
and  the  whole  aspect  of  the  flock  speaks  of  peace,  quiet,  repose.  It  tells  of  a  soul 
in  harmony  with  God,  passion  hushed,  discord  in  the  unruly  will,  and  the  struggle 
of  sinful  desire  destroyed.  II.  Divine  provision  for  appropriate  sustenance. 
"Pastures  of  grass,  and  waters  of  quietness."  Supply  not  only  sufficient,  but 
suitable  for  the  needs  of  the  flock.  It  answers  to  the  Gospel — the  good  tidings  of 
God  and  from  God,  a  proclamation  of  what  God  is,  and  how  God  feels  towards  us. 
Says  George  Eliot,  —  "The  first  condition  of  human  goodness  is  something  to  love, 
the  second,  something  to  reverence."  In  the  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we 
have  that  which  inspires  both  love  and  reverence.  III.  Divine  provision  for 
renewal  of  strength.  Few  creatures  are  more  helpless  than  sheep.  The  thought 
of  God  as  physician  to  His  flock  brings  Him  into  most  intimate  and  close  relation- 
ship. IV.  Divine  provision  for  active  service.  He  will  lead,  and  it  will 
always  be  in  righteousness.  No  guarantee  for  character  like  that  of  God's  leadings. 
Character  is  not  predestinated.  It  is  won  by  achievement,  and  it  will  be  won  if  we 
follow  where  God  leads.  "For  His  name's  sake" — that  is  the  secret  of  all  His 
kindness,  and  it  is  the  secret  of  our  consecration.  {George  Bainton.)  The  greeu 
^pastures  and  still  waters  where  the  flock  are  fed : — Here  we  have  the  ample  supply  of 
grace  aS"orded  to  the  believer  in  the  uew  covenant,  to  meet  all  his  spiritual  wants. 
I.  The  idea  of  rest  and  security.  "Lie  down."  The  pasture  is  indicative 
of  perfect  repose.  The  life  of  man  is  a  constant  striving  after  rest  and  satisfaction. 
True  rest  can  be  found  in  God  alone.  II.  The  idea  of  abundant  provision. 
It  is  not  one  piece  of  pasture -ground  that  is  spoken  of,  but  pastures.  There  is  no 
scant  supply.  And  what  diversity  there  is  in  God's  spiritual  provision  for  His 
people!  Grace  for  all  times  and  every  time.  .  .  .  "  StiU  waters."  These 
words  convey,  under  another  figure  and  symbol,  a  description  of  the  same  calm  and 
hallowed  repose,  secured  to  the  believer,  which  the  Psalmist  had  in  his  mind  in  the 
preceding  clause.  This  is  an  inland  river,  a  quiet,  gentle  stream.  Here,  too,  as  in 
the  former  figure,  we  have  the  abundance  of  God's  mercies  set  forth  ;  not  only 
varied  pastures,  but  varied  waters.  We  have  streams  of  peace,  of  purity,  of  pardon, 
of  sanctification, — all  exceeding  great  and  precious.  Conclude  with  the  reflection 
suggested  by  both  clauses,  that  religion  is  happiness.  {J.  B.  Macduff,  D.D.) 
Fast^ires  that  please  as  well  as  feed: — Not  only  He  hath  green  pastures  to  lead  me 
into,  which  shows  His  ability,  but  He  leads  me  into  them,  which  shows  His  good- 
ness. He  leads  me  not  into  pastures  that  are  withered  and  dry,  that  would  distaste 
me  before  I  taste  them  ;  but  He  leads  me  into  green  pastures,  as  well  to  please  my 
eye  with  the  verdure  as  my  stomach  with  the  herbage,  and  inviting  me,  as  it  were, 
to  eat,  by  setting  out  the  meat  in  the  best  colour.  A  meat  though  never  so  good, 
yet  if  it  look  not  handsomely,  it  dulls  the  appetite ;  but  when  besides  the  goodness 
it  hath  also  a  good  look,  this  gives  the  appetite  another  edge,  and  makes  a  joy 
before  enjoying.  But  yet  the  goodness  is  not  altogether  in  the  greenness.  Alas, 
green  is  but  a  colour,  and  colours  are  but  deceitful  things  :  they  might  be  green 
leaves,  or  they  might  be  green  flags  or  ru.shes  ;  and  what  good  were  to  me  in  such 
a  greenness  ?  No,  my  soul,  the  goodness  is  in  being  green  pastures,  for  now  they 
perform  as  much  as  they  promise  ;  and  as  in  being  gi-een  they  were  a  comfort  to  me 
as  soon  as  I  saw  them,  so  in  being  green  pastures  they  are  a  refreshing  to  me  now 
as  soon  as  I  taste  them.     {Sir  Richard  Baker.)        Good  ^Jasiurage : — 1.  Here  ia 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiil. 

fulness  (pastures  and  waters).  Pastures  alone  are  not  enough  for  sheep,  but  they  must 
have  waters  too.  2.  Here  is  goodness.  Though  there  be  pastures,  yet  if  they  be  not 
wholesome,  the  sheep  are  not  fed,  but  destroyed  by  them.  Not  mere  pastures,  but 
green  pastures  ;  not  mere  waters,  but  still  waters  are  provided  here  for  David.  3.  Here 
is  well-pleasedness.  I.  That  God  doth  provide  enough,  or  sufficiently  for 
His  people.  II.  That  as  God  provides  a  full  estate,  so  the  best  estate 
FOR  His  flock  or  people.  Pastures  which  are  green,  and  waters  which  are  still. 
To  omit  many  things  there  is  a  threefold  estate  of  God's  people  :  (1)  Their  spiritual 
estate  ;  (2)  their  glorious  estate  ;  (3)  their  temporal  estate.  That  the  condition  of  the 
godly  is  much  better  than  the  men  of  this  world  do  judge  it.  Godliness  is  no  parched 
wilderness,  no  barren  heath,  nor  like  the  mountains  of  Gilboa  :  it  hath  the  greenest 
pastures,  and  the  stillest  waters.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  Repose  in  life : — I.  Here  is  a 
promise,  then,  to  the  weary,  of  repose.  Thank  God  this  is  not  an  age  of  idleness. 
Can  we  equally  say,  thank  God  this  is  not  an  age  of  repose  ?  It  is  almost  the  prevail- 
ing stamp  which  defines  the  character  of  the  present  day — its  restlessness.  Call  it,  if 
you  will,  impatience ;  call  it  hurry.  Certainly,  whatever  is  the  opposite  to  repose.  It 
is  just  the  same  wherever  we  look.  Politics,  religion,  social  movements,  are  all 
whirled  along,  catching  up  in  their  gusty  flight  whatever  is  on  the  surface,  whatever 
is  light  and  movable,  one  scheme  sweeping  on  the  dust  of  another,  as  if  men  had 
imbibed  the  creed  which  proclaims,  ' '  Whatever  is,  is  wrong,  and  therefore  the 
opposite  to  the  present  system,  whatever  is,  is  right."  How  much  there  is 
around  us  and  about  us  to  think  of,  if  only  we  would  be  still !  The  world  is 
eloquent  with  parables  on  every  side  ;  the  walls  of  our  daily  environment  are  hung 
with  pictures.  The  sower  as  he  sows  is  also  preaching  :  the  lilies  as  they  grow,  the 
ravens  as  they  fly, — all  are  our  teachers.  How  mach  there  is  to  observe,  as 
naturalists  alone  will  tell  us,  to  our  shame,  if  we  are  only  patient  and  ready  to 
watch  !  And,  besides  the  pastures  of  our  daily  experience,  there  are  the  deep  cool 
pastures  of  good  books,  with  a  ready  supply  for  our  need  ;  above  all,  there  is  the 
Holy  Spirit,  ever  shedding  His  freshening  dew  on  the  daily  events  of  our  common 
life.  What  can  we  expect,  if  we  never  meditate,  if  we  never  think,  if  we  never 
read  ;  if  there  is  no  repose  and  no  green  pasture,  but  only  such  hurried  nibbling  of 
roadside  verbiage  and  well-worn  platitudes  as  lie  along  the  dusty  ti'ack  of  our  daily 
routine?  If  the  pastures  of  God  are  green  because  they  are  fresh,  they  are  also 
green  because  they  are  sheltered.  Around  them  is  the  protecting  hedge  of  God's 
Law.  God's  service  is  the  service  of  perfect  freedom,  where  to  admit  any  taint  of 
sinfulness  is  to  admit  weariness  and  distastefulness.  Let  us  try,  then,  and  gain 
some  repose  in  the  midst  of  this  weary  restlessness.  Repose,  if  possible,  in  our 
methods  ;  for  God  works  slowly,  and  to  work  together  with  Him  means  to  work 
slowly  also.  Let  us  gain  repose  in  our  daily  spiritual  life.  Restlessness  is  at  the 
bottom  of  many  hasty  actions,  which'  end  in  flying  in  the  face  of  God's  good  provi- 
dence for  us.  The  restlessness  of  imsettled  belief,  the  restlessness  of  no  belief,  are 
the  punishments  which  await  the  neglect  of  spiritual  repose.  These  green  pastures 
are  no  luxury  of  religion ;  they  are  a  necessity  of  life.  Each  day  must  have  its 
Nazareth  of  devotion,  as  life  has  its  own  Nazareth  of  subjection  in  childhood. 
II.  Another  note  which  rings  out  clearly  in  this  verse,  is  peace.  "  He  maketh  me  to 
lie  down  .  .  .  He  leadeth  me. "  How  sadly  the  soul  needs  peace — peace  in  His  felt 
presence  !  The  world  is  sown  with  trouble,  but  still  ' '  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down 
.  .  .  He  leadeth  me."  Panting  and  affrighted,  and  doubtful  of  ourselves.  He 
makes  us  lie  down.  He  feeds  us.  He  leads  us  on,  where  the  temptation  at  one  time 
had  seemed  likely  to  kiU  us.  Peace  rises  out  of  their  furious  onslaught,  or  their  petty 
annoyance.  And  yet  how  often  little  troubles  seem  to  have  power  to  vex  and 
irritate  us,  even  more  than  great  ones ! — such  things  as  distraction,  interruption, 
accident,  disappointment ;  so  many  barriers  put  in  our  path  to  deflect  us  into  duty, 
so  many  obstacles  to  provoke  our  peevish  ill-will.  Let  us  cheerfully  recognise  that, 
if  the  Good  Shepherd  is  leading  us,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  accident.  Ti-ifles  may 
very  easily  interfere  with  our  peace  of  mind  ;  but  they  may  also  be  God's  messengers 
to  teach  us  to  cast  away  aU  appearance  of  grumbling  and  fretfulness,  and  if  an 
obstacle  arise  in  our  ministry,  to  recognise  that  it  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  And 
yet  there  is  a  third  note  which  swells  up  in  the  triple  harmony  of  this  verse  ;  and 
that  is,  comfort.  "  In  the  multitude  of  the  sorrows  that  I  had  in  my  heart :  Thy 
comforts  have  refreshed  my  soul."  "The  waters  of  quietness "  have  become  in  one 
version  of  the  Psahn,  which  is  very  dear  to  us,  "  the  waters  of  comfort."  ( W.  G.  E. 
Newholt,  M.A.)  He  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters. — Still  waters : — I.  Still 
waters  are  distasteful  to  the  worldly  spirit.     Men  of  the  world  seek  for 


PSALM  xxiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  "^  445 

novelty  and  excitement,  but  their  pleasures  dry  up  like  a  summer  brook.  The 
edge  of  appetite  gets  dulled,  and  he  succeeds  best  who  can  give  fresh  keenness  to  the 
world's  appetite.  Still  waters  ?  No  !  These  to  worldly  hearts  would  be  misery. 
We  can,  however,  often  see  behind  all  these  brilliances  of  earth.  "Within,  there  is 
an  aching,  dying  soul.  II.  Still  waters  make  tjs  hear  the  voice  of  oxtr 
Saviour.  Sometimes  silence  itself  is  rest.  III.  Still  waters  are  not  stagnant 
WATERS.  They  are  deep,  pure,  living,  flowing.  The  waters  are  living  waters. 
True  of  the  Bible.  IV.  Still  waters  are  in  the  keeping  of  Christ.  The 
Shepherd  has  beforehand  surveyed  the  mountains  and  the  plains.  What  road  are 
we  to  take  when  there  seems  no  path  ?  Amid  the  broken  debris  of  rocks  the  Shep- 
herd leads  the  way.  V.  Still  waters  are  with  us  all  the  journey  through. 
"  Beside  "  them.  The  path  and  the  waters  go  together.  We  may  miss  some  joys, 
they  are  temporary — suited  to  certain  tastes  and  eras  in  our  life.  The  curtain  has 
fallen  over  them.  Can  that  photograph  represent  your  childhood  ?  Can  you  ever 
live  again  as  once  you  did  ?  As  the  rivers  from  their  simple  fountain — along  their 
broadening  course — flow  into  the  sea,  so  these  other  "waters"  lead  on  to  the  great 
ocean  of  immortality.  Listen  for  the  voice  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  Human  hearts 
himgry  for  the  sacrament  of  truth  hear  Him.  By  the  still  waters  of  meditation  and 
Scripture  and  prayer,  we  make  silence  in  our  hearts  for  Him.  ( W.  M,  Statham.) 
Beside  the  still  waters : — God's  chosen  ways  of  working  in  the  physical  world  are  not 
wholly  of  the  sudden  and  violent  sort.  Storm  and  earthquake  and  flood  have 
undoubtedly  played  their  part ;  but  God  seems  to  work,  by  preference,  slowly  and 
in  silence.  The  same  is  true  in  the  moral  world.  It  is  indeed  difficult  to  over- 
estimate the  force  of  a  great  soul.  It  is  well  to  remember  that  not  all  dislocating 
and  disturbing  spirits  put  forth  any  true  claim  to  greatness.  One  indeed  speaks 
what  the  many  feel ;  but  his  word  is  with  power  because  of  the  dumb  aspirations 
stirring  in  many  breasts,  and  a  universal  emotion  which  has  not  yet  found 
expression.  And  this  is  even  more  the  case  with  regard  to  moral  operations  of 
a  quieter  and  less  signal,  though  hardly  less  important  kind  ;  forces  which  do 
not  so  suddenly  change  the  world,  as  keep  it  sweet  and  pure,  and  perhaps,  in  the 
coiu-se  of  ages,  urge  it  a  little  nearer  the  throne  of  God.  A  father's  integrity  ;  a 
mother's  sweet  goodness  ;  the  quiet  air  of  a  happy  home  ;  a  domestic  courage  and 
patience,  at  which  you  have  looked  very  closely,  and  whose  every  line  and  lineament 
you  know  ;  some  ancestral  saintliness,  which  is  a  household  tradition,  and  no  more, 
hut  which  has  never  withered  in  the  fierce  light  of  ijublic  estimate, — these  things 
have  inspired  and  nourished  your  nobler  part.  They  are  the  refreshing  dew  and  the 
fertilising  rain,  the  restful  night,  and  the  kindling  day  of  God's  moral  world.  We 
insist  too  much  on  our  own  estimate  of  small  and  great  in  the  moral  world,  for- 
getting that  any  single  fact  or  individual  life  is  but  one  link  in  an  endless  chain  of 
causes  and  consequences,  of  which  we  ought  to  know  the  whole  before  we  can 
rightly  estimate  a  part.  No  mistake  can  be  greater  than  to  suppose  that  all 
the  world's  best  work  is  done  by  the  eloquent  tongue  and  the  busy  hand.  God 
Himself  provides  a  diversity  of  work  for  His  own  purposes ;  but  God  tempers 
His  weapons  in  His  own  way.  {C.  Beard,  B.A.)  Still  waters: — You  have, 
I  daresay,  often  seen  a  stream  rising  up  on  the  mountain  side,  amid  rocks  and 
ferns  and  twisted  roots,  and  the  short,  sweet  herbage  of  the  hill.  With  many 
a  playful  plunge  and  headlong  leap  it  finds  its  way  to  the  valley,  and  as  it  pursues 
its  course  passes  through  various  scenes.  So  flows  our  life.  Now  in  sunshine, 
now  in  shadow,  now  torn  by  strife  and  doubt,  and  now  reposing  by  the  quiet 
waters  of  rest.  The  variety  adds  to  our  moral  healthfulness  and  vigour.  Few 
lives  have  been  more  varied  than  that  of  David.  The  extremity  of  danger  and  even 
the  dread  of  death  he  knew,  as  well  as  the  heights  of  success  and  the  intoxicating 
sweets  of  power.  In  firm  faith  upon  a  Divine  and  unchanging  love  he  had  found  the 
quietness  and  assurance  of  which  he  speaks.  There  are  times  when  rest  seems  the 
one  thing  we  most  long  for.  As  when — I.  In  the  conflict  of  doubt.  Faith  is 
difficult  in  our  day.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  a  man  may  seek  rest — one  by 
thorough  examination  of  the  ground  of  his  faith  ;  the  other  by  trusting  those 
feelings  which  carry  us  beyond  reason  ;  to  faith  which  sees  and  hears  God  where 
reason  cannot.  II.  Under  conviction  of  sin.  This  is  a  dread  experience.  But 
it  would  be  good  for  many  to  know  it  who  now  lead  a  smooth  and  easy  life,  sailing 
merrily  over  sunny  seas.  There  is  much  in  the  Bible  to  awaken  such  conviction  of 
sin — the  Divine  wrath,  the  severity  of  Christ.  It  is  when  we  see  Christ  as  Saviour, 
we  have  rest.  III.  In  suffering  and  loss.  But  rest  in  God  is  possible.  And 
this  happy  condition  of  mind  is  to  be  cultivated  by  meditation,  worship,  prayer,  and 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiil. 

communion  with  God.  (P.  W.  Damton,  B.A.)  Still  waters : — And  now  see  the 
great  goodness  of  this  Shepherd,  and  what  just  cause  there  is  to  depend  upon  His 
providence;  for  He  lets  not  His  sheep  want,  but  He  leads  them  "beside  still 
waters  " ;  not  waters  that  roar  and  make  a  noise  enough  to  fright  a  fearful  sheep, 
but  waters  still  and  quiet,  that  though  they  drink  but  little,  yet  they  may  drink 
that  little  without  fear.     {Sir  Richard  Baker.) 

Ver.  3.  He  restoreth  my  soul. — The  restoration  of  the  soul: — 1.  It  implies  the 
quickening  and  invigoration  of  the  soul  in  seasons  of  depression  and  exhaustion.  A 
sheep  may  languish  from  internal  weakness  and  disorder,  and  may  need  the 
ajijilication  of  medicinal  restorations.  So  the  soul  may  suffer  from  its  inherent 
liabilities  to  weakness  and  weariness,  and  mistrust  of  God,  and  from  its  inability  to 
rest  calmly  and  in  good  faith  upon  the  precious  promises  of  His  Word.  At  such 
times.  He  who  has  hitherto  sustained  us  will  act  as  a  wise  and  good  physician,  and 
restore  us  to  health  and  vigour.  2.  The  distemper  of  which  we  complain  is  in  truth 
a  form  of  sin,  and  has  its  source  in  a  declining  faith,  and  in  a  relaxed  hold  on  God. 
The  main  feature  of  the  restoration  implies  the  wandering  of  the  sheep  from  the 
pasture  and  the  fold.  Thank  God  there  has  been  revealed  to  us  a  love  which  is  not 
measured  by  our  merits,  and  which  our  needs  cannot  exhaust ;  a  love  which  bears 
with  us  tenderly  and  patiently  in  the  midst  of  all  unfaithfulness  ;  a  love  stronger 
than  death — many  waters  cannot  quench  it.  In  our  wildest  and  most  distant 
wanderings  the  eye  of  God  wistfully  follows  our  course,  nor  will  He  suffer  our  disloyalty 
and  ingratitude  to  baffle  His  purpose  of  mercy,  or  sunder  the  ties  that  bind  us  to  Him. 
{James  Sfiiart. )  S(i2>py  restoration  : — Eestcration,  like  conversion,  is  the  work  of 
God.  Who  can  convert  a  sinner  ?  God  only.  Who  can  restore  a  backslider  1  The 
Almighty  alone.  I.  The  means  God  employs  to  bring  the  backslider  to 
REPENTANCE.  Any  one  who  has  tried  to  deal  with  a  backslider  knows  how  difficult 
it  is.  1.  He  uses  memory  (Matt.  xxvi.  75) ;  of  warnings  ;  of  promises.  2.  He 
reveals  Himself  as  unchangeable.  3.  Makes  known  His  faithfulness.  4.  His  tender- 
ness (John  vi.  37).  II.  The  way  of  return.  1.  It  is  a  way  of  humility.  2.  Of 
prayer.  3.  Of  distinct  renunciation  of  evil.  4.  The  return  must  be  whole-hearted 
and  unreserved.  I  would  say,  however,  do  not  try  to  work  yourself  into  a  certain 
state  of  feeling,  or,  as  an  old  writer  has  said,  "  Do  not  go  on  sjiinning  repentance,  as 
it  were,  out  of  your  own  bowels,  bringing  it  with  you  to  Christ,  instead  of  coming 
to  Him  by  faith  to  receive  it  from  Him."  Of  the  exact  nature  of  your  feelings  you 
never  can  be  a  proper  judge.  But  this  I  would  urge,  look  your  sin  steadily  in  the 
face  ;  judge  it  as  in  the  presence  of  God  ;  consider  it  in  the  light  of  His  warnings 
and  promises,  His  exhibition  of  Himself,  and  His  former  dealings  with  you.  Ask 
that  you  may  see  it  as  He  sees  it,  and  in  all  self-loathing  and  self-renunciation  cast 
yourself  afresh  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  III.  The  joyous  experience  of  the 
RESTORED.  Pardon  is  enjoyed.  Life  realised.  Peace.  Zeal  and  rest  in  work. 
And  all  heightened  by  contrast.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.)  Restoring  the  soul: — The 
soul  is  the  chief  part  of  man  ;  it  is  the  offspring  of  God.  All  that  relates  to  it 
must  therefore  be  full  of  interest.  I.  A  painful  fact  implied.  The  soul  may 
wander.  All  have  done  so,  but  even  the  converted  may  wander,  foolishly, 
perilously,  without  power  to  return, — and  all  this  through  sin.  II.  A  pleasing 
TRUTH  expressed.  "He  restoreth,"  &c.  We  cannot  do  this  of  ourselves.  The 
Lord  restoreth — to  real  safety,  to  prosperity  and  enjoyment.  He  does  this  by 
various  means — by  affliction,  by  mercies  heaped  upon  us  ;  by  His  Word  ;  through  the 
ministry  of  the  Gospel,  and  chiefly  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  all  this  He 
displays  wisdom,  power,  compassion.  III.  The  obligations  which  result. 
Penitence,  gratitude,  watchfulness,  dependence.  You  who  are  strangers  to  this 
restoring  grace,  take  heed,  think,  pray,  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {T. 
Kidd. )     The  soul  restorer : — I.  What  are  the  several  methods  or  ways  wherein 

THE  SOUL  OF  A  CONVERTED  CHRISTIAN  MAY  BE  OPPRESSED  AND   MADE  TO  DROOP  OB 

LANGUISH  ?  1.  Conscientious  apprehensions  of  sinful  guilt.  2.  Insolent  operation 
of  sinful  principles.  3.  Incessant  assaults  of  temptation.  4.  Ample  and  more 
permanent   desertions.     5.    Near    and    strong    afflictions.     II.    How    doth    God 

REFRESH  AND  BEAR  UP   COMFORTABLY   THE   SOUL   THAT   LANGUISHETH  UNDER  ANY 

OF  THOSE  KINDS  OF  OPPRESSURES  ?  T.  By  His  Word.  This  was  that  which 
quickened  David  in  his  aflBictions,  and  kept  him  from'  fainting  (Psa.  xix.  7). 
2.  By  His  Spirit.  Who  is  therefore  styled  the  Comforter,  because  He  doth  restore 
joy  and  cheerfulness.  3.  By  faith.  This  is  the  great  restorer  of  life  to  any  oppressed 
Christian.     III.  Why  doth  the  Lord  restore  life,  as  it  were,  and  comfort 


PSALM  xxiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  447 

TJNTO  THE  SOULS  OF  His  PEOPLE  ?  1.  Necessity  on  their  part.  Sense  of  sin  is  a  heavy 
thing.  2.  Goodness  of  compassion  on  God's  part.  3.  Fidelity  and  truth  in  God. 
4.  His  affections  are  much  towards  oppressed,  and  distressed,  and  languishing  souls. 
Consider  a  few  particulars.  1.  Soul  oppressions  are  very  painful.  The  soul  is 
the  seat  of  sweetest  comfort  or  deepest  sadness.  A  little  thing  in  the  eye  will 
trouble,  and  a  small  thing  on  the  brain  is  weighty,  and  any  burden  on  the  soul  is  very 
heavy.  2.  Soul  sinkings  are  very  prejudicial.  3.  The  Lord  only  hath  power  over 
the  soul,  and  the  burdens  of  it.  We  can  mar,  and  we  can  trouble  our  own  souls  and 
cast  them  down,  but  it  is  no  power  and  art  but  that  of  a  God  which  can  raise  up, 
revive,  and  settle  the  soul  again.  The  air  may  be  good  to  refresh  some  bodies,  and 
merry  company  to  hearten  a  melancholic  body  ;  for  sinking  bodies,  physic,  diet, 
recreation,  &c.,  may  be  good  restoratives ;  but  for  souls  that  are  sinking,  or  sunk, 
no  helps  can  restore  them  but  such  as  are  like  themselves.  Spiritual  souls,  spiritual 
maladies,  are  to  be  raised  up  with  spiritual  restoratives  only.  (0.  Sedgioick,  B.D.) 
Soul  restoration : — "He  restoreth  my  soul."  That  is  just  what  the  sinner  needs.  It 
is  idle  to  talk  about  Christian  culture,  or  Christian  growth  in  any  way,  until  the  soul 
is  restored  again  from  sin.  Before  you  can  expect  your  plant  to  grow  you  must  plant 
it  out ;  before  you  can  expect  the  sheep  to  be  led  in  green  pastures,  and  by  still  waters, 
and  protected  from  enemies,  it  must  be  brought  back  from  its  wandering.  He  wants 
to  bring  you  back  to  your  lost  goodness  ;  your  lost  innocence ;  your  lost  relation  to  God, 
when  you  could  pray  to  Him  as  naturally  as  you  could  talk  to  your  mother  ;  your  lost 
peace  of  heart ;  your  lost  tenderness  of  conscience  ;  your  lost  love  for  good  things  ; 
your  lost  sense  of  safety ;  your  lost  hope  of  heaven  and  eternal  life.  {A.  L.  Banks,  D.D. ) 
The  great  Restorer : — I.  God  will  preserve  the  grace  that  is  in  His  people. 
The  new  nature  in  the  believer  is  the  workmanship  of  God  ;  he  hath  a  new  nature. 
There  is  in  that  new  nature  that  which  is  like  God's  nature,  that  which  is  some 
reflection  of  God.  There  is  not  a  single  grace  of  the  believer  but  what  shows  forth 
some  of  the  attributes  there  are  in  God.  In  order  to  keep  His  people  God  puts  them 
into  the  hands  of  His  Son.  Jesus  said,  "  Neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of 
My  hand."  What  an  infinite  suitableness  and  propriety  there  is  in  Jesus  to  restore. 
Look  at  His  name — Jesus.  It  supposes  a  restorer.  As  God  He  is  omnipotent ;  as 
man  He  has  infinite  sympathy.  II.  The  sort  of  restoration.  Many  a  man  has 
shed  tears  for  sin  who  has  never  come  to  a  knowledge  of  its  true  evil.  There  is  a 
sorrow  which  does  not  work  death,  a  godly  sorrow.  It  is  oftentimes  diflBcult  to 
tread  the  maze  in  the  labyrinth  of  our  hearts  about  repentance.  I  think  of  those 
who  have  no  one  with  them  Avhen  they  fall ;  they  are  alone.  It  is  an  awful  thing 
to  be  alone  with  God.  The  subject,  however,  has  a  sweet  aspect  to  God's  tried  and 
tempted  children.  If  through  depravity  and  strong  inward  corruptions  we  are  led 
into  sin,  let  our  motto  be,  "Quick  restoriugs":  no  delay;  no  spirit  of  self- 
dependence  ;  seek  restoration  in  true  repentance.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Re- 
vival: — The  Psalmist  describes  the  revival  which  in  the  periods  of  spiritual  languor 
and  decline  he  derived  from  the  care  of  the  Lord  his  Shepherd.  I.  The  care 
WHICH  THE  Great  Shepherd  takes  to  reclaim  His  people.  From  the  erroneous 
and  sinful  courses  into  which  they  do  but  too  often  allow  themselves  to  be  betrayed. 
Even  the  renewed  man  is  not  in  this  world  so  thoroughly  established  in  holiness  as 
to  be  beyond  the  possibility  of  sinning,  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation,  beyond 
the  assaults  of  spiritual  danger.  But  even  when  astray.  He  will  in  His  wisdom  and 
love  seek  them  out  and  bring  them  back  to  Himself.  II.  The  recovery  of  the 
soul  from  languor  and  despair.  Often  David  had  felt  his  soul  when  it  was,  as 
it  were,  overwhelmed  with  anguish  and  despondency,  reireshed  and  revived  by  the 
assurances  of  the  Good  Shepherd's  love,  by  the  experience  of  the  Good  Shepherd's 
soothing  care.  David's  experience  is  that,  more  or  less,  of  every  Christian  soul. 
III.  The  design  of  this  comfort.  It  is  that  the  Shepherd  may  lead  the  soul 
"in  the  paths  of  righteousness."  In  the  Word  of  God  the  Psalmist  recognises  the 
only  absolute  and  infallible  rule,  whether  of  belief  or  duty.  And  it  is  as  copious 
and  complete  as  it  is  accurate  and  sure.  {T.  B.  Patterson,  M.A. )  My  Restorer: — 
This  sweetest  of  the  Psalms  sings  of  many  mercies  which  the  beb'ever  receives, 
and  traces  them  all  to  one  source — the  Good  Shepherd  Himself.  Text  reminds  us — 
I.  Of  our  true  position.  It  is  that  of  a  sheep  abiding  close  to  its  shepherd. 
Now  this  should  be  ours  because  of — 1.  Our  obligations  to  Christ.  2.  Our  relation- 
ships to  Him.  3.  If  we  would  have  happiness.  4.  Our  daily  necessities.  5.  Our 
infinite  perils.  6.  The  benefits  of  fellowship.  II.  Of  our  frequent  sin.  ' '  He 
restoreth  my  soul " — He  often  does  it ;  He  is  doing  it  now.  With  many  suspended 
oommunion  is  chronic    This  most  wrong.     And  where  it  is  not  so  bad  as  this, 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiu. 

there  are  sad  seasons  of  declension.  They  are  brought  about  by  worldly  conformity, 
forgetfulness  of  duty.  Jesus  is  a  jealous  lover.  III.  Of  oub.  Loed's  faithful 
LOVE.  He  will  never  give  up  His  sheep.  For  His  name's  sake.  He  wiU  use  all 
manner  of  means.  IV.  Of  His  supreme  power.  It  is  He  who  does  this.  It  was 
He  who  began  the  work  of  grace  in  you,  and  therefore  He  will  restore.  No  out- 
ward temptation  has  force  when  Christ  is  present.  His  presence  is  the  death  of 
every  sin,  the  life  of  every  grace.  I  see  the  green  leaves  of  a  plant  most  dear  to  aU 
who  love  the  woods  in  spring.  It  is  seen  nestling  under  a  hedge  under  a  shelving 
bank,  just  above  a  trickling  stream.  I  ask  it  why  it  does  not  bloom,  and  it  whispers 
to  me  that  it  will  bloom  by  and  by.  "  But,  sweet  primrose,  why  not  put  forth  thy 
lovely  flower  at  once,  and  gladden  us  with  thy  beauty?"  She  answers,  "I  am 
waiting  for  him — for  my  lord,  the  sun ;  when  he  cometh  and  putteth  forth  his 
strength  I  shall  put  on  my  beauty."  "  But  wilt  thou  not  need  soft  pearly  drops  of 
dew  to  glisten  on  thy  leaves,  and  the  violet  and  the  harebell  to  keep  thee  company, 
and  the  birds  to  sing  to  thee?"  To  which  she  repUes,  "He  will  bring  them,  ne 
will  bring  them  all."  "  But  art  thou  not  afraid  of  the  frost  and  the  dreary  snow- 
storms ? "  "He  will  chase  them  all  away  ;  I  shall  be  safe  enough  when  he  comes." 
Now,  we  are  the  plant  and  Jesus  is  our  sun.  And  He  restores  us  entirely,  and  now. 
Come  to  Christ  direct,  not  round  by  Sinai.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Shepherd  of 
the  lost  sheep : — If  He  has  appealed  to  my  love  as  the  Good  Shepherd  of  the  green 
pastui'es,  even  more  does  He  claim  my  adoration,  my  reverence,  my  heart,  as  the 
Shepherd  of  the  lost  and  straying  sheep.  I.  There  is  no  disguising  the  fact, 
HIDE  it  as  we  will,  OF  OUR  FREQUENT  FALLING  AWAY.  Be  it  the  Weakness  of 
our  human  nature,  ever  prone  to  evil ;  be  it  the  corrupted  atmosphere  in  which  we 
live,  the  swampy  marsh  of  the  world,  from  which  rises  up,  in  stealthy,  deadly 
fumes,  the  vapour  of  bad  public  opinion,  which  we  call  the  world,  where  the  mosses 
are  brightest,  and  the  flowers  the  fairest,  and  the  sunbeams  dance  the  merriest; 
be  it  Satan,  above  aU,  with  his  terrible  power  of  trickery  and  deceit ; — whatever 
it  may  be,  try  as  hard  as  we  may,  we  have  to  reckon  with  a  constant  deflection 
from  a  high  ideal.  And  all  along  the  course  of  our  life.  His  elforts  to  restore  us, 
to  help  us  to  persevere,  are  spread  out.  Think  only  of  the  many  new  beginnings 
which  He  ofi'ers  to  us.  The  oft-recm-ring  strength  of  our  Communion,  the  storehouse 
of  Sundays,  the  manifold  means  of  grace  which  surround  our  path,  are  well  known 
to  us.  But  think,  also,  of  such  things  as  the  disposition  of  day  and  night,  the 
necessity  of  sleep,  and  the  like :  these  are  aU  merciful  new  beginnings  which  offer 
us  occasions  for  fresh  eff'orts  after  amendment.  It  is  so  with  the  Church's  seasons, 
with  the  great  round  of  fast  and  festival,  each  with  a  fresh  aspect  of  Divine  grace, 
each  with  a  fresh  hope  of  a  better  life.  II.  And  being  restored,  once  more  THE 
PATHS  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS  LAY  OPEN  BEFORE  US — the  paths  which  come  from 
righteousness,  which  end  in  righteousness,  and  are  righteousness.  Certainly  we 
ought  to  strive  for  a  more  harmonious  life  of  goodness.  Our  lives  are  too  often 
sharply  divided  up,  as  you  might  divide  a  concert,  into  sacred  and  secular.  Most 
certainly  we  should  all  strive  to  live  by  rule.  It  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the 
importance  of  rule.  Rule  makes  us  like  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  every  action  appar- 
ently had  its  hour,  and  whose  whole  life  was  a  fulfilment  of  minute  prophecy. 
Rule,  once  more,  helps  us  to  utilise  life.  It  is  the  scaff'olding  from  which  all 
the  materials  which  daily  life  brings  us  can  be  placed  upon  the  wall.  The  paths  of 
righteousness,  the  very  highest  paths,  are  open  to  us  ;  our  very  sins  may  be 
stepping-stones  to  higher  things,  and  produce,  if  not  humility,  at  least  watchfulness. 
Christ  will  bring  out  character,  if  only  we  do  not  hinder  Him,  until  it  becomes 
established  in  righteousness.  III.  And  this  will  He  do  "for  His  name's 
SAKE."  "The  revealed  name,  which  gathers  up  and  expresses  for  man  just  so  much 
as  he  can  apprehend  of  the  Divine  nature."  His  name  is  Jesus.  As  great  con- 
querors are  named  after  their  victories,  so  He  is  named  from  His.  "He  shall  save  "  ; 
"  able  to  save  "  ;  "mighty  to  save."  Through  Jesus  is  the  way  to  escape.  This, 
perhaps,  is  Satan's  chief  terror  which  he  holds  over  us — the  impossibility  of  escape. 
His  name  is  Emmanuel,  "God  with  us"  :  with  us,  in  every  stage  of  our  life  ;  with 
us,  when  we  broke  away  ;  with  us,  when  we  came  back  ;  with  us,  as  we  are  gaining 
strength.  His  name  is  the  Christ,  the  Prophet  who  warns  me,  the  Priest  who 
atones  for  me,  the  King  who  rules  me.  So  He  restoreth  my  soul ;  so  He  leads  me 
in  the  paths  of  righteousness  ;  so  He  pledges  to  me  the  assurance  of  His  holy 
name.  {TF.  C.  E.  Newbolt,  M.A.)  He  leadeth  main  the  patlis  of  righteous- 
ness for  His  name's  sake. — Guidance  in  the  right  path : — There  is  a  well-known 
similitude  which  represents  human  natm-e  as  a  chariot  driven  by  two  horses,  one  of 


P8ALM  XXIII.]  THE  PS  ALUS.  449 

them  high-spirited  and  aspiring,  the  other,  heavy,  tame,  and  grovelling  ;  and  the 
charioteer  unable  to  exercise  over  either  of  them  absolute  control,  yields  first  to  the 
one  and  then  to  the  other,  so  that  the  chariot  is  not  carried  along  a  straight, 
continuous  path,  with  uuifoim  progress  towards  its  goal,  but  frequently  turns  aside 
and  stands  still.  The  image  is  in  itself  so  striking,  and  so  true  to  experience,  that  it 
needs  no  explanation.  There  is  in  all  men  a  higher  and  lower  nature,  which  are 
utterly  at  variance,  one  drawing  us  toward  good,  the  other  drawing  us  toward  evil ; 
one  having  its  source  in  the  spirit,  the  other  in  the  flesh.  And  hence  there  is 
within  us  a  more  or  less  perpetual  conflict  ;  and  even  when  we  have  been  awakened 
to  the  realities  of  the  spiritual  world,  and  have  felt  the  attractions  of  the  Divine  life, 
our  difficulties  have  not  ceased.  In  addition  to  accurate  knowledge  of  the  right,  we 
need  a  motive  power  which  will  ensure  obedience  to  its  claims,  transform  our 
intellectual  perception  into  spiritual  deeds,  and  harmonise  all  the  powers  of  the  soul 
in  the  presence  of  the  highest  light.  And  such  an  efficient  of  morality  is  suggested 
to  us  by  the  words  of  the  text,  "  He  leadeth  me."  Referring  to  the  custom  of 
the  Eastern  shepherds — going  before  their  sheep.  So  God  guides  us.  We  enter  the 
paths  of  righteousness,  not  because  we  are  driven  into  them,  not  because  we  are  sub- 
jected to  some  irresistible  force,  but  by  the  attraction  of  our  Lord's  loving  presence, 
and  the  persuasive  power  of  His  holy  wiU.  The  Bible,  valuable  as  it  is,  is  not  the 
only  means  of  God's  guidance.  In  some  conditions  of  mind  the  wisest  words  of 
themselves  cannot  suffice  us.  Apart  from  the  living  wiU  of  which  they  are  an 
expression,  they  are  poor  and  inefficient,  and  our  hearts  can  be  reached  only  as  we 
see  the  Father.  But  the  great  principles  of  religion  are  presented  to  us  not  as  dry 
and  formal  statements,  as  mere  axioms  and  rules,  but  are  clothed  with  flesh  and 
blood,  and  embodied  in  a  perfect  life.  He  leadeth  in  the  paths  of  righteousness, 
and  thus  gives  us  the  encouragement  of  His  owti  perfect  example.  Christ  trod 
before  us  every  step  of  the  way  which  He  wishes  us  to  tread.  It  is  wonderful  to 
see  how  there  is  in  Christ  a  manifestation  of  every  virtue  we  have  to  acquire.  "  He 
leadeth,"  and  therefore  He  draws  us  after  Him  by  gentle  and  gi'adual  guidance,  in 
which  He  graciously  accommodates  Himself  to  the  measure  of  our  strengtli.  Then 
the  motive  power  of  om-  life  must  be  found  in  our  love  to  the  Great  Shepherd  of  our 
souls.  He  goes  before  us  that  He  may  win  our  aff"ections  and  draw  us  after  Him. 
The  value  of  the  Divine  guidance  is  enhanced  by  the  ground  on  which  it  is  seen 
to  rest,  the  reason  for  which  it  is  given — "For  His  name's  sake."  The  name 
of  God  is  symbolic  of  His  natm-e.  Probably  the  Psalmist's  main  idea  is  that 
God  mil  lead  us  in  the  paths  of  righteousness,  not  because  He  is  urged  by 
considerations  external  to  Himself,  but  as  prompted  by,  and  in  order  to  honour 
the  wisdom,  the  love,  and  the  power  which  constitute  His  nature.  If  the  name 
which  David  has  especially  in  view  be  that  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  God  mil  do 
for  men  all  that  that  term  implies — He  will  not  deny  Hiijiself.  {James  Stuart.) 
God's  guidance : — How  much  would  be  gained,  and  how  much  would  be  lost,  if  we 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  this  Psalm  was  not  written  by  David  ?  A  great  deal 
would  certainly  be  lost.  For  David  is  a  man  whose  character  and  experience  have 
an  enduring  moral  and  religious  interest ;  everything  that  throws  light  on  his 
sorrows  and  joys,  his  faith,  his  fears,  his  sins,  and  his  repentance,  is  of  great  value  ; 
and  his  Psalm  contains  a  very  striking  illustration  of  the  depth  and  strength  of  his 
personal  trust  in  God.  It  helps  to  make  one  part  of  David's  life  real  and  vivid  to 
us.  Something  perhaps  would  be  gained.  If  it  was  written  by  some  obscure  saint 
this  might  seem  to  draw  the  Psalm  nearer  to  some  of  us,  and  to  give  us  a  stronger 
claim  to  all  its  disclosures  concerning  the  blessedness  of  a  life  in  God's  keeping. 
David  was  an  exceptional  man  ;  what  applies  to  him  may  not  apply  to  us.  Who- 
ever was  the  author,  the  Psalm  was  written  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  and 
but  for  our  familiarity  with  it,  its  very  antiquity  would  interest  and  move  us,  as  we 
are  interested  and  moved  by  an  ornament  that  belonged  to  a  Greek  who  lived  under 
the  Ptolemies,  or  to  an  Egyptian  who  worshipped  in  the  temple  of  Carnac,  in  the 
time  of  its  glory.  But  the  Psalm  has  another  and  pathetic  interest.  This  Psalm 
has  been  in  daily  use  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.  It  has  become  the  expres- 
sion of  the  experience,  not  of  a  solitary  saint,  but  of  a  countless  multitude  of  saints. 
The  Psahnist  says  that  he  belongs  to  a  flock  of  which  the  Living  and  Eternal  God 
is  the  Shepherd.  All  that  a  good  Eastern  shepherd  is  to  his  flock  when  he  is  guid- 
ing them  from  pasture  to  pastm-e  and  stream  to  stream,  God  will  be  to  us.  It  is  very 
easy  to  lose  our  way  in  life,  and  very  hard  to  find  it  again.  Without  any  evil  inten- 
tion, we  form  habits  of  living  which  are  sometimes  injurious  to  a  noble  morality,  and 
are  still  more  often  fatal  to  an  earnest  loyalty  to  God.     When  a  man  learns  that  he 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxin. 

has  gone  wrong,  he  should  appeal  at  once  to  the  pity  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  who  goes 
after  the  lost  sheep  till  He  finds  it.  It  is  easy  to  lose  our  way  when  we  are  not  look- 
ing to  Him  to  guide  us  ;  it  is  impossible  without  His  guidance  to  find  it  again.  The 
better  thing  is  not  to  lose  it.  The  really  devout  man  has  submitted  himself  to  the 
authority  of  God,  has  committed  himself  to  the  love  of  God,  and  may  rely  confi- 
dently on  the  guidance  of  God.  It  was  not  the  truth  alone  that  the  Psalmist  relied 
upon  to  guide  him,  but  God  Himself,  the  loving  God.  Religion  is  a  right  relation, 
not  between  man  and  truth,  not  between  man  and  law,  but  between  living  person 
and  living  person — between  man  and  God.  The  Psalmist  had  consented  to  follow 
God's  guidance,  and  he  was  relying  on  God  to  guide  him  in  "  the  paths  of  righteous- 
ness." Those  words,  however,  do  not  precisely  convey  the  Psalmist's  meaning.  He 
says  that  God  will  guide  His  flocks  in  the  "right  paths,"  the  "  direct  paths,"  to  their 
water  and  their  pasture.  And  only  righteous  paths  can  bring  us  to  where  God 
desires  us  to  come.  The  Psalmist  means  that  if  a  man  is  under  God's  guidance  he 
will  be  protected  from  making  a  wrong  decision  in  critical  moments  ;  he  wiU  not  take 
the  wrong  path.  God's  guidance  keeps  a  man  from  sin  ;  but  it  also  keeps  him  from 
wasting  his  strength  and  failing  to  make  the  most  of  all  his  powers  and  opportunities. 
In  all  projects  for  doint;  service  to  mankind,  a  devout  man  may  trust  God  to  guide 
him  in  right  paths.  We  may  miss  our  way  in  the  service  we  endeavour  to  render 
to  otliers,  as  well  as  in  the  ordering  of  our  personal  life,  because  we  lean  too  much  on 
our  own  understanding,  instead  of  trusting  in  the  Lord  with  all  our  heart,  acknow- 
lerlging  Him  in  all  our  ways,  and  looking  to  Him  to  guide  us  in  right  paths.  {B. 
W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  The  Divine  leadings : — I.  Some  of  the  means  by  which  God 
LEADS  U.S.  That  is,  by  which  He  prompts  us  to,  guides  and  encourages  us  in,  a  good 
and  righteous  conduct.  1.  God  hath  implanted  many  principles  in  our  nature 
which  prompt  and  incline  us  to  a  righteous  conduct.  These  may  be  more  powerful 
and  more  obvious  in  some  than  in  others  ;  but  in  some  degi-ee  they  exist  in  all :  nor 
can  they  be  referred  but  to  an  intelligent  cause.  All  that  is  good  in  us  comes  from 
God.  If  there  are  found  in  the  soul  of  man  certain  feelings  and  propensities,  certain 
desires  and  affections,  which  incline  him  to  a  good  and  righteous  conduct,  let  us  give 
glory  to  God,  and  in  all  these  acknowledge  His  hand  leading  us  in  His  righteous 
paths.  Feelings  of  sympathy  and  commiseration  are  gtmeral  and  powerful  principles 
in  the  heart  of  man.  There  are  not  many  who  can  witness  severe  distress  unmoved. 
The  principle  of  conscience  is  a  powerful  principle  operating  to  the  same  end.  It  will 
rarely  fail  to  point  to  the  righteous  path  ;  it  will  plead  with  us  to  adopt  it ;  it  will 
remonstrate  against  deserting  it ;  it  will  applaud  us  when  forming  the  resolution  to 
persevere  in  it.  The  desire  of  honest  fame  which  men  so  generally  feel  ;  the  dread 
of  the  disgrace  which  they  know  follows  the  discovery  of  an  unworthy  deed  ;  the 
pleasure  felt  upon  hearing  of  a  generous  act ;  the  indignation,  the  honest  indigna- 
tion, which  arises  when  we  are  told  of  flagrant  injustice  or  merciless  oppression, — are 
further  instances  of  strong  internal  feelings  all  favourable  to  a  righteous  life.  But 
God  can  work  by  any  means  and  suit  His  dealings  to  any  character.  2.  By  events 
which  take  place  in  the  course  of  His  providence,  God  urges  us  to  a  good  and 
righteous  conduct.  To  a  person  of  a  serious  and  well-constituted  mind,  the  most 
familiar  objects,  and  the  most  common  events  will  convey  instruction.  If  there  are 
those  who  are  insensible  to  the  ordinary  benignity  of  the  ordinary  operations  of  Pro- 
vidence, there  are  few  who  will  not  be  impressed  by  more  affecting  events  which  at 
times  occur.  3.  From  the  Divine  communications  which  God  hath  been  pleased 
to  make  to  us,  we  learn  yet  other  means  which  He  employs  to  guide,  to  animate,  to 
support  us  in  the  paths  of  righteousness.  11.  Acknowledge  our  obligations  to 
God,  for  employing  so  powerful  means  for  so  gracious  an  end.  The  paths 
of  righteousness  are  the  only  paths  of  peace.  In  the  paths  of  righteousness  one  may 
find  difficulties,  and  may  be  called  to  some  painful  efforts,  but  they  lead  to  certain 
and  everlasting  bliss.  Can  we  be  blind  to  the  great  criminality  of  our  conduct  if  we 
resist  these  means  which  God  employs  to  urge  us  to  a  good  and  righteous  life  ?  Let 
us  wisely  improve  what  God  hath  done  for  us.  When  He  is  employing  these  varied 
means  to  "lead  us  in  the  paths  of  righteousness,"  it  is  that  He  may  conduct  you  to 
the  mansions  of  bliss,  and  that  you  may  dwell  in  His  house  for  evermore.  {Robert 
Bogg,  D.D.)  God  leading  His  people:— I.  That  even  converted  persons  need 
A  God  to  lead  them.  0  Lord,  saith  the  Prophet  (Jer.  x.  23),  I  know  that  the  way 
of  man  is  not  in  himself :  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps.  And 
therefore  David  prays,  (Psa.  cxliii.  10)  Teach  me  to  do  Thy  will.  Whatthe  lead- 
ing of  God  is  which  is  here  meant.  1.  There  is  a  double  leading.  One  is  general 
in  a  way  of  common  providence.     Another  is  special  and  proper  to  the  state  and  acts, 


PSALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  451 

and  ways  of  grace  and  salvation,  whereto  a  more  singular  aid  and  influence  is  neces- 
sary. 2.  This  efficacious  guidance  or  leading  consists  of  these  particulars.  (1)  Of 
a  clearer  illumination.  They  have  eyes  given  them  to  see  their  Leader,  and  ears 
given  them  to  know  their  Leader  and  His  voice:  This  is  the  way,  walk  in  it  (Isa. 
XXX.  21).  Show  me  Thy  ways,  0  Lord,  teach  me  Thy  paths  (Psa.  xxv.  4).  (2)  Of 
a  peculiar  inclination  of  the  will  or  heart  to  ohey  and  follow  the  direction  of  God, 
which  some  do  call  exciting  grace.  (3)  Of  a  special  co-operation,  wherein  Divine 
assistance  concurs  with  the  will  renewed  and  excited,  enabling  it  both  to  will  and  to 
do  those  things  which  are  pleasing  unto  God,  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  both 
to  will  and  to  do.  (4)  Lastly,  of  a  singular  confirmation,  which  some  call  sustaining 
grace.  IL  This  for  the  natttre  of  this  guidance,  now  for  the  manner  of  it. 
It  is  delightful  as  well  as  gentle.  It  is  a  safe  leading.  It  is  a  faithful  leading.  Such  a 
leading  as  will  not  mislead  us.  Such  a  leading  as  will  not  fail  us.  III.  But  vi^hy 
SHOULD  converted  PERSONS  NEED  THE  LEADING  OF  GoD  ?  1.  In  respect  of  the 
imbecility  that  is  in  their  graces.  Grace  (considered  in  this  life)  though  it  be  a  sweet 
plant,  yet  it  is  but  a  plant  very  tender  ;  and  though  it  be  a  pleasing  child,  yet  but  a 
child  very  weak.  2.  In  respect  of  the  difficulties  which  are  in  the  way.  Though 
righteous  paths  be  heavenly  and  holy,  yet  many  times  are  they  made  stormy  and 
uneasy.  3.  In  respect  of  that  erroneous  aptness  in  us,  even  the  best  of  us ;  error  is 
manifold,  and  truth  simple  ;  many  ways  to  miss  the  mark,   one  only  to  hit  it. 

4.  Christians  must  make  progress  in  grace,  as  well  as  find  an  entrance  of  grace. 

5.  Lastly,  in  respect  of  that  backwardness  that  is  in  our  spirits  :  The  flesh  is  weak, 
saith  Christ.  The  journey  to  heaven  is  up  the  hill,  we  fail  against  wind  and  tide. 
The  first  use  shall  be  to  inform  us  of  the  great  love  of  God  towards  His  people,  whom 
He  is  pleased  not  to  leave,  but  to  guide  and  lead,  to  make  and  keep,  to  raise  up 
and  lead.  It  may  likewise  inform  us,  that  we  have  no  cause  to  glory  in  our  own 
strength.  IV.  It  will  prove  our  best  comfort,  having  such  a  Leader  to 
FOLLOW  Him.  (0.  Scdgivick,  B.D.)  In  the  paths  of  righteousness. — Eight  paths : 
— I.  The  paths.  The  Lord  can  lead  us  in  no  other  paths  than  such  as  He  walks  in 
Himself.  The  paths  of  creation  are  all  right  paths.  There  is  nothing  crooked,  per- 
verse, or  capricious  in  the  laws  of  nature.  The  paths  of  Providence  in  which  God 
walks  before  us  are  paths  of  rii:;liteousness.  People  never  question  it  when  He  goes 
before  them  in  the  glow  of  sunshine,  dropping  rich  bounties  every  step  He  takes. 
But  when  the  Lord  walks  before  us  covered  with  clouds,  and  a  rod  in  His  hand,  how 
common  then  to  talk  of  "mystery."  In  whatever  way  the  Lord  is  going  before  you 
now,  the  way  is  not  only  a  right  one  because  it  is  expedient  for  your  good,  and  will 
yield  you  benefit  at  last ;  but  it  is  absolutely,  constantly,  and  without  exception,  a 
righteous  one.  The  paths  of  duty,  too,  in  which  God  would  have  us  walk  before  Him 
are  paths  of  righteousness.  They  are  perfectly  straight.  The  paths  of  Christian 
faith,  and  obedience,  and  self-denial,  and  purity,  and  truth,  and  honesty,  and  love,  are 
all  straight.  They  run  parallel  with  the  laws  of  the  whole  outer  universe.  They  run 
parallel  with  the  laws  of  our  own  being.  They  run  parallel  with  the  interests  of  the 
eternal  future.  Sin  runs  across  those  interests.  II.  The  guidance  It  is  Divine. 
He,  the  covenant-keeping  God,  leadeth  me.  His  character  is  a  pledge  that  He  will 
lead  me  right.  It  is  individual.  "  He  leadeth  me."  He  leadeth  and  we  are  led.  How 
many  thoughts  this  suggests.  1.  How  manifold  are  the  methods  of  His  leading  ! 
2.  How  mysterious  is  the  innermost  secret  of  His  leading  !  {John  Stoughton,  D.D.} 
The  paths  of  righteousness  : — There  is  a  world  of  comfort  contained  in  the  simple 
words,  "  He  leadeth  me."  There  is  a  Divine  hand  and  purpose  in  all  that  befalls 
us.  He  leads  in  righteousness.  He  has  an  infinite  reason  for  all  He  does.  It  is 
not  for  us  to  attempt  to  unravel  the  tangled  thread  of  Providence.  What  a 
grandeur  and  dignity,  what  a  safety  and  security  it  would  give  to  life,  if  we  sought 
ever  to  regard  it  as  a  leading  of  the  Shepherd, — God  shaping  our  purposes  and 
destinies,  that  wherever  we  go,  or  wherever  our  friends  go,  He  is  with  us.  Let  us 
learn  the  lesson  of  our  entire  dependence  on  oxir  Shepherd  Leader,  and  our  need  of 
His  gi'ace  in  prosecuting  the  path  of  our  spiritual  life.  Be  it  ours  to  follow  after 
that  holiness,  that  righteoiisness,  witboiit  which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord.  {J.  R. 
Macduff,  D.D.)  Bight  paths  : — It  is  noted  as  a  further  mark  of  our  Shepherd's 
care  that  He  leads  us  in  the  paths  of  a  good  and  right  way.  What  these  paths  are, 
a  study  of  the  context  will  enable  us  with  little  difficulty  to  decide.  They  are 
spoken  of  in  conjunction  with  the  restoration  of  the  soul,  and  refer  to  the  guidance 
which  completes  and  crowns  it.  Our  revived  life  is  directed  in  a  worthy  course, 
and  we  are  prevented  from  further  wanderings  and  transgressions.  God  directs  us 
into  right  paths,  as  opposed  to  such  as  are  crooked,  uneven,  and  deceptive — patha 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [fsalm  xxiii. 

which  lead  directly  to  the  goal  which,  as  reasonable,  responsible  men,  we  ought  to 
reach,  and  which,  indeed,  we  must  reach  for  the  completion  of  our  life's  work  and 
the  satisfaction  of  our  nature.  The  standard  to  which  we  are  bound  to  conform  is 
righteousness.  "We  must  lire  in  rectitude  aud  integrity  of  character.  There  is  one 
coui-se  open  to  us.  We  must  act  up  to  the  light  that  is  in  us,  be  conscientiously 
fiiithfol  to  our  conceptions  of  right,  and  submit  with  all  loyalty  of  heart  to  the 
decisions  of  our  judgment  and  conscience.  [James  Stuart.)  Paths  of  rigMeous- 
ness : — I.  What  the  paths  of  righteousness  are.  A  path  is  nothing  else  but 
an  open  and  beaten  way  or  tract  to  walk  in.  There  are  two  sorts  of  paths  wherein 
men  maybe  said  to  walk.  Some  are  called  erroneous  and  false  ways  ;  the  Scriptures 
sometimes  call  these  crooked  paths,  because  they  do  not  lead  us  directly  to  heaven, 
but  wind  off.  Sometimes  our  own  paths,  because  they  are  not  ways  of  God's  institu- 
tion, but  of  our  own  invention.  Sometimes  paths  not  cast  up  (Jer.  xviii.  15), 
in  opposition  to  ancient  and  established  and  perused  ways  prescribed  by  God, 
and  insisted  in  by  the  old  faithful  servants  of  God.  These  paths  are  those  of 
infidelity  and  impenitency  and  impiety.  In  this  place  they  are  called  paths 
of  righteousness,  which  again  are  twofold,  either — 1.  Doctrinal,  in  which  respect 
the  precepts  of  God  are  called  the  paths  of  righteousness,  a  rule  to  a  man  in 
his  journey,  and  that,  if  which  he  will  still  follow,  will  assuredly  bring  him 
to  his  journey's  end  ;  so  the  precepts  of  God  are  the  rules  of  our  lives,  accord- 
ing to  which,  if  we  do  square  them,  everlasting  life  would  be  the  end  of  that 
journey.  2.  Or  practical,  and  this  path  of  the  righteous  is  that  which  the 
Scripture  calls  the  path  of  the  just,  or  the  way  of  good  men  (Isa.  xxvi.  7),  and  the 
paths  of  uprightness  (Prov.  ii.  13).  And  they  are  called  paths  in  the  plural 
number,  not  for  diversity,  but  for  number,   and  some  of  them  respect — (1)  God ; 

(2)  Man.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  Righteous  ways  : — The  ordering  of  our  hearts  and 
lives  according  to  the  right  line  or  rule  which  is  God's  Word  ;  a  course,  not  an  act. 
II.  What  is  it  to  be  led  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  ?  And  they  are  called 
righteous  paths — 1.  Because  the  righteous  God  prescribes  tliem.  2.  B  cause  the 
righteous  person  only  walks  in  them.  3.  Because  tliey  are  the  ways  which  are  the 
right  and  only  ways  to  lead  us  to  our  journey's  end.  III.  But  why  doth  the 
Lord  propound  righteous  paths  to  His  servants,  and  cause  them  to  walk 
IN  them  ?  1.  Because  they  are  paths  and  ways  suitable  to  His  own  nature.  Every 
leader  hath  ways  suitable  to  his  own  nature  :  the  devil  leads  in  ways  like  himself, 
sinful,  unclean,  &c.  And  God  leads  in  ways  suitable  to  Him  ;  He  is  an  holy  God, 
and  therefore  leads  in  holy  ways  ;  a  righteous  God,  and  therefore  leads  His  people 
in  righteous  paths.  2.  Righteous  paths  are  the  best  paths.  God  is  the  best  God, 
His  people  are  the  best  people,  and  righteous  paths  are  the  best  paths.  Best  in 
many  respects — (1)  No  paths  so  holy  and  clean.  (2)  Nor  so  safe.  The  way  of  the 
wicked  seduceth  them  (Prov.  xii.  26).  Nothing  exposeth  us  to  more  hazard  than  a 
.sinful  way ;  false  ways  are  always  unsure,  many  snares  and  dangers.  (3)  Nor  so 
pleasant.  On  a  good  way,  a  man  hath  the  company  of  a  good  God,  and  the  peace  of 
good  conscience.  (4)  Nor  so  honourable.  Wicked  ways  are  ever  most  shameful. 
IV.  Righteous  ways  are  the  right  way  to  heaven.  God  will  lead  His  people 
in  such  ways  wherein — 1.  He  may  receive  glory  from  them.  2.  They  may  receive 
glory  from  Him.  Their  graces  would  never  be  exercised,  nor  sins  subdued,  were 
not  the  paths  righteous,  &c.  For  what  is  the  exercise  of  grace,  but  a  motion  in  a 
righteous  path,  gi-aces  breaking  out,  working,  walking,  if  grace  were  only  bestowed 
for  our  conversion,  and  not  for  our  conversation  ?  Consider — 1 .  There  are  divers  paths 
and  ways  that  men  may  walk  in  besides  the  paths  of  righteousness.  2.  Though  every 
man  hath  a  path  to  walk  in,  yet  naturally  the  way  of  righteousness  we  do  not 
know.  3.  Of  all  paths  to  walk  in,  our  hearts  are  most  averse  to  these.  4.  What 
avails  it  tliough  paths  of  righteousness  be  propounded  unto  you,  and  that  you  do 
know  them,  if  all  this  while  you  are  not  led  in  those  paths  of  righteousness  ?  The 
properties  of  righteous  paths  are  these — (1)  They  are  supernatural.  (2)  They  are  diffi- 
cult.    It  is  more  difficult  to  creep  in  a  righteous  path  than  to  run  in  a  wicked  way. 

(3)  They  are  holy.  (4)  They  are  straight,  and  not  winding  and  crooked.  One  is  a 
rectitude  of  conformity.  Another  is  a  rectitude  of  tendency.  (5)  They  are  solitary. 
The  qualifications  of  those  persons  who  do  or  can  walk  in  paths  of  righteous- 
ness. As  affection  is  a  property  of  these  rigliteous  walkers,  so  likewise  is  subjection. 
Circumspection  is  another  property.  Perfection.  What  a  man  must  do,  so  that  he 
may  come  to  walk  in  paths  of  righteousness  ?  He  must  get  such  a  light  of  under- 
standing which  must  clear  his  mind  of  (1)  extreme  vanity,  and  (2)  of  unjust 
prejudices.     There  must  be  resolution  and  courage.     1.  Walk  in  these  paths  dili- 


PSALM  XXIII.]  TEE  PSALMS.  453 

gently.  2.  Uniformly.  Haltiiigs  and  excursions,  tripping  in  the  way,  or  starting 
out  of  the  way,  are  both  opposite  to  a  righteous  walking.  3.  Answerahly.  Not 
only  to  his  profession,  that  his  conversation  be  copied  out  of  it,  but  also  to  his  means 
and  long   standing.       4.  Progressively.        5.  Undauntedly.      (Ibid.)  For  His 

name's  sake. — The  Divine  name  a  plea: — But  why  is  it  that  this  great  Shepherd 
will  do  these  great  things  for  me  ?  Is  it  because  He  finds  me  to  be  a  sounder 
sheep  and  to  have  fewer  blemishes  upon  me  than  some  other  ?  Alas,  no ;  for  I 
am  nothing  but  blemishes  and  unsoundness  all  over ;  but  He  will  do  it  for  His 
name's  sake  ;  for  seeing  He  hath  taken  upon  Him  the  name  of  a  Good  Shepherd, 
He  will  discharge  His  part,  whatever  His  sheep  be.     {Sir  R.  Baker.) 

Ver.  4.  Thougli  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. —  Valleys 

of  (he  shadow:  —  The  royal  poet  is  putting  a  spiritual  meaning  into  the  various 
experiences  of  his  shepherd's  life  ;  and  as  he  once  led  his  flock  to  the  green  pastures 
and  by  the  still  waters,  so  he  ascribes  whatever  of  peaceful  happiness  his  own  life 
had  known,  to  the  kindly  guidance  of  God.  To-day  let  us  give  David's  metaphor  a 
practical  application  to  our  own  character  and  fate.  No  man  knows  what  is  the 
real  meaning  and  worth  of  life  till  he  has  consciously  passed  through  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death.  All  healthy  life  is  at  the  beginning  unconscious.  The 
analogy  of  the  body  helps  us  to  understand  this.  A  happy  child  lives  without  at 
all  thinking  of  life — what  it  is,  when  it  begins,  how  it  must  end.  One  can  conceive 
of  such  a  life  as  this  prolonged  through  manhood  and  old  age  ;  but  there  would  be 
something  less  than  human  in  its  unconsciousness.  And  there  are  lives,  far  more 
frequent,  which  are  unconscious  in  another  way,  because  to-day  they  eat  and  drink, 
and  to-morrow  die,  and  never  know  that  there  is  anythingmore  in  existence  than  this  ; 
which  are  below  the  consciousness  of  sin,  and  never  rise  to  a  knowledge  of  their  own 
wretchedness.  So  much  is  common  to  these  two  kinds  of  unconsciousness,  that  they  can 
only  be  startled  out  of  themselves  by  a  touch  of  pain.  The  consciousness  of  sin  can 
alone  reveal  the  infiniteness  of  duty,  the  pangs  of  sorrow  make  plain  the  depth  and 
compass  of  life.  But  no  one  of  us  ever  goes  down  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death  of  his  own  accord.  We  are  willing  to  live  the  unconscious  life  if  we  can. 
"We  know  the  depths  that  lie  below,  but  none  the  less  rejoice  to  skim  lightly  over 
the  surface.  By  and  by  God  comes,  and  with  His  own  Fatherly  hand  He  leads  us 
into  the  gloom,  and  leaves  us  there  awhile  alone.  There  is  not  one  of  us  who 
would  not  rejoice  in  life-long  exemption  from  bitter  bereavement,  who  would  not, 
if  he  could,  choose  this  form  of  blessing  almost  before  any  other.  And  yet  it  is  far 
better  that  God's  visitation  should  come  this  way  than  not  at  all.  If  the  soul  has 
in  it  a  certain  capacity  of  education  into  the  likeness  of  God,  and  can  acquire  a 
strength  and  a  sweetness  that  were  not  in  it  at  the  first ;  if,  moreover,  this  growth 
into  a  finer  force,  and  symmetry  is  to  be  manifested  upon  a  larger  than  any  earthly 
scale, — then  these  blows  of  fate  are  not  mere  subtractions  from  the  sum  of  happi- 
ness, and  therefore  to  be  wholly  deprecated,  but  stages  of  discipline,  states  of 
training  to  be  accepted,  when  they  come,  as  part  of  the  tuition  of  hfe.  There  are 
troubles  and  distresses  the  characteristic  of  which  is  to  recall  us  to  God  from  the 
mere  external  shows  and  shadows  of  life,  and  so  out  of  seeming  darkness  to  bring 
us  into  real  light.  But  sometimes  a  darkness  falls  upon  us  which  will  not  lift,  and 
whose  peculiar  horror  it  is  to  rob  us  of  the  belief  that  there  is  any  light  at  all.  It 
may  be  the  result  of  misfortune  ;  it  may  come  from  reasoning  overmuch ;  it  may 
be  the  dizziness  of  the  imagination.  Every  day  men  go  down  into  this  darkness, 
not  knowing  it,  and  able,  almost  content,  to  live  in  it.  Can  anything  be  so  truly 
pitiable  as  to  be  altogether  without  life's  divinest  thirst,  as  never  to  know  the 
desire  which  ti-anscends  all  others,  as  to  be  wholly  unconscious  of  the  satisfaction 
which,  once  felt,  is  recognised  as  including  all  strength  and  all  happiness?  It 
would  not  be  good  for  us  never  to  go  down  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death 
until  we  were  called  upon  to  make  the  inevitable  transit  from  this  life  to  another. 
Until  we  are  shaken  out  of  our  moral  unconsciousness  by  some  great  shock  and 
conflict  of  the  spirit  we  cannot  tell  what  nobleness  of  strength,  what  debasement  of 
weakness,  lie  concealed  within  us.  Our  faith  is  never  firmly  rooted  in  our  hearts 
till  we  have  looked  out  upon  life  and  faced  what  it  would  be  without  faith.  We 
never  know  what  God  is,  and  may  be,  to  our  spirits  till  we  have  gone  down  with 
Him  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow,  and  there  in  the  thick  darkness  felt  the  stay 
of  His  presence  and  the  comfort  of  His  love.  (C.  Beard,  B.A.)  Fearless  in 
dangers :  —  I.  That  great  calamities,  and  tekeible  dangers,  even  the 
SHADOWS  OF  DEATH  MAT  BEFALL  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.     For  the  Understanding 


•/ 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psaim  xxiii. 

of  this  assertion  premise  these  particulars,  namely,  that  there  are  several  shadows 
of  death,  or  terrible  ilangers  ;  some  are — 1.  Natural :  as  grievous  diseases  and 
sicknesses,  which  do  even  close  up  the  day  of  life.  2.  Malicious :  which  arise 
from  Satan  and  from  evil  men,  his  instruments.  3.  Spiritual :  these  dangers  of 
all  others  are  the  most  sore.  These  shadows  of  death,  or  great  and  near  dangers, 
do  cause  them  to  shake  off  their  great  secuiity.  When  a  storm  ariseth  it  is  time 
for  the  mariner  to  awake  aul  look  to  his  tackling,  and  when  the  city  is  beleaguered 
it  will  make  every  man  to  stand  to  his  arms.  Standing  waters  gather  mud,  and 
disused  weapons  rust.  They  do  demonstrate  the  solidity  and  validity  of  true  grace. 
They  increase  the  spirit  of  prayer  more.  They  do  dissolve  and  loosen  the  affections 
more  from  the  world.  Shadows  of  death  make  us  better  to  discern  the  shadows  of 
life,  the  poor  empty  vanities  of  the  world,  and  set  the  heart  more  on  heavenly 
purchases.  II.  That  p.ighteous  persons  abe  fearless  even  tjnuek  the 
SHADOWS  OF  death.  And  the  reasons  or  causes  of  this  fearlessness  of  man,  or 
dangers  by  man,  are  these — (1)  God  hath  wrought  in  them  a  true  fear  of  Himself; 
He  hath  put  His  fear  into  their  hearts  (Jer.  xxxii.  40).  Now,  the  true  fear  of  God 
purgeth  or  casteth  out  all  vain  fear  of  men.  (2)  They  know  that  the  originals 
of  fear  are  not  in  the  creatures.  Men  are  afraid  of  men  because  they  take  them 
to  be  more  than  men.  (3)  They  are  in  covenant  with  God,  and  God  with  them, 
therefore  they  fear  no  evil.  (4)  They  have  much  clearness  in  conscience  ;  and 
integrity  in  conscience  breeds  audacity  in  conscience.  (5)  They  have  faith  in  them, 
and  can  live  by  faith.  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith  (Heb.  ii.  3).  (6)  Lastly, 
they  may  be  fearless  notwithstanding  all  dangers,  forasmuch  as  those  dangers  shall 
never  do  them  hurt,  but  good.  And  who  is  he  that  will  harm  you  if  ye  be  followers 
of  that  which  is  good?  (1  Pet.  iii.  13.)  III.  That  God  is  present  with  His 
people  in  all  their  dangers  and  troubles,  and  that  presence  of  His  is 
the  ground  of  their  confidence.  (1)  That  God  is  present  with  His  in  aJI 
their  dangers.  (2)  Divine  presence  is  the  ground  of  Christian  confidence.  Some 
distinguish  thus  ;  there  is  a  fourfold  presence  of  God — (1)  One  is  natural.  And  thus 
is  He  present  with  all  creatures.  Whither  shall  I  flee  from  Thy  presence  (Psa. 
cxxxix.  7).  (2)  A  second  is  majestical.  And  thus  is  He  said  to  be  present  in  heaven  ; 
and  we  pray  to  Him  as  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  (3)  A  third  is  His  judicial 
presence.  And  thus  is  He  present  with  ungodly  men.  (4)  A  fourth  is  His  gracious 
or  favourable  presence.  Consider  the  qualities  of  His  presence  with  you,  and  it  may 
yield  you  singular  comfort  and  support.  (1)  It  is  the  presence  of  a  loving  God. 
(2)  It  is  the  presence  of  an  Almighty  God.  (3)  It  is  the  presence  of  an  active  God. 
At  such  times  you  will  certainly  need  the  presence  of  God.  Our  affections  are  apt 
to  be  most  impatient.  Our  fears  are  apt  to  be  most  violent.  Our  unbeliefs  ure  apt 
to  be  most  turbulent.  Our  consciences  are  apt  to  be  most  unquiet.  And  Satan  is 
most  ready  to  fish  in  troubled  waters.  (0.  Sedgvnck,  B.D.)  Light  in  a  dark- 
ened icay :—l.  A  picture  of  the  way  of  life  darkened.  When  thiswillbe 
we  know  not.  Bunyan  puts  it  mid-way,  but  sometimes  it  is  nearer  the  beginning 
than  the  end.  Childhood  knows  it  not :  gladsomeness  and  enjoyment  are  his  of 
right.  But  later  on  life  darkens.  But  come  how  and  when  it  may,  it  will  come 
at  the  right  time  and  in  the  right  way.  If  it  ever  work  evil,  the  fault  will  be  ours. 
Sometiuies  the  shadows  are  those  of  sorrow.  At  others,  of  doubt.  At  yet  other 
times  it  is  the  result  of  some  sin.  The  sorrow  of  wasted  power,  of  lost  confidence,  of 
violated  vows,  is  a  pang  which  wrings  the  human  heart  with  an  agony  it  knows  not 
how  to  bear.  Such  experiences  are  stern  and  solemn  realities.  II.  No  man  need 
GO  down  the  valley  alone.  There  is  light  in  the  darkened  way.  "  Thou  art 
with  me."  And  He  is  with  us  to  help  and  protect.  Augustine  wouLl  leave  Carthage 
to  go  to  Rome.  His  pious  motlier,  fearing  the  snares  of  Rome  for  her  wayward 
boy,  begged  him  not  to  go.  He  promised  to  remain,  but  in  the  night  stole  away. 
But  there,  where  his  mother  feared  he  would  be  lost,  he  was  saved.  Years  after  he 
wrote  thus,  ' '  Thou,  0  God,  knowing  my  mother's  desire,  refusedst  what  she  then  asked, 
that  Thou  mightest  give  her  what  she  was  for  ever  asking."  {George  Baintoii.) 
The  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death : — I.  The  pass  and  its  terropjs.  "The  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death."  Get  the  idea  of  a  narrow  ravine,  something  like  the 
Gorge  of  Gondo  or  some  other  stern  pass  upon  the  higher  Alps,  where  the  rocks 
seem  piled  to  heaven,  and  the  sunlight  is  seen  above  as  through  a  narrow  rift.  And 
80  troubles  are  sometimes  heaped  one  upon  another,  pile  on  pile,  and  the  road  is  a 
dreary  defile.  It  is  exceedingly  gloomy.  Some  of  you  don't  know  such  troubles. 
Do  not  seek  to  know.  Keep  bright  while  you  can.  Sing  while  you  may.  Be 
larks  and  mount  aloft  and  sing  as  you  mount.     But  some  of  God's  people  are  not 


PSALM  XXIII,]  THE  PSALMS.  455 

much  in  the  lark  line  ;  they  are  a  great  deal  more  like  owls.  But  despondingpeople, 
if  to  be  blamed,[are  yet  much  more  to  be  pitied.  Still,  the  coTenant  is  never  known 
to  Abraham  so  well  as  when  a  horror  of  great  darkness  comes  over  him,  and  then  he 
sees  the  shining  lamp  moving  between  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifice.  And  there  are 
parts  of  our  life  which  are  dangerous  as  well  as  gloomy.  The  Khyber  Pass  is  still 
terrible  in  men's  memories,  and  there  are  Khybers  in  most  men's  lives.  No  doul.t 
the  Lord's  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  but  for  all  that  there  are  enemies  on  the 
road  to  heaven.  And  then  its  solitude.  This  is  a  great  trial  to  some  spirits,  and 
mingling  in  crowds  is  no  relief,  for  tliere  is  no  solitude  of  the  spirit  so  intense  as 
that  which  is  often  felt  in  crowds.  Still,  this  valley  is  often  traversed.  Many  more 
go  by  this  road  than  most  people  dream.  But  it  is  not  an  unhallowed  pathway,  for 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  gone  along  it.  II.  The  pilgrim  akd  his  pkogkess. 
1.  He  is  calm  in  the  prospect  of  his  dreary  passage.  2.  And  is  steady  in  his  pro- 
gress. He  walks  through,  does  not  run  in  haste.  3.  And  he  is  secure  in  his 
expectancy.  There  is  a  bright  side  to  that  word  "through."  He  expects  to  come 
out  into  a  brighter  country.  4.. And  he  is  free  from  fear.  I  have  read  of  a  little 
lad  on  board  a  vessel  in  great  peril.  Everybody  was  alarmed.  But  he  kept  playing 
about,  amused  rather  at  the  tossing  of  the  ship.  When  asked  what  made  him  so 
fearless  he  replied,  "My  father  is  the  captain.  He  knows  how  to  manage."  Let 
us  so  believe  in  God.  Yet — 5.  He  is  not  at  all  fanatical.  He  gives  a  good  reason 
for  his  fearlessness.  "Thou  art  with  me!"  III.  The  Soul  and  its  Shephebd. 
"Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they  comfort  me."  The  rod  and  the  staff,  the  tokens  of 
shepherdry,  are  the  comforts  of  the  saints.  1.  The  rod  is  for  the  numbering  of  the 
sheep.  2.  For  rule.  3.  Guidance.  4.  Urging  onward.  I  have  had  to  lay  on  the 
rod  at  times  on  certain  fat  sheep  not  so  nimljle  as  they  ought  to  be.  But  their  wool 
is  so  thick  that  I  can  scarcely  make  them  feel.  But  the  Great  Shepherd  can,  and 
wUl.  5.  For  chastisement.  6.  For  protection.  How  David  defended  his  sheep. 
May  God  give  us  aU  the  faith  expressed  in  our  text.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  path 
of  life: — I.  The  path  of  life  as  shadowed  by  death.  "The  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death."  David  does  not  speak  of  the  article  of  death  here  as  some 
suppose.  He  does  not  say,  though  I  may  walk,  or  though  I  should  walk,  or  though 
I  must  walk,  but  though  I  walk.  He  is  speaking  of  his  walking  it  now.  There  is 
a  bright  sun,  it  is  true,  in  the  sky  of  life,  otherwise  there  could  be  no  "shadow  "  ; 
but  the  figure  of  death  is  so  colossal  that  its  shadow  covers  the  whole  sphere  of  our 
existence.  II.  The  path  of  life  as  trod  with  a  fearless  soul.  "  I  wiU  fear 
no  evil."  1.  Some  tread  the  valley  of  life  with  a  stolid  indifference.  They  seem 
utterly  regardless  of  the  dark  shadows  on  the  path,  and  whither  the  path  conducts 
them.  "Like  brutes  they  live."  2.  Some  tread  the  path  of  life  with  a  giddy 
fi-ivolity.  The  everlasting  jest  and  ceaseless  round  of  hilarious  excitement  indicate 
that  they  have  never  been  penetrated  with  a  true  idea  of  life.  3.  Some  tread  the 
path  of  life  with  a  slavish  dread.  They  are  afraid  of  their  end.  4.  Some  tread 
the  path  of  life  with  moral  bravery.  Thus  did  David.  III.  The  path  of  life  as 
WALKED  IN  companionship  WITH  GoD.  1.  Thou  art  with  me  as  the  infallible 
Guide  in  the  ever-thickening  gloom.  2.  Thou  art  with  me  as  a  safe  Protector  from 
every  conceivable  evil.  {Eomilist. )  The  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death : — Prepara- 
tion for  death  is  twofold — of  state  and  of  susceptibility.  We  may  be  prepared  in 
state,  as  David  was  when  he  cried,  "Oh,  spare  me  that  I  may  recover  strength 
before  I  go  hence  and  be  no  more  seen,"  but  he  was  not  prepared  in  feeling.  But 
here  in  our  text  he  is  prepared  in  both  ways.  "  I  will  fear  no  evil "  ;  his  experience 
was  ripe  for  death,  and  he  could  antieij^ate  the  event  with  confidence.  The 
Psalmist  looked  upon  the  Shepherd  in  this  place  as  the  Master  of  death,  and  so 
"  feared  no  evil."  I.  To  some  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  is  a  place 
OF  danger  and  alarm.  That  one  could  say  he  feared  no  evil  is  no  proof  that  there  is 
no  evil  for  others.  For  the  ungodly  there  is.  For — 1.  He  must  feel  "  the  sting  of 
death,"  which  "is  sin."  That  removed,  death  is  no  more  dangerous  than  a 
serpent  whose  sting  is  withdrawn.  2.  Then,  too,  conscience  will  be  roused,  and 
there  will  be  no  means  to  pacify  it.  Conscience  cannot  sleep  then,  though  they 
have  dozed  and  slumbered  undisturbed  by  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  and  the  noise  of 
death  cutting  down  some  old  barren  fig-tree  in  their  neighbom-hood.  3.  Then,  too, 
Mercy  will  depart  for  ever.  She  outstays  all  others,  but  now  even  Mercy  says, 
"Good-bye  for  ever!"  "Thou  didst  never  see  a  morning  when  I  did  not  meet 
thee  with  my  arms  full  of  kindnesses  toward   thee.     Thou  art  now  going  where  I 

have  not  been,  and  whither  I  shall  never  come Good-bye  !  "    And  the  hope  of 

man  is  lost !      3.  There  also  must  he  meet  the  wrath  of  God  without  a  hiding* 


A 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiil. 

place.  It  had  been  declared  many  times  that  it  was  approaching  ;  but  there  was 
noway  of  escape.  But  now  it  is  too  late  to  turn  back.  God's  wrath  must  now  be 
faced.  The  terrors  of  God  array  themselves  against  the  ungodly  men.  II.  The 
GODLY  man's  confidence  IN  THE  FACE  OF  DEATH.  "  I  will  fear,"  &c.  Yet  how 
terrible  the  description  of  death.  1.  A  valley — a  deep  and  dismal  place.  Some  live 
their  lives  in  the  hilltops  of  prosperity,  others  in  the  vales  of  adversity  and  sorrow, 
but  this  valley  lies  lower  than  these.  Yet  the  godly  man  fears  not.  2.  A  dark 
valley — a  valley  of  shadow,  "the  shadow  of  death  where  the  light  is  as  darkness." 
3.  A  dreadful  valley— for  it  belongs  to  death.  This  is  its  home,  here  its  court  and 
throne.  Some  have  fainted  at  the  sight  of  some  of  its  subjects  ;  what  of  the  King 
Himself?  But  here  is  one  going  down  into  its  domains.  It  is  probable  that  he  will 
run  silently  through,  and  as  swiftly  as  he  possibly  can,  until  he  is  nearly  breathless. 
No.  He  intends  walking  slowly  through,  as  if  resolved  to  view  it  well,  the  only 
time  he  shall  go  that  way.  Probably  he  intends  crossing  it  in  the  narrowest  place. 
No.  He  speaks  of  walking  the  whole  length  of  the  valley.  Is  he  afraid  he  may  fail 
and  faint  half-way  ?  No.  He  confidently  trusts  that  he  vdll  reach  the  farther  end. 
III.  The  grounds  of  his  confidence.  God's  presence.  "Thou  art  with  me." 
No  one  is  so  timid  as  a  godly  man  without  God.  He  will  go  nowhere  without 
Him.  But  with  Him  he  will  go  anywhere.  These  are  they  which  follow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  He  goeth.  {David  Roberts,  D.D.)  The  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death:— I  The  circumstances  in  which  the  believer  is  placed.  "The 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death"  has  been  supposed  to  describe  a  gloomy 
defile  in  which  the  traveller  sees,  as  it  were,  the  image  of  death  depicted 
wherever  he  turns  his  eyes.  Others,  again,  and  perhaps  with  greater  simplicity  of 
interpretation,  have  found  the  idea  of  dark  shadow,  impenetrable  gloom  cast  by 
some  overlianging  object  which  shuts  out  all  light.  The  natural  effect  of  peril  is  to 
create  alarm  ;  and  it  is  nothing  less  than  a  signal  triumph  over  the  strongest 
instincts  of  the  human  constitution  for  a  man,  when  he  walks  "through  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death,"  to  fear  no  evil.  It  is,  however,  a  triumph  over  nature,  to 
which  the  religion  of  the  Bible  frequently  calls,  and  for  which  she  abundantly 
prepares  her  followers.  II.  The  feelings  which  in  these  circumstances  he  is 
ABLE  to  entertain.  The  Psalmist  does  not  say,  "  I  AviU  not  fear,"  though  even 
had  he  said  so  we  should  have  known  how  to  interpret  his  words  with  due 
restrictions  ;  but  he  says,  "  I  will  fear  no  evil,"  that  is,  I  will  apprehend  no  real  or 
ultimate  injury.  The  Psalmist  had  made  too  enlarged  an  observation,  he  had 
passed  through  too  varied  an  experience  of  life,  to  suppose  that  the  clouds  which 
l>)wered  upon  the  scene  before  him  would  always  pass  away  innocuous.  Exactly  so 
the  Christian  now  has  no  reason  to  expect  that  he  will  be  spared  the  suffering — and 
that  to  the  extremity  of  mortal  endurance — of  what  is  painful,  and  desolating,  and 
agonising  ;  but  every  Christian  may  be  assured  that  all  these  things  shall  tail  to  do 
him  real  evil.  And  while  this  is  the  feeling  which  every  child  of  God  may  be 
exj>ected  to  entertain,  in  every  condition  in  which  he  can  be  placed  of  deadly  gloom 
and  peril,  so  it  is  peculiarly  the  sentiment  which  he  is  called  upon  to  cherish  when 
treading  in  particular  that  dreary  path  which,  to  most  minds,  is  suggested  by  the 
appellation,  "  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death."  A  sharp  thrill  of  undefined  yet 
overwhelming  terror  is  apt  to  shoot  across  his  soul  that,  in  the  words  of  the 
Psalmist,  he  exclaims,  "  My  heart  is  sore  vexed  within  me,  and  the  fear  of  death  is 
fallen  upon  me."  But  it  will  be  but  for  a  moment  that  the  Christian,  trusting  in  his 
Redeemer,  will  suffer  such  gloomy  thoughts  as  these  to  involve  his  spirit ;  presently, 
as  he  proceeds  deeper  and  deeper  down  the  perilous  descent,  you  will  hear  a  voice  of 
solemn  yet  not  desponding  melody  ascending  from  the  shades,  "I  will  trust  and 
not  be  afraid";  "Yea,  though  I  walk  through,"  &c.  III.  The  reasons  on 
which  the  Psalmist  grounds  and  justifies  his  persuasion.  That,  with 
whatever  circumstances  of  direct  and  most  deadly  peril  he  might  be  environed,  no 
real  evil  should  befall  him.  1.  The  fact  of  Jehovah's  friendly  presence.  2.  The 
fact  of  Jehovah's  pastoral  care  :  "Thou  art  with  me  ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff",  thev 
comfort  me."  The  Scriptural  expression,  "to  be  with  one,"  denotes  the  special 
presence  of  Jehovah  with  those  whom  He  loves,  to  guide,  to  help,  to  protect,  to 
favour,  and  to  bless  them  ;  as  when  Abimelech,  for  example,  congratulated  Abraham 
on  the  manifest  tokens  which  his  history  presented  that  he  was  the  object  of 
Almighty  favour,  by  saying,  "The  Lord  is  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  dost," — when 
our  Lord,  in  order  to  encourage  His  apostle  amidst  the  arduous  toils  and  trials  that 
awaite'd  him  at  Corinth,  spake  to  him  in  vision, — "Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee, 
and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee."     [T.  B.  Patterson,  M.A.)        A  funeral 


PSALM  xxili.]  THE  PSALMS.  457 

sermon: — Death  is  what  human  nature  is  prone  to  dread.  Most  men  shrink,  as 
long  as  they  are  ahle,  from  the  entrance  into  "the  valley  of  the  shadow  "  of  it.  Let 
us  consider  what  are  the  evils  to  be  encountered  in  passing  through  "the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death."  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  pains  of  death  must  be 
ENCOUNTEKED  BY  TJS  ;  and  these  fill  many  minds  with  dismay.  God  has  been 
pleased,  notwithstanding  the  redemption  of  our  race  from  utter  destruction,  to  leave 
in  the  world  demonstrations  of  their  fall,  and  amongst  these  are  the  anguish  and 
manifold  distresses  which  accompany  our  mortality.  II.  The  valley  of  death  is 
rendered  terrible  to  man,  because  it  inteerttpts  and  terminates  all  his 
earthly  pursuits  and  expectations.  III.  The  separation  from  the  objects 
WHO  Vi^ERE  ENDEARED  TO  US,  and  the  sccucs  and  pleasures  which  delighted  us  in 
the  present  world.  But  how  happy  those  who  in  this  solemn  hour  can  entrust  not 
only  themselves,  but  aU  whom  they  love,  to  the  tender  and  faithful  protection  of 
God.  IV.  Another  thing  which  renders  death  terrible  to  many  is  the  darkness 
WITH  which  it  is  ENCOMPASSED.  Shadows,  clouds,  and  gloom  rest  upon  it.  To  the 
infidel  it  is  dismally  obscure.  Bones  and  ashes  are  all  he  can  discover.  Conscience 
fills  it  with  ghosts  and  spectres  and  images  of  terror.  They  shudder  as  they  enter. 
They  cry  aloud  for  light.  V.  But  the  greatest  of  all  the  causes  of  anxiety  and  fear 
which  the  children  of  men  encounter  at  the  approach  of  death  is  the  apprehension 
OF  the  judgment  which  will  ensue.  {Bishop  Dehon.)  Through  the  dark 
valley : — Observe  that  dark  valley  attentively.  Consider  what  it  is  ;  whither  it 
leads  ;  what  its  shadow  means  ;  what  are  its  evils  ;  what  its  security  in  the 
midst  of  those  evils.  You  are  daily  approaching  it.  I.  A  gloomy  shadow. 
II.   A  FEARLESS  TRAVELLER.      III.  A  PRESENT  GoD.      {E.   HalUy,   Af.A.)  The 

valley  of  the  shadow : — We  are  debtors,  every  one  of  us,  to  that  old  poet,  who- 
ever he  was,  who,  in  ransacking  a  teeming  brain — teeming  with  images  of  idyllic 
peace  and  happiness,  and  also  with  images  of  nameless  dread  and  gloom — lighted 
upon  the  "valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  as  Bunyan  afterwards  lighted  upon  a 
"place  where  was  a  den,"  and  gave  to  all  that  in  human  experience  which  before 
death  is  worse  than  death  itself,  a  local  habitation  and  a  name.  Different  forms  of 
the  religious  sentiment  have  their  different  values  in  regard  to  the  dismal  experi- 
ence thus  happily  named.  None  of  them  has  actually  the  value  assigned  to  it. 
Religion,  natural  temperament,  courage,  cheeriness,  all  mingle  in  the  confidence  of 
him  who  here  says  "  I  will  fear  no  evil."  For  aught  we  know,  there  may  have  been 
as  much  of  the  one  as  of  the  other.  Natural  temper  and  disposition  count  for  much, 
usually  for  more  than  anything  else,  in  the  most  trying  moments  of  human  life. 
Then,  the  natural  man  is  apt  to  part  company  with  his  costume  of  habits  and 
customs,  and  to  show  himself  as  he  was  born,  the  bravest  of  the  brave  or  the 
weakest  of  the  weak.  It  is  not  the  most  pious  man  in  the  regiment,  I  suppose, 
who  is  always  the  coolest  in  the  forlorn  hope.  Some  men,  like  John  Wesley,  are 
brave  on  land  who  are  great  cowards  at  sea  ;  others,  like  some  of  Elizabeth's 
buccaneers,  are  timid  in  regard  to  the  least  adversity  occurring  in  a  hospital,  but 
undaunted  in  regard  to  it  if  it  threatens  in  a  gale.  Not  according  to  differences  of 
religious  belief,  but  according  to  idiosjmcrasies  of  disposition  or  accidental  habits  of 
mind,  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  varies  its  character.  As  regards  the  last 
fact  of  all,  which  makes  all  human  life  a  tragedy,  we  who  look  forward  to  it  with  a 
shudder  cannot  help  envying  the  coolies  of  St.  Helena  and  elsewhere,  who  lie  dowa 
to  die  as  peaceably  as  if  it  were  to  sleep ;  or  the  Turkish  soldiers  at  Plevna,  who 
preserved  such  coolness  in  presence  of  the  horrors  there.  You  can  scarcely  call  their 
fatalism  religious  sentiment,  yet  it  did  that  for  them.  Some  surgeons  say  that 
there  are  people  without  nerves.  What  is  a  terrible  ordeal  to  some  in  the  way  of 
pain,  to  others  is  a  mere  trifle.  Now,  though  religious  people  will  hardly  allow  it, 
it  is  a  fact  that  natural  temperament  has  far  more  to  do  with  heroism  in  its  most 
striking  forms  than  religion  has.  But  religion  has  to  do  with  it,  and  different  forms 
of  the  religious  sentiment  have,  therefore,  different  values  in  this  respect.  That  it 
is  glorious  to  die  for  one's  country  was  an  idea  with  which  the  whole  Greek  and 
Roman  life  was  saturated  in  a  way  unknown  to  the  Hebrew  race.  That  sentiment 
produced  its  natural  effect  in  Plutarch's  Lives,  the  reading  of  which  is  like  reading 
the  Charge  of  the  Light  Brigade.  But  it  is  when  you  come  down  to  Christian  times 
that  you  have  the  religious  sentiment,  the  rise  of  which  takes  you  back  to  this 
Psalm  and  earlier,  and  we  find  it  so  pervading  the  lives  of  multitudes  of  common 
men  and  women  that  they  are  found  to  be  instinct  with  a  courage  and  patience  which 
can  hardly  be  matched  in  Plutarch.  It  is  a  heroism,  not  of  the  general  and  liis 
staff,  but  of  plain  people.     And  we  have  it  here  in  this  Psalm.     The  trust  in  thfi 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

Divine  Shepherd  is  an  antidote  to  all  alarm.  What  that  sentiment  has  done 
to  lighten,  for  countless  multitudes  of  human  beings,  all  adversity,  and  the  last 
adversity  of  all,  to  make  the  unendurable  tolerable  or  even  welcome,  may  be  partly 
imagined  but  cannot  certainly  be  told.  It  is  still  what  it  has  been — to  multitudes 
it  is  still  what  nothing  else  is  or  coidd  be  in  the  way  of  solving  the  enigmas  of  life 
and  making  the  heavy  and  the  weary  weight  of  it  intelligible  and  supportable. 
{J.  Service,  D.D.)  Deej)  shades: — The  image  of  David's  great  distress,  "the 
valley,"  or  ravine,  "  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  or,  as  it  may  be  translated,  "  of  deep 
shades,"  can,  without  any  fancifulness,  be  connected  with  the  scenery  through 
which  he  passed  in  his  flight.  He  must,  after  crossing  Olivet,  have  descended  to 
the  fords  of  the  Jordan  by  one  of  the  rocky  passes  which  lead  from  the  table-land 
of  Jerusalem.  These  deep  ravines  are  full  of  ghastly  shadows,  and  David  passed 
down  one  of  them  as  the  evening  had  begun  to  fall,  and  waited  by  the  ford  of 
Jordan  till  midnight.  It  is  not  improbable  that  we  have  here  the  source  of  the 
image  in  this  verse.  Such  a  march  must  have  impressed  itself  strongly  on  his 
imagination.  The  weird  and  fierce  character  of  the  desolate  ravine,  the  long  and 
deathly  shadows  which  chilled  him  as  the  sun  sank,  the  fierce  curses  of  Shimei,  the 
fear  behind  him,  the  agony  in  his  own  heart  repeating  the  impression  of  the  land- 
scape, fastened  the  image  of  it  in  his  memory  for  ever.  He  has  thrown  it  into  poetry 
in  this  verse.  For  now,  when  he  mused  upon  his  trial,  he  transferred  to  the  present 
feelings  of  his  heart  at  Mahanaira  the  agony  of  that  terrible  day,  but  added  to  it  the 
declaration  of  the  faith  in  God  which  his  deliverance  had  made  strong  within  him. 
And  his  words  have  become  since  then  the  expression  of  the  feelings  of  all  men  in 
the  intensity  of  trial.  Not  merely  in  the  last  great  death-trial,  for  God  knows  that 
there  are  valleys  of  the  shadow  of  death  in  life  itself  which  are  worse  than  death  a 
thousand  times.  Thousands  welcome  death  as  the  reliever,  the  friend, — they  who 
have  seen  every  costly  argosy  of  hope  sink  like  lead  in  the  waters  of  the  past,  and 
whose  future  stretches  before  them  a  barren  plain  of  dreary  sea  on  which  a  fiery  sun 
is  burning  ;  and  they  who  look  back  on  a  past  of  unutterable  folly  and  darker  sin, 
and  who  know  that  never,  never  more  "  the  freshness  of  youth's  early  inspiration 
can  return."  The  innocent  morning  is  gone,  and  they  hide  their  heads  now  from 
the  fiery  simoom  of  remorse  in  the  desert  of  their  guilty  life.  It  is  the  conscience's 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  There  are  times,  too,  even  in  youth,  when,  by  a 
single  blow,  all  the  odour  and  colour  have  been  taken  out  of  living,  when  the 
treachery  of  lover  or  friend  has  made  us  say,  as  we  were  tortured  and  wrung  with 
the  bitterest  of  bitterness,  that  all  is  evil  and  not  good.  It  is  the  heart's  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death.  And  there  are  times  in  the  truest  Christian  life  when  all 
faith  is  blotted  out,  and  God  becomes  to  us  a  phantom,  a  fate,  impersonal,  careless, 
and  we  cry  out  that  we  have  no  Father  in  Heaven  ;  and  of  our  prayer,  too,  it  may 
be  said,  though  we  have  prayed,  oh  how  fervently,  "  He  answered  never  a  word." 
It  is  the  spirit's  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Now,  what  was  David's  refuge  in 
one  of  these  awful  hours  ?  It  was  faith  in  God,  the  Ever-Near.  David  had  entered 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  of  the  heart ;  he  had  been  betrayed,  insulted, 
exiled  by  the  one  whom  he  had  loved  best.  It  was  enough  to  make  him  disbelieve 
in  Divine  goodness  and  human  tenderness,  enough  to  harden  his  heart  into  steel 
against  God,  into  cruelty  against  man.  In  noble  faith  he  escaped  from  that  ruin  of 
the  soul,  and  threw  himself  upon  God — "  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with  me." 
the  next  verse,  supposing  the  Psalm  to  have  been  written  at  Mahanaim,  is  at  once 
comprehensible.  For  far  away  in  the  Eastern  city  there  came  consolation  to  David, 
through  the  visit  and  help  of  Barzillai,  who  brought  him  food.  "  Thou  preparest  a 
table  for  me,"  &c.  One  of  the  sad  comforts  of  trial  is  this,  that  it  is  the  touchstone 
of  friendship.  We  realise  then  who  are  true  gold.  We  often  lose  in  trial  what 
is  calculable ;  we  oftener  gain  what  is  incalculable.  Precisely  the  same  prin- 
ciple holds  good  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  blessing  of  all  trial  is  that  it 
disperses  the  vain  shows  of  life  on  which  we  rested,  and  makes  Christ,  the 
eternal  Certainty,  more  deeply  known.  But  liow  ?  How  do  we  know  another  ? 
Only  by  entering  into  his  spirit,  by  sharing  in  his  life.  There  is  a  broad 
distinction  between  an  acquaintance  and  a  friend.  We  may  see  an  acquaintance 
every  day,  but  we  never  see  his  heart.  We  hover  with  him  over  the  surfaces 
of  things,  touching,  it  may  be,  now  and  then  the  real  inward  life  as  a  swallow 
touches  a  stream  in  its  flight,  but  we  never  dwell  with  him  within  the  temple  of 
inward  thought  or  enter  with  him  into  the  inner  shrine  of  feeling.  A  friend—  how 
difi"erent  !  one  to  whom  your  heart  has  opened  itself  freely,  to  receive  from  whom  ia 
pleasure,  for  whom  to  sacrifice  yourself  is  joy.    So  we  become  at  home  in  his  nature, 


MALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  459 

and  so  is  it  vdtli  Christ  aud  the  Christian  man.  If  you  would  be  the  friend  of 
Christ  you  must  partake  of  His  life— the  life  of  self-sacrifice.  {A.  S.  Brooke.  M.A.) 
The  shadtrw  of  death : — This  valley,  in  Bunyan's  dream,  lies  about  midway  in  the 
journey  of  life.  This  is  one  of  those  revelations  of  the  soul's  experience  which 
makes  Bunyan's  book  a  mirror.  If  this  valley  lay  right  across  our  path  at  the  out- 
set it  would  wither  our  life  at  the  spring.  While  if  it  came  too  near  the  end  it 
would  be  too  late  to  bless  our  souls.  No,  not  near  the  beginning  is  that  valley.  I 
have  often  seen  a  little  child  sit  beside  the  coffin  that  held  its  mother,  with  as  fair  a 
light  on  its  face  as  I  hope  to  see  in  heaven.  And  I  have  said,  there  is  no  valley  and 
shadow  of  death  for  these  little  ones.  Nor,  either,  for  those  who  are  still  young. 
Sorrow  comes,  but  tliey  recover.  They  soon  resume  the  natural  habit  of  their  life  if 
you  let  them  alone.  Tliey  break  out  into  the  warm  bright  world  again,  like  a  Nor- 
way spring,  and  it  is  by  tlie  tender  mercy  of  God  that  they  do  so.  And  in  old  age 
that  valley  and  shadow  lie  behind  us.  When  a  great  English  painter  in  water 
colours  was  past  work,  and  was  waiting  for  his  simimons  to  depart, — for  he  was 
ninety-one, — he  told  his  servant  to  bring  in  his  masterpiece,  that  he  might  see  it  once 
more  before  he  died.  It  was  a  pictui'e  of  a  shipwreck.  He  looked  at  it  a  good 
while  and  then  said,  ' '  Bring  me  my  pencils  and  lift  me  up  ;  I  must  brighten  that 
black  cloud.  It  used  to  seem  just  right,  but  I  see  now  it  is  too  dark,  and  I  must 
brighten  it  before  I  go. "  And  when  it  was  done  he  died.  Now,  I  doubt  not  that 
when  he  painted  that  picture  the  cloud  was  not  one  shade  blacker  than  he  felt  it 
ought  to  be  ;  because  true  painters  always  dip  their  pencils  first  in  the  water  of  their 
own  lives,  and  press  the  pigments  out  of  their  hearts  and  brains.  But  the  way  from 
middle  age  to  ninety-one  had  lain  upward  into  the  light,  the  sweet,  calm  sunset  of 
his  life.  And  so  it  is  with  every  healthful  old  age.  Travelling  into  these  high  lati- 
tudes we  touch  at  last  a  polar  summer,  where  the  morning  twilight  of  the  new  day 
comes  out  of  heaven  to  blend  with  the  evening  twilight  of  the  old.  The  fear  of 
what  death  may  do,  and  the  awful  sense  of  what  death  can  do,  falls  on  us  most 
heavily,  through  the  prime  of  our  life,  when  all  our  powers  are  sturdiest.  It  is  in 
mid-ocean  that  the  storms  come.  And  this  experience  is  universal.  I  notice  it  in 
all  the  saints  whose  lives  are  revealed  to  us  in  the  Bible.  And  Christ  Himself 
passed  through  it.  Bunyan  makes  all  his  pilgrims  who  come  to  any  good  go  down 
into  it.  But  with  a  wonderfully  sweet  pathos,  he  makes  it  easier  for  the  lame  man 
who  is  getting  on  in  years,  and  for  the  maiden,  and  for  the  mother  with  her 
children,  than  he  will  ever  allow  it  to  be  for  stout  stalwart  souls  Uke  his  own.  If 
a  man  should  come  to  me  and  say,  "  I  have  never  been  down  there,  I  know  nothing 
about  it,"  then  his  future  is  a  sorry  one.  It  is  because  we  have  a  soul  and  a 
future  that  we  have  to  go  through  all  this.  But  for  this  man  would  be  mere  vanity 
and  hollowness.  And  there  is  a  great  growth  of  goodness  down  in  that  valley.  Do 
not  go  alone,  then.  Have  God  with  you  as  David  did.  Muster  all  the  promises  you 
can  hold  in  your  heart.  I  would  try  to  trace  the  beatitudes  even  in  the  flames  of 
hell.  And  look  on  to  the  dawn  of  the  new  day.  {R.  Collyer.)  The  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death : — This  hymn  is  the  pilgrim's  song  of  the  soul  on  its  way  to  eternity. 
The  Psalm  is  beautiful  and  impressive,  if  we  take  the  central  death  as  its  keynote. 
Then  all  that  goes  before  is  the  preparation  for  that  dark  crisis  which  is  the  turning- 
point  of  endless  joy.  The  valley  rules  the  whole  ;  what  precedes  is  its  anticipation, 
and  itself  is  the  anticipation  of  heaven.  1.  Mark  with  what  exquisite  simplicity  the 
anticipation  of  the  valley  is  introduced.  The  idea  of  death  is  inwrought  into  the 
habitual  thought  of  the  godly  man.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  life  is  a  continual 
alternation  of  light  and  shade,  of  open  pastures  and  shaded  valleys.  The  whole  of 
our  probation  may  be  said  to  be  spent  imder  the  shadow  of  the  great  death  that  sin 
hath  begotten,  of  the  terrible  cloud  that  has  come  between  us  and  God.  True 
religion  is  a  constant  and  distinct  realisation  of  the  fact  that  we  live  to  die,  and  must 
so  live  as  not  to  be  taken  by  surprise.  This  will  give  to  life  a  certain  solemnity  and 
pathos  which  nothing  else  will  give.  It  is,  nevertheless,  certain  that  the  expecta- 
tion of  the  valley  cannot  really  distress  the  religious  soul.  It  is  very  different  from 
that  horror  which  the  ungodly  and  "the  imsanctified  feel.  There  are,  indeed,  some 
who  are  all  their  lifetime  in  bondage,  though  true  Christians,  through  want  of  trust 
in  the  resources  of  the  Gospel.  Many  reasons  conspire  to  this  palsy  of  their  faith. 
They  love  the  world  too  much,  they  do  not  drink  deeply  enough  of  the  river  of  life, 
they  do  not  meditate  as  they  ought  on  eternal  things,  and  thus  they  cannot  join  the 
chorus  of  our  hymn.  But  the  anticipation  that  makes  this  Psahn  so  glad  is  better 
taught.  The  Christian  singer  is  one  who  Kves  under  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come  ;  and  those  powers  are  to  him  the  working  forces  of  the  present  state.     He  lives 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ppalm  xviii. 

in  a  supernatural  world,  and  regards  everything  in  its  relation  to  that  world.  The 
thought  of  the  valley  becomes  the  familiar  and  cheerful  habit  of  the  soul.  It  does  not 
diminish  the  energy  of  life  nor  blunt  the  appetite  for  such  pleasures  as  God  does  not 
interdict.  2.  The  singer  sings  his  way  into  the  valley  that  he  had  predicted  for 
himself.  The  language  of  his  poetry  blends  the  future  and  the  present,  "  I  will  fear 
no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with  me."  The  pilgrim  is  guided  into  the  valley  by  the  Good 
Shepherd  Himself.  Here  is  the  secret  hnk  between  death  and  preparation  for  death. 
The  blessedness  of  all  our  religion,  whether  in  life  or  death,  is  union  with  Jesus.  Our 
preparation  to  die  well  is  the  habitual  communion  of  our  soul  with  God.  Jesus  went 
that  way  of  sorrows  before  us.  "We  may  be  sure  that  the  Saviour  is  most  intimately 
with  and  in  His  dying  servant.  His  rod  is  the  symbol  of  His  authority  in  the 
domain  of  death  :  it  is  His  alone.  The  staff  is  the  symbol  of  the  strength  He  gives 
the  dying  saints.  The  pastor's  crook,  the  shepherd's  rod,  is  no  other  than  the 
Redeemer's  mediatorial  sceptre  swayed  over  one  special  region  of  His  vast  empire, 
that  which  is  under  the  shadow  of  death.  We  may  interpret  the  staff  as  that 
special  support  which  the  Redeemer  affords  to  every  dying  saint  when  his  heart  and 
flesh  would  otherwise  fail.  (  W.  B.  Pope.)  I  will  fear  no  evil. — On  the  fear  of 
death : — Fear,  though  a  natural  passion,  becomes  the  occasion  of  innumerable  dis- 
quietudes and  infelicities.  It  has  the  same  effect  upon  the  real  evils  and  calamities 
of  life  which  a  misty  air  has  upon  the  objects  of  sight :  it  makes  them  appear  con- 
fused and  indistinct,  and  at  the  same  time  much  larger  than  they  are  in  reality. 
The  object  most  universally  dreaded  is  death.  It  requires  all  the  aids  of  philosophy 
and  of  religion  to  enable  the  wisest  and  best  of  us  to  look  forward  to  this  event  with 
composure.  Give  some  general  directions  which  may  enable  us,  in  measure,  to  over- 
come the  fear  of  death.  1.  That  we  maintain  a  virtuous  habit  of  mind  and  course 
of  life,  and  exercise  ourselves  to  have  a  conscience  void  of  offence,  both  towards  God 
and  towards  man.  2.  Make  the  idea  of  death  familiar  to  our  minds,  by  frequently 
considering  our  latter  end.  Many  of  the  usual  terrors  of  death  appear  upon 
examination  to  be  imaginary,  or  of  very  little  moment.  3.  Reflect  that  this  is  a 
natural  and  unavoidable  event  which  is  common  to  all  the  human  race.  4.  We 
should  preserve  in  our  minds  a  lively  conviction  and  devout  sense  of  the  wise  and 
righteous  government  of  Almighty  God,  and  cheerfully  resign  ourselves  and  all  our 
concerns  to  His  direction.  5.  Look  forward,  with  joyful  expectation,  to  a  state  of 
perfect  and  endless  felicity  in  the  life  to  come.  (  TV.  Enjield.)  Courageous  faith  : 
— That  true  faith  is  a  courageous  grace  ;  it  inspires  the  soul  with  a  holy  and 
undaunted  boldness  amidst  the  greatest  of  dangers.  1.  Some  of  those  evils  that  are 
ready  to  intimidate  and  discourage  the  hearts  of  the  Lord's  people  in  a  time  of 
danger.  Their  own  weakness  and  insufficiency.  The  might  and  multitude  of  their 
enemies.  A  sense  of  giiilt  and  fear  of  wrath.  The  prevalence  of  indwelling  sin. 
The  black  clouds  of  desertion.  The  wrath  of  man,  and  fury  of  the  persecutor.  The 
dangerous  situation  of  the  Church  and  cause  of  God,  and  the  approach  of  death. 
2.  Some  account  of  that  faith  which  fortifies  the  soul  against  the  fear  of  these  evils. 
Sometimes  it  is  called  a  trusting  in  the  Lord,  or  a  looking  to  the  Lord,  or  a  staying 
ourselves  on  the  Lord,  or  a  casting  of  our  burden  on  the  Lord.  Some  of  its 
ingredients  are — a  knowledge  and  uptaking  of  a  God  in  Christ,  revealing  Himself  as 
reconciled,  and  making  over  Himself  to  us  in  a  well-ordered  covenant.  A  firm  and 
fixed  persuasion  of  the  truth  and  certainty  of  the  whole  revelation  of  God's  mind  and 
will  in  the  Word.  An  application  of  the  promises  to  the  soul  itself  in  particular. 
A  persuasion  of  the  power,  love,  and  faithfulness  of  the  Promiser.  A  renouncing  of 
all  other  refuges.  Some  concomitants  of  this  faith.  A  blessed  quietness  and  tran- 
quillity of  soul.  A  waiting  upon  the  Lord  in  the  way  of  duty.  Earnest  prayer  at  a 
throne  of  grace.  A  holy  obedience  or  regard  unto  all  God's  commandments.  Often 
with  a  soul -ravishing  joy  in  the  Lord.  The  courage  of  faith  appears  fi-om  the 
serenity  with  which  it  possesses  the  soul ;  the  hard  work  and  service  it  will 
adventure  ;  the  bold  and  daring  challenges  it  gives  to  all  enemies  and  accusers  ;  the 
weapons  which  it  wields  ;  the  battles  it  has  fought  and  the  victories  it  lias  gained  ; 
the  heavy  burdens  it  will  venture  to  bear  ;  the  hard  and  difficult  passes  that  faith  will 
open  ;  the  great  exploits  which  it  has  performed,  and  the  trophies  of  victory  and 
tntmiph  which  it  wears.  3.  That  Christian  fortitude  and  boldness  which  makes  a 
believer  fear  no  evil.  The  seat  and  subject  of  this  Christian  fortitude  is  the  heart  of 
a  believer,  renewed  by  sovereign  grace.  This  fortitude  consists  in  a  clear  and  dis- 
tinct knowledge  and  uptaking  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  It  makes  God's  Word 
the  boundary  of  faith  and  practice.  A  tenacious  adherence  to  truth  and  duty.  A 
holy  contempt  of  all  a  man  can  suffer  in  this  present  world.     Cheerfulness  and 


PSALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  461 

alacrity  of  spirit.  4.  The  influence  faith  has  upon  this  boldness.  It  inspires  the  soul 
by  presenting  God  to  the  soul ;  by  enabling  the  soul  to  make  right  estimate  of  truth, 
and  by  curing  it  of  the  fear  of  man.  It  views  the  inside  of  troubles  for  Christ,  as  well 
as  the  outside  of  them.  And  it  keeps  the  eye  of  the  soul  fixed  on  Jesus.  {E.  ErsHne.) 
On  death: — This  Psalm  exhibits  the  pleasing  picture  of  a  pious  man  rejoicing  in  the 
goodness  of  heaven.  He  looks  round  him  on  his  state,  and  his  heart  overflows  with 
gratitude.  Amidst  the  images  of  tranquillity  and  happiness  one  object  presents 
itself  which  is  suflScient  to  overcast  the  mind  and  to  damp  the  joy  of  the  greatest 
part  of  men  ;  that  is,  the  approach  of  death.  "With  perfect  composure  and  serenity 
the  Psalmist  looks  forward  to  the  time  when  he  is  to  pass  through  the  ' '  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death."  The  prospect,  instead  of  dejecting  him,  appears  to  heighten  his 
triumph,  by  that  security  which  the  presence  of  his  Almighty  Guardian  aff"orded 
him.  Such  is  the  happy  distinction  which  good  men  enjoy  in  a  situation  the  most 
formidable  to  human  nature.  That  threatening  aspect  which  appals  others,  eanies 
no  terror  to  them.  Let  us  consider  what  death  is  in  itself,  and  by  what  means  good 
men  are  enabled  to  meet  it  with  fortitude.  It  may  be  considered  in  tliree  views. 
As  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body.  As  the  conclusion  of  the  present  life. 
As  the  entrance  into  a  new  state  of  existence.  The  terrors  of  death  are,  in  fact, 
the  great  guardians  of  life.  They  excite  in  every  individual  that  desire  of  self- 
preservation  which  is  nature's  first  law.  They  reconcile  him  to  bear  the  distresses 
of  life  with  patience.  They  prompt  him  to  undergo  its  useful  and  necessary  labours 
with  alacrity  ;  and  they  restrain  him  from  many  of  those  evil  courses  by  which  his 
safety  would  be  endangered.  If  death  were  not  dreaded  and  abhorred  as  it  is  by 
many,  no  public  order  could  be  preserved  in  the  world.  ...  To  preserve  it  within 
such  bounds  that  it  shall  not  interrupt  us  in  performing  the  proper  offices  and  duties 
of  life  is  the  distinction  of  the  brave  man  above  the  coward,  and  to  surmount  it  in 
such  a  degree  that  it  shall  not,  even  in  near  prospect,  deject  our  spirit  or  trouble 
our  peace,  is  the  great  preference  which  virtue  enjoys  above  guilt.  It  has  been  the 
study  of  the  wise  and  reflecting,  in  every  age,  to  attain  this  steadiness  of  mind. 
Philosophy  pursued  it  as  its  chief  object ;  and  professed  that  the  chief  end  of  its 
discipline  was  to  enable  its  votaries  to  conquer  the  fear  of  death.  In  what  lights 
does  death  appear  most  formidable  to  mankind.  1.  As  the  termination  of  our 
present  existence ;  the  final  period  of  all  its  joys  and  hopes.  The  dejection  into 
which  we  are  apt  to  sink  at  such  a  juncture  will  bear  proportion  to  the  degree  of 
our  attachment  to  the  objects  which  we  leave,  and  to  the  importance  of  those 
resources  which  remain  with  us  when  they  are  gone.  2.  As  the  gate  which  opens 
into  eternity.  Under  this  view  it  has  often  been  the  subject  of  terror  to  the  serious 
and  reflecting.  We  must  not  judge  of  the  sentiments  of  men  at  the  approach  of 
death  by  their  ordinary  train  of  thought  in  the  days  of  health  and  ease.  Their 
views  of  moral  conduct  are  then  too  often  superficial.  Here  appears  the  great 
importance  of  those  discoveries  which  Christianity  has  made  concerning  the  govern- 
ment of  the  universe.  It  displays  the  ensigns  of  grace  and  clemency.  What 
completes  the  triumph  of  good  men  over  death  is  the  prospect  of  eternal  felicity. 
To  those  who  have  lived  a  virtuous  life,  and  who  die  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  the 
whole  aspect  of  death  is  changed.  Death  is  no  longer  the  tyrant  who  approaches 
with  an  iron  rod,  but  the  messenger  that  brings  the  tidings  of  life  and  liberty. 
{Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  Facing  death: — When  Sir  Henry  Havelock  lay  dying  he 
said  to  his  friend  and  fellow-soldier  Sir  James  Outram,  "For  more  than  forty  years 
I  have  so  ruled  my  life  that  when  death  came  I  might  face  it  without  fear." 
Looking  into  the  great  abyss: — How  we  die  is  certainly  of  much  less  importance  than 
how  we  live ;  but  still  it  strengthens  faith  to  see  the  hope  and  courage  that  are 
sometimes,  but  by  no  means  always,  felt  by  God's  own  people  at  the  last.  During 
the  sixteen  weeks  in  which  Sir  Bartle  Frere  was  dying,  though  he  was  nearly  always 
in  great  pain,  not  one  murmur  escaped  him.  Just  at  the  end  he  said,  ' '  I  have 
looked  down  into  the  great  abyss,  but  God  has  never  left  me  through  it  all." 
"Name  that  Name  when  I  am  in  pain,"  he  once  said  to  his  wife  ;  "it  calls  me 
back."  {Quiver.)  The  'power  of  the  jiresence  of  Christ: — "Thou  art  with  me." 
I  have  eagerly  seized  on  this  ;  for  out  of  all  the  terrors  wliich  gather  themselves  into 
the  name  of  death,  one  has  stood  forth  as  a  champion  fear  to  terrify  and  daunt  me. 
It  is  the  loneliness  of  death.  "I  die  alone."  Now,  loneliness  is  a  thing  which  we 
must  learn  to  face  in  our  work,  in  the  separations  of  life,  and  in  times  of  quiet. 
Certainly,  whether  we  like  it  or  not,  we  must  be  alone  in  death,  as  far  as  this  world 
is  concerned.  And  men  preach  to  us  detachment.  "Sit  loosely  to  the  world," 
they  say,  that  the  wrench  may  be  less  when  it  comes.     Pnt  the  Good  Shepherd  says 


462  ISE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

rather,  learn  attacliinent.  It  is  His  promise,  "  Fear  not ;  I  will  be  with  thee."  It 
is  our  confidence,  "  I  will  fear  no  evil :  for  Thou  art  with  me."  Nay,  more  ;  it  is 
our  joy,  "Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?"  And  is  not  this  the 
true  answer  to  our  fears  :  How  can  I  go  to  meet  that  shadow  ?  How  will  my  faith 
stand  its  cold  embrace  ?  How  shall  I  ever  believe  in  the  bright  promise  of  a  land 
beyond,  when  here  all  is  dark  ?  Let  us  ask  rather  :  How  am  I  going  to  meet  the 
duty  just  before  me  ?  Is  He  with  me  now  ?  Have  I  learned  to  find  Him  in  the 
quiet  hours  of  the  day  ?  Have  I  found  His  presence  in  desolating  sorrow  ?  Have  I 
felt  His  hand  in  darkness  and  doubt  ?  If  so,  I  need  not  look  forward.  He  is 
leading  me  on,  step  by  step  and  day  by  day.  He  is  habituating  me,  little  by  little, 
to  the  withdrawal  of  the  light,  and  to  utter  trust  in  Htm.  "Sufficient  imto  the 
day  is  the  evil  thereof."  "Thou  art  with  me."  Now  is  the  time  to  make  firm  that 
companionship.  To  be  still,  and  know  that  He  is  God.  To  find  the  guiding  Hand 
in  all  its  strength  and  security  amid  the  death  and  life  of  each  day's  hopes  and 
fears.  And  then,  when  we  enter  the  shadow,  still  it  will  be  "with  God  onwards." 
[W.  C.  E.  Newholt,  M.A.)  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they  comfort  me. — Comfort 
thro^igh  the  rod  and  staff : — -What  is  the  shepherd's  rod  ?  It  is  the  symbol  of  his 
defending  power.  It  is  the  weapon  by  which  our  Shepherd  strikes  down  our 
adversaries.  He  is  ever  on  the  alert  to  ward  off  from  us  threatening  ills.  What  is 
the  staff  ?  We  would  rather  call  it  the  shepherd's  crook,  which  is  often  bent  or 
hooked  at  one  end.  Beneath  it  the  sheep  pass  one  by  one  to  be  numbered  or  told. 
By  it  the  shepherd  restrains  them  from  wandering,  or  hooks  them  out  of  holes  into 
which  they  may  fall ;  by  it  also  he  corrects  them  when  they  are  disobedient.  In 
each  of  these  thoughts  there  is  comfort  for  the  tried  child  of  God.  We  are  numbered 
amongst  God's  sheep  as  we  pass  one  by  one  beneath  the  touch  of  the  Shepherd's 
crook.  By  the  Shepherd's  staff  we  are  also  extricated  from  circumstances  of  peril 
and  disaster  into  which  we  may  have  fallen  through  our  own  folly  and  sin.  By  the 
staff  the  shepherd  also  corrects  his  sheep.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.  A . )  The  wonderful 
staff: — I.  It  is  WONDERFtrL  for  its  power  10  PROTECT.  David  had  found  this  as 
a  shepherd  when,  by  means  of  his  staff,  he  vanquished  the  lion  and  the  bear.  So 
the  Bible  is  our  defence  against  our  soul's  enemies.  See  how  Jesus  used  it  (Matt. 
iv.  1,  &c.).  It  is  wonderful  for  its  power  to  protect.  II.  It  is  wonderful  for  its 
POWER  to  comfort.  Well,  God's  Word  is  like  a  staff  for  this  reason.  It  gives 
strength  to  His  people  when  they  feel  weak  and  ready  to  faint  under  their  labours  or 
their  trials.  III.  It  is  a  wonderful  staff,  because  of  its  power  to  save. 
(James  i.  21.)  The  Word  of  God  is  able  to  save  the  soul.  {R.  NevAon.)  The 
shepherd's  rod  and  staff : — In  1849  Dr.  Duff  was  ti'avelhng  near  Simla  under  the 
shadow  of  the  great  Himalaya  mountains.  One  day  his  way  led  to  a  narrow  bridle- 
path cut  out  on  the  face  of  a  steep  ridge  ;  along  this  narrow  path  that  ran  so  near 
the  great  precipice  he  saw  a  shepherd  leading  on  his  flock  following  him,  but  now 
and  then  the  shepherd  stopped  and  looked  back.  If  he  saw  a  sheep  creeping  up  too 
far  on  the  one  hand,  or  going  too  near  the  edge  of  the  dangerous  precipice  on  the 
other,  he  would  at  once  turn  back  and  go  to  it,  gently  pulling  it  back.  He  had  a 
long  rod  as  tall  as  himself,  round  the  lower  half  of  which  was  twisted  a  band  of  iron. 
There  was  a  crook  at  one  end  of  the  rod,  and  it  was  with  this  the  shepherd  took  hold 
of  one  of  the  hind  legs  of  the  sheep  to  pull  it  back.  The  thick  band  of  iron  at  the 
other  end  of  the  rod  was  really  a  staff,  and  was  ready  for  use  whenever  he  saw  a 
hyena  or  wolf  or  some  other  troublesome  animal  coming  near  the  sheep,  for  especially 
at  night  these  creatures  prowled  about  the  flock.  With  the  iron  part  of  the  rod  he 
would  give  a  good  blow  when  an  attack  was  threatened.  In  Psa.  xxiii.  4  we  have 
mention  made  of  "Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff."  There  is  meaning  in  both,  and  distinct 
meaning.  God's  rod  draws  us  back,  kindly  and  lovingly,  if  we  go  aside  from  His 
path.  God's  staff  protects  us  against  the  onset,  open  or  secret,  whether  it  be  men  or 
devils  which  are  the  enemies  watching  an  opportunity  for  attack.  {Life  of  Dr. 
Duff.) 

"Ver.  5.  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine  enemies. — 

The  Lord's  guests : — This  is  a  desert  scene.  A  hot,  panting  fugitive  is  fleeing  for 
his  life,  pursued  and  hunted  by  the  forces  of  a  fierce  revenge.  At  last  he  touches 
the  tent-rope  of  a  desert-man,  and  now  he  is  a  guest,  and  a  guest  is  safe.  Such  is 
the  undimmed  glory  of  Arab  hospitality.  To  injure  a  guest  is  the  mark  of  the 
deepest  depravity.  Such  is  the  desert  symbol  in  the  text.  What  is  its  spiritual 
significance?  The  soul  is  a  fugitive,  in  flight  across  the  plains  of  time.  The  soul 
is  pursued  by  enemies,  which  disturb  its  peace  and  threaten  its  destruction.     What 


PSALM  xxiii.]  THE  PSALMS.  463 


I 


are  these  enemies  that  chase  the  soul  across  the  ways  of  time  ?  1.  The  sin  of 
esterday.  I  cannot  get  away  from  it.  2.  The  temptation  of  to-day.  Sometimes 
e  approaches  me  in  deceptive  deliberateness  ;  sometimes  his  advance  is  so  stealthy 
that  in  a  moment  I  am  caught  in  Lis  snare.  3.  The  death  that  awaits  me  to- 
morrow. Man  seeks  to  banish  that  presence  from  his  conscience,  bi\t  he  pathetic- 
ally fails.  Whither  can  we  turn  ?  On  the  whole  vast  plain  is  there  one  tabernacle 
whose  tent-ropes  we  may  touch,  and  in  whose  circle  of  hospitality  we  may  find  food, 
refuge,  and  rest  ?  In  the  Lord  our  God  is  the  fugitive's  refuge.  In  the  Lord  our 
God  we  are  secured  against  the  destructiveness  of  our  yesterdays,  the  menaces  of 
to-day,  and  the  darkening  fears  of  the  morrow.  We  are  the  Lord's  guests,  and  our 
sanctuary  is  inviolable.  And  what  shall  I  find  in  the  tent  ?  The  enemies  frown  at 
the  open  door,  while  the  Psalmist  calmly  sits  down  to  a  feast  with  his  Lord.  We 
shall  find  a  sure  defence,  refreshing  repose,  and  abundant  provision.  {J.  H. 
Jowett,  M.A.)  Feasting  amidst  enemies: — 1.  That  the  malicious  envy  of  evil  men 
hath  not  been  able  to  hinder  blessings  from  descending  upon  the  godly.  2.  That 
it  hath  not  been  able  to  tear  otf  the  blessings  which  have  descended.  3.  That  upon 
their  greater  fretting  and  contriving  God  yet  liath  added  more  blessings  upon  His 
servants.  God  doth  not  at  all  depend  upon  wicked  men  hi  the  benediction  of 
His  servants.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  God's  hospitality  : — 1.  He  provides  for  His 
guests  a  feast  in  the  midst  of  their  enemies.  "  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in 
the  presence  of  my  enemies."  (1)  The  life  of  the  true  is  a  fea.st.  The  figure  implies 
three  things.  A  variety  in  the  pleasant.  Variety  is  ever  the  characteristic  and  the 
charm  of  banquets.  How  boundlessly  varied  the  blessings  which  heaven  has  spread 
out  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  good  on  this  earth.  There  are  the  sensuous,  the  intellec- 
tual, the  social,  and  the  religious.  The  figure  implies  an  abundance  in  the  pleasant. 
It  is  almost  essential  to  a  feast  that  the  provision  should  be  ample.  Meagreness  and 
scarcity  are  carefully  avoided  at  banquets.  How  immeasurable  are  the  blessings 
provided  for  the  good.  The  figure  implies  a  social  participation  in  the  pleasant. 
A  feast  is  not  for  one  but  for  many,  and  generally  for  those  of  such  kindred  senti- 
ment as  will  heighten  the  enjoyment.  Life  is  social.  (2)  The  life  of  the  true  is  a 
feast  prepared  by  God.  "Thou  preparest."  Not  only  does  He  prepare  the  feast 
for  His  guests,  but  He  prepares  His  guests  for  the  feast.  The  banquet,  however 
sumptuous  and  varied  in  its  provisions,  is  worthless  to  all  but  those  who  are  inclined 
to  participate,  and  who  have  the  necessary  appetite.  But  the  point  here  is  that  the 
feast  is  spread  out  in  the  "presence  of  enemies."  A  good  man  has  ever  had  enemies, 
and  ever  will.  David  had  them.  They  now  surrounded  him  as  he  was  feasting  at 
the  table  of  God's  providence.  There  is  something  gratifying  to  a  man  in  feasting 
before  enemies.  (1)  There  is  a  gratification  of  the  feeling  of  independence.  Enjoy- 
ing a  banquet  with  the  eye  of  an  enemy  on  you,  you  seem  to  dare  him  to  do  Ms 
worst.  You  have  the  happy  feeling  that  unrighteous  malice  cannot  injure  you. 
(2)  There  is  a  gratification  of  the  feeling  of  benevolence.  Sitting  down,  enjoying  a 
banquet  sufficient  for  all  your  enemies,  and  to  which  they  were  invited  but  would 
not  enter,  you  feel  that  as  they  look  on  there  is  a  splendid  opportunity  for  them  to 
learn  their  folly,  relent,  and  attend  the  entertainment.  (3)  There  is  a  gratification 
of  our  religious  feeling.  You  feel,  as  you  enjoy  the  rich  banquet  provided  for  you, 
that  you  have  an  opportunity  of  showing  your  enemies  the  wonderful  bountihood  of 
the  Master  of  the  feast.  You  give  Him  the  praise.  As  a  Host.  2.  He  follows  His 
guests  constantly  with  His  goodness.  "  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me 
all  the  days  of  my  life. "  3.  He  entertains  His  guests  for  ever  in  His  house.  "  And 
I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  What  a  house  is  His  !  How  vast, 
how  grand,  how  infinitely  numerous  and  elegant  its  apartments  !  The  universe  is 
His  house.  "In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions,"  &c.  To  dwell  in  thi.s 
house  for  ever,  no  longer  a  prodigal  in  a  far  country,  no  longer  a  wearied  pilgrim 
in  the  desert,  but  a  son  settlel  down  fur  ever  in  the  mansions  of  the  Fath-r. 
{Homilist.)  The  conflict  of  life  : — That  life  is  a  conflict  is  an  assertion  made  so 
frequently  that  it  has  become  one  of  the  common-places  of  moralists.  But  the 
common-place  assertion  contains,  nevertheless,  a  deep  truth  to  which  we  have  all 
at  some  time  or  other  to  bear  undisguised  and  heartfelt  witness.  We  have  enemies  ; 
we  are  liable  to  commit  grievous  mistakes.  We  find,  in  ways  innumerable,  that 
our  very  strength  is  weakness,  that  we  are  sadly  imperfect  and  fallible.  Our 
enemies  take  advantage  of  our  weaknesses,  and  use  them  as  weapons  for  our  destruc- 
tion. It  is  no  vague  and  meaningless  metaphor  which  describes  as  our  enemies 
"  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil."  Whether  we  will  or  not,  life  is  a  conflict,  as 
God  dwibtless  designed  it  to  be.     The  hostile  influences  awaken  and  invigorate  the 


464  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psALM  xxni. 

noblest  elements  of  our  nature,  supply  ttem  with  a  field  of  action,  and  by  means 
of  risks  and  dangers  train  them  to  hardihood  and  endurance.  (Jod  is  educating  us 
for  higher  things,  that  we  may  be  resigned  amid  trial,  pure  in  the  midst  of  tempta- 
tion, trustful  though  surrounded  by  darkness,  and  thankful  even  when  our  will  is 
crossed.  The  servants  of  God  are  to  be  heroes.  How  can  they  triumph  if  they  do 
not  strive  ?  There  is  deep  truth  enshrined  in  that  old  Oriental  legend,  according 
to  which  no  one  can  sing  a  song  to  the  immortals  who  cannot  be  the  hero  of  his  tale 
or  live  the  song  he  sings.  He  must  in  this  way  vindicate  his  right  to  speak  of 
deeds  of  high  and  holy  daring,  and  therefore  does  God  place  him  under  such  forms 
of  life  as  his  own  imagination  has  portrayed,  that  He  may  try  him  whether  he  be 
a  hero  indeed.  {James  Stuart.)  The  lyric  of  perfect  trust: — "The  nightingale 
of  Psalms, "  somebody  has  called  it — fiUing  the  night ;  flooding  it  with  its  song 
when  every  other  song  is  hushed.  "The  pearl  of  Psalms,"  another  has  called  it — 
pure,  beautiful,  and  beyond  price.  "The  Pleiades,"  says  a  third,  among  the  con- 
stellations into  which  these  ancient  singers  have  mapped  the  heaven  of  love  and 
hope  and  peace  which  bent  over  them.  Here  is  a  man  who  believed  in  God, — 
believed  in  Him  in  no  fictitious  sense.  David  had  in  his  miud  a  personal  Being  of 
infinite  love,  wisdom,  and  beneficence  whom  he  had  made  his  own — "my  Shep- 
herd." What  has  such  a  man  to  say  of  life?  Four  things.  I.  The  ■wealth, 
COMPLETENESS,  FFLNESS  OF  IT.  It  is  something  worth  possessing.  A  new  science 
has  been  developed  of  late — the  science  of  being  miserable.  Side  by  side  with  this 
there  is  a  mistaken  and  exaggerated  pietism,  which,  in  the  name  of  religion,  takes 
hold  of  everything  by  the  wrong  end.  Things  are  what  you  make  them  to  be. 
Life  is  what  you  make  it.  Take  the  man  who  has  a  personal  hold  of  God.  See  in 
him  the  wealth,  completeness,  fulness  of  life.  Full  provision  is  made  for  all  the 
necessities  of  man's  nature.  Life  is  a  feast :  "Thou  preparest  a  table  for  me."  I 
will  tell  you  how  life  looks  to  me.  1.  I  am — personal  existence  is  mine.  I  have 
a  being,  the  integrity,  the  sanctity  of  which  even  God  respects,  the  boundaries  of 
which  even  my  Maker  does  not  trench  upon.  2.  The  world  is  mine.  The  heavens 
and  the  earth  are  mine.  3.  Then  there  is  the  world  of  ideas,  which  come  greeting 
you  like  troops  of  angels,  from  the  books  of  gifted  souls,  from  the  mystic  recesses 
of  your  own  heart.  4.  Friendship  has  been  yours.  The  joy  of  serving,  the  joy  of 
charity,  the  joy  of  dispensing  sympathy,  of  bearing  burdens  which  are  not  your  own. 
5.  The  happiness  and  ennoblement  of  benefiting  the  world.  II.  Here  is  the  sense 
OF  perfect  security,  of  absolute  freedom  from  all  anxiety.  "Goodness 
and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life."  What  a  load  would  be  lifted  off 
some  minds  if  they  could  only  say  that,  and  be  sure  of  it.  Many  are  spoiling  their 
life  through  the  dread  of  what  maybe  somewhere  in  the  future.  III.  You  have 
the  record  here  of  deliverances,  restorations.  "He  restoreth  my  soul." 
The  Psahn  does  not  give  an  altogether  rose-coloured  view  of  Ufe.  Perils,  fears  are 
implied,  if  not  plainly  stated.  They  are  the  background  of  the  Psahn,  but  that 
only  brings  out  the  Psalm  into  brighter  relief  Take  the  dark  side  first.  "Yea, 
though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death."  That  is  not  the  valley 
of  death.  It  is  the  valley  of  doubt.  It  is  the  sorrow  into  which  you  can  put  no 
meaning.  It  is  the  agony  of  remorse.  But  from  these  things  God  restores  us. 
Very  graphic  is  this  language.  Engulfed,  overwhelmed  in  these  things.  He  giveth 
back  my  soul  to  me.  Shall  I  speak  of  forgiveness,  or  of  sorrow,  or  of  doubt? 
IV.  A  determination  arising  from  this  experience  of  God.  "I  will  dwell  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  It  means,  I  wiU  live  in  free  intercourse,  in  frank 
fellowship,  in  unbroken  friendship  with  God.  That  is  the  first  meaning ;  but  it 
does  mean  the  material  house  also, — the  temple  of  the  Lord,  where  we  meet  to 
renew  our  vows,  and  to  remind  ourselves  in  concert  of  the  God  who  is  the  inspira- 
tion of  our  life.  {J.  Morlais  Jones.)  The  table  prepared  in  presence  of  foes: — 
These  words  are  generally  supposed  to  allude  to  the  seasonable  hospitality  which 
Barzillai  and  his  friends  gave  to  David  during  his  flight  before  Absalom.  Then  the 
hospitality  of  strangers  upon  whom  he  had  no  claim  revived  the  heart  that  had 
been  sorely  stricken  by  the  ingratitude  of  his  own  flesh  and  blood.  Such  was  the 
table  to  which  David  refers ;  and  such  were  the  enemies  in  whose  presence  it  was 
prepared.  It  was  so  remarkable,  so  well-timed,  and  so  suitable  in  every  respect 
that  the  Psalmist  could  not  fail  to  recognise  in  it  the  direct  interposition  of  God's 
own  hand.  It  was  a  miracle  of  Divine  providence.  There  are  three  points  of 
resemblance  between  the  provision  made  for  David  and  the  provision  made  for  us. 
These  are  its  Divine  preparation,  its  abundance  and  suitableness,  and  its  being  made 
in  the  presence  of  our  enemies.     I.  The  enemies  in  whose  presence  our  table 


JTOALM  XXIII.]  TEE  PSALMS.  465 

IS  PKEPARED.  In  ancient  Greek  fable  we  are  told  about  the  Harpies,  monatrous 
creatures  with  the  bodies  and  wings  and  long  claws  of  birds,  and  the  faces  of 
maidens  pale  with  hunger.  They  were  sent  by  the  goda  to  torment  the  blind  pro- 
phet Phineus,  who  had  offended  them  by  ms  misdeeds.  Whenever  a  meal  was 
placed  before  the  unfortunate  man  the  Harpies  darted  down  from  the  air  and 
carried  it  off,  and  either  devoured  the  food  themselves  or  rendered  it  unfit  to  be 
eaten.  It  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  he  was  delivered  from  these  frightful 
enemies,  by  the  prowess  of  two  of  the  Argonauts  who  had  come  thither  in  search  of 
the  golden  fleece.  Like  all  classic  fables,  this  one  has  a  profound  moral.  Here 
man  is  represented  as  a  tiUer  of  the  ground,  upon  whom  the  Divine  curse  has  been 
pronounced  because  of  his  sins,  that  in  the  sweat  of  his  face  he  should  eat  bread  ; 
wise  by  insight  and  experience  in  regard  to  the  common  operations  of  agriculture, 
but  bUnd  as  to  the  issues  and  results  of  these  operations,  and  ignorant  of  what  may 
be  the  increase  of  his  sowing  and  the  harvest  of  his  toil,  if  any.  In  the  Harpies  we 
see  represented  the  various  enemies  that  are  connected  with  the  growth  and  supply 
of  our  food  that  are  constantly  on  the  watch  to  prevent  us  reaping  the  fruit  of  our 
labours,  and  rendering  it  unprofitable  and  unpalatable  when  it  is  reaped.  Since  sin 
came  into  the  world  God  has  ordained  that  man  should  encounter  in  full  force  the 
unkindly  elements  of  nature.  Nothing  is  more  precarious  than  the  growth  of  the 
com  upon  which  we  depend  for  our  daily  bread.  It  is  surrounded  continually  by 
innumerable  enemies.  There  is — 1.  Unsuitable  soil  and  climate.  It  is  within  a 
comparatively  small  area  of  the  earth's  surface  that  we  can  grow  our  com.  Beyond 
that  area  it  is  too  cold  or  too  hot.  2.  The  growth  of  our  corn  has  many  enemies  of 
the  animal  and  vegetable  world  to  encounter.  It  has  to  contend  with  its  own  kind. 
Weeds,  thorns,  and  thistles  cumber  the  ground,  and  in  their  growth  endeavour  to 
choke  and  starve  the  com  and  gain  sole  possession  of  the  soil  for  themselves.  There 
are  birds  that  eat  the  seed  as  soon  as  it  is  sown  in  the  field.  There  are  caterpillars 
and  insects  that  prey  upon  the  tender  blade.  And  worst  of  all,  there  are  rusts  and 
mildews  that  grow  with  its  growth,  and  appear  only  when  the  full  corn  is  in  the 
ear,  and  turn  the  nutritious  grain  into  black  dust  and  ashes.  And  there  are  human 
enemies  as  well  as  natural.  Competitions  and  rights  restrict  the  cultivation  of  the 
soil  ;  and  commercial  interests  cause  unequal  distribution  of  its  produce.  The 
farmer  has  to  encounter  the  difficulties  of  the  market.  Man,  in  having  thus  to  grow 
his  food  amid  a  continual  struggle  with  hostile  forces,  is  taught  in  the  most 
impressive  way  the  solemn  lesson  of  his  dependence  on  God.  II.  The  table  which 
IS  THUS  PEEPARED  FOB  US.  It  is  wiscly  adapted  to  our  necessities  as  human 
beings.  What  a  table  is  thus  spread  every  year.  On  the  table  of  the  wilderness  is 
spread  spontaneously  a  plentiful  feast  of  grass,  wild  fraits,  and  herbs  for  the  sus- 
tenance of  the  dumb,  helpless  creatures  that  can  neither  sow  nor  reap  nor  gather 
into  bams.  On  the  table  of  the  cultivated  haimts  of  men  are  spread,  year  after 
year,  the  golden  cornfields  which  witness  to  humsm  industry,  prudence,  and  fore- 
sight. What  sacred  memories  gather  round  the  table  thus  so  richly  furnished ! 
in.  Who  it  is  that  has  prepared  this  table  fob  us.  The  harvest  is  the 
subject  of  a  Divine  covenant  engagement.  Our  table  is  prepared  by  God's  own 
hand.  The  common  event  hides  from  us  the  Divine  hand.  In  reality,  in  every 
human  operation  man's  part  is  utterly  trifling  compared  with  God's.  When  we 
ask  God  to  give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread  we  simply  ask  that  God  would  enable 
us  to  Uve  from  hand  to  mouth  during  all  our  life.  To  the  use  of  one  day's  supply 
the  laws  of  providence  restrict  the  rich  and  the  poor  alike.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
Feasting  before  enemies : — In  the  former  part  of  the  Psalm  the  writer  represents  him- 
self as  a  sheep  enjoying  the  sure  protection  of  a  Divine  Shepherd  ;  but  here  he 
represents  himself  as  a  guest,  receiving  all  the  attentions  of  a  kind  and  generous 
host.  I.  That  David  considebed  himself  as  pbovided  for  and  distinguished 
BT  God.  All  in  prosperous  cfrcumstances  should  adopt  the  language  of  the  text. 
Would  that  they  did.  Then  they  would  recognise  in  all  the  good  things  they 
enjoy  so  many  provisions  of  a  feast  prepared  by  His  abounding  love.  But  not  alone 
will  this  thought  reveal  your  privileges,  it  will  impress  your  obligations.  It  was 
accounted,  of  old,  an  awful  thing  to  violate  the  understood  obligations  of  hospitality. 
The  eating  together  boimd  together.  ' '  He  who  did  eat  of  my  bread  hath  lifted  up 
the  heel  against  me  "  was  the  pathetic  complaint  of  the  Psalmist.  Does  not  thia 
show,  in  a  striking  light,  the  conduct  of  those  who  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God, 
to  return  evil  ?  They  are  guests,  entertained  with  bountiful  kindness,  and  breaking 
all  the  laws  of  such  entertainment ;  they  dishonom*  the  author  of  their  weal  and 
their  welcome,  and  add  treachery  to  transgression.     But  if  the  description  of  the 

3© 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiu. 

text  applies  to  the  blessing  of  our  outward  and  temporal  estate,  mucli  more  does  it 
apply  to  the  state  of  grace  in  which  believers  in  Christ  Jesus  stand.  The  provisions 
and  enjoyments  of  the  Gospel  excel  all  others.  What  table,  however  richly  spread,  is 
to  be  compared  to  that  to  which  Christ  unites  us  ?  II.  And  all  this  was  and  la 
"  IN  THE  PKESENCE  OF  MINE  ENEMIES."  David  reached  the  throne  of  Israel  through 
such  opposition  that  it  made  him  a  type  of  Him  who,  before  He  sat  down  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  "  endm-ed  the  Cross  and  despised  the  shame."  The  associations 
of  things  wonderfully  augment  and  diminish  their  importance  ;  and  the  association 
of  witnesses  is  one  of  the  most  potent  of  all.  Disgrace  and  punishment  would  lose 
the  greatest  part  of  their  evil  if  they  lost  all  their  publicity  ;  and  honour  and 
reward  are  rendered  infinitely  more  sweet  by  being  conferred  before  our  fellows. 
It  was  not  the  confinement  so  much  as  the  exposure  of  the  pillory  that  made  it 
terrible  as  a  mode  of  chastisement ;  and  where  would  be  the  heroes  of  this  world  if 
there  were  no  despatches  and  no  histories  ?  The  best  of  us  live  far  more  in  other 
men  than  we  are  willing  to  acknowledge ;  we  are  the  meek  servants  of  social 
opinion.  And  as  social  opinion  is  a  motive,  so  is  it  a  recompense.  The  censure  of 
the  world  may  be  a  great  chastisement,  when  there  are  no  other  pains  and  penalties  ; 
and  its  praise  a  sufficient  guerdon,  without  riches  and  honours.  In  David's  case 
there  was  everything  that  could  make  the  presence  of  spectators  significant  and 
important.  He  rose  to  dignity  and  plenty  in  spite  of  fierce  opponents.  Many 
beheld  him  thus  exalted  who  would  fain  have  kept  him  down  ;  and  the  elevation 
was  more  delightful  on  this  account.  If  we  may  so  say,  it  cost  God  more  to  put 
him  there  than  it  would  have  done  otherwise.  To  be  on  the  throne,  then,  in  spite  of 
opposition,  enemies  numerous  and  strong,  after  many  toils  and  tears,  not  only  as  a 
dignity  but  a  triumph — this  was  a  far  greater  and  more  blessed  thing  than  if  there 
had  been  little  or  no  difficulty  at  alL  Men  do  delight,  and  ever  have  delighted,  in 
the  overthrow  of  the  wicked.  There  is  no  man,  however  good,  who  is  not  pleased  that 
thieves  and  liars  and  murderers  are  found  out  and  punished.  Whatever  commisera- 
tion we  may  have  for  their  sufi'erings  as  men,  we  feel  complacency  in  the  fact  that 
they  do  suffer.  It  is  possible  to  cherish  revenge,  which  is  wrong ;  but  it  is  also 
possible  to  rejoice  without  cherishing  it,  which  is  right.  The  sentiment  is  natural, 
whether  the  object  on  which  it  feeds  be  present  or  prospective.  Let  us  not  take  a 
narrow  view  of  this  feeling.  It  is  not  rejoicing  in  suffering  as  such,  but  as  suffering 
on  particular  accounts.  Suffering  in  defence  of  right  we  honour.  But  suffering  ana 
shame  brought  on  those  who  have  trampled  on  all  righteousness  and  goodness  we 
rejoice  in,  and  are  right  to  do  so.  It  is  not  a  pitiful  vengeance,  but  a  right  healthy 
moral  sentiment.  David's  feast  in  the  presence  of  his  enemies  is  a  type  of  many 
feasts.  But  things  worth  having  involve  trouble  and  expense  in  the  getting.  You 
can  attain  to  honour  and  joy  only  in  "the  presence  of  enemies."  "  Faith  "  is  "  a 
good  fight,"  and  Christian  enterprise  is  a  "wrestling  with  spiritual  wickedness." 
Wherefore  "anoint  the  shield,"  "take  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,"  that  ye  "  may  be 
able  to  stand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all  to  stand."  {A.  J.  Morris.) 
Feasting  in  presence  of  enemies : — "  Thou  preparedest  a  table  for  me."  I  notice  that 
all  our  commentators  teach  that  there  is  a  break  here.  A  sheep  at  a  table  ;  that 
will  not  do,  although  the  idea  of  feeding  wiU  do.  Well,  the  kaleidoscope  seems  to 
have  taken  a  turn.  "  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine 
enemies."  What  does  that  mean  ?  I  somewhere  met  with  an  idea  which  has 
always  stuck  to  me.  I  do  not  know  what  commentator  it  was  in,  for  I  cannot  find 
it  now  ;  perhaps  it  was  somebody  whom  I  heard.  In  old  warfare  they  had  rather 
savage  ways  of  retaliating  upon  their  enemies.  After  the  battle  the  victors  had 
a  feast,  and,  in  order  to  enjoy  the  feast,  they  took  their  leading  captives — the  lead- 
ing men  of  the  opposing  army  whom  they  had  vanquished,  and  bound  them  to 
pillars  in  the  banqueting  hall,  and  compelled  them  to  look  on  while  those  whom 
they  had  meant  to  destroy  sat  and  feasted  royally  and  uproariously  in  their 
presence.  It  was  a  savage  way  of  acting — to  prepare  a  table  and  sit  down  and  drink 
to  the  confusion  of  their  enemies,  and  their  princes  and  their  captains  chained  to 
the  pillars.  It  gave  zest  to  the  feast,  did  it  not  ?  Ah,  there  is  a  true  idea  in  that. 
' '  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine  enemies. "  {John  M^Neiil. ) 
A  taibU  among  enemies:  —  I.  First,  theee  aee  temptations,  commonly  so 
called,  which  can  be  a  trouble  even  when  they  have  oeased  to  be  a  dread.  Just  when 
all  is  peace  and  glory  there  comes  the  ribald  mnrmur  of  an  evU  thought,  the  haunt- 
ing disquiet  of  some  evil  imagination.  Or  doubts,  again,  rise  up  at  the  moat 
solemn  moments,  at  some  turning-point  in  our  PAth.  "This  steep  road  cannot  be 
xi^ht.    The  higher  path  of  duly  is  a  mistaks.    The  view  of  nnintermpted  spleodoor 


PSALM  ixni.]  THE  PSALMS.  467 

wMcli  I  have  promised  myself  will  never  come  !  The  path  leads  nowhither  ;  it  is 
but  a  sheep-track,  beaten  by  the  tramp  of  unenquiring  generations.  I  am  the  slave 
of  an  imposture,  the  victim  of  a  cunningly  devised  fable. "  Doubts  are  certainly 
among  those  that  trouble  us.  And  then  there  is  the  constant  weakness,  the 
weariness  of  the  road,  the  faintness  which  makes  us  stumble,  the  distaste  for  prayer, 
the  distractions  which  perplex  us.  He  does  not  concern  Himself  with  them  ;  He  is 
busying  Himself  about  me.  The  way  lies  through  obstacles  more  and  even  greater 
than  these.  It  is  not  His  care  to  remove  temptation,  but  to  strengthen  the  tempted. 
He  never  promised  to  remove  trouble  ;  but  He  has  promised  to  make  anxiety  out  of 
the  question.  He  never  promised  to  remove  pain  ;  but  He  has  promised  to  elevate 
it  into  a  bearing,  supporting  cross.  "  He  prepares  a  table  before  me  in  the 
presence  of  mine  enemies."  II.  And  what  is  this  table,  so  strange,  so  un- 
expected, prepared  in  the  presence  of  enemies  thirsting  for  my  life  ?  Pre-eminently 
it  speaks  to  a  Christian  of  the  blessed  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Body  and  Blood.  In 
a  wider  meaning  it  is  our  Holy  Religion.  It  represents  aU  those  different  ways  and 
means  of  grace  in  which  God  strengthens  us  against  temptation.  If,  then,  we  are 
to  push  our  way  through  these  obstacles.  He  would  seem  to  say  that  above  all  things 
it  is  necessary  that  religion  should  preoccupy  the  soul ;  it  is  the  empty  soul  that  is 
so  mercilessly  tormented.  A  man  that  has  no  principle,  no  settled  religious  beliefs, 
no  settled  religious  obligations,  who  depends  on  his  surroundings  and  companions, 
it  is  he  who  is  so  mercilessly  tormented.  And  no  less  in  "  the  table  "  do  we  trace  a 
provision  of  strength,  Over  and  over  again  Holy  Scripture  appeals  to  us  with 
warning  voice,  "  Be  strong."  God  knows  the  strain  which  we  have  to  undergo,  the 
unhealthy  atmosphere,  the  miasmatic  plain,  the  poisonous  swamps  and  jungles 
through  which  the  path  winds,  and  therefore  He  prepares  a  table  of  strength. 
What  strength  we  might  have  if  we  made  use  of  this  table  of  religion  !  We  should 
find  ourselves  a  source  of  strength  to  all  around  us.  And  yet  again,  the  table  is  a 
feast  of  good  things.  There  is  the  intense  interest  of  religious  life  and  religious 
work.  Worldly  men  cannot  understand  it,  simply  because  they  have  not  thrown 
themselves  into  it.  It  would  seem  to  be  a  fiict  that  our  enjoyment  of  everything  is 
in  direct  proportion  to  the  interest  which  we  bestow  upon  it,  and  to  the  extent 
in  which  we  devote  ourselves  to  it.  Even  the  very  games  and  recreations  of 
life  are  insipid  when  we  cannot  play  them,  or  neglect  to  enter  into  them.  "The  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  See  how  joytul,  how  bright  God  is  all  around  us  in 
His  marvellous  works.  Do  not  let  us  despise  enthusiasms  ;  they  carry  us  on. 
They  are  a  table  of  delight  prepared  in  the  presence  of  our  enemies.  III.  And  as  the 
angels  came  and  ministered  to  Christ  after  His  temptation,  so  the  anointed  head 

AND   the  replenished   CUP  SPEAK   OF   THE  JOY  AND   GLADNESS  WHICH  WAIT  ON 

THOSE  WHO  OVERCOME.  There  is  the  oil  of  joy  and  grace  poured  over  our  heads, 
which  makes  us  prophets,  priests,  and  kings  of  God  to  all  those  with  whom  we  are 
brought  into  contact.  And  at  the  end  there  comes  the  full  cup.  Everything  con- 
tributes to  the  store  of  wealth,  and  all  things  work  together  for  good,  because  we 
love  God.  Life  in  all  its  changes,  health,  prosperity,  affliction,  all  add  to  the  great 
store  of  blessing,  and  God's  mercy  fills  the  cup  of  happiness  to  overflowing.  ( W. 
C.  E.  Newbolt,  M.A.)  Thou  anointest  my  liead  witli  oiL — The  anointing : — 
I.  David  had  been  anointed  to  kingship.  All  Christians  are  kings,  even  as  aU 
Christians  are  priests  ;  but  kings  only  anointed  not  crowned,  as  they  are  priests 
ordained,  not  yet  admitted  to  celestial  ministries  ;  and  though  the  ordination 
to  priestly  service  be  now  the  more  prominent  honour,  it  is  not  such  as  to  distrust  or 
overshadow  the  kingly  name  and  destiny.  II.  David  had  been  anointed  from  on 
high.  David's  crown  was  a  sure  one,  and  surer  than  that  already  worn  by  Saul  y. 
and  so  is  every  Christian's.  God's  purposes  in  providence  and  grace  are  sure  as  the 
seasons  and  the  sun.  The  kingship  of  every  believer  rests  not  on  his  own  might 
or  wisdom,  not  on  the  counsels  and  plans  of  his  fellow-men,  but  on  the  irreversible 
and  sovereign  grace  of  God.  III.  David  had  been  anointed  to  present  rule, 
AS  well  as  future  honour.  He  had  forthwith  to  rule  himself  as  a  preparation 
for  ruling  others.  IV.  David  was  anointed  of  the  Spirit.  With  "  the 
spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 
spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  V.  David  was  anointed 
IN  SECRET.  The  anointing  of  David  was  not  a  public  act.  VI.  David  was 
anointed  with  the  oil  of  joy.  Oil  was  a  symbol  of  joy.  "And  oil  to 
make  his  face  to  shine."  Of  Messiah  it  is  said,  "Thy  God  hath  anointed 
Thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  Thy  fellows."  {John  Sioughton,  D.D.) 
V7  cap  numetli  over. — The  ioealth  qf  life: — ^The  overflcwing  idea  is  everywhere. 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psaxm  xxiii. 

I.    OtTR   CUP   OF   NATURAL   BLESSING   IS    NOT   SIMPLY  StTFPICING   BUT   REDUNDANT. 

"We  see  this — 1.  In  the  beauty  of  creation  as  opposed  to  mere  utility.  The  sad 
philosopher  of  antiquity  confessed,  "He  hath  made  everything  beautiful  in  his 
time"  ;  and  the  poet  of  to-day  rejoices,  "All  things  have  more  than  barren  use." 
Some  modem  cynics  have  roundly  abused  nature,  and  tried  hard  to  show  the  seamy 
side  of  the  rainbow ;  but  the  loveliness  and  grandeur  of  things  are  too  much  for 
them,  and  the  poet's  vocation  is  not  yet  gone.  2.  In  the  abundance  of  creation  as 
opposed  to  mere  sufficiency.  "Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me."  And  how  richly 
is  that  table  furnished.  We  have  a  school  of  political  economists  tormented  by  the 
dread  of  population  outstripjjing  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  which  is  ever  warning 
society  against  the  awful  peril.  But  how  foolish  are  such  fears,  seeing  we  dwell  in  a 
world  so  rich  and  elastic.  Let  man  be  wise  and  good,  and  however  thronged  "the 
habitable  part"  of  the  earth,  there  shall  be  "no  complaining."  The  legend  tells  us 
that  in  olden  times  the  ear  of  wheat  extended  the  whole  length  of  the  straw,  and  it 
was  through  the  sin  of  man  that  the  ears  of  com  spring  as  we  see  them  now.  Truly 
this  legend  reflects  the  truth  at  all  times,  that  the  exuberance  of  God  has  been 
marred  by  the  folly  of  man.  II.  The  superabundance  of  our  cup  of  social 
BLESSING.  Think  of  home,  and  all  that  means ;  and  friendship  ;  and  philanthropy. 
And  art,  science,  literature.  Commerce  is  a  whole  vine  in  itself,  and  we  gaze  at  its 
embarrassing  lavishment  with  amazed  delight.  Surely,  when  the  nations  return  to 
wisdom  and  virtue  they  shall  no  more  be  an  hungered,  but  find  the  world  their 
Father's  house,  with  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  And  in  those  days,  too,  it  shall 
no  more  be  felt  that  the  individual  is  impoverished  by  society.  Now,  we  too  often  feel 
that  the  multitude  is  the  enemy  of  the  individual ;  that  the  increase  of  the  number 
makes  the  struggle  all  the  more  bitter  for  each  member.  But  really,  society  is  the 
instrument  of  God  for  multiplying  the  world's  riches  and  joy,  and  in  the  day  when 
the  human  brotherhood  shall  dwell  together  in  knowledge  and  love  each  shall  serve 
all,  and  all  each,  until  in  the  sublime  reciprocity  the  land  overflows  with  milk  and 
honey.  III.  The  munificence  of  God  is  revealed  to  the  uttermost  in  the 
CUP  OF  spiritual  blessing.  The  cup  of  salvation  mns  over.  It  was  not  the  study 
of  God  just  to  save  us,  but  to  save  us  fully,  overflowingly.  We  see  this — 1.  In  the 
pardoning  of  sin.  God  does  not  forgive  sin  with  measure  and  constraint,  but 
graciously  multiplies  pardons.  The  overflowing  cup  is  the  sign  of  a  grand  welcome, 
of  a  cordial  friendship,  of  a  most  hearty  love.  2.  In  the  sanctification  of  the  soul. 
We  are  not  merely  saved  by  Christ  from  ruin,  but  into  a  surpassing  perfection  of 
life.  The  Psalmist  prayed,  "Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean;  wash 
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  What  is  whiter  than  snow?  We  have 
white  clouds,  flowers,  foam,  shells  ;  but  in  the  whole  realm  of  nature  know  nothing 
whiter  than  snow.  But  the  human  spirit  aspires  to  a  truthfulness,  purity,  ana 
beauty  beyond  that  of  the  physical  universe,  it  pants  to  be  whiter  than  snow  ;  and 
this  sublimest  aspiration  of  our  being  is  destined  to  attainment  in  Jesus  Christ. 
"They  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  Here,  at  least,  the  actual 
reaches  the  ideal.  How  full  and  rich  the  Almighty  grace  1  ' '  Where  sin  abounded, 
grace  did  much  more  abound."  3.  Our  last  illustration  of  the  boundless  love  is  the 
provision  for  the  soul's  satisfaction  in  Christ  Jesus.  History  tells  that  an  ancient 
king  granted  pardon  to  some  criminals  under  sentence  of  death,  but  when  these 
discharged  malefactors  applied  for  relief  at  the  palace  gates  the  king  refused  them, 
protesting,  "I  gi-anted  you  life,  but  did  not  promise  you  bread."  This  is  not  the 
theory  of  the  Gospel ;  Christ  not  only  saves  from  destruction,  but  opens  to  the 
Boul  sources  of  rich  strengthening  and  endless  satisfaction.  Annually  when  the  ice 
breaks  up  in  Eussia  the  Czar  goes  in  state  to  drink  of  the  Eiver  Neva,  and  having 
drunk,  it  was  long  the  custom  for  the  Czar  to  return  the  cup  to  his  attendants  full 
of  gold,  but  year  by  year  the  cup  became  so  much  larger  that  at  length  a  stipulated 
sum  was  paid  instead  of  the  old  largesse.  But  however  large  the  vessel  we  bring  to 
God,  and  however  much  it  increases  in  capacity  with  the  discipline  of  years,  God 
shall  stm  make  it  to  overflow  with  that  peace  and  love  and  joy  which  is  better  than 
rubies  and  much  fine  gold.  {W.  L.  WatTdnson.)  The  overflovnng  cup: — Every 
few  years  we  have  people  critical  of  the  thanksgiving  proclamation.  They  say, 
"We  have  nothing  to  be  thankful  for.  Commerce  down;  manufactures  dull; 
commercial  prospects  blasted.  Better  have  a  day  for  fasting  than  a  day  for 
feasting. "  Indeed,  have  you  nothing  to  be  thankful  for  ?  Does  your  heart  beat  f 
Do  your  eyes  see  ?  Do  your  ears  hear  ?  Did  you  sleep  last  night  ?  Are  the  glorioiii 
heavens  above  your  head  ?  Is  the  solid  earth  beneath  your  feet  ?  Have  you  a 
Bible,  a  Christ,  a  proffered  heaven  1    Ay,  those  of  us  who  are  the  worst  off  have 


PSALM  xxxii.]  THE  PSALMS.  469 

more  blessings  than  we  appreciatu,  and  "  our  cup  runneth  over."  I.  Thanksgiving 
IN  THE  HOUSE.  I  just  want  to  look  around  and  see  what  God  has  been  doing  for 
you  in  your  home.  "  Oh,"  you  say,  *'  our  house  is  not  so  large  now  as  the  one  we 
used  to  have."  I  answer,  what  of  that?  It  is  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  keep  a 
large  house  clean.  Besides  that,  a  small  house  is  so  cosy.  Besides  that,  it  is  a  bad 
thing  for  children  to  have  a  luxuriant  starting.  But  I  step  into  your  parlour,  and  I 
find  there  the  evidences  of  refinement,  and  culture,  and  friendship.  I  go  on  to  the 
next  room  and  step  into  your  nursery,  and  I  am  greeted  with  the  shout  and  laughter 
of  your  children.  They  romp  ;  they  hide  ;  they  clap  their  hands.  Busy  all  day, 
without  fatigues,  they  fall  asleep  chattering  and  wake  up  singing.  And  the  little 
baby  has  its  realm,  waving  its  sceptre  over  the  parental  heart,  and  you  look  down 
in  its  wondering  eyes  and  see  whole  worlds  of  promise  there,  and  think  to  yourself, 
"those  little  hands  will  smooth  my  locks  when  they  get  grey,  and  those  little  feet 
will  run  for  me  when  I  am  sick,  and  those  eyes  will  weep  for  me  when  I  am  gone." 
Thank  God  to-day  that  upon  your  home  has  come  the  brightness  of  childhood,  and 
drop  a  tear  of  grief  for  those  who  weep  over  a  despoiled  cradle  and  toys  that  never 
will  be  caught  up  again  by  little  hands  now  still,  alas  !  for  ever.  And  I  go  into  the 
dining-room,  and  I  find  you  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  ;  and  into  your  libray, 
and  you  have  books  to  read,  many  of  them,  and  of  the  best  sort.  Thank  God  for 
books— plenty  of  them— books  to  make  you  study,  books  to  waft  you  into  reverie, 
books  to  make  you  weep,  books  to  make  you  laugh ;  books  of  travel,  of  anecdote,  of 
memoir,  of  legend ;  books  about  insects,  about  birds,  about  shells,  about  everything. 
Books  for  the  young,  books  for  the  old.  "  Oh,"  says  some  one,  "  I  have  not  all  these 
luxuries  ;  I  have  not  all  these  comforts  of  the  parlovir,  of  the  nursery,  of  the  dining- 
haU,  of  the  library."  But  certainly  you  know  something  of  the  height,  and  depth, 
and  length,  and  breadth  of  that  sweet,  tender,  joyous,  triumphant  word  "  homo"  I 
"  Oh,  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  ;  for  He  is  good ;  for  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever  "  ; 
and  let  each  one  clap  his  hands,  and  say  for  himself,  "My  cup  runneth  over." 
II.  I  pass  on  now  to  look  at  Thanksgiving  in  the  hovels  of  the  poor.  No 
banquet  smoking  on  their  table.  Oh,  it  is  hard  to  be  hungry  in  a  world  with  ripe 
orchards  and  luxuriant  harvests  and  herds  of  cattle  driven  to  the  slaughter.  You 
rich,  remember  these  poor  to-day,  and  help  them  to  join  in  the  thanksgiving  of  us 
all.  III.  Thanksgia'^ing  in  the  Church.  I  know  there  are  those  who  think  the 
Church  is  a  museum  of  antediluvian  fossils.  They  think  it  did  very  well  once,  but 
it  is  behind  the  times.  That  is  not  your  opinion.  You  love,  first,  your  home,  and 
next,  your  church.  0  ye  descendants  of  the  men  who  were  hounded  amid  the 
Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  who  fell  at  Bothwell  Bridge  ;  0  ye  sons  and  daughters  of 
the  men  who  came  across  wintry  seas  to  build  their  log  churches  in  the  American 
wilderness ;  0  ye  sons  and  daughters  of  those  who  stood  in  the  awful  siege  of 
Leyden,  and  shouted  the  martyrs'  triumph  in  the  horrors  of  the  Brussels  market- 
place ;  0  ye  descendants  of  the  men  whose  garments  were  dyed  in  the  wine-press  of 
Saint  Bartholomew  Massacre  ;  ye  sons  and  daughters  of  the  fire,  what  do  you  think 
to-day  of  a  quiet  Church,  and  a  free  pulpit,  and  a  Gospel  winged  with  mercy  and 
salvation  ?  "What  imperial  edict  forbids  our  convocation  ?  What  sword  thirsts  for 
our  blood  ?  "What  fires  are  kindled  for  our  torture  ?  None.  Defended  by  the  law, 
invited  by  the  Gospel,  baptized  by  the  Spirit,  we  are  here  to-day  free  men  of  the 
state,  free  men  of  God.  Let  us  give  thanks.  And  let  there  be— IV.  Thanksgiving 
IN  the  city  —  for  good  laws,  just  judges,  quiet  Sabbaths,  noble  churches,  &c. 
"Y.  Thanksgiving  in  the  nation — for  peace  and  prosperity,  &c.  {T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  The  overflowing  cup: — The  Psalm  culminates  in  this  expression.  It 
could  only  have  been  in  reference  to  spiritual  things  that  David  could  thus  speak. 
I.  Some  men's  cttps  never  run  over.  Because  taken  to  the  wrong  source.  Such 
are  the  cups  held  beneath  the  drippings  of  the  world's  leaky  cisterns.  Sopae  cnps 
are  never  filled,  because  the  bearers  of  them  suffer  from  the  grievous  disease  of 
natural  discontent.  The  heart  is  like  the  slough  of  despond,  into  which  thousands 
of  waggon  loads  of  material  were  cast,  and  yet  the  slough  did  swaUow  up  all,  and 
was  none  the  better.  Some  cups  never  run  over,  because  their  owners  are  envious. 
The  green  dragon  is  a  very  dangerous  guest  in  any  man's  home.  And  unbelief  is 
sure  to  prevent  a  man's  cup  running  over.  II.  "Why  does  the  cxtp  Etm  over? 
Because,  being  believers  in  Christ,  we  have  in  Him  all  things.  Between  here  and 
heaven  there  is  nothing  we  shall  want  but  what  God  has  supplied.  Because  the 
infinite  God  is  ours.  When  do  we  feel  this?  In  the  answer  of  our  prayers  and 
expectations.  The  Lord  has  given  you  more  than  imagination  pictured-  When 
Henry  the  Eighth  was  proposing  to  marry  Anne  of  Gleves,  Holbein  waa  sent  to 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [psalm  xxni. 

paint  her  picture,  witli  which  Henry  was  charmed.  But  when  he  saw  the  original 
his  judgment  was  very  different,  and  he  expressed  disgust  instead  of  affection.  The 
painter  had  deceived  him.  No  such  flatteries  can  ever  be  paid  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  So  beyond  all  conception  of  mind  and  heart  is  He.  Sometimes  the  text  is 
true  of  the  Christian's  joy.  (C-  ^-  Spurgeon. )  Bounty  sTiould  lead  to  charity : — 
If  God  makes  our  cup  to  run  over  in  His  bounty  we  should  make  it  to  run  over  In 
our  charity.  And  indeed,  wherefore  doth  the  Lord  make  our  cup  run  over  but  that 
others  should  be  refreshed  by  the  droppings  of  the  same.  (0.  SedgvncJc,  B.D.) 
Outward  blessings  abused : — The  ways  by  which  God's  outward  blessings  are  abused, 
are  principally  two.  1.  Iniquity.  2.  Vanity.  They  are  abused  when  they  are 
made  serviceable  and  occasional  unto  any  iniquity.  I  will  give  you  some  special 
instances  for  this — (1)  When  we  make  our  plenty  the  gi-ound  of  an  idle  and 
unprofitable  life  ;  to  live  without  any  calling  and  employment,  as  if  Divine  goodness 
in  any  kind  were  a  discharge  from  -all  industry.  (2)  When  we  consecrate,  nay,  that 
word  is  not  fit,  when  we  embezzle,  God's  bounty  and  mercies  to  luxury  and  drunken- 
ness. 3.  A  third  sin  is  loftiness.  4.  A  fourth  sin  unto  which  God's  plenty  may  be 
and  is  abused  is  carnal  confidence.  5.  A  fifth  sin  is  covetousness  and  love  of  the 
world.  But  I  proceed  to  the  second  way  wherein  men  do  abuse  the  plenty  of  God's 
goodness  to  them,  namely,  to  vanity ;  and  that  is  twofold,  either  of— 1.  Feasting. 
2.  Apparelling.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me. — A  good  man's  thoughts  in  his 
old  age: — The  Psalm  itself  consists  of  two  pictures — what  we  call  "the  shepherd," 
and  what  we  should  not  err  in  calling  "  the  king."  Both  have  to  do  with  character, 
spiritual  character,  relation  to  God.  They  may  apply  to  other  things,  national  or 
ecclesiastical,  but  here  is  their  chief  intent.  The  poem  supposes  the  man  who 
speaks  to  have  spiritual  life  in  him,  and  the  good  man  thus  utters  his  confidence 
in  the  protection  and  in  the  care  of  that  God  under  whose  loving  fatherhood  he  has 
been  brought  on  his  way.  In  the  second  part  of  the  Psalm  we  have  another  figure 
— a  different  sort  of  allegory  altogether.  It  refers,  perhaps,  to  a  more  advanced 
stage  of  the  Christian  life.  I  call  this  parable  "  the  king."  And  it  reminds  us  of 
the  "  certain  king  who  made  a  marriage  supper  for  his  son."  It  tells  of  man  made 
a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  coming  into  intimate  communion  with  God. 
And  all  tells  of  the  richness,  variety,  and  depth  of  the  soul's  satisfactions  in  such 
communion.  And  then  comes  the  good  man's  utterance  of  his  subjective  feelings 
after  taking  this  review  of  life.  Reasoning  from  the  past  to  the  future,  he  says, 
' '  Because  Thou  hast  been  my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings  will  I 
rejoice."  By  just  giving  a  little  turn  to  the  last  expression  of  the  text  I  see  three 
things — 1.  Firm  faith.  "Shall  follow  me."  "Goodness  and  mercy."  These  are 
just  the  two  things  into  which  God's  beneficence,  generally  considered,  naturally 
divides  itself.  Goodness  to  creatures ;  mercy  to  sinful  creatures.  An  angel  is  the 
object  of  one  ;  man  of  both.  The  good  man  says,  "  I  have  needed  both  ;  I  have 
had  both  all  my  days,  and  surely  they  shall  follow  me  all  my  days."  2.  There  is  also 
the  idea  of  settled  purpose.  "Shall  foUow  me."  By  daily  habits  of  devotion,  by 
the  culture  of  a  chUd-like  faith,  by  holy  familiarity  with  Divine  things,  I  will  seem 
to  myself  to  be  constantly  engaged  in  God's  service.  3.  Then  comes  the  assurance  of 
expectation  and  hope.  "  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  We  take  the  faith 
and  feeling  of  the  man  to  expand  and  enlarge,  tiU  they  embrace  the  great  and  ulti- 
mate future  of  the  life  that  is  to  be,  and  he  says,  "I  feel  that  I  have  been  led  onwards 
to  that.  These  capacities  and  affections  of  mine,  the  stirring  of  a  spiritual  life  within 
me,  were  never  made  to  find  their  perfection  here.  I  carry  within  myself,  in  my  own 
religious  consciousness,  a  prophecy,  an  earnest  of  something  greater  than  the  life  that 
now  is. "  4.  Observe  the  beautifulness  and  the  blessedness  of  a  Christian  old  age.  Age 
is  a  thing  that  may  be  very  beautiful.  It  is  when  "the  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of 
glory,  being  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness  " — when  there  are  no  marks  upon  the 
countenance  of  extinct  volcanoes,  dark  shadows  from  wrought-out  passions,  impres- 
sions of  darkness  and  crime,  but  when  the  life  has  been  spent  for  God.  It  is,  if  I  am 
not  mistaken,  Scougal — the  author  of  that  little  book  The  Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of 
Man — takes  a  review  of  life,  looks  back  upon  its  prominent  events,  its  afflictions 
and  its  trials,  and  upon  his  inward  experience,  and  ends  aU  by  saying,  "  I  am  this 
day  such  and  such  an  age,  and  I  bless  God  that  ever  I  was  born."  Voltaire  does 
just  the  same  thing  as  to  the  review,  but  with  a  totally  different  result.  In  one  of 
his  books  you  may  find  a  review  of  his  life.  The  querulous  old  man  puts  together 
aU  that  he  had  gone  through,  finds  it  dark  and  disappointing,  and  concluofes  by 


PSALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  471 

Baying,  "  I  am  this  day  so  and  so,  and  I  wish  that  I  had  never  been  bom."  There  is 
the  difference!  "I  thank  God,"  says  the  one,  "  that  ever  I  was  bom,"  because  he 
can  take  the  23rd  Psahn,  and  in  the  23rd  Psalm  he  can  read  the  history  of  his 
inward  life.  And  the  other  man,  though  he  had  great  ability  and  great  genius, 
and  had  a  long  and  wonderful  life,  which,  however,  nobody  would  say,  or  pretend 
to  say,  that  he  spent  it  in  walking  with  God,  he  says,  "I  wish  that  I  had  never 
been  born. "  Poor  man  ! — they  smothered  him  with  flowers  and  killed  him  with 
fame — and  it  came  to  this  1  And  the  last  thought  is,  that  the  best  way  to  be  able 
to  end  life  with  an  utterance  like  this  is  to  begin  it  well.  {Thomas  Binney.)  The 
ieliever's  security  and  confidence : — I.  To  David  the  events  of  life  weee  dis- 
plays OF  God's  goodness  and  mercy.  To  some,  in  view  of  David's  life,  this 
seems  an  exaggeration.  Such  an  opinion  must,  however,  be  founded  upon  either 
erroneous  or  defective  views  of  the  nature  of  God's  special  providence,  or  on  ignor- 
ance and  misapprehension  of  the  objects  to  which  that  providence  is  dii'ected. 
God's  special  providence  implies  that  he  exercises  a  controlling  iiifluence  over  all 
our  actions,  they  being  to  a  certain  extent  determined  as  being  the  necessary  effects 
of  man's  constitution  and  circumstances  combined,  and  which  God  has  formed, 
appointed,  and  arranged.  He  has  always  some  definite  object  in  view.  If  that 
object  be  to  promote  man's  happiness,  then  it  will  follow  that  all  the  events  of  his 
life  will  tend,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  that  end.  It  is  necessary  to  settle  what 
happiness  consists  in,  or  at  least  what  is  the  test  of  its  existence  and  degree.  In 
the  constitution  of  things  the  decree  of  God  has  established  an  immutable  con- 
nection between  happiness  and  holiness,  and  that  consequently  the  degree  of  hohness 
furnishes  a  certain  test  of  the  degree  of  happiness.  Man's  nature  is  in  itself  most 
unholy,  entirely  alienated  from  God,  and  devoted  to  sense  and  sin.  How  are  they 
to  be  roused  from  lethargy  and  really  impressed  with  Divine  truths  ?  Calamities 
and  misfortunes  are  the  means  God  uses.  These  are  well  fitted  to  make  the  truths 
of  the  existence  and  moral  government  of  God,  and  a  future  state  of  rewards  and 
punishments,  really  effective  truths.  No  doubt  affliction  often  fails  to  j)roduce 
permanent  good  results,  but  this  fact  only  aggravates  the  man's  condemnation. 
Even  moral  evils  and  sins  may  be  made  instrumental  in  the  promotion  of  the  same 
great  objects.  We  do  not  palliate  or  excuse  moral  offences  on  the  gi-ound  of  the 
good  account  to  which  they  may  be  turned,  for  this  would  be  to  act  on  the  principle 
of  "the  end  sanctifying  the  means."  For  if  a  man  whose  ordinary  conduct  is 
respectable  has,  through  the  force  of  hidden  corruption,  been  led  into  any  open  and 
nnquestionable  violation  of  morality,  it  may,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  be  made  the  ' 
means  of  producing  a  useful  and  salutary  result,  by  rousing  into  action  natural 
conscience,  by  inspiring  suspicion  and  alarm,  and  by  leading  to  serious  conviction. 
Even  to  vmconverted  persons  moral  transgressions  may  be  of  gi'eat  use  in  leading 
them  to  God.  II.  In  what  ciecxtmstances,  or  by  what  peesoNs,  this  state- 
ment MAY  BE  peoperly  MADE.  No  ouc  cau  cxpect  gcodncss  and  mercy  to  follow 
him  save  in  virtue  of  God's  promises.  It  is  a  fearful  doctrine,  but  clearly  stated  in 
Scripture  with  regard  to  many  individuals  of  the  human  race,  that,  so  far  from 
"goodness  and  mercy  following  them  all  the  days  of  their  life,"  everything  that  He 
gives  them  seems  only  the  more  to  estrange  them  from  God  and  goodness.  This  is 
just  a  statement  of  a  fact ;  and  if  such  persons  believe  that  the  dispensations  of  God's 
providence  with  reference  to  them  are  intended  to  cause  "goodness  and  mercy  to 
follow  them  all  the  days  of  their  life,"  or  that  they  will  in  fact  do  so,  they  are 
labouring  under  a  fatal  delusion.  Before,  then,  any  person  is  entitled  to  assert, 
with  reference  to  his  own  afflictions,  that  God  does  everything  for  the  best,  and  to 
apply  this  as  a  ground  of  comfort  and  consolation  to  himself,  he  must  not  only  love 
God,  but  know  and  be  convinced  that  God  loves  him.  It  is  really  astonishing  to 
see  how  very  seldom,  in  a  professing  Christian  country,  this  question  is  seriously 
entertained,  and  on  what  slight  and  trivial  grounds  men  are  contented  to  take  it  for 
granted  that  all  is  safe  with  them.  No  one  loves  God  but  a  true  Chi-istian,  because 
nothing  wiU  produce  love  to  God  but  the  belief  of  the  Gospel ;  and  of  course,  it  is  the 
behef  of  the  Gospel  that  makes  a  man  a  Christian.  ( W.  Cunningham,  D.D.)  The 
evidence  of  things  not  seen : — We  cannot — no  one  can,  not  the  profoundest  philo- 
sopher— tell  what  life  is,  but  we  know  that  it  is  fed  from  without.  And  the  higher 
the  form  of  existence  the  more  of  external  help  it  requires  in  order  to  its  proper 
development.  See  this  in  plant  life,  in  animal  life,  in  human  life.  And  this  last 
needs  most  of  all.  And  abundant  supply  is  forthcoming  for  it,  real,  wholesome, 
beautiful  satisfaction.  In  this  last  verse  of  the  Psalm  David  gives  utterance  to  a 
giand  assurance  and  anticipation  concerning  the  life  that  now  is.     He  should  not 


472  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

want.  Goodness  and  mercy  would  follow  liim  all  the  days  of  his  life.  Hence  what 
could  he  do  but  pour  out  his  thankfulness  unto  the  Lord,  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's 
house,  in  the  presence  of  all  His  people?  He  tells  us  that  goodness  aud  mercy 
are  special  marks  of  God's  dealings  with  men.  Let  us  think  of  them.  L  Goodness. 
"Good"  and  "God"  in  Anglo-Saxon  are  the  same  word.  Goodness  or  Godness, 
an  element  of  God's  nature.  "There  is  none  good  but  One,"  said  Jesus,  "that  is 
God."  It  is  simply  impossible  for  Him  ever  to  decree  or  wish  to  do  anything  evil. 
Ill  will  or  bad  purpose  on  His  part  is  inconceivable.  II.  Mercy.  This  also  is 
characteristic  of  the  Divine  relation  to  man.  In  giving  this  emphatic  testimony  to 
the  nobleness  of  mercy  David  does  but  voice  the  dearest  assurances  of  the  human 
heart  concerning  the  omnipotence  of  love.  God  is  good,  and  therefore  He  must  be 
merciful.  He  could  not  else  be  good.  He  has  bound  Himself  by  His  own  promise 
to  be  merciful  and  forgiving.  Hence  it  is  said,  "If  we  confess  our  sins  He  is 
faithful  and  just  to,"  &c.  No  wonder,  then,  that  David  felt  so  secure  when  think- 
ing of  the  future.  {George  Bainton.)  Goodness  and  mercy: — This  text  refers  to 
the  time  when  Absalom  had  risen  in  rebellion,  and  David  had  been  driven  to  seek 
refuge  in  Mahanaim.  Retribution  had  been  following  on  his  track  with  feet  shod 
with  wool,  and  he  was  now  only  reaping  what  he  had  sown  in  an  alienated  people 
and  a  rebellious  son.  But  the  light  of  heaven  shone  through  the  darkness  in  his 
soul,  for  at  the  same  time  he  felt  himself  compassed  about  with  a  sense  of  deliver- 
ance. Goodness  and  mercy  were  following  him  to  make  reparation  for  his  evil  days. 
God  gave  him  back  the  faith  of  his  childhood.  The  idea  is  a  beautiful  one,  the  idea 
of  God's  mercy  outrunning  our  necessities  ;  but  in  our  deeper  moods  we  feel  we  need 
it  to  follow  us.  We  need  God  for  our  yesterdays  as  much  as  for  our  to-morrows, 
for  our  rereward  as  much  as  for  oiu-  leader.  Not  as  an  American  Indian  pursuing 
Ms  enemy  to  the  death ;  not  like  an  avenger  of  blood,  in  his  awful  vendetta,  on  the 
track  of  the  manslayer  :  but  as  a  healer  of  the  wounds  we  have  inflicted  He  comes, 
to  neutralise  the  consequence  of  our  folly,  ignorance,  and  sin ;  to  separate  us  from 
the  debasing  associations  of  sin,  and  to  give  us  a  sense  of  recovered  freedom. 
The  consequences  of  our  sins  may  be  transformed  into  sources  of  joy  and 
fruitfulness  by  the  precious  alchemy  of  grace.  The  disappointments  of  earth 
may  become  the  appointments  of  heaven.  To  us  goodness  and  mercy  are  no 
abstract  qualities  ;  we  have  them  personified  in  God's  Son.  {R.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
The  goodness  of  Ood  following  man: — I.  The  blessings  here  anticipated. 
"Goodness  and  mercy."  1.  Goodness.  The  goodness  of  God  is  a  most  delightful 
and  animating  theme  ;  it  touches  every  chord  of  the  Christian's  heart.  "How  gi-eat 
is  Thy  goodness,  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  for  the  children  of  men."  2.  Mercy. 
Pardoning  mercy.  "Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity," 
&c.  Protecting  mercy.  The  good  man  has  his  difficulties  and  dangers.  ' '  Why 
art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul,  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ?  Hope 
thou  in  God,  for  I  shall  yet  praise  Him  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,"  &c. 
Sustaining  mercy.  Amid  holy  enterprises,  spiritual  conflicts,  arduous  duties, 
severe  afflictions,  tryin«;  bereavements,  God  has  sustained  His  saints.  Supplying 
mercy.  "My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  out  of  His  riches  in  glory  by  Jesus 
Christ."  But  we  are  prone  to  look  on  the  dark  side  of  His  providence,  and  to  ask, 
with  the  murmuring  Israelites,  "Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness?" 
II.  The  MANNER  OF  ITS  conveyance.  "Shall  follow  me."  As  the  mother's  eye 
and  hand  follow  her  little  one  as  he  makes  his  first  wobbling  attempt  to  toddle 
alone  j  as  the  needle  follows  the  lodestone  ;  as  the  water  out  of  the  rock  followed 
the  Israelites  through  the  desert ;  as  the  pUlar  of  glory  went  with  them  by  night 
and  by  day  :  so  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  the  faithful,  in  the  closet,  in  the 
family,  in  the  church,  in  the  world.  It  shall  follow  incessantly,  supply  fully, 
solace  richly,  sustain  powerfully,  pass  with  him  through  the  Jordan,  and  enter 
with  him  the  bright  portals  of  glory.  Here  we  have — 1.  The  continuance  of  it. 
All  the  days  of  my  life — that  is,  all  my  life  long — even  to  the  last.  2.  The 
certainty  of  it.  "Surely,"  &c.  "Hath  He  promised,  and  shall  He  not  bring  it 
to  pass  ? "  As  sure  as  you  need  it,  you  shall  have  it  ;  as  sure  as  you  require  it,  you 
shall  realise  it.  It  shall  come  seasonably  at  the  best  time,  in  the  wisest  manner, 
and  from  the  most  unexpected  quarter.  Its  certainty  is  founded  upon  the  Divine 
existence ;  its  communication  upon  Divine  veracity  ;  its  possession  is  the  fruit  of 
immutable,  unwavering,  undying  love,  "Surely,"  &c.  III.  The  consummation 
OF  IT.  "And  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  Conclusion— 
1.  Learn  to  be  grateful.  Beware  of  sinking  into  the  vortex  of  selfishness,  and 
burying  your  mercies  in   the  grave  of  forgetfulnesa.    2.  Learn  to   be  trustful. 


PSALM  xxiii.]  TEE  PSALMS.  478 

3.  Learn  to  be  active.  If  you  have  the  pledge  that  "goodness  and  mercy 
shall  follow  you  all  the  days  of  your  life,"  should  not  those  days  be  spent  for 
the  glory  of  Him — whose  you  are,  and  whom  you  serve  ?  Work  while  it  is 
day.  {John  Woodcock.)  Behind  and  lefore: — The  Psalmist  is  looking  at  his 
yesterdays.  He  is  gazing  at  the  panorama  of  his  past  life.  You  know  how 
sometimes  we  come  to  a  corner  of  the  road  in  the  journey  of  life  which  brings 
the  whole  of  our  past  way  vividly  before  us.  Perhaps  we  are  laid  aside  by  sick- 
ness, and  in  the  time  of  seclusion  the  memory  wanders  back  and  re-treads  the 
path  of  the  years.  Or  maybe  we  are  standing  by  the  open  grave  of  a  comrade 
whose  path  has  run  close  by  our  own  ;  our  memory  tugs  us  backward,  and  our 
past  life  opens  out  before  us  in  marvellous  clearness  and  intensity.  Or  some- 
times a  little  commonplace  incident  unlocks  the  doors  of  the  past,  and  in  vivid 
recollection  we  pass  through  all  its  rooms.  Now,  when  we  are  compelled  to 
look  back  at  the  past  of  our  life,  how  does  it  look  ?  Gazed  at  with  unprejudiced 
vision,  with  nothing  to  make  us  morally  colour-blind,  how  does  it  all  appear  T 
To  the  Psalmist,  as  he  recalled  the  way  he  had  come,  it  appeared  to  be  one  long 
imbroken  path  of  failure  and  sin.  His  path  was  marked  as  the  path  of  a  snail  or 
a  slug  over  some  tender  plant,  which  leaves  behind  it  the  slime  of  its  own  passage. 
The  retrospect  oppressed  him — yesterday  became  the  burden  of  to-day.  And  is 
not  that  so  with  all  who  seriously  think,  with  all  who  solemnly  estimate  the 
tenour  and  quality  of  their  days  ?  The  retrospect  becomes  oppressive ;  they 
cannot  comfortably  recount  the  detailed  stories  of  their  lives.  There  are  some 
whose  burden  is  to-morrow.  Their  fear  and  their  anxiety  centre  on  the  morrow. 
They  want  an  angel  to  go  before  them  to  prepare  their  way.  But  I  think  that 
where  there  is  one  soul  burdened  with  the  fear  of  to-morrow,  there  are  many 
bm-dened  with  the  fear  of  yesterday.  The  burden  of  conscience  never  comes  from 
to-morrow  ;  it  is  rolled  up  from  our  yesterdays.  It  is  not  prospect,  but  retrospect, 
that  lays  the  heaviest  weight  on  the  heart.  And  now  to  a  soul  so  oppressed 
there  comes  this  beautiful  thought  of  God  contained  in  my  text,  "  Goodness  and 
mercy  shall  follow  me."  Goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me,  shall  come  on 
after  me  and  wipe  away  that  slimy  track.  I  think  that  is  a  very  gracious  and 
inspiring  thought.  A  God  in  our  rear.  A  Father  coming  up  behind.  Goodness 
and  mercy  following  us.  You  have  seen  the  sands  at  a  popular  watering-place  cut 
and  dug  by  a  thousand  hands  and  feet,  littered  with  paper  and  all  kinds  of  refuse, 
and  befouled  in  a  hundred  ways.  Then  rolls  up  the  tide,  and  the  refuse  is  buried 
in  its  bosom,  and  all  the  unevennesses  are  smoothed  away.  It  is  even  so  with 
those  sands  of  time,  the  sands  of  past  years,  in  which  we  have  left  the  track  of  our 
sins ;  the  tidal  waves  of  Divine  goodness  and  mercy  roll  up,  and  the  unseemly 
track  may  be  smoothed  away.  "Goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me."  Suppose 
it  had  been,  "  Justice  shall  follow  me,"  avenging  justice,  cold  unsympathetic  law. 
If  justice  were  to  follow  even  the  best  of  us,  our  hearts  would  shake  with  fear.  It 
is  not  even  "Righteousness  shall  follow  me,"  but  goodness.  There  is  something  rich 
in  the  very  word.  "Goodness  shall  follow  me,"  and  mercy.  Grapes  with  the 
bloom  on.  Goodness  in  surpassing  sweetness  and  beauty.  "Goodness  and  mercy 
shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life."  Can  you  think  of  anything  fitter  in 
expression,  anything  that  could  more  tenderly  unfold  the  nature  of  the  God  who 
comes  in  the  rear  of  our  life  ?  "I  have  blotted  them  out  like  a  thick  cloud."  Do 
you  see  the  force  of  the  figure  ?  You  are  going  along  the  dry  and  glaring  road,  and 
you  stir  up  the  dust,  and  it  flies  like  a  thick  cloud  in  your  rear.  And  God  says 
that  as  we  go  along  the  way  of  life  we  stir  up  clouds  of  sin,  and  He  blots  them 
out.  As  John  Bunyan  says.  He  sprinkles  upon  it  the  water  of  grace,  and  the  dust 
is  laid.  Is  not  this  just  what  we  all  need  1  But  there  is  something  more  than  this. 
"  Goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me"  not  only  to  blot  out  our  sins,  but  to  gather 
up  the  fragments  of  our  goodness.  "We  want  a  God  in  our  rear  who  will  pick  up 
the  fragments — bits  of  good  resolution,  stray  thoughts,  stray  prayers,  beginnings 
of  heroism,  little  kindnesses,  all  the  broken  bits  of  goodness,  all  the  mites,  the  for- 
gotten jewels — to  gather  all  the  fragments  so  that  nothing  be  lost.  ' '  Goodness  and 
mercy  shall  follow  me, "  and  shall  miss  nothing  ;  the  God  who  follows  us  is  "  like 
nnto  a  woman,  who  lost  one  piece  of  silver,  and  who  lit  a  candle  and  swept  the 
house  and  sought  diligently  till  she  found  it,"  It  was  this  great  conception  of 
a  good  and  merciful  God  in  the  rear  which  converted  a  gloomy  retrospect  into  a 
glorious  hope.  Our  Father  is  behind  us,  goodness  and  mercy  follow  us  ;  let  us  leave 
our  yesterdays  trustfully  to  Him.  But  now  in  the  second  part  of  my  text  the 
Psalmist  turns  himself  round  from  retrospect  to  prospect.     He  turns  from  a  con- 


474  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxui. 

tempTation  of  the  past  to  a  contemplation  of  the  future.    What  ia  hia  idea  of 
futurity !    "I  shall  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."    Well,  you  say, 
there  is  nothing  peculiarly  glorious  or  definite  about  the  conception.     Stay  a  little. 
Before  you  can  estimate  the  quality  of  any  one's  heaven  you  must  know  their  con- 
dition on  earth.     Our  hopes  about  to-morrow  are  very  largely  shaped  and  coloured 
by  our  condition  to-day.      Look  at  the  Psalmist's  position.      When  this  Psabn 
was  composed  he  was  a  wanderer,  exiled  fi'om  the  peace  and  blessedness  of  his  own 
home.     All  our  conceptions  of  the  future  are  formed  in  a  similar  way.     No  two  of 
us  have  precisely  the  same  conception.     The  special  bliss  we  anticipate  is  shaped 
out  of  our  special  burden  now.    Go  down  to  our  coast  and  speak  to  some  old  fisher- 
man's wife,  whose  husband  and  sons  have  all  been  lost  in  the  deep,  and  ask  her 
what  in  her  loneliness  is  her  conception  of  heaven,  and  would  you  wonder  if  to  her 
one  of  the  pre-eminent  glories  of  the  place  is  this,  "  There  shall  be  no  more  sea  "  1    Go 
to  some  invalid  who  is  held  by  some  chronic  disease,  ask  her  what  is  her  conception 
of  heaven,  and  would  you  wonder  if  to  her  one  of  the  great  glories  of  the  place  is 
this,  "  There  shall  be  no  more  pain  "  ?    And  all  the  anticipations  are  true.     Every 
man's  present  need   discovers  one  of  the  glories  of  the  future.     It  takes  all  our 
diff"erent  needs  to  discover  the  glory  and  sufficiency  of  the  things  prepared  for  us. 
We  all  need  this  tug  of  the  future,  the  tug  of  the  days  that  are  to  be.     We  can  only 
get  out  of  the  deep  ruts  of  to-day  by  the  powerful  tug  of  to-morrow.     Life  grows 
heavy  and  stagnant  when  to-morrow  ceases  to  pull,  when  the  "  for  ever"  has  lost 
its  power.     Present  burdens  grow  light  in  the  strength  of  the  "  for  ever."     Present 
homelessness  can  be  almost  cheerfully  endured  when  in  its  coldness  the  Psalmist 
can  sing,    "I  shall  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."     {J.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Goodness  and  mercy  behind  us: — The  ugly  things  that  are  lying  in  wait   for  ua 
sometimes,  when  we  are  wholly  at  rest  and  quiet,  like  ambuscades  towards  which, 
all  blindly,  gay  troopers  ride,  carolling  love-ditties  or  exchanging  jests,  and  are 
suddenly  cut  down.     How,  sometimes,  ugly  things  have  lurked  in  our  path,  big 
with  sorrow  for  us,  that  could  have  been  so  easily  avoided,  and  would  have  been 
had  we  only  known.     But  we  knew  not,  we  suspected  not,  and  were  allowed  to  go 
forward  lightly,  as  though  we  were  going  to  receive  a  boon  instead  of  a  crushing 
blow.     Occasionally,  indeed,  we  are  visited  and  disturbed  before  some  tragic  mis- 
fortune with  an  unaccountable  anticipation  of  evil  to  which  we  refuse  to  listen, 
shaking  it  oflf  determinedly,  and  thrusting  it  from  us,  and  it  has  seemed  to  us  after- 
wards as  if  a  guardian  angel  had  been  trying  to  save  us,  and,  striving  in  vain,  had 
been  obliged  to  leave  us  to  our  fate.      But  in  the  case  of  each  of  us,  how  close  we 
have  often  been,   doubtless,  without  perceiving  it,  to  calamities  which  yet  were 
spared  us  ;  that  drew  very  nigh  while  we  heard  no  sound  of  their  footfall  beside  us, 
and  all  but  touching  us,  passed  harmlessly  by.     And  may  we  not  say  that  good- 
ness and  mercy  are  frequently  following  us  to  our  salvation  from  threatening  mis- 
chief— in  the  truer  thoughts,  the  better  feelings,  that  start  up  behind  our  frequent 
false  inclinings,  and  prevail  against  them,  in  the  wiser  mind  that  presently  awakes 
to  arrest  and  scatter  the  foolish  ;  in  the  wholesomer  heart  that  rises  to  check  the 
tmhealthy.    From  what  degradation  we  have  been  snatched  once  and  again  upon  the 
brink  of  which  we  were  tottering  ;  as  we  lingered  and  leaned  ready  to  slide,  there 
was  that  from  within  which  laid  hold  on  and  drew  us  back.     Or  suppose  thatin 
certain  moods  of  ours,  in  certain  moments  of  passion  or  soul-relaxation,  opportunity 
had  occurred — as  with  some  in  like  moods  and  moments  it  has  occurred  to  their 
undoing,  to  their  headlong  plunge  into  baseness  or  crime — how  different  matters 
might  have  been  with  us  to-day  1     How  much  of  what  would  be  termed  our  virtue 
seems  to  us,  when  we  reflect,  to  have  been  but  a  providential  hindering  of  our 
inclination  towards,  and  our  ripeness  for,  what  would  have  been  the  very  opposite  of 
virtue  !    We  have  been  guarded  and  hedged  in  to  preservation  from  ourselves. 
Can  you  not  say,  on  looking  back,  that  here  and  there,  in  this  and  that  crisis,  it 
was  as  though   God  had  been  our  rearward,  warding  off  from  us  devastation  and 
havoc  that  threatened  ?     True,    every  day  bears  upon  it  the  fruit  of  yesterday's 
sowing,  yet  have  we  not  felt,  when  enduring  the  judgment  of  some  previous  mistake 
or  misdeed,  that  the  judgment  was  tempered  with  mercy — that  it  is  not  so  severe  as 
it  might  have  been  expected  to  be  ?    Yes,  while  the  iniquities  and  inequities  of  the 
past  are  laid  upon  us,  we  are  constrained  to  acknowledge  often  that  they  might 
well  have  burdened  us  more  heavily  than  they  do.     They  are  not  upon  us  to  the 
uttermost  ;  there  are  withholdings — there  are  abatements,  as  though   a  gracious 
power  were  keeping  them  back  from  us  in  part.     {S.  A.  Tipple.)         God  following 
His  jaeo]}le : — That  God  may  follow  His  people  with  these  many  ways,  either  in 


PSALM  XXIII.]  THE  PSALMS.  476 

respect  of — 1.  His  intention  and  affection.  2.  His  assistance  and  preservation. 
3.  His  concurrence  and  augmentation.  4.  Evidence  and  manifestation.  (0.  Sedg' 
wick,  B.D.)  The  pilgrim's  rearguard,  goodness  and  mercy  : — John  Condor,  after- 
wards D.D.,  was  bom  at  Wimple,  in  Cambridgeshire,  3rd  June  1714.  His 
grandfather,  Richard  Condor,  kissed  him,  and  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  said,  "  Who 
knows  what  sad  days  these  little  eyes  are  likely  to  see  ?  "  Dr.  Condor  remarked, 
upon  mentioning  the  above  circumstances,  "These  eyes  have,  for  more  than  sixty 
years,  seen  nothing  but  goodness  and  mercy  follow  me  and  the  Churches  of  Christ 
even  to  this  day."  Goodness  and  mercy  following  to  repair : — Goodness  and  mercy 
pursues  to  repair  the  ravages  sin  has  wrought.  Nature  follows  the  footsteps  of  man, 
and  strives  to  obliterate  the  ravages  she  causes.  The  blasted  rocks  that  have  been 
exposed  on  the  hillside  she  soon  plants  with  the  self-sown  trees  and  shrubs  and 
hides  their  deformity.  The  stone  wall  which  in  its  newness  and  rawness  looks  such 
a  discordant  feature  in  the  landscape  she  subdues  by  the  grey  colouring  and  soft 
tenderness  of  her  lichens  and  mosses  into  beautiful  harmony  with  surrounding 
scenery.  Similarly  do  goodness  and  mercy  work  ;  but  they  are  now  no  longer 
abstract  qualities,  for  they  have  been  personified  in  the  Son  of  Man.  Goodness  and 
mercy: — I.  At  once  these  words  "goodness  AND  mercy  "  attract  otjr  attention. 
It  was  "goodness  and  mercy"  that  led  us  first  out  of  the  fold,  with  an  aim  and 
object  in  life.  There  was  "  goodness  and  mercy  "  in  that  shelter  from  the  noontide 
heat.  But  now  it  is  "goodness  and  mercy"  all  the  days  of  my  life.  We  owe  a 
good  deal  to  the  grace  that  comes  after  ;  the  grace  that  only  gives  us  the  wish  to 
do  what  is  right,  not  only  the  grace  that  starts  us  and  helps  us  in  what  is  right,  but 
also  the  grace  which  helps  us  to  finish.  Here  is  that  striking  characteristic  of  the  love 
of  God  Almighty  which  comes  out  in  all  His  dealings  with  us,  namely,  its  complete- 
ness. "Having  loved  His  own  which  were  in  the  world,  He  loved  them  unto  the 
end."  Creative  love,  which  placed  man  in  the  world,  did  not  exhaust  the  goodness 
of  God  towards  us  :  Redemptive  love  met  him  when  he  fell.  And  as  if  Redemptive 
love  itself  were  not  sufficient,  Sanctifying  love  came  in  to  fill  up  where  Redemptive 
love  seemed  to  lack.  So  it  is  with  each  single  soul.  God  completes  His  work. 
And,  indeed,  we  all  need  this  following  grace,  this  persistent  love  of  God.  Think 
how  much  misery  and  trouble  come  to  us  from  past  sins,  attacking  the  heels  of  life. 
How  many  would  faint  and  fail  if  God's  grace  did  not  follow  them  !  "The  gloiy  of 
the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rereward  "  (Isa.  Iviii.  8).  "  Lord,  we  pray  Thee  that  Thy  gi'ace 
may  always  prevent  and  follow  us."  IL  "  And  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of 
THE  Lord  for  ever."  It  is  your  hope  and  desire,  and,  please  God,  it  will  be  your 
privilege,  to  dwell  much  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  You  will  have  frequently  to  go 
there,  to  plead  the  gi-eat  Sacrifice.  Day  by  day  you  will  have  to  go  into  the  Holy 
Place  to  offer  the  incense.  It  will  be  yours  to  kindle  the  lamp  of  a  never-ceasing 
devotion,  to  place  the  Eucharistic  Shewbread  before  the  Lord.  Make  your  life  all 
temple,  all  part  of  the  refiivos,  the  sacred  enclosure.  Enlarge  it  towards  the  east, 
where  we  look  for  our  Saviour's  coming.  Let  it  be  a  life  of  patient  witness  for  God. 
Enlarge  it  towards  the  west,  where  the  sun  of  our  life  is  gently  dipping  towards  the 
grave,  in  a  life  of  preparedness.  Enlarge  it  towards  the  north,  on  the  frontier  of 
Satan.  Enlarge  it  towards  the  sunny  south  ;  take  in  many  a  piece  of  ground  which 
is  now  covered  by  worldly  occupations,  business,  or  pleasure.  "  I  wUl  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  This  should  be  our  aim,  to  attain  to  the  realisation  of 
the  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God ;  and  to  this  God  is  separating  us  off,  that  our 
sojourn  with  Him  may  be  eternal.  HI.  "The  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever." 
The  days  are  coming  when  God  Himself  will  measure  the  temple.  His  house,  to  see 
who  are  His,  and  who  shall  dwell  in  His  tabernacle.  It  is  the  permanence  of 
heaven  that  is  one  of  its  greatest  joys  in  prospect.  It  is  an  abiding  place,  a 
mansion.  There  is  no  restoring  there,  no  troubling  there ;  no  dark  misty  shade 
of  death  to  chiU  the  sunliglit  of  the  road.  {W.  C.  E.  Newbolt,  M.A.) 
I  will  dwell  In  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever. — The  Chxirch  as  a  home : — This  text 
simjily  means,  "  I  Avill  have  a  home  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  Whatever 
temple  or  church  or  chapel  stands  to  us  for  a  centre  or  rallying-place  of  our  religious 
belief  and  life,  we  should  cherish  it  as  a  sort  of  other  home.  Churches  stand  for 
the  common  brotherhood  of  all,  and  for  kindness  and  helpfulness  to  all.  What 
should  be  our  relation  to  these  Churches  ?  A  home  that  all  value.  We  know  what 
that  means.  We  don't  sit  there  all  our  time,  but  from  thence  we  go  forth  to  toil 
and  struggle  in  the  world.  Then  we  return  for  life's  innermost  peace  and  friendli- 
ness, reposefulness,  and  renewal.  Just  so  it  is  when  we  make  the  Church  into  a 
home — a  "  dwelling-place, "  to  use  the  Psalmist's  words.     Thither  we  go  for  the 


476  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiii. 

inspiration,  fellowship,  and  renewal  of  that  deeper  life  in  us  ;  thither  we  go  as 
children  gathering  about  the  feet  of  the  Great  Father,  to  feel  His  presence  and  to 
feel  it  altogether,  and  thence  we  go  forth  to  do  our  busiest  and  highest  part  in  the 
world.  That  is  the  use  of  the  Church.  Not  to  be  always  in  it.  That  was  the  old 
monkish  idea.  They  desired  to  make  it  a  permanent  sacred  enclosure,  where  God's 
saints  might  live  out  of  the  common  world  and  so  keep  pure  amid  never-ceasing 
■worship,  or  as  nearly  so  as  might  be.  But  Christ  teaches  us  a  nobler  idea,  the  idea 
of  home  and  of  active  life  in  the  world,  and  doing  its  work  and  busy  in  its  interests  ; 
and  religion,  with  a  constant  spirit  setting  up  this  other  home  of  prayer  and 
worship  where  we  feel  together  peace,  rest,  refreshment,  a  common  fellowship  to  the 
infinite  life,  and  brotherhood  to  each  other.  So  we  renew  life  at  the  best  part  of  it. 
Is  it  not  true  that  the  busier  one's  life  and  the  more  even  its  resting  times  are 
crowded  with  great  interests,  attractions,  and  engagements,  the  more  is  it  necessary, 
in  order  to  give  the  deeper,  inner  life  a  chance,  to  make  a  definite  time  and  place  for 
its  develojjment  among  life's  regular  engagements  and  duties  ?  That  is  what  you  do 
by  setting  yourselves  to  have  a  church-home.  Some  people  do  not  know  what  pleasure 
there  is  even  in  the  mere  joining  with  others  in  the  church.  It  may  not  be  much  they 
may  be  able  to  do  or  to  give,  but  their  sympathy,  their  encouragement  openly  declared, 
towards  those  who  are  struggling  to  keep  some  little  church-home  going,  is  in  itself 
a  help.  Any  one  who  thus  joins  in  that  fellowship  of  religious  life  gives  a  certain 
added  strength  and  cheer  to  the  whole  body.  Every  one  who  thus  says  to  some 
little  group  of  worshippers,  "  I  am  not  much,  but  such  as  I  am  I  am  with  you," 
helps  them  more  than  can  be  figured  in  any  statistics.  Himself ! — That  is  the  help 
I  plead  for,  the  help  to  oneself  and  the  help  to  one's  fellow-creatures.  Life  needs 
this  closer  cohesion  in  its  great  thoughts  and  aims,  this  quiet  home-coming,  as  it 
were,  of  the  single  worshipper,  this  sense  of  having  an  anchorage  in  the  midst  of 
the  wide,  rushing  stream  of  life.  {Brooke  Her/ord. )  The  Christian's  dwelling- 
place  : — This  ' '  house  of  the  Lord, "  observe,  is  on  the  other  side  of  ' '  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death  "  ;  and  therefore  it  is  just  a  description  of  heaven  ;  and  if  the 
character  of  a  shepherd  sets  forth  the  conduct  of  God  towards  His  people  while 
in  this  world,  the  character  of  a  monarch  sets  forth  His  character  towards  them  in 
the  world  to  come.  I.  The  scene  referred  to.  "The  house  of  the  Lord." 
1.  Because  it  is  the  scene  of  His  familiar  glory.  2.  Because  it  is  the  temple  of 
His  worship.  3.  As  it  is  the  palace  of  His  kingdom.  4.  As  it  is  the  abode  of  His 
family.  II.  The  assurance  expressed  by  the  Psalmist.  "I  will  dwell  in  it." 
1.  TMs  language  implies  the  assurance,  on  his  part,  of  the  existence  of  a  state  of 
future  blessedness.  Reason  says  there  must  be  such  a  state  ;  conscience  says  there 
is  such  a  state.  Hence  men  often  lull  their  conscience  ;  but  there  it  is — they  cannot 
destroy  it,  and  ever  and  anon  conscience  speaks  like  thunder.  Like  some  chemical 
characters,  in  certain  temperatures  they  are  illegible  ;  but  raise  the  temperature 
and  they  appear  in  all  their  reality.  But  apart  from  these  considerations,  let  us 
come  to  the  revelation  of  the  Bible.  Jesus  taught  immortality  :  no  one  taught  it  as 
He  did  ;  no  one  preached  it  as  He  preached  it.  He  said,  ' '  I  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life  :  he  that  beUeveth  in  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live  ;  and 
whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die."  2.  The  extent  of  the 
Psalmist's  assurance.  He  says,  "  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever." 
He  only  sojourned  in  it  here.  Man  is  never  satisfied  here.  There  is  quite  enough 
here  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  animal  ;  and  the  mere  animal  lives  here  in  content- 
ment, and  takes  its  till  of  happiness  for  its  little  inch  of  time.  But  not  so  man  : 
man  is  a  rational  being.  If  he  were  a  mere  intellectual  being,  and  nothing  more, 
then  he  might  dwell  here.  But  man  is  not  a  mere  intellectual  being  ;  he  is  a  moral 
being,  a  spiritual  being,  and  therefore  he  cannot  dwell  here.  ' '  But  in  the  house  of 
the  Lord,"  says  David,  "I  will  dwell  for  ever."  "I  shall  have  enough  there." 
3.  The  Psalmist's  strong  confidence  of  dwelling  there  "for  ever."  This  confidence 
rests  in  the  promise  of  God,  the  finished  work  of  the  Redeemer  and  the  sealing  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  this  prospect  reconcile  us  in  the  midst  of  all  aiiiiuti  jn,  iJf  we 
be  Christians,  and  let  us  prepare  for  that  dwelling  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
ever.  {Joseph  E.  Beaumont,  M.D.)  Tlie  earthly  and  the  heavenly  sanctuary : — 
I.  The  Church  below.  This  leads  us  to  speak  of  the  Sabbath,  when  the  church 
is  most  resorted  to.  The  solemn  setting  apart  of  places  for  divine  worship  is  not  of 
human  device,  but  possesses  all  the  sanctions  which  can  be  derived  from  the  known 
will  of  our  Creator.  And  thus  when  we  assemble  ourselves  in  the  church  we  bring 
ourselves  into  the  position  in  which  God  hath  declared  that  by  those  who  seek 
acquaintance  with  Himself  He  shall  be  found,  and  we  are  looking  in  the  channels 


PSALM  XXIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  ^TJ 

through  which  it  is  especially  promised.  II.  The  Chttrch  in  heaven.  But 
St.  John  says  there  is  no  temple  in  heaven.  But  what  does  that  show  but  that  men 
will  be  so  changed  there  that  churches  such  as  we  have  known  here  ■will  not  be 
needed  ?  You  could  not  draw  a  richer  picture  of  a  regenerated  earth  than  by  just 
supposing  such  an  extension  of  its  Sabbaths  as  alone  would  render  safe  the  removal 
of  its  churches.  {Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)  God's  house  the  home  of  our  hearts: — 
Is  our  Father's  house  so  unwelcome  and  dreary  a  place  that  theie  can  be  any  cause 
for  keeping  outside  as  long  as  the  winds  are  gentle  and  the  skies  bright,  and  only 
going  in  when  the  rain  comes  and  the  clouds  of  night  hang  heavily  in  the  heavens  ? 
Thank  God,  He  does  not  refuse  to  let  us  in  when  we  come  to  Him  as  our  refuge  in 
time  of  trouble ;  but  it  would  surely  be  a  better  thing  that  He  should  be  our 
"dwelling-place,"  the  home  of  our  hearts,  when  our  joy  is  perfect,  and  not  merely 
the  asylum  of  our  wretchedness.    {B.  W,  Dale.) 


PSALM  XXIV. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  earth  Is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof.— 7!^«  earth  the 
Lord's : — So  the  Psalmist  in  this  place  speaks  of  the  Divine  sovereignty  and  of  the 
Divine  purpose  and  programme.  The  Divine  sovereignty — the  earth  is  the  Lord's, 
and  the  fulness  thereof.  God  stretches  out  His  sceptre  over  all  places,  all  peoples,  all 
events.  However  you  parcel  the  earth  out.  He  is  the  great  Landlord  and  the 
Sovereign  Ruler  doing  according  to  His  will  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 
And  the  Psalmist  tells  us  in  this  place  on  what  this  rests.  God  created  it,  and  He 
sustains  it.  What  a  great  deal  you  see  in  the  world  that  your  ancestors  did  not  see, 
and  what  a  great  deal  your  children  will  see  in  it  that  you  do  not  see  !  It  is  a 
mysterious  world,  with  the  fulness  thereof.  How  there  is  wrapped  up  in  the  world 
unknown  possibilities  to  be  manifested  in  due  season.  When  God  created  the  world 
He  did  not  leave  it ;  He  lives  in  the  midst  of  the  splendour  He  first  created.  He  is 
evermore  active  in  all  the  things  of  nature  and  of  history.  You  build  a  palace,  and 
it  comes  to  ruin,  but  the  earth  never  comes  to  ruin.  You  never  have  to  put  an  iron 
band  round  the  firmament  to  hold  up  the  dome  as  they  have  put  an  iron  band  upon 
the  dome  of  St.  Peter's  at  Rome.  Now,  the  Psalmist  here  tells  how  God  seeks  to 
accomplish  His  great  purpose  in  the  world  that  He  created,  the  world  that  He 
maintains,  the  world  that  He  redeemed.  He  hath  founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and 
established  it  upon  the  floods.  What  is  that  ?  That  God,  who  is  the  Sovereign  of 
this  world,  has  a  great  purpose  in  its  government,  and  He  seeks  to  accomplish  that 
purpose  through  endless  mutability  and  conflict.  Now,  you  see  the  very  same 
thing  when  you  look  into  nature.  God  has  made  this  world  in  exactly  the  same 
way,  and  the  tangible  world,  the  planet  itself,  how  has  it  come  to  pass  ?  He 
called  forth  His  Spirit,  and  His  Spirit  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters.  Move- 
ment, you  see.  So  it  was  in  that  strange  old  world,  out  of  movement,  mutability, 
catastrophe,  out  of  these  seas  and  floods,  that  this  lovely  earth  arose,  as  the 
Greeks  fabled  that  Venus  arose  out  of  the  foam  of  the  sea.  Why,  you  know 
the  history  of  your  planet  now  pretty  well.  You  know,  your  fathers,  when  they 
wanted  to  explain  the  configuration  of  this  planet,  always  used  to  talk  about 
the  flood  and  the  deluge.  Oh  !  the  deluge  explained  a  lot.  But  you  know  a 
great  deal  better.  You  have  studied  geology  since  then.  Nowadays  you  do 
not  talk  about  Noah's  deluge  having  made  the  planet  what  it  is.  You  push 
it  a  great  deal  further  back  than  that.  For  all  that  went  on  in  these  revolutions 
have  left  their  signs  on  the  rocks.  What  terrific  floods,  what  mighty  deluges,  what 
burnings,  what  ages  of  frost  and  glaciers,  and  through  all  that  God  never  lost  sight 
of  His  final  purpose  to  make  this  planet  into  what  you  see  it  to-day — music,  colour, 
fragrance — a  great  and  delightful  theatre  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  life.  He 
hath  founded  it  upon  the  seas  and  established  it  upon  the  floods,  and  out  of 
movement,  imsettlement,  change,  it  arose,  the  lovely  planet  that  you  see  it  to-day. 
And  mind,  it  ia  always  going  on  just  the  same  to-day.  One  would  think  some- 
times, to  look  at  the  earth,  that  it  was  asleep.  But  make  no  mistake  about  that. 
The  one  thing  nature  never  will  stand  is  immovability.  She  won't  tolerate 
stagnation.  They  say  that  sometimes  in  the  Pacific  they  have  periods  of  absolute 
calm,  and  in  a  few  days  the  very  sea  begins  to  rot,  and  the  stench  is  insufler- 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiv. 

able.  Nature  won't  stand  it,  she  is  full  of  unsettlement,  full  of  movement,  full  of 
catastrophe.  That  is  the  way  you  keep  the  ocean  pure,  the  atmosphere  sweet,  and 
the  earth  full  of  vitality.  Now,  I  want  to  say  to  you  that  that  is  all  just  as  true  in 
the  history  of  ourselves.  If  you  will  look  down  the  history  you  will  find  that  God 
has  ever  been  active  in  the  midst  of  the  nations,  always  overturning  that  He  may 
introduce  a  civilisation  that  is  a  shade  better  than  tbe  civilisation  that  preceded  it. 
You  never  can  make  a  nation  fixed  and  permanent.  The  world  from  the  beginning 
amongst  the  nations  has  been  in  a  state  of  unrestfulness  and  changefulness.  But 
I  believe  there  never  has  been  a  change  in  this  world  but  it  has  been  for  the  better. 
Mind  you,  it  often  seems  to  a  careless  eye  as  if  the  world  were  going  back,  but 
whenever  the  critical  period  comes  the  best  is  always  on  the  top.  You  go 
back  in  history  to  the  great  conflict,  say,  between  the  Greeks  and  Orientals,  when 
there  seemed  a  time  that  the  Oriental  world  was  likely  to  swamp  Europe,  when  it 
was  likely  to  destroy  the  civilisation  of  Greece,  which  was  the  _promise  of  all  future 
civilisations.  But  when  the  critical  battle  came  the  Greek  was  master  of  the 
situation.  It  was  just  the  same  again  when  you  come  to  the  great  conflicts  between 
the  Romans  and  the  Pheenicians.  As  you  know  perfectly  well,  there  seemed  a  day 
when  the  Phoenician,  with  his  dark  superstitions,  his  terrible  practices,  was  going 
to  triumph  ;  but  when  the  ultimate  time  came,  when  the  final  battle  was  fought,  the 
Eoman  was  at  the  top,  with  his  wiser,  healthier,  and  nobler  conceptions,  ideals,  and 
strivings.  It  was  just  the  same  again  a  little  later  when  Mohammedanism  came 
into  contact  with  Europe,  and  the  Moor  was  at  the  very  gate  of  Vienna.  It  seemed 
as  if  the  inferior  civilisation  was  going  to  swamp  the  nobler,  but  God,  who  sat  upon 
the  face  of  the  waters,  said,  "Hitlierto  and  no  further,"  and  Mohammedanism 
was  turned  back,  and  it  has  been  going  back  ever  since.  It  has  stopped  a  bit  at 
Constantinople,  but  it  will  have  to  go.  God  has  not  made  this  world  to  go  back- 
wards. He  has  made  it  on  the  principle  of  a  sure  but  ofttimes  obscure  development. 
Mind,  I  confess  it  looks  as  if  it  were  not  so.  It  seems  sometimes  as  if  we  made  a 
great  deal  of  movement  for  positive  retrogression.  It  looks  so  uutil  we  think  about 
it.  The  world  keeps  going  to  pieces  continually,  and  you  never  get  anything  fixed. 
But  I  am  not  going  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  in  the  midst  of  instabilities  and 
revolutions  God  is  always  quietly  present.  Always  His  end  is  to  make  men  and 
nations  pure  and  perfect.  He  has  done  it  in  the  past ;  He  will  do  it  still.  Why, 
you  know  well  enough,  in  the  fifth  century — was  it  in  the  fifth  or  sixth? — a  few 
fishermen  laid  the  foundations  of  Venice  in  the  slime  of  the  lagoons.  These  men, 
mth  a  few  sticks  and  stones,  began  the  creation,  and  as  time  went  on  there  grew 
out  of  this  slender  and  rude  beginning  the  city  of  solemn  temples,  gorgeous 
palaces,  the  city  of  great  painters,  sculptors,  and  poets.  And  they  built  it  out  of 
the  seas  and  established  it  upon  the  floods — the  ideal  city,  the  city  dear  to  all  lovers 
of  the  perfect.  A  few  fishermen,  in  the  first  century,  under  the  direction  of  the 
Master  Builder,  laid  the  foundations  of  a  new  world  in  the  modern  rottenness  of  the 
old  civilisations,  and  now  for  1900  years  another  building  has  been  going  on,  the 
Church  of  Christ,  the  City  of  God,  the  Spiritual  Venice.  And  mind,  there  is  not  a 
single  movement  in  this  woi'ld  but  aids  it.  There  is  no  revolution  but  puts  another 
bit  of  marble  into  it.  He  has  founded  it  upon  the  seas  and  established  it  upon  the 
floods,  and  I  can  stand  and  see  the  whole  world  going  to  pieces  with  the  utmost 
tranquillity,  because  I  know  that  the  destructive  is  also  the  constructive,  and  God 
never.destroys  unless  He  is  going  to  build  in  its  place  something  that  is  larger  and  more 
rational  and  more  perfect.  And  all  this  is  true  of  tlie  individual  life.  Prepare 
yourselves  for  it.  Just  look  at  your  lives.  They  have  been  one  course  of  unsettle- 
ment, and  it  will  be  so  until  that  man  in  white  comes  and  reads  over  you  that  we 
never  continue  in  one  state.  That  is  the  way  with  us  here.  People  imagine  some- 
times that  they  have  got  things  pretty  fairly  square,  that  they  have  got  things  on  a 
good  basis,  and  that  they  are  going  to  have  a  nice,  tranquil  time  of  it.  Not  a  bit 
of  it.  He  has  built  it  upon  the  seas  and  founded  it  upon  the  floods.  He  will  turn 
it  over  directly.  You  may  be  sure  of  that.  When  people  marry  and  settle  down, 
you  sometimes  hear  people  say,  "Oh!  they  are  married  and  settled  now."  You 
fancy  you  have  got  things  into  shape.  You  don't  know  where  the  next  change  is  to 
come  from.  But  it  will  come.  There  is  no  settlement ;  but  mind  this,  every  time 
God  unsettles  you  it  is  for  a  great  moral  end.  There  ought  to  be  no  change  in 
your  life  which  does  not  leave  you  stronger  and  purer.  So  look  up,  the  world  is 
not  purposeless :  no  man's  life  is  a  chaos.  With  endless  variation,  contrast, 
conflict,  and  catastrophe  God  is  with  us,  and  He  will  bring  it  out  well  at  last, 
because  when  I  get  to  the  last  page  of  the  Book  I  read,  "  And  there  shall  be  no 


PSALM  XXIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  479 

more  sea. "      (  W.  L.    Watkinson. )  God's  mundane  property  and  man's  moral 

obligation: — I.  His  pkoperty.  1.  Its  extent.  The  earth  and  its  fulness  (ver.  1). 
2.  Its  foundation — creatorship.  "He  hath  founded  it,"  &c.  (ver.  2).  II.  Man's 
MORAL  OBLIGATION.  1.  It  urges  him  to  be  just.  "Will  a  man  rob  God  ?"  2.  To 
be  humble.  3.  To  be  thankful.  It  is  God  that  has  given  us  ourselves,  with  all  our 
capacities  and  means  of  improvement  and  of  pleasure.  4.  To  be  acquiescent.  God 
has  a  right  to  do  what  He  likes  with  His  own.  Let  the  text  be  written  on  our 
hearts.  It  is  engraved  on  the  front  of  the  Royal  Exchange,  but  how  few  pause  to 
read  it,  and  fewer  still  ponder  it  in  their  hearts.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  earth 
and  its  fulness: — There  was  a  time  when  every  separate  department  of  nature- was 
supposed  to  have  a  separate  deity  ruling  over  it.  Every  nation,  every  district, 
every  sphere  of  life,  every  profession,  every  trade  had  a  god  of  its  own.  There  was 
a  time  when  each  race  and  tribe  acknowledged  no  god  but  one.  Then  there  comes 
the  conviction  that  the  Power  which  all  are  in  some  form  seeking  after  is  one  and  the 
same  everywhere.  We  never  can  pass  from  His  dominions.  I.  The  Divine 
Pkesence  in  the  WORLD.  It  is  His  power  and  His  presence  which  we  behold 
around  us.  He  hath  created  and  preserveth  all.  The  universe  is  itself  a  manifes- 
tation of  Him  ;  it  is  His  garment,  it  is  illuminated  and  aglow  with  the  Divine 
presence.  As  with  the  earth,  so  with  its  fulness.  Its  products  are  irradiated  with 
a  heavenly  glory.  They,  too,  come  from  Him  who  is  wise  in  counsel  and  excellent 
in  working.  The  earth  is  given  to  the  sons  of  men,  that  it  may  be  subdued  and 
cultivated,  that  its  boundless  treasures  may  be  sought  out  and  developed.  There  is 
no  doubt  a  wrong  way  as  well  as  a  right  way  of  availing  ourselves  of  them.  II.  All 
things  God's  good  gifts.  If  this  can  be  said  of  meats  and  drinks,  how  much  more 
may  it  be  said  of  the  manifold  gifts  with  which  the  earth  is  ripe  ;  the  means  placed 
at  our  disposal  for  the  amelioration  of  human  suffering,  the  lessening  of  toil,  the 
advancement  of  knowledge,  the  increase  of  well-being  in  every  shape  and  form. 
There  was  recently  brought  to  light  in  Cornwall  an  old  picture  of  our  blessed  Lord, 
in  which  His  precious  blood  is  represented  as  flowing  over  the  various  implements 
of  industry — the  reaping-hook,  the  scythe,  the  shuttle,  the  cart — implying  that  by 
His  incarnation  all  human  labour  has  been  sanctified,  that  everything  wherewith  we 
carry  on  the  work  of  the  home,  or  of  the  world,  is  cleansed  and  consecrated  through 
the  life  and  death  of  Christ ;  that  in  Him  all  things  are  gathered  together  in  one, 
and  are  made  meet  to  be  laid  upon  the  altar  of  God.  {P.  M'Adam  Muir,  D.D.) 
Ood's  claims  upon  men : — There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  the  present  day  to  forget 
the  immanence  of  God  in  creation.  We  do  well  to  emphasise  the  constant  depend- 
ence of  the  universe  upon  the  preserving  power  of  God.  The  Psalmist  was  wiser 
than  the  wisest  atheistical  philosopher  when  he  declared  that  the  earth  is  the  Lord's, 
for  He  hath  founded  it.  The  more  we  learn  of  the  Creator  and  His  works  the  more 
must  we  realise  His  infinite  wisdom  and  almighty  power.  They  tell  us  that  the 
propositions  of  the  evolutionist,  if  true,  obviate  all  necessity  for  a  personal  Creator, 
But  there  must  have  been  a  great  creative  plan  or  this  universe  could  not  have  come 
into  being,  and  behind  that  plan  there  must  have  been  an  Omniscient  Personal 
Intelligence.  To  what  extent  have  men  realised,  and  do  men  realise  to-day,  the 
conception  of  the  text  ?  How  far  have  they  grasped  the  thought  that  the  earth  is 
the  Lord's  and  they  are  His  stewards  ?  The  Jew  was  vividly  reminded  of  the  truth 
by  that  strange  institution,  the  "  Year  of  Jubilee."  It  served  to  remind  the  whole 
nation  that  "Jehovah  was  the  Supreme  Landlord  under  whom  their  tenure  was 
held."  The  Psalmist  goes  a  step  further  when  he  declares  not  only  that  the  earth 
is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof,  but  also  "the  world  and  they  that  dwell 
therein."  Not  merely  because  we  are  created  beings  do  we  belong  to  God.  We 
have  realised  an  immeasurably  higher  claim  upon  our  service.  It  is  created  by  His 
"inestimable  love  in  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," — in  a 
■word,  by  the  mercies  of  Calvary.  How  many  of  you  thus  recognise  God's  claim 
upon  you  in  this  definite  manner?    (Henry  S.  Lunn,  M.D.)  The  earth  is  the 

Lord^s: — The  best  of  God's  gifts  are  often  those  which  are  least  valued.  It  is  the 
same  with  truths  as  it  is  with  things.  Whenever  a  truth  becomes  very  common, 
whenever,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  put  by  Divine  Providence  into  the  minds  of  all,  we 
begin  to  neglect  it,  and  to  forget  that  God  should  be  praised  for  it.  To  one  of 
these  old  and  familiar,  yet  pre-eminently  useful,  truths  attention  is  now  directed. 
From  the  earliest  dawn  of  our  reason  we  were  taught  that  God  made  us,  that  a 
Wise  and  Holy  Being  who  loves  us  was  our  Creator  and  the  Author  of  all  that 
exists,  and  what  we  were  taught  we  believed,  and  still  believe.  But  while  we  may 
both  know  and  believe  this  truth,  nothing  is  more  likely  than  that,  owing  to  its 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [mx-mxxit. 

Tery  oonunonness  and  our  familiarity  with  it,  we  may  realise  most  inadequately  the 
worth  of  it,  and  feel  very  little  of  that  gratitude  to  God  for  the  revelation  of  it 
which  we  ought  to  feel.  It  is  not  j^et  a  truth  known  to  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth. 
It  is  not  a  truth  which  any  man,  if  left  to  himself,  would  be  sure  or  even  likely  to 
find  oat.  Great  men,  giants  in  the  intellectual  world,  have  failed  to  attain  to  a 
clear  knowledge  of  God  as  the  alone  Creator  and  Lord  of  nature.  He  who  believes 
in  God  as  the  Creator  and  Euler  of  the  universe  can  be  neither  atheist,  materialist, 
or  pantheist.  The  faith  in  God  as  the  Creator  is  the  necessary  basis  of  all  higher 
spiritual  faith.  1.  The  world  being  recognised  as  the  work  and  manifestation  of 
God  is  thereby  invested  with  a  deep  religious  awe,  a  solemn  religious  significance. 

2.  It  is  a  source  of  pure  and  holy  joy  from  which  we  may  draw  whenever  we  look 
upon  anything  in  nature  that  is  fair  and  well-fitted  to  fulfil  the  end  of  its  creation. 

3.  By  thus  sending  men  to  nature  as  well  as  Scripture  for  their  religion  our  text 
tends  to  give  breadth  and  freedom  to  the  religious  character.  4.  Only  throngh 
realising  our  relation  to  nature  can  we  realise  our  relation  to  God  Himself.  We 
owe  all  to  God,  and  nothing  is  our  own.  {Robert  Fliiit,  D.D.)  The  truth  oj 
Divine  providence : — 1.  Though  this  is  generally  acknowledged  in  principle,  it  in 
departed  from  in  practice.  Only  casual  and  transient  thought  is  given  to  the  never- 
ceasing  care  and  kindness  of  Divine  providence.  2.  All  the  children  of  God  have, 
in  successive  ages,  proclaimed  and  deeply  felt  the  truth  of  the  providence  of  God. 
Many  instances  might  be  adduced  from  the  lives  and  declarations  of  the  patriarchs  to 
prove  that  whether  in  prosperity  or  adversity  the  sense  of  God's  providence  was 
ever  present,  and  His  right  of  possession  and  disposal  ever  uppermost  in  their 
minds.  3.  Practical  reflections.  The  business  of  commercial  life  tends  to  comxpt 
the  mind  and  the  affections,  to  withdraw  them  from  the  Creator  and  to  concentrate 
them  on  the  creature.  We  learn  the  duty  of  gratitude  for  all  those  blessings  which 
out  of  that  fulness  He  has  showered  on  us.  Since  the  world  and  its  fulness  is  God's 
and  not  ours,  as  He  can  give  so  He  can  take  away.  As  God  has  distributed  to  us 
some  part  of  the  world's  fulness,  for  the  use  and  abuse  of  our  trust  we  are  responsible 
to  Him.  The  text  farther  declares  that  not  only  the  "earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the 
fulness  thereof,"  but  also  "they  that  dwell  therein."  "All  sobIs  are  Mine," 
saith  the  Lord.  {Henry  Clissold,  M.A.)  The  merchants  of  Britain: — I.  Or  the 
ADVANTAGES  OF  COMMERCE.  1.  How  vast  it  is.  Its  standard  is  planted  upon  the 
Andes  and  the  ffimalayas.  The  great  Pacific  and  Atlantic  seas  are  beaten  white  by 
our  ships.  From  the  ghauts  of  Malabar  to  the  sands  of  Coromandel,  from  the 
steppes  of  the  Cossack  to  the  wilds  of  the  Arab,  from  the  Thames  and  the  Mersey  to 
the  Mississippi  and  the  Missouri,  the  commerce  of  Britain  has  extended  its  influence. 
2.  This  great  commercial  power  has  done  some  good.  It  has  opened  up  new 
channels  of  intercourse  with  mankind.  It  has  created  links  of  sympathy  and  bonds 
of  union  where  all  was  severance  and  estrangement  before^  3.  It  has  gathered 
roimd  it  great  homage  and  dclat.  4.  It  is  very  successful.  6.  Oi  great  importfince 
to  the  State.  6.  Must  ever  be  associated  with  agricultural  power.  7.  Is  one  of  tiie 
greatest  securities  against  war.  II.  Its  perils.  1.  Avarice.  2.  Considering 
everything  from  the  trade  point  of  view.  3.  Absorbing  carb.  4.  Eeckless  specula- 
tion. 5.  Pride.  6.  Forgetfulness  of  God.  III.  Its  eesponsibilities.  i.  Merchants 
should  acknowledge  God.  2.  Seek  to  extend  His  kingdom.  3.  Eemember  they 
are  but  stewards  of  their  wealth.  4.  Pity  the  poor.  6.  Spread  the  Gospel 
{J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  The  religiousness  of  secular  learning: — This  title  is  not  a 
ha^py  one.  "Religiousness  "  seems  to  indicate,  according  to  the  conventional  usage, 
a  flimsy,  fussy  attention  to  the  externals  of  religion,  rather  than  a  participation  in  the 
essential  spirit  of  it.  By  the  use  of  the  adjective  "secular"  you  might  suppose  I 
draw  the  usual  broad  distinction  between  things  sacred  and  profane.  My  question 
is  this,  What  of  religion — of  the  religious  spirit^s  there  about  that  which  is 
usually  called  secular  learning  ?  By  all  other  kinds  of  knowledge  than  the  theo- 
logical ?  When  a  man  is  studying  languages,  Literature,  or  science,  what  is  the 
attitude  of  the  soul  towards  God  ?  My  doctrine  is  founded  upon  the  principle 
asserted  in  the  text.  "The  fulness,"  that  is,  all  which  makes  it  up,  every  particle 
and  grain  of  which  it  is  composed.  All  things  are  dii-ectly  related  to  God  as  effects 
are  to  their  cause,  as  phenomena  to  their  basis,  substance,  or  reality.  They  exist  in 
Him  and  by  Him.  1.  All  secular  learning  is  directly  or  indirectly  religious,  because  it 
directly  or  indirectly  brings  us  into  contact  with  the  mind  of  God  as  manifested  in  His 
works.  When  you  have  learned  a  fact  in  nature  you  have  learned  a  thought  of  God. 
2.  Secular  learning  is  directly  religious  in  its  tendencies,  because  it  trains  and  educates 
the  mind  for  the  clearer  and  fuller  comprehension  of  theological  truth.    {J.  Cranbrook. ) 


MALM  XXIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  481 

Vers.  3,  4.  Who  sliaJl  ascend  into  the  WU  of  the  Lord  %— Climbing  the  mountain : — 
We  may  fairly  compare  the  life  of  a  Christian  to  the  ascent  of  a  mountain.  Propose 
the  text  as  a  serious  question.  I.  Some  who  answeb  "we  shall"  abe  toxtno 
BEGINNERS.  ThW  have  not  yet  tried  the  rougher  part  of  the  mountain.  Be  not 
over-confident.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  to  be  weak  is  to  be  strong.  II.  Othebs 
SPEAK  OUT  OF  SHEEE  IGNORANCE.  "Oh,"  Say  they,  "it  is  not  far  to  heaven.  It 
is  a  little  thmg  to  be  a  Christian.  You  have  only  to  say,  '  God  be^  merciful  to  me,' 
and  the  thing  is  done."  Oh,  poor  ignorant  soul,  your  folly  is  too  common.  To  the 
unaccustomed  traveller,  nothing  is  more  deceptive  than  a  lofty  Alp.  You  think 
you  can  get  to  the  top  in  half  an  hour,  but  find  it  a  full  day's  journey.  It  is  so 
with  religion.  III.  Others  think  they  have  found  a  smooth  egad  by  which 
THEY  MAY  AVOID  ALL  KOTJGHNESS.  Take  care,  presumptuous  soul,  for  the  greener 
the  path  the  greater  the  danger.  IV.  Others  think  they  will  be  sure  to 
ascend  becaxtse  OF  WHAT  THEY  CARRY  WITH  THEM.  This  is  the  Way  in  which  the 
worldly-wise  and  self-sufficient  talk,  and  those  who  are  rich  and  cumbered  with 
much  serving  in  the  world.  V.  But  others  seem  very  sad.  Why  mourn  you  ? 
"  Oh,"  say  they,  "  we  shall  never  ascend  the  hiU  of  God."  I  should  have  thought 
you  the  very  ones  who  would  ascend.  Why  do  you  think  you  shall  fail  ?  1.  One 
says :  "  I  am  so  weak,  and  the  hiU  is  so  exceeding  high.  I  can  do  nothing 
good."  But  God  wiU  help  you.  2.  "I  am  so  sorely  tried,  and  the  way  is  so 
rough."  But  the  road  to  heaven  never  was  anything  but  rough,  so  you  may 
be  the  more  sure  you  are  in  the  right  way.  3.  "But  I  have  been  sorelv 
tempted  ;  and  across  my  path  there  is  a  swollen  torrent,  and  I  cannot  wade  through 
it."  But  the  Lord  knows  how  to  deliver  thee.  In  one  of  the  wild  valleys  of 
Cumberland  we  were  rained  up  for  two  or  three  days.  The  little  brooks  had  been 
swollen  until  they  roared  like  thimdering  rivers.  But  I  noticed,  when  we  did  make 
the  attempt,  that  the  sheep  which  fed  upon  the  mountain  side  could  spring  from 
stone  to  stone,  rest  a  moment  in  the  middle,  while  the  angry  flood  rushed  on  either 
side,  and  then  leap  and  spring  again.  I  thought  of  the  text,  "  He  maketh  my  feet 
like  hind's  feet."  4.  "  But  I  have  lost  my  way  altogether.  I  cannot  see  a  step 
before  me ;  a  thick  fog  of  doubt  and  fear  hangs  over  me."  We  too  have  passed 
through  such  fogs.  Let  him  not  fear  but  trust  in  the  Lord.  6.  "  But  my  woe  is 
worse.  I  have  been  going  down  hill.  My  faith  is  not  as  strong  as  it  was  ;_my  love 
has  grown  cold  ;  my  depravity  has  burst  out.  I  am  sure  it  is  all  over  with  me." 
In  climbing  a  mountain  it  often  occiu's  that  the  path  winds  downward  for  a  season. 
But  Christians  never  mount  better  than  when  they  descend.  6.  "  But  I  am  in  such 
danger.  I  fear  I  shall  fall."  When  a  Christian  looks  down  it  is  likely  to  make  his 
head  swim.  Look  up  !  The  Scripture  does  not  bid  us  run  our  race  looking  at  our 
own  tottering  legs,  but  "lookiug  unto  Jesus."  VI.  Look  at  the  man  who  is  able 
TO  ASCEND  THE  HILL  OF  THE  LoRD.  1.  He  is  well-shod.  2.  Girt  about  his  loins. 
3.  He  has  a  strong  staff.  4.  And  a  guide.  5.  He  marks  the  way.  And  oh !  the 
joy  when  the  sunset  is  reached.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  message  of  the  Ascension 
Psalms : — On  its  historical  side  the  Ascension  of  Christ  is  an  event  of  surpassing 

frandeur  and  sublimity.  It  is  an  event  without  parallel  in  the  history  of  mankind, 
or  the  Ascension  of  Christ  rises  far  beyond  the  translations  of  Enoch  or  Elijah. 
His  ascension  was  the  ascension  of  a  risen  and  immortal  man,  of  a  spiritualised  and 
glorified  body.  It  was  therefore  a  perfectly  unique  and  unparalleled  event.  This 
historic  fact,  applied  to  ourselves,  penetrating  our  inmost  being,  conquering  our  wills, 
directing  our  motives,  stirring  our  thoughts,  exalting  our  actions — this,  and  this 
alone,  is  of  redeeming  service  and  eternal  consequence.  One  of  the  greatest  needs 
of  our  age  is  this  applied  Christianity ;  this  application  of  historic,  doctrinal 
religion  to  daUy  righteousness.  We  want  the  life  of  Christ  imputed  to  us ;  and 
imputed,  not  by  some  ecclesiastical  or  juridical  fiction,  but  in  a  plain,  honest, 
practical  way — the  way  of  faith  shown  forth  by  works.  What  a  poor  paltry  thing 
our  modem  respectable  Christianity  too  often  is  !  The  Christianity  of  the  Gospel  is 
real  and  glorious.  It  begins  with  the  cradle,  and  does  not  end  with  the  grave.  It 
has  no  will  except  the  will  of  God.  What  is  the  message  of  the  two  Ascension  Psalms 
(xxiv.,  XXV.)?  Thcar  first  message  is  of  Chiist.  That  message  was  primarily  and 
historically  fulfilled  when  Christ  Himself  passed  through  the  heavens.  But  the 
message  is  not  concerning  Christ  alone.  It  concerns  every  Christian  in  so  far  as  his 
character  and  conduct  are  fashioned  after  the  model  of  Christ,  his  redeeming  Lord. 
For  as  with  the  Resurrection,  so  also  with  the  Ascension  of  Christ.  He  is  the  first- 
fruits  ;  afterwards  all  that  are  His.  His  ascension  is  the  pledge  and  guarantee  of 
our  final  ascension.    Why  did  Christ  our  Lord  ascend?    The  Psalmist  answers: 

3* 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxir. 

"  Because  He  had  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart."  Because  Christ  was  perfect  in 
heart  and  life  ;  it  was  impossible  for  Him  to  be  holden  of  death  or  of  earth.  Not 
only  because  He  was  perfect  Son  of  God,  but  also  because  He  was  perfect  son  of 
man,  He  ascended  into  the  heavens.  His  Ascension  was  accomplished  by  the  force 
of  a  Divine  and  spiritual  necessity — a  spiritual  necessity  engendered  by  His  absolute 
and  unblemished  righteousness.  As  fire  ascends  towards  the  sun  by  a  natural  law, 
so  by  a  spiritual  law  goodness  ascends  towards  God.  "What  is  true  of  Christ  in 
perfection  is  also  true  of  every  Christian  in  part.  All  who,  in  humble  faith, 
imitate  His  character  will,  by  virtue  of  the  same  spiritual  necessity  which  compelled 
His  Ascension,  themselves  also  at  length  ascend  whither  He  has  gone  before  to 
prepare  a  place  for  them.  We  must  earnestly  endeavour  to  practise  the  character 
and  imitate  the  conduct  of  Christ  before  we  can  hope  to  follow  in  the  shining  path 
of  His  glorious  exaltation.  Ascension  in  heart  and  mind,  in  conversation  and 
conduct,  must  be  the  forerimners  of  final,  bodily  ascension.  {Canon  Diggle.) 
Who  shall  ascend? — Sometimes  the  question  is  asked  merely  from  idle  curiosity. 
Sometimes  with  a  sigh  of  hopelessness,  in  sheer  despair.  See  the  answer  of  the 
Psalm.  Not  only  outward  morality,  but  inward  purity.  His  walk,  his  work,  and 
his  conversation  must  all  be  absolutely  pure  ;  he  must  be  able  to  bridle  his  tongue,  as 
well  as  keep  his  heart  pure.  The  text  comes  to  us  on  Ascension  Day  to  tell  of  one 
who  has  climbed  this  hill.  It  is  because  He  has  gone  up  before  us  that  we  too  are 
able  to  enter  into  that  heavenly  hill.  He  has  ascended  up  on  high,  as  our  great  fore- 
runner. This  day's  truth  once  more  inspires  us  with  courage.  {E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.) 
A  great  question  and  its  answer : — This  introductory  question,  sung  as  the  procession 
climbed  the  steep,  had  realised  what  was  needed  for  those  who  should  get  the 
entrance  that  they  sought,  and  comes  to  be  a  very  significant  and  important  one. 
I.  The  question  of  questions.  It  lies  deep  in  all  men's  hearts,  and  underlies 
sacrifices  and  priesthoods  and  asceticisms  of  all  sorts.  It  sometimes  rises  in  the 
thoughts  of  the  most  degraded,  and  it  is  present  always  with  some  of  the  better  and 
nobler  of  men.  It  indicates  that,  for  life  and  blessedness,  men  must  get  somehow 
to  the  side  of  God,  and  be  quiet  there,  as  children  in  their  father's  house.  The 
imiversal  consciousness  is,  that  this  fellowship  with  God,  which  is  indispensable  to 
a  man's  peace,  is  impossible  to  a  man's  impurity.  So  the  question  raises  the 
thought  of  the  consciousness  of  sin  which  comes  creeping  over  a  man  when  he  is 
sometimes  feeling  after  God,  and  seems  to  batter  him  in  the  face  and  fling  him  back 
into  the  outer  darkness.  That  this  question  should  rise  and  insist  upon  being 
answered  as  it  does  proves  these  three  things — man's  need  of  God,  man's  sense  of 
God's  purity,  man's  consciousness  of  his  own  sin.  The  "ascent  of  the  hill  of  the 
Lord "  includes  all  the  present  life,  and  all  the  future.  II.  The  answer  to  this 
great  question.  The  Psalm  contains  the  qualifications  necessary.  They  are  four. 
They  mean,  "  Holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  An  impossible 
requirement  is  laid  down,  broad  and  stem  and  unmistakable.  But  is  that  all! 
Read  on  in  Psalm,  "He  shall  receive  a  blessing  from  the  Lord,  and  righteousness 
from  the  God  of  his  salvation."  So  then,  the  impossible  requii-ement  is  made 
possible  as  a  gift  to  be  received.  In  Jesus  Christ  there  is  the  new  life  bestowed  that 
wiU  develop  the  righteousness  far  beyond  our  reach.  {A.  Ilaclaren,  D.D.)  The 
"soul's  cry  and  the  true  response  : — I.  The  soul's  get,  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  the 
hill  of  the  Lord  ? "  The  spirit  of  this  question  is,  how  is  fellowship  with  the  great 
God  to  be  attained  ?  This  state  of  fellowship  with  God  is  the  great  want  of  human 
souls.  It  is — 1.  A  veiy  elevated  state.  It  is  the  highest  state  of  moral  being.  A 
soul  in  communion  with  God  is  high  up  above  the  mists,  impurities,  and  tumults  of 
worldly  life.  2.  A  very  holy  state.  Communion  with  Him  is  the  holiest  condition 
of  souls.  3.  A  very  desirable  state.  All  should  ascend,  but  what  is  the  qualification 
for  ascending  ?  Of  all  the  desirable  things  in  life  there  is  nothing  so  desirable  for 
man  as  fellowship  with  God.  For  this  his  nature  craves.  II.  The  true  response. 
1.  The  way  of  reaching  this  state.  (1)  Moral  cleanness.  A  man  may  be  clean- 
handed so  far  as  the  eyes  of  men  are  concerned,  and  black-hearted  to  the  eyes  of 
God.  The  clean  hands  must  be  hands  washed  by  the  pure  sentiments,  motives,  and 
aims  of  a  holy  heart.  The  means — (2)  Moral  reality.  2.  The  blessedness  of  reaching 
this  state.  "  He  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the  Lord."  This  blessing  includes 
all  others — loving  fellowship  with  himself,  and  the  possession  of  conscious  and 
divinely  recognised  rectitude  of  character.  {HomUist. )  The  one  requirement : — 
"  Who  may  ascend  ? "  was  a  picturesquely  appropriate  question  for  singers  toilina 
upwards  ;  and  "  who  may  stand  ? "  for  those  who  hoped  presently  to  enter  the  sacred 
presence.    The  uk  which  they  bore  had  brought  disaster  to  Dagon'a  temple,  M 


PSALM  XXIV.]  TEE  PSALMS.  483 

that  the  philistine  lords  had  asked  in  terror,  "  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy 
Lord  God  ? "  And  at  Beth-Shemesh  its  presence  had  been  so  fatal  that  David  had 
abandoned  the  design  of  bringing  it  up,  and  said,  "  How  shall  the  Ark  of  the  Lord 
come  to  me ! "  The  answer  which  lays  down  the  qualifications  of  true  dwellers  in 
Jehovah's  house  may  be  compared  with  the  similar  outlines  of  ideal  character  in 
Psalm  XV.  and  Isa.  xxxiii.  14.  The  one  requirement  is  "purity."  Here  that 
requirement  is  deduced  from  the  majesty  of  Jehovah,  as  set  forth  in  vers.  1,  2,  and 
from  the  designation  of  His  dwelling  as  "holy."  But  this  is  the  postulate  of  the 
whole  Psalter.  In  it  the  approach  to  Jehovah  is  purely  spiritual,  while  the  outward 
access  is  used  as  a  symbol ;  and  the  conditions  are  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
approach.  The  general  truth  implied  is,  that  the  character  of  the  God  determines 
the  character  of  the  worshippers.  Worship  is  supreme  admiration,  culminating  in 
imitation.  Its  law  is  always,  * '  They  that  make  them  are  like  unto  them  ;  so  is  every 
one  that  trusteth  in  them."  A  god  of  war  will  have  warriors,  and  a  god  of  lust 
sensualists  for  his  devotees.  The  worshippers  in  Jehovah's  holy  place  must  be  holy. 
The  details  of  the  answer  are  but  the  echoes  of  a  conscience  enlightened  by  the 
perception  of  His  character.  In  ver.  4  it  may  be  noted  that  of  the  four  aspects  of 
purity  enumerated,  the  two  central  refer  to  the  inward  life  (pure  heart ;  lifts  not 
his  desire  unto  vanity),  and  these  are  embedded,  as  it  were,  in  the  outward  life  of 
deeds  and  words.  Purity  of  act  is  expressed  by  "clean  hands," — neither  red  with 
blood  nor  foul  with  grubbing  in  dungliills  for  gold  and  other  so-called  good. 
Purity  of  speech  is  condensed  into  the  one  virtue  of  truthfulness  (swears  not  to  a 
falsehood).  But  the  outward  will  only  be  right  if  the  inward  disposition  is  pure, 
and  that  inward  purity  will  only  be  realised  when  desires  are  carefully  curbed  and 
directed.  As  is  the  desire,  so  is  the  man.  Therefore  the  prime  requisite  for  a  pure 
heart  is  the  withdrawal  of  affection,  esteem,  and  longing  from  the  solid-seeming 
illusions  of  sense.  "  Vanity  "  has,  indeed,  the  special  meaning  of  idols,  but  the 
notion  of  earthly  good  apart  from  God  is  more  relevant  here.  In  ver.  5  the 
possessor  of  such  purity  is  represented  as  receiving  "a  blessing,  even  righteousness," 
from  God,  which  is  by  many  taken  to  mean  beneficence  on  the  part  of  God, 
"inasmuch  as,  according  to  the  Hebrew  religious  view  of  the  world,  all  good 
is  regarded  as  reward  from  God's  retributive  righteousness,  and  consequently  as 
that  of  man's  own  righteousness  or  right  conduct"  (Hupfeld).  The  expression 
is  thus  equivalent  to  "salvation"  in  the  next  clause.  {A.  Maelaren,  D.D.) 
Character-fitness  for  worship : — The  occasion  of  this  Psalm  is  one  of  the  grandest  and 
most  illustrious  that  anywhere  occurs  in  history.  By  the  phrases  of  ascending  into 
the  hill  of  God  and  standing  in  His  holy  place,  the  Psalmist  would  point  out  the 
persons  who  are  to  be  admitted  to  worship  God  in  His  temple.  In  ascertaining 
the  qualifications  of  the  citizens  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  the  Psalmist  does  not 
so  much  as  mention  the  external  observances,  the  costly  and  laborious  rites  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  but  dwells  alone  on  the  great  and  essential  duties  of  morality, 
which  are  of  universal  and  eternal  obligation.  The  qualifications  here  are  those  of 
the  heart  and  of  the  life.  "Clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart."  It  is  not  enough  that 
we  wash  our  hands  in  innocency  before  men  :  we  must  be  pure  in  heart  before  the 
eyes  of  infinite  perfection.  True  religion  is  religion  of  the  heart ;  it  is  a  principle 
dwelling  in  the  mind,  that  extends  its  influence  through  the  whole  man,  and 
regulates  the  life.  Unless  our  religion  enter  the  heart  we  have  no  religion  at  all. 
We  can  never  attain  to  the  true  beauties  of  holiness  unless,  like  the  king's  daughters, 
we  be  all  glorious  within.  A  life  sacred  to  devotion  and  virtue,  sacred  to  the 
practice  of  truth  and  undefiled  religion,  joined  to  a  heart  pure,  pious,  and  benevo- 
lent, constitute  an  offering  more  acceptable  at  the  altars  of  the  Most  High  God  than 
wliole  hecatombs  of  burnt  offerings  and  a  thousand  hills  of  frankincense  in  a  flame. 
{J.Logan,  F.E.S.U.)  Character  developed  by  association: — As  soon  as  spirit  touches 
spirit  there  springs  up  between  them  a  relationship  which  we  call  moral.  Whatever 
rightly  riows  from  such  siiiritual  contact  is  morally  good.  It  is  in  the  intercourse 
of  human  society  that  man  proves  himself  to  be  a  moral  being.  Faith,  by  admitting 
lis  into  fresh  contact  with  God  and  with  our  fellows,  by  endowing  us  with  new 
relationshi[is  that  have  become  ours  through  our  inclusion  within  the  new  humanity, 
even  the  body  of  Christ,  has  necessarily  laid  upon  us  new  moral  obligations, 
responsibilities,  and  functions,  all  of  which  spring  out  of  the  very  nature  of  our 
corporate  faith.  If  we  would  determine  the  lines  and  features  of  the  Christian 
temper  and  character  we  must  look  to  the  nature  of  that  great  fellowship  into 
which  we  have  been  called.  The  Christian  character  asked  of  us  is  that  habit,  that, 
activity,  which  must  follow  on  our  acceptance  within  the  assembly  of  the  first-bom,, 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiv. 

within  the  city  of  God,     Whatever  that  acceptance  makes  desirable  and  natural, 
that  is  good  and  that  is  holy.    The  Church  is  a  moral  conception,  a  moral  condition, 
by  which  we  are  to  determine  character.     I.  The  Church  is  a  household.    What 
are  the  virtues  essential  to  a  household  such  as  our  Lord  pictures,  an  organised 
kingdom  of  work  ?     Fertile  activity.     The  character  will  be  forthcoming,  energetic, 
stirring.     The  household  demands  activity  of  character,  and  it  asks  for  a  skilled 
and  trained  activity.     What  type  and  rule  of  character  is  suggested  by — II.  The 
Church  as  a  family.     It  is  a  nursery  and  school  of  virtue.     A  family  produces 
a  character  of  courtesy,  a  sensitive  recognition  of  varying  characteristics,  a  delicate 
sense   of    others'   rights.     It  instils    self-repression,   self-control,   honour  for  one 
another,  esteem  of  one  another,  the  stooping  of  the  strong  to  the  weak.     Negative 
self-repression  will  learn  to  give  itself  positive  outflow  in  sympathy,  tenderness, 
and  affection.     III.  The  Church  as  a  body.     What  stamp  does  that  great  con- 
ception set  upon  character  ?     It  adds  one  peculiar  note,  the  note  of  witness.     A 
body  is  in  essence  the  evidence,  the  proof,  the  pledge  of  that  which  acts  through 
it.     Its  sole  function  throughout  all  its  parts  is  to  make  manifest  that  secret 
presence  which  animates  and  directs  it.     The  Christian  who  is  of  the  body  has 
mission,  has  vocation.     He  is  there  on  earth  to  declare  the  name,  to  manifest  the 
glory  of  God.     The  Christian  character  must  therefore  be  stamped  with  the  seal 
of  mission.     IV.  The  Church  as  a  Temple.    There  is  to  be  positive  beauty  in  the 
Christian  character.     It  is  to  be  full  of  delicate  and  lovely  refinement.    There  is  to 
be  a  touch  upon  it  of  grace,  a  charm  of  majesty  and  consecration.     A  character 
built  up  out  of  purity  and  love  will  have  about  it  also  the  sense  of  mystery,  the 
spirit  of  the  temple.     Purity  and  mystery,  the  temple  gifts,  where  are  thqrl 
Where  are  they  in  us,  in  our  Lives,  so  mixed,  so  unpurged,  and  so  worldly  ?    Not 
until  we  are  more  evidently  of  the  body  and  of  the  temple  will  men  be  able  to 
recognise  and  confess,  "this  is  the  generation  of  them  that  seek  Him,  that  seek  Thy 
face,  0  Jacob  ! "    {Canon  H.  Scott  Holland.)        Even  he  that  hath  clean  hands  and 
a  piure  heart. — The  pure  in  heart : — High  up  among  some  lofty  mountains  you  may 
at  some  time  have  been  surprised  and  delighted  by  the  sudden  and  unlooked-for 
discovery  of  a  crystal-like  lake,  nestling  cosily  amid  giant  clififs,  or  hemmed  in  and 
well-nigh  hidden  from  you  by  a  forest  of  solemn  and  majestic  pines  or  cedars.     By 
day  its  placid  surface  reflected  with  dazzling  splendour  the  sun's  efiEulgence  ;  while 
in  the  night  the  lovelier  and  more  subdued  glories  of  the  moon  and  stars  were  so 
clearly  reflected  that  the  lake  seemed  transformed  into  a  crystal  setting  which  held 
these  shining  jewels.     In  like  manner  is  the  Psalmist's  assertion  of  the  text  but  the 
reflection  of  that  which  has  ever  been  in  the  mind  of  the  Creator,  and  which  later  on 
was  enunciated  by  the  God-man  in  the  beatitude,  ' '  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart, 
for  they  shall  see  God."    But  why  such  stress  upon  this  virtue  of  purity  ?    Because 
— I.  Impurity  is  the  sin  God  most  hates.     In  proof,  see  what  brought  on  the 
Flood,  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  and  the  most  terrible  punishments  which  came  on 
God's  people.    In  the  history  of  nations  purity,  pre-eminence,  and  power  go  together. 
Let  a  nation  throw  down  the  statue  of  Purity  and  it  sounds  its  own  death-knell. 
II.  A  PURE  heart  purifies  all  that  it  approaches.     It  is  so  even  with  the 
most  ferocious  natures,  and  so  it  is  with  human  beings.     A  corrupt  heart  draws  out 
in  an  hour  all  that  is  bad  in  us  ;  a  spiritual  one  brings  out,  and  draws  to  itself,  all 
that  is  best  and  purest.     Such  was  Christ.     He  stood  in  the  world  the  light  of  the 
world,  to  which  all  rays  of  light  gradually  gathered.     He  stood  in  the  presence  of 
impurity,  and  men  became  pure.     III.  We  v?ho  are  God's  children  must  seek 
to  become  and  to  be  like  Him.     As  Light  can  have  no  fellowship  with  darkness, 
so  can  there  be  no  fellowship  between  us  and  Him  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to 
behold  iniquity.     Impurity  has  on  the  spiritual  man  precisely  the  same  eS'ect  that 
I)aralysis  has  on  the  physical  man.     The  sia  of  impurity  severs  us  from  Christ. 
IV.  Hovs^  mat  we  win  this  purity  of  heart  ?    We  would  say — 1.  Stand  out  firmly 
against  evil  thoughts  and  imaginations.     A  man's  heart  may  become  so  fouL  that 
purity  refuses  any  longer  to  be  its  guest.    Then  Satan  has  won  the  battle.     2.  Be 
careful  as  to  the  tufluence  of  your  companions.     3.  Also  be  careful  as  to  what  you 
read.     Books  often  blvmt  the  moral  sense.     Dwell  often  upon  the  spotless  purity  of 
the  Creator,  and  of  the  Master  while  upon  earth.     Pray  daily  for  grace  and  power 
to  hate  everything  that  can  take  away  from  the  whiteness  and  cleanness  of  your  soul, 
and  to  guard  against  it.     {Henry  Mottet.)        Spiritual  catJiarism: — This  new  term, 
derived  from  a  Greek  word  signifying  purity,  has  been  invented  by  Mr.  Tomlinsott 
to  distinguish  between  ordinary  and  chemical  cleanliness ;  for  the  two  things  are 
not  by  any  meaoa  the  aama.    We  imagind  that  oui  bodies^  when  we  have  thoroughly 


P8ALM  XXIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  485 

washed  them,  are  perfectly  free  from  all  impurity  ;  but  the  chemist  proves  to  us  by 
convincing  experiments  that,  though  we  wash  ourselves  with  snow-water,  and  make 
our  hands  never  so  clean,  we  are  still  unclean.  We  cannot  be  made  chemically  clean 
by  any  process  which  would  not  injure  or  destroy  us.  The  slightest  exposui'e  to 
the  air — the  great  receptacle  of  all  impurities — covers  our  skin  with  a  greasy  organic 
film,  which  pollutes  every  substance  with  which  we  come  into  contact.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  process  of  crystallisation  in  chemical  solutions  is  set  going  by  the 
presence  of  some  impurity,  in  the  shape  of  motes  or  dust-particles,  which  act  as 
nuclei  around  which  the  salts  gather  into  crystals.  But  if  the  solution  be  protected 
from  all  floating  impurities  by  a  covering  of  cotton-wool,  which  filters  the  air,  it 
may  be  kept  for  any  length  of  time  at  a  low  temperature  without  crystallising. 
A  glass  rod  that  is  made  chemically  clean  by  being  washed  with  strong  acids  or 
alkalies,  such  as  sulphuric  acid  or  caustic  potash,  can  be  put  into  the  solution  with- 
out exciting  any  change  in  it ;  but  the  smallest  touch  of  what  the  most  fastidious 
would  call  clean  fingers  starts  at  once  the  process  of  crystallisation,  thus  showing 
that  the  fingers  are  not  truly  clean.  Nature  is  exceedingly  dainty  in  her  operations. 
Unless  the  agents  we  employ  are  stainlessly  pure  they  will  not  produce  the  results 
which  we  naturally  expect  from  them.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  we  scrape  a  few  frag- 
ments from  a  fresh  surface  of  camphor,  and  allow  them  to  fall  on  water  that  is  newly 
drawn  from  the  cistern- tap,  into  a  chemically  clean  vessel,  they  will  revolve  with 
great  rapidity,  and  sweep  over  the  surface.  But  if  the  vessel,  before  being  filled, 
has  been  rubbed  and  polished  with  &  so-called  clean  cloth,  or  if  the  water  has  stood 
awhile,  or  if  a  finger  has  been  placed  in  it,  the  particles  of  camphor  will  lie  perfectly 
motionless ;  thus  proving  that,  however  clean  the  cloth  or  the  vessel  or  the  finger 
may  seem,  an  impurity  has  been  imparted  which  prevents  the  camphor  from 
exhibiting  its  strange  movements.  Or  to  adopt  a  more  familiar  experiment :  if  we 
pour  a  quantity  of  lemonade,  or  any  other  aerated  fluid,  into  a  glass  which  seems 
to  be  perfectly  clean  and  bright,  the  lemonade  will  at  once  effervesce  and  form 
bubbles  of  gas  on  the  sides  of  the  glass.  But  if  we  first  wash  the  glass  with  some 
strong  acid  or  alkali,  and  then  rinse  it  thoroughly  with  fresh  water  newly  drawn, 
we  may  pour  the  lemonade  into  it  and  no  bubbles  will  be  seen.  The  reason  is,  that 
in  the  former  case  the  glass  was  not  really  clean,  and  the  impurities  present  acted 
as  nuclei  in  liberating  gas.  But  in  the  latter  case  the  glass  was  really  clean,  and 
so  could  no  longer  liberate  the  gas  from  the  liquid.  Could  we  keep  it  clean  we 
might  stir  the  liquid  a  whole  day  and  no  sparkle  would  be  raised.  So,  then,  in 
common  things,  and  yet  more  in  spiritual,  our  utmost  purity  is  a  mere  relative  or 
comparative  thing.  We  are  never  really  clean.  Our  idea  of  purity  and  God's  idea 
are  two  very  different  things.  See  Job's  confession,  "Now,  mine  eye  seeth  Thee  ; 
wherefore,"  &c.  The  physical  fact  is  but  a  faint  image  of  the  moral ;  and  chemistry, 
in  showing  us  the  wonderful  purity  of  nature's  operations,  gives  a  new  meaning  and 
a  deeper  emphasis  to  the  declarations  of  Scripture  that  nature's  God  is  "of  purer 
eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity."  But  to  some  men  the  infinite  purity  of  God  is  a 
mere  proposition  exciting  no  emotion  in  the  soul,  a  mere  scientific  truth  like  the 
chemist's  talk  about  cleanliness.  To  another  it  is  the  most  intense  of  all  experiences, 
stirring  and  transforming  the  whole  nature.  Impurity  in  natural  things  is  caused 
by  waste,  disintegi-ation,  or  combustion.  When  objects  have  served  their  purpose 
in  one  form  they  become  effete,  and  therefore  impure.  Running  water  is  living 
water,  and  therefore  is  sweet  and  pure  ;  but  whenever  it  becomes  stagnant  it  loses 
its  life,  begins  to  putrefy,  and  becomes  foul  and  unwholesome.  A  rock  is  called  a 
live  rock  so  long  as  it  is  hard  and  soimd  in  the  quarry,  "glistens  like  the  sea- 
waves,  and  rings  under  the  hammer  like  a  brazen  bell,"  but  whenever  it  is  cut 
out  of  the  quarry  and  exposed  to  the  air  it  begins  to  lose  the  life  that  kept 
its  particles  together,  and  crumbles  into  dust.  In  its  native  bed  the  rock  is  pure, 
but  when  it  is  weathered  by  exposure  it  forms  the  mud  of  the  highway,  or  the 
dust  that  pollutes  everything  by  its  presence.  The  clay  and  soil  of  our  fields  are 
caused  by  the  oxidation  or  burning  of  pure  metals  ;  are,  in  fact,  the  ashes  of  metals. 
The  dirt  that  cleaves  to  our  footsteps,  as  the  emblem  of  all  impurity,  is  produced 
by  the  disintegration  of  the  brightest  metals  or  the  most  sparkling  jewels.  We  say 
of  a  tree,  that  it  is  living  when  it  is  growing  and  putting  forth  foliage  and  fruit,  and 
in  this  state  it  is  pure  and  beautiful ;  but  whenever  it  ceases  to  grow  it  dies,  and 
decay  begins,  and  it  harbours  all  sorts  of  abominable  things,  the  products  of  corrup- 
tion. Everywhere  throughout  nature  impurity  is  caused  by  objects  ceasing  to 
preserve  the  natural  life  that  is  in  them,  ceasing  to  serve  the  purpose  for  which 
they  were  created.    And  so  is  it  with  man.    Impuriij  in  him  ii  caused  by  the  loss  ^ 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiv. 

of  spiritual  life.  He  has  broken  the  law  and  order  of  his  existence,  and  his  whole 
nature  has  disintegrated  in  an  atmosphere  of  sin.  And  just  as  mica  is  the  first 
product  of  the  purest  crystal  when  it  is  broken  down  from  the  law  of  its  creation, 
so  all  impurity  in  man  is  the  vile  product — the  rust,  as  it  were — of  a  nature  made 
in  the  image  of  God,  through  its  corruption — that  is,  as  the  word  implies,  its  break- 
ing up  together  by  sin.  Separated  from  God,  his  rock,  he  has  suffered  decay  in  all 
his  parts.  Ceasing  to  grow  and  abide  in  the  Tree  of  Life,  he  has  been  cast  forth  as 
a  branch  and  is  withered,  the  prey  of  vile  lusts  and  morbid  vanities.  And  this  is 
true  of  all  men.  Yet  all  men  are  not  alike.  Many  feel  incapable  of  the  vices  which 
they  see  committed  around  them.  But  such  moral  purity  as  we  see  in  some 
individuals,  causing  them  to  thank  God  in  their  hearts  that  they  are  not  as  other 
men,  is  like  ordinary  cleanliness  as  compared  with  chemical  cleanliness.  We  think 
our  hands,  or  a  glass  of  water,  or  a  table-cloth  clean ;  they  certainly  seem  to  be 
pure  and  spotless  ;  our  senses  can  detect  no  defilement  in  them,  and  for  the 
common  purposes  of  life  they  may  be  sufficiently  clean.  But  when  we  submit  them 
to  the  test  of  chemical  experiment  we  find  out  the  hidden  impurities,  and  under- 
stand how  widely  different  our  notions  of  cleanliness  are  from  the  absolute  truth. 
Chemical  cleanliuess,  I  have  said,  is  produced  by  washing  vessels  and  substances 
that  are  employed  in  experiments  in  strong  sulphuric  acid,  or  with  a  strong  solution 
of  caustic  potash,  and  then  rinsing  with  water.  Analogous  to  these  powerful  appli- 
ances are  the  means  which  God  often  employs  to  produce  moral  purity,  those  chasten- 
ings  of  the  flesh  and  crucifixions  of  the  spirit  which  are  not  joyous  but  grievous.  He 
sends  sickness,  that  wears  out  the  body  ;  trouble,  that  racks  the  mind  ;  and  sorrow, 
that  takes  all  the  relish  out  of  life.  He  mortifies  self-seeking  by  disappointment, 
and  humbles  pride  by  failure.  He  makes  lust  its  own  scourge,  and  the  idolatry  of 
the  heart  its  own  punishment.  By  all  these  searching  and  terribly  energetic  puri- 
fiers, that  corrode  the  soul  as  sulphuric  acid  does  the  body.  He  helps  forward  out- 
wardly the  Spirit's  work  of  renewing  in  the  heart.  His  will  is  our  sanctification. 
But  it  needs  the  burning  heat  of  severe,  oft-repeated,  and  long-protracted  trial,  work- 
ing together  with  God's  Spirit,  to  evaporate  the  incongruous  elements  of  sin  and 
sense  that  make  us  impure,  and  to  build  up  the  pure  transparent  crystal  of  Christian 
simplicity.  And  this  process  is  ever  going  on, — and  amid  the  common  exposures  of 
our  daily  work.  Not  out  of  the  world,  but  in  the  world,  are  found  the  disciplines 
which  purify  the  soul.  {Hugh  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  qualifications  for  our 
heavenly  ascension : — This  Psalm  is  associated  with  the  removal  of  the  ark  of  the 
Lord  to  the  temple  which  stood  on  Mount  Zion.  It  sets  forth  those  who  should  be 
regarded  as  qualified  to  ascend  Mount  Zion,  and  take  part  in  the  proceedings  of 
that  memorable  day.  I.  Clean  hands.  The  Jews  attached  great  importance  to 
clean  hands,  especially  before  eating  and  worshipping.  In  the  literal  sense,  clean 
hands  may  not  be  regarded  as  a  necessary  qualification  for  Christians  in  order  to 
their  admission  to  the  true  holy  place,  which  is  heaven,  but  rather  what  clean  hands 
typify  and  represent  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Our  hands  are  the  representatives  of  our 
actions.  Therefore  clean  hands,  to  us  Christians,  would  mean  what  we  understand 
by  stainless  conduct.  They  mean  lawful  and  right,  honest  and  irreproachable 
actions.  Our  hands,  our  practical  conduct,  must  be  clean,  morally  unstained, 
undefiled,  if  we  are  to  follow  in  the  track  of  Christ's  ascension.  II.  A  puke  heart. 
The  character  of  a  man's  heart  determines,  above  all  things,  his  standing  in  th& 
sight  of  God,  his  fitness  to  see  God.  Clean  hands  without  a  pure  heart,  an  outward 
stainless  life  without  the  inward  spirit  of  purity,  will  not  suffice  to  admit  a  man  to 
the  holy  place  of  God's  presence.  What  is  a  pure  heart  ?  It  means  that  the  fountain- 
source  of  a  man's  nature,  from  which  flow  all  the  streams  of  his  life,  is  unpolluted 
by  sensual  lusts,  by  forbidden  passions,  by  foul  imaginations,  or  by  anything  what- 
ever that  is  morally  unclean.  By  a  pure  heart  is  meant  not  simply  a  chaste  heart, 
but  an  altogether  uncorrupt  heart,  of  which  chastity  is  only  one  of  many  forms. 
III.  Hath  not  lifted  tjp  his  soul  unto  vanity.  Hebrew,  "hath  not  set  his 
heart  upon  a  thing  of  nought."  Not  fixed  his  heart  upon  things  whose  intrinsic 
value  is  worthless  ;  such  things  as  money,  titles,  society,  worldly  knowledge,  earthly 
treasures,  and  the  pleasures  of  this  life.  He  does  not  set  his  affections  on  things  of 
the  earth.  He  does  not  allow  them  to  take  that  place  in  his  heart  which  is  due  to 
God,  and  to  God  only.  IV.  Nor  sworn  deceitfully.  By  this  is  meant  swear- 
ing falsely,  taking  an  oath  to  a  lie.  The  man  who  shall  stand  in  God's  holy  place 
must  be  a  "man  of  truth"  ;  a  man  like  Nathaniel,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile,  no 
artfulness,  no  pretence,  no  insincerity,  no  hypocrisy,  no  unreality,  no  untruth  in  any 
shape  whatever.     He  must  also  be  true  "in  the  inward  parts,"  in  his  motives,  aims,. 


PSAiMxxiv.]  TEE  PSALMS.  487 

intentions,  and  aspirations.  Ascending  to  heaven  is  a  matter  of  spiritual  character. 
Then  who,  among  ordinary  mortals,  is  really  qualified  for  ascending  to  heaven  t 
All  that  we  can  do  is  to  keep  the  standard  daily  before  our  eyes,  and  do  our  honest 
best  to  reach  it  as  far  as  possible.  The  life  we  are  now  living  day  by  day  may  be 
an  ascending  life,  ever  moving  upward,  heavenward,  Christ-ward.    {H.  O,  Youard.) 

Ver.  5.  And  righteonsness  from  the  God  of  Ms  salvation. — Go(ts  blessing  of 
righteousness : — The  first  glance  at  these  words  might  suggest  that  they  told  us  one  of 
the  rewards  which  the  man  who  had  fulfilled  the  preceding  requirements  received  from 
God.  But  that  would  be  but  a  poor  thing  to  say  ;  there  would  neither  be  gospel  nor 
logic,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  it.  For,  according  to  that,  all  that  was  said  here  would 
simply  be  that,  if  a  man  would  make  himself  righteous,  God  would  then  make  hira 
righteous ;  that  if  a  man  cleansed  his  heart,  and  got  Ms  hands  pure  and  his  soul 
fixed  upon  God  and  his  lips  truthful,  then,  after  that,  God  would  give  him  righteous- 
ness, which,  by  the  hypothesis,  he  has  already  got.  I  do  not  think  that  is  the 
meaning  of  the  words,  both  because  such  a  meaning  would  destroy  the  sequence  of 
thought,  and  because  a  man  cannot  so  make  himself  righteous  at  all.  It  is  more 
natural  to  take  these  words  as  carrying  on  the  description  of  the  man  who  is  fit  to 
stand  in  the  holy  place,  than  as  introducing  the  new  thought  of  certain  other  bless- 
ings which  the  righteous  man  of  the  previous  verse  receives.  So  regarded,  we  have 
a  deep  thought  here  in  answer  to  the  unspoken  doubt  which  must  needs  arise  on 
hearing  such  conditions.  One  can  well  fancy  the  hearer  replying,  your  statement 
of  qualifications  is  only  a  round-about  way  of  saying  JVo  one :  how  can  I  or  anybody 
attain  these  requirements?  If  these  be  necessary,  we  may  as  well  loiter  in  the 
flowery  vales  below  as  toil  up  only  to  see  Alps  on  Alps  arise,  and  the  temple  shining 
far  above  us,  inaccessible  after  all.  But  if  we  rightly  grasp  the  sequence  of  thought 
here,  we  have  here  the  blessed  truth  that  God's  impossible  requirements  are  God's 
great  gifts.  We  may  put  that  as  the  second  great  principle  in  these  verses :  the 
men  who  are  pure  receive  purity  as  a  gift  from  God.  God  will  give  righteousness. 
That  means  here  outward  and  inner  purity,  or,  in  effect,  the  sum  of  the  qualifica- 
tions already  insisted  on.  That  is  a  grand  thought,  though  it  sounds  strange  to 
some  men,  that  moral  condition — a  certain  state  of  heart  and  mind — can  be  given 
to  a  man.  Many  people  dismiss  such  a  hope  as  an  illusion,  and  smile  at  such  a 
gospel  as  an  impossibility.  So  it  is  for  us.  We  can  but  try  to  bring  motives  and 
influences  to  bear  on  one  another  which  may  tend  to  shape  character.  But  God 
can  work  on  the  springs  of  thought  and  will,  and  can  put  into  our  hearts  purity  and 
righteousness,  however  alien  and  remote  they  may  be  from  our  natural  dispositions 
and  from  our  past  lives.  Another  great  truth  here  is,  that  God  can  put  into  a  man's 
heart  some  one  germinal  principle  which  shall  develop  and  flower  out  into  all  graces 
and  purities  and  beauties  of  character  :  all  these  things  that  make  up  the  qualifica- 
tions, they  can  all  be  given  to  a  man  in  germ  from  God's  own  hand.  Still  further, 
these  words  imply  that  righteousness,  in  the  sense  of  purity  and  holiness,  is  salvation. 
••He  shall  receive  righteousness  from  the  God  of  his  salvation."  David  did  not 
merely  think  of  salvation  as  merely  temporal  deliverance,  and  we  are  not  to  think 
of  mere  deliverance  from  external  punishment  or  some  material  hell  as  exhausting 
its  meaning,  but  to  understand  that  the  main  part  of  salvation  is  that  God  shall 
impart  to  us  Himself,  and  fill  our  souls  with  His  righteousness.  But  we  have  to 
remember  that  all  this  is  made  a  great  deal  more  plain  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  He 
comes  and  brings  to  us  a  righteousness  by  which  we  shall  be  made  piire  if  we  will 
only  love  Him  and  trust  Him,  and  in  our  hearts  there  will  bloom  and  grow  the 
exotics  of  holy  and  virtuous  character,  and  our  lives  will  be  fragrant  with  the  pre- 
cious fruits  of  holy  and  virtuous  conduct.  By  the  implanting  within  us  of  His  own 
Spirit,  by  the  new  life  kindred  with  His  own,  which  we  thence  derive,  of  which 
righteousness  is  the  very  life  breath— for,  as  Paul  says,  "The  renewed  spirit  is  life 
because  of  righteousness  " — as  well  as  by  the  mere  ordinary  means  of  bringing  new 
and  powerful  motives  to  holiness,  by  the  atti-action  of  His  own  example,  and  by  love 
which  moulds  to  likeness,  Christ  gives  us  righteousness,  and  implants  at  least  the 
germ  of  all  purity.  The  last  thought  here  is— the  men  who  receive  righteousness 
are  the  men  who  seek  it  from  God.  "This  is  the  generation  of  them  that  seek 
Him,  that  seek  Thy  face,"  and,  as  the  last  words  ought  to  be  rendered,  "this  is 
Jacob,  the  true  Israel."  So  then  there  is  an  answer  to  another  unspoken  question 
that  might  arise.  The  question  might  still  remain — How  am  I  to  get  this  great 
gift  ?  The  Psalmist  believed  in  a  heart  of  love  so  deep  and  so  Divine  that  there 
was  nothing  more  needed  in  order  to  get  all  the  fulness  of  His  righteousness  and 


488  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUS'^RATOR.  [psalm  xxiv. 

purity  into  our  stained  spirits,  but  simply  to  ask  for  it.  To  desire  is  to  have,  to  seek 
is  to  possess,  to  wish  is  to  be  enriched  with  all  this  purity.  And  we  know  how, 
beyond  the  Psalmist's  anticipations  and  the  prophet's  hopes,  that  great  giving 
love  of  God  has  drawn  near  to  man,  in  the  unspeakable  gift  of  His  dear  Son,  in 
whom  the  most  sinful  amongst  us  has  righteousness,  and  the  weakest  amongst 
us  has  strength.  And  we  know  how  the  one  condition  which  is  needed  in 
order  that  there  should  pour  down  into  our  foul  hearts  the  cleansing  flood  of 
His  granted  righteousness,  is  simply  that  we  should  be  willing  to  accept,  that 
we  should  desire  to  possess,  and  that  we  should  turn  to  Christ  and  get  from 
Him  that  which  He  gives.  In  this  world  things  of  little  worth  have  to  be  toiled 
for.  Nothing  for  nothing  is  the  inexorable  law  in  the  world's  markets,  but  God 
sells  without  money  and  without  price.  Life  and  the  air  which  sustains  it  are  gifts. 
"We  have  to  work  for  smaller  things.  In  the  sweat  of  our  brow  we  have  to  win  the 
bread  that  perishes,  but  the  bread  of  life  "the  Son  of  Man  will  give  unto  Ufl,"  and 
of  it  we  have  but  to  "  take  and  eat." 

"  'Tis  only  heaven  can  be  had  for  the  asking, 
*Tis  only  God  that  is  given  away." 

Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  Men  have  been  asking  all  through 
the  ages,  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ? "  They  have  built  for  them- 
selves Babels  "that  their  tops  might  reach  heaven,"  but  it  has  been  all  in  vain. 
You  have  tried  to  climb.  Your  progress  has  been  slow,  like  that  of  some  crawling 
insect  upon  some  smooth  surface — an  inch  in  advance  with  immense  pains,  and  then 
a  great  slide  backwards.  But  heaven  bends  down  to  us,  and  Christ  puts  down  the 
palm  of  His  hand,  if  I  may  say  so,  and  bids  us  step  on  to  it,  and  so  bears  us  up 
on  His  hands.  We  shall  not  rise  without  our  own  efforts  and  many  a  hard  struggle, 
but  He  will  give  us  the  power  to  struggle,  and  the  certainty  that  we  shall  not  set  a 
stout  heart  to  a  steep  hill  in  vain.  So  put  away  your  hopelessness,  and  cease  your 
painful  toils.  ' '  Say  not  in  thine  heart  who  shall  ascend  into  heaven — the  word  is 
nigh  thee," — even  the  word  of  promise  that  trusting  to  Christ,  and  filled  with  His 
strength,  we  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles.  The  conditions  may  seem  hard 
and  even  impossible,  amounting  to  a  perpetual  sentence  of  exclusion  from  the  pre- 
sence of  God,  and  therefore  from  light  and  well-being.  But  be  of  good  cheer.  If 
you  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  you  shall  be  filled.  Seek  God  in  Christ, 
and  then,  though  nothing  that  has  not  wings  can  reach  the  steep  summit,  you  will 
have  the  wings  of  faith  and  love  budding  on  your  shoulders  with  which  you  may 
reach  it,  and  be  invested  by  your  righteous  Saviour  with  that  "fine  linen,  clean  and 
white,  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints,"  arrayed  in  which  you  will  be  fit  to  pass 
into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and  to  dwell  for  evermore  in  the  blaze  of 
that  pure  Light.  {A.  Maelaren,  D.D.)  The  gift  of  righteoumess : — Among  the 
Mexican  Catholics  there  used  to  be  great  anxiety  to  provide  themselves  with  a 
priest's  cast-off  robe  to  be  buried  in.  These  were  begged  or  bought  as  the  greatest 
of  treasures  ;  kept  in  sight  or  always  at  hand  to  remind  them  of  approaching  death. 
When  their  last  hour  drew  near  this  robe  was  flung  over  their  breasts  and  they  died 
happy,  their  stiffening  fingers  grasping  its  folds.  The  robe  of  Christ's  righteousness 
is  not  provided  for  the  dying  hour  merely,  for  the  hasty  investiture  of  the  spirit 
when  about  to  be  ushered  into  the  presence  of  the  King. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates. — The  ascension  of  Christ: — It  is 
generally  admitted  by  expositors  that  these  words  have  a  secondary,  if  not  a 
primary,  reference  to  the  return  of  the  Mediator  to  heaven,  when  He  had  accom- 
plished the  work  of  human  redemption.  Bishop  Horsley  affirms  that  the  Jehovah 
of  this  Psalm  must  be  Christ ;  and  the  entrance  of  the  Redeemer  into  the  kingdom 
of  His  Father  is  the  event  prophetically  announced.  But  you  will  say,  Are  we  to 
rejoice  in  the  departure  of  our  Lord  from  His  Church  ?  Suppose  that  Christ  had 
not  been  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  God,  would  not  the  supposition  materially 
affect  our  spiritual  condition  ?  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  both  the  proof  and 
consequence  of  the  completeness  of  His  mediatorial  work.  If  He  had  remained  in 
the  grave  we  could  only  have  regarded  Him  as  a  man  like  one  of  ourselves :  we 
could  not  have  looked  on  Him  as  our  substitute.  It  is  easy  to  certify  ourselves  of 
the  indispensableness  of  the  resurrection,  but  why  may  not  the  risen  Mediator  remain 
with  His  Church  ?  We  reply,  the  reception  of  our  nature,  in  the  person  of  our 
surety,  into  heavenly  places,  was  necessary  to  our  comfort  and  assurance.  So  long 
as  Christ  remained  on  earth  there  was  no  evidence  that  He  had  won  for  our  nature 


rsALM  XXIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  489 

readmission  to  the  paradise  from  which  it  had  been  exiled.  If  He  had  not  returned 
to  the  Father  we  must  always  have  feared  that  our  redemption  was  incomplete. 
The  plan  of  redemption  was  designed  to  reveal  to  the  world  the  Trinity  of  the  God- 
head. There  could  not  have  been  the  thorough  manifestation  of  the  Divinity  of  the 
Son  had  not  Christ  ascended  up  on  high.  His  ascension  and  exaltation  may  well 
furnish  us  with  great  matter  of  rejoicing.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  two  ascensions 
of  Christ: — "The  King  of  glory"  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  we  acknowledge  Him 
every  morning  in  the  Te  Deum,  "Thou  art  the  King  of  glory,  0  Christ."  He  is 
the  King  of  glory,  the  Giver  and  Owner  of  life  and  glory  ;  the  Brightness  of  His 
Father's  glory  and  the  express  Image  of  His  Person.  That  holy  Son  had  on  the 
day  of  His  incarnation  emptied  Himself  of  His  glory  for  a  while,  and  had  become 
like  unto  the  meanest  of  His  creatures.  On  the  day  of  His  crucifixion  He  offered 
up  all  His  humiliation,  for  a  sacrifice  to  His  Father ;  on  His  resurrection  day  He 
showed  Himself  ready  to  take  His  glory  again  ;  and  on  this  ascension  day  He  actually 
took  it.  The  King  of  glory  is  Christ  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  the  gates  which  He 
commands  to  be  opened  to  Him  are  the  gates  of  heaven — the  gates  of  His  own  chief 
city,  to  which  He  is  returning  as  David  returned  to  Jerusalem,  after  His  triumphant 
•warfare  against  His  and  our  enemies.  He  returns,  as  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle, 
having  bruised  Satan  under  His  feet,  first  in  His  temptation,  then  in  His  passion  on 
the  Cross,  lastly  in  His  descent  into  hell.  And  as  David  came  accompanied  by  his 
guards  and  soldiers,  who  had  been  fighting  on  his  side,  and  could  not  but  rejoice, 
as  faithful  and  dutiful  subjects,  in  their  king's  victory  ;  so  the  Psalm  represents  the 
Son  of  David  returning  to  the  Father's  right  hand  with  a  guard  of  angels  ;  who, 
as  they  come  near  the  holy  and  awful  gate,  cry  aloud  and  say,  "  Lift  up  your  heads, 
O  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors."  But  why  is  the  song  repeated  ? 
Why  are  the  everlasting  gates  invited  to  lift  up  their  heads  a  second  time  ?  We 
may  not  pretend,  here  or  in  any  place,  to  know  all  the  meaning  of  the  Divine  Psalms. 
But  what  if  the  repetition  of  the  verse  was  meant  to  put  us  in  mind  that  our  Saviour's 
ascension  will  be  repeated  also  ?  He  will  not  indeed  die  any  more ;  death  can  no 
more  have  any  dominion  over  Him;  "there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin." 
Neither,  of  course,  can  He  rise  again  any  more.  But  as  He  will  come  again  at  the 
end  of  the  world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  so  after  that  descent  He  will  have 
to  ascend  again.  Now  obsei-ve  the  answer  made  this  second  time.  Christ  ascend- 
ing the  first  time,  to  intercede  for  us  at  His  Father's  right  hand,  is  called  "the 
Lord  mighty  in  battle."  But  Christ,  ascending  the  second  time,  after  the  world 
hath  been  judged,  and  the  good  and  bad  separated  for  ever,  is  called  ' '  the  Lord  of 
Hosts."  Why  this  difference  in  His  Divine  titles?  We  may  reverently  take  it, 
that  it  signifies  to  us  the  difference  between  His  first  and  second  coming  down  to 
earth,  His  first  and  second  ascension  into  heaven.  As  in  other  respects  His  first 
coming  was  in  great  humility,  so  in  this,  that  He  came  in  all  appearance  alone. 
The  angels  were  indeed  waiting  round  Him,  but  not  visibly,  not  in  glory,  "He 
trode  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  Him."  He 
wrestled  with  death,  hell,  and  Satan  alone  :  alone  He  went  up  into  heaven.  Thus 
He  showed  Himself  "the  Lord  mighty  in  battle,"  mighty  in  that  single  combat. 
But  when  He  shall  come  down  and  go  up  the  second  time.  He  will  show  Himself 
"the  Lord  of  Hosts."  Instead  of  coming  down  alone,  in  mysterious  silence,  as  in 
His  wonderful  incarnation,  He  will  be  followed  by  all  the  Armies  of  heaven.  "The 
Lord  my  God  will  come,  and  all  His  saints  with  Him."  "The  Lord  cometh  with 
ten  thousand  of  His  saints."  Thus  He  will  come  down  as  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and 
as  the  Lord  of  Hosts  He  will  ascend  again  to  His  Father.  After  the  judgment  He 
will  pass  again  through  the  everlasting  doors,  with  a  greater  company  than  before  ; 
for  He  will  lead  along  with  Him,  into  the  heavenly  habitations,  all  those  who  shall 
have  been  raised  from  their  graves  and  found  worthy.  This  is  Christ's  second  and 
more  glorious  ascension,  in  which  He  will  be  visibly  and  openly  accompanied  by  the 
souls  and  bodies  of  the  righteous,  changed  and  made  glorious,  like  unto  His  glorious 
body.  The  angels  and  saints  will  come  with  Him  from  heaven,  and  both  they 
and  all  good  Christians  will  return  with  Him  thither.  {J.  Keble.)  The  three  pro- 
cessions:— I.  The  peimaet  reference  of  the  text.  See  the  account  of  the 
removal  of  the  ark  from  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  to  Jerusalem.  II,  The  similar 
SCENE  IN  the  New  Testament.  The  triumphal  procession  on  palm  Sunday.  That 
procession  could  boast  but  few  circumstances  of  dignity  and  majesty.     III.  The 

8FIRITTTAL  PASSAGE  OF  ChRIST  BY  FAITH   INTO  THE  STRONOHOLD  OF  THE  HEART 

OF  MAN.  1.  The  heart  is  susceptible  of  comparison  in  many  particulars  with 
the  literal  city  of  Jerusalem.     2,  The  remedy  is  to  be  found  in  admission  of 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiv. 

Christ  into  the  heart.  He  alone  can  thoroughly  cleanse  the  desecrated  temple. 
3.  Therefore  lay  aside  your  pride  and  self- righteousness,  and  become  Christ's 
disciples.  IV.  The  second  advent  is  hastening  fokwakd.  That  progress  is  to 
be  triumphant  in  character.  Its  ibsue  most  be  certain  victory.  {E.  M.  Goulium, 
D.G.L.) 

Ver.  8.  Who  is  this  King  of  glory. — The  King  of  glory  .-—In  the  old  days,  when 
the  king  of  England  wished  to  enter  the  city  of  London  through  Temple  Bar,  the 
gate  being  closed  against  him,  the  herald  advanced  and  demanded  entrance.  "  Open 
the  gate,"  shouted  the  herald.  "  Who  is  there  ?  "  questioned  a  voice  from  within. 
"  The  king  of  England  !  "  answered  the  herald.  The  gate  was  at  once  opened,  and 
the  king  passed,  amid  the  acclamations  of  the  people.  But  the  custom  was  an  old 
one,  and  stretched  back  perhaps  thousands  of  years  before  England  was  known  under 
that  name.  Jesus  is  our  "King  of  glory."  He  is  our  Lord,  "strong  and  mighty 
in  battle. "  We  may  apply  it  very  fitly  to  Christ's  ascension  to  heaven  after  His  life 
and  suffering  and  death  and  resurrection  here  on  the  earth.  When  Christ  came  to 
be  born  in  Bethlehem  He  put  aside  the  glory  which  He  had  before  the  world  was,  and, 
though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor.  As  one  of  the  old  preachers 
said,  Christ  has  gone  to  heaven  as  a  victor ;  leading  sin,  Satan,  death,  hell,  and 
all  His  enemies  in  triumph  at  His  chariot  wheels.  Christ  went  back  to  heaven 
after  the  mightiest  battle  ever  fought  in  the  universe,  and  went  back  triumphant 
over  sin  and  death.  We  might  properly  apply  these  words  to  the  coming  of  Christ, 
to  the  life  of  man,  and  to  the  civiKsation  of  the  world.  Christ  has  been  taking 
possession  of  the  life  of  mankind.  He  is  King  of  glory  in  modern  civilisation.  In 
spite  of  all  the  wickedness  there  is  in  the  world,  it  has  already  come  about  that 
the  most  dominant  personality  in  it  is  Christ.  Christ  has  possessed  and  become 
King  of  glory  in  the  very  counting  of  the  years  in  modern  centuries.  Christ  has 
knocked  at  the  gates  of  the  world  of  art,  and  He  is  the  King  of  glory  in  it.  Go 
hack  and  look  at  the  works  of  the  great  masters  and  you  will  see  that  they  are 
pictures  of  the  Christ.  And  when,  in  modern  times,  has  the  world  of  art  and 
modern  invention  in  illustration  been  so  stirred  as  in  Tissot's  "Life  of  Christ  in 
Art "  ?  Christ  has  knocked  at  the  door  of  literature,  and  He  is  the  King  of  glory 
in  the  literature  of  the  world.  Where  there  is  one  book  written  against  Christ  there 
are  a  hundred  thousand  books  wi-itten  to  illustrate  His  teaching  or  impress  the 
lessons  of  His  life.  We  may  apply  it  also  with  great  appropriateness  to  the  door  of 
our  hearts.     {L.  A.  Banks,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates. — A  triumphal  entrance : — I.  The  great 

THING  TO  DESIRE  IS  THE  ENTRANCE  OF  THE  KiNG  OF  GLORY  INTO  OUR  SOULS.  With- 
out it  thou  wilt  be  like  a  house  without  a  tenant — cold,  cheerless,  dilapidated,  deso- 
late. Thy  heart  will  be  as  a  nest  without  a  bird — a  poor,  sad  thing.  II.  There  are 
IMPEDIMENTS  TO  THIS  COMING  INTO  OUR  HEARTS.  The  text speaks  about  "doors" 
and  "  gates,"  and  there  are  such  to  our  hearts,  and  they  need  to  be  "lifted  up" 
ere  the  King  of  glory  can  come  ia.  Sometimes  it  is  our  wicked  prejudice.  We 
do  not  want  to  know  the  Gospel  ;  or  our  love  of  sin,  which  we  do  not  care  to  give 
up.  Then  there  is  the  door  which  I  may  call  the  iron  gate,  that  entereth  into  the 
city — the  door  of  unbelief.     That  unbelief  is  the  ruin  of  souls.     III.  If  Christ  is 

TO  ENTER  WE  MUST   BE  WILLING  TO    REMOVE   ALL  THESE.      The  text   SayS,    "  Lift  Up 

your  heads,"  as  if  they  were  to  lift  them  up  themselves.  Though  salvation  is  of 
grace,  it  is  never  against,  but  always  with  our  will.  IV.  It  is  grace  that  must 
enable  you  to  be  thus  willing.  Picture  the  inhabitants  trying  to  lift  up  the 
gates  themselves.  They  cannot,  and  what  shall  they  do  ?  An  invisible  spirit  stands 
by  them,  puts  his  power  with  theirs,  and  up  go  the  gates.  V.  Jesus  will  enter. 
He  was  willing  to  come  in  before  :  the  unwillingness  was  all  in  us.  VI.  And  He  is 
the  King  of  glory.  Thjs  title  belongs  to  the  Saviour.  It  proclaims  Him  in 
His  highest  authority.  Wliat  peerless  prince  is  this,  with  a  name  above  every 
name  ?  (C.  H.  Spurijcon.)  Christ  the  High  Priest  of  our  'profession  in  heaven  : — 
The  common  notion  seems  to  be  that  all  the  offices  of  the  Mediator  to  us-ward 
took  place  before  the  ascension.  Consistently  with  this  belief  that  high  festival  is 
despised  and  neglected.  The  truth  is,  that  His  acts  after  His  ascension  are  as 
distinct  and  important  as  those  which  took  place  before  that  event.  It  was  not  till 
the  ascension  that  He  offered  "gifts  and  sacrifices  for  men."  As  the  efficacy  of  the 
slain  victim  of  old  depended  on  its  blood  being  brought  into  "the  holiest  of  all,"  so 
the  efficacy  of  that  sacrifice  consummated  on  the  Cross  depends  and  is  assured  to 


P8ALM  XXIV.]  THE  PSALMS.  491 

us  by  its  continual  presentation  by  our  Mediator  in  heaven.  .  .  .  The  heavenly 
gates  have  been  lifted  up,  and  the  King  of  glory  has  gone  in.  But  "  who  is  this 
King  of  glory  ? "  The  Eternal  Son  of  the  Father,  clad  with  the  white  robe  of 
expiation,  girt  with  the  golden  zone  of  the  priesthood,  pleading  the  cause  not  only 
of  the  Church  at  large,  but  of  every  individual  member  thereof.  There  is  not  a 
trial  we  have,  as  we  pass  through  this  vale  of  tears,  but  He  knows  it  and  recognises 
it  as  the  lot  of  humanity  from  His  own  actual  experience.  {T.  Huntington,^  M.A.) 
The  triumphant  ascension  of  Christ  into  heaven : — Every  circumstance  in  this 
description  is  suited  to  impress  us  with  a  lofty  sense  of  the  majesty  of  the  Son  of 
God.  1.  He  is  described  as  a  powerful  conqueror.  In  what  conflicts  has  He  been 
engaged  1  We  can  speak  of  Him  as  having  overcome  the  world,  and  as  subduing 
the  great  enemy  of  man  and  bruising  the  serpent's  head.  2.  The  universal  sovereign. 
Note  His  pre-eminent  dignity.  He  is  seated  upon  the  throne  of  the  universe. 
3.  He  is  "  the  King  of  glory."  This  title  includes  in  its  meaning  the  substance  of 
the  description  previously  given.  This  is  a  subject  in  which  we  all  are  deeply  con- 
cerned. For  henceforth  we  can  look  to  Christ  as  our  Mediator  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  ;  as  the  Head  of  His  Church,  and  the  Author  of  aU  spiritual  blessings  ;  and  as 
opening  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers.  Lessons — (1)  The  subject  is  suited  to 
inspire  us  with  a  sure  trust  in  the  Captain  of  our  Salvation.  (2)  It  invites  us 
to  have  our  thoughts  and  affections  in  heaven.  (3)  It  teaches  us  to  look  forward  to 
another  ascension  yet  in  futurity,  and  calls  us  to  prepare  for  it.  ( Will.  Dealtry, 
D.D.)  The  ascension  of  Christ: — Consider   the   proijhetic  reference    of    these 

striking  words.  Tlie  ark  was  the  type  of  Christ.  We  may  regard  the  removal  of 
the  ark  to  Mount  Zion  as  typifying  Christ's  ascension  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

I.  The  title  which  is  here  given  to  Him.  "The  Kj_ng  of  glory."  When  He 
lived  among  men  little  did  He  appear  like  a  king  al;  "allT  "But  in  spite  of  all 
mockeries  He  was  a  King  even  then.  There  are  multitudes  who  have  still  low 
thoughts  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  there  are  many  religious  systems  whose  tendency 
is  to  produce  such  a  result.  11.  The  dignity  and  blessedness  claimed  for  Him. 
Admission  into  the  heavenly  mansions.  Who  are  the  persons  that  claim  for  Him 
this  high  honour  ?  The  angelic  hosts.  And  the  spirits  of  ju.st  men  made  ].erfeet 
took  part.  See  the  right  which  He  had  to  the  honour  and  blessedness  which  were 
now  claimed  for  Him.  That  is  taken  for  granted.  No  favour  is  craved.  Admission 
is  not  a  privilege  implored  or  supplicated.  He  had  a  right  to  the  heavenly  kingdom 
as  the  promised  reward  of  His  toils  and  sufferings.  He  had  also  a  right  on  the 
ground  of  conquest.  The  connection  between  the  victory  which  He  won  and  the 
glories  which  awaited  Him  is  quite  obvious.  III.  The  reception  which 
awaited  Him.  Here  we  can  say  but  little,  for  on  such  a  theme  poor  is  thought, 
and  altogether  impotent  the  most  emphatic  expressions.  Well  may  we,  therefore, 
rejoice  in  the  ascension  of  Christ.  With  the  fact  of  the  ascension  we  should  com- 
bine its  special  objects  and  purposes.  They  relate  not  to  Himself  alone,  but  to  us 
likewise.  The  ascension  of  Christ  should  remind  us  of  the  glorious,  yet  solemn  and 
momentous,  fact  of  His  second  coming.  (Expository  Outlines.)  An  urgent 
demand,  and  an  earnest  inquiry : — I.  The  demand.  It  may  be  applied  to  three 
events — 1.  To  the  entrance  of  the  ark  into  the  holy  city  (2  Sam.  vi.  ;  1  Chron. 
XV.).  2.  To  the  advent  of  Christ  at  His  incarnation.  The  doors  and  gates  of  the 
world's  heart  were  shut  against  Him.  "He  came  to  His  own,"  &c.  3.  To  the 
ascension  of  Christ  into  heaven.  4.  To  the  admission  of  Christ  into  the  human 
heart.  "  In  the  Gospel  history,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  Christ  had  a  fourfold  enter- 
tainment amongst  men.  Some  received  Him  into  their  house,  but  not  into  their 
heart,  as  Simon  the  Pharisee  (Luke  vii.  44).  Some  into  the  heart,  but  not  into  the 
house,  as  the  faithful  centurion  (Matt.  viii.  8).  Some  into  neither,  as  the  faithless 
Gergesenes  (Matt.  viii.  34).  Some  into  both,  as  Lazarus,  Martha,  and  Mary." 
And  Christ  now  seeks  admission  into  men's  hearts,  but  the  gates  are  closed.  5.  To 
the  return  of  Christ  to  heaven  at  last.  "  After  the  judgment,"  says  Keble,  "He 
will  pass  again  through  the  everlasting  doors  with  a  greater  company  than  before  ; 
for  He  will  lead  along  with  Him  into  the  heavenly  habitation  all  those  who  shall 
have  been  raised  from  their  graves  and   found  worthy"  (1   Thess.  iv.    14-18). 

II.  An  earnest  inquiry.  "Who  is  this  King  of  glory  ?  "  The  question  is  twice 
put.  None  can  be  of  greater  importance.  The  answer  tells.  1.  That  He  is  one 
strong  in.  Himself.  "The  Lord  strong."  2.  That  He  is  "mighty  in  battle." 
His  conquests  are  moral,  and  how  numerous,  constant,  universal,  and  ever- 
multiplying  they  are.  3.  That  He  is  vast  in  command.  "The  Lord  of  hosts." 
All  material   existences,    all   spiritual    are    His    hosts :    the    heavenly    orbs    are 


492  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxiv. 

His  hosts.  He  marshals  them  as  a  commander  his  battalions.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  The  God  who  dwells  with  men: — Notice  the  application,  the  historical 
and  original  application,  to  the  King  who  dwelt  with  Israel.  But  the  texts 
speak  of  the  Christ  who  dwells  with  men.  The  devout  hearts  in  Israel  felt 
that  there  was  something  more  needed  than  this  dwelling  of  Jehovah  within 
an  earthly  temple,  and  the  process  of  revelation  familiarised  them  with  the 
thought  that  there  was  yet  in  the  future  a  "coming  of  the  Lord  "  in  some  special 
manner  unknown  to  them.  When  was  that  fulfilled  ?  Christ  is  the  highest 
rapng  out  of  the  Divine  light,  and  the  mightiest  exhibition  of  the  Divine  power. 
Application  of  these  words  to  the  Christ  who  will  dwell  in  your  hearts.  His 
historical  manifestation  here  upon  earth,  and  His  incarnation,  which  is  the  true 
dwelling  of  Deity  amongst  men,  are  not  enough.  They  have  left  something  more 
than  a  memory  to  the  world.  He  is  as  ready  to  abide,  as  really  within  our  spirits, 
as  He  was  to  tabernacle  upon  earth  amongst  men.  And  the  very  central  idea  of 
that  Gospel  which  is  proclaimed  to  you  aU  is  this,  that  if  you  will  open  the  gates  of 
your  hearts  He  wiU  come  in,  in  all  the  plenitude  of  His  victorious  power,  and  dwell 
in  your  hearts,  their  Conqueror  and  their  King.  What  a  strange  contrast,  and  yet 
what  a  close  analogy  there  is  between  the  victorious  tones  and  martial  air  of  this 
summons  of  my  text,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates  !  that  the  King  of  glory 
may  come  in,"  and  the  gentle  words  of  the  Apocalypse,  "Behold  !  I  stand  at  the 
door  and  knock  ;  if  any  man  hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door  I  will  come  in  to 
him."  But  He  that  in  the  Old  Covenant,  arrayed  in  warrior  arms,  summoned  the 
rebels  to  surrender,  is  the  same  as  He  who  in  the  New,  with  the  night-dews  in 
His  hair  and  patience  on  His  face  and  gentleness  in  the  touch  of  His  hand 
upon  the  door,  waits  to  enter  in.  Open  your  hearts,  "and  the  King  of  glory 
shall  come  in."  And  He  will  come  in  as  a  King  that  might  seek  to  enter  some 
besieged  and  beleaguered  city  far  away  on  the  outposts  of  His  kingdom.  If  the 
relieving  force  can  be  thrown  into  Khartoum,  the  clouds  of  enemies  will  scatter. 
If  the  King  comes  in,  the  city  will  be  impregnable.  If  you  open  your  hearts  for 
Him  He  will  come  and  keep  you  from  all  your  foes,  and  give  you  the  victory  over 
them  all.  So  to  every  hard-pressed  heart,  waging  an  unequal  contest  with  toils 
and  temptations  and  sorrows  and  sins,  this  great  hope  is  given,  that  Christ  the 
Victor  will  come  in  His  power  to  garrison  heart  and  mind.  As  of  old  the  encour- 
agement was  given  to  Hezekiah  in  his  hour  of  peril,  when  the  might  of  Sennach- 
erib insolently  threatened  Jerusalem,  so  the  same  stirring  assurances  are  given  to 
each  who  admits  Christ's  succours  to  his  heart.  ' '  He  shall  not  come  into  this 
city,  for  I  will  defend  this  city  to  save  it  for  Mine  own  sake."  Open  your  hearts 
and  the  conquering  King  shall  come  in.  And  do  not  forget  that  there  is  another 
possible  application  of  these  words,  lying  in  the  future,  to  the  conquering  Christ 
who  shall  come  again.  The  whole  history  of  the  past  points  onwards  to  yet  a  last 
time  when  ' '  the  Lord  shall  suddenly  come  to  His  Temple, "  and  that  Christ  shall 
so  come  in  like  manner  as  He  went  into  heaven.  Again  shall  the  summons  ring 
out.  Again  shall  He  come  arrayed  in  flashing  brightness,  and  the  visible  robes 
of  His  imperial  majesty.  Again  shall  He  appear  mighty  in  battle,  when  "in 
righteousness  He  shall  judge  and  make  war."  For  a  Christian  one  great  memory 
fills  the  past— Christ  has  come  ;  and  one  great  hope  brightens  the  else  waste 
future — Christ  shall  come.  That  hope  has  been  far  too  much  left  to  be  cherished 
only  by  those  who  hold  a  particular  opinion  as  to  the  chronology  of  unfulfilled 
prophecy.  But  it  should  be  to  every  Christian  heart  "  the  blessed  hope,"  even 
the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  Him  who  has  come  in  the  past.  He  is  with  and  in 
us  in  the  present.  He  will  come  in  the  future  "  in  His  glory,  and  shall  sit  upon 
the  throne  of  His  glory."  All  our  pardon  and  hope  of  God's  love  depends  upon 
that  great  fact  in  the  past,  that  "the  Lord  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us, 
and  we  beheld  His  glory."  Our  purity  which  will  fit  us  to  dwell  with  God, 
our  present  blessedness,  all  our  power  for  daily  strife,  and  our  companionship  in 
daily  loneUness,  depend  on  the  present  fact  that  He  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith, 
the  seed  of  all  good,  and  the  conquering  antagonist  of  every  evil.  And  the  one 
light  which  fills  the  future  withi  hope,  peaceful  because  assured,  streams  from 
that  most  sure  promise  that  He  will  come  again,  sweeping  from  the  highest 
heavens,  on  His  head  the  many  crowns  of  universal  monarchy,  in  His  hand  the 
weapons  of  all-conquering  power,  and  none  shall  need  to  ask,  "  Who  is  this  King 
of  glory  1 "  for  every  eye  shall  know  Him,  the  Judge  upon  His  throne,  to  be  the 
Christ  of  the  Cross.  Open  the  doors  of  your  hearts  to  Him,  as  He  sues  for 
entrance  now  in  the  meekness  of  His  patient  love,  that  on  you  may  fall  in  that 


MAIM  XXV.3  THE  PSALMS.  498 

day  of  the  coming  of  the  King  the  blessing  of  the  servants  "  who  wait  for  their 
returning  Lord,"  that  when  He  cometh  and  knocketh  they  may  open  unto  Him 
immediately.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christ  demanding  admission  into  sinners' 
hearts: — 1.  Entrance  solemnly  demanded.  The  demand  is  addressed  to  the 
gates  (that  is,  princes  or  heads. — Vulg,).  Hence  it  is  understood  of  Christ's 
ascension  into  heaven.  Literally,  by  the  gates  are  meant  those  of  the  Temple, 
which  was  a  type  of  heaven.  The  gates  were  to  be  thrown  wide  open,  as  was 
fitting  when  the  ark  should  enter.  It  tells  of  the  receiving  of  Christ  into  the 
soul.  2.  For  whom  the  demand  is  made — for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  the 
ark  of  Gospel  ordinances  comes,  Christ  Himself  comes  to  the  hearts  of  sinners  for 
admission.  I.  Inquire  what  is  the  ark  of  Gospel  ordinances.  1.  The  Word 
read  and  preached.  2.  The  two  sacraments.  II.  How  Christ  comes  to  sinners. 
1.  With  the  offer  of  Himself.  2.  Exhibiting  Himself  in  the  sacraments.  3.  In 
both  He  demands  admission.  III.  Inferences  from  the  foregoing.  1.  The 
presence  of  Gospel  ordinances  shows  that  Christ  is  come  to  our  hearts  seeking 
admission.  2.  This  coming  will  aggravate  the  condemnation  of  those  who  refuse. 
IV.  What  is  it  to  open  the  heart  to  Christ?  There  is  an  initial  opening 
at  conversion,  and  a  progressive  one  afterwards.  The  opening  of  the  door  of 
the  understanding  and  of  the  will.  V.  Why  we  should  do  this  ?  The  house 
is  His  own.  The  Father  who  gave  it  to  Him  demands  this.  It  was  solemnly 
made  over  to  Him  at  your  baptism.  Some  will  not  so  much  as  open  the  outer 
door.  Others,  not  the  inner  door.  1.  It  is  Satan  who  keeps  Christ  out.  2.  See 
who  it  is  that  seeks  admission.  The  King  of  glory.  3.  How  unworthy  the 
house  is  of  Him.  4.  Note  His  condescension — He  will  come  if  you  open.  5.  This 
offer  cost  Him  dear.  6.  Your  positions  will  be  one  day  reversed.  7.  You  are 
solemnly  called  now.  8.  The  ofiFer  will  not  last  always.  9.  There  is  no  other 
way  to  be  saved.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Man's  Brother  in  heaven: — When  we 
were  in  Cuba  a  young  woman  over  at  Marianao  told  us  she  walked  over  to 
Morro  Castle  every  morning.  It  was  a  long  walk,  and  she  said  she  did  it 
because  her  brother  was  a  prisoner  there.  She  had  never  been  inside  that  castle, 
and  had  no  interest  in  it  until  her  brother  had  been  incarcerated  there  ;  and 
then  every  morning  that  sister  walked  all  the  way  from  Marianao  to  the  great 
castle,  and  looked  at  it  until  she  could  count  every  stone  and  knew  every 
tower,  and  knew  the  colour  of  every  archway,  and  recognised  the  position  of 
every  sentry.  She  was  interested  in  the  castle  because  she  had  a  brother  there. 
We  would  be  interested  in  heaven's  towers,  and  would  count  its  embattlements, 
and  would  love  to  read  about  and  study  it,  if  we  appreciated  the  value  of  our  Christ 
who  is  there.    (R.  H,  Conwell,  D.D.) 


PSALM  XXV. 

Vers.  1-3.  Unto  Ibee,  0  Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  souL — David  depressed : — I.  David 
WAS  AT  THIS  time  IN  A  STATE  OF  GREAT  TROUBLE.  This  is  the  children's  path ; 
it  is  the  path  most  of  God's  family  walk  in.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  path.  The 
Master  trod  the  path  before  them,  and  told  His  people  to  expect  tribulation.  In 
this  Psalm  we  see  afiBiiction  in  every  variety.  David  traces  his  afflictions  up  to  his 
sins  (ver.  18).  All  sin  is  the  cause  of  suffering.  If  no  sin,  no  suffering.  If  no 
body  there  would  be  no  shadow.  There  may  have  been  some  searching  out  of 
peculiar  sins.  Times  of  affliction  are  usually  times  of  deep  searching  of  heart. 
II.  David  was  at  this  time  depressed.  The  very  expression  "lift  up"  implies 
a  previous  casting  down.  Ver.  16,  he  says,  "  I  am  desolate  and  afflicted."  The 
believer,  compared  with  the  unbeliever,  is  a  strong  man  ;  he  must  needs  be  strong. 
But  the  strongest  is  not  always  strong.  All  borrowed  strength  is  of  necessity 
strength  that  fluctuates.  Creature  strength  is  dependent  strength,  and  therefore 
it  is  but  comparative  weakness.  Faith's  wing  does  not  always  soar  aloft ;  love  does 
not  always  burn  brightly.  Unbelief  always  weakens.  David  looked  to  his  troubles 
and  was  depressed.  In  our  afflictions  there  are  two  especial  dangers — that  of 
despising  them,  as  if  they  came  fortuitously  ;  and  the  danger  of  being  encumbered 
and  weighed  down  by  them,  looking  at  the  circumstances,  and  not  at  the  God  of 
the  ciioumstances.    III.  Dayu)  betakes  himself  xo  his  remedy.    The  believer 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxy. 

has  but  one  remedy.  The  world  talks  of  its  many  remedies,  but  all  are  ineffective. 
A  general  view  of  God,  in  the  power  of  faith  and  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
lifts  up  the  soul.  Nothing  so  lifts  us  up  against  soul  trouble  as  when  we  are 
enabled  to  say,  "0  my  God,  I  trust  in  Thee."  Is  there  anything  above  God's 
promises?  Yes,  God  Himself  is  above  His  promises,  and  the  very  substance  of 
them.  Our  trust  is  in  Him.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  nature  of  true  prayer : 
— This  opening  sentence  is  as  if  David  had  said,  "Let  others  lift  up  their  souls  to 
vanity,  I  will  dare  to  be  singular,  I  will  lift  up  my  soul  to  Thee. "  Holy  resolution, 
blessed  detennination.  I.  The  realisation  and  recognition  of  the  presence 
OF  God.  II.  The  abstraction  from  the  influences  of  the  world.  "I  will 
lift  up  my  soul."  III.  The  consecration  and  concentration  of  all  the 
energies  of  the  man.  The  consecration  willing  and  loving.  If  the  soul  be  lifted 
up  all  the  powers  are  so.  IV.  The  results  of  such  lifting  up  of  the  soul. 
We  shall  be — 1.  Transported  with  the  Divine  nearness.  2.  Transformed  into  the 
Divine  likeness.  3.  Translated  into  the  Divine  presence  now  and  hereafter. 
{F.  W.  Brown.)  Uplifting  the  soul: — It  is  not  easy  to  do  this.  "My  soul 
cleaveth  unto  the  dust."  We  may  lift  up  hands  and  eyes  and  voices,  but  it  is 
another  thing  to  uplift  the  soul.  Yet  without  this  there  is  no  real  devotion. 
And  the  Christian  will  be  no  more  satisfied  than  God.  This  marks  the  spiritual 
worshipper.  He  may  have  failed  in  words,  but  his  soul  has  been  lifted  up  to  God. 
And  the  spirituality  of  religion  is  its  enjoyment.  It  is  good  to  draw  near  to  God. 
Then  we  attend  on  the  Lord  without  distraction.  And  when  such  a  worshipper 
comes  forth  he  will  recommend  Christ  to  others,  and  that  not  without  effect.  For 
his  profiting  will  appear  unto  all  men.  His  face  shines.  His  heart  speaks.  His 
life  speaks.  His  character  speaks.  He  cannot  but  do  good,  even  without  design 
and  without  effort.  (  W.  Jay.)  The  uplift  of  the  soul  in  prayer ;— Gotthold,  in 
\i\%  Emhlcinfi,  says,  "Doves  have  been  trained  to  fly  from  place  to  place,  carrying 
letters  in  a  basket  fastened  to  their  necks  or  feet.  They  are  swift  of  flight ;  but  our 
prayers  and  sighs  are  swifter,  for  they  take  but  a  moment  to  pass  from  earth  to 
heaven,  and  bear  the  troubles  of  our  heart  to  the  heart  of  God.  These  messengers 
no  hostile  force  can  detain  ;  they  penetrate  the  clouds,  never  linger  on  the  way,  and 
never  desist  until  the  Most  High  attends.  A  tyrant  may  shut  up  a  godly  man  in 
the  deepest  dungeon,  immure  him  between  massive  walls,  and  forbid  him  all  inter- 
course with  his  fellow-men,  but  these  messengers  he  cannot  restrain ;  in  defiance 
of  all  obstacles  they  report  to  the  Omniscient  the  affliction  of  the  victim,  and  bring 
back  to  him  the  Divine  consolation."  The  lifting  up  of  the  soul  to  God: — The 
names  which  he  gives  God  are  Jehovah  and  Elohim— the  first  taken  from  His 
nature,  the  other  from  His  power ;  and  he  applieth  them  to  himself,  my  strong 
Gods,  including  the  persons  of  the  Trinity.  He  leadeth  us  to  God  in  our  prayers, 
Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee  ?  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  God 
is,  and  that  He  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him.  1.  First,  He  must 
love  thee,  and  then  He  will  defend  thee.  Blessed  is  the  people  whose  God  is  the 
Lord.  Those  are  foolish  who  seek  His  protection,  not  first  having  assurance  of  His 
love.  If  He  be  to  thee  Jehovah,  then  shall  He  also  be  to  thee  Elohim.  His  prayer 
is  signified  by  his  circumscription,  "  I  lift  up  my  soul  to  Thee  "  ;  and  his  faith,  "  I 
trust  in  Thee. "  What  is  prayer  but  a  lifting  up  of  the  heart  to  God,  for  the  heart 
must  first  be  affected,  and  then  it  will  frame  all  the  members  of  the  body,  and  draw 
them  up  with  it.  Whereby  it  appeareth  that  there  is  no  prayer  or  spiritual  service 
acceptable  to  God  but  that  which  comes  and  is  derived  from  the  heart,  ' '  My  son, 
give  Me  thy  heart."  Ye  are  praying,  but  your  heart  is  as  the  eye  of  the  fool  every- 
where. Sometimes  ye  are  thinking  of  the  earth,  sometimes  of  your  pleasure,  some- 
times sleeping,  sometimes  ye  know  not  what  ye  are  thinking.  And  sometimes  your 
voice  is  repeating  some  idle  and  deaf  sounds,  your  heart  no  whit  being  moved,  but 
as  a  parrot,  uttering  uncertain  sounds,  or  a  bell,  sounding  it  knows  not  what ; 
so  are  ye  with  your  mouth  praising  God,  your  heart  being  absented  from  Him. 
2.  Next,  his  faith  is  not  carried  about  hither  and  thither,  but  only  fixeth  itself  upon 
God.  3.  Thirdly,  the  lifting  up  of  the  heart  presupposeth  a  former  dejection  of  his 
soul.  {A.  Sijmson.)  Phases  of  a  pious  so2d : — I.  A  pious  soul  rising  to  God. 
An  indication  of  the  true  elevation  of  man  ;  what  is  it?  1.  The  elevation  of  the 
soul,  that  is,  the  rational  and  spiritual  nature,  that  which  was  the  divinity  within 
hira.  2.  It  is  the  elevation  of  the  soul  to  God.  The  soul  going  up  in  devout 
thought,  in  holy  gratitude,  in  sublime  adoration,  in  moral  assimilation  to  the 
Infinite  Jehovah.  3.  It  is  the  elevation  of  the  soul  to  God  by  personal  exertion. 
No  man  can  lift  up  my  soul   for  me.     II.  A   pious   soul  trusting   in   God. 


MALM  XXV.]  TEE  PSALMS.  495 

"O  my  God,  I  trust  in  Thee."  What  does  trust  in  the  Lord  imply  ?  1.  A  sense  of 
dependency  in  the  truster.  2.  A  belief  in  the  sufficiency  of  the  trusted.  III.  A 
PIOUS  SOTJL  WAITING  UPON  GoD.  "On  Thee  do  I  wait  aU  the  day."  1.  To  wait 
means  patience.  2.  To  wait  means  hope,  3,  To  wait  means  service.  IV.  A  Piotrs 
SOUL  PRATING  TO  GoD.  "Let  none  that  wait  on  Thee  be  ashamed."  The  prayer, 
from  vers.  3  to  7,  falls  into  two  divisions.  1.  Prayer  for  self.  (1)  Prayer  respecting 
Divine  deliverance.  (2)  Prayer  respecting  Divine  guidance.  (3)  Prayer  respecting 
Divine  remembrance.  2.  Prayer  for  others.  (1)  For  success  to  the  good.  (2)  For 
defeat  to  the  wicked,     (ffomilist.) 

Ver.  2.  Let  me  not  be  put  to  shame. — Deliverance  and  guidance : — Trust  that 
was  not  vindicated  by  deliverance  would  cover  the  face  with  confusion.  "Hopes 
that  breed  not  shame  "  are  the  treasure  of  him  whose  hope  is  in  Jehovah.  Foes 
unnamed  threaten  ;  but  the  stress  of  the  petitions  in  the  first  section  of  the  Psalm 
is  less  on  enemies  than  on  sins.  One  cry  for  protection  from  the  former  is  all  that 
the  Psalmist  utters,  and  then  his  prayer  swiftly  turns  to  deeper  needs.  In  the  last 
section  the  petitions  are  more  exclusively  for  deliverance  from  enemies.  Needful  as 
such  escape  is,  it  is  less  needful  than  the  knowledge  of  God's  ways,  and  the  man  in 
extremest  peril  orders  his  desires  rightly  if  he  asks  holiness  first  and  safety  second. 
The  cry  in  ver.  2  rests  upon  the  confidence  nobly  expressed  in  ver.  3,  in  which  the 
verbs  are  not  optatives,  but  futures,  declaring  a  truth  certain  to  be  realised  in  the 
Psalmist's  experience,  because  it  is  true  for  all  who,  like  him,  wait  on  Jehovah. 
True  prayer  is  the  individual's  sheltering  himself  under  the  broad  folds  of  the 
mantle  that  covers  all  who  pray.  The  double  confidence  as  to  the  waiters  on 
Jehovah  and  the  "treacherous  without  cause  "  is  the  summary  of  human  experi- 
ence as  read  by  faith.  Sense  has  much  to  adduce  in  contradiction,  but  the  dictvmi 
is  nevertheless  true  ;  only,  its  truth  does  not  always  appear  in  the  small  arc  of  the 
circle  which  lies  between  cradle  and  grave.  The  prayer  for  deliverance  glides  into 
that  for  guidance,  since  the  latter  is  the  deeper  need,  and  the  former  will  scarcely 
be  answered  unless  the  suppliant's  will  docilely  offers  the  latter.  The  soul  lifted  to 
Jehovah  will  long  to  know  His  wUl,  and  submit  itself  to  His  manifold  teachings. 
"Thy  ways  "  and  "Thy  paths"  necessarily  here  mean  the  ways  in  which  Jehovah 
desires  that  the  Psalmist  should  go.  "  In  Thy  truth  "  is  ambiguous,  both  as  to  the 
preposition  and  as  to  the  noun.  The  clause  may  either  mean  God's  truth  {i.e. 
faithfulness)  as  His  motive  for  answering  the  prayer,  or  His  truth  (i.e.  the  objective 
revelation)  as  the  path  for  men.  Predominant  usage  inclines  to  the  former  signifi- 
cation of  the  noun,  but  the  possibility  still  remains  of  regarding  God's  faithfulness 
as  the  path  in  which  the  Psalmist  desires  to  be  led,  i.e.  to  experience  it.  The  cry 
for  forgiveness  strikes  a  deeper  note  of  pathos,  and,  as  asking  a  more  wondrous 
blessing,  grasps  still  more  firmly  the  thought  of  what  Jehovah  is  and  always  has 
been.  The  appeal  is  made  to  ' '  Thy  compassions  and  loving-kindnesses,"  as  belong- 
ing to  His  nature,  and  to  their  past  exercise  as  having  been  "  from  of  old."  Embold- 
ened thus,  the  Psalmist  can  look  back  on  his  own  past,  both  on  his  outbursts  of 
youthful  passion  and  levity,  which  he  calls  "failures,"  as  missing  the  mark  ;  and 
on  the  darker  evils  of  later  manhood,  which  he  calls  "rebellions,"  and  can  trust 
that  Jehovah  will  think  upon  him  "according  to  His  mercy,"  and  "  for  the  sake  of 
His  goodness "  or  love.  The  vivid  realisation  of  that  Eternal  Mercy,  as  the  very 
mainspring  of  God's  actions,  and  as  setting  forth  in  many  an  ancient  deed  the 
eternal  pattern  of  His  dealings,  enables  a  man  to  bear  the  thought  of  his  own  sins. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Sliew  me  Thy  ways,  0  Lord ;  and  teach  me  Thy  paths. — Divine  authority 
upon  earth : — All  right  -  minded  men  will  agree  with  Matthew  Arnold's  famous 
saying,  that ' '  Conduct  is  three-fourths  of  human  life. "  It  will  be  also  admitted  that 
the  professed  aim  of  all  Churches  and  religious  societies  is  to  regulate  and  improve 
conduct.  Sometimes,  alas !  orthodoxy,  or  right  opinion,  has  been  put  not  merely 
first,  but  by  itself  alone  as  the  one  chief  aim  to  be  enforced  by  the  clergy,  and  to  be 
accepted  by  the  laity.  But  it  seems  only  fair  to  say  that  these  were  examples  of 
departure  from  the  original  ideal  of  a  Church  and  its  purpose.  The  claim  of  Divine 
authority  to  control  the  minds,  hearts,  and  lives  of  the  people,  and  to  interfere  even 
forcibly  with  individual  freedom  of  thought  and  action,  was  designed,  in  the  first 
instance,  for  the  welfare  of  society  and  the  moral  elevation  of  its  various  members, 
and  in  that  light  must  not  be  ruthlessly  condemned.  But  the  principle  was  liable 
to  abuse,  and  the  mischiefs  wrought  by  its  abuse  have  been  terrible.    They  have 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [maim  xxt. 

been  tlie  caose  of  conflict  which  will  continue  as  long  as  the  claim  of  DiTine 
authority  is  made  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  sense  of  a  6od-giTen  right  to  indiridoal 
freedom  remains  on  the  other.  What  is  the  mischief  that  we  want  to  remedy  I  It 
is  the  belief  in  the  "Divine  "  authority  of  that  which  is  but  "  human"  ;  and  as  a 
consequence,  the  separation  of  the  human  soul  from  personal  and  direct  intercourse 
with  God — ^the  substitution,  in  short,  of  the  human  for  the  Divine.  We  have  thes« 
objections  to  it  which  are  fatal.  I.  That  it  is  false.  It  is  sufficient  to  expose  the 
fallacy  of  the  argument  by  which  the  claim  of  Divine  authority  is  defended.  And 
nothing  is  easier  than  this.  The  Church  of  Bome  asserts,  without  proof,  that  God 
Himself  lived  on  earth  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  who  transmitted,  or  delegated.  His 
Divine  power  and  authority  first  to  the  apostles,  and  subsequently  to  ihe  Church 
foimded  by  them,  and  to  every  succeeding  head  or  pope  of  that  Church  ;  and  that 
this  Divine  authority  extends  to  matters  of  faith,  i.e.  doctrines  to  be  believed,  to 
rites  and  ceremonies,  and  to  discipline  and  morals.  Over  all  these,  at  least,  the 
authority  of  the  Church  is  claimed  to  be  identical  with  the  authority  of  God.  But 
when  we  reverently  ask  on  what  ground  we  must  accept  the  alleged  Divine  authority 
of  Jesus,  in  the  first  instance,  we  are  distinctly  told  that  we  must  take  all  that  on 
the  authority  of  the  Church.  This  is  arguing  in  a  circle.  XL  The  claim  is  need- 
less. That  is  to  say,  men  would  get  on  in  all  things  good,  in  the  attainment  of 
truth,  in  the  adoption  of  religious  ceremonies,  and  in  the  practice  of  virtue,  quite  as 
well  without  a  divinely  instituted  Church  as  with  it.  It  is  not  hard  to  show  that 
the  absence  of  belief  in  the  claim  to  Divine  authority  has  not  been  generally  followed 
by  any  detrimental  results  either  to  religion  or  virtue.  What  is  true  and  good  and 
useful  is  entu-ely  discoverable  without  the  aid  of  miraculous  revelation.  It  may  be 
argued,  this  claim  is  needful,  because  the  mass  of  men  will  not,  or  cannot,  think 
for  themselves  ;  and  the  vast  majority  crave  for  certainty  in  things  Divine,  which 
certainly  they  cannot  attain  without  the  intervention  of  a  divinely  appointed 
authority  upon  earth.  Because  men  crave  for  an  external  authority  in  matters  of 
faith  and  duty,  does  not  involve  that  they  really  need  the  authority  they  desire. 
{Charles  Voysey,  B.A.)  A  prayer  for  Divine  erUightenment : — The  text  expresses 
the  sincere  desire  of  every  Christian.  He  feels  that  he  needs  a  Divine  Teacher  to 
enable  him  to  understand  Divine  truth  and  obey  the  Divine  precepts.  Hence  he 
approaches  the  fountain  of  all  wisdom  with  the  prayer  of  the  text.  I.  A  prayer  foe 
Divine  enlightenment.  1.  The  importance  of  a  knowledge  of  God's  ways.  2.  A 
willingness  to  follow  Divine  teachiag.  Every  Christian  is  a  learner,  conscious  of 
his  own  ignorance,  and  anxious  to  be  divinely  taught.  He  is  prepared  to  renounce 
everything  in  his  creed  and  conduct  not  in  harmony  with  the  Word  of  God.  3.  A 
willingness  to  obey  Divine  teachings.  "Lead  me  in  Thy  paths,"  We  must  first 
know  God's  wiU,  then  do  it.  II.  God  is  the  Teacher  of  His  people.  How  does 
He  teach  ?  Human  spirit  can  speak  with  human  spirit.  Who  shall  dare  to  say  that 
the  human  spirit  cannot  be  communicated  with  by  the  Divine  ?  1.  By  His  Word. 
2.  By  His  Spirit.  3.  By  His  providence.  III.  The  Psalmist's  method  of  obtain- 
ing the  Divine  teaching.  "  On  Thee  do  I  wait  all  the  day."  1.  Wait  humbly. 
2.  Wait  earnestly.  3.  Wait  believingly.  4,  Wait  perse veringly.  5.  God's  response 
to  prayer  is  certain.  Let  us  have  confidence  in  God.  If  the  greatest  Being  deserves 
the  profoundest  reverence  ;  if  the  kindest  Being  deserves  the  heartiest  thanks  ;  and 
if  the  best  of  Beings  deserves  the  warmest  love,  then  our  highest  reverence,  thanks, 
and  love  are  due  to  God.  (H.  Woodcock. )  Taught  in  God's  ways : — In  this 
verse  are  contained — 1.  The  Person  whom  he  implores,  Jehovah  ;  whom  he  describeth, 
leading  him,  teaching  him,  receiving  him  in  favour,  and  nourishing  him  (vers.  4, 
5,  6,  and  7).  2.  What  he  seeks.  God's  ways.  3.  By  what  means  ?  Teach  me,  and 
lead  me.  4.  The  reason.  Because  Thou  art  my  God,  and  I  trust  in  Thee.  So 
should  pastors  do.  Who  would  be  a  good  master,  let  him  be  a  good  apprentice ; 
and  this  same  should  all  private  Christians  desire,  that  God  would  teach  them  that 
way  which  will  please  Him  best,  even  His  own  ways.  {A.  Symson.)  Tlie  know- 
ledge  of  God  in  His  ways : — Two  ways  in  which  we  may  understand  this  Psalm.  The 
writer  may  mean  it  as  a  prayer  for  direction,  that  he  may  be  taught  what  to  do, 
how  to  walk  so  as  to  please  God.  Or  that  God  would  declare  Himself  to  the 
petitioner,  and  manifest  to  him  what  He  is  doing  ;  that  God  would  show  His  own 
ways  to  David,  and  teach  him  the  issue  of  the  hidden  paths  in  which  he  was  walk- 
ing towards  Him  ;  not  the  paths  the  wi'iter  ought  to  follow,  but  those  which  the 
Almighty  was  pursuing.  Consider  this  latter  view.  Such  petitions  and  such  com- 
plaints are  common  in  the  Scriptures,  and  natural  to  the  heart  of  man.  They  are 
found  in  the  secret  thoughts,  and  not  seldom  in  the  expressed  prayers  of  experienced 


PSALM  XXV.]  TSE  PSALMS.  497 

and  advanced  Christians.  Job  was  no  common  adept  in  the  use  of  grace,  and  yet  he 
earnestly  begs,  "Show  me  wherefore  Thou  contendeat  with  me."  Jeremiah  was  a 
deeply  exercised  man,  yet  he  could  plainly  perceive  the  difiFerence  in  his  own  mind 
between  belief  and  faith,  between  principle  and  practice.  He  says  to  God,  "  Let  me 
talk  with  Thee  of  Thy  judgments."  In  the  text  the  Psabnist  appears  to  have  the 
natural  feeling  more  subdued.  He  caimot  tell  what  God  is  doing.  It  is  all  dark 
and  mysterious,  and  probably  he  thought  that  on  that  account  he  could  not  learn 
any  lesson  of  wisdom  from  it  :  a  conclusion  which  does  by  no  means  follow.  It  is 
not,  "Show  me  Thy  way,  0  Lord,"  but  ways  ;  plural,  not  singular,  not  as  though 
it  were  one  and  definite.  What  is  mysterious,  but  intricate  and  manifold,  often 
crossing  one  another,  and  apparently  inexplicable,  on  account  of  seeming  contradic- 
tions ;  not  merely  such  as  we  do  not  understand  on  account  of  our  ignorance,  but 
such  as  seem  impossible  to  be  explained,  because  of  their  contrariety  in  themselves. 
And  in  very  deed  this  is  often  the  appearance  of  the  ways  of  God.  They  are  not 
only  so  plural,  but  so  infinite  in  their  plurali^ ;  so  intertwined  with  and  intersect- 
ing each  other  that  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  if  they  were  fully  laid  open  to  our 
view  we  would  not  be  able  to  understand  them,  so  intricate  is  their  network.  There 
is  not  a  circumstance  that  occurs  to  ourselves  or  to  others  that  is  not  an  organised 
part  of  God's  instrumentality  for  bringing  His  purposes  to  pass.  Consider  the  ways 
in  which  God  deals  with  a  soul  in  mercy.  1.  In  awakening,  warning,  and  opening 
the  eyes.  2.  God's  ways  in  securing  to  Himself  the  heart  of  His  child  on  earth  are 
oftentimes  perplexing.  Discipline  may  succeed  when  love  fails.  3.  The  ways  in 
which  a  soul  is  led  to  feel  after  and  find  the  Lord.  No  one  can  teU  beforehand  of 
another  or  of  himself  what  will  be  the  efiTective  way,  or  what  will  fail.  4.  It  is  the 
same  in  the  teaching  and  building  up  of  a  soul.  {Gf.  Jeans,  M.A.)  David's 
desire  in  the  time  of  trouble: — I.  The  petition.  David  may  have  meant,  "Show 
me  Thy  ways,  0  Lord,  in  Thy  providence."  He  may  have  wished  a  clearer  insight 
into  the  great  ways  of  God  in  His  grace.  He  may  have  desired  to  know  more  dis- 
tinctly the  path  in  which  he  should  walk.  See  how  earnestly  he  urges  his  plea  :  he 
has  every  sort  of  motive  in  it.  There  is  the  plea  of  blindness,  of  ignorance,  of  utter 
weakness.  II.  The  plea.  1.  "Thou  art  the  God  of  my  salvation."  2.  It  is  the 
God  of  MY  salvation.  3.  He  says,  "On  Thee  do  I  wait  aU  the  day,"  that  is, 
throughout  the  whole  day.  Points  for  consideration.  See  what  the  true  mark  of  a 
spiritual  man  is.  See  that  God's  ways  are  always  deep.  His  providence — ^how  often 
it  is  intricate.  The  administrations  of  His  grace — how  profound  they  are.  3.  See 
the  humbleness  of  sanctified  affliction.  Sanctified  affliction,  because  it  is  quite  a 
mistake  to  suppose  that  all  affliction  is  blessed  to  a  child  of  Godi.  It  may  ultimately 
tend  to  good,  but  there  are  many  afflictions  that  are  not  immediate  blessings  to  him. 
{J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  0  Lord,  teach  me  Thy  paths. — The  Lord' s  paths : — The 
wicked  say  to  God,  Depart  from  us,  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  Thy  ways  ;  the 
good  man  acknowledges  God  in  everything,  and  he  commits  himself  entirely  to  His 
guidance  and  guardian  care.  I.  The  prayer.  The  subject  of  the  prayer — "  Lord's 
paths."  1.  Paths  of  Divine  providence.  Often  dark,  mysterious — always  wise  and 
right  and  good.  2.  Paths  of  grace.  Way  of  holiness,  happiness,  &c.  Way  through 
the  desert  to  Canaan.  Sometimes  obscure  and  clouded.  Pillar  of  cloud  necessary. 
3.  Paths  of  duty.  "  Lord,  what  wouldest  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  Duty  and  ease, 
duty  and  interest,  duty  and  desires,  often  at  variance.  The  prayer  itself  is  for 
Divine  teaching — "  Lord,  teach  me."  Here  is  an  admission  of  ignorance,  of  insuffi- 
ciency,  of  anxiety,  and  of  application  to  the  right  source.     "Lord,  teach  me" — 

1.  Clearly  to  imderstand  Thy  paths.  2.  Heartily  to  approve  of  them.  3.  Constantly 
to  walk  in  them.  Notice— II.  The  importance  of  this  prayer.  It  is  important 
to  our  intellectual  and  spiritual  improvement.  To  grow  in  knowledge,  path  shine 
more  and  more,  &c.  (2  Pet.  i.  5).     {J.  Burns,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Lead  me  in  Thy  truth,  aod  teach  me. — Chiiding  and  teaching: — A  short 
but  expressive  prayer.  AU  need  it.  We  need  it  when  we  are  surrounded  with 
gloom,  when  we  are  tempted,  and  when  we  find  our  path  very  rough.  I.  The 
petition  foe,  guidance.     We  need  it  because — 1.  We  are  ignorant  of  the  future. 

2.  The  way  is  dark.  3.  We  need  thus  to  pray,  from  a  deep  conviction  that  we  dare 
not  go  alone.  4.  Because  we  are  so  weak.  The  Psalmist  asks  that  God  will  lead 
him  according  to  His  own  revealed  will.  "  In  Thy  truth."  II.  The  petition  for 
instruction.     How  much  we  need  to  learn.     How  little  we  know  after  all  these 

iears.     We  don't  know  our  bodies,  still  less  our  souls.     We  know  not  about  time, 
ow  precious  it  is,  but  yet  less  of  eternity.     How  little  we  know  of  life  or  of  men. 
3a 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxv. 

Therefore  we  need  to  pray,  "  Lord,  t^ach  me."  (  William  Scott.)  On  Thee  do  I 
wait  all  the  day. — How  to  spend  the  day  with  God: — Who  can  truly  say  this? 
Who  among  us  lives  such  a  life  of  communion  with  God  ?  This  waiting  is  that  of 
patient  expectation  and  constant  attendance.  God  was  keeping  David  in  suspense. 
He  could  not  tell  what  was  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  But  he  waits  continually 
on  Him.  And  so,  in  like  circumstances,  must  we.  I.  What  is  it  to  wait  upon 
God  ?  1.  It  is  to  live  a  life  of  desire  towards  Him.  Our  desire  should  be,  not  only 
towards  the  good  things  God  gives,  but  towards  God  Himself.  2.  It  is  to  live  a 
life  of  delight  in  God.  Desire  is  love  in  motion,  as  a  bird  upon  the  wing.  Delight 
is  love  at  rest,  as  a  bird  upon  the  nest.  3.  It  is  a  life  of  dependence  on  God,  as  the 
child  waits  on  the  father.  4.  It  is  a  life  of  devotedness  to  God,  as  the  servant 
waits  on  his  master.  5.  And  it  is  to  make  His  will  our  rule  ;  for  our  practice  or  for 
our  patience,  as  the  will  of  His  providence  may  ordain.  II.  This  we  must  do 
EVERY  DAY,  AND  ALL  DAY  LONG.  1.  Every  day.  Servants  in  the  courts  of  princes 
have  their  weeks  or  months  of  waiting  appointed  them,  and  are  tied  to  attend 
only  at  certain  times  ;  but  God's  servants  must  never  be  out  of  waiting.  Sabbath- 
days  and  week-days,  idle  days  and  busy  days,  days  of  prosperity  and  of  adversity. 
2.  Toto  die, — or  all  the  day  through.  By  casting  our  daily  care  upon  Him.  By 
managing  our  daily  business  for  Him.  Receiving  our  daily  comforts  from  Him. 
Eesisting  onr  daily  temptations,  and  doing  our  daily  duties,  in  the  strength  of  His 
grace.  Application  :  Consider  this  need  of  waiting  on  God  at  particular  times.  At 
family  worship.  When  teaching  your  children.  At  shop  or  business.  At  meal 
times.  On  friendly  visits.  God  waits  to  be  gracious  to  those  who  wait  on  Him. 
{Matthew  Henry.)  Waiting  on  God : — I.  Illustrate  the  spirit  and  meaning 
OF  THIS  verse.  1.  It  does  not  mean  that  David  was  incessantly  occupied  with 
religious  exercises.  2.  The  words  are  quite  consistent  with  a  knowledge  of  many 
transgressions.  3.  The  words  involve  a  figurative  meaning.  This  "waiting"  is 
the  spirit  of  trust,  of  loving  obedience,  of  hope  and  confidence,  of  a  most  intimate 
friendship,  of  the  deepest  reverence.  II.  In  what  way  would  a  day  be  spent 
BY  ONE  WHO  sincerely  UTTERED  THESE  WORDS  ?  1.  The  day  would  be  begun  with 
God.  2.  One  who  has  begun  the  day  with  God  will  remember  His  presence,  and 
seek  His  favour  through  the  day.  What  is  wanted  of  all  of  us  is  to  carry  the 
habit  of  religion  into  our  ordinary  pursuits.  ( W.  G.  Barrett. )  Prolonged  wait- 
ing upon  God: — The  thoughtless  rush  before  God,  in  which  we  expect  to  get  all 
we  covet  and  away  again,  is  worse  than  sacrilege.  The  unapproachable  glories 
cannot  be  known  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  One  of  Ruskin's  pupils  once  said 
to  him,  "The  instant  I  entered  the  gallery  at  Florence  I  knew  what  you  meant 
by  the  supremacy  of  Boticelli."  "In  an  instant,  did  you?"  was  the  somewhat 
withering  reply.  "It  took  me  twenty  years  to  find  it  out."  If  we  wait  before 
God  for  a  life-time  we  shall  only  just  begin  to  feel  His  enchantments.  {Thomas 
O.  Selby.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Remember,  0  Lord,  Thy  tender  mercies.— Temp's  to  rememier  and  to 
forget : — It  is  only  by  a  figure  of  speech  that  we  can  speak  of  God  as  remembering 
and  forgetting.  It  is  an  accommodation  to  out  human  weakness  and  ignorance.  He 
who  sees  all  things  at  a  glance  has  no  n^^  <d  to  remember,  and  is  incapable  of 
forgetting.  Yet  God  acts  towards  us  as  if  He  both  remembered  and  forgot,  and  it 
is  enough  for  us  to  think  of  Him  in  that  way.  Here  the  Psalmist's  mind  seemed  to 
sway  backward  and  forward  between  these  two  words  "remember"  and  "remember 
not."  And  so — I.  We  wish  to  be  remembered  by  God.  It  is  sweet  to  be  had  in 
remembrance  by  friends,  No  one  of  us  likes  to  be  forgotten.  The  religious  man 
desires,  above  all  things,  to  be  remembered  of  God.  It  is  the  sign  and  proof  of  His 
sincerity.  If  there  be  no  serious  and  solemn  purpose  in  life ;  if  all  its  aims  and 
motives  and  actuating  impulses  are  vulgar,  sensual,  selfish,  there  will  be  no  wish 
to  have  God's  eye  upon  it ;  there  will  be  a  sort  of  relief  in  the  thought  that  He 
takes  no  notice  of  it,  that  He  passes  it  by  in  forgetfiilness.  But  to  one  whose 
endeavours  are  after  the  higher  life  the  thought  of  having  no  place  in  God's  mind 
is  dreadful.  II.  We  are  happy  in  the  thought  that  God  remembers.  But  we 
wish,  like  the  Psalmist,  that  He  could  both  remember  and  forget.  Memory  brought 
back  to  David  the  sins  of  bygone  years.  0  God,  he  cried,  forget  all  those  crooked 
and  dark  things,  as  I  would  forget  them,  and  call  to  mind  only  Thine  own  goodness 
and  love.  W^hat  a  strangely  mingled  cup  it  is  that  memory  gives  us  to  drink — full 
to  the  brim,  overflowing  with  sweetness.  Yet  we  cannot  take  a  deep  draught  of  the 
cap  without  coming  to  bitter  ingredients,  nay,  perhaps  to  fiery  morsels  that  bum 


MALM  XXV.  3  THE  PSALMS.  49f 

and  blister  the  month.  Memory  is  as  the  Ebal  and  Gerizim  of  our  lives.  The 
Psalmist  wished  to  separate  these  two  elements  of  memory.  He  was  afraid  lest  God 
should  eternalise  those  old  sins  by  keeping  them  in  mind.  He  did  not  like  to 
remember  them  himself.  He  wished  to  think  only  of  the  brighter,  lovelier  things 
• — the  Divine,  the  promising,  the  hopeful.  0  God,  forget  the  evil,  that  I  may  forget 
it  too.  Yes,  forget  as  far  as  possible  the  dark  scenes  of  the  years  that  lie  behind. 
Porget  the  very  sorrows  and  trials  and  bereavements,  unless,  indeed,  they  are  so 
recent  and  so  acute  that  it  would  only  mock  you  to  ask  you  to  forget  them.  Bring 
•with  you  out  of  the  passing  years  a  large  and  generous  legacy  of  sweet  and  pure  and 
holy  memories.  Be  sure  that  all  the  mercies  which  we  have  ever  known,  all  the 
Divine  love  and  pity  and  helpfulness  which  we  have  ever  proved,  all  that  com- 
passion and  sympathy  of  Jesus  Christ  which  have  been  our  stay,  will  be  repeated  in 
the  coming  days.  He  will  not  forget.  {J.  G.  Oreenhough,  M.A.)  The  Divifte 
remembrance : — An  aged  Christian,  lying  on  his  deathbed  in  a  state  of  such 
extreme  weakness  that  he  was  often  entirely  unconscious  of  all  around  him,  was 
asked  the  cause  of  his  perfect  peace.  He  replied,  "When  I  am  able  to  think,  I 
think  of  Jesus ;  and  when  I  am  unable  to  think  of  Him,  I  know  he  is  thinking 
of  me."  For  they  have  been  for  ever, — 2Tie  eternity  of  God's  mercies: — A  fair 
commendation  of  God's  mercies  from  the  eternity  thereof.  His  mercies  had  no 
beginning,  as  Himself  had  none,  and  shall  have  no  end — From  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting Thou  art  our  God.  As  the  ocean  and  main  sea  can  never  be  exhausted, 
but  would  furnish  water  to  all  the  world,  if  every  one  should  bring  vessels  to  draw 
water  therefrom  ;  so  if  we  have  faith  and  prayer  to  seek  grace  from  God,  He  is  all- 
sufficient  in  Himself  to  furnish  us  all.  {A  Symson. )  The  antiquity  of  mercy : — 
Let  the  ancientness  of  Divine  love  draw  up  our  hearts  to  a  very  dear  and  honourable 
esteem  of  it.  Pieces  of  antiquity,  though  of  base  metal,  and  otherwise  of  little  use  or 
value,  how  venerable  are  they  with  learned  men  !  and  ancient  charters,  how  careful 
are  men  to  preserve  them  ;  although  they  contain  but  temporary  privileges,  and 
sometimes  but  of  trivial  moment !  How,  then,  should  the  great  charter  of  heaven, 
so  much  older  than  the  world,  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance,  and  the  thoughts 
thereof  be  very  precious  to  us  ;  lying  down,  rising  up,  and  all  the  day  long  accom- 
panying us  !    (/.  Cole. ) 

Ver.  7.  Remember  not  the  sins  of  my  yovXh.— Youthful  sins:— The  Psalm 
belongs  to  the  later  days  of  David.  In  youth  we  live  in  the  present ;  in  age  we 
live  in  the  past.  I.  Youthful  sins  aee  kemembekedwhen  the  sinnee  attains 
TO  AN  ADVANCED  AGE.  Generally  speaking,  the  youthful  sinner  is  a  thoughtless 
sinner.  He  does  not  trouble  about  the  sin  or  its  consequences.  There  is  a  fallacy 
about,  that  the  sins  of  youth  are  not  actual  sins.  If  youthful  follies  gradually 
developed  themselves  into  manly  virtues,  then  all  hail,  youthful  follies  !  But  if  sin 
always  remains  sin,  and  wild  oats  sown  will  only  grow  up  wild  oats,  then  this  is  a 
fallacy  indeed.  There  comes  a  time  when  youthful  sins  rise  up  to  remembrance, 
both  with  the  sinner  and  with  the  saint.  The  saint  may  know  that  his  sins  are 
forgiven,  but  that  does  not  alter  the  ^rief  with  which  he  remembers  them.  How 
much  more  sadly  true  this  is  of  the  sinner,  who  does  not  know  of  sin  forgiven. 
There  comes  a  time  when  old  iniquities,  long  forgotten,  shall  rise  again  from  the 
dead,  and  like  spectres  haunt  the  man.  There  will  come  a  time  when  the  sins  of 
the  past  will  march  before  you  and  demand  judgment ;  and  what  then  ?    II.  When 

IN  ADVANCED   AGE    THE  SINS  OF  YOUTH  ABE  EEMEMBEEED,  THE  CEY  OF   THE  SOUL 

IS,  0  GoD  FOEGET  WHAT  I  MUST  EEMEMBEE.  David  does  not  ask  that  he  might 
forget  his  sins,  but  that  God  would  forget  them.  It  would  not  be  well  for  us  to 
forget  them,  even  when  they  are  forgiven.  Are  your  sins  in  God's  memory  as  well 
as  in  your  own  ?  There  are  those  who  have  their  sins  in  the  memory  of  God,  but  not 
in  their  own.  Others  have  their  sins  in  their  own  memory  and  in  the  memory  of 
God  too.  And  others  have  their  sins  in  their  own  memory,  but  not  in  God's. 
(Archibald  G.  Brovm.)  The  sins  of  youth: — We  have  no  ground  for  supposing 
that  the  youth  of  David  was  sinful  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  that  he  lived 
otherwise  than  "soberly,  righteously,  and  godly"  ;  or  that  he  did  not  serve  God 
purely,  willingly,  and  lovingly.  So  far  as  we  know,  his  offences  against  God  in  his 
youth  were  but  the  inevitable  faults  of  his  age — shortcomings,  indeed,  negligences 
and  ignorances,  and  so  things  to  be  deplored  and  avoided  ;  but  there  is  nothing  like 
any  intimation  of  a  vicious  youth  recorded  against  him  in  the  Word  of  God. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  always  undeveloped  tendencies  towards  evil  lurking  in  every 
youthful  heart,  and  on  their  encouragement  or  discouragement  the  tenor  of  the 


500  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxv. 

future  life  depends.  The  presumption  is,  that  David  was  no  longer  young  when 
this  Psalm  was  composed.  So  we  have  this  lesson,  that  his  penitence  and  sorrow 
for  sin  were  not  things  which,  being  once  expressed,  were  thought  of  no  more,  but 
that  they  were  ever  before  him,  for  years  and  years  after  his  sins  were  committed. 
So  must  it  be  with  those  whose  early  years  are  stained  with  the  defilements  of  sin. 
Either  they  will  go  on  as  they  have  begun,  adding  sin  to  sin,  or  they  must  be  con- 
tent to  pass  the  remainder  of  their  days  as  mourning  penitents.  As  we  sow  we 
shall  reap.  If  we  have  engaged  in  a  course  of  sin  we  must  be  content  to  have  a 
course  of  sorrow  afterwards.  Is  a  course  of  indulgence  in  any  sin  whatever  worth 
the  miseries  into  which  sin  inevitably  leads  ?  David  is  said  to  be  a  man  after  God's 
own  heart ;  but  only  because,  when  he  fell,  he  did  not  continue  in  sin.  He  was  not 
a  man  after  God's  own  heart  with  his  sins,  but  without  them,  because  of  his 
readiness  to  cast  them  from  him,  and  of  his  life-long,  loving,  trustful  penitence 
afterwards.  (F.  E.  Paget.)  The  registry  gate: — The  true  significance  of  the 
present  is  not  revealed  in  the  present.  The  present  usually  tells  us  only  half 
truths,    and   sometimes    falsehoods.      Only    the   lapse    of   years   makes   us   dis- 

Eassionate  judges  of  our  earlier  selves.  Hence  the  past  comes  into  our  maturer 
fe  as  an  element  of  pain  and  reproach.  The  text  is  the  utterance  of  a  rich  and 
ripe  experience — of  a  man  about  whom  the  shadows  have  begun  to  lengthen,  and 
who  is  letting  a  sorrowful  and  faultful  past  come  home  to  his  matured  judgment, 
to  be  tried  by  its  higher  standards  and  by  its  clearer  discrimination.  In  view 
of  what  we  know  of  David's  youth,  why  does  he  so  earnestly  plead  that  tho 
sins  of  his  youth  be  not  remembered  by  God  ?  The  answer  is  found  in  the  stand- 
point from  which  David  contemplated  his  life  ;  for  while  the  cool  retrospect  of  a  life 
brings  disappointment  and  disgust  to  every  thoughtful  man,  the  nature  and  degree 
of  this  disgust  are  regulated  according  to  the  standard  of  judgment  which  is  applied. 
The  majority  of  men  come,  sooner  or  later,  to  think  of  themselves  as  fools  in  their 
earlier  years,  but  they  do  not  likewise  come  to  think  of  themselves  as  sinners. 
When  one  begins  to  review  his  life  from  the  standpoint  of  his  moral  relation  to  God, 
he  sees  through  a  glass  which  gi-eatly  enlarges  the  range  of  his  retrospect,  thoughts 
as  well  as  deeds,  intention  as  well  as  performance,  motive  no  less  than  act — enter 
into  his  review.  Secret  faults  come  under  inspection,  with  presumptuous  sins ; 
what  he  is  not  as  well  as  what  he  is.  The  truth  assumed  in  these  words  is  one 
which  concerns  the  character  of  God,  which  gives  tone  to  this  whole  prayer  of 
David,  and  which  it  very  much  concerns  us  to  see  as  plainly  as  he  did — the  truth, 
that  God  cannot  be  passive  in  any  moral  relation.  Sin  cannot  come  to  the  notice  of 
God  without  setting  something  in  motion  against  itself,  any  more  than  the  poles  of 
a  battery  can  be  brought  together,  without  starting  an  electric  current.  God  cannot 
let  sin  alone.  As  a  Lawgiver,  He  must  take  cognisance  of  violated  law.  As  a 
Father,  He  must  strive  to  restore  an  erring  son.  As  an  Administrator,  He  must 
anticipate  the  far-reaching  consequences  of  a  violation  of  moral  order.  Here  men 
make  a  vital  mistake.  They  are  deceived,  and  mock  God  by  thinking  that  He  can, 
by  any  possibility,  be  false  to  His  own  pure  Being.  They  measure  Him  by  their 
own  standards,  and  think  that  their  own  good-natured  tolerance  of  sin  is  measured 
in  Him.  If  a  man  will  once  deliberately  consider  the  out-branchings  and  con- 
sequences of  a  single  sin,  even  in  the  light  of  the  familiar  laws  of  cause  and  effect, 
he  will  readily  see  what  a  stupendous  problem  is  that  of  forgiveness,  and  wUl  echo 
the  scribes'  question, — "Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only?"  We  are  not  to 
expect  God  will  literally  shut  our  sins  out  of  His  remembrance.  Nor  that  He  will 
change  His  attitude  towards  sin.  While  God's  relation  to  sin  remains  fixed.  His 
relation  to  the  sinner  may  be  changed.  How,  in  answer  to  such  a  prayer  as  David's, 
will  man  stand  related  to  the  follies  and  sins  of  his  past  life  ?  He  will  not  be 
entirely  rid  of  their  consequences,  especially  of  their  physical  consequences.  Nor 
will  God  cease  to  use  the  faultful  past  in  the  new  man's  education.  But  He  will 
never  taunt  him  with  the  past.  He  wants  to  use  the  past  only  as  a  help,  not  as  a 
sting.  And  into  the  heart  there  will  come  a  tranquil  rest,  a  deep  peace,  founded 
not  upon  hope  of  retrieving  the  past,  for  there  may  be  little  time  left ;  but  simply 
upon  the  conviction  that  God  ha',  taken  the  whole  sadly  confused  and  stained  life 
into  His  own  hands.  And  there  will  come  a  turning  with  fresh  zest  to  redeem  the 
time  which  remains.  [Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  Youth  should  be  given  to  God: 
— The  first-bom  should  be  sacrificed  to  God,  the  first-fruits  should  be  off'ered  to 
Him,  yea,  the  firstlings  of  beasts  if  they  had  not  been  redeemed,  their  necks 
behoved  to  have  been  broken.  Think  ye  not  that  God  hath  more  respect  of  the 
first-fruits  of  our  life  than  He  hath  of  the  first-fruits  or  firstlings  of  bullocks  ?    Thou 


PSALM  XXV.]  THE  PSALMS.  501 

sbouldst  consecrate  thy  beginnings  to  God  with  Josiah,  who  in  the  morning  of  his 
life,  even  early,  began  to  seek  the  Lord.     {Ibid. ) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Good  and  upright  is  the  Lord;  therefore  will  He  teach  sinners  in 
the  way. — The  guarantee  in  God  for  guidance  from  God : — The  Psalmist  exchanges 
petition  for  contemplation  ;  and  gazes  on  the  character  of  God,  in  order  thereby  to 
be  helped  to  confidence  in  an  answer  to  his  prayer.  Such  alternations  of  petition 
and  contemplation  are  the  very  heart-beats  of  devotion,  now  expanding  in  desire, 
and  now  closing  on  its  treasure  in  fruition.  Either  attitude  is  incomplete  without 
the  other.  Do  our  prayers  pass  into  such  still  contemplation  of  the  face  of  God  ? 
I.  The  Psalmist's  thottght  of  God.  "Good  and  upright."  God  equals  here, 
kind,  beneficent.  He  binds  the  two  quantities  together  in  the  feeling  of  their 
profoundest  harmony.  Neither  of  these  reaches  its  highest  beauty  and  supremest 
power  except  it  be  associated  with  the  other.  In  the  spectrum  analysis  of  that 
great  light  there  are  the  two  lines  ;  the  one  purest  white  of  righteousness,  and  the 
other  tinged  with  a  ruddier  glow,  the  line  of  love.  We  are  always  tempted  to 
wrench  the  two  apart.  Hence  you  get  types  of  religion  in  which  one  or  the  other 
is  emphasised  to  such  a  degree  as  almost  to  blot  out  the  other.  God  is  love.  We 
cannot  make  too  much  of  His  love,  unless  by  reason  of  it  we  make  too  little  of  His 
righteousness.  II.  The  calm  confidence  builded  on  this  conception  of  the 
Divine  charactee.  What  a  wonderful  "therefore"  that  is  ! — the  logic  of  faith, 
not  of  sense.  The  co-existence  of  these  two  aspects  in  the  perfect  Divine  character 
is  for  us  a  guarantee  that  He  cannot  leave  men,  however  guilty  they  may  be,  to 
grope  in  the  dark,  or  keep  His  lips  locked  in  silence.  The  Psalmist  does  not  mean 
guidance  as  to  practical  advantages  and  worldly  prosperity.  He  means  guidance  as 
to  the  one  important  thing,  the  sovereign  conception  of  duty,  the  eternal  law  of 
right  and  wrong.  What  is  love,  in  its  loftiest,  purest,  and  therefore  in  its  Divine 
aspect  ?  What,  except  an  infinite  desire  to  impart,  and  that  the  object  on  which  it 
falls  shall  be  blessed.  God  is  the  "giving"  God.  Not  our  happiness,  but  our 
rectitude,  is  God's  end  in  all  that  He  does  for  us.  Since  righteousness  is  blended 
with  love,  therefore  He  comes,  and  must  desire  to  bring  all  wanderers  back  into  the 
paths  which  are  His  own.  God  can  find  His  way  to  my  heart,  and  infuse  there 
illumination,  and  pure  affections,  and  make  my  eye  clear  to  discern  what  is  right. 
III.  The  condition  on  which  the  fulfilment  of  this  confidence  depends. 
"The  meek  will  He  guide,"  &c.  The  condition  of  our  hearing  and  profiting  by 
the  guidance  is  meekness ;  or  what  we  might  call  docility,  of  which  the  prime 
element  is  the  submission  of  our  own  wills  to  God's.  The  reason  why  we  go  wrong 
about  our  duties  is  mainly  that  we  do  not  supremely  want  to  go  right,  but  rather  to 
gratify  inclinations,  tastes,  or  passions.  Some  of  us  do  not  wish  to  know  what  God 
wishes  us  to  do.  Some  of  us  cannot  bear  suspense  of  judgment,  or  of  decision,  and 
are  always  in  a  hurry  to  be  in  action,  and  think  the  time  lost  that  is  spent  in 
waiting  to  know  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak.  If  you  do  not  clearly  see  what  to 
do,  then  clearly  you  may  see  that  you  are  to  do  nothing.  Wait  till  God  points  the 
path,  and  wish  Him  to  point  it,  and  hush  the  noises  that  prevent  your  hearing  His 
voice,  and  keep  your  wills  in  absolute  submission  ;  and,  above  all,  be  sure  that  you 
act  out  your  convictions,  and  have  no  knowledge  of  duty  which  is  not  represented 
in  your  practice,  and  you  will  get  all  the  light  which  you  need  :  sometimes  being 
taught  by  errors,  no  doubt,  often  being  left  to  make  mistakes  as  to  what  is  expe- 
dient in  regard  to  worldly  prosperity,  but  being  infallibly  guided  as  to  the  path 
of  duty  and  the  path  of  peace  and  righteousness.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Our 
Divine  Teacher : — Men  die  for  lack  of  knowledge,  hence  teaching  has  ever  held  a 
high  place  in  God's  dealing  with  sinful  man,  and  the  Divine  Teacher — the  Holy 
Spirit— not  only  points  out  the  way  of  life,  but  confers  power  to  pursue  that  way.  The 
first  without  the  second  would  prove  ineffective  to  accomplish  the  salvation  of  any 
man.  "It  would  have  been,"  says  T.  G.  Selby,  "a  cruel  absurdity  if  some  one 
had  stepped  up  to  Caliban  or  to  Quasimodo,  the  dwarf  in  Victor  Hugo's  Notre  Dame, 
who  impersonates  all  ugliness,  and  had  said  "Be  Apollo,  he  is  the  one  mould  of 
physical  perfection  into  which  you  may  try  and  compass  yourself."  It  would  be 
insane  stupidity  if  Tadema  or  Burne  Jones  were  to  go  to  some  limbless  monstrosity 
in  a  penny  show  and  say,  "Join  our  school,  paint  according  to  our  methods, 
reproduce  our  best  characteristics."  The  poor  wretch  lacks  the  natural  endowments 
which  fit  him  to  take  his  first  lessons  in  art.  The  meditation  of  a  devout  soul  upon 
God : — God  guides  the  soul  in  a  certain  way.  What  is  it  ?  I.  It  is  the  way  of 
MORAL  excellence.     It  is  described  as — 1.  "Judgment,"  i.e.  rectitude.     2.  "His 


502  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIU  ivsASM.  XXT. 

way,"  the  way  wliich  is  in  accordance  with  their  nature.  3.  "His  covenant."  All 
these  expressions  mean  holiness,  for  thereinto  doth  God  guide  the  soul.  II.  Of 
EXPERIMENTAL  BLESSEDNESS.     "All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy"  (ver.  10). 

1.  They  experience  the  mercy  of  God  in  their  use.  In  healing  their  diseases, 
sostaimng  their  existence,  removing  their  perplexities,  &c.  2.  The  truth  of  God  in 
their  use.  "Mercy  and  truth."  III.  Of  forgiveness.  "Pardon  mine  iniquity," 
&c.  (ver.  11).  1.  There  is  an  urgent  need  for  pardon  ;  and — 2.  A  sovereign  reason, — 
"Thy  name's  sake."  IV.  Of  moral  wealth.  Such  wealth  is — 1.  Abundant. 
"  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease."    He  shall  lodge  in  goodness,  as  the  margin  has  it. 

2.  Permanent,  "dwell."  3.  Transmissible,  "  His  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth. "  A 
truly  good  man  can  transmit  his  goodness  to  his  children,  and  bring  them  into  the 
spiritual  inheritance.  And  these — not  the  owners  of  broad  acres — are  the  true  in- 
heritor of  the  earth.  4.  Free.  "  What  man  is  he  that  feareth  the  Lord  ?  Him,"&c. 
It  does  not  matter  who  he  is,  if  he  has  true  religion.  V.  Of  Divine  friendship. 
"The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  The  man  who  walks  in  this 
way  gets  so  intimate  and  grows  so  friendly  with  God  that  he  becomes  initiated  into 
His  secrets,  acquainted  with  His  counsels.  There  is  no  mystery  in  this.  We  see  it 
every  day  where  there  is  strong  mutual  sympathy  between  two  minds.  VI.  Of 
ultimate  deliverance.  "He  shall  pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  net."  1.  Men  are 
entangled  in  dangers.  The  devil  has  laid  his  snares  in  all  directions.  2.  True 
men  will  be  delivered.  The  "  net "  will  be  broken,  the  snarer  confounded,  and  the 
soul  set  free.  8.  For  their  eyes  are  ever  towards  the  Lord.  God  fills  up  the  horizon 
of  a  good  man's  soul,     {ffomilist.) 

Ver.  9.  The  meek  will  He  teacli  His  way. — The  humble : — The  heathen  moralists 
give  many  admirable  counsels,  but  always  forget  humility.  They  had  not,  indeed, 
the  word  for  it.  The  term  "humility"  before  Christianity  meant  what  is  base, 
despicable,  vile.  Humility  can  only  come  with  the  knowledge  of  one's  self,  and 
man  did  not  truly  know  himself  until  he  had  made  a  study  of  himself  in  the  light 
of  the  holy  God.  Comparing  himself  only  with  his  fellow-men,  he  would  never 
learn  humility.  There  is  something  still  more  ^eflScacious  than  the  sight  of  the 
perfection  of  Jesus  Christ  to  produce  humility,  it  is  the  sight  of  His  love.  It  is  at 
the  foot  of  the  Cross  humility  is  born.  Christian  humility  should  penetrate  our 
entire  being.  Our  intelligence  must  be  humble.  We  are  in  danger  of  forgetting 
this  in  this  age  of  criticism  and  discussion.  Only  that  intelligence  which  humbles 
itself  before  God  can  readily  teach.  Our  heart  must  be  humble.  We  can  submit 
our  intelligence  entirely  to  God,  sacrifice  our  reason  to  Him,  boast  of  a  blind  faith, 
and  shelter  in  our  hearts  a  whole  world  of  pride.  So  far  as  humility  has  not  yet 
reached  and  conquered  our  heart,  it  is  but  a  theory.  It  happens,  in  the  Church, 
that  the  men  to  whom  God  has  dispensed  the  finest  gifts  advance  in  humility  in  the 
same  measure  as  they  advance  in  age  and  experience.  Consider  the  promises  which 
God  makes  to  the  humble.  "  The  meek  will  He  teach  His  way."  Unless  man  be 
taught  he  will  never  find  God's  way.  To-day  man's  intelligence  has  assumed  an 
immense  and  superb  confidence  in  itself.  It  has  faith  in  its  powers  ;  it  thinks  that 
it  has  come  to  an  end  of  all  problems,  that  it  will  surmount  every  obstacle.  It  is 
not  in  the  power  of  ignorance  and  mediocrity  to  produce  humility  ;  very  often  they 
nourish  pride.  Let  intelligence  grow,  but  let  it  never  forget  its  dependence  on 
God.  People  talk  of  the  benefits  of  trial.  Yes,  when  it  is  accepted  in  humbleness 
of  heart :  otherwise  it  will  rather  harden.  It  is  a  marvellous  thing  that  God  has 
never  wanted  to  be  served  by  the  strong,  but  always  by  the  humble.  Pass  in 
review  all  those  who  have  served  His  designs,  all  those  by  whom  He  has  taught  and 
saved  men,  you  will  see  that  they  all  have  been  formed  in  the  school  of  humility. 
Let,  then,  those  who  work  for  God  lay  hold  on  the  thought  that  to  humble  souls 
alone  has  God  taught  the  way  of  success.  {E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The  humble  taught 
the  Lord' s  way : — ^The  righteous  Lord  will  teach  sinners  His  way  ;  but  the  sinners, 
in  order  to  be  thus  divinely  taught,  must  be  humble.  Men  are  comparatively 
little  attracted  by  the  more  quiet  and  passive  virtues  of  life,  and  among  these  the 
virtue  of  humility  is  one  of  the  least  popular.  The  truth  is,  that  we  are  still  under 
the  influence  of  pagan  notions  about  it.  The  philosophers  of  the  past  never  under- 
stood it,  Christianity  has  transformed  and  ennobled  the  despised  word  by  giving 
us  the  thing  itself.  In  Christ  we  see  that  humility  makes  no  man  contemptible. 
The  words  before  us  present  this  virtue  of  humility  under  one  special  aspect.  Man 
has  something  to  learn,  and  God  has  something  to  teach,  and  humility  is  teachuble- 
ness.     Humility  is  the  result  of  self-knowledge,  and  this  cannot  be  obtained  until 


PSALM  XXY.1  THE  PSALMS.  503 

msn  has  learned  to  know  himself  in  the  light  of  God's  wisdom  and  holiness.  So 
long  as  he  compares  himself  with  his  fellow-creatures  around  him,  it  may  seem  to 
him  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  such  an  element  of  character  as  this.  God  teaches 
U3  humility  in  another  way.  He  shows  us  His  love  in  Christ.  How  can  we  be 
proud  when  we  know  that  God  has  loved  us,  and  that  Christ  has  died  for  us  ?  The 
very  faith  which  accepts  the  Gospel  has  its  root  in  lowliness  of  mind.  All  our 
Christian  life,  in  one  aspect  of  it,  is  a  growth  in  humility.  This  beautiful  virtue 
affects  our  whole  being,  rescuing  for  God  all  that  has  been  usurped  by  sin.  Our 
reason  must  be  humble.  Our  heart  must  be  humble.  Our  conduct  must  be  humble. 
God's  promise  to  "teach  His  way"  applies  to  our  knowledge  of  Divine  truth  ;  the 
everyday  dispensations  of  life ;  our  bearing  towards  others ;  and  to  our  Christian 
work.     {Clement  BailhacTu.) 

Yer.  10.  All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth  onto  such  as  keep  His 
covenant  and  His  testimonies. — The  dealings  of  God  with  His  ■people : — This  text 
is  intended  to  represent  a  universal  attribute  of  God,  in  all  His  ways  in  His  govern- 
ment of  the  world.  As  such  it  sets  before  us  an  important  element  of  strength  to 
the  Christian.  To  the  saved,  every  event,  of  whatsoever  kind  or  magnitude  it  may 
be,  or  seem  to  be,  is  under  the  ordering  of  one  sole  guiding  hand,  and  is  a  token 
of  mercy  and  truth.  I.  The  ascription  of  meecy  and  tktjth  to  all  the  paths 
OF  the  Lord.  Mercy  in  sparing  and  delivering  His  people  when  they  do  not 
deserve  it.  Truth,  in  that  it  is  in  accordance  with  promise.  His  Word  will  in  the 
end  be  found  faithful  to  the  letter,  and  whoever  takes  his  stand  on  that  shall  never 
be  ashamed.  There  is  a  close  connection  between  the  Word  of  God  and  His  paths. 
There  is  a  great  deal  implied  in  the  word  "  paths  " :  in  all  the  events  of  the  world 
we  may  see  God  moving,  see  by  faith,  that  is ;  for  His  paths  are  in  the  deep 
waters,  obliterated  from  view  in  the  very  act  of  making ;  His  footsteps  are  not 
known,  except  as  revealed  to  the  spirit  by  the  Spirit.  Whatever  comes  to  us  is  a 
path  of  God.  For  the  illustration  of  this  idea,  see  the  events  of  David's  history. 
You  cannot  unravel  the  web  of  Providence;  but  this  is  certain,  "all  the  paths  of 
the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth."  IL  The  persons  in  whom  this  attribute  of 
God's  acts  is  verified.  "Unto  such  as  keep  His  covenant."  Hereby  is  intended 
such  as  have  come  out  from  their  worldly  conversation,  and  are  endeavouring  to 
run  the  race  of  God's  children  as  Christians  in  the  world.  The  lowest  may  be  said 
in  some  sense  to  "keep  His  covenant."  The  highest  do  not  keep  it  perfectly. 
What  of  the  remainder  ?  (ff.  Jeans,  M.A.)  The  covenanter: — I.  The  spiritttal 
covenanter.  We  have  heard  of  the  old  Covenanters  of  Scotland.  I  have  a 
picture  of  one.  But  we  have  to  speak  of  those  who  at  this  day  keep  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord.  The  first  covenant  with  our  first  father  Adam  shuts  up  the  soul  in 
despair.  But  there  is  a  new  and  better  covenant.  God  has  shown  it  to  us,  and 
written  it  on  the  tablets  of  our  heart.  The  redeemed  man  has  been  the  subject  of 
a  special  call,  and  is  now  united  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  A  true  covenanter  says, 
"  Sooner  death  than  false  of  faith."  IL  The  covenanter's  notable  experience. 
"All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy,"  &c.  So,  then,  the  Lord  makes  many 
approaches  to  covenanting  men.  I  like  the  word  ' '  paths,"  for  it  seems  to  say  that  the 
Lord  has  walks  of  His  own.  He  makes  them  for  Himself,  and  comes  along  them 
quietly,  taking  us  at  unawares.  And  they  are  all  of  mercy  and  truth.  That  is  to 
say,  God  has  always  shown  the  truth  of  His  Word.  To  this  rule  there  is  no  excep- 
tion. (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  interpretive  value  of  obedience : — The  text  seems, 
at  first,  to  mean  that  the  Lord  is  merciful  and  faithful  to  such  as  do  His  will. 
They  shall  have  His  blessing.  As  they  deal  with  Him,  so  will  He  with  them. 
There  is  a  covenant,  a  spiritual  contract,  between  them :  on  the  one  hand,  so 
much  obedience  and  loyalty ;  on  the  other,  so  much  truth  and  mercy.  This  con- 
ception is  drawn  from  the  transactions  of  the  market,  and  in  its  lowest  terms 
puts  religion  on  the  level  of  mere  sale  and  barter.  There  is,  indeed,  an  element 
of  truth  in  it ;  see  Gal.  iv.  7,  8.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  they  who  work  just 
to  be  rewarded  by  God  will  miss  it  altogether.  The  true  reward  is  the  approval 
of  God,  and  they  alone  will  gain  it  who  think  more  of  God  than  of  themselves. 
This  is  the  distinction  made  in  New  Testament  between  faith  and  works.  The 
difference  is  seen  by  comparing  Jacob's  bargain  with  St.  Francis  Xavier's  "My 
God,  I  love  Thee,  not  because  I  hope  for  heaven  thereby,"  &c.  The  Christian 
saint  gives  everything  and  asks  nothing.  I  do  not  believe,  however,  that  the 
text  teaches  that  we  are  to  obey  God  in  order  that  He  may  be  merciful  and  true 
to  oa.    The  meaning,  I  take  it,  is  rather  that  those  who  obey  Him  are  thereby 


604  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxy. 

enabled  to  understand  His  ways,  and  to  see,  even  when  the  paths  of  the  Lord 
are  blind  and  steep,  that  they  are,  nevertheless,  the  paths  of  mercy  and  truth. 
They  who  keep  the  covenant  and  the  testimonies  of  God  have  their  eyes  opened 
to  know  the  purpose  and  motive  of  God's  acts.  The  secret  of  the  Lord,  the  under- 
standing of  His  strange  dealings  with  us,  is  open  and  plain  to  those  who  are 
near  to  Him,  who  fear  Him  with  the  fear  of  devout  reverence,  and  obey  Him  in 
the  keeping  of  His  covenant  and  testimonies.  L  This  is  plain  enough  in  ouk 
BELATiON  TO  THE  WORLD  OF  NATURE.  How  shall  we  come  into  complete  harmony 
of  eye  and  ear  and  touch  with  our  environment ;  how  shall  we  see  the  ' '  desirable, 
clear  light  of  the  new  morning,"  and  listen  fitly  to  the  music  of  the  brooks  ;  how 
shall  we  so  conduct  ourselves  that  the  sun  and  the  rain,  the  clouds  and  trees 
and  stars,  the  sights  and  sounds  of  nature,  shall  give  us  the  satisfaction  and 
benediction  that  God  intends  ?  The  way  is  as  evident  as  it  is  simple  and  homely  : 
we  mast  keep  the  covenant  and  the  testimonies  of  God  as  they  relate  to  our  daily 
health  of  body  ;  we  must  sleep  and  eat  and  work  aright ;  we  must  answer  the 
fitting,  natural  demands  of  our  physical  being,  and  keep  ourselves  alert  and  strong 
and  well.  Nothing  else  will  avail.  No  amount  of  beautiful  poetry  read  by  lamp- 
light, and  no  prayers  said  behind  closed  doors,  can  take  the  place  of  that 
imperative  obedience  to  the  primitive  laws  of  bodily  health  by  which  alone  we 
may  hope  to  look  through  clear  eyes  upon  this  fair  and  wonderful  world.     IL  This 

EVERLASTING   FACT   OF   THE   INTERPRETIVE  VALUE  OF   OBEDIENCE   HOLDS   TRUE   IN 

RELIGION  AS  IN  EVERYTHING  ELSE.  The  Bible  is  never  weary  of  teaching  it.  It 
is  one  of  the  eternal  principles  that  lie  at  the  heart  of  spiritual  truth.  The  teu 
lepers  who  are  cleansed  as  they  obey  are  representatives  of  all  of  us  :  as  we  go 
along  the  way  on  which  God  sends  us,  strength  and  health  of  soul  go  with  us. 
The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God.  They  who  are  devoted  to  God,  who  hold  all  else 
subordinate  to  their  service  of  Him,  whose  love  of  Him  is  the  supreme  fact  in  their 
lives,  who  live  in  His  conscious  presence,  see  Him  and  understand  Him.  It  is  as 
simple  and  natural  as  friendship.  Their  obedience  opens  their  eyes.  The  chosen 
disciples  of  Jesus  were  able  to  understand  Him  better  than  the  crowd,  because 
they  were  keeping,  as  best  they  could,  though  with  many  blunders,  the  eternal 
laws  which  expressed  His  own  will  and  way.  He  was  interpreted  to  them  by 
their  obedience.  We,  too,  if  we  would  know  Him,  must  approach  Him  by  this  way. 
Not  by  the  path  of  reason,  perplexing  ourselves  among  the  arguments  of  theologians  ; 
and  not  by  the  path  of  authority,  taking  what  the  ecclesiastics  tell  us  and  thinking 
no  more  about  it,  like  a  blind  man  trying  to  understand  a  sunrise  by  a  formula  ; 
but  by  the  path  of  personal  obedience  is  Christ  best  sought,  so  that,  doing  His  will, 
we  come  into  real  symyjathy  with  Him,  and  of  our  own  selves  recognise  Him  and 
believe  in  Him  and  love  Him.  So  it  is  with  certain  hard  duties  to  which  He 
summons  us,  and  which  are  tests  of  true  discipleship.  To  love  our  enemies  seems 
at  first  not  only  a  difficult  but  an  unnatural  and  unreasonable  affection.  It  appears 
like  an  injustice  to  our  friends.  We  say  flatly,  we  cannot  do  it.  And  the  other 
devout  exercises  which  are  of  a  piece  with  it,  such  as  speaking  as  well  as  we  honestly 
can  of  those  who  speak  ill  of  us,  and  turning  the  other  cheek,  and  going  two  miles 
for  those  who  would  compel  us  to  go  one,  and  doing  good  to  those  who  despitefully 
use  us,  the  more  we  simply  talk  or  think  about  these  requirements  of  Jesus,  the 
more  impossible  they  seem.  But  when  we  stop  discussing,  and  obey  ;  when  in  this 
or  that  immediate  instance  we  do  the  Master's  will,  hard  as  it  is,  going  out  of  our 
way  to  render  a  kind  service  to  one  who  has  injured  us,  forbearing  to  defend  our 
rights,  giving  up  our  own  strong  case  and  letting  our  importunate  neighbour  have 
his  way,  actually  permitting  him  to  take  advantage  of  us  if  he  will ;  when  we  simply 
do  what  Jesus  tells  us  to  do,  and  what  He  Himself  was  for  ever  doing,  then  the 
blessed  light  shines  out  upon  us,  and  we  understand  how  this  Christian  behaviour 
is  not  only  the  best  thing  in  a  vague  and  general  way  for  society,  but  is  the  very 
best  for  us  in  particular,  and  there  is  a  consciousness  of  the  approbation  of  God,  and 
a  new  and  consequent  joy  in  living,  which  is  far  better  than  any  advantage  we 
might  have  gained  by  pushing  in  ahead.  We  keep  the  covenant  and  the  testimonies 
of  God,  and  our  obedience  interprets  them,  and  it  is  made  plain  and  sure  to  us  that 
His  paths  are  truth  and  mercy.  Or,  to  take  another  illustration,  misfortune  of 
some  kind  befalls  us,  grief  attends  us,  the  world  goes  wrong,  the  light  of  life  is 
turned  of  a  sudden  into  black  darkness,  and  a  sore  burden,  too  heavy,  we  think,  for 
us  to  bear,  is  set  upon  our  shoulders,  and  it  is  desperately  hard  to  see  how  the  paths 
of  the  Lord  are  "  mercy."  They  may  be  "  truth,"  they  may  be  right ;  we  may  be 
punished  for  our  sins;  but  how  they  can  mean  "mercy,"  how  there  can  be  auy 


PSALM  XXV.]  THE  PSALMS.  605 

fatherly  love  in  them,  as  the  Gospel  tells  us,  passes  our  understanding.  Then,  if 
•we  betake  ourselves  to  philosophy,  there  is  but  cold  and  scanty  comfort.  A  wise 
man  wrote  a  book  on  the  consolations  of  philosophy,  and  another  wise  man  advises 
us  to  "  be  revenged  upon  fate  by  becoming  philosophers"  ;  excellent  counsel  for  the 
minor  perplexities  and  vexations  that  beset  us.  But  under  a  black  sky,  when  things 
are  not  only  amiss,  but  dreadfully  and  tragically  amiss,  it  is  a  weary  and  unsatisfying 
occupation.  "We  cannot  by  our  understanding  find  out  the  ways  of  God.  What 
shall  we  do,  then  ?  Let  us  submit  and  obey.  Let  us  take  up  the  new  burden  and 
carry  it,  facing  life  anew  under  these  strange  and  hard  conditions,  and  seeking  to  do 
our  (iaily  duty  in  it,  keeping  the  covenant  and  the  testimonies  of  the  Lord.  That 
is  the  way  that  leads  to  light.  So  it  is  throughout,  in  every  alternative  ;  everything 
comes  right  if  we  obey  God.  This  very  world  in  which  we  live  our  daily  lives  is 
already  heaven  to  those  who  do  the  will  of  God  as  it  is  done  in  hea%'en.  Here 
and  to-day,  they  who  keep  the  commandments  receive  the  blessing  of  which  Jesus 
assured  us  ;  they  enter  into  life.     {George  Hodges,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  For  Thy  name's  sake,  0  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity;  for  it  is  great. — A 
yrayer  for  pardon,  and  its  plea  .-—The  context  shows  that  this  is  the  prayer  of  a 
man  who  had  long  loved  and  served  God.  Yet  side  by  side  with  this  consciousness 
of  devotion  and  service  there  lie  the  profound  sense  of  sin,  and  of  the  need  of 
pardon.  This  consciousness  of  transgression  and  cry  for  pardon  are  inseparable 
and  permanent  accompaniments  of  a  devout  life  all  along  its  course,  but  they  are 
the  roots  and  beginnings  of  all  godliness.  As  a  rule,  the  first  step  which  a  man 
takes  to  knit  himself  consciously  to  God  is  through  the  gate  of  recognised  and 
repeated  and  confessed  sin,  and  imploring  the  Divine  mercy.  L  The  cry  for 
PARDON.  There  are  two  elements  in  forgiveness.  There  is  the  forgiveness  known 
to  law  and  practised  by  the  law-giver.  And  there  is  the  forgiveness  known  to  love, 
and  practised  by  the  friend,  or  parent,  or  lover.  The  one  consists  in  the  remission 
of  external  penalties.  But  there  is  a  forgiveness  deeper  than  legal  pardon.  We 
must  carry  both  of  these  ideas  into  our  thoughts  of  God's  pardon,  in  order  to  get 
the  whole  fulness  of  it.  Scripture  recognises  as  equally  real  and  valid,  in  our 
relations  to  God,  the  judicial  and  the  fatherly  side  of  the  relationship.  IL  The 
PLEA  FOR  PARDOv.  "  For  Thy  name's  sake."  1.  The  mercy  of  God  flows  fiom  the 
infinite  depths  of  His  own  character.  He  is  His  own  motive.  He  forgives  because 
He  is  God.  2.  The  past  of  God  is  a  plea  with  God  for  present  forgiveness.  "Thy 
name  "  in  Scripture  means  the  whole  revelation  of  the  Divine  character.  3.  The 
Divine  forgiveness  is  in  order  that  men  may  know  Him  better.  Nothing  reveals 
the  sweetness  of  the  Divine  name  like  the  assurance  of  His  pardon.  IIL  The 
REASON  FOR  THIS  EARNEST  CRY.  "  For  it  is  great."  That  may  be  a  reason  for 
the  pardon  ;  more  probably  it  is  a  reason  for  the  prayer.  The  fact  is  true  in  regard 
to  us  all.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  A  'prayer  and  a  plea: — Consider  this  prayer. 
1.  It  is  an  unreserved  confession  of  sin.  1.  As  his  own.  2.  As  great.  In 
both  respects  men  fail  in  such  confession.  They  acknowledge  sin  in  general,  but 
not  as  their  own  ;  or  they  extenuate  and  excuse  it.  II.  A  humble  application  for 
MERCY.  The  unregenerate  man  will  not  thus  humble  himself,  but  will  trust  to  his 
good  works  and  his  fancied  good  deservings.  III.  The  plea  urged.  "  For  Thy 
name's  sake."  It  is  drawn  from  God,  not  from  himself.  It  looks  to  the  Saviour, 
■who  is  the  manifestation  of  God's  name.  Let  this  be  our  only  plea.  IV.  The 
strong  faith  of  this  prayer.  David  believed  that  God  would  forgive  though 
his  sin  were  great.  Most  people  see  God  as  all  mercy  or  all  wrath.  Not  so  David. 
Have  we  such  holy  faith  ?  {T.  Cooper.)  A  plea  for  pardon: — I.  A  confession 
OF  SIN.  We  shall  be  induced  to  make  such  a  confession,  if  we  consider  that — 
1.  Our  sins  are  great  in  number.  How  often  do  we  offend  !  How  many  have  been 
the  follies  of  our  childhood,  the  crimes  of  our  youth,  and  the  backslidings  of  our 
riper  age  !  2.  Our  sins  are  great  in  their  turpitude.  This  appears  from  the  Being 
against  whom  sin  is  committed  ;  from  the  dignity  and  circumstances  of  its  subjects, 
from  the  degrading  character  which  it  sustains,  and  from  the  awful  effects  which 
it  produces.  3.  Our  sins  are  great  in  their  demerit.  The  punishment  due  to  sin 
must  be  in  proportion  to  the  majesty  and  glory  of  God,  whose  dignity  it  daringly 
insults,  and  whose  law  it  impiously  violates.  II.  An  appropriate  request  foe, 
pardon.  1.  The  language  of  genuine  repentance.  2.  The  language  of  devout 
solicitude.  3.  The  language  of  humble  confidence.  III.  An  argument  urged  to 
obtain  success.  It  suggests — 1.  The  pardon  of  sin  displays  the  glory  of  the  Divine 
perfections.     God's  name  signifies  His  nature.     2.  The  pardon  of  sin  demonstrates 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxv. 

the  eflficacy  of  Christ's  atonement.  3.  The  pardon  of  sin  exemplifies  the  truth  of 
the  sacred  Scriptures.  In  conclusion,  warn  the  careless,  encourage  the  penitent, 
and  congratulate  the  saints,  who  have  received  the  ' '  knowledge  of  salvation  by  the 
remission  of  their  sins."  (^Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Confession  and 
absolution: — I.  Confession  is  to  be  made  distinctly  and  directly,  and  only 
TO  THE  LOED.  There  were  priests  and  prophets  in  those  days,  but  David  unfolds 
the  story  of  kis  sin  to  God  Himself.  He  realises  that  all  sin  is  directly  aimed  at 
Grod.  Observe  in  David's  confession  the  utter  absence  of  excuses.  In  this  confession 
there  is  no  mention  of  punishment.  David  does  not  ask  to  be  let  off.  He  asks  for 
pardon  solely  and  simply.  And  David  had  a  true  conception  of  the  heinousness  of 
sin.  II.  A  pleading  pbayek.  Two  pleas.  The  first  he  finds  in  God.  "For  Thy 
name's  sake."  He  was  God's  own  child,  and  he  pleads  his  sonship.  The  second 
he  finds  in  his  own  sinfulness.  Many  mistake  by  asking  pardon  because  the 
iniquity  is  small.  The  strongest  plea  is  to  say  to  God,  *'  Have  mercy  upon  me,  for 
I  am  a  great  sinner.  I  have  sinned  in  a  thousand  ways,  and  even  ten  thousand 
times."  True  confession  brings  the  true  absolution.  {Thomas  Spurgeon.)  The 
prayer  for  pardon : — I.  The  peayer  for  pardon.  The  Psalm  is  an  appeal  for 
Divine  guidance  amidst  the  perplexity  of  life.  But  the  author  is  driven  to  think 
of  his  unworthiness  to  receive  it  because  of  past  perverseness.  Are  we  not  all  thus 
placed  ?  The  reason  why  many  are  lost  in  the  mazes  of  doubt  is  because  they  have 
not  humbled  themselves  to  penitence.  II.  The  grounds  of  the  prayer  for 
pardon.  1.  God's  faithfulness.  The  "name"  God  is  used  constantly  as  synony- 
mous with  His  character.  Forgiveness  is  a  Divine  disposition  as  well  as  an  act. 
God  is  acting  in  accordance  with  His  own  nature  in  listening  to  this  prayer.  The 
words  not  only  suggest  God's  character,  but  His  word.  ' '  For  Thy  name's  sake  " 
means  for  Thy  honour,  who  hast  pledged  Thy  word.  2.  The  suppliant's  need.  "  For 
it  is  great."  This  is  an  argument  that  needs  no  mastering.  For  who  cannot 
expatiate  on  his  needs !  Rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that  the  very  thing  which 
dismays  thee,  0  sinner, — the  greatness  of  thy  offence, — may  be  used  as  a  reason 
why  God  should  forgive  thee.  At  the  door  of  our  good  and  bountiful  Lord  the  plea 
of  utter  destitution  will  ensure  relief.  The  wretchedness  of  thy  crushed  condition 
beneath  a  mountain  load  of  guilt  will  stir  the  Divine  compassion.  (  Walter  Haw- 
kins. )  A  true  mark  of  a  penitent : — A  true  mark  of  a  penitent  sinner,  to  aggra- 
vate his  sin.  Some  use  to  extenuate  their  sins  by  comparing  them  vrith  the  sins 
of  others,  which  they  think  far  greater  than  theirs  are  ;  others  excuse  them,  as 
Adam  did  when  he  said.  The  woman  which  Thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave 
me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat ;  she  again  excused  herself.  The  serpent  beguiled  me, 
and  I  did  eat.  But  let  the  children  of  God  search  and  find  out  the  greatness  of 
their  sins,  and  aggravate  them,  that  God  may  extenuate  and  so  forget  them.  Are 
ye  laden  with  sin  ?  remember  it,  and  God  will  forget  it,  and  ease  you ;  if  ye  have  it 
before  your  eyes  He  shall  cast  it  behind  His  back  ;  but  if  you  think  nothing  of  sin, 
God  will  bind  it  on  your  back,  so  that  it  shall  press  you  down  as  a  millstone. 
{A.  Symson.)  A  strange  plea: — We  should  not  expect  a  criminal  before  an 
earthly  judge  to  advance  such  a  plea  as  this.  Yet  before  the  highest  Judge  of  all 
this  is  the  argument,  the  wise  argument,  of  the  awakened  soul.  We  should  not 
value  God's  pardon  when  obtain^  if  we  thought  lightly  of  our  sin.  When  our 
eyes  are  opened  to  see  the  extent  of  our  ruin  we  can  turn  this  appalling  discovery 
into  the  argument  of  the  text.  These  words  represent  a  real  personal  conviction 
of  sin.  We  are  ready  enough  to  accept  such  a  statement  about  our  sins,  without 
the  slightest  degree  of  humility  or  penitential  sorrow.  Consider  what  it  is  that 
makes  sin  great.  I.  It  is  great  according  to  the  position  it  occupies  in  the 
MORAL  scale.  There  is  a  subjective  as  well  as  an  objective  measure  of  sin.  Each 
sin  may  be  judged  in  the  abstract  according  to  its  heinousness ;  but  when  it  is 
committed  we  have  to  consider  the  conditions  under  which  it  was  committed.  Its 
guilt  must  depend  on  a  variety  of  considerations.  Two  offenders  may  commit 
precisely  the  same  offence,  and  yet  one  may  be  morally  much  guiltier  than  the 
other.  II.  Sin  is  great,  in  proportion  to  the  advantages  and  privileges 
OF  THE  SINNER.  Many  will  not  admit  this.  Respectable  church-going  people 
plume  themselves  on  their  privileges,  as  though  the  possession  of  these  might  be 
accepted  as  a  proof  that  their  own  spiritual  condition  could  not  be  otherwise  than 
satisfactory.  III.  Sin  is  great,  in  consideration  op  the  character  of  those 
AGAINST  WHOM  IT  IS  COMMITTED.  The  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  lies  in  its  being 
an  offence  against  infinite  love  revealed.  IV.  Sin  is  great,  in  proportion  to  its 
rsEQUBNOT.    If  a  man  is  proved  to  be  a  confirmed  criminal,  then  yon  may  be  suro 


MAI.K  xxy.]  THE  PSALMS.  607 

th»t  the  heaviest  sentence  the  law  allows  will  be  meted  out  to  him.  How  often 
hare  we  sinned  against  God  !    V.  Sin  is  gkbat  in  pkopoktion  to  the  amount 

OF  DBLIBKRATE  INTENTION  WITH  WHICH  IT  IS  COMMITTED.      Some  of  OUT  sins  are 

the  result  of  a  momentary  temptation,  and  may  be  attributed  to  a  passing  weakness. 
This  may  extenuate  our  guilt.  But  we  cannot  speak  thus  of^  the  determined, 
deliberate,  and  resolute  resistance  that  we  hare  offered  to  the  pleadings  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  our  souls.  The  text  contains  another  plea,  "  For  Thy  name's  sake." 
Onr  hope  lies  there.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  undertake  our  case  when  it  is 
desperate,  and  He  shows  His  almighty  power  most  chiefly  by  showing  mercy  and 
pity.  The  moral  glory  of  God  shines  out  more,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  in  pardon- 
ing a  sinner  than  in  making  a  world.  And  we  honour  His  name  most  when  we 
trust  Him  to  do  this.  {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Contrition: — God's  principal 
aim  is  to  bring  us  all  to  feel  that  our  iniquity  is  great.  I.  David  declared  that 
HIS  WAS  GEE  AT.  What  is  it  that  makes  our  sin  great  ?  1.  Against  whom  it  has 
been  committed.  2.  That  it  is  offence  against  most  just  and  equitable  law.  3.  That 
we  who  owe  so  much  to  God  should  sin  against  Him.  Think  of  the  number  of 
your  sins  and  the  lack  of  all  provocation.  We  have  sinned  for  sinning's  sake. 
And  we  have  gone  on  in  sin  after  we  have  known  and  felt  the  evil  of  it.  II.  There 
IS  A  plea  IN  THE  VERY  GREATNESS  OF  OUR  SINS.  The  pith  of  the  whole  text  lies 
in  the  words  which  we  forget  to  quote — "  For  Thy  name's  sake."  The  confession 
is  an  argument  now.  There  is  a  valid  plea  here.  If  salvation  were  by  merit,  then 
the  least  offender  would  get  off  best.  But  it  is  all  by  grace  ;  and  hence  the  greater 
the  pardon,  the  greater  the  glory  of  that  grace  in  bestowing  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  cry  for  pardon : — I.  The  confession.  "  Mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great."  The 
confession  of  a  regenerate  man  :  the  spirit  teaches  and  prompts.  The  natural  man 
excuses,  palliates,  minimises  his  sin ;  uses  false  weights  and  measures.  Our  view 
depends  on  distance,  position,  light,  and  medium.  God  views  according  to  unerring 
standard,  and  in  clearest  light ;  so  more  and  more  does  the  spirit-taught  soul. 
Sense  of  sin  grows  as  we  come  nearer  to  God.  This  confession  is  not  vague, 
unmeaning,  mere  form.  Take  one  sin — any  one — and  look  at  it  in  the  light ;  weigh 
it  in  the  scales  ;  it  is  great.  Consider  the  magnitude  and  multitude  of  your  sins. 
II.  The  prayer.  "Pardon."  Appeal  from  law  to  grace  ;  of  these  there  can  be 
no  mixture.  Great  sins  do  not  bar  this  appeal.  Great  sin  means  great  need.  No 
extenuating  circumstances  can  be  urged  ;  none  are  needed.  Pardon  is  free,  imme- 
diate, complete,  and  continual.  III.  The  plea.  "  For  Thy  name's  sake."  All 
self-merit  is  disowned.  God  delights  to  pardon.  God  has  promised  to  pardon. 
God's  name,  character,  word,  promise,  covenant  are  all  involved  in  hearing  prayer 
— this  prayer.  Christ  is  the  embodiment  of  the  Divine  name  for  sinners,  and  the 
sinner's  plea  with  God.     {James  Smith,  M.A.) 

Ver.  12.  What  man  is  he  that  feareth  the  Lord  ? — The/ear  of  God  a  restraining 
wjluence : — This  secret  fear,  if  it  be  once  planted  in  the  heart,  will  direct  thee  in  all 
good  actions  acceptable  to  God,  and  correct  thy  evil  doings.  The  love  of  God  hath 
a  constraining  power  whereby  it  compelleth  and  forceth  us  to  serve  Him :  the  fear 
of  God  hath  a  restraining  power,  by  which  it  restraineth  and  stayeth  us,  and  keepeth 
us  back  from  offending  Him  :  this  is  like  a  bit,  that  like  a  spur.  Abraham  feared 
that  the  fear  of  God  was  not  in  the  place  whereto  he  went.  Joseph  being  enticed  by 
his  mistress  to  commit  wickedness  with  her,  answered.  How  can  I  do  this  great 
wickedness,  and  so  sin  against  God  ?  The  Lord  plant  this  fear  in  our  hearts.  This  is 
a  filial  fear  which  he  craveth,  coming  from  love,  and  not  a  servile  fear,  which  cometh 
from  fear  of  punishment.  The  preserver  of  this  fear  in  thee  is  a  continual  nourish- 
ment in  thy  mind  of  the  presence  of  God,  to  whom  thou  presentest  all  thy  actions. 
Will  He  teach  the  way  that  he  shall  choose.  He  promiseth  four  benefits  to  the 
man  that  feareth  God, — He  heapeth  upon  him  grace  upon  grace  :  before  He  pardoned 
him,  and  now  He  directeth  the  man  whom  He  forgave  :  for  no  sooner  receiveth  He 
any  man  in  His  favour,  but  He  immediately  takes  the  protection  and  direction  of 
him.  But  out  of  these  words  we  see  three  things.  Fiist,  that  there  are  divers,  yea 
contrary  ways,  as  there  are  contrary  ends,  the  broad  and  the  narrow,  the  King's  way 
and  by-roads,  the  way  of  life  and  of  death.  This  is  against  such  as  dream  to  them- 
selves that  whatsoever  religion  they  profess,  or  howsoever  they  live,  they  shall  go  to 
heaven  ;  but  they  are  deceived,  for  if  thou  be  not  in  the  way  to  the  kugdom  thou 
shalt  never  attain  to  the  kingdom  ;  many,  yea  the  most  part,  are  not  going  but 
riding,  not  running  but  posting,  to  hell ;  of  whom,  if  it  be  demanded  whither  they 
go  %  they  will  answer,  to  heaven ;  yea,  and  they  will  brag  that  they  are  nearer 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxy. 

God  than  the  preacher  himself,  even  as  if  one  should  dream  of  life  at  the  point  of 
death.  Next,  we  see  that  a  man  cannot  of  himself  choose  the  right  way  to  heaven  ; 
for  the  natural  man  cannot  apprehend  those  things  which  appertain  to  God's 
kingdom,  neither  yet  can  he  see  them,  for  they  are  spiritually  discerned.  Where- 
upon followeth  the  third,  that  is,  how  man  shall  choose  the  good  and  refuse  the  evil 
way.  It  is  not  in  him  that  runneth,  nor  in  him  that  willeth,  but  in  God  that 
sheweth  mercy.  Moses  chose  rather  to  suffer  with  the  Church  than  to  be  called 
the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter.  {A.  Symson.)  The  fruits  of  godly  fear : — The 
"fear  of  God  "is  a  familiar  expression  in  the  Scriptures.  Let  us  lay  hold  of  one 
element  in  the  spacious  word.  When  we  profoundly  fear  a  thing  we  are  haunted 
by  it.  It  affects  everything.  To  fear  God  is  to  be  God-haunted,  God-possessed. 
But  this  figure  is  defective.  In  all  fruitful  fear  of  God  there  is  no  cringing,  no 
slavishness,  no  paralysing  terror.  Perfect  love  "casteth  out"  this  type  of  fear. 
Change  the  figure.  We  speak  of  being  haunted  by  an  air  of  music.  In  such  a  way 
the  man  who  fears  God  is  haunted  by  God's  presence  ;  God  is  an  abiding  conscious- 
ness. Everything  is  seen  in  relationship  to  God.  What  would  be  the  fruits  of 
such  a  fear  ?  The  succeeding  verses  give  some  outline  of  the  spacious  ministry. 
"Him  shall  He  teach  in  the  way  that  he  shall  choose.'  He  shall  be  guided  in  his 
choices.  He  shall  have  the  gift  of  enlightenment.  His  discernment  shall  be  refined 
so  as  to  perceive  the  right  way  when  the  ways  are  many.  His  moral  judgment 
shall  be  instructed.  The  moral  choice  shall  be  firm  and  sure.  The  practical 
judgment  shall  be  nurtured  and  refined  in  the  Lord's  school.  "His  soul  shall 
dwell  at  ease."  Restlessness  and  worry  shall  be  abolished.  The  sense  of  the 
companionship  of  God  will  make  every  place  the  realm  of  promise,  and  in  every 
place  he  will  find  the  riches  of  grace.  "His  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth."  Children 
become  heirs  when  parents  become  pious.  The  God-possessed  transmits  a  legacy  of 
blessing.  It  would  be  a  profitable  thing  to  calculate  what  one  may  inherit  because 
another  man  was  good.  "The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him." 
They  are  taken  into  intimate  fellowsliip.  To  be  made  the  depository  of  a  rare 
secret  is  to  be  sealed  as  a  friend.  How  can  we  become  God-haunted  ?  Let  us  begin 
by  deliberately  consulting  God  in  the  individual  movements  of  our  busy  life.  Refer 
everything  to  His  decision.  Begin  by  distinct  acts  of  volition.  This  may  become 
at  length  an  easy-fitting  habit,  and  may  even  ripen  into  the  spontaneity  of  an 
instinct.     {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14.  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him. — The  secret  of  the 
Lord : — Then  the  Lord  has  a  secret.  Why  does  He  not  tell  it  to  every  man  ?  Why 
do  we  not  tell  our  secrets  to  evei'y  man  ?  Every  man  does  not  understand  us.  We 
always  best  understand  those  who  are  like-minded  with  us.  God  gives  His  secret 
to  them  that  fear  Him.  We  individually  give  our  secret — knowledge  of  our  inner 
self — to  those  who  see  eye  to  eye  with  us,  and  by  so  much  would  not,  cannot,  offend 
us.  That  which  must  necessarily  be  a  secret  to  some,  even  knowledge  of  ourselves, 
is,  all  else  being  equal,  most  obtainable  by  them  that  fear  us ;  by  them  who  put 
confidence  in  us.  It  is  even  so  with  society ;  its  secret  is  with  them  that  fear  it. 
Outrage  the  moral  sense  of  society,  or  even  its  sense  of  propriety,  and  refuse  to  be 
reconciled,  and  society  will  cast  you  adrift.  He  who  acquiesces  in  the  ways  of 
society  is  received  by  society,  and  gets  from  it  such  secret  as  it  has  to  reveal.  He 
knows  society  through  reconciliation,  through  a  species  of  fear,  in  which  there  is 
an  admixture  of  love.  The  secret  of  business  is  with  him  who  bends  his  will  to  it. 
The  secret  of  all  science,  and  all  art,  is  with  them  that  love  it.  No  love,  no  secret, 
in  personal  intercourse,  in  industrial  pursuits,  in  society.  The  more  love,  the  more 
knowledge  or  secret.  Admiration,  devotion,  love,  each  according  to  its  nature  and 
degree  opens  all  locks  and  doors  and  souls.  Have  the  spirit  of  any  given  man,  and 
his  secret  is  yours.  Have  his  spirit  entirely,  and  you  have  him.  Harmony  with 
God,  sympathy,  animation  by  His  Spirit  is  necessary  to  knowing  Him.  (/.  S.  Swan.) 
The  secret  of  the  Lord: — I.  The  class  of  peksons  spoken  of.  Those  t'lat  "fear 
the  Lord."  1.  Fear  sometimes  signifies  fear  of  God's  punishments.  This  fear  is 
better  than  none  at  all,  as  it  exercises  a  restraining  power  over  men  who  would 
otherwise  commit  sin.  2.  But  there  is  a  fear  which  merits  the  severest  reproba- 
tion :  when  it  fears  God  because  it  considers  Him  to  be  an  angry,  vindictive  being. 
3.  There  is  a  fear  which  deserves  the  highest  commendation  ;  it  is  filial  fear,  the  fear 
which  an  afifectionate  child  has  of  grieving  its  father,  or  causing  him  pain.  II.  The 
PRIVILEGE  WHICH  SUCH  PERSONS  ENJOY.  "The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them." 
God  holds  communion  and  fellowship  with  men  whose  hearts  are  riglitly  disposed 


PSALM  XXV.]  THE  PSALMS.  509 

towards  them.  Suppose  a  group  of  persons  discussing  the  conduct  and  policy  of 
some  public  man.  All  kinds  of  opinions  might  be  expressed,  favourable  or  other- 
wise. But  of  what  worth  would  they  be  compared  with  the  word  of  one  who  knows 
this  public  man  personally,  intimately,  who  is  in  his  secret,  and  can  speak  with 
confidence  regarding  his  public  conduct?  Or  the  "secret"  may  be  illustrated  in 
another  way — by  the  relation  in  which  two  friends  stand  to  each  other,  who  are  in 
perfect  sympathy  with  one  another.  How  they  would  understand  each  other  !  A 
glance  of  the  eye,  a  mere  hint,  suffices  to  reveal  the  mind  of  the  one  to  the  other. 
So  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  God  are  enjoyed  by  the  man  who  fears  Him.  "What 
do  we  know  about  this  ' '  secret "  ?  The  infidel  Hume  taunted  his  servant  with 
believing  in  nonsense.  He  replied  that  in  his  History  of  England  Hume  told  of 
Queen  Mary,  who  said  that  when  she  died,  Calais  would  be  found  written  on  her 
heart.  So,  the  servant  said,  Christ  was  written  on  his  heart.  This  is  the  secret 
of  the  Lord.  (  W.  Logan,  M.A.)  The  teachings  of  God  within  and  without: — 
God  reveals  Himself  in  two  ways  to  man.  God  wrote  His  word  ' '  on  the  pages  of 
the  elements."  But  even  on  the  heathen  He  wrote  a  more  inward  law,  which 
answered  to  the  outward  and  interpreted  its  voice — the  law  of  conscience.  Each  of 
these  voices  is  made  more  distinct  as  man  is  brought  nearer  to  God.  And  when 
we  forget  both,  He  has  given  us  the  writings  of  the  law,  the  voices  of  the  prophets, 
the  melody  of  the  Psalms,  the  instruction  of  Proverbs,  the  experiences  of  histories, 
the  words  of  Jesus  and  the  Apostles.  He  speaks,  too,  by  His  Spirit.  God  ever 
speaks  to  the  heart,  as  He  speaks  through  the  Word  ;  for  He  cannot  contradict 
Himself.  What  then  ?  Because  God  must  prepare  the  heart  and  open  the  ear 
and  Hiiijself  speak  to  it,  does  nothing  depend  on  us?  It  is  with  us  to  hearken  or 
no.  "The  secret  of  the  Lord"  is  a  Imshed  voice,  a  gentle  intercourse  of  heart  to 
heart,  a  still  small  voice  whispering  to  the  inner  ear.  How  should  we  hear  it  if 
we  fill  our  ears  and  our  hearts  with  the  din  of  this  world  ?  There  are  two  conditions, 
as  there  are  degrees  of  inward  hearing.  You  must  fear  God.  You  must  be  hushed 
yourselves.  They  who  do  not  fear  God  cannot  hear  the  secret.  In  grace,  God 
forecojues  man,  and  man  follows  grace  given.  In  sin,  on  the  contrq.ry,  man  begins  ; 
he  casts  out  grace,  deadens  his  own  ear,  until  God's  voice  sounds  fainter  and  fainter. 
The  question  on  which  all  hangs  is  this — is  the  flesh  subdued  to  the  Spirit,  or  the 
Spirit  stifled  by  the  flesh  ?  This  is  the  first  condition  of  knowing  the  will  of  God, 
that  we  will  to  know  it  wholly.  In  vain  is  heaven  opened  to  eyes  fixed  on  earth. 
Love  sees  God.  .  .  .  The  Psalmist  speaks  not  of  the  "secret  of  the  Lord"  only, 
but  of  a  "secret  converse"  with  the  soul,  as  of  a  friend  with  his  friend.  To  have 
the  love  of  the  Great  Friend,  we  must  desire  no  love  out  of  Him.  St.  Bernard  says, 
"A  secret  counsel  calleth  for  a  secret  hearing.  He  will  assuredly  make  thee  hear 
of  joy  and  gladness  if  thou  receivest  Him  with  a  sober  ear."  "They  who  would 
behold  God,"  says  St.  Gregory,  "dwell  in  a  loneliness  of  soul,  and  free  from  the 
tumults  of  worldly  cares,  thirst  for  God."  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  knowledge 
of  God  revealed  to  them  that  fear  Him : — The  secret  of  the  Lord  means,  that  which 
cannot  be  known  unless  the  Lord  reveal  it.  And  the  phrase  here  implies  an 
intimate  knowledge  of  the  Divine  perfections,  of  the  dealings  and  dispensations  of 
God ;  a  holy  and  vital  communion  with  Him  ;  an  entire  trust  in  His  providential 
care  and  government,  together  with  that  peace  which  always  dwells  in  the  bosom 
of  a  true,  penitent,  pious  believer.  All  this,  including,  as  it  does,  a  full  acquaint- 
ance with  the  doctrines  and  duties,  the  privileges  and  comforts  of  the  life  of  faith,  , 
is  called  the  "secret  of  the  Lord,"  for  man  naturally  knows  nothing  of  them 
(Prov.  ii.  6,  9  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  9).  Men  think  all  this  enthusiasm,  and  have  no  notion 
that  there  is  anything  in  religion  which  they,  by  their  own  skill,  are  not  competent 
to  discover.  But,  for  instance,  how  can  any  man  who  neglects  the  worship  of 
God  pretend  to  decide  upon  its  importance  or  utility?  It  is  a  matter  of  ex- 
perience, and  he  is  unqualified  to  judge.  Because  the  sinner,  when  overtaken 
by  sickness  or  afiiiction,  declares  that  he  derives  no  comfort  from  religion,  are 
we  therefore  to  conclude  that  religion  has  no  comforts  to  bestow?  The  promises 
of  the  Gospel  belong  to  them  that  fear  the  Lord.  These  persons,  when  they 
read  the  Scriptures,  are  blessed  through  them ;  theirs,  too,  is  the  secret  of 
peace  in  the  midst  of  trouble  and  in  the  hour  of  death.  [T.  Slade,  M.A.) 
The  reward  of  fear : — Think  what  God's  secret  told  to  a  man  must  be.  I.  It  must 
BE  ONE  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  You  all  know  wliat  the  Bible  is  to  the  natural  heart.  It 
gives  information,  much  and  valuable,  about  most  important  things.  But  there  it 
ends.  It  does  not  touch  us,  does  not  move  us,  does  not  make  us  feel.  But  see  the 
true  Christian  over  his  Bible.     How  he  drinks  in  his  words,  and  how  they  refresh 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxt 

and  comfort  him.  How  he  trusts  them,  and  lives  by  them.  He  has  got  the  secret 
of  his  Bible.  II.  It  mtist  be  a  seceet  of  safety.  "The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a 
strong  tower ;  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe."  That  is  just  what  we 
cannot  do  ;  we  have  no  such  tower.  Life's  troubles  find  us  out  of  doors,  and  beat 
upon  us.  How  insecure,  defenceless,  comfortless  we  are.  A  tale  was  once  written 
of  a  man  who  had  committed  a  murder,  a  base,  treacherous,  but  well-concealed 
murder,  after  which  he  lived  for  many  years  in  respect  and  honour,  in  the  gratifica- 
tion of  all  tastes  and  wishes,  in  affluence,  and  comfort,  and  domestic  love,  till  a  day 
of  late  discovery  and  late  retribution.  People  spoke  of  this  as  an  "  immoral  story," 
because  it  gave  the  man  half  a  life  of  enjoyment.  But  that  was  a  short-sighted 
judgment.  How  little  could  such  observers  know  of  the  torture  that  man  endured 
from  the  one  fact  of  his  consciousness  of  insecurity  ;  that  at  any  moment  ruin  might 
come.  Without  security,  which  is  a  sense  of  safety,  no  happiness  is  worth  the  name. 
The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  a  secret  of  safety.  III.  A  secret  of  strength.  How 
strong  a  weak  person  may  become  who  has  it.  And  we  have  known  strong  men 
become  weak  for  the  lack  of  it.  IV.  A  secret  of  peace.  The  wicked  are  like  the 
"  troubled  sea."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  false  peace  ;  but  a  man  must  have  gone 
very  far  astray  before  he  can  know  that,  the  peace  of  spiritual  death.  Between  these 
two  extremes,  the  peace  of  God  and  the  peace  of  death,  there  lies  a  very  wide  and  dreary 
morass,  a  state  of  disquiet  and  unrest.  V.  Consider  the  communication  of  this 
SECRET.  It  is  given  to  them  who  "  fear  Him."  There  are  two  kinds  of  fear  :  that 
fear  which  is  cast  out  by  love,  and  that  fear  which  is  part  of  love.  It  is  a  very 
serious  thing  when  the  foundations  of  religion  are  not  laid  deep  in  the  fear  of  God. 
Kemember  that  the  fear  of  God,  like  everything  else,  must  come  instrumentally  by 
practice.  Abstain  from  something  to-night,  each  one  of  you,  some  thought,  some 
word,  some  act,  by  a  great  effort  if  necessary,  on  this  single  ground,  that  it  will  dis- 
please God.  Do  so  again  to-morrow ;  in  a  little  while  it  will  become  easier  to  you, 
at  last  it  will  become  habitual.  {C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  A  palace  of  Divine 
secrets : — I  ask  you  to  come  with  me  through  a  spiritual  palace,  and  I  will  describe 
the  several  apartments.  I.  "Wb  turn  aside  into  a  wide  and  spacious  hall. 
Before  us  is  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up, — it  is  the  throne  of  grace.  Watch  the 
comers  as  they  enter  ;  their  penitential  aspect,  humility,  solicitude  ;  listen  to  their 
confessions  and  their  requests.  They  have  come  with  woe,  care,  perplexity,  sin. 
But  they  all  fear  Him,  and  so  are  admitted  to  the  secret  of  prayer.  II.  Another 
CHAMBER — the  ARMOURY  OF  LIGHT.  Nations  boast  their  arsenals,  but  there  is  none 
like  this.  Watch  those  who  are  coming  in  and  being  armed.  III.  The  treasure- 
ROOM  which  contains  THE  BOOK  OF  LIFE.  Old  books  are  counted  as  treasures. 
Here  is  one  of  the  oldest,  and  it  is  indestructible.  Let  Mosaic  chronology  be  mistaken, 
it  only  makes  this  book  a  little  more  venerable  ;  for  it  was  made  ere  the  foundations 
of  the  earth.  Whose  names  are  in  it  ?  This  is  one  of  the  Lord's  secrets.  But  all 
those  who  have  been  bom  again  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  written  there.  IV.  The 
CHAMBER  OF  CONSOLATION.  Numcrous  visitors  come  crowding  in.  Heavily  laden, 
worn-out,  exhausted,  fainting  ones.  They  have  all  come  to  the  right  place.  Here 
are  staffs,  cordials,  medicines,  anchors,  lights,  garments  of  praise.  V.  The  room 
NAMED  "Cross  of  love."  This  is  the  highest  of  aU.  Here  is  revealed  the  secret 
of  secrets.  A  soft  and  heavenly  light  fills  the  whole  chamber.  St.  Paul  was  often 
in  this  room  ;  it  had  a  special  charm  for  him.  VI.  The  tower  of  the  palace.  It 
is  the  "Tower  of  Vision."  Winding  up  its  alabaster  stairs,  well-worn  but  ever- 
renewed,  we  at  last  reach  the  lofty  summit.  Below  us  is  the  world,  half  hidden  by 
the  mist,  its  hum  scarcely  audible.  Our  eyes  cUmb  up  to  the  regions  of  serene  and 
perpetuaJ  light,  to  the  holy  splendours  of  the  city  of  our  God.  {fF.  A.  Essery.) 
Hidden  manna,  or  The  mystery  of  saving  grace : — The  saving  grace  that  the 
children  of  God  have  is  a  secret  that  none  in  the  world  know  besides.  It  is 
called  a  secret  in  three  ways.  Secret  to  the  eye  of  nature  ;  but  this  is  not  meant. 
Secret  to  the  eye  of  taught  nature ;  but  this  is  not  meant.  Secret  to  the  eye 
of  enlightened  nature  ;  this  is  meant.  It  is  a  secret  to  all  unsanctified  professors. 
It  is  called  a  mystery.  Grace  is  spiritual,  and  can  only  be  received  by  the  spiritually 
minded.  A  man  must  have  another  secret  before  he  can  know  this  secret.  He  must 
be  a  new  creature.  1.  Use  for  instruction.  Is  God's  secret  with  them  that  fear 
Him  ?  Then  the  godly  are  the  friends  of  God.  Then  the  godly  are  all  one  with 
God.  2.  For  refutation.  Away  with  all  who  say  that  Grod  gives  no  secret  thing  to 
any  one  man  more  than  another.  3.  For  consolation.  They  are  so  honoured  with 
the  Lord  that  God  hides  no  good  thing  from  them  that  is  necessary  to  their  salva- 
tion.    4.  For  terror  to  the  wicked.     Here  is  horror  to  all  the  ungodly ;  they  ar» 


PSALM  XXV.]  THE  PSALMS.  511 

strangers  from  God,  they  are  not  admitted  into  God's  secrets.  ( W.  Fermer.)  The 
Lord's  secret  .-—1.  The  fear  of  the  Lord— its  origin  is  of  God.  Its  effect  is  cleansing, 
purifjring  from  the  power  and  love  of  sin  (Psa.  xix.  9).  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean, 
or  cleansing ;  its  evidence  is  in  assembling  with  the  Lord's  people  (Mai.  iii.  16). 
"Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord,"  Ac,  but  this  fear  is  not  the  cause  of  the  blessings 
spoken  of,  but  the  proof.  2.  In  every  heart  thus  filled  with  the  fear  of  God  there  is  a 
communication  of  a  secret.  The  Lord  opens  His  mind  and  His  heart  to  them,  and, 
to  begin  with  the  lowest,  there  is  the  secret  working  of  His  grace,  in  conviction  of 
sin,  of  righteousness,  of  pardon  and  peace — in  the  creation  of  a  spirit  of  prayer  and 
praise  ;  sSl  these  being  the  work  of  grace  in  the  soul.  Then  there  is  the  secret 
witness  of  the  Spirit,  testifying  to  their  adoption  into  His  family,  and  the  secret 
•whispers  of  His  love,  whereby  He  continues  to  assure  the  soul  by  these  tokens,  that 
He  has  loved  that  soul  with  an  everlasting  love,  and  prepared  it  for  a  crown  of  glory. 
3.  The  promise.  Something  more  in  prospect — He  will  show  them  His  covenant. 
The  "everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure";  this  was  David's 
support  in  trouble  and  in  the  hour  of  death.  He  will  show  them,  will  teach  them, 
more  and  more  therein,  the  nature  of  it,  the  duration  of  it,  its  comprehensiveness, 
its  security,  its  terms  and  conditions,  its  blessings  and  promises,  all  in  Christ,  and 
Christ  in  aU.  [A.  Hewlett,  M.A.)  OocPs  greatest  secret : — The  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  His  sending  His  Son  into  the  world  for  the  redemption  of  lost  mankind.  I.  The 
Gospel  of  Christ  is  a  mysteky.  It  is  not  attainable  without  supernatural  revela- 
tion. It  was  undiscoverable  by  the  most  exalted  powers  of  human  understanding 
until  God,  out  of  infinite  mercy,  was  pleased  Himself  to  reveal  it.  But  even  after  the 
clearest  revelation  that  our  present  state  is  capable  of  there  must  be  owned  to  be,  in 
the  Christian  religion,  mysteries  far  surpassing  the  highest  pitch  of  human  under- 
standing. To  "know  in  part "  is  too  poor  and  mean  a  degree  of  knowledge  for  our 
modem  Christian  philosophers.  To  them  there  must  be  nothing  in  Christianity 
mysterious.  Examine  their  pretensions,  and  we  shall  find  that  they  neither  speak 
of  faith  as  becomes  Christians,  nor  of  reason  as  becomes  men.  How  far  are  we  glad 
to  allow  the  use  of  reason  in  Divine  matters  ?  1.  Reason  is  of  great  use  in  asserting 
the  principles  of  natural  religion,  such  as  the  Being  of  a  God  ;  the  obligation  to 
worship  Him  ;  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  and  the  eternal  and  essential  difference 
between  good  and  evil,  partly  discoverable  by  natural  light.  2.  Reason  is  useful,  since 
it  is  from  rational  inducements  that  we  first  admit  even  revelation  itself.  It  is 
by  reason  we  distinguish  what  is  truly  Divine  from  enthusiasm  and  imposture. 
3.  Reason  is  of  excellent  use  in  expounding  and  interpreting  the  mind  and  meaning 
of  Holy  Writ,  as  long  as  it  is  sober  and  modest  and  keeps  strictly  to  the  analogy  of 
faith.  4.  Reason  is  usefully  employed  in  stopping  the  mouths  of  gainsayers,  in 
enlightening  their  blindness  or  subduing  their  contumacy,  in  confuting  heretics  by 
turning  their  own  weapons  upon  them,  and  vindicating  Divine  truth  from  all  those 
calumnies  which  are  imjustly  brought  against  it.  But  in  the  sublime  mysteries  of 
our  religion  reason  has  no  more  to  do,  when  it  is  once  satisfied  and  convinced  of 
the  revelation,  but  to  receive  from  it  those  truths  which  by  its  own  natural  powers 
it  never  had  been  able  to  have  found  out.  II.  The  qualifications  requisite  in 
THOSE  that  ABE  TO  RECEIVE  THIS  GREAT  MYSTERY.  "Them  that  fear  Him."  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  that  wisdom  which  alone  makes  wise  unto 
salvation ;  and  that — 1.  By  a  natural  efficiency.  Whoever  loves  the  precepts  of 
God,  and  delights  to  do  what  He  commands,  will  meet  with  little  difficulty  in 
believing  what  He  reveals.  There  is  a  natural  and  easy  passage  from  loving  to 
believing.  True  saving  faith  requires  a  devout  and  humble  submission  of  the  mind 
and  heart,  a  complacency  and  delight  and  joy  in  the  truths  that  it  receives. 
2.  Besides  this  natural  tendency,  there  are  through  the  whole  Scripture  many  signal 
examples,  as  well  as  positive  promises,  of  faith  and  heavenly  knowledge  to  a  due 
and  sincere  practice  of  what  we  already  know.  Inferences — (1)  Since  pride  and  self- 
conceit  and  a  too  confident  relying  upon  our  own  reason  have  been  shown  to  be 
so  dangerous  and  destructive  of  our  holy  faith,  let  us  strive  to  attain  a  deep  and 
true  humility  of  spirit,  and  a  just  sense  of  our  own  natural  blindness  and  infirmity. 
Let  as  avoid  all  curious  and  nice  inquiries  into  things  that  are  too  high  for  us. 
(2)  Let  us  heartily  and  industriously  and  zealously  set  upon  this  work,  the  fulfilling 
the  whole  will  of  our  Lord.  Then  there  would  soon  be  no  remains  of  infidelity 
left  in  us  ;  we  should  soon,  then,  to  our  unspeakable  joy  and  satisfaction,  feel,  by  a 
sincere  and  strict  observance  of  the  Christian  duties,  that  we  should  no  longer 
have  any  doubts  or  scruples  of  the  Christian  faith.  {R.  Duke.)  OcxTs 
teerets: — All  religions  have  their  arcana,   or  secrets  known  only  to  those  who|' 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxv, 

are  within.  The  religion  of  the  Bible  does  not  disdain  to  acknowledge  its  own 
secrets,  and  to  drive  away  from  its  archives  those  who  come  with  irreverent 
curiosity  to  pry  into  the  contents  of  revelation.  By  "secret"  we  are  here  to  under- 
stand familiar  intercourse.  The  word  here  rendered  "secret"  is  traced  to  a  word 
which  means  couch  ;  the  idea  is  that  of  two  friends  seated  upon  the  same  couch, 
holding  confidential  intercourse.  The  talk  is  as  between  companions,  and  is  con- 
ducted in  eager  whispers.  God  is  represented  thus  as  bringing  to  a  loving  heart 
His  own  peculiar  messages  and  communications,  which  He  will  not  publish  to  the 
general  world.  God  has  so  made  His  universe  that  its  various  parts  talk  to  one 
another.  Men  hold  friendly  and  confiding  intercourse.  The  sun  is  full  of  lessons, 
so  are  the  flowers,  so  are  all  the  winds  that  blow,  so  are  the  forests,  and  so  are  the 
oceans.  All  these  may  be  said  to  be  open  secrets  ;  that  is  to  say,  men  may  discover 
their  meanings  for  themselves — by  comparison,  by  the  study  of  analogy,  by  the 
watching  of  the  coming  and  going  phenomena  of  nature.  But  beyond  this  open 
revelation  there  is  a  secret  covenant.  God  calls  His  children  into  inner  places, 
and  there,  in  hushed  and  holy  silence,  He  communicates  His  thought  as  Hia 
children  are  able  to  receive  it.  "  He  will  show  them  His  covenant "  ;  He  will  read 
to  them  His  own  decrees  ;  He  will  be  His  own  interpreter,  and  make  plain  to  the 
heart  things  that  are  mysterious  to  the  intellect.  We  are  to  remember  that  in 
holding  these  secrets  we  do  not  hold  them  originally,  or  as  if  by  right :  we  hold 
them  simply  as  stewards  or  trustees,  and  we  are  not  to  make  them  common  property. 
The  heart  should  always  know  something  that  the  tongue  has  never  told.  Deep  in 
our  souls  there  should  be  a  peace  created  by  communion  with  God  which  no  out- 
ward riches  can  disturb.  "The  secret  of  the  Lord"  may  not  mean  any  curious 
knowledge  of  mere  details,  or  of  future  events,  or  the  action  and  interaction  of 
history  ;  but  it  may  mean,  and  does  mean,  a  complete  and  immutable  confidence 
that  God  reigns  over  His  whole  creation,  and  is  doing  everything  upon  a  basis  and 
under  a  principle  which  must  eventuate  in  final  and  imperturbable  peace.  The 
universe  is  not  governed  in  any  haphazard  way.  This  word  "covenant"  has  been, 
no  doubt,  abused,  perverted,  or  misapplied ;  but  its  use  indicates  that  the  Divine 
plan  is  sovereign,  settled,  unchangeable.  The  universe  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  it 
cannot  fail  of  its  purpose.  Revelation  is  the  heart  of  the  Most  High,  and  every  jot 
and  tittle  of  it  will  be  fulfilled.  The  truly  religious  life  is  not  a  matter  of  mere 
intellectual  intelligence,  or  information,  or  power  of  argument ;  it  is  a  profound  per- 
suasion of  the  heart,  a  real,  simple,  solid  trust  in  the  righteousness  and  goodness 
of  God.  How  such  a  trust  lifts  us  above  the  fret  and  the  anxiety  of  ever-changing 
details  !  This  passage  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  many  assurances  given  by  Jesus 
Christ  Himself.  He  promised  the  Holy  Spirit  to  abide  with  the  Church,  to  show 
the  Church  things  to  come,  and  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them 
unto  the  Church.  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  thus  an  ever-enlarging  mystery — an 
ever-enlarging  benefaction.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D. )  Revelations  to  those  who  obey : 
— There  are  commentators  who  refer  this  verse,  not  to  the  external  orderings  of 
God's  providence,  but  to  the  mental  assurance  which  God  gives  those  that  fear 
Him,  of  the  truth  of  His  Word,  and  the  adequacy  of  the  religion  it  reveals,  to 
satisfy  the  wants  of  the  soul.  This  mental  assurance,  wrought  into  the  soul  by 
God  Himself,  is  thought  by  some  to  be  the  secret  of  the  Lord  here  intended.  The 
Saviour  is  believed  to  refer  to  this  secret  assurance  in  the  words,  "If  any  man  will 
do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God "  (John  vii.  17). 
The  Jews  had  denied  the  Divine  reality  of  His  miracles,  and  also  that  the  Mes- 
sianic prophecies  had  been  verified  in  Him.  "Very  well,"  answers  our  Lord,  "I 
propose  to  you  another  means  of  testing  My  claim  to  be  your  Messiah  and  Saviour. 
Practise  the  precepts  of  the  religion  I  teach  you,  and  you  shall  soon  have  revealed 
to  you  the  secret  whether  it  be  of  God.  Do  His  will,  and  you  shall  know  of  the 
doctrine.  In  obeying  the  precept,  all  else  shall  become  plain. "  I  knew  a  man  who 
acted  upon  this  saying  of  the  Saviour.  He  admired,  as  perfect,  the  preceptive 
portions  of  the  Bible,  but  stumbled  at  some  of  its  peculiar  doctrines.  He  deter- 
mined, therefore,  to  ascertain  what  efi"ect  obeying  the  precepts  would  have  toward 
dissipating  his  difficulties  in  regard  to  the  doctrines  of  our  religion.  He  therefore 
at  once  endeavoured  to  live  in  every  respect  as  he  would  have  lived  had  he  been  a 
Christian :  reading,  praying,  attending  public  worship,  and  making  the  moral  code 
of  the  Bible  his  only  rule  of  action.  So  obeying  the  precept,  in  less  than  a  twelve- 
month's time  the  secret  of  the  Lord  was  revealed  to  him,  the  truth  of  all  the 
doctrines  of  God's  covenant  of  redeeming  mercy  in  Christ  was  made  plain  to  his  under- 
standing and  grateful  to  his  heart.     Here  is  a  cure  for  scepticism  within  the  reach 


PSALM  XXV.]  TEE  PSALMS.  513 

of  every  man.  {David  Caldwell,  M.A.)  Knowledge  the  revmrd  of  obedience: — 
1.  There  are  some  parts  of  the  Bible  whicli  none  but  a  learned  man  can  understand 
or  explain.  There  are  seeming  difficulties  and  discrepancies  in  the  Bible  which  may 
escape  the  notice  of  the  casual  reader,  but  of  which  all  well-instructed  theologians 
are  aware,  since  they  are  standing  objections  in  the  mouth  of  the  sceptic  or  the 
scorner.  2.  There  are  some  parts  of  the  Bible  which  all  can  understand.  No  one 
who  reads  the  New  Testament,  or  who  hears  it  read,  can  doubt  what  he  ought  to 
do,  and  what  he  ought  not  to  do.  The  Bible  is  clear  about  many  of  its  doctrines. 
3.  There  is  a  middle  class  of  truths  that  are  easy  of  comprehension  to  some,  and 
hard  to  others, — truths  which  human  learning  cannot  impart,  nor  the  want  of 
learning,  as  such,  exclude  from  the  mind.  These  are  the  most  solemn  and  most 
important  teachings  of  Scripture,  which  tell  us  of  the  intimate  relations  which  exist 
between  man  and  his  God :  such  as,  the  doctrines  of  the  corruption  of  our  nature  ; 
of  the  degrading  and  shameful  conduct  of  sin  ;  of  our  need  of  salvation  and  purifica- 
tion ;  of  our  own  inability  to  purify  and  save  ourselves  ;  of  the  priceless  blessings 
involved  in  the  atonement  of  Jesus,  and  in  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Of  all  these 
doctrines  it  may  justly  be  said,  they  are  easy  or  hard  to  be  understood  by  different 

Eersons,  and  sometimes  even  by  the  same  persons  at  different  times.  The  practical 
nowledge  of  these  great  truths  is  an  effort  beyond  the  power  of  the  intellect,  apart 
from  the  convictions  and  aspirations  of  the  soul.  The  natural  man  understandeth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  They  are  spiritually  discerned,  and  mere 
learning  cannot  spiritually  discern.  "If  any  man  will  do  God's  will  he  shall 
know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God."  An  obedience  springing  from  true 
faith  is  the  key  by  which  we  are  to  unlock  the  hidden  and  more  precious  mysteries 
of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  {O.  W.  Brameld.)  The  knowledge  of  covenant  secur- 
ities : — The  Eev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  when  speaking  of  God's  faithfulness  to  His  covenant 
promises,  used  the  striking  illustration  of  the  deed  to  a  house.  The  deed  may  be 
very  old.  It  may  be  hard  to  decipher.  The  parchment  may  be  stained  and 
cracked.  The  inmates  of  the  home  in  their  busy  life  may  forget  all  about  it.  But 
the  very  existence  of  the  home  depends  upon  it,  and  if  it  were  lost  and  could  not 
be  replaced,  sorrow  and  poverty  and  wretchedness  would  be  the  portion  of  that 
household.  So  our  peace  of  soul,  our  very  spiritual  life,  depends  on  the  covenant 
wlneh  God  the  Father  made  long  ago  on  our  behalf  with  Christ  the  Son,  that  for 
His  sake  our  sins  should  be  forgiven  and  we  should  have  a  right  to  the  many 
mansions. 

Vers.  16-18.  Turn  Thee  unto  me,  and  have  mercy  upon  me;  for  I  am  desolate 
and  afiUcted. — A  sufferer's  prayer : — How  tender  is  this  language,  and  how  instruc- 
tive too.  David  was  a  sufferer  as  well  as  a  king.  But  he  is  a  petitioner  also.  He 
prays  for — I.  Delivekance.  II.  A  kind  look  from  God  is  desirable  at  ant 
TIME,  BUT  in  affliction  AND  PAIN  it  is  like  life  from  the  dead.  Therefore  he 
says,  "Look  upon  mine  affliction  and  pain."  III.  Pardon.  "Forgive  all  my 
sins."  This  was  his  meaning;  let  it  be  ours.  {W.  Jay.)  The  cry  of  the 
afflicted: — Look  at  Loch  Lomond.  A  hundred  feet  of  water,  deep  and  dark  and 
deadly ;  the  waves  that  slumber  yonder  at  the  foot  of  the  Ben  will  drown  you. 
Yes,  but  when  God  sent  out  His  frost,  when  from  the  caves  of  the  north  there  crept 
the  congealing  influence,  lo  !  the  waves  slumbered  and  slept,  and  you  walked  and 
skimmed  on  your  ringing  steels  across  the  congealed  billows.  The  same  lake,  but 
so  transformed  that  you  could  skim  across  its  surface.  Some  of  you  know  what  it 
is  to  be  almost  overwhelmed  with  the  billows  of  trouble.  They  roll  over  you  again  and 
again,  and  recede  but  to  come  on  with  redoubled  power,  until  at  last  you  cry  out, 
"  Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish."  Then  there  comes  a  great  calm,  and  you  just  skim 
across  the  billows  of  your  daily  toil,  because  Christ  your  Saviour  has  told  the 
troubles  and  difliculties  and  monotony  to  sleep.  Oh,  what  a  glorious  thing  the 
grace  of  Christ  is!  (John  Bohertson.)  David' s  jprayer : — I  wonder  if  they  are 
able  to  say  of  us  in  the  time  of  sorrow  and  bereavement  and  trouble,  "Behold, 
he  prayeth. "  Those  travellers,  as  they  pass,  are  suddenly  arrested  by  a  sound  that 
is  strange  to  them,  and  they  ask  what  it  is.  It  is  David  at  his  prayers.  Ah,  he 
is  all  right !  Pray  on,  David  ;  do  not  be  ashamed  of  your  voice — let  it  sound  out. 
It  is  nobler  thus  to  pray,  than  with  loud,  uplifted  voice  to  give  the  command  to 
thine  armies  to  fall  in  to  the  front :  and  David's  voice  had  done  that  for  many  a 
day.  A  ringing,  clarion  peal  the  warrior  had  given  in  his  time :  "Fall  in  to  the 
front ! "  They  loved  to  hear  it  in  Israel.  When  the  king  spake,  it  reminded  them 
of  the  old  days  when  the  right  arm  of  the  young  warrior  did  valiant  things  for 

33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [psAtM  XXY. 

Jehovah ;  and  they  liked  to  hear  his  voice  rise  above  the  din  of  battle :  but  it  is 
ndbler,  kinglier,  and  far  more  grand  to  hear  the  old  king  with  his  quaverijig  voice 
lifted  up  in  prayer.  A  godly  man's  appeal: — I.  On  behalf  of  self.  1.  For 
deliverance  from  suffering  (ver.  16).  "The  road  to  heaven,"  says  an  old  writer, 
"is  soaked  with  the  tears  and  blood  of  the  saints."  2.  For  forgiveness  (ver.  18). 
He  traced  his  suflFerings  to  his  sins.  Sin  is  the  gall  in  the  cup  of  life  ;  the  root  of 
the  pestiferous  tree  of  all  natural  evil.  From  suffering  we  infer  sin.  He  believed 
that  his  sins  had  to  do  with  God.  Wrong  in  any  form  or  department  of  life  is  sin 
against  Him.  "Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned."  He  knew  that  God's 
forgiveness  was  necessary  to  his  deliverance.  3.  For  preservation  of  life,  of  con- 
fidence, of  character  (ver.  21).  -II.  On  behalf  of  society  (ver.  22).  There  is 
nothing  selfish  in  genuine  piety.  The  man  who  prays  and  struggles  only  for  his 
own  salvation  is  utterly  destitute  of  genuine  religion.  His  creed  may  be  correct, 
and  all  his  religious  observances,  but  he  has  not  the  root  of  the  matter  in  him. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  18.  Look  npon  mine  a£Siction  and  my  pain. — A  troubled  prayer : — I.  It  is 

WELL  rOK  us  WHEN  OTTE  PRATERS  ABOUT  OUE  SORROWS  ARE  LINKED  WITH  PRATBRB 

ABOUT  OUR  SINS.     Our  sorrows  profit  us  when  they  bring  our  sins  to  mind. 

1.  They  give  us  time  for  thought.     A  sick-bed  has  often  been  a  place  of  repentance. 

2.  Our  sorrows  are  often  the  direct  result  of  our  sins.  Then  we  cannot  but  remember 
them.  Not  to  have  sorrow  when  we  sin  is  a  mark  of  the  reprobate.  3.  "When 
our  sorrows  are  so  like  our  sins.  Jacob  was  a  crafty  deceiver,  and  he  in  his  turn  was, 
once  and  again,  craftily  deceived.  He  was  a  great  bargain-maker,  and  he  in  his  torn 
was  once  and  again  craftily  deceived.  He  cheated  his  father,  and  so  everybody 
cheated  him,  of  course.  How  often  we  have  to  eat  the  fruit  of  our  own  ways  ! 
4.  They  drive  us  out  of  an  atmosphere  of  worldliness.  There  is  our  nest,  and  a  very 
pretty,  snug  nest  it  is ;  and  we  have  been  very  busy  picking  up  all  the  softest 
feathers  that  we  could  find,  and  all  the  prettiest  bits  of  moss  that  earth  could  yield, 
and  we  have  been  engaged  night  and  day  making  that  nest  soft  and  warm.  There 
we  intended  to  remain.  We  meant  for  ourselves  a  long  indulgence,  sheltered  from 
inclement  winds,  never  to  put  our  feet  among  the  cold  dewdrops,  nor  to  weary  our 
pinions  by  mounting  up  into  the  clouds.  But  suddenly  a  thorn  pierced  our  breast ; 
we  tried  to  remove  it,  but  the  more  we  struggled  the  more  deeply  it  fixed  itself  into  us. 
Then  we  began  to  spread  our  wings,  and  as  we  mounted  we  began  to  sing  the  song 
which,  in  the  nest,  we  never  should  have  sung,  the  song  of  those  who  have  com- 
munion with  the  skies.  5.  Sometimes  they  remind  us  of  our  ingratitude.  How  sad 
a  blemish  upon  the  character  of  Hezekiah  it  was  that  he  rendered  not  again  unto  the 
Lord  according  to  the  benefits  done  unto  him.  6.  Sometimes  sorrows  remind  us  of 
want  of  sympathy  with  those  who  have  like  sorrows.  7.  Sorrow  is  also  sent  to 
admonish  us  of  our  neglect  of  Divine  teaching.  Why  that  rod  ?  Why  that  whip 
and  bridle  1  Because  I  have  been  like  the  horse  and  the  mule  which  had  no  under- 
standing. Let  us  humble  ourselves  before  God,  and  ask  with  Job,  "Show  me 
wherefore  Thou  contendest  with  me."  II.  It  is  well  when  wb  are  as  earnest 
ABOUT  OUR  SINS  AS  WE  ARE  ABOUT  OUR  SORROWS.  The  chaplain  of  Newgate  says 
many  of  the  prisoners  will  pretend  very  great  repentance  when  he  is  talking  to  them 
about  spiritual  things,  but  he  can  always  tell  whether  their  repentance  is  genuine  or 
not,  by  their  trying  to  bring  him  round  to  teU  them  something  about  their  punish- 
ment. Before  their  trial  they  frequently  ask  to  know  what  term  of  imprisonment 
they  are  likely  to  get.  Then,  when  they  are  undergoing  punishment,  they  frequently 
try  to  get  some  trifling  favour  through  his  means.  They  think  much  more  of  the 
punishment  than  they  do  of  the  crime.  If  I  go  to  God  and  only  ask  to  have  my 
sorrows  taken  ofi"  me,  what  is  that  ?  I  am  no  true  penitent.  It  is  the  pain  and  not 
the  sin  that  troubles  me.  III.  It  is  well  to  take  both  sorrow  and  sin  to  the 
SAME  place.  David  took  both  to  God.  1.  Take  our  sorrows  to  Him,  not  to  any 
neighbour  or  friend.  2.  But  let  us  take  our  sins  also.  8.  The  most  mournful  and 
the  most  sinful  are  welcome  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  4.  He  can  with  equal  ease  remove 
both.  IV.  Go  to  Him  in  the  right  spirit.  David  says,  "Look  upon,"  that  is 
aU.  But  when  he  speaks  of  his  sins  he  is  much  more  definite  as  to  what  he  would 
have  done  with  them,  "  Forgive  all  my  sins."  I  must  have  them  forgiven,  I  cannot 
bear  them.  _  {0.  H.  Spurgeon. )  Comfort  under  affliction : — We  know  not  the  nature 
of  the  sufferings  under  which  David  laboured,  whether  of  body  or  of  mind,  or  both ;  but 
this  we  know,  that  in  all  of  them  his  first  refuge  and  his  principal  relief  was  prayer. 
Suffering  times  are  times  both  of  searching  and  discovery.    It  is  a  fire  t^at  tries  a  man's 


PSALM  XXV.]  THE  PSALMS.  515 

work,  a  man's  temper,  and  a  man's  state  whether  he  be  really  a  child  of  God.  If  he 
be  not,  when  suffering  comes,  his  angry  almost  blasphemous  speeches  will  reveal  that. 
But  the  good  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,  will  bring  forth  good  things. 
God  being  pleased  with  him,  he  is  pleased  with  every  thing.  Hence  in  aflBiction, 
knowing  tiiat  it  is  laid  on  in  love,  and  that  he  deserves  much  more,  he  prays,  "  Look 
upon  mine  affliction,"  &c.  Two  things  are  taught  us  here — I.  That  a  kind  look 
FBOM  God  is  vebt  desirable  in  affliction;  for  it  is — 1.  A  look  of  special 
observation.  As  to  the  kind,  the  degree,  and  the  duration  of  our  affliction.  2.  Of 
tender  compassion.  3.  Of  support  and  assistance  (Exod.  iii.  7  ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  9).  Now 
here  we  generally  stop ;  if  the  Lord  will  but  grant  us  this,  it  is  all  we  ask,  we  will 
not  trouble  Him  for  more.     "We  forget  our  sin.     IL  That  the  sweetest  cordial 

UNDER  AFFLICTION  IS  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  DiVINE  FORGIVENESS  (Psa.  XXxii.  1  ;  Rom. 

iv.  7).  1.  Because  trouble  is  very  apt  to  bring  our  sins  to  remembrance  (Jer.  xxii. 
21 ;  Gen.  xlii.  21 ;  1  Kings  xvii.  18  ;  Psa.  xl.  12).  2.  Because  a  sense  of  pardon  will 
largely  remove  all  distressing  fears  of  death  and  judgment.  "When  we  feel  our  flesh 
wasting  and  this  earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle  ready  to  tumble  about  us,  we 
cannot  help  inquiring,  with  a  trembling  anxiety,  "When  I  am  turned  out  of  this 
house  where  shall  I  live  next  ? "  And  if  we  have  no  evidence  and  no  hope  of  an 
interest  in  the  Saviour,  how  terrible  the  prospect.  But  if  we  are  forgiven,  how  all 
is  changed.  So  then,  let  us — 1.  Praise  God  that  He  should  condescend  so  graciously 
as  to  look  favourably  upon  us.  2.  From  former  mercies  of  the  Lord,  if  the  Lord 
is  looking  upon  us,  let  us  hope  for  future  ones.  3.  If  a  kind  look  from  God  be  so 
comfortable,  what  must  heaven  be  ?    {Samuel  Lavington.) 

Ver.  21.  Let  integrity  and  uprightness  preserve  me;  for  I  wait  on  Thee.— 

Besolutions  made  and  strength  invoked  for  a  year  of  duty : — What  should  our 
memories  do  for  us  ?  If  we  are  really  humbled  and  grateful  for  the  past,  what  should 
we  resolve  on  now  ?  We  should  strive  to  "grow  in  grace,"  that  "love  may  abound 
more  and  more."    How  may  we  realise  this  desire,  for  we  have  many  enemies? 

1.  The  first  disposition  essentially  requisite  to  out  success  is  said  to  be  "integrity  and 
uprightness."  The  petition  implies  that  he  would  be  sincere  and  upright  towards 
God.  If  we  are  to  be  sincere  we  must  correct  our  own  faults.  We  must  cherish 
those  dispositions  which  God  approves.  We  must  try  to  fulfil  our  duty  better. 
And  we  must  do  all  the  good  we  can.  We  have  instances  in  Scripture  of  resolutions 
that  were  very  fruitless.  Israel  said  at  Sinai,  ' '  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we 
will  do. "  And  yet  in  less  than  six  weeks  they  were  dancing  before  the  Golden  Calf. 
Surely  the  wreck  of  many  a  fair  hope  in  past  years  may  tell  us  it  is  not  wise  to 
depend  on  ourselves.  The  Psalmist  says,  "For  I  wait  on  Thee" — "Hook  to  Thee 
to  sustain  that  integrity,  I  look  to  Thee  to  bless  it,  without  Thee  I  can  neither 
continue  upright  nor  secure  a  blessing  from  uprightness."  The  grace  of  God  alone 
can  enable  us  to  profit  by  any  external  advantages.  It  is  God  who  must  help  us  to 
conquer  even  the  least  fault.  It  is  God  alone  can  help  us  to  walk  with  any  measure 
of  steadfastness  in  the  path  of  obedience.  (Baptist  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  Justice, 
honesty,  truth,  and  sincerity : — Integrity  and  uprightness  are  terms  of  like  import, 
and  signify  a  virtue  that  is  essential  to  all  true  religion  and  morality.     I.  The 

NATURE   OF  INTEGRITY  OR  UPRIGHTNESS   IN   OUB  DEALINGS  WITH  MEN.      1.  With 

respect  to  our  actions  ;  and  so  it  may  be  taken  for  justice  and  honesty,  in  opposition 
to  injuring  and  cheating.  It  is  very  dishonest  to  borrow  money  or  goods,  or  to  trade 
upon  credit,  without  upright  designs  and  fair  prospects  of  paying  every  one  his  own. 

2.  With  respect  to  our  words.  This  may  be  taken  as  truth,  in  opposition  to  lying. 
But  to  understand  a  lie  there  are  moral  distinctions  that  must  be  attended  to.  The 
wrong  of  falsehood  consists  in  knowing  or  thinking  one  thing  and  saying  another 
with  an  intent  to  deceive.  There  are  lies  which  men  call  ludicrous,  but  they  had 
better  be  avoided.  Others,  called  officious,  which  are  told  to  hide  a  fault,  or  to 
prevent  some  mischief.  The  worst  of  all  is  the  injurious  lie.  II.  Recommend  this 
INTEGRITY.  1.  In  its  native  beauty.  2.  For  the  reality  and  honour  of  religion. 
All  religion  is  mockery,  and  vain  pretence  without  it.  3.  The  safety  and  happiness  of 
all  society  depend  upon  it.  There  is  no  living  with  a  man  of  a  false  heart  and  tongue. 
4.  Integrity  is  of  high  advantage  to  ourselves.  It  prevents  abundance  of  guilt,  and 
many  a  throbbing  wound  in  the  conscience  which  a  contrary  temper  and  behaviour 
would  subject  us  to.  It  screens  us  from  the  reproach  and  vengeance  of  wicked  men. 
This  should  excite  a  religious  care,  upon  Christian  principles,  to  exceed  the  brightest 
of  the  heathen  in  our  moral  conduct.  Let  us  see  that  our  hearts  be  made  upright 
by  the  renewing  of  our  minds.      {J,  Ouisd,  D.D.)         Integrity: — Truthfulness, 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

integrity,  and  goodness — qualities  that  hang  not  on  any  man's  breath — form  the 
essence  of  manly  character,  or,  as  one  of  our  old  writers  has  it,  "that  inbred  loyalty 
unto  virtue  which  can  serve  her  without  a  livery."  He  who  possesses  these  qualities, 
united  with  strength  of  purpose,  carries  with  him  a  power  which  is  irresistible. 
He  is  strong  to  do  good,  strong  to  resist  evil,  and  strong  to  bear  up  under  difficulty 
and  misfortune.  When  Stephen  of  Oolonna  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  base  assailants, 
and  they  asked  him  in  derision,  "Where  is  now  your  fortress?"  "Here,"  was 
his  bold  reply,  placing  his  hand  upon  his  heart.  It  is  in  misfortune  that  the 
character  of  the  upright  man  shines  forth  with  the  greatest  lustre  ;  and  when  all  else 
fails,  he  ta!kes  his  atfoid  upon  his  integrity  and  his  courage.    {Ghristian  Weekly.) 


PSALM  XXVL 

Yebs.  1-12.  Jadge  me,  0  Lord ;  for  I  liaye  walked  In  mine  Integrity.— Xeoifn^ 
proofs  of  persmuU  piety : — I.  A  steong  ceavino  fob  a  knowledge  of  the  beal 
STATE  OF  THE  OHABAOTEB.  "Judge  me,  0  Lord."  Implying — 1.  A  belief  in  the 
possibility  of  being  self-deceived.  2.  A  desire  to  be  made  right,  at  whatever  cost, 
11.  A  PRACTICAL  RECOGNITION  OF  God's  mekot.  "  For  Thy  loving-kinduess  is 
before  mine  eyes."  The  life  of  the  godly  is  marked  by — 1.  The  strongest  gratitude. 
2.  The  highest  courage.  III.  A  peofound  consciousness  of  sincerity  of  con- 
DtrcT.  "  I  have  walked  in  Thy  truth."  The  godly  man  hates  hypocrisy  and 
loathes  shame.  IV.  A  strong  repugnance  to  all  ungodly  society.  "1  have 
not  sat  with  vain  persons,"  &c.  1.  He  declares  that  he  never  had  any  fellowship  with 
them  (ver.  4).  2.  He  expresses  his  hatred  of  them  (ver.  5).  3.  He  prays  that  he 
may  not  be  gathered  to  their  company  (ver.  9).  Good  men  shun  the  society  of  the 
wicked,  because  (1)  it  is  wrong  ;  (2)  because  it  is  pernicious.  V.  A  delight  in  the 
public  worship  of  God.  "  I  will  wash  mine  hands  in  innocency,"  &c.  True  worship 
— 1.  Requires  personal  preparation.  2.  Consists  in  public  acknowledgments.  3.  Is 
inspired  with  the  presence  of  God.  VI,  A  fixed  determination  to  walk  ever 
with  the  holy.  "But  as  for  me,  I  will  walk,"  &c.  (vers,  11,  12).  (ffomilist.) 
The  character  of  an  upright  man  sketched  hy  himself: — To  do  this  requires  much 
introspection.  Yet  there  may  be  circumstances  when  such  work  becomes  neces- 
sary. I.  The  Psalmist  had  a  good  foundation  on  which  his  life  was  built. 
1.  Trust  in  Jehovah  (ver.  1).  2.  God's  loving-kindness  (ver.  5),  3.  God's  truth  ;  that 
is.  His  faithfulness  (ver.  3).  Note  :  all  the  supports  of  his  integrity  were  outside 
himself.  Happy  the  man  that  can  stay  his  mind  on  Divine  faithfulness  and  love  ! 
If  these  props  cease  to  sustain,  moral  and  spiritual  worth  pine  from  want  of  motive 
and  hope.  II.  'The  life  built  on  this  foundation  is  worthy  of  imitation. 
It  was  a  life  of— 1.  Integrity  (ver.  11).  2.  Straightforward  progress  (ver.  1),  3.  Avoid- 
ing evil  associations  (vers.  4,  5).  4.  Cultivation  of  holy  worship,  song,  and  thanks- 
giving (vers.  6-8,  12).  Note — (1)  Those  who  have  God  as  the  support  of  their  Life 
will  show  a  life  worthy  of  such  support.  (2)  Those  who  most  value  communion  with 
God  will  most  freely  appreciate  and  cultivate  the  stimulus  and  comfort  to  be  ob- 
tained from  united  worship.  (C.  Clemmce,  D.D.)  An  ajjpeal  marked  by  specijte 
entreaty : — Four  lines  of  supplication.  I.  That  God  would  vindicate  him  and 
not  let  him  be  mixed  up  with  those  he  hates  (vers.  1,  9, 10).  II.  That  God 
WOULD  search  and  PROVE  HIM  (ver.  2).  III.  That  God  would  purify  him  (ver.  3). 
Upright  before  men,  he  does  not  pretend  to  be  perfect  before  God.  IV.  That 
God  would  entirely  deliver  him  from  the  surroundings  of  unqenial  and 
•unholy  men  (vers.  9,  10).  {Ibid.)  BavicPs  appeal  and  its  issue : — I.  An  appeal 
to  God  to  be  his  judge.  II.  The  causes  that  induced  him  to  it.  1.  His  faith 
and  confidence  in  God.  2.  His  integrity.  (1)  How  he  carried  himself  to  men :  ab- 
staining from  all  association  with  wicked  doers.  (2)  How  to  God  :  showing  marks 
of  his  piety.  III.  The  petition.  That  God  would  not  suffer  him  to  be  polluted 
with  the  conversation  of  wicked  men,  nor  involved  in  their  punishment.  IV.  His 
GRATITUDE.  He  will  praise  the  Lord  in  the  Congregations.  {Bp.  Wm.  Nicholson.) 
David's  integrity: — It  would  be  madness  in  any  man,  however  blameless  his  life 
may  have  been,  to  call  upon  God  to  enter  into  judgment  with  him  for  his  offence* 
against  Him.  It  is,  however,  often  otherwise  in  regard  to  many  of  our  feUow-men. 
We  can  safely  invite  the  omniscient  Judge  to  decide  between  us  and  them.    We  can 


PSALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  517 

say  in  regard  to  them,  as  David  does,  "Judge  me,  0  Lord  ;  for  I  have  walked  in 
mine  integrity."  Though  Saul  sought  David's  life,  and  once  with  his  own  hand 
hurled  a  javelin  at  him  to  slay  him,  David  never  for  a  moment  swerved  from  the 
conduct  of  a  dutiful  subject.  He  still  fought  Saul's  battles  for  him,  and  though 
Saul  was  pursuing  him  as  an  outlaw,  spared  him  when  it  was  in  his  power  to  kill 
him.  He  never  raised  his  hand  against  the  king,  nor  allowed  those  under  his  control 
to  do  so.  Integrity  had  marked  his  whole  conduct,  so  that  Saul  himself  was  obliged 
to  acknowledge  with  tears,  "Thou  art  more  righteous  than  I;  for  thou  hast 
rewarded  me  good,  whereas  I  have  rewarded  thee  evil."  So  should  it  be  with  the 
Christian  always.  He  should  never  allow  the  injustice  of  others  to  mar  his  integrity. 
Principle,  not  passion,  should  be  the  pole  star  of  his  course.     (Z>.  Caldwell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2,  Examine  me,  0  Lord,  and  prove  me ;  try  my  reins  and  my  heart— 0«r 

Tieed  of  Divine  scrutiny : — I.  It  is  possible  that  we  mat  tky  ottkselves  by  false 
PRINCIPLES.  Self-examination  is  an  all-important  duty,  but  when  we  have  searched 
most  diligently  we  need  that  God  should  examine  us.  Now,  we  are  prone  to  err  in 
regard  to  our  repentance,  our  faith,  and  our  obedience — these  which  are  the  grand 
requisites  for  salvation.  II.  We  are  prone  to  be  partial  to  ourselves, — 
to  make  allowances  where  we  should   not.      III.    And  otjr  motives  in  our 

CONDUCT  ARE  SO  DIFFICULT  TO  ASCERTAIN  BY  ANY  BUT  GOD.  IV.  AnD 
when   we    DISCOVER  IMPERFECTIONS  WE   CANNOT   CORRECT  THEM,    eVCn   by   that 

Divine  grace  which  He  is  willing  to  bestow.  V.  The  Divine  judgment  will 
determine  the  decisions  of  the  last  day.  What  we  tMnk,  or  our  fellow-men 
believe,  will  not  avail  then.  VI.  What  is  needed  to  prepare  for  heaven. 
{S.  Morell.)  Examinations  (A  talk  with  children) : — As  a  rule,  children  are  not 
very  anxious  for  examinations.  They  do  not  see  what  possible  good  can  come  out 
of  them.  If  most  of  them  had  their  wishes,  they  never  would  have  one  at  all.  Yet 
in  days  to  come  these  children  will  see  that  of  all  things  that  they  did  in  their 
school  days  perhaps  the  most  important  were  these  very  examinations.  Now,  David 
here  asked  God  to  examine  him  ;  he  asked  a  very  keen  examiner  to  take  the  task 
in  hand.  He  knew  what  that  meant :  he  knew  that  no  weakness,  no  ignorance,  no 
sin  would  remain  hidden  ;  but  that  everything  would  be  known,  not  only  to  God, 
but  also  largely  to  David  himself.  And  that  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  he  wanted 
to  be  examined.  I.  Now,  observe  that  the  word  "examine"  here  is  a  very 
FORCIBLE  WORD.  It  means  "to  examine  by  fire,"  and,  therefore,  by  that  which 
shall  burn  up  all  the  dross,  and  only  leave  behind  that  which  can  pass  through  fire. 
Again,  the  word  "try"  is  further  expressive.  The  Hebrew  word  means  "melting 
by  fire";  in  other  words,  it  means  "examine  by  fire  to  the  point  of  melting.  ' 
Thus  the  examination  the  Psalmist  asked  for  was  an  examination  by  fire  —  an 
examination  that  should  burn  away  everything  that  was  impure.     II.  The  result 

OF  AN  EXAMINATION  TO  A  LARGE  EXTENT  IS  TO   MAKE  ONE  KNOW  ONESELF.      If  it 

were  not  for  the  examinations  which  children  get,  some  of  them  would  get  very 
conceited,  and  would  think  that  they  knew  everything.  When  any  one  begins  a 
study  he  is  convinced  in  a  week  or  so  that  he  knows  all  about  it.  If  you  see  him 
again  in  a  twelvemonth  he  begins  to  doubt  it ;  but  if  you  see  him  in  two  years  he 
is  quite  convinced  he  knows  very  little.  Now,  examinations  are  very  helpful  in  that 
way.  The  condition  of  learning  is  just  to  learn,  first  of  all,  that  we  know  next  to 
nothing,  and  thus  to  be  dissatisfied  with  ourselves.  Then,  and  then  only,  we  shall 
make  an  effort.  III.  Failure  in  examination  has  very  often  led  to  deter- 
mination on  the  part  of  a  boy  or  girl  never  to  fail  again  ;  thus  failure  has  been 
one  of  the  greatest  blessings  they  have  had  in  life.  David  felt  sure  that  if  God 
examined  him  he  would  know  very  much  more  of  his  own  poor  miserable  self  than 
he  did  before,  and  some  path  of  sin  which  had  escaped  his  notice  would  be  revealed 
to  him.  Indeed,  he  was  anxious  that  the  Lord  should  not  conceal  from  him  any- 
thing that  was  evil  in  him.  To  be  conscious  of  one's  error  is  the  first  step  necessary 
to  avoid  repeating  it.  IV.  Again,  there  was  another  feeling  on  the  part  of  David, 
namely,  that  thorough  as  God  was  as  an  examiner,  and  thorough  as  the  exposure 
would  be  by  such  an  examination,  GoD  was  nevertheless  vert  kind  ;  for  David 
says  in  the  following  verse,  ' '  For  Thy  loving-kindnesses  are  before  mine  eyes. "  Our 
best  loved  teachers  have  been  those  who,  though  they  saw  all  our  failings,  all  our 
mistakes,  very  clearly,  yet  did  not  hold  us  up  to  ridicule,  but  sympathised  with 
our  difficulties  and  put  the  best  construction  on  all  our  actions.  So  it  is  with  our 
Lord.  He  knows  our  hearts,  and  reads  every  thought  before  we  express  it  in  words. 
Hidden  desires  are  all  known  to  Him.     But  then,  He  is  so  kind,  so  loving,  so 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

forgiving,  we  can  leave  ourselves  in  His  hands.  {D.  Davies. )  Self-examination 
examined : — Self-examination  is  to  many  disciples  a  kind  of  first  point  in  practical 
religion.  It  is  heard  and  read  on  all  sides.  But  there  are  only  two  Scripture  pass- 
ages which  can  be  at  all  cited  for  it,  one  of  which  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5)  certainly  has  no 
such  meaning ;  and  the  other  (1  Cor.  xi.  28)  carries  no  sufficient  authority  for  the 
practice.     Scriptiu'e   sends  us  to  God:    "Examine  me,  0   Lord";    "Search  me, 

0  God  "  ;  "  The  Lord  trieth  the  heart."  I.  God  certainly  cak  examine  us,  and 
we  cannot  in  any  but  the  most  superficial  and  incomplete  sense  examine  ourselves. 
For — 1.  Our  memory  is  too  short  and  scant  to  recall  or  restore  the  conception  of  one 
in  a  himdred  million  of  the  acts  that  make  up  our  lives.  2.  Even  if  we  could  recall 
them,  every  one,  we  could  never  go  over  the  survey  of  such  vast  materials,  so  as  to 
form  any  judgment  of  them  or  of  ourselves.  3.  And  since  the  understanding  of  our 
present  state  is  impossible  without  understanding  all  the  causes  in  our  action  that 
have  fashioned  the  character  and  shaped  its  figure,  our  faculty  is  even  shorter  here 
than  before.     Omniscience  only  is  equal  to  the  task.     II.  In  vphat  is  fkequentlt 

ITNDEESTOOD  BY  SELF-EXAMINATION  THEKE  13  SOMETHING  MISTAKEN  OK  DECEIT- 
FUL which  needs  to  be  carefully  resisted.  1.  It  is  a  kind  of  artificial  state,  in 
which  the  soul  is  drawn  off  from  its  objects  and  works,  and  its  calls  of  love 
and  sacrifice,  to  engage  itself  in  acts  of  self- inspection.  2.  He  may  even  be 
so  engrossed  in  self  -  examination  as  to  become  morbidly  selfish  in  it ;  for 
nothing  is  more  selfish  than  to  be  always  boring  into  one's  self.      III.   How 

MUCH     IS     IMPLIED     IN     A     HEARTY     WILLINGNESS     OR     DESIRE     TO     HAVE     GOD 

EXAMINE  US  AND  PROVE  US.  A  mind  seeking  after  truth,  ready  to  receive  it ; 
more,  a  soul  already  found  to  be  in  God's  friendship,  sealed  with  the  witness  of  His 
acceptance.  IV.  There  is  a  way  of  coming  at  the  verdict  of  God,  whatever 
IT  may  be.  God  designs  always  to  give  us  the  benefit  of  His  own  knowledge  of  our 
state.  He  never  intended  us  for,  and  never  puts  us  to,  the  task  of  testing  our- 
selves. He  expects  to  do  this  for  us.  We  are  complete  only  in  Him.  He  is,  and  is 
ever  to  be,  our  Light,  and  we  only  know  ourselves  in  Him.  God  is  manifested  in 
the  consciousness  of  them  that  love  Him  and  are  right  towards  Him.  They  wiU 
know  God  by  an  immediate  knowledge  or  revelation.  They  will  have  His  Spirit 
witnessing  with  theirs.  God  has  planned  our  life  so  as  to  bring  us  into  a  perception 
of  the  many  defects  and  errors  lurking  in  us,  and  to  set  us  in  the  same  judgment  of 
them  that  He  has  Himself,  proving  us  at  every  turn,  trying  even  the  reins  and 
heart,  that  our  most  secret  things  may  be  revealed.  If  there  should  be  any  legiti- 
mate place  for  self-examination  it  is  in  the  field  where  we  go  to  discover  our  faults 
and  the  sins  that  require  to  be  forsaken  or  put  away.  {Horace  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
Morbid  self-inspection  kills  love: — Many  years  ago  I  knew  an  excellent,  much- 
esteemed  Christian  mother,  who  had  become  morbidly  introverted,  and  could  not 
find  her  love  to  God.  Seeing  at  once  that  she  was  stifling  it  by  her  own  self-inspect- 
ing engrossment,  which  would  not  aUow  her  to  so  much  as  think  of  God's  loveliness, 

1  said  to  her,  " But  you  love  your  son,  you  have  no  doubt  of  that."  "Of  course  I 
love  him,  why  should  I  not  ? "  To  show  her,  then,  how  she  was  killing  her  love  to 
God,  I  said,  ' '  But  take  one  week  now  for  the  trial,  and  make  thorough  examination 
of  your  love  to  your  son,  and  it  will  be  strange  if,  at  the  end  of  the  week,  you  do 
not  tell  me  that  you  have  serious  doubt  of  it."  I  returned  at  the  time,  to  be  dread- 
fully shocked  by  my  too  cruel  experiment.  "  No,"  she  said,  "  I  do  not  love  him  ; 
I  abhor  him."  She  was  fallen  oif  the  edge,  and  her  self-examination  was  become 
her  insanity  !  {Ihid. )  Qod  trying  the  reins  and  the  heart : — It  is  wonderful  to 
see  with  what  skill  God  has  adjusted  all  our  experiences,  in  this  mortal  life,  so  as 
to  make  us  sensible  of  our  errors  and  defects.  As  the  invisible  ink  is  brought  out 
in  a  distinct  colour  by  holding  what  is  written  to  the  fire,  so  God  brings  out  all 
our  faults  and  our  sins  by  the  scorches  of  experience  through  which  we  are  ever  pass- 
ing in  the  fiery  trials  of  life.  If  we  are  proud,  He  has  a  way  to  make  us  see  it,  and 
to  break  down  our  pride.  If  we  cherish  any  subtle  grudge  or  animosity,  He  will 
somehow  call  it  out  and  make  us  see  it.  If  we  are  selfish,  or  covetous,  or  jealous, 
or  frivolous,  or  captious,  or  self-indulgent,  or  sensual,  or  self-confident,  or  fanatical, 
or  self-righteous,  or  partial,  or  obstinate,  or  prejudiced,  or  uncharitable,  or  cen- 
sorious,— whatever  fault  we  have  in  us,  whether  it  be  in  the  mind,  or  the  head,  or 
the  body,  or  I  might  almost  say  the  bones,  no  matter  how  subtle,  or  how  ingeniously 
covered  it  may  be,  He  has  us  in  the  furnace  of  trial  and  correction,  where  He  is  turn- 
ing us  round  and  round,  lifting  us  in  prosperity,  crushing  us  in  adversity,  subduing 
us  with  aifliction,  tempting  out  our  faults  and  then  chastising  them,  humbling  us, 
correcting  as,  softening,  tempering,  soothing,  fortifying,  refining,  healing,  and  so 


PSALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  619 

managing  us,  as  to  detect  all  our  drossy  and  bad  qualities,  and  separate  them  from 
us.  He  sits  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver,  and  allows  nothing  to  escape  either  His 
discovery  or  our  correction.  No  self-examination  we  could  make  would  discover,  at 
all,  what  He  is  continually  bringing  to  the  light,  and  exposing  to  our  detection. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver,  3.  For  Thy  loving-kindness  is  before  mine  eyes ;  and  I  have  walked  in  Thy 
truth. — The  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  contem2)lated : — I.  "We  have  a  pleasant 
OBJECT  OF  CONTEMPLATIOK — the  loving-kinduess  of  the  Lord.  God  has  ever  been 
manifesting  this.  In  creation,  especially  in  the  creation  of  man.  Other  principles 
came  afterwards  into  operation.  God  must  be  just  as  well  as  beneficent.  Hence 
man,  when  he  sinned,  had  to  feel  the  effects  of  God's  sore  displeasure.  But  it  is 
only  when  this  is  viewed  in  its  connection  with  a  dispensation  of  mercy,  and  as 
designed  to  lead  us  to  repentance,  that  it  can  be  regarded  as  manifesting  His  loving- 
kindness.  It  is  not  merely  forbearance — the  patience  which  endures  for  a  season 
the  vessels  of  wrath,  and  which  must  at  last  give  way  to  the  growing  vengeance 
provoked  by  their  iniquities.  It  is  the  pitying  tenderness  with  which  our  miseries 
and  dangers  are  regarded,  the  redeeming  love  which  would  rescue  us  from  them  all, 
and  receive  and  cherish  us  again  as  dear  children,  and  delight  in  us  at  all  times  to 
do  us  good.  Therefore  consider — 1.  What  has  been  done  to  render  the  exercise 
of  mercy  consistent  with  justice.  See  this  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
"What  is  it  that  an-ests  the  attention  and  draws  to  itself  the  rapt  admiration  of  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved?  "Herein,"  he  exclaims,  "is  love  ;  not  that  we  loved 
God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent  His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins." 
Did  he  overlook  the  other  doings  of  God,  in  which  He  has  shown  His  goodness  to 
the  children  of  men  ?  No  ;  but  he  felt  that  this  transcends  them  all.  In  this  he 
saw  most  clearly  that  God  is  love.  2.  Think  on  the  fruits  of  this  loving-kindness. 
Our  mercies  temporal  and  spiritual  stretch  on  through  all  eternity.  Notice  also  its 
spontaneous  character,  and  its  constancy.  II.  The  makner  in  which  it  should 
BE  BEFORE  OTTB  EYES.  1.  As  the  frequent  subject  of  our  thought.  2.  As  the  sure 
gi-ound  of  our  hope.  4.  As  the  motive  of  our  praise.  (Jaines  Henderson,  D.D.) 
Think  well  and  do  well: — David  is  labouring  under  the  fear  that  he  should  be 
judged  and  condemned  with  the  ungodly.  He  therefore  urges  reasons  -wherefore 
this  should  not  be  so.  And  this  amongst  the  rest,  that  his  thoughts  were  upon  the 
loving -kindness  of  God.  "As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  "We  may 
form  a  better  judgment  of  ourselves,  probably,  from  the  tenor  of  our  thoughts  than 
from  any  other  evidence.  If  our  thoughts  all  go  downward,  downward  we  ourselves 
are  going.  But  if  there  be  some  breathings  towards  the  heavenly,  then  may  we 
have  hope  that  we  also  are  ascending  towards  the  heavenly  places  and  shall  dwell 
in  them  hereafter.  David  could  urge,  besides  the  secret  evidence  of  his  devout 
thoughts,  the  public  proof  of  his  holy  acts — "I  have  walked  in  Thy  truth."  The 
two  must  go  together  to  become  valid  evidence.  I.  The  mind  occupied  with  a 
FRUITFUL  subject.  "Thy  loving-kindness  is  before  mine  eyes."  It  is  exceedingly 
profitable  for  the  Christian  to  have  always  some  subject  of  thought  upon  his  mind. 
"When  the  mind  does  not  receive  holy  matters  to  feed  upon,  as  a  rule  it  preys  upon 
itself ;  like  certain  of  our  bodily  organs  which,  if  not  supplied  vdth  nutritive  matter, 
will  soon  begin  to  devour  their  own  tissues.  The  mind  when  it  eats  into  itself 
forms  doubts,  suspicions,  complaints  ;  and  nine  out  of  ten  of  the  doubts  and 
fears  of  God's  people  come  from  two  things — walking  at  a  distance  from  God,  and 
want  of  spiritual  nutriment  for  the  soul.  A  powerful  stream  of  holy  contemplation 
will  scour  the  thoughts  and  bear  away  the  foul  deposits  of  unholy  thought.  Now, 
David's  theme  here  is  a  rightful  subject  for  meditation.  It  is  our  bounden  duty  to 
think  much  upon  God's  loving-kindness.  And  it  is  a  good  subject,  and  wide,  and 
pleasing.  Very  plain  too,  and  suitable  and  seasonable  for  us  all.  II.  A  life 
ORDERED  BY  A  RIGHT  RULE.  "  I  have  walked  in  Thy  truth."  He  means,  "  I  have 
tried  to  order  my  religion  according  to  the  truth  God  has  revealed."  Can  we  all 
say  that  ?  Do  not  most  of  us  worship  God  in  the  way,  and  because  it  is  the  way, 
our  forefathers  did  ?  "We  are  of  one  mind  with  the  old  Saxon  king  who,  when  he  was 
about  to  be  baptized,  stood  with  one  leg  in  the  water  and  inquired  of  the  bishop, 
"Where  do  you  say  my  ancestors  are  gone?  They  knew  nothing  about  your 
Christianity."  "All  cast  into  hell,"  said  the  bishop.  "  Well,  then,"  said  this  fine 
old  Conservative,  "  I  will  go  with  them  ;  I  should  not  like  to  be  parted  from  my 
kith  and  kin."  "V'ery  much  of  this  principle  rules  our  country  still.  David  means, 
next,  that  he  had  walked  according  to  God's  law.     '*  I  have  walked  in  Thy  truth." 


620  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvl 

But — III.  See  the  link  which  binds  the  two  parts  of  the  text  together. 
The  one  lias  been  the  consequence  of  the  other.  Because  I  thought  much  of  Thy 
love,  therefore  I  walked  in  Thy  truth.  Our  thoughts  greatly  influence  our  actions. 
You  cannot  send  the  mind  up  the  chimney  and  expect  it  to  come  down  white.  What- 
ever road  the  thoughts  traverse,  all  the  faculties  of  manhood  will  go  after  them. 
But  there  are  some  men  who  separate  these  things.  There  are  some  men  who  think, 
or  say  they  think,  of  God's  loving-kindness,  but  do  not  walk  in  God's  truth.  What 
do  we  say  of  men  who  make  the  doctrines  of  grace  an  excuse  for  licentiousness  ? 
Paul  said,  "Their  damnation  is  just."  Others  there  are  who  say  they  walk  in 
God's  truth,  but  His  loving-kindness  is  never  before  their  eyes.  They  boast  of  their 
character,  but  they  never  think  of  God's  gi-ace.  They  are  Pharisees  ;  they  know  not 
what  spirit  they  are  of.  Let  us  remember  that  when  we  get  dull  in  the  practical 
part  of  religion,  the  best  way  of  revival  is  to  think  more  of  the  loving-kindness  of 
God.  [C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  An  encouraging  contemplation: — I.  As  A  subject  of 
CONTEMPLATION.  David  Said,  "My  meditation  of  Him  shall  be  sweet."  II.  As 
the  source  OF  ENCOURAGEMENT.  How  oftcu  we  need  this — under  a  sense  of  guilt ; 
in  our  afflictions.  III.  As  an  incitement  to  praise.  "  How  lamentable,"  says 
Leighton,  "is  it  that  a  world  so  full  of  God's  mercy  should  be  so  empty  of  His 
glory !  "  IV.  As  an  example  for  our  imitation.  There  have  been  those  who 
have  sought  to  resemble  Him.  (  W.  Jay.)  The  mani/estness  of  Divine  benignity  : 
— "God  is  beauty  and  love,"  says  Plato  ;  and  these  words  are  echoed  by  all  whose 
spiritual  vision  is  not  dimmed  by  sensual  feeling  and  sceptical  thought.  What  is 
meant  by  Divine  goodness  or  benignity  ?  Not  good-doing,  but  good-being — good- 
ness of  nature.  I.  God's  benignity  is  a  fact  ever  before  the  eyes  of  man's 
INVESTIGATING  INTELLECT.  Man's  logical  pathway  to  this  great  idea  is  by  three 
grand  stages.  1.  The  master-disposition  of  a  moral  being  is  ever  the  essence  of  his 
moral  character.  The  varied  impulses  of  the  soul  have  been  resolved  into  two  grand 
dispositions — the  good-seeking  and  the  self-seeking.  With  a  change  of  the  presiding 
disposition  there  comes  a  thorough  revolution  of  character.  2.  The  master-disposition 
of  an  absolutely  competent  being  is  always  expressed  in  the  general  tendency  of  his 
works.  God  is  such  a  being  ;  He  has  all  wisdom,  all  power  ;  and  we  are  authorised 
to  look  upon  the  universe  as  the  expression  of  His  heart.  3.  The  general  tendency 
of  the  universe  is  to  produce  happiness.  And  this  general  impression  is  confirmed 
by  all  scientific  research,  which  demonstrates  that  the  organisation  of  all  sentient 
beings  is  contrived  for  happiness ;  and  that  the  external  sphere  of  every  such  being 
contains  full  provision  for  its  happiness.  But  how  comes  it,  then,  that  there  is  so 
much  suffering  in  the  world?  (1)  Sufferings  form  a  small  item  compared  with 
enjoyments.  (2)  It  subserves  benevolent  ends.  II.  It  is  a  fact  ever  before  the 
EYE  OF  man's  general  CONSCIOUSNESS.  And  universal  man  believes  in  it  with 
a  faith  underlying  all  the  phenomena  of  life.  There  is — 1.  A  universally  felt 
responsibility  for  moral  evil.  2.  A  universally  felt  appreciation  of  benignity  as  the 
essence  of  excellence.  3.  A  universally  felt  obligation  to  worship.  4.  A  universally 
felt  desire  for  continued  existence.  III.  It  is  a  fact  ever  before  the  eye  of 
man's  biblical  faith.  The  Scriptures  reveal  the  goodness  of  God  as — 1.  Con- 
ferring blessings  of  a  transcendent  character.  2.  Conferring  these  blessings  on  those 
who  justly  deserved  His  displeasure.  3.  Conferring  them  by  means  of  the  most 
stupendous  sacrifice.  "He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all." 
That  God  should  have  bestowed  any  favour  upon  sinful  creatures  and  enemies  is  a 
wonderful  display  of  goodness ;  but  that  He  should  have  made  such  a  sacrifice 
"passeth  knowledge."  More,  He  makes  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ  Jesus.  His  goodness  is  His  glory.  Faith  in  His  goodness — (1)  Is  essential 
to  spiritual  union  ;  (2)  is  the  necessary  condition  of  spiritual  culture  ;  (3)  is  the 
solving  principle  of  all  intellectual  difficulties  touching  His  government ;  (4)  is 
the  under-foundation  of  all  our  hope.  (Homilist.)  The  loving-kindness  and 
truth  of  God : — I.  What  we  are  to  understand  by  this.  1.  It  may  be  taken  for 
either  an  essential  perfection  in  God,  or  some  external  dispensation  of  good  from 
God.  In  the  former  sense,  Psa.  li.  1  ;  in  the  latter,  Psa.  xlii.  8.  In  both  senses 
here.  2.  It  displays  and  exerts  itself  in  many  acts  of  providence,  but  especially  in 
Christ,  and  the  vouchsafement  of  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings  by  Him  (Joel  ii. 
13  ;  Tit.  iii.  4).  3.  It  may  be  considered  as  respecting  others  or  ourselves  (Eph. 
V.  25  ;  Gal.  ii.  20).  II.  What  it  is  for  God's  loving-kindness  to  be  before  our 
EYES.  1.  Duly  to  apprehend  it.  2.  To  believe  it,  and  be  persuaded  of  it  (John 
viii.  56  ;  Heb.  xi.  13).  3.  To  esteem  and  prize  it  (Psa.  xxxvi.  7).  4.  To  consider  it, 
and  be  seriously  reminded  of  it  (Exod.  xx.  20  ;  Song  i.  4).    III.  What  is  meant  by 


PSALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  521 

God's  tkuth.  1.  His  immutable  faithfulness  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  49,  xciv.  4).  2.  His 
"Word  (Psa.  cxix.  142).  3.  The  siucerity  of  those  that  belong  to  Him  (Psa.  li.  6). 
IV.  "What  it  is  to  walk  in  His  tkuth.  1.  To  place  our  firm  reliance  on  the 
faithfulness  of  God.  2.  To  attend  strictly  to  the  Word  of  God,  both  its  doctrinal 
and  practical  parts.  3.  To  be  upright  in  our  way,  in  opposition  to  that  walking  in 
craftiness  which  is  the  celebrated  policy  of  the  children  of  this  world.  4.  Persever- 
ance in  this  course.     {T.  Cruso.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  I  have  not  sat  with  vain  T^ersaDS.— Separate,  yet  near: — The  eyes 
which  have  God's  loving-kindness  ever  before  them  are  endowed  with  penetrative 
clearness  of  vision  into  the  true  hollowness  of  most  of  the  objects  pursued  by  men, 
and  with  a  terrible  sagacity  which  detects  hypocrisy  and  shame.  Association  with 
such  men  is  necessary,  and  leaven  must  be  in  contact  with  dough  in  order  to  do  its 
transforming  work  ;  but  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  whose  heart  is  truly  in  touch  with 
God  not  to  feel  ill  at  ease  when  brought  into  contact  with  those  who  have  no  share 
in  his  deepest  convictions  and  emotions.  .  .  .  No  doubt  separateness  from  evil- 
doers is  but  part  of  a  godly  man's  duty,  and  has  often  been  exaggerated  into  selfish 
withdrawal  from  a  world  which  needs  good  men's  presence  all  the  more  the  worse  it 
is  ;  but  it  is  a  part  of  his  duty  :  "  Come  out  from  among  them  and  be  separate  "  is  not 
yet  an  abrogated  command.  No  man  will  ever  mingle  with  "  men  of  vanity  "  so  as 
to  draw  them  from  the  shadows  of  earth  to  the  substance  in  God,  unless  his  loving 
association  with  them  rests  on  profound  revulsion  from  their  principles  of  action. 
None  comes  so  near  to  sinful  men  as  the  sinless  Christ ;  and  if  He  had  not  been  ever 
"separate  from  sinners  "  He  would  never  have  been  near  enough  to  redeem  them. 
"We  may  safely  imitate  His  free  companionship,  which  earned  Him  the  glorious 
name  of  their  Friend,  if  we  imitate  His  remoteness  from  their  evil.  (^.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  I  have  hated  the  congregation  of  evil-doers. —  With  wicked  men,  hut  not 
of  them: — Although,  when  driven  into  exile,  every  one  that  was  in  distress,  in  debt, 
&c.,  gathered  themselves  unto  David,  and  he  became  a  captain  over  them, — he  never 
led  them  against  his  king  and  country,  but  only  against  their  enemies  ;  and  in  time 
changed  the  most  reckless  and  turbulent  of  men  into  the  best  of  soldiers  and 
citizens.  There  is  no  place  where  the  sincere  Christian  cannot  make  his  influence  felt 
for  good  :  in  the  army,  in  the  navy,  in  trade,  at  the  bar,  on  the  bench,  in  the  halls 
of  legislation,  and  everywhere  ;  not  by  sacrificing,  but  by  maintaining  and  exhibit- 
ing his  principles  ic  his  spirit  and  conduct.     (Z).  Caldwell,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6,  7,  I  will  wash  mine  hands  in  innocency :  so  wiU  I  compass  Thine  altar, 

0  Lord. — Purity  of  heart  and  life : — I.  What  this  resolution  implies.  1.  An 
apprehension  of  the  holiness  of  God.  2.  The  condition — holiness — in  which  alone  he 
could  have  communion  with  God.  3.  Great  desire  for  it.  4.  Willing  to  give  up  all 
that  stood  in  his  way,  all  sin,  especially.  II.  What  is  implied  in  keeping  such 
resolution.  1.  Renunciation  of  present  sin.  2.  Repentance  for  what  is  past. 
3.  Restitution  and  confession.  4.  Regard  to  the  rights  of  others  in  aU  respects — plain 
honest  dealing  and  kindness.  Oh,  the  endless  tricks  of  selfishness,  and  the  endless 
subterfuges  with  which  men  excuse  themselves ;  and  yet  so  much  piety  in  the  midst 
of  it  all.  Sometimes  it  is  that  persons  would  not  on  any  account  stay  away  from 
church  on  the  Sabbath,  but  they  would  cheat  you  in  their  business  on  the  Monday 
if  they  had  an  opportunity  of  doing  so.  Suppose  you  say,  well,  I  am  seeking  to  get 
money  that  I  may  give  it  to  the  missionary  cause  !  Let  me  tell  you  that  a  man 
might  as  well  fit  out  a  pirate  ship  for  the  same  purpose  !  You  take  advantage,  lie 
and  cheat,  to  get  money  for  God  !  Well,  when  you  have  got  the  money  so  for  God  ; 
just  go  into  your  closet,  lay  the  money  down,  and  say,  "Lord,  Thou  knowest  how  I 
got  this  money  to-day  :  there  was  a  man  came  into  my  shop  and  wanted  a  certain 
article,  and  I  had  not  what  he  wanted,  but  I  had  one  not  so  good,  but  I  managed  to 
get  him  to  take  it,  and  I  charged  him  a  little  more  than  it  was  worth,  because 

1  wanted  to  give  something  to  the  missionary  cause  !  "  Now,  would  that  be  washing 
the  hands  in  innocency  ?  Would  an  infinitely  holy  God  accept  such  an  offering  ? 
Judge  ye  !  III.  We  now  pass  to  show  that  both  the  resolution  and  the  keep- 
ing of  it  are  indispensable  conditions  of  acceptance  with  God,  When  we 
talk  of  persons  being  justified  by  faith  we  always  mean  that  faith  implies  repent- 
ance, making  restitution,  obedience,  and  holiness  of  heart.  The  faith  that  takes  hold 
on  Christ  implies  all  this.  We  are  justified  by  faith  ;  but  it  is  the  faith  of  obedience 
to  God,  the  faith  which  leads  to  sanctification,  the  faith  which  works  by  love  and 
purifies  the  heart,  the  faith  that  overcomes  the  world.     Ah,  the  faith  that  overcomes 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

tlie  world,  that's  the  faith  to  mark  an  honest  man  !  No  man  has  faith  that  justifies 
him  who  has  not  faith  that  makes  him  honest.  If  you  are  not  honest  you  have  not 
faith  ;  in  God's  sense  of  the  term  you  have  not  the  faith  of  the  Gospel.  Now,  sup- 
pose that  every  person  in  this  house  were  at  this  moment  willing  to  do  as  the 
Psalmist  did,  and  were  to  come  right  out  and  say,  "I  will  wash  my  hands  in 
innocency  " — what  is  there  to  hinder  ?  (C.  G.  Finney.)  Preparation  for  Divine 
worship : — "Innocency  "  does  not  here  imply  moral  perfection.  David  was  innocent 
of  the  charges  advanced  against  him  by  his  enemies,  the  aiders  and  abettors  of 
Absalom's  rebellion  ;  but  he  was  not  morally  pure  as  was  the  God  he  worshipped.  He 
desired,  therefore,  that  God  would  try  his  reins  and  his  heart,  so  that  he  might  know 
and  confess  his  sin.  Washing  the  hands,  as  emblematic  of  purity  and  innocence,  was 
enjoiued  on  the  priests,  to  typify  that  inward  holiness  which  alone  rendered  service 
acceptable  to  God  ;  and  also  on  the  elders  of  the  city  nearest  to  which  the  body  of  a 
homicide  was  found.  Viewed  in  the  light  of  these  two  ceremonials,  David's  words 
may  here  be  regarded  as  a  protestation  of  innocency  in  reference  to  the  more  outward 
sense  by  which  religion  is  dishonoured,  and  a  declaration  of  sincerity  in  worship.  It 
was  then  he  would  draw  near  to  the  altar  in  company  with  the  worshippers  who 
gathered  round  it.  As  the  pious  Israelite  looked  towards  the  altar,  so  the  Christian 
turned  his  thoughts  to  the  Redeemer  whom  God  has  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  His  blood.  It  was  David's  chief  joy  to  visit  the  habitation  of  God's 
house,  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt.  With  a  lilce  devout  joy  should  we  enter 
His  sanctuary,  and  especially  when  we  approach  His  holy  table,  and  preparation  for 
this  worship  should  engage  the  Christian's  prayerful  attention.  I.  Its  necessity 
MAY  BE  ARGUED  FROM  SCRIPTURE.  Jacob  was  commanded  to  go  from  Shechem  to 
Bethel  to  fulfil  his  vow ;  and  for  this  he  and  his  household  prepared  by  purifying 
themselves  and  putting  away  the  strange  gods  from  among  them.  When  before  Sinai, 
Moses  was  instructed  to  sanctify  the  people  and  prepare  them  for  God's  presence  on 
the  mount.  There  is,  too,  that  solemn  preparation  for  the  Passover  after  Hezekiah 
had  reformed  the  temple  services,  when  its  observance  had  to  be  delayed  because  some 
had  come  up  to  the  feast  without  the  prescribed  purification  of  previous  religious  ser- 
vices. II.  It  MAY  BE  ARGUED  ALSO  FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  THING.  God  is  the 
infinitely  high  and  holy  One,  and  if  before  His  throne  the  angels  veil  their  faces,  how 
reverently  should  we  enter  His  gates  and  fall  at  His  footstool !  We  must  approach 
unto  His  presence  with  humility,  penitence,  and  prayer.  His  presence  there  is 
assured ;  for  He  cannot  He.  Love  should  be  present  in  all  our  worship,  and 
especially  at  that  memorial  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  our  Redeemer  to  whom  we  owe 
so  much.  (P.  Mearns.)  The  devout  worshipper: — With  all  his  disadvantages 
and  drawbacks,  David  was  the  ' '  man  after  God's  own  heart. "  If  he  sinned,  and 
that  exceedingly  before  the  Lord,  we  know  how  thoroughly  he  repented.  One 
feature  in  his  character  is  very  noticeable — his  love  for  the  house  of  God.  I.  David's 
PREPARATION  FOE  THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  LoRD.  Though  an  exile  in  the  land  of  the 
Philistines,  banished  from  the  service  and  worship  of  the  sanctuary,  surrounded  by 
those  who  would  watch  every  action  and  note  each  shortcoming,  he  yet  resolved  to 
give  them  no  opportunity  of  triumphing  over  him.  A  lesson  for  Christian  wor- 
shippers. 1.  Such  preparation  is  becoming.  What  amazing  condescension  to  be 
allowed  to  speak  with  God,  and  to  come  before  Him  with  thanksgiving !  2.  It 
is  necessary.  Worship  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God  unless  our  hands  are  washed  in 
innocency.  How  impressive  the  instructions  given  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  (Exod.  xxx. 
17-21) ;  Paul  directs  Timothy  to  see  that  the  Church  lifts  up  holy  hands  in  prayer 
(1  Tim.  ii.  8).  3.  It  has  most  happy  results — "the  blessing  from  the  Lord,  and 
righteousness  from  the  God  of  our  salvation."  II.  David's  engagements  in  the 
HOUSE  OF  THE  LoRD.  1.  David  knew  it  was  the  place  where  God's  honour  dwelt. 
Though  only  the  tabernacle,  it  was  nevertheless  the  place  the  Lord  had  chosen  to 
place  His  name  there — and  there  too  was  the  glory.  We  have  a  better  dispensation. 
2.  David  was  filled  with  gratitude  at  the  recollection  of  past  mercies  (vers.  6,  7). 
Shall  not  we  ?  Learn — 1.  How  necessary  that  we  manifest  a  becoming  reverence  in 
the  house  of  God.  2.  Our  services  can  only  be  reasonable  and  acceptable  when  we 
realise  the  purposes  for  which  we  assemble.  3.  The  dispositions  of  mind  pleasing  to 
God  are  the  same  under  the  new  as  under  the  old  economy.  4.  Let  the  text  lead  us  to 
a  holy  self-examination.  Have  I  washed  ?  &c.  {JF.  G.  Barrett.)  The  sacrament 
of  the  Lord's  Supper: — I.  The  duty  of  attending  it.  The  command  of  Christ  to 
"do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me"  is  indisputable;  His  design  in  that  command 
most  gracious  ;  the  benefits  accruing  to  ourselves  in  obeying  it  are  great  and  certain. 
The  duty  of  communicating,  therefore,  is  unquestionable  ;  the  sin  of  neglecting  so  to 


PSALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  523 

do  is  gi-eat.  It  is  as  dangerous  to  our  spiritual  condition  to  treat  the  sacrament  as 
nothing,  as  to  give  to  it  a  mysterious  efficacy  which  the  Scriptures  do  not  warrant. 
To  faith  Christ  is  present,  not  bodily  but  spiritually,  in  the  power  of  His  death  ;  and 
in  this  sense  His  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  His  blood  is  drink  indeed,  to  the  comfort, 
support,  and  nourishment  of  those  who  feed  on  Him  in  their  hearts  by  faith 
with  thanksgiving.  Christians  in  the  present  day  suffer  much  in  their  owu  souls, 
and  the  work  of  conversion  in  others  may  be  greatly  hindered  by  the  neglect  of  a 
due  and  worthy  participation  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  inasmuch  as  its  observance 
is  closely  connected  with  spirituality  of  mind,  and  a  prayerful  desire  for  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  our  fellow-men.  II.  The  state  of  mind  in  which  we  aee 
TO  DEAW  NEAR  TO  THE  Lord's  TABLE.  David  "desired  to  wash  his  hands  in 
innocency,"  and  so  compass  the  altar  of  God.  What  did  these  words  mean  to  him  ? 
Not  that  he  would  root  up  all  corruption  from  his  heart,  and  make  himself  entirely 
free  from  sin  ;  for  then  he  must  needs  wait  until  the  day  of  his  death  before  perform- 
ing his  vows.  His  meaning  is  to  be  found  in  his  description  of  the  blessed  state  of 
the  true  believer,  in  Psa.  xxxii.  1,  2.  St.  Paul  quotes  this  passage  in  Rom.  iv.  to 
prove  the  doctrine  of  our  pardon  and  justification  through  Christ,  by  which  he 
leaves  it  beyond  doubt  that  David  understood  that  doctrine,  and  described  the  happi- 
ness of  the  true  believer  who  by  faith  in  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ  as  typified 
in  the  Jewish  sacrifices  had  obtained  such  forgiveness.  In  this  state  of  mind  he 
desired  to  approach  the  altar  of  God  ;  and  in  this  state  of  mind  the  Christian  too  must 
approach  his  Father's  table.     {R.  Oakman,  B.A.)  Compassing  the  altar : — The 

Psalmist  will  go  round  and  round  the  altar,  looking  at  it,  looking  at  the  blood  on  its 
base,  and  the  blood  on  each  of  the  four  horns,  towards  north,  south,  east,  and  west, 
and  beholding  the  smoke  of  the  fire,  and  thinking  of  the  sacriiicial  victim  that  has 
died  there, — all  in  the  way  of  joyful  thanks  for  salvation  provided  for  men  !  It  is  a 
survey  of  redemption  work  taken  by  the  Redeemer ;  such  a  survey  as  every  member 
of  His  body  often  takes  after  having  felt  the  power  of  free  forgiveness,  and  while 
aiming  at  "innocency."  For  the  "compassing"  of  the  altar  takes  place  after 
pardon;  it  is  made  in  order  to  view  it  leisurely.     {Andrew  Bonar.) 

Ver  7.  That  I  may  publish  ■with  the  voice  of  thanksgiving,  and  tell  of  all 
Thy  wondrous  works. — Declaring  boldly  God's  mercy  and  goodness: — I  have  no 
notion  of  a  timid,  disingenuous  profession  of  Christ.  Some  preachers  and  professors 
are  like  a  rat  playing  at  hide  and  seek  behind  a  wainscot,  who  puts  his  head 
through  a  hole  to  see  if  the  coast  is  clear,  and  ventures  out  if  nobody  is  in  the  way  ; 
but  slinks  back  again  when  danger  appears.  "We  cannot  be  honest  to  Christ  except 
we  are  bold  for  Him.  He  is  either  worth  all  we  can  lose  for  Him,  or  He  is  worth 
nothihg.     {E.  Q.  Salter.) 

Ver.  8.  Lord,  I  have  loved  the  habitation  of  Thy  house.— T^e  importance  of  public 
woi'ship  : — The  form  of  godliness  may  often  remain  when  the  power  is  wanting ;  but 
the  power  cannot  well  subsist  where  the  form  is  altogether  absent.  Consider  the 
importance  of  public  worship — I.  As  it  respects  God.  If  there  be  a  Supreme 
Being,  a  Creator  of  the  race,  worship  should  be  rendered  to  Him,  both  private  and 
public.  The  natural  sentiments  of  mankind  universally  attest  this.  And  now 
that  revelation  has  been  given,  the  light  of  the  Gospel  has  come,  we  are  inexcusable 
if  we  do  not  obey  the  desire.  God  does  not  need  it,  but  is  willing  to  accept  it. 
11.  As  it  concerns  the  world.  Independently  of  its  effect  on  the  moral  principles 
of  the  race,  it  tends  to  peace  and  order,  it  humanises  and  civilises,  it  strengthens 
the  bonds  of  the  social  relation  and  brings  out  the  best  that  is  in  man.  III.  As  it 
CONCERNS  OURSELVES.  We  are  parts  of  a  great  whole,  each  with  duties  to  the  rest. 
Public  worship  aids  in  these.  It  gives  warmth  to  piety  and  adds  solemnity  to 
moral  virtue.  As  members  of  the  universal  Church,  we  adore  the  God  and  Father 
of  us  all,  through  the  Eedeemer  of  the  race,  by  the  sanctifying  Spirit  in  whom  we  all 
have  access.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D. )  Love  for  the  sanctuary : — I.  The  object  op  the 
Psalmist's  affection.  It  is  "the  habitation  of  Thy  house  and,"  &o.  "Out  of 
the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh,"  and  when  anything  la  thoroughly 
loved  it  is  very  hard  to  put  into  one  or  two  words  all  that  you  want  to  say ; 
language  seems  to  fail.  Hence,  again  and  again  does  the  Psalmist  tell  of  nia 
affection  for  the  house  of  God.  II.  His  profession  op  this  afpeotion.  Some 
people  make  no  profession ;  that  they  make  none  is  their  main  profession.  Let 
them  take  care  lest,  if  now  they  profess  they  regard  not  the  Lord,  He  at  the  last 
shall  profess,  "  I  never  knew  you."    Others  profess  only  before  men  to  be  praised  of 


624  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

tbem  :  a  poor  thing  this.  But  how  different  was  the  Psalmist's  oft-repeated  avowal. 
III.  Some  of  the  eeasons  for  this  profession.  They  have  to  do  with  present 
enjoyment  and  hope  of  the  future.  {J.  Aldis.)  The  institutions  of  God's  house: 
— I  suppose  that  nothing  short  of  an  entire  suspension  of  the  privileges  which  we 
recount  of  our  Sabbath  would  make  us  understand  what  the  house  of  God  is  worth 
to  us,  and  enable  us  to  enter  fully  into  the  mind  of  the  man  who,  driven  forth  an 
exile  from  Zion,  uttered  the  longing  of  his  heart  in  these  burning  words  :  "  As  the 
hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  so,"  &c.  (Psa.  xlii.  1,  2).  There  are  those  who 
cannot  remember  the  time  when  they  did  not  love  the  habitation  of  God's  house  ; 
others  have  found,  perhaps  late  in  life,  what  blessings  are  for  them  there.  But  let 
us  note  some  of  the  reasons  in  which  this  love  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  is  founded. 
I.  There  I  first  learned  to  know  myself  and  Thee.  There  has  been  rest 
since  you  knew  the  worst  of  yourself,  and  knew  that  God  knew  it,  and  pitied  and 
loved  you  still.  II.  There  I  have  learnt  most  richly  the  meaning  of  Thy 
discipline,  and  fodnd  strength  to  endure.  Some  of  you  have  gone  thither 
crushed  by  burdens,  pressed  by  temptations,  beggared  by  losses,  bewildered  by 
difficulties ;  ready  to  cry,  I  can  strive  no  longer,  I  am  worn  out,  I  give  up  the 
battle  at  last  in  despair.  And  then  blessed  words  have  seemed  to  stream  down  on 
you  from  the  height,  with  a  soothing  sweetness,  with  an  invigorating  force  such  aa 
no  words  which  you  have  ever  heard  elsewhere  have  conveyed.  III.  For  there  I 
was  guided  into  Thy  most  blessed  service.  IV.  There  I  found  meat  and 
fruitful  fellowship,  and  so  did  those  I  love  best.  We  little  estimate  what  the 
house  of  the  Lord  has  been  worth  to  our  souls.  As  little  do  we  measure  its  worth 
to  our  homes :  what  peace,  unity,  charity  it  has  engendered  ;  what  wandering, 
schism,  and  bitterness  it  has  spared.  {J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  The  house  of 
God: — I.  Reasons  for  loving  the  house  and  worship  of  God.  1.  Because  we 
love  Him  whose  house  it  is.  2.  Because  of  the  exercises  there  performed  :  prayer, 
reading,  and  exposition  of  the  Word,  praise.  3.  Because  of  the  company  we  meet 
there  :  God's  children,  angels,  God  Himself.  4.  Because  of  blessing  received  there  : 
pardon,  guidance,  comfort,  joy.  II.  How  this  affection  should  be  shown. 
1.  By  regular  attendance.  2.  By  entering  heartily  into  the  services.  3.  By  using 
our  influence  to  bring  others.  4.  By  contributing  to  maintain  the  house  and  worship 
of  God.  {Robert  Newton.)  Public  worship : — The  most  vital  thing,  as  far  as  the 
welfare  of  our  country  is  concerned,  is  not  what  we  call  its  constitution,  nor  its 
fiscal  policy,  nor  its  elementary  education,  nor  its  intellectual  or  industrial  achieve- 
ments ;  but,  paradoxical  as  it  may  sound,  its  attendance  at  the  sanctuary  on  the 
Lord's  day.  I.  Our  highest  being  is  dependent  on  our  conception  of  the 
character  of  God.  If  there  is  no  power  outside  a  man  greater  than  himself  whose 
law  he  recognises  and  to  whom  he  responds,  then,  saving  the  law  of  the  state  and 
the  convention  of  society,  he  is  subject  to  no  law,  he  is  the  free  creature  of  hia 
passions.  But  if  man  needs  an  authority  outside  self  to  control  his  selfish  passions, 
he  needs  an  ideal  standard  above  that  of  common  attainment  if  he  is  to  reach  to 
higher  moral  excellence.  With  a  lofty  ideal,  a  standard  above  ourselves,  we  are 
always  being  dissatisfied  with  ourselves  and  forced  to  make  efl"orts  to  improve.  Men 
may  rise  towards  their  God  ;  they  cannot  rise  above  Him.  One  thing  more,  man 
needs  also  within  himself  an  impulse  to  work,  for  virtue  is  often  very  hard  unless 
you  have  some  motive  which  shall  lead  to  higher  desires.  If  we  turn  from  theory  to 
history  and  to  personal  experience,  is  it  not  a  fact  that  morality  has  risen  or  gone 
down  just  in  proportion  as  faith  in  God  has  been  strong  or  feeble?  Even  so  calm 
and  unprejudiced  an  observer  as  Darwin  said  that  with  the  more  civilised  races  the 
conviction  of  the  existence  of  an  all-seeing  deity  has  had  a  potent  influence  on 
the  advancement  of  morality.  II.  This  faith  in  God  is  to  a  great  extent 
dependent  upon  public  worship.  In  this  busy  distracting  age,  were  there  no 
stated  times  for  public  worship,  men  would  run  great  risk  of  forgetting  God  and 
becoming  avowed  atheists.  If,  then,  the  life  of  faith  largely  depends  on  Divine 
worship,  and  upon  the  life  of  faith  depends  the  highest  well-being  of  society,  then 
every  one  who  by  his  example  encourages  the  neglect  of  public  worship,  whatever  be 
his  motive,  is  contributing  to  the  degradation  of  his  country,  whUe  in  many  cases 
he  is  securing  his  own.  And  while  attending  service  ourselves,  we  should  do  our 
utmost  also  to  induce  others  to  be  present ;  to  be  rid  of  all  which  keeps  men  away 
from  the  house  of  God  ;  and  to  acquire  everything  that  may  properly  attract  them 
there.  {Canon  Page  Roberts.)  The  value  of  public  worship : — I.  Worship  is  an 
institution  for  our  instruction.  Not  only  is  intellectual  enlightenment  gained, 
but  a  deep  insight  also  into  many  weighty  truths,  a  juster  discernment  of  right  and 


PSALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  525 

wrong,  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  state  of  our  own  heart,  the  need  of  salva- 
tion and  growth  in  grace.  II.  It  re-confirms  our  good  resolutions.  They 
need  to  be  again  and  again  renewed.  In  the  congregation  we  enter  into  the 
communion  of  saints,  and  are  mentally  incited  to  keep  our  vows.  "We  join  a  brother- 
hood possessing  the  same  frailties  and  having  the  same  needs.  The  inequalities 
of  life,  so  apparent  in  the  world,  vanish  here,  where  all  are  drawn  with  the  same 
bonds  of  love,  and  inclined  to  encourage  and  assist  each  other  on  the  way  of  life. 
III.  It  renews  and  strengthens  our  religious  feeling.  We  often  approach  a 
service  with  the  world  still  about  us,  with  trouble  and  sorrow  surging  round.  In 
the  sanctuary,  prayer  and  praise  and  the  Word  have  calmed  our  minds,  raised  us 
to  a  higher  plane,  given  us  a  truer  sense  of  the  proportion  of  things,  juster  views 
of  God  and  His  dealings.  {Homilist.)  David's  affection  for  the  house  of  God: — 
I.  David  had  an  affection  for  the  sanctuary.  1.  An  ardent  affection.  2.  A 
constant  affection.  3.  A  practical  affection.  II.  Eeasons  for  this  affection. 
Because  of— 1.  The  Proprietor's  residence  there.  2.  The  company  it  furnishes. 
3.  The  blessings  it  affords.  4.  The  habits  it  induces.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred 
Sermons. )  The  sanctity  of  Christian  art :  a  church-restoration  sermon : — The 
Greek  version  of  this  passage  may  be  translated,  "Lord,  I  have  loved  the  beauty  of 
Thy  house,  the  place  of  the  tabernacling  of  Thy  glory."  It  was  the  beauty  of  God's 
house  that  excited  the  ardour  of  the  Psalmist.  It  was  not  beneath  the  dignity  of 
inspiration  to  care  for  the  decent  and  splendid  provision  for  the  worship  of  the 
Supreme  ;  and  in  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  art  received  her  first  consecration  to  the 
worship  of  God.  I.  The  duty  of  reverent  care  for  the  externals  of 
worship.  1.  It  may  be  urged  that  it  is  not  right  to  affirm  that  an  ordinance  suited 
to  an  early  age  of  civilisation  must  continue,  notwithstanding  the  advance  of  human 
knowledge.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  should  not  be  forgotten,  that  that  part  of  the 
ceremonial  law  connected  with  the  fabric  of  the  temple  had  in  it  an  element  of 
stability.  2.  It  may  be  alleged  that  what  was  necessary  to  draw  the  minds  of  the 
Jews  from  the  tawdry  splendours  of  the  Canaanitish  worship  is  unnecessary  in  these 
days  of  Christian  enlightenment.  But  what  was  attractive  in  the  old  beliefs  was 
probably  a  remnant  of  the  old  tradition  of  reverence  to  God  which  had  never  wholly 
dieii  out  amongst  the  heathen.  3.  It  may  be  asserted  that  the  spiritual  nature  ol'  the 
Gospel  is  entirely  alien  from  a  system  that  appeals  to  the  senses  and  enlists  the 
imagination.  But  it  can  be  answered,  that  the  profound  est  theological  reasons  may 
be  adduced  for  a  worship  and  adoration  appealing  to  every  power  of  humanity  :  as 
witness  the  early  Christian  services,  the  Epistles,  the  Catacombs ;  and  when  the 
taste  and  bearing  of  Greece  combined  with  the  practical  skill  of  Italy  to  erect  and 
adorn  shrines  for  worship,  all  the  arts  found  their  legitimate  sphere  in  the  service  of 
the  Christian  religion.  II.  The  final  cause  why  God  has  implanted  in  us  a 
SENSE  OF  THE  BEAUTIFUL.  In  Him  alouc  is  perfection,  beatitude,  joy.  All  that 
is  beautiful  and  lovely  here  below  comes  from  Him.  Even  in  our  fallen  human 
nature  there  remains  sufficient  virtue  and  grace  to  make  us  acknowledge  and  revere 
the  true.  We  love  the  beautiful.  And  where  can  we  find  a  place  for  it  so 
appropriate  as  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house  ?  It  may  confidently  be  asserted, 
that  in  the  history  of  the  world  the  highest  manifestations  of  the  beautiful  have 
been  evolved  in  the  sublime  adoration  of  God.  {A.  P.  Forbes,  D.C.L.)  Our 
worship  of  God : — The  words  are  those  of  an  old  Jewish  poet,  spoken  centuries 
before  the  rise  of  Christianity.  They  express  a  pious  feeling  which  is  a  dominant 
note  of  the  Psalter.  The  affection  of  those  inspired  singers  for  the  sanctuary  of  the 
Lord  seems  irrepressible  ;  out  it  must,  whatever  the  theme — whether  a  prayer,  or  a 
lamentation,  or  a  thanksgiving,  or  a  sorrowful  confession  of  sin,  or  a  song  of  victory. 
The  temple  of  Jerusalem  was  the  Keblah  towards  which  God's  ancient  people  turned 
the  face  in  prayer,  wherever  they  might  be.  They  speak  of  "abiding  in  God's 
tabernacle,"  of  " dwelling  in  His  house  for  ever,"  of  "dwelling  in  His  courts,"  and 
being  "satisfied  with  the  beauty  of  His  house,  even  of  His  holy  temple."  Tliey 
never  weary  of  describing  the  glory  of  Mount  Zion,  and  the  happiness,  the  exulta- 
tion of  Divine  worship.  1,  Avoid  narrowness  in  your  religious  views.  Open  your 
heart  and  mind  to  the  whole  Bible,  not  only  to  a  part  of  it.  No  portion  of  Scripture 
is  superfluous,  but  everything  is  necessary  in  its  place — as  a  link  in  a  chain,  a  stage 
in  the  growth,  a  step  on  the  ladder  that  reaches  from  earth  to  heaven.  2.  Never 
imagine  that  while  beauty  and  stateliness  are  desirable  in  secular  buildings,  they 
are  superfluous  in  the  house  of  God.  Never  dream  that  spirituality  of  worship  is 
furthered  by  poverty  of  accessories,  by  absence  or  meagreness  of  ornament,  by  an 
utter  lack  of  comeliness  in  the  consecrated  place.     All  outward  and  visible  beauty 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

is  a  symbol  and  prophecy  of  tlie  Unseen  and  Eternal  Beauty,  and  therefore  natur- 
ally fitted  to  lift  our  hearts  to  that  great  Object  of  all  worship.  The  Church  may 
rightly  be  made  glorious  with  lavish  expense  of  art,  and  time,  and  means  :  if  only 
because  the  masses  of  God's  poor  stand  in  pressing  need  of  some  such  contrast  with 
their  ordinary  haunts,  to  waken  in  their  souls  the  sense  of  something  higher,  purer, 
nobler  than  the  sights  and  sounds  to  which  hard  necessity  has  restricted  them. 

3.  Every  church  is  "holy  ground,"  for  it  is  a  meeting-place  of  God  and  man  ;  and 
what  is  holy  should  be  beautiful.  Beauty  is  the  natural  stimulus  of  love.  The 
truth  that  God  meets  us  here  in  a  special  way  does  not  contradict  the  truth  of  His 
Presence  everywhere.  The  prophets  and  teachers  of  Israel  knew  quite  well  that  the 
Spiritual  is  the  only  Real,  and  that  spiritual  worship  means  a  worship  which  is 
heartfelt,  not  hollow,  reasonable  not  magical  and  meaningless, — a  worship  in  which 
the  entire  consciousness,  the  whole  nature,  concentrates  itself  upon  God.  Sursum 
corda — Lift  up  your  hearts  !  and  your  churches  may  be  perfect  shrines  of  beauty, 
and  your  services  musical  as  the  song  of  angels  ;  your  worship  will  not  therefore  be 
less  but  more  spiritual.  (<7.  /.  Ball,  M.A.)  Love  to  the  house  of  God : — I.  The 
OBJECT  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LOVE.  1.  TMs  habitation,  or  house,  is  designed  by 
the  Great  Proprietor  of  it  for  public  worship.  2.  It  implies  the  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  Presence.  II.  The  Christian's  love  to  the  house  of  God.  1.  The 
love  of  aflfection.  2.  The  love  of  preference.  3.  Because  of  advantages  realised  by 
attending  it.  (1)  Children  of  God  are  born  there.  (2)  There  the  believer  was  con- 
vinced of  sin.  (3)  There  the  presence  of  God  is  manifested.  (4)  It  is  the  banquet- 
ing house.     (5)  It  is  the  place  of  instruction.     (6)  Its  exercises  sweeten  for  glory. 

4.  Because  they  worship  with  good  men.  5.  It  is  a  practical  love.  (1)  Regular 
attendance.  (2)  Engagement  in  its  services,  according  to  ability.  (3)  Invitation 
to  others  to  attend.      (4)   Pecuniary  support.      (5)  Prayer.      III.   Application. 

1.  How  great  the  importance  and  advantages  of  Divine  worship.  Christ  and  His 
apostles  honoured  it  (Luke  iv.  16  ;  Acts  ii.  46).  2.  How  great  the  guilt  and 
danger  of  neglecting  the  house  of  God  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  27  ;  Zech.  xiv.  17,  19  ;  Heb.  x. 
25).  3.  If  the  earthly  temple  is  so  loved,  what  love  will  the  heavenly  temple 
create  !     {Helps  for  the  Pulpit.) 

Ver.  9.  Gather  not  my  soiQ  -with  sinners. — The  great  care  and  concern  now  that 
our  souls  be  not  gathered  luith  sinners  in  the  other  world,  considered  and  improved : — 
It  is  taken  for  granted  that  at  death  souls  are  gathered  together  after  their  own 
sort,  and  that  horror  is  felt  at  being  gathered  with  sinners.  In  discoursing  on  this 
doctrine  we  shall  note — I.  Some  things  implied  in  it.  1.  Here  souls  are  mingled 
together.  The  result  of  this  is  that  it  keeps  both  parties  uneasy  ;  they  are  a  mutual 
check  one  upon  another,  and  providence  varies  in  its   dispensations  accordingly. 

2.  In  the  other  world  there  will  be  separation  ;  and  that — 3.  The  time  for  this  is  at 
death.  But — 4.  The  saints  have  a  horror  of  being  gathered  with  sinners,  and  so, 
too,  have  the  wicked.  Balaam  (Numb.  xxi.  10).  II.  Who  are  sinners.  All 
unjustified  and  unsanctified  persons ;  such  as  they  who  neither  know  nor  care  about 
religion  :  the  profane,  the  mere  moralists  (Matt.  v.  20),  and  formalists  (2  Tim.  iii.  5). 
For  all  these  miss  the  mark  men  should  aim  at,  and  all  are  guilty  of  death 
before  the  Lord  (1  Kings  i.  21  ;  Rom.  iii.  19),  and  they  can  do  nothing  but  sin 
(Psa.  xiv.  3),  since  the  principles  that  govern  them  are  wrong  (Tit.  i.  15).  III.  The 
meaning  of  the  soitl  being  gathered  with  sinners  in  the  other  vtorld. 
The  soul  is  separated  from  the  body  at  death  and  goes  to  its  appointed  place,  which 
is  separate  from  that  of  saints.  IV.  The  concern  felt  in  reference  to  this. 
It  implies  an  earnest  belief  in  the  foregoing  truths,  and  a  dread  of  what  they 
declare,  together  with  an  acknowledgment  that  God  might  justly  condemn  them  ; 
wherefore  they  betake  themselves  to  His  mercy  (Job.  ix.  15).  V.  The  reasonable- 
ness of  such  concern.  1.  Because  to  be  gathered  with  sinners  is  to  be  separated 
from  God.  2.  In  a  most  doleful  place  (Isa.  xxiv.  22).  3.  With  the  most  frightful 
society  (Matt.  xxv.  41).     4.  Suffering  the  heaviest  punishment  (2  Thess.  i.  9). 

5.  To  be  left  in  their  sin  there ;  which  will  itself  be  their  punishment.  Their 
passions  wiU  rage,  but  they  cannot  be  satisfied.  6.  And  this  for  ever.  VI.  Lessons 
FROM  THIS  doctrine.  1.  However  favourable  the  condition  of  the  sinner  iu  this 
world,  it  is  a  miserable  one  after  all.  2.  That  the  great  business  of  our  life  is  to 
learn  to  die,  and  to  prepare  for  the  next  world.  3.  We  are  in  great  danger  of 
perishing,  and  therefore  should  be  all  the  more  earnest.  4.  Therefore  let  the  care- 
less, slothful,  delaying,  malignant  sinners  take  heed.  But — 5.  Such  as  are  showing 
this  concern  may  be  comforted,  for  they  are  in  the  way  of  duty,  and  are  taking 


PSALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  527 

their  work  in  time  ;  it  is  the  Spirit  who  works  in  them  this  concern,  and  they 
have  to  do  with  a  good  and  gracious  God  (Ezek.  xxiii.  11).  Then— 6.  Your  concern 
is  quite  different  from  that  of  the  ungodly,  who  also  shrink  from  hell,  as  Balaam 
did.  For  your  concern  is,  not  to  be  separated  from  Christ,  and  not  to  be  left  in 
sin  ;  and  you  are  now  forsaking  sin  with  true  purpose  of  heart.  Wherefore — 7.  Be 
thus  concerned  all  of  you,  come  to  Christ,  forsake  all  sin,  unite  with  the  godly, 
observe  ordinances,  avoid  the  way  of  sinners  now.  For  how  important  this  matter 
is  ;  nothing  is  to  be  put  before  it,  and  now  is  the  accepted  and  the  only  time,  and 
the  gathering  in  the  other  world  will  be  eternal  and  unutterable.  Wherefore,  upon 
the  whole,  let  me  obtain  of  you — (1)  That  you  will  take  some  serious  thoughts  of  the 
other  world  in  both  parts  of  it.  (2)  That  you  will  inquire  what  case  you  are  in  for 
it.  And — (3)  That  you  will  lay  down  measures  timely,  that  your  souls  be  not 
gathered  with  sinners  there.  May  the  Lord  persuade  and  incline  your  hearts  unto 
this  course.  {T.  Boston,  D.D. )  The  saint's  horror  at  the  sinner's  hell : — We  must 
all  be  gathered  in  due  course.  It  may  come  to-morrow  ;  it  may  be  deferred  another 
handful  of  years.  Filled  with  a  holy  horror  of  the  hell  of  sinners,  let  us  make  most 
sure  our  calling  to  the  heaven  of  the  blessed.  Consider — I.  The  gathering.  There 
have  been  many  such — Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  ;  Jericho  and  the  Canaanites ;  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  forgetting  all  these  inferior  gatherings,  let  us  look 
on  to  the  last  great  one,  which  is  proceeding  every  day  to  its  completion  As  the 
huntsman,  when  he  goes  forth  to  the  battue,  encompasses  the  beasts  of  the  forest 
with  an  ever-narrowing  ring  of  hunters,  that  he  may  exterminate  them  all  in  one 
great  slaughter,  so  the  God  of  Justice  has  made  a  ring  in  His  providence  about  the 
sinful  sons  of  men.  None  can  escape.  I  will  not  attempt  to  describe  what  our 
Saviour  veiled  in  words  like  these  :  "These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punish- 
ment." II.  The  prayer  itself.  We  are  all  agreed  about  it,  every  one  of  us. 
Sinners  do  not  wish  to  be  gathered  with  sinners.  But  the  reasons  of  the  one  prayer 
are  different  in  different  persons.  A  selfish  desire  to  escape  misery  is  sufficient  to 
account  for  it  with  sinful  men.  There  is  a  class  of  sinners  that  some  would  like  to 
be  gathered  with  now.  Can  we  say,  when  we  look  upon  the  bright  side  of  the 
wicked,  "Gather  not,"  &c.  ?  If  we  cannot  we  really  cannot  pray  the  prayer  at  all. 
But  the  Christian  prays  this  prayer  because,  as  far  as  his  acquaintance  with  sinners 
goes,  he  does  not  even  now  wish  for  their  company.  We  cannot  be  with  them  and 
feel  ourselves  perfectly  at  home.  And  even  now,  when  God  comes  to  punish  a 
nation,  the  Christian  has  to  suffer  with  the  rest.  He  may  well,  from  the  little  taste 
he  has  had  of  their  company,  pray,  "  Gather  not,"  &e.  I  do  not  know  any  class  of 
sinners  whose  company  the  Christian  would  desire.  I  should  not  like  to  live  with 
the  most  precise  of  hypocrites,  nor  with  the  formalist ;  and  as  for  the  blasphemer, 
we  would  as  soon  be  shut  up  in  a  tiger's  den.  And  there  are  other  reasons.  When 
sinners  are  gathered  at  the  last  their  characters  will  be  the  same.  And  think  of 
the  place,  the  pit  of  hell.     Their  occupations,  cursing  God  ;  their  sufferings,  the 

Eiin  of  body  and  soul  they  know.  And  they  are  for  ever  banished  from  God  and 
hrist.  III.  But  there  is  in  our  text  a  fear,  as  if  a  whisper  said,  "  Perhaps,  after 
all,  you  may  be  gathered  with  the  wicked."  This  fear  may  arise  from  remembrance 
of  past  sin.  Before  we  were  converted  we  lived  as  others.  Present  backwardness, 
unfruitfulness,  and  our  conscious  weakness,  these  all  rouse  this  fear.  Therefore 
note — IV.  The  answer  to  this  prayer.  Have  you  the  two  things  that  David 
had,  the  outward  integrity  and  the  inward  trust  ?  If  so,  then  you  cannot  be 
gathered  with  sinners.  For  the  rule  is,  like  to  like.  And  our  comrades  here  are  to 
be  our  companions  hereafter.  And  we  have  been  too  dearly  bought  with  Christ's 
blood,  and  are  too  much  loved  by  God ;  and  the  new  nature  given  you  will  not 
allow  of  it.  Careless  and  thoughtless  one,  I  entreat  you  to  consider  if  it  be  not  a 
dreadful  thing  to  be  a  sinner.  (C.  ff.  Spurgeon.)  The  awful  association : — Many 
disputes  there  are  concerning  the  origin  of  human  souls.  The  Bible  assigns  the 
first  origination  to  God,  and  closely  connects  all  with  the  first  man.  "  All  souls  are 
Mine  ;  as  the  soul  of  the  master,  so  the  soul  of  the  servant."  He  is  the  great  Lord 
of  human  souls.  I.  The  worth  op  the  hitman  soul.  Evinced — 1.  By  its 
intellectual  capacities :  thought,  reason,  memory,  conscience,  affection.  2.  By  its 
moral  capacities.  It  is  naturally  endowed  with  an  ability  to  know,  serve,  love,  and 
enjoy  God.  3.  By  its  immortality.  It  perishes  not  with  the  body.  "The  spirit 
of  man  goeth  upward," — to  God.  4.  By  the  efforts  of  fallen  spirits  to  effect  its 
destruction.    6.  By  the  means  which  Ctod  has  osed  for  its  salvation.    II.  The  souls 

OF  ALL  WILL  BK  OATHEBED  TOOBTHEB,  CLASSED  ANB  FIXED  FOB  ETEB,  IN  A  STATE 

bxhtabIlB  to  thxib  ohabacteb.    1.  What  is  more  reasonable  than  each  an  associa- 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

tion  of  similar  minds  after  tlieir  probation  ?  2.  Its  probability  is  to  be  inferred 
from  the  nature  of  God  and  the  present  state  of  trial.  3.  Its  certainty  is  proved 
by  Divine  testimony.  "He  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works." 
III.  The  souls  of  sinners  are  gathered  at  death  into  a  state  of  shame  and 
SUFFERING.  1.  This  is  a  matter  of  positive  Divine  assertion.  2.  Realise  the  fact. 
An  entire  company  of  lost  souls  ! — shut  up  with  such  for  ever.  Think  of  a  prison 
full  of  felons  and  blasphemers  !  3.  Consider  the  threatenings  connected  with  the 
fact.  The  wrath  of  God.  Sin  will  for  ever  live  in  them  and  incur  wrath.  Spiritual 
death  will  triumph  over  their  soul,  and  never  cease.  IV,  The  prayer  of  the 
TEXT.  "Gather  not  my  soul,"  &c.  1.  How  can  this  be  answered,  seeing  we  are 
sinners  ?  The  language  of  the  prayer  proceeds  from  a  consciousness  of  deserving  to 
be  gathered  with  sinners.  2.  Yet  the  prayer  supposes  the  possibility  of  being  heard 
and  answered.  The  scheme  of  salvation  shows  how  it  can  be.  3.  The  sincerity  of 
the  prayer  will  be  proved  by  returning  to  God  practically  and  in  heart.  If  we 
would  not  be  gathered  with  sinners  at  last  we  must  break  off  from  them  now. 
{Evangelist.)  The  eternal  separation: — I.  The  good  man  is  chiefly  concerned 
ABOUT  HIS  SOUL.  Many  anxious  as  to  health,  earthly  comforts,  security  of  goods, 
and  so  on.  The  care  of  the  godly  is  his  soul.  1.  The  soul  is  the  man.  2.  The 
salvation  of  the  soul  is  necessary  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  true  ends  of  our 
being.     The  soul  is  in  desperate  peril ;  and  none  but  Christ  can  save.     II.  TttB 

GOOD  MAN  KNOWS  THAT  THE  DESTINY  OF  THE   SOUL  IS  SETTLED  AT  DEATH.      Death 

comes  to  all.  And  "after  death  the  judgment":  inferred  by  reason,  foreboded  by 
conscience,  revealed  by  Scripture.  II.  The  good  man  recoils  in  horror  froh 
BEING  associated  IN  DESTINY  WITH  THE  WICKED.  Why  ?  Because  he  abhors 
(1)  their  character  ;  (2)  their  society ;  (3)  their  doom.  Do  we  shrink  from  the 
society  of  the  false,  the  impure,  the  revengeful,  the  slaves  of  lust  and  selfish- 
ness, how  much  more  should  we  recoil  from  eternal  fellowship  with  these  and  such 
as  these!  {W.  Forsyth,  M.A.)  The  gathering-time  of  souls: — As  there  is  a 
gathering-time  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  so  there  is  a  gathering-time  for  men. 
Death  is  the  reaper.  With  his  scythe  he  mows  down  the  generations,  and 
justice  gathers  whom  he  mows, — some  to  misery,  some  to  bliss.  Who  would  be 
gathered  with  the  sinners  in  the  great  world  of  retribution  ?  [D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
A  desire  to  be  separate  from  all  sinners : — Even  those  of  you  who  are  not  renewed 
by  Christ  despise  vice  when  she  walks  abroad  naked.  I  fear  me  ye  cannot  say  as 
much  when  she  puts  on  her  silver  slippers,  and  wraps  about  her  shoulders  her 
scarlet  mantle.  Sin  in  rags  is  not  popular.  Vice  in  sores  and  squalor  tempts  no 
one.  In  the  grosser  shapes,  men  hate  the  very  fiend  whom  they  love  when  it  is 
refined  and  delicate  in  its  form.  I  want  to  know  whether  you  can  say,  "  Gather 
not  my  soul  with  sinners  "  when  you  see  the  ungodly  in  their  high  days  and  holi- 
days ?  Do  you  not  envy  the  fraudulent  merchant  counting  his  gold,  his  purse 
heavy  with  his  gains,  while  he  himself  by  his  craft  is  beyond  all  challenge  by  the 
law  ?  Do  you  not  envy  the  giddy  revellers,  spending  the  night  in  the  merry  dance, 
laughing,  making  meiTy  with  wine,  and  smiling  with  thoughts  of  lust  ?  Yonder 
voluptuary,  entering  the  abode  where  virtue  never  finds  a  place,  and  indulging  in 
pleasures  unworthy  to  be  named  in  this  hallowed  house,  does  he  never  excite  your 
envy  ?  I  ask  you,  when  you  see  the  pleasures,  the  bright  side,  the  honours,  the 
emoluments,  the  gains,  the  merriments  of  sin,  do  ye  then  say,  "Gather  not  my 
soul  with  sinners '  ?  There  is  a  class  of  sinners  that  some  would  wish  to  be  gathered 
with,  those  easy  souls  who  go  on  so  swimmingly.  They  never  have  any  trouble  ; 
conscience  never  pricks  them  ;  business  never  goes  wrong  with  them  ;  they  have  no 
bands  in  their  life,  no  bonds  in  their  death  ;  they  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  men, 
neither  are  they  plagued  like  other  men.  They  are  like  the  green  bay  tree,  which 
spreads  on  every  side,  until  its  boughs  cover  whole  acres  with  their  shade.  These 
are  the  men  who  prosper  in  the  world,  they  increase  in  riches.  Can  we  say,  when 
we  look  at  these,  when  we  gaze  upon  the  bright  side  of  the  wicked,  "Gather  not 
my  soul  with  sinners "  ?  Remember,  if  we  cannot  do  so  without  reservation  we 
really  cannot  pray  the  prayer  at  all ;  we  ought  to  alter  it,  and  put  it,  '  *  Gather  not 
my  soul  with  openly  reprobate  sinners  "  ;  and  then,  mark  you,  as  there  is  only  one 
place  for  all  sorts  of  sinners,  moral  or  immoral,  apparently  holy  or  profane,  yonr 
prayer  cannot  be  heard,  for  if  you  are  gathered  with  sinners  at  all — with  the  best  of 
sinners — you  must  be  gathered  with  the  worst  of  sinners  too.  I  know,  children  of 
God,  ye  can  offer  the  prayer  as  it  stands,  and  say,  "  In  all  their  glory  and  their 
pomp,  in  all  their  wealth,  their  peace,  and  their  comfort,  my  soul  abhors  them,  and 
I  earnestly  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  by  the  blood  of  Jeaus,  *  Gather  not  my  soul  with 


fBALM  XXVI.]  THE  PSALMS.  529 

iiimers. '"  (C.  B.  Spurgeon. )  The  company  and  destiny  of  sinners  wndesirable  ;— 
As  for  blasphemers,  we  could  not  endure  them  a  moment.  Would  you  not  as  soon 
be  shut  up  in  a  tiger's  den  as  with  a  cursing,  swearing,  thievish  profligate  ?  Who 
can  endure  the  company  of  either  a  Voltaire  or  a  Manning  ?  Find  out  the  miserly, 
the  mean,  the  sneaking,  the  grasping — who  likes  to  be  with  them  !    The  angry,  the 

Sstulant,  who  never  try  to  check  the  unholy  passion,  one  is  always  glad  to  be  away 
om  such  folks  ;  you  are  afraid  lest  you  should  be  held  responsible  for  their  maa 
actions,  and  therefore,  if  you  must  be  with  them,  you  are  always  ill  at  ease.  With 
no  sort  of  sinners  can  the  child  of  God  be  hail-feUow.  Lambs  and  wolves,  doves 
and  hawks,  devils  and  angels  are  not  fit  companions  ;  and  so  through  what  little 
trial  the  righteous  have  had,  they  have  learned  that  there  is  no  sort  of  sinners  that 
they  woull  like  to  be  shut  up  with  for  ever.  (Ibid.)  The  final  separation  of 
mankind : — In  Jersey  City,  over  from  New  York,  there  is  one  of  the  largest  distri- 
buting centres  of  passenger  trafiBc  in  the  world.  All  the  passengers  for  the  various 
ramifying  routes  are  gathered  together  in  the  waiting  hall,  with  the  doors  closed. 
Suddenly  these  doors  are  flung  open,  and  in  a  high,  shrill  key  the  railway  attendant 
calls  out  the  route  of  the  train  that  is  about  to  start,  and  goes  over  the  names  of  the 
big  towns  on  that  route,  in  a  roll  long  enough  to  make  him  need  breath  when  he 
has  finished  it.  "Philadelphia,"  &c.,  &c.,  and  you  see  passengers  start  from  their 
seats  among  the  throng  and  hurry  to  the  exit  the  railway  man  indicates.  They  are 
bound  for  Philadelphia,  and  the  rest.  The  doors  close,  and  the  throng  inside  the 
hall  settle  down  again.  After  some  time  the  doors  are  flung  open  again,  and  the 
same  sing-song  of  the  route  and  the  list  of  stops.  "Chicago  and  St.  Louis,"  and 
you  see  another  company  of  passengers  make  their  way  out  to  the  waiting  train. 
They  are  those  going  to  Chicago  and  St.  Louis.  Again  the  doors  close,  and  again 
they  are  flung  to  the  wall,  and  this  time  the  list  of  names  the  fellow  calls  out  ends 
•with  "  Montreal,"  and,  when  I  heard  that,  I  started  up  and  made  for  the  door  ;  I 
was  going  to  Montreal.  In  a  few  hours  they  that  were  one  company  inside  the 
waiting-hall  of  the  station  of  Jersey  City  are  separated  by  hundreds  of  miles,  and 
never  all  to  meet  again.  That  is  like  this  world.  We  are  gathered  together  in  one 
waiting-hall  in  the  station  of  time,  and  those  sky-doors  have  yet  to  be  flung  open, 
and  the  voice  of  God,  the  last  trump,  is  to  burst  on  every  mortal  ear,  and  companies 
and  groups  have  to  separate  and  gather  according  to  their  destination  for  eternity. 
Here  passengers  for  heaven  :  there  passengers  for  hell.  You  cannot  tell  in  the 
waiting-hall  what  passengers  are  bound  the  glad  one  way  or  what  passengers  are 
hound  the  sad  other  way.  The  outward  appearance  is  all  we  can  see.  He  that 
looketh  upon  and  knoweth  the  heart  is  the  Lord.  Some  presumptuous  folk  would 
try  to  erect  a  dividing  barricade  in  the  waiting-hall,  and  divide  it  into  two  sections, 
whose  partitions  would  be  covered  in  regulation  form  with  ecclesiastical  jagged 
broken  glass,  mostly  coloured,  I  know.  But  it  will  not  do  :  it  will  not  do.  Leave 
the  division  to  the  Divider  Himself.  Judge  not,  but  wait  till  the  shout  of  the 
archangel  of  the  coming  King  is  heard  through  the  suddenly  flung  open  doors — in  a 
moment,  in  that  moment,  in  that  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  that  last  trump.  There 
are  only  two  groups,  and  two  departures,  and  two  destinations  from  this  waiting-hall  of 
time.    How  fitting  the  prayer,  "Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners."   {John  Bobertson.) 

Ver.  10.  Their  right  hand  is  fall  of  hrlbes. — Virtue  hated  by  the  wicked  :—Sa.x}l 
not  only  sought  David's  life  with  his  own  hand,  but  bribed  others  to  seek  it,  and 
betray  him  into  his  power  (1  Sam.  xxii.  6-19).  In  this  way  the  Jews  treated  the 
Son  of  David.  Failiiig  to  accomplish  His  death  themselves,  they  at  last  bribed  one 
of  His  own  disciples  to  betray  Him  into  their  hands.  It  is  strange  that  goodness 
should  have  always  met  with  such  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  world.  Many 
have  thought,  in  their  ignorance  of  the  human  heart,  that  virtue  only  needs  to  be 
presented  in  her  own  beautiful  colours  to  be  at  once  loved  by  all.  So  an  eminent 
Scotch  divine  thought  when,  after  depicting  in  terms  of  glowing  eloquence  the 
moral  beauty  and  amiability  of  virtue,  he  exclaimed,  "O  virtue,  if  thou  wert 
embodied,  all  men  would  love  thee  !  "  His  colleague  later,  addressing  the  same 
congregation,  said,  "  My  reverend  friend  observed  that  if  virtue  were  embodied  all 
men  would  love  her.  Virtue  has  been  embodied.  But  how  was  she  treated  ? 
Did  all  men  love  her  ?  No  ;  she  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  who,  after 
defaming,  insulting,  and  scourging  her,  led  her  to  Calvary,  where  they  crucified  her 
between  two  thieves."    (D.  Caldwell,  M.A.) 

Yer.  12.  My  foot  standeth  in  an  even  place  :  in  the  congregations  will  I  bless 
34 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [psalm  xxvi. 

tbe  Lord. — An  even  place : — I.  The  even  place  on  which  the  believer's  foot 

■WILL  STAND.  II.  ThE  BENEFITS  IN  POSSESSION,  IN  EXPERIENCE,  AND  IN  PROSPECT 
WHICH  HE  WILL  DERIVE  FROM  THIS  STANDING.  III.  ThE  OCCASION,  AND  THE 
MANNBE  IN  WHICH  IT  WILL  BECOME  HIM  TO  EXPRESS  HIS  GRATITUDE.      {Thomo* 

Daie.)  Worship  in  the  beauty  of  holiness: — By  the  foot,  the  instrument  of 
motion,  we  understand  the  whole  turn  and  conduct  of  life.  Thus  the  ways  of  a 
man  denote  his  doings  and  his  dealings,  the  affections  which  govern  him,  and  the 
actions  proceeding  from  them.  When  these  are  right,  or  even,  we  may  appeal  to 
God  as  Judge,  worship  Him  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  bless  Him  in  the  congre- 
gations. I.  Holiness  of  life  is  a  proper  qxtalification  for  all  who  would 
WORSHIP  God  with  acceptance.  Holiness  likens  us  to  God.  He  desires  the  holy 
to  worship  Him,  respects  their  service,  and  bestows  His  blessing.     II.  Holiness  of 

LIFE  is  an  essential  AS  WELL  AS  A  PROPER  QUALIFICATION  FOR  ALL  RESORTS  TO 

God  IN  RELIGIOUS  OFFICES.  Worship  is  not  enjoined  on  us  for  the  sake  of  God,  but 
for  our  own  benefit.  Its  main  intent  is  to  lodge  with  us  a  sense  of  our  depending 
upon  Him  for  all  we  have  and.  all  we  hope  for,  to  the  end  that  it  may  secure  our 
obedience  to  His  commands  and  provide  effectually  for  our  final  happiness.  We 
cannot,  therefore,  approach  Him  in  worship  without  a  heart  and  life  corresponding. 
{N.  Marshall,  D.D.)  Blessing  God  in  the  congregation : — If  a  saint's  single  voice 
in  prayer  is  so  sweet  to  God's  ear,  much  more  His  saints'  prayer  and  praise  in  consort 
together.  A  father  is  glad  to  see  any  one  of  his  children,  and  makes  him  welcome 
when  he  visits  him,  but  much  more  when  they  come  together  ;  the  greatest  feast  is 
when  they  all  meet  at  his  house.  The  public  praises  of  the  Church  are  the  emblem 
of  heaven  itself  There  is  a  wonderful  prevalence  in  the  joint  prayers  of  His  people. 
When  Peter  was  in  prison  the  Church  meets  and  prays  him  out  of  his  enemies'  hands. 
A  prince  will  grant  a  petition  subscribed  by  the  hands  of  a  whole  city,  which,  may 
be,  he  would  not  grant  at  the  request  of  a  private  subject.    {R,  OwmcUl,) 


BKD  OF  TOI*  t* 


Princeton  Theological  Semmary-Speer 


1    1012  01128  4801 


