■% 


I  s* 


Bunyan,  John,  1628-1688. 
The  works  of  John  Bunyan 


BR  75  .B7  1855 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2008  with  funding  from 

Microsoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/worksofjohnbunya03buny 


Bunyan,  John,  1628-1688. 
The  works  of  John  Bunyan 


BR  75  .B7  1855 


.     .  ,    FROM    THE    LIFE    BY   R    WHITE 
.'  .SEUM 


- 


i  if§ip  #&?!> 


THE 


WORKS  OF  JOHNBUNYAN. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  EACH  TREATISE,  NOTES, 


SKETCH   OF  HIS   LIFE,  TIMES,  AND   CONTEMPORARIES. 


VOLUME   THIRD. 


ALLEGORICAL,  FIGURATIVE,  AND  SYMBOLICAL. 

EDITED  BY 

GEORGE    OFFOR,  ESQ. 


BLACKIE    AND    SON: 

QUEEN  STREET,  GLASGOW;   SOUTH  COLLEGE  STREET,  EDINBURGH;  AND 

WARWICK  SQUARE,  LONDON. 

MDCCCLV. 


GLASGOW  : 
BLACSIE  AND  CO.,  PEINTEHS, 
VILLAFIELD. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  ALLEGORICAL  WORKS. 


Mn 

TnE  author's  religious  experience  and  knowledge  of  the 
way  of  salvation,  first  published  in  a  treatise  on  the 
covenants,  and  enlarged  in  his  Grace  Abounding  to 
the  Chief  of  Sinners ;  now  completed  in  an  allegory, 
showing  the  Christian's  journey  from  time  to  eternity, 
under  the  title  of 

THE  PILGRIMS  PROGRESS  FROM  THIS 
WORLD  TO  THAT  WHICH  IS  TO  COME. 

The  Introduction  by  the  Editor. 

Chap.  I.  Life  a  pilgrimage  through  a  state  of  spiritual 
conflicts;  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  a  guide  to  all  hea- 
venward pilgrims ;  the  author  furnished  with  leisure 
time  to  write  it,  by  being  for  many  years  shut  up  in 
prison  for  refusing  to  violate  his  conscience 1 

Chap.  II.  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  having  been  written 
in  prison,  difficulties  were  thrown  in  the  way  of  its 
publication 4 

CuAr.  III.  Bunyan's  extraordinary  qualifications  to 
write  the  pilgrimage,  sanctified  by  prison  discipline..       9 

Chap.  IV.  Bunyan's  release  from  jail,  and  his  publi- 
cation of  The  Pilgrim's  Progress 10 

Chap.  V.  The  inquiry,  Was  Bunyan  assisted  in  the 
composition  of  his  Pilgrim's  Progress,  answered  in 
the  negative — 1st,  From  his  own  declarations,  to 
which  may  be  added,  "  I  am  for  drinking  water  out 
my  own  cistern  ;"*  The  opinions  of  the  learned  ;  an 
analysis  of  every  work  previously  published  on  the 
same  subject,  or  with  a  similar  title  page.  For  a 
list  of  these  rare  volumes  see  the  Index.  In  these 
analyses  will  be  found  a  genuine  picture  of  Popery 
as  painted  by  herself , ...     29 

Chap.  VI.  A  bibliographical  account  of  all  the  editions 
of  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  published  during  the 
author's  life,  with  notices  of  the  more  prominent 
modern  editions,  and  translations  into  the  languages 
of  nearly  all  nations 55 

Chap.  VII.  An  account  of  the  versions,  commentaries, 
and  imitations  of  The  Pilgrim's  Progress 62 

Chap.  VITI.  The  opinions  of  many  learned  men  of  it3 
singular  merits,  and  the  causes  of  its  extraordinary 
popularity 66 

Chap.  IX.  Observations  upon  some  of  the  most  promi- 
nent parts 71 

Synopsis  or  Contents  of  the  Allegory 77 

Exact  copies  of  the  twenty  woodcuts  published  in  the 
early  editions,  with  Bunyan's  verse  under  each 79 

The  Author's  apology 85 

List  of  Commentaries  on  The  Pilgrim,  and  other 
Works,  which  have  furnished  illustrative  notes  to 
this  edition  ;  a  considerable  number  of  the  notes  are 
extracts  from  the  author's  Works,  with  some  by  the 
editor ;  a  view  of  Bedford  bridge  over  the  river  Ouse, 
showing  the  prison  in  which  the  amiable  and  pious 
author  was  incarcerated  for  more  than  twelve  years, 
in  the  prime  of  his  life,  rather  than  sacrifice  his  con- 
science by  submitting  to  human  laws  interfering  with 
Divine  worship 88 

First  Part. 

Graceless  becomes  a  Christian  ;  alarmed  for  the  safety 
of  his  soul  ;  is  treated  by  his  family  as  one  diseased      89 

Guided  by  Evangelist ;  runs  towards  the  Wicket-gate ; 
is  overtaken  by  Obstinate  and  Pliable ;  persuades 
Pliable  to  fly  with  him 90 

*  VoL  m.,  p.  o'Jb. 


Fall  into  tho  Slough  of  Despond  ;  Pliable  returns  ; 
Christian,  assisted  by  Help,  goes  on  ;  meets  Worldly- 
wiseman  :  complains  of  his  burden,  and  is  sent  out 
of  his  way  to  the  house  of  Legality ;  terrified  at 
Mount  Sinai 92 

Evangelist  appears,  and  puts  him  again  into  the  right 
road  ;  arrives  at  the  Wicket-gate  ;  is  admitted  by 
Good-will,  and  sent  to  the  Interpreter's  house ;  is 
shown  a  picture  ;  a  dusty  room  ;  Passion  and 
Patience ;  the  fire  of  grace ;  the  valiant  man  ;  the 
man  in  despair  ;  the  trembler 91 

Proceeds  to  the  cross  ;  loses  his  burden  ;  angels  give 
him  a  pardon,  new  clothing,  a  mark,  and  a  roll*;  tries 
to  alarm  three  men  asleep,  but  in  vain  ;  meets  For- 
malist and  Hypocrisy 102 

Ascends  the  hill  Difficulty  ;  sleeps  in  the  Arbour,  and 
drops  his  roll ;  is  awakened,  and  pursues  his  journey ; 
meets  Mistrust  and  Timorous;  misses  his  roll,  returns 
in  grief,  and  recovers  it ;  goes  on  to  the  Palace  Beau- 
tiful ;  encouraged  by  Watchful  he  passes  the  lions, 
and,  after  examination,  is  admitted  according  to  the 
laws  of  the  house ;  entertained ;  sleeps  in  the  Cham- 
ber of  peace  ;  sees  the  study ;  the  armoury ;  the 
Delectable  mountains 104 

Enters  the  Valley  of  Humiliation  ;  fights  with,  and 
overcomes  Apollyon ;  conies  to  the  Valley  of  the  Sha- 
dow of  Death  ;  terrified  by  the  spies  ;  assaulted  by 
foes  who  care  not  for  his  sword  ;  betakes  himself  to 
another  weapon,  "All-prayer;"  comes  out  of  the 
valley,  and  passes  the  old  giants,  Pagan  and  Pope...    Ill 

Overtakes  Faithful,  a  fellow-pilgrim  ;  hold  communion 
with  each  other  ;  converse  with  Talkative  ;  Evange- 
list forewarns  them  of  persecution  ;  enter  Vanity 
Fair;  are  maltreated  ;  imprisoned  ;  Faithful  is  tried 
and  burned 117 

Christian  pursues  his  journey,  and  is  joined  by  Hope- 
ful ;  By-ends  wishes  to  join  them ;  the  sophistry  of 
Hold-the-world  detected ;  Demas  tempts  them  to 
the  Hill  Lucre,  but  they  refuse;  arrive  at  the  River 
of  the  Water  of  life  ;  they  go  into  By-path  Meadow; 
follow  Vain-confidence;  are  taken  by  Giant  Despair, 
and  imprisoned  in  Doubting  Castle  ;  arguments  for 
and  against  suicide;  escape  by  the  Key  of  Promise; 
erect  a  Pillar  to  caution  others 1G2 

Arrive  at  the  Delectable  Mountains  ;  entertained  by 
the  Shepherds  ;  are  shown  Mounts  Error,  Caution, 
and  Clear ;  see  the  Celestial  Gate  ;  receive  some 
cautions  ;  fail  in  attempting  to  convert  Ignorance  ; 
robbery  of  Little-faith  ;  meet  the  Flatterer,  and  are 
caught  in  his  net ;  released  by  a  Shining  One ;  meet 
Atheist H8 

Adventures  on  the  Enchanted  Ground ;  means  of 
watchfulness  ;  enter  the  Land  of  Beulah  ;  are  sick 
with  love ;  approach  the  River  of  Death  ;  no  bridge; 
full  of  fear  and  dread,  but  get  safely  over  ;  received 
by  angels;  admitted  to  glory 152 

Second  Part. 

The  Author's  way  of  sending  it  forth 168 

Sagacity  relates  how  Christiana,  the  widow  of  Chris- 
tian, reflects  upon  her  former  conduct,  feels  her 
danger,  and  agrees  with  her  children  to  follow  her 
late  husband  in  pilgrimage  ;  is  encouraged  by  a 
secret  influence  on  her  mind  that  she  would  be  re- 
ceived ;  her  neighbours  dissuade  her,  but  she  pre- 
vails upon  one  of  them,  Mercy,  to  go  with  her;  she 
|      is  reviled  by  her  acquaintance 171 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   ALLEGORICAL  WORKS. 


Get  over  the  Slough  of  Despond,  and  are  admitted  at 
the  Wicket-gate,  and  rejoice  together;  they  are  fed, 
washed,  and  sent  on  their  way  ;  the  children  eat  the 
enemy's  fruit ;  are  assaulted,  but  rescued  by  the 
Reliever '. 178 

Arrive  at  the  Interpreter's  house  ;  shown  the  signifi- 
cant rooms,  the  man  who  prefers  a  muck-rake  to  a 
celestial  crown,  the  spider  in  the  best  room,  the  hen 
and  chickens,  butcher  and  sheep,  the  garden,  the 
field,  the  robin ;  the  Interpreter's  proverbs ;  tree  rot- 
ten at  the  heart;  they  relate  their  experience ;  Mercy 
is  sleepless  for  joy;  they  are  washed,  which  enlivens 
and  strengthens  them  ;  sealed  and  clothed 184 

Great-heart  guards  them  to  the  house  called  Beautiful ; 
pass  the  Sepulchre  where  Christian  lost  his  burden  ; 
pardon  by  word  and  deed,  an  important  distinction  : 
see  Simple,  Sloth,  and  Presumption  hanging;  names 
of  those  that  they  had  ruined  ;  Hill  Difficulty  ;  By- 
ways, although  stopped  and  barred  up,  still  entered  ; 
rest  in  the  Arbour,  but  are  afraid  to  sleep ;  still  suffer 
by  forgetfulness  ;  punishment  of  Timorous  and  Mis- 
trust ;  Giant  Grim  slain , 190 

Pilgrims  arrive  at  the  Palace  Beautiful ;  Great-heart 
returns ;  they  are  entertained  for  a  month  ;  the 
children  catechised ;  Mr.  Brisk  makes  love  to 
Mercy  ;  her  sister  Bountitul's  unhappy  marriage  ; 
Matthew  sick  with  the  enemy's  fruit  ;  is  healed  by 
Dr.  Skill ;  his  prescriptions  ;  instructive  questions  ; 
they  are  greatly  strengthened ;  Mr.  Great-heart  sent 
to  guard  them 196 

Enter  the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  and  are  pleased  with 
it ;  shepherd  boy's  song  ;  see  the  place  where  Chris- 
tian and  Apollyon  fought ;  come  into  the  Valley  of 
the  Shadow  of  Death  ;  are  greatly  terrified  ;  Giant 
Maul  slain  ;  find  Old  Honest,  a  pilgrim,  sleeping  ; 
he  joins  them  ;  story  of  Mr.  Fearing ;  good  men 
sometimes  much  in  the  dark ;  he  fears  no  difficul- 
ties, only  lest  he  should  deceive  himself;  case  of 
Self-will ;  a  singular  sect  in  the  Author's  time 205 

Are  entertained  at  the  House  of  Gaius  ;  pilgrims  the 
descendants  of  the  martyrs  ;  Matthew  and  Mercy 
betrothed  ;  riddles  in  verse ;  Slay-good,  a  giant, 
slain ;  Feeble-mind  rescued ;  proves  to  be  related  to 
Mr.  Fearing  ;  Not-right  killed  with  a  thunderbolt ; 
Matthew  and  Mercy,  and  James  and  Phebe,  married; 
Feeble-mind  and  Ready-to-halt  join  the  pilgrims ; 
profitable  converse  between  Honest  and  Great-heart  217 

Vanity  Fair;  the  death  of  Faithful  had  planted  a  little 
colony  of  pilgrims  there  ;  pleasant  communion ; 
courage  and  an  unspotted  life  essential  to  pilgrims  ; 
Samuel  and  Grace,  and  Joseph  and  Martha, married; 
the  Monster  (state  religion )  assaulted  and  wounded  ; 
believed  by  some  that  he  will  die  of  his  wounds ;  pass 
the  place  where  Faithful  was  martyred  ;  the  silver 
mine  ;  Lot's  wife '. 224 

Arrive  at  the  river  near  the  Delectable  Mountains ; 
By-path  Meadow  ;  Slay  Giant  Despair,  and  Diffi- 
dence, his  wife,  and  destroy  Doubting  Castle;  release 
Mr.  Despondency  and  Miss  Much-afraid;  Great- 
heart  addresses  the  Shepherds  in  rhyme;  Mounts 
Marvel,  Innocent,  and  Charity ;  see  the  Hole  in  the 
side  of  the  Hill ;  Mercy  longs  for  a  curious  Mirror ; 
the  Pilgrims  are  adorned ,. 228 

Story  of  Turn-away;  find,  Valiant-for-truth  wounded 
by  thieves  ;  account  of  his  conversion  ;  the  question 
debated,  that  if  we  shall  know  ourselves,  shall  we 
know  others  in  the  future  state  ?  arguments  used  by 
relatives  to  prevent  pilgrimage  ;  the  Enchanted 
Ground  ;  an  arbour  called  the  Slothful's  Friend  ;  in 
doubt  as  to  the  way,  the  book  or  map  is  examined ; 
Heedless  and  Bold  in  a  fatal  sleep  ;  surprised  by„a 
solemn  noise,  they  are  led  to  Mr.  Stand-fast  in 
prayer,  he  having  been  assailed  by  Madam  Bubble...  232 

Arrive  in  the  Land  of  Beulah,  and  are  delighted  with 
celestial  visions  on  the  border  of  the  River  of  Death; 
Christiana  summoned,  addresses  her  guide,  and 
blesses  her  children  and  her  fellow- pilgrims;   her 


last  words  ;  Mr.  Ready-to-halt  passes  the  river ;  ?A'" 
Feeble-mind  is  called,  will  make  no  will,  and  goes  up 
to  the  Celestial  City ;  Despondency  and  Much- 
afraid  die  singing  ;  Honest  dies  singing,  Grac<; 
reigns ;  Valiant-for-truth  and  Stand-fast  joyfully 
pass  the  river,  leaving  a  solemn  message  to  relatives"; 
joy  in  heaven  on  the  arrival  of  the  pilgrims  ;  Chris- 
tiana's children  a  blessing  to  the  church 240 

,  The  deep  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  the  author's 
soul,  in  its  recovery  from  ruin  to  the  divine  favour, 
in  the  form  of  an  allegory  called 

THE  HOLT  WAR  MADE  BY  SHADDAI  UPON 
DIABOLUS.FOR  THE  REGAINING  OF  THE 
METROPOLIS    OF    THE   WORLD;    or,    The 

Losing  and  Taking  again  of  the  Town  of  Mansoul. 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 245 

Poetical  Preface  to  the  Reader  by  the  Author 251 

This  Work  was  originally  published  in  the  form  of 
a  continuous  narrative ;  but,  to  enable  the  reader 
more  readily  to  pause  and  reflect,  the  Editor  has 
ventured  to  adopt  the  plan,  first  introduced  by  Mr. 
Burder,  of  dividing  it  into  chapters. 

Chap.  I.  The  original  beauty  and  splendour  of  Man- 
soul  under  Shaddai ;  her  noble  castle  ;  five  gates  ; 
perfection  of  the  inhabitants ,  the  origin  of  Diabolus ; 
his  pride  and  fall ;  his  revenge ;  council  of  war  to 
reduce  the  town ;  Diabolus  approaches  Eye-gate ;  his 
oration ;  Captain  Resistance  slain ;  My  Lord  Inno- 
cence killed  ;  the  town  taken 255 

Chap.  II.  Diabolus  occupies  the  castle ;  deposes  the 
Lord  Mayor,  Mr.  Understanding,  and  a  wall  erected 
to  darken  his  house  ;  Mr.  Conscience  the  Recorder 
put  out  of  office;  very  obnoxious  to  Diabolus  and  the 
inhabitants  ;  Mr.  Lord- will- be-will  heartily  espouses 
the  cause  of  Diabolus,  and  is  made  the  principal 
governor;  the  image  of  Shaddai  defaced,  and  that  of 
Diabolus  set  up  ;  Mr.  Lustings  made  Lord  Mayor ; 
Mr.  Forget-good,  Recorder;  new  Aldermen  appointed 
— Messrs.  Incredulity,  Haughty,  Swearing,  Whoring, 
Hard-heart,  Pityless,  Fury,  No-truth,  Stand-to-lies, 
False-peace,  Drunkenness,  Cheating,  and  Atheism  ; 
three  strongholds  built — Defiance,  Midnight-hold, 
and  Sweet-sin-hold 260 

Chap.  III.  The  Revolution  known  to  king  Shaddai; 
his  resentment  against  Diabolus;  his  gracious  inten- 
tion of  restoring  Mansoul ;  intimations  published,  but 
suppi'essed  by  Diabolus;  his  artifices  to  secure  the 
town  and  prevent  its  return  to  Shaddai 265 

Chap.  IV.  Shaddai  sends  an  army  of  40,000  spiritual 
energies  to  reduce  Mansoul,  under  the  command  of 
Captains  Boanerges,  Conviction,  Judgment,  and 
Execution,  who  address  the  inhabitants  powerfully, 
but  with  little  effect ;  Diabolus,  Incredulity,  Ill- 
pause,  and  others,  interfere  to  prevent  submission ; 
Prejudice  defends  Ear-gate,  with  a  guard  of  sixty 
deaf  men 270 

Chap.  V.  The  Captains  give  battle  to  the  town,  which 
resolutely  resists ;  they  retire  to  winter  quarters ; 
Tradition,  Human  Wisdom,  and  Man's  Invention, 
enlist  under  Boanerges ;  they  are  taken  prisoners, 
and  join  Diabolus  under  Captain  Anything ;  hostili- 
ties are  renewed,  and  the  town  much  molested ;  a 
famine  and  mutiny  in  Mansoul ;  a  parley  ;  proposi- 
tions made  and  rejected  ;  Understanding  and  Con- 
science quarrel  with  Incredulity  ;  a  skirmish 276 

Chap.  VI.  Lord  Understanding  and  Mr.  Conscience 
imprisoned ;  the  besieging  officers  petition  Shaddai 
for  a  reinforcement ;  it  is  approved ;  Emmanuel,  the 
king's  son,  is  appointed  to  conquer  the  town ;  marches 
with  a  great  army,  and  surrounds  Mansoul,  which  is 
strongly  fortified  against  him 232 

Chap.  VII.  Emmanuel  prepares  for  war  against  Man- 
soul ;  Diabolus  sends  Loth-to-stoop  with  proposals 
for  peace,  which  are  rejected  ;  he  proposes  to  patch 
up  a  peace  by  outward  reformation,  offering  to  become 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   ALLEGORICAL   WORKS. 


389 


Emmanuel's  deputy,  this  also  rejected ;  preparations 
for  battle ;  Diabolus  injures  the  town  ;  Ear-gate 
assaulted,  gives  way  ,  Emmanuells  forces  enter  the 
town,  and  take  possession  of  the  Recorder's  house  ; 
several  Diabolonians  killed 

Cn.vr.  VIII.  The  principal  inhabitants  hold  a  con- 
ference, and  agree  to  petition  the  prince  for  their 
lives  ;  the  castle  gates  broke  open  ;  triumphal  entry 
of  Emmanuel ;  Diabolus  is  bound  in  chains;  the  in- 
habitants, in  great  misery,  petition  again  and  again; 
a  free  pardon  is  published,  and  universal  joy  succeeds  290 

Chap.  IX.  The  liberated  prisoners  return  to  Mansoul 
with  great  joy;  the  inhabitants  request  Emmanuel 
to  reside  among  them  ;  he  makes  a  triumphal  entry 
amid  the  shouts  of  the  people;  the  town  is  new- 
modelled,  and  the  image  of  Shaddai  again  erected...   304 

Chap.  X.  The  strongholds  of  Diabolus  destroyed  ;  the 
great  Diabolonians  tried,  condemned,  and  executed, 
to  Ma  mold's  great  joy 309 

Chat.  XI.  Experience  is  made  an  officer;  the  charter 
renewed  and  enlarged,  with  special  privileges;  minis- 
try established  ;  Mr.  Conscience  the  preacher,  his 
duties  and  rewards  specified  ;  the  inhabitants  are 
clad  in  white  ;  receive  many  distinguishing  favours 
from  the  prince;  God's  peace  appointed  to  rule;  the 
unexampled  felicity  of  the  town ••   317 

Chap.  XII.  Carnal-security  prevails;  Emmanuel  pri- 
vately withdrawing,  Godly-fear  detects  it,  and  excites 
the  people  to  destroy  Carnal-security ;  they  try  to 
induce  Emmanuel  to  return 324 

Chap.  XIII.  The  Diabolonians  take  courage;  plots  are 
formed  to  re-conquer  Mansoul ;  vices,  under  virtuous 
names,  are  introduced,  and  do  immense  mischief; 
and  20.000  Doubters  are  raised  to  surprise  the  town  330 

Chap.  XIV.  Mr.  Prywell  discovers  the  plot;  prepara- 
tions for  defence ;  more  Diabolonians  executed ;  the 
Doubters  assault  Ear-gate,  but  are  repulsed ;  the 
townsmen  will  not  parley  ;  flattery  tried  in  vain  ; 
Jolly,  Griggish,  Gripe,  and  Rakeall,  executed;  Any- 
thing and  Loosefoot  imprisoned 339 

Chap.  XV.  Mjvnsoul  makes  a  rash  sortie  by  night  and 
is  worsted;  Diabolus  attacks  Feel-gate,  which  he 
forces,  and  Doubters  possess  the  town,  doing  incre- 
dible mischief;  Mansoul  petitions  Emmanuel,  and 
Credence  is  appointed  Lord  Lieutenant 348 

Chap.  XVI.  A  new  plot  laid  to  ruin  the  town,  by  riches 
and  prosperity  ;  Emmanuel  appears  to  assist  Man- 
soul ;  the  army  of  Doubters  routed ;  he  enters  the 
town  amidst  the  joyful  acclamations  of  the  inhabi 
tants 

Chap.  XVII.  A  new  army  of  Woodmen  or  persecutors 
attack  the  town,  but  are  taken  by  Faith  and 
Patience ;  the  principal  Doubters  tried,  convicted, 

and  executed 

CiiAr.  XVIII.  More  Diabolonians  condemned;  Em- 
manuel's admirable  speech  to  Mansoul 

Bunvan's  poetical  Epilogue  to  The  Holy  War;  in 
which  he  claims  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  entirely  as 
his  own,  and  anagramatizes  his  name 374 

THE  HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN;  or,  A  Description 
of  the  Man  that  gets  to  Heaven,  together  with  the 
Way  he  runs  in,  the  Marks  he  goes  by;  also,  Some 
Directions  how  to  Run  so  as  to  Obtain 375 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 375 

to  Slothful  and  Careless  People 37*3 

I.  The  words  opened,  and  this  doctrine  laid  down, 
namely,  that  they  that  will  have  heaven,  they  must 
run  for  it 381 

II.  The  word  run  opened  by  three  Scripture  expres- 
sions— flying,  pressing,  continuing 381 

III.  Several  reasons  for  the  clearing  of  the  doctrine....  381 

IV.  Nine  directions  how  to  run  so  as  to  obtain 383 

V.  Nine  motives  to  urge  us  on  in  the  way 389 

VI.  Nine  uses  of  this  subject 301 

VII.  Nine  provocations  to  run  with  the  foremost 304 

VIII.  A  Short  expostulation 394 


r.55 


361 


3G9 


400 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  or  THE  NEW  JERUSALEM, 

wherein  its  goodly  light,  walls,  gates,  angels,  and  the 
manner  of  their  standing,  are  expounded  ;  also,  her 
length  and  breadth,  together  with  the  golden  measur- 
ing-reed explained,  and  the  glory  of  all  unfolded  ; 
as  also  the  numerousness  of  its  inhabitants,  and  what 
the  tree  and  water  of  life  are,  by  which  they  arc 

sustai nod 395 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 395 

Dedication  to  the  Godly  Reader 897 

Dedication  to  the  Learned  Reader 898 

Dedication  to  the  Captious  Reader  and  to  the  Mother 

of  Harlots 399 

This  deeply-interesting  Treatise  is  a  Commentary  on 

Rev.  xxi.  10-27;  and  xxii.  1-4 

Fjrst,  The  vision  of  the  Holy  City,  or  gospel  church  in 
general : — 

Returning  out  of  Antichristian  captivity ;  why  the 
church  is  called  a  city ;  descends  out  of  heaven  ;  has 

the  glory  of  God  ;  her  light 401 

Second,  A  discovery  of  its  defence,  entrances,  and 
fashion  in  particular  : — 

The  defence  of  the  city ;  the  wall ;  the  gates ;  the 
angels  at  the  gates  ;  the  names  written  on  the  gates  ; 
the  order  of  the  gates  ;  the  foundations  of  the  wall ; 
how  we  are  to  understand  the  word  twelve  ;  the 
measuring  line  or  golden  reed  ;  the  city  measured  ; 
the  gates  measured ;  the  wall  measured  ;  the  form 

and  measure  of  the  city 411 

Third,  A  relation  of  the  glory  of  the  city,  its  walls, 
gates,  and  foundations  : — 

The  glory  of  the  walls  ;  the  glory  of  the  city  ;  the 
glory  of  the  foundations  ;  the  foundations,  what  they 
are,  and  how  placed  ;  the  glory  of  the  gates  and  of 
the  streets ;  the  city  has  no  temple ;  needs  not  the 

light  of  sun  or  moon 427 

Fourth,  The  inhabitants  of  the  City,  their  quality  and 
numerousness : — 

The  city  secure;  the  gates  always  open  ;  the  glory 
and  honour  of  the  nations  brought  into  it ;  none  but 

visible  saints  can  enter ■ 413 

Fifth,  The  provision  and  maintenance  of  the  City  : — 
Its  drink  the  water  of  life  ;  whither  this  water 
goes,  and  its  extension  ;  its  food  the  tree  of  life  ;  the 
ease,  peace,  and  tranquillity  of  the  city 450 

SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE  SPIRITUALIZED;  or, 
Gospel  light  fetched  out  of  the  Temple  at  Jerusa- 
lem, to  let  us  more  easily  into  the  glory  of  New 
Testament  truth 460 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 460 

To  the  Christian  Reader ^2 

I.-IV.  Where  the  temple  was  built ;  who  built  it ;  how, 
and  of  what  it  was  built 465 

V.-VIII.  Who  was  to  fell  the  trees  and  to  dig  the 
stones ;  in  what  condition  these  were  when  brought ; 
the  foundation ;  the  richness  of  the  stones  which 
were  laid  for  the  foundation 4C6 

IX.-XVII.  Which  way  the  face  of  the  front  of  temple 
stood  ;  of  the  courts";  the  brazen  altar  ;  the  pillars  ; 
the  height  of  the  pillars ;  the  chapiters  of  the  pillars ; 
the  pomegranates;  the  chains  upon  these  pillars;  the 
lily-work  upon  the  chapiters 4G9 

XVIII.-XXIV.  Of  the  fashion  of  the  temple:  the  out- 
ward glory  ;  the  porch  ;  the  ornaments  of  the  porch  ; 
the  ascent  by  which  they  went  up  to  the  porch  ;  the 
gate  of  the  porch  ;  the  pinnacles  of  the  temple 478 

XXV.-XXXV.  Of  the  porters  of  the  temple  ;  the 
charge  of  the  porters  ;  the  doors  ;  the  leaves  of  this 
gate;  what  the  doors  of  the  temple  were  made  of, 
and  how  adorned  ;  of  the  wall  :  the  garnishing  ;  the 
windows,  chambers,  and  stairs 4*7 

XXXVI.-XLVIII.  Of  the  molten  sea  ;  the  lavers  ;  the 
tables;  the  instruments  wherewith  the  sacrifices 
were  slain  ;  the  candlesticks  and  lamps  ;  the  shew- 
bread;  the. snuffers  and  snuff  dishes;  the  golden 
tongs  ;  the  altar  of  incense  ;  the  golden  censers 433 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  ALLEGORICAL  WORKS. 


XLIX.-LXV.  Of  the  golden  spoons,  bowls,  basons, 
flagons,  and  cups  belonging  to  the  temple ;  the 
chargers  ;  the  goings  out ;  the  singers  ;  the  union  of 
the  holy  and  most  holy  temple  ;  the  holiest  or  inner 
temple  ;  the  vail ;  the  doors,  golden  nails,  floors,  and 
walls  of  the  inner  temple  ;  the  ark  of  the  covenant ; 
placing  of  the  ark,  the  mercy-seat,  the  living  waters, 
and  the  chains  in  the  oracle  or  inner  temple.. 492 

LXVI.-LXX.  Of  the  high-priest,  and  of  his  office  in 
the  inner  temple  ;  of  the  high-priest's  going  alone, 
and  but  once  a  year,  into  the  holiest ;  the  cherubims ; 
the  figures  that  were  upon  the  walls 505 

A  DISCOURSE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  THE 
FOREST  OF  LEBANON,  showing  it  to  be  typical 
of  spiritual  things 510' 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 510 

Chap.  I.  A  distinct  building  at  a  great  distance  from 
the  temple  at  Jerusalem 512 

Chap.  II.  Of  what  this  house  was  a  type  ;  the  church 
under  persecution  in  the  wilderness 513~ 

Chap.  III.  Of  the  largeness  of  this  house  ;  a  place  of 
defence  and  not  of  assault;  if  afflicted,  fire  proceed- 
eth  to  devour  her  enemies 515 

Chap.  IV.  Of  the  materials  of  which  it  was  built,  sweet- 
scented  wood 516 

Chap.  V.  Of  the  windows,  and  of  what  they  were  types  519 

Chap.  VI.  Of  the  doors  and  posts,  and  their  square ; 
admirable  for  beauty  ;  the  world  striving  to  ravish 
and  plunder  her 522 

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  repetition  of  light  against  light ; 
Divine  light  against  Antichrist ;  all  opinions  to  be 
submitted  to  the  Word 523 

Chap.  VIII.  Of  the  golden  shields  and  targets,  and 
what  they  typified;  as  King  Solomon  supplied  all 
this  armour,  so  God  arms  his  saints 525 

Chap.  IX.  Of  the  vessels  of  pure  gold,  not  for  divine 
worship,  but  private  use ;  sometimes  full  of  bitter 
draughts,  at  other  times  the  cup  of  consolation  and 

of  salvation  :  God's  love  tokens  like  honey 527 

A  most  interesting  letter  from  PomponiusAlgerius, 
an  Italian  martyr,  one  of  the  pillars  in  God's  house    530 

Chap.  X.  The  porch  of  the  house  capable  of  holding 
1000  men ;  a  refuge  from  the  storm  ;  a  defence  from 
persecutors;  not  enough  to  be  content  with  the  porch; 
we  must  enter  the  house 533 

Conclusion— Why  persecution  is  allowed  of  God 536 

THE  WATER  OF  LIFE  ;  or,  A  Discourse  showing 
the  Richness  and  Glory  of  the  Grace  and  Spirit  of 
the  Gospel,  as  set  forth  in  Scripture  by  that  term, 
The  Water  of  Life 538 

Advertit«ment  by  the  Editor <  538 

The  Epistle  to  the  Reader,  or  Bunyan's  Bill  of  his 
Master's  Water  of  Life 539 

Text— Rev.  xxii.  1— The  divisions.  First,  The  subject 
matter.  Second,  The  quantity  of  this  water,  "a 
river."  Third,  Its  source,  the  throne  of  God. 
Fourth,^  Its  quality,  pure  and  clear  as  crystal. 
The  Spirit  of  grace  compared  to  water 540 

The  greatness  and  abundance  of  the  Water  of  Life  ; 
what  a  river  this  is,  and  inferences  to  be  drawn  from 
the  term  etvbb. 542 

The  head  or  well-spring  of  the  water  of  lite 545 

The  nature  and  quality  of  this  water;  pure,  clear  ;  no 
grudge  or  upbraiding  in  it ;  comes  from  God's  very 
heart ;  mighty  beyond  conception  ;  no  fear  of  excess 
or  of  surfeiting  here  ;  the  chiefest  good,  the  highest 
good;  conduct  influenced  by  doctrines 551 

The  application  of  the  whole  ;  this  water  of  life  excel- 
lent in  nature,  abundant  in  quantity,  has  a  glorious 
head-spring,  and  a  singularly  good  quality  ;  therefore 
ought  to  be  abundantly  used  ;  bless  God  for  provid- 
ing it,  and  test  all  doctrines  by  it 557 

A  MAP,  showing  the  Order  and  Causes  of  Salvation 
and  Damnation.     By  John  Bunyan,  Author  of  The 


Pilgrim's  Progress.  Printed  and  sold  by  William 
Marshall,  at  the  Bable,  in  Newgate  Street,  where  you 
may  have  Dr.  Owen's,  and  Mr.  Bunyan's  Works. 

This  curious  and  rare  copper-plate  engraving,  on 
a  large  sheet,  was  published  in  1663  ;  soon  after 
the  author  was  first  sent  to  prison,  the  profits  pro- 
bably assisted  in  maintaining  his  family.  It  is  now 
engraved  from  an  original  impression  in  1091,  at 
which  time  the  words,  "  Author  of  The  Pilgrim's 
Progress,"  and  the  publishers'  names,  were  added. 
It  has  never  been  re-published  in  any  edition  of 
Bunyan's  Whole  Works,  until  the  present  complete 
series.  It  commences  with  a  symbol  of  the  Trinity ; 
on  the  one  side  is  the  line  of  grace,  from  election,  by 
every  step  of  the  ascent  to  eternal  glory ;  and,  on  the 
other,  in  a  darker  shade,  the  road  from  reprobation 
to  eternal  ruin.  The  whole  is  interspersed  with 
poetry. 

THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE ;  or,  The  Doom  and 
the  Downfall  of  the  Fruitless  Professor :  showing 
that  the  day  of  grace  may  be  passed  with  him  long 
before  his  life  is  ended — the  signs  also  by  which  such 
miserable  mortals  may  be  known.    A  treatise  founded 

upon  Luke  xiii.  6-9 560 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 560 

To  the  Reader 561 

Introductory  Remarks  on  the  parable 561 

Two  things  to  be  taken  notice  of  and  to  be  inquired 

into  : — 
First,  The  metaphors  made  use  of :  A  certain  man ;  a 
vineyard  ;  a  fig-tree,  barren,  or  fruitless  ;  a  dresser ; 

three  years  ;  digging  and  dunging,  &c 562 

Second,  The  doctrine  or  mysteries  couched  under  such 
metaphors : — 

1.  By  the  man  in  the  parable  is  meant  God  the  Father  562 

2.  By  the  vineyard,  his  church 563 

3.  By  the  fig-tree,  a  professor 563 

4.  By  the  dresser,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 570 

5.  By  the  fig-tree's  barrenness,  the  professor's  fruitless- 
ness 570 

6.  By  the  three  years,  the  patience  of  God  that  for  a 
time  he  extendeth  to  barren  professors 570 

7.  The  calling  to  the  dresser  to  cut  it  down,  is  to  show 
the  outcries  of  justice  against  fruitless  professoi-s 571 

8.  The  dresser's  interceding  shows  how  the  Lord  Jesus 
steps  in  to  stop  or  defer  the  execution  of  the  sentence 

on  the  barren  fig-tree 574 

9.  The  dresser's  interceding  shows  how  unwilling  he  is 
that  the  barren  fig-tree  should  perish 574 

10.  His  digging  about  and  dunging  it  shows  his  willing- 
ness to  apply  gospel  help  to  the  barren  professor 574 

11.  The  supposition  that  the  barren  fig-tree  may  yet 
continue  fruitless,  shows  that  after  all  is  done  there 

are  some  professors  will  abide  barren 576 

12.  The  determination  at  last,  to  cut  it  down,  is  a 
certain  prediction  of  such  professor's  unavoidable 
destruction 576 

Proposition  First.  The  day  of  grace  ends  with  some 
men  before  God  taketh  them  out  of  the  world;  Cain, 

Ishmael,  and  Esau,  instances  of  this ' r»77 

Signs  of  being  past  grace ,.  579 

Proposition  Second.  The  death,  or  cutting  down  of 
such  men  will  be  dreadful 584 

LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 

Advertisement  by  ilie  Editor. — The  Life  and  Death  of 
Mr.  Badman  supposed  by  some  to  have  been  intended 
as  a  third  part  of  The  Pilgrim's  Progress;  being 
the  downward  road  of  a  sinner  to  eternal  misery;  his 
setting  out ;  miserable  career ;  wretched  in  the  grati- 
fication of  the  basest  passions,  and  awfully  impeni- 
tent in  death 586 

Five  curious  and  interesting  illustrations  of  the  form 
and  manner  in  which  the  Life  of  Badman  was  first 
published,  being  facsimiles  of  the  engravings  that 
accompanied  the  first  edition 588 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   ALLEGORICAL   WORKS. 


TJie  Author  to  tlv  Read,  r 590 

Chap.  1.  Badman's  death  and  its  evil  consequences ">Ho 

This  loads  to  the  discourse  of  his  life. 
Chap.  II.  Badman's  wicked  behaviour  in  childhood  ; 

original  sin  is  the  root  of  actual  transgression;  Bad- 
man  addicted  to  lying  from  a  child  :  a  lie  knowingly 
told  demonstrates  a  desperately  hard  heart;  the 
liar's  portion  :  an  example  for  liars;  a  spirit  of  lying 
accompanied  with  other  sins;  Badman  given  to  pit 
fer,  and  would  rob  his  father  ;  more  knit  to  his  com- 
panions than  either  father  or  mother,  and  would 
rejoice  to  think  of  their  death  ;  counted  thieving  no 
great  matter  ;  the  story  of  Old  Tod  ;  Badman  could 
not  abide  the  Lord's  day ;  given  to  swearing  and 
cursing ;  examples  of  God's  anger  against  them 
that  swear  ;  a  grievous  thins;  to  bring  up  children 
wickedly 596 

Cir.\r.  III.  Badman  put  to  be  an  apprentice  to  a  pious 
master;  had  all  advantages  to  be  good,  but  continued 
Badman  still ;  all  good  things  abominable  to  him  ; 
how  he  used  to  behave  at  sermons  ;  the  desperate 
words  of  II.  S.;  Badman's  acquaintances;  he  becomes 
a  frequenter  of  taverns  ;  his  master's  purse  pays  for 
his  drunkenness ;  a  caution  for  masters ;  Badman 
becomes  addicted  to  uncleanness  ;  what  evils  attend 
this  sin  ;  Badman  and  his  master  abhor  one  another ; 
Badman  runs  away  from  him 605 

Chap.  IV.  Badman  gets  a  new  master  as  bad  as  him- 
self; a  sign  and  demonstration  of  God's  anger  against 
Badman  ;  masters  should  beware  what  servants  they 
entertain  ;  Badman  and  his  master  cannot  agree, 
and  why  ;  could  bear  the  last  master's  reproof  better 
than  he  could  the  first ;  by  what  means  he  came  to 
be  completed  in  wickedness ;  out  of  his  time,  and 
goes  home  to  his  father , 611 

CnAP.  V.  Badman  in  business  ;  the  tricks  of  a  wicked 
tradesman  ;  sets  up  for  himself,  and  is  almost  as  soon 
set  down  again ;  the  reason  of  his  running  out ;  new 
companions ;  bad  temper ;  his  behaviour  under  his 
decays 

Chap.  VI.  Badman's  hypocritical  courtship  and  mar- 
riage to  a  pious  rich  young  lady  ;  neglect  of  counsel 
about  marriage  dangerous  ;  his  wicked  and  ungodly 
carriage ;  a  great  alteration  quickly  happens  to  Bad- 
man's  wife  ;  his  creditors  come  upon  him  ;  she  reaps 
the  fruit  of  her  unadvisedness  ;  he  drives  good  com- 
pany from  his  wile 

Chap.  VII.  Badman  throws  otf  the  mask,  and  cruelly 
treats  his  wife ;  seeks  to  force  her  from  her  religion  ; 
her  repentance  and  complaint  ;  the  evil  of  being 
unequally  yoked  together  ;  a  caution  to  young 
maidens  ;  rules  for  those  that  are  to  marry  ;  Bad- 
man's  children  by  this  good  woman  ;  advantages  of 
the  children  of  godly  parents  ;  disadvantages  of  those 
of  ungodly  parents  ;  contest  between  Badman  and 
his  wife ;  his  new  discourse  ;  having  paid  his  debts 
with  his  rich  wife's  money,  he  sets  up  again,  and 
runs  a  great  way  into  the  debt  of  many  ;  there  are 
abundance  like  Mr.  Badman 620 

Chap.  VIII.  Badman  a  bankrupt,  and  gets  by  it.  "hat- 
fuls  of  money  ;"  how  he  managed  things  in  order  to 
his  breaking  ;  his  sugar  words  to  his  creditors,  who 
at  last  agree  to  what  he  propounds  ;  no  plea  for  his 
dishonesty  ;  the  heinousness  of  this  sin  ;  fair  warn- 
ing ;  good  advice  ;  honest  dealing  with  creditors  ; 
fraudulent  bankruptcy  of  a  professor  a  heavy  blot 
upon  religion  ;  such  ought  to  be  disowned 628 

Chap.  IX.  I5adman's  fraudulent  dealings  to  get  money  ; 
uses  deceitful  weights,  scales,  and  measures  ;  the 
sinfulness  of  such  practices  ;  how  Badman  did  cheat 
and  hide  his  cheating  ;  some  plead  custom  to  cheat ; 
they  get  nothing  that  cozen  and  cheat ;  more  of  Bad- 
man's  bad  tricks  ;  of  extortion 633 

Chap.  X.  The  simple  Christian's  views  of  extortion  ; 
who  are  extortioners  ;  good  conscience  must  be  used 
in  selling  ;  we  must  not  make  prey  of  our  neighbour's 
ignorance,  necessity,  or  fondness  of  our  commodity  ; 


010 


61S 


we  must  use  good  conscience  in  buying;  charity 
must  be  used  in  our  dealings  ;  we  should  have  an  eye 
to  the  glory  of  God  in  all  our  transactions  ;  Badman 
used  to  laugb  at  those  that  told  him  of  his  faults 687 

Chap.  XI.  Instructions  for  righteous  dealing  ;  bow  to 
live  in  the  practice  of  this  ;  wo  ought  to  beware  of 
our  own  and  our  neighbour's  hurt ;  a  judgment  of 
God 610 

Chap.  XII.  Badman's  prole,  atheism,  infidelity,  and 
envy  ;  of  pride  in  general  ;  it  sticks  close  to  nature  ; 
two  sorts  of  pride  ;  signs  of  a  proud  man  ;  professors 
guilty  of  the  sin  of  pride  ;  a  stumbling-block  to  the 
world  ;  why  it  is  in  such  request  ;  evil  effects  of 
pride  ;  a  general  character  of  Badman,  and  brief 
relation  of  his  ways  ;  his  judgment  of  the  Scriptures  ; 
an  angry,  envious  man  ;  whence  envy  flows ;  some 
of  the  births  of  envy  ;  a  rare  thing 612 

Chap.  XIII.  Badman  in  some  trouble  of  mind  ;  he  gets 
drunk  and  breaks  his  leg  ;  it  has  no  good  effect  upon 
him  ;  how  many  sins  accompany  drunkenness ;  an 
open  stroke ;  God's  judgments  upon  drunkards  ; 
Clark's  Looking-Glass  for  Sinners ;  Badman  falls 


sick. 


613 


Chap.  XIV.  His  pretended  repentings  and  promises  of 
reform  when  death  stares  him  in  the  face ;  his  con- 
science wounded,  and  he  cries  out  in  his  sickness  ;  his 
atheism  will  not  help  him  now  ;  a  dreadful  example 
of  God's  anger ;  what  Badman  did  more  when  he 
was  sick  ;  great  alteration  in  him  ;  the  town-talk  of 
his  change;  his  wife  comforted;  he  recovers,  and 
returns  to  his  old  course 619 

Chap.  XV.  Death  leaves  Badman  for  a  season,  and  he 
returns  to  his  sins  like  a  sow  that  has  been  washed 
to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire ;  ignorant  physicians 
kill  souls  while  they  cure  bodies  ;  the  true  symptoms 
of  conversion  wanting  in  all  Badman's  sense  of  sin, 
and  desires  of  mercy ;  of  sick-bed  repentance,  and 
that  it  is  to  be  suspected  ;  a  sign  of  the  desperate- 
ness  of  man's  heart 651 

Chap.  XVI.  Badman's  wife's  heart  is  broken  ;  her 
Christian  speech,  and  talk  to  her  friends  and  her 
husband  ;  he  diverts  her  discourse ;  her  speech  to  her 
children  that  were  rude  ;  to  her  darling  child  who 
followed  her  ways ;  her  death  ;  one  of  her  children 
converted  by  her  dying  words 652 

Chap.  XVII.  Badman's  base  language  ;  he  is  tricked 
into  a  second  marriage  by  a  woman  as  bad  as  him- 
self;  what  she  was,  and  how  they  lived  ;  he  is  pun- 
ished in  his  second  wife  for  his  bad  carriages  towards 
his  first ;  he  is  not  at  all  the  better  ;  none  did  pity 
him  for  his  sorrow,  but  looked  upon  it  as  a  just 
reward 651 

Cuap.  XVIII.  Badman,  and  this  Ids  last  wife,  part  as 
poor  as  howlets ;  his  sickness  and  diseases,  of  which  he 
died  ;  his  name  stinks  when  he  is  dead  ;  that  he  dies 
impenitent  is  proved  ;  how  he  carried  it  to  good  men 
when  they  came  to  visit  him  in  his  last  illness ;  how 
he  was  when  near  his  end  ;  the  opinion  of  the  ignor- 
ant about  his  manner  of  dying 655 

Chap.  XIX.  Future  happiness  not  to  be  hoped  from  a 
quiet  hardened  death;  how  we  must  judge  whether 
men  die  well  or  no  ;  when  we  may  judge  of  a  man's 
eternal  state  by  the  manner  of  his  death;  account  of 
two  of  Badman's  brethren  ;  the  story  of  John  Cox  ; 
of  dying  in  despair  ;  further  discourse  of  Badman's 
death;  he  that,  after  a  sinful  life  dies  quietly,  goes 
to  hell,  proved  ;  sick-bed  repentance  seldom  good  for 
anything;  peace  in  a  sinful  state  a  sign  of  dam- 
nation    660 

Chap.  XX.  Without  godly  repentance  the  wicked  man's 
hope  and  life  die  together;  a  frivolous  opinion  ;  when 
a  wicked  man  dies  in  his  sins  quietly,  it  is  a  judg- 
ment of  God  upon  the  man  himself,  and  also  upon 
his  wicked  companions  that  beholdeth  him  so  to  die; 
the  quiet  death  of  a  wicked  man  enough  to  puzzle 
the  wisest  man  ;  David  himself  was  put  to  a  stand 
by  this;  enough  to  stagger  a  whole  world;  the  godly 


CONTENTS   OF   THE   ALLEGORICAL   WORKS. 


have  a  sanctuary  to  go  to,  the  Word  of  God,  by 
which  the  reasons  of  many  of  God's  judgments  are 
made  known;  conclusion  of  Badman's  life  and  death  663 

A  FEW  SIGHS  FROM  HELL:  or,  The  Groans 
of  a  Damned  Soul.  An  exposition  of  the  parable  of 
the  rich  man  and  the  beggar;  wherein  is  discovered 
the  lamentable  state  of"  the  damned  ;  their  cries, 
their  desires  in  their  distresses,  with  the  determina- 
tion of  God  upon  them;  a  good  warning  word  to 
sinners,  both  old  and  young,  to  take  into  considera- 
tion betimes,  and  to  seek,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ, 
to  avoid,  lest  they  come  into  the  same  place  of  tor- 
ment ;  also,  a  brief  discourse  touching  the  profitable- 
ness of  the  Scriptures  for  our  own  instruction,  in 
the  way  of  righteousness,  according  to  the  tendency 
of  the  said  parable 666 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 666 

The  preface  by  "the  Rev.  John  Gilford,  Pastor  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  at  Bedford,  of  which  John  Bunyan 
was  a  member — this,  after  a  long  commendation  of 
the  work,  contains  a  most  interesting  account  of  the 
author,  his  mean  condition,  and  employment ;  the 
sore  shooting  of  the  archers  at  him  for  his  earnestness 
and  zeal  in  his  Master's  work  ;  his  magnifying  and 
exalting  the  Scriptures,  and  an  exhortation  to  receive 
with  meekness  his  instructions 0?2 

Bunyan's  preface;  how  dangerous  to  be  walking  to  the 
place  of  anguish  and  darkness,  with  the  back  to 
heaven  and  the  face  to  hell ;  hark,  hear  the  bitter 
cries  of  those  newly  gone  before  ;  stop  before  it  be 
too  late 673 

The  commentary  on  Luke  xvi.  iy-ol  ;  the  beggar 
holdeth  forth  the  godly,  and  the  rich  man  the  un- 
godly ;  judging  from  outward  appearances  the  rich 
man  was  best  off 675 

Ver.  20,  21.  Saints,  poor  and  contemned,  content  with 
anything 676 

Ver.  22.  Death,  burial,  and  ascension  of  the  beggar; 
the  godly  in  death  attended  by  glorious  spirits 678 

Ver.  23.  The  rich  man  in  torments  sees  the  happiness 
of  Lazarus 681 

Ver.  24.  The  too  late  repentance  of  Dives  ;  his  cry, 
Send  Lazarus  with  a  drop  of  water,  for  I  am  tormented 
in  this  flame  ;  nine  reasons  for  this  cry 685 

Ver.  25.  The  cry  of  the  wicked  in  hell  availeth  nothing; 
the  bitter  recollection  of  a  neglected  salvation  ;  a 
scalding  hot  remembrance  of  their  sins 689 

Ver.  26.  The  great  and  impassable  gulf  between  heaven 
and  hell 693 

Ver.  27,  28.  The  prayer  of  Misery,  Send  a  messenger 
to  my  relatives ;  poor  scrubbed,  beggarly  Lazarus, 
the  scabbed  creep-hedge,  as  I  once  thought  him.  send 
him  to  my  sumptuous,  gay  house;  poor  not  to  be 
despised  if  they  cannot  speak  Hebrew,  Greek,  and 
Latin,  like  Pontius  Pilate  ;  reasons  why  this  prayer 
was  uttered "...   695 

The  Use  axd  Application.— Shall  1  lose  a  long  heaven 
for  a  short  pleasure  ;  consider  the  woes  of  those  that 
die  out  of  Christ 701 

Ver.  29-31.  They  that  will  uot  near  Moses  and  the 
Prophet!  would  not  listen  to  a  messenger  from 
heaven # 7,17 

Hear  the  gospel  tor  counsel,  instruction,  forewarning, 
comfort ;  but  to  them  that  fall  short,  grief 714 

PJTfl  -'>'" Is  or  reasons  why  the  Bible  is  undervalued.   715 

Five  uses  by  way  of  self-examination 721 


ONE  THING  IS  NEEDFUL;  or,  Serious  Medita-  PAS" 
tions  upon  the  Four  Last  Things — Death,  judgment, 
heaven,  and  hell.     A  Poem. 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 725 

An  Introduction  to  the  ensuinq  discourse 726 

Of  death ' 726 

Of  judgment 728 

Of  heaven 730 

Of  hell,  and  the  state  of  those  who  perish 733 

EBAL  AND  GERIZIM ;  or,  The  Blessing  and  the 
Curse  :  being  a  short  exhortation  to  sinnei-s  by  the 
mercy  and  severity  of  God.    A  Poem 737 

The  necessity  of  a  new  heart ;  the  spirit  of  prayer 740 

Of  godly  fear ;  of  uprightness  and  sincerity:  how  graces 
are  to  be  obtained  ;  of  imputed  righteousness 741 

Of  holiness  of  life  ;  the  operation  of  faith  ;  of  love  to 
God 742 

Love  inducing  Christian  conduct  from  Mount  Ebal 743 

A  BOOK  FOR  BOYS  AND  GIRLS  ;  or,  Temporal 
Things  Spiritualized.  In  subsequent  editions  this 
title  page  was  altered  to  DIVINE  EMBLEMS  ; 
or,  Temporal  Things  Spiritualized,  fitted  for  the  use 
of  Boys  and  Girls. . 746 

Advertisement  by  the  Editor 746 

The  Author  to  the  Courteous  Reader.  A  Poetical 
Preface 747 

In  this  appears  his  love  to  children  : — 

"I  think  some  may 
Call  me  a  baliy,  'cause  1  with  them  play." 

These  Emblems  or  Meditations  are  upon  the  following 
subjects : — 

1.  Upon  the  barren  fig-tree 748 

n .  Upon  the  lark  and  the  fowler  ;  111.  Upon  the  vine  ; 
iv.  Upon  an  egg 749 

v.  Of  fowls  flying  ;  vi.  Upon  the  Lord's  Prayer  ;  vn. 
Peep  of  day  ;  vm.  The  flint  in  the  water;  ix.  Upon 
the  fish  in  the  water 750 

x.  Upon  the  swallow  ;  xi.  The  bee  ;  xn.  A  lowering 
morning;  xm.  Overmuch  niceness ;  xiv.  Upon  a 
candle 751 

xv.  Upon  the  sacraments;  xvi.  Sun's  reflection  on  the 
clouds  ;  xvu.  Upon  apparel ;  xvni.  The  sinner  and 
the  spider 752 

xix.  Upon  the  dawn  of  day , 754 

xx.  On  the  mole  in  the  ground ;  xxi.  Of  the  cuckoo ; 
xxir.  The  boy  and  butterfly :  xxiu.  The  fly  at  the 
candle 755 

xxiv.  The  rising  sun  ;  xxv.  On  promise  of  Iruitlulness ; 
xxvi.  Upon  the  thief;  xxvu.  The  child  and  the  bird 
in  the  bush 756 

xxvm.  Of  Moses  and  his  wife ;  xxix.  Of  the  rose  bush  ; 
xxx.  Of  the  sun's  going  down 757 

xxxi.  Upon  the  frog;  xxxu.  The  whipping-top;  xxxm. 
Upon  the  pismire;  xxxiv.  The  beggar;  xxxv.  The 
horse  and  his  rider 753 

xxxvi.  On  a  pound  of  canities ;  xxxvu.  A  penny  loaf; 
xxxvtii.  The  boy  and  watch-maker;  xxxix.  On  a 
looking-glass 759 

xl.  On  the  love  01  Christ, ;  xli.  On  a  hen  cackling; 
xm.  Upon  an  hour-glass;  xliii.  On  a  snail;  xliv. 
On  the  spouse  of  Christ 760 

xlv.  On  a  skilful  player ;  xlvi.  On  man  by  nature  ; 
XL VII.  Upon  a  disobedient  child 761 

xlviii.  On  a  sheet  of  white  paper;  xux.  Upon  lire...    702 





S     00 


to     § 


n     P5 

£  2 


•■:.'  r  •--■■  - 


, 


LIST    OF    ENGRAVINGS 


DIRECTIONS    TO    THE    BINDER 


VOLUME    I. 

Portrait — Drawn  by  Macleay,  after  Sadler,    . 
The  Cnrmcn  and  Village  Green — Elstow, 
Buxyan's  Cottage,  Elstow,  and  Market-House,  Elstow 
St.  Peter's  First  Sermon  at  Jerusalem, 

The  Return  of  the  Prodigal, 

Presentation  in  the  Temple,  r 

Descent  from  the  Cross,   ...... 

Thankfulness, 

Create  a  Clean  Heart  in  Me,  0  God,  .... 
Prison  on  Bedford  Bridge — Two  Views, 


to  face  Vignette 

Vignette 

to  face 


to  face  "  Prison  Meditations,' 


TAOK 

Title. 

Title. 
1 
67 
240 
391 
497 
641 
685 
03* 


VOLUME    II. 

Eunyan's  Tomb — Bunhill  Fields  Burying  Ground,  London,       .         .         .  to  face  Vignette  Title. 

Bedford— from  London  Road, Vignette  Title. 

The  Entombment, to  face    129 

The  Pharisee  and  Publican, 215 

Jonah  Cast  into  the  Sea, ,         .        .        399 


VOLUME    III. 

Jons  Bunyan — Portrait  after  White to  face  Vignette  Title. 

Christian  Armed, Vignette  Title. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  4to, to  face   1 

Eighteen  fac-similes  of  the  Engravings  which  appeared  in  early  editions  of  the 

Pilgrim's  Progress, page  79-84 

Tail-piece — Bedford  Jail  and  Gatehouse 88 

Christian  Addressing  his  Wife  and  Children7, to  face      89 

Christian  Saluted  by  the  Three  Shining  Ones, 102 

Christian's  Combat  wrrn  Apollyon H3 


ii  LIST    OF    ENGRAVINGS. 

PAGE 

Christian,  Hopeful,  and  the  Shepherds, to  face  144 

Christian,  Hopeful,  and  Atheist,                . 152 

Ministering  Spirits  Meet  Christian  and  Hopeful, 164 

Portrait  of  Bunyan  on  Wood— Frontispiece  to  Pilgrim  (Part  Second),    ....  171 

Christiana  and  nER  Family  Sally  out  on  Pilgrimage, 177 

The  Pilgrims  committed  to  the  Care  of  Greatheart,          ......  190 

Great-heart  attacking  Giant  Grim,         ..........  196 

The  Pilgrims  entertained  at  the  House  of  Gaius, 219 

Emmanuel, 245 

Map  snowiNG  the  Order  and  Causes  of  Salvation  and  Damnation,   between  page  374  and  375 
Fac-similes  of  the  five  engravings  that  accompanied  the  first  edition  of  the 

Life  of  Badman, page  588,  589 

Divine  Emblems — "Fish  in  the  Water,"  &c,             749 

Divine  Emblems — "  Horse  and  his  Rider,"  <fcc,      ........  758 


ENGRAVINGS   IN    MEMOIR. 

PAGE 

Meeting-House — Zoar  Street, «         .     to  face    i 

Belfry  PoRcn,  Elstow, page      xii 

Autograph  of  John  Gifford,  ..........  xxviii 

Nine  Specimens  of  Bunyan 's  Handwriting, xxxvii,  xxxviii 

Impression  of  a  Seal  on  a  Gold  Ring — found  in  the  foundation  of  the  old  prison, 

Bedford  Bridge 1 

Old  Swan  Inn,  Bedford, liv 

Bunyan's  Jug, ,  Iviii 

Bunyan 's  Cottage  at  Bedford,     t lxiv 

Bunyan's  Autograpii, lxv,  lxvi,  lxxii 

Bunyan's  CnAiR, lxxv 

Bunyan's  Cabinet, ib. 

Personal  Utensils  used  by  John  Bunyan  :  — 

Pocket-knife,  with  spring,     ...........         lxxvi 

Larger  Knife,  without  spring — kept  open  or  shut  by  turning  a  ferrule,  .         .  ib. 

His  Apple-Scoop — curiously  carved,  .........  ib. 

Pocket-Box  of  Scales  and  Weights,  for  the  purchase  of  old  gold,  and  dipped  or  worn 

money,  with  the  figures  of  the  coins  on  each  weight  in  the  reign  of  James  I.,        .  ib. 


NOTE    TO   THE   BINDER. 


<.*  The  Binder  is  requested  to  observe,  when  binding  Complete  Sets  of  the  three  volumes  of  Bunyan's  Works, 
to  place  the  Preface  and  Life  at  the  beginning  of  Volume  First. — When  Volume  Third  is  bound 
separately,  place  the  Preface  and  Life  at  the  beginning  of  that  Volume. 


MEMOIR    OF    JOHN    BUNYAN. 


THE   FIRST   PERIOD. 

THIS  GREAT  MAN  DESCENDED  FROM  IGNOBLE  PARENTS — 
BORN  IN  POVERTY — HIS  EDUCATION  AND  EVIL  HABITS — 
FOLLOWS  HIS  FATHER'S  BUSINESS  AS  A  BRAZIER — ENLISTS 
FOR  A  SOLDIER — RETURNS  FROM  THE  WARS  AND  OBTAINS 
AN-  AMIABLE,  RELIGIOUS  WIFE — HER  DOWER. 

1  Tie  have  tin's  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  that  the  excellency 
of  the  power  may  be  of  God,  and  not  of  us.' — 2  Cor.  iv.  7. 

1  For  my  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your 
ways  my  ways,  saith  the  Lord.'1 — Isa.  Iv.  8. 

'  Though  ye  have  lien  among  the  pots,  yet  shall  ye  be  as  the 
wings  of  a  dove  covered  with  silver,  and  her  feathers  with 
yellow  gold.'' — Ps.  lxviii.  13. 

When  the  Philistine  giant,  Goliath,  mocked  the 
host  of  Israel,  and  challenged  any  of  their  stern 
warriors  to  single  combat,  what  human  being 
could  have  imagined  that  the  gigantic  heathen 
would  be  successfully  met  in  the  mortal  struggle 
by  a  youth  'ruddy  and  of  a  fair  countenance?' 
who  unarmed,  except  with  a  sling  and  a  stone, 
'  gave  the  carcases  of  the  hosts  of  the  Philistines 
to  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  to  the  wild  beasts  of 
the  earth.' 

Wiio,  upon  seeing  an  infant  born  in  a  stable, 
and  laid  in  a  manger,  or  beholding  him  when  a 
youth  working  with  his  father  as  a  carpenter, 
could  have  conceived  that  he  was  the  manifestation 
of  the  Deity  in  human  form,  before  whom  every 
knee  should  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess  Him  to 

be  THE  ETERNAL  ? 

Father  Michael,  a  Franciscan  friar,  on  a  journey 
to  Ancona,  having  lost  his  way,  sought  direction 
from  a  wretched  lad  keeping  hogs  —  deserted, 
forlorn,  his  back  smarting  with  severe  stripes, 
and  his  eyes  suffused  with  tears.  The  poor  ragged 
boy  not  only  went  cheerfully  with  him  to  point 
out  his  read,  but  besought  the  monk  to  take  him 
into  his  convent,  volunteering  to  fulfil  the  most 
degrading  services,  in  the  hope  of  procuring  a 
little  learning,  and  escaping  from  '  those  filthy 
hogs.'  How  incredulously  would  the  friar  have 
listened  to  any  one  who  could  have  suggested  that 
this  desolate,  tattered,  dirty  boy,  might  and  would 

VOL.   III. 


fill  a  greater  than  an  imperial  throne  !  Yet,  even- 
tually that  swine-herd  was  clothed  in  purple  and 
fine  linen,  and,  under  the  title  of  Pope  Sixtus  V., 
became  one  of  those  mighty  magicians  who  arc 
described  in  Roger's  Italy,  as 

*  Setting  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of  kings, 
And  through  the  world  subduing,  chaining  down 
The  free,  immortal  spirit — theirs  a  wondrous  spell.'1 

A  woman  that  was  'a  loose  and  ungodly  wretch' 
hearing  a  tinker  lad  most  awfully  cursing  and 
swearing,  protested  to  him  that  '  he  swore  and 
cursed  at  that  most  fearful  rate  that  it  made  her 
tremble  to  hear  him,'  'that  he  was  the  ungodliest 
fellow  for  swearing  that  ever  she  heard  in  all  her 
life,'  and  'that  he  was  able  to  spoil  all  the  youth 
in  a  whole  town,  if  they  came  in  his  company.' 
This  blow  at  the  young  reprobate  made  that  inde- 
lible impression  which  all  the  sermons  he  had  heard 
had  failed  to  make.  Satan,  by  one  of  his  own 
slaves,  wounded  a  conscience  which  had  resisted 
all  the  overtures  of  mercy.  The  youth  pondered 
her  words  in  his  heart  ;  they  were  good  seed 
strangely  sown,  and  their  working  formed  one  of 
those  mysterious  steps  which  led  the  foul-mouthed 
blasphemer  to  bitter  repentance ;  who,  when  he 
had  received  mercy  and  pardon,  felt  impelled  to 
bless  and  magnify  the  Divine  grace  with  shining, 
burning  thoughts  and  words.  The  poor  profli- 
gate, swearing  tinker  became  transformed  into  the 
most  ardent  preacher  of  the  love  of  Christ — the 
well-trained  author  of  The  Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved, 
or  Good  News  to  the  Vilest  of  Men. 

How  often  have  the  saints  of  God  been  made  a 
most  unexpected  blessing  to  others.  The  good 
seed  of  Divine  truth  has  been  many  times  sown 
by  those  who  did  not  go  out  to  sow,  but  who  were 
profitably  engaged  in  cultivating  their  own  graces, 
enjoying  the  communion  of  saints,  and  advancing 
their  own  personal  happiness  !  Think  of  a  few 
poor,  but  pious  happy  women,  sitting  in  the  sun 
one  beautiful  summer's  day,  before  one  of  their 
cottages,  probably  each  one  with  her  pillow  on  her 


1  For  a  most  interesting  account  of  the  rise  of  Sixtus  V., 
see  the  new  volume  of  the  Lounger's  Common-place  Book, 
1807,  p.  152. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


lap,  dexterously  twisting  the  bobbins  to  make  lace, 
the  profits  of  which  helped  to  maintain  their  chil- 
dren. While  they  are  communing  on  the  things 
of  God,  a,  travelling  tinker  draws  near,  and,  over- 
hearing their  talk,  takes  up  a  position  where  he 
might  listen  to  their  converse  while  he  pursued 
his  avocation.  Their  words  distil  into  his  soul; 
they  speak  the  language  of  Canaan  ;  they  talk  of 
holy  enjoyments,  the  result  of  being  born  again, 
acknowledging  their  miserable  state  by  nature, 
and  how  freely  and  undeservedly  God  had  visited 
their  hearts  with  pardoning  mercy,  and  supported 
them  while  suffering  the  assaults  and  suggestions  of 
Satan  ;  how  they  had  been  borne  up  in  every  dark, 
cloudy,  stormy  day ;  and  how  they  contemned, 
slighted,  and  abhorred  their  own  righteousness  as 
filthy  and  insufficient  to  do  them  any  good.  The 
learned  discourses  our  tinker  had  heard  at  church 
had  casually  passed  over  his  mind  like  evanescent 
clouds,  and  left  little  or  no  lasting  impression. 
But  these  poor  women,  '  methought  they  spake  as 
if  joy  did  make  them  speak;  they  spake  with  such 
pleasantness  of  Scripture  language,  and  with  such 
appearance  of  grace  in  all  they  said,  that  they 
were  to  me  as  if  they  had  found  a  new  world,  as 
if  they  were  people  that  dwelt  alone,  and  were 
not  to  be  reckoned  among  their  neighbours.'    Num. 

xxiii.  0. 

0 !  how  little  did  they  imagine  that  their  pious 
converse  was  to  be  the  means  employed  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  conversion  of  that  poor  tinker, 
and  that,  by  their  agency,  he  was  to  be  trans- 
formed into  one  of  the  brightest  luminaries  of 
heaven  ;  who,  when  he  had  entered  into  rest  would 
leave  his  works  to  follow  him  as  spiritual  thunder 
to  pierce  the  hearts  of  the  impenitent,  and  as 
heavenly  consolation  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted; 
liberating  the  prisoners  of  Giant  Despair,  and 
directing  the  pilgrims  to  the  Celestial  City.  Thus 
were  blessings  in  rich  abundance  showered  down 
upon  the  church  by  the  instrumentality,  in  the 
first  instance,  of  a  woman  that  was  a  sinner,  but 
most  eminently  by  the  Christian  converse  of  a  few 
poor  hut  pious  women. 

This  poverty-stricken,  ragged  tinker  was  the  son 
of  a  working  mechanic  at  Elstow,  near  Bedford. 
So  obscure  was  his  origin  that  even  the  Christian 
name  of  his  father  is  yet  unknown:1  he  was  born 


1  The  Rev.  J.  H.  A.  Rudd,  the  Vicar  of  EUow,  has  most 
kindly  furnished  me  with  an  extract  from  the  registers  of  all 
the  entries  relative  to  Banyan's  family.  The  register  com- 
mences in  1641,  and  lias  been  searched  to  1750.  It  confirms 
the  Rev.  J.  Juice's  impression,  that  soon  after  Bunyan  joined 
Gilford's  church  he  left  Elstow  to  live  in  Bedford. 

Thomas  Bouion,  buried,  Dec.  9,  1641. 

Mairgaret  Boniou,  wife,  buried,  June  20,  1644. 

Margaret  Boniou,  b.,  July  21,  10  it. 

Charles,  the  sou  of  Thos.  Bunion,  bapt.,  May  22,  1613. 

Charles  Buuion,  bur.,  May  30,  1643. 

Mary,  the  daught.  of  Joh.  Bonion,  bapt.,  July  20,  1G50. 


in  1628,  a  year  memorable  as  that  in  which  the 
Bill  of  Rights  was  passed.  Then  began  the  struggle 
against  arbitrary  power,  which  was  overthrown 
in  1688,  the  year  of  Bunyan's  death,  by  the  acces- 
sion of  William  III.  Of  Bunyan's  parents,  his 
infancy,  and  childhood,  little  is  recorded.  All  that 
we  know  is  from  his  own  account,  and  that  prin- 
cipally contained  in  his  doctrine  of  the  Law  and 
Grace,  and  in  his  extraordinary  development  of 
his  spiritual  life,  under  the  title  of  Grace  Abound- 
ing to  the  Chief  of  Sinners.  His  birth  would  have 
shed  a  lustre  on  the  wealthiest  mansion,  and  have 
imparted  additional  grandeur  to  any  lordly  palace. 
Had  royal  or  noble  gossips,  and  a  splendid  enter- 
tainment attended  his  christening,  it  might  have 
been  pointed  to  with  pride;  but  so  obscure  was  his 
birth,  that  it  has  not  been  discovered  that  he  was 
christened  at  all;  while  the  fact  of  his  new  birth  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  known  over  the  whole  world  to  the 
vast  extent  that  his  writings  have  been  circulated. 
He  entered  this  world  in  a  labourer's  cottage  of  the 
humblest  class,  at  the  village  of  Elstow,  about  a 
mile  from  Bedford.2  His  pedigree  is  thus  narrated 
by  himself: — 'My  descent  was  of  a  low  and  incon- 
siderable generation,  my  father's  house  being  of 
that  rank  that  is  meanest  and  most  despised  of 
all  the  families  in  the  land.'3  Bunyan  alludes  to 
this  very  pointedly  in  the  preface  to  A  Few  Sighs 
from  Hell: — '  I  am  thine,  if  thou  be  not  ashamed 
to  own  me,  because  of  my  low  and  contemptible 
descent  in  the  world.'4  His  poor  mid  abject 
parentage  was  so  notorious,  that  hi?  pastor,  John 
Burton,  apologized  for  it  in  his  recommendation 
to  The  Gospel  Truths  Opened : — '  Be  not  offended 
because  Christ  holds  forth  the  glorious  treasure 
of  the  gospel  to  thee  in  a  poor  earthen  vessel, 
by  one  who  hath  neither  the  greatness  nor  the 
wisdom  of  this  world  to  commend  him  to  thec.'J 
And  in  his  most  admirable  treatise,  on  The  Fear 
of  God,  Bunyan  observes — 'The  poor  Christian 


Elizabeth,  the  daughter  of  John  Bonyoii,  was  bora  14th.  day 
of  April,  1654. 

Thomas  ?  Bonion  of  the  town  of  Bedford,  and  Elizabeth 
of  the  parish  of  Elstow,  were  married,  May  ID,  165C. 


(The  Christian  name  of  the  husband,  and  the  surname  of  tbe 
wife,  are  very  much  obliterated). 

Ann  Bonyonn,  "Widdo,  was  buried,  12th  day  of  April,  1659. 

Thos.  Bunyan,  buried,  Feby.  7th,  1675. 

Ann  Buuyou,  Widdo,  buried  iu  Woolen,  September  25,  ]  6S0. 

The  marriage  here  recorded,  May  10,  1656,  could  uot  be 
that  of  John  Bunyan  to  his  second  wife  Elizabeth ;  for  she 
declared  to  Judge  Hale  in  August,  1661,  that  she  had  'uot 
been  married  to  him  yet  full  two  years.' — Vol.  i.  61. 

2  This  cottage  has  long  ceased  to  exist,  and  has  been  re- 
placed by  another  of  the  poorest  description.  But  from  an  old 
print  we  have  given  in  the  Flate,  p.  1,  vol.  i.,  a  representation 
of  the  original,  with  the  shed  at  side  often  mentioned  as  'The 
forge ;'  thus  leading  us  to  believe,  that  to  the  '  tinker's'  humble 
calling  might  be  uuited  that  of  the  '  smith,'  a  more  manly  and 
honourable  trade. 

3  Grace  Abounding,  No.  2.  *  Vol.  iii.,  p.  674. 

6  Vol.  ii.,  p.  140. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUXYAX. 


hath  something  to  answer  them  that  reproach  him 
for  his  ignoble  pedigree,  and  shortness  of  the 
glory  of  the  wisdom  of  this  world.  True  may 
that  man  say  I  am  taken  out  of  the  dunghill.  I 
was  horn  in  a  base  and  low  estate  ;  but  I  fear  God. 
This  is  the  highest  and  most  noble  ;  be  bath  the 
honour,  the  life,  and  glory  that  is  lasting.'1  In 
his  controversy  with  the  Strict  Baptists,  be  chides 
them  for  reviling  his  ignoble  pedigree  : — '  You 
closely  disdain  my  person  because  of  my  low 
descent  among  men,  stigmatizing  me  as  a  person 
i  f  that  rank  that  need  not  be  heeded  or  attended 
unto.'"'  He  inquired  of  his  father — '  Whether  we 
were  of  the  Israelites  or  no  ?  for,  finding  in  the 
Scripture  that  they  were  once  the  peculiar  people 
of  God,  thought  I,  if  I  were  one  of  this  race,  my 
soul  must  needs  be  happy.'"  This  somewhat 
justifies  the  conclusion  that  his  father  was  a  Gipsy 
tinker,  that  occupation  being  then  followed  by  the 
Gipsy  tribe.  In  the  life  of  Bunyan  appended  to 
the  forged  third  part  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
his  father  is  described  as  '  an  honest  poor  labouring 
man,  Avho,  like  Adam  unparadised,  had  all  the  world 
before  him  to  get  his  bread  in;  and  was  very  care- 
ful and  industrious  to  maintain  his  family.'4 

Happily  for  Bunyan,  he  was  born  in  a  neigh- 
bourhood in  which  it  was  a  disgrace  to  any  parents 
not  to  have  their  children  educated.  With  grati- 
tude he  records,  that  '  it  pleased  God  to  put  it 
into  their  hearts  to  put  me  to  school  to  learn  both 
to  read  and  to  write. '  In  the  neighbourhood  of  his 
birthplace,  a  noble  charity  diffused  the  blessings  of 
lettered  knowledge.5  To  this  charity  Bunyan  was 
for  a  short  period  indebted  for  the  rudiments  of 
education ;  but,  alas,  evil  associates  made  awful 
havoc  of  those  slight  unshapen  literary  impres- 
sions which  had  been  made  upon  a  niind  boisterous 
aud  impatient  of  discipline.  He  says — 'To  my 
shame,  I  confess  I  did  soon  lose  that  little  I 
learned,  and  that  almost  utterly.'0  This  fact  will 
recur  to  the  reader's  recollection  when  he  peruses 
Israel's  Hope  Encouraged,  in  which,  speaking  of 
the  all-important  doctrine  of  justification,  he  says 
— '  It  is  with  many  that  begin  with  this  doctrine 
as  it  is  with  boys  that  go  to  the  Latin  school ; 
they  learn  till  they  have  learned  the  grounds  of 
their  grammar,  and  then  go  home  and  forget  all.'' 

As  sooa  as  his  strength  enabled  him,  be  devoted 


''Vol.  i.,  p.  490.  -  Vol.  ii.,  p.  617. 

z  Grace  Abounding,  No.  ] S. 

4  Extracted  from  the  first  edition  in  the  British  Mosenm. 
Ii  wai  amen  altered  in  the  subsequent  impressions. 

5  In  15CG,  Sir  'I  nomas  Harper,  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  gave 
£180  fur  thirteen  acres  aud  a  rood  of  meadow  laud  in  Uolboru. 
This  was  settled,  in  trust,  to  promote  the  education  of  the  poor 
in  and  round  Bedford.  In  166S,  it  produced  a  yearly  revenue 
of  £9'J— a  cousiderable  sum  in  that  day,  but  not  in  any  pro- 
portion to  the  present  rental,  which  amounts  to  upwards  of 
£12,000  a-year. 

0  Grace  Abounding,  No.  3.  "  Vol.  i.,  p.  61S. 


bis  whole  soul  and  body  to  licentiousness — 'As  for 
my  own  natural  life,  for  the  time  that  1  was  with- 
out God  in  the  world,  it  was  indeed  according  to 
the  course  of  this  world,  and  the  spirit  that  now 
worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience.  It  was 
my  delight  to  be  taken  captive  by  the  devil  at  his 
will:  beiug  filled  with  all  unrighteousness;  that 
from  a  child  I  had  but  few  equals,  both  for  cursing, 
swearing,  lying,  and  blaspheming  the  holy  name 
of  God.'8 

It  has  been  supposed,  that  in  delineating  the  early 
career  of  Badman,  '  Bunyan  drew  the  picture  of 
his  own  boyhood.'9  But  the  difference-  is  broadly 
given.  Badman  is  the  child  of  pious  parents,  who 
gave  him  a  '  good  education'  in  every  sense,  both 
moral  and  secular  ;lu  the  very  reverse  of  Bunyan's 
training.  His  associates  would  enable  him  to  draw 
the  awful  character  and  conduct  of  Badman,  as  a 
terrible  example  to  deter  others  from  the  down- 
ward road  to  misery  and  perdition. 

Bunyan's  parents  do  not  appear  to  have  checked, 
or  attempted  to  counteract,  his  unbridled  career  of 
wickedness.  He  gives  no  hint  of  the  kind ;  but 
when  be  notices  his  wife's  father,  he  adds  that  be 
*  was  counted  godly  ;'  and  in  his  beautiful  non- 
sectarian  catechism,  there  is  a  very  touching  con- 
clusion to  his  instructions  to  children  on  their 
behaviour  to  their  parents  : — '  The  Lord,  if  it  be 
his  will,  convert  our  poor  parents,  that  they,  with 
us,  may  be  the  children  of  God.'11  These  fervent 
expressions  may  refer  to  his  own  parents  ;  and, 
connecting  them  with  other  evidence,  it  appears  that 
he  was  not  blessed  with  pious  example.  Upon  one 
occasion,  when  severely  reproved  for  swearing,  he 
says — '  I  wished,  with  all  my  heart,  that  I  might 
be  a  little  child  again,  that  my  father  might  learn 
me  to  speak  without  this  wicked  way  of  swearing. '1- 
In  his  numerous  confessions,  he  never  expresses 
pain  at  having,  by  bis  vicious  conduct,  occasioned 
grief  to  bis  father  or  mother.  From  this  it  may 
be  inferred,  that  neither  his  father's  example  nor 
precept  had  checked  this  wretched  propensity  to 
swearing,  and  that  he  owed  nothing  to  bis  parents 
for  moral  training;  but,  on  the  coutrary,  they  had 
connived  at,  and  encouraged  him  in,  a  course  of  life 
which  made  him  a  curse  to  the  neighbourhood  in 
which  he  lived. 

In  the  midst  of  all  this  violent  depravity,  the  Holy 
Spirit  began  the  work  of  regeneration  in  his  soul 
— a  long,  a  solemn,  yea,  an  awful  work — which 
was  to  fit  this  poor  debauched  youth  for  purity  of 
conduct — for  communion  with  heaven — for  won- 
drous usefulness  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel — for 
patient  endurance  of  sufferings  for  righteousness' 
sake — for  the  writing  of  works  which  promise  to 


8  Grace  Abounding,  Xo.  4.    '■>  Philip's  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  4. 

1  u  Vol.  iii.,  p.  597.  l '   Vol-  "•»  V-  56i- 

1  -  Grace  Abounding,  No.  27. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


be  a  blessing  to  the  Church  in  all  ages — for  his 
support  during  his  passage  through  the  black  river 
which  has  no  bridge — to  shine  all  bright  and 
glorious,  as  a  star  in  the  firmament  of  heaven. 
'  Wonders  of  grace  to  God  belong.' 

During  the  period  of  his  open  profligacy,  his 
conscience  was  ill  at  ease  ;  at  times  the  clanking 
of  Satan's  slavish  chains  in  which  he  was  hurrying 
to  destruction,  distracted  him.  The  stern  reality 
of  a  future  state  clouded  and  embittered  many  of 
those  moments  employed  in  gratifying  his  baser 
passions.  The  face  of  the  eventful  times  in  which 
he  lived  was  rapidly  changing ;  the  trammels  were 
loosened,  which,  with  atrocious  penalties,  had  fet- 
tered all  free  inquiry  into  religious  truth.  Puritan- 
ism began  to  walk  upright ;  and  as  the  restraints 
imposed  upon  Divine  truths  were  taken  off,  in  the 
same  proportion  restraints  were  imposed  upon  im- 
piety, profaneness,  and  debauchery.  A  ringleader 
in  all  wickedness  would  not  long  continue  without 
reproof,  either  personally,  or  as  seen  in  the  holy 
conduct  of  others.  Bunyan  very  properly  attri- 
buted to  a  gracious  God,  those  checks  of  conscience 
which  he  so  strongly  felt  eveu  while  he  was  ap- 
parently dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  '  The  Lord, 
even  in  my  childhood,  did  scare  and  affright  me 
with  fearful  dreams,  and  did  terrify  me  with 
dreadful  visions.'1  'I  often  wished  that  there  had 
been  no  hell,  or  that  I  had  been  a  devil  to  torment 
others.'  A  common  childish  but  demoniac  idea. 
His  mind  was  as  '  the  troubled  sea,  when  it  can- 
not rest,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt.'  '  A 
while  after,  these  terrible  dreams  did  leave  me  ; 
and  with  more  greediness,  according  to  the  strength 
of  nature,  I  did  let  loose  the  reins  of  my  lusts,  and 
delighted  in  all  transgression  against  the  law  of 
God.'  *  I  was  the  very  ringleader  of  all  the  youth 
that  kept  me  company,  into  all  manner  of  vice 
and  ungodliness.'" 

Dr.  Southey  and  others  have  attempted  to 
whiten  this  blackamore,  but  the  veil  that  they 
throw  over  him  is  so  transparent  that  it  cannot 
deceive  those  who  are  in  the  least  degree  spiritu- 
ally enlightened.  He  alleges  that  Bunyan,  in  his 
mad  career  of  vice  and  folly,  '  was  never  so  given 
over  to  a  reprobate  mind,''3  as  to  be  wholly  free 
from  compunctions  of  conscience.  This  is  the 
case  with  every  depraved  character  ;  but  he  goes 
further,  when  he  asserts  that  *  Bunyan's  heart 
never  was  hardened.'4  This  is  directly  opposed  to 
his  description  of  himself  : — '  I  found  within  me  a 
great  desire  to  take  my  fill  of  sin,  still  studying 
what  sin  was  yet  to  be  committed ;  and  I  made 
as  much  haste  as  I  could  to  fill  my  belly  with  its 
delicates,  lest  I  should  die  before  I  had  my  desire.' 


1  Grace  Abounding,  No.  5. 
3  Life,  p.  vii. 


2  Ibid,,  No.  8. 
4  Ibid.  p.  viii. 


He  thus  solemnly  adds,  '  In  these  things,  I  protest 
before  God,  I  lie  not,  neither  do  I  feign  this  sort 
of  speech ;  these  were  really,  strongly,  and  with  all 
my  heart,  my  desires  ;  the  good  Lord,  whose  mercy 
is  unsearchable,  forgive  me  my  transgressions.' 
The  whole  of  his  career,  from  childhood  to  man- 
hood, was,  '  According  to  the  course  of  this  world, 
according  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air, 
the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  dis- 
obedience.'  Ep.  ii.  2. 

These  reminiscences  are  alluded  to  in  the  pro- 
logue of  the  Holy  War  : — 

'  When  Mansoul  trampled  upon  tilings  Divine, 
And  wallowed  in  filth  as  doth  a  swine, 
Then  I  was  there,  and  did  rejoice  to  sec 
Diabolus  and  Mansoul  so  agree.' 

The  Laureate  had  read  this,  and  yet  considers  it 
the  language  of  a  heart  that  '  never  was  hard- 
ened.' He  says  that  'the  wickedness  of  the 
tinker  has  been  greatly  overcharged,  and  it  is 
taking  the  language  of  self-accusation  too  literally 
to  pronounce  of  John  Bunyan,  that  he  was  at  any 
time  depraved.  The  worst  of  what  he  was  in  his 
worst  days  is  to  be  expressed  in  a  single  word, 
the  full  meaning  of  which  no  circumlocution  can 
convey  ;  and  which,  though  it  may  hardly  be 
deemed  presentable  in  serious  composition,  I  shall 
use,  as  Bunyan  himself  (no  mealy-mouthed  writer) 
would  have  used  it,  had  it  in  his  days  borne  the 
same  acceptation  in  which  it  is  now  universally 
understood  ; — in  that  word  then,  he  had  been  a 
blackguard. 

The  very  head  and  front  of  his  offending 
Hath  this  extent — no  more.'  ° 

The  meaning  of  the  epithet  is  admirably  explained ; 
but  what  could  Dr.  Southey  imagine  possible  to 
render  such  a  character  more  vile  in  the  sight  of 
God,  or  a  greater  pest  to  society?  Is  there  any 
vicious  propensity,  the  gratification  of  which  is  not 
included  in  that  character  ?  Bunyan's  estimate  of 
his  immorality  and  profaneness  prior  to  his  conver- 
sion, was  not  made  by  comparing  himself  with  the 
infinitely  Holy  One,  but  he  measured  his  conduct  by 
that  of  his  more  moral  neighbours.  In  his  Jeru- 
salem Sinner  Saved,  he  pleads  with  great  sinners, 
the  outwardly  and  violently  profane  and  vicious, 
that  if  he  had  received  mercy,  and  had  become 
regenerated,  they  surely  ought  not  to  despair,  but 
to  seek  earnestly  for  the  same  grace.  He  thus 
describes  himself: — '  I  speak  by  experience;  I  was 
one  of  those  great  sin-breeders  ;  I  infected  all  the 
youth  of  the  town  where  I  was  born  ;  the  neigh- 
bours counted  me  so,  my  practice  proved  me  so  : 
wherefore,  Christ  Jesus  took  me  first ;  and,  taking 
me   first,    the    contagion   was  much   allayed    all 

5  Life,  pp.  xli.,  xlii. 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUN  VAX. 


tlic  town  over.  When  God  made  me  sigh,  they 
would  hearken,  and  inquiringly  say,  What's  the 
matter  with  John  ?  When  I  went  out  to  seek  the 
bread  of  life,  somo  of  them  would  follow,  and  the 
rest  be  put  into  a  muse  at  home.  Some  of  them, 
perceiving  that  God  had  mercy  upon  me,  came 
crying  to  him  for  mercy  too.'1  Can  any  one, 
in  the  face  of  such  language,  doubt  that  ho 
was  most  eminently  •  a  brand  snatched  from  the 
fire  ;'  a  pitchy  burning  brand,  known  and  seen 
as  such  by  all  who  witnessed  his  conduct  ?  He 
pointedly  exemplified  the  character  set  forth  by 
James,  '  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  a  world  of  iniquity, 
set  on  fire  of  hell,'  Ja.  m.  c  This  was  as  publicly 
known  before  his  conversion,  as  the  effects  of  the 
wondrous  change  were  openly  seen  in  his  Christian 
career  afterwards.  He  who,  when  convinced  of 
sin,  strained  his  eyes  to  see  the  distant  shining- 
light  over  the  wicket-gate,  after  he  had  gazed  upon 

'  The  wondrous  cross 

On  which  the  Prince  of  glory  died,' 

became  a  luminous  beacon,  to  attract  the  vilest  cha- 
racters to  seek  newness  of  life;  and  if  there  be 
hope  for  them,  no  one  ought  to  despair.  Far  be 
it  from  us  to  cloud  this  light,  or  to  tarnish  so 
conspicuous  an  example.  Like  a  Magdalene  or  a 
thief  on  the  cross,  his  case  may  be  exhibited  to 
encourage  hope  in  every  returning  prodigal.  Dur- 
ing this  period  of  his  childhood,  while  striving 
to  harden  his  heart  against  God,  many  were  the 
glimmerings  of  light  which  from  time  to  time 
directed  his  unwilling  eyes  to  a  dread  eternity. 
In  the  still  hours  of  the  night  '  in  a  dream  God 
opened '  his  ears  2 — the  dreadful  vision  was  that 
'  devils  and  wicked  spirits  laboured  to  draw  me 
away  with  them.'  These  thoughts  must  have  left 
a  deep  and  alarming  impression  upon  his  mind; 
for  he  adds,    'of  which  I  could  never  be  rid.'3 

The  author  of  his  life,  published  in  16ii2,  who 
was  one  of  his  personal  friends,  gives  the  following 
account  of  Bunyan's  profligacy,  and  his  checks  of 
conscience  : — '  He  himself  hath  often,  since  his 
conversion,  confessed  with  horror,  that  when  he 
was  but  a  child  or  stripling,  he  had  but  few  equals 
for  lying,  swearing,  and  blaspheming  God's  holy 
name  —  living  "without  God  in  the  world ;  the 
thoughts  of  which,  when  he,  by  the  light  of  Divine 
grace,  came  to  understand  his  dangerous  condi- 
tion, drew  many  showers  of  tears  from  his  sor- 
rowful eyes,  and  sighs  from  his  groaning  heart. 
The  first  thing  that  sensibly  touched  him  in  this 
his  unregenerate  state,  were  fearful  dreams,  and 
visions  of  the  night,  which  often  made  him  cry 
out  in  his  sleep,  and  alarm  the  house,  as  if  some- 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  79.         2  Job,  xxxiii.  15. 
3  Grace  Abounding,  No.  5,  vol.  i.,  p.  G. 


body  was  about  to  murder  him;  and  being  waked, 
he  would  start,  and  stare  about  him  with  such  a 
wildness,  as  if  some  real  apparition  had  yet  re- 
mained; and  generally  those  dreams  were  about 
evil  spirits,  in  monstrous  shapes  and  forms,  that 
presented  themselves  to  him  in  threatening  pos- 
tures, as  if  they  would  have  taken  him  away,  or 
torn  him  in  pieces.  At  some  times  they  seemed 
to  belch  flame,  at  other  times  a  continuous  smoke, 
with  horrible  noises  and  roaring.  Once  he  dreamed 
he  saw  the  face  of  the  heavens,  as  it  were,  all  on 
fire;  the  firmament  crackling  and  shivering  with  the 
noise  of  mighty  thunders,  and  an  archangel  flew 
in  the  midst  of  heaven,  sounding  a  trumpet,  and  a 
glorious  throne  was  seated  in  the  east,  whereon 
sat  one  in  brightness,  like  the  morning  star,  upon 
which  he,  thinking  it  was  the  end  of  the  world, 
fell  upon  his  knees,  and,  with  uplifted  hands 
towards  heaven,  cried,  0  Lord  God,  have  mercy 
upon  me!  What  shall  I  do,  the  day  of  judgment 
is  come,  and  I  am  not  prepared !  When  imme- 
diately he  heard  a  voice  behind  him,  exceeding 
loud,  saying,  Repent.  At  another  time  he  dreamed 
that  he  was  in  a  pleasant  place,  jovial  and  riot- 
ing, banqueting  aud  feasting  his  senses,  when  a 
mighty  earthquake  suddenly  rent  the  earth,  and 
made  a  wide  gap,  out  of  -which  came  bloody  flames, 
and  the  figures  of  men  tossed  up  in  globes  of 
fire,  and  falling  down  again  with  horrible  cries, 
shrieks,  and  execrations,  whilst  some  devils  that 
were  mingled  with  them,  laughed  aloud  at  their 
torments  ;  and  whilst  he  stood  trembling  at  this 
sight,  he  thought  the  earth  sunk  under  him,  and 
a  circle  of  flame  enclosed  him  ;  but  when  he 
fancied  he  was  just  at  the  point  to  perish,  one 
in  white  shining  raiment  descended,  and  plucked 
him  out  of  that  dreadful  place  ;  whilst  the  devils 
cried  after  him,  to  leave  him  with  them,  to  take 
the  just  punishment  his  sins  had  deserved,  yet  he 
escaped  the  danger,  and  leaped  for  joy  when  he 
awoke  and  found  it  was  a  dream.' 

Such  dreams  as  these  fitted  him  in  after  life  to 
be  the  glorious  dreamer  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
in  which  a  dream  is  told  which  doubtless  embodies 
some  of  those  which  terrified  him  in  the  night 
visions  of  his  youth. 

In  the  Interpreter's  house  he  is  'led  into  a  chamber  where 
there  was  one  rising  out  of  bed,  and  as  he  put  on  his  raiment 
he  shook  and  trembled.  Then  said  Christian,  Why  doth  this  man 
thus  tremble  ?  The  Interpreter  then  bid  him  tell  to  Christian 
the  reason  of  his  so  doing.  So  he  began  and  said,  This  night, 
as  I  was  in  my  sleep  I  dreamed,  and  behold  the  heavens  grew 
exceeding  black ;  also  it  thundered  aud  lightened  in  most 
fearful  wise,  that  it  put  me  into  an  agony.  So  I  looked  up  in 
my  dream,  and  saw  the  clouds  rack  at  an  uuusual  rate,  upon 
which  I  heard  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  saw  also  a  man 
sit  upon  a  cloud,  attended  with  the  thousands  of  heaven — they 
were  all  in  flaming  fire ;  also  the  heavens  were  in  a  burning 
flame.     I  heard  then  a  voice  saying,  "  Arise,  ye  dead,  and  come 


VI 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


to  judgment ;"  and  with  that  the  rocks  rent,  the  graves  opened, 
and  the  dead  that  were  therein  came  forth.  Some  of  them 
were  exceeding  glad,  and  looked  upward ;  and  some  sought  to 
hide  themselves  under  the  mountains.  Then  I  saw  the  man 
that  sat  upon  the  cloud  open  the  book,  and  bid  the  world  draw 
near.  Yet  there  was,  by  reason  of  a  fierce  flame  which  issued 
out  and  came  from  before  him,  a  convenient  distance  betwixt 
him  and  them,  as  betwixt  the  judge  and  prisoners  at  the  bar. 
I  heard  it  also  proclaimed,  "  Gather  together  the  tares,  the 
chaff,  and  stubble,  and  cast  them  into  the  burning  lake ;"  and 
with  that  the  bottomless  pit  opened  just  whereabout  I  stood, 
out  of  the  mouth  of  which  there  came,  in  an  abundant  manner, 
smoke  and  coals  of  fire,  with  hideous  noises.  It  was  also  said, 
"  Gather  my  wheat  into  the  garner ;"  and  with  that  I  saw 
many  catched  up  and  carried  away  into  the  clouds,  but  I  was 
left  behind.  I  also  sought  to  hide  myself,  but  I  could  not, 
for  the  man  that  sat  upon  the  cloud  still  kept  his  eye  upon  me  ; 
my  sins  also  came  into  my  mind,  and  my  conscieuce  did  accuse 
me  on  every  side.     Upon  that  I  awaked  from  my  sleep.' 

No  laboured  composition  could  have  produced 
such  a  dream  as  this.  It  flows  iu  such  dream-like 
order  as  would  lead  us  to  infer,  that  the  author 
who  narrates  it  had,  when  a  boj,  heard  the  twenty- 
fifth  chapter  of  Matthew  read  at  church,  and  the 
solemn  impression  following  him  at  night  assisted 
in  producing  a  dream  which  stands,  and  perhaps 
will  ever  stand,  unrivalled. 

Awful  as  must  have  been  these  impressions 
upon  his  imagination,  they  were  soon  thrown  off, 
and  the  mad  youth  rushed  on  in  his  desperate 
career  of  vice  and  folly.  Is  he  then  left  to  fill  up 
the  measure  of  his  iniquities  ?  No,  the  Lord  has  a 
great  work  for  him  to  do.  His  hand  is  not  short- 
ened that  he  cannot  save.  Bunyan  has  to  be  pre- 
pared for  his  work;  and  if  terrors  will  not  stop  him, 
manifested  mercies  in  judgments  are  to  be  tried. 

'  God  did  not  utterly  leave  me,  but  followed  me 
still,  not  now  with  convictions,  but  judgments ;  yet 
such  as  were  mixed  with  mercy.  For  once  I  fell 
into  a  creek  of  the  sea,  and  hardly  escaped  drown- 
ing. Another  time  I  fell  out  of  a  boat  into  Bed- 
ford river,  but  mercy  yet  preserved  me  alive. 
Besides,  another  time,  being  in  the  field  with  one 
of  my  companions,  it  chanced  that  an  adder  passed 
over  the  highway,  so  I,  having  a  stick  in  my  hand, 
struck  her  over  the  back;  and  having  stunned 
her,  I  forced  open  her  mouth  with  my  stick,  and 
plucked  her  sting  out  with  my  fingers;  by  which  act, 
had  not  God  been  merciful  unto  me,  I  might  by 
my  desperateness  have  brought  myself  to  my  end. 

'  This  also  have  I  taken  notice  of,  with  thanks- 
giving. When  I  was  a  soldier,  I,  with  others, 
were  drawn  out  to  go  to  such  a  place  to  besiege  it ; 
but  when  I  was  just  ready  to  go,  one  of  the  com- 
pany desired  to  go  iu  my  room,  to  which,  when  I 
had  consented,  he  took  my  place ;  and  coming  to 
the  siege,  as  he  stood  sentinel,  he  was  shot  into 
the  head  with  a  musket  bullet,  and  died.'  l 

1  Life  appended  to  the  fust  and  second  editions  of  the  forged 
third  part  of  tilgrim's  Progress. 


In  addition  to  these  mercies  recorded  by  his 
own  pen,  one  of  his  friends  asserts  that  he  acknow- 
ledged his  deep  obligations  to  Divine  mercy  for 
being  saved  when  he  fell  into  an  exceeding  deep 
pit,  as  he  was  travelling  in  the  dark ;  for  having 
been  preserved  iu  sickness;  and  also  for  providen- 
tial goodness  that  such  a  sinner  was  sustained 
with  food  and  raiment,  even  to  his  own  admiration. 

Bunyan  adds,  'Here  were  judgments  and  mercy, 
but  neither  of  them  did  awaken  my  soul  to  righ- 
teousness ;  wherefore  I  sioned  still,  and  grew  more 
and  more  rebellious  against  God,  and  careless  of 
mine  own  salvation.'  2 

That  such  a  scape-grace  should  enter  the  army 
can  occasion  no  surprise.  His  robust,  hardy  frame, 
used  to  exposure  in  all  weathers — his  daring 
courage,  as  displayed  in  his  perilous  dealing  with 
the  adder,  bordering  upon  fool-hardiness — his 
mental  depravity  and  immoral  habits,  fitted  him 
for  all  the  military  glory  of  rapine  and  desolation. 
In  his  Grace  Abounding  he  expressly  states  that 
this  took  place  before  his  marriage,  while  his 
earliest  biographer  places  this  event  some  years 
after  his  marriage,  and  even  argues  upon  it,  as 
a  reason  why  he  became  a  soldier,  that  «  when  the 
unnatural  civil  war  came  on,  finding  little  or 
nothing  to  do  to  support  himself  and  small  family, 
he,  as  many  thousands  did,  betook  himself  to 
arms.'3  The  same  account  states  that,  '  in  June, 
1645,  being  at  the  siege  of  Leicester,  he  was 
called  out  to  be  one  who  was  to  make  a  violent 
attack  upon  the  town,  vigorously  defended  by  the 
King's  forces  against  the  Parliamentarians,  but 
appearing  to  the  officer  who  was  to  command 
them  to  be  somewhat  awkward  in  handling  his 
arms,  another  voluntarily,  and  as  it  were  thrust 
himself  into  his  place,  who,  having  the  same  post 
that  was  designed  Mr.  Bunyan,  met  his  fate  by  a 
carbine  -  shot  from  the  wall ;  but  this  little  or 
nothing  startled  our  too  secure  sinner  at  that  time; 
for  being  now  in  an  army  where  wickedness 
abounded,  he  was  the  more  hardened.' 

Thus  we  find  Bunyan  engaged  in  military 
affairs.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  he  was  a 
soldier  prior  to  his  marriage,  and  that  he   was 


-  Grace  Abounding,  Nos.  12-14,  vol.  i.,  p.  7.  How  do 
these  hair-breadth  escapes  illustrate  the  unerring  providence  of 
God,  and  the  short-sightedness  of  even  pious  Christians.  It 
is  easy  to  imagine  the  exclamations  of  a  reflecting  character 
when  hearing  of  the  marvellous  escapes  of  this  wicked  youth. 
'Dark  providences!  the  good  and  benevolent  are  snatched 
away;  but  such  a  plague  as  this  has  his  life  preserved  to 
pester  us  still.  Short-sighted  mortal,  "  shall  not  the  Judge  of 
all  the  earth  do  right  ?" '  No  life  in  the  British  empire  was  so 
precious  in  the  sight  and  gracious  purposes  of  God,  as  that 
of  the  poor  depraved  lad ;  which  was  thus  preserved  by  the 
special  care  of  Divine  providence. 

3  J.ife  appended  to  part  third  of  Pilgrim's  Progress,  109?. 
This  is  omitted  from  the  third  edition  (1700),  and  all  the  sub- 
sequent ones. 


.MEMOIR   OF   JOHN    BUXYAX. 


present  at  the  siege  of  Leicester;  but  it  is  some- 
what strange  (if  true)  that  lie  should  have  preferred 
the  Parliamentary  to  the  Royal  army.  Although 
this  is  a  question  that  cannot  be  positively  decided 
without  further  evidence  than  has  yet  been  dis- 
covered, there  arc  strong  reasons  for  thinking  that 
so  loyal  a  man  joined  the  Royal  army,  and  not  that 
of  the  Republicans. 

The  army  into  which  Bunyan  entered  is  de- 
scribed as  being  'where  wickedness  abounded,'  but, 
according  to  Hume,  in  this  year  the  Republican 
troops  were  generally  pious  men. 

Bunyan's  loyalty  was  so  remarkable  as  to  ap- 
pear to  he  natural  to  him  ;  for  even  after  he  had 
so  severely  suffered  from  the  abuse  of  kingly  power, 
in  interfering  with  the  Divine  prerogative  of  ap- 
pointing modes  of  worship,  he,  who  feared  the 
face  of  no  man — who  never  wrote  a  line  to  curry 
favour  with  any  man  or  class  of  men — thus  ex- 
presses bis  loyal  feelings — '  I  do  confess  myself 
one  of  the  old-fashioned  professors,  that  covet  to 
fear  God,  and  honour  the  king.  I  also  am  for 
blessing  of  them  that  curse  me,  for  doing  good  to 
them  that  hate  me,  and  for  praying  for  them  that 
desnitefully  use  me  and  persecute  me  ;  and  have 
had  more  peace  in  the  practice  of  these  things 
than  all  the  world  are  aware  of.'  •  Pray  for  the 
long  life  of  the  king.'  *  Pray  that  God  would 
discover  all  plots  and  conspiracies  against  his  per- 
son and  government.'1  *  Will  you  rebel  against 
the  king  ?  is  a  word  that  shakes  the  -world.'2 
'  Pray  for  all  that  are  in  authority  ;  reproach  not 
the  governor,  he  is  set  over  thee  ;  all  his  ways  are 
God's,  either  for  thy  help  or  the  trial  of  thy  graces 
— this  is  duty,  will  render  thee  lovely  to  thy 
friends,  terrible  to  thine  enemies,  serviceable  as  a 
Christian.'3  'Let  kings  have  that  fear,  honour, 
reverence,  worship  that  is  due  to  their  place,  their 
office  and  dignity.'  '  I  speak  it  to  show  my 
loyalty  to  the  king,  and  my  love  to  my  fellow-sub- 
jects.'1 With  such  proofs  of  his  peaceful  submis- 
sion to  government  in  all  things  that  touched  not 
the  prerogatives  of  God ;  it  would  have  been 
marvellous  indeed  if  he  had  taken  up  arms 
against  his  king.  His  infatuated  delight  in 
swearing,  and  roisterous  habits,  were  ill  suited 
to  the  religious  restraints  of  the  Parliament- 
arians, while  they  would  render  him  a  high  prize 
to  Rupert's  dragoons.  Add  to  tln3,  the  remark- 
able fact,  that  Leicester  was  besieged  and  stormed 
with  terrible  slaughter  by  the  king,  but  not  by 
the  army  of  the  Parliament.  The  taking  of 
Leicester  by  the  king  in  person  was  attended 
with  great  cruelties.  The  abbey  was  burnt  by 
the   cavaliers.     Rupert's  black  flag  was  hoisted 


1  Vol.  ii,  p.  74.       -  Vol.  i.,  p.  732.      3  Vol.  ii.,  p.  JS8. 
4  Vol.  ii.,  p.  7UCJ;  ii.,  p.  45;  ii.,  601. 


on  the  gate  which  had  been  treacherously  given  u;>. 
Every  Scotchman  found  in  the  town  was  mur- 
dered. Tho  mace  and  town  seals  were  carried  off 
as  plunder  ;  and,  if  the  account  given  by  Thoresby 
in  his  History  of  Leicester  is  correct,  the  scene  of 
carnage  was  quite  enough  to  sicken  Bunyan  of  a 
military  life.  He  knew  the  mode  in  which  plun- 
der taken  from  the  bodies  of  the  slain  was  divided 
by  the  conquerors  :  — 

'  Or  as  the  soldiers  give  unto 
Ea<  h  man  the  share  and  lot, 
"Which  they  hy  dint  of  sword  have  won, 
From  their  most  daring  foe; 
While  he  lies  by  as  still  as  sto    , 
Xot  knowing  what  they  do.'  B 

1  The  king's  forces  having  made  their  batter!:?, 
stormed  Leicester;  those  within  made  stout  re- 
sistance, but  some  of  them  betrayed  one  of  the 
gates  ;  the  women  of  the  town  laboured  iu  making 
up  the  breaches,  and  in  great  danger.  The  king's 
forces  having  entered  the  town,  had  a  hot  encoun- 
ter in  the  market-place  ;  and  many  of  them  were 
slain  by  shot  out  of  the  windows,  that  they  gave 
no  quarter,  but  hanged  some  of  the  committee,  and 
cut  others  to  pieces.  Some  letters  say  that  tho 
kennels  ran  down  with  blood;  Colonel  Gray  the 
governor,  and  Captain  Hacker,  were  wounded 
and  taken  prisoners,  and  very  many  of  the  garri- 
son were  put  to  the  sword,  and  the  town  miserably 
plundered.  The  king's  forces  killed  divers  who 
prayed  quarter,  and  put  divers  women  to  the  sword/' 
and  other  women  and  children  they  turned  naked 
into  the  streets,  and  many  they  ravished.  They 
hanged  Mr.  Reynor  and  Mr.  Sawyer  in  cold  blood; 
and  at  Wighton  they  smothered  Mrs.  Barlow  es,  a 
minister's  wife,  and  her  children.'7 

Lord  Clarendon  admits  the  rapine  and  pi 
and  that  the  king  regretted  that  some  of  his  friends 
suffered  with  the  rest.8  Humphrey  Brown  deposed 
that  he  was  present  when  the  garrison,  having  sur- 
rendered upon  a  promise  of  quarter,  he  saw  the 
king's  soldiers  strip  and  wound  the  prisoners,  and 
heard  the  king  say — 'cut  them  more,  for  they  arc 
mine  enemies.'  A  national  collection  was  made  for 
the  sufferers,  by  an  ordinance  bearing  date  the  2Sth 
October,  1645,  which  states  that — '  Whereas  it  is 
very  well  known  what  miseries  befel  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  town  and  county  of  Leicester,  when 
the  king's  army  took  Leicester,  by  plundering  the 
said  inhabitants,  not  only  of  their  wares  in  their 
shops,  but  also  all  their  household  goods,  and  their 
apparel  from  their  backs,  both  of  men,  women,  and 
children,  not  sparing,  in  that  kind,  infants  in  their 

6  Vol.  iii.,p.  727;  v.  7,  8. 

6  The  women  were  remarkably  active  in  defending  tl.c 
town. 

7  Moresby  s  Leicester,  tto,  p.  12S. 

8  Ilist.  of  Rebellion,  edition  171.3,  vol.  ii.,  \ 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


cradles  ;  and,  by  violent  courses  and  tortures,  com- 
pelled them  to  discover  whatsoever  they  had  con- 
cealed or  hid,  and  after  all  they  imprisoned  their 
persons,  to  the  undoing  of  the  tradesmen,  and  the 
ruin  of  many  of  the  country. ' 

Can  we  wonder  that  '  the  king  was  abused  as 
a  barbarian  and  a  murderer,  for  having  put  num- 
bers to  death  in  cold  blood  after  the  garrison  had 
surrendered  ;  and  for  hanging  the  Parliament's 
committee,  and  some  Scots  found  in  that  town  ?' 
The  cruelties  practised  in  the  king's  presence  were 
signally  punished.  He  lost  709  men  on  that  oc- 
casion, and  it  infused  new  vigour  into  the  Parlia- 
ment's army.  The  battle  of  Naseby  was  fought 
a  few  days  after  ;  the  numbers  of  the  contending 
forces  were  nearly  equal  ;  the  royal  troops  were 
veterans,  commanded  by  experienced  officers ;  but 
the  God  of  armies  avenged  the  innocent  blood  shed 
in  Leicester,  and  the  royal  army  was  cut  to  pieces; 
carriages,  cannon,  the  king's  cabinet,  full  of  trea- 
sonable correspondence,  were  taken,  and  from  that 
day  he  made  feeble  fight,  and  soon  lost  his  crown 
and  his  life.  The  conquerors  marched  to  Leicester, 
which  surrendered  by  capitulation.  Heath,  in  his 
Chronicle,  asserts  that  '  no  life  was  lost  at  the  re- 
taking of  Leicester.'  Many  of  Bunyan's  sayings 
and  proverbs  are  strongly  tinged  with  the  spirit  of 
Rupert's  dragoons — '  as  we  say,  blood  up  to  the 
cars.'1  '  What  can  be  the  meaning  of  this  (trum- 
peters), they  neither  sound  boot  and  saddle,  nor 
horse  and  away,  nor  a  charge  ?  '2  In  his  allegories 
when  he  alludes  to  fighting,  it  is  with  the  sword 
and  not  with  the  musket  ;3  '  rub  up  man,  put  on 
thy  harness.'4  'The  father's  sword  in  the  hand 
of  the  sucking  child  is  not  able  to  conquer  a  foe.'5 

Considering  his  singular  loyalty,  which,  during 
the  French  Revolution,  was  exhibited  as  a  pattern 
to  Dissenters  by  an  eminent  Baptist  minister;6  con- 
sidering also  his  profligate  character  and  military 
sayings,  it  is  very  probable  that  Bunyan  was  in 
the  king's  army  in  1645,  being  about  seventeen 
years  of  age.  It  was  a  finishing  school  to  the 
hardened  sinner,  which  enabled  him,  in  his  account 
of  the  Holy  War,  so  well  to  describe  every  filthy 
lane  and  dirty  street  in  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

Whether  Bunyan  left  tho  army  when  Charles 
was  routed  at  the  battle  of  Naseby,  or  was  dis- 
charged, is  not  known.  He  returned  to  his  native 
town  full  of  military  ideas,  which  he  used  to  ad- 
vantage in  his  Holy  War.  He  was  not  reformed, 
but  hardened  in  sin,  and,  although  at  times 
alarmed  with  convictions  of  the  danger  of  his  soul, 
yet  in  the  end,  the  flesh  pleading  powerfully,  it 
prevailed ;     and  he  made  a  resolution  to  indulge 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  661.  2  Vol.  iii.,  p.  357. 

s  Vol.  iii.,  p.  113,  358.     i  Vol.  i.,  p.  720.     6  Vol.  i.,  p.  694. 
0  The  Political  Sentiments  of  John  Banyan,  re-published 
by  John  Martin,  1798. 


himself  in  such  carnal  delights  and  pleasures  as  ho 
was  accustomed  to,  or  that  fell  in  his  way.  '  His 
neglecting  his  business,  and  following  gaming  and 
sports,  to  put  melancholy  thoughts  out  of  his 
mind,  which  he  could  not  always  do,  had  rendered 
him  very  poor  and  despicable.'7 

In  this  forlorn  and  miserable  state,  he  was 
induced,  by  the  persuasion  of  friends,  under 
the  invisible  guidance  of  God,  to  enter  into  the 
marriage  state.  Such  a  youth,  then  only  twenty 
years  of  age,  would  naturally  be  expected  to 
marry  some  young  woman  as  hardened  as  him- 
self, but  he  made  a  very  different  choice.  His 
earliest  biographer  says,  with  singular  simplicity, 
'  his  poverty,  and  irregular  course  of  life,  made 
it  very  difficult  for  him  to  get  a  wife  suitable  to 
his  inclination ;  and  because  none  that  were  rich 
would  yield  to  his  allurements,  he  found  himself 
constrained  to  marry  one  without  any  fortune, 
though  very  virtuous,  loving,  and  conformably 
obedient  and  obliging,  being  born  of  good,  honest, 
godly  parents,  who  had  instructed  her,  as  well  as 
they  were  able,  in  the  ways  of  truth  and  saving 
knowledge.'3  The  idea  of  his  seeking  a  rich  wife 
is  sufficiently  droll ;  he  must  have  been  naturally 
a  persuasive  lover,  to  have  gained  so  good  a  help- 
mate. They  were  not  troubled  with  sending  cards, 
cake,  or  gloves,  nor  with  the  ceremony  of  receiving 
the  visits  of  their  friends  in  state  ;  for  he  says, 
that  '  This  woman  and  I  came  together  as  poor  as 
poor  might  be,  not  having  so  much  household  stuff 
as  a  dish  or  spoon  betwixt  us  both.'9  His  wife  had 
two  books,  Tlie  Plain  Mans  Pathway  to  Heaven, 
and  The  Practice  of  Piety ;  but  what  was  of  more 
importance  than  wealth  or  household  stuff,  she  had 
that  seed  sown  in  her  heart  which  no  thief  could 
steal.10  She  enticed  and  persuaded  him  to  read 
those  books.  To  do  this  he  by  application  'again 
recovered  his  reading,  which  he  had  almost  lost.' 
His  wife  became  an  unspeakable  blessing  to  him. 
She  presents  a  pattern  to  any  woman,  who,  having 
neglected  the  apostolic  injunction  not  to  be  un- 
equally yoked,  finds  herself  under  the  dominion 
of  a  swearing  dare  devil.  It  affords  a  lovely  proof 
of  the  insinuating  benign  favour  of  female  influ- 
ence.    This  was  the  more  surprising,  as  he  says, 


7  Life  of  Bunyan,  1692,  p.  12.         8  Ibid.,  1692,  p.  13. 

9  Vol.  i.,  p.  7. 

10  The  Pathway  to  Heaven  is  the  work  of  that  pious  puritan 
Dent,  and  is  full  of  those  striking  illustrations  which  were 
admirably  adapted  to  prepare  Bunyan  for  writing  his  allegories. 
A  copy  with  the  name  i\la  Bunyann,  written  on  the  title  page, 
has  long  been  in  the  editor's  library.  We  give  a  facsimile  of 
the  writing,  as  it  has  been  supposed  that  of  Bunyan.    This  is 


/*2&  Cs&yryy.a^r>7t- 


very  doubtful ;  it  appears  more  like  a  woman's  hand ;  but, 
if  it  is  the  name  of  Airs.  Bunyan,  then  it  indicates  that  his 
daughter  Mary,  baptized  20th  July,  1650,  was  called  after  her. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


*  the  thoughts  of  religion  were  very  previous  to 
ine,'  and  when  '  books  that  concerned  Christian 
piety  were  read  in  my  hearing,  it  was  as  it  were  a 
prison  to  me.'  In  spite  of  all  obstacles,  his  rugged 
heart  was  softened  by  her  tenderness  and  obedi- 
ence, he  'keeping  on  the  old  course,'1  she  upon 
every  proper  season  teaching  him  how  her  father's 
piety  secured  his  own  and  his  family's  happiness. 
Here  was  no  upbraiding,  no  snubbing,  no  curtain 
lectures;  all  was  affectionate,  amiable  mildness. 
At  first,  he  became  occasionally  alarmed  for  his 
soul's  salvation;  then  with  the  thought  of  having 
sinned  away  the  day  of  grace,  he  plunged  again 
into  sin  with  greediness ;  anon  a  faint  hope  of 
mercy  would  fill  him  with  fear  and  trembling. 
But  this  leads  us  to  the  wondrous  narrative  of  his 
new  birth. 


THE  SECOND  PERIOD. 

THE   INTERNA!  CONFLICT,    OR   BUNYAN's    CONVICTIONS  AND 
CONVERSION. 

All  nature  is  progressive ;  if  an  infant  was  sud- 
denly to  arrive  at  manhood,  how  idiotic  and  dan- 
gerous he  would  be  !  A  long  training  is  essential 
to  fit  the  human  being  for  the  important  duties  of 
life  ;  and  just  so  is  it  in  the  new  birth  to  spiritual 
existence — first  a  babe,  then  the  young  man  ;  at 
length  the  full  stature,  and  at  last  the  experienced 
Christian. 

The  narrative  of  Bunyan's  progress  in  his  con- 
version is,  without  exception,  the  most  astonishing 
of  any  that  has  been  published.  It  is  well  calcu- 
lated to  excite  the  profoundest  investigation  of 
the  Christian  philosopher.  Whence  came  those 
sudden  suggestions,  those  gloomy  fears,  those 
heavenly  rays  of  joy  ?  Much  learning  certainly 
did  not  make  him  mad.  The  Christian  dares  not 
attribute  his  intense  feelings  to  a  distempered 
brain.  Whence  came  the  invisible  power  that 
struck  Paul  from  his  horse  ?  Who  was  it  that 
geared  Job  with  dreams,  and  terrified  him  with 
visions  ?  What  messenger  of  Satan  buffeted 
Paul  ?  Who  put  '  a  new  song  '  into  the  mouth 
of  David  ?  We  have  no  space  in  this  short  memoir 
to  attempt  the  drawing  a  line  between  convictions 
of  sin  and  the  terrors  of  a  distempered  brain. 
Bunyan's  opinions  upon  this  subject  are  deeply 
interesting,  and  are  fully  developed  in  his  Holy 
War.  The  capabilities  of  the  soul  to  entertain 
vast  armies  of  thoughts,  strong  and  feeble,  repre- 
sented as  men,  women,  and  children,  are  so  great 
as  almost  to  perplex  the  strongest  understanding. 
All  these  multitudes  of  warriors  are  the  innume- 
rable thoughts — the  strife — in  one  soul.  Upon 
such  a  subject  an   interesting  volume   might  be 


1  Lfe  cfBunyan,  1G91,  p.  13. 


written.  But  we  must  fix  our  attention  upon 
the  poor  tinker  who  was  the  subject  of  this 
wondrous  war. 

The  tender  and  wise  efforts  of  Mrs.  Bunyan  to 
reclaim  her  husband,  were  attended  by  the  Divine 
blessing,  and  soon  led  to  many  resolutions,  on  his 
part,  to  curb  his  sinful  propensities  and  to  pro- 
mote an  outward  reformation  ;  his  first  effort  was 
regularly  to  attend  Divine  worship. 

He  says,  '  I  fell  in  very  eagerly  with  the  religion  ot  the 
times,  to  wit,  to  go  to  church  twice  a-day,  and  that  too  with 
the  foremost ;  and  there  should  very  devoutly  both  say  and 
sing  as  others  did,  yet  retaining  my  wicked  life;  but  withal,  I 
was  so  overrun  with  a  spirit  of  superstition,  that  I  adored,  and 
that  with  great  devotion,  even  all  things,  both  the  high-place, 
priest,  clerk,  vestment,  service,  and  what  else  belonging  to  the 
Church ;  counting  all  things  holy  that  were  therein  contained, 
and  especially,  the  priest  and  clerk  most  happy,  and  without 
doubt  greatly  blessed,  because  they  were  the  servants,  as  I  then 
thought,2  of  God,  and  were  principal  in  the  holy  temple,  to  do 
his  work  therein.  '  This  conceit  grew  so  strong  in  little  time 
upon  my  spirit,  that  had  I  but  seen  a  priest,  though  never  so 
sordid  and  debauched  in  his  life,3  I  should  find  my  spirit  fall 
under  him,  reverence  him,  and  knit  unto  him;  yea,  I  thought, 
for  the  love  I  did  bear  unto  them,  supposing  they  were  the 
ministers  of  God,  I  could  have  lain  down  at  their  feet,  and  have 
been  trampled  upon  by  them ;  their  name,  their  garb,  and  work 
did  so  intoxicate  and  bewitch  me.' 

All  this  took  place  at  the  time  when  The  Booh 
of  Common  Prayer,  having  been  said  to  occasion 
'  manifold  inconveniency,'  was,  by  an  Act  of 
Parliament,  '  abolished,'4  and  by  a  subsequent 
Act5  prohibited,  under  severe  penalties,  from  being 
publicly  used.  The  '  manifold  inconveniences'  to 
which  the  Act  refers,  arose  from  differences  of 
opinion  as  to  the  propriety  of  the  form  which  had 
been  enforced,  heightened  by  the  enormous  cruel- 
ties practised  upon  multitudes  who  refused  to  use 
it.  Opposition  to  the  English  Liturgy  was  more 
combined  in  Scotland,  by  a  covenant  entered  into, 
June  20,  1580,  by  the  king,  lords,  nobles,  and 
people,  against  Popery ;  and  upon  Archbishop 
Laud's  attempt,  in  1637,  to  impose  the  service-book 
upon  our  northern  neighbours,  tumults  and  blood- 
shed ensued  ;  until,  in  1643,  a  new  and  very  solemn 
league  and  covenant  was  entered  into,  which,  in 
1645,  extended  its  influence  to  England,  being  sub- 
scribed by  thousands  of  our  best  citizens,  with  many 
of  the  nobility — 'wherein  we  all  subscribe,  and  each 
with  his  own  hands  lifted  up  to  the  Most  High 
God,  doe  swear;'  that  being  the  mode  of  taking  an 
oath,  instead  of  kissing  the  cover  of  a  book,  as 
is  now  practised.  To  the  cruel  and  intemperate 
measures  of  Laud,  and  the  zeal  of  Charles,  for 
priestly  domination  over  conscience,  may  be  justly 


'-'  This  is  a  solemn  consideration ;  many  profess  to  serve 
God  while  they  are  bond-slaves  to  sin;  and  many  are  servants 
in  his  family  who  are  not  sons,  nor  heirs,  of  heaven.  Ulessed 
are  those  who  arc  both  servants  and  sons. 

3  Vol.  i.,  p.  7,  8.      *  Jan.  3,  1644-5.     *  Aug.  23,  1015. 
I 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUNYAN. 


attributed  the  wars  which  desolated  the  country, 
while  the  solemn  league  and  covenant  brought 
an  overwhelming  force  to  aid  the  Parliament  in 
redressing  the  grievances  of  the  kingdom.  Dur- 
ing the  Commonwealth  there  was  substituted,  in 
place  of  the  Common  Prayer,  A  Directory  for  the 
Publigve  Worship  of  God,  and  the  uniformity  which 
was  enjoined  in  it  was  like  that  of  the  Presbyte- 
rians and  Dissenters  of  the  present  day.  The 
people  having  assembled,  and  been  exhorted  to 
reverence  and  humility,  joined  the  preacher  in 
prayer.  lie  then  read  portions  of  Scripture,  with 
or  without  an  exposition,  as  he  judged  it  neces- 
sary, but  not  so  as  to  render  the  service  tedious. 
After  singing  a  psalm,  the  minister  prayed,  lead- 
ing the  people  to  mourn  under  a  sense  of  sin,  and 
to  hunger  and,  thirst  after  the  grace  of  God,  in 
Jesus  Christ ;  an  outline  or  abstract  is  given  of 
the  subject  of  public  prayer,  and  similar  instruc- 
tions are  given  as  to  the  sermon  or  pai'aphrase. 
Immediately  after  the  sermon,  prayer  was  again 
offered  up,  and  after  the  outline  that  is  given 
of  this  devotional  exercise,  it  is  noted,  '  And 
because  the  prayer  which  Christ  taught  his  dis- 
ciples, is  not  only  a  pattern  of  prayer,  but  itself  a 
most  comprehensive  prayer,  we  recommend  it  also 
to  be  used  in  the  prayers  of  the  Church.'  This 
beiug  ended,  a  psalm  was  sung,  and  the  minister 
dismissed  the  congregation  with  a  solemn  bless- 
ing.1 Some  of  the  clergy  continued  the  use  of 
prayers,  contained  in  the  liturgy,  reciting,  instead 
of  reading  them — a  course  that  was  not  objected 
to.  This  was  the  form  of  service  which  struck 
Bunyan  with  such  awe  and  reverence,  leaving  a 
very  solemn  impression  upon  his  mind,  which  the 
old  form  of  common  prayer  had  never  produced. 

Bunyan  was  fond  of  athletic  sports,  bell-ringing, 
and  dancing  ;  and  in  these  he  had  indulged,  so  far 
as  his  worldly  calling  allowed.  Charles  I.,  whether 
to  promote  Popery — to  divert  his  subjects  from 
political  grievances — or  to  punish  the  Puritans,  had 
endeavoured  to  drown  their  serious  thoughts  in  a 
vortex  of  dissipation,  by  re-publishing  the  Book 
of  &porls>  t0  be  used  on  Sundays.  That  '  after 
Divine  service  our  good  people  be  not  disturbed, 
letted,  or  discouraged  from  dancing,  cither  men  or 
women  ;  archery,  leaping,  vaulting,  or  any  other 
such  harmless  recreations ;  May  games,  Whitsun- 
ales,  Morris  dances,  May  poles,  and  other  sports.' 
But  this  was  not  all,  for  every  '  Puritan  and  Pre- 
cisian was  to  be  constrained  to  conformity  with 
these  sports,  or  to  leave  their  country.'  The  same 
severe  penalty  was  enforced  upon  every  clergyman 
who  refused  to  read  from  his  pulpit  the  Book  of 
Sports,  and  to  persuade  the  people  thus  to  dese- 
crate   the    Lord's-day.       •  Many   hundred    godly 


4toEdit.,  1641. 


ministers  were  suspended  from  their  ministry, 
sequestered,  driven  from  their  livings,  excommu- 
nicated, prosecuted  in  the  high  commission  court, 
and  forced  to  leave  the  kingdom  for  not  publishing 
this  declaration.  '2  A  little  gleam  of  heavenly  light 
falls  upon  those  dark  and  gloomy  times,  from  the 
melancholy  fact  that  nearly  eight  hundred  conscien- 
tious clergymen  were  thus  wickedly  persecuted. 
This  was  one  of  the  works  of  Laud,  who  out- 
bonnered  Bonner  himself  in  his  dreadful  career 
of  cruelty,  while  making  havoc  of  the  church  of 
Christ.  Even  transportation  for  refusing  obedience 
to  such  diabolical  laws  was  not  the  greatest  penalty ; 
in  some  cases  it  was  followed  by  the  death  of  the 
offender.  The  punishments  inflicted  for  nonconfor- 
mity were  accompanied  by  the  most  refined  and 
barbarous  cruelties.  Still  many  of  the  learned 
bowed  their  necks  to  this  yoke  with  abject  servility: 
thus,  Robert  Powell,  speaking  of  the  Boole  of  Sports, 
says,  '  Needless  is  it  to  argue  or  dispute  for  that 
which  authority  hath  commanded,  and  most  insuf- 
ferable insolence  to  speak  or  rorite  against  it.'3  These 
Sunday  sports,  published  by  Charles  I.,  inl633,had 
doubtless  aided  in  fostering  Bunyan's  bad  conduct 
in  his  youthful  days.  In  1644,  when  The  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  was  abolished,  an  Act  was  passed 
for  the  better  observance  of  the  Lord's-day  ;  all 
persons  were  prohibited  on  that  day  to  use  any 
wrestlings,  shooting,  bowling,  ringing  of  bells  for 

O     7  O7  O7  OO 

pastime,  masques,  wakes,  church-ales,  dancing, 
game,  sports  or  pastime  whatever  ;'  and  that  '  the 
Book  of  Sports  shall  be  seized,  and  publicly  burnt.' 
During  the  civil  war  this  Act  does  not  appear  to 
have  been  strictly  enforced;  for,  four  years  after  it 
was  passed,  we  find  Bunyan  and  his  dissolute  com- 
panions worshipping  the  priest,  clerk,  and  vest- 
ments on  the  Sunday  morning,  and  assembling  for 
their  Sabbath-breaking  sports  in  the  afternoon. 
It  was  upon  one  of  these  occasions  that  a  most 
extraordinary  impression  was  fixed  upon  the  spirit 
of  Bunyan.  A  remarkable  scene  took  place, 
worthy  the  pencil  of  the  most  eminent  artist. 
This  event  cannot  be  better  described  than  in  his 
own  words:  — 

'  One  day,  amongst  all  the  sermons  our  parson  made,  his 
subject  was,  to  treat  of  the  Sabbath-day,  and  of  the  evil  of 
breaking  that,  either  with  labour,  sports,  or  otherwise ;  now 
I  was,  notwithstanding  my  religion,  one  that  took  much  delight 
in  all  manner  of  vice,  and  especially  that  was  the  day  that  I 
did  solace  myself  therewith ;  wherefore  I  fell  in  my  conscience 
under  his  sermon,  thinking  and  believing  that  he  made  that 
sermon  on  purpose  to  show  me  my  evil  doing.  And  at  that 
time  I  felt  what  guilt  was,  though  never  before,  that  I  ecu 
remember;  but  then  I  was,  for  the  present,  greatly  loadeu 
therewith,  and  so  went  home,  when  the  sermon  was  ended, 
with  a  great  burthen  upon  my  spirit. 

-  Neale,  1822,  vol.  ii.,  p.  220. 
0  Life  of  Alfred,  comparing  him  to  Charles  I.     Preface. 
Svo.     1634. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


'  This,  for  that  instant,  did  benumb  the  sinews  of  my  best 
delights,  and  did  imbitter  my  former  pleasures  to  me;  but 
behold  it  lasted  not,  for  before  I  had  well  dined,  the  trouble 
began  to  go  off  my  mind,  and  my  heart  returned  to  its  old 
course.  But  0!  how  glad  was  I,  that  this  trouble  was  gone 
from  me,  and  that  the  tire  was  put  out,  that  I  might  sin  again 
without  control!  'Wherefore,  when  I  had  satisfied  nature 
with  my  food,  I  shook  the  sermon  out  of  my  mind,  and  to  my 
old  custom  of  sports  and  gaming  I  returned  with  great  delight. 

'  But  the  same  day,  as  I  was  ia  the  midst  of  a  game  at  eat, 
and  having  struck  it  one  blow  from,  the  hole,  just  as  I  was 
about  to  strike  it  the  second  time,  a  voice  did  suddenly  dart 
from  heaven  into  my  soul,  whieh  said,  "Wilt  thou  leave  thy 
ans  and  go  to  heaven,  or  luive  thy  sins  and  go  to  hell  ?"  At 
this  I  was  put  to  an  exceeding  maze ;  wherefore  leaving  my 
cat  upon  the  ground,  I  looked  up  to  heaven,  and  was  as  if  I 
had,  with  the  eyes  of  my  understanding,  seen  the  Lord  Jesus 
looking  down  upon  me,  as  being  very  hotly  displeased  with 
me,  and  as  if  iie  did  severely  threaten  mc  with  some  grievous 
punishment  for  these  and.  other  my  ungodly  practices. 

*  I  had  no  sooner  tkns  conceived  in  my  mind,  but,  suddenly, 
this  conclusion  was  fastened  on  my  spirit,  for  the  former  hint 
did  set  my  sins  again  before  my  face,  that  I  had  been  a  great 
and  grevious  sinner,  and  that  it  was  now  too  late  for  me  to 
look  after  heaven ;  for  Christ  would  not  forgive  me,  nor  par- 
don my  trausgressions.  Then  I  fell  to  musing  upon  this  also  ; 
and  while  I  was  thinking  on  it,  and  fearing  lest  it  should  be 
so,  I  felt  my  heart  sink  in  despair,  concluding  it  was  too  late ; 
and  therefore  I  resolved  in  my  mind  I  would  go  on  in  sin : 
for,  thought  I,  if  the  case  be  thus,  my  state  is  surely  miserable  ; 
miserable  if  I  leave  my  sins,  and  but  miserable  if  I  follow 
them ;  I  can  but  be  damned,  and  if  I  must  be  so,  I  had  as 
good  be  damned  for  many  sins,  as  be  damned  for  few. 

'Thus  I  stood  in  the  midst  of  my  play,  before  all  that  then 
were  present:  but  yet  I  told  them  nothing.  But  I  say,  I 
having  made  this  conclusion,  I  returned  desperately  to  my  sport 
again  ;  and  I  well  remember,  that  presently  this  kind  of  despair 
did  so  possess  my  soul,  that  I  was  persuaded  I  could  never 
attain  to  other  comfort  than  what  I  should  get  in  sin ;  for 
heaven  was  gone  already;  so  that  on  that  I  must  not  think.'1 

How  difficult  is  it,  when  immorality  has  been 
encouraged  by  royal  authority,  to  turn  the  tide  or 
to  stem  the  torrent.  For  at  least  four  years,  an 
Act  of  Parliament  had  prohibited  these  Sunday 
sports.  Still  the  supineness  of  the  justices,  and 
the  connivance  of  the  clergy,  allowed  the  rabble 
youth  to  congregate  on  the  Green  at  Elstow,  sum- 
moned by  the  church  bells  to  celebrate  their  sports 
and  pastimes,  as  they  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
doing  on  the  Lord's-day.- 

This  solemn  warning,  received  in  the  midst  of 
his  sport,  was  one  of  a  series  of  convictions,  by 
which  the  hardened  sinner  was  to  be  fitted  to 
receive  the  messages  of  mercy  and  love.     In  the 


1  Vol.  i„  p.  S,  9. 

•  The  game  of  cat,  tipeat,  or  "  sly,"  so  called  by  Wilson,  in 
his  life  of  Bunyan,*  is  an  ancient  game  well  known  in  many 
parts  of  the  kingdom.  A  number  of  holes  are  made  in  the 
ground,  at  equal  distances,  in  a  circular  direction ;  a  player  is 
stationed  at  each  hole  ;  the  opposite  party  stand  around  ;  one 
of  them  throws  the  cat  to  the  batsman  nearest  to  him  ;  every 
time  the  cat  is  struck,  the  batsmen  run  from  one  hole  to  the 
next,  and  score  as  many  as  they  change  positions;  but  if  the 
cat  is  thrown  between  them  before  reaching  the  hole,  that 
*  Wilson's  Edition  of  Works,  vol.  i.,  fol.  1736. 


midst  of  his  companions  and  of  the  spectators, 
Bunyan  was  struck  with  a  sense  of  guilt.  How 
rapid  were  his  thoughts — '  Vv'ilt  thou  leave  tliv 
sins  and  go  to  heaven,  or  have  thy  sins  an 
to  hell?'  With  the  eye  of  Ma  understanding  he 
saw  the  Lord  Jesus  as  'hotly  displeased.'  The 
tempter  suggests  it  is  •  too,  too  late'  to  seek  for 
pardon,  and  with  a  desperate  resolution  which  must 
have  cost  his  heart  the  severest  pangs,  he  con- 
tinued his  game.  Still  the  impression  remained 
indelibly  fixed  upon  his  mind. 

The  next  blow  which  fell  upon  his  hardened 
spirit  was  still  more  deeply  felt,  because  it  was 
given  by  one  from  whom  he  could  the  least  have  ex- 
pected it.  lie  was  standing  at  a  neighbour's  shop- 
window,  '  belching  out  oaths  like  the  madman  that 
Solomon  speaks  of, -who  scatters  abroad  firebrands, 
arrows,  and  death  '3  '  after  his  wonted  maimer.' 
He  exemplified  the  character  drawn  by  the 
Psalmist.  *  As  he  clothed  himself  with  curbing 
like  as  with  his  garment  :  so  let  it  come  into  his 
bowels  like  water,  and  like  oil  into  his  bones.' 
Here  was  a  disease  that  set  all  human  skill  at 
defiance,  but  the  great,  the  Almighty  Physician, 
cured  it  with  strange  physic.  Had  any  pro- 
fessor reproved  him,  it  might  have  been  passed 
by  as  a  matter  of  course  ;  but  it  was  so  ordered 
that  a  woman  who  was  notoriously  'a  very  loose 
and  ungodly  wretch,' protested  that  she  trembled  to 
hear  him  swear  and  curse  at  that  most  fearful  rate  ; 
that  he  was  the  ungodliest  fellow  she  had  ever 
heard,  and  that  he  was  able  to  spoil  all  the  youth 
in  a  whole  town.'*  Public  reproof  from  the  lips  of 
such  a  woman  was  an  arrow  that  pierced  his  in- 
most soul  ;  it  effected  a  reformation  marvellous  to 
all  his  companions,  and  bordering  upon  the  miracu- 
lous. The  walls  of  a  fortified  city  were  once  thrown 
down  by  a  shout  and  the  tiny  blast  of  rams'-horns, 
Jos.  vi. '20;  and  in  this  instance,  the  foundations  of 
Heart  Castle,  fortified  by  Satan,  are  shaken  by  the 
voice  of  one  of  his  own  emissaries.  Mortified  and 
convicted,  the  foul-mouthed  blasphemer  swore  no 
more ;  an  outward  reformation  in  words  and  con- 
duct took  place,  but  without  inward  spiritual  life. 
Thus  was  he  making  vows  to  God  and  breaking 
them,  repenting  and  promising  to  do  better  next 
time  ;  so,  to  use  his  own  homely  phrase,  lie  was 
'  feeding  God  with  chapters,  and  prayers,  and  pro- 
mises, and  vows,  and  a  great  many  more  such 
dainty  dishes,  and  thinks  that  he  serveth  God  as 
well  as  any  man  in  England  can,  while  lie  has 
only  got  into  a  cleaner  way  to  hell  than  the  rest  of 
his  neighbours  are  in.'0 

batsman  is  out.f     Such  was  the  childish  game  played  by  men 
on  the  Lord's-dav. 

3  Life  by  C.  Doe,  1698. 

4  Vol.  i.,  p.  9.  &  Saved  by  Grace,  vol.  i.,  p.  351. 

t  Strult's  Sporls  and  Pastime*,  8vo.,  p.  110. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


Such  a  conversion,  as  lie  himself  calls  it,  was 
•  from  prodigious  profaneness  to  something  like  a 
moral  life.'1  '  Now  I  was,  as  they  said,  become 
godly,  and  their  words  pleased  me  well,  though  as  yet 
I  was  nothing  hut  a  poor  painted  hypocrite. '  These 
are  hard  words,  but,  in  the  most  important  sense, 
they  were  true.  He  was  pointed  out  as  a  miracle 
of  mercy — the  great  convert — a  wonder  to  the 
world.  He  could  now  suffer  opprobrium  and 
cavils — play  with  errors — entangle  himself  and 
drink  in  flattery.  No  one  can  suppose  that  this 
outward  reform  was  put  on  hypocriticall3r,  as  a  dis- 
guise to  attain  some  sinister  object  ;  it  was  real, 
but  it  arose  from  a  desire  to  shine  before  his  neigh- 
bours, from  shame  and  from  the  fear  of  future  pun- 
ishment, and  not  from  that  love  to  God  which  leads 
the  Christian  to  the  fear  of  offending  him.  It  did 
not  arise  from  a  change  of  heart;  the  secret  springs 
of  action  remained  polluted;  it  was  outside  show, 
and  therefore  he  called  himself  a  painted  hypocrite. 
He  became  less  a  despiser  of  religion,  but  more 
awfully  a  destroyer  of  his  own  soul. 

A  new  source  of  uneasiness  now  presented  itself 
in  his  practice  of  bell-ringing,  an  occupation  re- 
quiring severe  labour,  usually  performed  on  the 
Lord's-day;  and,  judging  from  the  general  character 
of  bell-ringers,  it  has  a  most  injurious  effect,  both 
with  regard  to  morals  and  religion.  A  circumstance 
had  recently  taken  place  which  was  doubtless  inter- 
preted as  an  instance  of  Divine  judgment  upon 
Sabbath-breaking.  Clark,  in  his  Looking -Glass  for 
Saints  and  Sinners,  1657,  published  the  narrative: 
— '  Not  long  since,  in  Bedfordshire,  a  match  at  foot- 
ball being  appointed  on  the  Sabbath,  in  the  after- 
uoon  whilst  two  were  in  the  belfry,  tolling  of  a 
bell  to  call  the  company  together,  there  was  sud- 
denly heard  a  clap  of  thunder,  and  a  flash  of 
lightning  was  seen  by  some  that  sat  in  the  church- 
porch  coming  through  a  dark  lane,  and  flashing  in 
their  faces,  which  much  terrified  them,  and,  passing- 
through  the  porch  into  the  belfry,  it  tripped  up 
his  heels  that  was  tolling  the  bell,  and  struck  him 
stark  dead;  and  the  other  that  was  with  him  was 
so  sorely  blasted  therewith,  that  shortly  after  he 
died  also.'2  Thus  we  find  that  the  church  bells 
ministered  to  the  Booh  of  Sjwrts,  to  call  the  com- 
pany to  Sabbath-breaking.  The  bell-ringers  might 
come  within  the  same  class  as  those  upon  whom 
the  tower  at  Siloam  fell,  still  it  was  a  most  solemn 
warning,  and  accounts  for  the  timidity  of  so  reso- 
lute a  man  as  Bunyan.  Although  he  thought  it 
did  not  become  his  newly-assumed  religious  cha- 
racter, yet  his  old  propensity  drew  him  to  the 
church  tower.  At  first  he  ventured  in,  but  took 
care  to  stand  under  a  main  beam,  lest  the  bell 
should  fall  and  crush  him;  afterwards  he  would 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  9;  No.  32. 


2  Folio  edition,  pp.  50J-6. 


stand  in  the  door  ;    then  he  feared  the  steeple 
might  fall;  and  the  terrors  of  an  untimely  death, 


Belfry  Porcli,  ICIstow. 

and  his  newly-acquired  garb  of  religion,  eventually 
deterred  him  from  this  mode  of  Sabbath-breaking. 
His  next  sacrifice  made  at  the  shrine  of  self- 
righteousness  was  dancing:  this  took  him  one  whole 
year  to  accomplish,  and  then  he  bade  farewell  to 
these  sports  for  the  rest  of  his  life.3  We  are  not 
to  conclude  from  the  example  of  a  man  who  in 
after-life  proved  so  great  and  excellent  a  character, 
that,  under  all  circumstances,  bell-ringing  and 
dancing  are  immoral.  In  those  days,  such  sports 
and  pastimes  usually  took  place  on  the  Lord's-day; 
and  however  the  Church  of  England  might  then 
sanction  it,  and  proclaim  by  royal  authority,  in  all 
her  churches,  the  lawfulness  of  sports  on  that  sacred 
day,  yet  it  is  now  universally  admitted  that  it  was 
commanding  a  desecration  of  the  Sabbath,  and  let- 
ting loose  a  flood  of  vice  and  profaneness.  In  them- 
selves, on  days  proper  for  recreation,  such  sports 
may  be  innocent;  but  if  they  engender  an  unholy 
thought,  or  occupy  time  needed  for  self-examination 
and  devotion,  they  ought  to  be  avoided  as  siuful 
hinderauces  to  a  spiritual  life. 

Bunyan  was  now  dressed  in  the  garb  of  a 
religious  professor,  and  had  become  a  brisk  talker 
in  the  matters  of  religion,  when,  by  Divine  mercy, 
he  was  stripped  of  all  his  good  opinion  of  himself  ; 


3  In  the  Engraving,  p.  1 ,  vol.  i.,  is  a  view  of  part  of  the 
village  green,  Elstow,  with  the  ancient  building  now  used  as  a 
school-house,  as  seen  from  the  church-yard.  This  building  is 
older  than  the  time  of  Bunyan,  and  was  the  scene  of  village 
meetiugs  at  the  period  in  which  he  lived,  and  doubtless  asso- 
ciated with  his  dancing  and  thoughtless  amusements,  as  the 
green  itself  was  the  scene  of  the  game  of  cat.  A  view  look- 
ing towards  the  church  is  given  in  Vignette  to  vol.  i.  of  the 
Works. 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUNYAN. 


his  want  of  holiness,  ami  his  unchanged  heart,  were 
revealed  to  his  surprise  and  wonder,  by  means  simple 
and  efficacious,  but  which  no  human  forethought 
could  have  devised.  Being  engaged  in  his  trade 
at  Bedford,  he  overheard  the  conversation  of  some 
poor  pious  women,  and  it  humbled  and  alarmed  him. 
'I  heard,  but  I  understood  not;  for  they  were 
far  above,  out  of  my  reach.  Their  talk  was  about 
a  new  birth,  the  work  of  God  on  their  hearts, 
also  how  they  were  convinced  of  their  miserable 
state  by  nature ;  how  God  had  visited  their  souls 
with  his  love  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  with  what 
words  and  promises  they  had  been  refreshed, 
comforted,  aud  supported  against  the  temptations 
of  the  devil.  Moreover,  they  reasoned  of  the  sug- 
gestions and  temptations  of  Satan  in  particular ; 
and  told  to  each  other  hy  which  they  had  been 
afflicted,  and  how  they  were  borne  up  under  his 
assaults.  They  also  discoursed  of  their  own  wretch- 
edness of  heart,  of  their  unbelief;  and  did  con- 
temn, slight,  and  abhor  their  own  righteousness,  as 
filthy  and  insufficient  to  do  them  any  good.  And 
mcthought  they  spake  as  if  joy  did  make  them 
speak  ;  they  spake  with  such  pleasantness  of  Scrip- 
ture language,  and  with  such  appearance  of  grace 
in  all  they  said,  that  they  were  to  me  as  if  they 
had  found  a  new  world ;  as  if  they  were  people 
that  dwelt  alone,  and  were  not  to  be  reckoned 
among  their  neighbours.     Nu.  sxiii.  9. 

•  At  this  I  felt  my  own  heart  began  to  shake, 
as  mistrusting  my  condition  to  be  nought ;  for  I 
saw  that  in  all  my  thoughts  about  religion  and 
salvation,  the  new  birth  did  never  enter  into  my 
mind;  neither  kuew  I  the  comfort  of  the  Word 
and  promise,  nor  the  deceitfulness  and  treachery 
of  my  own  wicked  heart.  As  for  secret  thoughts, 
I  took  no  notice  of  them;  neither  did  I  under- 
stand what  Satan's  temptations  were,  nor  how  they 
were  to  be  withstood,  and  resisted. 

Thus,  therefore,  when  I  heard  and  considered 
what  they  said,  I  left  them,  and  went  about  my 
employment  again,  but  their  talk  and  discourse 
went  with  me ;  also  my  heart  would  tarry  with 
them,  for  I  was  greatly  affected  with  their  words, 
both  because  by  them  I  was  convinced  that  I  wanted 
the  true  tokens  of  a  truly  godly  man,  and  also  be- 
cause by  them  I  was  convinced  of  the  happy  and 
blessed  condition  of  him  that  was  such  a  one.' ! 

The  brisk  talker  or  '  talkative,'  was  confounded 
— he  heard  pious  godly  women  mourning  over  their 
worthlessne^  instead  of  vaunting  of  their  attain- 
ments. They  exhibited,  doubtless  to  his  great 
surprise,  that  self-distrust  and  humility  are  the 
beginnings  of  wisdom. 

These  humble  disciples  could  have  had  no  con- 
ception that    the  Holy  Spirit  was   blessing  their 

1  Vol.  i.,  p.  10. 


Christian  communion  to  the  mind  of  the  tinker, 
standing  near  them,  pursuing  his  occupation.  The 
recollection  of  the  converse  of  these  poor  women 
led  to  solemn  heart-searching  and  the  most  painful 
anxiety;  again  and  again  he  sought  their  com- 
pany, and  his  convictions  became  more  deep,  his 
solicitude  more  intense.  This  was  the  commence- 
ment of  an  internal  struggle,  the  most  remarkable 
of  any  upon  record,  excepting  that  of  the  psalmist 
David. 

It  was  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  regenerat- 
ing and  preparing  an  ignorant  and  rebellious  man 
for  extraordinary  submission  to  the  sacred  Scrip- 
tures, and  for  most  extensive  usefulness.  To  those 
who  never  experienced  in  any  degree  such  feel- 
ings, they  appear  to  indicate  religious  insanity. 
It  was  so  marvellous  and  so  mysterious,  as  to  be 
mistaken  by  a  poet  laureate,  who  profanely  calls 
it  a  being  •  shaken  continually  by  the  hot  and 
cold  fits  of  a  spiritual  ague : '  '  reveries : '  or 
one  of  the  '  frequent  and  contagious  disorders  of 
the  human  mind,'2  instead  of  considering  it  as 
wholesome  but  bitter  medicine  for  the  soul,  admi- 
nistered by  the  heavenly  Physician.  At  times  he 
felt,  like  David,  '  a  sword  in  his  bones,'  '  tears  hi3 
meat.'  God's  waves  and  billows  overwhelmed  him, 
rs.  xiii.  Then  came  glimmerings  of  hope — precious 
promises  saving  him  from  despair — followed  by 
the  shadow  of  death  overspreading  his  soul,  and 
involving  him  in  midnight  darkness.  He  could 
complain  in  the  bitterness  of  his  anguish,  '  Thy 
fierce  wrath  goeth  over  me.'  Bound  in  affliction 
and  iron,  his  '  soul  was  melted  because  of  trouble.' 
'Now  Satan  assaults  the  soul  with  darkness, 
fears,  frightful  thoughts  of  apparitions ;  now  they 
sweat,  pant,  and  struggle  for  life.  The  angels  now 
come  (Ps.  cvii.)  down  to  behold  the  sight,  and  rejoice 
to  see  a  bit  of  dust  and  ashes  to  overcome  princi- 
palities, and  powers,  and  might,  and  dominion.'  3 
His  mind  was  fixed  on  eternity,  and  out  of  the 
abundance  of  his  heart  he  spoke  to  one  of  his 
former  companions ;  his  language  was  that  of  re- 
proof— '  Harry,  why  do  you  swear  and  curse  thus  ? 
what  will  become  of  you  if  you  die  in  this  condi- 
tion?'4 His  sermon,  probably  the  first  he  had 
preached,  was  like  throwing  pearls  before  swine 
— '  He  answered  in  a  great  chafe,  what  woidd 
the  devil  do  for  company,  if  it  were  not  for  such 
as  I  am.'5 

By  this  time  he  had  recovered  the  art  of  read- 
ing, and  its  use  a  little  perplexed  him,  for  he 
became  much  puzzled  with  the  opinions  of  the 
Ranters,  as  set  forth  in  their  books.  It  is  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  delineate  their  sentiments;  they 
were  despised  by  all   the  sects  which   had   been 


2  Southey's  Life,  pp.  xsv.,  sxxii.  3  Vol.  i.,  p.  80. 

4  Vol.  i,  p.  11.  *  Vol.  hi.,  p.  607. 


"VIEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAX. 


connected  with  the  government,  because,  with  the 
Quakers  and  Baptists,  they  denied  any  magisterial 
or  state  authority  over  -conscience,  and  refused 
maintenance  to  ministers ;  but  from  the  testimony 
of  Bunyan,  and  that  of  the  early  Quakers,  they 
appear  to  have  been  practical  Antiuomians,  or  at 
least  very  nearly  allied  to  the  new  sect  called  Mor- 
monites.  Ross,  who  copied  from  Pagitt,  describes 
them  with  much  bitterness — '  The  Ranters  are 
unclean  beasts — their  maxim  is  that  there  is  no- 
thing sin  but  what  a  man  thinks  to  be  so — they 
reject  the  Bible — tkey  are  the  merriest  of  all  devils 
— they  deny  all  obedience  to  magistrates."1 

This  temptation  must  have  been  severe.  The 
Ranters  were  like  the  black  man  with  the  white 
robe,  named  Flatterer,  who  led  the  pilgrims  into 
a  net,2  under  the  pretence  of  showing  them  the 
way  to  the  celestial  city  ;  or  like  Adam  the  first, 
who  oifered  Faithful  his  three  daughters  to  wife3 
— the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and 
the  pride  of  life — if  he  would  dwell  with  him  in 
the  town  of  Deceit.  '  These  temptations,'  he 
says,  'were  suitable  to  my  flesh,'4  I  being  but 
a  young  man,  and  my  nature  in  its  prime ;  and, 
with  his  characteristic  humility,  he  adds,  '  God, 
who  had,  as  I  hope,  designed  me  for  better  things, 
kept  me  in  the  fear  of  his  name,  and  did  not  suf- 
fer me  to  accept  such  cursed  principles.'  Prayer 
opened  the  door  of  escape;  it  led  him  to  the  foun- 
tain of  truth.  '  I  began  to  look  into  the  Bible 
with  new  eyes.  Prayer  preserved  me  from  Rant- 
ing errors.  The  Bible  was  precious  to  me  in  those 
days.'  5  His  study  of  the  Holy  Oracles  now  be- 
came a  daily  habit,  and  that  with  intense  earnest- 
ness and  prayer.  In  the  midst  of  the  multitude 
of  sects  with  which  he  was  on  all  sides  surround- 
ed, he  felt  the  need  of  a  standard  for  the  opinions 
which  were  each  of  them  eagerly  followed  by  vota- 
ries, who  proclaimed  them  to  be  the  truth,  the 
way,  and  the  life.  He  was  like  a  man,  feeling  that 
if  he  erred  in  the  way,  it  would  be  attended  with 
misery,  and,  but  for  Divine  interference,  with  un- 
utterable ruin — possessed  of  a  correct  map,  but 
surrounded  with  those  who,  by  flattery,  or  threats, 
or  deceit,  and  armed  with  all  human  eloquence, 
strove  to  mislead  him.  With  an  enemy  within  to 
urge  him  to  accept  their  wily  guidance,  that  they 
might  lead  him  to  perdition — inspired  by  Divine 
grace,  like  Christian  in  his  Pilgrim,  he  '  put  his 
Angers  in  his  ears,  and  ran  on,  crying  Life,  life, 
eternal  life.'  He  felt  utter  dependence  upon 
Divine  guidance,  leading  him  to  most  earnest 
prayer,  and  an  implicit  obedience  to  Holy  Writ, 
which  followed  him  all  through  the  remainder 
of  his  pilgrimage.      'The    Bible'    he    calls    'the 

1  Ucresiograplty.  4to.   1G54.  p.  ]43. 

2  Vol.  iii.,  p.  151.  3  Vol.  iii.,  p.  US. 
4  Vol.  i.,p.ll.  *  Vol.  i.,  p.  11. 


scaffold,  or  stage,  that  God  has  buildcd  for  hope 
to  play  his  part  upon  in  this  world.' G  Hence 
the  Word  was  precious  in  his  eyes;  and  with  so 
immense  a  loss,  or  so  magnificent  a  gain,  the 
throne  of  grace  was  all  his  hope,  that  he  might 
be  guided  by  that  counsel  that  cannot  err,  and. 
that  should  eventually  insure  his  receptiou  to 
eternal  glory. 

While  in  this  inquiring  state,  he  experienced  much 
doubt  and  uncertainty  arising  from  the  apparent  con- 
fidence of  many  professors.  In  his  own  esteem  he 
appeared  to  be  thoroughly  humbled;  and  when  he 
lighted  on  that  passage — '  To  one  is  given  by  the 
spirit  the  word  of  wisdom,  to  another,  knowledge, 
and  to  another,  faith,.'  l  Co.  xii.  s,  9,  his  solemn  in- 
quiry was,  how  it  happened  that  he  possessed  so 
little  of  any  of  these  gifts  of  wisdom,  knowledge,  or 
faith — more  especially  of  faith,  that  being  essen- 
tial to  the  pleasing  of  God.  He  had  read  Matt.  xxi.  21, 
'  If  ye  have  faith  and  doubt  not,  ye  shall  say  unto 
this  mountain,  Be  thou  removed,  and  be  thou  cast 
into  the  sea  ;  it  shall  be  done  ;'  and  r,u.  xvii.  6, 
'  If  ye  had  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  ye 
might  say  to  this  sycamore  tree,  Be  thou  plucked 
up  by  the  root,  and  be  thou  planted  in  the  sea, 
and  it  shall  obey  you ;'  and  1  Co.  xiii.  2,  '  Though  I 
have  all  faith,  so  that  I  could  remove  mountains.' 
The  poor  tinker,  considering  these  passages  in  their 
literal  import,  imagined  they  were  meant  as  tests 
to  try  whether  the  believer  possessed  faith  or  not. 
He  was  a  stranger  to  the  rules  of  Hebrew  rhe- 
toric ;  nor  did  he  consider  that  they  were  ad- 
dressed to  the  apostles,  who  had  the  power  to  work 
miracles.  He  had  no  idea  that  the  removing  a 
mountain,  or  planting  a  sycamore  tree  m  the  sea, 
were  figures  of  speech  conveying  to  us  the  fact 
that,  aided  by  faith,  mountainous  difficulties  might 
and  would  be  overcome.  Anxious  for  some 
ocular  demonstration  that  he  had  faith,  he  almost 
determined  to  attempt  to  work  a  miracle — not 
to  convert  or  confirm  the  faith  of  others,  but  to 
satisfy  his  own  mind  as  to  his  possessing  faith. 
He  had  no  such  magnificent  idea  as  the  removal 
of  a  mountain,  for  there  were  none  in  his  neigh- 
bourhood, nor  to  plant  a  tree  in  the  sea,  for  Bed- 
fordshire is  an  inland  county;  but  it  was  of  the 
humblest  kind — that  some  puddles  on  the  road 
between  Elstow  and  Bedford  should  change  places 
with  the  dry  ground.  When  he  had  thought  of 
praying  for  ability,  his  natural  good  sense  led  him 
to  abandon  the  experiment.7  This  he  calls  '  being 
in  my  plunge  about  faith,  tossed  betwixt  the  devil 
and  my  own  ignorance.'3  All  this  shows  the  inten- 
sity of  his  feelings  and  his  earnest  inquiries. 

6  Vol.  i.,  p.  591. 

7  The  Rev.  H.  J.  Rose,  in  his  Biographical  Dictionary,  dis- 
torts this  singular  affair  into,  '  he  laid  claim  to  a  faith  of  such     ; 
magnitude  as  to  work  miracles !' 

8"  Vol.  i.,  p.  12. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOIIX    BTJNYA.N. 


It  may  occasion  surprise  to  some,  that  a  y«BBg 
man  of  such  extraordinary  powers  of  mind,  sliould 
have  indulged  the  thought  of  working  a  miracle  to 
settle  or  confirm  his  doubts;  but  we  HMiat  take  into 
account,  that  when  a  boy  be  bad  no  opportunity 
rawing  scripture!  knowledge  ;  no  Sunday 
schools,  no  Bible  class  excited  his  inquiries  as  to 
the  meaning  of  the  sacred  language.  The  Bible 
had  been  to  him  a  sealed  book  until,  in  a  state  of 
mental  agony,  he  cried,  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  8  The  plain  text  was  all  his  guide;  and  it 
would  not  have  been  surprising,  had  he  been  calb  d 
to  hot  lie  a  cask  of  new  wine,  if  he  had  refused  to 
use  old  wine  bottles;  or  had  be  cast  a  loaf  into  the 
neighbouring  river  Ouse,  expecting  to  find  it  after 
many  days.  The  astonishing  fact  is,  that  one  so 
unlettered  should,  by  intense  thought,  by  earnest 
prayer,  and  by  comparing  one  passage  with  another, 
arrive  eventually  at  so  clear  a  view  both  of  the 
external  and  internal  meaning  of  the  whole  Bible. 
The  results  of  his  researches  were  more  deeply 
impressed  upon  his  mind  by  the  mistakes  which 
he  had  made  ;  and  his  intense  study,  both  of 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  furnished  him 
with  an  inexhaustible  store  of  things  new  and  old 
— those  vivid  images  and  burning  thoughts,  those 
bright  and  striking  illustrations  of  Divine  truth, 
which  so  shine  and  sparkle  in  all  his  works.  What 
can  be  more  clear  than  his  illustration  of  saving 
faith  which  worketh  by  love,  when  in  after-life  he 
wrote  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.  Hopeful  was  in  a 
similar  state  of  inquiry  whether  he  had  faith. 
'  Then  I  said,  But,  Lord,  what  is  believing  V  And 
then  I  saw  from  that  saying,  He  that  comcth  to 
me  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  believeth  in  me 
shall  never  thirst,  that  believing  and  coming  was 
all  one,  and  that  he  that  came,  that  is,  ran  out  in 
his  heart  and  affections  after  salvation  by  Christ, 
he  indeed  believed  in  Christ.    Jn.  vi.  25.1 

In  addition  to  his  want  of  scriptural  education, 
it  must  be  remembered  that,  when  he  thought  of 
miraculous  power  being  an  evidence  of  faith,  his 
mind  was  in  a  most  excited  state — doubts  spread 
over  him  like  huge  masses  of  thick  black  clouds, 
hiding  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  from  his  sight. 
Xct  only  is  he  to  be  pardoned  for  his  error,  but 
admired  for  the  humility  which  prompted  him  to 
record  so  singular  a  trial,  and  his  escape  from  '  this 
in  of  the  tempter.'  While  •  thus  he  was 
tossed  betwixt  the  devil  and  his  own  ignorance,'2 
the  happiness  of  the  poor  women  whose  eon- 
ion  he  had  heard  at  Bedford,  was  brought 
to  his  recollection  by  a  remarkable  reverie  or  day 
dream: — 

'About  this  time,  the  state  and  hnppiucss  of  these  poor 
people  at  Bedford  was  thus,  in  a  dream  or  vision,  represented 


Vol.  iii.,  pp.  153,  IjG. 


-  Vol. 


to  mc.  I  saw  as  if  they  were  set  on  the  sunny  side  of  some 
high  mountain,  there  refreshing  themselves  with  the  pleasant 
bcani3  of  the  sun,  while  I  was  shivering  and  shrinking  in  the 
cnLl,  afflicted  with  frost,  snow,  end  dark  clonds.     Methonght 

al-'i,   bBtwbtt  me  and  them,   J    saw  a  wall  that  did  compass 
about  this  mountain;  now   through   this  wall  my  soul  did 
greatly  desire  to  pass,  condfariing  that  if  I  could,  1  v. 
even  into  the  very  midst  of  them,  and  there  also  comfort  my- 
self with  the  heat  of  their  sun. 

'About  this  wall  I  thought  myself  to  go  again  and  again,  still 
prying,  as  I  went,  to  see  if  I  could  find  some  way  or  passage, 
by  which  I  might  enter  therein;  but  none  could  I  find  for 
some  time.  At  the  last  I  saw,  as  it  were,  a  narrow  gap,  like 
a  little  doorway  in  the  wall,  through  which  I  attempted  to 
pass ;  but  the  passage  being  very  strait  and  narrow,  I  made 
many  efforts  to  get  in,  but  all  in  vain,  even  until  I  was  well 
nigh  quite  beat  out,  by  striving  to  get  in  ;  at  last,  with  great 
striving,  methonght  I  at  first  did  get  in  my  head,  and  after 
that,  by  a  sidling  striving,  my  shoulders,  and  my  whole  body  ; 
then  I  was  exceeding  glad,  and  went  and  sat  down  in  the  midst 
of  them,  and  so  was  comforted  with  the  light  and  heat  of  their 
sun. 

'  Now  this  mountain,  and  wall,  was  thus  made  out  to 
me  :  The  mountain  signified  the  church  of  the  living  God  ;  the 
sun  that  shone  thereon,  the  comfortable  shining  of  his  merci- 
ful face  on  them  that  were  therein  j  the  wall  I  thought  was 
the  Word,  that  did  make  separation  between  the  Christians 
and  the  world;  and  the  gap  which  was  in  this  wall,  I  thought, 
was  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  way  to  God  the  lather.  Jolm 
xiv.  6;  Mat.  vii.  u.  But  forasmuch  as  the  passage  was  wonder- 
ful narrow,  even  so  narrow  that  I  could  not,  but  with  great 
difficulty,  enter  iu  thereat,  it  showed  me,  that  none  could  enter 
into  life,  but  those  that  were  in  downright  earnest,  and  unless 
also  they  left  this  wicked  world  behind  them ;  for  here  was 
only  room  for  body  and  soul,  but  not  for  body  and  soul  and  sin.y 

'This  resemblance  abode  upon  my  spirit  many  days;  all 
which  time  I  saw  myself  in  a  forlorn  and  sad  condition,  but 
yet  was  provoked  to  a  vehement  hunger  and  desire  to  be  one 
of  that  number  that  did  sit  in  the  sunshine.  Xow  also  I  should 
pray  wherever  I  was ;  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  in  house  or 
field,  and  should  also  often,  with  lifting  up  of  heart,  sing  that 
of  the  fifty-first  Psalm,  "  O  Lord,  consider  my  distress."  ' 4 

In  this  striking  reverie  we  discover  the  budding 
forth  of  that  great  genius  which  produced  most 
beautiful  flowers  and  delicious  fruit,  when  it  be- 
came fully  developed  in  bis  allegories. 

While  this  trial  clouded  his  spirits,  he  was  called 
to  endure  temptations  which  are  common  to  most, 
if  not  all,  inquiring  souls,  and  which  frequently 
produce  much  anxiety.  He  plunged  into  the  xini- 
versity  problems  of  predestination,  before  he  had 
completed  his  lower  grammar-school  exercises  on 
faith  and  repentance.  Am  I  one  of  the  elect?  or 
has  the  day  of  grace  been  suffered  to  pass  by  never 
to  return  ?  '  Although  he  was  in  a  flame  to  find 
the  way  to  heaven  and  glory,'  these  questions  afflic- 
ted and  disquieted  him,  so  that  the  very  strength  of 
his  body  was  taken  away  by  the  force  and  power 
thereof.      '  Lord,   thought  I,  what  if  1  should  not 


3  It  is  as  easy  for  a  camel  to  go  through  (he  eye  of  a  needle, 
as  for  a  man  to"  pass  through  this  door  with  the  world  on  his 
back. 

4  Vol.  i.,  p.  13. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


be  elected!  It  may  be  you  are  not,  said  the 
tempter  ;  it  may  be  so,  indeed  thought  I.  Why 
then,  said  Satan,  you  had  as  good  leave  off,  and 
strive  no  farther;  for  if  indeed  you  should  not  be 
elected  and  chosen  of  God,  there  is  no  talk  of  your 
being  saved ;  "for  it  is  neither  of  him  that  willeth, 
nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth 
mercy." 

'  By  these  things  I  was  driven  to  my  -wit's  end, 
not  knowing  what  to  say,  or  how  to  answer  these 
temptations.  Indeed,  I  little  thought  that  Satan 
had  thus  assaulted  me,  but  that  rather  it  was  my 
own  prudence  thus  to  start  the  question :  for  that 
the  elect  only  obtained  eternal  life ;  that  I  without 
scruple  did  heartily  close  withal ;  but  that  myself 
was  one  of  them,  there  lay  all  the  question.'1 

Thus  was  he  for  many  weeks  oppressed  and  cast 
down,  and  near  to  '  giving  up  the  ghost  of  all  his 
hopes  of  ever  attaining  life,'  when  a  sentence  fell 
with  weight  upon  his  spirit — '  Look  at  the  genera- 
tions of  old  and  see;  did  ever  any  trust  in  the  Lord 
and  was  confounded, '  Ecdesiastieos  a.  10.  This  encou- 
raged him  to  a  diligent  search  from  Genesis  to  Reve- 
lation, which  lasted  for  above  a  year,  and  although 
he  could  not  find  that  sentence,  yet  he  was  amply 
rewarded  for  this  diligent  examination  of  the  Holy 
Oracles,  and  thus  he  obtained  '  yet  more  experience 
of  the  love  and  kindness  of  God.'  At  length  he 
found  it  in  the  Apocrypha,  and,  although  not  the 
language  of  inspiration,  yet  as  it  contained  the 
sum  and  substance  of  the  promises,  he  took  the 
comfort  of  it,  and  it  shone  before  his  face  for  years. 
The  fear  that  the  day  of  grace  had  passed  pressed 
heavily  upon  him  ;  he  was  humbled,  and  bemoaned 
the  time  that  he  had  wasted.  Now  he  was  con- 
fronted with  that  '  grim-faced  one,  the  Captain 
Fast-hope,  with  his  terrible  standard,'  carried  by 
Ensign  Despair,  red  colours,  with  a  hot  iron  and 
a  hard  heart,  and  exhibited  at  Eye-gate.2  At  length 
these  words  broke  in  upon  his  mind,  '  compel  them 
to  come  in,  that  my  house  may  be  filled — and  yet 
there  is  room.'  This  Scripture  powerfully  affected 
him  with  hope,  that  there  was  room  in  the  bosom 
and  in  the  house  of  Jesus  for  his  afflicted  soul. 

His  next  temptation  was  to  return  to  the  world. 
This  was  that  terrible  battle  with  Apollyon, 
depicted  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  and  it  is  also 
described  at  some  length  in  the  Jerusalem  Sinner 
Saved.  Among  many  very  graphic  and  varied 
pictures  of  his  own  experience,  he  introduces  the 
following  dialogue  with  the  tempter,  probably 
alluding  to  the  trials  he  was  now  passing  through. 
Satan  is  loath  to  part  Avith  a  great  sinner.  '  This 
day  is  usually  attended  with  much  evil  towards 
them  that  are  asking  the  way  to  Zion,  with  their 
faces  thitherward.     Now  the  devil  has  lost  a  sin- 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  13. 

2  Holy  War,  vol.  iii.,  p.  842,  346. 


ner  ;  there  is  a  captive  has  broke  prison,  and  one 
run  away  from  his  master.  Now  hell  seems  to  be 
awakened  from  sleep,  the  devils  are  come  out. 
They  roar,  and  roaring  they  seek  to  recover  their 
runaway.  Now  tempt  him,  threaten  him,  flatter 
him,  stigmatize  him,  throw  dust  into  his  eyes, 
poison  him  with  error,  spoil  him  while  he  is 
upon  the  potter's  wheel,  anything  to  keep  him 
from  coming  to  Christ.'3  *  What,  my  true  ser- 
vant,' quoth  he,  '  my  old  servant,  wilt  thou  forsake 
me  now  ?  Having  so  often  sold  thyself  to  me  to 
work  wickedness,  wilt  thou  forsake  me  now? 
Thou  horrible  wretch,  dost  not  know,  that  thou 
hast  sinned  thyself  beyond  the  reach  of  grace, 
and  dost  thou  think  to  find  mercy  now  ?  Art  not 
thou  a  murderer,  a  thief,  a  harlot,  a  witch,  a  sin- 
ner of  the  greatest  size,  and  dost  thou  look  for 
mercy  now  ?  Dost  thou  think  that  Christ  will 
foul  his  fingers  with  thee  ?  It  is  enough  to  make 
angels  blush,  saith  Satan,  to  see  so  vile  a  one 
knock  at  heaven-gates  for  mercy,  and  wilt  thou 
be  so  abominably  bold  to  do  it  ?'  Thus  Satan 
dealt  with  me,  says  the  great  sinner,  when  at  first 
I  came  to  Jesus  Christ.  And  what  did  you  reply  ? 
saith  the  tempted.  Why,  I  grauted  the  whole 
charge  to  be  true,  says  the  other.  And  what, 
did  you  despair,  or  how?  No,  saith  he,  I  said,  I 
am  Magdalene,  I  am  Zaccheus,  I  am  the  thief,  I 
am  the  harlot,  I  am  the  publican,  I  am  the  prodi- 
gal, and  one  of  Christ's  murderers  ;  yea,  worse 
than  any  of  these ;  and  yet  God  was  so  far  off 
from  rejecting  of  me,  as  I  found  afterwards,  that 
there  was  music  and  dancing  in  his  house  for  me, 
and  for  joy  that  I  was  come  home  unto  him.  0 
blessed  be  God  for  grace  (says  the  other),  for  then 
I  hope  there  is  favour  for  me.  Yea,  as  I  told  you, 
such  a  one  is  a  contiuual  spectacle  in  the  church, 
for  every  one  by  to  behold  God's  grace  and  wonder 
by.*  These  are  the  '  things  the  angels  desire  to 
look  into,'  l  Pe.  i.  12,  or  as  Bunyan  quaintly  says, 
this  is  the  music  which  causes  '  them  that  dwell  in 
the  higher  orbs  to  open  their  windows,  put  out 
their  heads,  and  look  down  to  see  the  cause  of 
that  glory.'   Le.  xv.  7,  io.5 

As  he  became  less  agitated  with  fear,  and  drew 
consolation  more  frequently  from  the  promises,  with 
a  timid  hope  of  salvation,  he  began  to  exhibit  singu- 
lar powers  of  conception  in  spiritualizing  temporal 
things.  His  first  essay  was  to  find  the  hidden 
meaning  in  the  division  of  God's  creatures  into 
clean  and  unclean.  Chewing  the  cud,  and  parting 
the  hoof,  he  conceived  to  be  emblematical  of  our 
feeding  upon  the  Word  of  God,  and  parting,  if  we 
would  be  saved,  with  the  ways  of  ungodly  men.'6 
It  is  not  sufficient  to  chew  the  cud  like  the  hare — 


Bunvan  on  the  Throne  of  Grace,  vol.  i.,  p.  677. 
Vol.  i.,  p.  SO.  &  Holy  War,  vol.  iii.,  p.  297- 

6  Vol.  i.,  p.  14. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


nor  to  part  the  hoof  like  the  swine — we  must  do 
hoth;  that  is,  possess  the  word  of  faith,  and  that  he 
evidenced  by  parting  with  our  outward  pollutions. 
This  spiritual  meaning  of  part  of  the  Mosaic  dis- 
pensation is  admirably  introduced  into  the  Pil- 
grim's Progress,  when  Christian  and  Faithful  ana- 
lyse the  character  of  Talkative.1  This  is  the 
germ  of  that  singular  talent  which  flourished  in 
after-life,  of  exhibiting  a  spiritual  meaning  drawn 
from  every  part  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  and 
which  leads  one  of  our  most  admired  writers2  to 
suggest,  that  if  Bunyan  had  lived  and  written  dur- 
ing the  early  days  of  Christianity,  he  would  have 
been  the  greatest  of  the  fathers. 

Although  he  had  received  that  portion  of  com- 
fort which  enabled  him  to  indulge  in  religious 
speculations,  still  his  mind  was  unsettled,  and  full 
of  fears.  He  now  became  alarmed  lest  he  had  not 
been  effectually  called  to  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.0  lie  felt  still  more  humbled  at  the  weak- 
ness of  human  nature,  and  at  the  poverty  of 
wealth.  Could  this  call  have  been  gotten  for 
money,  and  '  could  I  have  given  it;  had  I  a  whole 
world,  it  had  all  gone  ten  thousand  times  over  for 
this.'  In  this  he  was  sincere,  and  so  he  was  when 
he  said,  I  would  not  lose  one  promise,  or  have  it 
struck  out  of  the  Bible,  if  in  return  I  could  have 
as  much  gold  as  would  reach  from  London  to 
York,  piled  up  to  the  heavens.  In  proportion  to 
his  soul's  salvation,  honour  was  a  worthless  phan- 
tom, and  gold  but  glittering  dust.  His  earnest 
desire  was  to  hear  his  Saviour's  voice  calling  him 
to  his  service.  Like  many  young  disciples,  he  re- 
gretted not  having  been  born  when  Christ  was 
manifest  in  the  flesh,  '  Would  I  had  been  Peter 
or  John  ! '  their  privations,  sufferings,  martyrdom, 
was  nothing  in  comparison  to  their  being  with,  and 
hearing  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  calling  them 
to  his  service.  Strange,  hut  general  delusion !  as 
if  Christ  were  not  the  same  yesterday,  to  day,  and 
ior  ever.  Groaning  for  a  sense  of  pardon,  he  was 
comforted  by  Joel — '  I  will  cleanse  their  blood 
that  I  have  not  cleansed,  for  the  Lord  dwelleth  in 
Zion,'  Joeini.  21,  and  he  was  led  to  seek  advice  and 
assistance  from  a  neighbouring  minister,  and  from 
pious  persons. 

The  poor  women  in  Bedford,  whose  conversation 
had  been  blessed  to  his  thorough  awakening,  were 
sought  for,  and  to  them  he  unfolded  his  sorrows. 
They  were  members  of  a  Baptist  church,   under 
the  pastoral  care  of  John  Gifford,  a  godly,  pains- 
taking, and  most  intelligent  minister,  whose  his- 
tory is  very  remarkable.    In  early  life  he  had  been,  j 
like   Bunyan,  a  thoroughly  depraved   character  ;  ! 
like  him  had  entered  the  army,  and  had  been  pro-  I 
moted  to  the  rank  of  a  major  in  the  royal  forces,  i 
Having  made  an  abortive  attempt  to  raise  a  rebel- 
1  Vol.  iii.,  p.  123.         -  Addison.         s  Vol.  i.,  p.  14.         j 
VOL.  in. 


lion  in  his  native  county  of  Kent,4  he  and  eleven 
others  were  made  prisoners,  tried  by  martial 
law,  and  condemned  to  the  gallows.  On  the  night 
previous  to  the  day  appointed  for  his  execution, 
his  sister  found  access  to  the  prison.  The  guards 
were  asleep,  and  his  companions  drowned  in  intoxi- 
cation. She  embraced  the  favourable  moment, 
and  set  him  at  liberty.  Ho  lay  concealed  in  a 
ditch  for  three  days,  till  the  heat  of  the  search  was 
over,  and  in  disguise  escaped  to  London,  and  thence 
to  Bedford,  where,  aided  by  some  great  people  who 
favoured  the  royal  cause,  he  commenced  business 
as  a  doctor.  Here  his  evil  habits  followed  him, 
notwithstanding  his  merciful  deliverance.  Swear- 
ing, druukenness,  gambling,  and  other  immoral 
practices,  rendered  him  a  curse  to  others,  especially 
to  the  Puritans,  whom  he  bitterly  persecuted.  One 
night  he  lost  fifteen  pounds  at  play,  and,  becoming 
outrageous,  he  cast  angry  reproaches  upon  God. 
In  this  state  he  took  up  a  book  by  R.  Bolton — he 
read,  and  his  conscience  was  terror-stricken.  Dis- 
tress, under  conviction  of  sin,  followed  him.  He 
searched  his  Bible,  and  found  pardon  and  accept- 
ance. He  now  sought  acquaintance  with  those 
whom  before  he  had  persecuted,  but,  like  Paul, 
when  in  similar  circumstances,  '  they  were  all 
afraid  of  him.'  His  sincerity  soon  became  appa- 
rent ;  and,  uniting  with  eleven  others,  they  formed 
a  church.  These  men  had  thrown  off  the  fetters  of 
education,  and  were,  unbiassed  by  any  sectarian 
feeling,  being  guided  solely  by  their  prayerful  re- 
searches into  divine  truth  as  revealed  in  the 
Bible.  Their  whole  object  was  to  enjoy  Chris- 
tian communion — to  extend  the  reign  of  grace — 
to  live  to  the  honour  of  Christ — and  they  formed 
a  new,  and  at  that  time  unheard-of,  community. 
Water-baptism  was  to  be  left  to  individual  convic- 
tion; they  were  to  love  each  other  equally,  whether 
they  advocated  baptism  in  infancy,  or  in  riper 
years.  The  only  thing  essential  to  church-fel- 
lowship, in  Mr.  Gilford's  opinion,  was — '  Union 
with  Christ  ;  this  is  the  foundation  of  all  saints' 
communion,  and  not  any  judgment  about  externals.' 
To  the  honour  of  the  Baptists,  these  peaceable  prin- 
ciples appear  to  have  commenced  with  two  or  three 
of  their  ministers,  and  for  the  last  two  centuries  they 
have  been,  like  heavenly  leaven,  extending  their 
delightful  influence  over  all  bodies  of  Christians. 

Such  was  the  man  to  whom  Bunyan  was  intro- 
duced for  religious  advice  and  consolation  ;  and 
he  assisted  in  forming  those  enlarged  and  non- 
sectarian  principles  which  made  his  ministry 
blessed,  and  will  render  his  Works  equally  ac- 
ceptable to  all  evangelical  Christians  in  every  age 

4  April  1G 15.    About  300  discontented  persons  jrot  ;•■ 
in  Kent,  and  took  Sir  Pcrcival  Hart's  bouse;  Colonel  Blunt 
attacked  and  dispersed  them  with  horse  and  foot,  regained  the 
house, andmadethechief  oftheni prisoners.  Whit  dock,  folic  1 37. 
c 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


of  the  cliurcli.  Introduced  to  such  a  minister, 
and  attending  social  meetings  for  prayer  and 
Christian  converse,  he  felt  still  more  painfully  his 
own  ignorance,  and  the  inward  wretchedness  of 
his  own  heart.  'His  corruptions  put  themselves 
forth,  and  his  desires  for  heaven  seemed  to  fail.' 
In  fact,  while  he  compared  himself  with  his 
former  self,  he  was  a  religious  giant ;  in  com- 
parison with  these  pious,  long-standing  Chris- 
tians, he  dwindled  into  a  pigmy ;  and  in  the  pre- 
sence of  Christ  he  became,  in  his  own  view,  less 
than  nothing,  and  vanity.  He  thus  describes  his 
feelings : — '  I  began  to  sink — my  heart  laid  me 
low  as  hell.  I  was  driven  as  with  a  tempest — my 
heart  would  be  unclean — the  Canaanites  would 
dwell  in  the  land.'1  He  was  like  the  child 
which  the  father  brought  to  Christ,  who,  while 
he  was  coming  to  Him,  was  thrown  down  by  the 
devil,  and  so  rent  and  torn  that  he  lay  and 
Avallowed,  foaming.  His  heart  felt  so  hard,  that 
with  many  a  bitter  sigh  lie  cried,  '  Good  Lord  ! 
break  it  open.  Lord,  break  these  gates  of  brass, 
and  cut  these  bars  of  iron  asunder,'  Ps.  cvu.  16. 
Little  did  he  then  think  that  his  bitterness  of 
spirit  was  a  direct  answer  to  such  prayers.  Break- 
ing the  heart  was  attended  with  anguish  in  propor- 
tion as  it  had  been  hardened.  During  this  time 
he  was  tender  and  seusitive  as  to  the  least  sin ; 
'now  I  durst  not  take  a  pin  or  a  stick,  my  con- 
science woidd  smart  at  every  touch.'  *0,  how 
gingerly  did  I  then  go  in  all  I  said  or  did ! ' 2  '  Still 
sin  would  as  naturally  bubble  out  of  my  heart  as 
water  would  bubble  out  of  a  fountain.'  He  felt 
surprised  when  he  saw  professors  much  troubled 
at  their  losses,  even  at  the  death  of  the  dearest 
relative.  His  whole  concern  was  for  his  salvation, 
lie  imagined  that  he  could  bear  these  small  afflic- 
tions with  patience ;  but  '  a  wounded  spirit  who 
can  bear?' 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  miseries,  and  at  times 
regretting  that  he  had  been  endowed  with  an  im- 
mortal spirit,  liable  to  eternal  ruin,  he  was  jealous 
of  receiving  comfort,  lest  it  might  be  based  upon 
any  false  foundation.  Still  as  his  only  hope  he 
was  constant  in  his  attendance  upon  the  means 
of  grace,  and  'when  comforting  time  was  come,'  he 
heard  one  preach  upon  two  words  of  a  verse,  which 
conveyed  strong  consolation  to  his  weary  spirit; 
the  words  were,  '  my  love,'  Song  iv.  1.  From  these 
words  the  minister  drew  the  following  conclusions  : 
— 1.  That  the  church,  and  so  every  saved  soul,  is 
Christ's  love,  even  when  loveless  ;  2.  Christ's  love 
is  without  a  cause ;  3.  They  are  Christ's  love  when 
hated  of  the  world  ;  4.  Christ's  love  when  under 
temptation  and  under  desertion  ;  5.  Christ's  love 
from  first  to  last.3     Now  was  his  heart  filled  with 


comfort  and  hope.  '  I  could  believe  that  my  sins 
should  be  forgiven  me;'  and,  in  a  state  of  rap- 
ture, he  thought  that  his  trials  were  over,  and  that 
the  savour  of  it  would  go  with  him  through  life. 
Alas!  his  enjoyment  was  but  for  a  season — the 
preparation  of  his  soul  for  future  usefulness  was 
not  yet  finished.  In  a  short  time  the  words  of  our 
Lord  to  Peter  came  powerfully  into  his  mind — 
'  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you  ;'  and  so  strong 
was  the  impression  they  made,  that  he  thought 
some  man  addressed  them  to  him  ;  he  even  turned 
his  head  to  see  who  it  was  that  thus  spoke  to  him. 
This  was  the  forerunner  of  a  cloud  and  a  storm  that 
was  coming  upon  him.  It  was  the  gathering  up  of 
Satan's  mighty  strength,  to  have,  if  possible,  over- 
whelmed him.  His  narrative  of  this  internal  tem- 
pest in  his  soul — this  last  great  struggle  with  the 
powers  of  darkness — is  very  striking. 

*  About  the  space  of  a  month  after,  a  very  great  storm  came 
down  upon  me,  which  handled  me  twenty  times  worse  than  all 
I  had  met  with  before ;  it  came  stealiug  upon  me,  now  by  one 
piece,  then  by  another.  First,  all  my  comfort  was  taken  from 
me ;  then  darkness  seized  upon  me ;  after  which,  whole  floods 
of  blasphemies,  both  against  God,  Christ,  and  the  Scriptures, 
were  poured  upon  my  spirit,  to  my  great  confusion  and  asto- 
nish meat.  These  blasphemous  thoughts  were  such  as  also 
stirred  up  questions  in  me  against  the  very  being  of  God,  and 
of  his  only  beloved  Son.  As,  whether  there  were  in  truth  a 
God  or  Christ,  or  no  ?  And  whether  the  Holy  Scriptures  were 
not  rather  a  fable,  and  cunning  story,  thau  the  holy  and  pure 
Word  of  God. 

'  These  suggestions,  with  many  others,  which  at  this  time 
I  may  not,  dare  not  utter,  neither  by  word  nor  pen,  did 
make  such  a  seizure  upon  my  spirit,  and  did  so  overweigh  my 
heart,  both  with  their  number,  continuance,  and  fiery  force, 
that  I  felt  as  if  there  were  nothing  else  but  these  from  morn- 
ing to  night  within  me,  and  as  though  indeed  there  could  be 
room  for  nothing  else ;  and  also  concluded,  that  God  had,  iu 
very  wrath  to  my  soul,  given  me  up  uuto  them,  to  be  carried 
away  with  them  as  with  a  mighty  whirlwind. 

«  Only  by  the  distaste  that  they  gave  unto  my  spirit,  I  felt 
there  was  something  in  me  that  refused  to  embrace  them.'1 

Here  are  the  facts  which  are  allegorized  in  the 
history  of  Christian,  passing  through  the  Valley  of 
Humiliation,  and  fighting  with  the  Prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air.  'Then  Apollyon,  espying  his 
opportunity,  began  to  gather  up  close  to  Christian, 
and  wrestling  with  him,  gave  him  a  dreadful  fall ; 
and  with  that  Christian's  sword  flew  out  of  his 
hand.'  This  was  the  effect  of  his  doubts  of  the 
inspiration  of  the  Scriptures— the  sword  of  the 
Spirit.  '  I  am  sure  of  thee  now,  said  Apollyon  ; 
and  with  that  he  had  almost  pressed  him  to  death, 
so  that  Christian  began  to  despair  of  life  ;  but  as 
God  would  have  it,  while  Apollyon  was  fetching  of 
his  last  blow,  Christian  nimbly  stretched  out  his 
hand  for  his  sword,  and  caught  it,  saying,  "Rejoice 
not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy,  when  I  fall  I  shall 
arise,"   Mi.  vii.  s;  and  with  that  gave  him  a  deadly 


Vol.  i.,  p.  15.  -  Vol.  i.,  p.  lj 

3  Vol.  i.,  p.  16. 


No.  82. 


*  Vol.  i.,  p.  17,  13. 


MEMOIR    OF  JOHN   BUN  VAX. 


thrust,  which  made  him  gfcw  back  as  one  that  had  [ 
resented  his  mortal  wound.      Christian  perceiving 
that,  made  at  him  again,  saying,   "  Nay,   m  all  . 
these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  : 
him  that  loved  us  ;"  and  with  that  Apolkon  spread 
forth   his    dragon    wings,    and  sped    him    away.'1! 
What   an   awful   moment,    when    he  fell  unarmed 
before  his  ferocious  enemy!      'Faith  now  has  but  i 
little  time  to  speak  to  the  conscience — it  is  now 
Btruggting  for  life — it  is  now  lighting  with  angels 
— with  internals — all   it   can   do  now   is   to   cry, 
groan,    sweat,    fear,    fight,    and    gasp   for    life.'"  I 
How    desperate  the  eoniiict — the   mouth    of  hell  j 
yawning  to  swallow  him — man  cannot  aid  the  poor 
warrior,  all  his  help  is  in  God,     Is  it  not  a  wonder 
to  see  a  poor  creature,  who  in  himself  is  weaker 
than  the  moth,  to  stand  against  and  overcome  all 
devils — all  the  world — all  his  lusts  and  corruptions; 
or,  if  he  fall,  is  it  not  a  wonder  to  see  him,  when 
devils  and  guilt  are  upon  him,  to  rise  again,  stand 
upon  his  legs,  walk  with  God  again,  and  persevere 
in  faith  and  holiness?'3 

This  severe  conflict  lasted  for  about  a  year. 
He  describes  his  feelings  at  times  as  resembling  the 
frightful  pangs  of  one  broken  on  the  wheel.  The 
sources  of  his  misery  were  fears  that  he  had  sinued 
against  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  that  through  his 
hardness  of  heart  and  impatience  in  prayer — he 
should  not  persevere  to  the  end.  During  all  this 
time,  occasional  visits  of  mercy  kept  him  from 
despair ;  and  at  some  intervals  filled  him  with 
transports  of  joy.  At  one  time  so  delightfully  was 
his  burden  removed  that  he  could  not  tell  how  to 
contain  himself.  '  I  thought  I  could  have  spoken 
of  his  love  and  of  his  mercy  to  me,  even  to  the 
very  crows  that  sat  upon  the  ploughed  lands  before 
me,  had  they  been  capable  to  have  understood  me.4 
Thus  his  feelings  were  controlled  by  reason,  very 
different  to  the  poor  madman  who,  in  olden  time, 
is  represented  as  preaching  to  the  fish.  "With 
Bunyau  it  was  a  hallowed  joy — a  gush  of  holy 
gladness,  in  which  he  wished  all  creation  to  parti- 
cipate. His  heart  was  baptized  in  hope.  '  I 
kuow  that  my  Redeemer  livcth  ;'  and  with  holy 
Job,  he  wished  to  perpetuate  his  joy  by  a  memorial 
not  in  rock,  but  in  a  book  of  remembrance.  '  I 
would  I  had  a  pen  and  ink  here  to  write  it  down.' 
This  is  the  first  desire  that  he  expressed  to  pro- 
claim or  publish  to  others  the  great  Saviour  he 
had  found  :  but  he  was  not  yet  prepared  ;  he 
must  pass  through  deeper  depths,  and  possess  a 
living  knowledge  of  Divine  truth,  burnt  into  his 
soul  by  satanic  fires. 

Very  soon    after  this,    he    was  harassed    with 


1  Vol.  iii.,  p.  113. 

-  Buuyan's  Saints'  Privilege  and  Profit,  vol.  i.,  p.  CGI. 

3  Buuyan's  Saved  ly  Grace,  vol.  i.,  p.  340. 

1  Vol.  i.,  p.  17. 


fear  lest  he  should  part  with  Christ.  Tho 
tempter,  as  he  did  with  Christian  in  the  Valley  of 
the  Shallow  of  Death,  suggested  blasphemies  to 
him,  which  he  thought  had  proceeded  from  his 
own  mind.  '  Satan  troubled  him  with  his  stinking 
breath.  How  many  strange,  hideous,  and  amazing 
blasphemies  bare  some  that  are  coming  to  Christ 
had  injected  upon  their  spirits  against  him.'6 
'  The  devil  is  iudeed  very  busy  at  work  during  the 
darkness  of  a  soul.  He  throws  in  his  fiery  darts 
to  amazement,  when  we  arc  encompassed  with 
the  terrors  of  a  dismal  night;  he  is  bold  and  un- 
daunted in  his  assaults,  and  injects  with  a  quick 
and  sudden  malice  a  thousand  monstrous  and  abo- 
minable thoughts  of  God,  which  seem  to  be  the 
motions  of  our  own  minds,  and  terribly  grieve  and 
trouble  us.'0 

What  makes  these  arrows  more  penetrating  and 
distressing  is,  that  Satan,  with  subtle  art,  tips 
them  with  sentences  of  Scripture.  'No  place  for 
repentance;'  'rejected;'  'hath  never  forgive- 
ness,' and  other  passages  which,  by  the  malignant 
ingenuity  of  the  fiend,  are  formed  by  his  skill  as 
the  cutting  and  barbed  points  of  his  shafts.  At  one 
time  Bunyan  concluded  that  he  was  possessed  of 
the  devil ;  then  he  was  tempted  to  speak  and  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  thought  himself  alone 
in  such  a  tempest,  and  that  no  oue  had  ever  felt 
such  misery  as  he  did.  When  in  prayer,  his  mind 
was  distracted  with  the  thought  that  Satan  was 
pulling  his  clothes ;  he  was  even  tempted  to  fall 
down  and  worship  him.  Then  he  would  cry  after 
God,  in  awful  fear  that  eventually  Satan  would 
overcome  him.  During  all  this  time  he  was  strug- 
gling against  the  tempter;  and,  at  length,  the  day- 
spring  visited  him  in  these  words,  '  I  am  persuaded 
that  nothing  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus.'  Again  he  was  cast  down 
with  a  recollection  of  his  former  blasphemies. 
What  reason  can  I  have  to  hope  for  an  inheritance 
in  eternal  life  ?  The  question  was  answered  with 
that  portion  of  Scripture,  '  If  God  be  for  us,  who 
can  be  against  us?'  These  were  visits  which,  like 
Peter's  sheet,   of  a  sudden   were  caught  up  to 


5  Bunyau's  Christ  a  Complete  Saviour,  vol.  i.,  p.  210. 

c  .Rogers  on  Trouble  of  Mind.  Preface.  Thus  temptations 
are  suited  to  the  state  of  the  inquiring  soul;  the  learned 
man  who  studies  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Aquinas,  is  filled  with 
doubts  arising  from  'philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  profane  end 
vain  babblings  ;"  the  uulettered* mechanic  is  tried  not  by  logic, 
but  by  infernal  artillery ;  the  threateuings  of  God's  Word  are 
obscure  the  promises.  It  is  a  struggle  which,  to  one 
possessing  a  vivid  imagination,  is  attended  with  almost  intoler- 
able agonies — unbelief  seals  up  the  door  of  mercy. 

Bunyan  agreed  with  his  learned  contemporary,  Milton,  in 
the  invisible  agency  of  good  and  bad  spirits. 

'Millions  of  spiritual  oreftttties  '•', : 
L'uscen,  both  when  we  wake  and  when  v. 

The  malignant  demons  watch  their  opportunity  to  harass  the 
pilgrim  with  evil  thoughts,  injected  when  least  expected. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN    BVNYAN. 


Leaven  again.1  At  length,  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness arose,  and  shone  upon  him  with  healing  in- 
fluence. *  He  hath  made  peace  through  the  hlood 
of  his  cross,'  came  with  power  to  his  mind,  followed 
hy  the  consoling  words  of  the  apostle,  '  Forasmuch, 
then,  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and 
hlood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the 
same ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil,  and 
deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all 
their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage,'  He.  ii.  u,  is.  This 
was  the  key  that  opened  every  lock  in  Doubting 
Castle.  The  prisoner  escaped  to  breathe  the  air 
of  hope,  and  joy,  and  peace.  '  This,'  said  he, 
'was  a  good  day  to  me,  I  hope  I  shall  not  forget  it.' 
1 1  thought  that  the  glory  of  those  words  was  then 
so  weighty  on  me,  that  I  was,  both  once  and  twice, 
ready  to  swoon  as  I  sat,  not  with  grief  and  trouble, 
but  with  solid  joy  and  peace. ' 

His  mind  was  now  in  a  fit  state  to  seek  for 
church  fellowship,  as  a  further  means  of  advance 
in  his  knowledge  of  Divine  love.  To  effect  this 
object,  he  was  naturally  led  to  the  Baptist  church 
at  Bedford,  to  which  those  pious  women  belonged 
whose  Christian  communion  had  been  blessed  to 
him.  I  sat  under  the  ministry  of  holy  Mr.  Gifford, 
whose  doctrine,  by  God's  grace,  was  much  for  my 
stability.'  2  Although  his  soul  was  led  from  truth 
to  truth,  his  trials  were  not  over — he  passed  through 
many  severe  exercises  before  he  was  received  into 
communion  with  the  church.3 

At  length  he  determined  to  become  identified 
with  a  body  of  professed  Christians,  who  were 
treated  with  great  scorn  by  other  sects  because 
they  denied  infant  baptism,  and  he  became  en- 
gaged in  the  religious  controversies  which  were 
fashionable  in  those  days.  We  have  noticed  his 
encounter  with  the  Ranters,  and  he  soon  had  to 
give  battle  to  persons  called  Quakers.  Before 
the  Society  of  Friends  was  formed,  and  their 
rules  of  discipline  were  published,  many  Rant- 
ers and  others,  some  of  whom  were  bad  charac- 
ters and  held  the  wildest  opinions,  passed  under 
the  name  of  Quakers.  Some  of  these  denied  that 
the  Bible  was  the  Word  of  God;  and  asserted  that 
the  death  of  Christ  was  not  a  full  atonement  for 
sin — that  there  is  no  future  resurrection,  and  other 
gross  errors.  The  Quakers,  who  were  afterwards 
united  to  form  the  Society  of  Friends,  from  the 


1  Vol.  L,  p.  19.  '  Vol.  L,  p.  20. 

3  The  anxiety  of  this  pious  teacher  was  to  press  upon  his 
hearers  '  to  take  special  heed,'  not  to  receive  any  truth  upon 
trust  from  any  man,  but  to  pray  over  it  and  search  '  the  Holy 
Word.5  This,  Mr.  Southey  designates,  '  doctrine  of  a  most 
perilous  kind.'  How  happy  would  it  be  for  society  if  every 
religious  teacher  pressed  this  perilous  doctrine  upon  their 
hearers,  that  it  might  bring  forth  the  same  fruit  universally, 
as  it  did  specially  in  Bunyan.  Compare  Grace  Abounding, 
No.  117,  and  Southefs  Life,  p.  27,  28. 


first  denied  all  those  errors.  Their  earliest  apolo- 
gist, Barclay,  in  his  theses  on  the  Scriptures,  says, 
♦  They  are  the  doctrines  of  Christ,  held  forth  in 
precious  declarations,  spoken  and  written  by  the 
movings  of  God's  Spirit/  Whoever  it  was  that 
asserted  the  heresies,  to  Bunyan  the  investi- 
gation of  them,  in  the  light  of  Divine  truth,  was 
attended  with  great  advantages.  It  was  through 
'this  narrow  search  of  the  Scriptures  that  he  was 
not  only  enlightened,  but  greatly  confirmed  and 
comforted  in  the  truth.* 

He  longed  to  compare  his  experience  with  that 
of  some  old  and  eminent  convert,  and  '  God  did 
cast  into  his  hand '  Luther  On  the  Galalians,  'so 
old  that  it  was  ready  to  fall  piece  from  piece,  if  I 
did  but  turn  it  over/5  The  commentary  of  this 
enlightened  man  was  a  counterpart  to  his  own 
feelings.  *  I  found,'  says  Bunyan,  '  my  condition, 
in  his  experience  so  largely  and  profoundly  handled, 
as  if  his  book  had  been  written  out  of  my  own 
heart.  I  prefer  the  book  before  all  others  as  most 
fit  for  a  wounded  conscience.'  This  was  the 
'  voice  of  a  man '  that  Christian  '  heard  as  going 
before  him  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,' 
and  was  glad  that  some  who  feared  God  were  in 
this  valley  as  well  as  himself,  who  could  say,  '  I 
will  fear  no  evil  for  thou  art  with  me.'  6  In  many 
things  Luther  and  Bunyan  were  men  of  similar  tem- 
perament. Like  Emmanuel's  captains,  in  the  Holy 
War,  they  were  '  very  stout  rough-hewn  men  ; 
men  that  were  fit  to  break  the  ice,  and  to  make 
their  way  by  dint  of  sword/ 7  They  were  ani- 
mated by  the  same  principles,  and  fought  with  the 
same  weapons  ;  and  although  Luther  resided  in  a 
castle  protected  by  princes,  was  furnished  with 
profound  scholastic  learning,  and  became  a  terror 
to  Popery  ;  yet  the  voice  of  the  unlettered  tinker, 
issuing  from  a  dreary  prison,  bids  fair  to  be  far 
more  extensively  heard  and  blessed  than  that  of 
this  most  illustrious  reformer.8 


4  Vol.  i.,  p.  21.  6  Vol.  L,  p.  22. 

c  Vol.  iii.,  p.  115.  7  Vol.  ill.,  p.  270. 

8  Luther  fell  into  the  same  mistake  as  to  the  Baptists,  that 
Bunyan  did  as  to  the  Quakers.  Both  were  keenly  alive  to  the 
honour  of  Christianity,  and  were  equally  misled  by  the  loose 
conduct  of  some  unworthy  professors.  Luther  charges  the 
Baptists  as  being  '  devils  possessed  with  worse  devils.'  *  '  It 
is  all  one  whether  he  be  called  a  Frank,  a  Turk,  a  Jew,  or  an 
Anabaptist.'  f  '  Possessed  with  the  devil,  seditious,  and  bloody 
men. 'J  Even  a  few  days  before  his  death,  he  wrote  to  his  wife, 
'  Dearest  Kate,  we  reached  Halle  at  eight  o'clock,  but  could 
not  get  on  to  Eisleben,  for  there  met  us  a  great  Anabaptist, 
with  waves  and  lumps  of  ice,  which  threatened  us  with  a 
second  baptism.'  Bunyan,  iu  the  same  spirit,  calls  the  Quakers 
'a  company  of  loose  ranters,  light  notionists,  shaking  in  their 
principles  ! '  §  Denying  the  Scriptures  and  the  resurrection. jj 
These  two  great  men  went  through  the  same  furnace  of  the 
regeneration  ;  and  Bunyan,  notwithstanding  Luther's  prejudices 
against  the  Baptists,  most  affectionately  recommended  his 
Comment  on  the  Galalians,  as  an  invaluable  work  for  binding 
up  the  broken-hearted. 

*  Preface  to  Galatians.        +  Com.  Gal.  iv.  8,  9.        %  Gal.  v.  19. 
§  Vol.  ii.,  p.  133,  9,  21.        y  Com.  Gal.  iv.  29. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


Bunyan'3  happiness  was  now  very  c;reat;  his 
soul,  with  all  its  affections,  clavo  unto  Christ:  but 
lest  spiritual  pride  should  exalt  him  beyond  mea- 
sure, and  lest  he  should  be  scared  to  renounce 
his  Saviour,  by  the-  threat  of  transportation  and 
death,  his  heart  was  again  wounded,  and  quickly 
after  this  his  '  love  was  tried  to  purpose.' 

The  tempter  came  in  upon  him  with  a  most 
grievous  and  dreadful  temptation;  it  was  to  part 
with  Christ,  to  exchange  him  for  the  things  of 
this  life;  he  was  perpetually  tormented  with  the 
words  'sell  Christ.'  At  length,  he  thought  that 
his  spirit  gave  way  to  the  temptation,  and  a 
dreadful  and  profound  state  of  despair  overpowered 
him  for  the  dreary  space  of  more  than  two  years.1 
This  is  the  most  extraordinary  part  of  this  won- 
derful narrative,  that  he,  without  apparent  cause, 
should  thus  be  tempted,  and  feel  the  bitterness  of 
a  supposed  parting  with  Christ.  There  was,  doubt- 
less, a  cause  for  every  pang;  his  heavenly  Father 
afflicted  him  for  his  profit.  We  shall  soon  have  to 
follow  him  through  fiery  trials.  Before  the  justices, 
allured  by  their  arguments,  and  particularly  by 
the  sophistry  of  their  clerk,  Mr.  Cobb,  and  then 
dragged  from  a  beloved  wife  and  from  children  to 
whom  he  was  most  fondly  attached — all  these  fiery 
trials  might  be  avoided,  if  he  would  but  '  sell 
Christ.'  A  cold  damp  dungeon  was  to  incarcerate 
his  body  for  twelve  tedious  years  of  the  prime  of 
his  life,  unless  he  would  c  sell  Christ.'  His  minis- 
tering brother  and  friend,  John  Child,  a  Bedford 
man,  who  bad  joined  in  recommending  Bunyan's 
Vindication  of  Gospel  Truths,-  fell  under  this  tempta- 
tion, and  fearing  temporal  ruin  and  imprisonment 
for  life,  conformed,  and  then  fell  into  the  most 
awful  state  of  despair,  suffering  such  agonies  of 
conscience,  that,  to  get  rid  of  present  trouble,  he 
hurried  himself  into  eternity.  Probably  Bunyan 
alludes  to  this  awful  instance  of  fell  despair  in  his 
Publican  and  Phaiisee :  *  Sin,  when  appearing  in 
it3  monstrous  shape  and  hue,  frighteth  all  mortals 
out  of  their  wits,  away  from  God;  and  if  he  stops 
them  not,  also  out  of  the  world.' J  To  arm  Bunyan 
against  being  overcome  by  a  fear  of  the  lions  in 
the  way  to  the  house  Beautiful — against  giving 
way,  under  persecution — he  was  visited  with  terrors 
lest  he  should  sell  or  part  with  Christ.  During 
these  sad  years  he  was  not  wholly  sunk  in  despair, 
but  had  at  times  some  glimmerings  of  mercy.  In 
comparing  his  supposed  sin  with  that  of  Judas,  he 
was  constrained  to  find  a  difference  between  a 
deliberate  intention  to  sell  Christ  and  a  sudden 
temptation.4  Through  all  these  searchings  of  heart 
and  inquiries  at  the  Word,  he  became  fixed  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance  of  God's  saints. 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  23. 
s  Vol.  ii.,  p.  2C0. 


-Vol.  ii.,  p.  181. 

4  Vol.  i.,  p.  25;  Xo.  158. 


'  0  what  love,  what  care,  what  kindness  and  mercy 
did  I  now  see  mixing  itself  with  the  most  severe 
and  dreadful  of  all  God's  ways  to  his  people ;  ho 
never  let  them  fall  into  sin  unpardonable.'  'But 
theso  thoughts  added  grief  and  horror  to  me ;  I 
thought  that  all  things  wrought  for  my  eternal 
overthrow.'  So  ready  is  the  tender  heart  to  write 
bitter  things  against  itself,  and  as  ready  is  the 
tempter  to  whisper  despairing  thoughts.  In  the 
midst  of  this  distress  he  '  saw  a  glory  in  walking 
with  God/  although  a  dismal  cloud  enveloped  him. 
This  misery  was  aggravated  by  reading  the  fear- 
ful estate  of  Francis  Spira,  who  had  been  persuaded 
to  return  to  a  profession  of  Popery,  and  died  in  a 
state  of  awful  despair.5  '  This  book '  was  to  his 
troubled  spirit  like  salt  rubbed  into  a  fresh  wound. 
Bunyan  now  felt  his  body  and  mind  shaking  and 
tottering  under  the  sense  of  the  dreadful  judgment 
of  God  ;  and  he  thought  his  sin — of  a  momentary 
and  unwilling  consent  to  give  up  Christ — was  a 
greater  sin  than  all  the  sins  of  David,  Solomon, 
Manasseh,  and  even  than  all  the  sins  that  had  been 
committed  by  all  God's  redeemed  ones.  Was  there 
ever  a  man  in  the  world  so  capable  of  describing 
the  miseries  of  Doubting  Castle,  or  of  the  Slough 
of  Despond,  as  poor  John  Bunyan  ? 

He  would  have  run  from  God  in  utter  despera- 
tion; 'but,  blessed  be  his  grace,  that  Scripture,  in 
these  flying  sins,  would  call,  as  runuing  after  me, 
"  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  transgres- 
sions, and,  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins:  return  unto  me,  for 
I  have  redeemed  thee,"'  ls.xiiT.22.  Still  he  was 
haunted  by  that  scripture,  '  You  know  how  that 
afterwards,  when  he  would  have  inherited  the 
blessing,  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 
he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears.'  Thus  was  he 
tossed  and  buffeted,  involved  in  cloudy  darkness, 
with  now  and  then  a  faint  gleam  of  hope  to  save 
him  from  despair.  '  In  all  these/  he  says,  '  I  was 
but  as  those  that  justle  against  the  rocks ;  more 
broken,  scattered,  and  rent.  Oh!  the  unthought-of 
imaginations,  frights,  fears,  and  terrors,  that  are 
effected  by  a  thorough  application  of  guilt.'0 
'  Methought  I  saw  as  if  the  sun  that  shineth  in  the 
heavens  did  grudge  to  give  light,  and  as  if  the  very 
stones  in  the  street,  and  tiles  upon  the  houses,  did 
bend  themselves  against  me.'7  Here  we  find  him  in 
that  doleful  valley,  where  Christian  was  surrounded 
by  enemies  that  '  cared  not  for  his  sword,'  he  put 
it  up,  and  places  his  dependence  upon  the  more 
penetrating  weapon,  'All  Prayer.'  Depending 
upon  this  last  resource,  he  prayed,  even  when 
in  this  great  darkness  and  distress.  To  whom 
could  he  go  ?  his  case  was  beyond  the  power  of 
men  or  angels.  His  refuge,  from  a  fear  of  having 
committed  the  unpardonable  sin,  was  that  he  had 


6  See  note  in  vol  i.,  p.  2G. 
0  Vol.  i.,  p.  29. 


7  Vol.  i.,  p.  80. 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUNYAN. 


never  refused  to  be  justified  by  tbe  blood  of  Cbvist, 
but  ardently  wished  it;  this,  in  the  midst  of  the 
storm,  caused  a  temporary  calm.  At  length,  he 
■was  led  to  look  prayerfully  upon  those  scriptures 
that  had  tormented  him,  and  to  examine  their 
scope  and  tendency,  and  then  he  '  found  their 
visage  changed,  for  they  looked  not  so  grimly  on 
him  as  before  he  thought  they  did.'1  Still,  after 
Buch  a  tempest,  the  sea  did  not  at  once  become  a 
calm.  Like  one  that  had  been  scared  with  fire, 
every  voice  was  fire,  fire  ;  every  little  touch  hurt 
his  tender  conscience.2 

All  this  instructive  history  is  pictured  by  a  few 
words  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.  At  the  Inter- 
preter's house  the  pilgrim  is  shown  '  a  fire  burn- 
ing against  a  wall,  and  one  standing  by  it,  always 
casting  much  water  upon  it,  to  quench  it;  yet 
did  the  fire  burn  higher  and  hotter.'3  As  Esau 
beat  him  down,  Christ  raised  him  again.  The 
threatening  and  the  promise  were  like  glittering 
swords  clashing  together,  but  the  promise  must 
prevail. 

His  entire  relief  at  last  was  sudden,  while 
meditating  in  the  field  upon  the  words,  '  Thy 
righteousness  is  in  heaven.'  Hence  he  drew  the 
conclusion,  that  his  righteousness  was  in  Christ,  at 
God's  right  hand,  ever  before  him,  secure  from 
all  the  powers  of  sin  and  Satan.  Now  his  chains 
fell  oif;  he  was  loosed  from  his  affliction  and 
irons  ;  his  temptation  fled  away.  His  present 
supply  of  grace  he  compared  to  the  cracked 
groats  and  fourpence  half-pennies,4  which  rich  men 
carry  in  their  pockets,  while  their  treasure  is  safe 
in  their  trunks  at  home,  as  his  was  in  the  store- 
house of  heaven. 

This  dreary  night  of  awful  conflict  lasted  more 
than  two  years;  hut  when  the  day-spring  from  on 
high  visited  him,  the  promises  spangled  in  his  eyes, 
and  he  broke  out  into  a  song,  'Praise  ye  the  Lord. 
Praise  God  in  his  sanctuary:  praise  him  in  the  fir- 
mament of  his  power.      Praise  him  for  his  mighty 


1  The  study  of  those  scriptures,  in  order  that  the  solemn 
question  might  be  safely  resolved,  '  Can  such  a  fallen  sinner 
rise  again?'  was  like  the  investigation  of  the  title  to  an  estate 
upon  which  a  whole  livelihood  depended.  Every  apparent  flaw 
must  he  critically  examined.  Tremblingly  alive  to  the  import- 
ance of  a  right  decision,  his  prayers  were  most  earnest ;  and 
at  length,  to  his  unspeakable  delight,  the  word  of  the  law  and 
wrath  ^avc  place  to  that  of  life  and  grace. 

2  Vol.  i.,  p.  35.  3  Vol.  iii,  p.  100. 

4  Irish  sixpences,  which  passed  for  fourpence-halfpcnny. 
See  the  note  on  vol.  i.,  p.  30.  Since  writing  that  note  I  have 
discovered  another  proof  of  the  contempt  with  which  that  coin 
was  treated : — '  Christian,  the  wife  of  Robert  Green,  of  Bres- 
liam,  Somersetshire,  in  1663,  is  said  to  have  made  a  covenant 
with  the  devil;  he  pricked  the  fourth  finger  of  her  right 
hand,  between  the  middle  and  upper  joints,  and  took  two 
drops  of  her  blood  on  his  finger,  giving  her  a  fourpence-half- 
penny.  Then  he  spake  in  private  with  Catharine  her  sister, 
aud  vanished,  leaving  a  smell  of  brimstone  behind ! ' — Turner's 
Remarkable  Providences,  folio,  1667,  p.  2S. 


acts :  praise  him  according  to  his  excellent  great- 
ness.'5 

Bunyan's  opinion  as  to  the  cause  of  this  bitter 
suffering,  was  his  want  of  watchfulness,  his  not 
coming  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  that 
he  had  tempted  God.  The  advantages  he  con- 
sidered that  he  had  gained  by  it  were,  that  it 
confirmed  his  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God, 
so  that  he  lost  all  his  temptations  to  unbelief,  blas- 
phemy, and  hardness  of  heart,  Doubts  as  to  the 
truth  of  the  Word,  and  certainty  of  the  world  to 
come,  were  gone  for  ever. 

He  found  no  difficulty  as  to  the  keys  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  « Now  I  saw  the  apostles  to  be  the 
elders  of  the  city  of  refuge,  those  that  they  were 
to  receive  in,  were  received  to  life,  but  those  that 
they  were  to  shut  out,  were  to  be  slain  by  the 
avenger  of  blood.'  Those  were  to  enter  who,  with 
Peter,  confessed  to  Jesus,  'Thou  art  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  the  living  God,'  Mat.  xvi.  ie.  This  is  simply 
an  authority  to  proclaim  salvation  or  condemnation 
to  those  who  receive  or  reject  the  Saviour.  It  is 
upon  his  shoulder  the  key  of  the  house  is  laid, 
is.  xxii.  22.  Christ  only  has  the  key,  no  man  openetli 
or  shutteth,  Re.  i.  is ;  iii.  7.  All  that  man  can  do,  as 
to  binding  or  loosening,  is  to  warn  the  hardened 
and  to  invite  the  contrite. 

By  these  trials,  the  promises  became  more  clear 
and  invaluable  than  ever.  He  never  saw  those 
heights  and  depths  in  grace,  and  love,  and  mercy, 
as  he  saw  them  after  this  severe  trial — '  great  sins 
drew  out  great  grace;'  and  the  more  terrible  and 
fierce  guilt  was,  the  more  high  and  mighty  did  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ  appear.  These  are  Bunyan's 
own  reflections;  but  may  we  not  add  to  them,  that 
while  he  was  in  God's  school  of  trial,  every  groan, 
every  bitter  pang  of  anguish,  and  every  gleam  of 
hope,  were  intended  to  fit  him  for  his  future  work 
as  a  preacher  and  writer?  Weighed  in  the  balances 
of  the  sanctuary,  there  was  not  a  jot  too  little,  or 
an  iota  too  much.  Every  important  subject  which 
embarrasses  the  convert,  was  most  minutely  investi- 
gated, especially  faith,  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  divinity  of  Christ,  and  such  essential 
truths.  He  well  knew  every  dirty  lane,  and  nook, 
and  corner  of  Mansoul,  in  which  the  Diabolonians 
found  shelter,  and  well  he  knew  the  frightful  sound 
of  Diabolus's  drum.6  Well  did  his  pastor,  John 
Burton,  say  of  him,  '  He  hath  through  grace  taken 
these  three  heavenly  degrees,  to  wit,  union  with 
Christ,  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  and  experience 
of  the  temptations  of  Satan,  which  do  more  fit  a 
man  for  that  mighty  work  of  preaching  the  gospel, 
than  all  the  university  learning  and  degrees  that 
can  be  had.'7 

Preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  called — selected 


Holy  War. 


Vol.  ii.,  p.  141. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


from  Lis  associates  in  sin,  he  was  taken  into  this 
school,  and  underwent  the  strictest  religious  edu- 
cation. It  was  here  alone  that  his  rare  talent 
could  be  cultivated,  to  enable  him,  in  two  immortal 
allegories,  to  narrate  the  internal  discipline  he 
underwent.  It  was  here  he  attained  that  habitual 
access  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  that  insight  into 
the  inspired  volume,  which  tilled  his  writings  with 
those  solemn  realities  of  the  world  to  come  ;  while 
it  enabled  him  to  reveal  the  mysteries  of  com- 
munion with  the  Father  of  spirits,  as  he  so  wou- 
drously  does  in  his  treatise  on  prayer.  To  use 
the  language  of  Milton — t  These  are  works  that 
could  not  be  composed  by  the  invocation  of  Dame 
Memory  and  her  Siren  daughters,  but  by  devout 
prayer  to  that  Eternal  Spirit,  who  can  enrich  with 
all  utterance  and  knowledge,  and  send  out  his 
seraphim,  with  the  hallowed  fire  of  his  altar,  to 
touch  and  purify  the  lips  of  whom  he  pleases,  with- 
out reference  to  station,  birth,  or  education.'  The 
tent-maker  and  tinker,  the  fisherman  and  publican, 
and  even  a  friar  or  monk,1  became  the  honoured 
instruments  of  his  choice. 

Throughout  all  Bunyan's  writings,  he  never 
murmurs  at  his  want  of  education,  although  it  is 
often  a  source  of  humble  apology.  He  honoured 
the  learned  godly  as  Christians,  but  preferred  the 
Bible  before  the  library  of  the  two  universities.2  He 
saw,  what  every  pious  man  must  see  and  lament, 
that  there  is  much  idolatry  in  human  learning,  and 
that  it  was  frequently  applied  to  confuse  and  im- 
pede the  gospel.  Thus  he  addresses  the  reader  of 
his  treatise  on  Tlie  Law  and  Grace — '  If  thou  find 
this  book  empty  of  fantastical  expressions,  and 
without  light,  vain,  whimsical,  scholar-like  terms, 
it  is  because  I  never  went  to  school,  to  Aristotle 
or  Plato,  but  was  brought  up  at  my  father's  house, 
in  a  very  mean  condition,  among  a  company  of 
poor  countrymen.  But  if  thou  do  find  a  parcel  of 
plain,  yet  sound,  true,  and  home  sayings,  attribute 
that  to  the  Lord  Jesus  his  gifts  and  abilities, 
which  he  hath  bestowed  upon  such  a  poor  crea- 
ture as  I  am  and  have  been.'3  His  maxim  was — 
'  Words  easy  to  be  understood  do  often  hit  the 
mark,  whan  high  and  learned  ones  do  only  pierce 
the  air.  He  also  that  speaks  to  the  weakest  may 
make  the  learned  understand  him  ;  when  he  that 
slricetli  to  be  high,  is  not  only  of  the  most  part 
understood  but  of  a  sort,  but  also  many  times  is 
neither  understood  by  them  nor  by  himself!'4 
This  is  one  of  Bunyan's  maxims,  well  worthy  the 
consideration  of  the  most  profoundly  learned 
writers,  and  also  of  the  most  eloquent  preachers 
and  public  speakers. 

Banyan  was  one  of  those  pioneers  who  are  far 


Luther  and  Tvndnlc. 
Vol.  i.,  p.  195. 


-  Vol.  iii.,  p.  398. 
4  Vol.  iii.,  p.  3(Jb. 


in  advance  of  the  age  in  which  they  live,  and  the 
narrative  of  his  birth  and  education  adds  to  tho 
innumerable  contradictions  which  the  history  o£ 
man  opposes  to  the  system  of  Mr.  Owen  and  the 
Socialists,  and  to  every  scheme  for  making  tho 
offspring  of  the  poor  follow  in  leading-strings 
the  course  of  their  parents,  or  for  rendering  them 
blindly  submissive  to  the  dictates  of  the  rich,  the 
learned,  or  the  influential.  It  incontcstibly  proves 
the  gospel  doctrine  of  individuality,  and,  that 
native  talent  will  rise  superior  to  all  impediments. 
Our  forefathers  struggled  for  the  right  of  private 
judgment  in  matters  of  faith  and  worship — their 
descendants  will  insist  upon  it,  as  essential  to  salva- 
tion, personally  to  examine  every  doctrine  rela- 
tive to  the  sacred  objects  of  religion,  limited  only 
by  Holy  Writ.  This  must  be  done  with  rigorous 
impartiality,  throwing  aside  all  the  prejudices  of 
education,  and  be  followed  by  prompt  obedience  to 
Divine  truth,  at  any  risk  of  offending  parents,  or 
laws,  or  resisting  institutions,  or  ceremonies  which 

'  he  discovers  to  be  of  human  invention.  All  this, 
as  we  have  seen  in  Buuyan,  was  attended  with 
great  mental  sufferings,  with  painstaking  labour, 
with  a  simple  reliance  upon  the  Word  of  God,  and 

i  with  earnest  prayer.  If  man  impiously  dares  to 
submit  his  conscience  to  his  fellow-man,  or  to  any 
body  of  men  called  a  church,  what  perplexity  must 

j  he  experience  ere  he  can  make  up  his  mind  which 
to    choose  !       Instead   of  relying  upon   the    one 

[  standard  which  God  has  given  him  in  his  Word; 
should  he  build  his  hope  upon  a  human  system 
he  could  be  certain  only  that  man  is  fallible  and 
subject  to  err.  How  striking  an  instance  have 
we,  in  our  day,  of  the  result  cf  education,  whan 
the  mind  does  not  implicitly  follow  the  guidance 
of  the  revealed  Word  of  God.  Two  brothers, 
named  Newman,  educated  at  the  same  school, 
trained  in  the  same  university,  brought  up  under 

!  the  same  religious  system — all  human  arts  ex- 
hausted to  mould  their  minds  into  strict  unifor- 
mity, yet  gradually  receding  from  the  same  point 
in  opposite  directions,  but  in  equally  downward 
roads;  one  to  embrace  the  most  puerile  legends 

I  of  the  middle  ages,  the  other  to  open  infidelity. 
Not  so  with  those  who  follow  the  teachings  of  tho 
Word  of  God,  by  which,  and  not  by  any  church, 
they  are  to  be  individually  judged  at  the  great 
day :  no  pontiff,  no  priest,  no  minister,  can  in- 
tervene or  mediate  for  them  at  the  bar  of  God. 
There  it  will  be  said,  'I  know  you,  by  your 
prayers  for  Divine  guidance  and  your  sub  . 
to  my  revealed  will  ;'  or,  '  I  know  you  not, 
for  you  preferred  the  guidance  of  frail,  fallible 
men,  to  me,  and  to  my  Word — a  solemn  con- 
sideration, which,  as  it  proved  a  source  oi  solid 
happiness  and  extensive  usefulness  to  Bunyan  in 
his  pilgrimage,  so  it  insured  to  him,  as  it  will  to 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


all  who  follow  his  course,  a  solid  foundation  on 
which  to  stand  at  the  great  and  terrible  day,  and 
thus  enable  them  to  live  as  well  as  die  in  the  sure 
and  certain  hope  of  a  triumphant  entry  into  the 
celestial  city. 

THE  THIRD  PERIOD. 

BUNYAN  IS  BAPTIZED,  AND    ENTERS  INTO  COMMUNION  WITH 

A    CHRISTIAN     CHURCH    AT    BEDFORD IS    SET    APART    TO 

FILL    THE     DEACON'S      OFFICE,     AND      SENT    OUT     AS     AN 
ITINERANT   PREACHER  IN  THE    NEIGHBOURING  VILLAGES. 

Man  is  naturally  led  to  seek  the  society  of  his 
fellow-men.  His  personal  progress,  and  the  great 
interests  of  civilization,  depend  upon  the  nature  of 
his  friendly  intercourse  and  his  proper  associations. 
So  is  it  with  the  Christian,  but  in  a  much  higher 
degree.  Not  only  does  he  require  companions 
with  whom  he  can  enjoy  Christian  communion — of 
sufferings  and  of  pleasures — in  seasons  of  depress- 
ing trials,  and  in  holy  elevations — but  with  whom 
he  may  also  form  plans  to  spread  the  genial  influ- 
ence of  Christianity,  which  has  blessed  and  so 
boundlessly  enriched  his  own  soul.  Christian 
fellowship  and  communion  has  received  the  broad 
seal  of  heaven.  'The  Lord  hearkened,'  when 
they  that  feared  him  spake  often  to  one  another, 
1  and  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written  before 
him  for  them  that  feared  the  Lord,'  Mai.  Sii  16. 

Bunyan  possessed  a  soul  with  faculties  capable 
of  the  highest  enjoyment  of  the  communion  of 
saints  in  church  order.  His  ideas  of  mutual  for- 
bearance— that  '  in  lowliness  of  mind  should  each 
esteem  others  better  than  themselves ' — he  enforces 
with  very  peculiar  power,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
with  delicate  sensibility.  After  the  pilgrims  had 
been  washed  by  Innocence  in  the  Interpreter's 
bath,  he  sealed  them,  which  'greatly  added  to 
their  beauty,'  and  then  arrayed  them  in  white 
raiment  of  fine  linen  ;  and  '  when  the  women  were 
thus  adorned,  they  seemed  to  be  a  terror  one  to 
the  other,  for  that  they  could  not  see  that  glory 
each  one  on  herself  which  they  could  see  in  each 
other.  Now,  therefore,  they  began  to  esteem  each 
other  better  than  themselves.'1  '  The  Interpreter 
led  them  into  his  garden,  where  was  great  variety 
of  flowers.  Then  said  he,  Behold,  the  flowers  are 
divers  in  stature,  in  quality  and  colour,  and  smell 
and  virtue,  and  some  are  better  than  some  ;  also, 
where  the  gardener  hath  set  them,  there  they 
stand,  and  quarrel  not  with  one  another.'2  'When 
Christians  stand  every  one  in  their  places,  and  do 
their  relative  work,  then  they  are  like  the  flowers 
in  the  garden  that  grow  where  the  gardener  hath 
planted  them,  and  both  honour  the  gardener  and 
the  garden  in  which  they  are  planted.'3     In  the 


Vol.  iii.,  p.  190.  -  Vol.  iii.,  p.  186. 

Bunyan  on  Christian  Behaviour,  vol.  ii.;  p.  550. 


same  treatise  on  Christian  Behaviour,  similar 
sentiments  are  expressed  in  language  extremely 
striking  and  beautiful.  '  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel 
is  like  the  dew  and  the  small  rain  that  distilleth 
upon  the  tender  grass,  wherewith  it  doth  flourish 
and  is  kept  green.  Deut.  xxxii.  2.  Christians  are  like 
the  several  flowers  in  a  garden  that  have  upon 
each  of  them  the  dew  of  heaven,  which,  being 
shaken  with  the  wind,  they  let  fall  their  dew 
at  each  other's  roots,  whereby  they  are  jointly 
nourished,  and  become  nourishers  of  one  another. 
For  Christians  to  commune  savourly  of  God's 
matters  one  with  another,  it  is  as  if  they  opened 
to  each  other's  nostrils  boxes  of  perfume.'4  Similar 
peaceful,  heavenly  principles,  flow  through  Bun- 
yan's  Discourse  of  the  Building,  &c.,  of  Hie  House 
of  God  and  its  inmates  ;5  and  blessed  would  it  be 
if  in  all  our  churches  every  believer  was  baptized 
into  such  motives  of  forbearance  and  brotherly  love. 
These  sentiments  do  honour  to  the  head  and  heart 
of  the  prince  of  allegorists,  and  should  be  pre- 
sented in  letters  of  gold  to  every  candidate  for 
church  fellowship.  A  young  man  entertaining 
such  opinions  as  these,  however  rude  his  former 
conduct,  being  born  again  to  spiritual  enjoyments, 
would  become  a  treasure  to  the  Christian  society 
with  which  he  might  be  connected. 

In  ordinary  cases,  the  minister  or  people  who 
have  been  useful  to  a  young  convert,  lead  him  in 
his  first  choice  of  Christian  associates  ;  but  here 
we  have  no  ordinary  man.  Bunyan,  in  all  things 
pertaining  to  religion,  followed  no  human  autho- 
rity, but  submitted  himself  to  the  guidance  of  the 
inspired  volume.  Possessing  a  humble  hope  of 
salvation,  he  would  read  with  deep  interest  that 
'  the  Lord  added  to  the  church  such  as  should  be 
saved.'  The  question  which  has  so  much  puzzled 
the  learned,  as  to  a  church  or  the  church,  would 
be  solved  without  difficulty  by  one  who  was  as 
learned  in  the  Scriptures  as  he  was  ignorant  of 
the  subtle  distinctions  and  niceties  of  the  schools. 
He  found  that  there  was  one  church  at  Jerusalem 
(Acts  viii.  i),  another  at  Corinth  d  Cor.  i.  2),  seven  in 
Asia  (Rev.  i.  4),  and  others  distributed  over  the  world; 
that  '  the  visible  church  of  Christ  is  a  (or  every) 
congregation  of  faithful  men. ,fi  He  well  knew  that 
uniformity  is  a  fool's  paradise  ;  that  though  man 
was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  it  derogates  not 
from  the  beauty  of  that  image  that  no  two  men 
are  alike.  The  stars  show  forth  God's  handy 
work,  yet  '  one  star  differeth  from  another  star  iu 
glory  '  d  Cor.  xv.  41).  Uniformity  is  opposed  to  every 
law  of  nature,  for  no  two  leaves  upon  a  majestic 
tree  are  alike.  Who  but  au  idiot  or  a  maniac 
would  attempt  to  reduce  the  mental  powers  of  all 
men  to  uniformity  ?     Every  church  may  have  its 

i  Vol.  ii.,  p.  570.  5  Vol.  ii.,  p.  555. 

c  The  Nineteenth  Article. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


own  order  of  public  worship  wliilo  the  Scriptures 
form  the  standard  of  truth  and  morals.  Where  dif- 
ferences of  opinion  occur,  as  they  most  certainly 
will,  as  to  the  observance  of  days  or  abstinence 
from  meats — whether  to  stand,  or  sit,  or  kneel,  in 
prayer — whether  to  stand  while  listening  to  some 
pages  of  the  inspired  volume,  and  to  sit  while 
others  are  publicly  read — whether  to  call  Jude  a 
saint,  and  refuse  the  title  to  Isaiah — are  questions 
which  should  bring  into  active  exercise  all  the 
graces  of  Christian  charity;  and,  in  obedience  to 
the  apostolic  injunction,  they  must  agree  to  differ. 
*  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own 
mind '  (Rom.  \iv.  5).  Human  arts  have  been  ex- 
hausted to  prevent  that  mental  exercise  or  self- 
persuasion  which  is  essential  to  a  Christian  pro- 
fession. The  great  object  of  Satan  has  ever  been 
to  foster  indifference,  that  deadly  lethargy,  by 
loading  man  to  any  source  of  information  rather 
than  prayerful  researches  into  the  Bible.  Bun- 
van's  severe  discipline  in  Christ's  school  would 
lead  him  to  form  a  judgment  for  himself ;  he  was 
surrounded  by  a  host  of  sects,  and,  with  such  a 
Bible-loving  man,  it  is  an  interesting  inquiry  what 
party  he  would  join. 

lie  lived  in  times  of  extraordinary  excitement. 
England  was  in  a  transition  state.  A  long  chain 
of  events  brought  on  a  crisis  which  involved  the 
kingdom  in  tribulation.  It  was  the  struggle  be- 
tween the  unbridled  despotism  of  Episcopacy,  and 
the  sturdy  liberty  of  Puritanism.  For  although 
the  immediate  cause  of  the  civil  wars  was  gross 
misgovernment — arbitrary  taxation  without  the 
intervention  of  Parliament,  monopolies  and  patents, 
to  the  ruin  of  trade;  in  fact,  every  abuse  of  the  royal 
power — still,  without  the  additional  spur  of  reli- 
gious persecution,  the  spirit  of  the  people  would 
never  have  proved  invincible  and  overpowering. 
The  efforts  of  Archbishop  Laud,  aided  by  the 
queen  and  her  popish  confessor,  Panzani,  to  sub- 
jugate Britain  to  the  galling  yoke  of  R.ome,  sig- 
nally failed,  involving  in  the  ruin  the  life  of  the 
king  and  his  archbishop,  and  all  the  desolating 
calamities  of  intestiue  wars,  strangely  called  'civil.' 
In  this  strife  many  of  the  clergy  and  most  of  the 
bishops  took  a  very  active  part,  aiding  and  abet- 
ting the  king's  party  in  their  war  against  the 
parliament — and  they  thus  brought  upon  them- 
selves great  pains  and  penalties.  The  people 
became  suddenly  released  from  mental  bondage ; 
aud  if  the  man  who  had  been  born  blind,  when 
he  first  received  the  blessing  of  sight,  '  saw  men 
as  trees  walking,'  we  cannot  be  surmised  that 
religious  speculations  were  indulged  in,  some  of 
which  proved  to  be  crude  and  wild,  requiring  much 
vigorous  persuasive  pruning  before  they  produced 
good  fruit.  Bunyan  was  surrounded  by  all  these 
parties;    for   although   the   rights   of   conscience 

VOL.  III. 


were  not  recognized — the  Papists  and  Episcopa- 
lians, the  Baptists  and  Unitarians,  with  the  Jews, 
being  proscribed — yet  the  hand  of  persecution  was 
comparatively  light.  Had  Bunyan  chosen  to  as- 
sociate with  the  Episcopalians,  he  would  not  have 
passed  through  those  severe  sufferings  on  which  are 
founded  his  lasting  honours.  The  Presbyterians 
and  Independents  received  the  patronage  of  the 
state  under  the  Commonwealth,  and  the  great  mass 
of  the  clergy  conformed  to  the  directory,  many  of 
them  reciting  the  prayers  they  had  formerly  read  ; 
while  a  considerable  number,  whose  conscience 
could  not  submit  to  the  system  then  enforced  by 
law,  did,  to  their  honour,  resign  their  livings,  and 
suffer  the  privations  and  odium  of  being  Dissenters. 
Among  these  were  necessarily  included  the  bishops.1 
Of  all  sects  that  of  the  Baptists  had  been  the 
most  bitterly  written  against  and  persecuted.  Even 
their  first  cousins,  the  Quakers,  attacked  them 
in  language  that  would,  in  our  peaceful  days, 
be  considered  outrageous.  '  The  Baptists  used  to 
meet  in  garrets,  cheese-lofts,  coal-holes,  and  such 
like  mice  walks, ' — '  these  tumultuous,  blood-thirsty, 
covenant-breaking,  government-destroying  Ana- 
baptists.'2 The  offence  that  called  forth  these 
epithets  was,  that  in  addressing  Charles  II.  on  his 
restoration,  they  stated  that  "they  were  no  abet- 
tors of  the  Quakers."  Had  royal  authority  pos- 
sessed the  slightest  influence  over  Buuyan's  reli- 
gious opinions,  the  question  as  to  his  joining  the 
Baptists  would  have  been  settled  without  inves- 
tigation. Among  other  infatuations  of  Charles  I., 
had  been  his  hatred  of  any  sect  that  professed 
the  right  and  duty  of  man  to  think  for  himself 
in  choosing  his  way  to  heaven.  In  1G39  he  pub- 
lished his  '  Declaration  concerning  the  tumults  in 
Scotland,'  when  violence  was  resorted  to  against 
the  introduction  of  the  Common  Prayer  in  which 
he  denounced  voluntary  obedience  because  it  was 
not  of  constraint,  and  called  it  'damnable;'  he 
calls  the  principles  of  the  Anabaptists,  in  not  sub- 
mitting their  consciences  to  human  laws,  '  furious 
frenzies,'  and  '  madness  ;'  all  Protestants  are  '  to 
detest  and  persecute  them  ;'  '  these  Anabaptists 
raged  most  in  their  madness;'  'the  scandal]  of 
their  frenzies;'  '  we  are  amazed  at,  aud  aggrieved  at 
their  horrible  impudeuce  ;'  '  we  do  abhor  and  detest 


1  The  sufferings  of  the  Episcopalians  were  severe ;  they 
drank  the  bitter  cup  which  they  had  shortly  before  adiu. 
to  the  Puritans.    Under  suspicion  of  disloyalty  to  the  Col 
wealth,  they  were   most   unjustly  compelled  to  swallow  the 
Covenant  as  a  religious  test,  or  leave  preaching  and  t 
Their  miseries  were  not  to  be  compared  with  those  of  the 
Puritans.     Laud  was  beheaded  for  treason,  but  nunc  were  pot 
to  death  for  nonconformity.     It  was  an  age  when  i 
liberty  was  almost  unknown.     These  sufferings  were  repaid 
by  an  awful  retaliation  and  revenge,  when  Royalty  and  Episco- 
pacy were  restored. 

-  Penn's  Christian  Quaker, 
d 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


them  all  as  rebellious  and  treasonable.'1  This  whole 
volume  is  amusingly  assuming.  The  king  claims 
his  subjects  as  personal  chattels,  with  whose  bodies 
and  minds  he  had  a  right  to  do  as  lie  pleased. 
Bunyan  owed  no  spiritual  submission  to  man, 
'  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils  ;'  and  risking  all 
hazards,  he  became  one  of  the  denounced  and 
despised  sect  of  Baptists.  To  use  the  language 
of  his  pilgrim,  he  passed  the  lions,  braving  all  the 
dangers  of  an  open  profession  of  faith  in  Christ, 
and  entered  the  house  called  Beautiful,  which  'was 
built  by  the  Lord  of  the  hill,  on  purpose  to  enter- 
tain such  pilgrims  in.'2  He  first  gains  permission 
of  the  watchman,  or  minister,  and  then  of  the  in- 
mates, or  church  members.  This  interesting  event 
is  said  to  have  taken  place  about  the  year  1653.° 
Mr.  Doe,  in  lite  Straggler,  thus  refers  to  it,  Bunyan 
'  took  all  advantages  to  ripen  his  understanding  in 
religion,  and  po  he  lit  on  the  dissenting  congrega- 
tion of  Christians  at  Bedford,  and  was,  upon  con- 
fession of  faith,  baptized  about  the  year  1G53,'1 
when  he  was  in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age. 
No  minutes  of  the  proceedings  of  this  church,  prior 
to  the  death  of  Mr.  GifFord  in  1656,5  are  extant, 
or  they  would  identify  the  exact  period  when 
Bunyan's  baptism  and  admission  to  the  church 
took  place.  The  spot  where  he  was  baptized  is  a 
creek  by  the  river  Ouse,  at  the  end  of  Duck  Mill 
Lane.  It  is  a  natural  baptistery,  a  proper  width 
and  depth  of  water  constantly  fresh  ;  pleasantly 
situated ;  sheltered  from  the  public  highway  near 
the  High  Street.  The  Lord's  Supper  was  cele- 
brated in  a  large  room  in  which  the  disciples  met, 
the  worship  consecrating  the  place.0 

Religious  feelings  and  conduct  have  at  all  times 
a  tendency  to  promote  the  comfort,  and  elevate  the 
character  of  the  poor.  How  often  have  we  seen 
them  thus  blessed ;  the  ragged  family  comfort- 
ably clothed,  the  hungry  fed,  and  the  inmates  of 
a  dirty  miserable  cottage  or  hovel  become  a  pat- 
tern of  cleanly  happiness.  One  of  Bunyan's  bio- 
graphers, who  was  an  eye-witness,  bears  this 
testimony.  '  By  this  time  his  family  was  increased, 
and  as  that  increased  God  increased  his  stores,  so 
that  lie  lived  now  in  great  credit  among  his  neigh- 
bours.'     He  soon  became  a  respectable   member 


1  Folio,  p.  417.  2  Vol.  iii.,  p.  107. 

3  Vol.  iii.,  p.  705.  The  author  of  Btmyans  Life,  published 
ia  1690,  dates  his  baptism  'about  the  year  1653.' 

*  life  from  his  Cradle  to  his  Grave,  1700. 

6  September  21. 

6 'In  the  same  year,  and  about  the  same  period,  Oliver 
Cromwell  was  made  Lord  Proteetor.  Upon  this  coincidence, 
Mr.  Carlisle  uses  the  following  remarkable  language: — 'Two 
common  men  thus  elevated,  putting  their  hats  upon  their 
heads,  might  exclaim,  "  God  enable  me  to  be  king  of  what  lies 
under  this !  For  eternities  lie  under  it,  and  infinities,  ami 
heaven  also  and  hell !  and  it  is  as  big  as  the  uuivcrse,  this 
kingdom  ;  and  I  am  to  conquer  it,  or  be  for  ever  conquered 
by  it.     Now,  while  it  is  called  to-day  ! '  " 


of  civil  as  well  as  religious  society ;  for,  by  the 
time  that  he  joined  the  church,  his  Christian 
character  was  so  fully  established,  that,  notwith- 
standing the  meanness  of  his  origin  and  employ- 
ment, he  was  considered  Avorthy  of  uniting  in  a 
memorial  to  the  Lord  Protector.  It  was  to  recom- 
mend two  gentlemen  to  form  part  of  the  council, 
after  Cromwell  had  dissolved  the  Long  Parliament. 
It  is  a  curious  document,  very  little  known,  and 
Illustrative  of  the  peculiar  style  of  these  eventful 
times. 

Letter  from  the  people  of  Bedfordshire  to  the  Lord  General! 
Cromwell,  and  the  Councell  of  the  army. 

May  Uth,  1G53. 
May  it  please  your  Lordship,  and  the  rest  of  the  councill  of 
the  army.  We  (we  trust)  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  inhabitants 
in  the  county  of  Bedford,  haveiug  fresh  upon  our  hearts  the 
sadde  oppressions  we  have  (a  longe  while)  groan'd  under  from  the 
late  parlyament,  and  now  eyeing  and  owneing  (through  grace) 
the  good  hand  of  God  in  this  great  turne  of  providence,  being 
persuaded  that  it  is  from  the  Lord  that  you  should  be  instru- 
ment in  his  hand  at  such  a  time  as  this,  for  the  electing  of 
such  persons  whoe  may  goe  in  and  out  before  his  people  in 
righteousnesse,  and  governe  these  nations  in  judgment,  we 
haveing  sought  the  Lord  for  yow,  and  hopeing  that  God  will 
still  doe  greate  tilings  by  yow,  understanding  that  it  is  in  your 
hearte  through  the  Lord's  assistance,  to  establish  an  authority 
consisting  of  men  able,  loveing  truth,  feareing  God,  and  hateing 
covetousness ;  and  we  haveing  had  some  experience  of  men 
with  us,  we  have  judged  it  our  duty  to  God,  to  yow,  and  to  the 
rest  of  his  people,  humbly  to  preseut  two  men,  viz.,  Nathauiell 
Taylor,  and  John  Croke,  now  Justices  of  Peace  in  our  County, 
whom  we  judge  in  the  Lord  qualified  to  manage  a  trust  in  the 
ensuing  government.  All  which  we  humbly  referre  to  your 
serious  considerations,  and  subscribe  our  names  this  13th  day 
of  May,  1653— 

John  Eston,  Clement  Berridge,  Isaac  Freeman, 

John  Grewc,  John  Bunyan,  William  Dell, 

John  Gilford,  William  Baker,  junr.,William  Wheelar, 

Ja.  Rush,  Anth.  Harrington,  John  Gibbs, 

Tho.  Varrse,  Eichard  Spensley,  John  Donne, 

Michael  Cooke,  Edward  Covinson,  Tho.  Gibbs, 

John  Ramsay,  John  Hogge,  Edward  White, 

Robert  English,  John  Jelfard,  John  Browne, 

John  Edridge,  John  Ivory,  John  White, 

George  Gee,  Daniell  Groom c,  Charles  Peirse, 

Ambrose  Gregory,  Luke  Parratt,  Thomas  Cooke, 

William  Page,'    "  Thomas  Knott,  Thomas  Honnor. 

These  to  the  Lord  Gencrall  Cromwell,  and  the  rest  of  the 
councell  of  the  army,  present.7 

Bunyan's  daughter  Elizabeth  was  born  at  El- 
stow,  April  14,  1654,  and  a  singular  proof  of  his 
having  changed  his  principles  on  baptism  appears 
in  the  church  register.  His  daughter  Mary  was 
baptized  in  1650,  but  his  Elizabeth  in  1654  is 
registered  as  born,  but  no  mention  is  made  of 
baptism. 

The  poor  harassed  pilgrim  having  been  ad- 
mitted into  communion  with  a  Christian  church, 
enjoyed  fully,  for  a  short  season,  his  new  privi- 
leges.     He  thus  expresses  his  feelings  : — '  After 

7  In  possession  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYA.N. 


I  had  propounded  to  the  church  that  my  desire 
was  to  walk  in  the  order  and  ordinances  of  Christ 
with  them,  and  was  also  admitted  by  them:  while 
I  thought  of  that  hlcsscd  ordinance  of  Christ, 
which  was  his  last  supper  with  his  disciples 
before  his  death,  that  scripture,  "This  do  in  re- 
membrance of  me,"  was  made  a  very  precious 
word  unto  me;  for  by  it  the  Lord  came  down  open 
my  conscience  with  the  discovery  of  his  death  for 
my  sins  :  and  as  I  then  felt,  did  as  if  he  plunged 
me  in  the  virtue  of  the  same.'1 

In  this  language  wo  have  an  expression  which 
furnishes  a  c-ood  sample  of  his  energetic  fe< 
He  had  been  immersed  in  water  at  his  baptism, 
and  doubtless  believed  it  to  be  a  figure  of  his  death 
to  sin  and  resurrection  to  holiness  ;  and  when  he 
Bat  at  the  Lord's  table  he  felt  that  he  was  baptized 
into  the  virtue  of  his  Lord's  death  ;  he  is  \ 
into  it,  and  feels  the  holy  influence  covering  his 
soul  with  all  its  powers. 

IT  is  pastor,  John  Grfrbrd,  was  a  remarkably 
and  sensible  man,  exactly  fitted  to  assist  in 
maturing  the  mind  of  his  young  member.  Bun- 
van  had,  for  a  considerable  time,  sat  under  his 
ministry,  and  had  cultivated  acquaintance  with  the 
members  of  his  church  ;  aud  so  prayerfully  had  he 
made  up  his  mind  as  to  this  important  choice  of  a 
b,  with  which  he  might  enter  into  fellowship, 
that,  although  tempted  by  the  most  alluring  pro- 
spects of  greater  usefulness,  popularity,  and  emo- 
lument, he  continued  his  church  fellowship  with 
these  poor  people  through  persecution  and  dis- 
inprisonment  and  the  threats  of  transporta- 
tion, or  an  ignominious  death,  until  he  crossed 
the  river  'which  has  no  bridge,'  and  ascended  to 
the  celestial  city,  a  period  of  nearly  forty  years. 
Of  the  labours  of  his  first  pastor,  John  Gitford, 
but  little  is  known,  except  that  he  founded  the 
church  of  Christ  at  Bedford,  probably  the  first,  in 
modern  times,  which  allowed  to  every  individual 
freedom  of  judgment  as  to  water  baptism ;  re- 
ceiving all  those  who  decidedly  appeared  to  have 
put  on  Christ,  and  had  been  received  by  him  ; 
but  avoiding,  with  godly  jealousy,  any  mixture  of 
the  world  with  the  church.  Mr.  Gilford's  race  was 
short,  consistent,  and  successful.  Bimyan  calls 
him  by  an  appellation,  very  probably  common  in 
his  neighbourhood  and  among  his  flock,  '  holy 
Mr.  Gilford  ;'2  a  title  infinitely  superior  to  all  the 
honours  of  nobility,  or  of  royalty.  He  was  a 
miracle  of  mercy  and  grace,  for  a  very  few  years 
before  he  had  borne  the  character  of  an  impure 
and  licentious  man — an  open  enemy  to  the  saints 
of  God.  His  pastoral  letter,  left  upon  record  in 
the  church-book,  written  when  drawing  near  the 
end  of  his  pilgrimage,  is  most  admirable  ;  it  eon- 


1  Vol.  J.,  p.  30. 


-  \M.  ;.,  p.  20. 


tains  an  allusion  to  his  successors,  Burton  or 
Banyan,  and  must  have  had  a  tendency  in  forming 
their  views  of  a  gospel  church.  Even  Mr.  So 
praises  this  puritanic  epistle  as  exemplifying  '  a 
wise  and  tolerant  and  truly  Christian  spirit:'  and 
as  it  has  not  been  published  m  any  life  of  Bun- 
van,  1  venture  to  introduce  it  without  abridge- 
ment:— 

To  the  Church  over  which  God  made  rac  an  overseer  when 
I  was  iu  the  world. 

I  beseech  you,  brethren  beloved,  let  these  fallowing  words 
(wrote  in  my  love  to  you,  and  core  avar  yon,  when  our  b 
Father  was  removing  me  to  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son),  be 
read  in  your  church-gatherings  together.  I  shall  not  now, dearly 
beloved,  write  unto  you  about  that  which  is  the  first,  and  with- 
in all  other  things  arc  as  nothing  in  the  sight  of  God, 
via,,  the  keeping  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience; 
1  shall  not,  I  say,  write  of  these  things,  though  the 
having  spent  my  labours  among  you,  to  root  you  and  build 
you  up  in  Christ  through  the  grace  you  have  received  ;  and  to 
press  you  to  all  manner  of  holiness  in  your  conversations,  that 
you  may  be  found  of  the  Lord,  without  spot,  and  bla::. 
His  coining.  But  the  things  I  shall  speak  to  you  of,  are  about 
your  chl'hcii  affaiks,  which  I  fear  have  been  little  con 
by  most  of  you;  which  things,  if  not  mended  aright,  and  sub- 
mitted unto,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  will  by  degrees 
bring  you  under  divisions,  distractions,  and  at  last,  to  confusion 
of  that  gospel  order  and  fellowship  which  now,  through  grace, 
you  enjoy.  Therefore,  my  brethren,  in  the  first  place,  I  would 
not  have  any  of  yon  ignorant  of  this,  that  every  one  of  you 
are  as  much  bound  now  to  walk  with  the  church  in  all  love ; 
and  iu  the  ordinances  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  as  when  I  was 
present  among  you:  neither  have  any  of  you  liberty  to  join  your- 
selves to  any  other  society,  because  your  pastor  is  removed 
from  you ;  for  you  were  not  joined  to  the  ministry,  but  to 
Christ,  and  the  church ;  and  this  is  and  was  the  will  of  God 
in  Christ  to  all  the  churches  of  the  saints,  read  Acts  ii.  42  ; 
and  compare  it  with  Acts  i.  11,  15.  And  I  charge  you  before 
the  Lord,  as  you  will  answer  it  at  the  coining  of  our  Lord 
Jesus,  that  none  of  you  be  found  guilty  herein. 

Secondly.  Be  constant  in  your  church  assemblies.  Let  all 
the  work  which  concerns  the  church  be  done  faithfully  among 
you  ;  as  admission  of  members,  exercising  of  gi  Its,  election  of 
officers,  as  need  requires,  aud  all  other  things  as  if  named, 
which  the  Scriptures  being  searched,  will  lead  you  into,  through 
the  Spirit;  which  things,  if  you  do,  the  Lord  will  be  with 
you,  aud.  you  will  convince  others  that  Christ  is  your  head, 
aud  your  dependency  is  not  upon  man  ;  but  if  you  do  the 
work  of  the  Lord  negligently,  if  you  mind  your  own 
and  not  the  things  of  Christ,  if  you  grow  of  indifferent  spirits, 
whether  you  mind  the  work  of  the  Lord  iu  his  church 
]  fear  the  Lord  by  degrees  will  suffer  the  comfort  of  your  com- 
munion to  be  dried  up,  and  the  candlestick  which  is  yet  stand- 
ing to  be  broken  in  pieces ;  which  God  forbid. 

Now,  concerning  your  admission  of  members,  I  shall  leave 
you  to  the  Lord  for  counsel,  who  hath  hitherto  been  with  you  ; 
only  thus  much  I  think  expedient  to  stir  up  your  remembrance 
in  ;  that  after  you  are  satisued  in  the  work  of  grace  in  the  party 
you  are  to  join  with,  the  said  party  do  solemnly  declare  (before 
some  of  the  church  at  least),  That  Union  with  Christ  is  the  foun- 
dation of  all  saints' communion;  and  not  any  ordinances  of  Christ, 
or  any  judgment  or  opinion  about  externals ;  and  the  said  party 
ought  to  declare,  whether  a  brother  or  sister,  that  through  grace 
they  will  walk  in  love  with  the  church,  though  there  should  hap- 
pen any  di  (Terence  in  judgment  about  other  things.  Concerning 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


separation  from  the  church  about  baptism,  laying  on  of  hands, 
anointing  with  oil,  psalms,  or  any  externals,  I  charge  every  one 
of  you  respectively,  as  you  will  give  an  account  for  it  to  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  judge  both  quick  and  dead  at  his 
coming,  that  none  of  you  be  found  guilty  of  this  great  evil ; 
which,  while  some  have  committed,  and  that  through  a  zeal 
for  God,  yet  not  according  to  knowledge,  they  have  erred  from 
the  law  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  have  made  a  rent  from  the 
true  church,  which  is  but  one.  I  exhort  you,  brethren,  in 
your  comings  together,  Let  all  things  be  done  decently,  and  in 
order,  according  to  the  Scriptures.  Let  all  things  be  done 
among  you  without  strife  and  envy,  without  self-seeking  and 
vain-glory.  Be  clothed  with  humility,  and  submit  to  one  an- 
other in  love.  Let  the  gifts  of  the  church  be  exercised  accord- 
ing to  order.  Let  no  gift  be  concealed  which  is  for  edification; 
yet  let  those  gifts  be  chiefly  exercised  which  are  most  for  the 
perfecting  of  the  saints.  Let  your  discourses  be  to  build  up  one 
another  in  your  most  holy  faith,  and  to  provoke  one  another  to 
love  and  good  works :  if  this  be  not  well-minded,  much  time 
may  be  spent  and  the  church  reap  little  or  no  advantage.  Let 
there  be  strong  meat  for  the  strong,  aud  milk  for  babes.  In 
your  assemblies  avoid  all  disputes  which  gender  to  strifes,  as 
questions  about  externals,  and  all  doubtful  disputations.  If 
any  come  among  you  who  will  be  contentious  in  these  things, 
let  it  be  declared  that  you  have  no  such  order,  nor  any  of  the 
churches  of  God.  If  any  come  among  you  with  any  doctrine 
contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  you  must  not  treat  with 
such  an  one  as  with  a  brother,  or  enter  iuto  dispute  of  the 
things  of  faith  with  reasonings  (for  this  is  contrary  to  the 
Scriptures)  ;  but  let  such  of  the  brethren  who  are  the  fullest 
of  the  Spirit,  and  the  word  of  Christ,  oppose  such  an  one 
steadfastly  face  to  face,  aud  lay  open  his  fully  to  the  church, 
from  the  Scriptures.  If  a  brother  through  weakness  speak 
anything  contrary  to  any  known  truth  of  God  (though  not 
intended  by  him),  some  other  brother  of  the  church  must 
in  love  clear  up  the  truth,  lest  many  of  the  church  be  laid 
under  temptation.  Let  no  respect  of  persons  be  in  your  com- 
ings-together ;  when  you  are  met  as  a  church  there's  neither 
rich  nor  poor,  bond  nor  free  in  Christ  Jesus.  Tis  not  a 
good  practice  to  be  oil'ering  places  or  seats  when  those  who 
are  rich  come  in  ;  especially  it  is  a  great  evil  to  take  notice  of 
such  in  time  of  prayer,  or  the  word;  then  are  bowings 
aud  civil  observances  at  such  times  not  of  God.  Private 
wrongs  are  not  presently  to  be  brought  unto  the  church.  If 
any  of  the  brethren  are  troubled  about  externals,  let  some  of 
the  church  (let  it  not  be  a  church  business)  pray  for  and  with 
such  parties. 

None  ought  to  withdraw  from  the  church  if  any  brother 
should  walk  disorderly,  but  he  that  walkcth  disorderly  must 
bear  his  own  burden,  according  to  the  Scriptures.  If  any  brother 
should  walk  disorderly,  he  cannot  be  shut  out  from  any  ordi- 
nance before  church  censure.  Study  among  yourselves  what 
is  the  nature  of  fellowship,  as  the  word,  >  prayer,  and  breaking 
of  bread  ;  which,  whilst  few,  I  judge,  seriously  consider,  there 
is  much  falling  short  of  duty  in  the  churches  of  Christ.  You 
that  are  most  eminent  in  profession,  set  a  pattern  to  all  the 
rest  of  the  church.  Let  your  faith,  love,  and  zeal,  be  very 
eminent ;  if  any  of  you  cast  a  dim  light,  you  will  do  much 
hurt  in  the  church.  Let  there  be  kept  up  among  you  solemn 
days  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving ;  and  let  some  time  be  set 
apart,  to  seek  God  for  your  seeds,  which  thing  hath  hitherto 
been  omitted.  Let  your  deacons  have  a  constant  stock  by 
them,  to  supply  the  necessity  of  those  who  are  iu  want.  Truly, 
brethren,  there  is  utterly  a  fault  among  you  that  are  rich, 
especially  in  this  thing,  'tis  not  that  little  which  comes  from 


1  Heading  and  Prcachi 


you  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  that  will  excuse  you.  I 
beseech  you,  be  not  found  guilty  of  this  sin  any  longer.  He 
that  sows  sparingly  will  reap  sparingly.  Be  not  backward  in 
your  gatherings-together;  let  none  of  you  willingly  stay  till 
part  of  the  meeting  be  come,2  especially  such  who  should  be 
examples  to  the  flock.  One  or  two  things  are  omitted  about 
your  comings-together,  which  I  shall  here  add.  I  beseech  you, 
forbear  sitting  in  prayer,  except  parties  be  any  way  dis- 
abled; 'tis  not  a  posture  which  suits  with  the  majesty  of  such 
an  ordinance.  Would  you  serve  your  prince  so  ?  In  prayer, 
let  all  self-affected  expressions  be  avoided,  and  all  vain  repe- 
titions. God  hath  not  gifted,  I  judge,  every  brother  to  be  a 
mouth  to  the  church.  Let  such  as  have  most  of  the  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit  and  of  power,  shut  up  all  your  comings- 
together,  that  ye  may  go  away  with  your  hearts  comforted  and 
quickened. 

Come  together  in  time,  and  leave  off  orderly ;  for  God  is  a 
God  of  order  among  his  saints.  Let  none  of  you  give  offence 
to  his  brethren  in  indifferent  things,  but  be  subject  to  one 
another  in  love.  Be  very  careful  what  gifts  you  approve  of 
by  consent  for  public  service. 

Spend  much  time  before  the  Lord,  about  choosing  a  pastor, 
for  though  I  suppose  he  is  before  you,3  whom  the  Lord  hath 
appointed,  yet  it  will  be  no  disadvantage  to  you,  I  hope,  if  yon 
walk  a  year  or  two  as  you  are  before  election ;  and  then,  if  you 
be  all  agreed,  let  him  be  set  apart,  according  to  the  Scriptures. 
Salute  the  brethren  who  walk  not  in  fellowship  with  you,  with 
the  same  love  and  name  of  brother  or  sister  as  those  who  do. 

Let  the  promises  made  to  be  accomplished  in  the  latter 
days,  be  often  urged  before  the  Lord  in  your  comings-together; 
and  forget  not  your  brethren  in  bouds.  Love  him  much  for 
the  work's  sake,  who  labours  over  you  in  the  word  and  doc- 
trine. Let  no  man  despise  his  youth.4  Muzzle  not  the  mouth 
of  the  ox  that  treads  out  the  corn  to  you.  Search  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  let  some  of  them  be  read  to  you  about  this  thing.  If 
your  teacher  at  anytime  be  laid  aside,  you  ought  to  meet 
together  as  a  church,  and  build  up  one  another.  If  the  mem- 
bers at  such  a  time  will  go  to  a  public  ministry,  it  must  first 
be  approved  of  by  the  church.  Farewell;  exhort,  counsel, 
support,  reprove  one  another  in  love. 

Finally,  brethren,  be  all  of  one  mind,  walk  in  love  one  to 
another,  even  as  Christ  Jesus  hath  loved  you,  and  given  him- 
self for  you.  Search  the  Scriptures  for  a  supply  of  those 
things  wherein  I  am  wanting.  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who 
raised  up  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  multiply  his 
peace  upon  you,  and  preserve  you  to  his  everlasting  kingdom 
by  Jesus  Christ.     Stand  fast :  the  Lord  is  at  hand. 

That  this  was  written  by  me,  I  have  set  my  name  to  it,  in 
the  presence  of  two  of  the  brethren  of  the  church. 

Bunyan  was  now  settled  under  the  happiest  cir- 
cumstances, and  doubtless  looked  forward  to  much 
religious  enjoyment.     A  pious  wife — peace  in  his 


-  Not  to  wait  for  one  another,  each  one  to  come  in  good 
time. 

3  Alluding  to  Bunyan,  or  his  co-pastor,  Burton,  or  to  both 
of  them. 

4  Bunyan  was  about  twenty-seven  years  of  age. 

6  This  letter  was  copied  into  the  church  records  at  the  time: 
the  original  cannot  be  found.  It  was  published  with  Ryland's 
Funeral  Sermon  on  Symonds,  17SS,  and  in  Jukes'  very  inte- 
resting account  of  Bunyan's  church,  in  1849.  The  signature 
is  copied  from  an  original  in  the  Milton,  Slate  Papers,  library 
of  the  Antiquarian  Society. 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUNYAN. 


coul — a  most  excellent  pastor,  and  in  full  commu- 
nion with  a  Christian  church.  Alas  !  his  enjoy- 
ments were  soon  interrupted ;  again  a  tempest  was 
to  agitate  his  mind,  that  he  might  he  more  deeply 
humbled  and  prepared  to  become  a  Barnabas  or 
son  of  consolation  to  tbc  spiritually  distressed. 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  upon  the  baptism 
of  our  Lord,  after  that  sublime  declaration  of  Je- 
hovah— 'this  is  my  beloved  Son,'  'Jesus  was  led 
into  the  wilderness,  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.' 
As  it  was  with  their  leader,  so  it  frequently  happens 
to  his  followers.  After  having  partaken,  for  tho 
first  time,  of  the  holy  enjoyments  of  the  Lord's 
table — tending  to  exalt  and  elevate  them,  they  are 
often  abased  and  humbled  in  their  own  esteem,  by 
the  assaults  of  Satan  and  his  temptations,  aided  by 
an  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  Thus  Christian  having 
been  cherished  in  the  house  called  Beautiful,  and 
armed  for  the  conflict,  descended  into  the  Valley  of 
Humiliation,  encountered  Apollyon  in  deadly  com- 
bat, and  walked  through  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow 
of  Death.  '  For  three  quarters  of  a  year,  fierce 
and  sad  temptations  did  beset  me  to  blasphemy, 
that  I  could  never  have  rest  nor  ease.  But  at 
last  the  Lord  came  in  upon  my  soul  with  that 
same  scripture,  by  which  my  soul  was  visited  be- 
fore ;  and  after  that,  I  have  been  usually  very  well 
and  comfortable  in  the  partaking  of  that  blessed 
ordinance  ;  and  have,  I  trust,  therein  discerned  the 
Lord's  body,  as  broken  for  my  sins,  and  that  his 
precious  blood  hath  been  shed  for  my  transgres- 
sions. n  This  is  what  Bunyan  calls,  '  the  soul  killing 
to  itself  its  sins,  its  righteousness,  wisdom,  resolu- 
tions, and  the  things  which  it  trusted  in  by  nature;' 
and  then  receiving  'a  most  glorious,  perfect,  and 
never-fading  life.'  The  life  of  Christ  in  all  its 
purity  and  perfections  imputed  to  me — '  Sometimes 
I  bless  the  Lord  my  soul  hath  had  this  life  not 
only  imputed  to  me,  but  the  very  glory  of  it  upon 
my  soul — the  Son  of  God  himself  in  his  own  per- 
son, now  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father  repre- 
senting me  complete  before  the  mercy-seat  in  his 
ownself.'  'There  was  my  righteousuess  just  before 
the  eyes  of  Divine  glory.'2 

About  this  period  his  robust  hardy  frame  gave 
way  under  the  attack  of  disease,  and  we  have  to 
witness  his  feelings  when  the  king  of  terrors  ap- 
peared to  be  beginning  his  deadly  work.  Whether 
the  fiery  trials,  the  mental  tempest  through  which 
he  had  passed,  were  too  severe  for  his  bodily  frame, 
is  not  recorded.  His  narrative  is,  that,  '  Upon  a 
time  I  was  somewhat  inclining  to  a  consumption, 
wherewith,  about  the  spring  I  was  suddenly  and 
violently  seized,  with  much  weakness  in  my  outward 
man  ;  insomuch  that  I  thought  I  could  not  live.'3 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  39.  "-  Vol.  i.,  p.  515. 

3  Grace  Abounding,  No.  255,  vol.  i.,  p.  39. 


This  is  slightly  varied  in  his  account  of  this  illness 
in  his  Law  and  Grace.  He  there  says,  «  hav- 
ing contracted  guilt  upon  my  soul,  and  having 
some  distemper  of  body  upon  me,  I  supposed  that 
death  might  now  so  seize  upon,  as  to  take  me  away 
from  among  men.4  These  serious  considerations 
led  to  a  solemn  investigation  of  his  hopes.  His 
having  been  baptized,  his  union  to  a  church,  the 
good  opinion  of  his  fellow-men,  arc  not  in  the  slight- 
est degree  relied  upon  as  evidences  of  the  new 
birth,  or  of  a  death  to  sin  and  resurrection  to  holi- 
ness.' 'Now  began  I  afresh  to  give  myself  up 
to  a  serious  examination  after  my  state  and  condi- 
tion for  the  future,  and  of  my  evidences  for  that 
blessed  world  to  come:  for  it  hath,  I  bless  the 
name  of  God,  been  my  usual  course,  as  always,  so 
especially  in  the  day  of  affliction,  to  endeavour  to 
keep  my  interest  in  the  life  to  come,  clear  before 
my  eye. 

'  But  I  had  no  sooner  began  to  recall  to  mind  my 
former  experience  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  my 
soul,  but  there  came  flocking  into  my  mind  an  in- 
numerable company  of  my  sins  and  transgressions: 
amongst  which  these  were  at  this  time  most  to  my 
affliction,  namely,  my  deadness,  dulncss,  and  cold- 
ness in  holy  duties  ;  my  wanderings  of  heart,  my 
wearisomeness  in  all  good  things,  my  want  of  love 
to  God,  his  ways  and  people,  with  this  at  the  end 
of  all,  "Are  these  the  fruits  of  Christianity?  Are 
these  the  tokens  of  a  blessed  man  ?" 

'At  the  apprehension  of  these  things  my  sickness 
was  doubled  upon  me,  for  now  was  I  sick  in  my 
inward  man,  my  soul  was  clogged  with  guilt;  now 
also  was  my  former  experience  of  God's  goodness 
to  me  quite  taken  out  of  my  mind,  and  hid  as  if  it 
had  never  been,  nor  seen.  Now  was  my  soul 
greatly  pinched  between  these  two  considerations, 
"  Live  I  must  not,  die  I  dare  not."  Now  I  sunk 
and  fell  in  my  spirit,  and  was  giving  up  all  for 
lost ;  but  as  I  was  walking  up  and  down  in  my 
house,  as  a  man  in  a  most  woeful  state,  that  word 
of  God  took  hold  of  my  heart,  Ye  are  "justified 
freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that 
is  in  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  iii.  24).  But  0!  what  a 
turn  it  made  upon  me  ! 

'Now  was  I  as  one  awakened  out  of  some  trouble- 
some, sleep  and  dream ;  and  listening  to  this 
heavenly  sentence,  I  was  as  if  I  had  heard  it  thus 
expounded  to  me: — "Sinner,  thou  thinkest,  that 
because  of  thy  sins  and  infirmities,  I  cannot  save 
thy  soul  ;  but  behold  my  Son  is  by  me,  and  upon 
him  I  look,  and  not  on  thee,  and  will  deal  with 
thee  according  as  I  am  pleased  with  him."  At 
this  I  was  greatly  lightened  in  my  mind,  and  made 
to  understand,  that  God  could  justify  a  sinner  at 
any  time  ;  it  was  but  his  looking  upon  Christ,  and 


'  Vol  i.,  p.  515. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


imputing  of  his  benefits  to  us,  and  the  work  was 
forthwith  done.' * 

'Now  was  I  got  on  high,  I  saw  myself  within 
the  arms  of  grace  and  mercy  ;  and  though  I  was 
before  afraid  to  think  of  a  dying  hour,  yet  now  I 
cried,  Let  me  die.  Now  death  was  lovely  and 
beautiful  in  my  sight,  for  I  saw  that  we  shall  never 
live  indeed,  till  we  be  gone  to  the  other  world.  I 
saw  more  in  those  words,  "Heirs  of  God"  (Ro.viii.  17). 
than  ever  I  shall  be  able  to  express.  "  Heirs  of 
God,"  God  himself  is  the  portion  of  his  saints.'2 

As  his  mental  agitation  subsided  into  this  deli- 
cious calm,  his  bodily  health  was  restored  ;  to  use 
his  own  figure,  Captain  Consumption,  with  all  his 
men  of  death,  were  3  routed,  and  his  strong  bodily 
health  triumphed  over  disease;  or,  to  use  the  more 
proper  language  of  an  eminent  Puritan,  *  When 
overwhelmed  with  the  deepest  sorrows,  and  that 
for  many  doleful  months,  he  who  is  Lord  of 
nature  healed  my  body,  and  he  who  is  the  Father 
of  mercies  and  God  of  all  grace  has  proclaimed 
liberty  to  the  captive,  and  given  rest  to  my  weary 
soul.'4  Here  we  have  a  key  to  the  most  eventful 
picture  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress — The  Valley  of 
the  Shadow  of  Death — which  is  placed  in  the  midst 
of  the  journey.  When  in  the  prime  of  life,  death 
looked  at  him  and  withdrew  for  a  season.  It  was 
the  shadoio  of  death  that  came  over  his  spirit. 

The  church  at  Bedford  having  increased,  Bun- 
yan  was  chosen  to  fill  the  honourable  office  of  a 
deacon.  No  man  could  have  been  better  fitted  for 
that  office  than  Bunyan  was.  He  was  honesty 
itself,  had  suffered  severe  privations,  so  as  to  feel 
for  those  who  were  pinched  with  want;  he  had 
great  powers  of  discrimination,  to  distinguish  be- 
tween the  poverty  of  idleness,  and  that  distress 
which  arises  from  circumstances  over  which  human 
foresight  has  no  control,  so  as  to  relieve  with  pro- 
priety the  pressure  of  want,  without  encouraging 
the  degrading  and  debasing  habit  of  depending 
upon  alms,  instead  of  labouring  to  provide  the 
necessaries  of  life.  He  had  no  fine  clothes  to 
be  spoiled  by  trudging  down  the  filthiest  lanes, 
and  entering  the  meanest  hovels  to  relieve  suffer- 
ing humanity.  The  pour — and  that  is  the  great 
class  to  whom  the  gospel  is  preached,  and  by  whom 
it  is  received — would  hail  him  as  a  brother.  Gifted 
in  prayer,  full  of  sound  and  wholesome  counsel 
drawn  from  holy  writ,  he  must  have  been  a  pecu- 
liar blessing  to  the  distressed,  and  to  all  the  mem- 
bers who  stood  in  need  of  advice  and  assistance. 
Such  were  the  men  intended  by  the  apostles,  •  men 
of  honest  report,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  wis- 
dom '  (Ac.  vi.  3),  whom  the  church  were  to  select,  to 
relieve  the  apostles  from  the  duties  of  ministration 

1  Grace  Abounding,  No.  235-2o9,  vol.  i.,  p.  39. 
8  Vol.  i.,  p.  40.  3  Vol.  iii.,  p.  655. 

4  Rogers  on  Trouble  of  Mind. 


to  the  wants  of  the  afflicted  members,  in  the  dis- 
charge of  which  they  had  given  offence. 

While  thus  actively  employed,  he  was  again 
visited  with  a  severe  illness,  and  again  was  sub- 
ject to  a  most  searching  and  solemn  investigation 
as  to  his  fitness  to  appear  before  the  judgment- 
scat  of  God.  '  All  that  time  the  tempter  did 
beset  me  strongly,  labouring  to  hide  from  me  my 
former  experience  of  God's  goodness  ;  setting 
before  me  the  terrors  of  death,  and  the  judgment 
of  God,  insomuch  that  at  this  time,  through  rny 
fear  of  miscarrying  for  ever,  should  I  now  die,  I 
was  as  one  dead  before  death  came  ;  I  thought 
that  there  was  no  way  but  to  hell  I  must.'5 

'A  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear.'  Well  might 
the  apostle  say,  '  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope 
in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable '  d  Co. 
xv.  19).  Bunyan  had  enjoyed  holy  emotions  full 
of  glory,  and  now  the  devil  was  threatening 
him,  not  only  with  the  loss  of  heaven,  but  the 
terrors  of  hell.  The  Puritan,  Rogers,  describes 
religious  melancholy  as  '  the  worst  of  all  distem- 
pers, and  those  sinking  and  guilty  fears  which 
it  brings  along  with  it  are  inexpressibly  dreadful ; 
what  anguish,  what  desolation !  I  dare  not  look 
to  heaven ;  there  I  see  the  greatness  of  God,  who 
is  against  me.  I  dare  not  look  into  his  Word ; 
for  there  I  see  all  his  threats,  as  so  many  barbed 
arrows  to  strike  me  to  the  heart.  I  dare  not 
look  into  the  grave ;  because  thence  I  am  like  to 
have  a  doleful  resurrection ;  in  this  doleful  night 
the  soul  hath  no  evidence  at  all  of  its  former 
grace.'0  Bunyan's  experience  reminds  us  of  the 
impressive  language  of  Job — a  book  full  of  power- 
ful imagery  and  magnificent  ideas,  in  which  Bun- 
yan delighted,  calling  it  'that  blessed  book.'7 
Job  goes  on,  from  step  to  step,  describing  his 
mental  wretchedness,  until  he  rises  to  a  climax, 
God  'runneth  upon  me  like  a  giant'  (ivi.  7— 2B). 
'Thou  huntest  me  as  a  fierce  lion'  (x.  is).  'The 
arrows  of  the  Almighty  are  within  me;  they  drink 
up  my  spirit:  the  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves 
in  array  against  me'  (vi.  4).  Poor  Bunyan,  in  the 
depth  of  his  distress,  cried  unto  God,  and  was 
heard  and  relieved  from  these  soul  troubles.  He 
recollected  the  joyful  ascent  of  Lazarus  from  the 
extreme  of  human  misery  to  the  height  of  celestial 
enjoyments.  His  spirit  was  sweetly  revived,  and 
he  was  enabled,  with  delight,  to  hope  yet  in  God, 
when  that  word  fell  with  great  weight  upon  his 
mind,  '0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave, 
where  is  thy  victory?'  'At  this  he  became  both 
well  in  body  and  mind  at  once ;  his  sickness  did 
presently  vanish,  and  he  again  walked  comfortably 
in  his  work  for  God.'s     The  words,  '  hv  grace  are 


5  Grace  Abounding,  No.  2G0. 
7  Vol.  ii.,  p.  425. 


6  1st  edition,  p.  Zl 
8  Vol  i,  p.  41). 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN    BUNYAX. 


ye  saved,'  followed  him  through  the  rest  of  his 
pilgrimage.  His  consolation  was,  that  '  a  little 
true  grace  will  go  a  great  way;  yea,  and  do  more 
ira  than  we  are  aware  of.  If  we  have  hut 
grace  enough  to  keep  us  groaning  after  God,  it  is 
not  all  the  world  that  can  destroy  us.'  1  lie  had 
new  hecomo  deeply  instructed  in  the  Bchool  of 
Christ,  and  was  richly  furnished  with  the  weapons  of 
spiritual  warfare;  ' a  scrihe  instructed  into  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  like  unto  a  man  that  is  an  house- 
holder, which  bringeth  forth  out  of  his  treasure 
tilings  new  and  old'  (Mat.  xiii.  IS).  Or,  as  •  the  man 
of  God,  perfected,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good 
works  '  (j  Tim.  iii.  it).  It  was  powerfully  impressed 
upon  his  mind  that  all  his  inward  conflicts  were  to 
lie  made  use  of  in  preparing  him  to  instruct  others. 
All  the  events  of  his  Saviour's  life  passed  before 
his  mind  as  if  he  had  stood  by  as  a  witness  to  his 
birth — his  walking  with  his  disciples;  his  wondrous 
parables  and  stupendous  miracles;  his  mental  and 
bodily  sufferings ;  his  sacrifice,  burial,  ascension, 
intercession,  and  final  judgment;  all  passed  in  vivid 
-  before  the  eye  of  his  mind;  and  then,  he 
says,   '  as  I  was  musing  with  myself  what  these 

should  mean,  methought  I  heard  such  a 
word  in  my  heart  as  this,  *  I  have  set  thee  down  on 

•,  for  I  have  something  more  than  ordinary 
for  thee  to  do;'  which  made  me  the  more  to  marvel, 
saying,  '  What,  my  Lord,  such  a  poor  wretch  as  IV2 
Such  was  his  inward  call  to  the  ministry;  and  it 
being  attended  with  the  three  requisites  usually 
insisted  on  among  Dissenters — ability,  inclination, 
and  opportunity — he  was  sent  out  as  an  itinerant 
preacher  in  the  surrounding  villages  in  1655,  and 
laid  the  foundation  of  many  churches,  which  now 
flourish  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  Divine  grace. 
In  some  of  these  villages  the  gospel  had  never 
before  been  preached ;  they  were  strongholds  of 
Satan.  These  were  fit  places  for  the  full  display 
of  Lis  intrepid  energy. 

After  thus  preaching  and  much  suffering,  for 
fifteen  years,  he  was  appointed  to  the  pastoral 
office,  or  eldership.3  Can  a  man  enter  upon  the 
work  of  the  ministry  from  a  better  school  than  this  ? 
Deeply  versed  in  scriptural  knowledge;  thoroughly 
humbled  by  the  assaults  of  sin  and  Satan ;  aware 
of  his  devices  ;  with  a  keen  perception  of  the  value 
of  the  soul;  its  greatness;  and,  if  lost,  the  causes 
and  the  unspeakable  extent  of  its  loss.  Solemnly 
devout  and  fluent  in  prayer;  ready  in  conversation 
upon  heavenly  things;  speaking  the  truth  without 
fear  of  consequences,  yet  avoiding  unnecessary 
offence;  first  speaking  iu  the  church-meeting,  and 
then  more  extensively  in  barns,  or  woods,  or  dells, 
to  avoid  the  informers.4     Such  was  his  training; 

1  Vol.  i.,  p.  769.     -  Vol.  i.,  p.  549.     s  Church  Book,  1671. 

4  This  secrecy  became  needful  after  the  Restoration,  as  noticed 

more  fully  afterwards,  p.  lis.    During  those  years  of  persecu- 


and  the  result  was,  that,  when  permitted  to  pro- 
claim the  gospel  publicly,  thousands  hung  upon 
his  words  with  intense  feeling;  numerous  converts 
were  by  his  means  added  to  the  church;  the  proud 

(ion,  a  frequent  place  of  resort  was  a  dell  in  Wain-wood,  about 
three  miles  from  llitchiu.  Of  this  locality  the  following  notice 
will  be  acceptable: — Un  the   l'Jth  of  May,  1853,  a  splendidly 

to  the  shrines  of  Bnuyan  was  i 
at  1 1  it  cli  in  and  its  vicinity,  in  company  with  S.  T5.  Gcard,  E?q. 
Here  it  was  my  honOBX  to  shake  hands  with  honest  Edward 
Foster,  whose  grandfather  often  entertained  and  sheltered  John 
Banyan.  So  angular  a  case  1  had  never  met  with,  that  three 
i  I  line,  evidence  of  transactions 
n  Inch  ocenrred  at  a  distance  of  190  years.  1 1  i  -  grandfather  was 
born  in  1642,  and  for  many  years  was  a  friend  and  Don 
of  the  illustrious  dreamer.  Iu  1700,  when  lie  was  sixty-four 
years  of  I  gest  son  was  born,  and  in  1777,  when 

that  son  was  seventy-one  years  of  age,  his  youngest  son  was 
born,  and  iu  1853  he  has  the  pei  l'<  cL  use  of  limbs  and  faculties, 
and  properly  executes  the  important  office  of  assistant 
tohis  extensive  parish.  With  such  direct  testimony,  we  visiti  A 
romantic  delL  where,  in  the  still  hours  of  midnight, 
the  saiuts  of  God  were  wout  to  meet  and  unite  in  Divine  wor- 
ship. It  is  a  most  romantic  deli,  iu  Wain-wood,  which  crowns 
a. lull  about  three  miles  from  llitchin.  We  had  some  dilliculty 
in  making  our  way  through  the  underwood — crushing  the  beau- 
tiful hyacinths  and  primroses  which  covered  the  ground  iu  the 
richest  profusion,  and  near  the  top  t»f  the  hill  cuuie  suddenly 
upon  this  singular  dell — a  natural  little  eminence  formed  the 
pulpit,  while  the  dell  would  hold  under  its  shade  at  least  a 
thousand  people — and  now  I  must  give  you  the  countryman's 
eloqucnt  description  of  the  meetings  of  his  ancestors.  "  Here, 
under  the  canopy  of  heaven,  «  ith  the  rigour  of  winter's  nipping 
frost,  while  the  clouds,  obscuring  the  moon,  have  discharged 
their  flaky  treasures,  they  often  assembled  while  the  highly- 
gifted  and  heavenly-minded  Bunyan  has  broken  to  them  the 
bread  of  life.  The  word  of  the  Lord  was  precious  iu  those 
days.  And  here  over  his  devoted  head,  while  uncovered  in 
prayer,  the  pious  matrons  warded  oil'  the  driving  hail  aud  snow, 
by  holding  a  shawl  over  him  by  its  four  corners.  Iu  this 
devoted  dell  these  plain  unpolished  husbandmen,  like  the 
aucieut  YValdcnses,  in  the  valleys  of  Piedmont,  proved  them- 
selves firm  defenders  of  the  faith  in  its  primitive  purity,  and  of 
Divine  worship  in  its  primitive  style." 

Their  horses  on  which  they  rode,  from  various  parts,  were 
sheltered  iu  neighbouring  friendly  farms,  while  they,  to  avoid 
suspicion,  ascended  the  hill  by  scarcely  visible  footpaths.  Could 
line  weather  be  insured,  it  would  form  a  lovely  spot  for  a  melt- 
ing to  celebrate  the  third  jubilee  of  religious  toleration — there 
listen  to  a  Bunyan  of  our  age,  aud  device  measures  for  religions 
equality.  Then  we  might  close  the  service  by  solemnly  objur- 
ing every  system  which  gave  power  to  tyrannise  over  the  rights 
of  conscience.  Here,  as  in  other  places  where  Bunyan  founded 
churches,  the  cause  of  Christ  hath  spread.  At  llitchin,  iu 
1681,  about  thirty-five  Christians  united  in  the  following 

covenant : — 

'  \\  o  who,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  aud  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  have  obtained  grace  to  give  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  and 
one  to  another  by  the  will  of  God,  to  have  communion  with 
one  another,  as  saiuts  in  one  gospel  fellowship: — Do,  before 
God  our  Lather,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  aud  the  holj 
agree  and  promise  to  waft  together  iu   this  one  gospel   com- 
munion aud  fellowship  as  a  church  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  love  to 
the  Lord  and  one  to  another,  aud  endeavour  to  yield  sincere 
and  hearty  obedience  to  the  laws,  ordinances,  aud  appointments 
of  our  Lord  aud  Lawgiver  iu  his  church.     And  also  d 
aud  promise,  the  Lord  assisting,  to  follow  after  th 
which  make  for  peace,  and  tilings  wherewith  one  nn  . 
another,  that  so  living  aud  walking  in  love  and  | 
of  love  and  peace  mav  be  with  us.     Amen.' 

This  was  probably  drawn  by  Bunyan,  and  so  simple  aud 

comprehensive  has  it  proved,  that  the  church  has  nourished, 

.  a  spacious  and  handsome  place  of  worship  has  been 

erected,  to  accommodate  a  thousand  worshippers,  at  a  cost  of 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


became  broken-hearted,  and  tbe  lowly  were  raised, 
and  blessings  abounded;  the  drunkards  were  made 
sober ;  thieves  and  covetous  were  reclaimed ;  the 
blasphemers  were  made  to  sing  the  praises  of  God; 
the  desert  bid  fair  to  blossom  and  bring  forth  fruit 
as  a  garden.  But,  alas!  his  early  labours  were 
contrary  to  acts  of  parliament ;  the  spirit  of  in- 
tolerance and  persecution  soon  troubled,  and 
eventually  consigned  him  to  a  prison. 

Before  we  bid  a  final  farewell  to  Bunyan's  ex- 
traordinary mental  struggles  with  unbelief,  it  may 
be  well  to  indulge  in  a  few  sober  reflections.  Are 
tbe  narratives  of  these  mighty  tempests  in  his 
.spirit  plain  matters  of  fact  ?  No  one  can  read  the 
works  of  Butiyan  and  doubt  for  a  moment  his 
-truthfulness.  His  language  is  that  of  the  heart, 
fervent  but  not  exaggerated,  strong  but  a  plain 
tale  of  real  feelings.  He  says,  and  he  believed  it, 
1  My  sins  have  appeared  so  big  to  me,  that  I 
tli ought  one  of  my  sins  have  been  as  big  as  all  the 
sins  of  all  the  men  in  the  nation  ;  ay  and  of 
other  nations  too,  reader  ;  these  things  be  not 
fancies,  for  I  have  smarted  for  this  experience. 
It  is  true  that  Satan  has  the  art  of  making  the 
uttermost  of  every  sin  ;  he  can  blow  it  up,  make  it 
swell,  make  every  hair  of  its  head  as  big  as  a 
cedar;1  but  yet  the  least  stream  of  the  heart 
blood  of  Jesus  hath  vanished  all  away  and  hath 
made  it  to  fly,  to  the  astonishment  of  such  a  poor 
sinner,  and  hath  delivered  me  up  into  sweet  and 
heavenly  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.'2 
Some  have  supposed  the  narrative  to  be  exagger- 
ated, while  others  have  attributed  the  disturbed 
state  of  his  mind  to  disease ;  my  humble  belief  is 
that  tbe  whole  is  a  plain  unvarnished  account  of 
facts ;  that  those  facts  occurred  while  he  was  in 
full  possession  of  all  the  faculties  of  his  mind.  To 
ascribe  such  powers  to  the  invisible  world  by 
-which  we  are  constantly  surrounded,  does  not 
agree  with  the  doctrines  of  modern  philosophers. 
Those  holy  or  uuholy  suggestions  suddenly  in- 
jected, would  by  the  world  be  set  down  as  the 
hallucinations  of  a  distempered  imagination.  Car- 
nal relations  attributed  Christian's  alarm  to  'some 
frenzy  distemper  got  into  his  head,'  and  Southey, 
following  their  example,  ascribes  Bunyan's  hal- 
lowed feelings  to  his  want  of  '  sober  judgment,' 
'bis  brutality  and  extreme  ignorance,'  a  'stage 
of  burning  enthusiasm,'  and  to  '  an  age  in  which 
hypocrisy  was  regnant,  and  fanaticism  rampant 
throughout  the  laud.'3  What  a  display  of  reign- 
ing hypocrisy  and  rampaut  fanaticism  was  it  to 


£3000,  all  paid  for,  with  a  surplus  fund  in  hand  for  contin- 
gencies, of  £500.  In  addition,  there  are  also  large  and  com- 
modious chapels  for  the  Independents,  'Weslcvans,  and  Quakers 

1  Christ  a  Complete  Saviour,  vol.  i.,  p.  210. 

-  Law  and  Grace,  vol.  i.,  pp.  5-1'J,  550. 

3  Life  of  Banyan,  p.  xiv. 


see  the  game  at  cat  openly  played  by  men  on 
Sunday,  the  church  bells  calling  them  to  their 


sport 


Had    Southey  been  poet-laureate   to 


Charles  II.,  he  might  with  equal  truth  have  con- 
cealed the  sensuality,  open  profaneness,  and  de- 
bauchery of  that  profligate  monarch  and  his  court 
of  concubines,  and  have  praised  him  as  'the  Lord's 
anointed.'  Bunyan  was  an  eye-witness  of  the  state 
of  the  times  in  which  he  lived,  and  he  associated 
with  numbers  of  the  poor  in  Bedfordshire  and  the 
adjoining  counties.  So  truthful  a  man's  testi- 
mony is  of  great  value,  and  he  proves  that  no 
miraculous  reformation  of  manners  had  taken 
place  ;  no  regnant  hypocrisy  nor  rampant  fanati- 
cism. In  1655,  that  being  the  brightest  period  of 
the  Commonwealth,  he  thus  '  sighs  '  over  the  state 
of  his  country  : — 'There  are  but  a  few  places  in 
the  Bible  but  there  are  threatenings  against  one 
sinner  or  another;  against  drunkards,  swearers, 
liars,  proud  persons,  strumpets,  whoremongers, 
covetous,  railers,  extortioners,  thieves,  lazy  per- 
sons. In  a  word,  all  manner  of  sins  are  reproved, 
and  there  is  a  sore  punishment  to  be  executed  on 
the  committers  of  them ;  and  all  this  made  men- 
tion of  iii  the  Scriptures.  But  for  all  this,  how 
thick,  and  by  heaps,  do  these  wretches  walk  up 
and  down  our  streets?  Do  but  go  into  the  ale- 
houses, and  you  shall  see  almost  every  room 
besprinkled  with  them,  so  foaming  out  their  own 
shame  that  it  is  enough  to  make  the  heart  of  a 
saint  to  tremble.'4  This  was  a  true  character  of 
the  great  masses  of  the  labouring  and  trading- 
portions  of  the  commonwealth.  Let  us  hear  his 
testimony  also  as  to  the  most  sacred  profession, 
the  clergy,  in  1654  : — 

'A  reason  why  delusions  do  so  easily  take  place 
in  the  hearts  of  the  ignorant,  is,  because  those 
that  pretend  to  be  their  teachers,  do  behave  them- 
selves so  basely  among  them.  And  indeed  I  may 
say  of  these,  as  our  Lord  said  of  the  Pharisees  iu 
another  case,  the  blood  of  the  ignorant  shall  be 
laid  to  their  charge.  They  that  pretend  they  are 
sent  of  the  Lord,  and  come,  saying,  Thus  saith 
the  Lord ;  we  are  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  our 
commission  is  from  the  Lord  by  succession  ;  I  say, 
these  pretending  themselves  to  be  the  preachers  of 
truth,  but  are  not,  do,  by  their  loose  conversation, 
render  the  doctrine  of  God,  and  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  by  whom  the  saints  are  saved,  contemp- 
tible, and  do  give  tbe  adversary  mighty  encourage- 
ment, to  cry  out  against  the  truths  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  because  of  their  wicked  walking. 
For  the  most  part  of  them,  they  are  the  men  that 
at  this  day  do  so  harden  their  hearers  in  their 
sins  by  giving  them  such  ill  examples,  that  none 
goeth  beyond  them  for  impiety.  As,  for  example, 
would  a  parishioner  learn  to  be  proud,  he  or  she 
4  Sighs,  vol.  iii.,  p.  712. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


need  look  no  farther  than  to  the  priest,  his  wife, 
and  family  ;  for  there  is  a  notable  pattern  before 
them.  Would  the  people  learn  to  he  wanton? 
they  may  also  see  a  pattern  among  their  teachers. 
Would  they  learn  to  bo  drunkards  ?  they  may 
also  have  that  from  somo  of  their  ministers  ;  for 
indeed  they  are  ministers  in  this,  to  minister  ill 
example  to  their  congregations.  Again,  would 
the  people  learn  to  bo  covetous?  they  need  but 
look  to  their  minister,  and  they  shall  have  a  lively, 
or  rather  a  deadly  resemblance  set  beforo  them,  in 
both  riding  and  running  after  great  benefices,  and 
parsonages  by  night  and  by  day.  Nay,  they 
among  themselves  will  scramble  for  the  same.  I 
have  seen,  that  so  soon  as  a  man  hath  but  departed 
from  his  benefice  as  he  calls  it,  either  by  death 
or  out  of  covetousness  of  a  bigger,  we  have  had 
one  priest  from  this  town,  and  another  from  that, 
so  run,  for  these  tithe-cocks  and  handfuls  of  barley, 
as  if  it  were  their  proper  trade,  and  calling,  to 
hunt  after  the  same.  0  wonderful  impiety  and 
ungodliness !  are  you  not  ashamed  of  your  doings  ? 
Read  Ro.  i.  towards  the  end.  As  it  was  with  them, 
so,  it  is  to  be  feared,  it  is  with  many  of  you,  who 
knowing  the  judgments  of  God,  that  they  who  do 
such  things  are  worthy  of  death,  not  only  do  the 
same,  but  have  pleasure  also  in  them  that  do  them. 
And  now  you  that  pretend  to  be  the  teachers  of 
the  people  in  verity  and  truth,  though  we  know 
that  some  of  you  are  not,  is  it  a  small  thing 
with  you  to  set  them  such  an  example  as  this  ? 
Were  ever  the  Pharisees  so  profane;  to  whom 
Christ  said,  Ye  vipers,  how  can  ye  escape  the 
damnation  of  hell  ?  Doth  not  the  ground  groan 
under  you  ?  surely,  it  will  favour  you  no  more 
than  it  favoured  your  fore-runners.  Certainly  the 
wrath  of  God  lies  heavy  at  your  doors,  it  is  but 
Ezc.xiii,readthatwhoic^  very  little  while,  and  your  re- 
chapter,  and  you  will  compense    shall    be   upon    your 

lind  it  as  it  was  a  look-  x  L  J 

iug  glass  by  which  thou  own  head.     And  as  for  you  that 

mayest  notahlyseethem  •     i       i     r  n     i  .1 

with  their  marks  and  are  indeed  of  God  among  them, 
discoveries.  though   not   of  them,    separate 

yourselves.  Why  should  the  righteous  partake  of 
the  same  plagues  with  the  wicked  ?  0  ye  children 
of  the  harlot !  I  cannot  well  tell  how  to  have  done 
with  you,  your  stain  is  so  odious,  and  you  are  so 
senseless,  as  appears  by  your  practices.'1 

The  testimony  of  George  Fox  as  to  England's 
fashions  in  1654,  is  very  pointed  and  extremely 
droll: — "Men  and  women  are  carried  away  with 
fooleries  and  vanities  ;  gold  and  silver  upon  their 
backs,  -  store  of  ribbands  hanging  about  the  waist, 
knees,  and  feet — red  or  white,  black  or  yellow ; 
women  with  their  gold  ;  their  spots  on  their  faces, 
noses,  cheeks,  foreheads  ;  rings  on  their  fingers, 


1  Gospel  Truths,  vol.  ii.,  p.  178. 

2  Like  the  Bcef-catcrs,   or  yeomen  of  the  guard  at  the 
present  day. 

VOL.  III. 


cuffs  double,  like  a  butcher's  white  sleeves  ;  rib- 
bands about  their  hands,  and  three  or  four  "■old 
laces  about  their  clothes ;  men  dressed  like  fiddlers' 
boys  or  stage  players;  see  them  playing  at  bowls, 
or  at  tables,  or  at  shovel-board,  or  each  one  deck- 
ing his  horse  with  bunches  of  ribbands  on  his  head, 
as  the  rider  hath  on  his  own.  These  are  gentle- 
men, and  brave  fellows,  that  say  pleasures  are 
lawful,  and  in  their  sports  they  shout  like  wild 
asses.  This  is  the  generation  carried  away  with 
pride,  arrogancy,  lust,  gluttony,  and  uncleanness  ; 
who  cat  and  drink  and  rise  up  to  play,  their  eyes 
full  of  adultery,  and  their  bodies  of  the  devil's 
adorning.13  Such  quotations  from  the  writings  of 
men  of  undoubted  veracity,  and  who  lived  during 
that  period,  might  be  multiplied  to  fill  a  volume. 

Is  this  the  regnant  hypocrisy  and  rampant  fana- 
ticism which  prevailed  in  England,  and  which 
Southcy  supposes  to  have  influenced  Bunyan  and 
deranged  his  sober  judgment  ?  It  is  true  that 
the  Protector  and  his  council  discountenanced  vice 
and  folly,  and  that  there  was  more  piety  and  virtue 
in  the  kingdom  at  that  time  than  it  had  ever 
before  witnessed.  But  it  would  have  been  the 
greatest  of  miracles,  had  the  people  been  suddenly 
moralized,  after  having  been  baptized  in  brutality 
for  ages.  Not  a  century  had  elapsed  since  tho 
autos  da  fe  had  blazed  throughout  the  country, 
burning  the  most  pious,  moral,  and  enlightened  of 
her  citizens.  A  century  of  misery  to  the  profes- 
sors of  religion  had  passed,  in  which  the  persecu- 
tions of  Papists  and  Puritans,  hanging,  transport- 
ing, murdering  by  frightful  imprisonments  all 
those  who  dared  to  dissent  from  the  church  of 
England.  All  this  must  have  produced  a  debas- 
ing effect  upon  public  morals.  Even  among  pro- 
fessors Bunyan  discovered  pride,  covetousness, 
impiety,  and  uncleanness.4 

Bunyan 's  religious  impressions  did  not,  as 
Southey  states,  arise  from  his  ignorance,  brutal 
manners,  low  station,  nor  from  the  fanaticism  of 
the  age  in  which  he  lived.  Did  the  similar  feeling 
of  Job  or  David  spring  from  these  polluted  foun- 
tains ?  He  is  a  stranger  to  Christ's  school  that 
confounds  its  discipline  with  mental  drunkenness, 
or  with  tho  other  depraved  sources  alluded  to  by 
Southey.  The  luxurious  imagination  which  ruled 
over  him,  must  be  curbed  and  brought  into  sub- 
jection to  Christ.  He  must  be  weaned  from  a 
reliance  upon  sudden  impulses  to  rely  upon  Divine 
truth.  The  discovery  of  errors  by  scriptural  in- 
vestigation was  putting  on  armour  of  proof.  Self- 
confidence  was  gradually  swallowed  up  by  depend- 
ence upon  the  word — the  result  of  the  severest 


s  Journal,  folio,  1694,  p.  144.  Is  it  surprising  that  the 
Quakers,  at  such  a  time,  assumed  their  peculiar  neatness  of 
dress  ? 

4  Vol.  ii.,  p.  173,  5C6. 


MEMOIR  OP  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


spiritual  training.  Those  painful  exercises  produced 
a  life  of  holiness  and  usefulness.  Can  the  thistle 
produce  grapes,  or  the  noxious  weeds  corn  ?  Never ! 
His  experience  came  from  heaven,  in  mercy  to 
his  soul,  and  to  make  him  a  blessing  to  millions  of 
his  race.  By  this  he  was  made  truly  -wise,  civi- 
lized, enlightened,  and  elevated.  Every  painful 
feeling  was  measured  by  Divine  rule — weighed  in 
the  sanctuary  balance — not  one  iota  too  much  or 
too  littlo  to  form  his  noble  character.  He  has 
been  compared  with  Lord  Byron,  one  of  our  most 
impassioned  thinkers  and  writers ;  but  the  noble 
poet's  heart-griefs  were  on  the  wrong  side.  Judg- 
ing of  his  own  feelings  by  those  painted  on  his 
heroes : — they  fight  for  freedom  only  to  gratify 
lust,  pride,  and  ambition,  while  the  future  appeared 
in  dark,  dreary  uncertainty.  But  Bunyan  strives 
to  be  released  from  the  slavery  of  sin  and  Satan, 
that  he  might  enjoy  the  liberty  of  being  a  servant 
of  Christ,  whose  service  is  perfect  freedom,  with  a 
glorious  vista  of  eternity  occasionally  breaking  in 
upon  his  soul. 

Well  may  it  be  said  of  him : — Simple,  enchant- 
ing man!  what  does  not  the  world  oAve  to  thee 
and  to  the  great  Being  who  could  produce  such 
as  thee  ?  Teacher  alike  of  the  infant  and  of  the 
aged ;  who  canst  direct  the  first  thought  and  re- 
move the  last  doubt  of  man  ;  property  alike  of  the 
peasant  and  the  prince  ;  welcomed  by  the  ignorant 
and  honoured  by  the  wise;  thou  hast  translated 
Christianity  into  a  new  language,  and  that  a  uni- 
versal one  !     Thou  art  the  prose  poet  of  all  time ! 


THE  FOURTH   PERIOD. 

BUNYAN  ENTERS  INTO  CONTROVERSY — BECOMES  AN  AUTHOR 
— OFFENDS  A  PERSECUTING  MAGISTRACY,  AND  IS  PRO- 
CEEDED   AGAINST    AT   THE    SESSIONS    UNDER    AN    ACT    OF 

THE     COMMONWEALTH IS     ACCUSED     OF    REPORTING    A 

STRANGE    CHARGE    OF  WITCHCRAFT PUBLICLY   DISPUTES 

WITH   THE    QUAKERS. 

In  proportion  as  a  man  becomes  a  public  character, 
especially  if  eminent  for  talent  and  usefulness  in  the 
church,  so  will  his  enemies  increase.  The  envy  of 
some  and  the  malice  of  others  will  invent  slanders, 
or,  what  is  worse,  put  an  evil  construction  upon 
the  most  innocent  conduct,  in  the  hope  of  throwing 
a  shade  over  that  brightness  which  reveals  their 
own  defects.  In  this  they  are  aided  by  all  the 
craft,  and  cunning,  and  power  of  Satan,  the  arch- 
enemy of  man.  The  purity  of  gospel  truth  carries 
with  it  the  blessed  fruits  of  the  highest  order  of 
civilization  ;  the  atmosphere  in  which  it  lives  is 
'  good  will  to  man.'  Salvation  is  a  free  gift,  direct 
from  God  to  the  penitent  sinner.  It  cannot  be  ob- 
tained by  human  aid,  nor  for  all  the  gold  in  the 
universe.  It  cannot  possibly  be  traded  in,  bought, 
or  sold,  but  is  bestowed  without  money  or  price. 


Hence  the  opposition  of  Antichrist.  The  cry  or  groan 
of  the  contrite  enters  heaven  and  brings  down  bless- 
ings, while  the  most  elegant  and  elaborately-com- 
posed prayer,  not  springing  from  the  heart,  is  read 
or  recited  in  vain.  Human  monarchs  must  be  ap- 
proached by  petitions  drawn  up  in  form,  and  which 
may  be  accepted,  although  the  perfection  of  insin- 
cerity and  hypocrisy.  The  King  of  kings  accepts 
no  forms  ;  he  knows  the  heart,  and  requires  the 
approach  of  those  who  worship  him  to  be  in  sin- 
cerity and  in  truth  ;  the  heart  may  plead  without 
words,  God  accepteth  the  groans  and  sighs  of  those 
that  fear  him.  These  were  the  notions  that  Bunyan 
had  drawn  from  the  Holy  Oracles,  and  his  conver- 
sation soon  made  him  a  favourite  with  the  Puritans, 
while  it  excited  feelings  of  great  hostility  among 
the  neighbouring  clergy  and  magistrates. 

Bunyan's  conversion  from  being  a  pest  to  the 
neighbourhood  to  becoming  a  pious  man,  might 
have  been  pardoned  had  he  conformed  to  the 
Directory ;  but  for  him  to  appear  as  a  Dissenter 
and  a  public  teacher,  without  going  through  the 
usual  course  of  education  and  ordination,  was  an 
unpardonable  offence.  The  opinions  of  man  gave 
him  no  concern  ;  all  his  anxiety  was  to  have  the 
approbation  of  his  God,  and  then  to  walk  accord- 
ingly, braving  all  the  dangers,  the  obloquy,  and 
contempt  that  might  arise  from  his  conscientious 
discharge  of  duties,  for  the  performance  of  which 
he  knew  that  he  alone  must  give  a  solemn  account 
at  the  great  day. 

He  entered  upon  the  serious  work  of  the  ministry 
with  fear  and  trembling,  with  much  heart-search- 
ing, earnest  prayer,  and  the  advice  of  the  church 
to  which  he  was  united,  not  with  any  pledge  to 
abide  by  their  decision  contrary  to  his  own  convic- 
tion, but  to  aid  him  in  his  determination.  His 
own  account  of  these  important  inquiries  is  very 
striking: — 'After  I  had  been  about  five  or  six 
years  awakened,  and  helped  myself  to  see  both  the 
want  and  worth  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  also 
enabled  to  venture  my  soul  upon  him,  some  of  the 
most  able  among  the  saints  with  us,  for  judgment 
and  holiness  of  life,  as  they  conceived,  did  perceive 
that  God  had  counted  me  worthy  to  understand 
something  of  his  will  in  His  holy  and  blessed  Word, 
and  had  given  me  utterance,  in  some  measure,  to  ex- 
press what  I  saw  to  others  for  edification ;  therefore 
they  desired  me,  and  that  with  much  earnestness,  that 
I  would  be  willing  at  some  times  to  take  in  hand, 
in  one  of  the  meetings,  to  speak  a  word  of  exhor- 
tation unto  them.  The  which,  though  at  the  first 
it  did  much  dash  and  abash  my  spirit,  yet  being 
still  by  them  desired  and  entreated,  I  consented  to 
their  request,  and  did  twice,  at  two  several  assem- 
blies in  private,  though  with  much  weakness  and 
infirmity,  discover  my  gift  amongst  them ;  at  which 
they  did  solemnly  protest,  as  in  the  sight  of  the 


ME.M01U   OF  JOHN   BUNYAX. 


great  God,  they  were  both  affected  and  comforted, 
and  gave  thanks  to  the  Father  of  mercie3  for  the 
grace  bestowed  on  me. 

•  After  this,  sometimes,  when  some  of  them  did 
go  into  the  country  to  teach,  they  would  also  that 
I  should  go  with  them ;  where,  though  as  yet  I  did 
not,  nor  durst  not,  make  use  of  my  gift  in  an  open 
way,  yet  more  privately,  as  I  came  amongst  the 
good  people  in  those  places,  I  did  sometimes  speak 
a  word  of  admonition  unto  them  also,  the  which 
they,  as  the  other,  received  with  rejoicing  at  the 
mercy  of  God  to  me-ward,  professing  their  souls 
ay ere  edified  thereby. 

'  Wherefore  at  last,  being  still  desired  by  the 
church,  after  some  solemn  prayer  to  the  Lord, 
with  fasting,  I  was  more  particularly  called  forth, 
and  appointed  to  a  more  ordinary  and  public 
preaching  of  the  Word,  not  only  to  and  amongst 
them  that  believed,  but  also  to  offer  the  gospel  to 
those  who  had  not  yet  received  the  faith  thereof.'1 

The  ministry  of  Bunyan's  pastor,  whom  he  affec- 
tionately called  holy  Mr.  Giiford,  must  have  been 
wonderfully  blessed.  In  1G50  only  twelve  pious  men 
and  women  were  formed  into  a  Christian  church, 
and,  although  subject  to  fierce  persecution,  they 
had  so  increased  that  in  1G72  ten  members  had 
been  solemnly  set  apart  for  the  work  of  the  minis- 
try, and  they  became  a  blessing  to  the  country 
round  Bedford.  The  benighted  state  of  the  vil- 
lages was  a  cause  of  earnest  prayer  that  men  might 
be  sent  out,  apt  to  teach,  and  willing  to  sacrifice 
liberty,  and  even  life,  to  promote  the  peaceful  reign 
of  the  Redeemer.  The  names  of  the  men  who 
were  thus  set  apart  were — John  Bunyan,  Samuel 
Fenn,  Joseph  Whiteman,  John  Fenn,  Oliver  Scott, 
Luke  Ashwood,  Thomas  Cooper,  Edward  Dent, 
Edward  Isaac,   and  Nehemiah  Coxe.-     Four    of 


1  Grace  Abounding,  vol.  i.,  p.  41. 

2  Nehemiah  Coxe  is  said  to  have  been  a  descendant  from 
Dr.  Richard  Coxe,  preceptor  to  Edward,  VI.,  aud  Dean  of  Ox- 
ford. He  fled  from  persecution  under  Mary,  was  a  troubler 
of  his  brother  refugees  by  his  turbulent  temper,  and  his  attach- 
ment to  superstitious  ceremonies.  On  his  return,  he  was 
made  Bishop  of  Ely,  and  became  a  bitter  persecutor.  Benja- 
min Coxe,  A.M.,  probably  a  son  of  the  furious  bishop,  was  as 
ardently  fond  of  rites  and  ceremonies.  He  was  cited  to  appear 
before  Laud  for  denying  the  jure  divino  of  bishops,  and  the 
poor  bishop  said,  "  God  did  so  bless  me  that  I  gave  him  satis- 
faction." Mr.  Coxe  soon  after  came  out  as  a  Baptist,  and  having 
preached  at  Bedford,  he  settled  in  Coventry.  Here  he  dis- 
puted with  Mr.  Baxter  and  the  Presbyterians;  and  the  Indepen- 
dents had  lum  imprisoned  for  defending  adult  baptism  (Crosby, 
History  of  Baptists,  i.  35-4),  a  very  short  mode  of  settling  the 
controversy.  Probably  Nehemiah  Coxe  was  his  son,  settled  at 
Bedford  as  a  shoemaker.  He  was  a  learned  man,  and,  when  tried 
at  Bedford  assizes  for  preaching  the  gospel,  he  was  indicted  in 
the  usual  Normau-Prench,  or  Latin;  and  pleaded  first  in  Greek, 
which  the  prosecutors  not  understanding,  he  pleadediu  Hebrew, 
arguing,  that  as  his  indictment  was  in  a  foreign  tongue,  he 
was  entitled  to  plead  in  any  of  the  learned  languages.  The 
counsel  being  ignorant  of  those  languages,  and  the  judge  glad 
to  get  rid  of  a  vexatious  indictment,  dismissed  him,  saying  to 
the  counsellors,  '  Well,  this  cordwainer  hath  wound  you  all  up, 
gentlemen.'     This  anecdote  is  handed  down  in  a  funeral  scr- 


tbese  were  permitted  to  fulfil  their  course  without 
notoriety  ;  the  others  were  severely  persecuted, 
lined,  and  imprisoned,  but  not  forsaken. 

Encouraged  hy  the  opinion  of  the  church  which 
had  been  so  prayerfully  formed,  that  it  was  his 
duty  to  proclaim  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation, 
Bunyan  entered  upon  his  important  work,  and  was 
soon  encouraged  by  a  hope  that  Ins  labours  were 
useful  to  his  fellow-men.  'About  this  time,' he 
narrates,  '  I  did  evidently  find  in  my  mind  a  secret 
pricking  forward  thereto,  though,  I  bless  God,  not 
for  desire  ot  vain  glory,  for  at  that  time  I  was  most 
sorely  afflicted  with  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil 
concerning  my  eternal  state.  But  yet  I  could  not 
bo  content  unless  I  was  found  in  the  exercise  of 
my  gift ;  unto  which  also  I  was  greatly  animated, 
not  only  by  the  continual  desires  of  the  godly,  but 
also  by  that  saying  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  "  I 
beseech  you,  brethren  (ye  know  the  household  of 
Stephanas,  that  it  is  the  first-fruits  of  Achaia,  aud 
that  they  have  addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry 
of  the  saints),  that  ye  submit  yourselves  unto  such, 
and  to  every  one  that  helpeth  with  us,  and  labour- 

Cth  "  (1  Cor. xvi.  15.16). 

1  By  this  text  I  was  made  to  Bee  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  never  intended  that  men,  who  have  gifts  and 
abilities,  should  bury  them  in  the  earth,  but  rather 
did  command  and  stir  up  such  to  the  exercise  of 
their  gift,  and  also  did  commend  those  that  were 
apt  and  ready  so  to  do. 

1  Wherefore,  though  of  myself,  of  all  the  saints 
the  most  unworthy,  yet  I,  but  with  great  fear  and 
trembling  at  the  sight  of  my  own  weakness,  did 
set  upon  the  work,  and  did  according  to  my  gift, 
and  the  proportion  of  my  faith,  preach  that  hlessed 
gospel  that  God  had  showed  me  in  the  holy  Word  of 
truth  ;  which,  when  the  country  understood,  they 
came  in  to  hear  the  Word  by  hundreds,  and  that 
from  all  parts.  And  I  thank  God  he  gave  unto 
me  some  measure  of  bowels  and  pity  for  their 
souls,  which  did  put  me  forward  to  labour  with 
great  diligence  and  earnestness,  to  find  out  such 
a  word  as  might,  if  God  would  bless  it,  lay  hold 
of  and  awaken  the  conscience,  in  which  also  the 


mon  by  T.  Sutcliff,  on  the  death  of  Symonds,  one  of  the  pastors 
of  the  church  at  Bedford. 

Another  of  this  little  band  that  was  set  apart  with  Bunyan, 
became  so  useful  a  preacher  as  to  have  been  honoured  with  a  re- 
cord in  the  annals  of  persecution  in  the  reigu  of  Charles  II. 
John  Penn  was  on  Lord's-day,  May  15,  1G70,  committed  to 
prison  for  preaching  iu  his  own  house  ;  and  on  Tuesday,  all  his 
goods  and  stock  in  trade  were  seized  aud  carted  away,  leaving 
his  family  in  the  most  desolate  condition. 

In  the  following  week,  Edward  Isaac,  a  blacksmith,  another 
of  this  little  band,  having  been  fined,  had  all  his  stock  in 
trade,  and  even  the  anvil  upon  which  he  worked,  seized  and 
carted  away. 

Such  were  the  severe  trials  which  these  excellent  citizen? 
were,  with  their  families,  called  to  pass  through,  by  the  tyranny 
of  the  church  j  but  they  were  light,  indeed,  in  comparison  with 
those  that  awaited  the  amiable  and  pious  Bunyan. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


good  Lord  had  respect  to  the  desire  of  his  servant; 
for  I  had  not  preached  long  before  some  began  to 
be  touched,  and  be  greatly  afflicted  in  their  minds 
at  the  apprehension  of  the  greatness  of  their  sin, 
and  of  their  need  of  Jesus  Christ. 

•  But  I  at  first  could  not  believe  that  God  should 
speak  by  me  to  the  heart  of  any  man,  still  counting 
myself  unworthy ;  yet  those  who  were  thus  touched 
would  love  me,  and  have  a  particular  respect  for 
me ;  and  though  I  did  put  it  from  me  that  they 
should  be  awakened  by  me,  still  they  would  con- 
fess it,  and  affirm  it  before  the  saints  of  God.  They 
would  also  bless  God  for  me,  unworthy  wretch  that 
I  am !  and  count  me  God's  instrument  that  showed 
to  them  the  way  of  salvation. 

'  Wherefore,  seeing  them  in  both  their  words  and 
deeds  to  be  so  constant,  and  also  in  their  hearts  so 
earnestly  pressing  after  the  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ,  rejoicing  that  ever  God  did  send  me  where 
they  were ;  then  I  began  to  conclude  that  it  might 
be  so,  that  God  had  owned  in  his  work  such  a 
foolish  one  as  I ;  and  then  came  that  word  of  God 
to  my  heart  with  much  sweet  refreshment,  "  The 
blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish  came  upon 
me,  and  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for 

joy  "  (Job  xxix.  13). 

•  At  this  therefore  I  rejoiced  ;  yea,  the  tears  of 
those  whom  God  did  awaken  by  my  preaching 
would  be  both  solace  and  encouragement  to  me. 
I  thought  on  those  sayings,  "  Who  is  he  that 
maketh  me  glad,  but  the  same  that  is  made  sorry 
by  me"  (2  Cor.  a.  2).  And  again,  "Though  I  be 
not  an  apostle  to  others,  yet  doubtless  I  am  unto 
you :  for  the  seal  of  my  apostleship  are  ye  in  the 
Lord  "  (i  Cor.  ix.  2).  These  things,  therefore,  were 
as  an  another  argument  unto  me,  that  God  had 
called  me  to,  and  stood  by  me  in  this  work. 

4  In  my  preaching  of  the  Word  I  took  special 
notice  of  this  one  thing,  namely,  that  the  Lord  did 
lead  me  to  begin  where  his  Word  begins  with  sin- 
ners ;  that  is,  to  condemn  all  flesh,  and  to  open 
and  allege,  that  the  curse  of  God  by  the  law  doth 
belong  to,  and  lay  hold  on  all  men  as  they  come 
into  the  world,  because  of  sin.  Now  this  part  of 
my  work  I  fulfilled  with  great  feeling,  for  the  ter- 
rors of  the  law,  and  guilt  for  my  transgressions, 
lay  heavy  on  my  own  conscience.  I  preached  what 
I  felt,  what  I  smartingly  did  feel,  even  that  under 
which  my  poor  soul  did  groan  and  tremble  to  as- 
tonishment. Indeed,  I  have  been  as  one  sent  to 
them  from  the  dead  ;  I  went  myself  in  chains  to 
preach  to  them  in  chains  ;  and  carried  that  fire  in 
my  own  conscience  that  I  persuaded  them  to  be- 
ware of.1  I  can  truly  say,  that  when  I  have  been 
to  preach,  I  have  gone  full  of  guilt  and  terror  even 


1  If  Christians  recollected  with  what  anxiety  their  teachers 
prepared  and  delivered  their  sermons,  how  constant  and  prayer- 
ful would  be  their  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace. 


to  the  pulpit-door,  and  there  it  hath  been  taken  off, 
and  I  have  been  at  liberty  in  my  mind  until  I  have 
done  my  work,  and  then,  immediately,  even  before 
I  could  get  down  the  pulpit  stairs,  I  have  been  as 
bad  as  I  was  before  :  yet  God  carried  me  on  with 
a  strong  hand,  for  neither  guilt  nor  hell  could  take 
me  off  my  work.  Thus  I  went  on  for  the  space 
of  two  years,  crying  out  against  men's  sins,  and 
their  fearful  state  because  of  them.'2 

A  man  so  much  in  earnest  soon  became  a  most 
acceptable  and  popular  preacher.  He  studied  his 
sermons  carefully,  and  wrote  such  memorandums 
and  notes  as  might  refresh  his  memory  before  going 
into  the  pulpit,  although  his  intensity  of  feeling, 
his  ready  utterance,  and  natural  eloquence  which 
charmed  his  hearers,  and  his  extensive  usefulness 
as  a  preacher,  render  it  quite  improbable  that  ho 
restricted  himself  to  notes  while  publicly  engaged 
in  sacred  services.  They  must  have  aided  him 
when  he  did  not  enjoy  liberty  of  utterance.  '  At 
times  when  I  have  begun  to  speak  the  Word  with 
much  liberty,  I  have  been  presently  so  straitened 
in  speech  that  I  scarcely  knew  what  I  was  about, 
or  as  if  my  head  had  been  in  a  bag.'3  They 
were  valuable,  also,  as  a  proof  that  all  he  said 
had  its  exclusive  reference  to  the  world  to  come, 
without  the  mixture  of  politics,  which  might 
have  given  offence  to  the  Government.  Thus, 
when  he  was  apprehended  for  neglecting  to  attend 
the  church  service  and  for  preaching  the  gospel, 
in  his  conversation  with  Mr.  Cobb,  the  magis- 
trate's clerk,  he  said  *  that,  to  cut  off  all  occa- 
sions of  suspicion  from  any,  as  touching  the 
harmlessness  of  my  doctrine,  in  private  I  would 
willingly  take  the  pains  to  give  any  one  the  notes 
of  all  my  sermons,  for  I  do  sincerely  desire  to  live 
quietly  in  my  country,  and  to  submit  to  the  present 
authority.' i  In  such  troublesome  times  these 
would  afford  abundant  proof  that  he  was  desirous 
of  submitting  to  aH  the  political  institutions  of  his 
country,  while  he  dared  not  conform  to  human  laws 
affecting  his  faith  or  his  mode  of  worshipping  God, 
for  which  he  alone  was  to  stand  answerable  at  the 
great  day. 

2  Grace  Abounding,  vol.  i.,  p.  42.  The  taunts  and  revil- 
ings  of  a  poet  laureate  upon  Bunyan's  preaching  and  sufferings 
need  only  a  passing  notice.  No  words  could  be  more  vile  and 
slanderous  than  those  of  Mr.  Southey.  He  says, '  Peace  might- 
be  on  his  lips,  and  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  others  in  his  heart, 
but  he  was  certainly,  at  that  time,  no  preacher  of  good  will, 
nor  of  christian  charity.'  How  can  we  judge  of  a  preacher's 
good  will,  but  by  '  peace  on  his  lips?'  and  what  is  the  criterion 
of  Christian  charity,  except  it  be  '  zeal  for  the  salvation  of 
others  in  his  heart  ? 

3  Grace  Abounding,  No.  293,  vol.  i.,  p.  44. 

4  Vol.  i.,  p.  59.  Eben.  Chandler  thus  describes  Bunyan : 
'  His  wit  was  sharp  and  quick,  his  memory  tenacious  ;  it  being 
customary  with  him  to  commit  his  sermons  to  writing  after 
he  had  preached  them.' — Chandler  and  Wilson's  Preface  to 
Banyan's  Works,  folio.  1692.  All  these  autographs  have  un- 
accountably disappeared. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


The  employment  of  his  time  in  earning  a 
maintenance  for  his  family,  and  his  constant  en- 
gagements to  preach,  interfered  with  the  proper 
fulfilment  of  his  duties  as  a  deacon  of  the  church. 
His  resignation  of  this  important  office  is  thus 
recorded  in  the  minutes  of  the  church — ■  At  a 
meeting  held  on  the  27th  of  the  6th  month,  1G57, 
the  deacon's  office  was  transferred  from  John  Bun- 
yan  to  John  Pernio,  because  he  could  no  longer 
discharge  its  duties  aright,  in  consequence  of  his 
being  so  much  employed  in  preaching.' 

We  cannot  wonder  that  his  time  was  incessantly 
employed.  His  was  no  ordinary  case.  He  had 
to  recover  and  improve  upon  the  little  education 
he  had  received,  and  lost  again  by  dissipated 
habits.  He  must  have  made  every  effort,  by  his 
diligent  study  of  the  Bible,  to  gain  that  spiritual 
knowledge  which  alone  could  enable  him  to  pro- 
claim the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  and  that 
profound  internal  converse  with  the  throne  of  God 
which  appears  in  all  his  writings.  In  addition  to 
all  this,  he  was  engaged  in  continual  controversy 
with  a  variety  of  sects,  which,  in  his  sober  judg- 
ment, opposed  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  Among 
these  the  Ranters,  or  Sweet  Singers,  were  very 
conspicuous.  It  is  difficult  to  discover  what  were 
their  opinions,  but  they  appear  to  have  been  nearly 
like  the  Dutch  Adamites  ;  they  were  severely  per- 
secuted, by  public  authority,  under  the  Common- 
wealth, for  blasphemy.  George  Fox 
found  some  of  them  in  prison  at  Coventry 
in  1649,  and  held  a  short  disputation 
with  them.  They  claimed  each  one  to 
be  God,  founding  their  notion  on  such 
passages  as  l  Cor.  xiv.  25, 
'  God  is  in  you  of  a 
truth.'  Fox  quaintly 
asked  them  whether  it 
would  rain  the  next 
day ;  and  upon  their 
answering  that  they  could 
not  tell,  ■  Then  said  I  unto 
them,  God  can  tell.'1  Strange 
as  it  may  appear,  the  Ranters 
had  many  followers,  while 
numerous  pious  people  wero 
troubled  by  their  impudence 
and  perversion  of  Scripture, 
but  more  especially  by  their 
being  a  persecuted  people. 
Taking  advantage  of  the 
inquiries  that  were  excited 
by  these  strange  doctrines, 
Bunyan  determined  to  be- 
come an  author,  that  he 
might  set  forth  more  exten- 
sively than  he  could  do  by  preaching,  the  truths 
1  Noticed  in  the  life  annexed  to  1'Uyrim,  Part  III. 


of  the  gospel  in  their  native  purity,  simplicity, 
and  beauty,  as  an  antidote  to  fanaticism.  The 
learned  and  eloquent  looked  with  contempt  upon 
the  follies  of  the  Ranters,  Familists,  and  some  loose 
Quakers,  'and  only  deigned  to  abuse  them  with  rail- 
lery, while  the  poor  unlettered  tinker  wrote  against 
them.'  To  indite  a  work  would  be  to  him  a  pleasant 
recreation,  but  writing  a  book  must  have  been  ex- 
tremely difficult,  and  have  required  extraordinary  pa- 
tience. This  will  be  better  seen  by  a  specimen  of  his 
handwriting,  now  in  the  Bedford  Library,  found  in 
Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs,  the  three  volumes  of  which 
beguiled  many  of  his  tedious  hours  when  in  prison. 

fact*     t*>    O^       %U«A 

-Ry    %cM   mob   siW-aAt&r 

To  write  a  volume,  containing  about  twenty-five 
thousand  words,  must  have  been  a  serious  task  to 
such  a  scribe. 

It  is  interesting  to  trace  his  improvement  in 
caligraphy  while  recovering  his  lost  education,  and 
advancing  in  proficiency  in  an  art  so  essential  to 
his  constantly  extending  usefulness. 


XOHN  •  B 


JOHN 


o^u/& 


Doth  the  owle  to  them  apper 
Which  put  them  all  into  a  fear 


Mi 


\. 


0\*(*  \As'*\ 


Will  not  the  man  in  treble  crown 
Fright  the  owle  unto  the  ground.' 


The  above  signatures  in  Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs  (one  of  his  first  acquisitions  in 
book-collecting),  are  remarkably  rude  and  laboured;  a  great  effort  to  produce  hi-, 
name  handsomely  such  as  a  young  scribe  would  contemplate  with  no  small  degree 
of  satisfaction.  On  a  page  of  that  book,  under  the  engraving  of  an  owl  appearing 
at  a  council  held  by  Pope  John  at  Home,  he  had  written  the  above  four  lines. 

The  next  is  a  more  useful  running  hand,  how- 
ever defective  in  orthography  and  grammar  ;  it  is 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


from  the  first  page  of  a  copy  of  Bishop  Andrews* 


u 


n 


rttwm  tj 


ifooci 


The  inscription  in  a  copy  of  his  Holy  City,  1665, 
in  Dr.  Williams'  or  the  Dissenters'  Library,  Red 
Cross  Street,  is  in  a  still  more  useful  hand,  as  good 
as  that  of  most  authors  of  that  day — 


SrkT 


£4 


The  autograph  in  Powell's  Concordance,  in  the 
library  of  the  Baptist  Academy,  Bristol,  is  in  a  fair 
hand — 


j&£*  ^^ryp 


CZ7Z- 


His  autograph  is  in  possession  of  the  Society  of 
Antiquaries.  The  document  to  which  it  is  sub- 
scribed  is  written  in  a  remarkably  neat  hand, 
addressed  to  the  Lord  Protector.  The  signatures 
appear  to  he  written  as  if  in  the  writer's  best  style.2 


$f. 


03 


t-crij&Ti 


Signature  to  the  deed  of  gift3— 


*/>W^2 


In   addition   to  the  motives  which  have   been 
noticed  as  inducing  him  to  become  an  author,  it 


1  In  tlic  editor's  library,  folio,  1G35.  Orthography  was  little 
cared  for  in  those  days.  On  the  beautiful  portrait  of  Andrews, 
is  the  autograph  of  Annie  Brokett  hit  Blook ! 

-  This  document  is  copied  on  page  x.wi. 
3  Sec  page  kxii. 


appears,  that  in  the  course  of  his  itinerating  la- 
bours, he  was  much  grieved  with  the  general  depra- 
vity which  had  overspread  all  classes 
of   society.       Evil    communications 
had  corrupted  the  great  mass,  and 
occasioned  an  aversion  to  hear  the 
gospel,   which   plunged    the    people 
into  carnal  security.     When  roused 
by  his  preaching  they  too  often  found  refuge  in 
despair,  or  in  vain  attempts  to   impose  upon  God 
their  unholy  self-righteousness,   endeavouring  *  to 
earn  heaven  with  their  fingers'  ends  ;' i  anything 
rather  than   submit  to   receive  salvation 
as  the  free  gift  of  God,  and  thus  be  led 
to  consecrate  all  their  powers  to  his  glory 
and  the  comfort  of  society.      A  few  who 
appeared  to  have  thought  on  this  solemn 
subject,  without  any  change  of  conduct, 
are  called  by  Bunyan  'light  notionists, 
with  here  and  there  a  legalist,'5  or  those 
who  relied  upon  a  creed  without  the  fruits 
of  righteousness,  and  some  of  these  im- 
bibed notions  of  the  strangest  kind — that 
the  light  within  was  all-sufficient,  without 
any  written  revelation  of  the  will  of  God 
— that   the   account  of  Christ's  personal 
appearance  on  earth  was  a  myth,  to  repre- 
sent his  residence  in  the  persons  of  be- 
lievers, in  whom  he  suffers,  is  crucified, 
buried,  and  raised  again  to  spiritual  life — that  such 
persons  mightdo  whatever  their  inclinations  led  them 
to,  without  incurring  guilt  or  sin  ;  in  short,  many 
sinned  that  grace  might  abound ! !     Some  of  them 
professed  to  be  the  Almighty  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh.     All  this  took  place  in  what  was  called  a 
Christian  country,  upon  -which  millions  of  treasure 
had  been  spent  to  teach  religion  by  systems,  which 
had  persecuted  the  honest,  pious  professors  of  vital 
Christianity  to  bonds,  imprisonment,  and  death. 
This  had  naturally  involved  the  kingdom  in  impiety 
and  gross  immorality.      The  discovery  of  the  awful 
state  of  his  country,  while  he  was  engaged  in 
preaching  in  the  villages  round  Bedford  induced 
him,  in  the  humble  hope  of  doing  good,  to  become 
an  author,  and  with  trembling  anxiety  he  issued 
to  the  world  the  first  production  of  his  pen,    in 
1656,    under   the   title    of   Some    Gospel    Truths 
Opened  according  to  the  Scriptures ;    and,    as  we 
shall  presently  find,  it  met  with  a  rough  reception, 
plunging  him    into    controversy,  which    in    those 
days  was  conducted  with  bitter  acrimony. 

Before  it  was  published,  he  sought  the  appro- 
bation and  protection  of  Mr.  John  Burton,  who 
had  been  united  with  Mr.  Gifford  in  the  pastoral 
charge  of  the  church  to  which  Buuyan  belonged. 
The  testimony  that  lie  gives  is  very  interesting  : — 


p.  132. 


6  Vol.  ii,  p.  133. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUN  VAX. 


'Here  thou  bast  things  certain  and  necessary  to  be  be- 
lieved, which  thou  canst  not  too  much  study.  Therefore 
pray  that  thou  mayest  receive  it,  so  it  is  according  to  the 
Scriptures,  in  faith  and  love,  not  as  the  word  of  man  but 
as  the  word  of  God,  and  be  not  offended,  because  Christ 
holds  forth  the  glorious  treasure  of  the  gospel  to  thee  in 
a  poor  earthen  vessel,  by  one  who  hath  neither  the  great- 
ness nor  the  wisdom  of  this  world  to  commend  him  to  thee; 
for  as  the  Scripture  saith,  Christ,  who  was  low  and  contemp- 
tible in  the  world  himself,  ordinarily  chooseth  such  for  himself 
and  fur  the  doing  of  his  work.  "Not  many  wise  men  after 
the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble  are  called  :  but 
God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world."  This  man 
[Banyan]  is  not  chosen  out  of  an  earthly,  but  out  of  the 
heavenly  university,  the  church  of  Christ,  furnished  with  the 
Spirit,  gifts,  and  graces  of  Christ  -  -  out  of  which,  to  the  cud  of 
the  world,  the  word  of  the  Lord  and  all  true  gospel  ministers 
must  proceed.  And,  though  this  man  hath  not  the  learning 
or  wisdom  of  man;  yet,  through  grace,  he  hath  received  the 
teaching  of  God,  and  the  learning  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  1  It- 
hath  taken  these  three  heavenly  degrees — union  with  Christ, 
the  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  and  experience  of  the  temptations 
of  Satan — which  do  more  fit  a  man  for  the  mighty  work  of 
preaching  the  gospel,  than  all  the  university  learning  aud  de- 
grees that  can  be  had.  I  have  had  experience  with  many  other 
saints  of  this  man's  (Banyan's)  soundness  in  the  faith,  his 
godly  conversation,  and  his  ability  to  preach  the  gospel,  not  by 
human  art,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  aud  that  with  much 
success  in  the  conversion  of  sinners.  I  thought  it  my  duty  to 
bear  witness  with  my  brother  to  these  glorious  truths  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.' ' 

Bunyan  was  twenty-eight  years  of  age  when  he 
published  this  work,  and  as  he  attacked  the  follies  of 
his  times,  and  what  he  deemed  to  be  heresies,  were 
exposed  to  Scripture  light  and  condemned  without 
mercy,  it  very  naturally  involved  him  in  controversy. 
This  brought  forth  the  remarkable  resources  of  his 
mind,  which  was  stored  with  the  Scriptures — his 
fearlessness — ready  writ  and  keen  retort,  much 
sanctified  by  an  earnest  desire  for  the  salvation  of 
his  opponents.  An  extraordinary  man,  younger 
than  himself,  full  of  energy  and  enthusiasm,  entered 
the  lists  with  him  ;  and  in  Edward  Burrough,  very 
properly  called  a  son  of  thunder  and  of  consola- 
tion, Bunyan  found  an  able  disputant.  He  was 
talented,  pious,  and  fearless  in  his  Master's  work, 
and  became  eminently  useful  in  laying  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Society  of  Friends.  Soon  after  this 
he  was  numbered  with  the  noble  army  of  martyrs 
at  the  age  of  twenty-eight,  being  sacrificed  in 
Newgate,  at  the  shrine  of  religious  intolerance. 

At  this  time  the  Quakers  were  not  united  as  a 
body,  and  consequently  there  was  no  test  of  cha- 
racter nor  rules  of  discipline  for  those  who  assumed 
that  name.  They  were  very  dissimilar  men  to  their 
quiet  and  unobtrusive  descendants.  The  markets, 
fairs,  and  every  public  concourse  were  attended 
by  them,  denouncing  false  weights  and  measures, 
drunkenness  and  villany,  with  the  curses  of  the 
Almighty,  calling  upon  the  people,  frequently  with 

?  Vol.ii.,pp.  140,   141. 


furious  and  fearful  energy  and  powerful  eloquence, 
to  repent,  aud  cry  unto  God,  that  his  mercy  might 
bo  extended  to  the  salvation  of  their  immortal  souls. 
Their  zeal  led  them  to  many  breaches  of  (rood 
manners.  They  would  enter  churches,  and  after 
the  service,  when  the  quiet  folks  were  thinking  of 
gratifying  their  bodies  with  a  substantial  dinner, 
they  were  arrested  by  the  violent  declamation  of  a 
man  or  woman,  frequently  denouncing  the  priest 
as  being  the  blind  leading  the  blind.  This  natu- 
rally led  to  a  scene  of  riot  and  confusion,  in  which 
the  Quakers  were  in  many  cases  handled  with 
great  barbarity.  Among  these  disturbers  were 
mingled  persons  of  bad  character.  The  violence  of 
sectarian  feeling  in  the  churches  thus  disturbed, 
made  no  discrimination  between  bad  and  good  ; 
they  were  equally  subjected  to  the  roughest  treat- 
ment. Bunyan  attacked  those  who  denied  that 
Christ  had  appeared  in  the  world  as  Emmanuel, 
(Joel  with  us  'in  fashion  as  a  man,'  that  by  the 
infinite  merits  of  his  life  and  death  imputed  to 
believers,  they  might  be  made  holy.  His  attack 
was  also  directed  against  those  who  refused  ohe- 
dience  to  the  written  Word,  or  who  relied  upon 
inward  light  in  contradistinction  and  preference  to 
the  Bible.  The  title  to  Burrough 's  answer  is  a 
strange  contrast  to  the  violence  of  his  language — 
Hie  Gospel  of  Peace  contended  for  in  tlie  Spirit  of 
Meekness  and  Loce.  In  this  spirit  of  meekness 
he  calls  his  opponents  '  crafty  fowlers  preying 
upon  the  innocent;'  and  lovingly  exclaims,  '  How 
long  shall  the  righteous  be  a  prey  to  your  teeth, 
ye  subtle  foxes  ;  your  dens  are  in  darkness,  and 
your  mischief  is  hatched  upon  your  beds  of  secret 
whoredoms.'  The  unhallowed  spirit  of  the  age 
mistook  abuse  for  argument,  and  harsh  epithets 
for  faithful  dealing.- 

Bunyan  replied  in  A  Vindication  of  Gospel 
Truths,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  all  his  friends ; 
and  although  Burrough  answered  this  tract  also, 
Bunyan  very  wisely  allowed  his  railing  opponent 
to  have  the  last  word,  and  applied  his  great  powers 
to  more  important  labours  than  cavilling  with  one 
who  in  reality  did  not  differ  with  him.  The 
Quaker  had  been  seriously  misled  by  supposing 
that  the  Baptist  was  a  hireling  preacher;  and  we 
must  be  pleased  that  he  was  so  falsely  charged, 
because  it  elicited  a  crushing  reply.     Burrough, 


2  The  American  authors  of  a  recent  life  of  Burrough, 
[William  and  Thomas  Evans, Philadelphia,  republished  by  Gil- 
pin, London,  1851),  have  given  au  unfair  account  of  his  con- 
troversy with  Bunyan,  drawn  from  Burrough 's  works  in  Qk 
shape  of  a  supposed  dialogue.  Such  a  disputation  can  only 
he  understood  by  reading  both  sides  of  the  question.  "We 
unite  with  them  in  admiring  the  character  of  that  young  but 
noble  martyr.  They  are,  however,  wrong  in  their  conclusion 
that   'the  meekness  and  genlli  J   and 

adorned  his  whole  character.'  He  was  one  of  those  that  are 
called  in  the  Holy  War,  'rough  hewu  men  fit  to  break  the 
ice.'    Vol.  iii.  p.  270. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


in  reply  to  an  imputation  made  by  Bunyan,  that 
the  Quakers  were  the  false  prophets  alluded  to 
in  Scripture,  observed  that  'in  those  days  there 
■was  not  a  Quaker  heard  of.'  'Friend,'  replied 
Bunyan,  '  thou  hast  rightly  said,  there  was  not  a 
Quaker  heard  of  indeed,  though  there  were  many 
Christians  heard  of  then.  Again,  to  defend  thy- 
self thou  throwest  the  dirt  in  my  face,  saying,  If 
we  should  diligently  trace  thee,  we  should  find  thee 
in  the  steps  of  the  false  prophets,  through  fancied 
words,  through  covetousness,  making  merchandise 
of  souls,  loving  the  wages  of  unrighteousness. 
To  which  Bunyan  replied ;  '  Friend,  dost  thou 
speak  this  as  from  thy  own  knowledge,  or  did  any 
other  tell  thee  so  ?  However,  that  spirit  that  led 
thee  out  this  way,  is  a  lying  spirit ;  for  though  I 
be  poor,  and  of  no  repute  in  the  world  as  to  out- 
ward things,  yet  through  grace  I  have  learned,  by 
the  example  of  the  apostle,  to  preach  the  truth, 
and  also  to  work  with  my  hands,  both  for  mine 
own  living,  and  for  those  that  are  with  me,  when 
I  have  opportunity.  And  I  trust  that  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  hath  helped  me  to  reject  the  wages  of 
unrighteousness  hitherto,  will  also  help  me  still, 
so  that  I  shall  distribute  that  which  God  hath 
given  me  freely,  and  not  for  filthy  lucre  sake.'1 
Thus  had  he  learned  of  the  apostle  to  '  make  the 
gospel  of  Christ  without  charge  '  u  Co.  ix.  is) ;  and 
upon  this  subject  they  strangely  agreed.  The  same 
agreement  existed  between  them  upon  the  necessity 
of  inward  light  from  the  Holy  Spirit ;  without 
which  they  both  considered  the  Bible  to  be  a  dead 
letter.  The  peculiar  principle  which  separates  the 
Quaker  from  every  other  Christian  community,  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  light  within.  Upon  that 
subject  all  evangelical  sects  are  agreed.  The 
substantial  difference  is  whether  our  Lord  intended 
the  work  of  the  ministry  to  be  exclusively  a  work 
of  benevolence,  charity,  and  love,  binding  all  who 
are  capable  of  using  the  talent  intrusted  to  them, 
to  do  it  without  worldly  reward.  Surely  every 
man  may  be  satisfied  in  his  own  mind  upon  such  a 
subject,  without  quarrelling  with,  or  anathematiz- 
ing each  other.  Bunyan  and  Burrough  agreed, 
without  knowing  it,  in  the  sentiments  of  their 
illustrious  and  learned  cotemporary,  John  Milton, 
as  to  the  ministry  being  without  charge;  and  had 
they,  when  offended,  followed  their  Master's  rule, 
'  If  thy  brother  trespass  against  thee,  go  and  tell 
him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him  alone '  (Mat. 
xviii.  is),  had  they  met,  and  on  their  knees  before 
the  throne  of  grace,  sought  from  heaven  wisdom 
and  charity  in  defending  Divine  truth,  we  can  easily 
imagine  that  the  approbation  of  God  would  have 
been  manifested,  by  sending  them  on  their  impor- 
tant work  in  peaceful  unity.      They  had   been 


1  Vol.  ii„  p.  201. 


immersed  in  the  same  deep  and  solemn  regenera- 
tion, and  their  ardent  object  was  the  same — to 
spread  the  influence  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 

When  Christians  of  various  denominations  meet 
in  prayer,  how  it  melts  down  their  sectarian 
bitterness.  In  this  controversy,  mention  is  made 
of  a  total  abstinence  movement  in  the  time  of 
the  commonwealth,  a  germ  which  has  put  forth 
its  mighty  efforts  in  our  more  peaceful  and  happy 
times.  A  cloud  now  hovered  over  Bunyan,  and 
threatened  him  with  troubles  of  a  very  different 
kind  to  those  of  religious  controversy.  It  will 
startle  many  of  our  readers  to  hear  that,  under 
the  government  of  Cromwell,  Bunyan  was  perse- 
cuted for  his  religious  opinions  and  practices. 
Mr.  Jukes,  in  his  interesting  History  of  Banyan's 
Church,  thus  refers  to  it :  '  Soon  after  he  had 
resigned  the  office  of  deacon  in  1657,  the  hand 
of  persecution  was  raised  against  him  ;  for  at  a 
meeting  of  the  church,  held  on  the  25th  day  of 
the  twelfth  month,  in  the  same  year  (Feb.  1658), 
it  was  agreed  that  the  3d  clay  of  the  next  month  be 
set  apart  to  seek  God  in  the  behalf  of  our  brother 
Wheeler,  who  hath  been  long  ill  in  body,  whereby 
his  ministry  hath  been  hindered  ;  and  also  about 
the  church  affairs,  and  the  affairs  of  the  nation  ; 
and  for  our  brother  Whitbread,  who  has  long  been 
ill ;  and  also  for  counsel  what  to  do  with  respect 
to  the  indictment  of  brother  Bunyan  at  the  assizes, 
for  preaching  at  Eaton.'  2 

Although  persecution  for  religious  opinions  as- 
sumed a  milder  form  under  the  Commonwealth,  the 
great  principles  of  religious  freedom  and  equality 
were  neither  known  nor  practised.  The  savage 
barbarities  perpetrated  upon  Prynne,  Bastwick, 
Burton,  Leighton,  and  others,  by  Charles  I.  and 
his  archbishop,  Laud,  were  calculated  to  open  the 
eyes  of  the  nation  to  the  wickedness  and  inutility 
of  sanguinary  or  even  any  laws  to  govern  the  con- 
science, or  interfere  with  Divine  worship.  Alas  ! 
even  those  who  suffered  and  survived  became,  in 
their  turn,  persecutors.  The  great  object  of  perse- 
cution was  the  book  of  Common  Prayer,  the  use  of 
which  was  rigorously  prohibited.  The  clergy  were 
placed  in  an  extremely  awkward  predicament.  No 
sooner  was  the  Act  of  Parliament  passed  ordering 
the  Directory  to  be  used  and  the  Prayer-book  to  be 
laid  aside,  than  the  king,  by  his  royal  proclamation, 
issued  from  Oxford,  November  13,  1645,  ordered 
the  Directory  to  be  set  aside,  and  the  Common 
Prayer  to  be  used  in  all  the  churches  and  chapels. 
Both  these  orders  were  under  very  severe  penalties. 

The  Act  against  atheistical  opinions,  which 
passed  August  9,  1650,  illustrates  the  extraordi- 
nary state  of  the  times.  The  preamble  states  that, 
'  Divers  men  and  women  have  lately  discovered 

2  P.  1G. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


xli 


themselves  to  be  most  monstrous  in  their  opinions, 
and  loose  in  all  wicked  and  abominable  practices.' 
It  then  enacts  that  —  'Any  one,  not  being  mad, 
who  pretends  to  bo  God  Almighty,  or  who  de- 
clares that  unrighteousness,  uncleanness,  swearing, 
drunkenness,  and  the  like  filthiness  and  brutish- 
ness,  or  denying  the  existence  of  God,  or  who 
shall  profess  that  murder,  adultery,  incest,  forni- 
cation, uncleanness,  filthy  or  lascivious  speaking, 
are  not  wicked,  sinful,  impious,  abominable,  and 
detestable,  shall  be  imprisoned,  and,  for  a  second 
offence,  be  transported.'1 

One  of  the  Acts  that  affected  Bunyan  was  passed 
April  2G,  1G45,  cap.  52 — 'None  may  preach  but 
ordained  ministers,  except  such  as,  intending  the 
ministry,  shall,  for  trial  of  their  gifts,  be  allowed 
by  such  as  bo  appointed  by  both  houses  of  Parlia- 
ment. '  This  was  amended  by  '  an  ordinance 
appointing  commissioners  for  approbation  of  public 
preachers,'  March,  1G53.  In  this  Dr.  Owen, 
Goodwin,  Caryl,  and  many  others  are  named,  who 
were  to  judge  of  the  candidate's  fitness  to  preach.2 
The  Act  which  more  seriously  touched  Bunyan 
was  that  of  May  2,  1648,  which  enacts  that  any 
person  saying,  'that  man  is  bound  to  believe  no 
more  than  by  his  reason  he  can  comprehend,  or 
that  the  baptizing  of  infants  is  unlawful,  or  such 
baptism  is  void,  and  that  such  persons  ought  to  be 
baptized  again,  and,  in  pursuance  thereof,  shall 
baptize  any  person  formerly  baptized,  shall  be 
imprisoned  until  he  gives  security  that  he  will  not 
publish  or  maintain  the  said  error  any  more.'  s 


1  It  is  difficult  to  describe  the  state  of  those  times.  James 
Naylor  rode  into  Bristol,  a  multitude  accompanying  him, 
strewiug  their  scarfs,  handkerchiefs,  and  garments  on  the 
ground  for  his  horse  to  tread  on,  and  singing,  Hosanna  in  the 
highest ;  holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  He  was 
addressed  as  the  everlasting  son  of  righteousness,  and  prince 
of  peace.  His  brain  was  bewildered  with  adidation.  'Women 
kissed  his  feet,  and  called  him  Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  To  stop 
the  tumult,  he  was  apprehended,  and  had  he  been  simply 
subjected  to  the  discipline  of  a  mad-house,  like  Mr.  Brothers 
of  a  later  period,  his  blood  would  soon  have  recovered  from  its 
agitation.  Instead  of  this,  a  grand  parade  was  made  by  trying 
him  before  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and,  upon 
a  report  of  the  whole  house,  he  was  convicted  of  '  horrid 
blasphemy,'  and  it  was  by  the  small  majority  of  fourteen  that 
his  life  was  spared.  His  creel  sentence  was  whipping,  pillory, 
his  tongue  bored  through  with  a  red  hot  iron,  a  large  letter  B 
burnt  into  his  forehead,  and  to  be  imprisoned  during  the  plea- 
sure of  Parliament.  By  his  followers  he  was  considered  a 
martyr  •,  but  the  infatuation  soon  subsided.  After  his  release, 
he  was  mercifully  restored  to  his  senses,  and  became  a  useful 
Quaker. 

2  These  commissioners  were  called  'triers,'  and,  being  high 
Calvinists,  were  nick-named  Dr.  Absolute,  chairmau,  Mr.  Fata- 
lity, Mr.  Fri-babe,  Mr.  Dam-man,  Mr.  Narrow-grace,  Mr. 
Indefectible,  Mr.  Dubious,  and  others.  They  turned  out  of 
their  livings  those  clergymen  who  were  proved  to  be  immoral 
in  their  conduct,  and  others  who  did  not  come  up  to  the 
orthodox  staudard.  Of  these,  Mr.  Walker,  in  his  account  of 
the  sufferings  of  the  clergy,  gives  a  long  list. 

3  This  Act  or  ordinance  of  Parliament  involved  some  of  our 
excellent  ancestors  in  trouble.  Hansard  Knollys,  Wm.  Kiffin, 
.Mr.    Lamb,    and  many  others,  were   imprisoned   for   short 

VOL.  III. 


It  was  these  intolerant  proceedings  that  led  Milton 
to  publish  a  poem  On  tfte  New  Forcers  of  Con- 
science, beginning  with  these  lines — 

'Dare  ye,  for  this,  adjure  the  civil  sword, 
To  force  our  consciences  that  Christ  set  free.' 

This  last-mentioned  ungracious  and  uncalled- 
for  Act  against  the  Baptists,  led  some  violent 
spirits  to  print  a  paper,  entitled,  'The  Second 
Part  of  England's  new  Chains  Discovered,'  this 
was  read  in  many  Baptist  meeting-houses,  and  the 
congregations  called  upon  to  subscribe  it :  fortu- 
nately, they  were  peaceably  disposed,  and  denounced 
it  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  a  petition,  dated 
April  2,  1G49.  Mr.  Kiffin  and  the  others  were 
called  in,  when  the  Speaker  returned  them  this 
answer — '  The  House  doth  take  notice  of  the  good 
affection  to  the  Parliament  and  public  you  have 
expressed,  both  in  this  petition  and  otherways. 
They  have  received  satisfaction  thereby,  concerning 
your  disclaiming  that  pamphlet,  which  gave  such 
just  offence  to  the  Parliament,  and  also  concerning 
your  disposition  to  live  peaceably,  and  in  submis- 
sion to  the  civil  magistracy ;  your  expressions 
whereof  they  account  very  Christian  and  season- 
able. That  for  yourselves  and  other  Christians, 
walking  answerable  to  such  professions  as  in  this 
petition  you  make,  they  do  assure  you  of  liberty 
and  protection,  so  far  as  God  shall  enable  them, 
in  all  things  consistent  with  godliness,  honesty, 
and  civil  peace.'4  Whether  it  was  in  consequence 
of  this  good  understanding  having  remained  be- 
tween the  Baptists  and  the  Parliament,  or  from 
some  application  to  the  Protector,  or  from  some 
unknown  cause,  the  persecution  was  stayed;0  for 
the  indictment  does  not  appear  to  have  been  tried, 
and  Bunyan  is  found  to  have  been  present,  and  to 
have  taken  a  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  church, 
untd  the  25th  day  of  the  2d  Month,  16G0  (April), 
when  'it  was  ordered,  according  to  our  agreement, 
that  our  brother,  John  Bunyan,  do  prepare  to 
speak  a  word  at  the  next  church  meeting  ;  and 


periods ;  Edward  Barbour  for  eleven  months.  To  avoid  the 
informers,  adult  baptism  was  performed  at  midnight ;  for  this 
Henry  Deune  suffered  imprisonment.  That  gracious  and 
valuable  minister,  Vavasor  Powcl  also  suffered  a  short  impri- 
sonment during  the  Protectorate  ;  his  life  was  afterwards  sacri- 
ficed by  a  tedious  imprisonment  in  the  following  reign.  He 
was  taken,  with  his  flock,  at  a  midnight  meeting  ;  and  for  safe 
custody  they  were  locked  up  in  the  parish  church,  and  there 
he  preached  without  molestation.  When  conveyed  to  I 
tice's  house,  while  waiting  his  worship's  leisure,  hi 
preached.  When  this  magistrate  arrived,  he  was  violeully 
enraged  that  his  house  should  have  been  turned  into  a 
tide.  He  would  have  committed  them  at  once  to  prison  ,  bnt 
two  of  his  daughters  were  so  affected  with  the  sermon,  that,  at 
their  intercession,  after  severe  threatening?,  the  preacher  and 
his  friends  were  set  at  liberty. 

4  From  the  original,  in  the  editor's  possession. 

5  Cotton  Mather  says  that  these  laws  were  never  carried  to 
extremity,  and  were  soon  laid  entirely  by.     Hist,  of  America. 

f 


xlii 


MEMOIR  OP  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


that  our  brother  Whiternan  fail  not  to  speak  to 
hiin  of  it.'1 

This  invitation  "was  very  probably  intended  to 
introduce  kirn  to  the  congregation,  with  a  view  to 
his  becoming  an  assistant  pastor,  but  before  it 
took  place,  he  again  appeared  before  the  public  as 
an  author.  The  second  production  of  his  pen  is  a 
solemn  and  most  searching  work,  founded  upon 
the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  under 
the  title  of  A  few  Sighs  from  Hell,  or  the  Groans 
of  a  Damned  Soul ;  by  that  poor  and  contemptible 
Servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  John  Bunyan,  1G5S.  His 
humility  led  him  to  seek  the  patronage  of  his  pastor; 
and  Mr.  Gifford,  under  the  initials  of  J.  G.,  wrote 
a  preface  of  thirty-eight  pages,  but  he  dying  before 
it  reached  the  second  edition,  that  preface  was  dis- 
continued, and  the  title  somewhat  altered.  The 
only  copy  of  this  first  edition  yet  discovered  is  in 
the  royal  library  at  the  British  Museum.  It 
appears  to  have  belonged  to  Charles  II.,  who, 
■with  more  wit  than  decorum,  has  bound  it  up,  as 
a  supplement,  to  an  extremely  licentious  book,  as 
if  it  was  intended  to  say,  '  Her  house  is  the  way 
to  hell,  going  down  to  the  chamber  of  death;'  or 
that  a  licentious  life  endeth  in  '  sighs  from  hell.' 

Mr.  Gifford,  in  this  preface,  after  strongly  re- 
commending the  work,  speaks  of  the  author  in  the 
most  respectful  and  affectionate  terms,  showing 
that  his  zeal,  and  energy,  and  great  usefulness  had 
excited  the  envy  of  many  who  ought  to  have  en- 
couraged him  as  one  taught  by  the  Spirit,  and  used 
in  his  hand  to  do  souls  good — '  divers  have  felt 
the  power  of  the  Word  delivered  by  him ;  and  I 
doubt  not  but  that  many  more  may,  if  the  Lord 
continues  him  in  his  -work;'  and  he  gives  this  as  a 
reason  '  why  the  archers  have  shot  so  sorely  at 
him ;'  and  then  scripturally  proves  that  no  objec- 
tion should  be  made  to  his  valuable  services  from 
his  want  of  human  learning.  As  the  whole  of  this 
interesting  preface  is  acourately  reprinted  with  the 
book,  the  reader  is  referred  to  it  without  further 
extracts.2  The  Editor's  introduction  to  these  Sighs 
was  written  under  very  solemn  feelings,  produced 
by  reading  this  searching  treatise.  The  rich  man 
is  intended  to  personify  those  who,  neglecting 
salvation,  die  in  their  sins,  while  Lazarus  per- 
sonates all  those  who  humbly  receive  salvation  as 
the  gift  of  God  ;  who,  however  they  may  suffer 
in  this  world,  retain  their  integrity  to  death.  In 
this  parable,  a  voice  is  heard  from  the  place  of  tor- 
ment— the  cry  is  a  'drop  of  water,'  the  slightest 
relief  to  unutterable  woes;  and  that  a  messenger 
may  be  sent  to  warn  his  relatives,  lest  they  should 
be  plunged  into  the  same  torment.  The  impas- 
sable   gulf    defies    the   vain    request,    while    the 


1  Jukes'  History  of  Banyan's  Church,  p.  16. 

-  Works,  vol.  iii.,  p.  G67 ;  especially  pp.  672,  673. 


despised  Christian  reposes;  in  everlasting  and  in- 
describable enjoyment.  This  little  volume  was 
very  popular ;  nine  editions  were  printed  and  sold 
in  the  author's  lifetime,  besides  pirated  copies. 
Bunyan's  feelings  and  mode  of  preaching  are  well 
described  in  the  Grace  Abounding,2  and  will  be  felt 
by  every  attentive  reader  of  his  Sighs  from  Hell : 
— '  When  I  have  been  preaching,  I  thank  God, 
my  heart  hath  often,  with  great  earnestness,  cried 
to  God  that  he  would  make  the  Word  effectual  to 
the  salvation  of  the  soul.  Wherefore  I  did  labour 
so  to  speak  the  Word,  as  that  thereby,  if  it  were 
possible,  the  sin  and  person  guilty  might  be  parti- 
cularized by  it.' 

'And  when  1  have  done  the  exercise,  it  hath  gone 
to  my  heart,  to  think  the  Word  should  now  fall  as 
rain  on  stony  places;  still  wishing  from  my  heart, 
0  !  that  they  who  have  heard  me  speak  this  day, 
did  but  see  as  I  do,  what  sin,  death,  hell,  and  the 
curse  of  God  is;  and  also  what  the  grace,  and  love, 
and  mercy  of  God  is,  through  Christ,  to  men  in 
such  a  case  as  they  are  who  are  yet  estranged 
from  him. 

'For  I  have  been  in  my  preaching,  especially 
when  I  have  been  engaged  in  the  doctrine  of  life 
by  Christ,  without  works,  as  if  an  angel  of  God 
had  stood  by  at  my  back  to  encourage  me.' 

Such  feelings  are  not  limited  to  Bunyan,  but 
are  most  anxiously  felt  by  all  our  pious  ministers. 
How  fervently  ought  their  hearers  to  unite  in 
approaches  to  the  mercy-seat,  that  the  Divine 
blessing  may  make  the  Word  fruitful. 

In  those  days  it  was  not  an  uncommon  thing  for 
the  hearers,  at  the  close  of  the  sermon,  to  put 
questions  to  the  preacher,  sometimes  to  elicit  truth, 
or  to  express  a  cordial  union  of  sentiments,  or  to 
contradict  what  the  minister  had  said.  Upon  one 
occasion,  Mr.  Bunyan,  after  his  sermon,  had.  a 
singular  dispute  with  a  scholar.  It  is  narrated 
by  Mr.  C.  Doe,  who  was  a  personal  friend  and 
great  admirer  of  our  author,  and  who  probably 
heard  it  from  his  own  mouth,  and  will  be  found  in 
the  Struggler,  inserted  vol.  iii.,  p.  767. 

It  is  the  common  taunt  of  the  scorner,  and 
sometimes  a  stone  of  stumbling  to  the  inquirer, 
that,  while  the  Christian  believes  in  the  intensity 
of  the  Saviour's  sufferings,  and  that  God  was  made 
flesh  that  he  might  offer  himself  as  an  atonement 
to  redeem  mankind,  yet  few  are  saved,  in  com- 
parison with  those  who  are  lost — broad  is  the 
way  that  leadeth  to  destruction,  and  many  walk 
therein,  while  few  attempt  tiie  narrow  way  to  life  ; 
that  four  sorts  of  hearers  are  described  by  the 
Saviour,  only  one  receiving  the  truth;  as  if  the 
doleful  realms  of  darkness  and  misery  would  be 
more  thickly  peopled  than  those  of  light  and  hap- 


3  No.  2S0-317,  vol.  i.,  p.  42-46. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


xliii 


piness,  and  Satan  provo  stronger  than  Christ. 
Such  cavillers  forget  that  the  far  greater  portion 
of  mankind  die  in  infancy,  purified  by  the  Saviour's 
sufferings,  and  enter  heaven  in  the  perfection  of 
manhood.  As  Mr.  Toplady  justly  observes,  what 
a  vista  does  this  upen  to  tho  believer  through  the 
dreary  gloom  of  the  infidel!  They  forget,  also, 
that  all  those  who  gain  the  narrow  path,  once 
helped  to  throng  the  road  to  destruction;  and  that 
the  hearers,  whose  hardened  deceitful  hearts  re- 
jected the  gospel  under  one  sermon,  may,  by  mercy, 
have  them  opened  to  receive  it  under  another. 
And  who  dares  to  limit  the  Almighty  ?  The  power 
that  prepared  the  spirit  of  the  thief,  when  upon 
the  cross,  even  in  his  last  moments,  for  the  pure 
enjoyments  of  heaven,  still  exists.  Is  the  arm  of 
the  Lord  shortened  that  he  cannot  save?  The 
myriads  of  heaven  will  be  found  countless  as  are 
the  sands  upon  the  sea-shore,  and  the  harmony  of 
their  worship  shall  swell  like  the  voice  of  many 
waters  and  mighty  thunderings,  saying,  'Alleluja, 
for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth.'  What ! 
Satan  stronger  than  the  Almighty  Redeemer  ? 
Perish  the  thought.  Still  how  common  is  the 
question,  which  one  of  the  disciples  put  to  his  mas- 
ter, 'Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved?'  How 
striking  the  answer !  '  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the 
strait  gate '  (Lu.  xuu  23).  Encumber  not  thy  mind 
with  such  needless  inquiries,  but  look  to  thine  own 
salvation. 

Another  very  singular  anecdote  is  related,  which 
proves  that  the  use  of  the  churches  was  not  then 
limited  to  any  one  sect.  '  Being  to  preach  in  a 
church  in  a  country  village  (before  the  restoration 
of  king  Charles)  in  Cambridgeshire,  and  the  people 
being  gathered  together  in  the  church-yard,  a 
Cambridge  scholar,  and  none  of  the  soberest  of 
'em  neither,  enquired  what  the  meaning  of  that 
concourse  of  people  was,  it  being  upon  the  week 
day,  and  being  told,  That  one  Bunyan,  a  tinker, 
was  to  preach  there,  he  gave  a  boy  twopence  to 
hold  his  horse,  saying,  He  was  resolved  to  hear 
the  tinker  prate  ;  and  so  went  into  the  church  to 
hear  him.  But  God  met  with  him  there  by  his 
ministry,  so  that  he  came  out  much  changed,  and 
would,  by  his  good  will,  hear  none  but  the  tinker 
for  a  long  time  after,  he  himself  becoming  a  very 
eminent  preacher  in  that  county  afterwards.  This 
story  I  know  to  be  true,  having  many  a  time  dis- 
coursed with  the  man,  and,  therefore,  I  could  not 
but  set  it  down  as  a  singular  instance  of  the  power 
of  God  that  accompanied  his  ministry.' ! 

Bunyan's  veneration  for  the  Scriptures,  as  the 
only  source  and  standard  of  religious  knowledge, 
led  him  into  frequent  controversies.  In  common 
with  the  Christian  world,  he  wholly  depended  upon 
the  enlightening  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to 


1  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  J.  Banyan,  1700,  p.  27. 


impress  the  Divine  truths  of  revelation  upon  tho 
mind,  and  also  to  illustrate,  open,  and  applv  tho 
sacred  writings  to  the  heart  of  man.  I! nahle  to 
read  the  Bible  in  the  original  languages  in  which 
it  was  written,  be  wi.-ely  mads  use  of  every  aid 
that  might  enable  him  to  study  its  COntentE  with  the 
greatest  advantage.  It  was  his  habit  to  examine 
the  two  translations  then  in  common  nee.  The 
present  authorized  version,  first  published  in  1G11, 
is  that  to  which  he  usually  refers  ;  comparing  it 
with  the  favourite  Puritan  version  made  by  the 
refugees  at  Geneva,  and  first  printed  in  1560.  lie 
sometimes  quotes  the  Genevan,  and  so  familiar 
were  the  two  translations,  that  in  several  instances 
he  mixes  them  in  referring  from  memory  to  pas- 
sages of  holy  writ. 

Upon  one  of  his  journeys,  being  upon  the  road 
near  Cambridge,  be  was  overtaken  by  a  scholar, 
who  concluded  that  he  was  an  itinerant  preacher, 
whether  from  having  heard  him,  or  observing  his 
serious  deportment,  or  his  Bible  reading,  does  not 
appear,  although  the  latter  was  probably  the  rea- 
son. But  the  student  determined  to  have  a  brush 
with  him,  and  said,  '  How  dare  you  preach  from 
the  Bible,  seeing  you  have  not  the  original,  being 
not  a  scholar?'  Then  said  Mr.  Bunyan,  'Have 
you  the  original ?'  'Yes,  said  the  scholar.'  '  Nay, 
but,'  said  Mr.  Bunyan,  '  have  you  the  very  self- 
same original  copies  that  were  written  by  the  pen- 
men of  the  Scriptures,  prophets  and  apostles?' 
'No,'  said  the  scholar,  'but  we  have  the  true 
copies  of  these  originals.'  'How  do  you  know 
that?'  said  Mr.  Bunyan.  'How?'  said  tho 
scholar.  '  Why,  we  believe  what  we  have  is  a 
true  copy  of  the  original.'  '  Then,'  said  Mr.  Bun- 
yan, 'so  do  I  believe  our  English  Bible  is  a  true 
copy  of  the  original.'  Then  away  rid  the  scholar.- 
As  neither  persecution  nor  railing,  nor  temptations, 
nor  the  assaults  of  Satan,  produced  any  cfi'ect  upon 
Bunyan  to  prevent  his  preaching,  but  rather  excited 
his  zeal  and  energy,  means  of  a  more  deadly  na- 
ture were  resorted  to,  to  injure  or  prevent  his  use- 
fulness. As  Mr.  Gilford  said,  '  The  archers  shot 
sorely  at  him '  by  the  most  infamous  and  unfounded 
slanders,  which  he  thus  narrates  : — 

'  When  Satan  perceived  that  his  thus  tempting 
and  assaulting  of  me  would  not  answer  his  design, 
to  wit,  to  overthrow  my  ministry,  and  make  it 
ineffectual,  as  to  the  ends  thereof:  then  he  tried 
another  way,  which  was  to  stir  up  the  minds  of  the 
ignorant  and  malicious  to  load  me  with  slanders 
and  reproaches.  Now,  therefore,  I  may  say,  that 
what  the  devil  could  devise,  and  his  instruments 
invent,  was  whirled  up  and  down  the  country 
against  me,  thinking,  as  I  said,  that  by  that  means 
they  should  make  my  ministry  to  be  abandoned. 
It  beean,  therefore,  to  be  rumoured  up  and  down 


-  Vol.  iii.,  p.  707. 


xliv 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


among  the  people,  that  I  was  a  witch,  a  Jesuit,  a 
highwayman,  and  the  like.  To  all  which,  I  shall 
only  say,  God  knows  that  I  am  innocent.  But  as 
for  mine  accusers,  let  them  provide  themselves  to 
meet  me  before  the  tribunal  of  the  Son  of  God, 
there  to  answer  for  all  these  things,  with  all  the 
rest  of  their  iniquities,  unless  God  shall  give  them 
repentance  for  them,  for  the  which  I  pray  with  all 
my  heart. 

'  But  that  which  was  reported  with  the  boldest 
confidence,  was,  that  I  had  my  misses,  yea,  two 
wives  at  once,  and  the  like.  Now  these  slanders, 
with  the  others,  I  glory  in,  because  but  slanders, 
foolish,  or  knavish  lies,  and  falsehoods  cast  upon 
me  by  the  devil  and  his  seed  ;  and  should  I  not  be 
dealt  with  thus  wickedly  by  the  world,  I  should 
want  one  sign  of  a  saint,  and  a  child  of  God. 
"  Blessed  are  ye  (said  the  Lord  Jesus)  when  men 
shall  revile  you  and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say 
all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for  my  sake; 
rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  for  great  is  your 
reward  in  heaven,  for  so  persecuted  they  the  pro- 
phets which  were  before  you." 

'These  things  therefore,  upon  mine  own  account, 
trouble  me  not.  No,  though  they  were  twenty 
times  more  than  they  are,  I  have  a  good  conscience; 
and  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  me,  they  shall  be 
ashamed  that  falsely  accuse  my  good  conversation 
in  Christ.  Therefore  I  bind  these  lies  and  slan- 
ders to  me  as  an  ornament,  it  belongs  to  my  chris- 
tian profession  to  be  vilified,  slandered,  reproached, 
and  reviled.  I  rejoice  in  reproaches  for  Christ's 
sake.  My  foes  have  missed  their  mark  in  this 
their  shooting  at  me.  I  am  not  the  man.  If  all 
the  fornicators  and  adulterers  in  England  were 
hanged  by  the  neck  till  they  be  dead,  John  Bun- 
yan,  the  object  of  their  envy,  would  be  still  alive 
and  well.  I  know  not  whether  there  be  such  a 
thing  as  a  woman  breathing  under  the  copes  of  the 
whole  heaven,  but  by  their  apparel,  their  children, 
or  by  common  fame,  except  my  wife. 

'  And  in  this  I  admire  the  wisdom  of  God,  that 
he  made  me  shy  of  women  from  my  first  conver- 
sion until  now.  When  I  have  seen  good  men 
salute  those  women  that  they  have  visited,  I  have 
made  my  objection  against  it;  and  when  they  have 
answered,  that  it  was  but  a  piece  of  civility,  I  have 
told  them,  it  is  not  a  comely  sight.  Some  indeed 
have  urged  the  holy  kiss  ;  but  then  I  have  asked 
why  they  made  baulks,  why  they  did  salute  the 
most  handsome,  and  let  the  ill-favoured  go.  Not 
that  I  have  been  thus  kept,  because  of  any  good- 
ness in  me,  more  than  any  other,  but  God  has  been 
merciful  to  me,  and  has  kept  me,  to  whom  I  pray 
that  he  will  keep  me  still,  not  only  from  this,  but 
every  evil  way  and  work,  and  preserve  me  to  his 
heavenly  kingdom.     Amen.' 1 


Notwithstanding  all  Mr.  Bunyan's  care  to  avoid 
the  slightest  appearance  of  evil,  yet  being  over- 
persuaded  to  an '  act  of  humanity  and  civility  to 
one  of  his  female  members,  he  was  most  unjustly 
calumniated.  The  circumstances  which  gave  rise 
to  this  slander  are  narrated  in  James'  Abstract  of 
God's  dealings  with  Mrs.  Agnes  Beaumont,  of  which 
an  abridged  account  will  be  found  in  a  note  to  the 
Grace  Abounding?  It  exhibits  in  a  remarkable 
manner  how  easily  such  reports  are  raised  against 
the  holiest  men. 

Auother  still  more  extraordinary  and  unnatural 
charge  was  made  against  Bunyan.  He  lived  at 
a  period  when  witchcraft,  witches,  and  wizards 
were  in  the  height  of  fashion.  Any  poor  woman 
who  had  outlived  or  had  become  a  burden  to 
her  natural  protectors,  and  whose  temper  was 
soured  by  infirmities,  especially  if  her  language 
was  vulgar  and  her  appearance  repulsive,  ran 
the  risk  of  being  defamed  as  a  witch.  If  in  her 
neighbourhood  a  murrain  seized  the  cattle,  or 
a  disease  entered  a  family  which  baffled  the  little 
knowledge  of  the  country  practitioners — such  as 
epilepsy,  St.  Vitus's  dance,  or  St.  Anthony's  fire 
— it  was  ascribed  to  witchcraft,  and  vengeance 
was  wreaked  upon  any  reputed  witch.  In  many 
parts  of  England  she  was  tried  by  a  kind  of  Lynch 
law,  in  a  very  summary  manner.  Her  hands  and 
feet  being  bound  together,  she  was  thrown  into 
deep  water ;  if  she  sank,  and  was  drowned,  she  was 
declared  innocent;  if  she  swam,  it  was  a  proof  of 
guilt,  and  a  little  form  of  law  condemned  her  to 
the  stake  or  halter.  In  Scotland,  they  were  treated 
with  greater  barbarity;  they  were  awfully  tortured 
— thumb-screws,  the  boots  to  crush  their  knees, 
pricking  them  with  needles  or  awls  night  and  day, 
to  prevent  a  moment's  rest,  were  persevered  in — 
until  a  confession  was  extorted,  to  be  followed  by  a 
frightful  death.  The  ignorance  that  prevailed  may 
account  for  the  faith  of  the  vulgar  in  witchcraft; 
but  that  learned  divines,  and  even  the  enlightened 
Judge  Hale,  should  fall  into  the  delusion,  is  most 
surprising.  The  charge  against  Bunyan  was,  that 
he  had  circulated  some  paper  libelling  a  most 
respectable  widow,  a  Quakeress,  as  a  witch.  This 
paper  cannot  now  be  discovered  ;  but  the  story  is 
so  perfectly  ridiculous  as  to  render  it  quite  impro- 
bable that  Bunyan  had  any  knowledge  of  it.  The 
account  is  contained  in  a  rare  pamphlet  of  four 
leaves,  preserved  in  the  very  curious  library  of  the 
Society  of  Friends  at  Devonshire  House,  Bishops- 
gate.  It  is  entitled,  '  A  lying  wonder  discovered, 
and  the  strange  and  terrible  news  from  Cambridge 
proved  false ;  which  false  news  is  published  in  a 
libel,  concerning  a  wicked  slander  cast  upon  a 
Quaker  ;  but  the  author  of  the  said  libel  was 
ashamed  to  subscribe  his  name  to  it.     Also,  this 


1  Grace  Abounding,  vol.  i.,  p.  40. 


2  See  Note,  vol.  i.,  p.  45. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNTAN. 


xlv 


contains  an  answer  to  John  Bunion's  paper,  touch- 
ing the  said  imagined  witchcraft,  which  he  hath 
given  forth  to  your  wonderment,  as  he  saith:  hut 
it  is  also  proved  a  lio  and  a  slander  by  many  cre- 
dible witnesses  hereafter  mentioned.'1  It  narrates 
that  Margaret  Pryor,  of  Long  Stanton,  indicted, 
on  the  28th  July,  1059,  the  widow  Morlin,  a 
Quaker  lady,  for  having,  on  the  20th  November, 
1057,  took  her  out  of  bed  from  her  husband  in 
the  night,  put  a  bridle  in  her  mouth,  and  trans- 
formed her  into  a  bay  mare,  and  with  a  Quaker, 
William  Allen,  rode  upon  her  to  Maddenly  House, 
a  distance  of  four  miles;  that  they  made  her  fast 
to  the  latch  of  the  door,  while  she  saw  them  par- 
take of  a  feast  of  mutton,  rabbits,  and  lamb  [lamb 
in  November! !] ;  that  they  shone  like  angels,  and 
talked  of  doctrine,  and  that  she  knew  some  of  the 
guests;  that  her  feet  were  a  little  sore,  but  not 
her  hands,  nor  was  she  dirty.  In  examining  her, 
the  judge  elicited  that  she  made  no  mention  of  the 
story  for  a  year  and  three-quarters,  and  that  her 
deposition  then  was  that  some  evil  spirit  changed 
her  into  a  bay-horse;  that  her  hands  and  feet  were 
lamentably  bruised,  and  changed  as  black  as  a 
coal;  that  she  had  her  chemise  on,  which  was  all 
bloody,  from  her  sides  being  rent  and  torn  with 
the  spurs.  All  this  was  unknown  to  her  hus- 
band ;  nor  had  she  accounted  for  her  chemise  so 
strangely  fitting  a  horse  or  mare.  It  was  proved 
that  the  complainant  had  received  money  for 
bringing  the  charge,  and  pretended  to  have  burnt 
some  of  her  hair  with  elder-bark,  as  a  counter-charm 
to  prevent  it  happening  again.  The  judge  summed 
up  with  observing  that  it  was  a  mere  dream  or 
phantasy,  and  that  the  complainant  was  the  sorcer- 
ess, by  practising  incantations  in  burning  her  hair 
and  bark.  The  jury  found  a  verdict  of — not  guilty; 
and  thus  two  innocent  persons  were  saved  by  an 
enlightened  judge  from  an  ignominious  death. 
It  is  almost  incredible  that,  even  after  the  trial, 
priests  and  magistrates  who  had  promoted  the 
prosecution  professed  to  believe  that  the  charge 
was  true.  This  singular  narrative,  in  defence  of 
the  poor  persecuted  Quakeress,  is  signed  James 
Blackley,  an  alderman,  George  Whitehead,  and 
three  others.  No  one  can  believe  that  John 
Bunyan  gave  credit  to  such  a  tale,  or  mentioned 
it  to  the  injury  of  the  parties  accused.  His  reply 
was,  that  these  slanders  were  devised  by  the  devil 
and  his  instruments — '  God  knows  that  I  am  in- 
nocent.' The  probability  is,  that  the  pamphlet 
called  Strange  News  from  Cambrulgehad  been  sent 
to  him,  and  that  he  gave  it  to  some  Quaker  to 
answer. 

Considering  the  almost  universal  belief  in  witch- 
craft in  those  days — that  Baxter,  Cotton  Mather, 

1  4-to.  London,  IGo'J.     A  MS.  copy  is  in  the  editor's  pos- 
session. 


Clarke,  and  many  of  our  most  eminent  divines, 
believed  in  it — and  that  Bunyan  received  the  Scrip- 
tures in  our  authorized  translation  with  the  deep- 
est reverence,  it  becomes  an  interesting  inquiry 
how  far  he  believed  in  witchcraft,  possessions, 
incantations,  and  charms.  lie  was  persuaded 
that  Satan  could  appear  to  mankind  in  the  shape 
of  animals,  and  in  the  human  form.  Had  any 
one  doubted  the  possibility  of  these  appearances, 
he  would  at  that  time  have  been  called  an  atheist 
and  an  unbeliever  in  the  existence  of  God  and  of 
separato  spirits.  Thus  he  argues,  that  '  If  sin 
can  make  one  who  was  sometimes  a  glorious  angel 
in  heaven  now  so  to  abuse  himself  as  to  become, 
to  appearance,  as  a  filthy  frog,  a  toad,  a  rat,  a 
cat,  a  fly,  a  mouse,  or  a  dog,  to  serve  its  ends 
upon  a  poor  mortal,  that  it  might  gull  them  of 
everlasting  life,  no  marvel  if  the  soul  is  so  beguiled 
as  to  sell  itself  from  God  and  all  good  for  so  poor 
a  nothing  as  a  momentary  pleasure.'*  When 
speaking  of  the  impropriety  of  excluding  a  pious 
person  from  the  Lord's  table,  because  of  a  difference 
of  opinion  as  to  water  baptism,  he  says,  '  Do  you 
more  to  the  openly  profane — yea,  to  all  wizards 
and  witches  in  the  land  ?'3  In  quoting  Isaiah  -iii., 
he,  taught  by  the  Puritan  version,  puts  the  key 
in  the  margin — '  Wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall 
be  there  and  their  houses  shall  bo  full  of  dole- 
ful creatures.  And  owls  shall  dwell  §ThatiJ  the 
there,  and  satyrs*  shall  dance  there.'4  hobgoblin-, 
He  gave  no  credence  to  the  appearance 
of  departed  spirits,  except  in  the  hour  of  death; 
and  then,  while  between  time  and  eternity,  he 
thought  that  in  some  rare  cases  spiritual  sight 
was  given  to  see  objects  otherwise  invisible/ 

He  fully  believed  in  the  power  of  Satan  to  sug- 
gest evil  thoughts  to  the  pious  Christian,  and  to 
terrify  and  punish  the  wicked,  even  in  this  life  ; 
but  never  hints,  through  all  his  works,  at  any  power 
of  Satan  to  communicate  to  man  any  ability  to 
injure  bi3  fellows.  What  a  contrast  is  there 
between  the  Pilgrim  of  Loretto,  with  its  witch 
and  devil  story,  mentioned  in  the  introduction 
to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  and  Bunyan's  great  alle- 
gorical work !  Conjurors  and  fortune-tellers,  or 
witches  and  wizards,  were  vagabonds  deserving 
for  their  fraudulent  pretensions,6  punishment  by 
a  few  months'  imprisonment  to  hard  labour,  but 
not  a  frightful  death.  In  all  these  things  this 
great  man  was  vastly  in  advance  of  his  age. 
He  had  studied  nature  from  personal  observa- 
tion and  the  book  of  revelation.  In  proportion 
as  the  laws  of  nature  are  understood,  the  crafty 
pretensions  of  conjurors  and  witches  become  ex- 
posed to  contempt,     Bunyan  never  believed  that 


2  Vol.  i,  p.  683. 
4  Vol.  iii.,  p.  445. 
6  Vol.  iii.,  p.  48. 


3  Vol.  ii.  635. 
«  Vol.  iii.,  p.  680, 


xlvi 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


the  great  and  uncnangeable  principles  which  the 
Creator  has  ordained  to  govern  nature  could  he 
disturbed  by  the  freaks  of  poor  old  crazy  women, 
for  purposes  trifling  and  insignificant.  No,  such 
a  man  could  never  have  circulated  a  report  that 
a  woman  was  turned  into  a  bay  mare,  and  her 
chemise  into  a  horse-cloth  and  saddle !  Un- 
bridled sectarian  feeling  perverted  some  remark  of 
his,  probably  made  with  the  kindest  intention,  into 
a  most  incredible  slander. 

Among  the  many  singularities  of  that  very 
interesting  period,  one  was  the  number  of  reli- 
gious tournaments  or  disputations  that  were  held 
all  over  the  country.  The  details  of  one  of  these, 
between  Fisher,  a  Jesuit,  and  Archbishop  Laud, 
occupy  a  folio  volume.  In  these  wordy  duels 
the  Baptists  and  Quakers  bore  a  prominent  part. 
To  write  a  history  of  them  would  occupy  more 
space  than  our  narrow  limits  will  allow.  Bun- 
yan  entered  into  one  of  these  controversies  with 
the  Quakers  at  Bedford  Market-cross,1  and  pro- 
bably held  others  in  the  church,  those  buildings 
being  at  times  available  under  the  Protectorate  for 
such  purposes.  Bunyan  was  met  by  the  son  of 
thunder,  Edward  Burrough,  who  was  also  assisted 
by  Anne  Blackly,  a  remarkably  pious  woman 
and  an  able  disputant.  Bunyan  pressed  them 
with  the  Scriptures,  and  dealt  such  severe  blows 
that  Mrs.  Blackly,  in  the  public  assembly,  bid 
him  throw  away  the  Scriptures.  To  which  he 
answered,  '  No,  for  then  the  devil  would  be  too 
hard  for  me.'  The  great  controversy  was  as  to 
Christ  within  his  saints.  Bunyan  proved,  by  the 
holy  oracles,  that  Christ  had  ascended,  and  was 
at  the  right  hand  of  God ;  to  which  Mrs.  Blackly 
answered,  that  he  preached  up  an  idol,  and  used 
conjuration  and  witchcraft.  To  the  charge  of 
spiritual  conjuration  and  witchcraft  he  made  no 
reply,  it  being  unworthy  his  notice;  but  called 
upon  her  to  repent  of  her  wickedness  in  calling 
Christ  an  idol.  With  regard  to  his  presence  in 
his  saints,  he  reminded  her,  that  if  any  man  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his.2  As  a 
matter  of  course,  both  parties  claimed  the  victory; 
and  although  the  hearers  were  puzzled,  doubtless 
much  good  was  effected. 

These  were  comparatively  happy  days  for  God's 
fearers — much  valuable  seed  was  sown,  and  the 
light  of  divine  truth  penetrated  into  many  a  be- 
nighted town  and  village.  At  length  dark  and 
portentous  clouds  rolled  over  the  horizon.  The 
Protector  had  entered  into  rest;  his  son  was  wholly 
incapable  of  taking  the  helm  of  public  affairs. 
The  exiled  king,  Charles  II.,  declared  his  deter- 
mination to  publish  an  amnesty  for  all  political 

1  See  postscript  to  The  True  FaM  of  the  GaftpeiyftPeace, 
British  Museum. 

2  Vol.  ii.,  p.  201. 


offences  ;  and  from  Breda  issued  his  proclamation 
for  liberty  of  conscience,  and  the  kingdom  was 
cajoled  and  sold.  The  king  was  scarcely  seated  on 
his  throne,  and  armed  with  power,  when  he  threw 
off  the  mask.  Men  who  had  faithfully  performed 
very  painful  duties  under  the  authority  of  Acts 
of  Parliament  were  put  to  death,  others  im- 
prisoned and  transported,  and  uniformity  in  religion 
was  re-enacted  under  ferocious  penalties.  Bunyan 
was  to  endure  a  cruel  imprisonment,  with  all  the 
fears  of  an  ignominious  death.  'Now,'  he  says, 
'  as  Satan  laboured  by  reproaches  and  slanders, 
to  make  me  vile  among  my  countrymen,  that  if 
possible  my  preaching  might  be  made  of  none 
effect,  so  there  was  added  hereto  a  long  and 
tedious  imprisonment,  that  thereby  I  might  be 
frighted  from  my  service  for  Christ,  and  the  world 
terrified  and  made  afraid  to  hear  me  preach,  of 
which  I  shall  in  the  next  place  give  you  a  brief 
account.'3 


THE  FIFTH  PERIOD. 

BUNYAN  SUFFERS  PERSECUTION,  AND  A  LONG  AND  DANGER- 
OUS IMPRISONMENT,  FOR  REFUSING  TO  ATTEND  THE 
COMMON    PRAYER    SERVICE,    AND    FOR    PREACHING. 

'  0  liappie  he  who  doth  possesse 

Christ  for  his  fellow  prisoner,  who  doth  gladde 
"With  heavenly  sunbeames,  goales  that  are  most  sad.' 

[Written,  ly  William  Prpine,  on  his  Prison  wall,  in  the  Tower) 

The  men  who  arraign  their  fellows  before  any 
standard  of  orthodoxy,  or  claim  the  right  of  dic- 
tating forms  of  belief  or  modes  of  worship  under 
pains  or  penalties,  are  guilty  of  assuming  the  pre- 
rogative of  the  Most  High,  and  of  claiming,  for 
their  frail  opinions,  infallibility.  Such  are  guilty 
of  high  treason  against  the  Majesty  of  heaven — 
and  all  their  machinations  have  a  direct  tendency 
to  destroy  human  happiness — the  wealth  of  the 
nation,  and  that  universal  good-will  among  men 
which  the  gospel  is  intended  to  establish.  Such 
men  present  to  us  the  various  features  of  anti- 
christ, the  dread  enemy  of  mankind. 

The  duty  of  every  intelligent  creature  is  to 
watch  the  operations  of  nature,  that  he  may  be 
led  to  just  perceptions  of  the  greatness  of  the 
Creator,  and  the  goodness  of  his  immutable  laws. 
Soon  he  finds  his  perceptions  dim,  and  is  con- 
scious of  evil  propensities,  which  baffle  all  his 
efforts  at  sinless  perfection.  He  finds  nothing  in 
nature  to  solve  the  solemn  inquiry  how  sin  is  to 
be  pardoned,  and  evil  thoughts  and  habits  to  be 
rooted  out.  The  convinced  sinner  then  feels  the 
necessity  of  a  direct  revelation  from  God;  and  in  the 
Bible  alone  he  finds  that  astounding  declaration, 
which  leaves  all  human  philosophy  at  an  immea- 


Vol.  i.,  p.  46. 


MEMOIB  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


slvj 


surable  distance — 'Ye  must  be  born  again.' 
God  only  can  elicct  tbe  -wondrous  change — man, 
priest,  prophet,  or  magi,  can  do  him  no  good — 
his  terror-stricken  conscience  drives  him  to  his 
Creator,  and  faith  in  the  Redeemer)  causos  con- 
solation to  abound. 

In  every  kingdom  of  the  world,  the  Christian 
inquirer  is  met  by  the  opposition  of  antichrist,  in 
some  form  or  other,  attempts  will  ho  made  to  limit 
his  free-born  spirit  to  human  inventions  and  me- 
diations in  seeking  Divine  mercy.  He  feels  that 
he  is  bound,  by  all  his  hopes  of  happiness,  Here 
and  hereafter,  to  obey  God  rather  than  man,  in 
everything  pertaining  to  spiritual  religion.  In  his 
simple  obedience  to  the  Word  of  God,  he  braves  all  j 
dangers,  sure  of  the  Divine  blessing  and  support  i 
while  encountering  obloquy,  contempt,  allurements, 
and  persecution,  in  its  varied  polluted  forms  and 
appalling  cruelties. 

After  the  decease  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  it  soon 
became  apparent  that  the  exiled  king  would  he  re- 
stored. In  the  prospect  of  that  event,  Charles  II. 
promised  a  free  pardon  to  all  his  subjects,  ex- 
cepting only  such  persons  as  should  be  excepted 
by  parliament ;  and  '  we  do  declare  a  liberty  to 
tender  consciences,  and  that  no  man  shall  be 
disquieted  or  called  in  question  for  differences  of 
opiuion  in  matters  of  religion,  which  do  not  disturb 
the  peace  of  the  kingdom.'  Who  could  imagine, 
that,  in  the  face  of  this  solemn  declaration,  acts, 
the  most  oppressive  and  tyrannical,  would  be  passed 
— compelling  pretended  uniformity  in  belief  and 
real  uniformity  in  the  mode  of  public  worship — 
driving  the  most  pious  and  useful  clergymen  from 
their  pulpits  and  livings — preventing  them  from 
becoming  tutors  or  schoolmasters — and  not  suffer- 
ing them  to  live  within  five  miles  of  a  city  or  town. 
E-uinous  penalties  were  inflicted,  not  only  on  overy 
minister,  but  upon  every  hearer,  who  met  to  wor- 
ship God  in  private  houses  or  in  the  fields  and 
woods.  Christians,  convinced  of  the  wickedness 
of  such  laws,  strove,  by  every  possible  means,  to 
evade  the  penalties,  with  a  stern  determination  to 
worship  God  in  the  way  that  their  consciences  led 
them.  They  met  their  beloved  ministers  in  pri- 
vate places,  and  at  the  most  unseasonable  hours. 
It  is  said  that  Bunyan,  to  avoid  discovery,  went 
from  a  friend's  house  disguised  as  a  carter;  with 
his  white  frock,  wide-awake  cap,  and  his  whip  in 
his  hand,  to  attend  a  private  meeting  in  a  shel- 
tered field  or  barn.  To  prevent  these  meetings, 
severe  and  almost  arbitrary  penalties  were  enforced, 
a  considerable  part  of  which  went  to  the  informers 
— men  of  debauched  habits  and  profligate  prin- 
ciples. With  all  their  vigilance,  these  prohibited 
meetings  could  not  be  prevented.  In  some  cases, 
the  persecuted  disciples  of  a  persecuted  Lord  took 
houses  adjoining  each  other,  and,  by  opening  inter- 


nal communications,  assembled  togolher.  In  some 
cases,  tho  barn  or  room  in  whieh  they  met,  had  a 
door  behind  tho  pulpit,  by  which  the  preacher 
could  escape,  A  curious  letter,  preserved  in  tho 
archives  at  Devonshire  House,  states,  that  when 
a  Christian  assembly  was  held  mar  Devonshire 
Square,  while  tho  minister  was  in  his  sermon,  tho 
OJBOera  and  trained  bands  entered  the  meeting- 
house. The  preacher  immediately  ceased  preach- 
ing, and  gave  out  the  lines  of  a  hymn,  which  the 
congregation  joined  in  singing,  and  tho  officers, 
waited  till  the  devotional  exercise  was  ended. 
Tho  preacher,  taking  advantage  of  their  hesita- 
tion, made  his  escape  by  a  door  at  the  back  of  the 
pulpit ;  '  thus,'  says  the  quaint  Quaker;  'lie  choked 
the  informers  oil"  with  his  hymn.'  In  the  Life  of 
Lad-man  are  some  illustrative  anocdotcs  relating 
to  informers  and  their  violent  ends,  with  an  inte- 
resting cut  of  a  religious  meeting  in  the  fields. 
One  informer  is  in  a  neighbouring  tree,  to  identify 
the  meeters;  while  in  the  distance,  another  is  run- 
ning for  the  officers,  with  this  vorse  under  the 
print : — 

•Informer,  art  thou  in  the  tree? 
Take  heed;  lest  there  thou  hanged  be: 
Look  likewise  to  thy  foot-hold  well ; 
Lust,  if  thou  slip,  thou  fall  to  hell.' 

In  many  cases  the  justices  considered  a  field 
preacher  to  be  equally  guilty  with  a  regicide.1 
One  of  the  informers,  named  W.  S.,  was  very 
diligent  in  this  business  ;  '  he  would  watch 
a-nights,  climb  trees,  and  range  the  woods  a-days, 
if  possible  to  find  out  the  meeters,  for  then  they 
were  forced  to  meet  in  the  fields. '  At  length  he 
was  stricken  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  died  a  most 
wretched  object.2  The  cruelties  that  were  in- 
flicted upon  Dissenters  are  scarcely  credible.  Penn, 
tho  Quaker,  gives  this  narrative  of  faots: — 'The 
widow's  mite  hath  not  escaped  their  bauds;  they 
have  made  her  cow  the  forfeit  of  her  conscience, 
not  leaving  her  a  bed  to  lie  on,  nor  a  blanket  to 
cover  her ;  and  what  is  yet  more  barbarous,  and 
helps  to  make  up  this  tragedy,  the  poor  helpless 
orphan's  milk,  boiling  over  the  fire,  was  flung 
away,  and  the  skillet  made  part  of  their  prize ; 
that,  had  not  nature  in  neighbours  been  stronger 
than  cruelty  in  informers  and  officers,  to  open  her 
bowels  for  their  relief,  they  must  have  utterly 
perished.3  One  of  these  infamous,  hard-hearted 
wretches  in  Bedford,  was  stricken,  soon  after,  with 
death ;  and  such  had  been  his  notorious  brutality, 
that  his  widow  could  not  obtain  a  hearse,  bu1 
obliged  to  carry  his  body  to  the  grave  in  a  cart. 

It  is  gratifying  to  leave  these  horrors — those 
stains  upon  our  national  history — for  a  moment, 


1  .Maeaulay's  History  of  England,  vol.  L 

an. 

s  Pern's  Englantfa  Interest,  4to,  1073,  p.  2. 


xlvii 


MEMOIR   0?  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


to  record  an  event  which  took  place  about  fifty 
years  back.  The  Rev.  S.  Hillyard,  the  pastor 
of  Bunyan's  church,  thus  writes:  —  'When  our 
meeting-house  was  lately  repaired,  we  were  al- 
lowed, by  the  Lord  Lieutenant  and  the  justices, 
to  carry  on  our  public  worship,  for  a  quarter  of  a 
year  in  tbe  town-hall,  where,  if  it  had  been  stand- 
ing in  Mr.  Bunyan's  time,  he  must  have  been 
tried  and  committed  to  jail  for  preaching.'  How 
different  our  position  from  that  of  our  pilgrim 
forefathers. 

The  justices,  if  the  law  had  allowed  them, 
would,  from  the  first,  have  prevented  Bunyan's 
preaching.  When  they  had  the  power,  he  pos- 
sessed nothing  to  excite  the  cupidity  of  an  in- 
former :  this,  with  the  caution  of  his  friends,  saved 
him,  for  some  months,  from  being  apprehended ; 
they  met  privately  in  barns,  milk-houses,  and 
stables,  or  in  any  convenient  place  in  which  they 
were  not  likely  to  be  disturbed.  In  addition  to 
these  services,  every  opportunity  was  embraced  to 
visit  his  friends — praying  with  them,  and  adminis- 
tering consolation,  arming  them  with  a  steady  re- 
solve to  be  patient  in  suffering,  and  to  trust  in  God 
for  their  safety  and  reward.  At  length  an  informa- 
tion was  laid,  and  he  was  caught  in  the  very  act 
of  worshipping  God  with  some  pious  neighbours. 
Bunyan's  account  of  this  event  is  deeply  interest- 
ing ;  but  the  want  of  sufficient  space  prevents  my 
giving  more  than  an  abstract  of  it,  referring  the 
reader  to  his  Grace  Abounding  for  fuller  details. 

On  November  12,  1660,  as  the  winter  was 
setting  in,  having  been  invited  to  preach  at  Sam- 
sell,  in  Bedfordshire,  he  prepared  a  sermon  upon 
these  words — '  Dost  thou  believe  in  tbe  Son  of 
God  ? '  Jn.  ix.  35 ;  from  which  he  intended  '  to  show 
the  absolute  need  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
that  it  was  also  a  thing  of  the  highest  concern 
for  men  to  inquire  into,  and  to  ask  their  own 
hearts  whether  they  had  faith  or  no.'1  He  had 
then  been  a  preacher  of  the  glorious  gospel  of 
Christ  for  five  or  six  years,  without  any  interrup- 
tion ;  for,  although  indicted,  he  had  continued  his 
useful  career,  and  through  grace  had  received 
great  encouragement  and  eminent  proofs  of  the 
Divine  blessing. 

Francis  Wingate,  a  neighbouring  justice  of  the 
peace,  having  heard  of  the  intended  meeting,  issued 
his  warrant  to  bring  the  preacher  before  him.  The 
intention  of  the  magistrate  was  whispered  about, 
and  came  to  Bunyan's  ears  before  the  meeting 
was  held,  probably  to  give  him  an  opportunity 
of  escape.  His  friends,  becoming  alarmed  for  his 
safety,  advised  him  to  forego  the  opportunity.  It 
Avas  a  trying  moment  for  him  ;  he  had  a  beloved 
wife  to  whom  he  had  not  been  long  married,  and 
four  dear  children,  one  of  them  blind,  depending 
J  Vol.  ii.,  p.  593. 


upon  his  daily  labour  for  food.  If  he  escaped,  he 
might  continue  his  stolen  opportunities  of  doing 
good  to  the  souls  of  men.  He  hesitated  but  for  a 
few  minutes  for  private  prayer  ;  he  had  hitherto 
shown  himself  hearty  and  courageous  in  preaching, 
and  it  was  his  business  to  encourage  the  timid 
flock.  '  Therefore,  thought  I,  if  I  should  now  run 
and  make  an  escape,  it  will  be  of  a  very  ill  savour 
in  the  country  ;  what  will  my  weak  and  newly 
converted  brethren  think  of  it  ?  If  I  should  run, 
now  there  was  a  warrant  out  for  me,  I  might,  by 
so  doing,  make  them  afraid  to  stand  when  great 
words  only  should  be  spoken  to  them.'  He 
retired  into  a  close,  privately,  to  seek  Divine  direc- 
tion, and  came  back  resolved  to  abide  the  will  of 
God.  It  was  the  first  attempt,  near  Bedford,  to 
apprehend  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  and  he  thus 
argued  with  himself — '  If  God,  of  his  mercy,  should 
choose  me  to  go  upon  the  forlorn  hope,  that  is,  to 
be  the  first  that  should  be  opposed  for  the  gospel, 
if  I  should  fly  it  might  be  a  discouragement  to  the 
whole  body  that  should  follow  after.  And  I  thought 
that  the  world  thereby  would  take  occasion  at  my 
cowardliness,  to  have  blasphemed  thegospel/2  These 
considerations  brought  him  to  the  noble  resolution 
of  fulfilling  his  duty,  under  all  its  difficulties  and 
dangers.  In  these  reasonings  the  same  honourable 
decision  of  mind  animated  him  which  impelled 
Daniel,  and  the  three  Hebrew  youths,  to  violate 
the  wicked  laws  of  the  nation  in  which  they  lived, 
because  these  laws  were  opposed  to  the  will  of  God. 
He  and  they,  as  well  as  the  apostles,  judged  for 
themselves,  and  opposed  statutes  or  ancient  customs 
which,  in  their  opinion,  were  contrary  to  the  Divine 
law  by  which  they  were  to  be  judged  at  the  solemn 
and  great  day.  Nor  did  they,  in  the  prospect  of 
tbe  most  dread  personal  sufferings,  hesitate  to 
follow  tbe  convictions  of  their  minds.  Some  laws 
are  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  ob- 
servance of  them.  The  law  of  Pharaoh  to  destroy 
the  male  children  of  the  Israelites,  in  ancient  times, 
and  the  present  Popish  laws  of  Tuscany,  that  the 
Bible  shall  not  be  read,  are  laws  so  contrary  to 
common  sense,  and  tbe  most  sacred  duties  of  man, 
that  '  God  dealt  well '  with  those  who  broke  them 
in  Egypt,  as  he  has  ever  dealt  with  those  who 
have  thus  honoured  him.  The  millions  of  prayers 
that  were  offered  up  for  a  blessing  upon  the  con- 
fessors, Madiai,  have  been  answered.  Had  they 
perished  in  the  prisons  of  Tuscany,  they  would 
have  joined  the  noble  army  of  martyrs  before  the 
throne  of  God,  to  witness  his  judgments  upon  that 
persecuting  church  which  has  shed  so  much  holy 
blood. 

When  Bunyan  was  advised  to  escape  by  dismiss- 
ing the  meeting,  which  consisted  of  about  forty 
persons,  he  replied,  '  No,  by  no  means  ;  I  will  not 

»Vol.i.,  p.  51.  . 


MEMOIR  Or  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


dix 


stir,  neither  will  I  have  the  meeting  dismissed. 
Come,  he  of  good  cheer,  let  us  not  ho  daunted  ; 
our  cause  is  good,  we  need  not  he  ashamed  of  it ;  to 
preach  God's  Word  is  so  good  a  work,  that  we  shall 
ho  well  rewarded  if  we  suffer  for  that.'1  All 
this  took  place  ahout  an  hour  beforo  the  officers 
arrived.  The  service  was  commenced  with  prayer 
at  the  time  appointed,  the  preacher  and  hearers 
had  their  Bibles  in  their  hands  to  read  the  text, 
when  the  constable  and  his  attendants  came  in, 
and,  exhibiting  the  warrant,  ordered  him  to  leave 
the  pulpit  and  come  down  ;  but  he  mildly  told  him 
that  he  was  about  his  Master's  business,  and  must 
rather  obey  his  Lord's  voice  than  that  of  man. 
Then  a  constable  was  ordered  to  fetch  him  down, 
who,  coming  up  and  taking  hold  of  his  coat,  was 
about  to  remove  him,  when  Mr.  Bunyan  fixed  his 
eyes  steadfastly  upon  him  ;  having  his  Bible  open 
in  his  hand,  the  man  let  go,  looked  pale,  and  re- 
tired ;  upon  which  he  said  to  the  congregation, 
*  See  how  this  man  trembles  at  the  Word  of  God.' 
Truly  did  one  of  his  friends  say,  '  he  had  a  sharp, 
quick  eye.'  But  being  commanded  in  the  king's 
name,  he  went  with  the  officers,  accompanied  by 
some  of  his  friends,  to  the  magistrate's  residence. 
Before  they  left,  the  constable  allowed  him  to 
speak  a  few  words  to  the  people  of  counsel  and 
encouragement.  He  declared  that  it  was  a  mercy 
when  called  to  suffer  upon  so  good  an  account ; 
that  it  was  of  grace  that  they  had  been  kept  from 
crimes,  which  might  have  caused  their  apprehen- 
sion as  thieves  and  murderers,  or  for  some  wicked- 
ness ;  but  by  the  blessing  of  God  it  was  not  so, 
but,  as  Christians,  they  were  called  to  suffer  for  well- 
doing ;  and  that  we  had  better  be  persecuted  than 
the  persecutors.  The  constable  took  him  to  the  jus- 
tice's house,  but  as  he  was  from  home,  to  save 
the  expense  and  trouble  of  charging  a  watch  to 
secure  his  prisoner,  he  allowed  him  to  go  home, 
one  of  his  friends  undertaking  to  be  answerable 
for  his  appearance  the  next  day.  On  the  follow- 
ing morning  they  went  to  the  constable  and  then 
to  the  justice.  The  celebrated  Quaker,  John 
Roberts,  managed  an  affair  of  that  kind  better. 
There  was  plenty  of  time  to  have  held  and  dis- 
missed the  meeting  before  the  constable  arrived, 
and  then  he  might  have  done  as  Roberts  did — 
made  the  best  of  his  way  to  the  magistrate's  house, 
and  demanded,  'Dost  thou  want  me,  old  man?' 
and  when  asked  whether  or  not  he  went  to  church, 
his  ready  reply  was,  '  Yes,  sometimes  I  go  to  the 
church,  and  sometimes  the  church  comes  to  me.'*' 
When  Bunyan  and  the  constable  came  before 
Justice  Wingate,  he  inquired  what  the  meeters 
did,  and  what  they  had  with  them  ;    suspecting 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  51. 

3   This  very  interesting  Memoir  was  published  by  the 
Society  of  Friends,  1823. 
VOL.  III. 


that  they  met  armed,  or  for  treasonable  practices  : 
but  when  the  constable  told  him  that  they  were 
unarmed,  and  merely  assembled  to  preach  and  hear 
the  Word,  he  could  not  well  tell  what  to  say. 
Justice  Wingate  was  not  the  only  magistrate 
who  had  felt  difficulties  as  to  the  construction  of 
the  persecuting  acts  of  35  Eliz.  and  15  Chas.  II. 
Had  he  taken  an  opinion,  as  one  of  the  justices  at 
that  time  did,  it  might  have  saved  him  from  the 
infamy  and  guilt  of  punishing  an  innocent  man. 
The  case  was  this  : — '  Two  persons  of  insolent 
behaviour,  calling  themselves  informers,  demanded, 
on  their  evidence  of  having  been  present,  without 
summons  or  hearing  in  presence  of  the  accused, 
that  a  fine  of  £100  should  be  levied  ;  they  were 
at  the  meeting  and  heard  no  Common  Prayer  ser- 
vice.' The  opinion  was  that  there  must  be  evidence 
showing  the  intent,  and  that  the  meeting  was  held 
under  colour  and  irretenee  of  any  exercise  of  religion 
to  concoct  sedition.3  Mr.  Wingate  asked  Bunyan 
why  he  did  not  follow  his  calling  and  go  to  church? 
to  which  he  replied,  that  all  his  intention  was  to 
instruct  and  counsel  people  to  forsake  their  sins, 
and  that  he  did,  without  confusion,  both  follow  his 
calling  and  preach  the  Word.  At  this  the  angry 
justice  ordered  his  commitment  to  jail,  refusing 
bail,  unless  he  would  promise  to  give  up  preaching. 
While  his  mittimus  was  preparing,  he  had  a  short 
controversy  with  an  old  enemy  of  the  truth,  Dr. 
Lindale,  and  also  with  a  persecuting  justice,  Mr. 
Foster,  who,  soon  after,  sorely  vexed  the  people  of 
God  at  Bedford.  They  tried  their  utmost  endea- 
vours to  persuade  him  to  promise  not  to  preach  ; 
a  word  from  him  might  have  saved  his  liberty  ; 
but  it  was  a  word  which  would  have  sacrificed  his 
religious  convictions,  and  these  were  dearer  to  him 
than  life  itself.  This  was  a  trying  moment,  but  he 
had  been  forewarned  of  his  danger  by  the  extra- 
ordinary temptation  to  sell  Christ  narrated  in  his 
Grace  Abounding.  His  feelings,  while  they  were 
conducting  him  to  the  prison,  were  so  cheering  as 
to  enable  him  to  forget  his  sorrows  ;  he  thus  de- 
scribes them — '  Verily,  as  I  was  going  forth  of  the 
doors  I  had  much  ado  to  forbear  saying  to  them, 
that  I  carried  the  peace  of  God  along  with  me  ; 
and,  blessed  be  the  Lord,  I  went  away  to  prison 
with  God's  comfort  in  my  poor  soul.'4 

Tradition  points  out  the  place  in  which  this 
eminently  pious  man  was  confined,  as  an  ancient 
prison,  built  with  the  bridge  over  the  river  Ousc, 


3  Case  and  Opinion, under  the  head  'Conventicles,'  British 
Museum.  There  is  also  a  rare  Tract,  to  prove  that  the  Per- 
secuting Acts  expired  Oct.  24th,  1670. 

4  Vol.  i.,  p.  54.  How  unspeakable  the  mercy,  that  the 
persecutor  cannot  plunge  his  implements  of  torture  into  the 
spirit,  nor  prevent  its  intercourse  with  heaven  ! 

A  very  deeply  interesting  narrative  of  all  the  particulars  of 
this  examination  and  form  of  trial,  was  recorded  by  the  snf- 
ferer.     See  vol.  i.,  p.  50. 

9 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


supported  on  one  of  the  piers  near  the  middle 
of  the  river.1  As  the  bridge  was  only  four 
yards  and  a  half  wide,  the  prison  must  have 
been  very  small.  Howard,  the  philanthropist, 
visited  the  Bedford  prison,  that  which  was  digni- 
fied as  the  county  jail  about  1788,  and  thus  de- 
scribes it: — 'The  men  and  women  felons  associate 
together  ;  their  night-rooms  are  two  dungeons. 
Only  one  court  for  debtors  and  felons  ;  and  no 
apartment  for  the  jailer.'2  Imagination  can  hardly 
realize  the  miseries  of  fifty  or  sixty  pious  men  and 
women,  taken  from  a  place  of  public  worship  and 
incarcerated  in  such  dens  or  dungeons  with  felons, 
as  was  the  case  while  Bunyan  was  a  prisoner.  Twelve 
feet  square  was  about  the  extent  of  the  walls  ;  for 
it  occupied  but  one  pier  between  the  centre  arches 
of  the  bridge.  How  properly  does  the  poor  pilgrim 
call  it  a  certain  den  !  What  an  abode  for  men 
and  women  who  had  been  made  by  God  kings  and 
priests — the  heirs  of  heaven!  The  eyes  of  Howard, 
a  Dissenter,  penetrated  these  dens,  these  hidden 
things  of  darkness,  these  abodes  of  cruelty.  He 
revealed  what  lay  and  clerical  magistrates  ought 
to  have  published  centuries  before,  that  they  were 
not  fit  places  in  which  to  imprison  any,  even  the 
worst  of  criminals.  He  denounced  them,  huma- 
nity shuddered  at  the  discovery,  and  they  were 
razed  to  their  foundations.  In  this  den  God 
permitted  his  honoured  servant,  John  Bunyan,  to 
be  incarcerated  for  more  than  twelve  years  of  the 
prime  of  his  life.  A  man,  whose  holy  zeal  for  the 
salvation  of  sinners,  whose  disinterested  labours, 
whose  sufferings  for  Christ  prove  his  apostolical 
desceut  much  better  than  those  who  claim  descent 
from  popes,  and  Wolsey  or  Bonner — those  fiends 
in  human  shape. 

Bedford  bridge  was  pulled  down  in  the  year 
1811,  when  the  present  handsome  bridge  was 
built.  One  of  the  workmen  employed  upon  the 
ruins  found,  among  the  rubbish,  where  the  prison 
had  stood,  a  ring  made  of  fine  gold,  bearing  an 
inscription  which  affords  strong  presumptive  evi- 
dence that  it  belonged  to  our  great  allegorist.  Dr. 
Abbot,  a  neighbouring  clergyman,  who  had  daily 
watched  the  labours  of  the  workmen,  luckily  saw 
it,  and  saved  it  from  destruction.  He  constantly 
wore  it,  until,  drawing  near  the  end  of  his  pilgri- 
mage, in  1817,  he  took  it  off  his  own  finger 
and  placed  it  upon  that  of  his  friend  Dr.  Bower, 
then  curate  of  Elstow,3  and  at  present  the  dean  of 

1  There  were  three  prisons  in  Bedford — the  county  jail,  the 
bridewell,  and  the  tower  jail.  No  decisive  evidence  has  been 
discovered  as  to  which  prison  Bunyan  was  committed.  Two 
views  of  the  bridge  and  prison  are  given  in  the  plate  at 
p.  63,  vol.  i. 

2  Howard's  Account  of  Lazarettos,  &c.  4to,  1789,  p.  150. 

3  Elstow  is  a  perpetual  curacy  or  vicarage,  worth  at  that 
time  only  £35  per  annum !  forming  one  of  the  discreditable 
anomalies  of  the  church,  in  the  division  of  its  immense  re- 
venues. 


Impression  of  a  Seal 
ou  a  gold  ring5  found  in 
the  foundation  of  the  old 
prison,  Bedford  bridge. 


Manchester,  charging  him  to  keep  it  for  his  sake. 
This  ring  must  have  been  a,  present  from  some 
person  of  property,  as  a  token 
of  great  respect  for  Bunyan1  s 
pious  character,  and  probably 
from  an  indignant  sense  of  his 
unjust  and  cruel  imprisonment. 
By  the  kind  permission  of  the 
dean,  we  are  enbled  to  give  a 
correct  representation  of  this 
curious  relic.4 

Bunyan  was  thirty-two  years 
of  age  when  taken  to  prison. 
He  had  suffered  the  loss  of  his  pious  wife,  whose 
conversation  and  portion  had  been  so  blessed 
to  him.  It  is  not  improbable  that  her  peaceful 
departure  is  pictured  in  Christiana's  crossing  the 
river  which  has  no  bridge.  She  left  him  with  four 
young  children,  one  of  whom  very  naturally  and 
most  strongly  excited  his  paternal  feelings,  from 
the  circumstance  of  her  having  been  afflicted  with 
blindness.  He  had  married  a  second  time,  a 
woman  of  exemplary  piety  and  retiring  modesty  ; 
but  whose  spirit,  when  roused  to  seek  the  release 
of  her  beloved  husband,  enabled  her  to  stand  un- 
abashed, and  full  of  energy  and  presence  of  mind, 
before  judges  in  their  courts,  and  lords  in  their 
mansions.  When  her  partner  was  sent  to  jail,  she 
was  in  that  peculiar  state  that  called  for  all  his 
sympathy  and  his  tenderest  care.  The  shock  was 
too  severe  for  her  delicate  situation ;  she  became 
dangerously  ill,  and,  although  her  life  was  spared, 
all  hopes  had  fled  of  her  maternal  feelings  being- 
called  into  exercise.  Thus  did  one  calamity  follow 
another ;  still  he  preserved  his  integrity.6 

Bunyan  was  treated  with  all  the  kindness  which 


4  He  has  favoured  us  with  the  following  description  of  it : — 
'  The  ring  is  of  fine  gold,  very  like  in  colour  to  that  which  has 
been  brought  into  this  country  from  California.  The  head  is, 
1  think,  engraven,  but  the  letters  have  not  that  sharpness 
about  them  which  indicates  the  cngraviug  tool ;  and  the  I.  B. 
are  undoubted  indents  made  after  the  ring  was  finished.'  It 
is  not  the  usual  emblem  of  a  mourning  gift,  for  that  would 
have  the  cross-bones  under  the  skull ;  it  was  more  probably 
given  as  a  special  mark  of  esteem.  Three  things  are  certain — 
]  st,  That  if  so  valuable  a  gift  excited  the  poor  man's  pride,  its 
loss  must  have  been  a  serious  annoyance  to  one  whose  family 
was  dependent  upon  his  daily  labour.  2d,  His  preaching  talent 
must  have  been  highly  appreciated,  before  he  was  known  as  the 
author  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  to  have  brought  him  so  valu- 
able a  token  of  respect.  But  the  most  pleasing  and  remarkable 
reflection,  is  the  surprising  progress  of  good-will  among  men 
of  various  denominations,  that  a  ring,  worn  by  a  despised  aud 
persecuted  Nonconformist  of  a  former  age,  is  now  highly 
prized  and  worn,  from  respect  to  his  memory,  by  a  dignified 
clergyman  of  the  Established  church. 

0  This  was  not  his  only  ring ;  he  left,  inter  alia,  all  his 
rings  to  his  wife.     See  p.  lxxii. 

6  After  he  had  lain  in  jail  five  or  six  days,  an  application 
was  made  to  a  liberal  justice  at  Elstow,  named  Crumpton,  to 
release  him  on  bail ;  but  he  declined,  fearing  to  give  offence. 
He,  however,  so  felt  for  this  persecuted  servant  of  Christ,  as 
to  sell  him  an  edifice  and  barn,  which,  upon  his  release,  was 
converted  into  a  large  meeting-house. 


MliMOIR   OF   JOHN    BUNYAN 


u 


many  of  his  jailors  dared  to  show  him.   In  his  times, 
inrpriseamegt  and  fetters  <rere,ganerefly  cunpaniens . 

Thus  he  says — '  When  a  felon  is  going  to  be  tried, 
his  fetters  are  still  making  a  noise  on  his  heels.  l 
So  the  prisoners  in  the  Holy  War  are  represented 
as  being  '  brought  in  chains  to  the  bar  '  for  trial. 
'  The  prisoners  were  handled  by  the  jailer  so 
severely,  and  loaded  so  with  irons,  that  th 
in  the  prison.*-  In  many  cases,  prisoners  for  con- 
science' sake  were  treated  with  sueh  brutality, 
before  the  form  of  trial,  as  to  cause  their  death. 
By  Divine  mercy,  Bunyan  was  saved  from  these 
dreadful  punishments,  which  have  ceased  as  civili- 
sation has  progressed,  and  now  cloud  the  narratives 
of  a  darker  age. 

After  having  lain  in  prison  about  seven  weeks, 
the  session  was  held  at  Bedford,  for  the  county; 
and  Bunyan  was  placed  at  the  bar,  indicted  for 
devilishly  and  perniciously  abstaining  from  coming 
to  church  to  hear  Divine  service,  and  as  a  common 
upholder  of  several  unlawful  meetings  and  con- 
venticles, to  the  great  disturbance  and  distraction 
of  the  good  subjects  of  this  kingdom,  contrary  to 
the  laws  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  king.  In 
this  indictment  Bunyan  is  not  described  as  '  of 
Elstow'  but  'of  Bedford.'  Probably  he  had  re- 
moved to  Bedford  soon  after  he  joined  Gifford's 
church.  The  bench  was  numerous,  and  presided 
over  hy  Justice  Keelin.3  If  this  was  Sergeant 
Kelynge  who,  the  following  year,  was  made  Lord 
Chief- Justice,  he  was  a  most  arbitrary  tyrant, 
equalled  or  excelled  only  by  Judge  Jeffreys.  It 
was  before  him  that  some  persons  were  indicted 
for  attending  a  conventicle  ;  but  it  being  only 
proved  that  they  had  assembled  on  the  Lord's-day 
with  Bibles  in  their  hands  without  prayer-books,  and 
there  being  no  proof  that  their  meeting  was  only 
under  colour  or  pretence  of  religion,  the  jury  ac- 
quitted them.  Upon  this  he  fined  each  of  the  jury- 
men one  hundred  marks,  and  imprisoned  them  till 
the  fines  were  paid.  Again,  on  a  trial  for  murder, 
the  prisoner  being  under  suspicion  of  Dissent,  was 
one  whom  the  judge  had  a  great  desire  to  hang,  he 
fined  and  imprisoned  all  the  jury  because,  contrary 
to  his  direction,  they  brought  in  a  verdict  of  man- 
slaughter !  Well  was  it  said,  that  he  was  more 
fit  to  charge  the  Roundheads  under  Prince  Rupert 
than  to  charge  a  jury.  After  a  short  career,  he 
fell  into  utter  contempt.4  He  entered  into  a  long 
argument  with  the  poor  tinker,  about  using  the 
liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  first  warning 
him  of  his  danger  if  he  spake  lightly  of  it.  Bunyan 
argued  that  prayer  was  purely  spiritual,  the  offer- 
ing of  the  heart,  and  not  the  reading  of  a  form.    The 

1  Vol.  ii.,  p.  107.  -  Vol.  iii.,  p.  341,  3CG. 

3  From  his  autograph,  in  the  editor's  possession,  he  spelt 
Lis  name  John  Kehng. 

*  Lord  Cauiphell's  Lives  of  the  Chief  Justices. 


justice  declared  — '  We  know  tho  Common  Prayer- 
hook  hath  been  ever  since  the  apostles'  time,  and  is 
lawful  to  be  used  in  the  church !  ! '  It  is  reraising 
that  such  a  dialogue  was  ever  entered  upon  ;  cither 
Kelirrg  was  desirous  of  triumphing  over  the  cele- 
brated tinker,  or  his  countenance  and  personal  ap- 
pearance commanded  respect.  For  some  cause  he 
was  treated  with  great  liberality  for  those  times ; 
tho  extent  of  it  may  be  seen  by  one  justice  ask- 
ing him,  'Is  your  God  Beelzebub?'  and  another 
declaring  that  he  was  possessed  with  the  devil ! 
'  All  which,'  says  Bunyan,  '  I  passed  over,  the 
Lord  forgive  them  !'  When,  however,  the  justice 
was  worsted  in  argument,  and  acknowledged  that 
he  was  not  well  versed  in  Scripture,  he  demanded 
the  prisoner's  plea,  saying,  *  Then  you  confess  the 
indictment?'  'Now,'  says  Bunyan,  'and  not  till 
now,  I  saw  I  was  indicted  ;  and  said — "  This  I  cou- 
!;ave  had  many  meetings  together,  both  to 
pray  to  God,  and  to  exhort  one  another;  and  that 
we  had  the  sweet  comforting  presence  of  the  Lord 
among  us  for  our  encouragement  (blessed  be  his 
name!);  therefore  I  confess  myself  guilty,  and  no 
otherwise."  '  This  was  recorded  as  a  plea  of  guilty, 
and  Keling  resumed  his  natural  ferocity.  'Then,' 
said  he,  '  hear  your  judgment.  You  must  be  had 
back  again  to  prison,  and  there  lie  for  three  months 
following ;  and  then,  if  you  do  not  submit  to  go 
to  church  to  hear  Divine  service,  and  leave  your 
preaching,  you  must  be  banished  the  realm  ;  and 
after  that,  if  you  shall  be  found  in  this  realm  with- 
out special  license  from  the  king,  you  must  stretch 
by  the  neck  for  it.  I  tell  you  plainly;'  '  and  so  he 
bid  my  jailer  have  me  away.'  The  hero  answered 
— '  I  am  at  a  point  with  you:  if  I  were  out  of 
prison  to-day,  I  would  preach  the  gospel  again  to- 
morrow, by  the  help  of  God.'5 

The  statutes,  by  virtue  of  which  this  awful  sen- 
tence was  pronounced,  together  with  the  legal  form 
of  recantation  used  by  those  who  were  terrified 
into  conformity,  are  set  forth  in  a  note  to  the  Grace 
Abounding.6  Bunyan  was,  if  not  the  first,  one  of 
the  first  Dissenters  who  were  proceeded  against 
after  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.  ;  and  his  trial, 
if  .such  it  may  be  called,  was  followed  by  a  whole- 
sale persecution.  The  king,  as  head  of  the  Church 
of  England,  wreaked  his  vengeance  upon  all  classes 


4  Vol.  i.,  p.  57.  This  forcibly  reminds  us  of  Greathcart's 
reply  to  Giant  Maul—'  I  am  a  servant  of  the  God  of  heaven  ; 
my  business  is  to  persuade  sinners  to  repentance;  if  to  pre- 
vent this  Le  thy  quarrel,  let  us  fall  to  it  as  soon  as  thou  will,' 
vol.  iii.,  p.  210.  Southey  attempts  to  vindicate  the  justices  in 
condemning  Bunyan,  and  grossly  mis-states  the  facts;  deemiug 
him  to  be  unreasonable  and  intolerant ;  that  preaching  was 
incompatible  with  his  calling,  and  that  he  ought  not  to  have 
BMrifioed  his  liberty  in  such  a  cause !  The  poet-laureate  makes 
these  assertions,  knowing  the  vast  benelits  which  sprung  from 
the  determined  piety  and  honesty  of  the  persecuted  preacher. 
Would  not  By-ends,  Facing-hoth-ways,  and  ifave-all,  have 
jumped  to  the  same  conclusion? 

0  Vol.  i.,  p.  5G. 


m 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


of  Dissenters,  excepting  Roman  Catholics  and 
Jews. 

The  reign  of  Charles  II.  was  most  disgraceful 
and  disastrous  to  the  nation,  even  the  king  being 
a  pensioner  upon  the  French  court.  The  Dutch 
swept  the  seas,  and  threatened  to  burn  London ; 
a  dreadful  plague  depopulated  the  metropolis — 
the  principal  part  of  which  was,  in  the  follow- 
ing year,  with  its  cathedral,  churches,  and  pub- 
lic buildings,  destroyed  by  fire  ;  plots  and  conspi- 
racies alarmed  the  people  ;  tyranny  was  trium- 
phant; even  the  bodies  of  the  illustrious  dead  were 
exhumed,  and  treated  with  worse  than  savage  fero- 
city ;  while  a  fierce  persecution  raged  throughout 
the  kingdom,  which  filled  the  jails  with  Dissenters. 

In  Scotland,  the  persecution  raged  with  still 
more  deadly  violence.  Military,  in  addition  to 
civil  despotism,  strove  to  enforce  the  use  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer.  The  heroic  achieve- 
ments and  awful  suffering  of  Scottish  Christians, 
saved  their  descendants  from  this  yoke  of  bondage.1 

A  short  account  of  the  extent  of  the  sufferings 
of  our  pious  ancestors  is  given  in  the  Introduction 
to  the  Pilgrim' 's  Progress2 — a  narrative  which  would 
appear  incredible  did  it  not  rest  upon  unimpeach- 
able authority.  It  would  be  difficult  to  believe 
the  records  of  the  brutal  treatment  which  the  suf- 
ferers underwent  had  they  not  been  handed  down 
to  us  in  the  State  Trials,  and  in  public  registers, 
over  which  the  persecuted  had  no  control.  Two 
instances  will  show  the  extreme  peril  in  which  tbe 
most  learned  and  pious  men  held  their  lives.  John 
James,  the  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in  White- 
chapel,  was  charged,  upon  the  evidence  of  a  per- 
jured drunken  vagabond  named  Tipler,  a  pipe- 
maker's  journeyman,  who  was  not  present  in  the 
meeting,  but  swore  that  he  heard  him  utter  trea- 
sonable words.  Notwithstanding  the  evidence  of 
some  most  respectable  witnesses,  who  were  present 
during  the  whole  service,  and  distinctly  proved  that 
no  such  words  were  used,  Mr.  James  was  convicted, 
and  sentenced  to  be  hung.  His  distracted  wife  saw 
the  king,  presented  a  petition,  and  implored  mercy, 
when  the  unfeeling  monarch  replied,  '0!  Mr.  James; 
he  is  a  sweet  gentleman.'  Again,  on  the  following 
morning,  she  fell  at  his  feet,  beseeching  his  royal 
clemency,  when  he  spurned  her  from  him,  saying, 
'  John  James,  that  rogue,  he  shall  be  hanged  ; 
yea,  he  shall  be  hanged.'  And,  in  the  presence  of 
his  weeping  friends,  he  ascended  from  the  gibbet  to 
the  mansions  of  the  blessed.  His  real  crime  was, 
that  he  continued  to  preach  after  having  been 
warned  not  to  do  so  by  John  Robinson,  lieutenant 


1  Every  Christian  should  read  the  appalling  account  of  these 
sufferings,  recently  published  under  the  title  of  Ladies  of  the 
Covenant. 

2  Vol.  hi.,  p.  17. 


of  the  Tower,  properly  called,  by  Mr.  Crosby,3 
a  devouring  wolf,  upon  whose  head  the  blood  of 
this  and  other  innocent  Dissenters  will  be  found. 
Another  Dissenting  minister,  learned,  pious,  loyal, 
and  peaceful,  was,  during  Bunyan's  time,  marked 
for  destruction.  Thomas  Rosewell  was  tried  before 
the  monster  Jeffreys.  He  was  charged,  upon  the 
evidence  of  two  infamous  informers,  with  having 
doubted  the  power  of  the  king  to  cure  the  kings' 
evil,  and  with  saying  that  they  should  overcome 
their  enemies  with  rams'  horns,  broken  platters,  and 
a  stone  in  a  sling.  A  number  of  most  respectable 
witnesses  deposed  to  their  having  been  present; 
that  no  such  words  were  uttered,  and  that  Mr.  Rose- 
well  was  eminent  for  loyalty  and  devoted  attachment 
to  the  Government.  Alas  !  he  was  a  Dissenting 
teacher  of  high  standing,  of  extensive  acquire- 
ments, and  of  great  earnestness  in  seeking  the 
salvation  of  sinners  ;  and,  under  the  direction  of 
that  brutal  judge,  the  venal  jury  found  him  guilty, 
and  he  was  sentenced  to  be  hung.  This  frightful 
sentence  would  have  been  executed  but  from  a 
singular  interposition  of  Providence.  Sir  John 
Talbot  was  present  during  the  trial,  and  a  stranger 
to  Mr.  Rosewell ;  but  he  was  so  struck  with  the 
proceedings,  that  he  hastened  to  the  king,  re- 
lated the  facts,  and  added,  '  that  he  had  seen  the 
life  of  a  subject,  who  appeared  to  be  a  gentleman 
and  a  scholar,  in  danger,  upon  such  evidence  as 
he  would  not  hang  his  dog  on.'  And  added,  'Sire, 
if  you  suffer  this  man  to  die,  we  are  none  of  us 
safe  in  our  own  houses.'  At  this  moment  Jeffreys 
came  in,  gloating  over  his  prey,  exulting  in  the 
innocent  blood  he  was  about  to  shed,  when,  to  his 
utter  confusion,  the  king  said,  '  Mr.  Rosewell  shall 
not  die  ;'  and  his  pardon  was  issued  under  the  great 
seal.*  Every  Englishman  should  read  the  state 
trials  of  that  period,  recording  the  sufferings  of 
Richard  Baxter,  William  Penn,  Sir  H.  Vane,  and 
many  others  of  our  most  pious  forefathers ;  and 
they  must  feel  that  it  was  a  miracle  of  mercy 
that  saved  the  life  of  Bunyan,  and  gave  him  leisure 
to  write  not  only  his  popular  allegories,  but  the 
most  valuable  treatises  in  the  English  language 
upon  subjects  of  the  deepest  importance. 

When  he  entered  the  prison,  his  first  and  prayer- 
ful object  was  to  levy  a  tax  upon  his  affliction — 
to  endeavour  to  draw  honey  from  the  carcass  of  the 
lion.  His  care  was  to  render  his  imprisonment 
subservient  to  the  great  design  of  showing  forth 
the  glory  of  God  by  patient  submission  to  His  will. 
Before  his  commitment,  he  had  a  strong  presenti- 
ment of  his   sufferings ;  his  earnest  prayer,   for 


3  History  of  Baptists,  vol.  ii.,  p.  172.  Robinson  was  a 
nephew  of  Archbishop  Laud,  and  appeared  to  inherit  his  evil 
spirit. 

4  Wilson's  History  of  Dissenting  Churches,  and  the  Trial 

of  Rosewell. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


liii 


many  months,  was  that  he  might,  with  composure, 
encounter  all  his  trials,  even  to  an  ignominious 
death.  This  led  him  to  the  solemn  consideration 
of  reckoning  himself,  his  wife,  children,  health, 
enjoyments,  all  as  dying,  and  in  perfect  uncer- 
tainty, and  to  live  upon  God,  his  invisible  hut 
ever-present  Father. 

Like  an  experienced  military  commander,  he 
wisely  advises  every  Christian  to  have  a  reserve  for 
Christ  in  case  of  dire  emergency.  '  Wo  ought  to 
have  a  reserve  for  Christ,  to  help  us  at  a  dead  lift. 
When  profession  and  confession  will  not  do;  when 
loss  of  goods  and  a  prison  will  not  do;  when  loss 
of  country  and  of  friends  will  not  do;  when  nothing 
else  will  do,  then  willingly  to  lay  down  our  lives  for 
his  namo.'1  In  the  midst  of  all  these  dread  uncer- 
tainties, his  soul  was  raised  to  heavenly  contempla- 
tions of  the  future  happiness  of  the  saints  of  God. 

It  is  deeply  impressive  to  view  a  man,  with 
gigantic  intellect,  involved  in  the  net  which  was 
laid  to  trammel  his  free  spirit,  disregarding  his  own 
wisdom  ;  seeking  guidance  from  heaven  in  earnest 
prayer,  and  in  searching  the  sacred  Scriptures; 
disentangling  himself,  and  calmly  waiting  the  will 
of  his  heavenly  Father.  Still  he  severely  felt  the 
infirmities  of  nature.  Parting  with  his  wife  and  chil- 
dren, he  described  as  '  the  pulling  the  flesh  from 
the  bones.  I  saw  I  was  as  a  man  who  was  pull- 
ing down  his  house  upon  the  head  of  his  wife  and 
children  ;  yet,  thought  I,  I  must  do  it.'2  His 
feelings  were  peculiarly  excited  to  his  poor  blind 
Mary.8  •  0  !  the  thoughts  of  the  hardships  my 
poor  blind  one  might  go  under,  would  break  my 
heart  in  pieces.'  It  is  one  of  the  governing  prin- 
ciples of  human  nature,  that  the  most  delicate 
or  afflicted  child  excites  our  tenderest  feelings. 
'  I  have  seen  men,'  says  Bunyan,  '  take  most  care 
of,  and  best  provide  for  those  of  their  children  that 
have  been  most  infirm  and  helpless  ;  and  our 
Advocate  "  shall  gather  his  lambs  with  his  arms, 
and  carry  them  in  his  bosom."  '4  While  in  this 
state  of  distress,  the  promise  came  to  his  relief — 
1  Leave  thy  fatherless  children,  I  will  preserve 
them  alive;  and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  me.'  He 
had  heard  of  the  miseries  of  those  banished  Chris- 
tians who  had  been  sold  into  slavery,  and  perished 
with  cold  and  calamities,  lying  in  ditches  like  poor, 
forlorn,  desolate  sheep. 

At  the  end  of  three  months  he  became  anxious 
to  know  what  the  enemies  of  the  cross  intended  to 
do  with  him.  His  sentence  was  transportation 
and  death,  unless  he  conformed.  To  give  up  or 
shrink  from  his  profession  of  Christ,  by  embracing 
the  national  forms  and  submitting  his  conscience 
to  human  laws,  he  dared  not.     He  resolved  to  per- 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  ]'J8;  and  Grace  Abounding,  No.  326. 

2  Vol.  i.,  p.  4S.  s  Baptized  at  Elstow,  Julv  20,  1G50. 
*  Vol.  i.,  p.  108. 


severe  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  his  life.  To  add  to 
his  distress,  doubts  and  fears  clouded  his  prospects 
of  futurity  ;  •  Satan,'  said  he,  *  laid  hard  at  me  to 
beat  mo  out  of  heart.  At  length  he  came  to  the 
determination  to  venture  his  eternal  state  with 
Christ,  whether  he  had  present  comfort  or  not. 
His  state  of  mind  he  thus  describes — « If  God  doth 
not  come  in  (to  comfort  me)  I  will  leap  off  the 
ladder,  even  blindfold,  into  eternity,  sink  or  swim, 
come  heaven,  come  hell.  Lord  Jesus,  if  thou  wilt 
catch  me,  do;  I  Avill  venture  all  for  thy  name.' 
From  this  time  he  felt  a  good  hope  and  great 
consolation. 

The  clerk  of  the  peace,  Mr.  Cobb,  was  sent  by 
the  justices  to  persuade  him  to  conform,  and  had 
a  very  long  and  interesting  conference  with  him  in 
the  prison.  This  shows  that  the  magistrates  were 
well  convinced  that  ho  was  a  leader  in  nonconfor- 
mity, who,  if  brought  over,  would  afford  them  a 
signal  triumph.  In  fact,  he  was  called,  by  a  bene- 
ficed clergyman,  '  the  most  notorious  schismatic 
in  all  the  county  of  Bedford.'5  It  is  perhaps  to 
the  arguments  of  Cobb  that  he  refers  in  his  Ad- 
vice to  Sufferers.  *  The  wife  of  the  bosom  lies 
at  him,  saying,  0  do  not  cast  thyself  away;  if 
thou  takest  this  course,  what  shall  I  do  ?  Thou 
hast  said  thou  lovest  me  ;  now  make  it  manifest 
by  granting  this  my  small  request — Do  not  still 
remain  in  thine  integrity.  Next  to  this  come  the 
children,  which  are  like  to  come  to  poverty,  to 
beggary,  to  be  undone,  for  want  of  wherewithal  to 
feed,  and  clothe,  and  provide  for  them  for  time  to 
come.  Now  also  come  kindred,  and  relations,  and 
acquaintance ;  some  chide,  some  cry,  some  argue, 
some  threaten,  some  promise,  some  flatter,  and  some 
do  all  to  befool  him  for  so  unadvised  an  act,  as  to 
cast  away  himself,  and  to  bring  his  wife  and  children 
to  beggary  for  such  a  thing  as  religion.  These  are 
sore  temptations.  'G  It  was  during  this  period  of  his 
imprisonment  that  the  mad  attempt  was  made,  by 
Venner  and  his  rabble,  to  overturn  the  government. 
This  was  pressed  upon  Bunyan  a3  a  reason  why  he 
should  not  hold  meetings  for  religious  exercises,  but 
rely  upon  his  more  private  opportunities  of  exhort- 
ing his  neighbours.  In  reply  to  this,  Mr.  Cobb  is 
reminded  of  Bunyan 's  well-known  loyalty,  which 
would  become  useful  in  proportion  to  his  public 
teaching.  It  was  a  pleasing  interview,  which, 
while  it  did  not  for  a  moment  shake  his  determina- 
tion, led  him  to  thank  Mr.  Cobb  for  his  civil  and 
meek  discourse,  and  to  ejaculate  a  heartfelt  prayer 
— '  0  that  we  might  meet  in  heaven.'7  The  whole 
of  it  is  reprinted  at  the  end  of  the  Grace  Abounding, 
and  it  shows  that  God  gave  him  favour  even  with 
his  persecutors.  It  is  not  surprising  that  such  a 
prisoner  should  have  won  the  good  opinion  of  his 

,5  Vol.  ii.,  p.  279.      6  Vol.  ii,  p.  733.       7  Vol.  i.,  p.  CO. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


jailer,  so  that  he  was  permitted  the  consolation  of 
seeing  his  relatives  and  friends,  who  ministered  to 
his  comforts. 

When  the  time  arrived  for  the  execution  of  the 
bitterest  part  of  his  sentence,  God,  in  his  provi- 
dence, interposed  to  save  the  life  of  his  servant. 
He  had  familiarized  his  mind  with  all  the  circum- 
stances of  a  premature  and  appalling  death  ;  the 
gibbet,  the  ladder,  the  halter,  had  lost  much  of 
their  terrors  ;  he  had  even  studied  the  sermon  he 
would  then  have  preached  to  the  concourse  of 
spectators.  At  this  critical  time  the  king's  coro- 
nation took  place,  on  April  23,  1GG1.  To  garnish 
this  grand  ceremony,  the  king  had  ordered  the 
release  of  numerous  prisoners  of  certain  classes, 
and  within  that  description  of  offences  was  that 
for  which  Bunyan  was  confined.  The  proclama- 
tion allowed  twelve  months'  time  to  sue  out  the 
pardon  under  the  great  seal,  but  without  this  ex- 
pensive process  thousands  of  vagabonds  and  thieves 
were  set  at  liberty,  while,  alas,  an  offence  against 
the  church  was  not  to  be  pardoned  upon  such  easy 
terms.  Banyan  and  his  friends  were  too  simple, 
honest,  and  virtuous,  to  understand  why  such  a 
distinction  should  be  made.  The  assizes  being 
held  in  August,  he  determined  to  seek  his  liberty 
by  a  petition  to  the  judges.  The  court  sat  at  the 
Swan  Inn,  and  as  every  incident  in  the  life  of  this 
extraordinary  man  excites  our  interest,  we  are 
gratified  to  have  it  in  our  power  to  exhibit  the 
state  of  this  celebrated  inn  at  that  time. 


ran  Inn,  Bedford 


Having  written  his  petition,  and  made  some  fair 
copies  of  it,  his  modest,  timid  wife  determined  to 
present  them  to  the  judges.  Her  heroic  achieve- 
ments— for  such  they  deserve  to  be  called — on 
behalf  of  her  husband,  are  admirably  narrated  by 


-  The  cat,  copied  from  an  old  drawing  of  the  house  taken 
before  its  entire  demolition,  at  the  end  of  last  century,  exhibits 
its  quaint  characteristics.  The  bridge  foot  is  to  the  spectator's 
right;  the  church  tower  behind  is  that  of  St.  Mary's,  also 
seen  in  our  view  of  the  jail,  which  would,  of  course,  be  seen 
from  the  bow -windows  of  the  old  inn,  in  which  the  Judges  met. 


Bunyan,  the  whole  of  which  is  reprinted  in  our 
first  volume,2  and  deserves  a  most  attentive  perusal. 
"Want  of  space  prevents  us  repeating  it  here,  el- 
even making  extracts  from  it.  She  had  previously 
travelled  to  London  with  a  petition  to  the  House 
of  Lords,  and  entrusted  it  to  Lord  Barkwood,  who 
conferred  with  some  of  the  peers  upon  it,  and 
informed  her  that  they  could  not  interfere,  the  king 
having  committed  the  release  of  the  prisoners  to 
the  judges.  When  they  came  the  circuit  and  the 
assizes  were  held  at  Bedford  ;  Bunyan  in  vain 
besought  the  local  authorities  that  he  might  have 
liberty  to  appear  in  person  and  plead  for  his  release. 
This  reasonable  request  was  denied,  and,  as  a  last 
resource,  he  committed  his  cause  to  an  affectionate 
wife.  Several  times  she  appeared  before  the 
judges  ;  love  to  her  husband,  a  stern  sense  of 
duty,  a  conviction  of  the  gross  injustice  practised 
upon  one  to  whom  she  was  most  tenderly  attached, 
overcame  her  delicate,  modest,  retiring  habits,  and 
forced  her  upon  this  strange  duty.  Well  did  she 
support  the  character  of  an  advocate.  This  deli- 
cate, courageous,  high-minded  woman  appeared 
before  Judge  Hale,  who  was  much  affected  with 
her  earnest  pleading  for  one  so  dear  to  her,  and 
whose  life  was  so  valuable  to  his  children.  It 
was  the  triumph  of  love,  duty,  and  piety,  over 
bashful  timidity.  Her  energetic  appeals  were  in 
vain.  She  returned  to  the  prison  with  a  heavy 
heart,  to  inform  her  husband  that,  while  felons, 
malefactors,  and  men  guilty  of  misdemeanours 
wrere,  without  any  recantation  or  promise 
of  amendment,  to  be  let  loose  upon 
society  to  grace  the  coronation,  the  poor 
prisoners  for  conscience'  sake  were  to 
undergo  their  unjust  and  savage  sen- 
tences. Or,  in  plain  words,  that  refusing 
to  go  to  church  to  hear  the  Common 
i^P  Frayer  was  an  unpardonable  crime,  not 
]  1"3  ;^-  to  be  punished  in  any  milder  mode  than 
recantation,  or  transportation,  or  the 
halter.  With  what  bitter  feelings  must 
she  have  returned  to  the  prison,  believing 
that  it  would  be  the  tomb  of  her  beloved 
husband!  How  natural  for  the  distressed, 
insulted  wife  to  have  written  harsh  things 
against  the  judge  !  She  could  not  have 
conceived  that,  under  the  stately  robes 
of  Hale,  there  was  a  heart  affected  by  Divine  love. 
And  when  the  nobleman  afterwards  met  the  de- 
spised tinker  and  his  wife,  on  terms  of  perfect 
equality,  clothed  in  more  glorious  robes  in  the 
mansions  of  the  blessed,  how  inconceivable  their 
surprise  !  It  must  have  been  equally  so  with  the 
learned  judge,  when,  in  the  pure  atmosphere  of 
heaven,  he  found  that  the  illiterate  tinker,  harassed 
by  poverty  and  imprisonment,  produced  books,  the 
a  Vol.  i.,  p.  60. 


MEMOIR    OF   JOHN    IilAYAX. 


admiration  of  the  world.  As  Dr.  Chccver  elo- 
quently writes — •  How  little  could  he  dream,  that 
from  that  narrow  cell  in  Bedford  jail  a  glory  would 
shine  out,  illustrating  the  grace  of  God,  and  doing 
more  good  to  man,  than  all  the  prelates  and  judges 
of  the  kingdom  would  accomplish.'1 

Bunyan  was  thus  left  in  a  dreary  and  hopeless 
state  of  imprisonment,  in  which  he  continued  for 
somewhat  more  than  twelve  years,  and  it  hecomes 
an  interesting  inquiry  how  he  spent  his  time 
and  mauaged  to  employ  his  great  talent  in  his 
Master's  service.  The  first  object  of  his  solici- 
tude would  he  to  provide  for  his  family,  accord- 
ing to  iTim.v.  s.  How  to  supply  his  house  with 
hare  necessaries  to  meet  the  expenses  of  a  wife 
and  four  children,  must  have  filled  him  with 
anxiety.  The  illness,  death,  and  hurial  of  his 
first  beloved  wife,  had  swept  away  any  little  re- 
serve which  otherwise  might  have  accumulated,  so 
that,  soon  after  his  imprisonment  commenced,  be- 
fore he  could  resume  any  kind  of  labour,  his  wife 
thus  pleaded  with  the  judge  for  his  liberty,  ■  My 
lord,  I  have  four  small  children  that  cannot  help 
themselves,  of  which  one  is  blind,  and  have  nothing 
to  live  upon  but  the  charity  of  good  people.'  How 
inscrutable  are  the  ways  of  Providence  ;  the  rich 
revelling  in  luxury  while  using  their  wealth  to 
corrupt  mankind,  while  this  eminent  saint,  with 
his  family,  were  dependent  upon  charity  !  As  soon 
as  he  could  get  his  tools  in  order  he  set  to  work  ; 
and  we  have  the  following  testimony  to  his  in- 
dustry by  a  fellow-prisoner,  Mr.  Wilson,  the  Bap- 
tist minister,  and  of  Charles  Doe,  who  visited  him 
in  prison  : — '  Nor  did  he,  while  he  was  in  prison, 
spend  his  time  in  a  supine  and  careless  manner, 
nor  eat  the  bread  of  idleness  ;  for  there  have  I  been 
witness  that  his  own  hands  have  ministered  to  his 
and  his  family's  necessities,  making  many  hundred 
gross  of  long  tagged  laces,  to  fill  up  the  vacancies 
of  his  time,  which  he  had  learned  to  do  for  that 
purpose,  since  he  had  been  in  prison.  There,  also, 
I  surveyed  his  library,  the  least,  but  yet  the  best 
that  e'er  I  saw — the  Bible  and  the  Booh  of  Mar- 
tyrs? And  during  his  imprisonment  (since  I  have 
spoken  of  his  library),  he  writ  several  excellent  and 
useful  treatises,  particularly  The  Holy  City,  Chris- 
tina Behaviour,  The  Resurrection  of  the  Dead,  and 
Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief  of  Sinners.'3  Besides 
these  valuable  treatises,  Charles  Doe  states  that, 
of  his  own  knowledge,  in  prison  Bunyan  wrote  'lite 


1  Lectures  on  the  Pilgrim's  Progress. 

-  This  valuable  set  of  books  came  iuto  the  possession  of  my 
old  friend  Mr.  Wontncr,  of  the  Miuories,  London;  it  descended 
■t  Lis  decease,  to  his  widuw,  who  resided  on  Camberwell 
Green,  and  from  her  to  a  daughter,  married  to  Mr.  Panic!,  an 
orange  merchant  in  Botolph  Lane.  He  was  tempted  to  sell  it 
to  Mr.  Bonn,  the  bookseller,  from  whom  it  was  bought  for  the 
Bedford  library. 

3  Charles  Doe  in  Heavenly  Footman,  2d  edition,  1700. 


Pilgrim's  Progress,  the  first  part,  and  that  he  had 
this  from  his  own  mouth.4  In  addition  to  the 
demonstration  of  this  important  fact  contained  in 
the  introduction  to  T/ie  Pilgrim's  Progress,  there 
ought  to  have   been  added,  Bunyan's    statement 

j  made  in  introducing  his  second  part: — '  Nut,  bar- 
ing taken  up  my  lodgings  in  a  wood  about  a  mile 

|  off  the  place:'  no  longer  in  'a  den,'  but  sheltered, 
in  a  wood,  in  a  state  of  comparative,  but  not  of 
perfect  liberty,  about  a  mile  distant  from  the  den 
in  which  he  wrote  his  first  part.  Whether  this 
may  refer  to  his  former  cottage  at  Elstow,  of  which 
there  is  great  doubt,  or  to  the  house  he  occupied  in 
Bedford  after  his  release,  they  were  equally  about 
a  mile  from  the  jail.  lie  certainly  means  that 
the  two  parts  were  not  written  in  the  same  place, 
nor  is  there  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that 
in  prison  the  great  allegory  was  conceived  and 
written.  Well  might  Mr.  Doe  say,  '  What  hath 
the  devil  or  his  agents  got  by  putting  our  great 
gospel  minister  in  prison?'  the}'  prevented  his 
preaching  to  a  few  poor  pilgrims  in  the  villages 
round  Bedford,  and  it  was  the  means  of  spread- 
ing his  fame,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  by 
his  writings,  throughout  the  world.  Thus  does 
the  wrath  of  man  praise  God.  In  addition  to  the 
works  above  enumerated,  he  also  published  some 
extremely  valuable  tracts,  several  editions  of  a 
work  which  ought  to  be  read  by  all  young  Chris- 
tians— A  Treatise  on  the  Covenants  of  the  Baw  ami 
of  Grace;  several  editions  of  Sighs  from  Hell ;  A 
Map  of  Salvation  and  Damnation ;  The  Four  Bast 
Things,  a  poem  ;  Mount  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  or, 
Redemption  from  tfie  Curse,  a  poem ;  Prison  Me- 
ditations, a  poem  :  the  four  last  are  single  sheets, 
probably  sold  by  his  children  or  friends  to  assist 
him  in  obtaining  his  livelihood  :  Justification  by 
Faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  4  to  ;  Confession  of  His  Faith 
and  Reason  of  His  Practice.  The  most  remarkable 
treatise  which  he  published  'while  in  confinement, 
is  on  prayer,  from  the  words  of  the  apostle,  '  I  will 
pray  with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understanding 
also.'  His  attention  had  been  fixed  on  this  sub- 
ject when  his  free-bora  spirit  was  roused  by  the 
threat  of  Justice  Keeling,  '  Take  heed  of  speaking 
irreverently  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  for  if 
you  do  you  will  bring  great  damage  upon  yourself.' 
Bunyan  had  formed  his  ideas  of  prayer  from 
heartfelt  experience  ;  it  is  the  cry  of  the  bur- 
thened,  sinking  sinner,  'Lord  save  us,  we  perish;' 
or  adoration  rising  from  the  heart  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  filled  with  hopes  of  pardon  and  immortality. 
In  his  estimation,  any  form  of  human  invention  was 
an  interference  with  the  very  nature  of  prayer,  and 
with  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  alone  can 
inspire  our  souls  with  acceptable  prayer. 

In  expressing  his  views  upon  this  all-important 


'  '.clion  to  the  Pilgrim,  vol.  id.,  p.  0,  7. 


Ivi 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


subject,  Bunyan  was  simply  guided  by  a  sense  of 
duty.  Fear  of  the  consequences,  or  of  offending 
bis  enemies,  never  entered  bis  mind.  He  felt  that 
they  were  in  the  hands  of  his  heavenly  Father, 
and  that  all  their  malice  must  be  over-ruled  for 
good.  Notwithstanding  his  solemn  warning  not 
to  speak  irreverently  of  the  book,  bis  refusal  to 
use  which  bad  subjected  him  to  severe  privations 
and  the  fear  of  a  halter,  this  Christian  hero  was 
not  daunted,  but  gives  bis  opinion  of  it  with  all 
that  freedom  and  liberty  which  he  considered 
essential  to  excite  in  his  fellow-men  inquiries  as 
to  its  origin  and  imposition. 

It  is  not  my  province  to  enter  into  the  contro- 
versy whether  in  public  worship  a  form  of  prayer 
ought  to  be  used.  Let  every  one  be  persuaded 
in  his  own  mind  ;  but  to  pass  a  law  denouncing 
those  that  refuse  to  use  a  prescribed  form  as 
worthy  of  imprisonment,  transportation,  or  death, 
is  an  attack  upon  the  first  principles  of  Christianity. 
To  punish  those  who  spoke  irreverently  of  it,  was 
almost  an  acknowledgment  that  it  would  not  bear 
investigation.  To  speak  of  the  book  as  in  bis 
serious  judgment  it  deserved,  was  not  that  mark 
of  sectarianism  which  Romaine  exhibited  when  he 
called  the  beautiful  hymns  of  Dr.  Watts,  which 
are  used  so  much  in  public  worship  among  Dissen- 
ters, *  Watts'  jingle,'  and  '  Watts'  whims  V1  No 
answer  appears  to  have  been  published  to  Bunyan's 
extremely  interesting  volume  until  twelve  years 
after  the  author's  death,  when  a  reply  appeared 
under  the  title  of  Liturgies  Vindicated  by  the  Dis- 
senters, or  the  Lawfulness  of  Forms  of  Prayer  proved 
against  John Bunyan  and  the  Dissenters.  1700.  This 
is  a  very  rare  and  curious  volume.  The  author,  as 
usual  in  such  controversies,  deals  wholesale  in 
invective,  and  displays  all  the  ability  of  a  sophist. 

The  Christian  world  is  indebted  to  Dr.  Cheever 
for  a  beautiful  picture  of  Bunyan's  devotional  ex- 
ercise in  bis  cell.  '  It  is  evening  ;  be  finishes 
his  work,  to  be  taken  home  by  his  dear  blind 
child.  He  reads  a  portion  of  Scripture,  and, 
clasping  her  small  bands  in  bis,  kneels  on  the 
cold  stone  floor,  and  pours  out  his  soul  to  God ; 
then,  with  a  parting  kiss,  dismisses  her  to  her 
mother.  The  rude  lamp  glimmers  on  the  table ; 
with  his  Bible,  pen,  and  paper,  be  writes  as  though 
joy  did  make  him  write.  His  face  is  lighted  as 
from  the  radiant  jasper  walls  of  the  celestial  city. 
He  clasps  his  hands,  looks  upward,  and  blesses 

1  Psalmody  Edit.,  1775,  p.  137.  George  WMtefield,  in 
recommending  the  works  of  Bunyan,  says,  'Ministers  never 
write  or  preach  so  well  as  wheu  under  the  cross ;  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  and  of  glory  shall  rest  upon  them.'  *  Admiring  the 
courage  and  honesty  of  Bunyan,  when  alluding  to  the  Prayer- 
Book,  we  earnestly  unite  in  his  petition — '  The  Lord  in  mercy 
turn  the  hearts  of  his  people,  to  seek  more  after  the  Spirit  of 
prayer,  and,  in  the  strength  of  that,  to  pour  out  their  souls 
before  the  Lord.' 

*  Preface  to  Bunyan's  Works,  17C7. 


God  for  his  goodness.  The  last  you  see  of  him 
— is  alone,  kneeling  on  the  prison  floor ;  be  is 
alone  with  God.' 

Charles  Doe,  who  manifested  most  laudable 
anxiety  to  band  down  the  works  of  Bunyan  to 
posterity,  bears  honourable  testimony  to  bis  con- 
duct while  in  prison.  '  It  was  by  making  him  a 
visit  in  prison  that  I  first  saw  him,  and  became 
acquainted  with  him ;  and  I  must  profess  I  could 
not  but  look  upon  him  to  be  a  man  of  an  excellent 
spirit,  zealous  for  bis  master's  honour,  and  cheer- 
fully committing  all  his  own  concernments  unto 
God's  disposal.  When  I  was  there,  there  were 
about  sixty  Dissenters  besides  himself  there,  taken 
but  a  little  before  at  a  religious  meeting  at  Kaistoe, 
in  the  county  of  Bedford ;  besides  two  eminent 
Dissenting  ministers,  Mr.  Wheeler  and  Mr.  Dun 
(both  very  well  known  iu  Bedfordshire,  though 
long  since  with  God2),  by  which  means  the  prison 
was  very  much  crowded;  yet,  in  the  midst  of  all 
that  hurry  which  so  many  new-comers  occasioned, 
I  have  heard  Mr.  Bunyan  both  preach  and  pray 
with  that  mighty  spirit  of  faith  and  plerophory  of 
divine  assistance  that  has  made  me  stand  and 
wonder.'3  Here  they  could  sing,  without  fear  of 
being  overheard;  no  informers  prowling  round. 
The  world  was  shut  out ;  and,  in  communion  with 
heaven,  they  could  forget  their  sorrows,  and  have 
a  rich  foretaste  of  the  inconceivable  glory  of  the 
celestial  city.  It  was  under  such  circumstances 
that  Bunyan  preached  one  of  bis  most  remark- 
able sermons,  afterwards  published  under  the  title 
of  T/ie  Holy  City  or  the  New  Jerusalem,  1665. 
'  Upon  a  certain  first-day,  being  together  with 
my  brethren  in  our  prison-chamber,  they  expected 
that,  according  to  our  custom,  something  should 
be  spoken  out  of  the  Word  for  our  mutual  edifica- 
tion. I  felt  myself,  it  being  my  turn  to  speak,  so 
empty,  spiritless,  and  barren,  that  I  thought  I 
should  not  have  been  able  to  speak  among  them 
so  much  as  five  words  of  truth  with  life  and 
evidence.  At  last  I  cast  mine  eye  upon  this 
prophecy,  when,  after  considering  awhile,  me- 
thought  I  perceived  something  of  that  jasper  in 
whose  light  you  find  this  holy  city  descended  ; 
wherefore,  having  got  some  dim  glimmering  thereof, 
and  finding  a  desire  to  see  farther  thereinto,  I  with 
a  few  groans  did  carry  my  meditations  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  for  a  blessing,  which  he  did  forthwith  grant, 
and  helping  me  to  set  before  my  brethren,  we  did 
all  eat,  and  were  well  refreshed ;  and  behold,  also, 
that  while  I  was  iu  the  distributing  of  it,  it  so 
increased  in  my  hand,  that  of  the  fragments  that 
we  left,  after  we  had  well  dined,  I  gathered  up 
this  basketful.  Wherefore,  setting  myself  to  a 
more  narrow  search,  through  frequent  prayer,  what 


-  This  was  published  in  1098. 

3  Heaven/?/  Footman,  2d  edition,  1700..  p.  120. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


lvii 


first  with  doing,  and  then  with  undoing,  and  after 
that  with  doing  again,  I  thus  did  finish  it.'1  To 
this  singular  event  the  religious  public  are  indebted 
for  one  of  Banyan's  ablest  treatises,  full  of  tho 
striking  sparkles  of  his  extraordinary  imagination. 
It  was  a  subject  peculiarly  adapted  to  display  his 
powers — the  advent  of  New  Jerusalem,  her  im- 
pregnable walls  and  gates  of  precious  stones,  golden 
streets,  water  of  life,  temple,  and  the  redeemed 
from  all  nations  flocking  into  it.8 

In  these  times  of  severe  persecution,  two  of  the 
church  members,  S.  Fenn  and  J.  Whiteman,  were 
ordained  joint  pastors.  Fenn  has  just  been  de- 
livered out  of  prison ;  yet  they  ventured  to  brave 
the  storm,  and  in  this  year,  although  the  lions 
prowled  before  tho  porch,  a  number  were  added 
i  to  tho  church.  Thus  was  their  little  Jerusalem 
built  'even  in  troublous  times.' 

Bunyan's  popularity  and  fame  for  wisdom  and 
knowledge  had  spread  all  round  the  country,  and 
it  naturally  brought  him  visitors,  with  their  doubts, 
and  fears,  and  cases  of  conscience.  Among  these 
a  singular  instance  is  recorded  in  the  Life  of  Bad- 
man.  '  When  I  was  in  prison,'  says  the  narrator, 
*  there  came  a  woman  to  me  that  was  under  a 
great  deal  of  trouble.  So  I  asked  her,  she  being 
a  stranger  to  me,  what  she  had  to  say  to  me  ?  She 
said  she  was  afraid  she  should  be  damned.  I 
asked  her  the  cause  of  those  fears.  She  told  me 
that  she  had,  some  time  since,  lived  with  a  shop- 
keeper at  Wellingborough,  and  had  robbed  his 
box  in  the  shop  several  times  of  money,  and  pray, 
says  she,  tell  me  what  I  shall  do  ?  I  told  her  I 
would  have  her  go  to  her  master,  and  make  him 
satisfaction.  She  said  she  was  afraid  lest  he 
should  hang  her.  I  told  her  that  I  would  inter- 
cede for  her  life,  and  would  make  use  of  other 
friends  to  do  the  like;  but  she  told  me  she  durst 
not  venture  that.  Well,  said  I,  shall  I  send  to 
your  master,  while  you  abide  out  of  sight,  and 
make  your  peace  with  him  before  he  sees  you  ?  and 
with  that  I  asked  her  master's  name.  But  all  she 
said  in  answer  to  this  was,  pray  let  it  alone  till 
I.  come  to  you  again.  So  away  she  went,  and 
neither  told  me  her  master's  name  nor  her  own; 
and  I  never  saw  her  again.'3  He  adds,  '  I  could 
tell  you  of  another,  that  came  to  me  with  a  like 
relation  concerning  herself,  and  the  robbing  of 
her  mistress.' 

To  his  cruel  imprisonment  the  world  is  indebted 
for  the  most  surprising  narrative  of  a  new  birth 


1  Vol.  iii.,  p.  397,  398. 

2  This  deeply  interesting  book  is  dedicated  to  four  sorts  of 
readers — the  godly,  the  learned,  the  captious,  and  to  the  mother 
of  harlots.  To  her  he  says,  '  I  have  nothing  here  to  please 
your  wanton  eye,  or  voluptuous  palate ;  no  paint  for  thy 
■wrinkled  face,  nor  crutch  to  support  thy  tottenug  kingdom.' 
It  is  a  very  amusing  preface., 

8  Vol.  iii.,  p.  610. 
VOL.  III. 


that  has  ever  appeared.  It  was  there  that  he 
was  led  to  write  the  Grace  Abounding  to  (lie,  Chief 
of  Sinners,  lie  displays  in  the  preface  his  deep 
interest  in  the  spiritual  welfare  of  those  who  had 
been  born  under  his  ministry.  He  rejoices  in  their 
happiness,  even  while  ho  was  '  sticking  between 
the  teeth  of  the  lions  in  the  wilderness.  I  now 
again,  as  before  from  the  top  of  Shenir  and  iler- 
mon,  so  now  from  the  lions'  dens,  from  "  the 
mountains  of  the  leopards,"  do  look  yet  after  you 
all,  greatly  longing  to  sec  your  safe  arrival  into 
tho  desired  haven.'4  How  natural  it  was  that, 
while  narrating  his  own  experience,  he  should  be 
led  to  write  a  guide  to  pilgrims  through  time  to 
eternity,  and  that  it  should  be  dated  from  '  the  den! ' 

'And  thus  it  was :  I  writing  of  the  way 
And  race  of  saints,  in  this  our  gospel-day, 
Fell  suddenly  into  an  allegory 
About  their  journey,  and  the  way  to  glory.'  ° 

Any  one  possessing  powers  of  imagination,  to 
whom  the  adventures  of  Christian  are  familiar, 
would,  on  reading  the  Grace  Abounding,  be  con- 
tinually struck  with  the  likeness  there  drawn  of 
the  pilgrim — the  more  he  contemplates  the  two 
pictures  of  Christian  experience,  so  much  the  more 
striking  is  their  similarity.  The  one  is  a  narra- 
tive of  facts,  the  other  contains  the  same  facts 
allegorized.  Thus,  by  an  irresistible  impulse  from 
heaven  upon  the  mind  of  a  prisoner  for  Christ,  did 
a  light  shine  forth  from  the  dungeon  on  Bedford 
bridge  which  has  largely  contributed  to  enlighten 
the  habitable  globe.  The  Pilgrim  has  been  trans- 
lated into  most  of  the  languages  and  dialects  of 
the  world.  The  Caffrarian  and  Hottentot,  tho 
enlightened  Greek  and  Hindoo,  the  remnant  of  the 
Hebrew  race,  the  savage  Malay  and  the  voluptu- 
ous Chinese — all  have  the  wondrous  narrative  in 
their  own  languages.  Bunyan  was  imprisoned  by 
bigots  and  tyrants,  to  prevent  his  being  heard  or 
known ;  and  his  voice,  in  consequence,  reaches  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth.  Let  every  wretched  perse- 
cutor contemplate  this  instance  of  God's  over- 
ruling power.  You  will  surely  plunge  the  aveng- 
ing sword  into  your  own  vitals  if,  by  persecution, 
you  vainly  endeavour  to  wound  the  saints  of  the 
living  God.  You  may  make  hypocrites  throw 
off  their  disguise.  The  real  Christian  may  be  dis- 
couraged, but  he  perseveres.  He  feels  the  truth 
of  Bunyan's  quaint  saying,  '  the  persecutors  are 
but  the  devil's  scarecrows,  the  old  one  himself 
lies  quat ; '  while  the  eye  of  God  is  upon  him  to 
save  the  children  of  Ziou.G  His  otherwise  dreary 
imprisonment  was  lightened,  and  the  time  beguiled 
by  these  delightful  writings.  His  fcllow-pri -oners 
were  benefited  by  hearing  him  read  his  pilgrim's 
adventures.     But  this  has  been  so  fully  displayed 


Vol.  i.,  p.  4.  *  Author's  Apology  for  the  Pilgrim. 

Vol.  i.,  p.  GU2. 

h 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


in  the  introduction  to  the  Pilgrim  that  any  further 
notice  is  unnecessary.1 

While  busily  occupied  with  his  Grace  Abound- 
ing and  Pilgrim  s  Progress,  he  wrote  a  poetical 
epistle  in  answer  to  the  kind  inquiries  of  his  nume- 
rous friends  and  visitors.  After  thanking  them 
for  counsel  and  advice,  he  describes  his  feelings  in 
prison.  His  feet  stood  on  Mount  Zion  ;  his  body 
within  locks  and  bars,  while  his  mind  was  free  to 
study  Christ,  and  elevated  higher  than  the  stars. 
Their  fetters  could  not  tame  his  spirit,  nor  prevent 
his  communion  with  God.  The  more  his  ene- 
mies raged,  the  more  peace  he  experienced.  In 
prison  he  received  the  visits  of  saints,  of  angels, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God.  '  I  have  been  able  to 
laugh  at  destruction,  and  to  fear  neither  the  horse 
nor  his  rider.  I  have  had  sweet  sights  of  the 
forgiveness  of  my  sins  in  this  place,  and  of  my 
being  with  Jesus  in  another  world.'2  If  his 
cars  were  to  be  pierced  in  the  pillory,  it  would  be 
only  '  to  hang  a  jewel  there.'  The  source  of  his 
happy  feelings  is  well  expressed  in  one  of  the 
stanzas : — 

'  The  truth  and  I  were  both  here  cast 
Together,  and  we  do 
Lie  arm  in  ami,  and  so  hold  fast 
Each  other;  this  is  true.'3 
Yes,  honest  John  Banyan,  the  world  at  large  now 
gives  you  credit  for  the  truth  of  that  saying. 

How  strange  must  it  seem  to  the  luxurious 
worldling,  with  his  bed  of  down  and  splendid 
hangings,  but  aching  heart,  to  hear  of  the  exqui- 
site happiness  of  the  prisoner  for  Christ  on  his 
straw  pallet!  'When  God  makes  the  bed,'  as 
Bunyan  says,  '  he  must  needs  be  easy  that  is  cast 
thereon;  a  blessed  pillow  hath  that  man  for  his 
head,  though  to  all  beholders  it  is  hard  as  a  stone.'4 
In  the  whole  course 
of  his  troubles,  he 
enjoyed  the  sym- 
pathy of  his  family 
and  friends.  His 
food  was  brought 
daily,  and  such  was 
the  veneration  in 
which  his  memory 
was  embalmed,  that 
the  very  jug  in 
which  bis  broth  was 
taken  to  the  prison 
has  been  preserved 

tO  this  day.5  Bimyan'sJu-j. 

In  the  midst  of  all  his  sufferings  he  murmurs 
not,  nor  for  a  moment  gives  way  to  revenge;  he 


1  Vol.  hi,  p.  7.  a  Grace  Abounding,  No.  322. 

3  Vol.  i,  p.  65. ;;  i  Vol.  i.,  p.  7-41. 

5  This  jug  is  in  possession  of  Mrs.  Halyard,  widow  of  the 
late  Mr.  Hilly  aid,  who  was  minister  of  the  chapel  for  fifty 


leaves  the  persecutor  in  the  hands  of  God.  Stand 
off,  Christian;  pity  the  poor  wretch  that  brings 
down  upon  himself  the  vengeance  of  God.  Your 
pitiful  arm  must  not  strike  him — no,  stand  by, 
'  that  God  may  have  his  full  blow  at  him  in  his 
time.  Wherefore  he  saith  avenge  not  yourself 
— "  Vengeance  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord."  Give 
place,  leave  such  an  one  to  be  handled  by  me. '  ° 

'  There  are  several  degrees  of  suffering  for 
righteousness — the  scourge  of  the  tongue,  the 
rum  of  an  estate,  the  loss  of  liberty,  a  gaol,  a 
gibbet,  a  stake,  a  dagger.  Now  answerable  to 
these  are  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  pre- 
pared like  to  like,  part  proportioned  to  part,  only 
the  consolations  are  said  to  abound.'7  The  mind 
of  Bunyan  was  imbued  with  these  sentiments  ; 
baptized  into  them,  and  consequently  elevated  far 
above  the  fear  of  what  man  could  do  unto  him. 
Yes,  he  knew  the  power  of  God.  '  He  can  make 
those  things  that  in  themselves  are  most  fearful 
and  terrible  to  behold,  the  most  delightful  and 
most  desirable  things.  He  can  make  a  gaol  more 
beautiful  than  a  palace,  restraint  more  sweet  by 
far  than  liberty,  and  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater 
riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt.'3 

The  Bible,  that  heavenly  storehouse,  was  opened 
to  him :  '  I  never  had,  in  all  my  life,  so  great  an 
inlet  into  the  Word  of  God  as  now.'9  'I  have 
had  sweet  sights  of  forgiveness  and  of  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  I  have  seen  here  that  which,  while 
in  this  world,  I  shall  never  be  able  to  express. ' 

About  a  year  before  he  was  set  at  liberty  he 
received  a  very  popular  work,  written  by  Edward 
Fowler,  a  Bedfordshire  clergyman,  who  was  soon 
after  elevated  to  the  see  of  Gloucester.  It  was 
entitled  The  Design  of  Christianity,  and  professed 
to  prove  that  the  object  of  the  Saviour  was  merely 
to  place  man  in  a  similar  position  to  that  of  Adam 
before  the  fall.  It  is  an  extremely  learned  pro- 
duction, full  of  Greek  and  Latin  quotations ;  but, 
in  Bunyan's  estimation,  it  aimed  a  deadly  blow  at 
the  foundations  of  Christianity.  To  restore  man 
to  Adam's  innoceney,  and  then  to  leave  him  to 
cope  with  Satanic  subtlety,  was  to  cut  off  all 
hopes  of  salvation.  It  was  brought  to  him  in 
February  1672,  and  in  the  very  short  period  of 
forty-two  days,  Fowler's  theory  was  most  com- 
pletely demolished  by  Bunyan's  Defence  of  the 
Doctrine  of  Justification,  4to,  dated  from  prison, 
the  27th  of  the  12th  Month,  1671  (27th  March, 
1672).  This  was  answered  by  a  small  4to  volume, 
entitled  Dirt  Wiped  Off.  Bunyan  had  used  some 
harsh  epithets;  but  the  clergyman,  or  his  curate, 
beat  the  tinker  in  abusive  language.      He  had 


years,  and  died  in  1839.  One  tradition  says  the  jug  was 
used  as  noted  in  the  text;  another  that  his  broth  was  brought 
to  'chapel'  in  it,  for  his  Sunday  dinner,  in  the  vestry. 

6  Vol.  ii.,  p.  737-730.        7  2  Co.  i.  5  ;  vol.  ii,,  p,  735. 

8  Vol.  ii.,  p.  700.  o  Vol.  i.,  p.  47. 


MEMQIB  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


lis 


been  by  this  time  promoted  to  the  rectory  of 
Cripplegate.  For  an  account  of  this  controversy, 
the  reader  is  referred  to  tho  introduction  to  Bun- 
yan's  work  on  Justification,  and  to  that  to  tho 
Pilgrims  Progress.1  The  impression  it  made 
upon  the  puhlic  mind  is  well  expressed  in  a 
rude  rhyme,  made  hy  an  anonymous  author,  in 
his  Assembly  of  Moderate  Divines: 

'  There's  a  moderate  Doctour  at  Cripplegate  dwells, 
Whom  Smythcs  his  curate  in  trimming  cxcells; 
But  Bunyan  a  tinker  hath  tickled  his  gills.' 

The  last  work  that  he  wrote  in  prison  was  the 
confession  of  his  faith,  and  reason  of  his  practice 
as  to  mixed  communion,  not  with  the  world,  hut 
with  saints  of  other  denominations.  As  this 
plunged  him  into  a  fearful  controversy  with  his 
Dissenting  brethren  (Baptists,  Independents,  and 
Presbyterians),  a  notice  of  it  will  more  properly 
be  introduced  hi  our  account  of  that  conflict.  lie 
had  been  incarcerated  nearly  twelve  years,  and 
had  determined  to  suffer  to  the  end.  Here  he 
found  time  'to  weigh,  and  pause,  and  pause  again, 
the  grounds  and  foundations  of  those  principles 
for  which  he  suffered,'  and  he  was  a  Nonconformist 
still.  '  I  cannot,  I  dare  not  now  revolt  or  deny 
my  principles,  on  pain  of  eternal  damnation,'2  are 
his  impressive  words.  '  Faith  and  holiness  are 
my  professed  principles,  with  an  endeavour  to  be  at 
peace  with  all  men.  Let  they  themselves  be  judges, 
if  aught  they  find  in  my  writing  or  preaching  doth 
render  me  worthy  of  almost  twelve  years'  imprison- 
ment, or  one  that  deserveth  to  be  hanged  or 
banished  for  ever,  according  to  their  tremendous 
sentence.  If  nothing  will  do  unless  I  make  of  my 
conscience  a  continual  butchery  and  slaughter- 
shop,  unless  putting  out  my  own  eyes,  I  commit 
me  to  the  blind  to  lead  me,  I  have  determined,  the 
Almighty  God  being  my  help  and  shield,  yet  to 
suffer,  if  frail  life  might  continue  so  long,  even 
until  the  moss  shall  grow  over  mine  eye-brows, 
rather  than  to  violate  my  faith  and  principles.'3 
The  allusion  to  moss  growing  on  his  eye-brows 
most  probably  referred  to  the  damp  state  of  his 
den  or  dungeon. 

The  continuation  to  the  Grace  Abounding,  written 
by  a  friend,  and  published  four  years  after  his 
decease,  divides  his  imprisonment  into  three 
periods;  but  as  Bunyan  makes  it  one  continued 
imprisonment,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  it 
was  a  long,  dreary  confinement ;  during  which  the 
testimony  of  his  friend,  Samuel  Wilson,  is,  that  it 
was  '  an  uncomfortable  and  close  prison,  and  some- 
times under  cruel  and  oppressive  jailers.'     The 


division  into  three  parts  most  probably  alludes 
to  the  severity  or  liberality  of  his  jailers.  He 
had  at  times,  while  a  prisoner,  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  liberty ;  like  Joseph  in  Egypt,  some  of 
his  jailers  committed  all  to  his  hands.  There 
can  bo  little  doubt  but  that  he  went  from  the 
prison  to  preach  in  the  villages  or  woods,  and 
at  one  time  went  to  London  to  visit  his  admir- 
ing'1 friends;  but  this  coming  to  the  cars  of  the 
justices,  the  humane  jailer  had  well  nigh  lost  his 
place,  and  for  some  time  he  was  not  permitted  to 
look  out  at  the  door.  When  this  had  worn  off, 
he  had  again  opportunities  of  visiting  his  church 
and  preaching  by  stealth.  It  is  said  that  many 
of  the  Baptist  congregations  in  Bedfordshire  owe 
their  origin  to  his  midnight  preaching. 

Upon  one  occasion,  having  been  permitted  to 
go  out  and  visit  his  family,  with  whom  he  intended 
to  spend  the  night,  long  before  morning  he  felt 
so  uneasy  that  at  a  very  late  hour  he  went  back 
to  the  prison.  Information  was  given  to  a  neigh- 
bouring clerical  magistrate  that  there  was  strong 
suspicion  of  Bunyan  having  broke  prison.  At 
midnight,  ho  sent  a  messenger  to  the  jail,  that  he 
might  be  a  witness  against  the  merciful  keeper. 
On  his  arrival,  he  demanded,  'Are  all  the  prisoners 
safe?'  the  answer  was,  '  Yes.'  '  Is  John  Bunyan 
safe  V  '  Yes.'  '  Let  me  see  him.'  He  was  called 
up  and  confronted  with  the  astonished  witness, 
and  all  passed  off  well.  His  kind-hearted  jailer 
said  to  him,  '  You  may  go  out  when  you  will,  for 
you  know  much  better  when  to  return  than  I  can 
tell  you.'5 

During  these  twelve  terrible  years,  and  parti- 
cularly towards  the  end  of  his  imprisonment,  the 
members  and  elders  of  his  church  at  Bedford  suf- 
fered most  severely,  a  very  abridged  account  of 
which  is  given  in  the  introduction  to  the  Pilgrims 
Progress?  The  set  time  for  his  liberation  was  now 
drawing  near,  but  the  singular  means  by  which  it 
was  accomplished  must  be  reserved  for  our  next 
chapter. 

rEUIOD  SIXTH. 

BUNYAN  IS  DELIVERED  FROM  I'RISON — CONTROVERSY  WITH 
THE.  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  ON  THE  SUBJECT  OF  THE  LORD'S 
SUPPER — PUBLISHES  THE  PILGRDl'S  PROGRESS,  AND  MANY 
BOOKS,  AND  BECOMES  EXTREMELY  POPULAR — HIS  DE- 
CEASE AND  CHARACTER. 

As  Charles  II.  felt  himself  securely  seated  on  his 
throne,  his  design  to  establish  an  absolute  monarchy 
became  more  and  more  apparent.      The  adulation 


1  Vol.  i.,  p.  278 ;  and  vol.  iii.,  p.  13.         -  Vol.  ii.,  p.  593. 

3  Vol.  ii.,  p.  594. — Heroic  man  !  British  Christians  are  most 
deeply  indented  to  thee,  and  thy  fellow-sufferers,  for  the  high 
privileges  they  now  enjoy.  May  thy  name  be  had  in  ever- 
lasting remembrance. 


*  Vol.  i.,  p.  C2. 

6  It  has  been  doubted  whether  he  was  justified  in  thus 
making  excursions  from  the  prison.  This  may  be  answered  by 
the  question — Was  Peter  justified  in  leaving  the  prison,  and 
goini;  to  the  praver-mcetiug  at  .Mary"s  house  ?  Acts,  xii.,  7-1'J. 
~  •  Vol.  iii.,  p.  19. 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAX. 


of  his  professed  friends,  and  the  noisy  popularity 
with  which  he  was  greeted,  appear  to  have  fos- 
tered his  crafty  designs  to  rid  himself  of  parlia- 
mentary government.  His  whole  conduct  was  that 
of  a  Papist,  who  keeps  no  faith  with  Protestants  ; 
or  of  a  statesman,  whose  religion,  honour,  and 
truthfulness,  were  wholly  subservient  to  expediency. 
To  further  his  object,  he  formed  a  council  of  five 
noblemen,  two  of  whom  were  Roman  Catholics, 
and  the  other  three  either  careless  as  to  religion  or 
professed  infidels.  The  first  letter  of  their  names 
formed  the  word  Cabal.  Aided  by  these  he  sought 
to  extinguish  liberty,  and  extirpate  the  Protestant 
faith.1  To  furnish  himself  with  the  means  of 
indulging  his  unbridled  passions,  he,  like  a  buc- 
caneer, seized  the  Dutch  merchantmen  returning 
from  India  and  Smyrna,  without  any  declaration 
of  war,  and  laid  his  hands  upon  all  the  money 
borrowed  of  his  merchants  which  had  been  de- 
posited in  the  exchequer.  He  then  united  himself 
with  France  to  destroy  Holland,  the  stronghold  of 
liberty.  To  gratify  the  Roman  Catholics,  and 
conciliate  the  Dissenters,  he  issued  a  declaration  in 
favour  of  liberty  of  conscience,  the  seal  to  which 
he  afterwards  broke  with  his  own  hands,2  but  he 
could  not  prevent  a  considerable  degree  of  religious 
liberty  arising  from  such  vacillating  conduct. 

Bunyan,  Avho  had  secured  the  confidence  and 
esteem  of  his  jailer,  now  found  his  prison  more 
like  a  lodging-house,  and  enjoyed  great  privileges. 
He  frequently,  if  not  regularly,  attended  the  church 
meetings,  and  preached  with  some  degree  of  pub- 
licity. The  church  at  Bedford  was  at  this  time 
in  want  of  a  pastor,  and  their  eyes  were  naturally 
fixed  upon  Bunjan  to  succeed  to  that  important 
office.  There  were  two  weighty  considerations 
that  required  Divine  guidance  in  coming  to  a  con- 
clusion. One  was,  whether  it  might  injuriously 
affect  the  prisoner's  comforts,  and  the  other  was, 
the  propriety  of  making  choice  of  a  Christian 
brother  to  be  their  ministering  elder,  while  incar- 
cerated in  a  jail.  Feeling  these  difficulties,  the 
church  held  several  meetings  on  the  subject,  the 
minutes  of  which  are  very  interesting.  The  first 
was  held  at  Hawnes,  on  the  24th  of  the  eighth 
month  (October)  1671,  when  '  the  improvement 
of  the  gifts  of  the  church,  and  their  disposal  in 
an  orderly  way,  were  proposed  to  consideration, 
that  God  might  be  sought  for  direction  therein; 
and  a  time  further  to  consider  and  debate  thereof, 
was  appointed  this  day  seven-night,  at  evening,  at 
Bedford,  where  the  principal  brethren  were  de- 
sired for  that  purpose  to  come  together,  at  brother 
John  Fenn's ;  and  a  church-meeting  was  appointed 
to  be  there  that  day  week.  The  church  was  also 
minded  to  seek  God  about  the  choyce  of  brother 


1    It! 


pin. 


-  For  an  accurate  copy  of  this  declaration,  sec  vol.  iii.,  p.  21. 


Bunyan  to  the  office  of  elder,  that  their  way  in 
that  respect  may  be  cleared  up  to  them.'  At 
a  meeting  held  at  Bedford,  on  the  last  day  of 
the  ninth  month  (November),  there  was  appointed 
another  meeting  •  to  pray  and  consult  about  con- 
cluding the  affair  before  propounded,  concerning 
gifts  of  the  brethren  to  be  improved,  and  the 
choyce  of  brother  Bunyan  to  office,  at  Gamlingay, 
on  the  14th  day,  and  at  Hawnes,  the  20th,  and  at 
Bedford,  the  21st  of  the  same  instant,  which  it  was 
desired  might  be  a  general  meeting.'  After  all 
this  jealous  care,  and  these  fervent  applications  to 
the  throne  of  grace  for  Divine  guidance,  the  result 
was  most  gratifying.  *  At  a  full  assembly  of  the 
church  at  Bedford,  the  21st  of  the  tenth  month,3 
after  much  seeking  God  by  prayer  and  sober  con- 
ference formally  had,  the  congregation  did  at  this 
meeting,  with  joynt  consent,  signified  by  solemn 
lifting  up  of  their  hands,  call  forth  and  appoint 
our  brother  John  Bunyan  to  the  pastoral  office  or 
eldership.  And  he  accepting  thereof,  gave  him- 
self up  to  serve  Christ  and  his  Church,  in  that 
charge,  and  received  of  the  elders  the  right  hand 
of  fellowship,  after  having  preached  fifteen  years.' 
The  choice  thus  solemnly  made,  was  ratified  by  the 
abundant  blessings  of  heavenly  union  and  great 
prosperity — no  stranger  or  novice,  but  one  whose 
preaching  and  writings  had  proved  most  accept- 
able to  them  for  a  series  of  years — one  that  had 
been  owned  and  blessed  of  his  God,  and  whom  the 
church  delighted  to  honour. 

At  the  same  church  meeting,  *  The  congrega- 
tion having  had  long  experience  of  the  faithfulness 
of  brother  John  Fenn  in  his  care  for  the  poor,  did 
after  the  same  manner  solemnly  choose  him  to  the 
honourable  office  of  a  deacon,  and  committed  their 
poor  and  purse  to  him,  and  he  accepted  thereof, 
and  gave  himself  up  to  the  Lord  and  them  in  that 
service.'  The  church  did  also  determine  to  keep 
the  26th  inst.  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer,  both 
here,  and  at  Hawnes,  and  at  Gamlingay,  solemnly 
to  commend  to  the  grace  of  God  brother  Bunyan 
and  brother  Fenn,  and  to  entreat  his  gracious  as- 
sistance and  presence  with  them  in  their  respective 
works,  whereunto  he  hath  called  them.' 

The  most  extraordinary  circumstance  that  took 
place  at  this  time  was,  that  while  Bunyan  was  a 
prisoner  in  a  wretched  dungeon  for  preaching  the 
glad  tidings  of  salvation,  or,  in  the  mysterious 
legal  jargon  of  the  period,  •  holding  conventicles,' 
he  received  his  Majesty's  license  to  preach,  and 
thus  to  hold  conventicles  —  it  was  one  of  the 
first  that  was  granted.  His  Majesty  continued  to 
keep  him  a  prisoner  for  preaching  more  than  six 
months  after  he  had  licensed  him  to  preach! !  At 
the  same  time  that  the  permission  to  preach  was 


3  The  ecclesiastical  year  commenced  in  March, 
month  means  Decemher. 


The  tenth 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


hi 


granted  to  Bunyan,  the  house  of  Josiah  Roughed, 
Eedford,  was  licensed  by  his  Majesty's  command, 
for  the  use  of  such  as  do  not  conform  to  the 
Church  of  England.  In  this  John  Eunyan  was 
authorised  to  teach,  or  in  any  other  licensed  place.1 
These  were  among  tho  first  licenses  that  were 
granted.  The  present  highly-respected  pastor  of 
the  church  considers  that  this  license  does  not  refer 
to  Roughed 's  private  dwelling,  hut  rather  to  'an  edi- 
fice or  a  barn,  purchased  of  Robert  Crompton,  Esq., 
with  a  piece  of  ground  adjoining  it,'  in  the  parishes 
of  St.  Paul  and  Cuthbert,  for  £50,  in  1672,  by 
Roughed,  Eunyan,  Fenn,  and  others,  and  which  was 
released  by  Fenn  to  Eunyan  and  others,  November 
10,  1GS1,  two  days  before  Fenn's  death.  This 
building  having  been  properly  fitted  up  by  volun- 
tary contribution,  became  permanently  occupied  by 
the  church  as  its  place  of  meeting,  until  the  old 
chapel  was  erected  in  1707.  From  this  wo  may 
conclude  that  Eunyan  was  engaged  in  his  worldly 
occupation  as  a  brazier,  in  the  year  that  ho  ob- 
tained his  release  from  prison,  and  to  16S1. 

How  utterly  contemptible  does  any  Government 
become  when  they  tamper  with  spiritual  worship. 
At  one  period  they  punished  Dissenters  with  im- 
prisonment, transportation,  and,  to  use  Judge 
Reeling's  elegant  expression  in  his  sentence  on 
Bunyan,  '  to  stretch  by  the  neck  for  it;'  and  anon, 
the  very  same  Government,  under  the  same  king, 
gives  them  license  to  dissent !  Human  laws  affect- 
ing religion  can  never  be  the  standard  of  morality; 
to  read  the  Bible  is  considered  to  be  sin  in  Tus- 
cany, and  righteousness  in  Britain.  The  releaso 
of  this  great  and  pious  man  from  his  tedious  im- 
prisonment, has  been  hitherto  involved  in  a  cloud 
of  mystery,  which  it  will  be  our  happiness  to 
disperse,  while  we  record  that  event  in  a  clear, 
indisputable  narrative  of  facts.  His  earlier  bio- 
grapher, Mr.  Doe,  not  having  access  to  archives 
which  the  lapse  of  time  has  now  rendered  avail- 
able, attributed  his  release  to  the  influence  of 
Bishop  Barlow,  by  the  interference  of  Dr.  Owen. 
It  is  narrated  in  the  life  of  Dr.  Owen,  published  in 
1721  : — '  The  doctor  had  some  friends  also  among 
the  bishops,  Dr.  Barlow,  formerly  his  tutor,  then 
bishop  of  Lincoln,  who  yet  upon  a  special  occasion 
failed  him,  when  he  might  have  expected  the  ser- 
vice of  his  professed  friendship.  The  case  was 
this,  Mr.  John  Bunyan  had  been  confined  to  a  jail 
twelve  years,  upon  an  excommunication  for  Non- 
conformity. Now  there  was  a  law,  that  if  any 
two  persons  will  go  to  the  bishop  of  the  diocese, 
and  offer  a  cautionary  bond,  that  the  prisoner  shall 
conform  in  half  a  year,  the  bishop  may  release  him 
upon  that  bond;  whereupon  a  friend  of  this  poor 
man  desired  Dr.  Owen  to  give  him  his  letter  to 
the  bishop  in  his  behalf,  which  he  readily  granted. 


For  a  copy  of  these  licenses,  see  vol.  iii.,  p.  24. 


It  was  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  Popish 
plot,  when  this  letter  was  carried  to  the  bishop, 
who  having  read  it,  desired  "  a  little  time  to  con- 
sider of  it,  and  if  I  can  do  it,  you  may  be  assured 
of  my  readiness."  He  was  waited  upon  again 
in  about  a  fortnight,  and  his  answer  was,  "  I 
would  desire  you  to  move  tho  Lord  Chancellor 
in  the  case,  and,  upon  his  order,  I  will  do  it," 
To  which  it  was  replied,  "this  method  would  be 
chargeable,  and  tho  man  was  poor,  not  able  to 
expend  so  much  money ;  and,  being  satisfied  he 
could  do  it  legally,  it  was  hoped  his  Lordship 
would  remember  his  promise,  there  being  no  strain- 
ing a  point  in  the  case.  But  ho  would  do  it  upon 
no  other  terms,  which  at  last  was  done,  and  the 
poor  man  released."  And  for  this  we  are  told 
that  "  Mr  Bunyan  returned  him  his  unfeigned 
thanks,  and  often  remembered  him  in  his  prayers, 
as,  next  to  God,  his  deliverer."  '  The  whole  of 
this  story,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  Bunyan,  is  not 
only  improbable,  but  utterly  impossible.  Bun- 
yan was  never  excommunicated,  and  he  was  cer- 
tainly released  from  prison  two  or  three  years 
previous  to  Dr.  Barlow  becoming  a  bishop.  The 
critical  times  to  which  he  alludes,  refer  doubt- 
less to  the  Popish  plot,  which  took  place  in  1G78, 
Bunyan  having  been  released  in  1672.  The 
probability  is,  that  Dr.  Owen  did  about  1678 
apply  to  the  bishop  of  Lincoln  for  the  release  of 
some  poor  prisoner  under  sentence  of  excommuni- 
cation, it  being  his  province  to  release  such  pri- 
soners upon  their  making  peace  with  the  Church. 
If  this  person  was  a  friend  of  Bunyan's,  his  prayers 
for  the  bishop,  and  acknowledgments  for  this  act 
of  kindness,  are  readily  accounted  for.  That 
Barlow  had  nothing  to  do  with  Bunyan's  release 
is  now  perfectly  clear ;  because  all,  even  the  mi- 
nutest particulars  relative  to  it,  have  been  disco- 
vered. This  is  a  very  romantic  history,  and  neces- 
sarily leads  us  back  to  the  battle  of  Worcester. 
At  this  battle,  tho  republicans  were  numerous,  well 
disciplined,  and  led  by  experienced  officers ;  the 
royal  army  was  completely  routed,  and  its  leaders, 
who  survived  the  battle,  were  subject  to  the  se- 
verest privations.  Charles  found  refuge  at  Boscobel 
House,  and,  disguised  as  a  woodcutter,  was  hid  in 
an  oak.  His  adventures  and  hair-breadth  escapes 
fill  a  volume : — the  parliament  offered  one  thousand 
pounds  reward  for  his  apprehension.  At  length, 
after  wandering  in  various  disguises  forty  days,  he 
arrived  at  Brighton,  then  a  small  fishing  town, 
and  here  his  friends  succeeded  in  hiring  a  fishing 
boat  to  take  him  to  France.  Numerous  histories 
of  this  extraordinary  escape  were  published,  but 
no  two  of  them  agree,  excepting  that,  to  please 
the  king,  all  the  credit  was  given  to  Roman  Ca- 
tholics. Of  these  narratives,  that  by  Dr.  Lingard 
has  the  strangest  blunder.     When  they  left  Shore- 


Ixii 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


ham,  *  The  ship  stood  with  easy  sail  towards  the 
Isle  of  Wight,  as"  if  she  were  on  her  way  to  Deal, 
to  which  port  she  was  hound'1 — Deal  being  ex- 
actly in  the  contrary  direction !  Carte  has  the  best 
account.  The  vessel  was  bound  for  Poole,  coal- 
laden;  they  left  Shoreham  at  seven  a.m.  under 
easy  sail ;  and  at  five,  being  off  the  Isle  of  Wight, 
with  the  wind  north,  she  stood  over  to  France, 
and  returned  to  Poole,  no  one  discovering  that 
they  had  been  out  of  their  course.  A  letter  re- 
cently discovered  among  the  archives  of  the  So- 
ciety of  Friends  at  Devonshire  House  solves  every 
difficulty.  It  is  written  by  Ellis  Hookes  to  the 
wife  of  George  Fox,  dated  January,  1670 — 

*  Yesterday  there  was  a  friend  (a  quaker)  wth  the  long,  one 
that  is  John  Groves  mate,  he  was  the  man  y'.was  mate  to 
the  master  of  the  fisher-hoat  y'  carryed  the  king  away  when 
he  went  from  Worcester  fight,  and  only  this  friend  and  the 
master  knew  of  it  in  the  shipp,  and  the  friend  carryed  him 
(the  king)  ashoare  on  his  shoulders,  the  king  knew  him  again, 
and  was  very  friendly  to  him,  aud  told  him  he  remembered 
him  and  of  severall  things  y'  was  donne  in  ye  shipp  att  the 
same  time,  the  friend  told  him  the  reason  why  he  did  not 
come  all  this  while  was  y4  he  was  satisfied  in  y'  he  had  peace 
and  satisfaction  in  himselfe  y'  he  did  what  he  did  to  releiue  a 
man  in  distresse  and  now  he  desired  nothing  of  him  (the  king) 
but  that  he  would  sett  friends  at  libertie  who  were  great  suf- 
ferers or  to  that  purpose  aud  told  the  king  he  had  a  paper  of 
110  that  were  premunired  y'  had  lain  in  prison  about  G  years 
and  none  can  release  ym  but  him.  Soe  the  king  took  the 
paper  and  said  there  was  many  of  yra  and  y*  they  would  be  in 
again  in  a  monthes  time  and  y1  the  country  gentlemen  com- 
plained to  him  yl  they  were  so  troubled  wth  the  Quakers.  So 
he  said  he  would  release  him  six.  but  ye  friend  thinkes  to  goe 
to  him  again,  for  he  had  not  fully  cleared  himselfe.' 

This  letter  is  endorsed  by  Fox  himself,  '  E  Hookes 
to  M  F  of  pasages  consering  Richard  Carver,  that 
cared  the  King  of  his  backe.' 

E.  Hooke's  next  letter,  addressed  to  George  Fox, 
thus  continues  the  narrative — 

'February,  16G9-70. 

*  Dear  G.  F.  As  for  the  friend  that  was  with  the  King,  his 
love  is  to  thee.  He  has  been  with  the  King  lately,  and  Thomas 
Moore  was  with  him,  and  the  King  was  very  loving  to  them. 
He  had  a  fair  and  free  opportunity  to  open  his  mind  to  the 
King,  and  the  King  has  promised  to  do  for  him,  but  willed 
him  to  wait  a  mouth  or  two  longer.  1  rest  thy  faithful  friend 
to  serve  thee,  'E.  H.'- 

Tbe  captain  of  the  fisher-boat  was  Nicholas 
Tattersall,  whose  grave,  covered  with  a  slab  of  black 
marble,  is  still  to  be  seen  in  Brighton  church-yard, 
with  a  long  poetical  inscription,  now  scarcely  le- 
gible. On  the  Restoration,  he  applied  for  his  re- 
ward, and  was  made  a  commander  in  the  royal 
navy,  with  an  annuity  to  him  and  his  heirs  for 
ever  of  £100.  The  family  have  recently  become 
extinct.      His  fisher-boat  was  moored  for  a  con- 


-    1  4to,  vol.  vii.,  p.  75. 

2  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  J.  P.  Brown,  Esq.,  James  Street, 
Islington,  for  directing  my  attention  to  these  letters. 


siderable  time  in  the  Thames,  opposite  Whitehall. 
Years  had  rolled  on,  but  the  Quaker  mate  who  had 
so  materially  assisted  the  flying  prince — by  keeping 
the  secret — arranging  the  escape  with  the  crew, 
and  when,  in  fear  of  danger  from  a  privateer,  row-  , 
ing  the  prince  ashore,  and  in  shoal  water  carrying 
him  on  his  shoulders  to  the  land,  near  the  village 
of  Fecamp,  in  Normandy,  yet  he  had  not  been 
with  the  king  to  claim  any  reward.  This  escape 
took  place  in  1G51,  and  nearly  twenty  years  had 
elapsed,  ten  of  which  were  after  the  Restoration ; 
so  that  in  all  probability  the  king,  who  with  all  his 
faults  was  not  ungrateful,  was  agreeably  surprised 
with  his  appearance  at  the  palace.  Whatever 
alteration  the  rough  life  of  a  sailor  had  made  on 
his  appearance,  the  king  at  once  recognised  him. 
All  the  progress  he  had  made  as  to  worldly  pros- 
perity was  from  being  mate  of  a  fisher-boat,  under 
Tattersall,  to  becoming  mate  of  a  West  Indiaman, 
under  Captain  Grove.  His  Majesty,  who  had 
passed  his  time  more  with  courtiers  than  with 
Quakers,  was  doubtless  astonished  that  a  poor 
man,  having  such  a  claim  on  his  bounty,  should 
have  been  so  many  years  without  seeking  his  re- 
compense. On  asking  the  reason,  the  Quaker  nobly 
answered  to  this  effect,  That  the  performance  of  his 
duty  in  saving  the  life  of  the  hunted  prince,  was 
only  a  moral  obligation,  for  the  discharge  of  which 
God  had  amply  repaid  him  by  peace  and  satisfac- 
tion in  his  mind  and  conscience.  And  now,  Sire, 
I  ask  nothing  for  myself,  but  that  your  Majesty 
would  do  the  same  to  my  friends  that  I  did  for 
you — set  the  poor  pious  sufferers  at  liberty,  that 
they  may  bless  you,  aud  that  you  may  have  that 
peace  and  satisfaction  which  always  follows  good 
and  benevolent  actions.  The  king  attempted  feebly 
to  argue,  that  they  would  soon  offend  again,  and 
that  they  were  much  complained  of  by  the  country 
gentlemen.  How  readily  the  sailor  might  have 
said  to  his  sailor  king,  Alter  the  ship's  articles, 
let  all  the  crew  fare  alike  as  to  their  free  choice  in 
religion,  and  there  will  be  no  grumbling  in  your 
noble  ship ;  every  subject  will  do  his  duty.  The 
king  offered  to  release  any  six,  and  we  may  ima- 
gine the  sailor's  blunt  answer,  What,  six  poor 
Quakers  for  a  king's  ransom! !  His  Majesty  was 
so  pleased  as  to  invite  him  to  come  again,  when 
he  introduced  another  member  of  the  Society  of 
Friends,  Thomas  Moore.  At  this  period  an  amaz- 
ing number  of  Friends,  men  and  women,  were  in 
the  jails  throughout  the  kingdom,  torn  from  their 
families,  and  suffering  most  severe  privations,  under 
which  great  numbers  had  perished.  The  applica- 
tion for  the  release  of  the  survivors,  thus  happily 
commenced,  was  followed  up  with  zeal  and  energy, 
and  crowned  with  great  success.  This  narrative 
solves  all  those  difficulties  which  rendered  that 
remarkable  event  extremely  mysterious.    The  ques- 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


briii 


tion  naturally  arises  why  so  debauched  and  dis- 
solute a  king  should  prefer  such  tight-laced  Chris- 
tians to  be  the  peculiar  objects  of  his  mercy.  The 
reason  is  perfectly  obvious,  he  owed  his  life  to  one 
of  their  members,  who,  however  poor  as  to  this 
world,  possessed  those  riches  of  piety  which  pre- 
vented his  taking  any  personal  reward  for  an  act 
of  duty.  Shade  of  the  noble  sailor,  thy  name, 
Richard  Carver,  is  worthy  of  all  honour!  And  the 
more  so,  because  thy  gallant  bearing  has  been 
studiously  concealed  in  all  the  histories  of  these 
important  transactions.  Had  he  been  a  mischief- 
making  Jesuit,  like  Father  Iluddleston,  his  noble 
deed  would  have  been  trumpeted  forth  for  the  ad- 
miration of  the  world  in  all  ages.  His  name  was 
left  to  perish  in  oblivion,  because  he  was  of  a  de- 
spised sect.  It  is  an  honour  to  Christianity  that 
a  labouring  man  preferred  the  duty  of  saving  the 
life  of  a  human  being,  and  that  of  an  enemy,  to 
gaining  so  easily  heaps  of  glittering  gold.  And 
when  all  the  resources  of  royalty  were  ready  muni- 
ficently to  reward  him,  he,  like  Moses,  preferred  the 
rescue  of  his  suffering  friends  to  personal  honours 
or  emoluments — even  to  all  the  riches  of  England ! 
The  efforts  of  Carver  and  Moore  were  followed 
by  most  earnest  appeals  for  mercy  by  George 
Whitehead,  who  with  Moore  appeared  before  the 
king  in  council  several  times,  until  at  length  the 
royal  word  sanctioned  this  act  of  mercy.  The 
Quakers  were  then  appealed  to  by  sufferers  of 
other  denominations,  and  advised  them  to  obtain 
the  permission  of  the  king  in  council,  that  their 
names  might  be  inserted  in  the  deed  ;  rendering 
thc-m  all  the  assistance  that  was  in  their  power. 
Great  difficulties  were  encountered  in  passing  the 
cumbrous  deed  through  the  various  offices,  and  then 
in  pleading  it  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  The  num- 
ber of  Quakers  thus  released  from  imprisonment 
was  471,  being  about  the  same  number  as  those 
who  had  perished  in  the  jails.  The  rest  of  the 
prisoners  liberated  by  this  deed  were  Baptists  and 
Independents,  and  among  the  former  was  John 

BCNYAX. 

A  very  circumstantial  narrative  of  these  pro- 
ceedings, copies  of  the  minutes  of  the  privy  coun- 
cil, and  other  documents,  will  be  found  in  the 
introduction  to  The  Pilrjrim''s  Progress.1  One  of 
these  official  papers  affords  an  interesting  subject 
of  study  to  an  occasional  conformist.  It  is  the 
return  of  the  sheriff  of  Bedfordshire,  stating  that 
all  the  sufferings  of  Bunyan — his  privation  of 
liberty,  sacrifice  of  wife,  children,  and  temporal 
comforts,  with  the  fear  of  an  ignominious  death — 
were  for  refusing  to  attend  his  parish  church  and 
hear  the  Common  Prayer  service. 

When  it  is  considered  that  Bunyan  was  very 
severe    in   his    remarks    upon   the   Quakers,    the 


event  reflects  no  ordinary  degree  of  honour  upon 
the  Society  of  Friends,  at  whose  sole  charge,  and 
entirely  by  their  own  exertions,  this  great  deed 
of  benevolence  was  begun,  carried  on,  aud  com- 
pleted. It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  exact  dura- 
tion of  this  sad  imprisonment,  because  we  can- 
not discover  any  record  of  the  day  of  his  release. 
His  imprisonment  commenced  November  13,  1660, 
and  his  pardon  under  the  great  seal  is  dated  Sep- 
tember 13,  1672.  As  the  pardon  included  nearly 
500  sufferers,  it  occupied  some  time  to  obtain  offi- 
cial duplicates  to  be  exhibited  at  the  assizes  and 
sessions  for  the  various  counties.  A  letter  from 
E.  Hooks  to  Mrs.  Fox  intimates  that  none  were 
released  on  the  1st  November  1672.  Another 
letter  shows  that  the  Bedfordshire  prisoners  were 
discharged  before  January  10,  1673  ;2  confirm- 
ing Bunyan 's  own  account,  published  by  him  in 
the  Grace  Abounding,  1680,  that  his  imprisonment 
lasted  complete  twelve  years.3 

During  the  latter  period  of  his  imprisonment, 
probably  from  the  time  of  his  receiving  the  royal 
license  to  preach,  May  15,  1672,  he  enjoyed  extra- 
ordinary liberty — visiting  those  who  had  been  kind 
to  his  family,  and  preaching  in  the  surrounding 
couuties.  An  entry  in  the  records  of  the  city  of 
Leicester  proves  that  he  was  there,  and  claimed  the 
liberty  of  preaching — '  John  Bunyan 's  license  bears 
date  the  15th  of  May  1672,  to  teach  as  a  Congre- 
gational person,  being  of  that  persuasion,  in  the 
house  of  Josias  Roughed,  Bedford,  or  in  any  other 
place,  room,  or  house,  licensed  by  his  Majestie's 
memorand.  The  said  Bunyan  shewed  his  license 
to  Mr.  Mayor,  Mr.  Overinge,  Mr.  Freeman,  and 
Mr.  Browne,  being  then  present,  the  6th  day  of 
October,  1672,  that  being  about  two  months  before 
his  final  release  from  jail.'4 

His  first  object,  upon  recovering  his  liberty, 
appears  to  have  been  the  proper  arrangement  of 
his  worldly  business,  that  he  might  provide  for 
the  wants  cf  his  family,  a  matter  of  little  difficulty 
with  their  frugal  habits.  He,  at  the  same  time, 
entered  with  all  his  soul  into  his  beloved  work  of 
preaching  and  writing,  to  set  forth  the  glories  of 
Immanuel.  The  testimony  of  one  who  was  his 
'true  friend  and  long  acquaintance,'  is,  that  one 
of  the  first  fruits  of  Lis  liberation  was  to  visit  those 
who  had  assisted  him  and  comforted  his  family 
during  his  incarceration,  encouraging  those  who 
were  in  fear  of  a  prison,  and  collecting  means  of 
assistance  to  those  who  still  remained  prisoners; 
travelling  even  to  remote  counties  to  effect  these 
merciful  objects.5 

While  the  premises  occupied  by  Mr.  Roughed 
were  being  converted   into  a  capacious  meeting- 


1  Vol.  iii.,  pp.  21-2'J. 


•-  Vol.  iii.,  p.  27.  3  Vol.  i.,  p.  17 ;  No.  31?. 

4  Jukes'  History  of  Bunyan 's  Church,  p.  :'  1. 

5  Continuation  of  Life  to  Grace  Abounding. 


Ixiv 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


house,  the  pastor  was  indefatigable  in  visiting  the 
sick,  and  preaching  from  house  to  house,  settling 
churches  in  the  villages,  reconciling  differences, 
and  extending  the  sacred  influences  of  the  gospel, 
so  that  in  a  very  short  time  he  attained  the  appel- 
lation of  Bishop  Bunyan — a  title  much  better 
merited  by  him  than  by  the  downy  prelates  who 
sent  him  to  jail  for  preaching  that  which  they 
ought  to  have  preached. 

He  formed  branch  churches  at  Gamlingay, 
Hawnes,  Cotton-end,  and  Kempston,  in  connec- 
tion with  that  at  Bedford.  When  he  opened  the 
new  meeting-house,  it  was  '  so  thronged  that 
many  were  constrained  to  stay  without,  though  it 
was  very  spacious,  every  one  striving  to  partake  of 
his  instructions.     Here  he  lived,  in  much  peace 


Bunyan's  Cottage  at  Bedford. 

and  quiet  of  mind,  contenting  himself  with  that 
little  God  had  bestowed  upon  him,  and  sequester- 
ing himself  from  all  secular  employments  to  follow 
that  of  his  call  to  the  ministry.1  The  word  •  seques- 
tering' would  lead  us  to  conclude,  that  his  busi- 
ness was  continued  by  his  family,  under  his  care, 
but  so  as  to  allow  him  much  time  for  his  Christian 


1  It  is  generally  believed  at  Bedford,  that,  after  Bunyan  was 
imprisoned,  his  family  removed  from  Elstow  to  Bedford,  in 
order  that  they  might  have  more  frequent  access  to  him ;  and 
that,  on  his  release,  he  made  his  abode  there.  His  humble  dwell- 
ing was  much  like  that  of  his  father  at  Elstow,  most  uuassum- 
ing ;  just  such  a  cottage  as  a  poor  wounded  sinner  would  feel  at 
home  in  when  visiting  his  pastor  for  advice.  The  late  Rev.  J. 
Geard,  of  Hitchin,  in  his  Diary,  says — 'July  17,  1774.  I 
preached,  for  the  first  time,  at  Bedford,  to  the  successors  of 
good  Mr.  Bunyan's  congregation,  and  the  next  day  called  at 
the  house  where  he  used  to  live,  and  went  into  the  room  that 
tradition  reported  was  his  study.  This  house,  though  it  had 
been  the  habitation  of  so  truly  great  a  man,  was  now  let  for 
about  40*.  per  annum.'  Allowing  for  the  difference  in  the 
value  of  money,  Bunyan  would  have  now  paid  IGs.  a-year  rent 
for  his  humble  abode.  It  will  be  always  matter  of  regret, 
that  it  was  not  purchased  and  preserved  by  the  members  of 
the  '  Old  Meeting,'  when  it  was  offered  them  before  its  de- 
struction; we  procured,  however,  a  drawing  of  it,  which  is 
here  engraved.  The  cottage  was  in  the  parish  of  St.  Cuthbert, 
in  the  "street  opposite  the  meeting-house,  and  here  Bunyan 
lived,  while  he  was  pastor,  from  1681  to  1688. 


duties,  and  his  benevolent  pursuits.  His  peace- 
ful course  was  interrupted  by  a  severe  contro- 
versy with  the  Christian  world  upon  the  subject 
of  communion  at  the  Lord's  Table,  which  had 
commenced  while  he  was  in  prison.  He  would 
admit  none  but  those  who,  by  a  godly  conversa- 
tion, brought  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance,  nor 
dared  he  to  refuse  any  who  were  admitted  to 
spiritual  communion  with  the  Redeemer.  Every 
sect  which  celebrated  the  Lord's  Supper,  fenced 
the  table  round  with  ritual  observances,  except 
the  Baptist  church  at  Bedford,  which  stood  pre- 
eminent for  non-sectarianism.  A  singular  proof 
of  this  is,  that  the  catechism  called  Instruction  for 
the  Ignorant,  written  and  published  by  Bunyan,  is 
admirably  adapted  for  the  use,  not  only  of  his  own 
church,  but  of  Christians  of  all  denominations. 

His  spirit  was  greatly  refreshed  by  finding  that 
his  precept  and  example  had  been  blessed  to  his 
son  Thomas.  On  the  6th  of  the  11th  month, 
1673,  he  passed  the  lions,  and  was  welcomed  into 
the  house  called  Beautiful,  uniting  in  full  com- 
munion with  his  father's  church.  There  doubt- 
less was,  as  Mercy  expresses  it,  '  music  in  the 
house,  music  in  the  heart,  and  music  also  in 
heaven,  for  joy  that  he  was  here.'2  He  after- 
wards became  a  village  preacher. 

Bunyan  was  by  no  means  a  latitudinarian. 
No  one  felt  greater  decision  than  he  did  for  the 
truths  of  our  holy  faith.  When  his  Lord's  design 
in  Christianity  was,  as  he  thought,  perverted  by 
a  beneficed  clergyman,  then  he  sent  forth  from 
his  prison  an  answer  as  from  a  son  of  thunder, 
even  at  the  risk  of  his  life.  His  love  for  the 
pure  doctrines  of  the  gospel  was  as  decided  as 
his  aversion  to  sectarian  titles.  '  As  for  those 
factious  titles  of  Anabaptists,  Independents,  Pres- 
byterians, or  the  like,  I  conclude  that  they  came 
neither  from  Jerusalem,  nor  from  Antioch,  but 
rather  from  hell  and  Babylon,  for  they  naturally 
tend  to  divisions.'3  The  only  title  that  he  loved 
was  that  of  Christian.  '  It  is  strange  to  see  how 
men  are  wedded  to  their  own  opinions,  beyond 
what  the  law  of  grace  and  love  will  admit.  Here 
is  a  Presbyter — here  an  Independent  and  a  Bap- 
tist, so  joined  each  man  to  his  own  opinions,  that 
they  cannot  have  that  communion  one  with  an- 
other as  by  the  testament  of  the  Lord  Jesus  they 
are  commanded  and  enjoined.'4  The  meaning 
which  he  attached  to  the  word  '  sectarian '  is  very 
striking — Pharisees  are  sectarians,  they  who  in 
Divine  worship  turn  aside  from  the  rule  of  the 
written  Word,  and  in  their  manner  do  it  to  be 
seen  of  men — these  are  sectaries.5  Bunyan  was 
most  decided  as  to  the  importance  of  baptism  and 
the   Lord's    Supper.       '  Do  you  think  that   love 


2  Pilgrim,  vol.  iii.,  p.  19S. 
4  Vol.  ii.,  p.  538. 


3  Vol.  ii.,  p.  649. 
fi  Vol.  ii.,  p.  219. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


kv 


letters  are  not  desired  between  lovers?  Why  these, 
God's  ordinances,  they  are  his  love  letters,  and  his 
love  tokens,  too.  No  marvel,  then,  if  the  righteous 
do  so  desire  them.  "  More  to  he  desired  are  they 
than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold ;  sweeter  also 
than  honey,  and  the  honey-comb."  Christ  made 
himself  known  to  his  disciples  in  breaking  of  bread ; 
who  would  not,  then,  that  loves  to  know  him,  be 
present  at  such  an  ordinance?  Ofttimcs  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  the  comfortable  influence  of  it,  has  ac- 
companied the  baptized  in  the  very  act  of  adminis- 
tering of  it.'  His  views  of  the  fellowship  of  the 
saints  were  equally  explicit — '  Church  fellowship, 
rightly  managed,  is  the  glory  of  all  the  world.  No 
place,  no  community,  no  fellowship,  is  adorned 
and  bespangled  with  those  beauties,  as  is  a  church 
rightly  knit  together  to  their  Head,  and  lovingly 
serving  one  another.'5  Such  he  admitted  to  the 
table  of  their  common  Lord;  but,  in  his  esteem,  to 
communicate  with  the  profane  was  all  one  with 
sacrificing  to  the  devil. 

All  this  liberality  was  accompanied  by  very 
strict  notions  of  church  fellowship,  not  allowing 
private  judgment  in  the  withdrawing  of  any  mem- 
ber, if  the  church  withheld  its  approbation.  Mary 
Tilney  had  been  cruelly  robbed  by  the  persecuting 
Justice  Porter,  for  not  attending  the  parish  church, 
lie  carted  away  all  her  goods,  beds,  and  bedding, 
even  to  the  hangings  of  her  rooms.  She  was  a 
most  benevolent  widow,  and  was  more  troubled 
with  the  crying  and  sighing  of  her  poor  neigh- 
bours, than  with  the  loss  of  her  goods.  Ha- 
rassed by  persecution  at  Bedford,  she  removed  to 
London,  and  requested  her  dismission  to  a  church 
of  which  her  son-in-law  was  pastor,  which  was 
refused.  As  the  letter  announcing  this  to  her  is 
a  good  example  of  Bunyan's  epistolary  correspond- 
ence, it  is  carefully  extracted  from  the  church  book. 

'  Our  dearly-beloved  sister  Tilney. 

'Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  be  with  you,  by  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.     Amen. 

'  I  received  your  letter,  and  have  presented  it  to  the  sight 
of  the  brethren,  who,  after  due  consideration  of  your  motion, 
have  jointly  concluded  to  give  you  this  answer.  This  for  your- 
self (honoured  sister),  you  are  of  high  esteem  with  the  church 
of  God  in  this  place,  both  because  his  grace  hath  been  bestowed 
richly  upon  you,  and  because  of  your  faithful  fellowship  with 
us ;  for  you  have  heen  rightly  a  daughter  of  Abraham  while 
here,  not  being  afraid  with  any  amazement.  Your  holy  and 
quiet  behaviour,  also,  while  with  patience  and  meekness,  and 
in  the  gentleness  of  Christ,  you  suffered  yourself  to  be  robbed 
for  his  sake,  hath  the  more  united  our  affections  to  you  in  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  Yea,  it  hath  begotten  you  reverence, 
also,  in  the  hearts  of  them  who  were  beholders  of  your  meek- 
ness and  innocency  while  you  suffered ;  and  a  stinging  convic- 
tion, as  we  are  persuaded,  in  the  consciences  of  those  who 
made  spoil  for  themselves  ;*  all  which  will  redound  to  the 


5  Vol.  i.,  p.  757. 
.*  I  have  seen  some  of  the  official  returns  into  the  exchequer;  the 
amount  of  property  seized  was  enormous,  and  it  ia  almost  incredible  the 
small  amount  paid'  to  the  treasury. 
VOL.  III. 


praise  of  God  our  Father,  and  to  your  comfort  and  everlasting 
consolation  by  Christ,  in  the  day  he  shall  come  to  take  ven- 
geance for  his  people,  and  to  be  glorified  in  them  that  believe. 
Wherefore  we  cannot  (our  honoured  sister)  but  care  fur  your 
welfare,  and  increase  of  all  good  in  the  faith  and  kingdom  of 
Christ,  whose  servant  you  are,  and  whose  name  is  written  in 
your  forehead;  and  do  therefore  pray  God  and  our  Father,  that 
lie  would  direct  your  way,  and  open  a  door  in  his  temple  for 
you,  that  you  may  eat  his  fat  and  be  refreshed,  and  that  you 
may  drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  grape.  And  be  you  assured 
(hat,  with  all  readiness,  we  will  help  and  forward  you  what  we 
can  therein,  for  we  are  not  ashamed  to  own  you  before  all  the 
churches  of  Christ. 

But,  our  dearly  beloved,  you  know  that,  for  our  safety  and 
your  profit,  it  is  behoofful  that  we  commit  you  to  such,  to  be 
fed  and  governed  in  the  Word  and  doctrines  as,  we  are  suffi- 
ciently persuaded,  shall  be  able  to  deliver  you  up  with  joy  at 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints:  other- 
wise we  (that  we  say  not  you)  shall  receive  blushing  and  shame 
before  him  and  you ;  yea,  and  you  also,  our  honoured  sister, 
may  justly  charge  us  with  want  of  love,  and  a  due  respect  for 
your  eternal  condition,  if,  for  want  of  care  and  circumspection 
herein,  we  should  commit  you  to  any  from  whom  you  should 
receive  damage,  or  by  whom  you  should  not  be  succoured  and 
fed  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  incorruptible  Word  of  God. 
which  is  able  to  save  your  soul.  Wherefore  we  may  not, 
neither  dare  give  our  consent  that  you  feed  and  fold  with  such 
whose  principles  and  practices,  in  matters  of  faith  and  worship, 
we,  as  yet,  are  strangers  to,  and  have  not  received  commenda- 
tions concerning,  either  from  works  of  theirs  or  epistles  from 
others.  Yourself,  indeed,  hath  declared  that  you  are  satisfied 
therein ;  but,  elect  sister,  seeing  the  act  of  delivering  you  up 
is  an  act  of  ours  and  not  yours,  it  is  convenient,  yea,  very  ex- 
pedient, that  we,  as  to  so  weighty  a  matter,  be  well  persuaded 
before.  Wherefore  we  beseech  you,  that,  for  the  love  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  give  us  leave  to  inform  ourselves  yet 
better  before  we  grant  your  request ;  and  that  you  also  forbear 
to  sit  down  at  the  table  with  any  without  the  consent  of  your 
brethren.  You  were,  while  with  us,  obedient,  and  we  trust 
you  will  not  be  unruly  now.  And  for  the  more  quick  expedi- 
tion of  this  matter,  we  will  propound  before  you  our  further 
thoughts.  1.  Either  we  shall  consent  to  your  sitting  down 
with  brother  Cockain,  brother  Griffith,  brother  Palmer,  or 
other,  who,  of  long  continuance  in  the  city,  have  showed  forth 
their  faith,  their  worship,  and  good  conversation  with  the  Word  j 
2.  Or  if  you  can  get  a  commendatory  epistle  from  brother 
Owen,  brother  Cockain,  brother  Palmer,  or  brother  Griffith, 
concerning  the  faith  and  principles  of  the  person  and  people 
you  mention,  with  desire  to  be  guided  and  governed  by,  you 
shall  see  our  readiness,  in  the  fear  of  God,  to  commit  you  to 
the  doctrine  and  care  of  that  congregation.  Choose  you  whe- 
ther of  these  you  will  consent  unto,  and  let  us  hear  of  your 
resolution.  And  we  beseech  you,  for  love's  sake,  you  show, 
with  meekness,  your  fear  and  reverence  of  Christ's  institution; 
your  love  to  the  congregation,  and  regard  to  your  future  good. 
Finally,  we  commit  you  to  the  Lord  and  the  Word  of  his  grace, 
who  is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  to  give  you  an  inheritance 
among  them  that  are  sanctified.  To  God,  the  only  wise,  be 
glory  and  power  everlasting.  Amen.  —  Your  affectionate 
brethren,  to  serve  you  iu  the  faith  and  fellowship  of  the  gospel. 


A 


UAlAf< 


'aru 


Sent  from  Bedford,  the  19th 
of  the  1'ourtu  Mouth,  1071. 


Ixvi 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BTJNYAN. 


As  a  farther  illustration  of  Banyan's  sentiments 
on  this  subject,  we  give  the  following  letter  to  the 
church  at  Braintree : — 

'The  7th  of  the  Twelfth  Month,  1676  fjeb.  1677). 

'The  church  of  Christ  in  and  about  Bedford,  to  the  church 
of  Christ  in  and  about  Braintree,  sendeth  greeting, 

*  Holy  and  beloved — We,  fellow-heirs  with  you  of  the  grace 
of  life,  having  considered  your  request  concerning  our  honoured 
and  beloved  brother,  Samuel  Hensman :  that  he  shall  be  given 
up  to  you  for  your  mutual  edification,  and  his  furtherance  and 
joy  of  faith ;  and  considering  also,  in  the  capacity  he  now 
standeth  by  reason  of  his  habitation  amongst  you,  his  edifica- 
tion is  to  be  from  you,  not  from  us — he  being,  by  God's  pro- 
vidence (by  which  he  disposeth  the  world),  placed  at  such  a 
distance  from  us.  And  considering,  also,  the  great  end  of 
Christ  our  Lord,  in  ordaining  the  communion  of  saints,  is  his 
glory  in  their  edification,  and  that  all  things  are  to  be  done  by  his 
command  to  the  edification  of  the  body  iu  general,  and  of  every 
member  in  particular,  and  that  this  we  oft  (ought  ?)  to  design 
in  our  receiving  him,  and  giving  up  to  other  churches,  and  not 
to  please  ourselves:  do  as  before  God  and  the  elect  angels,  grant 
and  give  up  to  you  our  elect  brother,  to  be  received  by  you  in 
the  Lord,  and  to  be  nourished,  in  the  church  at  Braintree, 
with  you  as  one  that  is  dear  to  the  Father  and  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  this  we  the  willinger  do,  because,  as  we  are  in- 
formed concerning  you,  beloved,  you  are  not  rigid  iu  your 
principles,  but  are  for  communion  with  saints  as  saints,  and 
have  been  taught  by  the  Word  to  receive  the  brotherhood, 
because  they  are  beloved,  and  received  of  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  to  whose  grace  we  commend  you,  with  the  brother  of  late 
a  member  with  us,  but  now  one  of  you.  Grace  be  with  you 
all.  Written  by  the  appointment  of  the  church  here,  and  sub- 
scribed, in  her  name,  by  your  brethren,  as  follovveth : — 


£ 


t^nAfa/n/ 


Siir.  Fenn. 
John  Fenn. 
Luke  Astwood. 


Oliver  Stot. 
Thomas  Cooper. 
John  Croker. 


The  late  Mr.  Kilpin  of  Bedford  considered  the 
whole  of  this  letter  to  be  entered  in  the  minutes 
in  Bunyan's  hand-writing. 

There  is  also  in  the  church  hook  the  copy  of  a 
letter,  in  1674,  addressed  to  the  'church  some- 
time walking  with  our  brother  Jesse,'  refusing  to 
dismiss  to  them  Martha  Cumberland,  unless  they 
were  certified  that  they  continued  in  the  practice 
of  mixed  communion.  In  these  sentiments  Bun- 
yan  lived  and  died.  His  church  remains  the  same 
to  the  present  day.  In  the  new,  commodious,  and 
handsome  meeting-house,  opened  in  1850,  there 
is  a  baptistery,  frequently  used.  The  present 
minister,  the  amiable  and  talented  John  Jukes, 
baptizes  infants,  and  receives  the  assistance  of  a 
neighbouring  Baptist  minister  to  baptize  adults. 

Not  only  had  Bunyan  clear,  well-defined,  and 
most  decided  views  of  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel, 
but  also  of  all  its  doctrines.  His  knowledge  upon 
those  solemn  subjects  was  drawn  exclusively  from 
the  eacred  pages;  nor  dared  he  swerve  in  the 


slightest  degree  from  the  path  of  duty;  still  he 
belonged  to  no  sect,  but  that  of  Christian,  and 
the  same  freedom  which  had  guided  him  in  form- 
ing his  principles,  he  cheerfully  allowed  to  others. 
Hitherto,  water  baptism  had  been  considered  a 
pre-requisite  to  the  Lord's  table  by  all  parties. 
The  Episcopalians^  Presbyterians,  and  Independ- 
ents, had  denounced  the  Baptists  as  guilty  of  a 
most  serious  heresy,  or  blasphemy,  in  denying 
the  right  of  infants  to  baptism;  not  only  did  they 
exclude  the  Baptists  from  communion  with  their 
churches,  but  they  persecuted  them  with  extreme 
rigour.  When  the  Independents  made  laws  for 
the  government  of  their  colony  in  America,  in 
1644,  one  of  the  enactments  was,  '  That  if  any 
person  shall  either  openly  condemn,  or  oppose  the 
baptizing  of  infants,  or  seduce  others,  or  leave  tlie 
congregation  during  the  administration  of  the  rite, 
they  shall  be  sentenced  to  banishment. '  The  same 
year  a  poor  man  was  tied  up  and  whipped,  for  re- 
fusing to  have  his  child  baptized.  *  The  Rev.  J. 
Clarke,  and  Mr.  0.  Holmes,  of  Rhode  Island,  for 
visiting  a  sick  Baptist  brother  in  Massachusetts, 
instead  of  being  admitted  to  the  Lord's  table,  they 
were  arrested,  fined,  imprisoned,  and  whipped.' 
At  this  very  time,  the  Baptists  formed  their  colony 
at  Rhode  Island,  and  the  charter  concludes  with 
these  words,  *  All  men  may  walk  as  their  con- 
sciences persuade  them,  every  one  in  the  name  of 
his  God.'  This  is  probably  the  only  spot  in  the 
world  where  persecution  was  never  known.  The 
Baptists  considered  that  immersion  in  water  was 
the  marriage  rite  between  the  believer  and  Saviour; 
that  to  sit  at  the  Lord's  table  without  it  was 
spiritual  adultery,  to  be  abhorred  and  avoided, 
and  therefore  refused  to  admit  any  person  to  the 
Lord's  tahle  who  had  not  been  baptized  in  water 
upon  a  personal  profession  of  faith  in  the  Saviour. 
This  was  the  state  of  parties  when  Bunyan,  at 
the  commencement  of  his  pastorate,  entered  into 
the  controversy.  He  had  been  promised  a  com- 
mendation to  his  book  by  the  great,  the  grave, 
'the  sober'  Dr.  Owen,  but  he  withdrew  his  sanc- 
tion. 'And  perhaps  it  was  more  for  the  glory  of 
God,  that  truth  should  go  naked  into  the  world,' 
said  Bunyan,  '  than  as  seconded  by  so  weighty 
an  armour-bearer  as  he.'1  Bunyan  denied  that 
water  could  form  a  wedding  garment,  or  that 
water  baptism  was  a  pre-requisite  for  the  Lord's 
table,  or  that  being  immersed  in  water  was  putting 
on  our  Lord's  livery,  by  which  disciples  may  bo 
known.  *  Away,  fond  man,  do  you  forget  the 
text,  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my 
disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."'2  An 
attempt  was  made  to  embroil  Bunyan  in  a  public 
disputation  in  London  upon  this  subject,  which  he 
very  wisely  avoided.3     This   controversy  will  be 


1  Vol.  ii.,  649.      2  Vol.  ii.,  p. 


3  Vol  ii.,  p.  641. 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUNYAN. 


kvii 


found  in  our  second  volume,  and  is  deeply  interest- 
ing, making  allowance  for  the  esprit  de  corps  ma- 
infested  on  all  sides.  A  Terse  in  the  Emblems  is 
very  pertinent  upon  the  violence  of  this  dispute: — 

'  Our  gospel  has  had  here  a  summer's  day, 
But  in  its  suushine  we,  like  fools,  did  play; 
Or  else  fall  out,  and  with  each  other  wrangle, 
Aud  did,  iustcad  of  work,  not  much  but  jangle.'  1 

After  a  lapse  of  nearly  two  centuries,  Ban- 
yan's peaccahle  principles  have  greatly  prevailed ; 
so  that  now  few  churches  refuse  communion  on 
account  of  the  mode  in  which  water  baptism 
has  been  administered.  The  Baptists  are  no 
longer  deemed  heretics  as  they  formerly  were. 
Dr.  Watts  aided  this  kindly  feeling — '  A  church 
baptized  in  infancy,  or  in  adult  age,  may  allow 
communion  to  those  that  are  of  the  contrary  prac- 
tice in  baptism.'2  Robert  Robinson  praises 
Bunyau's  work,  and  advocates  his  sentiments  upon 
the  most  liberal  principles.  One  of  his  remarks  is 
very  striking  : — •  Happy  community !  that  can 
produce  a  dispute  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  years 
unstained  with  the  blood,  and  unsullied  with  the 
fines,  the  imprisonments,  and  the  civil  inconveniences 
of  the  disputants.  As  to  a  few  coarse  names,  rough 
compliments,  foreign  suppositions,  and  acrimo- 
nious exclamations,  they  are  only  the  harmless 
squeakings  of  men  in  a  passion,  caught  and  pinched 
in  a  sort  of  logical  trap.*'8  To  this  time,  Buuyan 
was  only  known  as  an  extraordinarily  talented  and 
eloquent  man,  whose  retentive  memory  was  most 
richly  stored  with  the  sacred  Scriptures.  All  his 
sermons  and  writings  were  drawn  from  his  own 
mental  resources,  aided,  while  in  prison,  only  by  the 
Bible,  the  Concordance,  and  Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs. 
Very  emphatically  he  says,  '  I  am  for  drinking 
water  out  of  my  own  cistern.'  '  I  find  such  a  spirit 
of  idolatry  in  the  learning  of  this  world,  that  had 
I  it  at  command  I  durst  not  use  it,  but  only  use 
the  light  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.'  '  1  will 
not  take  of  it  from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe  ratchet.'4 
it  must  not  be  understood  that  he  read  no  other 
works  but  his  Bible  and  Booh  of  Martyrs,  but  that 


*  Vol.  iii.,  p.  758. 

2  Christian  Church,  Svo,  1747,  p.  2S0. 

3  The  General  Doctrine  of  Toleration,  applied  to  Free 
Communion,  p.  8.  George  Whiiefield  most  warmly  approved 
the  communion  of  all  God's  saints  with  each  other.  This,  I 
must  own,  more  particularly  endears  Mr.  Bunyan  to  my  heart. 
lie  was  of  a  catholic  spirit.  The  want  of  water  (adult  baptism), 
with  this  man  of  God,  was  no  bar  to  outward  Christian  com- 
munion. And  I  am  persuaded  that  if,  like  him,  we  were  more 
deeply  and  experimentally  baptized  into  the  benign  and  gra- 
cious influences  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  we  should  be  less  baptized 
into  the  waters  of  strife  about  circumstantials  and  non-essen- 
tials. For  being  thereby  rooted  and  grouuded  in  the  love  of 
God,  we  should  necessarily  be  constrained  to  think  aud  let 
think,  bear  with  and  forbear  one  another  in  love,  and  without 
saying,  I  am  of  Paul,  Apollos,  or  Cephas ;  have  but  one  grand, 
laudable,  disinterested  strife,  namely,  who  should  live,  preach, 
and  exalt  the  ever-loving,  altogether-lovely  Jesus  most. 

4  Vol.  hi.,  p.  30 S. 


he  only  used  those  in  composing  his  various  trea- 
tises while  in  confinement.  He  certainly  had  and 
read  The  Plain  Mans  Pathway,  Practice  of  Piety, 
Luther  on  the  Galatlans,  Clarke's  Looking -glass  for 
Saints  and  Sinners,  Dodd  on  the  Commandments, 
Andrews'  Sermons,  Fowler  s  Design  of  Christianity. 
D'Anvers  and  Paul  on  Baptism,  and  doubtless  all 
the  books  which  were  within  his  reach,  calculated 
to  increase  his  store  of  knowledge. 

About  this  time  he  published  a  small  quarto 
tract,  in  which  he  scripturally  treats  the  doctrine 
of  eternal  election  and  reprobation.  This  rare 
book,  published  for  sixpence,  we  were  glad  to  pur- 
chase at  a  cost  of  one  guinea  and  a  half,  because 
a  modern  author  rejected  its  authenticity  !  It  is 
included  in  every  early  list  of  Bunyau's  works, 
and  especially  in  that  published  by  himself,  in  16SS, 
to  guard  his  friends  from  deception ;  for  he  had 
become  so  popular  an  author  that  several  forgeries 
had  been  published  under  his  initials.  These  few 
pages  on  election  contain  a  scriptural  treatise  upon 
a  very  solemn  subject,  written  by  one  whose  mind 
was  so  imbued  by  the  fear  of  God,  as  to  have  cast 
out  the  fear  of  man;  which  so  generally  embarrasses 
writers  upon  this  subject.  It  was  translated  into 
Welsh,  and  is  worthy  an  attentive  perusal,  espe- 
cially by  those  who  cannot  see  the  difference  be- 
tween God's  foreknowledge  and  his  foreordination. 

A  new  era  was  now  dawning  upon  him,  which, 
during  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life,  added  ten- 
fold to  his  popularity.  For  many  years  his  beauti- 
fully simple,  but  splendid  allegory,  Tlie  PllgrUna 
Progress,  lay  slumbering  in  his  drawer.5  Numerous 
had  been  his  consultations  with  his  pious  associates 
and  friends,  and  various  had  been  their  opinions, 
whether  it  was  serious  enough  to  be  published. 
All  of  them  had  a  solemn  sense  of  the  impropriety 
of  anything  like  trifling  as  to  the  way  of  escape 
from  destruction,  and  the  road  to  the  celestial  city. 
It  appears  strange  to  us,  who  have  witnessed  the 
very  solemn  impressions,  in  all  cases,  made  by 
reading  that  book,  that  there  could  have  been  a 
doubt  of  the  propriety  of  treating  in  a  colloquial 
manner,  and  even  under  the  fashion  of  a  dream, 
those  most  important  truths.  Some  said,  'John, 
print  it;'  others  said,  'not  so.'  Some  said,  'it 
might  do  good ;'  others  said,  'no.'  The  result  of  all 


0  He  hesitated  as  to  the  propriety  of  publishing  it,  probably 
from  the  influence  of  the  weighty  opinion  of  Martin  Luther. 
'  The  people  are  greatly  delighted  with  allegories  and  simili- 
tudes, and  therefore  Christ  oftentimes  useth  them  ;  for  they 
are,  as  it  were,  certain  pictures  which  set  forth  things  as  ll 
they  were  painted  before  our  eyes.  Paul  was  a  marvellous 
cunning  workman  in  handling  allegories,  but  Origen  and 
Jerome  turn  plain  Scriptures  into  unlit  and  foolish  allegories. 
Therefore,  to  use  allegories,  it  is  oftentimes  a  very  dangerous 
thing.'*  Such  instructions,  from  one  he  so  much  venerated, 
curbed  his  exuberant  imagination,  and  made  him  doubly  watch- 
ful, lest  allegorizing  upon  subjects  of  such  vast  importance  might 
'  darken  counsel  by  words  without  knowledge.' 
*  Com.  on  Gal.  iv.  SI. 


Ixviii 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


those  consultations  was  his  determination,  '  I  print 
it  will,'  and  it  has  raised  an  imperishable  monu- 
ment to  his  memory.  Up  to  this  time,  all  Bunyan's 
popularity  arose  from  his  earlier  works,  and  his 
sermons.  Leaving  out  of  the  question  those  most 
extraordinary  hooks,  Tlie  Pilgrims  Progress  and 
Holy  War,  his  other  writings  ought  to  have  handed 
down  his  name,  with  honour  and  popularity,  to  the 
latest  posterity.  While  the  logical  and  ponderous 
works  of  Baxter  and  Owen  are  well  calculated  to 
furnish  instruction  to  those  who  are  determined  to 
obtain  knowledge,  the  works  of  Bunyan  create  that 
very  determination,  and  furnish  that  very  know- 
ledge, so  blended  with  amusement,  as  to  fix  it  in 
the  memory.  Let  one  illustration  suffice.  It  is  our 
duty  to  love  our  enemies,  but  it  is  a  hard  lesson ; 
we  must  learn  it  from  the  conduct  of  the  Divine 
Creator — '  There  is  a  man  hates  God,  blasphemes 
his  name,  despises  his  being;  yea,  says  there  is 
no  God.  And  yet  the  God  that  he  carrieth  it  thus 
towards  doth  give  him  his  breakfast,  dinner,  and 
supper;  clothes  him  well,  and,  when  night  comes, 
has  him  to  bed,  gives  him  good  rest,  blesses  his 
field,  his  corn,  his  cattle,  his  children,  and  raises 
him  to  high  estate ;  yea,  and  this  our  God  doth 
not  only  once  or  twice,  but  until  these  transgres- 
sors become  old;  his  patience  is  thus  extended 
years  after  years,  that  we  might  learn  of  him  to 
do  well.'1  AH  the  works  of  Bunyan  abound  with 
such  striking  lessons,  as  to  render  them  extremely 
valuable,  especially  to  Sunday-school  teachers  and 
ministers,  to  enliven  their  addresses  and  sermons. 
But,  in  The  Pilgrims  Progress,  the  world  has  ac- 
knowledged one  train  of  beauties  ;  picture  after  pic- 
ture, most  beautifully  finished,  exhibiting  the  road 
from  destruction  to  the  celestial  city ;  our  only  diffi- 
culty in  such  a  display  being  to  decide  as  to  which 
is  the  most  interesting  and  strikingpiece  of  scenery.2 
The  editor's  introduction  to  that  extraordinary  book 
is  intended  to  prove  that  it  was  written  while  the 
author  was  imprisoned  for  refusing  to  submit  his 
conscience  to  human  laws,  and  that  it  is  a  perpetual 
monument  to  the  folly  of  persecution  ;  the  pecu- 
liar qualifications  of  the  author  are  displayed  in 
its  having  been  a  spontaneous  effusion  of  his  own 
mind,  unaided  by  any  previous  writer ;  an  analysis 
is  given  of  all  prior  pilgrimages,  in  which,  more  espe- 
cially in  The  Pilgrims,  Tlie  Pylgremage  of  the  Soule, 
Grande  Amoure,  and  in  TJie  Pilgrim  of  Loretto,  the 
reader  will  find  a  faithful  picture  of  some  of  the 
singularities  of  Popery  drawn  by  itself;  an  ac- 
count of  the  editions,  forgeries,  errors  in  printing, 


i  Vol.  iii„  p.  739. 

3  Even  Dean  Swift,  in  his  popular  Letter  to  a  Young  Divine, 
says,  '  I  have  heen  hetter  entertained,  and  more  informed  by  a 
few  pages  in  the  PitgrMs  Progress,  than  by  a  long  discourse 
upon  the  will  and  the  intellect,  and  simple  and  complex  ideas.' 
Nothing  short  of  extraordinary  merit  could  have  called  for 
such  a  eulogv  from  so  severe  a  critic. 


versions  and  translations  of  this  wonderful  book ; 
the  opinions  of  the  learned  and  pious  of  its  merits, 
principal  scenes,  and  a  synopsis.  It  has  been  the 
source  of  very  numerous  courses  of  lectures  by  mi- 
nisters of  all  denominations ;  and  has  been  turned 
into  a  handsome  volume  of  hymns,  adapted  for 
public  worship,  by  the  late  Mr.  Purday,  a  friend 
of  John  Wesley's,  and  a  laborious  preacher  for 
more  than  half  a  century. 

Great  efforts  have  been  made  by  the  most  popu- 
lar artists  to  enliven  the  scenes  of  the  pilgrimage ; 
but  no  colour  glows  like  the  enchanting  words  of 
Bunyan.  No  figures  are  so  true  to  nature,  and  so 
life-like.  Those  eminent  engravers,  Sturt  and 
Strut,  Stothard  and  Martin,  with  the  prize  efforts 
excited  by  the  Art  Union  of  England,  and  the 
curious  outlines  by  Mrs.  M'Kenzie,  the  daughter 
of  a  British  admiral,  have  endeavoured  to  exhaust 
the  scenes  in  this  inexhaustible  work  of  beautiful 
scenery.  The  most  elegant  and  correct  edition  is 
the  large-paper,  sumptuous  volume  by  Mr.  Bogue, 
admirably  illustrated  with  new  designs,  engraved  on 
wood  in  superior  style — a  volume  worthy  the  draw- 
ing-room of  queens  and  emperors.  The  designs, 
also,  of  the  late  David  Scott,  recently  published  at 
Edinburgh,  are  new,  and  peculiarly  striking.  His 
entrance  to  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death  is 
mysteriously  impressive,  a  fit  accompaniment  to 
Bunyan's  description,  which  is  not  excelled  by  any 
thing  in  Dante,  Spencer,  or  Milton.  In  both  parts 
of  the  Pilgrims  Progress  this  scene  is  full  of  ter- 
rific sublimity.  But  we  must  be  excused,  if  we 
most  warmly  recommend  our  own  offspring — the 
present  edition — as  combining  accuracy,  elegance, 
and  cheapness,  with  the  addition  of  very  numerous 
notes,  which,  we  trust,  will  prove  highly  illustra- 
tive and  entertaining. 

The  carping  criticisms  of  Mr.  Dunlop,  in  his 
History  of  Fiction,  and  of  an  author  in  the  Penny 
Encyclopedia,  are  scarcely  worth  notice.  The 
complaint  is,  want  of  benevolence  in  the  hero  of 
the  tale.  How  singular  it  is,  and  what  a  testi- 
mony to  its  excellence,  that  an  intelligent  writer 
upon  fictions  should  have  been  so  overpowered 
with  this  spiritual  narrative,  as  to  confound  it 
with  temporal  things.  Christian  leaves  his  wife 
and  children,  instead  of  staying  with  them,  to  be 
involved  in  destruction — all  this  relates  to  inward 
spiritual  feelings,  and  to  these  only.  Visited 
by  compunctions  of  heart,  Christian  strives  to  in- 
spire his  wife  and  children  with  the  same,  but 
in  vain  ;  he  attends  solitarily  to  his  spiritual  state, 
taunted  by  his  family,  while,  as  to  temporal  things, 
he  becomes  a  better  husband  and  father  than  ever 
he  was — but  this  is  not  prominent,  because  it  is  en- 
tirely foreign  to  the  author's  object,  which  is  to  dis- 
play the  inward  emotions  of  the  new  birth,  the  spi- 
journey  alone,  apart  from  all  temporal  affairs. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUN Y AN. 


Multitudes  read  it  as  if  it  was  really  a  dream,  the 
old  sleeping  portrait  confirming  the  idea.  In  the 
story,  Christian  most  mysteriously  embodies  all 
classes  of  men,  from  tho  prince  to  the  peasant — 
the  wealthiest  noble,  or  merchant,  to  the  humblest 
mechanic  or  labourer — and  it  illustrates  the  most 
solemn,  certain  truth,  that,  with  respect  to  the 
salvation  of  the  soul,  the  poorest  creature  in  exist- 
ence is  upon  perfect  equality  with  the  lordly  pre- 
late, or  magnificent  emperor,  with  this  word  ring- 
ing in  their  ears,  *  tho  rooit  have  the  gospel 
preached  to  them.'  The  Grace  Abounding,  or  Life 
of  Bunyan,  is  a  key  to  all  the  mysteries  of  The 
Pilgrim's  Progress,  and  Holy  War. 

Bunyan 's  singular  powers  are  those  of  descrip- 
tion, not  of  invention.  He  had  lived  in  the  city  of 
destruction — he  had  heard  the  distant  threatening 
of  the  awful  storm  that  was  shortly  to  swallow  it 
up  in  unutterable  ruin — he  had  felt  the  load  of  sin, 
and  rejoiced  when  it  was  rolled  away  before  a  cru- 
cified Saviour — he  knew  every  step  of  the  way,  and 
before  he  had  himself  passed  the  black  river,  he  had 
watched  prayerfully  over  those  who  were  passing, 
and  when  the  gate  of  the  city  was  opened  to  let  them 
enter,  he  had  strained  his  eyes  to  see  their  glory. 

The  purifying  influence  of  The  Pilgrim 's  Progress 
may  be  traced  in  the  writings  of  many  imaginative 
authors.  How  does  it  in  several  parts  beautify 
the  admirable  tale  of  Uncle  Tom,  and  his  Cabin. 
In  that  inimitable  scene,  the  death  of  the  lovely 
Eva,  the  distressed  negro,  watching  with  intense 
anxiety  the  progress  of  death,  says,  '  When  that 
blessed  child  goes  into  the  kingdom,  they'll  open 
the  door  so  wide,  we'll  all  get  a  look  in  at  the 
glory.'  Whence  came  this  strange  idea  —  not 
limited  to  the  poor  negro,  but  felt  by  thousands 
who  have  watched  over  departing  saints  ?  It  comes 
from  the  entrance  of  Christian  and  Hopeful  into 
the  celestial  city — '  I  looked  in  after  them,  and, 
behold,  the  city  shone  like  the  sun  ;  the  streets, 
also,  were  paved  with  gold,  and  in  them  they 
walked  with  crowns  on  their  heads,  palms  in  their 
hands,  and  golden  harps  to  sing  praises,  which, 
when  I  had  seen,  I  wished  myself  among  them.'1 
How  often  has  Bunyan 's  wit  sparkled  in  sermons, 
and  even  in  speeches  delivered  in  the  senate.  Pte- 
cently,  in  a  speech  on  the  coalition  ministry,  the 
following  reference  was  introduced: — 'Mr.  Facing- 
both-ways,  of  honest  John  Bunyan,  is  not  a  crea- 
ture mankind  can  regard  with  any  complacency  ; 
nor  will  they  likely  suffer  any  one  to  act  with 
one  party,  and  reserve  his  principles  for  another.' 
It  has  also  been  strangely  quoted  in  novel  writing 
— thus  in  Bell's  VilleUe — visiting  a  God-mother  in  a 
pleasant  retreat,  is  said  'to  resemble  the  sojourn  of 
Christian  and  Hopeful,  beside  the  pleasant  stream, 
with  green  trees  on  each  bank,  and  meadows  bcau- 


*  Vol.  ui.,  p.  1GC. 


tified  with  lilies  all  the  year  round.'  It  is  marvellous 
that  a  picture  of  nature  should  have  been  so  beauti- 
fully and  strikingly  described  by  an  unlettered  arti- 
zan,  as  to  be  used  in  embellishing  an  elegant  novel, 
written  nearly  two  centuries  after  his  decease.-' 

The  Pilgrim  was  followed  by  a  searching  treatise 
on  The  Fear  of  God.  The  value  of  this  book  led 
to  its  republication  by  the  Tract  Society,  and  4000 
copies  have  been  circulated.  It  is  a  neat  and 
acceptable  volume,  but  why  altered  ?  and  a  psalm 
omitted.0  Bunyan  says,  '  Your  great  ranting,  swag- 
gering, roysters ;'  this  is  modernized  into  '  Your 
ranting  boasters.'4  Then  followed,  the  Come  and 
Welcome  to  Jesus  Christ.  This  was  frequently 
reprinted,  and  hundreds  of  thousands  have  been 
circulated  to  benefit  the  world.  His  popularity 
increased  with  his  years;  efforts  were  made,  but  in 
vain,  to  steal  him  from  his  beloved  charge  at  Bed- 
ford. '  He  hath  refused  a  more  plentiful  income 
to  keep  his  station,'  is  the  language  of  his  surviv- 
ing friend,  Charles  Doe.  It  is  not  surprising  that 
he  was  thus  tempted  to  leave  his  poor  country 
church,  for  we  are  told  by  the  same  biographer,  that 
'  When  Mr.  Bunyan  preached  in  London,  if  there 
were  but  one  day's  notice  given,  there  would  be 
more  people  come  together  to  hear  him  preach, 
than  the  meeting-house  could  hold.  I  have  seen 
to  hear  him  preach,  by  my  computation,  about 
1200  at  a  morning  lecture,  by  seven  o'clock,  on 
a  working  day,  in  the  dark  winter  time.     I  also 


2  Within  the  Editor's  memory,  polished  writers  hesitated 
to  name  our  incomparable  allegorist,  on  account  of  his  humble 
name  and  education.     Thus  Cowpcr  sang — 

•I  name  thee  not,  lest  so  despised  a  nan:e 
Should  move  a  sneer  at  thy  deserved  lame.' 

Now  nearly  all  men  find  it  difficidt  to  do  that  name  sufficient 
honour.  One  of  the  most  splendid  steam-ships  in  America  is 
called  after  his  name.  A  magnificent  ship,  for  the  China  trade, 
was  built  at  Aberdeen  by  \Y alter  Hood  &  Co.,  which  so  swiftly 
traversed  the  ocean  as  to  have  made  the  voyage  from  Canton 
to  London  in  ninety-nine  days,  without  any  aid  from  steam. 
This  beautiful  and  grand  specimen  of  the  perfection  of  naval 
architecture  is  named  The  John  Bunyan.  Koman  Catholics 
have  printed  large  editions  of  the  Pilgrim,  with  alight  omis- 
sions, for  circulation  among  the  young  under  the  care  of  the 
nuns.  Our  English  fanatics  have  committed  a  crime  that 
would  make  a  papist  blush.  A  Rev.  E.  Neale  has  clumsily 
altered  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  that  Bunyan  might  appear  to 
teach  the  things  which  Banyan's  righteous  heaven-boru  soul 
abhorred.  It  is  a  piece  of  matchless  self-conceit  to  think  of 
mending  that  which  has  been  admired  by  the  wisest  of  the 
human  race  in  all  nations,  and  which  has  obtained  an  un- 
bounded popularity.  Such  an  attempt  to  alter  it  is  an  acknow- 
ledgment that  all"  the  boasted  power  of  Oxford,  Exeter,  and 
Rome,  are  unable  to  invent  a  tale  to  supersede  the  DO 
beauties  of  the  work  of  our  spiritually-minded,  heavenly-as- 
sisted brazier.  If  Mr.  Neale  should,  at  any  time,  alter  a  deed 
or  a  will  iu  a  similar  maimer,  the  law  declares  it  to  be  forgery, 
and  the  punishment  for  that  felony  is  transportation  for  life.  A 
similar  forsery  was  committed  in  a  recent  London  edition  ct 
Dr.  Cheever's  ll'M  Difficulty,  The  Traetarians,  doubtless, 
commit  these  scandalous  outrages  upon  the  Fathers,  and  aii 
other  writers,  and  deserve  the  contempt  of  every  honest,  up- 
right  mind. 

3  Vol.  i.,  p.  473.  4  Vol.  i.,  p.  4S0. 


kx 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


computed  about  3000  that  came  to  hear  him  one 
Lord's-day,  at  London,  at  a  town's  end  meeting- 
house, so  that  half  were  fain  to  go  hack  again  for 
want  of  room,  and  then  himself  was  fain  at  a  hack 
door  to  he  pulled  almost  over  people  to  get  up 
stairs  to  his  pulpit.'  This  took  jdace  in  a  large 
meeting-house,  erected  in  Zoar  Street,  either 
on  the  site  or  near  the  Globe  Theatre,  South- 
ward1 On  this  spot,  the  prince  of  dramatists 
amused  and  corrupted  crowded  houses;  while  in 
the  immediate  vicinity  were  the  stews  and  bear 
garden,  frequented  by  libertines  of  the  lowest  caste. 
One  Sunday,  in  1582,  many  were  killed  or  miser- 
ably wounded  while  attending  the  brutal  sport  of 
bear-baiting.  Here,  in  the  heart  of  Satan's  em- 
pire, the  prince  of  allegorists  attracted  multi- 
tudes, to  be  enlightened  by  his  natural  eloquence, 
and  to  be  benefited  by  the  fruits  of  his  prolific 
and  vivid  imagination,  at  all  times  curbed  and 
directed  by  the  holy  oracles.  It  was  a  spacious 
building,  covering  about  2000  feet  of  ground  (50 
by  40),  with  three  galleries,  quite  capable  of  hold- 
ing the  number  computed  by  Mr.  Doe.  We  have, 
from  correct  drawings,  furnished  our  subscribers 
with  the  plan  and  elevation  of  this  ancient  meeting- 
house. Having  preached  with  peculiar  warmth 
and  enlargement,  one  of  his  friends  took  him  by 
the  hand,  and  could  not  help  observing  what  a 
sweet  sermon  he  had  delivered  ;  'Ay,'  said  he, 
'you  need  not  remind  me  of  that,  for  the  devil 
told  me  of  it  before  I  was  out  of  the  pulpit!'2 
Amongst  his  hearers  were  to  be  found  the  learned 
and  the  illiterate.  It  was  well  known  that  Dr. 
John  Owen,  when  he  had  the  opportunity,  embraced 
it  with  pleasure,  and  sat  at  the  feet  of  the  un- 
learned, but  eloquent  tinker.  Charles  II.,  hearing 
of  it,  asked  the  learned  D.D.,  '  How  a  man  of  his 
great  erudition  could  sit  to  hear  a  tinker  preach  ?  ' 
to  which  the  doctor  replied,  '  May  it  please  your 
Majesty,  if  I  could  possess  the  tinker's  abilities,  I 
would  gladly  give  in  exchange  all  my  learning.' 

He  now  pictured  the  downward  road  of  the 
sinner  to  the  realms  of  death  and  darkness  in  the 
Life  of  Badman.  This  was  published  in  1680, 
and  is  written  in  a  language  which  fraudulent 
tradesmen  at  that  period  could  not  misunderstand; 
using  terms  now  obsolete  or  vulgar.  It  is  full  of 
anecdotes,  which  reveal  the  state  of  the  times,  as 
superlatively  immoral,  and  profane.  He  incident- 
ally notices  that  a  labourer  received  eightpence  or 
tenpence  per  day.3  At  that  time,  bread  and  all  the 
necessaries  of  life,  excepting  meat,  were  dearer  than 
they  are  at  present.      In  fact,  our  days  are  much 


1  Two  views  of  this  meeting-house,  an  exterior  and  interior, 
after  its  conversion  into  a  workshop,  are  given  in  the  Plate 
facing  page  i.  of  this  Memoir.  Iu  the  interior,  part  of  the 
beams  and  pillars  that  supported  the  gallery  still  remain. 

2  Toplady's  Works,  vol.  iv.,  p.  463. 

3  Vol.  iii.,  p.  637. 


happier  for  the  poor  than  any  preceding  ones  in 
British  history.  Bunyan's  notions  of  conscientious 
dealing,  will  make  all  traders  who  read  them — blush.4 

November  12,  1681,  Bunyan's  friend  and  fellow- 
labourer  Samuel  Penn,  was  removedfrom  this  world, 
and  in  the  following  year  persecution  raged  severely. 
The  church  was,  for  a  season,  driven  from  the 
meeting-house,  and  obliged  to  assemble  in  the  fields. 
The  Word  of  the  Lord  was  precious  in  those  days. 

In  1682,  while  surrounded  by  persecution,  he 
prepared  and  published  his  most  profound  and 
beautiful  allegory,  The  Holy  War,  made  by  Shad- 
dai  upon  Diabolus,  for  the  Regaining  of  the  Me- 
tropolis of  the  World;  or,  The  Losing  and  Taking 
again  the  Town  of  llansoul.5  The  frontispiece  is 
the  most  accurate  likeness  of  Bunyan  that  is  ex- 
tant ;  it  is  engraved  by  White,  from  a  drawing, 
also  by  him,  now  preserved  in  the  print  depart- 
ment of  the  British  Museum.  From  this  draw- 
ing, carefully  compared  with  the  print,  we  have 
furnished  the  expressive  likeness  wdiich  forms  the 
frontispiece  to  this  volume.  It  has  also  a  cor- 
rect whole-length  portrait,  with  emblematical  de- 
vices. This  exceedingly  beautiful  and  most  finished 
allegory  has  never  been  so  popular  as  The  Pilgrim'' s 
Progress,  for  reasons  which  are  shown  in  the  intro- 
duction to  Tlie  Holy  War.G  The  whole  narrative 
of  this  wondrous  Avar  appears  to  flow  as  naturally 
as  did  that  of  the  pilgrimage  from  the  highly  ima- 
ginative mind  of  the  author.  Man,  in  his  inno- 
cence, attracts  the  notice  and  hatred  of  Apollyon. 
Nothing  could  be  accomplished  by  force — all  by 
subtlety  and  deceit.  He  holds  a  council  of  war — 
selects  his  officers — approaches — parleys,  and 
gains  admittance — then  fortifies  the  town  against 
its  king — Immauuel  determines  to  recover  it — 
vast  armies,  under  appropriate  leaders,  surround 
the  town,  and  attack  every  gate.  The  ear  is  gar- 
risoned by  Captain  Prejudice  and  his  deaf  men. 
But  he  who  rides  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer 
is  victorious.  All  the  pomp,  and  parade,  and  hor- 
rors of  a  siege  are  as  accurately  told,  as  if  by  one 
who  had  been  at  the  sacking  of  many  towns.  The 
author  had  learnt  much  in  a  little  time,  at  the 
siege  of  Leicester.  All  the  sad  elements  of  war 
appear,  and  make  us  shudder — masses  of  armed 


4  One  of  his  anecdotes  is  remarkable,  as  exhibiting  the  state 
of  medical  knowledge  in  his  neighbourhood.  A  poor  wretch, 
who  had  taught  his  son  to  blaspheme,  was  affected  with  a 
nervous  twisting  of  the  muscles  of  his  chest.  This  was  sup- 
posed to  arise  from  a  Satanic  possession.  One  Freeman,  a 
more  than  ordinary  doctor,  attempted  the  cure.  They  bound 
the  patient  to  a  form,  with  his  head  hanging  down  over  the 
end ;  set  a  pan  of  coals  under  his  mouth,  and  put  something 
therein  that  made  a  great  smoke,  to  fetch  out  the  devil.  There 
they  kept  the  man  till  he  was  almost  smothered,  but  no  devil 
came  out  of  him*  The  death-bed  scene  of  the  broken-hearted 
Mrs.  Badman,  is  delicately  and  beautifully  drawn. 

5  Sutcliff's  History  of  Banyans  Church. 

6  Vol.  iii.,  p.  245. 

*  Vol.  iii.,  p.  605. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUN Y AX. 


lxxi 


men,  with  their  slings  and  baltcring-rams — clarions 
and  shouts — wounded  and  slain,  all  appear  as  in 
a  panorama.  The  mind  becomes  entranced,  and 
when  sober  reflection  regains  her  command,  we 
naturally  inquire,  Can  all  this  have  taken  place 
in  my  heart?  Tben  the  armies  of  Diabolus,  with 
his  thousands  of  Election  Doubters,  and  as  many 
Vocation  Doubters,  and  his  troops  of  Blood-men — 
thousands  slain,  and  yet  thousands  start  into  exist- 
ence. And  all  this  in  one  man !  How  number- 
less are  our  thoughts — how  crafty  the  approaches 
of  the  enemy — how  hopeless  and  helpless  is  the 
sinner,  unless  Immanuel  undertakes  his  recovery. 
The  Holy  War  is  a  most  surprising  narrative  of  the 
fall  and  of  tbe  recovery  of  man's  soul,  as  accurate 
as  it  is  most  deeply  interesting.  It  is  one  of  the 
most  perfect  of  allegories.1  There  is  as  vast  a  supe- 
riority in  Bunyan  s  Holy  War  over  that  by  Chrysos- 
tom,  as  there  is  iu  the  sun  over  a  rush-light. 

In  1GS4,  he  completed  his  Pilgrim  s  Progress, 
with  the  Journey  of  a  Female  Christian,  her  Chil- 
dren, and  the  Lovely  Mercy;  and  now,  as  his  inva- 
luable and  active  life  drew  towards  its  close,  his 
labours  were  redoubled.  In  hi3  younger  days, 
there  appeared  to  have  been  no  presentiment  on 
his  part  that  the  longest  term  of  human  life  would 
with  him  be  shortened,  but  rather  an  expectation 
of  living  to  old  age,  judging  from  an  expression 
in  his  Grace  Abounding.  When  he  enjoyed  a  good 
hope,  and  bright  anticipation  of  heavenly  felicity, 
'  I  should  often  long  and  desire  that  the  last  days 
were  come.  0  !  thought  I,  that  I  were  fourscore 
years  old  now,  that  I  might  die  quickly  and  be 
gone  to  rest.'2  At  that  time  he  did  not  anticipate 
twelve  years'  imprisonment  in  a  wretched  jail,  nor 
the  consequent  effects  it  must  have  upon  his 
robust  frame,  well  calculated  to  stand  all  weatbers, 
but  easily  sapped  and  undermined  by  a  damp  dun- 
geon. Symptoms  of  decay,  after  having  enjoyed 
his  liberty  for  about  a  year,  led  him  to  close  his 
Affectionate  Advice  to  his  Beloved  Flock,  on  their 
Christian  Behaviour ;  with  these  words,  '  Thus  have 
I  written  to  you,  before  I  die,  to  provoke  you  to 
faith  and  holiness,  and  to  love  one  another,  when 
I  am  deceased,  and  shall  be  in  paradise,  as  through 
grace  I  comfortably  believe ;  yet  it  is  not  there, 
but  here,  I  must  do  you  good.':J  It  is  remarkable 
that  Bunyan  escaped  all  the  dangers  of  the  trying 
reign  of  James  II.,  who,  at  times,  was  a  persecu- 
tor, and  at  times  endeavoured,  in  vain,  by  bland- 
ishments, to  win  the  Nonconformists.  His  minions 
had  their  eyes  upon  our  pilgrim,  but  were  foiled  in 
every  attempt  to  apprehend  him  ;  all  that  he  suf- 


1  A  beautiful  satire  is  contained  in  the  account  of  the  trai- 
tors— tradition,  human  wisdom,  and  man's  invention.  This 
picture  is  drawn  by  an  inimitable  artist.  Nor  have  we  seen 
anything  more  admirably  adapted  to  the  present  state  of  our 
Tractarian  times.     Vol.  ill.  277. 

-  Vol.  i.,  p.  22,  No.  123.  3  Vol.  ii,  p.  674. 


fered  was  the  occasional  spoiling  of  his  c;oods.* 
Neither  violence  nor  allurements  induced  him  to 
deviate  from  his  line  of  duty.  No  fear  of  man 
appeared  to  agitate  his  breast — ho  richly  enjoyed 
that  'perfect  love,'  which  'casteth  out  fear'  u  John 
Ik  18.)  James  did  all  that  an  unprincipled  man 
could  do  to  cajole  tho  Dissenters,  that  by  their 
aid  he  might  pull  down  the  walls  of  Protes- 
tantism, and  give  full  sway  to  the  Papacy.  He 
attempted,  among  many  others,  to  bribe  John 
Bunyan.  He  knew  not  how  well  he  was  read  in 
the  Book  of  Martyrs;  how  well  he  was  aware  that 
'  the  instruments  of  cruelty  are  in  their  habita- 
tions,' and  that  the  only  advantage  he  could  have 
received,  would  have  been  the  same  that  Poly pheme, 
the  monstrous  giant  of  Sicily,  allowed  to  Ulysses, 
that  he  would  eat  his  men  first,  and  do  him  the 
favour  of  being  eaten  last.  Mr.  Doe  states  that 
1  Regulators  were  sent  into  all  cities  and  towns 
corporate  to  new-model  the  magistracy,  by  turning 
out  some,  and  putting  in  others.  Against  this  Bun- 
yan expressed  his  zeal  with  great  anxiety,  as  fore- 
seeing the  bad  consequences  that  would  attend  it, 
and  laboured  with  his  congregation  to  prevent 
their  being  imposed  on  in  this  kind.  And  when  a 
great  man  in  those  days,  coming  to  Bedford  upon 
some  such  errand,  sent  for  him,  as  it  is  supposed, 
to  give  him  a  place  of  public  trust,  he  would  by  no 
means  come  at  him,  but  sent  his  excuse.'01  He 
knew  that  in  his  flesh  he  possessed  what  he  calls 
'Adam's  legacy,  a  conduit  pipe,  through  which  the 
devil  conveys  his  poisoned  spawn  and  venom,'6  and 
he  wisely  avoided  this  subtle  temptation.  He  de- 
tested the  'painted  Satan,  or  devil  in  fine  clothes.'7 
It  was  one  of  these  hypocritical  pretences  to  cor- 
rect evil,  while  really  meaning  to  increase  it,  and 
which  Bunyan  calls,  '  the  devil  correcting  vice. '  He 
was  watchful,  lest  '  his  inward  man  should  catch 
cold,'8  and  every  attempt  to  entangle  him  failed. 

This  godly  jealousy  led  him  to  sacrifice  worldly 
interests  to  an  extent  not  justifiable,  if  all  the 
facts  appear.  "When  told  that  a  very  worthy 
citizen  of  London  would  take  his  son  Joseph  ap- 
prentice without  fee,  and  advance  his  interests,  he 
refused,  saying,  *  God  did  not  scud  me  to  advance 
my  family,  but  to  preach  the  gospel.' 

At  this  time  he  again  manifested  his  lion  heart, 
by  writing  and  preparing  for  the  press  a  fearless 
treatise  on  Antichrist,  and  his  Ruin.  In  this  ho 
shows,  that  human  interference  with  Divine  wor- 
ship, by  penal  laws  or  constraint,  is  '  Antichrist ' 
— that  which  pretends  to  regulate  thought,  and  thus 
to  reduce  the  kingdom  of  Christ  to  a  level  with 
the  governments  of  this  world.  In  this  treatise, 
he  clearly  exhibits  the  meaning  of  that  passage, 


4  Life,  16'J2. 

*  Grace  Abounding  (continued),  vol.  i.,  p.  G3,  and  Life,  1002. 

6  Vol.  i.,  p.  505.        7  Yol.  i.,  p.  719.        tf  ^  ol.  i.,  p.  753. 


lxxii 


MEMOIR   OF   JOHN   BUNYAN. 


so  constantly  quoted  by  the  advocates  of  tyranny 
and  persecution  (Ezra  vjL  26),  and  shows  that  the 
laws  interfered  not  with  Divine  worship,  but 
that  they  upheld  to  the  fullest  extent  the  principle 
of  voluntary  obedience  (ver.  is);  so  that  any  man 
putting  constraint  upon  another  in  religious  affairs, 
would  be  guilty  of  breaking  the  law,  and  subject 
him  to  extreme  punishment.  This  was  one  of  the 
last  treatises  which  Bunyan  prepared  for  the  press, 
as  if  in  his  dying  moments  he  would  aim  a  deadly 
thrust  at  Apollyon.  Reader,  it  is  worthy  your 
most  careful  perusal,  as  showing  the  certain  down- 
fall of  Antichrist,  and  the  means  by  which  it  must 
be  accomplished. 

Feeling  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  life,  and 
that  he  might  be  robbed  of  all  his  worldly  goods, 
under  a  pretence  of  fines  and  penalties,  he,  on  the 
23d  of  December,  16S5,  executed  a  deed  of  gift, 
vesting  what  little  he  possessed  in  his  wife.  It  is 
a  singular  instrument,  especially  as  having  been 
sealed  with  a  silver  twopenny  piece.  The  original 
is  in  the  church  book,  at  Bedford: — 

'To  all  people  to  whom  this  present  writing  shall  com,  J. 
Bunyan  of  the  parish  of  St.  Cuthbirt's,  in  the  towne  of  Bed- 
ford, in  the  conn  of  Bedford,  Brazier  send  greeting.  Know 
ye,  that  I  the  said  John  Bunyan  as  well  for,  and  in  conside- 
ration of  the  natural  affection  and  loue  which  I  have,  and  bear 
vnto  my  welbeloued  wife,  Elizabeth  Bunyan,  as  also  for 
divers  other  good  causes  and  considerations,  me  at  this  present 
esspecially  moueing,  have  given  and  granted,  and  by  these 
presents,  do  give,  grant,  and  conferm  vnto  the  said  Elizabeth 
Bunyan,  my  said  wife,  all  and  singuler  my  goods,  chattels, 
debts,  ready  mony,  plate,  rings,  household  stuife,  aparrel, 
vtensills,  brass,  peuter,  beding,  and  all  other  my  substance, 
whatsoever  moueable  and  immoueable,  of  what  kinde,  nature, 
quality,  or  condition  soever  the  same  are  or  be,  and  in  what 
place  or  places  soever  the  same  be,  shall  or  may  be  found  as 
well  in  mine  own  custodes,  possession,  as  in  the  possession, 
hands,  power,  and  custody  of  any  other  person,  or  persons 
whatsoever.  To  have  and  to  hold  all  and  singuler  the  said 
goods,  chattels,  debts,  and  all  other,  the  aforesaid  premises 
vnto  the  said  Elizabeth,  my  wife,  her  executors,  administera- 
tors,  and  assigns  to  her  and  their  proper  vses  and  behoofs, 
freely  and  quietly  without  any  matter  of  challinge,  claime,  or 
demand  of  me  the  said  John  Bunyan,  or  of  any  other  person, 
or  persons,  whatsoever  for  me  in  my  name,  by  my  means  cavs 
or  procurement,  and  without  any  mony  or  other  thing,  there- 
fore to  be  yeeilded,  paid  or  done  vnto  me  the  said  John  Bunyan, 
my  executors,  administrators  or  assigns.  And  I,  the  said 
John  Bunyan,  all  and  singular,  the  aforesaid  goods,  chattels, 
aud  premises  to  the  said  Elizabeth  my  wife,  her  executors, 
administrators,  and  assignes  to  the  vse  aforesaid,  against  all 
people  do  warrant  and  forever  defend  by  these  presents.  And 
further,  know  ye,  that  I  the  said  John  Bunyan  have  put  the 
said  Elizabeth,  my  wife,  in  peacable  and  quiet  possession  of  all 
and  singuler  the  aforesaid  premises,  by  the  delivrye  vnto  her 
at  the  ensealing  hereof  one  coyned  peece  of  silver,  commonly 
called  two  pence,  fixed  on  the  seal  of  these  presents.1 

In  wittnes  wherof,  I  the  said  John  Bunyan  have  herevnto 
set  my  hand  and  seall  this  23d  day  of  December,  in  the  first 
year  of  the  reigne  of  our  soueraigne  lord,  King  James  the 


Second  of  England,  &c.; 
Jesus  Christ,  1685. 


in  the  year  of  our  lord  and  saviour, 


'Adr* 


fm 


■TJyVx^y, 


•&11 


1  Some  of  the  wax  remains,  but  the  coin  is  lost. 


Sealed  and  delivered  in  the  presence  of  vs,  whos  names  are 
here  vnder  written : — 

John  Bardolph.  "Willm.  Hawkes. 

Nicholas  Malin.  Lewes  Norman. 

It  appears  from  this  deed  that  Bunyan  continued 
in  business  as  a  brazier,  and  it  is  very  probable 
that  he  carried  it  on  until  his  decease.  This  deed 
secured  to  his  wife  what  little  he  possessed,  without 
the  trouble  or  expense  of  applying  to  the  ecclesias- 
tical courts  for  probate  of  a  will. 

Among  other  opinions  which  then  divided  the 
Christian  world,  was  a  very  important  one  relative 
to  the  law  of  the  ten  commandments,  whether  it 
was  given  to  the  world  at  large,  or  limited  to  the 
Jews  as  a  peculiar  nation  until  the  coming  of 
Messiah,  and  whether  our  Lord  altered  or  annulled 
the  whole  or  any  part  of  that  law.  This  question 
involves  the  observance  of  the  seventh-day  Sab- 
bath. An  awful  curse  is  denounced  upon  those 
who  do  not  continue  in  all  things  which  are  writ- 
ten in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  (Gal.  m.  to ; 
Deut.  ssvii.  20.  When  an  innovation  upon  the  almost 
universal  practice  of  infant  baptism  had  become 
an  object  of  inquiry  only  to  be  answered  from  the 
New  Testament,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  se- 
rious question,  why  God's  Sabbath-day  had  been 
altered,  shoidd  also  be  agitated  with  deep  feeling. 
Generally,  those  who  advocated  the  restoration  of 
the  Jewish  Sabbath  were  decidedly  of  opinion  that 
believers  only  were  fit  subjects  for  baptism,  and 
that  the  scriptural  mode  of  administering  it  was 
by  immersion  ;  hence  they  were  called  Seventh-day 
Baptists — Sabbatarians,  or  Sabbath-keepers. 

Bunyan  entered  with  very  proper  and  temperate 
zeal  into  this  controversy.  Popular  feeling  had 
no  influence  over  him ;  nor  could  he  submit  to  the 
opinions  of  the  ancient  fathers.  His  storehouse  of 
knowledge  was  limited  to  the  revealed  will  of  God, 
and  there  he  found  ample  material  to  guide  his 
opinion.  His  work  upon  this  subject  is  called, 
Questions  about  the  Nature  and  Perpetuity  of  the 
Seventh-day  Sabbath;  and  %) roof  that  the  First  Day 
of  the  Week  is  the  Christian  Sabbath.  It  is  one  of 
the  smallest  of  his  volumes,  but  so  weighty  in 
argument  as  never  to  have  been  answered. 

We  now  arrive  at  the  last  year  of  his  eventful 
and  busy  life,  during  wdiich  he  published  six  impor- 
tant volumes,  and  left  twelve  others  in  manuscript, 
prepared  for  publication.  A  list  of  these  will  be 
found  in  The  Struggler ;2  they  are  upon  the  most  im- 


2  Vol.  iii.,  p.  763. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


lxxiii 


portant  subjects,  ■which  are  very  admirably  treated.  I 
We  notice  among  these,  Tlie  Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved, 
or  Good  News  for  the  Vilest  of  Men.  It  is  a  spe- 
cimen of  preaching  calculated  to  excite  the  deepest 
interest,  and  afford  the  strongest  consolation  to  a 
soul  oppressed  with  the  sense  of  sin.  Great  sin- 
ner !  thou  art  called  to  mercy  by  name.  Arise ! 
shoulder  thy  way  into  court  through  any  crowd, 
— '  say,  Stand  away,  devil;  stand  away  all  discou- 
ragements; my  Saviour  calls  me  to  receive  mercy.' 
In  this  treatise,  Bunyan  has  repeated  from  memory 
what  he  had  read  in  some  book  when  in  prison, 
four  and  twenty  years  bofore.  It  is  a  curious 
legend,  which  he  doubtless  believed  to  be  true,  and 
it  displays  his  most  retentive  memory.1  His  poetry, 
like  his  prose,  was  not  written  to  gain  a  name, 
but  to  make  a  deep  impression.  One  of  his  pro- 
fessed admirers  made  a  strange  mistake  when  he 
called  them  doggerel  rhymes.2  His  Caution  to 
Watch  Against  Sin  is  full  of  solemn  and  impressive 
thoughts,  the  very  reverse  of  doggerel  or  bur- 
lesque. His  poem  on  the  house  of  God  is  worthy 
of  a  most  careful  perusal ;  and  thousands  have 
been  delighted  and  improved  with  his  emblems. 
One  rhyme  in  the  Pilgrim  can  never  be  forgotten — 

'  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall ; 
He  that  is  low  no  pride ; 
He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  guide,'  &c. 

The  careful  perusal  of  every  one  of  his  treatises, 
lias  excited  in  my  mind  a  much  livelier  interest 
than  any  other  religious  works  which,  in  a  long 
life,  have  come  under  my  notice.  In  fact,  the 
works  of  Bunyan  to  a  country  minister  may  be 
compared  to  a  vast  storehouse,  most  amply  replen- 
ished with  all  those  solemn  subjects  which  call  for 
his  prayerful  investigation ;  well  arranged,  ready 
of  access,  striking  in  their  simplicity,  full  of  vivid 
ideas  conveyed  in  language  that  a  novice  may  un- 
derstand. They  are  all  so  admirably  composed 
that  pious  persons,  whether  in  houses  of  convo- 
cation or  of  parliament,  or  the  inmates  of  a  work- 
house, may  equally  listen  to  them  with  increasing 
delight  and  instruction.  No  man  ever  more  richly 
enjoyed  the  magnificent  language  of  Job.  He 
called  it  'that  blessed  book.'3  The  deep  interest 
that  he  took  in  its  scenery  may  be  traced  through 
all  his  writings.  His  spirit,  with  its  mighty  powers, 
grasped  the  wondrous  truths  so  splendidly  pourtrayed 
in  that  most  ancient  book.  The  inspired  writings, 
which  so  eminently  give  wisdom  to  the  simple,  ex- 
panded his  mind,  while  his  mental  powers  were 
strengthened  and  invigorated  by  his  so  deeply 
drinking  into  the  spirit  of  the  inspired  volume. 


2  Vol.  i.,  p.  81. 

-  Mr.  Philip,  Critique  on  Bunyan,  p.  vi.  and  xvi. 

3  Vol.  ii.,  p.  425. 
\OL.  III. 


The  time  was  drawing  near  when,  in  the  midst 
of  his  usefulness,  and  with  little  warning,  he  was 
to  bo  summoned  to  his  eternal  rest.  He  had  been 
seriously  attacked  with  that  dangerous  pestilence 
which,  in  former  years,  ravaged  this  country,  culled 
the  sweating  sickness,  a  malady  as  mysterious  and 
fatal  as  the  cholera  has  been  in  later  times.  The 
disease  was  attended  by  great  prostration  of 
strength ;  but,  under  the  careful  management  of 
his  aifectionate  wife,  his  health  became  sufficiently 
restored  to  enable  him  to  undertake  a  work  of 
mercy ;  from  the  fulfilment  of  which,  as  a  blessed 
close  to  his  incessant  earthly  labour,  be  was  to 
ascend  to  his  Father  and  his  God  to  be  crowned 
with  immortality.  A  father  had  been  seriously 
offended  with  his  son,  and  had  threatened  to  disin- 
herit him.  To  prevent  the  double  mischief  of  a 
father  dying  in  anger  with  his  child,  and  the  evil 
consequence  to  the  child  of  his  being  cut  off  from 
his  patrimony,  Bunyan  again  ventured,  in  his  weak 
state,  on  his  accustomed  work,  to  win  the  bless- 
ings of  the  peace-maker.  He  made  a  journey  on 
horseback  to  Reading,  it  being  the  only  mode  of 
travelling  at  that  time,  and  he  was  rewarded  with 
success.  Returning  home  by  way  of  London  to 
impart  the  gratifying  intelligence,  he  was  over- 
taken by  excessive  rains,  and,  in  an  exhausted 
state,  he  found  a  kindly  refuge  in  the  house  of  his 
Christian  friend  Mr.  Strudwick,  and  was  there 
seized  with  a  fatal  fever.  His  much-loved  wife,  who 
had  so  powerfully  pleaded  for  his  liberty  with  the 
judges,  and  to  whom  he  had  been  united  thirty 
years,  was  at  a  great  distance  from  him.  Bedford 
was  then  two  days'  journey  from  London.  Pro- 
bably at  first,  his  friends  had  hopes  of  his  speedy- 
recovery;  but  when  the  stroke  came,  all  his  feel- 
ings, and  those  of  his  friends,  appear  to  have  been 
absorbed,  by  the  anticipated  blessings  of  immor- 
tality, to  such  an  extent,  that  no  record  is  left  as 
to  whether  his  wife,  or  any  of  his  children,  saw  him 
cross  the  river  of  death.  There  is  abundant  tes- 
timony of  his  faith  and  patience,  and  that  the 
presence  of  God  was  eminently  with  him. 

He  bore  his  trying  sufferings  with  all  the  pa- 
tience and  fortitude  that  might  be  expected  from 
such  a  man.  His  resignation  was  most  exemplary; 
his  only  expressions  were  '  a  desire  to  depart,  to  be 
dissolved,  to  be  with  Christ.'  His  sufferings  were 
short,  being  limited  to  ten  days.  He  enjoyed  a  holy 
frame  of  mind,  desiring  his  friends  to  pray  with 
him,  and  uniting  fervently  with  them  in  the  exercise. 
His  last  words,  while  struggling  with  death,  were, 
•  Weep  not  for  me,  but  for  yourselves.  I  go  to  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  will,  no 
doubt,  through  the  mediation  of  his  blessed  Son, 
receive  me,  though  a  sinner ;  where  I  hope  we  ere 
long  shall  meet,  to  sing  the  new  song,  and  remain 
everlastingly  happy,  world  without  end.     Amen.' 


Ixxiv 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


He  felt  the  ground  solid  under  his  feet  in  passing 
the  black  river  which  has  no  bridge,  and  followed 
his  pilgrim  into  the  celestial  city  in  August,  1688, 
in  the  sixtieth  year  of  his  age.  There  is  some 
uncertainty  as  to  the  day  of  his  decease :  Charles 
Doe,  in  the  Struggler,  1692,  has  August  31,  and 
this  has  been  copied  in  all  his  portraits.  In  the 
life  appended  to  the  Grace  Abounding,  1692,  his 
death-day  is  stated  as  August  12 ;  and  in  the 
memoir  appended  to  the  third  part  of  the  Pilgrim, 
also  in  1692,  the  date  is  August  17.  The  cir- 
cumstances of  his  peaceful  decease  are  well  com- 
pared by  Dr.  Cheever  to  the  experience  of  Mr. 
Standfast,  when  he  was  called  to  pass  the  river  : 
the  great  calm — the  firm  footing — the  address  to 
by-standers — until  his  countenance  changed,  his 
strong  man  bowed  under  him,  and  his  last  words 
were,  'Take  me,  for  I  come  to  thee.'  Then  the 
joy  among  the  angels  while  they  welcomed  the  hero 
of  such  spiritual  fights,  and  conducted  his  wander- 
ing soul  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  he  had  so 
beautifully  described  as  '  the  holy  city;'  and  then 
his  wonder  and  amazement  to  find  how  infinitely 
short  his  description  came  to  the  blissful  reality. 

The  deep  affliction  that  his  church  was  plunged 
into  led  to  several  special  meetings.  Wednes- 
day, the  4th  of  September,  '  was  kept  in  prayer 
and  humiliation  for  this  heavy  stroke  upon  us 
—  the  death  of  dear  brother  Bunyan ;  it  was 
appointed  also,  that  Wednesday  next  be  kept  in 
prayer  and  humiliation  on  the  same  account. 
At  the  meeting  held  on  the  11th,  it  was  ap- 
pointed that  all  the  brethren  meet  together  on 
the  18th  of  this  month,  September,  to  humble 
themselves  for  this  heavy  hand  of  God  upon  us, 
and  also  to  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  counsel  and 
direction  what  to  do,  in  order  to  seek  out  for  a  fit 
person,  to  make  choice  of  for  an  elder.  On  the 
18th,  when  the  whole  congregation  met  to  humble 
themselves  before  God,  by  fasting  and  prayer,  for 
his  heavy  and  severe  stroke  upon  us  in  taking 
away  our  honoured  brother  Bunyan  by  death,  it  was 
agreed  by  the  whole  congregation  that  care  be  taken 
to  seek  out  for  one  suitably  qualified  to  be  chosen 
an  elder  among  us,  and  that  care  was  committed 
by  the  whole  to  the  brethren  at  Bedford.'  Thus 
did  the  church  manifest  that  they  had  improved 
in  wisdom  under  his  ministry  by  flying,  in  their 
extreme  distress,  to  the  only  source  of  consolation. 
The  saddest  feelings  of  sorrow  extended  to  every 
place  where  he  had  been  known.  His  friend,  the 
Rev.  G.  Coehayn,  of  London,  says,  'it  pleased  the 
Lord  to  remove  him,  to  the  great  loss  and  inex- 
pressible grief  of  many  precious  souls.'  Numerous 
elegies,  acrostics,  and  poems  were  published  on  the 
occasion  of  his  decease,  lamenting  the  loss  thus 
sustained  by  his  country — by  the  church  at  large, 
and  particularly  by  the  church  and  congregation 


at  Bedford.      One  of  these,  '  written  by  a  dear 
friend  of  his,'  is  a  fair  sample  of  the  whole: — 


A   SHORT    ELEGY  IX   MEMORY    OF    MR.    JOHN   BUBTAff. 
WRITTEN   BY  A  DTAK  FEIEND    OV   HIS. 

The  pilgrim  travelling  the  world's  vast  stage, 

At  last  does  end  his  weaiy  pilgrimage  : 

He  now  in  pleasant  valleys  does  sit  down, 

And,  for  his  toil,  receives  a  glorious  crown. 

The  storms  are  past,  the  terrors  vanish  all, 

Which  in  his  way  did  so  affrighting  fall ; 

He  grieves  nor  sighs  no  more,  his  race  is  run 

Successfully,  that  was  so  well  hegun. 

You'll  say  he's  dead :  O  no,  he  cannot  die, 

He's  only  changed  to  immortality — 

Weep  not  for  him,  who  has  no  cause  of  tears ; 

Hush,  then,  your  sighs,  and  calm  your  needless  fears. 

If  anything  in  love  to  him  is  meant, 

Tread  his  last  steps,  and  of  your  sins  repent : 

If  knowledge  of  things  here  at  all  remains 

Beyond  the  grave,  to  please  him  for  his  pains 

And  suffering  in  this  world ;  live,  then,  upright, 

And  that  will  he  to  him  a  grateful  sight. 

Run  such  a  race  as  you  again  may  meet, 

And  find  your  conversation  far  more  sweet ; 

When  purged  from  dross,  you  shall,  unmix'd,  possess 

The  purest  essence  of  eternal  bliss. 


'  He  in  the  pulpit  preached  truth  first,  and  then 
He  in  his  practice  preached  it  o'er  again.' 
His  remains  were  interred  in  Bunhill  Fields, 
in  the  vault  of  his  friend  Mr.  Strudwick,  at 
whose  house  he  died.  His  tomb 1  has  been 
visited  by  thousands  of  pilgrims,  blessing  God 
for  his  goodness  in  raising  up  such  a  man,  so 
signally  fitted  to  be  a  blessing  to  the  times  in 
which  he  lived.  All  the  accounts  of  his  decease, 
published  at  the  time,  agree  as  to  his  place  of 
burial.  The  words  of  Mr.  Doe,  who  probably  at- 
tended the  funeral,  are,  "  he  was  buried  in  the  new 
burying-place,  near  the  artillery  ground,  where  he 
sleeps  to  the  morning  of  the  resurrection.'2  His 
Life  and  Actions,  1692,  records  that  'his  funeral 
was  performed  with  much  decency,  and  he  was 
buried  in  the  new  burying-ground  by  Moorfields.' 
Tlie  Struggler  calls  it  '  Fiusbury  burying-ground, 
where  many  Loudon  Dissenting  ministers  are  laid.'3 
Bunhill  Fields  burying-ground  for  Dissenters  was 
first  opened  in  1666.  The  inscription  upon  the 
tomb  to  his  memory  was  engraven  many  years 
after  his  funeral.  It  is  not  contained  in  the  list 
of  inscriptions  published  in  1717.  His  widow 
survived  him  four  years.  He  had  six  children 
by  his  first  wife,  three  of  whom  survived  him- — 
Thomas,  Joseph,  and  Sarah.  His  son  Thomas 
joined  his  church  in  1673,  and  was  a  preacher  in 
1692.  He  appears  to  have  been  usefully  employed 
in  visiting  absent  members  until  December  1718. 
My  kind  friend,  the  Rev.  J.  P.  Lockwood,  rector 
of  South  Hackney,  recently  discovered  entries  in 

1  Vol.  iii.,  p.  760.  2  Grace  Abounding,  1692. 

3  No.  25,  E.;  26,  W.;  26,  N.;  27,  S. 


MEMOIR   OF  JOHN   BUNYAN' . 


lxxv 


the  register  of  Kimbolton,  in  Huntingdonshire,  pro- 
bably of  the  descendants  of  this  sou,  Thomas.     No- 
vember 2G,  1G9S,  John  Bouion  and  Mary  Rogers, 
married:  she  was  buried,  September  7, 170G  ;  and 
he  again  married  Anne,  and  buried  her  in  1712, 
leaving  a  son  and  two  daughters.      His  death  is 
not  recorded.     One  of  the  descendants,  Hannah 
Bun  van,  died  in  1770,  aged  seventy-six  years,  and 
lies  in  the  burial-ground  by  the  meeting-house  at 
Bedford.     John  Bunyan's  son,  Joseph,  settled  at 
Nottingham,  and  marrying  a  wealthy  woman,  con- 
formed to  the  Church.     A  lineal  descendant  of  his 
was  living,  in  1S-17,  at  Islington,  near  London,  aged 
eighty-four,  Mrs.  Senegar,  a  fine  hearty  old  lady, 
and  a  Strict  Baptist.     She  said  to  n>e,  '  Sir,  excuse 
the  vanity  of  an  old  woman,  but  I  will  show  you 
how  I  sometimes  spend  a  very  pleasant  half-hour.' 
She  took  down  a  portrait  on  canvas  of  her  great 
forefather,  and  propped  it  up  on  the  table  with 
a  writing-desk,  with  a  looking-glass  by  its  side. 
'  There,  Sir,  I  look  at  the  portrait,  and  then  at 
myself,  and  can  trace  every  feature  ;  we  resemble 
each  other  like  two  pins.'  'Excepting  the  imperial 
and  moustachios,'  I  replied  ;  to  which  she  readily 
assented.     It  was  the  fact  that  there  was  a  strik- 
ing family  likeness  between  the  picture  and  her 
reflection  in  the  looking-glass.     Another  descen- 
dant, from  the  same  branch  of  the  family,  is  now 
living  at  Lincoln.    He  was  born  in  1775,  and  pos- 
sessed a  quarto  Bible,  published  by  Barker  and  j 
Bill  in  1641,  given  by  John  Bunyan  to  his  son 
Joseph.     This  was  preserved  in  his  family  until 
the  present  year,  when  it  came  into  the  editor's 
possession,  with  the  following  relics,  which  were, 
and  I  trust  will  yet  be  preserved  with  the  greatest 
care  : — An  iron  pencase,  made  by  Bunyan  the 
brazier,  with  some  stumps  of  old  pens,  with  which 
it  is  said  he  wrote  some  of  his  sermons  and  books; 
the  buckles  worn  by  him,  and  his  two  pocket-knives, 
one  of  them  made  before  springs  were  invented, 
and  which  is  kept  open  by  taming  a  ferrule  ;  his 
apple -scoop,  curiously  carved,   and  a   seal;    his 
pocket-box  of  scales  and  weights  for  money,  being 
stamped  with  the  figures  on  each  side  of  the  coins 
of  James  and  Charles  I.1     These  were  given  by 
Robert  Bunyan,  in  18-39,  then   sixty-fuur  years 
of  age,  to  a  younger  bra-neb.  of  the  family,  Mr. 
Charles  Robinson,  of  YYilford,  near  Nottingham 
(his  sister's  son),  for  safe  custody.     He  died  in 
1852 ;  while  his  aged  uncle  remains  in  good  health, 
subject  to  the    infirmities  of  his   seventy-eighth 
year.     On  many  of  the  blank  spaces  in  the  Bible 
are  the  registers  of  births  and  deaths  in  the  family, 
evidently  written   at  the   time.     Those  relics  are 
deposited  in  a  carved  oak  box.     They  were  sold 

1  As  matters  of  curious  interest  to  all  lovers  of  Bunyan,  we 
insert,  in  the  accompanying  paire,  engravings  of  these  relics, 
from  drawings  by  Mr.  Edward  Odor. 


with  the  late  Mr.  Robinson's  efTeets,  January, 
1853,  and  secured  for  me  by  my  excellent  friend 
James  Dix,  Esq.,  of  Bristol,  who  met  with  them 
immediately  after  the  sale,  on  one  of  his  journeys 
at  Nottingham.  They  are  not  worshipped  as 
relics,  nor  have  they  performed  miracles,  but  as 
curiosities  of  a  past  age  they  are  worthy  of  high 
consideration.  Everything  that  was  used  by  him, 
and  that  survives  the  ravages  of  time,  possesses  a 
peculiar  charm;  even  the  chair  in  which  he  sat  is 
preserved  m  the  vestry  of  the  new  chapel,  and  is  shown 
to  those  who  make  the  pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of 
Bunyan.- 


Ennynn's  Chair. 

In  the  samevestry  is  also  a  curious  inlaid  cabinet, 
small,  and  highly  finished.  It  descended  from 
Bunyan  to  a  lady  who  lived  to  an  advanced  age — 
Madam  Bithray ;  from  her  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Voley; 
and  of  his  widow  it  was  purchased  to  ornament 
the  vestry  of  Bunyan's  meeting-house. 


-^S* 


Bunyau's  Cabinet. 

The  personal  appearance  and  character  of  our 
pilgrim's  guide,  drawn  by  his  friend  Charles  Doe, 

-  The  chair  is  engraved  above,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  it  lias 
suffered  some  little  dilapidation  since  the  last 
-ravin- of  it.  The  legs  have  been  cut  down  to  suit  th 
of  one  "of  his  successors  in  the  ministry  !  I  With  regard to  the 
pulpit,  an  old  resident  in  Bedford  says-'The  e  <  ated John 
Howard  presented  a  new  pulpit  in  the  room  of  the  old  one, 
which  was  cut  up.  Of  part  of  the  wood  a  table  was  made, 
which  now  belongs  to  Mrs.  HUlyerd. 


lxxvi 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


will  be  found  at  the  end  of  bis  Grace  Abounding; 
to  winch  is  appended  bis  Dying  Sayings — '  of  sin 
— afflictions — repentance  and  coming  to  Christ — 


of  prayer — of  the  Lord's  day,  sermons,  and  week 
days:  "Make  the  Lord's  day  the  market  for  thy 
soul" — of  the  love  of  the  world — of  suffering; — 


PERSONAL    UTENSILS    USED    BY    JOHN    BUNYAN. 


Pocket-Knife,  with  spring- 


Larger  Knife,  without  spring  kept  open  or  shut, 
by  turning  a  ferrule. 


His  Apple-Scoop,  curiously  carved. 


'M  .. 


Pocket-Box  of  Scales  and  Weights,  for  the  purchase  of  old  gold,  and  dipped  or  worn  money,  with  the  figures 
of  the  coin  on  each  weight  in  the  reign  of  James  I. 


of  death  and  judgment — of  the  joys  of  heaven — 
and  the  torments  of  hell.' 

How  inscrutable  are  the  ways  of  Godt     Had 


Bunyan  lived  a  month  longer,  he  would  have  wit- 
nessed the  glorious  Revolution — the  escape  of  a 
great  nation.     The  staff  and  hope  of  Protestant 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


Europe  was  saved  from  a  subtle — a  Jesuitical 
attempt — to  introduce  Popery  and  arbitrary  go- 
vernment. The  time  of  his  death,  as  a  release 
from  the  incumbrance  of  a  material  body,  was 
fixed  by  infinite  wisdom  and  love  at  that  juncture, 
and  it  ought  not  to  be  a  cause  of  regret.  His 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  church  ceased  not 
with  his  mortal  life.  How  swiftly  would  his  glori- 
fied spirit  ily  to  see  the  landing  of  William,  and 
hover  with  joy  over  the  flight  of  the  besotted 
James  !  He  was  now  in  a  situation  to  prove  the 
truth  of  that  saying,  '  the  angels  desire  to  look 
into  '  the  truth  and  spread  of  the  glad  tidings. 
How  ho  would  prove  the  reality  of  his  opinion, 
expressed  in  TJie  Holy  War,  of  the  interest  taken 
by  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  in  the  prosperity  of 
the  church  on  earth.  When  Mansoul  was  con- 
quered, the  spirits  that  witnessed  the  victory 
'  shouted  with  that  greatness  of  voice,  and  sung 
with  such  melodious  notes,  that  they  caused  them 
that  dwell  in  the  highest  orbs  to  open  their  win- 
dows, and  put  out  their  heads  and  look  down  to 
see  the  cause  of  that  glory'  (Lu.xv.7-10.)1  So  may 
we  imagine  that  the  happy,  happy,  glorified  spirit 
of  Banyan  would  look  down  rejoicing,  when,  a  few 
years  after  he  had  yielded  up  his  pastoral  cares,  the 
seed  which  he  had  been  instrumental  in  sowing  pro- 
duced its  fruit  in  such  numbers,  that  the  old  meet- 
ing-house was  pulled  down,  and  in  its  place  a  large 
and  respectable  one  was  erected.  And  again,  on 
the  20th  February,  1850,  with  what  joy  would  he 
look  down  upon  the  opening  of  a  still  larger,  more 
commodious,  and  handsome  meeting-house,  bearing 
his  name,  and  capable  of  holding  1150  worship- 
pers. One  of  Bunyan's  pungent,  alarming  sayings 
to  the  careless  was,  '  Once  die,  we  cannot  come 
back  and  die  better.'"  If  anything  could  tempt 
him,  in  his  angelic  body,  to  re-visit  this  earth,  it 
would  be  to  address  the  multitude  at  the  new  Bun- 
van  Chapel  with  his  old  sermon  on  The  Jerusalem 
Sinner  Saved,  or  Good  News  to  the  Viled  of  Men. 
But  we  have  Moses  and  the  prophets — Christ  and 
his  apostles ;  if  we  shut  our  ears  to  them,  neither 
should  we  listen  to  a  messenger  from  the  New 
Jerusalem, 

When  it  is  recollected  that  Banyan  received  the 
most  imperfect  rudiments  of  education  in  a  cha- 
rity school  when  very  young,  which  were  '  almost 
entirely '  obliterated  by  bad  habits — that  he  was 
a  hard-working  man  through  life,  maintaining 
himself,  a  wife,  and  four  children,  by  his  severe 
labour  as  a  brazier — and  yet,  by  personal  efforts, 
he  educated  himself  and  wrote  sixty-two  valuable 
religious  treatises,  numbering  among  them  his 
inimitable  allegories,  The  Pilgrims  Progress  and 
Holy  War,  made  a  Concordance  to  the  Bible,  and 
conducted    important   controversies.       Preaching, 


Vol.  iii.,  p.  2(J7. 


Vol.  i.,  p.  714. 


while  at  liberty,  almost  innumerable  sermons  on  the 
Lord's-days  and  week-days,  early  in  the  morning 
and  late  at  night.  Visiting  his  flock  with  pastoral 
care — founding  churches  in  the  villages,  and  even 
in  towns  and  cities  far  distant  from  his  dwelling 
— constantly  giving  advice  to  promote  peace  and 
good  will,  and  rendering  benevolent  aid  by  long 
journeys!  His  whole  life  presents  to  us  a  picture 
of  most  astonishing,  energetic  perseverance.  Every 
moment  of  time  must  have  been  employed  as  if  he 
valued  it  as  a  precious  trust,  which,  if  once  lost, 
could  never  be  regained.  Who  of  us  can  compare 
our  life  with  his  last  thirty  years,  and  not  blush 
with  shame  ! 

The  finest  trait  in  Bunyan's  Christian  cha- 
racter was  his  deep,  heartfelt  humility.  This  is 
the  more  extraordinary  from  his  want  of  secular 
education,  and  his  unrivalled  talent.  The  more  we 
learn,  the  greater  is  the  field  for  research  that  opens 
before  us,  insomuch  that  the  wisest  philosophers 
have  most  seriously  felt  the  little  progress  they 
have  made.  He  acknowledged  to  Mr.  Cockayn,  who 
considered  him  the  most  eminent  man,  and  a  star 
of  the  first  magnitude  in  the  firmament  of  the 
churches,3  that  spiritual  pride  was  his  easily  beset- 
ting sin,  and  that  he  needed  the  thorn  in  the  flesh, 
lest  he  should  be  exalted  above  measure.  A  sense 
of  this  weakness  probably  led  him  to  peculiar 
watchfulness  against  it.  His  self-abasement  wa3 
neither  tinctured  with  affectation,  nor  with  the  pride 
of  humility.  His  humble-mindedness  appeared  to 
arise  from  his  intimate  communion  with  Heaven. 
In  daily  communion  with  God,  he  received  a  daily 
lesson  of  deeper  and  deeper  humility.  '  I  am  the 
high  and  lofty  One,  I  inhabit  eternity!  verily  this 
consideration  is  enough  to  make  a  broken-heart:  I 
man  creep  into  a  mouse-hole,  to  hide  himself 
from  such  majesty!  There  is  room  in  this  man's 
heart  for  God  to  dwell.'4  'I  find  it  one  of  the 
hardest  things  that  I  can  put  my  soul  upon,  even 
to  come  to  God,  when  warmly  sensible  that  I  am 
a  sinner,  for  a  share  in  grace  and  mercy.  1  can- 
not but  with  a  thousand  tears  say,  "God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  a  sinner  "  (Ezra  ix.  15).'  ° 

The  Ptevs.  Messrs.  Chandler  and  Wilson,  bear 
the  following  testimony  as  eye-witnesses  to  his 
character: — 'His  fancy  and  invention  were  very 
pregnant  and  fertile.  His  wit  was  sharp  and  cpjick 
— his  memory  tenacious,  it  being  customary  with 
him  to  commit  his  sermons  to  writing  after  he  had 
preached  them,'  a  proof  of  extraordinary  industry. 
1  His  understanding  was  large  and  comprehensive 
— his  judgment  sound  and  deep  in  the  fundamentals 
of  the  gospel.  His  experience  of  Satan's  tempta- 
tions in  the  power  and  policy  of  them,  and  of 
Christ's  presence  in,  and  by  his  Word  and  Spirit  to 

3  Vol.  i.,  p.  CSG.  *Vol.i.,pP.  090,631. 

4  Vol.  ii.,  p.  261. 


lxxviii 


MEMOIR  OF  JOHN   BUNYAN. 


succour  and  comfort  Iiira,  was  more  than  ordinary; 
the  grace  of  God  was  magnified  in  him  and  by 
Lira,  and  a  rich  anointing  of  the  Spirit  Avas  upon 
him ;  and  yet  this  great  saint  was  always  in  Lis 
own  eyes  the  chiefest  of  sinners,  and  the  least  of 
saints.  He  was  not  only  well  furnished  with  the 
helps  and  endowments  of  nature,  beyond  ordinary, 
but  eminent  in  the  graces  and  gifts  of  the  Spirit, 
and  fruits  of  holiness.  He  was  from  first  to  last 
established  in,  and  ready  to  maintain,  that  God- 
like principle  of  having  communion  with  saints  as 
such,  without  any  respect  to  difference  in  things 
disputable  among  the  godly.  His  carriage  was 
condescending,  affable,  and  meek  to  all,  yet  bold 
and  courageous  for  Christ.  He  was  much  struck 
at,  in  the  late  times  of  persecution  ;  being  far  from 
any  sinful  compliance  to  save  himself,  he  did 
cheerfully  bear  the  cross.'  Such  was  the  charac- 
ter given  of  him  by  these  two  eminent  divines,  in 
1693,  while  his  memory,  in  its  fullest  fragrance, 
was  cherished  by  all  the  churches. 

This  humility  peculiarly  fitted  him  to  instruct 
the  young,  of  whom  he  was  very  fond — 

'  Nor  do  I  blush,  although  I  think  some  may 
Call  me  a  baby,  'cause  I  with  them  play ; 
I  do  't  to  show  them  how  each  tingle  i'angle 
On  which  they  doating  are,  their  souls  entangle ; 
And,  since  at  gravity  they  make  a  tush, 
My  very  beard  I  cast  behind  a  bush.'  l 

He  had  friends  among  the  rich  as  well  as  the  poor. 
Of  this  his  solid  gold  ring  and  handsome  cabinet 
are  proofs.  From  a  letter  in  the  Ellis  correspond- 
ence, we  learn  that  Bunyan  had  so  secured  the 
affectious  of  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  as  to  be 
called  his  chaplain. 2 

Among  his  religious  friends  and  associates  he 
must  have  been  a  pleasing,  entertaining,  lively  com- 
panion. However  solemn,  nay  awful,  had  been  his 
experience  when  walking  through  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death,  yet  when  emerging  from  the 
darkness  and  enjoying  the  sunshine  of  Divine 
favour,  he  loved  social  intercourse  and  communion 
of  saints.  It  is  one  of  the  slanders  heaped  upon 
Christianity  to  call  it  a  gloomy,  melancholy  theme: 
though  '  it  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning 
than  to  the  house  of  feasting,'  yet  the  wisely  pious 
man  will  endeavour,  even  at  an  elegant  entertain- 
ment or  a  Lord  Mayor's  dinner,  to  drop  useful  hints. 
Whenever  Bunyan  describes  a  social  party,  espe- 


*  Vol.  iii.,  p.  748. 

-  It  is  noticed,  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  for  Ireland,  dated 
September -6,  108S — 'On  teusday  last  died  the  Lord  Mayor 
Sir  Jno  Shorter.  A  few  days  before  died  Bunuian  his  lordbhip's 
teacher  or  chaplain  a  man  said  to  be  gifted  that  way  though 
once  a  cobler.'*  We  can  excuse  the  sarcasm  of  a  Roman 
Catholic,  and  with  equal  good  nature,  and  more  truth,  remark, 
that  the  great  and  eminent  pope,  Sixtus  V.,  was  once  a  swine- 
herd— not  a  bad  school  in  which  to  study  how  to  keep  up  a 
despotic  sway  over  the  Papacy. 

*  Ellis'  Cor.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  1CL 


cially  a  feast,  he  always  introduces  a  wholesome 
dish ;  and  it  is  singular,  in  the  abundance  of  pub- 
lications, that  we  have  not  been  favoured  with 
JuJui  Bunyan  s  Nuts  to  Crack  at  Religious  Enter- 
tainments, or  a  Collection  of  his  Pious  Puddles. 
Thus,  at  the  splendid  royal  feast  given  to  Em- 
manuel, when  he  entered  Mansoul  in  triumph, 
'  he  entertained  the  town  with  some  curious  riddles, 
of  -secrets  drawn  up  by  his  father's  secretary,  hj 
the  skill  and  wisdom  of  Sliaddai,  the  like  to  which 
there  are  not  in  any  kingdom.'  '  Emmanuel  also 
expounded  unto  them  some  of  those  riddles  him- 
self, but  0  how  were  they  lightened  !  They  saw 
what  they  never  saw,  they  could  not  have  thought 
that  such  rarities  could  have  been  couched  in  such 
few  and  ordinary  words.  The  lamb,  the  sacrifice, 
the  rock,  the  door,  the  way.'3  '  The  second  Adam 
was  before  the  first,  and  the  second  covenant  was 
before  the  first.'4  '  Was  Adam  bad  before  he  eat 
the  forbidden  fruit?'5  '  How  can  a  man  say  his 
prayers  without  a  word  being  read  or  uttered?'6 
'  How  do  men  speak  with  their  feet? '  Answer,  rr. 
vi.  is.' 7  "  Why  was  the  brazen  laver  made  of  the 
women's  looking-glasses?'8  'How  can  we  com- 
prehend that  which  cannot  be  comprehended,  or 
know  that  which  passeth  knowledge?'9  "Who 
was  the  founder  of  the  state  or  priestly  domination 
over  religion?'10  What  is  meant  by  the  drum  of 
Diabolus  .and  other  riddles  mentioned  in  The  Holy 
War?11  The  poetical  riddles  in  The  Pilgrim's 
Progress  are  very  striking — 

'  A  man  there  was,  though  some  did  couut  him  mad, 
The  more  he  cast  away,  the  more  he  had.' 
How  can  '  evil  make  the  soul  from  evil  turn."2 
Can  'sin  be  driven  out  of  the  world  by  suffering?'18 
'  Though  it  may  seem  to  some  a  riddle, 
We  use  to  light  our  candles  at  the  middle.' M 
'What  men  die  two  deaths  at  once?'15 
'  Are  men  ever  in  heaven  and  on  earth  at  the  same  time? ' 10 
'Can  a  beggar  be  worth  ten  thousand  a-ycar  and  not 
know  it?'17 

He  even  introduced  a  dance  upon  the  destruc- 
tion of  Despair,  Mr.  Eeady-to-halt,  with  his  part- 
ner Miss  Much-afraid,  while  Christiana  and  Mercy 
furnished  the  music.  '  True,  he  could  not  dance 
without  one  crutch  in  his  hand  ;  but  I  promise  you 
he  footed  it  well.  Also  the  girl  was  to  be  com- 
mended, for  she  answered  the  music  handsomely.' 
Is  this  the  gloomy  fanaticism  of  a  Puritan  divine  ? 


"  Vol.  iii.,  p.  30S. 

4  Law  and  Grace,  marg.,  vol.  i.,  p.  524. 

0  Vol.  ii.,  p.  051.  G  Vol.  i.,  pp.  634,  635. 

7  Vol.  ii.,  p.  653.      e  Vol.  i.,  p.  647.       y  Vol.  ii.,  p.  15. 

10  Vol.  ii.,  p.  497.  "  Vol.  iii.,  p.  251. 

1'-'  Emblem  xiv.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  751. 

13  Christ  is  made  known  by  the  sufferings  of  his  saints, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  701,  and  note. 

14  Vol.  iii.,  p.  751,  and  note.  15  Vol.  iii.,  p.  595. 
1G  Vol.  ii.,  p.  22.                l'  Vol.  ii.,  p.  257. 


MEMOIR   OP  JOHN    BUN  YAW 


lxxlx 


It  is  true,  that  promiscuous  dancing,  or  any  other 
amusement  tending  to  evil,  he  hail  given  up  and 
discountenanced,  but  all  his  writings  tend  to  prove 
that  the  Christian  only  can  rationally  and  piously 
enjoy  the  world  that  now  is,  while  living  in  the 
delightful  hope  of  hliss  in  that  which  is  to  come. 

Bunyan's  personal  appearance  and  character 
was  drawn  by  his  friend  Mr.  Doe.  '  He  appeared 
in  countenance  stern  and  rough,  but  was  mild  and 
affable ;  loving  to  reconcilo  differences  and  make 
friendships.  He  made  it  his  study,  above  all  other 
tilings,  not  to  give  occasion  of  oil'ence.  In  his 
family  he  kept  a  very  strict  discipline  in  prayer  and 
exhortations.  lie  had  a  sharp,  quick  eye,  and  an 
excellent  discerning  of  persons  ;  of  good  judgment 
and  quick  wit.  Tall  in  stature,  strong-boned  ; 
somewhat  of  a  ruddy  face  with  sparkling  eyes ; 
his  hair  reddish,  but  sprinkled  with  gray:  nose 
well  set ;  mouth  moderately  large ;  forehead  some- 
thing high,  and  his  habit  always  plain  and  modest. 
My  determination  in  writing  this  memoir  has 
been  to  follow  the  scriptural  example,  by  fairly 
recording  every  defect  discoverable  in  Bunyan's 
character;  but  what  were  considered  by  some  to 
be  blemishes,  after  his  conversion,  appear,  in  my 
estimation,  to  be  beauties.  His  moral  and  religious 
character  was  irreproachable,  and  his  doctrinal 
views  most  scriptural ;  all  agree  in  this,  that  he 
was  a  bright  and  shining  light ;  unrivalled  for  his 
allegories,  and  for  the  vast  amount  of  his  useful- 
ness. His  friend,  Mr.  Wilson,  says,  •  Though  his 
enemies  and  persecutors,  in  his  lifetime,  did  what 
they  could  to  vilify  and  reproach  him,  yet,  being 
gone,  he  that  before  had  the  testimony  of  their 
consciences,  hath  now  their  actual  commendation 
and  applause.'1  To  this  we  may  add,  that  he 
was  without  sectarianism,  a  most  decided  Bible 
Christian.  This  reveals  the  secret  of  his  striking 
phraseology.     It  was  in  the  sacred  pages  of  Di- 


»  Works,  iulio,lU'J3k 


vine  truth  that  he  learned  grammar  and  rhetoric. 
Style,  and  all  his  knowledge  of  the  powers  i  ; 
guage — all  were  derived  from  the  only  source  of 
his  religious  wisdom  and  learning.  He  lived,  and 
thought,  and  wrote  under  the  influence  of  tli 
oracles,  translated  by  the  Puritans  in  1/HJO,  com- 
pared with  the  version  of  1G11.  Tliis  gives  a 
charm  to  all  his  works,  and  suit3  them  to  every 
human  capacity. 

Reader,  the  object  of  biography  is  to  excite 
emulation.  Why  should  not  others  arise  as  er- 
ly  to  bless  the  world  as  Banyan  did  ?  The 
storehouses  of  heaven  from  which  he  was  replen- 
ished with  holy  treasures,  are  inexhaustible.  As 
he  said,  'God  has  bags  of  mercy  yet  unsealed.' 
We  have  the  same  holy  oracles,  and  the  same 
mercy-seat.  The  time  is  past  for  merely  challeng- 
ing the  right  to  personal  judgment  of  religious 
truths.  In  Britain  the  lions  are  securely  chained, 
and  the  cruel  giants  disabled.  The  awful  crime  of 
imprisoning  and  torturing  man  for  conscience'  sake, 
exists  only  in  kingdoms  where  darkness  reigns — 
"Mcmgst  horrid  shapes,  and  shrieks,  and  sights  unholy.' 
We  stand  upon  higher  ground  than  our  fore- 
fathers ;  we  take  our  more  solemn  stand  upon  the 
imperative  duty  of  personal  investigation  —  that 
no  one  can  claim  the  name  of  Christian,  unless 
he  has  laid  aside  all  national,  or  family,  or  edu- 
cational prejudices,  and  drawn  from  the  holy 
oracles  alone  all  his  scheme  of  salvation  and  roles 
of  conduct.  All  the  secret  of  Bunyan's  vast  use- 
fulness, the  foundation  of  all  his  honour,  is,  that 
the  fear  of  God  swallowed  up  the  fear  of  man ; 
that  he  was  baptized  into  the  truths  of  revelation, 
and  lived  to  exemplify  them.  He  was  a  bright 
and  shining  light  in  a  benighted  world ;  and  of 
him  it  may  be  most  emphatically  said,  '  Blessed 
are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  that  they 
may  rest  from  their  labours ;  and  their  works  uo 
follow  them.' 

GEORGE  OFFOR. 


TTackney,  -Tune,  18531 


COPY  OF  THE  PROPOSALS  FOR  PUBLISHING  ALL  BUNYAN'S  WORKS, 


ISSUED   VERY   SHORTLY    AFTER    HIS   DECEASE. 

12.  C.  1.3**. 


The  original,  on  a  small  folio  sheet,  is  preserved  in  the  British  museum ; 


21 


The  first  volume  only 


vras  published,  containing  the  twenty  books  as  advertised,  1692. 


&fyz  labours  oi  Sofcn  Buugan,  author  at  the  pilgrim's  |3roi$rc£S,  late  minister  of  the  Gospel 
and  Pastor  of  the  congregation  at  Bedford,  collected,  and  to  be  printed  in  folio,  by  procurement  of  his 
church  and  friends,  and  by  his  own  approbation  before  his  death,  that  these  his  Christian  ministerial 
labours,  may  be  preserved  in  the  world.  He  was  an  eminent  convert,  and  experienced  cbristian.  He 
was  an  excellent,  eminent,  and  famous  gospel  minister.  He  hath  suffered  twelve  years'  imprisonment 
for  gospel  preaching.  His  books  have  sold  admirably  well.  And  he  behaved  himself  wisely,  plainly, 
courageously  as  a  follower  of  the  great  apostle  Paul,  as  he  was  a  follower  of  Christ.  And  therefore  all 
christian  people  may  reckon  themselves  obliged  to  preserve  these  his  labours  by  subscribing  for  a  folio. 
This  folio  will  contain  ten  of  bis  excellent  manuscripts,  prepared  for  the  press  before  his  death. 
And  ten  of  his  choice  books  already  printed,  but  long  ago,  and  not  now  to  be  had.  Their  titles  are 
as  followeth,  viz. 

Manuscripts. 
Paul's  departure  and  crown. 
Israel's  Hope  encouraged. 
Desires  of  the  righteous  granted. 
The  Saint's  priviledge  and  profit. 
UooLs  formerly  Printed. 
Gospel  truths  opened. 
Light  for  them  in  darkness. 
Instructions  for  the  Ignorant. 
A  map  of  Salvation,  &c. 
For  Printing  whereof  it  is  Proposed, 
I.   That  the  Author's  Effigies  shall  be  engraven  in  copper,  and  prefixt  before  the  book. 
II.  That  this  book  will  contain  about  one  hundred  and  forty  sheets,  in  folio ;  for  paper  aud  print  the 

same  writh  these  proposals. 
III.   That  the  subscribers  to  pay  ten  shillings  a  book,  viz.,  five  shillings  down,  and  five  shillings  at 

the  delivery  of  a  perfect  book  unbound. 
IV.   For  encouragement  of  them  that  shall  get  subscriptions  for  six  books,  they  shall  have  a  seventh 

gratis. 
V.  That  as  soon  as  three  hundred  subscriptions  is  brought  in,  the  book  shall  be  finished  in  six 
months  after. 
The  undertaker  is  William  Marshall,  at  the  Bible,  in  Newgate  Street,  London,  where  proposals  are  to 
be  had,  and  receipts  for  subscription-money  given;  and  care  shall  be  taken  that  it  shall  be  well 
corrected.  It  is  desired,  that  those  that  will  encourage  so  good  a  work,  would  speedily  send  in 
the  first  payment  of  their  money  to  those  persons  undernamed,  who  will  give  receipts  for  the  same. 


An  Exposition  on  the  ten  first  chap 

ters  of  Genesis. 
Justification  by  imputed  righteous 

ness. 


Saved  by  Grace. 
Christian  Behaviour. 
A  Discourse  of  Prayer. 
The  Straight  Gate. 


Christ  a  compleat  Saviour. 
Saints'  Knowledge  of  Christ's  Love. 
The  House  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon. 
A  description  of  Antichrist. 

The  new  Jerusalem. 
The  Resurrection. 


Mr.  John  Strudwick,  Grocer,  at  the  Star,  at  Hol- 

born  Bridge. 
Mr.   Charles  Dew,   at  the  Boar's  head,  in  the 

Borough,  in  Southwark. 
Mr.  Chandler,  minister,  and  Mr.  "William  Nichols, 

in  Bedford. 
Mr.  Edward  Den  of  Cranfield. 
Nicholas  Mayland  of  Gamlygay. 
Mr.  Luke  Astwood  of  Potton. 


Mr.  Samuel  Hensman  of  Brantery. 

Mr.  James  Collidge  in  Cambridge. 

Mr.  Pack  of  Exeter. 

Mr.  John  Clark  of  Gilford. 

Mr.  Masey  of  Harborough. 

Mr.  William  Hensmon  of  Wellingborough. 

Mr.  Sorey  of  Lancashire. 

Mr.  Chandler  of  Malborough. 

Mr.  Grifeth  and  Mr.  Pool  in  Lanviling. 


To  the  churches  of  Bristol  and  Canterbury,  the  said  William  Marshall,  the  undertaker,  does  promise,  that 
the  subscribers  shall  have  them  well  bound  in  good  calves'  leather,  for  two  shillings  a  piece. 

jTEfT*  Likewise  those  books  following,  concerning  Church  Government,  lately  published,  are  sold 
at  the  Bible,  in  Newgate  Street  :  Dr.  Owen  of  the  Nature  of  a  Gospel  Church,  and  its  Government, 
bound,  3s. ;  Ecclesiasticum,  or  a  Plain  and  Familiar  Christian  Conference,  concerning  Gospel  Churches 
and  Orders,  by  Dr.  Chaney,  bound,  Is.  The  Interest  of  Churches,  stitched,  6d.  Dr.  Owen's  brief 
Instruction  in  the  Worship  of  God,  bound,  Is.  A  Declaration  of  the  Faith  and  Order  owned  and 
practised  in  the  congregational  churches  in  England,  agreed  upon,  and  consented  unto,  by  their  Elders 
and  Messengers  at  the  Savoy,  which  is  now  agreed  on  by  this  late  agreement  of  the  churches,  bound, 
10c?.  Those  churches  that  take  numbers,  shall  have  them  cheaper.  Where  you  may  have  Caryl  on 
Job,  in  two  vols,  in  folio,  cheap  ;  and,  likewise,  ministers  that  wTould  supply  their  studies  cheap,  may 
have  Pool's  Synopsis,  Latin,  on  the  New  Testament,  in  two  large  volumes,  with  the  Index  ;  both  well 
bound,  for  30s. 


THE     PILGRIM'S     PROGRESS 


THIS  WOULD  TO  THAT  WHICH  IS  TO  COME: 

DEI  IVI  VIM    I  MIIR 

THE    SIMILITUDE    OF    A    DREAM. 

WHEREIN  IS  DISCOVERED  THE  MANNER  OF  HIS  SETTING  OUT,  HIS  DANGEROUS  JOURNEY 
AND  SAFE  ARRIVAL  AT  THE  DESIRED  COUNTRY. 


I  have  used  similitudes' — Ilosea  xii.  10. 


LICENSED    AND    ENTERED    ACCORDING    TO    ORDER. 

Loudon:  Printed  lor  Nath.  Ponder,  at  the  Peacock  in  the  Poultry,  1678. 

Now  faithfully  republished  with  all  the  additions  and  con-eel  ions  made  by  the  Author  to  the  lime  of  his  decease  ii 

August  16S8. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE    EDITOR. 


CHAPTER   I. 

LIFE  A  PILGRIMAGE  THROUGH  A  STATE  OF  SPIRITUAL  CON- 
FLICTS— 'THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS'  A  GUIDE  TO  ALL 
HEAVENWARD  PILGRIMS— THE  AUTHOR  FURNISHED  WITH 
LEISURE  TIME  TO  WRITE  IT,  BY  BEING  SHUT  UP  IN  PRI- 
SON FOR  REFUSING  TO  VIOLATE  HIS  CONSCIENCE. 

'  Art  thou  for  something  rare  and  profitable  ? 
Wouldest  thou  see  a  truth  within  a  fable? 
Art  thou  forgetful?    "Wouldest  thou  remember 
From  New  Year's  Day  to  the  last  of  December  ? 
Then  read  my  fancies,  they  will  stick  like  burs.' 

II  any  an's  Apology  for  his  Book. 

Tiie  pilgrimage  of  life  is  a  deeply-interesting  subject, 
coextensive  with  human  nature;  every  individual 
of  our  race  is  upon  pilgrimage,  from  the  cradle  to 
the  grave.  It  is  the  progress  of  the  soul  through 
time  to  cuter  upon  a  boundless  eternity  ;  beset  on  all 
sides,  at  every  avenue,  and  at  every  moment,  with 
spiritual  foes  of  the  deepest  subtilty,  journeying 
from  the  commencement  to  the  close  of  the  course 
through  an  enemy's  country,  uncertain  of  the  term 
of  existence,  certain  only  that  it  must  terminate 
and  usher  us  into  an  eternal  state,  either  of  exquisite 
happiness,  or  awful  misery.  How  natural  that 
every  man's  life  should  be  called  by  its  proper 
name — a  pilgrim,!  _ 

The  patriarch  felt  this  when  he  bowed  before 
Pharaoh,  and  said,  '  The  days  of  the  years  of  my 
pilgrimage  are  an  hundred  and  thirty  years:  few  and 
evil  have  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been,  and 
have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the 

vol..  in. 


life  of  my  fathers  in  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage.' 
Ge.  xhii.  9.  David  sang  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  in  the 
house  of  his  pilgrimage.  Ps.  cxbt.  54.  And  after  the 
lapse  of  ages,  when  the  Volume  of  Inspiration  was 
about  to  close,  the  Holy  Spirit  continued  the  simile 
in  the  apostolic  epistles,  'and  confessed  that  they 
were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.'  Heb.  xi. 
13.  As  such  we  are  exhorted,  'I  beseech  you,  as 
strangers  and  pilgrims,  ahstain  from  fleshly  lusts.' 
ire.ii.ii.  'See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly.'  Ep. 
v.  15.  '  So  run,  that  ye  may  obtain.'  l  Co.  Ix.  24,  These 
are  instructions  that  reach  the  heart  of  every  Chris- 
tian convert  throughout  the  world;  all  are  warned  of 
the  necessity  of  sobriety  and  vigilant  watchfulness, 
'  because  your  adversary,  the  devil,  as  a  roaring 
lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.' 
l  re.  v.  8.  '  He  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  prison,  that 
ye  may  be  tried ;  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and 
I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life.'  Re.  ii.  io. 

All  mankind  arc  pilgrims  ;  all  are  pressing 
through  this  world:  the  Christian  willingly  con- 
siders that  his  life  is  a  journey,  because  he  is  seek- 
ing a  better  country;  but  the  greater  multitude 
are  anxious  to  prevent  the  recollection,  that  tune  is 
a  preparation  for  eternity,  and,  in  consequence  of 
this  neglect,  they  shudder  when  approaching  the 
brink  of  the  grave,  into  which  they  are  irresistibly 
plunged.  Although  perpetual  examples  warn  them 
that  suddenlv,  at  a  moment  when  they  least  expect 
the  fatal  catastrophe,  it  may  befall  them,  still,  as 
if  infatuated,  they  make  no   inquiry  of  the   Holy 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Oracles  as  to  how  they  can  escape  the  second  death; 
hut  take  the  miserable  counsel  of  some  '  worldly- 
wise  man,'  and  seek  a  refuge  in  lies,  which  death 
will  terribly  sweep  away ;  or  they  wholly  neglect 
any  preparation  for  so  important  and  certain,  if 
not  sudden,  an  event.  All  are  on  the  advance ; 
time  hurries  on  those  whose  pilgrimage  is  limited 
to  the  foul,  but  fascinating  streets  of  the  '  city  of 
destruction, '  to  their  eternal  doom ;  while  those 
whose  anxious  cries  lead  them  to  the  Christian 
calling,  press  on  in  the  narrow  and  difficult  path 
that  leads  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

To  condense  the  instructions  given  to  the  pilgrim 
in  the  Inspired  Writings  into  a  map  of  the  road,  a 
guide  or  hand-book  to  the  celestial  city,  a  help  to 
Zion's  travellers,  and  a  faithful  warning  to  the 
votaries  who  crowd  the  broad  road  to  ruin,  was  a 
labour  of  love  for  its  vast  importance,  worthy  of 
the  highest  powers  of  human  intellect,  the  warmest 
Christian  philanthropy.  It  is  surprising  that  a 
work  which  so  naturally  suggests  itself  to  the 
imagination,  and  which  is  of  such  universal  interest, 
was  delayed  so  long.  The  abstruse  dreams  of 
Jewish  rabbies,  the  splendid  figures  and  scenery 
that  floated  before  the  minds  of  Oriental  and  Greek 
sages,  and  the  intense  subtlety  of  the  schoolmen  of  j 
the  Middle  Ages,  were  intended  for  a  very  limited 
class,  excluding  all  but  those  who  were  their  imme- 
diate disciples ;  and  all  their  instructions  having  a 
direct  tendency  to  lead  them  from  the  highway  of 
happiness,  to  wander  in  the  mazes  of  a  senseless 
sophistry,  or,  to  use  the  apostle's  words,  '  spoil 
them  through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit.'  It  was 
a  work  that  could  only  be  prepared  by  an  expanded 
soul,  above  all  sectarian  bias,  by  one  who  could, 
with  unbounded  charity,  embrace  all  nations,  all 
tongues,  and  every  people,  as  brethren  in  the  vast 
dominions  of  his  God  ;  by  one  who  felt  that  human 
happiness  would  not  be  perfect  until  this  universe 
became  the  kingdom  of  his  Christ.  Such  a  hal- 
lowed and  sanctified  mind  alone  could  furnish  his 
fellow-sinners  with  an  epitome  of  the  way  to  the 
celestial  city,  equally  acceptable  to  Christians  of 
all  denominations. 

To  write  for  the  instruction  of  the  whole  family 
of  man,  is  not  the  province  of  a  bigoted  sectarian, 
whose  visions  of  happiness  extend  no  further  than 
to  embrace  his  own  immediate  disciples.  Had 
ancient  sages,  or  more  modern  schoolmen,  felt  their 
brotherhood  to  the  whole  human  race,  knowing  that 
every  individual,  of  all  Sects  or  parties,  is  fulfilling 
bis  pilgrimage  through  the  short  space  of  time 
allotted  to  fit  him  for  an  unbounded  eternity, 
surely  some  of  the  great  and  illustrious  philosophers 
of  bygone  ages  would  have  attempted  to  complete 
an  allegor}'',  the  outline  of  which  had  been  given 
in  the  earliest  of  records — the  Holy  Oracles.  No 
trace,  however,  has  as  vet  been  found  in  Hebrew, 


Oriental,  Greek,  or  Latin  literature,  of  such  an 
attempt.  The  honour  of  producing  this  extraor- 
dinary work,  in  a  surprising  degree  of  perfection, 
was  reserved  to  a  later  age,  and  was  conferred  upon 
an  Englishman ;  a  man,  as  to  human  learning,  un- 
lettered, but  deeply  learned  in  the  school  of  Christ, 
and  profoundly  skilled  in  all  the  subtleties  of  the 
human  heart ;  upon  a  man  connected  with  a  deno- 
mination eminent  for  love  of  Christian  liberty,  and 
for  hazardous,  but  resolute  obedience  and  con- 
formity to  every  institute  which  they  found  in  the 
New  Testament ;  aud  therefore  everywhere  spoken 
against,  and  bitterly  persecuted. 

This  important  work  was  destined  to  be  accom- 
plished by  a  preaching  mechanic,  not  vainly  or 
falsely  claiming,  but  really  possessing  the  true 
evidence  of  apostolic  descent  in  spirit  and  in  truth, 
as  his  works  and  afflictions  fully  proved ;  to  a  man, 
while  suffering  under  the  tyranny  of  Antichrist, 
whose  judges  and  officers  shut  him  up  to  languish 
in  a  noisome  prison  for  twelve  years  and  a  half  of 
the  prime  of  his  life ;  thus  vainly  attempting  to 
bend  his  free,  his  heaven-bom  spirit,  to  submit, 
or  pretend  to  submit,  to  what  he  considered  to  be 
popish  and  unchristian  forms  and  ceremonies,  and 
to  compel  him  to  conform  to  the  church  established 
by  law ;  having  at  its  head,  at  that  time,  the  most 
debauched  monarch  in  Europe. 

He  was  apprehended  while  conducting  the  public 
worship  of  God,  and  sent  to  prison  in  Bedford  jail. 
The  indictment  preferred  against  him  was,  '  That 
John  Bimyan,  of  the  town  of  Bedford,  labourer, 
hath  devilishly  and  perniciously  abstained  from 
coming  to  church  to  hear  Divine  service,  and  is  a 
common  upholder  of  several  unlawful  meetings  and 
conventicles,  to  the  great  disturbance  and  distrac- 
tion of  the  good  subjects  of  this  kingdom,  contrary 
to  the  laws  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  King.'  To 
which  he  pleaded,  •  We  have  had  many  meetings 
together,  both  to  pray  to  God,  and  to  exhort  one 
another;  and  that  we  had  the  sweet  comforting- 
presence  of  the  Lord  among  us  for  our  encourage- 
ment ;  blessed  be  his  name  therefor !  I  confess 
myself  guilty  no  otherwise.'  No  witnesses  were 
examined,  but  a  plea  of  guilty  was  recorded  ;  and 
his  sentence  was,  '  You  must  be  had  back  again  to 
prison,  and  lie  there  for  three  months  following ; 
and,  at  the  three  months'  end,  if  you  do  not  sub- 
mit, and  go  to  church  to  hear  Divine  service,  and 
leave  your  preaching,  you  must  be  banished  the 
realm ;  and  if,  after  such  a  day  as  shall  be  ap- 
pointed you  to  be  gone,  you  shall  be  found  in  this 
realm,  you  must  stretch  by  the  neck  for  it,  I  tell 
you  plainly;  and  so  he  [the  justice]  bid  the  jailer 
have  him  away.'1 
This  was  soon  after  the  restoration  of  Charles  II., 


Bunyan's  owu  account  of  Lis  imprisonment,  vol.  i.  pp.  56,  57. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


when  a  persecuting  hierarchy  having  been  re-in- 
stated in  power,  revived  obsolete  and  tyrannical 
laws.  The  mechanic,  or  fisherman,  shall  not 
preach  or  teach,  was  the  sullen,  stern  voice  of 
despotic  authority.  Unit,  at  the  imminent  risk  of 
transportation,  and  even  of  death,  the  pious  and 
highly-talented  mechanic,  John  Bunyan,  perse- 
vered in  instructing  the  peasantry  who  came  within 
the  reach  of  his  voice.  He  was  for  this,  and  for 
not  attending  his  parish  church,  seized  and  sent  to 
Bedford  jail ;  and,  by  the  overruling  power  of  his 
God,  the  means  that  were  thus  used  to  prevent  his 
voice  from  being  heard  by  a  few  poor  labourers, 
opened  to  this  persecuted  disciple  of  Christ  the 
path  to  honour,  as  well  as  to  lasting  and  most 
extensive  usefulness. 

Dragged  from  the  arms  of  his  atfectionate  wife, 
who  was  brought  to  death's  door  by  painful  appre- 
hensions that  his  life  would  be  sacriliced ;  bereaved 
of  the  company  of  his  children,  and  of  personal 
communiou  with  the  little  flock  of  Christ  to  which 
he  ministered,  this  holiest,  most  harmless,  and 
useful  of  men  was  incarcerated  in  a  jail,  with  felons 
and  the  most  degraded  characters.  But  'surely 
the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee:  the  remainder 
of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain,'  0  Lord.  Ps. ham.  10. 
Here  he  finds  a  resting-place,  with  leisure  time  to 
write  his  far-famed  allegory;  here,  having  com- 
mended his  bereaved  wife  and  infant  family  to  the 
protection  of  the  King  of  kings,  even  in  that 
uex,  with  a  conscience  void  of  offence,  and  full  of 
spiritual  peace,  he  tranquilly  reposed,  waiting  with 
resignation  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father.  How 
strange  a  dwelling  for  one  so  highly  honoured  of 
God!  how  unearthly  a  mode  of  fitting  him  for  his 
glorious  destination,  to  shine  as  a  star  in  the 
heavenly  firmament,  and  to  occupy  a  mansion  in 
glory !  He  who  thinks  that  happiness,  or  holiness, 
or  true  honour,  is  to  be  measured  by  temporal 
grandeur,  makes  a  false  estimate,  and  knows  little 
of  the  ways  of  God. 

'  These  walls  and  bars  cannot  a  prison  make, 
The  freeljom  soul  enjoys  its  liberty; 
These  clods  of  earth  it  may  incaptivatc, 
"Wliilst  heavenly  minds  are  conversant  on  high, 
Ranging  the  fields  of  blessed  eternity.' 1 

The  poor  persecuted  Christian  was  free  from 
that  mental  wretchedness  which  cankered  the  souls 
of  his  persecutors ;  one  of  these,  named  Fecken- 
hani,  whose  violent  conduct  will  be  presently  seen, 
died  miserably  while  Bunyan  was  in  prison;2  and 


the  Christian  inhabitants  of  Bedford  trembled  under 
the  thought,  that  his  wretched  end  was  one  of  the 
just  judgments  of  Cod  upon  persecutors.  We 
must  lie,  however,  very  careful  in  such  conclusions. 
J'] very  solemn  event,  in  Divine  providence,  is  not 
to  be  considered  a  judgment  upon  those  who  have 
offended  God.  Thus,  when  Charles  11.  said  t.> 
Milton,  'Your  loss  of  sight  is  a  judgment  of  God 
upon  you  for  your  sins  committed  against  my 
father;'  the  intrepid  poet  dared  to  answer,  'Does 
your  Majesty  judge  so?  then  bow  much  greater 
must  have  been  the  sins  of  your  royal  father,  ■ 
that  I  have  only  lost  my  sight,  while  he  lost  his 
eyes,  and  head,  and  all  !' 

Notwithstanding  that  Bunyan  fully  anticipated 
an  ignominious  death,  his  days  were  spent  as  hap- 
pily as  the  prison  discipline  would  permit.  Working 
to  provide  for  his  family — studying  his  Bible — in- 
structing his  fellow-prisoners — and  writing  on  the 
most  important  subjects — must  have  fully  occupied 
every  moment  of  his  time.  And  it  was  here,  in 
this  den,  that  his  vivid  imagination  conceived,  and 
his  pen  wrote  this  wondrous  Pilgrimage,  under  the 
similitude  of  a  dream.  And  when  it  was  pnl 
to  the  world,  he  by  it  preached,  and  is  now  preach- 
ing, not  merely  to  a  few  villagers  in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  Bedford,  but  is  making  known  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation,  the  way  of  escape  from  the 
city  of  destruction,  the  pilgrim's  path  to  heaven,  to 
millions  of  every  clime. 

Thus  do  the  emissaries  of  Satan  ever  overreach 
themselves.     So  it  was  when  the  Bishop  of  London 
paid  a  large  price  for  a  few  score  of  English  New 
Testaments,    to    burn    them.       The    money   that 
Tyndale  received    from  Tonstall  enabled  him   to 
'  publish  a  new  and  superior  edition,  corrected  ia 
I  the  translation,  and  which  was  extensively  circu- 
!  lated.      Some    of   these   remain   to    this    day,3  a 
monument  to  the  faithfulness,  the  piety,  and  the 
talent  of  the  translator,  and  to  the  folly  of  perse- 
cution.    It  led  Tyndale  to  sing — 

•  The  devilish  imps  did  strive  to  have 
For  the  Holy  Book  a  burning  grave, 
But  all  their  travail  was  in  vain, 
God  midtiplicd  it  quick  again. 
The  pope  and  devil  are  scared  and  wondered, 
Their  gold  burns  one,  but  makes  a  hundred.'4 

The  world  would  probably  have  heard  but  littlo 
of  John  Bunyan— he  might,  with  thousands  of 
similar  valuable  characters,  have  remained  com- 
paratively unknown — had  not  the  natural  enmity 
of  the  human  heart  to  the  simple,  but  Divine  truths 


1  From  a  poem  by  Stephen  Colledge,  a  preaching  mechanic, 
written  a  few  days  before  he  suffered  death,  August  1681. 

2  He  was  called,  in  Bedford,  the  grand  informer.  Such 
were  the  indignant  feelings  of  his  neighbours,  that  his  widow- 
was  unable  to  hire  a  hearse,  but  took  his  body  in  a  cart  to  the 
grave.  See  Narrative  of  Proceedings  against  the  Noncon- 
formists at  Bedford,  4to,  1G70,  ia  the  Editor's  possession. 


3  A  fine  perfect  copv  is  in  the  Editor's  library. 

4  On  an  ancient  painting  of  Tyndale,  the  martyr,  in  pos- 
session of  the  Editor.  Under  an  emblematical  del  ice,  on  one 
side  of  the  portrait,  is  the  poetical  description.  The  represen- 
tation is  of  a  book  tied  to  a  stake,  burning,  while  a  number 
of  similar  books  are  flying  out  of  the  fire. 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


of  Christianity,  excited  wicked  men  to  acts  of  per- 
secution. Crafty  and  designing  priests,  under  the 
pretence  of  the  sole  cure  of  souls,  engrossed  the 
patronage  of  the  state,  enjoyed  exalted  dignities 
among  their  fellow-men,  and  appropriated  to  them- 
selves immense  wealth.  To  preserve  this  worldly 
eminence,  they  sought  to  stay  the  onward  improve- 
ment of  the  human  mind,  and  the  progress  of 
Divine  truth.  To  effect  this  ohject,  they  resorted 
to  an  old  plan  which  had  heen  often  tried,  and  had 
as  often  eminently  failed.  It  was  the  ohsolete 
system  of  tyranny  similar  to  that  which  cast  the 
three  Hebrew  youths  into  the  fiery  furnace,  Daniel 
into  the  den  of  lions,  and  had  martyred  thousands 
of  God's  saints— a  system  opposed  not  only  to  reason 
and  common  sense,  hut  to  the  operations  of  God  in 
nature.  It  was  to  compel  uniformity  in  modes  of 
worship,  and  matters  of  faith ;  to  hind  the  spirit  in 
fetters,  and  to  prevent  those  personal  inquiries  into 
religion  which  are  so  strictly  enjoined  in  the  Word 
of  God.  The  mode  of  a  sinner's  access  and  ap- 
proach to  the  throne  of  Divine  grace,  was  limited 
to  the  same  dull  round  of  forms  and  ceremonies 
under  all  circumstances  ;  in  fine,  it  demanded  the 
entire  prostration  of  the  immortal  mind  before  the 
claim  of  priestcraft  to  infallibility.  Such  a  sys- 
tem required  the  support  of  violence  and  tyranny. 
Therefore  it  was  enacted  by  law,  that  all  should 
constantly  attend  the  parish  church,  and  go  through 
the  prescribed  service,  upon  pain  of  fine,  imprison- 
ment, transportation,  or  death.  If  any  benevolent 
person,  not  connected  with  the  sect  of  religion 
taken  into  partnership  with  the  state,  was  detected 
in  visiting  and  praying  with  the  sick,  teaching  the 
ignorant  the  way  to  heaven,  comforting  the  dis- 
tressed conscience,  or  converting  sinners  to  holiness, 
he  was  doomed  to  imprisonment,  that  such  useful 
labours  might  be  stopped. 

By  this  time,  the  Bible,  which  for  ages  had  been 
concealed,  was  widely  circulated  among  the  people; 
education  had  spread  abroad  the  means  of  examin- 
ing those  sacred  pages ;  while  a  holy  ministry, 
under  the  Commonwealth,  had  extensively  sown 
the  seeds  of  life.  Many  felt  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come ;  hundreds  of  thousands  had  been 
taught  the  Assembly's  Catechism,  and  had  sanc- 
tioned the  Confession  of  Faith ;  while  upwards  of 
twenty  thousand  had  become  united  in  Baptist 
churches.  Multitudes  of  godly  men  and  women, 
of  all  denominations,  were  proving  the  sincerity 
and  truth  of  their  Christain  profession  by  their 
harmless,  benevolent,  and  pious  conduct.  The 
death  of  Oliver  Cromwell  let  loose  those  ambitious 
and  licentious  spirits,  which  had  been  for  some 
years  kept  under  severe  restraint.  It  opened  the 
way  for  the  restoration  of  the  old  system  of  ex- 
travagance, tyranny,  and  iniquity.  Like  streams 
long  pent  up,  they  now  rolled  on  with   resistless 


violence,  filling  their  course  with  the  tears  ef  the 
virtuous,  and  the  oaths  of  the  profane. 

The  Puritans,  by  their  simple  habits  of  life,  had 
secured  many  comforts,  which  excited  the  thirst 
of  plunder,  and  the  enemies  of  Divine  truth  en- 
tered with   alacrity  upon  the  work  of  wholesale 
persecution  and  spoliation.     Among  the  first  of 
those  upon  whom  the  hand  of  tyranny  fell,  was 
Jbhn  Bunyan,  a  man  who  had  determined,  at  all 
costs,  to  maintain  his  integrity.     With  the  most 
inflexible   devotion   to  his   Saviour,   he   preferred 
death  to  hypocrisy,  and  would  submit  to  no  com- 
promise with  the  enemies  of  his  soul's  happiness 
and   salvation.      In  the  face   of   most  imminent 
danger,  he  dared  not  pretend  to  believe  that  the 
priest  could,  by  any  ceremony,  convert  an  infant 
into  a  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  ;  or  that  one  poor  feeble,  sinful  man 
had  power  to  forgive  the  sins  of  his  fellow-trans- 
gressor.     He  dared  not  conform  to  ceremonies 
which  were  not  commanded  in  Holy  Writ.     He 
could  not  unite  with  a  system  which,  in  his  con- 
science, he  believed  to  be  directly  and  essentially 
opposed  to  Christianity ;  inasmuch  as  it  prevented 
free  inquiry,  and  usurped  the  throne  of  God,  in 
wickedly  attempting,  by  coercive  laws,  to  regulate 
or  direct  the  mode  in  which  the  soul  shall  publicly 
worship  the  God  of  salvation.      Bunyan  refused 
obedience  to  laws  that  interfered  with  the  sacred 
rights  of  conscience.     His  free  immortal  spirit  was 
not  to  be  confined  by  articles,  creeds,  and  confes- 
sions made  by  fallible  mortals.     He  persevered 
in  his  pious  benevolent  course,  and   the  tyrants 
immured  him  in  a  prison.      Here  his  God  most 
eminently  honoured  and  blessed  him,  and,  by  his 
providence    and   grace,  consecrated  him  to  be  a 
guide    and    companion  to   Christian    pilgrims   of 
every  country,  and  every  age,  while  on  their  way 
from  the  city  of  destruction  to  their  celestial  and 
eternal  habitation  in  glory. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  'PILGUIJI'S  PROGRESS'  WRITTEN  IN  PRISON DIFFICUL- 
TIES THROWN  IN  THE  WAT  OF  ITS  PUBLICATION. 

The  most  important  events  have  arisen  out  of 
circumstances  very  different  to  what  reason  could 
have  expected.  The  great  Lawgiver  of  Israel 
was  a  poor  foundling.  The  Redeemer  of  the  world 
was  born  in  a  stable.  The  sublime  Revelations  of 
John  were  written  by  an  exile  in  a  penal  settle- 
ment. The  universal  guide  to  Christian  pilgrims 
was  the  unaided  work  of  an  unlettered  mechanic, 
while  a  prisoner  for  conscience  sake.  So  unsearch- 
able are  the  ways  of  God : 

'  Behind  a  frowning  providence 
He  hides  a  smiling  face.' 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


'Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat.'  Jn.xhr.14.  'The 
wrath  of  man  sliall  praise  thee,'  0  Gotl  !  How 
wretched  is  the  state  of  those  persecutors  who,  like 
Satan,  are  found  fighting  against  the  Almighty!   To 

prevent  the  pious  and  talented  John  Bunyan  from 
doing  good,  state  religion  shut  him  up  in  a  noisome 
jail;  and  how  remarkably  was  it  overruled  for  the 
attainment  of  the  very  ohject  they  intended  to  pre- 
vent !  What  fearful  odds — the  power  of  the  state, 
priests  and  justices,  armed  with  Acts  of  Parliament, 
to  compel  nniformityin  faith  and  practice,  are  linked 
together  to  crush  a  poor  tinker!  he  preaches  the 
glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  a  few  poor  trembling 
sinners  ;  they  are  converted  ;  from  being  pests  to 
society,  they  hecome  valuable  and  useful  citizens; 
it  is  effected  in  a  ham — the  pomp  and  ceremonies 
and  vestments  used  in  a  consecrated  building  are 
set  at  nought.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  increased, 
with  all  its  hlesscd  effects,  without  the  aid  of  a 
learned  education.  God  must  be  prevented  from 
thus  going  with,  and  blessing  his  devoted  and 
humble  servant,  in  a  way  so  contrary  to  Acts  of 
Parliament  and  human  pride;  the  justices  meet — 
they  warn  their  destined  prey,  and  endeavour  to 
cajole  him  into  obedience  and  spiritual  slavery  ;  he 
saw  their  hostile  array,  he  knew  their  extensive 
powers — to  imprison,  transport,  put  to  an  igno- 
minious death.  What  could  a  poor  tinker  do 
under  such  alarming  circumstances  ?  He  had  a 
refuge  and  a  friend  that  they  saw  not,  knew  not. 
He  took  counsel  with  his  God,  and,  while  in  the 
path  of  duty,  felt  that  he  had  a  wall  of  fire  round 
about  him,  that  all  things  must  work  together  for 
good.  He  went  calmly  on  his  way.  The  warrant 
was  issued  by  Justice  Wingate,  a  name  known  only 
for  this  deed  of  iniquity.  It  was  the  first  attempt 
in  that  county  at  persecution.  The  place  at  which 
the  meeting  was  held  is  called  Samsell.  He  was 
warned  by  the  enemies  of  truth,  in  the  hopes  that 
he  would  fly,  and  that  they  might  triumph.  The 
jjosse  comitatus  was  raised,  and  the  liers-in-wait 
'kept  a  very  strong  watch  about  the  house;' 
his  timid  friends  begged  of  him  to  fly ;  he  walked 
into  a  close,  to  hold  communion  with  his  God ;  he 
went  into  the  meeting  with  his  spiritual  strength 
renewed.  When  requested  by  his  poor  friends, 
who  were  alarmed  for  his  safety,  not  to  hold  the 
meeting,  he  said,  '  I  will  not  stir,  neither  will  I 
have  the  meeting  dismissed  for  this.  Come,  be 
of  good  cheer,  let  us  not  be  daunted  ;  our  cause  is 
good,  we  need  not  be  ashamed  of  it.'  He  com- 
menced the  service  with  prayer,  during  which  he 
was  not  interrupted.  He  named  his  text:  '  Dost 
thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  V  Jn.  ix.  85;  in- 
tending to  show  the  absolute  need  of  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ,  and  that  it  was  also  a  thing  of  the 
highest  concern  for  men  to  inquire  into,  and 
to  ask  their  own  hearts  whether  they  had  it  or 


no.'  But  before  he  could  enter  upon  this  import- 
ant  inquiry,  the  constable  approached,  produced 
his  warrant,  and  put  his  hand  upon  his  person. 
Bunyan  looked  at  him;  the  man  turned  pair,  with- 
drew his  hand,  and  trembled;  it  was  the  jirsf  vic- 
tim that  he  had  arrested  under  those,  wicked  laws. 

After  a  few  words  of  counsel  and  encouragement 

to  the  people,  he  surrendered  himself  to  the  officer; 
and  upon  his  refusal  to  leave  off  preaching,  the  jus- 
tice committed  him  to  Bedford  jail,  where  he  Lay, 
under  a  cruel  sentence,  for  nearly  thirteen  years. 

We  may  easily  imagine  the  alarm  and  misery 
felt  by  his  affectionate  wife  and  his  four  children, 
one  of  whom  was  blind,  and  the  whole  community 
of  dissenters  in  that  part  of  the  country.  Anti- 
christ appeared  to  triumph.  It  is  very  probable 
that  his  fellow-worshippers  would  humble  them- 
selves before  God,  and,  with  broken  hearts,  inquire 
what  peculiar  crimes  they  had  been  guilty  of  to 
call  forth  this  severe  chastisement.  They  might 
call  to  remembrance  the  language  of  David,  '  Thy 
judgments  are  a  great  deep;'  and  be  comforted 
with  his  following  words,  '  0  Lord,  thou  preservest 
man.'  Who  could  have  imagined  that  the  jail 
was  to  be  bis  study,  his  Bethel,  and  the  means  of 
his  preaching  to  millions  of  his  fellow-sinners,  in 


all  ao-es   and  lam 


'0   the   depth  of  the 


riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God ! 
How  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his 
ways  past  finding  out ! ' 

In  possession  of  a  strong  bodily  frame,  and  of 
that  robust  health  which  arises  from  incessant 
activity  in  the  open  air  ;  travelling  about  the 
country  to  obtain  means  of  support  to  his  family 
by  his  labours,  and  exerting  himself  on  the  day  of 
rest  by  proclaiming  in  the  villages  the  glad  tidings 
of  salvation  ;  from  a  state  of  incessant  activity,  he 
was  suddenly  incarcerated  in  a  jail,  situated  on  a 
bridge,  and  over  the  centre  of  the  river  ;  the  small 
damp  dens  being  on  a  level  with  the  water.  Had 
he  been  sent  there  for  crime,  it  might  have  rapidly 
affected  his  health  and  spirits;  but  he  was  called 
to  suffer,  that  the  cause  of  truth  might  be  hon- 
oured, and  the  God  of  truth  was  with  him  to  pre- 
serve his  health,  and  to  comfort  and  support  his 
mind  with  those  supplies  of  happiness  to  which  the 
world  is  a  stranger,  and  which  it  can  neither  give 
nor  take  away.2 


1  See  Preface  to  his  '  Confession  of  Faith,'  vol.  ii.  p.  593. 

2  The  bank  of  this  river,  Ouse,  had  been  famous  fur  the  mag- 
nificent mausoleum  of  Oil'a,  king  of  the  Mercians,  one  of  tlie 
illustrious  murderers  and  robbers  of  his  time,  from  whom  tlie 
Editor's  family,  in  their  foolish  vanity,  claim  descent;  bul  this, 
as  Camden  savs,  'a  more  violent  and  BWifter  Btream  than  ordi- 
nary in  a  Hoo"d  swouped  clean  away.'     Upon  I 

erected,  a  pier  was  raised  from  the  river  to  support  I 
centre  arches;  and  in  tins  pier  was  Bnnyan's 
This  dark  place,  a  lit  habitation  for  cruelty.has  also  beenawept 
away.     The  eye  of  John   Howard,  in  1788,  penetrated  into 


THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


At  the  assizes,  a  plea  of  guilty  was  recorded ; 
and  although  numerous  prisoners,  charged  with 
crimes,  were  liberated  at  the  coronation  of  Charles 
II.,  his  case  did  not  come  within  the  proclamation, 
and  he  appeared  to  he  doomed  to  hopeless  imprison- 
ment or  to  an  untimely  end.  Happily,  the  regu- 
lations of  the  jail  allowed  him  the  use  of  his  Bible 
and  Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs,  and  of  the  materials 
for  writing.  His  time  was  beguiled  with  tagging 
laces  to  provide  for  his  poor  family;  in  praying 
with  and  exhorting  his  fellow-prisoners,  and  in 
the  composing  of  books,  which  were  extensively 
published,  for  the  instruction  of  the  world.  He 
soon  became,  like  Joseph  in  Pharaoh's  prison,  a 
favourite  with  the  jailer,  who  was  at  times  severely 
threatened  for  the  privileges  he  allowed  this 
prisoner  for  Christ.  Among  the  books  that  he 
wrote  in  prison,  we  shall  find  that  the  most  pro- 
minent and  important  one  was  the  'Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress.' Charles  Doe,  who  was  a  personal  friend 
of  Mr.  Bunyan's,  and  who  called  him  '  an  apostle 
of  our  age,  if  we  have  any,'  thus  narrates  the  fact 
in  his  IStruggler  for  tJie  Preservation  of  Mr.  John 
Bunyan's  Labours:1  '  In  the  year  1G60  (being  the 
year  King  Charles  returned  to  England),  having 
preached  about  five  years,  the  rage  of  gospel  ene- 
mies was  so  great,  that,  November  12th,  they  took 
him  prisoner,  at  a  meeting  of  good  people,  and 
put  him  in  Bedford  jail;  and  there  he  continued 
about  six  years,  and  then  was  let  out  again,  1666. 
Being  the  year  of  the  burning  of  London,  and  a 
little  after  his  release,  they  took  him  again,  at  a 
meeting,  and  put  him  in  the  same  jail,  where  he 
lay  six  years  more.  And  after  he  was  released 
again,  they  took  him  again,  and  put  him  in  prison 
the  third  time ;  but  that  proved  but  for  about  half 
a  year.  Whilst  he  was  thus  twelve  years  and  a 
half  in  prison,  he  wrote  several  of  his  published 
books,  as  by  many  of  their  epistles  appears;2  as 
'  Pray  by  the  Spirit,'  '  Holy  City,' '  Resurrection,' 
'  Grace  Abounding,'  and  others  ;  also,  '  The  Pil- 
grim's Progress,'  as  himself  and  many  others 
have  said.'     Mr.   Doe  thus  argues  upon  the  fact: 


this  den,  and  he  thus  described  it : — '  The  men  and  women 
felons  associate  together ;  their  night  rooms  are  two  dungeons 
— only  one  court  for  debtors  and  felons — no  infirmary — no 
bath.' — Howard's  Lazarettoes  and  Prisons,  4to,  1789,  p.  150. 
AY  ell  might  Banyan  call  it  'a  denl'  The  gate-house  was 
pulled  down  in  1765,  and  the  prison  was  demolished  very  soon 
after  Howard  had  unveiled  its  gloomy  wretchedness.  The 
bridge  was  only  fourteen  feet  wide ;  the  dungeons  must  have 
been  small  indeed.  How  strange  an  apartment  did  God  select 
for  his  servant,  in  which  to  write  this  important  book  ! 

1  A  deeply-interesting  paper  usually  appended  to  Bunyan's 
Works,  folio,  1692. 

2  Upon  his  first  release  from  prison,  in  1066,  he  published 
'  Grace  Abounding,'  and  in  the  title-page  states  '  also  what  he 
hath  met  with  in  prison.  All  which  was  written  by  his  own 
hand  there.'  The  Preface  to  'A  Defence  of  Justification'  is 
dated  from  prison,  1671.  So  his  'Confession:' — 'Thine  in 
bonds  for  the  gospel.' 


'  And  I  reckon  I  shall  not  be  out  of  the  way  if  I 
observe  and  say,  What  hath  the  devil  or  his  agents 
gotten  by  putting  our  great  gospel  minister,  Bun- 
yan,  in  prison?  for  in  prison,  as  before  mentioned, 
he  wrote  many  excellent  books,  that  have  published 
to  the  world  his  great  grace,  and  great  truth,  and 
great  judgment,  and  great  ingenuity;  and  to  in- 
stance, in  one,  '  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  he  hath 
suited  to  the  life  of  a  traveller  so  exactly  and 
pleasantly,  and  to  the  life  of  a  Christian,  that  this 
very  book,  besides  the  rest,  hath  done  the  super- 
stitious sort  of  men  and  their  practice  more  harm, 
or  rather  good,  as  I  may  call  it,  than  if  he  had 
been  let  alone  at  his  meeting  at  Bedford  to  preach 
the  gospel  to  his  own  auditory,  as  it  might  have 
fallen  out ;  for  none  but  priest-ridden  people  know 
how  to  cavil  at  it,  it  wins  so  smoothly  upon  their 
affections,  and  so  insensibly  distils  the  gospel  into 
them ;  and  hath  been  printed  in  France,  Holland, 
New  England,  and  in  Welsh,  and  about  a  hundred 
thousand  in  England,  whereby  they  are  made  some 
means  of  grace,  and  the  author  become  famous, 
and  may  be  the  cause  of  spreading  his  other  gospel 
books  over  the  European  and  American  world,  and, 
in  process  of  time,  may  be  so  to  the  whole  universe.' 
This  agrees  with  Bunyan's  marginal  glossary, 
as  to  the  place  where  he  was  located  when  visited 
with  this  wondrous  dream.  'As  I  walked  through 
the  wilderness  of  this  world,  I  lighted  on  a  certain 
place,  where  was  a  den  ;  and  I  laid  me  down  in 
that  place  to  sleep ;  and  as  I  slept  I  dreamed  a 
dream.'  The  marginal  note  to  that  'place  where 
was  a  den,'  is  '  The  Jail.'  This  was  first  added 
to  the  fourth  edition,  1680;  he  had  probably  been 
asked,  what  was  meant  by  the  den,  and  from  that 
time,  in  every  edition,  he  publishes  that  his  meaning 
was,  '  The  Jail.  '  That  Bunyan  attached  much 
importance  to  these  marginal  notes,  as  a  key  to  his 
works,  is  plainly  stated  in  his  verses  to  the  reader 
of  the  'Holy  War:' — ■ 

Nor  do  thou  go  to  work  without  my  key 
(In  mysteries  men  soon  do  lose  their  way), 
And  also  turn  it  right,  if  thou  woidd'st  know 
My  riddle,  and  would'st  with  my  heifer  plough. 
*  The       It  lies  there  in  the  window,*  fare  thee  well, 
argeU  *    My  next  may  be  to  ring  thy  passing-bell. 

No  language  can  be  plainer.  The  author  wishes 
all  his  readers  to  understand  where  he  conceived 
and  wrote  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress.'  He  says  that 
it  was  in  'a  den.'  He  puts  his  key  to  this  word 
in  the  window,  and  upon  turning  the  key  right, 
it  discovers  the  den  to  be  Bedford  jail.  In  this 
dismal  den  he  tranquilly  slept ;  like  the  Psalmist, 
he  feared  not  ten  thousands  of  people,  '  I  laid  me 
down  and  slept :  I  awaked,  for  the  Lord  sustained 
me.'  And  why?  It  was  because  '  I  cried  unto  the 
Lord,'  'thou,  0  Lord,  art  a  shield  for  me;  my 
glory,  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  head.'  Ps.  m.    Like 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


Peter,  with  a  conscience  void  of  offence,  '  he  slept 
while  a  prisoner  in  a  jail.1    And  although  Bunyan 

had  no  angel  from  heaven  to  open  the  prison  d 'a 

before  him,  he  had  that  heavenly  communion  which  i 
filled  Ids  soul  with  peace,  and  fitted  him  to  write  | 
for  the  instruction  of  mankind.    The  rapidity  with 
which  the  conception  of  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress' 
came  over  his  mind   and  was   reduced  to  writing, 
he  thus  describes  : — 

'  .\iiil  thus  it  was:  1  writing  of  the  way 
Ami  race  of  saints,  in  this  our  gospel  day, 
Pel]  suddenly  into  an  allegory 
About  their  journey,  and  the  way  to  glory. 
In  more  than  twenty  things,  which  I  Bel  down; 
This  done,  I  twenty  more  had  in  my  mown; 
And  they  again  began  to  multiply, 
Like  sparks  that  from  the  coals  of  fire  do  fly. 
Nay  then,  thought  I,  if  that  you  breed  so  fast, 
I'll  put  you  by  yourselves,  lest  you  at  last 
Should  prove  ad  infinitum,  and  eat  out 
The  book  that  I  already  am  about. 

***** 
Tims  I  set  pen  to  paper  with  delight, 
Aud  quickly  had  my  thoughts  iu  black  and  white. 
For  having  uow  my  met  hod  by  the  end, 
Still  as  I  pull'd,  it  came ;  and  so  I  penn'd 
It  down ;  until  at  last  it  came  to  he, 
For  length  and  breadth,  the  bigness  which  you  see.' 

This  simple  statement  requires  no  comment. 
In  jail  he  was  writing  some  book  of  '  the  way  and 
race  of  saints,'  most  probably  his  own  spiritual 
experience,  when  the  idea  came  over  his  mind  to 
represent  a  Christian's  course  from  his  conviction 
of  sin  to  his  arrival  in  glory,  as  a  journey  from  the 
city  of  destruction  to  the  celestial  city.  This  is 
the  opinion,  very  elegantly  expressed,  of  Dr. 
Cheever ;  '  As  you  read  the  "  Grace  Abounding," 
you  are  ready  to  say  at  every  step,  Here  is  the 
future  author  of  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  It  is 
as  if  you  stood  by  the  side  of  some  great  sculptor, 
and  watched  every  movement  of  his  chisel,  having 
had  his  design  explained  to  you  before,  so  that  at 
every  blow  some  new  trait  of  beauty  in  the  future 
statue  comes  clearly  into  view.'  While  thus  em- 
ployed,  he  was  suddenly  struck  with  the  thought 
of  his  great  allegory,  and  at  once  commenced 
writing  it,  and  in  a  short  time  his  first  part  was 
completed.  It  may  be  inferred  that  he  wrote 
these  two  books  about  the  same  time,  because 
what  he  omitted  in  the  first  edition  of  'Grace 
Abounding'  he  also  omitted  in  the  first  edition  of 
the  'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  but  inserted  it  in  the  sub- 
sequent editions  of  both  these  books;  one  of  these 
is  his  singular  illustration  of  gospel  truth  from  the 
unclean  beasts,  being  those  that  neither  chewed 
the  cud  nor  divided  the  hoof — one  of  the  conver- 
sations between  Hopeful  and  Christian.  This  is 
also  introduced  as  an  addition  to  'Grace  Abound- 
ing/ No.    71.      It   was   familiar  with   Bunyan   to 


connect  the  term  'den  '  with  his  cell  in  the  prison. 
Thus,  when  narrating  his  spiritual  imprisonment  ill 
Doubting  Castle,  the  Giant,  instead  of  ordering 
his  prisoners  to  their  cell  or  dungeon,  Ba;  t,  'Get 

you   down    into  your    DEM    again.'      So  also  in  the 

preface  to  '  Grace  Abounding, 'he  thus  addre 

converts:  'I  being  taken  from  you  in  presence, 
and  so  tied  up  that  1  cannot  perform  that  duty 
that  from  Cod  doth  lie  upon  mo  to  youward,  1 
now  once  again,  as  before,  from  the  top  of  Shauir 
and  llenuon,  so  now  from  the  lion's  DEN  -  do  look 
yet  after  you  all,  greatly  longing  to  see  your  safe 
arrival  into  the  desired  haven.' 

The  continuation  of  '  Grace  A  hounding  '  was 
written  by  'a  true  friend  and  long  acquaintance'  of 
Mr.  Banyan's;  '  That  his  good  end  may  be  known 
as  well  as  his  evil  beginning,  I  have  taken  upon 
me  from  myknoaiabje,  and  the  best  account  given 
by  other  of  his  friends,  to  piece  this  to  the  thread, 
too  soon  broken  off,  and  so  lengthen  it  out  to  his 
entering  upon  eternity.'  In  this  we  are  told  of 
his  long  imprisonment,  and  that  in  pri$oh  he 
wrote  the  '  Pilgrim's  Prog  i'art.    The 

mode  in  which  it  was  written,  and  the  u.-e  made 
of  it,  iu  illustrating  his  addresses  to  his  fellow- 
prisoners,  has  been  handed  down  by  one  of  them — 
Mr.  Marsom,  an  estimable  and  pious  preacher,  who 
was  confined  with  Mr.  Bunyan  in  Bedford  jail,  for 
conscience'  sake.  His  grand-daughter  married  Mr. 
Gurney,  the  grandfather  of  the  late  Baron  Gurney, 
and  of  W.  B.  Gurney,  Esq.,  his  brother,  the  justly- 
venerated  Treasurer  of  the  Baptist  Missionary 
Society,  and  he  furnished  me  with  the  following 
facts:  'Thomas  Marsom  was  an  ironmonger,  and 
pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church  at  Luton;  he  died  in 
January  1726,  at  a  very  advanced  age.  This 
Thomas  Marsom  was  a  fellow-prisoner  with  Bun- 
yan ;  and  my  grandfather,  who  knew  him  well,  was 
in  the  habit  of  repeating  to  his  son.  my  father, 
many  interesting  circumstances  which  he  had 
heard  from  him,  connected  with  his  imprisonment. 
One  of  these  was,  that  Bunyan  read  the  manuscript 
of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  '  to  his  fellow-pri 

^ing  their  opinion  upon  it.  The  descriptions 
naturally  excited  a  little  pleasantry,  and  .Marsom, 
wdio  was  of  a  sedate  turn,  gave  his  opinion  against 
the  publication  ;  but  on  reflection,  requested  per- 
mission to  take  the  manuscript  to  his  own  cell, 
that  he  might  read  it  alone.  Having  done  so,  he 
returned  it  with  an  earnest  recommendation  that 
it  should  he  published.'  How  easily  can  we  ima- 
gine the  despised  Christians  in  prison  for  their 
Lord's  sake,  thus  beguiling  the  dreary  hours. 
How  admirably  could  the  poor  preacher  illustrate 
his  discourses  to  his  fellow-prisoners  by  the  various 
adventures  of  his  pilgrims,  il^  had  receive,!  calls 
to  join  more  wealthy  churches,  but  he  affection- 
ately cleaved  to  his   poor  flock  at  Bedford-      Sup- 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


pose  his  exhortation  to  have  been  founded  on  these 
words,  '  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give ;'  how 
admirably  could  he  introduce  all  the  Jesuitic  sub- 
tleties of  Bye-ends,  Money-love,  and  his  party, 
and  refute  the  arguments  they  had  been  taught  by 
one  Gripe-man  of  Love  Gain,  a  market  town  in 
the  county  of  Coveting,  in  the  north.  Imagine 
him  to  be  exhorting  his  fellow-prisoners  on  the 
'Terrors  of  the  Lord,'  and  you  would  anticipate 
his  leading  in  the  burdened  Christian,  recount 
ing  the  awful  dream  of  the  day  of  judgment,  at 
the  Interpreter's  house,  and  narrating  his  ad- 
ventures in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death. 
Or  when  preaching  on  the  words,  '  Resist  the 
devil,'  who  like  him  could  recount  the  fight  with 
Apollyon  ? 

These  facts  are  placed  before  the  reader  lest  any 
one  should  for  a  moment  entertain  a  doubt  which 
would  cast  a  shade  over  one  of  the  glories  of  the 
'Pilgrim's  Progress.'  It  is  an  imperishable  monu- 
ment to  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  persecution  to 
prevent  the  spread  of  religious  principles.  The 
enemies  of  the  Christian  faith  imprisoned  John 
Bunyan  to  prevent  his  preaching  the  gospel  to  a 
few  poor  people,  and  by  it  he  preaches  and  will 
preach  to  millions  of  every  clime.  Keep  these 
facts  in  recollection — the  evidence  of  C.  Doe  who 
had  it  from  Bunyan 's  own  mouth ;  his  own  key — 
'den,'  '  the  jail  ;'  the  testimony  of  one  who  long 
enjoyed  his  friendship,  published  within  four  years 
of  his  decease  ;  the  tradition  handed  down  by  a 
fellow-prisoner — none  of  which  evidence  was  ever 
denied  by  the  advocates  for  persecution.  If  we 
refuse  such  testimony,  neither  should  we  believe 
if  Bunyan  was  permitted  to  come  from  the  invisible 
world  and  proclaim  its  truth  with  the  trump  of  an 
archangel. 

There  are  very  strong  internal  proofs  that  the 
Pilgrim  was  written  long  before  it  was  published. 
A  second  edition  issued  from  the  same  press,  by 
the  same  publishers,  in  the  same  year,  1678;  and 
there  is  found  a  striking  difference  in  the  spelling 
of  many  words  in  these  two  editions,  such  as 
'  drownded  '  is  corrected  to  'drowned,'  'Slow  of 
Despond'  to  'Slough  of  Despond,'  '  chaulk  '  to 
'  chalk,'  '  travailler  '  to  '  traveller,'  *  countrey  '  to 
'  country,'  '  raggs  '  to  '  rags,'  '  brust '  to  '  burst.' 
This  may  readily  be  accounted  for  by  the  author's 
having  kept  the  work  in  manuscript  for  some  years 
before  it  was  printed,  and  that  he  had  at  length 
consented  to  send  it  to  the  printers  as  he  had 
written  it.  There  is  an  apparent  difference  of 
twenty  years  in  the  orthography  of  these  two 
books,  which  were  published  in  the  same  year, 
besides  some  considerable  additions  of  new  char- 
acters in  the  second  edition.  The  printer  appears 
to  have  followed  the  manuscript  as  to  spelling, 
punctuation,  capitals,  and  italics.     It  proves,  that 


notwithstanding  his  very  numerous  and  important 
engagements,  Bunyan  found  time  to  cultivate  and 
improve  his  talents  in  composition,  between  the 
time  when  lie  wrote  the  first,  and  published  tli9 
second  edition. 

The  reason  why  it  was  not  published  for  several 
years  after  his  release,  appears  to  have  arisen  from 
the  difference  of  opinion  expressed  by  his  friends 
as  to  the  propriety  of  printing  a  book  which  treated 
so  familiarly  the  most  solemn  subjects. 

'  Well,  when  I  bad  thus  put  my  ends  together, 
I  show'd  them  others,  that  I  might  see  whether 
They  would  coudemn  them,  or  them  justify: 
And  some  said,  Let  them  live;  some,  Let  them  die. 
Some  said,  John,  print  it ;  others  said,  Not  so. 
Some  said,  It  might  do  good ;  others  said,  No.' 

Somewhat  similar  to  this,  was  the  conference  of 
dissenting  ministers  when  Sunday  Schools  were 
first  attempted;  the  desecration  of  the  Lord's  Day 
was  pleaded  against  them,  and  it  was  only  by  a 
very  small  majority  that  institutions  were  sanc- 
tioned, which  advanced  the  spread  of  Divine  truth 
with  a  rapidity  as  extraordinary  as  the  spread  of 
the  missionary  spirit,  or  even  as  is  the  increased 
speed  of  travelling  by  the  aid  of  steam. 

Thus  it  was  debated  whether  the  Pilgrim  should 
walk  forth  or  not,  fearing  lest  the  singularity  of 
his  dress  should  excite  vain  or  trivial  thoughts  in 
the  readers,  like  the  disturbance  at  Vanity  Fair ; 
or  it  might  arise  from  a  fear  lest  the  various  char- 
acters and  dialogues  should  be  considered  as  ap- 
proaching in  the  slightest  degree  to  the  drama. 
It  is  impossible  to  account  for  the  different  feelings 
excited  in  the  minds  of  men  by  reading  the  same 
narrative  in  which  all  are  equally  interested.  In 
this  case  the  fear  was,  lest  it  should  tend  to  excite 
a  light  or  trifling  spirit,  while  the  solemn  realities 
of  eternity  were  under  consideration.  In  most 
cases,  reading  this  volume  has  had  a  solemnizing 
effect  upon  the  mind.  Some  have  tried  to  read  it, 
but  have  shut  it  up  with  fear,  because  it  leads 
directly  to  the  inquiry,  Have  I  felt  the  burden  of 
sin  ?  Have  I  fled  for  refuge?  Others  have  been 
deterred,  because  it  has  such  home -thrusts  at 
hypocrisy,  and  such  cutting  remarks  upon  those 
who  profess  godliness,  but  in  secret  are  wanton 
and  godless.  The  folly  of  reliance  upon  an  imper- 
fect obedience  to  the  law  for  the  pardon  of  sin, 
repeatedly  and  faithfully  urged,  is  a  hard  and 
humbling  lesson.  It  mercilessly  exposes  the 
worthlessness  of  all  those  things  which  are  most 
prized  by  the  worldling.  No  book  has  so  continued 
and  direct  a  tendency  to  solemn  self-examination. 
Every  character  that  is  drawn  makes  a  powerful 
appeal  to  the  conscience,  and  leads  almost  irresist- 
ibly to  the  mental  inquiry,  '  Lord,  is  it  I  ?'  No 
work  is  calculated  to  infuse  deeper  solemnity  into 
the   mind   of  an   attentive  reader.      Well   might 


INTRODUCTION    BY    THE   EDITOR. 


Mr.  Macaulay  in  Ms  review  say,  'The  allegory  of 
Bunyan  Las  been  read  by  many  thousands  with 
tears;'  or  as  some  pious  man  has  written  upon 
the  fly-leaf  of  the  fourth  edition,  1GS0— 

'  Sleep  on,  good  man, 
Continue  still  thy  dreame. 
Your  allegories  do, 

I  think,  resemble 
Some  laudskip  vision 

At  which  souls  tremble,'1 

In  addition  to  the  serious  opposition  of  his 
friends  to  the  publication  of  the  Pilgrim,  we  should 
also  consider  the  author's  other  engagements. 
After  so  long,  so  harassing,  so  unjust  an  impri- 
sonment, much  of  his  time  must  have  been  spent 
in  restoring  order  to  his  house  and  in  his  church ; 
in  paying  pastoral  visits,  recovering  lost  stations 
which  had  been  suspended  during  the  violence  of 
persecution,  and  in  extending  his  devotional  and 
ministerial  exercises  in  all  the  villages  around 
Bedford  which  were  within  his  reach.  Such  was 
the  great  extent  of  his  labours  in  that  and  the 
adjoining  counties,  as  to  obtain  for  him  the  title  of 
Bishop  of  Bedford.  As  his  popular  talents  became 
known,  the  sphere  of  his  usefulness  extended,  so 
that  an  eye-witness  testified,  that  when  he  preached 
in  London,  '  if  there  were  but  one  day's  notice 
given,  there  would  be  more  people  come  together 
to  hear  him  preach,  than  the  meeting-house  could 
hold.  I, have  seen,  to  hear  him  preach,  about 
twelve  hundred  at  a  morning  lecture,  by  seven 
o'clock  on  a  working  day,  in  the  dark  winter 
time.'2  Such  popularity  must  have  occasioned  a 
considerable  tax  upon  his  time,  in  addition  to 
which  he  was  then  warmly  engaged  in  his  contro- 
versy on  Baptism,3  and  in  some  admirable  practi- 
cal works.  These  were  probably  some  of  the 
reasons  why  a  humble,  pious  author,  hesitated 
for  several  years  to  publish  a  work,  on  the  practi- 
cal bearings  of  which  his  friends  had  expressed 
such  opposite  opinions.  At  length  he  made  up 
his  mind — 

■  Since  you  are  thus  divided, 

I  print  it  will ;  and  so  the  case  decided.' 


1  By  Thomas  Collins,  written  on  the  blank  leaf  of  the  fourth 

edition,  1680,  presented  to  the  Editor  by Bullar,  Esq., 

Southampton. 

2  Charles  Doe,  in  the  Strugghr. 

3  This  controversy  was,  whether  or  not  KY.fto--baptism  is  a 
pre-rcquisite  to  receiving  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  who  is  to  be 
the  judge  as  to  the  mode  of  its  administration.  Some  of  the 
churches  agreed  with  the  Church  of  England  as  to  their  power 
to  decree  rites  and  ceremonies.  Not  so  John  Banyan.  He 
considered  that  this  question  should  be  left  to  the  personal 
decision  of  every  candidate.  The  fruits  of  the  new  birth,  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  alone  is  the  door  of  admis- 
sion to  the  Saviour's  family,  was,  in  bis  opinion,  the  only 
question  to  be  decided  by  the  church,  as  a  pie-requisite  to 
admission  to  the  table  of  his  Lord.  See  Mat.  iii.  11  j  .Mar. 
i.  8;  Lu.  iii.  16;  Jn.  i.  26 — 33;  compared  with  He.  vL  1, 
and  Ep.  iv.  5. 

VOx..  III. 


CHAPTER   III. 

bunyan's  qualifications  to  write  the  '  pilgrim's  pro. 
orlss'  sanctified  by  prison  discipline. 

That  the  author  of  the  Pilgrim  was  pre-eminently 
qualified  to  write  such  a  work  is  proved  by  its 
vast  circulation,  and  by  the  extraordinary  interest 
which  it  created,  and  has  kept  alive,  for  nearly  two 
centuries,  throughout  the  world.  This  ought  not 
to  excite  surprise,  when  it  is  recollected  that  it 
was  the  production  of  a  man  profoundly  learned  in 
all  the  subtleties  of  the  human  heart;  deeply  skilled 
in  detecting  error  and  sophistry  ;  thoroughly  hum- 
hied  under  a  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness.  He 
was  baptized  into  the  Divine  truths  of  Christianity 
by  the  searching,  -wounding,  and  healing  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Shut  up  for  twelve  years  with 
his  Bible,  all  the  rags  of  popery  and  heathenism 
were  stripped  off,  and  he  came  out  a  living  body 
of  divinity,  comparatively  free  from  mere  human 
doctrines  or  systems.  The  spirit  of  the  prophets 
and  apostles  breathes  in  his  language.  His  was 
an  education  which  all  the  academies  and  univer- 
sities in  the  world  could  not  have  communicated. 
He  was  deeply  learned  in  that  '  wisdom  that  is 
from  above,'  Ja.  iii.  n,  and  can  be  acquired  only  in 
the  school  of  Christ.  His  spirit  was  nurtured  by 
close,  unwearied,  prayerful  searching  of  the  Word 
of  life — by  perpetual  watchfulness  over  the  work- 
ings of  his  spirit,  and  by  inward  communion  with 
God.  He  knew  well  what  was  meant  by  '  groan- 
ingfl  which  cannot  be  uttered,'  no.  viiL  2G,  as  well  as 
by  being  '  caught  up, '  as  it  were,  to  '  the  third  hea- 
ven,' even  to  '  paradise,'  and  in  his  spirit  to  '  hear 
unspeakable  words  which  it  is  not  possible  for  man 
to  utter.'  2Co.„xliT.  4.  Previous  to  his  imprisonment 
he  had  gone  through  every  severe  spiritual  trial: 
with  the  Psalmist  he  had  sunk  in  deep  mire  where 
there  was  no  standing;  the  powers  of  darkness, 
like  '  the  floods,  overflow  me,'  Fs.  btix.  2;  and  with 
him  he  could  also  sing,  '  I  will  extol  thee,  0  Lord, 
for  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,'  rs.  ixjl  l;  'Thou  hast 
brought  up  my  soul  from  the  grave,'  Pa  ixx.  3;  'lie 
brought  me  up  out  of  an  horrible  pit,'  Ps.  rL  2  ; 
'  Thou  hast  healed  me ;'  '  Thou  hast  put  off  my 
sackcloth,  and  girded  me  with  gladness.'  In  his 
happier  days,  even  while  in  a  gloomy  jail,  he  felt 
that  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  that  invisible,  holy, 
spiritual  Jerusalem,  the  universal  church  of  Christ, 
encompassed  by  the  '  Lord  as  a  wall  of  fire,  and 
tho  glory  in  the  midst  of  her.'  He  lived  in  an 
atmosphere,  and  used  a  language,  unknown  to  the 
wisdom  of  this  world,  and  which  a  poet-laureate 
mistook  for  reveries,  for  '  the  hot  and  cold  fits  of 
a  spiritual  ague,'  or  for  the  paroxysms  of  disease.' 
Ilis  mind  was  deeply  imbued  with  all  that  wag 


Southey's  Life  of  Bumjan,  xxxiL 


10 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


most  terrific,  as  well  as  most  magnificent  in  reli- 
gion. In  proportion  as  his  Christian  course  be- 
came pure  and  lovely,  so  his  former  life  must 
have  been  surveyed  with  unmitigated  severity  and 
abhorrence. 

These  mental  conflicts  are  deeply  interesting ; 
they  arose  from  an  agonized  mind — a  sincere 
and  determined  spirit  roused  by  Divine  revelation, 
opening  before  his  astonished  but  bewildered  mind, 
solemn,  eternal  realities.  He  that  sits  in  the 
scorner's  seat  may  scoff  at  them,  while  he  who  is 
earnestly  inquiring  after  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life,  will  examine  them  with  prayerful  serious- 
ness. In  after-life,  the  recollection  of  these  emo- 
tions filled  his  lips  with  Avords  that  pierced  his 
hearers. 

When  at  liberty,  his  energetic  eloquence  had 
attracted  to  his  sermons  every  class.  It  is  said 
that  the  great  Dr.  John  Owen  was  asked  by  the 
King  how  a  man  of  his  learning  could  attend  to 
hear  a  tinker  preach,  he  replied,  '  May  it  please 
your  Majesty,  had  I  the  tinker's  abilities,  I  would 
most  gladly  relinquish  my  learning.'  Thus  did  a 
man,  profoundly  versed  in  scholastic  literature, 
and  that  sanctified  by  piety,  bow  to  the  superiority 
of  the  Spirit's  teaching.  The  unlettered  tinker 
led  captive,  by  his  consecrated  natural  eloquence, 
one  of  the  most  eminent  divines  of  his  day. 

Considering  the  amazing  popularity  of  the  '  Pil- 
grim's Progress,'  and  its  astonishing  usefulness  to 
all  classes  of  mankind,  in  all  the  countries  of  the 
earth,  may  we  not  attribute  its  author's  deep  and 
hallowed  feelings,  severe  trials,  and  every  lesson 
of  Divine  wisdom  he  received,  as  being  intended 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  fit  him  to  write  this  sur- 
prising Dream  ? 

Bunyan  was  a  master  of  rhetoric,  and  logic,  and 
moral  philosophy,  without  studying  those  sciences, 
or  perhaps  even  understanding  the  terms  by  which 
they  are  designated.  His  Bible  (wondrous  book!) 
was  his  library.  All  his  genius  was  nurtured  from 
the  living  fountain  of  truth ;  it  purified  his  style, 
and  adapted  his  work,  by  its  simplicity  and  energy, 
to  every  understanding.  His  key  to  its  mysteries 
was  earnest,  holy  prayer ;  and  musing  over  the 
human  heart,  and  watching  the  operations  of 
nature,  afforded  him  an  ample  illustration  of  its 
sacred  truths.  His  labour  in  tagging  laces  required 
no  application  of  mind,  so  that  his  time  for  study 
was  every  moment  of  his  life  that  he  could  save 
from  sleep,  and  even  then  his  ever-active  spirit  Avas 
busy  in  dreams,  many  of  which  contained  valuable 
lessons,  so  that  his  mind  became  most  richly  stored, 
and  was  perpetually  overflowing. 

'  The  poetry  of  the  Bible  was  not  less  the  source 
of  Bunyan 's  poetical  powers,  than  the  study  of 
the  whole  Scriptures  was  the  source  of  his  sim- 
plicity and  purity  of  style.     His  heart  was  not 


only  made  new  by  the  spirit  of  the  Bible,  but  his 
whole  intellectual  being  was  penetrated  and  trans- 
figured by  its  influence.  He  brought  the  spirit 
and  power,  gathered  from  so  long  and  exclusive 
a  communion  with  the  prophets  and  apostles,  to 
the  composition  of  every  page  of  the  "Pilgrim's 
Progress."  ' ' 
,  Human  character  was  unveiled  before  the  pene- 
trating eye  of  one  so  conversant  with  the  inspired 
writings ;  every  weak  point  is  seen,  as  well  as  the 
advantage  taken  by  the  subtle  enemy  of  souls ; 
and  all  so  admirably  and  plainly  pictured  that  he 
who  runs  must  stop,  read,  and  admire,  even  to  his 
surprise  and  wonder;  and  be  constrained  to  in- 
quire, Whence  had  this  poor  mechanic  such  know- 
ledge ? 

Nor  must  it  be  forgotten,  that  in  addition  to  his 
heavenly,  he  possessed  peculiar  earthly  qualifica- 
tions for  his  important  work.  He  had  been  the 
very  ringleader  in  all  manner  of  vice  and  ungodli- 
ness. John  Ryland's  description  of  his  character 
is  written  with  peculiar  pungency :  '  No  man  of 
common  sense  and  common  integrity  can  deny, 
that  Bunyan,  the  tinker  of  Elstow,  was  a  practical 
atheist,  a  worthless,  contemptible  infidel,  a  vile 
rebel  to  God  and  goodness,  a  common  profligate, 
a  soul-despising,  a  soul-murdering,  a  soul-damning 
thoughtless  wretch,  as  could  exist  on  the  face  of 
the  earth.  Now  be  astonished,  0  heaven,  to  eter- 
nity, and  wonder,  0  earth  and  hell !  while  time 
endures.  Behold  this  very  man  become  a  miracle 
of  mercy,  a  mirror  of  wisdom,  goodness,  holiness, 
truth,  and  love.  See  his  polluted  soul  cleansed 
and  adorned  by  Divine  grace,  his  guilt  pardoned, 
the  Divine  law  inscribed  upon  his  heart,  the  Divine 
image  or  the  resemblance  of  God's  moral  perfec- 
tions impressed  upon  his  soul.'2  He  had  received 
the  mere  rudiments  of  education,  but  vicious  habits 
had  '  almost  utterly  '  blotted  out  of  his  memory 
every  useful  lesson ;  so  that  he  must  have  had, 
when  impressed  with  Divine  truth,  great  deter- 
mination to  have  enabled  him  not  only  to  recover 
the  instruction  which  he  had  received  in  his 
younger  days,  but  even  to  have  added  to  it  such 
stores  of  valuable  information.  In  this,  his  natural 
quickness  of  perception  and  retentive  memory  must 
have  been  of  extreme  value.  Having  been  mixed 
up  intimately  with  every  class  of  men,  and  seen 
them  in  their  most  unguarded  moments,  it  enabled 
him  to  draw  his  characters  in  such  vivid  colours, 
and  with  such  graphic  accuracy.  Filled  with  an 
inspiration  Avhich  could  be  drawn  from  the  Bible 
alone,  he  has  delineated  characters  as  touching 
and  interesting  to  us  in  the  nineteenth  century  as 
they  Avere  to  our  pilgrim  forefathers  of  a  bygone 


1  North  American  Review,  vol.  lxxix. 

8  Buayaa's  Works,  8vo.     Preface  by  Ryland. 


INTRODUCTION   BY  THE  EDITOR. 


n 


Rge,  and  as  they  will  be  to  the  Christian  sojourner 
■:'  ages  yet  to  come.     It  is  a  history,  with  little 

variation,  of  that  which  must  always  happen  while 
Christianity  endures. 

Bunyan  had  run  the  round  of  sin ;  had  sown 
the  seed  of  vice,  and  brought  forth  the  bitter  fruits 
of  repentance ;  had  felt  intense  alarm  lest  eternal 
torments  should  swallow  up  his  soul  in  (hath;  had 
i!ed  for,  and  found  refuge  in,  the  sufferings  of 
Christ.  His  burden  removed,  he  loved  much,  be- 
cause to  him  much  had  been  forgiven  ;  he  had  been 
brought  up  out  of  horrible  darkness,  and  well  was 
lie  qualified  to  aid  those  who  were  walking  through 
the  dismal  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  ! 

His  out-door  habits  and  employments,  and  his 
sanctified  contemplations  on  the  beauties  of  nature, 
were  calculated  to  strengthen  the  vigour  of  Ins 
imagination,  and  the  decision  of  his  character. 
Happily,  the  glorious  Dreamer  never  appeared  to 
have  any  idea  of  his  own  immortal  fame  as  an 
author:  little  did  he  dream  of  the  happy  influence 
that  his  humble  labours  would  have  upon  millions 
of  mankind  ;  all  his  spirit  centred  in  his  Saviour  ; 
all  his  efforts  were  to  make  known  the  glad  tidings 
of  salvation  to  surrounding  sinners.  If  he  coveted 
the  tongue  of  an  angel,  it  was  not  for  brilliancy  of 
language,  but  that  he  might  use  burning  words  to 
make  an  indelible  impression  upon  his  hearers. 
Even  the  greatest  of  his  works  he  published  under 
the  humble  similitude  of  a  dream,  or  as  that  which 
had  passed  before  his  imagination,  unaided  by 
those  mental  powers  which  are  called  forth  in  com- 
posing a  narrative  intended  for  publication.  His 
sixty  humble  books  were  printed  without  ornament, 
upon  inferior  paper,  of  the  class  called  chap-books, 
from  their  being  vended  by  travelling  hawkers  called 
chapmen,  now  magniloquently  called  colporteurs. 

John  Burton,  a  minister,  thus  recommends  Bun- 
yan, in  an  introduction  to  Some  Gospel  Truths 
Opened,  1656:  'Be  not  offended  because  Christ 
holds  forth  the  glorious  treasure  of  the  gospel 
to  thee  in  a  poor  earthen  vessel,  by  one  who  hath 
neither  the  greatness  nor  the  wisdom  of  this 
world  to  commend  him  to  thee.  This  man  is  not 
chosen  out  of  an  earthly,  but  out  of  the  heavenly 
university,  the  church  of  Christ,  furnished  with 
the  Spirit,  gifts,  and  graces  of  Christ.  He  hath, 
through  grace,  taken  these  three  he  venly  degrees 
— union  with  Christ,  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit, 
and  experience  of  the  temptations  of  Satan;  which 
do  more  fit  a  man  for  that  weighty  work  of  preach- 
ing the  gospel,  than  all  university  learning  and 
degrees  that  can  be  had.  Having  had  experience, 
with  many  other  saints,  of  this  man's  soundness 
in  the  faith,  of  his  godly  conversation,  and  his 
ability  to  preach  the  gospel,  not  by  human  art, 
but  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  that  with  much 
success  in  the  conversion  of  sinners. ' 


His  character  and  qualifications  were  also  ad- 
mirably portrayed  by  his  pastor,  J.  Gifford,  soon 
after  he  entered  upon  the  work  of  the  ministry.' 
It  is  in  his  introduction  to  the  first  edition  of  a 
'Few  Sighs  from  Hell,'  1658,  and  as  this  inter- 
esting portrait  was  not  inserted  in  any  of  the  sub- 
sequent editions  of  that  book,  and  has  escaped  the 
researches  of  all  the  biographers  of  Bunyan,  I  am 
tempted  to  give  it  verbatim,  more  especially,  as  it 
is  generally  believed  that  John  Cifford  was  the 
Evangelist  who  directed  the  rilgrim  to  the  Wicket 
Gate,  put  him  again  into  the  path  when  under 
the  flames  of  Sinai,  and  prepared  him  for  perse- 
cution at  Vanity  Fair.  'Concerning  the  author 
(whatsoever  the  censures  and  reports  of  many  are), 
I  have  this  to  say,  that  I  verily  believe  God  hath 
counted  him  faithful,  and  put  him  into  the  niini- 
stery;  and  though  his  outward  condition  and  former 
employment  was  mean,  and  his  humane  learning 
small,  yet  is  he  one  that  hath  acquaintance  with 
God,  and  taught  by  his  Spirit,  and  hath  been  used 
in  his  hand  to  do  souls  good;  for  to  my  knowledge 
there  are  divers  who  have  felt  the  power  of  the 
word  delivered  by  him,  and  I  doubt  not  but  that 
many  more  may,  if  the  Lord  continue  him  in  his 
work;  he  is  not  like  unto  your  drones  that  will 
suck  the  sweet,  but  do  no  work.  For  he  hath 
laid  forth  himself  to  the  utmost  of  his  strength, 
taking  all  advantages  to  make  known  to  others 
what  he  himself  hath  received  of  God  ;  and  I  fear 
that  is  one  reason  why  the  archers  have  shot  so 
soarly  at  him ;  for  by  his  and  others'  industry,  in 
their  Master's  work,  their  slothfulness  hath  been 
reproved,  and  the  eyes  of  many  have  been  opened 
to  see  a  difference  between  those  that  are  sent  of 
God,  and  those  that  run  before  they  are  sent. 
And  that  he  is  none  of  those  light  fanatick  spirits 
that  our  age  abounds  withal,  this  following  dis- 
course, together  with  his  former,  that  have  been 
brought  to  publique  view,  will  testifie ;  for  among 
other  things  that  may  bear  record  to  him  herein, 
you  shall  find  him  magnifying  and  exalting  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  and  largely  showing  the  worth, 
excellency,  and  usefulness  of  them. 

4  And  surely  if  thou  shalt  (notwithstanding  this) 


1  John  Gifford  had  been  a  major  in  the  King's  army;  was 
convicted  for  raising  an  insurrection  in  Kent,  and  m 
to  die,  but  made  his  escape  from  prisou,  and  settled  in  Bedford 
as  a  medical  practitioner.     He  was  a  great  persecutor,  but 
became,  after  his  conversion,  a  Baptist  minister,  and  formed 
his  fellow-converts  into  a  church  at  Bedford,  about  1650,  over 
which  he  was  the  minister.     Bunyan  joined  this  church  m 
1053,  and  eventually  became  its  pastor  in  1G71 ;  and  it  con- 
tinues to  this  day  a  flourishing  Christian  chunk.     II 
toral  letter,  written  a  short  time  before  his  death,  is  01  I 
finest  specimens  of  a  pious  shepherd's  anxiety  for  t!.e  happi- 
ness of  his  (lock  that  has  ever  been  published.    It  was  print.,! 
for  the  lust  time  in  1849,  in  A  Brief  lUstory  of  Bunyan  t 
Church,   by    its  present    minister,   John   Juices,      lute   al»« 
Brooke's  Liccs  of  the  Furitans,  vol.  iii  p.  257. 


12 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


stumble  at  his  meanness  and  want  of  humane 
learning,  thou  wilt  declare  thine  unacquaintance 
with  God's  declared  method,  who,  to  perfect  his 
own  praise,  and  to  still  the  enemy  and  avenger, 
makes  choice  of  babes  and  sucklings,  and  in  their 
mouthes  ordaineth  strength.  Ps.  via.  2.  Though  men 
that  have  a  great  design  do,  and  must  make  use 
of  those  that  in  reason  are  most  likely  to  effect  it, 
yet  must  the  Lord  do  so  too  ?  then  instruments 
(not  himself)  would  carry  away  the  praise;  but 
that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence,  lie  hath 
chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
the  wise,  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things 
that  are  despised  hath  God  chosen.  1  Co.  i.  27-29. 
Cast  thine  eye  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  gospel 
dispensation  (which  surely,  if  at  any  time,  should 
have  come  forth  in  the  wisdom  and  glory  of  the 
world),  and  thou  shalt  see  what  method  the  Lord 
did  take  at  the  first  to  exalt  his  Son  Jesus ;  he 
goes  not  amongst  the  Jewish  rabbies,  nor  to  the 
schools  of  learning,  to  fetch  out  his  gospel  preachers, 
but  to  the  trades,  and  those  most  contemptible  too; 
yet  let  not  any  from  hence  conceive,  that  I  under- 
value the  gifts  and  graces  of  such  who  have  been, 
or  now  are  endued  with  them,  nor  yet  speak  against 
learning,  being  kept  in  its  place,  but  my  meaning 
is,  that  those  that  are  learned  should  not  despise 
those  that  are  not ;  or  those  that  are  not,  should 
not  despise  those  that  are,  who  are  faithful  in  the 
Lord's  work:  and,  therefore,  being  about  to  leave 
thee,  I  shall  leave  with  thee  two  scriptures  to  be 
considered  of.  The  one  is,  Jn.  xiii.  20 :  Verilij,  verily 
I  say  unto  you,  he  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send 
(mark  whomsoever),  receiveth  me;  and  lie  that 
receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that  sent  me.  The  other 
is,  Lu.  x.  16 :  He  that  heareth  you,  hearcth  me ;  and 
he  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  me ;  and  he  that 
despiseth  me,  desjoiseth  him  tMt  sent  me.' — I.  G. 
Bunyan  closes  his  own  preface  with  these  words, 
'  I  am  thine,  if  thou  be  not  ashamed  to  own  me, 
because  of  my  low  and  contemptible  descent  in 
the  world,  John  Bunyan.'  This  was  altered  in 
the  subsequent  editions  to,  '  I  am  thine,  to  serve 
in  the  Lord  Jesus,  John  Buflyan.' 

His  own  account  of  his  training  perfectly  agrees 
with  that  given  by  his  pastor.  In  the  epistle  to 
his  treatise  on  '  The  Law  and  Grace,'  about  16C0, 
he  thus  speaks:  'Reader,  if  thou  do  finde  this 
book  empty  of  fantastical  expressions,  and  without 
light,  vain,  whimsical,  scholar-like  terms,  thou 
must  understand,  it  is  because  I  never  went  to 
school  to  Aristotle  or  Plato,  but  was  brought  up  at 
my  father's  house,  in  a  very  mean  condition,  among 
a  company  of  poor  countrymen.  But  if  thou  do 
finde  a  parcel  of  plain,  yet  sound,  true,  and  home 
sayings,  attribute  that  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  his  gifts 
and  abilities,  which  he  hath  bestowed  upon  such 
a  poor  creature  as  I  am,  and  have  been.' 


Bunyan's  great  natural  abilities  required  to  be 
tempered  in  the  school  of  affliction :  and  his  ardent 
temperament  met  with  no  ordinary  degree  of  chas- 
tisement ;  his  principles  and  constancy  were  tried 
by  bonds  and  imprisonment ;  his  spirit,  in  the  war- 
fare of  controversy,  not  only  with  the  enemies  of 
his  Lord,  but  upon  minor  points  with  his  brother 
disciples.  And  with  some  of  these  he,  after  their 
wordy  war,  met  in  the  same  common  jail ;  united 
in  worship  before  the  throne  of  God;  former  wounds 
were  healed,  and  heart-burnings  sanctified;  and 
he  became  more  fully  fitted  as  a  guide  to  all  pil- 
grims of  every  sect.  He  passed  through  every 
trial  that  his  Lord  saw  needful,  to  temper  his 
ardent  spirit,  and  fit  him  to  write  his  immortal 
Allegory. 

It  is  difficult  to  account  for  Bunyan's  freedom 
from  those  popular  delusions  which  so  characterize 
the  age  in  which  he  lived,  and  which  spread  over 
the  most  pious  and  learned  of  his  contemporaries  ; 
the  belief  in  witchcraft,  sorcery,  ghosts,  and  goblin 
sprites,  who,  in  his  days,  were  supposed  to  ride 
upon  broomsticks  through  the  air,  or  'dart  through 
a  key-hole  swift  as  light.'  Stories  of  witchcraft, 
haunted  houses,  necromancy,  and  such  follies,  are 
found  in  the  pilgrimages  of  his  day.  Although  Sir 
Matthew  Hale,  Cotton  Mather,  Baxter,  and  our 
most  eminent  men,  were  strangely  full  of  faith  in 
these  fancies,  even  from  that  king  who  thought 
himself  a  mickle  wise  man,  but  proved  to  be  a 
fool  and  a  pedant,  to  the  wretch  called  the  witch- 
finder,  who,  by  his  perjuries,  legally  murdered  so 
many  poor  helpless  old  women,  for  the  rich  were 
rarely,  if  ever,  attacked.  Bunyan's  early  habits, 
and  want  of  education,  and  prolific  imagination, 
must  have  peculiarly  fitted  him  for  all  such  vulgar 
errors;  but  he  escaped  them  all.  Was  it  that, 
after  his  conversion,  the  solemnities  of  the  world 
to  come  swallowed  up  all  other  considerations  ?  or, 
was  it  the  workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  fit  his 
writings  to  be  a  blessing  to  future  and  more  enlight- 
ened generations  ?  It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  worthy 
of  serious  reflection. 

That  a  man  possessing  such  extraordinary  talent 
should  excite  the  envy  of  some,  and  the  bitterest 
animosity  of  others,  is  natural.  '  The  archers  did 
shoot  sorely  at  him,'  and  never  was  a  man  better 
armed  to  resist  and  crush  his  comparatively  puny 
assailants.  His  sentiments  and  conduct,  as  to  the 
profitable  trade  of  preaching,  were  also  calculated 
to  injure  him  in  the  esteem  of  the  clergy.  Among 
many  false  charges  brought  against  him,  one  was, 
the  making  merchandise  of  souls  through  covet- 
ousness.  His  reply  was,  '  Friend,  the  spirit  that 
led  thee  to  this  is  a  lying  spirit ;  for  though  I  be 
poor,  and  of  no  repute  in  the  world,  as  to  outward 
things,  yet,  through  grace,  I  have  learned,  by  the 
example  of  the  apostle,  to  preach  the  truth,  and 


INTRODUCTION    I3Y  THE   EDITOR. 


13 


also  to  work  with  mj  hands,  both  for  mine  own 
living  and  for  those  that  are  with  me,  when  I  have 
opportunity.  And  I  trust  that  the  Lord  Jesus, 
who  hath  helped  me  to  reject  the  wages  of  unrigh- 
teousness hitherto,  will  also  help  mo  still;  so  that 
I  shall  distribute  that  which  God  hath  given  me 
freely,  and  not  for  filthy  lucre's  sake.'1  In  those 
days,  hard  words  and  uncivil  language  were  com- 
monly used  in  controversy,  and  Bunyan's  early 
associations  and  singular  genius  furnished  his 
quiver  with  arrows  of  piercing  point.  His  moral 
character  was  assailed  in  the  grossest  terms ;  he 
was  called  a  wizard,  a  Jesuit,  a  highwayman,  a 
libertine,  and  was  charged  as  guilty  of  every  crime; 
to  this  he  gave  a  direct  denial,  and  triumphantly 
pointed  to  his  whole  conduct  since  his  conversion 
as  a  refutation  of  such  unfounded  calumnies. 
These  malignant  accusations  are  referred  to  and 
refuted  in  that  thrilling  narrative,  '  The  singular 
experience  and  great  sufferings  of  Mrs.  Agnes 
Beaumont,'  contained  in  a  deeply  interesting  vol- 
ume, An  Abstract  of  the  gracious  Dealings  of  God 
with  several  eminent  Christians,  hy  Samuel  James, 
M.A.3  Another  and  very  different  tournament 
took  place  hetween  him  and  E.  Fowler,  afterwards 
Bishop  of  Gloucester.  He  puhlished  his  views  of 
T7te  Design  of  Christian  it y ;  that  it  was  merely 
the  restoration  of  man  to  his  primitive  state. 
Bunyan  saw  his  hook,  and  very  justly  conceiving 
that  the  learned  divine  had  asserted  some  gross 
errors  upon  doctrinal  points  of  the  greatest  im- 
portance, he  treated  the  emhryo  hishop  just  the 
same  as  if  he  had  been  a  brother  tinker,  a  mere 
man  who  was  attempting  to  rob  his  (Bunyan's) 
beloved  Master  of  one  of  the  most  glorious  gems 
in  his  crown.  In  the  almost  incredibly  short  time 
of  forty-five  days,3  he,  in  jail,  composed  an  answer, 
consisting  of  118  pages  of  small  quarto,  closely 
printed,  and  in  which  he  completely  demolished 
the  theory  of  this  great  scholar.  It  is  entitled, 
'  A  Defence  of  the  Doctrine  of  Justification  by 
Faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  showing  true  Gospel  Holi- 
ness flows  from  thence  ;  or,  Mr.  Fowler's  pretended 
Design  of  Christianity  proved  to  be  nothing  more 
than  to  trample  under  foot  the  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God ;  and  the  idolizing  of  man's  own  righteous- 
ness.'4 In  this  hastily  written,  but  valuable  book, 
Bunyan  used  very  strong  language  ;  reflecting  upon 
a  man  of  considerable  influence,  and  one  of  his 
decided  enemies.  Of  some  of  Mr.  Fowler's  senti- 
ments, he  says,  '  Here  are  pure  dictates  of  a  brut- 
ish, beastly  man,  that  neither  knows  himself  nor 
one  tittle  of  the  Word  of  God.'5    '  But  why  should 


1  '  Gospel  Truths  Vindicated,'  vol.  ii.  p.  201. 

2  The  public  were  indebted  to  Mr.  S.  J.  Button  for  a  new 
and  handsome  edition  of  this  work  in  1824. 

3  Erom  Eebruary  13  to  March  27,  1671. 

1  Vol.  ii.  p.  278.  J  P.  283. 


this  thief  love  thus  to  clamber  ami  Beelt  to  nr0  to 
God  by  other  means  than  Christ?'8  Mr.  Fowler 
said,  '  It  cannot  be  worth  our  while  to  lav  out 
any  considerable  matter  of  our  heat,  either  for  or 
against  doubtful  opinions,  altt  rabh  modes,  rites  and 
circumstances  of  religion;  it  would  be  like  tin: 
apes  blowing  at  a  glow-worm,  which  affords  neither 
light  nor  warmth,7  and  whatsoever  is  commended 
by  the  custom  of  the  places  we  live  in,  or  com- 
manded by  superiors,  our  Christian  liberty  is  to  do 
them.'8  Bunyan  knew  the  feelings  of  the  clergy 
in  his  own  neighbourhood,  and  he  also  knew  that 
the  Act  of  Uniformity  had  just  turned  out  all  the 
godly  and  evangelical  ministers  from  the  Church 
of  England.  To  this  sophistry,  as  to  a  Christian's 
being  bound  by  the  custom  of  the  country  he  lives 
in,  and  by  the  authority  of  superiors,  as  to  outward 
forms  or  ceremonies  of  Divine  worship  and  religious 
teaching,  our  Pilgrim's  guide  thus  breaks  out  into 
what  .Mr.  Fowler  calls  a  Rabshakeh,  '  I  know  none 
so  wedded  thereto  as  yourselves,  even  the  whole 
gang  of  your  rabbling  counterfeit  clergy ;  who, 
generally,  like  the  ape  you  speak  of,  lie  blowing 
up  the  applause  and  glory  of  your  trumpery,  and, 
like  the  tail,  with  your  foolish  and  sophistical 
arguings,  you  cover  the  filthy  parts  thereof.'9 

To  Bunyan's  Treatise  a  reply  was  immediately 
published,  and  in  it  the  gentleman  and  scholar 
complains  of  the  uncharitable  terms  used  by  Bun- 
yan, and  we  are  led  to  expect  something  polite  and 
genteel ;  but,  unfortunately,  the  bishop  in  expect- 
ancy, or  one  of  his  friends,  beats  the  tinker  in 
harsh  epithets,  without  answering  his  hard  argu- 
ments. The  scoffer  calls  our  Pilgrim's  guide 
'grossly  ignorant,'  'most  unchristian  and  wicked,"0 
'  a  piece  of  proud  folly,'  '  so  very  dirty  a  creature 
that  he  disdains  to  defile  his  fingers  with  him;''" 
and  yet  writes  a  book  in  reply  to  him.  He  vaunt- 
ingly  says,  that '  Bunyan  can  no  more  disgrace  the 
bishop  than  a  rude  creature  can  eclipse  the  moon  by 
barking  at  her,  or  make  palaces  contemptible  by 
their  lifting  up  their  legs  against  them."1  '  lie  is  not 
in  the  least  concerned  (so  he  pretends)  at  the  brut- 
ish barkings  of  such  a  creature;'  'a  most  black- 
mouthed  calumniator;'12  '  John  Bunyan,  a  person 
that  hath  been  near  these  twenty  years,  or  longer, 
most  infamous  in  the  town  and  county  of  Bedford 
for  a  very  pestilent  schismatic;'13  and  winds  up 


6  Vol.  ii.  p.  293. 

7  Design  of  Chrhtianity,  8vo,  1G71,  p.  239. 

8  Ibid.  p.  242. 

9  'Defence  of  the  Doctrine  of  Justification,'  vol.  ii.  p.  322. 

10  Dirt  icipt  of,  4to,  1072,  title. 

11  Ibid,  preface.  12  Ibid.  p.  2. 

]3  Ibid.  p.  3.  This  exactly  agrees  with  the  opinion  of  Jus- 
tice  Chester,  expressed  at  the  assizes  wheu  Bunyan's  wife  so 
nobly  pressed  Judge  Hale  to  release  him:— '-My  lord,'  said 
Justice  Chester,  '  he  is  a  pestilent  fellow,  there  is  not  Bach  a 
fellow  in  the  country  again.' — liehition  of  Bunyan  3  Ivapri. 
sonment,  vol.  i.  p.  57. 


24. 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


much  of  his  abuse  in  these  words : — '  I  now  appeal 
to  authority,  whether  this  man  ought  to  enjoy  any 
interest  in  his  Majesty's  toleration;  and  whether 
the  letting  such  firebrands,  and  most  impudent, 
malicious  schismaticks,  go  unpunished  doth  not 
tend  to  the  subversion  of  all  government  ?  I  say, 
let  our  superiors  judge  of  this."  Bunyan  had 
then  suffered  nearly  twelve  years'  imprisonment, 
and  was  more  zealous  and  intrepid  than  ever ;  and 
yet  this  fanatic  bishop  would  have  had  his  impri- 
sonment continued,  or  his  life  forfeited,  because  he 
could  not  resist  the  arrows  with  which  this  prisoner 
for  Christ  assailed  him,  drawn  all  burning  from 
the  furnace  of  God's  Holy  Word.  This  was  one 
of  the  lessons  by  which  Bunyan  was  taught  how 
to  lead  the  Pilgrims  in  their  attack  upon  the 
monster,  Antichrist,  which  was  very  rampant,  and 
looked  upon  the  Pilgrims  with  great  disdain;  but 
these  valiant  worthies  did  continually  assault  him, 
until  he  became  wounded,  '  and  it  is  verily  believed 
by  some  that  this  beast  will  certainly  die  of  his 
wounds.'2  How  would  it  delight  the  church  of 
Christ  to  witness  his  death,  and  to  see  his  vile 
remains  buried  under  all  his  implements  of  torture ; 
his  inquisitions,  flames,  and  stakes,  dungeons  and 
racks,  halters  and  church-rates.  Another,  and 
a  very  serious  lesson,  he  was  taught  in  the  con- 
troversy which  he  carried  on  with  some  Quakers  and 
strict  Baptists. 

Bunyan's  controversy,  which  is  said  to  have 
been  with  the  Quakers,  was,  in  fact,  not  with  that 
highly  respectable  and  useful  body  of  Christians, 
but  with  persons  whom  he  considered  to  be  under 
serious  delusions ;  some  of  these  called  themselves 
Quakers.  At  this  period,  the  Society  of  Friends 
were  not  united  into  a  body  or  denomination.  The 
battle,  according  to  his  own  words,  was  against 
Satan,  and  those  lies  with  which  he  had  deceived 
some  enthusiastic  spirits.  These  characters  were 
called,  by  Bunyan,  a  company  of  loose  ranters  and 
light  notionists,  with  here  and  tbere  a  legalist, 
who  were  shaking  in  their  principles,  sometimes 
on  this  religion  and  sometimes  on  tbat.  It  is  true 
that  he  talks  of  the  Quakers'  delusions ;  but  his 
fight  was  with  principles,  and  not  persons,  and  he 
sets  forth  what,  in  his  opinion,  were  '  the  lies  with 
which  the  devil  beguileth  poor  souls. '  First,  That 
salvation  was  not  fully  completed  for  sinners  by 
Christ  Jesus.  Second,  Tbat  the  light  within  was 
sufficient  without  the  written  Word.  Some  of 
these  visionaries  denied  the  divinity  of  Christ; 
others  asserted  that  Christ  was  born,  lived,  and 
was  crucified  within  them,  and  that  he  was  only  to 
be  found  within  themselves  by  the  aid  of  that  light 
which  enlighteneth  every  man  that  cometh  into 


Dirt  loipt  off,  p.  70. 

'  Pilgrim's  Progress/  Part  II.,  Vanity  Fair. 


the  world ;  that  his  being  found  in  fashion  as  a 
man,  and  humbling  himself  to  the  death  of  the 
cross — in  fact,  that  his  personal  appearance  on 
earth,  was  only  typical  of  his  taking  up  a  residence 
in  the  soul  of  every  believer.  Thus  they  entirely 
abandoned  and  neglected  the  written  Word.  They 
adopted  some  singular  practices,  lived  upon  bread 
and  water,  forbade  marriage,  and  refused  to  wear 
hat-bands.3  Such  were  the  adversaries  against 
whom  he  wrote  the  first  book  that  he  published, 
called  '  Gospel  Truths  Opened.'  It  was  about  this 
time  that  Naylor  appeared ;  and  he,  acting  under 
the  delusion  of  having  Christ  within  him,  rode  on 
an  ass  into  Bristol,  while  the  mob  strewed  their 
clothes  before  him,  crying,  'Ilosanua!  blessed  is 
he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.'  And 
instead  of  reasoning  with  him,  in  order  to  remove 
this  temporary  delusion,  he  was  cruelly  tormented, 
imprisoned,  pilloried,  with  its  brutal  accompani- 
ments ;  burned  through  the  tongue  with  a  hot 
iron ;  branded  with  a  B  on  his  forehead  for  blas- 
phemy ;  whipped,  and  confined  to  hard  labour. 
Mr.  Grainger  says  '  that  the  discipline  of  a  prison 
soon  restored  him  to  his  senses;'*  and  we  are 
inclined  to  think  that  he  was  mercifully  restored 
to  his  right  mind,  because  he  was  some  years  after- 
wards received  into  the  Society  of  Friends,  as  a 
member,  and  died  in  their  communion — a  fact 
which  the  clergyman  had  not  the  honesty  to  state. 
Against  this  first  work  of  Bunyan's  an  answer 
was  published  by  Edward  Burroughs,  afterwards 
an  eminent  Quaker.  In  this,  he  fought,  as  Bun- 
yan called  it,  '  bitterly,  with  a  parcel  of  scolding 
expressions;'  and  he  advises  him  not  to  appear  so 
gross  a  railing  Rabshakeh  ;  and,  in  fact,  he  proved 
himself  a  match  for  his  adversary  with  those 
weapons.  He  calls  Bunyan  '  of  the  stock  of  Ish- 
mael,  and  of  the  seed  of  Cain,  whose  line  reacheth 
to  the  murthering  priests,  enemies  of  Christ  preach- 
ing for  hire.'  Bunyan  replies,  '  These  are  words 
flung  unto  the  winds  by  thee,  my  adversary.' 
Burroughs  having  thoughtlessly  urged  that  there 
was  not  a  Quaker  heard  of  in  the  days  of  John, 
his  keen  antagonist  replied,  '  Friend,  thou  hast 
rightly  said,  there  was  not  a  Quaker  heard  of  in- 
deed, though  there  were  many  Christians  heard  of 
then.'  '  Your  sister,  Anne  Blackley,  bid  me,  in  the 
audience  of  many,  to  throw  away  the  Scriptures ;  to 
which  I  answered,  No,  for  then  tlie  devil  would  be 
too  hard  for  me. '  Among  other  queries  put  to  him 
by  Burroughs,  one  was,  '  Is  not  the  liar  and  slan- 
derer an  unbeliever,  and  of  the  cursed  nature  ?  '5 


3  Hat-bands  were   gay  bunches   of  ribbons   and   rosettes 
fastened  round  the  hat  or  cap. 

'  Room  for  the  nolile  gladiator!  see 
His  coat  and  hat-band  show  his  quality.' 

4  Biog.  Hist,  of  England. 

5  '  Vindication  of  Gospel  Truths,'  query  8,  vol.  ii.  p.  209. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


15 


Bunyan's  reply  was,  '  The  liar  and  slanderer  is  an 
unbeliever ;  and  if  he  live  and  die  in  that  condition, 
his  state  is  very  sad,  though,  if  he  turn,  there  is 
hope  for  him  ;  therefore  repent  and  turn  quickly, 
or  else  look  to  yourselves,  for  you  are  the  men,  as 
is  clear  by  your  discourse.' 

This  controversy,  carried  ou  with  great  spirit 
and  warmth,  related  much  to  that  difficult  question, 
Whether  Christ  continued  his  human  body  after  his 
ascension,  or  was  it  resolved  into  a  spiritual  form  ? 
These  disputations,  which  led  to  a  prayerful  inves- 
tigation of  Scripture,  must  have  had  a  beneficial 
tendency.  Banyan  considered  that  his  antagonist 
did  not  value  the  Holy  Oracles  sufficiently ;  and 
Burroughs  considered  that  too  little  attention  was 
paid  to  '  Christ  formed  in  us  the  hope  of  glory.' 
Both  were  questions  of  the  deepest  importance;  and 
happy  was  it  for  those  of  their  countrymen  who 
witnessed  the  strife  between  these  giants,  and  were 
led  earnestly  and  prayerfully  to  search  into  these 
vital  and  important  truths.  The  dispute  presented 
much  wholesome  fruit,  although  not  served  up  in 
silver  dishes.  Burroughs's  friend,  Howgill,  bears 
this  testimony  of  his  worth: — '  Though  thou  didst 
cut  as  a  razor — and  many  a  rough  stone  hast  thou 
squared  and  polished,  and  much  knotty  wood  hast 
thou  hewn  in  thy  day — yet,  to  the  seed,  thy  words 
dropped  like  oil,  and  thy  lips  as  the  honeycomb.' 
Bunyan  held  a  public  disputation  with  these  zeal- 
ous missionaries  in  Paul's  Steeple  House,  Bed- 
ford Town,  May  23,  lb5G.'  This  was  a  contest 
which  involved  in  it  a  close  examination  of  the 
Sacred  Scriptures,  and  certainly  afforded  valuable 
lessons  in  fitting  Britain's  allegorist  for  his  great 
and  important  work. 

Bunyan's  difference  of  opinion  relative  to  the 
terms  of  communion  at  the  Lord's  table,  led  to  a 
controversy  with  the  Strict  Baptist  churches,  to 
all  of  which  he  was  sincerely  attached ;  and  this 
was  probably  one  of  the  means  by  which  he  was 
enabled  to  write  an  itinerary  to  all  pilgrims ;  for 
it  must  have  blunted  the  edge  of  his  sectarian 
feelings,  and  have  enlarged  his  heart  towards  the 
whole  Christian  community  of  every  class.  In  the 
preface  to  the  'Reason  of  his  Practice,' he  dis- 
plays all  the  noble  sentiments  of  a  Christian  con- 
fessor ;  of  one  who  has  been  deservedly  called  the 
Apostle  of  Bedford,  or  Bishop  Bunyan.  '  Faith 
and  holiness  are  my  professed  principles,  with  an 
endeavour,  so  far  as  in  me  lieth,  to  be  at  peace 
with  all  men.  What  shall  I  say?  let  mine  ene- 
mies themselves  be  judges,  if  anything  in  these 
following  doctrines,  or  if  aught  that  any  man  hath 
heard  me  preach,  doth,  or  hath,  according  to  the 
true  intent  of  my  words,  savoured  either  of  heresy 
or  rebellion.      I   say,  again,  let   they   them    slves 


1  See  Burroughs's  Works,  p.  ^Ui. 


be  judges,  if  aught  they  find  in  my  writings  or 
preaching  doth  render  me  worthy  of  almost  twelve 
years'  imprisonment,  or  one  that  deserveth  to  be 
hanged,  or  banished  for  ever,  according  to  their 
tremendous  sentence.  Indeed,  my  principles  are 
such  as  lead  me  to  a  denial  to  communicate  in  tho 
things  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  with  ungodly  and 
open  profane;  neither  can  I,  in  or  by  the  super- 
stitious inventions  of  this  world,  consent  that  my 
soul  should  be  governed  in  any  of  my  approaches 

to  God,  BECAUSE  COMMANDED  TO  THE  CONTRARY,  AND 

COMMENDED  for  so  refusixg.  Wherefore,  except- 
ing this  one  thing,  for  which  I  ought  not  to  bo 
rebuked,  I  shall,  I  trust,  in  despite  of  slander  and 
falsehood,  discover  myself  at  all  times  a  peaceablo 
and  obedient  subject.  But  if  nothing  will  do, 
unless  I  make  my  conscience  a  continual  butchery 
and  slaughter-shop,  unless,  putting  out  mine  own 
eyes,  I  commit  me  to  the  blind  to  lead  me  (as,  I 
doubt,  is  desired  by  some),  I  have  determined,  the 
Almighty  God  being  my  help  and  shield,  yet  to 
suffer,  if  frail  life  might  continue  so  long,  even 
till  the  moss  shall  grow  on  mine  eyebrows,  rather 
than  to  violate  my  faith  and  principles.  Touching 
my  practice,  as  to  communion  with  visible  saints, 
although  not  baptized  with  water,  I  say,  it  is  my 
present  judgment  so  to  do,  and  am  willing  to  render 
a  further  reason  thereof,  shall  I  see  the  leading 
hand  of  God  thereto.  Thine  in  bonds  for  the 
gospel,  John  Bunyan'.'  At  the  end  of  this  trea- 
tise, he  severely  alludes  to  the  unfair  practices  of 
controversialists ;  he  signs  himself,  '  I  am  thine  to 
serve  thee,  Christian,  so  long  as  I  can  look  out  at 
those  eyes  that  have  had  so  much  dirt  thrown  at 
them  by  many,  John  Bunyan.' 

Kiffin,  Denne,  T.  Paul,  and  Danvers  replied  to 
this  'Confession;'  Jesse,  and  others,  defended  it. 
This  led  to  the  publication  of  '  The  Differences 
about  Water-Baptism  no  Bar  to  Communion,'  and 
to  the  '  Peaceable  Principles  and  True.'  The 
controversy  was  carried  on  with  sufficient  acrimony 
to  shake  Bunyan's  sectarian  feelings,  and  to  excite 
in  his  breast  a  determined  spirit  of  2oersonal,  prayer- 
ful inquiry  at  the  Fountain  of  Truth,  in  all  matters, 
both  of  his  faith  and  practice  in  religion,  even  at 
the  risk  of  life. 

The  principles  of  our  great  allegorist  upon  this 
subject  have  spread  over  a  great  number  of  the 
Baptist  churches.  Bunyan  probably  considered 
these  sentiments  as  the  precursors  of  the  dawn  of 
a  happy  day,  when  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
with  purifying  power  like  heavenly  fire,  shall 
absorb  all  these  bitter  waters  of  contention  which 
occasioned  such  angry,  unholy  dissension  among 
the  churches  of  Christ;  when  the  soul  of  every 
believer  shall  be  imbued  and  immersed  in  sacred 
love  and  zeal  for  the  honour  of  our  Lord  and  tho 
increase  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  Bubject  of  water- 


16 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


baptism,  as  a  personal  duty,  be  better  understood 
and  appreciated. 

In  tins  conflict  with  his  brethren,  all  that  sanc- 
tified penetration,  that  unwavering  fortitude,  and 
that  determination,  first  to  understand,  and  then 
to  do  his  Lord's  will,  was  displayed,  that  fitted  the 
Author  to  write  his  surprising  Allegory,  and  to  be 
a  •  Great-heart'  to  guide  and  protect  his  weaker 
fellow-pilgrims. 

Soon  after  this,  the  prisons  of  England  were 
filled  with  the  most  pious  and  virtuous  of  her 
citizens ;  and  when  Bunyan  and  his  antagonists, 
both  Quakers  and  Baptists,  were  confined  within 
the  same  walls,  conversed  upon  spiritual  things, 
worshipped  unitedly  their  God  by  the  same  way 
of  access,  all  former  bitterness  and  animosities 
were  swallowed  up  in  the  communion  of  saints, 
and  the  wall  of  separation  was  thrown  down ;  not 
only  did  their  sufferings  increase  their  catholic 
spirit  and  respect  for  each  other,  but  they  became 
a  blessing  to  many  who  were  confined  for  real 
crimes ;  and  when  they  came  forth,  it  was  with 
renewed  powers  to  proclaim  the  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ.  Hundreds  of  poor,  imprisoned, 
godly  ministers  felt  the  power  of  those  words: 
'  Blessed  be  God,  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
tribulation,  that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them 
that  are  in  trouble. '  2  Co.  i.  4.  Like  Kelsey,  a  Bap- 
tist minister,  who  suffered  seventeen  years'  im- 
prisonment, they  could  say — 

'  I  hope  the  more  they  punish  me,  that  I  shall  grow  more  bold : 
The  furnace  they  provide  for  me,  will  make  me  finer  gold. 
My  friends,  my  God  will  do  me  good,  when  they  intend  me 

harm; 
They  may  suppose  a  prison  cold,  but  God  can  make  it  warm. 
What  if  my  God  should  suffer  them  on  me  to  have  their  will, 
And  give  me  heaven  instead  of  earth  ?    I  am  no  loser  still.' 

Thus  does  Antichrist  destroy  himself,  for  whether 
he  imprisons  the  Christian,  or  only  seizes  on  his 
goods,  he  uses  weapons  to  hasten  the  destruction 
of  his  own  kingdom. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

bunyan's  release  from  prison,  and  publication  of 
'  the  pilgrim's  progress. ' 

The  reigns  of  the  debauched  Charles  II.  and 
the  besotted  James,  those  fag-ends  of  an  unhappy 
race,  were  the  most  humiliating  that  these  realms 
ever  witnessed.  Deep  dissimulation,1  oft-repeated 
falsehoods,  wilful  and  deliberate  perjuries,  were 
employed  by  the  first  of  these  royal  profligates  to 


obtain  the  throne.  Solemn  pledges  to  pardon 
political  offenders  were  ruthlessly  violated,  as  well 
as  the  oaths  and  declarations  •  that  liberty  should 
be  extended  to  tender  consciences  on  religious 
subjects,  so  that  none  should  be  disturbed  or  called 
in  question  for  any  differences  of  opinion  in  matters 
of  religion.'2  The  fanatic  Church  of  England 
soon  obtained  laws  in  direct  violation  of  all  the 
King's  oaths  and  declarations,  such  as  the  Act  of 
Uniformity,  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts,  the 
Five-mile  and  Conventicle  Acts,  and  a  revival  of 
the  old  statutes  for  compelling  all  persons  to  attend 
the  Church  service ;  and  thus  forcing  the  weak- 
minded  to  become  hypocritical  members  of  the 
Church  which  was  then,  and  continues  to  this  day, 
to  be  preferred  by  the  state  as  best  suiting  its  pur- 
poses. Among  the  rest  was  an  Act  ordering  all 
the  subjects  of  the  realm,  for  ever,  to  meet  in  their 
respective  churches  on  the  29th  of  May  in  each 
year,  and  thanking  God  that  these  kingdoms  were 
on  that  day  new  born  and  raised  from  tlie  dead  :3 
an  Act  which  has  not  been  repealed,  but  remains  a 
disgrace  to  our  statute-book.  A  hurricane  of  per- 
secution followed,  and  all  the  jails  in  the  kingdom 
soon  became  filled  with  those  of  our  countrymen 
who,  by  their  virtue  and  piety,  were  the  brightest 
ornaments  of  Christianity.  While  these  barbarities 
were  perpetrating,  desolations  followed  in  rapid 
succession.  A  fearful  pestilence  swept  away  the 
inhabitants  of  the  metropolis,  followed  in  the  next 
year  by  a  conflagration  which  destroyed  the  cathed- 
ral, and  nearly  all  its  churches,  magazines,  houses, 
and  enormous  wealth.  Again,  in  the  succeeding 
year,  came  a  Dutch  fleet,  which  took  Sheerness, 
destroyed  our  shipping,  and  caused  a  degree  of 
consternation  thus  described  by  an  eye-witness, 
who  was  attached  to  the  court : 4  '  I  was  at  Lon- 
don in  the  plague  and  fire  years,  yet  in  neither  did 
I  observe  such  consternation  and  confusion  in  the 
looks  of  all  men,  as  at  this  time,  and  with  great 
cause:  for  if  the  Dutch  had  then  come  up  to 
London,  they  had  found  all  open  to  them,  not  one 
gun  mounted  at  Tilbury  Fort,  nor  one  frigate 
ready  in  the  river ;  so  as  they  might  have  forced 
all  the  ships  in  the  river  up  to  the  bridge,  and 
there  have  burnt  them,  which  would  certainly  have 
fired  the  Tower  and  all  the  suburbs  west  to  Black- 
wall,  as  well  as  Southwark  below  bridge.'  Still 
the  persecution  of  the  Christians  was  continued  in 
all  its  rigour. 

Bunyan  was  one  among  the  first  persons  pun- 
ished under  the  sanction  of  these  wicked  laws. 
He  was  taken,  seut  to  prison,  and  threatened 
with  transportation,  or  the  halter,  unless  he  would 


1  That  thorough  courtier,  Lord  Halifax,  apologizes  for  him 
thus: — 'If  he  dissembled,  let  us  remember  that  he  was  a 
king ;  and  that  dissimulation  is  a  jewel  in  the  royal  crown.' 
— Harris's  Charles  II.,  vol.  ii.  p.  16. 


2  Declaration  from  Breda. 

3  Meauing  the  restoration  of  the  Stuart  dynasty. 

4  Mr.  Roger  Cook.     Keunet's  Ridory  of  England,  vol. 
p.  265. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


17 


conform,  or  pretend  to  conform,  to  whatever  reli- 
gion happened  to  he  by  law  established.  This  at, 
all  hazards  he  steadily  refused ;  although,  at  that 
time,  he  fully  anticipated  being  hung.  Under 
such  an  awful  impression,  he  felt  exceedingly 
anxious  that,  suffering  for  the  cause  of  Christ,  he 
should  meet  death  with  fortitude,  and  be  enabled 
to  address  the  multitude  that  would  come  to  see 
him  die.  '  And,  thought  I,  if  it  must  be  so,  if 
God  will  but  convert  one  soul  by  my  very  last 
words,  I  shall  not  count  my  life  thrown  away,  nor 
lost.'1 

About  this  time  twelve  Baptists  were  sentenced 
to  be  hung  for  nonconformity.  One  of  these  was 
a  widow,  Mary  Jackman,  who  had  six  children ; 
their  reprieve  was  almost  miraculous.2 

Banyan's  sufferings  in  prison  were  aggravated 
by  his  affectionate  feelings  for  his  blind  daughter, 
and  with  tender  apprehension  he  speaks  of  her  in 
language  of  impassioned  solicitude.  '  Poor  child, 
thought  I,  what  sorrow  art  thou  like  to  have  for 
thy  portion  in  this  world  !  Thou  must  be  beaten, 
must  beg,  suffer  hunger,  cold,  nakedness,  and  a 
thousand  calamities,  though  I  cannot  now  endure 
the  wind  shall  blow  upon  thee  !  Oh,  the  hard- 
ships I  thought  my  blind  one  might  go  under,  would 
break  my  heart  to  pieces ! '  Then  he  casts  himself 
upon  the  boundless  power  of  his  God,  repents  his 
doubts,  and  is  filled  with  consolation.  Such  were 
the  severe  trials  by  which  he  was  qualified  to  write 
the  'Pilgrim's  Progress.' 

His  wife  was  a  partaker  of  his  own  spirit — a 
heroine  of  no  ordinary  stamp  in  so  trying  a  situa- 
tion. She  came  to  London  with  a  petition  for  the 
release  of  her  husband,  which  was  presented  to  the 
House  of  Lords;  but  in  vain.  Time  after  time  she 
appeared  in  person  before  the  judges;  and,  although 
a  delicate  young  woman  of  retiring  habits,  pleaded 
the  cause  of  her  husband  and  his  children  in  lan- 
guage worthy  of  the  most  talented  counsel;  but  all 
her  supplications  were  fruitless,  although  Judge 
Hale  was  evidently  affected  by  her  powerful  appeal, 
and  felt  much  for  her.  *  This  courageous,  this 
fine,  high-minded  English  woman,  and  Lord  Chief- 
Justice  Hale,  and  Bunyan,  have  long  since  met  in 
heaven ;  but  how  little  could  they  recognize  each 
other's  character  on  earth  !  How  little  could  the 
distressed  insulted  wife  have  imagined,  that  beneath 
the  judge's  ermine  there  was  beating  the  heart  of 
a  child  of  God,  a  man  of  humility,  integrity,  and 
prayer  !  How  little  could  the  great,  the  learned, 
the  illustrious,  and  truly  pious  judge  have  dreamed 
that  the  man,  the  obscure  tinker,  whom  he  was 
suffering  to  languish  in  prison  for  want  of  a  writ 
of  error,  would  one  day  be  the  subject  of  greater 


'  Grace  Abounding,'  No.  335. 
Crosby's  History,  vol.  ii.  p.  184. 


admiration  and  praise  than  all  the  judges  in  the 
kingdom  of  Great  Britain  !  How  little  could  ho 
dream,  that  from  that  narrow  cell  where  the  pri- 
soner was  left  incarcerated,  and  cut  off  apparently 
from  all  usefulness,  a  glory  would  shine  out,  illus- 
trating the  government  and  grace  of  God,  and 
doing  more  good  to  man,  than  all  the  prelates  and 
judges  of  the  kingdom  put  together  had  accom- 
plished.'3 

How  many  thousands  will  in  heaven  search  out 
Bunyan,  to  hear  his  own  accounts  of  his  sufferings, 
and  how  he  conceived  his  wondrous  dream  !  Nor 
will  they  forget  the  wife  whose  '  Plain  Man's  Path- 
way'4 led  him  to  his  first  inquiries  after  the 
Wicket-gate;  nor  his  Elizabeth,  who  so  nobly 
pleaded  for  him  before  the  judges. 

The  number  of  nonconformists  who  were  impri- 
soned in  these  trying  times,  will  never  be  fully 
known  until  the  great  day  when  all  secrets  will  bo 
revealed,  to  the  honour  of  the  persecuted  and  tho 
infamy  of  the  persecutors.  They  were  of  both 
sexes  and  of  all  ages,  from  the  child  of  nine  or  ten 
years  to  the  hoary-headed  saint  of  eighty,  who, 
bending  and  trembling  over  the  grave  with  bodily 
infirmities,  was  driven  to  prison  and  incarcerated 
in  a  filthy  dungeon.  In  Picart's  Eellgious  Cere- 
monies, it  is  stated  that  the  number  of  dissenters, 
of  all  sects,  who  perished  in  prison  under  Charles  II. 

Was  EIGHT  THOUSAND.5 

As  a  sect,  the  Quakers  were  the  most  severely 
handled.  Not  only  were  they  the  ardent  friends 
of  religious  liberty,  but  their  principles  led  them 
to  testify  against  oaths,  a  hireling  ministry, 
tithes,  and  other  ecclesiastical  demands,  whether 
by  forcible  or  voluntary  contributions ;  and  they 
taught  that  the  work  of  the  ministry  was  one  of 
the  purest  benevolence,  and  not  to  be  fulfilled  for 
the  love  of  pelf,  or  idleness,  or  worldly  distinction. 
The  law  required  them  to  attend  the  Church,  and 
when  there,  roused  by  the  foolish  and  wicked  ob- 
servations of  the  priest,  it  was  common  for  them 
to  take  out  their  Bibles,  and  denounce,  in  awful 
terms,  the  conduct  of  such  blind  teachers,  who 
were  leading  their  equally  blind  hearers  to  ever- 
lasting perdition.  And  for  this  they  were  impri- 
soned and  cruelly  treated. 

If  some  of  the  nonconformists  occasionally 
interrupted  the  clergyman  while  preaching,  tho 
Church  party  frequently  did  the  same  to  both 
Baptists  and  Quakers.  Thus  it  happened  when 
Bunyan  was  preaching  in  a  barn,  a  Church  scholar, 
wounded  by  his  observations,  cried  out,  '  You  aro 
a  deceiver,  a  person  of  no  charity,  nor  fit  to  preach  ; 


3  Dr.  Cheever's  Lectures. 

4  'this  book,  with  '  M.  Bunyan'  on  the  title-page,  is  in  the 
Editor's  possession. 

5  Paris,  lb09,  torn.  x.  p.  71:    *  Iluit  inolle  dissenters  de 
toutes  les  croyances  perirent  en  prison.' 


18 


THE    PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


for  you  condemn  the  greater  portion  of  your  hear- 
ers.' Bunyan  replied,  'Did  not  Jesus  Christ 
preach  to  the  same  effect,  when  he  described  four 
sorts  of  hearers — the  highway,  stony,  thorny,  and 
good  ground  ?  whereof  the  good  ground  were  the 
only  persons  to  be  saved  ?  Do  you  mean  to  say 
that  Jesus  was  unfit  to  preach  ?  Away  with  such 
logic  ! '  The  scholar  rode  away  much  better  pun- 
ished than  by  imprisonment,  for  disturbing  a  con- 
gregation which  he  was  not  compelled  to  attend. 

Multitudes  of  Quakers  and  Baptists  were  con- 
fined for  the  non-payment  of  ruinous  fines,  imposed 
after  the  officers  of  injustice  had  swept  away  all 
the  worldly  goods  that  they  possessed.  In  most 
cases  they  were  treated  with  extreme  cruelty ; 
some,  even  in  the  midst  of  the  plague  then  raging, 
were  dragged  from  their  homes  and  families,  and 
shut  up  in  a  jail  little  better  than  a  pest-house,  in 
which  seventy-nine  members  of  the  Society  of 
Friends,1  and  a  great  number  of  otter  noncon- 
formists died,  and  obtained  a  happy  release  from 
the  fangs  of  tyranny.  Upwards  of  eight  thousand 
Quakers  alone  suffered  imprisonment ; a  and  the 
record  of  those  who  died  in  prison,  as  preserved 
at  Devonshire  House,  Bishopsgate,  gives  the  fear- 
ful number  of  three  hundred  and  ninety-nine  per- 
sons of  that  persuasion  only.  At  Carlisle,  Dorothy 
Waugh  and  Ann  Robinson,  for  preaching,  were 
dragged  through  the  streets,  with  each  an  iron 
instrument  of  torture,  called  a  bridle,  upon  their 
heads,  and  were  treated  with  gross  indecency.3  A 
youth  named  James  Parnell,  aged  nineteen,  was 
treated  with  a  degree  of  cruelty  which,  had  it  not 
been  well  authenticated,  would  have  been  beyond 
our  credibility.  '  He  was  thrust  into  a  hole  in 
Colchester  Castle  not  so  wide  as  a  baker's  oven, 
and  at  a  considerable  height  from  the  pavement ; 
in  climbing  down  to  get  his  food,  his  hands  being 
benumbed,  he  lost  his  hold,  and  fell  upon  the 
stones,  wounding  his  head  severely,  and  bruising 
his  body.  In  this  state  he  was  beaten  by  the 
jailer,  and  thrust  into  a  similar  hole  nearer  the 
pavement.  He  was  shortly  released  from  further 
torments  by  death.'4  A  memorial  was  presented 
to  the  King  and  his  council  at  Whitehall,  '  Being 
a  brief  relation  of  some  of  the  cruel  and  inhuman 
usage,  and  great  persecution  and  imprisonment  of 
above  four  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  of  the 
people  of  God,  in  scorn  called  Quakers,  for  wor- 
shipping of  God,  and  meeting  together  in  the  fear 
ot  the  Lord.'5  The  summary  of  this  frightful 
broadside,  which  gives  an  account  of  the  number 
of  Quakers  in  every  prison  throughout  the  king- 
dom, and  is  of  undoubted  authority,   shows  that 


1  Hooke's  Address  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  4to, 
1674. 

2  Ibid.         3  Besse's  Sufferings.         4  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  191. 
6  Devonshire  House,  in  a  volume  of  tracts  4>to,  No.  57. 


such  was  the  thronged  state  of  the  prisons,  that 
in  some  cases  they  were  crowded  into  so  small  a 
space  that  some  had  to  stand  while  the  others 
laid  down.  Many  were  taken  out  dead.  To  add  to 
their  trials,  in  Somersetshire  the  vilest  felons  were 
ironed  to  the  poor  Quakers ;  all  the  prisons  were 
filled  with  men,  women,  and  children ;  the  aged 
and  young,  healthy  and  sick,  were  indiscriminately 
shut  up  with  the  vilest  of  ruffians,  their  clothes  torn 
off;  women  taken  from  their  beds  in  the  night, 
and  driven  along  the  dirty  roads  in  winter  to 
prison ;  sixty-eight  thrust  into  a  small  room,  with- 
out bread  or  water,  some  of  the  women  being  in 
the  most  trying  and  delicate  state  ;  many  in  chains 
and  fetters,  wallowing  in  indescribable  filth.  Sixty 
of  these  Quakers  were  at  one  time  confined,  with 
John  Bunyan  and  his  friends,  in  the  prison  on 
Bedford  Bridge.  In  •  Some  Account  of  the  Life 
and  Death  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan,'  prefixed  to  his 
works,  2  vols,  folio,  1737,  p.  xii.,  we  find  that 
'sixty  Dissenters  were  at  one  time  put  in  Bed- 
ford jail  for  attending  a  religious  meeting  at 
Kaistoe,  in  addition  to  Bunyan  and  the  usual  pri- 
soners, among  whom  were  two  eminent  dissenting 
ministers,  Mr.  Wheeler  and  Mr.  Dun.  Amidst  all 
this  hurry,  Bunyan  preached  and  prayed  among 
them  in  a  mighty  spirit  of  faith  and  overflowing 
of  Divine  assistance,  which  made  me  stand  and 
wonder.'6  In  one  place  of  confinement  in  that 
county,  'fifty  are  in  a  close  and  strait  place,  where 
many  are  sick  and  weak,  and  likely  to  perish. '  A 
very  affecting  appeal  was  made  at  this  time  to 
the  House  of  Commons.  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
four  nonconformists,  called  Quakers,  assembled  in 
Westminster  Hall,  and  sent  in  a  petition,  stating 
that  many  of  their  brethren  lay  in  irons,  cruelly 
beaten  by  cruel  jailers ;  many  have  died  in  their 
sufferings,  and  many  lie  sick  and  weak  upon  straw  ; 
and  then  praying  that  they  might  suffer  in  their 
stead,  and  that  their  bodies  might  be  put  into  the 
holes  and  prisons,  and  an  equal  number  of  their 
suffering  dying  friends  be  released.  Well  might 
the  editor  of  the  Christian  Examiner  call  this  '  the 
feelings  of  majestic  benevolence  expressed  in  ten- 
der and  beautiful  simplicity. ' 7  In  the  jail  for  the 
city  of  Bedford,  in  which  Bunyan  was  confined, 
the  prisoners  were  treated  with  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  humanity,  for  which  the  jailer  was 
severely  threatened  by  some  of  the  inhuman  jus- 
tices. So  was  Bunyan's  valuable  life  preserved, 
and  he  favoured  with  an  opportunity  of  writing  the 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress, 'and  so  fulfilling  his  great  and 
appointed  work.  During  this  time  he  was  permit- 
ted, by  favour  of  the  jailer,  to  visit  his  family,  and 
even  to  go  to  London.     This  soon  was  rumoured ; 

6  Evidently  written  by  an  eye-witness. 
'   Christian  Examiner,  vol.  i.  p.  211. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


19 


and  one  night  he  felt  so  uneasy,  when  at  home, 
that  at  a  very  late  hour  he  went  hack  to  the 
prison.  The  news  of  his  being  with  his  family  at 
Elstow,  was  that  very  day  taken  to  a  neighbouring 
priest,  who  at  midnight  sent  a  messenger  to  the 
jail,  that  he  might  be  a  witness  against  the  merci- 
ful keeper.  On  his  arrival  he  demanded,  '  Arc  all 
the  prisoners  safe?' — 'Yes.'  '  Is  John  Bunyan 
safe?' — 'Yes.'  'Let  me  see  him.'  He  was 
called,  and  appeared ;  and  all  was  well.  His  kind- 
hearted  jailer  said  to  him,  *  You  may  go  out  when 
you  will,  for  you  know  much  better  when  to  return 
than  I  can  tell  you.'  While  he  was  Buffering  this 
imprisonment,  his  friends  in  Bedford  were  severely 
visited  by  the  ruthless  hand  of  persecution. 

Mr.  Rulfhead1  was  one  of  Bunyan 's  principal 
friends  and  supporters,  and  had  the  honour  of 
being  the  first  that  had  his  house  plundered  in 
the  general  persecution,  when  those  who  refused 
to  attend  the  Church  service  were  so  severely 
visited. 

The  effect  of  persecution  upon  this  excellent  and 
pious  man  was,  that  he,  within  two  years,  opened 
his  house  for  the  reception  of  the  despised  Chris- 
tians, and  it  was  the  first  place  of  worship  that  was 
licensed  in  Bedford  for  the  use  of  the  nonconform- 
ists, if  not  the  first  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The 
account  of  the  ruffianly  transactions  which  took 
place  at  this  time,  is  contained  in  a  rare  tract, 
called,  '  A  True  and  Impartial  Narrative  of  some 
Illegal  and  Arbitrary  Proceedings  against  Innocent 
Nonconformists  in  the  Town  of  Bedford,  4to, 
1 670. ' 2  'On  Monday,  the  30th  of  May,  Feckman, 
the  chief  apparitor,  with  the  churchwarden,  con- 
stable, and  overseer,  began  to  distrain.  The  per- 
son's name  is  /.  Euffhead,  at  whose  house  they  first 
began.  He  had  been  fined  three  pounds,  and  they 
took  away  two  timber  trees,  value  seven  pounds.'3 

He  must  have  been  a  man  of  some  consequence 
in  the  town,  to  have  been  dealt  with  so  leniently ; 
for  in  most  cases  they  swept  away  all  the  stock 
in  trade,  tools,  and  household  furniture,  and  left 
the  bare  walls  to  shelter  the  widow  and  her  lament- 
ing orphans.  Mr.  Foster,  a  justice,  went  with 
the  band,  and  in  some  cases  doubled  the  fine,  be- 
cause it  was  not  immediately  paid.  The  misery 
was  such,  that  the  porters  said  they  would  be 
hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered  before  they  would 
assist  in  that  work.  Two  of  them,  for  so  refusing, 
were  caught  and  sent  to  Bedford  jail,  where, 
doubtless,  they  gave  an  account  to  Bunyan  of  the 
cruel  trials  to  which  bis  pious  friends  were  sub- 
jected. The  trained  bands  were  called  to  assist, 
but  '  the  tradesmen,  journeymen,  labourers,  and 
servants  having  either  left  the  town  or  hid  them- 


Spelt  '  Roughed'  in  the  Indulgence,  1672. 
In  the  library  of  the  Editor. 
Narrative,  p.  9. 


selves,  to  avoid  his  [Feckman's]  call,  the  town 
was  so  thin  of  people,  that  it  looked  more  like  a 
country  village  than  a  corporation ;  and  the  shops 
being  generally  shut  down,  it  seemed  like  a  place 
visited  with  a  pest,  where  usually  is  written  upon 
the  door,  Lord,  liave  mercy  on  its  I'  Similar  deso- 
lations fell  upon  many  cities  in  the  kingdom,  which 
must  have  been  utterly  ruined,  had  the  absurd 
attempt  to  enforce  uniformity  been  continued. 

In  reading  the  narrative  of  these  distressing  and 
cruel  proceedings,  the  mind  is  strangely  relieved 
by  the  humours  of  the  mob  who  accompanied  these 
legalized  plunderers.  '  Whilst  Battison  and  the 
other  officers  were  attempting  to  break  into  a  malt- 
house,  a  great  number  of  all  sorts  of  persons  were 
gathered  about  them,  expressing  their  indignation 
against  him,  for  attempting  this  against  Bardolf, 
the  maltster,  whom  the  whole  town  knew  to  be  a 
just  and  harmless  man.  And  the  common  sort 
of  people  covertly  fixing  a  calf's  tail  to  Battison 's 
back,  and  deriding  him  with  shouts  and  hollows, 
he  departed  without  taking  any  distress  there.'4 

Our  pious  teacher  had  his  time  so  fully  occu- 
pied in  prison,  that  his  hours  must  have  passed 
more  sweetly  and  swiftly  than  those  of  a  debauched 
monarch,  surrounded  with  luxuries,  in  his  magnifi- 
cent palaces.  To  tag  laces,  the  profit  of  which 
supported  a  beloved  wife,  and  his  family  of  help- 
less children,  must  have  employed  many  of  his 
hours  to  procure  the  scantiest  food,  and  most 
homely  clothing.  But  he  found  time  also  to  study 
his  Bible,  teach  his  fellow-prisoners,  and  compose 
books  which  have  inscribed  his  name  on  the  page 
of  history  more  indelibly  and  brilliantly  than  it 
could  have  been  if  set  with  diamonds  on  the  most 
splendid  earthly  crown.  He  who  could  write,  and 
loved  to  write,  such  volumes,  wanted  not  occupa- 
tion or  solace ;  he  might  have  said,  I  have  found 
a  nest  of  honey  in  the  carcass  of  the  lion  that 
roared  upon  me.  The  world  has  from  that  time 
been  refreshed  with  its  sweetness,  while,  as  a 
spiritual  medicine,  it  counteracts  the  guilt  and 
wretchedness  of  man.  From  such  adversity  God 
has  extracted  manna  for  the  nourishment  of  his 
church  in  the  wilderness. 

Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make 

Nor  iron  bars  a  cage ; 
Minds  innocent  and  quiet  take 

That  for  a  hermitage. 

For  though  men  keep  my  out  ward  man 

Within  their  locks  and  bars, 
Yet  by  the  faith  of  Christ  I  can 

Mount  higher  thau  the  stars. 

These  be  the  men  that  God  doth  connt 

Of  high  and  noble  mind ; 
These  be  the  men  that  do  surmount 

What  you  in  nature  find. 


Vdrrative,  p.  1. 


80 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


First  they  do  conquer  their  own  hearts, 

All  worldly  fears,  and  then 
Also  the  devil's  fiery  darts, 

And  persecuting  men. 

How  refreshing  for  such  scriptures  as  these  '  to 
thrill  through  the  soul '  of  a  prisoner  for  Christ — 
'Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,'  &c. ;  •  In  tbe 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation ;  but  be  of  good 
cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world.'  Thus  Bunyan 
says,  •  I  bave  had  sweet  sights  of  the  forgiveness 
of  sin  in  tbis  place.  0  the  Mount  Zion,  the  hea- 
venly Jerusalem,  the  innumerable  company  of 
angels,  and  God  the  Judge  of  all;  Jesus  the  Me- 
diator, and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect ! 
I  have  seen  here  what  I  never  can  express.  I  have 
felt  the  truth  of  that  scripture,  "Whom  having  not 
seen  ye  love ;  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  him 
not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory."  ' 

Many  years  after  he  had  obtained  his  liberty, 
notwithstanding  all  his  sufferings,  he,  with  the 
majesty  of  truth,  hurled  defiance  at  all  persecutors, 
and  exhorted  those  who  had  put  on  Christ  to  be 
steadfast  unto  the  end,  When  preaching  upon  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  he  thus  applied  his 
subject,  « We  are  environed  with  many  enemies, 
and  faith  in  the  love  of  God  and  of  Christ  is  our 
only  succour  and  shelter.  Wherefore,  our  duty, 
and  wisdom,  and  privilege  is,  to  improve  this  love 
to  our  own  advantage — improve  it  against  daily 
infirmities — improve  it  against  the  wiles  of  the 
Devil — improve  it  against  the  threats,  rage,  death, 
and  destruction  that  the  men  of  this  world  continu- 
ally, with  their  terror,  set  before  you. ' ' 

It  may  be  asked,  Why  dwell  so  much  upon  the 
sufferings  of  our  pilgrim  forefathers  ?  My  reply 
is,  To  those  trials  in  the  person  of  John  Bunyan, 
we  are  indebted  for  his  invaluable  book.  To  the 
groans,  and  tears,  and  blood  of  these  saints  we 
owe  the  great  privileges  we  now  enjoy.  And  my 
object  also  is  to  warn  my  readers  not  to  touch  the 
unclean  thing.  Antichrist  is  governed  by  the 
same  principles  and  powers  now  as  she  was  then ; 
the  Acts  of  uniformity  and  coercion,  to  use  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  remain  unaltered  ;  but  a 
more  humane  state  of  society  protects  our  persons 
from  her  despotism.  So  long  as  the  wealth  of  the 
state  is  the  bribe  to  conformity,  and  the  power 
of  taxing  and  imprisoning  the  nonconformist  is 
continued,  so  long  must  she  lie  under  the  strong 
suspicion  of  hypocrisy  and  tyranny.  She  was 
formerly  defiled  with  the  sufferings  unto  death  of 
many  of  the  saints  of  God.  And  while  the  system 
is  the  same,  it  becomes  us  to  listen  to  the  voice 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  '  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked 
together  with  unbelievers.     Come  out  from  among 


See  '  Saints'  Knowledge  of  Christ's  Love,'  vol.  ii.  p.  38. 


them,    and    be    ye    separate,    saith    the    Lord.' 

2  Co.  vi.  14,  17. 

It  would  not  be  proper  to  pass  by  the  contempt- 
ible sophistry  with  which  Mr.  Southey  justifies  an 
intolerant  bigoted  hierarchy  in  sending  our  Pilgrim 
to  prison,  '  where  his  understanding  had  leisure  to 
ripen  and  to  cool  .  .  .  favourable  for  his  moral 
and  religious  nature.'2  Can  this  be  the  language 
of  the  author  of  Wat  Tyler  ?  Yes ;  the  smile  of 
royalty  had  elevated  and  corrupted  him.  He 
might  now  regret  that  he  was  not  born  in  Bonner's 
days,  to  have  assisted  in  improving  the  morals  and 
religion  of  the  martyrs,  by  flogging  them  in  the 
coal-house  ! 

The  same  language  which  Southey  uses  to  justify 
the  Church  of  England  in  sending  our  Pilgrim  to 
prison,  would  equally  justify  the  horrid  cruelties 
practised  upon  those  pious  and  amiable  martyrs, 
Tyndale,  Latimer,  or  Ridley.  The  alleged  offence 
was  refusing  to  transfer  the  obedience  of  a  free  im- 
mortal spirit  from  God,  who  justly  claims  it,  to  err- 
ing, debauched,  or  ungodly  man,  who,  instigated  by 
Satan,  assumes  the  prerogatives  of  Deity  to  exer- 
cise dominion  over  the  mode  and  form  of  worship  ; 
to  impose  trammels  upon  that  which  must  be  free 
if  it  exists  at  all ;  for  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they 
who  worship  him  must  do  it  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
When  the  English  Established  Church  considered 
herself  unsafe,  unless  Bunyan  and  many  hundred 
kindred  minds  were  shut  up  in  prison,  it  proved 
itself  to  be  a  disgrace  to  the  gospel,  and  an  injury 
to  a  free  people.3  All  national  hierarchies  have 
estimated  the  minds  of  others  by  their  own  stand- 
ard ;  but  no  real  minister  of  the  gospel  can  be  like 
the  Vicar  of  Bray,  who  was  determined  to  retain 
his  vicarage,  whatever  doctrine  he  might  be  ordered 
to  preach. 

How  strangely  different  were  the  feelings  of  the 
poor,  pious,  unlettered  teacher,  to  those  of  arch- 
bishops, bishops,  and  clergy,  thousands  of  whom 
swore  under  Henry  VIII.  and  Edward  VI.  to 
abjure  the  Pope  ;  perjured  themselves  under  Mary, 
by  swearing  to  maintain  him;  and  under  Eliza- 
beth, again  perjured  themselves  by  taking  a  new 
oath  to  un-oath  Queen  Mary's  oath  ;  and  all  within 
the  space  of  a  few  years !  The  state,  by  enforcing 
conformity  to  an  Established  church,  naturally 
puts  the  people  upon  desperate  courses,  either  to 
play  the  hypocrite,  and  have  no  conscience  at  all,  or 
to  be  tortured  for  having  a  conscience  not  fashion- 
able or  pleasing  to  the  court  party.  They  must 
either  deny  their  faith  and  reason,  or  if  virtuous, 
be  destroyed  for  acting  according  to  them.4  Those 
who  have  no  religion  have  always  persecuted  those 
who  have  religious  principles ;  and  to  enable  them 

2  Southey's  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  lxvi. 

3  Dr.  Cheever,  p.  95. 

4  England's  Present  Interest,  4to,  l'J75,  by  Wm.  Penn. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


21 


to  do  this,  they  must  obey  the  state,  be  it  Chris- 
tian or  be  it  Mahometan.  Force  makes  hypocrites : 
persuasion  alone  makes  converts. 

Such  wholesale  persecutions  bid  fair  to  destroy 
the  trade  and  commerce  of  the  kingdom,  and  in- 
volve it  in  one  universal  desolation.  Sir  W.  Petty, 
the  founder  of  the  Shelbourne  family,  then  a  man 
of  considerable  note,  demonstated  this  in  his  Po- 
litical Arithmetic;  and  the  illustrious  founder  of 
Pennsylvania  gave  a  just  picture  of  the  miseries 
inflicted  by  the  Church  of  England,  in  her  endea- 
vours to  force  pious  and  honest  men  into  her  com- 
munion. •  Persons  have  been  flung  into  jails,  gates 
and  trunks  broken  open,  goods  distrained,  till  a 
stool  hath  not  been  left  to  sit  down  on.  Flocks 
of  cattle  driven,  whole  barns  full  of  corn  seized. 
Parents  left  without  their  children,  children  with- 
out their  parents,  both  without  subsistence.  But 
that  which  aggravates  the  cruelty  is,  the  widow's 
mite  hath  not  escaped  their  hands  ;  they  have  made 
her  cow  the  forfeit  of  her  conscience,  not  leaving 
her  a  bed  to  lie  on,  nor  a  blanket  to  cover  her  ; 
and  which  is  yet  more  barbarous,  and  helps  to 
make  up  this  tragedy,  the  poor  helpless  orpban's 
milk  boiling  over  the  fire,  was  flung  away,  and  the 
skillet  made  part  of  their  prize  ;  that,  had  not 
nature  in  neighbours  been  stronger  than  cruelty  in 
such  informers  and  officers,  to  open  her  bowels  for 
their  relief  and  subsistence,  they  must  have  utterly 
perished  ;'  and  what  has  such  cruelty  procured  ? 
'  the  judgments  of  God,  the  hatred  of  men.  To 
the  sufferers,  misery  ;  to  their  country,  decay  of 
people  and  trade  ;  and  to  their  own  consciences,  an 
infinite  guilt."  •  Men  must  either  have  no  con- 
science at  all,  or  be  hanged  for  having  a  conscience 
not  fashionable.'3  He  winds  up  a  manly,  learned, 
and  excellent  treatise,  by  saying  (inter  alia),  that 
'  the  interests  of  Britain  will  stand  longer  upon  the 
legs  of  the  English  people  than  of  the  English 
Church,'3  and  signs  himself  'An  English  Christian 
Man,  William  Penn.'  Persecution,  for  his  pure 
religious  feelings,  drove  him  and  thousands  of  the 
best  English  citizens  across  the  Atlantic,  to  seek 
among  savages  the  repose  denied  to  them  by  the 
Church  of  England,  and  to  found  a  state  and  an 
empire  where  the  perfect  equality  and  happiness  of 
every  sect,  the  non-interference  of  the  state  with 
the  spiritual  things  of  conscience  and  of  God,  will 
render  it  eventually  the  most  mighty  of  empires, 
and  an  unbounded  blessing  to  the  whole  universe. 

At  length  the  King  was  aroused  ;  probably  the 
grim  head  of  his  father  flitted  before  his  alarmed 
imagination ;  and,  to  restore  tranquillity  to  his 
kingdom,  he  issued  a  declaration  for  liberty  of 
conscience  ;   whether  induced  by  the  groans  of  an 


1  England's  Present  Interest,  Preface. 

2  Ibid.  p.  39.  3  Ibid.  p.  57. 


afflicted  people,  many  thousands  of  whom  had  suf- 
fered the  loss  of  all  things,  or  by  the  weakening  of 
his  kingdom  by  the  multitudes  who  emigrated  to 
America,  to  escape  the  tyranny  of  ecclesiastical 
persecution,  or  whether  to  relax  the  laws  against 
the  Papists,  has  been  a  subject  of  controversy,  and, 
however  we  may  be  sceptical  as  to  royal  declara- 
tions, yet,  judging  cautiously,  I  am  inclined  to 
hope  that  the  motives  set  forth  in  that  declaration 
were  true  ;  at  all  events,  it  is  an  indelible  record, 
that  the  dreadful  experiment  tried  for  twelve  cruel 
years,  to  compel  uniformity  in  Divine  worship  by 
fines,  imprisonment,  and  even  death,  most  signally 
failed,  while  it  involved  the  kingdom  in  a  state  of 
desolation,  from  which  it  required  the  glorious 
revolution  of  1688  to  restore  it  to  comparative 
prosperity. 

Favoured  by  the  prompt  and  kind  permission 
of  Sir  George  Grey,  one  of  her  Majesty's  principal 
Secretaries  of  State,  and  the  very  courteous  and 
hearty  assistance  of  Mr.  Lechmere,  Keeper  of  the 
Archives  in  the  State  Paper  Office,  every  possible 
search  was  made  to  find  any  papers  or  records 
relative  to  the  imprisonment  and  discharge  of 
Bunyan.  Having  thus  an  opportunity  of  tran- 
scribing all  that  could  be  found  at  the  fountain- 
head  of  intelligence,  it  may  prove  interesting  to  our 
readers  to  possess  a  correct  copy  of  these  import- 
ant documents.  The  first  is  the  King's  declaration, 
under  his  own  autograph  signature. 

p  -i        1         t>  His  Matie9  Declarat  ion 

V^liaiieS    SX  to  all  his  loveing  Subjects 

Our  care  and  Endeavours  for  the  preservation  of  the  Rights 
and  Interests  of  the  Church,  have  been  sufficiently  manifested 
to  the  World  by  the  whole  course  of  Our  Government  since 
Our  happy  Restauracon,  and  by  the  many  and  frequent  wayes 
of  Coercion  that  Wee  have  used  for  reduceing  all  erring  or  dis- 
senting persons,  and  for  composeing  the  unhappy  differences 
in  matters  of  Religion,  which  Wee  found  among  Our  Subjects 
upon  Our  Returne :  But  it  being  evident  by  the  sad  experience 
of  twelve  yeares  that  there  is  very  Little  fruite  of  all  those 
forceable  Courses  Wee  thinke  Our  Selfe  oblidged  to  make  use 
of  that  Supreame  Power  in  Ecclesiasticall  Matters  which  is  not 
onely  inherent  in  Us,  but  hath  been  declared  and  Recognized 
to  be  soe  by  severall  Statutes  and  Acts  of  Parliament;  And 
therefore  Wee  doe  now  accordingly  issue  this  Our  Declaration, 
as  well  for  the  quieting  the  Mindes  of  Our  Good  Subjects  in 
these  Points,  for  Invitcing  Strangers  in  this  Conjuncture  to 
come  and  Live  under  Us,  and  for  the  better  Encouragement 
of  all  to  a  cheareful  following  of  their  Trade  and  Callings,  from 
whence  Wee  hope  by  the  Blessing  of  God  to  have  many  good 
and  happy  Advantages  to  our  Government ;  As  also  for  pre- 
venting for  the  future  the  danger  that  might  otherwise  arise 
from  Private  Meetings,  and  Seditious  Conventicles; 

And  in  the  first  place,  Wee  declare  Our  expresse  Resolution 
Meaneing  and  Intention  to  be,  that  the  Church  of  England 
bee  preserved  and  remaine  entire  in  its  Doctrine,  Discipline, 
and  Government,  as  now  it  stands  established  by  Law ; 

And  that  this  bee  taken  to  bee,  as  it  is,  the  Basis,  Rule,  and 
Standard  of  the  Generall  and  Publicke  Worshipp  nf  God,  And 
that  the  Orthodox  Conformable  Clergy  doe  receive  and  enjoy 
the  Revenues  belonging   thereunto;    And   that   no  Person, 


22 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


though  of  a  different  opinion  and  Perswasiou  shall  hee  exempt 
from  paying  his  Tythes,  or  other  Dues  whatsoever.  And 
further  Wee  declare,  That  no  Person  shall  hee  capable  of  hold- 
ing any  benefice,  Liveing,  or  Ecclesiasticall  Dignity  or  Prefer- 
ment of  any  kinde  in  this  Our  Kingdome  of  England,  who  is 
not  exactly  Conformable.  Wee  doe  in  the  next  Place  declare 
Our  Will  and  Pleasure  to  bee,  That  the  Execution  of  all  and 
all  manner  of  Penall  Lawes  in  matters  Ecclesiasticall,  against 
whatsoever  sort  of  Non  Conformists,  or  Recusants,  bee  imme- 
diately suspended,  and  they  are  hereby  suspended.  And  all 
Judges,  Judges  of  Assise  and  Gaole  Delivery,  Sheriffes,  Justices 
of  the  Peace,  Mayors,  BaylifTs,  and  other  Officers,  whatsoever, 
whether  Ecclesiasticall,  or  Civill,  are  to  take  notice  of  it,  and 
pay  due  Obedience  thereunto. 

And  that  there  may  be  no  pretence  for  any  of  Our  Subjects 
to  continue  their  illegal!  meetings  and  Conventicles  Wee  doe 
Declare,  That  wee  shall  from  time  to  time  allow  a  sufficient 
Number  of  Places,  as  they  shall  bee  desired,  in  all  parts  of 
this  Our  Kingdome,  for  the  use  of  such  as  doe  not  conforme 
to  the  Church  of  Englaud,  to  meete  and  assemble  in,  in  Order 
to  their  Publick  Worship  and  Devotion;  which  Places  shall 
bee  open  and  free  to  all  Persons. 

But  to  prevent  such  disorders  and  inconveniencies  as  may 
happen  by  this  Our  Indulgence,  if  not  duely  regulated,  and 
that  they  may  be  the  better  protected  by  the  Civill  Magistrate 
Our  expresse  Will  and  Pleasure  is,  That  none  of  our  Subjects  doe 
presume  to  meete  in  any  Place,  untill  such  Place  bee  allowed, 
and  the  Teacher  of  that  congregation  be  approved  by  Us. 

And  Lest  any  should  apprehend  that  this  Restriction  should 
make  Our  said  Allowance  and  approbation  difficult  to  bee 
obtained,  Wee  doe  further  Declare,  That  this  Our  Indulgence, 
as  to  the  Allowance  of  the  Publick  Places  of  Worship,  and 
approbation  of  the  Teachers,  shall  extend  to  all  sorts  of  Non- 
Conformists  and  Recusants,  except  the  Recusants  of  the 
Roman  Catholick  Religion,  to  whom  We  shall  in  no  wise  allow 
Publick  Places  of  Worship,  but  only  indulge  them  their  share 
in  the  common  Exemption  from  the  execution  of  the  Penall 
Lawes,  and  the  Exercise  of  their  Worship  in  their  private 
Houses  onely. 

And  if  after  this  Our  Clemency  and  Indulgence,  any  of  Our 
Subjects  shall  presume  to  abuse  this  Liberty,  and  shall  preach 
seditiously,  or  to  the  Derogation  of  the  Doctrine,  Discipline, 
or  Government  of  the  Established  Church,  or  shall  meet  in 
Places  not  allowed  by  Us,  Wee  doe  hereby  give  them  warneing, 
and  Declare,  We  will  proceed  against  them  with  all  imaginable 
severity :  And  Wee  will  Lett  them  see  We  can  be  as  Severe  to 
punish  such  offenders,  when  soe  justly  provoked,  as  We  are 
Indulgent  to  truely  tender  consciences.  In  Wittnesse  whereof 
Wee  have  caused  Our  Greate  Seale  of  England  to  be  putt  and 
affixed  to  these  presents.  Given  att  Our  Court  att  Whitehall 
tliis  fifteenth  day  of  March  in  the  24th  yeare  of  Our  Reigne 
107|. 

At  this  time,  George  Whitehead,  one  of  the  most 
zealous  and  prominent  Quakers,  became  deeply 
affected  with  the  cruel  punishments  that  his 
brethren  and  sisters  were  suffering  for  Christ's 
sake.  He  was  a  man  who,  with  equal  composure 
and  zeal,  could  plead  before  royalty  and  nobles  in 
a  state  apartment,  or  impart  consolation  to  a  suf- 
fering Christian  in  a  dungeon  or  a  pest-house.  He 
thus  mentions  it  in  his  Journal,  '  Soon  after  the 
before-mentioned  declaration  of  indulgence  was 
published  in  print,  as  I  was  solitary  upon  the  road, 
returning  toward  London,  a  very  weighty  and  ten- 
der concern  fell  upon  my  spirit,  with  respect  to  our 


dear  friends  then  in  prisons,  being  above  four  hun- 
dred, many  of  whom  had  been  long  straitly  con- 
fined for  not  conforming,  some  having  endured  ten 
or  eleven  years'  imprisonment,  whereupon  I  wrote 
to  the  King,  and  requested  Thomas  Moor,  who  had 
an  interest  with  the  King  and  some  of  his  council, 
to  present  my  letter,  which  he  did  ;  and  a  few  days 
after  we  had  access  to  the  King's  presence,  and 
renewed  our  request,  whereupon  he  granted  us 
liberty  to  be  heard  on  the  next  council-day,  in  the 
same  week.  And  then  I,  with  Thomas  Moor  and 
Thomas  Green,  attended  at  the  council-chamber  at 
Whitehall,  and  were  all  admitted  in  before  the  King, 
and  a  full  council.  Being  called  to  the  upper  end 
of  the  council-board,  I  opened  and  fully  pleaded 
the  case  of  our  suffering  friends.  The  King  gave 
this  answer,  "  I'll  pardon  them.'"  They  were  per- 
mitted to  address  the  council  at  some  length,  and 
it  being  near  the  time  of  a  general  fast,  they  con- 
cluded with  these  words,  '  This  is  the  fast  the 
Lord  requires,  to  undo  the  heavy  burdens,  and  to 
let  the  oppressed  go  free. ' 

Favoured  with  an  order  from  the  Secretary  of 
State,  and  by  the  kind  assistance  of  J.  B.  Lennard, 
Esq.,  of  the  Privy  Council  Office,  I  obtained  access 
to  the  minutes  of  that  council ;  in  which  is  re- 
corded, that  a  circular  letter  be  sent  to  the  sheriffs 
of  the  counties  in  England  and  Wales — 

After  our  hearty  commendations — Whereas  request  hath 
been  made  unto  His  Majesty  in  behalf  of  the  Quakers  who 
remain  at  present  in  several  gaols  and  prisons  of  this  King- 
dom, That  His  Majesty  would  be  pleased  to  extend  his  mercy 
towards  them,  and  give  order  for  their  Release;  Which  His 
Majesty  taking  into  consideration,  hath  thought  fit,  in  order 
to  his  clearer  information,  before  he  resolve  any-thing  therein,  to 
command  us  to  write  these  Our  Letters  unto  you :  And,  accord- 
ingly, wee  do  hereby  will  and  require  you  to  procure  a  perfect 
Lyste  or  Calendar  of  the  names,  time,  and  causes  of  comitment 
of  all  such  Persons  called  Quakers,  as  are  remayning  in  any 
Goale  or  Prison  within  that  County,  and  to  return  ye  same 
forthwith  to  this  Board.  And  so  nothing  doubting  of  your 
ready  performance  of  this  His  Majesty's  command,  we  bid 
you  heartily  farewell. 

Prom  the  Court  at  Whitehall,  ye  29th  of  March,  1672. 
Signed 
Earle  of  Ossory       Earle  of  Carlisle        Lord  Holies 
Earle  of  Bathe        Ea  of  Lauderdail        Mr.  Secy  Trevor 
Earle  of  Craven      Lord  Newport  Mr.  of  ye  Ordnance. 

Like  tres  dated  and  signed  ut  supra  were  sent  to  ye  Warden 
of  ye  Fleet  and  Mareshall  of  ye  King's  Bench  Prisons,  And  to 
ye  Mayors  or  Justices  of  ye  seuerall  places  hereunder  written 
viz. 

Citty  and  County  of  y**  Citty  of  Chester. 

Citty  and  County  of  ye  Citty  of  Exon. 

Towne  and  County  of  Poole. 

Citty  and  County  of  Glocestcr. 

Citty  and  Coimty  of  Lincolne. 

Citty  and  County  of  Brestoll. 

Towne  and  County  of  Southton. 

Citty  and  County  of  ye  Citty  of  York.1 


Extracted  from  the  Register  of  the  Privy  Council. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


23 


The  indefatigable  manner  in  which  the  Quakers 
proceeded  to  get  the  requisite  official  signatures  to 
release  their  suffering  and  dying  friends,  is  beyond 
all  praise.  They  wrote  to  all  their  meetings 
throughout  tho  country  to  obtain  assistance,  to 
enable  them  to  meet  the  demands  for  fees,  and  even 
sent  their  talented  female  friends  to  the  officials, 
to  press  on  this  glorious  jail  delivery.  This  ap- 
pears from  the  following  letters  : — 

George  Whitehead  to  Stephen  Crisp. 

Srdoflst  Month  [_April~]  1672. 

Before  thy  letter  had  conic  to  hand,  I  had  drawn  np  a  paper 
containing  the  substance  of  thine,  which  Thos.  Moore  had  given 
to  the  King,  together  with  a  list  of  the  pnemunired  Friends 
and  of  those  sentenced  to  banishment,  &c. ;  which  hitherto 
has  been  effectual,  in  order  to  a  further  enquiry  about  Friends, 
&c.  How  far  the  King  aud  Council  have  proceeded,  in  answer 
to  the  request,  1  leave  it  to  Win.  Crouch  to  inform  thee.  Thy 
paper  is  kept  for  a  further  occasion  if  need  be,  if  our  end  be 
not  answered  by  them.  But  we  are  encouraged  to  hope  well 
for  divers  reasons.  I  could  not  well  send  to  write  to  thee 
before,  being  much  exercised  for  the  sufferers.  The  Council 
yesterday  signed  the  letters  to  the  Sheriffs  for  a  return  of 
Friends  Commitments,  &c.  to  the  Board ;  so  that  they  are 
like  to  be  had  with  expedition  into  the  several  Counties. 

My  very  dear  love  to  thee,  thy  wife,  R.  Crouch,  and  Friends 
In  haste,  thy  dear  brother 

[From  the  original.]  G.  W. 

John  Rouse  to  Margaret  Fox. 

London,  4th  of  2nd  Month  \_May~], 
Dear  Mother,  1672. 

Last  6th  day  the  two  women  took  the  grant  out  of 
the  Attorney-general's  office,  and  he  gave  them  his  fee,  which 
should  have  been  £5  ;  his  clerk  took  but  20,?.,  whereas  his  fee 
was  40.?.  Yesterday  they  went  with  it  to  the  Kiug,  who  signed 
it  in  the  Council ;  and  Arlington  also  signed  it,  but  would 
take  no  fees,  whereas  his  fees  would  have  been  £12  or  £20 ; 
neither  would  Williamson's  man  take  any  thing,  saying,  that 
if  any  religion  were  true,  it  was  ours.  To-morrow  it  is  to  pass 
the  signet,  and  on  sixth  day  the  privy  seal,  aud  afterwards 
the  broad  seal,  which  may  be  done  on  any  day.  The  power 
of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  mightily  in  the  accomplishment  of 
it ;  and  the  Lord  hath  bowed  their  hearts  wonderfully  in  it 
blessed  be  his  name  for  ever ! 

Thy  dear  son  in  the  Lord, 

John  Rouse. 

Upon  the  King's  declaration  being  published,  an 
outcry  was  raised  by  the  church,  that  it  was  only 
intended  to  favour  the  Papists,  although  in  it  they 
are  expressly  prohibited  from  the  public  exercise 
of  their  religion.  So  angry  was  the  King  at  his 
motives  being,  as  he  said,  misrepresented,  that  he 
went  to  the  Council  Office,  called  for  the  deed,  and 
with  his  own  hand  broke  off  the  great  seal  ;  the 
ribbon  remains  to  this  day  to  which  the  seal  had 
been  attached.  Still  the  declaration,  having  passed 
the  patent  offices,  was  fully  acted  upon,  and  a 
return  was  ordered  from  the  sheriffs  throughout 
the  kingdom,  of  the  names  of  all  prisoners,  called 
Quakers,  for  disobedience  to  the  laws  in  ecclesi- 
astical matters  within  their  respective   divisions, 


with  the  causes  of  their  commitment.  The  follow- 
ing are  the  minutes  of  the  Privy  Council  to  which 
their  returns  were  submitted  : — 

At  the  Court  at  Whitehall  the  8th  of  May  1672 
The  Kings  most  excellent  Mau* 
Lord  Arch  Bp  of  Canterbury    Earle  of  Bathe 

Lord  Keeper  Earle  of  Carlisle 

Duke  of  Lauderdail  Earle  of  Craven 

Lord  Chamberlain  Earle  of  Shaffsbury 

Visco*  Ffauconberge  Lord  Hollis 

Vise'  Halifaf  Mr  Vice  Chamberlain 

Lord  Bp  of  London  Mr.  Secretary  Trevor 

Lord  Newport  Sr  John  Duucombe 

Earle  of  Bridgwater  Mr  Chancellor  of  the  Dutchy 

Earle  of  Essex  Master  of  the  Ordinauce 

Earle  of  Anglesey  Sr  Thomas  Osborne 

Whereas  his  Matie  of  his  Princely  Clemency  was  graciously 
pleased  to  direct  that  Letters  should  be  written  from  this 
Board  to  the  Sherrifl's  of  the  respective  Countycs  and  Citties 
and  Countycs,  and  Townes  and  Countycs  within  his  Matie8 
Kingdome  of  England  and  Dominion  of  Wales,  requireing 
them  to  rcturne  perfect  lists  or  Callendcrs  of  the  Names  time 
aud  Causes  of  Comittmeut  of  all  such  Prisoners  called 
Quakers  as  remaine  in  their  severall  Gaoles,  or  prisons,  which 
they  accordingly  did,  and  the  same  were  by  order  of  his  Matle 
in  Councell  of  the  third  of  this  instant  delivered  into  the  hands 
of  the  right  Honoble  the  Lord  Keeper  of  the  great  Seale  of 
England,  [Sir  Orlando  Bridgman,]  who  haveing  considered 
thereof  did  this  day  returue  them  againe  together  with  his 
opinion  therevpon  as  followeth  viz' 
The  Returnes  that  are  made  touching  the  prisoners  in  the 

severall  Goalcs  are  of  severall  Kindcs. 

1  All  such  of  them  as  are  returned  to  be  convicted  to  be 
Transported  or  to  be  Convicted  of  a  Premunire  (vpon  which 
Convictions  I  suppose  Judgment  was  given)  are  not  legally 
to  be  discharged  but  by  his  Matiea  pardon  vnder  the  great 
seale. 

2  All  those  that  are  returned  to  be  in  prison  vpon  writts  of 
Excomuuicato  Capiendo  not  mentioning  the  cause  ought 
not  to  be  discharged  till  the  cause  appeares— ffor  if  it  be 
for  Tythes,  Legacyes,  Defamations  or  other  private  Interest, 
they  ought  not  to  bee  discharged  till  the  partie  be  satisfied. 

3  All  those  that  are  returned  in  prison  for  debt  or  vpon  Ex- 
chequer processe  or  of  any  of  the  other  Courts  at  \\  est- 
miuster,  are  not  to  be  discharged  till  it  be  Kuowne  for  what 
cause  those  processes  Issued  aud  those  debts  be  discharged. 

4  Those  that  are  in  prison  for  not  paying  their  ffynes  ought 
not  to  be  discharged,  without  paying  their  ll'ynes  or  a  Pardon. 
All  the  rest  I  conceive  may  be  discharged.     Which  being 

this  day  taken  into  consideration  his  Matie  was  gratiously 
pleased  to  declare,  that  he  will  Pardon  all  those  persons  called 
Quakers,  now  in  prison  for  any  offence  Committed,  relateisg 
only  to  his  Matie  and  not  to  the  prejudice  of  any  other  person. 
And  it  was  therevpon  ordered  by  his  Matie  iu  Councill  That 
a  List  of  the  Names  of  the  Quakers  in  the  Severall  Prisons 
together  with  the  causes  of  their  Comittment  be  and  is  here- 
with sent  to  his  Maa"  Attorney  Generall  who  is  required,  and 
Authorized  to  prepare  a  Bill  for  his  Ma*"  Royal]  Signatnw 
conteyning  a  Pardon  to  passe  the  great  Seale  of  England,  fur 
all  such  to  whom  his  Matie  may  legally  grant  tlie  same  .V  in 
Case  of  any  difficultic  that  he  attend  the  Lord  Keeper,  and 
receive  his  directions  therein. 

Ex.  J.  W.  Walker. 

Order  of  Councill  for  the  Quakers  gencndle  Tardou. 


24 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Endorsed. 

This  is  a  true  List  of  the  Names  of  such  persons  com- 
monly called  Quakers  and  others  which  are  by  Vertue  of  an 
Order  of  Councill  of  the  8th  of  May  last  past  to  be  inserted  in 
a  generall  Pardon. 

Ex.  J.  W.  Walker. 

Then  follow  the  names  of  four  hundred  and 
seventy-one  prisoners,  ordered  to  be  inserted  in 
the  pardon.  One  sentence  in  this  opinion  of  the 
Lord  Chancellor,  Sir  Orlando  Bridgman,  is  worthy 
of  especial  regard.  Having  noticed  the  cases  of 
all  those  who  had  been  legally  convicted,  either  by 
summary  process  before  a  magistrate,  or  by  petty 
session,  or  by  a  jury,  he  winds  up  with  a  sweeping 
expression,  '  All  (lie  rest  may  be  discharged.'  That 
multitudes  were  imprisoned  without  conviction, 
upon  the  mere  verbal  orders  of  a  justice,  there  can 
be  no  doubt.  These  would  be  set  at  liberty  with- 
out any  formal  pardon  ;  even  in  Bunyan's  case  no 
evidence  was  taken,  but  a  conviction  was  recorded. 
In  a  conversation  between  him  and  the  justice, 
and  also  with  the  clerk  privately,  lie  denied  having 
offended  any  law  whatever ;  but  his  honest  declara- 
tion, that  he  had  met  with  others  for  Divine  wor- 
ship, was  distorted  into  a  plea  of  guilty,  and  he 
was  sent  to  prison  without  redress.  '  They  took 
me  for  a  convicted  person,'  and  '  would  not  let  me 
out  of  prison,  as  they  let  out  thousands '  at  the  time  | 
the  King  was  crowned.1 

It  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  amount  of  misery 
inflicted  upon  the  Christian  Church  at  that  period, 
by  the  Episcopalian  establishment  supported  by 
the  state.  Among  the  multitude  of  prisoners 
who  were  liberated  from  our  over-crowded  prisons 
at  the  coronation  of  Charles  II.,  vast  numbers  had 
been  confined  for  their  love  to  the  Redeemer,  which 
prevented  their  conformity  to  the  forms  of  worship 
ordered  by  the  state.  In  addition  to  these,  a 
countless  host  was  discharged  under  the  just  deci- 
sion of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  '  All  the  rest,  I  con- 
ceive, may  be  discharged  ; '  while  nearly  five  hun- 
dred more  were  included  in  the  royal  pardon,  and 
great  numbers  were  still  left  to  perish  in  prison, 
for  the  non-payment  of  ecclesiastical  dues,  gener- 
ally of  a  trifling  amount.  The  loss  to  the  noncon- 
formists in  their  goods,  during  this  severe  and  cruel 
persecution,  has  been  estimated  at  half  a  million 
sterling,  seized  by  rapacious  officers  to  pay  fines 
for  not  attending  the  liturgy  and  service — an  enor- 
mous sum,  considering  the  value  of  money  at  that 
time  ;  yet  from  records  which  the  Editor  has  seen, 
it  was  not  over-stated.  But  a  small  portion  of 
this  found  its  way  into  the  royal  exchequer.  Our 
great  Allegorist  was  trained  up  in  the  fiercest 
spiritual  warfare  ;  and,  with  his  fellow-pilgrims, 
passed  through  the  severest  temporal  sufferings. 


1  '  Relation  of  the  Imprisonment  of  John  Bunyan,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  40,  41  ;  aud  Judge  Hale's  observation,  p.  42. 


May  God,  in  his  infinite  mercy,  forgive  the  livino; 
representatives  of  a  system  which  is  so  naturally 
full  of  cruelty,  and  not,  in  the  severity  of  his  jus- 
tice, visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  their  chil- 
dren ;  some  of  whom  appear,  even  now,  to  have 
an  inkling  for  similar  antichristian  conduct.  It 
cannot  be  forgotten  that,  within  a  few  years,  an 
estimable  man,  John  Childs  of  Bungay,  was  sent 
to  jail  for  refusing  to  pay  a  church  rate. 

But  to  return  to  our  distinguished  nonconformist 
prisoner.  On  the  day  following  the  meeting  of  the 
Privy  Council,  when  the  report  of  the  Lord  Chan- 
cellor was  received,  and  the  King  had  ordered  his 
royal  pardon  for  the  Quakers;  Bunyan,  being  still 
a  prisoner,  was,  in  pursuance  of  the  declaration 
for  liberty  of  conscience,  licensed  to  be  a  teacher, 
being  one  of  the  first  persons  that  were  so  regis- 
tered. These  were  the  first  permissions  to  preach 
given,  to  the  dissenters  from  the  established  sect, 
in  this  country. 

The  volume  from  which  these  extracts  are  made 
is  called  Indulgences,  1672,  under  the  head  'Con- 
gregational!.' 

Bedford  Licence  for  CHARLES  &c.  To  all  Mayors,  Bailiffs, 
John  lkmyon  to  Constables  and  other  Our  Officers  and 
house^oflosts  Ministers  Civil  and  Military  whom  it  may 
Roughed  9  May  concerne,  Greeting.  In  Pursuance  of  our 
72-  Declaration  of  the  15th  of  March  167$ 

Wee  doe  hereby  permitt  and  licence  John  Bunyon  to  bee  a 
Teacher  of  the  Congregation  allowed  by  Us  in  the  Howse  of 
Josias  Roughed  Bedford  for  the  use  of  such  as  doe  not  con- 
forme  to  the  Church  of  England,  who  are  of  the  Perswasion 
commonly  called  Congregationall.  With  further  licence  and 
permission  to  him  the  said  John  Bunyou  to  teach  in  any  other 
place  licensed  by  Us  according  to  our  said  Declaration.  Given 
at  Our  Court  at  Whitehall  the  9th  day  of  May  in  the  24th 
yeare  of  our  Reigue,  1672. 

By  his  Matie8  Command 

Arlington. 

At  the  same  time  the  house  of  Josias  Roughed 
was  registered  in  the  following  form : — 2 
A  place  for  a  Teacher  CHARLES  &c.  To  all  Mayors,  Bailiffs, 
Constables  and  other  Our  Officers  and 
Ministers  Civill  and  Military,  whom  it  may  concerne,  Greet- 
ing. In  pursuance  of  Our  Declaracon  of  the  15  of  March 
1 67$  Wee  have  allowed  and  Wee  doe  hereby  allow  of  the 
Howse  of  Josias  Roughed  in  Bedford  to  be  a  place  for  the  use 
of  such  as  doe  not  conforme  to  the  Church  of  England  who 
are  of  the  Perswasion  commonly  called  Congregationall  to 
meet  and  assemble  in,  in  order  to  their  Publick  Worship  & 
devotion.  And  all  aud  Singular  Our  Officers  and  Ministers 
Ecclesiasticall  Civill  and  Military,  whom  it  may  concerne  arc 
to  take  due  notice  hereof,  And  they  and  every  of  them  are 
hereby  strictly  charged  aud  required  to  hinder  any  Tumult  or 
Disturbance,  &  to  protect  them  in  their  said  Meetings  & 
Assemblies.  Given  at  &c  the  9th  dny  of  May  in  the  24th 
yeare  of  Our  Reigne  1672 

By  his  Matie*  Command 

AliLINGTON. 

2  See  a  similar  form  of  registration  in  Wilson's  History 
of  Dissenting  Churches,  vol.  iii.  p.  187- — The  house  of  Thos. 


Doolittle,  dated  April  2,  167$ 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE    EDITOR. 


The  church  of  Christ  at  Bedford  is  here  called  j 
Congregational.  In  ten  months,  about  three  thou- 
sand five  hundred  of  these  licenses  were  granted,  I 
only  one  being  at  Bedford;  many  were  for  persons 
and  places  called  Anabapt,  all  others  were  under 
the  term  Congregational,  Philip  Henry  was  in- 
dulged'in  his  house,  Malpas  Parish,  in  Flintshire.1 
Thomas  Senior  and  Henry  Ashurst,  in  their  re- 
spective houses  at  Clapton,  in  Hackney.  Bunyan's 
church  could  uot  fairly  be  called  Anabapt,  because 
it  consisted  of  members  some  of  whom,  probably, 
had  not  been  baptized  in  or  with  water,  some 
christened  in  infancy,  and  others  immersed  on  a 
profession  of  their  faith. 

Mr.  Roughed,  whose  house  was  licensed  for 
Bunyan  to  preach  in,  was  plundered  a  few  months 
previously  for  refusing  to  go  to  church.  To  attend 
such  a  place  was  one  month  a  violation  of  the  law, 
visited  with  ruinous  hues  and  imprisonments,  and 
the  next  month,  places  arc  licensed  according  to 
law,  for  any  person  to  attend,  instead  of  going  to 
church.  Law-makers  must  ever  be  the  scorn  and 
derision  of  the  world,  when  they  interfere  with 
Divine  and  spiritual  worship. 

The  Quakers  had  much  greater  influence  with 
the  King  and  his  council  than  all  the  other  deno- 
minations of  Christians  ;  and  it  was  soon  rumoured 
abroad  that  they  had  been  with  the  King  in  coun- 
cil, and  had  obtained  for  their  suffering  friends  a 
royal  promise  of  a  free  pardon.  Controversy  be- 
tween them  and  other  Christians  had  been  carried 
on  with  much  bitterness  of  speech,  and  in  this 
Bunyan  had  borne  a  prominent  part,  when  com- 
bating against  what  he  conceived  to  be  serious 
errors.  But  as  Christians  involved  in  one  common 
calamity,  the  Quakers  admitted  their  brethren  in 
affliction  to  partake  of  the  bounty  bestowed  ex- 
pressly upon  themselves.  Whitehead  thus  narrates 
this  delightful  fact  in  his  journal  : — '  When  the 
instrument  for  discharge  of  the  prisoners  was 
granted  to  our  friends,  there  being  other  dissenters, 
besides  Quakers,  in  some  prisons,  as  Baptists,  Pres- 
byterians, and  Independents  ;  some  of  their  solici-  . 
tors,  especially  one  William  Carter,  seeing  what 
way  we  had  made  with  the  King  for  our  friends' 
release,  they  desired  their  friends  in  prison  might 
be  discharged  with  ours,  and  have  their  names  in 
the  same  instrument,  and  earnestly  requested  my 
advice  or  assistance,  which  I  was  very  willing  to 
give  in  compassion  to  them  ;  and,  accordingly,  I 
advised  them  to  petition  the  King,  with  the  names 
of  the  prisoners  in  it,  for  his  warrant  to  have  them 
inserted  in  the  same  patent  with  the  Quakers, 
which  accordingly  they  did  petition  for,  and  obtain. ' 
'  Our  being  of  different  judgments  and  societies,  j 
did  not  abate  my  compassion  or  charity,  even 
towards  them  who  had  been  my  opposers  in  some 
cases.     Blessed  be  the  Lord  my  God,  who  is  the 


Father  and  fountain  of  mercies,  whose  love  and 
mercies  in  Christ  Jesus  to  us  should  oblige  us  t<> 
he  merciful  and  kind  one  to  another;  we  being 
required  to  love  mercy,  yea,  to  be  merciful,  as  well 
as  to  do  justly,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  the  Lord 
our  God.'1 

Such  was  the  Christian  conduct  of  men,  who,  of 
all  the  members  of  the  church  militant  upon  earth, 
have  been  the  most  grossly  slandered. 

In  pursuance  of  the  Quaker's  kind  advice, 
Bunyau  and  his  fellow-prisoners  petitioned  the 
King  for  their  liberty;  and  at  the  meeting  of  the 
Privy  Council,  held  on  the  8th  of  May  J  (J72,  in 
presence  of  His  Majesty,  and  a  numerous  assembly 
of  his  nobles,  before  the  grant  of  pardon  to  relieve 
the  Quakers  was  engrossed,  it  is  recorded — 

At  the  Court  at  Whitehall,  8th  May,  1072. 
Reference     Peticdn        Upon   reading   this  day  at  the  board 

tunm.NlVisumTsm  t,ie  humble  petition  of  John  trim,  John 
r:" l-r    ,,;'*ue   Bunyon,  John  Dunn,  Thomas  Haynes, 

and  Bi^dlurd  Goalo.      ...  ,,  ,   .-,  . 

Simon  Havnea,  and  George  Fan  prisoners 
in  the  Goal  of  Bedford  and  James  Rogers  prisoner  in  the 
Castle  of  Cambridge  for  being  at  Conventicles  and  Non-con- 
formity. It  was  ordered  to  be  referred  to  the  Sheriffs  of 
the  Counties  of  Bedford  and  Cambridge  to  examine  the  said 
Petitions  and  forthwith  certify  this  Board  whether  the  said 
parties  are  detained  in  prison  for  the  offences  therein  men- 
tioned or  for  what  other  crimes. 

At  the  Court  at  Whitehall,  y*  17th  of  May,  1672. 
The  King's  most  excellent  Matie- 

Lord  Arch  Bp  of  Canterbury  Earle  of  Shaffsbury 

Lord  Keeper  Viscot  Fauconberg 

Duke  of  Lauderdale  \  iscot  Halifax 

Duke  of  Ormonde  Lord  Newport 

Marquis  of  Worcester  Lord  liollis 

Earle  of  Bridgewater  Lord  Clifford 

Earle  of  Essei  .Mr.  Vice  Chamberlain 

Earle  of  Anglesey  .Mr.  Secretary  Trevor 

Earle  of  Bathe  Mr.  Montague 

Earle  of  Carlisle  Mr.  Chancellor  of  ye  Dutchy 

Earle  of  Craven  Master  ofy'  Ordnance 

Earlfi  of  Arlington  Sr  Thomas  Osborne. 

Whereas- by  order  of  the  Board  of  the  8th  Instant  the  humble 
Petition  of  John  Fenn  John  Bunyon  John  Dunn  Thomas 
Haynes  Simon  Haynes  and  George  Farr  Prisoners  in  the  Goals 
ui  Bedford  Convicted  upon  severall  Statutes  for  not  conforming 
to  the  Rights  and  Ceremonyes  of  the  Church  of  England  and 
for  being  at  unlawful  Meetings,  was  Referred  to  the  Sheriffeof 
the  County  of  Bedford  who  was  required  to  Certify  thu 
whether  the  said  persons  were  comitted  for  the  Crimes  in  the 
said  Petition  mentioned  and  for  no  oilier  which  he  haveing 
accordingly  done  by  his  cert ilieate  dated  the  11th  Instant  It 
was  thereupon  this  day  ordered  by  his  Ma'1"  in  Councill,  That 
the  said  petition  and  Certificate  be  (and  are  herewith;  sent  to 
his  Ma1'"  Attorney  General],  who  is  authorised  and  required  to 
insert  them  into  the  Generall  Pardon  to  be  pasted  lor  the 
Quakers.  If  he  finds  that  they  are  within  the  compel 
Ma1'1'*  pardon  according  to  the  Rule  Prescribed  by  tbi 
of  the  8lh  of  May  about  pardon  lor  the  Quakers. 


Whitehead's  Christian  Progress,  8vo,  1725,  p.  8S8. 

4 


B6 


THE   riLGEIM'S   PROGRESS. 


The  like  order  for  Francis  Holcroft  and  James  Rogers  for 
frequenting  unlawful  meetings  as  by  certificate  from  the  Sheriffe 
of  Cambridge  of  the  10th  and  11th  Instant. 

[The  sheriff's  return  cannot  befound.~\ 

At  a  Court  at  Whitehall,  ye  22d  May  1672, 

A  similar  order  was  made  for  Walter  Peun  and  twelve  others, 
prisoners  in  Wilts. 

At  a  Court  -f  7th  of  June  1672, 
On  a  Certificate  of  the  Mayor,   Sheriff  and  Aldermen  of 

Worcester,  Robert  Smith,  a  Baker,  was  ordered  to  be  inserted 

in  the  pardon. 

On  the  12th  of  June,  the  petition  of  twenty-two  prisoners 

was  read  and  referred  to  the  Sheriffs,  and  on  the  26th  their 

names  were  ordered  to  be  inserted  in  the  pardon. 

On  the  14th  of  June  Thomas  More  the  Quaker  obtained  a 

similar  order,  and  on  the  26th  of  June  Thomas  Gower  Durham 

and  eight  prisoners  in  Devon  and  Exeter  were  ordered  to  be 

inserted  in  the  pardon. 

Through  all  these  minutes  the  intended  patent 
is  referred  to  as  the  general  pardon  to  the  Quakers. 

Thus  we  find  undoubted  proof  upon  the  records 
of  the  Privy  Council  of  England,  presided  over  by 
the  King  in  person,  that  John  Bunyan's  only  crime, 
as  certified  by  the  sheriff,  and  for  which  he  was  j 
counted  worthy  of  so  cruel  an  imprisonment,  was  j 
being  present  with  others  to  worship  his  Maker  in 
simplicity  and  in  truth.  This  was  all  his  crime  ; 
'  the  very  head  and  front  of  his  offence. '  0  that 
all  her  Majesty's  subjects  would  constantly  follow 
his  example !  then  might  our  prisons  be  converted 
into  colleges  and  schools,  and  our  land  become  an 
earthly  paradise. 

In  pursuance  of  this  great  and  benevolent  object, 
these  indefatigable  Quakers  obtained  a  warrant  to 
the  Attorney-General,  for  a  free  pardon,  of  which 
the  following  is  a  copy: — 

Our  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  you  prepare  a  bill  for  the 
royal  signature,  and  to  pass  our  Great  Seal  of  England,  con- 
taining our  gracious  pardon  unto  [here  follow  the  prisoners' 
names].  Of  all  offences,  contempts  and  misdemeanours  by 
them,  or  any  of  them  committed  before  the  21st  day  of  July 
1672,  against  the  several  statutes  made  in  the  first,  twenty- 
third,  and  thirty-fifth  years  of  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth : 
in  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  our  late  royal  grandfather, 
King  James  ;  and  in  the  16th  year  of  our  reign — in  not  com- 
ing to  church  aud  hearing  divine  service  j  in  refusing  to  take 
the  oath  of  allegiance  and  supremacy,  and  frequenting  or 
being  present  at  seditious  conventicles ;  and  of  all  premuuires, 
judgments,  convictions,  sentences  of  excommunication,  and 
transportation  thereupon;  and  of  all  fines,  amercements,  pains, 
penalties,  aud  forfeitures  whatsoever,  thereby  incurred,  with 
restitution  of  lands  aud  goods,  and  such  other  clauses,  and  non 
obstantes,  as  may  render  this  our  pardon  most  effectual ;  for 
which  this  shall  be  your  warraut. 

Given  at  our  Court  at  Whitehall  the  —  day  of  June,  in  the 
twenty-fourth  year  of  our  reign. 

But  now  a  new  and  very  serious  difficulty  pre- 
sented itself  in  the  shape  of  enormous  fees,  in 
thfc  different  offices  through  which  the  pardon  had 
\o  pass ;  these  amounted  to  between  twenty  and 


thirty  pounds  for  each  person  whose  name  was 
inserted  in  it.  Whitehead  again  applied  to  the 
King,  and  at  length  all  difficulties  were  removed 
by  the  following  order: — 

His  Majesty  is  pleased  to  command,  that  it  be  signified  as 
his  pleasure  to  the  respective  officers  and  sealers,  where  the 
pardon  to  the  Quakers  is  to  pass,  that  the  pardon,  though 
comprehending  great  numbers  of  persons,  do  yet  pass  as  one 
pardon,  and  pay  but  as  one. 

Arlington. 

At  the  Court  at  Whitehall,  the  13th  of  Sep.  1672. 

Whitehead  adds,  '  Though  we  had  this  warrant 
from  the  King,  yet  we  had  trouble  from  some  of 
the  covetous  clerks,  who  did  strive  hard  to  exact 
upon  us.' 

A  very  considerable  sum  for  those  days,  and  for 
such  poor  persons  to  raise,  was  needful  to  carry 
this  pardon  into  full  effect.  The  dissenters  had 
been  enormously  plundered.  Hundreds,  if  not 
thousands,  had  been  stripped  of  all  that  they  pos- 
sessed, so  that  the  prison,  intended  and  used  as  a 
place  of  rigorous  punishment,  was  in  fact  their 
only  shelter  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather. 
The  expenses  of  a  royal  pardon  for  such  a  number 
of  prisoners  was  very  great,  not  merely  in  the 
drawing,  engrossing,  and  passing  through  the 
various  offices  and  departments  of  the  state,  but 
in  employing  efficient  persons  to  go  through  the 
kingdom  to  plead  this  pardon  before  the  various 
sessions  and  assizes.  Every  impediment  that 
cruelty  could  invent  was  thrown  in  the  way  of  the 
release  of  these  Christian  prisoners  for  noncon- 
formity, by  the  squirarchy  and  clergy.  To  raise 
the  requisite  funds,  a  strong  appeal  was  made 
by  the  following  circular  sent  to  the  Quakers  in 
the  country: — 

Friends  and  Brethren, 

We  suppose  you  may  not  be  insensible  how  that  upon 
sundry  applications  made  to  the  King  and  Council  in  time 
past  and  more  especially  now  of  late  for  the  release  of  our 
dear  suffering  Friends,  the  Clerk  and  others,  and  others  attend- 
ing him  and  them,  have  upon  that  account  been  put  to  a  great 
deal  of  trouble  and  pains  in  writing  of  orders  and  letters  to 
the  Sheriffs  of  the  respective  Counties  in  England  and  Wales, 
aud  otherwise  in  order  to  Friends'  discharge,  aud  although  for 
some  years  together  their  labour  therein  (as  well  as  those  of 
us  who  travelled  in  that  affair  on  Friends'  behalf)  was  from 
time  to  time  rendered  ineffectual,  yet  at  this  present,  there 
appears  a  very  great  probability  of  accomplishing  our  friends 
liberty,  which  hath  and  doth  renew  an  additional  trouble  upon 
them,  and  thereby  a  further  obligation  laid  upon  us  to  requite 
them  for  their  pains,  and  not  only  them  but  also  the  Clerks  of 
the  Keeper,  Attorney  General,  and  other  inferior  officers,  who 
in  drawing  up  the  Kings  grant  and  orders,  and  Friends  gene- 
ral discharge  (now  in  agitation  towards  an  accomplishment) 
will  be  at  no  small  trouble  in  writing  and  other  services  in 
order  thereunto  that  we  apprehend  Friends  cannot  be  clear  if 
they  do  not  in  some  measure  answer  the  reasonable  part  in 
them  by  gratifying  them  for  their  pains.  Wherefore  we  saw 
meet  to  recommend  it  to  such  Friends  in  the  Counties  as  are 
or  have  been  lately  prisoners  for  tbe  truth's  sake  and  who  are 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


87 


to  share  in  the  benefit  that  may  accrue  by  the  King's  intended 
genera]  discharge  thai  they  nil]  be  pleased  to  contribute  their 
proportion  toward  defraying  of  this  great  charge  which  they 
are  desired  forthwith  to  take  into  their  consideration  accord- 
ingly and  to  Bend  it  np  to  London  with  all  convenient  expedi- 
tion unto  Gerard  Roberts,  John  Osgood,  and  William  "Welch 
or  any  or  either  of  them  for  the  purpose  aforementioned.  We 
remain  Your  dear  biendi  and  brethren. 

London,  5th  of  4th  no.  167B, 

Part  of  the  money  is   already  disbursed  on  this  behalf  by 

Friends  in  Londou. 

Extraeted  from  the  Minute  Book  of  the  Society  of  Friends, 
1678,  Devonshire  House,  Bisho] 

All  difficulties  having  been  overcome,  this  Magna 
Charta,  or  grant  of  liberty,  was  issued. 

The  original  patent,  with  the  Great  Seal  attached 
to  it,  is  carefully  preserved  by  the  Society  of  Friends, 
in  their  archives  at  Devonshire  House,  and  it  con- 
tains the  names  of  twenty  prisoners  not  included 
in  the  order  of  Privy  Council.  But  Bunyan's 
name  is  in  both.  It  is  in  Latin  in  the  usual  form, 
prepared  by  Mr.  Nicolls,  the  principal  clerk  to  the 
Attorney-General,  to  the  following  effect: — 

Charles  the  Second  by  the  Grace  of  God  of  England,  Scot- 
land, France  and  Ireland,  King,  Defender,  &c.  To  all  to  whom 
the  present  letters  shall  come  greeting — Know  ye  that  we 
moved  with  piety1  of  our  special  grace,  and  of  our  certain 
knowledge  and  mere  motion,  Have  pardoned,  remitted  and 
released  and  by  these  presents  for  us  our  heirs  and  successors 
Do  pardon,  remit  and  release  to  Edward  Pattison,  John  Ellis, 
Arthur  Cooke  and  Richard  Cannon  prisoners  in  our  Gaol  of 
Newgate  within  our  City  of  Loudon. 

And  in  the  same  form  the  prisoners  are  named 
in  the  other  jails  throughout  the  kingdom.  The 
following  were  fellow-sufferers  at  that  time  in 
Bedford  jail: — 

John  Fcuu,  John  Bunnion,  John  Dunn,  Thomas  Ilayues, 
George  Farr,  James  Rogers,  John  Rush,  Tabitha  Rush,  and 
John  Curfe,  Prisoners  in  the  Common  Gaol  for  our  County 
of  Bedford.  [The  names  and  places  of  imprisonment  having 
been  given  of  the  four  hundred  and  ninety-one  prisoners,  the 
jrrant  goes  on  with  great  care  to  secure  the  benefit  intended] — 
to  each  of  them — or  by  whatsoever  other  names  or  name — 
surname — addition  of  name — Art — Office — Mystery  or  Place 
they — are  known  deemed  called  or  named  or  lately  was  known 
iVe.  All  and  all  manner  crimes  transgressions  offences  of 
prcmunire — unlawful  conventicles  contempts  and  ill  behaviour 
whatsoever — by  himself  alone  or  with  any  other  person  how- 
soever whensoever  or  in  what  maimer  soever  or  wheresoever 
advised  commanded  attempted  done  perpetrated  or  committed 
before  the  thirtieth  day  of  July  last  past  before  the  date  of 
these  presents,  against  the  form  of  the  Statute  &C  In  witness 
of  which  thing  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  to  be  made 

1  Charles  II.'s  notion  of  being  pious  must  have  arisen 
from  the  flattery  bestowed  upon  his  father,  it  being  impossible 
to  have  arisen  from  any  other  source.  'The  conceptions  of 
kings  are  as  far  above  the  vulgar  as  their  conditiou  is;  for, 
beiug  higher  elevated,  and  walking  upon  the  battlements  of 
sovereignty,  they  sooner  receive  the  inspirations  of  heaven.' — 
Howel's  Bodonds  Grove,  p.  61.  [Why  not  conduct  Divine 
service  over  the  dome  of  St.  Pain's  ?] 


patent.  Witness  myself  at  Westminster  the  18th  of  September 
in  the  twenty  fourth  year  of  our  reign  [1072.]  By  writ  of 
Privy  Seal.     Pigott. 

This  instrument  is  extended  by  the  forma  of  law, 
so  that  every  name  is  repeated  eleven  times,  and 
in  which  our  great  sufferer's  name  is  spelt  in  four 
different  ways.  Bwnmon  twice,  Bwnytm  five  times, 
Bunnyon  once,  and  Bunnyan  three  times.  It  is 
singular  that  he  spelt  his  own  name  in  different 
ways  in  the  early  part  of  his  life,  and  on  the  draw- 
ing of  his  portrait  by  White  it  is  spelt  Julia  Bvmon, 
while  on  the  engraving  done  by  the  same  artist  it 
is  John  Bunnyon.9  The  names  inserted  in  this 
pardon  are  four  hundred  and  ninety-one. 

Bunyan  having  had  a  very  sharp  controversy 
with  the  Quakers,  it  is  a  strong  manifestation  of 
their  Christian  spirit  that  he  certainly  obtained  his 
release  through  their  instrumentality ;  for  they 
paid  all  the  expenses  of  getting  the  royal  grant, 
and  also  of  having  it  served  throughout  the  king- 
dom ;  and  to  do  this  with  speed,  many  of  the 
prisoners  being  in  a  dying  state  with  the  severity 
of  their  sufferings,  duplicates  of  the  pardon  were 
made  and  authenticated,  and  messengers  were  dis- 

|  patched  throughout  the  country  to  set  the  prisoners 
at  liberty.  At  first,  Whitehead  and  his  friends 
took  the  patent  with  them,  and  produced  it  at  the 
assizes  and  quarter-sessions.      With  some  reluct- 

;  ance  on  the  part  of  the  persecuting  justices,  they 
consented  to  discharge  the  prisoners  named  in  the 
patent,  not  daring  to  disobey  the  royal  mandate. 

I  They  then  discovered  that  some  of  the  pious  suf- 
ferers had  still  been  omitted,  notwithstanding  the 
return  made  by  the  sheriffs,  and  the  additions 
which  had  been  made  at  Whitehead's  request, 
before  the  Great  Seal  was  attached.  On  behalf  of 
these  they  pleaded  effectually,  and  they  also  were 
discharged  from  confinement. 

The  great  anxiety  of  the  Quakers  to  effect  their 
object  is  shown  by  many  letters  which  passed  at 
the  time  between  their  leading  ministers.  This 
will  be  seen  by  the  following  extracts: — 

Ellis  Ilookes  to  Margaret  Fox. 

Yith  o/Qth  mouth  {Sept.)  1G72. 
G.  W.  and  myself  have  been  much  employed  this  summer 
in  the  business  of  the  prisoners  liberty,  &c. — (lie  describes  the 
process  of  getting  the  pardon  through  the  various  offices.) 

Ellis  Hookes  to  Margaret  Fox. 

1st  of  8th  mo  (Nov.)  1672. 
The  deed  of  pardon  prepared  on  1 1  skins  about  500  names  ; 
hoped  that  a  letter  from  the  Principal  Secretary  of  Male  'may 
be  effectual  to  discharge  them.' 

Same  to  same. 

10/A  cflOtk  month  {Jan.)  107 J. 
All  the  prisoners  were  Discharged  except  those  in  I ' 
Cumberland,  Lancashire,  and  Monmouth  in  Wales. 


Print-room,  British  Museum. 


28 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


It  is  said  that  Bishop  Barlow  interceded  for 
Bunyan ;  hut  if  he  did,  there  is  no  record  or  peti- 
tion to  that  effect  preserved  either  in  the  State 
Paper  or  Privy  Council  Offices.  He  was  not  then 
a  bishop,  hut  possessed  great  influence,  and  had 
written,  Tlie  case  of  a  Toleration  in  Matters  of 
Religion,  which  he  extended  further  than  any  divine 
of  that  age.  This,  and  his  friendship  with  Dr. 
Owen,  might  have  given  rise  to  the  report.  Barlow 
became  afterwards  a  trimmer,  and  sided  with  the 
court  party — a  very  natural  effect  of  his  elevation 
into  bad  company. 

My  conviction  is,  that  Bunyan  owed  his  release 
to  the  desolating  effects  produced  by  a  wholesale 
persecution  visiting  tens  of  thousands  who  dared 
not,  as  they  valued  the  honour  of  Christ  or  the 
salvation  of  their  souls,  attend  the  national,  and, 
in  their  opinion,  anti-scriptural  service ;  and  that 
the  Privy  Council,  finding  that  the  country  must 
be  plunged  into  revolution  or  ruin  if  the  wretched 
system  of  compulsive  uniformity  was  continued, 
determined  to  relax  its  severity,  grant  liberty  of 
worship,  and  discharge  the  prisoners.  As  this 
could  not  be  done  by  proclamation,  and  the  pri- 
soners were  too  poor  to  sue  out  a  patent  individu- 
ally, much  difficulty  and  delay  might  have  arisen 
to  prevent  their  discharge.  This  was  removed  by 
the  active  benevolence  of  George  Whitehead.  The 
appeal  which  he  and  his  friends  made  was  allowed  ; 
and  he  appears  to  have  obtained  the  insertion  of 
twenty  names  which  were  not  in  the  Privy  Council 
list  to  be  added  to  the  pardon.  Whitehead's  con- 
cern appears  to  have  followed  immediately  after  the 
declaration  for  liberty  of  conscience  was  published. 
Whether  it  arose  from  some  intimation  given  him 
by  Mr.  Moor,  or  from  a  secret  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  can  only  be  known  in  a  future  state. 
For  the  payment  of  the  fees,  and  for  sending  his 
release  to  the  prison,  and  for  obtaining  his  liberty, 
Bunyan  was  indebted  to  the  Quakers.  By  this 
patent,  all  fines  were  remitted,  and  that  without 
finding  security  for  future  conduct. 

Bunyan's  gratitude  for  the  preservation  of  his 
life,  and  his  deliverance  from  prison,  shone  through 
all  his  conduct.  It  appeared  strikingly  in  his 
admirable  treatise  of  '  Antichrist.'  In  the  chap- 
ter on  the  instruments  that  God  will  use  to  bring 
Antichrist  to  his  ruin :  '  Let  the  King  have  verily 
a  place  in  your  hearts.  Pray  for  kings ;  I  am  for 
blessing  of  them  that  curse  me ;  and  for  doing  good 
to  them  that  hate  me,  and  despitefully  use  me,  and 
persecute  me.'1 

Prom  this  time  there  appears  no  more  discord 
between  Bunyan  and  the  Quakers.  The  Ranters 
had  separated  from  them,  and  soon  disappeared ; 
while    the   Quakers  became   united  into    a  most 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  74. 


useful  church  of  Christ,  under  the  name  of  '  The 
Society  of  Friends.'  When  they  understood  each 
other's  peaceful  and  pious  principles,  all  hostility 
came  to  an  end. 

Charles  Doe  states  that,  on  the  21st  of  Decem- 
ber 1671,  while  Bunyan  was  yet  a  prisoner,  he 
was,  by  the  church  at  Bedford,  called  to  the  pas- 
toral office.  This  was  in  or  about  the  last  of  his 
twelve  years'  imprisonment;  and  when  set  at 
liberty,  he  preached  the  gospel  publicly  at  Bed- 
ford, and  about  the  countries,  and  at  London,  with 
very  great  success,  being  mightily  followed  every- 
where.2 

From  this  time  to  his  peaceful  removal  to  the 
celestial  city,  he  was  divinely  protected,  and  his 
liberty  preserved,  in  the  midst  of  the  severe  per- 
secutions under  which  many  of  his  nonconforming 
brethren  suffered.  No  man  in  the  kingdom  was 
more  fearless  and  uncompromising  in  the  publi- 
cation of  Divine  truth,  both  through  the  medium 
of  the  press  and  of  the  pulpit.  With  him,  the 
fear  of  man  was  swallowed  up  in  the  fear  of 
God  ;  so  that  he  boldly  persevered  in  the  path  of 
duty,  at  the  imminent  risk  of  losing  all  his  tem- 
poral blessings,  and  even  life  itself;  and  yet  he 
was  unmolested !  After  producing  such  a  work 
as  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  the  fruit  of  his  prison 
meditations ;  after  coming  forth  from  his  thirteen 
years'  incarceration  in  a  narrow,  damp,  wretched 
dungeon,  which,  by  Divine  power,  had  been  trans- 
formed into  the  house  of  God  and  gate  of  heaven  ; 
he  appeared  like  a  Christian  giant,  refreshed  by 
wholesome  discipline  and  diet.  The  emissaries  of 
Satan  dared  not  again  to  risk  the  sending  him  to 
a  jail,  where  he  might  produce  some  other  and 
more  potent  instrument  for  the  destruction  of  their 
kingdom.  Protected  by  his  God,  he  devoted  him- 
self, body,  soul,  and  spirit,  to  the  building  up  of 
that  spiritual  kingdom  which  disarms  tyrants  and 
despots,  both  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  sets  the  cap- 
tive free,  and  fills  the  souls  of  those  that  receive  it 
with  blessing  and  praise. 

He  possessed  a  devoted  wife,  to  whom  he  was 
married  about  the  year  1658,  he  being  then  a 
widower  with  four  children.  His  marriage  to  his 
first  wife,  one  of  his  biographers  says,  '  proves, 
too,  I  readily  grant,  that  she  had  little  prudence.' 
If  by  prudence  he  means  worldly  pelf,  Bunyan 
valued  it  not ;  they  were  happy  in  their  union,  and 
she  was  highly  honoured.  Had  she  been  unhappy, 
he  would  have  been  charged  as  the  cause  of  her 
unhappiness.  She  was  the  chosen  vessel  to  assist 
him  in  obtaining  the  treasures  of  the  gospel,  and 
must  be  honoured  as  one  of  the  means  by  which  he 
was  prepared  to  publish  his  universal  guide  to  Chris- 
tian pilgrims.     It  was  his  second  wife,  who  pleaded 


The  Struggles 


INTRODUCTION    BV   THE   EDITOR. 


09 


Ms  cause  with  suoli  modest  intrepidity  before  the 

judges,  and  Bhe  must  have  assisted  him  greatly  in 
arranging  his  affairs,  One  of  his  oldest  biographers 
tells  us,  that  'when  he  came  abroad  again,  he  found 
his  temporal  affairs  were  gone  to  wreck;  and  he 
had,  as  to  them,  to  begin  again,  as  if  he  had  newly 
come  into  the  world  ;  but  yet  he  was  not  destitute 
of  friends,  who  had  all  along  supported  him  with 
necessaries,  and  had  been  very  good  to  his  family; 
so  that,  by  their  assistance,  getting  things  a  little 
about  him  again,  he  resolved,  as  much  as  possible, 
to  decline  worldly  business,  and  give  himself  wholly 
up  to  the  service  of  God."  A  circumstance  which 
took  place  on  the  Gth  of  November  1673,  must 
have  greatly  comforted  him.  His  sufferings  and 
ministry  were  a  blessing  to  his  son,  Thomas,  who 
not  only  became  a  member  of  his  church,  but  was 
Bet  apart  as  an  occasional  preacher,  and  exercised 
his  ministerial  gifts  in  the  villages  round  Bedford. 
In  six  years  after  his  liberation,  he  had  published 
nine  valuable  treatises,  among  which  were  his  con- 
troversial books  with  his  Baptist  brethren;  and 
then  he,  having  overcome  all  his  scruples,  pub- 
lished, although  against  the  wish  of  some  of  his 
friends,  the  First  Part  of  this  greatest  of  all  his 
labours,  bis  vade-mecum  of  the  heaven-ward  pil- 
grim, by  which  his  memory  is  embalmed  and  his 
name  diffused  throughout  all  the  Christian  churches 
of  every  sect  and  denomination. 


CHAPTER  V. 

WAS    BUNYAN    ASSISTED    IN    THE    COMPOSITION    OF    HIS 
PILGRIM  ? 

To  this  question  take  his  own  reply — 

*  Some  say  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  not  mine, 
Insinuating  as  if  I  would  shine 
In  name  and  fame  by  the  worth  of  another, 
Like  some  made  rich  by  robbing  of  their  brother. 
Or  that  so  fond  I  am  of  being  sire, 
I'll  father  bastards  :  or,  if  need  require, 
I'll  tell  a  lie  in  print  to  get  applause. 
I  scorn  it ;  John  such  dirt-heap  never  was, 
Since  God  converted  him.     Let  this  suffice 
To  show  why  I  my  Pilgrim  patronize. 

'  It  came  from  mine  own  heart,  so  to  my  head, 
And  thence  into  my  liugers  trickled  ; 
Then  to  my  pen,  from  whence  immediately 
On  paper  I  did  dribble  it  daintily. 

'  .Manner  and  matter  too  was  all  miue  own, 
Nor  was  it  unto  any  mortal  known, 
'Till  I  had  done  it.     Nor  did  any  then, 
By  books,  by  wits,  by  tongues,  or  hand,  or  pen, 
Add  five  words  to  it,  or  wrote  half  a  line 
Thereof:  the  whole,  and  ev'ry  whit  is  miue. 

'Also  for  this-  thiue  eye  is  now  upon, 
The  matter  in  this  manner  came  from  none, 


Hut  the  same  heart  and  head,  fingers  and  pen, 
As  did  the  other.      Witness  all  good  nun; 
Eor  none  in  all  the  world  without  a  lie, 
Can  Bay  that  this  is  mine,  excepting  1. 
I  write  not  this  of  any  ostentation, 
Nor  'cause  I  seek  of  men  their  commendation ; 
I  do  it  to  keep  them  from  such  surmise, 
As  tempt  them  will  my  name  to  scandalize. 
"Witness  my  name,  if  anagram'd  to  thee, 
The  letters  make,  Nu  honey  in  a  B. 

'  John  Bunyan.' 

I  dare  not  presume  to  say,  that  I  know  I  hare  hit  rigbl  i.: 
everything ;  but  this  I  can  say,  I  have  endeavoured  so 
to  do.  True,  I  have  not  for  these  things  fished  in  other 
men's  waters ;  my  Bible  and  Concordance  are  my  only 
library  in  my  writings.'  3 

He  who  doubts  the  word  of  John  Bunyan,  knows 
nothing  of  the  character  and  soul  of  a  man  who 
j  suffered  nearly  thirteen  years'  imprisonment  in 
Bedford  jail,  rather  than  utter  a  falsehood  or  use 
tho  slightest  simulation.  Such  objectors  deserve 
chastisement  in  Doubting  Castle,  and  should  be 
flogged  with  the  royal  garter — Honi  soil  qui  mal 
y  pense.  But  such  there  have  been  from  1G78  to 
a  late  period  ;  and  the  same  feeling  which  led  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  to  reject  the  Messiah,  he- 
cause  he  appeared  as  the  son  of  a  carpenter,  pro- 
bably has  led  authors  of  great  repute  to  express 
their  doubts  as  to  the  originality  of  the  '  Pilgrim's 
Progress,'  because  the  author  was  an  unlettered 
man — the  reason  why,  as  his  pastor  says,  '  the 
archers  shot  so  sorely  at  him.' 

Dr.  Dibdin,  in  his  Typographical  Antiquities, 
describing  C axton 's  Pilgrimage  of  the  Soul,  says — 
'This  extraordinary  production,  rather  than  Ber- 
nard's Me  of  Man,  laid  the  foundation  of  John 
Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress.'"4  The  late  Dr. 
Adam  Clarke,  in  a  Postscript  to  a  Life  of  Bunyan, 
observes  that  '  his  whole  plan  being  so  very  similar 
to  Bernard's  religious  allegory,  called  the  Isle  of 
Man,  or,  Proceedings  in  Mansldre;  and  also  to 
that  most  beautiful  allegorical  poem,  by  Mr.  Ed- 
mund Spenser,  oddly  called  the  Faery  Queen,  there 
is  much  reason  to  believe  that  one  or  other,  if  not 
both,  gave  birth  to  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."'5 

Mr.  Montgomery,  a  devoted  admirer  of  Bunyan's 
genius,  considers  that  the  print  and  the  verses  en- 
titled Tlie  Pilgrim,  in  Whitney's  Emblems,  dedi- 
cated to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  in  1585,  might, 
perhaps,  have  inspired  the  first  idea  of  tbis  extra- 
ordinary work.6 

Southey,  who  investigated  this  subject  with  great 
ability,  came  to  a  very  pointed  conclusion:  *It 
would,  indeed,  be  as  impossible  for  me  to  believe 


1  Life,  18mo,  1692;  re-published  by  Ivimey,  1832,  p.  31. 
-  The  '  Holy  War,'  in  which  these  lines  were  inserted. 


3  Preface  to  '  Solomon's  Temple  Spiritualized.' 

4  Vol.  i.  p.  153. 

5  Bunyan's  Pilgrim  :  an  Epic  Poem  by  C.  C.  V.  G.,  ISil, 
p.  44. 

6  Montgomery's  Christian  Poet. 


30 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


that  Bunyan  did  not  write  the  "  rilgrhn's  Pro- 
gress," as  that  Porson  did  write  a  certain  copy  of 
verses  entitled  the  Devil's  T/iouglcls.'  Now,  as 
these  verses  were  doubtless  written  by  Southey 
himself,  he  had  arrived  at  a  conviction  that  Bun- 
yan was  fully  entitled  to  all  the  honour  of  con- 
ceiving and  writing  his  great  allegory.  Still,  he 
says,  '  the  same  allegory  had  often  been  treated 
before  him.  Some  of  these  may  have  fallen  in 
Bunyan's  way,  and  modified  his  own  conceptions 
when  he  was  not  aware  of  any  such  influence."  It 
is  high  time  that  these  questions  were  fully  inves- 
tigated, and  set  at  rest. 

It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  Bunyan  knew  no 
language  but  his  own ;  and  that  all  his  characters, 
as  well  as  the  trial  by  jury,  are  purely  English. 
When  he  used  five  common  Latin  words  in  Dr. 
Skill's  prescription,  Ex  came  el  sanguine  Cliristi, 
this  perfectly  unassuming  author  tells  his  readers, 
in  a  marginal  note,  '  Tlie  Laline  I  boirow.'  It  is 
absurd  to  suppose  that  learned  men  read  to  him 
old  monkish  manuscripts,  or  the  allegories  of  a 
previous  age  ;  for  his  design  was  unknown,  he  had 
formed  no  plan,  nor  had  he  any  intention  to  have 
written  such  a  book,  until  it  came  upon  him  sud- 
denly. His  first  idea  was  inspired  from  one  of  his 
own  works  while  composing  it,  and  then  the  whole 
story  flowed  into  his  mind  as  quick  as  he  could 
write  it.  Every  attempt  has  been  made  to  tarnish 
his  fair  fame ;  the  great  and  learned,  the  elegant 
poet  and  the  pious  divine,  have  asserted,  but  with- 
out foundation  in  fact,  or  even  in  probability,  that 
some  of  his  ideas  were  derived  from  the  works  of 
previous  writers. 

Every  assertion  or  suggestion  of  this  kind  that 
came  to  my  knowledge,  has  been  investigated,  and 
the  works  referred  to  have  been  analyzed.  And 
beyond  this,  every  allegorical  work  that  could  be 
found  previous  to  the  eighteenth  century,  has  been 
examined  in  all  the  European  languages ;  and  the 
result  is  a  perfect  demonstration  of  the  complete  ori- 
ginality of  Bunyan.  '  It  came  from  his  own  heart.' 
The  plot,  the  characters,  the  faithful  dealing,  are 
all  his  own.  And  what  is  more,  there  has  not 
been  found  a  single  phrase  or  sentence  borrowed 
from  any  other  book,  except  the  quotations  from 
the  Bible,  and  the  use  of  common  proverbs.  To 
arrive  at  this  conclusion  has  occupied  much  time 
and  labour,  at  intervals,  during  the  last  forty  years. 
The  works  read  and  analyzed  commence  with  our 
monkish  manuscripts,  and  continue  through  the 
printed  books  published  prior  to  the  Reformation, 
when  the  church,  having  no  competition  in  the 
cure  of  souls,  spoke  out  without  disguise ;  and 
from  that  time  to  1678,  when  our  Pilgrim  ap- 
peared.    Many,  if  not  all  the  works  so  examined, 

1  Southey's  L'/e  of  Banyan,  p,  x'1. 


contain  useful  information  ;  and  some  of  them  show 
what  was  taught  by  the  Church  of  England  when 
she  refused  the  Bible  to  the  laity,  and  was  uni- 
formed. And,  as  m}r  readers  ought  to  judge  for 
themselves,  while,  in  most  cases,  these  rare  volumes 
are  beyond  their  reach,  it  may  prove  useful  to 
print  these  analyses,  and  then  every  reader  can 
form  his  own  opinion  as  to  the  probability,  or 
rather  the  impossibility,  of  Bunyan's  having  gained 
any  idea,  or  phrase,  or  name,  from  any  source  but 
his  own  prolific  imagination.  My  determination 
in  all  these  researches  has  been  to  report  the  whole 
truth ;  and  had  it  been  discovered  that  some  hints 
might  have  been  given  by  previous  writers,  it 
would  not  have  been  any  serious  reflection  upon 
the  originality  of  a  work  which  has  no  prototype. 
This  idea  is  well  represented  by  Mr.  Montgomery : 
'  If  the  Nile  could  be  traced  to  a  thousand  springs, 
it  would  still  be  the  Nile  ;  and  so  far  undishonoured 
by  its  obligations,  that  it  would  repay  them  a 
thousand-fold,  by  reflecting  upon  the  nameless 
streams,  the  glory  of  being  allied  to  the  most  re- 
nowned of  rivers.'2  But  there  has  been  no  dis- 
covery of  any  tributary  spring;  no  borrowed  phrases; 
no  more  hints,  even,  than  such  as  naturally  arise 
from  the  open  treasury  or  storehouse  of  Holy  Writ. 

The  greatest  characteristic  of  original  genius  is 
its  spontaneous  exertion — the  evidence  of  having 
written  without  labour  and  without  the  conscious- 
ness of  doing  anything  remarkable,  or  the  ambi- 
tious aim  of  doing  a  great  work.  The  greatest 
efforts  of  genius  flow  as  naturally  as  it  is  for  com- 
mon men  to  breathe.  In  this  view,  Bunyan's 
work  comes  nearer  to  the  inspired  poetry  of  the 
Hebrews  in  its  character  than  any  other  human 
composition.  He  wrote  from  the  impulse  of  his 
genius,  sanctified  and  illuminated  by  a  heavenly 
influence ;  as  if,  indeed,  he  had  exerted  no  volun- 
tary supervision  over  its  exercise.  Everything  is 
as  natural  and  unconstrained  as  if  it  had  not  been 
intended  for  public  inspection.  There  has  not 
been  found  any  model  with  which  it  can  even  be 
compared.3  It  is  a  beautiful  transparency,  seen 
as  the  heavenly  light  shines  through — the  renewed 
spirit  alone  enjoys  the  picture  in  its  perfection, 
with  all  its  chaste  but  glowing  colours.  It  can 
be  fully  appreciated  only  by  him  who  possesses 
that  spiritual  light  without  which  the  things  of  God 
and  heaven  cannot  be  discerned. 

Bunyan's  works  furnish  ample  proof  that  his 
mind  was  preparing,  for  many  years,  the  plan  and 
incidents  which  render  this  allegory  so  striking. 
This  may  easily  be  traced  in  his  works,  although 
it  was  not  known  to  himself;  for,  however  he  was  all 
his  spiritual  life  employed  in  unintentionally  pre- 

2  Introductory  Essay  to  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  p.  xxv. 
ColHus. 

8  Dr.  Chccver. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


ill 


paring  the  material,  the  design  struck  him  suddenly. 
Twenty  years  beforo  his  great  work  appeared,  he 
published  a  most  pungent  work,  called  '  Sighs 
from  Ilell.'  The  preface  to  this  book  alludes  to  u 
pilgrimage  ;  and  in  it  is  found  some  similar  ideas 
to  those  which  occur  in  the  conversation  between 
Christian  and  Pliable.  It  thus  commences: 
1  Friend,  because  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  be 
walking  towards  a  place  of  darkness,  the  journey 
that  must  of  the  pour  souls  in  the  world  are  taking 
with  delight,  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  tell 
thee  what  sad  success  those  souls  have  had,  and 
are  like  to  have,  by  persevering  therein.  Why, 
friend,  hast  thou  thy  back  to  heaven  and  thy  face 
to  hell;  and  art  thou  running  full  hastily  that  way  ? 
1  beseech  thee,  stop  thy  earnest  race,  and  look 
what  entertainment  thou  art  like  to  have.  Hark ! 
dost  thou  hear  the  bitter  cries  of  those  who  have 
gone  before  ;  shall  not  these  mournful  groans 
pierce  thy  flinty  heart  ?  0  !  sinner,  sinner,  there 
are  better  things  than  hell  to  be  had,  and  a  thou- 
sand times  cheaper.  0  !  there  is  no  comparison  ; 
there  is  heaven,  there  is  God,  there  is  Christ,  there 
is  communion  with  an  innumerable  company  of 
saints  and  angels.'  How  do  these  ideas  remind 
us  of  Christian's  encouraging  words  to  Fliable  ! 

In  examining  the  following  accounts  of  allegories 
composed  by  learned  doctors,  bishops,  and  divines, 
the  simple  Christian  will  rejoice  and  triumph  in  the 
amazing  superiority  of  a  poor  unlettered  preaching 
mechanic,  guided  only  by  his  Bible.  Sanctified 
learning  is  exceedingly  valuable  ;  yet  the  produc- 
tions of  an  unlettered  man,  wholly  influenced  by 
the  Holy  Oracles,  shines  resplendeutly  over  the  la- 
boured, murky  productions  of  lettered  men,  who,  for- 
saking the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  are  trammelled 
with  creeds,  confessions,  canons,  articles,  decretals, 
fathers,  and,  we  may  almost  add,  grandfathers. 

The  first  work,  in  the  order  of  time,  that  claims 
our  notice,  has  never  been  printed.     It  is  called 

Tlte  Pilgrim. 

This  ancient  poem,  a  manuscript  on  vellum,  illustrated  with 
drawings,  but  very  much  damaged,  is  in  the  Cottonian  Collec- 
tion in  the  British  Museum;  probably  translated  in  the  fifteenth 
century  from  the  first  of  the  Three  Pilgrimages,  a  French 
manuscript.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  dream,  and  it  concludes  by 
fixing  the  pilgrim  as  a  monk  in  a  Cistercian  monastery.  Soon 
after  setting  out,  he  is  tempted  by  a  golden  image,  but  is  driven 
from  it  by  the  appearance  of  a  dead  corpse.  He  then  en- 
couuters  an  armed  man,  who  eudeavours  to  entice  him  to  turn 
aside  to  see  his  mistress,  and  uses  a  magic  circle  and  incanta- 
tions. They  hold  a  long  conversation,  in  which  is  narrated 
the  case  of  a  Duke  Fryse,  who  had  consented  to  be  baptized ; 
he  is  represented  with  a  girdle  about  his  middle,  otherwise 
naked,  except  his  crown ;  but  when  he  had  got  into  the  bap-  | 
tistery,  he  becomes  alarmed  by  a  voice  which  informs  him 
that  it  is  an  unlucky7  day :  — 

'  For  hym  thought  he  hcrde  a  cry 
That  aflcrmed  certeyuly 


For  synnc  and  for  Inyqnyte 

How  mo  folk  schulde  dampned  be 

At  the  day  of  Jugenieute 

Gon  to  helle  there  to  be  brcut, 

Ye  mo  as  in  comparisoun 

Tlianne  folk  for  thcr  savacyon 

Scholde  that  day  rcceyucd  be 

To  dwelle  iu  hcucue  that  fayrc  cyte.' 
The  duke,  although  a  bishop  has  got  him  by  one  hand,  with 
one  of  his  legs  in  the  baptistery,  gets  his  liberty,  and  runs 
away.  Had  sprinkling  been  the  practice  in  those  days,  the 
bishop  might  readily  have  managed  the  ceremony  with  a 
handful  of  water.  The  pilgrim  then  has  a  very  long  adventure 
with  Heresy,  who  strives  earnestly  to  draw  bin  aside.  She  is 
engaged  with  a  pair  of  scissors,  cutting  strips  from  Pelagians, 
Allans,  and  other  '  Sectys  founde  false  and  vutrcwe.'  These 
she  puts  together,  to  form  a  new  system  of  divinity.  He 
becomes  sadly  puzzled ;  she  had  laid  her  nets  so  artfully,  '  In 
loud,  on  water,  and  in  the  hayr.'  He  sees  many  attempt  to 
pass,  but  all  are  entangled  j  at  length  by  fasting  and  by  great 
penance,  he  slips  through  the  nets. 

He  is  then  assaulted  by  Satan,  who  tells  him  that  he  has 
devoured  thousands  of  Christ's  flock,  and  has  so  many  arts 
that  he  cannot  escape  him.  The  devil,  to  terrify  the  pilgrim, 
narrates  a  recent  adventure  by  which  he  had  succeeded  in 
destroying  a  holy  hermit.  He  had  transformed  himself  into 
an  angel  of  light,  and  went  to  the  hermit,  warning  him  that 
Satan  would  soon  overcome  him  if  he  was  not  courageous  to 
resist;  that  he  would  appear  to  him  in  the  shape  of  his  father, 
aud  if  he  parleyed  with  the  fiend,  he  must  be  lost;  and  ex- 
horted him  to  smite  the  fiend  at  once  with  sword  or  knife. 
Soon  after  this,  his  father  really  came  to  visit  him,  when  the 
deluded  hermit  plunged  a  dagger  to  his  heart,  aud  thus  fell 
into  the  jaws  of  the  fiend.  The  pilgrim,  much  terrified,  kept 
crossing  himself,  at  which  Satan  drew  back ;  and  by  continu- 
ing to  make  the  sign  of  the  cross,  he  makes  his  escape.  He 
is  then  stopped  by  Fortune  and  her  Wheel,  and  by  Idolatry, 
but  evades  them.  A  fortune-teller  wishes  him  to  have  his 
nativity  cast,  but  as  he  knows  that  many  men  are  born  at  the 
same  moment,  some  to  fortune  and  many  to  misery,  he  knows 
that  there  can  be  no  virtue  in  such  consultations  of  the  stars. 
He  is  then  profited  by  images  in  churches,  to  remind  us  of  the 
holy  lives  of  saints  ; — 

'  And  vu  to  folkes  many  on  [a  one] 
Ful  greet  proifyte  also  they  dun.' 
Sorcery  endeavours  to  catch  him  with  her  crooked  hook ; 
and  he  is  assailed  by  Worldly-gladness,  but  escapes.  At  length 
Grace  Dieu  visits  him  in  a  stately  ship,  having  a  palace  aud 
castle  on  deck.  He  embarks,  and  is  shown  a  large  baptistery, 
filled  with  tears  from  an  eye  in  a  rock.  This  bath  is  replenished 
with  tears  of  repentance,  by  works  of  supererogation.  Its 
virtues  are  thus  described  : — 

1  For  it  re-cureth  euery  wounde 

Call  this  Baptym  the  sccunde 

That  dothe  away  alle  greuance 

With  which  water  Dame  peuaunce 

Makyth  a  lye1  I  the  ensure 

To  wasche  away  al  ordure, 

In  whiehe  bath  in  certayne 

The  hooly  woinmau  Mawdelyue 

Iwashen  was  tak  heed  her  to 

The  Apostle  Peter  eke  also 

And  many  mo  than  I  may  telle 

Were  Iwaschen  in  this  welle 

1   '  A  lye ;'  water  impregnated  with  alkaline  salt. 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


And  so  schalt  thou  by  reed  of  me 
Yeue  thou  lyste  to  purged  be.' 

Grace  Dieu  fills  up  the  bath,  and  the  pilgrim,  naked,  enters 
the  baptistery  to  his  middle,  and  is  bathed  and  washed.  She 
then  tells  him  he  may  make  his  choice  of  monastic  orders — 
Cisterces,  Clunys,  Charterhous,  or  Preechers  Minours:  he 
chooses  to  enter  the  Cistercian  order.  The  porter,  'Drede 
of  God,'  at  first  refuses  him ;  but  Charity  receives  and  shows 
him  over  the  establishment :  he  is  shown  many  books.  The 
librarian  says : — 

'  And  my  name  zeue  thou  lyste  be 

Is  called  Agyographe, 

Which  is  to  seyne  I  the  ensure 

Of  holy  wrytynge  the  Scripture, 

And  at  feyres  and  at  feestis 

I  reste  in  skynues  oft'  dede  bestis.' 

She  expresses  a  clear  notion  of  the  Old  Testament  as  en- 
lightened by  the  New: — 

'  I  mene  as  thus  in  sentement, 
That  the  oolde  testament 
"Were  derke  and  cloudy  off  his  syght 
Zeue  that  it  ne  took  his  lyght 
Claryfyed  by  eutendemeut 
Oil'  the  newe  testament, 
Whos  schynynge  in  conclusyoun 
Is  cause  off  our  Salvacyoun.' 

He  is  shown  a  mirror,  which  exhibits  the  sins  of  the  person 
who  looks  in  it ;  he  is  also  shown  one  of  Flattery's  mirrors, 
which  exhibits  the  most  defiled,  as  angels  of  purity.  He  is  at 
length  introduced  to  the  chief  prior,  Obedience,  and  sits  down 
to  dinner : — 

'  And  also  as  I  dyde  obserue, 
Noon  other  folke  at  mete  serue 
But  folkes  deede  euere  more 
Where  off  I  was  abaschyd  sore.' 

Abstinence  is  the  freytourer  and  butler ;  the  servants  were 
the  skeletons  of  those  who  had  founded  and  endowed  the  abbey. 
Wilful  Poverty,  in  a  state  of  nudity,  sings  a  song,  ending  with — 

'  I  slepe  in  Joye  and  sekerness 
For  theues  may  not  robbe  me.' 

Unwilling  Poverty  sits  grumbling  and  murmuring.  Dame 
Chastity  at  last  introduces  the  pilgrim  to  Prayer,  who  makes 
him  welcome  in  these  lines  : — 

'  Wherefore  callyd  I  am  Prayere 
Whiche  that  am  the  messagere 
That  flee  to  heuene  with  whynges  lyght, 
Fer  aboue  the  sterres  bryght 
To  fore  the  lord  to  present 
Prayer  made  iu  good  entente.' 

He  then  speaks  to  the  pilgrim  about  the  servants,  who  were 
the  spectres  of  the  founders  : — 

'  And  cche  wyght  for  his  good  dede 
Is  worthi  to  resseyue  his  mede 
Lyke  his  meryte  off  equyte 
These  dcede  folk  which  thou  dost  se.' 

Grace  Dieu,  Obedience,  Latrya,  and  Prayer,  then  give  him 
instructions  for  his  future  conduct  in  the  monastery,  where 
he  remains  until  death  strikes  him,  and  he  awakes  from  his 
sleep. 

There  is  an  ancient  pilgrimage  noticed  in  Skel- 
ton's   Eyght  Delectable    Treaty  se  upon   a  Goodly 


Garlande  or  Cliapelet  of  Laurell.     The  author  re- 
counts his  literary  labours;  inter  alia — ■ 

'  Of  my  ladys  grace  at  the  contemplacyoun 
Owt  of  frenshe  in  to  englysshe  prose 
Of  mannes  lyfe  the  peregrynacioun 
He  did  translate,  enterprete  and  disclose.' 

No  copy  of  this  pilgrimage  has  been  discovered 
and  identified  as  his ;  and  very  high  authority  con- 
nects the  second  hue  with  the  '  peregrynatioun.' 
If  so,  it  is  in  prose  ;  but  if  the  first  two  lines  refer 
to  the  Contemplation  on  the  Virgin  Mary's  Grace,  a 
prose  work,  and  Skelton  being  a  poet,  it  would  lead 
us  to  infer  that  the  pilgrimage  was  in  verse.  The 
poem  last  described  maj  prove  to  be  the  trans- 
lation referred  to  by  Skelton.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
Bunyan  never  gained  a  hint  from  John  Skelton, 
the  satirist. 

The  Abbey  of  the  Holy  GJwst. 

This  curious  allegory  was  written  by  John  Al- 
cocke,  the  founder  of  Jesus  College,  Cambridge, 
a  learned  and  abstemious  English  bishop,  in  the 
reign  of  Henry  VII. 

The  author  represents  the  fall  and  recovery  of  mankind  under 
the  simile  of  an  Abbey,  the  inmates  of  winch  are  perfect  in  holi- 
ness and  happiness.  The  abbess  is  Charity  ;  the  prioress,  Wis- 
dom; the  sub-prioress,  Mekenesse;  and  the  nuns,  Poverty,  Clean- 
ness, Temperance,  Soberness,  Penauce,  Buxomness,  Coufession, 
Righteousness,  Predication,  Strength,  Pacience,  Simplicity, 
Mercy,  Largeness,  Reason,  Pity,  Meditation,  Orison,  Devocion, 
Contemplation,  Chastity,  Jubilation,  Honesty,  Curtesy,  Fear, 
and  Jealousy.  This  abbey  was  conveyed  by  the  Almighty  to 
Adam,  Eve,  and  their  heirs  for  ever,  upon  condition  that  he 
withstood  the  temptation  of  the  fiend  and  that  of  his  wife. 
The  deed  is  witnessed  by  angels  and  man,  heaven  and  earth, 
sun  and  moon,  stars,  and  all  creatures.  Geven  at  Paradise, 
the  first  day  that  man  was  made ;  in  the  year  of  the  reigning 
of  Almighty  God,  King  of  Kings,  whose  kingdom  never  began 
nor  never  shall  have  end.  No  persons  were  to  be  admitted 
until  Conscience  had  cleansed  the  soul  with  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Two  maidens,  called  Love  and  Righteousness,  shall 
cast  away  from  Conscience  all  manner  of  filth ;  Meekness  and 
Poverty  shall  keep  them  poor  in  spirit. 

The  abbey  was  situated  upon  the  waters  of  repentance.  Joy 
and  Mercy  built  the  walls  and  strengthened  them  with  alms. 
Patience  and  Strength  are  the  pillars  and  buttresses.  The 
nuns  have  each  her  place ;  Contemplation  is  the  doctor ;  Devo- 
tion the  butler  [the  bishop  remarks,  '  Alas  1  if  I  durst  say, 
full  many  be  in  religion  (nuns),  but  few  be  religious'];  Ory- 
son  shall  be  chanter.  St.  Bernard  saith,  When  we  pray  in 
good  life,  our  good  Angel  danseth  and  maketh  thereof  a  present 
to  the  Father  of  heaven.  The  abbey  being  so  well  furnished, 
a  tyrant  came,  and  in  an  evil  hour,  while  the  portress  was 
absent,  he  put  in  his  four  daughters,  who  were  all  of  shrewd 
manners;  the  fiend  father  of  them  all.  Their  names  were 
Pride,  Envy,  False  Judgment,  and  Lust ;  and  these  destroyed 
the  abbey,  and  dispersed  the  inmates.  The  punishment  of 
man  was  the  loss  of  Paradise,  to  spend  his  days  in  sorrow,  to 
eat  grass  that  groweth  on  the  earth,  and  never  to  come  to 
bliss  until  the  abbey  was  restored.  When  Adam  and  Eve  died, 
their  souls  went  to  hell ;  and  not  only  they,  but  all  those  that 
of  them  came  for  four  thousand  six  hundred  years ;  to  hell 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


83 


they  went,  every  one.  Then  some  of  the  nuns  prayed  the  Holy 
Ghost  for  assistance.  David,  Isaiah,  and  others,  endeavoured 
to  re-edify  the  abbey  ;  but  in  vain.  At  length  Christ  came, 
and  sought  out  the  abbess  aud  her  company  for  thirty-three 
years;  and  at  last  brought  them  together  by  hanging  on  the 
cross;  after  which  he  led  them  with  him  into  hell,1  and  took 
OOt  Adam  and  Eve  bis  wife,  and  all  his  friends,  and  replaced 
them  in  the  Abbey  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  Paradise. 

From  this  curious  and  very  rare  little  volume,  Banyan  conld 
not  have  gained  any  idea ;  but  iu  it  are  some  translations  of 
-  of  Scripture  made  fifty  years  before  any  version  of 
the  Bible  was  published  in  English,  which  prove  the  great 
liberties  the  church  touk  with  the  Scriptures;  and  the  extent 
to  which  they  misled  the  people,  while  the  Holj  Oracles  were 
locked  up  in  a  foreign  language.  Matt.  iii.  2:  '  Shrive  ye  and 
do  ye  penance,  and  be  ye  of  good  belief;  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
nigheth  fast.'  John  viii.  G  :  '  He  stooped  down  aud  wrote  on 
the  ground  with  his  finger  all  their  sins,  so  that  each  of  them 
might  se  how  sinfull  other  was.'  Matt.  xxvi.  38  :  '  I  have,  he 
said,  full  much  dread  against  that  I  shall  die.  Sit  ye  down, 
he  said,  aud  wake  ye,  and  bid  your  beads  till  I  come  again  to 
you.' 2 


The  Pylgremage  of  the  Sowle.     Printed  by  Wil- 
liam Caxton.     1483.     Small  Folio.3 

Dr.  Dibilin  having,  in  his  account  of  this  very 
rare  volume,  stated  that  '  this  extraordinary  pro- 
duction, which,  perhaps,  rather  than  Bernard's 
Idle  0/ Man,  laid  the  foundation  of  John  Bunyan's 
"  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  '  I  shall  make  no  apology  to 
the  reader  for  the  following  specimens  of  its  poetry 
and  prose.  Not  daring  to  trust  to  the  doctor's 
specimens,  which  occupy  eight  folio  pages,  my 
analysis  is  drawn  from  a  careful  perusal  of  the 
original  edition  by  Caxton,  compared  with  the 
manuscript  written  in  1413  ;  the  result  is,  to  estab- 
lish honest  John's  originality,  and  to  excite  great 
surprise  that  the  learned  doctor  could  have  pub- 
lished so  unfounded  an  insinuation. 

As  I  laye  in  a  seynt  laurence  nyght,  slepyng  in  my  bedde, 
me  bifelle  a  full  merueylous  drenie. 

Having  finished  my  pilgrimage  and  laid  aside  my  fleshly 
carrion,  it  appeared  loathsome  and  dame  Misericord  buried  it. 
The  fowle  horrible  Satan  cruelly  menaced  me  and  told  me  I 
was  his  prisoner — a  youngling  of  full  huge  beauty  appeared, 
and  defends  the  soul  of  the  pilgrim,  who  is  taken  to  judgement. 
He  is  brought  before  Michael,  while  his  good  angel  pleads  for 
him  Satan  cries  loudly  agaiust  him.  The  devils  complain  that  as 
soon  as  a  pilgrim  is  born  and  washed  in  the  salt  lye  (christened) 
Grace  Dieu  assigns  them  a  guardian  angel — we  are  ill  used,  let 
us  cry  a  row  so  loud  that  in  spite  of  them  they  shall  hear  our 
complaint.  Peter  the  porter  of  heaven  is  called  to  testify 
whether  the  pilgrims  have  done  penance — Call  St.  George  for 
the  Gentiles,  for  clerks  St.  Nicholas,  for  hermits  St.  Anthony, 
St.  Benet  for  monks,  for  wedded  folk  St.  Paul — not  that  he 
was  ever  married,  but  he  taught  the  duties  of  marriage — for 


1  Hence  'the  descent  into  hell'  in  a  Popish  creed,  falsely 
called  '  the  Apostles'  Creed.' 

-  From  a  copy  in  the  Editor's  library,  printed  by  "Wynkin 
de  Worde. 

8  British  Museum,  21,  d. 

VOL.  III. 


widows  St.  Anne,  for  maids  St.  Kathcrine.  The  Pilsrim  is 
placed  before  the  tribunal,  aud  his  guardian  angel  pleads  that 
he  bad  kept  bis  belief,  never  lost  his  scrip,  nor  bis  burden,*  aud 
having  persevered  to  the  end,  he  ought  to  be  safe.  The  corsed 
Satan  acknowledged  that  the  Pilgrim  passed  the  water  and  was 
tin  rein  washed  and  fully  cleansed  of  all  rather  fylthe,5  but  as 
soon  as  he  knew  good  and  evil  he  set  little  by  that  washing, 
but  cast  himself  like  a  swine  in  ordure  and  fylthe.  He  was 
washed  at  a  tender  age  unwillingly,  and  although  by  this  laver 
the  fold  spot  of  sin  original  was  utterly  avoided,  yet  he  has  not 
kept  the  vow,  and  is  more  spotted  with  deadly  sin  than  he  was 
before  he  was  washed ;  aud  as  all  heathen  men  that  have  never 
received  this  laver  belong  to  our  Company  because  they  have 
it  not,  much  more  those  that  have  received  these  gifts  of  Grace 
de  Dieu  and  despised  them  must  be  ours.  The  soul  pleads  in 
verse,  he  appeals  to  Jesus.  Some  of  the  lines  are  striking : 
'  For  though  there  ran  a  river  from  thy  side, 
That  all  the  world  doth  fully  overflow, 
Thy  grace  is  whole,  as  every  man  may  know.' 

He  then  appeals  to  Mary — 

'  Now  be  my  help  a  blissful  heaven's  Quene 
Let  somewhat  of  the  grace  on  me  be  seen 

I  am  be-knowen  that  I  have  done  amiss 

Eternal  death  deserved  with  my  deed 

But  gracious  Lady  Queen  of  Heaven's  bliss 

Thou  be  my  help  and  comfort  in  this  nede 

I  am  that  same  that  highly  have  mis-wrought 

Against  thy  child  Jesu3  and  eke  thee 

Yet  know  I  well  that  Lion  is  he  not 

Nor  thou  nor  might  no  Lioness  be 

In  thou  there  is  no  malice  nor  cruelty 

Though  that  I  have  thy  son  and  the  agrieved 
By  thee  is  all  my  trust  to  be  relieved.'  ° 
He  calls  upon  Michael — John  Baptist,  apostles  aud  martyrs, 
and  all  saints. 

Justice  pleads  agaiust  him,  and  will  allow  none  to  speak  011 
his  behalf.  He  then  answers  for  himself,  and  accuses  Satan 
of  being  a  liar;  but  the  fiend  calls  the  worm  of  conscience1  to 
bear  witness  against  him,  and  he  relates  all  his  wickedness  that 
was  not  purged  with  penance,  and  as  he  spoke,  Satan  wrote  it 
all  down  in  a  great  paper.  The  soul  defends  himself  by  having 
at  all  times  borne  his  burdon  and  scrip,8  by  his  natural  frailty 
and  the  temptations  of  Satan  and  allurements  of  the  world. 
Mercy  pleads  for  him  that  he  had  been  contrite,  and  made 
amends  for  sin,  and  had  confessed ;  but  when  his  good  and 
bad  deeds  were  weighed,  the  evil  was  heaviest.  Then  Mercy 
flew  to  heaven  and  brought  back  a  pardon  from  Jesus,  which 
is  given  in  verse  ;  inter  alia  : — 

'  At  instance  of  mine  own  mother  sweet 
To  whom  I  may  no  manner  of  thing  deny 
And  mercy  also  may  I  not  forget 
Unto  their  good  9  myself  I  will  apply 
This  grace  I  grant  them  of  my  royalty 
That  I  shall  them  receive  unto  my  peace 
Of  hell  pain  I  grant  them  full  release.' 


4  The  pilgrim's  staff. 

5  '  Rather  fylthe  ;'  early  pollution,  original  sin. 

6  Reader,  this  is  undisguised  Popery,  published  to  the  world 
before  the  Reformation,  by  the  Church  of  Rome.  Judge  for 
yourself.  Do  Papists  pray  to  the  Virgin  ?  Is  she  their  inter- 
cessor and  saviour  ? 

7  Syndercsys. 

8  II is  staff  or  vows. 

9  '  Bone'  in  the  poem.     The  French  word  not  translated 


SI 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


CLrist  balances  the  wicked  works  of  this  sinner  with — 
'  Of  the  treasure  of  my  bitter  passion 
And  of  the  merit  of  my  mother  dear 
To  whom  none  other  hath  comparison 
"With  merit  of  my  saints  all  in  fear 
That  to  my  bidding  full  obedient  were 
Of  plenty  and  of  superabundance 
A  forset J  full  which  putteth  in  balance.' 

The  balance  is  in  favour  of  the  soul,  and  his  sentence  is  to 
bear  all  his  sins  as  a  burden  into  purgatory,  and  abide  in  the 
fire  until  all  are  burned  and  '  thou,  clean  purged  of  all  thy  foul 
sins,  shall  then  be  pardoned.'  At  this  sentence  Satan  is  sore 
annoyed,  and  has  great  anguish. 

He  meets  a  number  of  pilgrims  from  purgatory,  who  sing  to 
the  Trinity  and  to  Mary  a  song  of  praise  for  their  deliverance. 
The  angels  join  in  a  song  without  comparison  more  lusty  than 
he  had  heard  before.  Then  came  one  pilgrim,  conducted  by  a 
huge  number  of  angels,  each  having  in  his  hand  some  lusty 
instrument,  as  harp,  organs,  kc,  some  of  which  he  could  not 
scribe.  It  was  a  soul  who,  by  extraordinary  penance,  had  suf- 
fered his  purgatory  on  earth.  He  then  sees  a  number  of 
pilgrims  condemned  to  'brenne  withynne  the  fyre  of  helle, 
neuer  to  be  releued.'  An  ugly  company  of  devils  seized  them, 
saying, '  Goo  we  fast  in  to  helle  ;  there  shall  we  fynde  a  warm 
duellynge  place.'  Our  poor  pilgrim  is  taken  to  purgatory, 
where,  in  three  days,  he  imagines  that  he  has  suffered  a  thou- 
sand  years'  indescribable  tortures.  His  guardian  angel  is  with 
him  in  the  fire,  but  being  a  pure  spirit,  suffereth  not.  In  his 
torments,  he  is  told  that  naught  can  help  him  but  masses  and 
the  good  '  dedes  of  hooly  chirche.'  He  asks,  "What  is  the  use 
of  the  pardons  and  indulgences  granted  by  the  church  ?  His 
angel  tells  him  that  they  abridge  the  time  of  punishment  and 
pain;  that  for  every  deadly  sin  he  must  suffer  seven  years' 
purgation,  and  the  thousand  years  that  he  had  suffered  was  but 
as  a  moment,  for  his  fardel  of  sins  seemed  to  be  as  huse  as 
ever,  although  the  fire  was  so  fierce,  that  if  the  great  sea  fell 
therein,  it  would  be  dried  in  a  moment.  At  length,  Grace 
Dieu  sends  from  the  church  a  quantity  of  prayers,  masses,  and 
good  works,  to  comfort  the  pilgrims  in  purgatory — a  packet 
to  each  prisoner,  with  the  names  of  those  who  had  purchased 
the  masses  for  their  relief.  Every  soul  answered  the  summons, 
and  greedily  took  the  relief,  all  swimming  in  hot  fire  :  it  was 
ointment  that  relieved  their  horrid  pains,  and  decreased  their 
burden  of  sins.  He  then  discovers  the  place  in  which  Adam 
and  the  Fathers,  to  John  the  Baptist,  were  confined,  till  Christ 
descended  into  hell  and  released  them.  The  prison  also  in 
which  the  souls  of  infants  who  had  died  without  being  christened 
— a  dark  and  doleful  place,  where  they  will  be  shut  up  for 
ever.  He  inquires  how  it  is  possible  for  the  God  of  love  thus 
to  condemn  the  innocent  ?  His  angel  refers  him  to  the  words 
of  Christ  to  Nicodemus  :  '  As  seynt  John  recordeth,  he  seith, 
that  an  innocent  deyng  \cithout  hajitym  is  damjmed  tcithouted 
ende.' 2  And  they  lay  in  endless  darkness,  and  never  know 
joy :  and  this  pain  shall  be  extended  to  all  the  most  innocent 
souls  not  baptized.  All  these  places  of  punishment  are  within 
enclosed  all  round  by  the  earth.  He  is  then  led  by  his  angel 
to  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the  fire  still  burning  within  him, 
to  every  place  in  which  he  had  committed  sin ;  the  punishment 
was  according  to  the  nature  of  his  crime — sometimes  shut  up 
in  thick  ice,  the  pain  being  more  intolerable  than  fire.  This 
was  for  having  used  baths  and  stenes  s  for  easement  of  his 
body.     One  soul  who  had  been  purged,  could  not  escape, 


1  '  A  forset ;.'  a  bundle. 

2  Stranee  perversion  of  the  words, '  Ye  must  be  born  asain ! ' 

3  Bra!,.-; 


because  his  executors  had  neglected  to  pay  his  debts.  He  finds 
that  one  day's  penance  upon  earth  cleanseth  from  sins  more 
than  years  of  purgatory.  In  the  journey  he  finds  his  bones, 
and  has  a  long  conversation  with  them,  in  which  they  mutually 
criminate  each  other. 

His  guardian  angel  then  takes  him  into  the  very  depth  of 
the  earth,  to  hell,  the  stink  of  which  nearly  caused  his  soul  to 
burst.  The  unbaptized  innocents  he  saw  in  a  place:  '  Hit  was 
wonder  merueylous  blacke  and  derke  ynowe :'  ever  flying  about 
seeking,  but  never  finding,  a  hole  to  escape.  He  then  came 
to  a  darker  place  of '  fire  horrible  and  wonder  hideous.'  There 
saw  he  the  cursed  fiends ;  some  blew  the  fire ;  some,  with  iron 
forks,  righted  the  brands ;  some,  with  sharp  hooks,  dressed  the 
wretched  souls  into  divers  pains.  Lucifer  sat  in  a  red-hot  iron 
chair,  chained  with  red-hot  chains.  The  devils  torment  each 
other.  The  punishment  of  Pride  is  that  a  devil  sits  upon  her 
head,  and  befouls  her  as  much  as  he  can.  Hypocrites  are 
trodden  perpetually  under  foot  by  devils,  ingulfed  in  fire  and 
stink.  The  envious  and  backbiters  were  hung  by  red-hot 
iron  hooks  through  their  tongues  over  eternal  flames.  Judas 
thus  hung,  but  as  his  mouth  had  kissed  the  king,  his  lips 
shined  like  gold ;  and  his  tongue  was  drawn  out  through  his 
neck,  and  he  hung  in  hottest  flames.  Traitors  were  broken 
upon  wheels,  fixed  by  hooks  turning  swiftly  round ;  the  same 
punishment  was  inflicted  upon  lawyers,  proctors,  and  counsel, 
who,  to  fill  their  purses,  had  pleaded  for  the  guilty  against  the 
innocent.  Upon  seeing  a  number  of  souls  being  devoured  by 
wolves,  but  never  eaten;  others  having  molten  brass  poured 
down  their  throats,  he  swooned,  but  is  revived  by  his  angel. 
These  were  the  punishments  of  extortioners.  Angry  people 
were  tied  up  in  bundles,  and  pitched  into  fiery  furnaces;  drunk- 
ards were  laid  upon  burning  coals,  with  sulphur,  their  throats 
slit,  and  tongues  drawn  through  the  slit ;  the  lechours  were 
laid  upon  beds  of  burning  thorns,  full  of  venomous  and  huge 
toads  and  worms,  for  ever  biting  and  gnawing  them.  The 
boiling  caldron  and  pit  of  hell  was  boiling  full  of  heretics ;  and 
when  our  Lord  shall  renew  the  world,  all  their  burning  and 
stinking  and  horrible  pains  shall  be  renewed,  and  all  the  filth 
that  may  be  found  in  every  other  place,  shall  be  cast  thereto. 
He  then  ascends  to  the  earth,  and  sees  the  tree  from  which 
Eve  plucked  the  apple,  and  which,  after  process  of  time,  formed 
the  cross  on  which  the  Saviour  suffered.  Then  follows  a 
number  of  dialogues  between  the  Trinity,  regarding  the  scheme 
of  mercy.  His  purgation  being  finished,  and  sins  consumed, 
his  angel  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  began  to  mount  towards 
heaven.  The  angel  shows  him  many  mansions ;  tells  him 
how  saints'  days  are  to  be  kept.  In  the  feast  of  the  Purification, 
the  cherubims  sing  this  song : — 

*  Heryed4  be  thou  blysfull  henen  quene 
And  worshyped  mote0  thou  be  in  euery  place 
That  moder  art  and  very  mayden  clene 
Of  god  our  lord  thou  geten  hast  that  grace 
Thou  cause  of  ioyes  arte,  and  of  solace 
By  meryte  of  thy  great  humylyte 
And  by  the  fioure  of  thy  vyrgynyte 
Honoured  be  thou,  blessyd  lady  bryght 
By  thy  person  embelysshed  is  nature 
Of  heuen  blysse  augmented  is  the  lyght 
By  presence  of  so  fayre  a  creature 
Thy  worthynesse  passeth  al  mesure 
For  vnto  thyn  estate  Imperyall 
No  preysynge  is  that  may  be  peregaL' 6 


Heryed;'  praised- 
1  Mote :'  must. 
'Peregal;'  equal 


•from  which  is  derived  hu-rah. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


35 


In  the  feast  of  Ascension  the  father  honoured  the  sone ;  and 
at  the  feast  of  Ac-sumption,  the  Sou  honoured  and  worshipped 
his  mother. 

Song  of  angels  on  Easter  day,  to  the  Saviour,  is — 

*  When  thou  were  dead,  to  hell  thou  descended 
And  fetched  them  out  that  lay  there  in  pain.' 

The  angel  illustrates  to  him  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  hy 
the  world  being  round,  without  beginning  or  end;  having  I 
breadth,  length,  and  depth,  which  three,  by  unity  in  measure, 
comprises  one  world.  So  in  a  body  is  matter,  form,  and  sub- 
stance ;  if  one  of  these  be  missing,  it  is  imperfect.  So  the 
matter  is  likened  to  the  Father,  the  form  to  the  Son,  and  the 
substance  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  to  every  perfect  work,  there 
must  be  might,  cunning,  and  will.  He  then  asks,  that  as 
these  three  are  one,  how  came  it  that  one  was  separated  and 
became  incarnate  alone  ?  This  is  accounted  for,  as  a  snnbeam 
does  not  leave  the  sun,  but  enliveneth  the  earth ;  so  the  Son 
illuminated  the  world,  being  clothed  with  man's  flesh  in  the 
blessed  maiden,  and  yet  departed  he  not  from  his  Father's 
presence.  When  properly  prepared,  the  angel  went  to  clear 
his  way  to  heaven,  and  as  he  looked  after  him,  a  '  wonder 
huge  light'  descended  from  the  high  heaven,  smiting  on  his 
eye,  and  awoke  him  from  his  sleep ;  whereof  he  was  full  sorry, 
after  having  seemed  to  live  so  many  thousand  years ;  the  clock 
struck  twelve,  and  the  bell  tolled  midnight,  and  he  remembered 
that  he  had  not  slept  three  hours  while  all  these  adventures 
had  passed.  Now  Jesus  give  us  grace  to  come  to  this  bliss ! 
Translated  in  1413,  and  printed  by  ^W.  Caxton,  June  6,  1483. 

There  is,  in  the  British  Museum,'  a  very  fine  and 
curious  MS.  copy  of  this  very  singular  work,  illus- 
trated with  rude  illuminated  drawings.  It  finishes 
with,  ■  Here  endith  the  dreem  of  the  pilgrimage  of 
the  soule,  translated  owt  of  the  Frensch  in  to  En- 
glysche.  The  yere  of  our  Lord  iLCCCCsm.'  The 
translator  craves  indulgence,  if  '  in  som  places  ther 
it  be  ouer  fantastyk  nought  grounded  nor  foundable 
in  Holy  Scripture,  ne  in  docteors  wordes,  for  I 
my ght  not  go  fro  myn  auctor.' 

The  original  work  was  written  in  verse  hy  Guil- 
laume  de  Guillonville,  prior  of  Chaalis,  about  1330. 

TJie  Booke  of  the  Pylgrymage  of  Man.  4to,  26 
leaves.  Woodcut  of  Pilgrim,  with  staff  and 
cockle-shell,  and  clasped  book  in  his  left  hand.2 

Here  begynneth  a  boke,  in  Frenche  called,  le  pelerynage  de 
L'homme  (in  latyn,  peregrinatio  humani  generis),  aud  in  oure 
Maternal  tunge,  the  pylgrymage  of  mankynd,  of  late  drawen 
and  in  compendiouce  prose  copouded  by  the  reuerent  father  in 
god  dane  william3  hendred  Prioure  of  the  honourable  place  and 


1  Addit.  MSS.,  Bibl.  Eg.  615.   It  was  bought  of  Mr.  Rodd,  ■ 
1S36  ;  but  appears  to  want  the  first  leaf  of  the  text. 

-  This  rare  book  is  in  the  library  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford. 
I  am  indebted  to  my  friend,  Mr.  Underbill,  for  the  above 
analysis. 

3  Guillaime  de  Guilleville,  moine  de  chaliz.  It  was  printed 
in  Paris  byAllerard;  not  dated,  but  about  the  year  1500. 
Mr.  Greswell,  in  his  notice  of  this  book,  says,  '  Not  only  in 
early  ages,  but  in  later  also,  mankind  have  been  found  less 
willing  to  be  instructed  by  abstract  reasoning,  than  by  fables 
or  similitudes.  Hence  the  popularity  of  these  old  religious 
fictions.  The  "Pilgrim's  Pkogeess"'  of  our  day  confessedly 
excels  all  others  of  its  kind.     And  though  some  have  endea- 


pryory  of  Leomynstre :  and  now  newly,  at  the  specyal  com- 
maundemente  of  the  same  Father  reuerent,  I  haue  compyled  the 
tenure  of  the  same  in  Metre  comprehended  in  xxvi.  chaptours 
as  ensnynge  appereth. 

THE    TABLE. 

First,  the  prologe,  with  the  exposyon  and  enterpretacyon 

of  the  name  of  their  sayd  reuerent  father  in  God. 
Item  how  man  was  made  of  viij  partyes.    Capitulo  primo. 
Item  how  almyghty  god  put  adam  into  paradyce,  and  of 

his  first  age.     Ca.  ......        ij 

Item  the  secounde  age  of  mankynde,  and  howe  y*  sonnes 

of  noe  Bylded  the  Toure  of  Babylon.     Cap. 
Item  how  man  procedyd  his  thirde  age,  and  of  the 

synkynge  of  cyties.     Ca. iiij 

Item  howe  Moyses  receyuyd  ij  tables  of  the  lawe  in  the 

iiij  age  of  man.     Ca v 

Item  howe  kyng  Salamon  byldyd  the  temple  of  god  in 

the  Cytie  of  Jerusalem.     Ca.   .....       vi 

Item  howe  the  vj  age  enduryd  telle  che  commvnge  of 

oure  sauyoure.     Ca.       .         .         .         .         .  v  ij 

Item  how  mankynde  endured  and  of  the  nombre  of  yeres 

from  the  begynnynge  of  the  worlde  to  the  byrthe  of 

criste.     Ca 

Item  howe  almyghty  God  was  pylgrym  for  iij  causes 

and  howe  he  gaue  mankynde  ensample  to  do  hi; 

grymage.     Ca.      .......       ix 

Item  which  iij  synguler  poyntys  apperteyne  to  a  pyl- 

gryme.     Ca.  .......        x 

Item  howe  mankynde  entereth  the  londe  of  June  at  the 

age  of  Lx.     Ca xi 

Item  an  exposition  autorysed  by  Scripture  of  y*  concep- 
tion of  seynt  John  Bapryst.     Ca.    .         .         .  : 
Item  howe  mankynde  entereth  into  a  kyngdome  namyd 

the  londe  of  July  and  parte  of  the  marterdome  of  seynt 

Thomas  of  cauntorbury.     Ca,  .         .         .         .     xij 

Item  a  parable  of  auctorytie  of  the  hooly  order  of  seynt 

Benet.     Ca.  ...... 

Item  how  mankynde  enteryth  the  empyre  of  august  and 

of  the  aboundaunte  welth  that  there  is.     Ca.     .         .      xv 
Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth  and  goeth  thorowe  the 

dukedome  of  September.     Ca.         .         .         .         .     xvj 
Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth  into  the  londe  of  October 

at  the  age  of  a  C.  yere.     Ca.  .....    xvij 

Item  how  mankynde  enteryth  the  barury  of  Nonembre.  C 
Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth  the  lordshyp  of  Decem- 
ber.    Ca. xix 

Item  howe  mankynde  goth  thorowe  the  londe  of  January 

and  of  the  strastye  that  coste.     Ca.  xx 

Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth  the  londe  of  February.  Ca.  xxi 
Item  howe  man  procedyth  his  pylgrymage  in  and  thorowe 

the  londe  of  Marche.     Ca. xx'j 

Item  howe  Batayle  was  mayntaynd  bytwene  sol  Justice 

and  pluto  duke  o  tenebris.     Ca niij 

Item  howe  vyse  toke  the  fowarde  on  his  party,  and  howe 

sol  Justitie  fled.     Ca. niiij 

Item  howe  sol  justicie  turned  agayne  and  dyscumfyte  vyce 

and  wanne  the  feld.     Ca.        .....     xxv 

Item  the  conclucyon  of  this  boke.     Ca.        .         .         .    xi .  i 

Here  endeth  the  table. 
'  We  hym  folowynge  a  full  good  spede. 
-      :ly  anone  the  skrymysche  beganne. 
And  so  sure  for  matter  in  d^de. 

voured  to  trace  its  prototype  in  earlier  works,  it  was  a  perfectly 
spontaneous  and  original' effort  of  the  genius  of  its  unlettered 
author.'     See  Annals  of  Parisian  Tutographi/,  p.  245. 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


Uyce  with  his  felysshyp  faste  laycd  on 
That  voce  mea  was  agast  soone. 
Thenne  oure  capteyne  Sol  iusticie. 
With  In  manus  tuas  away  dyd  flye. 
In  to  a  darke  vale  that  was  nygh  hy. 
But  yet  at  the  desyre  and  specyall  request. 
Of  a  gracyouse  man  callyd  domine  exaudi. 
He  came  agayne  and  shortly  in  haste. 
To  ayde  us  there  came  one  hyeng  faste. 
"Whiche  is  callyd  with  all  and  some. 
Benedictus  qiu  venit  ad  prelium.' 

So  he  sets  out  with  Beatus  vir  for  a  guide,  and  enters  the 
land  of  June — a  royal  land,  full  of  pleasures  and  fruits,  of 
which  he  eat  plenteously  in  every  lane ;  then  came  to  a  place 
held  hy  the  '  Pope  of  June,'  where  was  the  cleanest  castell  in 
Xtendom,  called,  '  castell  of  corpus  xti :' — 

'  Of  whiche  indulgence  hy  auctorytye 
The  founder  is  called  by  naturall  sext 
Of  the  romaynes  romanus  pontifex,' 

where  man  could  be  healed  from  worldly  wretchedness  and 
sinful  sore. 

His  guide  then  led  him  to  dominus  iUuminatio  for  a  safe- 
conduct  in  all  the  lands  they  should  visit : — 

*  So  for  to  purchas  a  parfyte  wryte. 
To  soule  justicie  we  tote  our  way. 
Sealed  to  haue  oure  saffe  condyte. 
And  he  shortly  sayde  not  nay. 
But  also  haue  us  of  his  lyuery. 
A  fencyble  garment  Joyntly  compylcd. 
With  fayth  and  hope  that  we  exiled.' 
They  then  come  to  a  monastery,  &c. 

Emprynted  at  London  by  me  Richard  Faques, 
dwellyng  in  Poulys  churche  yerde  at  the  sygne  of 
the  Maydynhed. 

The  informacym  for  pylgrymes  unto  the  holy  lande, 
Tliat  is  to  wyt  to  Rome,  to  Jherusalem  and  to 
Many  Oilier  Holy  Places.  Imprinted  by  Wyn- 
kin  de  Worde.     1524.1 

This  rare  volume  is  a  hand-book  for  pilgrims;  gives  the 
routes,  coin,  conveyances,  fees,  and  other  instructions  to  those 
who  were  going  on  any  distant  pilgrimage.  It  also  contains 
the  narrative  of  a  pilgrim  in  his  journey  to  the  Holy  Land. 
Sixty-six  pilgrims  sailed  from  Venice  in  one  ship ;  they  visit 
Jerusalem  and  other  places  in  the  Holy  Land.  He  gives  the 
pronunciation  of  useful  words  to  enable  future  visitors  to  ask 
for  bread,  wine,  &c.  It  is  a  very  rare  tract,  but  there  is 
nothing  allegorical  about  the  narrative,  which  is  simply  of  the 
facts  as  they  took  place. 

The  next  allegorical  work  in  chronological  order, 
representing  life  as  a  pilgrimage,  is 

Tlte  Histcnie  of  Graunde  Amoure  and  la  bell  Pucel; 
called  the  Pastime  of  Pleasure,  containing  (lie 
Knowledge  of  (lie  Seven  Sciences,  and  the  Course 
of  Man's  Life  in  this  Worlde.  Invented  by 
Stephen  Hawes,  Grome  of  King  Henry  the 

1  Retrospective  Review,  vol.  ii.  p.  327. 


Seuenth  his  Chamber.     Printed  by  John  Way- 
lande,  1554.     Small  4to. 

Such  is  the  rarity  of  this  volume,  that,  although 
it  wants  six  leaves,  it  bears  this  iuscription  on  the 
fly-leaf,  '  I  bought  this  Volume  at  Mr.  Bindley 's 
sale,  January  21st,  1813,  for  the  inordinate  sum 
of  forty  guineas.  James  Boswell '  (Author  of  the 
Life  of  Dr.  Johnson). 

Mr.  Hallam,  in  his  Literature  of  Europe,  gives 
a  good  account  of  this  poem : — '  From  the  title  we 
might  hardly  expect  a  learned  allegory,  in  which 
the  seven  sciences  of  the  trivium  and  quadrivium, 
besides  a  host  of  abstract  virtues  and  qualities, 
play  their  parts  in  living  personality.  It  is  rude, 
obscure,  full  of  pedantic  Latinisms,  but  learned  and 
philosophical.  The  best,  though  probably  an  un- 
expected, parallel  for  Hawes,  is  John  Bunyan  ; 
their  inventions  are  of  the  same  class,  various  and 
novel ;  their  characters,  though  abstract  in  name, 
have  a  personal  truth  about  them  ;  they  render 
the  general  allegory  subservient  to  inculcating  a 
system,  the  one  of  philosophy,  the  other  of  religion. 
I  do  not  mean  that  the  Pastime  of  Pleasure  is  equal 
in  merit,  as  it  certainly  has  not  been  in  success, 
to  the  "Pilgrim's  Progress."  Bunyan  is  powerful 
and  picturesque,  from  his  concise  simplicity;  Hawes 
has  thecommon  failings  of  our  old  writers — a  tedious 
and  languid  diffuseness,  an  expatiating  on  themes 
of  pedantry  in  which  the  reader  takes  no  interest, 
a  weakening  of  every  feature  and  every  reflection, 
by  ignorance  of  the  touches  that  give  effect.  Hawes 
was  educated  at  Oxford,  and  travelled  much  on 
the  Continent,  and  held  an  office  in  the  Court  of 
Henry  VII.  He  was  the  earliest  of  our  learned  and 
accomplished  gentlemen. ' 

Hawes 's  work  was  the  result  of  a  learned  educa- 
tion, great  connections,  an  extensive  knowledge  of 
the  world,  and  singular  ability ;  still  Mr.  Hallam 
justly  admits  that  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress'  is 
greatly  superior  as  a  work  of  genius,  although 
Bunyan  was  not  blessed  even  with  the  rudiments 
of  education,  no  literary  connections,  and  his  travels 
extended  not  beyond  his  neighbouring  villages. 
How  extensive  and  prolific  must  have  been  the 
natural  powers  of  Bunyan's  mind!  But  compare 
the  moral  tendency  of  those  two  allegories:  Hawes's 
inspiration  is  from  beneath,  strongly  tinged  with 
the  smoke  of  the  infernal  pit  ;  Bunyan  is  inspired 
by  heaven,  his  whole  course  is  illuminated  from 
the  celestial  city.  His  pilgrims  breathe  a  heavenly 
atmosphere  ;  every  line  of  his  narrative  has  a  holy, 
and,  consequently,  a  happy  tendency.  Hawes 
derived  his  knowledge  from  worldly  philosophers, 
Bunyan  from  the  Bible. 

The  Pastime  of  Pleasure  is  a  narrative  of  the  adventures 
of  a  love-sick  knight,  in  search  of  a  lady  named  La  Bell  Pucel. 
He  is  directed  to  the  Tower  of  Doctrine,  where  he  is  told  that 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


37 


he  must  become  proficient  in  Ihe  seven  liberal  sciences,  in  order 
to  win  bis  lady. 

Walking  in  a  gay  meadow,  lie  finds  a  statue,  whose  hands 
point  to  two  paths,  one  of  contemplative  life: — 

'And  in  the  other  hande,  ryght  fayre  wryttcu  was 
This  is  the  waye,  of  worldly  dignitye 
Of  the  actiue  lyfe,  who  wyll  in  it  passe 
Unto  the  tower,  of  fayre  dame  bcautye 
Fame  shall  tell  him,  of  the  way  in  certainty* 
Unto  la  bell  pucell,  the  fayre  lady  excellent 
Aboue  all  other,  in  cleare  beauty  splendent.' 

In  pursuit  of  this  beautiful  virgin  he  chooses  the  path  of 
active  life,  and  sets  out: — 

'  Thus  all  alone,  I  began  to  trauayle 
Forthe  on  my  waye,  by  long  contiuuaunce 
But  often  times,  I  had  great  maruayle 
Of  the  by  pathes,  so  full  of  pleasaunce 
Whiche  for  to  take,  I  had  great  doubtance 
But  euermore,  as  nere  as  I  myght 
I  toke  the  waye,  whiche  went  before  me  right.' 

On  his  journey  he  falls  asleep,  and  is  awaked  by  the  sound 
of  a  horn.  A  lovely  lady,  on  horseback,  rides  swiftly  up  to 
him,  accompanied  by  two  greyhounds,  with  their  names  set  in 
diamonds  upon  their  collars — Grace  and  Govemaunce.  The 
lady  proves  to  be  Fame ;  she  presents  to  him  the  two  grey- 
hounds, praises  La  Bell  Pucell,  and  instructs  him  how  to  attain 
her  in  the  Tower  of  Music,  and  she  informs  him  that  he  will 
have  great  labour,  and  must  pass  through  hard  adventures 
before  he  will  attain  his  object : — 

'  For  by  the  waye,  there  lye  in  waite 
Gyantes  great,  disfigured  of  nature 
That  all  deuoureth,  by  their  euil  conceite 
Against  whose  strength,  there  may  no  man  endure 
They  are  so  huge,  and  strong  out  of  measure 
"With  many  serpentes,  foule  and  odious 
In  sundry  likenesse,  blacke  and  tedious 

But  beyond  them,  a  great  sea  there  is 

Beyonde  whiche  sea,  there  is  a  goodly  land 

Most  full  of  fruite,  replete  with  ioye  and  bliss 

Of  right  fine  golde,  appeareth  all  the  sande 

In  this  faire  realme,  where  the  tower  doth  stand 

Made  all  of  golde,  enameled  about 

With  noble  stories,  whiche  do  appeare  without.' 

He  at  length  arrives  at  the  castle,  when  the  portresse  thus 
questions  him : — 

*  Tyll  that  I  came  to  a  royall  gate 
Where  I  sawe  standyug  the  goodly  portres 
Whiche  axed  me,  from  whence  I  came  alate 
To  whom  I  gan,  in  euery  thing  expresse 
All  myne  aduenture,  chaunce  and  busines 
And  eke  my  name,  I  tolde  her  euery  dell 
When  she  hearde  thys,  she  liked  me  ryght  well.' 

The  portress,  whose  name  was  Conntenaunce,  introduced 
him  into  the  castle,  and  in  the  Fair  Hall,  upon  the  arras,  is 
portrayed  the  perils  he  will  have  to  encounter ;  that  Folly  will 
beset  his  path,  but  that  Correction  will  follow  : — 

'  And  in  her  hande,  a  strong  knotted  whippe 
At  every  iarte  she  made  him  for  to  skippe.' 

He  finds  that  he  will  have  to  destroy  a  giant  with  three 
heads,  another  more  fierce  with  four  heads,  and  a  third  still 
mure  terrible  with  seven  heads,  and  at  length  he  will  win  and 


wed  La  Bell  Pucell.     The  principal  officers  in  the  castle  are 
thus  named : — 

1  The  marshall,  yclipped  was  dame  Reason 
And  the  yeures,  also  observaunce 
The  pantcr  Pleasaunce,  at  euery  season 
The  good  Butler,  curteys  continuaunce 
And  the  chiefe  coke,  was  called  tempcraunce 
The  lady  chambcrlayne,  mimed  fidclityc 
And  the  bye  stewarde,  Liberalitye.' 

He  is  then  sent  in  succession  to  Grammar,  Logic,  Rhetoric, 
and  at  length  to  Music.  In  the  Temple  of  Music,  he  sees  and 
falls  deeply  in  love  with  La  Bell  Pucell.  She  returns  his  love, 
but  informs  him  that  he  will  have  to  brave  many  desperate 
adventures  before  they  can  be  united.  He  promises  to  fit 
himself  for  all  that  may  happen,  and  goes  to  Chivalry — he  is 
taught  by  Minerva — harnessed  and  knighted: — 

1  For  first  good  hope,  his  legge  harneys  should  be 
His  habergion,  of  perfect  rigbteousnes 
Gyrde  fast,  wyth  the  girdle  of  chastitie 
His  rich  placarde,1  should  be  good  busines 
Brodered  with  almes,  so  full  of  larges2 
The  helmet  mekenes,  and  the  shelde  good  fayeth, 
His  swerde  Gods  worde,  as  S.  Paule  sayeth.' 

Fortitude,  Consuetude,3  Justice,  Misericorde,  Sapience,  Cur- 
tesye,  Concord,  and  dame  Minerva  see  him  on  his  road,  and 
bid  him  farewell.  His  first  adventure  is  with  a  Kentish  man, 
Godfrey  Gobilion,  who  gives  an  account  of  his  parentage  in 

these  lines : — 

'  Ich  am  a  gentilman,  of  much  noble  kynne 
Though  Iche  be  cladde,  in  a  knaues  skynue 

For  there  was  one,  called  Peter  Pratefast 
That  in  all  his  life,  spake  no  worde  in  waste 
He  weddid  a  wife,  that  was  called  Maude 
I  trow  quod  I,  she  was  a  gorgious  boude 
Thou  best,  quod  he,  she  was  gentle  and  good 
She  gaue  her  husbande,  many  a  furde  hode 

And  at  bis  meales,  without  any  misse 
She  would  him  serue,  in  clenly  wise  iwya 
God  loue  her  soule,  as  she  loued  clenlines 
And  kept  her  dishes,  from  all  foulenes 
When  she  lacked  clowtcs,  without  any  fayle 
She  wyped  her  dishes,  with  her  dogges  tayle.' 

The  conversation  that  ensues  between  these  worthies,  on  the 
misfortunes  of  lovers,  exceeds  for  gross  indelicacy  the  tales  of 
Chaucer."  Grand  Amour  continues  his  journey,  and  becomes 
a  regular  Jack  the  Giant-killer.  His  first  adventure  was  with 
a  monster  twelve  feet  high,  with  three  heads.  These  he  decap- 
itated; and  is  then  attacked  by  a  second  and  more  formidable 
giant,  fifteen  feet  high,  with  seven  heads,  named,  Dissimula- 
tion, Delay,  Discomfort,  Variaunce,  Envy,  Detraction,  and 
Doublcness ;  all  these  he  cuts  off,  and  is  then  received  and 
entertained  by  seven  fine  ladies.  His  next  fierce  encounter  is 
with  demons.  Pallas  instructs  him  how  to  fight  with  them. 
He  attacks  and  slays  the  great  dragon — wins  La  Bell  Pucell, 
and  is  married  to  her,  and  enjoys  great  happiness,  until  he  is 
quietly  removed  by  death  to  purgatory,  where,  having  been 
purified,  he  goes  to  heaven. 


1  'Placarde;'  a  stomacher  or  breastplate,  frequently  orna- 
mented with  jewels. 

2  '  Larges ;'  a  bounty  bestowed,  a  large  gift.— Imp.  D>rf. 

3  '  Consuetude ;'  custom,  common  law  or  equity,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  statute  law  or  justice. 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


In  vain  have  I  endeavoured  to  discover  the 
intention  of  the  author  in  this  allegory.  His 
editor  says,  that  it  was  to  stimulate  young  men 
to  study  the  seven  liberal  sciences !  Its  natural 
effect  would  he  to  stimulate  them  to  licentiousness. 
These  were  the  class  of  hooks  given  to  the  people 
by  the  church,  in  preference  to  the  Bible. 

We  now  come  to  a  very  rare  pilgrimage,  written 
in  Italian,  and  entitled  Libro  del  Peregrino,  by 
J.  Cauice,  dedicated  to  Lucresse  Borgie. 

The  edition  in  my  library  is  'El  nouamente  stam- 
pato  et  hysloriato,  small  8vo,  with  woodcuts,  Venice, 
1524.'  I  have  also  a  translation  into  French, 
by  T.  Dassy,  Secretary  of  State  to  the  King  of 
Navarre  ;  it  is  called  Le  Peregrin :  traidant  de 
Llwnneste  et  pudique  amour,  par  pure  et  sincere 
Vertu.  It  is  elegantly  printed  in  black  letter,  with 
woodcuts,  small  4to,  Lyons,  1528,  and  from  it 
the  following  analysis  was  made : — 

The  pilgrim,  a  native  of  Ferrara,  at  the  age  of  twenty-two 
years  on  May-day,  attended  to  hear  a  Dominican  Friar  preach. 
Divine  love  lay  in  ambush,  and  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher 
pierced  his  heart.  He  passed  a  restless  night — speaks  in  silence, 
and  at  length  cries  out,  O  life  more  miserable  than  death  1  his 
thoughts  wound  him  and  he  is  wretched.  Under  the  character 
of  a  lady  named  Geneure,  the  daughter  of  Angiolo  (the  Virgin 
Mary,  queen  of  angels),  to  that  time  unknown  to  him,  is  per- 
sonated that  which  alone  can  cure  his  wounded  spirit.  This 
lady  is  very  wise  and  modest,  young,  but  ancient  in  prudence, 
and  very  difficult  to  obtain.  He  becomes  very  desirous  of 
obtaining  her,  and  his  pilgrimage  is  made  with  this  object. 
Through  the  aid  of  Geneure's  nurse,  Violante,  he  corresponded 
with  her,  and  sought  an  interview.  He  is  directed  to  a  sub- 
terraneous passage,  by  which  he  hopes  secretly  to  reach  her 
house  in  the  night;  but  mistakes  the  chamber,  and  enters  that 
of  another  young  lady,  named  Lyonore  (the  lioness),  the 
daughter  of  Petruccio  (the  thirty),  and  mistook  her  for 
Geneure.  This  sad  adventure  with  Lyonore  involves  him  in 
great  trouble.  It  came  to  the  knowledge  of  Geneure,  and  she 
weeps  for  her  pilgrim's  treason;  but  is  comforted  by  her 
mother  (the  blessed  Virgin),  who  tells  her  that  it  is  natural  to 
man  to  go  astray.  Geneure  threatens  to  enter  a  nunnery,  and 
submits  to  her  mother  that  the  vows  of  obedience  and  poverty 
are  of  sovereign  virtue.  The  pilgrim,  before  Geneure  entered 
upon  her  noviciate,  met  her  accidentally  at  church,  and  pro- 
poses marriage,  his  faults  are  forgiven,  they  become  united, 
and  pass  their  time  in  great  happiness,  until  death  separated 
them. 

If  Bunyan  had  been  able  to  have  read  this 
quaint  old  Italian  or  French  story,  he  would  never 
have  devoted  his  valuable  time  to  such  a  mass 
of  rubbish ;  and  if  he  had,  not  the  slightest  idea 
could  have  suggested  itself  to  have  assisted  him 
in  composing  the  adventures  of  his  Pilgrim.  In 
fact,  he  dared  not  to  have  spent  an  hour  over  a 
book,  which,  under  the  title  of  The  Pilgrim,  con- 
tains all  the  looseness  of  an  Italian  love-story. 

This  book  was  for  some  time  very  popular.  I 
have  two  Venice  editions,  in  8vo,  printed  in  italics, 


1524  and  1527.  I  have  seen  also  a  similar  edition 
not  dated,  and  one  of  1538.  There  is  also  a  very 
handsome  one  of  the  French  translation,  printed 
by  Gallist,  Du  Pres,  Paris,  1528,  and  another  in 
1540.  Niceron  thus  accounts  for  its  popularity, 
'  Ce  livre  faisait  en  France,  au  commencement  du 
regne  de  Frangois  I.,  les  delices  de  la  jeunesse,  et 
donnait  lieu  aux  predicateurs  d'on  blarner  forte- 
ment  la  lecture  comme  dangereuse." 

It  is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  those  who 
write  and  publish  for  the  millions,  too  frequently 
circulate  opinions  and  supposed  facts  without  per- 
sonal investigation.  Mr.  Chambers,  the  popular 
publisher  at  Edinburgh,  whose  works  find  readers 
as  far  as  the  English  language  is  known,  has 
joined  those  who  appear  to  detract  from  Bunyan, 
by  charging  him  with  plagiarism. 

In  his  Encyclopedia  of  Literature,'1  speaking  of  Gawin 
Douglas,  the  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  a  celebrated  Scottish  poet, 
he  observes,  '  The  principal  original  composition  of  Douglas 
is  a  long  poem,  entitled,  The  Palace  of  Honour.  It  was 
designed  as  an  epilogue  for  the  conduct  of  a  king,  and  there- 
fore addressed  to  James  IV.  The  poet  represents  himself  as 
seeing,  in  a  vision,  a  large  company  travelling  towards  the 
Palace  of  Honour.  He  joins  them,  and  narrates  the  particulars 
of  the  pilgrimage.  The  well-known  "  Pilgrim's  Progress"  bears 
so  strong  a  resemblance  to  this  poem,  that  Bunyan  could 
scarcely  have  been  ignorant  of  it.' 

With  some  trouble  I  found  a  copy  of  this  very 
rare  tract  by  Douglas.  It  is  a  slwrt  poem,  but 
being  in  the  ancient  Scottish  dialect,  it  is  quite 
long  enough  to  weary  an  Englishman's  patience. 
Had  it  been  Douglas's  long  poem,  a  translation  of 
Virgil,  it  would  have  defied  any  attempt  of  mine 
to  read  it ;  but,  by  the  aid  of  a  good  modern  glos- 
sary, I  read  it  through,  and,  to  my  extreme  sur- 
prise, found  that  it  has  not,  either  in  the  plot  or 
detail,  the  slightest  similarity  whatever  to  the 
'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  and  that  it  is  written  in 
terms  that  a  poor  unlettered  minister  could  not 
have  understood. 

The  principal  character  in  the  story  is  represented  as  being 
in  a  desert,  when,  hearing  the  noise  of  an  approaching  caval- 
cade, he  gets  into  a  stock  [a  hollow  tree],  and  sees  them  pass. 
He  then  follows  them  to  the  Palace  of  Honour,  and  gives  a 
description  of  what  took  place.  Had  Bunyan  seen  and  read 
the  following  stanza,  and  understood  it,  how  indignant  would 
he  have  felt  at  the  author's  notion  of  baptismal  regeneration: — 


'  Ze  bene  all  borne  the  sonnis  of  Ire  I  ges 
Sine  throw  Baptisme  gettis  grace  and  faithfulnes. 
Than  in  zone  Carwell  surelie  ze  remane, 
Oft  stormested  with  this  warldis  brukilnes 
Q.nhill  that  ze  fall  in  sin  and  wretchitness 
Than  schip  brokin  sail  ze  drown  in  endles  pane 
Except  be  faith  ze  find  the  plank  agane 
Be  Christ,  wirkiug  gude  warkis  I  vnderstund 
Remaine  thairwith,  thir  sail  zow  bring  to  laud.'8 


1  Hist,  des  Hotnmes  illustres,  44  torn.     Paris,  1] 

2  Vol.  i.  p.  44.  8  Ibid. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


39 


Surely  Mr.  Chambers  could  not  have  imagined  that  the 
representation  of  a  large  party  going  up  a  hill  of  polished 
warble,  and  on  the  summit  seeing  the  infernal  regions  as  nar- 
rated in  the  following  verses,  coidd  have  aided  Banyan  in  his 
solemn  account  of  the  Christian's  feeling  in  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death  \ — 

'  As  we  approchit  neir  the  hillcs  In  id 
Ane  terribill  sewch  birnand  in  flammis  reid 
Abhominabill,  and  how  as  hell  to  se 
All  full  of  briutstane,  Pick  and  bulling  Leid, 
Quhair  mony  wretchit  creature  lay  deid. 
And  miserabill  catiucs  zelland  loude  on  hie 
I  saw,  quhilk  den  micht  wcill  compairit  be 
Till  Xanthus  the  flude  of  Troy  sa  schill 
Birnand  at  Venus  best  contrair  Achill. 

Amid  our  passage  lay  this  viglie  sicht 
Nocht  braid  bot  sa  horribill  to  cuerie  wicht 
That  all  the  warld  to  pas  it  sidd  hauc  dreid. 
"Weill  I  considderit  na  vppennair  I  micht 
And  to  discend  sa  hiddeous  was  the  hieht 
I  durst  not  aueuture  for  this  eird  on  dreid. 
Trimbland  I  stude  wt  teith  chatterand  gude  spcid 
My  Nymphe  beheld  my  cheir  and  said  let  be 
Thow  sail  nocht  aill,  and  lo  the  caus  (quod  sche) 
To  me  thou  art  commit,  &c.' 
There  may  be  as  much  poetic  beauty  in  these  lines  as  there 
is  melody  in  the  drone  of  the  bagpipe,  but  there  is  not  the 
slightest  similarity,  nor  even  any  idea  in  the  whole  poem,  that 
could  by  possibility  have  aided  the  author  of  the  '  Pilgrim's 
Progress.' 

The  Pryke  of  Conscience} 
A  very  curious  old  English  poem ;  it  is  theological  and 
descriptive,  but  not  allegorical. 

TIte  Myrrour  of  Lyfe,  by  William  of  Nassyno-ton, 
1418.2 
An  ancient  English  poetical  treatise  on  religion ;  excepting 
the  title,  it  has  no  pretence  to  allegory. 

CasteUum  Amoris.     Le  Chateau  D' 'Amour,  by 
Robert  Grosteste. 

A  fine  copy  of  this  curious  poem,  in  Norman  French,  is  in 
the  British  Museum.3  It  narrates  the  creation  and  fall  of 
man  j  the  four  daughters  of  God,  Mercy,  Truth,  Patience,  and 
Peace,  unite  to  devise  the  means  of  man's  restoration.  The 
divisions  are — I.  The  Prophets  predict.  II.  The  Saviour  is 
born  in  the  great  Palace  of  Love.  III.  The  Palace  is  described 
with  its  keepers.  IV.  Satan  attempts  to  overcome  the  keepers. 
It  is  a  very  curious  poem,  and  is  called  at  the  end,  Scala  Cceli. 
I  venture  to  give  a  specimen  of  this  singular  composition,  and 
have  selected  the  following,  because  it  treats  upon  the  subject 
of  baptismal  regeneration,  which  at  present  occupies  so  much 
of  the  public  attention.  The  author  was  evidently  of  that 
party  who  pretend  to  believe  that  the  God  of  love  will  send  a 
poor  babe  to  everlasting  misery,  if  its  parents  neglect  or 
refuse  to  have  it  christened ! !  As  the  French  is  old  aud 
contracted,  a  translation  is  added : — 
'  O  baptize  treslour  fussent  '  They  were  then  baptized 
Et  nomi  Deu  pater  et  In  the  names  of  God  the  Father 
Deo  fiz.  and  of  the  Son 

1  Brit.  Mus.  Bib  E-ert.  846.    B. 

2  Brit.  Mus.  Eg.  657. 

3  Brit.  Mus.  Roy.  Lib.  17,  c.  viii. 


Et  du  saynt  espiritz  And  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

Kar  qi  baptize  ne  scrra  For  whoever  is  not  baptized 

Ca  en  eel  ne  entera  lie  in  heaven  dial]  not  enter 

Mcs  ci  crcaut  cy  baptize  But  those  created  in  tine  baptism 

Serront  mys  a  sauuetc.'  Shall  be  put  into  salvation.' 

Scala  Perfeccionis  Englyshed.     The  Ladder  of  Per- 
fection, written  by  Walter  Hilton,  about  1380. 

This  was  one  of  the  most  popular  of  the  monkish 
writings,  and  so  much  esteemed  in  the  reign  of 
James  II.,  as  to  have  been  published  by  the  court 
to  promote  the  influence  of  popery  in  these  realms; 
it  was  then  very  much  altered,  and  not  improved. 

The  only  allegory  in  it  is  the  Ladder,  placed  upon  the  earth 
to  ascend  by  steps  to  heaven.  It  was  intended  for  monks  and 
nuns,  to  guide  them  in  devotional  exercises,  so  that  their  affec- 
tions might  be  gradually  raised  from  earthly  things.  It  is  the 
most  scriptural  of  all  the  monkish  manuscripts,  but  the  evan- 
gelical truths  are  omitted  in  the  more  modern  printed  editions. 
Thus  he  says,  if  we  were  only  infected  by  original  sin,  and  had 
escaped  the  pollution  of  actual  transgression,  we  must  have  per- 
ished but  for  the  sufferings  of  Christ.4  To  speak  for  thy  profit 
and  my  own,  '  say  I  thus  that  thou  neuer  so  moche  a  wreche, 
hadest  thou  done  neuer  so  moche  syn,  for  sake  thi  self  and  al 
thi  werkes  gode  and  bad,  cry  mercy  and  aske  oneli  saluacion  be 
vertue  of  the  precious  passion  mekeli  and  trusteli  and  with 
outyen  doute  thou  schalt  haue  it,  and  fro  this  original  syn  and 
al  other  that  thou  have  done  thou  sal  be  saf.'  4  Dr.  Dibdin 
considers  this  a  wild  and  dangerous  exposition  of  the  consoling' 
doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion  made  by  an  enthusiastic 
writer  1 5  Hilton  gives  a  faithful  warning  against  placing 
dependence  upon  happy  feelings,  unless  they  arise  from  a  living 
faith.  '  I  had  rather  feel,  and  have  a  stedfast  desire  and  a  pure 
spiritual  union  with  my  Lord  Jesus,  though  I  cannot  see  him 
with  my  ghostly  eye,  than  to  have  without  this  desire  the 
fruit  of  all  the  bodily  penance  of  all  living  men,  or  all  the 
visions  and  revelations  of  angels'  songs  and  sounds.'  '  Jesus 
leadeth  the  soul  into  itself.  The  secret  voice  of  Jesus  is  fully 
true,  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they 
know  me."  There  is  no  feigning  iu  it,  nor  fantasy,  nor  pride, 
nor  hypocrisy;  but  softness,  meekness,  peace,  love,  and  charity. 
And  it  is  full  of  life,  love,  and  grace  ;  and,  therefore,  when  it 
soundeth  in  the  soul,  it  is  sometime  of  so  great  might,  that  the 
soul  suddenly  layeth  off  hand  all  that  there  is,  praying,  speak- 
ing, reading,  or  thinking,  and  all  manner  of  bodily  work,  and 
listeneth  thereto,  fully  hearing  and  perceiving,  in  rest  and  in 
love,  the  sweet  steuen8  of  this  spiritual  voice,  as  it  were  rav- 
ished from  the  mind  of  all  earthly  things.  Sometimes  Jesus 
showeth  himself  as  a  master,  sometimes  as  a  father,  and  some- 
times as  a  lovely  spouse  ;  and  it  kcepeth  the  soul  in  a  wonder- 
ing reverence,  and  a  lovely  beholding  of  him,  that  the  soul 
liketh  never  so  well  as  then.' 7 

It  is  delightful  to  meet  with  such  beams  of  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  in  a  dark  age,  like  the  day- 
spring  from  on  high,  breaking  through  a  dismal 
night  with  its  cheering  rays.8 

4  Copied  from  a  fine  and  perfect  MS.  in  the  Editor's  lib- 
rary, chap.  xliv. 

■  Typographical  Antiquities,  vol.  ii.  p.  37. 
c  Melody,  from  '  streuen,'  or  strain. 

7  Cap.  xliv.  part  2.  . 

8  It  is  very  surprising  that  so  little  appears  to  be  known  «r 
this  good  man ;  he  was  a  Carthusian  monk  of  Sion,  or  Skene, 
and  author  of  about  twelve  different  works. 


40 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Tlie  Pilgrimage  of  Perfection ;  supposed  to  be  writ- 
ten by  William  Bond.  4to,  printed  by  Pynson, 
1526. 

A  fine  copy  of  tins  rare  book  is  in  the  extensive 
and  valuable  library  of  my  kind  friend,  the  Rev. 
J.  H.  M.  Luxmoore,  rector  of  Marcweil,  near  Wrex- 
ham, by  whose  permission  the  following  analysis 
was  made: — 

This  work  is  more  particularly  intended  for  the  monastic 
orders,  to  promote  what,  in  those  days,  were  called  pious  feel- 
ings ;  hy  which  it  was  intended  to  treat  the  gifts  of  providence, 
the  comforts,  and  even  necessaries  of  life,  with  contempt ;  to 
abstain  from  reasonable  enjoyments;  to  retire  into  solitudes 
where  no  relative  duties  could  be  performed ;  lacerating  the 
body;  submitting  the  soul,  with  blind  obedience,  to  the  will 
of  men ;  a  looking  forward  with  dread  to  the  future ;  con- 
templating the  God  of  love,  not  as  the  forgiver,  but  as  the 
avenger  of  sin;  and  to  which  may  be  added,  that  climax  of 
pride,  fanaticism,  and  folly,  in  which  Jews,  Mahometans,  and 
all  antichrist  glory — that  there  is  no  salvation  out  of  the  pale 
of  their  own  sect. 

The  volume  commences  with  the  tree  of  grace  and  the  tree 
of  vice ;  under  the  branch  of  avarice,  a  nun  is  told  to  Xotc 
r>t  a  pin  or  a  nrtiell  kept  contravn  to  nc  commaunticmcnt 
of  tljrir  soucraine  it  is  tiampnafalc. 

It  is  divided  into  two  parts  :  first,  '  sheweth  howe  the  lyfe 
of  euery  cristian  is  as  a  pilgremage :  second,  the  iourney  of 
religion — man  is  never  contented  in  the  cage  of  this  world ; 
wherfore  it  appcreth  that  ther  is  an  hyer  cage  and  another 
place  for  his  full  contentation.' — '  As  the  iewes  spoyled  Egipt 
of  their  richesse,  so  the  christians  have  spoyled  both  iewes  and 
philosophers  of  the  noble  veritces  of  philosophy ;' 

'  In  heuen  euery  man  and  woman  shalbe  as  an  emperonr  and 
empresse.' 

The  journey  begins  with  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  pro- 
fessing by  it  to  be  pilgrims;  openly  forsaking  the  devil, 
pomps,  mortal  sins,  honours,  riches,  and  pleasures ;  for  daily 
sustenance,  is  given  the  blessed  body  of  our  Lord  in  the  sacra- 
ment, by  which  these  pilgrims  are  raised  above  nature  to 
immortal  glory.  Jn.  vi.  53  is  thus  translated  : — '  Except  ye 
eat  the  flesh  of  the  son  of  the  virgin,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye 
cannot  have  life  in  you ;'  but  it  is  silent  as  to  the  cup  being 
denied  to  the  laity.  1  Pe.  ii.  2,  3, is  thus  translated: — 'As 
infants  and  young  children :  whom  our  mother,  holy  church, 
hath  brought  forth,  by  the  regeneration  of  baptism  in  the  faith 
of  Christ  Jesus.' 

Then  follow  very  extensive  instructions  to  the  pilgrims, 
without  any  attempt  at  allegory.     Many  portions  of  Scripture 
are  given,  but  they  are  strangely  translated.      The  Lord's 
prayer : — '  0  father  in  heuen  dclyuer  vs  fro  all  euyll  of  peyne 
and  synne.     Suffre  vs  nat  to  be  ouerthrowen  in  temptacion. 
Forgyue  vs  our  offences  as  we  forgyue  them  that  hath  offended 
vs.     Gyue  vs  our  dayly  sustenaunce  and  necessaryes.     Thy 
wyll  be  fulfylled  in  erthe,  as  it  is  in  heuen.     Thy  kyngdome  , 
come  to  vs.     Thy  holy  name  be  santifyed.'     1  Co.  hi.  13 : —  j 
'  But  yet  (as  saynt  Poule  sayth)  the  fyer  of  purgatory  must 
proue  his  workes.'      When  suffering  pain  from  fasting,   he  \ 
adviseth  that  such  pain  be  allayed  by  using  these  words : —  | 
'  Ah,  caryon  carion  and  wormes  meate :  what  vauntage  shalte 
thou  haue,  ever  to  stuffe  and  fyll  the  greedy  gutte  of  thy  bely 
with    delicate  meetes   and  drinkes  which    damn  the  soule.' 
Praying  to  our  blessed  Lady  and  to  the  saints  is  ordered, 
because  Job  was  commanded  to  '  call  to  some  of  the  sayntes 
of  heuen,  and  they  wil  answere,'  Job  v.  1.     In  the  ten  com-  | 


mandments,  the  second  is  omitted,  and  the  tenth  is  divided 
into  two,  to  make  up  the  number.  The  Virgin  Mary  can 
obtain  blessings  for  us,  because  '  The  mother  of  God,  sheweth 
to  her  son  her  pappes  and  brestes,  with  the  which  she  gaue 
hyni  sucke ! !  therefore  make  supplication  to  her,  to  have  mercy 
on  tin's  present  churche  militant,  releue,  socoure,  and  helpe 
it.'  The  heavenly  anthem  is  translated : — '  Glory  be  to  god 
in  heuyn,  and  peace  in  erthe  to  man  or  woman,  that  hath°  a 
good  wyll,'  Lu.  ii.  11.  The  pilgrimage  is  divided  into  seveu 
days,  and  on  the  seventh  the  soid  approaches  to  perfection  ; 
and  here  the  feelings  or  experience  of  the  pilgrims  strongly 
remind  lis  of  some  modern  sects,  such  as  the  Irvingites — 
'  Some  in  this  vnwont  ioye  haue  been  compelled  to  syng,  some 
to  wepe,  some  coude  uothiuge  speke ;  but  Jesu,  Jesu,  Jesu. 
Some  coude  nat  saye  so  moche,  but  onely  expresse  suche 
voyces,  that  be  nat  in  use  to  siynifye  any  thyny :  one  Mas- 
seus  in  such  ioye  coude  speke  nothing  but  v  v  v.'  With  the 
Quakers,  '  Some  other  in  such  jubile,  trymbled  or  quaked  in 
all  the  ioyntes  of  their  bodyes.'  Like  the  Ranters,  '  Some 
were  constrayned  to  leape  and  daunce  for  ioye,  and  some  to 
clappe  their  handes.'  Some  have  arrived  at  so  high  a  state 
of  mortification,  that  if  asked  '  whether  they  coude  be  con- 
tented, for  the  love  and  pleasure  of  god,  and  to  fulfyll  his  wyll, 
to  lye  for  euermore  in  the  paynes  of  hell,  without  remedy, 
they  wolde  answere :  ye  with  all  their  hertes.'  In  such  a 
state  was  St.  Bernard,  who  was  ravished  before  the  cross  when 
the  body  '  losed  itsclfe  from  the  crosse,  and  halsed l  and  kyssed 
hym  most  swetely ;'  the  holy  Brigit  was  lifted  up  in  the  aire, 
and  her  face  was  made  to  shync  brighter  than  the  sonne  ! ! ! 

The  reader  need  not  be  told  that  Bunyan  could 
have  had  no  help  from  this  impure  source. 

Tlie  Pyj)e,  or  Tonne  of  the  lyfe  of  perfection.  4to, 
1532. 
This  is  an  allegorical  work  for  the  instruction  of  nuns, 
written  by  the  old  wretch  of  Sion ; 2  and  although  it  is  not 
a  pilgrimage  or  a  dream,  it  is  a  guide  to  female  pilgrims. 
Under  the  idea  of  wine  being  kept  in  a  pipe  or  tun,  is  repre- 
sented:— 1.  The  life  of  perfection,  as  the  wine;  2.  Religion, 
the  pipe;  3.  Essential  vows,  obedience,  wilful  poverty,  and 
chastity,  the  siavts;  4.  Holy  rules,  the  hoops;  5.  Ceremonies, 
the  icickers,  by  which  the  hoops  are  made  fast.  If  these 
wickers  fail,  the  hoops  open,  the  cask  falls  to  pieces,  and  the 
wine  is  lost ;  all  depends  upon  the  ceremonies.  This  curious 
book  was  published  to  prevent  the  spread  of  heresy  '  by  newe 
tangle  persones,'  aided  by  the  New  Testament,  which  had  then 
been  about  six  years  in  circulation  in  England  ;  for  '  Luther, 
with  all  his  discyples,  depraue  all  maner  of  religyons,  except 
onely  (as  they  call  hit)  the  religyon  of  Christe.  Wherefore  I 
thought  it  necessary  to  answer  the  perilous  poison  of  such 
blaterers.'  The  work  is  divided  into  three  parts :  '  Of  Obedi- 
ence,' '  Wylfull  Poucrtie,'  and  '  Chastite ;'  being  the  three 
"reat  vows  made  by  the  nuns  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  1.  Of 
Obedience.  Without  implicit  obedience,  there  is  not  the 
slightest  hope  of  salvation.  This  related,  not  only  to  the 
obedience  due  by  nuns  to  the  pope,  the  priest,  and  the  abbess, 
but  also  to  the  obedience  due  by  a  wife  to  her  husband.  If 
married  ladies  acted  in  the  same  spirit  then  as  they  do  now, 
might  not  the  sorrowful  inquiry  have  been  made,  '  Lord,  are 
there  [even  a]  few  that  be  saved  ?'  '  Kynges  as  sone  as  they 
were  conuerted  and  baptized,  left  their  dyademes  and  were 

1  '  Halsed  ;'  bowed  the  head,  embraced,  saluted. 

2  Richard  Whytforde,  a  monk  in  the  monastery  of  Syon, 
near  Richmond,  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


41 


subiects  unto  the  clergie,  and  under  theyr  obedience,'  a  pecu- 
liar kind  of  antinomianism  reigned  in  the  church ;  '  I  say, 
that  no  temporall  lawe  maye  bynde  any  spirituall  persone. 
This  have  we  said  vnto  Tyndale  that  arche  heretike.'  Some 
of  the  rules  and  examples  show  that  nuns  were  sad  women, 
who  could  '  braule  and  chide ;  eat  and  drynke  to  excess ' — 
'  they  be  in  right  great  jeoperty  of  nawfrage 1  and  wracke  of 
chastite.'  Obedience  in  ecclesiastical  payments  is  enforced  by 
a  very  odd  translation  of  Nu.  xviii.  22 : — *  Those  persones 
that  wolde  nat  be  obedient  duely  to  pay  theyr  tythes,  were 
judged  by  our  Lord  vnto  deth;'  and  whether  God,  or  the 
vicar  of  God,  gave  any  manner  of  commandment,  it  is  all  one, 
and  by  like  reverence  to  be  performed ;  '  our  lorde  god,  in 
maner  makyng  the  prelates  and  souereynes  equall  with  hym- 
selfe.'  The  extent  of  obedience  is  thus  illustrated: — 'that 
man  that  in  obedience  to  his  souereyne  dyd  caste  his  owne 
chylde  quicke  into  a  hole  flamynge  ouen  has  now  laude,  prayse, 
thanke,  and  grace,  because  he  was  obedient  as  he  would  have 
had  indignation  of  god  and  vengeaunce  if  he  had  not  obeyed.' 
2.  Of  Wylfull  Pouertie.  This  vow  was  so  strict  that  no  monk 
or  nun  was  to  consider  their  clothes  their  own,  but  the  property 
of  the  establishment ;  and,  to  terrify  the  poor  votaries,  a  story 
is  told,  fol.  cc,  of  a  monk  that  did  appear  after  his  death  to 
one  of  his  companions,  showing  that  he  was  in  marvellous  great 
pains,  'for  bycause  he  gaue  a  payre  of  olde  showes  vnto  a  pore 
body  without  leaue.'  All  the  efforts  and  threats  to  prevent 
the  monks  from  getting  money  was  in  vain ;  and  our  unhappy 
author  laments  that  there  are  few  monasteries  in  England  but 
where  the  monks  lend  and  boiTow ;  play  for  money  at  all 
manner  of  games ;  dice,  cards,  bowls,  aud  sometimes  at  worse 
or  more  inconvenient  things ;  while  the  nuns  enjoy  their  gains, 
make  good  cheer,  sing  and  laugh,  play  and  sport,  and  be  as 
merry  as  lay  people.  We  close  our  account  of  this  singular 
volume  by  extracting  a  curious  version  of  Ps.  cxxxvii.  9 : — 
'  Blessed  be  that  person  that  doth  hold  and  restrain  his  chil- 
dren, and  that  doth  thrust  and  crush  their  head  unto  the 
stone,  that  is  unto  Christ  and  his  passion  and  death.' 


No  one  can  for  a  moment  suppose  that  Bunyan 
could  have  gained  a  hint  from  this  volume. 

Viaggio  Spirituale,  vel  quale,  fac&ndosi  passaggio 
da  questa  vita  mortale,  si  ascende  alia  celeste. 
Del  R.  P.  Cornelio  Bellanda,  di  Verona,  4to, 
with  the  Aldine  mark.     Venetia,  1578. 

This  spiritual  pilgrimage,  from  mortal  life  to  the  celestial, 
has  nothing  in  it  allegorical,  but  in  ten  chapters  treats  of 
penance,  confession,  the  judgment,  heavenly  blessedness,  &c. 
It  is  a  very  rare  volume,  elegantly  printed  by  Aldus,  jun.2 

The  Vision  of  Pierce  Plowman. 
*  I  am  inclined  to  think,'  says  Mr.  D 'Israeli,  in 
his  Amenities  of  Literature,  '  that  we  owe  to  Piers 
Ploughman,  an  allegorical  work  of  the  same  wild 
invention  from  that  other  creative  mind,  the  author 
of  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  How  can  we  think  of 
the  one,  without  heing  reminded  of  the  other  ? 
Some  distant  relationship  seems  to  exist  between 
the  Ploughman's  Doxoell  and  Dobet,  and  Dobest, 
Friar  Flatterer,  Grace,  the  Portress  of  the  magnifi- 


1  'Naufrage;'  shipwreck. 

2  In  the  Editor's  library.     See  Renonard  Annates,  de  Vlm- 
frimarie  des  Aide,  vol.  i.  p.  397. 

VOL.  III. 


cent  Tower  of  Truth,  viewed  at  a  distance,  and  by 
its  side  the  dungeon  of  Care,  Natural  Understand- 
ing, and  his  lean  and  stern  wife  Study,  and  all  the 
rest  of  this  numerous  company,  and  the  shadowy 
pilgrimage   of  the  "Immortal   Dreamer"  to  the 
"  Celestial  City."     Yet  I  would  mistrust  my  own 
feeling,  when  so  many  able  critics,  in  their  various 
researches  after  a  prototype  of  that  singular  pro- 
duction, have  hitherto  not  suggested  what  seems 
to  me  obvious.'     Such  a  notice  by  so  popular  a 
writer,  led  me  very  closely  to  examine  this  severe 
satire.     It  is  written  in  language  that  to  Bunyan 
would  have  been  almost  as  impenetrable  as  Hebrew 
or  Greek.     It  is  a  very  curious  poem,  composed 
about  the  time  of  Wicliff,  by  one  of  the. Lollards, 
said  to  be  by  Robert   Langland.     In   a  poetical 
vision  or  dream,  he  exposes  and  reproves  vice,  and 
extols  Christian  virtue.     'The  printer  [R.  Crowley, 
1550]  states,  that  it  was  written  in  the  time  of 
Edward   III.,  when  it  pleased  God  to  open  the 
eyes  of  many  to  see  his  truth,  giving  them  bold- 
ness of  heart  to  open  their  mouths,  and  cry  out 
against  the  works  of  darkness.  This  writer  feigneth 
himself  in  dreams  most  Christianly  to  instruct  the 
weak,  and  sharply  rebuke  the  obstinate  blind.     He 
godlily,  learnedly,  and  wittily  rebuked  vice  in  all 
classes.'    There  is  nothing  in  this  very  interesting 
book  that  could,  in  the  slightest  degree,  have  aided 
Bunyan,  if  he  had  been  able  to  read  it.     It  presents 
a  melancholy  picture  of  the  state  of  the  clergy,  and 
of  society  generally,  at  that  time  ;  and,  according 
to  his  account,  pilgrims  were  very  sad  story-tellers. 

'  Pilgrames  and  Palmers  plyght  hem  togyther 
For  to  seke  S.  James  and  sayntes  at  Rome 
They  went  forth  theyr  way,  wyth  many  wyse  tales, 
And  had  leaue  to  lye  all  hyr  lyfe  after.' 

The  hermits  appear  to  have  had  a  still  worse  propensity— 

'  Hermets  on  a  heape  wyth  hoked  staues 
Wenten  to  Walsingham,  and  her  wenches  after.' 

Mr.  D' Israeli  must  have  been  dreaming  when  he 
imagined  the  slightest  resemblance  between  Piers 
Plowman's  Vision  and  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress,' 
either  in  the  plan,  or  in  any  of  the  details  of  this 
curious  poem. 

Chaucer's  Canterbury  Talcs 

Were  told  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  Thomas-a-Bccket ; 
and  it  is  evident  that  these  pretended  holy  journeys  were  full 
of  vice  and  profligacy. 

Erasmus,  On  tlie  Religious  Pilgrimages. 
The  very  droll  colloquy  of  Erasmus,  called  the  Peliginus 
Pilgrimage,  is  preceded  by  an  account  of  a  shipwreck,  when 
all  the  passengers  and  crew  are  calling  each  on  his  patron 
saint,  promising  pilgrimages  and  offerings.  Among  them— 
'  one  vowed  to  St.  Christopher,  in  the  great  church  at  Pans, 
"  as  loud  as  he  could  bawl,"  that  he  might  be  sure  to  be  heard, 
a  wax  candle,  as  big  as  himself,  and  he  was  rather  a  mountain 


42 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


than  a  statue :  a  friend  gave  him  a  touch.  Have  a  care  what 
you  promise,  says  he,  for  if  you  should  sell  yourself  to  your 
shirt,  you  are  not  able  to  purchase  such  a  candle.  Hold 
your  tongue,  you  fool,  says  t'other,  softly,  for  fear  the  saint 
should  hear  him ;  let  me  set  foot  a  land  once,  and  he  has  good 
luck  if  he  get  so  much  as  a  tallow  candle  of  me ! !'  This  pil- 
grimage has  a  long  letter  from  the  Virgin  Mary,  written  by 
one  of  her  secretaries,  in  droll  terms,  complaining  that  it  is  of 
no  use  that  hundreds  should  pray  to  her  at  once,  for  she  could 
only  hear  one  at  a  time,  and  had  no  power  to  assist  her  wor- 
shippers. 

No  one  can  suppose  that  Bunyan  gained  any 
hint  from  such  satirical  works  as  these. 


Spenser's  Faery  Queen. 

To  this  work  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  considered  Bun- 
yan to  have  heen  indebted  for  some  ideas  in  his 
'Pilgrim,'  or  'Holy  War.'  It  must  require  no 
ordinary  degree  of  penetration  to  discover  that 
which  is,  to  many,  perfectly  concealed. 

This  is  a  very  long  but  elegant  allegorical  poem,  composed 
of  seven  legends :  1.  The  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  or  Holi- 
ness. This  gallant  knight,  properly  caparisoned  and  accoutred, 
rides  forth  with  Truth,  represented  as  a  fair  lady;  his  first 
adventure  is  with  a  monstrous  dragon  called  Error,  who  is 
slain.  They  take  refuge  in  the  cell  of  an  aged  sire,  who  acted 
the  part  of  a  holy  hermit,  but  proved  to  be  a  most  unholy 
enchanter ;  he  calls  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep,  and  transforms 
them  into  a  gallant  knight  and  a  beautiful  woman.  He  kindles 
a  flame  of  jealousy  in  the  breast  of  the  red  cross  knight,  so 
that  he  abruptly  quits  his  fair  companion,  and  in  his  journey 
meets  with  a  knight  called  '  Sans  Foy  ;'  they  fight,  and  Sans 
Toy  is  killed,  and  a  lovely  lady,  his  companion,  is  taken  cap- 
tive ;  she  proves  to  be  '  Falsehood.'  He  is  taken  prisoner  by 
the  contrivance  of  Falsehood,  and  is  thrown  into  a  dungeon  in 
the  castle  of  Giant  Orgoglio,  where  he  lies  in  despair  for  three 
months.  Truth  iuduces  Prince  Arthur  to  attack  the  Giant, 
whose  body  disappears  when  he  is  slain  after  a  fearful  combat; 
he  relieves  the  red  cross  knight  from  a  cell  — 

'  Where  cntred  in,  his  feet  could  find  no  floor, 
But  all  a  deep  descent,  as  dark  as  hell, 
That  breathed  ever  forth  a  filthy  bauefull  smell.' 

He  is  then  led  to  a  house  of  holiness,  and  is  taught  repentance. 
Our  knight  then  seeks  and  fights  the  old  dragon  fiend  for 
three  successive  days,  and  kills  him.  He  visits  the  infernal 
realms ;  sees  what  the  classic  poets  have  described ;  meets 
again  with  his  lady  Truth,  and  his  adventures  close  with  their 
marriage.  The  next  legend  is  that  of  Temperance  narrating 
the  exploits  of  Sir  Guyon.  He  attacks  and  overcomes  Furor, 
Incontinence,  and  Mammon.  He  recounts  from  a  friar's  book 
*  a  chronicle  of  Briton's  Kings.'  His  startling  description  of 
our  forefathers  is  a  good  specimen  of  his  versification  and 
stanzas : — 

'  But  far  in  land  a  salvage  nation  dwelt 
Of  hideous  giaunts,  and  halfe-beastly  men, 
That  never  tasted  grace,  nor  goodness  felt ; 
But  wild  like  beastes  lurking  in  loathsome  den, 
And  flying  fast  as  roebueke  through  the  fen  ; 
All  naked  without  shame  or  care  of  cold, 
By  hunting  and  by  spoiling  liveden  ; 
Of  stature  huge,  aud  eke  of  corage  bold, 
That  sonues  of  men  amazed  their  stcruess  to  behold.' 


Temperance  is  besieged,  but  relieved  by  Prince  Arthur.  Then 
follows  the  legends  of  Britomartis,  or  Chastity:  all  the  chapters 
are  headed  with  poetical  contents  ;  as — 

'  The  witches  sonue  loves  Florimell, 
She  flyes ;  he  faines  to  dy. 
Satyrene  saves  the  squyre  of  Dames 
From  Gyauntes  tyranny.' 

The  other  legends  are  of  friendship,  justice,  courtesy,  con- 
stancy, aud  mutability.  The  first  legend  of  Holiness  is  the 
only  one  that  bears  the  slightest  resemblance  to  any  part  of 
the  '  Pilgrim '  or  '  Holy  War.'  In  this  we  have  a  battle  with 
the  old  dragon  fiend,  a  descent  into  hell,  and  being  a  prisoner 
in  a  giant's  castle.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  Bunyan  could 
have  found  time,  even  had  lie  the  inclination,  to  have  read  the 
Faery  Queen.  His  poetry  is  from  the  school  of  Francis 
Quarks,  and  not  of  Spenser.  The  knightly  hero  seeks  the  old 
dragon  fiend  ;  the  pilgrim  is  sought  by  Apollyon.  Apostolic 
injunctions  would  naturally  lead  our  allegorist  Bunyan  to  por- 
tray the  dreadful  combat.  '  The  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion, 
walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,'  whom  resist. 
Clothed  in  the  armour  described  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephc- 
sians,  and  wielding  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  his  final  success 
was  certain — '  resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you.'  Such 
texts,  with  his  own  experience  of  the  saint's  conflict  with  the 
powers  of  darkness,  naturally  suggested  the  fight  with  Apollyon, 
without  the  aid  of  any  uninspired  author. 

All  Spenser's  imagery  of  the  Infernal  Regions 
is  taken  from  Ovid,  Virgil,  and  Dante.  But  the 
pilgrims'  fears,  while  passing  through  the  Valley 
of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  depict  the  author's  per- 
sonal feelings,  and  the  experience  of  David.  '  The 
sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and  the  pains  of 
hell  gat  hold  upon  me :  I  found  trouble  and  sorrow.' 
Ps.  cxvi.  3.  The  strong  language  of  Job  fch.  xv.),  'A 
dreadful  sound  is  in  his  ears ;  he  believeth  not  that 
he  shall  return  out  of  darkness;'  and  the  emotions 
of  the  psalmist,  '  an  horrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay,' 
led  to  an  intensity  of  feeling,  under  doubts  and 
fears,  which  knightly  poetry,  however  elegant,  could 
never  have  engendered.  Spenser  was  a  philoso- 
pher well  acquainted  with  heathen  literature,  from 
which  his  images  are  drawn.  While  Bunyan,  shut 
out  of  the  enticing  treasures  of  human  learning, 
possessed  in  that  Inspired  Volume,  which  was  his 
daily  solace  under  severe  privations,  the  most  noble 
model  for  his  allegorical  imagery,  he  neither  wanted, 
nor  could  he  have  gained,  the  slightest  hint  from 
Spenser. 


Le  Voyage  du  Chevalier  Errant.  Par.  F.  J.  do 
Cartheny.  Written  about  the  year  1311. 
8vo,  Anvers,  1557.  Published  in  English 
under  the  title  of  The  Voyage  of  the  Wander- 
ing Knight.  Showing  the  whole  course  of 
Man's  Life;,  how  apt  he  is  to  follow  Vanity, 
and  how  hard  it  is  for  him  to  attain  to  Vir- 
tue. Devised  by  John  Cartheny,  a  Frenchman ; 
and  Translated  out  of  French  into  English 
by  W[illiam]   G[oodyeare]  of   Southampton, 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE    EDITOR. 


43 


Merchant ;  a  work  worthy  the  reading,  and 
dedicated  to  Sir.  P.  Drake,  Knt.  London, 
Printed  by  Thos.  Snodham,  4to.  No  date,  but 
about  1611.     {See  Herbert,  p.  1022.) 

The  knight  determines  to  seek  the  palace  of  true  felicity, 
find  first  tries  riches,  pleasure,  and  honours  j  hut  he  adds,  '1 

Vras  as  very  a  fool   in   this   as   he  who  hoped  to  catch  fish   by 

angling  in  the  air,  or  hunt  the  hare  with  hounds  in  the  open 
sea.'  Under  the  guidance  of  Fully,  he  obtained  from  an 
armorer  named  Evil-will,  a  shirt  of  lasciviousness,  a  doublet 
lit'  lewd  desires,  hosen  '  of  vain  pleasures,  armour  of  ignorance, 
a  corslet  of  inconstancy,  vamhraces '-'  of  arrogancy,  gauntlets  of 

a  gorgel  of  licentiousness,  a  helmet  of  lightness,  a 
buckler  of  shainelessness,  a  gilt-cap  of  vain-glory,  a  girdle  of 
intemperance,  a  Bword  of  rebellion,  and  a  lance,  named  Hope 
of  Long-life.  '  Then  Pride  prepared  me  a  galloping  horse, 
called  Temerity.  At  last  Folly  apparelled  herself  lightly  with 
a  cloak  of  feathers,  and  mounted  upon  a  jenet ;  and  opening 
her  feathers  and  wings  with  the  wind,  away  she  flew  ;  and  1 
also,  at  a  wild  adventure,  set  spurs  to  my  horse,  and  away  we 
went  both.' 

During  their  ride,  Folly  tells  him  her  triumphs  in  such 
gross  terms,  that  the  knight  found  fault  with  this  insatiable 
empress,  and  calls  her  some  very  unpolite  names ;  hut  not 
having  received  God's  grace,  he  was  unable  to  forsake  her. 
They  come  to  two  paths,  one  a  goodly  green  meadow;  the 
other  rocky,  narrow,  and  full  of  mountains ;  and  here  met  with 
two  elegant  ladies,  on  chargers  richly  caparisoned.  Lady 
Voluptuousness  pictures  to  him  the  pleasures  of  idleness,  with 
all  worldly  delights;  and  Lady  Felicity,  the  advantages  of 
industry  and  virtue.  As  the  husbandman  could  expect  no 
corn  unless  he  prepared  the  ground  aud  sowed  the  seed ;  so 
that  man  is  marvellously  misinformed  who  thinketh  to  achieve 
true  blessedness  unless  he  prepares  his  way  by  virtue  and  good 
deeds.  But  while  Reason  preferred  the  good  advice  of  Felicity, 
Folly  prevailed,  and  led  him  to  the  palace  of  Voluptuousness. 
The  palace  is  minutely  described,  with  all  its  wantou  and 
luxurious  enjoyments.  After  leading  a  beastly  life  eleven  days, 
he  goes  out  hunting,  accompanied  by  his  gay  ladies ;  when 
suddenly  the  palace  sinks  into  the  earth,  yielding  such  an  air 
of  brimstone,  that  the  like  hath  not  been  felt.  The  knight 
'  sunk  into  a  beastly  bog  up  to  his  saddle,'  and  his  companions 
changed  into  serpents,  snakes,  toads,  and  venomous  worms. 
He  fell  into  despair,  howled,  and  scratched  his  face  ;  he  tried 
in  vain  to  get  out,  and  found  '  that  after  a  man  be  once  sunk 
in  sin,  he  will  not  be  able  to  recover  himself  unless  he  have 
the  help  of  God's  grace.'  After  bitter  repentance,  he  prays  ; 
and  a  splendid  lady,  called  God's-Grace,  relieved  him,  and  he 
left  Temerity  his  horse,  and  Folly  his  governess,  in  the  bog  to 
fish  for  frogs.  '  Thus  you  see  that  God's  grace  draweth  us 
from  sins  without  any  merit  of  ours  ;  howbeit  uot  without  an 
inward  heart-grief  aud  sorrow  for  sin,  which  is  a  special  gift 
of  God's  grace.'  His  new  guide  showed  him  the  ruins  of  the 
palace  of  worldly  Felicity  converted  into  a  great  bed  of  iron, 
red  hot,  upon  which  his  late  companions  were  tormented.  He 
is  then  led  to  the  school  of  repentance,  which  is  surrounded 
with  a  moat,  called  Humility.  Here  all  his  follies  are 
brought  to  his  remembrance;  he  sees  what  torments  he  had 
deserved  for  them,  and  was  half  in  despair.  Portions  of 
Scripture  are  exhibited,  which  comfort  and  convert  him. 
Understanding,  now  preaches  him  a  sermon  on  the  history  of 
Mary  Magdalene.  The  knight  then  receives  the  communion, 
and  is  carried  to  the  palace  of  Virtue.     The  third  part  of  the 


voyage  describes  the  happiness  whih  his  fell  in  company  with 
Lady  Virtue.     At  length  Faith,  from  the  top  of  a  tower,  shows 

him  the  city  of  heaven.  It  concludes  with  a  prayer,  the  creed, 
and  ten  commandments,  and  an  exhortation  to  perseverance 
until  the  knight  shall  attain  the  glorious  city  of  paradise. 

Although  this  work  was  doubtless  intended  for 
good,  yet  such  is  the  indelicacy  of  many  of  its 
scenes,  that  it  was  more  calculated  to  excite  evil 
passions  than  to  lead  an  inquirer  to  happiness. 
The  way  of  salvation  is  confined  to  moral  observ- 
ances, without  that  spring  of  virtue  which  flows 
from  faith,  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  its  consequent 
evangelical  obedience.  There  is  no  similarity  be- 
tween this  Voyage  and  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,' 
except  it  be  the  foresight  of  the  heavenly  paradise, 
which  has  been,  and  is,  one  of  the  enjoyments  of 
the  real  Christian  from  the  Revelations  of  John  to 
the  present  time.3  There  is  no  ground  for  sup- 
posing that  the  persecuted  Bunyan  ever  saw  this 
Clievalier  Errant. 

Whitney's  Emblems.  4to,  Leyden,  15SG;  pp.179. 
The  cut  over  one  of  the  emblems  represents  a 
man  swimming,  with  a  pack  upon  his  back. 

'  Desire  to  haue,  dothe  make  vs  muche  indure, 
In  trauayle,  toile,  aud  labour  voide  of  reste : 
The  marchant-man  is  caried  with  this  lure, 
Throughe  scorching  heate,  to  regions  of  the  Easte  : 

Oh  thirste  of  goulde,  what  not  ?  but  thou  canst  do : 
And  make  meus  hartes  for  to  consent  thereto. 

1  The  trauailer  poore,  when  shippe  doth  suffer  wracke, 
Who  hopes  to  swimme  vnto  the  wished  laude, 
Dothe  venture  life,  with  fardle  on  his  backe, 
That  if  he  scape,  the  same  in  steede  maye  stande. 
Thus,  hope  of  life,  and  loue  vnto  his  goods, 
Houldes  vp  his  chinne,  with  burthen  in  the  floods.' 

Another  emblem  has  a  cut,  representing  a  pilgrim  with  his 
staff  leaving  a  globe  [the  world]  behind  him,  p.  225.  Pere- 
grinus  Christianus  loquitur. 

Advek  deceiptfull  worlde,  thy  pleasures  I  detest : 
Notoe,  others  with  thy  shoices  delude;  my  hope  in  heauen  doth 
rest. 

Inlarged  as  followeth : — 
'  Even  as  a  flower,  or  like  vnto  the  grasse, 

"Which  now  dothe  stande, and  straight  with  sithc  dothe  fall, 
So  is  our  state :  now  here,  now  hence  wee  passe : 
For,  time  attendes  with  shredding  sithe  for  all. 

And  dcathe  at  lengthe,  both  oulde,  and  yonge,  doth  strike-' 
And  into  dust  dothe  turne  vs  all  alike. 

'  Yet,  if  we  marke  how  swifte  our  race  dothe  ronnc, 
And  waighe  the  cause,  why  wee  created  bee : 
Then  shall  we  know,  when  that  this  life  is  donne, 
AVee  shall  bee  sure  our  countrie  right  to  see. 

For,  here  wee  are  but  straungers,  that  must  flitte : 
The  nearer  home,  the  nearer  to  the  pitte. 


1  Stockings. 


Armour  for  the  arms. 


3  Mr.  Lowndes,  in  his  Bibliographical  Manual,  says  that 
Bunyan,  in  his  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  was  much  indebted  to 
this  Wandering  Knight !  ! 
1      *  Adieu. 


44 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


0  happie  they,  that  pondering  this  arighte, 
Before  that  here  their  pilgrimage  bee  past, 
Resigne  this  world :  and  marche  with  all  their  mighte 
Within  that  pathe,  that  leades  where  ioyes  shall  last. 

And  whilst  they  may,  there,  treasure  vp  their  store, 

Where,  without  rust,  it  lastes  for  euermore. 
This  worlde  must  chaunge :  That  worlde,  shall  still  indure. 
Here,  pleasures  fade :  There,  shall  they  endlesse  bee. 
Here,  man  doth  sinne :  And  there,  hee  shalbee  pure, 
Here,  deathe  hee  tastes :  And  there,  shall  neuer  die. 

Here,  hathe  hee  griefe :  And  there  shall  ioyes  possesse. 

As  none  hath  seene,  nor  anie  harte  can  gesse.' 

These  are  the  poemsfrom  which  Mr.  Montgomery 
conceives  Bunyan  might  perhaps  have  inspired  his 
first  idea ! 

The  other  of  Whitney's  Emblems  upon  pilgrimage,  is  under 
a  cut  representing  Mercury  and  two  men  travelling  upon  a 
road. 

*  The  trauaylinge  man,  vncertaine  where  to  goe, 
When  diuers  wayes  before  his  face  did  lie, 
Mercurius  then,  the  perfect  pathe  did  showe, 
Which  when  he  tooke,  he  neuer  went  awrie, 

But  to  his  wishes,  his  iorneys  ende  did  gaine 
In  happie  howre,  by  his  direction  plaine. 
'  This  trauailinge  man :  doth  tell  our  wandringe  state, 
Before  whose  face,  and  eeke  on  euery  side, 
Bypathes,  and  wayes,  appeare  amidd  our  gate, 
That  if  the  Lorde  bee  not  our  onlie  guide : 
We  stumble,  fall,  and  dailie  goe  astraye, 
Then  happie  those,  whome  God  doth  shew  the  waye.' 

The  Pilgrimage  to  Paradise.  Compiled  for  the 
Direction,  Comfort,  and  Resolution  of  God's 
poore  distressed  Children  in  passing  through 
this  irksome  Wildernesse  of  Temptation  and 
Tryall.  By  Leonard  Wright.  4to,  London, 
1591. 
Full  of  sound  instruction,  but  not  allegorical. 

Benoist  (Father-Confessor  to  Mary  Queen  of  Scots), 
le  CJievalier  Chrestien. 
This  is  a  dialogue  between  a  Christian  knight  and  an  infidel, 
whom  he  attempts  to  instruct  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and 
the  Romish  faith.  It  has  cuts  representing  the  knight's  horse, 
and  the  various  parts  of  his  armour  and  habiliments,  which 
are  spiritualized.  Some  of  these  instructions  to  an  infidel  are 
curious,  '  Comme  l'Eglise,  second  Paradis,  a  este  plantee  et 
est  contenue  en  la  Vierge,  monde  mystique.' »  *  Be  la  descente 
de  Jesus  Christ  en  enfer,  ou  il  a  remporte  encore  une  autre 
victoire  sur  Satan,  brisant  ses  prisons,  et  deliverant  les  Peres 
qu'il  y  tenoit  captif.'2  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  descent 
into  hell  in  what  is  called  the  Apostles'  Creed.  Among  other 
curious  discoveries  which  the  author  makes  is,  that  if  Adam 
had  not  been  persuaded  to  sin  by  his  wife,  his  posterity  would 
not  have  been  corrupt.3 

Tlie  Pilgrimage  of  Princes.     By  L.  Lloid,  one  of 
Queen  Elizabeth's  Sergeants-at-Arms. 
There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  this  entertaining 
volume.      It  is  a  pilgrimage  to  the  characters  and 


Edit.  Rouen,  1609,  8vo,  p.  97. 


P.  160.         3  P.  48. 


works  of  princes,  which  are  curiously  exhibited. 
A  few  are  in  poetry,  such  as  that  of  King  Herod ; 

'  When  Herod  reigned  iu  Juda  king 

His  life  so  loathsome  led, 
On  sucking  babes  and  infants  blood, 

This  cruel  tyrant  fed. 
To  seek  our  Saviour  Christ,  he  kill'd 

The  Babes  of  Juda  land ; 
,  And  thought  our  God  could  not  escape 

His  fomie  bloody  hand. 
Of  worms  this  Herod  was  devoured, 

Of  vermin  loe,  and  mice : 
His  bones,  his  flesh,  was  all  consumed 

And  eaten  up  of  Lice.' 


Tlie  Plaine  Mans  Path-way  to  Heaven.  By  Arth. 
Dent.  1601. 
There  is  a  rare  tract  under  this  title  in  black 
letter,  with  a  woodcut  of  the  author,  12  leaves ; 
but  the  book  that  was  made  a  blessing  to  Bunyan 
is  a  small  octavo  volume.  This  little  book  made 
a  considerable  part  of  the  worldly  goods  which 
Bunyan's  first  wife  brought  as  her  portion,  and  it 
became  one  of  the  means  by  which  he  was  awakened 
from  the  dreary  sleep  of  sin,  and  therefore  an  in- 
valuable portion.  It  is  singular  that  no  one  has 
charged  him  with  taking  any  hints  from  this  book, 
which  is  one  of  the  very  few  which  he  is  known  to 
have  read  prior  to  his  public  profession  of  faith 
and  holiness  in  baptism. 

The  author,  in  his  epistle,  calls  it  a  '  controversie  with  Satan 
and  Sinne.'  It  is  a  dialogue  between  '  a  Divine,  an  Honest 
Man,  an  Ignorant  Man,  and  a  Caviller.'  They  commence 
about  buying  a  good  cow,  then  worth  four  pounds,  and  are 
drawn  into  religious  conversation.  The  author  is  so  high  a 
Calvinist,  that,  speaking  of  infants,  he  says,  '  some,  no  doubt, 
are  saved  through  the  election  of  grace.'  He  commences  with 
the  new  birth :  arguments  are  adduced  to  show  why  good  and 
worthy  men  are  lost,  because  they  esteem  a  preacher  no  more 
than  a  shoemaker,  nor  the  Scriptures  than  their  old  shoes. 
He  places  lying  among  the  principal  sins,  which  he  calls  the 
Beelzebubs  of  the  world.  He  introduces  very  familiar  illustra- 
tions and  well-known  proverbs.  Speaking  against  pride,  he 
says,  '  How  proud  many  (especially  women)  be  of  baubles.  For 
when  they  have  spent  a  good  part  of  the  day  in  tricking  and 
trimming,  pricking  aud  pinning,  pranking  and  pouncing,  gird- 
ing and  lacing,  and  braving  up  themselves  in  most  exquisite 
manner,  out  they  come  into  the  streets  with  their  pedlar's  shop 
upon  their  backs  and  take  themselves  to  be  little  Angels — they 
are  one  lump  of  pride — the  time  will  come  when  they  and  all 
their  gay  clouts  will  be  buried  in  a  grave  —  what  will  all 
this  profit  them  when  their  bodies  are  buried  in  the  dust  and 
their  souls  in  hell-fire  ?  what  then  will  they  say  of  these  doubled 
aud  redoubled  ruffs,  strutting  fardingales,  long  locks,  fore  tufts, 
shag  haire  and  new  fashions  ?  "  He  complains  of  two  marks 
being  paid  for  a  pair  of  stockings  [£1,  6s.  8c/.]  1  'What  say 
you  to  our  artificial  women,  which  will  be  better  thau  God  hath 
made  them  ?  they  like  not  his  handy  work,  they  will  mend  it 
— they  will  have  other  completions,  other  hair,  other  bones, 
and  other  ....  than  God  made  them.'  Modern  refine- 
ment prevents  one  of  these  words  from  being  copied ;  but  the 
monstrous  deformity  shown  by  some  ladies  of  our  day,  appears 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


45 


then  to  have  been  in  fashion.  Dent  calls  such  ladies  pictures, 
puppets,  and  peacocks.  Had  Bunyan  been  a  plagiarist,  how 
readily  might  he  have  borrowed  an  idea  from  Dent  of  the 
Muck-rake.  '  The  gripple  muck-rakers  had  as  leve  part  with 
their  blood  as  their  goods.  They  will  pinch  their  own  backs 
and  bellies  to  get  their  god  into  their  chest.'  But  Bunyan's 
Muck-rake  is  all  his  own.  'Mony  lazie  lozels  and  luskish 
youths  do  nothing  but  walk  the  streets,  sit  on  stalls,  and  fre- 
quent Ale  houses.  Many  rich  women  do  ordinarily  lie  in  bed 
till  nine  of  the  clock,  aud  then  forsooth  rise,  and  make  them- 
selves ready  to  goe  to  dinner.  And  after  they  have  well  dined, 
they  spend  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  a  good  part  of  the  night 
also,  in  playing,  prattling,  babbling,  cackling,  prating,  and 
gossipping.     Fie  on  this  idle  life. ' l 

The  enmity  of  the  natural  man  against  these  who  bear  the 
image  of  Christ  is  thus  expressed:  'It  is  a  wonder  to  consider 
how  deadly  the  wicked  hate  the  righteous,  and  almost  in  every 
Thing  oppose  themselves  against  them :  and  that  in  most  vir- 
ulent and  spiteful  manner.  They  raile  aud  slander,  scoffe  and 
scorne,  mocke  aud  mowe  at  them,  as  though  they  were  not 
worthy  to  live  upon  the  earth.  They  esteeme  every  pelting 
Rascall,  and  prefer  euery  vile  Varlet  before  them.  And  though 
they  have  their  Hues  and  liberty,  their  breath  and  safety,  and 
all  that  they  haue  else  by  them  [for  their  sakes],  yet  for  all 
that,  they  coidd  be  content  to  eate  their  heart  with  garlicke : 
so  great,  so  fiery,  so  burning  and  hissing-hot  is  their  fury 
and  malice  against  them.  They  may  be  compared  to  a  man 
that  standeth  upon  a  bough  in  the  top  of  a  tree,  and  with  an 
axe  choppeth  it  off,  and  therewithall  falleth  down  with  it, 
and  breaketh  his  necke.'  2  Dent,  speaking  of  the  entrance  by 
the  strait  gate,  says :  '  It  must  be  done  by  great  strife  against 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  Diuell — none  can  enter  in  without 
vehement  crowding  and  almost  breaking  their  shoulder-bones 
—many  which  seek  shall  not  bee  able  to  enter.'  How  different 
to  Bunyan's  description :  '  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto 
you.'  Yet  both  are  right:  one  places  his  obstacles  long  before 
the  pilgrim  arrives  at  the  gate ;  then,  having  overcome  the 
world  and  the  flesh,  the  devil  shoots  at  him  ;  the  other  reserves 
all  the  Christian's  opposition  to  the  time  when  entering  the 
gate.  Dent's  language  is  picturesque:  'We  haue  all  the 
Diuels  in  hell  against  vs,  with  all  their  horns,  heads,  marvell- 
ous strength,  infinite  wiles,  cunning  devices,  deepe  slights,  and 
methodical  temptations.  Here  runs  a  sore  streame  against  vs. 
Then  haue  we  this  present  euill  world  against  us,  with  her 
innumerable  baits,  snares,  netts,  gins  and  grins  to  catch  vs, 
fetter  vs  and  entangle  vs.  Here  haue  wee  protittes  and  plea- 
sures, riches  and  honour,  wealth  and  preferment,  ambition  and 
couetousuesse.  Here  comes  in  a  Camp-royall  of  spiritual  and 
inuisible  enemies.  Lastly  we  haue  our  flesh,  that  is,  our  cor- 
rupted nature  against  vs:  wee  haue  our-selues  against  our- 
selues.'  This  book  was  written  fifty  years  after  the  Reforma- 
tion ;  but  so  slow  were  the  clergy  to  teach,  or  the  people  to 
learn,  that  when  a  farmer  is  asked,  '  What  is  the  end  of  receiv- 
ing the  sacrament  ? '  he  answered, '  To  receive  my  maker.'  And 
when  asked  how  many  sacraments  there  were,  his  answer  was, 
'  Two,  Bread  and  Wine! '  Bunyan  must  have  felt  the  force  of 
such  language  as  the  following :  '  Every  siu  that  a  man  commit- 
teth  is  as  a  thorn  thrust  deep  into  the  soul ;  which  will  not  be  got 
out  again  but  with  many  a  sigh,  and  many  a  sorrowful  Oh  !  Oh  I 
Every  sin  is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron  and  the  point  of  a 
diamond  upon  the  conscience,  which,  if  not  felt  in  this  life, 
then  with  woe,  and  alas!  when  it  is  too  late.'  The  farmer  being 
deeply  affected  with  a  sense  of  his  danger,  Atheist  advises  him 
to  read  '  The  Court  of  Venus,  The  Palace  of  Pleasure,  Beds 


P.  170. 


2  P.  221. 


of  Southampton,  Ellen  of  Rumm/n,  The  Merry  Jest  of  the 
Friar  and  the  Boy,  The  Pleasant  Story  of  Clem  of  the  Clouyh, 
Adam  Bell,  and  William  of  Cloudesley,  The  Odd  Tale  of 
William,  Richard,  and  Humphrey,  The  Pretty  Conceit  of  John 
Splinter's  Last  Will — excellent  books  against  heart  qualms 
and  dumpishness.'  To  which  the  zealous  minister  replied  : 
'  They  are  good  to  kindle  a  fire — they  were  devised  by  the 
devil,  seeu  aud  allowed  by  the  Pope,  printed  in  Hell,  bound  by 
Hobgoblins,  and  published  in  Rome,  Italy,  and  Spaiu.'  3 

This  volume  must  have  been  exactly  suited  to 
the  warm  imagination  of  Bunyan.  It  had  proved 
invaluable  to  him  as  a  means  of  conversion ;  but, 
after  a  careful  and  delightful  perusal,  no  trace  can 
he  found  of  any  phrase  or  sentence  having  been 
introduced  into  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress.' 

The  copy  which  the  Editor  has  used  in  extract- 
ing the  above  account  is  the  nineteenth  impression, 
1625,  and  has  the  name  of  M.  Bunyonn  written  on 
the  bottom  of  the  title ;  probably  the  very  volume 
which  his  wife  brought  him  as  her  dowry.4 

The  result  of  long,  anxious,  and  expensive  in- 
quiries is,  that,  from  the  first  idea  to  the  completion 
of  his  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  it  entirely  flowed  from 
Bunyan's  own  soul.     Well  might  he  say — 

'  Manner  and  matter  too  was  all  mine  own.' 


Sir  Walter    Raleigh's   Pilgrimage.     Written   by 
himself,  and  published  in  his  remains. 

'  Give  me  my  scalop  shell  of  quiet, 

My  staff  of  faith  to  walk  upon, 

My  scrip  of  joy,  immortal  diet; 

My  bottle  of  salvation. 

My  gown  of  glory,  hope's  true  gage,5 
And  thus  I'll  take  my  pilgrimage. 

Blood  must  be  my  body's  only  balmcr, 

No  other  balm  will  there  be  given  ; 

Whilst  my  soul,  like  a  quiet  Palmer," 

Travelleth  towards  the  land  of  Heaven. 
Over  the  silver  mountains, 
Where  springs  the  nectar  fountains, 

There  will  I  kiss  the  bowl  of  bliss ; 

And  drink  mine  everlasting  fill 

Upon  every  milken  hill. 

My  soul  will  be  a  dry  before, 
But  after  it  will  thirst  no  more. 

I'll  take  them  first  to  quench  my  thirst, 

And  taste  of  nectar's  suckets, 

At  those  clear  wells,  where  sweetness  dwells, 

Drawn  up  by  saints  in  chrystal  buckets. 
Then  by  that  happy  blestfull  day, 
More  peaceful  pilgrims  I  shall  see, 
That  have  cast  off  their  rags  of  clay, 
And  walk  apparelled  fresh  like  me ; 

And  when  our  bottles  and  all  wc 

Are  fill'd  with  immortality, 


3  Pp.  371,  372.    Edit.  1625. 

4  In  the  Editor's  library. 

5  '  Gage ;'  a  pledge  or  challenge  to  combat. 

6  'Palmer;'    a  pilgrim,  from  their  carrying 
palm,  especially  on  return. 


branch  of 


46 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Then  the  blest  parts  we'll  travel ; 

Strowed  with  rubies  thick  as  gravel. 

Ceilings  of  diamonds,  sapphire  flowers, 

High  walls  of  coral,  and  pearly  bowers. 

Prom  thence  to  Heaven's  bribeless  hall, 

Where  no  corrupted  vices  brawl ; 

No  conscience  molten  into  gold, 

No  forg'd  accuser  bought  or  sold, 

No  cause  deferr'd,  no  vain-spent  journey, 

Por  there  Christ  is  the  king's  attorney ; 

Who  pleads  for  all  without  degrees, 

And  he  hath  Angels,1  but  no  fees; 

And  when  the  twelve  grand  million  jury 
Of  our  sins,  with  direful  fury, 
'Gainst  our  souls,  black  verdicts  give, 
Christ  pleads  his  death  and  then  we  live. 

Be  thou  my  speaker  (taintless  pleader, 

Unblotted  Lawyer,  true  proceeder) 

Thou  would'st  salvation  e'en  for  alms, 

Not  with  a  bribed  lawyer's  palms. 
And  this  is  my  eternal  plea 
To  him  that  made  heaven,  earth  and  sea, 
That  since  my  flesh  must  die  so  soon, 
And  want  a  head  to  dine  next  noon, 
Just  at  the  stroke,  when  my  veins  start  and  spread, 
Set  on  my  soul  an  everlasting  head. 

Then  am  I  ready,  like  a  Palmer,  fit 

To  tread  those  blest  paths  which  before  I  writ, 

Of  Death  and  Judgement,  Heaven,  and  Hell, 

Who  oft  doth  think,  must  needs  die  well.' 

Tlte  Plain  Mans  Pilgrimage,  or  Journey  towards 
Heaven,  wherein  if  he  walke  carefully  he  may 
attain  to  everlasting  life.  By  W.  W[ehster]. 
18mo,  1613. 

First,  To  set  out  on  the  journey,  we  must  get  rid  of  covet- 
ousness.  Second,  For  speed,  we  must  begin  young — give  God 
the  heart,  and  number  our  days.  We  have  a  long  journey  to 
go  in  a  short  space  of  time — a  day.  A  short  life  is  like  a 
winter's  day;  a  long  life  like  a  day  in  summer.  One  of  his 
similes  is  far  beyond  ordinary  comprehension.  '  For  as  the 
windows  of  the  temple  were  large  within  and  narrow  without ; 
so  they  which  are  within  the  church  have  greater  light  than 
they  which  are  without.'  Another  extract  will  show  the  doc- 
trinal views  of  the  author.  '  We  must  put  on  his  (Christ's) 
righteousness,  which  is  as  strange  a  vesture  to  us,  as  our  flesh 
was  to  him  ;  it  requires  great  cunning  to  wear  it  cleanly  and 
comely,  from  foyling2  and  rending  it,  lest  it  should  be  taken 
from  us  again.' 

The  author  gives  much  good  advice  as  to  search- 
ing the  Scriptures  and  prayer,  but  there  is  nothing 
allegorical  in  this  rare  little  volume. 


The  Pilgrim. 

This  old  comedy,  by  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  could  afford 
no  hint  to  Bunyan,  and  it  is  very  probable  that  he  never 
wasted  one  of  his  precious  minutes  over  a  play. 

To  a  late  period,  and  even  to  the  present  day, 


1  '  Angels ;'  gold  coins,  one-third  of  a  sovereign,  afterwards 
raised  to  ten  shillings ;  or  the  spirits  of  heaven. 
-  '  Foyling ;'  pressing,  creasing,  rumpling. 


in  Roman  Catholic  countries,  the  word  pilgrim  is 
only  understood  as  relating  to  a  meritorious  pil- 
grimage to  the  shrine  of  some  saint.  In  the 
Glossographia  Anglicana,  1719,  the  meaning  of  the 
word  pilgrim  is  '  one  that  travels  upon  account  of 
religion,  to  visit  holy  places  ;  to  pay  his  devotion  to 
the  relics  of  dead  saints.'  The  principal  places 
were  Rome,  Loretto,  Jerusalem,  Compostella,  and 
'the  local  shrines  with  which  every  country  in 
Europe  abounded.  In  former  times  it  was  a  duty 
inculcated  upon  all  classes,  from  the  king  to  the 
peasant,  from  the  archbishop  to  the  humblest 
clerk,  all  bent  beneath  the  custom  of  the  times ; 
and  two  visits  to  a  neighbouring  shrine  were  con- 
sidered equivalent  to  one  at  double  the  distance. 
Such  as  were  unable  to  go  in  person,  gave  money 
to  have  the  duty  performed  by  proxy.  A  dream 
or  vision,  a  penance  ordered,  or  a  vow  made  in  the 
hour  of  danger,  were  frequently  the  prelude  to  a  pil- 
grimage, and  the  belief  was  general,  that  if  they 
were  not  made  during  life,  they  might,  with  greater 
trouble,  be  performed  after  death. 

*  Some  went  for  payment  of  a  vow 
In  time  of  trouble  made, 
And  some  who  found  that  pilgrimage 
Was  a  pleasant  sort  of  trade.'  3 

Frequently  two  hundred  thousand  pilgrims  were 
at  Loretto  at  one  time.  They  formed  proces- 
sions round  the  palace  of  our  Lady,  on  their  bare 
knees,  five,  seven,  nine,  or  twelve  times.  We 
can  scarcely  credit  the  accounts  of  the  number  of 
devotees  who  practised  all  sorts  of  vices,  going 
and  returning,  to  secure  the  pardon  of  sin,  by  visit- 
ing the  shrine,  and  invoking  the  aid  of  the  saint — 
so  besotted  and  intoxicated  were  mankind  made  by 
the  Church.  In  six  months,  from  January  to  June, 
1435,  the  King  of  England  granted  licenses  to 
two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  pilgrims,  to 
Compostella  alone ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  give 
any  idea  of  the  myriads  of  Europeans  who  perished 
on  pilgrimages,  especially  to  the  Holy  Land.  The 
church  constantly  prayed  for  these  votaries,  as  the 
Church  of  England  now  prays  for  those  who  travel 
by  land  or  by  water. 

The  Rev.  W.  Acworth,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Bible 
Society,  related  an  anecdote,  which  may  be  useful 
to  travellers  in  popish  countries  ;4  '  A  gentleman 
who  had  travelled  before  me  from  Rome,  had  with 
him  some  Bibles,  Testaments  and  tracts,  on  the 
top  of  which  he  had  placed  good  old  John  Bunyan's 
Pilgrim's  Progress.  When  the  package  was  opened, 
the  Douanniers  examined  this  book,  and  not  being 
very  good  English  scholars,  they  knew  not  what 
to  make  of  the  title,  Bun — Bun — Bunyan's  Pil- 
grim's Progress!      "What  is  that?"  said  one; 


Southcy. 


Report,  May  1S36,  p.  392. 


INTRODUCTION    HY   THE   EDITOR. 


4  7 


"  01),"  replied  the  other,  "  'tis  some  work  on  the 
advantage  of  pilgrimages  ;  '  ami  consequently  the 
whole  were  immediately  allowed.  Now,  I  had  my 
regular  passport ;  but  I  venture  to  say,  that  good 
John  Bunyan's  Pilgrim  was  a  better  passport  for 
the  Bible  than  any  other  which  could  have  been 
found  on  that  occasion.' 


Tlte  Pilgrim's  Practice,  containing  many  Godly 
Travels.  Bv  Robert  Bruen.  Svo,  Loud. 
L621. 

The  Pilgrim's  Profession. — This  is  accompanied  by 
The  Pearl  of  the  Gospel  ;  with  a  glass  for  Gen- 
tlemen to  dress  themselves  by.  By  Thomas 
Taylor,  D.D.      8vo,  1624. 

There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  these  volumes. 

Tlic  Pilgrim  of  Casteele ;  written  in  Spanish,  trans- 
lated into  English;  4to,  1C23  ;  and  repub- 
lished many  times. 

This  is  a  romance,  probably  invcutcd  iu  Euglish.  It  repre- 
sents a  lover  in  the  disguise  of  a  pilgrim.  He  suffers  ship- 
wreck, and  is  picked  up  by  sonic,  fishermen,  who  mistook  him, 
when  covered  with  weeds  and  mud,  for  a  fardel  of  cloth ;  but 
found  it  to  be  the  pilgrim  in  a  trance.  They  restore  him  to 
strength,  and  he  enters  upon  some  very  extraordinary  adven- 
tures. In  his  journey,  he  gives  a  good  illustration  of  the  then 
popular  faith  in  haunted  houses.  Being  benighted,  he  found 
a  lodging  in  a  hospital,  deserted  'in  regard  of  a  strange  noyse 
which  every  night  was  there  heard,  which  hath  happened 
ever  since  the  death  of  a  stranger  who  came  thither  to  lodge, 
nobody  hath  dwelt  there.'  The  pilgrim  having  made  the 
sign  of  the  cross,  laid  down  to  sleep,  but  in  the  deep  silence 
he  awoke,  for  '  his  bed  did  move  as  a  ship  or  a  horse,  which 
did  carry  him  ;  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  saw  horsemen  enter  by 
two  and  two  into  the  chamber,  who,  lighting  torches  which 
they  held  in  their  hands  at  the  caudle  which  he  had  left 
burning,  cast  them  against  the  ceiling  of  the  chamber,  where 
they  stuck  fast  with  their  bottoms  upward,  which  dropt  down 
binning  flames  upon  his  bed  and  upon  his  clothes.  He  covereth 
himself  as  well  as  possibly  he  could,  leaving  a  little  hole  to 
look  out  at,  that  he  might  see  whether  his  bed  did  burn  or  no ; 
when  as  instantly  he  saw  the  flames  out,  and  that  upon  a  table 
which  was  in  a  corner  of  the  chamber,  four  of  them  were  at 
primero,  they  passed,  discarded,  and  set  up  money,  as  if  they 
had  truly  played.  At  length  they,  debating  upon  a  difference, 
fell  into  a  quarrel  in  the  chamber,  which  made  such  a  noise 
with  clashing  of  swords,  that  the  miserable  pilgrim  called  for 
help  upon  our  lady  of  Gadalupe  ;  when  the  clattering  of  swords, 
and  all  other  noise  ceased,  and  he  was  all  of  a  sweat  with  fear. 
Presently  he  felt  that  the  bed  and  the  clothes  were  pulled  away 
from  him  by  the  uttermost  corners,  and  he  saw  a  man  come  in 
with  a  lighted  torch  in  his  hand,  followed  by  two  others,  the 
one  with  a  great  brazen  bason,  and  the  other  sharpi  uing  a  little 
knife.  Then  began  he  to  tremble,  and  all  his  hair  to  stand  on 
end;  he  would  have  spoken,  but  was  not  able,  when  they  were 
in  ai  him,  the  torch  was  put  out  ;  and  the  pilgrim,  thinking  that 
they  would  kill  him,  put  his  hands  forth  against  the  knife,  win  n 
he  felt  that  they  laid  hold  on  him,  he  gave  a  great  cry,  and  the 
torch  instantly  kindled  again,  ami  he  saw  himself  between  two 
mastiff  dogs,  who  held  him  fa.-t  iu  their  teeth.    Jesus,  cried  out 


the  pilgrim;  at  which  name  all  those  fantastic  illusions  vanished 
away,  leaving  him  so  weary  and  bo  affrighted  that  he  could 
Btaj  there  no  longer.  He  then  went,  to  a  holy  hermit,  win. 
had  a  stone  for  his  pillow,  his  stall'  for  a  companion,  and  a 
death's  head  for  his  looking-glass;  who  learnedly  attributed 
all  these  midnight    revels  to  '  angels  alien  from  the  Lowes! 

quire,  who  gaffer  less  pains  than  other,  as  having  not  so  much 
sinned,  but  do  take  pleasure  to  displease  men  with  fright  in.-, 
noises,  rumours,. subtilties,  and  such  like  things,  which  they  do  iu 
the  night  in  houses,  which  thereby  they  make  altogether  unha- 
bitable, not.  being  able  otherwise  to  hurt  but  by  these  foolish 
and  ridiculous  efforts,  limited  and  bound  by  the  Almighty.' 

It  appears  by  numerous  stories  in  this  book,  that 
the  Pilgrim's  habit  was  frequently  assumed  by  run- 
away lovers,  of  whom  this  volume  contains  many 
romantic  accounts.  It  contains  nothing  allegorical. 
but  professes  to  be  a  relation  of  matter-of-fact 
adventures. 

The  most  curious  book  which  has  fallen  under 
my  notice,  upon  these  painful  pilgrimages,  is 

TJte  Pilgrim  of  Loretto  performing  his  Vow  made  to 
the  Glorious  Virgin  Mary,  Mother  of  God.  By 
L.  Richeomc.  4to,  Paris,  1G30.  Dedicated  to 
Mary,  Queen  of  Charles  I. 

This  work  is  intended  to  show  the  merits  and  ad. 
of  pilgrimages  to  holy  places;  because  the  Jews  were  pilgrims 
to  Jerusalem  three  times  a  year.  The  kings,  or  sages,  made 
their  pilgrimage,  guided  to  the  star  of  the  world.  Our  Lord 
was  a  pilgrim  iu  Egypt,  and  he  has  left  many  places  to  which 
Christians  should  undertake  holy  pilgrimages,  and  obtain  the 
fruits  of  his  graces;  among  these,  Loretto  is  the  most  famous. 
This  chapel  is  forty  feet  long,  twenty  wide,  and  twenty-five 
high,  built  of  ordinary  small  stones,  hard  and  squared  long,  of 
the  colour  of  brick;  the  walls  adorued  with  paintings  of  sacred 
stories,  a  stone  altar — 'breathing as  it  were  something  divine.' 
The  image  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  crowned  with  precious  stones; 
her  gown  of  cloth  of  gold,  with  a  sky-coloured  mantle.  On 
her  left  arm  the  little  child  Jesus,  having  a  countenance  full 
of  grace  and  majesty.  In  the  year  1291,  the  9th  of  May,  this 
house  was  at  night  carried  by  angels  from  Galilee  into  Scla- 
vnnia,  and  remained  there  four  years.  On  the  night  of  the 
19th  of  November,  1294,  it  was  removed,  first  into  the  Mark 
of  Ancona,  to  a  forest,  the  property  of  a  lady  named  Loretto ; 
but  the  forest  being  infested  with  thieves,  it  was  removed  to  a 
hill  hard  by.  In  less  than  a  month,  it  was  again  removed  to 
Reccanata,  and  there  remains.  Dr.  Franklin  says  that  three 
removes  are  as  bad  as  a  fire;  but  this  house,  with  all  its  con- 
tents, was  bodily  removed,  without  injury,  four  times;  and  to 
prevenl  scepticism,  the  author  recounts  some  wonder.-  per- 
formed by  angels — 'we  know  by  their  naturall  force,  they 
roule  about  the  huge  frames  of  the  celestial!  Bodys,  from  East 
to  West  with  an  admirable  swiftness  and  constancy  now  these 
six  thousand  yeares  togeathcr,  without  any  paine  or  difficnltj  : 
a  work  without  comparison  more  difficult,  than  to  carry  a 
house  once  or  twice,  from  one  country  to  another,  although  it 
be  miraculous,  and  admirable  for  the  rarenes.'  He  adds  the 
testimony  of  Francis  Prior,  which,  if  true,  decides  the  fact  — 
'  he  had  often  heard  of  his  grandfather,  that  lie  did  see  the 
house  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  when  being  carried  in  I  he  air  it 
lighted  in  the  forest;'  besides  which,  it  was  honoured  with 
innumerable  miracles.  The  result  was,  that  emperors,  popes, 
and  princes  presented  gifts  to  the  Virgin,  until  the  massive 
gold  and  silver  plate,  diamonds,  and  baubles  accumulated  to 


43 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


an  incredible  value;  it  has  been  thought  that  millions  of 
pounds  sterling  would  not  have  paid  for  them,  at  a  fair  valua- 
tion.1 

This  pilgrimage  is  completed  in  forty  days ;  thrice  seven 
going,  being  the  number  of  penance  and  purgation ;  nine  to 
spend  at  Loretto,  for  the  orders  of  angels,  the  intellectual 
light;  and  ten  to  return,  it  being  the  number  of  perfection. 
The  pilgrim  is  to  use  his  rosary  of  sixty-three  beads,  the  age 
of  the  Virgin  when  she  died ;  saying  upon  the  small  beads  an 
Ave  Maria,  and  upon  the  larger,  every  tenth,  a  Paternoster. 
Having  confessed  and  communicated,  three  pilgrims  commence 
the  pilgrimage ;  and  the  first  day's  meditation  was  on  the 
condition  of  man,  as  a  pilgrim  and  stranger  upon  earth.  It 
closes  with  a  canticle,  of  which  this  is  the  last  stanza : — 

*  Merrily  then,  let's  march  apace 
Unto  this  blessed  Virgin's  Hall, 
There  shall  we  see  the  heaven's  grace 
Inclosed  in  a  Chappel  small : 

And  learne  to  be  of  this  may de- wife 

Perfect  Pilgrimes  all  our  life.' 

Similar  instructions  are  given  for  each  day's  meditation. 
After  the  ten  commandments  follow  the  five,  which  were  for- 
gotten or  omitted  in  the  decalogue,  and  are  called  the  Com- 
mandments of  the  Church.  1.  To  keep  the  feasts.  2.  To 
hear  mass.  3.  To  fast  Lent,  &c.  4.  To  confess.  5.  To  take 
the  sacrament  at  Easter :  to  which  are  added,  6.  Not  to  marry 
in  times  forbidden ;  and  7.  To  pay  tithes. 

When  they  had  arrived  at  Loretto,  themes  were  given  for 
this  nine  days'  meditation,  during  his  sojourn  there :  as,  a 
meditation  upon  the  holy  eucharist ;  on  the  conception  of  the 
blessed  Virgin ;  on  her  ancestors ;  presentation ;  espousal  of 
Joseph  and  Mary,  both  being  virgins  to  the  time  of  their 
death ;  the  incarnation ;  nativity,  &c.  Before  leaving  Loretto, 
they  pray  to  the  Virgin ;  the  close  of  this  prayer  is—'  to  stirre 
us  up  to  yield  honour,  praise,  and  immortal  thanks  to  the 
Sonne  and  the  Mother,  who  with  their  honour  have  made  thee 
so  honourable.' 

On  their  return,  these  pilgrims  were  mistaken  for  thieves, 
and  narrowly  escaped  death.  Many  miracles  are  talked  over ; 
and  among  them,  one  narrated  by  Fisher,  Bishop  of  Rochester, 
in  1526,  in  his  book  against  OEcolampadius,  of  a  priest  who 
lived  many  months  without  food  or  hunger,  and  in  the  midst 
of  snow,  without  feeling  cold,  BY  licking  a  stone. 

The  best  sentence  in  the  volume  is  in  the  thirty-fifth  day. 
The  meditation  is  upon  the  preaching  of  John  :  '  he  that  in 
his  preaching  maketh  himselfe  admired,  and  not  Jesus  Christ, 
and  draweth  the  harts  of  his  hearers  after  himselfe,  and  not 
after  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  thiefe,  employing  his  Maisters  money 
and  guiftes  to  his  owue  uses,  and  not  to  his  Maisters  honour.' 
The  three  pilgrims  being  benighted,  climbed  an  oak  to  pass 
the  night.  One  of  them  said,  '  If  it  rains,  what  shall  we  do  ? 
'We  will  doe,'  answered  another,  'as  they  do  in  Normandy.' 
•And  what  do  they  there?'  replied  he.  'They  let  it  raiu,' 
quoth  the  other.  At  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  they  are  alarmed 
by  a  horrible  spectacle.  A  monstrous  old  goat,  with  a  black 
candle  burning  blue  between  his  horns,  read  in  a  book,  making 
a  circle,  when  sixty -six  sorcerers  and  witches  came  riding 
through  the  air,  to  this  devil's  ball.  As  they  arrived,  they 
did  the  old  goat  homage,  by  kissing  under  his  tail,  and  com- 
menced dancing.  Upon  a  bank  they  made  an  altar,  and 
parodied  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass.  At  length,  the  old  goat 
caught  sight  of  the  pilgrims;  in  a  moment  the  dance  was 
dashed;  three  of  them  were  turned  into  fierce  wolves,  who 
mounted  the  tree  to  devour  the  pilgrims ;    but  they  made  the 

1  See  Library  of  Learning,  Svo,  p.  -1G3. 


sign  of  the  cross,  and  said,  '  Jesus  Maria ;'  the  wolves  fell 
down  like  sacks  of  corn,  and  the  assembly  vanished,  leaving  a 
most  horrible  stench  behind  them  ;2  as  if  the  plague  had  there 
burnt  all  the  rags  of  her  infection.  All  this  is  narrated,  not 
as  an  allegory,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact.  When  such  abominable 
stories  were  believed,  we  can  hardly  wonder  at  the  brutal 
severity  of  our  laws  against  poor  old  women,  called  witches. 

In  the  morning,  among  gobbets  of  flesh  and  other  foul 
matters,  they  found  a  piece  of  turnip,  cut  to  resemble  a  host,3 
with  a  silver  chalice  and  paten ;  these  they  carried  to  the 
nearest  monastery,  from  which  tbey  had  been  stolen. 

A  merchant,  who  had  befriended  the  pilgrims,  when,  in  the 
most  imminent  danger  of  being  murdered,  vowed  to  devote 
himself  to  religion,  and  was  instantly  carried,  by  invisible 
agency,  through  the  air,  for  many  miles  to  a  monastery,  where 
he  took  the  vows. 

The  pilgrims  meet  some  beset  with  pretended  reformation, 
and  recover  them  to  holy  church,  by  narrating  some  miracles ; 
among  others,  one  of  a  priest  who  was  captured  by  the  Turks, 
and  on  his  refusing  to  turn  Mahometan,  they  took  out  his 
bowels  and  heart,  and  put  them  into  his  hands,  leaving  him 
to  be  devoured  by  wild  beasts.  But  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow 
that  he  had  made  to  the  blessed  Virgin,  he  got  up  and  walked 
to  Loretto,  with  his  heart  and  bowels  in  his  hands ;  recounted 
to  the  officers  of  the  church  what  had  happened,  showed  them 
his  empty  body  and  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  fulfilled  his  vow ! 
A  painting  of  this  miracle  is  preserved  in  the  chapel.  The 
pilgrims,  on  the  fortieth  day,  return  in  safety,  and  become 
monks.  This  curious  and  rare  volume  ends  with  the  Litany, 
Rosary,  and  Corone  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  in  English :  being 
the  official  prayers  to  Mary,  as  sanctioned  by  the  church. 
These  illustrate  the  dispute  as  to  whether  or  not  she  is  an 
object  of  worship  with  the  Romish  Church.  The  following  is 
'  The  Oblation  of  the  Assumption :' — 

'  0  Soueraigne  Lady  and  Virgin,  the  honour  of  mankind, 
and  beauty  of  the  heavens,  I  humbly  offer  uuto  thee  1 0.  Aves 
and  one  Pater-noster,  to  the  glorious  mystery  of  thy  Assump- 
tion ;  when  by  the  B.  Sonne,  thou  wert  called  to  his  euer- 
lasting  glory,  &  deseruedst  at  thy  happy  passage  to  haue  pre- 
sent the  holy  Apostles  thy  seruants,  &  wast  receiued  body  and 
soule  into  the  heauenly  habitations  of  the  celestiall  spirits,  as 
Queene  of  the  Angels  &  mother  of  their  Lord  &  maister.' 

The  lady  who,  with  considerable  talent  and  great 
humility,  published  Bunyan  in  epic  poetry,  under 
the  signature  of  C.  C.  V.  G.,  in  a  note  to  a  Key, 
says,  *  It  is  a  certain  fact,  and  one  not  very  gener- 
ally known,  that  a  complete  design  of  a  Pilgrim's 
Progress  is  to  be  found  in  Luciau's  "  Hermotimus ; 
it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  Bunyan  could  have 
seen  it  there,  from  the  limited  educational  advan- 
tages he  possessed ;  yet,  the  obvious  allegory  oc- 
curred to  his  mind,  unschooled  as  it  was,  in  a  similar 
arrangement  with  that  suggested  by  Lucian."  '4 

Mr.  Tooke  thus  translates  the  passage:5  'Her- 
motimus, of  Cladomena,  of  whom  it  is  related,  that 
his  soul  often  quitted  him,  and  after  having  wan- 
dered a  long  while  about  the  world  by  itself,  re- 

2  Pp.  356,  357.  This  volume  is  of  extreme  rarity;  it  is  in 
the  Editor's  library. 

3  '  Host ;'  the  consecrated  wafer. 

4  This  also  struck  Mr.  Southey.  See  his  Letter  to  Sir  E. 
Brydges  in  his  Autobiography,  vol.  ii.  p.  285. 

*  Lucian's  Works,  translated  by  Tooke,  with  Wieland's 
Notes,  4to,  1820,  vol.  ii.  p.  268. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


49 


turned  again  into  its  body,  and  that  Hermotimus  was 
several  times  taken  for  dead,  and  always  rose  again. ' 
To  this  Mr.  Wieland  adds  a  note :  '  It  was  a  singu- 
lar gift  that  he  had  of  being  able  to  leave  his  body, 
and  come  into  it  again  ;  and  as  a  proof  that  his  soul, 
while  its  body  lay  for  dead,  was  actually  out  of  it, 
he  knew,  not  only  to  give  account  of  the  remotest 
places,  and  of  what  he  had  there  seen  and  heard, 
with  accuracy,  and  in  conformity  to  truth,  but  also 
foretold  sundry  future  events,  as  earthquakes  and 
other  calamities,  which  actually  came  to  pass. 
And  this  he  carried  on  so  long,  that  his  faithful 
wife  was  induced  to  deliver  up  his  body  to  his 
enemies,  during  one  of  these  emigrations  of  the 
soul,  who  immediately  burnt  it ;  and  thus  for  ever 
stopped  all  re-entrance  to  the  poor  soul.  The 
learned  Bishop  Huet  directly  pronounces  this  beau- 
tiful story  to  be  an  old  wife's  tale.'  Where  the 
poor  burnt-out  soul  obtained  another  habitation, 
we  are  not  told.  This  notion  of  the  soul  wandering 
about  without  the  body  has  been  lately  revived, 
among  other  absurdities  called  Mesmerism ;  but 
what  idea  Bunyan  could  get  from  this  absurd 
story,  is  far  beyond  my  comprehension. 

Bernard's  Isle  of  Man;  or,  the  Legal  Proceedings 
in  Manshire  against  Sin. 
This  interesting  little  volume  was  very  popular. 
The  author,  a  Puritan  member  of  the  Church  of 
England,  who,  profiting  by  the  personal  respect 
felt  for  him  by  his  bishop,  escaped  punishment, 
and  was  permitted  to  enjoy  his  living  of  Batcomb. 
The  purity  of  his  life ;  his  zeal  for  the  conversion 
of  perishing  sinners ;  and  his  obedience  to  the  dic- 
tates of  his  own  conscience,  would,  but  for  such 
protection,  have  subjected  him  to  persecution.  The 
late  Dr.  Adam  Clarke1  considered  that  there  was 
much  reason  to  believe  that  Tlie  Isle  of  Man,  or 
Spenser's  Faery  Queen,  gave  birth  to  the  ■  Pilgrim's 
Progress '  and  '  Huly  War. '  Dr.  Southey  2  imagines 
that  Bunyan  had  seen  this  book,  because  his  verses 
introductory  to  the  Second  Part  have  some  simi- 
larity to  Bernard's  Apology  for  his  Allegory,  which 
closes  the  volume.  Such  authorities  induced  me 
to  a  careful  re-perusal  of  a  book  which  had  given 
me  much  pleasure  in  bygone  days. 

Sin  is  the  Thief  and  Robber ;  lie  stealeth  our  graces  ;  spoil- 
eth  us  of  every  blessiug;  utterly  undoeth  us,  and  maketh 
miserable  both  body  and  soul.  He  is  a  murderer ;  spares  no 
person,  sex,  or  age;  a  strong  thief;  no  liuman  power  can 
bind  him;  a  subtle  thief;  he  beguiled  Adam,  David,  yea, 
even  Paul.  The  only  watchman  to  spy  him  out  is  Godly- 
Jealousy.  His  resort  is  in  Soul's  Town,  lodging  in  the  heart. 
Sin  is  to  be  sought  in  the  by-lanes,  and  in  Sense,  Thought, 
Word,  and  Deed  Streets.     The  hue  and  cry  is  after  fellows 


1  Postscript  to  Wetherall's  Life  of  Banyan,  prefixed  to  The 
Pilgrim,  an  Epic  Poem,  by  C.  C.  V.  G.,  Parsons'  Town,  1844. 

2  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  xci. 
VOL.  III. 


called  Outside,  who  nod  or  sleep  at  church,  and,  if  awake,  have 
their  mind  wandering;  Sir  Worldly-wise,  a  self-conceited 
earth-worm  ;  Sir  Luke-warm,  a  Jaek-on-both-sides ;  Sir  Plaus- 
ible Civil  ;  Master  Machiavel;  a  licentious  fellow  named 
Libertine  ;  a  snappish  fellow,  one  Scrupulosity  ;  and  one  Bab- 
bling-Babylonian; these  conceal  the  villain  Sin.  To  escape, 
he  pretends  to  be  an  honest  man;  calls  vices  by  virtuous 
names ;  his  relations,  Ignorance,  Error,  Opinion,  Idolatry, 
Subtilty,  Custom.  Forefathers,  Sir  Power,  Sir  Sampler,  Sir 
Most-do,  Sir  Silly;  Vain  Hope,  Presumption,  Wilful  and  Saint- 
like, all  shelter  and  hide  him.  The  Justice,  Lord  Jesus,  issues 
his  warrant,  God's  Word ;  to  the  Constable,  Mr.  Illuminated- 
Understanding,  dwelling  iu  Regeneration,  aided  by  his  wife 
Grace ;  his  sons  Will  and  Obedience,  and  his  daughters,  Faith, 
Hope,  and  Charity,  with  his  men  Humility  and  Self-Denial,  and 
his  maids  Temperance  and  Patience.  Having  got  his  warrant, 
he  calls  to  aid  his  next  neighbour  Godly  Sorrow,  with  his 
seven  sons  Care,  Clearing,  Indignation,  Fear,  Vehement 
Desire,  Zeal,  and  Revenue ;  these  are  capable  of  apprehending 
the  sturdiest  thief.  He  goes  to  the  common  inn,  an  harlot's 
house  called  Mistress  Heart,  a  receptacle  for  all  villains  and 
thieves,  no  dishonest  person  being  denied  house-room.  Mis- 
tress Heart  married  her  own  father,  one  Old-man,  keeping 
riot  night  and  day,  to  prevent  any  godly  motion  from  lodging 
there.  The  house  has  five  doors,  Hearing,  Seeing,  Tasting, 
Smelling,  and  Feeling.  Eleven  maids,  impudent  harlots,  wait 
upon  the  guests,  Love,  Hatred,  Desire,  Detestation,  Vaiu-hope, 
Despair,  Fear,  Audacity,  Joy,  Sorrow,  and  Anger,  and  a  man- 
servant Will.  The  Dishes  are  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  served  in 
the  platter  of  pleasure ;  the  lust  of  the  eyes  in  the  plate  of 
profit ;  and  the  pride  of  life.  The  drink  is  the  pleasures  of 
sin ;  their  bed-room  is  natural  corruption.  '  In  this  room 
lyeth  Mistress  Heart,  all  her  maids,  her  man,  and  all  her 
guests  together,  like  wild  Irish.'  The  bed  is  impenitency,  and 
the  coverings  carnal  security  ;  when  the  constable  enters,  he 
attaches  them  all  with  apprehensions  of  God's  wrath,  and 
carries  them  before  the  judge,  who  examines  the  prisoners,  and 
imprisons  them  until  the  assizes,  in  the  custody  of  the  jailer, 
New-man.  '  If  any  prisoner  breaks  out,  the  sheriff  Religion 
must  bear  the  blame;  saying,  This  is  your  religion,  is  it?' 
The  keepers  and  fetters,  as  vows,  fasting,  prayer,  &c,  are 
described  with  the  prison. 

The  second  part  is  the  trial  of  the  prisoner,  and  judgment 
without  appeal ;  the  commission  is  Conscience ;  the  circuit  the 
Soul ;  the  counsel  for  the  king  are  Divine  Reason  and  Quick- 
sightedness ;  the  clerk  Memory ;  the  witness  Godly  Sorrow ; 
the  grand  Jury  Holy  Men,  the  inspired  authors ;  the  traverse 
jury  Faith,  Love  of  God,  Fear  of  God,  Charity,  Sincerity, 
Unity,  Patience,  Innocency,  Chastity,  Equity,  Verity,  and 
Contentation ;  all  these  are  challenges  by  the  prisoners,  who 
would  be  tried  by  Nature,  Doubting,  Careless,  &c.,  all  free- 
holders of  great  means.  This  the  judge  overrules ;  Old-man 
is  put  on  his  trial  first,  and  David,  Job,  Isaiah,  and  Paul,  are 
witnesses  against  him.  He  pleads,  '  There  is  no  such  thing  as 
Original  Corruptions ;  Pelagius,  a  learned  man,  and  all  those 
now  that  are  called  Anabaptists,  have  hitherto,  and  yet  do 
maiutaiu  that  sin  cometh  by  imitation,  and  not  by  inbred 
pravity.3     Good,  my  lord,  cast  not  away  so  old  a  man,  for  I 

3  Acts  xxviii.  22.  This  slander  was  thus  published  in  1 083. 
Iu  the  face  of  the  Baptist  Confession  of  Faith,  printed  in  1646, 
presented  to  Parliament,  and  many  times  reprinted,  the  eleventh 
Article  in  which  is—'  In  the  beginning  God  made  all  things 
verv  good;  created  man  after  his  own  image;  full  with  all 
meet  perfection  of  nature,  and  free  from  all  sin  ;  but  long  he 
abode  not  in  this  honour,  Satan  using  the  subtlety  of  the  ser- 
pent to  seduce,  first  Eve,  then  by  her,  seducing  Adam,  who, 
without  any  compulsion,  in  eating  the  forbidden  fruit,  trans- 


50 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


am  at  this  day  5569  years  old.'  He  is  found  guilty,  and  his 
sentence  is—'  Thou  shalt  be  carried  back  to  tiie  place  of  exe- 
cution, and  there  be  cast  off,  with  all  thy  deeds,  and  all  thy 
members  daily  mortified  and  crucified  with  all  thy  lusts,  of 
(very  one  that  hath  truly  put  on  Christ.'  Mistress  Heart  is 
then  tried;  Moses  (Gen.  viii.  21),  Jeremiah  (xvii.  9),  Ezekiel, 
Matthew  (xv.  ',)),  and  others,  give  evidence,  and  she  is  con- 
victed, and  sentenced  to  perpetual  imprisonment  under  the 
jailer,  Mr.  New-man.  All  the  rest  of  the  prisoners  are  tried  ; 
the  juries  called  in  due  order;  prisoners  plead;  witnesses  are 
called;  defence  heard,  verdict  given,  and  sentence  passed. 
One  among  the  prisoners,  named  Papistry,  has  a  long  trial 
with  numerous  scriptures  brought  to  testily  against  him:  his 
sentence  closes  the  book — '  That  thou,  the  Master  of  Iniquity, 
with  the  Old  Serpent  called  the  Devil,  or  Satan  thy  father, 
with  thy  lewd  mother  that  great  whore,  drunk  with  the  blood 
of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus,  which  sitteth  upon  a  scarlet-coloured 
beast;  as  also  with  that  false  prophet,  the  son  of  perdition, 
thy  guide  and  governor,  shall  be  cast  alive  where  the  dragon 
is,  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone,  there  to  be 
tormented  with  all  the  marked  ones  in  the  presence  of  the 
holy  angels,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb ;  without  rest 
day  and  night,  the  smoke  of  which  torment  shall  ascend  up 
tor  ever  and  for  ever,  without  mercy  or  hope  of  redemption.' 
The  contents  form  a  key  to  the  allegory. 

There  is  not  the  slightest  similarity  between  this 
and  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  and  the  only  resem- 
blance it  bears  to  the  '  Ploly  War,'  is  making  the 
senses  the  means  of  communication  with  the  heart 
or  soul — an  idea  usual  and  universal  in  every  age, 
the  use  of  which  cannot  subject  a  writer  to  the 
charge  of  plagiarism.  A  correspondent  in  the 
Gentleman  s  Magazine1  imagines  the  following 
Btrange  genealogy  or  descent :  Bunyan  from  Ber- 
nard ;  from  Y\ete\\ev's  Purple  Island;  from  Spenser's 
Faery  Queen;  from  Gawin  Douglas's  King  Hart; 
from  the  Old  Mysteries  and  Moralities.  He  might 
have  added,  from  the  dreams  of  the  Fathers  !  !  ! 


Scudder's  Christian'. 


Walk,  1025. 


This  excellent  book  was  much  read  by  the  Puri- 
tans and  nonconformists,  and  was  strongly  recom- 
mended by  Dr.  Owen  and  R.  Baxter. 

The  sum  of  it  is  a  Christian's  directions  to  walk  with  God. 
The  moral  actions  of  man's  life  are  aptly  resembled  by  the 
metaphor  of  walking ;  no  man  while  he  liveth  here  is  at  home. 
There  are  two  contrary  homes  to  which  every  man  is  always 
going,  either  to  heaven  or  to  hell.  Every  action  of  man  is 
one  pace  or  step  whereby  he  goeth  to  the  one  place  or  the 
other;  so  that  God's  own  children,  while  they  live  in  this 
world  as  pilgrims  and  strangers,  are  but  in  the  way,  not  in  the 
country  which  they  seek. 


gressed  the  command  of  God  and  fell,  whereby  death  came 
■upon  alt  his  posterity,  who  now  are  conceived  in  sin,  and,  by 
nature,  the  children  of  wrath,  the  servants  of  sin,  the  subjects 
of  death,  and  other  miseries  in  this  world,  and  for  ever,  unless 
t/ie  Lord  Jesus  Christ  set  them  free.'  How  marvellous,  that 
a  pious  clergyman,  while  presenting  to  the  world  the  Trial  of 
Sin,  should  be  guilty  of  so  great  a  piece  of  iniquity,  as  this 
gross  and  uncalled-for  misrepresentation  ! 
1  January  1844,  p.  32. 


The  book  that  has  been  most  noticed  as  likely 
to  have  been  seen  by  Banyan,  is 

Bolswert's  Pilgrimage  of  Duy/kens  ami  Willemy li- 
kens, Svo,  Antwerp,  16-7.'" 
It  was  translated  into  French,  and  became  some- 
what popular.  This  book  was  noticed  by  two 
gentlemen  from  Yorkshire,  who  ciilled  to  see  my 
e-xtensive  collection  of  early  English  Bibles  and 
books,  about  twenty-four  years  ago.  Among  other 
books  they  noticed  a  very  fine  copy  of  this  rare 
volume  of  Bolswert's,  the  prints  in  which  reminded 
them  of  Banyan's  '  Pilgrim,'  and  on  their  return 
to  the  north,  a  paragraph  was  inserted  in  a  pro- 
vincial paper  stating  that  our  '  Pilgrim's  Progress' 
was  a  translation.  The  falsehood  of  such  a  state- 
ment has  been  fully  proved  by  Mr.  Southey,  to 
whom  the  identical  volume  was  lent,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  fully  entering  into  the  question,  and  there 
appears  not  to  be  the  slightest  similarity  in  the  two 
stories. 

The  cuts  which  struck  my  visitors  were — A  man  sleeping, 
and  a  pilgrim  leaning  over  the  bed ;  through  the  open  door 
two  pilgrims  are  seen  walking ;  they  stoop  on  the  bank  of  a 
river,  at  the  head  of  which,  in  the  distance,  the  sun  is  setting. 
Another  cut  represents  the  pilgrims  with  fools'  caps  ou  their 
heads,  driven  by  a  mob,  and  one  of  them  before  a  man  sitting 
with  his  secretary  at  a  table;  a  third  shows  the  alarmed 
pilgrim  in  a  circle  of  lighted  caudles,  while  a  necromancer 
produces  goblins  and  sprites  from  an  overhanging  hill;  a 
fourth  shows  the  two  pilgrims  going  up  a  steep  mountain, 
when  one  of  them  falls  over  the  brink.  The  story  is,  that 
Dovekiu  goes  to  Willemyukeu  to  awake  her,  aud  she  sets  out; 
they  wash  in  a  river  which  has  its  source  in  Rome,  and,  taking 
the  Netherlands  in  its  icay,  flows  ou  to  Jerusalem.  They  are 
infested  with  vermin  at  a  kermes;3  go  through  a  number  of 
ridiculous  adventures,  until  one  is  blown  from  a  rock,  aud  is 
lost ;  the  other  arrives  at  Jerusalem,  and  is  m;u-ried. 

This  short  analysis  is  by  Mr.  Southey  ;  but  a 
translation  of  this  pilgrimage  into  French  lately 
fell  into  my  hands,  and  on  an  attentive  perusal  of 
it,  the  object  of  the  writer  becomes  perfectly 
apparent. 

Dovekin — Colombelle,  the  dove — is  one  who,  without  in- 
quiry, obeys  the  church.  Willeuiynken — Volontairette,  self- 
willed,  or  without  restraint — will  not  submit  without  inquiry. 
These  two  sisters  set  out  on  pilgrimage :  Colombelle  is  happy 
in  every  adventure,  until  blessed  with  a  spleudid  husbaud  and 
great  wealth ;  while  Volontairette  gets  into  perpetual  dangers 
aud  difficulties,  until  she  meets  a  violent  death. 

The  whole  object  is  to  prevent  inquiry ;  to  keep 
the  mind  enslaved  to  priestcraft ;  to  obstruct  that 
research  into  scriptural  truth  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
enjoins,  '  Prove  all  things  ;  hold  fast  that  which  is 
good.'  l  Tu.  v.  21.    'Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit, 


-  Bolswcrt  was  an  engraver  of  great  eminence.  He  illus- 
trated Sucquet's  Via  Vide  Eternce ;  the  plates  to  tins  book 
are  beautifully  engraved,  and  are  remarkable  for  Lis  prolitio 
imagination  in  drawing  devils. 

3  '  Kermes ;'  a  Flemish  fair. 


INTRODUCTION   BY  THE    BDITOB. 


B1 


■•'.-  tlio  spirits  whether  they  arc  of  r!'"l  :  be- 
eause  many  false  prophi  i  out  into  the 

world. '  i  to.  iv.  i.    It  i-  almost  a  wonder  that  a  tale 

me  popish  ; 
country,  hai  doI  been  published  in  English. 
We  oow  come  to  b  similar  claaa  ofboolu  pul  I 
during  Bunyan'fl  life. 

Wholes 

towards  Jerusalem  <  e.     By  John 

Eodges.     A  pocket  rolume,  I 

Tliis  is  a  series  of  meditations  on  •  fly  Writ, 

arrauged  in  the  onler  of  the  alphabet. 

The  8ouU?s  Progresse  to  the  Celestz 

I!  ,n;  ,,'u  Jeru  ah  m.  By  w  vy  of  g  >'/>';/  medita- 
tions awl  holy  contemplations.  Accomj 
with  divers  learned  exhortations  ami  pithy  per- 
suasions, tending  to  Christianity  and  Humanity. 
In  two  parts.  J'ir.-t,  on  the  Nature  of  God,  and 
ad,  on  the  sum  of  the  Gospel.  By  John 
Wells,  small  4to,  1639. 

True  Inventory  of  the  Goods  and  Chat 

8tition,  late,  of  the  parish  of  Ignorance,  in  the 
County  of  Blind  Devotion,     4to,  1642. 

The  Lost  Will  and  Testament  of  Sir  J.  Presbyter; 
with  his  admonitions  to  legions  of  perjured 
friends.     4to,  1047. 
The  two  last  belong  to  a  series  of  satirical  atta* :1 
I  icy. 

'  it'io.l  Dud 
By  II.. T.,  1646;  with  a  frontispiece  representing 
a  Saint  armed,  supported  by  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity,  fighting  Diabolus,  attended  by  Ifundus 

and  Caro.    Flame  is  proceeding  from  the  mouth 

of  Diabolus. 
Tliis  is  a  long  and  dreary  conference  between  a  sinner  and 
Satan,  with  soliloquies  and  prayers  <_:;' 
cot  relieved  by  anything  allegorical. 

The  Christian  Pilgrim  in  oj!  Conquest. 

By  John  Castaniza.     Printed  in  Paris,  1652. 

A  enrious,  but  not  allegorical  volume  of  popish  instructions, 
with  fine  plates. 

Tfie  Pilgrim,  from  Quarles's  EirJMms. 

'  0  that  my  icays  icere  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes.' — 
rix.5. 
1. 
'  Thus  I,  the  object  of  the  world's  disdain, 

"With  pilgrim  face  surround  the  weary  earth : 
1  only  relish  what  the  world  counts  vain ; 

Her  moth's  my  grief;  her  sullen  grief  my  mirth  ; 
Her  tight  my  darkness  ;  and  her  truth  my  error  t 
Her  freedom  is  my  goal;  and]  .        j  terror. 


•  not  my  ■eemfi 

re  the* ; 

•  my  prison,  and  my  home's  above; 
My  life's  s  preparation  hot  to  leave  thee; 

Like  one  I 

With  tin     I  not  live  witho  I 

3. 

'  The  world's  a  lab'rintl  toons '  ways 

Are  all  OOmp 

:   he's  hurry'd  bach  that  stays 
S  thou irht ;  and  be  1 
I  It  way    -   i  irk,  her  path  untrod,  unev'n  ; 
So  hard's  the  .  Heave:.! 

4. 
.  ;yringJ  lab'rinth  is  betrench'd  about 
On  either  hand  with  streams  of  sulph'rous  fin 
closely3  sliding,  erring  in  and  out, 

their  own  invention, 
He  falls  without  redress,  and  sinks  without  dimension. 
5. 

-    where  shall  I  meet 
.<:  lucky  hand  to  lead  my  trembling  paces? 
"What  trusty  lantern  will  direct  my  feet 

.  rous  places  ? 
What  hopes  have  I  to  pass  without  a  g 

rough,  a  thousand  fall 
6. 
'  An  unexpected  star  did  gently  slide 

•  to  a  greater  I  \ 

I  -ra'l  found  a  double  guide ; 
A  pillar  and  a  cloud — by  day,  by  night ; 
Yet  in  rny  desp'rate  dangers,  which  be  far 
.More  great  than  theirs,  I  have  no  pillar,  cloud,  nor  star. 
7. 
'  0  that  the  pinions  of  a  clipping  ; 

Would  cut  my  passage  through  the  empty  air; 
Mine  e;  _  f  mount  above 

The  reach  of  danger,  '-are  ! 

My  backward  eyes  should  near  commit  that  fault, 
Whose  lasting  guilt  should  build  a  monument  of  sJL 
8. 

f  li^'ht 
Enrich  mine  eyes  with  thy  refulg'-:  I 
Thou  art  my  path,  direct  my  steps  aright ; 

I  have  no  other  tight,  no  other  way: 
I'll  trust  my  God,  and  him  alone  pursue ; 
His  law  shall  be  my  path,  his  heavenly  tight  n 

u     Cap.  iv. 
'  0  Lord,  who  art  the  light,  the  way,  the  truth,  I 
in  whom  there  is  no  darkness,  error,  vanity,  nor  death :    the 
light,  without  which  there  is  darkness;  the  way,  without  which 

truth,  without  which  there  , 
the  life,  without  which  there  is  death.  *.  there 

be  tight,  and  I  shall  see  light,  and  eschew  darkness ;  I  shall 
sec  the  way,  and  avoid  wandering;  I  shall  see  the  truth,  and 
shun  error  j  I  shall  see  life,  and  escape  death.  Illuminate,  0 
illuminate  my  blind  soul,  which  sittcth  in  darkness,  and  the 
shadow  of  death :  and  direct  my  feet  in  the  way  of  peace.' 


1  'Anfractuous,'  winding 
-  '  (>yring;'  full  of  tu  i 
3  '  Closely ;'  slily,  sen 
*  ■  Clipping ;" 


52 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


'Epia  2. 
'  Pilgrim,  trudge  on,  what  makes  thy  sod  complain, 
Crowns  thy  complaint ;  the  way  to  rest  is  paiu : 
The  road  to  resolution  lies  by  doubt : 
The  next  way  home's  the  farthest  way  about.' 

Under  the  Commonwealth,  a  great  effort  was 
made  to  purify  the  Church,  by  an  examination  of 
all  those  clergymen  who,  either  from  profane  con- 
duct, ignorance,  or  want  of  talent,  were  a  scandal 
to  their  profession  ;  or  whose  violent  attachment  to 
monarchy  led  them  to  foment  rebellion  against  the 
Government,  and  who  were  unfit  for  the  work  of 
the  ministry;  all  such  were  ejected  from  their 
livings ;  and  pluralists  were  strictly  limited  to  one 
living,  the  selection  being  left  to  themselves.  These 
triers  and  judges  are  all  named  in  an  ordinance  of 
the  Lords  and  Commons,  October  20,  1645,  and 
September  26,  1646.  The  description  of  charac- 
ters they  were  to  try,  is  thus  given:  — 

'  All  persons  that  shall  blasphemously  speak  or  write  any 
thing  of  God,  his  holy  word,  or  Sacraments.  An  incestuous 
person.  An  adulterer.  A  fornicator.  A  drunkard.  A  pro- 
fane swearer  or  curser.  One  that  hath  taken  away  the  life  of 
any  person  maliciously.  All  worshippers  of  images,  Crosses, 
Crucifixes,  or  Reliques ;  all  that  shall  make  any  images  of  the 
Trinity,  or  of  any  Person  thereof.  All  religious  worshippers 
of  Saints,  Angels,  or  any  mere  creature.  Any  person  that 
shall  profess  himself  not  to  be  in  charity  with  his  neighbour. 
Any  person  that  shall  challenge  any  other  person  by  word, 
message,  or  writing  to  fight,  or  that  shall  accept  such  chal- 
lenge and  agree  thereto.  Any  person  that  shall  knowingly 
carry  any  such  challenge  by  word,  message,  or  writing.  Any 
person  that  shall  upon  the  Lord's  day  use  any  dancing,  playing 
at  dice,  or  cards,  or  any  other  game;  Masking,  Wake,  Shooting, 
Bowling,  playing  at  foot-ball,  or  stool-ball,  Wrestling,  or  that 
shall  make,  or  resort  unto  any  plays,  interludes,  fencing,  Bull- 
baiting  or  Bear-baiting,  or  that  shall  use  hawking,  hunting 
or  coursing,  fishing  or  fowling,  or  that  shall  publickly  expose 
any  wares  to  sale,  otherwise  than  as  is  provided  by  an  ordin- 
ance of  parliament.  Any  person  that  shall  travel  on  the 
Lord's  "Day  without  reasonable  cause.  Any  person  that 
keepeth  a  known  stewes  or  brothel  house,  or  that  shall  solicit 
the  chastity  of  any  person  for  himself  or  any  other.  Any 
person,  father  or  mother,  that  shall  consent  to  the  marriage 
of  their  child  to  a  papist,  or  any  person  that  shall  marry  a 
papist.  Any  person  that  shall  repair  for  any  advice  unto  any 
witch,  wizard,  or  fortune  teller.  Any  person  that  shall  assault 
his  parents,  or  any  magistrate,  Minister,  or  Elder  in  the 
execution  of  his  office.  Any  person  that  shall  be  legally 
attainted  of  Burretry,  Forgery,  Extortion,  or  Bribery.  And 
the  severall  and  respective  Elderships  shall  have  power  like- 
wise to  suspend  from  the  sacrament  of  the  Lords  Supper  all 
ministers  that  shall  be  duly  proved  to  be  guilty  of  any  of  the 
crimes  aforesaid,  from  giving  or  receiving  the  Sacrement  of 
the  Lords  Supper.'  With  power  to  appeal  to  the  provincial 
Assembly,  to  the  Nationall,  and  from  thence  to  the  Parliament.1 

The  commissioners,  called  triers,  ejected  many 
from  their  livings  who  had  been  a  disgrace  to  their 
calling.  The  character  of  the  clergy  was  at  a 
very  low  standard.  Bunyan  called  them  proud, 
wanton,   drunkards,  covetous,  riding  after  tithe- 


cocks  and  handfuls  of  barley.2  And  the  exclusion 
of  such  from  their  livings,  has  been  since  called 
the  sufferings  of  the  clergy !  To  ridicule  the  efforts 
of  these  triers,  and,  at  the  same  time,  some  of  the 
Calvinistic  doctrines,  a  small  volume  was  pub- 
lished, entitled  The  Examination  of  Tilenus  in 
Utopia,  London,  1658;  said  to  have  been  written 
by  Bishop  Womack  ;3  and  merely  because  the 
names  of  the  supposed  triers  are  Dr.  Absolute, 
Mr.  Fatality,  Mr.  Fri-babe,  Dr.  Damn-man,  Mr. 
Take  o'  Trust,  Mr.  Narrow  Grace  [Philip  Rye], 
Mr.  Know-little  [Hugh  Peters],  Dr.  Dubious  [R. 
Baxter],  <fcc,  therefore  it  has  been  asserted4  that 
Bunyan  must  have  read  and  profited  by  this  book, 
in  composing  his  allegorical  works. 

It  is  neither  a  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  a  '  Holy 
War,'  nor  a  '  Heavenly  Footman ;'  and  to  imagine 
that  Bunyan  was  assisted  by  this  book,  merely  be- 
cause the  triers  are  named  after  some  doctrinal  or 
practical  bias,  is  as  absurd  as  to  suppose  that  the 
boys  in  a  grammar-school  were  aided  by  Bun- 
yan, because  they  nick-named  their  master,  'Dr. 
Flog'em,'  for  his  unmanly  and  absurd  attempts  to 
drive  Latin  by  force  into  his  pupils. 

In  the  Journal  of  George  Fox,  one  of  the  found- 
ers of  the  Society  of  Friends,  under  the  year  1659, 
is  the  copy  of  a  long  letter  sent  by  him  to  these 
triers.  In  this  he  calls  upon  them  to  dismiss  all 
ministers  who  are  '  evil  beasts,  slow  bellies,  given 
to  wine  and  filthy  lucre,  proud,  and  that  have  fallen 
into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil.'  He  instances 
one  Ralph  Hollingworth,  priest  of  Phillingham, 
whose  parishioner,  Thomas  Bromby,  a  thatcher, 
having  refused  to  pay  a  sum  under  six  shillings  for 
tithe-dues,  instead  of  preaching  the  glad  tidings 
of  salvation  to  him,  and  his  wife  and  family,  sent 
him  to  jail,  and  had  then  kept  him  there  eight  and 
thirty  weeks. 

We  now  come  to  a  short  Pilgrimage,  which  has 
in  it  one  feature  similar  to  the  perseverance  of 
Christian.  It  is  one  of  the  delightful  poems  of 
George  Herbert's,  in  his  pocket  volume  called  Tiie 
Temple,  entitled,5 

Tlie  Pilgrimage. 

'  I  travel  on,  seeing  the  hill,  where  lay 
My  expectation. 
A  long  it  was  and  weary  way 
The  gloomy  cave  of  Desperation 
I  left  on  the  one,  and  on  the  other  side 
The  rock  of  Pride. 


1  An  original  copy,  in  possession  of  the  Editor,  pp.  5-7. 


2  '  Vindication  of  Gospel  Truths,'  vol.  ii.  p.  178. 

3  Southey's  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  92. 

4  A  most  intelligent  bookseller,  and  a  great  admirer  of 
Ruuyan,  lent  me  two  volumes,  observing  that  it  was  univer- 
sally admitted  that  the  triers  had  aided  our  Author;  but  if  he 
had  ever  read  the  triers,  it  must  have  tried  his  patience,  and 
satisfied  him  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  ground  for  such 
an  admission. 

5  Eleventh  edition,  pp.  135,  136. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


53 


'Anil  so  I  camo  to  rhansies  meadows  strewed 
With  many  ■  flower; 
Fain  would  1  here  have  made  abode, 
lint  I  was  qnicken'd  by  my  hour. 
So  to  cares  cops  1  came,  and  there  got  through 

With  much  ado. 
'That  led  me  to  the  wild  of  Passion;  which 
Some  call  the  world  ; 
A  wasted  place,  but  sometimes  rich, 
Here  1  was  robb'd  of  all  my  gold, 
Save  one  good  Angel,1  which  a  friend  had  ti'd 
Close  to  my  side. 

'  At  length  I  got  unto  the  gladsom  hill, 
■\\  here  lay  my  hope, 

Where  lay  my  heart ;  and  climbing  still, 

When  1  had  gain'd  the  lirow  and  top, 
A  lake  of  brackish  waters  on  1  lie  ground 
AY  as  all  I  found. 

'  "With  that  abash'd  and  struck  with  many  a  sting, 
Of  swarming  tears, 
I  fell,  and  cry'd,  Alas  my  King ! 
Can  both  the  way  and  end  be  tears? 
Yet  takiug  heart,  I  rose,  and  then  perceiv'd 
1  was  deceived. 

'  My  hill  was  further :    So  I  slung  away, 
Yet  heard  a  cry 
Just  as  I  went,  None  goes  that  way 
And  lives :    If  that  be  all,  said  I, 
After  so  foul  a  Journey  death  is  fair, 
And  but  a  chair.' 

The  only  similarity  is  that  Christian  goes  up  the  hill  Diffi- 
culty; he  hears  the  cry  of  Timorous  and  Mistrust: — 'Just 
before  us  lie  a  couple  of  lions ;  if  we  came  within  reach,  they 
would  presently  pull  us  in  pieces.'  Christian's  reply  was — 
'If  I  go  back,  I  shall  perish.  If  I  can  get  to  the  celestial 
city,  I  am  sure  to  be  in  safety  there.     I  must  venture.' 

A  Dialogue  between  Life  and  Death.  Very  requisite 
for  the  contemplation  of  all  transitory  Pilgrims, 
and  pious-minded  Christians.      1657. 

This  little  hook  consists  of  only  twenty-four 
leaves,  and  might  have  been  seen  by  Bunyan  as  a 
religious  tract  previous  to  his  writing  tbe  '  Pil- 
grim's Progress.'  It  contains  nothing  allegorical 
as  to  pilgrimages,  nor  any  idea  that  could  have 
assisted  our  author  in  composing  his  great  work. 

It  is  a  Dance  of  Death,  illustrated  with  very  rude  cuts,  and 
printed  with  a  homely  rhyme  to  each. 

A  Spiritual  Journey  of  a  young  man  towards  the 
Land  of  Peace  to  live  essentially  in  God,  who 
met  in  his  journey  with  three  sorts  of  dispute. 
With  some  proverbs  or  sentences,  which  the 
old  age  spake  to  tbe  young  man.  Also  a 
Spiritual  Dialogue,  whereunto  is  annexed  a 
round  or  chorus  dance,  whereunto  the  vain 
heathenish  lusts,  with  their  wicked  confused 


loose  minds  and  thoughts  (as  well  in  confusion 
as  in  a  show  of  holiness),  assemble  from  all 
corners  of  the  earth,  and  dancing  hand  in 
band,  skip  and  jump  to  Hell.  Translated  out 
of  Dutch.  London,  printed  by  J.  Macock, 
1G59.     Small  4to. 

There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  this  volume;  it  consists  of 
disputations,  proverbs,  and  dialogues,  the  whole  intent  of  which 
is  to  show  that  an  illuminated  uniform  spirit  must  be  Bought, 
not  from  the  Bible,  but  from  inward  light,  and  that  to  seek 
knowledge  from  the  Scripures  without  that  spirit  is  like  jour- 
aeying  by  night  with  a  lantern  in  which  there  is  no  light — 
fighting  with  a  scabbard  without  a  sword — quenching  thirst 
with  a  vessel  in  which  is  no  wine,  or  being  contented,  whin 
hungry,  with  a  cupboard  or  bin  without  bread. 

Reading's  Guide  to  the  Holy  City;  or,  Directions  and 
Helps  to  an  Holy  Life.     4to,  Oxford,  1G57. 

The  Pilgrim's  Pass  to  the  New  Jerusalem.  By 
M.  R.  Gent,  London,  1659,  small  8vo. 

This  volume  contains  a  series  of  meditations  on  passages  of 
Scripture,  intended  to  convey  the  consolations  of  a  good  hope, 
through  faith  in  the  Redeemer,  to  his  pilgrims.  It  contains 
nothing  allegorical. 

Pordage's  Mundorum  Explicatio,  or  tJie  Explanation 
of  an  Hieroglyphkal  Figure  ;  wherein  are 
couched  the  mysteries  of  the  Eternal,  Inter- 
nal, and  External  Worlds,  showing  the  true 
progress  of  a  Soul  from  the  Court  of  Babylon 
to  the  City  of  Jerusalem  ;  from  the  Adamical 
fallen  state,  to  the  regenerate  and  Angelical. 
A  Sacred  Poem.  8vo,  1661. 
There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  these  volumes. 

Jesus,  Maria,  Joseph;  or,  Tlie  devout  Pilgrim  to  the 
ever  blessed  Virgin  Mary.  12ino,  Amsterdam, 
1663. 

This  is  a  mere  guide  to  devotees,  in  their  approaches  to  the 
Virgin  Mary. 

Philothea's  Pilgrimage  to  Perfection.  Described  in 
a  Practice  of  Ten  Days'  Solitude.  By  Brother 
John  of  the  Holy  Cross,  Frier  Minour.  Small 
8vo,  Bruges,  1668.2 

A  rare  volume,  published  during  the  time  that 
Bunyan  was  writing  his  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  ;'  and 
it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  he  saw  this  Roman 
Catholic  production  ;  but  if  he  had  seen  and  read 
it,  he  could  not  have  gleaned  a  hint  to  use  in  bis 
wondrous  'Dream.'  It  is  dedicated  to  the  Countess 
Dowager  of  Sussex. 

In  this,  Brother  John  Cross  has  made  a  wonderful  discovery 
—that  countesses,  being  the  more  refined  images  of  God,  above 
the  vulgar,  have,  by  their  noble  descent,  a  clearer  aptness  to 


1  '  Angel ;'  a  gold  coin,  in  value  one-third  of  the  ancient 

sovereign. 


2  In  the  Editor's  library. 


54 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


sublime  thoughts  and  actions !  What  could  such  a  man  have 
thought  of  the  son  of  a  carpenter,  of  fishermen,  of  publicans, 
of  tent-makers,  or  of  tinkers  ?  The  .pilgrim's  name  is  '  Philo- 
thea  ;*  she  enters  on  her  pilgrimage  with  the  author's  good 
wishes,  expressed  in  the  language  of  Holy  Toby :  '  Walk  well, 
God  be  in  thy  way,  and  his  holy  Angell  accompany  Thee' 
The  journey  is  divided  iuto  ten  days'  solitary  employment,  that 
the  pilgrim  might  be  ravished  into  the  heavenly  paradise,  to 
hear  and  see  what  we  are  loath  to  leave  and  cannot  utter.  To 
attain  this,  very  minute  directions  are  given  as  to  time,  place, 
posture  of  body,  method,  choice  of  a  guide,  &c.  The  guide  he 
describes  as  '  a  medicine  of  life  and  immortality.'  '  Woe  be  to 
him  that  is  alone,'  says  Brother  John,  probably  feeling  under 
his  state  of  celibacy.  His  qualification  is  knowledge,  charity, 
and  discretion ;  he  will  securely  lead  thee  to  rest  and  peace. 
Her  exercises  are  to  be  vocal  prayer,  reading  spiritual  books, 
corporal  mortifications,  and  manual  labour  ;  use  only  one  meal 
a  day;  to  this,  add  a  hair  cloth  next  the  skin,  and  occasional 
floggings.  These  are  general  instructions,  which  are  followed 
by  objects  for  meditation  on  each  day's  journey,  so  as  to 
arrive  at  perfection  in  ten  days  ;  solitude,  humility  and  auster- 
ity, patience  and  charity,  vileness  by  sin,  the  sacrament,  mor- 
tification, flight  from  earth,  spiritual  life,  God  speaking  to  man, 
love's  ascents  and  descents,  the  soul's  repose  in  God,  union 
with  Christ,  and  ending  with  meditations  upon  the  Passions. 

An  Hue  and  Cry  after  Conscience;  or,  Tlie  Pil- 
grim's Progress  by  Candle- LigM,  in  Search  after 
Honesty  and  Plain  Dealing.     Represented  un- 
der the  Similitude  of  a  5©3&<£&;pfl.    Where- 
in is  discovered  the  The  Pritty  manner  of  his 
setting  out.       His  Pleasant   Humours  on  his 
Journey.      The   Disappointment  he   met  with 
after  all  his  Search.     Together  with  his  flight 
at  last  into  another  Country,  where  he  is  still 
on  his   Ramhles.     Written  by  John  Dunton. 
1685,  18mo. 
The  advertisement  to  the  reader  says,  that,  as  the  anthor's 
previous  work  was  of  the  pilgrim's  journey  to  an  heavenly 
country,  so  now  of  all  sorts  of  wicked  pilgrims,  of  either  sex, 
that  are  either  posting  directly  to  hell,  or  madly  dancing  and 
frolicking  upon  the  brink  of  destruction.      Progressing  by 
candle-light,  all  manner  of  vice  and  roguery  is  painted  to  the 
life,  in  its  proper  colours;  and  then  brought  to  light  as  a  fatal 
spectacle  to  the  thinking  and  gazing  part  of  mankind,  together 
with  the  most  eminent  cheats  of  all  trades  and  professions. 

This  is  a  display  of  vice,  villany,  and  deceit  of  every  descrip- 
tion, without  any  continuous  plot ;  and  it  adds  one  to  a  thou- 
sand proofs  of  the  degraded  and  debauched  state  of  society  in 
the  reign  of  Charles  IT.,  and  of  our  happy  exemption  from 
such  scenes.  Morality  and  purity  have  extended,  as  voluntary 
efforts  to  spread  Divine  truth  increased ;  awful  was  the  state 
of  society  when  none  but  state-paid  priests  were  permitted  to 
teach  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation.1 

Bishop  Patrick's  Parable  of  the  Pilgrim.  4to,  1687. 

Whoever  has  patience  to  wade  through  ten  pages 
of  Bishop  Patrick's  Parable,  must  be  fully  con- 
vinced that  his  Lordship's  limping  and  unwieldy 


Pilgrim  will  never  be  able,  with  all  his  hobbling, 
to  overtake,  or  even  to  get  within  sight  of  John 
Bunyan  by  many  a  thousand  miles — a  striking 
proof  that  exquisite  natural  ability  casts  a  brighter 
and  more  captivating  lustre,  than  the  deepest  ac- 
quired parts.  The  bishop's  Pilgrim  has  only  one 
description  which  has  the  slightest  similarity  to 
Bunyan 's  style. 

A  gentleman  rides  up  to  the  pilgrims, '  very  civil  and  invit- 
ing,' but  they  observed  that  he  had  a  sword  by  his  side,  and  a 
pair  of  pistols  before  him,  together  with  another  instrument 
hanging  at  his  belt,  which  was  formed  for  pulling  out  of  eyes. 
They  told  him — '  We  are  strongly  possessed  against  those  who 
would  make  us  believe  we  cannot  see  our  way  unless  we  let 
them  pull  out  our  eyes,  and  who  are  not  content  to  labour  by 
reason  to  bring  them  to  their  bent,  but  shoot  them  to  death 
if  they  stiffly  refuse,  as  if  they  were  but  rogues  and  thieves.' 
The  learned  bishop  does  not  approve  of  the  Roman  Catholics 
using  force,  pulling  out  of  eyes,  or  shooting  churchmen ;  while, 
at  that  very  time,  his  own  church,  if  dissenters  refused,  to  use 
his  own  phrase,  to  have  their  eyes  pulled  out,  sent  them  to 
prison,  tormented  them,  and,  in  some  cases,  they  hung,  drew, 
and  quartered  them  I  On  getting  rid  of  him,  another  man, 
more  sad  and  melancholy,  crossed  their  way,  with  a  dagger  by 
his  side  and  a  pistol  peeping  out  of  his  pocket — he  represents 
the  Presbyterians  or  Independents;  aud  to  him  the  Episcopalian 
says,  '  I  retain  my  own  eyes,  but  use  also  those  of  "  the  Con- 
ductors of  Souls ;  and  am  glad  with  all  mine  heart  that  I  have 
met  with  one  both  to  teach  and  to  watch  over  me."  Your 
dagger  will  soon  grow  to  a  sword ;  you  pretend  to  liberty,  and 
will  give  none.'  How  true  is  the  saying,  "  with  what  judg- 
ment ye  judge  ye  shall  be  judged."  ' 

The  A^ery  crime  which  the  learned  bishop  imputes 
to  others,  was  most  prominently  his  own  ;  for  at 
that  time  no  Church  was  more  hostile  to  the  Chris- 
tian's duty  of  seeing  with  his  own  eyes,  or  judging 
for  himself  from  a  personal  examination  of  the 
Sacred  Scriptures.  The  bishop  exclaims  against 
those  who  persecuted  his  Church,  but  veils  the  in- 
famous Protestant  persecutions  by  which  that  same 
Church  was  spotted  as  with  a  leprosy. 

After  all,  Patrick,  with  some  excellencies,  is  but 
a  sorry  pedlar,  dealing  in  damaged  wares ;  for,  in- 
stead of  Christian  experience  formed  from  Scrip- 
ture, we  find  scraps  from  the  philosophers  and 
heathen  mythology.  Patrick  and  Bunyan  were 
writing  their  pilgrims  about  the  same  time :  they  do 
not  appear  to  have  anything  in  common.  Patrick 
was  a  learned  man,  and  his  elaborate  work  re- 
quires the  pains  to  read  it  which  he  took  in  its 
composition  ;  while  Bunyan's  story  flowed  freely 
from  his  rich  imagination,  and  the  reader  enjoys 
it  with  the  same  flowing  pleasure. 

The  sixth  edition  of  the  Parable  of  the  Pilgrim 
has  a  finely  executed  frontispiece,  representing  a 
pilgrim  leaving  a  city,  and  going  a  roundabout 
way  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  shines  forth  in 
the  clouds.2 


1   A  copy  of  this   book  is  preserved 
Ko.  700.  A.  3,  in  the  British  Museum. 


Duntou's    Works, 


2  London,  1CS7. 


INTRODUCTION'    M   THE   EDITOR. 


55 


Patrick's  Pilgrim,  slightly  abridged,  was  pub- 
lished in  the  Englishman's  Library  ;  and  still  more 
abridged,  in  a  neat  pocket  volume,  at  Oxford,  by 
Parker. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  EDITIONS  OF  TIIK  '  PIL- 
GRIM'S PKOOBZSS'  PUBLISHED  DURING  TIIK  AUTHC-k's 
LIFE,  WITH  NOTICES  OF  TIIK  MORE  PROMINENT  MODERN 
EDITIONS. 

The  first  edition  uf  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  ' 
was  published  in  a  foolscap  8vo,  in  1G78.  This 
volume  is  of  extraordinary  rarity ;  only  one  copy 
being  known  to  exist,  and  that  in  the  most  beau- 
tiful preservation,  in  the  original  binding,  clean 
and  perfect.  It  was  discovered  in  a  nobleman's 
library,  and,  judging  from  its  appearance,  had 
never  been  read.  It  is  now  in  the  cabinet  of 
H.  S.  Holford,  Esq.,  of  Weston  Birt  House,  Tet- 
bury,  Gloucestershire.  To  that  gentleman  the 
public  are  deeply  indebted  for  his  liberal  permis- 
sion, given  to  me  on  behalf  of  the  Hanserd  Knollys 
Society,  not  only  to  copy  it  for  publication  by  that 
Society,  but  also  to  correct  the  proof-sheets  of  the 
edition  by  a  careful  comparison  of  them  with  the 
original.  Having  with  great  care  and  labour 
edited  that  edition,  I  can  certify  that  it  is  an 
accurate  reprint,  not  merely  verbal,  but  literal, 
including  the  punctuation,  and  the  use  of  capitals 
and  italics.  The  volume  contains  253  pages,  with 
a  black-letter  head-line.  It  has  no  portrait  or 
cuts.  In  it  are  some  words  and  sentences  which 
were  omitted  in  all  the  subsequent  editions  until 
that  in  1847,  by  the  Hanserd  Knollys  Society. 

The  second  edition  was  published  also  in  the 
year  1G7S.  The  title  is  nearly  similar  to  the 
first,  with  the  words,  '  The  second  Edition,  with 
Additions.'  And  to  this  very  considerable  addi- 
tions had  been  made.  A  copy  of  this  book,  wanting 
the  verses  at  the  end,  is  in  the  British  Museum  ; 
and  a  very  fine  and  perfect  one  is  in  the  library 
of  W.  E.  Gurney,  Esq.,  Denmark  Hill.1  It  is 
comprised  in  276  pages,  and  has  no  portrait  or 
cuts.  It  has  many  more  typographical  errors 
than  the  first  edition,  but  the  spelling  is  greatly 
modernized  and  improved. 

The  third  edition  appeared  in  the  following 
year,  1679,  by  the  same  publishers.  A  most 
beautiful  copy  of  this  rare  volume,  bound  in  olive 
morocco,  to  all  appearance  new,  is  in  the  library 
of  the  Rev.  *  *  *  - 

It  contains  287  rages,  with  a  portrait  of  the 


1  The  same  book  was  lent  to  Tbos.  Scott  by  Mrs.  Gurney, 
Holborn.  See  Preface  to  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,  with  Notes, 
by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Scott.' 

-  Lent  to  me  by  my  worthy  friend,  Mr.  Leslie,  Bookseller, 
Great  Queen  Street. 


author,  engraved  by  R.  W[bite].  f.  marked  upon 
the  rock,  but  no  other  cut  or  Illustration.  This 
portrait  is  well  engraved,  and  a  credit  to  the  emi- 
uent  artist,  who  was  a  personal  friend  of  Mr. 
Bunyan's.  It  is  very  superior  to  the  miserable 
imitations  which  ornamented  later  editions.  In 
this  a  considerable  addition  was  made;  and  this 
completed  the  allegory.  From  that  time  to  the 
author's  decease,  every  edition  presents  some  little 
additions  of  side-notes  or  references. 

The  fourth  edition  is  by  the  same  publishers,  in 
1680;  it  contains  288  pages,  and  has  the  portrait. 
A  copy  of  this  is  in  the  Editor's  possession.  An- 
other copy  of  this  same  edition,  lent  to  me  by  Mr. 
Pickering,  bookseller,  Piccadilly,  has  on  the  back 
of  the  portrait,  An  Advertisement  front  the  Book- 
seller: — 

1  The  Pilgrims  Progress,  having  sold  several  Impressions, 
and  with  good  Acceptation  among  the  People,  (there  are  some 
malicious  men  of  our  profession  of  lewd  principles,  hating 
honesty,  and  Coveting  other  mens  rights,  and  which  we  call 
Land  Pirates,  one  of  this  society  is  Thomas  Bradyl,  a  Printer, 
who  I  actually  found  printing  my  Book  for  himself,  and  five 
more  of  his  Confederates,)  but  in  truth  he  hath  so  abominably 
and  basely  falcitied  the  true  Copic,  and  changed  the  Notes, 
that  they  have  abused  the  Author  in  the  seuce,  and  the  Pro- 
priator  of  his  right  (and  if  it  doth  steal  abroad,  they  put  a 
cheat  upon  the  people).  You  may  distinguish  it  thus,  The 
Notes  are  Printed  in  Long  Primer,  a  base  old  letter,  almost 
worn  out,  hardly  to  be  read,  and  such  is  the  Book  it  self. 
Whereas  the  true  Copie  is  Printed  in  a  Leigable  fair  Character 
and  Brevier  Notes  as  it  alwaics  has  been,  this  Fourth  Edi- 
tion hath,  as  the  third  had,  the  Authors  picture  before  the 
Title,  and  hath  more  then  22  passages  of  Additions,  pertinently 
placed  quite  thorow  the  Book,  which  the  Counterfeit  hath  not. 

'n.p: 

'  This  is  Brevier,  and  the  true  '  This  is  Long  Primer 
Copy.'  j  Letter. ' 

The  additions  alluded  to  are  quotations  from 
Scripture,  and  side-notes.  Dunton  had  a  high 
opinion  of  Braddyll,  and  calls  him  a  first-rate 
printer,  active,  diligent,  and  religious.3  Ponder 
certainly  did  not  unite  in  these  encomiums. 

The  fifth  edition  is  also  by  Ponder,  and  was 
published  in  1680;  it  contains  221  pages.  This 
has  the  portrait,  and  one  woodcut  on  page  128 — 
the  Martyrdom  of  Faithful,  with  the  verse  beneath. 
A  fine  copy  is  in  possession  of  my  excellent  friend 
Mr.  Pickering. 

The  sixth  has  not  been  found  in  a  perfect  state. 

The  seventh,  in  very  beautiful  preservation,  is 
in  the  library  of  R.  B.  Sherring,  Esq.,  Bristol.  It 
was  published  by  Ponder,  1681,  containing  286 
pages,  handsomely  printed,  with  the  portrait,  and 
the  cut  of  the  Martyrdom  of  Faithful,  on  a  separate 
leaf,  between  the  pages  164  and  165.  It  was  a 
copy  of  this  edition  which  Banyan  used  in  writing 


3  Life  and  Errors  of  J  oh, i  DumIom. 


56 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


his  Second  Part,  all  the  references  in  which, 
made  to  the  First  Part,  correspond  with  this  edi- 
tion. On  the  hack  of  the  portrait  is  a  manuscript 
memorandum,  that  the  book  was  given  to  Thos. 
Hayward  Aug.,  1682.  Pretium  Is.  6d. 

There  were  two  eighth  editions  in  1682;  they 
have  211  pages,  and  two  leaves  of  a  list  of  •  Books, ' 
printed  for  Ponder,  the  publisher.  A  fine  copy 
of  one  of  these  is  in  Sion  College  Library ;  and 
the  other,  somewhat  imperfect,  is  in  the  Editor's 
possession.  On  the  back  of  the  frontispiece  is  the 
following  Advertisement : — 

'The  Pilgrims  Progress  having  found  good  Acceptation 
among  the  People  to  the  carrying  off  a  Seventh  Impression, 
which  had  many  Additions,  more  than  any  preceding :  and  the 
Publisher  observing,  that  many  persons  desired  to  have  it 
Illustrated  with  Pictures,  hath  endeavoured  to  gratifie  them 
therein ;  And,  besides  those  that  are  ordinarily  Printed  to  the 
fifth  Impression,  hath  provided  Thirteen  Copper  Cuts  curiously 
Engraven  for  such  as  desire  them.' 

Of  these  cuts,  which  were  sold  for  one  shilling, 
nothing  is  known,  unless  they  are  the  set  of  neat 
engravings  inserted,  four  in  a  sheet,  in  Chandler 
and  Wilson's  edition  of  Bunyau's  Works,  2  vols, 
folio,  1737,  very  fine  impressions  of  which  appeared 
in  an  early  German  translation,  published  in  Lon- 
don, under  which  are  the  English  verses ;  they  are 
sixteen  in  number,  but  if  the  three  '  that  are  ordin- 
arily printed  to  the  eighth  impression '  be  deducted, 
the  number  then  agrees  with  the  advertisement. 
The  whole  of  these  designs  were  cut  in  wood,  and 
with  the  verses  were  printed  in  the  thirteenth 
edition. 

This  eighth  edition  looks  as  if  it  was  printed 
with  a  Dutch  type;  sheet  D,  pp.  49-72,  differs 
from  the  rest  of  the  volume,  and  it  is  very  singular, 
that  in  the  two  following  editions  the  same  differ- 
ence is  found  in  sheet  D,  which  is  a  sharper  type, 
and  more  closely  printed. 

Gay,  in  his  What-d' ye-call  it?  a  farce,  repre- 
sents a  man  about  to  be  shot,  when  a  countryman 
offers  him  a  book  to  pray  by ;  he  takes  it,  and 
says : — 

'  1  will,  I  will. 

'  Lend  me  thy  haudkercher.  [Reads  and  weeps.]  "  The  Pil- 
grim's Pro — " 

'  I  cannot  see  for  tears !     "  Pro —  Progress," — Oh ! 
'  "  The  Pilgrim's  Progress — eighth — edi-ti-ou, 

Lon-don — print-ed — for — Ni-cho-las  Bod-ding-tou : 

With  new  ad-di-tions  never  made  before," 

Oh  1  'tis  so  moving,  I  can  read  no  more ! ' 

This  farce  was  first  acted  in  1715,  and  proves  that 
the  '  Pilgrim  '  was  then  a  most  popular  religious 
book.  The  late  Mr.  Heber,  and  Mr.  Wilson,  sup- 
posed that  this  referred, not  to  the  eighth  by  Ponder, 
but  to  the  eighteenth  edition,  which  was  printed  for 
N.  Boddington;  but  might  it  not  more  probably  re- 
fer to  the  ekjJdh  edition  of  the  '  Pilgrim,'  Part  II., 


which  was  printed  by  that  celebrated  publisher,  a 
fine  copy  of  which  is  in  the  Editor's  collection  ? 

There  are  two  ninth  editions,  both  bearing  the 
imprint  of  N.  Ponder ;  the  first  of  these  is  dated 
1683,  212  pages.  A  copy  of  this  is  in  the  Editor's 
library,  and  another  in  possession  of  L.  Pocock, 
Esq.,  Montague  Street.  It  has  a  different  portrait, 
but  the  same  woodcuts  as  the  eighth,  with  the  addi- 
tion of  Doubting  Castle  on  p.  145,  numbered  135. 

Another  and  distinct  edition  is  called  the  ninth, 
also  by  N.  Ponder,  with  the  same  cuts  as  the 
last,  on  212  pages,  but  with  a  different  type ;  this 
bears  the  date  of  1684.  A  copy  is  in  the  exten- 
sive library  of  Joshua  Wilson,  Esq.,  Highbury. 
On  the  back  of  the  portrait  there  is  the  advertise- 
ment of  the  thirteen  copper  plates,  in  addition  to 
those  '  ordinarily  printed  to  the  eighth  impression. ' 

The  tenth  edition,  by  Ponder,  1685,  on  200 
pages,  is  in  the  Editor's  collection.  In  the  title 
the  name  is  spelt  Banian,  but  he  signs  the  Apo- 
logy as  usual,  Bunyan.  This  has  the  frontispiece, 
and  two  woodcuts  only;  that  of  Doubting  Castle  is 
omitted.  On  the  reverse  of  the  title  is  this  Adver- 
tisement : 

The  Pilgrims  Progress  from  this  World  to  that  which  is 
to  come  ;  The  Second  Part :  delivered  under  the  similitude  of 
a  Bream,  wherein  is  set  forth  the  Manner  of  the  setting  out 
of  Christian's  Wife  and  Children,  their  Dangerous  Journey, 
And  Safe  Arrival  at  the  desired  Country,  by  John  Bunian. 
I  have  used  Similitudes.     Hos.  12.  10.     Price  One  Shilling. 

The  eleventh  edition  was  in  1688,  as  advertised 
at  the  end  of  '  The  Water  of  Life. ' 

Twelfth,  in  the  Editor's  collection,  dated  1689, 
also  by  Ponder. 

The  thirteenth  edition  has  fourteen  woodcuts,  with 
the  verses  under  each ;  the  last  of  which  affords  a 
curious  proof  of  the  extreme  carelessness  with  which 
this  popular  work  was  published.  This  cut,  in  the 
former  copies,  represented  the  pilgrims  triumph- 
antly rising  on  the  clouds  to  the  Celestial  City, 
attended  by  angels,  with  a  crown  over  Christian, 
and  under  this  was  a  suitable  verse.  Imagine  this 
cut  exchanged  for  one  in  which  you  see  the  two  pil- 
grims in  distress,  wading  through  the  river  of  death ; 
one  sinking  hi  despair,  the  other  standing  firm,  and 
holding  his  companion's  chin  above  water ;  and  you 
read,  under  this  picture,  the  same  verse  that  was 
placed  under  that  of  their  triumphal  ascent : — 
'  Now,  now,  look  how  the  holy  Pilgrims  rise  ; 
Clouds  are  their  Chariots.     Angels  are  their  Guide.' 

A  more  complete  travesty  could  hardly  have  been 
devised. 

Bunyan  gives  a  hint,  in  the  verses  with  which 
the  First  Part  is  concluded,  of  his  intention  to  con- 
tinue the  allegory.  This  was  not  done  until  1684, 
and  the  great  popularity  of  his  work  induced  un- 
worthy men  to  publish  continuations,  intended  to 
cheat  the  public  into  a  belief  that  they  came  from 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


5  7 


the  pen  of  Bunyan.      Tie  thus  warns  the  public. 
in  the  verses  prefixed  to  the  Second  Part :  — 
1  Tis  true,  some  have,  of  late,  to  Counterfeit 

Mi/  Pilgrim,  d>  their  own,  my  Title  set; 

Yea,  others,  half  my  name  and  Title  too; 

Save  Btitched  to  their  Hooks,  to  make  them  Jo; 

But  yet  they,  by  their  Features,  do  declare 

Themselves  not  mine  to  be,  whose  ere  they  arc.' 

No  trace  lias  been  found  of  the  book  or  books 
which  appeared  before  L684,  under  Bunyan 's  ini- 
tials or  half  his  name.  The  only  counterfeit  which 
has  been  discovered  is  in  the  library  of  the  Baptist 
Mission  House,  wanting  the  frontispiece.1  It  was 
published  under  the  following  title: — 'The  Second 
Fart  of  the  ^tlgftmg  3jirOgr*00,  from  this 
present  World  of  Wickedness  and  Misery  to  an 
eternity  of  Holiness  and  Felicity,  exactly  described 
under  the  similitude  of  a  Dream,  kc.  They  were 
Strangers  and  Pilgrims  on  Earth,  Ileb.  xi.  13 — 10. 
Let  tis  lay  aside  every  weight  and  the  sin  that  doth 
so  easily  beset  us,  Heb.  xii.  7.  London,  for  Thomas 
Malthus  at  the  Sun  in  the  Poultry  1G83.'  The 
frontispiece  has  two  whole-length  portraits,  one 
sleeping  with  his  head  resting  on  his  hand — both 
in  clerical  garb. 

The  author  dedicates,  with  some  pomp,  his  little  work  to 
Jehovah,  aud  signs  it  T.  S.  There  are  two  poems  at  the  end 
of  the  volume  by  R.  B.,  and  the  author's  Apology  for  his 
Rook.  It  is  very  probable,  from  this  Apology,  that  the  author 
was  oue  of  those  who,  when  consulted  about  publishing  Bun- 
yan's  First  Part,  said,  'No.'  He  calls  Bunyan's  volume  'a 
necessary  and  useful  tract,  which  hath  deservedly  obtained  such 
an  universal  esteem  and  commendation  ;'  and  he  then  destroys 
all  his  commendation  by  discovering  a  four-fold  defect  in  that 
discourse:  First,  nothing  is  said  of  man  in  his  first  creation  ; 
secoud,  nor  of  his  misery  in  his  lapsed  state,  before  conversion  ; 
third,  briefly  passing  over  Divine  goodness  in  reconciling  sin- 
ners ;  and,  fourthly,  the  reading  of  it  occasioned,  in  vain  and 
frothy  minds,  lightness  aud  laughter. 

Such  carping  criticism  is  utterly  unworthy  of  comment. 
Bunyan  finds  his  pilgrim  fallen  from  his  first  creation  into  a 
state  of  misery,  and  under  a  sense  of  his  danger,  crying, '  What 
shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?'  He  unfolds,  in  multitudinous  variety, 
instances  of  Divine  goodness  in  reconciling  sinners,  and  almost 
irresistibly  leads  his  reader  to  accompany  the  poor  pilgrim  in  his 
way  to  the  celestial  city,  full  of  the  solemnity  of  his  heavenly 
calling. 

Who  the  author  of  this  Pilgrim's  Progress  is,  it  may  be 
difficult  to  ascertain.  He  dreams  that  multitudes  are  dancing 
in  the  broad  way  to  misery,  and  only  two  or  three  toiling 
on  the  narrow  up-hill  path  to  happiness.  lie  accounts  for 
this,  first,  from  infant  baptism  leading  them  to  imagine  that 
they  are  in  the  right  path,  and  that  no  profaneness  can 
prevent  them  attaining  that  eternal  inheritance  which  they 
vainly  imagine  to  be  a  right  conferred  upon  them  in  their 
christening;  secondly,  they  deli ght  in  sin;  thirdly,  preferring 
to  go  to  hell  with  a  multitude,  rather  than  to  heaven  with  a 
few;  fourthly,  because  their  reward  is  of  merit,  and  not  of 
srift;  fifthly,  'many  refuse  the  narrow  way  because  of  its  sim- 
plicity: they  must  have  their  glorious  colleges  and  splendid 
ministers,  their  beautiful  quires,  aud  raised  altars,  with  hang- 

1  A  perfect  copy  is  also  in  the  Editor's  library. 

vol.  in. 


ings  of  anas  and  tapestry,  furnished  with  the  finest  silver  and 

gold  of  Ophir,  a  gaudy  and  pompons  worship  and  musick  to 
delight  their  spirits,'  &c.  He  found  these  people  dancing  « it  h 
mirth  and  jollity  round  a  bottomless  pit  to  the  outcries  and 
screeches  of  the  damned,  and  playing  with  the  flames  of  hell. 
One  of  these  madmen  becomes  alarmed  at  the  preaching  of 
Boanerges,  and  Conscience  and  Judgment  do  their  utmost  to 
terrify  him.  Then  comes  Affection,  and  promises  the  poor  peni- 
tent wings  to  fly  above  the  clouds.  Will  huffs  and  hectors,  and 
must  have  him  leave  off  canting  and  whining  ;  but  after  a  long 
dialogue,  Will  consents  to  go  on  pilgrimage.  They  meet  with 
Apollyon,  and  have  other  adventures:  a  poor,  spirit li 
of  the  inimitable  Rrst  Part  by  Bunyan.  After  passing  more 
than  half  his  pilgrimage,  his  old  heart  is  taken  out,  and  a  new 
one  given  to  him.  Under  the  idea  of  a  feast,  where  the  guests 
arc  Gad  on  dishes  of  gospel  mysteries,  sauced  with  eternity,  the 
author  states  his  peculiar  notions.  He  at  length  arrives  at  the 
River;  Faith  and  Hope  support  him;  he  is  received  by  the 
Shining  Ones,  and  enters  the  city.  In  all  probability,  this 
book  never  reached  a  second  edition,  being  totally  eclipsed  by 
the  real  Second  Part,  in  1684. 

The  author  of  this  forgery,  in  his  Apology,  refers 
to  a  custom  among  the  Puritans  of  giving  the 
mourners  at  a  funeral  a  book  instead  of  rings, 
gloves,  wine,  or  biscuit.  '  This,'  he  says,  '  would 
prevent  trifling  discourse,  as  is  too  commonly  used 
on  such  occasions.  Among  those  few  who  have 
practised  this,  abundance  of  good  hath  been  done 
by  that  means ;  and  who  knows,  were  it  more 
generally  used  at  our  burials,  what  good  might  be 
effected  thereby  ? '  " 

At  length,  in  1684,  Bunyan  published  the 
Second  Part  of  his  'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  in  a 
similar  volume  to  his  first.  It  has  224  pages. 
For  the  use  of  a  fine  copy  of  this  rare  book,  we 
are  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  executors  of  the 
late  Lea  Wilson,  Esq.  In  this  volume  seven  pages 
are  in  a  larger  type  than  the  rest,  from  p.  100  to 
1U6  inclusive;  p.  106  is  numbered  120.  It  has 
only  one  cut — the  dance  round  the  head  of  Giant 
Despair.  The  next  edition  which  we  have  been 
fortunate  enough  to  obtain  has  a  similar  title  to 
the  first;  it  has  no  indication  of  what  edition  it  is, 
but  bears  the  date  of  16S7.  These  two  editions 
were  published  by  N.  Ponder  in  the  Poultry.  The 
sixth  edition  appeared  in  1693,  by  Ponder  and  Bod- 


-  One  of  these  books  is  the  memorial  of  a  most  valuable 
Seventh-day  Baptist:  The  Last  Legacy  of  Mr.  Joseph  Davis, 
who  departed  this  Life,  Feb.  1C,  170?,  being  a  Brief  Account 
of  the  mu-t  Material  Circumstances  of  his  Life  and  Profession. 
Written  by  himself,  and  given  at  his  Funeral  to  his  Friends 
and  Acquaintances,  &c.  Within  a  black  border.  Another 
book  used  for  this  purpose  was  Dr.  Bates's  Everlasting  Heat 
of  the  Saints  in  Heaven.  My  copy  has,  within  a  black  bor- 
der, 'In  remembrance  of  Mrs.  Mary  Cross,  the  late  wife  of 
Mr.  John  Cross,  &c.  &c.  This  book  she  had  a  particular 
respect  for ;  and  therefore  it  is  hoped  it  will  by  her  Friends 
be  more  acceptable  than  Gloves.'  It  is  bound  in  black,  with 
a  irilt  skull  and  cross-bones  on  the  cover.  Another  of  these 
volumes  was  Dr.  Bates's  Four  Last  Things,  with  his  Portrait. 
On  the  title  is  printed,  'Recommended  as  proper  to  be  given 
at  Funerals.'  Second  edition,  1691.  It  is  dedicated  to 
Rachel  Lady  Russcl.  See  the  bookseller's  advertisement,  as 
to  custom  of  giving  a  book  at  funerals. 

8 


58 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


dington,  in  Duck  Lane;  the  seventh  in  1696,  bj 
Ponder;  the  eighth  by  Boddington,  in  1702  ;  the 
ninth  is  by  N.  Boddington,  at  the  Golden  Ball,  in 
Duck  Lane,  1708.1 

Since  that  time,  innumerable  editions  have  issued 
from  the  press ;  but  before  giving  a  short  account 
of  the  most  prominent  of  these,  we  must  not  forget 
an  impudent  forgery,  called  the  Third  Part  of  this 
popular  allegory. 

It  was  probably  the  intention  of  Bunyan  to  write 
a  Third  Part.  Christian's  four  boys,  with  their 
wives  and  children,  are  represented  as  remaining  to 
be  a  blessing  to  the  church.  He  closes  his  Second 
Part  with  these  words  :  '  Should  it  be  my  lot  to  go 
that  way  again,  I  may  give  those  that  desire  it, 
an  account  of  what  I  here  am  silent  about ;  mean- 
time I  bid  my  reader,  Adieu. '  His  design  might 
have  been  to  display  the  difficulties  of  maintaining 
a  course  according  to  godliness  in  the  busy  scenes 
of  life,  among  mechanics,  tradesmen,  and  others. 
His  death,  in  1688,  cut  short  his  labours. 

The  extensive  circulation  of  Bunyan's  Works, 
and  his  extraordinary  fame  as  an  author,  excited 
the  cupidity  of  contemptible  scribblers  to  forge  his 
name  to  productions  quite  unworthy  of  his  great 
natural  and  acquired  talent.  He  had  scarcely 
entered  into  rest,  before  a  tract  appeared,  which 
might,  from  its  title,  have  imposed  upon  those  not 
well  acquainted  with  his  style  of  writing.  It  is  a 
quarto  tract,  entitled,  'The  Saint's  Triumph,  or 
The  Glory  of  the  Saints  with  Jesus  Christ.  De- 
scribing the  joys  and  comforts  a  believer  reaps  in 
heaven,  after  his  painful  pilgrimage  and  sufferings 
on  earth.  With  weighty  encouragements  to  draw 
poor  doubting  Christians  to  Christ.  Laying  open 
the  main  lets  and  hinderances  which  keep  them 
from  him.  With  helps  to  recover  God's  favour. 
To  which  is  added ;  The  Glorious  Resurrection  in 
the  last  day,  for  them  that  sleep  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Discoursed  in  a  Divine  ejaculation,  by  J.  B.  With 
a  bold  woodcut  portrait  of  John  Bunyan  on  the 
title-page.  London  Bridge,  printed  for  J.  Blare,  at 
the  Looking  Glass,  1688.'  Neither  the  style,  nor 
sentiments,  nor  the  use  of  Latin  quotations,  have 
the  slightest  similarity  to  our  great  author's  works. 

In  a  very  few  years  there  was  published : — 

Hie  Pilgrim's  Progress,  (be,  the  Third  Part — to 
which  is  added,  The  Life  and  Death  of  John 
Bunyan,  Author  of  the  First  and  Second  Part: 
this  compleating  the  whole  Progress. 
This  Third  Part  made  its  appearance  in  1692  ; 
and  although  the  title  does  not  directly  say  that 
it  was  written  by  Bunyan,  yet  it  was  at  first  gene- 
rally received  as  such.     In  1695,2  it  reached  a 


second  edition,  and  a  sixth  in  1705.  In  1708,  it 
was  denounced  in  the  title  to  the  seventh  edition 
of  the  Second  Part,  by  a  '  Note,  the  Tldrd  Part, 
suggested  to  be  J.  Bunyan's,  is  an  imposture.'  It  is 
surprising  that  so  contemptible  a  production  could 
for  one  moment  have  been  received  by  the  public 
as  written  by  Bunyan.  The  late  Rev.  John  New- 
ton, in  very  happy  language,  asserts  that  '  a  com- 
mon hedge-stake  deserves  as  much  to  be  compared 
with  Aaron's  rod,  which  yielded  blossoms  and 
almonds,  as  this  poor  performance  to  be  obtruded 
upon  the  world  as  the  production  of  Bunyan.'3 
Dr.  Ryland  justly  observes,  that '  when  the  anony- 
mous scribbler  of  the  Third  Part  of  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress  tried  to  obtrude  his  stuff  on  the  world  as 
the  production  of  Mr.  Bunyan,  the  cheat  was  soon 
discovered  ;  every  Christian  of  taste  could  see  the 
difference  as  easily  as  we  can  discern  the  superior 
excellence  of  a  Raphael  or  a  Titian  from  the  pro- 
ductions of  a  common  dauber:  and  we  can  as 
easily  distinguish  Bunyan  from  all  other  writers, 
as  we  can  discern  the  difference  between  the  finest 
cambric  and  a  piece  of  hop-sacking. ' i  The  author 
of  this  forgery  is  as  yet  unknown. 

A  much  more  respectable  attempt  was  recently 
made  towards  a  Third  Part,  under  the  title  of 
'Pilgrims  of  the  nineteenth  century;  a  continua- 
tion of  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  upon  the  plan 
projected  by  Mr.  Bunyan.  Containing  a  history 
of  a  visit  to  the  town  of  Toleration ;  with  an  ac- 
count of  its  charter,  and  a  description  of  the  prin- 
ciples and  customs  of  its  inhabitants.  Under  the 
similitude  of  a  dream.  By  Joseph  Ivimey.  1827.' 
The  object  of  this  volume  is  to  show  the  advan- 
tages which  resulted  from  the  Act  of  Toleration, 
by  the  adventures  of  Christian's  children  ;  but 
what  they  had  to  do  with  the  nineteenth  century, 
may  be  difficult  to  ascertain.  It  is  full  of  political 
allusions,  and  proclaims  the  author's  peculiar  sen- 
timents. Bunyan's  object  was  to  win  souls  to 
Christ,  under  the  influence  of  whose  presence  the 
most  highly-liberal  principles,  both  political  and  re- 
ligious, will  be  fostered.  Intolerance,  fanaticism, 
and  bigotry  fly  from  the  presence  of  the  Saviour 
as  naturally  as  the  shades  of  night  vanish  before 
the  rising  sun.  There  is  much  valuable  and  inter- 
esting information  in  Mr.  Ivimey 's  volume  to  Pro- 
testant dissenters,  but  even  that  is  much  encum- 
bered. He  is  so  delighted  with  Toleration  as 
almost  to  forget  that  it  is  only  one  step  towards 
liberty.  When  Christianity  shall  have  spread  its 
genial  influences  over  our  rulers,  all  sects  will  be 
equally  cherished  in  running  the  race  of  benevo- 
lence and  charity ;  then  the  burning  of  Christians 


1  All  these  editions  are  in  the  Editor's  lihrary. 

2  The  first  edition  is  in  the  British  Museum,  but  it  has  I 
no  title.     The  Life  which  is  appended  to  it  has  the  date  1 692.  | 


3  Preface  to  the  first  edition  of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,' 
with  Mr.  Newton's  Notes.  12mo,  London,  1776.  Many 
times  reprinted. 

4  Preface  to  Bunyan's  Works.     Svo,  1792. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


M 


for  their  obedience  to  God,  or  tolerating  them  to 
love  ami  worship  their  Maker,  according  to  the 
dictates  of  their  eoiwicnccs,  hut  still  compelling 
them  to  support  what  is  in  their  conviction  Anti- 
ohristian,  will  be  equally  wondered  at  as  gigantic 

grievances,  and  an  intolerant  ahuse  of  governing 
powers. 

Formany  years  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress'  was 
Continually  printed  on  very  ordinary  paper,  and 
innumerable  were  the  copies  that  issued  from   tlie 

press ;  the  woodcuts,  when  worn  out,  were  replaced 
by  an  inferior  Bet.  Each  Part  was  published  separ- 
ately, in  the  ordinary  shilling  chap-hook  form  ; 
these  are  sometimes  met  with  hound  together,  and 

forming  a  stout  volume.  Thus  Part  hirst,  twenty- 
second  edition,  with  new  cuts,  1727,  with  Part 
Second,  the  thirteenth  edition,  with  five  cuts  and 
a  note,  stating  that  the  Third  Part  is  an  imposture; 
and  then  Part  Third,  thirteenth  edition,  1743. 
Another  copy  has  Tart  First,  the  twenty-third 
edition,  1731;  Part  Second,  the  fourteenth  edition, 
1728;  and  Part  Third,  the  twelfth  edition,  not 
dated.  The  first  edition  of  the  Three  Parts,  uni- 
formly printed,  which  has  fallen  under  our  notice, 
is  by  J.  Clarke,  1743;  a  MS.  memorandum  gives 
the  price  of  the  volume,  Is.  6d.  The  most  wretched 
set  of  cuts  are  to  an  edition  printed  for  D.  Bunyan, 
in  Fleet  Street  ;  another,  with  similar  cuts,  is 
sold  by  J.  Bunyan  above  the  Monument,  meaning 
higher  up  Fish  Street  Hill  than  where  the  Monu- 
ment stands.  In  1728,  there  appeared  a  hand- 
some edition  of  the  Two  Parts,  '  Adorned  with 
curious  sculptures  by  J.  Sturt.'  The  editor  of 
that  edition  states,  that  the  former  were  printed 
for  the  poorer  sort  at  a  cheap  rate  [in  a  small 
type],  so  that  many  worthy  Christians  by  age  and 
infirmities  were  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  it.  This 
was  duly  weighed  by  persons  of  distinction  and 
piety,  who  determined  to  have  it  handsomely 
printed,  and  they  generously  contributed,  by  large 
subscriptions,  to  secure  its  being  a  correct  edition. 
In  comparison  with  all  that  had  preceded  it,  this 
shone  forth  an  elegant  8vo  volume,  fit,  at  that 
period,  to  ornament  any  library  or  drawing-room. 
The  engravings  are  from  the  old  designs,  and  well 
executed.  This  was  for  many  years  considered  to 
be  the  standard  edition,  and  was  frequently  re- 
printed;  in  1775,  two  editions  of  this  volume  were 
published,  after  which  that  with  Mason's  Notes 
superseded  it.  Who  the  editor  was  is  not  known; 
hut  this  book  very  sadly  abounds  with  gross  errors. 
When  Faithful  joined  Christian,  in  the  conversation 
about  the  old  man  who  offered  Faithful  his  three 
(laughters,  the  editor  has  altered  it  to  '  one  of 
them.'  In  Part  II.  p.  G3,  '  lines  '  is  put  for  'lions;' 
another  and  very  serious  error  occurs  in  the  cate- 
chising of  James  by  Prudence;  she  asks  him, 
'  How  doth  God  the  Son  save  thee  ?'  the  answer 


and  the  next  question  is  left  out ;  and  it  appears 
thus:  «By  his  illiinuna/iuii,  by  his  ruionil'mii,  and 
by  his  p-eservat ion.''  The  lines  that  were  omitted 
are:  "James.  By  his  Righteousness,  Death,  and 
Blood,  and  Life,  l'lud.  And  how  doth  God  tho 
Holy  Ghost  save  thee  ?'  Mr.  Mason,  in  his  edi- 
tion with  notes,  took  as  his  standard  this  erroneous 
copy, and  put  a  note  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  [G'J]: 

(/)  I  cannot  prevail  en  myself  to  let  this  part  | 
without  making  an  observation.  .Mr.  Bunyan  expresses  him- 
self \i  ty  elcir,  and  sound  in  the  faith  ;  but  here  it  is  not  so:  for 
what  is  here  ascribed  to  the  Son,  is  rather  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  ;  and  indeed  the  work  of  salvation  effected  by  the  Son 
of  God  is  entirely  left  out.  I  am,  therefore,  inclined  to  think 
that  here  is  a  chasm,  though  not,  perhaps,  in  the  author's  ori- 
ginal work,  hut  by  its  passing  through  later  editions.  It  really 
seems  defective  here  in  the  explanation  of  salvation  by  the 
distinct  offices  of  the  Holy  Trimly. 

In  the  next  edition  with  Mason's  Notes,  he, 
having  discovered  his  error,  very  properly  inserted 
the  missing  lines,  hut  as  improperly  continued  his 
note  reflecting  upon  Bunyan  ;  1  and  it  was  con- 
tinued in  many  subsequent  editions  in  which  the 
text  was  correctly  printed. 

A  line  is  omitted  in  Sturt's  edition,  Part  II. 
p.  185,  and  in  many  subsequent  ones.  '  How 
were  their  eyes  now  filled  with  celestial  visions,' 
should  be,  '  How  were  their  ears  now  filled  with 
heavenly  noises  and  their  eyes  delighted  with 
celestial  visions.'  But  a  more  unaccountable  error 
occurs  in  the  First  Part,  p.  95,  where  Bunyan  says 
'the  Brute2  in  his  kind  serves  God  far  better  than 
he  '  [Talkative],  the  printer  has  strangely  altered 
the  word  '  Brute  '  for  '  Brewer.'  It  is  easier  to 
account  for  an  error  in  printing  a  missal  in  Paris, 
in  the  rubric  of  which  should  be,  '  lei  le  pretre 
otera  sa  calotte  '  (here  the  priest  shall  take  off 
his  cap) ;  but  in  printing,  the  a  was  exchanged 
for  u  in  calotte:  the  printer  was  ruined  and  the 
books  burnt.  It  is  quite  impossible  to  notice  all 
the  errors ;  they  abound  in  almost  every  page  of 
all  these  interesting  editions.  Some  of  these  errors 
have  been  continued  through  nearly  all  the  modern 
editions,  with  other  serious  alterations.  Thus, 
when  the  pilgrims,  in  the  Second  Part,  leave 
the  Delectable  Mountains,  they  in  a  song  record 
the  goodness  of  God  in  giving  them,  at  proper 
distances,  places  of  rest,  '  Behold,  how  Jiihj  are 
tho  stages  set  !  '  the  word  '  stages  '  is  altered 
in   many  to  'tables;'3  and  in  other  editions  to 


1  In  possession  of  S.  J.  Button,  Esq.,  Racquet  Court;  of 
Mr.  Gammon,  Bethnal  Green  ;  and  of  the  Editor.  This  singu- 
lar note,  hv  Mr.  Mason,  is  reprinted  in  an  edition  of  "huh 
many  thousand  copies  were  sold,  published  by  Hummer  and 
Brewis,  Love  Lane,  Eastcheap.     l-'nio,  1S13. 

2  It  is  correct  in  the  edition  of  1728,  of  which  Lord  Aflh- 
bnrnham  and  the  Editor  have  very  fine  copies. 

■  \\  ith  Scott's  Notes  and  Montgomery  s  Lssay.  Glasgow, 
by  Colli  us. 


60 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


'  stables. ' x  When  the  pilgrims  escape  from  Doubt- 
ing Castle,  they  sing,  'Out  of  the  way  we  went,' 
&c. ;  one  line  of  these  verses  is  left  out  in  all  the 
modern  editions— an  omission  which  ought  to  have 
been  seen  and  supplied,  because  all  these  songs 
throughout  the  volume  are  uniformly  in  stanzas 
of  six  lines.  In  Hopeful's  account  of  his  conver- 
sion, Bunyan  says,  '  I  have  committed  sin  enough 
in  one  duty  to  send  me  to  hell;'  this  is  altered 
to  'one  day.'2  In  the  conversation  with  Igno- 
rance, Christian  observes,  « When  OUR  thoughts 
of  our  hearts  and  ways  agree  with  the  Word;' 
meaning  when  we  sit  in  judgment  upon  our 
thoughts,  and  our  opinion  of  our  thoughts  agrees 
with  the  Word  :  but  the  strength  and  meaning  of 
this  serious  passage  is  lost  by  altering  the  words 
to  'when  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts,'  &c.  This 
alteration  has  been  very  generally,  if  not  univer- 
sally, made.  Another  very  extraordinary  error 
has  crept  into  many  editions,  and  among  them 
into  the  elegant  copies  printed  by  Southey,  and 
that  by  the  Art-Union  with  the  prints  in  oblong 
folio.  It  is  in  the  conversation  between  Christian 
and  Hopeful,  about  the  robbery  of  Little  Faith. 
Bunyan  refers  to  four  characters  in  Scripture  who 
were  notable  champions,  but  who  were  very  roughly 
handled  by  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt ;  they 
made  David  (Ps.  xxxviii.)  groan,  mourn,  and  roar. 
Heman  and  Hezekiah  too,  though  champions  in 
their  day,  had  their  coats  soundly  brushed  by 
them.  Peter  would  go  try  what  he  could  do — they 
made  him  at  last  afraid  of  a  sorry  girl.  Some 
editor  not  acquainted  with  Heman  {see  Ps.  lxxxvm.), 
and  not  troubling  himself  to  find  who  he  was, 
changed  the  name  to  one  much  more  common  and 
familiar,  and  called  him  '  Hainan.'3  More  recent 
editors,  including  Mr.  Southey  and  the  Art-Union, 
probably  conceiving  that  Hainan,  however  exalted 
he  was  as  a  sinner,  was  not  one  of  the  Lord's 
champions  in  his  day,  changed  the  name  to  that 
of  Mordecai.4  A  most  unwarrantable  and  foolish 
alteration.  In  the  Second  Part,5  '  This  Vision '  is 
put  for  '  This  Visitor.'  The  marginal  note,  '  The 
Light  of  the  Word '  is  changed  to  '  The  Light  of 
the  World.' 6  This  error  is  perpetuated  by  Southey 
and  others.  A  copy  of  Sturt's  edition,  with  every 
error  marked  in  the  text,  appears  to  be  more 
covered  with  spots  than  a  leopard's  skin. 

This  wondrous  Dream  has  been  translated  into 
nearly  all   the  languages  of  the  world.     To  Mr. 


1  Editions  with  Mason's  Notes,  aud  iu  the  first  with  Sturt's 
Plates,  1728. 

2  Sturt's  edition,  p.  167. 

3  Editions  by  Birds  and  Co.,  Edinburgh,  8vo;  Mosley,  Gains- 
borough, 1792,  &c. ;  London,  with  Newton's  Notes,  1776; 
and  by  D.  Bunyan,  1768. 

4  It  occurs  also  in  au  edition  by  Hodson  and  Deighton, 
London,  1792. 

*  Sturt's  edition,  p.  9.  e  P.  173. 


Doe's  enumeration  of  one  hundred  thousand  co-pies 
in  English  having  been  circulated  in  the  life  of  the 
author,  must  be  added  all  the  editions  in  North 
America.  There  were  then  also  translations  into 
French,  Flemish,  Dutch,  Welsh,  Gaelic,  and  Irish  ; 
and,  since  then,  it  has  been  read  by  the  Christian 
Hebrews  in  the  holy  city,  Jerusalem,  in  their  own 
language,  without  points  ;  and  probably  beside  the 
waters  of  Jordan  and  Tiberias ;  and  far  may  it 
spread  !7  It  has  also  been  translated  into  Spanish, 
Portuguese,  Italian,  Danish,  German,  Estonian, 
Armenian,  Burmese,  Singhalese,  Orissa,  Hindoo- 
stanee;  Bengalee,  by  Dr.  Carey,  8vo,  Serampore, 
1821;  Tamil,  Marathi,  Canarese,  Gujaratti,  Malay, 
Arabic,  in  a  handsome  8vo  volume,  with  woodcuts, 
printed  at  Malta;  Romaic,8  Samoan,  Tahitian, 
Pichuana,  Bechuana,  Malagasy,  New  Zealand. y 
And  in  Dr.  Adam  Clarke's  library  was  a  copy  in 
Latin,  entitled  Per ■egrinalis  Progressus,  a  J.  Bunyan 
Lat.  edit,  a  Gul.  Massey,  4to.  A  copy  of  the  Welsh 
translation,  published  before  Bunyan's  decease,  but 
which  had  not  come  to  his  knowledge,  is  in  the 
library  of  Miss  Atherton  of  Kersell  Cell,  near 
Manchester.  That  lady,  not  understanding  the 
Welsh  language,  most  readily  and  kindly  furnished 
me  with  some  particulars  of  this  rare  volume, 
extracted  in  Welsh ;  and  it  appears  that  the  title- 
page  exactly  follows  the  English  editions.  The 
preface  is  signed  S.  H.  It  has  the  marginal  notes 
and  references.  Licensed  by  R.  Midgley,  23rd  of 
November  1687.  Printed  in  London  by  J.  Rich- 
ardson, 12mo,  168$,  the  10th  of  January.  '  The 
translator  advises  such  as  desire  to  learn  to  read 
Welsh,  to  buy  the  Primer  and  Almanack  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Jones,  because  the  letters  and  syllables 
are  in  them. '  The  late  Mr.  Thomas  Rodd  informed 
me  that  he  possessed  a  copy  in  Welsh,  translated 
by  Thomas  Jones,  published  in  1699,  small  8vo. 
The  Dutch  edition  was  very  neatly  printed,  with 
superior  cuts,  t' Utrecht,  by  Jan  van  Paddenburgh, 
1684. 

The  French  translation  is  a  neat  pocket  volume, 
with  copper-plates,  very  superior  to  any  embellish- 
ments in  the  early  English  copies,  Amsterdam, 
chez  Boekholt,  1685.  The  frontispiece  represents 
our  pilgrim  with  his  burden  on  his  shoulders, 
knocking  at  the  wicket-gate.  The  title  is,  Voyage 
oVun  ChrestienversVEtemitc,  par  Monsieur  Bunjan 
F.M.  en  Bedtford.  The  '  Lecteur  ami'  comprises 
fourteen  pages.     In  it  he  describes 

'  The  author  of  this  book,  Mr.  John  Bunyan,  is,  at  this 
time,  an  upright  and  faithful  minister  at  Bedford,  in  England 


7  Gentleman  s  Magazine,  April  1844.    It  is  in  a  small  12mo, 
the  price  of  which  is  6*. ! 

8  Bunyan's  'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  Romaic,  by  S.  J.  Bilson. 
8vo,  Melitse,  1824.     Brit.  Mus.  Addl.  Books. 

"  See  Lists  by  Tract  Society,  iu  Report,  1847  ;  and  in  T/'te 
Pilgrim,  a  tract.     Also,  copies  iu  possession  of  the  Editor. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


61 


— a  man  of  unexampled  piety  and  devotion  ■.  such  an  one  as 
lit  im  trius,  of  whom  John  speaks  in  his  3rd  Epistle  end  12th 
verse.  Even'  one  bears  witness  that,  in  this  little  volume, 
::iul  in  his  other  works,  appear  a  manifest  and  peculiar  wisdom, 
very  great  experience,  and  a  penetrating  sight  into  spiritual 
things.  The  design  of  our  author  is  simply  to  present  a  peni- 
tent soul  '  wards  Eternity,  How 
he  turns  from  his  former  state  of  perdition,  leaves  his  home, 
and  sets  his  steps  towards  the  Jerusalem  tni  high  ;  his  adven- 
tures by  the  way ;  his  view  of  those  that  choose  for  themselves 
bypaths  that  lead  to  hell;  we  donht  not  hut  that  sonic,  in 
turning  over  these  leaves, will  read  their  own  experience  inge- 
niously drawn  out,  and  their  own  portrait  placed  before  their 
eyes,  as  if  they  saw  themselves  in  a  glass.  The  Christian 
traveller,  the  true  citizen  of  Zion,  is  skilfully  portrayed  to  the 
life.  If  a  hypocritical  professor  should  have  his  eyes  illumin- 
ated, he  will  here  see  himself  under  another  name  than  that 
of  Christian — his  foolish  imaginations  overthrown — his  hopes 
perish,  and  all  his  expectations  swept  away  like  a  cobweb.  If 
any  one  judge  that  this  mode  of  writing  is  not  sufficiently 
solemn  for  such  spiritual  matters,  and  doubt  the  propriety  of 
representing  them  BS  a  dream  and  under  such  images,  they 
should  recollect  that  our  author  was  unintentionally  led  to  this 
manner  of  writing,  and  found  himself  very  much  embarrassed 
as  to  the  propriety  of  publishing  it  to  the  world  ;  and  did  not 
venture  to  print  it  until  persuaded  by  many  learned  and  pious 
men.  Our  Bunyan  wrote  allegorieally,  in  the  hopes  that 
Divine  truth  might  reach  the  very  depths  of  the  heart.  Many 
great  theologians  have  treated  the  most  important  truths  in 
the  same  figurative  manner,  following  the  footsteps  of  our 
great  and  sovereign  Rabbi  Jesus  Christ,  who  taught  by  simili- 
tudes, as  also  the  prophets  were  constrained  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  speak.  Oh  that  our  readers  may  find  themselves  to  be 
true  citizens  of  Zion,  with  their  feet  in  the  Royal  Highway, 
that  they  may  be  fortified,  consoled,  and  instructed;  and,  if 
convinced  of  backsliding,  may  return  to  the  paths  of  peace,  to 
love  King  Jesus,  the  Lord  of  the  Hill.  And  may  many  take  our 
Christian  by  the  skirt  of  his  robe,  and  say,  we  will  go.  with 
thee.  May  it  arrest  the  attention  of  the  Flemings  as  it  has 
that  of  the  English,  among  whom,  in  a  very  few  years,  it  has 
been  printed  many  times.' 

This  interesting  preface,  which  we  have  some- 
what abridged,  ends  with  a  quotation  from  Acts 
xx.  32. 

Bunyan's  language  is  so  purely  English,  his 
style  so  colloquial,  his  names  and  titles  so  full  of 
meaning,  that  it  must  have  heen  a  most  difficult 
hook  to  translate.  This  is  seen  on  turning  to  the 
fifth  question  put  hy  Prudence,  on  the  Pilgrim's 
arrival  at  the  Palace  Beautiful. 

'  Pru.  Et  qui  est  ce,  je  te  prie,  que  te  rend  si  desireux  de  la 
montagne  de  Sion  ? 

'  Chree.  Quoy,  demandes  tu  cela?  O  mon  Dieu  !  comme  le 
rerf  brame  apres  le  decours  des  eaux  fraisches,  ainsi  mon  eeur2 
desire  apres  toy  le  Dieu,  le  Grand  Dieu  vivaut.  C'est  la  ou 
j'attends  de  voir  en  vie  celuy  que  je  vis  autrefois  mort,  et  pendu 
sur  la  croix;  c'est  la  ou  j'espere  d'etre  nnefois  deoharge  de 
toutes  ces  choses,  qui  mccausent  tant  de  peine,  tant  de  doideur, 
taut  de  dommage,  &  m'en  ont  cause  jnsqnes  a  te  jour  icy ;  c'est 
la,  a  ce  qu'on  ma  dit,  qu'il  n'y  aura  plus  de  mort ;  c'est  la  ou 
je  jouiray  d'une  compagnie,  a  laquelle  je  prendray  le  plus  grand 
plaisir.     Car,  pour  te  dire  la  veritc,  je  l'aiine ;  voire 


1  Uniformly  spelt,  in  this  book,  ceur. 


Me  t'aimeray  en  Urate  obeissanee. 
Tante  que  vivray,  O  mon  Dieu,  ma  puissance. 

Je  dis,  je  l'aiine,  a  cause  qu'il  a  illumine  lis  yeui  obscurcis  de 
mon  entendement  par  one  lumiere  divine,  procedee  ties  rayons 

du  soleil  de  sa  grace,  lumiere  qui  m'a  servi  tie  guide  pour  me 
coudnire  en  ce  chemin;  mais  aussi  je  l'aiine,  pource  qu'il  ma 
deoharge'  de  mon  fardeau:  ..V  je  me  trouve  las  a  cause  tie  mon 

ma]   iutiiieiir ;  ah  que  mon  ceur  soupire  apres  ce  lieu,  oil  je 

serai  delivre  de  niourir  ;  apres  eelte  compagnie,  Ou  l'ou  ehantera 
a  jamais,  saint,  saint,  saint,  est  ]i'',teni:d  des  armer-.' 

The  answer  in  English  is  one  hundred  ami  two 
words;  in  French,  extending  to  two  hundred  ami 
twenty. 

The  Slough  of  Despond  is  called  Le  Bourbier 
Misfiance;  Worldly- Wiseman,  Sage  Mondain; 
Faithful,  Loyal;  Talkative,  Grand  Jaseur;  Pick- 
thank,  Flaiieur ;  My  Old  Lord  Letchery,  Mon 
vieux  Seigneur  Assez  Bon ;  No-good,  Vaidrien ; 
Live-loose,  Vivan  J\L>rf ;  Hate-light,  Grand  Hai- 
veux ;  Bye-ends,  Auirefin.  The  ]>oetry  would  have 
seriously  puzzled  the  worthy  translator;  hut  instead 
of  attempting  it.  he  supplies  its  place  from  French 
psahns  or  hymns.  The  copper-plates  are  rather 
line  specimens  of  drawing  and  engraving.  Sweep- 
ing the  room  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  and  At- 
tempting to  awake  the  Sleepers  on  the  Enchanted 
Ground,  are  new  designs. - 

There  is  a  copy  in  the  British  Museum  some- 
what modernized,  Rotterdam,  1722  ;3  and  a  very 
handsome  edition,  with  plates  hy  an  eminent  Dutch 
engraver,  printed  at  Rotterdam,  1 757  ;  *  and  one 
with  woodcuts,  12mo,  Basle,  1728,5  &C.  kc.  These 
are  French  Protestant  translations  ;  hesides  which, 
there  have  heen  man)'  editions  of  a  Roman  Catholic 
translation  into  French.  This  is  greatly  abridged, 
and,  of  course,  Giant  Pope  is  omitted;  and  so  is 
the  remark  ahout  Peter  heing  afraid  of  a  sorry  girl. 
They  are  very  neat  pocket  volumes,  printed  in 
Paris,  1783;  at  Rouen,  1821,  &c.  &c,  entitled, 
Le  PiUrinage  (Tun  Homme"  Chrkien  Traduit  de 
L 'Anglois.  In  the  preface,  the  Roman  Catholic 
translator  calls  the  English  nation  jiulicieuse  el 
edairie.  The  Editor  bought  a  copy  of  this  hook 
in  a  convent  in  France.  The  lady-abbess  assured 
him  that  it  was  a  most  excellent  work  to  promote 
piety  and  virtue! — a  sentence  which  first  led  him 
to  the  discovery  that  the  old  lady  had  a  remark- 
ably sweet  voice. 

Dr.  Cheever  accounts  thus  for  the  extensive 
popularity  of  our  '  Pilgrim:' — 

'  It  is  a  piece  of  rich  tapestry,  in  which,  with  the  Word  of 
God  before  him  as  his  original  and  guide,  and  with  all  these 
heavenly  materials  tinged  in  the  deep  feelings  of  his  own  coii- 


2  A  fine  copy  is  in  the  library  of  S.J.  Button,  Esq,  E 
Court,  Tleet  Street. 

3  British  Museum,  111.'?,  b. 

*  In   possession  of  Mr.   Thornton,  the  Cottage,  Oapham 
Common. 

1  A  line  copy  in  possession  of  the  Editor. 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


verted  heart,  he  wove  into  one  beautiful  picture  the  spiritual 
scenery  and  thrilling  events  of  his  own  journey  as  a  Christian 
pilgrim.  It  is  all  fresh  and  graphic  from  his  own  experience, 
vivid  with  real  life,  freshly  portrayed  from  the  Word  of  God ; 
nor  can  you  tell  that  Bunyan  was  of  any  sect,  save  that  he  was 
a  living  member  of  the  church  of  Christ.' 

This  work  has  afforded  the  deepest  interest  to 
the  painter ;  and  it  has  also  excited  the  poet  to 
sing  our  Pilgrim's  adventures,  both  in  rhyme  and 
blank  verse.  The  ornamental  embellishments  were 
at  first  good  woodcuts  for  a  chap-book,1  faithful 
copies  of  which  will  be  found  in  this  edition  ;  these 
dwindled  down,  in  succeeding  editions,  to  the  cheap- 
est and  most  contemptible  cuts  that  can  be  con- 
ceived. The  worst  of  these  is  in  an  edition  of  the 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  by  a  namesake  of  the  author, 
Mr.  D.  Bunyan.  The  next  series  were  the  copper- 
plates to  Sturt's  edition ;  fine  impressions  of  these 
designs  are  found,  four  on  a  page,  in  the  first  com- 
plete edition  of  Bunyan 's  Works,  1737.  Since 
then,  many  beautiful  sets  of  engravings  have  been 
published  in  the  editions  by  Heptiustall  and  Scott, 
between  1788  and  1793,  the  most  beautiful  being 
a  series  of  sixteen  elegant  designs  by  Stothard, 
engraved  by  Strut.2  These  were  reduced,  and 
published  in  4to,  with  Sonnets  by  George  Towns- 
end,  Prebendary  of  Durham.  Thus,  at  length,  we 
find  that  Bishop  Bunyan  keeps  company  with  other 
dignitaries.  Twenty-four  original  outlines  were 
published  by  Mrs.  Mackenzie ;  and  a  set  of  very 
beautiful  engravings,  with  a  valuable  letterpress 
accompaniment  by  J.  Conder.  The  edition  by 
Southey  is  elegantly  illustrated.  The  Art- Union 
has  favoured  the  public  with  a  series  of  illustra- 
tions in  oblong  folio,  some  of  which,  however  ele- 
gantly designed,  would  probably  puzzle  even  the 
keen,  penetrating  eye  of  Bunyan  to  discover  what 
work  they  were  intended  to  illustrate.3  A  more 
Feries  defect  is  observable  in  this  oblong  edition. 
Bunyan's  terms  are  considered  as  too  vulgar,  and 
two  of  his  words  are  exchanged  for  the  more  polite 
term  of  '  harlot  ;'4  while,  on  the  corner  of  page  36, 
an  indecent  cut  is  exhibited  !  The  Introduction 
and  Life  of  Bunyan,  by  Godwin  and  Pocock,  are 
well  written  and  handsomely  illustrated.  A  simi- 
lar series  of  outline  engravings  to  the  '  Pilgrim's 
Progress,'  by  the  daughter  of  a  British  Admiral, 
were  given  to  the  subscribers  to  the  Sailor's  Home 
in  Well  Street,  London.  They  were  on  tinted 
paper,  the  same  size  as  those  by  the  Art-Union, 
but  very  inferior  both  in  design  and  engraving.  A 
large  sheet  of  beautiful  woodcuts  was  lately  pub- 
lished by  that  eminent  artist,  Thomas  Gilks.     The 


1  Books  sold  by  hawkers. 

2  Sturt  and  Strut  were  men  of  a  different  era. 

8  The  meeting  of  Christian  and  Faithful,  one  of  them  with 
crucifix  ;  the  destruction  of  By-end9,  &c. 
1  See  page  47. 


most  elegant  edition  for  a  drawing-room  or  library 
that  has  been  published  is  one  just  finished,  by 
Mr.  Bogue.  It  is  not  only  a  correct  text,  but  is 
rich  in  illustrative  woodcuts  and  borders,  and  has 
a  deeply-interesting  Memoir  of  Bunyan,  from  the 
pen  of  Dr.  Cheever. 

In  1844,  a  very  handsome  edition  of  the  'Pil- 
grim's Progress'  was  published  in  folio,  on  fine 
paper,  for  purposes  of  illustration.  It  has  a 
Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Scott. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

VERSIONS,  COMMENTS,  AND  IMITATIONS  OF  TnE  '  PILGRIM.' 

The  earliest  poetical  attempts  to  promote  the 
circulation  of  the  '  Pilgrim'  is  of  the  First  Part, 
done  into  verse  by  Francis  Hoffman,  printed  by 
R.  Tookey,  1706.  Not  only  is  the  prose  versified, 
but  he  has,  according  to  his  taste,  versified  Bun- 
yan's verse.  Thus,  the  long  controversy  as  to  the 
propriety  of  publishing  the  work,  in  Hoffman's 


'  One  Part  said,  Print  it ;  others  it  decry'd ; 
Some  said,  it  would  do  good,  which  some  denied : 
I,  seeing  them  divided  to  Extreams, 
Could  from  them  hope  no  Favour  but  the  Flames ; 
Resolving,  since  Two  Parties  could  not  do't, 
Being  Third  my-self,  to  give  the  casting  Vote, 
And  have  it  printed.' 

It  has  a  smart  hit  at  occasional  conformity. 
Thus  Apollyon  says — 

'    "T  is  with  professors,  now  in  Fashion  grown, 
T'  espouse  his  cause  a  while  to  serve  their  own ; 
Come,  with  me  go  occasionally  back, 
Rather  than  a  preferment  lose,  or  lack.'  5 

Judging  from  these  and  other  specimens,  it  is 
not  surprising  that  the  work  was  never  repub- 
lished. It  has  some  woodcuts,  and  is  very  rare.6 
Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  render  Bunyan's 
'  Pilgrim '  a  popular  work  in  poetry,  but  all  have 
failed.  The  most  respectable  is  by  J.  S.  Dodd, 
M.D.,  8vo,  Dublin,  1795.  This  is  in  blank  verse, 
and  with  good  engravings ;  it  has  also  an  index, 
and  all  the  passages  of  Scripture  given  at  length  ; 
not  only  those  that  are  directly  referred  to,  but 
also  a  number  of  others  which  might  have  sug- 
gested ideas  to  the  author  that  he  embodied  in 
his  work.  The  notes  are  well  written,  and  short. 
They  were  reprinted,  without  acknowledgment,  in 
an  edition  of  the  'Pilgrim,'  in  three  parts,  pub- 
lished by  Macgowan;   London,  1822. 


6  Page  60. 

6  A  perfect  copy  in  the  library  of  W.  B.  Gurney,  Esq.;  and 
another  in  the  library  of  Lord  Ashbnrnham.  Mr.  Pickering 
has  one  without  the  translator's  name :  this  is  merely  a  new 
title,  probably  to  make  the  rhyme  pass  as  Bunyan's.  It  is 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Southey  in  his  Lfe  of  Bunyan,  p.  xcvii. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


63 


George  Burder,  the  well-known  author  of  the 
Village  Sermons,  published,  in  1804,  Banyan's 
•  Pilgrim's  Progress, '  Part  the  First,  versified, 
winch  passed  through  several  Urge  editions,  am! 

was  tQUOh  used  in  Sunday-school.- ;  it  has  VfOod- 
cuts.  A  very  handsome  edition  of  this  has  been 
lately  published,  With  the  Second   1  'ait ,  hy  the  au- 

thor  of  Seriptun  Truths vn  Versa,  and  is  profusely 
ornamented  with  woodcuts.  T.  Dibdin  also  pub- 
lished  Bunyan's  'Pilgrim's  Progress,' metrically 
condensed,  in  six  cantos.     This  embraces  only'the 

First  Part.  The  author  claims  having  kept  the 
simplicity  of  the  original,  and  a  rigid  observance 
of  every  doctrine  enforcing  the  certainty  of  the 
one  only  road  to  safety  and  salvation.1  The  late 
Isaac  Taylor,  of  Ongar,  published  Bunynn  Ex- 
plained to  a  Child,  being  pictures  and  Poems 
founded  upon  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress;'  two  very 
neat  and  interesting  little  volumes,  each  containing 
fifty  cuts.2 

Dr.  Adam  Clarke  considered  that  our  Pilgrim 
might  he  more  read  hy  a  certain  class  if  published 
as  an  epic  poem. 

'  The  whole  body  of  the  dialogue  and  description  might  be 
preserved  perfect  and  entire ;  and  the  task  would  not  be  diffi- 
cult, as  the  work  has  the  complete  form  of  an  epic  poem,  the 
versification  alone  excepted.  But  a  poet,  and  a  poet  only, 
can  do  this  work,  and  such  a  poet,  too,  as  is  experimentally 
acquainted  with  the  work  of  God  on  his  own  soul.  I  subscribe 
to  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Addison,  that,  had  J.  Bunyan  lived  in 
the  time  of  the  primitive  fathers,  lie  would  have  been  as  great 
a  father  as  any  of  them.'3 

A  lady  who  wrote  under  the  initials,  C.  C.  V.  G., 
has  recently  made  the  attempt,  and  she  does  not 
appear  to  have  heen  aware  that  Dr.  Dodd  had 
gone  over  the  same  ground.  It  is  a  highly  respect- 
able production,  divided  into  six  cantos,  but  in- 
cludes only  the  First  Part. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress   Versified.     By  the   Rev. 
W.  E.  Hume,  B.A.     2  vols.  fcp.  8vo.  1844-5. 

In  this  poetic  attempt,  each  part  is  divided  into  six  cantos. 
At  the  first  glance,  it  appeared  more  like  a  parody  than  a  seri- 
ous effort  to  convey  the  sense ;  but  the  author  seems  to  be  in 
earnest.  A  very  few  lines  will  show  the  poetic  talent  which  is 
displayed.     The  pilgrim  about  to  start : 

'  Trembling  he  was,  and  tears  I  well  could  track, 
Till  broke  he  forth,  and  cried,  "  AYhat  shall  I  do,  alack  !  "  > 

On  Ignorance  arriving  at  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City, 

1  They  told  the  Kiug,  but  down  he  would  not  run. 

The  first  part  ends  thus : 

'  The  way  to  hell,  from  gate  of  heaven,  was  there, 
E'en  as  from  Ruin's  town.     I  woke — had  dream'd,  declare.' 


Post  8vo,  Harding  and  King,  1834. 

Post  8vo,  London,  1835. 

Postscript  to  a  Life  of  Bunyan,  1S44. 


.1  /■'■,  i  Poetic  Version  of  the  First  Part  of  the  P>'~ 
grim's  Progress.     In  Ten  Books.     By  J.  B. 

Drayton.      With  a  Memoir,  and  Notes  selected 
and  abridged  from  the  Rev.  T,  Scott.      L2mO, 
Cheltenham.      No  date. 
This  first  appeared  under  the  title  ef  Paetie 
Bunyan,  fcp,  8vo,  1821.     'To  tempi  those  who  alighl  the 
original  as  a  coarse  and  illiterate  production  togweil  a  perusal, 
and  they  will  Sad  thai  its  merittare  of  the  highest  order— 'Con- 
ceived in  the  true  spirit  of  poetry — like  a  rude  but  luxuriant 
wilderness.'     The  Christian's  burden  ia  called  '  a  Bordid  pi  it. 
His  description  of  the  Interpreter  will  give  an  idea  of  Mr 
Drayton's  style: 

'  Meek  was  his  mean, 
Yet  fiery  keen, 
The  ordeal  inquest  of  hi*  eve, 

And  blent  with  hoary  majesty, 

A  stately  wand  lie  bore  ; 
But,  ere  he  taught  his  mystic  lore, 
He  asked  the  Pilgrim's  late  abode, 

His  errand,  and  his  destined  road.' 

When  Christian  met  the  men  naming  from  the  Valley  of 

the  Shadow  of  Death,  his  inquiry  is  anything  but  poetic — 

'Hold!  Whafathe  Damagi 
Little  interest  has  been  excited  by  these  endear 
Tours  to  versify  the  'Pilgrim.'  All  the  attempts 
to  improve  Bunyan  are  miserable  failures  ;  it  is 
like  holding  up  a  rushlight  to  increase  the  beauty 
of  the  moon  when  in  its  lull  radiance.  II is  line- 
old  vernacular  colloquial  English  may  be  modern- 
ized and  spoiled,  but  cannot  be  improved.  The 
expression  used  to  denote  how  hard  the  last  lock 
in  Doubting  Castle  'went,'  may  grate  upon  a  polite 
car,  but  it  has  a  deep  meaning  that  should  warn  us 
of  entering  by-path  meadows. 

Bunyan's  poetry,  interspersed  throughout  the 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  displays  the  perpetual  bent 
of  the  writer's  mind.  No  show,  no  attempt  at 
parade,  all  his  object  is  to  fix  truth  upon  the  con- 
science; and  some  of  his  homely  rhymes  ought 
never  to  be  forgotten.  The  impression  made  in 
childhood  'sticks  like  burs.'  "Who  that  has  once 
read  the  lay  of  the  Shepherd's  boy,  will  ever  for- 
get the  useful  lesson  ? 

'  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall, 
He  that  is  low  no  pride  ; 

He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  guide.' 

Mr.  Burder  of  Coventry  divided  the  'Pilgrim"- 
Progress,'  Part  I.  into  twenty,  and  Part  II.  into 
fifteen  chapters,  with  short  notes  at  the  end  of 
each;4  it  has  been  several  times  republished;  but 
this  innovation  was  not  well  received. 

Numerous  have  heen  the  editions  with  nol 
illustrate  the  author's  meaning,  hy  men  oi 
eminence;  but  Montgomery's  beautiful  description 
at  once  shows  that,  doctrinally  or  experimentally 
considered,  they  are  not  needed.     '  Bunyan's  alio. 

4  Brit.  JIus.  113,  b.;  Editor's  library. 


C4 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


gory  is  so  perfect,  that,  like  the  light,  whilst  re- 
vealing through  its  colourless  and  undistorting 
medium  every  ohject,  yet  is. itself  concealed.' 

A  Key  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress;  designed  to  assist 

the  admirers  of  that  excellent  book  to  read 

it  with  understanding  and  profit,   as  well  as 

pleasing  entertainment.     By  Andronicus. 

This  contains  some  useful  information ;  it  passed  through 

two  editions  in  1797. 

A  Course  of  Lectures  Illustrative  of  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  delivered  at  the  Tabernacle,  Haver- 
ford  West,     By  Daniel  Warr.     8vo,  1825. 
These  lectures,  twenty  in  number,  embrace  only  the  First 
Part.     They  proved  acceptable  to  those  who  heard  them,  and 
were  published  by  subscription.     Nine  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight  copies  were  subscribed  for  at  8*.  each. 

Lectures  on  the  Pilgrim  s  Progress,  and  on  the  Life 
and  Times  of  Bunyan.  By  Rev.  George  B. 
Cheever,  D.D.,  of  New  York. 
This  is  the  work  of  one  of  Bunyan's  kindred 
spirits.  If  there  was  any  foundation  for  the  Chinese 
theory  of  the  transmigration  of  souls,  one  might 
imagine  that  Bunyan  had  been  again  permitted 
to  visit  the  church  on  earth,  in  the  person  of  Dr. 
Cheever.  The  numerous  editions  of  these  lectures 
which  have  been  sold  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic 
has  proved  how  acceptable  a  work  it  is  ;  to  give  its 
beauties  would  be  to  copy  the  whole ;  they  that 
have  read  it  will  read  it  again  and  again  with 
renewed  pleasure.  They  who  have  not  read  it 
may  safely  anticipate  a  choice  literary  treat. 

Attempts  to  explain  the  spiritual  meaning  of 
such  a  writer  have  sometimes  deserved  the  reproof 
contained  in  the  following  anecdote: — 'A  late 
eminent  and  venerated  clergyman,1  published  an 
edition  of  Bunyan's  Pilgrim,2  which  he  accom- 
panied with  expository  notes.  A  copy  of  this 
work  he  benevolently  presented  to  one  of  his  poor 
parishioners.  Some  time  afterwards  the  poor  man 
was  met  by  the  clergyman,  who  inquired,  "  Well, 
have  you  read  the  Pilgrim's  Progress?"  the  re- 
ply was,  "Yes,  sir."  It  was  further  asked,  "  Do 
you  think  you  understand  it?"  "0,  yes,  sir," 
was  the  answer,  with  this  somewhat  unexpected 
addition,  "And  1  hope  before  long  I  shall  under- 
stand the  notes  !"  '3  Still  there  can  be  no  doubt 
hut  that  notes  from  other  of  Bunyan's  treatises, 
and  from  eminent  authors,  must  be  highly  illus- 
trative and  interesting. 

1  Thomas  Scott,  author  of  the  Commentary  on  the  Bible, 
and  other  valuable  works.  Sir  James  Stephen,  in  his  Ecclesi- 
astical Biography,  says  of  Thomas  Scott — '  He  died  neglected, 
if  not  despised,  by  the  hierarchy  of  the  Church  of  England ; 
although  in  him  she  lost  a  teacher,  weighed  against  whom  the 
most  reverend,  right  reverend,  very  reverend,  and  venerable 
personages,  if  all  thrown  together  into  the  opposing  scale,  would 
at  once  have  kicked  the  beam.' — Vol.  ii.  p.  123. 

3  12mo,  with  Plates.     Coventry,  17'J7. 

■s  Pritchard's  Life  of  Ivimey,  p.  139. 


The  •  Pilgrim's  Progress '  has  also  been  abridged. 
One  of  the  early  publications  of  the  Tract  Society 
was  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress,  Part  the  First,' 
divided  upon  Mr.  Burder's  plan,  into  twenty 
chapters.  It  is  in  eight  Parts,  at  \\d.  each,  with 
a  recommendation  that  the  children  should  find 
the  texts  referred  to,  and  repeat  them  when  con- 
venient ;   it  has  a  woodcut  to  each  Part. 

An  Extract  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Two  Parts, 
divided  into  chapters,  12mo,  Dublin.  For  the 
Methodist  Book-room,  1810.     Price  3s.  3d. 

This  contains  nearly  the  whole ;  Giants  Pagan  and  Pope  are 
excluded,  so  also  are  the  fiend's  whispering  evil  thoughts  into 
the  Pilgrim's  ears.  Christiana  speaks  of  her  old  husband  in- 
stead of  her  good  husband.  The  narrative  is  injured  by  the 
omissions  and  alterations. 

The  Pilgrim 's  Progress.  By  John  Bunyan;  abridged 
for  the  use  of  schools.    By  J.  Townsend.    With 
a  Sketch  of  the  Author's  Life. 
This  little  book  was   extensively  circulated,   especially  in 

Sunday  Schools. 

Tiie  Pilgrim  s  Progress.     By  John  Bunyan. 

A  miniature  abridgment,  with  cuts,  title  printed  in  gold 
on  a  blue-glazed  paper,  the  edges  gilt,  has  been  lately  selling 
in  the  streets  of  London  for  \d.  each ! 

A  strange  attempt  was  made  by  Joshua  Gilpin, 
rector  of  Wrockwardine,  Shropshire,  in  1811,  to 
fit  Bunyan  with  a  modern  and  fashionable  suit  of 
clothes,  and  under  the  tuition  of  a  petit  mailre, 
train  him  for  elegant  drawing-room  company. 
How  odd  an  idea  to  dress  Bunyan  a-la-mode,  place 
him  in  an  elegant  party,  chill  him  with  ices,  and 
torment  his  soul  with  the  badinage  of  a  Mrs.  Per- 
kin's  Ball.  It  was  entitled,  'Bunyan's  Pilgrim's 
Progress  ;  in  which  the  phraseology  of  the  author 
is  somewhat  improved,  some  of  his  obscurities 
elucidated,  and  some  of  his  redundancies  done 
away.'  A  handsome  8vo  volume,  1811.  Mr. 
Gilpin  complains  that  the  Pilgrim's  defects  are 
conspicuous  and  offensive,  but  gives  no  specimens 
of  them.  Instead  of  Faithful  telling  Christian 
the  common  feeling  against  Pliable,  in  plain  Eng- 
lish, '  0,  they  say,  Hang  him,  he  is  a  turn-coat ; 
he  was  not  true  to  his  profession;'  Mr.  Gilpin 
prefers,  '  They  tauntingly  say,  that  he  was  not 
true  to  his  profession.'  And  as  to  the  unfashion- 
ably  pointed  remarks  by  the  Interpreter,  that  a 
Christian  profession,  without  regeneration,  is  like 
a  tree  whose  leaves  are  fair,  but  their  heart  good 
for  nothing  but  to  be  tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder- 
box*  this  is  too  bad  to  be  mended,  and  is,  there- 
fore, struck  out  altogether.  The  public  did  not 
encourage  Mr.  Gilpin's  metamorphoses,  and  the 
book  is  forgotten.  In  the  following  year  Mr.  Gilpin 
published,  anonymously,  The  Pilgrimage  of  Theo- 
philus  to  the  City  of  God.     It  was  intended  for  the 

*  P.  245. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE    EDITOR. 


65 


instruction  of  his  children.  It  is  free  from  sectarian- 
ism and  slander;  being  the  adventures  of  two  young 
Pilgrims,  who  become  ministers.  The  whole  of  the 
plot  is  taken  from  Bun  van;  is  a  pious  imitation,  but, 
like  many  Others,  it  is  even  now  forgotten. 

It  would  l>e  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  at- 
tempts which  have  been  made  to  copy  Bunyan 's  alle- 
gory.   A  few  of  them  deserve  notice.    One  of  these 

was  an  impudent  forgery.     It  was  under  the  title  of 

The  Progress  of  the  Pilgrim,  in  Two  Parts.  Written 
by  way  of  a  Dream.     Adorned  with  several  new 
pictures,  ho.xh.  io,  I  have  used  similitudes.    Lon- 
don,  by  J.    Blare,   at   the   Looking   Glass,   on 
London  Bridge,  1705. 
In  this,  which  is  published  us  an  original  work,  Evangelist 
is  called  Good-news ;  Worldly-wiseman,  Mr.  Politic  Worldly , 
Legality,  Mr.  Law-do;  The  Interpreter,  Director;  The  Palace 
Beautiful,  Grace's  Hall;  Giant  Desperation  of  Dillident  Castle; 
Mr.  Despondency  and  his  daughter  Much-afraid  are  called,  One 
Much-cast-down,  and  his  kinsman,  Almost  Overcome.     Who- 
ever was  employed  in  stealing  this  literary  property,  and  dis- 
guising the  stolen   goods,  appears    to    have    been  a  Roman 
Catholic;  he  omits  Giant  Pope;  and  Faithful,  called  1'idelius, 
ia  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered,  that  being  the  punishment 
indicted  on  the  Roman  Catholics  by  Elizabeth  and  James  I. 

Bugg's    Pilgrim's    Progress   from   Quakerism   to 
Christianity.      4to,  and  8vo,  1698. 
The  author  had  been  a  Quaker,  but  conformed,  and  attacked 
his  old  friends  with  great  vituperation.     It  is  not  allegorical. 

Desiderius  ;  or,  the  Original  Pilgrim.  By  L. 
Howell,  M.A. 
This  was  written  in  Spanish,  and  has  been  published  in 
Latin,  Italian,  trench,  Dutch,  and  German.  Mr.  Howell 
says  in  the  preface,  '  I  am  assured  that  Mr.  Royston,  the 
bookseller,  very  well  knew  that  Dr.  Patrick  took  his  pilgrim 
from  it.'  It  is  the  mode  by  which  a  gentleman  curbed  his 
passions,  and  became  a  good  church-going  man,  and  qualified 
himself  (p.  12-1)  to  trust  iu  God.  It  was  not  published  in 
English  until  1717. 

Tlie  Young  Mans  Guide  through  Uie  wilderness  of  j 
this  world  to  the  heavenly  Canaan :  showing  him 
how  to  carry  himself  Christian-like,  the  whole 
course  of  his  life.     By  Thomas  Gouge.      1710; 
small  8vo. 
This  is  a  valuable  work,  but  not  allegorical. 

Tlie  Statesman's  Progress,  or  a  Pilgrimage  to  Great- 
ness ;  delivered  under  the  similitude  of  a  dream, 
wherein   are   discovered,    The   manner   of  his 
setting  out,  his  dangerous  journey,  and  safe 
arrival  at  the  desired  country  ;  with  the  manner 
of  his  acting  when  he  came  there.      By  JOHN 
BOKYAJT.     With  a  Latin  quotation  from  Horace. 
London,  printed,  and   Lublin  reprinted  in  the 
year  1741.     8vo. 
This  is  a  shrewd  attack  upon  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  one  of  I 
the  most  corrupt  of  English   statesmen,  just  before  his  final 
full.     It  was  he  that  said  '  every  man  had  his  price,'  and  who 
VOL.  III. 


attacked  Mr.  Pitt,  afterwarda  Earl  of  Chatham,  on  bis  youth; 
exciting  a  reply  which  must  be  admired  to  the  latest  age. 
This  Pilgrimage  represents  Walpole  under  the  name  of  Bad- 
man,  on  his  course  to  Greatness  Ball,  where  grew  the  golden 

pippins.        lie    is    introduced    to   (Jueen    Vice,    behind    whose 

throne  stood  Death  with  ropes,  axes,  and  daggers  in  bis  hand. 

Badman  attains  his   object,  lias  pOBSeSSiOD  Oi    the  golden  t'rnit, 

and  by  its  aid  exercises  absolute  sway.  The  allegory  is  kept 
up  with  great  spirit. 

Our  readers  need  not  he  reminded  that  Bun- 
yan's name  was  used  because  he  was  the  prince  of 
allegorists,  in  the  same  way  that  Homer's  name 
would  have  heen  used  if  it  had  been  a  poem,  or 
Juvenal,  had  it  heen  a  satire  in  verse.  It  is  of 
great  rarity  ;  the  account  is  taken  from  a  copy  iu 
the  Editor's  library. 

The  celebrity  of  Bunyan  led  to  another  impudent 
forgery,  in  a  pamphlet  entitled,  The  advantages 
and  disadvantages  of  the  Marriage  State,  as  entered 
into  with  religious  or  irreligious  jwrsons,  delivered 
under  the  similitude  of  a  dbbam.  With  notes  ex- 
planatory and  improving.  By  J.  B  *  *  *  *  N, 
Minister  of  the  Gospel.  The  sixth  edition,  with 
addition  of  new  cuts.  Bosworth;  Printed  by 
Robert  Grinley,  for  the  author,  1775.  The  fronti- 
spiece is  the  Sleeping  Portrait  on  the  Lion's  Den, 
with  skull  and  cross  bones  ;  above  arc  the  Pilgrim 
with  his  burden,  and  the  Wicket  Gate;  under  this 
is  inscribed  John  Bunyan  of  Bedford.  It  was 
impudent  enough  to  publish  this  for  the  author  in 
1775,  Bunyan  having  died  in  1688. 

Tlie  Spanish  Pilgrim;  or  an  admirable  discovery 
of  a  Romish  Catholic.1 
A  tract  to  show  the  easiest  way  to  invade  Spain. 

lite  Pilgrim;  or,  a  Picture  of  Life.     By  a  Chinese 
Philosopher,  2  vols,  by  Johnston. - 
A  caricature,  exhibiting  English  manners,  iu  the  reign  of 
George  III.,  through  a  distorted  medium. 

The  New  Pilgrims;  or,  the  Pious  Indian  Convert, 
containing  a  faithful  account  of  Flattain  Gela- 
shenin,  a  heathen  who  was  baptized  into  the 
Christian  Faith  by  the  name  of  George  James, 
and  by  that  means  brought  from  the  darkness 
of  Paganism  to  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  of 
which  he  afterwards  became  an  able  and  worthy 
minister;  and  the  wonderful  things  which  he 
saw  in  a  vision.      London,  12mo,  1748. 

A  Voyage  through  Hell,  by  Uce  I  urinal  ,1c  Man  of 
War,  Captain  Singh-Eye.     8vo,  1770. 

This  is  a  very  curious  allegory  ;  part  of  the  crew  demur  to 
signing  the  articles  because  they  are  Unitarian.  The  mob  who 
see  the  ship  sail,  abuse  the  Captain.  After  many  adventures, 
she  arrives  iu  hell,  and  the  crew  and  officers  arc  tried ;  all  the 
Unitarians  are  acquitted,  and  sail   on  to  heaven,  but  ull  the 


1  British  Museum,  1103,  e. 

I  ibrary,  British  Museum,  245,  f.  7. 


56 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Trinitarians  enter  into  eternal  torment.  This  volume  is  very 
rare.  It  is  the  only  book  that  I  have  seen  iu  which  Unitarians 
avow  such  diabolical  sentiments. 

Shrubsole's  Christian  Memoirs ;  or,  New  Pilgrimage 
to  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem.     1 777  ;  republished 
1799,  and  in  1807. 
This  was  supposed  to  contain  allusions  to  certain  persons  of 
some  note,  and  was  for  a  time  a  popular  book. 

The  Female  Pilgrim  ;   or  the  travels  of  Hephzibah, 

a  description  of  her  Native  Country,  with  the 

State   of  the   Inhabitants  thereof.     By  John 

Mitchell. 

This  contains  some  account  of  the  religious  state  of  this 

country  in  the  latter  end  of  the  reign  of  George  III. ;  it  has 

plates,  and  passed  through  several  editions.    The  author  states, 

that  he  has  not  been  influenced  by  malice  to  those  persons 

whose  characters  he  has  drawn  as  odious ! 

A  second  Pilgrim  s  Progress  from  the  town  of  Deceit 
to  the  kingdom  of  Glory.  By  Philalethes.  8vo, 
1790. 

This  is  an  allegory,  but  not  a  dream.  It  is  the  adventures 
of  "Wake-heart,  who  gets  to  glory. 

The  Progress  of  the  Pilgrim,  Good  Intent,  in  Jacob- 
inical Times.  By  Miss  Anne  Burgess,  of  tbe 
Vale  of  Honiton. 
This  was,  for  a  time,  very  popular,  and  went  through  as 
many  as  seven  editions  at  least,  in  the  years  1800  and  1801  ; 
it  arose  out  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  was  intended  to 
counteract  republican  principles,  and  free  inquiries  into  prac- 
tices called  religious.  It  has  some  witty  passages,  and  a  tender 
attachment  to  the  crown  and  mitre.  It  represents  philosophy 
as  having  for  its  father  Lucifer;  and  its  mother  Nonsense  !  ' 
That  the  mitre  assumes  no  control.  Lawful  government  and 
church  establishments  are  venerable,  and  to  be  admired  and 
supported ;  that  the  rights  of  man  teach  plunder  and  robbery ; 
that  those  who  oppose  the  church,  as  by  law  established,  seek 
to  promote  atheism.  The  authoress  invents  a  she-devil,  called 
Mental  Energy,  who  invites  men  to  destruction,  by  thinking 
for  themselves. 

It  must  have  required  the  aid  of  some  church 
wealth  and  influence  to  have  pushed  this  book  iuto 
circulation ;  it  is  now  nearly  forgotten.2 

The  Sailor  Pilgrim;  in  Two  Parts.    By  R.  Hawker, 
D.D.     1806. 
This  passed  through   several   editions,  and  was  a  valuable 
means  of  awakening  seafaring  men  to  the  importance  of  reli- 
gion.    It  abounds  with  interesting  anecdotes. 

Zions  Pilgrim.     1808. 

This,  and  Zion's  Warrior,  by  the  same  author,  arc  full  of 
anecdotes,  useful  in  their  day.     They  are  not  allegorical. 

77ie  Travels  of  Humanias  in  search  of  the  Temple 
of  Happiness.  An  allegory.  By  William 
Lucas.     12mo,  1809. 


1  Page  63. 

2  In   the  Editor's   Library. 
Seventh  Edition,  1801. 


First   Edition,    1800,   and 


The  Prodigal's  Pilgrimage  into  afar  Country,  and 

back  to  his  Father's  House ;  in  fourteen  stages. 

By  Thomas  Jones,  Curate  of  Creaton.      1825. 

This  is  the  adventures  and  return  of  the  prodigal,  founded 

on  the  parable  in  Lu.  xv.,  but  is  not  allegorical.3 

The  Sojourn  of  a  Sceptic  in  the  Land  of  Darkness, 
to  the  City  of  Strongholds,  in  the  Similitude  of  a 
.Dream.     Edinburgh,  1847. 
The  prose  and  poetry  in  this  volume  are  equally  contemptible  t 
'  Who  follow  lies  they  love  (that  walk  or  crawl), 
A  lie,  at  last,  to  ruin  may  pursue  ; 
Who  swallow  greasy  camels,  hump  and  all, 
A  gnat  may  scandalize,  and  strangle  too.'  4 
This  is  one  of  those  books  which,  in  the  words  of  Porson,'  will  be 
read  when  Homer  and  Virgil  are  forgotten,  but — not  till  then.' 

The  Great  Journey,  a  Pilgrimage  through  tlie  Valley 
of  Tears  to  Mount  Zion,  the  City  oftlie  living  God. 

This  is  an  unassuming  little  book,  which  the  author  calls,  a 
borrowed  ray  from  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress.'  It  is  neatly 
ornamented  with  cuts.     A  desirable  present  to  the  young. 

The  most  beautiful  ray  from  the  '  Pilgrim's 
Progress,'  which  has  reached  us,  is  from  the  pen 
of  that  elegant  writer,  Dr.  Cheever  of  New  York. 
It  is  Tlie  Hill  Difficulty,  or  Tlie  Jewish  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, The  Plains  of  Ease,  and  other  allegories.  It 
has,  in  addition,  some  extremely  interesting  papers. 
Unfortunately  it  has  not  been  reprinted  in  England, 
but  what  is  worse  is,  that  parts  of  the  volume 
leaving  out  the  most  beautiful,  and  selecting  those 
tbat  suited  a  certain  purpose,  have  been  printed 
under  the  title  of  Dr.  Cheever's  Hill  Difficulty — a 
forgery  exceedingly  vexatious  to  an  author  of  such 
high  repute.  It  is  hoped  that  some  honest  pub- 
lisher will  favour  us  with  an  accurate  and  cheap  re- 
print of  this  instructive  allegory.  A  part  left  out 
in  the  first  chapter  of  the  London  edition  refers  to  a 
controversy  which  has  for  some  time  agitated  this 
country,  even  to  the  calling  forth  of  a  decision  in  tbe 
House  of  Lords.  It  is  an  attempt  to  get  over  the 
Hill  Difficulty  without  trouble ;  it  is  thus  narrated : 

'  There  has  been  constructed  there  a  great  balloon,  to  avoid 
climbing,  named  Baptismal  Regeneration,  in  which,  by  an 
ingenious  chemical  use  of  a  little  font  of  water,  a  very  subtle 
light  gas  was  manufactured  to  fill  the  balloon ;  and  then  the 
adventurers,  having  been  made  to  inhale  the  same  gas,  stepped 
iuto  a  car  to  which  the  balloon  was  attached,  and  were  carried 
along  quite  swiftly.  These  adventurers  all  lost  their  lives  in 
the  end,  unless  they  got  out  of  the  car,  and  took  to  the  real 
pilgrimage.  Still  tlie  pateutees  insisted  upon  this  being  the 
only  way  to  salvation.'  He  goes  on  with  great  humour  to 
show  that  the  Pope  was  the  original  patentee. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  OPINIONS  OF  THE  GREAT  AND  LEARNED,  UPON  THE 
MERITS  OF  THE  '  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS,'  AND  THE  CAUSES 
OF  ITS  POPULARITY. 

To  venerate  the  memory  of  Bunyan,  is  the  duty 
of  every  British  Christian  ;   quite  as  much  as  it  is 


British  Museum. 


4  Page  113. 


INTRODUCTION    BV    TDK    EDITOR. 


67 


the  pride  of  Englishmen  universally  to  admire  the 
genius  of  Shakspeare  or  of  .Milton,  the  philosophy 
of  Locke,  or  the  philanthropy  of  Howard,  11-' 
ought  ever  to  be  placed  in  that  constellation  which 
is  composed  of  the  brightest  luminaries  that  shed 
a  lustre  upon  our  national  literature.  His  allegory 
seizes  our  imagination  in  childhood,  and  leaves  an 
indelible  impression  —  it  exeited  our  wonder  then. 
and  our  admiration  and  esteem  in  riper  age.  Thus 
one  of  our  hcst  poets  dcscrihes  it  as 

'  Pleasure  derived  in  childhood  approved  in  age.' 

There  is  a  degree  of  publicity  to  which  we  should 
not  like  to  have  seen  John  Bunyan  exposed,  and 
from  which  his  '  Pilgrim  '  had  a  narrow  escape. 
The  amasing  popularity  of  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress' 
very  nearly  led  to  the  accomplishment  of  a  strange 
design,  which  would  have  shocked  all  our  puritan 
feelings.  It  was  a  curious  attempt  of  Air.  Gilpin 
to  dress  Bunyan  a-Ja-mode,  but  how  much  more 
singular  to  have  introduced  him  upon  the  stage  in 
a  Royal  Metropolitan  Theatre ! !  This  was  most 
seriously  contemplated.  -The  whole  story  was 
turned  into  an  Oratorio,  and  every  preliminary 
arrangement  was  made  to  have  brought  it  out  in 
Lent  183-1. 

The  manuscript  oratorio,  with  the  correspond- 
ence of  George  Colman  the  licenser,  Mr.  Bunn  the 
Manager  and  Proprietor,  and  Mr.  Mash  of  the  Lord 
Chamberlain's  Office,  are  in  the  Editor's  possession. 
But  the  fear  of  my  Lord  Bishop  of  London,  whose 
power  could  have  stopped  the  license,  prevented 
the  attempt  to  bring  into  the  tainted  atmosphere 
of  a  theatre,  as  a  dramatic  entertainment,  the  poor 
burdened  pilgrim,  his  penitence,  his  spiritual  com- 
bats, bis  journey,  and  his  ascent  to  the  Celestial 
City.  It  was  to  have  been  introduced  with  splendid 
scenery,  and  with  all  the  fascinating  accompani- 
ments of  music  and  painting,  as  a  sacred  oratorio, 
to  amuse  Christians  in  the  sorrowful,  fasting,  hypo- 
critical season  of  Lent. 

Cowper's  apostrophe  to  Bunyan — 

'  Oh  thou,  whom,  home  on  fancy's  eager  wing 
Back  to  the  season  of  life '3  happy  spring, 
I  pleased  remember,  and,  while  memory  yet 
Holds  fast  her  office  here,  can  ne'er  forget. 
Ingenious  Dreamer!  in  whose  well-told  tale 
Swi  it  fiction  and  sweet  truth  alike  prevail ; 
Whose  humorous  vein,  strong  sense,  and  simple  style, 
ilay  teach  the  gayest,  make  the  gravest  smile  ; 
A\  ltty,  and  well  employed,  and  like  thy  Lord, 
Speaking  in  parables  bis  slighted  Word. 
I  name  thee  not,  lest  so  despised  a  name 
Should  move  a  sneer  at  thy  deserved  fame. 
Yet  e'en  in  transitory  life's  late  day, 
That  mingles  all  my  brown  with  sober  gray, 
Revere  the  man,  whose  Pii.ouim  marks  the  road, 
And  guides  the  PROGRESS  of  the  soul  to  God. 
'Twcre  well  with  most,  if  books  that  could  ei 
Their  childhood,  pleased  them  at  a  riper  age  ; 
The  man,  approving  what  had  charmed  the  boy, 
A\  oidd  die  at  last  in  comfort,  peace,  and  joy.' 


How  rapid  has  been  the  change  in  public  opinion 
since  Cowper's  line  was  written  — 

'Leal  bo  despised  a  name !' 
One  of  the  most  magnificent  American  steamers 
now  bears  the  alluring  name  of  The  John  Bunyan  ; 

and    in    1849    an    advertisement    appeared    in    tho 

London  Papers:  '  for  Bong  Kong  and  Shanghae, 

will  be  despatched  positively  on  the  20th  of  June, 
the  splendid  fast  sailing-ship  John  Bunyan.1 

The  influence  that  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress'  bad 
upon  a  late  learned  and  zealous  divine,  is  well 
described  in  the  autobiography  of  the  celebrated 
Dn.  Adam  Clarke, 

A  child's  view  of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress' — 

At  this  early  age  he  read  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  as  be 
would  read  a  book  of  chivalry.  Christian  was  a  great  hero, 
by  whom  the  most  appalling  difficulties  were  surmounted,  the 
most  incredible  labours  performed,  powerful  enchantments 
dissolved,  giants  conquered,  and  devils  quelled.  It  waa  not 
likely  that  he  would  see  it  as  a  spiritual  allegory,  and,  there. 
fore,  it  was  no  wonder  that  he  could  not  comprehend  how 
Christian  and  Hopeful  could  submit  to  live  several  days  and 
nights  in  the  dungeon  of  Doubting  Castle,  under  t lie  torture 
of  Giant  Despair,  while  the  former  '  had  a  key  in  his  bosom 
which  could  open  every  lock  in  that  castle.' 

Lord  Kaimes,  who  did  not  in  the  slightest  degree 
partake  with  Bunyan  in  his  feelings  of  veneration 
for  Christianity,  admires  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress,' 
as  being  composed  in  a  style  enlivened  like  that 
of  Homer,  by  a  proper  mixture  of  the  dramatic  and 
narrative. 

Mr.  Grainger,  who  was  of  the  high  church 
party,  in  his  Biographical  History  of England,  calls 
it  '  Bunyan 's  masterpiece;  one  of  the  most  popular, 
and,  I  will  add,  one  of  the  most  ingenious  books  in 
in  the  English  language.' 

Dr.  S.  Johnson,  that  unwieldy  and  uncouth 
leviathan  of  English  literature,  who  was  so  thorough 
bred  a  churchman  as  to  starve  himself  on  a  crossed 
bun  on  Good  Friday,  and  to  revel  in  roast  beef  and 
good  cheer  on  the  day  dedicated  to  Christ's  mass; 
who  was  so  well  taught  in  the  established  church 
as  to  pray  for  his  wife  *  Tetty'  thirty  years  after 
her  decease;  yet,  even  he,  with  his  deep-rooted 
prejudices  against  dissenters,  cannot  withhold  his 
meed  of  praise — he  describes  the  'Pilgrim's  I'm. 
gress  '  as  'a  work  of  original  genius,  and  one  of 
the  very  few  books  which  every  reader  wishes  had 
been  longer.'1 

'Johnson  praised  John  Bunyan  highly  :  his  "Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress" has  great  merit,  both  for  invention,  imagination,  and 
the  conduct  of  the  story ;  and  it  has  had  the  best  evidence  of 
its  merit,  the  general  and  continued  approbation  of  mankind. 
Pew  books,  I  believe,  have  had  a  more  extensive  sale.  It  is 
remarkable,  that  it  begins  very  much  like  Dante;  yet  there 
was  no  translation  of  Dante  when  he  wrote.  There  ia 
to  think  that  he  had  read  Spenser.' "' 


1  .Mrs.  Piozzi  a  Anecdotes. 

-  Boswell'a  Life  of  Johnson,  Svo,  vol.  ii.  p.  219. 


68 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


'  It  was  by  no  common  merit  that  the  illiterate  sectary  ex- 
tracted praise  like  this  from  the  most  pedantic  of  critics,  and 
the  most  bigoted  of  Churchmen  and  Tories.' * 

A  deeply  read,  learned,  and  highly  esteemed 
clergyman  told  me  that  when  he  was  young,  placed 
under  peculiar  circumstances,2  he  read  the  '  Pil- 
grim's Progress '  many  times  ;  for  when  he  arrived 
at  the  '  Conclusion,'  he  never  thought  of  changing 
his  book,  hut  turning  to  the  first  page,  started 
again  with  poor  Christian,  and  never  felt  weary  of 
his  company.  Well  might  Dr.  Johnson  say,  it  is 
one  of  the  few  hooks  in  which  one  can  never  possibly 
arrive  at  the  last  page. 

Dr.  Franklin,  whose  sound  judgment  renders 
his  opinion  peculiarly  gratifying,  in  his  praise  of  the 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  comes  home  to  the  feelings 
of  all  who  have  read  this  universally  admired  book : 

'  Honest  John  Bunyan  is  the  first  I  know  of  who  has  mingled 
narrative  aud  dialogue  together — a  mode  of  writing  very  en- 
gaging to  the  reader,  who,  in  the  most  interesting  passages, 
finds  himself  admitted,  as  it  were,  into  the  company,  aud  pre- 
sent at  the  conversation.' 3 

Toplady  speaks  with  the  warmth  of  a  Christian, 
•who  not  only  admired,  but  understood  and  felt  its 
important  truths: 

'  The  "  Pilgrim's  Progress"  is  the  finest  allegorical  work 
extant ;  describing  every  stage  of  a  Christian's  experience, 
from  conversion  to  glorification,  iu  the  most  artless  simplicity 
of  language;  yet  peculiarly  rich  with  spiritual  unction,  and 
glowing  with  the  most  vivid,  just,  and  well-conducted  ma- 
chinery throughout.  It  is,  in  short,  a  masterpiece  of  piety 
and  genius ;  and  will,  we  doubt  not,  be  of  standing  use  to  the 
people  of  God,  so  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure.' 

And  in  his  diary,  Sunday,  Feb.  7,  17G8: — 

'  Iu  the  evening,  read  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim."  What  a  stiff, 
sapless,  tedious  piece  of  work  is  that  written  by  Bishop  Pat- 
rick !  How  does  the  unlearned  tinker  of  Bedford  outshine  the 
Bishop  of  Ely !  I  have  heard  that  his  lordship  wrote  his  Pil- 
grim by  way  of  autidote  against  what  he  deemed  the  fanati- 
cism of  John  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim."  But  what  a  rich  fund  of 
heavenly  experience,  life,  and  sweetness,  does  the  latter  con- 
tain !  How  heavy,  lifeless,  and  unevangelical,  is  the  former ! 
Such  is  the  difference  between  writing  from  a  worldly  spirit 
and  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.'  4 

Dr.  Ryland's  opinion  was  that 

'Asa  popular  practical  writer,  on  a  great  variety  of  import- 
ant subjects,  for  the  use  of  the  bulk  of  common  Christians, 
I  will  dare  to  affirm  that  he  has  few  equals  in  the  Christian 
world.  I  am  persuaded  there  never  has  been  a  writer  in  the 
English  language  whose  works  have  spread  so  wide,  and  have 
been  read  by  so  many  millions  of  people,  as  Mr.  Bunyan's.' 


1  Macaulay,  Edinburgh  Review,  1831. 

2  At  church,  obliged  to  sit  still,  while  a  dull  parson  read 
equally  dull  sermons. 

3  Private  Life  of  Franklin. 

4  Life  and  Writings  of  Toplady.  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  40.  8vo, 
1825.  It  may  be  true  that  Patrick's  Pilgrim  was  intended 
as  an  antidote  to  what  he  considered  the  fanaticism  of  Bun- 
yan's other  writings,  but  the  Bishop's  Pilgrim  was  published 
prior  to  that  of  John  Bunyan. 


The  Great  French  Biography  (Roman  Catholic), 
having  alluded  to  his  employment  in  prison,  adds. 

'  Mais  il  y  ecrivit  aussi  son  fameux  Voyage  du  Pelerin,  alle- 
gorie  religieuse  parfaitement  soutenue,  qui  a  eu  cinquantc 
editions,  et  a  ete  traduite  en  plusieurs  langues.'  5 

James  Montgomery: — 

'  It  has  been  the  lot  of  John  Bunyan,  an  unlettered  artisan, 
to  d,o  more  than  one  in  a  hundred  millions  of  human  beings, 
even  in  civilized  society,  is  usually  able  to  do.  He  has  pro- 
duced a  work  of  imagination,  of  such  decided  originality,  as  not 
only  to  have  commanded  public  admiration  on  its  first  appear- 
ance, but  amidst  all  changes  of  time  and  style,  and  modes  of 
thinking,  to  have  maintained  its  place  in  the  popular  literature 
of  every  succeeding  age ;  with  the  probability  that,  so  long  as 
the  language  in  which  it  is  written  endures,  it  will  not  cease 
to  be  read  by  a  great  number  of  the  youth  of  all  future  genera- 
tions, at  that  period  of  life  when  their  minds,  their  imagina- 
tions, and  their  hearts  are  most  impressible  with  moral  excel- 
lence, splendid  picture,  and  religious  sentiment.  The  happy 
idea  of  representing  his  story  under  the  similitude  of  a  dream, 
enabled  him  to  portray,  with  all  the  liveliness  of  reality,  the 
scenes  which  passed  before  him.  It  makes  the  reader  himself, 
like  the  author,  a  spectator  of  all  that  occurs;  thus  giving  him 
a  personal  interest  in  the  events,  an  individual  sympathy  for 
the  actors  and  sufferers.  It  would  be  difficult  to  name  another 
work  of  any  kind  in  our  native  tongue  of  which  so  many  edi- 
tions have  been  printed,  of  which  so  many  readers  have  lived 
atid  died  ;  the  character  of  whose  lives  and  deaths  must  have 
been  more  or  less  affected  by  its  lessons  and  examples,  its 
fictions  and  realities.' 

Dr.  Cheever: — 

'  Perhaps  no  other  work  could  be  named  which,  admired  by 
cultivated  minds,  has  had,  at  the  same  time,  such  an  amelior- 
ating effect  on  the  working  classes  in  society  as  the  "Pilgrim's 
Progress."  It  is  a  work  so  full  of  native  good  sense,  that  no 
mind  can  read  it  without  gaining  iu  wisdom  and  vigour  of 
judgment.  It  is  one  of  the  books  that,  by  being  connected 
with  the  dearest  associations  of  childhood,  always  retain  their 
hold  on  the  heart ;  and  it  exerts  a  double  influence  when,  at 
a  graver  age,  and  less  under  the  despotism  given  to  imagina- 
tion in  childhood,  we  read  it  with  a  serene  and  thoughtful 
perception  of  its  meaning.  How  many  children  have  become 
better  citizens  of  the  world  through  life,  by  the  perusal  of  this 
book  in  infancy  !  How  many  pilgrims,  in  hours  when  perse- 
verance was  almost  exhausted,  and  patience  was  yielding,  and 
clouds  and  darkness  were  gathering,  have  felt  a  sudden  return 
of  animation  and  courage  from  the  remembrance  of  Christian's 
severe  conflicts,  aud  his  glorious  entrance  at  last  through  the 
gates  into  the  city  ! ' 

Robert  Southey: — 

'  Bunyan's  fame  may  be  literally  said  to  have  risen ;  begin- 
ning among  the  people,  it  made  its  way  up  to  those  who  are 
called  the  public.  In  most  instances,  the  many  receive 
gradually  and  slowly  the  opinions  of  the  few  respecting  literary 
merit ;  aud  sometimes,  in  assentation  to  such  authority,  pro- 
fess with  their  lips  an  admiration  of  they  know  not  what.  But 
here  the  opinion  of  the  multitude  has  been  ratified  by  the  judi- 
cious. The  people  knew  what  they  admired.  It  is  a  book 
which  makes  it  way  through  the  fancy  to  the  understanding 
and  the  heart.  The  child  peruses  it  with  wonder  and  delight ; 
in  youth  we  discover  the  genius  which  it  displays ;  its  worth 
is  apprehended  as  we  advance  in  years ;   and  we  perceive  its 


8vo.     Paris,  1810,  torn.  iii.  p. 


-112. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


C'J 


merits  Coding!;  in  declining  age.     If  it  is  not  a  well  of  Eng-  I 
liafa  ondeGled,  to  which  the  poet  as  well  aa  the  philologist  must 

repair,  if  they  would  drink  of  the  living  waters,  it  is  a  clear  j 
stream  of  current  English — the  vernacular  speech  of  his  age —  ; 
sometimes,  indeed,  in  its  rusticity  and  coarseness,  but  always 
in  its  plainness  and  its  strength.' 

Coleridge  the  Poet:  — 

'The  "  Pilgrim's  Progress"  is  composed  in  the  lowest  style 
of  English,  without  slang  or  false  grammar.  If  you  were  to 
polish  it,  yon  would  at  once  destroy  the  reality  of  the  vision. 

'This  wonderful  wori  is  one  of  the  very  few  books  which 
may  be  read  over  repeatedly  at  different  times,  and  each  time 
with  a  new  and  different  pleasure.  I  rend  it  once  a<  a  theolo- 
gian, and  let  me  assure  you,  that  there  is  great  theological 
acumen  in  the  work;  once  with  devotional  feelings;  and  once 
as  a  poet ;  1  could  not  have  believed  beforehand  that  Calvinism 
could  be  painted  in  such  exquisitely-delightful  colours. 

'  I  know  of  no  book,  the  Bible  excepted,  as  above  all  com- 
parison, which  I,  according  to  my  judgment  and  experience, 
could  so  safely  recommend,  as  teaching  and  enforcing  the 
whole  saving  truth  according  to  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ 
Jesus,  as  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  It  is,  in  my  conviction, 
incomparably  the  best  sumrna  theologia  evangelicce  ever  pro- 
duced by  a  writer  not  miraculously  inspired.' — (May  and  June, 
1830.     Table  Talk,  vol.  i.  pp.  160,  1G1.) 

Dr.  Arnold  of  Rugby: — 

'  I  have  left  off  rending  our  diviues,  because,  as  Pascal  said 
of  the  Jesuits,  if  I  had  spent  my  time  in  reading  them  fully, 
1  should  have  read  a  great  many  indifferent  books.  But  if  I 
could  find  a  great  man  among  them,  I  would  read  him  thank- 
fully and  earnestly.  As  it  is,  I  hold  John  Banyan  to  have 
been  a  man  of  incomparably  greater  genius  than  auy  of  them, 
and  to  have  given  a  far  truer  and  more  edifying  picture  of 
Christianity.  His  "  Pilgrim's  Progress"  seems  to  be  a  com- 
plete reflection  of  Scripture,  with  noue  of  the  rubbish  of  the 
theologians  mixed  up  with  it.' — {Dr.  Arnold  to  Justice  Cole- 
ridge, Nov.  30,  1836.     Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  65.) 

And,  'I  have  always  been  struck  by  its  piety;  I  am  now 
(having  read  it  through  again,  after  a  long  interval)  struck 
etpially,  or  even  more,  by  its  profound  wisdom.' — Ibid.  vol.  ii. 
p.  65. 

Mr.  Macaulay,  from  his  Review  of  Souther's 
Life  of  Bunyan: — 

'  The  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  " 
is,  that  it  is  the  only  work  of  its  kind  which  possesses  a  strong 
human  interest.  Other  allegories  only  amuse  the  fancy.  It 
is  not  so  with  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  That  wonderful 
book,  while  it  obtains  admiration  from  the  most  fastidious 
critics,  is  loved  by  those  who  are  too  simple  to  admire  it. 
In  the  wildest  parts  of  Scotland,  it  is  the  delight  of  the  pea- 
santry. In  every  nursery,  the  "Pilgrim's  Progress"  is  a 
greater  favourite  than  Jack  the  Giant-killer. 

'  Every  reader  knows  the  straight  and  narrow  path  as  well 
as  he  knows  a  road  in  which  he  has  gone  backward  and  for- 
ward a  hundred  times.  This  is  the  highest  miracle  of  genius 
— that  things  which  are  not  should  be  as  though  they  were — 
that  the  imaginations  of  one  mind  should  become  the  personal 
recollections  of  another.  And  this  miracle  the  tinker  has 
wrought.  There  is  no  ascent,  no  declivity,  no  resting-place, 
no  turn-stile,  with  which  we  are  not  perfectly  acquainted.  The 
wicket-gate,  and  the  desolate  swamp  which  separates  it  from 
the  City  of  Destruction — the  long  line  of  road,  as  straight  as 
a  rule  can  make  it— the  Interpreter's  house,  and  all  its  fair 


shows — the  prisoner  iu  the  iron  cage — the  palace,  at  the  doors 
of  which  armed  men  kept  guard,  and  on  the  battlements  of 
which  walked  persons  clothed  all  in  gold — the  cross  and  tin; 
sepulchre — the  steep  hill  and  the  pleasant  arbour — the  stately 
front  of  the  House  Beautiful  by  the  wayside — the  low  green 
Valley  of  Humiliation,  rich  with  grass  and  covered  with  flocks 
— are  all  as  well  known  to  us  as  the  sights  of  our  own  street. 
Then  we  come  to  the  narrow  place,  where  Apollyon  strode 
right  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  way,  to  stop  the  journey 
of  Christian  ;  and  where,  afterwards,  the  pillar  was  set  up,  to 
testify  how  bravely  the  Pilgrim  had  fought  the  good  light.  As 
we  advauce,  the  valley  becomes  deeper  and  deeper.  The  shade 
of  the  precipices  on  both  sides  falls  blacker  and  blacker.  The 
clouds  gather  over-head.  Doleful  voices,  the  clanking  of  chains, 
and  the  rushing  of  many  feet  to  and  fro,  are  heard  through  the 
darkness.  The  way  hardly  discernible  in  gloom,  and  close  by 
the  mouth  of  the  burning  pit,  which  sends  forth  its  flames,  its 
noisome  smoke,  and  its  hideous  shapes,  to  terrify  the  adven- 
turer. Thence  he  goes  on,  amidst  the  snares  and  pitfalls,  with 
the  mangled  bodies  of  those  who  have  perished  lying  in  the 
ditch  by  his  side.  At  the  end  of  the  long  dark  valley,  he 
passes  the  dens  in  which  the  old  giants  dwelt,  amidst  the 
bones  and  ashes  of  those  whom  they  had  slain.  Then  the 
road  passes  straight  on  through  a  waste  moor,  till  at  length 
the  towers  of  a  distant  city  appear  before  the  traveller ;  and 
soon  he  is  in  the  midst  of  the  innumerable  multitudes  of 
Vanity  Fair.  There  are  the  jugglers  and  the  apes,  the  shops 
and  the  puppet-shows.  There  are  Italian  Row,  and  French 
Row,  and  Spanish  Row,  and  Britain  Row — with  their  crowds 
of  buyers,  sellers,  and  loungers,  jabbering  all  the  languages  of 
the  earth.  Thence  we  go  on  by  the  little  hill  of  the  silver 
mine,  and  through  the  meadow  of  lilies,  along  the  bank  of  that 
pleasant  river,  which  is  bordered  on  both  sides  by  fruit-trees. 
On  the  left  side,  branches  off  the  path  to  that  horrible  castle, 
the  court-yard  of  which  is  paved  with  the  skulls  of  pilgrims ; 
and  right  onward  are  the  sheeplblds  and  orchards  of  the 
Delectable  Mountains.  From  the  Delectable  Mountains  the 
way  lies  through  the  fogs  and  briers  of  the  Enchanted  Ground, 
with  here  and  there  a  bed  of  soft  cushions  spread  under  a  green 
arbour.  And  beyond  is  the  land  of  Beulah  ;  where  the  flowers, 
the  grapes,  and  the  songs  of  birds  never  cease,  and  where  the 
sun  shines  night  and  day.  Thence  are  plainly  seen  the  golden 
pavements  and  streets  of  pearls,  on  the  other  side  of  that  black 
and  cold  river  over  which  there  is  no  bridge. 

'All  the  stages  of  the  jouruey — all  the  forms  which  cross 
or  overtake  the  pilgrims  —  the  giants  and  hobgoblins,  ill- 
favoured  ones  and  shining  ones — the  tall,  comely,  swarthy 
Madam  Bubble,  with  her  great  purse  by  her  side,  and  her 
fingers  playing  with  the  money — the  black  man  in  the  bright 
vesture — Mr.  YVorldly-wiseman  and  my  Lord  Hate-good — Mr. 
Talkative  and  Mrs.  Timorous — all  are  actually  existing  beings 
to  us.  We  follow  the  travellers  through  their  allegorical  pro- 
gress, with  interest  not  inferior  to  that  with  which  we  follow 
Elizabeth  from  Siberia  to  Moscow,  or  Jeanie  Deans  from  Edin- 
burgh to  London.  Bunyan  is  almost  the  oidy  writer  that 
ever  gave  to  the  abstract  the  interest  of  the  concrete.  Reli- 
gion has  scarcely  ever  worn  a  form  so  calin  and  soothing  as  in 
his  allegory.  The  feeling  which  predominates  through  the 
whole  book  is  a  feeling  of  tenderness  for  weak,  timid,  and 
harassed  minds.  The  character  of  Mr.  Fearing  —  of  Mr. 
Feeble-mind — of  Mr.  Despondency,  and  his  daughter  Mitt 
Much-afraid — the  account  of  poor  Little-faith,  who  was  robbed 
by  the  three  thieves  of  his  spending  money— the  description 
of  Christian's  terror  in  the  dungeons  of  Giant  Despair,  and  in 
his  passage  through  the  river— all  clearly  show  how  strong  a 
sympathy  Bunyan  felt,  after  his  own  mind  had  become  clear 
and  cheerful,  for  persons  afflicted  with  religious  melancholy. 


70 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


1  The  style  of  Bunyan  is  delightful  to  every  reader ;  and 
invaluable  as  a  study  to  every  person  who  wishes  to  obtain  a 
wide  command  over  the  English  language.  The  vocabulary 
is  the  vocabulary  of  the  common  people.  There  is  not  an 
expression,  if  we  except  a  few  technical  terms  of  theology, 
which  would  puzzle  the  rudest  peasant.  We  have  observed 
several  pages  which  do  not  contain  a  single  word  of  more  than 
two  syllables.  Yet  no  writer  has  said  more  exactly  what  he 
meant  to  say.  For  magnificence,  for  pathos,  for  vehement 
exhortation,  for  subtle  disquisition,  for  every  purpose  of  the 
poet,  the  orator,  and  the  divine,  this  homely  dialect — the  dia- 
lect of  plain  working  men — was  perfectly  sufficient.  There  is 
no  book  in  our  literature  on  which  we  would  so  readily  stake 
the  fame  of  the  old,  unpolluted  English  language ;  no  book  which 
shows  so  well  how  rich  that  language  is  in  its  own  proper 
wealth,  and  how  little  it  has  been  improved  by  all  that  it  has 
borrowed.  Though  there  were  many  clever  men  in  England 
during  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  there  were 
only  two  great  creative  minds ;  one  of  those  minds  produced 
the  Paradise  Lost,  the  other  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress." 

'There  are,  we  think,  some  characters  and  scenes  in  the 
"  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  which  can  be  fully  comprehended  and 
enjoyed  only  by  persons  familiar  with  the  history  of  the  times 
through  which  Bunyan  lived.  The  character  of  Mr.  Great- 
heart,  the  guide,  is  an  example.  "We  have  not  the  least  doubt 
that  Bunyau  had  in  view  some  stout  old  Greatheart  of  Naseby 
and  Worcester ;  who  prayed  with  his  men  before  he  drilled 
them  ;  who  knew  the  spiritual  state  of  every  dragoon  in  his 
troop ;  and  who,  with  the  praises  of  God  in  his  mouth,  and  a 
two-edged  sword  in  his  hand,  had  turned  to  flight,  in  many 
fields  of  battle,  the  swearing  druuken  bravoes  of  Rupert  and 
Lunsford.  Every  age  produces  such  men  as  Bye-ends — he 
might  have  found  all  his  kindred  among  the  public  men  of 
that  time;  among  the  Peers— my  Lord  Turn-about,  my  Lord 
Time-server,  and  Lord  Fair-speech.  In  the  House  of  Com- 
mons— Mr.  Smooth-man,  Mr.  Anything,  and  Mr.  Facing- 
both-ways ;  nor  would  the  parson  of  the  parish,  Mr.  Two- 
tougues,  have  been  wanting.' 

Mr.  Macadlay's  character  of  John  Bunyan, 
from  his  invaluable  History  of  England: — 

'To  the  names  of  Baxter  and  Howe  must  be  added  the  uame 
of  a  man  far  below  them  in  station  and  in  acquired  knowledge, 
but  in  virtue  their  equal,  and  in  genius  their  superior,  John 
Bunyan.  Bunyan  had  been  bred  a  tinker,  and  had  served 
as  a  private  soldier.  Early  in  life  he  had  been  fearfully  tor- 
tured by  remorse  for  his  youthful  sins,  the  worst  of  which 
seem,  however,  to  have  been  such  as  the  world  thinks  venial. 
His  keen  sensibility,  and  his  powerful  imagination,  made  his 
internal  conflicts  singularly  terrible.  At  length  the  clouds 
broke.  From  the  depths  of  despair,  the  penitent  passed  to  a 
state  of  serene  felicity.  An  irresistible  impulse  now  urged  him 
to  impart  to  others  the  blessing  of  which  he  was  himself  pos- 
sessed. He  joined  the  Baptists,  and  became  a  preacher  and 
writer.  His  education  had  been  that  of  a  mechanic.  He  knew 
no  language  but  the  English  as  it  was  spoken  by  the  common 
people.  He  had  studied  no  great  model  of  composition,  with 
the  exception — an  important  exception  undoubtedly — of  our 
noble  translation  of  the  Bible.  His  native  force  of  genius,  and 
his  experimental  knowledge  of  all  the  religious  passions,  from 
despair  to  ecstacy,  amply  supplied  in  him  the  want  of  learning. 
His  rude  oratory  roused  and  melted  hearers,  who  listened, 
without  interest,  to  the  laboured  discourses  of  great  logicians 
and  Hebraists.  His  works  are  widely  circulated  among  the 
humbler  classes.  One  of  them,  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  was, 
in  his  own  lifetime,  translated  into  several  foreign  languages. 
It  was,  however,  scarcely  known  to  the  lcarued  and  polite;  and 


had  been,  during  near  a  century,  the  delight  of  pious  cottagers 
and  artizaus,  before  it  was  publicly  commended  by  any  man  of 
high  literary  emineuce.  At  length  critics  condescended  to 
inquire  where  the  secret  of  so  wide  and  so  durable  a  popularity 
lay.  They  were  compelled  to  own  that  the  ignorant  multitude 
had  judged  more  correctly  than  the  learned,  and  that  the 
despised  little  book  was  really  a  masterpiece.  Bunyan,  indeed, 
is  as  decidedly  the  first  of  allegorists,  as  Demosthenes  is  the 
first  of  orators,  or  Shakspeare  the  first  of  dramatists.  Other 
allefgorists  have  shown  great  ingenuity,  but  no  other  allegorist 
has  ever  been  able  to  touch  the  heart,  and  to  make  abstrac- 
tions objects  of  terror,  of  pity,  and  of  love.' 

Lord  Campbell. — It  is  one  of  the  extraordinary 
signs  of  the  times  in  which  we  live,  to  Avitness  the 
highest  judicial  functionary  in  the  kingdom  speak- 
ing, without  sectarian  partiality,  and  in  the  high- 
est terms  of  praise,  of  a  preaching  mechanic.  It 
is  in  Lord  John  Campbell's  Life  of  Chief-Justice 
Hale,  when  the  judges,  before  whom  Mrs.  Bunyan 
had  so  powerfully  pleaded  for  her  husband's  liberty, 
were  trumpeted  out  of  Bedford,  she  burst  into  tears, 
saying,  '  Not  so  much  because  they  are  so  hard- 
hearted against  me  and  my  husband,  but  to  think 
what  a  sad  account  such  poor  creatures  will  have 
to  give  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord:' — 

'  Little  do  we  know  what  is  for  our  permanent  good,'  says 
Lord  John  Campbell.  '  Had  Bunyan  then  been  discharged, 
and  allowed  to  enjoy  liberty,  he  no  doubt  would  have  returned 
to  his  trade,  filling  up  his  intervals  of  leisure  with  field- 
preaching  ;  his  name  would  not  have  survived  his  own  gene- 
ration, and  he  could  have  done  little  for  the  religious  im- 
provement of  mankind.  The  prison  doors  were  shut  upon 
him  for  twelve  years.  Being  cut  off  from  the  external  world, 
he  communed  with  his  own  soul ;  and  inspired  by  Him  who 
touched  Elijah's  hallowed  lips  with  fire,  he  composed  the 
noblest  of  allegories,  the  merit  of  which  was  first  discovered 
by  the  lowly,  but  which  is  now  lauded  by  the  most  refined 
critics ;  and  which  has  done  more  to  awaken  piety,  and  to 
enforce  the  precepts  of  Christian  morality,  than  all  the  sermons 
which  have  been  published  by  all  the  prelates  of  the  Anglican 
church.'1 

The  Penny  Encyclopedia  is  the  only  work  which 
has  treated  the  *  Pilgrim's  Progress  '  with  dis- 
respect.  Under  the  article  John  Bunyan,  it  says : — 

'  Among  his  works,  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  has  attained 
the  greatest  notoriety.  If  a  judgment  is  to  be  formed  of  the 
merits  of  a  book  by  the  number  of  times  it  has  been  reprinted, 
and  the  many  languages  into  which  it  has  been  translated,  no 
production  in  English  literature  is  superior  to  this  coarse  alle- 
gory. On  a  composition  which  has  been  extolled  by  Dr. 
Johnson,  and  which,  in  our  own  times,  has  received  a  very 
high  critical  opinion  in  its  favour,  it  is  hazardous  to  venture  a 
disapproval;  and  we,  perhaps,  speak  the  opinion  of  a  small 
minority  when  we  confess  that  to  us  it  appears  to  be  mean, 
jejune,  and  wearisome.' 

Probably  this  is  the  glorious  minority  of  one. 
Such  an  opinion  may  excite  pity  and  indignation, 
but  needs  no  comment. 

The  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  *  has  proved  an  in- 
valuable aid  to  the  Sunday-school  Teacher,  and  to 
the  Missionary.      One  of  the  latter  wrote  home  with 

1  Lord  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chief  Justices,  vol.  i.  p.  561. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


joy  to  inform  his  Christian  friends,  that  a  Malay 
sat  up  three  nights  to  read  it,  never  having  before 
seen  so  beautiful  a  book,  and  praying  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  may  influence  his  countrymen  to  read,  and 
also  enlighten  their  hearts  to  understand  the 
wondrous  divum.  The  pundit  who  was  engaged  to 
translate  it  into  Singhalese,  was  so  deeply  affected 
by  the  Btory,  that,  at  times,  he  could  not  proceed  ; 
when  he  had  passed  the  wicket-gate,  ami  Christian's 
burden  fell  from  his  shoulders,  at  the  sight  of 
Christ  crucified,  he  was  overcome  with  joy — he 
laughed,  wept,  clapped  his  hands,  danced,  and 
shouted,  'delightful,  delightful ! '  It  was  especially 
bleBsed  to  the  persecuted  Christian  natives  in 
Ceylon  ;  in  their  distress  when  driven  from  home, 
in  places  of  danger,  they  encouraged  each  other  by 
repeating  portions  of  scripture,  and  the  vivid  deli- 
neations of  perseverance  and  triumph  from  the 
'Pilgrim's  Progress.' 

No  book,  the  result  of  human  labour  and  in- 
genuity, has  been  so  eminently  useful.  Let  Homer 
have  the  credit  of  his  lofty  poem,  Plato  of  his 
Philosophy,  Cicero  of  his  elegancies,  and  Aquinas 
of  bis  subtleties ;  but  for  real  value,  as  connected 
with  human  happiness,  our  unlettered  mechanic 
rises  infinitely  their  superior. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

observations  on  the  most  prominent  parts  op  the 
'  pilgrim's  progress.' 

Before  taking  a  walk  with  the  pilgrims,  to  point 
out  a  few  peculiarities  not  noticed  by  commenta- 
tors, it  may  be  well  to  answer  the  inquiry  so  often 
made — Is  the  narrative  that  of  the  author's  and 
his  wife's  own  experience?  Sly  humble  opinion  is 
that  he  did  not  so  intend  it.  His  first  wife  had 
been  for  years  an  inhabitant  of  the  Celestial  City, 
and  his  second  was  a  decided  Christian  long  he- 
fore  his  'Pilgrim'  was  written.  At  the  pillar  to 
commemorate  Lot's  wife,  Hopeful  calls  to  Chris- 
tian, '  for  be  was  learned,' — a  title,  so  far  as  lettered 
lore  was  concerned,  Bunyan  could  not  have  given 
to  himself,  nor  would  he  have  applied  it  as  to  his 
own  spiritual  knowledge.  It  appears  not  to  be 
intended  to  portray  the  experience  of  any  one  man 
or  woman,  but  the  feelings,  doubts,  conflicts,  and 
enjoyments  of  the  Christian  character.  The  whole 
household  of  faith  embodied  and  described  in  the 
sacred  pages,  enlarged  by  his  own  experience,  and 
that  which  he  discovered  in  his  Christian  inter- 
course;  from  the  first  fearful  cry,  '  What  shall  I 
do  to  be  saved?'  until  the  crown  of  glory  and  im- 
mortality is  put  upon  bis  head  with  the  anthem, 
'  It  i3  finished,'  '  Blessed  arc  the  dead  who  die 
in  the  Lord.' 

Among  some  very  singular  discoveries  made 
from    the    pages   of  this   eminently  non-sectarian 


I  book,  is,  that  it  sanctions  the  old  and  curious  cus- 
tom of  christening  infants.      The  mind  capable  of 

i  making  such  a  discovery,  must  he  familiar  with 
very  Jesuitic  and  far-fetched  arguments  in  defence 

!  of  a  custom  which,  Bunyan  thought,  set  tbe  Bible, 
and  reason  too,  at  defiance,  and  could  only  be 
defended  by  tradition,  handed  down  to  us  by  tho 
Papists  from  the  dark  and  gloomy  ages  of  Buper* 
stition.  It  is  in  an  edition  with  notes  by  Mr.  St. 
John,  and  a  key  by  II.  Wood.1  In  the  index  there 
appears  the  following  sentiments  under  the  word — 

'Baptism. — The  ordinance  of,  to  be  observed,  and  the  ad« 
vantage  that  children  are  thereby  made  partakers,  who  arc 
thllH  early  admitted  into  the  visible  church  of  Christ.  Chris- 
tian's sons  have  been  married,  and  their  olive  branches  were 
springing  op,  when  Christiana  and  her  troop  of  children  and 
grandchildren  had  passed  the  hill  Lucre,  and  arrived  at  the 
green  meadows.  Here  they  find  a  house  is  built  for  the 
nourishing  and  bringing  up  those  lambs,  the  babes  of  those 
women  that  go  on  pilgrimage.' 

The  annotator  seizes  an  opportunity  from  this 
parental  anxiety  to  '  train  up  a  child  in  the  way 
he  should  go,'  to  introduce  Bunyan  as  an  authority 
for  the  christening  of  infants. 

But  to  return  to  our  '  Pilgrim.'  A  charge  has 
been  made  against  the  arrangement  of  the  story, 
because  the  converts  in  the  town  of  Vanity  are  not 
described  as  having  entered  the  way  by  the  wicket- 
gate.  They  witness  the  patient  endurance  of 
sufferings  in  Faithful,  and  are  led  to  feel  that 
there  must  be  some  solemn  realities  in  religion  to 
which  they  were  strangers  ;  we  have  no  account 
of  their  convictions  nor  misery ;  their  Slough  of 
Despond,  or  entering  the  wicket-gate,  or  relief  on 
the  sight  of  Christ  crucified,  for  all  this  has  been 
already  told  in  Christian's  experience.  The  lovely 
inmates  in  the  Palace  Beautiful,  descriptive  of  the 
temper  which  every  member  of  a  Christian  church 
ought  to  cultivate,  are  left  there  as  if  they  went  no 
further  towards  Zion.  Christian's  journey  does 
not  appear  to  occupy  the  time  taken  to  perform 
the  same  distance  by  Christiana.  These,  and  many 
other  apparent  discrepancies,  are  essential  to  the 
author's  design,  because  he  represents  it  all  under 
the  similitude  of  a  DreaM.  The  following  quota- 
tions clearly  indicate  some  changes  of  import- 
ance, interfering  with  Christian  liberty  between  the 
writing  of  tho  First  Part  in  prison  before  1673, 
and  the  publication  of  tho  Second  Part  in  1684. 
When  Christiana  came  to  the  Slough  of  Despond, 

'  She  perceived  also,  that  notwithstanding  the  command  of 
the  King,  to   make  this  place  for  pilgrims  good,  yet  it  was 
rather  worse   than   formerly.     Tor  that  many  there  he  that 
pretend  to  be  the  Kind's  labourers;  and  that  say  they  at 
mending  the  King's  highway,  that  bring  dirt  and  dung  instead   Q 
of  stones,  and  so  mar  instead  of  mending.' 

Before  the  pilgrims  attempted   to  aaoend  tbe 


Published  by  Rickerby,  Sherborne  Lane.  183S. 


72 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Hill  Difficulty,  tliey  sought  for  some  refreshment, 
and  Great-heart  said — 

*  This  is  the  spring  that  Christian  drank  of  before  he  went 
up  this  hill ;  and  then  'twas  clear  and  good ;  but  now  'tis  dirty 
with  the  feet  of  some  that  were  not  desirous  that  pilgrims  here 
should  quench  their  thirst.' 

The  two  lions  in  the  way  to  frighten  the  young 
inquirer  from  making  a  public  profession  at  the 
Palace  Beautiful,  may  represent  the  civil  and  ec- 
clesiastical powers  when  assuming  the  throne  of 
God,  to  judge  and  compel  men  as  to  forms  of 
Divine  worship.  Their  effort  was  to  prevent  fur- 
ther inquiries,  and  thus  turn  the  pilgrims  back  to 
the  City  of  Destruction  ;  they  are  chained,  to  show 
tbat  these  devils  are  under  Divine  control,  and  can 
only  hurt  such  as  they  may  devour.  A  cessation, 
or  temporary  relief  from  persecution,  puts  them  to 
sleep  as  Faithful  passes ;  and  a  recollection  of  the 
misery  and  cruelties  they  had  so  recently  perpe- 
trated, raises  Giant  Grim  to  back  them,  and  terrify 
Christiana,  Mercy,  and  the  children.  The  effects 
.  of  this  cruel  persecution  of  the  saints  thinned  the 
number  of  professors. 

'  Now,  to  say  the  truth,  this  way  had  of  late  lain  much  un- 
occupied, and  was  almost  all  grown  over  with  grass.' 

Their  fears  are  at  that  time  dissipated  by  Great- 
heart  the  guide,  who  slays  the  Giant. 

While  Christiana  and  her  company  rest  at  the 
town  of  Vanity, 

'  There  came  a  monster  out  of  the  woods,  and  slew  many 
of  the  people  of  the  town.  It  would  also  carry  away  their 
children,  aud  teach  them  to  suck  its  whelps.  Now  no  man  in 
the  town  durst  so  much  as  face  this  monster ;  but  all  men 
tied  when  they  heard  the  noise  of  his  coming.  This  monster 
propounded  conditions  to  men ;  and  such  men  as  loved  their 
lives  more  than  their  souls,  accepted  those  conditions.  So 
they  came  under.' 

From  all  this  it  is  obvious,  that  between  the 
time  when  Bunyan  wrote  the  First  Part,  and  the 
publication  of  the  Second,  some  painful  events  had 
taken  place,  interfering  with  a  Christian  profession. 
Those  iniquitous  laws,  called  the  Five  Mile  and 
the  Conventicle  Acts,  were  passed  in  the  16,  17, 
and  22  Charles  II.  ;  the  first  of  these  imposed 
ruinous  fines,  imprisonment,  and  death,  upon  all 
persons  above  sixteen  years  of  age,  who  attended 
Divine  service  where  the  Liturgy,  the  compulsive 
use  of  which  had  proved  an  awful  curse  and  scourge 
to  the  kingdom,  was  not  read.  The  second  or- 
dained that  no  nonconformist  minister  should  live 
within  five  miles  of  any  town.  Bunyan  did  inhabit 
aud  live  in  Bedford  by  compulsion,  but  he  was  not 
proceeded  against,  although  it  would  have  been  as 
^  just  as  was  the  conduct  of  the  Recorder  of  London 
™  on  the  trial  of  Penn,  for  holding  a  conventicle ;  for 
he  ordered  an  officer  of  the  court  to  put  Penn's  hat 
on  his  head,  and  then  fined  Penn  for  having  it  on! ! 
The  third  of  these  Acts  was  to  suppress  all  meetings 


for  worship  among  the  nonconformists  ;  these  were 
passed  in  1665,  1666,  and  1671,  and  in  a  short 
time  made  the  frightful  desolations  to  which  we  havo 
before  referred;  so  that  it  appears  as  if  the  First 
Part  was  written  before  1666  or  1667,  when  these 
abominable  laws  were  enforced,  and  the  Second 
Part  after  their  effects  had  been  seen  and  felt.  That 
these  horrid  laws  were  obtained  and  put  in  force 
by  the  clergy,  urged  on  by  the  bishops,  we  have 
melancholy  proof.  Even  all  publicans  attending 
any  conventicle,  had  their  licenses  taken  from 
them.1  In  the  diocese  of  Salisbury,  not  one  dis- 
senting meeting  was  left.  On  October  11,  1666, 
an  order  was  issued,  that  iu  Scotland  all  leases 
and  rents  should  be  void  as  to  those  who  did  not 
attend  the  parish  church.  Any  person  holding  a 
conventicle  was  fined  five  thousand  marks ;  and  at 
length  the  King  ordered  military  execution  in  that 
kingdom  upon  all  nonconformists,  without  process 
or  conviction.2  The  result  of  the  severe  sufferings 
of  our  Scottish  forefathers  in  the  faith,  was  the 
exemption  of  their  posterity  from  the  use  of  the 
detested  book.  The  saints  of  those  days  comforted 
one  another  with  a  proverb : — '  It  is  better  that  the 
body  should  die  to  this  world  by  the  lions  without, 
than  that  body  and  soul  should  die  eternally  by  our 
lusts  within.'  Interference  with  the  education  of  the 
children  of  dissenters  was  under  the  14  Charles  II., 
which  enacts,  'That  no  person  shall  teach  any 
children,  whether  in  a  private  family  or  in  a  school, 
unless  licensed  by  his  diocesan,  and  all  were  to  be 
taught  according  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,' 
or  ruinous  fines  and  imprisonments  were  enforced. 
Thus  the  Slough  of  Despond  became  more  foul ;  the 
spring  of  water  became  muddy  ;  the  lions  so  thinned 
the  number  of  pilgrims  that  the  grass  grew  upon  the 
road,  and  the  monster  was  very  rampant.  He  who 
feels  no  indignation  when  listening  to  such  enormous 
crimes  perpetrated  by  wicked  laws,  has  the  despi- 
cable spirit  of  a  slave.  Nothing  but  the  voice  of 
the  Saviour  commanding  us  to  forgive  his  and  our 
enemies,  could  prevent  us  leading  our  children  to  the 
altar  of  our  God  to  swear  eternal  enmity  against  a 
system  founded  on  tyranny,  and  producing  as  its 
effects  all  the  abominations  of  desolation. 

There  is  great  reason  to  suppose  that  the  man  in 
the  iron  cage,  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  alludes  to 
an  apostate,  one  John  Child.  He  had  been  a  Bap- 
tist minister,  and  was  born  at  Bedford  in  1638. 
It  may  have  been  to  him  that  Burroughs  refers  in 
his  account  of  a  disputation  which  he  and  some 
Quakers  had  in  Bedford  Church  with  John  Bunion, 
and  one  Fen,  and  J.  Child,  Nov.  23,  1656.  They, 
as  Burroughs  says,  laid  down,  '  That  very  God 
and  the  everlasting  Father  died  on  the  cross  as  man. 


See  Harris's  Life  of  Charles  II 
Ibid.  p.  120. 


p.  106,  &c. 


INTRODUCTION    BY   THE   EDITOR. 


78 


That  the  Word  that  was  in  the  beginning  was 
crucified.  That  justification  is  without  respect 
to  obedience.  Thai  there  is  a  light  which  con- 
vinceth  of  sin,  besides  the  light  of  Christ.     That 

there  is  no  saving  knowledge,  hut  comes  from  with- 
out from  heaven.'1  John  Child  was  then  only 
eighteen  years  of  age.  and  he  appears  to  have  been 

an  intimate  friend  of  Bunyan's,  so  that  when  his 
'Vindication  of  Gospel  Truths'  was  published, 
John  Child  united  in  a  recommendatory  preface— 
this  was  in  1657.  From  a  dread  of  persecution 
be  conformed  to  the  Church  of  England,  and  he 
maybe  the  person  referred  to  in  Bunyan's  '  Defence 
of  Justification,'  who  said,  'If  the  devil  should 
preach,  I  would  bear  him,  before  1  would  suffer 
pi  rsecution  ;  as  a  brave  fellow  which  1  could  name, 
in  his  rant,  was  pleased  to  declare.'  This  poor 
wretch  afterwards  became  terrified  with  awful  com- 
punctions of  conscience,  lie  was  visited  by  Mr. 
Keach,  Mr.  Collins,  and  a  Mr.  B.  (probably  Bun- 
yan.)  When  pressed  to  return  to  the  fold  of 
Christ,  be  said,  '  If  ever  I  am  taken  at  a  meeting, 
they  will  have  no  mercy  on  me,  and  triumph, 
This  is  the  man  that  made  his  recantation ;  and  then 
ruin  me  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  and  I  cannot 
bear  the  thought  of  a  cross  nor  a  prison.  I  had  a 
fancy,  the  other  morning,  that  tbe  sheriff's  officers 
were  coming  to  seize  all  that  I  bad.'  His  cries 
were  awful.  '  i"  shall  go  to  hell;  Iambrolcen  in 
judgment:  when  I  think  to  pray,  either  I  have  a 
ji ashing  in  my  face,  as  if  it  were  in  a  fame,  or  J 
am  dumb  and  cannot  speak.'  In  a  tit  of  desperation 
he  destroyed  himself  on  the  loth  October  1GS4. 
This  was  one  of  the  innumerable  unholy  triumphs 
of  the  state  in  its  interference  with  religion.2 

Christian's  sleeping  in  tbe  arbour,  as  well  as 
the  emblem  of  tbe  muck-rake  seen  in  the  Inter- 
preter's house,  is  illustrated  by  Quarles  in  his 
Emblems — 

'  Well,  sleep  thy  (ill,  and  take  thy  soft  reposes ; 
But  know,  withal,  sweet  tastes  have  sour  closes; 
And  he  repents  in  thorns,  that  sleeps  in  beds  of  roses.'3 

And  on  an  avaricious  muck-rake — 

'  '1  he  vulture  of  insatiate  minds 
Still  want-,  am!  wanting  seeks,  and  seeking  finds 
New  fuel  to  increase  her  rav'nous  tire.'4 

The  warning  giving  by  Evangelist  to  the  pil- 
grims, that  persecution  awaited  them,  might  have 
been  drawn  from  the  affectionately  faithful  conduct 
of  Mr.  GifTord,  Bunyan's  pastor,  in  encouraging 
him  to  preach  in  tbe  villages  at  the  risk  of  impri- 
sonment, and  even  of  death. 

The  trial  at  Vanity  Fair  is  an  almost  unconscious 
operation  of  quiet  but  keen  satire  upon  the  trials 
which  took  place  at  the  time,  sanctioned  by  all  the 

1  Burroughs's  Worts,  folio,  p.  305. 

-  Relation  of  the  Life  and  Dtuth  of  John  Child,  1731. 

8  Book  i.- — vii.  4  Book  ii. — ii. 


formalities  of  law.  '  they  brought  them  forth  to 
their  trial  in  order  to  their  condemnation.1     'The 

imaginary  trial  of  Faithful,  before  a  jury  composed 
of  personified  vices,  was  just  and  merciful,  when 

compared  with  the  real  trial  of  Lady  Mice  Lisle 
before  that  tribunal  where  all  the  vices  sat  in  the 
person  of  Jefferies.'8 

This  is  one  of  tbe  most  remarkable  pa 
in  tbo  'Pilgrim's  Progress.'  It  is  impossible 
to  doubt  that  Bunyau  intended  to  satirize  the 
mode,  in  which  state  trials  were  conducted  and)  r 
Charles  II.  The  license  given  to  witnesses  for  the 
prosecution,  tbe  shameless  partiality  and  ferocious 
insolence  of  the  judge,  tho  precipitancy  and  the 
blind  rancour  of  the  jury,  remind  us  of  those 
odious  mummeries  which,  from  the  Restoration  to 
the  Revolution,  were  merely  forms  preliminary  to 
banging,  drawing,  and  quartering.  Lord  Hate-good 
perforins  the  office  of  counsel  for  tho  prisoners,  as 
well  as  Scroggs  himself  could  have  performed  it. 
No  one  who  knows  the  state  trials  can  be  at  a  loss 
for  parallel  cases.  Indeed,  write  what  Bunyan 
would,  tbe  baseness  and  cruelty  of  tbe  lawyers  of 
those  times  'sinned  up  to  it  still,'  and  even  went 
beyond  it. 

'Judge.  Thou  runagate,  heretic,  and  traitor,  hast  thou  heard 
what  these  honest  gentlemen  have  witnessed  against  thee? 

'  Faithful.  May  I  speak  a  few  words  in  my  ow  n  defiance  ? 

'  Judge.  Sirrah,  sirrah !  thou  deservest  to  live  no  longer,  but 
to  be  slain  immediately  upon  the  plaee ;  yet,  that  all  men  may 
see  our  gentleness  to  thee,  let  us  hear  what  thou,  vile  runagate, 
hast  to  say.' 

Had  Bunyan  possessed  lands,  or  wealth,  to  have 
excited  tbe  cupidity  of  tbe  lawyers  or  informers, 

:  be  would  not  have  escaped  hanging  for  so  faith- 
ful a  picture  of  Judge  Jefferies. 

Every  dissenter  should  read  tbe  trial  of  William 
Penn  and  William  Mead,  which  took  place  in 
August  1G70.6  They  were  indicted  for  preach- 
ing in  Gracechurcb  Street,  the  police  and  military 

;  having  taken  possession  of  the  Friends'  Meeting- 
house there.  The  jury  refused  to  find  Mead 
guilty,  when  the  judge  addressed  them — '  Gentle- 
men, you  shall  not  be  dismissed  till  we  have  a 
verdict  that  the  court  will  accept ;  and  you  shall  be 
locked  up  without  meat,  drink,  tire,  and  tobacco. 
Yon  shall  not  thus  think  to  abuse  the  court;  we 
will  have  a  verdict,  by  the  help  of  God,  or  you 
shall  starve  for  it.'  They  requested  an  essential 
accommodation,  but  it  was  peremptorily  denied. 
1  hiving  been  locked  up  all  night,  on  the  following 
morning,  when  the  court  was  opened,  the  jury 
again  persisted  in  finding  Mead  not  guilty;  and 
the  foreman  said,  '  We  have  agreed  according  to 
our  consciences.'  The  Lord-mayor  replied,  'That 
conscience   of  yours   would  cut   my   throat;'   ho 


i  Edinburgh  Review,  December  1831. 

c  Male  Trials;  and  ab-o  published  at  the  time,  price  2d. 

lu 


74 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


answered,  'No,  my  Lord,  it  never  shall;'  when  the 
Lord-mayor  said,  '  But  I  will  cut  yours  so  soon  as 
I  can.'  Again  they  were. locked  up  until  the 
evening ;  they  then  kept  to  their  verdict,  when  the 
Lord-mayor  threatened  to  cut  the  foreman's  nose. 
Penn  said,  '  It  is  intolerable  that  my  jury  should 
be  thus  menaced,'  when  the  Mayor  cried  out, 
'  Stop  his  mouth ;  jailer,  bring  fetters,  and  stake 
him  to  the  ground.'  Penn  replied  calmly,  'Do 
your  pleasure;  I  matter  not  your  fetters:'  and  the 
recorder  thus  addressed  the  jury,  '  I  say  you  shall 
go  together,  and  bring  in  another  verdict,  or  you 
shall  starve.'  A  second  night  they  were  locked 
up  without  food  or  accommodation.  On  the  third 
morning  these  true-born  Englishmen  again  brought 
in  their  verdict  not  guilty,  and  for  this  the  jury 
were  sent  as  prisoners  to  Newgate ! ! !  Their  names 
were,  Thomas  Veer,  Edward  Bushell,  John  Ham- 
mond, Henry  Henley,  Henry  Michel,  John  Bright- 
man,  Charles  Milson,  Gregory  Walklet,  John  Baily, 
William  Lever,  James  Damask,  and  Wil  Plumsted 
— names  that  ought  to  be  printed  in  gold,  and 
exhibited  in  the  house  of  every  nonconformist,  and 
sculptured  in  marble  to  ornament  our  new  House 
of  Commons.  The  effects  of  persecution  for  re- 
fueling to  obey  man  when  he  usurped  the  throne 
of  God,  hastened  an  approaching  era.  England 
shuddered ;  dissenters  increased ;  and  eventually 
the  King  saved  his  contemptible  head  by  the  quick- 
ness of  his  heels.  Toleration  succeeded  persecu- 
tion, and  it  is  now  time  that  freedom  should  take  the 
place  of  toleration,  and  the  liberties  of  Englishmen 
be  freed  from  the  polluted  touch  of  any  hierarchy. 

The  difference  between  the  time  when  the  First 
Part  of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  '  was  written,  and 
the  Second  printed,  appears  very  strikingly  in  the 
state  of  the  town  of  Vanity.  '  In  those  days  we 
were  afraid  to  walk  the  streets,  but  now  we  can 
show  our  heads.  TIten  the  name  of  a  professor 
was  odious,  now,  specially  in  some  parts  of  our 
town,  religion  is  counted  honourable. ' 

The  surprising  difference  between  (lien  and  now 
can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  Declaration  for 
liberty  of  conscience  made  in  1672,  while  the 
author  was  in  prison,  proving  by  strong  circum- 
stantial evidence  that  the  First  Part  was  written 
before  1672,  the  Second  having  been  written  before 
1684,  and  even  then  the  nonconformist  ministers 
were  called  '  kidnappers  ; ' l  and  very  soon  after 
this,  persecution  again  lifted  up  her  accursed  head. 

How  keenly  does  Christian  unravel  the  subtleties 
of  By-ends  and  his  company!  Bunyan  was  aw- 
fully but  justly  severe  against  hypocrisy  upon  such 
as  named  the  name  of  Christ,  and  did  not  depart 
from  iniquity.  In  his  '  Holy  Life,  the  Beauty  of 
Christianity,'  he  thus  addresses  such  characters  : 


1  Marginal  note  to  Second  Part  of  the  '  Pilgrim.' 


'  Christ  calls  them  hypocrites,  wbited  walls,  painted 
sepulchres,  fools,  and  blind.  This  is  the  man  that 
hath  the  breath  of  a  dragon  ;  he  poisons  the  air 
round  about  him.  This  is  the  man  that  slays  his 
children,  his  kinsmen,  his  friend,  and  himself  ;  that 
offends  his  little  ones.  Oh  !  the  millstone  that 
God  will  shortly  hang  about  your  neck,  when  the 
time  is  come  that  you  must  be  drowned  in  the  sea 
and  deluge  of  God's  wrath.'  2 

When  By-ends  would  have  joined  the  Pilgrim's 
company,  Christian  was  decided  :  '  Not  a  step 
further,  unless  you  will  own  religion  in  his  rags  as 
well  as  when  in  his  silver  slippers,  and  stand  by 
him,  too,  when  bound  in  irons.'  A  writer  in  the 
Edinburgh  Fteoiew3  very  justly  says — 

'  The  town  of  Bedford  probably  contained  more  than  one  poli- 
tician, who,  after  contriving  to  raise  an  estate  by  seeking  the 
Lord  during  the  reign  of  the  saints,  contrived  to  keep  what  he 
had  got  by  persecuting  the  saints  during  the  reign  of  the 
strumpets.' 

Christian  having  admirably  triumphed  over  these 
enemies  and  over  Demas,  becomes  confident,  and 
not  only  involves  himself,  but  leads  his  companion 
into  great  trouble,  by  leaving  the  strait  but  rough 
road,  and  thus  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  fearful 
!  giant.  While  in  the  dungeon,  and  suffering  under 
awful  doubts,  Bunyan  aptly  introduces  the  subject 
of  suicide.  This  dialogue  upon  self-murder,  between 
Christian  and  Hopeful  in  Doubting  Castle,  might 
have  been  intended  as  an  antidote  to  Dr.  Donne's 
singular  treatise  to  prove  '  that  self-homicide  is  not 
so  naturally  sin,  that  it  may  never  be  otherwise. ' 
So  singular  a  thesis  by  a  learned  man  and  a  digni- 
tary of  the  Church,  must  have  made  a  deep  im- 
pression upon  the  public.  It  was  published  by 
authority  in  1044.  In  his  preface,  the  learned 
Doctor  says,  '  Whether  it  be  because  I  had  my 
first  breeding  and  conversation  with  men  of  a  sup- 
pressed and  afflicted  religion,  accustomed  to  the 
despite  of  death,  or  from  other  causes ;  whensoever 
any  affliction  assails  me,  methinks  I  have  the  keys 
of  llie  prison  in  my  own  hand,  and  no  remedy  pre- 
sents itself  so  soon  to  my  heart  as  mine  own  sword. 
Often  meditation  of  this  hath  won  me  to  a  charitable 
interpretation  of  their  action  who  die  so ; '  and  his 
conclusion  is,4  'that  self-homicide  may  be  free, 
not  only  from  enormous  degrees  of  sin,  but  from 
all.'  The  whole  work  displays  great  learning  and 
extreme  subtlety  ;  I  doubt  much  whether  St. 
Thomas  Aquinas  could  have  argued  so  absurdly 
wicked  a  proposition  better ;  and  against  such  an 
adversary  Bunyan  appears  in  the  person  of  Hope- 
ful, and  in  a  few  words  dissipates  all  the  mist  of 
his  subtleties,  and  exposes  the  utter  peril  and 
destruction  that  must  follow  so  awful  a  sin  as  self- 
murder.      The  dignitary  of  the  Church  was  taught 

-  See  vol.  ii.  p.  b'60.  3  December  1831. 

*  Donne's  Thesis,  p.  ~ti. 


INTRODUCTION   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


75 


by  schoolmen  a  difference  between  sins  which  a 

simple  Christian  could  not  have  conceived.  Dr. 
Donne  quotes  the  penitential  canons  which  inflicl 
a  greater  penance  upon  one  who  kills  his  wife,  than 

upon  one  who  kills  his  mother;  '  not  that  the  fault 
is  greater,  but  that,  otherwise,  mare  would  commit 
it.'8  Our  pious  Pilgrim,  taught  by  the  Boly  Spirit, 
abhors  nil  sin  as  bringing  the  curse  of  the  law  upon 
the  Burner,  and  requiring  the  blood  of  atonement 
to  cleanse  its  stain. 

The  view  of  those  who  fell  under  despair,  as 
seen  from  the  Delectable  Mountains,  is  exactly  in 
accordance  with  the  experience  narrated  in  the 
'Grace  Abounding,'  No.  186.  '0  the  unthought-of 
imaginations,  frights,  fears,  and  terrors,  that  arc 
affected  hv  a  thorough  application  of  guilt,  yielded 
to  desperation  !  this  is  the  man  that  hath  his 
dwelling  among  the  tombs  with  the  dead.'  Compare 
this  with  the  Pilgrim's  feelings  in  Doubting  Castle, 
and  their  view  from  the  Delectable  Mountains. 

Bunyan  was  by  nature  a  philosopher;  he  knew 
the  devices  of  Satan,  and  warns  the  professor  of 
his  danger  of  backsliding.  The  conversation  upon 
this  subject  between  the  pilgrims,  opens  the  depths 
of  the  human  heart,  and  the  subtleties  of  Satan,  j 
One  Temporary  represents  those  professors  who  I 
return  to  the  world ;  he  had  wept  under  a  sense  ' 
of  sin ;  had  set  out  on  pilgrimage,  but  was  per- 
verted by  Save-self.  Christian  had  a  narrow  escape 
from  Worldly-wiseman,  but  Temporary  was  lost, 
lie  warns  the  pilgrim  of  one  great  device  of  the 
enemy  in  his  treatise  of  'A  Holy  Life.'  'Take 
heed,  professor,  of  those  sins  -which  Satan  finds 
most  suitable  to  your  temper  and  constitution ; ' 
these,  as  the  little  end  of  the  wedge,  enter  with 
ease,  and  so  make  way  for  those  that  come  alter, 
with  which  Satan  knows  he  can  rend  the  soul  in 
pieces. 

In  the  conversation  with  Ignorance,  Bunyan 
speaks  the  sentiments,  but  not  in  the  language  of 
Arthur  Dent,  when,  in  the  Plain  Mans  Pathway 
to  Heaven,  he  says — 

'  You  measure  yourselves  by  yourselves,  and  by   others ; 
which  is  a  false  mete-wand.     For  you  seem  to  lie  str 
long  as  you  are  measured  by  yourselves  and  by  others;  but  lay 
the  rule  of  God's  Word  unto  you,  and  then  you  lie  all 
crooked.' 

At  length  Christian  and  Hopeful  arrive  at  the 
river  which  has  no  bridge ;  they  cross  in  safety, 
and  ascend  to  blessedness,  which  'eye  bath  not 
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  iuto  the 
heart  of  man  to  conceive.'  We  see  them  enter, 
and  are  ready  to  exclaim — ■ 

'Celestial  visions— Then  the  wondrous  story, 
Of  Ji  nt  seem'd  a  tale  most  true  ; 

How  lie  beheld  their  entrano 

Aud  saw  them  pass  the  pearly  portal  through  ; 

1  Page  28. 


Catching,  meanwhile,  a  beatific  view 
Of  that  bright  city,  shining  like  tin    un 
Whose  glittering  streets  appear'd  of  golden  hue, 

\\  here  spirits  of  the  jn>i  their  conflicts  done, 

Walk'd  in  white  robes,  with  palms,  and  crowned  every  one.'1 

After  having  accompanied  the  Pilgrim  and  his 
friend  Hopeful  to  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City, 
and  longed  to  enter  with  him  into  the  realms  of 
bliss,  we  naturally  revert  to  his  widow  and  orphans, 
and  with  renewed  delight  do  we  find  the  truth  of 
the  promise:  'Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband,'  'a 
father  to  the  fatherless.'  Wo  unite  heart  and 
soul  with  the  amiable  family  at  the  Interpreter's 
house,  who  'leaped  for  joy'  when  they  arrived. 
And  on  reaching  the  Palace  Beautiful,  '0  what 
a  noise  for  gladness  was  there  within,  when  the 
Damsel  did  but  drop  that  word  out  of  her  mouth- 
Christiana  and  her  boys  have  come  on  pilgrimage!' 
Having  been  the  road  before,  we  feel  renewed 
pleasure  at  every  step,  and  richly  enjoy  our  new 
companions ;  for  the  inexhaustible  treasures  of 
Banyan's  mind  furnishes  us  with  new  pleasures 
every  step  of  the  way. 

Banyan's  views  of  church-fellowship  show  his 
heavenly-mindedness,  and  happy  would  it  be  fur 
the  church  if  all  its  members  were  deeply  imbued 
with  these  peaceful,  lovely  principles ;  he  thus 
expresses  them: 

'  Christians  are  like  the  several  Flowers  in  a  garden,  that 
have  upon  each  of  them  the  Dew  of  Heaven,  which  being 
shaken  with  the  wind,  they  let  fall  their  dew  at  each  other's 
roots,  whereby  they  are  jointly  nourished,  and  become  nour- 
ishes of  one  another.  Also  where  the  Gardiner  has  set  them, 
there  they  stand,  aud  quarrel  not  with  one  another,  lor 
Christians  to  commune  savourly  of  God's  matters  one  with 
another,  it  is  as  if  they  opened  to  each  other's  nostrils  Boxes 
of  Perfumes.1  Saith  Paul  to  the  Church  at  Home:  /  long  to  it v 
you,  that  I  may  impart  unto  you  some  spiritual  gift,  to  the 
end  yon  may  be  established;  that  is,  that  I  may  be  comforted 
together  with  you,  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me' 
Rom.  i.  11,  12. 

The  character  of  Mercy  is  lovely  throughout  the 
whole  journey;  but  there  is  a  circumstance  in  her 
courtship  which  may  not  be  generally  understood. 
It  is  where  she  refers  to  the  conduct  of  her  brother- 
in-law  to  her  sister  Bountiful — a  method  of  separ- 
ating man  and  wife  at  all  times  perfectly  illegal, 
and  happily  at  present  unknown:  'Because  my 
sister  was  resolved  to  do  as  she  begun,  that  is,  to 
show  kindness  to  the  poor,  therefore  her  husband 
first  cried  her  down  at  the  cross,  and  then  turned 
her  out  of  his  doors.'  This  is  a  summary  mode  of 
divorce,  not  mentioned  in  any  work  on  vulgar  cus- 
toms or  popular  antiquities.  My  kind  friend,  the 
Rev.  J.  Jukes,  the  pastor  of  the  church  at  Bedford, 
informs  me,  '  That  the  practice  of  crying  a  wife  at 

-'  Barton's  Minor  Poena,  p.  75.     1824,  fcp.  8vo. 

s  Vol  ii    p.  57(1;  Treatise  on  'Christian  Behaviour;    see 

also  the 'Pilgrim,'  Part  II.,  of  the  garden  in  th«  Interpreter! 
ho!ise. 


7S 


THE   PILGRTM'S   PROGRESS. 


the  market-cross  seems  to  have  prevailed  in  Bed- 
fordshire almost  to  the  present  time,  and  to  have 
been  merely  a  mode  of  advertisement  to  the  public, 
that  the  husband  would  not  pay  the  debts  of  his 
wife,  contracted  subsequent  to  the  time  when  it 
occurred.' 

The  character  of  Mr.  Brisk  is  wittily  drawn  in 
Bunyan's  Emblems: — 

— '  Candles  that  do  blink  within  the  socket, 
And  saints  whose  eyes  are  always  in  their  pocket, 
Are  much  alike ;  such  candies  make  us  fumble  ; 
And  at  such  saints,  good  men  and  bnd  do  stumble.' 

Bunyan  enjoyed  the  beauties  of  nature,  espe- 
cially the  singing  of  birds ;  thus  when  Christiana 
leaves  the  Palace  Beautiful,  the  songs  of  the  birds 
are  reduced  to  poetry,  to  comfort  the  pilgrims.  A 
bird  furnished  him  with  one  of  his  Divine  Emblems. 
It  is  upon  the  lark: — 

*  This  pretty  bird,  oh !   how  she  flies  and  sings 
But  could  she  do  so  if  she  had  not  wings? 
Her  wings  bespeak  my  faith,  her  songs  my  peace; 
When  I  believe  and  sing,  my  doubtings  cease.' 

Mercy  longs  for  that  mirror  which  flatters  not, 
and  the  shepherds  give  her  a  Bible.  Modern 
Christians  may  wonder  that  she  had  not  previously 
furnished  herself  with  one ;  doubtless  she  had  the 
use  of  one,  and  all  her  pocket-money  went  to  re- 
lieve the  distresses  of  the  poor  of  Christ's  flock. 
Think  of  the  thousands  of  pious  men  and  women 
incarcerated  in  dungeons,  because  they  loved 
Christ,  and  dared  not  violate  conscience.  What 
a  charge  upon  those  saints  who  possessed  the 
means  of  rendering  them  assistance  !  The  re- 
venues of  the  Church  by  law  established  were 
never  used  for  the  distribution  of  Bibles.  The 
Church  had  obtained  a  most  enormous  and  in- 
jurious privilege,  for  the  sole  printing  of  Bibles  in 
all  languages,  to  withhold  altogether,  or  give  a 
supply  as  they  chose.  The  natural  consequence 
of  this  was,  a  high  price  for  books  printed  on  bad 
paper,  and  miserably  incorrect.  Of  late  years, 
part  of  the  wealth  she  derived  from  her  monopoly 
in  printing  incorrect  Bibles  has  been  wrung  from 
her,  and  the  Word  of  life  now  flows  all  pure  as  a 
mighty  river,  to  refresh  the  earth.  All  honour  be 
paid  to  those  who  fought  that  battle,  and  obtained 
that  important  victory.  In  Bunyan's  time,  the 
Church  allowed  it  only  '  in  a  niggard  stream,  and 
that  polluted.'  Herbert  has  well  expressed  the 
value  of  the  mirror  which  Mercy  longed  for: — 

'The  Bible  is  the  looking-glass  of  souls,  wherein 
All  men  may  see 
Whether  they  be 
Still  as  by  nature  they  are,  deformed  with  sin ; 
Or  in  a  better  case, 
As  new  adorned  with  grace.'1 


Herbert's  Synagogue,  p.  ]. 


And  he  has  thus  shown  the  value  of  its  sacred 
pages,  to  guide  the  benighted  travellers:  'Great- 
heart  struck  a  light,  and  took  a  view  of  his  book 
or  map.' 

'  The  Bible  1     That's  the  book.     The  book  indeed, 
The  book  of  books  1 
On  which  who  looks, 
As  he  should  do  aright,  shall  never  need 
Wish  for  a  better  light 
To  guide  him  in  the  night.'2 

The  Christian  reader  can  scarcely  know,  after 
having  read  the  whole  volume,  which  gave  the 
greatest  enjoyment — whether  travelling  in  com- 
pany with  Christian  and  his  bosom  friend,  or  the 
delightful  feelings  excited  by  witnessing  the  ma- 
tronly conduct  of  Christiana ;  seeing  her  modest 
friend,  Mercy,  a  lovely  companion,  or  the  excellent 
picture  of  child-like  behaviour  in  the  four  boys: 
retracing  the  road,  every  step  becomes  delightfully 
interesting,  and  the  Valley  of  Humiliation  the  most 
lovely  picture  of  the  whole.  The  courtship  of 
Mr.  Brisk — the  additions  to  their  company — the 
weddings,  and  the  happy  close3 — this,  with  the 
final  perseverance  of  the  whole  party,  leads  every 
reader  earnestly  to  wish  for  a  Third  Part,  more 
adventures,  more  of  the  Divine  goodness,  more 
proofs  that  in  this  world,  with  all  its  bitterness, 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  makes  its  possessors 
happy  ;  yes,  '  we  have  the  promise  of  the  life  that 
now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come.'  But 
death,  probably  from  the  latent  effects  of  his  im- 
prisonment, cut  short  the  valuable  life  of  the  pil- 
grim's friend.  And  now,  after  long  neglect,  his 
country  is  teeming  with  his  name  as  a  national 
honour,  and  scarcely  knows  how  sufficiently  to 
show  respect  and  admiration  to  his  memory.  Mag- 
nificent merchant-ships  bear  that  name  to  oriental 
and  transatlantic  countries.  Several  thousand 
pounds  have  been  subscribed  to  adorn  the  scene 
of  his  labours  at  Bedford,  with  a  Bunyan  Chapel, 
capable  of  seating  about  twelve  hundred  worship- 
pers— a  more  appropriate  monument  to  his  memory 
than  a  statue  or  a  splendid  tomb.  The  pens  of 
our  greatest  literary  men  have  been  employed  to 
exhibit  his  singular  piety,  his  extraordinary  talent, 
and  his  extensive  usefulness,  and  his  image  is  to 
be  placed  with  those  of  Milton,  Shakspeare,  Hamp- 
den, and  the  giant  men  who  have  shed  glory  upon 
this  nation,  in  the  splendid  new  house  in  which  the 
Commons  of  England  are  to  hold  their  sittings. 

Hackney,  Sept.  1850.  GEO.    OfFOR. 


2  Herbert's  Synagogue,  p.  15. 

3  The  last  words  of  Christiana  were — *  I  come,  Lord,  to  lie 
with  thee,  and  bless  thee.' 

'  How  my  heart 

Longs,  JESUS,  for  thy  coming!  to  set  free, 
Th'  imprison'd  pilgrim  from  frail  flesh  aud  sin, 
1'rom  evil  aud  from  death,  to  wing  her  way, 
Her  joyful  way,  to  liberty  and  thee  I' 


THE     PILGRIM'S     PROGRESS 

PBOM 

THIS  WOULD  TO  THAT  WHICH  IS  TO  COME: 

DKI.IVI.HKD    UNDER 

THE    SIMILITUDE    OF    A    DREAM. 
By  .JOHN  BUNYAX. 


This  edition  is  prepared  from  a  careful  collation  of  the  twelve  editions  published  by  the  author 
during  his  life.  It  embraces  the  whole  allegory  in  its  native  simplicity  and  beauty ;  illustrated  with 
appropriate  engravings  ;  and  variorum  NOTES;  being  extracts  from  Bunyan's  various  treatises  which 
illustrate  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  together  with  the  most  striking  and  valuable  Notes  by  Cheever, 
Macaulay,  Newton,  Mason,  Scott,  Ivimey,  Burder,  M'Nicoll,  Dr.  Dodd,  and  other  Commentators,  with 
a  few  by  the  Editor.  To  preserve  the  uniformity  of  the  text,  the  foe-similes  of  all  the  original  wood- 
cuts, with  the  verse  under  each,  are  placed  together  in  the  order  in  which  they  first  appeared  ; 
presenting  a  short  pictorial  outline  of  the  principal  scenes  of  this  spiritual  pilgrimage,  in  those  rude 
representations  which  so  delighted  and  interested  us  in  our  childhood. 


SYNOPSIS  OF  THE  ALLEGORY  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


FIRST  PART. 

The  Author's  Apology,  a  poem.  Graceless  becomes 
a  Christian ;  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  his  soul ;  is 
treated  by  his  familj  as  one  diseased;  guided  by  Evan- 
gelist ;  runs  towards  the  Wicket-gate ;  is  overtaken 
by  Obstinate  and  Pliable ;  persuades  Pliable  to  fly  with 
him;  fall  into  the  Slough  of  Despond;  Pliable  returns; 
Christian,  assisted  by  Help,  goes  ou ;  meets  Worldly- 
wiseman;  complains  of  his  burden,  and  is  sent  out 
of  his  way  to  the  house  of  Legality;  terrified  at  Mouut 
Sinai ;  Evangelist  appears  and  puts  him  again  into  the 
right  road;  arrives  at  the  Wicket-gate;  is  admitted 
by  Good-will,  and  sent  to  the  Interpreter's  house ;  is 
shown  a  picture;  a  dusty  room;  Passion  and  Patience; 
the  fire  of  grace ;  the  valiant  man ;  the  man  in  de- 
spair ;  the  trembler ;  proceeds  to  the  cross ;  loses  his 
burden;  angels  give  him  a  pardon,  new  clothing,  a 
mark,  and  a  roll ;  tries  to  alarm  three  men  asleep,  but 
iu  vain;  meets  Formalist  and  Hypocrisy  ;  ascends  the 
hill  Difficulty;  sleeps  in  the  Arbour,  and  drops  his  roll; 
is  awakened,  and  pursues  his  journey;  meets  Mistrust 
and  Timorous ;  misses  his  roll ;  returns  in  grief,  and 
recovers  it ;  goes  on  to  the  Palace  Beautiful ;  encour- 
aged by  Watchful,  he  passes  the  lions,  and,  after  exam- 
ination, is  admitted  according  to  the  laws  of  the  house; 
entertained  ;  sleeps  in  the  Chamber  of  Peace ;  sees  the 
study;  the  armoury;  the  Delectable  Mountains;  enters 
the  Yalley  of  Humiliation ;  fights  with  and  overcomes 


|  Apollyon;  comes  to  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death; 

I  terrified  by  the  spies;  assaidted  with  foes  who  care 
not  for  his  sword;  betakes  himself  to  another  weapon, 
'All-prayer;'  comes  out  of  the  Valley,  and  passes  the 

I  old  giants,  Pagan  and  Pope;  overtakes  Faithful,  a 
fellow-pilgrim ;  hold  communion  with  each  other ;  con- 

!  verse  with  Talkative ;  Evangelist  forewarns  them  of 
persecution;  enter  Vanity  Fair;  are  maltreated;  im- 
prisoned; Faithful  is  tried  and  burned;  Christian  pur- 
sues his  journey,  and  is  joined  by  Hopefid ;  By-ends 
wishes  to  join  them ;  the  sophistry  of  Hold-the-world 
detected ;  Demas  tempts  them  to  the  hill  Lucre,  but 
they  refuse ;  arrive  at  the  River  of  the  Wrater  of  Life; 
they  go  into  By-path  Meadow;  follow  Vain-Confidence; 
are  taken  by  Giaut  Despair,  and  imprisoned  in  Doubt - 
iiiLT  Castle;  arguments  for  and  against  suicide;  escape 
by  the  Key  of  Promise;  erect  a  pillar  to  caution 
others;  arrive  at  the  Delectable  Mountains;  enter- 
tained by  the  shepherds;  are  shown  Mounts  Error, 
Caution,  and  Clear;  see  the  Celestial  Gate;  receive 
some  cautions;  fail  hi  attempting  to  convert  Igno- 
rance; robbery  of  Little-faith;  meet  the  Flatterer, 
and  are  caught  in  his  net;  released  by  a  Sinning 
One;  meet  Atheist;  adventures  on  the  Enchanted 
Ground;  means  of  watchfulness;  enter  the  Land 
of  Beulah;  are  sick  with  love;  approach  the  River 
of  Death;   no  bridge;  full  of  fear  and  dread,  but 

jget    safely  over;    received    by   angel-    admitted    to 

|  glory. 


73 


SYNOPSIS   OF  THE   ALLEGORY. 


SECOND   PART. 

The  Author's  way  of  sending  it  forth,  a  poem. 
Sagacity  narrates  how  Christiana,  the  widow  of  Chris- 
tian, reflects  upon  her  former  conduct,  feels  her  dangers 
and  agrees  with  her  children  to  follow  her  late  husband 
in  pilgrimage ;  is  encouraged  by  a  secret  influence  on 
her  mind  that  she  would  be  received ;  her  neighbours 
dissuade  her,  but  she  prevails  upon  one  of  them,  Mercy, 
to  go  with  her ;  she  is  reviled  by  her  acquaintance ; 
get  over  the  Slough  of  Despond,  and  are  admitted  at 
the  Wicket-gate,  and  rejoice  together.  They  are  fed, 
washed,  and  sent  on  then;  way ;  the  children  eat  the 
enemies'  fruit ;  are  assaulted,  but  rescued  by  the  Re- 
liever ;  arrive  at  the  Interpreter's  house ;  shown  the 
significant  rooms,  the  man  who  prefers  a  muck-rake  to 
a  celestial  crown,  the  spider  in  the  best  room,  the  hen 
and  chickens,  butcher  and  sheep,  the  garden,  the  field, 
the  robin ;  the  Interpreter's  proverbs ;  tree  rotten  at 
heart;  they  relate  their  experience;  Mercy  is  sleepless 
for  joy;  they  are  washed,  which  enlivens  and  strengthens 
them ;  sealed  and  clothed ;  Great-heart  guards  them  to 
the  house  called  Beaiitiful ;  pass  the  sepidchre  where 
Christian  lost  his  burden ;  pardon  by  word  and  deed, 
an  important  distinction ;  see  Simple,  Sloth,  and  Pre- 
sumption hanging ;  names  of  those  that  they  had 
ruined;  Hill  Difficidty;  By-ways,  although  stopped 
and  cautioned,  still  entered ;  rest  in  the  Arbour,  but 
are  afraid  to  sleep ;  still  suffer  by  forgetfulness ; 
punishment  of  Timorous  and  Mistrust ;  Giant  Grim 
slain ;  pilgrims  arrive  at  the  Palace  Beautiful ;  Great- 
heart  returns ;  they  are  entertained  for  a  month ;  the 
children  catechised ;  Mr.  Brisk  makes  love  to  Mercy ; 
her  sister  Bouutiful's  unhappy  marriage ;  Matthew 
sick  with  the  enemies'  fruit ;  is  healed  by  Dr.  Skill ; 
his  prescriptions ;  instructive  questions ;  they  are 
greatly  strengthened ;  Mr.  Great-heart  sent  to  guard 
them;  enter  the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  and  are  pleased 
with  it;  shepherd  boy's  song;  see  the  place  where 
Christian  and  Apollyon  fought ;  come  into  the  Valley 
of  the  Shadow  of  Death  ;  are  greatly  terrified  ;  Giant 
Maul  slain ;  find  Old  Honest,  a  pilgrim,  sleeping ;  he 
joins  them ;  story  of  Mr.  Fearing ;  good  men  some, 
tunes  much  in  the  dark ;  he  fears  no  difficulties,  only 
lest  he  should  deceive  himself ;    case  of  Self-will ;    a  j 


singular  sect  in  the  author's  time ;  are  entertained  at 
the  house  of  Gaius ;  pilgrims  the  descendants  of  the 
martyrs;  Matthew  and  Mercy  betrothed;  riddles  in 
verse;  Slay -good,  a  giant,  slain;  Feeble-mind  rescued; 
proves  to  Tbe  related  to  Mr.  Fearing ;  Not-right  killed 
with  a  thunder-bolt ;  Matthew  and  Mercy,  and  James 
and  Phebe, married;  Feeble-mind  and  Ready-to-halt  join 
the  pilgrims ;  profitable  converse  between  Honest  and 
Great-heart ;  Vanity  Fair ;  the  death  of  Faithful  had 
planted  a  little  colony  of  pilgrims  there;  pleasant  com- 
munion; courage  and  an  unspotted  life  essential  to 
pilgrims ;  Samuel  and  Grace,  and  Joseph  and  Martha, 
married.  The  Monster  [state  religion]  assaulted  and 
wounded ;  beheved  by  some  that  he  will  die  of  his 
wounds;  pass  the  place  where  Faithful  was  martyred; 
the  silver  mine  ;  Lot's  wife  ;  arrive  at  the  river  near 
the  Delectable  Mountains ;  By-path  Meadow ;  slay 
Giant  Despair,  and  Diffidence,  his  wife,  and  destroy 
Doubting  Castle  ;  release  Mr.  Despondency  and  Miss 
Much-afraid ;  Great-heart  addresses  the  shepherds  in 
rhyme ;  Mounts  Marvel,  Innocent,  and  Charity ;  see 
the  hole  in  the  side  of  the  Hill ;  Mercy  longs  for  a 
curious  mirror;  the  pilgrims  are  adorned;  story  of 
Turn-away;  fiud  Valiant-for-truth  wounded  by  thieves  ; 
account  of  his  conversion ;  the  question  debated,  that 
if  we  shall  know  ourselves,  shall  we  know  others  in 
the  future  state  ?  arguments  used  by  relatives  to  pre- 
vent pilgrimage ;  the  Enchanted  Ground ;  an  arbour 
called  the  Slothful's  Friend ;  in  doubt  as  to  the  way, 
the  book  or  map  is  examined ;  Heedless  and  Bold  in  a 
fatal  sleep ;  surprised  by  a  solemn  noise,  they  are  led 
to  Mr.  Stand-fast  in  prayer,  he  having  been  assailed 
by  Madam  Bubble;  arrive  in  the  Land  of  Beulah,  and 
are  delighted  with  celestial  visions  on  the  borders  of 
the  River  of  Death ;  Christiana  summoned,  addresses 
her  guide,  and  blesses  her  cliildren  and  her  fellow- 
pilgrims  ;  her  last  words ;  Mr.  Ready-to-halt  passes 
the  River ;  Feeble-mind  is  called,  will  make  no 
will,  and  goes  up  to  the  Celestial  City ;  Despond- 
ency  and  Much-afraid  die  singing;  Honest  dies  sing- 
ing Grace  reigns;  Valiaut-for-truth  and  Stand-fast 
joyfully  pass  the  river,  leaving  a  solemn  message 
to  relatives.  Joy  in  heaven  on  the  arrival  of  the 
pilgrims.  Christiana's  children  a  blessing  to  the 
church. 


ji  S    - 


2   ~-    Zt  "S 

=  -5  -  5         5 


—  -s  ,_  c3         O 

o  1  s  s 


I  *£ 


o  f*  -^ 


i  a3«s   I  § 

Ills     15 


i  *- 1  a 


?ssa      r.  ? 


I  El     ^ 


■8  g, 


-§  3  »  g 


"a"  £    bD  5 

)£>  £  -2  s 

'pit 


cd  J   a 


*  «  S  « 

o    g    S  .J 
&  >h  a,  a 


s  g  g  g 

■§  2   "*"  ^3 

^  S   -3  ,— 

g  g  s 


2  ,d 

-2    « 


If 

c  «» 


S  >  3. 1 


gl^S 


if  13  §*S 

I  =s «"  i.       b  * 
*  13  J        -g  g 


O^-aa.  be  '-: 


P^5  -g.g 


THE   AUTHOR'S    APOLOGY 

FOR    HIS     BOOK. 


When  at  the  first  I  took  my  pen  in  hand, 
Thus  for  to  write,  I  did  not  understand 
That  I  at  all  should  make  a  little  book 
In  such  a  mode :  nay,  I  had  undertook 
To  make  another ;  which,  wheu  almost  done, 
Before  I  was  aware,  I  this  begun. 

And  thus  it  was  :  I  writing  of  the  way 
And  race  of  saints,  in  this  our  gospel-day, 
Fell  suddenly  into  an  allegory 
About  their  journey,  and  the  way  to  glory, 
In  more  than  twenty  things,  which  I  set  down ; 
Tins  done,  I  twenty  more  had  in  my  crown ; 
And  they  again  began  to  multiply, 
Like  sparks  that  from  the  coals  of  fire  do  fly. 
Nay,  then,  thought  I,  if  that  you  breed  so  fast, 
I'll  put  you  by  yourselves,  lest  you  at  last 
Should  prove  ad  infinitum,  and  eat  out 
The  book  that  I  already  am  about. 

Well,  so  I  did ;  but  yet  I  did  not  think 
To  show  to  all  the  world  my  pen  and  ink 
In  such  a  mode ;  I  only  thought  to  make 
I  knew  not  what :  nor  did  I  undertake 
Thereby  to  please  my  neighbour ;  no,  not  I ; 
I  did  it  mhie  own  self  to  gratify. 

Neither  did  I  but  vacant  seasons  spend 
In  this  my  scribble ;  nor  did  I  intend 
But  to  divert  myself  in  doing  this, 
From  worser  thoughts  which  make  me  do  amiss. 

Thus  I  set  pen  to  paper  with  delight, 
And  quickly  had  my  thoughts  on  black  and  white. 
Tor  having  now  my  method  by  the  end, 
Still  as  I  pull'd  it  came ;  and  so  I  penn'd 
It  down ;  until  it  came  at  last  to  be, 
For  length  and  breadth,  the  bigness  which  you  see. 

Well,  when  I  had  thus  put  mine  ends  together, 
I  show'd  them  others,  that  I  might  see  whether 
They  would  condemn  them,  or  them  justify : 
And  some  said,  Let  them  live;  some,  Let  them  die. 
Some  said,  John,  print  it ;  others  said,  Not  so 
Some  said,  It  might  do  good ;  others  said,  No 

Now  was  I  in  a  strait,  and  did  not  see 
Which  was  the  best  thing  to  be  done  by  me : 


At  last  I  thought;  since  you  are  thus  divided, 
I  print  it  will ;  and  so  the  case  decided. 

For,  thought  I,  some,  I  see,  would  have  it  dGne, 
Though  others  in  that  channel  do  not  run : 
To  prove  then,  who  advised  for  the  best, 
Thus  I  thought  fit  to  put  it  to  the  test. 

I  further  thought,  if  now  I  did  deny 
Those  that  would  have  it,  thus  to  gratify ; 
I  did  not  know,  but  hinder  them  I  might 
Of  that  which  would  to  them  be  great  delight. 

For  those  which  were  not  for  its  coming  forth, 
I  said  to  them,  Offend  you  I  am  loath  ; 
Yet  since  your  brethren  pleased  with  it  be, 
Forbear  to  judge,  till  you  do  further  see. 

If  that  thou  wilt  not  read,  let  it  alone ; 
Some  love  the  meat,  some  love  to  pick  the  bone. 
Yea,  that  I  might  them  better  palliate,1 
I  did  too  with  them  thus  expostulate : 

May  I  not  write  in  such  a  style  as  this  ? 
In  such  a  method  too,  and  yet  not  miss 
My  end — thy  good  ?     Why  may  it  not  be  done  ? 
Dark  clouds  bring  waters,  when  the  bright  bring 

none. 
Yea,  dark  or  bright,  if  they  their  silver  drops 
Cause  to  descend,  the  earth,  by  yielding  crops, 
Gives  praise  to  both,  and  carpeth  not  at  either, 
But  treasures  up  the  fruit  they  yield  together : 
Yea,  so  commixes  both,  that  in  her  fruit 
None  can  distinguish  this  from  that ;  they  suit 
Her  well  when  hungry  :  but  if  she  be  full, 
She  spews  out  both,  and  makes  their  blessings  null 

You  see  the  ways  the  fisherman  cloth  take 
To  catch  the  fish ;  what  engines  doth  lie  make ! 
Behold  !  how  he  engageth  all  his  wits ; 
Also  his  snares,  hues,  angles,  hooks,  and  nets. 
Yet  fish  there  be,  that  neither  hook  nor  line, 
Nor  snare,  nor  net,  nor  engine  can  make  thine : 
They  must  be  grop'd  for,  and  be  tickled  too, 
Or  they  will  not  be  catch'd,  whate'er  you  do. 


1  In  the  first  eight  editions  published  by  Bunyan,  the  word 
'  palliate  '  is  used  ;  but  in  the  ninth  (1684),  and  subsequently, 
it  was  altered  to  '  moderate.' — (Ed.) 


56 


THE   AUTHOR'S   APOLOGY   FOR   HIS   BOOK. 


How  does  the  fowler  seek  to  catch  his  game 
By  divers  means  !     AJl  which  one  cannot  name  : 
His  gun,  his  nets,  his  lime-twigs,  light  and  bell : 
He  creeps,  he  goes,  he  stands ;  yea,  who  can  tell 
Of  all  his  postures  ?     Yet,  there's  none  of  these 
Will  make  him  master  of  what  fowls  he  please. 
Yea,  he  must  pipe  and  whistle,  to  catch  this, 
Yet  if  he  does  so,  that  bird  he  will  miss. 

If  that  a  pearl  may  in  a  toad's  head  dwell, 
And  may  be  found  too  in  an  oyster-shell ; 
If  things  that  promise  notliing,  do  contain 
What  better  ib  than  gold;  who  will  disdain. 
That  have  an  inkling '  of  it,  there  to  look, 
That  they  may  find  it  ?     Now  my  little  book, 
(Though  void  of  all  those  paintings2  that  may  make 
It  with  this  or  the  other  man  to  take), 
Is  not  without  those  things  that  do  excel. 
What  do  in  brave,3  but  empty  notions  dwell. 

Well,  yet  I  am  not  fully  satisfied, 
That  this  your  book  will  stand,  when  soundly  tried. 

Why,  what's  the  matter?      It  is  dark.      What 
though  ?4 
But  it  is  feigned.     What  of  that,  I  trow  ? 
Some  men  by  feigned  words,  as  dark  as  mine, 
Make  truth  to  spangle,  and  its  rays  to  shine ! 
But  they  want  solidness  :  Speak,  man,  thy  mind : 
They  drown  the  weak,  metaphors  make  us  blind. 

Solidity,  indeed,  becomes  the  pen 
Of  him  that  writeth  things  divine  to  men : 
But  must  I  needs  want  solidness,  because 
By  metaphors  I  speak  ?     Were  not  God's  laws, 
His  gospel-laws,  in  olden  time  held  forth 
By  types,  shadows,  and  metaphors  ?     Yet  loath 
Will  any  sober  man  be  to  find  fault 
With  them,  lest  he  be  found  for  to  assault 
The  highest  wisdom.     No  ;  he  rather  stoops, 
And  seeks  to  find  out  what  by  pins  and  loops ; 
By  calves  and  sheep ;  by  heifers  and  by  rams ; 
By  birds  and  herbs,  and  by  the  blood  of  lambs, 
God  speaketk  to  him.     And  happy  is  he 
That  finds  the  light  and  grace  that  in  them  be. 

Be  not  too  forward,  therefore,  to  conclude 
That  I  want  solidness,  that  I  am  rude : 
All  things  solid  in  show,  not  solid  be ; 
All  things  in  parables  despise  not  we, 
Lest  things  most  hurtful,  lightly  we  receive ; 
And  things  that  trood  are,  of  our  souls  bereave. 


My  dark  and  cloudy  words  they  do  but  hold 
The  truth,  as  cabinets  enclose  the  gold. 

The  prophets  used  much  by  metaphors 
To  set  forth  truth :  Yea,  who  so  considers 
Christ,  his  apostles  too,  shall  plainly  see, 
Tint  truths  to  this  day  in  such  mantles  be. 

Am  I  afraid  to  say,  that  Holy  Writ, 
Which,  for  its  style  and  phrase,  puts  down  all  wit, 
Is  everywhere  so  full  of  all  these  things 
(Dark  figures,  allegories),  yet  there  springs 
From  that  same  book,5  that  lustre,  and  those  rays 
Of  light,  that  turn  our  darkest  night  to  days. 

Come,  let  my  carper  to  his  life  now  look, 
And  find  there  darker  lines  than  in  my  book 
He  findeth  any.     Yea,  and  let  him  know, 
That  in  his  best  things  there  are  worse  lines  too. 

May  we  but  stand  before  impartial  men, 
To  his  poor  one  I  dare  adventure  ten ; 
That  they  wdl  take  my  meaning  in  these  lines 
Bar  better  than  his  lies  in  silver  shrines. 
Come,  truth,  although  in  swaddling  clouts,  I  find, 
Informs  the  judgment,  rectifies  the  mind; 
Pleases  the  understanding,  makes  the  will 
Submit ;  the  memory,  too,  it  doth  fill 
With  what  doth  our  imaginations  please ; 
Likewise,  it  tends  our  troubles  to  appease. 

Sound  words,  I  know,  Timothy  is  to  use, 
And  old  wives'  fables  he  is  to  refuse ; 
But  yet  grave  Paul  him  nowhere  did  forbid 
The  use  of  parables ;  in  which  lay  hid 
That  gold,  those  pearls,  and  precious  stones  that  wero 
Worth  digging  for,  and  that  with  greatest  care. 

Let  me  add  one  word  more.     0  man  of  God ! 
Art  thou  offended  ?  dost  thou  wish  I  had 
Put  forth  my  matter  in  another  dress  ? 
Or,  that  I  had  in  things  been  more  express  ? 
Three  things  let  me  propound,  then  I  submit 
To  those  that  are  my  betters  (as  is  fit) : — 

1.  I  find  not  that  I  am  denied  the  use 
Of  this,  my  method,  so  I  no  abuse 
Put  on  the  words,  things,  readers,  or  be  rude 
In  handling  figure  or  similitude, 
In  application ;  but,  all  that  I  may, 
Seek  the  advance  of  truth,  tins  or  that  way. 
Denied,  did  I  say  ?     Nay,  I  have  leave 
(Example,  too,  and  that  from  them  that  have 


1  *  Inkling ;'  intimation,  slight  knowledge. — (Ed.) 

2  The  first  and  second  editions  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress 
bad  no  cuts,  not  even  the  sleeping  portrait. — (Ed/ 

3  '  Brave ;'  showy,  ostentatious. — (En.) 
*  What  though  [it  be  dark]?— (Ed.) 


s  '  That  same  book'  made  a  prison  a  far  happier  place  than 
a  palace  without  it.  Wondrous  book!  happy  is  that  soul 
which  is  enlightened  to  '  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  God'i 
law,'  Ps.  cxk.  18.— (Ed.) 


THE   AUTHOR'S   APOLOGY   FOR   HTS   BOOK. 


87 


God  better  pleased  by  their  words  or  ways 
Than  any  man  that  breatheth  now-a-days) 
Thus  to  express  my  mind,  thus  to  declare 
Things  unto  thee  that  excellentest  are. 

2.  I  find  that  men  (as  high  as  trees)  will  write 
Dialogue-wise ;  yet  no  man  doth  them  slight 
For  writing  so ;  indeed,  if  they  abuse 

Truth,  cursed  be  they,  and  the  craft  they  use 

To  that  intent ;  but  yet  let  truth  be  free 

To  make  her  sallies  upon  thee  and  me, 

Which  way  it  pleases  God.     Tor  who  knows  how, 

Better  than  he  that  taught  us  first  to  plough, 

To  guide  our  mind  and  pens  for  his  design  ? 

And  he  makes  base  things  usher  in  divine. 

3.  I  find  that  Holy  "Writ,  in  many  places, 
Hath  semblance  with  this  method,  where  the  cases 
Do  call  for  one  thing  to  set  forth  another ; 

Use  it  I  may,  then,  and  yet  nothing  smother 
Truth's  golden  beams ;  nay,  by  this  method  may 
Make  it  cast  forth  its  rays,  as  light  as  day. 

And  now,  before  I  do  put  up  my  pen, 
I'll  show  the  profit  of  my  book,  and  then 
Commit  both  thee  and  it  unto  that  hand 
That  pulls  the  strong  down  and  makes  weak  ones 

stand. 

This  book,  it  cbalketh  out  before  thine  eyes 
The  man  that  seeks  the  everlasting  prize ; 
It  shows  you  whence  he  comes,  whither  he  goes, 
What  he  leaves  undone  ;  also,  what  he  does ; 
It  also  shows  you  how  he  runs  and  runs, 
'Till  he  unto  the  gate  of  glory  comes. 

It  shows,  too,  who  set  out  for  life  amain, 
As  if  the  lasting  crown  they  would  attain ; 
Here,  also,  you  may  see  the  reason  why 
They  lose  their  labour,  and,  like  fools,  do  die. 


This  book  will  make  a  traveller  of  thee, 
If  by  its  counsel  thou  wilt  ruled  be ; 
It  will  direct  thee  to  the  Holy  Land, 
If  thou  wilt  its  directions  understand ; 
Yea,  it  will  make  the  slothful  active  be ; 
The  blind,  also,  delightful  things  to  see.1 

Art  thou  for  something  rare  and  profitable  ? 
Wouldest  thou  see  a  truth  within  a  fable  ? 
Art  thou  forgetful  ?     Wouldest  thou  remember 
Prom  New  Year's  Day  to  the  last  of  December  ? 
Then  read  my  fancies,  they  will  stick  like  burs, 
And  may  be  to  the  helpless  comforters. 

This  book  is  writ  in  such  a  dialect 
As  may  the  minds  of  listless  men  affect ; 
It  seems  a  novelty,  and  yet  contains 
Nothing  but  sound  and  honest  gospel  strains. 


Would'st  thou  divert  thyself  from  melancholy  ? 
Would'st  thou  be  pleasant,  yet  be  far  from  folly  ? 
Would'st  thou  read  riddles,  and  their  explanation  ? 
Or  else  be  drowned  in  thy  contemplation  ? 
Dost  thou  love  picking  meat  ?  or  would'st  thou  see 
A  man  i'  th'  clouds,  and  hear  him  speak  to  thee  ? 
Would'st  thou  be  in  a  dream,  and  yet  not  sleep  ? 
Or,  woidd'st  thou  in  a  moment  laugh  and  weep  ? 
Woidd'st  thou  lose  thyself  and  catch  no  harm  ? 
And  find  thyself  again  without  a  charm  ? 
Would'st  read  thyself,  and  read  thou  know'st  not 

what, 
And  yet  know  whether  thou  art  bless'd  or  not 
By  reading  the  same  lines  ?     Oh  then  come  hither, 
And  lay  my  book,  thy  head,  and  heart  together. 
John  Bunyan. 


1  Many  there  have  been  to  whom,  by  loss  of  sight,  all  this 
world  has  been  shut  up  in  darkness,  but  who  have  richly 
enjoyed  a  spiritual  vision  of  God,  of  heaven,  and  of  eternal 
bliss.— (Ed.) 


TJie  following  are  the  principal  Works  from  which  (lie  Notes  to  tills  Edition  of  The  Pilgrim 
liave  been  selected : — 


The  Pilgrims  Progress,  Part  the  First.  12nio,  1776.  The 
preface  states,  that  '  an  edition,  containing  some  brief  notes  to 
illustrate  the  more  difficult  passages,  lias  been  long  desired. 
An  attempt  of  this  kind  is  now  submitted  to  the  public.'  This 
appears  to  be  the  first  edition  with  notes.  There  is  no  indi- 
cation of  who  the  notes  are  by;  but  there  can  be  little  doubt 
but  that  they  are  from  the  pen  of  the  Rev.  J.  Newton,  the 
friend  of  Cowper.  The  Editor  has  four  editions  of  this  inter- 
esting volume— 1776,  1782,  1789,  and  1797- 

The  Pilgrims  Progress;  both  Parts,  with  Notes.  By  W. 
Mason.  Svo,  1778.  In  the  preface,  Mr.  Mason  says,  'I  have 
often  wished  to  see  some  explanatory  notes  upon  certain  pas- 
sages in  it.  Having  been  solicited  to  undertake  this,  at  a 
lime  when  no  one  had  attempted  it,  I  have  endeavoured, 
according  to  the  ability  which  God  has  given  me,  to  execute 
it.'  This  book  was  published  in  numbers,  and  the  notes 
proved  very  acceptable.  The  subscribers  requested  that  more 
frequent  and  longer  notes  should  be  given.  Mr.  Mason  pro- 
mises to  comply  with  this  request.  The  advertisement  is 
dated  '  Kotherhithe,  March  8,  1776.' 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  with  Notes.  By  A  Bachelor  of 
Arts  of  Oxford— J.  B.     8vo.  1792. 

The  Pilgrims  Progress  in  blauk  verse.  By  J.  S.  Dodd,  M.D. 
Dublin,  1795. 


The  Pilgrim  s  Progress,  with  a  Key  to  the  Allegory.  Pub- 
lished by  lieptinstall,  1796. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  divided  into  Chapters.  By  the 
Rev.  G.  Burder,  of  Coventry.     12mo,  1797. 

A  Keg  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.  By  Andronicus.  1 2mo, 
second  edition,  1797. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  with  Notes.  Bv  the  Rev.  T.  Scott. 
8vo. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress  versified,  with  short  Notes.  By 
G.  Burder,  1804. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  with  Life.  Bv  M'Nicoll  and  Dr 
A.  Clarke.     Svo,  1809. 

Warr's  Course  of  Lectures,  Illustrative  of  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress.     Svo,  1825. 

'The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  with  Historical  and  Practical  Notes. 
By  the  Rev.  J.  Ivimey.     8vo.     Oxford,  1S24;  London,  1829. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  au  Epic  Poem.  By  C.  C.  V.  G. 
Svo.     Parsonstown,  1844. 

'J he  Pilgrim's  Progress,  an  Epic  Poem,  Two  Parts.  Pub- 
lished by  Bagster,  1845. 

Dr.  Cheever's  [exceedingly  interesting]  Lectures.     1S46. 

The  extracts  from  Bunyan's  other  works,  which  so  admir- 
ably illustrate  his  Pilgri?/i's  Progress,  have  a  reference  to  titis 
new  edition. 


BEi>Fora>  JAIL  AUD  GATEHOUSE. 
Situated  over  He  middle  of  the  river  Ouse.    In  this  damp  den  John  Bunyan  wrote  the  wondrous  »bfam.     The  View  was  taken  !n  1 
The  Gatehouse  ves  nulled  down  in  1W».    The  nrison.  in  which  the  sleeping  apartments  are  called  by  Mr.  Howar-i  two  dun(.e 
ucd  unci]  lu»l  j;reM  Lhilanthroiist  unveiled  its  gloom)  wretchedness  in  I7BS,  soon  after  which  it  ua.-.  willed  down. 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS; 


SIMILITUDE    OF    A    DREAM. 


TART    I 


As  I  walked  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world, 
I  lighted  on  a  certain  place,  where 
was  a  den ; l  and  I  laid  me  down  in 
that  place  to  sleep :  and  as  I  slept,  I  dreamed  a 
dream.  I  dreamed,  and,  hehold,  '  I  saw  a  man 
clothed  with  rags,  standing  in  a  certain  place,  with 
his  face  from  his  own  house,  a  hook  in  his  hand, 
and  a  great  burden  upon  his  back,'  is.  lxiv.  6.  Ln.  xiv. 

S3.  Ps.  xixviii.  4.  Hab.  ii.  2.  Ac.  xvi.  31.      I  looked,   and  Saw 

him  open  the  book,2  and  read  therein ;  and  as  he 

read,  he  wept  and  trembled ;  and  not  being  able 

longer  to  contain,  he  brake  out  with 

a    lamentable    cry,    saying,    '  What 

Shall  I  do?'  Ac.ii.37.3 

In  this  plight,  therefore,  he  went  home,  and  re- 
frained himself  as  long  as  he  could,  that  his  wife 
and  children  should  not  perceive  his  distress ;  but 
he  could  not  be  silent  long,  because  that  his  trouble 
increased.  Wherefore  at  length  he  brake  his  mind 
to  his  wife  and  children  ;  and  thus  he  began  to  talk 
to  them:  '0  my  dear  wife,'  said  he,  'and  you,  the 
children  of  my  bowels,  I,  }rour  dear  friend,  am  in 
myself  undone,  by  reason  of  a  burden  that  lieth 


1  The  jail.  Mr.  Banyan  wrote  this  precious  book  in  Bed- 
ford jail,  where  he  was  imprisoned  twelve  years  for  preaching 
the  gospel.  His  bonds  were  those  of  the  gospel ;  and,  like 
Peter,  he  could  sleep  soundly  in  prison.  Blessed  be  God  for 
even  the  toleration  and  religious  privileges  we  now  enjoy  in 
consequencetif  it.  Our  author,  thus  prevented  from  preaching, 
turned  his  thoughts  to  writing;  and,  during  his  confinement, 
composed  'The  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  and  many  other  useful 
works.  Thus  the  Lord  causes  '  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise 
him.'  The  servants  of  Christ,  when  restrained  by  wicked 
laws  from  publishing  the  word  of  life  from  the  pulpit,  have 
become  more  abundantly  useful  by  their  writings.  —  (G. 
Burder.) 

a  You  will  observe  what  honour,  from  his  Pilgrim's  first 
*ettin_'  out,  Bunyan  puts  upon  the  Word  of  God.  He  would 
give  to  no  inferior  iustrumentality,  not  even  to  one  of  God's 
providences,  the  business  of  awakening  his  Pilgrim  to  a  sense 
of  his  danger ;  but  he  places  him  before  us  reading  his  book, 
awakened  by  the  Word.  And  he  makes  the  first  efficacious 
motive  in  the  mind  of  this  Pilgrim  a  military  fear  of  the  terrors 
of  that  Word,  a  sense  of  the  wrath  to  come,  beneath  the  burden 
of  sin  upon  his  soul. — (Cheever,  Lect.  vi.)  The  alarms  of  such 
an  awakened  soul  are  very  different  from  the  terrors  of  super- 
stitious icmoranee,  which,  arisin'_'  from  fright  or  danger,  are 
easily  quitted,  with  the  silly  mummeries  of  priestcraft. — (Andro- 
nicus.) 

'J  '  What  shall  I  do?'     This  is  his  first  exclamation.     He 
has  not  as  yet  advanced  so  far  as  to  say,  What  shall  I  do  to  be 
saved!' — (Cheever,  Lect.  vi.) 
VOL.  III. 


hard  upon  me  ;  moreover,  I  am  for  certain  informed 
that  this  our  city  will  be  burned  with 
fire  from  heaven ;    in  which  fearful 
overthrow,  both  myself,  with  thee,  my  wife,  and 
you,  my  sweet  babes,  shall  miserably  come  to  ruin, 
except  (the  which  yet  I  see  not)  some 
way  of  escape  can  be  found,  whereby  "ef  *"™*  ™£g 
we  may  be  delivered.'     At  this,  his 
relations  were    sore   amazed ;    not  for  that   they 
believed  that  what  ho  had  said  to  them  was  true, 
but  because  they  thought  that  some  frenzy  dis- 
temper had  got  into  his  head;4  therefore,  it  drawing 
towards  night,  and  they  hoping  that  sleep  might 
settle  his  brains,  with  all  haste  they  got  him  to 
bed.     But  the  night  was  as  troublesome  to  him  as 
the  day ;  wherefore,  instead  of  sleeping,  he  spent  it 
in  sighs  and  tears.    So  when  the  morning  was  come, 
they  would  know  how  he  did  ;  he  told  them,  worse 
and  worse ;  he  also  set  to  talking  to  them  again, 
but  they  began  to  be  hardened.     They  also  thought 
to  drive  away  his  distemper  by  harsh 
and  surly  carriages  to  him.      Some-   ^^rieffi  for 
times  they  would  deride,   sometimes 
they  would  chide,  and  sometimes  they  would  quite 
neglect  him.    Wherefore  he  began  to  retire  himself 
to  his  chamber  to  pray  for,  and  pity  them,  and  also 
to  condole  his  own  misery.      He  would  also  walk 
solitarily   in   the    fields,    sometimes   reading,   and 
sometimes   praying ;   and  thus   for  some  days   he 
spent  his  time.0 

Now  I  saw  upon  a  time,  when  he  was  walking 
in  the  fields,  that  he  was,  as  he  was  wont,  reading 
in  his  book,  and  greatly  distressed  in  his  mind ;  and 
as  he  read,  he  burst  out,  as  he  had  done  before, 
crying,  '  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved?'  Ac.  ivi  30,  31. 

I  saw  also  that  he  looked  this  way  and  that  way, 
as  if  he  would  run ;  yet  he  stood  still,  because,  as 

4  Sometimes  I  have  been  so  loaden  with  my  sins,  that  I 
could  not  tell  where  to  rest,  nor  what  to  do;  yea,  at  such 
times,  I  thought  it  would  have  taken  away  my  senses. — (Buu- 
yan's  Law  and  Grace.) 

6  See  the  picture  of  a  true  penitent ;  a  deep  sense  of  danger, 
and  solemn  concern  for  his  immortal  soul,  and  for  hiawife  and 
children ;  clothed  with  rags  ;  his  face  turned  from  his  house ; 
studying  the  Bible  with  intense  interest ;  a  great  burdi  n  on 
his  back ;  praying ;  '  the  remembrance  of  bis  sins  is  grievous, 
and  the  burdeu  of  them  is  intolerable.'  Reader,  have  you 
felt  this?— (Dr.  Dodd.) 

lis 


90 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


I  perceived,  he  could  not  tell  which  way  to  go.1  I 
looked  then,  and  saw  a  man  named  Evangelist  com- 
ing to  him,  who  asked,  'Wherefore  dost  thou  cry?' 

He  answered,  Sir,  I  perceive,  by  the  hook  in  my 
hand,  that  I  am  condemned  to  die,  and  after  that 
to  come  to  judgment,  He.  ix.  27;  and  I  find  that  I 
am  not  willing  (Job  xvi.  21,  22)  to  do  the  first,  nor  able 
(Eze.  xxii.  14)  to  do  the  second. 

Then  said  Evangelist,  Why  not  willing  to  die, 
since  this  life  is  attended  with  so  many  evils  ?  The 
man  answered,  Because  I  fear  that  this  burden  that 
is  upon  my  back  will  sink  me  lower  than  the  grave; 
and  I  shall  fall  into  Tophet.  is.  xxx.  33.  And,  Sir,  if 
I  be  not  fit  to  go  to  prison,  I  am  not  fit,  I  am  sure, 
to  go  to  judgment,  and  from  thence  to  execution ; 
and  the  thoughts  of  these  things  make  me  cry. 

Then  said  Evangelist,  If  this  be  thy  condition, 
„     ■ ..      ,  ,     why  standest  thou   still  ?     He   an- 

Conviction  of  the  J  , 

necessity  of  fly-  swered,  Because  1  know  not  whither 
to  go.     Then  he  gave  him  a  parch- 
ment roll,  and  there  was  written  within,  '  Fly  from 
the  wrath  to  come. '  Mat.  iii  7. 

The  man  therefore,  read  it,  and  looking  upon 
Evangelist  very  carefully,  said,  Whither  must  I 
fly  ?  Then  said  Evangelist,  pointing  with  his 
finger  over  a  very  wide  field,  Do  you  see  yonder 
wicket  gate  ?  Mat.  vn.  13.  The  man  said,  No.  Then 
said  the  other,  Do  you  see  yonder  shining  light  ? 
Fs.  cxix.  105.  2  Pe.  i.  19.  He  said,  I  think  I  do.  Then 
said  Evangelist,  Keep  that  light  in 
to™htad^3  your  eye,  and  go  up  directly  thereto, 

thefWo?dVith°Ut  so  shalt  tll0U  see  the  Sate ;  at  whicll> 
when  thou  knockest,  it  shall  be  told 
thee  what  thou  shalt  do.2  So  I  saw  in  my  dream 
that  the  man  began  to  run.  Now,  he  had  not  ran 
far  from  his  own  door,  but  his  wife  and  children 
perceiving  it,  began  to  cry  after  him  to  return, 
Lu.  xiv.  26;  but  the  man  put  his  fingers  in  his  ears, 
and  ran  on,  crying,  Life  !  life  !  Eternal  life  !  So 
he  looked  not  behind  him,  Ge  xix.  17,  but  fled  towards 
the  middle  of  the  plain.3 
They  that  fiy  from       The  neighbours  also  came  out  to 

the    wrath    to  see  him  run,   and  as  he  ran,   some 

come,  are  a  gaz- 

ing-stock  to  the  mocked,  others  threatened,  and  some 
cried    after    him    to     return  :     and 


1  Reader!  be  persuaded  to  pause  a  moment,  and  ask  your- 
self the  question — What  is  my  case?  Did  I  ever  feel  a  deep 
concern  about  my  soul  ?  Did  I  ever  see  my  danger  as  a  sin- 
ner? Did  I  ever  exclaim,  in  the  agony  of  my  spirit,  'What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?'  Be  assured  that  real  godliness  begins 
in  feeling  the  burden  of  sin. —  (G.  Burder.) 

2  The  advice  is  to  fly  at  once  to  Christ,  and  that  he  will  then 
be  told  what  to  do.  He  is  not  told  to  get  rid  of  his  burden  first, 
by  reforming  his  life,  and  theu  to  apply  for  further  instruction 
to  the  Saviour. — ( J.  B. ) 

*  When  a  sinner  begins  to  fly  from  destruction,  carnal 
relations  will  strive  to  prevent  him;  but  the  sinner  who  is  in 
earnest  for  salvation,  will  be  deaf  to  invitations  to  go  back. 
The  more  he  is  solicited  by  them,  the  faster  he  will  fly  from 
them. — (Mason.) 


among  those  that  did  so,  there  were  two  that  were 
resolved  to  fetch  him  back  by  force, 
je.  xx.  io.  The  name  of  the  one  was  °£™' 
Obstinate,  and  the  name  of  the  other 
Pliable.4  Now  by  this  time,  the  man  was  got  a 
good  distance  from  them  ;  but,  however,  they  were 
resolved  to  pursue  him ;  Avhich  they  did,  and  in  a 
little  time  they  overtook  him.  Then  said  the  man, 
Neighbours,  wherefore  are  ye  come  ?  They  said, 
To  persuade  you  to  go  back  with  us.  But  he  said, 
That  can  by  no  means  be.  You  dwell,  said  he,  in 
the  City  of  Destruction,  the  place  also  where  I  was 
born ;  I  see  it  to  be  so ;  and  dying  there,  sooner 
or  later,  you  will  sink  lower  than  the  grave,  into  a 
place  that  burns  with  fire  and  brimstone.  Be  con- 
tent, good  neighbours,  and  go  along  with  me. 

What,  said  Obstinate,  and  leave  our  friends  and 
our  comforts  behind  us  ?  5 

Yes,  said  Christian,  for  that  was  his  name, 
because  that  all  '  which  you  shall  forsake, '  2  Co.  iv. 
is,  is  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  a  little  of 
that  which  I  am  seeking  to  enjoy ;  and  if  you  will 
go  along  with  me,  and  hold  it,  you  shall  fare  as  I 
myself,  for  there,  where  I  go,  is  enough  and  to 
spare.  Lu.  xv.  17.    Come  away,  and  prove  my  words. 

Obst.  What  are  the  things  you  seek,  since  you 
leave  all  the  world  to  find  them  ? 

Chr.  I  seek  an  '  inheritance  incorruptible,  unde- 
filed,  and  that  fadeth  not  away, '  1  Pe.  i.  4,  and  it  is 
laid  up  in  heaven,  He.  xi.  is,  and  safe  there,  to  be 
bestowed,  at  the  time  appointed,  on  them  that 
diligently  seek  it.  Read  it  so,  if  you  will,  in  my 
book. 

Obst.  Tush,  said  Obstinate,  away  with  your 
book  ;   will  you  go  back  with  us,  or  no  ? 

Chr.  No,  not  I,  saith  the  other;  because  I  have 
laid  my  hand  to  the  plough.  Lu.  ix.  62. 

Obst.  Come,  then,  neighbour  Pliable,  let  us 
turn  again,  and  go  home  without  him  ;  there  is  a 


4  The  names  of  these  two  neighbours  are  admirably  charac- 
teristic, not  confined  to  any  age  or  place,  but  always  accompany 
the  young  convert  to  godliness,  as  the  shadow  does  the  sub- 
stance. Christian  is  firm,  decided,  bold,  and  sanguine.  Obsti- 
nate is  profane,  scornful,  self-sufficient,  and  contemns  God's 
Word.  Pliable  is  yielding,  and  easily  induced  to  engage  in 
things  of  which  he  understands  neither  the  nature  nor  the 
consequences. —  (T.  Scott.) 

6  Objection.  If  I  would  run  as  you  would  have  me,  then  I 
must  run  from  all  my  friends,  for  none  of  them  are  running 
that  way.  Answ.  And  if  thou  dost,  thou  wilt  run  into  the 
bosom  of  Christ,  and  of  God.  And  what  harm  will  that  do 
thee  ?  Objec.  But  if  I  run  this  way,  I  must  run  from  all  my 
sins.  Answ.  That's  true  indeed;  yet  if  thou  dost  not,  thou 
wilt  run  into  hell-fire.  Objec.  But  I  shall  be  mocked  of  all  my 
neighbours.  Answ.  But  if  thou  lose  the  benefit  of  heaven, 
God  will  mock  at  thy  calamity.  Objec.  But,  surely,  I  may 
begin  this,  time  enough  a  year  or  two  hence.  Answ.  Hast  thou 
any  lease  of  thy  life  ?  Did  ever  God  tell  thee  thou  shalt  live 
half  a  year  or  two  months  longer  ?  Art  thou  a  wise  man  to 
let  thy  immortal  soul  hang  over  hell  by  a  thrend  of  uncertain 
time,  which  may  soon  be  "cut  asunder  by  death? — (Bunyan's 
Preface  to  the  Heavenly  Footman.) 


mi:    l'l I.C. KIM'S    PROGRESS. 


91 


company  of  these  crazed-headed  coxcombs,  that 
when  they  take  a  fancy  by  the  end,  are  wiser  in 
their  own  eyes  than  seven  men  that  can  render  a 
reason.  rr.  x.wi.  in. 

Pli.  Then  said  Pliable,  Do  not  revile ;  if  what 
the  good  Christian  says  is  true,  the  things  he  looks 
after  are  bettor  than  ours ;  my  heart  inclines  to  go 
with  my  neighbour. 

Obst.  What  !  more  fools  still  ?  Be  ruled  by  me, 
and  go  back  ;  who  knows  whither  such  a  brain-sick 
fellow  will  lead  you  ?  Go  back,  go  back,  and  be 
wise. 

Chr.  Nay,  but  do  thou  come  with  thy  neigh- 
„,  .  .         . ,,.     bour  Pliable :   there  are  such  things 

Christian  and  Ob-  .  ° 

stmate  pull  for  to  be  had  which  I  spoke  of,  and  many 
Pliable's  soul.  ,     .       \      •  i  t  ii- 

more  glories  besides ;  if  you  believe 

not  me,  read  here  in  this  book,  and  for  the  truth 
of  what  is  expressed  therein,  behold,  all  is  con- 
firmed by  the  blood  of  him  that  made  it.  lie.  xiii.  20, 

21;  it  17-21. 

Pli.   Well,  neighbour  Obstinate,  saith  Pliable, 

RSable  contented  l  beSin  t0  COme  t0  a  P°int  ?  l  intecd 
to  go  with  Chris-  to  go  along  with  this  good  man,  and 

to  cast  in  my  lot  with  him.      But, 

my  good  companion,  do  you  know  the  way  to  this 

desired  place  ? 

Cur.  I  am  directed  by  a  man  whose  name  is 
Evangelist,  to  speed  me  to  a  little  gate  that  is 
before  us,  where  we  shall  receive  instructions  about 
the  way. 

Pli.  Come  then,  good  neighbour,  let  us  be  going. 
Then  they  went  both  together. 

Obst.  And  I  will  go  back  to  my  place,  said 
Obstinate    goes  Obstinate ;  I  will  be  no  companion 

railing  bacL      of  such  misled  fantastical  fellows. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  when  Obstinate 
Talk  between  was  Sone  back,  Christian  and  Pliable 
christian  and   went  talking  over  the  plain  ;  and  thus 

Pliable.  ,         ,  °,     .      ..        r 

they  began  their  discourse. 

Chr.  Come,  neighbour  Pliable,  how  do  you  do? 
I  am  glad  you  are  persuaded  to  go  along  with  me  ; 
bad  even  Obstinate  himself  but  felt  what  I  have 
felt,  of  the  powers  and  terrors  of  what  is  yet 
unseen,  he  would  nut  thus  lightly  have  given  us 
the  back. 

Pli.  Come,  neighbour  Christian,  since  there  is 
none  but  us  two  here,  tell  me  now  further,  what 
the  things  are,  and  how  to  be  enjoyed,  whither 
we  are  going. 

Chr.  I  can  better  conceive  of  them  with  my 
God's  things  un-  mind,  than  speak  of  them  with  my 
speakabie.  tongue  ;  but  yet  since  you  are  desir- 
ous to  know,  I  will  read  of  them  in  my  book. 

Pli.  And  do  you  think  that  the  words  of  your 
book  are  certainly  true  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  verily,  for  it  was  made  by  him  that 
cannot  he.  Tit.  i.  2. 

Pli.  Well  said.      What  things  are  they? 


Cur.  There  is  an  endless  kingdom  to  be  inhabited, 
and  everlasting  life  to  be  given  us,  that  we  may 
inhabit  that  kingdom  forever,   is.  xiv.  17.  jL.  x.  27-29 

Pli.  Well  said.      And  what  else  ? 

CnR.  There  are  crowns  of  glory  to  be  given  ua, 
and  garments  that  will  make  us  shine  like  the  sun 
in  the  firmament  of  heaven  !   2  Ti.  iv.  8.   Be.  \\\.  4.  Mat. 

xiii.  43. 

Pli.  This  is  very  pleasant.      And  what  else? 

Chr.  There  shall  be  no  more  crying,  nor  sorrow  ; 
for  he  that  is  owner  of  the  place  will  wipe  all  tears 
from  our  eyes.   is.  xxv.  8.  Re.  vii.  ir>,  17 ;  xxi.  4. 

Pli.  And  what  company  shall  we  have  there  ? 

Cmr.  There  we  shall  be  with  Beraphims,  and 
cherubims,  creatures  that  will  dazzle  your  eyes  to 
look  on  them.  There,  also,  you  shall  meet  with 
thousands  and  ten  thousands  that  have  gone  before 
us  to  that  place;  none  of  them  are  hurtful,  but 
loving  and  holy,  every  one  walking  in  the  sight  of 
God,  and  standing  in  his  presence  with  acceptance 
for  ever ;  in  a  word,  there  we  shall  see  the  elders 
with  their  golden  crowns ;  there  we  shall  see  the 
holy  virgins  with  their  golden  harps  ;  there  we  shall 
see  men,  that  by  the  world  were  cut  in  pieces,  burnt 
in  flames,  eaten  of  beasts,  drowned  in  the  seas,  for 
the  love  that  they  bare  to  the  Lord  of  the  place ; 
all  well,  and  clothed  with  immortality  as  with  a 
garment.1  is.  vi.  2.  1  Th.  iv.  16,  17.  Re.  vii.  17;  iv.  *;  xiv.  1-5. 

Jn.  xii.  25.    2  Co.  v.  2-5. 

Pli.  The  hearing  of  this  is  enough  to  ravish 
one's  heart;  but  are  these  things  to  be  enjoyed  ? 
How  shall  we  get  to  be  sharers  thereof  ? 

Chr.  The  Lord,  the  governor  of  the  country, 
hath  recorded,  that  in  this  book,  the  substance  of 
which  is,  if  we  be  truly  willing  to  have  it,  he  will 
bestow  it  upon  us  freely,  is.  iv.  i,  2, 12.  Jn.  vii.  3; ;  vi.  37. 

Re.  xxL  6  ;   xxii.  17. 

Pli.  Well,  my  good  companion,  glad  am  I  to 
hear  of  these  things ;  come  on,  let  us  mend  our 
pace.2 

1  It-  is  interesting  to  compare  this  account  of  heaven  with 
that  which  Bunyan  gave  in  the  Preface  to  his  '  Sighs  from 
Hell,'  published  twenty  years  before : — '  O  sinner,  sinner, 
there  are  better  things  than  lull  to  be  had,  and  at  a  cheaper 
rate  by  the  thousandth  part  than  that.  0  there  is  no  com- 
parison ;  there  is  heaven,  there  is  God,  there  is  Christ,  their 
is  communion  with  an  innumerable  company  of  saints  and 
angels.' — (Ed.) 

■  Here  you  have  another  volume  of  meaning  in  a  single 
touch  of  the  pencil.  Pliable  is  one  of  those  who  are  willing, 
or  think  they  are  willing,  to  have  heaven,  but  without  any 
sense  of  sin,  or  of  the  labour  and  self-denial  necessary  to  enter 
heaven.  Bat  now  his  heart  is  momentarily  fired  with  Chris- 
tian's ravishing  descriptions,  and  as  he  seems  to  have  nothing 
to  trouble  his  conscience,  and  no  difficulties  to  overcome,  the 
pace  of  an  honest,  thorough  inquirer,  the  movement  of  a  soul 
sensible  of  its  distresses  and  its  sins,  and  desiring  comfort  only 
in  the  way  of  healing  and  of  holiness,  seems  much  too  slow 
for  him.  He  is  for  entering  heaven  at  once,  going  much 
faster  than  poor  Christian  can  keep  up  with  him.  Then,  said 
Christian,  I  cannot  go  so  fast  as  I  would,  by  reason  of  His 
burden  that  is  on  mr  back.— (Checver.) 


92 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Chr.  I  cannot  go  so  fa3t  as  I  would,  by  reason 
of  this  burden  that  is  on  my  back. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that,  just  as  they  bad 
The  Slough  of   ended  this  talk,  they  drew  near  to  a 

Despond.  yery  m;rv  si0Ugn  that  was  in  the  midst 
of  the  plain ;  and  they,  being  heedless,  did  both 
fall  suddenly  into  the  bog.  The  name  of  the 
slough  was  Despond.1  Here,  therefore,  they  wal- 
lowed for  a  time,  being  grievously  bedaubed  with 
the  dirt ;  and  Christian,  because  of  the  burden  that 
was  on  his  back,  began  to  sink  in  the  mire. 

Pli.  Then  said  Pliable,  Ah  !  neighbour  Chris- 
tian, where  are  you  now  ? 

Ciir.  Truly,  said  Christian,  I  do  not  know. 

Pli.  At  that  Pliable  began  to  be  offended,  and 
angrily  said  to  his  fellow,  Is  this  the  happiness 
you  have  told  me  all  this  while  of  ?  If  we  have 
such  ill  speed  at  our  first  setting  out,  what  may  Ave 
it  is  not  enough  expect  betwixt  this  and  our  journey's 
to  be  pliable.  en  j  ?  May  I  get  out  again  with  my 
life,  you  shall  possess  the  brave  country  alone  for 
me.  And  with  that  he  gave  a  desperate  struggle 
or  two,  and  got  out  of  the  mire  on  that  side  of  the 
slough  which  was  next  to  his  own  house :  so  away 
he  went,  and  Christian  saw  him  no  more. 

Wherefore  Christian  was  left  to  tumble  in  the 
Christian,  in  Slough  of  Despond  alone ;  but  still  he 
trouble,  seeks   endeavoured  to  struggle  to  that  side 

still  to  set  fur-  it  -ii 

ther  from  his  of  the  slough  that  was  still  further 
from  his  own  house,  and  next  to  the 
wicket-gate ;  the  which  he  did,  but  could  not  get 
out,  because  of  the  burden  that  was  upon  his  back.2 
But  I  beheld  in  my  dream,  that  a  man  came  to 
him,  whose  name  was  Help,  and  asked  him  what  he 
did  there  ? 

Chr.   Sir,  said  Christian,  I  was  bid  go  this  way 

by  a  man  called  Evangelist,  who  directed  me  also 

to  yonder  gate,  that  I  might  escape  the  wrath  to 

come.  And  as  I  was  going  thither,  I  fell  in  here. 

Help.  But  why  did  not   you  look 

The  promises.     -        ,  J  J 

tor  the  steps  ( 
Chr.  Fear  followed  me  so  hard,  that  I  fled  the 
next  way,  and  fell  in.3 


1  Satan  casts  the  professor  into  the  mire,  to  the  reproach 
of  religion,  the  shame  of  their  brethren,  the  derision  of  the 
world,  and  the  dishonour  of  God.  He  holds  our  hands 
while  the  world  buffets  us.  He  puts  bears'  skins  upon  us, 
and  then  sets  the  dogs  at  us.  He  bedaubeth  us  with  his 
own  foam,  and  then  tempts  us  to  believe  that  that  bedaubing 
comes  from  ourselves.—  {Good  News  to  the  VUest  of  Men, 
vol.  i.  p.  69.) 

2  Guilt  is  not  so  much  a  wind  and  a  tempest,  as  a  load  and 
burden.  The  devil,  and  sin,  and  the  curse  of  the  law,  and 
death,  are  gotten  upon  the  shoulders  of  this  poor  man,  and  are 
treading  of  him  down,  that  he  may  sink  into,  and  be  swallowed 
up  of,  his  miry  place.  Job  xli.  30. —  (Bunyan's  Saints"  Know- 
ledge of  Christ's  Love,  vol.  ii.  p.  6.) 

3  In  this  Slough  of  Despond  there  were  good  and  firm  steps, 
sound  promises  to  stand  upon,  a  causeway,  indeed,  better  than 
adamant,  clear  across  the  treacherous  quagmires ;  but  mark 
you,  fear  followed  Christian  so  hard,  that  he  fled  the  nearest 


Help.  Then  said  he,  Give  me  thy  hand;  so  he 
gave  him  his  hand,  and  he  drew  him  out,  and  set 
him  upon  sound  ground,  and  bid  him  Hel  Ufts  llim 
go  on  his  way.  Ps.  xi.  2.  out- 

Then  I  stepped  to  him  that  plucked  him  out,  and 
said,  Sir,  wherefore  (since  over  this  place  is  the  wav 
from  the  City  of  Destruction,  to  yonder  gate)  is  it 
that  this  plat  is  not  mended,  that  poor  travellers 
might  go  thither  with  more  security?  And  he  said 
unto  me,  This  miry  slough  is  such  a  place  as  cannot 
be  mended.  It  is  the  descent  whither  Whatmakestne 
the  scum  and  filth  that  attends  con-  Slough  of  Des- 
viction  for  sin,  doth  continually  run,  p0U 
and  therefore  it  is  called  the  Slough  of  Despond : 
for  still,  as  the  sinner  is  awakened  about  his  lost 
condition,  there  ariseth  in  his  soul  many  fears,  and 
doubts,  and  discouraging  apprehensions,  which  all 
of  them  get  together,  and  settle  in  this  place.  And 
this  is  the  reason  of  the  badness  of  this  ground. 

It  is  not  the  pleasure  of  the  King  that  this  place 
should  remain  so  bad,  is.  xxxv.  3,  4 ;  his  labourers, 
also,  have,  by  the  directions  of  his  Majesty's  sur- 
veyors, been,  for  above  these  sixteen  hundred 
years,  employed  about  this  patch  of  ground,  if, 
perhaps,  it  might  have  been  mended ;  yea,  and  to 
my  knowledge,  said  he,  here  have  been  swallowed 
up  at  least  twenty  thousand  cart-loads ;  yea,  mil- 
lions of  wholesome  instructions,  that  have,  at  all 
seasons,  been  brought  from  all  places  of  the  King's 
dominions,  and  they  that  can  tell,  say,  they  are  the 
best  materials  to  make  good  ground  of  the  place, 
if  so  be  it  might  have  been  mended ;  but  it  is  the 
Slough  of  Despond  still ;  and  so  will  be  when  they 
have  done  what  they  can.4 

True,  there  are,  by  the  direction  of  the  Lawgiver, 
certain  good  and  substantial  steps,  ^^  promjse!,  0f 
placed  even  through  the  very  midst    forgiveness  and 

*  °  •>  ,  acceptance    to 

of  this  slough ;  but  at  such  time  as  life  by  faith  in 
this  place  doth  much  spew  out  its 
filth,  as  it  doth  against  change  of  weather,  these 
steps  are  hardly  seen  ;  or  if  they  be,  men,  through 
the  dizziness  of  their  heads,  step  besides,  and  then 
they  are  bemired  to  purpose,  notwithstanding  the 
steps  be  there ;  but  the  ground  is  good,  when  they 
are  once  got  in  at  the  gate.5  l  Sa.  xli.  23. 


way,  and  fell  in,  not  stopping  to  look  for  the  steps,  or  not 
thinking  of  them.  Now  this  is  often  just  the  operation  of 
fear;  it  sets  the  threatenings  against  the  promises,  when  it 
ought  simply  to  direct  the  sold  from  the  threatenings  to  the 
promises.  It  is  the  object  of  the  threatenings  to  make  the 
promises  shine,  and  to  make  the  soul  lay  hold  upon  them,  and 
that  is  the  purpose  and  the  tendency  of  a  salutary  fear  of  the 
Divine  wrath  on  account  of  sin,  to  make  the  believer  flee 
directly  to  the  promises,  and  advance  on  them  to  Christ. — 
(Cheever.) 

4  Signifying  that  there  is  nothing  but  despondency  mid 
despair  in  the  fallen  nature  of  sinful  man :  the  best  that  we 
can  do,  leaves  us  in  the  Slough  of  Despond,  as  to  any  hope  in 
ourselves. — (Mason.) 

*  That  is,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  never  find  good 
ground,  nor  safe  sounding,  nor  comfortable  walking,  till  we 


THE    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


93 


Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that,  by  this  time, 
Pliable  f?ot  Pliable  was  got  home  to  his  house 
I'm"' i'i  of'' his  again;  so  that  his  neighbours  came 
neighbours.  to  vjs|t  ]x\m  .  ami  gome  0f  them  called 
him  wise  man  for  coming  back,  and  some  called 
him    fool    for    hazarding   himself  with    Christian; 

Hi.    entertain-    ot,ujrs»  aSai,\  did   mock   at   h'3  cow" 
"'""  i>y  them   ardliness.  Baying.  'Surely,  since  you 

at  his  return.       .  'Jo'  J'  J 

began  to  venture,    1   would  not  have 

been  so  base  to  have  given  out  for  a  few  difficul- 
ties.' So  Pliable  sat  sneaking  among  them.  But, 
at  last,  he  got  more  confidence,  and  then  they  all 
turned  their  tabs,  and  began  to  deride  poor  Chris- 
tian behind  his  back.  And  thus  much  concerning 
Pliable. 

Now  as  Christian  was  walking  solitarily  by  him- 
self,1 he  espied  one  afar  off  come  crossing  over  the 
field  to  meet  him ;  and  their  hap  was  to  meet  just 
as  they  were  crossing  the  way  of  each  other.  The 
Mr  w  idl  gentleman's  name  that  met  him  was 
wiaemanmeeta  Mr.  Worldly-wiseman ;  he  dwelt  in 
the  town  of  Carnal  Policy,  a  very  great 
town,  and  also  hard  by  from  whence  Christian  came. 
This  man,  then,  meeting  with  Christian,  and  having 
some  inkling2  of  him,  for  Christian's  setting  forth 
from  the  City  of  Destruction  was  much  noised 
abroad,  not  only  in  the  town  where  he  dwelt,  but, 
also,  it  began  to  be  the  town-talk  in  some  other 
places.  Master  Worldly-wiseman,  therefore,  having 
some  guess  of  him,  by  beholding  his  laborious  going, 
by  observing  his  sighs  and  groans,  and  the  like, 
began  thus  to  enter  into  some  talk  with  Christian. 

World.  How  now,  good  fellow,  whither  away 
Talk  betwixt  after  this  burdened  manner  ? 
^seln'a.ia  Chr.  A  burdened  manner,  indeed, 
Christian.  as  ever)  j  think,  poor  creature  had  ! 
And  whereas  you  ask  me,  Whither  away  ?  I  tell 
you,  Sir,  I  am  going  to  yonder  wicket-gate  before 
me ;  for  there,  as  I  am  informed,  I  shall  be  put 
into  a  way  to  be  rid  of  my  heavy  burden. 

WORLD.  Ilast  thou  a  wife  and  children  ? 

CnR.  Yes ;  but  I  am  so  laden  with  this  bur- 
den, that  I  cannot  take  that  pleasure  in  them  as 
formerly ;    methinks  I  am  as  if  I  had  none,  l  Co. 

vii.  29. 

World.  Wilt  thou  hearken  unto  me  if  I  give 
thee  counsel  ? 

Chr.  If  it  be  good,  I  will ;  for  I  stand  in  need 
of  good  counsel. 


enter  into  possession  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  till  our  feet  arc 
set  upon  Christ,  who  is  the  Rock  of  ages. — (Mason.) 

1  And  now  you  may  think,  perhaps,  that  Christian  having 
got  out  of  the  Slough  of  Despond,  and  fairly  on  his  way,  it  is 
aD  well  with  him ;  but  not  so,  for  now  he  comes  into  a  peril 
that  is  far  greater  than  the  last — a  peril  through  which  we  sup- 
pose that  every  soul  that  ever  goes  on  pilgrimage  passes,  and 
a  peril  in  which  multitudes  that  get  safely  across  the  Slough 
of  Despond,  perish  for  ever. — (Cheever.) 

2  '  Some  inkling ;'  some  intimation,  hiut,  or  slight  know- 
ledge: obsolete. — (Ed.) 


World.   I   would  advise  thee,  then,   that  thou 
with  all  speed  get  thyself  rid  of   thy      m,.    Worldly- 
burden  :  for  thou  wilt  never  be  settled      ",'7,'." !'|"  "l 
in  thy  mind  till  then  ;   nur  canst  thou       Christian, 
enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  blessing  which  Cud  hath 
bestowed  upon  thee  till  then. 

Chr.  That  is  that  which  I  seek  for,  even  to  be 
rid  of  this  heavy  burden;  but  get  it  off  myself,  1 
cannot;  nor  is  there  any  man  in  our  country  that 
can  take  it  off  my  shoulders  ;  therefore  am  I  going 
this  way,  as  I  told  you,  that  I  may  be  rid  of  my 
burden. 

World.  Who  bid  you  go  this  way  to  be  rid  of 
thy  burden  ? 

Ciir.  A  man  that  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  very 
great  and  honourable  person ;  his  name,  as  I 
remember,  is  Evangelist. 

World.  I  beshrew  him  for  his  counsel!  there 
is  not  a  more  dangerous  and  trouble-  Mr.  Worldly- 
some  way  in  the  world  than  is  that  de'S"  hv'.'n- 
unto  which  he  hath  directed  thee;  gent's  counsel, 
and  that  thou  shalt  find,  if  thou  wilt  be  ruled  by 
his  counsel.  Thou  hast  met  with  something,  as  I 
perceive  already  ;  for  I  see  the  dirt  of  the  Slough 
of  Despond  is  upon  thee;  but  that  slough  is  tho 
beginning  of  the  sorrows  that  do  attend  those  that 
go  on  in  that  way.  Hear  me,  I  am  older  than 
thou  ;  thou  art  like  to  meet  with,  on  the  way  which 
thou  goest,  wearisomeness,  painfulness,  hunger, 
perils,  nakedness,  sword,  lions,  dragons,  darkness, 
and,  in  a  word,  death,  and  what  not!  These 
things  are  certainly  true,  having  been  confirmed 
by  many  testimonies.  And  why  should  a  man  so 
carelessly  cast  away  himself,  by  giving  heed  to  a 
stranger  ? 

Ciir.  Why,  Sir,  this  burden  upon  my  back  is 
more  terrible  to  me  than  are  all  these  The  frame  of 
things  which  you  have  mentioned ;  ydung^CLris- 
nay,  methinks  1  care  not  what  I  meet  Uan- 
with  in  the  way,  if  so  be  I  can  also  meet  with 
deliverance  from  my  burden. 

World.  How  earnest  thou  by  the  burden  at  first  ? 

Ciir.  By  reading  this  book  in  my  hand. 

World.   I  thought  so ;  and  it  is  happened  unto 
thee  as  to  other  weak  men,  who,  med- 
dling with  things  too  high  for  them,     man  doe^not 
do  suddenly  fall  into  thy  distractions  ;     ^./J 

which  distractions  do  not  only  unman     jus  in  reading 
J*  the  Bibie, 

men,  as  thine,   I  perceive,  has  done 

thee,  but  they  run  tbem  upon  desperate  ventures, 

to  obtain  they  know  not  what. 

Cur.  I   know  what  I  would  obtain;   it  i- 
for  my  heavy  burden. 

World.   But  why  wilt  thou  seek  for  ease  this 
way,  seeing  so  many  dangers  attend    VVhil|l,r    Mr 
it  ?  especially  since,  hadst  thou  but     WbrJdrj 

r  ;  T         1 1    j-       *     n,un    Prcfers 

patience  to   hear  me,    1  could  direct     morality  before 
thee  to   the  obtaining  of  what  thou     «K.tra,tg*.e. 


94 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


rlesirest,  without  the  dangers  that  thou  in  this  way 
wilt  run  thyself  into ;  yea,  and  the  remedy  is  at 
hand.  Besides,  I  will  add,  that,  instead  of  those 
dangers,  thou  shalt  meet  with  much  safety, 
friendship,  and  content.1 

Chr.  Pray,  Sir,  open  this  secret  to  me. 

World.  Why,  in  yonder  village — the  village  is 
named  Morality — there  dwells  a  gentleman  whose 
name  is  Legality,  a  very  judicious  man,  and  a  man 
of  a  very  good  name,  that  has  skill  to  help  men  off 
with  such  burdens  as  thine  are  from  their  shoul- 
ders :  yea,  to  my  knowledge,  he  hath  done  a  great 
deal  of  good  this  way ;  aye,  and  besides,  he  hath 
skill  to  cure  those  that  are  somewhat  crazed  in 
their  wits  with  their  burdens.2  To  him,  as  I  said, 
thou  mayest  go,  and  be  helped  presently.  His 
house  is  not  quite  a  mile  from  this  place,  and  if  he 
should  not  be  at  home  himself,  he  hath  a  pretty 
young  man  to  his  son,  whose  name  is  Civility,  that 
can  do  it  (to  speak  on)  as  well  as  the  old  gentle- 
man himself;  there,  I  say,  thou  mayest  be  eased 
of  thy  burden  ;  and  if  thou  art  not  minded  to  go 
back  to  thy  former  habitation,  as,  indeed,  I  would 
not  wish  thee,  thou  mayest  send  for  thy  wife  and 
children  to  thee  to  this  village,  where  there  are 
houses  now  stand  empty,  one  of  which  thou  mayest 
have  at  reasonable  rates ;  provision  is  there  also 
cheap  and  good;  and  that  which  will  make  thy 
life  the  more  happy  is,  to  be  sure,  there  thou  shalt 
live  by  honest  neighbours,  in  credit  and  good 
fashion. 

Now  was  Christian  somewhat  at  a  stand ;  but 
Christian  snared  presently  he  concluded,  if  this  be  true, 
//-Wiseman's  "  which  this  gentleman  hath  said,  my 
words.  wisest  course  is  to  take  his  advice; 

and  with  that  he  thus  further  spoke. 

Chr.  Sir,  which  is  my  way  to  this  honest  man's 
house  ? 
„     . ,.-    •        World.  Do  you  see  yonder  hill  ? 

Mount  Sinai.  J  J 

Chr.  Yes,  very  well. 

World.  By  that  hill  you  must  go,  and  the  first 
house  you  come  at  is  his. 

So  Christian  turned  out  of  his  way,  to  go  to  Mr. 
Legality's  house  for  help ;  but,  behold,  when  he 
was  got  now  hard  by  the  hill,  it  seemed  so  high, 


1  There  is  great  beauty  in  this  dialogue,  arising  from  the 
exact  regard  to  character  preserved  throughout.  Indeed,  this 
forms  one  of  our  author's  peculiar  excellencies ;  as  it  is  a  very 
difficult  attainment,  and  always  manifests  a  superiority  of 
genius. — (Scott.) 

2  Mr.  Worldly- wiseman  prefers  morality  to  Christ  the  strait 
gate.  This  is  the  exact  reasoning  of  the  flesh.  Carnal  reason 
ever  opposes  spiritual  truth.  The  notion  of  justification  by 
our  own  obedience  to  God's  law  ever  works  in  us,  contrary 
to  the  way  of  justification  by  the  obedience  of  Christ.  Self- 
righteousness  is  as  contrary  to  the  faith  of  Christ  as  indulging 
the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  The  former  is  the  white  devil  of 
pride,  the  latter  the  black  devil  of  rebellion  and  disobedience. 
See  the  awful  consequences  of  listening  to  the  reasonings  of 
the  flesh. — (Mason.) 


and  also  that  side  of  it  that  was  next  the  wayside. 
did  hang  so  much  over,  that  Chris-  christian  afraid 
tian  was  afraid  to  venture  further,  smaivvouWflu 
lest  the  hill  should  fall  on  his  head ;  on  his  head- 
wherefore  there  he  stood  still,  and  wotted3  not 
what  to  do.  Also  his  burden  now  seemed  heavier 
to  him,  than  while  he  was  in  his  way.  There 
came  also  flashes  of  fire  out  of  the  hill,  that  made 
Christian  afraid  that  he  should  be  burned.  Ex.  xix 
16,  is.  Here,  therefore,  he  sweat  and  did  quake  for 
fear.  He.  xii.  21.  And  now  he  began  to  be  sorry  that 
he  had  taken  Mr.  Worldly-wiseman's  counsel. 
And  with  that  he  saw  Evangelist 
coming  to  meet  him  ;  at  the  sight  also  eto^Christian" 
of  whom  he  began  to  blush  for  shame,  snfai'andbok- 
So  Evangelist  drew  nearer  and  nearer ;     eth  severely 

1  •  i  •        1      1      i      -i  upon  him. 

and  coming  up  to  him,  he  looked  upon 

him  with  a  severe  and  dreadful  countenance,  and 

thus  began  to  reason  with  Christian. 

Evan.  What  dost  thou  here,  Christian  ?  said 
he  :   at  which  words  Christian  knew   ^        r  . 

Evangelist  rea- 

not   what   to  answer ;    wherefore  at     sons   afresh 

.     ,  ,  ,  ,  ...  with  Christian. 

present   he    stood   speechless    before 
him.      Then  said  Evangelist  further,  Art  not  thou 
the  man  that  I  found  crying  without  the  walls  of 
the  City  of  Destruction  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  dear  Sir,  I  am  the  man. 

Evan.  Did  not  I  direct  thee  the  way  to  the 
little  wicket-gate  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  dear  Sir,  said  Christian. 

Evan.  How  is  it,  then,  that  thou  art  so  quickly 
turned  aside  ?  for  thou  art  now  out  of  the  way. 

Chr.  I  met  with  a  gentleman  so  soon  as  I  had 
got  over  the  Slough  of  Despond,  who  persuaded 
me  that  I  might,  in  the  village  before  me,  find  a 
man  that  could  take  off  my  burden. 

Evan.  What  was  he  ? 

Chr.  He  looked  like  a  gentleman,4  and  talked 
much  to  me,  and  got  me  at  last  to  yield ;  so  I  came 
hither :  but  when  I  beheld  this  hill,  and  how  it 
hangs  over  the  way,  I  suddenly  made  a  stand,  lest 
it  should  fall  on  my  head. 

Evan.  What  said  that  gentleman  to  you  ? 

Chr.  Why,  he  asked  me  whither  I  was  going  ? 
And  I  told  him. 

Evan.  And  what  said  he  then  ? 

Chr.  He  asked  me  if  I  had  a  family  ?  And  I 
told  him.  But,  said  I,  I  am  so  loaden  with  the 
burden  that  is  on  my  back,  that  I  cannot  take 
pleasure  in  them  as  formerly. 


3  'And  wotted;'  and  knew.  From  the  Saxon  mien,  to 
know  ;  see  Imperial  Dictionary. — (Ed.) 

4  Beware  of  taking  men  by  their  looks.  They  may  look  as 
gentle  as  lambs,  while  the  poison  of  asps  is  under  their  tongue; 
whereby  they  iufect  many  souls  with  pernicious  errors  and 
pestilent  heresies,  turning  them  from  Christ  aud  the  hope  of 
full  justification  and  eternal  life  through  him  only,  to  look  to, 
and  rely  upon,  their  own  works,  in  whole,  or  in  part,  for  sal- 
vation.— (Mason.) 


THE    I'lI.CKIM'S    PROGRESS. 


95 


Evan.   And  what  said  he  then  ? 

Chr.  He  hid  me  with  speed  get  rid  of  my  hur-  I 
den ;  and  I  told  him  it  was  ease  that  I  sought. 
And,  said  I,  I  am  therefore  going  to  yonder  gate,  | 
to  receive  further  direction  how  1  may  get  to  the  ! 
place  of  deliverance.     So  ho  said  that  he  would 
show  me  a  bettor  way,  and  short,  not  so  attended 
with  difficulties  aa  the  way,  Sir,  that  you  set  me 
in;  which  way,  said  he,  will  direct  you  to  a  gen- 
tleman's house  that  hath  skill  to  take  off  these 
burdens  :   so  1  believed   him,1  and  turned  out  of 
that  way  into  this,  if  haply  I  might  be  soon  eased 
of  my  burden.    But  when  I  came  to  this  place,  and 
beheld  things  as  they  are,  I  stopped  for  fear  (as  1 
said)  of  danger:  but  I  now  know  not  what  to  do. 

Evan.  Then,  said  Evangelist,  stand  still  a  little, 
that  I  may  show  thee  the  words  of  God.  So  he 
stood  trembling.  Then  said  Evangelist,  '  See  that 
ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh.  For  if  they 
escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth, 
much  more  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn  away 
from  him  that  spealxth  from  heaven.'  He.  rii.25. 
He  said,  moreover,  '  Now  the  just  shall  live  by 
faith :  but  if  any  man  draw  back,  my  soul  shall 
Evangelist  con-  have  no  pleasure  in  him.'  lie.  x.  08.  He 
tiMeSofChirut'  also  did  thus  apply  them:  Thou  art 
err<jr-  the  man  that  art  running  into  this 

misery  ;  thou  hast  begun  to  reject  the  counsel  of 
the  Most  High,  and  to  draw  back  thy  foot  from 
the  way  of  peace,  even  almost  to  the  hazarding  of 
thy  perdition. 

Then  Christian  fell  down  at  his  foot  as  dead, 
crying,  *  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am  undone ! '  At  the 
sight  of  which,  Evangelist  caught  him  by  the 
right  hand,  saying,  *  All  manner  of  sin  and  blas- 
phemies shall  be  forgiven  unto  men,'  Mat.  xii.  31. 
.Mar.  iii.  28;  '  Be  not  faithless,  but  believing.'  Jn.  xx.  27. 
Then  did  Christian  again  a  little  revive,  and  stood 
up  trembling,  as  at  first,  before  Evangelist." 

Then  Evangelist  proceeded,  saying,  Give  more 
earnest  heed  to  the  things  that  I  shall  tell  thee  of. 
Mr.  Worldly-  I  will  now  show  thee  who  it  was  that 
deluded  thee,  and  who  it  was  also  to 
he  sent  thee. — The  man  that 
met  thee  is  one  Worldly-wiseman,  and  rightly  is 
he  so  called ;  partly,  because  he  savoureth  only 
the  doctrine  of  this  world,  1  Jn.  It.  5  (therefore  he 
always  goes  to  the  town  of  Morality  to  church); 


ffueman  (L  - 

scribtd     b\ 

EvangeMat         whom 


1  As  the  belief  of  the  truth  lies  at  the  fountain  of  the  hope 
of  eternal  life,  and  is  the  cause  of  any  one  becoming  a  pilgrim  ; 
mi  the  belief  of  a  lie  is  the  cause  of  any  one's  turning  out  of 
the  way  which  leads  to  glory. — (Mason.; 

2  bee  the  glory  of  gospel  grace  to  sinners.  See  the  amazing 
love  oi  Christ  in  dying  for  sinners.  O  remember  the  price, 
which  obtained  the  pardon  of  our  sins,  at  nothing  less  than  his 
most  precious  blood  1  Believe  his  wonderful  love.  Rejoice 
in  his  glorious  salvation.  Live  in  the  love  of  him,  iu  the 
hatred  of  your  sins,  and  in  humbleness  of  mind  before  him.' — 
(Mason.) 


and  partly  because  he  loveth  that  doctrine  best, 
for  it  saveth  him  best  from  the  cross.  Ga.  vi.  is.  And 
because  he  is  of  this  carnal  temper,  therefore  ho 
seeketh  to  prevent  my  ways,  though    r 

r  ii.  Evangelist   (In- 

right.      Mow  there  are  three  things  in     eoyen  the  Oe- 

this  man's   counsel,   that   thou  must     Worldly-witi. 

utterly  abhor.  """• 

1.  His  turning  thee  out  of  the  way.  2.  II  i- 
labouring  to  render  the  cross  odious  to  thee.  And, 
3.  His  setting  thy  feet  in  that  way  that  lcadeth 
unto  the  administration  of  death. 

First,  Thou  must  abhor  his  turning  thee  out  of 
the  way;  yea,  and  thine  own  consenting  thereto: 
because  this  is  to  reject  the  counsel  of  God  for  tho 
sake  of  the  counsel  of  a  Worldly-wiseman.  The 
Lord  says,  '  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,' 
Lu.  xiu.  24,  the  gate  to  which  I  send  thee  ;  for  '  strait 
is  the  gate  which  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there 
be  that  find  it.'  Mat.  vii.  u.  From  this  little  wicket- 
gate,  and  from  the  way  thereto,  hath  this  wicked 
man  turned  thee,  to  the  bringing  of  thee  almost 
to  destruction  ;  hate,  therefore,  his  turning  thee 
out  of  the  way,  and  abhor  thyself  for  hearkening 
to  him. 

Secondly,  Thou  must  abhor  his  labouring  to 
render  the  cross  odious  unto  thee ;  for  thou  art  to 
prefer  it  '  before  the  treasures  in  Egypt. '  He.  xi. 
25,  26.  Besides,  the  King  of  glory  hath  told  thee, 
that  he  that  '  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it. '  Mar. 
viii.  35.  Jn.  xii.  25.  Mat.  x.  39.  And,  '  He  that  comes  after 
him,  and  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife, 
and  children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and 
his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple.'  Lu.  xiv.  aa 
I  say,  therefore,  for  man  to  labour  to  persuade 
thee,  that  that  shall  he  thy  death,  without  which, 
the  truth  hath  said,  thou  canst  not  have  eternal 
life ;  this  doctrine  thou  must  abhor. 

Thirdly,  Thou  must  hate  his  setting  of  thy  feet 
in  the  way  that  leadeth  to  the  ministration  of 
death.  And  for  this  thou  must  consider  to  whom 
he  sent  thee,  and  also  how  unable  that  person  was 
to  deliver  thee  from  thy  burden. 

lie  to  whom  thou  wast  sent  for  ease,  being  by 
name  Legality,  is  the  son  of  the  bond  woman  which 
now  is,  and  is  iu  bondage  with  her  children,  Gal.  It. 
21-27;  and  is,  iu  a  mystery,  this  mount  The  Bond- 
Sinai,  which  thou  hast  feared  will  fall  waaaa' 
on  thy  head.  Now,  if  she,  with  her  children,  are 
in  bondage,  how  canst  thou  expect  by  them  to  be 
made  free  ?  This  Legality,  therefore,  is  not  able 
to  set  thee  free  from  thy  burden.  No  man  was 
as  yet  ever  rid  of  his  burden  by  him ;  no,  nor  ever 
is  like  to  be:  ye  cannot  be  justified  by  the  works 
of  the  law  ;  for  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  man 
living  can  be  rid  of  his  burden:  then  lore,  Mr. 
Worldly-wiseman  is  an  alien,  and  Mr.  Legality  is 
a  cheat;  and  for  his  son  Civility,  notwithstanding 
his   simpering  looks,  he  is  but  a  hypocrite,   and 


96 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


cannot  help  thee.  Believe  me,  there  is  nothing 
in  all  this  noise,  that  thou  hast  heard  of  these 
sottish  men,  hut  a  design  to  beguile  thee  of  thy 
salvation,  by  turning  thee  from  the  way  in  which 
1  had  set  thee.  After  this,  Evangelist  called  aloud 
to  the  heavens  for  confirmation  of  what  he  had 
said :  and  with  that  there  came  words  and  fire  out 
of  the  mountain  under  which  poor  Christian  stood, 
that  made  the  hair  of  his  flesh  stand  up.  The 
words  were  thus  pronounced :  '  As  many  as  are  of 
the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  ;  for  it  is 
written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not 
iu  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  hook  of  the 
law  to  do  them.1  GaL  iiL  10. 

Now  Christian  looked  for  nothing  but  death, 
and  began  to  cry  out  lamentably ;  even  cursing 
the  time  in  which  he  met  with  Mr.  Worldly-wise- 
man  ;  still  calling  himself  a  thousand  fools  for 
hearkening  to  his  counsel:  he  also  was  greatly 
ashamed  to  think  that  this  gentleman's  arguments, 
flowing  only  from  the  flesh,  should  have  the  pre- 
valency  with  him  as  to  cause  him  to  forsake  the 
right  way.  This  done,  he  applied  himself  again 
to  Evangelist,  in  words  and  sense  as  follows: — 

Chr.  Sir,  what  think  you  ?  Is  there  hope  ? 
Christian  in-  May  I  now  go  back,  and  go  up  to  the 
maTyet  be  wicket-gate  ?  Shall  I  not  be  aban- 
haPPy-  doned  for  this,  and  sent  back  from 

thence  ashamed  ?  I  am  sorry  I  have  hearkened 
to  this  man's  counsel.  But  may  my  sin  be 
forgiven  ? 

Evan.  Then  said  Evangelist  to  him,  Thy  sin  is 
very  great,  for  by  it  thou  hast  committed  two  evils  ; 
thou  hast  forsaken  the  way  that  is  good,  to  tread 
Evangelist  com-  m  forbidden  paths;  yet  will  the  man 
fbrteW         at  the  gate  rece;ve  thee>  for  he  jias 

good-will  for  men ;  only,  said  he,  take  heed  that 
thou  turn  not  aside  again,  '  lest  thou  perish  from 
the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.' 
p8.  it  12.  Then  did  Christian  address  himself  to  go 
back ;  and  Evangelist,  after  he  had  kissed  him, 
gave  him  one  smile,  and  bid  him  God- speed.  So 
he  went  on  with  haste,  neither  spake  he  to  any 
man  by  the  way  ;  nor,  if  any  asked  him,  would  he 
vouchsafe  them  an  answer.  He  went  like  one 
that  was  all  the  while  treading  on  forbidden  ground, 
and  could  by  no  means  think  himself  safe,  till  again 
he  was  got  into  the  way  which  he  left,  to  follow 
Mr.  Worldly-wiseman's  counsel.  So,  in  process 
of  time,  Christian  got  up  to  the  gate.  Now,  over 
the  gate  there  was  written,  « Knock,  and  it  shall 
be  opened  unto  you. '  Mat.  vii.  8. 


1  Legality  is  as  great  an  enemy  to  the  cross  of  Christ  as 
licentiousness;  for  it  keeps  the  soul  from  coming  to,  believing 
in,  and  trusting  wholly  to  the  blood  of  Christ  for  pardon,  and 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  for  justification  1  so  that  it  keeps 
the  soul  in  bondage,  and  swells  the  mind  with  pride,  while 
licentiousness  brings  a  scandal  on  the  cross. —  (Mason.) 


He  knocked,  therefore,  more  than  once  or  twice, 
saying— 

•  May  I  now  enter  here  ?     Will  he  within 
Open  to  sorry  me,  though  I  have  been 
An  uudeserving  rebel  ?     Then  shall  I 
Not  fail  to  sing  his  lasting  praise  on  high.' 

At  last  there  came  a  grave  person  to  the  gate, 
named  Good-will,  who  asked  who  was  there  ?  and 
whence  he  came  ?  and  what  he  would  have  ?  2 

Chr.  Here  is  a  poor  burdened  sinner.  I  come 
from  the  City  of  Destruction,  but  am  going  to 
Mount  Zion,  that  I  may  be  delivered  from  the 
wrath  to  come.  I  would,  therefore,  Sir,  since  I 
am  informed  that  by  this  gate  is  the  way  thither, 
know  if  you  are  willing  to  let  me  in  ! 

Good-will.  I  am  willing  with  all  The  gate  will 
my  heart,  said  he;  and  with  that  he  jMSrted 
opened  the  gate.3  sinners. 

So  when  Christian  was  stepping  in,  the  other 
gave  him  a  pull.  Then  said  Christian,  What 
means  that  ?  The  other  told  him.  A  little  dis- 
tance from  this  gate,  there  is  erected  a  strong 
castle,  of  which  Beelzebub  is  the  Satan  envies 
captain ;  from  thence,  both  he  and  teethe  strait 
them  that  are  with  him  shoot  arrows  Sate- 
at  those  that  come  up  to  this  gate,  if  haply  they 
may  die  before  they  can  enter  in.4 

Then  said  Christian,  I  rejoice  and  tremble.  So 
when  he  was  got  in,  the  man  of  the  christian  en- 
gate    asked   him    who    directed    him     ^  joy  g^a 

thither  ?  trembling. 

Chr.  Evangelist  bid  me  come  hither,  and  knock 


2  The  straitness  of  this  gate  is  not  to  be  understood  car- 
nally, but  mystically.  This  gate  is  wide  enough  for  all  the 
truly  sincere  lovers  of  Tesus  Christ,  but  so  strait  that  it  will 
keep  all  others  out.  The  gate  of  Eden  was  wide  enough  for 
Adam  and  his  wife  to  go  out  at,  yet  it  was  too  strait  for  them 
to  go  in  at.  Why?  They  had  sinned;  and  the  cherubim 
and  the  flaming  sword  made  it  too  strait  for  them.  The  gates 
of  the  temple  were  six  cubits  wide,  yet  they  were  so  strait 
that  none  who  were  unclean  might  enter  them. —  (Bunyan's 
Strait  Gate,  vol.  i.  p.  367.) 

3  Here  behold  the  love  of  Jesus,  in  freely  aud  heartily 
receiving  every  poor  sinner  who  comes  unto  him  ;  no  matter 
how  vile  they  have  been,  nor  what  sins  they  have  committed, 
he  loves  them  freely  and  receives  them  graciously;  for  he 
has  nothing  but  good-will  to  them.  Hence,  the  heavenly 
host  sang  at  his  birth,  '  Good-wid  towards  men.'  Lu.  ii.  14. 
— (Mason.) 

4  As  sinners  become  more  decided  in  applying  to  Christ, 
and  assiduous  in  the  means  of  grace,  Satan,  if  permitted,  will 
be  more  vehemeut  in  his  endeavours  to  discourage  them, 
that,  if  possible,  he  may  induce  them  to  desist,  and  so  come 
short  of  the  prize. — (Scott.)  A  whole  heaven  and  eternal  life 
is  wrapped  up  in  this  little  word  in — 'Strive  to  enter  in,' 
this  calls  for  the  mind  and  heart.  Many  professors  make 
their  striving  to  stand  rather  in  an  outcry  of  words,  than  in 
a  hearty  labour  against  the  lusts  and  love  of  the  world.  But 
this  kind  of  striving  is  but  a  beating  the  air,  and  will  come 
to  nothing  at  last. — (Bunyan's  Strait  Gale,  vol.  i.  p.  366.) 
Coming  souls  will  have  opposition  from  Satan.  He  casts  his 
fiery  darts  at  them ;  wanderings  in  prayer,  enticements  to  old 
sins,  aud  even  blasphemous  thoughts,  assail  the  trembling 
penitent,  when  striving  to  enter  into  the  strait  gate,  to  drive 
him  from  '  the  way  and  the  life.' — (En.) 


THE    FILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


'.'7 


(as  I  did) ;  and  he  said  that  you,  Sir,  would  tell 
me  what  I  must  do. 

Good-will.  An  open  door  is  set  before  thee,  and 
Mk     between    ™  man  can  shut  it. 
Good -will  and        Gnu.    Now   I    beffiu    to    reap    the 

Christian.  ,  _  .  ,  *»  x 

benenta  or  my  hazards. 

Good-will.  But  how  is  it  that  you  came  alone  ? 

Ciir.  Because  none  of  my  neighbours  saw  their 
danger,  as  I  saw  mine. 

Good-will.  Did  any  of  them  know  of  your 
coming  ? 

Chb,  Yes;  my  wife  and  children  saw  me  at  the 
first,  and  called  after  me  to  turn  again  ;  also,  some 
of  my  neighbours  stood  crying  and  calling  after  me 
to  return ;  but  I  put  my  lingers  in  my  cars,  and 
so  came  on  my  way. 

Good-will.  But  did  none  of  them  follow  you,  to 
persuade  you  to  go  back  ? 

Ciir.  Yes,  both  Obstinate  and  Pliable;  but 
when  they  saw  that  they  could  not  prevail,  Ob- 
stinate went  railing  back,  but  Pliable  came  with 
me  a  little  way. 

Good-will.  But  why  did  he  not  come  through  ? 

Ciir.  We,  indeed,  came  both  together,  until  we 

came  at  the  Slough  of  Despond,  into  the  which  we 

also  suddenly  fell.     And  then  was  my 

A  man  mm- have  .    ,  ,  nv    1.1        j-  j  1 

company  when  neighbour,  r  liable,  discouraged,  and 
heeaveen."Unndr  would  not  adventure  further.  Where- 
yet  go  thither   fore,  jrettinsf  out  a°;ain  on  that  side 

alone.  °  ,  .     °  .     °        ,  ,  .  T 

next  to  his  own  house,  he  told  me  1 
should  possess  the  brave  country  alone  for  him ; 
so  he  went  his  way,  and  I  came  mine— he  after 
Obstinate,  and  I  to  this  gate. 

Good-will.  Then  said  Good-will,  Alas,  poor 
man !  is  the  celestial  glory  of  so  small  esteem  with 
him,  that  he  counteth  it  not  worth  running  the 
hazards  of  a  few  difficulties  to  obtain  it  ? 

Chr.  Truly,  said  Christian,  I  have  said  the  truth 
of  Pliable,  and  if  I  should  also  say  all  the  truth  of 
Christian accus-  myself,  it  will  appear  there  is  no 
tSSSA   betterment1  betwixt  him  and  myself. 

the  gate.  Jt    J3    true>  ]ie  wenfc    Dack    to    his   own 

house,  but  I  also  turned  aside  to  go  in  the  way  of 
death,  being  persuaded  thereto  by  the  carnal  argu- 
ments2 of  one  Mr.  Worldly-wiseman. 

Good-will.  Oh !  did  he  light  upon  you  ?  What ! 
he  would  have  had  you  a  sought  for  ease  at  the 
hands  of  Mr.  Legality.  They  are,  both  of  them, 
a  very  cheat.      But  did  you  take  his  counsel  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  as  far  as  I  durst ;  I  went  to  find  out 
Mr.  Legality,  until  I  thought  that  the  mountain 


1  '  No  betterment '  is  an  admirable  expression  of  the 
Christian's  humility — he  set  out  in  company,  but  reached  the 
gate  alone ;  still  it  is  not  unto  me,  but  unto  thy  name  be  all 
the  glory. —  (En.) 

'  '  Carnal  arguments '  is  altered  to  '  carnal  agreement,'  in 
several  of  Mr.  Bunyan's  editions ;  see  third  to  the  ninth. — 
(Ed.) 

VOL.   III. 


that  stands   by  his   house  would  have  fallen  upon 
my  head ;   wherefore,  there  I  was  forced  to  stop. 

Good-will.  That  mountain  has  been  the  death 
of  many,  and  will  be  the  death  of  many  more  ;  it 
is  well  you  escaped  being  by  it  dashed  in  pieces. 

Ciir.  Why,  truly,  I  do  not  know  what  bad 
become  of  me  there,  had  not  Evangelist  happily 
met  me  again,  as  I  was  musing  in  the  midst  of  my 
dumps ;  but  it  was  God's  mercy  that  he  came  to 
me  again,  for  else  I  had  never  come  hither.  But 
now  I  am  come,  such  a  one  as  I  am,  more  fit,  in- 
deed, for  death,  by  that  mountain,  than  thus  to 
stand  talking  with  my  Lord  ;  but,  0!  what  a  favour 
is  this  to  me,  that  yet  I  am  admitted  entrance  here  ! 

Good-will.  We  make  no  objections  against  anv, 
notwithstanding  all  that  they  have  done  before 
they  come  hither.  They  are  •  in  no  christian  com- 
Aviso  cast  out,'  Jn.  vi.  37;  and  therefore,  fortcd as;un- 
good  Christian,  come  a  little  way  with  me,  and  I 
will  teach  thee  about  the  way  thou  must  go.  Look 
before  thee;  dost  thou  see  this  nar-  _.  ...     ,.    , 

.  Christian  direet- 

row  way  i      Iiiat   is   the  way  thou     cd  vet  on  ins 
must  go;  it  was  cast  up  by  the  patri-     "a>- 
archs,  prophets,  Christ,  and  his  apostles ;  and  it 
is  as  straight  as  a  rule  can  make  it.     This  is  the 
way  thou  must  go.3 

Chr.  But,  said  Christian,  are  there    ~  .  ..      ,  .. 

.  '  Christian  afraid 

no  turnings  nor  windings,  by  which  a     of  losing  his 
stranger  may  lose  his  way? 

Good- will.  Yes,  there  are  many  ways  butt  down 
upon  this,  and  they  are  crooked  and  wide.  But 
thus  thou  mayest  distinguish  the  right  from  the 
wrong,  the  right  only  being  straight  and  narrow. 

Mat.  viL  14. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  Christian  asked 
him  further  if  he  could  not  help  him  christian  weary 
off  with  his  burden  that  was  upon  his  ot  ""  burden- 
back  ;  for  as  yet  he  had  not  got  rid  thereof,  nor 
could  he  by  any  mens  get  it  off  without  help. 

He  told  him,  as  to  thy  burden,  be  Thcrcisnodeii- 
content  to  bear  it,  until  thou  comest    vyram-e    from 

gudt   and 

to  the  place  of  deliverance ;  for  there    burden  of  Bin, 
it  will  fall  from  thy  back  of  itself.  and  Wood^of 

Then  Christian  began  to  gird  up  ChrIst- 
his  loins,  and  to  address  himself  to  his  journey. 
So  the  other  told  him,  That  by  that  he  was  gone 
some  distance  from  the  gate,  he  would  come  at 
the  house  of  the  Interpreter  j  at  whose  door  he 
should  knock,  and  he  would  show  him  excellent 


3  Christian,  when  admitted  at  the  strait  gate,  is  directed  in 
the  narrow  way ;  not  in  the  broad  fashionable  religion,  i n 
the  broad  road,  every  man  may  choose  a  path  suited  to  his 
inclinations,  shift  about  to  avoid  difficulties,  or  accommodate 
himself  to  circumstances ;  and  he  may  be  sure  of  company 
agreeable  to  his  taste.  But  Christians  must  follow  one  another 
in  the  narroio  way  on  the  same  track,  faring  enemies,  and 
bearing  hardships,  withwi  attempting  to  erode  them ;  nor  is 
any  indulgence  given  to  different  tastes,  habits,  or  propensi- 
ties.—(Scott.) 

13 


<J8 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


things.  Then  Christian  took  his  leave  of  his 
friend,  and  he  again  bid  him  God-speed. 

Then  he  went  on  till  he  came  at  the  house  of 
Christian  comes   the   Interpreter,1   where  he  knocked 

of   the    Inter-     over    and    0ver »     at    la3t    0ne    Ca™e    t0 

preter.  the  door,  and  asked  who  was  there. 

Chr.  Sir,  here  is  a  traveller,  who  was  bid  by  an 
acquaintance  of  the  good-man  of  this  house  to  call 
here  for  my  profit ;  I  would  therefore  speak  with 
the  master  of  the  house.  So  he  called  for  the 
master  of  the  house,  who,  after  a  little  time,  came 
to  Christian,  and  asked  bim  what  he  would  have. 

Chr.  Sir,  said  Christian,  I  am  a  man  that  am 
come  from  the  City  of  Destruction,  and  am  going 
to  the  Mount  Zion ;  and  I  was  told  by  the  man 
that  stands  at  the  gate,  at  the  head  of  this  way, 
that  if  I  called  here,  you  would  show  me  excellent 
He  is  enter-    things,  such  as  would  be  a  help  to  me 

tamed.         [n  mj  journey.2 

Inter.  Then  said  the  Interpreter,  'Come  in ;  I 
will  show  thee  that  which  will  be  pro- 

Mumination.       ^^  ^  ^       ^  ^  commanded  his 

man  to  light  the  candle,3  and  bid  Christian  follow 
him :  so  he  bad  him  into  a  private  room,  and  bid 
bis  man  open  a  door  ;  the  which  when  he  had  done, 
Christian  sees  a   Christian  saw  the  picture  of  a  very 

grave  picture.  grave  person  hang  up  against  the  wall ; 
The  fashion  of  an(l  ^'ls  was  tne  fashion  of  it.    It  had 

the  picture.  e^es  lifted  up  to  heaven,  the  best  of 
books  in  his  hand,  the  law  of  truth  was  written 
upon  bis  lips,  the  world  was  behind  his  back.  It 
stood  as  if  it  pleaded  with  men,  and  a  crown  of 
gold  did  hang  over  its  head.4 

1  With  great  propriety  Bunyan  places  the  house  of  the  In- 
terpreter beyond  the  strait  gate  ;  for  the  knowledge  of  Divine 
things,  that  precedes  conversion  to  God  by  faith  in  Christ,  is 
very  scanty,  compared  with  the  diligent  Christian's  subsequent 
attainments. — (Scott.) 

2  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  twelve  consecutive  pages  in 
the  English  language,  that  contain  such  volumes  of  meaning, 
in  such  beautiful  aud  instructive  lessons,  with  such  heavenly 
imagery,  in  so  pure  and  sweet  a  style,  and  with  so  thrilling  an 
appeal  to  the  best  affections  of  the  heart,  as  these  pages  de- 
scriptive of  Christian's  sojourning  in  the  house  of  the  Inter- 
preter. This  good-man  of  the  house,  the  Interpreter,  we  are, 
without  doubt,  to  take  as  the  representative  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
with  his  enlightening  and  sanctifying  influences  on  the  heart. 
— (Cheever.)  The  order  in  which  these  heavenly  lessons  are 
taught,  is  worthy  our  admiration. — (Ed.) 

3  As  in  creation,  so  in  conversion,  God's  command  is, '  Let 
there  be  light ;'  it  comes  by  the  Word ;  no  Bible,  no  light. 
God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness  ;  a  blessed  mystery 
to  prove  the  Christian  indeed — light  in  his  mind  at  variance 
with  his  nati\e  darkness. — (Bunyan,  on  Genesis) 

4  The  first  object  presented  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the 
mind  of  a  young  believer,  is  the  choice  of  his  minister ;  not  to 
be  submissive  to  human  orders,  but  to  choose  for  himself.  The 
leading  features  are,  that  he  be  grave,  devotional,  a  lover  of  his 
Bible,  one  who  rejects  error  and  preaches  the  truth ;  uninflu- 
enced by  paltry  pelf  or  worldly  honours;  pleading  patiently  to 
win  souls;  seeking  only  his  Master's  approbation;  souls,  and 
not  money,  for  his  hire;  an  immortal  crown  for  his  reward. 
With  the  laws  of  men  and  friendship  to  mislead  us,  how  essen- 
tial is  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this  important  choice! 


Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  What  meaneth  this? 
Inter.  The  man  whose  picture  this  is,  is  one  of 
a  thousand;  he  can  beget  children,  l  Co.  jv.  15,  travail 
in  birth  with  children,  Oa.  iv.  19,  and  nurse  them 
himself  when  they  are  born.  And  whereas  thou 
seest  him  with  his  eyes  lift  up  to  heaven,  the  best 
of  books  in  his  hand,  and  the  law  of  truth  writ  on 
his  lips,  it  is  to  show  thee,  that  his  work  is  to  know 
and  unfold  dark  things  to  sinners  ;  even  as  also  thou 
seest  him  stand  as  if  he  pleaded  with  men ;  and 
whereas  thou  seest  the  world  as  cast  x^  meaning  of 
behind  him,  and  that  a  crown  hangs  the  picture. 
over  his  head,  that  is  to  show  thee  that  slighting 
and  despising  the  things  that  are  present,  for  the 
love  that  he  hath  to  his  Master's  service,  he  is  sure 
in  the  world  that  comes  next  to  have  glory  for  his 
reward.  Now,  said  the  Interpreter,  I  have  showed 
thee  this  picture  first,  because  the  man  -^  he  showed 
whose  picture  this  is,  is^he  only  man  inm  the  pic- 
whoni  the  Lord  of  the  place  whither 
thou  art  going,  hath  authorized  to  be  thy  guide  in 
all  difficult  places  thou  mayest  meet  with  in  the 
way ;  wherefore,  take  good  heed  to  what  I  have 
showed  thee,  and  bear  well  in  thy  mind  what  thou 
hast  seen,  lest  in  thy  journey  thou  meet  with  some 
that  pretend  to  lead  thee  right,  but  their  way  goes 
down  to  death. 

Then  he  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  into 
a  very  large  parlour  that  was  full  of  dust,  because 
never  swept ;  the  Avhich,  after  he  had  reviewed  a 
little  while,  the  Interpreter  called  for  a  man  to 
sweep.  Now,  when  he  began  to  sweep,  the  dust 
began  so  abundantly  to  fly  about,  that  Christian 
had  almost  therewith  been  choked.  Then  said  the 
Interpreter  to  a  damsel  that  stood  by,  Bring  hither 
the  water,  and  sprinkle  the  room  ;  the  which,  when 
she  had  done,  it  was  swept  and  cleansed  with 
pleasure. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  What  means  this  ? 
Inter.  The  Interpreter  answered,  This  parlour 
is  the  heart  of  a  man  that  was  never  sanctified  by 
the  sweet  grace  of  the  gospel;  the  dust  is  his 
original  sin  and  inward  corruptions,  that  have 
defiled  the  whole  man.  He  that  began  to  sweep  at 
first,  is  the  Law ;  but  she  that  brought  water,  and 
did  sprinkle  it,  is  the  Gospel.  Now,  whereas  thou 
sawest,  that  so  soon  as  the  first  began  to  sweep, 
the  dust  did  so  fly  about  that  the  room  b}r  him 
could  not  be  cleansed,  but  that  thou  wast  almost 
choked  therewith ;  this  is  to  show  thee,  that  the 
law,  instead  of  cleansing  the  heart  (by  its  working) 
from  sin,  doth  revive,  put  strength  into,  and  increase 

— (Ed.)  And  whose  portrait  is  Bunyan  describing  here  ?  We 
think  he  had  only  Mr.  Gifford  in  his  eye  as  a  faithful  minister 
of  Christ ;  but  Bunyan  too  had  been  the  pleader  with  men, 
and  over  his  own  head  the  crown  of  gold  was  shining;  and 
while  he  wrote  these  words,  you  may  be  sure  that  his  spirit 
thrilled  within  him  as  he  said,  And  I  too  am  a  minister  of 
Jesus  Christ. — (Cheever.) 


THE   TILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


it  in  the  soul,  even  as  it  doth  discover  and  forbid 
it,  for  it  doth  not  give  power  to  subdue.1  iu>.  viL  6. 

1  Co.  xv.  56.    lio.  v.  80. 

Again,  as  thou  sawest  the  damsel  sprinkle  the 
room  with  water,  upou  which  it  was  cleansed  with 
pleasure ;  this  is  to  show  thee,  that  when  the  gos- 
pel comes  in  the  sweet  and  precious  influences 
thereof  to  the  heart,  then,  I  say,  even  as  thou 
Bawest  the  damsel  lay  the  dust  by  sprinkling  the 
floor  with  water,  so  is  sin  vanquished  and  subdued, 
and  the  soul  made  clean,  through  the  faith  of  it, 
and    consequently  iit  for    the   King    of  glory  to 

inhabit.  Jn.  xv.  3.  Ep.  v.  26.  Ac.  xv.  0.  Ro.  xvi.  25,  26.  Jn.  xv.  13. 

I  saw,  moreover,  in  my  dream,  that  the  Inter- 

He  slimu.d  hjm   prater  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  had 

Passii  a  and      him  into  a  little  room,  where  sat  two 

little  children,  each  one  in  his  chair. 

The  name  of  the  eldest  was  Passion,  and  the  name 

of  the  other  Patience.     Passion  seemed  to  be  much 

discontented ;   but  Patience  was  very  quiet.    Then 

Christian  asked,  What  is  the  reason  of  the  discon- 

I'assion     will   tent    of   Passion?      The    Interpreter 

Pauw?s°for   answered,    The     Governor    of    them 

waiting.  would   have   him    stay  for   his   best 

things  till  the  beginning  of  the  next  year;  but  he 

will  have  all  now ;    but  patience  is  willing  to  wait. 

Then   I    saw   that   one   came  to  Passion,  and 

Passion  has  his   brought  him  a  bag  of  treasure,  and 

dtsue.         poured  it  down  at  his  feet,  the  which 

he  took  up  and  rejoiced  therein,  and  withal  laughed 

,  ,      ...     Patience  to  scorn.      But  I  beheld  but 

And    quickly 

lavishes  all  a  while,  and  he  had  lavished  all  away, 
and  had  nothing  left  him  but  rags. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  the  Interpreter, 
Expound  this  matter  more  fully  to  me. 

Inter.  So  he  said,  These  two  lads  are  figures : 
The  matter  ex-    Passion,  of  the  men  of  this  world ;  and 

pounded.  patience,  of  the  men  of  that  which  is 
to  come;  for,  as  here  thou  seest,  Passion  will 
have  all  now  this  year,  that  is  to  say,  in  this 
world ;  so  are  the  men  of  this  world :  they  must 


have  all  their  good  things  now,  they  cannot  stay 
till  next  year,  that  is,  until  the  next  world, for  their 
portion  of  good.  That  proverb,  '  A  ^  w 
bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  manforabimi 
bush,'  is  of  more  authority  with  them 
than  are  all  the  Divine  testimonies  of  the  good  of 
the  world  to  come.  But  as  thou  sawest  that  he 
had  quickly  lavished  all  away,  and  had  presently 
left  him  nothing  but  rags ;  so  will  it  be  with  all 
such  men  at  the  end  of  this  world. " 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  Now  I  see  that 
Patience  has  the  best  wisdom,  and  patieucehasthe 
that  upon  many  accounts.  First,  Be-  beblu 
cause  he  stays  for  the  best  things.  Second,  And 
also  because  he  will  have  the  glory  of  his,  when 
the  other  has  nothing  but  rags. 

Inter.  Nay,  you  may  add  another,  to  wit,  the 
glory  of  the  next  world  will  never  wear  out ;  but 
these  are  suddenly  gone.  Therefore  Passion  had 
not  so  much  reason  to  laugh  at  Patience,  because 
be  had  his  good  things  first,  as  Patience  will  have 
to  laugh  at  Passion,  because  he  had  his  best  things 
last;  for  first  must  give  place  to  last,  Things  th;it  .„,, 
because  last  must  have  his  time  to  [^""^f c 
come  ;  but  last  o-ives  place  to  nothing ;  things  that  are 
for  there  is  not  another  to  succeed. 
He,  therefore,  that  hath  his  portion  first,  must 
needs  have  a  time  to  spend  it ;  but  he  that  hath 
his  portion  last,  must  have  it  lastingly;  therefore 
it  is  said  of  Dives,  'Thou  in  thy  life-  Dives  hadhis  good 
time  receivedst  thy  good  things,  and  lUms*  Urst- 
likewise  Lazarus  evil  things ;  but  now  he  is  com- 
forted, and  thou  art  tormented.'  Lu.  xvi.  25. 

Chr.  Then  I  perceive  it  is  not  best  to  covet 
things  that  are  now,  but  to  wait  for  things  to 
come. 

Inter.  You  say  the  truth:  'For  the  things 
which  are  seen  are  temporal;  but  the  n,e  first  things 
things  which  are  not  seen  are  eter- 


1  Christian  well  knew  this  in  bis  own  deep  experience ;  for 
the  burden  of  sin  was  on  him  still,  and  sorely  did  be  feel  it 
while  the  Interpreter  was  making  this  explanation ;  and  had 
it  not  been  for  bis  remembrance  of  the  warning  of  the  man 
at  the  gate,  he  would  certainly  have  besought  the  Interpreter 
to  take  off  his  burden.  The  law  coidd  not  take  it  off;  he  had 
tried  that;  and  grace  had  not  yet  removed  it;  so  he  was 
forced  to  be  quiet,  and  to  wait  patiently.  But  when  the 
damsel  came  and  sprinkled  the  floor,  and  laid  the  dust,  and 
then  the  parlour  was  swept  so  easily,  there  were  the  sweet 
influences  of  the  gospel  imaged;  there  was  Divine  grace  distil- 
ling as  the  dew ;  there  was  the  gentle  voice  of  Christ  hushing 
the  storm  ;  there  were  the  corruptions  of  the  heart,  which  the 
law  had  but  roused  into  action,  yielding  under  the  power  of 
Christ ;  and  there  was  the  soul  made  clean,  and  lit  for  the 
King  of  glory  to  inhabit.  Indeed,  this  was  a  most  instructive 
emblem.  0  that  my  heart  might  be  thus  cleansed,  thought 
Christian,  and  thin  I  verily  believe  I  could  bear  my  burden 
with  great  ease  to  the  end  of  my  pilgrimage  ;  but  1  have  had 
enough  of  that  tierce  sweeper,  the  Law.  The  Lord  deliver  me 
from  his  besom  ! — (Cheever.) 


arc  but  temporal. 

nal.'  2  Co.  iv.  is.  But  though  this  be  so,  yet  since 
things  present,  and  our  fleshly  appetite,  are  such 
near  neighbours  one  to  another;  and  again,  be- 
cause things  to  come,  and  carnal  sense,  are  such 
strangers  one  to  another ;  therefore  it  is  that  the 
first  of  these  so  suddenly  fall  into  amity,  and  that 
distance  is  so  continued  between  the  second. 
Then  I  saw  in  my  dream  that  the  Interpreter 
i  took  Christian  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  into   a 


2  This  was  a  vivid  and  striking  emblem,  and  one  which,  in 
its  general  meaning,  a  child  could  understand.  Passion  stands 
for  the  men  of  this  world,  Patience  of  that  which  is  to  come  ; 
Passion  for  those  who  will  have  all  their  good  things  now. 
Patience  for  those  who  are  willing,  with  self-denial,  to  wa. 
for  something  better;  Passion  for  those  who  are  absorb  dm 
temporal  trifles,  Patience  for  those  whose  hearts  are  1.x  upon 
eternal  realities;  Pas-io„  the  a^^"V5£l£l 
impatient  eagerness  with  which  they  are  followed,  Patana  the 
SS  SffS  unseen,  and  the  faith,  hujmh.v,  and  tofo* 
to  the  world  exercised  in  order  to  enjoy  them.  It  IB  a  good 
commentary  upon  Ps.  lniti  — (CI 


100 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


place  where  was  a  fire  burning  against  a  wall,  and 
one  standing  by  it,  always  casting  much  water  upon 
it,  to  quench  it ;  yet  did  the  fire  burn  higher  and 
hotter. 

Then  said  Christian,  Wbat  means  this  ? 

The  Interpreter  answered,  This  fire  is  tbe  work 
of  grace  that  is  wrought  in  the  heart ;  he  that 
casts  water  upon  it,  to  extinguish  and  put  it  out, 
is  the  Devil;  but  in  that  thou  seest  the  fire  not- 
withstanding burn  higher  and  hotter,  thou  shalt 
also  see  the  reason  of  that.  So  he  had  him  about 
to  the  backside  of  the  wall,  where  he  saw  a  man 
with  a  vessel  of  oil  in  his  hand,  of  the  which  he 
did  also  continually  cast,  but  secretly,  into  the  fire.1 

Then  said  Christian,  What  means  this  ? 

The  Interpreter  answered,  This  is  Christ,  who 
continually,  with  the  oil  of  his  grace,  maintains 
the  work  already  begun  in  the  heart:  by  the  means 
of  which,  notwithstanding  what  the  devil  can  do, 
the  souls  of  his  people  prove  gracious  still.  2Co.xh\9. 
And  in  that  thou  sawest  that  the  man  stood  be- 
hind the  wall  to  maintain  the  fire,  that  is  to  teach 
thee  that  it  is  hard  for  the  tempted  to  see  how 
this  work  of  grace  is  maintained  in  the  soul. 

I  saw  also,  that  the  Interpreter  took  him  again 
by  the  hand,  and  led  him  into  a  pleasant  place, 
where  was  buikled  a  stately  palace,  beautiful  to 
behold  ;  at  the  sight  of  which  Christian  was  greatly 
delighted ;  he  saw  also,  upon  the  top  thereof,  cer- 
tain persons  walking,  who  Avere  clothed  all  in  gold. 

Then  said  Christian,  May  we  go  in  thither  ? 

Then  the  Interpreter  took  him,  and  led  him  up 
towards  the  door  of  the  palace ;  and  behold,  at  the 
door  stood  a  great  company  of  men,  as  desirous  to 
go  in,  but  durst  not.  There  also  sat  a  man  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  door,  at  a  table-side,  with 
a  book  and  his  inkhorn  before  him,  to  take  the 
name  of  him  that  should  enter  therein;  he  saw 
also,  that  in  the  doorway  stood  many  men  in 
armour  to  keep  it,  being  resolved  to  do  the  men 
that  would  enter  what  hurt  and  mischief  they 
could.     Now  was  Christian  somewhat  in  amaze. 


1  This  instructive  vision  springs  from  the  author's  painful, 
but  blessed  experience.  The  flame  of  love  in  a  Christian's 
heart,  is  like  the  fire  of  despair  in  Satan's  spirit — unquench- 
able. Before  Eunyan  had  been  behind  the  wall,  the  tempter 
suggested  to  him — 'You  are  very  hot  for  mercy,  but  I  will 
cool  you,  though  I  be  seven  years  in  chilling  your  heart,  I  can 
do  it  at  last;  I  will  have  you  cold  before  long.' — {Grace  Abound- 
ing, No.  110.)  He  is  the  father  of  lies.  Thus  he  said  to 
Christian  in  the  fight,  '  Here  will  I  spill  thy  soul;'  instead  of 
V  hich,  Apollyon  was  put  to  flight. 

We  cannot  fail  with  such  a  prop, 
That  bears  the  earth's  huge  pillars  up. 

Satan's  water  can  never  be  so  powerful  to  quench,  as  Christ's 
oil  and  grace  are  to  keep  the  fire  burning.  Sinner,  believe  this, 
and  love,  praise,  and  rejoice  in  thy  Lord.  He  loves  with  an 
everlasting  love ;  he  saves  with  an  everlasting  salvation  ;  with- 
out his  perpetual  aid,  we  should  perish ;  Christ  is  the  Alpha 
and  Omega  of  our  safety  ;  but  how  mysterious  is  the  saint's 
perseverance  until  we  have  seen  the  secret  supply  ! — (Ed.) 


At  last,  when  every  man  started  back  for  fear  of 
the  armed  men,  Christian  saw  a  man 

„  .  The  valiant  man. 

ot  a  very  stout  countenance  come  up 
to  the  man  that  sat  there  to  write,  saying,  '  Set 
down  my  name,  Sir:'2  the  which  when  he  had 
done,  he  saw  the  man  draw  his  sword,  and  put  an 
helmet  upon  his  head,  and  rush  toward  the  door 
upon  the  armed  men,  who  laid  upon  him  with  deadly 
force:  but  the  man,  not  at  all  discouraged,  fell  to 
cutting  and  hacking  most  fiercely.  So  after  he 
had  received  and  given  many  wounds  to  those  that 
attempted  to  keep  him  out,  he  cut  his  way  through 
them  all,  Ac.  xiv.  22,  and  pressed  forward  into  the 
palace,  at  which  there  was  a  pleasant  voice  heard 
from  those  that  were  within,  even  of  those  that 
walked  upon  the  top  of  the  palace,  saying — 

'  Come  in,  come  in ; 
Eternal  glory  thou  shalt  win.' 

So  he  went  in,  and  was  clothed  with  such  gar- 
ments as  they.  Then  Christian  smiled  and  said, 
I  think  verily  I  know  the  meaning  of  this.3 

Now,  said  Christian,  let  me  go  hence.  Nay, 
stay,  said  the  Interpreter,  till  I  have  showed  thee 
a  little  more,  and  after  that  thou  shalt  go  on  thy 
way.  So  he  took  him  by  the  hand  again,  and  led 
him  into  a  very  dark  room,  where  there  Despair  like  an 
sat  a  man  in  an  iron  cage.  uon  cage- 

Now  the  man,  to  look  on,  seemed  very  sad ;  he 
sat  with  his  eyes  looking  down  to  the  ground,  his 
hands  folded  together,  and  he  sighed  as  if  he 
would  break  his  heart.  Then  said  Christian, 
What  means  this  ?  At  which  the  Interpreter  bid 
him  talk  with  the  man. 

Then  said  Christian  to  the  man,  What  art  thou  ? 
The  man  answered,  I  am  what  I  was  not  once. 

Chr.  What  wast  thou  once  ? 

Man.  The  man  said,  I  was  once  a  fair  and 
flourishing  professor,  both  in  mine  own  eyes,  and 
also  in  the  eyes  of  others ;  I  once  was,  as  I 
thought,  fair  for  the  Celestial  City,  and  had  then 
even  joy  at  the  thoughts  that  I  should  get  thither. 

Lu.  viii.  13. 

Chr.   Well,  but  what  art  thou  now  ? 


2  For  a  man  to  fight  his  way  through  infernal  enemies,  is 
in  every  age  a  fearful  battle ;  but  in  addition  to  this,  to  enter 
his  name  as  a  nonconformist  in  Bunyan's  time,  demanded 
intrepidity  of  no  ordinary  degree;  their  enemies  were  the 
throne,  the  laws,  and  the  bishops,  armed  with  malignity  against 
these  followers  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  there  were  noble  spirits, 
'  of  very  stout  countenance,'  that  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  cut 
their  way  through  all  opposition.  Bunyau  was  one  of  these 
worthies. — (Ivimey.) 

3  Verily  thou  didst,  noble  Christian !  And  who  is  there 
that  does  not  know  the  meaning  of  it,  and  what  heart  so  cold 
as  not  to  be  ravished  by  it !  Yea,  we  should  think  that  this 
passage  alone  might  set  any  man  out  on  this  pilgrimage,  might 
bring  many  a  careless  traveller  up  to  the  gate  of  this  glorious 
palace  to  say,  Set  down  my  name,  Sir  1  How  full  of  instruc- 
tion is  this  passage  I  It  set  Christian's  own  heart  on  fire  to 
run  forward  on  his  journey,  although  the  battle  was  before  him. 
— (Cheever.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


101 


Man.  I  am  now  a  man  of  despair,  and  am  shut 
up  in  it,  as  in  this  iron  cage.     I  cannot  get  out. 

0  now  1  cannot ! 

Chr.   But  how  earnest  thou  in  this  condition  ? 

Man.  I  left  off  to  watch  and  he  soher ;  I  laid 
the  reins  upon  the  neck  of  my  lusts  ;  I  sinned 
against  the  light  of  the  Word,  and  the  goodness 
of  God ;  I  have  grieved  the  Spirit,  and  he  is 
gone;   I  tempted  the  devil,  and  he  is  come  to  me ; 

1  have  provoked  God  to  anger,  and  he  has  left 
me;  I  have  so  hardened  my  heart,  that  1  cannot 
repent. 

Then  said  Christian  to  the  Interpreter,  But  is 
there  no  hope  for  such  a  man  as  this  ?  Ask  him, 
said  the  Interpreter.  Nay,  said  Christian,  pray 
Sir,  do  you. 

Inter.  Then  said  the  Interpreter,  Is  there  no 
hope,  hut  you  must  be  kept  in  the  iron  cage  of 
despair  ? 

Man.  No,  none  at  all. 

Inter.  Why,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  is  very 
pitiful. 

Man.  I  have  crucified  him  to  myself  afresh, 
He.  vi.  g  ;  I  have  despised  his  person,  Lu.  xix.  14 ;  I 
have  despised  his  righteousness ;  I  have  '  counted 
his  blood  an  unholy  thing;'  I  have  '  done  despite 
to  the  Spirit  of  grace. '  He.  x.  28,  29.  Therefore  I 
have  shut  myself  out  of  all  the  promises,  and 
there  now  remains  to  me  nothing  but  threatenings, 
dreadful  threatenings,  fearful  threatenings  of  cer- 
tain judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall 
devour  me  as  an  adversary.1 

Inter.  For  what  did  you  bring  yourself  into 
this  condition  ? 

Man.  For  the  lusts,  pleasures,  and  profits  of 
this  world ;  in  the  enjoyment  of  which  I  did  then 
promise  myself  much  delight ;  but  now  every  one 
of  those  things  also  bite  me,  and  gnaw  me  like  a 
burning  worm. 

Inter.  But  canst  thou  not  now  repent  and 
turn  ? 

Man.  God  hath  denied  me  repentance.  His 
Word  gives  me  no  encouragement  to  believe;  yea, 
himself  hath  shut  me  up  in  this  iron  cage ;  nor 
can  all  the  men  in  the  world  let  me  out.  0  eter- 
nity !  eternity !  how  shall  I  grapple  with  the 
misery  that  I  must  meet  with  in  eternity  ! 

Inter.  Then  said  the  Interpreter  to  Christian, 
Let  this  man's  misery  be  remembered  by  thee, 
and  be  an  everlasting  caution  to  thee.2 


1  All  these  deeply  interesting  pictures  are  intended  for 
every  age  and  every  clime.  This  iron  cage  of  despair  has  ever 
skm  up  its  victims.  Many  have  supposed  that  it  had  a  special 
reference  to  one  John  Child,  who,  under  the  fear  of  persecution, 
abandoned  his  profession,  and,  in  frightful  desperation,  miser- 
ably perished  by  his  own  hand.  See  Introd.  p.  ?o  ;  see  also 
the  sickness  and  death  of  Mr.  Badman's  brother. —  (Ed.) 

2  Bunyan  intended  not  to  represent  this  man  as  actually 
beyond  the  reach  of  mercy,  but  to  show  the  dreadful  conse- 


Ciir.  Well,  said  Christian,  this  is  fearful!  God 
help  me  to  watch  and  be  sober,  and  to  pray  that 

1  may  shun  the  cause  of  this  man's  misery  !3  Sir, 
is  it  not  time  for  me  to  go  on  my  way  now  ?4 

Inter.  Tarry  till  I  shall  show  thee  one  thing 
more,  and  then  thou  shalt  go  on  thy  way. 

So  he  took  Christian  by  the  hand  again,  and  led 
him  into  a  chamber,  where  there  was  one  rising 
oul  of  bed;  and  as  he  put  on  his  raiment,  he  shook 
and  trembled.  Then  said  Christian,  Why  doth 
this  man  thus  tremble  ?  The  Interpreter  then  bid 
him  tell  to  Christian  the  reason  of  his  so  doing. 
So  he  began  and  said,  This  night,  as  I  was  in  my 
sleep,  I  dreamed,  and  behold  the  heavens  grew 
exceeding  black ;  also  it  thundered  and  lightened 
in  most  fearful  wise,  that  it  put  me  into  an  agony; 
so  I  looked  up  in  my  dream,  and  saw  the  clouds 
rack5  at  an  unusual  rate,  upon  which  I  heard  a 
great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  saw  also  a  man  sit 
upon  a  cloud,  attended  with  the  thousands  of  hea- 
ven; they  were  all  in  flaming  fire:  also  the  heavens 
were  in  a  burning  flame.  I  heard  then  a  voice 
saying,  'Arise,  ye  dead,  and  come  to  judgment;' 
and  with  that  the  rocks  rent,  the  graves  opened, 
and  the  dead  that  were  therein  came  forth.  Some 
of  them  were  exceeding  glad,  and  looked  upward ; 
and  some  sought   to  hide   themselves  under  the 

mountains.     1  Co.  xv.  52.    1  Th.  iv.  1C.    Jude  14.    Jn.  v.  28,  29 

2  Th.  i.  7,  8.  Re.  xx.  11-14.  Is.  xxvi.  21.  ML  vii.  16, 17.  Ps.  xcv.  1-3. 

Da.  vii.  io.  Then  I  saw  the  man  that  sat  upon  the 
cloud  open  the  book,  and  bid  the  world  draw  near. 
Yet  there  was,  by  reason  of  a  fierce  flame  which 
issued  out  and  came  from  before  him,  a  convenient 
distance  betwixt  him  and  them,  as  betwixt  the 
judge  and  the  prisoners  at  the  bar.  Mai.  hi.  2,  3.  Da. 
■rii.  o,  io.  I  heard  it  also  proclaimed  to  them  that 
attended  on  the  man  that  sat  on  the  cloud,  '  Gather 
together  the  tares,  the  chaff,  and  stubhle,  and  cast 
them  into  the  burning  lake.'  Mat.  iii.12;  xiii.  30.  Mai. 
iv.  l.  And  with  that,  the  bottomless  pit  opened, 
just  whereahout  I  stood;  out  of  the  mouth  of 
which  there  came,  in  an  abundant  manner,  smoke 
and  coals  of  fire,  with  hideous  noises.  It  was 
also  said  to  the  same  persons,  '  Gather  my  wheat 
into  the  garner. '  Lu.  m.  n.     And  with  that  I  saw 


quences  of  departing  from  God,  and  of  being  abandoned  of 
him  to  the  misery  of  unbelief  and  despair. — (Cheever.) 

3  '  An  everlasting  caution ' — '  God  help  me  to  watch.'  The 
battle  with  Apollyon,  the  dread  valley,  the  trying  scene  at 
Vanity  hair,  the  exhilarating  victory  over  By-ends  and  Demas, 
dissipated  the  painful  scene  of  the  iron  cage ;  and  want  of 
prayerful  caution  led  Christian  into  the  dominion  of  Despair, 
and  he  became  for  a  season  the  victim  shut  up  in  this 

ful  ca°;e.  Reader,  may  we  be  ever  found  '  looking  unto  Jesus,' 
then  shall  we  be  kept  from  Doubting  Castle  aud  the  iron  cage. 
—(Ed.)  .  . 

4  In  the  midst  of  these  heavenly  instructions,  why  in  such 
haste  to  go  ?  Alas !  the  burden  of  sin  upon  his  back  pressed 
him  on  to  seek  deliverance. — (Ed.) 

6  'Rack;'  driven  violently  by  the  wind.— (Ed.) 


102 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


many  catched  up  and  carried  away  into  the  clouds, 
but  I  was  left  behind.  1  Th.  iv,  16, 17.  I  also  sought 
to  hide  myself,  but  I  could  not,  for  the  man  that 
sat  upon  the  cloud  still  kept  his  eye  upon  me:  my 
sins  also  came  into  my  mind ;  and  my  conscience 
did  accuse  me  on  every  side.  Ro.  u.  14, 15.  Upon 
this  I  awaked  from  my  sleep. 

Chr.  But  what  was  it  that  made  you  so  afraid 
of  this  sight  ? 

Man.  Why,  I  thought  that  the  day  of  judgment 
was  come,  and  that  I  was  not  ready  for  it:  but 
this  frighted  me  most,  that  the  angels  gathered 
up  several,  and  left  me  behind ;  also  the  pit  of 
hell  opened  her  mouth  just  where  I  stood.  My 
conscience,  too,  afflicted  me;  and,  as  I  thought, 
the  Judge  had  always  his  eye  upon  me,  showing- 
indignation  in  his  countenance.1 

Then  said  the  Interpreter  to  Christian,  Hast 
thou  considered  all  these  things  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  and  they  put  me  in  hope  and  fear.2 

Inter.  Well,  keep  all  things  so  in  thy  mind 
that  they  may  be  as  a  goad  in  thy  sides,  to  prick 
thee  forward  in  the  way  thou  must  go.     Then 


1  We  go  about  the  world  in  the  day-time,  and  are  absorbed 
in  earthly  schemes ;  the  world  is  as  bright  as  a  rainbow,  and 
it  bears  for  us  no  marks  or  predictions  ot  the  judgment,  or  of 
our  sins;  and  conscience  is  retired,  as  it  were,  within  a  far 
inner  circle  of  the  soul.  But  when  it  comes  night,  and  the 
pall  of  sleep  is  drawn  over  the  senses,  then  conscience  comes 
out  solemnly,  and  walks  about  in  the  silent  chambers  of  the 
soul,  and  makes  her  survey  and  her  comments,  and  sometimes 
sits  down  and  sternly  reads  the  record  of  a  life  that  the  waking 
man  would  never  look  into,  and  the  catalogue  of  crimes  that 
are  gathering  for  the  judgment.  Imagination  walks  trem- 
blingly behind  her,  and  they  pass  through  the  open  gate  of  the 
Scriptures  into  the  eternal  world — for  thither  all  things  in 
man's  being  naturally  and  irresistibly  tend  ; — and  there,  imagi- 
nation draws  the  judgment,  the  soul  is  presented  at  the  bar  of 
God,  and  the  eye  of  the  Judge  is  on  it,  and  a  hand  of  fire  writes, 
'  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  found  wanting  !'  Our 
dreams  sometimes  reveal  our  character,  our  sins,  our  destinies, 
more  clearly  than  our  waking  thoughts  ;  for  by  day  the  ener- 
gies of  our  being  are  turned  into  artificial  channels,  by  night 
our  thoughts  follow  the  bent  that  is  most  natural  to  them ; 
and  as  man  is  both  an  immortal  and  a  sinful  being,  the  conse- 
quences both  of  his  immortality  and  his  sinfulness  will  some- 
times be  made  to  stand  out  in  overpowering  light,  when  the 
busy  pursuits  of  day  are  not  able  to  turn  the  soul  from  wan- 
dering towards  eternity. — (Cheever.)  Bunyan  profited  much 
by  dreams  and  visions.  '  Even  in  my  childhood  the  Lord  did 
scare  and  affright  me  with  fearful  dreams,  and  did  terrify  me 
with  dreadful  visions.'  That  is  a  striking  vision  of  church- 
fellowship  in  the  Grace  Abounding,  Kos.  53 — 56;  aud  an 
awful  dream  is  narrated  in  the  Greatness  of  the  Soul — '  Once 
I  dreamed  that  I  saw  two  persons,  whom  I  knew,  in  hell ; 
and  methought  I  saw  a  continual  dropping  from  heaven,  as  of 
great  drops  of  fire  lighting  upon  them,  to  their  sore  distress,' 
vol.  i.  p.  L48.— (Ed.) 

2  Our  safety  consists  in  a  due  proportion  of  hope  and  fear. 
When  devoid  of  hope,  we  resemble  a  ship  without  an  anchor ; 
when  unrestrained  by  ftar,  we  are  like  the  same  vessel  under 
full  sail  without  ballast.  True  comfort  is  the  effect  of  watch- 
fulness, diligence,  and  circumspection.  What  lessons  could 
possibly  have  been  selected  of  greater  importance,  or  more 
suited  to  estabhsh  the  new  convert,  than  these  are  which  our 
author  has  most  ingeniously  and  agreeably  inculcated,  under 
the  emblem  of  the  Interpreter's  curiosities  ? — (Scott.) 


Christian  began  to  gird  up  his  loins,  aud  to  address 
himself  to  his  journey.  Then  said  the  Interpreter, 
The  Comforter  be  always  with  thee,  good  Chris- 
tian, to  guide  thee  in  the  way  that  leads  to  the 
City.     So  Christian  went  on  his  way,  saying — 

1  Here  I  have  seen  things  rare  and  profitable ; 
Things  pleasant,  dreadful,  things  to  make  me  stable 
In  what  I  have  begun  to  take  in  haud  j 
Then  let  me  think  on  them,  and  understand 
Wherefore  they  showed  me  were,  and  let  me  be 
Thankful,  0  good  Interpreter,  to  thee.' 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  the  highway  up 
which  Christian  was  to  go,  was  fenced  on  either 
side  with  a  wall,  and  that  wall  was  called  Salva- 
tion, is.  xxvi.  i.  Up  this  way,  therefore,  did  bur- 
dened Christian  run,  but  not  without  great  diffi- 
culty, because  of  the  load  on  his  back.3 

He  ran  thus  till  he  came  at  a  place  somewhat 
ascending,  and  upon  that  place  stood  a  cross,  and 
a  little  below,  in  the  bottom,  a  sepulchre.  So  I 
saw  in  my  dream,  that  just  as  Christian  came  up 
with  the  cross,  his  burden  loosed  from  off  his 
shoulders,  and  fell  from  off  his  back,  and  began  to 
tumble,  and  so  continued  to  do,  till  it  came  to  the 
mouth  of  the  sepulchre,  where  it  fell  in,  and  I  saw 
it  no  more. 

Then  was  Christian  glad  and  lightsome,  and 
said,  with  a  merry  heart,  '  He  hath  men  God  r6> 
given  me  rest  by  his  sorrow,  and  life     leas;f  «'  owe 

°  J  guilt  aud  burnVn, 

by  his  death.  Then  he  stood  still  we  are  as  those 
awhile  to  look  and  wonder;  for  it  was  eap  or,,oy' 

very  surprising  to  him,  that  the  sight  of  the  cross 
should  thus  ease  him  of  his  burden.  He  looked, 
therefore,  and  looked  again,  even  till  the  springs 
that  were  in  his  head  sent  the  waters  down  his 
cheeks.  Zee.  xii.  io. *  Now,  as  he  stood  looking  and 
weeping,  behold  three  Shining  Ones  came  to  him 
and  saluted  him  with  '  Peace  be  to  thee.'  So  the 
first  said  to  him,  '  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,' 
Mar.  u.  5 ;  the  second  stripped  him  of  his  rags,  and 
clothed  him  'with  change  of  raiment,'  Zee.  m.  4; 
the  third  also  set  a  mark  in  his  forehead,  and 
gave  him  a  roll  with  a  seal  upon  it,  which  he  bade 
him  look  on  as  he  ran,  and  that  he  should  give  it 


8  This  is  an  important  lesson,  that  a  person  may  be  in 
Christ  and  yet  have  a  deep  sense  of  the  burden  of  sin  upon 
the  soul. — (Cheever.)  So  also  Bunyan — 'Every  height  is 
a  difficulty  to  him  that  is  loaden  ;  with  a  burden,  how  shall 
we  attain  the  heaven  of  heavens?' — {Knowledge  of  Christ's 
Love.) 

4  This  efficacious  sight  of  the  cross  is  thus  narrated  in 
Grace  Abounding,  No.  115  : — 'Travelling  in  the  country,  and 
musing  on  the  wickedness  and  blasphemy  of  my  heart,  that 
scripture  came  in  my  mind — "  Having  made  peace  through  the 
blood  of  his  cross."  Col.  i.  20.  I  saw  that  day  again  and  again, 
that  God  and  my  soul  were  friends  by  his  blood;  yea, that  the 
justice  of  God  and  my  soul  could  embrace  and  kiss  each  other. 
Tins  was  a  good  day  to  me ;  I  hope  I  shall  not  forget  it.' 
He  was  glad  and  lightsome,  and  had  a  merry  heart ;  he  was 
before  inspired  with  hope,  but  now  he  is  a  happy  believer. — 
(En.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


103 


in  at  the  Celestial  Gate.  Ep.  i.  13.1  So  they  went 
their  way.  Then  Christian  gave  three  leaps  for 
joy,  and  went  on  singing — 


A  Christian  can 
sing  though 
alone,    when 

God  doth  give 
him  the  joy  of 
his  heart. 


:  Thus  far  I  did  come  laden  with  my  sin ; 
Nor  could  aught  ease  the  grief  that  I  was  in 
Till  I  came  hither :  What  a  place  is  this ! 
Must  here  he  the  beginning  of  my  bliss? 
Must  here  the  burden  fall  from  off  my  back? 
Must  here  the  strings  that  bound  it  to  me  crack? 
Blest  cross !  blest  sepulchre  1  blest  rather  be 
The  man  that  there  was  put  to  shame  for  me!'2 

I  saw  then  in  my  dream,  that  he  went  on  thus, 
even  until  he  came  at  a  bottom,  where  he  saw,  a 
little  out  of  the  way,  three  men  fast  asleep,  with 
fetters  upon  their  heels.  The  name  of  the  one  was 
Simple,  Sloth,  and  Simple,  another  Sloth,  and  the  third 

Presumption.       Presumption. 

Christian  then  seeing  them  lie  in  this  case,  went 
to  them,  if  perad venture  he  might  awake  them, 
and  cried,  You  are  like  them  that  sleep  on  the  top 
of  a  mast,  for  the  Dead  Sea  is  under  you — a  gulf 
that  hath  no  bottom.  Pr.  xxm.  34.  Awake,  there- 
fore, and  come  away ;  be  willing  also,  and  I  will 
help  you  off  with  your  irons.  He  also  told  them, 
If  he  that  '  goeth  about  like  a  roaring  lion  '  comes 
by,  you  will  certainly  become  a  prey  to  his  teeth. 
1  Pe.  v.  8.  With  that  they  looked  upon  him,  and 
began  to  reply  in  this  sort :  Simple  said,  '  I  see 
There  is  no  per-  no  danger;'  Sloth  said,  '  Yet  a  little 
ifGod'openeth  more  sleep;'  and  Presumption  said, 
not  the  eyes.      «  Every  fat3  must  stand  upon  its  own 


1  None  but  those  who  have  felt  such  bliss,  can  imagine  the 
joy  with  which  this  heavenly  visitation  fills  the  soul.  The 
Father  receives  the  poor  penitent  with,  '  Thy  sins  be  forgiven 
thee.'  The  Son  clothes  him  with  a  spotless  righteousness. 
'  The  prodigal  when  he  returned  to  his  father  was  clothed  with 
rags ;  but  the  best  robe  is  brought  out,  also  the  gold  ring  and 
the  shoes ;  yea,  they  are  put  upon  him  to  his  rejoicing.' — 
{Come  and  Welcome,vol.  i.p.  265.)  The  Holy  Spirit  gives  him 
a  certificate;  thus  described  by  Bunyan  in  the  Rouse  of 
God:— 

'  But  bring  with  thee  a  certificate, 
To  show  thou  seest  thyself  most  desolate; 
Writ  by  the  master,  with  repentance  seal'd;  > 
To  show  also,  that  here  thou  wonld'st  be  healed 
By  those  fair  leaves  of  that  most  blessed  tree 
By  which  alone  poor  sinners  healed  be :  2 
And  that  thou  dost  abhor  thee  for  thy  ways, 
And  would'st  in  holiness  spend  all  thy  days ;  3 
And  here  be  entertained;  or  thou  wilt  find 
To  entertain  thee  here  are  none  inclined.' 

Vol.  ii.  p.  580. 

Such  a  certificate,  written  upon  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spiiit, 
may  be  lost  for  a  season,  as  in  the  arbour  on  the  hill,  but  can- 
not be  stolen  even  by  Taint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt.  For 
the  mark  in  his  forehead,  see  2  Co.  iii.  2,  3 ;  '  not  with  ink, 
but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  known  and  read  of  all 
men.' — (Ed.) 

2  He  that  has  come  to  Christ,  has  cast  his  burden  upon  him. 
By  faith  he  hath  seen  himself  released  thereof;  but  he  that  is 
but  coming,  hath  it  yet,  as  to  sense  and  feeling,  upon  his  own 
shoulders. — {Come  and  Welcome,  vol.  i.  p.  264.) 

3  '  Fat;'  a  vessel  in  which  things  are  put  to  be  soaked,  or 
to  ferment ;  a  vat. — (Ed.) 

1  Ac.  ix.  26,  27.        2  Re.  xxi.  27.        3  He.  xxii.  14,  15.    See  also 
1  Eph.  i.  13.  2  Re.  raii.  2.        s  Job  xlii  6.  Tit.  ii  12—14. 


bottom;  what  is  the  answer  else  that  I  should 
give  thee  V  And  so  they  lay  down  to  sleep  again, 
and  Christian  went  on  his  way. 

Yet  was  he  troubled  to  think  that  men  in  that 
danger  should  so  little  esteem  the  kindness  of  him 
that  so  freely  offered  to  help  them,  both  by  awak- 
ening of  them,  counselling  of  them,  and  proffering 
to  help  them  off  with  their  irons.4  And  as  he  was 
troubled  thereabout,  he  espied  two  men  come 
tumbling  over  the  wall,  on  the  left  hand  of  the 
narrow  way ;  and  they  made  up  apace  to  him. 
The  name  of  the  one  was  Formalist,  and  the  name 
of  the  other  Hypocrisy.  So,  as  I  said,  they  drew 
up  unto  him,  who  thus  entered  with  christian  talked 
them  into  discourse.  Wltli  thcm- 

Chr.  Gentlemen,  whence  came  you,  and  whither 
go  you  ? 

Form,  and  Hyp.  We  were  born  in  the  land  of 
Vain-glory,  and  are  going  for  praise  to  Mount 
Sion. 

Chr.  Why  came  you  not  in  at  the  gate,  which 
standeth  at  the  beginning  of  the  way  ?  Know  you 
not  that  it  is  written,  that  he  that  cometh  not  in 
by  the  door,  '  but  cliinbeth  up  some  other  way, 
the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  robber  ? '  Jn.  x.  1. 

Form,  and  Hyp.  They  said,  That  to  go  to  the 
gate  for  entrance  was,  by  all  their  countrymen, 
counted  too  far  about ;  and  that,  therefore,  their 
usual  way  was  to  make  a  short  cut  of  it,  and  to 
climb  over  the  wall,  as  they  had  done. 

Chr.  But  will  it  not  be  counted  a  trespass  against 
the  Lord  of  the  city  whither  we  are  bound,  thus  to 
violate  his  revealed  will  ? 

Form,  and  Hyp.  They  told  him,  that,  as  for 
that,  he  needed  not  to  trouble  his  They  that  come 
head  thereabout;  for  what  they  did,  butnotbytffe 
they  had  custom  for ;  and  could  pro-     floor.ttinkthat 

J  \  r  they    can    say 

duce,ifneed  were,  testimony  that  would     something  in 

.      „  .,  ,,  j       vindication   of 

witness  it  lor  more  than  a  thousand  tueirownprac- 
years.  tlce- 

Chr.  But,  said  Christian,  will  your  practice 
stand-  a  trial  at  law  ? 

Form,  and  Hyp.  They  told  him,  That  custom, 
it  being  of  so  long  a  standing  as  above  a  thousand 
years,  would,  doubtless,  now  be  admitted  as  a  thing 
legal  by  any  impartial  judge;  and  beside,  said 
they,  if  we  get  into  the  way,  what's  matter  whicli 
way  we  get  in  ?  if  we  are  in,  we  are  in ;  thou  art 
but  in  the  way,  who,  as  we  perceive,  came  in  at 
the  gate ;  and  we  are  also  in  the  way,  that  came 


4  No  sooner  has  Christian   'rereived   Christ'  than  he  at 

once  preaches  to  the  sleeping  sinners  the  great  salvation,     lie 

stays  not  for  human  calls  or  ordination,  but  attempts  to  awaken 

1  them  to  a  sense  of  their  danger,  and  presently  exhorts  with 

authority  the  formalist  and  hypocrite.     So  it  was  in  the  per- 

I  sonal  experience  of  Bunyan ;  after  which,  when  his  brethren 

!  discovered   his  talent,  they  invited  him  to  preach  openly  and 

]  constantly.     Dare  any  one  find  fault  with  that  conduct,  which 

I  proved  so  extensively  useful  ?—  (Ed.) 


104 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


tumbling   over    the  wall;    wherein,   now,    is    thy 
condition  better  than  ours  ? 

Chr.  I  walk  by  the  rule  of  my  Master;  you 
walk  by  the  rude  working  of  your  fancies.  You 
are  counted  thieves  already,  by  the  Lord  of  the 
way ;  therefore,  I  doubt  you  will  not  be  found  true 
men  at  the  end  of  the  way.  You  come  in  by  your- 
selves, without  his  direction ;  and  shall  go  out  by 
yourselves,  without  his  mercy.1 

To  this  they  made  him  but  little  answer ;  only 
they  bid  him  look  to  himself.  Then  I  saw  that 
they  went  on  every  man  in  his  way,  without  much 
conference  one  with  another ;  save  that  these  two 
men  told  Christian,  that  as  to  laws  and  ordinances, 
they  doubted  not  but  they  should  as  conscien- 
tiously do  them  as  he ;  therefore,  said  they,  we  see 
not  wherein  thou  differest  from  us,  but  by  the  coat 
that  is  on  thy  back,  which  was,  as  we  trow,2  given 
thee  by  some  of  thy  neighbours,  to  hide  the  shame 
of  thy  nakedness. 

Chr.  By  laws  and  ordinances  you  will  not  be 
saved,  since  you  came  not  in  by  the  door.  Ga.  u.  ig. 
And  as  for  this  coat  that  is  on  my  back,  it  was 
given  me  by  the  Lord  of  the  place  whither  I  go ; 
and  that,  as  you  say,  to  cover  my  nakedness  with. 
And  I  take  it  as  a  token  of  his  kindness  to  me; 
for  I  had  nothing  but  rags  before.  And,  besides, 
thus  I  comfort  myself  as  I  go :  Surely,  think  I, 

Christian    has      wlien  1  COme   to  tlle  £ate  of  the   <%> 

got  Lis  Lord's   the  Lord   thereof  will  know  me  for 

coat     on     his  .        . 

back,   ar.a  is   good,  since  I  have  his  coat  on  my 
therewith;  lie  hack — a  coat  that  he  gave  me  freely 

also^tffi  in  tlie  day  tliat  ^e  stripped  me  of  my 
mark  and  his  rags.  I  have,  moreover,  a  mark  in 
my  forehead,  of  which,  perhaps,  you 
have  taken  no  notice,  which  one  of  my  Lord's 
most  intimate  associates  fixed  there  in  the  day 
that  my  burden  fell  off  my  shoulders.  I  will  tell 
you,  moreover,  that  I  had  then  given  me  a  roll, 
sealed,  to  comfort  me  by  reading,  as  I  go  on  the 
way;  I  was  also  bid  to  give  it  in  at  the  Celestial 
Gate,  in  token  of  my  certain  going  in  after  it  ;  all 
which  things,  I  doubt,  you  want,  and  want  them 
because  you  came  not  in  at  the  gate. 

To  these  things  they  gave  him  no  answer ;  only 
they  looked  upon  each  other,  and  laughed.3    Then 

1  The  formalist  has  only  the  shell  of  religion ;  he  is  hot  for 
forms,  because  it  is  all  that  he  has  to  contend  for.  The  hypo- 
crite is  for  God  and  Baal  too ;  he  can  throw  stones  with  both 
hands.  He  carries  fire  in  one  hand,  and  water  in  the  other. 
—{Strait  Gate,  vol.  i.  p.  3S9.)  These  men  range  from  sect 
to  sect,  like  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness 
of  darkness  for  ever.  They  are  ban-en  trees;  and  the  axe, 
whetted  by  sin  and  the  law,  will  make  deep  gashes.  Death 
sends  Guilt,  his  first-born,  to  bring  them  to  the  King  of 
terrors. — {Barren  Fig-tree.) 

2  'We  trow;'  we  believe  or  imagine -.  from  the  Saxon.  See 
Imperial  Dictionary. — (Ed.) 

3  These  men  occupied  the  seat  of  the  scorner ;  they  had 
always  been  well  dressed.  His  coat  might  do  for  such  a  raga- 
muffin as  he  had  been ;  but  they  needed  no  garment  but  their 


I  saw  that  they  went  on  all,  save  that  Christian 
kept  before,  who  had  no  more  talk    „  .  . 

■.  .  „  ,  Christian     has 

but  with  himself,  and  that  sometimes     talk  with  him- 
sighingly     and     sometimes    comfort-     se  ' 
ably;4  also  he  would  be  often  reading  in  the  roll 
that  one  of  the  Shining  Ones  gave  him,  by  which 
he  was  refreshed. 

I  beheld,  then,  that  they  all  went  on  till  they 
came  to  the  foot  of  the  Hill  Difficulty ;    ne  comes  to  the 


at  the  bottom  of  which 


spring. 


There  were  also  in  the  same  place  two  other  ways 
besides  that  which  came  straight  from  the  gate ; 
one  turned  to  the  left  hand,  and  the  other  to  the 
right,  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill ;  but  the  narrow 
way  lay  right  up  the  hill,  and  the  name  of  the 
going  up  the  side  of  the  hill  is  called  Difficulty. 
Christian  now  went  to  the  spring,  and  drank  thereof, 
to  refresh  himself,  is.  xiix.  10,  and  then  began  to  go 
up  the  hill,  saying — 

'  The  hill,  though  high,  I  covet  to  ascend, 
The  difficulty  will  not  me  offend ; 
For  I  perceive  the  way  to  life  lies  here. 
Come,  pluck  up  heart,  let 's  neither  faint  nor  fear ; 
Better,  though  difficult,  the  right  way  to  go, 
Than  wrong,  though  easy,  where  the  end  is  woe.' 

The  other  two  also  came  to  the  foot  of  the  hill ; 
but  when  they  saw  that  the  hill  was  steep  and 
high,  and  that  there  were  two  other  ways  to  go ; 
and  supposing  also  that  these  two  ways  might 
meet  again,  with  that  up  which  Christian  went,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  hill ;  therefore  they  were 
resolved  to  go  in  those  ways.  Now  the  name  of 
one  of  those  ways  was  Danger,  and  the  name  of  the 
other  Destruction.  So  the  one  took  the  way  which 
is  called  Danger,  which  led  him  into  a  The  dan„er  of 
great  wood,  and  the  other  took  direct-  tinning  out  of 
ly  up  the  way  to  Destruction,  which 
led  him  into  a  wide  field,  full  of  dark  mountains, 
where  he  stumbled  and  fell,  and  rose  no  more.5 


ouTi  righteousness — the  forms  of  their  church.  The  mark,  or 
certificate  of  the  new  birth,  was  an  object  of  scom  to  them. 
Probably  they  pitied  him  as  a  harmless  mystic,  weak  in  mind 
and  illiterate.  Alas  1  how  soon  was  their  laughter  turned  into 
mourning.  Fear  and  calamity  overwhelmed  them.  They 
trusted  in  themselves,  and  there  was  none  to  deliver. — (Ed.) 

4  The  Christian  can  hold  no  communion  with  a  mere 
formal  professor.  The  Christian  loves  to  be  speaking  of  the 
Lord's  grace  and  goodness,  of  his  conflicts  and  consolations,  of 
the  Lord's  dealings  with  his  soul,  and  of  the  blessed  confidence 
which  he  is  enabled  to  place  in  him. — (J.  B.) 

6  Such  is  the  fate  of  those  who  keep  their  sins  with  their 
profession,  and  will  not  encounter  difficulty  in  cutting  them 
off.  '  Not  all  their  pretences  of  seeking  after  and  praying  to 
God  will  keep  them  from  falling  and  splitting  themselves  in 
sunder.' — (A  Holy  Life  the  Beauty  of  Christianity)  There 
are  heights  that  build  themselves  up  in  us,  and  exalt  them- 
selves to  keep  the  knowledge  of  God  from  our  hearts.  They 
oppose  and  contradict  our  spiritual  understanding  of  God 
and  his  Christ.  These  are  the  dark  mountains  at  which  we 
should  certainly  stumble  and  fall,  but  for  one  who  can  leap 
and  skip  over  them  to  our  aid. —  (Saints'  Knowledge  of  Christ' I 
Love,  vol.  ii.  p.  8.) 


THE    riLC RIM'S    PROGRESS. 


105 


I  looked,  then,  after  Christian,  to  see  him  go  up 
the  hill,  where  I  perceived  he  fell  from  running  to 
going,  and  from  going  to  clamhering  upon  his 
hands  and  his  knees,  because  of  the  steepness  of 
the  place.  Now,  ahout  the  midway  to  the  top 
of  the  hill  was  a  pleasant  arhour, 
made  by  the  Lord  of  the  hill  for  the 
refreshing  of  weary  travellers ;  thither,  therefore, 
Christian  got,  where  also  he  sat  down  to  rest  him. 
Then  he  pulled  his  roll  out  of  his  bosom,  and  read 
therein  to  his  comfort;  he  also  now  began  afresh 
to  take  a  review  of  the  coat  or  garment  that  was 
given  him  as  he  stood  by  the  cross.  Thus  pleasing 
himself  awhile,  he  at  last  fell  into  a  slumber,  and 
thence  into  a  fast  sleep,1  which  detained  him  in 
that  place  until  it  was  almost  night ;  and  in  his 
lie  (hat  sleeps  sleep  his  roll  fell  out  of  his  hand.2 
is  a  loser.  Now,  as  he  was  sleeping,  there  came 
one  to  him,  and  awaked  him,  saying,  '  Go  to  the 
ant,  thou  sluggard;  consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise.' 
rr.vi.  6.  And  with  that  Christian  suddenly  started  up, 
and  sped  him  on  his  way,  and  went  apace,  till  he 
came  to  the  top  of  the  hill. 

Now,  when  he  was  got  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill, 
there  came  two  men  running  to  meet  him  amain  ; 

Christian  meet.    t,le   IiamC    °f  the    0ne    WaS   TimOTOBS, 

«ith  Mistrust   and  of  the  other  Mistrust ;  to  whom 

and  Timorous,     ^i     •     •  •  i     o-  1       >        i 

Christian  said,  feirs,  what  s  the  mat- 
ter? You  run  the  wrong  way.  Timorous  answered, 
that  they  were  going  to  the  City  of  Zion,  and  had 
got  up  that  difficult  place  ;  but,  said  he,  the  further 
we  go,  the  more  danger  we  meet  with  ;  Avherefore 
we  turned,  and  are  going  back  again.3 

Yes,  said  Mistrust,  for  just  before  us  lie  a  couple 
of  lions  in  the  way,  whether  sleeping  or  waking  we 
know  not,  and  we  could  not  think,  if  we  came 
within  reach,  but  they  would  presently  pull  us  in 
pieces. 

Cm;.  Then  said  Christian,  You  make  me  afraid, 
but  whither  shall  I  fly  to  be  safe  ?  If  I  go  back 
to  mine  own  country,  that  is  prepared  for  fire  and 
brimstone,  and  I  shall  certainly  perish  there.  If 
I  can  get  to  the  Celestial  City,  I  am  sure  to  he  in 
Christian  shakes  safety  there.     I  must  venture.    To  go 

off  fear.  ^^  jg  not],ing  Dut  death  ;  to  go  for- 
ward is  fear  of  death,  and  life  everlasting  beyond  it. 


1  Pleased  with  the  gifts  of  grace,  rather  than  with  the  gra- 
cious giver,  pride  secretly  creeps  in  ;  and  we  fall  first  into  a 
sinful  self-complacence,  and  then  into  indolence  and  security 
This  is  intended  by  his  falling  fast  asleep. — (Dr.  I>odd.) 

-  Sinful  sloth  deprives  the  Christian  of  his  comforts.  What 
he  intended  only  for  a  moment's  nap,  like  a  man  asleep  during 
sermon-time  in  church,  became  a  deep  sleep,  and  his  roll  fell 
out  of  his  hand ;  and  yet  he  ran  well  while  there  was  nothing 
special  to  alarm  him.  Religious  privileges  should  refresh  aud 
not  puff  up. — (Chcevcr.) 

3  But  why  go  back  again  ?     That  is  the  next  way  to  hell. 
Never  go  over  hedge  and  ditch  to  hell.     They  that  miss  life 
perish,  because  they  will  not  let  go  their  sins,  or  have  no 
saving  faith. — (Bunyau's  Strait  Gate,  vol.  i.  p.  38S.) 
VOL.  III. 


I  will  yet  go  forward.4  So  Mistrust  and  Timorous 
ran  down  the  hill,  and  Christian  went  on  his  way. 
But,  thinking  again  of  what  he  beard  from  the 
men,  he  felt  in  his  bosom  for  his  roll,  that  he  might 
read  therein,  and  be  comforted;  but  ChriiHanrnmed 
he  felt,  and  found  it  not.  Then  was  j*  jg^STJ; 
Christian  in  great  distress,  and  knew  taaeoomfwt 
not  what  to  do;  for  he  wanted  that  which  used  to 
relieve  him,  and  that  which  should  have  been  his 
pass  into  the  Celestial  City.  Here,  therefore,  he 
began  to  be  much  perplexed,  and  knew  not  what 
to  do.5  At  last,  he  bethought  himself,  that  he  had 
slept  in  the  arbour  that  is  on  the  side  Heiapa 
of  the  hill ;  and,  falling  down  upon  his  for  Lls  roU 
knees,  he  asked  God  forgiveness  for  that  his  foolish 
fact,  and  then  went  back  to  look  for  his  roll.  But 
all  the  way  he  went  back,  who  can  sufficiently  set 
forth  the  sorrow  of  Christian's  heart!  Sometimes 
he  sighed,  sometimes  he  wept,  and  oftentimes  he 
chid  himself  for  being  so  foolish  to  fall  asleep  in 
that  place,  which  was  erected  only  for  a  little 
refreshment  for  his  weariness.  Thus  therefore  he 
went  back,  carefully  looking  on  this  side,  and  on 
that,  all  the  way  as  he  went,  if  happily  he  might 
find  his  roll,  that  had  been  his  comfort  so  many 
times  in  his  journey.  He  went  thus,  Christiim  be_ 
till  he  came  again  within  sight  of  the  wail-  hi*  tooi- 
arbour  where  he  sat  and  slept ;  but 
that  sight  renewed  his  sorrow  the  more,  by  bring- 
ing again,  even  afresh,  his  evil  of  sleeping  into  his 
mind.  Re.  it  5.  l  Th.  v.  7,  8.  Thus,  therefore,  he  now 
went  on  bewailing  his  sinful  sleep,  saying,  '  0 
wretched  man  that  I  am  !'  that  I  should  sleep  in 
the  day-time !  that  I  should  sleep  in  the  midst  of 
difficulty!  that  I  should  so  indulge  the  flesh,  as  to 
use  that  rest  for  ease  to  my  flesh,  which  the  Lord 
of  the  hill  hath  erected  only  for  the  relief  of  the 
spirits  of  pilgrims!6 

How  many  steps  have  I  took  in  vain !      Thus  it 
happened  to  Israel,  for  their  sin  ;  they  were  sent 


4  To -go  forward  is  attended  with  the  fear  of  death,  but 
eternal  life  is  beyond.     I  must  venture. 

My  hill  was  further:  so  1  slung  away, 

Yit  beard  a  cry 
Just  as  I  went, '  None  poos  that  way 
And  lives.'    If  that  be  all,  said  1, 
Alter  so  foul  a  journey,  death  is  fair 
And  hut  a  chair. 

— (G.  Herbert's  Templt.—The  Tilgnmagr.) 

6  Vc  is  perplexed  for  his  roll ;  this  is  right.     If  we  Buffi  r 
spiritual  loss,  and  are  easy  and  unconcerned  about  it,  it  is  a 
sad  sign  that  we  indulge  carnal  security  and  vain  coi.: 
—  (Mason.) 

6  The  backslider  is  attended  with  fears  end  doubts,  such  as 
he  felt  not  before,  built  on  the  vileness  of  his  backsliding; 
more  dreadful  scriptures  look  him  in  the  fare,  with  their 
dreadful  physiognomy.  His  new  sins  all  tarn  talking  devils 
threatening  devils,  roaring  devils,  within  him.  Besides,  he 
doubts  the  truth  of  his  first  conversion,  and  thus  adds  lead  to 
his  heels  in  returning  to  God  by  Christ.  He  can  tell 
stories,  and  yet  such  as  arc  very' true.  No  man  can  tell  what  u 
to  be  seen  and  felt  in  the  whale's  belly  but  Jonah.— (1' 
Christ  a  Complete  Saviour,  vol.  i  p   224-) 

11 


106 


THE   PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


back  again  by  the  way  of  the  Red  Sea ;  and  T  am 
made  to  tread  those  steps  with  sorrow,  which  I 
might  have  trod  with  delight,  had  it  not  been  for 
this  sinful  sleep.  How  far  might  I  have  been  on 
my  way  by  this  time !  I  am  made  to  tread  those 
steps  thrice  over,  which  I  needed  not  to  have  trod 
but  once  ;  yea,  now  also  I  am  like  to  be  benighted, 
for  the  day  is  almost  spent.  0  that  I  had  not  slept ! 
Now  by  this  time  he  was  come  to  the  arbour 
again,  where  for  a  while  he  sat  down  and  wept ; 
but  at  last,  as  Christian  would  have  it,  looking 
Christian  find-    sorrowfully  down  under  the  settle,  there 

wnerehhe  tost    he  esPied  his  ro11 5    tlie  which  he>  with 
jt-  trembling  and  haste,  catched  up,  and 

put  it  into  his  bosom.  But  who  can  tell  how  joy- 
ful this  man  was  when  he  had  gotten  his  roll  again  ! 
for  this,  roll  was  the  assurance  of  his  life  and  ac- 
ceptance at  the  desired  haven.  Therefore  he  laid 
it  up  in  his  bosom,  gave  thanks  to  God  for  directing 
his  eye  to  the  place  where  it  lay,  and  with  joy  and 
tears  betook  himself  again  to  his  journey.  But  0 
how  nimbly  now  did  he  go  up  the  rest  of  the  hill ! 
Yet,  before  he  got  up,  the  sun  went  down  upon 
Christian  ;  and  this  made  him  again  recal  the 
vanity  of  his  sleeping  to  his  remembrance  ;  and  thus 
he  again  began  to  condole  with  himself.  0  thou 
sinful  sleep !  how,  for  thy  sake  am  I  like  to  be 
benighted  in  my  journey !  I  must  walk  without  the 
sun  ;  darkness  must  cover  the  path  of  my  feet ;  and 
I  must  hear  the  noise  of  the  doleful  creatures,  be- 
cause of  my  sinful  sleep,  l  Th.  v.  6,  7.  Now  also  he 
remembered  the  story  that  Mistrust  and  Timorous 
told  him  of,  how  they  were  frighted  with  the  sight 
of  the  lions.  Then  said  Christian  to  himself  again, 
These  beasts  range  in  the  night  for  their  prey ;  and 
if  they  should  meet  with  me  in  the  dark,  how  should 
I  shift  them  ?  How  should  I  escape  being  by  them 
torn  in  pieces  ?  Thus  he  went  on  his  way.  But 
while  he  was  thus  bewailing  his  unhappy  miscar- 
riage, he  lift  up  his  eyes,  and  behold  there  was  a 
very  stately  palace  before  him,  the  name  of  which 
was  Beautiful ;  and  it  stood  just  by  the  highway 
side.1 

So  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  he  made  haste  and 
went  forward,  that  if  possible  he  might  get  lodging 
there.  Now  before  he  had  gone  far,  he  entered 
into  a  very  narrow  passage,  which  was  about  a 
furlong  off  of  the  porter's  lodge  ;  and  looking  very 
narrowly  before  him  as  he  went,  he  espied  two  lions 
in  the  way.2     Now,  thought  he,  I  see  the  dangers 


1  '  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  is  Mount 
Ziou ;  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge.'  Those  who 
enter  must  joyfully  submit  to  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  this 
house. — (Andronicus.) 

2  The  two  lions,  civil  despotism  and  ecclesiastical  tyranny, 
terrified  many  young  converts,  when  desirous  of  joining  a 
Christian  church,  here  represented  by  the  Beautiful  Palace. 
In  the  reign  of  the  Tudors  they  committed  sad  havoc.  In 
Buuyan's  time,  they  were  chained,  so  that  few  suffered  martyr- 


that  Mistrust  and  Timorous  were  driven  back  by. 
(The  lions  were  chained,  but  he  saw  not  the  chains.) 
Then  he  was  afraid,  and  thought  also  himself  to  go 
back  after  them,  for  he  thought  nothing  but  death 
was  before  him.  But  the  porter  at  the  lodge,  whose 
name  is  Watchful,  perceiving  that  Christian  made 
a  halt  as  if  he  would  go  back,  cried  unto  him, 
saying,  Is  thy  strength  so  small  ?  Mar.  xm.  34-37. 
Fear  not  the  lions,  for  they  are  chained,  and  are 
placed  there  for  trial  of  faith  where  it  is,  and  for 
discovery  of  those  that  have  none.  Keep  in  the 
midst  of  the  path,  and  no  hurt  shall  come  unto 
thee. 

Then  I  saw  that  he  went  on,  trembling  for  fear 
of  the  lions,  but  taking  good  heed  to  the  directions 
of  the  porter ;  he  heard  them  roar,  but  they  did  him 
no  harm.  Then  he  clapped  his  hands,  and  went  on 
till  he  came  and  stood  before  the  gate,  where  the 
porter  was.  Then  said  Christian  to  the  porter,  Sir, 
what  house  is  this  ?  and  may  I  lodge  here  to- 
night ?  The  porter  answered,  This  house  was  built 
by  the  Lord  of  the  hill,  and  he  built  it  for  the  relief 
and  security  of  pilgrims.  The  porter  also  asked 
whence  he  was,  and  whither  he  was  going. 

Chr.  I  am  come  from  the  City  of  Destruction, 
and  am  going  to  Mount  Zion  ;  but  because  the  sun 
is  now  set,  I  desire,  if  I  may,  to  lodge  here  to-night. 
Por.  What  is  your  name  ? 
Ciir.  My  name  is  now  Christian,  but  my  name 
at  the  first  was  Graceless ;  I  came  of  the  race  of 
Japheth,  whom  God  will  persuade  to  dwell  in  the 
tents  of  Shem.  Ge.  ix.  27. 

Por.  But  how  doth  it  happen  that  you  come  so 
late?     The  sun  is  set. 

Chr.  I  had  been  here  sooner,  but  that,  'wretched 
man  that  I  am!'  I  slept  in  the  arbour  that  stands 
on  the  hill-side  ;  nay,  I  had,  notwithstanding  that, 
been  here  much  sooner,  but  that,  in  my  sleep,  I  lost 
my  evidence,  and  came  without  it  to  the  brow  of 
the  hill ;  and  then  feeling  for  it,  and  finding  it  not, 
I  was  forced,  with  sorrow  of  heart,  to  go  back  to 
the  place  where  I  slept  my  sleep,  where  I  found  it, 
and  now  I  am  come. 

Por.  Well,  I  will  call  out  one  of  the  virgins  of 
this  place,  who  will,  if  she  likes  your  talk,  bring 
you  in  to  the  rest  of  the  family,  according  to  the 
rules  of  the  house.  So  Watchful,  the  porter,  rang 
a  bell,  at  the  sound  of  which  came  out  at  the  door 


dom,  although  many  were  ruined,  imprisoned,  and  perished 
in  dungeons.  When  Faithful  passed  they  were  asleep.  It  was 
a  short  cessation  from  persecution.  In  the  Second  Part,  Great- 
heart  slew  Giant  Bloody-man,  who  backed  the  lions ;  probably 
referring  to  the  wretched  death  of  that  monster,  Judge  Jefferies. 
And  in  the  experience  of  Mr.  Fearing,  it  is  clear  that  the  Hill 
Difficulty  and  the  lions  were  intended  to  represent  temporal 
and  bodily  troubles,  and  not  spiritual  difficulties : — '  When  we 
came  at  the  Hill  Difficulty,  he  made  no  stick  at  that,  nor  did 
he  much  fear  the  lions ;  for  you  must  know  that  his  trouble 
was  not  about  such  tilings  as  these  j  his  fear  was  about  his 
acceptance  at  last.' — (En.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


107 


of  the  house,  a  grave  and  beautiful  damsel,  named 
Discretion,  and  asked  why  she  was  called. 

The  porter  answered,  This  man  is  in  a  journey 
from  the  City  of  Destruction  to  Mount  Zion,  but 
being  weary  and  benighted,  he  asked  me  if  he 
might  lodge  here  to-night;  so  I  told  him  I  would 
call  for  thee,  who,  after  discourse  had  with  him, 
mayest  do  as  Beemeth  thee  good,  even  according 
to  the  law  of  the  house. 

Then  she  asked  him  whence  he  was,  and  whither 
he  was  going ;  and  he  told  her.  She  asked  him 
also  how  he  got  into  the  way ;  and  he  told  her. 
Then  she  asked  him  what  he  had  seen  and  met 
with  in  the  way  ;  and  he  told  her.  And  last  she 
asked  his  name ;  so  he  said,  It  is  Christian,  and 
1  have  so  much  the  more  a  desire  to  lodge  here 
to-night,  because,  by  what  I  perceive,  this  place 
was  built  by  the  Lord  of  the  hill,  for  the  relief  and 
security  of  pilgrims.  So  she  smiled,  but  the  water 
stood  in  her  eyes  ;  and  after  a  little  pause,  she  said, 
1  will  call  forth  two  or  three  more  of  the  family. 
So  she  ran  to  the  door,  and  called  out  Prudence, 
Piety,  and  Charity,  who,  after  a  little  more  dis- 
course with  him,  had  him  into  the  family ;  and 
many  of  them  meeting  him  at  the  threshold  of  the 
house,  said,  '  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord;' 
this  house  was  built  by  the  Lord  of  the  hill,  on 
purpose  to  entertain  such  pilgrims  in.1  Then  he 
bowed  his  head,  and  followed  them  into  the  house. 
So  when  he  was  come  in  and  sat  down,  they  gave 
him  something  to  drink,  and  consented  together, 
that  until  supper  was  ready,  some  of  them  should 


1  Christian,  after  feeling  the  burden  of  sin,  entering  by 
Christ  the  gate,  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  lessons  of  high 
concern  in  the  Bible  or  House  of  the  Interpreter;  after  losing 
his  burden  by  faith  in  his  crucilicd  Saviour,  his  sins  pardoned, 
clothed  with  his  Lord's  righteousness,  marked  by  a  godly 
profession,  he  becomes  fit  for  church-fellowship ;  is  invited  by 
Bishop  Giflbrd,  the  porter;  and,  with  the  consent  of  the  inmates, 
he  enters  the  house  called  Beautiful.  Mark,  reader,  not  as 
essential  to  salvation  ;  it  is  by  the  side  of  the  road,  not  across 
it ;  all  that  was  essential  had  taken  place  before.  Faithful  did 
not  enter.  Here  is  no  compulsion  either  to  enter  or  pay  :  that 
would  have  converted  it  into  the  house  of  arrogance  or  persecu- 
tion. It  is  upon  the  Hill  Difficulty,  requiring  personal,  willing 
efforts  to  scramble  up;  and  holy  zeal  and  courage  to  bear  the 
taunts  of  the  world  and  the  growling  frowns  of  the  lions.  Here 
he  has  new  lessons  to  learn  of  Discretion,  Piety,  Prudence,  and 
Charity,  to  bear  with  his  fellow-members,  ami  they  with  him  ; 
and  here  he  is  armed  for  his  journey.  Many  are  the  blessed 
enjoyments  of  church-fellowship.  '  Esther  was  had  to  the 
house  of  the  women  to  be  puritied,  aud  so  came  to  the  king. 
God  also  hath  appointed  that  those  who  come  into  his  royal 
presence  should  lir^t  go  to  the  house  of  the  w  omen,  the  church.' 
(See  Bunyan's  Greatness  of  the  boul,  vol.  i.  p.  146.)  Every 
soul  must  be  fitted  for  the  royal  presence,  usually  in  church- 
fellowship :  but  these  lovely  maidens  sometimes  wait  on  and 
instruct  those  who  never  enter  the  house  Beautiful;  who 
belong  to  the  church  universal,  but  not  to  any  local  body  of 
Christians.  John  directs  hia  Revelations  to  the  seven  churches 
in  Asia;  Paul,  his  epistles  to  the  churches  in  Galatia,  or  to  the 
church  at  Corinth — all  distinct  bodies  of  Christians ;  James  to 
the  twelve  tribes ;  and  Peter  to  the  strangers,  and  '  to  them 
that  Lave  obtained  like  precioup  faith,'  of  all  churches. — (Ed.) 


have  some  particular  discourse  with  Christian,  for 
the  best  improvement  of  time;  and  they  appointed 
Piety,  and  Prudence,  and  Charity  to  discourse  with 
him  ;  and  thus  they  began : 

Piety.  Come,  good  Christian,  since  we  have 
been  so  loving  to  you,  to  receive  you  Hetytowimc. 
into  our  house  this  night,  let  us,  if  )""' 

perhaps  we  may  better  ourselves  thereby,  talk  with 
you  of  all  things  that  have  happened  to  you  in 
your  pilgrimage. 

Ciir.  With  a  very  good  will,  and  I  am  glad  that 
you  are  so  well  disposed. 

PlETY.  What  moved  you  at  first  to  betake  your- 
self to  a  pilgrim's  life  V 

Cur.  I  was  driven  out  of  my  native  country, 
by  a  dreadful  sound  that  was  in  mine   llow  Christian 
ears ;  to  wit,  that  unavoidable  destruc-     ",:u  ^T"^ 
tion  did  attend  me,  if  I  abode  iu  that     ^^o- 
place  where  I  was. 

Piety.  But  how  did  it  happen  that  you  came 
out  of  your  country  this  way  ? 

Chr.  It  was  as  God  would  have  it;  for  when  I 
was  under  the  fears  of  destruction,  I  did  not  know 
whither  to  go ;  but  by  chance  there  came  a  man, 
even  to  me,  as  I  was  trembling  and  How  he  got  into 
weeping,  whose  name  is  Evangelist,  uiewaytoZinu 
and  he  directed  me  to  the  wicket-gate,  which  else 
I  should. never  have  found,  and  so  set  me  into  the 
way  that  hath  led  me  directly  to  this  house. 

Piety.  But  did  you  not  come  by  the  house  of 
the  Interpreter  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  and  did  see  such  things  there,  the 
remembrance  of  which  will  stick  by  me  as  long  as 
I  live ;  especially  three  things,  to  wit,    ,     ,       ,    , 

i  o,     •        •       i         •         oo  •         A  rehearsal    of 

now  Christ,  in  despite  ot  bataii,  main-     what  he  saw  in 
tains  his  work  of  grace  in  the  heart ;        L  wsy' 
how  the  man  had  sinned  himself  quite  out  of  hopes 
of  God's  mercy;  and  also  the  dream  of  him  that 
thought  in  his  sleep  the  day  of  judgment  was  come. 

Piety.  Why,  did  you  hear  him  tell  his  dream? 

Chr.  Yes,  and  a  dreadful  one  it  was.  I  thought 
it  made  my  heart  ache  as  he  was  telling  of  it ;  but 
yet  I  am  glad  I  heard  it. 

Piety.  Was  that  all  that  you  saw  at  the  house 
of  the  Interpreter  ? 

Chr.  No;  he  took  me  and  had  me  where  he 
showed  me  a  stately  palace,  and  how  the  people 
were  clad  in  gold  that  were  in  it ;  and  how  there 
came  a  venturous  man  and  cut  his  way  through  the 
armed  men  that  stood  in  the  door  to  keep  him  out ; 
and  how  he  was  bid  to  come  in,  and  win  eternal 
glory.  Methought  those  things  did  ravish  my  heart .' 
1  would  have  staid  at  that  good  man's  house  a 
twelvemonth,  but  that  1  knew  I  had  further  to  go. 

Piety.  And  what  saw  you  else  in  the  way  ? 

Cim.  Saw !  why,  I  went  but  a  little  further,  and 
I  saw  one,  as  I  thought  in  my  mind,  hang  bleeding 
upon  the  tree ;  and  the  vevy  sight  of  him  made  my 


103 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


burden  fall  off  my  back  (for  I  groaned  under  a  very 
heavy  burden),  but  then  it  fell  down  from  off  me. 
It  was  a  strange  thing  to  me,  for  I  never  saw  such 
a  thing  before ;  yea,  and  while  I  stood  looking  up, 
for  then  I  could  not  forbear  looking,  three  Shining 
Ones  came  to  me.  One  of  them  testified  that  my 
sins  were  forgiven  me ;  another  stripped  me  of  my 
rags,  and  gave  me  this  broidered  coat  which  you 
see ;  and  the  third  set  the  mark  which  you  see  in 
my  forehead,  and  gave  me  this  sealed  roll  (And 
with  that  he  plucked  it  out  of  his  bosom.) 

Piety.  But  you  saw  more  than  this,  did  you  not  ? 

CiiR.  The  things  that  I  have  told  you  were  the 
best,  yet  some  other  matters  I  saw,  as,  namely,  I 
saw  three  men,  Simple,  Sloth,  and  Presumption, 
lie  asleep  a  little  out  of  the  way,  as  I  came,  with 
irons  upon  their  heels ;  but  do  you  think  I  could 
awake  them?  I  also  saw  Formality  and  Hypocrisy 
come  tumbling  over  the  wall,  to  go,  as  they  pre- 
tended, to  Zion,  but  they  were  quickly  lost,  even 
as  I  myself  did  tell  them ;  but  they  would  not  be- 
lieve. But  above  all,  I  found  it  hard  work  to  get 
up  this  hill,  and  as  hard  to  come  by  the  lions' 
mouths ;  and  truly  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  good 
man,  the  porter  that  stands  at  the  gate,  I  do  not 
know  but  that  after  all  I  might  have  gone  back 
again ;  but  now,  I  thank  God  I  am  here,  and  I 
thank  you  for  receiving  of  me. 

Then  Prudence  thought  good  to  ask  him  a  few 
questions,  and  desired  his  answer  to  them. 
Prudence    dis-        Prud.  Do  you  not  think  sometimes 
courses  him.      0f  the  country  from  whence  you  came  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  but  with  much  shame  and  detesta- 

Christian's      tion  :  '  truty  if  I  had  Deen  mindful  of 

thoughts  of  ids   that  country  from  whence  I  came  out, 

native  country.      T       •    1      1  1      1 

1  might  have  had  opportunity  to  have 
returned ;  but  now  I  desire  a  better  country,  that 
is,  an  heavenly.'  He.  xi.  15, 16. 

Prud.  Do  you  not  yet  bear  away  with  you  some 

of  the  things  that  then  you  were  conversant  withal  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  but  greatly  against  my  will ;  espe- 

Christian    dis-   cia%  my  inward  and   carnal  cogita- 

tasted  with  car-   tions,  with  which  all  my  countrymen, 

nal  cogitations.  J  J  > 

as  well  as  myself,  were  delighted ;  but 

now  all  those  things  are  my  grief ;  and  might  I 

but  choose  mine  own  things,  I  would  choose  never 

christian's      to  think  of  those  things  more;  but 

choice.         when  j  woui(j  be  doing  of  that  which 

is  best,  that  which  is  worst  is  with  me.  Ro.  vii. 

Prud.  Do  you  not  find  sometimes,  as  if  those 
things  were  vanquished,  which  at  other  times  are 
your  perplexity? 

Chr.    Yes,  but  that  is  but  seldom;   but  they 
Christian's      are  to  me  golden  hours,  in  which  such 
golden  hours,     things  happen  to  me.1 


1  The  true  Christian's  inmost  feelings  will  best  explain 
these  answers,  which  no  exposition  can  elucidate  to  those  who 


Prud.  Can  you  remember  by  what  means  yon 
find  your  annoyances,  at  times,  as  if  they  were 
vanquished  ? 

Chr.  Yes;  when  I  think  what  I  saw  at  the  cross, 
that  will  do  it ;  and  when  I  look  upon  How  christian 
my  broidered  coat,  that  will  do  it;  %£JZ?c£. 
also  when  I  look  into  the  roll  that  I  options, 
carry  in  my  bosom,  that  will  do  it ;  and  when  my 
thoughts  wax  warm  about  whither  I  am  going, 
that  will  do  it.2 

Prud.  And  what  is  it  that  makes  you  so  desirous 
to  go  to  Mount  Zion  ? 

Chr.  Why,  there  I  hope  to  see  him  alive  that 
did  hang  dead  on  the  cross  ;  and  there   TO,      _  .  u 
I  hope  to  be  rid  of  all  those  things     would  be    at 

xi     ,.   .      xi  •     j  •  Mount  Sion. 

that  to  this  day  are  in  me  an  annoy- 
ance to  me  ;  there,  they  say,  there  is  no  death  ;  and 
there  I  shall  dwell  with  such  company  as  I  like 
best.  is.  xxv.  a  Re.  xxi.  4.  For,  to  tell  you  truth,  I 
love  him,  because  I  was  by  him  eased  of  my  bur- 
den ;  and  I  am  weary  of  my  inward  sickness.  I 
would  fain  be  where  I  shall  die  no  more,  and  with 
the  company  that  shall  continually  cry,  '  Holy, 
holy,  holy.' 

Then  said  Charity  to  Christian,  Have  charity  dis- 
you  a  family  ?    Are  you  a  married  man  ?     courses  him- 

Chr.   I  have  a  wife  and  four  small  children.3 

Char.  And  why  did  you  not  bring  them  along 
with  you? 

Chr.  Then  Christian  wept,  and  said,  0  how 
willinsrlv  would  I   have  done  it !    but   „..  ..    ,   , 

*s  -1  Christian's  love 

they  were  all  of  them  utterly  averse     to  his  wife  and 

.,      .  children. 

to  my  going  on  pilgrimage. 

Char.  But  you  should  have  talked  to  them,  and 
have  endeavoured  to  have  shown  them  the  danger 
of  being  behind. 

Chr.  So  I  did ;  and  told  them  also  what  God 
had  shown  to  me  of  the  destruction  of  our  city ; 
'  but  I  seemed  to  them  as  one  that  mocked, '  and 
they  believed  me  not.  Ge.  six.  u. 

Char.  And  did  you  pray  to  God  that  he  would 
bless  your  counsel  to  them  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  and  that  with  much  affection;  for  you 
must  think  that  my  wife  and  poor  children  were 
very  dear  unto  me. 


are  unacquainted  with  the  conflict  to  which  they  refer.  The 
golden  hours,  fleeting  and  precious,  are  earnests  of  the  ever- 
lasting holy  felicity  of  heaven. — (Scott.) 

2  The  only  true  mode  of  vanquishing  carnal  thoughts  is  look- 
ing at  Christ  crucified,  or  dwelling  upon  his  dying  love,  the 
robe  of  righteousness  which  clothes  his  naked  soul,  his  roll  or 
evidence  of  his  interest,  and  the  glory  and  happiness  of  heaven  ! 
Happy  souls  who  thus  oppose  their  corruptions! — (Dr.  Dodd.) 

3  This  was  the  fact  as  it  regards  Bunyau  when  he  was 
writing  the  '  Pilgrim.'  He  had  a  wife,  two  sons,  and  two 
daughters.  This  conversation  was  first  published  in  the  second 
edition,  1678  ;  and  if  he  referred  to  his  own  family,  it  was  to 
his  second  wife,  a  most  worthy  and  heroic  woman ;  but  she 
and  some  of  his  children  were  fellow-pilgrims  with  him.  His 
eldest  son  was  a  preacher  eleven  years  before  the  Second  Part 
of  the  '  Pilgrim'  was  published. —  (Ed.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


109 


Char.  "Rut  did  you  tell  them  of  your  own  sorrow, 
and  fear  of  destruction?  for  I  suppose  that  destruc- 
tion was  visible  enough  to  you. 

Cur.   Yes,  over,    and    over,    and    over.      They 

Christian'. fears    nliSht  *ls0  8<-'°    "V  &»«    iu    my  COUI1- 

shina  tenance,  in  my  tears,  and  also  in  my 
in  his  v,."v  trembling  under  the  apprehension  of 
Kraataunce.  the  jU(igluent  tliat  did  hang  over  our 
beads;  but  all  was  not  sufficient  to  prevail  with 
them  to  come  with  me. 

CHAR.  But  what  could  they  say  for  themselves, 
why  they  came  not? 

Chr.  Why,  my  wife  was  afraid  of  losing  this 
The  cause  why  world,  and  my  children  were  given  to 
!uvu  tilfgo  the  foolish  delights  of  youth;  so  what 
with  him.  Dy  one  thing,  and  what  by  another, 

they  left  me  to  wander  in  this  manner  alone. 

Char.  But  did  you  not,  with  your  vain  life, 
damp  all  that  you  by  words  used  by  way  of  per- 
suasion to  bring  them  away  with  you?1 

Chr.  Indeed,  I  cannot  commend  my  life;  for  I 
am  conscious  to  myself  of  many  failings  therein  ; 
1  know  also,  that  a  man  by  his  conversation  may 
soon  overthrow,  what  by  argument  or  persuasion 
he  doth  labour  to  fasten  upon  others  for  their  good. 
Christian's  good  Yet  this  I  can  say,  I  was  very  wary 
SmviiT^d  of  gfrmg  them  occasion,  by  any  un- 
chiidren.  seemly  action,  to  make  them  averse 

to  going  on  pilgrimage.2  Yea,  for  this  very  thing, 
they  would  tell  me  I  was  too  precise,  and  that  I 
denied  myself  of  things,  for  their  sakes,  in  which 
they  saw  no  evil.  Nay,  I  think  I  may  say,  that 
if  what  they  saw  in  me  did  hinder  them,  it  was  my 
great  tenderness  in  sinning  against  God,  or  of 
doing  any  wrong  to  my  neighbour. 

Char.  Indeed  Cain  hated  his  brother,  'because 
his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother's  right- 
eous,' 1  Jn.  m.  12;  and  if  thy  wife  and  children  have 
"    . ..        ,       been  offended  with  thee  for  this,  thev 

Christian    clear  .    - 

of  their  blood   thereby  show  themselves   to  be  im- 
placable to  good,  and  '  thou  hast  de- 
livered thy  soul  from  their  blood.'  Eze.  iii.  19. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  thus  they  sat 
talking    together   until    supper  was    ready.3      So 


1  0  soul !  consider  this  deeply.  It  is  the  life  of  a  Christian 
that  carries  more  conviction  anil  persuasion  than  his  words. — 
(Mason.) 

2  Those  that  religiously  name  the  name  of  Christ,  and  do 
not  depart  from  iniquity,  cause  the  perishing  of  many.  A  pro- 
fessor that  hath  not  forsaken  his  iniquity  is  like  one  that  comes 
out  of  a  pest-house  to  his  home,  with  all  his  plague-sores 
running.  He  hath  the  breath  of  a  dragon,  and  poisons  the 
air  round  about  him.  'Ihis  is  the  man  that  slays  his  children, 
his  kinsmen,  his  friends,  and  himself.  0 1  the  millstone  that 
God  will  shortly  hang  about  your  necks,  when  you  must  be 
drowned  in  the  sea  and  deluge  of  God's  wrath. — (Bunyan's 
Holy  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  530.) 

3  How  beautiful  must  that  church  be  where  Watchful  is  the 
porter;  where  Discretion  admits  the  members;  where  Pru- 
dence takes  the  oversight ;  where  Piety  conducts  the  worship ; 
aud  where  Charity  endears  the  members  one  to  another !    They 


What  Christian 

SU]). 


when  they  had  made  ready,  they  sat  down  to  meat 
Now  the  table  was  furnished  '  with  fat 
things,  and  with  wine  that  was  well  b 
refined  : '  and  all  their  talk  at  the  table  p* 
was  about  the  Lord  of  the  hill ;  as,  namely,  about 
what  he  had  done,  and  wherefore  he  Their  talk  at 
did  what  he  did,  and  why  he  had  «WPer-*«ne. 
budded  that  house.  And  by  what  they  said,  I 
perceived  that  he  had  been  a  great  warrior,  and 
had  fought  with  and  slain  '  him  that  had  the  power 
of  death,'  but  not  without  great  danger  to  himself, 
which  made  me  love  him  the  more.4  He.  ii.  14,  |& 

For,  as  they  said,  and  as  I  believe  (said  Chris- 
tian), he  did  it  with  the  loss  of  much  blood ;  but 
that  which  put  glory  of  grace  into  all  he  did,  was, 
that  he  did  it  out  of  pure  love  to  his  country.  And 
besides,  there  were  some  of  them  of  the  household 
that  said  they  had  been  and  spoke  with  him  since 
he  did  die  on  the  cross ;  and  they  have  attested 
that  they  had  it  from  his  own  lips,  that  he  is  such 
a  lover  of  poor  pilgrims,  that  the  like  is  not  to  be 
found  from  the  east  to  the  west. 

They,  moreover,  gave  an  instance  of  what  they 
affirmed,  and  that  was,  he  had  stripped  himself  of 
his  glory,  that  he  might  do  this  for  the  poor ;  anil 
that  they  heard  him  say  and  affirm,  '  that  he 
would  not  dwell  in  the  mountain  of  Zion  alone.' 
They  said,  moreover,  that  he  had  made  Ch  .  .  , 
many  pilgrims  princes,  though  by  na-  princes  of  beg- 
ture  they  were  beggars  born,  and  their 
original  had  been  the  dunghill,    l  Sa.  ii.  8.  Ps.  cxiii.  7. 

Thus  they  discoursed  together  till  late  at  night ; 
and  after  they  had  committed  themselves  to  their 
Lord  for  protection,  they  betook  themselves  to  rest : 
the  Pilgrim  they  laid  in  a  large  upper  christian's  bed- 
chamber, whose  window  opened  toward  chamber, 
the  sun-rising  ;  the  name  of  the  chamber  was 
Peace  ;s  where  he  slept  till  break  of  day,  and  then 
he  awoke  and  sanp-6 — 


partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  a  feast  of  fat  things,  with  wine 
well  refined.— (J.  B.) 

4  Ah  !  theirs  was  converse  such  a9  it  behoves 
Man  to  maintain,  and  such  as  God  approves — 
Christ  and  his  character  their  only  scope, 
Their  subject,  aud  their  object,  aud  their  hope. 
0  days  of  heaven,  and  nights  of  equal  praise  1 
Serene  and  peaceful  as  those  heavenly  days 
When  souls  drawn  upwards  in  cominuniou  sweet, 
Enjoy  the  stillness  of  some  close  retreat, 
Discourse,  as  if  releas'd  and  safe  at  home, 
Of  dangers  past,  and  wonders  yet  to  come. — (Cowper.) 
*  When   Christiana  and   her  party  arrived  at  this  house 
Beautiful,  she  requested  that  they  might  repose  in  the  same 
chamber,  called  Peace,  which  was  granted.     The  author,  in 
his  marginal  note,  explains  the  nature  of  this  resting-place  by 
the  words,  '  Christ's  bosom  is  for  all  pilgrims.' — (Ed.) 
0  How  suddenly  that  straight  and  glittering  shaft 
Shot  'thwart  the  earth  1     In  crown  of  living  lire 
TJp  comes  the  day  !     As  if  they,  couscious,  quuff'd 
The  sunny  flood,  hill,  forest,  city,  spire, 
Laugh  in  the  wakening  light.     Go,  vain  Desire  ! 
The^dusky  lights  have  gone ;  go  thou  thy  way  1 


110 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Where  am  I  now?     Is  this  the  love  and  care 
Of  Jesus  for  the  meu  that  pilgrims  are  ? 
Thus  to  provide  !  that  I  should  be  forgiven  ! 
And  dwell  already  the  next  door  to  heaven  ! 

So,  in  the  morning,  they  all  got  up ;  and  after 
some  more  discourse,  they  told  him  that  he  should 
not  depart  till  they  had  shown  him  the  rarities  of 
Christian  had  that  place.  And  first,  they  had  him 
and  ^hafhe  into  the  study,  where  they  showed  him 
saw  there.  records  of  the  greatest  antiquity;  in 
which,  as  I  remember  my  dream,  they  showed  him 
first  the  pedigree  of  the  Lord  of  the  hill,  that  he 
was  the  son  of  the  Ancient  of  Days,  and  came  by 
that  eternal  generation.  Here  also  was  more  fully 
recorded  the  acts  that  he  had  done,  and  the  names 
of  many  hundreds  that  he  had  taken  into  his  ser- 
vice ;  and  how  he  had  placed  them  in  such  habita- 
tions, that  could  neither  by  length  of  days,  nor 
decays  of  nature,  be  dissolved. 

Then  they  read  to  him  some  of  the  worthy  acts 
that  some  of  his  servants  had  done :  as,  how  they 
bad  '  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness, 
obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions, 
quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of 
the  sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong, 
waxed  valiant  in  fight,  and  turned  to  flight  the 
armies  of  the  aliens.'  He.  xi.  33,  34. 

They  then  read  again  in  another  part  of  the 
records  of  the  house,  where  it  was  showed  how 
willing  their  Lord  was  to  receive  into  his  favour 
any,  even  any,  though  they  in  time  past  had  offered 
great  affronts  to  his  person  and  proceedings.  Here 
also  were  several  other  histories  of  many  other 
famous  things,  of  all  which  Christian  had  a  view ; 
as  of  things  both  ancient  and  modern ;  together 
with  prophecies  and  predictions  of  things  that  have 
their  certain  accomplishment,  both  to  the  dread  and 
amazement  of  enemies,  and  the  comfort  and  solace 
of  pilgrims. 

The  next  day  they  took  him  and  had  him  into 

the  armoury,  where  they  showed  him  all  manner  of 

Christian  had    famHure,  which  their  Lord  had  pro- 

iuto  the  ar-    vided  for  pilgrims,  as  sword,  sheild, 

helmet,  breastplate,  all -prayer,  and 

shoes  that  would  not  wear  out.1     And  there  was 


And  pining  Discontent,  like  them  expire ! 
Be  called  my  chamber  Peace,  when  ends  the  day, 
And  let  me,  with  the  dawn,  like  Pilgrim,  sing  and  pray. 
Great  is  the  Lord  our  God, 
And  let  his  praise  be  great : 
He  makes  his  churches  his  abode, 

His  most  delightful  seat.— (Dr.  Watts.) 
1  Should  you  see  a  man  that  did  not  go  from  door  to  door, 
but  he  must  be  clad  in  a  coat  of  mail,  and  have  a  helmet  of 
brass  upon  his  head,  and  for  his  life-guard  not  so  lew  as  a 
thousand  men  to  wait  on  him,  would  you  not  say,  Surely  this 
man  has  store  of  enemies  at  hand  ?  If  Solomon  used  to  have 
about  his  bed  no  less  than  threescore  of  the  valiautest  of  Israel, 
holding  swords,  and  being  expert  in  war,  what  guard  and  safe- 
guard doth  God's  people  need,  who  are,  night  and  day,  roared 


here  enough  of  this  to  harness  out  as  many  men, 
for  the  service  of  their  Lord,  as  there  be  stars  in 
the  heaven  for  multitude.2 

They  also  showed  him  some  of  the  engines  with 
which  some  of  his  servants  had  done  wonderful 
things.  They  showed  him  Moses'  Christiania 
rod ;  the  hammer  and  nail  with  which  made  to  see 
Jael  slew  Sisera ;  the  pitchers,  trum- 
pets, and  lamps  too,  with  which  Gibeon  put  to  flight 
the  armies  of  Midian.  Then  they  showed  him  the 
ox's  goad  wherewith  Shamgar  slew  six  hundred 
men.  They  showed  him,  also,  the  jaw-bone  with 
which  Samson  did  such  mighty  feats.  They 
showed  him,  moreover,  the  sling  and  stone  with 
which  David  slew  Goliah  of  Gath ;  and  the  sword, 
also,  with  which  their  Lord  will  kill  the  Man  of 
Sin,  in  the  day  that  he  shall  rise  up  to  the  prey. 
They  showed  him,  besides,  many  excellent  things, 
with  which  Christian  was  much  delighted.  This 
done,  they  went  to  their  rest  again.3 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that,  on  the  morrow, 
he  got  up  to  go  forward ;  but  they  desired  him  to 
stay  till  the  next  day  also ;  and  then,  said  they, 
we  will,  if  the  day  be  clear,  show  christian  show. 
you  the  Delectable  Mountains,4  which,  table  M0Un-eC" 
they  said,  would  yet  further  add  to  tams- 
his  comfort,  because  they  were  nearer  the  desired 
haven  than  the  place  where  at  present  he  was ;  so 
he  consented  and  staid.  When  the  morning  was 
up,  they  had  him  to  the  top  of  the  house,  and  bid 
him  look  south ;  so  he  did  ;  and,  behold,  at  a  great 
distance,  he  saw  a  most  pleasant  mountainous 
country,  beautified  with  woods,  vineyards,  fruits  of 
all  sorts,  flowers  also,  with  springs  and  fountains, 
very  delectable  to  behold,  is.  miii.  16,  17.     Then  he 


on  by  the  unmerciful  fallen  angels  ?  Why,  they  lie  in  wait  for 
poor  Israel  in  every  hole,  and  he  is  for  ever  in  danger  of  being 
either  stabbed  or  destroyed. —  (Bunyan's  Israel's  Hope,  vol.  i. 
p.  602.) 

2  Christ  himself  is  the  Christian's  armoury.  When  he  puts 
on  Christ,  he  is  then  completely  armed  from  head  to  foot. 
Are  his  loins  girt  about  with  truth  ?  Christ  is  the  truth.  Has 
he  on  the  breastplate  of  righteousness  ?  Christ  is  our  right- 
eousness. Are  his  feet  shod  with  the  gospel  of  peace  ?  Christ 
is  our  peace.  Does  he  take  the  shield  of  faith,  and  helmet  of 
salvation  ?  Christ  is  that  shield,  and  all  our  salvation.  Does 
he  take  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God  ? 
Christ  is  the  Word  of  God.  Thus  he  puts  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  by  his  Spirit  fights  the  fight  of  faith ;  and,  in  spite  of 
meu,  of  devils,  and  of  his  own  evil  heart,  lays  hold  of  eternal 
life.      Thus  Christ  is  all  in  all.— (J.  B.) 

3  The  church  in  the  wilderness,  even  her  porch,  is  full  of 
pillars — apostles,  prophets,  and  martyrs  of  Jesus.  There  are 
hung  up  also  the  shields  that  the  old  warriors  used,  and  on  the 
walls  are  painted  the  brave  achievements  they  have  done. 
There,  also,  are  such  encouragements  that  one  would  think  that 
none  who  came  thither  would  ever  attempt  to  go  back.  Yet 
some  forsake  the  place. — (Bunyan's  House  of  Lebanon) 

4  The  Delectable  Mountains,  as  seen  at  a  distance,  represent 
those  distinct  views  of  the  privileges  and  consolations,  attainable 
in  this  life,  with  which  believers  are  sometimes  favoured.  This 
is  the  pre-eminent  advantage  of  Christian  communion,  and  can 
only  be  enjoyed  at  some  special  seasons,  when  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness sluues  upon  the  soul. — (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Ill 


asked  the  name  of  the  country.  They  said  it  was 
lmmanuel's  Land  ;  and  it  is  as  common,  said  they, 
as  this  hill  is,  to  and  for  all  the  pilgrims.  And 
when  thou  comest  there,  from  thence,  said  they, 
thou  mayest  see  to  the  gate  of  the  Celestial  City, 
as  the  shepherds  that  live  there  will  make  appear. 
Now,  he  bethought  himself  of  setting  forward, 

christian  sets    nid  they  were  willing  he  should.     But 

forward.        flrstt  sti^  tney>  jet  us  go  again  into 

the  armoury.     So  they  did ;  and  when  they  came 

christian  sent    there,  they  harnessed  him  from  head 

away  armed.       to  foofc  w;tn   wnat  wa3   0f   ^rooff  lest> 

perhaps,  he  should  meet  with  assaults  in  the  way. 
He  being,  therefore,  thus  accoutred,  walketh  out 
with  his  friends  to  the  gate,  and  there  he  asked 
the  porter  if  he  saw  any  pilgrims  pass  by.  Then 
the  porter  answered,  Yes. 

Chr.   Pray,  did  you  know  him  ?  said  he. 

For.  I  asked  his  name,  and  he  told  me  it  was 
Faithful. 

Chr.  0,  said  Christian,  I  know  him ;  he  is  my 
townsman,  my  near  neighbour  ;  he  comes  from  the 
place  where  I  was  born.  How  far  do  you  think 
he  may  be  before  ? 

Por.   He  is  got  by  this  time  below  the  hill. 

Chr.  Well,  said  Christian,  good  Porter,  the 
How  Christian  Lord  be  with  thee,  and  add  to  all  thy 
ereet  'at  part-  blessings  much  increase,  for  the  kind- 
ms-  ness  that  thou  hast  showed  to  me. 

Then  he  began  to  go  forward  ;  but  Discretion, 
Piety,  Charity,  and  Prudence,  would  accompany 
him  down  to  the  foot  of  the  hill.  So  they  went  on 
together,  reiterating  their  former  discourses,  till 
they  came  to  go  down  the  hill.  Then,  said  Chris- 
tian, as  it  was  difficult  coming  up,  so,  so  far  as  I 
can  see,  it  is  dangerous  going  down.  Yes,  said 
Prudence,  so  it  is,  for  it  is  a  hard  matter  for  a  man 
The  Vaiky  of     to  go  down  into  the  Valley  of  Ilumili- 

UuniUiauon.       atJ0Q>  ag  tj10U    art   now%  an(J    to  catch 

no  slip  by  the  way  ;  therefore,  said  they,  are  we 
come  out  to  accompany  thee  down  the  hill.  So 
he  began  to  go  down,  but  very  warily;  yet  he 
caught  a  slip  or  two.1 


1  Thus  it  is,  after  a  pilgrim  has  been  favoured  with  any 
special  and  peculiar  blessings,  there  is  danger  of  his  being 
pulled  up  by  them,  and  exalted  on  account  of  them ;  so  was 
even  holy  Paul ;  therefore,  the  messenger  of  Satan  was  per- 
mitted to  buffet  him.  2  Co.  xii.  7- — (Mason.)  "We  are  not  told 
here  what  these  slips  were  ;  but  when  Christian  narrates  the 
battle  to  Hopeful,  he  lets  us  iuto  the  secret: — '  These  three 
villains,'  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt,  '  set  upon  me,  and  I 
beginning,  like  a  Christian,  to  resist,  they  gave  but  a  call,  and 
in  came  their  master.  I  would,  as  the  saying  is,  have  given  my 
life  for  a  penny,  but  that,  as  God  would  have  it,  I  was  clothed 
with  armour  of  proof.'  In  the  Second  Part,  Great-heart  attri- 
buted the  sore  combat  with  Apollyon  to  have  arisen  from  '  the 
fruit  of  those  slips  that  he  got  in  going  down  the  hill.'  Great 
enjoyments  need  the  most  prayerful  watchfulness  iD  going 
down  from  them,  lest  those  three  villains  cause  us  to  slip. 
Christian's  heavenly  enjoyment  in  the  communion  of  saints  was 
lollowed  by  his  humbling  adventures  in  the  valley — a  needful 


Then  I  saw  in  my  dream  that  these  good  com- 
panions, when  Christian  was  gone  to  the  bottom 
of  the  hill,  gave  him  a  loaf  of  bread,  a  bottle  of 
wine,  and  a  cluster  of  raisins ;  and  then  he  went 
on  his  way. 

But  now,  in  this  Valley  of  Humiliation,  poor 
Christian  was  hard  put  to  it ;  for  he  had  gone  hut 
a  little  way,  before  he  espied  a  foul  fiend  coming 
over  the  field  to  meet  him ;  his  name  is  Apollyon. 
Then  did  Christian  begin  to  be  afraid,  and  to  cast 
in  his  mind  whether  to  go  back  or  to  stand   his 
ground.     But  he  considered  again  that   Chri8tiimnoa 
he  had  no  armour  for  his  back ;  and,     mour  for  his 
therefore,   thought  that  to  turn  the 
back  to  him  might  give  him  the  greater  advantage, 
with  ease  to  pierce  him  with  his  darts.2    Therefore 
he  resolved  to  venture  and  stand  his   Christian's   re- 
ground;  for,    thought  he,   had  I  no     ^hat  «£ 
more  in  mine  eye  than  the  saving  of     Apollyon. 
my  life,  it  would  be  the  best  way  to  stand. 

So  he  went  on,  and  Apollyon  met  him.  Now 
the  monster  was  hideous  to  behold ;  he  was  clothed 
with  scales,  like  a  fish  (and  they  are  his  pride), 
he  had  wings  like  a  dragon,  feet  like  a  bear,  and 
out  of  his  belly  came  fire  and  smoke,  and  his 
mouth  was  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion.3  When  he 
was  come  up  to  Christian,  he  beheld  him  with  a 
disdainful  countenance,  and  thus  began  to  question 
with  him. 

Apol.  Whence  come  you  ?  and  whither  are  you 
bound  ? 

Chr.  I  am  come  from  the  City  of  Destruction, 
which  is  the  place  of  all  evil,  and  am  going  to  the 
City  of  Zion. 

Afol.  By  this  I  perceive  thou  art  one  of  my 
subjects,  for  all  that  country  is  mine,  KilC0XiTse  bc_ 
and  I  am  the  prince  and  god  of  it.  twixtChristiaa 
How  is  it,  then,  that  thou  hast  run 
away  from  thy  king  ?  Were  it  not  that  I  hope 
thou  mayest  do  me  more  service,  I  would  strike 
thee  now,  at  one  blow,  to  the  ground. 

Chr.  I  was  born,  indeed,  in  your  dominions, 
but  your  service  was  hard,  and  your  wages  such 
as  a  man  could  not  live  on,  '  for  the  wages  of  sin 


proof  of  Divine  love  to  his  soul.  '  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chasteneth.' — (Eu.)  'A  broken  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not 
despise.'  Has  he  given  it  to  thee,  my  reader  ?  Then  he  has 
given  thee  a  cabinet  to  hold  his  grace  in.  True,  it  is  painful 
now,  it  is  sorrowful,  it  bleeds,  it  sighs,  it  sobs.  Well,  very 
well ;  all  this  is  because  he  has  a  mind  that  thou  mayest 
rejoice  in  heaven. — (Banyan's  Accejdahle  Sacrifice.) 

2  '  No  armour  for  his  back ;'  to  desist  is  inevitable  ruin, 
lie  sees  no  safety  except  in  facing  his  enemy.  Fear  itself 
creates  additional  courage,  and  induces  him  to  stand  his  ground. 
— (Drayton.) 

3  The  description  of  Apollyon  is  terrible.  This  dreadful 
imagery  is  collected  from  various  parts  of  Scripture,  where  the 
attributes  of  the  most  terrible  animals  are  given  him  ;  the 
attributes  of  leviathan,  the  dragon,  the  lion,  and  the  bear ;  to 
denote  his  strength,  his  pride,  bis  rage,  his  coura-e,  aud  bin 
cruelty. — (Andronicus.) 


112 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


is  death,'  Ro.  vi  23;  therefore,  when  I  was  come  to 
years,  I  did  as  other  considerate  persons  do,  look 
out,  if,  perhaps,  I  might  mend  myself. 

Apol.  There  is  no  prince  that  will  thus  lightly 
Apoiiyon's  flat-  lose  lns  subjects,1  neither  will  I  as 
tery-  yet  lose  thee;  but  since  thou  corn- 

plainest  of  thy  service  and  wages,  he  content  to 
go  hack ;  what  our  country  will  afford,  I  do  here 
promise  to  give  thee. 

Chr.  But  I  have  let  myself  to  another,  even  to 
the  King  of  princes ;  and  how  can  I,  with  fairness, 
go  hack  with  thee  ? 

AroL.  Thou  hast  done  in  this  according  to  the 
.    „         ,       proverb,  '  Changed  a  bad  for  a  worse ;' 

Apollyon  under-    r        .     .  t  /» 

values  Christ's  but  it  is  ordinary  for  those  that  have 
professed  themselves  his  servants, 
after  a  while  to  give  him  the  slip,  and  return  again 
to  me.     Do  thou  so  too,  and  all  shall  be  well. 

Ciir.  I  have  given  him  my  faith,  and  sworn  my 
allegiance  to  him ;  how,  then,  can  I  go  back  from 
this,  and  not  be  hanged  as  a  traitor  ? 

Apol.  Thou  didst  the  same  to  me,  and  yet  I 

Apollyon  pre-      am  wiUirlg  t0  PaSS  hJ  all»  if  D0W  tll0U 

tends  to  be     wilt  yet  turn  again  and  go  back. 

Chr.  What  I  promised  tbee  was  in 
my  nonage  ;2  and,  besides,  I  count  the  Prince 
under  whose  banner  now  I  stand  is  able  to  absolve 
me ;  yea,  and  to  pardon  also  what  I  did  as  to 
my  compliance  with  thee ;  and  besides,  0  thou 
destroying  Apollyon !  to  speak  truth,  I  like  his 
service,  his  wages,  his  servants,  his  government, 
his  company,  and  country,  better  than  thine ;  and, 
therefore,  leave  off  to  persuade  me  further ;  I  am 
his  servant,  and  I  will  follow  him. 

Apol.   Consider  again,  when  thou  art  in  cool 
,    ,     blood,  what  thou  art  like  to  meet  with 

Apollyon  pleads  ' 

the  gnevous  in  the  way  that  thou  goest.  Tnou 
tians,  to  dis"  knowest  that,  for  the  most  part,  his 
fcm&omw^  servants  come  to  an  ill  end,  be- 
sisting  in  lus  cause  they  are  transgressors  against 
me  and  my  ways.  How  many  of 
them  have  been  put  to  shameful  deaths  !  and, 
besides,  thou  countest  his  service  better  than  mine, 
whereas  he  never  came  yet  from  the  place  where 
he  is  to  deliver  any  that  served  him  out  of  their 
bauds ;  but  as  for  me,  how  many  times,  as  all  the 


1  In  our  days,  when  emigration  is  so  encouraged  by  the 
state,  it  may  be  difficult  for  some  youthful  readers  to  under- 
stand this  argument  of  Apoiiyon's.  In  Bunyan's  time,  every 
subject  was  deemed  to  be  Crown  property,  and  no  one  dared 
depart  the  realm  without  a  license.  Thus,  when  Cromwell  and 
his  heroes  had  hired  ships,  and  were  ready  to  start  for  America, 
Charles  I.  providentially  detained  them,  to  work  out  the  great 
Revolution. — (Ed.) 

2  Promises  or  vows,  whether  made  by  us  or  by  others  on 
our  behalf,  before  we  possessed  powers  of  reason  or  reflection, 
cannot  be  binding.  The  confirmation  or  rejection  of  all  vows 
made  by  or  for  us  in  our  nonage,  should,  on  arriving  at  years, 
of  discretion,  be  our  deliberate  choice,  for  we  must  recollect 
that  no  personal  dedication  can  be  acceptable  to  God  unless  it 
is  the  result  of  solemn  inquiry. — Ed. 


world  very  well  knows,  have  I  delivered,  either  by 
power  or  fraud,  those  that  have  faithfully  served 
me,  from  him  and  his,  though  taken  by  them ;  and 
so  I  will  deliver  thee. 

Chr.  His  forbearing  at  present  to  deliver  them 
is  on  purpose  to  try  their  love,  whether  they  will 
cleave  to  him  to  the  end ;  and  as  for  the  ill  end 
thou  sayest  they  come  to,  that  is  most  glorious  in 
their  account;  for,  for  present  deliverance,  they 
do  not  much  expect  it,  for  they  stay  for  their 
glory,  and  then  they  shall  have  it,  when  their 
Prince  comes  in  his  and  the  glory  of  the  angels. 

Apol.  Thou  hast  already  been  unfaithful  in  thy 
service  to  him  ;  and  how  dost  thou  think  to  receive 
wages  of  him  ? 

Chr.  Wherein,  0  Apollyon !  have  I  been 
unfaithful  to  him  ? 

Apol.  Thou  didst  faint  at  first  setting  out,  when 
thou  wast  almost  choked  in  the  Gulf  Apollyon  pleads 
of  Despond ;  thou  didst  attempt  wrong  fSf s  in- 
ways  to  be  rid  of  thy  burden,  whereas  against  him. 
thou  shouldest  have  stayed  till  thy  Prince  had 
taken  it  off;  thou  didst  sinfully  sleep,  and  lose  thy 
choice  thing;  thou  wast,  also,  almost  persuaded 
to  go  back,  at  the  sight  of  the  lions ;  and  when 
thou  talkest  of  thy  journey,  and  of  what  thou  hast 
beard  and  seen,  thou  art  inwardly  desirous  of 
vain-glory  in  all  that  thou  sayest  or  doest.3 

Chr.  All  this  is  true,  and  much  more  which 
thou  has  left  out ;  but  the*  Prince,  whom  I  serve 
and  honour,  is  merciful,  and  ready  to  forgive ;  but, 
besides,  these  infirmities  possessed  me  in  thy 
country,  for  there  I  sucked  them  in ;  and  I  have 
groaned  under  them,  been  sorry  for  them,  and 
have  obtained  pardon  of  my  Prince.4 


3  Mark  the  subtlety  of  this  gradation  in  temptation.  The 
profits  of  the  world  and  pleasures  of  sin  are  held  out  as  allure- 
ments. The  apostasy  of  others  suggested.  The  difficulties, 
dangers,  and  sufferings  of  the  Lord's  people,  are  contrasted 
with  the  prosperity  of  sinners.  The  recollections  of  our  sins 
and  backslidings,  under  a  profession  of  religion.  The  supposi- 
tion that  all  our  profession  is  founded  in  pride  and  vain-glory. 
All  backed  by  our  own  consciences ;  as  if  Apollyon  strad- 
dled quite  across  the  way,  and  stopped  us  from  going  on. — 
(Andronicus.) 

4  This  dialogue  is  given,  in  different  words,  in  the  Jerusalem 
Sinner  Saved,  vol.  i.  pp.  79.  80.  Satan  is  loath  to  part  with  a 
great  sinner.  What,  my  true  servant,  quoth  he,  my  old 
servaut,  wilt  thou  forsake  me  now?  Having  so  often  sold 
thyself  to  me  to  work  wickedness,  wilt  thou  forsake  me  now  ? 
Thou  horrible  wretch,  dost  not  know  that  thou  hast  sinned 
thyself  beyond  the  reach  of  grace,  and  dost  thou  think  to  find 
mercy  now  ?  Art  not  thou  a  murderer,  a  thief,  a  harlot,  a 
witch,  a  sinner  of  the  greatest  size,  and  dost  thou  look  for 
mercy  now  ?  Dost  thou  think  that  Christ  will  foul  his  fingers 
with  thee?  It  is  enough  to  make  angels  blush,  saith  Satan, 
to  see  so  vile  a  one  knock  at  heaven's  gates  for  mercy,  and 
wilt  thou  be  so  abominably  bold  to  do  it  ?  Thus  Satan  dealt 
with  me,  says  the  great  sinner,  when  at  first  I  came  to  Jesus 
Christ.  And  what  did  you  reply  ?  saith  the  tempted.  Why, 
I  granted  the  whole  charge  to  be  true,  says  the  other.  And 
what,  did  you  despair,  or  how  ?  No,  saith  he,  I  said,  I  am 
Magdalene,  I  am  Zaceheus,  I  am  the  thief,  I  am  the  harlot,  I 
am  the  publican,  I  am  the  prodigal,  and  one  of  Christ's  mur- 


THE    PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


113 


Afol.  Then  Apollyon  broke  out  into  a  grievous 

Apollyon    in    .     "S"0'   SW"S>   l    am    aU  "W"!  t0    th'3 

r>i:.'r  fails  upon    Prince ;   I  hate  his  person,  his  laws, 

ChrUUan.  l  i         T 

ami  people ;  1  am  come  out  on  pur- 
pose to  withstand  thee. 

Cim.  Apollyon,  beware  what  you  do ;  for  I  am 
in  the  king's  highway,  the  way  of  holiness ;  there- 
fore take  heed  to  yourself. 

ArOL.  Then  Apollyon  straddled  quite  over  the 
whole  breadth  of  the  way,  and  said,  I  am  void  of 
fear  in  this  matter:  prepare  thyself  to  die;  for  I 
swear  by  my  infernal  den.  that  thou  shalt  go  no 
further;  here  will  I  spill  thy  soul. 

And  with  that  he  threw  a  flaming  dart  at  his 
breast  ;l  but  Christian  had  a  shield  in  his  hand, 
with  which  he  caught  it,  and  so  prevented  the 
danger  of  that. 

Then  did  Christian  draw ;  for  he  saw  it  was 
time  to  bestir  him :  and  Apollyon  as  fast  made  at 
him,  throwing  darts  as  thick  as  hail ;  by  the  which, 
notwithstanding  all  that  Christian  could  do  to 
„.  .  ..  avoid  it,  Apollyon  wounded  him  in  his 

wounded  in  his  head,  his  hand,  and  foot.  This  made 
faith,  and  con-  Christian  give  a  little  back  ;  Apollyon, 
venation.  therefore,   followed   his   work   amain, 

and  Christian  again  took  courage,  and  resisted  as 
manfully  as  he  could.  This  sore  combat  lasted 
for  above  half  a  day,  even  till  Christian  was  almost 
quite  spent ;  for  you  must  know,  that  Christian, 
by  reason  of  his  wounds,  must  needs  grow  weaker 
and  weaker. 

Then  Apollyon,  espying  his  opportunity,  began 
Apollyon  cast-  to  gather  up  close  to  Christian,  and 
the  ground  the  wrestling  with  him,  gave  him  a  dread- 
Christian.  fui  fan .  anj  with  t]iat)  Christian's 
sword  flew  out  of  his  hand.  Then  said  Apollyon, 
I  am  sure  of  thee  now.2  And  with  that  he  had 
almost  pressed  him  to  death ;  so  that  Christian 
began  to  despair  of  life:  but  as  God  would  have 
it,  while  Apollyon  was  fetching  of  his  last  blow, 
thereby  to   make   a  full  end   of  this  good  man, 


derers— yea,  worse  thau  any  of  these ;  and  yet  God  was  so  far 
oil'  from  rejecting  of  rne,  as  I  found  afterwards,  that  there  was 
music  and  dancing  in  his  house  lor  me,  and  for  joy  that  I  was 
coine  home  unto  him.  When  Satan  charged  Luther  with  a 
long  list  of  crimes,  he  replied,  This  is  all  true ;  but  write 
another  line  at  the  bottom,  'The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  eleanseth  us  from  all  sin.' — (Ed). 

1  The  devil  is  that  great  and  dogged  leviathan,  that '  spread- 
eth  sharp  pointed  things  upon  the  mire.'  Job  xL  30.  For  be 
the  spreading  nature  of  our  corruptions  never  so  broad,  he 
will  find  sharp  pointed  things  enough  to  stick  in  the  mire  of 
them  for  our  affliction  ;  they  are  called  fiery  darts,  and  he  has 
abundance  of  them  with  which  he  can  and  will  sorely  prick 
and  wound  our  spirits. — (Buuyan  on  Christ's  Love,  vol.  ii. 
p.  65.) 

-  When  infidel  thoughts  prevail,  so  that  doubts  of  the  truth 
of  Scripture  take  hold  of  the  mind,  the  sword  of  the  Spirit 
flies  out  of  the  hand.  Unarmed  before  a  ferocious  enemy,  it 
was  an  awful  moment;  but  God  revives  his  faith  in  the 
Divine  Word,  he  recovers  his  sword,  and  gi\  es  his  eueuvy  a 
deadly  plunge — I  shall  rise. — (Drayton.) 
YOL.  III. 


Christian  nimbly  stretched  out  his  hand  for  his 
sword,  and  caught  it,  saying,  '  Rejoice  not  against 
me,    0  mine  enemy :    when   I  fall,   1 

i     ii  •        ,  i        .  ,        ,  Christian''? 

shall  arise,  Mi.  vii.  s;  and  with  that  rictary  ora 
gave  him  a  deadly  thrust,  which  made  Al'°"}":'- 
him  give  back,  as  one  that  had  received  his  mortal 
wound.  Christian  perceiving  that,  made  at  hint 
again,  saying,  '  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are 
more  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  loved  us.' 
Ro.  viu.  37.  And  with  that  Apollyon  spread  forth 
his  dragon's  wings,  and  sped  him  away,  that  Chris- 
tian for  a  season  ''  saw  him  no  more.4  Ja.  to.  :. 

In  this  combat  no  man  can  imagine,  unless  he 
had  seen  and  heard  as  I  did,  what  a  brief  relation 
yelling  and  hideous  roaring  Apollyon  ly  yj  SJJectJ 
made  all  the  time  of  the  fight — ho  ^r- 
spake  like  a  dragon ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  what 
sighs  and  groans  burst  from  Christian's  heart.  I 
never  saw  him  all  the  while  give  so  much  as  one 
pleasant  look,  till  he  perceived  he  had  wounded 
Apollyon  with  his  two-edged  sword ;  then,  indeed, 
he  did  smile,  and  look  upward;  but  it  was  the 
dreadfulest  sight  that  ever  I  saw.5 

So  when  the  battle  was  over,  Christian  said, 
'  I  will  here  give  thanks  to  him  that   christian  givr3 
delivered  me  out  of  the  mouth  of  the     God  thanks  tor 
lion,  to  him  that  did  help  me  against 
Apollyon.'      And  so  he  did,  saying — 


3  '  For  a  season,'  is  only  found  in  the  first  edition.  These 
words  may  have  been  omitted,  iu  Bunyan's  subsequent  edi- 
tions, by  a  typographical  error,  or  have  been  struck  out  by 
hun.  My  impression  is,  that  they  were  left  out  by  the  printer 
in  error;  because,  in  the  Second  Part,  when  (he  pilgrims  pass 
the  spot  and  talk  of  the  battle,  we  are  told  that  '  when  Apoll- 
yon was  beat,  he  made  his  retreat  to  the  next  valley.'  And 
there  poor  Christian  was  awfully  beset  with  him  again. —  (Kn  ; 

4  You  will  find,  from  the  perusal  of  Bunyan's  owu  spiritual 
life,  that  he  has  here  brought  together,  in  the  assault  of  Apoll- 
yon upon  Christian,  many  of  the  most  grievous  temptations 
with  which  his  owu  soul  was  beset,  as  also,  in  Christian's  an- 
swers agaiust  them,  the  very  method  of  defence  which  he  him- 
self was  taught  by  Divine  grace  in  the  midst  of  the  conflict. 
It  is  here  condensed  into  a  narrow  and  vivid  scene,  but  it 
extended  over  years  of  Bunyan's  life;  and  the  wisdom  that  is 
in  it,  and  the  points  of  experience  illustrated,  were  the  fruit 
of  many  months  of  paiufulness,  danger,  and  desperate  struggle 
with  the  adversary,  which  he  had  to  go  through. — (Cheever.) 

s  The  literal  history  of  this  terrific  conflict  may  be  found  in 
Banyan's  cxperieuce  recorded  in  Grace  Abounding,  Nos.  L31 
— 173,  when  he  recovered  his  sword,  and  put  his  enemy  to 
flight.     He  describes  his  agonies  in  the  combat  as  if  he  was 
being  racked  upon  the  wheel,  and  states  that  it  lasted  for 
about  a  year.     Floods  of  blasphemies  were   poured  in   upon 
him,  but  he  was  saved  from  utter  despair,  because  t! 
loathsome  to  him.     Dr.  Cheever  eloquently  says,  '  What  made 
the  tight  a  thousand  times  worse  for  poor  Christian  was,  that 
many  of  these  hellish  darts  were  tipped,  by  Apollyon- 
nant  ingenuity,  with  sentences  from  Scripture;'  so  thai 
tian  thought  the  Bible  was  against  him.     One  of  tie  - 
darts  penetrated  his  soul  with  the  awful  words,  'no  place  lor 
repentance  ;'  and  another  with,  '  hath  never  forgiveness.'     1  lie 
recovery  of  his  sword  was  by  a  heavenly  suggestion  that  he 
did  not   'refuse  him  that  spcakcth:'  new   vigour  was  com- 
municated.    '  When  I  fall,  I  shall  arise,'  was  a  home-thrust 
at  Satan  ;  who  letl  him,  richly  to  enjoy  the  consolations  o!  tne 
gospel  after  this  dreadful  battle.      (ED.) 

15 


114 


THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


Great  Beelzebub,  the  captain  of  this  fiend, 
Design'd  my  ruin ;  therefore  to  this  end 
He  sent  him  harness'd  out ;  and  he  with  rage, 
That  hellish  was,  did  fiercely  me  engage. 
But  blessed  Michael  helped  me,  and  I, 
By  dint  of  sword,  did  quickly  make  him  fly. 
Therefore  to  him  let  me  give  lasting  praise, 
And  thank  and  bless  his  holy  name  always. 
Then  there  came  to  him  a  hand,  with  some  of 
the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life,  the  which  Christian 
took,    and   applied   to  the   wounds  that   he  had 
received  in  the  battle,  and  was  healed  immediately.1 
He  also  sat  down  in  that  place  to  eat  oread,  and 
to  drink  of  the  bottle  that  was  given  him  a  little 
Christian   goes  'before;    so    being   refreshed,   he  ad- 
on  his  journey   dressed  himself  to  his  iourney,  with 

with  his  sword  -i-i         1       n       i 

drawn  in  ids   his  sword  drawn  in  liis  hand ;  tor  he 
said,  I  know  not  but  some  other  enemy 
may  be  at  hand.     But  he  met  with  no  other  affront 
from  Apollyon  quite  through  this  valley. 

Now,  at  the  end  of  this  valley,  was  another, 
The  Valley  of  ca^e(^  the  Valley  OI"  the  Shadow  of 
the  shadow  of  Death,  and  Christian  must  needs  go 

Death. 

through  it,  because  the  way  to  the 
Celestial  City  lay  through  the  midst  of  it.  Now 
this  valley  is  a  very  solitary  place.  The  prophet 
Jeremiah  thus  describes  it:  'A  wilderness,  aland 
of  deserts,  and  of  pits,  a  land  of  drought,  and  of 
the  shadow  of  death,  a  land  that  no  man'  (but  a 
Christian)  'passed  through,  and  where  no  man 
dwelt.'  Je.  ii.  6. 

Now  here  Christian  was  worse  put  to  it  than  in 
his  fight  with  Apollyon;  as  by  the  sequel  you 
shall  see.2 

I  saw  then  in  my  dream,  that  when  Christian 
The  children  of  was  got  to  the  borders  of  the  Shadow 
thespiesgoback.  0f  Death,  there  met  him  two  men, 
children  of  them  that  brought  up  an  evil  report  of 
the  good  land,  Nu.  xiii.,  making  haste  to  go  back ;  to 
whom  Christian  spake  as  follows : — 

Chr.  Whither  are  you  going  ? 

Men.  They  said,  Back!  back!  and  we  would 
have  you  to  do  so  too,  if  either  life  or  peace  is 
prized  by  you. 


1  By  '  leaves '  here  (Rev.  xxii.  2),  we  are  to  understand  the 
blessed  and  precious  promises,  consolations,  and  encourage- 
ments, that,  by  virtue  of  Christ,  we  find  everywhere  growing 
on  the  new  covenant,  which  will  be  handed  freely  to  the 
wounded  conscience  that  is  tossed  on  the  reckless  waves  of  doubt 
and  unbelief.  Christ's  leaves  are  better  thau  Adam's  aprons, 
lie  sent  his  Word,  and  healed  them.— (Buuyan's  Holy  City.) 

2  However  terrible  these  conflicts  are,  they  are  what  every 
Christian  pilgrim  has  to  encounter  that  is  determined  to  win 
heaven.  Sin  and  death,  reprobates  and  demons,  are  against 
him.  The  Almighty,  all  good  angels  and  men,  is  for  him. 
Eternal  life  is  the  reward.  Be  not  discouraged,  young  Chris- 
tian !  '  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  r  We  shall 
come  off  more  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  hath  loved 
us.  Equal  to  our  day  so  shall  be  our  strength.  The  enemies 
had  a  special  check  from  our  Lord,  while  Mr.  'Fearing  passed 
through. 

'  Though  death  and  hell  obstruct  the  way 
The  meanest  saint  shall  win  the  day.'— (Ed.) 


Chr.  Why?  what's  the  matter?  said  Christian. 

Men.  Matter !  said  they ;  we  were  going  that 
way  as  you  are  going,  and  went  as  far  as  we  durst ; 
and  indeed  we  were  almost  past  coming  back ;  for 
had  we  gone  a  little  further,  we  had  not  been  here 
to  bring  the  news  to  thee. 

Chr.  But  what  have  you  met  with?  said  Christian. 

Men.  Why,  we  were  almost  in  the  Valley  of 
the  Shadow  of  Death ;  hut  that,  by  good  hap,  we 
looked  before  us,  and  saw  the  danger  before  we 

Came  to  it.  Ps.  sliv.  19  ;  cvii.  10. 

Chr.  But  what  have  you  seen  ?  said  Christian. 

Men.  Seen  !  Why,  the  valley  itself,  which  is 
as  dark  as  pitch ;  we  also  saw  there  the  hobgob- 
lins, satyrs,  and  dragons  of  the  pit ;  we  heard  also 
in  that  Valley  a  continual  howling  and  yelling,  as 
of  a  people  under  unutterable  misery,  who  there 
sat  bound  in  affliction  and  irons;  and  over  that 
Valley  hangs  the  discouraging  clouds  of  confusion. 
Death  also  doth  always  spread  his  wings  over  it. 
In  a  word,  it  is  every  whit  dreadful,  being  utterly 

without  Order.  Job  iii.  5;  x.  26. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  I  perceive  not  yet, 
by  what  you  have  said,  but  that  this  is  my  way  to 
the  desired  haven.3  Je.  ii.  6. 

Men.  Be  it  thy  way ;  we  will  not  choose  it  for 
ours.  So  they  parted,  and  Christian  went  on  his 
way,  but  still  with  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand ; 
for  fear  lest  he  should  be  assaulted. 

I  saw  then  in  my  dream  so  far  as  this  valley 
reached,  there  was  on  the  right  hand  a  very  deep 
ditch :  that  ditch  is  it  into  which  the  blind  have 
led  the  blind  in  all  ages,  and  have  both  there 
miserably  perished.4  ?s.  lxix.  14, 15.  Again,  behold, 
on  the  left  hand,  there  was  a  very  dangerous  quag, 
into  which,  if  even  a  good  man  falls,  he  can  find 
no  bottom  for  his  foot  to  stand  on.  Into  that  quag 
king  David  once  did  fall,  and  had  no  doubt  therein 
been  smothered,  had  not  He  that  is  able  plucked 
him  out. 

The  pathway  was  here  also  exceeding  narrow, 
and  therefore  good  Christian  was  the  more  put  to 
it ;  for  when  he  sought,  in  the  dark,  to  shun  the 
ditch  on  the  one  hand,  he  was  ready  to  tip  over 
into  the  mire  on  the  other ;  also  when  he  sought 
to  escape  the  mire,  without  great  carefulness  he 
would  be  ready  to  fall  into  the  ditch.  Thus  he 
went  on,  and  1  heard  him  here  sigh  bitterly ;  for 
besides  the  dangers  mentioned  above,  the  path- 
way was  here  so  dark,  that  ofttimes,  when  he  lift 


a  '  Desired  heaven/  in  some  of  Bunyan's  editions. — (Ed.) 
4  The  ditch  on  the  right  hand  is  error  in  principle,  into 
which  the  bliud,  as  to  spiritual  truth,  fall.  Tlie  ditch  on  the 
left  hand  means  outward  sin  and  wickedness,  which  many  fall 
into.  Both  are  alike  dangerous  to  pilgrims :  but  the  Lord 
'will  keep  the  feet  of  his  saints.'  1  Sa.  ii.  9.  —  (Mason.) 
Dr.  Dodd  considers  that  by  the  deep  ditch  is  intended  '  pre- 
sumptuous hopes,'  and  the  no  less  dangerous  quag  to  be 
'  despairing  fears.' — (Ed.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


115 


up  his  foot  to  set  forward,  he  knew  not  where,  or 
upon  what  he  should  set  it  m >xt. 

Ahout  the  midst  of  this  valley,  T  perceived  the 
mouth  of  hell  to  he,  and  it  stood  also  hard  by 
the  way-side.  Now,  thought  Christian,  what  shall 
I  do  ?  And  ever  aud  anon  the  flame  and  smoke 
would  come  out  in  such  abundance,  with  sparks 
and  hideous  noises  (things  that  cared  not  for 
Christian's  sword,  as  did  Apollyon  before),  thai 
lie  was  forced  to  put  up  his  sword,  and  betake 
himself  to  another  weapon,  called  All-prayer.  Eph. 
vi.  is.  So  he  cried  in  my  hearing,  '  0  Lord,  I 
beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul ! '  Vs.  cxvi.  4.  Thus  he 
went  on  a  great  while,  yet  still  the  flames  would 
be  reaching  towards  him.1  Also  he  heard  doleful 
voice?,  and  rushings  to  and  fro,  so  that  sometimes 
he  thought  he  should  be  torn  iu  pieces,  or  trodden 
down  like  mire  iu  the  streets.  This  frightful  sight 
was  seen,  and  these  dreadful  noises  were  heard  by 
him  for  several  miles  together.  And,  coining  to  a 
place,  where  he  thought  he  heard  a  company  of 
fiends  coming  forward  to  meet  him,  he  stopped 
Christian  put  to  au^  Dega11  to  muse  what  he  had  best  to 
■  stand,  but  for  do.  Sometimes  he  had  half  a  thought 
to  go  back  ;  then  again  he  thought 
he  might  be  half  way  through  the  valley ;  he 
remembered  also  how  he  had  already  vanquished 
many  a  danger,  and  that  the  danger  of  going 
back  might  be  much  more  than  for  to  go  forward  ; 
so  he  resolved  to  go  on.  Yet  the  fiends  seemed  to 
come  nearer  and  nearer ;  but  when  they  were  come 
even  almost  at  him,  he  cried  out  with  a  most  vehe- 
ment voice,  '  I  will  walk  in  the  strength  of  the 
Lord  God  ;'  so  they  gave  back,  and  came  no  further. 

One  thing  I  would  not  let  slip ;  I  took  notice 
that  now  poor  Christian  was  so  confounded,  that  he 
did  not  know  his  own  voice;  and  thus  I  perceived 
it.  Just  when  be  was  come  over  against  the  mouth 
of  the  burning  pit,  one  of  the  wicked  ones  got  be- 

Christian  made    nind    llim>  alld  stePt  UP  *>*%  to  him> 

^d:^e'hat,lie  and,  whisperingly,  suggested  many 
mies,  when  it  grievous  blasphemies  to  him,  which  he 
suggestedthem  verily  thought  had  proceeded  from  his 
into  his  mind.  owu  miIul.  This  put  Christian  more 
to  it  than  anything  that  he  met  with  before ;  even 
to  think  that  he  should  now  blaspheme  him  that  he 
loved  so  much  before  ;  yet,  if  he  could  have  helped 
it,  he  would  not  have  done  it;  but  he  had  not  the 
discretion  either  to  stop  his  ears,  or  to  know  from 
whence  these  blasphemies  came."' 


1  The  sight  of  an  immortal  soul  in  peril  of  its  eternal  in- 
terests, beset  with  enemies,  engaged  iu  a  desperate  conflict, 
with  hell  opening  her  mouth  before,  and  fiends  and  tempta- 
tions pressing  alter,  is  a  sublime  and  awful  speetacle.  Man 
cannot  aid  him:  all  his  help  is  in  God  only.— (Cheever.) 

2  And  as  for  the  secrets  of  Satan,  such  as  are  suggestions 
to  question  the  being  of  God,  the  truth  of  his  Word,  and  to  be 
annoyed  with  devilish  blasphemies,  none  are  more  acquainted 
with  these  than  the  bi-rgest  siuuers  at  their  conversion;  where- 


Wben  Christian  had  travelled  in  this  disconsolate 
condition  some  considerable  time,  he  thought  he 
heard  the  voice  of  a  man,  as  going  before  him, 
saying,  '  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil;  for  thou  art 
with  me.'  Ps.  xxiii.  4.'5 

Then  he  was  glad,  and  that  for  these  reasons : 

First,  Because  he  gathered  from  thence,  that 
some  who  feared  God,  were  iu  this  valley  as  well 
as  himself. 

Secondly,  For  that  he  perceived  God  was  with 
them,  though  in  that  dark  and  dismal  state  ;  and 
why  not,  thought  he,  with  me?  though,  by  reason 
of  the  impediment  that  attends  this  place,  I  cannot 
perceive  it.  Job  is.  n. 

Tliirdly,  For  that  he  hoped,  could  he  overtake 
them,  to  have  company  by  and  by.  So  he  went 
on,  and  called  to  him  that  was  before  ;  but  he  knew 
not  what  to  answer;  for  that  he  also  thought  him- 
self to  be  alone.  And  by  and  by  the  chriBtfandadat 
day  broke  ;  then  said  Christian,  He  break  ofda-v- 
hath  turned  '  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morn- 
ing. '   Am.  v.  8.4 

Now  morning  being  come,  he  looked  back,  not 
out  of  desire  to  return,  but  to  see,  by  the  light  of 
the  day,  what  hazards  he  had  gone  through  in  the 
dark.  So  he  saw  more  perfectly  the  ditch  that 
was  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  quag  that  was  on 
the  other ;  also  how  narrow  the  way  was  which  led 
betwixt  them  both ;  also  now  he  saw  the  hobgob- 
lins, and  satyrs,  and  dragons  of  the  pit,  but  al' 
afar  off  (for  after  break  of  day,  they  came  not 
nigh) ;  yet  they  were  discovered  to  him,  according 
to  that  which  is  written,  '  He  discovercth  deep 
things  out  of  darkness,  and  bringeth  out  to  light, 
the  shadow  of  death.'  J»b  xii.  22. 

Now  was  Christian  much  affected  with  his  de- 
liverance from  all  the  dangers  of  his  solitary  way  ; 
which  dangers,  though  he  feared  them  more  before, 
yet  he  saw  them  more  clearly  now,  because  the 
light  of  the  day  made  them  conspicuous  to  him. 
And  about  this  time  the  sun  was  rising,  and  this 


fore  thus  also  they  are  prepared  to  be  helps  in  the  church  to 
relieve  and  comfort  others. — {Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved,  vol.  L 
p.  80.)  See  also  a  very  interesting  debate  upon  this  subj<  et 
iu  Come  and  Welcome  to  Jesus  Christ,  vol.  i.  p.  250.  O, 
no  one  knows  the  terrors  of  these  days  but  myself. — {Grace 
Abounding,  Nos.  100—102.)  Satan  and  his  angels  trouble 
his  head  with  their  stinking  breath.  How  many  strange, 
hideous,  and  amazing  blasphemies  have  some,  that  are  coining 
to  Christ,  had  injected  upon  their  spirits  against  him.  — 
{Christ  a  Complete  Saviour,  vol.  i.  p.  20(J.)  He  brought  me 
up  also  out  of  a  horrible  pit ;  a  pit  of  noise  of  devils,  and  of 
my  heart  answering  them  with  distrust  and  fear. —  {Saints' 
Knowledge  of  Christ's  Love.) 

3  The  experience  of  other  saints  is  very  encouraging;  for 
the  soul  finds  that  others  have  gone  before  him  hi  dreadlul, 
dark,  and  drcarv  paths. — (Mason.) 

4  To  walk  in'  darkness,  and  not  be  distressed  for  it,  argues 
stupidity  of  the  soul.  To  have  the  liuht  of  God's  countenance 
shine  upon  us,  and  not  to  rej'iee  and  be  thankful  tor  it,  is 
impossible.—  (Masoa .) 


116 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


was  another  mercy  to  Christian  ;  for  you  must 
note,  that  though  the  first  part  of  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death  was  dangerous,  yet  tins  second 
The  second  part  part  which  he  was  yet  to  go,  was,  if 
of  this  valley  p0ssible,  far  more  dangerous  :*  for  from 
ous.  the  place  where  he  now  stood,  even  to 

the  end  of  the  valley,  the  way  was  all  along  set  so 
full  of  snares,  traps,  gins,  and  nets  here,  and  so 
full  of  pits,  pitfalls,  deep  holes,  and  shelvings  down 
there,  that  had  it  now  heen  dark,  as  it  was  when 
he  came  the  first  part  of  the  way,  had  he  had  a 
thousand  souls,  they  had  in  reason  heen  cast  away;2 
but,  as  I  said,  just  now  the  sun  was  rising.  Then 
said  he,  '  His  candle  sliineth  upon  my  head,  and 
by  his  light  I  walk  through  darkness.'  Jbbxxix.  3. 

In  this  light,  therefore,  he  came  to  the  end  of  the 
valley.  Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  at  the  end 
of  this  valley  lay  blood,  bones,  ashes,  and  mangled 
bodies  of  men,  even  of  pilgrims  that  had  gone  this 
way  formerly ;  and  while  I  was  musing  what  should 
be  the  reason,  I  espied  a  little  before  me  a  cave, 
where  two  giants,  POPE  and  PAGAN,  dwelt  in 
old  time ;  by  whose  power  and  tyranny  the  men 
whose  bones,  blood,  ashes,  <fcc,  lay  there,  were 
cruelly  put  to  death.3  But  by  this  place  Christian 
went  without  much  danger,  whereat  I  somewhat 
wondered ;  but  I  have  learnt  since,  that  PAGAN 
has  been  dead  many  a  day ;  and  as  for  the  other, 
though  he  be  yet  alive,  he  is,  by  reason  of  age,  and 
also  of  the  many  shrewd  brushes  that  he  met  with 
in  his  younger  days,  grown  so  crazy  and  stiff  in 
his  joints,  that  he  can  now  do  little  more  than  sit 
in  his  cave's  mouth,  grinning  at  pilgrims  as  they 
go  by,  and  biting  his  nails  because  he  cannot  come 
at  them.* 


■  I  would  not  be  too  confident,  but  I  apprehend  that  by 
this  second  part  of  the  valley  we  are  taught  that  believers  are 
not  most  iu  danger  when  under  the  deepest  distress ;  that  the 
snares  and  devices  of  the  enemy  are  so  many  and  various, 
through  the  several  stages  of  our  pilgrimage,  as  to  baffle  all 
description ;  and  that  all  the  emblems  of  these  valleys  could 
not  represent  the  thousandth  part  of  them.  Were  it  not  that 
the  Lord  guides  his  people  by  the  light  of  his  Word  and 
Spirit,  they  never  could  possibly  escape  them. — (Scott.) 

2  The  wicked  spirits  have  made  and  laid  for  us  snares,  pits, 
holes,  and  what  not,  if  peradveuture  by  something  we  may  be 
destroyed.  Yea,  and  we  should  most  certainly  be  so,  were  it 
not  for  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  they. — (Bunyan's  Saints' 
Knowledge  of  Christ's  Love,  vol.  ii.  p.  8.) 

8  Alas,  my  dear  country !  would  to  God  it  could  not  be  said 
to  thee,  since  the  departure  of  paganism  and  popery,  '  The 
blood  of  the  poor  innocents  is  found  in  thy  skirts,  not  by  a 
secret  search,  but  upon  thy  kings,  princes,  priests,  and  pro- 
phets.' Je.  ii.  34,  26.  Let  us  draw  a  veil  over  the  infamy  of 
Protestant  persecution,  and  bless  Jehovah,  who  has 
broken  the  arrow  and  the  bow. — (Andronicus.)  It  may  be 
questioned  whether  popery  may  not  yet  so  far  recover  its 
vigour  as  to  make  one  more  alarming  struggle  against  vital 
Christianity,  before  that  Man  of  Sin  be  finally  destroyed. 
Our  author,  however,  has  described  no  other  persecution  than 
what  Protestants,  in  his  time,  carried  on  against  one  another 
with  very  great  alacrity. — (Scott.) 

4  The'  quaint  and  pithy  point  of  this  passage  stamps  it  as 
one  of  Bunyan's  most  felicitous  descriptions.     We  who  live  in 


So  I  saw  that  Christian  went  on  his  way ;  yet,  at 
the  sight  of  the  Old  Man  that  sat  in  the  mouth  of 
the  cave,  he  could  not  tell  what  to  think,  especially 
because  he  spake  to  him,  though  he  could  not  go 
after  him  ;  saying,  '  You  will  never  mend,  till  more 
of  you  be  burned.'  But  he  held  his  peace,  and  set 
a  good  face  on  it,  and  so  went  by  and  catched  no 
hurt.5     Then  sang  Christian, 

O  world  of  wonders !  (I  can  say  no  less) 
That  I  should  be  preserv'd  in  that  distress    - 
That  I  have  met  with  here !     O  blessed  be  ' 
That  hand  that  from  it  hath  deliver'd  me  1 
Dangers  iu  darkness,  devils,  hell,  and  sin, 
Did  compass  me,  while  I  this  vale  was  in : 
Yea,  snares  and  pits,  and  traps,  and  nets,  did  lie    • 
My  path  about,  that  worthless,  silly  I 
Might  have  been  catch'd,  entangled,  and  cast  down ;  . 
But  since  1  live,  let  Jesus  wear  the  crown. 
Now,  as  Christian  went  on  his  way,  he  came  to 
a  little  ascent,  which  was  cast  up  on  purpose,  that 
pilgrims  might  see  before  them.     Up  there,  there- 
fore, Christian  went ;  and  looking  forward,  he  saw 
Faithful  before  him,  upon  his  journey.      Then  said 
Christian  aloud,  'Ho!  ho!   Soho!  stay,  and  I  will 
be  your  companion.  '6    At  that,  Faithful  looked  be- 


a  later  age  may,  indeed,  suspect  that  he  has  somewhat  ante- 
dated the  death  of  Pagan,  and  the  impotence  of  Pope;  but  his 
picture  of  their  cave  and  its  memorials,  his  delineation  of  the 
survivor  of  this  fearful  pair,  rank  among  those  master-touches 
which  have  won  such  lasting  honour  for  his  genius. — (Bernard 
Barton.) 

6  Christian  having  passed  the  gloomy  whirlwind  of  tempta- 
tion to  despair,  now  walks  in  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Righte- 
ousness, through  the  second  part  of  the  valley.  There  he 
encounters  the  persecution  of  the  state  church.  Act  after  act 
of  Parliament  had  been  passed — fidl  of  atrocious  penalties, 
imprisonments,  transportation,  and  hanging — to  deter  poor 
pilgrims  from  the  way  to  Zion.  '  The  way  was  full  of  snares, 
traps,  gins,  nets,  pitfalls,  and  deep  holes.'  Had  the  darkness 
of  mental  anguish  been  added  to  these  dangers,  he  must  have 
perished.  The  butcheries  of  Jefferies  strewed  the  way  with 
blood,  bones,  ashes,  and  mangled  bodies  of  pilgrims.  Pope 
reared  his  ugly  head,  and  growled  out,  '  More  of  you  must  be 
burned.'  The  desolating  tyranny  of  the  church  was  curbed  by 
the  King's  turning  papist,  which  paved  the  way  for  the  glorious 
Revolution  of  1688.  It  appears  from  the  Grace  Abounding, 
that  to  the  time  of  Bunyan's  imprisonment  for  preaching  the 
gospel,  he  was  involved  frequently  in  deeply-distressing  spiri- 
tual darkness ;  but,  from  his  entering  the  prison,  he  walked  iu 
the  light  of  God's  countenance  to  his  dying  day. — (En.) 

6  We  are  now  to  be  introduced  to  a  new  pilgrim,  and 
Christian  is  no  more  to  go  on  his  way  aloue.  The  sweet 
Christian  communion  depicted  in  this  book  forms  one  of  the 
most  delightful  features  in  it,  and  Faithful  and  Hopeful  are 
both  of  them  portraits  that  stand  out  in  as  firm  relief  as  that 
of  Christian  himself.  Faithful  is  the  Martyr  Pilgrim,  who 
goes  in  a  chariot  of  fire  to  heaven,  and  leaves  Christian  alone ; 
Hopeful  springs,  as  it  were,  out  of  Faithful's  ashes,  and  sup- 
plies his  place  all  along  the  remainder  of  the  pilgrimage.  The 
communion  between  these  loving  Christians,  their  sympathy 
and  share  in  each  other's  distresses,  their  mutual  counsels  and 
encouragements,  temptations  and  dangers,  experience  and  dis- 
cipline, their  united  joys  and  sorrows,  and  their  very  passing 
of  the  river  of  death  together,  form  the  sweetest  of  all  examples 
of  the  true  fellowship  of  saints,  united  to  the  same  Saviour, 
made  to  drink  into  the  same  Spirit,  baptized  with  the  same 
sufferings,  partakers  of  the  same  consolations,  crowned  with 
the  same  crown  of  life,  entering  together  upon  glory  evcrlast- 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


117 


hind  him ;  to  whom  Christian  cried  again,  '  Stay, 
stay,  till  I  come  up  to  you.'  But  Faithful  answered, 
'  No,  I  am  upon  my  life,  and  the  avenger  of  hlood 
is  behind  me.' 

At  this,  Christian  was  somewhat  moved,  and 
Christian  over-  putting  to  all  his  strength,  he  quickly 
takes  Faithful.  got  up  w;th  Faithful,  and  did  also 
overrun  him  ;  so  the  last  was  first.  Then  did 
Christian  vain-gloriously  smile,  because  he  had 
gotten  the  start  of  his  brother;1  but  not  taking 
good  heed  to  his  feet,  he  suddenly  stumbled  and 
fell,  and  could  not  rise  again,  until  Faithful  came 
up  to  help  him. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  they  went  very  lovingly 
Christian's  fall  on  together,  and  had  sweet  discourse 
52SJB52  of  all  things  that  had  happened  to 
ingly  to|ether.  them  in  their  pilgrimage ;  and  thus 
Christian  began. 

Chr.  My  honoured  and  well-beloved  brother, 
Faithful,  I  am  glad  that  I  have  overtaken  you ; 
and  that  God  has  so  tempered  our  spirits,  that 
we  can  walk  as  companions  in  this  so  pleasant  a 
path. 

Faith.  I  had  thought,  dear  friend,  to  have  had 
your  company  quite  from  our  town ;  but  you  did 
get  the  start  of  me,  wherefore  I  was  forced  to  come 
thus  much  of  the  way  alone. 

Chr.  How  long  did  you  stay  in  the  City  of 
Destruction,  before  you  set  out  after  me  on  your 
pilgrimage  ? 

Faith.  Till  I  could  stay  no  longer;  for  there 
Thcirtaik  about   was  great  talk  presently  after  you  were 

from     whenM    »0ne  0Ut'  tUat  0Ur  cit^  WOulc1'  in  sll0rt 

they  came.        time,  with  fire  from  heaven,  be  burned 
down  to  the  ground. 

Chr.  What !   did  your  neighbours  talk  so  ? 


ing. — (Clieever.)  The  author  has  displayed  great  skill  iu  in- 
troducing a  companion  to  his  Pilgrim  in  this  place.  Thus  far 
the  personal  adventures  of  Christian  had  been  of  the  most 
extraordinary  kind,  and  sufficient  of  themselves  to  exercise  the 
reader's  sympathies  for  him;  but  these  feelings  would  have 
languished  from  weariness,  however  intensely  the  sequel  might 
have  been  wrought,  had  attention  been  claimed  for  a  solitary 
wanderer  to  the  end  of  the  journey.  Here  then  the  history, 
which  had  probably  reached  its  climax  in  the  preceding  scenes, 
revives,  by  taking  a  new  form,  and  exciting  a  fresh  interest, 
rather  doubled  than  divided,  though  two  have  thenceforward 
to  share  it  instead  of  one.  Besides,  the  individual  experience 
of  one  man,  however  varied,  would  not  have  been  sufficient  to 
exemplify  all  the  most  useful  lessons  of  the  gospel,  unless  the 
trials  of 'many  persons,  of  different  age,  sex,  and  disposition, 
were  interwoven.  The  instance  at  hand  will  illustrate  this 
point. — (Montgomery.) 

1  Ah,  what  a  smile  was  that !  How  much  sin  was  there  in 
it,  instead  of  humble  spiritual  gratitude,  and  joy.  Now  see 
how  he  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  and  how  surely, 
along  with  spiritual  pride,  comes  carelessness,  false  security, 
and  a  grievous  fall.— (Cheevcr.)  The  very  person's  hand  we 
need  to  help  us,  whom  we  thought  we  had  exceeded. — (Mason.) 
When  a  consciousness  of  superiority  to  other  Christians  leads 
to  vain  glory,  a  fall  will  be  the  consequence ;  but  while  it 
excites  compassion,  it  also  cements  Christian  friendship.— 
(lvimey.) 


Faith.  Yes,  it  was  for  a  while  in  everybody 'a 
mouth. 

Chr.  What!  and  did  no  more  of  them  but  you 
come  out  to  escape  the  danger? 

Faith.  Though  there  was,  as  I  said,  a  great 
talk  thereabout,  yet  I  do  not  think  they  did  firmly 
believe  it.  For  in  the  heat  of  the  discourse,  I 
heard  some  of  them  deridingly  speak  of  you,  and 
of  your  desperate  journey  (for  so  they  called  this 
your  pilgrimage),  but  I  did  believe,  and  do  still, 
that  the  end  of  our  city  will  be  with  fire  and  brim- 
stone from  above ;  and  therefore  I  have  made  my 
escape. 

Chr.  Did  you  hear  no  talk  of  neighbour  Pliable  ? 
Faith.  Yes,  Christian,  I  heard  that  he  followed 
you  till  he  came  at  the  Slough  of  Despond,  where, 
as  some  said,  he  fell  in ;  but  he  would  not  be 
known  to  have  so  done ;  but  I  am  sure  he  was 
soundly  bedabbled  with  that  kind  of  dirt. 

Chr.  And  what  said  the  neighbours  to  him  ? 
Faith.  He  hath,  since  his  going  back,  been 
had  greatly  in  derision,  and  that  among  How  PKable  was 
all  sorts  of  people;  some  do  mock  and  when" lie  got 
despise  him ;  and  scarce  will  any  set  )l3rae- 
him  on  work.  He  is  now  seven  times  worse  than 
if  he  had  never  gone  out  of  the  city.2 

Chr.  But  why  should  they  be  so  set  against  him, 
since  they  also  despise  the  way  that  he  forsook  ? 

Faith.  0!  they  say,  Hang  him,  he  is  a  turn-coat ; 
he  was  not  true  to  his  profession.  I  think  God 
has  stirred  up  even  his  enemies  to  hiss  at  him, 
and  make  him  a  proverb,  because  he  hath  for- 
saken the  way.  Je.  xxix.  is,  19. 

Chr.  Had  you  no  talk  with  him  before  you  came 
out? 

Faith.  I  met  him  once  in  the  streets,  but  he 
leered  away'on  the  other  side,  as  one  ashamed  of 
what  he  had  done;  so  I  spake  not  to  him. 

Chr.  Well,  at  my  first  setting  out,  I  bad  hopes 
of  that  man ;  but  now  I  fear  he  will  perish  in  the 
overthrow  of  the  city;  For  'it  is  happened  to  him 
according  to  the  true  proverb,  The  The  dog  and  the 
dog  is  turned  to  his  own  vomit  again;  B0W< 
and  the  sow  that  was  washed,  to  her  wallowing  in 
the  mire.'  2  re.  u  22. 

Faith.  These  are  my  fears  of  him  too;  but  who 
can  hinder  that  which  will  be  ? 

Chr.  Well,  neighbour  Faithful,  said  Christian, 
let  us  leave  him,  and  talk  of  things  that  more  im- 
mediately concern  ourselves.  Tell  me  now,  what 
you  have  met  with  in  the  way  as  you  came ;  for  I 
know  you  have  met  with  some  things,  or  else  it 
may  be  writ  for  a  wonder. 

Faith.   I  escaped  the  Slough  that  I  perceived 

2  Mr.  Anything  became  a  brisk  man  in  the  broil ;  but  both 
sides  were  against  him,  because  he  was  true  to  none.  He  had, 
for  his  malapertness,  one  of  his  legs  broken,  and  Le  that  did  it 
wished  it  had  been  his  neck.— {Holy  War.) 


118 


THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


you  fell  Into,  and  got  up  to  the  gate  without  that 
Faithful  assault-  danger;  only  I  met  with  one  whose 

cd  by  Wanton.    name    wftg    Wanton>  who   haJ   Hke   to 

have  done  me  a  mischief. 

Chb.  It  was  well  you  escaped  her  net ;  Joseph 
was  hard  put  to  it  by  her,  and  he  escaped  her  as 
you  did;  but  it  had  like  to  have  cost  him  his  life. 
Ge.  xxxlx.  n—13.     But  what  did  she  do  to  you  ? 

Faith.  You  cannot  think,  but  that  you  know 
something,  what  a  flattering  tongue  she  had ;  sbe 
lay  at  me  hard  to  turn  aside  with  her,  promising 
me  all  manner  of  content. 

Chr.  Nay,  she  did  not  promise  you  the  content 
of  a  good  conscience. 

Faith.  You  know  what  I  mean ;  all  carnal  and 
fleshly  content. 

Chr.  Thank  God  you  have  escaped  her ;  '  The 
abhorred  of  the  Lord  shall  fall  into  her  ditch.' 

Tr.  xxii.  14. 

Faith.  Nay,  I  know  not  whether  I  did  wholly 
escape  her  or  no. 

Chr.  Why,  I  trow,  l  you  did  not  consent  to  her 
desires  ? 

Faith.  No,  not  to  defile  myself;  for  I  remem- 
bered an  old  writing  that  I  had  seen,  which  said, 
'  Her  steps  take  hold  on  hell.'  Pr.  v.  5.  So  I  shut 
mine  eyes,  because  I  would  not  be  bewitched  with 
her  looks.  Job  xxxi.  1  Then  she  railed  on  me,  and 
I  went  my  way.2 

Chr.  Did  you  meet  with  no  other  assault  as  you 
came  ? 

Faith.  When  I  came  to  the  foot  of  the  hill 
called  Difficulty,  I  met  with  a  very  aged  man,  who 
He  is  assaulted  asked  me  what  I  was,  and  whither 
by  Adam  the  bound.  I  told  him  that  I  am  a 
pilgrim,  going  to  the  Celestial  City. 
Then  said  the  old  man,  Thou  lookest  like  an  honest 
fellow ;  wilt  thou  be  content  to  dwell  with  me  for 
the  wages  that  I  shall  give  thee  ?  Then  I  asked 
him  his  name,  and  where  he  dwelt.  He  said  his 
name  was  Adam  the  First,  and  that  he  dwelt  in  the 
town  of  Deceit.  Eph.  iv.  22.  I  asked  him  then,  what 
was  his  work,  and  what  the  wages  that  he  would 
give.  He  told  me,  that  his  work  was  many  de- 
lights; and  his  wages,  that  I  should  be  his  heir  at 
last.  I  further  asked  him,  what  house  he  kept, 
and  what  other  servants  he  had.  So  he  told  me, 
that  his  house  was  maintained  with  all  the  dainties 
in  the  world ;  and  that  his  servants  were  those  of 
his  own  begetting.  Then  I  asked  if  he  had  any 
children.    He  said  that  he  had  but  three  daughters ; 


1  '  I  trow,'  I  believe  or  imagine  (Imp.  Diet.) — (Ed.) 
-  If  the  experience  of  Christian  is  an  exhibition  of  Bunyan's 
own  feelings,  the  temptations  of  Madam  Wanton  are  very  pro- 
perly laid  in  the  way  of  Faithful,  aud  not  of  Christian.  She 
would  have  had  no  chance  with  the  man  who  admired  the  wis- 
dom of  God  in  making  him  shy  of  women,  who  rarely  carried 
it  pleasantly  towards  a  woman,  and  who  abhorred  the  common 
salutation  of  women. —  (Grace  Aboundii:g,  No.  316.) — Ed. 


the  Lust  of  the  Flesh,  the  Lust  of  the  Eyes,  and 
the  Pride  of  Life,  and  that  I  should  marry  them 
all  3  if  I  would.  1  Jn.  ii.  is.  Then  I  asked  how  long 
time  he  would  have  me  live  with  him  ?  And  he 
told  me,  As  long  as  he  lived  himself. 

Chr.  Well,  and  what  conclusion  came  the  old 
man  and  you  to,  at  last  ? 

.  Faith.  Why,  at  first,  I  found  myself  somewhat 
inclinable  to  go  with  the  man,  for  I  thought  he 
spake  very  fair;  but  looking  in  his  forehead,  as  I 
talked  with  him,  I  saw  there  written,  'Put  off  the 
old  man  with  his  deeds.' 

Chr.  And  how  then  ? 

Faith.  Then  it  came  burning  hot  into  my  mind, 
whatever  he  said,  and  however  he  flattered,  when 
he  got  me  home  to  his  house,  he  would  sell  me 
for  a  slave.4  So  I  bid  him  forbear  to  talk,  for  I 
would  not  come  near  the  door  of  his  house.  Then 
he  reviled  me,  and  told  me,  that  he  would  send 
such  a  one  after  me,  that  should  make  my  way 
bitter  to  my  soul.  So  I  turned  to  go  away  from 
him ;  but  just  as  I  turned  myself  to  go  thence,  I 
felt  him  take  hold  of  my  flesh,  and  give  me  such 
a  deadly  twitch  back,  that  I  thought  he  had  pulled 
part  of  me  after  himself.  This  made  me  cry,  '  0 
wretched  man  ! '  Ro.  vii.  24.  So  I  went  on  my  way 
up  the  hill. 

Now  when  I  had  got  about  half  way  up,  I  looked 
behind,  and  saw  one  coming  after  me,  swift  as 
the  wind ;  so  he  overtook  me  just  about  the  place 
where  the  settle  stands. 

Chr.  Just  there,  said  Christian,  did  I  sit  down 
to  rest  me;  but  being  overcome  with  sleep,  I  there 
lost  this  roll  out  of  my  bosom 

Faith.  But,  good  brother,  hear  me  out.  So  soon 
as  the  man  overtook  me,  he  was  but  a  word  and 
a  blow,  for  down  he  knocked  me,  and  laid  me  for 
dead.5  But  when  I  was  a  little  come  to  myself 
again,  I  asked  him  wherefore  he  served  me  so. 
He  said,  because  of  my  secret  inclining  to  Adam 
the  First:  and  with  that  he  struck  me  another 
deadly  blow  on  the  breast,  and  beat  me  down 
backward ;  so  I  lay  at  his  foot  as  dead  as  before. 
So,  when  I  came  to  myself  again,  I  cried  him 
mercy ;  but  he  said,  I  know  not  how  to  show 
mercy ;  and  with  that  knocked  me  down  again.6 
He  had  doubtless  made  an  end  of  me,  but  that  one 
came  bv,  and  bid  him  forbear. 


3  'All'  is  omitted  from  every  edition  by  Bunyau,  except  the 
first;  probably  a  typographical  error. 

4  An  awful  slavery!  'None  that  go  unto  her  return  again, 
neither  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  life.'  Pr.  ii.  19. — (Ed.) 

3  That  sinner  who  never  had  a  threatening  fiery  visit  from 
Moses,  is  yet  asleep  in  his  sins,  under  the  curse  and  wrath  of 
the  law  of  God.— (C.C.V.G.) 

6  As  the  law  giveth  no  strength,  nor  life  to  keep  it,  so  it 
accepteth  none  of  them  that  are  under  it.  Sin  and  Die,  is  for 
ever  its  language.  There  is  no  middle  way  in  the  law.  It 
hath  not  ears  to  hear,  nor  heart  to  pity,  its  penitent  ones. — 
(Buuyan  on  Justification,  vol.  i.  p.  316.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


119 


Chr.   Who  was  that  that  hid  him  forbear. 

Faith.  I  did  not  know  hira  at  first,  but  as  he 
went  by,  I  perceived  the  holes  in  his  hands,  and 
in  his  side ;  then  I  concluded  that  he  was  our 
Lord.     So  I  went  up  the  hill. 

Ciir.  That  man  that  overtook  you  was  Moses. 
The  temper"  of   He  spareth  none,  neither  knoweth  he 

Moses.  how  £0  S]10W  mercy  to  those  that  trans- 
gress his  law. 

FAITn.  1  know  it  very  well;  it  was  not  the  first 
time  that  he  has  met  with  me.  It  was  he  that 
came  to  me  when  I  dwelt  securely  at  home,  and 
that  told  me  he  would  burn  my  house  over  my 
head,  if  I  stayed  there. 

Ciir.  But  did  you  not  see  the  house  that  stood 
there  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  on  the  side  of  which 
Moses  met  you  ? 

Faith.  Yes,  and  the  lions  too,  before  I  came  at 
it ;  but  for  the  lions,  I  think  they  were  asleep;  for 
it  was  about  noon ;  and  because  I  had  so  much  of 
the  day  before  me,  I  passed  by  the  porter,  and 
came  down  the  hill. 

Chr.  He  told  me  indeed,  that  he  saw  you  go 
by,  but  I  wish  you  had  called  at  the  house,  for 
they  would  have  showed  you  so  many  rarities, 
that  you  would  scarce  have  forgot  them  to  the 
day  of  your  death.  But  pray  tell  me,  Did  you 
meet  nobody  in  the  Valley  of  Humility? 

Faith.   Yes,  I  met  with  one  Discontent,  who 

Faithful  assault-  would  wimi)gty  ha™  persuaded  me  to 
ed  by  Discon-  go  back  again  with  him;  his  reason 
was,  for  that  the  valley  was  altogether 
without  honour.  He  told  me,  moreover,  that  there 
to  go  was  the  way  to  disobey  all  my  friends,  as 
Pride,  Arrogancy,  Self-conceit,  Worldly-glory,  with 
others,  who,  he  knew,  as  he  said,  would  be  very 
much  offended,  if  I  made  such  a  fool  of  myself  as 
to  wade  through  this  valley. 

Chr.   Well,  and  how  did  you  answer  him? 

Faith.  I  told  him  that  although  all  these  that 
Faithful's  answer  he  named  might  claim  kindred  of  me, 
to  Discontent.  and  t^at  j-jghtly,  for  indeed  they  were 
my  relations  according  to  the  flesh,  yet  since  I 
became  a  pilgrim,  they  have  disowned  me,  as  I 
also  have  rejected  them ;  and  therefore  they  were 
to  me  now  no  more  than  if  they  had  never  been  of 
my  lineage. 

I  told  him,  moreover,  that  as  to  this  valley  he 
had  quite  misrepresented  the  thing;  'for  before 
honour  is  humility ;  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a 
fall.'  Therefore,  said  I,  I  had  rather  go  through 
this  valley  to  the  honour  that  was  so  accounted 
by  the  wisest,  than  choose  that  which  he  esteamed 
most  worthy  our  affections. 

Chr.  Met  you  with  nothing  else  in  that  valley? 


1  The  word  'temper'  was  altered,  in  the  fourth  and  subse- 
quent editions  to  '  thunder.' — (Ed.) 


Faith.  Yes,  I  met  with  Shame ;  but  of  all  the 
men  that  I  met  with  in  my  pilgrimage,  „e  is  „ssaultcd 
he,  I  think,  bears  the  wrong  name.  »*th  Shame. 
The  others  would  be  said  nay,  after  a  little  argu- 
mentation, and  somewhat  else;  but  this  bold-faced 
Shame  would  never  have  done.2 

Ciir.   Why,  what  did  he  say  to  you  ? 

Faith.  What!  why,  he  objected  against  religion 
itself;  he  said  it  was  a  pitiful,  low,  sneaking 
business  for  a  man  to  mind  religion :  he  said  that 
a  tender  conscience  was  an  unmanly  thing ;  and 
that  for  a  man  to  watch  over  his  words  and  ways, 
so  as  to  tie  up  himself  from  that  hectoring  liberty, 
that  the  brave  spirits  of  the  times  accustom  them- 
selves unto,  would  make  him  the  ridicule  of  the 
times.  He  objected  also,  that  but  few  of  the 
mighty,  rich,  or  wise,  were  ever  of  my  opiuion, 
l  Co.  i.  26 ;  iii.  is.  rhi.  iii.  -,  8 ;  nor  any  of  them  neither 
Jn.  vii.  48,  before  they  were  persuaded  to  be  fools, 
and  to  be  of  a  voluntary  fondness,  to  venture  the 
loss  of  all,  for  nobody  knows  what.  He  moreover 
objected  the  base  and  low  estate  and  condition  of 
those  that  were  chiefly  the  pilgrims,  of  the  times 
in  which  they  lived ;  also  their  ignorance,  and 
want  of  understanding  in  all  natural  science. 
Yea,  he  did  hold  me  to  it  at  that  rate  also,  about 
a  great  many  more  things  than  here  I  relate ;  as. 
that  it  was  a  shame  to  sit  whining  and  mourning 
under  a  sermon,  and  a  shame  to  come  sighing  and 
groaning  home ;  that  it  was  a  shame  to  ask  my 
neighbour  forgiveness  for  petty  faults,  or  to  make 
restitution  where  I  have  taken  from  any.  He  said 
also,  that  religion  made  a  man  grow  strange  to 
the  great,  because  of  a  few  vices,  which  he  called 
by  finer  names ;  and  made  him  own  and  respect 
the  base,  because  of  the  same  religious  fraternity. 
And  is  not  this,  said  he,  a  shame?3 

Chr.  And  what  did  you  say  to  him  ? 

Faith,  Say !  I  could  not  tell  what  to  say  at  the 
first.  Yea,  he  put  me  so  to  it,  that  my  blood  came 
up  in  my  face  ;  even  this  Shame  fetched  it  up,  and 
had  almost  beat  me  quite  off.  But,  at  last,  I  began 
to  consider,  that  '  that  which  is  highly  esteemed 
among    men,  is  had    in    abomination  with  God.' 


2  The  delineation  of  this  character  is  a  masterly  grouping 
together  of  the  arguments  used  by  men  of  this  world  against 
religion,  in  ridicule  and  contempt  of  it.  Faithful's  account  of 
him,  and  of  his  arguments,  is  a  piece  of  vigorous  satire,  full  of 
truth  and  life. — (Cheever.) 

3  Nothing  can  be  a  stronger  proof  that  we  have  lost  the 
image  of  God,  than  shame  concerning  the  things  of  God.  Tins 
shame,  joined  to  the  fear  of  man,  is  a  very  powerful  enemy  to 
God's  truths,  Christ's  glory,  and  our  soul's  comfort.  Hitter 
at  once  get  out  of  our  pain,  by  declaring  boldly  for  Christ  and 
his  cause,  than  stand  shivering  on  the  brink  of  profession,  ever 
dreading  the  loss  of  our  good  name  and  reputation:  for  Christ 
says  (awful  words):' "Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of 
my  words,  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation,  of  him  also 
shall  the  JSou  of  man  be  ashamed  when  he  cometh  in  the  glory 
of  his  Father.'  Mar.  viii.  38.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  attacked 
by  shame,  and  another  to  be  conquered  by  it.— (Mason.) 


120 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Lu.  xvi.  is.  And  I  thought  again,  this  Shame  tells 
me  what  men  are ;  hut  it  tells  me  nothing  what 
God,  or  the  Word  of  God  is.  And  I  thought,  more- 
over, that  at  the  clay  of  doom,  we  shall  not  he 
doomed  to  death  or  life,  according  to  the  hectoring 
spirits  of  the  world,  but  according  to  the  wisdom 
and  law  of  the  Highest.  Therefore,  thought  I, 
what  God  says  is  best,  indeed  is  best,  though  all 
the  men  in  the  world  are  against  it.  Seeing,  then, 
that  God  prefers  his  religion ;  seeing  God  prefers 
a  tender  conscience ;  seeing  they  that  make  them- 
selves fools  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  are  wisest ; 
and  that  the  poor  man  that  loveth  Christ  is  richer 
than  the  greatest  man  in  the  world  that  hates  him  ; 
Shame,  depart,  thou  art  an  enemy  to  my  salvation. 
Shall  I  entertain  thee  against  my  sovereign  Lord? 
How  then  shall  I  look  him  in  the  face  at  his  com- 
ing ?  Should  I  now  be  ashamed  of  his  ways  and 
servants,  how  can  I  expect  the  blessing?  Mar.  via.  ss. 
But,  indeed,  this  Shame  was  a  bold  villain  ;  I  could 
scarce  shake  him  out  of  my  company;  yea,  he  would 
be  haunting  of  me,  and  continually  whispering  me 
in  the  ear,  with  some  one  or  other  of  the  infirmities 
that  attend  religion  ;  but  at  last  I  told  him  it  was 
but  in  vain  to  attempt  further  in  this  business ;  for 
those  things  that  he  disdained,  in  those  did  I  see 
most  glory ;  and  so  at  last  I  got  past  this  impor- 
tunate one.  And  when  I  had  shaken  him  off,  then 
I  began  to  sing — 

The  trials  that  those  men  do  meet  withal, 

That  are  obedieut  to  the  heavenly  call, 

Are  manifold,  and  suited  to  the  flesh, 

And  come,  and  come,  and  come  again  afresh ; 

That  now,  or  sometime  else,  we  by  them  ui;iy 

Be  taken,  overcome,  and  cast  away. 

0  let  the  pilgrims,  let  the  pilgrims,  then, 

Be  vigilant,  and  quit  themselves  like  men. 
Cim.  I  am  glad,  my  brother,  that  thou  didst  with- 
stand this  villain  so  bravely ;  for  of  all,  as  thou 
sayest,  I  think  he  has  the  wrong  name ;  for  he  is 
so  bold  as  to  follow  us  in  the  streets,  and  to  attempt 
to  put  us  to  shame  before  all  men  ;  that  is,  to  make 
us  ashamed  of  that  which  is  good ;  but  if  he  was 
not  himself  audacious,  he  would  never  attempt  to 
do  as  he  does.  But  let  us  still  resist  him  ;  for  not- 
withstanding all  his  bravadoes,  he  promoteth  the 
fool,  and  none  else.  '  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory,' 
said  Solomon,  •  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion 

of  fools.'    Pr.  iii.  35. 

Faith.  I  think  we  must  cry  to  him  for  help 
against  Shame,  who  would  have  us  to  be  valiant 
for  the  truth  upon  the  earth. 

CriR.  You  say  true ;  but  did  you  meet  nobody 
else  in  that  valley  ? 

Faith.  No,  not  I,  for  I  had  sunshine  all  the 
rest  of  the  way  through  that,  and  also  through  the 
Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death.1 


Chr.  It  was  well  for  you.  I  am  sure  it  fared 
far  otherwise  with  me  ;  I  had  for  a  long  season,  as 
soon  almost  as  I  entered  into  that  valley,  a  dread- 
ful combat  with  that  foul  fiend  Apollyon ;  yea,  I 
thought  verily  he  would  have  killed  me,  especially 
when  he  got  me  down  and  crushed  me  under  him, 
as  if  he  would  have  crushed  me  to  pieces ;  for  as 
he  threw  me,  my  sword  flew  out  of  my  hand;  nay, 
he!  told  me  he  was  sure  of  me  ;  but  I  cried  to  God, 
and  he  heard  me,  and  delivered  me  out  of  all  my 
troubles.  Then  I  entered  into  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death,  and  had  no  light  for  almost  half 
the  way  through  it.2  I  thought  I  should  have  been 
killed  there,  over  and  over  ;  but  at  last  day  broke, 
and  the  sun  rose,  and  I  went  through  that  which 
was  behind  with  far  more  ease  and  quiet. 

Moreover,  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  as  they  went 
on,  Faithful,  as  he  chanced  to  look  on  one  side, 
saw  a  man  whose  name  is  Talkative,3  walking  at  a 
distance  besides  them ;  for  in  this  place,  there  was 
room  enough  for  them  all  to  walk.  He  Talkative  do- 
was  a  tall  man,  and  something  more  scribed. 
comely  at  a  distance  than  at  hand.  To  this  man 
Faithful  addressed  himself  in  this  manner. 

Faith.   Friend,  whither  away  ?     Are  you  going 
to  the  heavenly  country  ? 


1  Christian  in  a  great  measure  escaped  the  peculiar  tempta- 
tions that  assaidled  Faithful,  yet  he  sympathized  with  Mm;  nor 


did  the  latter  deem  the  gloomy  experiences  of  his  brother 
visionary  or  imaginative,  though  he  had  been  exempted  from 
them.  One  man,  from  a  complication  of  causes,  is  exposed  to 
temptations  of  which  another  is  ignorant;  aud  in  this  case  he 
needs  much  sympathy,  which  he  seldom  meets  with;  while 
they  who  are  severe  on  him  are  liable  to  be  baffled  in  another 
way,  which,  for  want  of  coincidence  in  habit,  temperature,  and 
situation,  he  is  equally  prone  to  disregard.  Thus  Christians 
are  often  led  reciprocally  to  censure,  suspect,  or  dislike  each 
other,  on  those  very  grounds  which  would  render  them  useful 
and  encouraging  counsellors  and  companions  1 — (Scott.) 

2  Bunyan,  in  his  Pilgrim's  Progress,  places  the  Valley  of 
the  Shadow  of  Death,  not  where  we  should  expect  it,  at  the 
end  of  Christian's  pilgrimage,  but  about  the  middle  of  it. 
Those  who  have  studied  the  history  of  Bunyan  and  his  times 
will  hardly  wonder  at  this.  It  was  then  safer  to  commit 
felony  than  to  become  a  Dissenter.  Indeed,  a  felon  was  fa- 
surer  of  a  fair  trial  than  any  Dissenting  minister,  after  the 
restoration  of  Charles  II.  This  Bunyan  found.  Simply  and 
solely  for  preaching,  he  was  condemned  by  Keeling  to  impri- 
sonment. That  was  to  be  followed  by  banishment  if  he  did 
not  conform,  and,  in  the  event  of  his  return  from  banishment 
without  license  from  the  King,  the  judge  added,  '  You  must 
stretch  by  the  neck  for  it;  I  tell  you  plainly.'  Christian  en- 
dured, in  the  first  portion  of  this  dismal  valley,  great  darkness 
and  distress  of  mind  about  his  soul's  safety  for  eternity,  and, 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  valley,  the  dread  of  an  ignominious, 
and  cruel,  and  sudden  execution  in  the  midst  of  his  days — a 
fear  more  appalling  than  the  prospect  of  a  natural  death.  This 
he  was  enabled  to  bear,  because  he  then  enjoyed  the  light,  the 
presence,  and  the  approbation  of  his  God. — (Ed.) 

8  The  character  now  introduced  under  a  most  expressive 
name,  is  an  admirable  portrait,  drawn  by  a  masterly  hand,  from 
some  striking  original,  but  exactly  resembliug  numbers  in  every 
age  and  place,  where  the  truths  of  the  gospel  are  generally 
known.  Such  men  are  more  conspicuous  than  humble  believers, 
but  their  profession  will  not  endure  a  strict  investigation. — 
(Scott.)  Render,  be  careful  not  to  judge  harshly,  or  despise  a 
real  believer,  who  is  blessed  with  fluency  of  utterauce  on  Divine 
subjects. — (E».) 


THE   riLGltni'S  PROGRESS. 


121 


Talk.  I  am  going  to  the  fame  place. 

Faith.  That  is  well ;  then  I  hope  ivc  may  have 
your  good  company. 

Talk.  With  a  very  good  will,  will  I  be  your 
companion. 

ftuflifnl    and        Faith.  Come  on,  then,  and  let  US  go 

....    together,  ami  let  us  spend  our  time  in 

discoursing  of  things  that  are  profitable. 

Talk.   To  talk  of  things  that  are  -nod,  to  me  is 
very  acceptable,  with  you,  or  with  any  other;  and 
1  am  glad  that  1  have  met  with  those  that  incline 
.     „      to  so  good  a  work;  for,  to  speak  the 
i:  nth,  there  are  hut  few  that  care  thus 
to  spend  their  time  (as  they  are  in 
their  travels),  hut  choose  much  rather  to  he  speak- 
ing of  things  to  no  profit ;  and  this  hath  been  a 
trouble  to  me. 

Faith.  That  is  indeed  a  thing  to  be  lamented; 
for  what  things  so  worthy  of  the  use  of  the  tongue 
and  mouth  of  men  on  earth,  as  are  the  things  of 
the  God  of  heaven? 

Talk.  I  like  you  wonderful  well,  for  your  sayings 
are  fuil  of  conviction  ;  and  I  will  add,  what  thing 
is  so  pleasant,  and  what  so  profitable,  as  to  talk 
of  the  things  of  God?  What  things  so  pleasant 
(that  is,  if  a  man  hath  any  delight  in  things  that 
are  wonderful)  ?  For  instance,  if  a  man  doth  de- 
light to  talk  of  the  history  or  the  mystery  of  things; 
or  if  a  man  doth  love  to  talk  of  miracles,  wonders, 
or  signs,  where  shall  he  find  things  recorded  so 
delightful,  and  so  sweetly  penned,  as  in  the  Holy 
Scripture  ? 

Faith.  That  is  true  ;  but  to  be  profited  by  such 
things  in  our  talk  should  be  that  which  we  design. 

Talk.  That  is  it  that  I  said  ;  for  to  talk  of  such 
Taikative's  fine   things  is  most  profitable ;  for  by  so 

discourse.  doing,-  a  man  may  get  knowledge  of 
many  things;  as  of  the  vanity  of  earthly  things, 
and  the  benefit  of  things  above.  Thus,  in  general, 
but  more  particularly,  by  this,  a  man  may  learn  the 
necessity  of  the  new  birth  ;  the  insufficiency  of  our 
■works ;  the  need  of  Christ's  righteousness,  &c. 
Besides,  by  this  a  man  may  learn,  by  talk,  what  it 
is  to  repent,  to  believe,  to  pray,  to  suffer,  or  the 
like ;  by  this  also  a  man  may  learn  what  are  the 
great  promises  and  consolations  of  the  gospel,  to 
his  own  comfort.  Further,  by  this  a  man  may 
ham  to  refute  false  opinions,  to  vindicate  the  truth, 
aud  also  to  instruct  the  ignorant.1 

Faith.  All  this  is  true,  and  glad  am  I  to  hear 
these  things  from  you. 


Talk.  Alas!  the  want  of  this  is  the  cause  why 
so  few  understand  the  need  of  faith,  and  the  neces- 
sity of  a  work  of  grace  in  their  soul,  in  order  to 
eternal  life;  but  ignorantly  live  in  the  works  of  the 
law,  by  which  a  man  can  by  no  means  obtain  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. 

Faith.  But,  by  your  leave,  heavenly  knowledge  of 
these  is  the  gift  of  God;  no  man  attaineth  to  them 
by  human  industry,  or  only  by  the  talk  of  them. 

Talk.  All  this  1  know  very  well.  For  a  man 
can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given  0  bravc  T;i]k:i. 
him  from  heaven  ;  all  is  of  grace,  not  Uve- 

of  works.  I  could  give  you  a  hundred  scriptures 
for  the  confirmation  of  this. 

Faith.  Well,  then,  said  Faithful,  what  is  that 
one  thing  that  we  shall  at  this  time  found  our  dis- 
course uponl 

Talk.  What  you  will.  I  will  talk  of  things 
heavenly,  or  things  earthly;  things  o  brave  Taika- 
moral,  or  things  evangelical ;    things  tlVL- 

sacred,  or  things  profane ;  things  past,  or  things 
to  come  ;  things  foreign,  or  things  at  home  ;  things 
more  essential,  or  things  circumstantial ;  provided 
that  all  be  done  to  our  profit. 

Faith.   Now  did  Faithful  begin  to  wonder ;  and 
stepping  to  Christian  (for  he  walked  Faiftft 
all  this  while  by  himself),  he  said  to     "v™ 
him  (but  softly),  What  a  brave  companion  have  we 
got !      Surely  this  man  will  make  a  very  excellent 

trim. 
HE.    At  this  Christian   modestly  smiled,   and 
said,  This  man,  with  whom  you  are  so   christiil!1  m;ikc, 
taken,  will  beguile,  with  that  tongue     a  di 

'  „    ,  t         i  i  •  talkative,  tell- 

of  his,  twenty  of  them  that  know  him     in-     Ettthral 

wllo  he  was. 

not. 

Faith.  Do  you  know  him,  then  ? 

Cim.  Know  him  !  Yes,  better  than  he  knows 
himself. 

Faith.  Pray,  what  is  he  ? 

Gnu.  His  name  is  Talkative ;  he  dwellcth  in  our 
town ;  I  wonder  that  you  should  be  a  stranger  to 
him,  only  I  consider  that  our  town  is  large. 

Faith.  Whose  son  is  he  ?  And  whereabout 
does  he  dwell  ? 

Cilr.  He  is  the  son  of  one  Say -well;  he  dwelt 
in  Prating  Row ;  and  he  is  known  of  all  that  are 
acquainted  with  him,  by  the  name  of  Talkative  in 
Prating  Row  ;  and  notwithstanding  his  fine  tongue, 
he  is  but  a  sorry  fellow. - 

Faith.   Well,  he  seems  to  be  a  very  pretty  man. 

Chr.  That  is,  to  them  who  have  not  thorough 
acquaintance   with  him;    for  he  is  best  abroad; 


1  As  an  outward  profession,  without  a  lioly  life,  is  no  evidence 
of  religion,  neither  i  re  excel!  ol  -  f  that  the  per- 

sons who  possess  th(  m  are  partakers  of  grace:  so  it  is  an  awful 
fact,  that  some  have  edilicd  the  church  by  their  gilts,  who 
have  themselves  been  destitute  of  the  s]  ■  -.Ivimey.) 

I  concluded,  a  little  grace,  a  little  love,  a  little  of  the  true  fear 
of  God,  is  belter  than  all  gifts.— (Grace  Abounding) 

VOL.  III. 


2  The  Pharisee  goes  on  boldly,  fears  nothing,  but  trustctli 
in  himself  that  his  state  is  good;  he  hath  his  mouth  full  ol 
many  fine  things,  whereby  he  strokes  himself  over  the  head,  and 
calls'  himself  one  of  God's  white  boys,  that,  like  the  Prodigals 
brother,  never  transgressed.— {Pharisee  and  Publican,  vol.  u. 
p.  215.)  lfi 


122 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


near  home,  lie  is  ugly  enough.  Your  saying  that 
he  is  a  pretty  man,  brings  to  my  mind  what  I 
have  observed  in  the  work  of  the  painter,  whose 
pictures  show  best  at  a  distance,  but,  very  near, 
more  unpleasing. 

Faitii.  But  I  am  ready  to  think  you  do  but  jest, 
because  you  smiled. 

Chr.  God  forbid  that  I  should  jest  (although  I 
smiled)  in  this  matter,  or  that  I  should  accuse  any 
falsely !  I  will  give  you  a  further  discovery  of  him. 
This  man  is  for  any  company,  and  for  any  talk ;  as 
he  talketh  now  with  you,  so  will  he  talk  when  he 
is  on  the  ale-bench ;  and  the  more  drink  he  hath  in 
his  crown,  the  more  of  these  things  he  hath  in  his 
mouth  ;  religion  hath  no  place  in  his  heart,  or  house, 
or  conversation ;  all  he  hath,  lieth  in  his  tongue, 
and  his  religion  is  to  make  a  noise  therewith. 

Faith.  Say  you  so !  then  am .  I  in  this  man 
greatly  deceived.1 

Chr.  Deceived !  you  may  be  sure  of  it ;  remem- 
ber the  proverb,  '  They  say,  and  do  not.'  Mat.  xxiii.  3. 
But  the  '  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  Avord,  but  in 
Talkative  talis,  power. '  i  Co.  iv.  20.  He  talketh  of  prayer, 
but  does  not.  of  repentance,  of  faith,  and  of  the  new 
birth  ;  but  he  knows  but  only  to  talk  of  them.  I 
have  been  in  his  family,  and  have  observed  him 
both  at  home  and  abroad ;  and  I  know  what  I  say 
ins  house  is  °^  k*m  *s  *he  truth.  His  house  is  as 
empty  of  re-  empty  of  religion,  as  the  white  of  an 

hgiou.  x    •  a        ' 

egg  is  of  savour.  There  is  there,, 
neither  prayer,  nor  sign  of  repentance  for  sin  ;  yea, 
the  brute  in  his  kind  serves  God  far  better  than  he. 
He  is  a  stain  to  He  is  the  very  stain,  reproach,  and 
religion.  shame  of  religion,  to  all  that  know 
him ;  it  can  hardly  have  a  good  word  in  all  that 
end  of  the  town  where  he  dwells,  through  him. 
Ro.  ii.  24,  25.  Thus  say  the  common  people  that  know 
The  proverb  that  him,  A  saint  abroad,  and  a  devil  at 

goes  of  him.       home>      His  family  finds  ifc  SQj  he 

is  such  a  churl,  such  a  railer  at,  and  so  unreason- 
able with  his  servants,  that  they  neither  know  how 

1  Talkative  seems  to  have  been  introduced  on  purpose  that 
the  author  might  have  a  fair  opportunity  of  stating  his  senti- 
ments concerning  the  practical  nature  of  evangelical  religion,  to 
which  numbers  in  his  day  were  too  inattentive ;  so  that  this 
admired  allegory  has  fully  established  the  important  distinction 
between  a  dead  and  a  living  faith,  on  which  the  whole  contro- 
versy depends.— (Scott.)  '  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues 
of  men  and  of  angels,  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  as  sounding 
brass  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.'  1  Co.  xiii.  1.  Just  thus  it  is  with 
him  who  has  gifts,  but  wants  grace.  Shall  I  be  proud,  because 
I  am  sounding  brass.  Is  it  so  much  to  be  a  fiddle?  Hath  not 
the  least  creature  that  hath  life,  more  of  God  in  it  than  these  ? 
—[Grace  Abounding,  No.  297-300.)  Some  professors  are 
pretty  busy  and  ripe,  able  to  hold  you  in  a  very  large  discourse 
of  the  glorious  gospel ;  but,  if  you  ask  them  concerning  heart 
work,  and  its  sweet  influences  and  virtues  on  their  souls  and 
consciences,  they  may  answer,  I  find  by  preaching  that  I  am 
turned  from  my  sins  in  a  good  measure,  and  have  learned  [in 
tongue]  to  plead  for  the  gospel.  This  is  not  far  enough  to  prove 
them  under  the  covenant  of  crace. — [Law  and  Grace,  vol.  i. 
P.  515.) 


to  do  for,  or  speak  to  him.  Men  that  have  any 
dealings  with  him,  say,  it  is  better  to  deal  with  a 
Turk  than  with  him ;  for  fairer  dealing  Meu  s]lull  to 
they  shall  have  at  their  hands.  This  deaI  ™&  him- 
Talkative  (if  it  be  possible)  will  go  beyond  them, 
defraud,  beguile,  and  over-reach  them.  Besides 
he  brings  up  his  sons  to  follow  his  steps ;  and  if  he 
findeth  in  any  of  them  a  foolish  timorousness  (for 
so  he  calls  the  first  appearance  of  a  tender  con- 
science), he  calls  them  fools,  and  blockheads,  and 
by  no  means  will  employ  them  in  much,  or  speak 
to  their  commendations  before  others.  For  my 
part,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  he  has,  by  his  wicked 
life,  caused  many  to  stumble  and  fall ;  and  will  be, 
if  God  prevent  not,  the  ruin  of  many  more.2 

Faith.  Well,  my  brother,  I  am  bound  to  believe 
you ;  not  only  because  you  say  you  know  him,  but 
also  because,  like  a  Christian,  you  make  your  re- 
ports of  men.  For  I  cannot  think  that  you  speak 
these  things  of  ill-will,  but  because  it  is  even  so  as 
you  say. 

Chr.  Had  I  known  him  no  more  than  you,  I 
might  perhaps  have  thought  of  him  as,  at  the  first, 
you  did ;  yea,  had  he  received  this  report  at  their 
hands  only  that  are  enemies  to  religion,  I  should 
have  thought  it  had  been  a  slander — a  lot  that 
often  falls  from  bad  men's  mouths  upon  good  men's 
names  and  professions ;  but  all  these  things,  yea, 
and  a  great  many  more  as  bad,  of  my  own  know- 
ledge, I  can  prove  him  guilty  of.  Besides,  good 
men  are  ashamed  of  him ;  they  can  neither  call  him 
brother,  nor  friend  ;  the  very  naming  of  him  among 
them  makes  them  blush,  if  they  know  him. 

Faith.  Well,  I  see  that  saying  and  doing  are 
two  things,  and  hereafter  I  shall  better  observe 
tins  distinction. 

Chr.  They  are  two  things  indeed>  and  are  as 
diverse  as  are  the  soul  and  the  body ;  for  as  the 
body  without  the  soul  is  but  a  dead  The  carcass  of 
carcass,  so  saying,  if  it  be  alone,  is  but  religion. 
a  dead  carcass  also.  The  soul  of  religion  is  the 
practical  part:  'Pure  religion  and  undefiled,  before 
God  and  the  Father,  is  this,  to  visit  the  fatherless 
and  widows  in  their  affliction,  and  to  keep  himself 

unspotted  from  the  WOrld. '  Ja.  5.  27  ;  see  ver.  22-26.     This 

Talkative  is  not  aware  of;  he  thinks  that  hearing 
and  saying  will  make  a  good  Christian,  and  thus 
he  deceiveth  his  own  soul.  Hearing  is  but  as  the 
sowing  of  the  seed ;  talking  is  not  sufficient  to  prove 

2  Read  this,  and  tremble,  ye  whose  profession  lies  only  on 
your  tongue,  but  who  never  knew  the  love  and  grace  of  Christ 
in  your  souls.  0  how  do  you  trifle  with  the  grace  of  God, 
with  precious  Christ,  and  with  the  holy  Word  of  truth!  O 
what  an  awful  account  have  you  to  give  hereafter  to  a  holy, 
heart-searching  God!  Ye  true  pilgrims  of  Jesus,  read  this,  and 
give  glory  to  your  Lord,  for  saving  you  from  resting  in  barren 
notions,  and  taking  up  with  talking  of  truths ;  and  that  he  has 
given  you  to  know  the  truth  in  its  power,  to  embrace  it  in  your 
heart,  and  to  live  and  walk  under  its  constraining,  sanctifying 
influences.     Who  made  you  to  differ? — (Mason.) 


THE   HLC  RIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Ul 


that  fruit  is  indeed  in  the  heart  and  life;  ami  let 
us  assure  ourselves,  that  at  the  day  of  doom  men 
shall  he  judged  according  tQ  their  fruits.  Mat.xiii.,  or, 
It  will  not  he  said  then,  1  >id  j ea  believe?  but,  Were 
you  doers,  or  talkers  only?  and  accordingly  shall 
they  be  judged.  The  end  of  the  world  is  compared 
to  our  harvest;  and  you  know  men  at  harvest  re- 
gard nothing  but  fruit.  Not  that  anything  can 
be  accepted  that  is  not  of  faith,  but  I  speak  this 
to  show  you  how  insignificant  the  profession  of 
Talkative  will  be  at  that  day. 

FAITH.  This  brings  to  my  mind  that  of  Moses, 
by  which  he  deseriheth  the  beast  that  is  clean. 

Faitttfhl   rmi-        Lev.  xi.    Dent.  xiv.       He  is  SUcll  ■  one  that 

*?      parteth  the  hoof  and  cheweth  the  cud  ; 
laii.aivc.  not  that  parteth  the  hoof  only,  or  that 

cheweth  the  cud  only.  The  hare  cheweth  the  cud, 
hut  yet  is  unclean,  because  he  parteth  not  the  hoof. 
And  this  truly  rescmbleth  Talkative,  he  cheweth 
the  cud,  he  seeketh  knowledge,  he  cheweth  upon 
the  word ;  but  he  divideth  not  the  hoof,  he  parteth 
not  with  the  way  of  sinners ;  but,  as  the  hare,  he 
retaineth  the  foot  of  a  dog  or  bear,  and  therefore 
he  is  unclean.1 

Chr.  You  have  spoken,  for  aught  I  know,  the 
true  gospel  sense  of  those  texts.  And  I  will  add 
another  thing:  Paul  calleth  some  men,  yea,  and 
those  great  talkers  too,  '  sounding  brass,  and  tink- 
ling cymbals,'  that  is,  as  he  expounds  them  in 
Talkative    like   another  place,   '  things  without  life, 

10   tiling   that         •    •  l    >  ml  • 

sound  without    giving  SOUIIU.    1  Co.  xiii.  1— 3;  xiv.  7.     lllings 

mc-  without  life,  that  is,  without  the  true 

faith  and  grace  of  the  gospel ;  and  consequently, 
things  that  shall  never  be  placed  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  among  those  that  are  the  children  of  life; 
though  their  sound,  by  their  talk,  be  as  if  it  were 
the  tongue  or  voice  of  an  angel. 

Faith.  Well,  I  Avas  not  so  fond  of  his  company 
at  first,  but  I  am  as  sick  of  it  now.  What  shall 
we  do  to  be  rid  of  him  ? 

Cur.  Take  my  advice,  and  do  as  I  bid  you,  and 
you  shall  find  that  he  will  soon  be  sick  of  your 
company  too,  except  God  shall  touch  his  heart,  and 
turn  it. 

Faith.   What  would  you  have  me  to  do  ? 

Chr.  Why,  go  to  him,  and  enter  into  some 
serious  discourse  about  the  power  of  religion ;  and 
ask  him  plainly  (when  he  has  approved  of  it,  for 


1  Tliis  spiritual  application  of  the  law  of  Moses  is  found  in 
the  narrative  of  Bunyan's  experience  in  the  Grace  Abounding, 
A'o.  71:  '1  was  also  made,  about  this  time,  to  see  something 
concerning  the  heasts  that  Musts  counted  clean  and  unclean. 
I  thought  those  beasts  were  types  of  men :  the  clean,  types  of 
them  that  were  the  people  of  God;  hut  the  unclean,  types  of 
such  as  were  the  children  of  the  wicked  one.  Now,  1  read, 
that  the  clean  beasts  chewed  the  cud;  that  is,  thought  I,  they 
show  us  we  m.\\%tfeed  upon  the  Word  of  God;  they  also  parted 
the  hoof,  I  thought  that  signified  we  must  part,  if  we  would 
be  saved,  with  the  ways  of  ungodly  men.' 


that  he  will)   whether  this  thing  he  set  up  in  his 
heart,  house,  or  conversation  ?- 

Farm    Then   Faithful  stepped   forward    . 


and  said  to  Talkative,  Come,  what  chee 


H« 


is  it  now  ? 

Talk.  Thank  you,  well.  I  thought  we  should 
have  had  a  great  deal  of  talk  by  this  time. 

Paitii.  Well,  if  you  will,  we  will  fall  to  it  now; 
and  since  you  left  it  with  me  to  state  the  question, 
let  it  be  this:  How  doth  the  saving  grace  of  God 
discover  itself,  when  it  is  in  the  heart  of  man  ? 

Talk.  I  perceive  then,  that  our  talk  must  be 
about  the  power  of  things.  Well,  it  is  a  very  good 
question,  and  I  shall  be  willing  to  T;i,kntivc.3 fa1se 
answer  you.  And  take  my  answer  in  diaoofeiij  of  a 
brief,  thus :  First,  Where  the  grace  of 
Cod  is  in  the  heart,  it  causeth  there  a  great  outcry 
against  sin.     Secondly 

Faith.  Nay,  hold,  let  us  consider  of  one  at  once. 
I  think  you  should  rather  say,  It  shows  itself  by 
inclining  the  soul  to  abhor  its  sin. 

Talk.  Why,  what  difference  is  there  between 
crying  out  against,  and  abhorring  of  sin  ? 

Faith.  0  !  a  great  deal.  A  man  may  cry  out 
against  sin  of  policy,  but  he  cannot  To  out 

abhor  it,  but  by  virtue  of  a  godly  anti-     against  sin,  no 

,  .  .  T  ,  ii  sijjn  01  ijrace. 

pathy  against  it.      I  have  heard  many 
cry  out  against  sin  in  the  pidpit,  who  yet  can  abide 
it  well  enough  in  the  heart,  house,  and  conversation. 
Joseph's  mistress  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  as  if 
she  had  been  very  holy ;  but  she  would  willingly, 
notwithstanding  that,  have  committed  uncleanness 
with  him.  Ge.  xxxix.  15.     Some  cry  out  against  sin, 
even  as  the  mother  cries  out  against  her  child  in 
her  lap,  when  she  calleth  it  slut  and  naughty  girl, 
and  then  falls  to  hugging  and  kissing  it.3 
Talk.  You  lie  at  the  catch,  I  perceive.4 
Faith.  No,  not  I ;  I  am  only  for  setting  things 
right.     But  what  is  the  second  thing  whereby  you 
would  prove  a  discovery  of  a  work  of  grace  in  the 
heart  ? 

Talk.   Great  knowledge  of  gospel  mysteries. 


2  True  faith  will  ever  show  itself  by  its  fruits ;  real  conver- 
sion, by  the  life  and  conversation.  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is 
not  to  be  mocked  with  the  tongue,  if  the  heart  is  not  right  to- 
wards him  in  love  and  obedience. — (Mason.) 

3  This  distinction  between  speaking  against  sin,  and  feeling 
a  hatred  to  it,  is  so  vastly  important,  that  it  forms  the  only 
infallible  test  to  distinguish  between  those  who  are  '  quickened' 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  those  who  '  have  a  name  to  live  and 
are  dead.'  It  is  a  very  awful  statement,  but,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
strictly  correct,  that  ministers  may  declaim  against  sin  in  the 

;  pidpit,  who  vet  indulge  it  in  the  parlour.  There  may  be 
much  head  knowledge,  where  there  is  no  heart  religion.— 
(Ivimey.) 

|  *  Christian  faithfulness  detects  mere  talkatives,  and  they 
complain,  '  in  so  saying  thou  condemuest  us  also;'  they  will  bear 
uo  longer,  but  seek  refuge  under  more  comfortable  preachers, 
or  in  more  candid  company,  and  represent  those  faithful  moni- 
tors as  censorious,  peevish,  and  melancholy  men— lying  at  the 

I  catch.— (Scott.) 


124 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Faith.  This  sign  should  have  heen  first;  hut 

Great       know-    ^rst  0r  ^aS*»  *'  *s  a^s0  ^se  '  ^0r  know- 

ledge  no  sigii  ledo-e,  great  knowledg-e,  may  he  ob- 

of  grace.  .  °    '    ?     ,  .       \    ,  , 

tamed  m  the  mysteries  or  the  gospeJ, 
and  yet  no  work  of  grace  in  the  soul.  1  Co.  xiii.  Yea, 
if  a  man  have  all  knowledge,  he  may  yet  be  nothing, 
and  so  consequently  be  no  child  of  God.  When 
Christ  said,  '  Do  you  know  all  these  things  ? ' 
and  the  disciples  had  answered,  Yes ;  he  addeth, 
•  Blessed  are  ye  if  ye  do  them.'  He  doth  not  lay 
the  blessing  in  the  knowing  of  them,  but  in  the 
doing  of  them.  For  there  is  a  knowledge  that  is 
not  attended  with  doing :  '  He  that  knoweth  his 
master's  will,  and  doeth  it  not.'  A  man  may  know 
like  an  angel,  and  yet  he  no  Christian,  therefore 
your  sign  of  it  is  not  true.  Indeed,  to  Jcnmo  is  a 
thing  that  pleaseth  talkers  and  boasters  ;  but  to  do 
is  that  which  pleaseth  God.  Not  that  the  heart 
Knowledge  and  can  be  good  without  knowledge ;  for 
knowledge.  witnout  that  the  heart  is  naught. 
There  is,  therefore,  knowledge  and  knowledge. 
Knowledge  that  resteth  in  the  bare  speculation  of 
tilings ;  and  knowledge  that  is  accompanied  with 
the  grace  of  faith  and  love  ;  which  puts  a  man  upon 
doing  even  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart :  the 
_     .       ,  ,      first  of  these  will  serve  the  talker ;  but 

1  rue  knowledge  .     .        . 

attended  with  without  the  other  the  true  Christian  is 
not  content.  '  Give  me  understanding, 
and  I  shall  keep  thy  law ;  yea,  I  shall  observe  it 
with  my  whole  heart. '  rs.  crix.  34. 

Talk.  You  lie  at  the  catch  again ;  this  is  not 
for  edification.1 

Faith.  Well,  if  you  please,  propound  another 
sign  how  this  work  of  grace  discovereth  itself  where 
it  is. 

Talk.  Not  I,  for  I  see  we  shall  not  agree. 

Faith.  Well,  if  you  will  not,  will  you  give  me 
leave  to  do  it  ? 

Talk.  You  may  use  your  liberty. 

Faith.  A  work  of  grace  in  the  soul  discovereth 
One  good  sign    itself,  either  to  him  that  hath  it,  or  to 

ofsracc-        standers  by. 

To  him  that  hath  it  thus :  It  gives  him  convic- 
tion of  sin,  especially  of  the  defilement  of  his  na- 
ture and  the  sin  of  unbelief  (for  the  sake  of  which 
he  is  sure  to  be  damned,  if  he  findeth  not  mercy 
at  God's  hand,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ).  Jn.  xvi  s. 
Ro.  vii.  2i.  Jn.  xvi.  9.  Mar.  xvi.  ig.     This  siodit  and  sense 


1  In  the  Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved,  Banyan  explaius  his  mean- 
ing of  '  lying  at  the  catch'  in  these  solemn  words,  referring  to 
those  who  abide  in  sin,  and  yet  expect  to  be  saved  by  grace : 
'  Of  this  sort  are  they  that  build  up  Zion  with  blood,  and  Jeru- 
salem with  iniquity;  that  judge  for  reward,  and  teach  for  hire, 
and  divine  for  money,  and  lean  upon  the  Lord.  Mic.iii.  10, 11. 
This  is  doing  tilings  with  a  high  hand  against  the  Lord  our 
God,  and  a  talcing  him,  as  it  were,  at  the  catch!  This  is,  as 
we  say  among  men,  to  seek  to  put  a  trick  upon  God,  as  if  he 
had  not  sufficiently  fortified  his  proposals  of  grace  by  his  Holy 
Word,  against  all  such  kind  of  fools  as  these' — (Vol.  i.  p.  93.) 


of  things  worketh  in  him  sorrow  and  shame  for 
sin;  he  findeth,  moreover,  revealed  in  him  the 
Saviour  of  the  world,  and  the  absolute  necessity 
of  closing  with  him  for  life,  at  the  which  he  findeth 
hungerings  and  thirstings  after  him ;  to  which 
hungerings,  &c,  the  promise  is  made.  Ps.  xxxviii.  is. 

Je.  xxxi.  19.    Ga.  ii.  1C.    Ac.  iv.  12.  Mat.  v.  G.  Re.  xxi.  G.       Now. 

according  to  the  strength  or  weakness  of  his  faith 
in  his  Saviour,  so  is  his  joy  and  peace,  so  is  his 
love  to  holiness,  so  are  his  desires  to  know  him 
more,  and  also  to  serve  him  in  this  world.  But 
though  I  say  it  discovereth  itself  thus  unto  him, 
yet  it  is  but  seldom  that  he  is  able  to  conclude 
that  this  is  a  work  of  grace ;  because  his  corrup- 
tions now,  and  his  abused  reason,  make  his  mind 
to  misjudge  in  this  matter;  therefore,  in  him  that 
hath  this  work,  there  is  required  a  ver}r  sound 
judgment  before  he  can,  with  steadiness,  conclude 
that  this  is  a  work  of  grace. 

To  others,  it  is  thus  discovered : 

1.  By  an  experimental  confession  of  his  faith  in 

Christ.  Ro.  x.  10.    Phi.  i.  27.    Mat.  v.  19. 

2.  By  a  life  answerable  to  that  confession ;  to 
wit,  a  life  of  holiness ;  heart-holiness,  family-holi- 
ness (if  he  hath  a  family),  and  by  conversation- 
holiness  in  the  world ;  which,  in  the  general,  teach- 
eth  him,  inwardly,  to  abhor  his  sin,  and  himself  for 
that,  in  secret ;  to  suppress  it  in  his  family,  and 
to  promote  holiness  in  the  world ;  not  by  talk  only, 
as  a  hypocrite  or  talkative  person  may  do,  but 
by  a  practical  subjection,  in  faith  and  love,  to  the 
power  of  the  Word.  Jn.  xiv.  15.  Fs.  1.  23.  Job  xiu.  5,  c. 
Eze.  xx.  43.  And  now,  Sir,  as  to  this  brief  descrip- 
tion of  the  work  of  grace,  and  also  the  discovery 
of  it,  if  you  have  aught  to  object,  object ;  if  not, 
then  give  me  leave  to  propound  to  you  a  second 
question. 

Talk.  Nay,  my  part  is  not  now  to  object,  but 
to  hear;  let  me,  therefore,  have  your  second 
question. 

Faith.  It  is  this :  Do  you  experience  this  first 
part  of  this  description  of  it  ?  and  Another  good 
doth  your  life  and  conversation  testify  sisn  of  s1*™- 
the  same  ?  or  standeth  your  religion  in  word  or 
in  tongue,  and  not  in  deed  and  truth  ?  Pray,  if 
you  incline  to  answer  me  in  this,  say  no  more  than 
you  know  the  God  above  will  say  Amen  to ;  and, 
also,  nothing  but  what  your  conscience  can  justify 
you  in  ;  •  for,  not  he  that  commendeth  himself  is 
approved,  but  wdiom  the  Lord  commendeth. '  Be- 
sides, to  say,  I  am  thus,  and  thus,  when  my  con- 
versation, and  all  my  neighbours,  tell  me  I  lie,  is 
great  wickedness.2 

Talk.  Then  Talkative  at  first  began  to  blush  ; 


2  Blessed  faithful  dealing!  O  that  it  was  more  practised 
in  the  world,  and  in  the  "church!  How  then  would  vain 
talkers  be  detected  in  the  one,  and  driven  out  of  the  other. 
—  [Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


but,  recovering  himself,  thus  he  replied :  You  come 

Tidkntivennt      now  to  experience,  to  conscience,  and 

"'      Cod ;  and  to  appeal  to  him  for  justi- 

qnesUou.  fication  of  what  is  spoken.    This  kind 

of  discourse  I  did  not  expect ;  nor  am  I  disposed 

to  give  an  answer  to  such  questions,  because  I 

count  not  myself  bound  thereto,  unless  you  take 

upon   you    to    he   a    catechiscr,  and,  though    you 

should  so  do,  yet  1  may  refuse  to  make  you  my 

judge.     But,  I  pray,  will  you  tell  me  why  you  ask 

mc  such  questions  ?  l 

Faith.   Because  I  saw  you  forward  to  talk,  and 

mswhj   because  I  knew  not  that  you  had  aught 

hun  <i:at'^   else  but  notion.     Besides,  to  tell  you 

l'u»-  all  the  truth,  I  have  heard  of  you,  that 

you  are  a  man  whose  religion  lies  in  talk,  and  that 

your  conversation  gives  this  your  mouth-profession 

'  . ,  f  „     ,  .     the  lie.     They  say,   you  are  a   spot 
Faithful's  plain  .    •;         J'    J  f 

dealing       to   among  Christians ;  and  that  religion 

farcth    the  worse    for    your    ungodly 

conversation ;  that  some  already  have  stumbled  at 

your  wicked  ways,  and  that  more  are  in  danger  of 

being  destroyed  thereby;    your  religion,  and  an 

ale-house,  and  covetousness,  and  uncleanness,  and 

swearing,  and  lying,  and  vain  company  keeping, 

Sue.,  will  stand  together.     The  proverb  is  true  of 

you  which  is  said  of  a  whore,  to  wit,  that  she  is  a 

shame  to  all  women ;  so  are  you  a  shame  to  all 

professors.2 

Talk.  Since  you  are  ready  to  take  up  reports, 

and  to  judge  so  rashly  as  you  do,  I  cannot  but 

„  „  ,.     „.       conclude   you    are    some    peevish    or 

Talkative  flings  J  r       .        ,. 

away  from  melancholy  man,  not  nt  to  be  dis- 
coursed with  ;  and  so  adieu.'J 
Chr.  Then  came  up  Christian,  and  said  to  his 
brother,  I  told  you  how  it  would  happen ;  your 
words  and  his  lusts  could  not  agree  ;  he  had  rather 
leave  your  company  than  reform  his  life.     But  he 


1  Heart  searching,  soul  examining,  and  close  questioning  of 
the  conduct  of  life,  will  not  do  with  talkative  professors.  Ring 
a  peal  on  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  many  will  chime  in  with 
you ;  but  speak  closely  how"  grace  operates  upon  the  heart,  and 
influences  the  life  to  follow  Christ  in  self-denying  obedience, 
they  cannot  bear  it;  they  are  oli'ended  with  you,  and  will  turn 
away  from  you,  and  call  you  legal. — (Mason.) 

2  I  observe  that,  as  there  are  trees  wholly  noble,  so  there 
are  also  their  semblance ;  not  right,  but  ignoble.  There  is  the 
grape,  and  the  wild  grape;  the  rose,  and  the  canker  rose;  the 
apple  and  the  crab.  Now,  fruit  from  these  wild  trees,  however 
it  may  please  children  to  play  with,  yet  the  prudent  count  it 
of  no'valuc.  There  are  also  in  the  world  a  generation  of  pro- 
fessors that  bring  forth  nothing  but  wild  olive  berries;  saints 
only  before  men,  devils  and  vipers  at  home ;  saints  in  word, 
but  sinners  in  heart  and  lite.  Well,  saith  God,  this  profession 
is  but  a  cloak :  I  will  loose  the  reins  of  this  man,  and  give  him 
up  to  his  own  vile  affections.  '  I  will  answer  him  by  myself.' 
Eze.  xiv.  7.  Thou  art  too  hard  for  the  church  :  she  knows  not 
how  to  deal  with  thee.  "Well,  I  will  deal 'with  that  man  my- 
self.— (Bunyan's  Barren  Fig-tree) 

3  Where  the  heart  is  rottem  it  will  ward  off  conviction,  turn 
from  a  faithful  reprover,  condemn  him,  and  justify  itself.  Faith- 
ful dealing  will  not  do  for  unfaithful  souls.  Mind  not  that,  but 
be  faithful  to  the  truth. —  (Mason.) 


is   gone,   as   I  said;    let  him  go,  the  loss  is  no 
man's  but  his  own ;  he  has  saved  us 

,  .         «  r  ,  .  «       ,       A  good  riddance. 

the  trouble  of  going  Irom  him;  tor  he 
continuing  (as  I  suppose  he  will  do)  as  he  is,  ho 
would   have   been   but   a    blot    in    our  company; 
besides,  the  apostle   says,    '  From   such  withdraw 
thyself. ' 

Faith.  But  I  am  glad  we  had  this  little  dis- 
course with  him  ;  it  may  happen  that  he  will  think 
of  it  again ;  however,  I  have   dealt  plainly  with 
him,  and  so  am  clear  of  his  blood,  if  he  perisheth. 
Cim.  You  did  well  to  talk   so  plainly  to  him 
as  you  did ;  there  is  but  little  of  this  faithful  deal- 
ing  with  men  now-a-days,  and  that  makes  religion 
to  stink  so  in  the  nostrils  of  many,  as  it  doth  ;  for 
they  are  these  talkative  fools  whose  religion  is  only 
in  word,  and  are  debauched  and  vain  in  their  con- 
versation, that  (being  so  much  admitted  into  the 
fellowship  of  the  godly)  do  puzzle  the  world,  blem- 
ish Christianity,  and  grieve   the  sincere.      I  wish 
that  all  men  would  deal  with   such  as  you  have 
done ;  then  should  they  either  be  made  more  con- 
formable  to  religion,    or   the  company  of  saints 
would  be  too  hot  for  them.     Then  did  Faithful  say, 
How  Talkative  at  first  lifts  up  liis  plumes ! 
How  bravely  doth  he  speak!    How  he  presumes 
To  drive  down  all  before  him !     But  so  soon 
As  Faithful  talks  of  heart-work,  like  the  moon 
That's  past  the  full,  into  the  wane  he  goes. 
And  so  will  all,  but  he  that  ueart-wokk.  knows. 

Thus  they  went  on  talking  of  what  they  had 
seen  by  the  way,  and  so  made  that  way  easy  which 
would,  otherwise,  no  doubt,  have  been  tedious  to 
them ;  for  now  they  went  through  a  wilderness. 

Now,  when  they  were  got  almost  quite  out  of 
this  wilderness,  Faithful  chanced  to  cast  his  eye 
back,  and  espied  one  coming  after  them,  and  he 
knew  him.  Oh  !  said  Faithful  to  his  brother,  Who 
comes  yonder  ?  Then  Christian  looked,  and  said, 
It  is  my  good  friend  Evangelist.  Aye,  and  my 
good  friend  too,  said  Faithful,  for  it  was  he  that 
set  me  the  way  to  the  gate.  Now  was  Evan,clist 
Evanp-elist  come   up  unto   them,  and       overtakes 

,  °  ,  .     ,  them  again. 

thus  saluted  them : 

Evan.  Peace  be  with  you,  dearly  beloved  ;  and 
peace  be  to  your  helpers. 

Chr.   Welcome,  welcome,  my  good  Evangelist; 
the  sight  of  thy  countenance  brings  to    They  a 
my  remembrance  thy  ancient  kindness   «»e  sightof hua. 
and  unwearied  labouring  for  my  eternal  good. 

Faith.  And  a  thousand  times  welcome,  said 
good  Faithful.  Thy  company,  0  sweet  Evangelist, 
how  desirable  it  is  to  us  poor  pilgrims  ! i 

Evan.   Then  said  Evangelist,  How  hath  it  fared 


1  How  they  rejoiced  again  to  meet  Evangelist,  and  listen  to 
his  encouraging  and  animating  exhortations  ;  of  winch,  as  they 
were  now  neaAhe  sreat  town  of  Vanity  Fair,  they  would  stand 
in  special  need.     Indeed,  it  was  to  forewarn  them  of  what  they 


126 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


with  you,  my  friends,  since  the  time  of  our  last 
parting  ?  What  have  you  met  with,  and  hew 
have  you  behaved  yourselves  ? 

Then  Christian  and  Faithful  told  him  of  all 
things  that  had  happened  to  them  in  the  way ; 
and  how,  and  with  what  difficulty,  they  had  arrived 
to  that  place.1 

Evan.  Right  glad  am  I,  said  Evangelist,  not 
His  exhortation   that  y°u  have  met  with  trials,   but 

to  tiiem.  tkat  you  have  been  victors  ;  and  for 
that  you  have,  notwithstanding  many  weaknesses, 
continued  in  the  way  to  this  very  day. 

I  say,  right  glad  am  I  of  this  thing,  and  that 
for  mine  own  sake  and  yours.  I  have  sowed,  and 
you  have  reaped ;  and  the  day  is  coming,  when 
both  he  that  sowed  and  they  that  reaped  shall 
rejoice  together ;  that  is,  if  you  hold  out ;  '  for 
in  due  season  ye  shall  reap,  if  ye  faint  not.'  jn.  iv.  36. 
Ga.  vi.  9.  The  crown  is  before  you,  and  it  is  an 
incorruptible  one ;  '  so  run,  that  you  may  obtain' 
it.  l  Co.  it  24-27.  Some  there  be  that  set  out  for 
this  crown,  and,  after  they  have  gone  far  for  it, 
another  comes  in,  and  takes  it  from  them ;  hold 
fast,  therefore,  that  you  have,  let  no  man  take 
your  crown.  Re.  m.  n.2  You  are  not  yet  out  of 
the  gun-shot  of  the  devil ;  you  have  not  resisted 
unto  blood,  striving  against  sin ;  let  the  kingdom 


were  to  meet  -with,  there,  and  to  exhort  them,  amidst  all  per- 
secutions, to  quit  themselves  like  men,  that  Evangelist  now 
came  to  them.  His  voice,  so  solemn  and  deep,  yet  so  inspiring 
and  animating,  sounded  like  the  tones  of  a  trumpet  on  the  eve 
of  battle. — (Cheever.) 

1  The  pilgrims  are  now  about  to  enter  upon  a  new  era — to 
leave  their  privacy  in  the  wilderness,  and  commence  a  more 
public  scene — perhaps  alluding  to  Bunyan's  being  publicly  set 
apart  to  the  work  of  the  ministry.  It  was  in  the  discharge 
of  these  public  duties  that  he  was  visited  with  such  severe  per- 
secution. This  interview  with  Evangelist  reminds  one  of  the 
setting  apart  of  Dissenting  ministers.  It  is  usnal,  on  these 
occasions,  for  the  Christians  entering  on  such  important  duties, 
to  give  a  short  account  of  what  '  had  happened  in  the  way,'  and 
their  reasons  for  hoping  that  they  were  called  by  God  to  the 
work.  They  receive  the  advice  of  their  ministering  elder,  and 
the  pastor  prays  for  their  peace  and  prosperity.  Evangelist's 
address  would  make  a  good  outline  of  an  ordination  sermon. 
Bunyan's  account  of  his  being  thus  set  apart  in  1656  (with 
seven  other  members  of  the  same  church)  is  narrated  in  Grace 
Abounding,  Nos.  266 — 270.  The  second  address  of  Evangelist 
peculiarly  relates  to  the  miseries  endured  by  Nonconformist 
ministers  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II. — (Ed.) 

a  Shall  the  world  venture  their  soul's  ruin  for  a  poor  cor- 
ruptible crown ;  and  shall  not  we  venture  the  loss  of  a  few 
trifles  for  an  eternal  crown  ?  Shall  they  venture  the  loss  of  eter- 
nal life  for  communion  with  base,  drunken,  covetous  wretches ; 
and  shall  we  not  labour  as  hard,  run  as  fast,  nay,  a  hundred 
times  more  diligently,  for  such  glorious  and  eternal  friends  as 
God  to  love,  Christ  to  redeem,  the  Holy  Spirit  to  comfort,  and 
saints  and  angels  in  heaven  for  company  ?  Shall  it  be  said  at 
the  last  day,  that  the  wicked  made  more  haste  to  hell  than 
you  to  heaven  ?  0  let  it  not  be  so,  but  run  with  all  might 
and  main!  They  that  will  have  heaven  must  run  for  it, 
because  the  devil  will  follow  them.  There  is  never  a  poor  soul 
that  is  gone  to  it,  but  he  is  after  that  soul.  And  I  assure 
them  the  devil  is  nimble;  he  is  light  of  foot,  and  can  run 
apace.  He  hath  overtaken  many,  tripped  up  their  heels,  and 
given  them  an  everlasting  fall. —  {Heavenly  Foolman.) 


be  always  before  you,  and  believe  steadfastly  con- 
cerning things  that  are  invisible.  Let  nothing 
that  is  on  this  side  the  other  world  get  within  you ; 
and,  above  all,  look  well  to  your  own  hearts,  and 
to  the  lusts  thereof,  '  for  they  are  deceitful  above 
all  things,  and  desperately  wicked ;'  set  your  faces 
like  a  flint ;  you  have  all  power  in  heaven  and 
earth  on  your  side. 

'  Chk.  Then  Christian  thanked  him  for  his  ex- 
hortation ;  but  told  him,  withal,  that  ^  do  t]iank 
they  would  have  him  speak  further  to  fo™  for  ins  ex- 
theni  for  their  help  the  rest  of  the  way, 
and  the  rather,  for  that  they  well  knew  that  he 
was  a  prophet,  and  could  tell  them  of  things  that 
might  happen  unto  them,  and  also  how  they  might 
resist  and  overcome  them.  To  which  request 
Faithful  also  consented.  So  Evangelist  began 
as  followeth: 

Evan.  My  sons,  you  have  heard  in  the  words  of 
the  truth  of  the  gospel  that  vou  must,    „         ..  ,  „ 

°      \      .  ■  .      '     He     predicteth 

through  many  tribulations,  enter  into     what  troubles 


Fair,   and    en- 


that  in  every  city  bonds  and  afflictions 


expect  that  you  should  go  long  on  your 
pilgrimage  without  them,  in  some  sort  or  other. 
You  have  found  something  of  the  truth  of  theso 
testimonies  upon  you  already,  and  more  will  imme- 
diately follow ;  for  now,  as  you  see,  you  are  almost 
out  of  this  wilderness,  and  therefore  you  will  soon 
come  into  a  town  that  you  will  by  and  by  see  before 
you ;  and  in  that  town  you  will  be  hardly  beset 
with  enemies,  who  will  strain  hard  but  they  will 
kill  you  ;  and  be  you  sure  that  one  or  both  of  you 
must  seal  the  testimony  which  you  hold,  with 
blood;  but  be  you  faithful  unto  death,  and  the 
King  will  give  you  a  crown  of  life.  Hewhoselotit 
He  that  shall  die  there,  although  his     will  be  there  to 

....  suffer,  will  h.ivr 

death  will  be  unnatural,. and  his  pain  the  better  of 
perhaps  great,  he  will  yet  have  the  Msbrotker- 
better  of  his  fellow ;  not  only  because  he  will  be 
arrived  at  the  Celestial  City  soonest,  but  because 
he  will  escape  many  miseries  that  the  other  will 
meet  with  in  the  rest  of  his  journey.  But  when 
you  are  come  to  the  town,  and  shall  find  fulfilled 
what,  I  have  here  related,  then  remember  your 
friend  and  quit  yourselves  like  men,  and  commit 
the  keeping  of  your  souls  to  your  God  in  well-doing, 
as  unto  a  faithful  Creator.3 


3  Bunyan  illustrates  the  care  of  Christ  for  his  afflicted  ones 
with  striking  simplicity.  '  I  love  to  play  the  child  with  chil- 
dren. I  have  met  with  a  child  that  had  a  sore  finger,  so  that 
it  was  useless.  Then  have  I  said,  Shall  we  cut  off  this  finger, 
and  buy  my  child  a  better,  a  brave  golden  finger  ?  At  this  he 
started,  and  felt  indignation  against  me.  Now,  if  a  chdd  has 
such  tenderness  for  a  useless  member,  how  much  more  tender 
is  the  Son  of  God  to  his  afflicted  members  ?' — (Saint's  Privilege, 
vol.  i.  p.  674.)  The  test  here  quoted  forms  the  foundation  of 
Bunyan's  admirable  Advice  to  Sufferers,  in  which  he  delight- 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


127 


Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  when  they  were 
got  out  of  the  wilderness,  they  presently  saw  a 
town  heforc  them,  and  the  name  of  that  town  is 
Vanity ;  and  at  the  town  there  is  a  fair  kept, 
called  Vanity  Fair:  it  is  kept  all  the  yearlong; 
it  heareth  the  name  of  Vanity  Fair,  hecause  the 
town  where  it  is  kept  is  lighter  than  vanity ;  ami 
alsohecansc  all  that  is  there  sold,  or  that  cometh 
thither,  is  vanity.  As  is  the  saying  of  the  wise, 
'All  that  cnnieth  wvanity.'Ec.  i.;ii.  li,  I7;xi.  s.  Is.xl  it. 

This  fair  is  no  new-erected  business,  hut  a  thing 
of  ancient  standing ;  I  will  show  you  the  original 
of  it. 

Almost  five  thousand  years  agonc,  there  were 
The  antiquity  of  pilgrims  walking  to  the  Celestial  City 

this  iau\  as  t]iesc  two  honest  persons  are :  and 
Beelzebub,  Apollyon,  and  Legion,  with  their  com- 
panions, perceiving  by  the  path  that  the  pilgrims 
made,  that  their  way  to  the  city  lay  through  this 
town  of  Vanity,  they  contrived  here  to  set  up  a  fair ; 
a  fair  wherein  should  be  sold  all  sorts  of  vanity, 
and  that  it  should  last  all  the  year  long:  there- 
Themcrehnm'Use  fore  at  this  fair  are  all  such  merchan- 
ui  iius  mir.  ^jse  goi^  as  houses>  lands,  trades, 
places,  honours,  preferments,  titles,  countries, 
kingdoms,  lusts,  pleasures,  and  delights  of  all 
sorts,  as  whores,  bawds,  wives,  husbands,  children, 
masters,  servants,  lives,  blood,  bodies,  souls,  silver, 
gold,  pearls,  precious  stones,  and  what  not.1 

And,  moreover,  at  this  fair  there  is  at  all  times 
to  be  seen  juggling,  cheats,  games,  plays,  fools, 
apes,  knaves,  and  rogues,  and  that  of  every 
kind. 

Here  are  to  be  seen  too,  and  that  for  nothing, 
thefts,  murders,  adulteries,  false  swearers,  and  that 
of  a  blood-red  colour.2 


fully  dwells  upon  the  topics  which  Evangelist  addresses  to  the 
Pilgrims,  when  on  the  verge  of  hitter  persecution. — (Ed.) 

y  Vanity  hair  is  the  City  of  Destruction  in  its  gala  dress, 
in  its  most  seductive  and  sensual  allurements.  It  is  this  world 
in  miniature,  with  its  various  temptations.  Hitherto  we  have 
observed  the  pilgrims  by  themselves,  in  loneliness,  in  obscurity, 
in  the  hidden  life  and  experience  of  the  people  of  God.  The 
allegory  thus  far  has  been  that  of  the  soul,  amidst  its  spiritual 
enemies,  toiling  towards  heaven ;  now  there  comes  a  scene 
more  open,  tangible,  external ;  the  allurements  of  the  world 
are  to  be  presented,  with  the  manner  iu  which  the  true  pilgrim 
conducts  himself  amidst  them.  It  was  necessary  that  Banyan 
should  show  his  pilgrimage  in  its  external  as  well  as  its  secret 
spiritual  conflicts;  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  draw  the 
batmen  the  pursuits  and  deportment  of  the  children 
of  this  world  and  the  children  of  light ;  that  he  should  show- 
how  a  true  pilgrim  appears,  and  is  likely  to  be  regarded,  who, 
amidst  the  world's  vanities,  lives  above  the  world,  is  dead  to 
it,  and  walks  through  it  as  a  stranger  and  a  pilgrim  towards 
heaven. — (Cheever.j 

2  A  just  description  of  this  wicked  world.  How  many, 
though  they  profess  to  be  pilgrims,  have  never  yet  set  one 
foot  out  of  this  fair;  but  live  in  it  all  the  year  round !  They 
'  walk  according  to  the  course  of  this  world,'  Ep.  ii.  2 ;  for 
'the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  their  miuds.'  2  Co.  iv.  -1. 
But  all  those  for  whose  sins  Jesus  hath  died  '  he  delivers  from 
this  present  evil  world.'  Ga.  i.  4.     You  cannot  be  a  pilgrim,  if 


And  as  in  other  fairs  of  less  moment,  there  are 
the  several  rows  and  streets,  under  their  proper 
names,  where  such  and  such  wares  arc  vended;  so 
here  likewise  you  have  the  proper  places,  rows, 
streets  (viz.  countries  and  kingdoms),  where  the 
wares  of  this  fair  are  soonest  to  he  found.  II.  re 
is  the  Britain  Row,  the  French  Row,  xia-  streets  i  f 
the  Italian  Row,  the  Spanish  Row,  the  tllls  te- 
German  Row,  where  several  sorts  of  vanities  are  to 
be  sold.  But,  as  in  other  fairs,  some  one  com- 
modity is  as  the  chief  of  all  the  fair,  so  the  ware 
of  Rome  and  her  merchandise  is  greatly  promoted 
in  this  fair;  only  our  English  nation,  with  some 
others,  have  taken  a  dislike  thereat.3 

Now,  as  I  said,  the  way  to  the  Celestial  City 
lies  just  through  this  town  where  this  lusty  fair  is 
kept;  and  he  that  will  go  to  the  City,  and  yet  not 
go  through  this  town,  must  needs  '  go  out  of  the 
world. '  l  Co.  v.  10.  The  Prince  of  princes  Christ  went 
himself,  when  here,  went  through  this  through  tins  lair. 
town  to  his  own  country,  and  that  upon  a  fair  day 
too;  yea,  and  as  I  think,  it  was  Beelzebub,  the 
chief  lord  of  this  fair,  that  invited  him  to  buy  of 
his  vanities;  yea,  would  have  made  him  lord  of 
the  fair,  would  he  but  have  done  him  reverence  as 
he  went  through  the  town.  Mat.  iv.  s.  Lu.  iv.  5-7.  Yea, 
because  he  was  such  a  person  of  honour,  Beelzebub 


you  are  not  delivered  from  this  world  and  its  vanities;  for  if 
you  love  the  world,  if  it  has  your  supreme  affections,  the  love 
of  God  is  not  in  you,  1  Jn.  ii.  15  ;  you  have  not  one  grain  of 
precious  faith  in  precious  Jesus. —  (Mason.) 

s  Mr.  James,  who,  in  1815,  published  the  'Pilgrim'  in 
verse,  conjectures  that  Bunyan's  description  of  the  Fair  arose 
from  his  having  been  at  Stiuhridge  hair,  uear  Cambridge.  I: 
was  thus  described  in  1786  : — 'The  shops  or  booths  are  built 
in  rows  like  streets,  having  each  its  name ;  as  Garlick  Row, 
Bookseller's  Row,  Cook  Row,  fee.  Here  are  all  sorts  of  traders, 
who  sell  by  wholesale  or  retail;  as  goldsmith's  toymen, 
braziers,  turners,  milliners,  haberdashers,  hatters,  mercers, 
drapers,  pewterers,  china  warehouses,  and,  in  a  word,  most 
trades  that  can  be  found  iu  London.  Here  are  also  taverns, 
coffee-houses,  and  eating-houses,  iu  great  plenty.  The  chiel 
diversions  are  puppets,  rope-dancing,  and  music  booths.  To 
this  Pair,  people  from  Bedfordshire  and  the  adjoining  counties 
still  resort.  Similar  kinds  of  fairs  are  now  kept  at  Frankfort 
and  Leipzig.  These  mercantile  fairs  were  very  injurious  to 
morals  ;  but  not  to  the  extent  of  debauchery  and  villany,  which 
reign  in  our  present  annual  fairs,  near  the  metropolis  am 
cities.'  See  an  account  of  this  fair  in  Hone's  Yrar  Book, 
p.  1538.— (Ed.)  Our  author  evidently  designed  to  exhibit  in 
his  allegory  the  grand  outlines  of  the  difficulties,  temptations, 
and  sufferings,  to  which  believers  are  exposed  in  this  evi! 
world ;  which,  in  a  work  of  this  nature,  most  be  related  as  if 
they  came  upon  them  one  after  another  in  regular  succession  ; 
though  in  actual  experience  several  may  meet  together,  many 
may  molest  the  same  person  again  and  again,  and  son  1 
him  in  every  stage  of  brie  jonroey.  We  should,  therefore, 
singly  consider  the  instruction  conveyed  by  every  slli 
incident,  without  measuring  our  experience,  or  calculat) 

.  by  comparing  them  with  circumstances  which  might 
be  reversed  or  altered  with  almost  endless  variety.  In  gene- 
ral, Yanitv  hair  represents  the  wretched  state  of  In 
those  populous  places  especially,  where  true  religion  is  neglected 
and  persecuted;  and,  indeed, 'iu  the  whole  world  h 
wickedness,'  as  distinguished  from  the  church  ot  redeemed 
sinners.' — (Scott.) 


1S!8 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


had  him  from  street  to  street,  and  showed  him  all 

the  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  a  little  time,  that 

he  might,  if  possible,   allure  the  Blessed  One  to 

.      ,.    cheapen  and  buy  some  of  his  vanities ; 

Christ     bought  ?  ? 

nothing  in  this  but  he  had  no  mind  to  the  merchandise, 
and  therefore  left  the  town,  without 
laying  out  so  much  as  one  farthing  upon  these 
vanities.  This  fair,  therefore,  is  an  ancient  thing, 
of  long  standing,  and  a  very  great  fair.  Now 
The  Pilgrims  these  Pilgrims,  as  I  said,  must  needs 
enter  the  fair.  g0  through  this  fair.1  Well,  so  they 
did;  hut,  behold,  even  as  they  entered  into  the 
fair,  all  the  people  in  the  fair  were  moved,  and  the 
__     , .    .        town  itself  as  it    were   in  a  hubbub 

Ihe    fair    m   a 

hubbub  about   about  them ;  and  that  for  several  rea- 

tliera.  r 

sons;  for — 

First,  The  pilgrims  were  clothed  with  such  kind 
The  first  cause  of  raiment  as  was  diverse  from  the 
of  {he  hubbub.  raiment  of  any  that  traded  in  that 
fair.  The  people,  therefore,  of  the  fair,  made  a 
great  gazing  upon  them :  some  said  they  were 
fools,  some  they  were  bedlams,  and  some  they  are 
outlandish  men.2  1  Co.  a.  7,  s. 

Secondly,  And  as  they  wondered  at  their  apparel, 
second  cause  of  so  they  did  likewise  at  their  speech  ; 
the  hubbub.  for  few  could  understand  what  they 
said ;  they  naturally  spoke  the  language  of  Canaan, 
but  they  that  kept  the  fair  were  the  men  of  this 
world ;  so  that,  from  one  end  of  the  fair  to  the 
other,  they  seemed  barbarians  each  to  the  other. 

Thirdly,  But  that  which  did  not  a  little  amuse 
Third  cause  of  the  merchandisers  was,  that  these  pil- 

the  hubbub.       grjms  get  yery  i;gnt  by  ali  tne;r  wareg  . 

they  cared  not  so  much  as  to  look  upon  them  ;  and 
if  they  called  upon  them  to  buy,  they  would  put 
their  fingers  in  their  ears,  and  cry,  '  Turn  away 
mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity,'3  and  look  up- 
wards, signifying  that  their  trade  and  traffic  was 
in  heaven.  Ps.  cxix.  37.  Phi.  m.  io,  20. 

One  chanced  mockingly,  beholding  the  carriage 

Fourth  cause  of   of  the  men,  to  say  unto  them,  What 

the  hubbub.     wiu  ye  buy  ?  But  thej)  looldng  graVely 


1  Christ  will  not  allow  his  followers  to  bury  their  talent  in 
the  earth,  or  to  put  their  light  under  a  bushel;  they  are  not 
to  go  out  of  the  world,  or  to  retire  into  cloisters,  monasteries, 
or  deserts ;  but  they  must  all  go  through  this  fair.  Thus  our 
Lord  endured  all  the  temptations  and  sufferings  of  this  evil 
world,  without  being  impeded  or  entangled  by  them,  or  step- 
ping iu  the  least  aside  to  avoid  them  ;  and  he  was  exposed  to 
greater  enmity  and  contempt  than  any  of  his  followers.— (Scott.) 

-  The  world  will  seek  to  keep  you  out  of  heaven  with  mocks, 
flouts,  taunts,  threat  en  i  11  gs,  jails, 'gibbets,  halters,  burnings,  and 
deaths.  There  ever  was  enmity  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent 
and  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  110  endeavours  can  reconcile 
them.  The  world  says,  They  will  never  come  over  to  us  ;  and 
we  again  say,  By  God's  grace  we  will  not  go  over  to  them. 

3  Holy  Hunt  of  Hitchin,  as  he  was  called,  a  friend  of  Bun- 
van's,  passing  the  market-place  where  mountebanks  were 
performing,  one  cried  after  him,  '  Look  there,  Mr.  Hunt.' 
Turning  his  head  another  way,  he  replied,  '  Turn  away  mine 
eyes  from  beholding  vanity.' — (lvimey.) 


upon  him,  answered,  'We buy  the  truth.'4  Pr.  xxiii. 23. 
At  that  there  was  an  occasion  taken  to  despise 
the  men  the  more:    some  mocking, 

•.  .  They  are  mocked. 

some  taunting,  some  speaking  re- 
proachfully, and  some  calling  upon  others  to  smite 
them.  At  last  things  came  to  a  hub-  Tlie  fai-r  in  a 
bub,  and  great  stir  in  the  fair,  inso-  hubbub. 
much  that  all  order  was  confounded.  Now  was 
word  presently  brought  to  the  great  one  of  the 
fair,  who  quickly  came  down,  and  deputed  some 
of  his  most  trusty  friends  to  take  these  men  into 
examination,  about  whom  the  fair  was  almost  over- 
turned. So  the  men  were  brought  to  Thev  are  exa- 
examination  ;  and  they  that  sat  upon  mined. 
them,  asked  them  whence  they  came,  whither  they 
went,  and  what  they  did  there  in  such  an  unusual 
garb  ?  The  men  told  them,  that  they  They  tell  who 
were  pilgrims  and  strangers  in  the  w^p'they 
world,  and  that  they  were  going  to  came- 
their  own  country,  which  was  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem, lie.  ix.  13-16;  and  that  they  had  given  no 
occasion  to  the  men  of  the  town,  nor  yet  to  the 
merchandisers,  thus  to  abuse  them,  and  to  let  them 
in  their  journey,  except  it  was,  for  that,  when  one 
asked  them  what  they  would  buy,  they  said  they 
Avould  buy  the  truth.4  But  they  that  were  ap- 
pointed to  examine  them  did  not  believe  them  to 
be  any  other  than  bedlams  and  mad,  They  are  not 
or  else  such  as  came  to  put  all  things  believed, 
into  a  confusion  in  the  fair.  Therefore  they  took 
them  and  beat  them,  and  besmeared  them  with 
dirt,  and  then  put  them  into  the  cage,  that  they 
might  be  made  a  spectacle  to  all  the  They  are  put  iu 
men  of  the  fair.  There,  therefore,  the  cage. 
they  lay  for  some  time,  and  were  made  the  objects 
of  any  man's  sport,  or  malice,  or  revenge,  the 
great  one  of  the  fair  laughing  still  at  all  that  befell 
tliem.  But  the  men  being  patient,  and  Their  behaviour 
not  rendering  railing  for  railing,  but  in  the  ea°e- 
contrariwise,  blessing,  and  giving  good  words  for 
bad,  and  kindness  for  injuries  done,  some  men  in 
the  fair  that  were  more  observing,  and  less  pre- 
judiced than  the  rest,  began  to  check  and  blame 
the  baser  sort  for  their  continual  abuses  done  by 
them  to  the  men ;  they,  therefore,  in  angry  man- 


4  An  odd  reply.  What  do  they  mean?  That  they  are 
neither  afraid  nor  ashamed  to  own  what  was  the  one  subject 
of  their  souls'  pursuit — the  truth.  Understand  hereby,  that 
the  whole  world,  which  lieth  in  wickedness,  is  deceived  by  a 
lie,  and  is  under  the  delusion  of  the  father  of  lies.  In  oppo- 
sition to  this,  all  believers  in  Christ  are  said  to  be  of  the  truth. 
1  Jn.  iii,  19.  They  know  and  believe  that  capital  truth  with 
which  God  spake  from  heaven,  'This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased.'  Mat.  iii.  17.  This  truth — that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  our  only  Saviour — lies  at  the 
foundation  of  all  their  hope;  and  to  get  more  and  more 
acquainted  with  him,  is  the  grand  object  of  their  pursuits. 
For  this  the  world  hates  (hem ;  and  Satan,  who  is  an  enemy 
to  this  truth,  stirs  up  the  world  against  them.  'For,'  says 
our  Lord,  '  they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of 
the  world.'  Jn.  xvii.  16. — (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


129 


ncr,  let  fly  at  them  again,  counting-  them  as  bad 
. ..     as  the  men  in  the  cao-c,  ami  telling 

The  men  of  the  j  »  j        . 

fair  do  fall  out  them  that  they  seemed  confederates, 
selves5  about  ami  should  be  made  partakers  of  their 
thesetwomen.  misfortune8.l  The  other  replied,  that 
for  aught  they  could  see,  the  men  were  quiet, 
and  sober,  and  intended  nobody  any  barm ;  and 
that  there  were  many  that  traded  in  their  fair,  that 
■were  more  worthy  to  be  put  into  the  cage,  yea,  and 
pillory  too,  than  were  the  men  that  they  bad  abused. 
Thus,  after  divers  words  had  passed  on  both  sides, 
the  men  behaving  themselves  all  the  while  very 
wisely  and  soberly  before  them,  they  fell  to  some 
blows  among  themselves,  ami  did  barm  one  to 
Th.v  are  made  another.  Then  were  these  two  poor 
A?saU&b-f  mcu  brought  before  their  examiners 
ancc.  again,   and  there    charged   as  being- 

guilty  of  the  late  hubbub  that  had  been  in  the  fair. 
So  they  beat  them  pitifully,  and  hanged  irons  upon 
ihcyarcicdup  tnem»  and  led  tlicm  m  chains  up  and 
and  down  the  down  the  fair,  for  an  example  and  a 
fair  iu  chains,  .  .  ,       , ,  i 

for  a  terror  to   terror  to  others,  lest  any  should  speak 

in  their  behalf,  or  join  themselves  unto 
them.2  But  Christian  and  Faithful  behaved  them- 
selves yet  more  wisely,  and  received  the  ignominy 
and  shame  that  was  cast  upon  them,  with  so  much 
Someof  themen  mee^ness  an&  patience,  that  it  won  to 
of  the  fair  won  their  side,  though  but  few  in  compari- 
son of  the  rest,  several  of  the  men  in 
the  fair.  This  put  the  other  party  yet  into  greater 
Their  adversar-  raSe»  insomuch  that  they  concluded 
jes  resolve  to  the  death  of  these  two  men.  Where- 
fore they  threatened,  that  the  cage 
nor  irons  should  serve  their  turn,  but  that  they 
should  die,  for  the  abuse  they  had  done,  and  for 
deluding  the  men  of  the  fair. 

Then  were  they  remanded  to  the  cage  again, 
until  further  order  should  be  taken  with  them.  So 
they  put  them  in,  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the 
stocks. 

Here,  therefore,  they  called  again  to  mind  what 
they  bad  heard  from  their  faithful  friend  Evan- 
gelist, and  were  the  more  confirmed  in  their  way 


1  In  1670,  the  town  porters  of  Bedford  being  commanded 
to  assist  in  a  brutal  attack  upon  the  Nonconformists,  ran  away, 
'  They  would  be  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered,  before 
they  would  assist  in  that  work ;'  for  which  cause  the  justices 
committed  two  of  them  (which  they  could  take)  to  the  jail. 
The  shops  were  shut  up,  so  that  it  seemed  like  a  place  visited 
with  the  pest,  where  usually  is  written  upon  the  door,  'Lord, 
have  mercy  upon  us!' — (Narrative  of  Proceedings  against 
Nonconformists,  p.  5.     4to,  1670.) 

-'  This  is  a  true  representation  of  what  took  place  in  England 
iu  Bunyan's  time.  It  was  a  disgrace  to  our  nation,  that  Eng- 
lishmen, urged  on  by  a  fanatic  church,  treated  two  young  and 
interesting  women  with  a  barbarity  that  would  make  savages 
(so  called;  blush.  It  was  at  Carlisle  that  two  female  pilgrims, 
Dorothy  Waugh  and  Ann  Robinson,  were  dragged  through  the 
streets,  with  each  an  iron  instrument  of  torture,  called  a  bridle, 
upon  their  heads ;  and  were  treated  with  sross  indecencv. — 
(Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


and  sufferings,  by  what  he  told  them  would  happen 
to  them.3  They  also  now  comforted  each  other, 
that  whose  lot  it  was  to  suffer,  even  he  should  have 
the  best  of  it ;  therefore  each  man  secretly  wished 
that  he  might  have  that  preferment:  but  commit- 
ting themselves  to  the  all-wise  disposal  of  Him  that 
ruleth  all  things,  with  much  content  they  abode  in 
the  condition  in  which  they  were,  until  they  should 
be  otherwise  disposed  of.4 

Then  a  convenient  time  being  appointed,  they 
brought  them  forth  to  their  trial,  in   T1  ^. 

order  to  their  condemnation.  When  i>u'  into  the 
.        .  .  ,  ,         cage,  and  after 

the  time  was  come,  they  were  brought     brought      to 

before  their   enemies  and   arraigned.     tua' 
The  Judge's  name  was  Lord  Hate-good.    Their  in- 
dictment was    one   and   the   same  in   substance, 
though  somewhat  varying  in  form,  the  contents 
whereof  were  this : — ■ 

'  That  they  were  enemies  to,  and  disturbers  of 
their  trade;  that  they  had  made  com-   xheir  indict' 
motions  and  divisions  in  the  town,  and        meut- 
had  won  a  party  to  their  own  most   dangerous 
opinions,  in  contempt  of  the  law  of  their  prince.'5 

Then  Faithful  began  to  answer,  that  he  had  oidy 
set  himself  against  that  which  had  set   ,,  ... ,  „ 

.      °,  .  .  laithful's      aii- 

ltself  arramst  him  that  is  lii<jdicr  than     swer  for  him- 

self 

the  highest.  And,  said  be,  as  for 
disturbance,  I  make  none,  being  myself  a  man  of 
peace ;  the  parties  that  were  won  to  us,  were  won 
by  beholding  our  truth  and  innocence,  and  they 
are  only  turned  from  the  worse  to  the  better.  And 
as  to  the  king  you  talk  of,  since  be  is  Beelzebub, 
the  enemy  of  our  Lord,  I  defy  him  and  all  his 
angels. 

Then  proclamation  was  made,  that  tney  that  had 
aught  to  say  for  their  lord  the  king  against  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar,  should  forthwith  appear  and 
give  in  their  evidence.     So  there  came  in  three 


3  The  great  object  of  the  gospel  is  to  lit  man  for  his  active 
duties  in  this  world,  and  prepare  him  for  heavenly  enjoy- 
ments iu  the  world  to  come.  Not  like  those  lazy  creeping  thing  3 
that  shut  themselves  up  in  nunneries  or  monasteries  to  avoid 
the  temptations  and  troubles,  the  resistance  or  bearing  of  which 
glorifies  God.  Christians  are  to  be  as  lights — not  hid  under  a 
bushel,  but  seen  of  all  men.  The  prayer  of  their  Lord  was 
and  is,  not  that  they  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  but 
kept  from  its  evil  contaminations. — (Ed.) 

4  In  Bunyan's  account  of  his  imprisonment,  he  closes  it 
with  these  words  : — 'Thus  have  I,  in  short,  declared  the  man- 
ner and  occasion  of  my  being  in  prison;  where  I  lie  waiting 
the  good  will  of  God  to  do  with  me  as  he  pleaseth  ;  knowing 
that  not  one  hair  of  my  head  can  fall  to  the  ground  without 
the  will  of  my  Lather  which  is  in  heaven.  Let  the  rage  and 
malice  of  men  be  ever  so  great,  they  can  do  no  more,  nor  go 
any  further,  than  God  permits  them.  "When  they  have  doue 
their  worst,  "  we  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good 
to  them  that  love  God."'  Ro.  viii.  2S. 

6  The  description  of  the  process  against  the  pilgrims,  is 
framed  in  such  a  manner  as  emphatically  to  e:^pose  the  secret 
reasons  which  influence  men  thus  to  persecute  their  innocent 
neighbours.  The  very  names  employed  declare  the 
corrupt  principles  of  the  heart  from  whence  this  atrocious 
conduct  results, — (Scott.) 

17 


130 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


witnesses;,  to  wit,  Envy,  Superstition,  and  Pick- 
thank.  They  were  then  asked  if  they  knew  the 
prisoner  at  the  har ;  and  what  they  had  to  say  for 
their  lord  the  king1  against  him. 

Then  stood  forth  Envy,  and  said  to  this  effect : 
My  Lord,  I  have  known  this  man  a 

Envy  begins.       ,  ,.  .        _. 

long  time,  and  wdl  attest  upon  my 

oath  hefore  this  honourahle  hench,  that  he  is 

Judge.  Hold.  Give  him  his  oath.  (So  they 
sware  him.)     Then  he  said — 

Envy.  My  Lord,  this  man,  notwithstanding  his 
plausible  name,  is  one  of  the  vilest  men  in  our 
country.  He  neither  regardeth  prince  nor  people, 
law  nor  custom ;  hut  doth  all  that  he  can  to  possess 
all  men  with  certain  of  his  disloyal  notions,1  which 
lie  in  the  general  calls  principles  of  faith  and  holi- 
ness. And,  in  particular,  I  heard  him  once  myself 
affirm,  that  Christianity  and  the  customs  of  our 
town  of  Vanity,  were  diametrically  opposite,  and 
could  not  he  reconciled.  By  which  saying,  my 
Lord,  he  doth  at  once  not  only  condemn  all  our 
laudable  doings,  but  us  in  the  doing  of  them. 

Judge.  Then  did  the  Judge  say  to  him,  Hast 
thou  any  more  to  say? 

Envy.  My  Lord,  I  could  say  much  more,  only 
I  would  not  be  tedious  to  the  court.  Yet,  if  need 
be,  when  the  other  gentlemen  have  given  in  their 
evidence,  rather  than  anything  shall  be  wanting 
that  will  despatch  him,  I  will  enlarge  my  testimony 
against  him.     So  he  was  bid  stand  by. 

Then  they  called  Superstition,  and  bid  him  look 
upon  the  prisoner.  They  also  asked,  what  he 
could  say  for  their  lord  the  king  against  him. 
Then  they  sware  him  ;  so  he  began. 

Super.  My  Lord,  I  have  no  great  acquaintance 
Superstition  with  this  man,  nor  do  I  desire  to  have 
follows.  further  knowledge  of  him ;  however, 
this  I  know,  that  he  is  a  very  pestilent  fellow,  from 
some  discourse  that,  the  other  day,  I  had  with 
him  in  this  town ;  for  then  talking  with  him,  I 
I  heard  him  say,  that  our  religion  was  naught,  and 
such  by  which  a  man  could  by  no  means  please 
God.  Which  sayings  of  his,  my  Lord,  your  Lord- 
ship very  well  knows,  what  necessarily  thence  will 
follow,  to  wit,  that  we  do  still  worship  in  vain,  are 
yet  in  our  sins,  and  finally  shall  be  damned ;  and 
this  is  that  which  I  have  to  say.2 


1  Tins  is  one  of  Satan's  lies,  much  used  by  his  emissaries,  to 
the  present  day.  A  Christian  fears  God,  and  honours  the 
lung ;  he  renders  unto  civil  government  that  which  belongs  to 
civil  and  temporal  things,  but  he  dares  not  render  unto  Ceesar 
the.  things  that  belong  to  God ;  and  for  thus  righteously  doing 
he  is  called  disloyal. — (Ed.) 

2  Superstition,  or  false  devotion,  is  a  most  bitter  enemy  to 
Christ's  truth  and  his  followers.  This  fellow's  evidence  is 
very  true ;  for  as  the  lawyer  said  of  Christ's  doctrine, '  Master, 
thus  sayiug,  thou  reproachest  us  also.'  Lu.  xi.  45.  So  false 
worshippers,  who  rest  in  forms,  and  rites,  and  shadows,  are 
stung  to  the  quick  at  those  who  worship  God  in  the  Spirit, 


Then  was  Pickthank  sworn,  and  bid  say  what 
he  knew,  in  behalf  of  their  lord  the  king,  against 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar. 

Pick.  My  Lord,  and  you  gentlemen  all,  This 
fellow  I  have  known  of  a  long  time,  pidcthank'stes- 
and  have  heard  him  speak  things  that  timony. 
ought  not  to  be  spoke ;  for  he  hath  railed  on 
our  noble  prince  Beelzebub,  and  hath  sinsareaUior^ 
spoken  contemptibly  of  his  honour-  ^d  great  ones. 
able  friends,  whose  names  are  the  Lord  Old  Man, 
the  Lord  Carnal  Delight,  the  Lord  Luxurious,  the 
Lord  Desire  of  Vain  Glory,  my  old  Lord  Lechery, 
Sir  Having  Greedy,  with  all  the  rest  of  our  nobility; 
and  he  hath  said,  moreover,  That  if  all  men  were 
of  his  mind,  if  possible,  there  is  not  one  of  these 
noblemen  should  have  any  longer  a  being  in  this 
town.  Besides,  he  hath  not  been  afraid  to  rail  on 
you,  my  Lord,  who  are  now  appointed  to  be  his 
judge,  calling  you  an  ungodly  villain,  with  many 
other  such  like  vilifying  terms,  with  which  he  hath 
bespattered  most  of  the  gentry  of  our  town.3 

When  this  Pickthank  had  told  his  tale,  the  Judge 
directed  his  speech  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  say- 
ing, Thou  runagate,  heretic,  and  traitor,  hast  thou 
heard  what  these  honest  gentlemen  have  witnessed 
against  thee  ? 

Faith.  May  I  speak  a  few  words  in  my  own 
defence  ? 

Judge.  Sirrah  !  Sirrah  !  thou  deservest  to  live 
no  longer,  but  to  be  slain  immediately  upon  the 
place ;  yet,  that  all  men  may  see  our  gentleness 
towards  thee,  let  us  hear  what  thou,  vile  runagate, 
hast  to  say. 

Faith.  1.  I  say,  then,  in  answer  to  what  Mr. 
Envy  hath  spoken,  I  never  said  aught  Faithful.s  (le_ 
but  this,  That  what  rule,  or  laws,  or  fence  of  him- 
custom,  or  people,  were  flat  against 
the  Word  of  God,  are  diametrically  opposite  to 
Christianity.    If  I  have  said  amiss  in  this,  convince 


rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh ; 
such  a  conduct  pours  the  utmost  contempt  upon  all  the  will- 
worship,  and  doctrines,  and  superstition  of  carnal  men. — 
(Mason.)  With  such,  traditions,  human  inventions,  forms, 
and  externals,  appear  venerable  and  sacred ;  and  they  are  mis- 
taken with  pertinaceous  ignorance  for  the  substance  of  religion. 
What  is  pompous  and  burdensome  appeai-s  to  such  men  meri- 
torious ;  and  the  excitement  of  mere  natural  passions,  as  at  a 
tragedy,  is  falsely  deemed  a  needful  help  to  true  devotion. 
Their  zeal  hardens  their  hearts,  and  causes  bitter  rage,  en- 
mity, and  calumny,  against  the  pious  Christians. — (Scott.) 

3  As  soon  as  the  poor  sinner  says,  '  O  Lord  our  God,  other 
lords  beside  thee  have  had  dominion  over  us:  but  by  thee 
only  will  we  make  mention  of  thy  name,'  Is.  xxvi.  13,  your 
officious  Pickthauks  are  always  ready  to  bear  testimony  against 
him  ;  and  a  blessed  testimony  this  is;  it  is  well  worth  living  to 
gain,  and  dying  in  the  cause  of.  If  we  are  real  disciples  of 
Christ,  we  shall,  as  he  did,  testify  of  the  world  that  the  works 
thereof  are  evil,  and  the  world  will  hate  us  for  his  sake.  Jn. 
vii.  7. —  (Mason.)  Pickthank  has  no  real  principle,  but  puts 
on  zeal  for  any  party  that  will  promote  his  interests;  he 
inwardly  despises  both  the  superstitious  and  the  spiritual  wor- 
shipper.— (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


131 


me  of  my  error,  and  I  am  ready  here  before  you 
to  make  my  recantation. 

2.  As  to  the  second,  to  wit,  Mr.  Superstition, 
and  his  charge  against  me,  I  said  only  this,  That 
in  the  worship  of  God  there  is  required  a  Divine 
faith ;  hut  there  can  bo  no  Divine  faith  without  a 
Divine  revelation  of  the  will  of  God.  Therefore, 
whatever  is  thrust  into  the  worship  of  God  that  is 
not  agreeable  to  Divine  revelation,  cannot  be  done 
but  by  a  human  faith,  which  faith  will  not  be 
profitable  to  eternal  life. 

3.  As  to  what  Mr.  Pickthank  hath  said,  I  say 
(avoiding  terms,  as  that  I  am  said  to  rail,  and  the 
like),  that  the  prince  of  this  town,  with  all  the 
rabbiement,  his  attendants,  by  this  gentleman 
named,  are  more  fit  for  a  being  in  hell,  than  in 
this  town  and  country:  and  so,  the  Lord  have 
mercy  upon  me  !  1 

Then  the  Judge  called  to  the  jury  (who  all  this 
T  ,    ,    while  stood  by,  to  hear  and  observe)  ;2 

Tlie       Judge's  » '  '  . 

speech  to  the  Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  you  see  this 
juii'  man  about  whom  so  great  an  uproar 

hath  been  made  in  this  town.  You  have  also 
heard  what  these  worthy  gentlemen  have  witnessed 
against  him.  Also  you  have  heard  his  reply  and 
confession.  It  lieth  now  in  your  breasts  to  hang 
him,  or  save  his  life ;  but  yet  I  think  meet  to 
instruct  you  into  our  law. 

There  was  an  Act  made  in  the  days  of  Pharaoh 
the  Great,  servant  to  our  prince,  that  lest  those 
of  a  contrary  religion  should  multiply,  and  grow 
too  strong  for  him,  their  males  should  be  thrown 
into  the  river.  Ex.  i.  There  was  also  an  Act  made 
in  the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  Great,  another 
of  his  servants,  that  whosoever  would  not  fall 
down  and  worship  his  golden  image,  should  be 
thrown  into  a  fiery  furnace.  Pa.  i&  There  was  also 
an  Act  made  in  the  days  of  Darius,  that  whoso, 
for  some  time,  called  upon  any  God  but  him, 
should  be  cast  into  the  lions'  den.  Ba.  \i  Now  the 
substance  of  these  laws  this  rebel  has  broken,  not 
only  in  thought  (which  is  not  to  be  borne)  but  also 
in  word  and  deed ;  which  must  therefore  needs  be 
intolerable. 


1  This  is  the  Christian's  plea  aud  glory.  While  lie  knows 
'the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,'  Pr.  xii.  10,  yet 
he  also  knows  that  the  'merciful  kindness  of  the  Lord  is  great, 
and  the  truth  of  the  Lord  tnduretk  fur  ever.'  Pa.  cxvii.  2. — 
(Mason.) 

2  A  more  just  and  keen  satirical  description  of  such  legal 
iniquities  can  scarcely  he  imagined,  than  that  contained  in  this 

The  statutes  and  precedents  adduced,  with  ahumour- 
ous  reference  to  the  style  in  which  charges  are  commonly  given 
to  juries,  show  what  patterns  persecutors  choose  to  copy,  and 
whose  kingdom  they  labour  to  uphold.  Nor  can  any  impartial 
man  deny,  that  the  inference  is  fair,  which  our  author  meant 
the  reader  to  deduce,  namely,  that  nominal  Protestants,  enact- 
ing laws  requiring  conformity  to  their  own  creeds  and  forms, 
and  inflicting  punishments  on  such  as  peaceably  dissent  from 
them,  arc  actually  iuvolved  in  the  guilt  of  these  heathen  perse- 
cutors.— (Scott.) 


For  that  of  Pharaoh,  his  law  was  made  upon  a 
supposition,  to  prevent  mischief,  no  crime  being 
yet  apparent ;  but  here  is  a  crime  apparent.  For 
the  second  and  third,  you  see  he  disputeth  against 
our  religion  ;  and  for  the  treason  he  hath  confessed, 
he  deserveth  to  die  the  death. 

Then  went  the  jury  out,  whose  names  were,  Mr. 
Blind-man,  Mr.  No-good,  Mr.  Malice,    The  jury  and 
Mr.  Love-lust,    Mr.   Live-loose,    Mr.      ******* 
Heady,  Mr.   High-mind,  Mr.   Enmity,  Mr.  Liar, 
Mr.  Cruelty,  Mr.  Hate-light,  and  Mr.  Implacable; 
who  every  one  gave  in  his  private  verdict  against 
him  among  themselves,  and  afterwards  unanimously 
concluded  to  bring  him  in  guilty  before  the  Judge. 
Aud  first,  among  themselves,  Mr.  Blind-man,  the 
foreman,  said,  I  see  clearly  that  this   Everyone's  pri- 
man  is  a  heretic.3    Then  said  Mr.  No-      val"e  ""** 
good,  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth.    Ay, 
said  Mr.  Malice,  for  I  hate  the  very  looks  of  him. 
Then  said  Mr.  Love-lust,  I  could  never  endure  him. 
Nor  I,  said  Mr.  Live-loose,  for  he  would  always  be 
condemning  my  way.      Hang  him,  hang  him,  said 
Mr.  Heady.     A  sorry  scrub,  said  Mr.  High-mind. 
My  heart  riseth  against  him,  said  Mr.  Enmity.     He 
is  a  rogue,  said  Mr.  Liar.     Hanging  is  too  good 
for  him,  said  Mr.  Cruelty.      Let  us  despatch  him 
out  of  the  way,  said  Mr.  Hate-light.     Then  said 
Mr.  Implacable,  Might  I  have  all  the  world  given 
me,  I  could  not  be  reconciled  to  him ;    j.       conclude 
therefore,  let  us  forthwith  bring  him     to  bring  him  in 

'      ,        .     ,         .      .  i  t  i         guilty  ot  death, 

in  guilty  of  death.'1     And  so  they  did  ; 
therefore  he  was  presently  condemned,  to  be  had 
from  the  place  where  he  was,  to  the  place  from 
whence  he  came,  and  there  to  be  put  to  the  most 
cruel  death  that  could  be  invented.0 

They,  therefore,  brought  him  out,  to  do  with  him 
according  to  their  law ;  and,  first,  they   The  creel  death 
scourged  him,  then  they  buffeted  him,       o:  * ;"1-1  ;u- 
then  they  lanced  his  flesh  with  knives  ;   after  that, 

3  These  words,  aud  this  trial,  were  quoted  (January  25, 
1S4S)  "by  the  Attorney-General,  at  Westminster  Hall,  in 
answer  to  the  manner  in  which  Dr.  Hampden  was  then  charged 
with  heresy  by  the  Puseyitcs. — (Eb.) 

*  If  the  Lord  were  to  leave  us  in  the  hands  of  men,  we 
should  still  find  that  their  tender  mercies  are  cruel.  Such  a 
jury  as  tried  Faithful  might  be  found  in  every  county  of  Britain. 
—(Border.)  To  this  may  be  added,  that  the  witnesses  are 
still  living. — (En.) 

5  Nothing  can  be  more  masterly  than  the  satire  contained 
in  this  trial.  The  judge,  the  witnesses,  and  the  jury,  arc 
portraits  sketched  to  the  1Mb,  and  finished,  every  one  of  them, 
in  quick,  concise,  and  graphic  touches ;  the  ready  testimony 
J  is  especially  characteristic.  Rather  than  anything 
s'.iould  'be  wanting  that  might  be  necessary  to  despatch  the 
prisoner,  he  woidd  enlarge  his  testimony  against  him  to  any 
requisite  degree.  The  language  and  deportment  of  the  judge 
are  a  copy  to  the  life  of  some  of  the  infamous  judges  under 
long  Charles,  especially  .Tefl'eries.  You  may  find,  m  the  trial  of 
the  noble  patriot  Algernon  Sidney,  the  abusive  language  ot  the 
judge  against  Faithful  almost  word  tor  word.  The  charge  _  tc 
the  jury,  with  the  Acts  and  laws  on  which  the  condemnation 
of  the  prisoner  was  founded,  arc  fall  of  ingenuity  and  meaning. 
,  — (Cheever.) 


132 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


they  stoned  him  with  stones,  then  pricked  him 
with  their  swords ;  and,  last  of  all,  they  burned 
him  to  ashes  at  the  stake.  Thus  came  Faithful  to 
his  end.1  , 

Now  I  saw  that  there  stood  hehind  the  multi- 
&.  chariot  and  tude,  a  chariot  and  a  couple  of  horses, 
fakeCS  "'away  waiting  for  Faithful,  who  (so  soon  as 
I'aithM.  his  adversaries  had  despatched  him) 

was  taken  up  into  it,  and  straightway  was  carried 
up  through  the  clouds,  with  sound  of  trumpet,  the 
nearest  way  to  the  Celestial  Gate.2 

But  as  for  Christian,  he  had  some  respite,  and 
Christian  is  still   was  remanded  hack  to  prison.     So  he 
alive-  there  remained  for  a  space ;  but  he  that 

overrules  all  things,  having  the  power  of  their  rage 
in  his  own  hand,  so  wrought  it  about,  that  Christian 
for  that  time  escaped  them,  and  went  his  way  ;3 
and  as  he  went,  he  sang,  saying — 

Well,  Faithful,  thou  hast  faithfully  profest 

„,,  Unto  thy  Lord ;  with  whom  thou  shalt  be  blest, 

Hie  Song  that  *  '  ' 

Cluistianmade    When  faithless  ones,  with  all  their  vain  delights, 

°l    i  f^^   Are  crying  out  under  their  hellish  plights, 
alter  lus death      „.        i75.ii  i     •  3  i  .  . ,  • 

bmg,  i'aitnlul,  sing,  and  let  thy  name  survive; 

For,  though  they  kill'd  thee,  thou  art  yet  alive. 
Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  Christian  went 

Christian    has      n0t    f°rtl1    awne>     for    tnei'G    Was    one 

another  com-  -\vhose  name  was  Hopeful  (beinp-  made 
so  by  the  beholding  of  Christian  and 
Faithful  in  their  words  and  behaviour,  in  their 
Sufferings  at  the  Fair),  who  joined  himself  unto 
him,  and,  entering  into  a  brotherly  covenant,  told 
him  that  he  would  be  his  companion.  Thus,  one 
died  to  bear  testimony  to  the  truth,  and  another 
rises  out  of  his  ashes,  to  be  a  companion  with 
Christian  in  his  pilgrimage.4     This  Hopeful  also 


1  Bunyan  gives  a  good  portrait  of  Faithful  in  his  House  of 
Lebanon,  referring  to  the  character  of  Pomporius  Algerius, 
mentioned  in  Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs.  '  Was  not  this  man, 
think  you,  a  giant?  did  he  not  behave  himself  valiantly?  was 
not  his  mind  elevated  a  thousand  degrees  beyond  sense,  carnal 
reason,  fleshly  love,  and  the  desires  of  embracing  temporal 
things  ?  This  man  had  got  that  by  the  end  that  pleased  him  ; 
neither  could  all  the  flatteries,  promises,  threats,  reproaches, 
make  him  once  listen  to,  or  inquire  after,  what  the  world,  or 
the  glory  of  it  could  afford.  His  mind  was  captivated  with 
delights  invisible.  He  coveted  to  show  his  love  to  his  Lord, 
by  laying  down  his  life  for  His  sake.  He  longed  to  be  where 
there  shall  be  no  more  pain,  nor  sorrow,  nor  sighing,  nor  tears, 
nor  troubles.  He  was  a  man  of  a  thousand  !'  Speaking  of  the 
pillars  in  that  house  at  Lebanon,  he  says,  'These  men  had  the 
faces  of  lions,  they  have  triumphed  in  the  flames.' 

2  This  is  a  most  exquisitely  beautiful  sketch ;  it  is  drawn  to 
the  life  from  many  an  era  of  pilgrimage  in  this  world ;  there 
are  in  it  the  materials  of  glory,  that  constituted  spirits  of  such 
noble  greatness  as  are  catalogued  in  the  eleventh  of  Hebrews 
— traits  of  cruel  mockings  and  scourgiugs,  bonds  and  impri- 
sonments.— (Cheever.) 

s  Political  interests  engage  ungodly  princes  to  promote 
toleration,  and  chain  up  the  demon  of  persecution.  The  cruel- 
ties they  exercise  disgust  the  people,  and  they  are  disheartened 
bv  the  ill  success  of  then  efforts  to  extirpate  the  hated  sect. — 
(Scott.) 

4  I  have  often  recorded  it  with  thankfulness,  that  though  in 
the  dreary  day  of  my  pilgrimage,  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  a 


told  Christian,  that  there  were  many  more  of  the 
men  in  the  Fair,  that  would  take  their  There  are  more 
time  and  follow  after.  tte^fei^wai 

So  I  saw  that  quickly  after  they  were  follow- 
got  out  of  the  Fair,  they  overtook  one  that  was 
going  before  them,  whose  name  was  Tuey  07ertake 
By-ends ;  so  they  said  to  him,  What  %-ends. 
Countryman,  Sir  ?  and  how  far  go  you  this  way  ? 
He  told  them,  that  he  came  from  the  town  of 
Fair-speech,  and  he  was  going  to  the  Celestial 
City,  but  told  them  not  his  name. 

From  Fair-speech  !  said  Christian.  Is  there 
any  good  that  lives  there  ?  Pr.  xxvi.  25. 

By-ends.  Yes,  said  By-ends,  I  hope. 

Chr.  Fray,  Sir,  What  may  I  call  you  ?  said 
Christian. 

By-ends.  I  am  a  stranger  to  you,  and  you  to 
me:  if  you  be  going  this  way,  I  shall  By.emls  loath  to 
be  glad  of  your  company;  if  not,  1  tell  his  name. 
must  be  content. 

Chr.  This  town  of  Fair-speech,  said  Christian, 
I  have  heard  of ;  and,  as  I  remember,  they  say  it 
is  a  wealthy  place. 

By-ends.  Yes,  I  will  assure  you  that  it  is ;  and 
I  have  very  many  rich  kindred  there. 

Chr.  Pray,  who  are  your  kindred  there  ?  if  a 
man  ma}'  be  so  bold. 

By-ends.  Almost  the  whole  town ;  and  in  par- 
ticular, my  Lord  Turn-about,  my  Lord  Time-server, 
my  Lord  Fair-speech  (from  whose  ancestors  that 
town  first  took  its  name),  also  Mr.  Smooth-man, 
Mr.  Facing-both-ways,  Mr.  Any-thing;  and  the 
parson  of  our  parish,  Mr.  Two-tongues,  was  my 
mother's  own  brother,  by  father's  side;  and  to 
tell  you  the  truth,  I  am  become  a  gentleman  of 
good  quality,  yet  my  great-grandfather  was  but  a 
waterman,  looking  one  way  and  rowing  another, 
and  I  got  most  of  my  estate  by  the  same  occu- 
pation. 

Chr.  Are  you  a  married  man  ? 

By-ends.  Yes,  and  my  wife  is  a  very  virtuous 
woman,  the  daughter  of  a  virtuous  The  wife  and  kin- 
woman;  she  was  my  Lady  Feigning's  dred  of  By-ends. 
daughter,  therefore  she  came  of  a  very  honourable 
family,  and  is  arrived  to  such  a  pitch  of  breeding, 
that  she  knows  how  to  carry  it  to  all,  even  to 
prince  and  peasant.  It  is  true  we  somewhat  differ 
in  religion  from  those  of  the  stricter  sort,  yet  but 
in  two  small  points ;  first,  Ave  never  where  By-ends 
strive  asrainst  wind  and  tide;  secondly,     differs  .  &«? 

°  '  J  >      others  in  reJl- 

we  are  always  most  zealous  when  reli-     gwn. 
gion  goes  in  his  silver  slippers ;  Ave  love  much  to 
walk  with  him  in  the  street,  if  the  sun  shines,  and 
the  people  applaud  him.5 

dear  and  faithful  Christian  friend,  yet  he  has  always  raised  up 
another.  A  very  great  blessing  this,  for  which  Christians  can 
never  be  thankful  enough. — (Mason.) 

6  Is  not  this  too  much  the  case  with  professors  of  this  day  ? 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


133 


Then  Christian  stepped  a  little  aside  to  his  fellow 
Hopeful,  saying,  It  runs  in  my  mind  that  this  is 
one  By-ends  of  Fair-speech;  and  if  it  he  he,  wc 
have  as  very  a  knave  in  our  company,  as  dwelleth 
in  all  these  parts.  Then  said  Hopeful,  Ask  him ; 
methinks  he  should  not  he  ashamed  of  his  name. 
So  Christian  came  up  with  him  again,  and  said, 
Sir,  you  talk  as  if  you  knew  something-  more  than 
all  the  world  doth  ;*  and  if  I  take  not  my  mark 
amiss,  1  deem  I  have  half  a  guess  of  you:  Is  not 
your  name  Mr.  By-ends,  of  Fair-speech  ? 

By-exds.  This  is  not  my  name,  hut  indeed  it  is 
a  nickname  that  is  given  me  hy  some  that  cannot 
ahide  me ;  and  I  must  be  content  to  hear  it  as  a 
reproach,  as  other  good  men  have  home  theirs 
before  me. 

Chr.  But  did  you  never  give  an  occasion  to  men 
to  call  you  hy  this  name  ? 

By-exds.  Never,  never  !  The  worst  that  ever 
How  By-ends  I  did  to  give  them  an  occasion  to  give 
got  his  name.     me  jj^  name  waSj  that  j  iiaj  alwavs 

the  luck  to  jump  in  my  judgment  with  the  present 
way  of  the  times,  whatever  it  was,  and  my  chance 
was  to  get  thereby ;  but  if  things  are  thus  cast 
upon  me,  let  me  count  them  a  blessing ;  but  let 
not  the  malicious  load  me  therefore  with  reproach. 

Chr.  I  thought,  indeed,  that  you  were  the  man 
that  I  heard  of ;  and  to  tell  you  what  I  think,  I 
fear  this  name  belongs  to  you  more  properly  than 
you  are  willing  we  should  think  it  doth. 

By-ends.    Well,  if   you  will  thus  imagine,   I 

fie  desires  to  cannot  ue^P  '*  5  J011  sna^  ^n{^  me  a 
keep  company   fair  company-keeper,  if  you  will  still 

with  Christian.        ,     .         L       J  l       .        J 

admit  me  your  associate. 
Chr.  If  you  will  go  with  us,  you  must  go  against 
wind  and  tide;2  the  which,  I  perceive,  is  against 
your  opinion ;  you  must  also  own  religion  in  his 
rags,  as  well  as  when  in  his  silver  slippers ;  and 
stand  by  him,  too,  when  bound  in  irons,  as  well  as 
when  he  walketh  the  streets  with  applause. 


The  Spirit  of  truth  says,  'All  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus 
shall  sutler  persecution.'  2  Ti.  iii.  12.  But  how  many  act  as  if 
they  had  found  the  art  of  making  the  Spirit  of  truth  a  liar ! 
for  they  can  so  trim  and  shape  their  conduct,  as  they  vainly 
think  to  follow  Christ,  and  yet  to  keep  in  with  the  world, 
which  is  at  enmity  against  him — a  most  fatal  and  soul- 
deceiving  error. — (Mason.) 

1  'What  is  this  something  that  By-ends  knew  more  than  all 
the  world?  How  to  unite  heaven  and  hell — how  to  serve  God 
and  Mammon — how  to  he  a  Christian  and  a  hypocrite  at  the 
same  time.  0  the  depth  of  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart ; 
alas!  how  many  similar  characters  now  exist,  with  two  tongues 
in  one  mouth,  looking  one  way  and  rowing  another. — (Ed.) 

"  Fear  not,  therefore,  in  her  for  to  ahide, 
She  keeps  her  ground,  come  weather,  wind,  or  tide. 

— (Bunyan's  House  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  579.) 

If  wc  will  follow  Christ,  he  tells  us  that  we  must  take  up 
our  cross.  The  wind  sets  always  on  my  face ;  and  the  foaming 
rage  of  the  sea  of  this  world,  and  the  proud  and  lofty  waves 
thereof  do  continually  beat  upon  the  sides  of  the  bark,  or  ship, 
that  myself,  my  cause,  and  my  followers  arc  in. — (Bunyan's 
Greatness  of  the  Soul,  vol.  i.  p.  107.) 


By-ends.  You  must  not  impose,  nor  lord  it  over 
my  faith  ;  leave  me  to  my  liberty,  and  let  me  «-o 
with  you. 

Chr.  Not  a  step  further,  unless  you  will  do  in 
what  I  propound,  as  we. 

Then  said  By-ends,  I  shall  never  desert  my  old 
principles,  since  they  are  harmless  and  profitable. 
If  I  may  not  go  with  you,  I  must  do  as  I  did  beforo 
you  overtook  me,  even  go  by  myself,  until  some 
overtake  me  that  will  be  glad  of  my  company." 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  Christian  and 
Hopeful  forsook  him,  and  kept  their  By-end 
distance  before  him;  but  one  of  them  cl11' 
looking  back,  saw  three  men  following  Mr.  By-ends, 
and  behold,  as  they  came  up  with  him,  he  made 
them  a  very  low  conge  ;  and  they  also  gave  him  a 
compliment.  The  men's  names  were  He  lias  new 
Mr.  Ilold-the-world,  Mr.  Money-love,  companions. 
and  Mr.  Save-all;4  men  that  Mr.  B}r-ends  had 
formerly  been  acquainted  with ;  for  in  their  min- 
ority they  were  schoolfellows,  and  were  taught  by 
one  Mr.  Gripeman,  a  schoolmaster  in  Love-gain, 
which  is  a  market  town  in  the  county  of  Coveting, 
in  the  north.  This  schoolmaster  taught  them  the 
art  of  getting,  either  by  violence,  cozenage,  flat- 
tery, lying,  or  by  putting  on  a  guise  of  religion ; 
and  these  four  gentlemen  had  attained  much  of 
the  art  of  their  master,  so  that  they  could  each 
of  them  have  kept  such  a  school  themselves. 

Well,  when  they  had,  as  I  said,  thus  saluted 
each  other,  Mr.  Money-love  said  to  Mr.  By-ends, 
Who  are  they  upon  the  road  before  us  ?  (for  Chris- 
tian and  Hopeful  were  yet  within  view.) 

By-ends.  They  are  a  couple  of  far  countrymen, 
that,  after  their  mode,  are  going  on  By-enda'character 
pilgrimage.  of  lh   ] 

Money-love.  Alas  !  Why  did  they  not  Btay, 
that  we  might  have  had  their  good  company  ?  for 
they,  and  we,  and  you,  Sir,  I  hope,  are  all  going 
on  a  pilgrimage. 

By-ends.  We  are  so,  indeed;  but  the  men 
before  us  arc  so  rigid,  and  love  so  much  their  own 
notions,5  and  do  also  so  lightly  esteem  the  opinions 


3  Mind  how  warily  these  pilgrims  acted  to  this  deceitful 
professor.  They  did  not  too  rashly  take  up  an  ill  opinion 
against  him;  but  when  they  had  full  proof  of  what  he  was, 
they  did  not  hesitate  one  moment,  but  dealt  faithfully  with 
him,  and  conscientiously  withdrew  from  him. — (Mason.)  In 
a  letter  written  in  1CG1,  from  Exeter  jail,  by  Mr.  Abraham 
(.'hear,  a  Baptist  minister  of  Plymouth,  who  suffered  greatly 
for  nonconformity,  and  at  length  died  in  a  state  of  bani 

there  is  this  remark,  'We  have  many  brought  in  here  daily, 
who  go  out  again  almost  as  soon,  for  a  week  in  a  prison  tries 
a  professor  more  than  a  month  in  a  church.' — (Ivimey.) 

4  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  the  persons  here  intro- 
duced were  settled  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Vanity,  or  the 
City  of  Destruction;  hut,  indeed,  they  |  inselvcs 
pilgrims,  and  desired,  during  the  'sunshine,'  to  associ 

I  pilgrims,  provided  they  would  allow  them  to  hold  the  world, 
i  love  money,  and  save  all,  whatever  became  of  faith  aud  holiness, 
1  of  honestv.  piety,  truth,  and  charity. — (Scott.) 

6  Pretended  friends  come  with  such  expostulations  as  these : 


J  34 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


of  others,  that  let  a  man  be  never  so  godly,  yet  if 
he  jumps  not  -with  them  in  all  things,  they  thrust 
him  quite  out  of  their  company. 

Saye-all.  That  is  bad,  but  we  read  of  some 
that  are  righteous  overmuch;1  and  such  men's 
rigidncss  prevails  with  them  to  judge  and  condemn 
all  but  themselves.  But,  I  pray,  what,  and  how 
many,  were  the  things  wherein  you  differed  ?  2 

By-ends.  Why,  they,  after  their  headstrong 
manner,  conclude  that  it  is  duty  to  rush  on  their 
journey  all  weathers ;  and  I  am  for  waiting  for 
wind  and  tide.  They  are  for  hazarding  all  for  God 
at  a  clap ;  and  I  am  for  taking  all  advantages  to 
secure  my  life  and  estate.  They  are  for  holding 
their  notions,  though  all  other  men  are  against 
them ;  but  I  am  for  religion  in  what,  and  so  far 
as  the  times,  and  my  safety,  will  bear  it.  They  are 
for  religion  when  in  rags  and  contempt ;  but  I  am 
for  hirn  when  he  walks  in  his  golden  slippers,  in 
the  sunshine,  and  with  applause.3 

Mb.  Hold-tiie-world.  Aye,  and  hold  you 
there  still,  good  Mr.  By-ends ;  for,  for  my  part,  I 
can  count  him  but  a  fool,  that,  having  the  liberty 
co  keep  Avhat  he  has,  shall  be  so  unwise  as  to  lose 
it.  Let  us  be  wise  as  serpents;  it  is  best  to  make 
hay  when  the  sun  shines ;  you  see  how  the  bee 
lieth  still  all  winter,  and  bestirs  her  only  when 
she  can  have  profit  with  pleasure.  God  sends 
sometimes  rain,  and  sometimes  sunshine ;  if  they 
be  such  fools  to  go  through  the  first,  yet  let  us  be 
content  to  take  fair  weather  along  with  us.  For 
my  part,  I  like  that  religion  best,  that  will  stand 
with  the  security  of  God's  good  blessings  unto  us; 
for  who  can  imagine,  that  is  ruled  by  his  reason, 
since  God  has  bestowed  upon  us  the  good  things 
of  this  life,  but  that  he  would  have  us  keep  them 


Why,  dear  Sir,  will  you  give  sucli  offence  ?  How  much  would 
it  be  for  your  comfort  and  interest  in  the  world  if  you  would 
but  be  a  little  more  complying,  and  give  way  in  some  particular 
points  and  phrases.  0  what  a  syren's  song !  May  the  Lord 
enable  every  faithful  servant  to  reply,  '  Get  thee  behind  me, 
Satan.'— (J.  B.) 

1  These  words  of  Solomon  are  thus  wichedly  misapplied  by 
many  to  the  present  day.     Ec.  vii.  1G,  17  probably  refers  to 
the  administration  of  justice  which  should  be  tempered  with 
mercy,  but  not  with  laxity ;  or  it  may  refer  to  the  foolish 
opinions  expressed  npon  the  characters  of  pharisee  and  publican, 
exalting  the  one  or  decrying  the  other  overmuch.     It  cannot 
be  meant  to  censure  the  utmost  efforts  after  true  righteousness, 
nor  to  sanction  the  slightest  degree  of  wickedness. — (Ed.) 
2  Woe  unto  them  who  wander  from  the  way. 
Art  bound  for  hell,  against  all  wind  and  weather  ? 
Or  art  thou  one  agoing  backward  thither  ? 
Or  dost  thou  wink,  because  thou  would' st  not  see  ? 
Or  dost  thou  sideling  go,  and  would' st  not  be 
Suspected?     Yet  these  prophets  can  thee  tell, 
"Which  way  thou  art  agoing  down  to  hell. 
— (Acts  viii.  20-22.    Bunyan's  House  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  5S2.) 
3  Notwithstanding  By-ends  could  be  reserved  with  faithful 
pilgrims,  yet  he  can  speak  out  boldly  to  those  of  his  own  spirit 
and  character.     O  the  treacherous  deceiviugs  of  the  desperate 
wickedness  of  the  human  heart !    Who  can  know  it  ?    No  one 
but  the  heart-searching  God. —  (Mason.) 


for  his  sake  ?  Abraham  and  Solomon  grew  rich  in 
religion.  And  Job  says,  that  a  good  man  shall  lay 
up  gold  as  dust.  But  he  must  not  be  such  as  the 
men  before  us,  if  they  be  as  you  have  described 
them. 

Mr.  Save-all.  I  think  that  we  are  all  agreed 
in  this  matter,  and  therefore  there  needs  no  more 
words  about  it.4 

'Mr.  Money-love.  No,  there  needs  no  more 
words  about  this  matter  indeed;  for  he  that  believes 
neither  Scripture  nor  reason  (and  you  see  we  have 
both  on  our  side),  neither  knows  his  own  liberty, 
nor  seeks  his  own  safety.5 

Mr.  By-ends.  My  brethren,  we  are,  as  you  see, 
going  all  on  pilgrimage ;  and  for  our  better  diver- 
sion from  things  that  are  bad,  give  me  leave  to 
propound  unto  you  this  question : 

Suppose  a  man,  a  minister,  or  a  tradesman,  &c, 
should  have  an  advantage  lie  before  him,  to  get  the 
good  blessings  of  this  life,  yet  so  as  that  he  can 
by  no  means  come  by  them  except,  in  appearance 
at  least,  he  becomes  extraordinary  zealous  in  some 
points  of  religion  that  he  meddled  not  with  before; 
may  he  not  use  this  means  to  attain  his  end,  and 
yet  be  a  right  honest  man  ? 

Mr.  Money-love.  I  see  the  bottom  of  your 
question  ;  and,  with  these  gentlemen's  good  leave, 
I  will  endeavour  to  shape  you  an  answer.  And  first 
to  speak  to  your  question  as  it  concerns  a  minister 
himself:  Suppose  a  minister,  a  worthy  man,  pos- 
sessed but  of  a  very  small  benefice,  and  has  in  his 
eye  a  greater,  more  fat,  and  plump  by  far ;  he  has 
also  now  an  opportunity  of  getting  of  it,  yet  so  as 
by  being  more  studious,  by  preaching  more  fre- 
quentl}',  and  zealously,  and,  because  the  temper  of 
the  people  requires  it,  by  altering  of  some  of  his 
principles  ;  for  my  part,  I  see  no  reason  but  a  man 
may  do  this  (provided  he  has  a  call),  aye,  and 
more  a  great  deal  besides,  and  yet  be  an  honest 
man.     For  why — 

1.  His  desire  of  a  greater  benefice  is  lawful 
(this  cannot  be  contradicted),  since  it  is  set  before 
him  by  Providence;  so  then,  he  may  get  it,  if  he 
can,  making  no  question  for  conscience  sake. 


4  Some  men's  hearts  are  narrow  upwards,  and  wide  down- 
wards: narrow  as  for  God,  but  wide  for  the  world.  They 
gape  for  the  one,  but  shut  themselves  up  against  the  other. 
The  heart  of  a  wicked  man  is  widest  downward ;  but  it  is  not 
so  with  the  righteous  man.  His  desires,  like  the  temple 
Ezekiel  saw  in  the  vision,  are  still  widest  upwards,  and  spread 
towards  heaven.  A  full  purse,  with  a  lean  soul,  is  a  great 
curse.  Many,  while  lean  in  their  estates,  had  fat  souls ;  but 
the  fattening  of  their  estates  has  made  their  souls  as  lean  as  a 
rake  as  to  good. — (Bunyan's  Righteous  Mans  Desires,  vol.  i. 
p.  745.) 

"  This  dialogue  is  not  in  the  least  more  absurd  and  selfish 
than  the  discourse  of  many  who  now  attend  on  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel.  If  worldly  lucre  be  the  honey,  they  imitate  the 
bee,  and  only  attend  to  religion  when  they  can  gaiu  by  it ;  they 
determine  to  keep  what  they  have  at  any  rate,  and  to  get 
more,  if  it  can  be  done  without  open  scandal. — (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


135 


2.  Besides,  his  desire  after  that  benefice  makes 
him  more  studious,  a  more  zealous  preacher,  <tc., 
and  so  makes  him  a  Letter  man;  yea,  makes  him 
better  improve  his  parts,  which  is  according  to  the 
mind  of  God 

3.  Now,  as  for  his  complying  with  the  temper 
of  his  people,  by  dissenting,  to  serve  them,  sonic 
of  his  principles,  this  argueth — (1.)  That  he  is  of 
a  self-denying  temper.  (2.)  Of  a  sweet  and  win- 
ning deportment.  And  so  (3.)  More  fit  fur  the 
ministerial  funetion. 

4.  I  conclude  then,  that  a  minister  that  changes 
a  small  for  a  great,  should  not,  for  so  doing,  be 
judged  as  covetous;  but  rather,  since  he  is  improved 
in  his  parts  and  industry  thereby,  be  counted  as 
one  that  pursues  his  call,  and  the  opportunity  put 
into  his  hand  to  do  good. 1 

And  now  to  the  second  part  of  the  question, 
which  concerns  the  tradesman  you  mentioned. 
Suppose  such  an  one  to  have  but  a  poor  employ 
in  the  world,  but  by  becoming  religious,  he  may 
mend  his  market,  perhaps  get  a  rich  wife,  or  more, 
and  far  better  customers  to  his  shop;  for  my  part, 
I  see  no  reason  but  that  this  may  be  lawfully  done. 
For  why — 

1.  To  become  religious  is  a  virtue,  by  what 
means  soever  a  man  becomes  so. 

2.  Nor  is  it  unlawful  to  get  a  rich  wife,  or  more 
custom  to  my  shop. 

3.  Besides,  the  man  that  gets  these  by  becoming 
religious,  gets  that  which  is  good,  of  them  that  are 
good,  by  becoming  good  himself ;  so  then  here  is 
a  good  wife,  and  good  customers,  and  good  gain, 
and  all  these  by  becoming  religious,  which  is  good; 
therefore,  to  become  religious  to  get  all  these,  is  a 
good  and  profitable  design.2 

This  answer,  thus  made  by  this  Mr.  Money-love 
to  Mr.  By-cnds's  question,  was  highly  applauded 
by  them  all ;  wherefore  they  concluded,  upon  the 
whole,  that  it  was  most  wholesome  and  advan- 
tageous. And  because,  as  they  thought,  no  man 
was  able  to  contradict  it,  and  because  Christian 


1  There  is  a  fuud  of  satirical  humour  in  the  supposed  case 
here  very  gravely  stated;  and  if  the  author,  in  his  accurate 
observations  on  mankind,  selected  his  example  from  among  the 
mercenaries  that  are  the  scandal  of  the  Established  Church,  her 
most  faithful  friends  will  not  greatly  resent  this  conduct  of  a 
r. — (Scott.)  Dr.  Paley  would  have  done  well  to  hare 
read  this  chapter  in  Bunyan  before  composing  sonic  of  the 
chapters  in  his  Moral  Philosophy,  and  his  Sermon,  on.  the 
Ul'i lily  of  Distinctions  in  the  Ministry. —  (Cheever.) 

-  litre  is  worldly  wisdom,  infernal  locric,  and  the  sophistry 
of  Satan.     AVc  hear  thic  om  money-loving 

professors,  who  arc  destitute  of  the  power  of  faith.  But  in 
opposition  to  all  this,  the  Huh  Ghost  testifies,  'The  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil/  1  Ti.  vi.  1U,  and  a  covetous 
man  is  an  idolater.  Col.  iii.  5.  Uc.ir  this,  and  tremble,  ye 
avaricious  professors.  Remember,  ye  followers  of  the  Lamb, 
ye  arc  called  to  'let your  conversation  be  without  covetousness,' 
lie.  xiii.  5;  your  Lord  testifies,  'Ye  cannot  serve  ( 
Mammon.'  Lu.  xvL  13. — (Mason.) 


and  Hopeful  were  yet  within  call,  they  jointly 
agreed  to  assault  them  with  (he  question  as  soon 
as  they  overtook  them  ;  and  the  rather  because 
they  had  opposed  Mr.  By-ends  before.  So  they 
called  after  them,  and  they  stopped,  and  stood  still 
till  they  came  up  to  them  ;  but  they  concluded,  as 
they  went,  that  not  Mr.  By-ends,  but  old  Mr.  HolcU 
the-world,  should  propound  the  question  to  them, 
because,  as  they  supposed,  their  answer  to  him 
would  be  without  the  remainder  of  that  heat  that 
was  kindled  betwixt  Mr.  By-ends  and  them,  at 
their  parting  a  little  before. 

So  they  came  up  to  each  other,  and  after  a 
short  salutation,  Mr.  Ilold-the-world  propounded 
the  question  to  Christian  and  his  fellow,  and  bid 
them  to  answer  it  if  they  could. 

Cim.  Then  said  Christian,  Even  a  babe  in  re- 
ligion may  answer  ten  thousand  such  questions. 
For  if  it  be  unlawful  to  follow  Christ  for  loaves  (as 
it  is  in  the  sixth  of  John),  how  much  more  abomin- 
able is  it  to  make  of  him  and  religion  a  stalking- 
horse,  to  get  and  enjoy  the  world!3  Nor  do  we 
find  any  other  than  heathens,  hypocrite?,  d 
and  witches,  that  are  of  this  opinion.4 

1.  Heathens;  for  when  Hamor  and  Shechem 
had  a  mind  to  the  daughter  and  cattle  of  Jacob, 
and  saw  that  there  was  no  ways  for  them  to  come 
at  them,  but  by  becoming  circumcised ;  they  say 
to  their  companions,  if  every  male  of  us  be  circum- 
cised, as  they  are  circumcised,  shall  not  their  cattle, 
and  their  substance,  and  every  beast  of  theirs,  he 
ours?  Their  daughter  and  their  cattle  were  that 
which  they  sought  to  obtain,  and  their  religion 
the  stalking-horse  they  made  use  of  to  come  at 
them.     Read  the  whole  story,  Gee  xxxiv.  20-23. 

2.  The  hypocritical  Pharisees  were  also  of  this 
religion  ;  long  prayers  were  their  pretence  ;  but  to 
get  widows'  houses  was  their  intent ;  and  greater 
damnation  was  from  God  their  judgment.  La  xx.40, 47. 

3.  Judas  the  devil  was  also  of  this  religion ;  he 
was  religious  for  the  bag,  that  he  might  be  pos- 
sessed of  what  was  therein;  but  he  was  lost,  cast 
away,  and  the  very  son  of  perdition. 

4.  Simon  the  witch  was  of  this  religion  too  ;  for 
he  would  have  had  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he  might 
have  got  money  therewith ;  and  his  sentence  from 
Peter's  mouth  was  according,  Ac.  via.  ih-.j. 


3  How  doth  this  commend  itself  to  those  who  make  mer- 
chandise of  souls.  'What  swarms  of  such  locusts  arc  there  in 
this  day  !— (J.  B.) 

4  If  thou  art  one  who  tradeth  in  hot!- 
God's  now,  the  devil's  then ;  or  if  di 
Thou  mak'st  of  coming  to  thy  God  for  life; 
Or  if  thy  light  and  lusts  are  at  a  strife 
About  who  should  be  master  of  thy  soul, 
Aud  lovest  one,  the  other  do^t  control ; 

Ou  which  thou  frown'st,  to  which  a  hand  I 

— fTit.  i.  16.    fitevol.  iLp. 


136 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


5.  Neither  will  It  out  of  ray  mind,  but  that  that 
man  that  takes  up  religion  for  the  world,  will  throw 
away  religion  for  the  world ;  for  so  surely  as  Judas 
designed  the  world  in  becoming  religious,  so  surely 
did  he  also  sell  religion  and  his  Master  for  the 
same.  To  answer  the  question  therefore  affirm- 
atively, as  I  perceive  you  have  clone  ;  and  to  accept 
of,  as  authentic,  such  answer,  is  both  heathenish, 
hypocritical,  and  devilish  ;  and  your  reward  Avill  be 
according  to  your  works.1  Then  they  stood  staring- 
one  upon  another,  but  had  not  wherewith  to  answer 
Christian.  Hopeful  also  approved  of  the  soundness 
of  Christian's  answer ;  so  there  was  a  great  silence 
among  them.  Mr.  By-ends  and  his  company  also 
staggered  and  kept  behind,  that  Christian  and 
Hopeful  might  outgo  them.  Then  said  Christian 
to  his  fellow,  If  these  men  cannot  stand  before  the 
sentence  of  men,  what  will  they  do  with  the  sen- 
tence of  God  ?  And  if  they  are  mute  when  dealt 
with  by  vessels  of  clay,  what  will  they  do  when 
they  shall  be  rebuked  by  the  flames  of  a  devouring 
fire?2  ..  | 

Then  Christian  and  Hopeful  outwent  them  again, 
and  wTent  till  they  came  at  a  delicate  plain,  called 
The  ease  that   Ease,  where  they  went  with  much  con- 

ffSHt£S  tent »  out  that  Plain  was  Dut  narrow, 
this  life.  so  thgy  were  qUickly  got  over  it.    Now 

at  the  further  side  of  that  plain,  was  a  little  Hill 
Lucre  urn,  a  called  Lucre,  and  in  that  hill  a  silver 
dangerous  hill.  mjne>  wHch  some  of  them  that  had 
formerly  gone  that  way,  because  of  the  rarity  of 
it,  had  turned  aside  to  see  ;  but  going  too  near  the 
brink  of  the  pit,  the  ground  being  deceitful  under 
them,  broke,  and  they  were  slain ;  some  also  had 
been  maimed  there,  and  could  not,  to  their  dying- 
day,  be  their  own  men  again. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  a  little  off  the 

1  Bunyan,  in  his  Holy  Life  the  Beauty  of  Christianity, 
thus  addresses  such  characters :  '  This  is  the  man  that  hath  the 
breath  of  a  dragon ;  he  poisons  the  air  round  about  him.  This 
is  the  man  that  slays  his  children,  his  kinsmen,  his  friend,  and 
himself — be  that  offends  God's  little  ones.  0  the  millstone 
that  God  will  shortly  hang  about  your  neck,  when  the  time  is 
come  that  you  must  be  drowned  in  the  sea  and  deluge  of  God's 
wrath!'— (See  vol.  ii.  p.  530.)  The  answer  of  Christian,  though 
somewhat  rough,  is  so  conclusive  as  to  fortify  every  honest 
mind  against  all  the  arguments  which  the  whole  tribe  of  time- 
serving professors  ever  did,  or  ever  can  adduce,  in  support  of 
their  ingenious  schemes  and  insidious  efforts  to  reconcile 
religion  with  covetousness  and  the  love  of  the  world,  or  to 
render  it  subservient  to  their  secular  interests. —  (Scott.) 

2  Here  see  the  blessedness  of  being  mighty  in  the  Scripture, 
and  the  need  of  that  exhortation,  '  Let"  the  "Word  of  Christ 
dwell  in  you  richly.'  Col.  iii.  10.  For  the  Word  of  God  is 
quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword ;  it 
pierces  through  all  the  subtle  devices  of  Satan,  and  the  cunning 
craftiness  of  carnal  professors ;  and  dividcth  asunder  the  carnal 
reasonings  of  the  llcsh,  and  the  spiritual  wisdom  which  cometh 
from  above. 

Teach  me,  my  God  and  King, 
In  all  things  thee  to  see, 
And  what  I  do  in  any  thing 

To  do  it  as  for  thee. — (Mason.) 


road,  over  against  the  silver  mine,  stood  Deinas 
(gentleman-like)  to  call  to  passengers  Demas  at  the 
to  come  and  see;  who  said  to  Christian  ^/^tochris- 
and  his  fellow,  Ho!  turn  aside  hither,  tianandHope- 
t   T       ...     ,  .  .        o  ful  to  come  to 

and  1  will  show  you  a  thing.  him. 

Chr.  What  thing  so  deserving  as  to  turn  us  out 
of  the  way  to  see  it  ? 

Demas.  Here  is  a  silver  mine,  and  some  digging 
in  'it  for  treasure.  If  you  will  come,  with  a  little 
pains  you  may  richly  provide  for  yourselves. 

Hope.  Then  said  Hopeful,  Let  us  Hopeful  tempt- 
o-n  spp  *  ed  t0  s°'  bnt 

b°  see-  Christkmholds 

Chr.  Not  I,  said  Christian,  I  have  Mlu  bacb- 
heard  of  this  place  before  now  ;  and  how  many  have 
there  been  slain ;  and  besides  that,  treasure  is  a 
snare  to  those  that  seek  it ;  for  it  hindereth  them 
in  their  pilgrimage.  Then  Christian  called  to 
Demas,  saying,  Is  not  the  place  dangerous  ?  Hath 
it  not  hindered  many  in  their  pilgrimage  ?  He*,  xiv.  8. 

Demas.  Not  very  dangerous,  except  to  those 
that  are  careless  (but  withal,  he  blushed  as  he 
spake). 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  Hopeful,  Let  us  not 
stir  a  step,  but  still  keep  on  our  way. 

Hope.  I  will  warrant  you,  when  By-ends  comes 
up,  if  he  hath  the  same  invitation  as  Ave,  he  will 
turn  in  thither  to  see. 

Chr.  No  doubt  thereof,  for  his  principles  lead 
him  that  way,  and  a  huudred  to  one  but  he  dies 
there. 

Demas.  Then  Demas  called  again,  saying,  But 
will  you  not  come  over  and  see  ? 

Chr.  Then  Christian  roundly  answered,  saying, 
Demas,  thou  art  an  enemy  to  the  right       christian 
ways  of  the  Lord  of  this  way,  and     roundeth  up 
hast  been  already  condemned  for  thine 
own  turning  aside,  by  one  of  his  Majesty's  judges, 
2  Tim.  iv.  io ;  and  why  seekest  thou  to  bring  us  into 
the  like  condemnation  ?     Besides,  if  we  at  all  turn 
aside,  our  Lord  the  King  will  certainly  hear  thereof, 
and  will  there  put  us  to  shame,  where  we  would 
stand  with  boldness  before  him. 

Demas  cried  again.  That  he  also  was  one  of 


3  The  Hill  Lucre  stands  somewhat  out  of  the  way,  but 
temptingly  near.  They  that  will  prolit  by  the  mine  must  turn 
aside  for  it.  Pr.  xxviii.  20,  22.  Sir  J.  Mandeville,  in  his 
Travels,  says,  that  in  the  Vale  Perilous  is  plenty  of  gold  and 
silver,  and  many  Christian  men  go  in  for  the  treasure,  but  few 
come  out  again,  for  this  are  strangled  of  the  devil.  But  good 
Christian  men,  that  are  stable  in  the  faith,  enter  without  peril. 
—(Ed.) 

4  Eve  expected  some  sweet  and  pleasant  sight,  that  woidd 
tickle  and  delight  her  deluded  fancy ;  but,  behold  sin,  and  the 
wrath  of  God,  appear  to  the  shaking  of  her  heart ;  and  thus, 
even  to  this  day,  doth  the  devil  delude  the  world.  His  temp- 
tations  are  gilded  with  sweet  and  fine  pretences,  that  men  shall 
be  wiser,  richer,  more  in  favour,  live  merrier,  fare  better,  or 
something  ;  and  by  such  like  things  the  fools  are  easily  allured. 
But  when  their  eyes  are  opened,  instead  of  seeing  what  the 
devil  falsely  told  them,  they  see  themselves  involved  in  wrath. 
— (Bunyan  on  Genesis,  vol.  ii.  p.  431.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROCRESS. 


137 


their  fraternity ;  and  that  if  they  would  tarry  a 
little,  he  also  himself  would  walk  with  them. 

CllR.  Then  said  Christian,  What  is  thy  name  ? 
Ib  it  Dot  the  same  hy  the  which  1  have  called  thee? 

Demas.  Yes,  my  name  is  Demas;  I  am  the  son 
of  Abraham 

Cm;.  I  know  you  ;  Gchazi  was  your  great-grand- 
father, and  Judas  your  father;  and  you  have  trod 
in  their  steps.  9  Ki.  v.  80.  Mat.  xxvi.  it,  16;  xxviL  1-6.  It 
is  hut  a  devilish  prank  that  thou  usest ;  thy  father 
was  hanged  for  a  traitor,  and  thou  deservest  no 
hotter  reward.  Assure  thyself,  that  when  wc  come 
to  the  King,  we  will  do  him  word  of  this  thy  be- 
haviour.     Thus  they  went  their  way. 

By  this  time  By-ends  and  his  companions  were 
come  again  within  sight,  and  they,  at  the  first  beck, 
By-ends  goes  wcnt  ovcr  to  Demas.  Now,  whether 
over  to  Demas.  they  fell  into  the  pit  by  looking  over 
the  brink  thereof,  or  whether  they  went  down  to 
dig,  or  whether  they  were  smothered  in  the  bottom 
by  the  damps  that  commonly  arise,  of  these  things 
I  am  not  certain ;  but  this  I  observed,  that  they 
never  were  seen  again  in  the  way.1  Then  sang 
Christian — 

By-ends  and  silver  Demas  both  agree ; 
One  calls,  the  other  runs,  that  he  may  be 
A  sharer  in  his  lucre  ;  so  these  do 
Take  up  in  this  world,  and  no  further  go. 

Now  I  saw  that,  just  on  the  other  side  of  this 
plain,  the  Pilgrims  came  to  a  place  where  stood  an 
Tliev  BM  a  old  monument,  hard  by  the  highway 
Btrange  monu-  side  ;  at  the  sight  of  which  they  were 
both  concerned,  because  of  the  strange- 
ness of  the  form  thereof ;  for  it  seemed  to  them  as 
if  it  had  been  a  woman  transformed  into  the  shape 
of  a  pillar ;  here  therefore  they  stood  looking,  and 
looking  upon  it,  but  could  not  for  a  time  tell  what 
they  should  make  thereof.  At  last  Hopeful  espied 
written  above  the  head  thereof,  a  writing  in  an 
unusual  hand ;  but  he  being  no  scholar,  called  to 
Christian  (for  he  was  learned)  to  see  if  he  could 
pick  out  the  meaning ;  so  he  came,  and  after  a  ' 
little  laying  of  letters  together,  he  found  the  same 
to  be  this,  '  Remember  Lot's  wife.'  So  he  read  it 
to  his  fellow  ;  after  which  they  both  concluded  that 
that  was  the  pillar  of  salt  into  which  Lot's  wife 

1  Here  you  see  the  end  of  double-minded  men,  who  vainly 
attempt  to  temper  the  love  of  money  with  the  love  of  Christ. 
u  with  their  art  for  a  season,  but  the  cud  makes  it 
manifest  what  they  were.  Take  David's  advice,  '  1  'n  t  nol  thyself 
because  of  evil-doers.'  Ps.  xxxvii.  1.  '  Be  not  thou  afraid  when 
one  is  made  rich,  when  the  glory  of  his  house  is  increased.' 
Ps.  xlix.  1(5.  But  go  thou  into  the  sanctuary  of  thy  God,  read 
his  Word,  and  understand  the  end  of  these  men. — 
Often,  as  the  motley  reflexes  of  my  experience  move  in  long 
processions  of  manifold  gror;  -  the  distinguished 

and  world-honoured  company  of  Christ  ian  mammonists  appear 
to  the  eye  of  c  1   as  a  drove  of  camels  heavily 

laden,  yet  all  at  full  speed ;  and  each  in  l  ho  confident  expectation 
(  f  passing  through  the  eye  of  the  needle,  without  stop  or  halt, 
. — (Coleridge.) 

VOL.  III. 


was  turned,  for  her  looking  baclc  with  a  covetous 
heart,  when  she  was  going  from  Sodom  for  Bafety,8 
Ge.xlx.26;  which  siulden  and  amazing  sight  gave 
them  occasion  of  this  discourse. 

Cnrt.  Ah,  my  brother!  this  is  a  seasonable  sight; 
it  came  opportunely  to  us  after  the  invitation  which 
Demas  gave  us  to  come  over  to  view  the  Hill  Lucre; 
and  had  we  gone  ovcr,  as  he  desired  us,  and  as  thou 
wast  inclining  to  do,  my  brother,  wc  had,  for  aught 
I  know,  been  made  ourselves  like  this  woman,  a  spec- 
tacle for  those  that  shall  come  after  to  behold. 

Hope.  I  am  sorry  that  I  was  so  foolish,  and  am 
made  to  wonder  that  I  am  not  now  as  Lot's  wife ; 
for  wherein  was  the  difference  betwixt  her  sin 
and  mine  ?  She  only  looked  back;  and  I  had  a 
desire  to  go  see.  Let  grace  be  adored,  and  let  me 
be  ashamed,  that  ever  such  a  thing  should  be  in 
mine  heart. 

dm.  Let  us  take  notice  of  what  we  see  here, 
for  our  help  for  time  to  come.  This  woman  escaped 
one  judgment,  for  she  fell  not  by  the  destruction 
of  Sodom ;  yet  she  was  destroyed  by  another,  as 
we  see  she  is  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt. 

HorE.  True,  and  she  may  be  to  us  both  caution 
and  example  ;  caution,  that  we  should  shun  her  sin; 
or  a  sign  of  what  judgment  will  overtake  such  as 
shall  not  be  prevented  by  this  caution  ;  so  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram,  with  the  two  hundred  and 
fifty  men  that  perished  in  their  sin,  did  also  become 
a  sign  or  example  to  others  to  beware.  Num.  xxvi.  9, 10. 
But  above  all,  I  muse  at  one  thing,  to  wit,  how 
Demas  and  his  fellows  can  stand  so  confidently 
yonder  to  look  for  that  treasure,  which  this  woman, 
but  for  looking  behind  her,  after  (for  we  read  not 
that  she  stepped  one  foot  out  of  the  way)  was  turned 
into  a  pillar  of  salt ;  especially  since  the  judgment 
which  overtook  her  did  make  her  an  example, 
within  sight  of  where  they  are  ;  for  they  cannot 
choose  but  see  her,  did  they  but  lift  up  their  eyes. 

Cim.  It  is  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at,  and  it 
argueth  that  their  hearts  arc  grown  desperate  in 
the  case ;  and  I  cannot  tell  who  to  compare  them 
to  so  fitly,  as  to  them  that  pick  pockets  in  the 
presence  of  the  judge,  or  that  will  cut  purses  under 
the  gallows. u  It  is  said  of  the  men  of  Sodom,  that 
they  were  sinners  exceedingly,  because  they  were 

2  I  have  sometimes  wondered  at  Lot.  His  wife  looked 
behind  her,  and  died  immediately  ;  bnt  he  would  noi  so 

as  look  behind  him  to  see  her.  We  do  not  read  that  he  did  so 
much  as  once  look  where  she  was,  or  what  was  become  of  her. 
His  heart  was  set  upon  his  journey;  and  well  it  might.  There 
was  the  mountains  before  him,  and  the  lire  and  brimstone 
behind  him.  His  life  lay  at  stake;  and  had  he  looked  behind 
him  he  had  lost  it.  Do  thou  so  run,  and  'rememo 
wife.' — (Bunyan's  Heavenly  Footman.) 

3  Tn  former  times,  the  purse  was  carried  hanging  to  a  gudle 
round  the  waist,  and  great  dexterity  was  requisite  to  cut  and 
carry  it  away  without  the  knowledge  of  the  owner,  i'ublie 
executions  for  theft  had  so  little  effect  in  repressing  crime, 
that  thefts  were  committed  in  sight  of,  or  even  under  the 


fallows.— (Ed.) 


18 


13S 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


sinners  before  the  Lord,  that  is,  in  his  eyesight, 
and  notwithstanding  the  kindnesses  that  he  had 
showed  them,  Gen.  xiii.  id  ;  for  the  land  of  Sodom  was 
now  like  the  garden  of  Eden  heretofore.  Gen.  xiii.  10. 
This,  therefore,  provoked  him  the  more  to  jealousy, 
and  made  their  plague  as  hot  as  the  fire  of  the 
Lord  out  of  heaven  could  make  it.  And  it  is  most 
rationally  to  be  concluded,  that  such,  even  such  as 
these  arc,  that  shall  sin  in  the  sight,  yea,  and  that 
too  in  despite  of  such  examples  that  are  set  con- 
tinually before  them,  to  caution  them  to  the  con- 
trary, must  be  partakers  of  severest  judgments. 

Hope.  Doubtless  thou  hast  said  the  truth ;  but 
what  a  mercy  is  it,  that  neither  thou,  but  espe- 
cially I,  am  not  made  myself  this  example!      This 
ministereth  occasion  to  us  to  thank  God,  to  fear 
before  him,  and  always  to  remember  Lot's  wife.1 
I  saw,  then,  that  they  went  on  their  way  to  a 
pleasant  river;  which  David  the  king- 
called  'the  river  of  God,'  but  John  'the 
river  of  the  water  of  life. '    Pu.  i.w.  9.  Re.  xsii.  Eze.  si»ii. 
Now  their  way  lay  just  upon  the  bank  of  the  river ; 
here,  therefore,  Christian  and  his  companion  walked 
with  great  delight ;  they  drank  also  of  the  water 
of  the  river,  which  was  pleasant,  and  enlivening  to 
their  weary  spirits  :3  besides,  on  the  banks  of  this 
Trees   i>y   the   river,  on  either  side,  were  green  trees, 
!'m7']'e'^s'Uof  that  bore  all  manner  of  fruit ;  and  the 
the  trees.         leaves  of  the  trees  were  good  for  medi- 
cine ;  with  the  fruit  of  these  trees  they  were  also 
much  delighted  ;  and  the  leaves  they  eat  to  prevent 
surfeits,  and  other  diseases  that  are  incident  to 
those  that  heat  their  blood  by  travels.      On  either 
side  of  the  river  was  also  a  meadow,   curiously 
A  weadow  in   beautified  with  lilies,  and  it  was  green 
which  they  lie   all  the  year  long.     In  this  meadow 
'   they  lay  down,  and  slept;    for  here 


they  might  lie  down  safely.  When  they  awoke,  they 
gathered  again  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees,  and  drank 
again  of  the  water  of  the  river,  and  then  lay  down 
again  to  sleep.  Ps.  »dil  2.  is.  ziv.  o».  Thus  they  did 
several  days  and  nights.4     Then  they  sang — 

Beliold  ye  how  these  crystal  streams  do  glide, 
To  comfort  pilgrims  by  the  highway  side ; 
,    The  meadows  green,  besides  their  fragrant  smell, 
Yield  dainties  for  them :  and  he  that  can  tell 
What  pleasant  fruit,  yea,  leaves,  these  trees  do  yield, 
Will  soon  sell  all,  that  he  may  buy  this  field. 

So  when  they  were  disposed  to  go  on  (for  they 
were  not,  as  yet,  at  their  journey's  eud),  they  ate 
and  drank,  and  departed.5 

Now,  I  beheld  in  my  dream,  that  they  had  not 
journeyed  far,  but  the  river  and  the  way  for  a  time 
parted ;  at  which  they  were  not  a  little  sorry ;  yet 
they  durst  not  go  out  of  the  way.  Now  the  way 
from  the  river  was  rough,  and  their  feet  tender,  by 
reason  of  their  travels ;  '  so  the  souls  of  the  pil- 
grims were  much  discouraged  because  of  the  way.' 
Nn.  xsi.  4.  Wherefore,  still  as  they  went  on,  they 
wished  for  better  way.6  Now,  a  little  before  them, 
there  was  on  the  left  hand  of  the  road  a  meadow, 
and  a  stile  to  go  over  into  it ;  and  that  meadow  is 
called  By-path  Meadow.  Then  said 
Christian  to  his  fellow,  If  this  meadow  y"pa 
lieth  along  by  our  way-side,  let  us  go  over  into  it.7 
Then  he  went  to  the  stile  to  see,  and  0ne  temptation 
behold,  a  path  lay  alone;  by  the  way,  does  make  way 
,,         .,x        -j       *   .1       i.  -r,   •        for  another. 

on  the  otner  side  ot  the  fence.     It  is 
according  to  my  wish,  said  Christian.     Here  is 
the  easiest  going ;  come,  good  Hopeful,  and  let  us 
go  over. 


1  Alas!  poor  pilgrims,  like  Peter,  you  soon  forgot  the  judg- 
ment, although  yoiir  sight  of  Lot's  wife  had  so  affected  your 
spirits.  How  soon  you  went  into  By-path  Meadow !  '  where- 
fore, let  him  that  thinketh  he  st  andeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall.' 
1  Co.  x.  12.— (Ed.) 

2  By  this  river,  which  is  called  'a  pure  river  of  water  of  life, 
clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb,'  Re.  xxii.  1,  we  may  understand  clear  and  comfortable 
views  of  God's  everlasting  love  and  electiug  grace.  They 
could  see  in  it  God's  glory  shining  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  view  their  own  faces  in  it,  to  their  inexpressible  joy.  This 
is  the  river  'the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  city  "of  God.' 
Ps.  xlvi.  4.  The  streams  which  flow  from  this  river  of  elect- 
ing love,  are  vocation  to  Christ,  justification  by  Christ,  sancti- 
iieation  in  Christ,  perseverance  through  Christ,  glorification 
with  Christ,  and  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing  on  Christ.  All 
this  these  pilgrims  now  enjoyed,  and  all  this  every  fellow- 
citizen  of  the  saints  is  called  to  enjoy  iu  his  pilgrimage*  to  Zion. 
God  hath  chosen  us  in  Christ,  and  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual 
blessings  in  Mm.  O  how  happy,  peaceful,  and  joyful  arc 
pilgrims,  when  the  Spirit  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ,  shows 
them  to  us,  and  blesses  us  with  a  sense  of  interest  in  all  the 
love  of  God,  and  finished  salvation  of  Jesus!  —  (Mason.) 

3  Blessed  state  indeed,  but  of  short  duration !  Too  often 
these  desirable  consolations  of  the  Spirit  render  the  Christian 
careless  aud  anwatchful. — (Border.) 


i  A  scene  to  sootiie  and  calm  a  mind  fretted  and  harassed 
with  the  cares  and  turmoils  of  this  every-day  world ;  a  sunny 
vista  into  the  future,  welcome  iu  a  weary  hour  to  the  worn 
spirit,  which  longs,  as  for  the  wings  of  the  dove,  that  it  may 
flee  away,  and  be  at  rest ;  a  glimpse  of  Sabbath  quietness  oil 
earth,  given  as  a  pledge  aud  foretaste  of  the  more  glorious  and 
eternal  Sabbath  of  heaven. —  (Bernard  Barton.) 

5  Now  had  I  an  evidence,  as  I  thought,  of  my  salvation 
from  heaven,  with  many  golden  seals  thereon,  all  hanging  in 
my  sight.  Now  could  I  remember  the  manifestations  of  grace 
with  comfort ;  and  longed  that  the  last  day  were  come,  that  I 
might  for  ever  be  inflamed  with  the  sight,  and  joy,  and  com- 
munion with  him,  whose  soul  was  made  an  offering  for  my  sins. 
Before  this  I  lay  trembling  at  the  mouth  of  hell ;  now  I  had 
got  so  far  therefrom  that  I  could  scarce  discern  it.  0,  thought 
1,  that  I  were  fourscore  years  old,  that  I  might  die  quickly, 
and  my  soul  be  gone  to  rest. — (Grace  Abounding,  No.  128.) 

c  They  shotdd  have  said,  It  is  true  this  way  is  not  so  plea- 
sant as  the  meadow,  but  it  is  the  Lord's  way,  and  the  best, 
doubtless,  for  us  to  travel  in.  A  man  speedily  enters  into 
temptation  when  he  becomes  discontented  with  God's  allot- 
ments; then  Satan  presents  allurements,  and  from  wishing  for 
a  better  way,  the  sotd  goes  into  a  worse.  The  discontented 
wish  is  father  to  a  sinful  will ;  /  ivish  for  a  letter  is  followed 
by,  I  will  have  a  better,  and  so  the  soul  goes  astray. — (Chccver.) 

'  The  transition  into  the  by-path  is  easy,  for  it  lies  close  to 

the  right  way;  only  you  must  get  over  a  stile,  that  is,  you 

must  quit   Christ's  imputed  righteousness,  and  trust  in  your 

own  inherent  righteousness;   and  then  you  are  in  By-path 

j  Meadow  directly. — (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S    HIOGIIESS. 


139 


Hope.  Cut  how  if  this  path  should  lead  us  out 
of  the  way?1 

Cnu.  That  is  not  like,  said  the  other.  Look, 
Strong  cinis-  doth  it  not  go  along  by  the  way-side? 
SSSftrt  So  Hopeful,  being  persuaded  by  his 

>•  fellow,  went  after  him  over  the  stile. 
When  they  were  gone  over,  and  were  got  into  the 
path,  they  found  it  very  easy  for  their  feet;  and 
withal,  they,  looking  before  theni,  espied  a  man 
walking  as  they  did  (and  his  name  was  Vain-con- 
fidence) ;  so  they  called  after  him,  and  asked  him 
See  what  it  is  whither  that  way  led.  He  said,  To 
lart^S  *e  Celestial  Gate.2  Look,  said  Chris- 
Btrongere.  tjan>  JiJ  not  I  tell  you  so  ?     By  this 

you  may  sco  we  are  right.  So  they  followed,  and 
he  went  before  them.  But,  behold,  the  night  came 
on,  and  it  grew  very  dark;  so  that  they  that  were 
behind,  lost  the  sight  of  him  that  went  before. 

He,  therefore,  that  went  before :;  (Vain-confidence 
by  name),  not  seeing  the  way  before  him,  fell  into 

a  pit  to  catch   a  dccP  I511'  l3- ix- 1G'  wllich  was  0I1  PU1'- 
-slori-   pose  there  made,  by  the  Prince  of  those 

grounds,  to  catch  vain-glorious  fools 
withal,  and  was  dashed  in  pieces  with  his  fall.4 

Now  Christian  and  his  fellow  heard  him  fall.  So 
they  called  to  know  the  matter,  but  there  was 
none  to  answer;  only  they  heard  a  groaning.  Then 
Reasoning  be-  said  Hopeful,  Where  arc  avc  now  ? 
tianaud Hope-  Then  was  his  fellow  silent,  as  mistrust- 
ful-  ing  that  he  had  led  him  out  of  the 

way ;  and  now  it  began  to  rain,  and  thunder,  and 
lighten5  in  a  very  dreadful  manner;  and  the  water 
rose  amain.0 


1  The  best  caution  I  can  give  to  others,  or  take  myself,  is, 
not  to  be  guided  iu  matters  of  faith  by  meu,  but  to  make  the 
.Scriptures  our  only  rule— to  look  to  God  for  the  teaching  of 
his  blessed  Spirit,  that  he  may  keep  our  feet  from  the  ways  of 
death.— (J.  B.) 

-  '  There  is  a  way  that  seems  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end 
thereof  are  the  ways  of  death.'  Fr.  xiv.  12.  Vain  confidence 
is  this  very  way.  0  how  easy  do  professors  get  into  it !  yea, 
real  pilgrims  are  pror.c  also  to  take  up  with  it,  owing  to  that 
legality,  pride,  and  self-righteousness,  which  work  in  their  fallen 
nature.  Sec  the  end  of  it,  and  tremble ;  for  it  leads  to  darkness, 
and  ends  in  death.  Lord,  humble  our  proud  hearts,  and  empty 
us  of  self-righteousness,  pride,  and  vain  confidence. —  (.Mason.) 

3  So,  sometimes,  real  pilgrims  take  counsel  and  example  of 
strangers,  of  worldly  men,  and  of  presumptuous  careless  per- 
sons. Vain  confidence  is  a  sad  guide  anywhere,  but  especially 
when  one  has  wandered  out  of  the  way. — (Chcever.) 

*  If  thou  be  prying  into  God's  secret  decrees,  or  entertain 
questions  about  nice  curiosities,  thou  niayest  stumble  and  fall 
to  thine  eternal  ruin.  Take  heed  of  that  lofty  spirit,  that, 
devil-like,  cannot  be  content  with  its  own  station. — (Heavenly 
Footman.) 

1  The  thunder  and  lightning  plainly  show  that  this  by-path 
leads  to  Sinai,  not  to  Ziou.  One  step  over  the  stile,  by  giving 
way  to  a  self-righteous  spirit,  and  you  enter  the  territories  of 
despair. — (J.  13.) 

0  How  varied  is  the  experience  of  a  Christian!  he  had  just 
before  overcome  Deinas,  and  conquered  By-ends  and  his  com- 
panions; is  warned  by  Lot's  wile,  and  now  elated  with  the 
strength  of  his  principles  ;  boldness  takes  the  place  of  caution; 
lie  ventures  upon  an  easier  path,  and  is  involved  iu  misery. 
—(Ed.) 


Then  Hopeful  groaned  in  himself,  saying,  0  that 
I  had  kept  on  my  way! 

Cim.  Who  could  have  thought  that  this  path 
should  have  led  us  out  of  the  way  I 

Hope.   I  was  afraid  on  it  at  the  very  fir 
therefore  gave,  you  that  gentle  caution.     I  would 
have  spoke  plainer,  but  that  you  are  older  than  J.' 

ClIR.  Good  brother,  be  not  offended  ;  I  am  Borry 
I  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  way,  and    „,  .  ,.    , 

1  T      1  •  ,       .  .  (I"'*1' 

that  1  nave  put  thee  into  such  immt-     pentance     for 

uent  danger;  pray,  my  brother,  forgive. 

me  ;  I  did  not  do  it  of  an  evil  intent.8     tIu;  way- 

HorE.  Be  comforted,  my  brother,  for  I  f 
thee  ;  and  believe  too  that  this  shall  be  for  our  good. 

Cim.  1  am  glad  I  have  with  me  a  merciful 
brother;  but  we  must  not  stand  thus:  let  us  try 
to  go  back  again. 

Hope.  But,  good  brother,  let  me  go  before. 

Ciir.  No,  if  you  please,  let  me  go  first,  that  if 
there  be  any  danger,  I  may  be  first  therein,  because 
by  my  means  we  are  both  gone  out  of  the  way. 

Hope.  No,  said  Hopeful,  you  shall  not  go  first ; 
for  your  mind  being  troubled  may  lead  you  out  of 
the  way  again.  Then,  for  their  encouragement, 
they  heard  the  voice  of  one  saying,  'Set  thine 
heart  toward  the  highway,  even  the  way  which 
thou  wentest;  turn  again.'  je.  xxxi.  21.  But  by  this 
time  the  waters  were  greatly  risen,  by  reason  of 
which  the  way  of  going  back  was  very  dangerous. 
(Then  I  thought  that  it  is  easier  going  out  of  the 
way  when  we  are  in,  than  going  in  when  we  are 
out.)  Yet  they  adventured  to  go  back,  They  are  in 
but  it  was  so  dark,  and  the  flood  was  ^X  £ 
so  high,  that  in  their  going  back  they  &h  6°  ^'ck: 
had  like  to  have  been  drowned  nine  or  ten  times. :) 

Neither  could  they,  with  all  the  skill  they  had, 
get  again  to  the  stile  that  night.  Wherefore,  at 
last,  lighting  under  a  little  shelter,  they  sat  down 
there  until  the  day-break  ;  but,  being  weary,  they 
fell  asleep.     Now  there  was,  not  far  „,, 

i-       ii        i        ii  i      li,c;' 

irom  the  place  where  they  lay,  a  castle, 

called    Doubting    Castle,    tho    owner  Lsl)a1'' 

whereof  was   Giant  Despair;10  and  it  was  in  his 

•  When  Banyan  pleaded,  so  energetically,  for  the  communion 

of  saints,  irrespective  of  water-baptism,  one  of  his  arguments 

was,  '  I  be  strongest  may  sometimes  be  out  of  the  way.'     '  Re- 

LC  another  as  Christ  also  received  us.' — (Vol.ii.p.610.) 

8  Here  see,  that  as  Christians  are  made  helpful,   - 
through  prevailing  corruptions,  they  arc  liable  to  prove  hurtful 
to  each  other.     But  observe  how  grace  works  :  it  humbles,  it 
makes  the  soul  confess  and  be  sorry  for  its  misfortunes.    Here 
is  no  reviling  one  another;  but  a  tender  sympathy  as  I 
concern  for  each  other.     (J  the  mighty  power  ot   tha 

and  truth  which  came  by  Jesus  Christ !     How  docs  il  ■ 
souls  in  the  fellowship  of  love ! — (Mason.) 

9  How  easy  it  is  to  trace  the  path  that  led  the  pilgrims 
astray!     To  avoid  the  roughness  of  the  way,  th 

by-path,  that  by  measures  of  carnal  pi  avoid 

aitlictions.  Guided  by  \  ain-confidence,  they  were  led  from  the 
road,  and  when  this  Vain-contidcncc  was  destroyed,  they  were 
involved  in  distress  and  danger. — (Ivimey.) 

iu  The  personification  of  Despair  is  one  of  the  most  in 


140 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


grounds  they  now  were  sleeping:  -wherefore  he, 
getting  up  in  the  morning  early,  and  walking  up 

He  finds  them  an(1  down  in  llis  ^elds»  caught  Chris- 
iu  ins  ground,   tian  and  Hopeful  asleep  in  his  grounds. 

and        carries    m,  .,.  A  .  ,  , 

them  to  Doubt-   Then,  with  a  grim  and  surly  voice, 

ing  Castle.  he   b;d  them  awake  .    and  asked  thcm 

whence  they  were,  and  what  they  did  in  his  grounds. 
They  told  him  they  were  pilgrims,  and  that  they 
had  lost  their  way.  Then  said  the  Giant,  You  have 
this  night  trespassed  on  me,  hy  trampling  in,  and 
lying  on  my  grounds,  and  therefore  you  must  go 
along  with  me.  So  they  were  forced  to  go,  "because 
he  was  stronger  than  they.1  They  also  had  but 
little  to  say,  for  they  knew  themselves  in  a  fault. 
The  Giant  therefore  drove  them  before  him,  and 
J  put  them  into  his  castle,  into  a  very 

The     grievous-    1  '      .       .  J 

ness  of  their   dark  dungeon,  nasty  and  stinking  to 

imprisonment.       .  .   .,        ,.   . 

the  spirits  of  these  two  men.  rs.ixxxvm.  is. 
Here  then  they  lay  from  Wednesday  morning  till 
Saturday  night,  without  one  bit  of  bread,  or  drop 
of  drink,  or  light,  or  any  to  ask  how  they  did;  they 
were  therefore  here  in  evil  case,  and  were  far  from 
friends  and  acquaintance.  Now  in  this  place  Chris- 
tian had  double  sorrow,2  because  it  was  through 
his  unadvised  counsel  that  they  were  brought  into 
this  distress.3 


tive  and  beautiful  portions  of  Bunyan's  allegory.  It  appeals 
either  to  every  man's  experience,  or  to  every  man's  sense  of 
what  may  come  upon  him,  on  account  of  sin.  It  is  at  once,  in 
some  respects,  the  very  gloomiest  and  very  brightest  part  of  the 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress ;'  for  it  shows  at  once  to  what  a  depth  of 
misery  sin  may  plunge  the  Christian,  aud  also  to  what  a  depth 
the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  may  reach.  The  colouring  of  the 
picture  is  extremely  vivid,  the  remembrance  of  it  can  never 
pass  from  the  mind;  and,  as  in  a  gallery  of  beautiful  paintings, 
there  may  often  be  one  that  so  strongly  reminds  you  of  your 
own  experience,  or  that  in  itself  is  so  remarkably  beautiful  as 
to  keep  you  dwelling  upon  it  with  unabated  interest ;  so  it  is 
with  this  delineation  of  Giant  Despair,  among  the  many  admir- 
able sketches  of  Bunyan's  piety  and  genius.  It  is  so  full  of 
deep  life  and  meaning  that  you  cannot  exhaust  it,  and  it  is  of 
such  exquisite  propriety  and  beauty  that  you  are  never  tired 
with  examining  it. — (Cheever.) 

1  Sooner  or  later  Doubting  Castle  will  be  the  prison,  and 
Giant  Despair  the  keeper  of  all  those  who  turn  aside  from 
Christ  and  his  righteousness,  to  trust  in  any  wise  in  themselves, 
and  to  their  righteousness.  'Our  God  is  a  jealous  God,'  ever 
jealous  of  his  own  glory,  and  of  the  honour  of  his  beloved  Son. 

—(Mason.)     So  under  the  old  cut,  illustrating  the  Pilgrims  in 

Doubting  Castle,  are  these  lines: — 

'  The  pilgrims  now,  to  gratify  the  flesh, 
Will  seek  its  ease ;  but  O !  "how  they  afresh 
Do  thereby  plunge  themselves  new  griefs  into! 
Who  seek  to  please  the  flesh,  themselves  undo.* 

2  Blessed  sorrow !  how  many  are  there  who  never  tasted 
the  bread  of  heaven,  nor  the  water  of  life  from  the  wells  of 
salvation ;  who  arc  strangers  to  the  communion  of  saints,  but 
do  not  feel  themselves  to  be  '  in  evil  case,'  nor  have  wept  under 
a  sense  of  their  wretched  state. — (Ed.) 

3  What  !  such  highly-favoured  Christians  in  Doubting 
Castle  ?  After  having  travelled  so  far  in  the  way  of  salvation, 
seen  so  many  glorious  things  in  the  way,  experienced  so  much 
of  the  grace  and  love  of  their  Lord,  and  having  so  often  proved 
his  faithfulness  ?  Is  not  this  strauge  ?  No ;  it  is  common — 
the  strongest  Christians  are  liable  to  err  and  get  out  of  the  way, 
and  then  to  be  beset  with  very  great  and  distressing  doubts. — 
(Mason.)    Despair,  like  a  tremendous  giant,  will  at  last  seize  on 


Now,  Giant  Despair  had  a  wife,  and  her  name 
was  Diffidence.4  So,  when  he  was  gone  to  bed,  he 
told  his  wife  what  he  had  done  ;  to  wit,  that  he 
had  taken  a  couple  of  prisoners,  and  cast  them 
into  his  dungeon,  for  trespassing  on  his  grounds. 
Then  he  asked  her  also  what  he  had  best  to  do  fur- 
ther to  them.  So  she  asked  him  what  they  were, 
whence  they  came,  and  whither  they  were  bound  ; 
and  he  told  her.  Then  she  counselled  him,  that 
when  he  arose  in  the  morning  he  should  beat  them 
without  any  mercy.  So,  when  he  arose,  he  getteth 
him  a  grievous  crab-tree  cudgel,  and  goes  down 
into  the  dungeon  to  them,  and  there  first  falls  to 
rating  of  them  as  if  they  were  dogs,  although  they 
never  gave  him  a  word  of  distaste.  Then  he  falls 
upon  them,  and  beats  them  fearfully,  On  Thursday, 
in  such  sort,  that  they  were  not  able  £?  wfpri- 
to  help  themselves,  or  to  turn  them  toners, 
upon  the  floor.  This  done,  he  withdraws  and  leaves 
them,  there  to  condole  their  misery,  and  to  mourn 
under  their  distress.  So  all  that  day  they  spent 
the  time  in  nothing  but  sighs  and  bitter  lamenta- 
tions. The  next  night,  she,  talking  with  her  hus- 
band about  them  farther,  and  understanding  that 
they  were  yet  alive,  did  advise  him  to  counsel  them 
to  make  away  themselves.  So  when  morning  was 
come,  he  goes  to  them  in  a  surly  manner  as  before, 
and  perceiving  them  to  be  very  sore  with  the 
stripes  that  he  had  given  them  the  clay  before,  he 
told  them,  that  since  they  were  never  like  to  come 
out  of  that  place,  their  only  way  would  0nFrida  Ghl,fc 
be  forthwith  to  make  an  end  of  them-  Despair  coun- 
selves,  either  with  knife,  halter,  or  km  Cthem°- 
poison,  for  why,  said  he,  should  you  selves- 
choose  life,  seeing  it  is  attended  with  so  much 
bitterness  ?  5     But  they  desired  him  to  let  them 


the  souls  of  all  unbelievers;  and  when  Christians  conclude,  from 
some  misconduct,  that  they  belong  to  that  company,  they  arc 
exposed  to  be  taken  captive  by  him.  They  do  not,  indeed,  fall 
and  perish  with  Yain-confidence ;  but  for  a  season  they  find  it 
impossible  to  rise  superior  to  prevailing  gloomy  doubts  bor- 
dering on  despair,  or  to  obtain  the  least  comfortable  hope  of 
deliverance,  or  encouragement  to  use  the  proper  means  of 
seeking  it. — (Scott.) 

4  The  wife  of  Despair  is  Diffidence,  or  a  distrust  of  God's 
faithfulness,  and  a  want  of  confidence  in  his  mercy.  When  a 
Christiau  follows  such  counsels,  gloom  and  horror  of  mind  will 
be  produced,  and  life  become  a  burden. —  (Ivimey.) 

6  Bunyau,  in  one  of  his  delightful  treatises  of  comfort 
against  despair,  introduces  the  following  striking  colloquy: — 
'  Says  Satan,  Dost  thou  not  know  that  thou  art  one  of  the 
vilest  in  all  the  pack  of  professors  ?  Yes,  says  the  sold,  I  do. 
Says  Satan,  Dost  thou  not  know  that  thou  hast  horribly  sinned  ? 
Yes,  says  the  soul,  I  do.  Well,  saith  Satan,  now  will  I  come 
upon  thee  with  my  appeals.  Art  thou  not  a  graceless  wretch  ? 
l'es.  Hast  thou  an  heart  to  he  sorry  for  this  wickedness  ? 
No,  not  as  I  should.  And  albeit,  saith  Satan,  thou  prayest 
sometimes,  yet  is  not  thy  heart  possessed  with  a  belief  that 
God  will  not  regard  thee?  Yes,  says  the  sinner.  Why,  then, 
despair,  and  go  hang  thyself,  saith  the  devil.  And  now  we 
are  at  the  end  of  the  thing  designed  and  driven  at  by  Satan. 
But  what  shall  I  now  do,  saith  the  sinner?  I  answer,  take  up 
the  words  of  the  text  against  him,  '  That  ye  may  be  able  to 


THE   HI.G RIM'S    PROGRESS. 


1-U 


go.  With  that  he  looked  ugly  upon  them,  and, 
rushing  to  them,  had  doubtless  made  an  end  of 

them  himself,  hut  that  he  fell  into  one  of  his  tits 
The  Giant  some-  (for  he  sometimes,  in  sunshiny  weather, 
tmushasfits.     M\  int(1  fa^l  .mi\  [oat  for  a  ,;„„.   ,],,. 

use  of  his  hand;  wherefore  he  withdrew,  and  left 
them  as  before,  to  considerwhat  to  ilo.  Then  did 
the  prisoners  consult  between  themselves,  whether 

it  was  hest  to  take  his  counsel  or  no;  and  thus 
tlu",   i  ■    ;i'  to  discourse: 

Cm;.  Brother,  said  Christian,  what  shall  we  do  ? 

Christian  The  life  that  we  now  live  is  miserable. 
crushed.  por  my  y,ar{f  I  know  not  whether  is 
hest,  to  live  thus,  or  to  die  out  of  hand.  '  My  soul 
chooseth  strangling  rather  than  life,'  and  the  grave 
is  more  easy  for  me  than  this  dungeon.  Job  vii.  15. 
Shall  we  he  ruled  hy  the  Giant  ?  - 

IIor-E.  Indeed,  our  present  condition  is  dreadful, 
Hopeful  com-    and  death  would  he  far  more  welcome 

torts  him.        to   me  tjiau  t]ms  f0l.  cvcr  to   aRitle . 

hut  yet,  let  us  consider,  the  Lord  of  the  country 
to  which  we  are  going  hath  said,  Thou  shalt  do 
no  murder :  no,  not  to  another  man's  person  ;  much 
more,  then,  are  we  forbidden  to  take  his  counsel 
to  kill  ourselves.  Besides,  he  that  kills  another, 
can  Imt  commit  murder  upon  his  body  ;  hut  for  one 
to  kill  himself,  is  to  kill  body  and  soul  at  once. 
And,  moreover,  my  brother,  thou  talkest  of  ease 
in  the  grave;  but  hast  thou  forgotten  the  hell, 
whither  for  certain  the  murderers  go  ?  For  '  no 
murderer  hath   eternal   life,'   &c.3     And   let  us 


comprehend  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height; 
and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge.' — 
(Saints'  Knowledge  of  Christ's  Love,  vol.  ii.  p.  37.) 

1  Giant  Despair,  it  seems,  has  fits  in  sunshiny  weather;  that 
is,  a  gleam  of  hope,  from  Christ  the  Sun  of  righteousness, 
sometimes  darted  into  their  minds. — (Burder.) 

-  Satan  and  his  angels  will  not  be  wanting  to  help  forward 
the  calamity  of  the  man,  who,  iu  coming  to  Christ,  is  beat  out 
of  breath,  out  of  heart,  out  of  courage,  by  wind  that  blows  him 
backward.  They  will  not  be  wanting  to  throw  up  his  heels  in 
their  dirty  places,  nor  to  trouble  his  head  with  the  fumes  of 
q]  breath.  And  now  it  is  hard  coming  to  God;  Satan 
lias  the  art  of  making  the  most  of  every  sin;  lie  can  make  e\  ery 
hair  u;i  the  head  as  big  as  a  cedar.  But,  soul,  Christ  can  save 
unto  the  uttermost !  come,  man,  come.  He  can  do  exceeding 
;  ly  above  all  we  can  ask  or  think.' — (Banyan's  Complete 
Saviour,  vol.  i.  p.  209.)  Poor  Christian  !  what  I  tempted  to 
destroy  thyself?  Lord,  what  is  man!  But  see,  despairing 
souls,  mark  the  truth  of  that  word,  'There  hath  no  temptation 
taken  you  but  such  as  is  common  to  man;  but  God  is  faithful, 
wlio  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able; 
but  will,  with  the  temptation,  also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that 
ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it.'  1  Co.  x.  13. — (Mason.) 

3  Banyan  had  an  acute  sense  of  the  exceeding  sinfidncss  of 

sin,  and  no  saint  had   suffered  more  severely  from  despair. 

One  of  his  great  objects,  iu  most  of  his  works,  is  to  arm  poor 

pilgrims  against  desponding  fears.     Thus,  in  his  first  treatise 

on  Gospel  Truths — '  He  (the  devil;  wdl  be  sure  to  present  to 

science  the  most  sad  sentences  of  the  Scripture;  yea, 

them  home  with  such  conning  arguments,  that  if  it 

Me  he  will  make  thee  despair,  and  make  away  thyself 

as  did  JuJas.' — (Vol.  ii.  p.  132.)     Sin,  when  seen  in  its  colours, 

and  when  appearing  in  its  monstrous  shape  aud  hue,  frighteth 

it  "its,  away  from  God,  and,  if  he  stops 


consider,  again,  that  all  the  law  is  not  in  the  hand 
of  Giant  Despair.  Others,  so  far  as  I  can  under- 
stand, have  been  taken  by  him,  as  well  as  we;  and 
yet  have  escaped  out  of  his  hand.  Who  knows,  hut 
that  God  that  made  tin:  world  may  cause  that 
Giant  Despair  may  die?  or  that,  at  some  time  or 
other,  he  may  forget  to  lock  us  in?  or  that  he  may, 
in  a  short  time,  have  another  of  his  fits  before  us, 
and  may  lose  the  use  of  his  limhs  ?  and  if  ever 
that  should  come  to  pass  again,  for  my  part,  1  am 
resolved  to  pluck  up  the  heart  of  a  man,  and  to 
try  my  utmost  to  get  from  under  his  hand.  I  was 
a  fool  that  I  did  not  try  to  do  it  hefore  ;  hut,  how- 
ever, my  brother,  let  us  he  patient,  and  endure  a 
while.  The  time  may  come  that  may  give  us 
a  happy  release;  but  let  us  not  be  our  own  mur- 
derers. With  these  words,  Hopeful  at  present  did 
moderate  the  mind  of  his  brother;  so  they  con- 
tinued together  (in  the  dark)  that  day,  iu  their  sad 
and  doleful  condition.4 

Well,  towards  evening,  the  Giant  goes  down  into 
the  dungeon  again,  to  see  if  his  prisoners  had  taken 
his  counsel ;  but  when  he  came  there,  he  found 
them  alive  ;  and  truly,  alive  was  all ;  for  now,  what 
for  want  of  bread  and  water,  and  hy  reason  of  the 
wounds  they  received  when  he  beat  them,  they 
could  do  little  but  breathe.  But,  I  say,  he  found 
them  alive ;  at  which  he  fell  into  a  grievous  rage, 
and  told  them,  that  seeing  they  had  disobeyed  his 
counsel,  it  should  be  worse  with  them  than  if  they 
had  never  been  born. 

At  this  they  trembled  greatly,5  and  I  think  that 
Christian  fell  into  a  swoon  ;6  but,  coming  a  little  to 
himself  again,  they  renewed  their  discourse  about 
the  Giant's  counsel,  and  whether  yet  they  had  best 
to  take  it  or  no.  Now  Christian  again  seemed  to 
be  for  doing  it,7  but  Hopeful  made  his  christian  stili 
second  reply  as  folio weth: —  dejected. 


them  not,  also  out  of  the  world.  This  is  manifest  by  Cain, 
Judas,  Saul,  and  others.  They  fly  from  before  God,  oue  to 
one  fruit  of  despair,  and  one  to  another. — {Pharisee  and  Pub- 
lican, vol.  ii.  p.  200.) 

4  Ah  admirable  chain  of  reasoning,  pointing  out  the  evils 
of  despair,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved,  vol.  i. 
pp.  91,  92,  under  the  head  fifthly.  '  It  will  make  a  man  his 
own  tormentor,  and  flounce  and  fling  like  a  wild  bull  in  a 
net.  Is.  Ii.  20.  Despair!  it  drives  a  man  to  the  study  of  his 
own  ruin,  and  brings  him  at  last  to  be  his  own  executioner.' 
2  Sa.  x\ii.  23.  -Mat.  xxvii.  3-5. — (Ed.) 

0  Alas,  how  changed  !     Expressive  of  his  mind, 
His  eyes  are  sunk,  arms  folded,  head  reelin'd; 
Those  awful  syllables,  hell,  death,  and  sin, 
Though  whisper'd,  plainly  tell  what  works  n 
— (Cowper's  2 
'  A  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ? ' 

0  To  bring  the  state  of  Christian's  mind  before  us,  rc.'d 
the  lamentations  of  the  Psalmist,  when  he  was  a  prisoner  iu 
Doubting  Castle,  under  Giant  Despair,  iu  Vs.  lxxxviii.;  aud 
Banyan's  experience,  as  narrated  iu  No.  163  of  Grace  Abound- 
ing. Despair  swallowed  him  up,  and  that  passage  fell  like  a  hot 
thunderbolt  upon  his  conscicuee,  '  He  was  rejected,  for  he  found 
no  place  for  repentance.' — (lvimey.) 

7  Dr.  Donne,  the  celebrated  Dean  of  St.  raid's,  had  recently 


14; 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Hope.  My  brother,  said  lie,  reraemberest  thou 

„     . ,  not  how  valiant  thon  hast  been  hereto- 

Hopeful     com- 
forts! lira  again,  fore?    Apolljon  could  not  crush  thee, 

meAhmss  °to  nor  could  all  that  thou  didst  hear, 
remembrance.     Qr   gC(?>  QJ,   feel>    in   the  yapey  of  the 

Shadow  of  Death.  What  hardship,  terror,  and 
amazement  hast  thou  already  gone  through  !  And 
art  thou  now  nothing  but  fear  !  Thou  seest  that 
I  am  in  the  dungeon  with  thee,  a  far  weaker  man 
by  nature  than  thou  art;  also,  this  Giant  has 
wounded  me  as  well  as  thee,  and  hath  also  cut  off 
the  bread  and  water  from  my  mouth  ;  and  with  thee 
I  mourn  without  the  light.  But  let  us  exercise  a 
little  more  patience  ;  remember  how  thou  playedst 
the  man  at  Vanity  Fair,  and  wast  neither  afraid 
of  the  chain,  nor  cage,  nor  yet  of  bloody  death. 
Wherefore  let  us  (at  least  to  avoid  the  shame,  that 
becomes  not  a  Christian  to  be  found  in)  bear  up 
with  patience  as  well  as  we  can.1 

Now,  night  being  come  again,  and  the  Giant  and 
his  wife  being  in  bed,  she  asked  him  concerning 
the  prisoners,  and  if  they  had  taken  his  counsel. 
To  which  he  replied,  They  are  sturdy  rogues,  they 
choose  rather  to  bear  all  hardship,  than  to  make 
away  themselves.  Then  said  she,  Take  them  into 
the  castle-yard  to-morrow,  and  show  them  the 
bones  and  skulls  of  those  that  thou  hast  already 
despatched,  and  make  them  believe,  ere  a  week 
comes  to  an  end,  thou  also  wilt  tear  them  in 
pieces,  as  thou  hast  done  their  fellows  before 
them.2 


published  a  thesis,  In  prove  that  suicide,  under  some  circum- 
stances, was  justifiable.  Hopeful  answers  all  his  arguments, 
and  proves  it  to  be  the  foulest  of  murders.  Bunyan,  in  his 
treatise  on  Justification,  vol.  i.  p.  314,  thus  notices  the  jailer's 
intent  to  commit  suicide,  when  the  doors  of  the  prison  in  which 
Paul  was  confined  were  tin-own  open: — 'Even  now,  while  the 
earthquake  shook  the  prison,  he  had  murder  in  his  heart —  j 
murder,  I  say,  and  that  of  a  high  nature,  even  to  have  hilled 
his  own  body  and  soul  at  once.' — (Ed.) 

1  Here  is  the  blessing  of  a  hopeful  compemion ;  here  is 
excellent  counsel.  Let  vain  professors  say  what  they  may 
against  looking  back  to  past  experiences,  it  is  most  certainly 
good  and  right  so  to  do ;  not  to  encourage  present  sloth  and 
presumption,  but  to  excite  fresh  confidence  of  hope  iu.  the 
Lord.  "We  have  David's  example,  and  Paul's  word  to  encourage 
us  to  this,  '  The  Lord  that  delivered  me  out  of  the  paw  of  the 
lion,  and  out  of  the  paw  of  the  bear,  he  will  deliver  me  out  of 
the  hand  of  this  Philistine,'  1  Sa.  xvii.  37 ;  and  says  Paul. 
'  We  had  the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves,  that  we  should 
not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  iu  God  which  raiseth  the  dead.' 
2  Co.  i.  9.— (Mason.) 

2  It  is  a  carious  picture  which  Bunyan  has  drawn  of  the 
intercourse  between  the  giant  and  his  wife  Diffidence.  They 
form  a  very  loving  couple  in  their  way ;  and  the  giant  takes 
no  new  step  in  the  treatment  of  the  pilgrims  without  consult- 
ing Mrs.  Diffidence  over  night,  so  that  the  curtain  lectnrcs  to 
which  we  listen  are  very  curious.  But  Mrs.  Diffidence  ought 
rather  to  have  been  called  Dame  Desperation,  or  Desperate 
Resolution;  for  she  seems,  if  anything,  the  more  stubborn 
genius  of  the  two. — (Cheever.)  By  these  conversations  be- 
tween Diffidence  and  Despair,  after  they  had  retired  to  bed, 
Bunyan  perhaps  designed  to  intimate  that,  as  melancholy  per- 
sons seldom  get  rest  at  night,  the  gloominess  of  the  season 
contributes  to  the  distress  of  their  minds.     So  Asaph  com- 


So  when  the  morning  was  come,  the  Giaut  goes 
to  them  again,  and  takes  them  into  the  castle- 
yard,  and  shows  them,  as  his  wife  had  bidden  him. 
These,  said  he,  were  pilgrims  as  you 

. '  .   r  i    •  On  Saturday, 

are,  once,  and  they  trespassed  in  my    the    Giant 
grounds,  as  you  have  done  ;  and  when     ftKtoto 
I  thought  fit,  I  tore  them  in  pieces,     «'oult\  Puil 

°     .      .  t      mi  j  them  in  pieces. 

and  so,  within  ten  days,  1  will  do  you. 
Go,  'get  you  down  to  your  den  again  ;  and  with 
that,  he  beat  them  all  the  way  thither.  They  lay, 
therefore,  all  day  on  Saturday  in  a  lamentable 
case,  as  before.3  Now,  when  night  was  come,  and 
when  Mrs.  Diffidence  and  her  husband,  the  Giant, 
were  got  to  bed,  they  began  to  renew  their  dis- 
course of  their  prisoners  ;  and  withal  the  old  Giaut 
wondered,  that  he  could  neither  by  his  blows  nor 
his  counsel  bring  them  to  an  end.  And  with  that 
his  wife  replied,  I  fear,  said  she,  that  they  live  in 
hope  that  some  will  come  to  relieve  them,  or  that 
they  have  picklocks  about  them,  by  the  means  of 
which  they  hope  to  escape.  And  sayest  thou  so, 
my  dear  ?  said  the  Giant ;  I  will,  therefore,  search 
them  in  the  morning. 

Well,  on  Saturday,  about  midnight,  they  began 
to  pray,  and  continued  in  prayer  till  almost  break 
of  day.4 

Now,  a  little  before  it  was  day,  good  Christian, 
as  one  half-amazed,  brake  out  in  this  passionate 
speech:   What  a  fool,  quoth  he,  am 

T     -i         ±     -\-      •  .•    ^  •         j  A  key  in  Chris* 

1,  thus  to  lie  in  a  stinking  dungeon,  turn's    bosom, 

when  I  may  as  well  walk  at  liberty  !  JjKSStS 

I  have  a  key  in  my  bosom,  called  Pro-  ^  Doubting 

•ii    t  Castle. 
mise,  that  will,  1  am  persuaded,  open 

any  lock  iu  Doubting  Castle.  Then  said  Hopeful, 
That  is  good  news,  good  brother ;  pluck  it  out  of 
thy  bosom,  and  try.0 


plains:  'My  sore  ran  in  the  night,  and  ceased  not:  my  soul 
refused  to  be  comforted.'  Ps.  Ixxvii.  2. — (Ivimey.) 

3  How  would  the  awful  lesson  of  the  man  iu  the  iron  cage, 
at  the  Interpreter's  house,  now  recur  to  poor  Christian's  mind: 
'  I  cannot  get  out,  O  now  I  cannot !  I  left  off  to  watch,  and 
am  shut  up  in  this  iron  cage,  nor  can  all  the  men  in  the  world 
let  me  out.'  Christian's  answer  to  the  despairing  pilgrim  now 
soon  broke  upon  his  memory:  '  The  Son  of  the  Blessed  is  very 
pitiful.'— (Ed.) 

i  What!  Pray  in  the  custody  of  Giant  Despair,  in  the 
midst  of  Doubting  Castle,  and  when  their  own  lolly  brought 
them  there  too  ?  Yes ;  mind  this,  ye  pilgrims,  ye  are  exhorted, 
'  I  will  that  men  pray  everywhere,  without  doubting.'  1  Ti. 
ii.  8.  "We  can  be  in  no  place  but  God  can  hear,  nor  in  any 
circumstance  but  God  is  able  to  deliver  us  from.  And  be 
assured,  that  when  the  spirit  of  prayer  comes,  deliverance  is 
nigh  at  hand. — (Mason.)  Perhaps  the  author  selected  Satur- 
day at  midnight  for  the  precise  time  when  the  prisoners  begaa 
to  pray,  in  order  to  intimate  that  the  preparation  for  the  Lord's 
day,  which  serious  persons  are  reminded  to  make  for  its  sacred 
services,  are  often  the  happy  means  of  recovering  those  that 
have  fallen  into  sin  and  despondency. — (Scott.) 

6  All  at  once,  by  a  new  revelation,  which  none  but  the  Sa- 
viour could  make,  Christian  finds  the  promises.  Cin'ist  had 
been  watching  over  his  erring  disciples — he  kept  back  the 
hand  of  Despair  from  destroying  them — he  binds  up  the 
broken  heart,  and  healcth  all  their  woimds. — (Cheever.)     As 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


113 


Then  Christian  pulled  it  out  of  his  bosom,  ami 
began  to  try  at  the  dungeon  door,  whose  holt  (as 
he  turned  the  key)  gave  back,  and  the  door  flew 
open  with  ease,  and  Christian  and  Hopeful  both 
came  out.  Then  he  went  to  the  outward  door  that 
leads  into  the  castle-yard,  and, with  his  key,  opened 
that  door  also.  After,  he  went  to  the  iron  gate, 
for  that  must  he  opened  too;  but  that  look  went 
damnable  hard,1  yet  the  key  did  open  it.  Then 
they  thrust  open  the  gate  to  make  their  escape 
with  speed,  but  that  gate,  as  it  openeil,  made  such 
a  creaking,  that  it  waked  C.iiant  Despair,  who, 
hastily  rising  to  pursue  his  prisoners,  felt  his  limbs 
to  fail,  for  his  fits  took  him  again,  so  that  he  could 
by  no  means  go  after  them.-  Then  they  went  on, 
and  came  to  the  King's  highway,  and  so  were  safe, 
because  they  were  out  of  his  jurisdiction^ 

Now,  when  they  were  gone  over  the  stile,  they 
began  to  contrive  with  themselves  what  they  should 
do  a1  that  stile,  to  prevent  tho.se  that  should  come 
after,  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  Giant  Despair.4 


:   rs  all  the  intricate  wards  of  a  lock,  and  throws  back  ! 
its  bolts,  so  the  precious  promises  of  God  iu  his  Word,  if 
turned  by  the.  strong  hand  of  faith,  will  open  all  the  doors 
which  unbelief  and  despair  have  shut  upon  us. — (Burder.) 

1  Bunyan  was  a  plain-spoken  man,  and  feared  not  to  offend 
delicate  ears  when  truth  required  honest  dealing.  In  his  trea- 
tise on  the  Law  and  Grace,  he  says :  '  And  therefore,  my 
brethren,  seeing  God,  our  lather,  hath  sent  us,  damnable  trai- 
tors, a  pardon  from  heaven,  even  all  the  promises  of  the  gospel, 
and  hath  also  sealed  to  the  certainty  of  it  with  the  heart-blood 
of  his  dear  Son,  let  us  not  be  daunted. — (Vol.  i.  p.  562.) 

-  Precious  promise !  The  promises  of  God  in  Christ  arc 
the  life  of  faith,  and  the  quickeners  of  prayer.  O  how  oft  do 
we  neglect  God's  great  and  precious  promises  in  Christ  Jesus, 
while  doubts  and  despair  keep  us  prisoners !  So  it  was  with 
these  pilgrims;  they  were  kept  under  hard  bondage  of  soul  for 
four  days.  Hence  see  what  it  is  to  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God; 
for  he  only  is  the  Comforter:  and  if  he  withdraws  his  influ- 
ences, who  or  what  can  comfort  us?  Though  precious  pro- 
mises are  revealed  iu  the  Word,  yet  we  can  get  no  comfort 
from  them  but  by  the  grace  of  the  Spirit. — (Mason. J 

8  It  was  Sabbath  morning.  The  sun  was  breaking  over 
the  hills,  and  fell  upon  their  pale,  haggard  countenances,  l! 
was  to  them  a  new  creation;  they  breathed  (lie  fresh,  reviving 
air,  and  brushed,  with  hasty  steps,  the  dew  from  the  untrodden 
grass,  and  fled  the  nearest  way  to  the  stile,  over  which  they 
had  wandered.  They  bad  harried  a  lesson  by  suffering,  which 
nothing  else  could  have  taught  them,  and  which  would  remain 
with  them  to  the  day  of  their  death.— (Cheever.)  The  expe- 
rience of  these  '  three  or  four'  dreadful  days  is  specially  re- 
corded in  Grace  Abounding,  Kos.  2G1-2G3.  The  key  which 
opened  the  doors  in  Doubting  Castle  was  these  words,  applied 
with  power  to  his  soul,  '  I  must  go  to  Jesus,'  in  connection 
with  He.  xii.  22-21.  Of  the  first  night  of  his  deliverance  he 
says,  '  I  could  scarcely  lie  in  my  bed  for  joy  and  peace,  and 
triumph  through  Christ.' — (Ed.) 

1  They  fell  to  devising  what  soldiers,  and  how  ninny,  Diabolus 
should  go  against  Mansoul  with,  to  take  it  ;  and  afl 
debate,  it  was  concluded  that  n  ■  1  hat  expe- 

than  an  army  of  terrible  doi  I 
concluded  to  send  against  Mansoul  an  army  of  sturdj 
Diabolus  was  to  beat  up  his  i 

ten  iu  the  Land  of  Doubt  id  lieth  upon  the 

-  of  a  place  called  Hell-gate  Hill.     I 
over  the  election  doubters ;  his  ;  his  stand- 

ard-bearer was  Mr.  Destructive ;    and  the  great  red  dragon 
he  had  for  his  scutcheon.    Captain  Fury  v.  as  over  the  vocation 


So  they  consented  to  erect  there  a  pillar,  and  t-> 
engrave   upon  the   side  thereof   this    .... 

°  *  ......  A  pulax  erected 

sentence — '  Over  this  stile  is  the  way  by  l ; 
to  Doubting  Castle,  which  is  kept  by 
Giant  Despair,  who  despiseth  the  King  of  the 
Celestial  Country,  and  seeks  to  destroy  his  holy 
pilgrims.'  Many,  therefore,  that  followed  after, 
read  what  was  written,  and  escaped  the  danger. 
This  done,  they  sang  as  follows: — 

Out  of  the  way  we  went,  and  then  we  found 

"What  'twas  to  tread  upon  forbidden  grouud; 

And  let  them  that  come  after  have  a  care, 

Lest  heedlessness  makes  them,  as  wc,  to  fare. 

Lest  they  for  trespassing  his  prisoners  are, 

"Whose  castle  's  Doubting,  and  whose  name  's  Despair. 

They  went  then  till  they  came  to  the  Delect- 
able Mountains,  which  mountains  be-  Hie  DelectaWe 
long  to  the  Lord  of  that  hill  of  which  Mountains. 
we  have  spoken  before ;  so  they  went  up  to  the 
mountains,  to  behold  the  gardens  and  orchard.-, 
the  vineyards  and  fountains  of  water ;  where  also 
they  drank  and  washed  themselves,  They  are  refreshed 
and  did  freely  cat  of  the  vineyards.6  m  *" ' 
Now  there  were  on  the  tops  of  these  mountains, 
shepherds  feeding  their  flocks,  and  they  stood  by 
the  highway  side.  The  Pilgrims  therefore  went 
to  them,  and  leaning  upon  their  staves  (as  is  com- 
mon with  weary  pilgrims,  when  they  stand  to  talk 
with  any  by  the  way),  they  asked,  Talk  with  the 
Whose  Delectable  Mountains  are  Shepherfs. 
these  ?  And  whose  be  the  sheep  that  feed  upon 
them  ? 

Smsr.  These  mountains  are  Immanucl's  Land, 
and  they  are  within  sight  of  his  city ;  and  the 
sheep  also  are  his,  and  he  laid  down  his  life  for 
them.   Ju.  x.  n. 

Cnn.   Is  this  the  way  to  the  Celestial  City  ? 

SnEr.  You  are  just  in  your  way. 

Cnn.   How  far  is  it  thither  ? 

Siiep.  Too  far  for  any  but  those  that  shall  get 
thither  indeed. 

Ciik.   Is  the  way  safe  or  dangerous  ? 

Shep.  Safe  for  those  for  whom  it  is  to  be  safe ; 
'  but  the  transgressors  shall  fall  therein.'0  Ho.xir.9. 

doubters;  his  standard-bearer  was  darkness;  his  colours  were 
|  pale ;  and  his  scutcheon  the  fiery  flying  serpent.    Captain  Dam- 
nation was  over  the  grace  doubters ;  his  were  the  red  eoloirs  ; 
Mr.  No-life  bore  them ;  his  scutcheon  was  the  Black  ] 
1  —  {Holy 

0  When  offending  Christians  are  brought  to  deep 
ancc,  renewed  exercises  of  lively  faith,  and  willing  i  ! 

|  *  restores  to  them  the  joy  of  his  salvation,'  a 
1 1  -  become  more  abundant  and  pertnane 

sent  those  calm 
of  peace  and  comfort.—   : 

0  O  how  man]  row  weary  of  the  way,  fall  short, 

!     Though  thi 

too  strait,  and  too  narrow  for  many  who  set  out,  and  never 

hold  out  to  the  end ;  yet  all  who  are  begotten  by  the  A\  ord  of 

grace,  and  bom  of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  shall  persevere  to  the 


144 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Chr.  Is  there,  in  this  place,  any  relief  for  pil- 
grims that  are  weary  and  faint  in  the  way  ? 

Siiep.  The  Lord  of  these  mountains  hath  given 
us  a  charge  not  to  he  'forgetful  to  entertain 
strangers,'  He.  xffi.  2;  therefore  the  good  of  the  place 
is  before  you. 

I  saw  also  in  my  dream,  that  when  the  Shep- 
herds perceived  that  they  were  wayfaring  men, 
they  also  put  questions  to  them,  to  which  they 
made  answer  as  in  other  places  ;  as,  Whence  came 
you  ?  And,  How  got  you  into  the  way  ?  And, 
By  what  means  have  you  so  persevered  therein  ? 
For  hut  few  of  them  that  begin  to  come  hither,  do 
show  their  face  on  these  mountains.  But  when 
the  Shepherds  heard  their  answers,  being  pleased 
therewith,  they  looked  very  lovingly  upon  them, 
The  shepherds  and  said,  Welcome  to  the  Delectable 
income  them.    Mountains.1 

The  Shepherds,  I  say,  whose  names  were  Know- 
The  names  of  ledge,  Experience,  Watchful,  and  Sin- 

the  Shepherds.    cerGj  took  them  by  the  hand)  anj  had 

them  to  their  tents,  and  made  them  partake  of  that 
which  was  ready  at  present.2  They  said,  more- 
over, We  would  that  ye  should  stay  here  a  while, 
to  be  acquainted  with  us ;  and  yet  more  to  solace 
yourselves  with  the  good  of  these  Delectable 
Mountains.  They  then  told  them  that  they  were 
content  to  stay ;  so  they  went  to  their  rest  that 
night,  because  it  was  very  late. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  in  the  morning 
the  Shepherds  called  up  Christian  and  Hopeful  to 
walk  with  them  upon  the  mountains :  so  they  went 
forth  with  them,  and  walked  a  while,  having  a 
pleasant  prospect  on  every  side.  Then  said  the 
They  are  sure*   Shepherds  one  to   another,  Shall  we 

wonders.  show  these  Pilgrims  some  wonders  ? 
So  when  they  had  concluded  to  do  it,  they  had 
The   Mountain   them  first  to  the  top  of  a  hill  called 

of  Error.  Error,  which  was  very  steep  on  the 
furthest  side,  and  bid  them  look  down  to  the  bot- 


end,  being  kept  by  the  mighty  power  of  God,  through  faith, 
unto  eternal  salvatiou.  1  Pe.  i.  5. — (Mason.) 

1  There  is  in  this  laconic  description  of  the  homely  dreamer 
a  richness  of  beauty  which  no  efforts  of  the  artist' can  ade- 
quately portray;  and  in  the  concise  dialogue  of  the  speakers,  a 
simple  sublimity  of  eloquence  which  any  commentary  could 
only  weaken.  While  our  feelings  are  excited  by  this  descrip- 
tion, we  cannot  but  remember  that  '  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor 
car  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the 
things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him. — 
(Bernard  Barton.) 

2  Precious  names !  "What  is  a  pilgrim  without  knowledge  ? 
What  is  head-knowledge  without  heart-experience  ?  And 
watchfulness  and  sincerity  ought  to  attend  us  every  step. 
When  these  graces  are  in  us  and  abound,  they  make  delectable 
mountains  indeed. — (Mason.) 

3  This  was  Bunyan's  note ;  but,  after  his  decease,  it,  was 
altered  in  1707  to  '  shown  wonders,'  and  so  has  continued  to 
the  present  time.  The  author's  meaning  was,  that  these 
wonders  were  real,  undoubted,  sure.  Prom  the  introduction 
of  this  note  to  the  time  of  Bunyan's  death,  he  continued  the 
word  '  sore.' — (Ed.) 


torn.  So  Christian  and  Hopeful  looked  down,  and 
saw  at  the  bottom  several  men  dashed  all  to  pieces 
by  a  fall  that  they  had  from  the  top.  Then  said 
Christian,  What  meaneth  this  ?  The  Shepherds 
answered,  Have  you  not  heard  of  them  that  were 
made  to  err,  by  hearkening  to  Hymeneus  and 
Philetus,  as  concerning  the  faith  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body  ?  2  Ti.  ii.  17,  is.  They  answered, 
Yes.  Then  said  the  Shepherds,  Those  that  you 
see  lie  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  bottom  of  this 
mountain  are  they ;  and  they  have  continued  to 
this  day  unburied,  as  you  see,  for  an  example  to 
others  to  take  heed  how  they  clamber  too  high,  or 
how  they  come  too  near  the  brink  of  this  moun- 
tain.4 

Then  I  saw  that  they  had  them  to  the  top  of 
another  mountain,  and  the  name  of 
that  is  Caution,  and  bid  them  look 
afar  off ; 5  which,  when  they  did,  they  perceived, 
as  they  thought,  several  men  walking  up  and 
down  among  the  tombs  that  were  there ;  and  they 
perceived  that  the  men  were  blind,  because  they 
stumbled  sometimes  upon  the  tombs,  and  because 
they  could  not  get  out  from  among  them.G  Then 
said  Christian,  What  means  this  ? 

The  Shepherds  then  answered,  Did  you  not  see 
a  little  below  these  mountains  a  stile  that  led  into 
a  meadow,  on  the  left  hand  of  this  way  ?  They 
answered,  Yes.  Then  said  the  Shepherds,  From 
that  stile  there  goes  a  path  that  leads  directly  to 
Doubting  Castle,  which  is  kept  by  Giant  Despair, 
and  these,  pointing  to  them  among  the  tombs, 
came  once  on  pilgrimage  as  you  do  now,  even  till 
they  came  to  that  same  stile ;  and  because  the 
right  way  was  rough  in  that  place,  they  chose  to 
go  out  of  it  into  that  meadow,  and  there  were 
taken  by  Giant  Despair,  and  cast  into  Doubting 
Castle:  where,  after  they  had  been  a  while  kept 
in  the  dungeon,  he  at  last  did  put  out  their  eyes, 
and  led  them  among  those  tombs,  where  he  has 
left  them  to  wander  to  this  very  day,  that  the 
saying  of  the  wise  man  might  be  fulfilled,  '  He 
that  wandereth  out  of  the  way  of  understanding, 
shall  remain  in  the  congregation  of  the  dead.' 

4  Pine-spun  speculations  and  curious  reasonings  lead  men 
from  simple  truth  and  implicit  faith  into  many  dangerous  and 
destructive  errors. — (Mason.) 

s  It  is  well  for  us  to  be  much  on  this  mount.  "We  have 
constant  need  of  caution.  Take  heed  and  beware,  says  our 
Lord.  Paul  takes  the  Corinthians  up  to  this  Mount  Caution, 
and  shows  them  what  awful  things  have  happened  to  professors 
of  old ;  and  he  leaves  this  solemn  word  for  us,  '  Wherefore,  let 
him  that  thinketh  he  staudeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall.'  1  Co. 
x.  12.— (Mason.) 

6  O  the  unthought-of  imaginations,  frights,  fears,  and  ter- 
rors, that  are  effected  by  a  thorough  application  of  guilt,  yield- 
ing to  desperation !  This  is  the  man  that  hath  his  dwelling 
among  the  tombs  with  the  dead,  that  is  always  crying  out,  and 
cutting  himself  with  stones.  Mar.  v.  3.  But  all  in  vain;  de- 
speration will  not  comfort  him,  the  old  covenant  will  not  save 
him. — {Grace  Abounding,  No.  185.) 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


14S 


Pr.  ixi.  lc.1  Then  Christian  and  Hopeful  looked 
upon  one  another,  with  tears  gushing  out,  but  yet 
said  nothing  to  the  Shepherds.2 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  the  Shepherds 
had  them  to  another  place,  in  a  bottom,  where 
was  a  door  in  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  they  opened 
the  door,  and  bid  them  look  in.  They  looked  in, 
therefore,  and  saw  that  within  it  was  very  dark 
and  smoky ;  they  also  thought  that  they  heard 
there  a  rumbling  noise  as  of  fire,  and  a  cry  of  some 
tormented,  and  that  they  smelt  the  scent  of  brim- 
stone. Then  said  Christian,  What  means  this  ? 
A.  by-way  to   The  Shepherds  told  them,  This  is  a  by- 

HelL  wav  £0  ]ie,\]t  a  way  tjiat;  hypocrites  go  in 
at;  namely,  such  as  sell  their  birthright,  with 
Esau;  such  as  sell  their  master,  with  Judas;  such 
as  blaspheme  the  gospel,  with  Alexander;  and 
that  lie  and  dissemble,  with  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
his  wife.3  Then  said  Hopeful  to  the  Shepherds, 
I  perceive  that  these  had  on  them,  even  every  one, 
a  show  of  pilgrimage,  as  we  have  now  ;  had  they 
not? 

Siiep.  Yes,  and  held  it  a  long  time  too. 

Hope.  How  far  might  they  go  on  in  pilgrimage 
in  their  day,  since  they  notwithstanding  were  thus 
miserably  cast  away  ? 

Siiep.  Some  further,  and  some  not  so  far,  as 
these  mountains.* 

Then  said  the  Pilgrims  one  to  another,  We 
had  need  to  cry  to  the  Strong  for  strength. 

Siiep.  Aye,  and  you  will  have  need  to  use  it, 
when  you  have  it,  too. 


1  Some  retain  the  name  of  Christ,  and  the  notion  of  him  as 
a  Saviour ;  but  cast  him  off  in  the  very  things  wherein  the 
essential  parts  of  his  sacrifice,  merits,  and  priesthood  consist. 
In  this  lies  the  mystery  of  their  iniquity.  They  dare  not  alto- 
gether deny  that  Christ  doth  save  his  people,  as  a  Priest ;  but 
then  their  art  is  to  confound  his  offices,  until  they  jostle  out 
of  doors  the  merit  of  his  blood  and  the  perfection  of  his  justi- 
fying righteousness.  Such  draw  away  the  people  from  the 
cross  (put  out  their  eyes),  and  lead  them  among  the  infidels. 
— (Bunyan's  Israel's  Hope,  vol.  i.  p.  615.) 

2  Probably  to  guard  pilgrims  against  the  Popish  doctrine  of 
auricular  confession. — (Ed.) 

3  Those  seem  to  shun  the  common  broad  road ;  but  hav- 
ing only  the  mark  of  religion,  while  their  hearts  are  not  right 
with  God,  are  as  effectually  ruined  as  the  most  profligate  and 
open  offenders. — (Burder.) 

*  Thus  we  read  of  some  who  were  once  enlightened,  and 
had  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of 
the  world  to  come.  He.  vi.  6.  It  is  hard  to  say  how  far  or  how 
long  a  person  may  carry  on  a  profession,  and  yet  fall  away, 
and  come  short  of  the  kingdom  at  last.  This  should  excite 
to  diligence,  humility,  and  circumspection,  ever  looking  to 
Jesus  to  keep  ns  from  falling. — (Mason.) 

*  It  reflects  the  highest  credit  on  the  diffidence  of  Bunyan's 
genius — a  genius  as  rich  in  its  inventions,  and  as  aspiring  in 
its  imaginative  flights,  as  ever  poet  could  possess  or  lay  claim 
to — that,  after  such  an  exordium,  he  should  have  made  no 
effort  minutely  to  describe  what  was  in  its  own  splendour  of 
glory  indescribable.  How  beautifully,  without  exciting  any 
disappointment  in  a  reader  of  taste,  feeling,  and  judgment,  does 
he,  by  a  few  artless  words,  render  most  impressive  and  sublime, 
what"  more  elaborate  description  could  only  have  made  con- 
fused and  unsatisfactory.     Nothing  can  be  more  admirable 

VOL    III. 


By  this  time  the  rilgrims  had  a  desire  to  go 
forward,  and  the  Shepherds  a  desire  they  should; 
so  they  walked  together  towards  the  end  of  tho 
mountains.  Then  said  the  Shepherds  one  to  an- 
other, Let  us  here  show  to  the  Pilgrims  tho  gates 
of  tho  Celestial  City,  if  they  have  The  Shepherds' 
skill  to  look  through  our  perspective  Pcr9Pective  gi"»*- 
glass.5  Tho  Pilgrims  then  lovingly  accepted  tho 
motion;  so  they  had  them  to  tho  top  of  a  high 
hill,  called    Clear,   and   gave    them 

•v   •        i  ~-  x     i      l  The  inu  Clear- 

their  glass  to  look. 

Then  they  essayed  to  look,  but  the  remembrance 
of  that  last  thing  that  tho  Shepherds  had  showed 
them,  made  their  hands  shako ;  by  The  fruits  of 
means  of  which  impediment,  they  servile  fear, 
could  not  look  steadily  through  the  glass;  yet 
they  thought  they  saw  something  like  the  gate, 
and  also  some  of  the  glory  of  the  place.6  Then 
they  went  away,  and  sang  this  song — 

Thus,  by  the  Shepherds,  secrets  are  reveal'd, 
Which  from  all  other  men  are  kept  conceal'd. 
Come  to  the  Shepherds,  then,  if  you  would  sec 
Things  deep,  things  hid,  and  that  mysterious  be.7 

When  they  were  about  to  depart,  one  of  the 
Shepherds  gave  them  a  note  of  the  way.  An- 
other of  them  bid  them  beware  of  the  ^  twofold 
Flatterer.  The  third  bid  them  take  heed  cauti0n- 
that  they  sleep  not  upon  the  Enchanted  Ground. 
And  the  fourth  bid  them  God  speed.  So  I  awoko 
from  my  dream.8 


than  this  brief  and  indistinct  report  of  the  perspective  glass ; 
it  cannot  offend  the  most  fastidious  taste,  yet  leaves  scope  for 
the  exercise  of  the  most  ardent  and  aspiring  imagination. — 
(Bernard  Barton.) 

0  Such  mountains  round  about  this  house  do  stand 
As  one  from  thence  may  see  the  Holy  Land. 

— (Bunyan's  House  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  579.) 

7  After  going  through  the  conflict  with  Apollyon,  the  Val- 
ley of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  the  scenes  in  Vanity  Fair,  and  tho 
dread  experience  of  the  pilgrims  in  Giant  Despair's  Castle,  it 
is  well  to  note  what  a  gallery  of  solemn  eealities  is  here, 
what  a  system  of  Divine  truth,  commending  itself  to  all  men's 
consciences.  It  is  not  so  much  the  richness  of  imagination, 
nor  the  tenderness  of  feeling  here  exhibited,  nor  the  sweetness 
and  beauty  of  the  imagery,  with  which  this  book  is  filled,  as  it 
is  the  presence  of  these  realities  that  constitutes  the  secret 
of  its  unbounded  power  over  the  soul.  Walk  up  and  down  in 
this  rich  and  solemn  gallery.  How  simple  are  its  ornaments  I 
How  grave,  yet  beautiful,  its  architecture!  Amidst  all  this 
deep,  serene  beauty  to  the  imagination,  by  how  much  deeper  a 
tone  do  these  pictures  speak  to  the  inner  spiritual  being  of 
the  sod  1  When  you  have  admired  the  visible  beauty  of 
the  paintings,  turn  again  to  seek  their  meaning  in  that  light 
from  eternity  by  which  the  artist  painted  them,  and  by  which 
he  would  have  all  men  examine  their  lessons,  and  receive  and 
feel  the  full  power  of  their  colouring.  In  this  light,  the  walls 
of  this  gallery  seem  moving  with  celestial  figures  speaking  to 
the  sold.  They  are  acting  the  drama  of  a  life  which,  by  most 
men,  is  only  dreamed  of;  but  the  drama  is  the  reality,  and  it 
is  the  spectators  only  who  are  walking  in  a  vain  show — 
(Cheever.) 

•»  This  is  the  first  break  in  the  dream,  and,  doubtless,  had 
an  important  meaning.  Perhaps  the  pilgrimage  may  be  divided 
into  four  parts :  1.  The  convert  flying  from  the  wrath  to 
come;  instructed  at  the  Interpreter's  house;  relieved  of  bis 


146 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


And  I  slept,  and  dreamed  again,  and  saw  the 
same  two  Pilgrims  going  down  the  mountains  along 
the  highway  towards  the  city.  Now,  a  little  below 
The  Country  of  these  mountains,  on  the  left  hand, 
whLeifca°me0f  lieta  tlie  country  of  Conceit;1  from 
Ignorance.  which  country  there  comes  into  the 
way  in  which  the  Pilgrims  walked,  a  little  crooked 
lane.  Here,  therefore,  they  met  with  a  very  brisk 
lad,  that  came  out  of  that  country ;  and  his  name 
was  Ignorance.  So  Christian  asked  him  from 
what  parts  he  came,  and  whither  he  was  going. 

-,..,.  ,        Ignor.  Sir,  I  was  born  in  the  coun- 

Cnnstian     and  ' 

i^noraucehave   try  that  heth   off  there,   a  little   on 

the  left  hand,  and  I  am  going  to  the 

Celestial  City. 

Chk.  But  how  do  you  think  to  get  in  at  the 
gate  ?  for  you  may  find  some  difficulty  there. 

Ignor.  As  other  good  people  do,  said  he. 

Chr.  But  what  have  you  to  show  at  that  gate, 
that  may  cause  that  the  gate  should  be  opened  to 
you? 

Ignor.  I  know  my  Lord's  will,  and  I  have  been 
_  ,  ,    a  good  liver ;  I  pay  every  man  his  own  ; 

The  ground  of         =>  •  i  ■,      •  i 

ignorance's  1  pray,  last,  pay  tithes,  and  give  alms, 
ope-  and  have  left  my  country  for  whither  I 

am  going.2 

Ciir.  But  thou  earnest  not  in  at  the  wicket-gate 
that  is  at  the  head  of  this  way ;  thou  earnest  in 
hither  through  that  same  crooked  lane,  and  there- 
fore, I  fear,  however  thou  mayest  think  of  thyself, 
when  the  reckoning  day  shall  come,  thou  wilt  have 
laid  to  thy  charge  that  thou  art  a  thief  and  a  robber, 
instead  of  getting  admittance  into  the  city. 

Ignor.  Gentlemen,  ye  be  utter  strangers  to  me, 
I  know  you  not ;  be  content  to  follow  the  religion 


burden  at  the  cross ;  ascends  the  Hill  Difficulty ;  overcomes 
his  timidity ;  and,  2.  Enters  a  church  at  the  House  Beautiful ; 
and,  as  a  private  member,  continues  his  journey,  until,  3.  He 
meets  Evangelist,  near  Vanity  Fair,  and  is  found  fit  to  become 
an  itinerant  preacher ;  in  which  calling  he  suffers  persecution, 
and  obtains  that  fitness  which  enables  him,  4.  On  the  De- 
lectable Mountains,  to  enter  upon  the  responsible  duties  of  a 
ministering  elder  or  pastor  of  a  church,  and  is  ordained  by 
Knowledge,  Experience,  Watchful,  and  Sincere.  Is  this  com- 
mencement of  his  public  labours  the  important  point  when  the 
author  '  awoke  from  his  dream  ? ' — (Ed.) 

1  This  country  we  are  all  born  in ;  all  are  ignoramuses  by 
nature.  Some  live  long  in  the  country  of  Conceit,  and  many 
end  their  days  in  it.  Are  you  come  out  of  it  ?  So  was  Ignor- 
ance ;  but  he  breathed  his  native  air.  So  long  as  a  sinner 
thinks  he  can  do  anything  towards  making  himself  righteous 
before  God,  his  name  is  Ignorance;  he  is" full  of  self-conceit, 
and  destitute  of  the  faith  of  Christ. — (Mason.) 

2  Now,  is  it  not  very  common  to  hear  professors  talk  at 
this  rate  ?  Yes,  and  many  who  make  a  very  high  profession 
too ;  their  hopes  are  plainly  grounded  upon  what  they  are  in 
themselves,  and  how  they  differ  from  their  former  selves  and 
other  sinners,  instead  of  what  Christ  is  to  us  and  what  we  are 
in  Christ.  But  the  profession  of  such  is  begun  with  an  ignor- 
ant, whole,  self-righteous  heart ;  it  is  continued  in  pride,  self- 
seeking,  and  self-exalting,  and  ends  in  awful  disappointment. 
Eor  such  are  called  by  our  Lord  thieves  and  robbers ;  they 
rob  him  of  the  glory  of  his  grace  and  the  gift  of  his  imputed 
righteousness. — (Mason .) 


of  your  country,  and  I  will  follow  the  religion  of 
mine.  I  hope  all  will  be  well.  And  He  gaith  to 
as  for  the  gate  that  you  talk  of,  all  the  every  one  that 
world  knows  that  that  is  a  great  way 
off  of  our  country.  I  cannot  think  that  any  man  in 
all  our  parts  doth  so  much  as  know  the  way  to  it, 
nor  need  they  matter  whether  they  do  or  no,  since 
we  have,  as  you  see,  a  fine  pleasant  green  lane, 
that  comes  down  from  our  country,  the  next  way 
into  the  way. 

When  Christian  saw  that  the  man  was  '  wise  in 
his  own  conceit, '  he  said  to  Hopeful,  whisperingly, 
'  Tliere  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him.'  Pr.  xxvi.  12. 
And  said,  moreover,  •  When  he  that  is  a  fool  walketh 
by  the  way,  his  wisdom  faileth  him,  and  he  saith 
to  every  one  tliat  he  is  a  fool. '  Ec.  x.  3.  What,  shall 
we  talk  further  with  him,  or  out-go  How  to  carry  it 
him  at  present,  and  so  leave  him  to  toafoo1' 
think  of  what  he  hath  heard  already,  and  then  stop 
again  for  him  afterwards,  and  see  if  by  degrees  we 
can  do  any  good  to  him  ?     Then  said  Hopeful — 

Let  Ignorance  a  little  while  now  muse 
On  what  is  said,  and  let  him  not  refuse 
Good  counsel  to  embrace,  lest  he  remain 
Still  ignorant  of  what's  the  chiefest  gain. 
God  saith,  those  that  no  understanding  have, 
Although  he  made  them,  them  he  will  not  save. 

Hope.  He  further  added,  It  is  not  good,  I  think, 
to  say  all  to  him  at  once ;  let  us  pass  him  by,  if 
you  will,  and  talk  to  him  anon,  even  as  he  is  able 
to  bear  it.3 

So  they  both  went  on,  and  Ignorance  he  came 
after.  Now  when  they  had  passed  him  a  little 
way,  they  entered  into  a  very  dark  lane,  where 
they  met  a  man  whom  seven  devils  had  bound  with 
seven  strong  cords,  and  were  carrying  of  him  back 
to  the  door  that  they  saw  on  the  side  of  the  hill.4 
Mat.  xii.  45.  Pr.  v.  22.  Now  good  Christian  began  to 
tremble,  and  so  did  Hopefid  his  companion ;  yet 
as  the  devils  led  away  the  man,  Christian  looked 
to  see  if  he  knew  him  ;  and  he  thought  _    ,  .  .  .. 

'  o         The  destruction 

it  might  be  one  Turn-away,  that  dwelt     of  one  Turu- 
in  the  town  of  Apostasy.     But  he  did 
not  perfectly  see  his  face,  for  he  did  hang  his  head 
like  a  thief  that  is  found.5     But  being  once  past, 


8  It  is  best  not  to  converse  much  at  once  with  persons  of 
this  character,  but,  after  a  few  warnings,  to  leave  them  to  their 
reflections ;  for  their  self-conceit  is  often  cherished  by  alter- 
cations, in  which  they  deem  themselves  very  expert,  however 
disgusting  their  discourse  may  prove  to  others. — (Scott.) 

4  An  awful  scene  was  beheld  by  the  pilgrims.  A  professor, 
named  Turn- away,  bound  with  seven  cords,  was  led  by  devils 
to  the  by-way  to  hell.  Let  every  one  inquire,  Who  is  this 
wanton  professor? — He  who  discovers  a  trifling,  worldly, 
wanton  spirit,  dreads  not  the  appearance  of  evil,  complies  with 
the  fashions  of  the  carnal  world,  and  associates  with  the 
enemies  of  our  Lord ;  and,  in  time,  becomes  a  damnable  apos- 
tate. Lord,  keep  us  from  such  a  beginning  and  such  an  end  1 
— (Burder.) 

6  The  '  very  dark  lane'  in  which  '  Turn-away'  was  met  by 
the  pilgrims,  represents  the  total  darkness  of  the  minds  of 


THE   riLG KIM'S   PROGRESS. 


M7 


Hopeful  looked  after  him,  and  espied  on  his  hack 
a  paper  with  this  inscription,  '  Wanton  professor, 
and  damnable  apostate.'1  Then  said  Christian  to 
his  fellow,  Now  I  call  to  remcinhrance,  that  which 
was  told  me  of  a  thing  that  happened  to  a  good 
Chriatiantallet])  man  hereabout.  The  name  of  the  man 
!r  <s«'"',,ri°o"  was  Little-faith,  hut  a  good  man,  and 
Little-faith.  ]1C  dwelt  in  the  town  of  Sincere.  The 
thing  was  this:  At  the  entering  in  at  this  passage, 

_     ,  .     there   comes    down    from    Broad-way 

Hroart-wav  gate.  ,  •;, 

Gate,  a  lane  called  Dead  Man  s  Lane;- 

l'c.iil  Man's  lane.  ,,     ,  ,  <•    .  i  1  , 1      i 

so  called  hecause  of  the  murders  that 
are  commonly  done  there;  and  this  Little-faith 
going  on  pilgrimage,  as  we  do  now,  chanced  to  sit 
down  there,  and  slept.  Now  there  happened,  at 
that  time,  to  come  down  the  lane  from  Broad-way 
Gate,  three  sturdy  rogues,  and  their  names  were 
Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt  (three  hrothcrs), 
and  they  espying  Little-faith,  where  he  was,  came 
galloping  up  with  speed.  Now  the  good  man  was 
just  awake  from  his  sleep,  and  was  getting  up  to 
go  on  his  journey.  So  they  came  up  all  to  him, 
and  with  threatening  language  bid  him  stand.  At 
this,  Little-faith  looked  as  white  as  a  clout,  and 
Litde-faith  had  neitlier  Powcr  t0  fight  nor  fly. 
robbed  by  Then  said  Faint-heart,  Deliver  thy 
Mistrust, «nd  purse.  But  he  making  no  haste  to  do 
Guilt.  jt  ^or  jl(J  wag  loath  to  lose  his  money), 

Mistrust  ran  up  to  him,  and  thrusting  his  hand 
into  his  pocket,  pulled  out  thence  a  bag  of  silver. 
They  got  away  Then  he  cried  out,  Thieves !  Thieves ! 
knocked"'  kiln"  "With  that,  Guilt,  with  a  great  club 
down-  that  was  in  his  hand,  struck  Little- 

faith  on  the  head,  and  with  that  blow  felled  him 
flat  to  the  ground ;  where  he  lay  bleeding  as  one 


that  would  bleed  to  death.3  All  this  while  the 
thieves  stood  by.  But,  at  last,  they  hearing  that 
sonic  were  upon  the  road,  and  fearing  lest  it  should 
bo  one  Great-grace,  that  dwells  in  the  city  of  Good- 
confidence,  they  betook  themselves  to  their  heels, 
and  left  this  good  man  to  shift  for  himself.  Now, 
after  a  while,  Little-faith  came  to  himself,  and 
getting  up,  made  shift  to  scrabble  on  his  way.4 
This  was  the  story. 

IIoi'E.  But  did  they  take  from  him  all  that  ever 
he  had  ? 

Ciir.   No;  the  place  where  his  jewels  were  they 
never  ransacked,  so  those  he  kept  still.    Liul(..f.,l(h  , Mt 
But,  as  I  was  told,  the  good  man  was     not    hfe    beet 
much   afflicted   for  his   loss,   for  the 
thieves  got  most  of  his  spending-moncy.      That 
which  they  got  not  (as  I  said)  were  jewels/'  also 
he  had  a  little  odd  money  left,  but  scarce  enough 
to  bring  him  to  his  journey's  end,  i  re.  iv.  18;  nay,  if 
I  was  not  misinformed,  he  was  forced    Little-faith 
to  beg  as  he  went,  to  keep  himself    tohUjonrneyl 
alive  ;  for  his  jewels  he  might  not  sell.     CI,d- 
But  beg,  and  do  what  he  could,  he  went  (as  we 
say)  with  many  a  hungry  belly  the  most  part  of 
the  rest  of  the  way.6 

Hope.  But  is  it  not  a  wonder  they  got  not  from 
him  his  certificate,  by  which  he  was  to  receive  his 
admittance  at  the  Celestial  Gate  ? 

Chr.    It  is  a  wonder;  but  they  got  not  that, 

though  they  missed  it  not  through  any    He  kept  not  his 

,°  :  »   ,  .         t       i         i     •  best  things  i.v 

good  cunning  of   his;    tor  he,    being     his  own  nm. 

dismayed  with  their  coming  upon  him,  mas-  ~ Tl  '  ' l- 
had  neither  power  nor  skill  to  hide  anything ;  so  it 
was  more  by  good  Providence  than  by  his  endeav- 
our, that  they  missed  of  that  good  thing.7 


such  wicked  professors ;  for  '  if  the  light  that  is  in  them  be 
darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness ! '  "When  their  charac- 
ters are  made  manifest,  they  are  ashamed  to  look  their  former 
pious  friends  in  the  face.  '  The  wicked  shall  be  holden  with 
the  cords  of  his  sins.'  Pr.  v.  22. — (Ivimey.) 

1  O  beware  of  a  light  trifling  spirit  and  a  wanton  behaviour. 
It  is  often  the  forerunner  of  apostasy  from  God.  It  makes 
one  tremble  to  hear  those  who  profess  to  follow  Christ  in  the 
regeneration,  crying,  What  harm  is  therein  this  game  and  the 
other  diversion  ?  The  warmth  of  love  is  gone,  and  they  are 
become  cold,  dead,  and  carnaL  O  how  many  instances  of 
these  abound! — (Mason.) 

2  In  times  of  persecution,  loose  professors  are  driven  down 
Dead  Man's  Lane  to  Broad- way  Gate ;  thus  Satan  murders 
the  souls  of  men,  by  threatening  to  kill  their  bodies.  Believers 
that  are  weak  in  faith  are  betrayed  into  sinful  compliances; 
they  sleep  when  they  ought  to  watch,  they  conceal  or  deuy 
their  profession,  and  thus  contract  guilt ;  Faint-heart  assaults 
them,  Mistrust  plunders  them,  and  Guilt  beats  them  down. — 
(Scott.) 

3  The  fly  in  the  spider's  net  is  the  emblem  of  the  soul  in 
such  a  condition.  If  the  soul  struggleth,  Satan  labonrelh  to 
hold  it  down.  If  it  make  a  noise,  he  bites  it  with  blasphem- 
ous mouth  ;  insomuch  that  it  must  needs  die  at  last  in  the  net, 
if  the  Lord  Jesus  help  not  Believing  is  sure  sweating  work. 
Only  strong  faith  can  make  Satan  flee.  O  the  toil  of  a  gra- 
cious heart  in  this  combat,  if  faith  be  weak  I  The  man  can 
get  no  higher  than  his  knees,  till  an  arm  from  heaven  help  him 
up. — (Bunyan's  Holy  City.) 


4  When  Bunyan  was  imprisoned,  his  sentence  was — To  be 
transported,  if  he  did  not  conform  in  three  months  ;  and  then, 
if  found  as  a  Nonconformist,  in  this  country,  he  should  be 
hung.  Determined  at  all  hazards  not  to  be  a  traitor  to  his 
God,  he  anticipated  being  hung ;  and  was  anxious,  in  such  a 
cause,  to  meet  death  with  firmness.  When  his  fears  prevailed, 
he  dreaded  lest  he  should  make  but  a  scrabbling  shift  to 
clamber  up  the  ladder. —  (See  Grace  Abounding,  No.  33k) 

5  Where  there  is  a  faint  heart  in  God's  cause,  and  mistrn-t 
of  God's  truths,  there  will  be  guilt  in  the  conscience,  and  but 
little  faith.  These  rogues  will  prevail  over,  and  rob  such  souls 
of  the  comforts  of  God's  love  and  of  Christ's  salvation.  By 
his  jewels,  we  may  understand  those  radical  graces  of  the  Spirit 
— faith,  hope,  and  love.  By  his  spending-money,  the  sealing 
and  earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  his  heart.  2  Co.  i.  22.  Of  tin's 
Divine  assurance,  and  the  sense  of  the  peace  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  he  was  rob%ed ;  so  that,  though  he  still  went  on 
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  yet  he  dragged  on  but  heavily  and 
uncomfortably. — (Mason.) 

6  Bunyan  throws  great  light  upon  this  subject  in  his  Christ 
a  Complete  Saviour,  vol.  i.  p.^la:— '  We  are  saved  by  Christ  j 
brought  to  glorv  by  Christ  ■   and  all  our  works  arc   D 

wise  made  acceptable  to  God,  but  by  the  person  aud  excellen- 
cies of  Christ.  Therefore,  whatever  the  jewels  are,  and  the 
bracelets  and  the  pearls  that  thou  shall  be  adorned  mth,  aa  a 
reward  of  service  done  to  God  in  this  world,  for  them  thou 
must  thauk  Christ,  and,  before  all,  confess  that  he  was  Hie 
1  meritorious  cause  thereof.'  , 

7  What  was  this  good  thing?     His  precious  faith,  whose 


143 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Hope.  But  it  must  needs  be  a  comfort  to  him, 
that  they  got  not  this  jewel  from  him.1 

Chr.  It  might  have  been. great  comfort  to  him, 
had  he  used  it  as  he  should ;  but  they  that  told 
me  the  story  said,  that  he  made  but  little  use  of  it 
all  the  rest  of  the  way,  and  that  because  of  the 
dismay  that  he  had  in  the  taking  away  his  money ; 
indeed,  he  forgot  it  a  great  part  of  the  rest  of  his 
journey ;  and  besides,  when  at  any  time  it  came 
into  his  mind,  and  he  began  to  be  comforted  there- 
with, then  would  fresh  thoughts  of  his  loss  come 
again  upon  him,  and  those  thoughts  would  swallow 
up  all.   1  Pe.  L  9. 

He  is  pitiea  by        Hope.  Alas !  poor  man.    This  could 
Loth-         not  but  be  a  great  grief  to  him. 

Chr.  Grief!  aye,  a  grief  indeed.  Would  it  not 
have  been  so  to  any  of  us,  had  we  been  used  as 
he,  to  be  robbed,  and  wounded  too,  and  that  in  a 
strange  place,  as  he  was  ?  It  is  a  wonder  he  did 
not  die  with  grief,  poor  heart !  I  was  told  that  he 
scattered  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  way  with  nothing 
but  doleful  and  bitter  complaints ;  telling  also  to 
all  that  overtook  him,  or  that  he  overtook  in  the 
way  as  he  went,  where  he  was  robbed,  and  how ; 
who  they  were  that  did  it,  and  what  he  lost ;  how 
he  was  wounded,  and  that  he  hardly  escaped  with 
his  life.2 

Hope.  But  it  is  a  wonder  that  his  necessity  did 
not  put  him  upon  selling  or  pawning  some  of  his 
jewels,3  that  he  might  have  wherewith  to  relieve 
himself  in  his  journey. 

Chr.  Thou  talkest  like  one  upon  whose  head  is 
the  shell  to  this  very  day;  for  what  should  he 
Christian  snub-  pawn  them,  or  to  whom  should  he 
forhnnadv"s°ed  sell  them  ?  In  all  that  country  where 
speaking.  }ie  was  robbed,  his  jewels  were  not 

accounted  of;  nor  did  he  want  that  relief  which 
could  from  thence  be  administered  to  him.  Besides, 
had  his  jewels  been  missing  at  the  gate  of  the 
Celestial  City,  he  had  (and  that  he  knew  well 
enough)  been  excluded  from  an  inheritance  there ; 
and  that  would  have  been  worse  to  him  than  the 
appearance  and  villany  of  ten  thousand  thieves. 

Hope.  Why  art  thou  so  tart,  my  brother?  Esau 
sold  his  birthright,  and  that  for  a  mess  of  pot- 


author,  finisher,  and  object  is  precious  Jesus.  And  where  he 
gives  this  precious  gift  of  faith,  though  it  be  but  little,  even  as 
a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  not  all  the  powers  of  earth  and  hell 
can  rob  the  heart  of  it.  Christ  prayed  for  his  disciple  that  his 
faith  should  not  fail,  or  be  totally  lost ;  therefore,  though  Peter 
lost  his  comforts  for  a  season,  yet  not  his  faith  totally^  not  his 
soul  eternally ;  for,  says  Jesus,  of  all  his  dear  flock,  yea,  of 
those  of  little  faith  too,  None  shall  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand. 
There  is  one  blessed  security,  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  our  Lord. 
— (Mason.) 

1  Hope,  love,  humility,  meekness,  patience,  longsuffering, 
compassion,  and  mercy,  are  gracious  dispositions  wrought  in 
the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  These  are  the  believer's  jewels ; 
and  it  is  his  duty  to  keep  them  clean,  that  their  beauty  and 
lustre  may  be  apparent. — (Andronicus.) 

2  Little-faith  cannot  come  all  the  way  without  crying.     So 


tage,  and  that  birthright  was  his  greatest  jewel ; 
and  if  he,  why  might  not  Little-faith  do  so  too? 

He.  xii.  16. 

Chr.  Esau  did  sell  his  birthright  indeed,  and  so 
do  many  besides,  and  by  so  doing  ex-  ,  ,. 
elude  themselves  from  the  chief  bless-  aboutEsauand 
ing,  as  also  that  caitiff  did ;  but  you 
must  put  a  difference  betwixt  Esau  and  Little-faith, 
and  also  betwixt  their  estates.  Esau's  birthright 
was  typical,  but  Little -faith's  jewels  were  not  so; 
Esau's  belly  was  his  god,  but  Little-  Esau  was  ruled 
faith's  belly  was  not  so  ;  Esau's  want  ^y  his  lusts. 
lay  in  his  fleshly  appetite,  Little-faith's  did  not  so. 
Besides,  Esau  could  see  no  further  than  to  the  ful- 
filling of  his  lusts ;  •  Behold  I  am  at  the  point  to 
die  (said  he),  and  what  profit  shall  this  birthright 
do  me  ? '  Ge.  xxv.  32.  But  Little-faith,  though  it  was 
his  lot  to  have  but  a  little  faith,  was  by  his  little 
faith  kept  from  such  extravagances,  and  made  to 
see  and  prize  his  jewels  more  than  to  sell  them,  as 
Esau  did  his  birthright.  You  read  not  anywhere 
that  Esau  had  faith,  no,  not  so  much  Esau  never  had 
as  a  little;   therefore  no  marvel  if,  faitlu 

where  the  flesh  only  bears  sway  (as  it  will  in  that 
man  where  no  faith  is  to  resist),  if  he  sells  his 
birthright,  and  his  soul  and  all,  and  that  to  the 
devil  of  hell ;  for  it  is  with  such,  as  it  is  with  the 
ass,  who  in  her  occasions  cannot  be  turned  away. 
Je.  iL  24.  When  their  minds  are  set  upon  their  lusts, 
they  will  have  them  whatever  they  cost.  But 
Little-faith  was  of  another  temper,  his  mind  was 
on  things  divine;  his  livelihood  was  Little-faith 
upon  things  that  were  spiritual,  and  u°o'n  Esau's 
from  above ;  therefore,  to  what  end  Pottase- 
should  he  that  is  of  such  a  temper  sell  his  jewels 
(had  there  been  any  that  would  have  bought  them) 
to  fill  his  mind  with  empty  things?  Will  a  man 
give  a  penny  to  fill  his  belly  with  hay ;  or  can  you 
persuade  the  turtle-dove  to  live  upon  a  comparison 
carrion  like  the  crow?  Though  faith-  l^uee.Tove the 
less  ones  can,  for  carnal  lusts,  pawn,  ^d  the  crow- 
or  mortgage,  or  sell  what  they  have,  and  themselves 
outright  to  boot ;  yet  they  that  have  faith,  saving 
faith,  though  but  a  little  of  it,  cannot  do  so.  Here, 
therefore,  my  brother,  is  thy  mistake. 


long  as  its  holy  boldness  lasts,  so  long  it  can  come  with  peace, 
but  it  will  go  the  rest  of  the  way  with  crying. — (Bunyan's 
Come  and  Welcome,  vol.  i.  p.  288.) 

3  Banyan  showrs  the  difference  between  'his  spending-money,' 
or  that  treasure  which  the  Christian  carries  in  his  earthen  ves- 
sel, and  his  jewels,  in  Grace  Abounding,  No.  232  : — '  It  was 
glorious  to  me  to  see  his  [Christ's]  exaltation.  Now  I  could  look 
from  myself  to  him,  and  should  reckon  that  all  those  graces  of 
God  that  now  were  green  in  me,  were  yet  but  like  those  cracked 
groats  and  fourpence-halfpennies,1  that  rich  men  carry  in  their 
purses,  when  their  gold  is  in  their  trunks  at  home.  Oh !  1 
saw  that  my  gold  was  in  my  trunk  at  home,  in  Christ  my  Lord 
and  Saviour.  Now,  Christ  was  all;  all  my  wisdom,  all  my 
righteousness,  all  my  sanctification,  and  all  my  redemption.5 

1  Irish  sixpences,  which,  in  the  dearth  of  silver  coin  in  England,  were 
made  current  at  iourpence-halipenny. — (Ed.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


149 


HorE.  I  acknowledge  It ;  but  yet  your  severe 
reflection  had  almost  made  mo  angry.1 

Cim.  Why,  I  did  but  compare  thee  to  some  of 
the  birds  that  are  of  the  brisker  sort,  who  will 
run  to  and  fro  in  untrodden  paths,  with  the  shell 
upon  their  heads;  hut  pass  by  that,  and  consider 
the  matter  tinder  debate,  and  all  shall  be  well 
betwixt  thee  and  me. 

IIorE.  But,  Christian,  these  three  fellows,  I  am 
persuaded  in  my  heart,  are  but  a  company  of 
cowards;-'  would  they  have  run  else,  think  you,  as 
they  did,  at  the  noise  of  ono  that  was  coming  on 
Bopefa]  nrag-  the  road  ?  Why  did  not  Little-faith 
t'crs-  pluck  up  a  greater  heart  ?     lie  might, 

methinks,  have  stood  one  brush  with  them,  and 
have  yielded  when  there  had  been  no  remedy. 

Cnii.  That  they  are  cowards,  many  have  said, 
No  mat  heart  but  few  have  found  it  so  in  the  time 
!'iKTo",lisWlbut  of  trial.  As  for  a  great  heart,  Little- 
little  faith.  faitli  had  none  ;  and  I  perceive  by  thee, 
my  brother,  hadst  thou  been  the  man  concerned, 
thou  art  but  for  a  brush,  and  then  to  yield.  And, 
...    ,  verily,  since  this  is  the  height  of  thy 

W  c  have   more  J '  -  j« • 

courage  when    stomach,  now  they  are  at  a  distance 

out,  than  when     n  1        1  i     .  i  ±t 

iu  [the  con-  from  us,  should  they  appear  to  thee 
ihct^  as  they  did  to  him,  they  might  put 

thee  to  second  thoughts. 

But,  consider  again,  they  are  but  journeymen 
thieves,  they  serve  under  the  king  of  the  bottom- 
less pit,  who,  if  need  be,  will  come  in  to  their  aid 
himself,  and  his  voice  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion. 
Christian  tells  Ts.  vii.  2.  i  Pe.  v.  8.  I  myself  have  been 
rience  in  inis  engaged  as  this  Little-faith  was,  and 
case-  I  found  it  a  terrible   thing.      These 

three  villains  set  upon  me,  and  I  beginning,  like  a 
Christian,  to  resist,  they  gave  but  a  call,  and  in 
came  their  master.  1  would,  as  the  saying  is, 
have  given  my  life  for  a  penny  ;  but  that,  as  God 
would  have  it,  I  was  clothed  with  armour  of  proof. 
Aye,  and  yet,  though  I  was  so  harnessed,  1  found 
it  hard  work  to  quit  myself  like  a  man.  No  man 
can  tell  what  in  that  combat  attends  us,  but  he 
that  hath  been  in  the  battle  himself.3 


1  Hopeful  was  not  the  first  pilgrim  who  has  been  '  almost 
made  angry  '  while  holding  a  friendly  debate  upon  that  highly- 
important  subject,  the  doctrine  of  the  saints'  final  perseverance. 
Pilgrims  ought  to  debate  upon  those  subjects  without  being 
angry.— (K 1 1.) 

J  Hopeful  here  expresses  himself  as  if  he  had  read  Banyan 
on  Christ's  Love: — '  But  to  fear  man  is  to  forget  God.  He 
taketh  part  with  them  that  fear  him;  so  that  we  may  boldly 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  helper,  and  I  will  nut  liar  what  man  shall 
do  unto  me."  He.  siii.  6.  Would  it  not  be  amazing  to  see  a 
man  eucompas>ed  with  chariots,  and  hones,  and  weapons  of 
defence,  yet  afraid  of  being  sparrow-blasted,  or  overrun  by  a 
grasshopper?' — (VoL  ii.  p.  13.; 

3  Who  can  stand  iu  the  evil  day  of  temptation,  when  beset 
with  Faiut-hcart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt,  backed  by  the  power  of 
t heir  master,  Satan?  No  one,  unless  armed  with  the  whole 
armour  of  God;  and  even  then,  the  power  of  such  infernal 
foes  makes  it  a  hard  light  to  the  Christian.     Hut  this  is  our 


Hope.  Well,  but  they  ran,  you  see,  when  they  did 
but  suppose  that  one  Great-grace  was  in  the  way.4 
Chr.  True,  they  have  often  fled,  both  they  and 
their  master,  when  Great-grace  hath  but  appeared; 
and  no  marvel ;  for  he  is  the  King's  xi,c  Kj„„.g 
Champion.  But,  I  trow,5  you  will  Champion. 
put  some  difference  betwixt  Little-faith  and  tho 
King's  Champion.  All  the  King's  subjects  are 
not  his  champions,  nor  can  they,  when  tried,  do 
such  feats  of  war  as  he.  Is  it  meet  to  think  that 
a  little  child  should  handle  Goliah  as  David  did  ? 
Or  that  there  should  be  the  strength  of  an  ox  iu 
a  wren  ?  Some  are  strong,  some  arc  weak ;  somo 
have  great  faith,  some  have  little.  This  man  was 
one  of  the  weak,  and  therefore  he  went  to  the  wall. 
Hope.  I  would  it  had  been  Great-grace  for  their 
sakes. 

Cim.  If  it  had  been,  he  might  have  had  his 
hands  full ;  for  I  must  tell  you,  that  though  Great- 
grace  is  excellent  good  at  his  weapons,  and  has, 
and  can,  so  long  as  he  keeps  them  at  sword's  point, 
do  well  enough  with  them  ;  yet,  if  they  get  within 
him,  even  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  or  the  other,  it  shall 
go  hard  but  they  will  throw  up  his  heels.  And  when 
a  man  is  down,  you  know,  what  can  he  do  ? 

Whoso  looks  well  upon  Great-grace's  face,  shall 
see  those  scars  and  cuts  there,  that  shall  easily 
give  demonstration  of  what  I  say.  Yea,  once 
1  heard  that  he  should  say  (and  that  when  he 
was  in  the  combat),  '  We  despaired  even  of  life.'6 
How  did  these  sturdy  rogues  and  their  fellows  make 
David  groan,  mourn,  and  roar  ?  Yea,  Heman  and 
Hezekiah,  too,  though  champions  in  their  day, 
were  forced  to  bestir  them,  when  by  these  assault- 
ed; and  yet,  notwithstanding,  they  had  their  coats 
soundly  brushed  by  them.  Peter,  upon  a  time, 
would  go  try  what  he  could  do ;  but  though  some 
do  say  of  him  that  he  is  the  prince  of  the  apostles, 
they  handled  him  so,  that  they  made  him  at  last 
afraid  of  a  sorry  girl. 

Besides,  their  king  is  at  their  whistle.  He  is 
never  out  of  hearing ;  and  if  at  any  time  they  bo 
put  to  the  worst,  he,  if  possible,  comes  iu  to  help 


glory,  the  Lord  shall  fight  for  us,  and  we  shall  hold  our  peace. 
We  shall  be  silent  as  to  ascribing  any  glory  to  ourselves,  know- 
ing our  very  enemies  are  part  of  ourselves,  and  that  we  are 
more  than  conquerors  over  all  these  (only)  through  Him  who 
loved  us.  Ro.  viii.  37. — (Mason.) 

4  'One  Great-grace;'  a  believer,  or  minister,  who  having 
honourably  stood  his  ground,  endeavours  to  restore  the  fallen. 
The  remembrance  of  such,  helps  to  drive  away  despondency,  and 
inspires  the  trembling  penitent  with  hope  of  mercy. —  (Scott.) 

*  '  I  trow;'  I  imagine  or  believe  :  nearly  obsolete. 

6  Now  here  you  see  what  is  meant  by  Great-grace,  who  is 
so  often  mentioned  iu  this  book,  and  by  whom  so  many  valiant 
things  were  done.  We  read,  '  With  great  power  the  apostles 
gave  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.'  Vt  hy  was  it  r  Be- 
cause '  great  grace  was  upon  them  all.'  Ac.  iv.  33.  So  you  see 
all  is  of  grace,  from  first  to  last,  in  salvation.  H  we  do  great 
things  Ear  Christ,  yet,  not  unto  us,  but  uuto  the  great  grace  oi 
oiu-  Lord,  be  all  the  glory.— (Mason.) 


150 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


them ;  and  of  him  it  is  said,  '  The  sword  of  him 
Leviathan's  that  layeth  at  him  cannot  hold ;  the 
sturdiness.  Spear)  the  jart>  nor  the  habergeon :  he 
«steemeth  iron  as  straw,  and  brass  as  rotten  wood. 
The  arrow  cannot  make  him  flee ;  sling  stones  are 
turned  with  him  into  stubble.  Darts  are  counted 
as  stubble :  he  laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear.' 
Job  xii.  26-29.  What  can  a  man  do  in  this  case  ?  It 
is  true,  if  a  man  could,  at  every  turn,  have  Job's 
horse,  and  had  skill  and  courage  to  ride  him,  he 
might  do  notable  things  ;  '  for  his  neck  is  clothed 
„u  „    .   with  thunder,  he  will  not  be  afraid  of 

The     excellent  '  „    .  . 

mettle  that  is  the  grasshopper  ;  the  glory  ot  his 
in  Job's  horse.  nostrils  zs  terrible ;  he  paweth  in  the 
valley,  and  rejoiceth  in  his  strength,  he  goeth  on 
to  meet  the  armed  men.  He  mocketh  at  fear,  and 
is  not  affrighted,  neither  turneth  he  back  from  the 
sword.  The  quiver  rattleth  against  him,  the  glit- 
tering spear,  and  the  shield.  He  swalloweth  the 
ground  with  fierceness  and  rage,  neither  believeth 
he  that  it  is  the  sound  of  the  trumpet.  He  saith 
among  the  trumpets,  Ha,  ha !  and  he  smelleth  the 
battle  afar  off,  the  thunder  of  the  captains,  and 

the  shouting. '  Job  xxxix.  19—25. 

But  for  such  footmen  as  thee  and  I  are,  let  us 
never  desire  to  meet  with  an  enemy,  nor  vaunt  as 
if  we  could  do  better,  when  we  hear  of  others 
that  they  have  been  foiled,  nor  be  tickled  at  the 
thoughts  of  our  own  manhood;  for  such  commonly 
come  by  the  worst  when  tried.1  Witness  Peter, 
of  whom  I  made  mention  before.  He  would  swag- 
ger, aye,  he  would ;  he  would,  as  his  vain  mind 
prompted  him  to  say,  do  better,  and  stand  more 
for  his  Master  than  all  men ;  but  who  so  foiled, 
and  run  down  by  these  villains,  as  he  ?  2 

WThen,  therefore,  we  hear  that  such  robberies 
are  done  on  the  King's  highway,  two  things  become 
us  to  do:  1.  To  go  out  harnessed,  and  to  be  sure 
to  take  a  shield  Avith  us ;  for  it  was  for  want  of 
that,  that  he  that  laid  so  lustily  at  Leviathan  could 
not  make  him  yield ;  for,  indeed,  if  that  be  want- 


1  If  we  saw  our  own  weakness,  we  should  never  court 
dangers,  nor  rim  iu  the  way  of  temptation ;  yet,  if  our  tempta- 
tions be  ever  so  sharp  and  strong,  and  our  dangers  ever  so 
great,  if  the  Lord  is  our  strength,  we  need  not  fear. — (J.  B.) 

2  From  this  sweet  and  edifying  conversation,  learn  not  to 
think  more  highly  of  yourself  than  you  ought  to  think ;  but  to 
think  soberly,  according  to  the  measure  of  faith  which  God 
hath  dealt  to  you.  Ro.  xii.  3.  Now,  it  is  of  the  very  essence 
of  faith  to  lead  us  out  of  all  self-confidence  and  vain  vaunting. 
For  we  know  not  how  soon  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt 
may  spring  up  in  us,  and  rob  us  of  our  comforts,  and  spoil  our 
joys. — (Mason.) 

a  Instead  of  saying,  '  Though  all  men  deny  thee,  yet  will 
not  I,'  it  behoves  us  to  use  all  means  of  grace  diligently,  and 
to  he  instant  in  prayer,  that  the  Lord  himself  may  protect  us 
by  his  power,  and  animate  us  by  his  presence,  and  then  only 
shall  we  be  enabled  to  overcome  both  the  fear  of  man  and  the 
temptations  of  the  devil. —  (Scott.) 

4  But  how  contrary  to  this  is  the  walk  and  conduct  of  some 
who  profess  to  be  pilgrims,  and  yet  can  wilfully  and  deliberately 
go  upon  the  devil's  ground,  and  indulge  themselves  in  carnal 


ing,  he  fears  us  not  at  all.  Therefore,  he  that  had 
skill  hath  said,  '  Above  all,  taking  the  shield  of 
faith,  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all  the 
fiery  darts  of  the  wicked. '  Ep.  vi.  16. 

2.  It  is  good,  also,  that  we  desire  of  the  King 
a  convoy,3  yea,  that  he  will  go  with  n  is  g00a  to 
us  himself.  This  made  David  rejoice  Uave  a  couv°y- 
when  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death ;  and 
M'oses  was  rather  for  dying  where  he  stood,  than 
to  go  one  step  without  his  God.  Ex.  xxxm.  15.  0  my 
brother,  if  he  will  but  go  along  with  us,  what  need 
we  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands  that  shall  set  them- 
selves against  us  ?  Ps.  m.  5-8;  xxvii.  1-3.  But,  with- 
out him,  the  proud  helpers  '  fall  under  the  slain.' 

Is.  x.  4. 

I,  for  my  part,  have  been  in  the  fray  before 
now;  and  though,  through  the  goodness  of  him 
that  is  best,  I  am,  as  you  see,  alive ;  yet  I  cannot 
boast  of  my  manhood.     Glad  shall  I  be,  if  I  meet 
with  no  more  such  brunts ;  though,  I  fear,  we  are 
not  got  beyond  all  danger.4     However,  since  the 
lion  and  the  bear  have  not  as  yet  devoured  me,  I 
hope  God  will  also  deliver  us  from  the  next  uncir- 
cumcised  Philistine.     Then  sang  Christian — 
Poor  Little-faith  1    Hast  been  among  the  thieves  ? 
Wast  rohb'd  ?     Remember  this,  whoso  believes, 
And  gets  more  faith,  shall  then  a  victor  be 
Over  ten  thousand,  else  scarce  over  three. 

So  they  went  on,  and  Ignorance  followed.     They 
went  then  till  they  came  at  a  place  where  they 
saw  a  way  put  itself  into  their  way,   Away,  and  a 
and  seemed  withal  to  lie  as  straight         way- 
as  the  way  which  they  should  go ;  and  here  they 
knew  not  which  of  the  two  to  take,  for  both  seemed 
straight  before  them ;  therefore,  here  they  stood 
still  to  consider.     And  as  they  were    The  flatterer 
thinking  about  the  way,  behold  a  man,     ***» tUem- 
black  of  flesh,  but  covered  with  a  very  light  robe, 
came  to   them,  and  asked  them  why  they  stood 
there.5     They  answered,  they  were  going  to  the 

pleasures  and  sinful  diversions !  Such  evidently  declare  in 
plain  language,  that  they  desire  not  the  presence  of  God,  but 
that  he  should  depart  from  them ;  but  a  day  will  come  which 
will  bring  on  terrible  reflections  of  mind  for  such  things. — 
(Mason.) 

6  Mr.  Ivimey's  opinion  is,  that  this  '  way  which  put  itself 
into  their  way,'  and  the  flatterer,  relates  to  Antinomianism. 
Of  this  I  can  form  no  accurate  judgment,  never  having  met  with 
an  Autiuomian,  or  one  who  professed  to  be  against  the  law  of 
God.  I  have  metwith  those  who  consider  that  believers  are  bound 
to  prefer  the  law  of  God  as  revealed  by  Jesus  Christ,  in  Mat. 
xxii.  37-40,  to  be  their  rule  of  life,  instead  of  limiting  them- 
selves to  the  law  of  God  as  given  by  Moses,  in  Ex.  xx.;  but  it 
has  been  for  this  reason,  that  the  law  proclaimed  by  Christ 
unites  in  it  the  law  given  by  Moses,  and  all  the  law  and  the 
prophets.  This  law,  as  given  by  Christ,  is  in  a  few  words  of 
beautiful  simplicity,  which  can  neither  be  misunderstood  nor  be 
forgotten.  Mason  says, '  It  is  plain  the  author  means  the  way  of 
self-righteousness,'  into  wliich  the  flatterer  enticed  the  pilgrims, 
out  of  the  Scripture  highway  to  heaven,  in  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.  When  ministers  ditfer,  private  Christians  must  think  for 
themselves.    My  judgment  goes  with  Mr.  Mason.— (Ed.)   This 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


151 


Celestial  City,  but  knew  not  which  of  these  ways 
to  take.     Follow  me,  said  the  man,  it  is  thither 

Christian      and    tlmt    1    am    S°'WS-       So    thcy  Allowed 

ins  fellow  do-  him  in  the  way  that  but  now  came  in- 
to the  road,  which  by  degrees  turned, 
and  turned  them  so  from  the  city  that  they  desired 
to  go  to,  that,  in  little  time,  their  faces  were  turned 
away  from  it ;  yet  they  followed  him.  But  by  and 
by,  before  thcy  were  aware,  he  led  them  both 
They  arc  taken  within  the  compass  of  a  net,  in  which 
m  a  net.  ti)ey  wore  ^oi^  so  cntangled,  that  they 
knew  not  what  to  do ;  and  with  thai  the  white 
robe  fell  off  the  black  man's  back.  Then  they 
saw  where  they  were.  Wherefore,  there  they  lay 
crying  some  time,  for  they  could  not  get  them- 
selves out.1 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  his  fellow,  Now  do 
Tiiey  bewail  I  see  myself  in  an  error.  Did  not  the 
their  condition.  Shepherds  bid  us  beware  of  the  flatter- 
ers ?  As  is  the  saying  of  the  wise  man,  so  we 
have  found  it  this  day,  'A  man  that  flattereth 
his  neighbour,  spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet.'  rr. 

xxix.  5. 

Hope.  They  also  gave  us  a  note  of  directions 
about  the  way,  for  our  more  sure  finding  thereof; 
but  therein  we  have  also  forgotten  to  read,  and 
have  not  kept  ourselves  from  the  paths  of  the  de- 
stroyer. Here  David  was  wiser  than  we;  for, 
saith  he,  •  Concerning  the  works  of  men,  by  the 
word  of  thy  lips,  I  have  kept  me  from  the  paths 
of  the  destroyer.'  Ps.  xv».  4.  Thus  they  lay  bewail- 
ing themselves  in  the  net.  At  last  they  espied 
A  shining  one    a  Shining  One  coming  towards  them, 

wiXawiupCui    with  a  whip  of  small  cord  in  his  hand. 

his  hand.  When  he  was  come  to  the  place  where 

they  were,  he  asked  them  whence  they  came,  and 
what  they  did  there.  They  told  him  that  they 
were  poor  pilgrims  going  to  Zion,  but  were  led  out 
of  their  way  by  a  black  man,  clothed  in  white,  who 
bid  us,  said  they,  follow  him,  for  he  was  going 
thither  too.  Then  said  he  with  the  whip,  It  is 
Flatterer,  a  false  apostle,  that  hath  transformed 
himself  into  an  angel  of  light.  Pr.  xxix.  5.  Da.  xi.  32. 
2  Co.  xL  13, 14.     So  he  rent  the  net,  and  let  the  men 

way,  which  seemed  as  straight  as  the  right  way,  and  in  enter- 
ing on  which  there  was  no  stile  to  be  passed,  must  denote  some 
very  plausible  and  gradual  deviation  from  the  simplicity  of  the 
gospel,  in  doctrine  or  practice.  If,  in  such  a  case,  instead  of  a 
personal  prayerful  searching  the  Scripture,  we  rely  upon  the 
opinion  of  our  friends,  and  listen  to  the  flatterer,  we  shall 
certainly  be  misled. — (Scott.) 

1  Luther  was  wont  to  caution  against  the  white  devil  as 
much  as  the  black  one;  for  Satan  transforms  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light,  and  his  ministers  as  ministers  of  righteousness. 
2  Co.  xi.  14, 15.  And  how  do  they  deceive  souls?  By  flattery. 
Leading  poor  sinners  into  a  line  notion  of  some  righteous 
character  they  have  in  themselves,  what  great  advances  they 
hare  made,  ami  what  high  attainments  they  have  arrived  to, 
even  to  be  perfect  in  themselves,  to  be  free  from  sin,  and  full 
of  nothing  but  love.  These  are  black  meu  clothed  iu  white. 
— (Mason.) 


out.     Then   said  ho  to  them,  Follow  me,  that  I 
may  set  you  in  your  way  again.      So  he  led  them 
back  to  the  way  which  they  had  left  to  follow  the 
Flatterer.    Then  he  asked  them,  saying,  Whore  did 
you  lie  the  last  night  ?     They  said,    They  an  at- 
With  the  Shepherds,  upon  the  Delect-     Kta3 
able  Mountains.     He  asked  them  then,     i'or-.iiuh„  -,. 
if  they  had  not  of  those  Shepherds  a  note  of  direc- 
tion for  the  way.      They  answered,  Yes.     But  did 
you,  said  he,  when  you  were  at  a  stand,  pluck  out 
and  read  your  note?     They  answered,  No.      lie 
asked  them,  Why  ?     They  said,  they  forgot.     Ho 
asked,   moreover,    if  the   Shepherds   did   not  bid 
them  beware  of  the  Flatterer.     They   Deceivers  fine 
answered,  Yes,  but  we  did  not  imagine,       W*"* 
said  thcy,  that  this  fine-spokeu  man  had  been  be.8 
Ro.  xvi.  18. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  he  commanded 
them  to  lie  down  ;  which,  when  they   ™.  , . 

did,  he  chastised  them  sore,  to  teach  a»J  seat  aa 
them  the  good  way  wherein  they  should 
walk,  De.  xxv.  2;  and  as  he  chastised  them,  he  said, 
'  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten ;  be 
zealous,  therefore,  and  repent.'  Re.  hi.  19.  2  Ch.  >i. 26, 27. 
This  done,  he  bid  them  go  on  their  way,  and  take 
good  heed  to  the  other  directions  of  the  Shepherds.. 
So  they  thanked  him  for  all  his  kindness,  and  went 
softly  along  the  right  way,  singing — 

Come  hither,  you  that  walk  along  the  way ; 
See  how  the  pilgrims  fare  that  go  astray ! 
They  catched  are  in  an  entangling  net, 
'Cause  they  good  counsel  lightly  did  forget: 
'Tis  true,  they  rescued  were,  but  yet  you  see, 
They're  scourg'd  to  boot.    Let  this  your  caution  be. 

Now,  after  a  while,  they  perceived,  afar  off,  one 
coming  softly  and  alone,  all  along  the  highway  to 
meet  them.  Then  said  Christian  to  his  fellow, 
Yonder  is  a  man  with  his  back  toward  Zion,  and 
he  is  coming  to  meet  us. 

Hope.  I  see  him,  let  us  take  heed  to  ourselves 
now,  lest  he  should  prove  a  flatterer  also.      So  he 
drew  nearer  and  nearer,  and  at  last     The  Atheist 
came  up  unto  them.      His  name  was    meets  lhKm- 


2  By  this  shining  one  understand  the  loving  Lord  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  leader  and  guide  of  Christ's  people.  'When  they 
err  and  stray  from  Jesus  the  way,  and  are  drawn  from  hini  as 
the  truth,  the  Spirit  comes  with  his  rod  of  conviction  and  chas- 
tisement, to  whip  souls  for  their  self-righteous  pride  and  folly, 
back  to  Christ,  to  trust  wholly  in  him,  to  rely  only  on  him, 
and  to  walk  in  sweet  fellowship  with  him.  So  he  acted  by  the 
Galatian  church,  which  was  flattered  into  a  notion  of  sell- 
righteousness,  and  sclf-justihcation.  So  David,  whin  he  found 
himself  nearly  lost,  cries  out,  '  He  restoreth  my  soul :  he 
leadeth  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for  his  name's  sake.' 
Ps.  xxiii.  3.— (Mason.)  The  devil,  in  his  attempts  after  our 
destruction,  maketh  use  of  the  most  suitable  means.  The  ser- 
pent, Adam  knew,  was  subtle,  therefore  Satan  aseth  him,  there- 
by to  catch  this  goodly  creature,  man.  Hereby  the  devil  least 
appeared  [this  fine-spoken  man],  and  least  appearing,  the 
temptation  soonest  took  the  tinder.  —  (liunyau  ou  GenOU, 
vol.  ii.  p.  l-S.j 


152 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Atheist,  and  he  aslted  them  whither  they  were 
going. 

Chr.  We  are  going  to  the  Mount  Zion. 
He  laughs  at        Then  Atheist  fell  into  a  very  great 
them-        laughter. 

Chr.  What  is  the  meaning  of  your  laughter  ? 

Atheist,   I  laugh  to  see  what  ignorant  persons 
you  are,  to  take  upon  you  so  tedious  a  journey, 
and  yet  are  like  to  have  nothing  but  your  travel 
for  your  pains. 
They  reason  to-        Chr.  Why,  man,  do  you  think  we 

gether-         shall  not  he  received? 

Atheist.  Received!  There  is  no  such  place  as 
you  dream  of  in  all  this  world.1 

Chr.  But  there  is  in  the  world  to  come. 

Atheist.  When  I  was  at  home  in  mine  own 
country,  I  heard  as  you  now  affirm,  and  from  that 
hearing  went  out  to  see,  and  have  been  seeking 
this  city  this  twenty  years ;  but  find  no  more  of  it 
than  I  did  the  first  day  I  set  out.  Je.  xxii.  12.  Ec.  x.  15. 

Chr.  We  have  both  heard  and  believe  that  there 
is  such  a  place  to  be  found. 

Atheist.  Had  not  I,  when  at  home,  believed,  I 
had  not  come  thus  far  to  seek ;  but  finding  none 
(and  yet  I  should,  had  there  been  such  a  place  to 
The  Atheist  be  found,  for  I  have  gone  to  seek  it 
contents  this  further  than  you),  I  am  going  back 
world.  again,  and  will  seek  to  refresh  myself 

with  the  things  that  I  then  cast  away,  for  hopes 
of  that  which,  I  now  see,  is  not.2 
ciuistianproveth       Ciir.  Then  said  Christian  to  Hopeful 

his  brother.      hig    M()^  jg    jj   ^  ^^  ^  ^ 

hath  said  ? 

Hope.  Take  heed,  he  is  one  of  the  flatterers ; 
Hopeful's  gra-  remember  what  it  hath  cost  us  once 
cious  answer.  already  for  our  hearkening  to  such 
kind  of  fellows.     What !  no  Mount  Zion  ?     Did  we 


1  The  backsliding  of  a  Christian  comes  through  the  overmuch 
persuading  of  Satan  and  lust ;  that  the  man  was  mistaken,  and 
that  there  was  no  such  horror  in  the  things  from  which  he 
fled ;  nor  so  much  good  in  the  things  to  which  he  hasted. 
Turn  again,  fool,  says  the  devil.  I  wonder  what  frenzy  it  was 
that  drove  thee  to  thy  heels,  and  that  made  thee  leave  so  much 
good  behind  thee  as  other  men  find  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 
and  the  good  of  the  world.  As  for  the  law,  and  death,  and 
the  day  of  judgment,  they  are  but  mere  scarecrows,  set  up  by 
politic  heads,  to  keep  the  ignorant  in  subjection.  Well,  he 
goes  back,  fool  as  he  is,  conscience  sleeps,  and  flesh  is  sweet ; 
but,  behold,  he  again  sees  his  own  nakedness— he  sees  the  law 
whetting  his  axe— the  world  is  a  bubble.  He  also  smells  the 
brimstone  which  begins  to  burn  within  him.  Oh  1  saith  he,  I 
am  deluded!  'Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  GoAl'—{CAmt  a 
Complete  Saviour,  vol.  i.  p.  223.) 

2  A  wicked  man,  though  he  may  hector  it  at  times  with  his 
proud  heart,  as  though  he  feared  neither  God  nor  hell ;  yet 
again,  at  times,  his  soul  is  even  drowned  with  terrors.  If  one 
knew  the  wicked,  when  they  are  under  warm  convictions,  then 
the  bed  shakes  on  which  they  lie ;  then  the  proud  tongue  doth 
falter  in  their  mouth,  and  their  knees  knock  one  against 
another.  Then  their  conscience  stares,  and  roars,  and  tears, 
and  arraigns  them.  O !  none  can  imagine  what  fearful  plights 
a  wicked  man  is  in  at  times  1— (Buuyan's  Desires  of '  the 
Righteous,  vol.  i.  p.  746.) 


not  see,  from  the  Delectable  Mountains,  the  gate  of 

the  city  ? 3      Also,  are    we  not   now  to    A  remembrance 

walk  by  faith?     Let  us  go  on,  said     ££££?£; 
Hopeful,  lest  the  man  with  the  whip     helP     against 

,  .      .  r      present  tenipt- 

overtake  us  again.    2  Co.  v.  7.  ations. 

You  should  have  taught  me  that  lesson,  which 
I  will  round5  you  in  the  ears  withal:  'Cease,  my 
son,  to  hear  the  instruction  tJiat  causeth  to  err  from 
the  words  of  knowledge.'  Pr.  xix.  27.  I  say,  my 
brother,  cease  to  hear  him,  and  let  us  '  believe  to 
the  saving  of  the  soul. '  He.  x.  39. 

Chr.  My  brother,  I  did  not  put  the  question  to 
thee,  for  that  I  doubted  of  the  truth  of  our  belief 
myself,  but  to  prove  thee,  and  to  fetch  from  thee 
a  fruit  of  the  honesty  of  thy  heart,  a  fruit  of  an 
As  for  this  man,  I  know  that  he  is  honest  heart- 
blinded  by  the  god  of  this  world.  Let  thee  and  I 
go  on,  knowing  that  we  have  belief  of  the  truth, 
'  and  no  lie  is  of  the  truth.'  1  Jn.  ii.  21. 

Hope.  Now  do  I  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God.  So  they  turned  away  from  the  man  ;  and  he, 
laughing  at  them,  went  his  way. 

I  saw  then  in  my  dream,  that  they  went  till  they 
came  into  a  certain  country,  whose  air  ^  are  come 
naturally  tended  to  make  one  drowsy,     totheEnchanfr 

.*  1      .  .    .      ..  .     j      ed  Ground. 

if  he  came  a  stranger  into  it.     And 

here  Hopeful  began  to  be  very  dull   Hopeful  begins 

and  heavy  of  sleep ;  wherefore  he  said 

unto  Christian,  I  do  now  begin  to  grow  so  drowsy 

that  I  can  scarcely  hold  up  mine  eyes ;  let  us  lie 

down  here,  and  take  one  nap.6 

Chr.  By  no  means,  said  the  other ;  christian  keeps 
lest,  sleeping,  we  never  awake  more.        him  awake- 

Hope.  Why,  my  brother?  Sleep  is  sweet  to 
the  labouring  man ;  we  may  be  refreshed  if  we  take 
a  nap.7 


3  On  the  Delectable  Mountains,  the  pilgrims  had  a  sight  of 
the  Celestial  City.  No  matter  if  it  was  but  a  glimpse  j  still  they 
saw  it,  they  really  saw  it,  and  the  remembrance  of  that  sight 
never  left  them.  There  it  was  in  glory  !  Their  hands  trem- 
bled, their  eyes  were  dim  with  tears,  but  still  that  vision  was 
not  to  be  mistaken.  There,  through  the  rifted  clouds,  for  a 
moment,  the  gates  of  pearl  were  shining,  the  jasper  walls,  the 
endless  domes,  the  jewelled  battlements!  The  splendour  of 
the  city  seemed  to  pour,  like  a  river  of  light,  down  upon  the 
spot  where  they  were  standing. — (Cheever.) 

*  See  how  we  are  surrounded  with  different  enemies !  No. 
sooner  have  they  escaped  the  self-righteous  flatterer,  but  they 
meet  with  the  openly  profane  and  licentious  mocker — aye,  and 
he  set  out,  and  went  far  too ;  yea,  further  than  they.  But, 
behold,  he  has  turned  his  back  upon  all ;  and  though  he  hadi 
been  twenty  years  a  seeker,  yet  now  he  proves,  that  he  haa 
neither  faith  nor  hope,  but  ridicules  all  as  delusion.  Awful  to 
think  of !  O  what  a  special  mercy  to  be  kept  believing  and 
persevering,  and  not  regarding  the  ridicule  of  apostates ! — ■ 
(Mason.) 

6  '  To  round ;'  to  be  open,  sincere,  candid.  '  Maister  Bland 
answered  flatly  and  roundly.' — (Pox's  Book  of  31  arty rs.) 

6  Upon  the  declaration  for  liberty  of  conscience,  the  church 
for  a  season  was  free  from  persecution.  It  was  like  enchanted 
ground;  and  some,  who  had  been  watchful  in  the  storm, 
became  careless  and  sleepy  in  this  short  deceitful  calm. — (Ed.) 

7  Ah,  these  short  naps  for  pilgrims !     The  sleep  of  death. 


THE   IMLC RIM'S    PROGRESS. 


1-  o 


Cur.  T>o  you  not  remember  that  one  of  the 
Shepherds  bid  ua  beware  of  theEnehanted  Ground  0 
lie  meant  by  that,  that  we  should  beware  of  sleep- 
ing; 'Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others,  but 
let  us  watch  and  be  sober.'2  1  Th.  v.  c. 

Hope.  I  acknowledge  myself  in  a  fault ;  and 

i     .  bad  I  been  here  alone,  1  had  by  sleep- 

He  is  thankful.     .  ,       .  .  ,       .      ,  \         \ 

ing  run  the  danger oi  death.  1  see  it 
is  true  that  the  wise  man  saith,  'Two  are  better 
than  one.'  Hitherto  hath  thy  company  been  my 
mercy,  and  thou  shalt  have  a  good  reward  for  thy 
labour.   Be,  h.  9. 

To  prevent  CllR.    Now  then,  said   Christian,  to 

they  f!"i  to        prevent  drowsiness  in  this  place,  let 
gotf  discourse.    us  fall  foto  good  discourse. 

iranne         HOPE.   With  all  niv  heart,  said  the 

}>r>  veHts  dru«-  J 

*iness.  other. 

Cnu.   Where  shall  we  begin  ? 
Hope.   Where  God  began  with  us.     But  do  you 
begin,  if  you  please. 

Chb.   I  will  sing  you  first  this  song: — 

When   saints  Jo   sleepy  grow,    let  them  come 

hither, 

„       K7"  And  hear  how  these  two  pilgrims  talk  together : 

The  Pi  earners     ■..■,,,,         ,  ri, 

Uule.  Yea,  let  tliem  learu  of  them,  in  any  wise, 

Thus  to  keep  ope  their  drowsy  slumb'ring  eyes. 

Saints'  fellowship,  if  it  he  manag'd  well, 

Keeps  them  awake,  and  that  in  spite  of  hell. 

CllR.  Then  Christian  began,  and  said,  I  will  ask 
Tiiey  begin  at  you  a  question.  How  came  you  to 
of e  thc^coi^   think  at  first  of  so  doing  as  you  do 

W5WMM.  nOW? 

Hope.  Do  you  mean,  bow  came  I  at  first  to  look 
after  the  good  of  my  soul  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  that  is  my  meaning. 

Hope.  I  continued  a  great  while  in  the  delight 
of  those  things  which  were  seen  and  sold  at  our 
fair;  things  which,  I  believe  now,  would  have,  had 
I  continued  in  them  still,  drowned  me  in  perdition 
and  destruction. 

Chr.  What  things  were  they  ? 

Hope.  All  the  treasures  and  riches  of  the  world. 
Also  I  delighted  much  in  rioting,  revelling,  drink- 
in  the  enchanted  air  of  this  world,  usually  begins  with  one  of 
these  short  naps. — (Cheever.) 

1  The  Enchanted  Ground  may  represent  worldly  pi  ■ 
agreeable  dispensations  succeeding  long-continued  difficulties. 
This  powerfully  tends  to  produce  a  Lethargic  frame  of  mind : 
i he  man  attends  to  religious  duties  more  from  habit,  than  from 
delight  in  the  service  of  God.  No  situation  requires  so  much 
watchfulness.  Other  experiences  resemble  storms,  which  keep 
a  man  awake ;  this  is  a  treacherous  calm,  which  lulls  him  to 
sleep. — (Scott.) 

2  O  Christian,  beware  of  sleeping  on  this  enchanted  ground  ! 
When  all  things  go  easy,  smooth,  and  well,  we  are  prone  to 
grow  drowsy  in  soul.  How  many  are  the  calls  in  the  Word 
aLraiii^t  spiritual  slumber !  and  yet  how  many  professors, 
through  the  enchanting  air  of  this  world,  are  fallen  into  the 
deep  sleep  of  formality!  Ik  warned  by  them  to  cry  to  thy 
Lord  to  keep  thee  awake  to  righteousness,  and  vigorous  in  the 
ways  of  thy  Lord. —  (Mason.) 

VOL.   III. 


ing,  swearing,  lying,  uneleanness,  Sahhuth-hrcak- 

inff.    and    what    not,    that    tended    to    ,,     ,  ,,  , . 
i  i  i       i.       t  p        i        .  Hopeful's  1  h 

destroy  the  soul.     Lnit  1  found  at  last,     befcw   eon- 

by  bearing  and  considering  of  tilings 

that  are  Divine,  which  indeed  1  heard  of  you,  as 

also  of  beloved  Faithful,  that  was  put  to  death  for 

his  faith  and  good  living  in  Vanity  Pair,  that  'the 

end  of  these  tilings  is  death.'  Bo.  vi.  21-28.  And  that 
for  these  things'  sake,  '  cometh  the  wrath  of  God 
upon  the  children  of  disobedience.'  Ep.  v.  ft 

Chr.  And  did  you  presently  fall  under  the  power 
of  this  conviction  ? 

Hope.  No,  I  was  not  willing  presently  to  know 
the  evil  of  sin,  nor  the  damnation  that  RopefoJ  at  Hist 
follows  upon  the  commission  of  it ;  but  aeainat  the3"" 
endeavoured,  when  my  mind  at  first  h^hl- 
began  to  be  shaken  with  the  Word,  to  shut  mine 
eyes  against  the  light  thereof. 
•  Chr.  But  what  was  the  cause  of  your  carrying 
of  it  thus  to  the  first  workings  of  God's  blessed 
Spirit  upon  you  ? 

Hope.  The  causes  were,  1.  I  was  ignorant  that 
this  was  the  work  of  God  upon  me.  I  Rcasons  of  hig 
never  thought  that  by  awakenings  for  lasting  of  the 
sin,  God  at  first  begins  the  conver- 
sion of  a  sinner.  2.  Sin  was  yet  very  sweet  to 
my  flesh,  and  I  was  loath  to  leave  it.  3.  1  could 
not  tell  how  to  part  with  mine  old  companions, 
their  presence  and  actions  were  so  desirable  unto 
me.  4.  The  hours  in  which  convictions  were  upon 
me,  were  such  troublesome  and  such  heart-affright- 
ing hours,  that  I  could  not  bear,  no  not  so  much 
as  the  remembrance  of  them  upon  my  heart.3 

Chr.  Then,  as  it  seems,  sometimes  you  got  rid 
of  your  trouble  ? 

Hope.  Yes,  verily,  but  it  would  come  into  my 
mind  again,  and  then  I  should  be  as  bad,  nay, 
worse  than  1  was  before. 

Chr.  Why,  what  was  it  that  brought  your  sins 
to  mind  again  ? 

Hope.  Many  things  ;  as, 


1.  "If  I  did  but  meet  a  good  man 
the  streets ;  or, 


When  lie  had 
lust  his  sense 
of    sin,    what 

2.   If  1  have  beard  any  read  in  the     brought       ,s 
Bible;  or,  again- 


s  Here  you  see,  as  our  Lord  says,  'It  is  the  Spirit  who 
quickeneth,  the  flesh  protiteth  nothing.'  Jn.  vi.  03.  Our  car- 
nal nature  is  so  far  from  profiting  in  the  work  of  conversion 
to  Christ,  that  it  is  at  enmity  against  him,  and  opposes  the 
Spirit's  work  in  showing  us  our  want  of  him,  and  bringing  - 
to  him.  Man's  nature  and  God's  grace  arc  two  direct  oppo- 
rites.  Nature  opposes,  but  grace  subdues  nature,  and  brings 
it  to  submission  and  subjection.  Arc  we  truly  convinced  of 
sin,  and  converted  to  Christ?  This  is  a  certain  and  sure  evi- 
dence of  it— we  shall  say  from  our  hearts,  Not  onto  na,  nor 
unto  anv  yieldinga  and  compliances  of  our  nature,  free-will, 
and  power,  but  unto  thy  name,  O  Lord,  be  all  the  gbrj 
it  is  by  thy  free,  sovereign,  effieaciona  grace,  we  an-  what  we 
are.  Hence,  see  the  ignorance,  lolly,  and  pride  oi  those  who 
exalt  free-will,  and  nature's  power,  &C,  N  enly  Hey  do  not 
know  themselves,  even  as  they  are  known—  (M 


154 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


3.  If  mine  head  did  begin  to  ache  ;   or, 

4.  If  I  were  told  that  some  of  my  neighbours 
were  sick ;  or, 

5.  If  I  heard  the  hell  toll  for  some  that  were 
dead;   or, 

6.  If  I  thought  of  dying  myself;  or, 

7.  If  I  heard  that  sudden  death  happened  to 
others ; 

8.  But  especially,  when  I  thought  of  myself, 
that  I  must  quickly  come  to  judgment. 

Chr.  And  could  you  at  any  time,  with  ease,  get 
oil"  the  guilt  of  sin,1  when,  by  any  of  these  ways,  it 
came  upon  you  ? 

Hope.  No,  not  I,  for  then  they  got  faster  hold 
of  my  conscience ;  and  then,  if  I  did  but  think  of 
going  back  to  sin  (though  my  mind  was  turned 
against  it),  it  would  be  double  torment  to  me. 

Chr.  And  how  djd  you  do  then  ? 

Hope.  I  thought  I  must  endeavour  to  mend  my 
When  he  could   life  5  for  else»  thought  I,  I  am  sure  to 

nolongershake     De  damned. 

ott  his  guilt  by 

sinful  courses,        Chr.    And   did    vou   endeavour   to 

then     he    en-  -,  „  J 

deavuurs        to    nieilO.  f 

mend.  HopE>  Yes ;  and  fled  from  not  only 

my  sins,  but  sinful  company  too ;  and  betook  me 
to  religious  duties,  as  prayer,  reading,  weeping  for 
sin,  speaking  tmth  to  my  neighbours,  <fcc.  These 
things  did  I,  with  many  others,  too  much  here  to 
relate. 

Chr.   And  did  you  think  yourself  well  then  ? 

Hope.  Yes,  for  a  while;  but,  at  the  last,  my 

Thenhe  thought   trouble  came  tumbling  upon  me  again, 
himself  wefi.      auj   that   over  ^  neck  of  all  my  rQr 

formations* 

Chr.  How  came  that  about,  since  you  were  now 
reformed  ? 

Hope.  There  were  several  things  brought  it  upon 
Reformation  at  me>  especially  such  sayings  as  these : 
last  could  not    «  All  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthv 

help,  and  why.  ,  °  in, 

rags.  is.  Mv.  c.  '  By  the  works  ot  the 
law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified.'  Ga.  a.  16.  ■  When  ye 
shall  have  done  all  those  things,  say,  We  are  un- 
profitable,' Luxvii.  io;  with  many  more  such  like. 
From  whence  I  began  to  reason  with  myself  thus: 
If  all  my  righteousnesses  are  filthy  rags ;  if,  by 
the  deeds  of  the  law,  no  man  can  be  justified;  and 
if,  when  we  have  done  all,  we  are  yet  unprofitable, 
then  it  is  but  a  folly  to  think  of  heaven  by  the  law. 
His  being  a  I  further  thought  thus :  If  a  man  runs 
law, "troubled  a  hundred  pounds  into  the  shopkeeper's 
hlm-  debt,  and  after  that  shall  pay  for  all 

that  he  shall  fetch ;  yet,  if  this  old  debt  (stands  still 

1  Not  the  evil  of  sin  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  the  remorse 
and  fear  of  wrath,  with  which  the  convinced  sinner  is  oppressed, 
and  from  which  he,  at  times,  seeks  relief  by  means  which  ex- 
ceedingly increase  his  actual  guilt.  Nothing  but  a  fr<ee  par- 
don, by  faith  iu  the  atouiug  sacrifice  of  Christ,  can  take  away 
guilt;  but  the  uneasiness  of  a  man's  conscience  may  be  for  a 
time  removed  by  various  expedients. — (Scott.) 


in  the  book  uncrossed,  for  that  the  shopkeeper  may 
sue  him,  and  cast  him  into  prison  till  he  shall  pay 
the  debt. 

Chr.  Well,  and  how  did  you  apply  this  to 
yourself  ? 

Hope.  Why,  I  thought  thus  with  myself:  I 
have,  by  my  sins,  run  a  great  way  into  God's 
book,  and  that  my  now  reforming  will  not  pay  off 
that  score ;  therefore  I  should  think  still,  under 
all  my  present  amendments,  But  how  shall  I  be 
freed  from  that  damnation  that  I  have  brought 
myself  in  danger  of,  by  my  former  transgres- 
sions ? 

Chr.  A  very  good  application ;  but,  pray,  go  on. 

Hofe.  Another  thing  that  hath  troubled  me, 
even  since  my  late  amendments,  is,  that  if  I  look 
narrowly  into  the  best  of  what  I  do  His  espying  bad 
now,  I  still  see  sin,  new  sin,  mixing  J^8  Xt'es 
itself  with  the  best  of  that  I  do ;  so  tl(Juulea  hml- 
that  now  I  am  forced  to  conclude,  that  notwith- 
standing my  former  fond  conceits  of  myself  and 
duties,  I  have  committed  sin  enough  in  one  duty 
to  send  me  to  hell,2  though  my  former  life  had 
been  faultless.3 

Chr.  And  what  did  you  do  then  ? 

Hope.  Do  !   I  could  not  tell  what  to  do,  until  I 
brake  my  mind  to  Faithful,  for  he  and 
I  were  well  acquainted.     And  he  told     break  his  mmd 
me,  that  unless   I  could   obtain   the     „ho  toH^S 
righteousness  of  a  man  that  never  had     tllK  way  to  be 

•  -i  ■  i  •  saved. 

sinned,  neither  mine  own,  nor  all  the 
righteousness  of  the  world,  could  save  me. 

Chr.  And  did  you  think  he  spake  true  ? 

Hope.  Had  he  told  me  so  when  I  was  pleased 
and  satisfied  with  mine  own  amendment,  I  had 
called  him  fool  for  his  pains ;  but  now,  since  I  see 
mine  own  infirmity,  and  the  sin  that  cleaves  to  my 
best  performance,  I  have  been  forced  to  be  of  his 
opinion. 

Chr.  But  did  you  think,  when  at  first  he  sug- 
gested it  to  you,  that  there  was  such  a  man  to  be 
found,  of  whom  it  might  justly  be  said,  that  he 
never  committed  sin  ? 


2  In  modern  editions,  this  has  been  altered  to  '  sin  enough 
in  one  day.'  But  in  any  period  of  time,  selecting  that  duty 
in  the  discharge  of  which  we  have  felt  the  most  pure,  there 
has  been  a  mixture  of  sin.  '  For  there  is  not  a  day,  nor  a 
duty ;  not  a  day  that  thou  livest,  nor  a  duty  that  thou  dost, 
but  will  need  that  mercy  should  come  after  to  take  away  thy 
iniquity.' — (Huiiyan's  Saints'  Privilege,  vol.  i.  p.  679.)  These 
are  solemn  and  humbling  reilections. — (Ed.) 

3  Thus,  you  see,  in  conversion,  the  Lord  does  not  act  upon 
us  as  though  wre  were  mere  machines.  No,  we  have  under- 
standing; he  enlightens  it.  Then  we  come  to  a  sound  mind; 
we  think  right,  and  reason  justly.  We  have  wills ;  what  the 
understanding  judges  best,  the  will  approves,  and  then  the 
allections  follow  after;  and  thus  we  choose  Christ  for  our 
Saviour,  and  glory  only  in  his  righteousness  and  salvation. 
When  the  heavenly  light  of  truth  makes  manifest  what  we  are, 
and  the  dauger  we  are  iu,  then  we  rationally  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come,  to  Christ  the  refuge  set  before  us. — (^iasun.j 


THE    PILGRIM'S   rilOfHtESS. 


155 


Mora.  T  must,  confess  the  words  nt  first  sounded 
At     which    he    strangely,  but  after  a  little  more  tak 
started  at  pre-    and  company  with  him,  1  had  full  con- 
sent. .     .         ,      •   . 
viction  about  it. 

Chr.  And  did  you  asi  him  what  man  this  was, 
and  how  you  must  be  justified  by  him  I 

Hope.  Yes,  and  he  told  me  it  was  the  Lord 
Jesus,  that  dwelleth  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Most  High.  And  thus,  said  he,  you  must  he  jus- 
tified by  him,  even  by  trusting  to  what  he  hath 
done  by  himself  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  and  suf- 
fered when  he  did  hang  on  the  tree.  1  asked  him 
A. mare partieu>  further,  how  that  man's  righteousness 
theway'tobe  Could  be  of  that  eilieaey  to  justify 
■""*■  another  before  <  J <k1  ?    And  he  told  me 

he  was  the  mighty  God,  and  did  what  he  did,  and 
died  the  death  also,  not  for  himself,  but  for  me  ; 
to  whom  his  doings,  and  the  worthiness  of  them, 
should  be  imputed,  if  I  believed  on  him.  lie.  x.  Ro.  Lv. 

CoL  i.  1  Te.  i. 

Chr.  And  what  did  you  do  then  ? 
Hope.  I  made  my  objections  against  my  believ- 
Hc  doubts  of     in£>   for  that  I   thought  he  was  not 
acceptation.      wjHing  to  save  me. 
Chr.   And  what  said  Faithful  to  you  then  ? 
Hope.  He  bid  me  go  to  him  and  see.     Then  I 
said  it  was  presumption;  but  he  said,  No,  for  I 
was  invited  to  come.  Mat.  xL  28.     Then  he  gave  me 
a  book  of  Jesus,  his  inditing,  to  encourage  me  the 
He  is  better     more   freely  to   come ;   and  he   said, 
instructed.       concerning  that  book,  that  every  jot 
and  tittle  thereof  stood  firmer  than  heaven  and 
earth.  Mat,  xxiv.  35.    Then  I  asked  him,  What  I  must 
do  when  1  came  ;  and  he  told  me,  I  must  entreat 
upon  my  knees,  with  all   my  heart   and  soul,  the 
Father  to  reveal  him  to  me.  Ps.  xcv.  6.  Dan.  vi.  10.  Je. 
xxi.v.  12, 13.     Then  1  asked  him  further,  how  I  must 
make  my  supplication  to  him  ?      And  he  said,  Go, 
and  thou  shalt  find  him  upon  a  mercy-seat,  where 
he  sits  all  the  year  long,  to  give  pardon  and  for- 
giveness to  them  that  come.      I   told   him  that  I 
knew  not  what  to  say  when  I  came.      And  he  bid 

me  say  to  this  effect,  God  be  mer- 
He  is  bid  to  pray.       ..  ,    .  •  11 

citul  to  me  a  sinner,  and  make  me  to 
know  and  believe  in  Jesus  Christ;  for  1  see,  that 
if  his  righteousness  had  not  been,  or  I  have  not 
faith  in  that  righteousness,  1  am  utterly  cast  away.1 
Lord,  I  have  heard  that  thou  art  a  merciful  God, 
and  hast  ordained  that  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  should 
be  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;   and  moreover,  that 


thou  art  willing  to  bestow  him  upon  such  a  poor 
Binner  as  I  am  (and  I  am  a  .sinner  indeed).  Lord, 
take  therefore  this  opportunity,  and  magnify  thy 
grace  in  the  salvation  of  my  soul,  through  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ.     Amen.  i:x.  xw.  ■>■>.  lc.  xvi.  2.  Nu. 

\ii.  89.  Be.  iv.  16. 

Ciir.   And  did  you  do  as  you  were  bidden  ? 


HOPE.    Yes;    over,   and   over,   and 


He  prays. 


Chr.  And  did  the  Father  reveal  his  Son  to  you  ? 

HOPE;  Not  at  the  first,  nor  second,  nor  third, 
nor  fourth,  nor  fifth;  no,  nor  at  the  sixth  time 
neither. 

Chr.   What  did  you  do  then  ? 

HOPE,    What  !  why  I  could  not  tell  what  to  do. 

Chr.  Had  you  not  thoughts  of  leaving  off 
praying  ? 

IiorE.  Yes,  an  hundred  times  twice  He  thought  <o 
tolJ  leaveofl  praying; 

Chr.  And  what  was  the  reason  you  did  not  ? 
Hope.  1  believed  that  that  was  true  which  had 
been  told  me,  to  wit,  that  without  the   „    ,    . 

'  .'  He    durst    not 

righteousness  of  this  Christ,   all  the     leave  off  pray- 

world  could  not  save  me;  and  there- 
fore, thought  1  with  myself,  if  1  leave  off  I  die, 
and  I  can  but  die  at  the  throne  of  grace.  And 
withal,  this  came  into  my  mind,  'Though  it  tarry, 
wait  for  it ;  because  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not 
tarry.'  Ha.  ii.  3.  So  I  continued  praying  until  the 
Father  showed  me  his  Son.2 

Chr.  And  how  was  he  revealed  unto  you? 

Hope.  I  did  not  see  him  with  my  bodily  eyes, 
but  with  the  eyes  of  my  understand-  (UUtk reveal. 
ing,  Ep.  i.  is,  19;  and  thus  it  was:  One  ed  to 
day  I  was  very  sad,  1  think  sadder 
than  at  any  one  time  in  my  life,  and  this  sadness 
was  through  a  fresh  sight  of  the  greatness  and 
vileness  of  my  sins.  And  as  I  was  then  looking 
for  nothing  but  hell,  and  the  everlasting  damna- 
tion of  my  soul,  suddenly,  as  I  thought,  1  >aw  the 
Lord  Jesus  look  down  from  heaven  upon  me,  and 
saying-,  '  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved.'  A&xvi.  8L 

But  I  replied,  Lord,  I  am  a  great,  a  very  great 
sinner.  And  he  answered,  'My  grace  is  sufficient 
for  thee.'3  2  Co.  xii.  9.  Then  1  said,  But,  Lord, 
what  is  believing  ?     And  then   1  saw  from  that 


1  Pray  mind  this.  The  grand  object  of  a  sensible  sinner  is 
riLrlitf)LiMi>55.  He  has  it  not  in  himself;  tins  lie  knows. 
\\  here  is  it  to  be  found  ?  In  Christ  only.  This  is  ai 
truth;  and  without  faith  in  this,  even  sinner  must  be  lost. 
Consider,  it  is  at  the  peril  of  your  soul  that  you  reject  the  j 
righteousness  of  Christ ;  and  do  not  believe  that  God  imput- 
eth  it  without  works  for  the  justilicatiou  of  the  ungodly.  O 
ye  stout-hearted,  self-righteous  sinners,  ye  who  are  far  from 
righteousness,  know  this  and  tremble  I — (Mason.,)  I 


2  The  true  nature  of  faith  is  to  believe  and  rest  upon  the 
Word  of  truth,  and  wait  for  the  promised  comfort.  That  faith 
which  is  the  gift  of  God  leads  the  soul  to  wait  upon  and  cry 
to  God,  aud  not  to  rest  till  it  has  some  blessed  testimony 
from  God  of  interest  in  the  love  and  favour  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus.  But  O  how  many  professors  rest  short  of  this ! — 
(Mason.) 

3  As  I  thought  my  case  most  sad  and  fearful,  these  words 
did  with  greai  power  suddenly  break  Lu  upon  me,  'Mj  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee,'  three  times  together.  01  methought 
every  word  was  a  mighty  word  for  me  ;  as  my,  and  grace,  and 
sufficient,  and  for  thee;  they  were  then,  and  - 

stilL  far  bhreer  than  others  be.— {Grace Mounding,  No.  206.) 


15(5 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


saving,  'He  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger, 
and  he  that  helieveth  on  me  shall  never  thirst;' 
that  helieving  and  coming  was  all  one;  and  that 
he  that  came,  that  is,  ran  out  in  his  heart  and 
affections  after  salvation  by  Christ,  he  indeed  be- 
lieved in  Christ.  Jn.  vi  35.  Then  the  water  stood 
in  mine  eyes,  and  I  asked  further,  But,  Lord,  may 
such  a  great  sinner  as  I  am,  be  indeed  accepted 
of  thee,  and  he  saved  by  thee  ?  And  I  heard  him 
say,  '  And  him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out.'  Jn.  vL  37.  Then  I  said,  But  how,  | 
Lord,  must  I  consider  of  thee  in  my  coming  to  ' 
thee,  that  my  faith  may  be  placed  aright  upon  j 
thee  ?  Then  he  said,  'Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.'  l  Ti.  i.  15.  '  He  is  the  end  of  j 
the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believ- 
eth.'  Ro.  x.  4.  '  He  died  for  our  sins,  and  rose  again  j 
for  our  justification.'  Ro.  iv.  25.  '  He  loved  us,  and 
washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood. '  Re.  i.  5. 
'  He  is  mediator  betwixt  God  and  us.'  l  Ti.  ii.  5.  '  He 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us. '  He.  vii.  25. 
From  all  which  I  gathered,  that  I  must  look  for 
righteousness  in  his  person,  and  for  satisfaction 
for  my  sins  by  his  blood ;  that  what  he  did  in 
obedience  to  his  Father's  law,  and  in  submitting 
to  the  penalty  thereof,  was  not  fur  himself,  but 
for  him  that  will  accept  it  for  his  salvation,  and 
be  thankful.  And  now  was  my  heart  full  of  joy, 
mine  eyes  full  of  tears,  and  mine  affections  running 
over  with  love  to  the  name,  people,  and  ways  of 
Jesus  Christ.1 

Ciir.  This  was  a  revelation  of  Christ  to  your 
soul  indeed ;  but  tell  me  particularly  what  effect 
this  had  upon  your  spirit.2 

Hope.  It  made  me  see  that  all  the  world,  not- 
withstanding all  the  righteousness  thereof,  is  in  a 
state  of  condemnation.  It  made  me  see  that  God 
the  Father,  though  he  be  just,  can  justly  justify  the 
coming  sinner.  It  made  me  greatly  ashamed  of 
the  vileness  of  my  former  life,  and  confounded  me 
with  the  sense  of  mine  own  ignorance ;  for  there 
never  came  thought  into  my  heart  before  now,  that 
showed  me  so  the  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  made 
me  love  a  holy  life,  and  long  to  do  something  for 
the  honour  and  glory  of  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus;  yea,  I  thought  that  had  I  now  a  thousand 


1  The  Lord's  dealings  with  his  children  are  various,  but  all 
lead  to  the  same  end;  some  are  shaken  with  terror,  while  others 
are  more  gently  draws,  as  with  cords  of  love.  In  these  things 
believers  should  not  make  their  experiences  standards  one  for 
another ;  still  there  is  a  similarity  in  their  being  brought  to 
the  same  ,point  of  rejecting  both  sinful  and  righteous  self,  and 
believing  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  their  complete  salvation. 
— (Andronicus.) 

2  Christ  did  not  appear  to  Hopeful's  senses,  but  to  his 
understanding ;  and  the  words  spoken  are  no  other  than  tests 
of  Scripture  taken  in  their  genuine  meaning — not  informing 
him,  as  by  a  new  revelation,  that  his  sins  were  pardoned,  but 
encouraging  him  to  apply  for  this  mercy,  and  all  other  bless- 
ings of  salvation. — (Scott.) 


gallons  of  blood  in  my  body,  I  could  spill  it  all  for 
the  sake  of  the  Lord  Jesus.3 

I  saw  then  in  my  dream  that  Hopeful  looked 
back  and  saw  Ignorance,  whom  they  had  left  be- 
hind, coming  after.  Look,  said  he  to  Christian, 
how  far  yonder  youngster  loitereth  behind. 

Chr.  Aye,  aye,  1  see  him ;  he  careth  not  for 
our  company. 

Hope.  But  I  trow  it  would  not  have  hurt  him, 
had  he  kept  pace  with  us  hitherto. 

Ciir.  That  is  true ;  but  I  warrant  you  he  thinketh 
otherwise. 

Hope.  That  I  think  he  doth  ;  but,  however,  let 
us  tarry  for  him.     So  they  did.  Young    ignor- 

Then  Christian  said  to  him,  Come  aga^S 
away,  man,  why  do  you  stay  so  behind  ?     talk- 

Ignor.  I  take  my  pleasure  in  walking  alone, 
even  more  a  great  deal  than  in  company,  unless  I 
like  it  the  better.4 

Then  said  Christian  to  Hopeful  (but  softly), 
Did  I  not  tell  you  he  cared  not  for  our  company  ? 
But,  however,  said  he,  come  up,  and  let  us  talk 
away  the  time  in  this  solitary  place.  Then, 
directing  his  speech  to  Ignorance,  he  said,  Come, 
how  do  you  ?  How  stands  it  between  God  and 
your  soul  now  ? 

Ignor.  I  hope  well ;  for  I  am  always  full  of 
good   motions,    that   come    into   my     _ 
mind,  to  comfort  me  as  I  walk.   rr.    tope,  and  the 

ground  of  it. 
xiviii.  26. 

Chr.   What  good  motions  ?  pray,  tell  us. 

Ignor.   Why,  I  think  of  God  and  heaven. 

CnR.  So  do  the  devils  and  damned  souls. 

Ignor.  But  I  think  of  them,  and  desire  them.5 

Chr.  So  do  many  that  are  never  like  to  come 
there.  '  The  soul  of  the  sluggard  desireth,  and 
hath  nothing.'  Pr.  sin.  i. 


3  Since  the  dear  hour  that  brought  me  to  Thy  foot, 
Aud  cut  up  all  my  follies  by  the  root, 
I  never  trusted  in  an  arm  but  Thine, 
Nor  hoped,  but  in  Thy  righteousness  Divine. 
My  prayers  and  alms,  imperfect  aud  defiled, 
Were  but  the  feeble  efforts  of  a  child. 
Howe'er  perform'd,  it  was  their  brightest  part 
That  they  proceeded  from  a  grateful  heart. 
Cleans'd  in  Thine  own  all-purifying  blood, 
Forgive  their  evil,  and  accept  their  good. 
I  cast  them  at  Thy  feet — my  only  plea 
Is  what  it  was,  dependence  upon  thee! 

— (Cowper.) 
*  Not  governed  by  the  Word  of  God,  but  by  his  own  will, 
his  grounds  of  confidence  for  salvation  unfitted  him  for  Chris- 
tian fellowship,  unless  he  happened  to  fall  in  with  a  man  who 
had  imbibed  his  own  notions. — (Ed.) 

5  The  desire  of  heaven — when  its  nature  is  not  understood, 
the  proper  means  of  obtaining  it  are  neglected,  other  objects 
are  preferred  to  it — is  no  proof  that  a  man  will  be  saved.  The 
expression,  '  The  desire  of  grace  is  grace,'  is  very  fallacious. 
■But  to  hunger  and  thirst  for  God,  and  his  righteousness,  his 
favour,  image,  and  service,  as  the  supreme  good,  so  that  no 
other  object  can  satisfy  the  heart,  is  grace  indeed,  and  shall  te 
completed  in  glory. — (Scott.) 


THE    PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


157 


TgNOR.  But  I  think  of  them,  and  leave  all  for 
them. 

Chr.  That  I  douht ;  for  leaving  all  is  a  hard 
matter;  yea,  a  harder  matter  than  many  are 
aware  of.  But  why,  or  by  what,  art  thou  per- 
suaded that  thou  hast  left  all  for  God  and  heaven  ? 

Ignor.   My  heart  tells  me  so. 

CllR.  The  wise  man  Bays,  '  lie  that  trusts  his 
own  heart  is  a  fool.'1  n.  xxviii.  20. 

Ignor.  This  is  spoken  of  an  evil  heart,  hut  mine 
is  a  good  one. 

Chr.   But  how  dost  thou  prove  that  ? 

Ignor.   It  comforts  me  in  hopes  of  heaven. 

Cur.  That  may  bo  through  its  deceitfulness ; 
for  a  man's  heart  may  minister  comfort  to  him  in 
the  hopes  of  that  thing  for  which  he  yet  has  no 
ground  to  hope. 

Ignor.  But  my  heart  and  life  agree  together, 
and  therefore  my  hope  is  well  grounded. 

CflR.  Who  told  thee  that  thy  heart  and  life 
agree  together  ? 

Ignor.  My  heart  tells  me  so. 

Chr.  Ask  my  fellow  if  1  be  a  thief  !  Thy  heart 
tells  thee  so  !  Except  the  Word  of  God  beareth 
witness  in  this  matter,  other  testimony  is  of  no 
value. 

Ignor.  But  is  it  not  a  good  heart  that  hath  good 
thoughts  ?  and  is  not  that  a  good  life  that  is 
according  to  God's  commandments  ? 

Chr.  Yes,  that  is  a  good  heart  that  hath  good 
thoughts,  and  that  is  a  good  life  that  is  according 
to  God's  commandments ;  but  it  is  one  thing, 
indeed,  to  have  these,  and  another  thing  only  to 
think  so. 

Ignor.  Pray,  what  count  you  good  thoughts, 
and  a  life  according  to  God's  commandments  ? 

Chr.  There  are  good  thoughts  of  divers  kinds ; 
some  respecting  ourselves,  some  God,  some  Christ, 
and  some  other  things. 

Ignor.  What  be  good  thoughts  respecting  our- 
selves ? 
what  are  gooa      CnR.  Such  as  agree  with  the  Word 

thou.!,.;.    of  God 

Ignor.  When  do  our  thoughts  of  ourselves  agree 
with  the  Word  of  God  ? 

CnR.  When  we  pass  the  same  judgment  upon 
ourselves  which  the  Word  passes.  To  explain 
myself — the  Word  of  God  saith  of  persons  in  a 
natural  condition,  '  There  is  none  righteous,  there 
is  none  that  doeth  good.'  Ro.  iiL  It  saith  also, 
that '  every  imagination  of  the  heart  of  man  is  only 

1  Real  Christrans  are  often  put  to  a  stand,  while  they  find 
and  feel  the -workings  of  all  corruptions  and  sinsin  their  nature  ; 
and  when  they  liear  others  talk  so  highly  of  themselves,  how 
lull  their  hearts  arc  of  love  to  God,  and  of  good  motions, 
without  any  complainings  of  their  hearts.  Bat  all  thi-.  is  from 
the  ignorance  of  their  own  hearts;  and  pride  and  self-righte- 
ousness harden  them  against  feeling  its  desperate  wick' 
(Masou.) 


evil,  and  that  continually.'  Ge.vt.6.  And  again, 
1  The  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his 
youth.'  Ro.  viii.  21.  Now  then,  when  we  think  thus 
of  ourselves,  having  sense  thereof  then  are  our 
thoughts  good  ones,  because  according  to  the 
Word  of  God. 

Ignor.  I  will  never  believe  that  my  heart  is 
thus  had. 

Chr.  Therefore  thou  never  hadst  one  good 
thought  concerning  thyself  in  thy  life.  But  let 
me  go  on.  As  the  Word  passeth  a  judgment  upon 
our  heart,  so  it  passeth  a  judgment  upon  our  win  s  ; 
and  when  our  thoughts  of  our  hearts  and  ways 
agree  with  the  judgment  which  the  Word  giveth  of 
botlr,  then  are  both  good,  because  agreeing  thereto. 

Ignor.   Make  out  your  meaning. 

Cur.  Why,  the  Word  of  God  saith  that  man's 
ways  are  crooked  ways ;  not  good,  but  perverse, 
r-s.  exxv.  s.  Pr.  ii.  15.  It  saith  they  are  naturally  out 
of  the  good  way,  that  they  have  not  known  it. 
Ro.  iiL  Now,  when  a  man  thus  thinketh  of  his 
ways ;  I  say,  when  he  doth  sensihly,  and  with 
heart  humiliation,  thus  think,  then  hath  he  good 
thoughts  of  his  own  ways,  because  his  thoughts 
now  agree  with  the  judgment  of  the  Word  of  God.3 

Ignor.  What  are  good  thoughts  concerning  God  ? 

Chr.  Even  as  1  have  said  concerning  ourselves, 
when  our  thoughts  of  God  do  agree  with  what  tho 
Word  saith  of  him  ;  and  that  is,  when  we  think 
of  his  being  and  attributes  as  the  Word  hath 
taught,  of  which  I  cannot  now  discourse  at  large  ; 
but  to  speak  of  him  with  reference  to  us :  Then 
we  have  right  thoughts  of  God,  when  we  think 
that  he  knows  us  better  than  we  know  ourselves, 
and  can  sec  sin  in  us  when  and  where  we  can  see 
none  in  ourselves;  when  we  think  he  knows  our 
inmost  thoughts,  and  that  our  heart,  with  all  its 
depths,  is  always  open  unto  his  eyes ;  also,  when 
we  think  that  all  our  righteousness  stinks  in  his 
nostrils,  and  that,  therefore,  he  cannot  abide  to  see 
us  stand  before  him  in  any  confidence,  even  in 
all  our  best  performances. 

Ignor.  Do  you  think  that  I  am  such  a  fool  as 
to  think  God  can  see  no  further  than  I  ?  or,  that 
I  would  come  to  God  in  the  best  of  my  perform- 
ances ? 

Chr.   Why,  how  dost  thou  think  in  this  matter? 

Ignor.  Why,  to  be  short,  I  think  I  must  believe 
in  Christ  for  justification. 

Chr.  How  !  think  thou  must  believe  in  Christ, 
when  thou  seest  not  thy  need  of  him  !  Thou 
neither  seest  thy  original  nor  actual  infirmities  ; 
but  hast  such  an  opinion  of  thyself,  and  of  what 


2  1  saw  that  it  was  not  my  good  frame  of  heart  that  made 
mj  righteousness  better,  aoryel  my  bad  frame  that  made  my 
righteousness  worse;  for  my  righteousness  was  Jesus  Christ, 
the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.  He.  xiii.  8. — 
{Grace  Aboundlinj,  No.  229.) 


153 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


thou  dost,  as  plainly  renders  thee  to  be  one  that 
did  never  see  a  necessity  of  Christ's  personal  righ- 
teousness to  justify  thee  before  God.1  How,  then, 
dost  thou  say,  I  believe  in  Christ  ? 

Ignor.   I  believe  well  enough  for  all  that. 

Chr.   How  dost  thou  believe  ? 

Ignor.  I  believe  that  Christ  died  for  sinners ; 

The  faith  of     and  that   I    shall  be  justified  before 

Ignorance.  q0(i  from  t]ie  curset  through  his  gra- 
cious acceptance  of  my  obedience  to  his  law.  Or 
thus,  Christ  makes  my  duties,  that  are  religious, 
acceptable  to  his  Father,  by  virtue  of  his  merits ; 
and  so  shall  I  be  justified.2 

Chr.  Let  me  give  an  answer  to  this  confession 
of  thy  faith. 

1.  Thou  believest  with  a  fantastical  faith;  for 
this  faith  is  nowhere  described  in  the  Word. 

2.  Thou  believest  with  a  false  faith ;  because 
it  taketh  justification  from  the  personal  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  and  applies  it  to  thy  own.3 

3.  This  faith  maketh  not  Christ  a  justifier  of 
thy  person,  but  of  thy  actions ;  and  of  thy  person 
for  thy  actions'  sake,  which  is  false.4 

4.  Therefore,  this  faith  is  deceitful,  even  such 
as  will  leave  thee  under  wrath,  in  the  day  of  God 
Almighty ;  for  true  justifying  faith  puts  the  soul, 
as  sensible  of  its  lost  condition  by  the  law,  upon 
flying  for  refuge  unto  Christ's  righteousness,  which 
righteousness  of  his  is  not  an  act  of  grace,  by  which 
he  maketh,  for  justification,  thy  obedience  accepted 
with  God ;  but  his  personal  obedience  to  the  law, 
in  doing  and  suffering  for  us  what  that  required 
at  our  hands  ;  this  righteousness,  I  sa}",  true  faith 
accepteth  ;  under  the  skirt  of  which,  the  soul  being 
shrouded,  and  by  it  presented  as  spotless  before 


1  Here  we  see  how  naturally  the  notion  of  man's  righteous- 
ness blinds  his  eyes  to,  and  keeps  his  heart  from  believing,  that 
Christ's  personal  righteousness  alone  justifies  a  sinner  in  the 
sight  of  God  ;  and  yet  such  talk  bravely  of  believing,  but  their 
faith  is  only  fancy.  They  do  not  believe  unto  righteousness  ; 
but  imagine  they  have  now,  or  shall  get,  a  righteousness  of  their 
own,  some  how  or  other.     Awful  delusion ! — (Mason.) 

2  Here  is  the  very  essence  of  that  delusion  which  works  by 
a  lie,  and  so  much  prevails,  and  keeps  up  an  unscriptural  hope 
in  the  hearts  of  so  many  professors.  Do,  reader,  study  this 
point  well ;  for  here  seems  to  be  a  show  of  scriptural  truth, 
v  uile  the  rankest  poison  lies  concealed  in  it.  For  it  is  utterly 
subversive  of,  and  contrary  to,  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel. 
— (Mason.) 

8  The  way  of  being  justified  by  faith  for  which  Ignorance 
pleads  may  well  be  called  '  fantastical ,'  as  well  as  '  Jalse;'  for 
it  is  nowhere  laid  down  iu  Scripture ;  and  it  not  only  changes 
the  way  of  acceptance,  but  it  takes  away  the  rule  and  standard 
of  righteousness,  and  substitutes  a  vague  notion,  called  sincerity, 
in  its  place,  which  never  was,  nor  can  be,  defined  with  precision. 
—(Scott.) 

4  Justification  before  God  comes,  not  by  imitating  Christ 
as  exemplary  in  morals,  but  tlirough  faith  in  His  precious 
blood.  To  feed  on  Jesus  is  by  respecting  him  as  made  of  God 
a  curse  for  our  sin.  I  have  been  pleased  with  observing,  that 
none  of  the  signs  and  wonders  in  Egypt  could  deliver  the 
children  of  Israel  thence,  until  the  lamb  was  slain. — (Bunyan 
on  Juslifi.callan..  vol.  ii.  p.  330.) 


God,  it  is  accepted,  and  acquit  from  condemna- 
tion.5 

Ignor.  What !  would  you  have  us  trust  to 
what  Christ,  in  his  own  person,  has  done  without 
us  ?  This  conceit  would  loosen  the  reins  of  our 
lust,  and  tolerate  us  to  live  as  we  list ;  for  what 
matter  how  we  live,  if  we  may  be  justified  by 
Christ's  personal  righteousness  from  all,  when  we 
believe  it  ? 

Chr.  Ignorance  is  thy  name,  and  as  thy  name 
is,  so  art  thou ;  even  this  thy  answer  demonstrat- 
ed what  I  say.  Ignorant  thou  art  of  what  justi- 
fying righteousness  is,  and  as  ignorant  how  to 
secure  thy  soul,  through  the  faith  of  it,  from  the 
heavy  wrath  of  God.  Yea,  thou  also  art  ignorant 
of  the  true  effects  of  saving  faith  in  this  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  which  is,  to  bow  and  win  over  the 
heart  to  God  in  Christ,  to  love  his  name,  his  Word, 
ways,  and  people,  and  not  as  thou  ignorantly 
imaginest. 

Hope.  Ask  him  if  ever  he  had  Christ  revealed 
to  him  from  heaven.6 

Ignor.  What !  you  are  a  man  for  revelations  ! 
I  believe  that  what  both  you,  and  all  ignorance  jan- 
the  rest  of  you,  say  about  that  mat-  gi«»vith  them, 
ter,  is  but  the  fruit  of  distracted  brains. 

Hope.  Why,  man !  Christ  is  so  hid  in  God  from 
the  natural  apprehensions  of  the  flesh,  that  he  can- 
not by  any  man  be  savingly  known,  unless  God 
the  Father  reveals  him  to  them.7 


6  Under  these  four  heads,  we  have  a  most  excellent  detec- 
tion of  a  presumptive  and  most  dangerous  error  which  now 
greatly  prevails,  as  well  as  a  scriptural  view  of  the  nature  of 
true  faith,  and  the  object  it  fixes  on  wholly  and  solely  for 
justification  before  God,  and  acceptance  with  God.  Reader, 
for  thy  soul's  sake,  look  to  thy  foundation.  See  that  thou 
build  upon  nothing  in  self,  but  all  upon  that  sure  foundation 
which  God  hath  laid,  even  his  beloved  Son,  and  his  perfect 
righteousness. — (M  ason.) 

6  This,  by  all  natural  men,  is  deemed  the  very  height  of 
enthusiasm ;  but  a  spiritual  man  knows  its  blessedness,  and 
rejoices  in  its  comfort.  It  is  a  close  question.  "What  may  we 
understand  by  it  ?  Doubtless,  what  Paul  means  when  he  says, 
'  It  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me,'  Ga.  i.  15,  16:  that 
is,  he  had  such  an  internal,  spiritual,  experimental  sight,  and 
knowledge  of  Christ,  and  of  salvation  by  him,  that  his  heart 
embrace<I  him,  his  soul  cleaved  to  him,  his  spirit  rejoiced  in 
him  ;  his  whole  man  was  swallowed  up  with  the  love  of  him,  so 
that  he  cried  out  in  the  joy  of  his  soul,  This  is  my  beloved  and 
my  friend — my  Saviour,  my  God,  and  my  salvation.  He  is 
the  chief  of  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely.  We  know 
nothing  of  Christ  savingly,  comfortably,  and  experimentally, 
till  he  is  pleased  thus  to  reveal  himself  to  us.  Mat.  xi.  27- 
This  spiritual  revelation  of  Christ  to  the  heart  is  a  blessing 
and  comfort  agreeable  to,  and  consequent  upon,  believing  on 
Christ,  as  revealed  outwardly  in  the  Word.  Therefore,  every 
believer  should  wait,  and  look,  and  long,  and  pray  for  it. 
Beware  you  do  not  despise  it ;  if  you  do,  you  will  betray  your 
ignorance  of  spiritual  things,  as  Ignorance  did. — (Mason.) 

7  Many  of  these  revelations  appear  in  the  Grace  Abound- 
ing, as  '  that  scripture  fastened  on  my  heart,'  No.  201  ;  'that 
sentence  darted  in  upon  me,'  No.  204 ;  '  these  words  did  with 
great  power  break  in  upon  me,'  No.  206  ;  '  suddenly  this 
sentence  fell  upon  my  soul,'  No.  229 ;  and  many  others. — 
(Ed.) 


THE    PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


1.-9 


Tgsor.  Tliat  is  your  faith,  but  not  mine;  yet 
He  weaka  re-  mine,  I  doubl  aot,  is  as  good  as  yours, 
KhlfiLv*  though  1  have  nut  in  my  head  so  many 
not-  whimsies  a3  you. 

C'iir.  Give  me  leave  to  put  in  a  word.  You 
ought  not  so  slightly  to  speak  of  this  matter;  for 
this  I  will  boldly  affirm,  even  as  my  good  com- 
panion hath  done,  that  no  man  can  know  Jesus 
Christ  but  by  the  revelation  of  the  Father,  Mat 
xi.  27;  yea,  and  faith  too,  by  which  the  soul  layeth 
hold  upon  Christ,  if  it  be  right,  must  be  wrought 
by  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  mighty  power ; 
the  working  of  which  faith,  I  perceive,  poor  Ignor- 
ance, thou  art  ignorant  of.  l  Co.  xii.  3.  ep.  i.  is,  vj.  Be 
awakened  then,  see  thine  own  wretchedness,  and 
fly  to  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  by  his  righteousness, 
which  is  the  righteousness  of  God,  for  he  himself 
is  God,  thou  shalt  be  delivered  from  condemnation.1 
Ignor.  You  go  so  fast,  I  cannot  keep  pace  with 
aw  talk  broke  you.  Do  you  go  on  before  ;  I  must 
UP-  stay  a  while  behind.2 

Then  they  said — 

Well,  Ignorance,  wilt  thou  yet  foolish  be, 
To  slight  good  counsel,  teu  times  given  thee  ? 
And  it'  thou  yet  refuse  it,  thou  shalt  know, 
Ere  long,  the  evil  of  thy  doing  so. 
Remember,  man,  in  time,  stoop,  do  not  fear ; 
Good  counsel  taken  well,  saves :  therefore  hear. 
But  if  thou  yet  shalt  slight  it,  thou  wilt  be 
The  loser  (Ignorance)  I'll  wan-ant  thee. 

Then  Christian  addressed  thus  himself  to  his 
fellow:— 

Chr.  Well,  come,  my  good  Hopeful,  I  perceive 
that  thou  and  I  must  walk  by  ourselves  again. 

So  I  saw  in  my  dream  that  they  went  on  apace 
before,  and  Ignorance  he  came  hobbling  after. 
Then  said  Christian  to  his  companion,  It  pities  me 
much  for  this  poor  man,  it  will  certainly  go  ill  with 
him  at  last. 

Hope.  Alas!  there  are  abundance  in  our  town 
in  his  condition,  whole  families,  yea,  whole  streets, 
and  that  of  pilgrims  too ;  and  if  there  be  so  many 
in  our  parts,  how  many,  think  you,  must  there  be 
in  the  place  where  he  was  born  ? 

Cbr.  Indeed  the  Word  saith,  '  He  hath  blinded 
their  eyes,  lest  they  should  see,'  &c.  But  now  we 
are  by  ourselves,  what  do  you  think  of  such  men  ? 

1  That  sinner  is  not  thoroughly  awakened,  who  does  not 
see  his  need  of  Christ's  righteousness  to  be  imputed  to  him. 
Nor  is  he  quickened,  who  has  not  tied  to  Christ  as  '  the  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth.'  Ro.  x.  4. 
—(Mason.) 

2  Ignorant  professors  cannot  keep  pace  with  spiritual  pil- 
rrims,  nor  can  they  relish  the  doctrine  of  making  Christ  all  in 
all,  in  the  matter  of  justification  and  salvation,  and  making  the 
sinner  nothing  at  all,  as  having  no  hand  in  the  work,  nor  getting 
any  glory  to  himself  by  what  he  is  able  to  do  of  himself. 
Free  grace  and  free  will ;  Christ's  imputed  righteousness,  and 
the  notion  of  man's  personal  righteousness,  cannot  accord. — 
(Mason.)  1 


Have  they  at  no  time,  think  you,  convictions  of 
sin,  and  so  consccpiently  fears  that  their  state  is 
dangerous  ? 

Hope.  Nay,  do  you  answer  that  question  your- 
self, for  you  are  the  elder  man. 

Chr.  Then  I  say,  sometimes  (as  I  think)  tiny 
may  ;  but  they  being  naturally  ignorant,  understand 
not  that  such  convictions  tend  to  their  good ;  and 
therefore  they  do  desperately  seek  to  stifle  them, 
and  presumptuously  continue  to  flatter  themselves 
in  the  way  of  their  own  hearts. 

Hope.  I  do  believe,  as  you  say,  that  fear  tends 
much  to  men's  good,  and  to  make  The  good  u«c  of 
them  right,  at  their  beginning  to  go  lcar- 

on  pilgrimage. 

Chr.  Without  all  doubt  it  doth,  if  it  be  right; 
for  so  says  the  Word,  '  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom,'8  Fr.  i.7;  itio.  Ps.  cxi.  10.  job 

xxviii.  28. 

Hope.   How  will  you  describe  right  fear  ? 

Chr.  True  or  right  fear  is  discovered 
,        ,  .  .  B  Right  fear, 

by  three  things: — 

1.  By  its  rise  ;  it  is  caused  by  saving  convictions 
for  sin. 

2.  It  driveth  the  soul  to  lay  fast  hold  of  ChrLt 
for  salvation. 

3.  It  begetteth  and  continueth  in  the  soul  a 
great  reverence  of  God,  his  Word,  and  ways,  keep- 
ing it  tender,  and  making  it  afraid  to  turn  from 
them,  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  to  anything 
that  may  dishonour  God,  break  its  peace,  grieve 
the  Spirit,  or  cause  the  enemy  to  speak  reproach- 
fully.4 

Hope.  Well  said ;  I  believe  you  have  said  the 
truth.  Are  we  now  almost  got  past  the  Enchanted 
Ground  ? 

Chr.  Why,  art  thou  weary  of  this  discourse  ? 

Hope,  No,  verily,  but  that  I  would  know  where 
we  are. 

Chr.  We  have  not  now  above  two  miles  further 
to  go  thereon.      But  let  us  return  to    vvhy  ignorant 

,T         ,,        .  ,   ,  persons  stille 

our  matter.      Now  the  ignorant  know     convictions. 
not  that  such  convictions  as  tend  to    1.  In  general, 
put  them  in  fear  are  for  their  good,  and  therefore 
they  seek  to  stifle  them. 


8  Take  heed  of  hardening  thy  heart  at  any  time,  against 
convictions  or  judgments.  I  bid  you  before  to  beware  of  a 
hard  heart ;  now  1  bid  you  beware  of  hardening  your  soft  heart. 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  pulse  of  the  sold.  Pulses  that  beat 
best  are  the  best  sigus  of  life ;  but  the  worst  show  that  life  is 
present.  Intermitting  pulses  are  daugerous.  David  and  Peter 
had  an  intermitting  pulse,  in  reference  to  this  fear. —  (liunyau 
on  the  Fear  of  God,  vol.  i.  pp.  487,  489.) 

4  Mark  well  Christian's  definition  of  'fear.'  It  is  one  of 
those  precious  passages  in  which  our  author  gives  us  the  suhje<  t 
matter  of  a  whole  treatise  in  a  few  short  and  plain  sentences. 
Treasure  it  up  in  your  heart,  and  often  ponder  it  there.  It 
will  prove,  through  the  blessing  of  the  Spirit,  a  special  means 
of  enlivening,  when  spiritual  langour,  in  consequence  ol  worldly 
ease,  is  creeping  upon  your  soul. — (AndrouieUsJ 


KO 


THE   PIT.GP.TM'S   PKOGEESS. 


Hope.  How  do  they  seek  to  stifle  them  ? 
Chr.  1.  They  think  that  those  fears  are  wrought 
by  the  devil  (though  indeed  they  are 
particular,    wr0Ug])t  Qf  qq<^  .   &n^   thinking  so, 

they  resist  them  as  things  that  directly  tend  to 
their  overthrow.  2.  They  also  think  that  these 
fears  tend  to  the  spoiling  of  their  faith,  when,  alas 
for  them,  poor  men  that  they  are,  they  have  none 
at  all!  and  therefore  they  harden  their  hearts 
against  them.  3.  They  presume  they  ought  not 
to  fear;  and  therefore,  in  despite  of  them,  wax 
presumptuously  confident.  4.  They  see  that  those 
fears  tend  to  take  away  from  them  their  pitiful  old 
self-holiness,1  and  therefore  they  resist  them  with 
all  their  might. 

Hor-E.  I  know  something  of  this  myself;  for, 
before  I  knew  myself,  it  was  so  with  me.2 

Chr.  Well,  we  will  leave,  at  this  time,  our 
neighbour  Ignorance  by  himself,  and  fall  upon 
another  profitable  question. 

Hope.  With  all  my  heart,  but  you  shall  still 
begin. 

Chr.  Well  then,  did  you  not  know,  about  ten 
Talk  ab.mt  one  years  ago,  one  Temporary  in  your 
Temporary.  parts>  who  was  a  forward  man  in  re- 
ligion then  ?3 

Hope.  Know  him!  yes,  he  dwelt  in  Graceless, 
Where  he   a  town  about  two  miles  off  of  Honesty, 

dwelt-      and  he  dwelt  next  door  to  one  Turnback. 

Chr.  Right,  he  dwelt  under  the  same  roof  with 

lie  was  towardiy  him.       Well,    that    man    was    much 

once.         awakened  once ;   I  believe  that  then 

he  had  some  sight  of  his  sins,  and  of  the  wages 

that  were  due  thereto. 

Hope.  I  am  of  your  mind,  for,  my  house  not 
being  above  three  miles  from  him,  he  would  oft- 
times  come  to  me,  and  that  with  many  tears. 
Truly  I  pitied  the  man,  and  was  not  altogether 
without  hope  of  him ;  but  one  may  see,  it  is  not 
every  one  that  cries,  Lord,  Lord. 

Chr.  He  told  me  once  that  he  was  resolved  to 
go  on  pilgrimage,  as  we  do  now ;  but  all  of  a 
sudden  he  grew  acquainted  with  one  Save-self,  and 
then  he  became  a  stranger  to  me. 

Hope.   Now,  since  we  are  talking  about  him, 


1  '  Pitiful  old  self-holiness.'  Mind  this  phrase.  Par  was  it 
from  the  heart  of  good  Mr.  Bunyau  to  decry  personal  holiness. 
It  is  nothing  hut  self-holiness,  or  the  holiness  of  the  old  man 
of  sin  ;  for  true  holiness  springs  from  the  belief  of  the  truth, 
aud  love  to  the  truth.  All  besides  this  only  tends  to  self- 
eoulidence,  and  self-applause. —  (Mason.) 

2  It  is  good  to  call  to  mind  one's  own  ignorance,  when  in 
our  natural  estate,  to  excite  humility  of  heart,  and  thankfulness 
to  God,  who  made  us  to  differ,  and  to  excite  pity  towards  those 
who  are  walking  in  nature's  pride,  self-righteousness,  and  self- 
confidence. — (Mason.)       ♦ 

0  '  Temporary  ;'  one  who  is  doctrinally  acquainted  with  the 
gospel,  but  a  stranger  to  its  sanctiiyiug  power.  The  reasons 
aud  manner  of  such  men's  declensions  and  apostasy  are  very 
justly  and  emphatically  stated. — (Scott.) 


let  us  a  little  inquire  into  the  reason  of  the  sudden 
backsliding  of  him  and  such  others. 

Chr.  It  may  be  very  profitable,  but  do  you  begin. 

Hope.  Well  then,  there  are  in  my  judgment  four 
reasons  for  it : — 

1.  Though  the  consciences  of  such  men  are 
awakened,  yet  their  minds  are  not  Ueasonswhvto. 
changed;  therefore,  when  the  power  waruiy  ones  go 
of  guilt  weareth  away,  (hat  which  pro- 
voked them  to  be  religious  ceaseth,  wherefore  they 
naturally  turn  to  their  own  course  again,  even  as 
we  see  the  dog  that  is  sick  of  what  he  has  eaten, 
so  long  as  hi.=  sickness  prevails,  he  vomits  and 
casts  up  all ;  not  that  he  doth  this  of  a  free  mind 
(if  we  may  say  a  dog  has  a  mind),  but  because  it 
troubleth  his  stomach ;  but  now,  when  his  sickness 
is  over,  and  so  his  stomach  eased,  his  desire  being 
not  at  all  alienate  from  his  vomit,  he  turns  him 
about  and  licks  up  all,  and  so  it  is  true  which  is 
written,  '  The  dog  is  turned  to  his  own  vomit  again. ' 
2  Pe.  ii.  22.4  Thus  I  say,  being  hot  for  heaven,  by 
virtue  only  of  the  sense  and  fear  of  the  torments 
of  hell,  as  their  sense  of  hell,  and  the  fears  of 
damnation,  chills  and  cools,  so  their  desires  for 
heaven  and  salvation  cool  also.  So  then  it  comes 
to  pass,  that  when  their  guilt  and  fear  is  gone, 
their  desires  for  heaven  and  happiness  die,  aud 
they  return  to  their  course  again.5 

2.  Another  reason  is,  they  have  slavish  fears 
that  do  overmaster  them;  I  speak  now  of  the 
fears  that  they  have  of  men,  for  '  the  fear  of  man 
bringeth  a  snare.'  Pr.  xxix.  25.  So  then,  though  they 
seem  to  be  hot  for  heaven,  so  long  as  the  flames 
of  hell  are  about  their  ears,  yet,  when  that  terror 
is  a  little  over,  they  betake  themselves  to  second 
thoughts ;  namely,  that  it  is  good  to  be  wise,  and 
not  to  run  (for  they  know  not  what)  the  hazard  of 
losing  all,  or,  at  least,  of  bringing  themselves  into 
unavoidable  and  unnecessary  troubles,  and  so  they 
fall  in  with  the  world  again. 

3.  The  shame  that  attends  religion  lies  also  as 
a  block  in  their  way ;  they  are  proud  and  haughty, 
and  religion  in  their  eye  is  low  and  contemptible ; 
therefore,  when  they  have  lost  their  sense  of  hell 
and  wrath  to  come,  they  return  again  to  their 
former  course. 

4.  Guilt,  and  to  meditate  terror,  are  grievous  to 


4  In  Hoffman's  poetical  version  of  the  '  Pilgrim,'  this  sen- 
tence is,  '  And  nature  will  ret  urn,  like  Pope,  to  pork ;'  alluding 
to  one  of  the  Popes,  who  used  daily  to  have  a  dish  of  pork ; 
but,  being  sick,  his  physicians  forbade  it,  when  the  Pope,  in  a 
rage,  cried  out,  '  Give  me  my  pork,  in  spite  of  God.' — (Ed.) 

6  A  true  description  of  the  state  of  some  professors.  Here 
see  the  reason  why  so  many  saints,  as  they  are  called,  fall  away. 
From  hence  some  take  occasion  to  deny  the  scriptural,  soul- 
comforting  doctrine,  of  the  certain  perseverance  of  God's  saints 
unto  eternal  glory.  So  they  display  the  pride  of  their  own 
hearts,  their  ignorance  of  God's  Word,  while  they  make  God's 
promises  of  no  effect,  and  the  gospel  of  his  grace,  only  much 
ado  about  nothing. — (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


161 


them.  They  like  not  to  see  their  misery  before 
they  come  into  it;  though  perhaps  the  sight  of  it 
first,  it'  they  loved  that  sight,  might  make  them  fly 
whither  the  righteous  fly  and  are  safe.  But  be- 
cause they  do,  as  I  hinted  before,  even  slum  the 
thoughts  of  guilt  and  terror,  therefore,  when  once 
they  are  rid  of  their  awakenings  about  the  terrors 
and  wrath  of  God,  they  harden  their  hearts  gladly, 
and  choose  such  ways  as  will  harden  them  more 
and  more. 

CllR.  You  are  pretty  mar  the  business,  for  the 
bottom  of  all  is,  tor  want  of  a  change  in  their  mind 
and  will.  And  therefore  they  are  but  like  the  felon 
that  standeth  before  the  judge,  he  quakes  and 
trembles,  and  seems  to  repent  most  heartily,  but 
the  bottom  of  all  is  the  fear  of  the  halter ;  not  that 
he  hath  any  detestation  of  the  offence,  as  is  evident, 
because,  let  but  this  man  have  his  liberty,  and  he 
will  be  a  thief,  and  so  a  rogue  still,  whereas,  if  his 
mind  was  changed,  he  would  be  otherwise. 

HorE.  Now,  I  have  showed  you  the  reasons  of 
their  going  back,  do  you  show  me  the  manner 
thereof.1 

Chr.   So  I  will,  willingly. 

1.  They  draw  off  their  thoughts,  all  that  they 
How  the  apostate  may«  fr°m  the  remembrance  of  God, 

goes  back.       death,  and  judgment  to  come. 

2.  Then  they  cast  off  by  degrees  private  duties, 
as  closet  prayer,  curbing  their  lusts,  watching, 
sorrow  for  sin,  aud  the  like. 

3.  Then  they  shun  the  company  of  lively  and 
warm  Christians. 

4.  After  that,  they  grow  cold  to  public  duty,  as 
hearing,  reading,  godly  conference,  and  the  like. 

5.  Then  they  begin  to  pick  holes,  as  we  say,  in 
the  coats  of  some  of  the  godly  ;  and  that  devilishly, 


1  Three  young  fellows.  Mr.  Tradition,  Mr.  Humau-wisdoin, 
and  Mr.  Man's-invention,  proffered  their  services  to  Shaddai. 
The  captains  told  them  not  to  be  rash ;  but,  at  their  entreaty, 
they  were  listed  into  Boanerges'  company,  aDd  away  they 
went  to  the  war.  Being  in  the  rear,  they  were  taken  pri- 
soners. Then  Diabolus  asked  them  if  they  were  willing  to 
Berve  against  Shaddai.  They  told  him,  that  as  they  did  not 
so  much  live  by  religion  as  by  the  fates  of  fortune,  they  would 
serve  him.  So  he  made  two  of  them  sergeauts  ;  but  he  made 
Mr.  Man's-invention  his  ancient-bearer  [standard-bearer]. — 
(Banyan's  Holy  War.) 

2  See  how  gradually,  step  by  step,  apostates  go  back.  It 
begins  in  the  unbelief  of  the  heart,  and  ends  in  open  sins  in 
the  life.  "Why  is  the  love  of  this  world  so  forbidden?  Why 
is  covetousness  called  idolatry  ?  Because,  whatever  draws  away 
the  heart  from  God,  and  prevents  enjoying  close  fellowship 
w  ith  him,  naturally  tends  to  apostasy  from  him.  Look  well  to 
your  hearts  and  affections.  '  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence, 
tor  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life.'  Pr.  iv.  23.  If  you  neglect 
to  watch,  you  will  be  sure  to  smart  under  the  sense  of  sin  on 
earth,  or  its  curse  in  hell.  '  See  then  that  ye  walk  circum- 
spectly, not  as  fools,  but  as  wise,  redeeming  the  time,  because 
the  days  arc  evil.'  Ep.  v.  15,  16. — (Mason.) 

3  0  what  a  blessed  state !  what  a  glorious  frame  of  soul  is 
this !  Job  speaks  of  it  as  the  candle  of  the  Lord  shining  upon 
his  head;  chap.  xxix.  3.  The  church,  in  a  rapture,  cries  out, 
'  Sing,  O  heavens ;  and  be  joyful,  0  earth ;  break  forth  into 

VOL.  III. 


that  they  may  have  a  seeming  colour  to  throw  re- 
ligion (for  the  sake  of  some  infirmity  they  have 
espied  in  them)  behind  their  backs. 

G.  Then  they  begin  to  adhere  to,  and  associate 
themselves  with,  carnal,  loose,  and  wanton  men. 

7.  Then  they  give  way  to  carnal  and  wanton 
discourses  in  secret ;  and  glad  are  they  if  they  can 
see  such  things  in  any  that  are  counted  honest, 
that  they  may  the  more  boldly  do  it  through  their 
example. 

8.  After  this,  they  begin  to  play  with  little  sins 
openly. 

9.  And  then,  being  hardened,  they  show  them- 
selves as  they  are.  Thus,  being  launched  again 
into  the  gulf  of  misery,  unless  a  miracle  of  grace 
prevent  it,  they  everlastingly  perish  in  their  own 
deceivings.- 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  by  this  time  the 
Pilgrims  were  got  over  the  Enchanted  Ground,  and 
entering  into  the  country  of  Beulah,  whose  air  was 
very  sweet  and  pleasant,  the  way  lying  directly 
through  it,  they  solaced  themselves  there  for  a 
season,  is.  bdi.  4.  Yea,  here  they  heard  continually 
the  singing  of  birds,  and  saw  every  day  the  flower3 
appear  in  the  earth,  and  heard  the  voice  of  the 
turtle  in  the  land.  Ca.  a.  10-12.  In  this  country  the 
sun  shineth  night  and  day  ;  wherefore  this  was  be- 
yond the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  and  also 
out  of  the  reach  of  Giant  Despair,  neither  could 
they  from  this  place  so  much  as  see  Doubting 
Castle.3  Here  they  were  within  sight  of  the  city 
they  were  going  to,  also  here  met  them  some  of 
the  inhabitants  thereof;  for  in  this  land  the 
Shining  Ones  commonly  walked,  because  it 
was  upon  the  borders  of  heaven.     In  this  land  also 


singing,  0  mountains  :  for  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people.' 
Is.  xlix.  13.  Paul  calls  this,  'The  fulness  of  the  blessing  of 
the  gospel  of  Christ.'  Ro.  xv.  29.  0  rest  not  short  of  enjoying 
the  full  blaze  of  gospel  peace  and  spiritual  joy. —  (Mason.) 
During  the  last  days  of  that  eminent  man  of  God,  Dr.  Payson, 
he  once  said,  '  When  I  formerly  read  Bunyan's  description  of  the 
Land  of  Beulah,  where  the  sun  shines  and  the  birds  sing  day 
and  night,  I  used  to  doubt  whether  there  was  snch  a  place ; 
but  now  my  own  experience  has  convinced  me  of  it,  and  it 
infinitely  transcends  all  my  previous  conceptions.'  The  best 
possible  commentary  on  the  glowing  descriptions  in  Buuyau  is 
to  be  found  in  that  very  remarkable  letter  dictated  by  Dr.  Pay- 
son  to  his  sihtcr,  a  few  weeks  before  his  death  : — '  "Were  I  to 
adopt  the  figurative  language  of  Bunyan,  I  might  date  this 
letter  from  the  Land  Beulah,  of  which  I  have  been  for  some 
weeks  a  happy  inhabitant.  The  Celestial  City  is  full  in  my 
view.  Its  glories  have  been  upon  me,  its  breezes  fan  me,  its 
odours  are  wafted  to  me,  its  sounds  strike  upon  my  ears,  and 
its  spirit  is  breathed  into  my  heart.  Nothing  separates  me 
from  it  but  the  River  of  Death,  which  now  appears  but  as  bd 
insignificant  rill,  that  may  be  crossed  at  a  single  step,  whenever 
God  shall  give  permission.  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  has 
been  gradually  drawing  nearer  and  nearer,  appearing  larger  and 
brighter  as  lie  approached,  and  now  he  fills  the  whole  tu  mi 
sphere,  pouring  forth  a  flood  of  glory,  in  which  I  seem  to 
float,  like  an  insect  in  the  beams  of  the  snn ;  exulting,  yet 
almo?t  trembling,  while  I  gaze  on  this  excessive  brightness, 
and  wondering,  with  unutterable  wonder,  why  God  should  deign 
thus  to  shine  upon  a  sinful  worm.'—  (Checver.) 


1G2 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


the  contract  between  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom 
was  renewed;  yea,  here,  'As  the  bridegroom  re- 
joiceth  over  the  bride,  so  did  their  God  rejoice  over 
them.'  is.  lxii.  5.  Here  they  had  no  want  of  corn 
and  wine  ;  for  in  this  place  they  met  with  abund- 
ance of  what  they  had  sought  for  in  all  their  pil- 
grimage, ver.  8.  Here  they  heard  voices  from  out 
of  the  city,  loud  voices,  saying,  *  Say  ye  to  the 
daughter  of  Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh! 
Behold,  his  reward  is  with  him ! '  ver.  n.  Here  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  country  called  them,  '  The 
holy  people,  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  Sought  out, ' 

&C    ver.  12. 

Now,  as  they  walked  in  this  land,  they  had  more 
rejoicing  than  in  parts  more  remote  from  the  king- 
dom to  which  they  were  bound ;  and  drawing  near 
to  the  city,  they  had  yet  a  more  perfect  view 
thereof.  It  was  builded  of  pearls  and  precious 
stones,  also  the  street  thereof  was  paved  with  gold; 
so  that  by  reason  of  the  natural  glory  of  the  city, 
and  the  reflection  of  the  sunbeams  upon  it,  Chris- 
tian with  desire  fell  sick,  Hopeful  also  had  a  fit  or 
two  of  the  same  disease.1  Wherefore,  here  they 
lay  by  it  a  while,  crying  out,  because  of  their 
pangs,  '  If  ye  find  my  Beloved,  tell  him  that  I  am 
sick  of  love.'2  Ca.  v.  8. 

But  being  a  little  strengthened,  and  better  able 
to  bear  their  sickness,  they  walked  on  their  way, 
and  came  yet  nearer  and  nearer,  where  were 
orchards,  vineyards,  and  gardens,  and  their  gates 
opened  into  the  highway.  Now,  as  they  came  up 
to  these  places,  behold,  the  gardener  stood  in  the 
way,  to  whom  the  Pilgrims  said,  Whose  goodly 
vineyards  and  gardens  are  these  ?  He  answered, 
They  are  the  King's,  and  are  planted  here  for  his 


1  In  the  immediate  view  of  heavenly  felicity,  Paul  '  desired 
to  depart  hence,  and  be  with  Christ,  as  far  better'  than  life. 
David  '  fainted  for  God's  salvation.'  In  the  lively  exercise  of 
holy  affections,  the  believer  grows  weary  of  this  sinful  world, 
longs  to  have  his  faith  changed  for  sight,  bis  hope  swallowed 
up  in  enjoyment,  and  his  love  perfected. — (Scott.) 

2  No  other  language  than  that  of  Bunyan  himself,  perused 
in  the  pages  of  his  own  sweet  book,  could  be  successful  in 
portraying  this  beauty  and  glory;  for  now  he  seems  to  feel 
that  all  the  dangers  of  the  pilgrimage  are  almost  over,  and  he 
gives  up  himself  without  restraint  so  entirely  to  the  sea  of 
bliss  that  surrounds  him,  and  to  the  gales  of  heaven  that  are 
wafting  him  on,  and  to  the  sounds  of  melody  that  float  in  the 
whole  air  around  him,  that  nothing  in  the  English  language 
can  be  compared  with  this  whole  closing  part  of  the  '  Pilgrim's 
Progress,'  for  its  entrancing  splendour,  yet  serene  and  simple 
loveliness.  The  colouring  is  that  of  heaven  in  the  soul ;  and 
Bunyan  has  poured  his  own  heaven-entranced  soul  into  it. 
"With  all  its  depth  and  power,  there  is  nothing  exaggerated, 
and  it  is  made  up  of  the  simplest  and  most  scriptural  materials 
and  images.  "We  seem  to  stand  in  a  flood  of  light,  poured  on 
os  from  the  open  gates  of  paradise.  It  falls  on  every  leaf  and 
shrub  by  the  way-side  ;  it  is  reflected  from  the  crystal  streams 
that,  between  grassy  banks,  wind  amidst  groves  of  fruit-trees 
into  vineyards  and  flower-gardens.  These  fields  of  Beidah  are 
just  below  the  gate  of  heaven ;  and  with  the  light  of  heaven 
there  come  floating  down  the  melodies  of  heaven,  so  that  here 
there  is  almost  an  open  revelation  of  the  things  which  God 
hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him. — (Cheever.) 


own  delight,  and  also  for  the  solace  of  pilgrims. 
So  the  gardener  had  them  into  the  vineyards,  and 
bid  them  refresh  themselves  with  the  dainties. 
De.  xxiii.  24.  He  also  showed  them  there  the  King's 
walks,  and  the  arbours,  where  he  delighted  to  be ; 
and  here  they  tarried  and  slept.3 

Now  I  beheld  in  my  dream,  that  they  talked 
more  in  their  sleep  at  this  time  than  ever  they  did 
in  all  their  journey ;  and  being  in  a  muse  there- 
about, the  gardener  said  even  to  me,  Wherefore 
musest  thou  at  the  matter  ?  It  is  the  nature  of 
the  fruit  of  the  grapes  of  these  vineyards  to  go 
down  so  sweetly,  as  to  cause  the  lips  of  them  that 
are  asleep  to  speak.4 

So  I  saw  that  when  they  awoke,  they  addressed 
themselves  to  go  up  to  tbe  city.  But,  as  I  said, 
the  reflection  of  the  sun  upon  the  city  (for  '  the 
city  was  pure  gold, '  Re.  xxi.  is)  was  so  extremely 
glorious,  that  they  could  not,  as  yet,  with  open 
face  behold  it,  but  through  an  instrument  made 
for  that  purpose.  2  Co.  m.  18.  So  I  saw,  that  as  they 
went  on,  there  met  them  two  men,  in  raiment  that 
shone  like  gold;  also  their  faces  shone  as  the  light.5 

These  men  asked  the  Pilgrims  whence  they 
came  ;  and  they  told  them.  They  also  asked 
them  where  they  had  lodged,  what  difficulties  and 
dangers,  what  comforts  and  pleasures  they  had 


3  This  is  the  place,  this  is  the  state, 

Of  all  that  fear  the  Lord ; 
Which  men  nor  angels  may  relate 

With  tongue,  or  pen,  or  word. 
No  night  is  here  for  to  eclipse 

Its  spangling  rays  so  bright ; 
Nor  doubt,  nor  fear,  to  shut  the  lips 

Of  those  within  this  light. 

The  strings  of  music  here  are  tuned 

For  heavenly  harmony, 
And  every  spirit  here  perfumed 

With  perfect  sanctity. 
Here  run  the  crystal  streams  of  life, 

Quite  thorow  all  our  veins ; 

And  here  by  love  we  do  unite 

With  glory's  golden  chains. 

— (Bunyan's  One  Thing  Needful) 
4  Mr.  Flavel,  being  on  a  journey,  set  himself  to  improve 
I  the  time  by  meditation ;  when  his  mind  grew  intent,  till  at 
I  length  he  had  such  ravishing  tastes  of  heavenly  joys,  and  such 
full  assurance  of  his  interest  therein,  that  he  utterly  lost  the 
sight  and  sense  of  this  world  and  all  its  concerns,  so  that  for 
hours  he  knew  not  where  he  was.  At  last,  perceiving  himself 
faint,  he  alighted  from  his  horse  and  sat  down  at  a  spring, 
where  he  refreshed  himself,  earnestly  desiring,  if  it  were  the 
will  of  God,  that  he  might  there  leave  the  world.  His  spirit 
reviving,  he  finished  his  journey  in  the  same  delightful  frame; 
and  all  that  night  passed  without  a  wink  of  sleep,  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  still  overflowing  him,  so  that  he  seemed  an  inhabit- 
ant of  the  other  world. — (Pneumatologia,  4to,  2d  edit.  p.  210.) 
6  Who  are  these  ministering  spirits,  that  the  author  calls 
'men?'  Are  they  the  glorified  inhabitants  of  the  Celestial 
City  ?  Moses  and  Elias  appeared  at  the  transfiguration ;  so 
the  spirit  who  spake  with  John,  Re.  xx.  10,  was  his  fellow- 
servant.  Are  these  '  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect ' — the 
angel-ministering  spirits  which  are  sent  forth  to  minister  for 
them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?  He.  i.  14;  xii.  22,  23. 
-(En.) 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


163 


Deuth. 


met  in  the  way  ;  and  they  told  them.  Then  said 
the  men  that  met  them,  You  have  hut  two  difficul- 
ties more  to  meet  with,  and  then  you  are  in  the 
city.1 

Christian  then,  and  his  companion,  asked  the 
men  to  go  along  with  them  ;  so  they  told  them  they 
would.  15ut,  said  they,  you  must  ohtain  it  by 
your  own  faith.  So  I  saw  in  my  dream  that  they 
went  on  together,  until  they  came  in  sight  of  the 
gate. 

Now,  I  further  saw,  that  hetwixt  them  and  the 
gate  was  a  river,  hut  there  was  no  bridge 
to  go  over ;  the  river  was  very  deep.  At 
the  sight,  therefore,  of  this  river,  the  Pilgrims 
were  much  stunned :  hut  the  men  that  went  with 
them  said,  You  must  go  through,  or  you  cannot 
come  at  the  gate.2 

The  Pilgrims  then  began  to  inquire  if  there  was 
Death  is  not  n0  other  way  to  the  gate ;  to  which 
welcome      to    they  answered,  Yes;  but  there  hath 

nature,  though  J  . 

i>y  it  we  pass  not  any,  save  two,  to  wit,  Lnoch  and 
world  into  Elijah,  been  permitted  to  tread  that 
g    y>  path,  since  the  foundation  of  the  world, 

nor  shall,  until  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound,  l  Co. 
xv.  51,  52.  The  Pilgrims  then,  especially  Christian, 
began  to  despond  in  their  minds,  and  looked  this 
way  and  that,  but  no  way  could  be  found  by  them, 
by  which  they  might  escape  the  river.3  Then  they 
asked  the  men  if  the  waters  were  all  of  a  depth. 
ADgeis  help  us  They  said,  No ;  yet  they  could  not 
aWy  Xou^h  nelp  them  in  that  case  ;  for,  said  they, 
death.  vou  suaii  gn(j  jt  deeper  or  shallower, 

as  you  believe  in  the  King  of  the  place. 

They  then  addressed  themselves  to  the  water; 
and  entering,  Christian  began  to  sink,  and  crying 
out  to  his  good  friend  Hopeful,  he  said,  I  sink  in 
deep  waters ;  the  billows  go  over  my  head,  all  his 
waves  go  over  me  !      Selah.4 


1  "What  are  these  two  difficulties?  Are  they  not  death 
without,  and  unhelief  within?  It  is  through  the  latter  that 
the  former  is  all-distressing  to  us.  O  for  a  strong,  world- 
conquering,  sin-subduing,  death-overcoming  faith,  in  life  and 
death  !  Jesus,  Master,  speak  the  word,  unhelief  shall  flee,  our 
(kith  shall  not  fail,  and  our  hope  shall  be  steady. —  (Mason.) 

2  Well,  now  the  pilgrims  must  meet  with,  and  encounter, 
their  last  enemy,  death.  When  he  stares  them  in  the  face, 
their  fuars  arise.  Through  the  river  they  must  go.  What 
have  they  to  look  at?  \Vhat  they  are  in  themselves,  or  what 
they  have  done  and  been?  No.  Only  the  same  Jesus  who 
conquered  death  for  us,  and  can  overcome  the  fear  of  death  in 
us. — (Mason.) 

3  But  tim'rous  mortals  start  and  shrink 
To  cross  this  narrow  sea ; 
'i  hej  linger,  shivering  on  the  brink, 
And  fear  to  launch  away. — (Walls.) 
Evodias  could  not  join  in  the  petition  of  the  Liturgy — 'From 
death,  good  Lord,  deliver  us.'     lie  had  his  wish;  and 
expired  suddenly  on  a  Lord's-day  morning,  while  thousands 
were  assembling  to  hear  him  preach. — (Andronicus.) 

4  Banyan  died  in  perfect  peace,  tin mgh  it  is  probable  that 
he  expected  darkness  in  the  trying  hoar.  Thus  he  says,  in  his 
treatise  on  Paul's  Departure,  'Aye,  this  will  make  thee  cry, 
though  thou  be  as  good  as  David.     \\  herefore  learn  by  his 


Then  said  tho  other,  P>o  of  good  cheer,  my 
hrothcr,  I  feel  the  bottom,  and  it  is 
good.  Then,  said  Christian,  Ah  !  my  diet  at  the 
friend,  'the  sorrows  of  death  have  hour of deaUl- 
compassed  me  about ;'  I  shall  not  see  the  land  that 
flows  with  milk  and  honey ;  and  with  that  a  great 
darkness  and  horror  fell  upon  Christian,  so  that 
ho  could  not  see  before  him.  Also  here  he  in 
great  measure  lost  his  senses,  so  that  he  could 
neither  remember,  nor  orderly  talk  of  any  of  those 
sweet  refreshments  that  he  had  met  with  in  tho 
way  of  his  pilgrimage.  But  all  the  words  that  ho 
spake  still  tended  to  discover  that  he  had  horror  of 
mind,  and  heart  fears  that  he  should  die  in  that 
river,  and  never  obtain  entrance  in  at  the  gate. 
Here  also,  as  they  that  stood  by  perceived,  he  was 
much  in  the  troublesome  thoughts  of  the  sins  that 
he  had  committed,  both  since  and  before  he  hegan 
to  be  a  pilgrim.  It  was  also  observed  that  he  was 
trouhled  with  apparitions  of  hobgoblins  and  evil 
spirits ;  for  ever  and  anon  he  would  intimate  so 
much  hy  words.5  Hopeful,  therefore,  here  had 
much  ado  to  keep  his  brother's  head  above  water ; 
yea,  sometimes  he  would  be  quite  gone  down,  and 
then,  ere  awhile,  he  would  rise  up  again  half  dead. 
Hopeful  also  would  endeavour  to  comfort  him, 
saying,  Brother,  I  see  the  gate,  and  men  standing 
by  to  receive  us ;  but  Christian  would  answer,  It 
is  you,  it  is  you  they  wait  for;  you  have  been 
Hopeful  ever  since  I  knew  you.6  And  so  have  you, 
said  he  to  Christian.  Ah,  brother!  said  he,  surely 
if  I  was  right  he  would  now  arise  to  help  me ;  but 
for  my  sins  he  hath  brought  me  into  the  snare,  and 
hath  left  me.  Then  said  Hopeful,  My  brother, 
you  have  quite  forgot  the  text,  where  it  is  said  of 
the  wicked,  '  Tliere  are  no  bands  in  their  death ; 
but  their  strength  is  firm.  They  are  not  in  trouble 
as  otlier  men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like  oilier 
men.' Ps.  lxxiii.  4,  5.  These  troubles  and  distresses 
that  you  go  through  in  these  waters  are  no  sign 
that  God  hath  forsaken  you ;  but  are  sent  to  try 
you,   whether  you   will  call  to  mind  that  which 

sorrows  to  serve  thy  generation,  by  the  will  of  God,  before 
falling  asleep.  God  can  pardon  thy  sins,  and  yet  make  theru 
a  bitter  thing  and  a  burden  at  death.  It  is  easy  to  HIM  to 
pardon,  and  yet  break  all  thy  bones;  or  show  lrimself  in  such 
dreadful  majesty,  that  heaven  and  earth  shall  tremble  at  his 
presence.  Let  the  thoughts  of  this  prevail  with  thee  to 
manage  thy  time  and  work  in  wisdom,  while  thou  art  well.' 
(Vol.  i.  p.  730.)— (Ed.) 

5  Satan  is  suffered  to  be  very  busy  with  God's  people  iu 
their  last  moments,  but  he  too,  like  death,  is  a  conquered 
enemy  by  our  Jesus;  therefore,  amidst  all  his  attacks,  they 
arc  safe.  He  cannot  destroy  them  whom  Jesus  hath  redeemed, 
for  he  is  faithful  to  them,  and  almighty  to  save. — (Mason.) 

6  Hopeful,  agreeably  to  his  name,  was  not  only  preserved 
from  terror,  but  enabled  to  encourage  his  trembling  companion ; 
telling  him  the  welcome  news  that  'he  felt  the  bottom,  and 
it  was  good.'  Blessed  experience  !  If  Christ  is  our  founda- 
tion, we  have  nothing  to  fear,  even  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan, 
for  death  itself  cannot  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ.— - 
(Burder.) 


164 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


heretofore  you  have  received  of  his  goodness,  and 
live  upon  him  in  your  distresses.1 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  Christian  was  as 

Christian  deliv-    in    a   mUS«    a   ^ile.        To    whom    also 

ered  from  his  Hopeful  added  this  word,  Be  of  good 
cheer,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole  ;2 
and  with  that  Christian  brake  out  with  a  loud 
voice,  0  !  I  see  him  again,  and  he  tells  me,  '  When 
thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with 
thee ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  over- 
flow thee.'  is.  xiiii.  2.  Then  they  both  took  courage, 
and  the  enemy  was  after  that  as  still  as  a  stone, 
until  they  were  gone  over.  Christian  therefore 
presently  found  ground  to  stand  upon,  and  so  it 
followed  that  the  rest  of  the  river  was  but  shallow. 
Thus  they  got  over.3  Now,  upon  the  bank  of  the 
„,,  ,    ,     river,  on  the  other  side,  they  saw  the 

i  he    angels   do  '  •  i  i 

wait  for  them,  two  shining  men  again,  who  there 
are  "passed  out   waited   for   them  ;    wherefore,   being 

of  this  world.       come    Qut    of    the    riyerj    they    salute<l 

them,  saying,  We  are  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth 
to  minister  for  those  that  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation. 
Thus  they  went  along  towards  the  gate.4  Now 
you  must  note  that  the  city  stood  upon  a  mighty 
hill,  but  the  Pilgrims  went  up  that  hill  with  ease, 
because  they  had  these  two  men  to  lead  them  up 

They  have  put    ty  tne  armS  '  als0'  tney  natl  le^  tneir 

oft  mortality,  mortal  garments  behind  them  in  the 
river,  for  though  they  went  in  with  them,  they 
came  out  without  them.  They,  therefore,  went 
up  here  with  much  agility  and  speed,  though  the 
foundation  upon  which  the  city  was  framed  was 
higher  than  the  clouds.5  They,  therefore,  went  up 
through  the  regions  of  the  air,  sweetly  talking  as 
they  went,  being  comforted,  because  they  safely 
got  over  the  river,  and  had  such  glorious  com- 
panions to  attend  them.6 


1  When  you  visit  a  sick  or  death  hed,  be  sure  that  you  take 
God's  "Word  with  you,  iu  your  heart  and  in  your  mouth.  It 
is  from  that  oidy  that  you  may  expect  a  blessing  upon,  and  to 
the  soul  of,  the  sick  or  the  dying ;  for  it  is  by  the  Word  of 
God  faith  came  at  the  first ;  it  is  by  that,  faitli  is  strengthened 
at  the  last ;  and  Jesus  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  Scrip- 
tures.— (Mason.) 

2  Jesus  Christ,  he  is  indeed  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the 
first  and  the  last,  the  beginning  of  our  hope,  and  the  end  of 
our  confidence.  We  begin  and  end  the  Christian  pilgrimage 
with  him ;  and  all  our  temptations  and  trials  speak  loudly,  and 
fully  confirm  to  us  that  truth  of  our  Lord,  '  Without  me  ye 
can  do  nothing.'  Jn.  xv.  5. — (Mason.) 

3  The  temporary  distresses  of  dying  believers  often  arise 
from  bodily  disease,  which  interrupt  the  free  exercise  of  their 
intellectual  powers.  Of  this  Satan  will  be  sure  to  take  advan- 
tage, as  far  as  he  is  permitted,  and  will  suggest  gloomy  ima- 
ginations, not  only  to  distress  them,  but  to  dishearten  others 
by  their  example.  Generally  they  who,  for  a  time,  have  been 
most  distressed,  have  at  length  died  most  triumphantly. — 
(Scott.) 

*  I  cannot  trust  myself  to  read  the  account  of  Christian 
going  up  to  the  Celestial  Gate,  after  his  passage  though  the 
River  of  Death. — (Arnold.) 

6  Bunyau,  in  his  Saints'  Knotoledge  of  Christ's  Love,  de- 
scribes the  feelings  of  the  pilgrim,  while  clothed  with  mortality, 


The  talk  they  had  with  the  Shining  Ones  was 
about  the  glory  of  the  place ;  who  told  them  that 
the  beauty  and  glory  of  it  was  inexpressible.  There, 
said  they,  is  the  'Mount  Zion,  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem, the  innumerable  company  of  angels,  and 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.'  He.  xii.  22-24. 
You  are  going  now,  said  they,  to  the  paradise  of 
God,  wherein  you  shall  see  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat 
of  the  never-fading  fruits  thereof;  and  when  you 
come  there,  you  shall  have  white  robes  given  you, 
and  your  walk  and  talk  shall  be  every  day  with 
the  King,  even  all  the  days  of  eternity.  Re.  ii.  7;  m.  4; 
xxii.  5.  There  you  shall  not  see  again  such  things 
as  you  saw  when  you  were  in  the  lower  region  upon 
the  earth,  to  wit,  sorrow,  sickness,  affliction,  and 
death,  '  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away. ' 
You  are  now  going  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  and  to  the  prophets — men  that  God  hath 
taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come,  and  that  are 
now  resting  upon  their  beds,  each  one  walking 
in  his  righteousness.7  is.  ivii.  1,  2.  Uv.  17.  The  men 
then  asked,  What  must  we  do  in  the  holy  place  ? 
To  whom  it  was  answered,  You  must  there  receive 
the  comforts  of  all  your  toil,  and  have  joy  for  all 
your  sorrow;  you  must  reap  what  you  have  sown, 
even  the  fruit  of  all  your  prayers,  and  tears,  and 
sufferings  for  the  King  by  the  way.  Ga.  vi.  7.  In 
that  place  you  must  wear  crowns  of  gold,  and 
enjoy  the  perpetual  sight  and  vision  of  the  Holy 
One,  for  'there  you  shall  see  him  as  he  is.'  1  Jn. 
Ui.  2.  There  also  you  shall  serve  him  continually 
with  praise,  with  shouting,  and  thanksgiving, 
whom  you  desired  to  serve  in  the  world,  though 
with  much  difficulty,  because  of  the  infirmity  of 
your  flesh.  There  your  eyes  shall  be  delighted 
with  seeing,  and  your  ears  with  hearing  the  plea- 
sant voice  of  the  Mighty  One.  There  you  shall 
enjoy  your  friends  again,  that  are  gone  thither 
before  you ;  and  there  you  shall  with  joy  receive, 
even  every  one  that  follows  into  the  holy  place 


looking  up  to  the  heights  of  heaven.  Christ  could  mount  up 
— Elijah  had  a  chariot  of  fire — Enoch  was  taken  by  God.  But 
I,  poor  I,  how  shall  I  get  thither?  How  often  are  considering 
thoughts  wanting  in  professors  !  The  question  is  happily  solved 
in  Christian  and  Hopeful's  experience;  they  left  all  their 
mortal  garments  and  burdens  behind  them  in  the  river,  and 
their  free  spirits  for  the  first  time  felt  the  sweets  of  liberty  in 
their  perfection — (Ed.) 

6  I  know  that  all  who  go  to  paradise,  are  conducted  thither 
by  these  holy  ones ;  but  yet,  for  all  that,  such  as  die  under  the 
cloud,  for  unchristian  walking  with  God,  may  meet  with  dark- 
ness on  that  day,  and  go  heavily  hence.  But  as  for  those  who 
have  been  faithful  to  their  God,  they  shall  see  before  them,  or 
from  earth  see  glory. — (Bunyan's  Pauls  Departure,  vol.  i. 
p.  741.) 

7  Ah,  Christian !  None  can  conceive  or  describe  what  it  is  to 
live  in  a  state  separate  from  a  body  of  siu  and  death.  Surely  in 
some  happy,  highly-favoured  moments,  we  have  had  a  glimpse, 
a  foretaste  of  this,  and  could  realize  it  by  faith.  O  for  more 
and  more  of  this,  till  we  possess  and  enjoy  it  in  all  its  fulness! 
If  Jesus  be  so  sweet  to  faith  beloiv,  who  can  tell  what  he  is  in 
full  fruition  above?     This  we  must  die  to  know. — (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


165 


after  you.  There  also  shall  you  he  clothed  with 
glory  and  majesty,  and  put  into  an  equipage  fit  to 
ride  out  with  the  King  of  glory.  When  he  shall 
come  with  sound  of  trumpet  in  the  clouds,  as  upon 
the  wings  of  the  wind,  you  shall  come  with  him  ; 
and  when  he  shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  judgment, 
you  shall  sit  by  him ;  yea,  and  when  he  shall  pass 
sentence  upon  all  the  workers  of  iniquity,  let  them 
be  angels  or  men,  you  also  shall  have  a  voice  in 
that  judgment,  because  they  were  his  and  your 
enemies.  1  Th.  iv.  ln-17.  Jude  14.  Da.vii.9, 10.  1  Co.  vi  -',  8. 
Also  when  he  shall  again  return  to  the  city,  you 
shall  go  too,  with  sound  of  trumpet,  and  be  ever 
with  him. 

Now,  while  they  were  thus  drawing  towards  the 
gate,  behold  a  company  of  the  heavenly  host  came 
out  to  meet  them ;  to  whom  it  was  said,  by  the 
other  two  Shining  Ones,  These  are  the  men  that 
have  loved  our  Lord  when  they  were  in  the  world, 
and  that  have  left  all  for  his  holy  name ;  and  he 
hath  sent  us  to  fetch  them,  and  we  have  brought 
them  thus  far  on  their  desired  journey,  that  they 
may  go  in  and  look  their  Redeemer  in  the  face 
with  joy.  Then  the  heavenly  host  gave  a  great 
shout,  saying,  '  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called 
unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.'  Be.  xbc.  9. 
There  came  out  also  at  this  time  to  meet  them, 
several  of  the  King's  trumpeters,  clothed  in  white 
and  shining  raiment,  who,  with  melodious  noises, 
and  loud,  made  even  the  heavens  to  echo  with  their 
sound.  These  trumpeters  saluted  Christian  and 
his  fellow  with  ten  thousand  welcomes  from  the 
world  ;  and  this  they  did  with  shouting,  and  sound 
of  trumpet. 

This  done,  they  compassed  them  round  on  every 
side ;  some  went  before,  some  behind,  and  some 
on  the  right  hand,  some  on  the  left  (as  it  were  to 
guard  them  through  the  upper  regions),  continu- 
ally sounding  as  they  went,  with  melodious  noise, 
in  notes  on  high ;  so  that  the  very  sight  was  to 
them  that  could  behold  it,  as  if  heaven  itself  was 
come  down  to  meet  them.1     Thus,  therefore,  they 


1  Bunyan  has,  with  great  beauty  and  probability,  brought 
in  the  ministry  of  angels,  and  regions  of  the  air,  to  be  passed 
through  in  their  company,  rising,  and  still  rising,  higher  and 
higher,  before  they  come  to  that  mighty  mount  on  which  he 
has  placed  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City.  The  angels  receive 
his  pilgrims  as  they  come  up  from  the  River  of  Death,  and 
form  for  them  a  bright,  glittering,  seraphic,  loving  convoy, 
whose  conversation  prepares  them  gradually  for  that  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory  which  is  to  be  theirs  as  they  enter 
in  at  the  gate.  Bunyan  has  thus,  in  this  blissful  passage  from 
the  river  to  the  gate,  done  what  no  other  devout  writer,  or 
dreamer,  or  speculator,  that  we  are  aware  of,  has  ever  done; 
he  has  filled  what  perhaps  in  most  minds  is  a  mere  blank,  a 
vacancy,  or  at  most  a  bewilderment  and  mist  of  glory,  with 
definite  and  beatific  images,  with  natural  thoughts,  and  with 
the  sympathizing  communion  of  g<  atle  spirits,  who  form,  as  it 
were,  an  outer  porch  and  persp  tgh  which 

the  soul  passes  into   uncreated  light.      Bunyan   has  thrown  a 
bridge,  as  it  were,  for  the  imagination,  over  the  deep,  sudden, 


walked  on  together;  and  as  they  walked,  ever  and 
anon  these  trumpeters,  even  with  joyful  sound, 
would,  by  mixing  their  music  with  looks  and  ges- 
tures, still  signify  to  Christian  and  his  brother, 
how  welcome  they  were  into  their  company,  and 
with  what  gladness  they  came  to  meet  them ;  and 
now  were  these  two  men,  as  it  were,  in  heaven, 
beforo  they  came  at  it,  being  swallowed  up  with 
the  sight  of  angels,  and  with  hearing  of  their 
melodious  notes.  Here  also  they  had  the  city 
itself  in  view,  and  they  thought  they  heard  all  the 
bells  therein  to  ring,  to  welcome  them  thereto. 
Hut  above  all,  the  warm  and  joyful  thoughts  that 
they  had  about  their  own  dwelling  there,  with  such 
company,  and  that  for  ever  and  ever.  0  by  what 
tongue  or  pen  can  their  glorious  joy  be  expressed  !'*' 
And  thus  they  came  up  to  the  gate. 

Now,  when  they  were  come  up  to  the  gate,  there 
was  written  over  it  in  letters  of  gold,  'Blessed  are 
they  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they  may 
have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in 
through  the  gates  into  the  city.'  lie.  xxiL  H. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  the  Shining  Men 
bid  them  call  at  the  gate ;  the  which,  when  they 
did,  some  looked  from  above  over  the  gate,  to  wit, 
Enoch,  Moses,  and  Elijah,  etc.,  to  whom  it  was 
said,  These  pilgrims  are  come  from  the  City  of 
Destruction,  for  the  love  that  they  bear  to  the  King 
of  this  place ;  and  then  the  pilgrims  gave  in  unto 
them  each  man  his  certificate,3  which  they  had 
received  in  the  beginning ;  those,  therefore,  were 
carried  into  the  King,  who,  when  he  had  read 
them,  said,  Where  are  the  men  ?  To  whom  it  was 
answered,  They  are  standing  without  the  gate. 
The    King   then    commanded   to   open  the   gate, 


open  space  of  an  untried  spiritual  existence ;  where  it  finds, 
ready  to  receive  the  soul  that  leaves  the  body,  ministering 
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  unto  them  who  are  to  be  heirs 
of  salvation. — (Cheever.) 

2  Glory  beyond  :,!  .■'■  rj  i  rar  seen 
1  Sy  waking  sense,  or  by  the  dreaming  soul  I 

appearance,  instantaneously  disclosed, 
Was  of  a  mighty  City — boldly  say 
A  wilderness  of  building,  sinking  far, 
And  self-withdrawn  into  a  wondrous  depth, 
Far  sinking  into  splendour  without  end  ! 
fabric  it  seemed  of  diamond  aud  of  gold, 
With  alabaster  domes  and  silver  spires, 
And  blazing  terrace  upon  terrace,  high 
Uplifted:  here,  serene  pavilions  bright, 
Tn  avenues  disposed  ;  there,  towers  begirt 
With  battlements,  that  on  their  restless  fronts 
Bore  stars — illumination  of  all  gems! 

—  (WordswortL.) 
s  A  certificate, 
To  show  thou  seest  thyself  most  desolate  ; 
Writ  by  the  Master,  with  repentance  seal'd. 
To  show  also  that  here  [by  Christ]  thou  would'st  be  healed. 
***** 
Aud  that  thou  dost  abhor  thee  for  thy  ways, 
And  would'st  in  holiness  spend  all  thy  days. 

— (Bunyau's  House  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  5  SO. 


165 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


1  That  the  righteous  nation, '  said  he,  '  which  keep- 
eth  the  truth,  may  enter  in.'1  is.  rxvi.  2. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream  that  these  two  men 
went  in  at  the  gate ;  and  lo,  as  they  entered,  they 
were  transfigured,  and  they  had  raiment  put  on 
that  shone  like  gold.  There  were  also  that  met 
them  with  harps  and  crowns,  and  gave  them  to 
them — the  harps  to  praise  withal,  and  the  crowns 
in  token  of  honour.  Then  I  heard  in  my  dream 
that  all  the  bells  in  the  city  rang  again  for  joy, 
and  that  it  was  said  unto  them,  '  Enter  ye  into 
the  joy  of  your  Lord.'2  I  also  heard  the  men 
themselves,  that  they  sang  with  a  loud  voice, 
saying,  *  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 

POWER,  BE  UNTO  HIM  THAT  SITTETH  UPON  THE  THRONE, 
AND  INTO  THE  LAMB,  FOR  EVER  AND  EVER'  Re.  v.  13. 

Now  just  as  the  gates  were  opened  to  let  in  the 
men,  I  looked  in  after  them,  aud,  behold,  the  City 
shone  like  the  sun ;  the  streets  also  were  paved 
with  gold,  and  in  them  walked  many  men,  with 
crowns  on  their  heads,  palms  in  their  hands,  and 
golden  harps  to  sing  praises  withal. 

There  were  also  of  them  that  had  wings,  and 
they  auswered  one  another  without  intermission, 
saying,  '  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord. '  Re.  iv.  s. 
And  after  that,  they  shut  up  the  gates ;  which, 
when  I  had  seen,  I  wished  myself  among  them. 

Now  while  I  was  gazing  upon  all  these  things, 
Ignorance  comes  I  turned  my  head  to  look  back,  and 
up  to  the  nvcr.  saw  ignorance  Come  up  to  the  river 
side ;  but  he  soon  got  over,  and  that  without  half 
that  difficulty  which  the  other  two  men  met  with.3 


1  Blessed  indeed  is  that  man  who,  while  encumbered  with 
a  sinful  body,  can  truly  say,  '  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me.'  In  him  all  the  commandments  are  obeyed — 
all  my  sius  washed  away  by  his  blood — and  my  soid  clothed 
with  righteousness  and  immortality.  Blessed  are  the  dead 
who  die  in  the  Lord:  they  enter  the  Celestial  City.  This  is 
the  righteous  nation,  which  keepeth  the  truth.  O  my  reader, 
would  yon  be  one  of  the  glorified  inhabitants  of  that  city 
whose  builder  and  maker  is  God?  Then  must  you  five  the 
life  of  faith ;  so  run  that  ye  may  obtain  ;  ever  be  found  looking 
uuto  Jesus. — (Ed.) 

'  Prepare  me,  Lord,  for  thy  right  hand, 
Then  come  the  joyful  day; 
Come  death,  and  some  celestial  baud, 
And  letch  my  soul  away.' 

2  0  what  acclamations  of  joy  will  there  be,  when  all  the 
children  of  God  meet  together,  without  the  fear  of  being 
disturbed  by  Antichrist!  How  will  the  heavens  echo  of  joy, 
when  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  shall  come  to  dwell  with  her 
husband!  If  you  would  be  better  satisfied  what  the  beatific 
vision  means,  my  request  is,  that  you  would  live  holily,  and 
thus  go  and  see.  Christ  is  the  desire  of  all  nations,  the  joy 
of  angels,  the  delight  of  the  Father.  What  solace,  then, 
must  that  soul  lie  filled  with,  which  hath  the  possession  of 
Christ  to  all  eternity? — (Buuyan's  Dying  Sayings,  vol.  i.  pp. 
Gi,  65.) 

3  When  a  formal  visit  from  a  minister,  a  few  general  ques- 
tions, and  a  prayer,  with  or  without  the  sacrament,  calm  the 
mind  of  a  dying  person,  whose  lite  has  been  unsuitable  to  the 
Christian  profession ;  no  doubt,  could  we  penetrate  the  veil,  we 
should  see  him  wafted  across  the  river  in  the  boat  of  Vain- 
hope,  and  meeting  with  the  awful  doom  that  is  here  described. 
Fiom  such  fatal  delusions,  good  Lord,  deliver  us! — (Scott.) 


For  it  happened  that  there  was  then  in  that  place, 
one  Vain-hope,4  a  ferryman,  that  with  vain-hope  does 
his  boat  helped  him  over ;  so  he.  as  ferry him  OTer- 
the  other  I  saw,  did  ascend  the  hill,  to  come  up  to 
the  gate,  only  he  came  alone  ;  neither  did  any  man 
meet  him  with  the  least  encouragement.  When 
he  was  come  up  to  the  gate,  he  looked  up  to  the 
writing  that  was  above,  and  then  began  to  knock, 
supposing  that  entrance  should  have  been  quickly 
administered  to  him  ;  but  he  was  asked  by  the  men 
that  looked  over  the  top  of  the  gate,  Whence  came 
you  ?  and  what  would  you  have  ?  He  answered, 
I  have  eat  and  drank  in  the  presence  of  the  King, 
and  he  has  taught  in  our  streets.  Then  they 
asked  him  for  his  certificate,  that  they  might  go  in 
and  show  it  to  the  King ;  so  he  fumbled  in  his 
bosom  for  one,  and  found  none.  Then  said  they, 
Have  you  none  ?  But  the  man  answered  never  a 
word.  So  they  told  the  King,  but  he  would  not 
come  down  to  see  him,  but  commanded  the  two 
Shining  Ones  that  conducted  Christian  and  Hopeful 
to  the  City,  to  go  out  and  take  Ignorance,  and 
bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  have  him  away.  Then 
they  took  him  up,  and  carried  him  through  the  air, 
to  the  door  that  I  saw  in  the  side  of  the  hill,  and 
put  him  in  there.  Then  I  saw  that  there  was  a 
way  to  hell,  even  from  the.  gates  of  heaven,  as  well 
as  from  the  City  of  Destruction !  a  So  I  awoke, 
and  behold  it  was  a  dream. 


4  Vain-hope  ever  dwells  in  the  bosom  of  fools,  and  is  ever 
ready  to  assist  Ignorance.  He  wanted  him  at  the  last,  and  he 
found  him.  He  had  been  his  companion  through  life,  and  will 
not  forsake  him  in  the  hour  of  death.  You  see  Ignorance  had 
no  pangs  in  his  death,  no  fears,  doubts,  and  sorrows,  no  terror 
from  the  euemy,  but  all  was  serene  aud  happy.  Vain-hope 
was  his  ferryman ;  and  he,  as  the  good  folks  say,  died  like  a 
lamb.  Ah,  but  did  such  lambs  see  what  was  to  follow,  when 
Vain-hope  had  wafted  them  over  the  river,  they*  would  roar 
like  lious  ! — (Mason.) 

5  This  is  a  most  awfid  conclusion.  Consider  it  deeply.  Weigh 
it  attentively,  so  as  to  get  good  satisfaction  from  the  Word  to 
these  important  questious: — Am  I  in  Christ,  the  way,  the 
only  wray,  to  the  kingdom,  or  not  ?  Do  I  see  that  all  other 
ways,  whether  of  sin  or  self-righteousness,  lead  to  hell  ?  Does 
Christ  dwell  in  my  heart  by  faith  ?  Am  I  a  new  creature  in 
him  ?  Do  I  renounce  my  owti  righteousness,  as  well  as  abhor 
my  sins  ?  Do  I  look  alone  to  Christ  for  righteousness,  and 
depend  only  on  him  for  holiness  ?  Is  he  the  only  hope  of  my 
soid,  and  the  only  confidence  of  my  heart  ?  And  do  I  desire 
to  be  found  in  lima ;  knowing  by  the  Word,  and  feeling  by  the 
teaching  of  his  Spirit,  that  I  am  totally  lost  in  myself?  Thus, 
is  Christ  formed  in  me,  the  only  hope  of  glory  ?  Do  I  study 
to  please  him,  as  well  as  hope  to  enjoy  him  ?  Is  fellowship 
with  God  the  Father,  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  so  prized  by 
me,  as  to  seek  it,  and  to  esteem  it  above  all  things  ?  If  so, 
though  I  may  find  all  things  in  nature,  in  the  world,  and 
from  Satan,  continually  opposing  this,  yet  I  am  in  Christ 
the  way,  aud  he  is  in  me  the  truth  and  the  life. — (Mason.) 
How  far  may  such  an  one  go?  This  important  question 
is  very  solemnly  argued  in  Bunyan's  Law  and  Grace.  He 
may  be  received  into  church-fellowship — and,  like  the  foolish 
virgins,  be  clear  from  outward  pollution — have  gone  forth 
from  the  rudiments  aud  traditions  of  men — and  had  then- 
lamps,  but  still  lost  then-  precious  soids.  They  may  bear  ottice 
in  the  church,  as  Judas  carried  the  bag,  and  as  Demas !     They 


THE    PILGRIM'S   PR0GRES9 


107 


TUE    CONCLUSION. 

Now,  Headku,  I  have  told  my  dream  to 
See  if  thou  canst  interpret  it  to  me, 
Or  to  thyself,  or  neighbour;  but  take  beed 
Of  misinterpreting ;  for  that,  instead 
Of  doing  good,  will  hut  thyself  abuse  : 
By  misinterpreting,  evD  ensues. 


may  become  preachers  and  ministers  of  the  gospel,  with  rare 
gilts,  and  a  fluent  tongue,  like  an  angel,  to  speak  ol  I  be  biddi  n 
mysteries;  but  may  die  nnder  the  curse.  They  maj  have 
the  gifts  of  the  spirit  and  prophecy,  and  be  but  a  Balaam. 

They    may    stand    thus    until    Christ,    conic  and    rcual    them. 

They  may,  with  confidence,  say.  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not 

eaten  and  drank  in  thy  presence,  and  taught  in  thy  name,  and 
in  thy  name  have  east  out  devils?  aud  yet,  poor  creatures,  be 
shut  out ! — (Ed.) 


Take  heed  also,  that  thou  be  not  extri 
In  playing  with  (he  outside  of  my  dream: 

Nor  let  my  figure  or  similitude 
Put  thee  into  a  laughter  or  a  fend. 

Leave  lliis  for  hoys  and  fouls;   but  as  for  I  hoc, 
Do  thou  the  substance  of  my  matter  sec. 

Put  by  the  curtains,  look  within  my  veil, 
Turn  up  my  metaphors,  and  do  not  fail; 
There,  if  thou  seckest  them,  such  things  to  find, 
As  will  he  helpful  to  an  honest  mind, 

\\  hat  of  my  dross  thou  findest  there,  be  bold 
To  throw  away,  but  yet  preserve  the  gold ; 
What  if  my  gold  be  wrapped  up  in  ore?  — 
None  throws  away  the  apple  for  the  core. 
Put  if  thou  shalt  cast  all  away  as  vain, 
I  know  not  but  'twill  make  inc  dream  a<_rain. 


ME    END    OF    THE   FIRST   FART. 


THE    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS 

FROM 

THIS  WORLD  TO  THAT  WHICH  IS  TO  COME. 


THE     SECOND     PART. 


DELIVERED  UNDEE 

THE    SIMILITUDE    OF    A    DREAM. 

WHEREIN  IS  SET  FORTH  THE  MANNER  OF  THE  SETTING  OUT  OF  CHRISTIAN'S  WIFE  AND  CHILDREN 
THEIR  DANGEROUS  JOURNEY,   AND  SAFE  ARRIVAL  AT  THE  DESIRED  COUNTRY. 

By   JOHN    BUNYAN. 


used  similitudes' — Hosea  xii.  10. 


Loodon :  Printed  for  Nathaniel  Ponder,  at  the  Peacock  in  the  Poultry,  near  the  Church,  1684. 


THE    AUTHOR'S    WAY 

OF 

SENDING  FORTH  HIS  SECOND  PART  OF  THE  PILGRIM. 


Go  now,  my  little  book,  to  every  place, 

Where  my  first  Pilgrim  has  but  shown  his  face, 

Call  at  their  door.     If  any  say,  Who's  there  ? 

Then  answer  thou,  Christiana  is  here. 

If  they  bid  thee  come  in,  then  enter  thou, 

With  all  thy  boys ;  and  then,  as  thou  know'st  how, 

Tell  who  they  are,  also  from  whence  they  came ; 

Perhaps  they  know  them  by  their  looks,  or  name. 

But  if  they  should  not,  ask  them  yet  again 

If  formerly  they  did  not  entertain 

One  Christian,  a  Pilgrim  ?     If  they  say 

They  did ;  and  were  delighted  in  Ins  way : 

Then  let  them  know,  that  those  related  were 

Unto  him ;  yea,  his  wife  and  children  are. 

Tell  them,  that  they  have  left  their  house  and 
home, 
Are  turned  Pilgrims,  seek  a  world  to  come ; 
That  they  have  met  witli  hardships  in  the  way, 
That  they  do  meet  with  troubles  night  and  day ; 
That  they  have  trod  on  serpents,  fought  with  devils, 
Have  also  overcome  a  many  evils. 
Yea,  tell  them  also  of  the  next,  who  have 
Of  love  to  pilgrimage,  been  stout  and  brave 
Defenders  of  that  way,  and  how  they  still 
Refuse  this  world,  to  do  their  Father's  will. 

Go,  tell  them  also  of  those  dainty  things, 
That  pilgrimage  unto  the  Pilgrim  brings. 
Let  them  acquainted  be,  too,  how  they  are 
Beloved  of  their  King,  under  his  care : 
What  goodly  mansions  for  them  he  provides, 
Tho'  they  meet  with  rough  winds,  and  swelling  tides, 


How  brave  a  calm  they  will  enjoy  at  last, 
Who  to  their  Lord,  and  by  his  ways  hold  fast. 

Perhaps  with  heart  and  hand  they  will  embrace. 
Thee,  as  they  did  my  firstling,  and  will  grace 
Thee,  and  thy  fellows,  with  such  cheer  and  fare, 
As  show  will  they  of  Pilgrims  lovers  are. 

OBJECTION  I. 

But  how,  if  they  will  not  bebeve  of  me 
That  I  am  truly  thine ;  'cause  some  there  be 
That  counterfeit  the  Pilgrim  and  his  name, 
Seek,  by  disguise,  to  seem  the  very  same ; 
And  by  that  means  have  wrought  themselves  into 
The  hands  and  houses  of  I  know  not  who  ? 


'Tis  true,  some  have  of  late,  to  counterfeit 
My  Pilgrim,  to  their  own  my  title  set ; ' 
Yea  others,  half  my  name  and  title  too 
Have  stitched  to  their  book,  to  make  them  do ; 
But  yet  they,  by  their  features,  do  declare 
Themselves  not  mine  to  be,  whose  e'er  they  are. 

If  such  thou  meet'st  with,  then  thine  only  way 
Before  them  all,  is,  to  say  out  thy  say, 
In  thine  own  native  language,  which  no  man 
Now  useth,  nor  with  ease  dissemble  can. 
If,  after  all,  they  still  of  you  shall  doubt, 
Thinking  that  you,  like  gipsies,  go  about 


3  In  1683,  the  year  before  Bunyan  published  his  Second 
Part,  a  little  volume  was  printed  under  the  same  title,  by  some 
anonymous  author ;  for  a  description  of  it,  see  the  Introduc- 
tion, p.  57.— (Ed.) 


THE   AUTHOR'S   WAY  OF   SENDING   FORTH    HIS   SECOND   PART. 


169 


In  naughty  wise,  the  country  i"  defile, 
Or  that  you  seek  good  people  to  beguile 
With  things  unwarrantable;  send  for  me, 

And  I  will  testily  you  Pilgrims  be. 

Yea,  I  will  testily  thai  only  you 

j\ly  Pilgrims  arc;  ami  1  iiat  alone  will  do. 

OBJECTION  II. 

Bui  yet,  perhaps,  1  may  inquire  for  him, 
Of  those  that  wish  him  damned,  life  and  limb. 
What  shall  1  do,  when  I  at  such  a  door 
For  Pilgrims  ask,  and  they  shall  rage  the  more?1 

ANSWER. 
Fright  not  thyself,  my  book,  for  such  bugbears 
Arc  n. ifhing  else  but  ground  for  groundless  fears. 
My  Pilgrim's  book  has  travcll'd  sea  and  land, 
Yet  could  I  never  come  to  understand 
That  it  was  slighted,  or  turn'd  out  of  door 
By  any  kingdom,  were  they  rich  or  poor. 

In  France  and  Flanders,  where  men  kill  each  other, 
My  Pilgrim  is  esteein'd  a  friend,  a  brother. 

In  Holland  too,  'tis  said,  as  I  am  told, 
My  Pilgrim  is  with  some  worth  more  than  gold. 

Highlanders  and  wild  Irish  can  agree 
My  Pilgrim  should  familiar  with  them  be. 

'Tis  in  New  England  under  such  advance, 
Receives  there  so  much  loving  countenance, 
As  to  be  trimm'd,  new  cloth' d,  and  deck'd  with  gems 
That  it  may  show  its  features  and  its  limbs, 
Yet  more ;  so  comely  doth  my  Pilgrim  walk, 
That  of  lrlm  thousands  daily  sing  and  talk.2 

If  you  draw  nearer  home,  it  will  appear, 
My  Pilgrim  knows  no  ground  of  shame  or  fear ; 
City  and  country  will  him  entertain 
With,  Welcome  Pilgrim ;  yea,  they  can't  refrain 
From  smiling,  if  my  Pilgrim  be  but  by, 
Or  shows  his  head  in  any  company. 

Brave  gallants  do  my  Pilgrim  hug  and  love, 
Esteem  it  much,  yea,  value  it  above 
Things  of  a  greater  bulk  :  yea,  with  delight, 
Say,  My  lark's  leg  is  better  than  a  kite. 

Young  ladies,  and  young  gentlewomen  too, 
Do  no  small  kindness  to  my  Pilgrim  show. 
Their  cabinets,  their  bosoms,  and  their  hearts, 
My  Pilgrim  has,  'cause  he  to  them  imparts 


1  While  the  carnal  heart  is  in  a  state  of  such  hitter  enmity 
against  the  gospel,  it  requires  wisdom  to  introduce  the  subject 
of  religion;  still  we  have  a  duty  to  perforin,  even  it'  the  truth 
should  prove  a  savour  of  death  uuto  death.  We  must  live  the 
gospel  in  the  sight  of  such,  and  not  be  daunted  from  inviting 
them  to  become  pilgrims  to  the  Celestial  City. — (Ed.) 

2  I  went  over  the  Tract  House  iu  New  York,  and  was  de- 
lighted to  sec  there  six  steam-presses.  During  the  last  year, 
they  printed  SEVENTEEN  thousand  copies  of  Bunyau's 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress.' — {American  Scenes,  by  Eben.  Davies, 
London,  1849,  p.  299.) 

VOL.  III. 


His  pretty  riddles  in  such  wholesome  strains, 
As  yields  them  profit  double  to  their  pains 
Of  reading ;  yea,  I  think,  I  may  be  bold 
To  say,  some  prize  him  far  above  their  gohl 

The  very  children  that  do  walk  the  street, 
If  they  do  but  my  holy  Pilgrim  meet, 
Salute  him  will,  will  wish  him  well,  and  say, 
lie  is  the  only  stripling  of  the  day. 

They  that  have  never  seen  him,  yet  admire 
What  they  have  heard  of  him,  and  much  desire 
To  have  his  company,  and  hear  him  tell 
Those  pilgrim  stories  which  he  knows  so  well. 

Yea,  some  who  did  not  love  him  at  the  first, 
But  call'd  him  fool  and  noddy,  say  they  must, 
Now  they  have  seen  and  heard  him,  him  commend 
And  to  those  whom  they  love,  they  do  him  send.3 

Wherefore,  my  Second  Part,  thou  need'st  not  be 
Afraid  to  show  thy  head;  none  can  hurt  thee, 
That  wish  but  well  to  him  that  went  before, 
'Cause  thou  com'st  after  with  a  second  store 
Of  things  as  good,  as  rich,  as  profitable, 
For  young,  for  old,  for  stagg'ring,  and  for  stable. 

OBJECTION  III. 

But  some  there  be  that  say,  He  laughs  too  loud ; 
And  some  do  say,  His  head  is  in  a  cloud. 
Some  say,  His  words  and  stories  are  so  dark, 
They  know  not  how,  by  them,  to  find  his  mark. 

ANSWER. 

One  may,  I  think,  say,  Both  his  laughs  and  cries, 
May  well  be  guess'd  at  by  his  wat'ry  eyes. 
Some  things  are  of  that  nature,  as  to  make 
One's  fancy  chuckle,  while  his  heart  doth  ache. 
When  Jacob  saw  his  Rachel  with  the  sheep, 
He  did  at  the  same  time  both  kiss  and  weep. 

Whereas  some  say,  A  cloud  is  in  his  head, 
That  doth  but  show  how  wisdom's  covered 
With  its  own  mantles,  and  to  stir  the  mind 
To  a  search  after  what  it  fain  would  find. 
Things  that  seem  to  be  hid  in  words  obscure, 
Do  but  the  godly  mind  the  more  allure 
To  study  what  those  sayings  should  contain, 
That  speak  to  us  in  such  a  cloudy  strain. 

I  also  know  a  dark  similitude 
Will  on  the  fancy  more  itself  intrude, 
And  will  stick  faster  in  the  heart  and  head, 
Than  things  from  similes  not  borrowed. 

3  This  poem  was  written  within  six  years  of  the  first  publi- 
cation of  the  First  Part.  In  that  short  period  it  had  become 
so  wonderfully  popular  as  to  have  been  extensively  circulated 
in  the  languages  which  the  author  mimes,  and  to  have  had  a 
large  circulation  iu  America.  After  another  four  years,  namely 
in  1688,  upwards  of  one  hundred  thousand  copies  had  becu 
issued  iu  English  ;  and  to  the  present  time  it  has  been  steadily 
increasing  in  popularity,  so  that,  after  one  hundred  and  sevcuty 
years  have  elapsed,  it  is  more  popular  than  ever.  This  is  a  fact 
without  parallel  in  the  annals  of  literature.— (Ed.) 

22 


170 


THE   AUTHOR'S   WAY   OF   SENDING  FORTH   HIS   SECOND   PART. 


Wherefore,  my  book,  let  no  discouragement 
Hinder  thy  travels.     Behold,  thou  art  sent 
To  friends,  not  foes ;  to  friends  that  will  give  place 
To  thee,  thy  Pilgrims,  and  thy  words  embrace. 

Besides,  what  my  first  Pilgrim  left  conceal'd : 
Thou,  my  brave  second  Pilgrim,  hast  reveal' d ; 
What  Christian  left  lock'd  up,  and  went  his  way, 
Sweet  Christiana  opens  with  her  key.1 

OBJECTION  IV. 

But  some  love  not  the  method  of  your  first ; 
Romance  they  count  it,  throw 't  away  as  dust, 
If  I  should  meet  with  such,  what  should  I  say  ? 
j\J  ust  I  slight  them  as  tbey  slight  me,  or  nay  ? 

ANSWER. 

My  Christiana,  if  with  such  thou  meet, 
By  all  means,  in  all  loving-wise,  them  greet ; 
Render  them  not  reviling  for  revile ; 
But  if  they  frown,  I  prithee  on  them  smile ; 
Perhaps  'tis  nature,  or  some  ill  report, 
Has  made  them  thus  despise,  or  thus  retort. 

Some  love  no  cheese,  some  love  no  fish,  and  some 
Love  not  their  friends,  nor  their  own  house  or  home ; 
Some  start  at  pig,  slight  chicken,  love  not  fowl, 
More  than  they  love  a  cuckoo,  or  an  owl ; 
Leave  such,  my  Christiana,  to  their  choice, 
And  seek  those  who  to  find  thee  will  rejoice ; 
By  no  means  strive,  but  in  humble-wise, 
Present  thee  to  them  in  thy  Pilgrim's  guise. 

Go,  then,  my  little  book,  and  show  to  all 
That  entertain,  and  bid  thee  welcome  shall, 
What  thou  shalt  keep  close,  shut  up  from  the  rest, 
And  wish  what  thou  shalt  show  them  may  be  blest 
To  them  for  good,  may  make  them  choose  to  be 
Pilgrims  better  by  far  than  thee  or  me. 

Go,  then,  I  say,  tell  all  men  who  thou  art ; 
Say,  I  am  Christiana,  and  my  part 
Is  now,  with  my  four  sons,  to  tell  you  what 
It  is  for  men  to  take  a  Pilgrim's  lot. 

Go  also,  tell  them  who  and  what  they  be, 
That  now  do  go  on  pilgrimage  with  thee ; 
Say,  Here's  my  neighbour,  Mercy,  she  is  one 
That  has  long  time  with  me  a  Pilgrim  gone. 
Come,  see  her  in  her  virgin  face,  and  learn 
'Twixt  idle  ones  and  Pilgrims  to  discern. 
Yea,  let  young  damsels  learn  of  her  to  prize 
The  world  which  is  to  come,  in  any  wise. 
When  little  tripping  maidens  follow  God, 
And  leave  old  doting  sinners  to  his  rod ; 
'Tis  like  those  days  wherein  the  young  ones  cried, 
Hosanna !  to  whom  old  ones  did  deride. 

1  After  the  author  had  heard  the  criticisms  of  friends  and 
foes  upon  the  First  Part,  he  adopts  this  second  narrative  to  be 
a  key  explaining  many  things  which  appeared  dark  in  Chris-  I 
tian's  journey.— -(Ed.)  I 


Next,  tell  them  of  old  Honest,  who  you  found 
With  his  white  bans,  treading  the  Pilgrim's  ground. 
Yea,  tell  them  how  plain-hearted  this  man  was, 
How  after  his  good  Lord  he  bare  bis  cross ; 
Perhaps  with  some  gray  head  this  may  prevail 
With  Christ  to  fall  in  love,  and  sin  bewail. 

Tell  them  also,  how  Master  Fearing  went 
On  pilgrimage,  and  how  the  time  Le  spent 
In  solitariness,  with  fears  and  cries ; 
And  how,  at  last,  he  won  the  joyful  prize. 
He  was  a  good  man,  though  much  down  in  spirit, 
He  is  a  good  man,  and  doth  life  inherit. 

Tell  them  of  Master  Feeble-mind  also, 
Who,  not  before,  but  still  behind  would  go. 
Show  them  also,  how  he  had  like  been  slain, 
And  how  one  Great-heart  did  his  life  regain. 
This  man  was  true  of  heart,  though  weak  in  grace, 
One  might  true  godliness  read  in  his  face. 

Then  tell  them  of  Master  Beady-to-halt, 
A  man  with  crutches,  but  much  without  fault ; 
Tell  them  how  Master  Feeble-mind  and  he 
Did  love,  and  m  opinions  much  agree. 
And  let  all  know,  though  weakness  was  their  chance, 
Yet  sometimes  one  could  sing,  the  other  dance. 

Forget  not  Master  Valiant-for-the-truth, 
That  man  of  courage,  though  a  very  youth. 
Tell  every  one  his  spirit  was  so  stout, 
No  man  could  ever  make  him  face  about ; 
And  how  Great-heart  and  he  could  not  forbear, 
But  put  down  Doubting  Castle,  slay  Despair. 

Overlook  not  Master  Despondency,  , 
Nor  Much-afraid,  his  daughter,  though  they  lie 
Under  such  mantles,  as  may  make  them  look 
(With  some)  as  if  their  God  had  them  forsook. 
They  softly  went,  but  sure,  and  at  the  end, 
Found  that  the  Lord  of  Pilgrims  was  their  friend. 
When  thou  hast  told  the  world  of  all  these  things, 
Then  turn  about,  my  book,  and  touch  these  strings, 
Which,  if  but  touch'd,  will  such  music  make, 
They'll  make  a  cripple  dance,  a  giant  quake. 

These  riddles  that  lie  couch'd  within  thy  breast, 
Freely  propound,  expound ;  and  for  the  rest 
Of  thy  mysterious  Hues,  let  them  remain 
For  those  whose  nimble  fancies  shall  them  gain. 

Now  may  this  little  book  a  blessing  be 
To  those  who  love  this  little  book  and  me ; 
And  may  its  buyer  have  no  cause  to  say, 
His  money  is  but  lost  or  thrown  away ; 
Yea,  may  this  Second  Pilgrim  yield  that  fruit, 
As  may  with  each  good  Pilgrim's  fancy  suit ; 
And  may  it  persuade  some  that  go  astray, 
To  turn  their  feet  and  heart  to  the  right  way, 
Is  the  hearty  prayer  of 

The  Author, 

John  Btjntan. 


THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS; 


SIMILITUDE    OP    A    DREAM. 


THE  SECOND  TART. 


Courteous  Companions, 


Some  time  since,  to  tell  you  my  dream  that  I  had 
of  Christian  the  Pilgrim,  and  of  his  dangerous 
journey  towards  the  Celestial  Country,  was  pleas- 
ant to  me,  and  profitable  to  you.  I  told  you  then, 
also,  what  I  saw  concerning-  his  wife  and  children, 
and  how  unwilling  they  were  to  go  with  him  on 
pilgrimage,  insomuch  that  he  was  forced  to  go  on 
his  progress  without  them  ;  for  he  durst  not  run 
the  danger  of  that  destruction  which  he  feared 
would  come  by  staying  with  them  in  the  City  of 
Destruction.  Wherefore,  as  1  then  showed  you, 
lie  left  them  and  departed.1 

Now  it  hath  so  happened,  through  the  multi- 
plicity of  business,  that  I  have  been  much  hindered 
and  kept  back  from  my  wonted  travels  into  those 
parts  whence  he  went,  and  so  could  not,  till  now, 
obtain  an  opportunity  to  make  further  inquiry  after 
whom  he  left  behind,  that  I  might  give  you  an 
account  of  them.2  But  having  had  some  concerns 
that  way  of  late,  I  went  down  again  thitherward. 
Now,  having  taken  up  my  lodgings  in  a  wood,  about 
a  mile  off  the  place,  as  I  slept,  I  dreamed  again.3 

And  as  I  was  in  my  dream,  behold,  an  aged 
gentleman  came  by  where  I  lay ;  and  because  he 
was  to  go  some  part  of  the  way  that  I  was  travel- 
ling, methought  I  got  up  and  went  with  him.  So 
as  we  walked,  and  as  travellers  usually  do,  I  was 

1  This  address  prepares  the  reader  for  a  greater  variety  of 
experience  and  adventures  than  lie  meets  with  in  the  First 
Part;  all  of  which  are  different:  and  the  behaviour  of  the 
several  pilgrims,  under  their  various  calamities,  are  beautifully 
described.  Their  conflicts  and  their  consolations  being  mani- 
fold, convince  us  that  the  exercises  of  every  experii  n 
arc  for  the  must  part  dissimilar,  notwithstanding,  if  they  pro- 
ceed from  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  they  have  the  same  happy 
tendency.— (.Mason.)  The  Second  Part  is  peculiarly  adapted 
to  direct  and  encourage  female  Christians  and  young  persons; 
and  it  is  hoped  will  be  a  blessing  to  such.— (Border.)  Per- 
haps the  Second  Part  of  this  pilgrimage  comes  nearer  to  the 
ordinary  experience  of  the  great  multitude  of  Christians  than 
the  First  Part  j  and  this  may  have  been  Banyan's  intention. 
The  First  Part  shows,  as  in  Christian,  Faithful,  and  Hopeful, 
the  ureal  examples  and  strong  lights  of  this  pilgrimage  .  it  is 
as  if  Paul  and  Lather  were  passing  over  the  scene.  "The 
Second  Part  shows  a  variety  of  pilgrims,  whose  stature  and 
experience  arc  more  on  a  level  with  our  own.  The  First  Part 
is  more  severe,  sublime,  inspiring;  the  Second  Part  is  more 
soothing  and  comforting.  The  First  Tart  has  deep  and  awful 
shadows  mingled  with  its  light,  terribly  instructive,  and  like 


as  if  we  fell  into  discourse,  and  our  talk  happened 
to  be  about  Christian  and  his  travels;  for  thus  I 
began  with  the  old  man: 

Sir,  said  I,  what  town  is  that  there  below,  that 
lieth  on  the  left  hand  of  our  way  ? 

Then  said  Mr.  Sagacity  (for  that  was  his  name), 
It  is  the  City  of  Destruction,  a  populous  place,  but 
possessed  with  a  very  ill-conditioned  and  idle  sort 
of  people. 

I  thought  that  was  that  city,  quoth  I ;  I  went 
once  myself  through  that  town,  and,  therefore, 
know  that  this  report  you  give  of  it  is  true. 

Sag.  Too  true ;  I  wish  I  could  speak  truth  in 
speaking  better  of  them  that  dwell  therein. 

Well,  Sir,  quoth  I,  then  I  perceive  you  to  be  a 
well-meaning  man  ;  and  so  one  that  takes  pleasure 
to  hear  and  tell  of  that  which  is  good.  Pray,  did 
you  never  hear  what  happened  to  a  man  some  time 
ago  in  this  town,  whose  name  was  Christian,  that 
went  on  pilgrimage  up  towards  the  higher  regions  ? 

Sag.  Hear  of  him  !  Aye,  and  I  also  heard  of 
the  molestations,  troubles,  wars,  captivities,  cries, 
groans,  frights,  and  fears  that  he  met  with  and  had 
in  his  journey  ;  besides,  I  must  tell  you,  all  our 
country  rings  of  him.  There  are  but  few  houses 
that  have  heard  of  him  and  his  doings  hut  have 
sought  after  and  got  the  records  of  his  christians  are 
pilgrimage;  yea,  I  think  I  may  say  JS**^* 
that  that  his  hazardous  journey,  has  though  called 
,  ■  fo013       wllue 

got  a  many  well-wishers  to  his  ways;     they  are  here. 

warnings  from  hell  and  the  grave.  The  Second  Part  is  more 
continually  and  uninterruptedly  cheerful,  full  of  good  nature 
and  pleasantry,  and  showing  the  pilgrimage  in  lights  and  shades 
that  are  common  to  weaker  Christians. — (Cheeyer.) 

2  The  First  Pari  bad  been  published  six  years,  during  which 
time  Mr.  Bunyan  had  been  so  folly  occupied  bj  bis  pastoral 
labours  ami  frequent  preaching  in  different  parts  of  England, 
that  he  had  uot  been  able  to  accomplish  his  design  of  publishing 
A  Female  Pilgrim's  Progress.  He  was  with  out  exception 
the  mo-t  popular  preacher  of  his  day.—  (IvimeyO 

3  The  First  Part  was  written  in  Bedford  jail;  t  hi- is 'about 
amiieoil  the  place,1  at  thevillageof  Blstow,  where  Mr.  I 
resided,  and  where  his  house  is  still  standing— a  very 
cottage,  and  an  object  of  curiosity,  as  is  also  the  very  ancient 
church  and  tower.     The  toner  answer.-  to  the  description  of 
the  'steeple-house'  in  which  Mr.  Bunyan  was  i 

ing  the  bells.    '  The  main  beam  that  lay  overthwart  tie 
from  side  to  side/  and  under  which  h 

bells  should  fall  and  kill  him,'  presents  exactly  that  appear- 
ance.— (lvimey.) 


172 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


for  though,  when  he  was  here,  he  was  fool  in  every 
man's  mouth,  yet,  now  he  is  gone,  he  is  highly 
commended  of  all.  For,  it  is  said,  he  lives  bravely 
where  he  is ;  yea,  many  of  them  that  are  resolved 
never  to  run  his  hazards,  yet  have  their  mouths 
water  at  his  gains.1 

They  may,  quoth  I,  well  think,  if  they  think 
anything  that  is  true,  that  he  liveth  well  where  he 
is;  for  he  now  lives  at  and  in  the  Fountain  of 
Life,  and  has  what  he  has  without  labour  and 
sorrow,  for  there  is  no  grief  mixed  therewith. 
fBut,  pray,  what  talk  have  the  people  about 
him?]2 

Sag.  Talk!  the  people  talk  strangely  about 
him ;  some  say  that  he  now  walks  in  white,  Re. 
iii.  4 ;  vi.  ii ;  that  he  has  a  chain  of  gold  about  his 
neck ;  that  he  has  a  crown  of  gold,  beset  with 
pearls,  upon  his  head.  Others  say  that  the  Shining 
Ones,  that  sometimes  showed  themselves  to  him  in 
his  journey,  are  become  his  companions,  and  that 
he  is  as  familiar  with  them  in  the  place  where 
he  is  as  here  one  neighbour  is  with  another.  Be- 
sides, it  is  confidently  affirmed  concerning  him, 
that  the  King  of  the  place  where  he  is  has  be- 
stowed upon  him  already  a  very  rich  and  pleasant 
dwelling  at  court,  Zee.  iii.  i ;  and  that  he  every  day 
eateth,  Lu.  xiv.  is,  and  drinketh,  and  walketh,  and 
talketh  with  him ;  and  receiveth  of  the  smiles  and 
favours  of  him  that  is  Judge  of  all  there.  Moreover, 
it  is  expected  of  some,  that  his  Prince,  the  Lord 
of  that  country,  will  shortly  come  into  these  parts, 
and  will  know  the  reason,  if  they  can  give  any,  why 
his  neighbours  set  so  little  by  him,  and  had  him 
so  much  in  derision,  when  they  perceived  that  he 
would  be  a  pilgrim.  Jude  u,  is.  For,  they  say,  that 
now  he  is  so  in  the  affections  of  his  Prince,  and 
that  his  Sovereign  is  so  much  concerned  with  the 
Christian's  Kin?  indignities  that  were  cast  upon  Chris- 
n-iiitakeChris-  tian,  when  he  became  a  pilgrim,  that 
he  will  look  upon  all  as  if  done  unto 
himself;3  and  no  marvel,  for  it  was  for  the  love 


1  This  is  quite  natural,  aud  very  common.  The  men  of  this 
world  will  canonize  those  for  saints,  when  dead,  whom  they 
stigmatized  with  the  vilest  names  when  living.  Besides  many 
others  I  could  mention,  this  I  have  peculiarly  remarked  in 
respect  to  that  man  of  God,  that  faithful  minister  of  Christ, 
the  late  Rev.  Mr.  Whitefield.  Scarce  any  one  went  through 
more  public  reproach  than  he  did  ;  yet  how  often  have  I  been 
amazed  to  hear  persons  who  held  him,  his  character  aud  con- 
duct, in  the  vilest  contempt  when  living,  who,  now  he  is  dead, 
speak  iu  the  most  respectful  manner  of  him  !  0  let  us  leave 
our  characters  to  him  who  died  for  our  sins,  and  to  whom  we 
can  commit  our  souls. — (Mason.)  'The  memory  of  the  just 
is  blessed.'  All  men's  minds  water  at  a  pilgrim's  gains,  while 
they  are  resolved  never  to  run  a  pilgrim's  hazards, 

0  let  me  die  his  death  !   all  nature  cri^s : 
Then  live  bis  life — all  nature  (alters  there. 

2  These  Words  were  introduced  after  the  author's  decease. 
Not  being  able  to  discover  by  what  authority  they  were  added, 
I  have  put  them  within  brackets. — (Ed.) 

3  What  a  thunderbolt  is  this !      Reader,  have  you  ever 


that  he  had  to  his  Prince  that  he  ventured  as  he 
did.4  Lu.  x.  ig. 

I  dare  say,  quoth  I,  I  am  glad  on  it ;  I  am  glad 
for  the  poor  man's  sake,  for  that  he  now  has  rest 
from  his  labour,  Re.  xiv.  13 ;  and  for  that  he  now 
reapeth  the  benefit  of  his  tears  with  joy,  rs.  cxxtu 
5,  6 ;  and  for  that  he  has  got  beyond  the  gunshot 
of  his  enemies,  and  is  out  of  the  reach  of  them 
that  hate  him.  I  also  am  glad,  for  that  a  rumour 
of  these  things  is  noised  abroad  in  this  country ; 
who  can  tell  but  that  it  may  work  some  good  effect 
on  some  that  are  left  behind  ?  But,  pray  Sir, 
while  it  is  fresh  in  my  mind,  do  you  hear  anything 
of  his  wife  and  children  ?  Poor  hearts  !  I  wonder 
in  my  mind  what  they  do.5 

Sag.  Who!  Christiana  and  her  sons?  They 
are  like  to  do  as  well  as  did  Christian  Good  tidings  of 
himself;  for  though  they  all  played  JS*S%%. 
the  fool  at  the  first,  and  would  by  no  de- 
means be  persuaded  by  either  the  tears  or  entreaties 
of  Christian,  yet  second  thoughts  have  wrought 
wonderfully  with  them ;  so  they  have  packed  up, 
and  are  also  gone  after  him.6 

Better  and  better,  quoth  I.  But  what !  wife 
and  children,  and  all  ? 

Sag.  It  is  true ;  I  can  give  you  an  account  of 
the  matter,  for  I  was  upon  the  spot  at  the  instant, 
and  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  whole 
affair. 

Then,  said  I,  a  man,  it  seems,  may  report  it  for 
a  truth  ? 

Sag.  You  need  not  fear  to  affirm  it;  I  mean 
that  they  are  all  gone  on  pilgrimage,  both  the 
good  woman  and  her  four  boys.  And  being  (we 
are,  as  I  perceive)  going  some  considerable  way 

spoken  harshly  to,  or  persecuted,  a  child  of  God — a  poor  peni- 
tent sinner  ?  Hear  the  word  of  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth — 
'  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  the  least  of  these  my  brethren, 
ye  have  done  it  unto  me.' — (Ed.)  Read  this  and  tremble,  ye 
who  speak  evil  of  those  things  which  ye  know  not. — (J.  B.) 

4  Mark  this  well.  No  matter  what  profession  we  make,  if 
the  love  of  Christ  be  not  its  foundation.  All  is  nothing  with- 
out this  love.  It  is  this  love  in  the  heart  that,  like  oil  in  the 
lamp,  keeps  the  profession  of  Christ  burning  bright.  ■  The 
more  this  love  is  felt,  the  more  ardent  the  fire  of  zeal  burns, 
and  the  more  steadily  we  shall  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord ; 
and  never  leave  off  nor  give  over,  till  we  see  and  enjoy  the 
Lord  in  his  kingdom. — (Mason.) 

6  It  is  not  improbable  that  Mr.  Bunyan  had  an  eye  to  his 
own  wife  and  four  children,  and  that  .these  were  the  leading- 
characters  in  this  religious  drama ;  and  also  that  the  history 
of  Christians  of  his  acquaintance  furnished  the  other  person- 
ages.— (Ivimey.)  The  Editor  differs  in  this  opinion,  believing 
that  all  the  experience  narrated  iu  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  '  is 
drawn  from  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  which  fits  it  for  every 
age  of  the  church,  to  the  final  consummation  of  all  things. 
Others  have  agreed  with  Mr.  Ivimey.  Reader,  you  must 
form  your  own  opinion.—  (Ed.) 

8  Though  moral  suasion,  and  all  the  affectionate  arguments 
from  a  tender  husband,  or  an  affectionate  parent,  may  prove 
ineffectual  for  the  present ;  yet,  when  the  Lord  works  by  his 
mighty  power,  then  only  they  prove  effectual  to  saving  pur- 
poses. Then  let  us  not  neglect  our  duty,  but  be  earnest  in 
it,  and  leave  the  event  to  sovereign  grace. — (Mason.) 


TIIK    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


173 


together,  I  will  give  you  au  account  of  the  whole 
of  the  matter. 

This  Christiana  (for  that  was  her  name  from  the 
day  that  she,  with  her  children,  betook  them 

First  Part,     tn  ;l  pilgrim 'b  life),  after  her  husband 

p.  164.         was  L,.,I1U.  oyer  t|1(1  pjyg^  un,i  ahe  could 

hear  of  liim  no  more,  her  thoughts  began  to  work 
in  her  mind.  First,  for  that  she  had  lost  her  hus- 
band, ami  for  that  the  loving  bond  of  that  relation 
was  utterly  broken  betwixt  them.     For  yon  know, 

said  lie  to  me,  nature  can  do  no  less  but  enter- 
tain the  living  with  many  a  heavy  cogitation  in  the 
remembrance  of  the  loss  of  loving  relations.  This, 
therefore,  of  her  husband  did  cost  her  many  a  tear. 

But  this  was  not  all;  for  Christiana  did  also 
begin  to  consider  with  herself,  whether  her  unhe- 
al irk  this,  you  coming  hehaviour  towards  her  husband 
was  not  one  cause  that  she  saw  him 
reiatious.  no  more ;    an(|   that  in  such  sort   he 

was  taken  away  from  her.  And  upon  this,  came 
into  her  mind,  by  swarms,  all  her  unkind,  unna- 
tural, and  ungodly  carriages  to  her  dear  friend; 
which  also  clogged  her  conscience,  and  did  load 
her  with  guilt.  She  was,  moreover,  much  hroken 
with  calling  to  rememhrance  the  restless  groans, 
hrinish  tears,  and  self-hemoanings  of  her  husband, 
and  how  she  did  harden  her  heart  against  all  his 
entreaties,  and  loving  persuasions,  of  her  and  her 
sons,  to  go  with  him  ;  yea,  there  was  not  anything 
that  Christian  either  said  to  her  or  did  before  her 
all  the  while  that  his  burden  did  hang  on  his  back, 
but  it  returned  upon  her  like  a  flash  of  lightning, 
and  rent  the  caul  of  her  heart  in  sunder.  Specially 
First  Part,  that  hitter  outcry  of  his,  '  What  shall 
p-  S9-  I  do  to  be  saved  ? '  did  ring  in  her 
ears  most  dolefully.1 

Then  said  she  to  her  children,  Sons,  we  are  all 
undone.  I  have  sinned  away  your  father,  and  he 
is  gone ;  he  would  have  had  us  with  him,  hut  I 
would  not  go  myself.      I   also   have  hindered  you 

1  Those  who  cruelly  and  unkindly  treat  their  godly  reiatious 
and  friends  on  account  of  theii  religion,  mast 
in  the  bitterness  of  their  spirit,  and  groan  in  the  sorrow  of 
•heir  soul,  if  ever  the  Lord  grants  them  repentance  unto  life. 
— (Mason.) 

•  Happy  i-  that  death  which  brings  the  believer  to  heaven, 
and  the  surviving  relan  the  gate 

of  glory  to  one,  and  the  door  of  conversion  to  the  other. — 
I  Border.) 

3  Is  it   any  marvel,  that    a   quickened   enl 

should  be  judged  by  those  around  him,  who  an-  yel  dead  in 
their  sins,  to  be  full  of  whims  and  melancholy?  No!  it  is 
very  natural  for  them  to  think  us  fools  and  mad;  but  we  know 
that  they  really  are  so.— (Mason.) 

4  One  of  God's  cuds  in  instituting  marriage  is,  that,  under 
a  figure,  Christ  and  his  church  should  be  Bet  forth.     ] 

a  awa  t  scent  wrapped  up  in  that  relation.  Be  such  a  husband 
to  thy  believing  wife,  that  she  may  say,  God  hath  given  to  me 
a  husband  that  preaehcth  Christ  the  church  every 

day. — If  thy  wife  be  unbelieving,  then  hast  a  duty  to  perform 
under  a  double  obligation  ;  for  she  is  liable  every  moment  to 
eternal  ruin.     U  how  little  sense  of  the  worth  of  souls  is  there 


of  life.8  With  thai  thi  boys  fell  all  into  ten-., 
and  cried  out  to  go  after  their  father.  0  !  said 
Christiana,  that  it  had  been  but  our  lot  to  go  with 
him,  then  had  it  fared  well  with  us,  beyond  what 
it  is  like  to  do  now;  for  though  1  formerly  fool- 
ishly imagined,  concerning  the  troubles  of  your 
father,  that  they  proceeded  of  a  foolish  fancy  that 
he  had,  or  for  that  he  was  overrun  with  melan- 
choly humours  ;  yet  now  it  will  not  out  of  my 
|  mind  hut  that  they  sprang  from  another  cause,  to 
wit,  \'r.v  th.it  the  Light  of  light  was  given  him,  Ja.  i. 
28-25;  by  the  help  of  which,  as  I  perceive,  he  has 
I  the  snares  of  death.3  Then  they  all  wept 
again,  and  cried  out,  0  woe  worth  the  day!4 

The  next  night  Christiana  had  a  dream;  and, 
behold,  she  saw  as  if  a  broad  parch-  Christiana's 
ment  was  opened  before  her,  in  which  du;ir"- 
were  recorded  the  sum  of  her  ways,  Lu.  xviii.  18 ;  and 
the  times,  as  she  thought,  looked  very  black  upon 
her.  Then  she  cried  out  aloud  in  her  sleep, 
'  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  a  sinner!  ' '  and  the 
little  children  heard  her. 

After  this,  she  thought  she  saw  two  very  ill- 
favoured   ones  standing  by   her  lied-    Mwfc  tMg  tUi 

side,  and  saying,   What  shall  we  do     is  " 

....  o   e         i  •  ..      ewenceol  lw  U. 

with  this  woman  :   tor  she  cries  out 

for  mercy  waking  and  sleeping ;  if  she  be  suffered 
to  go  on  as  she  begins,  we  shall  lose  her  as  we  have 
lost  her  husband.  Wherefore  wre  must,  by  one 
way  or  other,  seek  to  take  her  off  from  the  thoughts 
of  what  shall  be  hereafter,  else  all  the  world  can- 
not help  it  but  she  will  become  a  pilgrim. 

Now  she  awoke  in  a  great  sweat,  also  a  trem- 
bling was  upon  her ;  but  after  a  while  she  fell  to 
sleeping  again.  And  then  she  thought  she  saw 
Christian  her  husband  in  a  place  of  Heip  against 
bliss,  among  many  immortals,  with  a  d,stuUl 
harp  in  his  hand,  standing  and  playing  upon  it 
before  one  that   sat  on  a  throne,  with  a  rainbow 

in  the  hearts  of  some  husbands !     This  is  manifest  by  their 

unchristian  carriage  to  and  before  their  wives. — 'Wives  also 

should  be  discreet,  chaste,  keepers  at  home,  good,  obedient  to 

their  own  husbands.     Why?     Because,  otherwise, the  Word 

of  God  will  be  blasphemed.  Tit.  ii.  5.     Take  heed  of  an  idling, 

talking,  wrangling  tongue.     It  is  odious  in  maid-  or  wives  to 

be  like  parrots,  not  bridling  the  tongue.   It  is  unseemly  to  see 

a  woman,  as  much  as  once  in  her  lifetime,  to  oiler  to  over-top 

her  husband.     I  do  not  intend  that  women  should  be  slaves 

by  this  subjection:   'Let  every  man  love  his  wife  as  himself, 

and  the  wife  see  that  she  reverence  her  husband.'  Ep.  v.  'i'6. 

would  not  speak  a  word  to  her  churlish  husband  until 

in  a  sober  temper,  and  his  wine  gone  out  of  him. — 

Christian  Behaviour,  vol.  ii.  pp.  558 — 561.) 

is  the  first  cry  of  an  awakened  sinner — mercy  for  the 

lost  and  miserable;  and  no  sooner  are  the  sinner's  eyes  opened 

n  ined,  di  sperate  state,  and  to  cry  for  mercy,  but  the 

god  of  this  world,  who  hitherto  had  blinded  the  eyes, and  kept 

the  heart  seeurclv  by  presumption,  now  opposes  the   I 

bo  a  throne  of  grace,  to  rcy,  and  to  the 

Saviour  of  the  lost.     Satan  does  not  easily  part  with  his  prey. 

lint  ,le>us,  the  strong  man,  armed  with  almighty  power  and 

ag  love,  will  conquer  and  casl  him  out.     That  is  the 

uercy,  or  none  could  ever  be  saved.— (Mason.) 


174 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


about  his  head.  She  saw  also  as  if  he  bowed  his 
head,  with  his  face  to  the  paved  work  that  was 
under  the  Prince's  feet,  saying,  I  heartily  thank 
my  Lord  and  King,  for  bringing  of  me  into  this 
place.  Then  shouted  a  company  of  them  that 
stood  round  about,  and  harped  with  their  harps ; 
but  no  man  living  could  tell  what  they  said,  but 
Christian  and  his  companions.1 

Next  morning,  when  she  was  up,  had  prayed  to 
God,  and  talked  with  her  children  a  while,  one 
knocked  hard  at  the  door,  to  whom  she  spake  out, 
saying,  If  thou  comest  in  God's  name,  come  in.  So 
he  said,  Amen,  and  opened  the  door,  and  saluted 
her  with  'Peace  be  to  this  house.'  The  which, 
when  he  had  done,  he  said,  Christiana,  knowest 
Convictions  tnou  wherefore  I  am  come  ?  Then  she 
seconded  with    blushed  and  trembled,  also  her  heart 

fresh  tidings  of    ,  ..... 

God's  readi-  began  to  wax  warm  with  desires  to 
ness  opar  on.  know  wnence  ne  came,  and  what  was 
his  errand  to  her.  So  he  said  unto  her,  My  name 
is  Secret  ;2  1  dwell  with  those  that  are  high.  It  is 
talked  of,  where  I  dwell,  as  if  thou  hadst  a  desire 
to  go  thither ;  also,  there  is  a  report,  that  thou 
art  aware  of  the  evil  thou  hast  formerly  done  to 
thy  husband,  in  hardening  of  thy  heart  against 
his  way,  and  in  keeping  of  these  thy  babes  in  their 
ignorance.  Christiana,  the  Merciful  One  has  sent 
me  to  tell  thee,  that  he  is  a  God  ready  to  forgive, 
and  that  he  taketh  delight  to  multiply  to  pardon 
offences.  He  also  woidd  have  thee  know,  that  he 
inviteth  thee  to  come  into  his  presence,  to  his 
table,  and  that  he  will  feed  thee  with  the  fat  of  his 
house,  and  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob  thy  father. 

There  is  Christian  thy  husband  (that  was),  with 
legions  more,  his  companions,  ever  beholding  that 
face  that  doth  minister  life  to  beholders  ;  and  they 
will  all  be  glad  when  they  shall  hear  the  sound  of 
thy  feet  step  over  thy  Father's  threshold. 

Christiana  at  this  was  greatly  abashed  in  her- 
self, and  bowing  her  head  to  the  ground,  this 
Visitor  proceeded,  and  said,   Christiana,  here  is 


I  also  a  letter  for  thee,  which  I  have  brought  from 
thy  husband's  King.  So  she  took  it  and  opened 
it,  but  it  smelt  after  the  manner  of  the  best  per- 
fume, Ca.  i.  3 ;  also  it  was  written  in  letters  of  gold. 
The  contents  of  the  letter  was,  That  the  King 
would  have  her  do  as  did  Christian  her  husband ; 
for  that  was  the  way  to  come  to  his  city,  and  to 
dwell  in  his  presence  with  joy  for  ever.  Christiana  quite 
At  this  the  good  woman  was  quite  overcome, 
overcome ;  so  she  cried  out  to  her  visitor,  Sir,  will 
you  carry  me  and  my  children  with  you,  that  we 
also  may  go  and  Avorship  this  King  ? 

Then  said  the  visitor,  Christiana,  the  bitter  is 
before  the  sweet.    Thou  must  through  _„_.... 

o       Further  instruc- 

troubles,  as  did  he  that  went  before  Won  to  Chris- 
thee,  enter  this  Celestial  City.  Where- 
fore I  advise  thee  to  do  as  did  Christian  thy  hus- 
band. Go  to  the  wicket-gate  yonder,  over  the  plain, 
for  that  stands  in  the  head  of  the  way  up  which 
thou  must  go,  and  I  wish  thee  all  good  speed.  Also 
I  advise  that  thou  put  this  letter  in  thy  bosom ; 
that  thou  read  therein  to  thyself,  and  to  thy  child- 
ren, until  you  have  got  it  by  rote  of  heart,3  for  it 
is  one  of  the  songs  that  thou  must  sing  while  thou 
art  in  this  house  of  thy  pilgrimage,  rs.  cxix.  u  ■,  also 
this  thou  must  deliver  in  at  the  further  gate.4 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  this  old  gentle- 
man, as  he  told  me  this  story,  did  himself  seem 
to  be  greatly  affected  therewith.  He,  moreover, 
proceeded  and  said,  So  Christiana  called  her  sons 
together,  and  began  thus  to  address  herself  unto 
them:  My  sons,  I  have,  as  you  may  Christianapi.ays 
perceive,  been  of  late  under  much  well  tor  her 
exercise  in  my  soul,  about  the  death  J 
of  your  father ;  not  for  that  I  doubt  at  all  of  his 
happiness,  for  I  am  satisfied  now  that  he  is  well. 
I  have  been  also  much  affected  with  the  thoughts 
of  mine  own  state  and  yours,  which  I  verily  be- 
lieve is  by  nature  miserable.  My  carriages,  also, 
to  your  father  in  his  distress,  is  a  great  load  to  my 
conscience ;  for   I   hardened   both  my  own  heart 


1  The  mind,  during  sleep,  is  often  occupied  with  those  sub- 
jects that  have  most  deeply  engaged  the  waking  thoughts;  and 
it  sometimes  pleases  God  to  make  use  of  ideas  thus  suggested, 
to  influence  the  conduct  by  exciting  fears  or  hopes.  But  if  we 
attempt  to  draw  conclusions  on  doctrines,  or  to  discover  hidden 
things  by  them,  it  becomes  a  dangerous  species  of  enthusiasm. 
— (Scott.)  There  is  no  just  reason  to  doubt  that  God  still 
employs  dreams  for  the  conversion  of  sinners.  'In  a  dream, 
in  a  vision  of  the  night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men,  in 
slumberings  upon  the  bed;  then  he  openeth  the  ears  of  men, 
and  sealeth  their  instruction.'  Job  xxxiii.  15,  16. — (Ivimey.) 
Dreams  are  sometimes  of  use  to  warn  and  encourage  a  Chris- 
tian, and  seem  to  be  really  '  from  God ;'  but  great  caution  is 
necessary,  lest  they  mislead  us,  as  they  do  weak  and  enthusi- 
astic persons.  They  must  never  be  depended  on  as  the  ground 
of  hope,  or  th  test  of  our  state ;  nothing  must  be  put  in  the 
place  of  the  Word  of  God. — (Burder.) 

2  'The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,'  Ps. 
cxi.  10  ;  and  '  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear 
hiiu.'  Ps.  xxv.  14.      The  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  never  con-  I 


vinces  the  soul  of  sin,  but  he  also  revives  and  comforts  the 
heart  with  glad  tidings  of  free  and  full  pardon  of  sin,  through 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb. — (Mason.)  Probably  the  name  of  this 
visitor  was  derived  from  what  was  said  by  the  heavenly  visitor 
to  Manoah.  Ju.  xiii.  18. — (Ivimey.)  The  silent  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  are  here  personified.  The  intimations  of 
Secret  represent  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which 
the  sinner  understands  the  real  meaning  of  the  Sacred  Scrip- 
tures as  to  the  way  of  salvation. — (Scott,  abridged.) 

3  '  Rote  of  heart ;'  *  rote '  is  to  commit  to  memory,  so  as  to 
be  able  to  repeat  fiueutly,  as  a  wheel  runs  round,  but  without 
attaching  any  idea  or  sense  to  the  words ;  'rote  of  heart '  is  to 
do  this  with  a  full  understanding  of  the  meaning. —  (Ed.) 

4  As  the  Spirit  testifies  of  Christ,  so  he  leads  the  soul  to 
Christ,  that  he  may  be  the  sinner's  only  hope,  righteousness, 
and  strength.     Thus  he  glorifies  Christ. — (Mason.) 

But  bring  thou  with  thee  a  certificate, 
To  show  thou  seest  thyself  most  desolate  ; 
Writ  by  the  Master,  with  repentance  seal'd. 

— {House  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  580.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


175 


and  your?  against  him,  and  refused  to  go  with  him 

on  pilgrimage.1 

The  thoughts  of  those  things  would  now  kill  inc. 
outright,  but  that  lor  a  dream  which  1  had  last 
night,  and  but  for  the  encouragement  that  this 
stranger  has  given  me  this  morning.  Come,  my 
children,  let  us  pack  up  and  begone  to  the  gate 
that  leads  to  the  Celestial  Country,  that  we  may 
see  your  father,  and  be  with  him  and  his  com- 
panions in  peace,  according  to  the  laws  of  that 
land. 

Then  did  her  children  burst  out  into  tears  for 
joy,  that  the  heart  of  their  mother  was  so  inclined.3 
So  their  visitor  bade  them  farewell ;  and  they  began 
to  prepare  to  set  out  for  their  journey. 

But  while  they  were  thus  about  to  be  gone,  two 
of  the  women,  that  were  Christiana's  neighbours, 
came  up  to  her  house,  and  knocked  at  her  door. 
To  whom  she  said  as  before,  If  you  come  in  God's 
Christiana's  name,  come  in.  At  this  the  women 
rtZs^JHd  ™>re  stunned  ;  for  this  kind  of  lan- 
ueighbours.  guage  they  used  not  to  hear,  or  to 
perceive  to  drop  from  the  lips  of  Christiana.3  Yet 
they  came  in ;  hut,  behold,  they  found  the  good 
woman  a-preparing  to  be  gone  from  her  house. 

So  they  began  and  said,  Neighbour,  pray  what 
is  your  meaning  by  this  ? 

Christiana  answered  and  said  to  the  eldest  of 

them,  whose  name  was  Mrs.  Timorous,  I  am  pre- 

FirstPart,       paring  for  a  journey.     (This  Timorous 

p.  105.  was  daUghter  to  him  that  met  Chris- 
tian upon  the  Hill  Difficulty,  and  would  have  had 
him  go  back  for  fear  of  the  lions.) 

Tim.   For  what  journey,  I  pray  you  ? 

Christ.  Even  to  go  after  my  good  husband.  And 
with  that  she  fell  a-weeping. 


to  visit   Chris- 

lima.      \uili 

Mi  rcj .  '.n.-   of 


1  Blessed  penitence !  Christian's  children,  when  he  set  out 
in  his  pilgrimage,  had  been  liable  to  Mr.  Banyan's  severe 
remarks  in  his  valuable  book  on  Christian  Behaviour  -. — '  I 
observe  a  vile  spirit  amongst  some  children,  who  overlook,  or 
have  slighting  or  scornful  thoughts  of  their  parents.  Such  an 
one  hath  got  just  the  heart  of  a  dog  or  a  beast,  that  will  bite 
those  that  begot  them.  But  my  father  is  poor,  and  I  am  rich, 
and  it  will  be  a  hiuderance  to  mc  to  respect  him.  1  tell  thee, 
thou  arguest  like  an  atheist  and  a  beast,  and  standest  full  flat 
against  the  Son  of  God.  Mar.  vii.  9 — 13.  Must  a  little  of  the 
glory  of  the  butterfly  make  thee  not  honour  thy  father  and 
mother?  Little  dost  thou  know  how  many  prayers,  sighs,  and 
tears  have  been  wrung  from  their  hearts  on  thine  account.' 
—  (Vol.  ii.  pp.  502,  503.)— (Ed.) 

2  The  awakening  of  a  sinner  may  be  effected  by  very  dif- 
ferent means.  Lydia's  heart  was  opened  through  attern 
PanTs  ministry ;  the  jailer's,  through  the  alarm  produced  in 
his  mind  by  the  fear  of  disgrace  and  punishment.  Christian 
was  brought  to  a  sense  of  his  lost  condition  by  reading  the 
Scriptures;  Christiana,  by  reflecting,  after  the  death  of  her 
husband,  upon  her  unkind  treatment  of  him  on  account  of  his 
religion,  the  thought  of  which  'rent  the  caul  of  her  heart  iu 
sunder;'  and  the  four  boys,  by  the  conversation  of  their  mother 
with  them  about  their  departed  father,  aud  about  her  having 
neglected  their  souls.  Religion  is  a  personal  concern,  aud 
begins  with  repentance  and  sorrow  for  sin.  Children  are  not 
saved  by  the  faith  of  their  parents,  but  must  be  individually 


Tim.   I  hope  not  so,  good  neighbour;  pray,  for 

your  poor  children's  sakes,  do  not  so   „. 

,  Iimormi 

unwomanly  cast  away  yourself. 

Christ.  Nay,  my  children  shall  go 
'  with  me,  not  one  of  them  is  willing  to 
stay  behind.1 

Tim.  I  wonder,  in  my  very  heart,  what,  or  who 
has  brought  you  into  this  mind. 

Christ.  Oh!  neighbour,  knew  you  but  as  much 
as  I  do,  I  doubt  not  but  that  you  would  go  with  me. 

Tim.  Prithee,  what  new  knowledge  hast  thou 
got,  that  so  worketh  off  thy  mind  from  thy  friends, 
and  that  teinpteth  thee  to  go,  nobody  knows  where  \ 

CmtiST.  Then  Christiana  replied,  1  have  been 
sorelj  afflicted  since  my  husband's  departure  from 
me ;  but  especially  since  he  went  over  the 
river.  But  that  which  troublcth  me  most, 
is  my  churlish  carriages  to  him,  when  he  was  under 
his  distress.  Besides,  I  am  now  as  he  was  then  ; 
nothing  will  serve  me  but  going  on  pilgrimage.  I 
was  a- dreaming  last  night  that  1  saw  him.  0  that 
my  soul  was  with  him  !  lie  dwelleth  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  King  of  the  country  ;  he  sits  and  eats 
with  him  at  his  table ;  he  is  become  a  companion 
of  immortals,  l  Co.  v.  1-4,  and  has  a  house  now  given 
him  to  dwell  in,  to  which  the  best  palaces  on  earth, 
if  compared,  seem  to  me  to  be  but  as  a  dunghill. 
The  Prince  of  the  place  has  also  sent  for  me,  with 
promise  of  entertainment  if  I  shall  come  to  him  ; 
his  messenger  was  here  even  now,  and  has  brought 
me  a  letter,  which  invites  me  to  come.  And  with 
that  she  plucked  out  her  letter,5  and  read  it,  and 
said  to  them,  What  now  will  ye  say  to  this  ? 

Tim.  0  the  madness  that  has  possessed  thee 
and  thy  husband,  to  run  yourselves  upon  such 
difficulties  !  You  have  heard,  I  am  sure,  what 
}*our  husband  did  meet  with,  even,  in  a  manner,  at 
the  first  step  that  he  took  on  his  way,  First  Partj 
as  our  neighbour  Obstinate  can  yet        P-9"- 

brought  to  feel  their  own  sinfulness,  and  to  confess  their  own 
guilt  and  danger;  nor  will  a  mother's  prayers  save  her  children, 
unless  they  heartily  unite  with  her  in  them. —  (lvimey.) 

3  Reader,  stop  and  examine.  Did  ever  any  of  your  carnal 
acquaintance  take  knowledge  of  a  difference  of  your  language 
and  conduct  ?  [Does  it  stun  them  ?~]  Or  do  they  still  like  and 
approve  of  you  as  well  as  ever  ?  What  reason,  then,  have  you 
to  think  yourself  a  pilgrim  ?  If  the  heart  be  ever  so  little 
acquainted  with  the  Lord,  the  tongue  will  discover  it,  and 
the  carnal  and  profane  will  ridicule  and  despise  you  for  it. — 
(Mason.) 

4  '  Is  tcillhxj  to  stay  behind.'  Mr.  Bunyan  has  strongly 
intimated,  in  this  account,  that  children,  very  young  persons, 
may  be  the  subjects  of  renewing  grace,  aud  may  experience 
the  power  of  the  gospel  upon  their  hearts,  producing  thai  faith 
that  is  of  the  operation  of  God,  and  works  meet  for  repentance. 
This  fact  is  abundantly  continued  by  mauy  living  instances  of 
very  young  persons  knowing  the  grace  of  God  iu  truth,  and 
adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour. — (Ivimey.J 

6  This  was  a  love-letter,  full  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  the 
precious  invitatious  of  his  loving  heart  to  sinners  to  came  unto 
him  as  recorded  in  his  blessed  Word.  Happy  sinners,  whose 
eyes  are  opened  to  read  it !  But  this  the  world  calls  madness. 
— (Muson.) 


176 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


testify,  for  he  went  along  with  him;  yea,  and  Pli- 
able too,  until  they,  like  wise  men,  were  afraid  to 
go  any  further.  We  also  heard,  over  and  above, 
how  he  met  with  the  lions,  Apollyon,  the  Shadow 
of  Death,  and  many  other  things.  Nor  is  the 
The  reasonings  danger  that  he  met  with  at  Vanity 
of  the  flesh.      Fair  t0  be  forgotten  by  thee;  for  if 

he,  though  a  man,  was  so  hard  put  to  it,  what 
canst  thou,  being  but  a  poor  woman,  do  ?  Con- 
sider also,  that  these  four  sweet  babes  are  thy 
children,  thy  flesh  and  thy  bones.  Wherefore, 
though  thou  shouldest  be  so  rash  as  to  cast  away 
thyself ;  yet,  for  the  sake  of  the  fruit  of  thy  body, 
keep  thou  at  home.1 

But  Christiana  said  unto  her,  Tempt  me  not,  my 
neighbour.  I  have  now  a  price  put  into  my  hand 
to  get  gain,  and  I  should  be  a  fool  of  the  greatest 
size,  if  I  should  have  no  heart  to  strike  in  with 
the  opportunity.2  And  for  that  you  tell  me  of  all 
these  troubles  that  I  am  like  to  meet  with  in  the 
way,  they  are  so  far  off  from  being  to  me  a  dis- 
couragement, that  they  show  I  am  in  the  right. 
A  pertinent  re-  '  ^ie  fitter  must  come  before  the 
ply  to  fleshly    sweet,'  and  that  also  will  make   the 

reasonings.  ,  ,-.T,  « 

sweet  the  sweeter.  Wherefore,  since 
you  came  not  to  my  house  in  God's  name,  as  I 
said,  I  pray  you  to  be  gone,  and  not  to  disquiet 
me  further.3 

Then  Timorous  also  reviled  her,  and  said  to  her 
fellow,  Come,  neighbour  Mercy,  let  us  leave  her  in 
her  own  hands,  since  she  scorns  our  counsel  and 
company.  But  Mercy  was  at  a  stand,  and  could 
not  so  readily  comply  with  her  neighbour,  and 
Mercy's  bowels  that  ^or  a  twof°hl  reason.  First,  her 
yearn      over   bowels  yearned  over  Christiana.      So 

she  said  within  herself,  If  my  neigh- 
bour will  needs  be  gone,  I  will  go  a  little  way  with 
her  and  help  her.  Secondly,  her  bowels  yearned 
over  her  own  soul,  for  what  Christiana  had  said 


1  The  observations  of  the  unconverted,  when  they  perceive 
the  conscience  of  a  poor  sinner  alarmed  for  tear  of  the  wrath 
to  come,  are  admirably  put  in  Bunyan's  Come  and  Welcome, 
vol.  i.  p.  278  :  'They  attribute  the  change  to  melancholy— to 
sitting  alone — to  overmuch  reading — to  going  to  too  many 
sermons — to  too  much  studying  and  musing  on  what  they 
hear.  They  conclude  that  it  is  for  want  of  merry  company — 
for  want  of  physic ;  and  they  advise  them  to  leave  off  reading, 
going  to  sermons,  the  company  of  sober  people,  and  to  be 
merry,  to  go  a-gossiping.  But,  poor  ignorant  siuner,  let  me 
deal  with  tbee.  It  seems  that  thou  hast  tamed  counsellor  for 
Satan.  Thou  judgest  foolishly.  Thou  art  like  Elymas  the 
sorcerer,  that  sought  to  turn  the  deputy  from  the'  faith,  to 
pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord.  Take  heed,  lest  some 
heavy  judgment  overtake  thee.'  Pilgrim,  beware  of  the 
solemn  warnings  of  God  in  Be.  xiii.  6,  and  He.  x.  38. — (Ed.) 

-'  Buuyan  probably  alludes  to  l'r.  .wii.  10  •.  'Wherefore  is 
there  a  price  in  the  hand  of  a  fool  to  get  wisdom,  seeing  he 
hath  no  heart  to  it?' — (Iviiney.) 

3  It  is  well  to  be  bold  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  blunt 
w  ith  those  who  seek  to  turn  us  away  from  following  on  to 
know  the  Lord ;  for  nothing  less  than  life  and  salvation,  or 
death  and  damnation,  will  be  the  issue  of  it. — (Mason.) 


had  taken  some  hold  upon  her  mind.4  Wherefore 
she  said  within  herself  again,  I  will  yet  have  more 
talk  with  this  Christiana,  and  if  I  find  truth  and 
life  in  what  she  shall  say,  myself  with  my  heart 
shall  also  go  with  her.  Wherefore  Mercy  began 
thus  to  reply  to  her  neighbour  Timorous. 

Mercy.  Neighbour,  I  did,  indeed,  come  with 
you  to  see  Christiana  this  morning  ;  Timorous  for- 
and  since  she  is,  as  you  see,  a-taking  MereyhUeave1 
of  her  last  farewell  of  her  country,  I  to  her- 
think  to  walk,  this  sun-shine  morning,  a  little  way 
with  her,  to  help  her  on  the  way.  But  she  told  her 
not  of  the  second  reason,  but  kept  that  to  herself. 

Tim.  Well,  I  see  you  have  a  mind  to  go  a-fool- 
ing  too,  but  take  heed  in  time,  and  be  wise.  While 
we  are  out  of  danger,  we  •  are  out ;  but  Avhen  we 
are  in,  we  are  in.  So  Mrs.  Timorous  returned  to 
her  house,  and  Christiana  betook  herself  to  her 
journey.5  But  when  Timorous  was 
got  home  to  her  house,  she  sends  for  acquaints  her 
some  of  her  neighbours,  to  wit,  Mrs.  the  good  Chri^- 
Bat's-eyes,  Mrs.  Inconsiderate,  Mrs.  t»alja  intends 
Light-mind,  and  Mrs.  Know-nothing. 
So  when  they  were  come  to  her  house,  she  falls 
to  telling  of  the  story  of  Christiana,  and  of  her 
intended  journey.      And  thus  she  began  her  tale.6 

Tim.  Neighbours,  having  had  little  to  do  this 
morning,  I  went  to  give  Christiana  a  visit;  and  when 
I  came  at  the  door,  I  knocked,  as  vou  know  it  is 
our  custom.  And  she  answered,  If  you  come  in 
God's  name,  come  in.  So  in  I  went,  thinking  all 
was  well.  But  when  I  came  in,  I  found  her  pre- 
paring herself  to  depart  the  town,  she,  and  also 
her  children.  So  I  asked  her  what  was  her  mean- 
ing by  that.  And  she  told  me,  in  short,  that  she 
was  now  of  a  mind  to  go  on  pilgrimage,  as  did 
her  husband.  She  told  me  also  a  dream  that  she 
had,  and  how  the  King  of  the  country  where  her 
husband  was,  had  sent  her  an  inviting  letter  to 
come  thither. 

Then  said  Mrs.  Know-nothing,  And    Mrs.  Know- 
what !   do  you  think  she  will  go  ?  nothing. 


4  The  very  tliiugs  which  excite  the  rage  and  scorn  of  some 
persons,  penetrate  the  hearts  of  others.  Thus  the  Lord  makes 
one  to  differ  from  another,  by  preparing  the  heart  to  receive 
the  good  seed  of  Bivine  truth.  Yet  every  one  willingly  chooses 
the  way  he  takes,  without  constraint  or  hiuderauce,  except  his 
own  prevailing  dispositions. —  (Scott.) 

6  Here  we  see  our  Lord's  word  verified,  '  The  one  shall  be 
taken,  and  the  other  left.'  Mat.  xxiv.  41.  Mercy  is  called, 
and  Timorous  left.  All,  to  appearance,  seems  chance  and 
accident ;  but  sovereign  grace  overrules  all  things.  '  All 
things  are  of  God,  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  Jesus 
Christ.'  2  Co.  v.  18.— (Mason.) 

6  This  tale,  by  the  names,  arguments,  and  discourse  intro- 
duced into  it,  shows  what  kind  of  persons  despise  and  revile 
all  those  that  fear  God,  and  seek  the  salvation  of  their  souls. 
Profligates,  who  never  studied  religion,  pass  sentence  upon  the 
most  diflicult  controversies  without  hesitation.  Such  persons 
call  for  our  compassion  and  prayers  even  more  thau  our 
detestation. — (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


177 


Tim.  Aye,  go  she  will,  whatever  come  on't  ;  and 
methinks  I  know  it  by  this;  fur  that  which  was 
my  great  argument  to  persuade  her  to  stay  at  home 
(to  wit,  the  troubles  she  was  like  to  meet  with  in 
the  way)  is  one  great  argument  with  her  to  put  her 
forward  on  her  journey.  For  she  told  me  in  so 
many  words,  '  The  bitter  goes  before  the  sweet.' 
Yea,  and  forasmuch  as  it  so  doth,  it  makes  the 
sweet  the  sweeter. 

Mrs.  Bat's -eyes.  0,  this  blind  and  foolish 
woman  !   said  she ;  will  she  not  take 

rs.     ats-eyes.    wftmJng  |,y  ])0r  ]ulsbftnd's  afflictions  ? 

For  my  part,  I  see,  if  he  was  here  again,  he  would 
rest  him  content  in  a  whole  skin,  and  never  run  so 
many  hazards  for  nothing. 

Mrs.  Inconsiderate  also  replied,  saying,  Away 
Mrs.  incon-    "lib  such  fantastical  fools  from  the 
siderate.       town  j    ^  g00(j  riddance,  for  my  part, 
I  say,  of  her.      Should  she  stay  where  she  dwells, 
and  retain  this  her  mind,  who  could  live  quietly  by 
her  ?  for  she  will  either  be  dumpish  or  unneigh- 
bourly, or  talk  of  such  matters  as  no  wise  body 
can  abide ;  wherefore,  for  my  part,  I  shall  never 
be  sorry  for  her  departure.     Let  her  go,  and  let 
better  come  in  her  room.     It  was  never  a  good 
world  since  these  whimsical  fools  dwelt  in  it.1 
Then  Mrs.   Light-mind  added  as  followeth: — 
Mrs.  Light-     Come,  put  this  kind  of  talk  away.      I 
mmd"        was  yesterday  at  Madam  Wanton's, 

Madam  Wanton.        .  ,-,  .  •, 

she  that  had   where  we  were  as  merry  as  the  mauls. 

been  too  hard     F°r  Wh°  d°  y°U  think  Sh0uld  be  there' 

for  Faithful  in   but  I   and  Mrs.   Love-the-flesh,  and 

time  past.  ,  _    _         _       . 

First  Part  three  or  four  more,  with  Mr.  Lechery, 
p.  us. '  Mrs.  Filth,  and  some  others.  So  there 
we  had  music,  and  dancing,  and  what  else  was 
meet  to  fill  up  the  pleasure.  And,  I  dare  say, 
my  lady  herself  is  an  admirably  well-bred  gentle- 
woman, and  Mr.  Lechery  is  as  pretty  a  fellow. 

By  this  time,  Christiana  was  got  on  her  way,  and 
Mercy  went  along  with  her.  So  as  they  went,  her 
children  being  there  also,  Christiana  began  to  dis- 


1  O  how  do  such  carnal  wretches  sport  with  their  own 
damnation,  while  they  despise  the  precious  truths  of  God,  and 
ridicule  his  beloved,  chosen,  and  called  people  !  But  as  it  was 
in  the  beginning,  he  who  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted 
him  who  was  born  after  the  Spirit,  so  it  is  now,  and  will  be 
as  long  as  the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent 
are  upon  the  earth. — (Mason.)  Such  characters  are  portrayed 
by  the  apostle,  in  his  solemn  riddle,  1  Ti.  v.  6. — (Ivimey.) 

2  The  singular  dispensations  of  Providence,  and  the  strong 
impressions  made  by  the  Word  of  God  upon  some  minds,  seem 
to  amount  to  a  special  invitation ;  while  others  are  gradually 
and  gently  brought  to  embrace  the  gospel,  and  these  are  some- 
times discouraged  lest  they  have  never  been  truly  awakened. 
They  should  recollect  that  the  Lord  dclighteth  in  mercy;  that 
Christ  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  any  that  come  to  him ;  and 
that  they  who  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God,  solely  through  the 
redemption  of  his  Son,  shall  assuredly  be  saved. — (Scott.) 

8  Such  is  the  true  spirit  of  real  pilgrims,  that  do  not  love 
to  eat  their  precious  morsel  alone.     They  wish  others  to  know 
Christ,  and  to  become  followers  of  him  with  themselves. — 
(Mason.) 
VOL.  III. 


course.     And,  Mercy,  said  Christiana,  I  take  this 
as  an  unexpected   favour,   that   thou    Diicomw  be- 
shouldst  set  foot  out  of  doors  with  me,     ^(\xt  M^J 
to  accompany  me  a  little  in  my  way.      canfattaM 

MERCY.   Then  said  young   Mercy  (for  she  was 
but  young),  If  I  thought  it  would  be   Merry  inciinc, 
to  purpose  to  go  with  you,  I  would       to8°- 
never  go  near  the  town  any  more. 

Christ.  Well,  Mercy,  said  Christiana,  cast  in 
thy  lot  with  me ;  I  well  know  what  Christiana 
will  be  the  end  of  our  pilgrimage.  My  neighbourwith 
husband  is  where  he  would  not  but  bo  her- 
for  all  the  gold  in  the  Spanish  mines.  Nor  shalt 
thou  be  rejected,  though  thou  goest  but  upon  my 
invitation.-  The  King  who  hath  sent  for  me  and 
my  children  is  one  that  delighteth  in  mercy.  Be- 
sides, if  thou  wilt,  I  will  hire  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
go  along  with  me  as  my  servant ;  yet  we  will  have 
all  things  in  common  betwixt  thee  and  me ;  only, 
go  along  with  me.8 

Mercy.  But  how  shall  I  be  ascertained  that  I 
also  shall  be  entertained?  Had  I  this  Mercydoubtsof 
hope  but  from  one  that  can  tell,  I  a<*eptancc 
would  make  no  stick  at  all,  but  would  go,  being 
helped  by  him  that  can  help,  though  the  way  was 
never  so  tedious.4 

Christ.  Well,  loving  Mercy,  I  will  tell  thee 
what  thou  shalt  do.  Go  with  me  to  Christiana  al  - 
the  wicket- gate,  and  there  I  will  '^'f  whid/'u 
further  inquire  for  thee  ;  and  if  there  Chri'st.andpro- 
thou  shalt  not  meet  with  encourage-  ^''inquire  for 
ment,  I  will  be  content  that  thou  her' 
shalt  return  to  thy  place.  I  also  will  pay  thee  for 
thy  kindness  which  thou  showest  to  me  and  my 
children,  in  thy  accompanying  us  in  our  way,  as 
thou  dost. 

Mercy.  Then  will  I  go  thither,  and  will  tato 
what  shall  follow ;  and  the  Lord  grant 
that  my  lot  may  there  fall,  even  as  the 
King  of  Heaven  shall  have  his  heart  upon  me.5 


Mercy  prays. 


4  Though  Christiana  clearly  knew  her  calling  of  God,  yet 
Mercy  did  not ;  therefore  she  is  in  doubt  about  it.  Just  so  it 
is  with  many  at  their  first  setting  out.  Hence  they  are  ready 
to  say — and  I  have  met  with  many  who  have  said — that  they 
could  even  wish  to  have  had  the  most  violent  convictions  of 
sin,  and  to  have  been,  as  it  were,  shook  over  the  mouth  of 
hell,  that  they  might  have  a  greater  certainty  of  their  being 
called  of  God.  But  this  is  speaking  unadvisedly.  Better  to 
take  the  apostle's  advice :  '  Give  all  diligence  to  make  your 
calling  sure.' — (Mason.) 

4  Here  is  a  precious  discovery  of  a  heart  divinely  instructed. 
Mind,  here  is  no  looking  to  anything  Mercy  was  in  herself, 
nor  to  anything  she  could  do  for  herself,  fur  hope.  But  all  is 
resolved  into  this — even  the  love  of  the  heart  of  the 
Kino  of  heaven.  Reader,  can  you  be  content  with  this? 
Can  you  cast  all,  and  rest  all,  upon  the  love  of  Christ  ?  Then 
bless  his  loving  name  for  giving  you  a  pilgrim's  heart. — 
(Mason.)  Mercy  clearly  discovered  a  work  of  grace  on  her 
heart.  She  was  anxious  about  her  acceptance  at  last ;  she 
began  to  pray;  she  threw  herself  on  the  mere  mercy  of  Christ's 
heart ;  and  proved  '  the  bowels  of  a  pilgrim,'  by  lameuting  the 
sad  coudition  of  her  carual  relatious. — (Burder.) 

23 


178 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Christiana  then  was  glad  at  her  heart,  not  only 
Christiana  glad  that  she  had  a  companion,  but  also 
of  Mercy's  for  that  she  had  prevailed  with  this 
company.  ^^  maid  to  fall  in  love  with  her  own 
salvation.  So  they  went  on  together,  and  Mercy 
began  to  weep.  Then  said  Christiana,  Wherefore 
weepeth  my  sister  so  ? 

Mercy.  Alas!   said  she,  who  can  hut  lament, 

Mercy  grieves  that  shaU  but  riShtly  consider,  what 
for  her  carnal  a  state  and  condition  my  poor  rela- 
xations.1 .  ,.     ,         ,  . 

tions  are  in  that  yet  remain  in  our 
sinful  town  ?  and  that  which  makes  my  grief  the 
more  heavy  is,  because  they  have  no  instructor, 
nor  any  to  tell  them  what  is  to  come. 

Christ.  Bowels  becometh  pilgrims ;    and  thou 

dost  for  thy  friends  as  my  good  Christian  did  for 

me  when  he  left  me ;  he  mourned  for 

prayers  8 were   that  I  would  not  heed  nor  regard  him; 

answered  for 
his  relations, 
after 

and  now  both  I  and  thou,  and  these 
my  sweet  babes,  are- reaping  the  fruit  and  benefit 
of  them.  I  hope, -Mercy,  these  tears  of  thine  will 
not  be  lost ;  for  the  truth  hath  said,  that  '  They 
that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy'  in  singing. 
And  '  he  that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing 
precious  seed,  shall  doubtless  come  again  with 
rejoicing,   bringing   his    sheaves   with    him.'    Ps. 

exxvi.  5,  6. 

Then  said  Mercy — 

Let  the  Most  Blessed  be  my  guide, 

If  't  be  his  blessed  will ; 
Unto  his  gate,  into  his  fold, 

Up  to  his  holy  hill. 


1  This  truth  is  exemplified  in  the  Holy  War: — 'Now 
Mr.  Desires,  when  he  saw  that  he  must  go  on  this  errand, 
besought  that  Mr.  Wet:eyes  should  go  with  him  to  petition 
the  Prince.  This  Mr.  Wet-eyes  was  a  poor  man,  a  man  of  a 
broken  spirit,  yet  one  that  could  speak  well  to  a  petition. 
Then  Mr.  Wet-eyes  fell  on  his  face  to  the  ground,  and  said, 
O  my  Lord,  I  see  dirt  in  my  own  tears,  and  filthiness  at  the 
bottom  of  my  prayers ;  but,  I  pray  thee,  mercifidly  pass  by 
the  sin  of  Mansoul.' — (Ed.) 

2  Perhaps  the  most  delightful  portion  of  the  Second  Dream 
of  Bunyan  is  its  sweet  representation  of  the  female, character. 
There  never  were  two  more  attractive  beings  drawn  thau  Chris- 
tiana and  Mercy ;  as  different  from  each  other  as  Christian  and 
Hopeful,  and  yet  equally  pleasing  in  their  natural  traits  of 
character,  and  under  the  influence  of  Divine  grace,  each  of 
them  reflecting  the  light  of  heaven  in  an  original  and  lovely 
variety.  His  own  conception  of  what  constitutes  a  bright 
example  of  beauty  and  consistency  of  character  in  a  Christian 
woman,  Bunyan  has  here  given  us,  as  well  as  in  his  First 
Dream,  the  model  of  steadfast  excellence  in  a  Christian  man. 
The  delineation,  in  both  Christiana  and  Mercy,  is  eminently 
beautifid.  We  have,  in  these  characters,  his  own  ideal  of  the 
domestic  virtues,  and  his  own  conception  of  a  well-ordered 
Christian  family's  domestic  happiness.  Wherever  he  may  have 
formed  his  notions  of  female  loveliness  and  excellence,  he  has, 
in  the  combination  of  them  in  the  Second  Part  of  the  '  Pil- 
grim's Progress,'  presented  two  characters  of  such  winning 
modesty  and  grace,  such  confiding  trutb  and  frankness,  such 
simplicity  and  artlessness,  such  cheerfulness  and  pleasantness, 
such  native  good  sense  and  Christian  discretion,  such  sincerity, 


And  let  him  never  suffer  me 

To  swerve  or  turn  aside 
From  his  free  grace,  and  holy  ways, 

Whate'er  shall  me  betide. 

And  let  him  gather  them  of  mine, 

That  I  have  left  behind ; 
Lord,  make  them  pray  they  may  be  thine, 

With  all  their  heart  and  mind.2 

Now  my  old  friend  proceeded,  and  said :     But 
when  Christiana  came  up  to  the  Slough      lu-st  i  u-t, 
of   Despond,    she  began  to  be   at  a        p- 93- 
stand  ;  for,  said  she,  this  is  the  place  in  which  my 
dear  husband  had  like  to  have  been   Tneir  own  car. 
smothered  with  mud.     She  perceived,     Hal      ?0!ldn: 

*  sions,    instead 

also,  that  notwithstanding  the  com-  of  the  Word  of 
rnand  of  the  King  to  make  this  place 
for  pilgrims  good,  yet  it  was  rather  worse  than 
formerly.  So  I  asked  if  that  was  true.  Yes, 
said  the  old  gentleman,  too  true ;  for  that  many 
there  be  that  pretend  to  be  the  King's  labourers, 
and  that  say  they  are  for  mending  the  King's 
highway,  that  bring  dirt  and  dung  instead  of 
stones,  and  so  mar  instead  of  mending.3  Here 
Christiana,  therefore,  with  her  boys,  did  make  a 
stand;  but,  said  Mercy,  Come,  let  us  Mercy the boId. 
venture,  only  let  us  be  wary.  Then  est  at  the 
they  looked  well  to  the  steps,  and  spond.'  ° 
made  a  shift  to  get  staggeringly  over.4 

Yet,  Christiana  had  like  to  have  been  in,  and 
that  not  once  nor  twice.  Now  they  had  no  sooner 
got  over,  but  they  thought  they  heard  words  that 
said  unto  them,  '  Blessed  is  she  that  believed ; 
for  there  shall  be  a  performance  of  those  things 
which  were  told  her  from  the  Lord. '  Lu.  i.  45. 


gentleness,  and  tenderness,  that  nothing  could  be  more  delight- 
ful. The  matronly  virtues  of  Christiana,  and  the  maidenly 
qualities  of  Mercy,  are  alike  pleasing  and  appropriate.  There 
is  a  mixture  of  timidity  and  frankness  in  Mercy,  which  is  as 
sweet  in  itself  as  it  is  artlessly  and  unconsciously  drawn;  and 
in  Christiana  we  discover  the  very  characteristics  that  can 
make  the  most  lovely  feminine  counterpart,  suitable  to  the  stem 
and  lofty  qualities  of  her  husband. — (Cheever.) 

3  Instead  of  being  what  they  profess,  the  King's  labourers, 
Paul  calls  them  soul-troublers.  Ga.  v.  10.  For  instead  of 
preaching  a  free,  full,  and  finished  salvation,  bestowed  as  a  free 
gift,  by  rich  grace,  upon  poor  sinners  who  can  do  nothing  to 
entitle  themselves  to  it ;  hehold,  these  wretched  daubers  set 
forth  salvation  to  sale  upon  certain  terms  and  conditions  which 
sinners  are  to  perform  and  fulfil.  Thus  they  distress  the  up- 
right and  sincere,  and  deceive  the  self-righteous  and  unwary, 
into  pride  and  delusion.  Thus  they  mar,  instead  of  mending, 
the  way;  and  bring  dirt  and  dung,  instead  of  stones,  to  make 
the  way  sound  and  safe  for  pilgrims. — (Mason.) 

*  '  Looked  well  to  the  steps ; '  that  is,  '  the  promises,'  as 
Bunyan  explains  in  the  margin  of  Part  First.  'Struggling  to 
be  rid  of  our  burden,  it  only  sinks  us  deeper  in  the  mire,  if 
we  do  not  rest  by  faith  upon  the  promises,  and  so  come  indeed 
to  Christ.  Precious  promises  they  are,  and  so  free  and  full 
of  forgiveness  and  eternal  life,  that  certainly  the  moment  a 
dying  soul  feels  its  guilt  and  misery,  that  soul  may  lay  hold 
upon  them,  and  find  Christ  in  them  ;  aud  were  it  not  for  un- 
belief, there  need  be  no  Slough  of  Despond  for  the  soul  to 
struggle,  aud  plunge,  in  its  mire  of  depravity.' — (Cheever.) 
-(Ed.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


179 


Then  thov  wont  on  again;  and  said  Mercy  to 
Christiana,  Had  1  as  good  ground  to  hope  for  a 
loving  reception  at  the  wicket-gate  as  you,  I  think 
no  Slough  of  Despond  would  discourage  me. 

Well,  said  the  other,  you  know  your  sore,1  and 
I  know  mine  ;  and,  good  friend,  we  shall  all  have 
enough  evil  before  we  come  at  our  journey's  end. 

For  can  it  he  imagined,  that  the  people  that 
design  to  attain  such  excellent  glories  as  we  do, 
and  that  are  so  envied  that  happiness  as  wo  arc; 
hut  that  we  shall  meet  with  what  fears  and  scares, 
with  what  troubles  and  afflictions  they  can  pos- 
Bibly  assault  us  with,  that  hate  us  ? 

And  now  Mr.  Sagacity  left  me  to  dream  out  my 
dream  by  myself.  Wherefore,  methought  I  saw 
Christiana  and  Mercy,  and  the  boys,  go  all  of 
them  up  to  the  gate;  to  which,  when  they  were 
come,  they  betook  themselves  to  a 
b«y made  with  short  debate  about  how  they  must 
!rrta'rU°as  manage  their  calling  at  the  gate,  and 
well  as  in  faith    what  should  be  said  to  him  that  did 

and  hope.  _  .     .     . 

open  to  them.  So  it  was  concluded, 
since  Christiana  was  the  eldest,  that  she  should 
knock  for  entrance,  and  that  she  should  speak  to 
him  that  did  open,  for  the  rest.  So  Christiana 
First  Part,  began  to  knock  ;  and,  as  her  poor  bus- 
p.  96.  band  did,  she  knocked,  and  knocked 
again.  But,  instead  of  any  that  answered,  they 
The  doe  — the  a^  thought  tbat  they  heard  as  if  a 
devii_an  ene-    dog  came  barking  upon  them  ;  a  dog, 

my  to  prayer.  °  °     L  ...  ° 

and  a  great  one  too,  and  this  made 
the  women  and  children  afraid :  nor  durst  they, 
for  a  while,  to  knock  any  more,  for  fear  the  mastiff 
Christiana  and  should  fly  upon  them.  Now,  there- 
5S  fore,  they  were  greatly  tumbled  up 
pmyer.  au(j  down  Jn  their  minds,  and  knew 

not  what  to  do:  knock  they  durst  not,  for  fear  of 
the  dog;  go  back  they  durst  not,  for  fear  the 
Keeper  of  that  gate  should  espy  them  as  they  so 
went,  and  should  be  offended  with  them ;  at  last 
they  thought  of  knocking  again,  and  knocked 
more  vehemently  than  they  did  at  the  first.  Then 
said  the  Keeper  of  the  gate,  Who  is  there  ?  So  the 
dog  left  off  to  bark,  and  he  opened  unto  them.2 
Then  Christiana  made  low  obeisance,  and  said, 


1  All  the  varieties  in  the  experience  of  those  who  are  walk- 
in?  in  the  same  path  can  never  be  enumerated;  some  of  their 
sores  are  not  only  unreasonable  but  unaccountable,  through 
the  weakness  of  the  human  mind,  the  abiding  effects  of  pecu- 
liar impressions,  the  remains  of  unbelief,  and  the  artitices  of 
t>atan. — (Scott.) 

2  No  sooner  does  a  poor  sinner  open  his  lips  in  prayer  to 
Jesus,  but  the  devil  will  bark  at  him,  and  by  all  means  try  to 
terrify  and  discourage  him.  Do  you  find  this  ?  "What  is  our 
remedy  ?  '  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you.  Draw 
nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you,'  Ja.  iv,  7,  8. — 
(Mason.)  "When  the  fear  of  God  possesses  the  heart,  such 
disturbances  cannot  long  prevent  earnest  cries  for  mercy,  but 
will  eventually  reuder  them  more  fervent  and  importunate  than 
ever. —  (Scott.) 


Let  not  our  Lord  be  offended  with  his  hand- 
maidens, for  that  we  have  knocked  at  his  princely 
gate.  Then  said  the  Keeper,  Whence  come  ye, 
and  what  is  that  you  would  have  ? 

Christiana  answered,  We  are  come  from  whence 
Christian  did  come,  and  upon  the  same  errand  as 
he ;  to  wit,  to  be,  if  it  shall  please  you,  graciously 
admitted  by  this  gate  into  the  way  that  leads  to 
the  Celestial  City.  And  I  answer,  my  Lord,  in 
the  next  place,  that  1  am  Christiana,  once  the 
wife  of  Christian,  that  now  is  gotten  above.3 

With  that  the  Keeper  of  the  gate  did  marvel, 
saying,  What !  is  she  become  now  a  pilgrim  that, 
but  a  while  ago,  abhorred  that  life  ?  Then  she 
bowed  her  head,  and  said,  Yes,  and  so  are  these 
my  sweet  babes  also. 

Then  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  let  her  in, 
and  said  also,  '  Suffer  the  little  children  How  Christiana 
to  come  unto  me;'  and  with  that  he  «  entertained 
shut  up  the  gate.  This  done,  he  called 
to  a  trumpeter  that  was  above,  over  the  gate,  to 
entertain  Christiana  with  shouting  and  sound  of 
trumpet  for  joy.  So  he  obeyed,  and  sounded,  and 
filled  the  air  with  his  melodious  notes.  Lu.  iv.  7. 

Now  all  this  while  poor  Mercy  did  stand  with- 
out, trembling  and  crying,  for  fear  that  she  was 
rejected.  But  when  Christiana  had  gotten  admit- 
tance for  herself  and  her  boys,  then  she  began  to 
make  intercession  for  Mercy. 

Christ.  And  she  said,  My  Lord,  I  have  a  com- 
panion of  mine  that  stands  yet  with-   q^^,,.^ 
out,  that  is  come  hither  upon  the  same     prayer  for  her 

..  \     ,    •  1        friend  Mercy. 

account  as  myself ;  one  that  is  much 
dejected  in  her  mind,  for  that  she  comes,  as  she 
thinks,  without  sending  for ;  whereas  I  was  sent 
to  by  my  husband's  King  to  come. 

Now  Mercy  began  to  be  very  impatient,  for 
each  minute  was  as  long  to  her  as  an  hour  ; 
wherefore  she  prevented  Christiana  Thedeiaysmake 
from  a  fuller  interceding  for  her,  by  ^'SfleS 
knocking  at  the  gate  herself.  And  vcnter- 
she  knocked  then  so  loud,  that  she  made  Chris- 
tiana to  start.  Then  said  the  Keeper  of  the  gate, 
Who  is  there  ?  and  said  Christiana,  It  is  my 
friend. 

So  he   opened  the  gate   and  looked  out,   but 


3  Think  much  of  them  that  have  gone  before ;  how  safe 
they  are  in  the  bosom  of  Jesus.  Would  they  be  here  again 
for  a  thousand  worlds?  Sometimes  when  my  base  heart  hath 
been  inclining  to  this  world,  and  to  loiter  iu  my  journej 
towards  heaven,  the  very  consideration  of  the  glorious  saints 
and  angels— what  they  enjoy,  what  low  thoughts  they  have 
of  the  things  of  this  world,  how  they  would  befool  me  if  they 
did  but  know  that  my  heart  was  drawing  back— this  hath 
made  mc  rush  forward,  and  disdain  those  beggarly  things;  and 
say  to  my  soul,  Come,  soul,  let  us  not  be  weary;  let  us  see 
what  heaven  is;  let  us  venture  all  for  it.  It  will  quit  the 
cost.  Reader,  what  sayest  thou  to  this?  Art  thou  resolved 
to  follow  me?  Nay,  resolve  to  get  before  me  if  thou  canst. 
— {Heavenly  Footman.) 


180 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Mercy  was  fallen  down  without,  in  a  swoon,  for  she 
fainted,  and  was  afraid  that  no  gate 

Mercy  faints.  ,  ,  ,  ,   .     ,  ° 

would  be  opened  to  ner. 

Then  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  said,  Dam- 
eel,  I  bid  thee  arise. 

0  Sir,  said  she,  I  am  faint ;  there  is  scarce  life 
left  in  me.  But  he  answered,  That  one  once  said, 
4  When  my  soul  fainted  within  me,  I  remembered 
the  Lord ;  and  my  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  into 
thine  holy  temple.'  Jonah u.  7.  Fear  not,  but  stand 
upon  thy  feet,  and  tell  me  wherefore  thou  art 
come.1 

Mercy.  I  am  come  for  that  unto  which  I  was 
The    cause  of  never  invited,  as  my  friend  Christiana 

her  fainting.       was#       JJera  was   from   tJje    King,  and 

mine  was  but  from  her.  Wherefore  I  fear  I  pre- 
sume.2 

Keep.  Did  she  desire  thee  to  come  with  her  to 
this  place  ? 

Mercy.  Yes ;  and,  as  my  Lord  sees,  I  am 
come.  And,  if  there  is  any  grace  or  forgiveness 
of  sins  to  spare,  I  beseech  that  I,  tby  poor  hand- 
maid, may  be  partaker  thereof. 

Then  he  took  her  again  by  the  hand,  and  led 
her  gently  in,  and  said,  I  pray  for  all 
them  that  believe  on  me,  by  what  means 
soever  they  come  unto  me.  Then  said  he  to  those 
that  stood  by,  Fetch  something,  and  give  it  Mercy 
to  smell  on,  thereby  to  stay  her  fainting.  So  they 
fetched  her  a  bundle  of  myrrh  ;  and  a  while  after, 
she  was  revived.3 

And  now  was  Christiana  and  her  boys,  and 
Mercy,  received  of  the  Lord  at  the  head  of  the 

1  Being  made  to  understand  what  great  sinners  the  Lord 
hath  had  mercy  upon,  and  how  large  his  promises  were  still 
to  sinners,  this  made  me,  through  the  assistance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  to  cleave  to  him,  to  hang  upon  him,  and  yet  to  cry, 
though  as  yet  there  was  no  answer,  The  Lord  help  all  his  poor, 
tempted,  afflicted  people  to  do  the  like. — (Bunyan.) 

2  Mercy's  case  is  not  singular.  Many  have  set  out  just  as 
she  did,  and  have  been  discouraged  by  the  same  reason  as  she 
was.  She,  as  many  have  been,  was  encouraged  to  set  out  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord  by  her  neighbour  and  friend.  Hence 
she,  as  many  others  also  have  thought,  there  was  no  cause  to 
conclude  that  she  was  effectually  called  by  the  Lord,  but  it 
was  only  the  effect  of  moral  persuasion,  and  therefore  doubted 
and  fainted,  lest  she  should  not  meet  with  acceptance.  But 
her  very  doubts,  fears,  and  distress,  proved  the  earnestness  of 
her  heart,  and  the  desire  of  her  soul,  after  the  Saviour  j  and 
also  that  his  attracting  love  and  gracious  power  had  a  hand  in 
the  work.  "Well  therefore  might  Bunyan  call  upon  his  readers 
to  mark  her  graeious  reception  by  Christ.  Mark  this,  ye  poor, 
doubting,  fearing,  trembling  souls,  who  are  halting  every  step, 
and  fearing  you  have  not  set  out  aright,  hear  what  Christ's  angel 
said,  and  be  not  discouraged:  '  Fear  not  ye,  for  I  know  that  ye 
seek  Jesus.'  Mat.  xxviii.  5. — (Mason.) 

3  The  prisoners  taken  in  the  Holy  War  were  affected  like 
Mercy.  '  Why  did  you  not  cry  to  me  before,  said  the  Prince, 
yet  I  will  answer  you  so  as  will  be  for  my  glory.  At  this 
Mr.  Wet-eyes  gave  a  great  sigh,  and  death  seemed  to  sit  on 
their  eye-brows ;  they  covered  their  faces,  and  threw  them- 
selves down  before  him.  Then  the  Prince  bid  them  stand 
upon  their  feet,  and  said,  I  have  power  to  forgive,  and  I  do 
forgive.  Moreover,  he  stripped  the  prisoners  of  their  mourn- 
ing-weeds, and  gave  them  beauty  lor  ashes.' — (Ed.) 


way,  and  spoke  kindly  unto  by  him.  Then  said 
they  yet  further  unto  him,  We  are  sorry  for  our 
sins,  and  beg  of  our  Lord  his  pardon,  and  further 
information  what  we  must  do. 

I  grant  pardon,  said  he,  by  word  and  deed :  by 
word,  in  the  promise  of  forgiveness ;  by  deed,  in 
the  way  I  obtained  it.  Take  the  first  from  my 
lips  with  a  kiss,  Ca.  i.  2 ;  and  the  other  as  it  shall 
be  Tevealed.4  jn.  xx.  20. 

Now,  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  he  spake  many 
good  words  unto  them,  whereby  they  were  greatly 
gladded.  He  also  had  them  up  to  the  top  of  the 
gate,  and  showed  them  by  what  deed  Christ  crucified 
they  were  saved;  and  told  them  withal,  8een  ^  off- 
That  that  sight  they  would  have  again,  as  they 
went  along  in  the  way,  to  their  comfort. 

So  he  left  them  a  while  in  a  summer  parlour 
below,  where  they  entered  into  talk   Talk  between  the 
by  themselves ;  and  thus  Christiana       Christians. 
began :   0  Lord  !  how  glad  am  1  that  we  are  got 
in  hither. 

Mercy.  So  you  well  may;  but  I  of  all  have 
cause  to  leap  for  joy. 

Christ.  I  thought  one  time,  as  I  stood  at  the 
gate  (because  I  had  knocked,  and  none  did  an- 
swer), that  all  our  labour  had  been  lost,  especially 
when  that  ugly  cur  made  such  a  heavy  barking 
against  us.5 

Mercy.  But  my  worse  fear  was  after  I  saw 
that  you  was  taken  into  his  favour,  and  that  I 
was  left  behind.  Now,  thought  I,  it  is  fulfilled 
which  is  written,  '  Two  women  shall  be  grinding 
together,  the  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left. ' u 
Mat.  xxiv.  41.  I  had  much  ado  to  forbear  crying  out, 
Undone  !   undone  ! 7 


4  Pardon  by  word  seems  to  denote  the  general  discovery 
of  free  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ  to  all  that  believe,  which 
is  sealed  by  transient  comforts  and  lively  affections.  Par- 
don by  deed  may  relate  to  the  manner  in  which  the  bless- 
ing was  purchased  by  the  Saviour ;  and  when  this  is  clearly 
understood,  the  believer  attains  to  stable  peace  and  hope. — 
(Scott.) 

6  The  devil  often  barks  most  at  us,  and  brings  his  heaviest 
accusations  against  us,  when  mercy,  peace,  comfort,  and  salva- 
tion are  nearest  to  us. 

'Press  on,  nor  fear  to  win  the  day, 
Though  earth  and  hell  obstruct  the  way.' — (Mason.) 

6  Many  hellish  darts  are  tipped  by  Apollyon's  malignaut 
ingenuity  with  sentences  of  Scripture,  made  to  flame  just  like 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one;  so  that  the  Scriptures  appear 
to  stand  against  the  trembling  Christian. — (Ed.) 

7  Here  is  genuine  humility ;  no  replying  against  God — no 
calling  in  question  his  sovereign  right  to  receive  or  to  reject. 
No;  all  that  this  poor  humble  heart  thought  was,  now  is 
fulfilled  what  is  written,  '  One  shall  be  taken  and  the  other 
left.'  If  so,  what  had  she  to  say  ?  No  impeachment  of  the 
Lord's  dealings,  but  ouly,  I  am  undone.  But  yet,  on  seeing 
what  was  written  over  the  gate, '  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened,' 
from  that,  and  not  from  any  sight  of  worthiness  in  herself, 
but  lost  as  she  felt  herself,  she  was  encouraged  to  knock  again, 
or  to  cry  and  pray  more  vehemently  than  ever.  Here  is  a 
blessed  example  of  deep  humility,  and  of  holy  boldness,  excited 
by  the  Divine  WTord.  Go  thou,  ruined  sinner,  and  do  likewise. 
— (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


181 


And  afraid  I  was  to  knock  anymore;  but  when 

Rrst  Part,     I  looked  up  to  what  was  written  over 

p.  96.        tne    gate,    I   took  courage.1     I   also 

thought  that  I  must  either  knock  again,  or  die ; 

so  I  knocked,  but  1  cannot  tell  how,  for  my  spirit 

now  struggled  betwixt  life  and  death. 

Christ.  Can  you  not  tell  how  you  knocked  ? 
Christ i:i!KUhinks  I  am  sure  your  knocks  were  so  ear- 
i'rnVs''i,''iu'rml  iK>st,  that  the  very  sound  of  them 
th,nslu-  made  me  start;    I  thought  I  never 

heard  such  knocking  in  all  my  life  ;  I  thought  you 
would  have  come  in  by  violent  hands,  or  have  taken 
the  kingdom  by  storm.  Mat  xi.  12. 

Mercy.  Alas  !  to  be  in  my  case,  who  that  so 
was  could  but  have  done  so  ?  You  saw  that  the 
door  was  shut  upon  me,  and  that  there  was  a  most 
cruel  dog  thereabout.  Who,  1  say,  that  was  so 
faint-hearted  us  I,  that  would  not  have  knocked 
with  all  their  might  ?  But,  pray,  what  said  my 
Lord  to  my  rudeness  ?  "Was  he  not  angry  with 
me  ? 

Christ.  When  he  heard  your  lumbering  noise, 
Christ  pleased  he  Save  a  wonderful  innocent  smile ; 
with  loud  and  I  believe  what  you  did  pleased  him 
well  enough,  for  he  showed  no  sign  to 
the  contrary.  But  I  marvel  in  my  heart,  why  he 
keeps  such  a  dog ;  had  I  known  that 
first  did  knoV  before,"  I  fear  I  should  not  have  had 
meet  with  in  ita  heart  enough  to  have  ventured  myself 
journey  to  hea-  m  ^jg  manner.  But  now  we  are  in, 
vn,  it  would  .  .  ' 

hardly  ever  set   we  are  in  ;  and  I  am  glad  with  all  my 

heart.3 

Mercy.  I  will  ask,  if  you  please,  next  time  he 
comes  down,  why  he  keeps  such  a  filthy  cur  in  his 
yard  ;   I  hope  he  will  not  take  it  amiss. 

Aye,  do,  said  the  children,  and  persuade  him  to 
The  children  are  hang  him ;  for  we  are  afraid  he  will 
afraid  of  the  dog.    ^ite  us  when  we  g0  hence. 

So  at  last  he  came  down  to  them  again,  and 
Mercy  fell  to  the  ground  on  her  face  before  him, 
and  worshipped,  and  said,  Let  my  Lord  accept  of 
the  sacrifice  of  praise  which  I  now  offer  unto  him 
with  the  calves  of  my  lips. 

So  he  said  unto  her,  '  Peace  be  to  thee,  stand 
up.'  But  she  continued  upon  her  face,  and  said, 
'  Righteous  art  thou,  0  Lord,  when  I  plead  with 
thee:  yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  judgments.' 


1  The  express  words  of  such  invitations,  exhortations,  and 
prolines,  written  in  the  Bible,  are  more  efficacious  to  en- 
jourage  those  who  are  ready  to  give  up  their  hopes,  than  all 
the  consolatory  topics  that  can  possibly  be  substituted  in  their 
place.— (Scott.) 

a  "When  a  mariner  enters  upon  a  voyage,  or  a  soldier  on  a 
campaign,  they  know  not  what  hardships  they  may  encounter, 
nor  whether  their  lives  may  be  sacrificed  without  attaining 
their  object;  but  whatever  hardships  the  Christian  has  to 
encounter,  he  will  come  off  more  than  conqueror — he  will 
reach  the  desired  haven  in  safety — through  him  that  loved  us. 
Fear  not — 

'Though  death  and  hell  ohstruct  the  way, 
The  meanest  saint  shall  win  the  day.— (Ed.) 


Jc.  xii.  i.     Wherefore  dost  thou  keep  so  cruel  a  dog 


in  thy  yard,  at  tho  sight  of  which 


Merc;  upoita- 


such  women  and  children  as  we,  are     late*  about  the 
ready  to  fiy  from  thy  gate  for  fear  ?         °s' 

lie  answered  and  said,  That  dog  has  another 
owner,  he  also  is  kept  close  in  another 
man's  ground,  only  my  pilgrims  hear 
his  harking;  he  belongs  to  the  castle  which  you 
see  there  at  a  distance,  but  can  come    nrst  p.llt, 
up  to  the  walls  of  thi3  place.     He  has      p- 90- 
frighted  many  an  honest   pilgrim  from  worse   to 
better,  by  the  great  voice  of  his  roaring.     Indeed, 
he  that  owneth  him  doth  not  keep  him   of  any 
goodwill  to  me  or  mine,  but  with  intent  to  keep 
the  pilgrims  from  coming  to  me,  and   that    they 
may  be  afraid  to  knock  at  this  gate  for  entrance. 
Sometimes  also  he  has  broken  out,  and  has  worried 
some  that   I  loved ;    but  I   take   all    at  present 
patiently.      I  also  give  my  pilgrims   A  chcck  to  the 
timely  help,  so  they  are  not  delivered     carnal  fear  of 
up  to  his  power,  to  do  to  them  wdiat 
his  doggish  nature  would  prompt   him  to.     But 
■what !     my  purchased   one,    I   trow,    hadst   thou 
known  never  so  much  beforehand,  thou  wouldst 
not  have  been  afraid  of  a  dog. 

The  beggars  that  go  from  door  to  door  will, 
rather  than  they  will  lose  a  supposed  alms,  run 
the  hazard  of  the  bawling,  barking,  and  biting, 
too,  of  a  dog ;  and  shall  a  dog — a  dog  in  another 
man's  yard,  a  dog  whose  barking  I  turn  to  the 
profit  of  pilgrims — keep  any  from  coming  to  me  ? 
I  deliver  them  from  the  lions,  their  darling  from 
the  power  of  the  dog.4 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  I  con-  airi8tian97  when 
fess  my  ignorance ;  I  spake  what  I     wise  enough,  ac- 

,  ,  tiii  quiesce    m    the 

understood  not ;  1  acknowledge  that     wisdom  of  then 
thou  dost  all  things  well. 

Christ.  Then  Christiana  began  to  talk  of  their 
journey,  and  to  inquire  after  the  way.  So  he  fed 
them,  and  washed  their  feet,  and  set  them  in  the 
way  of  his  steps,  according  as  he  had  j-u-st  p;irt, 
dealt  with  her  husband  before.  So  I  P*  97- 
saw  in  my  dream,  that  they  walked  on  in  their  way, 
and  had  the  weather  very  comfortable  to  them. 

Then  Christiana  began  to  sing,  saying— 

Bless'd  be  the  day  that  I  began 

A  pilgrim  for  to  be ; 
And  blessed  also  be  that  man 

That  thereto  moved  me. 


3  Strive  to  enter  in;  a  whole  heaven  and  eternal  life  is 
wrapped  up  in  this  little  word  IN.  Strive ;  this  calls  for  the 
mind  and  heart.  Many  professors  make  their  striving  to  stand 
rather  in  an  outcry  of  words,  than  in  a  hearty  labour  against 
the  lusts  and  love  of  the  world,  and  their  own  corruptions. 
But  this  kind  of  striving  is  but  a  beating  the  air,  and  will 
come  to  nothing  at  last. — (Bunyan's  Strait  Gate,  vol.  i. 
p.  369.) 

4  Thus  the  dog  of  hell  may  be  of  service,  not  only  in  keeping 
the  sheep  close  together,  hut  in  making  them  keep  close  to 
their  Shepherd.— (J.  B.) 


182 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


lis  true,  'twas  long  ere  I  began 

To  seek  to  live  for  ever : 
But  now  I  run  fast  as  I  can ; 

'Tis  better  late  than  never. 

Our  tears  to  joy,  our  fears  to  faith, 

Are  turned,  as  we  see, 
That  our  beginning,  as  one  saith, 

Shows  what  our  end  will  be. 

Now  there  was,  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall 
that  fenced  in  the  way  up  which  Christiana  and 

The  devil's  Her  companions  were  to  go,  a  garden, 
garden.  an(j  tkat  garden  belonged  to  him 
whose  was  that  harking  dog  of  whom  mention  was 
made  hefore.  And  some  of  the  fruit-trees  that 
grew  in  that  garden  shot  their  branches  over  the 
wall ;  and  heing  mellow,  they  that  found  them 
did  gather  them  up,  and  oft  eat  of  them  to  their 
hurt.  So  Christiana's  boys,  as  boys  are  apt  to  do, 
,.    ._.        .   being  pleased  with  the  trees,  and  with 

1  hp  children  eat  »  r_  » 

of  the  enemy's    the  fruit  that  did  hang  thereon,  did 
plash1  them,  and  began  to  eat.   Their 
mother  did  also  chide  them  for  so  doing,  but  still 
the  boys  went  on.2 

Well,  said  she,  my  sons,  you  transgress,  for 
that  fruit  is  none  of  ours ;  but  she  did  not  know 
that  they  did  belong  to  the  enemy ;  I  will  warrant 
you,  if  she  had,  she  would  have  been  ready  to  die 
for  fear.  But  that  passed,  and  they  went  on  their 
way.  Now,  by  that  they  were  gone  about  two 
bow-shots  from  the  place  that  let  them  into  the 
Two  ill-favoured  way,  they  espied  two  very  ill-favoured 
ones-  ones    coming    down   apace    to    meet 

them.3  With  that,  Christiana  and  Mercy,  her 
friend,  covered  themselves  with  their  veils,  and  so 
kept  on  their  journey ;  the  children  also  went  on 
before  ;  so  that  at  last  they  met  together.  Then 
they  that  came  down  to  meet  them,  came  just  up 
They  assault  to  the  women,  as  if  they  would  em- 
Christiana.      brace   them .    but    Christiana    said, 


1  '  Plash '  was,  in  later  editions,  altered  to  '  pluck.'  To 
plash,  is  to  cut  hedges  or  trees.  The  boys  did  plash,  or  had  a 
cut  at  the  trees,  to  knock  the  fruit  off. — (Ed.) 

2  What  is  this  garden  but  the  world  ?  What  is  the  fruit 
they  here  found?  '  The  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye, 
and  the  pride  of  life.'  1  Jn.  ii.  16.  Of  this  the  boys  ate. 
The  mother  chides  them  for  taking  that  which  did  not  belong 
to  them,  but  she  did  not  know  that  it  grew  in  the  devil's 
garden.  Mark  the  consequence  of  their  eating  this  fruit  here- 
after.— (Mason.)  The  terrifying  suggestions  of  Satan  [the 
dog's  barking]  give  believers  much  present  uneasiness,  yet 
they  often  do  them  great  good,  and  seldom  eventually  hurt 
them  ;  but  the  allurements  of  those  worldly  objects  which  he 
throws  in  their  way  are  far  more  dangerous  and  pernicious. 
Many  of  these  arc  very  attractive  to  young  persons;  but  all 
parents  who  love  the  souls  of  their  children  should  employ  all 
their  influence  and  authority  to  restrain  them  from  those  vain 
pleasures  which  '  war  against  the  soul,'  and  are  most  dangerous 
when  least  suspected.  This  fruit  may  be  found  in  the  pilgrim's 
path,  but  it  grows  in  Beelzebub's  garden,  and  should  be  shunned 
as  poison.  Many  diversions  and  pursuits,  both  in  high  and 
low  life,  are  of  this  nature,  though  often  pleaded  for  as  inno- 
cent, by  some  persons  who  ought  to  know  better. — (Scott.) 


Stand  back,  or  go  peaceably  by,  as  you  should. 
Yet  these  two,  as  men  that  are  deaf,  regarded  not 
Christiana's  words,  but  began  to  lay  hands  upon 
them.  At  that  Christiana,  waxing  very  ^  p.]?rimg 
wroth,  spurned  at  them  with  her  feet,  struggle  with 
Mercy  also,  as  well  as  she  could,  did 
what  she  could  to  shift  them.  Christiana  again 
said  to  them,  Stand  back,  and  begone;  for  we  have 
no  money  to  lose,  being  pilgrims,  as  you  see,  and 
such,  too,  as  live  upon  the  charity  of  our  friends. 

Ill-favoured.  Then  said  one  of  the  two  of  the 
men,  We  make  no  assault  upon  you  for  money, 
but  are  come  out  to  tell  you,  that  if  you  will  but 
grant  one  small  request,  which  we  shall  ask,  we 
will  make  women  of  you  for  ever. 

Christ.  Now  Christiana,  imagining  what  they 
should  mean,  made  answer  again,  We  will  neither 
hear,  nor  regard,  nor  yield  to  what  you  shall  ask. 
We  are  in  haste,  cannot  stay ;  our  business  is  a 
business  of  life  and  death.  So,  again,  she  and 
her  companions  made  a  fresh  essay  to  go  past 
them ;  but  they  letted  them  in  their  way. 

Ill-fav.  And  they  said,  We  intend  no  hurt  to 
your  lives ;  it  is  another  thing  we  would  have. 

Christ.  Ah,  quoth  Christiana,  you  would  have 
us  body  and  soul,  for  I  know  it  is  for 

,,     ,  ,     .  ...     ,.       She  cries  out. 

that  you  are  come ;  but  we  will  die 
rather  upon  the  spot,  than  suffer  ourselves  to  be 
brought  into  such  snares  as  shall  hazard  our  well- 
being  hereafter.  And  with  that  they  both  shrieked 
out,  and  cried,  Murder !  murder !  and  so  put 
themselves  under  those  laws  that  are  provided  for 
the  protection  of  women.  De.  xxii.  23-27.  But  the 
men  still  made  their  approach  upon  them,  with 
design  to  prevail  against  them.  They,  therefore, 
cried  out  again.4 

Now,  they  being,  as  I  said,  not  far  from  the 
gate  in  at  which  they  came,  their  voice  It  is  gooa  to  cry 
was  heard  from  where  they  were,  out  when  we 
thither ;  wherefore  some  of  the  house 
came  out,  and  knowing  that  it  was  Christiana's 
tongue,  they  made  haste  to  her  relief.  But  by 
that  they  were  got  within  sight  of  them,  the  women 


8  What  are  these  ill-favoured  ones  ?  Such  as  you  will  be 
sure  to  meet  with  in  your  pilgrimage ;  some  vile  lusts,  or 
cursed  corruptions,  which  are  suited  to  your  carnal  nature. 
These  will  attack  you,  and  strive  to  prevail  against  you.  Mind 
how  these  pilgrims  acted,  and  follow  their  example.  If  one 
was  to  fix  names  to  these  ill-favoured  ones,  they  might  be 
called  Unbelief  and  Licentiousness,  which  aim  to  rob  Christ's 
virgins  of  their  chastity  to  him. — (Mason.) 

4  Here  we  see  that  the  most  violent  temptation  to  the 
greatest  evil  is  not  sin,  if  resisted  and  not  complied  with. 
Our  Lord  himself  was  tempted  in  all  things  like  as  we  are, 
yet  without  sin.  Therefore,  ye  followers  of  him,  do  not  be 
dejected  and  cast  down,  though  you  should  be  exercised  with 
temptations  to  the  blackest  crimes,  and  the  most  heinous  sins. 
You  cannot  be  assaulted  with  worse  than  your  Lord  was,  He 
was  tempted,  but  he  resisted  Satan,  and  overcame  all,  in  our 
nature.  Cry  to  him  3  he  is  the  Reliever  who  will  come  in  the 
hour  of  distress. —  (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


IS3 


were  in  a  very  great  scuffle,  the  children  also  stood 

The  Reliever     orying  by.     Then  did  ho  that  came 

comes.  Jn  f0,.  tjl0;r  rei;ef  Cll\\  out  t0   t]10   ruf. 

fians,  saying,  What  is  that  thing  that  you  do  ? 
Would  you  make  niy  Lord's  people  to  transgress  ? 
The  ill  ones  flv  ^°  a'so  Attempted  to  take  them,  hut 
to  the  devil  f ox  they  did  make  their  escape  over  the 
wall,  into  the  garden  of  the  man  to 
whom  the  great  dog  belonged ;  so  the  dog  became 
their  protector.  Tins  Reliever  then  came  up  to  the 
women,  and  asked  them  how  they  did.  So  they 
answered,  We  thank  thy  Prince,  pretty  well;  oidy 
we  have  been  somewhat  affrighted  ;  we  thank  thee 
also,  for  that  thou  earnest  in  to  our  help,  for  other- 
wise we  had  been  overcome. 

Reliever.  So  after  a  few  more  words,  this  Re- 
Ti,<  iMievor talks  Hew  said  as  followetli :  I  marvelled 
to  the  women.  mucn  when  you  were  entertained  at 
the  gate  above,  being,  [as]  ye  knew,  that  ye  were 
but  weak  women,  that  you  petitioned  not  the  Lord 
there  for  a  conductor;  then  might  you  have  avoided 
these  troubles  and  dangers,  for  he  would  have 
granted  you  one.1 

Curist.  Alas !  said  Christiana,  we  were  so 
taken  with  our  present  blessing,  that 

Mark  this.        .  r  -  =' 

dangers  to  come  were  forgotten  by  us  ; 
besides,  who  could  have  thought,  that  so  near  the 
King's  palace,  there  should  have  lurked  such 
naughty  ones  ?  Indeed,  it  had  been  well  for  us, 
had  we  asked  our  Lord  for  one ;  but,  since  our 
Lord  knew  it  would  be  for  our  profit,  I  wonder 
he  sent  not  one  along  with  us  ! 2 

Rel.  It  is  not  always  necessary  to  grant  things 
Weloseforwant  not  asked  for,  lest,  by  so  doing,  they 
of  asking  fur.  become  of  little  esteem  ;  but  when 
the  want  of  a  thing  is  felt,  it  then  comes  under, 
in  the  eyes  of  him  that  feels  it,  that  estimate  that 
properly  is  its  due,  and  so,  consequently,  will  be 
thereafter  used.  Had  my  Lord  granted  you  a 
conductor,  you  would  not  neither  so  have  bewailed 
that  oversight  of  yours,  in  not  asking  for  one,  as 
now  you  have  occasion  to  do.  So  all  things  work 
for  good,  and  tend  to  make  you  more  wary. 

Christ.  Shall  we  go  back  again  to  my  Lord, 
and  confess  our  folly,  and  ask  one  ? 

Rel.  Your  confession  of  your  folly  I  will  present 
him  with.  To  go  back  again  you  need  not;  for 
in  all  places  where  you  shall  come,  you  will  find 


1  '  Yc  have  not,  because  yc  ask  not.'  Ja.  iv.  2. 

2  It  is  well  to  be  taken  with  present  blessings,  to  be  joyful 
in  them,  and  thankful  for  them  ;  but  it  is  wrong  to  forget  our 
dangers,  and  grow  secure. — (Mason.) 

3  When  the  soul  is  happy  in  the  love  of  God,  it  is  ready  to 
conclude  that  dangers  are  past,  that  doubts  and  fears  are 
entirely  removed ;  but  as  loug  as  we  arc  in  this  world,  we 
shall  find  the  expediency  of  our  Lord's  exhortation — '  Watch 
and  pray.' — (J.  B.) 

4  Here  is  a  display  of  a  truly  Christian  spirit,  in  that  open 
and  ingenuous  confession  of  her  fault,  taking  all  the  blame 


no  want  at  all ;  for  in  every  of  my  Lord's  lod"-in"-s, 
which  he  has  prepared  for  the  reception  of  his  pil- 
grims, there  is  sufficient  to  furnish  them  against 
all  attempts  whatsoever.  But,  as  I  said,  '  lie  will 
be  inquired  of  by  them,  to  do  it  for  them.'  Eze. 
xnvi.  87.  And  it  is  a  poor  thing  that  is  not  worth 
asking  for.  When  he  had  thus  said,  he  went  back 
to  his  place,  and  the  Pilgrims  went  on  their  way. 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  What  a  sudden  blank 
is   here  !       I   made   account  we   had   The  mistake  of 
now  been  past  all  danger,  and  that         Merry. 
we  should  never  see  sorrow  more.3 

Christ.  Thy  innocency,  my  sister,  said  Chris- 
tiana to  Mercy,  may  excuse  thee  much  ;  but  as 
for  me,  my  fault  is  so  much  the  greater,  Christiana's 
for  that  I  saw  this  danger  before  I  BmlL 
came  out  of  the  doors,  and  yet  did  not  provide  for 
it  where  provision  might  have  been  had.  I  am 
therefore  much  to  be  blamed.4 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  How  knew  you  this 
before  you  came  from  home  ?  Pray  open  to  me 
this  riddle. 

Christ.  Why,  I  will  tell  you.  Before  I  set  foot 
out  of  doors,  one  night,  as  I  lay  in  my  bed,  I  had 
a  dream  about  this  ;  for,  methought  I  saw  two  men, 
as  like  these  as  ever  the  world  they  could  look, 
stand  at  my  bed's  feet,  plotting  how  they  might 
prevent  my  salvation.  I  will  tell  you  their  very 
words.  They  said  (it  was  when  I  was  in  my 
troubles),  What  shall  we  do  with  this  Christiana's 
woman  ?  for  she  cries  out,  waking  and  drcam  rePeated- 
sleeping,  for  forgiveness.  If  she  be  suffered  to  go 
on  as  she  begins,  we  shall  lose  her,  as  we  have  lost 
her  husband.  This,  you  know,  might  have  made 
me  take  heed,  and  have  provided  when  provision 
might  have  been  had. 

Mercy.  Well,  said  Mercy,  as  by  this  neglect 
we  have  an  occasion  ministered  unto  Mercy  makes 
us,  to  behold  our  own  imperfections;  f^ir  neglect  ot 
so  our  Lord  has  taken  occasion  thereby,  du(y- 
to  make  manifest  the  riches  of  his  grace ;  for  he, 
as  we  see,  has  followed  us  with  unasked  kindness, 
and  has  delivered  us  from  their  hands  that  were 
stronger  than  we,  of  his  mere  good  pleasure.5 

Thus,  now  when  they  had  talked  away  a  little 
more  time,  they  drew  nigh  to  a  house  which  stood 
in  the  way,  which  house  was  built  for  the  relief  of 
pilgrims ;  as  you  will  find  more  fully  related  in  the 


upon  herself,  and  excusing  Mercy.  This  is  not  natural  to  us, 
but  the  grace  of  Christ  humbles  the  heart,  and  silences  the 
tongue  to  self-justifying  pleas.  O  for  more  of  this  precious 
grace ! — (Mason.) 

6  Mark  those  phrases — 'the  riches  of  his  grace,' and  '  his 
mere  good  pleasure.'  You  cannot  entertain  too  exalted  ideas 
of  these,  nor  speak  too  highly  of  them.  Pilgrims  should  be 
known  by  their  language  as  well  as  their  walk.  'I  hose  who 
talk  highly  of  their  own  perfection,  speak  little,  if  at  all,  of  the 
riches  of  God's  grace,  and  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will.  Beware 
of  the  infection  of  pride  and  si-lf-riijlitcuus  lcaveu.—  (Mason.) 


184 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


First  Part  of  these  Records  of  the  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress. So  they  drew  on  towards  the  house  (the 
House  of  the  Interpreter),  and  when  they  came  to 

the  door,  they  heard  a  great  talk  in 
Talk    in   the       ,,      ,  i         m  j 

interpreter's      the  house.      Ihey  then  gave  ear,  and. 

cSata^  heard>  as  they  thought,  Christiana 
going  on  pil-      mentioned  hy  name.      For  you  must 

gnmage.  ,  •*  •> 

know  that  there  went  along,  even  be- 
fore her,  a  talk  of  her  and  her  children's  going  on 
pilgrimage.  And  this  thing  was  the  more  pleasing 
to  them,  because  they  had  heard  that  she  was  Chris- 
tian's wife,  that  woman  who  was  sometime  ago  so 
unwilling  to  hear  of  going  on  pilgrimage.  Thus, 
therefore,  they  stood  still,  and  heard  the  good  people 
within  commending  her,  who,  they  little  thought, 
She  knocks  at      stood  at  the  door.     At  last  Christiana 

the  door.       knocked,  as  she  had  done  at  the  gate 

before.  Now,  when  she  had  knocked,  there  came  to 

The    d  the  door  a  young  damsel,  named  Inno- 

openedtothem   cent,  and  opened  the  door  and  looked, 

and  behold  two  women  were  there. 

Damsel.  Then  said  the  damsel  to  them,  With 
whom  would  you  speak  in  this  place  ? 

Christ.  Christiana  answered,  We  understand 
that  this  is  a  privileged  place  for  those  that  are 
become  pilgrims,  and  we  now  at  this  door  are  such  ; 
wherefore  we  pray  that  we  may  be  partakers  of 
that  for  which  we  at  this  time  are  come ;  for  the 
day,  as  thou  seest,  is  very  far  spent,  and  we  are 
loath  to-night  to  go  any  further. 

Damsel.  Pray,  what  may  I  call  your  name,  that 
I  may  tell  it  to  my  Lord  within  ? 

Christ.  My  name  is  Christiana ;  I  was  the  wife 
of  that  pilgrim  that  some  years  ago  did  travel 
this  way,  and  these  be  his  four  children.  This 
maiden  also  is  my  companion,  and  is  going  on 
pilgrimage  too. 

Innocent.  Then  ran  Innocent  in  (for  that  was 
her  name)  and  said  to  those  within,  Can  you  think 
Joyin  the  House  w^°  ls  at  tue  door  •  There  is  Chris- 
of  the  inter-   tiana  and  her  children,  and  her  com- 

preter        that  .  ,  ' 

Christiana  is  panion,  all  waiting  for  entertainment 
p  grim.  jjere_  Then  they  leaped  for  joy,  and 
went  and  told  their  master.  So  he  came  to  the 
door,  and  looking  upon  her,  he  said,  Art  thou  that 
Christiana  whom  Christian,  the  good  man,  left 
behind  him,  when  he  betook  himself  to  a  pilgrim's 
life? 

Christ.  I  am  that  woman  that  was  so  hard- 
hearted, as  to  slight  my  husband's  troubles,  and 


1  The  Holy  Spirit,  the  Interpreter,  who  was  promised  by 
the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  sent  in  his  name,  guides  believers  into 
all  truth.  '  And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God.'  Jn.  vi.  45. 
Humble  confession,  and  serious  consecration  of  heart,  are 
sacrifices  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God ;  and  such  simple- 
hearted  pilgrims  are  received  by  the  church  with  a  hearty  wel- 
come. '  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come ;  and  let  him  that 
heareth  say,  Come.'  Re.  xxii.  17.— (Ed.) 

2  Here  is  joy  indeed,  which  strangers  to  the  love  of  Christ 
intermeddle  not  with.     Surely,  this  is  the  joy  of  heaven ;  and 


that  left  him  to  go  on  in  his  journey  alone,  and 
these  are  his  four  children  ;  but  now  I  also  am 
come,  for  I  am  convinced  that  no  way  is  right  but 
this. 

Inter.  Then  is  fulfilled  that  which  also  is  written 
of  the  man  that  said  to  his  son,  '  Go,  work  to-day 
in  my  vineyard.  He  answered  and  said,  I  will  not : 
but  afterward  he  repented  and  went.'  Mat.  xxi.  29. 
'  Christ.  Then  said  Christiana,  So  be  it,  Amen. 
God  make  it  a  true  saying  upon  me,  and  grant  that 
I  may  be  found  at  the  last  of  him  in  peace,  without 
spot,  and  blameless  ! 

Inter.  But  why  standest  thou  thus  at  the  door  ? 
Come  in,  thou  daughter  of  Abraham.  We  were 
talking  of  thee  but  now,  for  tidings  have  come  to 
us  before,  how  thou  art  become  a  pilgrim.  Come, 
children,  come  in  ;  come,  maiden,  come  in.  So 
he  had  them  all  into  the  house.1 

So,  when  they  were  within,  they  were  bidden  sit 
down  and  rest  them ;  the  which  when  they  had 
done,  those  that  attended  upon  the  Pilgrims  in  the 
house,  came  into  the  room  to  see  them.  And  one 
smiled,  and  another  smiled,  and  they  Qld  saintg  .  . 
all  smiled,  for  joy  that  Christiana  was  to  see  the 
become  a  pilgrim.  They  also  looked  waik'm  God's 
upon  the  boys.  They  stroked  them  ways- 
over  the  faces  with  the  hand,  in  token  of  their  kind 
reception  of  them.  They  also  carried  it  lovingly 
to  Mercy,  and  bid  them  all  welcome  into  their 
Master's  house.2 

After  a  while,  because  supper  was  not  ready,  the 
Interpreter  took  them  into  his  signifi- 

,  ii  1.1  1     .     The  Significant 

cant  rooms,  and  snowed  them  what        Rooms. 
Christian,  Christiana's  husband,  had      First  Part, 
seen  some  time  before.     Here,  there-     p-98-  103- 
fore,  they  saw  the  man  in  the  cage,  the  man  and 
his  dream,  the  man  that  cut  his  way  through  his 
enemies,  and  the  picture  of  the  biggest  of  them 
all,  together  with  the  rest  of  those  things  that  were 
then  so  profitable  to  Christian. 

This  done,  and  after  these  things  had  been  some- 
what digested  by  Christiana  and  her  company,  the 
Interpreter  takes  them  apart  again,  and  has  them 
first  into  a  room  where  was  a  man  that   T,  „  mo„     ... 

J. he  man   with 

could  look  no  way  but  downwards,  with  the  muck-rake 
a  muck-rake  in  his  hand.  There  stood 
also  one  over  his  head  with  a  celestial  crown  in 
his  hand,  and  proffered  him  that  crown  for  his 
muck-rake ;  but  the  man  did  neither  look  up,  nor 
regard,  but  raked  to  himself  the  straws,  the  small 
sticks,  and  dust  of  the  floor.3 


if  thou  hast  this  joy,  thou  hast  the  love  that  reigns  in  heaven. 
Glory  to  Jesus,  1  think  I  can  truly  say,  I  have  this  blessed 
evidence  in  my  heart,  that  I  know  somewhat  of  this  joy 
arising  from  seeing  poor  lost  sinners  converted  to  Jesus,  so  as 
to  love  him  and  follow  him.  0  for  a  spread  and  increase  of 
this  spirit  among  Christians  of  all  denominations ! — (Mason.) 
3  The  emblematical  instruction  at  the  Interpreter's  house, 
in  the  former  part,  was  so  important  and  comprehensive,  that 


THE    PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


185 


Then  said  Christiana,  I  persuade  myself  that  I 
know  somewhat  the  meaning  of  this  ;  for  this  is  a  | 
figure  of  a  man  of  this  world,  is  it  not,  good  Sir  ?  j 

IRTER.  Thou  hast  said  the  right,  said  he,  and 
his  muck-rake  doth  show  his  carnal  mind.  And 
whereas  thou  sccst  him  rather  give  heed  to  rake 
up  straws  and  sticks,  and  the  dust  of  the  floor, 
than  to  what  He  says  that  calls  to  him  from  ahove 
with  the  oeleBtial  crown  in  his  hand,  it  is  to  show 
that  heaven  is  hut  as  a  fahle  to  some,  and  that 
things  here  are  counted  the  only  things  sub- 
stantial. Now,  whereas,  it  was  also  showed  thee, 
that  the  man  could  look  no  way  hut  downwards, 
it  is  to  let  thee  know  that  earthly  things,  when 
they  are  with  power  upon  men's  minds,  quite  carry 
their  hearts  away  from  God.1 
_  .  „     ,  Christ.  Then    said  Christiana,   0 

Christianas  l       i  2 

prayer  against    deliver  me  from  this  muck-rake  ! 

the  muck-rake.  j^^      ^^  prayer>  ga;d  the  Inter. 

preter,  has  lain  hy  till  it  is  almost  rusty.  '  Give 
me  not  riches,'  is  scarce  the  prayer  of  one  of  ten 
thousand,  Pr.  *xx.  8.  Straws,  and  sticks,  and  dust, 
with  most,  are  the  great  things  now  looked  after.3 

With  that  Mercy  and  Christiana  wept,  and  said, 
It  is,  alas  !   too  true.4 

"When  the  Interpreter  had  shown  them  this,  he 
has  them  into  the  very  best  room  in  the  house;  a 
very  brave  room  it  was.  So  he  bid  them  look  round 
about,  and  see  if  they  could  find  anything  profitable 
there.  Then  they  looked  round  and  round ;  for 
there  was  nothing  there  to  be  seen  but  a  very  great 
spider  on  the  Avail :  and  that  they  overlooked. 


we  are  astonished  at  the  striking  additions  here  adduced.  The 
lirst  emblem  is  very  plain ;  and  so  apposite,  that  it  is  won- 
derful any  person  should  read  it  without  lifting  up  a  prayer  to 
the  Lord,  and  Baying,  '  0  deliver  me  from  this  muck-rake!' — 
(Scott,  altered  by  En.)  Awful  thought  1  Straws,  and  sticks, 
and  dust,  preferred  to  Christ  and  salvation  1 

'  If  angels  weep,  it  is  at  such  a  sight !' — (Burder.) 
1  Our  Lord  said,  '  Where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your 
heart  be  also.'  To  be  carnally-minded  is  death,  but  to  be 
spiritually-minded  is  life  and  peace.  If  our  treasure  is  in 
heaven,  we  need  not  envy  those  griping  muck-worms  who  are 
cursed  in  their  basket  and  in  their  store. — (J.  B.) 

2  The  vulture  of  insatiate  minds 

Still  wants,  and  wanting  seeks,  and  seeking  finds 

New  fuel  to  increase  her  rav'nous  fire. 

The  grave  is  sooner  cloy'd  thau  men's  desire. 

— (Quarks'  Emblerns) 

3  A  full  purse  and  a  lean  soul,  is  a  sign  of  a  great  curse. 
O  it  is  a  sad  grant,  when  the  desire  is  only  to  make  the  belly 
big,  the  estate  big,  the  name  big ;  when  even  by  this  bigness 
the  soul  pines,  is  made  to  dwindle,  to  grow  lean,  and  to  look 
like  an  anatomy !  Like  a  man  in  a  dropsy,  they  desire  this 
world,  as  he  doth  drink,  till  they  desire  themselves  quite  down 
to  hell. — (Bunyan's  Desire  of  the  Righteous,  vol.  i.  p.  767.) 

4  Reader,  didst  thou  never  shed  a  tear  for  thy  base  and 
disingenuous  conduct  towards  thy  Lord,  in  preferring  the 
sticks  and  straps  of  this  world  to  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ,  and  the  salvation  of  thy  immortal  soul?  0  this  is 
natural  to  us  all !  and  though  made  wise  unto  salvation,  yet 
this  folly  cleaves  to  onr  old  nature  still.  Let  the  thought 
humble  us,  and  make  us  weep  before  the  Lord. —  (Mason.) 

VOL.  III. 


Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  Sir,  1  see  nothing  ; 
but  Christiana  held  her  peace. 

Inter.  But,  said  the  Interpreter,  look  again  : 
and   she  therefore  looked  ao-ain,  and 

•  i    ii        •        t        it  •       it  i      0**1"  si,'",,r- 

said,  Here  is  not  anything  but  an  ugly 

spider,  who  hangs  hy  her  hands  upon  the  wall 
Then  said  he,  Is  there  but  one  spider  in  all  this 
spacious  room?  Then  the  water  stood  in  Chris- 
tiana's eyes,  for  she  was  a  woman  quick  of  ap- 
prehension;  and  she  said,  Yea,  Lord,  Tau,  ai)0Ut  t)ie 
there  is  here  more  than  one.  Yea,  BpM«r. 
and  spiders  whose  venom  is  far  more  destructive 
than  that  which  is  in  her.  The  Interpreter  then 
looked  pleasantly  upon  her,  and  said,  Thou  hast 
said  the  truth.  This  made  Mercy  blush,  and  the 
boys  to  cover  their  faces,  for  they  all  began  now 
to  understand  the  riddle.0 

Then  said  the  Interpreter  again,  '  The  spider 
taketh  hold  with  their  hands  (as  you  see),  and  is  in 
kings'  palaces.'  Pr.  xxx.  28.  And  wherefore  is  this 
recorded,  but  to  show  you,  that  how  The  interpreta- 
full  of  the  venom  of  sin  soever  you  be,  l10"- 

yet  you  may,  by  the  hand  of  faith,  lay  hold  of, 
and  dwell  in  the  best  room  that  belongs  to  the 
King's  house  above!0 

Christ.  I  thought,  said  Christiana,  of  some- 
thing of  this ;  but  I  could  not  imagine  it  all.  I 
thought  that  we  were  like  spiders,  and  that  we 
looked  like  ugly  creatures,  in  what  fine  room  soever 
we  were ;  but  that  by  this  spider,  this  venomous 
and  ill-favoured  creature,  wc  were  to  learn  how  to 
act  faith,  that  came  not  into  my  mind.  And  yet  she 
has  taken  hold  with  her  hands,  as  I  see,  and  dwells 
in  the  best  room  in  the  house.  God  has  made 
nothing  in  vain. 

Then  they  seemed  all  to  be  glad  ;  but  the  water 
stood  in  their  eyes;  yet  they  looked  one  upon 
another,  and  also  bowed  before  the  Interpreter. 


0  They  knew  the  venom  of  sin  which  was  in  their  fallen 
nature.  This  made  them  cover  their  faces  with  shame,  and 
sink  into  deep  humility  of  heart.  Every  true  interpreter  of 
God's  Word — yea,  the  blessed  Interpreter  of  Gods  heart, 
Jesus — will  look  pleasantly  upon  such  who  confess  the  truth  ; 
while  he  beholds  the  proud,  self-righteous  siuner  afar  off. — 
(Mason.) 

6  faith  apprehends,  and  then  the  soul  dwells  in  the  best 
room  indeed,  even  in  the  very  heart  of  God  in  Christ.  The 
Lord  increase  our  faith  in  tins  precious  truth,  that  we  may 
the  more  love  and  glorify  the  God  of  grace  and  truth !  O  let 
not  our  venom  of  sin  deject  us,  while  there  is  the  blood  of 
Christ  to  cleanse  usl  0  for  a  stronger  love  to  Christ,  and 
greater  hatred  of  sin  !  Both  spring  from  believing. — (Mason.) 
The  emblem  of  the  spider  is  illustrated  in  Bunyan's  invaluable 
treatise  on  the  Resurrection  and  Eternal  Judgment — 'The 
spider  will  be  a  witness  against  man,  for  she  layeth  hold  with 
her  hands,  and  is  in  kings'  palaces.  It  is  man  only  that  will 
not  lay  hold  on  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  the  sj  ider  doth  bid 
aim.  i"'r.  xxx.  28.'— (Vol.  ii.  p.  111.)— (En.) 

Call  me  not  ugly  thing; 

God,  wisdom  hath  unto  the  pismire  given, 
And  spiders  may  teach  men  the  way  to  heaven. 

.    .  (Bunyan's  Emblems) 

24 


ISC 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


He  had  them  then  into  another  room,  where 
Of  the  Hen  and    was  a  hen  an<i  chickens,  and  bid  them 

Chickens.  observe  a  while.  So  one  of  the  chickens 
went  to  the  trough  to  drink,  and  every  time  she 
drank,  she  lift  up  her  head,  and  her  eyes  towards 
heaven.  See,  said  he,  what  this  little  chick  doth, 
and  learn  of  her  to  acknowledge  whence  your 
mercies  come,  by  receiving  them  with  looking  up. 
Yet  again,  said  he,  observe  and  look ;  so  they 
gave  heed,  and  perceived  that  the  hen  did  walk  in 
a  fourfold  method  towards  her  chickens.  1.  She 
had  a  common  call,  and  that  she  hath  all  day  long. 
2.  She  had  a  special  call,  and  that  she  had  but 
sometimes.  3.  She  had  a  brooding  note.  And 
4.  She  had  an  outcry.  Mat.  xxiii.  37. 

Now,  said  he,  compare  this  hen  to  your  King, 
and  these  chickens  to  his  obedient  ones.1  For, 
answerable  to  her,  himself  has  his  methods,  which 
lie  walketh  in  towards  his  people;  by  his  common 
call,  he  gives  nothing ;  by  his  special  call,  he  always 
has  something  to  give ;  he  has  also  a  brooding- 
voice,  for  them  that  are  under  his  wing  ;  and  he 
has  an  outcry,  to  give  the  alarm  when  he  seeth  the 
enemy  come.2  I  chose,  my  darlings,  to  lead  you 
into  the  room  where  such  things  are,  because  you 
are  women,  and  they  are  easy  for  you.3 

Christ.  And  Sir,  said  Christiana,  pray  let  us 
see  some  more.  So  he  had  them  into  the  slaughter- 
ed the  Butcher  house,  where  was  a  butcher  killing  of 
and  the  sheep.   a  siieep  .  and  behold  the  sheep  was 


■  It  is  very  humbling  to  human  pride  to  be  compared  to 
chickens,  as  dependants  on  the  fostering  care  of  the  hen,  or  as 
children  relying  upon  a  parent.  In  Banyan's  Last  Sermon, 
are  some  striking  allusions  to  the  Christian's  dependence  upon 
his  heavenly  Father:— '  It  is  natural  for  a  child,  if  he  wants 
shoes,  to  tell  his  father ;  if  he  wants  bread,  they  go  and  tell 
him.  So  should  the  children  of  God  do  for  spiritual  bread 
— strength  of  grace — to  resist  Satan.  When  the  devil  tempts 
you,  run  home  and  tell  your  heavenly  Father — pour  out  your 
complaints  to  God;  this  is  natural  to' children.  If  any  wrong 
them,  they  tell  their  father ;  so  do  those  that  are  born  of  God", 
when  they  meet  with  temptations,  they  go  and  tell  God  of 
them.'— (Vol.  ii.  p.  757.)— (Ed.) 

'  Common  call,  the  invitations ;  brooding  voice,  the  pro- 
mises ;  outcry,  the  warnings  of  the  gospel. —  (Ivimey.) 

3  Observations  and  experience  justify  this  excellent  simile. 
God's  common  call  is  to  all  his  creatures  who  live  within  the 
sound  of  his  gospel.  His  special  call  is  when  he  bestows  the 
grace,  peace,  and  pardon  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  upon  his 
people.  The  brooding  note  is  when  he  gathers  them  under 
his  wings,  warms  their  hearts  with  the  comforts  of  his  love, 
nourishes  their  souls  with  close  fellowship  with  himself,  and 
refreshes  their  spirits  with  the  overflowings  of  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  '  In  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice,'  says 
David.  Ps.  lxiii.  7-  '  I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with  great 
delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste.'  Ca.  ii.  3.  O  for 
more  of  these  precious  brooding  notes,  to  be  gathered  under 
the  wing  of  Immauuel !  But  be  our  frames  and  experiences 
what  they  may,  still  we  are  ever  in  danger;  for  our  enemies 
surround  us  on  every  side,  and  our  worst  are  within  us. 
Therefore  our  Lord  has  an  outcry;  he  gives  the  alarm,  calls 
us,  and  warns  us  of  danger.  W  hy  ?  That  we  should  flee.  O 
pilgrims,  when  dangers  are  near,  run  unto  him  I  For  'the 
name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower ,  the  righteous  runneth 
into  it,  and  is  safe.'  Pr.  xviii.  10.— (-Mason.) 


quiet,  and  took  her  death  patiently.  Then  said 
the  Interpreter,  You  must  learn  of  this  sheep  to 
suffer,  and  to  put  up  wrongs  without  murmurings 
and  complaints.  Behold  how  quietly  she  taketh 
her  death,  and  without  objecting,  she  sutfereth  her 
skin  to  be  pulled  over  her  ears.  Your  King  doth 
call  you  his  sheep. 

After  this  he  led  them  into  his  garden,  where 
was  great  variety  of  flowers ;  and  he 
said,  Do  you  see  all  these?  So  Chris-  0f  the  Garden- 
tiana  said,  Yes.  Then  said  he  again,  Behold  the 
flowers  are  diverse  in  stature,  in  quality,  and  colour, 
and  smell,  and  virtue ;  and  some  are  better  than 
some ;  also  where  the  gardener  hath  set  them, 
there  they  stand,  and  quarrel  not  with  one  another.* 

Again,  he  had  them  into  his  field,  which  he  had 
sowed  with  wheat  and  corn  ;  but  when 
they  beheld,  the  tops  of  all  were  cut 
off,  only  the  straw  remained  ;  he  said  again,  This 
ground  was  dunged,  and  ploughed,  and  sowed  ;  but 
what  shall  we  do  with  the  crop?  Then  said  Chris- 
tiana, Burn  some,  and  make  muck  of  the  rest. 
Then  said  the  Interpreter  again,  Fruit,  you  see,  is 
that  thing  you  look  for,0  and  for  want  of  that  you 


4  The  church  is  a  garden  enclosed,  Christ  is  the  gardener, 
his  people  are  called  God's  husbandry.  The  difference  in  the 
plants  and  flowers  shows  the  different  effects  of  grace  upon  the 
heart.  —  (J.  B.)  When  Christians  staud  every  one  in  his 
place,  and  do  their  owu  work,  then  they  are  like  the  flowers  in 
the  garden,  that  stand  and  grow  where  the  gardener  hath 
planted  them ;  and  then  they  shall  both  honour  the  garden  in 
which  they  are  planted,  and  the  gardener  that  hath  so  disposed 
of  them.  From  the  hyssop  in  the  wall,  to  the  cedar  in  Leba- 
non, their  fruit  is  their  glory. — Christians  are  like  the  several 
flowers  in  a  garden,  that  have  upon  each  of  them  the  dew  of 
heaven  ;  which,  being  shaken  with  the  wind,  they  let  fall  their 
dew  at  each  others'  roots,  whereby  they  are  jointly  nourished, 
and  become  nourishers  of  one  another.  For  Christians  to 
commune  savourly  of  God's  matters  one  with  another,  it  is  as 
if  they  opened  to  each  others'  nostrils  boxes  of  perfume.  Saith 
Paul  to  the  church  at  Rome,  '  I  long  to  see  you,  that  I  may 
impart  unto  you  some  spiritual  gift,  to  the  end  ye  may  be 
established ;  that  is,  that  I  may  be  comforted  together  with 
you,  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me.'  Ro.  i.  11,  12. 
— ^Buuyan's  Christian  Behaviour,  vol.  ii.  pp.  550,  570.) 
I  have  observed,  that  as  there  are  herbs  and  flowers  in  our 
gardens,  so  there  are  their  counterfeits  in  the  field ;  only  they 
are  distinguished  from  the  other  by  the  name  of  wild  ones. 
There  is  faith  and  wild  faith  ;  and  wild  faith  is  presumption. 
I  call  it  wild  faith,  because  God  never  placed  it  in  his  garden 
— his  church ;  it  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  field — the  world. 
— (Bunyan's  Good  News,  vol.  i.  p.  93.)  We  ought  not  to  be 
contented  with  a  situation  among  the  noxious  weeds  of  the 
desert ;  but  if  we  be  planted  among  the  ornamental  and  fra- 
grant flowers  of  the  Lord's  garden,  we  are  honoured  indeed. 
We  should  watch  against  envy  and  ambition,  contempt  of  our 
brethren  and  contention.  We  ought  to  be  satisfied  in  out- 
places, doing  'nothing  through  strife  or  vain  glory,  or  with 
murmuriugs  and  disputings;'  but  endeavour,  in  the  meekness 
of  wisdom,  to  diffuse  a  heavenly  fragrance  around  us,  and  to 
adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things. — (Scott.) 

0  The  husbandman  is  not  repaid  by  the  straw  or  chaff.  So 
the  suherings  of  Christ,  the  preaching,  promises,  and  ordin- 
ances of  the  gospel,  were  not  intended  to  bring  men  to  profess 
certain  doctrines,  or  observe  certain  forms  ;  but  to  render  men 
fruitful  in  good  works,  by  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
All  profession  wilt  terminate  in  everlasting  misery,  which   is 


THE    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


387 


condemn  it  to  the  fire,  and  to  be  trodden  under 
foot  of  men:  beware  that  in  this  you  condemn 
nnt  yourselves.1 

Then,  us  they  were  coming  in  from  abroad,  they 
Of  the  Robin  espied  a  little  robin  with  a  great  spider 
indtheSpider.  m  ]lis  mouthj  so  the  Interpreter  said. 
Look  here.  So  they  looked,  and  Mercy  wondered ; 
but  Christiana  said.  What  a  disparagement  is  it 
to  such  a  little  pretty  bird  as  the  robin-redbreast 
is,  he  being  also  a  bird  above  many,  that  loveth 
to  maintain  a  kind  of  BOCiableness  with  man  ;  I  had 
thought  they  had  lived  upon  crumbs  of  bread, 
Or  upon  other  BUch  harmless  matter;  I  like  him 
worse  than  I  did. 

The  Interpreter  then  replied,  This  robin  is  an 
emblem,  very  apt  to  set  forth  some  professors  by; 
for  to  sight,  they  are,  as  this  robin,  pretty  of  note, 
colour,  and  carriage.  They  seem  also  to  have  a 
very  great  love  for  professors  that  are  sincere ; 
and  above  all  other,  to  desire  to  sociate  with  them, 
and  to  be  in  their  company,  as  if  they  could  live 
upon  the  good  man's  crumbs.  They  pretend  also, 
that  therefore  it  is  that  they  frequent  the  house  of 
the  godly,  and  the  appointments  of  the  Lord  ;  but, 
when  they  are  by  themselves,  as  the  robin,  they 
can  catch  and  gobble  up  spiders,  they  can  change 
their  diet,  drink  iniquity,  and  swallow  down  sin 
like  water.2 

So,  when  they  were  come  again  into  the  house, 
Pray,  and  you  because  supper  as  yet  was  not  ready, 
wMcffyet  hea  Christiana  again  desired  that  the  In- 
murevealed.  terpreter  would  either  show  or  tell  of 
some  other  things  that  are  profitable. 

Then  the  Interpreter  began,  and  said,  The 
fatter  the  sow  is,  the  more  she  desires  the  mire; 
the  fatter  the  ox  is,  the  more  gamesomely  he  goes 
to  the  slaughter;  and  the  more  healthy  the  lusty 
man  is,  the  more  prone  he  is  unto  evil. 

There  is  a  desire  in  women  to  go  neat  and  fine, 
and  it  is  a  comely  thing  to  be  adorned  with  that 
that  in  God's  sight  is  of  great  price. 

It  is  easier  watching  a  night  or  two,  than  to  sit 


not  productive  of  this  good  fruit.  '  True  religion  and  nude- 
filed  '  consists  not  iu  forms,  creeds,  and  ceremonies,  but  is  Mo 
visit  and  comfort  the  widows  and  the  fatherless.' — (Scott.) 

1  This  is  a  necessary  caution.  Paul  says,  'Thou  art  inex- 
cusable, 0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest ;  for  wherein 
thou  judgest  another,  thou  eondeinnest  thyself,  for  thou  that 
judgest  doest  the  same  things.'  James  has  laid  down  an  ex- 
cellent rule  of  conduct — O  that  it  were  more  attended  to ! — 
'So  speak  ye,  and  so  do,  as  they  that  shall  be  judged  by  the 
law  of  liberty.'  How  inconsistent  for  a  pardoned  malefactor 
to  insult  even  those  who  are  under  condemnation!  If  arjy 
inau  seenieth  to  be  religious,  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue  from 
commending  himself  and  condemning  others,  this  man's  reli- 
gion is  vain.  He  that  judgeth  his  brother  speaketh  evil  of  the 
law,  and  judgeth  the  law. — (J.  B.) 

1  A  very  striking  emblem  this,  and  most  pertinently  applied  ; 
and  if  your  soul  is  sincere,  it  will  cause  a  holy  fear,  create  a 
godly  jealousy,  put  you  upon  self-examining,  and  make  you 
sigh  out  in  some  such  words  as  David,  'Starch  me,  0  God, 


up  a  whole  year  together.       So  it  is  easier  for  one 

to  begin  to  profess  well,  than  to  hold  out  as  he 
should  to  the  end. 

Every  shipmaster,  when  in  a  storm,  will  will- 
ingly cast  that  overboard  that  is  of  the  smallest 
value  in  the  vessel :  but  who  will  throw  the  best 
out  first?      None  but  he  that  feareth  not  God. 

One  leak  will  sink  a  ship;  and  one  sin  will 
destroy  a  sinner. 

lie  that  forgets  his  friend,  is  ungrateful  unto 
him  ;  but  he  that  forgets  bis  Saviour,  is  unmerciful 
to  himself. 

He  that  lives  in  sin,  and  looks  for  happiness 
hereafter,  is  like  him  that  soweth  cockle,  and 
thinks  to  fill  his  barn  with  wheat  or  barley. 

If  a  man  would  live  well,  let  him  fetch  his  last  day 
to  him,  and  make  it  always  his  company  keeper. 

Whispering,  and  change  of  thoughts,  prove  that 
sin  is  in  the  world. 

If  the  world,  which  God  sets  light  by,  is  counted 
a  thing  of  that  worth  with  men  ;  what  is  heaven, 
which  God  commendeth? 

If  the  life  that  is  attended  with  so  many 
troubles,  is  so  loath  to  be  let  go  by  us,  what  is 
the  life  above? 

Everybody  will  cry  up  the  goodness  of  men; 
but  who  is  there  that  is,  as  he  should,  affected 
with  the  goodness  of  God? 

We  seldom  sit  down  to  meat,  but  we  eat  and 
leave ;  so  there  is  in  Jesus  Christ  more  merit  and 
righteousness  than  the  whole  world  has  need  of.8 

When  the  Interpreter  had  done,  he  takes  them 
out  into  his  garden  again,  and  had  of  „|C  tree  that 
them  to  a  tree,  whose  inside  was  all  is  rotten  at 
rotten  and  gone,  and  yet  it  grew  and 
had  leaves.  Then  said  Mercy,  What  means  this? 
This  tree,  said  he,  whose  outside  is  fair,  and  whose 
inside  is  rotten,  it  is  to  which  many  may  be  com- 
pared, that  are  in  the  garden  of  God ;  who  with 
their  mouths  speak  high  in  behalf  of  God,  but 
indeed  will  do  nothing  for  him ;  whose  leaves  are 
fair,  but  their  heart  good  for  nothing  but  to  bo 
tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder  box.4 


and  know  my  heart;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts:  and  see 
if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way 
everlasting.1  Ps.  exxxix.  23,  24.  O  what  will  it  avail  in  a 
dyiag  hour,  or  in  the  judgment  day,  that  we  have  worn  the 
mark  of  profession,  and  seemed  to  man,  what  we  were  not  in 
heart  and  reality  of  life  before  God!  From  all  self-deceiving, 
good  Lord,  deliver  us  1    for  we  are  naturally  prone   to   it.— 

a  This  observation  is  grounded  on  the  good  old  distinction, 
that  the  merit  of  Christ's  obedience  unto  death  is  efficient  for 
all  who  In,  faith  apply  for  an  interest  in  it.  Nothing  but 
pride,  the  carnal  mind,  and  enmity  to  God  and  religion. 
influence  men  to  neglect  so  great  salvation ;  and  "hen  the 
re  uncrating  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  accompanies  the 
Word,  sinners  are  made  willing  to  accept  the  pfoflered  mercy, 
and  encouraged  by  the  invitations  which  before  they  sinfully 
slighted.— (Scott.) 

i   |!::it  i,  it,\  very  character,  says  many  a  doubling,  broken- 


18S 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Now  supper  was  ready,  the  tal;le  spread,  and 
They  are  at  a^  things  set  on  the  board ;  so  they 
Suppsr.  sa£  ,]own  an(j  di^fj  eat,  when  one  had 
given  thanks.  And  the  Interpreter  did  usually 
entertain  those  that  lodged  with  him,  with  music 
at  meals ;  so  the  minstrels  played.  There  was 
also  one  that  did  sing,  and  a  very  fine  voice  he 
had.     His  song  was  this: 

The  Lord  is  only  my  support, 

And  he  that  doth  me  feed ; 

How  can  1  then  want  anything 

Whereof  I  stand  in  need? 

When  the  song  and  music  Avas  ei.d  d,1  the  In- 

_,...„  terpreter   asked    Christiana    what    it 

Talk  at  Supper.  1 

was  that  at  first  did  move  her  to  betake 

A  repetition   of    ,  .„  ,         t-,.,      .      ,     ....         />,     ... 

n.riU.aiia'sex-  herself  to  a  rilgrim  s  lite.  Christiana 
pcrieucc.  answered,  First,  The  loss  of  my  hus- 

band came  into  my  mind,  at  which  I  was  heartily 
grieved ;  but  all  that  was  but  natural  affection. 
Then,  after  that,  came  the  troubles  and  pilgrimage 
of  my  husband  into  my  mind,  and  also  how  like  a 
churl  I  had  carried  it  to  him  as  to  that.  So  guilt 
tuok  hold  of  my  mind,  and  would  have  drawn  me 
into  the  pond  ;  but  that  opportunely  I  had  a  dream 
of  the  well-being  of  my  husband,  and  a  letter 
sent  me  by  the  King  of  that  country  where  my 
husband  dwells,  to  come  to  him.  The  dream  and 
the  letter  together  so  wrought  upon  my  mind, 
that  they  forced  me  to  this  way. 

Inter.  But  met  you  with  no  opposition  before 
you  set  out  of  doors  ? 

Christ.  Yes,  a  neighbour  of  mine,  one  Mrs. 
Timorous  (she  was  akin  to  him  that  would  have 
persuaded  my  husband  to  go  back,  for  fear  of  the 
lions).  She  all  to  befooled  me  for,  as  she  called  it, 
my  intended  desperate  adventure ;  she  also  urged 


hearted  sinner.  Well,  thank  God,  says  many  a  self-confident, 
whole-hearted  Pharisee,  it  is  far  from  being  mine.  We  can 
only  say  this,  he  that  knows  most  of  his  own  superlatively 
deceitful  and  desperately  wicked  heart,  suspects  himself  most, 
and  exercises  most  godly  jealousy  over  himself;  while  persons, 
who  see  least  of  themselves,  are  most  self-confident  and  daring. 
Even  Judas  could  as  boldly  ask,  'Master,  is  it  I'  who  shall 
betray  thee?  as  any  of  the  rest  of  his  disciples. — (Mason.) 

1  Mr.  lvimey  supposes  this  to  be  intended  by  Mr.  Jiunyan 
to  show  his  approbation  of  the  practice  of  singing  in  public 
worship.  It  was  then  a  custom  which  had  been  recently 
introduced,  and  was  a  subject  of  strong  controversy.  Soon 
after  Dunyau's  death,  Benjamin  Keach  vindicated  the  prac- 
tice, by  proving  that  singing  is  an  ordinance  of  Jesus  Clirist, 
in  answer  to  Marlowe's  Discourse  against  Suigiuy.  It  must 
not  be  forgotten,  that  our  pilgrim  forefathers  generally  met  in 
secret,  and  that  singing  would  have  exposed  them  to  imminent 
peril  of  their  lives.  .Now  we  have  no  such  fear;  we  can  unite 
heart  aud  voice  in  the  language  of  Dr.  Watts — 
'  Lord,  how  delightlul  'tis  to  see 

A  whole  assembly  worship  thee! 

At  once  they  sing.' 
That  is,  when  singing  men  or  women  do  not  prevent  the 
godly  from  uniting  in  this  delightful  part  of  Divine  worship 
by  introducing  new  tunes,  to  sing  to  the  praise  aud  glory  of 
themselves.  Let  such  as  are  guilty  of  this  solemnly  ask  the 
question,  Was  the  late  Mr.  Huntingdon  right  in  estimating 
their  piety  at  less  than  twopence  per  dozen  ? — (Ed.) 


what  she  could  to  dishearten  me  to  it ;  the  hard- 
ship and  troubles  that  my  husband  met  with  in  the 
way,  but  all  this  I  got  over  pretty  well.2  But  a 
dream  that  I  had  of  two  ill-looked  ones,  that  I 
thought  did  plot  how  to  make  me  miscarry  in  my 
journey,  that  hath  troubled  me  much ;  yea,  it  still 
runs  in  my  mind,  and  makes  me  afraid  of  every  one 
that  I  meet,  lost  they  should  meet  me  to  do  me  a 
mischief,  and  to  turn  me  out  of  the  way.  Yea,  I 
may  tell  my  Lord,  though  I  would  not  have  every- 
body know  it,  that  between  this  and  the  gate  by 
which  we  got  into  the  way,  we  were  both  so  sorely 
assaulted  that  we  were  made  to  cry  out,  Murder ! 
and  the  two  that  made  this  assault  upon  us  were 
like  the  two  that  I  saw  in  my  dream. 

Then  said  the   Interpreter,   Thy  beginning  is 
good,  thy  latter  end  shall  greatly  in-  a  question  put 
crease.     So  he  addressed  himself  to       t0  Mercy- 
Mercy,  and  said  unto  her,  And  what  moved  thee 
to  come  hither,  sweet  heart  ? 

Then  Mercy  blushed  and  trembled,  and  for  a 
while  continued  silent. 

Inter.  Then,  said  he,  be  not  afraid,  only  believe, 
and  speak  thy  mind. 

Mercy.  So  she  began,  and  said,  Truly,  Sir,  my 
want   of    experience    is    that    which   „ 

,  x  .,  ,     Mercy's  answer. 

makes  me  covet  to  be  in  silence,  and 
that  also  that  fills  me  with  fears  of  coming  short 
at  last.  I  cannot  tell  of  visions  and  dreams  as 
my  friend  Christiana  can ;  nor  know  I  what  it  is  to 
mourn  for  my  refusing  of  the  counsel  of  those  that 
were  good  relations.3 

Inter.  What  was  it  then,  dear  heart,  that  hath 
prevailed  with  thee  to  do  as  thou  hast  done  ? 

Mercy.  Why,  when  our  friend  here  was  packing 
up  to  be  gone  from  our  town,  I  and  another  went 
accidentally  to  see  her ;  so  we  knocked  at  the  door 
and  went  in.  When  we  were  within,  and  seeing 
what  she  was  doing,  we  asked  what  was  her 
meaning.  She  said,  she  was  scut  for  to  go  to  her 
husband ;  and  then  she  up  and  told  us  how  she 
had  seen  him  in  a  dream,  dwelling  in  a  curious 
place,  among  immortals,  wearing  a  crown,  playing 


2  Ah,  Mrs.  Timorous,  how  many  professed  pilgrims  hast 
thou  befooled  and  turned  back  1  How  often  does  she  attack 
and  affright  many  real  pilgrims !  I  am  sure  she  has  often 
made  my  poor  heart  ache  with  her  ghastly  looks  and  terrify- 
ing speeches.  0  may  we  ever  say  to  her,  in  our  Lord's  words, 
'  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan ;  thou  savourest  not  the  things 
that  be  of  God,  but  those  that  be  of  men.'  Mat.  xvi.  23.— 
(Mason.) 

s  A  very  simple  and  artless  confession.  The  Lord  works 
very  diti'erently  upon  his  elect ;  but  always  to  the  same  end, 
namely,  to  make  us  prize  Christ,  his  salvation  and  his  ways, 
aud  to  abhor  ourselves,  the  paths  of  sin,  and  to  cast  off  all 
self-righteous  hopes.  If  this  is  effected  in  thy  heart,  reader, 
no  matter  whether  thou  canst  tell  of  visions  aud  dreams,  and 
talk  high  of  experiences.  Where  the  soul  is  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  love  to  his  ways, 
though  there  may  be  many  fears,  yet  this  is  an  indubitable 
proof  of  a  real  and  sincere  pilgrim. — (Mason.) 


THE    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


189 


upon  a  harp,  eating  and  drinking  at  his  Prince's 
table,  and  singing  praises  to  him  for  bringing  him 

(hither,  A:c.  Now,  methought,  while  she  was 
telling-  tliese  things  unto  us,  my  heart  burned 
within  me  ;  and  1  said  in  my  heart,  If  this  he  true, 
I  will  leave  my  father  and  my  mother,  and  the  land 
of  my  nativity,  and  will,  if  1  may,  go  along  with 
Christiana. 

So  I  asked  her  further  of  the  truth  of  these 
tilings,  and  if  she  would  let  ine  go  with  her;  for  I 
saw  now  that  there  was  no  dwelling,  hut  with  the 
danger  of  ruin,  any  longer  in  our  town.  But  yel 
1  came  away  with  a  heavy  heart,  not  for  that  I  was 
unwilling  to  come  away,  but  for  that  so  many  of 
my  relations  were  left  behind. 

And  I  am  come,  with  all  the  desire  of  my  heart, 
and  will  go,  if  I  may,  with  Christiana,  unto  her 
husband,  and  his  King.1 

Inter.  Thy  setting  out  is  good,  for  thou  hast 
•riven  credit  to  the  truth.-'  Thou  art  a  Ruth,  who 
did,  for  the  love  she  bare  to  Naomi,  and  to  the 
Lord  her  God,  leave  father  and  mother,  and  the 
land  of  her  Dativity,  to  come  out,  and  go  with  a 
people  that  she  knew  not  heretofore.  '  The  Lord 
recompense  thy  work,  and  a  full  reward  be  given 
thee  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  uuder  whose  wings 
thou  art  come  to  trust.'  r.u.  H.  12. 

Now  supper  was  ended,  and  preparation  was 
„,       ,,        made  for  bed;  the  women  were  laid 

Tliev  address       .  ' 

themselves     singly  alone,  and  the  boys  by  them- 

lorbed.  ,      J        xt  i  nr  ■     i     j 

selves.      JN  ow  when  Mercy  was  in  bed, 

she  could  not  sleep  for  joy,  for  that  now  her  doubts 

Mercy's  good   of    missing    at    last,    were    removed 

night's  rest.    furt}ier  from  jier  than  ever  they  were 

before.     So  she  lay  blessing  and  praising  God,  who 

had  had  such  favour  for  her. 

In  the  morning  they  rose  with  the  sun,  and 
prepared  themselves  for  their  departure ;  but  the 
Interpreter  would  have  them  tarry  awhile,  for,  said 
he,  you  must  orderly  go  from  hence.     Then,  said 

1  They  who  are  acquainted  with  the  manner  in  which  per- 
sons are  received  into  Congregational  churches,  by  relating  a 
verbal  account  of  their  experience,  will  recognize  in  this  nar- 
rative a  resemblance  to  that  practice.  Christiana,  a  grave 
matron,  appears  to  have  felt  no  difficulty  in  complying  with 
the  requisition;  but  Mercy,  young  and  inexperienced,  blushed 
and  trembled,  and  for  a  while  continued  silent.  Their  profes- 
sion being  approved,  the  readiness  of  the  church  to  receive 
them  is  expressed  by  the  warmest  wishes  for  their  spiritual 
prosperity. — (Ivimey.) 

2  'Thou  hast  given  credit  to  the  truth;'  what  is  this  but 
faith — the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God?  But  some  may  ask, 
What !  is  justifying,  saving  faith,  nothing  more  than  a  belief 
of  the  truth?  If  so,  the  very  devils  believe  ;  yea,  more,  they 
tremble  also.  True;  but  mind  how  Mercy's  faith  wrought  Ly 
her  works.  She  tied  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  her  in 
the  gospel.  She  tied  from  sin,  from  the  City  of  Destruction, 
to  Christ  for  salvation.  Though  she  had  not  the  joy  of  faith, 
yet  she  followed  on  to  know  the  Lord,  walking  in  his  ways, 
and  hoping  for  comfort  from  the  Lord  in  his  due  time.  O  ! 
if  thou  hast  a  irrain  of  this  precious  faith  in  thy  heart,  bless 
Jesus  for  it,  and  go  on  thy  way  rejoicing. —  (Mason.) 


They  are  sealed. 


he  to  the  damsel  that  first  opened  unto  them,  Tako 
them  and  have  them  into  the  garden  to  the  bath, 
and  there  wash  them,  and  make  them  clean  from 
the  sod  which  they  have  gathered  by  travelling. 
Then  Innocent  the  damsel  took  them,  and  had 
them  into  the  garden,  and  brought  The  bath 
them  to  the  bath;  so  she  told  them  Sanctincathm. 
that  there  they  must  wash  and  be  clean,  for  so  her 
master  would  have  the  women  to  do  that  called 
at  his  house,  as  they  were  going  on  pilgrimage. 
They  then  went  in  and  washed,  yea,    ,.,         ... 

,  ,       ,  i       ii  ii  J  hey  wash  111  it. 

they  and  the  boys  and  all ;   and  they 

came  out  of  that  bath,  not  only  sweet  and  clean, 

but   also    much   enlivened    and    strengthened    in 

their  joints.3     So  when  they  came  in,  they  looked 

fairer  a  deal   than   when   they   went  out   to  the 

washing.4 

When  they  were  returned  out  of  the  garden 
from  the  bath,  the  Interpreter  took  them,  and 
looked  upon  them,  and  said  unto  them,  Fair  as 
the  moon.  Then  he  called  for  the 
seal,  wherewith  they  used  to  be  sealed 
that  were  washed  in  his  bath.  So  the  seal  was 
brought,  and  he  set  his  mark  upon  them,  that  they 
might  he  known  in  the  places  whither  they  were 
yet  to  go.  Now  the  seal  was  the  contents  and 
sum  of  the  passover  which  the  children  of  Israel 
did  eat  when  they  came  out  from  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  the  mark  was  set  between  their  eyes.'' 
This  seal  greatly  added  to  their  beauty,  for  it  was 
an  ornament  to  their  faces.     It  also  added  to  their 

3  Mr.  Ivimey  considers  that  this  bath  in  the  garden  refers 
to  the  baptism  of  the  pilgrims  by  immersion,  after  having 
related  their  experience,  as  a  publicly  putting  on  of  Christ. 
'  And  now  why  tamest  thou  ?  Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and 
wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.'  Ac. 
xxii.  10.  Innocent  says  that  '  her  master  would  have  them 
do;'  and  they  went  out  into  the  garden  to  the  bath,  and  were 
much  enlivened  by  it.  Bunyan  left  it  to  the  convert  to  act 
for  himself  as  to  water-baptism;  all  that  he  required,  as  a  pre- 
requisite to  church-communion,  was  the  new  birth,  or  the  bap- 
tism of  the  Holy  Spirit,  lie  calls  this  the  '  bath  of  sanetifica- 
tion;'  no  Christian  considers  water-baptism  a  source  of  sancti- 
fication;  it  is  only  the  outward  sign.  It  must  be  left  to  the 
reader's  candid  judgment  to  decide  whether  baptism,  upon  a 
profession  of  faith,  is  lure  intended  by  that  that  the  master 
VAjald  have  them.  do. —  (Ko.) 

4  There  is  no  travelling  on  pilgrimage  without  gathering 
soil.  There  are  no  pilgrims  but  daily  need  to  have  recourse 
to  this  bath  of  sanctification —  the  blood  of  Jesus,  which 
cleanses  from  all  sin.  1  Ju.  i.  7-  Christ  is  the  fountain  opened 
for  sin  and  for  uucleanness.  Zee.  xiii.  1.  Christ  is  the  soul's 
only  bath.  As  all  baths  arc  for  the  purification  of  the  body, 
such  is  this  bath  to  our  soul.  But  unless  a  bath  be  used,  this 
cannot  be  etl'ccted ;  so,  uuless  we  have  recourse  to  Christ,  we 
cannot  enjoy  the  purification  of  the  soul;  but  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Sauctilier,  convinces  us  of  sin,  shows  us  our  fresh-contracted 
spots  and  defilements,  and  leads  us  to  the  blood  of  the  Iamb. 
(J  h,w  docs  this  enliven  and  strengthen  our  souls,  by  filling 
our  conscience  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing  !— (Mason.) 

6  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  I  receive  and  own 
of  the  covenant  of  grace ;  the  former  as  a  sign  of  our  engraft- 
ing into  Christ,  and  the  latter  to  show  forth  his  death,  as  an 
emblem  or  type  of  the  benefits  purchased  thereby  to  his  chuicii 
and  people— (Philip  Henry,  altered  by  t,D.) 


190 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


True  humility. 


gravity,  and  made  their  countenances  more  like 
them  of  angels.1  Ex.  nil  s-io. 

Then  said  the  Interpreter  again  to  the  damsel 
that  waited  upon  these  women,  Go  into  the  vestry 
and  fetch  out  garments  for  these  people ;  so  she 
They  me  went  and  fetched  out  white  raiment, 
clothed.  amj  jajj  (jown  before  him  ;  so  he  com- 
manded them  to  put  it  on.  '  It  was  fine  linen, 
white  and  clean.'  When  the  women  were  thus 
adorned,  they  seemed  to  he  a  terror  one  to  the 
other ;  for  that  they  could  not  see  that  glory  each 
one  on  herself,  which  they  could  see  in  each  other. 
Now,  therefore,  they  began  to  esteem  each  other 
better  than  themselves.  '  For  you  are 
fairer  than  I  am,'  said  one;  and  'you 
are  more  comely  than  I  am,'  said  another.2  The 
children  also  stood  amazed  to  see  into  what  fashion 
they  were  brought.3 

The  Interpreter  then  called  for  a  man-servant 
of  his,  one  Great-heart,  and  bid  him  take  sword, 
and  helmet,  and  shield ;  and  take  these  my  daugh- 
ters, said  he,  and  conduct  them  to  the  house  called 
Beautiful,  at  which  place  they  will  rest  next.4  So 
he  took  his  weapons  and  went  before  them ;  and 
the  Interpreter  said,  God  speed.  Those  also  that 
belonged  to  the  family,  sent  them  away  with  many 
a  good  wish.  So  they  went  on  their  way  and 
fang— 

This  place  has  been  our  second  stage; 

Here  we  have  heard  and  seen 
Those  good  things  that,  from  age  to  age, 
To  others  hid  have  been. 

The  dnnghill-raker,  spider,  hen, 

The  chicken,  too,  to  me 
Hath  taught  a  lesson;  let  me  then 

Conformed  to  it  be. 

The  butcher,  garden,  and  the  field, 

The  robin  and  his  bait, 
Also  the  rotten  tree  doth  yield 

Me  argument  of  weight ; 

1  This  means  the  sealing  of  the  Spirit,  whereby  they  were 
sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption.  Ep.  iv.  30.  0  this  is 
blessed  sealing !  None  know  the  comfort  and  joy  of  it  but 
those  who  have  experienced  it.  It  confirms  our  faith,  estab- 
lishes our  hope,  and  inflames  our  affections  to  God  the  Father 
for  his  everlasting  love,  to  God  the  Son  for  his  everlasting 
atonement  and  righteousness,  and  to  God  the  Spirit  for  his 
enlightening  mercy,  regenerating  grace,  quickening,  sanctify- 
ing, testifying,  and  assuring  influences,  whereby  we  know  that 
we  are  the  children  of  God  ;  for  '  the  Spirit  itself  beareth  wit- 
ness with  our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.'  Ro. 
viii.  16.  All  the  comfort  of  our  souls  lies  in  keeping  this  seal 
clear  in  our  view.  Therefore  grieve  not  the  Holy"  Spirit. — 
(Mason.) 

-  They  who  have  put  on  this  raiment  are  clothed  with 
humility;  they  readily  perceive  the  excellence  of  other  be- 
lievers, but  can  only  discern  their  own  in  the  glass  of  God's 
Word.  At  the  same  time,  they  become  very  observant  of 
their  own  defects,  and  severe  in  animadverting  on  them,  but 
proportionally  candid  to  their  brethren ;  and  thus  they  learn 
the  hard  lesson  of  esteeming  others  better  than  themselves. — 
(Scott.) 


To  move  me  for  to  watch  and  pray, 

To  strive  to  be  sincere ; 
To  take  my  cross  up  day  by  day, 

And  serve  the  Lord  with  fear. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  they  went  on, 
and  Great-heart  went  before  them :  so  they  went 
and  came  to  the  place  where  Christian's  burden 
fell  off  his  back,  and  tumbled  into  a  sepulchre. 
Here  then  they  made  a  pause  ;  and  here  also  they 
blessed  God.  Now,  said  Christiana,  it  comes  to 
my  mind,  what  was  said  to  us  at  the  gate,  to  wit, 
that  we  should  have  pardon  by  word  and  deed  ;  by 
word,  that  is,  by  the  promise  ;  by  deed,  to  wit,  in 
the  way  it  was  obtained.  What  the  promise  is,  of 
that  I  know  something  ;  but  what  it  is  to  have 
pardon  by  deed,  or  in  the  way  that  it  was  ob- 
tained, Mr.  Great-heart,  I  suppose  you  know ; 
wherefore,  if  you  please,  let  us  hear  you  discourse 
thereof. 

Great-heart.  Pardon  by  the  deed  done,  is  par- 
don obtained  by  some  one,  for  another  A  comment  up 
that  hath  need  thereof:  not  by  the 
person  pardoned,  but  in  the  way,  saith 
another,  in  which  I  have  obtained  it. 
So  then,  to  speak  to  the  question  more 
[at]  large,  the  pardon  that  you  and  Mercy,  and 
these  boys  have  attained,  was  obtained  by  another, 
to  wit,  by  him  that  let  you  in  at  the  gate ;  and 
he  hath  obtained  it  in  this  double  way.  He  has 
performed  righteousness  to  cover  you,  and  spilt 
blood  to  wash  you  in.5 

Christ.  But  if  he  parts  with  his  righteousness 
to  us,  what  will  he  have  for  himself  ? 

Great-heart.  He  has  more  righteousness  than 
you  have  need  of,  or  thau  he  needeth  himself. 

Christ.   Pray  make  that  appear. 

Great-heart.  With  all  my  heart ;  but  first  I 
must  premise,  that  he  of  whom  we  are  now  about  to 
speak  is  one  that  has  not  his  fellow.  He  has  two 
natures  in  one  person,  plain  to  be  distinguished, 
impossible  to  be  divided.  Unto  each  of  these 
natures  a  righteousness  belone'eth,  and  each  riffli- 


what 
said  at  the 
Gate,  or  a  dis- 
course of  our 
being  justified 
by  Clirist. 


3  This  is  always  the  case  when  souls  are  clothed  in  the  robe 
of  Christ's  righteousness.  They  are  little,  low,  and  mean  in 
their  own  eyes,  and  they  esteem  each  other  better  than  them- 
selves ;  whereas  they  who  at  all  look  to,  or  depend  upon,  their 
own  righteousness  for  their  clothing  and  justification  before 
God,  always  look  down  with  an  air  of  supercilious  contempt 
upon  others  who  they  think  are  not  so  righteous  as  them- 
selves. Lord,  hide  self-righteous  pride  from  my  heart,  and 
sink  me  into  the  depth  of  humility,  that  I  may  ever  glory  in 
thee,  in  whom  I  am  perfectly  righteous  ! — (Mason.)  See  also 
Ro.  vi.  1-5,  and  Gal.  iii.  27  —  (Ivitney.) 

4  The  conductor,  named  Great-heart,  is  a  gospel  minister 
under  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  courageous,  armed 
with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  enjoying  the  hope  of  salvation, 
and  defended  by  the  shield  of  faith. — (Burder.) 

6  This  is  the  comfort,  joy,  and  glorying  of  a  pilgrim's 
heart.  Hath  Jesus  performed  righteousness  to  cover  us,  and 
spilled  blood  to  wash  us  ?  Have  we  the  faith  of  this  ?  O  how 
ought  we  to  love  him,  rejoice  in  him,  and  study  to  glorify  him 
in  every  step  of  our  pilgrimage  ! — (Mason.) 


THE    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 


191 


teousness  is  essential  to  that  nature;  bo  that  one 
may  as  easily  cause  the  nature  to  he  extinct,  as  to 
separate  its  justice  or  righteousness  from  it.  Of 
these  righteousnesses,  therefore,  we  are  not  made 
partakers,  so  as  that  they,  or  any  of  them,  should 
he  put  upon  us,  that  we  might  be  made  just,  and 
live  thereby.  Besides  these,  there  is  a  righteous- 
ness which  this  Person  has,  as  these  two  natures 
arc  joined  in  one  :  and  this  is  not  the  righteousness 
of  the  Godhead,  as  distinguished  from  the  man- 
hood ;  nor  the  righteousness  of  the  manhood,  as 
distinguished  from  the  Godhead;  but  a  righteous- 
ness which  standeth  in  the  union  of  both  natures, 
and  may  properly  he  called,  the  righteousness  that 
is  essential  to  his  being  prepared  of  God  to  the 
capacity  of  the  mediatory  office,  which  he  was  to 
be  intrusted  with.  If  ho  parts  with  his  first 
righteousness,  he  parts  with  his  Godhead  ;  if  he 
parts  with  his  second  righteousness,  he  parts  with 
the  purity  of  his  manhood;  if  he  parts  with  this 
third,  he  parts  with  that  perfection  that  capacitates 
him  to  the  office  of  mediation.  He  has,  therefore, 
another  righteousness,  which  standeth  in  perform- 
ance, or  obedience,  to  a  revealed  will ;  and  that  is 
it  that  he  puts  upon  sinners,  and  that  by  which 
their  sins  are  covered.  Wherefore  he  saith,  '  As 
by  one  man's  disobedience,  many  were  made  sin- 
ners ;  so  by  the  obedience  of  one,  shall  many  be 
made  righteous.'  1  Ro.  v.  19. 

Christ.  But  are  the  other  righteousnesses  of 
uo  use  to  us? 

Great-heart.  Yes ;  for  though  they  are  essen- 
tial to  his  natures  and  office,  and  so  cannot  be 
communicated  unto  another,  yet  it  is  by  virtue  of 
them,  that  the  righteousness  that  justifies,  is,  for 
that  purpose,  efficacious.  The  righteousness  of 
his  Godhead  gives  virtue  to  his  obedience  ;  the 
righteousness  of  his  manhood  giveth  capability  to 
his  obedience  to  justify;  and  the  righteousness 
that  standeth  in  the  union  of  these  two  natures  to 
his  office,  giveth  authority  to  that  righteousness  to 
do  the  work  for  which  it  is  ordained. 

So  then,  here  is  a  righteousness  that  Christ,  as 
God,  has  no  need  of,  for  he  is  God  without  it; 
here  is  a  righteousness  that  Christ,  as  man,  has 
no  need  of  to  make  him  so,  for  he  is  perfect  man 
without  it ;  again,  here  is  a  righteousness  that 
Christ,  as  God-man,  has  no  need  of,  for  he  is  per- 

-  Here  Bunyan  gives  a  very  clear  ami  distinct  account  of 
that  righteousness  of  Christ,  as  .Mediator,  which  he  wrought 
out  by  his  perfect  obedience  to  the  law  of  God  for  all  his  seed. 
And  by  this  righteousness,  and  no  other,  are  they  fully  justified 
from  all  condemnation  in  the  sight  of  God.  Header,  study 
this  point  deeply,  so  as  to  be  established  in  it.  It  is  the 
essence  of  the  gospel,  enters  into  the  life  and  joy  of  faith, 
brings  relief  to  the  conscience,  and  influence  to  the  love  of 
the  Lord  our  Righteousness  ;  and  so  brings  forth  the  fruits  of 
righteousness  which  are  by  him  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God, 
and  administers  Divine  consolation  in  the  Lour  of  death. — 
(Mason.) 


i'retly  so  without  it.  Here,  then,  is  n  righteous- 
ness that  Christ,  as  God,  as  man,  as  God-man,  has 
no  lord  of,  with  reference  to  himself,  and  therc- 
fore  he  can  spare  it  ;  a  justifying  righteousness, 

that  he  for  himself  wanteth  not,  and  therefore  he 
giveth  it  away ;  hence  it  is  called  '  the  gift  of 
righteousness.'  ito.  v.  17.    This  righteousness,  since 

Christ  .Jesus  the  Lord  has  made  himself  under  the 
law,  must  be  given  away  ;  for  the  law  doth  not 
only  hind  him  that  is  under  it  '  to  do  justly,'  but 
to  use  charity.  Wherefore  he  must,  he  ought,  bv 
the  law,  if  he  hath  two  coats,  to  give  one  to  him 
that  hath  none.  Now,  our  Lord,  indeed,  hath  two 
coats,  one  for  himself,  and  one  to  spare;  where- 
fore he  freely  bestows  one  upon  those  that  have 
none.  And  thus,  Christiana,  and  Mercy,  and  the 
rest  of  you  that  are  here,  doth  your  pardon  come 
by  deed,  or  by  the  work  of  another  man.  Your 
Lord  Christ  is  he  that  has  worked,  and  has  given 
away  what  he  wrought  for,  to  the  next  poor  beggar 
he  meets.2 

But,  again,  in  order  to  pardon  by  deed,  there 
must  something  be  paid  to  God  as  a  price,  as  weh 
as  something  prepared  to  cover  us  withal.  Sin  has 
delivered  us  up  to  the  just  curse  of  a  righteous 
law  ;  now,  from  this  curse  we  must  be  justified  by 
way  of  redemption,  a  price  being  paid  for  the 
harms  we  have  done,  Ro.  iv.  24 ;  and  this  is  by  the 
blood  of  your  Lord,  who  came  and  stood  in  your 
place  and  stead,  and  died  your  death  for  your 
transgressions.  Ga.  in.  13.  Thus  has  he  ransomed 
you  from  your  transgressions  by  blood,  and  covered 
your  polluted  and  deformed  souls  with  righteous 
ness.  For  the  sake  of  which,  God  passeth  by  you, 
and  will  not  hurt  you,  when  he  comes  to  judge  the 
world. 

Christ.  This  is  brave.     Now,  I  see  there  was 
something  to  be  learned  by  our  being    Christiana  af- 
pardoned  by  word  and  deed.     Good     JS^J 
Mercy,  let  us  labour  to  keep  this  in     redemption. 

2  Is  there  righteousness  in  Christ  ?  That  is  mine,  the 
believer  may  say.  Did  he  bleed  for  sins  ?  It  was  for  mine. 
Hath  he  overcome  the  law,  the  devil,  aud  hell?  The  victory 
is  mine  And  I  do  count  this  a  most  glorious  life. — Some- 
times (I  bless  the  Lord)  my  soul  hath  this  life  not  only 
imputed  to  me,  but  the  glory  of  it  upon  my  spirit.  Upon  a 
time,  when  1  was  under  many  condemn!  ngs  of  heart,  ami 
fearing  1  should  miss  glory,  methonght  1  felt  such  a  secret 
motion  as  this — Thy  righteousness  is  in  heaven.  The  splen- 
dour and  shining  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  upon  my  bouI,  gave 

I  me  to  see  clearly  that  my  righteousness,  by  which  I  should  be 
justified,  was  the  Son  of  God  himself  representing  me  before 
the  merry-seat  in  his  own  person  ;  so  that  1  saw  clearly,  that 
day  and  night,  wherever  I  was,  and  whatever  I  was  doing, 
there  was  my  righteousness,  just  before  the  eyes  of  the  Divine 
glory,  and  continually  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  At  another 
time,  whilst  musing,  being  afraid  to  die,  these  words  came 

,  upon  my  soul,  'Being  justified  freely  by  bis  grace,  through 
the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ.''  This  stayed  my  heart. 

I  And  thus  is  the  sinner  made  alive   fri  by  being 

justified  through  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  which  is  unto  all 

1  and  141011  all  them  that"  believe. —  (Banyan's  Law  and  Grace) 


192 


THE    riLGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


mind ;  and  my  children,  do  you  remember  it  also. 
But,  Sir,  was  not  this  it  that  made  my  good 
Christian's  hurden  fall  from  off  his  shoulder,  and 
that  made  him  give  three  leaps  for  joy  ?  * 

Great-heart.  Yes,  it  was  the  belief  of  this, 
Howthestrings  that  cut  those  strings,  that  could  not 
that      bnund    De  cut  by  other  means  ;  and  it  was  to  i 

Christian's  bur-        .        .  .  •"  ,     .  ..  .  ,.,■ 

den  to  him  give  him  a  proof  of  the  virtue  of  tins, 
woe  cut.  that  he  was  suffered  to  carry  his  bur- 

den  to  the  cross. 

Christ.  I  thought  so  ;  for  though  my  heart  was 
lightful  and  joyous  before,  yet  it  is  ten  times  more 
lightsome  and  joyous  now.  And  I  am  persuaded 
by  what  I  have  felt,  though  I  have  felt  but  little 
as  yet,  that  if  the  most  burdened  man  in  the 
world  was  here,  and  did  see  and  believe  as  I  now 
do,  it  would  make  his  heart  the  more  merry  and 
blithe.2 

Great-heart.  There  is  not  only  comfort,  and 
„         _  ..      the  ease  of  a  burden  brought  to  us, 

How     affectmn  •  <•    i 

to  Christ  is  be-  by  the  sight  and  consideration  of  these, 
go  in  esou.  -^  an  endeared  affection  begot  in  us 
by  it;  for  who  can,  if  he  doth  but  once  think  that 
pardon  comes  not  only  by  promise,  but  thus,  but 
be  affected  with  the  way  and  means  of  his  re- 
demption, and  so,  with  the  man  that  hath  wrought 
it  for  him  ? 

Christ.   True;    methinks   it  makes  my  heart 

lirst  Part      hleed  to  think  that  he  should  bleed 

p.  102.  '     for   me.      0    thou   loving    One !      0 

Cause   of  ad-   thou  blessed  One  !   Thou  deservest  to 

have  me  ;  thou  hast  bought  me ;  thou 

deservest  to  have  me  all ;  thou  hast  paid  for  me 

ten  thousand  times  more  than  I  am  worth !      No 

marvel  that  this  made  the   water   stand   in  my 

husband's  eyes,  and  that  it  made  him  trudge  so 

nimbly  on ;   I  am  persuaded  he  wished  me  with 

him ;  but,  vile  wretch  that  I  was,  I  let  him  come 

all  alone.     0  Mercy,  that  thy  father  and  mother 

were  here;  yea,  and  Mrs.  Timorous  also;  nay,  I 

wish  now  with  all  my  heart,  that  here  was  Madam 

1  Sometimes  I  have  been  so  loatlen  with  my  sins,  that  I 
could  not  tell  where  to  rest,  nor  what  to  do ;  yea,  at  such 
times,  I  thought  it  would  have  taken  away  my  senses ;  yet,  at 
that  time,  God  through  grace  hath  all  on  a  sudden  so  effectu- 
ally applied  the  blood  that  was  spilt  at  Mount  Calvary  out  of 
the  side  of  Jesus,  unto  my  poor,  wounded,  guilty  conscience, 
that  presently  1  have  found  such  a  sweet,  solid,  sober,  heart- 
comforting  peace,  that  1  have  been  in  a  strait  to  think  that  I 
should  love  and  honour  him  no  more.  Sometimes  my  sins 
have  appeared  as  big  as  all  the  sius  of  all  the  men  in  the 
nation — (reader,  these  things  be  not  fancies,  for  I  have  smarted 
for  this  experience) ;  but  yet  the  least  stream  of  the  heart- 
blood  of  Jesus  hath  vanished  all  away,  and  I  have  been  de- 
livered up  into  sweet  and  heavenly  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost. —  (Banyan's  Lmv  and  Grace,  vol.  i.  p.  519.) 

-  While  the  soul  lives  upon  the  sweet  impressions  which 
are  made  by  the  application  of  the  promises,  it  may  be  said  to 
live  upon  frames  and  feelings ;  for  as  its  comforts  abate,  so  will 
its  confidence.  The  heart  can  never  be  established  iu  grace, 
till  the  understanding  is  enlightened  to  discern  what  it  is  to 
have  pardon  by  the  deed  done.' — (J.  B.) 


Wanton  too.  Surely,  surely  their  hearts  would  be 
affected  ;  nor  could  the  fear  of  the  one,  nor  the 
powerful  lusts  of  the  other,  prevail  with  them  to 
go  home  again,  and  to  refuse  to  become  good 
pilgrims.3 

Great-heart.  You  speak  now  in  the  warmth  of 
vour  affections.  Will  it,  think  you,  be  always 
thus  with  you  ?  Besides,  this  is  not  communicated 
to  every  one  that  did  see  your  Jesus  bleed.  There 
were  that  stood  by,  and  that  saw  the  blood  run 
from  his  heart  to  the  ground,  and  yet  were  so  far 
off  this,  that, instead  of  lamenting,  they  laughed 
at  him;  and,  instead  of  becoming  his  disciples, 
did  harden  their  hearts  against  him.  So  that  all 
that  you  have,  my  daughters,  you  To  be  a(Tected 
have  by  a  peculiar  impression  made  with  .  £h™}' 
by  a  Divine  contemplating  upon  what  he  has  done, « 
1  have  spoken  to  you.  Remember  a  msspeu' 
that  it  was  told  you,  that  the  hen,  by  her  common 
call,  gives  no  meat  to  her  chickens.  This  you 
have,  therefore,  by  a  special  grace.4 

Now,  I  saw  still  in  my  dream,  that  they  went  on 
until  they  were  come  to  the  place  that   Si    le     and 
Simple,  and  Sloth,  and  Presumption,5     Sloth.    and 
lay  and  slept  in,  when  Christian  went     hinged,  and 
by  on  pilgrimage ;  and,  behold,  they     *  y' 
were  hanged  up  in  irons  a  little  way  off  on  the 
other  side.6  « 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy  to  him  that  was  their 


3  O  brave  Christiana !  See  what  it  is  to  have  one's  heart 
inflamed  with  a  sense  of  the  love  of  Christ.  Christiana  thinks 
every  one  would  naturally  be  affected  as  she  was,  if  they  were 
present ;  but  she  forgets  that  which  she  sees  and  feels  is  of 
special,  peculiar,  distinguishing  grace.  —  (Mason.)  Shall  I 
have  my  sins  and  lose  my  soul  ?  Would  not  heaven  be  better 
to  me  than  my  sins  ? — the  company  of  God,  Christ,  saints, 
and  angels,  than  the  company  of  Cain,  Judas,  Balaam,  with 
the  devils,  in  the  furnace  of  fire?  Canst  thou  now  that 
rcadest,  or  hearest  these  lines,  turn  thy  back,  and  go  on  in 
thy  sins? — (Bunyan's  Law  and  Grace,  vol.  i.  p.  575.)  Beader, 
thus  would  Christiana  plead  with  ungodly  relatives  and  friends; 
and  if  thou  art  in  such  a  case,  wilt  thou  not  listen  to  such  a 
plea?— (Ed.) 

4  Mind  how  tenderly  Great-heart  deals  with  warm-hearted 
Christiana.  He  does  not  attempt  to  throw  cold  water  upon 
the  fire  of  her  affections,  but  gently  insinuates,  1.  The  peculiar 
frame  of  the  mind  she  speaks  from;  2.  Suggests  that  she  must 
not  always  expect  to  be  in  such  raptures ;  and,  3.  Reminds 
her  that  her  indulgences  were  of  a  peculiar  nature,  not  com- 
mon to  all,  but  bestowed  upon  the  faithful  in  Christ  only ; 
and  that,  therefore,  amidst  all  her  joyful  feelings,  she  shoidd 
know  to  whom  she  was  indebted  for  them,  and  give  all  the 
glory  to  the  God  of  all  grace. — (Mason.) 

6  Simple,  contented  in  gross  ignorance ;  Sloth,  an  indolence 
which  smothers  all  conviction ;  Presumption,  carnal  security 
which  hardens  against  reproof. —  (Andronicus.)  These  are  the 
great  opposers  of  vital  religion.  The  end  of  these  things  is 
death  — (Burder.) 

6  It  was  a  custom,  to  a  late  period,  to  hang  up  mui- 
derers  in  irons,  until  the  body  dropped  to  pieces ;  that  such 
terrible  examples  might  deter  others  from  the  like  crimes; 
hence,  under  the  old"  wood-cut  illustrating  this  passage,  it 
written — 

'  R.  hold  hern  h<  w  the  «Iothfnl  are  a  si;ne, 
lluug  up,  'cau»u  nulv  ttiiys  Ihej  did  decline.' 
-(ED.) 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


193 


guide  ami  conductor,  What  arc  those  three  men? 
and  for  what  arc  they  hanged  there  ? 

Great-heart.  Those  three  men  were  men  of 
very  had  qualities.  They  had  no  mind  to  he  pil- 
grims themselves,  and  whosoever  they  could  they 
hindered.  They  were  for  sloth  and  folly  themselves, 
and  whoever  they  could  persuade  with,  they  made 
so  too ;  and,  withal,  taught  them  to  presume  that 
they  should  do  well  at  last.  They  were  asleep  when 
Christian  went  hy ;  and  now  you  go  hy,  they  are 
hanged.1 

Mekcy.  But  could  they  persuade  any  to  he  of 
their  opinion  ? 

Great-heart.  Yes;  they  turned  several  out  of 
Their  crimes.  t"e  way-  There  was  Slow-pace  that 
Who  they  pre-  they  persuaded  to  do  as  they.  They 
tu'iaouVuf'the  a's0  prevailed  with  one  Short-wind, 
"''>•  with  one  No-heart,  with  one  Linger- 

nfter-lust,  and  with  one  Sleepy-head,  and  with  a 
young  woman,  her  name  was  Dull,  to  turn  out  of 
the  way,  and  become  as  they.  Besides,  they 
brought  up  an  ill  report  of  your  Lord,  persuading 
others  that  he  was  a  taskmaster.  They  also 
brought  up  an  evil  report  of  the  good  land,  saying 
it  was  not  half  so  good  as  some  pretend  it  was. 
They  also  began  to  vilify  his  servants,  and  to  count 
the  very  best  of  them  meddlesome,  troublesome, 
busybodies.  Further,  they  could  call  the  bread  of 
God  husks  ;  the  comforts  of  his  children,  fancies  ; 
the  travel  and  labour  of  pilgrims,  things  to  no 
purpose.2 

Christ.  Nay,  said  Christiana,  if  they  were  such, 
they  shall  never  be  bewailed  by  me.  They  have 
but  what  they  deserve ;  and  I  think  it  is  well  that 
they  hang  so  near  the  highway,  that  others  may 
see  and  take  warning.  But  had  it  not  been  well 
if  their  crimes  had  been  engraven  on  some  plate  of 


1  God,  as  it  were,  gibbets  some  professors,  and  causes  their 
names  and  characters  to  be  publicly  exhibited,  as  a  terror  to 
others,  and  as  a  warning  to  his  own  people. — (Mason.)  The 
dreadful  falls  and  awful  deaths  of  some  professors  are  to  put 
others  upon  their  guard  against  superficial,  slothful,  and  pre- 
sumptuous hopes.  The  real  occasion  of  turning  aside  lies  in 
the  concealed  lusts  of  the  heart. — (Scott.) 

2  Let  us  consider  the  characters  of  these  three  professors : 
1.  Here  is  a  Simple,  a  foolish  credulous  professor,  ever  learn- 
ing, but  never  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  so  as  to 
believe  it,  love  it,  and  be  established  on  it  j  hence  liable  to  be 
carried  away  by  every  wind  of  doctrine.  2.  Sloth,  a  quiet, 
easy  professor,  who  never  disturbs  any  one  by  his  diligence  in 
the  Word  of  God,  nor  his  zeal  for  the  truths  and  glory  of 
God.  3.  Presumption,  one  who  expects  salvation  in  the  end, 
without  the  means  prescribed  by  God  for  attaining  it.  () 
beware  of  these  three  sorts  of  professors,  for  they  turn  many 
aside ! — (Mason.) 

3  What  is  meant  by  the  Hill  Difficulty?  Christiana  has 
set  out  from  Destruction,  been  received  and  encouraged  at  the 
wicket-gate,  and  directed  on  her  journey.  The  path  is  com- 
paratively easy,  until  she  is  about  to  put  on  a  public  profes- 
sion, by  joining  a  church.  This  is  situated  upon  the  summit 
of  this  hill  of  difficult  ascent.  Is  it  intended  to  represent  that 
prayerful,  watchful,  personal  investigation  into  Divine  truth, 
which  ought  to  precede  church-fellowship  ?     Nothing  is  more 

VOL.  III. 


iron  or  brass,  and  left  here,  even  whore  they  did 
their  mischiefs,  for  a  caution  to  other  bad  men  ? 

Great-heart.  So  it  is,  as  you  well  may  perceive, 
if  you  will  go  a  little  to  the  wall. 

Mercy.  No,  no  ;  let  them  hang,  and  their  names 
rot,  and  their  crimes  live  for  ever  against  them. 
I  think  it  a  high  favour  that  they  were  hanged 
before  we  came  hither;  who  knows  else  what  they 
might  have  done  to  such  poor  women  as  we  are  i 
Then  she  turned  it  into  a  song,  saying — 

Now  then,  you  three,  hang  there,  and  be  a  sign 
To  all  that  shall  against  the  truth  combine. 
And  let  him  that  comes  after  fear  this  end, 
If  uuto  pilgrims  he  is  not  a  friend. 
And  thou,  my  soul,  of  all  such  men  beware, 
That  unto  holiness  opposcrs  are. 

Thus  they  went  on,  till  they  came  at  the  foot 
of  the  Hill  Difficulty,3  where,  again,  lirsti'art 
their  good  friend,  Mr.  Great-heart,  p-  RH. 
took  an  occasion  to  tell  them  of  what  it  h  difficult 
happened  there  when  Christian  him-  SoctriMiner. 
self  went  by.  So  he  had  them  first  roueoua  tum* 
to  the  spring.  Lo,  said  he,  this  is  the  spring  that 
Christian  drank  of,  before  he  went  up  this  hill; 
and  then  it  was  clear  and  good,  but  now  it  is  dirty 
with  the  feet  of  some  that  are  not  desirous  that 
pilgrims  here  should  quench  their  thirst.  Eze.  xxiiv.  is. 
Thereat  Mercy  said,  And  why  so  envious,  trow  ? 
But,  said  their  guide,  it  will  do,  if  taken  up,  and 
put  into  a  vessel  that  is  sweet  and  good ;  for  then 
the  dirt  will  sink  to  the  bottom,  and  the  water 
come  out  by  itself  more  clear.4  Thus,  therefore, 
Christiana  and  her  companions  were  compelled  to 
do.  They  took  it  up,  and  put  it  into  an  earthen 
pot,  and  so  let  it  stand  till  the  dirt  was  gone  to  the 
bottom,  and  then  they  drank  thereof.0 


difficult  to  flesh  and  blood  than  to  be  compelled,  upon  pain  of 
endless  ruin,  to  think  for  ourselves  on  matters  of  religion. 
The  formalist  and  hypocrite  follow  the  persuasions  of  man, 
and  take  an  easier  path,  and  are  lost.  The  fear  of  man  cause* 
some  to  abandon  the  ascent.  Dr.  Cheever  has,  in  his  Hill 
Difficulty,  very  happily  described  the  energy  that  is  needful  to 
enable  the  pilgrim  to  make  the  asceut.  He  forcibly  proves 
the  utter  impossibility  of  making  the  asceut  by  ceremonial 
observances,  or  while  encumbered  with  worldly  cares  or  pride 
in  trinkets  of  gold  and  costly  array.  He  reminds  us  of  the 
solemn  advice  of  Peter,  "  be  ye  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  a 
holy  priesthood  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifice  acceptable  to  God 
by  Jesus  Christ."  Every  weight  must  be  set  aside,  and  salva- 
tion must  be  worked  out  with  fear  and  trembling. — (Ed.) 

4  The  river  of  life  is  pure  and  clear  as  crystal.  Is  the 
doctrine  offered  to  thee  so  ?  Or  is  it  muddy,  and  mixed  with 
the  doctrines  of  men  ?  Look,  man,  and  see,  if  the  foot  of  the 
worshippers  of  Paal  be  not  there,  aud  the  water  fouled  thereby. 
What  water  is  fouled  is  not  the  water  of  life,  or  at  least  not  in 
its  clearness.  "Wherefore,  if  thou  tiudcst  it  not  right,  o  uj 
higher  towards  the  spring-head,  for  nearer  the  spring  the  more 
pure  and  clear  is  the  wafer.—  (Bunyan's  Water  of  Life.) 

6  This  represents  to  us  that  some  preachers,  as  the  prophet 
savs,  foul  the  water  with  their  feet,  Eze.  xi.\iv.  IS;  that  is, 
though  they  preach  somewhat  about  Christ,  and  salvation  by 
him,  yet  they  so  clog,  mire,  and  pollute  the  stream  of  free 
grace'  with  pre-requisites,  terms,  and  conditions,  that  the  poor 

25 


194 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Next,  he  showed  them  the  two  by-ways  that 

By-paths  Were    at    tue   ^00t    °^  the   ^»    w^ere 

tiiough  barred    Formality  and  Hypocrisy  lost  them- 

up,    will    not         ,  J.      ,  ,V,         /  , 

keep  all  from   selves.     And,  said  he,  these  are  dan- 
going  in  thenu    ger()ug    pathg<        TwQ    were   here    cagt 

away  when  Christian  came  by.  And  although, 
as  you  see,  these  ways  are  since  stopped  up  with 
chains,  posts,  and  a  ditch,  yet  there  are  that  will 
choose  to  adventure  here,  rather  than  take  the 
pains  to  go  up  this  hill.1 

Christ.  '  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard.'  Pr. 
xiiL  15.  It  is  a  wonder  that  they  can  get  into  those 
ways  without  danger  of  breaking  their  necks. 

Great-heart.  They  will  venture.  Yea,  if  at  any 
time  any  of  the  King's  servants  do  happen  to  see 
them,  and  do  call  unto  them,  and  tell  them  that 
they  are  in  the  wrong  ways,  and  do  bid  them  beware 
the  danger,  then  they  will  railingly  return  them 
answer,  and  say,  '  As  for  the  word  that  thou  hast 
spoken  unto  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we  will  not 
hearken  unto  thee ;  but  we  will  certainly  do  what- 
soever thing  goeth  forth  out  of  our  own  mouth,' 
&c.  Je.  xiiv.  16, 17.  Nay,  if  you  look  a  little  further, 
you  shall  see  that  these  ways  are  made  cautionary 
enough,  not  only  by  these  posts,  and  ditch,  and 
chain ;  but  also  by  being  hedged  up,  yet  they  will 
choose  to  go  there.2 

Christ.  They  are  idle ;  they  love  not  to  take 
l  he  reason  why  pains ;  uphill  Avay  is  unpleasant  to 
tcTgo  °iii10by-  them.  So  it  is  fulfilled  unto  them  as 
wa>s-  it  is  written,  '  The  way  of  the  slothful 

man  is  as  an  hedge  of  thorns.'  Pr.  xv.  19.  Yea,  they 
will  rather  choose  to  walk  upon  a  snare,  than  to 
go  up  this  hill,  and  the  rest  of  this  way  to  the 
city. 

Then  they  set  forward,  and  began  to  go  up  the 

The  hill  put3   kill,  and  up  the  hill  they  went;  but 

the  Pilgrims  to   before  they  got  to  the  top,  Christiana 

began  to  pant ;  and  said,  I  dare  say, 


thirsty  soul  cannot  drink  the  water,  nor  allay  his  thirst  with 
it ;  but  is  forced  to  let  it  stand,  till  these  gross  dregs  sink  to 
the  bottom.  Yea,  we  ought  to  beware  of  drinking  such  filthy 
dregs ;  for  they  will  certainly  swell  us  up  with  the  tympany 
of  pride  of  our  free  will,  human  merit,  and  self-righteousness, 
which  oppose  the  glory  of  Jesus,  and  comfort  of  our  souls. — 
(Mason.) 

1  Although  the  cautions  of  Holy  Writ  are  plain  as  posts 
and  chains,  and  the  warnings  as  a  ditch,  and  the  solemn 
threatenings  of  the  New  Testament  against  pharisaic  formalism 
and  hypocrisy  are  like  a  hedge,  to  prevent  pilgrims  wandering 
into  paths  that  end  in  eternal  misery,  yet  tiiere  are  many  who 
break  through  all  these  merciful  restraints,  and  rush  upon 
destruction. —  (Ed.) 

2  Examine,  which  do  you  like  best,  self-soothing  or  soul- 
searching  doctrine?  Formalists  and  hypocrites  love  the 
former,  and  hate  the  latter,  liut  the  sincere  and  upright  are 
discovered  by  desiring  to  have  their  hearts  searched  to  the 
quick,  and  their  ways  tried  to  the  utmost;  and,  therefore, 
with  David  will  cry,  '  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart ; 
try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts ;  and  see  if  there  be  any 
wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting.'  Ps. 
exxxix.  23,  24.— (Mason.) 


this  is  a  breathing  hill.  No  marvel  if  they  that 
love  their  ease  more  than  their  souls,  choose  to 
themselves  a  smoother  way.3  Then  said  Mercy,  I 
must  sit  down  ;  also  the  least  of  the  children  began 
to  cry.  Come,  come,  said  Great-heart,  sit  not 
down  here,  for  a  little  above  is  the  Prince's  arbour. 
Then  took  he  the  little  boy  by  the  hand,  and  led 
him  up  thereto. 

■  When  they  were  come  to  the  arbour,  they  were 
very  willing  to  sit  down,  for  they  were   nej  sit  ta  tLe 
all  in  a  pelting  heat.  Then  said  Mercy,       arbour. 
How  sweet  is  rest  to  them  that  labour.4     ph-st  Part, 
Mat.  xi.  28.     And  how  good  is  the  Prince        p' 
of  pilgrims,   to  provide    such    resting-places    for 
them  !     Of  this  arbour  I  have  heard  much  ;  but  I 
never  saw  it  before.     But  here  let  us  beware  of 
sleeping;  for,  as  I  have  heard,   for  that  it  cost 
poor  Christian  dear. 

Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart  to  the  little  ones, 
Come,  my  pretty  boys,  how  do  you  do  ?  The  utile  boy's 
What  think  you  now  of  going  on  pil-  JSW^S 
grimage  ?  Sir,  said  the  least,  I  was  t0  Mercy, 
almost  beat  out  of  heart  ?  but  I  thank  you  for 
lending  me  a  hand  at  my  need.5  And  I  remember 
now  what  my  mother  hath  told  me,  namely,  that 
the  way  to  heaven  is  as  up  a  ladder,  and  the  way 
to  hell  is  as  down  a  hill.  But  I  had  rather  go  up 
the  ladder  to  life,  than  down  the  hill  to  death.6 

Then  said  Mercy,  But  the  proverb  is,  To  go 

down   the  hill  is  easy.      But  James   ^^  fa  hard. 

said  (for  that  was  his  name),  The  est,  up  hill  or 
,        .  .  ,  .  .    .  down  hill. 

day  is  coming,  when,  in  my  opinion, 

going  down  hill  will  be  the  hardest  of  all.      'Tis 

a  good  boy,  said  his  Master,  thou  hast  given  her  a 


8  Heart- work  is  hard  work ;  it  is  hard  work  to  be  stripped ; 
it  is  hard  work  to  deny  self,  take  up  your  cross,  and  follow 
Jesus.  It  is  hard  work  to  light  the  fight  of  faith  ;  it  is  hard 
work  against  hope  to  believe  in  hope.  A  formalist  and  hypo- 
crite will  go,  in  outward  things,  as  far  as  the  real  Christian  ; 
but  touch  him  on  the  inward  work,  and  he  will  start  aside. — 
(J.B.) 

*  He  who  is  a  stranger  to  the  hard  work  of  self-denial,  and 
how  difficult  it  is  to  the  flesh,  knows  not  what  this  Hill  Diffi- 
culty means  ;  for  the  nearer  to  the  arbour  of  Jesus'  rest,  the 
more  difficulties  in  the  way,  but  the  sweeter  it  is  when  attained. 
—  (Mason.) 

6  Regard  not  in  thy  pilgrimage  how  difficult  the  passage  is, 
but  whither  it  tends ;  not  how  delicate  the  journey  is,  but 
where  it  ends.  If  it  be  easy,  suspect  it ;  if  hard,  endure  it. 
He  that  cannot  excuse  a  bad  way,  accuseth  his  own  sloth ; 
and  he  that  sticks  in  a  bad  passage,  can  never  attain  a  good 
journey's  end. — (Quarks'  Enchiridion,  cent.  3,  ch.  xxx.) 

6  There  were  stairs  in  the  temple,  and  but  one  pair,  and 
these  winding.  He  that  went  up  must  turn  with  the  stairs. 
This  is  a  type  of  a  twofold  repentance ;  that  by  which  we  turu 
from  nature  to  grace,  and  that  by  which  we  turn  from  the 
imperfections  of  a  state  of  grace  to  glory.  But  this  turning 
and  turning  still,  displeases  some  much.  They  say  it  makes 
them  giddy ;  but  I  say,  Nothing  like  this  to  make  a  man 
steady.  A  straight  stair  is  like  the  ladder  that  leads  to  the 
gallows.  They  are  turning  stairs  that  lead  to  the  heavenly 
mansion.  Stay  not  at  their  foot ;  but  go  up  them,  and  up 
them,  and  up  them,  till  you  come  to  heaven. — (bunyan's 
Solomons  Temple.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


195 


right  answer.     Then  Mercy  smiled  ;  but  the  little 
boy  did  blush.1 

Christ.  Come,  said  Christiana,  will  you  cat  a 
They  refresh  bit,  a  little  to  sweeten  your  mouths, 
themselves.  whjle  y0U  s|t  here  to  rest  your  legs  ? 
For  I  have  here  a  piece  of  pomegranate,  which 
Mr.  Interpreter  put  in  my  hand,  just  when  I  came 
out  of  his  doors.  He  gave  me  also  a  piece  of  a 
honeycomb,  and  a  little  bottle  of  spirits.  I  thought 
he  gave  you  something,  said  Mercy,  because  he 
called  you  aside.  Yes  ;  so  he  did,  said  the  other. 
But,  said  Christiana,  it  shall  still  be,  as  I  said  it 
Bhould,  when  at  first  we  came  from  home,  thou 
shalt  be  a  sharer  in  all  the  good  that  I  have, 
because  thou  so  willingly  didst  become  my  com- 
panion. Then  she  gave  to  them,  and  they  did  eat, 
both  Mercy  and  the  boys.    And,  said  Christiana  to 


Mr.  Great-heart,  Sir,  will  you  do 


But  he 


answered,  You  are  going  on  pilgrimage,  and  pre- 
sently I  shall  return.  Much  good  may  what  you 
have  do  to  you.  At  home  I  eat  the  same  every  day. 
Now,  when  they  had  eaten  and  drank,  and  had 
chatted  a  little  longer,  their  guide  said  to  them. 
The  day  wears  away,  if  you  think  good,  let  us  pre- 
pare to  be  going.  So  they  got  up  to  go,  and  the 
Christiana  for-  little  boys  went  before.  But  Christiana 
gets  her  botue  forgot  to  take  her  bottle  of  spirits  with 
her ;  so  she  sent  her  little  boy  back 
to  fetch  it.  Then  said  Mercy,  I  think  this  is  a 
losing  place.  Here  Christian  lost  his  roll;  and 
here  Christiana  left  her  bottle  behind  her.  Sir, 
what  is  the  cause  of  this  ?  So  their  guide  made 
answer,  and  said,  The  cause  is  sleep  or  forgetful- 
nes3.  Some  sleep  when  they  should  keep  awake; 
and  some  forget  when  they  should  remember;  and 
this  is  the  very  cause  why,  often  at  the  resting- 
places,  some  pilgrims,  in  some  things,  come  otf 
losers.     Piljrrims  should  watch,  and 

Mark  this.  ,  °  ,         ,  .         . 

remember  what  they  have  already  re- 
ceived under  their  greatest  enjoyments;  but  for  want 
of  doing  so,  ofttimes  their  rejoicing  ends  in  tears, 
First  Part,     and  their  sunshine  in  a  cloud.2  Witness 
pp.  105,  1U6.   t]ie  story  0f  Christian  at  this  place.3 


1  When  we  are  praised,  a  conscious  blush  should  pervade 
us,  well  knowing  how  much  we  have  to  be  ashamed  of.  But 
some  have  got  such  vain  confidence  in  their  own  righteousness, 
merits,  and  perfection,  that  they  have  hereby  got  what  the 
Scriptures  call  a  whore's  forehead,  and  refuse  to  be  ashamed. 
Je.  iii.  3.  O  cry  to  the  Lord  continually  against  spiritual 
pride,  and  for  an  humble  heart,  knowing  thyself  to  be  a  poor 
sinner! — (Mason.) 

-  live  looking  first  into  those  worthy  privileges  which  God 
had  given  her,  and  dilating  delightfully  of  them  before  the  devil, 
she  lost  the  dread  of  the  command  from  oil"  her  heart,  which 
Satan  perceiving,  now  added  to  his  former  forged  doubt  a 
plain  and  flat  denial — '  Ye  shall  not  surely  die.'  When  people 
dally  with  the  devil,  and  sit  too  near  their  outward  advan- 
tases,  thev  fall  into  temptation. —  (Bun van  on  Genesis,  vol.  ii. 
p.^429.) 

3  Reader,  mind  this  well,  remember  it  often,  and  it  wiL'  do 
thee  good.     I  aui  a  witness  against  myself,  of  how  much  I 


WThcn  they  were  come  to  the  place  where  Mis- 
trust and  Timorous  met  Christian  to  persuade  him 
to  go  back  for  fear  of  the  lions,  they  perceived  as 
it  wcic  a  stage,  and  before  it,  towards  the  road,  a 
broad  plate,  with  a  copy  of  verses  written  thereon, 
and  underneath,  the  reason  of  raising  up  of  that 
stage  in  that  place,  rendered.  The  verses  were 
these : — 

Let  him  who  sees  this  stage  take  heed 

Unto  his  heart  and  tongue ; 

Lest  if  he  do  not,  here  he  speed, 

As  some  have  long  agoue. 

The  words  underneath  the  verses  were,  *  This 
stage  was  built  to  punish  such  upon,  who  through 
Timorousness  or  Mistrust,  shall  be  afraid  to  go 
further  on  pilgrimage ;  also,  on  this  stage,  both 
Mistrust  and  Timorous  were  burned  through  the 
tongue  with  a  hot  iron,  for  endeavouring  to  hinder 
Christian  in  his  journey.'* 

Then  said  Mercy,  This  is  much  like  to  the  say- 
ing of  the  Beloved,  '  What  shall  be  given  unto 
thee  ?  or  what  shall  be  done  unto  thee,  thou  false 
tongue?  Sharp  arrows  of  the  mighty,  with  coals 
of  juniper.'  rs.  cxx.  3— i. 

So  they  went  on,  till  they  came  within  sight  of 
the  lions.     Now  Mr.  Great-heart  was     v.  .  „  . 

lirst  Part 

a  strong  man,  so  he  was  not  afraid  of       p-  loo. 
a  lion ;  but  yet  when  they  were  come   An  emblem  of 
up  to  the  place  where  the  lions  were,     f™  {^eiyl 
the  boys  that  went  before  were  glad     whe,n  thcreu "' 

.,,.,,.  ?    .  "O  danger,  hut 

to  cringe  behind,  for  they  were  afraid  shrink  when 
of  the  lions;  so  they  stepped  back,  and 
went  behind.  At  this  their  guide  smiled,  and  said, 
How  now,  my  boys,  do  you  love  to  go  before, 
when  no  danger  doth  approach,  and  love  to  come 
behind  so  soon  as  the  lions  appear? 

Now,  as  they  went  up,  Mr.  Great-heart  drew 
his  sword,  with  intent  to  make  a  way  for  the  Pil- 
grims, in  spite  of  the  lions.  Then  there  appeared 
one,  that  it  seems,  had  taken  upon  of  Grim  the 
him  to  back  the  lions  ;  and  he  said  to  KddSjtto 
the  Pilgrims'  guide,  What  is  the  cause  Bona- 
of  your  coming  hither  ?  Now  the  name  of  that  man 
was  Grim,  or  Bloody-man,  because  of  his  slaying 
of  Pilgrims,  and  he  was  of  the  race  of  the  giants.0 


have  lost  by  indulging  the  flesh,  and  how  much  I  have  suffered 
by  forgetfulness.  But  O  what  a  gracious  Lord  do  we  serve  I 
this  is  no  excuse  for  our  folly,  but  an  aggravation  of  our  faults ; 
and  ought  to  sink  us  lower  in  shame,  and  to  excite  us  to 
greater  care,  diligence,  and  watchfulness  j  else  we  shall  surely 
smart  for  our  folly,  if  not  in  hell,  yet  in  our  consciences. — 
(Mason.) 

4  This  may  refer  to  the  awful  end  of  one  of  Bunyan's  early 
friends,  who  became  a  notorious  apostate — one  John  Child, 
whose  sufferings  were  published  with  those  of  Spira.  Child 
was  so  afraid  of  persecution,  as  to  give  up  his  profession ;  and 
then,  overwhelmed  by  despair,  be  committed  suicide.  Or  to 
such  an  one  as  the  professor,  in  the  Marian  days,  who  recanted 
to  save  burning,  but  who  was  burnt  to  death  by  his  house 
catching  tire. — (Ivimey.) 

6  It  is  not  very  easy  to  determine  the  precipe  idea  of  th  • 


196 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


Great-heart.  Then  said  the  Pilgrims'  guide, 
These  women  and  children  are  going  on  pilgrim- 
age ;  and  this  is  the  way  they  must  go,  and  go  it 
they  shall,  in  spite  of  thee  and  the  lions.1 

Grim.  This  is  not  their  way,  neither  shall  they 
go  therein.  I  am  come  forth  to  withstand  them, 
and  to  that  end  will  hack  the  lions.2 

Now,  to  say  truth,  hy  reason  of  the  fierceness 
of  the  lions,,  and  of  the  grim  carriage  of  him  that 
did  hack  them,  this  way  had  of  late  Iain  much 
unoccupied,  and  was  almost  all  grown  over  with 
grass. 

Ciirist.  Then  said  Christiana,  Though  the  high- 
ways have  been  unoccupied  heretofore,  and  though 
the  travellers  have  been  made  in  time  past  to  walk 
through  by-paths,  it  must  not  be  so  now  1  am 
risen.     Now  '  I  am  risen  a  mother  in  Israel. '  Ju.  t.  6, 7. 

Grim.  Then  he  swore  by  the  lions,  but  it  should; 
and  therefore  bid  them  turn  aside,  for  they  should 
not  have  passage  there. 

Great-heart.  But  their  guide  made  first  his 
approach  unto  Grim,  and  laid  so  heavily  at  him 
with  his  sword,  that  he  forced  him  to  a  retreat.3 


author  in  each  of  the  giants  who  assault  the  Pilgrims,  and  are 
slain  by  the  conductor  and  his  assistants.  Some  have  sup- 
posed that  unbelief  is  here  meant,  but  Grim  or  Bloody-man 
seem  not  to  be  apposite  names  for  this  inward  foe ;  nor  can 
it  be  conceived,  that  unbelief  should  more  violently  assault 
those  who  are  under  the  care  of  a  valiant  conductor,  than  it 
had  done  the  solitary  pilgrims.  I  apprehend,  therefore,  that 
this  giant  was  intended  for  the  emblem  of  certain  active  men 
who  busied  themselves  in  framing  and  eiecuting  persecuting 
statutes,  which  was  done  at  the  time  when  this  was  written, 
more  violently  than  it  had  been  before.  Thus  the  temptation 
to  fear  man,  which  at  all  times  assaults  the  believer  when 
required  to  make  an  open  profession  of  his  faith,  was  exceed- 
ingly increased ;  and  as  heavy  fines  and  severe  penalties,  in 
accession  to  reproach  and  contempt,  deterred  men  from  joining 
themselves  in  communion  with  dissenting  churches,  that  way 
was  almost  unoccupied,  and  the  travellers  went  through  by- 
paths, according  to  the  author's  sentiments  on  the  subject. 
But  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  by  which  the  ministers  of 
Christ  wielded  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  overcame  this  enemy ; 
for  the  example  and  exhortations  of  such  courageous  com- 
batants animated  even  weak  believers  to  overcome  their  fears, 
and  to  act  according  to  their  consciences,  leaving  the  event  to 
God.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  author's  meaning ;  and 
perhaps  he  also  intended  to  encourage  his  brethren  boldly  to 
persevere  in  resisting  such  persecuting  statutes,  confidently 
expecting  that  they  should  prevail  for  the  repeal  of  them ;  by 
which,  as  by  the  death  of  the  giant,  the  pilgrims  might  be 
freed  from  additional  terror,  in  acting  consistently  with  then- 
avowed  principles. —  (Scott.) 

1  This  reminds  us  of  the  words  of  Mr.  Godly-fear  to  Dia- 
bolus,  when  Captain  Credence  sent  a  petition  to  Immanuel  for 
mercy : — '  We  are  resolved  to  resist  thee  as  long  as  a  captain, 
a  man,  a  sling,  or  a  stone  shall  be  found  in  Mansoul  to  throw 
at  thee.  Then  said  the  Lord  Mayor  to  Diabolus,  O  thou 
devouring  tyrant,  be  it  known  to  thee,  we  shall  hearken  to 
none  of  thy  words !' — (Bunyan'e  Holy  War.)  Happy  are  the 
Godly-fears  and  Great-hearts  who  use  such  decided  language 
to  the  enemy  of  souls.- — (Ed.) 

2  Sincere  and  earnest  Christians,  at  this  time,  had  a  pro- 
verbial expression : — '  It  is  better  that  the  body  should  die  to 
this  world  by  the  lions  without,  than  that  body  and  60ul 
should  die  eternally  by  our  lusts  within.' — (Ed.) 

8  0  pilgrims,  when  dangers  beset  you,  and  fears  arise  in 


Grim.  Then  said  he  that  attempted  to  back  tho 
lions,  Will  you  slay  me  upon  mine  own  ground  ? 

Great-heart.  It  is  the  King's  highway  that  we 
are  in,  and  in  his  way  it  is  that  thou  ,  A  . .  . 

'         ,,,.,,  A  fisht  betwixt 

hast  placed  thy  lions;  but  these  women  Grim  andGreat- 
and  these  children,  though  weak,  shall  eart' 
hold  on  their  way  in  spite  of  thy  lions.  And  with 
that  he  gave  him  again  a  downright  blow,  and 
brought  him  upon  his  knees.  With  this  blow  he 
also  broke  his  helmet,  and  with  the  next  he  cut 
off  an  arm.  Then  did  the  giant  roar  so  hideously, 
that  his  voice  frighted  the  women,  and  yet  they 
were  glad  to  see  him  lie  sprawling 

Y  i       tit  i       ,•  The  Victory. 

upon  the  ground.    Now  the  lions  were 
chained,  and  so  of  themselves  could  do  nothing.4 
Wherefore,  when  old  Grim,  that  intended  to  back 
them,  was  dead,  Mr.  Great-heart  said  to  the  Pil- 
grims,  Come  now,  and  follow  me,  and  no  hurt 
shall  happen  to  you  from  the  lions.     They  there- 
fore went  on,  but  the  women  trembled   They  pass  by 
as  they  passed  by  them  ;   the  boys      *o lions, 
also  looked  as  if  they  would  die,  but  they  all  got 
by  without  further  hurt.5 

Now  then  they  were  within  sight  of  the  Porter's 
Lodge,  and  they  soon  came  up  unto  it ;  but  they 
made  the  more  haste  after  this  to  go  thither, 
because  it  is  dangerous  travelling  there  in  the 
night.  So  when  they  were  come  to  the  gate,  the 
guide  knocked,  and  the  Porter  cried,  _, 
Who  is  there?  But  as  soon  as  the  the  Porter's 
guide  had  said,  It  is  I,  he  knew  his  °  ge' 
voice,  and   came   down  (for   the   guide   had   oft 


you,  hear  what  the  Lord  speaks  to  yon ;  and  in  the  belief  of 
his  truth,  quit  yourselves  manfully :  '  Fight  the  good  fight  of 
faith,'  ever  remembering  that  '  you  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  Christ  who  hath  loved  you  1'  Faith  will  exalt  the 
love  and  power  of  Christ  above  the  fear  of  every  enemy.— 
(Mason.) 

*  O  pilgrim,  it  is  sweet  to  reflect  that  every  lion-like  foe  is 
under  the  control  of  thy  God,  and  cannot  come  one  link  of 
the  chain  nearer  to  thee  than  thy  Lord  will  permit !  There- 
fore, when  fears  and  terrors  beset  thee,  think  of  thy  Lord's 
love  to  thee,  his  power  engages  to  preserve  thee,  and  his  pro- 
mises to  comfort  thee.  For  '  the  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all  them 
that  call  upon  him.'  Ps.  cxlv.  18. — (Mason.) 

5  From  the  deeply  interesting  narrative  of  the  experience 
of  Mr.  Fearing,  it  is  plain  that  the  lions  and  their  backer, 
Giant  Grim  or  Bloody-man,  relates  entirely  to  temporal 
troubles ;  most  likely  to  those  infamous  penal  statutes  under 
which  Dissenters  so  severely  suffered.  The  uniting  in  church- 
fellowship  was  not  only  attended  with  the  ordinary  difficulties, 
but  with  danger  from  the  lions — church  and  state ;  especially 
when  backed  by  ferocious  judges,  such  as  Jefferies  aud  others. 
Spiritual  enemies — sin,  death,  and  hell — were  the  only  terrors 
under  which  Mr.  Fearing  suffered;  temporal  persecutions — 
'  difficulties,  lions,  or  Vanity  Fair — he  feared  not  at  all.'  The 
battle  probably  refers  to  the  flimsy  sophistry  used  in  defence 
of  persecution,  as  opposed  to  the  Word  of  God,  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  by  which  our  Puritan  heroes  destroyed  these  anti- 
christian  arguments. — (Ed.)  Now  that  the  lions  are  removed, 
may  we  not  fear  that  hypocrites  will  thrust  themselves  into 
our  chm-ches  ?  It  is  easy,  cheap,  and  almost  fashionable,  to 
be  religious:  this  should  promote  solemn  investigation. — 
(Andronicus.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


197 


before  that,  come  thither,  as  a  conductor  of  pil- 
grims). When  he  was  come  down,  lie  opened  the 
gate,  and  seeing  the  guide  standing  just  before  it 
(for  he  saw  not  the  women,  for  they  were  behind 
him),  he  said  unto  him,  How  now,  Mr.  Great-heart, 
■what  is  your  business  here  so  late  to-night?  I 
have  brought,  said  he,  some  pilgrims  hither,  where, 
by  my  Lord's  commandment,  they  must  lodge ;  I 
had  been  hero  some  time  ago,  had  I  not  been 
opposed  by  the  giant  that  did  use  to  back  the 
lions;  but  I,  after  a  long  and  tedious  combat  with 
him,  have  cut  him  oft',  and  have  brought  tho 
Pilgrims  hither  in  safety.1 

Porter.  Will   you   not   go    in,    and    stay   till 


Great-heart  at- 
tempts to  go 
lack. 


Great-heart.  No,  I  will  return  to 
y  Lord  to-night. 
Christ.   Oh,  Sir,  I  know  not  how  to  be  willing 
^       „.,    .       you  should  leave  us  in  our  pilgrimage, 

The      Pilgrims    J  o  .  ,  ,.  ,  ,         i 

implore  ins  you  have  been  so  faithful  and  so  lov- 
compauy  s  i  .  j^  ^o  ug^  ^.ou  have  fought  so  stoutly 
for  us,  you  have  been  so  hearty  in  counselling 
of  us,  that  I  shall  never  forget  your  favour  to- 
wards us. 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  0  that  we  might  have 
thy  company  to  our  journey's  end !  How  can  such 
poor  women  as  we  hold  out  in  a  way  so  full  of 
troubles  as  this  way  is,  without  a  friend  and 
defender? 

James.  Then  said  James,  the  youngest  of  the 
boys,  Pray,  Sir,  be  persuaded  to  go  with  us,  and 
help  us,  because  we  are  so  weak,  and  the  way  so 
dangerous  as  it  is.2 

Great-heart.  I  am  at  my  Lord's  command- 
ment ;  if  he  shall  allot  me  to  be  your  guide  quite 
through,  I  will  willingly  wait  upon  you.     But  here 

n.  ,  .  ,  you  failed  at  first ;  for,  when  he  bid 
Help    lost    for    J  »  .  ,  , 

wautofagUig  me  come  thus  far  with  you,  then  you 
should  have  begged  me  of  him  to  have 
gone  quite  through  with  you,  and  he  would  have 
granted  your  request.  However,  at  present,  I 
must  withdraw;  and  so,  good  Christiana,  Mercy, 
and  my  brave  children,  Adieu. 

Then  the  Porter,  Mr.  Watchful,  asked  Chris- 

Eirst  Part,     tiana  of  her  country,  and  of  her  kin- 

p.  loc.       (jretj .  anj  sue  sa;j^  i  came  from  the 


1  How  mindful  is  our  Lord  of  us  1  How  gracious  is  he  to 
us !  'What  blessed  provision  doth  he  make  for  us !  If  pil- 
prims  are  attacked  by  Giant  Grim,  and  terrified  with  the 
sight  of  lions,  they  may  be  sure  that  it  is  only  a  prelude  to 
some  sweet  enjoyment  of  their  Lord's  love,  and  that  they  are 
near  to  some  asylum,  some  sanctuary  of  rest,  peace,  and  com- 
fort. Some  bitter  generally  precedes  the  sweet,  and  makes  the 
sweet  the  sweeter. — (Mason.) 

2  0  it  is  hard  work  to  part  with  Great-heart  I  How  many 
blessings  do  we  lose  for  want  of  asking  1  Great-heart  is  at 
the  command  of  our  Lord.  0  for  more  power  to  cry  inces- 
santly to  the  Lord  for  the  presence  of  Great-heart,  that  we 
may  go  on  more  cheerfully  and  more  joyfully  in  the  ways  of 
the  Lord ! — iMason.) 


City  of  Destruction;  I  am  a  widow  woman,  and 
my  husband  is  dead  ;  his  name  was  christian:,,,,;*.-. 
Christian,  tho  Pilgrim.     How!   said  lu'rs>"'   known 

'  °  .  to   the  Porterj< 

the  Porter,   was    ho    your  husband  {    he  tellt  it  to  a 

Yes,  saul  she,  and  these  are  his  chil- 
dren; and  this,  pointing  to  Mercy,  is  one  of  my 
townswomen.  Then  the  Porter  rang  his  bell,  as 
at  such  times  he  is  wont,  and  there  came  to  the 
door  one  of  the  damsels,  whose  name  was  Humble- 
mind  ;  and  to  her  the  Porter  said,  Go  tell  it  within, 
that  Christiana,  the  wife  of  Christian,  and  her 
children,  are  come  hither  on  pilgrim-  ,  ttteIl(rirtl 
age.  She  weut  in,  therefore,  and  told  of  the  Pilgrims 
it.  But  0  what  noise  for  gladness 
was  there  within,  when  the  damsel  did  but  drop 
that  word  out  of  her  mouth ! 

So  they  came  with  haste  to  the  Porter,  for 
Christiana  stood  still  at  the  door.  Then  some  of 
the  most  grave  said  unto  her,  Come  in,  Christiana,' 
come  in,  thou  wife  of  that  good  man;  come  in, 
thou  blessed  woman ;  come  in,  with  all  that  are 
with  thee.  So  she  went  in,  and  they  followed  her 
that  were  her  children  and  her  companions.  Now 
when  they  were  gone  in,  they  were  had  into  a  very 
large  room,  where  they  were  bidden  to  sit  down  ; 
so  they  sat  down,  and  the  chief  of  the  house  was 
called  to  see  and  welcome  the  guests.  Then  they 
came  in,  and  understanding  who  they  Christians'  love 
were,  did  salute  each  other  with  a  J]ie  gignt  I) 
kiss,  and  said,  Welcome,  ye  vessels  of  one  mll,et' 
the  grace  of  God ;  welcome  to  us  your  friends.3 

Now,  because  it  was  somewhat  late,  and  be- 
cause the  Pilgrims  were  weary  with  their  journey, 
and  also  made  faint  with  the  sight  of  the  fight, 
and  of  the  terrible  lions,  therefore  they  desired,  as 
soon  as  might  be,  to  prepare  to  go  to  rest.  Nay, 
said  those  of  the  family,  refresh  yourselves  first 
with  a  morsel  of  meat ;  for  they  had  prepared  for 
them  a  lamb,  with  the  accustomed  sauce  belong- 
ing thereto,4  Ex.  xii.  21,  28.  Jn.  i.  29;  for  the  Porter 
had  heard  before  of  their  coming,  and  had  told  it 
to  them  within.  So  when  they  had  supped,  and 
ended  their  prayer  with  a  psalm,  they  desired  they 
might  go  to  rest.  But  let  us,  said  Christiana,  if 
we  may  be  so  bold  as  to  choose,  be  in  iirst  part> 
that  chamber  that  was  my  husband's       P-  lu'J- 


3  Here  is  a  blessed  mark  of  being  vessels  of  the  grace  of 
God,  when  we  delight  in  the  sight  of,  salute,  and  welcome 
others  in  the  way  to^Zion,  and  mutually  have  our  hearts  aud 
affections  drawn  out  to  each  other  in  love.  O  how  sweet  is 
the  fellowship  of  pilgrims  below  1  "What  must  it  be  above  ? 
Infinitely  above  conception. — (.Mason.) 

4  Reader,  can  you  feed  upon  Christ  by  faith?  Is  the  Lamb 
the  nourishment  of  thy  soul,  and  the  portion  of  thy  la  n  .J 
Canst  thou  say,  from  blessed  experience,  '  His  flesh  is  meat 
indeed,  aud  his  blood  is  drink  indeed  ?'  Is  it  thy  delight  to 
think  of  him,  hear  of  him,  speak  of  him,  abide  in  him,  and 
live  upon  him  ?  O  bless  him  and  praise  hirn  for  his  distin- 
guishing mercy,  this  spiritual  appetite  1  It  is  peculiar  to  his 
beloved  ones  only.— (Mason.) 


193 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


when  he  was  here ;  so  they  had  them  up  thither, 
and  they  lay  all  in  a  room.  When  they  were  at 
„,  .  ,,    .  rest,    Christiana   and  Mercv  entered 

Christ's    bosom  ' 

is  for  all  pil-   into  discourse  about  things  that  were 
convenient. 
Cijrist.   Little  did  I  think  once,  that  when  my 
husband  went  on  pilgrimage,  I  should  ever  have 
followed. 

Mercy.  And  you  as  little  thought  of  lying  in  his 
bed,  and  in  his  chamber  to  rest,  as  you  do  now. 

Christ.  And  much  less  did  I  ever  think  of  see- 
ing his  face  with  comfort,  and  of  worshipping  the 
Lord  the  King  with  him  ;  and  yet  now  I  believe  I 
shall. 

Mercy.  Hark  !     Don't  you  hear  a  noise  ? 
Christ.  Yes  ;  it  is,  as  I  believe,  a  noise  of  music, 
for  joy  that  we  are  here.2 

Mercy.  Wonderful !  music  in  the  house,  music 
in  the  heart,  and  music  also  in  heaven, 
for  joy  that  we  are  here  ! 3 
Thus  they  talked  a  while,  and  then  betook  them- 
selves to  sleep.     So,  in  the  morning,  when  they 
were  awake,  Christiana  said  to  Mercy : 

Christ.   What  was   the  matter  that  you  did 
Mercydidiaugh  laugh  in  your  sleep  to-night  ?     I  sup- 
in  ller  sleep.     p0se  vou  was  \a  a  dream. 

Mercy.  So  I  was,  and  a  sweet  dream  it  was ; 
but  are  you  sure  I  laughed  ? 

Christ.  Yes ;  you  laughed  heartily;  but,  prithee, 
Mercy,  tell  me  thy  dream. 

Mercy.  I  was  a-dreamed  that  I  sat  all  alone  in 
a  solitary  place,  and  was  bemoaning  of 
y"  am"  the  hardness  of  my  heart.  Now,  1 
had  not  sat  there  long,  but  methought  many  were 
gathered  about  me,  to  see  me,  and  to  hear  what 
it  was  that  I  said.  So  they  hearkened,  and  1  went 
on  bemoaning  the  hardness  of  my  heart.  At  this, 
some  of  them  laughed  at  me,  some  called  me  fool, 
and  some  began  to  thrust  me  about.     With  that, 

wiiather      methought  I  looked  up,  and  saw  one 

drain  was.  coming  with  wings  towards  me.  So 
he  came  directly  to  me,  and  said,  Mercy,  what 
aiieth  thee  ?     Now,  when  he  had  heard  me  make 

1  Pray  mind  the  above  note,  'Christ's  bosom  is  for  all 
pilgrims.'  [This  is  the  room  in  which  they  all  lay,  and  its 
name  is  Peace. — Ed.]  It  is  there  the  weary  find  rest,  and 
the  burdened  soul  ease.  O  l'or  more  redlinings  of  soul  upon 
the  precious  bosom  of  our  Lord  !  We  can  be  truly  happy  no- 
where else. — (Mason.) 

•  Immanuel  also  made  a  feast  for  them.  lie  feasted  them 
with  food  that  grew  uot  in  the  fields  of  Mansoul,  nor  in  the 
whole  kingdom  of  the  Universe.  It  came  from  the  Father's 
court.  There  was  music  also  all  the  while  at  the  table,  and 
man  did  eat  angels'  food.  I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you,  that 
the  musicians  were  the  masters  of  the  songs  sung  at  the  court 
of  Shaddai. —  (Buuyan's  Holy  11'ar) 

3  0  what  precious  harmony  is  this  1  How  joyful  to  be  the 
subjects  of  it,  and  to  join  in  it  1  The  free,  sovereign  grace  of 
God  is  the  delightful  theme,  and  glory  to  God  in  the  highest 
the  universal  chorus.  It  is  the  wonder  and  joy  of  sinners  on 
earth,  and  of  angels  in  heaven. —  (Mason.) 


my  complaint,  he  said  '  Peace  be  to  thee.'  He 
also  wiped  mine  eyes  with  his  handkerchief, 
and  clad  me  in  silver  and  gold.  He  put  a  chain 
about  my  neck,  and  ear-rings  in  mine  ears,  and  a 
beautiful  crown  upon  my  head.  Eze.  xvi.  B-ll.  Then 
he  took  me  by  the  hand,  and  said,  Mercy,  come 
after  me.  So  he  went  up,  and  I  followed,  till  we 
came  at  a  golden  gate.  Then  he  knocked ;  and 
when  they  within  had  opened,  the  man  went  in, 
and  I  followed  him  up  to  a  throne,  upon  which  one 
sat,  and  he  said  to  me,  Welcome,  daughter.  The 
place  looked  bright  and  twinkling,  like  the  stars, 
or  rather  like  the  sun  ;  and  I  thought  that  I  saw 
your  husband  there.  So  I  awoke  from  my  dream.4 
But  did  I  laugh  ? 

Christ.  Laugh  !  aye,  and  well  you  might,  to  see 
yourself  so  well.  For  you  must  give  me  leave  to 
tell  you,  that  I  believe  it  was  a  good  dream ;  and 
that,  as  you  have  begun  to  find  the  first  part  true, 
so  you  shall  find  the  second  at  last.  '  God  speaketh 
once,  yea  twice,  yet  man  perceiveth  it  not.  In  a 
dream,  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  when  deep  sleep 
falleth  upon  men,  in  slumberings  upon  the  bed.'0  Job 
xxiiu.  14,  is.  We  need  not,  when  abed,  lie  awake  to 
talk  with  God.  He  can  visit  us  while  we  sleep,  and 
cause  us  then  to  hear  his  voice.  Our  heart  ofttimes 
wakes  when  we  sleep  ;  and  God  can  speak  to  that, 
either  by  words,  by  proverbs,  by  signs  and  simili- 
tudes, as  well  as  if  one  was  awake.6 

Mercy.  Well,  I  am  glad  of  my  dream ;  for  I 
hope,  ere  long,  to  see  it  fulfilled,  to  Mercy  siaci  0t 
the  making  me  laugh  again.7  her  dreaw- 

Christ.  I  think  it  is  now  high  time  to  rise,  and 
to  know  what  we  must  do. 

Mercy.  Pray,  if  they  invite  us  to  stay  awhile, 
let  us  willingly  accept  of  the  proffer.     1  am  the 


4  Our  author  intimates  that  God  sometimes  communicates 
spiritual  knowledge  and  heavenly  joy  by  '  dreams  and  visions 
of  the  night.'  The  Holy  One  '  worketh  all  thiugs  after  the 
counsel  of  his  own  will,'  and  employs  what  means  he  pleases 
to  bring  into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of 
Christ.  The  effect  produced  by  dreams  must  be  brought  to 
this  test.  It  is  a  good  maxim,  that  what  leads  to  God,  must 
have  come  from  God. — (Ivimey.) 

5  If  Mercy  was  sweetly  surprised  with  this  dream,  we  are 
sure  that  nothing  but  the  surprise  of  mercy  can  overcome  the 
hardened  sinner's  heart,  who,  expecting  the  stroke  of  justice, 
instead  of  the  executioner  with  a  death-warrant,  finds  a  mes- 
senger of  peace,  with  a  pardon  free  and  full,  revealing  the 
grace,  mercy,  and  love  of  God,  through  the  redemption  which 
there  is  in  the  love  of  God. — (J.  B.) 

6  O  how  blessed  are  they  who  are  watching  and  waiting 
continually  to  hear  the  small,  still  voice  of  the  Spirit,  speaking 
rest  and  peace  to  their  souls  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb!  O 
how  condescending  is  our  Lord,  thus  to  visit  us,  and  converse 
with  us  in  the  way  to  his  kingdom ! — (Mason.)  And  how 
blessed  is  church  fellowship  when  the  members  are  governed 
by  these  heavenly  principles,  watchfulness,  humility  of  mind, 
prudence,  piety,  and  charity. — (Ed.) 

7  The  assurance  that  the  dream  should  be  accomplished,  is 
grounded  on  the  effects  produced  upon  Mercy's  heart;  there 
is  no  danger  of  delusion,  when  so  scriptural  an  encouragement 
is  inferred  eveu  from  a  dream. — (Scoii.j 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


109 


willingcr  to  stay  awhile  licrc,  to  crow  better  ac- 
quainted  with  these  mauls.  Methinks  Prudence, 
Piety,  and  Charity  have  very  comely  and  sober 
countenances.1 

Christ.  Wo  shall  seo  what  they  will  do.  So 
when  they  were  up  and  ready,  they  came  down, 
and  they  asked  one  another  of  their  rest,  and  if  it 
was  comfortahle,  or  not. 

Mercy.  Very  good,  said  Mercy ;  it  was  one 
of  the  best  eight's  lodging  that  ever  I  had  in  my 
life. 

Then  said  Prudence  and  Tiety,  If  you  will  he 

Tiiey  stay  here   persuaded  to   stay  here   awhile,    you 

same  nine.       si,aii  nave  wnat  tjie  ]K)USC  w;n  afford. 

Citar.  Aye,  and  that  with  a  very  good  will,  said 
Charity.  So  they  consented  and  staid  there  about 
a  month,  or  above,  and  became  very  profitable  one 
Prudence  de-  to  another.  And  because  Prudence 
c-hfse  Christil  would  see  how  Christiana  had  brought 
aua-achiuren.  up  iier  children,  she  asked  leave  of 
her  to  catechise  them.  So  she  gave  her  free  con- 
sent.2 Then  she  began  at  the  youngest,  whose 
name  was  James. 

james        Prudence.  And  she  said,  Come,  James, 

catechised.  cangt  thou  jgJJ  me  W]1Q  maJe  thee  ? 

James.  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Prud.  Good  boy.  And  canst  thou  tell  me  who 
saves  thee  ? 

James.  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Prud.  Good  boy  still.  But  how  doth  God  the 
Father  save  thee  ? 

James.  By  his  grace. 

Prud.  How  doth  God  the  Son  save  thee  ? 

James.  By  his  righteousness,  death,  and  blood, 
and  life. 

Prud.  And  how  doth  God  the  Holy  Ghost  save 
thee  ? 

James.  By  his  illumination,  by  his  renovation, 
and  by  his  preservation.'3 

Then  said  Prudence  to  Christiana,  You  are  to 
be  commended  for  thus  bringing  up  your  children. 
I  suppose  I  need  not  ask  the  rest  these  questions, 
since  the  youngest  of  them  can  answer  them  so 


1  Can  we  wonder  that  the  pilgrims  longed  to  spend  some 
time  with  such  lovely  companions?  Reader,  how  is  your  in- 
clination? Add  to  these  'Simplicity,  Innocence,  and  Godly-sin- 
cerity; without  which  three  graces  thou  wilt  be  a  hypocrite, 
let  thy  notions,  thy  knowledge,  thy  profession,  and  commen- 
dations from  others,  be  what  they  will.' — (Holy  Life,  vol.  ii. 
p.  530.)  Christian,  in  choosing  thy  companions,  specially 
cleave  to  these  six  virgins,  fur  they  no1  onlj  have  very  comely 
and  sober  countenances,  hut  Christ  dwells  with  them. — (Ed.) 

2  When  Christiana  was  admitted  into  the  church,  care  was 
taken  trt  inquire  into  the  religions  knowledge  of  her  children. 
This  is  an  important  branch  of  ministerial  and  parental  duty. 
The  answers  given  by  the  children  do  their  mother  honour, 
and  prove  that  she  had  not  laboured  in  vain.  Let  every 
pious  parent  imitate  her  example,  and  hope  for  her  success. — 
(binder.) 


well.      I  will  therefore  now  apply  myself  to  the 
next  youngest. 

PRUD.   Then   she   said,  Come,  Joseph   (for  his 
name  was  Joseph),  will  you   let  me       JoBeph 
catechise  you  ?  catechised. 

Joseph.    With  all  my  heart. 

PttUD.  What  is  man  ? 

JosEPn.  A  reasonable  creature,  so  made  by  God, 
as  my  brother  said. 

Prud.   What  is  supposed  by  this  word  '  saved  ? ' 

Joseph.  That  man,  by  sin,  has  brought  himself 
into  a  state  of  captivity  and  misery. 

Prud.  What  is  supposed  by  his  being  saved  by 
the  Trinity  ? 

Joseph.  That  sin  is  so  great  and  mighty  a  tyrant, 
that  none  can  pull  us  out  of  its  clutches,  but  God  ; 
and  that  God  is  so  good  and  loving  to  man,  as  to 
pull  him  indeed  out  of  this  miserable  state. 

Prud.  What  is  God's  design  in  saving  of  poor 
men  ? 

Joseph.  The  glorifying  of  his  name,  of  his  grace, 
and  justice,  <kc,  and  the  everlasting  happiness  of 
his  creature. 

Prud.  Who  are  they  that  must  be  saved  ? 

Joseph.  Those  that  accept  of  his  salvation.4 

Prud.  Good  boy,  Joseph  ;  thy  mother  has  taught 
thee  well,  and  thou  hast  hearkened  to  what  she 
hath  said  unto  thee. 

Then  said  Prudence  to  Samuel,  who  was  the 
eldest  but  one, 

Prud.  Come,  Samuel,  are  you  will-       Samuel 
ing  that  I  should  catechise  you  also  ?      catechised. 

Samuel.  Yes,  forsooth,  if  you  please. 

Prud.  What  is  heaven  ? 

Sam.  A  place  and  state  most  blessed,  because 
God  dwelleth  there. 

Prud.  What  is  hell  ? 

Sam.  A  place  and  state  most  woeful,  because  it 
is  the  dwelling-place  of  sin,  the  devil,  and  death. 

Prud.  Why  wouldest  thou  go  to  heaven  ? 

Sam.  That  I  may  see  God,  and  serve  him  with- 
out weariness ;  that  I  may  see  Christ,  and  love 
him  everlastingly ;  that  I  may  have  that  fulness 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  me  that  I  can  by  no  means 
here  enjoy. 


3  This  is  a  very  sensible  mode  of  catechising  the  hoys 
according  to  their  ages  and  acquirements,  with  questions, 
exciting  their  attention  to  subjects  of  the  gravest  importance. 
Compare  this  with  the  custom  of  asking  a  child  its  name,  and 
requiring  it  to  narrate  circumstances  which  took  place  in  the 
time  of  unconscious  babyhood;  instead  of  impressing  upon  it 
the  existence  of  God  and  the  solemn  realities  of  eternity.  The 
Assembly's,  Dr.  Watts',  and  especially  Bunyan's  catechisms, 
are  admirably  adapted  to  assist,  a  parent  in  these  important 
and  responsible  exercises. — (Bo.) 

4  The  young  pupil  is  not  here  taught  to  answer,  all  the  elect, 
but  practically  'those  that  accept  of  his  salvation.'  This  is 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  other,  while  it  instruct 
encourages  the  learner  without  perplexing  him.  It  is  absurd 
to  teach  the  hardest  lessons  to  the  youngest  sehulars  iu  the 
school  of  Christ. — (Scott ) 


200 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


Prud.  A  very  good  boy  also,  and  one  that  has 
learned  well. 

Then  she  addressed  herself  to  the  eldest,  whose 
Matthew      name  was  Matthew ;   and  she  said  to 
catechised.     him>    Come)   Matthew,    shall    I    also 
catechise  you? 

Matthew.  With  a  very  good  will. 
Prud.  I  ask,  then,  if  there  was  ever  anything 
that  had  a  being  antecedent  to,  or  before  God  ? 

Matt.  No  ;  for  God  is  eternal ;  nor  is  there  any- 
thing excepting  himself,  that  had  a  being  until  the 
beginning  of  the  first  day.  '  For  in  six  days  the 
Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that 
in  them  is.' 

Prud.  What  do  you  think  of  the  Bible  ? 
Matt.  It  is  the  holy  Word  of  God. 
Prud.  Is  there  nothing  written  therein  but  what 
you  understand  ? 

Matt.  Yes.     A  great  deal. 
Prud.  What  do  you  do  when  you  meet  with 
such  places  therein  that  you  do  not  understand  ? 

Matt.  I  think  God  is  wiser  than  I.  I  pray  also 
that  he  will  please  to  let  me  know  all  therein  that 
he  knows  will  be  for  my  good.1 

Prud.  How  believe  you,  as  touching  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead  ? 

Matt.  I  believe  they  shall  rise,  the  same  that 
was  buried;  the  same  in  nature,  though  not  in 
corruption.  And  I  believe  this  upon  a  double 
account:  First,  because  God  has  promised  it; 
secondly,  because  he  is  able  to  perform  it.2 

Then  said  Prudence  to  the  boys,  You  must  still 
Prudence's  con-  hearken  to  your  mother,  for  she  can 
thet'ateciiism^  learn  you  more.  You  must  also  dili- 
of  the  boys,  gently  give  ear  to  what  good  talk  you 
shall  hear  from  others ;  for,  for  your  sakes  do  they 
speak  good  things.  Observe,  also,  and  that  with 
carefulness,  what  the  heavens  and  the  earth  do 
teach  you ;  but  especially  be  much  in  the  medita- 
tion of  that  Book  that  was  the  cause  of  your 
father's  becoming  a  pilgrim.  I,  for  my  part,  my 
children,  will  teach  you  what  I  can  while  you  are 
here,  and  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  ask  me  ques- 
tions that  tend  to  godly  edifying. 

Now,  by  that  these  Pilgrims  had  been  at  this 
Mercy  has  a  place  a  week,  Mercy  had  a  visitor  that 
sweetheart.     pretended  some  goodwill  unto  her,  and 


1  Though  this  is  answered  with  the  simplicity  of  a  child ; 
yet  it  is,  and  ever  will  be,  the  language  of  every  father  in 
Christ.  Happy  those  whose  spirits  are  cast  into  this  luunble, 
evangelical  mould!  O  that  this  Spirit  may  accompany  us  iu 
all  our  researches,  in  all  our  ways,  and  through  all  our  days! —  I 
(Mason.)  Our  inability  to  discover  the  meaning  of  these 
passages  should  teach  us  humility,  and  submission  to  the 
decisions  of  our  infallible  instructor. — (Scott.) 

-  Here  is  the  foundation  of  faith,  and  the  triumph  of  hope, 
God's  faithfulness  to  his  promise,  and  his  power  to  perform. 
Having  these  to  look  to,  what  should  stagger  our  faith,  or 
deject  our  hope?  "We  may,  we  ought  to  smile  at  all  carunl 
objections,  and  trample  upon  all  corrupt  reasonings. — (Mason.) 


his  name  was  Mr.  Brisk,  a  man  of  some  breed- 
ing, and  that  pretended  to  religion ;  but  a  man 
that  stuck  very  close  to  the  world.  So  he  came 
once  or  twice,  or  more,  to  Mercy,  and  offered  love 
unto  her.  Now  Mercy  was  of  a  fair  countenance, 
and  therefore  the  more  alluring. 

Her  mind  also  was,  to  be  always  busyino-  of 
herself  in  doing;  for  when  she  had 
nothing  to  do  for  herself,  she  would 
be  making  of  hose  and  garments  for  others,  and 
would  bestow  them  upon  them  that  had  need.3 
And  Mr.  Brisk,  not  knowing  where  or  how  she 
disposed  of  what  she  made,  seemed  to  be  greatly 
taken,  for  that  he  found  her  never  idle.  I  will 
warrant  her  a  good  housewife,  quoth  he  to  himself.4 

Mercy  then  revealed  the  business  to  the  maidens 
that  were  of  the  house,  and  inquired  Mercy  inquires 
of  them  concerning  him,  for  they  did  l^mngMr! 
know  him  better  than  she.5  So  they  Brisk- 
told  her,  that  he  was  a  very  busy  young  man,  and 
one  that  pretended  to  religion ;  but  was,  as  they 
feared,  a  stranger  to  the  power  of  that  which  was 
good. 

Nay  then,  said  Mercy,  I  will  look  no  more  on 
him ;  for  I  purpose  never  to  have  a  clog  to  my 
soul.6 

Prudence  then  replied  that  there  needed  no 
great  matter  of  discouragement  to  be  given  to  him, 
her  continuing  so  as  she  had  begun  to  do  for  the 
poor,  would  quickly  cool  his  courage. 

So  the  next  time  he  comes,  he  finds  her  at  her 

old  work,  a-making  of  things  for  the   _  ,,      .... 

mi  -ii       „,,       •      l  Talk     betwixt 

poor.     Then  said  he,  What!   always     Mercy  and  Mr. 

at  it  ?     Yes,  said  she,  either  for  my- 
self or  for  others.     And  what  canst  thou  earn 
a  day  ?  quoth  he.     I  do  these  things,  said  she, 
'  that  I  may  be  rich  in  good  works,  lading  up  in 


3  This  is  an  important  lesson  to  young  females,  how  they 
may  profitably  employ  their  time,  adorn  the  gospel,  and  be 
useful.  It  is  much  better  to  imitate  Dorcas,  in  making 
garments  for  the  poor,  than  to  waste  time  and  money  iu 
frivolous  amusements,  or  needless  decorations;  or  iu  more 
elegant  and  fashionable  accomplishments. — (Scott.) 

4  The  character  of  M  r.  Brisk  is  portrayed  to  the  life  m 
Buuyan's  Emblems — 

■  Candles  that  do  blink  within  the  socket, 
And  saints  whose  eyes  are  always  in  their  pocket, 
Are  much  alike:  such  candles  make  us  tumble; 
And  at  such  saints,  good  men  and  bad  do  stumble.' 

6  The  character  of  Mercy  is  lovely  throughout  the  pilgrim- 
age; but  in  the  important  choice  of  a  partner  for  life,  she 
manifests  great  prudence  and  shrewdness;  she  asks  the  advice 
of  those  who  knew  Mr.  Brisk,  and  whose  names  proved  how 
capable  they  were  to  give  it.  And  she  acted  upon  their  know- 
ledge of  his  character.  And  when  she  discovered  the  utter 
selfishness  of  bis  disposition,  she  thankfully  bid  him,  Good  bye, 
sweet  heart ;  and  parts  for  life. — (Ed.) 

6  Most  blessed  resolution !  Ah,  pilgrims,  if  ye  were  more 
wary,  lest,  by  your  choice  and  conduct,  ye  brought  clogs  to 
your  souls,  how  many  troubles  would  ye  escape,  and  how 
much  more  happy  would  you  be  in  your  pilgrimage!  It  is 
for  want  of  this  wisdom  and  conduct,  that  many  bring  evil 
upon  themselves. — Mason. 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


201 


ftore  a  good  foundation  against  the  time  to  come, 
that  I  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.'  1  Ti.  vi.  17—10. 
Why,  prithee,  what  dost  thou  with  them?  said  he. 
Clothe  the  naked,  said  she.  With  that  his  coun- 
He  forsakes  her,    tenance  fell.      So  he  forhoro  to  come 

and  why.  at  jjer  again.  an,l  when  he  was  asked 
the  reason  why,  he  said,  that  Mercy  was  a  pretty 
lass,  hut  troubled  with  ill  conditions.1 

When  he  had  left  her,  Prudence  said,  Did  I  not 
tell  thee,  that  Mr.  Brisk  would  soon 
>tuv:  of  mercy  forsake  thee  '(  yea,  he  will  raise  up  an 
Mm'"1  in"  ale  ill  report  of  thee  ;  for,  notwithstand- 
ing of  Mercy  fog  his  pretence  to  religion,  and  his 
seeming  love  to  Mercy,  yet  Mercy 
and  he  are  of  tempers  so  different,  that  1  believe 
they  will  never  come  together. 

Mekcy.  I  might  have  had  husbands  afore  now, 
though  I  spake  not  of  it  to  any ;  but  they  were 
such  as  did  not  like  my  conditions,  though  never 
did  any  of  them  find  fault  with  my  person.  So 
they  and  I  could  not  agree. 

Prdd.  Mercy  in  our  days  is  little  set  by,  any 
further  than  as  to  its  name  ;  the  practice,  which  is 
set  forth  by  thy  conditions,  there  are  but  few  that 
can  abide. 

Mercy.  Well,  said  Mercy,  if  nobody  will  have 
Mercy's       nie.  I  will  die  a  maid,  or  my  conditions 

resolution.  shall  he  to  me  as  a  husband.  For  I 
cannot  change  my  nature ;  and  to  have  one  that 
lies  cross  to  me  in  this,  that  I  purpose  never  to 
admit  of  as  long  as  I  live.  I  had  a  sister  named 
riow  Mercy's  Bountiful,  that  was  married  to  one  of 
served  by  her  these  churls ;  but  he  and  she  could 
husband.  never  agree;    but  because  my  sister 

was  resolved  to  do  as  she  had  begun,  that  is,  to 
show  kindness  to  the  poor,  therefore  her  husband 
first  cried  her  down  at  the  cross,  and  then  turned 
her  out  of  his  doors.2 

Prud.  And  yet  he  was  a  professor,  I  warrant  you. 

Mercy.  Yes,  such  a  one  as  he  was,  and  of  such 
as  he,  the  world  is  now  full ;  but  I  am  for  none  of 
them  all. 

Now  Matthew,  the  eldest  son  of  Christiana,  fell 
Matthew  Bick,  and  his  sickness  was  sore  upon 
falls  Mt-k.      him,  for  he  was  much  pained  in  his 


1  How  easily  are  the  best  of  characters  traduced,  and  false 
constructions  put  upon  the  best  of  actions!  Reader,  is  this 
your  lot  also?  Mind  your  duty.  Look  to  your  Lord.  Per- 
severe in  his  works  and  ways;  and  leave  your  character  with 
him,  to  whom  you  can  trust  your  soul.  '  For  if  God  be  for 
ns,  who  shall  be  against  us?  what  shall  harm  us,  if  we  be 
followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?'— (Mason.) 

2  Crying  at  the  cross,  and  turning  a  wife  out  of  doors, 
refers  to  a  vulgar  error,  which  had  its  influence  to  a  late 
period  in  Bedfordshire.  It  was  a  speedy  mode  of  divorce, 
similar  to  that  practised  in  London,  by  lending  a  wife  by  a 
halter  to  Smithfield,  and  selling  her.  '1  lie  crying  at  the 
market  cross  that  a  man  would  not  be  answerable  for  the 
debts  that  might  be  incurred  by  his  wife,  was  the  mode  of 
advertising,  which  was  supposed  to  absolve  a  husband  from 
maintaining  his  wife;  a  notion  now  fully  exploded. —  (Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


bowels,  so  that  he  was  with  it,  at  times,  pulled  as 
it  were  both  ends  together.3  There  dwelt  also  not 
far  from  thence,  one  Mr.  Skill,  an  ancient  and 
well  approved  physician.  So  Christiana  desired  it, 
and  they  sent  for  him,  and  he  came.  When  he 
was  entered  the  room,  and  had  a  little  orfpei  of  con- 
observed  the  boy,  he  concluded  that  science, 
he  was  sick  of  the  gripes.  Then  he  said  to  his 
mother,  What  diet  has  Matthew  of  late  fed  upon? 
Diet,  said  Christiana,  nothing  but  that  which  is 
wholesome.  The  physician  answered,  This  boy 
has  been  tampering  with  something  The  physician's 
that  lies  in  his  maw  undigested,  and  lodgment 
that  will  not  away  without  means.  And  I  tell 
you,  he  must  be  purged,  or  else  he  will  die. 

Sam.  Then  said  Samuel,  Mother,  mother,  what 
was  that  which  my  brother  did  gather  Samuel  puts  his 
up  and  eat,  so  soon  as  we  were  come  "["'],' ' . ', 
from  the  gate  that  is  at  the  head  of  brotherdideat 
this  way  ?  You  know  that  there  was  an  orchard 
on  the  left  hand,  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall,  and 
some  of  the  trees  hung  over  the  wall,  and  my 
brother  did  plash  and  did  eat. 

Ciiiust.  True,  my  child,  said  Christiana,  he  did 
take  thereof,  and  did  eat;  naughty  boy  as  he  was, 
I  did  chide  him,  and  yet  he  would  eat  thereof.4 

Skill.  I  knew  he  had  eaten  something  that  was 
not  wholesome  food;  and  that  food,  to  wit,  that 
fruit,  is  even  the  most  hurtful  of  all.  It  is  tho 
fruit  of  Beelzebub's  orchard.  I  do  marvel  that 
none  did  warn  you  of  it  ;  many  have  died  thereof. 

Ciluist.  Then  Christiana  began  to  cry  ;  and  she 
said,  0  naughty  boy !  and  0  careless  mother ! 
What  shall  1  do  for  my  son ! 5 

Skill.  Come,  do  not  be  too  much  dejected;  the 
boy  may  do  well  again,  but  he  must  purge  and 
vomit. 


3  See  the  effects  of  sin.  It  will  pinch  and  gTipe  the  con- 
science, and  make  the  heart  of  a  gracious  soul  sick. —  (Mason.) 
Matthew,  in  being  admitted  a  member  of  the  church,  repre- 
sented by  the  house  Beautiful  and  its  happy  family,  had  to 
relate  his  experience,  and  this  brought  to  his  recollection 
plashing  the  trees,  and  eating  the  enemy's  fruit,  of  which  his 
brother  also  reminds  them. —  (Ed.) 

4  How  often  do  we  suffer  by  neglecting  the  cautions  of  a 
pious  parent  or  friend.  '  In  time  of  temptation  it  is  our  duty 
to  keep  close  to  the  word,  then  we  have  Satan  at  the  end  of 
the  staff.     When  Eve  was  tempted,  she  went  to  the  outside  of 

!  her  liberty,  and  sat  herself  on  the  brink  of  danger,  when  she 

I  said,  we  may  cat  of  all  but  one.' — (Bunyan  on  Genesis,  vol.  ii. 

'  p.  42'J.)    Christiana  had  eluded  the  boys":  '  You  transgress,  for 

that  fruit  is  none  of  ours.'     Still  the  boys  went  on,  and  now 

Matthew  feels  the  bitterness  of  repentance. —  (Ed.) 

6  Although  the  mother  did  warn  and  chide  her  son,  yet  she 
did  not  use  her  authority  to  prevent  his  taking  the  fruit 
which  belonged  to  another.  She  takes  the  fault  home,  falls 
under  the  sense  of  it,  and  is  grieved  for  it.  A  tender  con- 
science is  a  blessed  sign  of  a  gracious  heart.  Ye  parents,  who 
know  the  love  of  Christ,  watch  over  your  chUdrenj  see  to  it, 
lest  you  smart  for  your  sins,  in  not  warning  and  preventing 
them,  that  'the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  depart  from  all  evil;' 
yea,  to  abstain  from  the  very  appearance  of  it. — (Mason, 
altered  by  En.) 

2f» 


202 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Christ.  Pray,  Sir,  try  the  utmost  of  your  skill 
with  him,  whatever  it  costs. 

Skill.  Nay,  I  hope  I  shall  he  reasonahle.     So 

Totionprepared.   he  ""*?    hil"  *  P^S6'  bllt  U  WaS    t0° 

weak ;  it  was  said,  it  was  made  of  the 
Wood  of  a  goat,  the  ashes  of  a  heifer,  and  with 
some  of  the  juice  of  hyssop,  <fcc.  He.  x.  1-4.  When 
Mr.  Skill  had  seen  that  that  purge  was  too  weak, 
he  made  him  one  to  the  purpose ;  it  was  made  ex 
The  Latin  1  came  et  sanguine  Chiisti.1  Jn.  vi.  54-57. 
bonow.  Ju  ix  u  ^y0u  know  physicians  give 
strange  medicines  to  their  patients.)  And  it  was 
made  up  into  pills,  with  a  promise  or  two,  and  a 
proportionable  quantity  of  salt.  Mar.  ix.  49.  Now  he 
was  to  take  them  three  at  a  time  fasting,  in  half  a 
quarter  of  a  pint  of  the  tears  of  repentance.  When 
this  potion  was  prepared,  and  brought  to  the  boy, 
-»,    .      .   ..    he  was  loath  to  take  it,  though  torn 

The    boy  loath        .  .  '  » 

take  the  with  the  gripes,  as  if  he  should  be 
pulled  in  pieces.  Come,  come,  said 
the  physician,  you  must  take  it.  It  goes  against 
my  stomach,  said  the  boy.  Zee.  xii.  10.  I  must  have 
you  take  it,  said  his  mother.  I  shall  vomit  it  up 
again,  said  the  boy.  Pray,  Sir,  said  Christiana 
to  Mr.  Skill,  how  does  it  taste?  It  has  no  ill 
taste,  said  the  doctor  ;  and  with  that  she  touched 

The        mother    0ne    °^   ^G   P^'S    W'th    the    **P    °^   ^er 

tastes  it,  and  tongue.  Oh,  Matthew,  said  she,  this 
potion  is  sweeter  than  honey.  If  thou 
lovest  thy  mother,  if  thou  lovest  thy  brothers,  if 
thou  lovest  Mercy,  if  thou  lovest  thy  life,  take  it. 
So  with  much  ado,  after  a  short  prayer  for  the 
blessing  of  God  upon  it,  he  took  it,  and  it  wrought 
kindly  with  him.  It  caused  him  to  purge,  it  caused 
him  to  sleep,  and  rest  quietly;  it  put  him  into 
a  fine  heat  and  breathing  sweat,  and  did  quite 

So  in  little 


physic. 


rid  him  of  his 


,a  2 


A  word  of  God   "~  " —  gripes 

in  the  hand  of  time  he  got  up,   and  walked  about 

with  a  staff,  and  would  go  from  room 

to    room,   and   talk   with    Prudence,   Piety,   and 

Charity,  of  his  distemper,  and  how  he  was  healed.3 

1  Mr.  Bunyan's  great  modesty  and  humility  are  truly  ad- 
mirable ;  he  quotes  Latin,  but  is  careful  to  tell  us,  '  The  Latin 
I  borrow.'  The  English  is,  '  Of  the  flesh  and  of  the  blood  of 
Christ.'  This  is  the  only  portion  for  sin-sick  souls.  Feeding 
upon  Christ's  flesh  and  blood  by  faith,  keeps  us  from  sinning, 
and  when  sick  of  sin,  these,  and  nothing  but  these,  can  heal 
and  restore  us.  Yet  there  is  in  our  nature  an  unaccountable 
reluctance  to  receive  these,  through  the  unbelief  which  works 
in  us  I     So  Matthew  found  it. — (Mason.) 

2  See  the  blessed  effects  of  receiving  Christ,  when  under 
the  sense  of  sin,  and  distressed  for  sin.  0  what  a  precious 
Saviour  is  Jesus  I  What  efficacy  is  there  in  his  flesh  and 
blood,  to  purge  the  conscience  from  guilt!  Lord,  what  a 
mercy  is  it,  that  though  we  sin,  yet  thou  art  abundant  to 
pardon,  yea,  multiplies!;  thy  pardons;  yea,  and  also  giveth 
poor,  pained,  broken-hearted  sinners  to  know  and  feel  thy 
pardoning  love! — (Mason.) 

3  How  correctly  are  the  effects  of  an  indidgence  in  sinfid 
lusts  described.  Sin  and  sorrow  are  inseparable.  The  bur- 
dened conscience  of  a  backslider  can  be  relieved  in  no  other 
way,  than  that  iu  which  it  was  first  '  purged  from  dead  works,' 


So  when  the  boy  was  healed,  Christiana  asked 
Mr.  Skill,  saying,  Sir,  what  will  content  you  for 
your  pains  and  care  to,  and  of  my  child?  And  he 
said,  You  must  pay  the  Master  of  the  College  of 
Physicians,  according  to  rules  made  in  that  case 
and  provided.  He.  jdiL  11— ig. 

Christ.  But,  Sir,  said  she,  what  is  this  pill 
good  for  else  ? 

Skill.  It  is  an  universal  pill ;  it  is  good  against 
all  the  diseases  that  Pilgrims  are  in-   m, . 

•  1       A     A  IT  •      .  -I,  Tllis     P'U     a« 

cident   to  ;    ana  when  it  is  well  pre-     universal    re- 
pared,  it  will  keep  good,  time  out  of     me  y- 
mind. 

Christ.  Pray,  Sir,  make  me  up  twelve  boxes 
of  them ;  for  if  I  can  get  these,  I  will  never  take 
other  physic.4 

Skill.  These  pills  are  good  to  prevent  diseases, 
as  well  as  to  cure  when  one  is  sick.  Yea,  I  dare 
say  it,  and  stand  to  it,  that  if  a  man  will  but  use 
this  physic  as  he  should,  it  will  make  him  live  for 
ever.  Jn.  vi.  50.  But,  good  Christiana,  thou  must 
give  these  pills  no  other  way  but  as   T         .        c 

Ti  -lie  -r>  1  In    a    SlaSS    °f 

I  have  prescribed  ;  for,  if  you  do,  they  the  tears  of 
will  do  no  good.5  So  he  gave  unto  repen  auce" 
Christiana  physic  for  herself,  and  her  boys,  and 
for  Mercy;  and  bid  Matthew  take  heed  how  he 
eat  any  more  green  plums,  and  kissed  them,  and 
went  his  way. 

It  was  told  you  before,  that  Prudence  bid  the 
boys,  that  if  at  any  time  they  would,  they  should 
ask  her  some  questions  that  might  be  profitable, 
and  she  would  say  something  to  them. 

Matt.  Then  Matthew,  who  had  been  sick,  asked 
her,  Why,  for  the  most  part,  physic 
should  be  bitter  to  our  palates  ? 

Prud.  To  show  how  unwelcome  the  Word  of 
God,  and  the  effects  thereof,  are  to  a  carnal  heart. 

Matt.  Why  does  physic,  if  it  does  of  the  effects  of 
good,  purge,  and  cause  that  we  vomit?         physic 


Of  physic. 


by  exercising  faith  in  the  atoning  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as 
the  only  sacrifice  for  sin,  '  If  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault, 
ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness.'  Ga.  vi.  1.  '  Flee  youthful  lusts,'  aud  be  upon 
your  guard  against  the  fruit  of  Beelzebub's  orchard. — (Ivimey.) 
4  The  relation  of  Matthew's  sickness,  and  the  method  of 
his  cure,  may  be  justly  esteemed  among  the  finest  passages  of 
this  work.  He  ate  the  fruit  of  Beelzebub's  orchard,  sin,  the 
disease  of  the  soul,  threatening  eternal  death.  It  is  an  un- 
speakable mercy  to  be  exceedingly  pained  with  it.  Such  need 
the  physician,  and  the  remedy  is  at  hand. 

Nothing  hut  thy  blood,  0  Jesus  I 

Can  relieve  us  from  our  smart ; 

Nothing  else  from  guilt  release  us 

Nothing  else  can  melt  the  heart. — (Hart.) 

It  is  the  universal  medicine;  blessed  are  those  that  will  never 
take  any  other  physic. — (Burder.) 

6  This  advice  should  be  carefidly  noted.  Numbers  abuse 
the  doctrine  of  free  salvation  by  the  merits  and  redemption 
of  Christ,  and  presume  on  forgiveness,  when  they  are  destitute 
of  genuiue  repentance,  and  give  no  evidence  of  sanctification. 
But  this  most  efficacious  medicine  iu  that  case  will  do  no 
good;  or  rather,  the  perverse  abuse  of  it  will  increase  their 
guilt,  and  tend  to  harden  their  hearts  in  sin. — (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   mOGRESS. 


203 


Prud.  To  show  that  the  Word,  when  it  works 
effectually,  cleanseth  the  heart  and  mind.  For 
look,  what  the  one  doth  to  the  body,  the  other 
doth  to  the  soul.1 

Matt.  What  should  we  learn  by  Beeing  the  flame 
Of  fire,  and  of      of  our  tire  go  upwards  \  and  by  seeing 

the  sun.  t]ic  beams  and  sweet  influences  of  the 
sun  strike  downwards  { 

Prcd.  By  the  going  np  of  the  fire  we  are  taught 
to  ascend  to  heaven,  by  fervent  and  hot  desires. 
And  by  the  sun's  Bending  bis  beat,  beams,  and  ' 
sweet  influences  downwards,  we  are  taught  that 
the  Saviour  of  the  world,  though  high,  reaeheth 
down  with  his  grace  and  love  to  us  below. 

MATT.  Where  have  the  clouds  their 

Of  the  clouds.  .       , 

water  i 

Prud.  Out  of  the  sea. 

Matt.  What  may  we  learn  from  that  ? 

Prud.  That  ministers  should  fetch  their  doctrine 
from  God. 

Matt.  Why  do  they  empty  themselves  upon  the 
earth  ? 

Prud.  To  show  that  ministers  should  give  out 
what  they  know  of  God  to  the  world. 

Matt.  Why  is  the  rainbow  caused 

Of  the  rainbow.     .       , ,  0 

by  the  sun  f 
Prcd.  To  show  that  the  covenant  of  God's  grace 
is  confirmed  to  us  in  Christ. 

Matt.  Why  do  the  springs  come  from  the  sea 
to  us,  through  the  earth  ? 

Prud.  To  show  that  the  grace  of  God  comes  to 
us  through  the  body  of  Christ. 

Matt.  Why  do  some  of  the  springs 

Of  the  springs.       .  .    ,  J  „  .  .    .    ,.,/,     ° 

rise  out  or  the  tops  or  high  hills  i 

Prud.  To  show  that  the  spirit  of  grace  shall 
spring  up  in  some  that  are  great  and  mighty,  as 
well  as  in  many  that  are  poor  and  low. 

Matt.    Why  doth    the   fire  fasten 
upon  the  candlewick  ? 

Prud.  To  show,  that  unless  grace  doth  kindle 
upon  the  heart  there  will  be  no  true  light  of  life 
in  us. 

Matt.  Why  is  the  wick  and  tallow,  and  all, 
spent  to  maintain  the  light  of  the  candle  ? 

Prud.  To  show  that  body  and  soul,  and  all, 
should  be  at  the  service  of,  and  spend  themselves 
to  maintain,  in  good  condition,  that  grace  of  God 
that  is  in  us. 


1  Imnyan's  bill  of  his  Master's  writer  of  life: — 'As  men, 
in  their  bills,  do  give  an  account  of  the  persons  cured,  and  the 
diseases  removed,  so  could  I  give  you  account  of  numberless 
numbers  that  have  not  only  been  made  to  live,  but  to  live  for 
ever,  by  drinking  this  pure  water  of  life.  No  disease  comes 
amiss  to  it.  It  cures  blindness,  deafness,  dumbness,  deaduess. 
This  right  holy  water  (Ml  other  is  counterfeit]  will  drive  away 
evil  spirits.  It  will  make  you  hare  a  white  so'.il,  and  that  is 
better  than  a  white  skin.' — (Bnnyan's  Water  of  Life)  Who- 
ever offers  to  purify  the  heart,  and  heal  a  wounded  conscience, 
by  any  other  means,  is  a  deceiver  and  a  soul-destroyer. —  (Ed.) 


Of  the  candle. 


Matt.  \\  by  doth  the  pelican  pierce 
i  i_         *      -.i    i        i   n  q  Of  the  pelican, 

her  own  breast  With  her  hill  f 

Prud.  To  nourish  her  young  ones  with  her 
blood,  anil  thereby  to  show  that  Christ  the  blesBed 
so  loveth  his  young,  his  people,  as  to  save  them 
from  death  by  bis  blood. 

Matt.    What   may    one    learn   by 

.  .         x.  19  Of  the  cock, 

hearing  the  cock  crow  i 

Prud.  Learn  to  remember  Peter's  sin,  and 
Peter's  repentance.  The  cock's  crowing  shows 
also  that  day  is  coming  on;  let  then  the  crowing 
of  the  cock  put  thee  in  mind  of  that  last  and  ter- 
rible day  of  judgment.3 

Now,  about  this  time  their  month  was  out ; 
wherefore  they  signified  to  those  of  the  house  that 
it  was  convenient  for  them  to  up  and  be  going. 
Then  said  Joseph  to  his  mother,  It  is  convenient 
that  you  forget  not  to  send  to  the  house  The  weak  mav 
of  Mr.  Interpreter,  to  pray  him  to  ^Z 
grant  that  Mr.  Great-heart  should  be  Payers, 
sent  unto  us,  that  he  may  be  our  conductor  the 
rest  of  our  way.  Good  boy,  said  she,  I  had  almost 
forgot.  So  she  drew  up  a  petition,8  and  prayed 
Mr.  Watchful,  the  Porter,  to  send  it  by  some  fit 
man,  to  her  good  friend  Mr.  Interpreter;  who, 
when  it  was  come,  and  he  had  seen  the  contents, 
of  the  petition,  said  to  the  messenger,  Go  tell  them 
that  I  will  send  him. 

When  the  family,  where  Christiana  was,   saw 
that  they  had  a  purpose  to  go  forward,    Thg    ^^ 
they  called  the  whole  house  together,     begone  on  their 
to  give  thanks  to  their  King  for  send-     "a}- 
ing  of  them  such  profitable  guests  as  these.    Which 
done,  they  said   to  Christiana,  And  shall  we  not 
show  thee  something,  according  as  our  custom  is 
to  do  to  pilgrims,  on  which  thou  mayest  meditate 
when   thou  art   upon  the  way  ?      So    they  took 
Christiana,  her  children,  and  Mercy,  into  the  closet, 
and   showed  them  one  of  the  apples 
that  Eve  did  eat  of,  and  that  she  also 
did  give  to  her  husband,  and  that  for  the  eating  of 
which  they  both  were  turned  out  of  Paradise;  and 
asked  her  wdiat  she  thought  that  was  ?    ^  gjg]lt  0f  sin  is 
Then   Christiana   said,   It  is  food  or        ■■»** 
poison,  I  know  not  which.4     So  they  opened  tho 


2  This  conversation  is  adapted  for  the  meditation  of  a 
restored  backslider.  Evangelical  truth  prescribes  the  mo;t 
powerful  antidotes  to  presumption  and  despair : — '  My  little 
children,  these  thiugs  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not.  And 
if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous.'  1  Jn.  ii.  1. —  (Ivimey.) 

3  Having    experienced   the   great   advantage    of    a    pious 
minister  or  elder,  they  were  naturally  desirous  of  havi 
comfort  through  their  pilgrimage.    The  petition  maj  i 

the  custom,  among  dissenting  churches,  of  let! 

sion  given  to  members  wheu  they  move  to  a  distant  locality. 

—(Ed.) 

*  How  much  is  contained  in  that  answer  of  Christiana  as 
to  the  origin  of  evil— '  It  is  food  or  poison,  I  know  not  which  I 
To  believers,  it  will  be  their  elevation  to  a  degree  of  bliss  that 


Eve's  apple. 


204 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Golden  anchor. 


matter  to  her,  and  she  held  up  her  hands  and 
wondered.1  Ge.  m.  e.  Ro.  vii.  24. 

Then  they  had  her  to  a  place,  and  showed  her 
Jacob's  ladder.      Now  at  that  time 

Jacob's  ladder.      ,,  .  ,. 

there  was  some  angels  ascending  upon 
it.  So  Christiana  looked,  and  looked,  to  see  the 
angels  go  up ;  and  so  did  the  rest  of  the  company. 
Then  they  were  going  into  another  place,  to  show 
them  something  else  ;  hut  James  said  to  his  mother, 
Asight  of  Christ  Pray>  hid  them  stay  here  a  little  longer, 
is  taking.  for  th;g  ;g  a  cur;ou3  sight.3  So  they 
turned  again,  and  stood  feeding  their  eyes  with 
this  so  pleasant  a  prospect.  Ge.  xxviii.  12.  Jn.  i.  51. 
After  this,  they  had  them  into  a  place  where  did 
hang  up  a  golden  anchor,  so  they  bid 
Christiana  take  it  down ;  for,  said 
they,  you  shall  have  it  with  you,  for  it  is  of  abso- 
lute necessity  that  you  should,  that  you  may  lay 
hold  of  that  within  the  veil,  and  stand  steadfast, 
in  case  you  should  meet  with  turbulent  weather ; 
so  they  were  glad  thereof.3  He.  vi.  19.  Then  they 
took  them,  and  had  them  to  the  mount  upon  which 
_.    ,.    .  Abraham  our  father  had  offered  up 

Of     Abraham  l 

offering  up  Isaac  his  son,  and  showed  them  the 
altar,  the  wood,  the  fire,  and  the  knife, 
for  they  remain  to  be  seen  to  this  very  day.  Ge.  xxii.  9. 
When  they  had  seen  it,  they  held  up  their  hands 
and  blessed  themselves,  and  said,  0  what  a  man 
for  love  to  his  Master,  and  for  denial  to  himself, 
was  Abraham  !  After  they  had  showed  them  all 
these  things,  Prudence  took  them  into  the  dining- 
Pmdence's  vir-  room,  where  stood  a  pair  of  excellent 
ginals.         virginals  ;4  so  she  played  upon  them, 


they  would  never  have  otherwise  enjoyed ;  to  the  faithless,  it 
will  he  poison  of  the  deadliest  kind.  Here  is  no  attempt  to 
explain  the  origin  of  evil  in  our  world ;  a  subject  far  beyond 
all  our  powers  of  investigation. — (Ed.) 

1  It  is  not  enough  that  the  Holy  Spirit  convince  us  of  sin 
at  our  first  setting  out  on  pilgrimage,  and  make  us  sensible  of 
our  want  of  Christ ;  but  he  also  keeps  up  a  sight  and  sense  of 
the  evil  of  sin  in  its  original  nature,  as  well  as  actual  trans- 
gressions. This  often  makes  us  wonder  at  sin,  at  ourselves, 
and  at  the  love  of  Christ  in  becoming  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins. 
And  this  also  humbles  us,  makes  us  hate  sin  the  more ;  and 
makes  Christ,  his  atonement,  and  righteousness,  more  and 
more  precious  in  our  eyes,  and  inestimable  in  our  hearts. — 
(Mason.) 

2  The  ministration  of  angels  is  an  animating  theme  to 
believers,  and  is  well  adapted  to  promote  their  confidence  in 
the  care  and  protection  of  God.  '  Are  they  not  all  ministering 
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of 
salvation?'  He.  i.  14. — (Ivimey.) 

3  This  is  the  anchor  of  hope.  This  keeps  the  soul  safe,  and 
steady  to  Jesus,  who  is  the  alone  object  of  our  hopes.  Hope 
springs  from  faith.  It  is  an  expectation  of  the  fulfilment  of 
those  things  that  are  promised  in  the  Word  of  truth,  by  the 
God  of  all  grace.  Faith  receives  them,  trusts  in  them,  relies 
upon  them ;  and  hope  waits  for  the  full  accomplishment  and 
enjoyment  of  them. — (Mason.) 

4  Bunyan  loved  harmony — he  had  a  soul  for  music.  But 
whether  he  intended  by  this  to  sanction  the  introduction  of 
instrumental  music  into  public  worship,  is  not  clear.  The 
late  Abraham  Booth  and  Andrew  Fuller  were  extremely  averse 
to  it ;  others  are  as  desirous  of  it.     Music  has  a  great  effect 


and  turned  what  she  had  showed  them  into  this 
excellent  song,  saying — 

Eve's  apple  we  have  showed  yon, 

Of  that  be  you  aware ; 
You  have  seen  Jacob's  ladder,  too, 

Upon  which  angels  are. 
An  anchor  you  received  have; 

But  let  not  these  suffice, 
Until,  with  Abr'am,  you  have  gave 

Your  best  a  sacrifice. 

Now,  about  this  time,  one  knocked  at  the  door; 
so  the  Porter  opened,  and  behold  Mr.  Great-heart 
was  there ;  but  when  he  was  come  in,  Mr.  Great-heart 
what  joy  was  there  !  For  it  came  come  a-ain- 
now  fresh  again  into  their  minds,  how  but  a  while 
ago  he  had  slain  old  Grim  Bloody-man  the  giant, 
and  had  delivered  them  from  the  lions. 

Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart  to  Christiana,  and  to 
Mercy,  My  Lord  hath  sent  each  of  _   .  . 

J  J  He  brings  a  to- 

you  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  also  some     ken  from  ins 

,      ■,  ^1  -^i  1         Lord  with  him. 

parched  corn,  together  with  a  couple 

of  pomegranates ;  he  has  also  sent  the  boys  some 

figs  and  raisins,  to  refresh  you  in  your  way.5 

Then  they  addressed  themselves  to  their  journey; 
and  Prudence  and  Piety  went  along  with  them. 
When  they  came  at  the  gate,  Christiana  asked  the 
Porter  if  any  of  late  went  by  ?  He  said,  No  ;  only 
one  some  time  since,  who  also  told  me,  that  of  late 
there  had  been  a  great  robbery  com- 

...    ,         xt       t^-       •    1  •    t  Robbery, 

mitted  on  the  lung  s  highway,  as  you 

go ;  but,  he  said,  the  thieves  are  taken,  and  will 

shortly  be  tried  for  their  lives.6     Then  Christiana 

and  Mercy  were  afraid ;  but  Matthew  said,  Mother, 

fear  nothing,  as  long  as  Mr.  Great-heart  is  to  go 

with  us,  and  to  be  our  conductor. 

Then  said  Christiana  to  the  Porter,  Sir,  I  am 

much  obliged  to  you  for  all  the  kind-   Christianatakcs 

nesses  that  you  have  showed  me  since     herleaveoftho 

I  came  hither ;  and  also  for  that  you 

have  been  so  loving  and  kind  to  my  children ;   1 


on  the  nervous  system,  and  of  all  instruments  the  organ  is  the 
most  impressive.  The  Christian's  inquiry  is,  whether  sensations 
so  produced  assist  the  soul  in  holding  communion  with  the  Father 
of  spirits,  or  whether,  uuder  our  spiritual  dispensation,  the  Holy 
Ghost  makes  use  of  such  means  to  promote  intercourse  between 
our  spirits  and  the  uuseen  hierarchies  of  heaven. — (Ed.) 

5  O  how  reviving  and  refreshing  are  those  love-tokens  from 
our  Lordl  Great-heart  never  comes  empty-handed.  He 
always  inspires  with  courage  and  confidence.  Let  us  look 
more  into,  and  heartily  believe  the  Word  of  truth  and  grace  ; 
and  cry  more  to  our  precious  Immauuel,  and  we  shall  have 
more  of  Great-heart's  company.  It  is  but  sad  travelling  with- 
out him. — (Mason.) 

8  What  this  great  robbery  was,  whether  spiritual  or  tem- 
poral, is  left  to  the  reader  to  imagine.  The  sufferings  of  the 
Dissenters  were  awfully  severe  at  this  time.  Had  it  been  a  year 
later,  we  might  have  guessed  it  to  have  referred  to  the  suffer- 
ings of  that  pious,  excellent  woman,  Elizabeth  Gaunt,  who  was 
burnt,  October  23, 1 685.  She  was  a  Baptist,  and  cruelly  mar- 
tyred. Penn,  the  Quaker,  saw  her  die.  '  She  laid  the  straw 
about  her  for  burning  her  speedily,  and  behaved  herself  in  such 
a  manner  that  all  the  spectators  melted  in  tears.' — (Ed.) 


THE    riLGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


205 


bow  not  how  to  gratify  your  kindness.  Where- 
fore, pray,  as  a  token  of  my  respects  to  you,  accept 
of  this  small  mite ;  so  she  put  a  gold  angel  in  his 
The  Porter's  hand,  and  he  made  her  a  low  obeis- 
btosing.  nnce>  am]  g.^;^  Lct  t],v  garments  he 
always  white,  and  let  thy  head  want  no  ointment.1 
Let  Mercy  live,  and  not  die,  and  let  not  her  works 
he  few.  And  to  the  hoys  he  said,  Do  you  fly  youth- 
ful lusts,  and  follow  after  godliness  with  them  that 
are  grave  and  wise ;  so  shall  you  put  gladness  into 
your  mother's  heart,  and  ohtain  praise  of  all  that 
are  sober-minded.  So  they  thanked  the  Porter, 
and  departed. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  they  went  forward 
until  they  were  come  to  the  hrow  of  the  hill,  where 
Piety,  bethinking  herself,  cried  out,  Alas!  I  have 
forgot  what  I  intended  to  bestow  upon  Christiana 
and  her  companions ;  I  will  go  back  and  fetch  it. 
So  she  ran  and  fetched  it.  While  she  was  gone, 
Christiana  thought  she  heard  in  a  grove,  a  little 
way  off,  on  the  right  hand,  a  most  curious  melo- 
dious note,  with  words  much  like  these — 

Through  all  my  life  thy  favour  is 

So  frankly  show'd  to  me, 
That  in  thy  house  for  evermore 

My  dwelling-place  shall  be. 

And,  listening  still,  she  thought  she  heard  an- 
other answer  it,  saying — 

For  why  ?     The  Lord  our  God  is  good, 
His  mercy  is  for  ever  sure; 
His  truth  at  all  times  firmly  stood, 
And  shall  from  age  to  age  endure. 

So  Christiana  asked  Prudence  what  it  was  that 
made  those  curious  notes  ?     They  are,  said  she, 


1  .Mr.  Ivimey  is  of  opinion  that  by  this  Bunyan  sanctioned 
a  hireling  ministry,  but  it  appears  more  to  refer  to  the  common 
custom  of  rewarding  servants  to  whom  you  have  given  trouble. 
He  adduces  Lu.  x.  7;  1  Ti.  v.  18 ;  and  1  Co.  ix.  11-14.  It 
is  a  subject  of  considerable  difficulty ;  but  how  is  it  that  no 
minister  ever  thinks  of  referring  to  the  plainest  passage  upon 
this  subject  in  the  New  Testament?  It  is  Ac.  xx.  17-38, 
especially  ver.  33-35.  The  angel  was  a  gold  coin,  in  value 
half  a  sovereign. — (Ed.) 

2  Such  mountains  round  about  this  house  do  stand 
As  one  from  thence  may  see  the  Holy  Land.1 
Her  fields  are  fertile,  do  abound  with  corn; 
The  lilies  fair  her  valleys  do  adorn. - 
The  birds  that  do  come  hither  every  spring, 
For  birds,  they  are  the  very  best  that  Brag.3 
Her  friends,  her  neighbours  too,  do  call  her  blest  ,4 
Angels  do  here  go  by,  turn  in,  and  rest.' 
The  road  to  paradise  lies  by  her  gate,9 
Here  pilgrims  do  themselves  accommodate 
With  bed  and  board;  and  do  such  stories  tell, 
As  do  for  truth  and  profit  all  excel. 

Nor  doth  the  porter  here  say  any  nay, 
That  hither  would  turn  in,  that  here  would  stay. 
This  house  is  rent  free ;  here  the  man  may  dwell 
That  loves  his  landlord,  rules  his  passions  well. 

—  (Bunyan's  House  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  579.) 


»  ?<.  c\xv.  2. 
'  P..  ihui.  i. 


Ca.  ii.  1. 
lie.  x.u.  2. 


Ca.  ii.  11,12. 
Gcxxviii.  17. 


our  country  birds ;  they  sing  these  notes  but  sel- 
dom, except  it  be  at  the  spring,  when  the  flowers 
appear,  and  the  sun  shines  warm,  and  then  you 
may  hear  them  all  day  long.-'  Ca,  ii.  n,  12.  1  often, 
said  she,  go  out  to  hear  them;  we  also  ofttimes 
keep  them  tame  in  our  house.  They  are  very  fine 
company  for  us  when  we  are  melancholy;  also 
they  make  the  woods,  and  groves,  and.  solitary 
places,  places  desirous  to  be  in.8 

By  this  time  Piety  was  come  again  ;  so  she  said 
to  Christiana,  Look  here,  I  have  piety 
brought  thee  a  scheme  of  all  those  ^'  XS^al 
things  that  thou  hast  seen  at  our  parting. 
house,  upon  which  thou  mayest  look  when  thou 
tindest  thyself  forgetful,  and  call  those  things 
again  to  remembrance-  for  thy  edification  and 
comfort.4 

Now  they  began  to  go  down  the  hill  into  the 
Valley  of  Humiliation.  It  was  a  steep  j^rt  Part, 
hill,  and  the  way  was  slippery ;  but  P- 1U- 
they  were  very  careful,  so  they  got  down  pretty 
well.  When  they  were  down  in  the  Valley,5  Piety 
said  to  Christiana,  This  is  the  place  where  Chris- 
tian your  husband,  met  with  the  foul  fiend  Apollyon, 
and  where  they  had  that  dreadful  fight  that  they 
had ;  I  know  you  cannot  but  have  heard  thereof. 
But  be  of  good  courage,  as  long  as  you  have  here 
Mr.  Great-heart  to  be  your  guide  and  conductor, 
we  hope  you  will  fare  the  better.  So  when  these 
two  had  committed  the  Pilgrims  unto  the  conduct 
of  their  guide,  he  went  forward,  and  they  went 
after. 

Great-heart.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  We 


3  It  is  sweet  melody  when  we  can  sing  with  grace  in  the 
heart.  The  joy  arising  from  God's  free  grace  and  pardoning 
love,  is  greater  than  the  joy  of  harvest,  or  of  one  who  rejoices 
when  he  divides  the  spoil. — (J.  B.)  Those  joyful  notes  Bpring 
from  a  sense  of  nearness  to  the  Lord,  and  a  firm  confidence  in 
his  Divine  truth  and  everlasting  mercy.  O  when  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  shines  warmly  on  the  soul,  it  makes  the  pil- 
grims sing  most  sweetly  I  These  songs  approach  very  nearly 
to  the  heavenly  music  in  the  realm  of  glory. —  (Mason.) 

4  Forgetfulness  makes  things  nothings.  It  makes  us  as  if 
things  had  never  been ;  and  so  takes  away  from  the  soul  one 
great  means  of  stay,  support,  and  encouragement.  Winn 
David  was  dejected,  the  remembrance  of  the  hill  Hcrmon  was 
his  stay.  ^Yhen  he  was  to  go  out  against  Goliah,  the  remem- 
brance of  the  lion  and  the  bear  was  bis  support.  The  recovery 
of  a  backslider  usually  begins  at  the  remembrance  of  former 
things. —  (Bunyan's  Holy  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  507.) 

5  After  being  thus  highly  favoured  with  sensible  comforts, 
in  the  views  of  faith,  the  comforts  of  hope,  and  the  joy  of 
love,  the  next  step  these  pilgrims  are  to  take  is  down  the 
Hill  Difficulty,  into  the  Valley  of  Humiliation.  What  doth 
this  place  signify  ?  A  deep  and  abiding  sight  and  sense  of 
our  ruined  state,  lost  condition,  and  desperate  eJrctunstances, 
as  fallen  sinners.  This  is  absolutely  neci  ssary,  lest  we  should 
think  more  highly  of  ourselves  than  we  ought  to  think.  For 
the  Lord  oft  favours  us  with  manifestations  of  his  love,  and  the 
comforts  of  his  Spirit;  but,  through  the  corruption  of  our 
nature,  we  are  prone  to  be  exalted  in  ourselves,  and,  as  it 
were,  intoxicated  by  them.  Hence  we  are  exhorted  '  to  think 
soberly.'  Eo.  xii.  3'.  Tlii*  the  Valley  of  Humiliation  caiuei 
us  to  do. —  (.Masou.) 


206 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


need  not  to  be  so  afraid  of  tliis  Valley,  for  here  is 

Mr.  Great-heart   nothing  to  hurt  us,  unless  we  procure  it 

UuSion.°f  t0  ourselves.    It  is  true,  Christian  did 

First  Part,     here  meet  with  Apollyon,  with  whom 

page  in.      he  a]so  h^  a  gore  comDat .  hut  that 

fray  was  the  fruit  of  those  slips  that  he  got  in  his 
going  down  the  hill ;  for  they  that  get  slips  there, 
must  look  for  combats  here.  And  hence  it  is, 
that  this  Valley  has  got  so  hard  a  name.  For  the 
common  people,  when  they  hear  that  some  fright- 
ful thing  has  befallen  such  a  one  in  such  a  place, 
are  of  an  opinion,  that  that  place  is  haunted  with 
some  foul  fiend,  or  evil  spirit ;  when,  alas !  it  is 
for  the  fruit  of  their  doing,  that  such  things  do 
befall  them  there. 

This  Valley  of  Humiliation  is  of  itself  as  fruit- 
_,,  ,      ful  a  place,  as  any  the  crow  flies  over ; 

The  reason  why  , 

Christian  was   and  I  am  persuaded,  if  we  could  hit 

bo  beset  here.  .,  .    ,  ,     n     ,  , 

upon  it,  we  might  find  somewhere 
hereabouts,  something  that  might  give  us  an  account 
why  Christian  was  so  hardly  beset  in  this  place. 

Then  James  said  to  his  mother,   Lo,  yonder 
.    ...      ...        stands  a  pillar,  and  it  looks  as  if  sonie- 

A.  pillar  with  an  i  / 

inscription  on  thing  was  written  thereon ;  let  us  go 
and  see  what  it  is.  So  they  went, 
and  found  there  written,  '  Let  Christian's  slips, 
before  he  came  hither,  and  the  battles  that  he  met 
with  in  this  place,  be  a  warning  to  those  that  come 
after.'  Lo,  said  their  guide,  did  not  I  tell  you, 
that  there  was  something  hereabouts,  that  would 
give  intimation  of  the  reason  why  Christian  was  so 
hard  beset  in  this  place?  Then,  turning  himself 
to  Christiana,  he  said,  No  disparagement  to  Chris- 
tian, more  than  to  many  others,  whose  hap  and 
lot  his  was ;  for  it  is  easier  going  up,  than  down 
this  hill,  and  that  can  be  said  but  of  few  hills  in 
all  these  parts  of  the  world.  But  we  will  leave 
the  good  man,  he  is  at  rest,  he  also  had  a  brave 
victory  over  his  enemy ;  let  him  grant  that  dwelleth 
above,  that  we  fare  no  worse,  when  we  come  to  be 
tried,  than  he. 

But  we  will  come  again  to  this  Valley  of  Humi- 
This  VaUey  a  liation.     It  is  the  best  and  most  useful 

brave  place.         pjece  Qf  groun(J  JQ  all  tuoge  partg#       jt 


1  Thu3  beautifully  does  our  author  describe  the  grace  of 
humility.  O  that  every  reader  may  know  its  excellence  by 
happy  experience  1 — (Burder.) 

2  These  are  the  rare  times ;  above  all,  when  I  can  go  to 
God  as  the  Publican,  sensible  of  his  glorious  majesty,  sensible 
of  my  misery,  and  bear  up  and  affectionately  cry,  '  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner.'  For  my  part,  I  find  it  oue  of  the 
hardest  things  I  can  put  my  soul  upon,  when  warmly  sensible 
that  I  am  a  sinner,  to  come  to  God  for  a  share  in  mercy  and 
grace;  I  cannot  but  with  a  thousand  tears  say,  '  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  a  sinner.' — (Buuyan's  Pharisee  and  Publican, 
vol.  ii.  p.  261.) 

8  Though  this  Valley  of  Humiliation,  or  a  clear  sight  and 
abiding  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of  our  nature,  and  the  wicked- 
ness of  our  hearts,  may  be  very  terrifying  to  pilgrims,  after 
they  have  been  favoured  with  peace  and  joy,  and  comforted  by 
the  views  of  faith  and  hope,  yet  it  is  a  very  safe  place;  and 


is  fat  ground,  and,  as  you  see,  consisteth  much  in 
meadows ;  and  if  a  man  was  to  come  here  in  the 
summer-time,  as  we  do  now,  if  he  knew  not  any- 
thing before,  thereof,  and  if  he  also  delighted  him- 
self in  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  he  might  see  that 
that  would  be  delightful  to  him.  Behold  how 
green  this  Valley  is,  also  how  beautified  with 
lilies.1  Ca.  ii.  l.  I  have  also  known  many  labouring 
men  that  have  got  good  estates  in  this  Valley  of 
Humiliation  ('  for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but 
gives  more,  more  grace  unto  the  humble,'  Ja.  iv.6; 
l  Pe.  t.  5),  for  indeed  it  is  a  very  fruitful   „ 

.,  .  .  J  Men   thrive   in 

soil,  and  doth  bring  forth  by  handfuls.  the  Valley  of 
Some  also  have  wished,  that  the  next 
way  to  their  Father's  house  were  here,  that  they 
might  be  troubled  no  more  with  either  hills  or 
mountaius  to  go  over ;  but  the  way  is  the  way, 
and  there  is  an  end.3 

Now,  as  they  were  going  along,  and  talking, 
they  espied  a  boy  feeding  his  father's  sheep.  The 
boy  was  in  very  mean  clothes,  but  of  a  very  fresh 
and  well-favoured  countenance  ;  and  as  he  sat  by 
himself,  he  sang.  Hark,  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  to 
what  the  shepherd's  boy  saith.  So  they  hearkened, 
and  he  said — 

He  that  is  down  needs  fear  no  fall ; 

He  that  is  low,  no  pride; 
He  that  is  humble,  ever  shall 

Have  God  to  be  his  guide.  PM.  iv.  12, 13. 

I  am  content  with  what  I  have, 

Little  be  it,  or  much ; 
And,  Lord,  contentment  still  I  crave, 

Because  thou  savest  such. 
Fulness  to  such  a  burden  is, 

That  go  on  pilgrimage ; 
Here  little,  and  hereafter  bliss, 

Is  best  from  age  to  age.4  lie.  xiii.  5. 

Then  said  the  guide,  Do  you  hear  him?  I  will 
dare  to  say,  that  this  boy  lives  a  merrier  life,  and 
wears  more  of  that  herb  called  heart's-ease  in  his 
bosom,  than  he  that  is  clad  in  silk  and  velvet  ;5 
but  we  will  proceed  in  our  discourse. 


though,  at  first  entering  into  it,  and  seeing  more  of  themselves 
than  was  ever  before  showed  them,  they  may  fear  and  tremble, 
yet,  after  some  continuing  here,  they  are  more  reconciled  and 
contented;  for  here  they  find  the  visits  of  their  Lord,  and  in 
the  depths  of  their  humility,  they  behold  the  heights  of  his 
love  and  the  depths  of  his  mercy,  and  cry  out  in  joy,  Where 
sin  aboundeth,  grace  superabounds.  Though  sin  abounds  in 
me,  the  grace  of  Jesus  superabounds  towards  me.  Though  I 
am  emptied  of  all,  yet  I  have  an  inexhaustible  fulness  in  Jesus, 
to  supply  me  with  all  I  want  and  all  I  hope. — (Mason.) 

4  The  humble  man  is  contented ;  if  his  estate  be  low,  his 
heart  is  lower  still.  He  that  is  little  in  his  own  eyes,  will 
not  be  much  troubled  at  being  little  in  the  eyes  of  others. — 
(Watson.)  Those  circumstances  that  will  not  disturb  a  humble 
man's  sleep,  will  break  a  proud  man's  heart. — (Matt.  Heury.) 
They  that  get  slips  in  going  down  the  hill,  or  would  hide  his 
descent  by  deception,  or  repine  at  it,  must  look  for  combats 
when  in  the  valley. —  (Ivimey.) 

6  Perhaps  the  shepherd's  boy  may  refer  to  the  obscure  but 
quiet  station  of  some  pastors  over  small  congregations,  who 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


207 


Tn  this  Valley  our  Lord  formerly  had  liis  country 

house  ;  he  loved  much  to  he  here ;  he 

the  flesh,0!™!    loved  also  to  walk  these  meadows,  for 

}!oSUSeC(inUtrte   lic  found  tlie  air  was  Peasant.1     Be- 

VaUey  of  liu-    sides,  here  a  man  shall  he  free  from 

initiation.  .  -  .       ,  .  „ 

the  noise,  and  from  the  hurryings  ot 
this  life.  All  states  are  full  of  noise  and  con- 
fusion, only  the  Valley  of  Humiliation  is  that 
empty  and  solitary  place.  Here  a  man  shall  not 
be  so  let  and  hindered  in  his  contemplation,  as  in 
other  places  he  is  apt  to  be.  This  is  a  Valley  that 
nobody  walks  in,  but  those  that  love  a  pilgrim's 
life.  And  though  Christian  had  the  hard  hap  to 
meet  here  with  Apollyon,  and  to  enter  with  him  a 
brisk  encounter,  yet  I  must  tell  you,  that  in  former 
times  men  have  met  with  angels  here,  have  found 
pearls  here,  and  have  in  this  place  found  the  words 

of  life.2    Ho.  xii.  4,  5. 

Did  I  say,  our  Lord  had  here  in  former  days 
his  country-house,  and  that  he  loved  here  to  walk  ? 
I  will  add,  in  this  place,  and  to  the  people  that 
live,  and  trace  these  grounds,  he  has  left  a  yearly 
revenue,  to  be  faithfully  paid  them  at  certain 
seasons,  for  their  maintenance  by  the  way,  and  for 
their  further  encouragement  to  go  on  in  their 
pilgrimage.   Matxi.  29. 

Samuel.3  Now,  as  they  went  on,  Samuel  said 
to  Mr.  Great-heart ;  Sir,  I  perceive  that  in  this 
Valley  my  father  and  Apollyon  had  their  battle ; 
but  whereabout  was  the  fight?  for  I  perceive  this 
Valley  is  large. 

Great-heart.  Your  father  had  that  battle  with 
Apollvon,  at  a  place  vonder,  before 

Forgetful  Green.        r  .   J  r  J      .      . ,  , 

us,  in  a  narrow  passage,  just  beyond 
Forgetful  Green.4     And  indeed,  that  place  is  the 


live  almost  unknown  to  their  brethren,  but  are,  iu  a  measure, 
useful  and  very  comfortable. —  (Scott.) 

1  Our  Lord  chose  retirement,  poverty,  and  an  obscure 
station;  remote  from  bustle,  and  favourable  to  devotion;  so 
that  his  appearance  in  a  public  character,  and  in  crowded 
scenes,  for  the  good  of  mankind  and  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
was  a  part  of  his  self-denial,  in  which  '  he  pleased  not  himself.' 
Some  are  banished  into  this  valley,  but  the  poor  in  spirit  love 
to  walk  in  it ;  and  though  some  believers  here  struggle  with 
distressing  temptations,  others,  in  passing  through  it,  enjoy 
much  communion  with  God. —  (Scott.) 

2  Ever  remember  the  words  of  our  Lord,  '  It  is  enough  for 
the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  master.'  If  your  Lord  made  it 
his  chief  delight  to  be  in  this  Valley  of  Humiliation,  learn 
from  his  example  to  prize  this  valley.  Though  you  may  meet 
with  an  Apollyon  or  a  destroyer  here,  yet  you  are  safe  in  the 
arms  and  under  the  power  of  your  all-conquering  Lord:  '  Pot 
though  the  Lord  is  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  Ion  ly.' 
Therefore  you  may  add  with  David,  'Though  I  walk  in  the 
midst  of  trouble,  thou  wilt  revive  me :  thou  shalt  stretch 
lorth  thine  hand  against  the  wrath  of  mine  enemies,  and  thy 
right  hand  shall  save  me.'  Fs.  exxxviii.  7.  Such  are  the  con- 
fidence, the  reasoning,  and  the  pleading  of  humble  souls  iu  the 
power  of  faith,  which  leads  them  quite  out  of  themselves  to 
their  Lord. —  (Mason.) 

3  In  the  first  edition  this  name  is  printed  '  Simon ;'  it  was 
corrected  to  Samuel  in  Bunyan's  later  editions. — (Ed.) 

4  It  is  marvellous  to  see  how  some  men  are  led  captive  by- 


most  dangerous  place  in  all  these  parts.  For  if 
at  any  time  the  pilgrims  meet  wuh  any  brunt,  it 
is  when  they  forget  what  favours  they  have  re- 
ceived, and  how  unworthy  they  are  of  them.0  This 
is  the  place  also,  where  others  have  been  hard  put 
to  it;  but  more  of  the  place  when  we  are  come  to 
it ;  for  I  persuade  myself,  that  to  this  day  there 
remains  either  some  sign  of  the  battle,  or  some 
monument  to  testify  that  such  a  battle  there  was 
fought. 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  I  think  I  am  as  well 
in  this  Valley,  as  I  have  been  anywhere  else  in  all 
our  journey;  the  place,  methinks,  suits  with  my 
spirit.  I  love  to  be  in  such  places  Humility  a 
where  there  is  no  rattling  with  coaches,  8wect  srace- 
nor  rumbling  with  wheels ;  methinks,  here  one 
may,  without  much  molestation,  be  thinking  what 
he  is,  whence  he  came,  what  he  has  done,  and  to 
what  the  King  has  called  him ;  here  one  may 
think,  and  break  at  heart,  and  melt  in  one's  spirit, 
until  one's  eyes  become  like  '  the  fish-pools  of 
Heshbon.'  Ca.  vii.  4.  They  that  go  rightly  through 
this  Valley  of  Baca,  make  it  a  well,  the  rain  that 
God  sends  down  from  heaven  upon  them  that  are 
here,  also  filleth  the  pools,  rs.  lxxxiv.  e,  7.  This 
Valley  is  that  from  whence  also  the  King  will  give 
to  his  their  vineyards,  Ho.  ii.  is ;  and  they  that  go 
through  it,  shall  sing,  as  Christian  did,  for  all  he 
met  with  Apollyon. 

Great-heart.  It  is   true,  said   their  guide,  I 
have  gone  through  this  Valley  many 
a   time,   and  never  was  better  than         e*f  i™meL 
when  here. 

I  have  also  been  a  conductor  to  several  pilgrims, 
and  they  have  confessed  the  same.  '  To  this  man 
will  I  look  (saith  the  King),  even  to  him  that  is 


forgetfulness.  Those  that  some  time  thought  no  pains  too 
much,  no  way  too  far,  no  hazards  too  great  to  run  for  eternal 
life,  become  as  if  they  had  never  thought  of  such  things. 
Should  one  say  to  some — Ait  not  thou  that  man  1  saw  crying 
out  under  a  sermon,  'What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved?'  that  I 
heard  speak  well  of  the  holy  Word  of  God?  how  askew  they 
will  look  upon  one.  Or  if  they  acknowledge  that  such  things 
were  with  them  once,  they  do  it  more  like  dejected  ghosts  thau 
as  men. — (Bunyan's  Ho///  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  507.) 

s  0  pilgrims,  attend  to  this  I  Pride  and  ingratitude  go 
hand  in  hand.  Study,  ever  study  the  favours  of  your  Lord ; 
how  freely  they  are  bestowed  upon  you,  and  how  utterly  un- 
worthy you  are  of  the  least  of  them.  Beware  of  Forgetful 
Green.  Many,  after  going  some  way  on  pilgrimage,  get  into 
this  Green,  and  continue  here;  and  talk  of  their  own  faithful- 
ness to  grace  received,  the  merit  of  their  works,  and  a  second 
justification  by  their  works,  &c.  Hence  it  is  plain  that  they 
are  fallen  asleep  on  this  Forgetful  Green,  and  talk  incoherently, 
as  men  do  in  their  sleep ;  for  they  fra-get  that  they  are  still 
sinners— poor,  needy,  wretched  sinners;  and  that  they  want 
the  blood  of  Christ  to  cleanse  them,  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
to  justify  them,  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  keep  them  humble, 
and  to  enable  them  to  live  by  faith  upon  the  fulness  of  Christ 
to  sanctify  them,  as  much  as  they  did  when  they  first  set  out  as 
pilgrims.  O  it  is  a  most  blessed  thing  to  be  kept  mindful  of 
what  we  are,  and  of  the  Lord's  free  grace  aud  unmerited 
goodness  to  us  1 — (Mason.) 


208 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  trembleth  at  my 
word. ' X   Is.  Lsvi.  2. 

Now  they  were  come  to  tlie  place  where  the 
afore-mentioned  battle  was  fought.  Then  said 
the  guide  to  Christiana,  her  children,  and  Mercy, 
This  is  the  place,  on  this  ground  Christian  stood, 
and  up  there  came  Apollyon  against  him.  And 
look,  did  not  I  tell  you?  here  is  some 

The  place  where       e  ,        ,         u      11        i  .1 

Christian  and   ot  your  husband  s  blood  upon  these 


the  Rend  did    gt()nes  to  thjs  dfty  .    be]10lJ)  alSOj  how 

signs   of  the   here  and  there  are  yet  to  bs  seen  upi 


fight.        Some 

signs 

battle  remain. 


the  place,  some  of  the  shivers  of  Apoll- 
yon's  broken  darts;  see  also,  how  they  did  beat 
the  ground  with  their  feet  as  they  fought,  to  make 
good  their  places  against  each  other ;  how  also, 
with  their  by-blows,  they  did  split  the  very  stones 
in  pieces.  Verily,  Christian  did  here  play  the 
man,  and  showed  himself  as  stout,  as  could,  had  he 
been  there,  even  Hercules  himself.2  When  Apoll- 
yon was  beat,  he  made  his  retreat  to  the  next 
Valley,  that  is  called,  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow 
of  Death,  unto  which  we  shall  come  anon.3 

Lo,  yonder  also  stands  a  monument,  on  which 
A  monument  of  is  engraven  this  battle,  and  Christian's 

the  battle,  victory,  to  his  fame  throughout  all 
ages.  So,  because  it  stood  just  on  the  wayside 
before  them,  they  stepped  to  it,  and  read  the 
writing,  which  word  for  word  was  this — 

Hard  by,  here  was  a  battle  fought, 
Most  strange,  and  yet  most  true;4 
A    mmument    Christian  and  Apollyon  sought 
of  Christian's        Each  other  to  subdue, 
victory.  rp^g  man  g0  }jrave]y  piay'j  the  man, 

He  made  the  fiend  to  fly ; 
Of  which  a  monument  I  stand, 
The  same  to  testify. 

When  they  had  passed  by  this  place,  they  came 

First  Part,     upon  the  borders  of  the  Shadow  of 

p.  114..        Death ;  and  this  Valley  was  longer  than 

the  other ;  a  place,  also,'  most  strangely  haunted 

1  '  Trembles  at  God's  "Word,'  so  as  not  to  dare  pick  and 
choose  which  doctrines  he  will  receive,  and  which  reject. 
Would  you  act  thus  by  God's  holy  commandments  ?  Would 
you  choose  one  and  reject  another?  Are  they  not  all  of  equal 
authority  ?  And  are  not  all  his  holy  doctrines  also  stamped 
with  the  same  Divine  sanction?  Where  there  is  true  faith  in 
them,  it  will  make  a  man  tremble  to  act  thus  by  God's  Word  1 
— (Mason.) 

2  We  ought  to  study  the  records  of  the  temptations,  con- 
flicts, faith,  patience,  and  victories  of  believers ;  mark  their 
wounds,  by  what  misconduct  they  were  occasioned,  that  we 
may  watch  and  pray  lest  wc  fall  in  like  manner.  Learn  how 
they  repelled  the  assaults  of  the  tempter,  that  we  may  learn  to 
resist  him  steadfast  in  the  faith.  Their  triumphs  should 
animate  us  to  keep  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  we  may 
be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day. — (Scott.) 

3  If  Satan  be  driven  back  from  one  attack,  prepare  for 
another.  Bless  God  for  your  armour.  Never  put  it  off. — 
(Mason.) 

*  If  this  monument  refers  to  the  experience  of  Bunyan,  as 
exhibited  in  his  Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief  of  Sinners,  it  is 
well  called,  '  Most  strange,  and  yet  most  true.' — (Ed.) 


with  evil  things,  as  many  are  able  to  testify  ;5  but 
these  women  and  children  went  the  better  through 
it,  because  they  had  daylight,  and  because  Mr. 
Great-heart  was  their  conductor. 

When  they  were  entered  upon  this  Valley,  they 

thought  that  they  heard  a  groaning,  „ 

°  ,       ,  Groamngs  heard, 

as  of  dead  men,  a  very  great  groan- 
ing. They  thought,  also,  they  did  hear  words  of 
lamentation  spoken,  as  of  some  in  extreme  torment. 
These  things  made  the  boys  to  quake,  the  women 
also  looked  pale  and  wan  ;  but  their  guide  bid  them 
be  of  good  comfort. 

So  theywent  on  a  little  further,  and  they  thought 
that  they  felt  the  ground  begin  to  shake  The  oround 
under  them,  as  if  some  hollow  place  shakes. 
was  there  ;  they  heard  also  a  kind  of  a  hissing,  as 
of  serpents,  but  nothing  as  yet  appeared.  Then 
said  the  boys,  Are  we  not  yet  at  the  end  of  this 
doleful  place?  But  the  guide  also  bid  them  b« 
of  good  courage,  and  look  well  to  their  feet,  lest 
haply,  said  he,  you  be  taken  in  some  snare.6 

Now  James  began  to  be  sick,  but  I  think  the 
cause  thereof  was  fear ;  so  his  mother  James  s\cY  with 
gave  him  some  of  that  glass  of  spirits  fcar- 

that  she  bad  given  her  at  the  Interpreter's  house, 
and  three  of  the  pills  that  Mr.  Skill  had  prepared, 
and  the  boy  began  to  revive.      Thus  they  went  on, 
till  they  came  to  about  the  middle  of  the  Valley, 
and  then  Christiana  said,  Methinks  I     The  Fiend 
see  something  yonder  upon  the  road  be-       appears. 
fore  us,  a  thing  of  such  a  shape  such  as  I  have  not 
seen.     Then  said  Joseph,  Mother,  what  is  it?     An 
ugly  thing,  child ;  an  ugly  thing,  said  she.     But, 
mother,  what  is  it  like?  said  he.      It   The  Pilgrims 
is  like  I  cannot  tell  what,  said  she.      areafriiid- 
And  now  it  was  but  a  little  way  off;  then  said  she, 
It  is  nigh. 

Well,  well,  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  Let  them  that 
are  most  afraid,  keep  close  to  me.  So  Great-heart  en- 
the  fiend  came  on,  and  the  conductor  images  them. 
met  it;  but  when  it  Avas  just  come  to  him,  it 
vanished  to  all  their  sights.  Then  remembered 
they  what  had  been  said  some  time  ago,  '  Resist 
the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you.'  Ja.  iv.  7. 

They  went  therefore  on,  as  being  a  little 
refreshed ;    but    they  had    not    gone    far,    before 

Mercy,  looking  behind  her,  saw,  as  she        ,  .. 

V  °  ,  .  i-i  v  A  lion, 

thought,   something  most  like  a  lion, 


6  This  valley  represents  the  inward  distress,  conflict,  and 
alarm,  arising  from  darkness  and  insensibility  of  mind.  It 
varies  according  to  the  constitution,  animal  spirits,  health, 
education,  and  strength  of  mind  of  different  persons. — (Scott.) 

6  None  know  the  distress,  anguish,  and  fear  that  haunt  pil- 
grims in  this  valley,  but  those  who  have  been  in  it.  The 
hissings,  revilings,  aud  injections  of  that  old  serpent,  with  all 
his  infernal  malice,  seem  to  be  let  loose  upon  pilgrims  in  this 
valley.  Asaph  seems  to  be  walking  in  this  valley  when  he 
says,  'As  for  me,  my  feet  were  almost  gone,  my  steps  had  well 
nigh  slipped.'  Ps.  hxiii.  2.— (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


209 


fend  it  came  a  great  padding  pace  after ;  and  it  hail 
n  hollow  voice  of  roaring;  and  at  every  roar  that 
it  gave,  it  made  all  the  Valley  echo,  and  their 
hearts  to  aehc,  save  the  heart  of  him  that  was  their 
guide.  So  it  came  up  ;  and  Mr.  Great-heart  went 
behind,  and  put  the  Pilgrims  all  before  him.  The 
lion  also  came  on  apace,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  ad- 
dressed himself  to  give  him  battle.  But  when  he 
saw  that  it  was  determined  that  resistance  should 
be  made,  he  also  drew  back,  and  came  no  further.1 

I  Te.  v.  8,  9. 

Then  they  went  on  again,  and  their  conductor 
did  go  before  them,  till  they  came  at  a  place  where 

A  pit  and  dark-  was  cast  UP   a   lMt    trie  whole    breadth 

uess-  of  the  way ;  and,  before  they  could  be 

prepared  to  go  over  that,  a  great  mist  and  dark- 
ness fell  upon  them,  so  that  they  could  not  see. 
Then  said  the  Pilgrims,  Alas !  now  what  shall  we 
do?  But  their  guide  made  answer,  Fear  not, 
stand  still,  and  see  what  an  end  will  be  put  to  this 
also.  So  they  staid  there,  because  their  path  was 
marred.  They  then  also  thought  that  they  did 
hear  more  apparently  the  noise  and  rushing  of  the 
enemies ;  the  lire,  also,  and  the  smoke  of  the  pit, 
was  much  easier  to  be  discerned.2  Then  said 
Christiana  to  Mercy,  Now  I  see  what  my  poor 
Christiana  now  husband  went  through  ;  I  have  heard 
knows  what  her  much  of  this  place,  but  I  never  was 

husband  telt.       ,  .     „  ^  , 

here  betore  now.  Poor  man,  lie  went 
here  all  alone  in  the  night ;  he  had  night  almost 
quite  through  the  way;  also,  these  fiends  were 
busy  about  him,  as  if  they  would  have  torn  him  in 
pieces.  Many  have  spoke  of  it,  but  none  can  tell 
what  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death  should 
mean,  until  they  come  in  it  themselves.  '  The 
heart  knows  its  own  bitterness ;  and  a  stranger 
intermeddleth  not  with  its  joy.'  To  be  here  is  a 
fearful  thing. 

Great-heart.  This  is  like  doing  business  in 
Great-heart's  great  waters,  or  like  going  down  into 
rcP'y-  the  deep ;  this  is  like  being  in  the 
heart  of  the  sea,  and  like  going  down  to  the  bot- 
toms of  the  mountains ;  now  it  seems  as  if  the 
earth,  with  its  bars,  were  about  us  for  ever.  But 
let  them  that  walk  in  darkness,  and  have  no  light, 
trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  upon  their 


1  Satan  is  often  most  dreadful  at  a  distance,  and,  courage- 
ously resisted,  will  not  advance  nearer.  This  advice  is  ever 
needful,  '  Be  sober ;  be  vigilant.'  These  pilgrims  kept  up  their 
watch.  Satan  did  come  upon  them  unawares ;  still  they  heard 
his  approach ;  they  were  prepared  for  his  attack ;  lo,  Satan 
drew  back. — (Mason.) 

-  Miserable,  uncomfortable  walking;  with  a  pit  before  us, 
and  darkness  around,  yea,  within  us,  and  hell  seeming  to 
move  from  beneath  to  meet  us  who  have  been  left  to  the  dark- 
ness of  our  nature,  the  terrors  of  a  fiery  law,  the  sense  of  guilt, 
and  the  fear  of  hell !  0  what  an  unspeakable  mercy,  iusuch 
a  distressing  season,  to  have  an  Almighty  Saviour  to  look  to, 
and  call  upon  for  safety  and  salvation  I  '  For  he  will  hear  our 
cry  and  save  us.'  Ps.  cxlv.  19. — i^Masou.) 

VOL.  III. 


God.3  is.  l.  io.  For  my  part,  as  I  have  told  you 
already,  I  have  gone  often  through  this  Valley, 
and  have  been  much  harder  put  to  it  than  now  I 
am,  and  yet  you  see  I  am  alive.  I  would  not 
boast,  for  that  1  am  not  mine  own  saviour ;  but  I 
trust  we  shall  have  a  good  deliverance.  Come,  let 
us  pray  for  light  to  him  that  can  lighten  our  dark- 
ness, and  that  can  rebuke  not  only  these,  but  all 
the  Satans  in  hell. 

So  they  cried  and  prayed,  and  God  sent  light 

and  deliverance,  for  there  was  now  no     _ 

,       .       ,     .  .    ,,  ,  They  pray. 

let  m  their  way  ;  no  not  there,  where 
but  now  they  were  stopped  with  a  pit.  Yet  they 
were  not  got  through  the  Valley  ;  so  they  went  on 
still,  and  behold  great  stinks  and  loathsome  smells, 
to  the  great  annoyance  of  them.4  Then  said  Mercy 
to  Christiana,  There  is  not  such  pleasant  being 
here,  as  at  the  gate,  or  at  the  Interpreter's,  or  at 
the  house  where  we  lay  last. 

0  but,  said  one  of  the  boys,  it  is  not  so  bad  to 
go  through  here,  as  it  is  to  abide  hero  Une  of  the  boys' 
always;  and  for  aught  I  know,  one  re^- 
reason  why  we  must  go  this  way  to  the  house  pre- 
pared for  us,  is,  that  our  home  might  be  made  the 
sweeter  to  us.5 

Well  said,  Samuel,  quoth  the  guide,  thou  hast 
now  spoke  like  a  man.  Why,  if  ever  I  get  out 
here  again,  said  the  boy,  I  think  I  shall  prize  light 
and  good  way  better  than  ever  I  did  in  all  my 
life.  Then  said  the  guide,  We  shall  be  out  by 
and  by.G 

So  on  they  went,  and  Joseph  said,  Cannot  we 
see  to  the  end  of  this  Valley  as  yet  ?  Then  said 
the  guide,  Look  to  your  feet,  for  you  shall  pre- 
sently be  among  the  snares.  So  they  looked  to 
their  feet,  and  went  on ;  but  they  were  troubled 


3  This  text  has  been  a  sheet  anchor  to  my  soul  under  dark- 
ness and  distress.  I  doubt  not  but  it  has  been  so  to  many 
others.  0  there  is  an  amazing  depth  of  grace,  and  a  wonder- 
ful height  of  mercy  in  it.  Bless  God  for  it.  Study  it  deeply. 
— (Mason.) 

4  \\  hat  must  the  pure  and  holy  Jesus  have  suffered  when 
he  tasted  death  in  all  its  bitterness?  His  sold  was  in  an 
agony.  Hell  was  let  loose  upon  him.  This  is  your  hour,  said 
he,  aud  the  power  of  darkness,  when  he  cried  out,  '  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?'  It  seemed  as  if  the 
pains  of  hell  had  got  hold  of  him.  O  what  justice  and  judg- 
ment I  what  love  and  mercy!  what  power  and  might  were 
here  displayed  1  And  all  this  for  us,  and  for  our  salvation. 
W  hat  shall  we  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  hisbeuetits? — (J.  B.) 

6  Precious  thought ;  under  the  worst  and  most  distressing 
cirenmstanees  think  of  this.  Their  continuance  is  short.  The 
appointment,  love.  Their  end  shall  be  crowned  with  glory. 
Our  dark  and  distressing  nights  make  us  prize  our  light  and 
joyful  days  the  more. — (Mason.) 

6  The'tremendous  horrors  of  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of 
Death,  figuratively  represents  the  gloomy  frame  of  mind  in 
which  fears  rise  high,  aud  temptations  greatly  abound,  more 
especially  "hen  they  are  augmented  by  bodily  disease.  Pew 
Christians  are  wholly  exempted  from  such  distressing  seasons, 
but  all  are  not  distressed  alike.—  (Burder.)  Banyan's  experi- 
ence, recorded  in  his  Grace  Abounding,  shows  that  I 
when  under  conviction,  very  familiar  with  these  horrors. — (ED.) 

27 


*10 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


much  with  the  snares.     Now,  when  they  were  come 

among  the  snares,  they  espied  a  man  cast  into  the 

ditch  on  the  left  hand,  with  his  flesh  all  rent  and 

torn.     Then  said  the  guide,  That  is  one  Heedless, 

Heedless  is  slain  that  was  agoing  this  way ;  he  has  lain 

■md  Take-heed  there  a  great  while.1     There  was  one 

Take-heed  with   him,  when   he  was 

taken   and   slain  ;    hut  he   escaped   their  hands. 

You  cannot  imagine  how  many  are  killed  hereabout, 

and  yet  men  are  so  foolishly  venturous,  as  to  set 

out  lightly  on  pilgrimage,  and  to  come  without  a 

First  Part,     guide.2    Poor  Christian !  it  was  a  won- 

p.  ill.       ^  tnat  ]ie  jiere  esCaped  ;   Dut  he  was 

beloved  of  his  God :  also,  he  had  a  good  heart  of  his 
own,3  or  else  he  could  never  have  done  it.  Now 
they  drew  towards  the  end  of  the  way ;  and  just 
there  where  Christian  had  seen  the  cave  when  he 
went  by,  out  thence  came  forth  Maul, 
a  giant.  This  Maul  did  use  to  spoil 
young  pilgrims  with  sophistry;  and  he  called 
Great-heart  by  his  name,  and  said  unto  him,  How 
ne  quarrels  with  many  times  have  you  been  forbidden 
Great-heart.     to  do  tiiese  t]lings  ?     Then  said  Mr. 

Great-heart,  What  things?  What  things?  quoth 
the  giant ;  you  know  what  things ;  but  I  will  put 
an  end  to  your  trade.  But  pray,  said  Mr.  Great- 
heart,  before  we  fall  to  it,  let  us  understand  where- 
fore we  must  fight.  Now  the  women  and  children 
stood  trembling,  and  knew  not  what  to  do.  Quoth 
the  giant,  You  rob  the  country,  and  rob  it  with 
the  worst  of  thefts.4  These  are  but  generals,  said 
Mr.  Great-heart;  come  to  particulars,  man. 


Maul,  a  giant. 


1  Heedless  professors,  be  warned.  The  doctrines  of  grace 
were  never  intended  to  lull  any  asleep  in  carnal  security.  If 
they  do  so  by  you,  it  is  a  sure  sign  that  what  should  have 
been  for  your  health  proves  an  occasion,  of  your  falling. — 
(Mason.)  0  the  miserable  end  of  them  that  obey  not  the 
gospel — punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  glory  of  his  power.  —  (J.  B.) 

2  Prayer  prevailed,  and  they  were  delivered. 

By  glimm'ring  hopes,  and  gloomy  fears, 

We  trace  the  sacred  road ; 
Through  dismal  deeps,  and  dung'rous  snares, 

We  make  our  way  to  God. — (Binder.) 

3  By  a  good  heart  is  here  meant,  that  Christian  was  endued 
with  boldness  and  courage  from  above ;  as  the  Psalmist  says, 
'  Wait  on  the  Lord,  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen 
thine  heart.'—  (J.  B.) 

4  Satan's  master  argument  is,  Thou  art  a  horrible  sinner,  a 
hypocrite,  one  that  has  a  profane  heart,  and  one  that  is  an 
utter  stranger  to  a  work  of  grace.  I  say  this  is  his  Maul,  his 
club,  his  master-piece.  He  doth  with  this  as  some  do  by  their 
most  enchanting  songs,  sings  them  everywhere.  I  believe 
there  are  but  few  saints  in  the  world  that  have  not  had  this 
temptation  sounding  in  their  ears.  But  were  they  but  aware, 
Satan  by  all  this  does  but  drive  them  to  the  gap,  out  at  which 
they  should  go,  aud  so  escape  his  roaring.  Saith  he,  Thou  art 
a  great  sinner,  a  horrible  sinuer,  a  profane-hearted  wretch,  one 
that  cannot  be  matched  for  a  vile  one  in  the  country.  The 
tempted  may  say,  Aye,  Satan,  so  I  am,  a  sinner  of  the  biggest 
size,  and,  therefore,  have  most  need  of  Jesus  Christ ;  yea,  be- 
cause I  am  such  a  wretch  Jesus  calls  me  first.  I  am  he, 
wherefore  stand  back,  Satan,  make  a  lane ;  my  right  is  first  to 
come  to  Jesus  Christ.  This,  now,  would  be  like  for  like ;  this 
would  foil  the  devil :  this  would  make  him  say,  I  must  not 


Then  said  the  giant,  Thou  practisest  the  craft 
of   a   kidnapper ;    thou  gatherest  up  „  ,, 

11  °       .  r  God's    ministers 

women  and  children,  and  earnest  them  counted  as  kid- 
in  to  a  strange  country,  to  the  weaken-  nappeis- 
ing  of  my  master's  kingdom.  But  now  Great-heart 
replied,  I  am  a  servant  of  the  God  of  heaven ;  my 
business  is  to  persuade  sinners  to  repentance ;  I 
am  commanded  to  do  my  endeavour  to  turn  men, 
women,  and  children,  '  from  darkness  to  light,  and 
from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God:'    , 

,.,,,.,        .-ii-i  1^   "lie     giant    and 

and  it  this  be  indeed  the  ground  of    Mr.  Great-heart 
thy  quarrel,  let  us  fall  to  it  as  soon   mus    ° 
as  thou  wilt. 

Then  the  giant  came  up,  and  Mr.  Great-heart 
went  to  meet  him ;  and  a3  he  went,  he  drew  his 
sword,  but  the  giant  had  a  club.     So  Avithout  more 
ado,  they  fell  to  it,  and  at  the  first  blow  the  giant 
struck  Mr.    Great-heart  down   upen   one  of  his 
knees ;  with  that  the  women  and  chil-   Weak    folks, 
dren  cried  out ;   so  Mr.  Great-heart     prayers    do 
recovering  himself,  laid  about  him  in     help  strong 
full  lusty  manner,  and  gave  the  giant      °  s  cnes' 
a  wound  in  his  arm ;  thus  he  fought  for  the  space 
of  an  hour,  to  that  height  of  heat,  that  the  breath 
came  out  of  the  giant's  nostrils,  as  the  heat  doth 
out  of  a  boiling  caldron. 

Then  they  sat  down  to  rest  them,  but  Mr.  Great- 
heart  betook  him  to  prayer  ;  also  the  women  and 
children  did  nothing  but  sigh  and  cry  all  the  time 
that  the  battle  did  last.5 

When  they  had  rested  them,  and  taken  breath, 
they  both  fell  to  it  again,6  and  Mr.  Great-heart 
with  a  full  blow,  fetched  the  giant  The  giant 
down  to  the  ground.  Nay,  hold,  and  stlU(*down. 
let  me  recover,  quoth  he ;  so  Mr.  Great-heart 
fairly  let  him  get  up.  So  to  it  they  went  again, 
and  the  giant  missed  but  little  of  all-to-breaking 
Mr.  Great-heart's  skull  with  his  club. 

Mr.  Great-heart  seeing  that,  runs  to  him  in  the 
full  heat  of  his  spirit,  and  pierceth  him  under  the 
fifth  rib  ;  with  that  the  giant  began  to  faint,  and 
could  hold  up  his  club  no  longer.  Then  Mr.  Great- 
heart  seconded  his  blow,  and  smote  the  head  of 
the  giant  from  his  shoulders.  Then  the  women 
and  children  rejoiced,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  also 
praised  God,  for  the  deliverance  he  had  wrought.7 

deal  with  this  man  thus  ;  for  then  I  put  a  sword  into  his  hand 
to  cut  off  my  head. — (Good  News  for  the  Vilest  of  Men,  vol.  i. 
p.  96.) 

°  The  greatest  heart  cannot  understand  without  prayer,  nor 
conquer  without  the  almighty  power  of  God.  The  belief  of 
this  will  excite  prayer. — (Mason.) 

6  The  severity  of  Job's  sufferings  probably  suggested  to  the 
author,  the  idea  of  taking  rest  during  the  conflict.  '  How  long 
wilt  thou  not  depart  from  me,  nor  let  me  alone  till  I  swallow 
down  my  spittle?'  Job  vii.  19.  Here  is  no  timidly  miucing 
the  matter  with  sophistry  or  infidelity ;  but  a  manful,  prayer- 
ful, lighting  it  out.— (Ed.) 

7  Mr.  Ivimey  considers,  that  in  Giant  Maul  is  characterised 
that  erroneous  but  common  notion,  that  the  church  of  Christ 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


211 


"When  this  was  done,  they  among  them  erected 

_  ,    ,  .       .a  pillar,  and  fastened  the  giant's  head  I  \ 
Fie  is  slain,  and      , f  '         ,  ,     °     .,    .     .   .       J 

his  liead  dis-   thereon,  and  wrote  unuerneatn  in  lct- 

posc  °*  ters,  that  passengers  might  read- 

lie  that  did  wear  this  head,  was  one 

That  pilgrims  did  misuse ; 
He  stoppM  their  Way,  he  spared  none, 

But  diil  them  all  abase; 
Until  that  I,  Great-heart,  arose, 

The  pilgrim's  guide  to  be; 
Until  that  I  did  him  oppose, 

That  was  their  enemy. 

Now  I  saw,  that  they  went  to  the  ascent  that 
was  a  little  way  off,  cast  up  to  he  a  prospect  for 
First  Vnrt,  pilgrims  (that  was  the  place  from 
p.  lie.  '  whence  Christian  had  the  first  sight 
of  Faithful  his  brother) ;  wherefore  here  they  sat 
down,  and  rested  ;  they  also  here  did  eat  and 
drink,  and  make  merry,  for  that  they  had  gotten 
deliverance  from  this  so  dangerous  an  enemy.1 
As  they  sat  thus,  and  did  eat,  Christiana  asked 
the  guide  if  he  had  caught  no  hurt  in  the  battle. 
Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  No,  save  a  little  on 
my  flesh ;  yet  that  also  shall  be  so  far  from  being 
to  my  detriment,  that  it  is  at  present  a  proof  of 
my  love  to  my  Master  and  you,  and  shall  be  a 
means,  by  grace,  to  increase  my  reward  at  last.2 

2  Co.  iv. 


consists  exclusively  of  some  one  state  religion,  to  dissent 
from  which  is  to  cause  schism,  and  to  rend  the  seamless  coat 
of  Christ.  Maul  dwelt  in  the  place  where  Pagan  and  Pope 
had  resided ;  the  club  being  the  temporal  power  to  compel 
uniformity.  If  so,  the  declaration  for  liberty  of  conscience 
slew  the  siant,  and  the  Act  of  toleration  prevented  his  resurrec- 
tion. Alas,  how  little  do  such  Antichristians  know  of  that 
spiritual  kingdom  which  extends  over  all  the  temporal  king- 
doms of  the  earth,  and  which  constitutes  Christ  the  King  of 
lings. — (Ed.)  Carnal  reasoning  upon  the  equity  of  the  Divine 
proceedings  have  mauled  many  a  Christian — robbed  him  of  his 
comfort,  and  spoiled  his  simplicity.  As  soon  as  we  turn  aside 
to  vain  janglings  and  doubtful  disputations,  we  get  upon  the 
devil's  ground.  As  Great-heart  was  knocked  down  with  this 
giant's  club,  so  many  a  faithful  minister  has  beeu  confounded 
with  the  subtle  arguments  of  a  cunning  disputer.  The  way 
to  overcome  this  giant  is  to  keep  close  to  Scripture,  and  pray 
for  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.— (J.  B.)  Though  Maul 
was  baffled,  disabled,  and  apparently  slain ;  it  will  appear 
that  he  has  left  a  posterity  on  earth  to  revile,  injure,  and 
oppose  the  spiritual  worshippers  of  God  in  every  generation. 
— (Scott.) 

1  Well  may  Giant  Maid,  with  his  sophistry,  be  called  a 
dangerous  enemy.  Many  of  this  tribe  are  mentioned  in  the 
IMy  War,  as  Lord  Cavil,  the  Lord  Brisk,  the  Lord  Pragmatic, 
the  Lord  Murmur,  and  one  Clip-promise,  a  notorious  villain. 
These  lords  felt  the  edge  of  Lord  Will-be- will's  sword,  for  which 
his  Prince  Immauuel  honoured  him.  Clip-promise  was  set  in 
the  pillory,  whipped,  and  hanged.  One  clipper-of-promise 
does  great  abuse  to  Mansoul  in  a  little  time.  Banyan's 
judgment  was,  that  'all  those  of  his  name  and  life  should  be 
served  even  as  he!' — (Ed.) 

2  Light  afflictions,  but  for  a  moment,  and  which  work  out 
for  us  an  eternal  weight  of  glory — '  a  little  hurt  on  my  flesh.' 
If  this  refers  to  Bunyan's  twelve  years'  imprisonment  under  the 
maul  of  sophistry,  how  must  his  natural  temper  have  been 
subdued  by  humility  ! — (Ed.) 


Christ.  But  was  you  not  afraid,  good  Sir,  when 
you  saw  him  come  out  with  his  club  ? :i   Discomne  of  the 

Great-heart.   It  is  my  duty,  said  ,i»llt- 

he,  to  distrust  my  own  ability,  that  I  may  have 
reliance  on  him  that  is  stronger  than  all. 

Christ.  But  what  did  you  think  when  he  fetched 
you  down  to  the  ground  at  the  first  blow? 

Great-heart.  Why,  I  thought,  quoth  he,  that 
so  my  Master  himself  was  served,  and  yet  he  it 
was  that  conquered  at  the  last. 

Matt.  When  you  all  have  thought  what  you 
please,  I  think  God  has  been  wonder-   ,.  ,,,       , 

1  '  ...  Matthew    hrre 

ful  good  unto  us,  both  in  bringing  us  admires  Good- 
out  of  this  Valley,  and  in  delivering 
us  out  of  the  hand  of  this  enemy  ;  for  my  part,  I 
see  no  reason,  why  we  should  distrust  our  God  any 
more,  since  he  has  now,  and  in  such  a  place  as 
this,  given  us  such  testimony  of  his  love  as  this. 
Then  they  got  up  and  went  forward.     Now  a 

little  before  them  stood  an  oak;  and    -,,  „ 

.Old  Honest  a. 
under  it,  when  they  came  to  it,  they     sleep  under  au 

found  an  old  pilgrim  fast  asleep ;  they 

knew  that  he  was  a  pilgrim  by  his  clothes,  and 

his  staff,  and  his  girdle. 

So  the  guide,  Mr.  Great  heart,  awaked  him,  and 
the  old  gentleman,  as  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  cried  out, 
What's  the  matter?  Who  are  you?  and  what  is 
your  business  here?4 

Great-heart.  Come,  man,  be  not  so  hot,  here 
is  none  but  friends ;  yet  the  old  man  gets  up,  and 
stands  upon  his  guard,  and  will  know  of  them 
what  they  were.  Then  said  the  guide,  My  name 
is  Great-heart ;  I  am  the  guide  of  these  Pilgrims, 
which  are  going  to  the  Celestial  Country. 

Honest.  Then  said  Mr.  Honest,  I  cry  you 
mercy ;  I  feared  that  you  had  been  One  saint  some- 
of  the  company  of  those  that  some  another  for  hi! 
time  ago  did  rob  Little-faith  of  his  eue,">- 
money  ;  but  now  I  look  better  about  me,  I  perceive 
you  are  honester  people. 

Great-heart.   Why,   what  woul 
or  could  you  have  done,  to  have  helped 
yourself,  if  we  indeed  had  been  of  that  company. 

Hon.  Done !  why  I  would  have  fought  as  long 
as  breath  had  been  in  me ;  and  had  I  so  done,  I 
am  sure  you  could  never  have  given  me  the  worst 
on  it ;  for  a  Christian  can  never  be  overcome, 
unless  he  should  yield  of  himself.0 


Talk  between 
d,      Great-heart 


3  This  club  we  may  suppose  to  mean  human  power,  under 
which  many  godly  ministers,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Buf- 
fered greatly.  Blessed  be  God,  we  have  nothing  of  this  to  fear 
in  our" day  ;"  therefore,  the  more  shame  for  such  professors  who 
desert  Christ  when  they  have  nothing  to  fear  but  the  breath  of 
reproach,  a  nickname,  or  a  by- word  of  contempt.— (Mason.) 

4  The  experienced  Christian  will  be  afraid  of  new  acquaint- 
ance; hi  his  most  unwatchful  seasons  he  is  folly  convinced 
that  no  enemy  can  hurt  him,  unless  he  is  induced  to  yield  to 
temptation,  and  commit  sin. —  (Scott.) 

5  The  character  of  Honesty  is  beautifully  drawn  by  a  mas- 
i  terly  hand.     'Ihe  aged  pilgrim,  worn  out  with  fatigue,  can  sa) 


212 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


Great-heart.  Well  said,  father  Honest,  quoth 
the  guide ;  for  by  this  I  know  thou  art  a  cock  of 
the  right  kind,  for  thou  hast  said  the  truth. 

Hon.  And  by  this,  also,  I  know  that  thou 
knowest  what  true  pilgrimage  is  ;  for  all  others  do 
think  that  we  are  the  soonest  overcome  of  any. 

Great-heart.  Well,  now  we  are  so  happily  met, 
Whence  Mr.  Pray  let  nie  crave  your  name,  and  the 
Honest  came.    name  0f  the  place  you  came  from. 

Hon.  My  name  I  cannot ;  but  I  came  from  the 
town  of  Stupidity;  it  lieth  about  four  degrees 
beyond  the  City  of  Destruction. 

Great-heart.  Oh  !  are  you  that  countryman, 
then  ?  I  deem  I  have  half  a  guess  of  you ;  your 
name  is  Old  Honesty,  is  it  not  ?  So  the  old  gen- 
tleman blushed,  and  said,  Not  Honesty,  in  the 
abstract,1  but  Honest  is  my  name;  and  I  wish 
that  my  nature  shall  agree  to  what  I  am  called. 

Hon.  But,  Sir,  said  the  old  gentleman,  how 
could  you  guess  that  I  am  such  a  man,  since  I 
came  from  such  a  place? 

Great-heart.  I  had  heard  of  you  before,  by 
my  Master ;  for  he  knows  all  things  that  are  done 
on  the  earth ;  but  I  have  often  wondered  that  any 
stnpified  oneg  should  come  from  your  place,  for  your 
tTosT' merely  town  is  worse  than  is  the  City  of  De- 
camal  struction  itself. 

Hon.  Yes,  we  lie  more  off  from  the  sun,  and 
so  are  more  cold  and  senseless;  but  was  a  man  in 
a  mountain  of  ice,  yet  if  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
will  arise  upon  him,  his  frozen  heart  shall  feel  a 
thaw ;  and  thus  it  hath  been  with  me.2 

Great-heart.  I  believe  it,  father  Honest,  I 
believe  it ;  for  I  know  the  thing  is  true. 

Then  the  old  gentleman  saluted  all  the  Pilgrims 
with  a  holy  kiss  of  charity ;  and  asked  them  of 
their  names,  and  how  they  had  fared  since  they 
set  out  on  their  pilgrimage.3 


without  fear,  '  I  laid  me  down  and  slept ;  I  awaked ;  for  the 
Lord  sustained  me.'  He  blushed  when  his  name  was  men- 
tioned, and  proved  to  be  a  most  valuable  acquisition  to  the 
Pilgrim  party.— (En.) 

1  By  honesty,  in  the  abstract,  he  means  to  distinguish  be- 
tween his  earnest  desire  to  be  honest,  and  a  perfect  character. 
Every  Christian  is  the  subject  of  honesty  or  justice,  upright- 
ness and  sincerity ;  yet  when  we  come  to  describe  these  virtues 
in  the  abstract,  or  what  they  really  are  in  their  strict  purity 
and  utmost  perfection,  where  is  the  Christian  but  must  wear 
the  conscientious  blush,  as  Honesty  did,  under  a  sense  of  his 
imperfections  ? — (Mason.) 

2  This  is  the  confession  of  an  honest  heart.  It  is  never 
afraid  of  ascribing  too  much  to  the  sovereignty  of  grace ;  nor 
of  giving  all  the  glory  to  the  Sun  of  Kighteousnrss,  for  shining 
upon,  and  melting  down  its  hard  frozen  soul. — (Mason.) 

3  If  the  kiss  of  charity  be  given,  great  care  should  be  taken 
that  it  is  a  'holy'  kiss.  'Some  have  urged  the  holy  kiss,  but 
then  I  have  asked  why  they  made  baulks ;  why  they  did  salute 
the  most  handsome,  and  let  the  ill-favoured  go.  This  has  been 
unseemly  in  my  sight.' — {Grace  Abounding,  No.  315.)  How- 
ever such  a  custom  may  have  been  innocent  in  the  oriental  scenes 
of  apostolic  labours,  it  has  been  very  properly  discontinued  in 
later  ages,  unless  it  be  as  in  the  case  of  old  Honest,  or  the 
unexpected  meeting  of  very  old  friends  and  relatives. —  (Ed.) 


Christ.  Then  said  Christiana,  My  name,  I  sup- 
pose you  have  heard  of;  good  Chris-  oid  Honest  and 
tian  was  my  husband,  and  these  four  Christiana  talk. 
were  his  children.  But  can  you  think  how  the  olJ 
gentleman  was  taken,  when  she  told  him  who  she 
was !  He  shipped,  he  smiled,  and  blessed  them 
witli  a  thousand  good  wishes,  saying: 

t  Hon.  I  have  heard  much  of  your  husband,  and 
of  his  travels  and  wars,  which  he  underwent  in  his 
days.  Be  it  spoken  to  your  comfort,  the  name  of 
your  husband  rings  over  all  these  part3  of  the 
world:  his  faith,  his  courage,  his  enduring,  and 
his  sincerity  under  all,  has  made  his  name  famous. 
Then  he  turned  him  to  the  boys,  and  He  ds0  talk9 
asked  them  of  their  names,  which  they    "■>*  *e  b?>'s. 

,11.  aii  -ii  •'Old    Air.   llo- 

told  him.  And  then  said  he  unto  nest's  blessing 
them :  Matthew,  be  thou  like  Matthew  on  em' 
the  publican,  not  in  vice,  but  in  virtue.  Mat.  x.  3. 
Samuel,  said  he,  be  thou  like  Samuel  the  prophet, 
a  man  of  faith  and  prayer.  Ps.  xdx.  6.  Joseph,  said 
he,  be  thou  like  Joseph  in  Potiphar's  house,  chaste, 
and  one  that  flies  from  temptation.  Ge.  xxxix.  And 
James,  be  thou  like  James  the  Just,  and  like 
James  the  brother  of  our  Lord.  Ac.  i.  13,  u.  Then 
they  told  him  of  Mercy,  and  how  she  pie  Wesseth 
had  left  her  town  and  her  kindred  to  Mercy. 
come  along  with  Christiana  and  with  her  sons. 
At  that  the  old  honest  man  said,  Mercy  is  thy 
name ;  by  Mercy  shalt  thou  be  sustained,  and 
carried  through  all  those  difficulties  that  shall 
assault  thee  in  thy  way,  till  thou  shalt  come  thither, 
where  thou  shalt  look  the  Fountain  of  Mercy  in 
the  face  with  comfort. 

All  this  while  the  guide,  Mr.  Great-heart,  was 
very  much  pleased,  and  smiled  upon  his  companion. 

Now,  as  they  walked  along  together,  the  guide 
asked  the  old  gentleman,  if  he  did  not  know  one 
Mr.  Fearing,  that  came  on  pilgrimage    Talk  of  one 
out  Of  his  parts?  Mr.  fearing. 

Hon.  Yes,  very  well,  said  he.  He  was  a  man 
that  had  the  root  of  the  matter  in  him ;  but  he 
was  one  of  the  most  troublesome  pilgrims  that 
ever  I  met  with  in  all  my  days.4 


4  The  character  and  narrative  of  Fearing  is  drawn  and 
arranged  with  great  judgment,  and  in  a  very  affecting  manner. 
Little-faith,  mentioned  in  the  First  Part,  was  faint-hearted  and 
distrustful ;  aud  thus  he  contracted  guilt,  aud  lost  his  comfort ; 
bat  Fearing  dreaded  sin,  and  coming  short  of  heaven,  more 
than  all  that  flesh  could  do  unto  him.  He  was  alarmed  more 
at  the  fear  of  being  overcome  by  temptation,  than  from  a 
reluctance  to  undergo  derision  or  persecution.  The  peculiarity 
of  this  description  of  Christians  must  be  traced  back  to  consti- 
tution, habit,  first  impressions,  disproportionate  and  partial 
views  of  truth,  and  improper  instructions;  these,  concurring 
with  weakness  of  faith,  and  the  common  infirmities  of  human 
nature,  give  a  cast  to  their  experience  aud  character,  which 
renders  them  uncomfortable  to  themselves,  and  troublesome  to 
others.  Yet  no  competent  judges  doubt  that  they  have  the 
root  of  the  matter  iu  them ;  and  none  arc  more  entitled  to  the 
patient,  sympathizing,  and  tender  attention  of  ministers  and 
Christians. — (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


213 


Great-tie  art.  I  perceive  you  knew  hini  ;  for  you 
Lave  given  a  very  right  character  of  him. 

Hon.  Knew  him !  I  was  a  great  companion  of 
his;  I  was  with  him  most  an  end;  when  he  first 
began  to  think  of  what  would  come  upon  us  here- 
after, I  was  with  him. 

Great-heart.  I  was  his  guide  from  my  Master's 
house  to  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City. 

IIox.  Then  you  knewhim  to  he  a  trouhlesomeone. 

GREAT-nEART.  I  did  so,  but  I  could  very  well 
bear  it ;  for  men  of  my  calling  are  oftentimes 
intrusted  with  the  conduct  of  such  as  he  was. 

Hon.  Well  then,  pray  let  us  hear  a  little  of  him, 
and  how  he  managed  himself  under  your  conduct. 

Great-heart.  Why,  he  was  always  afraid  that 
„    ^    .    ,      he  should  come  short  of  whither  he  had 

Mr.  Fennns  s  .  .   .  . 

troublesome     a  desire  to  go.    Everything  frightened 

pi  grimace.      ^.^  ^at  ^e  heard  anybody  speak  of, 

that  had  but  the  least  appearance  of  opposition  in 

„.    u^.     it.     I  hear  that  he  lay  roaring  at  the 

His    l>eliaviour  *  ° 

at  the  Slough  Slough  of  Despond  for  about  a  month 
together ;  nor  durst  he,  for  all  he  saw 
several  go  over  before  him,  venture,  though  they, 
many  of  them,  offered  to  lend  him  their  hand.  He 
would  not  go  back  again  neither.1  The  Celestial 
City,  he  said,  he  should  die  if  he  came  not  to  it ; 
and  yet  was  dejected  at  every  difficulty,  and  stum- 
bled at  every  straw  that  anybody  cast  in  his  way. 
Well,  after  he  had  lain  at  the  Slough  of  Despond 
a  great  while,  as  I  have  told  you,  one  sunshine 
morning,  I  do  not  know  how,  he  ventured,  and  so 
got  over ;  but  when  he  was  over,  he  would  scarce 
believe  it.  He  had,  I  think,  a  Slough  of  Despond 
in  his  miud ;  a  slough  that  he  carried  everywhere 
with  him,  or  else  he  could  never  have  been  as  he  was. 
So  he  came  up  to  the  gate,  you  know  what  I  mean, 
that  stands  at  the  head  of  this  way ;  and  there 
His  behariour  also  he  stood  a  good  while,  before  he 
at  the  gate.  wouhd  adventure  to  knock.  When  the 
gate  was  opened,  he  would  give  back,  and  give 
place  to  others,  and  say  that  he  was  not  wortby. 
For,  for  all  he  got  before  some  to  the  gate,  yet 
many  of  them  went  in  before  him.  There  the  poor 
man  would  stand,  shaking  and  shrinking.  I  dare 
say,  it  would  have  pitied  one's  heart  to  have  seen 
him;  nor  would  he  go  back  again.  At  last,  he 
took  the  hammer  that  hanged  on  the  gate  in  his 
hand,  and  gave  a  small  rap  or  two;  then  one 
opened  to  him,  but  he  shrank  back  as  before.  He 
that  opened  stepped  out  after  him,  and  said,  Thou 
trembliug  one,  what  wantest  thou  ?     With  that  he 


1  "We  cannot  but  admire  the  variety  of  experiences  introduced 
into  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.  Many  have  died  remarkably 
happy  in  the  Lord,  who,  till  very  near  their  last  moments, 
have  been  in  bondage  through  the  fear  of  death.  We  may  be 
6ure  of  this,  that  wherever  the  Lord  has  begun  a  work,  he  will 
carry  it  on  to  the  great  decisive  day.  The  proof  of  this  is 
'  he  would  not  go  back!'  '  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  then 
are  ye  my  disciples  indeed.' — (J.  13.) 


fell  down  to  the  ground,  lie  that  spoke  to  him 
wondered  to  sec  him  so  faint.  So  he  said  to  him, 
Peace  he  to  thee ;  up,  for  I  have  set  open  the  door 
to  thee.  Come  in,  for  thou  art  blessed.  With 
that  he  got  up,  and  went  in  trembling;  and  when 
he  was  in,  he  was  ashamed  to  show  his  face.  Well, 
after  he  had  been  entertained  there  a  while,  as  you 
know  how  the  manner  is,  he  was  hid  go  on  his 
way,  and  also  told  the  way  he  should  take.  So 
he  came  till  he  came  to  our  house.  But  as  he 
behaved  himself  at  the  gate,  so  he  did  nis  bclnvi( 
at  my  master  the  Interpreter's  door.  «t  the  [uter- 
He  lay  thereabout  in  the  cold  a  good  prc  l 
while,  before  he  would  adventure  to  call ;  yet  he 
would  not  go  back,  and  the  nights  were  long  and 
cold  then.  Nay,  he  had  a  note  of  necessity  in  his 
bosom  to  my  master,  to  receive  him  and  grant 
him  the  comfort  of  his  house,  and  also  to  allow  hira 
a  stout  and  valiant  conductor,  because  he  was  him- 
self so  chicken-hearted  a  man ;  and  yet,  for  all 
that,  he  was  afraid  to  call  at  the  door.  So  he  lay 
up  and  down  thereabouts,  till,  poor  man!  he  was 
almost  starved.  Yea,  so  great  was  his  dejection, 
that  though  he  saw  several  others,  for  knocking, 
get  in,  yet  he  was  afraid  to  venture.  At  last,  I 
think,  I  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  perceiving 
a  man  to  be  up  and  down  about  the  door,  I  went 
out  to  him,  and  asked  what  he  was ;  but,  poor 
man  !  the  water  stood  in  his  eyes ;  so  I  perceived 
what  he  wanted.  I  went,  therefore,  in  and  told 
it  in  the  house,  and  we  showed  the  tiling  to  our 
Lord.  So  he  sent  me  out  again,  to  entreat  him  to 
come  in ;  but,  I  dare  say,  I  had  hard  work  to  do 
it.  At  last  he  came  in ;  and  I  will  IIow  he  wm 
say  that  for  my  Lord,  he  carried  it  entertained 
wonderfully  lovingly  to  him.  There 
were  but  a  few  good  bits  at  the  table,  but  some 
of  it  was  laid  upon  his  trencher.  Then  he  pre- 
sented the  note,  and  my  Lord  looked  thereon,  and 
said  his  desire  should  be  granted.  So,  when  he  had 
been  there  a  good  while,  he  seemed  He  is  a  little 
to  get  some  heart,  and  to  be  a  little  ^Yrut^re- 
more  comfortable ;  for  my  master,  ter'8 House. 
you  must  know,  is  one  of  very  tender  bowels,  espe- 
cially to  them  that  are  afraid ;  wherefore  he  carried 
it  so  towards  him,  as  might  tend  most  to  his 
encouragement.  Well,  when  he  had  had  a  sight 
of  the  things  of  the  place,  and  was  ready  to  take 
his  journey  to  go  to  the  city,  my  Lord,  as  he  did 
to  Christian  before,  gave  him  a  bottle  of  spirits, 
and  some  comfortable  things  to  eat.  Thus  we  set 
forward,  and  1  went  before  him ;  but  the  man  was 
but  of  few  words,  only  he  would  sigh  aloud. 

When  we  were  come  to  where  the  three  fellows 
were  handed,  he  said  that  he  doubted   He  m  greatly 

,  ,  ,       ,  .  ,      ,  .-.    i  alraid  when  lie 

that  that  would  be  Ins  end  also.  Unly  »wthegibbetj 
he  seemed  glad  when  he  saw  the  Cross  ^«^w  *  u£ 
and  the  Sepulchre.    There,  I  confess,     Cm* 


214 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


he  desired  to  stay  a  little  to  look,  and  he  seemed, 
for  a  while  after,  to  be  a  little  cheery.  When  we 
came  at  the  Hill  Difficulty,  he  made  no  stick  at 
that,  nor  did  he  much  fear  the  lions  ;  for  you  must 
know  that  his  trouble  was  not  about  such  things  as 
those  ;  his  fear  was  about  his  acceptance  at  last.1 

I  got  him  in  at  the  House  Beautiful,  I  think, 
Dumpish  at    Dei"ore  ne  was  willing.      Also,  when 

the  House    he  was  in,  I  brought  him  acquainted 

Beautiful 

with  the  damsels  that  were  of  the 
place  ;  but  he  was  ashamed  to  make  himself  much 
for  company.  He  desired  much  to  be  alone,  yet 
he  always  loved  good  talk,  and  often  would  get 
behind  the  screen  to  hear  it.  He  also  loved  much 
to  see  ancient  things,  and  to  be  pondering  them  in 
his  mind.  He  told  me  afterwards  that  he  loved  to 
be  in  those  two  houses  from  which  he  came  last, 
to  wit,  at  the  gate,  and  that  of  the  Interpreter, 
but  that  he  durst  not  be  so  bold  to  ask. 

When  we  went  also  from  the  House  Beautiful, 
±  ,         down  the  hill,  into  the  Valley  of  Hu- 

He  went  down         .....  .  « 

into,  and  was   miliation,  he  went  down   as  well  as 

in,r\heP  Valley    ever    I    saw  man    m    my   life  5     for   he 

tfon  Huuuliil"  cared  not  how  mean  he  was,  so  he 
might  be  happy  at  last.  Yea,  I  think, 
there  was  a  kind  of  a  sympathy  betwixt  that  valley 
and  him ;  for  I  never  saw  him  better  in  all  his 
pilgrimage  than  when  he  was  in  that  valley.2 

Here  he  would  lie  down,  embrace  the  ground, 
and  kiss  the  very  flowers  that  grew  in  this  valley. 
La.  iii  27-29.  He  would  now  be  up  every  morning 
by  break  of  day,  tracing  and  walking  to  and  fro 
in  this  valley. 

But  when  he  was  come  to  the  entrance  of  the 
Much  perplexed   Valley  of  the   Shadow  of  Death,   I 

of  tlufshadow  thought  I  should  have  lost  my  man ; 

of  Death.  not  for  tjiat  he  ^d  anj  inclination  to 

go  back ;  that  he  always  abhorred ;  but  he  was 
ready  to  die  for  fear.  Oh  !  the  hobgoblins  will  have 
me  !  the  hobgoblins  will  have  me  !  cried  he ;  and 
I  could  not  beat  him  out  on  it.  He  made  such  a 
noise,  and  such  an  outcry  here,  that,  had  they  but 
heard  him,  it  was  enough  to  encourage  them  to 
come  and  fall  upon  us.3 


1  See  all  through  this  character,  what  a  conflict  there  was 
between  fear,  and  the  influence  of  grace.  Though  it  may  not 
be  the  most  comfortable,  yet  the  end  of  Mr.  Fearing  was  very 
joyful.  0  what  a  godly  jealousy  displayed  itself  all  through 
his  life!  Better  this,  than  strong,  vain-glorious  confidence. 
The  Valley  of  Humiliation  suits  well  with  fearin"-  hearts  — 
(Mason.) 

2  When  persons  are  naturally  fearful  and  low-spirited,  it 
will  be  fouud,  notwithstanding  the  courage  and  comfort  they 
sometimes  are  favoured  with,  that  the  constitutional  bias  of 
their  tempers  and  dispositions  will  discover  itself,  more  or 
less,  all  through  their  pilgrimage.  Thus  there  is  a  kind  of 
sympathy  between  Fearing  and  the  Valley  of  Humiliation, 
which  seems  congenial  to  him. — (J.  B.) 

s  O  what  a  time  of  need  is  the  day  of  death,  when  I  am  to 
pack  up  all,  to  be  gone  from  hence ;  now  a  man  grows  near  the 
borders  of  eternity;  he  sees  into  the  skirts  of  the  next  world. 


But  this  I  took  very  great  notice  of,  that  this 
valley  was  as  quiet  while  he  went  through  it,  as 
ever  I  knew  it  before  or  3ince.  I  suppose  these 
enemies  here  had  now  a  special  check  from  our 
Lord,  and  a  command  not  to  meddle  until  Mr. 
Fearing  was  passed  over  it. 

It  would  be  too  tedious  to  tell  you  of  all.  We 
will,  therefore,  only  mention  a  passage  or  two  more. 
When  he  was  come  at  Vanity  Fair,  I  Hi8  behaviour 
thought  he  would  have  fought  with  all  «*  Vanity  Fair. 
the  men  at  the  fair.  I  feared  there  we  should 
both  have  been  knocked  on  the  head,  so  hot  was 
he  against  their  fooleries.4  Upon  the  Enchanted 
Ground,  he  was  also  very  wakeful.  But  when  he 
was  come  at  the  river,  where  was  no  bridge,  there 
again  he  was  in  a  heavy  case.  Now,  now,  he  said, 
he  should  be  drowned  for  ever,  and  so  never  see 
that  face  with  comfort  that  he  had  come  so  many 
miles  to  behold. 

And  here,  also,  I  took  notice  of  what  was  very 
remarkable ;  the  water  of  that  river  was  lower  at 
this  time  than  ever  I  saw  it  in  all  my  life.  So  he 
went  over  at  last,  not  much  above  wet-shod.5  When 
he  was  going  up  to  the  gate,  Mr.  Great-heart 
began  to  take  his  leave  of  him,  and  to  wish  him  a 
good  reception  above.  So  he  said,  I  shall,  I 
shall.  Then  parted  we  asunder,  and  His  boldness  a» 
I  saw  him  no  more.  last- 

Hon.  Then,  it  seems,  he  was  well  at  last. 

Great-heart.  Yes,  yes ;  I  never  had  doubt 
about  him ;  he  was  a  man  of  a  choice  spirit,  only 
he  was  always  kept  very  low,  and  that  made  hi3 
life  so  burdensome  to  himself,  and  so  troublesome 
to  others.  Fs.  lxxxviii.  He  was,  above  many,  tender 
of  sin.  He  was  so  afraid  of  doing  injuries  to  others, 
that  he  often  would  deny  himself  of  that  which  was 
lawful,    because  he  would  not  offend.   Ro.  iiv.  21. 

1  Co.  viii.  13. 

Hon.  But  what  should  be  the  reason  that  such 
a  good  man  should  be  all  his  days  so  much  in  the 
dark?6 


Now  death  is  death,  and  the  grave  the  grave  indeed.  Has 
he  laid  up  grace  for  this  day,  while  cold  death  strokes  his 
hand  over  his  face,  and  over  his  heart,  and  is  turning  his  blood 
into  jelly ;  while  strong  death  is  loosing  his  silver  cord,  and 
breaking  his  golden  bowl  ? — Banyan's  Saints'  Privilege,  vol.  i. 
p.  678.  Can  a  great-hearted  saint  wonder  that  Mr.  Fearing 
was  at  his  wit's  end? — (Ed.) 

4  Here  is  a  glorious  display  of  a  fearing  heart.  Full  of 
courage  against  evil,  and  fired  with  zeal  for  God's  glory. — 
(Mason.) 

b  O  how  gracious  is  our  Lord !  as  thy  day  is,  O  Pilgrim,  so 
shall  thy  strength  be.  Even  the  river  of  death,  though  there 
can  be  no  bridge  to  go  over,  yet  faith  makes  one;  and  the  Lord 
of  faith  makes  the  waters  low,  to  suit  the  state  of  bis  beloved 
ones. — (Mason.) 

6  We  know  the  least  appearance  of  a  sin  better  by  its  native 
hue,  than  we  know  a  grace  of  the  Spirit.  Sin  is  sooner  felt 
in  its  bitterness  upon  a  sanctified  soul  than  is  the  grace  of 
God.  Sin  is  dreadful  and  murderous  in  the  sight  of  a  sanc- 
tified soul.  Grace  lies  deep  in  the  hidden  part,  but  sin  floats 
above  in  the  flesh,  and  is  easier  seen.     Grace  as  to  quantity, 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


215 


Great-heart.  There  are  two  sorts  of  reasons 

Reasons     why    ^or  li :    ^ne  1S'  ^ie  w's0  ^0(*  w'^  nave 
irood  men  are   it  so ;  some  must  pipe,  and  some  must 

so  in  the  dark.  >t        nr      -n 

weep.  Mut  «.  16-is.  Now  Mr.  r  earing 
was  one  that  played  upon  this  bass;  he  and  his 
fellows  sound  the  sackbut,  whose  notes  are  more 
doleful  than  the  notes  of  other  music  are ;  though, 
indeed,  some  say  the  bass  is  the  ground  of  music. 
And,  for  my  part,  I  care  not  at  all  for  that  pro- 
fession that  begins  not  in  heaviness  of  mind.  The 
first  string  that  the  musician  usually  touches  is  the 
bass,  when  he  intends  to  put  all  in  tune.  God  also 
plays  upon  this  string  first,  when  he  sets  the  soul 
in  tune  for  himself.  Only  here  was  the  imperfec- 
tion of  Mr.  Fearing,  he  could  play  upon  no  other 
music  but  this,  till  towards  his  latter  end.1 

I  make  hold  to  talk  thus  metaphorically,  for  the 
ripening  of  the  wits  of  young  readers;  and  because, 
in  the  book  of  the  Revelations,  the  saved  are  com- 
pared to  a  company  of  musicians  that  play  upon 
their  trumpets  and  harps,  and  sing  their  songs 
before  the  throne.  Re.  viiL  2 ;  xiv.  2,  3. 

Hon.  He  was  a  very  zealous  man,  as  one  may 
see  by  what  relation  you  have  given  of  him  ;  diffi- 
culties, lions,  or  Vanity  Fair,  he  feared  not  at  all. 
It  was  only  sin,  death,  and  hell  that  was  to  him  a 
terror,  because  he  had  some  doubts  about  his 
interest  in  that  celestial  country.2 

Great-heart.  You  say  right.     Those  were  the 
a  close  about   things  that  were  his  troublers,   and 
Lim-         they,  as  you  have  well  observed,  arose 
from  the  weakness   of  his  mind  thereabout,  not 
from  weakness  of  spirit  as  to  the  practical  part  of  a 
pilgrim's  life.     I  dare  believe  that,  as  the  proverb 
is,  '  he  could  have  bit  a  firebrand,  had  it  stood  in 
his  way;'  but  the  things  with  which  he  was  op- 
pressed, no  man  ever  yet  could  shake  off  with  ease. 
Christ.  Then  said  Christiana,  This  relation  of 
Christiana's    ^r-  Fearing  has  done  me  good.      I 
sentence,      thought  nobody  had  been  like  me; 
but  I  see  there  was  some  semblance  betwixt  this 


seems  less  than  sin.  'What  is  leaven,  or  a  grain  of  mustard 
sired,  to  the  bulky  lump  of  a  body  of  death  ?  It  is  a  rare  thing 
(or  some  Christians  to  see  their  graces,  but  a  thing  very  com- 
mon for  such  to  see  their  sins,  to  the  shaking  of  their  souls. — 
(Banyan's  JUtsire  of  the  Righteous,  vol.  i.  p.  755.) 

1  This  is  an  every-day  character  in  the  church,  delicately 
and  accurately  drawn,  a  man,  as  Mr.  Ivimey  says,  that '  carried 
the  Slough  of  Despoud  in  his  mind  everywhere  with  him,'  not 
from  the  difficulties  of  the  way,  nor  the  frowns  of  the  world, 
but  from  doubts  lest  sin,  death,  and  hell,  should  prevail  over 
them.  They  walk  safely,  however  sorrowfully;  and  seldom  give 
the  enemy  an  occasion  to  rejoice. — (Ed.) 

-  lkre  is  a  very  striking  lesson  for  professors.  Talk  not  of 
your  great  knowledge,  rich  experience,  comfortable  frames, 
and  joyful  feelings;  all  are  vain  and  delusive,  if  the  gospel  has 
not  a  holy  iullucuce  upon  your  practice.  On  the  other  hand, 
be  not  dejected  if  you  are  not  favoured  with  these;  for  if  a 
holy  fear  of  God,  and  a  godly  jealousy  over  yourselves,  possess 
your  heart,  verily  you  are  a  partake!  of  the  grace  of  Christ. — 
vMason.) 


good  man  and  I ;  only  we  differed  in  two  things: 
His  troubles  were  so  great,  they  break  out ;  but 
mine  I  kept  within.  His,  also,  lay  so  hard  upon 
him,  they  made  him  that  he  could  not  knock  at 
the  houses  provided  for  entertainment ;  but  my 
trouble  was  always  such  as  made  me  knock  the 
louder. 

Mercy.  If  I  might  also  speak  my  heart,  I  must 
say,  that  something  of  him  has  also  Mercy*» 
dwelt  in  me;  for  I  have  ever  been  wntence. 
more  afraid  of  the  lake,  and  the  loss  of  a  place  in 
Paradise,  than  I  have  been  of  the  loss  of  other 
things.  0,  thought  I,  may  I  have  the  happiness 
to  have  a  habitation  there,  it  is  enough,  though  I 
part  with  all  the  world  to  win  it ! 

Matt.  Then  said  Matthew,  Fear  was  one  thing 
that   made  me  think  that  I  was  far     Matthew's 
from  having  that  within  me  that  ac-      sc"lcnce- 
companies  salvation  ;  but  if  it  was  so  with  such  a 
good  man  as  he,  why  may  it  not  also  go  well  with 
me  ? 

James.  No  fears,  no  grace,  said  James.    Though 
there  is  not  always  grace  where  there       James's 
is  the  fear  of  hell,  yet,  to  be  sure,      ■■■*«»■ 
there  is  no  grace  where  there  is  no  fear  of  God.3 

Great-heart.  Well  said,  James,  thou  hast  hit 
the  mark ;  for  the  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of 
wisdom ;  and,  to  be  sure,  they  that  want  the  be- 
ginning, have  neither  middle  nor  end.  But  we 
will  here  conclude  our  discourse  of  Mr.  Fearing, 
after  we  have  sent  after  him  this  farewell. 

Well,  Master  Fearing,  thou  didst  fear 

Thy  God,  and  wast  afraid 
Of  doing  anything,  while  here, 

that  woidd  have  thee  bctray'd.  Their  Earcwc-tl 

And  didst  thou  fear  the  lake  and  pit  ?         »•">»<  >»"1- 

Would  others  did  so  too  1 
For,  as  for  them  that  want  thy  wit, 

They  do  themselves  undo.4 

3  Hatred  to  sin  can  only  arise  from  the  love  of  God.  In 
vain  do  men  think  of  deterring  others  from  sin,  or  driving 
them  to  duty  by  low  terrors,  or  low  requirements,  'the  strong 
man  armed  will  keep  his  palace,  till  a  stronger  than  he  cometh 
and  taketh  from  him  the  armour  whereiu  he  trusted.  But 
herein  they  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  which  set  forth 
love  as  the  constraining  motive  to  true  obedience. — (J.  J3.) 

4  Christians  who  resemble  Fearing,  are  greatly  retarded  in 
their  progress  by  discouraging  apprehensions ;  they  arc  apt  to 
spend  too  much  time  in  unavailing  complaints  ;  yet  they  cannot 
think  of  giving  up  their  feeble  hopes,  or  of  returning  to  their 
forsaken  worldly  pursuits  and  pleasures.  They  are  indeed 
helped  forward,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  in  a  very  extraor- 
dinary manner;  yet  they  still  remain  exposed  to  alarms  and 
discouragements,  in  every  stage  of  their  pilgrimage.  They 
arc  afraid  even  of  relying  on  Christ  for  salvation,  because  they 
have  not  distinct  views  of  his  love,  and  the  methods  of  his 
grace;  and  imagine  some  other  qualitication  to  be  nei 
besides  the  willingness  to  seek,  knock,  and  a>k  for  the  pro- 
mised blessings,  with  a  real  desire  of  obtaining  them.  They 
imagine,  that' there  has  been  something  is  their  past  life,  or 
tbat  there  is  some  peculiarity  in  their  present  habits,  and  way 
of  applying  to  Christ,  which  may  exclude  them  from  the 
benefit:  so  that  they  pray  with  diffidence;  and,  being  eon- 


216 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


Now  I  saw,  that  they  still  went  on  in  their  talk  ; 
for  after  Mr.  Great-heart  had  made  an  end  with 
Mr.  Fearing,  Mr.   LTonest  began  to  tell  them  of 

Of  Mr  Self  will     anotuer>  ^ut  I"3   name  was   ^T.  Self- 

will.  He  pretended  himself  to  he  a 
pilgrim,  said  Mr.  Honest ;  but  I  persuade  myself 
he  never  came  in  at  the  gate  that  stands  at  the 
head  of  the  way. 

Great-heart.  Had  you  ever  any  talk  with  him 
about  it  ? 

Hon.  Yes,  more  than  once  or  twice  ;  but  he 
nnn      . .  ,    would  always  be  like  himself,   self- 

OUl  Honest  had  TT  J        .  ' 

talked     with   willed.     He  neither  cared   tor  man, 
nor  argument,  nor  yet  example  ;  what 
his  mind  prompted  him  to,  that  he  would  do,  and 
nothing  else  could  he  be  got  to. 

Great-heart.  Pray,  what  principles  did  he 
hold  ?  for  I  suppose  you  can  tell. 

Hon.  He  held,  that  a  man  might  follow  the  vices 
Seif-wiii's  as  well  as, the  virtues  of  the  pilgrims  ; 
opinions.      an(i  that  if  he  did  botll)  he  shoul(1  be 

certainly  saved. 

Great-heart.  How!  if  he  had  said,  It  is  pos- 
sible for  the  best  to  be  guilty  of  the  vices,  as  well 
as  to  partake  of  the  virtues  of  pilgrims,  he  could 
not  much  have  been  blamed ;  for  indeed  we  are 
exempted  from  no  vice  absolutely,  but  on  condition 
that  we  watch  and  strive.1  But  this,  I  perceive, 
is  not  the  thing ;  but  if  I  understand  you  right, 
your  meaning  is,  that  he  was  of  that  opinion,  that 
it  was  allowable  so  to  be. 

Hon.  Aye,  aye,  so  I  mean ;  and  so  he  believed 
and  practised. 

Great-heart.  But  what  ground  had  he  for  his 
so  saying? 

Hon.  Why,  he  said  he  had  the  Scripture  for  his 
warrant. 

Great-heart.  Prithee,  Mr.  Honest,  present  us 
with  a  few  particulars. 

Hon.  So  I  will.  He  said,  To  have  to  do  with 
other  men's  wives,  had  been  practised  by  David, 


sciously  unworthy,  can  hardly  believe  that  the  Lord  will  grant 
their  requests.  They  are  also  prone  to  overlook  the  most 
decisive  evidences  of  their  reconciliation  to  God;  and  to  per- 
severe in  arguing  with  perverse  ingenuity  against  their  own 
manifest  happiness.  The  same  mixture  of  humility  and  un- 
belief renders  persons  of  this  description  backward  in  asso- 
ciating with  their  brethren,  and  iu  frequenting  those  companies 
in  which  they  might  obtain  further  instruction ;  for  they  are 
afraid  of  being  considered  as  believers,  or  even  serious  inquirers; 
so  that  ali'ectiouate  and  earnest  persuasion  is  requisite  to  prevail 
with  them  to  join  in  those  religious  exercises,  by  which 
Christians  especially  receive  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Vet  this  arises  not  from  disinclination,  but  diffidence;  and 
though  they  are  often  peculiarly  favoured  with  seasons  of  great 
comfort,  to  counterbalance  their  dejections,  yet  they  never 
hear  or  read  of  those  who  '  have  drawn  back  to  perdition,' 
but  they  are  terrified  with  the  idea  that  they  shall  shortly 
resemble  them ;  so  that  every  warning  given  against  hypocrisy 
or  self-deception  seems  to  point  them  out  by  name,  and  every 
new  discovery  of  any  fault  or  mistake  in  their  views,  temper, 


God's  beloved  ;  and  therefore  he  could  do  it.  Ke 
said,  To  have  more  women  than  one,  was  a  thing 
that  Solomon  practised ;  and  therefore  he  could  do 
it.  He  said,  That  Sarah  and  the  godly  midwives 
of  Egypt  lied,  and  so  did  saved  Rahab  ;  and  there- 
fore he  could  do  it.  He  said,  That  the  disciples 
went  at  the  bidding  of  their  Master,  and  took  away 
the  owner's  ass  ;  and  therefore  he  could  do  so  too. 
He  said,  That  Jacob  got  the  inheritance  of  his 
father  in  a  way  of  guile  and  dissimulation  ;  and 
therefore  he  could  do  so  too.2 

Great-heart.  Highly  base !  indeed.  And  you 
are  sure  he  was  of  this  opinion  ? 

Hon.  I  have  heard  him  plead  for  it,  bring  Scrip- 
ture for  it,  bring  argument  for  it,  &c. 

Great-heart.  An  opinion  that  is  not  fit  to  be 
with  any  allowance  in  the  world. 

Hon.  You  must  understand  me  rightly.  He 
did  not  say  that  any  man  might  do  this ;  but  that 
those  that  had  the  virtues  of  those  that  did  such 
things,  might  also  do  the  same. 

Great-heart.  But  what  more  false  than  such  a 
conclusion  ?  for  this  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that 
because  good  men  heretofore  have  sinned  of  iu- 
firmity,  therefore  he  had  allowance  to  do  it  of  a 
presumptuous  mind ;  or  if,  because  a  child  by  the 
blast  of  the  wind,  or  for  that  it  stumbled  at  a  stone, 
fell  down,  and  defiled  itself  in  mire,  therefore  ho 
might  wilfully  lie  down  and  wallow  like  a  boar 
therein.  Who  could  have  thought  that  any  one 
could  so  far  have  been  blinded  by  the  power  of 
lust  ?  But  what  is  written  must  be  true :  They 
'  stumble  at  the  word,  being  disobedient ;  where- 
unto  also  they  were  appointed.'  1  Pe.  u.  8. 

His  supposing  that  such  may  have  the  godly 
men's  virtues,  who  addict  themselves  to  their  vices, 
is  also  a  delusion  as  strong  as  the  other.  It  is 
just  as  if  the  dog  should  say,  I  have,  or  may  have, 
the  qualities  of  the  child,  because  I  lick  up  its 
stinking  excrements.  To  eat  up  the  sin  of  God's 
people,  is  no  sign  of  one  that  is  possessed  with 


or  conduct,  seems  to  decide  their  doom.  At  the  same  time, 
they  are  often  remarkably  melted  into  humble,  admiring  grati- 
tude, by  contemplating  the  love  aud  sufferings  of  Christ,  and 
seem  to  delight  in  hearing  of  that  subject  above  all  others. 
They  do  not  peculiarly  fear  difficulties,  self-denial,  reproaches, 
or  persecution,  which  deter  numbers  from  making  au  open 
profession  of  religion  j  and  yet  they  are  more  backward  in  this 
respect  than  others,  because  they  deem  themselves  unworthy 
to  be  admitted  to  such  privileges  aud  iuto  such  society,  or 
else  are  apprehensive  of  being  finally  separated  from  them  or 
becoming  a  disgrace  to  religion. — (Scott.) 

1  This  is  a  solid,  scriptural  definition;  pray  mind  it.  Here 
conditions  may  safely  be  admitted;  and  happy  is  the  Christian 
who  keeps  closest  to  these  conditions,  in  order  to  enjoy  peace 
of  conscience,  and  joy  of  heart  in  Christ. — (Mason.) 

2  That  heart,  which  is  under  the  teaching  and  influence  of 
the  grace  of  God,  will  detect  such  horrid  notions,  and  cry  out 
against  them.  God  forbid  that  ever  I  shoidd  listen  one  mo- 
ment to  such  diabolical  sentiments!  for  they  are  hatched  in 
hell,  and  propagated  on  earth,  by  the  father  of  lies. — (Mason.) 


THE   riLGRIM'S   TROGRESS. 


217 


their  virtues,  no.  ir.  8.  Korean  I  believe,  that  one 
that  is  of  this  opinion,  can  at  present  have  faith  or 
love  in  him.  But  1  know  you  have  made  strong 
objections  against  him;  prithee,  what  can  h<j  say 
for  himself  ?x 

Hon*.  Why,  ho  says,  To  do  this  by  way  of 
opinion,  seems  abundance  more  honest,  than  to  do 
it,  and  yet  hold  contrary  to  it  in  opinion. 

Great-heart.  A  very  wicked  answer;  for  though 
to  let  loose  the  bridle  to  lusts,  while  our  opinions 
are  against  such  things,  is  bad;  yet,  to  sin,  and 
[dead  a  toleration  so  to  do,  is  worse.  The  one 
stumbles  beholders  accidentally,  the  other  pleads 
them  into  the  snare. 

Hon.  There  are  many  of  this  man's  mind,  that 
have  not  this  man's  mouth  ;  and  that  makes  going 
on  pilgrimage  of  so  little  esteem  as  it  is. 

GREAT-HEART.  You  have  said  the  truth,  and  it 
is  to  be  lamented ;  but  he  that  feareth  the  King 
of  Paradise,  shall  come  out  of  them  all. 

Christ.  There  are  strange  opinions  in  the  world ; 
I  know  one  that  said,  It  was  time  enough  to  repent 
when  they  come  to  die.2 

Great-heart.  Such  are  not  over  wise.  That 
man  would  have  been  loath,  might  he  have  had  a 
week  to  run  twenty  miles  in  for  his  life,  to  have 
deferred  that  journey  to  the  last  hour  of  that  week. 

IIox.  You  say  right ;  and  yet  the  generality  of 
them,  that  count  themselves  pilgrims,  do  indeed  do 
thus.  I  am,  as  you  see,  an  old  man,  and  have 
been  a  traveller  in  this  road  many  a  day ;  and  I 
have  taken  notice  of  many  things.0 

I  have  seen  some  that  have  set  out  as  if  they 
would  drive  all  the  world  afore  them,  who  yet 
have,  in  few  days,  died  as  they  in  the  wilderness, 
and  so  never  got  sight  of  the  promised  land. 

1  have  seen  some  that  have  promised  nothing, 


1  It  is  a  horrible  and  blasphemous  perversion  of  Scripture, 
to  take  encouragement  in  sin,  from  those  sad  examples  of  it  in 
the  Mints,  which  are  held  up,  in  terrorem,  as  so  many  beacons 
by  which  we  may  avoid  the  same.  To  talk,  and  especially  to 
act  like  Self-will  ail'ords  the  fullest  proof  that  a  man  never 
came  in  at  the  gate.  The  Lord  change  every  such  perverse 
will,  and  preserve  the  church  from  principles  and  practices  so 
diabolical. — (Burder.)  M  hat  shall  we  say  to  these  things? 
1  ord,  keep  me! — (J.  B.) 

-  It  may  be  seriously  inquired  as  to  whether  in  all  Satan's 
temptations,  any  one  is  so  fatal  to  immortal  souls  as  the  idea 
of  a  death-bed  repentance.  Have  not  prayers  against  suddei 
death  a  tendency  to  interfere  with  or  obstruct  that  daily  wallc 
with  God,  which  alone  can  fit  us  to  meet  the  king  of  terrors? 
When  heart  and  strength  fail;  when  the  body  is  writhing  in 
agony,  or  lying  an  insensible  lump  of  mortality  ;  is  that  the 
tune' to  make  peace  with  God ?  Such  persons  must  be  in-' 
fatuated  with  strange  notions  of  the  Divine  Being.  No,  my 
Life  is  the  time  to  serve  the  Lord,  the  time  to  insure 
the  great  reward.  Sudden  death  is  a  release  from  much  pain 
and  anxiety.  It  is  tlie  most  merciful  gate  by  which  we  can 
enter  upon  immortality. — (En.) 

3  Pray  attentively  mind,  and  deeply  consider  the  six  following 
observations:  tiny  are  just  j  they  are  daily  confirmed  to  us  in 
the  different  conduct  of  professors,   Study,  and  pray  to  improve 
them  to  your  soul's  prolit. — iMason.) 
VOL.  III. 


at  first  setting  out  to  be  pilgrims  and  thai  one 
would  have  thought  could  not  have  lived  a  day, 
that  have  yet  proved  very  good  pilgrims. 

1  have  seen  souk;  who  have  run  hastily  forward, 
that  again  have,  after  a  little  time,  run  as  fast  just 
hack  again. 

I  have  seen  some  who  have  spoken  very  well  of 
a  pilgrim's  life  at  first,  that,  after  a  while,  have 
spoken  as  much  against  it. 

I  have  heard  some,  when  they  first  set  out  for 
Paradise,  say  positively  there  is  such  a  place  ;  who 
when  they  have  hcen  almost  there,  have  come  hack 
again,  and  said  there  is  none. 

I  have  heard  some  vaunt  what  tiny  would  do,  in 
case  they  should  be  opposed,  that  have,  even  at  a 
false  alarm,  fled  faith,  the  pilgrim's  way,  and  all.4 

Now,  as  they  were  thus  in  their  way,  there  came 
one  running  to  meet  them,  and  said,    i.rcsh  ncws  0{ 
Gentlemen,    and  you  of   the  weaker        trouble. 
sort,  if  you  love  life,  shift  for  yourselves,  for  the 
robhers  are  before  you.5 

Great-heart.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  They 
be  the  three  that  set  upon  Little-faith     rir.t  Part 
heretofore.      Well,    said    lie,    we   are        v- 1*7. 
ready  for  them ;  so  they  went  on  their    Great -liearfs 
way.     Now,  they  looked  at  every  turn-     reso1 
ing,  when  they  should  have  met  with  the  villains; 
but  whether  they  heard  of  Mr.  Greatdieart,  or 
whether  they  had  some  other  game,  they  came  not 
up  to  the  Pilgrims. 

Christiana  then  wished  for  an  inn  for  herself 
and  her  children,  because  they  were  christianan-isii- 
weary.6  Then  said  Mr.  Honest,  There  eth  fur  uu  '""• 
is  one  a  little  before  us,  where  a  very  honourable 
disciple,  one  Gaius,  dwells.  Ro.  xri  23.  ^ 

So  they  all  concluded  to  turn  in  thither, 
and  the  rather,  because  the  old  gentleman  gave 
him  so  good  a  report.     So  when  they  came  to  the 
door,  they  went  in,  not  knocking,  for  folks  use  not 


4  Adam  hid  himself  because  he  was  naked.  But  how  could 
he  be  naked,  when  before  he  had  made  himself  an  apron  ?  O  ! 
the  approach  of  God  consumed  and  burnt  oil  his  apron  I  His 
apron  would  not  keep  him  from  the  eye  of  the  incorruptible 
(iod.  When  God  deals  with  such  meu  for  sin,  assuredly  thej 
will  find  themselves  naked. —  (Bunyan  ou  Genesis,  vol.  ii. 
p.  432.)  If  the  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pnrsueth,  how  can 
they  stand  when  God  lets  loose  death  and  eternity  upon  their 
guilty  souls? — (Ed.) 

*  Thou  art  bound  to  heaven,  but  the  way  thither  is  danger- 
ous.    It  is  beset  everywhere  with  evil  angels,  who  would  rob 
thee  of  thy  soul.     If  thou  wouldest  go  ou  cheerfully  in  thy 
dangerous  journey,  commit  thy  treasure — thy  soul,  t.>  I 
keep;  and  then  thou  mayesl  say  with  comfort,  Well,  tl 
is  over;  my  soul  is  safe;  the  thieves,  if  they  meet  me, 
come  at  that ;   God  will  keep  it  to  my  joy  and  comfort  at  the 
great  day.— (Banyan's  Advice  to  Sufferers,  vol.  ii.  p.  701.) 

u  The  spiritual  refreshment,  arising  from  experimental 
sation,  seems  to  be  especially  intended  ,  but  the  name  < 
suggests  also  the  importance  of  the  apostle's  exhortatio 
hospitality  without  judging.'  Thisought  to  h 
strangers  if  they  are  certified  to  us  as  brethren  m  i 
(Scott.)  Every  Christ  ian'a  house  should,  so  far  as  ability 
be  an  inn  for  the  refreshment  of  weary  tellou  -pilgrims.— (i^D.j 

23 


213 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


Gaius's  Cook. 


to  knock  at  the  door  of  an  inn.     Then  they  called 
They  enter  into  f°r  the  master  of  the  house,  and  he 
his  house.      came  t0  them>    So  they  asked  if  they 
might  lie  there  that  night. 

Gaius.  Yes,  gentlemen,  if  ye  be  true  men,  for 
my  house  is  for  none  but  pilgrims.  Then  was 
Gains  entertains  Christiana,  Mercy,  and  the  boys,  the 
them.andhow.    more  gia(^   for  that   ti,e  lnn_keeper 

was  a  lover  of  pilgrims.  So  they  called  for  rooms, 
and  he  showed  them  one  for  Christiana  and  her 
children,  and  Mercy,  and  another  for  Mr.  Great- 
heart  and  the  old  gentleman. 

Great-heart.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  Good 
Gaius,  what  hast  thou  for  supper?  for  these  pil- 
grims have  come  far  to-day,  and  are  weary. 

Gaius.  It  is  late,  said  Gaius,  so  we  cannot  con- 
veniently go  out  to  seek  food ;  but  such  as  we 
have,  you  shall  be  welcome  to,  if  that  will  content.1 

Great-heart.  We  will  be  content  with  what  thou 
hast  in  the  house;  forasmuch  as  I  have  proved  thee, 
thou  art  never  destitute  of  that  which  is  convenient. 

Then  he  went  down  and  spake  to  the  cook,  whose 
name  was  Taste-that-which-is-good, 
to  get  ready  supper  for  so  many  pil- 
grims. Thi3  done,  he  comes  up  again,  saying, 
Come,  my  good  friends,  you  are  welcome  to  me, 
and  I  am  glad  that  I  have  a  house  to  entertain 
you ;  and  while  supper  is  making  ready,  if  you 
please,  let  us  entertain  one  another  with  some  good 
discourse.  So  they  all  said,  Content. 
„,  „     .  ,  Gaius.    Then    said   Gaius,   Whose 

Talk     between 

Gaius  and  Ids  wife  is  this  aged  matron?  and  whose 
daughter  is  this  young  damsel. 
Great-heart.  The  woman  is  the  wife  of  one 
Christian,  a  Pilgrim  of  former  times ;  and  these 
are  his  four  children.  The  maid  is  one  of  her 
acquaintance ;  one  that  she  hath  persuaded  to 
come  with  her  on  pilgrimage.  The  boys  take  all 
after  their  father,  and  covet  to  tread 
in  his  steps ;  yea,  if  they  do  but  see 
any  place  where  the  old  Pilgrim  hath  lain,  or  any 
print  of  his  foot,  it  ministereth  joy  to  their  hearts, 
and  they  covet  to  lie  or  tread  in  the  same. 

Gaius.  Then  said  Gaius,  Is  this  Christian's  wife? 
and  are  these  Christian's  children?  I  knew  your 
husband's  father,  yea,  also  his  father's  father. 
Many  have  been  good  of  this  stock ;  their  ancestors 

Of  Christian's  dwelt  first  at  Alltioch.  Ac.  xi.  2G.  Chris- 
ancestors,  tian's  progenitors  (I  suppose  you  have 
heard  your  husband  talk  of  them)  were  very  worthy 
men.  They  have,  above  any  that  I  know,  showed 
themselves  men  of  great  virtue  and  courage,  for 
the  Lord  of  the  Pilgrims,  his  ways,  and  them  that 

1  This  character  is  drawn  from  that  of  the  well-beloved  Gaius, 
in  the  third  epistle  of  John.  Although,  in  comparison  with  the 
great  bulk  of  Christians,  there  are  but  few  such  in  the  church ; 
yet  in  all  ages,  and  in  most  churches,  some  hospitable  Gaius  is 
to  be  found.     May  their  numbers  be  greatly  increased. — (Ed.) 


Mark  this. 


loved  him.  I  have  heard  of  many  of  your  husband's 
relations,  that  have  stood  all  trials  for  the  sake  of 
the  truth.  Stephen,  that  was  one  of  the  first  of 
the  family  from  whence  your  husband  sprang,  was 
knocked  on  the  head  with  stones.  Ac.  vii.  59,  60. 
James,  another  of  this  generation,  was  slain  with 
the  edge  of  the  sword.  Ac.  xn.  2.  To  say  nothing  of 
Paul  and  Peter,  men  anciently  of  the  family  from 
whence  your  husband  came,  there  was  Ignatius, 
who  was  cast  to  the  lions  ;2  Romanus,  whose  flesh 
was  cut  by  pieces  from  his  bones,  and  Polycarp, 
that  played  the  man  in  the  fire.  There  was  he 
that  was  hanged  up  in  a  basket  in  the  sun,  for  the 
wasps  to  eat ;  and  he  who  they  put  into  a  sack, 
and  cast  him  into  the  sea  to  be  drowned.  It  would 
be  utterly  impossible  to  count  up  all  of  that  family 
that  have  suffered  injuries  and  death,  for  the  love 
of  a  pilgrim's  life.  Nor  can  I  but  be  glad,  to  see 
that  thy  husband  has  left  behind  him  four  such 
boys  as  these.  I  hope  they  will  bear  up  their 
father's  name,  and  tread  in  their  father's  steps, 
and  come  to  their  father's  end. 

Great-heart.  Indeed,  Sir,  they  are  likely  lads ; 
they  seem  to  choose  heartily  their  father's  ways. 

Gaius.  That  is  it  that  I  said ;  wherefore  Chris- 
tian's family  is  like  still   to   spread    . ,  .    x  „,  . 

J  r  Advice  to  Chris- 

abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  ground,  tiana  about  her 
and  yet  to  be  numerous  upon  the  face  oy°' 
of  the  earth ;  wherefore,  let  Christiana  look  out 
some  damsels  for  her  sons,  to  whom  they  may  be 
betrothed,  <fcc,  that  the  name  of  their  father  and 
the  house  of  his  progenitors  may  never  be  forgotten 
in  the  world.3 

Hon.  It  is  pity  this  family  should  fall  and  be 
extinct. 

Gaius.  Fall  it  cannot,  but  be  diminished  it  may; 
but  let  Christiana  take  my  advice,  and  that  is  the 
way  to  uphold  it. 

And,  Christiana,  said  this  Innkeeper,  I  am  glad 
to  see  thee  and  thy  friend  Mercy  together  here,  a 
lovely  couple.  And  may  I  advise,  take  Mercy  into 
a  nearer  relation  to  thee ;  if  she  will,  let  her  be 
given  to  Matthew,  thy  eldest  son ;  it  is  the  way  to 
preserve  you  a  posterity  in  the  earth.  So  this 
match  was  concluded,  and  in  process  Mercy  Dn(] 
of  time  they  were  married ;  but  more  Matthew  marry. 
of  that  hereafter. 

2  Ignatius,  a  bishop  or  pastor  of  a  church  in  Antioch,  cruelly 
martyred  for  the  truth  in  the  second  century ;  not  Ignatius 
Loyola,  the  Jesuit.  Mr.  Bunyan  obtained  all  this  information 
from  Foxe's  Book  of  Martyrs,  which  was  written  before  Satan 
bad  introduced  the  Jesuits  into  the  world. — (En.) 

3  '  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all.'  He.  xiii.  4.  Notwith- 
standing all  the  cares  of  a  family,  while  the  married  have  many 
troubles,  the  single  have  few,  if  any,  real  enjoyments  of  life. 
The  will  of  our  heavenly  Father  is  here  enforced  upon  the 
pilgrims  by  Gaius — only  let  pilgrims  be  united  together, 
marry  in  the  Lord,  and  we  may  expect  his  blessing  to  tit  us  to 
do  his  will.  Vowrs  of  celibacy  are  from  beneath,  from  the 
father  of  lies — contrary  to  the  order  of  nature,  and  the  ex- 
pressed will  of  God.     '  It  is  not  good  to  be  alone.' — (En.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


219 


Gams  also  proceeded,  ami  said,  I  will  now 
6peak  on  the  behalf  of  women,  to  take  away  their 
reproach.  For  as  death  and  the  curse  came  into 
the  world  by  a  woman,  Ge.  UL,  so  also  did  life  and 
health:  'God  sent  forth  his  Son  made  of  a  woman.' 
Ga.  iv.  4.  Yea,  to  show  how  much  those  that  came 
Whv  women  of  after,  did  abhor  the  act  of  the  mother, 
dire'd  "cua-  this  sex,  in  the  Old  Testament,  co- 
drea-  veted  children,  if  happily  this  or  that 

woman  might  be  the  mother  of  the  Saviour  of  the 
world. 

I  will  say  again,  that  when  the  Saviour  was 
come,  women  rejoiced  in  him  before  cither  man  or 
angel.  Lu.  ii.  1  read  not,  that  ever  any  man  did 
U'ive  unto  Christ  so  much  as  one  groat ;  but  the 
women  followed  him,  and  ministered  to  him  of 
their  substance.  Lu.  viii.  2,  3.  It  was  a  woman  that 
washed  his  feet  with  tears,  and  a  woman  that 
anointed  his  body  to  the  burial.  Lu.  vil  37,  so.  Ja.  xi.2.; 
xii.  3.  They  were  women  that  wept,  when  he  was 
going  to  the  cross,  and  women  that  followed  him 
from  the  cross,  and  that  sat  by  his  sepulchre,  when 
he  was  buried.  Lu.  xxiu.  27.  Mat.  xxvii.  55,  56,  gi.  They 
were  women  that  were  first  with  him  at  his  resur- 
rection-morn;  and  women  that  brought  tidings 
first  to  his  disciples,  that  he  was  risen  from  the 
dead.  Lu.  xxiv.  22,  23.  Women,  therefore,  are  highly 
favoured,  and  show  by  these  things  that  they  are 
sharers  with  us  in  the  grace  of  life. 

Now  the  cook  sent  up  to  signify  that  supper 
was  almost  ready,  and  sent  one  to  lay 
the  cloth,  the  trenchers,  and  to  set 
the  salt  and  bread  in  order. 

Then  said  Matthew,  The  sight  of  this  cloth,  and 
of  this  fore-runner  of  the  supper,  begetteth  in  me 
a  greater  appetite  to  my  food  than  I  had  before. 

Gaius.  So  let  all  ministering  doctrines  to  thee, 
in  this  life,  be<ret  in  thee  a  greater 

What     to     be      ,      .  •'  ,  P    , 

gathered  from  desire  to  sit  at  the  supper  or  the  great 
SSf  rfJS  KinS  in  his  kingdom;  for  all  preach- 
ing, books,  and  ordinances  here,  are 
but  as  the  laying  of  the  trenchers, 
and  as  setting  of  salt  upon  the  board,  Avhcn  com- 
pared with  the  feast  that  our  Lord  will  make  for 
us  when  we  come  to  his  house. 

So  supper  came  up ;  *  and  first,  a  heave-shoulder, 
and  a  wave-breast,  Le.  vii.  32—34 ;  r.  14, 15,  were  set  on 
the  table  before  them,  to  6how  that  they  must 
begin  their  meal  with  prayer  and  praise  to  God. 
Ts.  xxv.  l.  ne.  xiu.  13.  The  hcavc-shouldcr,  David 
lifted   his   heart   up  to  God  with ;  and  with   the 


Supper  ready; 


tlie   cloth  and 
trenchers. 


1  The  different  parts  of  social  worship  ami  Christian  fellow* 
ship  are  here  allegorically  described.  The  heave-shoulder  and 
wave-breast  typify  the  power  and  love  of  our  great  High  Priest ; 
that  we  should  devote  to  him  our  whole  heart,  with  ferveut 
prayer,  and  grateful  praise.  The  wine  represents  tlie  exhilar- 
ating etFccts  of  the  shedding  of  Christ's  blood,  and  its  applica- 
tion to  us  by  living  faith.  The  milk  is  the  simple  instruction 
of  the  Scriptures.     Tlie  butter  and  honey  are  animating  views 


wave-breast,  where  his  heart  lay,  with  that  he 
used  to  lean  upon  his  harp  when  he  played.  Theso 
two  dishes  were  very  fresh  and  good,  and  they  all 
eat  heartily  well  thereof. 

The  next  they  brought  up,  was  a  bottle  of  wine, 
red  as  blood.  De.82.lt  So  Gaius  said  to  them, 
Drink  freely  ;  this  is  the  juice  of  the  true  vine, 
that  makes  glad  the  heart  of  God  and  man.  ju.  ix.  13. 
Jn.  xv.  1.     So  they  drank  and  were  merry. 

The  next  was  a  dish  of  milk  well  crumbed  ;  but 
Gaius  said,   Let  the  boys  have  that, 

,,     ,,,  xi         1  A  dish  of  milk. 

that  they  may  grow  thereby.  1  Pe.  U.  1,2. 

Then  they  brought  up  in  course  a  dish  of 
butter  and  honey.  Then  said  Gaius,  0f  bonej  and 
Eat  freely  of  this ;  for  this  is  good  to  htttw' 
cheer  up,  and  strengthen  your  judgments  and 
understandings.  This  was  our  Lord's  dish  when 
he  was  a  child:  'Butter  and  honey  shall  he  eat, 
that  he  may  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose 

the  good.'    Is.  vii.  15. 

Then  they  brought  them  up  a  dish  of  apples, 
and  they  were  very  good  tasted  fruit. 

rru  -mr         1  -»r  l  A  dish  of  apples. 

1  hen  said  Matthew,  May  we  eat  apples, 
since  they  were  such,  by,  and  with  which,   the 
serpent  beguiled  our  first  mother? 
Then  said  Gaius — 

Apples  were  they  with  which  we  were  beguil'd ; 
Yet  sin,  not  apples,  hath  our  souls  defil'd. 
Apples  forbid,  if  eat,  corrupt  the  blood ; 
To  eat  such,  when  commanded,  does  us  good. 
Drink  of  his  flagons,  then,  thou  church,  his  dove, 
And  eat  his  apples,  who  are  sick  of  love. 

Then  said  Matthew,  I  made  the  scruple,  because 
I  awhile  since  was  sick  with  eating  of  fruit. 

Gaius.  Forbidden  fruit  will  make  you  sick,  but 
not  what  our  Lord  has  tolerated. 

While  they  were  thus  talking,  they  were  pre- 
sented with  another  dish,  and  it  was  a 

.  A  dish  of  nuts. 

dish  of  nuts.  Ca.  vt  11.     Then  said  some 
at  the  table,  Nuts  spoil  tender  teeth,  especially 
the  teeth  of  children ;  which  when  Gaius  heard, 
he  said — 

Hard  texts  arc  nuts  (I  will  not  call  them  cheaters), 
Whose  shells  do  keep  their  kernels  from  the  eaters. 
Ope  then  the  shells,  and  you  shall  have  the  meat; 
They  here  are  brought  for  you  to  crack  and  eat. 

Then  were  they  very  merry,  and  sat  at  the  table 
a  long  time,  talking  of  many  things.  Then  said 
the  old  gentleman,  My  good  landlord,  while  we  are 
cracking  your  nuts,  if  you  please,  do  you  open  this 
riddle:2 


of  God  and  heavenlv  joy.  The  apples  are  the  promises  and 
privileges  of  Christians  '(see  Ca.  ii.  3.  Pr.  xxtr.  11).  And  the 
nuts  those  difficult  doctrines,  which  amply  repay  us  the  trouble 
of  penetrating  their  meaning.  Christians  so  employed  have 
far  sweeter  enjoyments  than  they  ever  had  in  the  mirth,  diver- 
sions, and  pleasures  of  the  world.— (Scott.) 

*  Jtanyan  takes  advantage  of  the  common  pastime  of  solving 


220 


THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS. 


A  man  there  was,  though  some  did  count 

A.  riddle  pnt  forth  ,  . , 

by  Old  Honest.  him  mad> 

The  more  he  cast  away,  the  more  he  had. 

Then  they  all  gave  good  heed,  wondering  what 
good  Gaius  would  say ;  so  he  sat  still  awhile,  and 
then  thus  replied: — 

He  that  bestows  his  goods  upon  the  poor, 
aius  opens  1 .     g^  j^yg  as  mucn  again,  and  ten  times  more. 

Joseph  Then  said  Joseph,  I  dare  say,  Sir,  I  did 

wonders.    no^  thjnk  y0U  could  have  found  it  out. 

Oh !  said  Gaius,  I  have  heen  trained  up  in  this 
way  a  great  while;  nothing  teaches  like  experience; 
I  have  learned  of  my  Lord  to  he  kind ;  and  have 
found  hy  experience,  that  I  have  gained  thereby. 
1  There  is  that  scattered),  and  yet  incrcaseth  ;  and 
there  is  that  withholdeth  more  than  is  meet ;  hut 
it  tendcth  to  poverty.  Pr.  xi.  24.  There  is  that  maketh 
himself  rich,  yet  hath  nothing ;  there  is  that  maketh 
himself  poor,  yet  hath  great  riches.' 1  Pr.  xni.  7. 

Then  Samuel  whispered  to  Christiana,  his 
mother,  and  said,  Mother,  this  is  a  very  good 
man's  house,  let  us  stay  here  a  good  while,  and 
let  my  brother  Matthew  be  married  here  to  Mercy, 
before  we  go  any  further.3 

The  which  Gaius  the  host  overhearing,  said, 
With  a  very  good  will,  my  child. 
,.  ...  ,        So  they  staid  there  more  than  a 

Matthew      and  J  . 

Mercy  aremar-   month,  andMercywas  given  to  Matthew 

riud.  .,. 

to  wife. 

While  they  staid  here,  Mercy,  as  her  custom 
was,  would  be  making  coats  and  garments  to  give 
to  the  poor,  by  which  she  brought  up  a  very  good 
report  upon  the  Pilgrims.3 

But  to  return  again  to  our  story.  After  supper 
_,,    .  .     the  lads  desired  a  bed  ;  for  that  they 

The  hoys  go  to  »  J 

bed,  the  rest  were  weary  with  travelling :  then 
Gaius  called  to  show  them  their  cham- 
ber; but  said  Mercy,  I  will  have  them  to  bed. 
So  she  had  them  to  bed,  and  they  slept  well ;  but 
the  rest  sat  up  all  night ;  for  Gaius  and  they  were 
such  suitable  company,  that  they  could  not  tell 
how  to  part.  Then  after  much  talk  of  their  Lord, 
„,,„  ,     themselves,  and   their    journey,   old 

Old  Honest  nods.    -,        TT  .         ,  J       .      ,       , 

Mr.  Honest,  he  that  put  forth  the 


riddles,  to  teach  important  truth  in  a  way  calculated  to  he 
impressed  on  the  memory.  Thus,  in  the  treatise  on  the  Cove- 
nants of  the  Law  and  Grace,  the  second  Adam  was  before  the 
first,  and  also  the  second  covenant  before  the  first.  This  is  a 
riddle. — (Vol.  ii.  p.  524.) — (Ed.)  Observe  here,  the  feast  of 
pilgrims  was  attended  with  mirth.  Christians  have  the  greatest 
reason  to  be  merry ;  but  then  it  ought  to  be  spiritual  mirth, 
which  springs  from  spiritual  views  and  spiritual  conversation. 
— (Mason.) 

1  When  Christian  intercourse  is  conducted  with  gravity 
and  cheerfulness  united,  it  is  both  pleasant  and  instructive. 
Speech  should  be  '  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt,  that 
it  may  minister  grace  to  the  hearers,'  and  thus  '  provoke  one 
another  unto  love,  and  to  good  works ;'  thus  are  the  young 
encouraged  to  follow  that  which  is  good. — (Ivimey.) 

2  Here  is  a  genuine  discovery  of  a  gracious  heart     when  it 


riddle  to  Gaius,  began  to  nod.     Then  said  Great- 
heart,  What,  Sir,  you  begin  to  be  drowsy ;  come, 
rub  up ;  now  here  is  a  riddle  for  you.     Then  said 
Mr.  Honest,  Let  us  hear  it. 
Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart, 

He  that  will  kill,  must  first  be  overcome, 

"Who  live  abroad  would,  first  must  die  at  home.         n     °" 

Ha !  said  Mr.  Honest,  it  is  a  hard  one,  hard  to 
expound,  and  harder  to  practise.  But  come, 
landlord,  said  he,  I  will,  if  you  please,  leave  my 
part  to  you ;  do  you  expound  it,  and  I  will  hear 
what  you  say. 

No,  said  Gaius,  it  was  put  to  you,  and  it  is 
expected  that  you  should  answer  it. 

Then  said  the  old  gentleman, 

He  first  by  grace  must  conquer'd  be, 
That  sin  would  mortify ;  T]ie  ri(idJe 

And  who,  that  lives,  would  convince  me,         opened. 
Unto  himself  must  die.4 

It  is  right,  said  Gaius  ;  good  doctrine  and  expe- 
rience teaches  this.  For,  first,  until  grace  dis- 
plays itself,  and  overcomes  the  soul  with  its  glory, 
it  is  altogether  without  heart  to  oppose  sin ;  be- 
sides, if  sin  is  Satan's  cords,  by  which  the  soul 
lies  bound,  how  should  it  make  resistance,  before 
it  is  loosed  from  that  infirmity? 

Secondly,  nor  will  any,  that  knows  either  reason 
or  grace,  believe  that  such  a  man  can  be  a  living 
monument  of  grace  that  is  a  slave  to  his  own 
corruptions. 

And  now  it  comes  in  my  mind,  I  will  tell  you  a 
story  worth  the  hearing.    There  were     .        ,. 
two  men  that  went  on  pilgrimage ;  the      worth  the 
one  began  when  he  was  young,  the 
other  when  he  was  old.    The  young  man  had  strong 
corruptions  to  grapple  with ;  the  old  man's  wero 
decayed  with  the  decays  of  nature.     The  young 
man  trod  his  steps  as  even  as  did  the  old  one,  and 
was  every  way  as  light  as  he.     Who  now,  or  which 
of  them,  had  their  graces  shining  clearest,  since 
both  seemed  to  be  alike  ? 

Hon.  The  young  man's,  doubtless.  For  that 
which  heads  it  against  the  greatest 

.  ,  -  ,        .          A  comparison. 

opposition,  gives   best   demonstration 

that  it  is  strongest ;  especially  when  it  also  holdeth 


is  delighted  with  spiritual  company  and  conversation,  and  longs 
for  its  continuance.     Is  it  so  with  you  ? — (Mason.) 

3  If  our  love  to  sinners  be  only  shown  by  seeking  their 
spiritual  good,  it  will  be  considered  as  a  bigoted  desire  to 
proselyte  them  to  our  sect ;  but  uniform  diligent  endeavours 
to  relieve  their  temporal  wants  are  intelligible  to  every  man, 
and  bring  a  good  report  on  the  profession  of  the  gospel.  Mat. 
v.  16.— (Scott.) 

4  0,  this  dying  to  self,  to  self-righteous  pride,  vain  confid- 
ence, self-love,  and  self-complacency,  is  hard  work  to  the  old 
man ;  yea,  it  is  both  impracticable  and  impossible  to  him.  It  is 
only  grace  that  can  conquer  and  subdue  him;  and  where  grace 
reigns,  this  work  is  carried  on  day  by  day.  And  yet  the  old 
man  of  siu,  and  self-righteousnes?,  still  lives  in  us: — (Mason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


221 


pace  with  that  that  meets  not  with  half  so  nrach  ; 
as,  to  he  sure,  old  age  does  not.1 

Besides,  I  have  observed  that  old  men  have 
blessed  themseltJS  with  this  mistake, 
namely,  taking  the  decajS  of  nature 
for  a  gracious  conquest  over  corruptions,  ami  so 
have  been  apt  to  beguile  themselves.  Indeed,  old 
men  that  are  gracious,  are  best  able  to  give  advice 
to  them  that  are  young,  because  they  have  seen 
most  of  the  emptiness  of  things.  But  yet,  for  an 
old  and  a  young  [man]  to  set  out  both  together, 
tin'  young  one  has  the  advantage  of  the  fairest  dis- 
covery of  a  woik  of  grace  within  him,  though  the 
old  man's  corruptions  are  naturally  the  weakest. 

Thus  they  sat  talking  till  break  of  day.  Now, 
when  the  family  was  up,  Christiana  bid  her  son 
James  that  he  should  read  a  chapter;  so  he  read 
the  fifty-third  of  Isaiah.  "When  he  had  done, 
Another  quts-  ^r-  Honest  asked,  why  it  was  said 
lluu-  that  the  Saviour  is  said  to  come  '  out 

of  a  dry  ground  ; '  and  also,  that  '  he  had  no  form 
or  comeliness  in  him  ? ' 

Great-heart.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  To 
the  first,  I  answer,  Because  the  church  of  the 
Jews,  of  which  Christ  came,  had  then  lost  almost 
all  the  sap  and  spirit  of  religion.  To  the  second, 
I  say,  The  words  are  spoken  in  the  person  of  the 
unbelievers,  who,  because  they  want  that  eye  that 
can  see  into  our  Prince's  heart,  therefore  they 
judge  of  him  by  the  meanness  of  his  outside. 
Just  like  those  that  know  not  that  precious  stones 
are  covered  over  with  a  homely  crust ;  who,  when 
they  have  found  one,  because  they  know  not  what 
they  have  found,  cast  it  again  away,  as  men  do  a 
common  stone. 

Well,  said  Gaius,  now  you  are  here,  and  since, 
as  1  know,  Mr.  Great-heart  is  good  at  his  weapons, 
if  you  please,  after  we  have  refreshed  ourselves,  we 
will  walk  into  the  fields,  to  see  if  we  can  do  any 
good.-'  About  a  mile  from  hence,  there  is  one  Slay- 
good,  a  giant  that  does  much  annoy  the  King's 
highway  in  these  parts ;  and  I  know  whereabout 

Giant  Slay-good    his    haunt    is;       IIe.is    niaster    of    a 
assaulted  nwi   number  of  thieves ;    it  would  be  well 

if  we  could  clear  these  parts  of  him. 


1  Old  age  affords  advantage  in  overcoming  some  propensi- 
ties, yet  habits  of  indulgence  often  counterbalance  the  decays 
of  nature ;  and  avarice,  suspicion,  and  peevishness,  with  other 
t\il-,  gather  strength  as  men  advance  in  years.  Some  old 
men  may  imagine  that  they  have  renounced  sin,  because  they 
are  no  longer  capable  of  committing  the  crimes  in  which  they 
once  lived. — (Scott.) 

*  The  refreshment  of  Divine  consolations,  and  Chilian 
fellowship,  is  intended  to  prepare  us  tor  vigorously  maintaining 
the  good  fight  of  faith  ;  not  only  against  the  enemies  of  our 
own  souls,  but  also  against  the  opposers  of  our  most  holy 
religion.  We  are  soldiers,  and  should  unite  together  under 
the  Captain  of  Salvation,  to  contend  for  the  faith  once  delivered 
to  the  saints,  by  every  method  authorized  by  the  Word  of 
God  ;  nor  must  we  shrink  from  danger  and  contumely  in  so 
good  a  cause. — (Scott.,) 


So  they  consented,  and  went,  Mr.  Great-heart 
with  his  sword,  helmet,  and  shield,  and  the  rest 
with  spears  and  staves/' 

When  they  came  to  the  place  where  he  was,  they 
found  him  with  one  Feeble-mind  in  his  He  is  found  with 
hands,  whom  his  servants  had  brought  5nmd  ^JjJ 
unto  him,  having  taken  him  in  the  ,'""1- 
way.  Now  the  giant  was  rifling  him,  with  a  pur- 
pose, after  that,  to  pick  his  hones,  for  he  was  of 
the  nature  of  flesh-eaters. 

Well,  so  soon  as  he  saw  Mr.  Great-heart  and  his 
friends  at  the  mouth  of  his  cave,  with  their  weapons, 
he  demanded  what  they  wanted. 

Great-heart.  We  want  thee;  for  we  are  come 
to  revenge  the  quarrel  of  the  many  that  thou  hast 
slain  of  the  pilgrims,  when  thou  hast  dragged  them 
out  of  the  King's  highway;  wherefore,  come  out 
of  thy  cave.  So  he  armed  himself  and  came  out ; 
and  to  a  battle  they  went,  and  fought  for  above  an 
hour,  and  then  stood  still  to  take  wind. 

Slay.  Then  said  the  giant,  Why  are  you  hero 
on  my  ground  ? 

Great-heart.  To  revenge  the  blood  of  pilgrims, 

as  I   also  told  thee  before.     So  they  went  to  it 

again,  and  the  giant  made  Mr.  Great-heart  give 

back  ;  but  he  came  up  again,  and,  in  the  greatness 

of  his  mind,  he  let  fly  with  such  stoutness  at  the 

giant's  head  and  sides,  that  he  made  him  let  his 

weapon  fall  out  of  his  hand ;  so  he  smote  him,  and 

slew  him,  and  cut  off  his  head,  and  brought  it 

away  to  the  inn.     lie  also  took  Feeble-    0         y  . , 

mind,  the  pilgrim,  and  brought  him     mind  rescued 
....      .     i  •    l    i    •  Tim        Ai  faun  the  giant. 

with  nun  to  Ins  lodgings.     \\  lien  they 

were   come  home,  they  showed   his   head   to  the 

family,  and  then  set  it  up,  as  they  had  done  others 

before,  for  a  terror  to  those  that  shall  attempt  to 

do  as  he  hereafter.4 

Then  they  asked  Mr.  Feeble-mind  how  he  fell 
into  his  hands  ? 

Feeble-mind.  Then  said  the  poor  man,  I  am  a 
sickly  man,  as  you  see;  and,  hecause  How  Feeb!c_ 
death  did  usually  once  a  day  knock  at  mind  ^me  to 
my  door,  I  thought  I  should  never  be  L  a  °r 
well  at  home ;  so  I  betook  myself  to  a  pilgrim'.-, 
life,  and   have  travelled  hither  from  the  town  of 


3  It  may  be  asked,  how  far  it  is  right  to  expose  ourselves  to 
danger  and  difficulties,  since  it  is  rashness,  not  courage,  to 
expose  ourselves  to  unnecessary  danger,  or  to  give  unnecessary 
offence.     I  would  auswer,  It  can  never  be  improper  t 

error,  or  oppose  a  prevailing  vice,  by  which  God's  children  are 
in  danger  of  being  beguiled.— (J.  B.) 

4  Giant  Slay-good  represents  a  wicked,  cruel  man — a  mere 
cannibal,  invested  with  judicial  authority — a  selfish,  malignant 
persecutor,  who  intimidated  feeble-minded  professors  by  fines 
ami  imprisonments,  to  the  hazard  of  their  souls.  By  the 
thieves,  of  whom  he  was  master,  wore  perhaps  intended  the 
common  informers,  who  got  their  living  by  giving  evidence 
against  Nonconformists;  some  cruel  magistrates  pursued  them 
to  death.  The  attack  was  by  scriptural  and  rational  argu- 
ments, which  led  to  a  great  alteration  in  these  accursed  laws. 
— (Ivimey  and  bcott.J 


222 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Uncertain,  where  I  and  my  father  were  horn.  I 
am  a  man  of  no  strength  at  all  of  body,  nor  yet 
of  mind ;  hut  would,  if  I  could,  though  I  can  hut 
craw],  spend  my  life  in  the  pilgrim's  way.1  When 
1  came  at  the  gate  that  is  at  the  head  of  the  way, 
the  Lord  of  that  place  did  entertain  me  freely ; 
neither  ohjected  he  against  my  weakly  looks,  nor 
against  my  feeble  mind;  but  gave  me  such  things 
that  were  necessary  for  my  journey,  and  bid  me 
hope  to  the  end.  When  I  came  to  the  house  of 
the  Interpreter,  I  received  much  kindness  there ; 
and  because  the  Hill  Difficulty  was  judged  too 
hard  for  me,  I  was  carried  up  that  by  one  of  his 
servants.  Indeed,  I  have  found  much  relief  from 
pilgrims,  though  none  were  willing  to  go  so  softly 
as  I  am  forced  to  do ;  yet  still,  as  tbey  came  on, 
tbey  bid  me  be  of  good  cheer,  and  said  that  it  was 
the  will  of  their  Lord  that  comfort  sbould  be  given 
to  the  feeble-minded,  and  so  went  on  their  own 
pace,  l  Th.  v.  u.  When  I  was  come  up  to  Assault 
Lane,  then  this  giant  met  with  me,  and  bid  me 
prepare  for  an  encounter ;  but,  alas  !  feeble  one 
that  I  was,  I  had  more  need  of  a  cordial.  So  he 
came  up  and  took  me.  I  conceited 
he  should  not  kill  me.  Also,  when  he 
had  got  me  into  his  den,  since  I  went  not  with 
him  willingly,  I  believed  I  should  come  out  alive 
again ;  for  I  have  heard,  that  not  any  pilgrim 
that  is  taken  captive  by  violent  hands,  if  he  keeps 
beart-whole  towards  his  Master,  is,  by  the  laws  of 
Providence,  to  die  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy. 
Robbed  I  looked  to  be,  and  robbed  to  be  sure  I 
am ;  but  I  am,  as  you  see,  escaped  with  life ;  for 
the  which  I  thank  my  King  as  author,  and  you  as 
the  means.  Other  brunts  I  also  look  for  ;  but 
this  I  have  resolved  on,  to  wit,  to  run 
when  I  can,  to  go  when  I  cannot  run, 
and  to  creep  when  I  cannot  go.  As  to  the  main, 
I  thank  him  that  loves  me,  I  am  fixed.  My  way 
is  before  me,  my  mind  is  beyond  the  river  that  has 
no  bridge,  though  I  am,  as  you  see,  but  of  a  feeble 
mind.2 

Hon.  Then  said  old  Mr.  Honest,  Have  you  not, 


1  All  pilgrims  are  not  alike  vigorous,  strong,  and  lively ; 
Borne  are  weak,  creep  and  crawl  on,  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord. 
No  matter,  if  there  be  but  a  pilgrim's  heart,  all  shall  be  well 
3t  last ;  for  Omnipotence  itself  is  for  us,  and  then  we  may 
boldly  ask,  '  Who  shall  be  against  us?' — (Mason.)  Constitu- 
tional timidity  and  lowness  of  spirits,  arising  from  a  feeble 
frame,  give  a  peculiar  cast  to  the  views  and  nature  of  religious 
profession,  which  unfits  for  hard  and  perilous  service.  The 
difference  between  Feeble-mind  and  Fearing  seems  to  be  this — 
the  former  was  more  afraid  of  opposition,  and  the  latter  more 
doubtful  about  the  event,  which  perhaps  may  intimate,  that 
Slay-good  rather  represents  persecutors  than  deceivers. — (Scott.) 

2  What  a  sweet  simple  relation  is  here  I  Doth  it  not  suit  many 
a  feeble  mind  ?  Poor  soul,  weak  as  he  was,  yet  his  Lord  pro- 
vided against  his  danger.  He  sent  some  strong  ones  to  his 
deliverance,  and  to  slay  his  enemy.  Mind  his  belief,  even  in 
bis  utmost  extremity.  Learn  somewhat  from  this  Feeble- 
suiud. — (Mason.) 


some  time  ago,  been  acquainted  with  one  Mr.  Fear- 
ing, a  pilgrim. 

Feeble.  Acquainted  with  him  !  Yes ;  he  came 
from  the  town  of  Stupidity,  which  MrFearing Mr. 
lieth  four  degrees  to  the  northward  of  Feeble-mind's 
the  City  of  Destruction,  and  as  many 
off  of  where  I  was  horn ;  yet  we  were  well  ac- 
quainted, for,  indeed,  he  was  my  uncle,  my  father's 
brother.  He  and  I  have  been  much  of  a  temper. 
He  was  a  little  shorter  than  I,  but  yet  we  were 
much  of  a  complexion. 

Hon.   I  perceive  you  know  him  ;  and  I  am  apt 
to  believe  also,  that  you  were  related  Feeble-mind  has 
one   to    another;    for   you   have   his    ring's  let 
whitely  look,  a  cast  like  his  with  your    tmes- 
eye,  and  your  speech  is  much  alike. 

Feeble.  Most  have  said  so  that  have  known 
us  both ;  and  besides,  what  I  have  read  in  him,  I 
have,  for  the  most  part,  found  in  myself. 

Gaids.  Come,  Sir,  said  good  Gaius,  be  of  good 
cheer,  you  are  welcome  to  me,  and  to  Gams  comforts 
my  house,  and  what  thou  hast  a  mind  Uim- 
to,  call  for  freely ;  and  what  thou  wouldest  have 
my  servants  do  for  thee,  they  will  do  it  with  a 
ready  mind. 

Then  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  This  is  unexpected 

favour,  and  as  the  sun  shinino;  out  of    „  ..       .     , 
'  o  Notice    to    be 

a  very  dark  cloud.     Did  Giant  Slay-     taken  of  Pro- 
good  intend  me  this  favour  when  he 
stopped  me,  and  resolved  to  let  me  go  no  further  ? 
Did  he  intend,  that  after  he  had  rifled  my  pockets, 
I  should  go  to  Gaius,  mine  host  ?     Yet  so  it  is.3 

Now,  just  as  Mr.  Feeble-mind  and  Gaius  were 

thus  in  talk,  there  comes  one  running,    TMingsIl0W0ne 

and  called  at  the  door,  and  told  that,     Not-right  was 

,  .,         i      i    ir>    «.    i  sIain  Wlt"   u 

about  a  mile  and  a  half  off,  there  was     thunderbolt, 

one  Mr.  Not-right,  a  pilgrim,  struck  mind's  6comI 
dead  upon  the  place  where  he  was  ment  upon  it. 
with  a  thunder-holt.4 

Feeble.  Alas !  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  is  he 
slain  ?  He  overtook  me  some  clays  before  I  came 
so  far  as  hither,  and  would  be  my  company-keeper. 
He  also  was  with  me  when  Slay-good,  the  giant, 
took  me ;  but  he  was  nimble  of  his  heels,  and 
escaped.  But,  it  seems,  he  escaped  to  die,  and  I 
was  took  to  live.5 


3  0  how  sweet  to  reflect,  that  the  most  gigantic  enemies 
shall  be  conquered,  and  their  most  malicious  designs  be  overruled 
for  our  good  ;  yea,  what  they  intend  for  our  ruin  shall  be  made 
to  work  for  our  health  and  prosperity. — (Mason.) 

4  '  Whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  and  whosoever 
will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it.'  Mat.  xvi.  25. — (Ed.) 
Here  is  a  contrast  between  a  feeble  believer  and  a  specious 
hypocrite ;  the  latter  eludes  persecutions  by  time-serving,  yet 
perishes  in  his  sins ;  the  former  suffers  and  trembles,  yet  hopes 
to  be  delivered  and  comforted.  The  frequency  with  which  this 
is  introduced,  and  the  variety  of  characters  by  which  it  is 
illustrated,  show  us  how  important  the  author  deemed  such 
warnings. — (Scott.) 

6  Events,  which  at  first  appear  big  with  misery  and  mis- 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


223 


What,  one  would  think,  doth  seek  to  slay  outright, 
Ofttimes  delivers  from  the  saddest  plight. 

That  very  providence,  whose  face  is  death, 

Doth  ofttimes  to  the  lowly  life  bequeath. 

I  taken  was,  he  did  escape  and  flee; 

Hands  cross'd  gives  death  to  him,  and  life  to  me. 

Now,  about  this  time,  Matthew  and  Mercy  wore 
married,  Also  Gains  gave  Iris  daughter  Fhelie 
to  James,  Matthew's  brother,  to  wife  ;  after  which 
time  thej  vet  staid  above  ten  days  at  Gains'  house, 
spending  their  time,  and  the  seasons,  like  as  pil- 
grims used  to  do.1 

When  they  were  to  depart,  Gains  made  them  a 

„..  .  feast,  and  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and 
The    Pilgrims  J 

prepare  logo     were  merry.     Now  the  hour  was  come 

that  they  must  be  gone ;  wherefore, 

Mr.  Great-heart  called  for  a  reckoning  ;  but  Gaius 

told  him,  that  at  his  house  it  was  not  the  custom 

for  pilgrims  to  pay  for  their  entertainment.      He 

TT     ..  .    boarded  them  by  the  year,  but  looked 

How  thev  greet  J  r< 

one  another  at  for  his  pay  from  the  good  Samaritan, 
who  had  promised  him,  at  his  return, 
whatsoever  charge  he  was  at  with  them,  faithfully 
to  repay  him.  i.u.  x.  34,  35.  Then  said  Mr.  Great- 
heart  to  him, 

Great-heart.  '  Beloved,  thou  dost  faithfully 
whatsoever  thou  dost  to  the  brethren,  and  to 
strangers  ;  which  have  borne  witness  of  thy  charity 
before  the  church  ;  whom  if  thou  (yet)  bring  for- 
ward on  their  journey  after  a  godly  sort,  thou 
shalt  do  well.'  3  Jn.  5,  6. 

Then  Gaius  took  his  leave  of  them  all,  and  of 

Gaius  hi    last   ms  children,  and  particularly  of  Mr. 

kindness    to   Feeble  -  mind.       He    also    gave    him 

something  to  drink  by  the  way. 

Now  Mr.   Feeble-nrind,  when  they  were  going 

out  of  the  door,  made  as  if  he  intended  to  linger ; 

the  which  when  Mr.  Great-heart  espied,  he  said, 

Come,  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  pray  do  you  go  along  with 

us,  I  will  be  your  conductor,  and  you  shall  fare  as 

the  rest. 

Feeble.  Alas!  I  want  a  suitable  companion; 
Feeble-mind  for  you  are  all  lusty  and  strong ;  but  I, 
going  behind.  as  y0U  sec>  am  wea]j  .  j  CU00Se,  there- 
fore, rather  to  come  behind,  lest,  by  reason  of  my 
many  infirmities,  I  should  be  both  a  burden  to 
myself  and  to  you.  I  am,  as  I  said,  a  man  of  a 
weak  and  feeble  mind,  and  shall  be  offended  and 

fcrtune,  have  been  found  afterwards  to  have  been  as  so  many 
dark  passages,  to  lead  into  brighter  and  more  glorious  displays 
of  the  Divine  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness. —  (J.  15.) 

1  '  Marriage  is  honourable  iu  all ;'  nor  will  Christian  females 
find  such  a  state  any  hinder:: nee  to  theii  abounding  iu  works 
of  charity  and  mercy.  By  fulfilling  the  duties  of  the  married 
life,  they  "ill  cause  the  ways  of  God  to  be  well  spoken  of. 
The  desire  of  Paul  was,  'That  the  younger  women  many,  be 
sober,  love  their  husbands,  love  their  children,  be  discreet, 
chaste,  keepers  at  home,  good,  obedient  to  their  own  husbands, 
that  the  "Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed.'  Tit.  ii.  -1,  5. — 
(Ivimey.) 


made  weak  at  that  which  others  can  bear.  I  shall 
like  no  laughing  ;  I  shall  like  no  gay  attire  ;  I 
shall  like  no  unprofitable  questions.  Nay,  1  am  so 
weak  a  man,  as  to  be  offended  with  that  which 
others  have  liberty  to  do.      I  do  not 

,  ,,     ,  1        t  Hiscxcusi'forit. 

yet  know  all  the  truth ;  I  am  a  very 
ignorant  Christian  man  ;  sometimes,  if  I  hear  aomo 
rejoice  iu  the  Lord,  it  troubles  me,  because  I  can- 
not do  so  too.  It  is  with  me,  as  it  is  with  a  weak 
man  among  the  strong,  or  as  with  a  sick  man 
among  the  healthy,  or  as  a  lamp  despised  ('He 
that  is  ready  to  slip  with  his  feet,  is  as  a  lamp 
despised  in  the  thought  of  him  that  is  at  case ; 
Job  xti.  0),  so  that  T  know  not  what  to  do.2 

Great-heart.  But,  brother,  said  Mr.  Great-heart, 
I  have  it  in  commission  to  'comfort  the  Great-heart's 
feeble-minded,'  and  to  '  support  the  connisaton. 
weak.'  iTh.  v.  14.  You  must  needs  go  along  with 
us;  we  will  wait  fur  you  ;  we  will  lend  you  our 
help,  Ro.  xiv.  1 ;  we  will  deny  ourselves  of  some  things, 
both  opinionative  and  practical,  for  your  sake, 
1  Co.  vid.,  we  will  not  enter  into  doubtful  disputa- 
tions before  you ;  we  will  be  made  all  things  to  you, 
rather  than  you  shall  be  left  behind.3  1  Co.  fct  23. 

Now  all  this  while  they  were  at  Gaius's  door; 
and  behold,  as  they  were  thus  in  the     A  Christian 
heat  of  their  discourse,  Mr.  Ready-to-        6pmt" 
halt  came  by,  with  his  crutches*  in  his     *  rromises. 
hand,  rs.  xxxviii.  17 ;  and  he  also  was  going  on  pil- 
grimage. 

Feeble.  Then  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind  to  him, 
Man,  How  earnest  thou  hither  ?    I  was  ...  . 

'  •    •  1         t  1      i   EeeDle-minuglau 

but  iust  now  complaining,  that  I  had    toseeKeady-to. 

0        .,1  ■         t    .  .  1  ..     halt  come  by. 

not  a  suitable  companion,  but  thou  art 
according  to  my  wish.      Welcome,  welcome,  good 
Mr.  Ready-to-halt,  I  hope  thee  and  I  may  be  some 
help. 

READY-TO-nALT.  I  shall  be  glad  of  thy  company, 
said  the  other ;  and  good  Mr.  Feeble-nrind,  rather 
than  we  will  part,  since  we  are  thus  happily  met, 
I  will  lend  thee  one  of  my  crutches.4 

Feeble.  Nay,  said  he,  though  I  thank  thee  for 
thy  goodwill,  I  am  not  inclined  to  halt  before  I 
am  lame.  Howbcit,  I  think,  when  occasion  is,  it 
may  help  me  against  a  dog.5 


2  "What  an  open,  ingenuous  confession  is  here!  though 
feeble  in  mind,  he  was  strong  iu  wisdom  and  sound  judgment. 
—  (.Mason.)  Woe  be  to  those  who  offend  one  of  these  little 
ones ;  no  less  dear  to  God  than  the  most  eminent  and  dis- 
tinguished saints. — (J.  B.) 

a  O  that  this  were  more  practised  anions:  Christians  of  dif- 
ferent standings,  degrees,  and  judgments !  If  they  who  are 
strong  were  thus  to  bear  with  the  weak,  as  they  ought,  how 
much  more  love,  peace,  and  unanimity  would  prevail ! — 
(Mason.) 

4  Excellent !  See  the  nature  of  Christian  love  ;  even  to  be 
ready  to  spare  to  a  brother,  what  we  ourselves  have  occasion 
for.  Love  looketh  not  at  the  things  of  our  own,  but  to  pro- 
vide for  the  wants  of  others. — 1  M 

6  The  character  of  r'eeble-mind  scims  to  coincide,  in  some 
things,  with  that  of  Tearing:,  and  in  others  with  the  description 


£24 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Ready.  If  either  myself  or  my  crutches  can  do 
tliee  a  pleasure,  we  are  both  at  thy  command,  good 
Mr.  Feeble-mind. 

Thus  therefore  they  went  on ;  Mr.  Great-heart 
and  Mr.  Honest  went  before,  Christiana  and  her 
children  went  next,  and  Mr.  Feeble-mind  and  Mr. 
Peady-to-halt,  came  behind  with  his  crutches.1 
Then  said  Mr.  Honest, 

Hon.  Pray,  Sir,  now  we  are  upon  the  road,  tell 
us  some  profitable  things  of  some  that 

New  talk.         .  .,      .         ""     ,    c 

have  gone  on  pilgrimage  beiore  us. 

Great-heart.  With  a  good  will.  I  suppose  you 
First  Part,        have  heard  how  Christian  of  old  did 

P-m-  meet  with  Apollyon  in  the  Valley  of 

Humiliation  ;  and  also  what  hard  work  he  had,  to 
go  through  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death. 
Also  I  think  you  cannot  but  have  heard  how  Faith- 
ful was  put  to  it  with  Madam  Wanton,  with  Adam 
the  first,  with  one  Discontent,  and  Shame,  four  as 
deceitful  villains  as  a  man  can  meet  with  upon  the 
road. 

Hon.  Yes,  I  have  heard  of  all  this  ;  but  indeed, 
good  Faithful  was  hardest  put  to  it  with  Shame ; 
lie  was  an  unwearied  one. 

Great-heart.  Aye;  for,  as  the  Pilgrim  well  said, 
lie  of  all  men  had  the  wrong  name. 

Hon.  But  pray,  Sir,  where  was  it  that  Christian 

First  Part,     ana<   Faithful  met   Talkative?     That 
p-  V2°-      same  was  also  a  notable  one. 

Great-heart.  He  was  a  confident  fool,  yet  many 
follow  his  ways. 

Hon.  He  had  like  to  have  beguiled  Faithful. 

Great-heart.  Aye,  but  Christian  put  him  into  a 

First  Part,     way  quickly  to  find  him  out.     Thus 

p.  123.       tney  went  on  till  they  came  at  the 

place  where  Evangelist  met   with   Christian  and 

Faithful,  and  prophesied  to  them  of  what  should 

befall  them  at  Vanity  Fair. 

Great-heart.  Then  said  their  guide,  Hereabouts 
did  Christian  and  Faithful  meet  with  Evangelist, 
who  prophesied  to  them  of  what  troubles  they 
should  meet  with  at  Vanity  Fair. 

Hon.  Say  you  fo?  1  dare  say  it  was  a  hard 
chapter  that  then  he  did  read  unto  them.2 


of  Little-faith.  Constitutional  timidity  and  lowness  of  spirits, 
arising  from  a  feeble  frame,  and  frequent  sickness,  while  they 
are  frequently  the  means  of  exciting  men  to  religion,  give  also 
a  peculiar  east  to  their  views  and  the  nature  of  their  profession 
— tend  to  hold  them  under  perpetual  discouragements,  and 
unfit  them  for  hard  and  perilous  services.  '1  his  seems  implied 
in  the  name  given  to  the  native  place  of  Feeble-mind ;  yet 
tins  is  often  connected  with  evident  sincerity,  and  remarkable 
perseverance  in  the  ways  of  God. — (Scott.) 

1  Here,  very  ingeniously,  an  associate  is  found  for  poor 
Feeble-mind;  in  one  equally  weak,  lame,  and  limping  iu  his 
religious  sentiments,  who,  instead  of  forming  his  own  senti- 
ments from  the  Word  of  Truth,  leant  upon  the  sentiments 
and  opinions  of  others.  The  hesitation  of  Feeble-mind  to 
accept  one  of  his  crutches,  is  humourously  conceived.  He 
would,  weak  as  he  was,  think  for  himself;  though  he  had  no 
objection  to  quote  the  opinion  of  another  Christian  against  an 


Great-heart.    It  was   so;   but  he  gave  thern 
encouragement  withal.     But  what  do     j'irstPart, 
we  talk  of  them  ?  they  were  a  couple       P- 13°- 
of  lion-like  men  ;  they  had  set  their  faces  like  flint. 
Don't  you  remember  how  undaunted  they   were 
when  they  stood  before  the  judge? 
Hon.  Well,  Faithful  bravely  suffered. 
Great-heart.   So  he  did,  and  as  brave  things 
came  on  it ;  for  Hopeful  and  some  others,  as  the 
story  relates  it,  were  converted  by  his  death. 

Hon.  Well,  but  pray  go  on ;  for  you  are  well 
acquainted  with  things. 

Great-heart.  Above  all  that  Christian  met  with 
after  he  had  passed  through  Vanity     rirst  part 
Fair,  one  By-ends  was  the  arch  one.         P-  V6~- 
Hon.  By-ends !   What  was  he  ? 
Great-heart.  A  very  arch  fellow  ;  a  downright 
hypocrite.      One  that  would  be  religious  which  way 
ever  the  world  went;  but  so  cunning,  that  he  would 
be  sure  neither  to  lose  nor  suffer  for  it.     He  had  his 
mode  of  religion  for  every  fresh  occasion ;  and  his 
wife  was  as  good  at  it  as  he.     He  would  turn  and 
change  from  opinion  to  opinion ;  yea,  and  plead 
for  so  doing  too.     But,  so  far  as  I  could  learn,  he 
came  to  an  ill  end  with  his  by-ends ;  nor  did  I  ever 
hear  that  any  of  his  children  were  ever  of  any 
esteem  with  any  that  truly  feared  God. 

Now,  by  this  time,  they  were  come  within  sight 
of  the  town  of  Vanity,  where  Vanity   T, 

-'  '  «      lney  are   come 

Fair  is  kept.  So,  when  they  saw  that  within  sight  of 
they  were  so  near  the  town,  they  con- 
sulted with  one  another,  how  they  should  pass 
through  the  town ;  and  some  said  one  thing,  and 
some  another.  At  last  Mr.  Great-heart  said,  I 
have,  as  you  may  understand,  often  been  a  con- 
ductor of  pilgrims  through  this  town ;  They  enter  into 
now  I  am  acquainted  with  one  Mr.     one  Mr.  Mna,. 

Mr,  .         ,  .  son's  to  lodgo. 

nason,   a  Cyprusian   by  nation,  an 

old  disciple,  at  whose  house  we  may  lodge.  Ac.  xxi.  ig. 
If  you  think  good,  said  he,  we  will  turn  in  there.'1 
Content,  said  old  Honest ;  Content,  said  Chris- 
tiana ;  Content,  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind  ;  and  so  they 
said  all.  Now,  you  must  think,  it  was  even-tide 
by  that  they  got  to  the  outside  of  the  town ;  but 
Mr.  Great-heart  knew  the  way  to  the  old  man's 


adversary. —  (lvimey.)  'As  iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  a  man 
sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his  friend.'  liow  great  a 
comfort  to  find  a  fellow-pilgrim  whose  experience  agrees  with 
our  own,  and  with  whom  we  can  take  sweet  counsel !  Still 
all  our  dependence  must  be  on  Ready -to-halt's  crutches — '  the 
promises.' — (Ed.) 

-  The  near  prospect  of  persecution  is  formidable  even  to 
true  believers,  notwithstanding  all  the  encouragements  of  God's 
\\  ord.  It  is  useful  to  realize  such  scenes,  that  we  may  pray, 
without  ceasing,  for  wisdom,  fortitude,  patience,  meekness, 
faith,  and  love  sufficient  for  us,  should  matters  come  to  the 
worst. — (Scott.) 

a  liow  happy  to  find  a  family,  in  Vanity  Fair,  whose  master 
will  receive  and  entertain  pilgrims.  Blessed  be  God  for  the 
present  revival  of  religion  in  our  day,  and  for  the  many  houses 
that  are  open  to  friends  of  the  Lamb. — (Alason.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   TROCHES*. 


223 


house.  So  thither  tlioy  came ;  and  lie  called  at 
the  door,  and  the  old  man  within  knew  his  tongue 
so  soon  as  ever  lie  heard  it ;  so  he  opened,  and  they 
all  came  in.  Then  said  Mnason  their  host,  How 
far  have  ye  come  to-day?  So  they  said,  From  the 
house  of  Gains  our  friend.  I  promise  you,  said  he, 
you  have  gone  a  good  stitch,  you  may  well  he  a 
weary;   sit  down.      So  they  Bat  down. 

Great-heart  Then  said  their  guide,  Come,  what 
r  ^gtafloj  cheer,  Sir.  '.  1  d:.re  say  you  are  wel- 
entartainmmt.    comc  to  my  friend. 

Mnason.  I  also,  said  Mr.  Mnason,  do  hid  you 
welcome,  and,  whatever  you  want,  do  hut  say,  and 
we  will  do  what  we  can  to  get  it  for  you. 

HON.  Our  great  want,  a  while  since,  was  har- 
hour  and  good  company,  and  now  I  hopo  we  have 
both. 

MtfASON.  For  harbour,  you  see  what  it  is;  but 
for  good  company,  that  will  appear  in  the  trial. 

Great-heart.  Well,  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  will 
you  have  the  Pilgrims  up  into  their  lodging? 

Mnason.  I  will,  said  Mr.  Mnason.  So  he  bad 
them  to  their  respective  places;  and  also  showed 
them  a  very  fair  dining-room,  where  they  might 
be,  and  sup  together,  until  time  was  come  to  go 
to  rest. 

Now,  when  they  were  set  in  their  places,  and 
were  a  little  cheery  after  their  journey,  Mr.  Honest 
asked  bis  landlord,  if  there  were  any  store  of  good 
people  in  the  town? 

MNASON.  We  have  a  few,  for  indeed  they  are 
but  a  few,  when  compared  with  them  on  the  other 
Bide. 

Hon.  Cut  bow  shall  we  do  to  see  some  of  them? 
They  desire  to  for  the  sight  of  good  men  to  them  that 
p'.a' peopii of  are  S'oin8'  ou  pilgrimage,  is  like  to  the 
the  town.  appearing  of  the  moon  and  the  stars 

to  them  that  are  sailing  upon  the  seas.1 

Then  Mr.  Mnason  stamped  with  bis  foot,  and 
bis  daughter  Grace  came  up;  so  be  said  unto  her, 
Grace,  go  you,  tell  my  friends,  Mr. 
Contrite,  Mr.  Holy-man,  Mr.  Love- 
saint,  Mr.  Dare-not-lic,  and  Mr.  Penitent;  that  I 
have  a  friend  or  two  at  my  house  that  have  a  mind 
this  evening  to  see  them. 


Some  sent  for. 


1  The  inquiry  of  disciples,  after  suitable  company,  discovers 
that  they,  with  David,  love  the  Lord's  saints;  and  in  the 
excellent  of  the  earth  is  all  their  delight.  Ps.  xvi.  3.  A  genuine 
discovery  this  of  a  gracious  heart. —  M 

a  Great,  indeed,  was  the  change  in  the  town  of  Vanity, 
when  Christiana  and  her  party  of  pilgrims  arrived,  compared 
with  the  but  recent  period  when  Faithful  was  martyred.  The 
declaration  of  liberty  of  conscience  had  rendered  the  profes- 
sion of  vital  godliness  more  public,  still  there  was  persecution 
enough  to  make  it  comparatively  pure.  Dr.  Cheever  has 
indulged  in  a  delightful  reverie,  in  his  lecture  ou  Vanity  Fair, 
Borne  1'  Qgth,  how  our  glorious  dreamer  would 
uow  describe  the  face  of  society  in  our  present  Vanity  Fair. 
After  describing  the  consequences  that  had  arisen  from  religion 
having  become  Fasiiionallk,  he  hints  at  the  ret] 
movement  towards  Popery,  known  under  the  name  of  Pnse)  ism. 

VOL.  III. 


So  Grace  went  to  call  them,  and  they  came ; 
and,  after  salutation  made,  they  sat  down  together 
at  the  table. 

Then  said  Mr.  Mnason,  their  landlord,  My  neigh- 
bours, I  have,  as  you  sec,  a  company  of  strati 
come  to  my  bouse;  they  are  Pilgrims;  they  come 
from  afar,  and  are  going  to  mount  Zion.  But  who, 
quoth  be,  do  you  think  this  is?  pointing  with  his 
finger  to  Christiana;  it  is  Christiana,  the  wife  of 
Christian,  that  famous  Pilgrim,  who,  with  Faithful 
bis  brother,  were  so  shamefully  handled  in  our 
town.  At  that  they  stood  amazed,  saying,  We 
little  thought  to  sec  Christiana,  when  Grace  came 
to  call  us;  wherefore  this  is  a  very  comfortable 
surprise.  Then  they  asked  her  of  her  welfare,  and 
if  these  young  men  were  her  husband's  sons?  And 
when  she  had  told  them  they  were,  they  said,  The 
King  whom  you  love  and  serve,  make  you  as 
your  father,  and  bring  you  where  he  is  in  peace! 

Hon.  Then  Mr.  Honest  (when  they  were  all  sat 
down)  asked  Mr.  Contrite,  and  the  SometnlkbetwKt 
rest,  in  what  posture  their  town  was 

1  Contrite. 

at  present? 

Contrite.  You  may  be  sure  we  arc  full  of  hurry 
in  fair-time.  It  is  bard  keeping  our  hearts  and 
spirits  in  any  good  order,  when  we  are  in  a  cum- 
bered condition.  He  that  lives  in  such  Tlie  fniit  of 
a  place  as  this  is,  and  that  has  to  do  watchfulness. 
with  such  as  we  have,  has  need  of  an  item,  to  cau- 
tion him  to  take  heed,  every  moment  of  the  day. 

Hon.  But  how  are  your  neighbours  for  quietness  ? 

Contrite.  They  are  much  more  moderate  now 
than  formerly.     You  know  bow  Chris-    v 

r\  rsecuunn  not 

tian  and  Faithful  were  used  at  our  so  hot  at  Vanity 
town  ;  but  of  late,  I  say,  they  have 
been  far  more  moderate.  I  think  the  blood  of 
Faithful  lieth  with  load  upon  them  till  now ;  for 
since  they  burned  him,  they  have  been  ashamed 
to  burn  any  more.  In  those  days  we  were  afraid 
to  walk  the  streets,  but  now  we  can  show  our  heads. 
Then  the  name  of  a  professor  was  odious  ;  now, 
especially  in  some  parts  of  our  town  (for  you  know 
our  town  is  large),  religion  is  counted  honourable. - 


'It  happened,  in  process  of  time,  that  a  part  of  the  pilgrims 
who  remained  in  Vanity  Fair,  began  to  visit  the  cave  of  Giant 
Pope,  and  it  became  a  sort  of  fashionable  pilgrimage  to  that 
cave.  They  brushed  up  the  giant,  and  gave  him  medii 
alleviate  the  hurts  from  those  bruises  which  he  had  received 
in  h;s  youth  ;  and,  to  make  the  place  pleasauf.cr,  they  carefully 
cleared  away  the  remains  of  the  bones  and  skulls  of  burned 
pilgrims,  and  plai  aclosnre  with  Bowers  and  ercr- 

-i  i  *  ii-.'  '  The  cage  in  which  the  Pilgrims  were  once  confined 
was  now  never  used;  some  said  it  was  consecrated  for  church 
purposes,  ami  put  under  the  cathedral,  in  a  deep  cell,  from 
which  it  might  again  be  brought  forth  if  occasion  required  it.' 
The  Doctor's  description  of  the  present  -  .   Pair  is 

rarj  deeply  interesting  and  amusing. — (En.)     When  i 
is   counted  honourable,   we    shall   not    want   professors;    but 
trying  times  are  sifting  times.     As  the  chaff  flies  before  the 
wind,  so  will  the  formal  professors  before  a  storm  of  persecu- 
tion,—(J.  B.) 

29 


226 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Then  said  Mr.  Contrite  to  them,  Pray  how  fareth 
it  with  you  in  your  pilgrimage  ?  How  stands  the 
country  affected  towards  you? 

Hon.  It  happens  to  us  as  it  happeneth  to  way- 
faring men ;  sometimes  our  way  is  clean,  some- 
times foul,  sometimes  up  hill,  sometimes  down  hill ; 
we  are  seldom  at  a  certainty;  the  wind  is  not 
always  on  our  backs,  nor  is  every  one  a  friend  that 
we  meet  with  in  the  way.  We  have  met  with  some 
notable  rubs  already ;  and  what  are  yet  behind,  we 
know  not ;  but  for  the  most  part,  we  find  it  true, 
that  has  been  talked  of,  of  old,  A  good  man  must 
suffer  trouble. 

Contrite.  You  talk  of  rubs  ;  what  rubs  have 
you  met  withal? 

Hon.  Nay,  ask  Mr.  Great-heart,  our  guide,  for 
he  can  give  the  best  account  of  that. 

Great-iieart.  We  have  been  beset  three  or  four 
times  already.  First,  Christiana  and  her  children 
were  beset  with  two  ruffians,  that  they  feared  would 
a  took  away  their  lives.  We  were  beset  with  Giant 
Bloody-man,  Giant  Maul,  and  Giant  Slay-good, 
Indeed  we  did  rather  beset  the  last,  than  were 
beset  of  him.  And  thus  it  was :  After  we  had  been 
some  time  at  the  house  of  '  Gaius,  mine  host,  and 
of  the  whole  church,'  Ro.  xvi.  23,  we  were  minded 
upon  a  time  to  take  our  weapons  with  us,  and  so 
go  see  if  we  could  light  upon  any  of  those  that 
were  enemies  to  pilgrims  (for  we  heard  that  there 
was  a  notable  one  thereabouts).  Now  Gaius  knew 
his  haunt  better  than  I,  because  he  dwelt  there- 
about; so  we  looked,  and  looked,  till  at  last  we 
discerned  tbe  mouth  of  his  cave ;  then  we  were 
glad,  and  plucked  up  our  spirits.  So  we  ap- 
proached up  to  his  den,  and  lo,  when  we  came 
there,  he  had  dragged,  by  mere  force,  into  his  net, 
this  poor  man,  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  and  was  about  to 
bring  him  to  his  end.  But  when  he  saw  us,  sup- 
posing, as  we  thought,  he  had  had  another  prey, 
he  left  the  poor  man  in  his  hole,  and  came  out. 
So  we  fell  to  it  full  sore,  and  he  lustily  laid  about 
him  ;  but  in  conclusion,  he  was  brought  down  to 
the  ground,  and  his  head  cut  off,  and  set  up  by  the 
way-side,  for  a  terror  to  such  as  should  after 
practise  such  ungodliness.  That  I  tell  you  the 
truth,  here  is  the  man  himself  to  affirm  it,  who 
was  as  a  lamb  taken  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion. 

Feeble-mind.  Then  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  I 
found  this  true,  to  my  cost,  and  comfort ;  to  my 
cost,  when  he  threatened  to  pick  my  bones  every 
moment;  and  to  my  comfort,  when  I  saw  Mr. 
Great-heart  and  his  friends  with  their  weapons, 
approach  so  near  for  my  deliverance. 


1  Kindness  to  the  poor  increases  and  builds  up  the  church. 
It  conquers  the  prejudices  of  the  worldly,  secures  their  confi- 
dence, and  brings  them  under  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
They  rationally  conclude  that  they  cannot  be  bad  people  who 
do  so  much  good. — (Ivimey.) 


Holt-man.  Then  said  Mr.  Holy-man,  There  are 
two  things  that  they  have  need  to  be  Mr.  noiy-man's 
possessed  with,  that  go  on  pilgrimage ;  8Peech- 
courage,  and  an  unspotted  life.  If  they  have  not 
courage,  they  can  never  hold  on  their  way ;  and  if 
their  lives  be  loose,  they  will  make  the  very  name 
of  a  Pilgrim  stink. 

Love-saint.  Then  said  Mr.  Love-saint,  I  hope 
this  caution  is  not  needful  amongst  Mr. Love-saint's 
you.  But  truly,  there  are  many  that  speech, 
go  upon  the  road,  that  rather  declare  themselves 
strangers  to  pilgrimage,  than  strangers  and  pil- 
grims in  the  earth. 

Dare-not-lie.  Then  said  Mr.  Dare-not-lie,  It  is 
true,  they  neither  have  the  pilgrim's  Mr.  Dare-not- 
weed,  nor  the  pilgrim's  courage  ;  they  Ue's  sPecch- 
go  not  uprightly,  but  all  awry  with  their  feet ;  one 
shoe  goes  inward,  another  outward,  and  their  hosen 
out  behind  ;  there  a  rag,  and  there  a  rent,  to  the 
disparagement  of  their  Lord. 

Penitent.  These  things,  said  Mr.  Penitent, 
they  ought  to  be  troubled  for  ;  nor  are  Mr.  Penitent's 
the  pilgrims  like  to  have  that  grace  speech. 
put  upon  them  and  their  pilgrim's  progress,  as 
they  desire,  until  the  way  is  cleared  of  such  spots 
and  blemishes. 

Thus  they  sat  talking  and  spending  the  time, 
until  supper  was  set  upon  the  table ;  unto  which 
they  went  and  refreshed  their  weary  bodies ;  so 
they  went  to  rest.  Now  they  stayed  in  this  fair 
a  great  while,  at  the  house  of  this  Mr.  Mnason, 
who,  in  process  of  time,  gave  his  daughter  Grace 
unto  Samuel,  Christiana's  son,  to  wife,  and  his 
daughter  Martha  to  Joseph. 

The  time,  as  I  said,  that  they  lay  here,  was 
long  (for  it  was  not  now  as  in  former  times). 
Wherefore  the  Pilgrims  grew  acquainted  with  many 
of  the  good  people  of  the  town,  and  did  them  what 
service  they  could.  Mercy,  as  she  was  wont, 
laboured  much  for  the  poor ;  wherefore  their  bel- 
lies and  backs  blessed  her,  and  she  was  there  an 
ornament  to  her  profession.1  And,  to  say  the 
truth  for  Grace,  Phebe,  and  Martha,  they  were  all 
of  a  very  good  nature,  and  did  much  good  in  their 
place.  They  were  also  all  of  them  very  fruitful ; 
so  that  Christian's  name,  as  was  said  before,  was 
like  to  live  in  the  world. 

While  they  lay  here,  there  came  a  monster  out 
of  the  woods,  and  slew  many  of  tbe 
people  of  the  town.     It   would  also 
carry  away  their  children,  and  teach  them  to  suck 
its  whelps.2     Now,  no  man  in  the  town  durst  so 


2  This  monster  is  Antichrist.  The  devil  is  the  head;  the  syna- 
gogue of  Satan  is  the  body;  the  wicked  spirit  of  iniquity  is  the 
soul.  The  devil  made  use  of  the  church  [the  clergy]  to  midwife 
this  monster  into  the  world.  He  had  plums  in  his  dragon's 
mouth,  and  so  came  in  by  flatteries.  He  metamorphosed  himself 
into  a  beast,  a  man,  or  woman;  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
loved  the  woman  dearly,  became  her  sons,  and  took  up  helmet 


THE   riLGKIM'S   PROGRESS. 


227 


much  as  face  this  monster;  hut  all  men  fled  when 
they  heard  of  the  noise  of  his  coming. 

The  monster  was  like  unto  no  one  heast  upon 
His  shape,  his   the  earth  ;  its  body  was  like  a  dragon, 

nature.  an(j  jt  ]m(i  seveD  heads  and  ten  horns. 

Re.  xvii.  3.  It  made  great  havoc  of  children,  and 
yet  it  was  governed  by  a  woman.1  This  monster 
propounded  conditions  to  men,  and  such  men  as 
loved  their  lives  more  than  their  souls,  accepted  of 
those  conditions.     So  they  came  under.2 

Now  this  Mr.  Great-heart,  together  with  these 
that  came  to  visit  the  pilgrims  at  Mr.  Mnason's 
house,  entered  into  a  covenant  to  go  and  engage 
this  heast,  if  perhaps  they  might  deliver  the  people 
of  this  town  from  the  paws  and  mouth  of  this  so 
devouring  a  serpent. 

Then  did  Mr.  Great-heart,  Mr.  Contrite,  Mr. 
How  he  is  en-   Holy-man,  Mr.  Dare-not-lie,  and  Mr. 

gaged.  Penitent,  with  their  weapons  go  forth 

to  meet  him.  Now  the  monster,  at  first,  was  very 
rampant,  and  looked  upon  these  enemies  with  great 
disdain ;  hut  they  so  belaboured  him,  being  sturdy 
men  at  arms,  that  they  made  him  make  a  retreat; 
so  they  came  home  to  Mr.  Mnason's  house  again. 

The  monster,  you  must  know,  had  his  certain 
seasons  to  come  out  in,  and  to  make  his  attempts 
upon  the  children  of  the  people  of  the  town ;  also 
these  seasons  did  these  valiant  worthies  watch  him 
in,  and  did  still  continually  assaidt  him  ;  inso- 
much, that  in  process  of  time  he  became  not  only 
wounded,  but  lame;  also  he  has  not  made  that 
havoc  of  the  townsmen's  children,  as  formerly  he 
has  done.  And  it  is  verily  believed  by  some,  that 
this  beast  will  die  of  his  wounds.3 

This,  therefore,  made  Mr.  Great-heart  and  his 


and  shield  to  defend  her.  She  arrayed  herself  in  flesh-taking 
ornaments — gold,  and  precious  stones,  like  an  harlot.  She 
made  the  kings  drunken,  and  they  gave  her  the  blood  of  saints 
and  martyrs  until  she  was  drunken,  and  did  revel  and  roar. 
But  when  her  cup  is  drunk  out,  God  will  call  her  to  such  a 
reckoning,  that  all  her  clothes,  pearls,  and  jewels  shall  not  be 
able  to  pay  the  shot.  This  beast  is  compared  to  the  wild 
boar  that  comes  out  of  the  wood  to  devour  the  church  of  God. 
Ps.kxx.  13.  The  temporal  sword  will  kill  its  body,  but  spirit 
can  only  he  slain  by  spirit ;  the  Lord  the  Spirit  will  slay  its 
soul. — (Banyan  on  Antichrist,  vol.  ii.  p.  47.)  Is  not  Anti- 
christ composed  of  all  the  State  religions  in  the  world  ? — (Ed.) 

1  For  this  woman's  name  and  costume  see  Re.  xvii.  1 — 4. 
She  has  just  sent  one  of  her  illegitimate  sons  to  England,  under 
the  impudent  assumption  of  Archbishop  of  Westminster. — (Ed.) 

2  And  that  you  may  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  this,  look 
back  aud  compare  Antichrist  four  hundred  years  ago,  with 
Antichrist  as  he  now  is,  aud  you  shall  see  what  work  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  begun  to  make  with  him  ;  kingdoms  and  countries 
he  hath  taken  from  her.  True,  the  fogs  of  Antichrist,  and  the 
smoke  that  came  with  him  out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  has 
eclipsed  the  glorious  light  of  the  gospel ;  but  you  know,  in 
eclipses,  when  they  are  recovering,  all  the  creatures  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth  cannot  put  a  stop  to  that  course,  until  the  sun 
or  the  moon  have  recovered  their  glory.  And  thus  it  shall  be 
now,  the  Lord  is  returning  to  visit  this  people  with  his  primi- 
tive lustre ;  he  will  not  go  back  until  the  light  of  the  sun  shall 
be  sevenfold. — (Bunyau's  Antichrist  and  hit  Ruin,  vol.  ii. 
p.  48.) 


follows  of  great  fame  in  this  town ;  so  that  many 
of  the  people  that  wanted  their  taste  of  things,  yet 
had  a  reverend  esteem  and  respect  for  the  in.' 
Upon  this  account  therefore  it  was,  that  theso 
pilgrims  got  not  much  hurt  here.  True,  there 
were  some  of  the  baser  sort,  that  could  see  no 
more  than  a  mole,  nor  understand  more  than  a 
beast ;  these  had  no  reverence  for  these  men,  aor 
took  they  notice  of  their  valour  or  adventures.5 

Well,  the  time  grew  on  that  the  Pilgrims  mu?t 
go  on  their  way,  wherefore  they  prepared  for  their 
journey.  They  sent  for  their  friends;  they  con- 
ferred with  them ;  they  had  some  time  set  apart, 
therein  to  commit  each  other  to  the  protection  of 
their  Prince.  There  were  again,  that  brought 
them  of  such  things  as  they  had,  that  were  fit  for 
the  weak  and  the  strong,  for  the  women  and  the 
men,  and  so  Laded  them  with  such  things  as  were 
necessary.  Ac.  xxviii.  io. 

Then  they  set  forward  on  their  wry ;  and  their 
friends  accompanying  them  so  far  as  was  conven- 
ient, they  again  committed  each  other  to  the  pro- 
tection of  their  King,  and  parted. 

They,  therefore,  that  were  of  the  Pilgrims'  com- 
pany went  on,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  went  before 
them.  Now  the  women  and  children  being  weakly, 
they  were  forced  to  go  as  they  could  bear ;  by  this 
means  Mr.  Ready-to-halt  and  Mr.  Feeble-mind  had 
more  to  sympathize  with  their  condition. 

When  they  were  gone  from  the  townsmen,  and 
when  their  friends  had  bid  them  farewell ;  they 
quickly  came  to  the  place  where  Faithful  was  put 
to  death  ;  there  therefore  they  made  a  stand,  and 
thanked  Him  that  had  enabled  him  to  bear  his 
cross  so  well ;  and  the  rather  because  they  now 
found  that  they  had  a  benefit  by  such  a  manly 
suffering  as  his  was.6 

They  went  on,  therefore,  after  this,  a  good  way 


3  'Wheu  nations  have  restored  to  the  people  the  property 
of  which  they  have  been  plundered,  under  the  pretence  of 
assisting  to  obtain  the  pardou  of  sin  and  the  favour  of  God, 
the  monster  will  soon  die ;  when  neither  rule,  nor  honour, 
nor  pelf  is  to  be  gained  by  hypocrisy. — (Ed.) 

1  This  may  refer  to  that  noble  baud  of  eminent  men  who, 
in  1675,  preached  the  morning  exercises  against  Popery; 
among  others  were  Owen,  Manton,  Baxter,  Doolittle,  Jeukyu, 
Poole,  and  many  others.  They  were  then,  and  ever  will  be, 
of  great  fame. — (Ed.) 

*  The  plaus  of  Charles  II.  and  James  II.,  to  re-establish 
Popery  in  England,  were  defeated  by  the  union  of  the  eminent 
Nonconformists  with  some  decided  enemies  to  Rome  in  the 
Established  Church ;  this  brought  them  into  esteem  and  respect. 
Mr.  Scott's  note  on  this  passage  is — '  The  disinterested,  and 
bold  decided  conduct  of  many  dissenters,  on  this  occasion,  pro- 
cured considerable  favour  both  to  them  and  their  brethren,  with 
the  best  friends  of  the  nation ;  but  the  prejudices  ol 
prevented  them  from  reaping  all  the  advantage  from  it  that 
they  ontiht  to  have  done.' — (Ed.) 

8  David  Hume,  in  his  History  of  England,  admitted  the 
invaluable  services  of  the  Puritans,  '  By  whom  the  precious 
spark  of  liberty  was  kindled  and  preserved,  and  to  whom  the 
English  owe  all  the  blessings  of  their  excellent  constitution.' 
—(Ed.) 


THE   Hi.r.KIM'fi  PROGRESS. 


further,  talking  of  Christian  and  Faithful;  and  | 
how  Hopeful  joined  himielf  to  Chri  itiaa  after  that 
Faithful  was  (lend. 

Now  they  were  come  up  with  the  Hill  Lucre, 
:  ,rti      where  the  silver  mine  was,  which  tool 

off  from  lii     pilgrin ,  and 

Into  which,  as  some  think,  By  ends  Fell  and  per> 
I  bed;  wherefore  they  considered  that.  But  when 
they  were  come  to  the  old  monument  that  stood 
over  against  the  hill  Lucre,  to  wit,  to  the  pillar  of 
salt  that  stood  also  within  view  of  Sodom  and  its 
stinking  lake;  they  marvelled,  as  did  Christian 
before,  that  men  of  thai  knowledge  and  ripene  of 
they  were,  should  be  so  blinded  as  to  turn 
bere.  Only  they  considered  again,  that 
nature  i  i  no!  affected  with  the  harms  that  othei  s 
have  mel  with,  e  peoially  if  that  thing  upon  which 
they  look,  ba  ■  an  attracting  virtue  upon  the  fooli  ih 
I  iye. 

1  saw  now  thai  they  went  on,  (ill  they  came  at 
,(i,      the  river  that  was  on  this  side  of  the 

p  Delectable  Mountains.     To  the  river 

where  the  fine  trees  grow  on  both  sides;  and  whose 
leave  .  if  taken  inwardly,  are  good  again  il  surfeits, 
where  the  meadows  are  green  all  the  year  long, 
and  where  they  might  lie  down  safely,  r-.  udu. 

By  this  river  side,  In  the  meadow,  there  were 

ind  fold  i  for  sheep,  a  b le  built  for  the 

1 rishing  and  bringing  up  of  those  lambs,  the 

of  those  women  that  go  on  pilgrimage.  9«  » a, 
M  o  there  was  here  one  that  was  intrusted  with 

them,  who  < Id  have  compassion,  and  that  oould 

gather  these  lambs  with  hi  i  arm,  and  carry  them 

in  hi  ■  bi i,  and  thai  oould  gently  lend  those  that 

were  with  young,  ti,  d.  a  New  to  the  care  of  this 
man,  Christiana  admonished  her  four  daughters  to 
commit  (heir  little  ones,  that  by  these  waters  they 
mighl  be  bou  ed,  harboured,  succoured,  and  nour- 
'  bi  d,  aud  thai  none  of  them  might  be  laoking  in 
time  to  eome.1  This  Man,  if  any  of  them  go 
a  itray,  or  be  lo  it,  be  will  bring  them  again  ;  he 
«ill  also  hind  up  that  whioh  was  broken,  and  will 
strengthen  them  that  are  siok,  Bm.  mdr.  u  ifl.  Here 
they  will  never  wanl  meat,  and  drink,  and  olothing; 
bere  they  will  be  kepi  from  thieves  and  robbers; 
for  this  Man  will  die  before  one  of  those  oommitted 
to  hi  •  tru  i  shall  be  loi  t.  3a.  kxiil  l  Bi  side  i,  here 
they  hall  be  ure  to  have  "nod  nurture  and  ad- 
monition, and  shall   be  taught  to  walk  in  right 

paths,  and  that   you  Knew  is  a  favour  of  DO   Small 

account.    A.1  o  here,  as  you  ee,  are  «h  ticate  waters, 


1  This  Is  "  moil  encouraging  view  of  the  tender  core  of  the 

.  i"  the  ohildn  n  ol  bi  lievei  i  c uitti  d  to  hii  oare,  by 

godly  parenta,     Nol  byanj  ceremonial  obiervanee,  but  hycon< 

mi  fervi  ui  upplii  tttionitoth  thi  i  i  ei  on  their  behalf, 
.nid  by  a  i  -il  i  ten!  pioui  example  to  train  thorn  up  in  the  way 

in  which  they  ihould  go,  thai  when  the]  i Id  they  ihoald 

nol  deparl  from  the  new  and  living  way,  -(En.) 


plea  mi  meadows,  dainty  Sowers,  variety  of  trees, 
and  such  as  bear  wholesome  fruit;  fruit  not  like 
that  thai  Matthew  ate  of,  (hat  fell  over  the  wall 
out  of  Beelzebub's  garden  ;  but  fruit  thai  pro- 
cureth  health  where  there  is  none,  and  that  oon« 
tinuetb  and  increaseth  it  where  it  is.8 

So  they  were  < tent  to  commit  their  little  one  i 

to  him;  and  that  which  was  also  an  encourage 

ineiit,  to  them  so  to  do,   was,  for  that,    all    lln  .  w.i  . 

to  be  at  the  charge  ol*  the  King,  and  so  was  as  an 
hospital  for  young  children  and  orphans, 

Now  they  went,  on;  and  when  they  were  come 
to  By  path  Meadow,  to  the  stile  oyer      ,,.||L:I  ,,mI 
which  Christian  went,  with  his  fellow        P  ! 

Hopeful,   when    they    were,     taken    hy      '  i,.     i„  ■„    .„  ,., 

1  J  •'        i  H  1 1  j  1 1 .  1 1 1    1 1 1 1  ■ . 

Giant  Despair,  and  put  into  Doubting    hnve  n  mind  to 

I  'a    lie  ;    they  Sat  down   and   eon  allied          ,,',  Qj  J  '  il, 
what,  was  best   to   he   done  ;    to   wit, 
now  they  were  so  strong,  and  had  got  sneli  a  man 
as    Mr.  (ireat  heart,    for    their   eondnelor,    whether 

they  had  not  best  to  make  an  attempt  upon  the 

Giant,  demolish  his  castle,  and,  if  there  were    any 

pilgrims  in  it,  to  set,  them  at  liberty,  before  they 
went  any  further.  So  one  said  one  thing,  and 
another  said  the  contrary.  One  questioned  if  it  wa  i 
lawful  to  go  upon  uneonsecrated  ground;  another 
said  they  might,  provided  their  end  was  good;  but 

Air.  (ireat,  heart,  said.  Though  that  assert  ion  ollered 
last  CanUOl    be  universally  true,  yet  1   have  a.   com- 

mandment  to  resist  sin,  to  overcome  evil,  to  fight 
the  good  fight  of  faith;  and,  l  pray,  with  whom 
should  1  fight  this  good  fight,  if  not  with  Giant 
Despair?  1  will,  therefore,  attempt  the  taking 
away  of  his  life,  and  the  demolishing  of  Doubting 
< !a  lie.  Then  said  he,  Who  will  go  with  me  i 
Then  said  old  Honest,  I  will,  And  so  will  we 
too,  said  Christiana's  four  sons,  Matthew,  Samuel, 
James,  and  Joseph;  for  they  were  young  men  and 

Strong.  1  .in.  iii.  18,  II.  So  they  left  the,  women  in 
the  road,  and  with  them  Mr.  Feeble-mind  and  Mr. 

Ready  to  halt  with  his  orutohes,  to  be  their  guard, 

until    they  came    hack  ;    for   in    that    place    though 

Giant  Despair  dwelt  so  near,  they  keeping  in  the 
road,  a  little  child  might  lead  them,  b,  a,  & 

So    Mr.   (Ireat   heart,  old     Honest,  and    the    four 

young  men,  went  to  go  up  to  Doubting  Castle,  to 
look  for  Giant  Despair.  When  they  came  at  the 
Castle-gate,  they  knocked  ^^~  entrance  with  an 
unusual  noise.  At  that  the  old  Giant  comes  to 
the  gate,  and  Diffidence,  his  wife,  follows.     Then 

said  he,   Who,  and  what  is  he  that,  is  so  hardy,  a; 

after  this  manner  to  molest  the  Giant  Despair? 


Hi  iv  we  frequently  find  our  author  speaking  of  our  God 
and  Saviour  at  man;  be  excels  in  thie.  n  li  to  be  wi  bed 
thai  authoi  in, i  |,n  ,m  h.  i ,  wrote  and  ipoke  of  the  manhood 
of  Jeaui,  who  woj  ii  perfect  man,  like  unto  ni  In  .'ill  things 
excepl  sin.  The  view  and  consideration  of  this  la  iweot  to 
faith,  and  endcori  our  Saviour  to  our  heart*.-— (Maaon.) 


1111.    PILGRIM'S    PROGR]    3. 


Groat  heart  replied,  It  Is  1.  Great  heart,  one 
of  the  King  of  the  Celestial  Country'!  oonduo 
ton  of  pilgrims  to  their  plaeej  and  I  demand  of 
thee  thai  thou  open  thj  galea  for  tnj  entrance, 
Propare  thyself  al  o  to  fight,  for  1  ara  oome  to 
away  thj  bead,  aad  t«>  demolioh   Doubting 

C  OS  tie. 

Now  Giant    Despair,  beoaute  he  was  i  giant, 

thoughl  no  man  oould  overooms  him  ; 

'"""''"' ,'1"-     and,  again,  thought  he,  shies  here 

tofore   1   have  made  s  oonque  I  oi   angels,  shall 

Great  heart  make  me  afraid  !     So  he  hoi 

himself,  and  wont  out.     He  had  a  oap  of  steel  upon 

his  head,  s  breast  plate  of  fire  girded  to  him,  and 

he  oame  nut  in  iron  shoes  with  a  great  club  in  Ins 

hand.     Then  these  six  men  made  up  to  him,  and 

beset  him  behind  and  before.     Also  when  Diffi- 

denoe,  the  giantess,  oame  up  to  help  bim,  old  Mr. 

Honest  <-ut  her  down  at  one  blow,     Then  they 

fought  for  their  live*,  and   Giant    Despair  was 

brought  down  t<>  the  ground,  but  was 

''"'"'•        vcr\  loath  i"  die,    1 1<-  struggled  hard, 

.  nd  had,  as  thej  soy,  as  manj  lives  as  a  oat ;  but 

I  real  heart  was  hie  death,  for  he  Left  him  not  (ill 

he  had  severed  his  head  from  Ids  shoulders.1 

'i  hen  thej  fell  to  demolishing  Doubting  Castle, 

that  you  know  might  with  eo  is  bs 

''      done,  sinoe  Giant  Despair  was  dead. 

They  were  seven  days  in  destroying  i>r  that;  and 

in  it  of  pilgrims  thej  found  one  Mr.  Despondenoy, 

almost  starved  (<>  death,  and  one  Mueh  afraid,  hie 

daughter;  these  two  thej    saved  olive.     But   it 

would  have  made  you  a  wondered  to  have  seen  the 

dead  bodies  that  lav  here  and  there  in  the  oastli 

yard,   and   how   full   of   dead   men's   bones   tint 

dungeon  was. 

W  heU   Mr.   Civ. il   limit    and  his  enni|>anion  I  Lid 

performed  this  exploit,  thej  took  Sir,  Dospondenoy, 
and  his  daughter  Much-afraid,  into  their  proteo 
for  they  were  bone  it  people,  though  thej 
were  prisoners  in  Doubting  Castle,  to  that  tyrant 
Giant  Despair.  They,  therefore,  l  say,  took  with 
them  the  head  of  tin-  Giant,  Lr  bis  bodj  thej  had 
buried  under  a  heap  of  stones,  and  down  to  the 


1    \\  Ii  it     i  .linn. (     GrCOl    In'  ul    do  ';'    u  lull     feat      UOt     | 

what  vi  o  Greol  hi  art  P 

id  Giant  De  paii   be    lain  bj  tha  power 
t-heart,  with '  the  iword  of  the  Spirit,  wnioh  u  tin- 
Word  "i  Qod,'  E  ph   vi,  I ,  i  even  Di  pondi  uci .  thou 
n  delivered,  sod  bi    dau  [hti  [  Mm  h  i 
bo  rescued,    0  for  more  of  Great  heart  i  company  ' 

i  inful,  and 

uti I,  bul  ii  i  hall  I"  fluallj  incci    ful.     '  I  am  per- 
suaded,' laitfa  the  apostle, '  that   oeithei  death,  nor  life,  nor 
aor  principalities,  nor  powers,  noi  things  present,  nor 
things  to  come,  aor  hoi  bth,  noi  depth,  noi  anj  other  creature, 
i.  bi  from  the  low  of  God,  which  ii  In 
Chrial  Jc  hi  "in  Lord.'    Pan]  demoliahed  the  an  lie, and  lie? 
I  .  but, 

.  niii.,"!  remain, 
An, i  nuke  Di  luau  Ike  Olunl  Uti 


i  l  to  their  oompanions  theyoame,  and  showed 
them  what  they  had  done,     Now   when  feeble- 
mind  and  Readj  to  halt  ■  avi  that  it  wa  -  th 
oi   Giant   Despair  indeed,  thej  were  verj   jocund 
and  merrj .-     Now  Chi  i  itiana,  if  n<  od  wa  ,  oould 

play    unon   the  v  iol,  and    Ii.  r   dan •  lilt-r     , 

Aii'i i'v  u\x>u  the  int.' ;    o,    inoe  they      "-1 

•  merrj  di  po  ed,  she  plop  d  '  "  J"v 
them  ii  lesson,  and  Readj  to  halt  would  danoe. 
So  he  took  De  pondenoy'  i  daughter,  named  Muoli 
afraid,  bj  the  hand,  and  to  danoing  thej  went  in 
the  load.  True,  he  oould  not  danoe  without  one 
orutoh  in  his  hand;  but,  I  promise  von,  he  footed 
it  well,  All  o  the  gii  I  was  to  be  commended,  for 
slio  answered  the  music  handsomely. 

a  i  for  M  i .  I  ii  pondenoj ,  the  rau  io  » a  not 
muoh  (^  liim;  be  was  for  feeding  rather  than 
danoing,  for  that  be  wa  i  alrao  I  stoi  ved*  I  o 
Christiana  gave  bim  i  ome  of  her  bottl  i  oi 
for  present  roliof,  and  tlien  propared  him 
thing  to  eat ;  and,  in  little  time,  the  old  gonth  man 
oame  t>>  himself,  and  began  to  be  finelj  revived. 

Now  l  aaw  in  my  dream,  when  all  the  e  I 
were  flnii  bed,  Mr.  Great  heart  took  the  head  of 
Giant  Despair,  and  set  it  upon  a  pole  bj  the  hi  fh« 
way  side,  right  over  against  the  pillar  that  I 
tian  oreoted  for  a  caution  to  pilgrims  that 
after,  to  take  heed  of  entering  into  his  grounds. ' 
Though  Doubting  Caitle  be  doraoll  h'd, 
Ami  the.  Giant  Deipair  hath  toit  his  head, 
Sin  oan  rebuild  the  Castle,  moko't  roiuoiu, 
Ami  in.: k»-  Deipair  the  G    it  livi 

Then  he  writ  under  it,  upon  a  rnarbli 

ill,"  q  \ er  e  i  follovi  ing  i 

'This  the  bead  of  him,  whose  name  onlj 

in  former  times  did  pilgrimi  terrify, 

[■]    i     Ue'i  down  .  and  Diffldi 

Brave  Master  On 

De  pondenoy,  his  daughtei  Muoh  ilVaid,  I m  immontnl 

Great  heart  (be  them  also  the  man  liai  ploy'd; 

Who  hereof  doubts,  If  he'll  but  oast  bis  eyo 

t  |i  hithi  r,  in i; 

i  in    hi  "i  also,  whi  n  doubtin  \  oi  ipplos  d  tnoo, 

Doth  ihom  i i  ft  u  i  thoj  have  di  livi 

"  How  wall  d 

Muoh  afraidi,   Head]  to  halti,  and  the   Feebl  I 

<  'ome  and  u  ■  leo   ■  '    '  Poor  ■• i  ■    oul,  thou  art   ill 

man  that  would  ride  full  gallop,  whose  hoi  e  will  hardlj  trot ' 
Now,  the  deairoof  1 

Die  dull  jade  bo  ride but  bj  the  h  teli 

Ing,  and  ipurrii  mk.    Thj  fl«  h 

tbii  dull  jade  ;  it  will  aot  a  dlop  after  Chri  I   It  will  I 

ward,  though  thj  il  ana  heaven  li( 

.i  irt,  '  hri  I  jad  n  th  i rdin  ■  to  thi     aeei   j 

heart.'    (Vol.l.p 

|    ||  the  work  and  aim  of  even  i  ithful  mi 
Christ,  to  de  troj  Giant    Di  | 

CtoUe,  in  the  henrti  of  God'i  children.     \ i  awful  ch 

It  not  ,,,  the  world,  thi •  man  who  a  niino-  th mstcri  i 

idohorooter,  n I  lot  '■"" !  "•' 

n tn  of  m Motion  which  Is  « i >d  '"  -" 

who  lireallj  oalled  and  lent  nt  God      J.  BJ 


230 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


When  these  men  had  thus  hravelj  showed  them- 
selves against  Doubting  Castle,  and  had  slain 
Giant  Despair,  they  went  forward ;  and  went  on 
till  they  came  to  the  Delectable  Mountains,  where 
Christian  and  Hopeful  refreshed  themselves  with 
the  varieties  of  the  place.  They  also  acquainted 
themselves  with  the  shepherds  there,  who  welcomed 
them,  as  they  had  done  Christian  before,  unto  the 
Delectable  Mountains. 

Now  the  Shepherds,  seeing  so  great  a  train  follow 
Mr.  Great-heart,  for  with  him  they  were  well 
acquainted,  they  said  unto  him,  Good  Sir,  you 
have  got  a  goodly  company  here.  Pray,  where 
did  you  find  all  these  ? 

Then  Mr.  Great-heart  replied : 

First,  here  is  Christiana  and  her  train, 
Her  sons,  and  her  sons'  wives,  who  like  the  wain,1 
Keep  by  the  pole,  and  do  by  compass  steer, 
From  sin  to  grace,  else  they  had  not  been  here ; 
The  Guide's    Next,  here's  old  Honest  come  on  pilgrimage, 
3peech  to  the   «■,,,,..  ,T, 

Shepherds.     Keady-to -halt,  too,  who,  I  dare  eugase, 

True-hearted  is,  and  so  is  Peeble-mind, 
Who  willing  was  not  to  be  left  behind ; 
Despondency,  good  man,  is  coming  after, 
And  so  also  is  Much-afraid  his  daughter. 
May  we  have  entertainment  here,  or  must 
We  further  go  ?     Let's  know  whereon  to  trust. 
Then  said  the  Shepherds,  This  is  a  comfortable 
Their  entertain-   company.     You  are  welcome  to  us, 
went.         for  we  }iave  [comfort]  for  the  feeble  as 
for  the  strong.     Our  Prince  has  an  eye  to  what 
is  done  to  the  least  of  these ;  therefore  infirmity 
must  not  be  a  block  to  our  entertainment.  Mat.  xxv.  40. 
So  they  had  them  to  the  palace  door,  and  then 
said  unto  them,  Come  in,  Mr.  Feeble-mind ;  Come 
in,  Mr.  Ready-to-halt ;   come  in,  Mr.  Despondency, 
and  Mrs.  Much-afraid,  his  daughter.2    These,  Mr. 
Great-heart,  said  the  Shepherds  to  the  guide,  we 
call  in  by  name,  for  that  they  are  most  subject  to 
draw  back ;  but  as  for  you,  and  the  rest  that  are 
strong,  we  leave  you  to  your  wonted  liberty.    Then 
said  Mr.  Great-heart,  This  day  I  see  that  grace 
doth   shine  in  your  faces,  and  that  you  are  my 
A  description      Lord's  Shepherds  indeed ;  for  that  you 
herds? shq)'     have  not  pushed  these  diseased  neither 
with    side    nor    shoulder,    but    have 
rather  strewed  their  way  into   the   palace   with 
flowers,  as  you  should.3  Eze.  xxxiv.  21. 


1  'The wain,'  seven  bright  stars  in  the  constellation  of  Ursa 
Major,  called  by  country  people,  the  plough,  or  the  wain,  or 
Charles  I.  s  chariot. — (Ed.) 

2  Those  ministers  who  exercise  the  greatest  affection  towards 
weak  and  upright  Christians,  are  most  according  to  the 
description  of  pastors,  after  God's  own  heart,  given  in  the 
Scriptures  of  truth. — (Iviniey.) 

3  Bunyan  was  peculiarly  tender  with  the  weak ;  they  are 
to  be  received,  but  not  to  doubtful  disputations.  Thus,  with 
regard  to  the  great  cause  of  separation  among  Christians, 
he  says,  '  If  water-baptism '  (whether  by  sprinkling  of  infants', 
or  immersing  of  adults)  '  trouble  their  peace,  wound  the  con-' 
sciences  of  the  godly,  and  dismember  their  fellowships,  it  is, 


So  the  feeble  and  weak  went  in,  and  Mr.  Great- 
heart  and  the  rest  did  follow.  When  they  were 
also  set  down,  the  Shepherds  said  to  those  of  tho 
weaker  sort,  What  is  it  that  you  would  have  ?  for, 
said  they,  all  things  must  be  managed  here  to  tho 
supporting  of  the  weak,  as  well  as  the  warning  of 
the  unruly. 

So  they  made  them  a  feast  of  things  easy  of 
digestion,  and  that  were  pleasant  to  the  palate, 
and  nourishing;  the  which,  when  they  had  received, 
they  went  to  their  rest,  each  one  respectively  unto 
his  proper  place.  When  morning  was  come,  be- 
cause the  mountains  were  high,  and  the  day  clear, 
and  because  it  was  the  custom  of  the  Shepherds  to 
show  to  the  Pilgrims,  before  their  departure,  some 
rarities  ; i  therefore,  after  they  were  ready,  and  had 
refreshed  themselves,  the  Shepherds  took  them  out 
into  the  fields,  and  showed  them  first  what  they 
had  showed  to  Christian  before. 

Then  they  had  them  to  some  new  places.  The 
first  was  to  Mount  Marvel,  where  they 

1      i     j  j    t_    i     1  1  v         Mount  M.irveL 

looked,  and  beheld  a  man  at  a  dis- 
tance,  that  tumbled  the  hills  about  with  words. 
Then  they  asked  the  Shepherds  what  that  should 
mean  ?     So  they  told  them,  that  that  man  was 
a  son  of  one  Great-grace,  of  whom  you  read  in  the 
First  Part  of  the  Records  of  the  Fil-     ■pirat  -p^ 
grim's  Progress.     And  he  is  set  there       P- 149- 
to  teach  pilgrims  how  to  believe  down,  or  to  tumble 
out  of  their  way,  what  difficulties  they  shall  meet 
with,  by  faith.5  Mar.  ».  23,  24.     Then  said  Mr.  Great- 
heart,  I  know  him.     He  is  a  man  above  many. 

Then  they  had  them  to  another  place,  called 
Mount  Innocent ;  and  there  they  saw  Mount 
a  man  clothed  all  in  white,  and  two  innocent, 
men,  Prejudice  and  Ill-will,  continually  casting  dirt 
upon  him.  Now,  behold,  the  dirt,  whatsoever  they 
cast  at  him,  would  in  little  time  fall  off  again,  and 
his  garments  would  look  as  clear  as  if  no  dirt  had 
been  cast  thereat.6 


although  an  ordinance,  for  the  present  to  be  prudently  shunned, 
for  the  edification  of  the  church.'  '  Love  is  more  discovered 
when  we  receive,  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  than  when  we  refuse 
his  children  for  want  of  water.' — (Bunyan  on  Baptism,  vol.  ii. 
p.  608.)  When  will  such  peaceful  sentiments  spread  over  the 
church?— (En.) 

4  There  are  things  taught  by  the  gospel,  here  called  'rarities/ 
which,  though  high  and  mysterious,  will  yet,  when  clearly 
stated,  prove  the  means  of  exciting  Christians  to  live  by  faith, 
and  to  cidtivate  whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of  good 
report. —  (Ivimey.) 

5  Strong  faith,  in  the  words  of  Christ,  will '  believe  down ' 
mountains  of  afflictions,  or  tumble  them  out  of  the  Christian's 
way.  Though  it  will  not  perform  miracles,  it  will  remove 
difficulties  resembling  mountains. — (Ivimey.) 

6  The  history  of  Joseph,  with  that  of  Mr.  Bunyan,  aud  of 
thousands  besides,  proves,  that  charges  against  a  godly,  inno- 
cent man,  arising  from  the  prejudice,  ill-will,  and  malice  of  his 
enemies,  shall  eventually  turn  out  to  his  honour,  and  to  their 
confusion.  '  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and 
persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you 
falsely,  for  my  sake.'  Mat.  v.  11.— (Ed J 


THE   HLG RIM'S   PROGRESS. 


231 


Mount  Charity. 


Then  said  the  Pilgrims,  What  means  this  ?  The 
Shepherds  answered,  This  man  is  named  Godly- 
man,  and  this  garment  is  to  show  the  innoceney  of 
his  life.  Now,  those  that  throw  dirt  at  him,  are 
such  as  hate  his  well-doing;  hut,  as  you  see  the 
dirt  will  not  stiek  upon  his  clothes,  so  it  shall  he 
with  him  that  liveth  truly  innocently  in  the  world. 
Whoever  they  he  that  would  make  such  men  dirty, 
they  lahour  all  in  vain;  for  God,  hy  that  a  little 
time  is  spent,  will  cause  that  their  innocence  shall 
hreak  forth  as  the  light,  and  their  righteousness 
as  the  noon-day. 

Then  they  took  them,  and  had  them  to  Mount 
Charity,  where  they  showed  them  a 
man  that  had  a  hundle  of  cloth  lying 
before  him,  out  of  which  he  cut  coats  and  garments 
for  the  poor  that  stood  about  him ;  yet  his  bundle 
or  roll  of  cloth  was  never  the  less. 

Then  said  they,  What  should  this  be  ?  This  is, 
said  the  Shepherds,  to  show  you,  that  he  that  has 
a  heart  to  give  of  his  labour  to  the  poor,  shall 
never  want  wherewithal.  lie  that  watereth  shall 
be  watered  himself.  And  the  cake  that  the  widow 
gave  to  the  prophet  did  not  cause  that  she  had 
ever  the  less  in  her  barrel. 

They  had  them  also  to  a  place  where  they  saw 
,    ,        one  Fool,  and  one  Want-wit,  washing 

rheworkof  one  . 

].<i  .ind  one  of  an  Ethiopian,  with  intention  to 
make  him  white ;  but  the  more  they 
washed  him  the  blacker  he  was.  They  then  asked 
the  Shepherds  what  that  should  mean.  So  they 
told  them,  saying,  Thus  shall  it  be  with  the  vile 
person.  All  means  used  to  get  such  a  one  a  good 
name  shall,  in  conclusion,  tend  but  to  make  him 
more  abominable.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Pharisees, 
and  so  shall  it  be  with  all  hypocrites.1 

Then  said  Mercy,  the  wife  of  Matthew,  to  Chris- 
,,         ,  tiana,  her  mother,  Mother,  I  would,  if 

Merry    has     a  *  '  . 

mind  to  see   it  might  be,  see  the  hole  in  the  hill,  or 

n'leliuj.  that  commonly  called  the  by-way  to 

First  Part,     hell.     So  her  mother  brake  her  mind 

to  the  Shepherds.      Then  they  went 

to  the  door.     It  was  in  the  side  of  a  hill,  and 

they  opened  it,  and  bid  Mercy  hearken  awhile.    So 

she  hearkened,  and  heard  one  saying,  Cursed  be 


1  This  represents  the  folly  of  those  who  go  ahout  to  reform 
the  manners,  without  aiming  at  the  conversion  of  the  heart. 
Nature,  in  its  highest  state  of  cultivation  and  improvement,  is 
nature  still.  That  which  is  horn  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that 
which  is  horn  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit. —  (J.  B.) 

-  0,  damned  souls  will  have  thoughts  that  will  clash  with 
glory,  clash  with  justice,  clash  with  law,  clash  with  itself,  clash 
with  hell,  and  with  the  everlaatingness  of  misery;  hut  the 

Eoint,  the  edge,  and  the  poison  of  all  these  thoughts  will  still 
e  galling,  and  dropping  tin  ir  stings  into  the  sore,  grieved, 
wounded,  fretted  place,  which  is  the  conscience,  thouuh  not 
the  conscience  only ;  for  1  may  say  of  the  souls  in  lit  11,  that 
they,  all  over,  are  hut  one  wound,  one  sore. —  (Bunynn's  Great- 
ness of  the  Suul,  vol.  i.  p.  ll'J.)  "Well  might  Mercy  say, 
'  Blessed  are  they  that  are  delivered  from  this  place  ! ' — (En.) 


my  father,  for  holding  of  my  feet  back  from  the 
way  of  peace  and  life;  and  another  said,  0  that 
I  had  been  torn  in  pieces,  before  I  had,  to  save 
my  life,  lost  my  soul!  and  another  said,  If  I  were 
to  live  again,  how  would  I  deny  myself,  rather 
than  come  to  this  place  !  Then  there  was  as  if 
the  very  earth  had  groaned  and  quaked  under  tho 
feet  of  this  young  woman  for  fear.  So  she  looked 
white,  and  came  trembling  away,  saying,  Blessed 
bo  he  and  she  that  are  delivered  from  this 
place.2 

Now  when  the  Shepherds  had  shown  them  all 
these  things,  then  they  had  them  back  to  the 
palace,  and  entertained  them  with  what  the  house 
would  afford.  But  Mercy  being  a  young  and 
breeding  woman,  longed  for  some-  Mcrcy  lo^th, 
thing  that  she  saw  there,  but  was  and  for  what 
ashamed  to  ask.  Her  mother-in-law  then  asked 
her  what  she  ailed  ;  for  she  looked  as  one  not  well. 
Then  said  Mercy,  There  is  a  looking-glass  hangs 
up  in  the  dining-room,  off  which  I  cannot  take 
my  mind:  if,  therefore,  I  have  it  not,  I  think  I 
shall  miscarry.  Then  said  her  mother,  I  will 
mention  thy  wants  to  the  Shepherds,  and  they  will 
not  deny  it  thee.  But  she  said,  I  am  ashamed 
that  these  men  should  know  that  I  longed.  Nay, 
my  daughter,  said  she,  it  is  no  shame  but  a  virtue, 
to  long  for  such  a  thing  as  that.  So  Mercy  said, 
Then,  mother,  if  you  please,  ask  the  Shepherds  if 
they  are  willing  to  sell  it. 

Now  the  glass  was  one  of  a  thousand.  It  would 
present  a  man,  one  way,  with  his  own  it  was  the  Word 
features  exactly,  Ja.  l  23 ;  and,  turn  it  0|  God- 
but  another  way,  and  it  would  show  one  the  very 
face  and  similitude  of  the  Prince  of  Pilgrims  him- 
self, l  Co.  xiH.  12.  Yea,  I  have  talked  with  them 
that  can  tell,  and  they  have  said,  that  they  have 
seen  the  very  crown  of  thorns  upon  his  head,  by 
looking  in  that  glass ;  they  have  therein  also  seen 
the  holes  in  his  hands,  in  his  feet,  and  his  side. 
3  Co.  iii.  is.  Yea,  such  an  excellency  is  there  in 
that  glass,  that  it  will  show  him  to  one  where  they 
have  a  mind  to  see  him ;  whether  living  or  dead ; 
whether  in  earth  or  heaven  ;  whether  in  a  state  of 
humiliation,  or  in  his  exaltation ;  whether  coming 
to  suffer,  or  coming  to  reign.3 

Christiana,   therefore,   went  to  the   Shepherds 


3  O  what  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  long  for  the  AVord  of  God 
so  as  not  to  be  satisfied  without  it,  aud  to  prize  it  above  and 
beyond  all  other  things  !     Love  to  the  AVord  excites  the  soul 
to  say  with  David,  '  1   have  longed  fur  thy  salvation,  O  Lord.' 
Ps.  cxix.  174.     This  is  a  special  mark  of  a  gracious  soul.— 
(Mason.)     Every  true  believer  longs  to  be  more  con 
acquainted  with  the  Scriptures  from  day  to  day,  and  I 
into   them   continually.  —  (Scott.)      Abraham  Cheer,    who 
perished  in  prison  for  nonconformity  in   Bunyan's  time,  pub- 
lished a  little  volume  of  Poems,  in  which  he  compares  the 
Bible  to  a  looking-glass,  in  these  very  appropriate  hues  ;— 
•If  morn  by  morn  you  in  this  date  will  dre«  jm,  _ 

1  have  some  hopes  Out  God  bj  it  DM]  -  H*J 


232 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


apart1 — now  the  names  of  the  Shepherds  are 
First  Part,  Knowledge,  Experience,  Watchful, 
P-  Ui-  and  Sincere — .and  said  unto  them, 
There  is  one  of  my  daughters,  a  breeding  woman, 
that  I  think  doth  long  for  something  that  she  hath 
seen  in  this  house ;  and  she  thinks  she  shall  mis- 
carry, if  she  shall  by  you  be  denied. 

Experience.  Call  her,  call  her ;  she  shall  assur- 

She    doth    not    eclty  nave  wllat   we    can    nelP    ner    t0- 

lose  her  long-  So  they  called  her,  and  said  to  her, 
Mercy,  what  is  that  thing  thou  wouldst 
have  ?  Then  she  blushed,  and  said,  The  great  glass 
that  hangs  up  in  the  dining-room.  So  Sincere  ran 
and  fetched  it,  and,  with  a  joyful  consent,  it  was 
given  her.  Then  she  bowed  her  head,  and  gave 
thanks,  and  said,  By  this  I  know  that  I  have 
obtained  favour  in  your  eyes. 

They  also  gave  to  the  other  young  women  such 
things  as  they  desired,  and  to  their  husbands  great 
commendations,  for  that  they  had  joined  with  Mr. 
Great-heart,  to  the  slaying  of  Giant  Despair,  and 
the  demolishing  of  Doubting  Castle. 

About  Christiana's  neck,  the  Shepherds  put  a 
bracelet,  and  so  they  did  about  the  necks  of  her 
How  the  Shep-  four  daughters ;  also  they  put  ear- 
herds   adom   rings  in  their  ears,  and  jewels  on  their 

the  Pilgrims.      _     °         ,     ,  J 

foreheads." 
When  they  were  minded  to  go  hence,  they  let 
them  go  in  peace,  but  gave  not  to  them  those 
certain  cautions  which  before  were  given  to  Chris- 
First  Part,     tian  and  his  companion.     The  reason 
P-  m-       was,  for  that  these  had   Great-heart 
to  be  their  guide,   who   was   one   that  was  well 
acquainted  with  things,  and   so  could  give  them 
their  cautions  more  seasonably ;  to  wit,  even  then 
when  the  danger  was  nigh  the  approaching. 

What  cautions  Christian  and  his  companion  had 
First  Part,     received  of  the  Shepherds,  they  had 
p- lal-       also  lost,  by  that  the  time  was  come 
that  they  had  need  to  put  them  in  practice.    Where- 
fore, here  was  the  advantage  that  this  company 
had  over  the  other. 

Eroni  hence  they  went  on  singing,  and  they  said, 
Behold,  how  fitly  are  the  stages  set 
For  their  relief  that  pilgrims  are  become ! 
And  how  they  us  receive  without  one  let, 
That  makes  the  other  life  our  mark  and  home  ! 
What  novelties  they  have  to  us  they  give, 
That  we,  though  Pilgrims,  joyful  lives  may  live ; 
They  do  upon  us,  too,  such  things  bestow, 
That  show  we  Pilgrims  are,  where'er  we  go. 


1  This  doubtless  is  meant  to  intimate, that  in  times  of  great 
anxiety,  and  in  prospect  of  seasons  of  difficulty,  Christiana 
desire  above  all  things  the  special  supports  and  consolations  of 
the  Word  of  God. — (Iviiney.) 

2  By  this  jewelry  is  probably  intimated,  that  they  gave 
them  written  testimonials  of  possessing  the  ornament  of  a 
meek  and  quiet  spirit,  that  they  might  be  recognized  as  Chris- 
tian women  by  other  churches. — (Ivimey.) 


When  they  were  gone  from  the  Shepherds,  they 
quickly  came  to  the  place  where  Chris-  Part  First 
tian  met  with  one  Turn-away,  that  p.  146. 
dwelt  in  the  town  of  Apostasy.  Wherefore  of  him 
Mr.  Great-heart,  their  guide,  did  now  put  them  in 
mind,  saying,  This  is  the  place  where  Christian 
met  with  one  Turn-away,  who  carried   „ 

•<  _  How  one  luvn- 

with  him  the  character  of  his  rebel-     away  mana-ed 
li6n  at  his  back.     And  this  I  have  to       *  dl'0s ' 
say  concerning  this  man ;  he  would  hearken  to  no 
counsel,  but  once  falling,  persuasion  could  not  stop 
him. 

When  he  came  to  the  place  where  the  Cross  and 
the  Sepulchre  were,  he  did  meet  with  one  that  did 
bid  him  look  there,  but  he  gnashed  with  his  teeth, 
and  stamped,  and  said,  he  was  resolved  to  go  back 
to  his  own  town.  Before  he  came  to  the  gate,  he 
met  with  Evangelist,  who  offered  to  lay  hands  on 
him,  to  turn  him  into  the  way  again.  But  this 
Turn-away  resisted  him,  and  having  done  much 
despite  unto  him,  he  got  away  over  the  wall,  and 
so  escaped  his  hand.  He.  x.  26-29. 

Then  they  went  on ;  and  just  at  the  place 
where  Little-faith  formerly  was  robbed,   „    ,. ..    .. 

.  »  '    OneVahant-for- 

there  stood  a  man  with  his  sword  truth  beset 
drawn,  and  his  face  all  bloody.  Then 
said  Mr.  Great-heart,  What  art  thou  ?  The  man 
made  answer,  saying,  I  am  one  whose  name  is 
Valiant-for-truth.  I  am  a  pilgrim,  and  am  going 
to  the  Celestial  City.  Now,  as  I  was  in  my  way, 
there  were  three  men  did  beset  me,  and  propounded 
unto  me  these  three  things:  1.  Whether  I  would 
become  one  of  them.  2.  Or  go  back  from  whence 
I  came.  3.  Or  die  upon  the  place.3  To  the  first, 
I  answered,  I  had  been  a  true  man  a  long  season, 
and  therefore  it  could  not  be  expected  that  I  now 
should  cast  in  my  lot  with  thieves.  Pr.  i.  10—14. 
Then  they  demanded  what  I  would  say  to  the 
second.  So  I  told  them  that  the  place  from  whence 
I  came,  had  I  not  found  incommodity  there,  I  had 
not  forsaken  it  at  all ;  but  finding  it  altogether 
unsuitable  to  me,  and  very  unprofitable  for  me,  I 
forsook  it  for  this  way.  Then  they  asked  me  what 
1  said  to  the  third.  And  I  told  them,  My  life  cost 
more  dear  far,  than  that  I  should  lightly  give  it 
away.     Besides,  you  have  nothing  to  do  thus  to 


3  From  the  names  given  to  these  opposers,  they  appear  to 
represent  certain  wild  enthusiasts  who  intrude  themselves  in 
the  way  of  professors,  to  perplex  their  minds,  and  persuade, 
them  that,  unless  they  adopt  their  reveries  or  superstitions, 
they  cannot  be  saved.  An  ungovernable  imagination,  a  mind 
incapable  of  sober  reflection,  and  a  dogmatizing  spirit,  charac- 
terize these  enemies  of  the  truth ;  they  assault  religious  persons 
with  specious  reasonings,  cavilling  objections,  confident  asser- 
tions, bitter  reproaches,  proud  boastings,  sarcastic  censures, 
and  rash  judgments.  They  endeavour  to  draw  them  to  their 
party,  or  drive  them  from  attending  to  religion  at  all.  But 
the  Word  of  God,  used  with  fervent,  persevering  prayer,  v\  ill 
silence  such  dangerous  assailants,  and  confirm  others  also. — 
(Scott.) 


THE   riLGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


233 


put  tilings  to  my  choice ;  wherefore,  at  your  peril 
lie  it,  if  you  meddle.  Then  these  three,  to  wit, 
Wild-head,  Inconsiderate,  and  Tragmatic,  drew 
upon  me,  and  1  also  drew  upon  them. 

So  we  fell  to  it,  one  against  three,  for  the  space 
ITmv    lie    lie-   of  above  three  hours.     They  have  left 

MdeputUth«n  uPon  lne-  as  y°u  scc»  some  of  tllC 
tonight  marks  of  their  valour,  and  have  also 

carried  away  with  them  some  of  mine.     Tliey  arc 
hut  just  now  gone.     I  suppose  they  might,  as  the 
saving  is,  hear  your  horse  dash,  and  so  they  hetook 
them  to  flight. 

Great  heart  n  ,,    ,    , 

wond.rs  at  bis        Great-heart,   but  here  was  great 

nlma'        odds,  three  against  one. 

Valiant.  It  is  true  ;  hut  little  or  more  are 
nothing  to  him  that  has  the  truth  on  his  side. 
4  Though  an  host  should  encamp  against  me,'  said 
one,  '  my  heart  shall  not  fear ;  though  war  should 
rise  against  me,  in  this  will  I  be  confident.'  r.s. 
xxvii.  s.  Besides,  saith  he,  I  have  read  in  some 
records,  that  one  man  has  fought  an  army.  And 
how  many  did  Samson  slay  with  the  jaw-bone  of 
an  ass  ? l  Ju.  xv.  is,  16. 

Great-iieart.  Then  said  the  guide,  Why  did 
you  not  cry  out,  that  some  might  have  come  in  for 
your  succour  ? 

Valiant.  So  I  did,  to  my  King,  who,  I  knew, 
could  hear,  and  afford  invisible  help,  and  that  was 
sufficient  for  me. 

Great-heart.  Then  said  Great-heart  to  Mr. 
Valiant-for-truth,  Thou  hast  worthily  behaved  thy- 
self. Let  me  see  thy  sword.  So  he  showed  it  him. 
When  he  had  taken  it  in  his  hand,  and  looked 
thereon  a  while,  he  said,  Ha  !  it  is  a  right  Jeru- 
salem blade,  is.  u.  3. 

Valiant.  It  is  so.  Let  a  man  have  one  of  these 
blades,  with  a  hand  to  wield  it  and  skill  to  use  it, 
and  he  may  venture  upon  an  angel  with  it.  He 
need  not  fear  its  holding,  if  he  can  but  tell  how  to 
lay  on.  Its  edges  will  never  blunt.  It  will  cut 
flesh  and  bones,  and  soul  and  spirit,  and  all.  Ep. 

vi.  12-17.    He.  iv.  12. 

Great-heart.  But  you  fought  a  great  while ;  I 

wonder  you  was  not  weary. 

Valiant.  I  fought  till  my  sword  did  cleave  to 

j.    w    .      my  hand  ;  and  when  they  were  joined 

The  frith,     together,  as  if  a  sword  grew  out  of 

my  arm,    and    when   the   blood    ran 

through  my    fingers,    then    I    fought  with    most 


1  Truth  will  make  a  man  valiant ;  and  valour  lor  truth  will 
make  a  pilgrim  light  with  wild- headed,  inconsiderate,  and 
pragmatic  opposers.  The  blood  he  loses  in  such  a  battle  is 
ur,  the  scars  he  gets  are  his  glory. — (Mason.)  lie 
does  not  attempt  to  hide  himself,  or  run  from  his  and  his 
Lord's  enemies.  (J  that  pilgrims,  especially  those  that  arc 
young,  were  better  trained  to  this  battle!  In  Bunyau's  time, 
there  were  comparatively  few  of  these  cavillers;  now  their 
name  is  Legion. — (Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


Great-heart.  Thou  hast  done  well.  Tliou  hast 
1  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin.'  Thou 
shalt  abide  by  us,  come  in  and  go  out  with  us,  for 
we  are  thy  companions. 

Then  they  took  him,  and  washed  his  wounds, 
and  gave  him  of  what  they  had  to  refresh  him  ; 
and  so  they  went  on  together.  Now,  as  they  went 
on,  because  Mr.  Great-heart  was  delighted  in  him, 
for  he  loved  one  greatly  that  he  found  to  be  a  man 
of  his  hands,  and  because  there  were  with  his; 
company  them  that  were  feeblo  and  weak,  there- 
fore he  questioned  with  him  about  many  things; 
as,  first,  what  countryman  he  was  ?:J 

Valiant.  1  am  of  Dark-land ;  for  there  I  was 
born,  and  there  my  father  and  mother  are  still. 

Great-heart.  Dark-land,  said  the  guide;  doth 
uot  that  lie  up  on  the  same  coast  with  the  City  of 
Destruction  ? 

Valiant.  Yes,  it  doth.    Now,  that  which  caused 

me  to  come  on  pilgrimage  was  this;    „mvMr  V;il|;i(!, 

we  had  one  Mr.  Tell-true  came  into     came  ">  ro  on 
,1         ,1.,  i    i     pilgnmage. 

our  parts,  and  he  told  it  about  what 

Christian  had  done,  that  went  from  the  City  of 
Destruction;  namely,  how  he  had  forsaken  his 
wife  and  children,  and  had  betaken  himself  to  a 
pilgrim's  life.  It  was  also  confidently  reported, 
how  he  had  killed  a  serpent  that  did  come  out  to 
resist  him  in  his  journey,  and  how  he  got  through 
to  whither  he  intended.  It  was  also  told,  what  wel- 
come he  had  at  all  his  Lord's  lodgings,  especially 
when  he  came  to  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City ; 
for  there,  said  the  man,  he  was  received  with  sound 
of  trumpet,  by  a  company  of  Shining  Ones.  He 
told  it  also,  how  all  the  bells  in  the  city  did  ring 
for  joy  at  his  reception,  and  what  golden  garments 
he  was  clothed  with,  with  many  other  things  that 
now  I  shall  forbear  to  relate.  In  a  word,  that  man 
so  told  the  story  of  Christian  and  his  travels,  that 
my  heart  fell  into  a  burning  haste  to  be  gone  after 
him  ;  nor  could  father  or  mother  stay  me!  So  I 
got  from  them,  and  am  come  thus  far  on  my  way. 
Great-heart.  You  came  in  at  the  gate,  did 
you  not  ? 


2  In  this  battle,  this  striving  for  the  truth,  three  considera- 
tions strike  the  mind.— 1.  Reliance  upon  Divine  aid,  without 
which  we  can  do  nothing.  2.  A  right  Jerusalem  weapon, 
forged  iu  the  lire  of  love,  well  tempered  with  Rible  truths. 
Such  a  sword  will  make  even  the  angeUf  the  bottomless  pit 
flee,  its  edge  will  never  blunt,  and  it  will  cut  through  every- 
thing opposed  to  it.     3.  Decision  of  character,  per-  i 

to  the  utmost ;  no  trimming  or  meanly  compounding  for 
truth,  but  a  determination,  in  the  Lord's  strength,  to  come  off 
more  than  conquerors.  It  is  blessed  lighting  when  hand  and 
heart  are  engaged,  and  the  sword  grows   united   to  both.— 

3  The  church  of  Christ  has  produced  heroes  of  the  first 
class  in  point  of  courage,  which  they  have  displayed  in  circum- 
stances  of  great  danger.  Luther  and  Knox,  and  [atim.  r  and 
Bunyan,  were  men  of  this  stamp  ;  each  of  whom  m,, ht  wuh 
great  propriety,  have  been  named  \  ahant-lor-thc-truth.- 
(Ivimey.)  SQ 


234 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Valiant.  Yes,  yes ;  for  the  same  man  also  told 
He  begins   us  tnat  a^  would  be  nothing,  if  we  did  not 

right,      begin  to  enter  this  way  at  the  gate.1 

Great-heart.  Look  you,  said  the  guide  to  Chris- 
fliristian's  name   tiana,  the  pilgrimage  of  your  husband, 

famous.  an(j  wnat  jie  iias  gotten  thereby,  is 
spread  abroad  far  and  near. 

Valiant.  Why,  is  this  Christian's  wife  ? 

Great-heart.  Yes,  that  it  is  ;  and  these  are  also 
her  four  sons. 

Valiant.   What !  and  going  on  pilgrimage  too  ? 

Great-heart.  Yes,  verily;  they  are  following 
after. 

Valiant.  It  glads  me  at  heart.  Good  man  ! 
lie  is  much  re-   how  joyful  will  he  be  when  he  shall 

'Christians  SCe    see  tliem  tliat  would  not  S°  with  nim> 
wife.  yefc  to  enter  after  him  in  at  the  gates 

into  the  City  ! 

Great-heart.  Without  doubt  it  will  be  a  com- 
fort to  him  ;  for,  next  to  the  joy  of  seeing  himself 
there,  it  will  be  a  joy  to  meet  there  his  wife  and 
children. 

Valiant.  But,  now  you  are  upon  that,  pray  let 
me  hear  your  opinion  about  it.  Some  make  a 
question,  Whether  we  shall  know  one  another 
when  we  are  there. 

Great-heart.  Do  they  think  they  shall  know 
themselves  then,  or  that  they  shall  rejoice  to  see 
themselves  in  that  bliss  ?  and  if  they  think  they 
shall  know  and  do  these,  why  not  know  others, 
and  rejoice  in  their  welfare  also  ?2 

Again,  since  relations  are  our  second  self,  though 
that  state  will  be  dissolved  there  ;  yet  why  may  it 
not  be  rationally  concluded,  that  we  shall  be  more 
glad  to  see  them  there,  than  to  see  they  are 
wanting  ? 


1  The  reason  why  so  many  professors  set  out,  aud  go  on 
for  a  season,  but  fall  away  at  last,  is,  because  they  do  not  enter 
into  the  pilgrim's  path  by  Christ,  who  is  the  gate.  They  do 
not  see  themselves  quite  lost,  ruined,  hopeless,  and  wretched ; 
their  hearts  are  not  broken  for  sin ;  therefore  they  do  not. 
begin  by  receiviug  Christ  as  the  only  Saviour  of  such  miser- 
able sinners.  But  they  set  out  in  nature's  strength  ;  and  not 
receiving  nor  living  upon  Christ,  they  fall  away.  This  is  the 
reason  of  this  inquiry,  Did  you  come  in  at  the  gate  ?  A  ques- 
tion we  ought  to  put  to  ourselves,  and  be  satisfied  about. — 
(Mason.) 

2  Among  many  puzzling  questions  which  agitate  the  Chris- 
tian's mind,  this  is  very  generally  a  subject  of  inquiry.  At 
the  mount  of  transfiguration,  the  apostles  knew  the  glorified 
spirits  of  Moses  and  Mias.  The  rich  man  and  Lazarus  and 
Abraham  knew  each  other.  The  most  solemn  inquiry  is,  to 
reconcile  with  the  bliss  of  heaven  the  discovery  that  some 
dear  relative  has  been  shut  out.  Shall  we  forget  them  ?  or 
will  all  our  exquisite  happiness  centre  in  the  glory  of  God  ? 
liunvuu  has  no  doubt  upon  personal  identity  iu  heaven : — 

'  Our  friends  that  lived  godly  here 

Shall  there  be  found  again; 
The  wife,  the  child,  and  lather  de;ir, 

With  Others  of  our  train. 
Those  God  did  use  us  to  convert 
We  there  with  joy  shall  meet. 
And  jointly  shall,  with  all  our  heart, 
Iu  life  each  other  greet.' 

— [.One  Thing  Needful,  ver.  69,  71.)— (Ed.) 


Valiant.  Well,  I  perceive  whereabouts  you  are 
as  to  this.  Have  you  any  more  things  to  ask  me 
about  my  beginning  to  come  on  pilgrimage  ? 3 

Great-heart.  Yes.  Was  your  father  and  mother 
willing  that  you  should  become  a  pilgrim  ? 

Valiant.  0  no !  They  used  all  means  imaginable 
to  persuade  me  to  stay  at  home. 

Great-heart.  What  could  they  say  against  it  ? 

Valiant.  They  said  it  was  an  idle  The  great  stum- 
life  ;  and  if  I  myself  were  not  inclined  ££  ^°\^ 
to  sloth  and  laziness,  I  would  never      frie1nd?  w?re 

.        .  ,  laid     in     his 

countenance  a  pilgrim  s  condition.*  way. 

Great-heart.  And  what  did  they  say  else  ? 

Valiant.  Why,  they  told  me  that  it  was  a 
dangerous  way ;  yea,  the  most  dangerous  way  in 
the  world,  said  they,  is  that  which  the  pilgrims  go. 

Great-heart.  Did  they  show  wherein  this  way 
is  so  dangerous  ? 

Valiant.  Yes ;  and  that  in  many  particulars. 

Great-heart.  Name  some  of  them. 

Valiant.  They  told  me  of  the  Slough  of  De- 
spond, where  Christian  was  well  nigh  TIie  nrst  stum- 
smothered.  They  told  me  that  there  Ming-block, 
were  archers  standing  ready  in  Beelzebub  Castle, 
to  shoot  them  that  should  knock  at  the  wicket- 
gate  for  entrance.  They  told  me  also  of  the  wood, 
and  dark  mountains  ;  of  the  Hill  Difficulty  ;  of  the 
lions;  and  also  of  the  three  giants,  Bloody-man, 
Maul,  and  Slay-good.  They  said,  moreover,  that 
there  was  a  foul  fiend  haunted  the  Valley  of  Hu- 
miliation, and  that  Christian  was  by  him  almost 
bereft  of  life.  Besides,  said  they,  you  must  go 
over  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  where  the 
hobgoblins  are  ;  where  the  light  is  darkness  ;  where 
the  way  is  full  of  snares,  pits,  traps,  and  gins.  The)' 
told  me  also  of  Giant  Despair,  of  Doubting  Castle, 
and  of  the  ruin  that  the  Pilgrims  met  with  there. 
Further,  they  said  I  must  go  over  the  Enchanted 
Ground,  which  was  dangerous.  And  that,  after 
all  this,  I  should  find  a  river,  over  which  I  should 
find  no  bridge,  and  that  that  river  did  lie  betwixt 
me  and  the  Celestial  Country. 

Great-heart.  And  was  this  all  ? 

Valiant.  No.    They  also  told  me  that 
this  way  was  full  of  deceivers,0  aud  of 


3  A  sound  Christian  is  not  afraid  to  be  examined,  and  sifted 
to  the  bottom,  for  he  can  give  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in 
him.  He  knows  why  and  wherefore  he  commenced  his  pil- 
grimage.— (Mason.) 

4  This  is  a  reproach  cast  upon  religion  in  every  age. 
Pharaoh  said  to  Moses  and  the  Israelites,  '  Ye  are  idle,  ye  are 
idle.'  Meu  by  nature  imagiue,  that  time  spent  in  reading  the 
Bible  and  in  prayer  is  wasted.  It  behoves  all  believers  to 
avoid  every  appearance  of  evil;  and,  by  exemplary  diligence, 
frugality,  and  good  management,  to  put  to  silence  the  ignor- 
ance of  foolish  men. — (Scott.) 

5  Worldly  people,  in  opposing  the  gospel,  descant  upon  the 
hypocrisy  of  religious  persons;  they  pick  up  every  vague 
report  that  they"  hear  to  their  disadvantage,  and  narrowly 
watch  for  the  halting  of  such  as  they  are  acquainted  with; 
and  then  they  form  general  conclusions  from  a  few  distorted 


THE   TILR  RIM'S   PROGRESS. 


236 


persons  that  laid  in  wait  there  to  turn  good  men 
out  of  the  path. 

Great-heart.  But  how  did  they  make  that  out? 

Valiant.  They  told  me  that  Mr.  Worldly-wise- 
man  did  there  lie  in  wait  to  deceive.  They  also 
Baid,  that  there  was  Formality  and  Hypocrisy  con- 
tinually on  the  road.  They  said  also  that  By-ends, 
Talkative,  or  Demas  would  go  near  to  gather  mo 
up;  that  the  Flatterer  would  catch  me  in  his  net; 
or  that,  with  green-headed  Ignorance,  I  would  pre- 
sume to  go  on  to  the  gate,  from  whence  he  always 
was  sent  hack  to  the  hole  that  was  in  the  side  of 
the  hill,  and  made  to  go  the  by-way  to  hell. 

Great-heart.  I  promise  you  this  was  enough 
to  discourage ;  but  did  they  make  an  end  here  ? 

Valiant.  No;  stay.  They  told  me  also  of 
many  that  had  tried  that  way  of  old, 

The  thud.       ^      tj)afc     jifuj     gone     a     gT(,at     .^ 

therein,  to  see  if  they  could  find  something  of 
the  glory  there,  that  so  many  had  so  much  talked 
of  from  time  to  time ;  and  how  they  came  hack 
again,  and  hcfooled  themselves  for  setting  a  foot 
out  of  doors  in  that  path,  to  the  satisfaction  of 
all  the  country.  And  they  named  several  that 
did  so;  as  Obstinate  and  Fliable,  Mistrust  and 
Timorous,  Turn-away  and  old  Atheist,  with  several 
more,  who,  they  said,  had  some  of  them,  gone  far 
to  see  if  they  could  find  ;  hut  not  one  of  them  found 
so  much  advantage  by  going  as  amounted  to  the 
weight  of  a  feather.1 

Great-ueart.  Said  they  anything  more  to  dis- 
courage you  ? 

Valiant.  Yes.  They  told  me  of  one  Mr.  Fear- 
ing who  was  a  pilgrim ;    and  how  he 

The  fourth.      *  s    ,    ^  ■  Tx  *i     x    i 

found  this  way  so  solitary,  that  lie 
never  had  comfortable  hour  therein.  Also  that 
Mr.  Despondency  had  like  to  have  been  starved 
therein  ;  yea,  and  also,  which  I  had  almost  forgot, 
that  Christian  himself,  about  whom  there  has  been 
such  a  noise,  after  all  his  ventures  for  a  celestial 
crown,  was  certainly  drowned  in  the  Black  River, 
and  never  went  foot  further,  however  it  was  smo- 
thered up.2 

and  uncertain  stories.  Thus  they  endeavour  to  prove  that 
there  is  no  reality  in  religion.  This  is  a  frivolous  sophistry, 
often  employed  after  all  other  arguments  have  heen  silenced. 
—(Scott.) 

1  If  Judas  the  traitor,  or  Francis  Spira  the  backslider,  were 
alive,  to  whisper  these  men  in  the  ear  a  little,  and  to  tell  them 
what  it  hath  cost  their  souls  fur  turning  hack,  it  would  surely 
stick  by  them  as  long  as  they  have  a  day  to  live  in  the  world. 
Agrippa  gave  a  fair  step  on  a  sudden ;  he  stepped  almost  into 
the  bosom  of  Christ  iu  less  than  half  an  hour.  '  Almost  thou 
persuadest  me  to  he  a  Christian.'  It  was  but  almost,  and  so 
he  had  as  good  been  not  at  all.  lie  stepped  fair,  but  stepped 
short.  He  was  hot  whilst  he  ran,  but  he  was  quickly  out  of 
breath.  0  this  but  almost  1  I  tell  you,  it  lost  his  soul. 
\\  hat  a  doom  they  will  have,  who  were  almost  at  heaven's 
gate,  but  ran  back  again  ! — (Bunyan's  Heavenly  Footman) 

'  How  natural  is  it  for  carnal  men  to  give  an  evil  report 
of  the  ways  of  the  Lord ;  and  to  discourage  those  who  are  just 


Great-heart.  And  did  none  of  these  things 
discourage  you  ? 

Valiant.  No;  they  seemed  but  as  so  many 
nothings  to  me. 

Great-heart.  How  came  that  about? 
Valiant.     Why,    1    still    believed   lliAvl, 
what  Mr.  Tell-true  had  said,  and  that 
carried  me  beyond  them  all. 

Great-heart.  Then  this  was  your  victory,  even 
your  faith. 

Valiant.  It  was  so.  I  believed,  and  therefore 
came  out,  got  into  the  way,  fought  all  that  Bet 
themselves  against  me,  and,  by  believing,  am  come 
to  this  place.'5 

Who  would  true  valour  see, 

Let  him  come  hither  ; 
One  here  will  constant  be, 

Come  wind,  come  weather. 
There's  no  discouragement 
Shall  make  him  once  relent, 
His  first  avow'd  intent 
To  be  a  pilgrim. 

Who  so  beset  him  round 

With  dismal  stories, 
Do  but  themselves  confound, 

His  strength  the  more  is; 
No  lion  can  him  fright, 
He'll  with  a  giant  fight ; 
But  he  will  have  a  right 

To  be  a  pilgrim. 

Hobgoblin  nor  foul  fiend 

Can  daunt  his  spirit ; 
He  knows  he  at  the  eud 

Shall  life  inherit. 
Then  fancies  fly  away, 
He'll  fear  not  what  men  say; 
He'll  labour  night  and  day 

To  bu  a  pilgrim. 

By  this  time  they  were  got  to  the  Enchanted 
Ground,'1  where  the  air  naturally  tended  j^rst  i>.irt) 
to  make  one  drowsy  ;  and  that  place  P1 1"-- 
was  all  grown  over  with  briars  and  thorns,  except- 
ing here  and  there,  where  was  an  Enchanted 
Arbour,  upon  which  if  a  man  sits,  or  in  which,  if 
a  man  sleeps,  it  is  a  question,  say  some,  whether 

setting  out,  by  telling  of  the  dangers  and  difficulties  they  shall 
meet  with !  But  here  is  not  one  word  of  the  pleasures,  com- 
forts, and  joys,  that  are  experienced  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord. 
No,  they  feel' them  not,  they  believe  not  one  word  about  them; 
therefore  they  cannot  speak  of  them. — (Mason.) 

8  Here  we  see  that  valiant  soldiers  of  Christ  ascribe  all 
to  faith.  They  set  out  with  faith,  and  they  hold  on  and  hold 
out  by  believing.  Thus  they  give  all  the  glory  to  Christ  who 
is  the  object,  author,  and  finisher  of  faith. — (Mason.) 

4  Various  are  the  enemies  we  meet  with  in  our  Christian 
warfare.  The  world,  with  its  enchantments,  has  a  tendency 
to  stupifv,  and  bring  on  a  fatal  lethargy.  How  manj 
sors  receive  principles,  by  which  they  harden  themselves  in 
carnal  pursuits  and  Bensnal  gratiflcationBj  and  others,  still 
preserving  a  religions  name  and  character,  are  as  dead  in  their 
souls,  as  devoted  to  the  world  as  these,  though  contending  lor 
nnciples,  and  high  in  their  religious  pretensions!— 
(J.  B.) 


235 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


ever  he  shall  rise  or  wake  again  in  this  world.1 
Over  this  forest,  therefore,  they  went,  both  one 
and  the  other,  and  Mr.  Greatheart  went  before, 
for  that  he  was  the  guide ;  and  Mr.  Valiant-for- 
truth,  he  came  behind,  being  there  a  guard,  for 
fear,  lest  peradventure  some  fiend,  or  dragon,  or 
giant,  or  thief,  should  fall  upon  their  rear,  and  so 
do  mischief.  They  went  on  here,  each  man  with 
his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand,  for  they  knew  it  was 
a  dangerous  place.  Also  they  cheered  up  one 
another  as  well  as  they  could ;  Feeble-mind,  Mr. 
Great-heart  commanded,  should  come  up  after 
him,  and  Mr.  Despondency  was  under  the  eye  of 
Mr.  Valiant.2 

Now  they  had  not  gone  far,  but  a  great  mist  and 
darkness  fell  upon  them  all,  so  that  they  could 
scarce,  for  a  great  while,  see  the  one  the  other ; 
wherefore  they  were  forced,  for  some  time,  to  feel 
for  one  another  by  words;  for  they  walked  not 
by  sight. 

But  any  one  must  think  that  here  was  but  sorry 
going  for  the  best  of  them  all ;  but  how  much  worse 
for  the  women  and  children,  who  both  of  feet  and 
heart,  were  but  tender.  Yet  so  it  was,  that  through 
the  encouraging  words  of  he  that  led  in  the  front, 
and  of  him  that  brought  them  up  behind,  they 
made  a  pretty  good  shift  to  wag  along. 

The  way  also  was  here  very  wearisome,  through 
dirt  and  slabbiness.  Nor  was  there  on  all  this 
ground  so  much  as  one  inn,  or  victualling  house, 
therein  to  refresh  the  feebler  sort.  Here,  therefore, 
was  grunting,  and  puffing,  and  sighing.  While 
one  tumbleth  over  a  bush,  another  sticks  fast  in  the 
dirt ;  and  the  children,  some  of  them,  lost  their 
shoes  in  the  mire.  While  one  cries  out,  I  am 
down;  and  another,  Ho!  where  are  you?  and  a 
third,  The  bushes  have  got  such  fast  hold  on  me, 
I  think  I  cannot  get  away  from  them. 


1  It  behoves  all  who  love  their  souls  to  shun  that  hurry  of 
business,  and  multiplicity  of  affairs  and  projects,  into  which 
many  are  betrayed  by  degrees,  in  order  to  supply  increasing 
expenses,  that  might  be  avoided  by  strict  frugality ;  for  they 
load  the  soul  with  thick  clay,  are  a  heavy  weight  to  the  most 
upright,  render  a  man's  way  doubtful  and  joyless,  and  drown 
many  in  perdition. —  (Scott.) 

2  Old  pilgrims,  ye  who  have  set  out  well,  and  gone  on  well 
for  a  long  season,  consider  ye  are  yet  in  the  world,  which  is 
enchanted  ground.  Know  your  danger  of  seeking  rest  here, 
or  of  sleeping  in  any  of  its  enchanting  arbours.  Though  the 
flesh  may  be  weary,  the  spirit  faint,  and  the  arbours  inviting, 
yet  beware.  Press  on.  Look  to  the  Strong  for  strength; 
and  to  the  Beloved  for  rest  in  his  way. — (Mason.) 

3  Mark  how  the  ready  hands  of  death  prepare ; 

His  bow  is  bent,  and  he  hath  notch'd  his  dart; 
He  aims,  he  levels  at  thy  slunib'riug  heart. 
The  wound  is  posting ;  0  be  wise,  beware  ! 
What,  has  the  voice  of  danger  lost  the  art 
To  raise  the  spirit  of  neglected  care  ? 

Well,  sleep  thy  fill,  and  take  thy  soft  reposes ; 
But  know,  withal,  sweet  tastes  have  sour  closes ; 
And  he  repents  in  thorns  that  sleeps  in  beds  of  roses. 
—  (Ovaries'  Emblems,  i. — vii.) 


Then  they  came  at  an  arbour,  warm,  and  pro- 
mising much  refreshing  to  the  Pil-  An  arW  on 
grims  ;  for  it  was  finely  wrought  above  the  Knchant- 
head,  beautified  with  greens,  furnished  mg 
with  benches  and  settles.3  It  also  had  in  it  a  soft 
couch,  whereon  the  weary  might  lean.  This,  you 
must  think,  all  things  considered,  was  tempting : 
for  the  Pilgrims  already  began  to  be  foiled  with  the 
badness  of  the  way ;  but  there  was  not  one  of  them 
that  made  so  much  as  a  motion  to  stop  there.  Yea, 
for  aught  I  could  perceive,  they  continually  gave 
so  good  heed  to  the  advice  of  their  guide,  and  he 
did  so  faithfully  tell  them  of  dangers,  and  of  the 
nature  of  dangers,  when  they  were  at  them,  that 
usually,  when  they  were  nearest  to  them,  they  did 
most  pluck  up  their  spirits,  and  hearten  one  another 
to  deny  the  flesh.  This  arbour  was  The  name  of 
called  The  Slothful's  Friend,  on  pur-  the  arboui- 
pose  to  allure,  if  it  might  be,  some  of  the  pilgrims 
there  to  take  up  their  rest  when  weary. 

I  saw  then  in  my  dream,  that  they  went  on  in 
this  their  solitary  ground,  till  they  The  way  &&. 
came  to  a  place  at  which  a  man  is  apt  cult  t0  6uiL 
to  lose  his  way.4  Now,  though  when  it  was  light, 
their  guide  could  well  enough  tell  how  to  miss  those 
ways  that  led  wrong,  yet  in  the  dark  he  was  put 
to  a  stand;  but  he  had  in  his  pocket  The„uide] 
a  map  of  all  ways  leading  to,  or  from  map  of  ail 
the  Celestial  City ;  wherefore  he  struck  ufor  from  "hi 
a  light,  for  he  never  goes  also  without  Clty" 
his  tinder-box,  and  takes  a  view  of  his  book  or 
map,  which  bids  him  be  careful,  in  that  place,  to 
turn  to  the  right-hand  way.  And  had  he  not  hero 
been  careful  to  look  in  his  map,  they  had  all,  in 
probability,  been  smothered  in  the  mud;  for,  just 
a  little  before  them,  and  that  at  the  end  of  the 
cleanest  way  too,  was  a  pit,  none  knows  how  deep, 
full  of  nothing  but  mud,  there  made  on  purpose  to 
destroy  the  Pilgrims  in.5 

Then  thought  I  with  myself,  who  that  goeth  on 
pilgrimage,   but  would  have  one  of 

II  1.      j.  X.-        1.1     x    i  God's  Book- 

these  maps  about  mm,  that  ho  may 

look  when  he  is  at  a  stand,  which  is  the  way  ha 

must  take.6 


4  This  inculcates  the  duty  of  constant  attention  to  the 
precepts  and  counsels  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  reliance  on  it3 
promises ;  and  a  habitual  application  to  the  Lord  by  prayer, 
to  teach  us  the  true  meaning  of  his  Word,  that  we  may  learn 
the  way  of  peace  and  safety  in  the  most  difficult  and  doubtful 
cases. — (Scott.) 

5  The  Word  of  God  is  compared  to  a  map  and  a  lantern; 
to  these  we  shall  do  well  to  take  heed,  as  to  light  shining 
in  a  dark  place.  Let  this  be  the  pilgrim's  guide,  when  the 
light  of  spiritual  joy  or  sensible  comfort  is  withdrawn. — 
(Burder.) 

6  — - —  To  follow  Christ. 

He  is  to  them  instead  of  eyes, 
He  must  before  them  go  in  any  wise; 
And  he  must  lead  them  by  the  water  side, 
This  is  the  work  of  him  our  faithful  guide. 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


237 


They  went  on,  then,  in  this  Enchanted  Ground, 

An  arbour,  and    tiU     &W    ™m<i     to    "here    there     was 

two  uieep  another  arbour,  and  it  was  built  by  the 
highway-side.  And  in  that  arbour 
there  lay  two  men,  whoso  names  were  Heedless 
and  Too-bold.1  These  two  went  thus  far  on  pil- 
grimage ;  but  here,  being  wearied  with  their  jour- 
ney, they  sat  down  to  rest  themselves,  and  so  fell 
fast  asleep.  When  the  Pilgrims  saw  them,  they 
stood  still,  and  shook  their  heads;  for  they  knew 
that  the  sleepers  were  in  a  pitiful  case.  Then  they 
consulted  what  to  do,  whether  to  go  on  and  leave 
them  in  their  sleep,  or  to  step  to  them,  and  try  to 
awake  them.  So  they  concluded  to  go  to  them, 
and  awake  them  ;  that  is,  if  they  could ;  but  with 
this  caution,  namely,  to  take  heed  that  themselves 
did  not  sit  down  nor  embrace  the  offered  benefit 
of  that  arbour. 

So  they  went  in,  and  spake  to  the  men,  and 
called  each  by  his  name,-  for  the  guide,  it  seems, 
did  know  them  ;  but  there  was  no  voice  nor  answer. 
riiePilsrimstry  Then  the  guide  did  shake  them,  and 

to  wake  them.    j0  what    jie    coul(j   to   distmb  them. 

Then  said  one  of  them,  I  will  pay  you  when  I  take 
my  money.  At  which  the  guide  shook  his  head. 
I  will  fight  so  long  as  I  can  hold  my  sword  in  my 
hand,  said  the  other.  At  that  one  of  the  children 
laughed. 

Then  said  Christiana,  What  is  the  meaning  of 
Theirendeavour  this  ?  The  guide  said,  They  talk  in 
is  fruitless.  the;r  gjg^  ]f  you  strike  them,  beat 
them,  or  whatever  else  you  do  to  them,  they  will 
answer  you  after  this  fashion  ;  or,  as  one  of  them 
said  in  old  time,  when  the  waves  of  the  sea  did 


heat  upon  him,  and  he  slept  as  one  upon  the  mast 
of  a  ship,  '  When  shall  1  awake  ?  I  will  seek  it 
yet  again.'  rr.  xxiii.  34,  33.  You  know,  when  men 
talk  in  their  sleep,  they  say  anything,  but  their 
words  are  not  governed  either  by  faith  or  reason. 
There  is  an  incoherency  in  their  words  now,  as 
there  was  before,  betwixt  their  going  on  pilgrimage, 
and  sitting  down  here.3  This,  then,  is  the  mis- 
chief of  it,  when  heedless  ones  go  on  pilgrimage, 
it  is  twenty  to  one  but  they  are  served  thus;  for 
this  Enchanted  Ground  is  one  of  the  last  refuges 
that  the  enemy  to  pilgrims  has.  Wherefore  it  is, 
as  you  see,  placed  almost  at  the  end  of  the  way, 
and  so  it  standeth  against  us  with  the  more  advan- 
tage. For  when,  thinks  the  enemy,  will  these 
fools  be  so  desirous  to  sit  down,  as  when  they  are 
weary?  and  when  so  like  to  be  weary,  as  when 
almost  at  their  journey's  end  ?  Therefore  it  is,  I 
say,  that  the  Enchanted  Ground  is  placed  so  nigh 
to  the  Land  Beulah,  and  so  near  the  end  of  their 
race.4  Wherefore,  let  pilgrims  look  to  themselves, 
lest  it  happen  to  them  as  it  has  done  to  these,  that, 
as  you  see,  are  fallen  asleep,  and  none  can  wake 
them.5 

Then  the  Pilgrims  desired,  with  trembling,  to 
go  forward ;  only  they  prayed  their  na  ^m  of  tLc 
guide  to  strike  alight,  that  they  might  VWlL 
go  the  rest  of  their  way  by  the  help  of  the  light 
of  a  lantern.6  So  he  struck  a  light,  and  they 
went  by  the  help  of  that  through  the  rest  of  this 
way,  though  the  darkness  was  very  great.  2  re.  i.  19. 

But  the  children  began  to  be  sorely  weary ;  and 
they  cried  out  unto  him  that  loveth  TbechiMrenciy 
pilgrims,  to  make  their  way  more  coui- 


lor  weuruicss. 


Since  snares,  and  traps,  and  gins  are  for  us  set, 
Since  here's  a  hole,  and  there  is  spread  a  net, 
O  let  no  body  at  my  muse  deride, 
No  man  can  travel  here  without  a  guide. 

—  (Bunyan's  Ilouse  of  God,  vol.  ii.  p.  582.) 
1  Ignorance  and  pride  may  long  maintain  a  form  of  godli- 
ness, though  it  be  a  weariness  to  them ;  but  after  a  time  they 
will  be  gradually  drawn  back  into  the  world,  retaining  nothing 
of  their  religion  except  certain  distorted  doctrinal  notions. —  j 
(Scott.) 

-  It  is  the  duty,  and  will  be  the  practice  of  pilgrims,  to  ! 
strive  to  be  instrumental  to  the  good  of  others.     But,  at  the 
same  time,  it  behoves  them  to  take  heed  to   themselves,  and 
watch,  lest  they  catch  harm  from  them  and  their  conduct. — 
(Mason.) 

3  What  a  sound  sleep  of  infatuation  hath  this  enchanting 
world  cast  many  a  professor  into  1  They  are  proof  against  all 
warnings,  and  dead  as  to  any  means  of  arousing  them.  When 
this  sleep  of  death  seizes  the  soul,  it  destroys  faith,  infatuates 
reason,  and  causes  men  to  talk  incoherently.  They  have  lost 
the  language  of  pilgrims.  Their  state  is  awful;  beware  of  it; 
pray  against  it.  For  '  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love 
of  the  Father  is  not  in  him.'  1  .In.  ii.  15. —  (Masou.) 

4  This  view  of  the  Enchanted  Ground  seems  to  vary  from 
that  which  has  been  considered  in  the  First  Part.  The  cir- 
cumstances of  believers  who  are  deeply  engaged  in  business, 
and  constrained  to  spend  much  of  their  time  among  worldly 
people,  may  here  be  particularly  intended.  This  may  some- 
times be  unavoidable ;  but  it  is  enchanted  ground.  Many 
professors,  fascinated  by  the  advantages  and  connections  thus 


presented  to  them,  fall  asleep,  and  wake  no  more ;  and  others 
are  entangled  by  those  thorns  and  briers  which  '  choke  the 
Word,  and  render  it  unfruitful.'  The  more  soothing  the  scene 
the  greater  the  danger,  and  the  more  urgent  need  is  there  for 
watchfulness  and  circumspection. — (Scott.) 

*  This  is  a  solemn  period  in  the  Christian's  pilgrimage. 
In  the  Heavenly  Footman,  Bunyan  has  given  some  admirable 
general  directions : — '  Because  I  woidd  have  you  think  of  them, 
take  all  in  short  in  this  little  bit  of  paper— 1.  Get  into  the 
way.  2.  Then  study  on  it.  3.  Then  strip  and  lay  aside  every. 
thing  that  would  hinder.  4.  Beware  of  by-paths.  5.  Do  not 
gaze  and  stare  much  about  thee ;  but  be  sure  to  ponder  the 
path  of  thy  feet.  G.  Do  not  stop  for  any  that  call  alter  thee, 
whether  it  be  the  world,  the  flesh,  or  the  devil;  for  all  these 
will  hinder  thy  journey  if  possible.  7.  Be  not  daunted  with 
any  discouragements  thou  meetest  with  as  thou  goest.  8.  Take 
heed  of  stumbling  at  the  cross.  And,  9.  Cry  hard  to  God  for 
an  enlightened  heart  and  a  willing  mind,  and  God  give  thee  ;i 
prosperous  journey.  Vet,  before  I  do  quite  take  my  leave  of 
thee,  a  few  motives.  It  may  be  they  will  be  as  good  as  a 
pair  of  spurs,  to  prick  on  thy  lumpish  heart  in  this  rich 
Voyage.  If  thou  wiunest,  then  heaven,  Gud,  Christ,  glory 
eternal  is  thine.  If  thou  lose,  thou  procurest  eternal  death.' 
-(Ed.) 

•  The  "Word  of  God  is  the  only  light  to  direct  our  steps. 
lie  who  neglects  this  is  a  fool.     He  who   se's  up  and 

for  any  other  bght  to  direct  him  is  mad,  and  1. 

he  does.    As  folly  and  madness  beset  him,  dan. 

will  come  upon  him.     Trembling  souls  will  attend  closely  to 

God's  Word. —  (Mason.) 


>3S 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


fortable.  So  by  that  they  had  gone  a  little  further, 
a  wind  arose,  that  drove  away  the  fog ;  so  the  air 
became  more  clear. 

Yet  they  were  not  off,  by  much,  of  the  Enchanted 
Ground,  only  now  they  could  see  one  another  better, 
and  the  way  wherein  they  should  walk. 

Now,  when  they  were  almost  at  the  end  of  this 
ground,  they  perceived  that,  a  little  before  them, 
was  a  solemn  noise  of  one  that  was  much  concerned. 
So  they  went  on  and  looked  before  them;  and  behold, 
Stand-fast  upon  they  saw,  as  they  thought,  a  man  upon 
^eEmh-mted  his  knees,  with  hands  and  eyes  lift 
Ground.  yp^   anj  speaking,   as  they  thought, 

earnestly  to  one  that  was  above.1  They  drew  nigh, 
but  could  not  tell  what  he  said.  So  they  went 
softly  till  he  had  done.  When  he  had  done,  he 
got  up,  and  began  to  run  towards  the  Celestial 
City.  Then  Mr.  Great-heart  called  after  him,  say- 
ing,  Soho  !  friend,  let  us  have  your  company,  if 
you  go,  as  I  suppose  you  do,  to  the  Celestial  City. 
So  the  man  stopped,  and  they  came  up  to  him. 
But  so  soon  as  Mr.  Honest  saw  him,  he  said,  I 

The  story  of    know  this  man.  Then  said  Mr.  Valiant- 

staiid-fast.  for-truth,  Prithee,  who  is  it  ?  It  is 
one,  said  he,  who  comes  from  whereabouts  I  dwelt. 
His  name  is  Stand-fast ;  he  is  certainly  a  right 
good  pilgrim. 

So  they  came  up  one  to  another;  and  presently 
Stand-fast  said  to  old  Honest,  Ho,  father  Honest, 
are  you  there  ?  Aye,  said  he,  that  I  am,  as  sure 
„  „     ,  .         as  you  are  there.     Right  glad  am  I, 

Talk     between  J  o        s>  > 

him  and  Mr.  said  Mr.  Stand-fast,  that  I  have  found 
you  on  this  road.  And  as  glad  am  I, 
said  the  other,  that  I  espied  you  upon  your  knees. 
Then  Mr.  Stand-fast  blushed,  and  said,  But  why, 
did  you  see  me  ?  Yes,  that  I  did,  quoth  the  other, 
and  with  my  heart  was  glad  at  the  sight.  Why, 
what  did  you  think?  said  Stand-fast.  Think! 
said  old  Honest,  what  should  I  think  ?  I  thought 
we  had  an  honest  man  upon  the  road,  and  there- 
fore should  have  his  company  by  and  by.  If  you 
thought  not  amiss  [said  Stand-fast],  how  happy 
am  I ;  but  if  I  be  not  as  I  should,  1  alone  must 
bear  it.  That  is  true,  said  the  other ;  but  your 
fear  doth  further  confirm  me,  that  things  are  right 


1  lie  who  fears  always,  will  pray  evermore.  The  fear  of 
the  heart  will  bring  pilgrims  on  their  knees.  He  who  fears 
to  be  or  go  wrong,  will  pray  to  be  set  right.  The  Lord  will 
direct  the  heart,  and  order  the  goings  of  all  who  cry  to  him. 
Fear  and  prayer  go  hand  in  hand.  Joy  shall  attend  them. — 
(Mason.) 

2  No  more  money  than  an  owl  loves  light.  *  The  anti- 
quarian, who  delights  to  solace  himself  in  the  benighted  days 
of  monkish  owl-light,  sometimes  passes  for  a  divine.' — (War- 
burton.)— (Ed.) 

5  My  soul,  what's  lighter  than  a  feather  ?     Wind. 
Than  wind  ?   The  fire.     And  what  than  fire  ?    The  mind. 
What's  lighter  than  the  mind  ?  A  thought.   Than  thought  ? 
This  bubble  world.     What  than  this  bubble  ?     Naught. 

— (Queries.) 


betwixt  the  Prince  of  Pilgrims  and  your  soul ;  for, 
saith  he,  '  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth  always.' 
Valiant.  Well,  but  brother,  I  pray  thee  tell  us 
what  was  it  that  was  the  cause  of  thy  being  upon 
thy  knees  eveu  now  ?  Was  it  for  that  some 
special  mercies  laid  obligations  upon   They  found  him 

thee,   Or  how?  at  prayer. 

Stand-fast.  Why,  we  are,  as  you  see,  upon  the 
Enchanted  Ground ;  and  as  I  was  com-  What  it  was 
fog  along,  I  was  musing  with  myself  b^ujoi^ 
of  what  a  dangerous  road  the  road  in  knees- 
this  place  was,  and  how  many  that  had  come  even 
thus  far  on  pilgrimage  had  here  been  stopped, 
and  been  destroyed.  I  thought  also  of  the  manner 
of  the  death  with  which  this  place  destroyeth  men. 
Those  that  die  here,  die  of  no  violent  distemper. 
The  death  which  such  die  is  not  grievous  to  them  ; 
for  he  that  goeth  away  in  a  sleep,  begins  that 
journey  with  desire  and  pleasure ;  yea,  such 
acquiesce  in  the  will  of  that  disease. 

Hon.  Then  Mr.  Honest,  interrupting  of  him,  said, 
Did  you  see  the  two  men  asleep  in  the  arbour  ? 

Stand-fast.  Aye,  aye,  I  saw  Heedless  and  Too- 
bold  there  ;  and,  for  aught  I  know,  there  they  will 
lie  till  they  rot.  Pr.  x.  7.  But  let  me  go  on  in  my 
tale.  As  I  was  thus  musing,  as  I  said,  there  was 
one,  in  very  pleasant  attire,  but  old,  who  presented 
herself  unto  me,  and  offered  me  three  things ;  to 
wit,  her  body,  her  purse,  and  her  bed.  Now,  the 
truth  is,  I  was  both  a-weary  and  sleepy  ;  I  am  also 
as  poor  as  an  owlet,2  and  that,  perhaps,  the  witch 
knew.  Well,  I  repulsed  her  once  and  twice,  but 
she  put  by  my  repulses,  and  smiled.  Then  I  began 
to  be  angry ;  but  she  mattered  that  nothing  at  all. 
Then  she  made  offers  again,  and  said,  If  I  would 
be  ruled  by  her,  she  would  make  me  great  and 
happy;  for,  said  she,  I  am  the  mistress  of  the 
world,  and  men  are  made  happy  by  me.  Then  I 
asked  her  name,  and  she  told  me  it  was  Madam 
Bubble.3  This  set  me  further  from  Madara  Bubble> 
her;  but  she  still  followed  me  with      or  ,this  vaiu 

mi  t  i  world. 

enticements.  I  hen  1  betook  me  as 
you  saw,  to  my  knees ;  and  with  hands  lift  up,  and 
cries,  I  prayed  to  him  that  had  said  he  would  help.4 
So,  just  as  you  came  up,  the  gentlewoman  went 
her  way.  Then  I  continued  to  give  thanks  for 
this  my  great  deliverance ;  for  I  verily  believe  she 
1  intended  no  good,  but  rather  sought  to  make  stop 


of 


me  in  my  journey. 


Prayer's  arrow  drawn 


Down  to  the  head  by  nervous  peuitence, 
Or  meek  humility's  compliant  strings, 
Wings  to  the  destiu'd  mark  its  certain  way, 
And  ne'er  was  shot  in  vain  ! 

— (Dodd's  Epiphany,  p.  32,  4to.) 
s  0  pilgrims,  beware  of  this  Madam  Bubble !  Know  and 
consider  well,  that  ye  have  a  nature  exactly  suited  to  accept  of 
her  offers,  and  to  fall  in  love  with  her  promises.  The  riches, 
honours,  and  pleasures  of  this  world,  what  mortal  can  with- 
stand ?  or  who  can  forego  them  ?     No  one  but  he  who  sees 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


239 


Hox.  Without  doubt  her  designs  were  bad.  "But 
stay,  now  you  talk  of  her,  methinks  I  either  have 
seen  her,  or  have  road  .some  story  of  her. 

Staxd-fast.  Perhaps  you  have  done  hoth. 

Hon.  Madam  Bubble!  is  she  not  a  tall,  comely 
dame,  something  of  a  swarthy  complexion ? 

Staxd-fast.  Right,  you  hit  it,  she  is  just  such 
a  one. 

Hox.  Doth  she  not  speak  very  smoothly,  and 
give  you  a  smile  at  the  end  of  a  sentence  ? 

Staxd-fast.  You  fall  right  upon  it  again,  for 
these  are  her  very  actions. 

IIox.  Doth  she  not  wear  a  great  purse  by  her 
side;  and  is  not  her  hand  often  in  it,  fingering  her 
money,  as  if  that  was  her  heart's  delight? 

Stand-fast.  It  is  just  so  ;  had  she  stood  by  all 
this  while,  you  could  not  more  amply  have  set  her 
forth  before  me,  nor  have  better  described  her 
features. 

IIox.  Then  he  that  drew  her  picture  was  a  good 
limner,  and  he  that  wrote  of  her  said  true.1 

GREAT-nEART.  This  woman  is  a  witch,  and  it  is 
by  virtue  of  her  sorceries  that  this 
ground  is  enchanted.  Whoever  doth 
lay  their  head  down  in  her  lap,  had  as  good  lay 
it  down  upon  that  block  over  which  the  axe  doth 
hang ;  and  whoever  lay  their  eyes  upon  her  beauty, 
are  counted  the  enemies  of  God.  Ja.  It.  i.  1  Jn.  ii.  15. 
This  is  she  that  maintaineth  in  their  splendour  all 
those  that  are  the  enemies  of  pilgrims.  Yea,  this 
is  she  that  hath  bought  off  many  a  man  from  a 
pilgrim's  life.  She  is  a  great  gossipper ;  she  is 
always,  hoth  she  and  her  daughters,  at  one  pilgrim's 
heels  or  another,  now  commending,  and  then  pre- 
ferring the  excellencies  of  this  life.  She  is  a  bold 
and  impudent  slut;  she  will  talk  with  any  man. 
She  always  laugheth  poor  pilgrims  to  scorn ;  but 
highly  commends  the  rich.  If  there  he  one  cun- 
ning to  get  money  in  a  place,  she  will  speak  well 
of  him  from  house  to  house  ;  she  loveth  banqueting 

more  charms  in  Jesns,  more  glory  in  his  cross,  and  more  com- 
fort in  the  enjoyment  of  his  love  and  presence ;  and  there- 
fore, is  continually  looking  and  crying  to  him,  '  Turn  away 
mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity.' — (Mason.)  Many,  indeed, 
are  her  fair  promises  and  golden  dreams.  Many  hath  she 
brought  to  the  halter,  and  ten  thousand  times  more  to  hell. 
O  for  precious  faith,  to  overcome  the  world ;  and  to  pass 
through  it,  in  pursuit  of  a  nobler  portion,  as  strangers  and 
pilgrims  1 — (Burder.) 

1  Is  she  not  rightly  named  Babble?  Art  thou  convinced 
that  she  is  nothing  more?  'Why  then  dost  thou  not  break 
loose  from  her  hold  ?  I  ask,  Why  lias  the  world  such  hold  of 
thee?  "Why  dost  thou  listen  to  her  enchantments?  For 
shame!  Stir  up  thy  strength,  call  forth  thy  powers!  What  ! 
be  convinced  that  the  world  is  a  bubble,  and  be  led  captive  by 
her.  Shake  her  off,  you  ought,  you  should,  it  is  your  duty. 
Let  Mr.  Stand-fast  answer  these  questions.  His  earn 
solemn  prayers  plainly  prove  the  sense  he  had  of  his  own 
weakness  and  inability  to  extricate  himself  from  her  enchant- 
ments. Though  some  may  appear  to  despise  the  dominion  of 
tin,  I  am  convinced  that  it  must  be  a  Divine  power  to  deliver 
me  from  it. —  (J.  B.) 


and  feasting  mainly  well ;  she  is  always  at  one  full 
table  or  another.  She  has  given  it  out  in  some 
places,  that  she  is  a  goddess,  and  therefore  somo 
do  worship  her.  She  has  her  times  and  open  places 
of  cheating;  and  she  will  say  and  avow  it,  that 
none  can  show  a  good  comparable  to  hers.  She 
promiscth  to  dwell  with  children's  children,  if  they 
will  but  love  and  make  much  of  her.  She  will  cast 
out  of  her  purse  gold  like  dust,  in  some  places,  and 
to  some  persons.  She  loves  to  be  sought  after, 
spoken  well  of,  and  to  lie  in  the  bosoms  of  men. 
She  is  never  weary  of  commending  hn-  commodities, 
and  she  loves  them  most  that  think  best  of  her. 
She  will  promise  to  some  crowns  and  kingdoms,  if 
they  will  but  take  her  advice;  yet  many  hath  she 
brought  to  the  halter,  and  ten  thousand  times  more 
to  hell. 

Staxd-fast.  0,  said  Stand  fast,  what  a  mercy 
is  it  that  I  did  resist!  for  whither  might  she  have 
drawn  me! 

Great-heart.  Whither!  nay,  none  but  God 
knows  whither.  But,  in  general,  to  be  sure,  she 
would  have  drawn  thee  into  'many  foolish  and 
hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and 
perdition.'  1  Ti.  vi  0. 

It  was  she  that  set  Absalom  against  his  father, 
and  Jeroboam  against  his  master.  It  was  she  that 
persuaded  Judas  to  sell  his  Lord,  and  that  pre- 
vailed with  Demas  to  forsake  the  godly  pilgrims' 
life;  none  can  tell  of  the  mischief  that  she  doth. 
She  makes  variance  betwixt  rulers  and  subjects, 
betwixt  parents  and  children,  betwixt  neighbour 
and  neighbour,  betwixt  a  man  and  his  wife,  be- 
twixt a  man  aud  himself,  betwixt  the  flesh  and 
the  heart. 

Wherefore,  good  Master  Stand-fast,  be  as  your 
name  is,  and  '  when  you  have  done  all,  Stand.' - 

At  this  discourse  there  was,  among  the  Pilgrims, 
a  mixture  of  joy  and  trembling  ;  but  at  length  they 
brake  out,  and  sang— 

What  danger  is  the  pilgrim  in ! 

1 1  ow  many  are  his  foes  1 
How  many  ways  there  are  to  sin 
No  Living  mort;d  knows. 


-  It  was  amidst  this  Enchanted  Ground  that  good  Mr. stand- 
fast, whom  the  Pilgrims  there  found  upon  Ins  knees,  was  so 
hard  beset  and  enticed  by  Madam  Bubble;    aud  indeed  it  is 
by  her  sorceries  that  the  ground  itself  is  enchanted.     Madam 
Bubble  is  the  world,  with   its  allurements  aud  vanities;  and 
whosoever,  as  Mr.  Great -heart  said,  do  lay  their  eyes  upon 
her  beauty  are  counted  the  enemies  of  God;    for  God  hath 
said  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  against  God; 
and  he  hath  said  furthermore,  'Love  not  the  world,  nor  the 
things  of  the  world  ;  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the 
the  Father  is  not  in  him.'     So   Mr.  Stand-fast  did  well  to  he- 
take  him  to  his   knees  praying  to  him   that   could  help   him. 
So  if  all  pilgrims,  when  worldly  proposals  and  en'. 
allure  them,  and   they  feel   the   iove  of  the  Wi 
them,  and  gaming  on'  them,  would  thus  go  to  more  1 
prayer,    and     he  "made    more    ri{ 
Madam  Bubble  wo'dd  rot  gaiu  so  many  victories.— (Cheever.) 


240 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Some  of  the  ditch  shy  are,  yet  can 

Lie  tumbling  in  the  mire ; 
Some,  though  they  shun  the  frying-pan, 

Do  leap  iuto  the  fire. 

After  this,  I  beheld  until  they  were  come  unto 
First  Part,  the  Land  of  Beulah,  where  the  sun 
P- 161-  shineth  night  and  day.1  Here,  because 
they  were  weary,  they  betook  themselves  a  while 
to  rest;  and,  because  this  country  was  common 
for  pilgrims,  and  because  the  orchards  and  vine- 
yards that  were  here  belonged  to  the  King  of  the 
Celestial  country,  therefore  they  were  licensed  to 
make  bold  with  any  of  his  things.  But  a  little 
while  soon  refreshed  them  here ;  for  the  bells  did 
so  ring,  and  the  trumpets  continually  sound  so 
melodiously,  that  they  could  not  sleep ;  and  yet 
they  received  as  much  refreshing,  as  if  they  had 
slept  their  sleep  ever  so  soundly.  Here  also  all 
the  noise  of  them  that  walked  in  the  streets,  was, 
More  pilgrims  are  come  to  town.  And  another 
would  answer,  saying,  And  so  many  went  over  the 
water,  and  were  let  in  at  the  golden  gates  to-day. 
They  would  cry  again,  There  is  now  a  legion  of 
Shining  Ones  just  come  to  town,  by  which  we 
know  that  there  are  more  pilgrims  upon  the  road  ; 
for  here  they  come  to  wait  for  them,  and  to  com- 
fort them  after  all  their  sorrow.  Then  the  Pil- 
grims got  up,  and  walked  to  and  fro ;  but  how 
were  their  ears  now  filled  with  heavenly  noises,  and 
their  eyes  delighted  with  celestial  visions!  In 
this  land  they  heard  nothing,  saw  nothing,  felt 
nothing,  smelled  nothing,  tasted  nothing,  that  was 
Death  bitter  to   offensive  to  their  stomach  or  mind ; 

sweet*  to    the    0nty  wlieQ    tne7   tasted    of   tlie    water 

soul.  of  the  river  over  which  they  were  to 

go,  they  thought  that  tasted  a  little  bitterish  to 
the  palate,  but  it  proved  sweeter  when  it  was 
down. 


1  The  ensuing  description   represents  the  happy  state  of 
those  that  live  in  places  favoured  with  many  lively  Christians, 
united   in   heart   aud  judgment;    and    where   instances  of 
triumphant  deathhed  scenes  are  often  witnessed.     Aged  be- 
lievers, in  such  circumstances,  have  heen  remarkably  delivered 
from  fears  and  temptations,  and  animated  by  the  hopes  and 
earnests  of  heaven;   so  that,  while  death  seemed   bitter  to 
nature,  it  became  pleasant  to  the  soul  to  think  of  the  joy  and 
glory  that  would  immediately  follow  it. —  (Scott.) 
O  scenes  surpassing  fable,  and  yet  true  I 
Scenes  of  accomplish'd  bliss,  which  who  can  see, 
Though  but  in  distant  prospect,  and  not  feel 
His  soul  refresh'd  with  foretaste  of  the  joy? 
Bright  as  a  sun  the  sacred  City  shines ; 
All  kingdoms  and  all  princes  of  the  earth 
Flock  to  that  light,  the  glory  of  all  lands 
Plows  into  her ;  unbounded  is  her  joy, 
And  endless  her  increase.     Thy  rams  are  there, 
Nebaioth,  and  the  flocks  of  Kedar  there ; 
The  looms  of  Orrnus,  and  the  mines  of  Iud, 
And  Saba's  spicy  groves  pay  tribute  there. 
Praise  is  in  all  her  gates ;  upon  her  walls, 
Aud  in  her  streets,  aud  in  her  spacious  courts, 
Is  heard  Salvation  I 


In  this  place  there  was  a  record  kept  of  the 
names  of  them  that  had  been  pilgrims  of  old,  and 
a  history  of  all  the  famous  acts  that  they  had 
done.  It  was  here  also  much  dis-  Death  has  its 
coursed  how  the  river  to  some  had  had  to^s  ate 
its  Sowings,  and  what  ebbings  it  has  the  tide- 
had  while  others  have  gone  over.  It  has  been  in 
a  manner  dry  for  some,  while  it  has  overflowed  it3 
banks  for  others. 

In  this  place  the  children  of  the  town  would  go 
into  the  King's  gardens,  and  gather  nosegays  for 
the  Pilgrims,  and  bring  them  to  them  with  much 
affection.  Here  also  grew  camphire,  with  spike- 
nard, and  saffron,  calamus,  and  cinnamon,  with  all 
its  trees  of  frankincense,  myrrh,  and  aloes,  with 
all  chief  spices.  With  these  the  Pilgrims'  cham- 
bers were  perfumed,  while  they  staid  here ;  and 
with  these  were  their  bodies  anointed,  to  prepare 
them  to  go  over  the  river  when  the  time  appointed 
was  come. 

Now,  while  they  lay  here,  and  waited  for  the 

good  hour,  there  was  a  noise  in  the    . 

°  .A  messeneer  of 

town,  that  there  was  a  post  come  from  Death  sent  to 
the  Celestial  City,  with  matter  of  great  ms  ldnd" 
importance  to  one  Christiana,  the  wife  of  Christian 
the  Pilgrim.  So  inquiry  was  made  for  her,  and 
the  house  was  found  out  where  she  was;  so  the 
post  presented  her  with  a  letter ;  the 

.       .  i  /•  ,  Tr    .,  i       His  message. 

contents  whereof  were,    '  Had,  good 
woman !  I  bring  thee  tidings  that  the  Master  calleth 
for  thee,  and  expecteth  that  thou  shouldest  stand 
in  his  presence,  in  clothes  of  immortality,  within 
these  ten  days.' 

When  he  had  read  this  letter  to  her,  he  gave 
her  therewith  a  sure  token  that  he  was  a  true 
messenger,  and  was  come  to  bid  her  make  haste 
to  be  gone.  The  token  was,  an  arrow 
with  a  point  sharpened  with  love,  let  d0eath\o°theni 
easily  into  her  heart,  which  by  degrees  jgyjS,  JJ 
wrought  so  effectually  with  her,  that  to  die. 
at  the  time  appointed  she  must  be  gone.2 

When  Christiana  saw  that  her  time  was  come, 
and  that  she  was  the  first  of  this  company  that  was 
to  go  over,  she  called  for  Mr.  Great-heart  her 
guide,  and  told  him  how  matters  were.  So  he  told 
her  he  was  heartily  glad  of  the  news,  aud  could 
have  been  glad  had  the  post  come  Her  speech  to 
for  him.  Then  she  bid  that  he  should  hei  Guide- 
give  advice  how  all  things  should  be  prepared  for 
her  journey.     So  he  told  her,  saying,  thus  and 


2  These  messengers  are  the  diseases  or  decays  by  which  the 
Lord  takes  down  the  earthly  tabernacle,  when  he  sees  good  to 
receive  the  souls  of  his  people  iuto  his  immediate  presence. 
In  plain  language,  it  was  reported  that  Clvristiana  was  sick  and 
near  death,  aud  she  herself  became  seusible  of  her  situation. 
'The  arrow  sharpened  by  love'  implies,  that  the  time,  manner, 
and  circumstances  of  the  believer's  death,  are  appointed  by 
him  '  who  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us.'  lie,  as  it  were, 
says  to  the  dying  saint,  '  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid.' — (Scott.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


241 


thus  it  must  l)c;  and  wo  that  survive  will  accom- 
pany  yon  to  the  river  side. 

Then  she  called  fur  her  children,  and  gave  them 
her  blessing,  and  told  them,  that  she 
yet  read  with  comfort  the  mark  that 
was  set  in  their  foreheads,  and  was  glad  to  see 
them  with  her  there,  and  that  they  had  kept  their 
garments  so  white.  Lastly,  she  bequeathed  to  the 
poor  that  little  she  had,  and  commanded  her  sons 
and  her  daughters  to  he  ready  against  the  messen- 
ger should  come  for  them. 

When  she  had  spoken  these  words  to  her  guide 

and  to  her  children,  she  called  for  Mr.  Valiant-for- 

truth,  and  said  unto  him,  Sir,  you  have 

To  Mr.  Valiant.  ,.        ,  ,  ,  ,,.    . 

in  all  places  showed  yourself  true- 
hearted;  'he  faithful  unto  death,'  and  my  King 
will  give  you  'a  crown  of  life.'  I  would  also 
entreat  you  to  have  an  eye  to  my  children  ;  and  if 
at  any  time  you  see  them  faint,  speak  comfortably 
to  them.  For  my  daughters,  my  sons'  wives,  they 
have  been  faithful,  and  a  fulfilling  of  the  promise 
To  Mr.  stand-  upon    them   will  he  their  end.     But 

last-  she  gave  Mr.  Stand-fast  a  ring. 
Then  she  called  for  old  Mr.  Honest,  and  said 
of  him,  '  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed, 
in  whom  is  no  guile.'  Then  said  he, 
I  wish  you  a  fair  day,  when  you  set  out  for  Mount 
Zion,  and  shall  he  glad  to  see  that  you  go  over  the 
river  dry-shod.  But  she  answered,  Come  wet, 
come  dry,  I  long  to  he  gone;  for,  however  the 
weather  is  in  my  journey,  I  shall  have  time  enough 
when  I  come  there  to  sit  down  and  rest  me,  and 
dry  me. 

Then  came  in  that  good  man  Mr.  Ready-to-halt, 

To  Mr.  Ready-  to  see  her.      So  she  said  to  him,  Thy 

to-hait.       travel  hither  has  been  with  difficulty ; 

hut  that  will  make  thy  rest  the  sweeter.     But  watch 

and  be  ready ;  for  at  an  hour  when  you  think  not, 

the  messenger  may  come. 

After  him  came  in  Mr.  Despondency,  and  his 
daughter  Much-afraid,  to  whom  she 

To   Despond-         .  ,    ,T  ,  ,       -,i      ,'       i  c  1  e 

ency and hiii    said,  1  ou  ought  with  thankfulness,  tor 
daughter.        eyer    tQ   rememi>er    y0ur  deliverance 

from  the  hands  of  Giant  Despair,  and  out  of 
Doubting  Castle.  The  effect  of  that  mercy  is,  that 
you  are  brought  with  safety  hither.  Be  ye  watch- 
ful, and  cast  away  fear ;  '  be  sober  and  hope  to 
the  end.' 

Then  she  said  to  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  Thou  wast 


To  old   Ileiu^t. 


1  This  is  the  faith  and  patience  of  this  dying  Christian 
heroine,  who  hegan  her  pilgrimage  with  trembling  steps, 
maintained  her  journey  with  holy  zeal,  and  thus  finished  her 
course  with  joy. — (Ivimey.) 

1  0  how  blessed  is  the  death  of  the  righteous,  who  die  in 
the  Lord  !  Even  a  wicked  Balaam  could  wish  for  this.  But 
it  will  be  granted  to  none  but  those  who  have  lived  in  the 
Lord  ;  whose  souls  have  been  quickened  by  his  Spirit  to  come 
unto  Jesus,  believe  in  him,  and  glory  of  him  as  their  righteous- 
ness and  salvation. — plasou.) 

VOL.  III.       *  ' 


delivered  from  the  mouth  of  Giant  Slay-good,  that 
thou  mightest  live  in  the  light  of 
the  living  for  ever,  and  see  thy  King  ToFe«-'u'"""i- 
with  comfort ;  only  I  advise  thee  to  repent  thee 
of  thine  aptness  to  fear  and  doubt  of  his  goodm 
before  he  sends  for  thee;  lest  thou  shouldest,  when 
ho  conies,  be  forced  to  stand  before  him,  for  that 
fault,  with  blushing. 

Now  the  day  drew  on,  that  Christiana  must  he 
gone.  So  the  road  was  full  of  people  to  see  her 
take  her  iourney.    But,  behold,  all  the    ,, 

ill"  ll  •  r  ''(T     'ast     "lav, 

banks  beyond  the  river  were  full  of  and  manner  at 
horses  and  chariots,  which  were  come  ci'drtur(;- 
down  from  above  to  accompany  her  to  the  city 
gate.  So  she  came  forth,  and  entered  the  river, 
with  a  beckon  of  farewell  to  those  that  followed 
her  to  the  river  side.  The  last  words  that  she  was 
heard  to  say  here,  were,  I  come,  Lord,  to  be  with 
thee,  and  bless  thee.1 

So  her  children  and  friends  returned  to  their 
place,  for  that  those  that  waited  for  Christiana 
had  carried  her  out  of  their  sight.  So  she  went 
and  called,  and  entered  in  at  the  gate  with  all  the 
ceremonies  of  joy  that  her  husband  Christian  had 
done  before  her. 

At  her  departure  her  children  wept.  But  Mr. 
Great-heart  and  Mr.  Valiant  played  upon  the  well- 
tuned  cymbal  and  harp  for  joy.  So  all  departed 
to  their  respective  places.2 

In  process  of  time  there  came  a  post  to  the  town 
again,  and  his  business  was  with  Mr.  Ready-to- 
halt.  So  he  inquired  him  out,  and  Ready-to-halt 
said  to  him,  I  am  come  to  thee  in  the  "munoned. 
name  of  him  whom  thou  hast  loved  and  followed, 
though  upon  crutches;  and  my  message  is  to  tell 
thee,  that  he  expects  thee  at  his  table  to  sup  with 
him,  in  his  kingdom,  the  next  day  after  Easter; 
wherefore  prepare  thyself  for  this  journey.8 

Then  he  also  gave  him  a  token  that  he  was  a 
true  messenger,  saying,  I  have  broken  thy  golden 
howl,  and  loosed  thy  silver  cord.  Ec.  xii.  6. 

After  this,  Mr.  Ready-to-halt  called  for  his  fel- 
low-pilgrims, and  told  them,  saying,  I  am  sent  for, 
and  God  shall  surely  visit  you  also.  So  he  desired 
Mr.  Valiant  to  make  his  will ;  and  because  he  had 
nothing  to  bequeath  to  them  that  should  survive 
him,  but  his  crutches,  and  his  good  wishes,  there- 
fore thus  he  said,  These  crutches  I  priI! 
bequeath  to  my  son  that  shall  tread      1Jls  waL 


5  Evident  decays  of  natural  powers  as  effectually  convince 
the  observing   person,  as  if  a  messenger  had    been    • 
inform  him.     But  men  in  general  cling  to  life,  wilfoJlj  ova 
look  such  tokens,  and  try  to  keep  up  to  the  last  the  vai 
of  recovering;   those  around  them,  by  a  cm 
soothe  them  in  the  delusion;  so  that  numbers  die  of  chronic 
diseases  as  suddenly  as  if  they  had  been  shot   throng 
heart.      Perhaps  the  author  had  some  reference    to 
inexplicable  presages  of  death  which  some  persons  evidently 
experience. — (Scott.) 

31 


242 


THE  PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


in  my  steps,  with  a  hundred  warm  wishes  that  he 
may  prove  hetter  than  I  have  done. 

Then  he  thanked  Mr.  Great-heart  for  his  eon- 
duct  and  kindness,  and  so  addressed  himself  to  his 
journey.  When  he  came  at  the  brink  of  the  river, 
he  said,  Now  I  shall  have  no  more  need  of  these 
crutches,  since  yonder  are  chariots  and  horses  for 
me  to  ride  on.  The  last  words  he  was  heard  to 
say  was,  Welcome  life ! l     So  he  went 

Ilis  last  words.     ,  . 

his  way. 

After  this,  Mr.  Feeble-mind  had  tidings  brought 

Feeble-mind    him,  that  the  post  sounded  his  horn 

summuued.     at  j^  cuamber  door.     Then  he  came 

in,  and  told  him,  saying,  I  am  come  to  tell  thee, 

that  thy  Master  hath  need  of  thee ;  and  that,  in 

very  little  time,  thou  must  behold   his    face    in 

brightness.     And  take  this  as  a  token  of  the  truth 

of  my  message,  'Those  that  look  out  of  the  windows 

shall  be  darkened. ' 2  Ec.  xii.  3. 

Then  Mr.  Feeble-mind  called  for  his  friends,  and 
told  them  what  errand  had  been  brought  unto  him, 
and  what  token  he  had  received  of  the  truth  of  the 
lie  makes  no  message.  Then  he  said,  Since  I  have 
wiu-  nothing  to  bequeath  to  any,  to  what 
purpose  should  I  make  a  will  ?  As  for  my  feeble 
mind,  that  I  will  leave  behind  me,  for  that  I  have 
no  need  of  that  in  the  place  whither  I  go.  Nor  is  it 
worth  bestowing  upon  the  poorest  pilgrim  ;  where- 
fore, when  I  am  gone,  I  desire  that  you,  Mr.  Valiant, 
would  bury  it  in  a  dunghill.  This  done,  and  the 
day  being  come  in  which  he  was  to  depart,  he 
entered  the  river  as  the  rest.  His  last  words  were, 
_.  ,  ,      Hold  out,  faith  and  patience.     So  he 

His  last  words.  .  ... 

went  over  to  the  other  side. 
When  days  had  many  of  them  passed  away, 
Mr.  Despond-   ^r*  Despondency  was  sent  for ;  for  a 
ency's  sum-  post  was  come,  and  brought  this  mes- 
sage to  him :  Trembling  man,  these 
are  to  summon  thee  to  be  ready  with  thy  King  by 
the  next  Lord's  day,  to  shout  for  joy  for  thy  deliver- 
ance from  all  thy  doubtings. 

And,  said  the  messenger,  that  my  message  is 

true,  take  this  for  a  proof ;  so  he  gave  him  the 

grasshopper  to  be  a  burden  unto  him.  Ec.  xii.  5.   Now, 

His  daughter  ^r-   Despondency's  daughter,  whose 

goes  too.      name  wag  Much-afraid,  said,  when  she 


1  See  the  joyful  end  of  one  ready  to  halt  at  every  step.  Take 
courage  hence,  ye  lame,  halting  pilgrims. — (Mason.) 

'J  The  tokens  are  taken  from  that  well-known  portion  of 
Scripture,  Ec.  xii.  1-7;  in  which  the  dealings  of  the  Lord  are 
represented  as  uniformly  gentle  to  the  feeble,  trembling,  humble 
believer ;  and  the  circumstances  of  their  deaths  comparatively 
encouraging  and  easy. — (Scott.) 

3  In  the  Holy  War,  the  doubters  having  been  dispersed, 
three  or  four  thrust  themselves  into  Mansoul.  Now,  to  whose 
house  should  these  Diabolian  doubters  go,  but  to  that  of  Old 
Evil-questioning.  So  he  made  them  welcome.  "Well,  said  he, 
be  of  what  shire  you  will,  you  have  the  very  length  of  my 
foot,  are  one  with  my  heart.  So  they  thanked  him.  I,  said 
one,  am  an  election-doubter;   I,  said  another,  am  a  vocation- 


heard  what  was  done,  that  she  would  go  with  he? 
father.  Then  Mr.  Despondency  said  to  his  friends, 
Myself  and  my  daughter,  you  know  what  we  have 
been,  and  how  troublesomely  we  have  behaved  our- 
selves in  every  company.  My  will  and 
my  daughter's  is,  that  our  desponds 
and  slavish  fears  be  by  no  man  ever  received,  from 
the  day  of  our  departure,  for  ever ;  for  I  know  that 
after  my  death  they  will  offer  themselves  to  others.3 
For,  to  be  plain  with  you,  they  are  ghosts  the 
which  we  entertained  when  we  first  began  to  be 
pilgrims,  and  could  never  shake  them  off  after ;  and 
they  will  walk  about  and  seek  entertainment  of  the 
pilgrims ;  but,  for  our  sakes,  shut  ye  the  doors 
upon  them.4 

When  the  time  was  come  for  them  to  depart, 
they  went  to  the  brink  of  the  river.  The  last  words 
of  Mr.  Despondency  were,  Farewell 

•    •.  .  i  j  tt  ■       i         i  i         His  last  words. 

night,  welcome  day.      Mis  daughter 

went  through  the  river  singing,  but  none  could 

understand  what  she  said.5 

Then  it  came  to  pass,  a  while  after,  that  there 
was  a  post  in  the  town  that  inquired    Mr  Honest 
for  Mr.  Honest.     So  he  came  to  his    summoned, 
house  where  he  was,  and  delivered  to  his  hand  these 
lines :   Thou  art  commanded  to  be  ready  against 
this  day  sevennight,  to  present  thyself  before  thy 
Lord,  at  his  Father's  house.    And  for  a  token  that 
my  message  is  true,  '  All  thy  daughters  of  music 
shall  be  brought  low.'  Ec.  xii.  4.     Then  Mr.  Honest 
called  for  his  friends,  and  said  unto   He  jj,akeg  no 
them,  I  die,  but  shall  make  no  will.         wilL 
As  for  my  honesty,  it  shall  go  with  me ;  let  him 
that  comes  after  be  told  of  this.     When  the  day 
that  he  was  to  be  gone  was  come,  he  addressed 
himself  to  go  over  the  river.     Now  the  river  at 
that  time  overflowed  the  banks  in  some  places ;  but 
Mr.  Honest  in  his  lifetime  had  spoken  Good-conscience 
to  one  Good-conscience  to  meet  him    neStSoverr  the 
there,  the  which  he  also  did,  and  lent    nver- 
him  his  hand,  and  so  helped  him  over.     The  last 


doubter ;  then  said  the  third,  I  am  a  salvation-doubter ;  and 
the  fourth  said,  I  am  a  grace-doubter.  I  am  persuaded 
you  are  down  boys,  and  are  one  with  my  heart,  said  the  old 
gentleman. — (Ed.) 

4  Pilgrims,  mind  this.  It  is  as  much  your  duty  to  strive, 
in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  against  unreasonable  doubts  and 
slavish  fears,  as  against  sin ;  nay,  are  they  not,  in  their  own 
nature,  the  worst  of  sins,  as  they  spring  from  infidelity,  and 
dishonour  God's  precious  truth,  glorious  grace,  and  everlasting 
salvation  ?  Never,  never,  then,  cherish  or  give  way  to  them,  but 
resist,  and  shut  the  door  of  your  hearts  against  them. — (Mason.) 

6  How  various  is  the  experience  of  Christians  in  the  hour 
of  death.  Christian  and  Hopeful  inquired  '  if  the  waters  were 
all  of  a  depth.'  The  answer  was,  '  You  shall  find  it  deeper  or 
shallower,  as  you  believe  iu  the  King  of  the  place.'  '  What 
ailed  thee,  0  Jordan,  that  thou  wast  driven  back?'  The 
answer  is,  '  At  the  presence  of  the  Lord :  at  the  presence  of 
the  God  of  Jacob.'  In  proportion  as  a  Christian  can  say,  '  for 
me  to  live  is  Christ,'  in  that  proportion  may  he  hope  to  find 
the  water  shallow,  and  feel  support  to  his  feet  in  the  trying 
passage. — (Ed.) 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


213 


Ilia  last  words. 


words  of  Mr.  LTonest  were,  Grace  reigns.     So  he 

left  the  world. 

After  this,  it  was  noised  abroad,  that  Mr. Valiant- 
Mr.  Valiant  for-truth  was  taken  with  a  summons, 
summoned,    ^y  t]ie  same  post  as  the  other;  ami 

had  this  for  a  token  that  the   summons  was  true, 

*  That  his  pitcher  was  broken  at  the  fountain.'  Ec. 
sii.  6.  When  he  understood  it,  ho  called  for  his 
friends,  and  told  them  of  it.  Then,  said  he,  I  am 
going  to  my  Father's;  ami  though  with  great  dif- 
ficulty I  am  got  hither,  yet  now  I  do  not  repent 
me  of  all  the  trouhle  I  have  been  at  to  arrive  where 

I  am.  My  sword  I  give  to  him  that 
shall  succeed  me  in  my  pilgrimage, 
and  my  coarage  and  skill  to  him  that  can  get  it. 
My  marks  and  scars  I  cany  with  me,  to  he  a  wit- 
ness for  me,  that  I  have  fought  his  battles,  who 
now  will  he  my  rewardcr.  When  the  day  that  he 
must  go  hence  was  come,  many  accompanied  him 
to  the  river-side,  into  which  as  he  went,  he  said, 
Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ? '  And 
is   he  went  down  deeper,   he    said, 

*  Grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? '  So  he  passed 
over,  and  all  the  trumpets  sounded  for  him  on  the 
other  side.1 

Then  there  came  forth  a  summons  for  Mr.  Stand- 
Mr.  stand-fastis  fast — tms  ^r-  Stand-fast  was  he  that 

summoned.        t]le    rest    0f  t]ie    Pi]grimS    found  upon 

his  knees  in  the  Enchanted  Ground — for  the  post 
brought  it  him  open  in  his  hands.  The  contents 
whereof  were,  that  he  must  prepare  for  a  change 
of  life,  for  his  Master  was  not  willing  that  he  should 
he  so  far  from  him  any  longer.  At  this  Mr.  Stand- 
fast was  put  into  a  muse.  Nay,  said  the  messenger, 
you  need  not  doubt  of  the  truth  of  my  message,  for 
here  is  a  token  of  the  truth  thereof :  '  Thy  wheel 
is  broken  at  the  cistern.'  Ec.  xii.  6.  Then  he  called 
He  calls  for  Mr.   ,mto  him  Mr.  Great-heart,  who  was 

Great-heart,  their  guide,  and  said  unto  him,  Sir, 
although  it  was  not  my  hap  to  be  much  in  your 
good  company  in  the  days  of  my  pilgrimage  ;  yet, 
since  the  time  I  knew  you,  you  have  been  profitable 
to  me.     When   I  came  from  home,  I  left  behind 

His  speech  to   nie  a  wife  and  five  small  children;  let 

him-         me  entreat  you,  at  your  return  (for  I 

know  that  you  will  go,  and  return  to  your  Master's 

house,  in  hopes  that  you  may  yet  be  a  conductor 

to  more  of  the  holy  pilgrims),  that  you  send  to  my 


1  In  the  truth  of  Jesus  is  victory.  He  who  is  valiant  for 
it  shall  share  most  of  its  comforts  in  life,  and  in  death.  0 
Lord,  increase  our  faith  in  the  never-failing  word  of  truth  and 
i.race,  for  thy  glory  and  our  soul's  triumph ! — (Mason.) 

2  Such  is  the  joy  and  blessedness  of  faith !  How  does  it 
bring  near  and  realize  the  sight  of  Christ  in  glory  I  Do  we 
indeed  see  Qhrist  by  the  eye  of  faith  ?  Is  he  the  one,  the  chief 
object  of  our  soul  ?  Verily,  then  we  shall  count  our  days  on 
earth  toilsome  ones,  and  long  for  the  full  fruition  of  him  in 
glory.  0  it  will  he  our  great  glory  to  see  that  dear  Man, 
whose  blessed  head  was  crowned  with  thorns,  and  whose  lovely 


family,  and  let  them  be  acquainted  with  all  that 
hath,  or  shall  happen  unto  me.     Tell    q,  , 
them,  moreover,  of  my  happy  arrival       bis  family. 
to  this  place,  and  of  the  present  [and]  late  hi 
condition  that  I  am  in.    Tell  them  also  of  Christian, 
and  Christiana  his   wife,    and   how   she  and  her 
children  came  after  her  husband.     Tell  them  also 
of  what  a  happy  end  she  made,  and  whither  she 
is  gone.     I  have  little  or  nothing  to  send  to  my 
family,  except  it  be  prayers  and  tears  for  them; 
of  which  it  will  suffice  if  thou  acquaint  them,  if 
peradventure  they  may  prevail. 

When  Mr.  Stand-fast  had  thus  set  things  in 
order,  and  the  time  being  come  for  him  to  haste  him 
away,  he  also  went  down  to  the  river.  Now  there 
was  a  great  calm  at  that  time  in  the  river ;  where- 
fore Mr.  Stand-fast,  when  he  was  about  half-way 
in,  stood  a  while  and  talked  to  his  companions  that 
had  waited  upon  him  thither;  and  he  said,  This 
river  has  been  a  terror  to  many ;  yea, 

,  ,  ,  n    •         1         i  r  nis  last  word?. 

the  thoughts  of  it  also  have  often 
frightened  me.  Now,  methinks,  I  stand  easy,  my 
foot  is  fixed  upon  that  upon  which  the  feet  of  the 
priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  stood, 
while  Israel  went  over  this  Jordan.  Jos.  m.  17.  The 
waters,  indeed,  are  to  the  palate  bitter,  and  to  the 
stomach  cold  ;  yet  the  thoughts  of  what  I  am  going 
to,  and  of  the  conduct  that  waits  for  me  on  the 
other  side,  doth  lie  as  a  glowing  coal  at  my  heart. 

I  see  myself  now  at  the  end  of  my  journey,  my 
toilsome  days  are  ended.  I  am  going  now  to  seo 
that  head  that  was  crowned  with  thorns,  and  that 
face  that  was  spit  upon  for  me.2 

I  have  formerly  lived  by  hearsay  and  faith  ;  but 
now  I  go  where  I  shall  live  by  sight,  and  shall  be 
with  him  in  whose  company  I  delight  myself. 

I  have  loved  to  hear  my  Lord  spoken  of ;  and 
wherever  I  have  seen  the  print  of  his  shoe  in  the 
earth,  there  I  have  coveted  to  set  my  foot  too. 

llis  name  has  been  to  me  as  a  civet-box ;  yea, 
sweeter  than  all  perfumes.  His  voice  to  me  ha3 
been  most  sweet ;  and  his  countenance  I  have  more 
desired  than  they  that  have  most  desired  the  light 
of  the  sun.  His  word  I  did  use  to  gather  for  my 
food,  and  for  antidotes  against  my  faiutings.  '  He 
has  held  me,  and  hath  kept  me  from  mine  ini- 
quities ;  yea,  my  steps  hath  he  strengthened  in  his 
way.'3 


face  was  spit  upon,  for  us.  O  that  we  may  be  living  every 
day  upon  him  ami  to  him,  till  we  see  him  as  he  is  I — (Mason.) 
3  This  speech  has  been  justly  admired  as  one  of  the  most 
striking  passages  in  the  whole  work;  but  it  is  so  plain  that  it 
only  requires  an  attentive  reader.  It  may,  however,  be  irorl by 
of  our  observation,  that,  iu  all  the  instances  before  us,  the 
pflgrima  are  represented  as  resting  their  only  dependence,  at 
the  closing  scene,  on  the  mercy  of  God,  through  the  righte- 
ousness and  atonement  of  his  Son;  and  yet  recollecting  their 
conscious  integrity,  boldness  in  professing  and  contending  fur 
the  truth,  love  to  the  cause,  example,  and  words  of  Christ, 


244 


THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 


Now,  while  he  was  thus  in  discourse,  his  coun- 
tenance changed,  his  strong  man  howed  under 
him ;  and  after  he  had  said,  Take  me,  for  I  come 
unto  thee,  he  ceased  to  be  seen  of  them. 

But  glorious  it  was  to  see  how  the  open  region 
was  filled  with  horses  and  chariots,  with  trumpeters 
and  pipers,  with  singers  and  players  on  stringed 
instruments,  to  welcome  the  Pilgrims  as  they  went 
up,  and  followed  one  another  in  at  the  beautiful 
gate  of  the  city.1 

As  for  Christian's  children,  the  four  boys  that 


obedience  to  his  precepts,  delight  in  his  ways,  preservation 
from  their  own  iniquities,  and  consistent  behaviour,  as  evidences 
that  their  faith  was  living,  and  their  hope  warranted ;  and  in 
this  way  the  retrospect  conduced  to  their  encouragement. 
Moreover,  they  all  concur  in  declaring  that,  while  they  left 
their  infirmities  behind  them,  they  should  take  their  graces 
along  with  them,  and  that  their  works  would  follow  them.' — 
(Scott.) 

1  0  who  is  able  to  conceive  the  inexpressible,  inconceivable 
joys  of  heaven !  How  will  the  heavens  echo  with  joy,  when 
the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  shall  come  to  dwell  with  her 
husband  for  ever !  Christ,  the  desire  of  nations,  the  joy  of 
angels,  the  delight  of  the  Father ;  what  solace  then  must  the 
soul  be  filled  with,  that  hath  the  possession  of  him  to  all 
eternity  !  0  what  acclamations  of  joy  will  there  be,  when  all 
the  children  of  God  shall  meet  together,  without  fear  of  being 
disturbed  by  the  antichristian  and  Caiuish  brood  1  If  you 
would  be  better  satisfied  what  the  beatifical  vision  means,  my 
request  is,  that  you  would  live  holily,  and  go  and  see. — 
(Bunyan's  Dying  Sayings,  vol.  i.  p.  65.) 

2  It  was  not  without  design  that  our  excellent  author  tells 
us,  that  the  four  boys,  with  their  wives  and  children,  were 
suffered  to  continue  in  life  for  a  time,  for  the  increase  of  the 
church  in  the  place  where  they  dwelt.  He  doubtless  intended 
to  write  a  Third  Part  of  his  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  founded  upon 
this  circumstance,  with  a  design,  probably  to  show  the  influ- 
ence of  real  religion  and  evangelical  sentiments  on  persons  in 
business  and  in  domestic  life. — (Ivimey.) 

3  The  view  of  the  peaceful  and  joyful  death  of  the  pilgrims, 
cannot  but  affect  every  reader ;  and  many,  perhaps,  may  be 
ready  to  say,  '  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and 


Christiana  brought  with  her,  with  their  wives  and 
children,  I  did  not  stay  where  I  was  till  they  were 
gone  over.  Also,  since  I  came  away,  I  heard  one 
say  that  they  were  yet  alive,  and  so  would  be  for 
the  increase  of  the  church  in  that  place  where 
they  were,  for  a  time.2 

Shall  it  be  my  lot  to  go  that  way  again,  I  may 
give  those  that  desire  it  an  account  of  what  I  here 
am'  silent  about.3     Meantime,  I  bid  my  reader 

Adieu. 


let  my  last  end  be  like  his ; '  but,  except  they  make  it  their 
principal  concern  to  live  the  life  of  the  righteou?,  such  a  wish 
will  be  frustrated.  If  any  man,  therefore,  doubt  whether  this 
allegory  do  indeed  describe  the  rise  and  progress  of  religion  in 
the  soul — the  beginning,  continuance,  and  termination  of  the 
godly  man's  course  to  heaven,  let  him  diligently  search  the 
Scriptures,  and  fervently  pray  to  God,  from  whom  alone 
'  cometh  every  good  and  perfect  gift,'  to  enable  him  to  deter- 
mine this  question.  But  let  such  as  own  themselves  to  be 
satisfied  that  it  does,  beware  lest  they  rest  in  the  pleasure  of 
reading  an  ingenious  work  on  the  subject,  or  in  the  ability 
of  developing  many  of  the  author's  emblems.  Let  them  beware 
lest  they  be  fascinated,  as  it  were,  into  a  persuasion  that  they 
actually  accompany  the  pilgrims  in  the  life  of  faith  and  walk- 
ing with  God,  in  the  same  measure  as  they  keep  pace  with  the 
author  in  discovering  and  approving  the  grand  outlines  of  his 
plan.  And  let  every  one  carefully  examine  his  state,  senti- 
ments, experience,  motives,  tempers,  affections,  and  conduct, 
by  the  various  characters,  incidents,  and  observations,  that  pass 
under  his  review — assured  that  this  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest 
consequence.  We  ought  not,  indeed,  to  call  any  man  master, 
or  subscribe  absolutely  to  all  his  sentiments ;  yet  the  diligent 
practical  student  of  Scripture  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the 
warnings,  counsels,  and  instructions  of  this  singular  work  agree 
with  that  sacred  touchstone,  or  that  characters  and  aetions  will 
at  last  be  approved  or  condemned  by  the  Judge  of  the  world, 
in  a  great  degree  according  to  the  sentence  passed  on  them  in 
this  wise  and  faithful  book.  The  Lord  grant  that  both  tho 
writer  and  readers  of  these  observations  'may  find  mercy  in  that 
day,'  and  be  addressed  in  these  gracious  words,  '  Come,  ye 
blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  yoa 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world.' — (Scott.) 


THE    HOLY    WAR, 

MADE 

BY     S  II  ADD  A  I    UPON    DIABOLUS, 

FOR   THE    REGAINING    OF    THE   METROPOLIS    OF    THE    WORLD 

OR,  THE   LOSING    AND   TAKING   AGAIN    OF   THE   TOWN    OF    MANSOUL. 

By  JOHN    BUNYAN, 

The  Autiiob  op  '  The  Pilgrim's  I'boguf.ss.' 


1  have  used  rimilitudea.' — Ilosca  xii.  10. 


London:  Friuted  for  Dorman  Newman,  at  the  King's  Arms  in  the  Poultry;  and  Benjamin  Alsop, 
at  the  Angel  and  Bible  iu  the  Poultry,  1682. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


Bunyan's  account  of  the  Holy  War  is  indeed  an 
extraordinary  book,  manifesting  a  degree  of  genius, 
research,  and  spiritual  knowledge,  exceeding  even 
that  displayed  in  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress. '  To  use 
the  words  of  Mr.  J.  Montgomery,  'It  is  a  work  of 
that  master  intelligence,  which  was  privileged  to 
arouse  kindred  spirits  from  torpor  and  inactivity, 
to  zeal,  diligence,  and  success.' 

It  was  first  published  in  16S2,  in  a  small  octavo 
volume,  and,  like  the  first  edition  of  the  Pilgrim, 
it  was  printed  in  a  very  superior  manner  to  all  the 
subsequent  editions,  to  a  recent  period.  The  por- 
trait of  the  author,  by  White,  which  faced  the  title- 
page,  is  without  doubt  the  best  likeness  that  has 
ever  appeared  of  our  great  allegorist.1  In  addition 
to  this  is  a  whole  length  figure  of  the  author,  with 
a  representation  of  Heart-castle  on  his  left  breast ; 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  behind,  being  partly  seen 
through  him ;  Emmanuel  and  his  army  on  the 
heart  side,  and  Diabolus  with  his  dragons  on  his 
right.  From  the  publication  of  this  popular  book 
in  16S2,  it  has  been  constantly  kept  in  print,  so 
that  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  numbers  that 
have  been  circulated.  As  time  rolls  on,  the  '  Holy 
War,'  allegorized  by  John  Bunyan,  becomes  more 
and  more  popular ;  nor  can  there  be  a  doubt,  but 
that  so  long  as  the  internal  conflict  and  spiritual 
warfare  between  the  renewed  soul  and  its  deadly 
enemies  are  maintained,  this  book  will  become  in- 
creasingly popular. 

The  'Holy  War,'  although  so  very  extraordinary 
an  allegory,  has  not  been  translated  into  so  many 
languages,  nor  has  it  been  so  much  read  in  English, 

1  The  original  drawing  by  White,  from  which  he  engraved 
the  portrait,  is  preserved  in  the  print  department  of  the  British 
Museum.  An  accurate  copy  from  it  is  prefixed  to  this  edition 
of  bis  'Works. 


as  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress.'  This  would  naturally 
arise  from  the  Pilgrimage  being  a  more  simple 
narrative.  It  is  a  journey  full  of  the  most  striking 
scenery  and  incidents,  which  is  read  with  the  deepest 
interest  by  all  classes,  from  the  children  in  a  work- 
house to  the  profoundest  Christian  philosopher. 
The  facts  which  are  intended  to  be  impressed  upon 
the  mind  by  the  force  of  the  allegory,  are  seen  and 
appreciated  by  the  Christian  without  requiring 
much  investigation;  while  the  'Holy  War'  is  carried 
on  under  an  allegorical  representation  by  no  means 
so  transparent.  Man's  soul  is  figured  under  the 
simile  of  a  town,  which  having  surrendered  to  an 
insidious  and  mortal  enemy,  is  besieged  by  its 
lawful  Sovereign  with  all  the  *  pomp  and  circum- 
stances '  of  war  ;  the  arch-enemy  is  driven  out, 
the  town  retaken,  new-modelled,  and  garrisoned 
by  Emmanuel. 

To  the  Christian,  whose  aim  and  end  is  peace, 
war  presents  a  most  forbidding  aspect.  He  loves 
not  to.  see  the  garments  rolled  in  blood,  nor  to  hear 
the  dying  groans  of  the  wounded,  nor  the  heart- 
rending cries  of  the  bereaved,  especially  those  of 
the  widow  and  the  orphan.  Spoliation  and  rob- 
bery are  not  the  pastimes  of  the  child  of  God,  nor 
is  cruelty  the  element  of  his  happiness  or  peace. 
To  read  of  such  scenes,  produces  painfully  inter- 
esting sensations  ;  but  even  these  are  not  so  strong 
or  intense  as  those  delightful  feelings  which  per- 
vade the  mind  while  watching  the  poor  pilgrim  in 
his  struggles  to  get  through  the  Slough  of  Despond, 
his  terror  under  the  flames  of  Mouut  Sinai,  his 
passing  unhurt  the  darts  from  Beelzebub's  castle, 
and  his  finding  refuge  at  the  Wicket  Gate.  It  is 
true,  that  the  most  delicate  Christian  must  become 
a  stern  warrior — the  most  sensitive  ear  must  bo 
alarmed  with  the  sound  of  Diabolus's  drum,  and 


216 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY   THE  EDITOR. 


at  times  feel  those  inward  groanings  which  cannot 
be  uttered — pass  through  « the  fiery  trial,'  and 
'endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus 
Christ;'  while  at  other  periods  of  his  experience, 
flushed  with  victory,  he  will  cry  out,  '  Who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?'  We  must 
fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  or  we  can  never 
lay  hold  on  eternal  life.  We  must  he  engaged  in 
this  holy  war,  and  fight  or  perish.  There  is  no 
neutrality,  no  excuse  that  can  be  awaiting  at  the 
day  of  judgment.  The  servant  of  Christ  is  there- 
fore found  trusting  in  the  Captain  of  salvation, 
furnished  with  the  whole  armour  of  God,  with 
which  his  soul  is  clothed  by  the  Holy  Spirit — 
having  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet,  the  breast- 
plate, the  two-edged  sword.  It  was  being  thus 
mysteriously,  invulnerably  armed,  that  gave  the 
delicate,  learned,  pious  Lady  Anne  Askew  strength 
to  triumph  over  her  agonies,  when  the  Papists  dis- 
jointed every  bone  and  sinew  of  her  body  on  the 
rack.  Her  spiritual  armour  enabled  her  with 
patience  to  bless  God  at  the  stake,  when,  for  re- 
fusing to  worship  Antichrist,  she  was  burned  in 
Smithfield,  and  her  soul  ascended  to  heaven  in  a 
flaming  fiery  chariot.  It  is  the  same  spiritual 
armour,  the  same  Captain  to  guide,  the  same 
Spirit  to  sanctify,  the  same  Father  to  bless  us, 
by  which  alone  we  can  become  more  than  con- 
querors over  our  vigilant  and  powerful  enemies. 
The  Holy  war  is  in  this  volume  presented  to  us  by 
an  old,  experienced,  faithful  warrior;  it  is  an  alle- 
gorical narrative,  written  by  a  master  hand,  guided 
by  deeply  penetrating,  searching  powers  of  mind. 
It  is  his  own  severe  brunts  with  the  great  enemy, 
who  is  aided  by  his  army  of  pomps,  vanities,  lusts, 
and  allurements,  many  lurking  within,  disguised  to 
appear  like  angels,  while  under  their  masquerade 
dress  they  are  very  devils.  It  is  written  by  one 
who  possessed  almost  boundless  resources  of  im- 
agination. It  is  more  profound,  more  deeply 
spiritual  than  the  pilgrimage  from  Destruction  to 
the  Celestial  City ;  and  to  understand  its  hidden 
meaning,  requires  the  close  and  mature  application 
of  the  renewed  mind.  There  are,  alas !  compara- 
tively few  that  are  blessed  with  spiritual  discern- 
ment ;  and  even  of  these,  there  are  but  few  inclined 
to  mental  investigation  and  research.  These  are 
reasons  why  it  has  not  been  so  popular  a  book 
as  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress.'  To  aid  those  whose 
time  for  reading  is  limited,  notes  are  given,  by 
which  obsolete  words  and  customs  are  explained, 
and  the  reader  assisted  to  appreciate  the  beauties, 
and  to  understand  the  meaning  of  this  allegory.  It 
is  earnestly  hoped  that  many  Avill  richly  enjoy  the 
comforts,  instructions,  consolations,  and  strength 
which  the  author  ardently  wished  to  convey  to 
Zion's  warriors,  by  the  study  of  this  important 
subject. 


I  have  already,  in  my  long  Introduction  to  the 
'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  noticed  the  peculiar  genius 
and  originality  which  are  conspicuous  in  all  Bun- 
yan's  works,  and  which  most  resplendently  appear 
in  his  allegorical  writings.  That  genius  became 
hallowed  and  sanctified  by  prison  discipline,  by 
an  intense  study  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and 
by  his  controversies  with  great  men  of  various 
sects  and  parties.  In  the  'Holy  War'  Bunyan's 
peculiar  genius  shines  forth  in  its  most  beauteous 
lustre ;  the  whole  is  new,  genuine,  flowing  forth 
from  his  own  deep  and  rich  experience.  It  is,  in 
fact,  the  same  narrative  that  he  had  published 
under  the  title  of  'Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief 
of  Sinners,  or  a  brief  and  faithful  relation  of  the 
exceeding  mercy  of  God,  in  Christ,  to  his  poor  ser- 
vant John  Bunyan.'  This  simple,  heart-affecting 
narrative,  is  here  related  under  the  allegorical  re- 
presentation of  the  '  Holy  War.'  In  this,  all  the 
circumstances  of  his  conviction  of  sin,  and  his  con- 
version to  God,  are  narrated  with  startling  interest 
from  the  first  alarm — his  being  roused  from  a  state 
of  death-like  lethargy,  his  opposition  to  the  grace 
of  God,  his  refusals  of  the  invitations  of  Emman- 
uel, and  his  being  at  length  conquered  to  become 
a  monument  of  Divine  mercy — a  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Then  came  his  declension  by  carnal 
security,  and  his  misery  in  that  state,  until  he  was 
finally  reconquered ;  and  his  heart  is  permanently 
occupied  by  Emmanuel.  The  '  Grace  Abounding,' 
aided  by  the  marginal  notes  of  the  author  to  the 
*  Holy  War,'  forms  a  very  valuable  key  to  the  mys- 
teries of  this  allegory;  without  their  aid  some 
passages  would  be  found  deeply  mysterious,  and 
hard  to  be  understood.  Nor  can  this  be  considered 
extraordinary,  when  it  is  recollected  that  the  whole 
of  the  allegory  is  a  revelation  of  scenes,  feelings, 
hopes,  fears,  and  enjoyments,  which  are  unknown, 
unfelt,  and  invisible  to  all  except  to  those  whose 
minds  are  enlightened  by  Divine  truth ;  and  even 
of  these,  very  few  have  had  the  deep  and  trying 
experience  with  which  the  author  was  exercised. 

That  the  *  Holy  War '  allegorically  represents 
Bunyan's  personal  feelings,  is  clearly  declared  by 
him  in  the  poetical  Introduction  or  Address  to  the 
Reader,  prefixed  to  the  book.  He  adverts  to 
books  of  fiction,  and  solemnly  declares — 

'  I  have  somewhat  else  to  do, 

Than  with  vain  stories  thus  to  trouble  you, 
For  my  part,  /  [myself)  was  in  the  town, 
Both  when  'twas  set  up,  and  when  pulling  down ; 
I  saw  Diabolus  in  his  possession,     -     - 
Yea,  I  was  there  when  she  own'd  him  for  lord.' 
A  remarkable  verse  describes  his  state  before 
conversion — 

'  When  Mansoul  trampled  upon  things  Divine, 
And  wallowed  in  filth  as  doth  a  swine ; 
When  she  betook  herself  unto  her  arms,  *  jjig 

Fought  her  Emmanuel,  despis'd  his  charms,*    couusda. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


247 


Then  I  was  there,  ami  did  rejoice  to  see 
Diabolus  anil  Mansoul  90  agree.' 

Some  editor,  imagining  that  Bnnyan  could  never 
have  so  rejoiced,  forgetting  hia  own  words  in  the 
fourth  section  of  his  '  Grace  Abounding  ' — '  It  was 
my  deUght  to  be  taken  captive  by  the  devil,  at  his 
will ' — altered  those  words  to — 

'Then  I  was  there,  and  grieved  for  to  see 
Diabolus  and  Mansoul  so  agree.' 
This    alteration,    which    perverts    the    author's 
meaning,  appears  in  a  London  edition,  1752,  and 
has  been  copied  into  many  modern  editions,  even 
into  those  hy  Mason  and  Burder.1 

The  author  having  in  the  ahove  lines  descrihed 
his  unconverted  state,  goes  on  to  delineate  his 
convictions  in  theso  words : — 

— i '  What  is  here  in  view, 

Of  mine  own  knowledge,  I  dare  say  is  true. 
I saio  the  Prince's  armed  men  come  down, 
I  saw  the  captains,  heard  the  trumpets  sound; 
Yea,  how  they  set  themselves  in  battle-ray, 
I  shall  remember  to  my  dying  day' 

The  whole  of  this  address  is  descriptive  of  what 
the  author  saw,  felt,  or  heard — 

'  What  shall  I  say  ?     I  heard  the  people's  cries, 
And  saw  the  Prince  wipe  tears  from  Mansoid'9  eyes ; 
/  heard  the  groans,  and  saw  the  joy  of  many, 
Tell  you  of  all,  I  neither  will,  nor  can  I ; 
But  by  what  here  I  say,  you  well  may  see 
That  Mansoul's  matchless  wars  no  fables  be.' 

The  narrative  of  this  eventful  war  is  authenti- 
cated by  his  personal  feelings  while  under  the 
chastising,  correcting,  hand  of  his  heavenly  Father; 
in  his  new  birth  and  subsequent  experience ;  in 
bringing  his  soul  from  darkness  to  marvellous  light, 
and  from  the  wretched  bondage  of  sin  to  the 
glorious  liberty  of  the  gospel.  This  address  is 
closed  with  a  very  important  notice,  which  all  our 
readers  should  keep  constantly  in  mind — it  is  to 
attend  to  the  author's  key  to  the  allegory,  and 
that  is  his  marginal  notes— 

'  Nor  do  thou  go  to  work  without  my  key, 
(In  mysteries  men  soon  do  lose  their  way), 
And  also  turn  it  right,  if  thou  woidd'st  know 
My  riddle,  and  would'st  with  my  heifer  plough. 
It  lies  there  in  the  window,*  fare  thee  well, 
My  next  may  be  to  ring  thy  passing-bell.' 

The  last  line  strongly  reminds  us  of  the  author's 
difficulty  to  quit  the  gin  and  beer-drinking  practice 
of  bell-ringing,  to  which  in  his  youth  he  was  so 
much   addicted.      It    is    recorded    in    his   '  Grace 


•The 
margent 


1  These  words  were  correctly  given  in  an  edition  that  I 
published  in  1806.— (ED.) 

-  How  strange  to  hear  a  sermon,  on  the  day  of  sacred  rest, 
from  the  words,  'Keep  holy  the  Sabbath  day,'  accompanied  by 
'a  trible-bob  graudsire,'  the  men  labouring  and  sweating  most 
violently. — (Ed.) 


The  form  and  order  of  the  narrative  is  exceed- 
inu.lv  beautiful,  and  deeply  interesting  to  those  win. 
have  lieen  engaged  in  a  similar  warfare.  Passing 
over  the  short  and  vivid  narration  of  the  fall  of 
man,  our  personal  feelings  are  excited  hy  wit] 
[ng  the  methods  of  grace,  adapted  hy  a  covenant" 
keeping  God  and  Father,  to  rescue  his  people  from 
their  natural  state  of  Diabolonian  slavery.  Many 
of  the  incidents  will  bring,  to  the  enlightened 
reader's  recollection,  the  solemn  and  powerful  im- 
pressions under  which  he  struggled,  when  oppi 
the  invitations  of  Emmanuel.  His  holy  joy,  when 
a  sense  of  pardoning  love  and  mercy  came  over 
his  soul ;  and  his  anxieties,  when  in  conflict  with 
doubts,  and  fears,  and  blood-men. 

Our  young  readers  must  be  cautioned  not  to 
give  way  to  doubts  and  fears  for  their  soul's  safety, 
because  they  have  never  passed  through  the  sam<; 
feelings  which  fitted  Bunyan  for  a  sphere  of 
extraordinary  usefulness.  God  bring3  his  lambs, 
and  sheep  into  the  fold  by  such  means  as  are 
agreeable  to  his  infinite  wisdom  and  grace.  Some 
surrender  at  the  first  summons ;  others  hold  out 
during  a  long  and  distressing  siege.  'God's  ways 
are  not  our  ways.'  All  our  anxious  inquiries 
should  be,  Is  Emmanuel  in  Ileart-castle?  is  he 
'  formed  in  me  the  hope  of  glory  ?  '  do  I  live  and 
believe  in  him  who  has  immutably  decreed  that 
'  whosoever  ' — be  he  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  un- 
learned— if  he  *  liveth  and  believeth  in  me,  shall 
never  die  ?  '  It  matters  not,  as  to  my  salvation, 
whether  the  siege  was  long  or  short.  The  vital 
question  is,  Has  my  heart  been  conquered;  do 
I  love  Emmanuel  ?  If  I  do,  it  is  because  he  first 
loved  me,  and  he  changeth  not.  In  proportion  to 
the  trouble  that  I  gave  to  my  Conqueror,  so  should 
be  my  zealous,  holy,  happy  obedience  to  his  com- 
mands. Much  is  expected  from  those  to  whom 
much  has  been  forgiven.  The  Conqueror,  by  his 
victory,  fits  us  for  those  peculiar  duties  to  which 
he  intends  to  devote  us  in  extending  his  kingdom. 
In  the  history  of  this  war,  the  reader's  attention 
will  be  naturally  arrested  by  the  fact  that  Man- 
soul, having  voluntarily  surrendered  to  the  dominion 
of  Satan,  made  no  effort  to  relieve  herself.  No 
spiritual  feelings  lurked  in  the  walls  to  disturb  the 
reign  of  Diabolus  ;  not  even  a  prayer  or  a  sigh 
breaks  forth  from  her  heart  for  deliverance  ;  she 
felt  not  her  degradation  nor  her  danger;  she  was 
dead  while  she  yet  lived— dead  in  sin ;  and  from 
this  state  would  have  sunk,  as  thousands  have, 
from  spiritual  and  temporal  death  into  eternal  and 
irretrievable  ruin.  The  first  conception  of  a  scheme 
for  her  deliverance  from  such  awful  danger, 
in  the  celestial  court  of  her  Creator;  grace  lays 
the  foundation,  and  raises  the  top-stone.  AH  the 
redeemed  of  God  will  unite  in  one  song,  «  Not  unto 
us,  0  Lord ;  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give 


24S 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY   THE   EDITOR. 


glory.'  A  covenant  is  made,  ordered  in  all  things 
and  sure,  to  save  Mansoul ;  and  from  this  emanates 
the  vast,  the  costly  design  of  her  deliverance.  To 
effect  this  great  object,  the  Mosaic  dispensation — 
the  Law,  with  all  its  terrors,  is  sent,  in  fearful 
array,  to  conquer  or  destroy.  This  is  allegorically 
represented  under  the  similitude  of  an  army  of 
forty  thousand  warriors,  •  stout,  rough-hewn  men, 
fit  to  break  the  ice,  and  make  their  way  by  dint 
of  sword. '  They  are  under  the  command  of  four 
captains,  each  with  his  ensign — Boanerges  and 
Thunder,  Conviction  and  Sorrow,  Judgment  and 
Terror,  Execution  and  Justice.  To  resist  this 
force,  Diabolus  arms  the  town,  hardens  the  con- 
science, and  darkens  the  understanding.  He  places 
at  Eargate  a  guard  of  deaf  men,  under  old  Mr. 
Prejudice,  and  plants  over  that  important  gate 
two  great  guns,  Highmind  and  Heady.  He  arms 
Mansoul  with  the  whole  armour  of  Satan,  which 
is  very  graphically  described.  Summons  after 
summons  is  unheeded.  The  death  of  friends,  sick- 
ness, and  trouhles,  pass  by  apparently  without  any 
good  result.  They  '  will  not  hearken  to  the  voice 
of  charmers,  charming  never  so  wisely. '  At  length, 
the  town  is  assaulted,  conscience  becomes  alarmed, 
but  the  will  remains  stubborn.  The  beleaguering 
of  the  town — planting  the  ensigns — throwing  up 
batteries — the  slings  casting,  with  irresistible  force, 
portions  of  the  Word  into  the  mind — the  battering- 
rams  beating  upon  the  gates,  especially  Eargate — 
exciting  alarm  under  the  fear  of  the  just  and  awful 
punishment  due  to  sin — all  are  described  with  an 
extraordinary  knowledge  of  military  terms  and 
tactics.  The  episode  of  the  three  volunteers  who 
enlisted  under  Shaddai,  into  Captain  Boanerges's 
company — Tradition,  Human-wisdom,  and  Man's- 
invention — are  inimitably  beautiful.  When  they 
were  caught  in  the  rear,  and  taken  prisoners — '  as 
they  did  not  live  so  much  by  religion  as  by  the 
fates  of  fortune' — they  offer  their  services  to 
Diabolus,  and  are  joined  to  Captain  Anything's 
company.  After  a  few  sharp  assaults,  convictions 
of  sin  alarm  the  conscience,  and  six  of  Diabolus's 
new  Aldermen  are  slain  with  one  shot.  Their 
names  are  well  worthy  an  attentive  consideration, 
showing  what  open  vices  are  abandoned  upon  the 
soul  being  first  terrified  with  the  fear  of  retribution 
— Swearing,  Whoring,  Fury,  Stand-to-lies,  Drunk- 
enness, and  Cheating. 

Alarms  are  continued  by  day  and  night,  until  it 
is  said  of  Mansoul,  '  Upon  all  her  pleasant  things 
there  was  a  blast,  and  burning  instead  of  beauty ; 
with  shows  of  the  shadow  of  death.'  Thus  was  it 
with  David — 'My  soul  is  cast  down  within  me: 
deep  calleth  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of  thy  water- 
spouts ;  all  thy  waves  and  thy  bdlows  are  gone 
over  me. '    Vs.  xlii.  6,  7. 

All  the  assaults  of  Moses  and  the  Law  are  in- 


effectual ;  the  gates  remain  closed  against  her  King 
and  God.  The  thunders  of  Sinai  and  the  voice  of 
the  prophets  may  alarm,  but  cannot  conquer  Man- 
soul. The  thundering,  terrifying  captains  appeal 
to  the  celestial  court,  and  Emmanuel — God  with 
us — condescends  to  fight  the  battle,  and  secure  the 
victory.  The  angelic  hosts  desire  to  look  into 
these  things — they  are  the  peers  of  the  heavenly 
realm — the  news  '  flew  like  lightning  round  about 
the  court' — and  the  greatest  peers  did  covet  to 
have  commissions  under  Emmanuel.  The  captains 
that  accompany  him  in  this  grand  expedition  are 
Faith,  Hope,  Charity,  Innocence,  and  Patience. 
Mansoul  is  to  be  won  by  persuasion  to  receive  her 
Saviour.  The  cost  of  the  enterprise  is  vast  in- 
deed ;  the  army  is  numerous  as  our  thoughts,  and 
who  can  number  '  the  multitude  of  his  thoughts  ?' 
The  battering  rams  and  slings,  we  are  told  by  the 
margin,  mean  the  books  of  Sacred  Scripture,  sent 
to  us  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Em- 
manuel is  irresistible — Mansoul  is  taken — Diabolus 
is  dragged  out,  stripped  of  his  armour,  and  sent  to 
the  parched  places  in  a  salt  land,  'seeking  rest, 
but  finding  none.' 

The  heart  at  first  trembles  lest  punishment 
should  be  justly  poured  out  upon  her  for  treason, 
but  it  becomes  the  throne  of  its  lawful  King ;  and 
instead  of  God's  anger,  his  pardon  and  blessings 
are  proclaimed,  and  Mansoul  is  filled  with  joy, 
happiness,  and  glory. 

Reader,  can  you  call  to  mind  the  peace  and 
holy  enjoyment  which  took  possession  of  your  soul, 
when — having  passed  through  the  fears  and  hopes, 
the  terrors  and  alarms,  of  the  new  birth — you  sat 
down,  for  the  first  time,  at  the  table  of  the  Lord, 
to  celebrate  the  wonders  of  his  grace  ?  Then  you 
rejoiced  in  hope  full  of  immortality  ;  then  you  could 
exclaim,  '  0  tidings  !  glad  tidings  !  good  tidings 
of  good,  and  of  great  joy  to  my  soul ! '  '  Then  they 
leaped  and  skipped  upon  the  walls  for  joy,  and 
shouted,  Let  Emmanuel  live  for  ever  !'  And  then 
you  fondly  thought  that  happiness  was  secure  for 
the  rest  of  your  pilgrimage,  until  your  glorified 
spirit  should  enter  into  the  celestial  city. 

Alas  !  your  enemies  were  not  dead.  They  in- 
sidiously seized  an  unguarded  moment.  Remiss  in 
watchfulness,  and  formal  in  prayer,  Carnal-security 
invaded  the  mind.  Your  ardent  love  is  cooled — 
intercourse  with  heaven  is  slighted — and  by  slow 
degrees,  and  almost  unperceived,  Emmanuel  leaves 
Heart-castle ;  and  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air  promotes  the  treason,  and  foments  rebellion, 
by  the  introduction  of  loose  thoughts,  under  the 
name  of  harmless  mirth.  The  news  soon  reach 
Diabolus,  and  an  infernal  conference,  or  dialogue 
of  devils,  is  revealed  by  our  author;  who  had 
watched  the  course  and  causes  of  spiritual  declen- 
sion, and  was  not  '  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices.' 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


24'J 


The  malignant  craft  and  subtilty  displayed  in 
Satan's  counsel,  are  described  in  a  manner  far 
beyond  an  ordinary  imagination.  They  display 
the  almost  unbounded  resources  of  genius  and  in- 
vention so  richly  possessed  by  tho  prince  of  alle- 
gorists,  John  Banyan,  It  reminds  us  of  the  dia- 
logue between  Lucifer  and  Beelzebub,  in  that  rare 
work  by  Barnardine  Ochine,  a  reformer,  published 
in  1549,  called,  A  Tragedy  or  Dialogue  of  (he  un- 
just usurped  Primacy  of  (he  llishop  of  Borne.1  In 
this  is  represented,  in  very  popular  language,  the 
designs  of  Lucifer  to  ruin  Christianity  by  the 
establishment  of  Popery.  Lucifer  thus  addresses 
his  diabolical  conclave — '  I  have  devised  to  make 
a  certain  new  kingdom,  replenished  with  idolatry, 
superstition,  ignorance,  error,  falsehoods,  deceit, 
compulsion,  extortion,  treason,  contention,  discord, 
tyranny,  and  cruelty;  with  spoiling,  murder,  ambi- 
tion, filthiness,  injuries,  factions,  sects,  wickedness, 
and  mischief;  in  the  which  kingdom  all  kinds  of 
abomination  shall  be  committed.  And  notwith- 
standing that  it  shall  be  heaped  up  with  all  kinds 
of  wickedness,  yet  shall  the  [professed]  Christian 
men  think  it  to  be  a  spiritual  kingdom,  most  holy 
and  most  godly.  The  supreme  head  of  this  king- 
dom shall  be  a  man  which  is  not  only  sinful,  and 
an  abominable  robber  and  thief,  but  he  shall  be 
sin  and  abomination  itself;  and  yet,  for  all  that, 
shall  be  thought  of  Christian  men  a  God  in  earth, 
and  his  members,  being  most  wicked,  shall  be 
called  of  men  most  holy.  God  sent  his  Son  into 
the  world,  who,  for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  hath 
humbled  himself  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 

The  Pope  the  I  will  send  my  son  into  the  world,  who, 
dc\u'sson.  £or  ^e  destruction  and  condemnation 
of  mankind,  shall  so  advance  himself  that  he  shall 
take  upon  him  to  be  made  equal  with  God.'  '  I 
will,  by  craft  and  diligence,  shadow  and  cover 
superstition  and  idolatry  with  a  fair  face,  and 
beauty  of  holy  ceremonies,  that  men  shall  be  made 
so  drunken  and  so  amazed  with  this  outward  pomp 
and  show,  that  they  shall  not  be  able  to  discern 
truth  from  falsehood,  when  they  be  drowned  in  the 
flood  of  idolatry  and  superstition.'  '  I  will  cause 
them  to  be  most  cruel  tyrants  and  butchers  of 
Christ  and  his  members,  under  a  pretence  of  zeal 
to  the  house  of  God.  They  shall  hide  their  un- 
cleanness  and  filthy  behaviour  with  an  exceeding 
wide  cloak  of  hypocri.-y,  and  with  glorious  shining 
titles.'  Thus  this  intrepid  reformer  opened  up  the 
origin,  the  development,  the  desolations,  of  Popery; 
and,  with  a  similar  knowledge  of  Satan's  devices, 
the  Nonconformist  Bunyau  shows  the  means  by 
which  Diabolus  urges  the  young  Christian  into  a 

backsliding  state.  '  Let  our  Diabolonian  friends 
in  Mansoul  draw  it  into  sin,  for  there  is  nothing 


From  a  copy  in  the  Editor's  library. 


like  sin  to  devour  Mansoul;  while  we  will  send 
against  it  an  army  of  twenty  or  thirty  thousand 
sturdy  terrible  doubters.  Sin  renders  Mansoul 
sick  and  faint,  while  doubts  are  by  it  made  fierce 
and  strong.'  At  length  Diabolus  and  his  army  of 
doubts  march  from  Hellgate  Hill  to  Mansoul :  the 
order  in  which  they  are  placed,  and  the  Dames  of 
the  officers,  are  very  instructive,  as  well  as  curious. 
Election-doubters,  under  Captain  Rage — Vocation- 
doubters,  commanded  by  Captain  Fury — Grace- 
doubters,  led  by  Capt.  Damnation — Faith-doubters, 
under  Captain  Insatiable — Perseverance-doubters, 
led  by  Captain  Brimstone — Resurrection-doubter^, 
by  Captain  Torment — Salvation-doubters,  under 
Captain  Noease — Glory-doubters,  commanded  by 
Captain  Sepulchre — Felicity-doubters,  led  by  Cap- 
tain Pasthope.  Incredulity  was  Lord-general,  and 
Diabolus  was  King  and  Commander-in-chief.  The 
roaring  of  the  drum — their  alarming  outcries,  Hell- 
fire  !  Hell-fire  ! — their  furious  assaults — the  mul- 
titude of  doubts — and  the  perplexity  of  poor  dis- 
tracted Mansoul,  are  admirably  and  truly  narrated. 
The  town  makes  a  sortie  in  the  night,  but  Dia- 
bolus and  his  legions,  experienced  in  night  work, 
drive  them  back,  and  severely  wound  Captains 
Faith,  Hope,  and  Experience.  Again  the  gates 
are  assaulted,  and  Diabolus  and  his  doubters  gain 
an  entrance,  by  the  senses,  into  the  town,  but 
cannot  force  the  heart ;  and  Mansoul  is  reduced 
to  the  greatest  straits  and  sadness.  In  this  ex- 
tremity, prayers  are  incessantly  offered  up  to  Em- 
manuel ;  but,  for  a  long  time,  they  can  obtain  no 
satisfactory  answers.  Both  parties  are  on  the 
alert;  but  Diabolus  finds  it  impossible,  either  by 
treachery,  or  by  storming  with  his  legion  of  doubts, 
to  gain  possession  of  Ileart-castle.  Being  worsted 
in  a  general  engagement,  the  doubters  are  slain, 
and  are  buried  with  their  armour;  yea,  all  that 
did  but  smell  of  a  Diabolonian  doubter.  The  arch- 
fiend now  enters  upon  a  new  mode  of  assault — he 
sends  for  a  reinforcement,  to  try  the  effect  of  per- 
secution ;  and  obtains  an  army  of  fifteen  thousand 
bloodmen,  from  the  province  of  Loathgood.  To 
these  were  added  ten  thousand  new  doubters,  under 
their  commander  old  Incredulity.  These  blood- 
men  were  '  rugged  villains,  and  had  done  feats 
heretofore;'  '  they  were  mastiffs,  and  would  fasten 
upon  father,  mother,  brother,  yea,  upon  the  Prince 
of  princes.  Among  their  officers  is  Captain  Pope, 
whose  colours  were  the  stake,  the  flame,  and  tho 
good  man  in  it.'  To  these  I  would  humbly  suggest 
the  propriety  of  adding  one  more — it  is  Captain 
State-religion,  upon  whose  standard  should  be  re- 
presented the  Nonconformist  John  Bunyan  in  a. 
damp  dreary  dungeon,  writing  his  'Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, '  with  his  poor  blind  child  at  his  feet.  0 
persecutor,  whether  you  burn  or  imprison  a  Non- 
conformist, or  harass  him  in  Ecclesiastical  courti, 

Z-2, 


250 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY  THE   EDITOR. 


or  seize  his  goods  to  support  forms  or  ceremonies 
which  he  helieves  to  be  Antichristian,  your  com- 
mander is  old  Incredulity — your  king  is  Diabolus! 
The  Woodmen  send  a  summons  to  Mansoul  '  as 
hot  as  a  red  hot  iron,'  threatening  fire  and  sword, 
and  utter  destruction ;  but  the  God  who  visited 
our  pious  author  in  prison,  and  cherished  and  com- 
forted him  in  his  twelve  years'  sufferings  under 
persecution,  came  to  the  relief  of  Mansoul.  The 
Diabolonian  army  is  routed — the  doubters  are  slain, 
excepting  a  few  who  escaped — the  bloodmen  or 
persecutors  were  not  to  be  slain,  but  to  be  taken 
alive.  The  prisoners  are  brought  to  trial,  with  all 
the  forms  and  solemnities  of  law ;  and  the  narra- 
tive concludes  with  a  most  admirable  charge  from 
Emmanuel  to  keep  Mansoul  in  a  state  of  the  most 
prayerful  vigilance.  Enemies  still  lurk  within,  to 
keep  her  humble ;  that  she  may  feel  her  depend- 
ence upon  God,  and  be  found  much  in  communion 
with  him.  •  Believe  that  my  love,'  says  Emman- 
uel, '  is  constant  to  thee.  Watch,  hold  fast,  till 
I  come.' 

In  the  whole  detail  of  this  war,  very  singular 
skill  is  manifested.  A  keen  observer  of  all  that 
passed  before  him,  aided  by  a  most  retentive  me- 
mory, and  a  fertile  imagination,  enabled  our  pil- 
grim forefather  to  gain  much  knowledge  in  a  short 
time.  He  had  been  engaged,  as  a  private  soldier, 
in  the  Civil  war ;  and  was  at  the  siege  of  Leices- 
ter, when  it  was  taken  by  Prince  Rupert.  This 
gave  him  a  knowledge  of  the  meauing  of  trumpet 
©r  bugle  sounds;  so  that,  when  the  trumpeters 
made  their  best  music,  in  the  expectation  of  Em- 
manuel's speedy  assistance  to  help  Mansoul,  Dia- 
bolus exclaims,  '  What  do  these  madmen  mean  ? 
they  neither  sound  to  boot  and  saddle,  nor  horse 
and  away,  nor  a  charge.' 

Bunyan  had  been  released  from  his  tedious  and 
cruel  imprisonment  for  conscience  sake  ahout  ten 
years,  when  he  published  the  'Holy  War.'  In 
this  interval  of  time,  although  labouring  inces- 
santly to  win  souls  to  Christ,  being  a  very  popular 
preacher,  yet  he  must  have  found  time  to  gratify 
his  incessant  thirst  for  knowledge ;  gaining  that 
he  might  communicate,  and  in  imparting  it,  re- 
ceiving into  his  own  mind  a  rich  increase.  This 
would  douhtless  lead  him  to  read  the  best  of 
our  Puritan  and  Nonconformists'  works,  so  that 
we  find  him  using  the  Latin  words  primum 
mobile,  carefully  noting  in  the  margin  that  he 
meant  'the  soul;'  and  from  hence  he  must  have 
scraped  acquaintance  with  Python,  Cerberus,  and 
the  furies  of  mythology,  whom  he  uses  in  this 
war,  describing  accurately  their  names  and  qua- 
lities. 

At  first  sight,  it  may  seem  strange  that  the 
armies,  both  within  and  without  the  city,  should 
be  so  numerous,  as  it  is  but  one  man  who  is  the 


object  of  attack  and  defence — one  human  body, 
containing  one  immortal  Mansoul ;  but  if  the  reader 
reflects  that  every  soldier  represents  a  thought, 
who  can  number  them  ?  At  one  time,  by  the 
sin-sickness,  eleven  thousand — men,  women,  and 
children — died  in  Mansoul !  this  is  interpreted  by 
Bunyan  to  mean,  that  the  men  represented  '  good 
thoughts' — the  women,  'good  conceptions' — and 
the  children,  'good  desires.'  The  town  is  assaulted 
by  thirty  or  forty  thousand  doubts,  very  curiously 
and  methodically  arranged. 

The  value  of  the  marginal  notes  is  very  great, 
throwing  immediate  light  upon  many  difficult  pas- 
sages. Every  reader  should  make  free  use  of  tho 
key  which  lieth  in  the  window.*  The  , 
value  of  this  key  is  seen  by  a  few 
quotations.  Thus,  when  Diabolus  beat,  a  charge 
against  the  town,  my  Lord  Reason  was  wounded 
in  the  head — the  brave  Lord  Mayor,  Mr.  Under- 
standing, in  the  eye — and  'many  also  of  the  inferior 
sort  were  not  only  wounded,  but  slain  outright.' 
The  margin  explains  this  as  meaning  '  Hopeful 
thoughts.'1  When  the  enemy  broke  into  the  town 
at  Feelgate,  during  a  night  of  terror,  and  got 
possession,  it  is  described  as  being  accompanied 
by  all  the  horrors  of  war — by  atrocities  probably 
even  greater  than  those  perpetrated  by  Rupert's 
cavaliers  at  Leicester.  '  Young  children  were 
dashed  in  pieces,  yea,  those  unborn  were  destroyed.' 
'  The  women  were  beastlike  abused.'  This  is 
interpreted  by  two  marginal  notes — '  Good  and 
tender  thoughts,'  'Holy  conceptions  of  good.' 

The  storming  of  Leicester  took  place  in  tho 
night,  and  furnished  Bunyan,  who  was  an  eye- 
witness, with  a  correct  notion  of  raising  the  stan- 
dard, beleaguring  the  city,  and  forcing  the  gates, 
and  a  lively  view  of  the  desolations  he  describes. 
Awful  as  is  his  account  of  the  sacking  of  Man- 
soul, with  its  murders  and  desolations,  yet  it  may 
prove  to  be  a  good  description  of  the  conduct  of 
Prince  Rupert  and  his  cavaliers  at  the  storming 
of  Leicester.  Strike  out  the  name  of  Diabolus, 
and  insert  Rupert,  and  put  Leicester  instead  of 
Mansoul,  and  the  account  of  the  brutal  conduct  of 
the  Royal  army  will  be  found  accurately  described. 
Lord  Clarendon,  who  wrote  to  gain  the  smiles  of 
royalty,  plainly  tells  us  that,  when  Prince  Rupert 
and  the  King  took  Leicester,  '  The  conquerors 
pursued  their  advantage  with  the  usual  license  of 
rapine  and  plunder,  and  miserably  sacked  the 
whole  town,  without  any  distinction  of  persons  and 
places.  Churches  and  hospitals,  as  well  as  other 
houses,  were  made  a  prey  to  the  enraged  and 
greedy  soldier,  to  the  exceeding  regret  of  the 
King.'  Clarendon  goes  on  to  account  for  the 
exceeding  regret  of  Charles :  it  Avas  because  many 


1  See  subsequent  page. 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY   THE   EDITOR, 


251 


of  liia  faithful  friends  bad  suffered,  in  the  confu- 
sion of  this  murderous  scene  of  rapine  and  plunder. 
In  the  '  Holy  War,'  Bunyan  has  not  heen,  nor 
can  ho  ever  be,  charged  with  copying  from  any 
author  who  preceded  him.  Erasmus,  Gouge,  and 
many  other  of  our  Reformers,  Puritans,  and  Non- 
conformists, commented  upon  the  Christian's  arm- 
our and  weapons.  Benjamin  Reach,  about  the 
time  that  the  '  Holy  War  '  appeared,  published  his 
War  with  the  Devil,  or,  The  Young  Mans  Conflict 
with  the  Powers  of  Darkness.  It  is  a  scries  of 
admirable  poetical  dialogues  on  the  corruption  and 
vanity  of  youth,  the  horrible  nature  of  sin,  and 
deplorable  condition  of  fallen  man  ;  with  the  rule 
of  conscience  and  of  true  conversion.  It  has  no- 
thing allegorical  in  it,  but  is  replete  with  practical 
warnings  and  exhortations.  No  one  had  ever  at- 
tempted, under  the  form  of  an  allegory,  to  describe 
the  internal  conflict  between  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness and  of  the  mind  in  the  renewed  man ;  the 
introduction  of  evil  thoughts  and  suggestions,  their 
unnatural  union  with  the  affections,  and  the  off- 
spring of  such  union,  under  the  name  of  Diabolo- 
nians,  who,  when  Mansoul  is  watchful  unto  prayer, 
lurk  in  the  walls ;  but  when  in  a  backsliding  state, 
are  tolerated  and  encouraged  openly  to  walk  the 
streets.  Some  have  supposed  that  there  is  a  slight 
similarity  between  the  description,  given  by  John 
Chrysostom  of  the  battle  between  the  hosts  of  hell 
and  mankind,  and  John  Bunyan 's  '  Holy  War.'  It 
is  not  at  all  probable  that  Bunyan  was  acquainted 
with  Chrysostom  on  the  Priesthood,  which  was  then 
locked  up  in  the  Greek  language,  but  has  been 
since  translated  into  English.  Nor  can  we  And  any 
similarity  between  the  work  of  the  pious  apostolically 
descended  tinker,  and  the  learned  Greek  father. 
Chrysostom 's  picture  of  the  battle  is  contained  in 
n  letter  to  Basil,  urging  him  to  become  a  minister 
of  the  gospel.  It  is  in  words  to  this  effect: — '  Pent 
up  in  this  body,  like  a  dungeon,  we  cannot  discern 
the  invisible  powers.  Could  you  behold  the  black 
army  of  the  devil  and  his  mad  conflict,  you  would 
witness  a  great  and  arduous  battle,  in  which  there 
is  no  brass  or  steel,1  no  horses  or  wheeled  chariots, 
no  fire  and  arrows,  but  other  instruments  much  more 
formidable.  No  breastplates,  or  shields,  or  swords, 
or  darts.  The  very  sight  of  this  accursed  host 
is  alone  sufficient  to  paralyze  a  soul  which  is  not 
imbued  with  courage  furnished  by  God,  and  with 
even  greater  foresight  than  valour.  Could  you 
calmly  survey  all  this  array  and  war,  you  would 
see,  not  torrents  of  blood  or  dead  bodies,  but  fallen 
60uls  !  You  would  see  wounds  so  grievous,  that 
human  war,  with  all  its  horrors,  is  mere  child's 
play  or  idle  pastime,  in  comparison  to  the  sight  of 


1  All  Diabolus's  army  are  by  Bunyan  clothed  in  iteel  armour. 
-(Ed.) 


so  many  souls  struck  down  every  day  by  Satan.' 
Thus  this  learned  Greek  lather  very  eloquently 
represents  the  great  battle  of  Satan  and  his  costs, 
against  all  mankind.     But  for  a  description  of  the 

internal  conflict,  Diabolus  and  his  army  of  doubters 
and  bloodmen  arrayed  against  the  powers  of  Man- 
soul,  Bunyan  stands  alone  and  most  beautifully 
resplendent. 

In  this  war  there  is  no  combination  of  souls  to 
resist  Satan,  nor  can  any  human  powers  in  any 
way  assist  us  in  the  trying  battle.  Here,  0  my 
reader,  you  and  1  must  stand  alone  far  from  the 
aid  of  our  fellow-men.  We  must  call  upon  all  the 
resources  of  our  minds,  and  while  there  is  unity 
within,  no  resisting  or  treason — while  the  Holy 
Spirit  strengthens  and  inclines  the  will,  the  under- 
standing-, the  conscience,  the  affections,  and  all  our 
powers  are  united  to  resist  Satan,  God  fights  for 
us,  and  the  heart  is  safe  under  the  gracious  smiles 
of  our  Emmanuel.  May  we  never  forget  that  our 
spiritual  life  is  totally  dependent  upon  him,  in 
whom,  as  to  the  body,  we  live,  and  move,  and  have 
our  being.  But  when  doubts  enfeeble  us,  and 
bloodmen  harass  us,  there  is  no  help  from  man. 
No  pope,  cardinal,  archbishop,  minister,  or  any 
human  power  can  aid  us  ;  all  our  hope  is  in  God 
alone ;  every  effort  for  deliverance  must  be  by  fer- 
vent prayer  and  supplication,  from  the  heart  and 
conscience,  directly  to  God.  Our  petitions  must 
be  framed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  presented  unto 
Shaddai,  not  by  priest  or  prelate,  but  by  our 
Emmanuel,  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  intercessor  and 
mediator. 

The  attentive  reader  of  Bunyan 's  works  will 
notice  the  difference  between  the  trial  of  Faithful 
in  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  and  that  of  the  pri- 
soners brought  to  the  bar  as  traitors  in  the  '  Holy 
War.'  The  judge  and  jury  are  particularly  over- 
bearing to  Faithful,  much  more  so  than  to  the 
Diabolonians.  Still  there  is  one  very  strong  fea- 
ture in  which  they  all  agree.  The  prisoners  are 
all  brought  to  their  trial,  not  that  their  guilt  or 
innocence  might  be  proved,  but  in  order  to  their 
condemnation  and  execution.  All  are  brought  up 
in  chains,  a  custom  which  then  was  very  prevalent, 
if  not  universal,  but  which  is  now  only  read  of  as 
a  cruel  practice  of  a  bygone  age. 

There  are  a  few  riddles  or  questions  arising  out 
of  this  narrative,  the  solving  of  which  may  afford 
instructive  amusement  to  the  reader.  What  is 
meant  by  the  drum  of  Diabolus,  which  so  terrified 
Mansoul  ?  Refer  to  Ga.  iii.  lO.  He.  vi.  4-3.  1  .'n.  v.  V,  H» 
xii.  23.  Why  Avere  the  troops  numbered  at  forty 
thousand,  that  came  up  to  alarm  and  convince 
Mansoul  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment, 
while  Emmanuel's  army  is  not  numbered  ?  See 
Job.  iv.  13.  He.  xii.  22.  When  the  doubters  are  slain  or 
driven  from  Mansoul,  after  her  conversion,  they  go 


252 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY   THE  EDITOR. 


straggling  up  and  down  the  country  enslaving  the 
barbarous  people  (the  margin  informs  us  that  the 
unbeliever  never  fights  the  doubters).  Why  do  they 
go  by  fives,  nines,  and  seventeens  ?  Do  these  odd 
numbers  refer  to  the  nine  companies  of  doubters, 
and  eight  of  bloodmen,  who  were  under  the  com- 
mand of  five  fallen  angels — Diabolus,  Beelzebub, 
Lucifer,  Legion,  and  Apollyon?  Fearful  odds 
against  a  poor  fallen  sinner,  five  evil  spirits,  or 
nine  classes  of  doubts,  or  these  nine  doubts  united 
to  eight  kinds  of  bloodmen  or  persecutors. 

In  a  work  so  highly  allegorical,  and  founded 
upon  a  plain  narrative  of  facts  in  the  experience 
of  the  author,  the  editor  deemed  it  needful  to  add 
numerous  notes.  These  contain  all  that  appeared 
to  be  explanatory  or  illustrative  in  other  commen- 
taries, with  many  that  are  original ;  obsolete  terms 
and  customs  are  explained  ;  references  are  given  to 
about  fifty  passages  in  the  '  Grace  Abounding,' 
that  the  reader's  attention  may  be  constantly 
directed  to  the  solemn  truths  which  are  displayed 
under  this  delightful  allegory.  The  editor  has 
the  consolation  of  hoping  that  the  result  of  great 
labour  can  do  no  injury.  Those  whose  deep  expe- 
rience in  the  spiritual  warfare  enables  them  to  un- 
derstand and  enjoy  the  allegory,  can  pass  them  by; 
while  many  of  the  poor  but  immortal  souls  engaged 
in  this  warfare,  who  are  not  deeply  experienced, 
may  receive  aid  and  encouragement  to  persevere, 
until  they  shall  exclaim,  The  battle  is  fought,  the 
victory  is  one,  eternal  praises  to  the  great  and 
gracious  Emmanuel. 

Reader,  I  must  not  detain  you  much  longer  from 
the  pleasure  of  entering  upon  a  narrative  so  deeply 
interesting  to  all  who  possess  the  understanding- 
heart — an  allegory,  believed  by  very  many  to  be 
the  most  beautiful  and  extraordinary  that  mere 
human  genius  ever  composed  in  any  language. 
0  consider  the  worth  of  an  immortal  soul !  God 
sent  his  servants,  Moses  and  the  prophets,  with 
their  slings  and  battering-rams,  their  great  and 
precious  promises  to  the  early  propliets,  who  have 
faithfully  handed  them  down  to  us  ;  and  then  came 
Emmanuel  and  his  heavenly  army,  and  all  this  to 
conquer  Mansoul !  Without  the  shedding  of  blood, 
there  is  no  remission  of  sin.  The  blood  of  bulls 
and  of  goats  cannot  wash  out  our  stains.  We  must 
be  found  in  Christ  as  part  of  his  mystical  body, 
and  thus  in  perfection  obey  the  Divine  law,  and 
then,  through  the  sin-atoning  offering  of  Emmanuel, 
God's  equal,  eternal  Son,  a  fountain  is  opened  for 
sin  and  uncleanness,  in  which  our  souls,  being  puri- 
fied, shall  be  clothed  with  the  garment  of  salvation. 
Who  can  calculate  the  worth  of  his  immortal  soul, 
that  God  himself  should  pay  60  costly  a  price  for 


its  redemption!  May  the  desire  of  every  reader 
be,  0  that  my  soul  may  be  engaged  in  this  holy 
war,  my  ears  be  alarmed  by  the  infernal  drum  of 
Diabolus,  that  my  Heart-castle  may  receive  the 
King  of  salvation,  and  Christ  be  found  there  the 
hope  of  glory.  Then  may  we  feel  the  stern  neces- 
sity of  incessant  watchfulness  and  prayer  against 
carnal  security,  or  any  other  cause  of  backsliding, 
with  its  consequent  miseries. 

Well  may  the  world  wonder,  how  a  poor  travel- 
ling tinker  could  gain  the  extraordinary  know- 
ledge, which  enabled  him  to  become  the  greatest 
allegorical  writer  that  the  world  ever  saw.  The 
reason  is  obvious,  he  lived  and  moved  and  had  his 
being  in  the  atmosphere  of  God's  revealed  will. 
It  was  this  that  enabled  him  to  take  the  wings 
of  the  morning,  and  fly  not  only  to  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  visible  but  of  the  invisible  world ;  to 
enjoy  scenes  of  light  and  glory,  such  as  Gabriel 
contemplated  when  he  came  from  heaven  to  Naz- 
areth, and  revealed  to  Mary  her  high  destiny — 
that  her  Son  should  be  the  promised  Saviour,  who 
should  bear  the  government  of  the  universe  upon 
his  shoulders — whose  name  was  Wonderful — Coun- 
sellor— the  Mighty  God — the  everlasting  Father — 
the  Prince  of  Peace — Emmanuel,  God  with  us. 

Bunyan's  industry  and  application  must  have 
been  intense,  he  could  not  by  possibility  for  a  single 
moment  say,  '  soul  take  thine  ease,'  inglorious,  de- 
structive ease.  His  hands  had  to  labour  for  his 
bread,  and  to  provide  for  a  most  exemplary  wife 
aud  four  childern,  one  of  them  blind.  There  was 
no  hour  of  his  life  when  he  could  have  said  to  his 
soul.  Let  all  thy  noble  powers  be  absorbed  in  eating, 
drinking,  being  merry — mere  animal  gratifications. 
The  Holy  War,  the  solemn  results  depending  upon 
it,  salvation  or  eternal  ruin,  the  strong  desire  to 
glorify  Emmanuel,  the  necessity  to  labour  for  his 
household — that  blessed  industry  left  him  no  op- 
portunity for  weaving  a  web  of  unmeaning  casuistic 
subtilties,  in  which  to  entangle  and  engulph  his 
soul,  like  a  Puseyite  or  a  German  Rationalist.  The 
thunders  and  lightnings  of  Sinai  had  burnt  up  all 
this  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,  and  with  child-like 
simplicity  he  depended  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  while 
drawing  all  his  consolations  and  all  his  spiritual 
supplies  from  the  sacred  Scriptures. 

Bunyan's  narrative  of  the  Holy  War,  from  its 
commencement  in  the  fall  of  man  to  that  splendid 
address  of  Emmanuel  with  which  it  concludes,  has 
been  the  study  of  the  Editor  for  more  than  forty 
years,  and  he  hopes  that  no  future  year  of  the 
residue  of  his  life  will  be  spent  without  reading 
this  solemn,  soul-stirring,  delightful  narrative. 

Hacknet,  April  1851.  GEO.    OfFOR. 


TO    THE    HEADER, 


"Tis  strange  tome,  (Lai  lihej  thai  love  to  tell 

Things  done  of  old,  yea,  and  that  do  excel 
Their  equals  in  historiology, 
Speak  not  of  Mansoul'a  wars,  but  lei  them  lie 
Dead,  like,  old  fables,  or  such  worthless  things, 
That  to  the  reader  no  advantage  brings: 
When  men,  let  them  make  what  they  will  their  own, 
Till  they  know  this,  are  to  themselves  unknown. 
Of  stories  I  well  know  there  's  divers  sorts, 
Some  foreign,  some  domestic ;  and  reports 
Are  thereof  made,  as  fancy  leads  the  writers ; 
By  books  a  man  may  guess  at  the  inditers. 

Some  will  again  of  that  which  never  was, 
Nor  will  be,  feign,  and  that  without  a  cause, 
Such  matter,  raise  such  mountains,  tell  such  things 
Of  men,  of  laws,  of  countries,  and  of  kings  : 
And  in  their  story  seem  to  be  so  sage, 
And  with  such  gravity  clothe  ev'ry  page, 
That  though  their  frontispiece  say  all  is  vain, 
Yet  to  their  way  disciples  they  obtain.1 
But,  readers,  I  have  somewhat  else  to  do, 

Than  with  vain  stories  thus  to  trouble  you ; 
Christians     What  here  I  say,  some  men  do  know  so  well, 
They  can  with  tears  and  joy  the  story  tell. 
The  town  of  Mansoul  is  well  known  to  many, 
Nor  are  her  troubles  doubted  of  by  any 
Scrimures.    ^na^  are  acquainted  with  those  histories 
That  Mansoul,  and  her  wars,  anatomize. 
Then  lend  thine  ear  to  what  I  do  relate 
Touching  the  town  of  Mansoul  and  her  state, 
How  she  was  lost,  took  captive,  made  a  slave ; 
And  how  against  him  set,  that  should  her  save. 
Yea,  how  by  hostile  ways,  she  did  oppose 
Her  Lord,  and  with  his  enemy  did  close. 
For  they  arc  true ;  he  that  will  them  deny 
Must  needs  the  best  of  records  vilify. 
Tor  my  part,  I  (myself)  was  in  the  town, 
Both  when  'twas  set  up,  and  when  pulling  down, 
I  saw  Diabolus  in  his  possession, 
And  Mansoul  also  under  Ins  oppression. 
Yea,  I  was  there  when  she  ownd  him  for  lord, 
And  to  him  did  submit  with  one  accord. 


1  Very  few  persons  can  imagine  what  trumpery  trash  was 
circulated  by  hawkers  and  chapmen  in  Banyan's  time,  and 
even  to  the  period  when  the  Tract  Society  was  established. 
Lying  wonders  and  lewd  stories  were  eagerly  read,  to  the  de- 
struction of  millions.  Thanks  to  the  piety  of  Sunday-school 
teachers,  their  supplications  were  heard,  and  our  youth,  when 
taught  to  read,  are  now  supplied  with  nutritious  literary  food, 
by  the  aid  of  that  iuvaluable  society. — (Ed.) 


When  Mansoul  trampled  upon  things  Divine, 
And  wallowed  in  tilth  as  doth  a  swine; 
When  she  betook  herself  unto  her  anus, 
Fought  her  Emmanuel,  despis'd  his  charms,        n;s , 
Then  I  was  there,  and  did  rejoice  to  see 
Diabolus  and  Mansoul  so  agree.2 

Let  no  men,  then,  count  me  a  fable-maker, 
Nor  make  my  name  or  credit  a  partaker 
Of  their  derision;  what  is  here  in  view, 
Of  mine  own  knowledge,  I  dare  say  is  true. 

I  saw  the  prince's  armed  men  come  down, 
By  troops,  by  thousands,  to  besiege  the  town. 
I  saw  the  captains,  heard  the  trumpets  sound, 
And  how  his  forces  covcr'd  all  the  ground. 
Yea,  how  they  set  themselves  in  battle-ray, 
I  shall  remember  to  my  dying  day. 

I  saw  the  colours  waving  in  the  wind, 
And  they  within  to  mischief  how  combin'd, 
To  ruin  Mansoul,  and  to  make  away 
Her  prinwm  mobile3  without  delay.  rter  Sot-i. 

I  saw  the  mounts  cast  up  against  the  town, 
And  how  the  slings  were  placed  to  beat  it  down. 
I  heard  the  stones  fly  whizzing  by  mine  ears, 
What  longer  kept  in  mind  than  got  in  fears, 
I  heard  them  fall,  and  saw  what  work  they  made. 
And  how  old  Mors  did  cover  with  his  shade     De;i;h- 
The  face  of  Mansoul ;  and  I  heard  her  cry, 
Woe  worth  the  day,  in  dying  I  shall  die  ! 

I  saw  the  battering  rams,  and  how  they  play'd,* 
To  beat  ope  Ear-gate,  and  I  was  afraid 
Not  only  Ear-gate,  but  the  very  town, 
Would  by  those  battering  rams  be  beaten  down. 

I  saw  the  fights,  and  heard  the  captains  shout, 
And  each  in  battle  saw  who  faced  about ; 

1  saw  who  wounded  were,  and  who  were  slain;    Lwu 
And  who,  when  dead,  would  come  to  life  again. 

I  heard  the  cries  of  those  that  wounded  were, 
While  others  fought  like  men  bereft  of  fear, 
And  while  the  cry,  Kill,  kill,  was  in  mine  ears, 
The  gutters  ran,  not  so  with  blood  as  tears. 

Indeed,  the  captains  did  not  always  fight, 
But  then  they  would  molest  us  day  and  night ; 

2  Bunyan,  in  his   Grace  Abounding,  No.  4,  thru  I 

that  awful  period  of  his  experience—'  It  was  my  delight  to  be 
taken  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will.'  In  IT"'-',  and  even  in 
Burder's  edition,  the  line  is  strangely  altered  to — 

'  Then  I  was  there,  and  grieved  for  to  sec.'— <Ed.) 

3  Terms  much  used  by  writers  in  Bunyan's  time,  meaning 
as  stated  in  the  margin,  'her  soul' — Eu. 

*  'The  battering  rams'  are  the  books  of  Holy  Scripture; 
see  margin,  p. 280— (En.) 


234 


TO  THE  READER. 


Their  cry,  Up,  fall  on,  let  us  take  the  town, 
Kept  us  from  sleeping,  or  from  lying  down. 

I  was  there  when  the  gates  were  broken  ope, 
And  saw  how  Mansoul  then  was  stript  of  hope.1 
I  saw  the  captains  march  into  the  town, 
How  there  they  fought,  and  did  their  foes  cut  down. 

I  heard  the  prince  bid  Boanerges  go 
Up  to  the  castle,  and  there  seize  his  foe, 
And  saw  him  and  his  fellows  bring  him  down 
In  chains  of  great  contempt  quite  through  the  town. 

I  saw  Emmanuel  when  he  possest 
His  town  of  Mansoul,  and  how  greatly  blest 
A  town,  his  gallant  town  of  Mansoid  was, 
When  she  received  his  pardon,  lived  his  laws ! 

When  the  Diabolonians  were  caught, 
When  tried,  and  when  to  execution  brought, 
Then  I  was  there ;  yea,  I  was  standing  by 
When  Mansoul  did  the  rebels  crucify. 

I  also  saw  Mansoul  clad  all  in  white, 
And  heard  her  prince  call  her  his  heart's  delight. 
I  saw  him  put  upon  her  chains  of  gold, 
And  rings,  and  bracelets,  goodly  to  behold. 

What  shall  I  say  ? — I  heard  the  people's  cries, 
And   saw  the   prince  wipe  tears  from  Mansoul's 

eyes. 
I  heard  the  groans,  and  saw  the  joy  of  many : 
Tell  you  of  all,  I  neither  will,  nor  can  I. 
But  by  what  here  I  say,  you  well  may  see 
That  Mansoul's  matchless  wars  no  fables  be. 

Mansoid !  the  desire  of  both  princes  was, 
One  keep  his  gain  would,  t'other  gain  his  loss ; 
Diabolus  would  cry,  The  town  is  mine ; 
Emmanuel  would  plead  a  right  Divine 
Unto  his  Mansoul ;  then  to  blows  they  go, 
And  Mansoul  cries,  These  wars  will  me  undo. 

Mansoul !  her  wars  seem'd  endless  in  her  eyes, 
She's  lost  by  one,  becomes  another's  prize. 
And  he  again  that  lost  her  last  would  swear, 
Have  her  I  will,  or  her  in  pieces  tear. 

Mansoul,  it  was  the  very  seat  of  war, 
Wherefore  her  troubles  greater  were  by  far, 
Than  only  where  the  noise  of  war  is  heard, 
Or  where  the  shaking  of  a  sword  is  fear'd, 
Or  only  where  small  skirmishes  are  fought, 
Or  where  the  fancy  fighteth  with  a  thought. 

1  '  I  felt  such  a  clogging  and  heat  at  my  stomach,  by  reason 
of  my  terrors,  that  I  was,  especially  at  some  times,  as  if  my 
breast-bone  would  split  asunder.' — {Grace  Abounding,  No.164.) 

2  The  death  of  the  body,  or  loss  of  a  limb,  is  as  nothing 
compared  with  the  eternal  loss  of  a  never-dying  soul. — (Ed.) 

3  This  line,  in  the  first  edition,  is  at  the  bottom  of  a  page. 
In  many  copies,  viz.,  in  that  of  1752,  printed  both  at  London 
and  at  Glasgow;  that  with  Mason's  notes,  1782;  and  that 
with  Adam's  notes,  1795,  &c,  this  line  is  omitted,  and  one 
inserted  to  make  up  the  rhyme — 

•  They  are  the  on.'y  men  that  have  science." 


She  saw  the  swords  of  fighting  men  made  red, 
And  heard  the  cries  of  those  with  them  wounded ; 
Must  not  her  frights  then  be  much  more  by  far, 
Than  theirs  that  to  such  doings  strangers  are  ? 
Or  theirs  that  hear  the  beating  of  a  drum, 
But  not  made  fly  for  fear  from  house  and  home  ? 

Mansoul  not  only  heard  the  trumpet  sound, 
But  saw  her  gallants  gasping  on  the  ground ; 
Wherefore,  we  must  not  think  that  she  could  rest 
With  them,  whose  greatest  earnest  is  but  jest : 
Or  where  the  blust'ring  threat'ning  of  great  wars 
Do  end  in  parleys,  or  in  wording  jars. 

Mansoul,  her  mighty  wars,  they  did  portend 
Her  weal  or  woe,  and  that  world  without  end ; 
Wherefore  she  must  be  more  concerned  than  they 
Whose  fears  begin  and  end  the  self-same  day : 
Or  where  none  other  harm  doth  come  to  him 
That  is  engaged,  but  loss  of  life  or  limb,2 
As  all  must  needs  confess  that  now  do  dwell 
In  Universe,  and  can  this  story  tell. 

Count  me  not  then  with  them  that  to  amaze 
The  people,  set  them  on  the  stars  to  gaze, 
Insinuating  with  much  confidence, 
That  each  of  them  is  now  the  residence 3 
Of  some  brave  creatures ;  yea,  a  world  they  will 
Have  in  each  star,  though  it  be  past  their  skill 
To  make  it  manifest  to  any  man, 
That  reason  hath,  or  tell  his  fingers  can.4 

But  I  have  too  long  held  thee  in  the  porch, 
And  kept  thee  from  the  sunshine  with  a  torch. 
Well,  now  go  forward,  step  within  the  door, 
And  there  behold  five  hundred  times  much  more 
Of  all  sorts  of  such  inward  rarities 
As  please  the  mind  will,  and  will  feed  the  eyes 
With  those,  which  if  a  Christian,  thou  wilt  see 
Not  small,  but  things  of  greatest  moment  be. 

Nor  do  thou  go  to  work  without  my  key 
(In  mysteries  men  soon  do  lose  their  way), 
And  also  turn  it  right  if  thou  wouldst  know 
My  riddle,  and  wouldst  with  my  heifer  plough. 
It  lies  there  in  the  window,  fare  thee 

well, 
My  next  may  be  to  ring  thy  passing-bell. 

Jo.  Bun  yah. 


The  mai-gent.  £ 


4  It  is  not  surprising  that  Bunyan  wondered  at  the  con- 
fidence with  which  these  speculations  were  published.  His 
knowledge  of  invisible  things  was  drawn  exclusively  from  the 
Bible,  which  is  silent  upon  the  subject  of  a  plurality  of  worlds. 
He  does  not  say  there  is  no  such  thing,  but  that  it  cannot  be 
demonstrated. —  (Ed.) 

5  Bunyan  intended  his  marginal  notes  as  a  key  to  the  text. 
How  strikingly  does  this  illustrate  the  first  page  of  his  '  Pil- 
grim'— '  I  lighted  on  a  certain  place  where  was  a  den ;'  the 
margin  is  a  key  to  show  that  it  was  written  in  '  the  jail.'  So, 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  '  Holy  War,'  the  Diabolonians  dashed 
young  children  in  pieces ;  the  margin  explains  this  to  meauj 
'  good  and  tender  thoughts.' — (Ed.) 


A    RELATION 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


[ClIArTER    I.] 

[Contents: — The  original  beauty  and  splendour  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  while  under  the  dominion  of  Shaddai — Its  nohle 
castle  descrihed — Its  five  pates — The  perfection  of  its  in- 
habitants— The  origin  of  Diabolus— His  pride  and  fall- 
Revenge  meditated — A  council  of  war  held  to  deliberate 
on  the  best  means  of  seducing  the  town  of  Mansoul — 
Diabolus  marches  to  the  town,  and  sits  down  before  Eye- 
gate — His  oration — Captain  Resistance  slain — My  Lord 
Innocence  killed — The  town  taken.] 

In  my  travels,  as  I  walked  through  many  regions 
and  countries,  it  was  my  chance  to  happen  into 
that  famous  continent  of  Universe;  a  very  large 
and  spacious  couutry  it  is.  It  lieth  between  the 
two  poles,  and  just  amidst  the  four  points  of  the 
heavens.  It  is  a  place  well-watered,  and  richly 
adorned  with  hills  and  valleys,  bravely  situate  ; 
and  for  the  most  part  (at  least  where  I  was)  very 
fruitful,  also  well  peopled,  and  a  very  sweet  air. 

The  people  are  not  all  of  one  complexion,  nor 
yet  of  one  language,  mode,  or  way  of  religion  ;  but 
differ  as  much  as,  it  is  said,  do  the  planets  them- 
selves. Some  are  right,  and  some  are  wrong, 
even  as  it  happencth  to  be  in  lesser  regions. 

In   this   country,   as   I  said,  it  was  my  lot  to 

travel,  and  there  travel  I  did  ;  and  that  so  long, 

even  till  I  learned  much  of  their  mother-tongue, 

together  with  the  customs  and  manners  of  them 

anions  whom  I  was.     And  to  speak 

A  natural  state  °  .  ..  x 

pleasing  to  the   truth,   1  was  much  delighted  tc  see 

and  hear  many  things  which  I  saw 

and  heard  among  them.     Yea,  I  had  (to  be  sure) 

even  lived  and  died  a  native  among  them,  so  was 

I  taken  with  them  and  their  doings,  had  nut  my 

Master  sent  for  me  home  to  his  house, 

there  to  do  business  for  him,  and  to 

over-see  business  done.1 

Now  there  is  in  this  gallant  country  of  Universe 
a    fair   and    delicate   town,    a   corporation,    called 


1  With  what  Christian  simplicity  is  this  most  important 
history  introduced.  The  author,  a  traveller  in  the  world,  de- 
lighted with  its  customs,  would  have  perished  in  his  sins,  but 
that  God  called  him  to  his  service  and  salvation. — (I'.D.) 

2  Mansoul,  or,  as  the  margin  reads,  man,  so  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made,  was  glorious  in  his  original  sinless  state, 
but  will  be  infinitely  more  glorious  if  saved  to  eternal  bliss, 
by  uniou  with  Christ. — (En.) 


The  Almighty. 


Mansoul.     A  town  for  its  building  so  curious,  for 
its   situation  so   commodious,  for   its 

...  ,  T  Man. 

privileges   so   advantageous — 1   mean 

with  reference  to  its  original — that  I  may  say  of 

it,  as  was  said  before  of  the  continent  in  which  it 

is  placed,  There  is  not  its  equal  under  the  whole 

heaven. 

As  to  the  situation  of  this  town,  it  lieth  just 

between   the   two  worlds,  and   the    first   founder, 

and  builder  of  it,   so  far  as  by  the 

,  .  .  .  '   ,       T       Scriptures. 

best    and    most   authentic    records    1 

can  gather,  was  one  Shaddai ;  and  he  built  it  for 

his   own   delight.3     He  made   it  the 

mirror  and  glory  of  all  that  he  made, 

even  the  top-piece,  beyond  anything  else  that  he 

did  in  that  country.    Ge.  i.  26.     Yea,  so   goodly  a 

town  was  Mansoul,  when  first  built,  that,  it  is  said 

by  some,  the  gods,  at  the  setting  up 

,J  '  f  .  i  Created  angels. 

thereof,  came  down  to  see  it,  and  sang 
for  joy.  And  as  he  made  it  goodly  to  beheld,  so 
also  mighty  to  have  dominion  over  all  the  country 
round  about.  Yea,  all  was  commanded  to  ac- 
knowledge Mansoul  for  their  metropolitan,  all  was 
enjoined  to  do  homage  to  it.  Ave,  the  town  itself 
had  positive  commission  and  power  from  her  King 
to  demand  service  of  all,  and  also  to  subdue  any 
that  any  ways  denied  to  do  it. 

There  was  reared  up  in  the  midst  of  this  town 

a    most    famous   and    stately  palace. 

.    ,       i  it    i  Th°  heart. 

tor   strength,   it   might   be   called   a 

castle  ;  for  pleasantness,  a  paradise  ;  for  largeness, 

a  place  so  copious  as  to  contain   all   the  world. 

Ec.  iii.  li.      This  palace  the  King  Shaddai  intended 

but  for  himself  alone,  and  not  another  with  him;* 

partly  because   of  his   own   delights,   and  partly 

because  he  would  not  that  the  terror  of  strangers 

should  be  upon  the  town.     This  place    xi,epo«crso/ 

Shaddai  made  also  a  garrison  of,  but        tl,e  souh 


3  The  name  *i»,  Shaddai,  one  of  the  names  of  God,  mi  ana 
'the  pourcr  forth,'  the  source  of  existence,  the  all-bountiful, 

the  all-mid. iv,  in  whom  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our 
being.  If  be  withhold  his  blessings,  the  universe  must 
perish.  '  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  should*  be  mindful  of 
him?'— (Ed.)  .,  .     .. 

*  Professor,  if  thy  heart  be  idolatrous,  or  devoted  to  the 
world  and  thy  lusts,' thy  religion  is  vain,  thou  deceive,!  thine 
own  soul.  God  says  to  all,  '  My  «a,  give  me  thme  heart. 
Pr.  xiiii.  26.— (Mason.) 


256 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


committed  the  keeping  of  it  only  to  the  men  of 
the  town. 

The  wall  of  the  town  was  well  built,  yea,  so  fast 

and  firm  was  it  knit  and  compact  together,  that 

had  it  not  been  for  the  townsmen  themselves,  they 

could  not  have  been  shaken  or  broken  for  ever. 

For  here  lay  the  excellent  wisdom  of  him  that 

built  Mansoul,  that  the  walls  could 

°  y'     never  be  broken  down,  nor  hurt,  by 

the  most  mighty   adverse  potentate,   unless  the 

townsmen  gave  consent  thereto. 

This  famous  town  of  Mansoul  had  five  gates  in 
at  which  to  come,  out  at  which  to  go,  and  these 
were  made  likewise  answerable  to  the  walls,  to 
wit,   impregnable,   and   such   as  could  never  be 
opened  nor  forced    but  by  the  will  and  leave  of 
those   within.      The   names   of   the   gates   were 
these,  Ear-gate,  Eye-gate,   Mouth- 
gate,  Nose-gate,  and  Feel-gate.1 
Other  things  there  were  that  belonged  to  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  which,  if  you  adjoin  to  these, 
will  yet  give  further  demonstration  to  all  of  the 
The  state  of    Sloi7  and  strength  of  the  place.   _  It 
Mansoul  at     had  always  a  sufficiency  of  provision 
within  its  walls  ;  it  had  the  best,  most 
wholesome,  and  excellent  law  that  then  was  extant 
in  the  world.     There  was  not  a  rascal,  rogue,  or 
traitorous  person  then  within  its  walls.     They  were 
all  true  men,  and  fast  joined  together  ;  and  this, 
you  know,  is  a  great  matter.     And  to  all  these, 
it  was  always — so  long  as  it  had  the  goodness  to 
keep  true  to  Shaddai  the  king — his  countenance, 
his  protection,  and  it  was  his  delight,  <fcc. 

Well,  upon  a  time  there  was  one 

The  Devil.      _..   ,    .       „*  .    ,  .  , 

Diabolus,''  a  mighty  giant,  made  an 
assault  upon  this  famous  town  of  Mansoul,  to  take 
it,  and  make  it  his  own  habitation.     This  giant 
Sinners,    the     TVas  khig  of  the  blacks  or  negroes,3 
fallen  angels.     an(j   a  most   raving   prince  he  was. 
We  will,  if  you  please,  first  discourse  of  the  origi- 
nal of  this  Diabolus,  and  then  of  his 
Dkboius.  °    taking  of  this  famous  town  of  Man- 
soul. 
This  Diabolus  is  indeed  a  great  and  mighty 
prince,  and  yet  both  poor  and  beggarly.     As  to 
his  original,  he  was  at  first  one  of  the  servants 
of  King  Shaddai,  made,  and  taken,  and  put  by 
him  into  most  high  and  mighty  place,  yea,  was 
put  into  such   principalities  as  belonged  to  the 


1  The  five  senses  (see  the  margin)  are  the  gates  to  Mansoul. 
While  they  were  guarded,  no  enemy  could  injure  the  town; 
now  they  require  a  double  watch. — (En.) 

2  £ua(io\os  (Diabolus)  is  frequently  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. It  is  translated  *  a  slanderer,'  *  au  accuser,'  and  '  ad- 
versary ;'  and,  in  Mat.  iv.  I ;  Re.  xii.  9 ;  xx  2,  '  The  prince  of 
devils.'     It  is  the  same  as  yav  (Satan),  in  Hebrew. — (Ed.) 

3  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  this  is  a  reflection  upon  the 
unhappy  sons  of  Africa  who  had  been  sold  into  slavery.  The 
margin  is  the  key  to  the  meaning  of  the  words ;  '  blacks  or 


be3t  of  his  territories  and  dominions.  This  Dia- 
bolus was  made  son  of  the  morning,  and  a  brave 
place  he  had  of  it.  is.  xiv.  12.  It  brought  him  much 
glory,  and  gave  him  much  brightness,  an  income 
that  might  have  contented  his  Luciferian  heart,  had 
it  not  been  insatiable,  and  enlarged  as  hell  itself. 

Well,  he  seeing  himself  thus  exalted  to  great- 
ness and  honour,  and  raging  in  his  mind  for  higher 
state  and  degree,  what  doth  he  but  begins  to 
think  with  himself  how  he  might  be  set  up  as 
Lord  over  all,  and  have  the  sole  power  under 
Shaddai!  Now  that  did  the  King  reserve  for  his 
Son,  yea,  and  had  already  bestowed  it  upon  him. 
Wherefore  he  first  consults  with  himself  what  had 
best  to  be  done,  and  then  breaks  his  mind  to  some 
other  of  his  companions,  to  the  which  they  also 
agreed.  So,  in  fine,  they  came  to  this  issue,  that 
they  should  make  an  attempt  upon  the  King's  Son 
to  destroy  him,  that  the  inheritance  might  be 
theirs.  Well,  to  be  short,  the  treason,  as  I  said, 
was  concluded,  the  time  appointed,  the  word  given, 
the  rebels  rendezvoused,  and  the  assault  attempted.4 
Now  the  King  and  his  Son  being  all  and  always 
eye,  could  not  but  discern  all  passages  in  his  do- 
minions ;  and  he  having  always  love  for  his  Son  as 
for  himself,  could  not,  at  what  he  saw,  but  be 
greatly  provoked  and  offended;  wherefore,  what 
does  he,  but  takes  them  in  the  very  nick ;  and,  first 
trip  that  they  made  towards  their  design,  convicts 
them  of  the  treason,  horrid  rebellion,  and  conspir- 
acy that  they  had  devised,  and  now  attempted  to 
put  into  practice ;  and  casts  them  altogether  out 
of  all  place  of  trust,  benefit,  honour,  and  prefer- 
ment. This  done,  he  banishes  them  the  court; 
turns  them  down  into  the  horrible  pits,  as  fast 
bound  in  chains,  never  more  to  expect  the  least 
favour  from  his  hands,  but  to  abide  the  judgment 
that  he  had  appointed,  and  that  for  ever.  2Pe.iL  i; 

Jude  6. 

And  yet,  now,  they  being  thus  cast  out  of  all 
place  of  trust,  profit,  and  honour,  and  also  know- 
ing that  they  had  lost  their  prince's  favour  for 
ever,  being  banished  his  courts,  and  cast  down  to 
the  horrible  pits,  you  may  be  sure  they  would  now 
add  to  their  former  pride  what  malice  and  rage, 
against  Shaddai,  and  against  his  Son,  they  could. 


negroes '  mean  *  sinners,  the  fallen  angels.'  Negro  slaves  were 
believed  to  be  convicted  criminals  sold  to  the  whites  for  trans- 
portation. English  convicts  were,  at  that  time,  sold  as  slaves 
to  the  planters  in  the  West  Indies.  A  man,  for  merely  being 
a  Quaker,  was  thus  sold  as  a  slave  in  New  England.  The 
horrors  that  were  disclosed  in  this  diabolical  traffic  stamps  a 
demon  character  upon  every  slave-dealer  or  holder.  The  prin- 
cipal of  these  are  negroes,  who  steal  their  fellows ;  aud,  like 
black  devils,  sell  them  to  the  white  devils,  who  hold  these  poor 
creatures  in  slavery. — (Ed.) 

4  '  And  there  was  war  in  heaven :  Michael  and  his  angels 
fought  against  the  dragon ,  and  the  dragon  fought,  and  his 
angels,  and  prevailed  not ;  neither  was  their  place  found  any 
more  in  heaven.'  Re.  xii.  7,  8. 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


Wherefore,  roving  and  ranging  in  much  fury  from 
place  to  place,  if  perbapB  they  might  find  some- 
thing that  was  the  King's,  to  revenge  (by  spoiling 
of  that  themselves)  on  hire,  1  iv.  r.  t;  at  last  they 
happened  into  tins  spacious  country  of  UniTdrse, 
and  steer  their  course  towanls  the  town  of  Man- 
soul:  and  considering  that  that  town  was  one  ol 
the  chief  works  and  delights  of  King  Shaddai, 
what  i\o  they,  but,  after  counsel  taken,  make  an 
assault  upon  thai !  I  say  they  knew  that  Mansoul 
belonged  unto  Shaddai,  for  they  were  there  when 
he  built  it,  and  beautified  it  for  himself.1  So 
when  they  had  found  the  place,  they  shouted  hor- 
ribly for  joy,  and  roared  on  it  as  a  lion  upon  the 
prey,  saying,  Now  we  have  found  the  prize,  and 
how  to  he  revenged  on  King  Shaddai 

A  councilor  war    r  ,     ,    »        ,       ,      «  ., 

Diabo.    h>r   what   he   hath   done   to   us.     So 


Mainst    thev  sat  down,  ftna'  called  a  council 


held 

lus  and  In*  t 
lows,    agaii 

the    to«n   of   0f   War,    and  considered  with    them 

Mansoul. 

selves  what  ways  and  methods  they 
had  best  to  engage  in,  for  the  winning  to  them- 
selves this  famous  town  of  Mansoul ;  and  these  four 
things  were  then  propounded  to  be  considered 
of.  First.  Whether  they  had  best,  all  of  them,  to 
show  themselves  in  this  design  to  the 
town  of  Mansoul.  Second.  Whether 
they  had  best  to  go  and  sit  down  against  Mansoul, 
in  their  now  ragged  and  beggarly  guise.  Third. 
Whether  they  had  best  to  show  to  Mansoul  their 
intentions,  and  what  design  they  came  about,  or 
whether  to  assault  it  with  words  and  ways  of 
deceit.  Fourth.  Whether  they  had  not  best,  to 
some  of  their  companions,  to  give  out  private 
orders  to  take  the  advantage,  if  they  see  one  or 
more  of  the  principal  townsmen,  to  shoot  them  ;  if 
thereby  thev  shall  judge  their  cause  and  design 
will  the  better  be  promoted. 

First.  It  was  answered  to  the  first  of  these  pro- 
To  the  first  pro-   posals  in  the  negative,  to  wit,  that  it 
posaL  would  not  be  best  that  all  should  show 

themselves  before  the  town,  because  the  appearance 
of  many  of  them  might  alarm  and  fright  the  town  ; 
whereas  a  few,  or  but  one  of  them,  was  not  so 
likely  to  do  it.  And  to  enforce  this  advice  to  take 
place,  it  was  added  further,  that  if  Mansoul  was 
frighted,  or  did  take  the  alarm,  it  is  impossible, 
said  Diabolus — for  he  spake  now — that  we  should 
take  the  town  ;  for  that  none  can  enter  into  it  with- 


1  Mr.  Burder  supposes  that  the  fall  of  the  BDgelfl  took  place 
after  the  creation  of  man,  because  Job  says  that  at  the  laying 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  "the  morning  .-tar>  sang  I 
and  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy'  (xx.wiii.  7).      Bui  angels 
in  a  fallen  Btate  had  forfeited  their  high  and  exalted  titles  and 

glory.— (Ed.) 

';  This  agrees  with  Milton  as  to  the  perfect  freedom  of  the 

will  before' the  fall  :— 

not  immutable; 

Hi  iii r  it  in  ;i,_\  power;  ordained  tli_\  uiil 
By  nature  free.-—  [Portidue  Luit,  li.  r.) 


out  its  own  consent.2  Let  therefore  but  few  or 
but  one  assault  Mansoul,  and  in  mine  opinion,  s:iid 
Diabolus,  let  me  be  he.  Wherefore  to  this  they 
all  agreed,  and  then  to  the  second  proposal  they 
came,  namely, 

Second.  Whether  they  had  best  to  go  and  sit 
down  before  .Mansoul  in  their  now  The  second  pro. 
nagged  and  beggarly  guise.  To  which  i'"s:'' 
it  was  answered  also  in  the  negative,  l'>y  no  means; 
and  that  because  though  the  town  of  Mansoul  had 
been  made  to  know  and  to  have  to  do,  before  now, 
with  things  that  are  invisible,  they  did  never  as 
yet  see  any  of  their  fellow-creatures  in  so  sad  and 
rascal  condition  as  they.  And  this  was  the  advico 
of  that  tierce  Alecto.3  Then  said 
Apullyon,  the  advice  is  pertinent, 
for  even  one  of  us  appearing  to  them  as  we  aro 
now,  must  needs  both  beget  and  multiply  such 
thoughts  in  them  as  will  both  put  them  into  a 
consternation  of  spirit,  and  necessitate  them  to  put 
themselves  upon  their  guard.  And  if  so,  said  he, 
then,  as  my  lord  Alecto3  said  but  now,  it  is  in  vain 
for  us  to  think  of  taking  the  town.  Then  said 
that  mighty  giant  Beelzebub,  the  advice 

.  i         i    T       .  .  *       •      j  i         Beelzebub. 

that  already  is  given  is  sate  ;  tor  though 
the  men  of  Mansoul  have  seen  such  things  as  we 
once  were,  yet  hitherto  they  did  never  behold  such 
things  as  we  now  are.  And  it  is  best,  in  mine 
opinion,  to  come  upon  them  in  such  a  guise  as  is 
common  to,  and  most  familiar  among  them.4  To 
this,  when  they  had  consented,  the  next  thing  to  be 
considered  was,  in  what  shape,  hue,  or  guise,  Dia- 
bolus had  best  to  show  himself,  when  he  went 
about  to  make  Mansoul  his  own.  Then  one  said 
one  thing,  and  another  the  contrary  ;  at  last  Lucifer 
answered,  that  in  his  opinion  it  was 
best  that  his  lordship  should  assume 
the  body  of  some  of  those  creatures  that  they  of 
the  town  had  dominion  over.  For,  quoth  he,  these 
are  not  only  familiar  to  them,  but  being  under  them, 
they  will  never  imagine  that  an  attempt  should  by 
them  be  made  upon  the  town  ;  and,  to  blind  all, 
let  him  assume  the  body  of  one  of  these  beasts 
that  Mansoul  deems  to  be  wiser  than  any  of  the 
rest.  Ge.  iii.  1.  Re.  xx.  i,  2.  This  advice  was  applaud- 
ed of  all  ;  so  it  was  determined  that  the  giant 
Diabolus  should  assume  the  dragon,  for  that  he 
was  in  those  days  as  familiar  with  the  town  of 
Mansoul  as  now  is    the  bird  with  the  boy.      For 

3  It  is  cxident  that  Bunyan  thought  thai  a  fury,whi  - 
hair  was  a  living  snake,  ought  rather  to  be 

as  generally  pictured;  but, query,  was  it  in  tb< 
manuscript  Diabolus,  mistaken  by  the  printer  I 
had  given  this  advice.     Some  editors  navi  alt  red  I 
but  as  it  is  Alecto  in  all  Banyan's  own  editions,  it  is  here 
continued. —  (Ed.)  . 

*  If  devils  cordially  unite  in  the  work  o(  i 
oughl  Christians  to  unite  in  their  efforts  to  promote 1 
dom  of  Christ.    We  should  be '  wisi  as  serpent*,  while   harm- 
li  --  as  doves.' — (Eo.) 

oo 


258 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


nothing  that  was  in  its  primitive  state  was  at  all 
amazing  to  them.1  Then  they  proceeded  to  the 
third  thing-,  which  was, 

Third.  Whether  they  had  hest  to  show  their  in- 
The  third  pro-  tentions  or  the  design  of  his  coming 
posal.  ^0  Mansoul,   or   no.       This   also    was 

answered  in  the  negative,  hecause  of  the  weight 
that  was  in  the  former  reasons,  to  wit,  for  that 
Mansoul  were  a  strong  people,  a  strong  people 
in  a  strong  town,  whose  wall  and  gates  were  im- 
pregnable, to  say  nothing  of  their  castle,  nor  can 
they  by  any  means  he  won  hut  by  their  own  con- 
sent. Besides,  said  Legion2  (for  he  gave  answer 
to  this),  a  discovery  of  our  intentions  may  make 
them  send  to  their  King  for  aid,  and  if  that  be 
done,  I  know  quickly  what  time  of  day  it  will  be 
with  us.  Therefore  let  us  assault  them  in  all  pre- 
tended fairness,  covering  of  our  intentions  with  all 
manner  of  lies,  flatteries,  delusive  words  ;  feigning 
of  things  that  never  will  be,  and  promising  of  that 
to  them  that  they  shall  never  find.  This  is  the 
•way  to  win  Mansoul,  and  to  make  them,  of  them- 
selves, to  open  their  gates  to  us  ;  yea,  and  to  desire 
us  too,  to  come  in  to  them. 

And  the  reason  why  I  think  that  this  project 
will  do  is,  because  the  people  of  Mansoul  now 
are  every  one  simple  and  innocent  ;  all  honest  and 
true  ;  nor  do  they  as  yet  know  what  it  is  to  be 
assaulted  with  fraud,  guile,  and  hypocrisy.  They 
are  strangers  to  lying  and  dissembling 
lips  ;  wherefore  we  cannot,  if  thus  we 
be  disguised,  by  them  at  all  be  discerned ;  our  lies 
shall  go  for  true  sayings,  and  our  dissimulations 
for  upright  dealings.  What  we  promise  them, 
they  will  in  that  believe  us,  especially  if  in  all 
our  lies  and  feigned  words  we  pretend  great  love 
to  them,  and  that  our  design  is  only  their  advan- 
tage and  honour.  Now  there  was  not  one  bit  of 
a  reply  against  this ;  this  went  as  current  down  as 
doth  the  water  clown  a  steep  descent ;  wherefore 
they  go  to  consider  of  the  last  proposal,  which  was, 

Fourth.  Whether  they  had  not  best  to  give  out 
The  fourth  pro-  orders  to  some  of  their  company,  to 
posal.  shoot  some  one  or  more  of  the  prin- 

cipal of  the  townsmen,  if  they  judge  that  their 
cause  may  be  promoted  thereby. 

This  was  carried  in  the  affirmative,  and  the  man 


fO~ 


1  In  this  infernal  conference  the  names  are  well  chosen. 
Apollyon  signifies  the  Destroyer;  Beelzebub,  the  Prince  of 
Devils ;  Lucifer,  the  Morning  Star,  a  fallen  angel,  the  arch- 
devil  ;  Alecto,  a  heathen  name  of  one  of  the  furies,  whose  head 
was  covered  with  snakes,  and  who  was  full  of  vengeance; 
Tisiphone,  another  of  the  furies. — (Burder.) 

2  'Legion;'  a  military  term.  Among  the  Romans,  five 
thousand  men.     An  indefinite  number.  Mar.  v.  9. — (Mason.) 

8  Resistance  to  the  first  sin  is  of  the  utmost  importance: — 
'  Sin  will  at  first,  ju9t  like  a  beggar,  crave 
One  penny  or  one  halfpenny  to  have ; 
Ami,  it'  you  grant  its  first  suit,  't  will  aspire 
1'iuiii  pence  to  pounds,  and  so  will  stdl  mount  higher 
To  the  whole  soul.' — (Bunyan's  Caution,  vol.  ii.  p.  575.) 


that  was  designed  by  this  stratagem  to  be  de- 
stroyed was  one  Mr.  Resistance,  otherwise  called 
Captain  Resistance.    And  a  creat  man    „„„      „    . 

•       »t  i      i  •       /-<  •       i?     •  Of  Capt.  Resist- 

m    Mansoul   this   Captain   Resistance        am.-, 
was;  and  a  man  that  the  giant  Diabolus  "^ 

and  his  band  more  feared  than  they  feared  the  whole 
town  of  Mansoul  besides.3  Now  who  should  be 
the  actor  to  do  the  murder,  that  was  the  next, 
and-  they  appointed  one  Tisiphone,  a  fury  of  the 
lake,  to  do  it. 

They  thus  having  ended  their  council  of  Avar, 
rose  up,  and  essayed  to  do  as  they  The  result  of 
had  determined.  They  marched  to-  their  council, 
wards  Mansoul,  but  all  in  a  manner  invisible, 
save  one,  only  one  ;  nor  did  he  approach  the  town 
in  his  own  likeness,  but  under  the  shape  and  in 
the  body  of  the  dragon.4 

So  they  drew  up,  and  sat  down  before  Ear-gate, 
for  that  was  the  place  of  hearing  for  all  without 
the  town,  as  Eye-gate  was  the  place  of  perspection. 
So,  as  I  said,  he  came  up  with  his  Diabolus  march- 
train  to  the  gate,  and  laid  his  ambus-  towuf  and  calls 
cado  for  Captain  Resistance  within  for  audience, 
bow-shot  of  the  town.  This  done,  the  giant 
ascended  up  close  to  the  gate,  and  called  to  the  town 
of  Mansoul  for  audience.  Nor  took  he  any  with 
him,  but  one  All-pause,5  who  was  his  orator  in  all 
difficult  matters.  Now,  as  I  said,  he  being  come 
up  to  the  gate,  as  the  manner  of  those  times  was, 
sounded  his  trumpet  for  audience.  At  which  the 
chief  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  such  as  „.  T  , 
my  Lord  Innocent,  my  Lord  Will-be-  Mansoul  ap- 
will,6  my  Lord  Mayor,  Mr.  Recorder,7  pea" 
and  Captain  Resistance  came  down  to  the  wall  to 
see  who  was  there,  and  what  was  the  matter. 
And  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  when  he  had  looked  over 
and  saw  who  stood  at  the  gate,  demanded  what 
he  was,  wherefore  he  was  come,  and  why  he  roused 
the  town  of  Mansoul  with  so  unusual  a  sound. 

Diab.  Diabolus  then,  as  if  he  had  been  a  lamb, 
began  his  oration,  and  said ;  Gentle-  DiabnWs 
men  of  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul,  oration. 
I  am,  as  you  may  perceive,  no  far  dweller  from 
you,  but  near,  and  one  that  is  bound  by  the  King 
to  do  you  my  homage,  and  what  service  I  can  ; 
wherefore,  that  I  may  be  faithful  to  myself,  and  to 
you,  I  have  somewhat  of  concern  to  impart  unto 
you.  Wherefore  grant  me  your  audience,  and 
hear  me  patiently.     And,  first,  I  will  assure  you, 


4  '  The  dragon ;'  a  scriptural  name  of  the  devil ;  see  Re.  sii. 
xiii. — (Ed.) 

5  In  the  early  editions  this  dangerous  enemy  is  called  All- 
pause  when  first  introduced,  but  always  afterwards  Ill-pause. 
-(Ed.) 

6  The  will  by  which  we  determine  for  or  against  an  action. 

7  The  Recorder  is  conscience,  by  which  we  judge  of  an  action 
as  good  or  bad,  according  to  the  light  we  enjoy,  whether  by 
the  law  of  nature  or  by  the  written  law.  Conscience  records 
our  actions ;  cad,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  the  book  of  con- 
science is  one  of  those  which  shall  be  opened. — (Burder.) 


THE   HOLY   AVAR. 


259 


it  is  not  myself,  but  you;  not  mine,  but  your  ad- 
vantage that  I  seek,  by  what  I  now  do,  as  will  full 
well  be  made  manifest  by  that  I  bave  opened  my 
mind  unto  you.  For,  gentlemen,  1  am,  to  tell  v"u 
tbe  truth,  come  to  Bhow  you  liow  you  may  obtain 
great  and  ample  deliverance  from  a  bondage  that, 
unawares  to  yourselves,  you  are  captivated  and 
enslaved  under.  At  tins  the  town  of  Mansoul 
Hanson]  began  to  prick  up  its  ears,  and  what 
engaged.  js  jt(  prfty>  wuat  j3  ;t>  thought  tbey; 
and  be  said,  I  bave  Bomewhat  to  say  to  you  con- 
cerning  your  King,  concerning  bis  law,  and  also 
touching  yourselves.  Touching  your  King,  I  know 
he  is  great  and  potent,  but  yet  all  that  be  bath 
said  to  you  is  neither  true,  nor  yet  for  your  advan- 
tage. 1.  It  is  not  true,  for  that  wherewith  be 
hath  hitherto  awed  you  shall  not  come  to  pass, 
nor  be  fulfilled,  though  you  do  the  thing  that  he 
hath  forbidden.  But  if  there  was  danger,  what  a 
slavery  is  it  to  live  always  in  fear  of  the  greatest 
of  punishments,  for  doing  so  small  and  trivial  a 
tfiing  as  eating  of  a  little  fruit  is?  2.  Touching 
_. .  ,   ,      .     his  laws,  this  I  say  further,  they  are 

Pmliolus  s  sub-  *  ,        .  •>      , 

tiety  made  up  both  unreasonable,  intricate,  and  in- 
tolerable. Unreasonable,  as  was  hinted 
before,  for  that  the  punishment  is  not  proportioned 
to  the  offence.  There  is  great  difference  and  dis- 
proportion betwixt  the  life  and  an  apple ;  yet  the 
one  must  go  for  the  other,  by  the  law  of  your 
Shaddai.  But  it  is  also  intricate,  in  that  he  saith, 
first,  you  may  eat  of  all ;  and  yet  after,  forbids 
the  eating  of  one.  And  then,  in  the  last  place,  it 
must  needs  be  intolerable,  forasmuch  as  that  fruit 
which  you  are  forbidden  to  eat  of,  if  you  are  for- 
bidden any,  is  that,  and  that  alone,  which  is  able, 
by  your  eating,  to  minister  to  you  a  good  as  yet 
unknown  by  you.  This  is  manifest  by  the  very 
name  of  tbe  tree ;  it  is  called  the  tree  of  knoidedge 
of  good  and  evil ;  and  have  you  that  knowledge  as 
vet?  No,  no,  nor  can  you  conceive  how  good,  how 
pleasant,  and  bow  much  to  be  desired  to  make  one 
wise  it  is,  so  long  as  you  stand  by  your  king's 
commandment.  Why  should  you  be  holden  in 
ignorance  and  blindness?  Why  should  you  not 
be  enlarged  in  knowledge  and  understanding? 
And  now,  ah!  ye  inhabitants  of  the  famous  town 
of  Mansoul,  to  speak  more  particularly  to  your- 
selves, you  are  not  a  free  people!      You  are  kept 


1  Satan  may  tempt,  but  cannot  force  the  soul  to  sin,  .Ta.  i.  1 1; 
we  are  therefore  commanded  to  resist  the  devil,  that  he  may 
flee  from  us.  To  destroy  this  resistance,  therefore,  must  he  a 
great  point  with  the  enemy. — (Border.) 

-  The  artful  speech  of  Diabolus  is  founded  upon  the  scrip- 
tural account  of  the  fir>t  temptation.  '  Ye  shall  not  surely 
die,'  said  the  father  of  lies,  and  he  still  persists  in  it.  God 
says,  Sinner,  thou  shalt  die;  Satan  Bays,  Thou  shalt  not  die. 
Which  of  these  ought  we  to  believe? — (Burder.) 

3  'That  he.'  According  to  Tyrwhitt,  p.  113,  UK  was  pre- 
fixed to  proper  names  by  the  Saxons  emphatically.  Shakspeare 
thus  lists  it:  '1  stand  to  answer  thee,  or  any  he  the  proudest 


both  in  bondage  and  slavery,  and  that  by  a  griev- 
ous threat;  no  reason  being  annexed,  but  so  I  will 
have  it,  BO  it  shall    be.      And  is  it  not   grievOUB  to 

think  on,  that  that  very  thing  thai  you  are  for- 
bidden to  do,  might  you  but  do  it,  would  yield  you 
both  wisdom  and  honour;  for  then  your  eves  ss\\\ 
lie  opened,  and  you  shall  be  as  gods.  Now,  since 
this  is  thus,  quoth  he,  can  you  be  kept  by  anv 
prince  in  more  slavery,  and  in  greater  bondage, 
than  you  are  under  this  day?  You  are  made  un- 
derlings, and  are  wrapped  up  in  in  conveniences, 
as  I  have  well  made  appear.  For  what  bondage 
greater  than  to  be  kept  in  blindness?  Will  not 
reason  tell  you  that  it  is  better  to  have  eyes  than  to 
be  without  them;  and  so  to  be  at  liberty,  to  be  bet- 
ter than  to  be  shut  up  in  a  dark  and  stinking  cave. 

And  just  now,  while  Diabolus  was  speaking 
these  words  to  Mansoul,  Tisiphone  Captain  Resist- 
shot  at  Captain  Resistance,  where  he  a"cu  *1:""- 
stood  on  the  gate,  and  mortally  wounded  him  in 
the  head ;  so  that  he,  to  the  amazement  of  the 
townsmen,  and  tbe  encouragement  of  Diabolus, 
fell  down  dead  quite  over  the  wall.1  Now,  when 
Captain  Resistance  was  dead,  and  he  was  the  only 
man  of  war  in  the  town,  poor  Mansoul  was  wholly 
left  naked  of  courage,  nor  had  she  now  any  heart 
to  resist.  But  this  was  as  the  devil  would  have 
it.2  Then  stood  forth  that  he,3  Mr.  Mr.  I 
lllpause,  that  Diabolus  brought  with  Swaof  Man- 
bim,  who  was  his  orator,4  and  he  ad-  Boul- 
dressed  himself  to  speak  to  the  town  of  Mansoul: 
the  tenor  of  whose  speech  here  follows. 

Illpacse.  Gentlemen,  quoth  he,  it  is  my  mas- 
ter's happiness  that  he  has  this  day  a  quiet  and 
teachable  auditory,8  and  it  is  hoped  by  us  that 
we  shall  prevail  with  you  not  to  cast  off  good 
advice ;  my  master  has  a  very  great  love  for  you, 
and  although,  as  lie  very  well  knows,  that  he  runs 
the  hazard  of  the  anger  of  King  Shaddai,  yet  love 
to  you  will  make  him  do  more  than  that.0  Nor 
doth  there  need  that  a  word  more  should  be  spoken 
to  confirm  for  truth  what  he  hath  said  ;  there  is 
not  a  word  but  carries  with  it  self-evidence  in  its 
bowels ;  tbe  very  name  of  the  tree  may  put  an 
end  to  all  controversy  in  this  matter.      1  therefore 


of  thy  sort.'     Banyan  uses  it  as  a  mark  of  contempt.    A  m  - 
tor  would  say, '  That  fellow,  Mr.  lllpause.'— (Kd.) 

1  Re  stance  failed  in  our  first  mother.  .She  paused,  and  it 
was  an  Ill-pause;  whatever  contradicts  God's  Word  should  be 
instantly  resisted  as  diabolical. — (Burder.) 

A  The  most  imminent  danger  to  the  soul  is  when  Satan  finds 
a  death-like,  quiet,  teachable  auditory.     So  it  was  when  Whit- 
&  Id  and  Wesley,  on  their  godlike  mission,  roused  the 
who,  to  a  frightful  extent,  were  slumbering  on  the  brink  of 
eternal  torments. — (Ed.) 

•  Beware  of  flattery  and  hj  pocrisy,  especially  of  that  cunning 
craftiness  of  false  teachers  whereby  thej  lie  in  wail  to 
nnwary  souls,  and  keep  them  in  darkm   - 
that   dates   the    sinner   with   vain    confidence,    is   much    more 

dangerous  than  the  Mack  one  i 
uess,  and  despair. — (Mawhj 


260 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


at  this  time  shall  only  add  this  advice  to  you, 
under,  and  by  the  leave  of  my  lord  (and  with  that 
he  made  Diabolus  a  very  lo\y  conge).  Consider 
his  words,  look  on  the  tree,  and  the  promising- 
fruit  thereof;  remember  also  that  yet  you  know 
but  little,  and  that  this  is  the  way  to  know  more ; 
and  if  your  reasons  be  not  conquered  to  accept  of 
such  good  counsel,  you  are  not  the  men  that  I  took 
you  to  be.  But  when  the  towns-folk  saw  that  the 
tree  was  good  for  food,  and  that  it  was  pleasant 
to  the  eye,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one 
wise,  they  did  as  old  Illpause  advised,  they  took 
and  did  eat  thereof.  Now  this  I  should  have  told 
you  before,  that  even  then,  when  this  Illpause 
was  making  of  his  speech  to  the  townsmen,  my 
My  Lord  inno-  Lord  Iunoceucy — whether  by  a  shot 
cency's  death.  from  tiie  camp  0f  the  giant,  or  from 
some  sinking  qualm  that  suddenly  took  him,  or 
whether  by  the  stinking  breath  of  that  treacherous 
villain  old  Illpause,  for  so  I  am  most  apt  to  think — 
sunk  down  in  the  place  where  Iip  stood,  nor  could 
he  be  brought  to  life  again.1  Thus  these  two 
brave  men  died ;  brave  men  I  call  them,  for  they 
were  the  beauty  and  glory  of  Mansoul,  so  long  as 
they  lived  therein  ;  nor  did  there  now  remain  any 
more  a  noble  spirit  in  Mansoul,  they  all  fell  down, 
and  yielded  obedience  to  Diabolus,  and  became  his 
slaves  and  vassals,  as  you  shall  hear.2 

Now  these  being  dead,  what  do  the  rest  of  the 
The  town  taken,    towns-folk,  but  as  men  that  had  found  a 

and  how.  fool's  paradise,  they  presently,  as  afore 
was  hinted,  fall  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  giant's 
words ;  and  first  they  did  as  Illpause  had  taught 
them,  they  looked,  they  considered,  they  were 
taken  with  the  forbidden  fruit,  they  took  thereof, 
and  did  eat ;  and  having  eaten,  they  became  imme- 
diately drunken  therewith  ;  so  they  opened  the  gate, 
both  Eargate  and  Eyegate,  and  let  in  Diabolus 
with  all  his  bands,  quite  forgetting  their  good  Shad- 
dai,  his  law,  and  the  judgment  that  he  had  annexed 
with  solemn  threatening  to  the  breach  thereof.3 

[Chapter  II.] 

[Contents: — Diabolus  takes  possession  of  the  castle — The 
Lord  Mayor,  Mr.  Understanding,  is  deposed,  and  a  wall 
built  before  his  house,  to  darken  it — Mr.  Conscience,  the 
Recorder,  is  put  out  of  office,  and  becomes  very  obnoxious 
both  to  Diabolus  and  to  the  inhabitants — My  Lord  Will- 
be-will,  heartily  espousing  the  cause  of  Diabolus,  is  made 
the  principal  governor  of  the  town — The  image  of  Shad- 
dai  defaced,  and  that  of  Diabolus  set  up  in  its  stead — 
Mr.  Lustings  is  made  Lord  Mayor,  and  Mr.  Forget-good, 
Recorder — New  aldermen  appointed — Three  forts  built 
to  defend  the  town  against  Shaddai.] 
Diabolus,  having  now  obtained  entrance  in  at 

the  gates  of  the  town,  marches  up  to  the  middle 


thereof,  to  make  his  conquest  as  sure  as  he  could, 
and  finding  by  this  time  the  affections  of  the  people 
warmly  inclining  to  him,  he,  as  thinking  it  was 
best  striking  while  the  iron  is  hot,  made  this 
further  deceivable  speech  unto  them,  saying,  Alas, 
my  poor  Mansoul !  I  have  done  thee  indeed  this 
service,  as  to  promote  thee  to  honour,  and  to 
greaten  thy  liberty,  but  alas!  alas!  poor  Man- 
soul,' thou  wantest  now  one  to  defend  thee,  for 
assure  thyself  that  when  Shaddai  shall  hear  what 
is  done,  he  will  come ;  for  sorry  will  he  be  that 
thou  hast  broken  his  bonds,  and  cast  his  cords 
away  from  thee.  What  wilt  thou  do — wilt  thou 
after  enlargement  suffer  thy  privileges  to  be  in- 
vaded and  taken  away?  or  what  wilt  resolve  with 
thyself?  Then  they  all  with  one  consent  said  to 
this  bramble,  Do  thou  reign  over  us.  He  &  enter_ 
So  he  accepted  the  motion,  and  be-  tained  for  their 
came  the  king  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
This  being  done,  the  next  thing  was  to  give  him 
possession  of  the  castle,  and  so  of  the  whole 
strength  of  the  town.  Wherefore  into  He  is  possessed 
the  castle  he  goes — it  was  that  which  °nd  fortified  it 
Shaddai  built  in  Mansoul  for  his  own  lor  H™^ 
delight  and  pleasure — this  now  was  become  a  den 
and  hold  for  the  giant  Diabolus.4 

Now  having  got  possession  of  this  stately  palace 
or  castle,  what  doth  he  but  make  it  a  garrison  for 
himself,  and  strengthens  and  fortifies  it  with  all 
sorts  of  provision  against  the  King  Shaddai,  or 
those  that  should  endeavour  the  regaining  of  it  to 
him  and  his  obedience  again. 

This  done,  but  not  thinking  himself  yet  secure 
enough,  in  the  next  place,  he  bethinks  ITe  ncw.niodel- 
himself  of  new-modelling  the  town  ;  leth  lhe  luwu- 
and  so  he  does,  setting  up  one,  and  putting  down 
another  at  pleasure.0  Wherefore  my  Lord  Mayor, 
whose  name  was  my  Lord  Understanding,  and 
Mr.  Recorder,  whose  name  was  Mr.  Conscience, 
those  he  puts  out  of  place  and  power. 

As  for  my  Lord  Mayor,  though  he  was  an  un- 
derstanding man,  and  one  too  that   MyLoruMayor 
had  complied   with   the   rest  of  the     put    out  "of 
town  of  Mansoul  in  admitting  of  the 
giant  into  the  town,  yet  Diabolus  thought  not  fit 


1  The  breath  of  temptation,  entertained  for  a  moment,  admits 
unbelief,  and  destroys  primitive  innocence.  In  a  spiritual 
sense,  man  died ;  and,  by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came 
upon  all  to  condemnation.  Re.  v.  18. — (Burder.) 


Then  peace  expired, 


And  every  grace  fell  slaughter'd  round  her  tomb. 

— (Swain's  Redemption^ 

3 •  Her  rash  hand,  in  evil  hour, 

Forth  reaching  to  the  fruit,  she  pluck'd,  she  ate : 
Karth  felt  the  wound,  and  nature,  from  her  seat, 
Sighing  through  all  her  works,  gave  signs  of  woe, 
That  all  was  lost. — {Paradise  Lost,  B.  ix.) 
4  His  nolle  passions,  once  the  blissful  seat 
Of  each  celestial  grace,  became  the  den 
Of  fiends  infernal. — (Swain.) 
6  God's  image  of  holiness  being  obliterated.  Satan,  with  all 
his  horrid  crew  of  lusts  and  vile  affections,  gained  admittance ; 
the  understanding  was  perverted,  and  the  affections  estranged. 
— (Masou.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


261 


to  let  him  abide  in  liis  former  lustre  and  glory, 
because  he  was  a  seeing  man.  Wherefore  he 
darkened  it  not  only  by  taking  from  him  bis  office 
and  power,  but  by  building-  of  a  high  and  strong 
towei',  just  between  the  sun's  reflections,  and  the 
windows  of  my  lord's  palace,  :'«„.  x.  i,  5;  by  which 
means    his    house    and    all,    and    the    whole   of  bis 

habitation,  was  made  as  dark  as  darkness  itself. 

And  thus  being  alienated  from  the  light,  he  be- 
came as  one  that  was  born  blind.  Ep,  tv.  18,  n>.  To 
this  his  house  my  lord  was  confined,  as  to  a 
prison  ;  nor  might  he  upon  his  parole  go  further 
than  within  his  own  hounds.  And  now  had  he 
had  a  heart  to  do  for  Mansoul,  what  could  lie 
do  for  it  or  wherein  could  be  be  profitable  to  her? 
So  then,  so  long  as  Mansoul  was  under  the  power 
and  government  of  Diabolus — and  so  long  it  was 
under  him  as  it  was  obedient  to  him  ;  which  was 
even  until  by  a  war  it  was  rescued  out  of  bis 
hands — so  long  my  Lord  Mayor  was  rather  an 
impediment  in,  than  advantage  to,  the  famous 
town  of  Mansoul. 

As  for  Mr.  Recorder,  before  the  town  was  taken 
he  was  a  man  well  read  in  the  laws  of  his  King, 
and  also  a  man  of  courage  and  faithfulness,  to 
speak  truth  at  every  occasion  ;  and  he  had  a  tongue 
as  bravely  hung  as  he  had  an  head  tilled  with 
judgment.     Now  this  man,  Diabolus 

The     Kecorder 

put  out  of  could  by  no  means  abide,  because, 
place-  though   he  gave  his   consent   to    his 

coming  into  the  town,  yet  be  could  not,  by  all 
wiles,  trials,  stratagems,  and  devices  that  he  could 
use,  make  him  wholly  his  own.  True,  he  was 
much  degenerated  from  bis  former  King,  and  also 
much  pleased  with  many  of  the  giant's  laws  and 
service  ;  but  all  this  would  not  do,  forasmuch  as 
be  was  not  wholly  his.  He  would  now  and  then 
think  upon  Shaddai,  and  have  dread 

He    sometimes  .       -1  ,  .  .      ,  , 

r  his  of  his  law  upon  him,  and  then  he 
tust  King.  W0U1(J  speak  with  a  voice  as  great 
against  Diabolus  as  when  a  lion  roareth  ; J  yea, 
and  would  also  at  certain  times  when  his  fits  were 
upon  him — for  you  must  know  that  sometimes  he 
had  terrible  fits — [he  would]  make  the  whole  town 
of  .Mansoul  shake  with  his  voice:  and,  there- 
fore, the  now  king  of  Mansoul  could  not  abide 
him." 

Diabolus  therefore  feared  the  Recorder  more 
than  any  that  was  left  alive  in  the  town  of  Man- 
soul, because,  as  1  said,  his  words  did  shake  the 
whole  town  ;  they  were  like  the  rattling  thunder, 

1  0  sinner,  listen  now  to  the  voice  of  conscience,  before  his 
awful  suggestions  drive  thee  to  despair. 

' 0  give  it  leuve  lo  speak; 

_ '    (i  bear  it  now, 
Wliilu  useful  its  advice,  as  accent!  mild.' — (Young.) 

-  The  office  and  power  of  conscience,  the  old  recorder,  is 
beautifully  described.  He  will  sometimes  speak,  yea,  war  aloud, 
testifying  for  Gud,  and  against  sin. — (Burder.J 


and  also  like  thunder-claps,  Since  therefore  the 
giant  could  not  make  him  wholly  his  own,  what 
doth  he  do  but  studies  all  that  he  could  to  debauch 
the  old  gentleman;  and  by  debauchery  to  stupify 
his  mind,  and  more  harden  his  heart  in  wa 
vanity.  Ami  as  he  attempted,  so  he  accomplished 
his  design  ;  he  debauched  the  man, 

,    ,  ..        ,  1    !•        1  1  1    •  •  "''    IS    M1"ri'    "  I « -  - 

and  by  little  and  little  so  drew  lnm  into  bandied  than 
sin  ami  wickedness,  that  at  last  he 
was  not  only  debauched  as  at  first,  and  so  by  con- 
sequence defiled,  but  was  almost,  at  last,  1  say, 
past  all  conscience  of  sin.  Ami  this  was  the 
furthest  Diabolus  could  go.  Wherefore  he  be- 
thinks him  of  another  project;  and  that  was  to 
persuade  the  men  of  the  town  that  Mr.  Recorder 
was  mail,  and  so  not  to  he  regarded  :  and  for  this 
he  urged  Ins  fits,  and  said,  If  he  he  himself,  why 
doth  he  not  do  thus  always?  but,  quoth  he,  as  all 
mad  folks  have  their  tits,  and  in  them  their  raving 
language,  so  hath  this  old  and  doating  gentleman. 
Thus,  by  one  means  or  another,   he   „., 

.,,*',,  ,  ,.    ,  ,  "ie  town  taken 

quickly  got  Mansoul  to  Blight,  neglect,  oit  from  heed- 
and  despise  whatever  Mr.  Recorder  "'g0 
could  say.3  For  besides  what  already  you  have 
heard,  Diabolus  bad  a  way  to  make  the  old  gentle- 
man, when  he  was  merry,  unsay  and  deny  what 
he  in  his  fits  had  affirmed  ;  and,  indeed,  this  was 
the  next  way  to  make  himself  ridiculous,  ami  to 
cause  that  no  man  should  regard  him.  Also,  now 
he  never  spake  freely  for  King  Shaddai,  but  always 
by  force  and  constraint ;  besides,  he  would  at  one 
time  be  hot  against  that  at  which  at  n„„.consc:ence 
another  he  would   hold   his  peace,  so     b5«nnea      so 

1  rnliculous     as 

uneven   was   he    now   in   his    doings.      «ith     carnal 

Sometimes    be   would   be  as    if  fast 

asleep,  and  again  sometimes  as  dead,   even  then 

when  the  whole  town  of  Mansoul  was  in  her  career 

after  vanity,  and  in  her  dance  after  the  giant's 

pipe. 

Wherefore,  sometimes,  when  Mansoul  did  use 
to  be  frightened  with  the  thundering  voice  of  the 
Recorder  that  was,  and  when  they  did  tell  Diabolus 
of  it,  he  would  answer  that  what  the  old  gentle- 
man said  was  neither  of  love  to  him  nor  pity  to 
them,  but  of  a  foolish  fondness  that  he  had  to  be 
prating  ;  and  so  would  hush,  still,  and  put  all  to 
quiet  again.  And  that  he  might  leave  no  argu- 
ment unurged  that  might  tend  to  make  them 
secure,  ho  said,  and  said  it  often,  0  Mansoul !  con- 
sider that  notwithstanding  the  old  gentleman'.-, 
rage,  and  the  rattle  of  his  high  and  thundering 
words,  you  hear  nothing  of  Shaddai  himself,  when, 
liar  and  deceiver  that  he  was,  every  outcry  of 
Mr.  Recorder  against  the  sin  of  Mansoul  Wi 


3  This  is  the  old  device  of  Satan.     It  was  thus  hi 
poor  Christian,  in  the  PUgrmt Progrui,  when  first  alarmed 
soul's  welfare— 'They  thought  that  some  frcuzy  dis- 
temper  had  got  into  his  head.'—  (ED.) 


;62 


THE   HOLY   "WAR. 


voice  of  God  in  him  to  tliem.  But  lie  goes  on  and 
Satanical  says,  You  see  that  he  values  not  the 
rhetonc  i0SS)  noi.  rebe]lion  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul,  nor  will  he  trouble  himself  with  calling  of  his 
town  to  a  reckoning  for  their  giving  of  themselves 
to  me.  lie  knows  that  though  ye  were  his,  now 
you  are  lawfully  mine;  so,  leaving  us  one  to  another, 
he  now  hath  shaken  his  hands  of  us.1 

Moreover,  0  Mansoul!  quoth  he,  consider  how 
I  have  served  you,  even  to  the  uttermost  of  my 
power ;  and  that  with  the  best  that  I  have,  could 
get,  or  procure  for  }Tou  in  all  the  world :  besides, 
I  dare  say,  that  the  laws  and  customs  that  you 
now  are  under,  and  by  which  you  do  homage  to 
me,  do  yield  you  more  solace  and  content  than  did 
the  paradise  that  at  first  you  possessed.  Your 
liberty  also,  as  yourselves  do  very  well  know,  has 
been  jrreatly  widened  and  enlarged  by 

His  flatteries.  &  ,  T  i>         i  j. 

me ;  whereas  I  found  you  a  pent-up 
people.  I  have  not  laid  any  restraint  upon  you  ; 
you  have  no  law,  statute,  or  judgment  of  mine  to 
frighten  you ;   I  call  none  of  you  to  account  for 

your  doings,  except  the  madman  (you 

Conscience.      f  ,    °  T  \        ,  ,  w.     , 

know  who  I  mean).  1  have  granted 
you  to  live,  each  man,  like  a  prince,  in  his  own, 
even  with  as  little  control  from  me  as  I  myself 
have  from  you. 

And  thus  would  Diabolus  hush  up,  and  quiet  the 

town  of  Mansoul,  when  the  Recorder, 

Men   sometimes  .  .  , 

angry  with  their  that  was,  did  at  times  molest  them; 
yea,  and  with  such  cursed  orations 
as  these  would  set  the  whole  town  in  a  rage  and 
fury  against  the  old  gentleman ;  yea,  the  rascal 
crew  at  some  times  would  be  for  destroying  of  him. 
They  have  often  wished,  in  my  hearing,  that  he 
had  lived  a  thousand  miles  off  from  them :  his 
company,  his  words,  yea,  the  sight  of  him,  and 
especially  when  they  remembered  how  in  old  times 
he  did  use  to  threaten  and  condemn  them — for  all 
he  was  now  so  debauched — did  terrify  and  afflict 
them  sore.2 

But  all  wishes  were  vain ;   for  I   do  not  know 

how,   unless   by  the  power   of  Shaddai,   and  his 

wisdom,  he  was  preserved  in  being  amongst  them. 

Besides,  his  house  was  as  strong  as  a 

castle,  and  stood  hard  to  a  stronghold 

of  the  town.     Moreover,  if  at  any  time  any  of  the 

crew  or  rabble  attempted  to  make  him  away,  he 

could  pull  up  the  sluices,  and  let  in  such 

floods,  as  would  drown  all  round  about  him. 

1  Liars  ought  to  have  good  memories;  just  before  this  the 
devil  said,  '  When  Shaddai  shall  hear  what  is  done,  he  will 
come.'  .Now  he  tells  them,  '  He  hath  shako'  his  hauds  of  us,' 
or  entirely  given  us  up.— (Ed.) 

-  Conscience,  in  natural  men,  is  very  unequal  and  irregular 
in  its  opposition  to  sin ;  yet  by  tits  and  starts  he  will  cry  out, 
and  so  frighten  the  sinner,  that  he  wishes  him  '  a  thousand 
miles  off,'  so  as  to  give  him  no  disturbance.  The  powers  of 
conscience  cannot  be  utterly  defaced. —  (Buider.) 


But  to  leave  Mr.  Recorder,  and  to  come  to  my 
Lord  Will-be-will,  another  of  the  gentry 
of  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  This 
Will-be-will  was  as  high-born  as  any  man  in  Man- 
soul, and  was  as  much,  if  not  more,  a  freeholder 
than  many  of  them  were:  besides,  if  I  remember 
my  tale  aright,  he  had  some  privilege  peculiar  to 
himself  in  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  Now, 
together  with  these,  he  was  a  man  of  great 
strength,  resolution,  and  courage ;  nor  in  his  oc- 
casion could  any  turn  him  away.  But  I  say, 
whether  he  was  proud  of  his  estate,  privileges, 
strength,  or  what — but  sure  it  was  through  pride 
of  something — he  scorns  now  to  be  a  slave  in  Man- 
soul ;  and  therefore  resolves  to  bear  office  under 
Diabolus,  that  he  might,  such  an  one  as  he  was, 
be  a  petty  ruler  and  governor  in  Mansoul.3  And, 
headstrong  man  that  he  was,  thus  he  began  be- 
times; for  this  man,  when  Diabolus  did  make  his 
oration  at  Ear-gate,  was  one  of  the  first  that  was 
for  consenting  to  his  words,  and  for  accepting  of 
his  counsel  as  wholesome,  and  that  was  for  the 
opening  of  the  gate,  and  for  letting  him  into  the 
town  :  wherefore  Diabolus  had  a  kindness  for  him, 
and  therefore  he  designed  for  him  a  place  ;  and 
perceiving  the  valour  and  stoutness  of  the  man,  he 
coveted  to  have  him  for  one  of  his  great  ones,  to 
act  and  do  in  matters  of  the  highest  concern.4 

So  he  sent  for  him,  and  talked  with  him  of  that 
secret  matter  that  lay  in  his  breast, 

The  will  takes 

but  there  needed  not  much  persuasion     place     under 
•      .i       -      ..   .,   <..:,  i.      ._     l)h 


in  the  case ;  for 


at  first  he   was 


liabolus. 

willing  that  Diabolus  should  be  let  into  the  town, 
so  now  he   was   as  willing   to  serve   him   there. 
When  the  tyrant  therefore  perceived  the  willing- 
ness of  my  lord  to  serve  him,  and  that  his  mind 
stood  bending  that  way,  he  forthwith  made 
him  the  captain  of  the  castle,  governorof  the   Flesh.' 
wall,  and  keeper  of  the  gates  of  Mansoul ;    &en:,es- 
yea,  there  was  a  clause  in    his  commission  that 
nothing  without    him  should  be  done  in  all  the 
town  of  Mansoul.      So  that  now,  next  to  Diabolus 
himself,  who  but  my  lord  Will-be-will  in  all  the 
town    of   Mansoul ;    nor  could  anything    now   be 
done,  but  at  his  will  and  pleasure,  throughout  the 
town  of  Mansoul.     He  had  also  one   nIr.  Mind,  my 
Mr.  Mind5   for  his  clerk,   a  man  to     Lord's  clerk. 
speak  on,  every  way  like  his  master ;  for  he  and 


3  The  will  scorns  to  be  a  slave,  but  plunges  into  the  worst 
of  slavery — that  to  Satan  and  to  sin ;  and  in  that  slavery  must 
perish,  unless  emancipated  aud  redeemed  by  Christ. — (En.) 

4  The  will  is  a  lord,  a  person  of  great  importance,  a  govern- 
ing faculty ;  and  there  could  be  no  sin  till  the  will  consented 
to  the  temptation.  In  fallen  man,  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law 
of  God,  but  obstinately  opposed  to  it,  and  therefore  a  fit  deputy 
for  the  devil. — (Border.) 

0  The  mind  or  judgment,  whereby  we  distinguish  between 
good  and  evil,  lawful  and  unlawful.  2  Co.  iii.  14.  Tit.  i.  15.— 
(Mason.)  How  awfully  has  sin  fettered  man,  and  made  him  a 
slave.— (En.) 


THE    HOLY   WAT5. 


203 


his  lord  were  in  principle  one,  and  in  practice  not 
far  asunder.  Ro.  riii  ;.  And  now  was  Mansoul 
brought  under  to  purpose,  and  made  to  fulfil  the 
lusts  of  the  will  and  of  the  mind. 

Bui  it  will  not  out  of  my  thoughts,  what  a  desper- 
ate one  this  Will-he-will  was,  when  power  was  put 
into  his  hand.  First,  be  flatly  deuied  that  he  owed 
any  .sUit  or  s.-rvicc  to  his  former  prince  and  liege 
Lord.  'I'll-  done,  in  the  next  place  he  took  an 
oath,  and  swore  fidelity  to  his  great  master  I  Ma- 
bolus,  and  then,  being  stated  and  settled  in  his 
places,  offices,  advancements,  and  preferments, 
0!  you  cannot  think,  unless  you  had  Been  it,  the 
Btrange  work  that  this  workman  made  in  the  town 
of  Mansoul  J 

First,  he  maligned  Mr.  Recorder  to  death;  he 

,     „    would  neither  endure  to  see  him,  nor 
Tlic  carnal  «;11  . 

up, M-iii  cou-    to   hear  the  words   ot    his   mouth;   he 

would  shut  his  eves  when  he  saw  him, 
and  stop  his  ears  when  he  heard  him  speak:  also, 
he  could  not  endure  that  so  much  as  a  fragment 
of  the  law  of  Shaddai  should  he  anywhere  seen  in 
the  town.  For  example,  his  clerk,  Mr.  Mind,  had 
some  old,  rent,  and  torn  parchments  of  the  law  of 
good  Shaddai  in  his  house,1  but  when  Will-he-will 
saw  them,  he  cast  them  behind  his  hack.  Ne.  U.  2C 
True,  Mr.  Recorder  had  some  of  the  laws  in  his 
.,,    study,  hut  my  lord  could  by  no  means 

Corrupt       will  -  «*  •> 

lores    a    dark    come  at  them:   he  also  thought,  and 

's'    said,  that  the  windows  of  my  old  Lord 

Mayor's  bouse  were  always  too  light  f«»r  the  profit 

of  the  town  of  Mansoul.      The  light  of  a  candle  be 

could  not  endure.     Now,  nothing  at  all   pleased 

Will-he-will  but  what  pleased  Diabolus  his  lord. 

There  was  none  like  him  to  trumpet  about  the 
streets  the  brave  nature,  the  wise  conduct,  and 
great  glory  of  the  King  Diabolus.  lie  would 
range  and  rove  throughout  all  the  streets  of  Man- 
soul  to  cry  up  his  illustrious  lord,  and  would  make 
himself  even  as  an  abject,  among  the 
base  and  rascal  crew,  to  cry  up  his 
valiant  prince.  And  I  say,  when  and  whereso- 
ever he  found  these  vassals,  he  would  even  make 
himself  as  one  of  them.  In  all  ill  courses  he 
would  act  without  bidding,  and  do  mischief  with- 
out commandment. 

The  Lord  Will-he-will  also  had  a  deputy  under 
him,  and  his  name  was  Mr.  Affection;  one  that 
was  also  greatly  debauched  in  his  principles,  and 
answerable  thereto  in  his  life.  lto.  L  25.  lie  was 
wholly  given  to  the  flesh,  and  therefore  they  called 

'•The  onawakened  sinner  lias  do  pleasure  in  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures; they  are  to  him  like  old,  rent,  torn  law  parchment*, 
which  are  written  in  a  lan<-'uai:e  that  lie  cannot  understand, 
and  he  casts  them  away. — (Eo.) 

2  What  a  progeny  !  but  they  are  the  genuine  fruits  of  sin, 
which  is  of  an  impudent,  scornful,  and  revengeful  nature  j  aud 
they  have  made  the  soul  an  enemy  to  justice,  mercy,  and  truth. 
—(Mason.) 


Vain  thoughts. 


him  Vile-affection,     Now  there  was  he,  an 
Carnal-lust,  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Miud 
(like  to  like,  quoth  the  devil   to  the 
collier)  that  fell   in   love,  and    made  a      lust- 
match,  and  were  married;   and,  as   I  take  it,  they 
had  several  children, as  Impudent,  Blackmouth,  and 
Bate-reproof;  these  three  were  black  hoy.-,.     And 
besides  these  they  had  three  daughters,  as  Scorn- 
truth,  and  Slightgod,  and  the  name  of  the  youngest 
was  Revenge;  these  were  all  married  in  the  town, 
and  also  begot  and  yielded  many  had  brats,  too 
many  to  he  here  inserted.2     But  to  pas-  by  this. 

When  the  giant  had  thus  ingarrisoned  himself  in 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  bad  put  down  and  Bet 
up  whom  he  thought  good;  be  betakes  himself  to 
(h  facing.  Now  there  was  in  the  marketplace  in 
Mansoul,  and  also  upon  the  gates  of  the  castle,  an 
image  of  the  blessed  Bang  Shaddai;  this  image  was 
so  exactly  engraven,  and  it  was  engraven  in  gold. 
that  it  did  the  most  resemble  Shaddai  himself  of 
anything  that  then  was  extant  in  the  world.  This 
be  basely  commanded  to  he  defaced,  what  Nutmtii 
and  it  was  as  basely  done  by  the  hand  dd- 

of  Mr.  Notruth.  Now  you  must  know,  that  a3 
Diabolus  had  commanded,  and  that  by  the  hand 
of  Mr.  Notruth,  the  image  of  Shaddai  was  del 
lie  likewise  gave  order  that  the  same  Mr.  Notruth 
should  set  up  in  its  stead  the  horrid  and  formidable 
image  of  Diabolus;  to  the  great  contempt  of  the 
former  King,  and  debasing  of  his  town  of  Mansoul. 

Moreover,  Diabolus  made  havoc  of  all  remains 
of  the  laws  and  statutes  of  Shaddai  ^  law..lxiok, 
that  could  be  found  in  the  town  of     de*tn 

.  r  .  .  .  .       ,      could  be  so. 

Mansoul ;  to  wit,  such  as  contained 
either  the  doctrines  of  morals,  with  all  civil  and 
natural  documents.  Also  relative  severities  he 
sought  to  extinguish.3  To  be  short,  there  was 
nothing  of  the  remains  of  good  in  Mansoul  which 
he  and  Will-he-will  sought  not  to  destroy  ;  for  their 
design  was  to  turn  Mansoul  into  a  brute,  and  to 
make  it  like  to  the  sensual  sow,  by  the  hand  of 
Mr.  Notruth.* 

When  he  had  destroyed  what  law  and  good 
orders  he  could,  then,  further  to  effect  his  design 
— namely,  to  alienate  Mansoul  from  Shaddai,  her 
king — he  commands  and  they  set  up  his  own  vain 
edicts,  statutes,  and  commandments,  in  all  places 
of  resort  or  concourse  in  Mansoul ;  to  wit,  such  as 
gave  liberty  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  1  . 


3  Relative  severities  are  the  duties  we  owe  to  Cod,  to  our- 
selves, and  to  man,  as  puhlic  and  private  prayer,  obedience  and 
affection  to  parents  and  relatives,  aud  that  duty  so  essential  to 
our  spirit's  welfare — 'self-examination.1 

the  sinner  becomes  to  every  pood  work  reprobate. — t.M 

4  Satan  would  conceal  or  obliterate  the  sacred  .•scriptures, 
prevent  the  practice  of  duty  to  God  or  to  our  neighbour,  and 
make  man  merely  carnal  and  brutish.     Awl 

cceded;   so  that  'man  has  become  thai 

beast,  half -devil,  uniting  in  buns 

former  with  the  diabolic  temper  ul  the  latter.— tburdcr.) 


264 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,  which  are  not  of 
Shaddai,  but  of  the  world,  i  jn.  a.  ie.  He  encouraged, 
countenanced,  and  promoted  lasciviousness,  and 
all  ungodliness  there.  Yea,  much  more  did  Dia- 
bolus  to  encourage  wickedness  in  the  town  of  Man- 
soul;  he  promised  them  peace,  content,  joy,  and 
bliss  in  doing  his  commands,  and  that  they  should 
never  be  called  to  an  account  for  their  not  doing 
the  contrary.  And  let  this  serve  to  give  a  taste 
to  them  that  love  to  hear  tell  of  what  is  done  be- 
yond their  knowledge,  afar  off  in  other  countries.1 
Now  Mansoul  being  wholly  at  his  beck,  and 
brought  wholly  to  his  bow,  nothing  was  heard  or 
seen  therein  but  that  which  tended  to  set  up  him. 
But  now,  he  having  disabled  the  Lord  Mayor 
They  have  a  new  and  Mr.  Recorder  from  bearing  of 
and  a  newX-  office  iu  Mansoul,  and  seeing  that  the 
corder.  town,  before  he  came  to  it,  was  the 

most  ancient  of  corporations  in  the  world ;  and 
fearing,  if  he  did  not  maintain  greatness,  they  at 
any  time  should  object  that  he  had  done  them  an 
injury,  therefore,  I  say,  that  they  might  see  that 
he  did  not  intend  to  lessen  their  grandeur,  or  to 
take  from  them  any  of  their  advantageous  things, 
he  did  choose  for  them  a  Lord  Mayor  and  a  Re- 
corder himself;  and  such  as  contented  them  at  the 
heart,  and  such  also  as  pleased  him  wondrous  well. 
The  name  of  the  Mayor  that  was  of  Diabolus's 
The  new  Lord  making  was  the  Lord  Lustings;  a 
May°r-  man  that  had  neither  eyes  nor  ears ; 
all  that  he  did,  whether  as  a  man  or  as  an  officer, 
he  did  it  naturally,  as  doth  the  beast.2  And  that 
which  made  him  yet  the  more  ignoble,  thouo-h 
not  to  Mansoul,  yet  to  them  that  beheld  and  were 
grieved  for  its  ruins,  was,  that  he  never  could 
savour  good,  but  evil. 

The  Recorder  was  one  whose  name  was  Forget- 
Tiie  new  Recor-   good  ;  and  a  very  sorry  fellow  he  was. 
He  could  remember  nothing  but  mis- 
chief, and  to  do  it  with  delight.     He  was  naturally 
prone  to  do  things  that  were  hurtful ;  even  hurtful 
to  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  to  all  the  dwellers 
there.     These  two,  therefore,  by  their  power  and 
Thoughts.    Practice>  example  and  smiles  upon  evil, 
did  much  more  grammar,3  and  settle  the 


Great  is  the  the  danger  of  seeking  to  be  wise  above  what 
is  written.  The  Bible  is  the  limit  of  all  real  knowledge  in 
matters  of  religion.  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,  if  any 
doctrine  or  practice  is  not  to  be  found  there,  reject  it  instantlv 
and  for  ever ;  it  is  poisonous,  aud  tends  to  death  and  hell  — 
(En.) 

2  '  Neither  eyes  nor  ears ;'  no  regard  to  reason  nor  danger, 
but  hurried  on  by  mere  appetite  to  every  tlcshlv  indulgence! 
— (Burder.)  How  degraded !  Man  becomes  a  "compound  of 
devilish  and  benstly  lusts.  '  Lord,  what  is  man  that  thou  should 
be  mindful  of  him.' — (Ed.) 

3  To  '  grammar ;'  to  instil  into  the  mind. — (Ed.) 

4  Nothing  could  evidence  more  intrepid  faithfulness  than 
this  severe,  but  just,  reflection  upon  the  open  licentiousness  aud 
debauchery  of  Charles  II.  and  his  courtiers.  Nearly  thirteen 
years  of  frightful  imprisonment  had  not  chilled  his  faithful 


common  people  in  hurtful  ways.  For  who  doth 
not  perceive,  but  when  those  that  sit  aloft  are  vile, 
and  corrupt  themselves,  they  corrupt  the  whole 
region  and  country  where  tliey  are  ?4 

Besides  these,  Diabolus  made  several  burgesses 
and  aldermen  in  Mansoul ;  such  as  out  He  doth  make 
of  whom  the  town,  when  it  needed,  BS^aS 
might  choose  them  officers,  governors,  "ll°- 
and  magistrates.  And  these  are  the  names  of  the 
chief  of  them,  Mr.  Incredulity,  Mr.  Haughty,  Mr. 
Swearing,  Mr.  Whoring,  Mr.  Hardheart,  Mr.  Piti- 
less, Mr.  Fury,  Mr.  Notruth,  Mr.  Stand-todies, 
Mr.  Falsepeace,  Mr.  Drunkenness,  Mr.  Cheating, 
Mr.  Atheism — thirteen  in  all.  Mr.  Incredulity  is 
the  eldest,  and  Mr.  Atheism  the  youngest,  of  the 
company.5 

There  was  also  an  election  of  common  council- 
men,  and  others ;  as  bailiffs,  sergeants,  constables, 
and  others ;  but  all  of  them  like  to  those  afore- 
named, being  either  fathers,  brothers,  cousins,  or 
nephews  to  them  ;  whose  names,  for  brevity's  sake, 
I  omit  to  mention. 

When  the  giant  had  thus  far  proceeded  in  his 
work,  in  the  next  place  he  betook  He  huiideth  three 
himself  to  build  some  strongholds  in  Cef  mlf'go' 
the  town.  And  he  built  three  that  vernore. 
seemed  to  be  impregnable.  The  first  he  called 
the  Hold  of  Defiance,  because  it  was  made  to  com- 
mand the  whole  town,  and  to  keep  it  from  the 
knowledge  of  its  ancient  King.  The  second  he 
called  Midnight-hold,  because  it  wras  built  on  pur- 
pose to  keep  Mansoul  from  the  true  knowledge  of 
itself.  The  third  was  called  Sweet-sin-hold,  be- 
cause by  that  lie  fortified  Mansoul  against  all 
desires  of  good.  The  first  of  these  holds  stood 
close  by  Eyegate,  that  as  much  as  might  be  light 
might  be  darkened  there.  The  second  was  built 
hard  to  the  old  castle,  to  the  end  that  that  might 
be  made  more  blind,  if  possible.  And  the  third 
stood  in  the  market-place.6 

He  that  Diabolus  made  oovernor  over  the  first 


spirit,  nor  cowed  him  in  doing  his  duty.     In  serving  God  he 
was  a  stranger  to  fear. — (Ed.) 

6  '  What  a  vile  set  of  wretches!'  the  reader  will  exclaim  ;  but 
are  you  sure  that  they  do  not  rule  your  heart  ?  Unbelief  is 
the  first,  aud  how  natural  the  gradation  to  Atheism,  the  last — ■ 
the  scoruer's  seat. — (Ed.) 

'Christ  purged  his  temple,  so  must  tliou  fliy  heart. 
All  sinful  thoughts  are  thieves,  together  niet 
To  cozen  thee.' — (Herbert.) 

c  Thus  Satan  fixes  his  empire  in  the  soul: — 1.  By  enmUy 
and  aversion  to  Divine  instruction;  2.  By  the  blindness  of 
the  understanding,  aud  perverseness  o-f  the  will,  by  which  the 
knowledge  of  its  lamentable  state  aud  of  God  are  concealed ; 
aud,  3.  By  a  habit  and  delight  in  sin,  rolling  it  as  a  sweet 
morsel  under  the  tongue ;  all  which,  if  grace  prevent  not,  will 
drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition. — (Mason.)  Reader, 
beware,  these  three  strongholds  are  the  greatest  enemies  to 
human  happiness: — 1.  Indiffereut  carelessness;  2.  Ignorance 
of  the  new  birth  aud  of  spiritual  religion,  which  is  the  strength 
of  superstition — the  cruel  persecutor  of  the  saints;  3.  Lusts, 
which  degrade  the  soul  into  slavery  to  Satan. — (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


of  these,  was  one  Spitegod,  a  most  blasphemous 
wretch,  He  came  with  the  whole  rabble  of  them 
that  came  against  Mausoul  at  first,  and  was  him- 
self one  of  themselves.  Ee  that  was  made  the 
governor  of  Midnight-hold,  was  one  Love-no-light. 
lie  was  also  of  them  that  oame  first  against  the 
town.  And  he  that  was  made  the  governor  of  the 
hold  called  Sweet-sin-hold,  was  one  whose  name 
was  Loveflesh ;  he  was  also  a  very  lewd  fellow, 
but  not  of  that  country  where  the  other  are  bound.1 
This  fellow-  could  find  more  sweetness  when  he 
Stood  sucking  of  a  lust,  than  he  did  in  all  the 
paradise  of  God. 

And  now  Diabolus  thought  himself  Bafe;  he 
had  taken  Mansoul ;  he  had  ingarrisoned  himself 
therein  ;  he  had  put  down  the  old  officers,  and 
Oabolua  has  had  set  up  new  ones ;  he  had  defaced 
made liis nest.  the  jmage  „f  shaddai,  and  had  set  up 
his  own;  he  had  spoiled  the  old  law-hooks,  and 
had  promoted  his  own  vain  lies;  he  had  made  him 
new  magistrates,  and  set  up  new  aldermen  ;  he 
had  built  him  new  holds,  and  had  manned  them 
for  himself.'  And  all  this  he  did  to  make  himself 
secure,  in  case  the  good  Shaddai,  or  his  Son,  should 
come  to  make  an  incursion  upon  him. 

[CriAPTER.   111.] 

[Contents.-—  Information  of  the  revolution  carried  to  the  court 
of  King  Shaddai — His  great  resentment  of  the  rebellion 
— His  gracious  intention  of  restoring  Mansoul — Some 
intimations  of  this  published — Care  of  Diabolus  to  sup- 
press them — His  artifices  to  secure  the  town,  and  prevent 
its  return  to  Shaddai.] 

Now  you  may  well  think,  that  long  before  this 

Tidiues  mmed   tmie  AVOrtl>  bJ  some  or  other,  could  not 

aurt  of   but  be  carried  to  the  good  King  Shad- 

what  IihiI  hap-     ,.,  ..-.r  r-i  • 

|.ened  to  Man-    dai,  bow  his  Mansoul  in  the  continent 

of  Universe  was  lost;  and  that  the 
renegade  giant  Diabolus,  once  one  of  his  Majesty's 
servants,  had,  in  rebellion  against  the  King,  made 
sure  thereof  for  himself;  yea,  tidings  were  carried 
and  brought  to  the  King  thereof,  and  that  to  a 
\x-v\  circumstance.3 

As  first,  How  Diabolus  came  upon  Mansoul — 
they  being  a  simple  people,  and  innocent — with 
craft,  subtilty,  lies,  and  guile.  Item,  That  he  had 
treacherously  slain  the  right  noble  and  valiant  cap- 
tain, their  Captain  Resistance,  as  he  stood  upon 
the  gate,  with  the  rest  of  the  townsmen.  Item, 
How  my  brave  Lord   Innocent   fell  down  dead — 


1  Loveflesh  was  one  of  the  corrupted  Manaoulians,  and, 
therefore,  not  bound  to  the  place  wh<  nee  Spit<  god  and  Love- 

n it- ;  these  were  Diabolonians. — (En.) 

2  How  awful  and  complete  is  the  revolution  !  The  under- 
standing is  darkened,  the  conscience  debauched,  the  will  per- 
verted, the  image  of  God  defaced,  the  law  of  God  suppressed, 
and  lusts  triumphant ;  while  the  proud  sinner  defies  God,  loves 
midnight  darkness,  and  wallows  in  sin.  What  an  awful,  but 
accurate,  picture  of  apostate  man  1  God,  be  merciful  to  us 
sinners. — (Burder.) 

VOL.  III. 


with  grief,  some  say,  or  with  being  poisoned  with 
the  stinking  breath  of  one  [llpause,  a-  say  others 
— at  the  hearing  of  his  just  hod  ami  rightful 
prince  Shaddai  bo  abused  by  the  mouth  of  so  filthy 
a  Diabolonian  as  that  varlet  1  llpause  was.  The 
messenger  further  told,  that  after  this  lllpause 
had  made  a  short  oration  to  the  townsmen,  in 
behalf  of  Diabolus  his  master,  the  simple  town 
believing  that  what  was  said  was  true,  with  one 
consent  did  open  Eargate,  the  chief  gate  of  the 
Corporation,  and  did  let  him  with  his  crew  into  a 
possession  of  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  lie 
further  showed  how  Diaholus  had  served  the  Lord 
.Mayor  and  Mr.  Recorder,  to  wit,  that  he  had  put 
them  from  all  place  of  power  and  trust.  Item, 
He  showed  also  that  my  Lord  Will-be-will  was 
turned  a  very  rebel  and  renegade,  and  that  - 
one  Mr.  Mind,  his  clerk;  ami  that  they  two  did 
range  and  revel  it  all  the  town  over,  and  teach 
the  wicked  ones  their  ways,  lie  said,  moreover, 
that  this  Will-be-will  was  put  into  great  trust  ; 
and,  particularly,  that  Diabolus  had  put  into 
Will-he-will's  hand  all  the  strong  places  in  Man- 
soul ;  and  that  Mr.  Affection  was  made  my  Lord 
Will-be-wiU's  deputy  in  his  most  rebellious  affairs. 
Yea,  said  the  messenger,  this  monster,  Lord  Will- 
be-will,  has  openly  disavowed  his  King  Shaddai, 
and  hath  horribly  given  his  faith  and  plighted  his 
troth  to  Diabolus.4 

'Also,' said  the  messenger,  'besides  all  this,  the 
new  king,  or  rather  rebellious  tyrant,  over  the 
once  famous,  but  now  perishing,  town  of  Mansoul, 
has  set  up  a  Lord  Mayor  and  a  Recorder  of  his 
own.  For  Mayor,  he  has  set  up  one  Mr  Lustings, 
and  for  Recorder,  Mr.  Forget-good;  two  of  the 
vilest  of  all  the  town  of  Mansoul.'  This  faithful 
messenger  also  proceeded,  and  told  what  a  sort  of 
new  burgesses  Diabolus  had  made,  also  that  lie 
had  builded  several  strong  forts,  towers,  and  Btrong- 
holds  in  Mansoul.  He  told  too,  the  which  1  hail 
almost  forgot,  how  Diabolus  had  put  the  town  of 
Mansoul  into  arms,  the  better  to  capacitate  them 
on  his  behalf  to  make  resistance  against  Shaddai 
their  king,  should  he  come  to  reduce  them  to  their 
former  obedience. 

Now  this  tidings-teller  did  not  deliver  his  rela- 
tion of  things  in  private,  but  in  open  court,  the 
King  and  his  Son,  high  lords,  chief  QM  at  f01irt 
captains,  and  nobles,  being  all  there  to  hear  the  tid- 
present  to  hear.  But  by  that  they 
bad  heard  the  whole  of  the  story,  it  would  have 
amazed  one  to  have  seen,  had  he  been  there  to 


s  '  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world.'     'Not  a  sparrow  shall  fall  without  your  1 
'  The  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.'  -Mai.  I    ! 
—(En.) 

4  '  Ye  have  said,  We  have  made  a  covenant  with  death,  aad 
with  hell  are  we  at  agreement.'  Is.  xxriii.  13.— (Ed.) 

;,  1 


266 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


behold  it,  what  sorrow  and  grief,  and  compunction 
of  spirit,  there  was  among  all  sorts,  to  think  that 
famous  Mansoul  was  now  taken  ;  only  the  King, 
and  his  Son  foresaw  all  this  long  before,  yea,  and 
sufficiently  provided  for  the  relief  of  Mansoul, 
though  they  told  not  everybody  thereof.  Yet,  be- 
cause they  also  would  have  a  share  in  condoling 
of  the  misery  of  Mansoul,  therefore  they  also  did, 
and  that  at  the  rate  of  the  highest  degree,  bewail 
the  losing  of  Mansoul.  The  King  said  plainly, 
*  That  it  grieved  him  at  his  heart,'  and  you  may 
be  sure  that  his  Son  was  not  a  whit  behind  him. 
Ge.  vi.  5,  6.  Thus  gave  they  conviction  to  all  about 
them,  that  they  had  love  and  compassion  for  the 
famous  town  of  Mansoul.  Well,  when  the  King 
and  his  Son  were  retired  into  the  privy-chamber, 
there  they  again  consulted  about  what  they  had 

The  secret  of  his  designed  before,  to  wit,  that  as  Mail- 
purpose.  sou]  should  in  time  be  suffered  to  be 
lost,  so  as  certainly  it  should  be  recovered  again ; 
recovered  I  say,  in  such  a  way  as  that  both  the 
King  and  his  Son  would  get  themselves  eternal 
™.  c      «„  ,    fame  and  glory  thereby.     Wherefore 

The  Son  of  God.  i  •  i       i       «  #•  m      n    • 

after  this  consult,  the  Son  or  Shaddai, 
a  sweet  and  comely  person,  and  one  that  had 
always  great  affection  for  those  that  were  in 
affliction,  but  one  that  had  mortal  enmity  in  his 
heart  against  Diabolus,  because  he  was  designed 
for  it,  and  because  he  sought  his  crown  and  dignity. 
This  Son  of  Shaddai,  I  say,  having  stricken  hands1 
with  his  Father,  and  promised  that  he  would  be  his 
servant  to  recover  his  Mansoul  again,  stood  by  his 
resolution,  nor  would  he  repent  of  the  same.  is. 
xik.  5.  l  Ti.  i.  is.  He.  xiii.  14.  The  purport  of  which 
a  brave  design  agreement  was  this :  to  wit,  That  at  a 
tovTof'Man-  certain  time  prefixed  by  both,  the 
soul.  King's  Son  should  take  a  journey  into 

the  country  of  Universe ;  and  there,  in  a  way  of 
justice  and  equity,  by  making  of  amends  for  the 
follies  of  Mansoul,  he  should  lay  a  foundation  of 
her  perfect  deliverance  from  Diabolus,  and  from 
his  tyranny.2 

Moreover,  Emmanuel  resolved  to  make,  at  a 
time  convenient,  a  war  upon  the  giant  Diabolus, 
even  while  he  was  possessed  of  the  town  of  Man- 
By  the  Holy  soul !  ar>d  that  he  would  fairly,  by 
Ghost.  strength  of  hand,  drive  him  out  of  his 
hold,  his  nest,  and  take  it  to  himself,  to  be  his 
habitation. 

This  now  being  resolved  upon,  order  Avas  given 

The  Holy  Scrip-    to  tUe  Lord  Chief  Secretary,  to  draw 

tures.  Up  a  fajr  record  0f  what  was  deter- 


1  'To  strike  hands'  means  to  enter  into  agreement,  make 
a  coutract,  or  become  security.  Pr.  xvii.  18. — (Ed.) 

2  How  astonishing  is  the  Divine  benignity  !  Who  can 
express  it  so  well  as  in  the  words  of  Emmanuel  himself,  God 
so  loved  the  world?  So  loved!  How  much  he  loved,  no 
tongue  can  tell,  no  heart  conceive.  It  is  love  unsought,  un- 
paralleled, free,  and  everlasting. —  (Burder.) 


mined,  and  to  cause  that  it  should  be  published  in 
all  the  corners  of  the  kingdom  of  Universe.  A 
short  breviat3  of  the  contents  thereof  you  may,  if 
you  please,  take  here  as  follows : 

•  Let  all  men  know  who  are  concerned,  That  the 
Son  of  Shaddai,  the  great  King,  is 
engaged,  by  covenant  to  his  Father,  to  ^  Contents- 
bring  his  Mansoul  to  him  again  ;  yea,  and  to  put 
Mansoul  too,  through  the  power  of  his  matchless 
love,  into  a  far  better,  and  more  happy  condition 
than  it  was  in  before  it  was  taken  by  Diabolus.'4 

These  papers,  therefore,  were  published  in  several 
places,  to  the  no  little  molestation  of  the  tyrant 
Diabolus,  for  now,  thought  he,  I  shall  be  molested, 
and  my  habitation  will  be  taken  from  me. 

But  when  this  matter,  I  mean  this  purpose  of 
the  King  and  his  Son,  did  at  first  take  air  at 
court,  who  can  tell  how  the  high  lords,  chief 
captains,  and  noble  princes,  that  were  Among  the 
there,  were  taken  with  the  business.  Angels. 
First,  they  whispered  it  one  to  another,  and  after 
that  it  began  to  ring  out  throughout  the  King's 
palace ;  all  wondering  at  the  glorious  design  that 
between  the  King  and  his  Son  was  on  foot  for  the 
miserable  town  of  Mansoul.  Yea,  the  courtiers 
could  scarce  do  any  thing,  either  for  the  King  or 
kingdom,  but  they  would  mix  with  the  doing 
thereof  a  noise  of  the  love  of  the  King  and  his 
Son,  that  they  had  for  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

Nor  could  these  lords,  high  captains,  and  princes, 
be  content  to  keep  this  news  at  court,  yea,  before 
the  records  thereof  were  perfected,  themselves  came 
down  and  told  it  in  Universe.  At  last  Dial)o]ug  per. 
it  came  to  the  ears,  as  I  said,  of  Dia-  piexed  at  the 
bolus,  to  his  no  little  discontent.  For 
you  must  think  it  would  perplex  him  to  hear  of 
such  a  design  against  him ;  well,  but  after  a  few 
casts  in  his  mind,  he  concluded  upon  these  four 
things. 

First.  That  this  news,  this  good  tidings,  if 
possible,  should  be  kept  from  the  ears  Heconciudedon 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul.5  For,  said  several  things. 
he,  if  they  shall  once  come  to  the  knowledge  that 
Shaddai,  their  former  King,  and  Emmanuel,  his 
Son,  are  contriving  of  good  for  the  town  of  Man- 
soul ;  what  can  be  expected  by  me,  but  that  Man- 
soul will  make  a  revolt  from  under  my  hand  and 
government,  and  return  again  to  him. 


3  '  Breviat ;'  a  summary  or  epitome ;  a  word  commonly  used 
in  Bunyan's  time. — (Ed.) 

4  Early  intimation  was  given  to  a  lost  world  of  God's 
gracious  designs  in  favour  of  rebel  man.  He  was  pleased  to 
publish  in  his  Word  this  benevolent  purpose. — (Burder.) 

6  It  is  the  interest  of  hell  to  keep  men  in  ignorance  of  the 
gospel.  His  great  instrument,  in  all  ages  and  climes,  has 
been  a  wicked  priestcraft.  All  that  tends  to  prevent  anxious 
personal  inquiry  for  salvation  is  from  beneath,  from  the  father 
of  lies.  '  1  believe  as  the  church  believes,  and  the  church 
believes  as  I  believe,'  is  the  wretched  sophistry  by  which 
Satan  entangles  souls  in  his  net. — (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


267 


Now,  to  accomplish  this  his  design!  lie  renews 
...  .  „      .    his  flattery  with  my  Lord  Will-he-will, 

r  ir<t.    How    to  •  •  t 

keep  the  news  and  al.-o  gives  him  strict  charge  and 
from  Muusoul.  ,       .         ,         ,        ,  ,   ,  , 

command,  that  he  should  keep  watch 

by  day  and  by  night  at  all  the  gates  of  the  town, 

especially  Eargate  and  Byegate.     For  I  hear  of 

a  design,  quoth  he,  a  design  to  make  us  all  traitor-, 

and  that   Mansoul   must  be  reduced  to  its  first 

bondage  again.      I  hope  they  are  but  flying  stories, 

Ihewfflenn*-    quoth  he;   however,  let  no  such  news 

:  the    by  any  means  he  let  into  Mansoul,  lest 
gospel. 

the  people  be  dejected  thereat;  I  think, 

my  lord,  it  can  be  no  welcome  news  to  von,  I  am 
Good  thoughts  sure  it  is  none  to  me.  And  I  think 
o^tfthetown*  that  at  this  time  it  should  he  all  our 
of  Mansoul.  wisdoms  and  care,  to  nip  the  head  of 
all  such  rumours  as  shall  tend  to  trouble  our  people. 
Wherefore,  I  desire,  my  lord,  that  you  will  in  this 
matter  do  as  I  say,  let  there  be  strong  guards  daily 
kept  at  every  gate  of  the  town.  Stop  also  and 
examine  from  whence  such  come,  that  you  perceive 
do  from  far  come  hither  to  trade ;  nor  let  them  by 
any  means  he  admitted  into  Mansoul,  unless  you 
shall  plainly  perceive  that  they  are  favourers  of 
All  good  thoughts  our  excellent  government.  I  com- 
the  to" "are  t"  niand,  moreover,  said  Diabolus,  that 
be  suppressed.  t]iere  ^e  S](;es  continually  walking  up 
and  down  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  let  them  have 
power  to  suppress,  and  destroy,  any  that  they  shall 
perceive  to  be  plotting  against  us,  or  that  shall 
prate  of  what  by  Shaddai  and  Emmanuel  is  in- 
tended. 

This,  therefore,  was  accordingly  done;  my  Lord 
Will-he-will  hearkened  to  his  lord  and  master,  went 
willingly  after  the  commandment,  and,  with  all  the 
diligence  he  could,  kept  any  that  would  from  going 
out  abroad,  or  that  sought  to  bring  this  tidings  to 
Mansoul,  from  coming  into  the  town. 

Secondly.  This  done,  in  the  next  place,  Diabolus, 

.  „    that  he  might  make  Mansoul  as  sure 

A     new    oath  ° 

imposed  upon  as  he  could,  frames  and  imposes  a  new 
oath  and  horrible  covenant  upon  the 
townsfolk:  to  wit,  '  That  they  should  never  desert 
him,  nor  bis  government,  nor  yet  betray  him,  nor 
seek  to  alter  his  laws;  but  that  they  should  own, 
confess,  stand  by.  and  acknowledge  him  for  their 
rightful  king,  in  defiance  to  any  that  do,  or  here- 
after shall,  by  any  pretence,  law,  or  title  whatever, 
lay  claim  to  the  town  of  Mansoul.'  Thinking 
belike  that  Shaddai  had  not  power  to  absolve  them 
from  this  covenant  with  death,  and  agreement  with 


'They  glory  in  their  shame, 

reject  the  .sustenance  Divine, 

To  beggarly  vile  appetites  descend  ; 

Ask  alms  of  earth,  lor  guests  that  came  from  heav'n; 

Sink  iuto  slaves  ;  and  sell  for  present  hire 

Their  rich  reversion,  and  (what  shares  its  fate), 

Their  native  freedom,  to  the  prince  who  sivays 

The  uether  world.' — (Young.) 


heft.    Is.  xxviii.  ir,.      Nor  did   the  silly  Mansoul   stick 
or  boggle  at  all  at  this  most  monstrous  en 
meat,  hut,  as  if  it  had  been  a  sprat  in 

the  mouth  of  a  whale,  they  swallowed 
it  without  any  chewing.      Were   they  troubled   at 
it?      Nay,    they   lather  bragged    and    boasted    of 
their  so  brave  fidelity  to  the  tyrant,  their  pretende  1 
King,  swearing  that  they  would   never  he  ,-!. 
lings,  nor  forsake  their  old  lord  for  a  new.1 

Thus  did  Diabolus  tie  poor  Mansoul  fast;  but 
jealousy,  that  never  thinks  itself  strong  enough,  put 
him,  in  the  next  plaee,   upon   another 
exploit,  which  was  yet  more,  it  pos- 
sible, to  debauch  this  town  of  .Mansoul.     ^  "^  b£ 
Wherefore  he  caused,  by  the  hand  of     manees,  rallof 

J  .         haidrv.2 

one  Mr.  Filth,  an  odious,  nasty,  lasci- 
vious piece  of  beastliness  to  be  drawn  up  in  writing, 
and  to  he  set  upon  the  castle  gates ;  whereby  he 
granted  and  gave  license  to  all  his  true  and  trusty 
sons  in  Mansoul,  to  do  whatsoever  their  lustful 
appetites  prompted  them  to  do,  and  that  no  man 
was  to  let,  hinder,  or  control  them,  upon  pain  of 
incurring  the  displeasure  of  their  prince. 
Now  this  he  did  for  these  reasons : 

1.  That  the  town  of  Mansoul  might  be  yet  made 
weaker  and  weaker,  and  so  more  un-  seasons  of  his 
able,  should  tiding  come  that  their  Unudoing. 
redemption  was  designed,  to  believe,  hope,  or  con- 
sent to  the  truth  thereof.  For  reason  says,  the 
bigger  the  sinner,  the  less  grounds  of  hope.-,  of 
mercy.3 

2.  The  second  reason  was, If,  perhaps,  Emmanuel, 
the  Son  of  Shaddai  their  king,  by  seeing  the  hor- 
rible and  profane  doings  of  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
might  repent,  though  entered  into  a  covenant  of 
redeeming  them,  of  pursuing  that  covenant  of  their 
redemption;  for  he  knew  that  Shaddai  was  holy, 
and  that  his  Son  Emmanuel  was  holy;  yea.  he 
knew  it  by  woeful  experience  ;  for,  for  the  iniquity 
and  sin  of  Diabolus  was  he  cast  from  the  bighi  at 
orbs.  Wherefore,  what  more  rational  than  for  him 
to  conclude,  that  thus  for  sin  it  might  fare  with 
Mansoul.  But  fearing  also  lest  this  knot  should 
break,  he  bethinks  himself  of  another,  to  wit: 

3.  To  endeavour  to  possess  all  hearts  in  the  town 
of  Mansoul  that  Shaddai  was  raising  of  an  army, 
to  come  to  overthrow  and  utterly  to  destroy  tins 
town  of  Mansoul,  and  this  he  did  to  fore.-tal  any 
tidings   that   might   come   to  their  ears   of    their 


-  'Baldly;'  obscenity.  The  abounding  of  such  depraved 
publications"  allbrds  a  good  criterion  of  the  moral  state  "t  a 
country— China,  very  degraded;  France,  di 
under  'the  Pope's  nose,  most  degraded  ;  few,  in  comparison, are 
now  to  be  found  in  England,  and  they  hide 
Christian  knowledge  progresses.  In  Banyan's  time,  under  the 
depraved  Charles  J  I.,  they  awfully  abounded  under  the  care 
of  Mr.  Filth.— (Ed.)  .       .    .. 

3  Not  so,  Bays  the  Scripture,  H  isa  Baying  worthy  of  ail 
acceptation,  thai  Christ  came  to  save  sinners,  even  the  chief 
of  sinners.— See  Banyan's  Jerusalem  .burner  i^veJ.—{hu.) 


168 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


deliverance ;  for,  thought  he,  if  I  first  brute1  this, 
the  tidings  that  shall  come  after,  will  all  be  swal- 
lowed up  of  this ;  for  what  else  will  Mansoul  say, 
when  they  shail  hear  that  they  must  be  delivered, 

The  nlace  of  ^u*  *na*  ^le  *rue  meamno  *s>  Shaddai 
hearing  and  of    intends  to  destroy  them  ;  wherefore,  he 

considering.  1  i     1  •  1 

summons  the  whole  town  into  the 
market-place,  and  there,  with  deceitful  tongue,  thus 
he  addresses  himself  unto  them  : — 

'  Gentlemen,  and  my  very  good  friends,  You  are 
all,  as  you  know,  my  legal  subjects,  and  men  of 
the  famous  town  of  Mansoul ;  you  know  how,  from 
the  first  day  that  I  have  been  with  you  until  now, 
I  have  behaved  myself  among  you,  and  what  liberty, 
and  great  privileges  you  have  enjoyed  under  my 
government,  I  hope  to  your  honour,  and  mine,  and 
also  to  your  content  and  delight.  Now,  my  famous 
Mansoul,  a  noise  of  trouble  there  is  abroad,  of 
trouble  to  the  town  of  Mansoul,  sorry  I  am  there- 
of for  your  sakes.  For  I  have  received  but  now 
by  the  post  from  my  lord  Lucifer — and  he  useth 
to  have  good  intelligence — that  your  old  king 
Shaddai  is  raising  of  an  army  to  come  against  you, 
to  destroy  you  root  and  branch:2  and  this,  0  Man- 
soul, is  now  the  cause  that  at  this  time  I  have 
called  you  together ;  namely,  to  advise  what  in  this 
juncture  is  best  to  be  done ;  for  my  part,  I  am  but 
one,  and  can  with  ease  shift  for  myself,  did  I  list 
to  seek  my  own  ease,  and  to  leave  my  Mansoul  in 
all  the  danger.  But  my  heart  is  so  firmly  united 
to  you,  and  so  unwilling  am  I  to  leave  you,  that  I 
am  willing  to  stand  and  fall  with  you,  to  the  utmost 
hazard  that  shall  befall  me.3  What  say  you,  0  my 
Mansoul  ?  Will  you  now  desert  your  old  friend,  or 
do  you  think  of  standing  by  me?'  Then  as  one 
man,  with  one  mouth,  they  cried  out  together,  'Let 
him  die  the  death  that  will  not.' 

Then  said  Diabolus  again,  '  It  is  in  vain  for  us  to 
Very  deceivahie   hope  for  quarter,  for  this  king  knows 

language.  not  j10w  to  si10W  ;t .  true>  perhaps,  he 
at  his  first  sitting  down  before  us  will  talk  of,  and 
pretend  to,  mercy,  that  thereby,  with  the  more  ease, 
and  less  trouble,  he  may  again  make  himself  the 
master  of  Mansoul.  Whatever  therefore  he  shall 
say,  believe  not  one  syllable  or  tittle  of  it,  for  all 
such  language  is  but  to  overcome  us,  and  to  make 
us,  while  we  wallow  in  our  blood,  the  trophies  of 


his  merciless  victory.  My  mind  is,  therefore,  that 
we  resolve,  to  the  last  man,  to  resist  him,  and  not 
to  believe  him  upon  any  terms ;  for  in  at  that  door 
will  come  our  danger.4  But  shall  we  be  flattered 
out  of  our  lives  ?  I  hope  you  know  more  of  the 
rudiments  of  politics  than  to  suffer  yourselves  so 
pitifully  to  be  served. 

•  But  suppose  he  should,  if  he  gets  us  to  yield, 
saVe  some  of  our  lives,  or  the  lives  of  some  of  them 
that  are  underlings  in  Mansoul,  what  help  will  that 
be  to  you  that  are  the  chief  of  the  town  ;  especially 
of  you  whom  I  have  set  up,  and  whose  greatness 
has  been  procured  by  you  through  your  faithful 
sticking  to  me?     And  suppose  again, 
that  he  should  give  quarter  to  every     ying  angaage" 
one  of  you,  be  sure  he  will  bring  you  into  that 
bondage  under  which  you  were  captivated  before, 
or  a  worse ;  and  then  what  good  will  your  lives  do 
you  ?   Shall  you  with  him  live  in  pleasure  as  you 
do  now  ?     No,  no,  you  must  be  bound  by  laws  that 
will  pinch  you,  and  be  made  to  do  that  which  at 
present  is  hateful  to  you ;  I  am  for  you,  if  you  are 
for  me,  and  it  is  better  to  die  valiantly,  than  to 
live  like  pitiful  slaves.5     But  I  say,  the  life  of  a 
slave  will  be  counted  a  life  too  good   „   .     -.a  of 
for  Mansoul  now ;    blood,  blood,  no-     losing  of  Man- 
thing  but  blood  is  in  every  blast  of 
Shaddai's   trumpet   against    poor  Mansoul  now.6 
Pray,  be  concerned,  I  hear  he  is  coming  up ;  and 
stand  to  your  arms,  that  now  while  you  have  any 
leisure,  1  may  learn  you  some  feats  of  war.     Ar- 
mour for  you  I  have,  and  by  me  it  is ;  yea,  and  it 
is  sufficient  for  Mansoul  from  top  to  toe ;  nor  can 
you  be  hurt  by  what  his  force  can  do,  if  you  shall 
keep  it  well  girt  and  fastened  about  you.     Come 
therefore  to  my  castle,  and  welcome,    „       t    t^ 
and  harness  yourselves  for  the  war.     upon    arming 
There  is  helmet,  breastplate,   sword, 
and  shield,  and  what  not,  that  will  make  you  fight 
like  men. 

'  1.  My  helmet,  otherwise  called  an  head-piece, 
is  hope  of  doinr>-  well  at  last,  what  lives 

,.  m  •      .      ,i     .       i.i       His  helmet. 

soever  you  live.  This  is  that  which 
they  had,  who  said,  that  they  should  have  peace 
though  they  walked  in  the  wickedness  of  their 
heart,  'to  add  drunkenness  to  thirst.'  De.  xxix.  19. 
A  piece  of  approved  armour  this  is,  and  whoever 
has  it  and  can  hold  it,  so  long  no  arrow,  dart, 


1  'Brute,'  generally  spelt  'bruit;'  report,  rumour,  fame. — 
Imp.  Die. —  (Ed.) 

-  This  is  one  of  the  great  lies  with  which  Satan  and  his 
emissaries  would  keep  sinners  in  bondage,  by  leading  them  to 
think  that  Christ  came  not  to  save,  but  to  destroy,  and  that 
true  religion  is  a  dull,  melancholy,  pursuit,  tending  only  to 
misery  and  melancholy;  the  very  reverse  of  all  Christian 
experience  and  truth. — (Ed.) 

a  Well  may  Satan  be  called  the  father  of  lies;  all  his  object 
is  to  destroy  souls.  He  is  a  merciless  tyrant ;  his  service  is 
the  vilest  drudgery ;  his  wages  are  pain,  sorrow,  sickness, 
temporal,  and  eternal  death.  O  for  that  spiritual  wisdom 
from  heaven  by  which  alone  we  can  detect  his  devices. — (Ed.) 


4  The  strength  of  Satan's  kingdom  lies  in  preventing  men 
from  thinking  or  examining  for  themselves. — (Ed.) 

6  How  do  the  most  wretched  slaves,  eveti  the  devil's  dirtiest 
drudges,  hug  their  chains,  and  try  to  imagine  themselves  free. 
The  believer  alone  knows  what  liberty  is ;  Christ's  service  is 
perfect  freedom,  and  his  ways — all  his  ways,  and  none  but 
his  ways — are  pleasantness  and  peace. — (Ed.) 

8  Without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of 
sins ;  but  with  the  blood-shedding  of  Jesus,  the  gospel  of  peace 
and  salvation  is  brought  to  the  guilty  conscience.  How  malig- 
nantly the  father  of  lies  can  pervert  the  plainest  gospel  truths, 
— (ED.\ 


TTTE   HOLY   WAR. 


.TO 


swoni,  or  shield  can  hurt  him ;  this  therefore  keep 

on,  and  thou  wilt  keep  off  many  a  h!ow,  my  Man- 

soul.1 

•2.  My  breastplate  is  a  breastplate  of  iron;  I 

had  it  forged  in  mine  own  country,  and 
Hisbreastplate.      „  ',  ,.  ,    .       •    .  , 

all  my  soldiers  aro  armed  therewith; 

in  plain  language  it  is  an  hard  heart,  an  heart  as 

hard  as  iron,  and  as  much  past  feeling  as  a  stone; 

the  which  if  you  get,  and    keep,   neither  mercy 

shall  win   you,   nor  judgment   fright  yon.   Be.ix.9. 

This,  therefore,  is  a  piece  of  armour  most  necessary 

for  all  to  put  on  that  hate  Shaddai,  and  that  would 

tight  against  him  under  my  banner. 

'  3.  My  sword  is  a  tongue  that  is  set  on  fire  of 

hell,  rs.  ivii.  4,  and  that  can  bend  itself 

to  speak  evil  of  Shaddai,  his  Son,  his 

ways,  and  people.  Pilxiv. a.      Use  this;  it  has  been 

tried  a  thousand  times  twice  told ;  whoever  hath 

it,  keeps  it,  and  makes  that  use  of  it  as  I  would 

have  him,  can  never  be  conquered  by  mine  enemy. 

Ja.  iii.  3—5. 

'•i.  My  shield  is  unbelief,  or  calling  into  question 
the  truth  of  the  Word,  or  all  the  say- 
ings that  speak  of  the  judgment  that 
Shaddai  has  appointed  for  wicked  men.  Use  this 
shield.  Job  xv.  :'G.  Many  attempts  he  has  made  upon 
it,  and  sometimes,  it  is  true,  it  has  been  bruised. 
Ps.  lxxvi.  3.  But  they  that  have  writ  of  the  wars  of 
Emmanuel  against  my  servants,  have  testified  that 
he  could  do  no  mighty  work  there  because  of  their 
unbelief.  Mar.  vi.  5,  6.  Now,  to  handle  this  weapon 
of  mine  aright,  it  is  not  to  believe  things  because 
they  are  true,  of  what  sort  or  by  whomsoever  as- 
serted. If  he  speak  of  judgment,  care  not  for  it; 
if  he  speak  of  mercy,  care  not  for  it ;  if  he  pro- 
mise, if  he  swear  that  he  would  do  to  Mansoul, 
if  it  turn,  no  hurt  but  good,  regard  not  what  is 
said ;  question  the  truth  of  all ;  for  this  is  to  wield 
the  shield  of  unbelief  aright,  and  as  my  servants 
ought  and  do;  and  he  that  doth  otherwise  loves 
me  not,  nor  do  I  count  him  but  an  enemy  to  me. 

'5.  Another  part  or  piece,'  said  Diabolus,  'of 
mine  excellent  armour  is  a  dumb  and  prayerlcss 
spirit — a  spirit  that  scorns  to  cry  for  mercy;  where- 
fore lie  you,  my  Mansoul,  sure  that  you  make  use  of 
this.3     What !  cry  for  quarter,  never  do  that  if  you 


1  How  many  baptized  infidels  perish  in  a  vain  hope  that 
Divine  mercy  will  be  extended  to  impenitent,  unawakened 
sinners;  forgetting  that  'a  God  all  mercy,  is  a  God  uujust.' 
—  (Ed.) 

u  This  shield  of  the  devil  is  used  to  an  extent  that  few 
persous  imagine.  Ail  the  impenitent  disbelieve  the  punish- 
ment of  sin,  and  use  this  shield  to  ward  oil'  conviction  ;  and 
how  many  of  the  children  of  God,  when  in  a  state  of  doubt, 
use  the  same  shield,  to  prevent  the  cut  ranee  of  those  pro- 
mises which  would  bring  consolation  to  their  wounded  souls! 
Strangely  has  sin  perverted  the  faculties  of  Mansoul. — (£d.) 

3  llmv  skilfully  Satan  plies  his  suggestions,  to  keep  p  or 
shiners  from  their  knees.  lie  knows  that  lie  cauuot  withstand 
godly,  fervent,  prayer. — (Kb.) 


would  be  mine  ;  1  know  you  are  BtOUt  men,  and  am 
Sure  that  I  have  clad  you  with  that  which  i>  armour 

of  proof;  wherefore  to  cry  to  Shaddai  lor  mercy,  let 

thatr be  far  from   you.      Besides  all  this,  I   have  a 

maul,  fire-brands,  arrows  and  death,  all  Lr"od  liand- 

weapons,  and  BUch  as  will  do  execution. '* 

After  lie  had  thus  furnished  his  men     „     .    , 

He    bsela  >D 
with  armour  and   arms,  he  addressed      withe 

himself  to  them  in  such  like  words  as 
these: — 'Remember,'  quoth  he,  'that  I  am  your 
rightful  king,  and  that  you  have  taken  an  oath,  and 
entered  into  covenant  to  be  true  to  me  and  my 
cause ;  I  say,  remember  this,  and  show  yourselves 
stout  and  valiant  men  of  Mansoul.  Remember  also 
the  kindness  that  I  have  always  showed  to  you, 
and  that  without  your  petition:  I  have  granted  to 
you  external  things,  wherefore  tho  privileges, 
grants,  immunities,  profits  and  honours  wherewith  I 
endowed  you,  do  call  for  at  your  hands  returns  of 
loyalty,  my  lion-like  men  of  Mansoul ;  and  when 
so  fit  a  time  to  show  it  as  when  another  shall  seek 
to  take  my  dominion  over  you,  into  their  own 
hands  ?  One  word  more,  and  I  have  done,  Can 
we  but  stand,  and  overcome  this  one  shock  or 
brunt,  I  doubt  not  but  in  little  time  all  the  world 
will  be  ours ;  and  when  that  day  comes,  my  true 
hearts,  I  will  make  you  kings,  princes,  and  cap- 
tains, and  what  brave  days  shall  we  have  then  ?  '•' 
Diabolus  having  thus  armed,  and  fore-armed  his 
servants  and  vassals  in  Mansoul,  against  their  good 
and  lawful  king  Shaddai ;  in  the  next  place,  he 
doubleth  his  guards  at  the  gates  of  the  town,  and 
he  takes  himself  to  the  castle,  which  was  his  strong 
hold.  His  vassals  also,  to  show  their  They  <>f  Man- 
wills,  and  supposed,  but  ignoble,  gal-  J^0^* 
lantry,  exercise  themselves  in  their  8iaut- 
arms  every  day,  and  teach  one  another  feats  of 
war;  they  also  defied  their  enemies,  and  sang  up 
the  praises  of  their  tyrant;  they  threatened  also 
what  men  they  would  be,  if  ever  things  should  rise 
so  hio;h  as  a  war  between  Shaddai  and  their  kins:.6 


4  Header,  we  have  here  presented  to  our  view  the  whole 
armour  of  the  devil — presumption,  hardness  of  heart,  a  blas- 
phemous tongue,  unbelief,  and  a  prayerlcss  spirit.  This  is 
Satan's  armour;  the  very  reverse  of  that  which  God  has  pro- 
vided for  Christian  soldiers. — (Burder.) 

6  Thus  Satan  deceivcth  the  world,  promising  liberty  and 
pleasure,  while  slavery  and  destruction  are  his  only  aim.  '  All 
these  things,'  said  he  to  our  Lord,  '  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 
wilt  worship  me.'  O  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  say,  'Get 
thee  behind  me,  Satan.' — (Burder.)  Satan  first  beguiles,  then 
destroys,  and  lastly  torments;  he  flatters  only  to  betray  and 
ruin. — (Mason.) 

ti  Reader,  having  accompanied  Bunyan  thus  far  in  his 
War,  pause  and  consider  whether  you  understand  his  spiritual 
meaning:    the    original  perfection  of   human   nature  —  the 
temptations  of  the  enemy  of  souls— the  loss  of  innocency— 
the   admission  of   Diabolus  into  the  heart    oi 
reign  of  sin— the  first  intimations  of  Divine  mercy-    : 
precautions  to  prevent  it— to  resist  th(  -and  to 

keep  i  he  soul  in  shivery,— have  I  felt  all  tins  in  my  own  ex- 
perience?— (En.) 


270 


THE  HOLY  WATt. 


[Chapter  IV.] 

[Contents; — Shaddai  sends  an  army  of  forty  thousand  to  re- 
duce Mansoul,  under  the  direction  of  four  captains,  Boa- 
nerges, Conviction,  Judgment, and  Execution,  who  address 
the  inhahitants  with  great  energy,  but  to  little  purpose — 
Diabolus,  Incredulity,  Illpause,  and  others,  interfere  to 
pvevent  submission  —  Prejudice  defends  Eargate  with  a 
guard  of  sixty  deaf  men.] 

Now  all  this  time,  the  good  King,  the  King 
Btadtoiprepa*.  Shaddai  was  preparing  to  send  an 
etii  an  army   army  to  recover  the  town  of  Mansoul 

for   the    rero-  •       n  i       ,1  c  ±i     ■ 

very  of  Mm-  again,  from  under  the  tyranny  ot  their 
sox^  pretended    king    Diabolus.     But    he 

thought  good,  at  the  first,  not  to  send  them  hy  the 
hand  and  conduct  of  brave  Emmanuel  his  Son, 
but  under  the  hand  of  some  of  his  servants,  to  see 
first,  by  them,  the  temper  of  Mansoul;  and  whether 
The  wonts  of  by  them  they  would  be  won  to  the 
Gud-  obedience  of  their  King.     The  army 

consisted  of  above  forty  thousand,  all  true  men ; 
for  they  came  from  the  King's  own  court,  and 
were  those  of  his  own  choosing. 

They  came  up  to  Mansoul  under  the  conduct  of 
four  stout  generals,  each  man  being  a  captain  of 
The  captains'  ten  thousand  men,  and  these  are  their 
names.  names,  and  their  signs.  The  name  of 
the  first  was  Boanerges ;  the  name  of  the  second 
was  Captain  Conviction ;  the  name  of  the  third 
was  Captain  Judgment;  and  the  name  of  the  fourth 
was  Captain  Execution.  These  were  the  captains 
that  Shaddai  sent  to  regain  Mansoul.1 

These  four  captains,  as  was  said,  the  King 
thought  fit,  in  the  first  place,  to  send  to  Mansoul,  to 
make  an  attempt  upon  it ;  for  indeed,  generally  in 
all  his  wars  he  did  use  to  send  these  four  captains 
in  the  van,  for  they  were  very  stout  and  rough- 
hewn  men,  men  that  were  fit  to  break  the  ice,  and 
to  make  their  way  by  dint  of  sword,  and  their  men 
were  like  themselves.2  Ps.  ix.  4. 

To  each  of  these  captains  the  King  gave  a  bon- 
ner  that  it  might  be  displayed,  because  of  the  good- 
ness of  his  cause,  and  because  of  the  right  that  he 
had  to  Mansoul.  First  to  Captain  Boanerges,  for 
he  was  the  chief ;  to  him,  I  say,  was  given  ten 
thousand  men.  His  ensign  was  Mr.  Thunder;  he 
bare  the  black  colours,  and  his  escutcheon  Avas 
three  burning  thunderbolts.  Mar.  iii.  17.     The  second 


1  The  army  of  forty  thousand  terrors  of  the  law  was  not  so 
fearful  as  one  threatening  of  the  new  covenant.  Bead  care- 
fully Grace  Abounding,  No.  246. —  (Ed.) 

2  Mansoul's  spirit  is  first  to  be  broken  by  the  terrors  of  the 
law ;  there  is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  the  very  appro- 
priate names  of  the  captains.  But  why  forty  thousand  con- 
victions and  terrors,  unless  from  that  number  of  valiant  men 
'  prepared  for  war,'  that  went  up  with  Joshua,  who  was  feared 
'as  they  feared  Moses?'  Jos.  iv.  13.  The  margin  says,  'The 
words  of  God.'  There  are  in  the  Bible  810,697  words,  so 
that  the  40,000  and  above  may  refer  to  the  number  of  those 
passages  intended  to  convince  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of 
judgment  to  come. — (Ed.) 


captain  was  Captain  Conviction  ;  to  him  was  also 
given  ten  thousand  men.  His  ensign's  name  was 
Mr.  Sorrow ;  he  did  bear  the  pale  colours,  and  his 
escutcheon  was  the  book  of  the  law  wide  open, 
from  whence  issued  a  flame  of  fire.  De.  xxxhi.  2.  The 
third  captain  was  Captain  Judgment;  to  him  was 
given  ten  thousand  men.  His  ensign's  name  was 
Mr.  Terror ;  he  bare  the  red  colours,  and  his  es- 
cutcheon was  a  burning  fiery  furnace.  Mat.  xjii  40,  41. 
The  fourth  captain  was  Captain  Execution ;  to  him 
was  given  ten  thousand  men.  His  ensign  was  one 
Mr.  Justice;  he  also  bare  the  red  colours,  and  his 
escutcheon  was  a  fruitless  tree,  with  an  axe  lying 
at  the  root  thereof.   Mat.  iii.  10. 

These  four  captains,  as  I  said,  had  every  one  of 
them  under  his  command  ten  thousand  men  ;  all 
of  good  fidelity  to  the  King,  and  stout  at  their 
military  actions.3 

Well,  the  captains,  and  their  forces,  their  men 
and  under-officers,  being  had  upon  a  day  by  Shad- 
dai into  the  field,  and  there  called  all  over  by  their 
names,  were  then  and  there  put  into  such  harness4 
as  became  their  degree,  and  that  service  that  now 
they  were  going  about  for  their  King.5 

Now,  when  the  King  had  mustered  his  forces — 
for  it  is  he  that  mustereth  the  host  to  the  battle — 
he  gave  unto  the  captains  their  several  commissions, 
with  charge  and  commandment,  in  the  audience  of 
all  the  soldiers,  that  they  should  take  heed  faith- 
fully and  courageously  to  do  and  execute  the  same, 
Their  commissions  were,  for  the  substance  of  them, 
the  same  in  form ;  though  as  to  name,  title,  place, 
and  degree  of  the  captains,  there  might  be  some, 
but  very  small  variation.  And  here  let  me  give 
you  an  account  of  the  matter  and  sum  contained 
in  their  commission. 

A  commission  from  the  great  Shaddai,  King  of  Man- 
soul, to  his  trusty  and  noble  captain,  the  Captain 
Boanerges ,6  for  his  making  roar  upon  the  town 
of  Mansoul. 

'  0  thou  Boanerges,  one  of  my  stout  and 
thundering  captains,  over  one  ten  xheir  commis- 
thousand   of  my  valiant  and  faithful  Slun- 


3  '  Boanerges,'  a  powerful  awakening  ministry;  *  Conviction,' 
an  awful  display  of  the  requirements  of  the  law ;  '  Judgment,' 
the  dreadful  expectation  of  the  great  day;  'Execution,' the 
destruction  of  impenitent  sinners.  These  are  means  of  con- 
viction, although  in  many  cases,  as  that  of  Lydia,  the  heart  is 
gently  opened  to  admit  Emmanuel. —  (Ed.) 

4  '  Harness ;'  dress  or  equipments  for  fighting  men,  or  for 
horses.— (Ed.) 

4  These  are  the  usual  means  of  conviction  and  conversion, 
but  not  the  only  means.  Some  are  gently  led  to  the  Saviour, 
to  others  'in  a  dream,  in  a  vision  of  the  night;  he  openeth  the 
ears  of  men,  and  scaleth  their  instruction.'  Job  xxxiii.  15,  16. 
The  great  question  is,  Do  I  love  the  Lord  ?  Does  that  love 
lead  to  obedience? — (Ed.) 

6  A  son  of  thunder,  meaning  a  powerful  proclamation  of  the 
gospel,  which,  when  made  effectual  iu  the  heart  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  becomes  the  power  of  God  to  salvation. — (Mason.) 


THE    HOLY   AVAR. 


271 


servants ;  go  tliou  in  my  name,  with  this  thy 
force,  to  the   miserable   town  of  Mansoul;   ami 

when  tliou  comest  thither,  offer  them  first  con- 
ditions of  peace,  lhtx.ll.  Lakes,  ft.  and  command 
them,  that  casting  off  the  yoke  and  tyranny  of 
the  wicked  Diabolus,  they  return  to  me,  their 
rightful  Prince  and  Lord;  command  them, also,  that 
they  cleanse  themselves  from  all  that  is  his  in  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  and  look  to  thysel!  that  thou  hast 
good  satisfaction  touching  the  truth  of  their  obed- 
ience. Thus  when  thou  hast  commanded  them,  if 
they  in  truth  submit  thereto,  then  do  thou,  to  the 
uttermost  of  thy  power,  what  in  thee  lies,  to  set 
up  for  me  a  garrison  in  the  famous  town  of  Man- 
soul  ;  nor  do  thou  hurt  the  least  native  that  moveth 
or  hreatheth  therein,  if  they  will  submit  themselves 
to  me,  hut  treat  thou  such  as  if  they  were  thy  friend 
or  brother — for  all  such  I  love,  and  they  shall  be 
dear  unto  me — and  tell  them  that  1  will  take  a 
time  to  come  unto  them,  and  to  let  them  know  that 
1  am  merciful,   l  Th.  u.  :-n. 

1  But  if  they  shall — notwithstanding  thy  sum- 
mons, and  the  production  of  thy  authority — resist, 
stand  out  against  thee,  and  rebel,  then  do  I  com- 
mand thee  to  make  use  of  all  thy  cunning,  power, 
might,  and  force,  to  bring  them  under  by  strength 
of  hand.      Farewell.' 

Thus  you  see  the  sum  of  their  commissions,  for, 
as  I  said  before,  for  the  substance  of  them  they 
were  the  same  that  the  rest  of  the  noble  captains 
had. 

Wherefore  they  having  received  each  commander 
his  authority,  at  the  hand  of  their  King,  the  day 
They  prepare  for  being  appointed,  and  the  place  of  their 
a  march.  rendezvous  prefixed,  each  commander 

appeared  in  such  gallantry  as  became  his  cause 
and  calling.  So,  after  a  new  entertainment  from 
Shaddai,  with  flying  colours,  they  set  forward  to 
march  towards  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  Cap- 
tain Boanerges  led  the  van;  Captain  Conviction  and 
Captain  Judgment  made  up  the  main  body,  and 
Captain  Execution  brought  up  the  rear.  Bph.iL  13, 
17.  They  then  having  a  long  way  to  go,  for  the 
town  of  Mansoul  was  far  oil'  from  the  court  of  Shad- 
dai, they  marched  through  the  regions  and  countries 
of  many  people,  not  hurting  or  abusing  any,  hut 
blessing  wherever  they  came.  They  also  lived  upon 
the  King's  cost  in  all  the  way  they  went.1 

Having  travelled  thus  for  many  days,2  at  last 
they  came   within    sight  of  Mansoul  ;   the  which, 


1  Although  Banyan  was  not  a  hireling  preacher,  but  for  a 
great  portion  of  his  life  maintained  himself  and  his  family  by 
the  labour  of  his  hands,  yet  he  plainly  intimates  that  itinerating 
ami  missionary  labourers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard  must  be  main- 
tained at  the  Kind's  cost  while  away  from  home. — (Ed.) 

2  The  distance  to  which  man  has  fallen  from  Sod,  is  well 
set  forth  in  the  Church  Homily  en  the  Nativity:  '  Before  he 
Was  beloved,  now  he  is  abhorred;  before  hi'  was  mosi  beautiful 
and  iirecious,  now  he  is  vile  and  wretched.    Instead  of  the  image 


when  they  saw,  the  captains  could  for  their  heart! 

do  110  less  than  for  a  while  bewail  the  ( dition  of 

the  town,  for  they  quickly  saw  how  that  it  u.i- 
prostrate  to  the  will  of  Diabolus,  and  to  his  ways 
and  designs.  Well,  to  be  short,  the  captains  came 
up  before  the  town,  march  up  to  Ear-ate,  sit  down 
there,  tor  that  was  the  place  of  hearing.  So,  when 
they  had  pitched  their  tents  and  intrenched  them- 
selves, they  addressed  themselves  to  make  their 
assault. 

Now  the  townsfolk  at  first,  beholding  so  gal- 
lant a  company,  so  bravely  accoutered,  T)ie  worl(1 

and    so    excellently  disciplined,   hav-     convim 

,.    *    .  l  ,      the  well-order- 

ing  on   their   glittering   armour,  and     ed  life  of  Uie 

displaying  of  their  flying  colours,  8  ly' 
could  not  hut  come  out  of  their  houses  and  gaze. 
But  the  cunning  fox,  Diabolus,  fearing  that  the 
people,  after  this  sight,  should  oi.  a  sudden  sum- 
mons, open  the  gates  to  the  captains,  came  down 
with  all  haste  from  the  castle,  and  made  them 
retire  into  the  body  of  the  town,  who,  when  he 
had  them  there,  made  this  lying  and  dece'vable 
speech  unto  them  : — 

'  Gentlemen,'  quoth  he,  'although  you  are  my 
trusty  and  well-beloved  friends,  yet  I  ^^  ^ 
cannot  but  a  little  chide  vou  for  your  »tcs  their  minds 

,    ,  .  ...  from  thrm. 

late  uncircumspect    action,   m    going 
out  to  gaze  on  that  great  and  mighty  force  that 
but  yesterday  sat  down  before,  and  have  now  in- 
trenched themselves,  in  order  to  the  maintaining 
of  a  siege  against,  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul. 
Do  you  know  who  they  are,  whence  they  come, 
and  what  is  their  purpose  in  setting  down  before 
the  town  of  Mansoul  ?     They  are  they   Timt'*  i 
of  whom  I  have  told  you  long  ago,     tu"- 
that  they  would  come  to  destroy  this  town,  and 
against  whom  I  have  been  at  the  cost  to  arm  you 
with  cap-a-pie  *  for  your  body,  besides  great  forti- 
fications for  your  mind.      Wherefore,  then,  did  yon 
not  rather,  even  at  the  first  appearance  of  them, 
cry  out,  fire  the  beacons,  and  give  the 
whole  town  an  alai 
that  we  might  all  have  been  in" a  pos-     [g^*^ 

ture   of  defence,   and    been   ready   to     Mansoul      a- 
,...".  g.uns!  lain. 

have  received  them  with  the  highest 
acts  of  defiance,  then  had  you  showed  yourselves 
men  to  my  liking;  whereas,  by  what  you  have 
done,  you  have  made  me  half-afraid  ;  1  Bay  hail- 
afraid,  that  when  they  and  we  shall  come  to  push 
a  pike,  I  shall  find  you  want  courage  to  stand  it 


satan      gpreatlv 
concernin«r  them,      afraid  oi  God's 


of  God,  he  is  now  the  image  of  the  devil ;  instead  of  being  the 
citi/.m  of  heaven,  he  i.,  the  bond-slave  of  heU  . 
pari  of  his  former  purity  and  cleanness,  but  is  .V 
and  defiled,  and  is  nothing  but  a  lump  of  sin,  I 

Bating  death.'     What  -  i   i 
mind  of  an  unconverted  clergyman,  who  prides  nimsel 
dipnity  of  human  nature,  and  yet  reads  tins  I  • 
timi.— (Ed.) 

3  '  Cap-a-pie;'  armed  all  over  from  head  to  feet—  {!„ . 


273 


THE   HOLY   WAT!. 


out  any  longer.  Wherefore  have  I  commanded  a 
watch,  aud  that  you  should  douhle  your  guards  at 
the  gates  ?  Wherefore  have  I  endeavoured  to 
make  you  as  hard  as  iron,  and  your  hearts  as  a 
piece  of  the  nether  millstone  ?  Was  it,  think  you, 
that  you  might  show  yourselves  women,  and  that 
you  might  go  out  like  a  company  of  innocents  to 
llestirsthemup  gaze  on  your  mortal  foes?  Fy,  fy, 
tothe ministers  P11^  yourselves  into  a  posture  of  de- 
of  the  Word  fence,  heat  up  the  drum,  gather  to- 
gether in  warlike  manner,  that  our  foes  may 
know  that,  hefore  they  shall  conquer  this  corpor- 
ation there  are  valiant  men  in  Mansoul. 

'I  will  leave  off  now  to  chide,1  and  will  not  farther 
rebuke  you ;  hut  I  charge  you  that  henceforwards 
you  let  me  see  no  more  such  actions.  Let  not 
henceforward  a  man  of  you,  without  order  first 
obtained  from  me,  so  much  as  show  his  head  over 
the  wall  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  You  have  now 
heard  me,  do  as  I  have  commanded,  and  you  shall 
cause  me  that  I  dwell  securely  with  you,  and  that 
I  take  care  as  for  myself,  so  for  your  safety  and 
honour  also.      Farewell.'1 

Now  were  the  townsmen  strangely  altered  ;  they 
were  as  men  stricken  with  a  panic  fear ;  they  ran 
„,        .  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of  the 

When    sinners  „  ,,  ,  .  TT  . 

hearken  to  Sa-   town  or  Mansoul,  crying  out,  '  Help, 

set' in'ay  rage    lielP !     tlie    men    tliat    tunl    the    WOllJ 

against  godii-    UpSide   down  are  come  hither  also;' 

ncss.  L  m  ' 

nor  could  any  of  them  he  quiet  after, 
hut  still,  as  men  bereft  of  wit,  they  cried  out,  '  The 
destroyers  of  our  peace  and  people  are  come. '  This 
went  down  with  Diubolus.  '  Aye !'  quoth  he  to 
himself,  '  this  I  like  well,  now  it  is  as  I  would 
have  it;  now  you  show  your  obedience  to  your 
prince,  hold  you  but  here,  and  then  let  them  take 
the  town  if  they  can.' 

Well,  before  the  King's  forces  had  sat  before 

Mansoul  three  days,  Captain  Boanerges  commanded 

The  King's  trum-  his  trumpeter  to  go  down  to  Eargate, 

pet  sounded  at  and  there,  in  the  name  of  the  Great 

Eargate.  „,     , ,   .  =    . 

bnauaai,  to  summons  JVlansoul  to  give 

audience  to  the  message  that  he,  in  his  Master's 
name,  was  to  them  commanded  to  deliver.  So  the 
trumpeter,  whose  name  was  Take-heed-what-you- 
hear,  went  up,  as  he  was  commanded,  to  Ear-gate, 
and  there  sounded  his  trumpet  for  a  hearing;  but 
They  will  not  there  was  none  that  appeared  that 
gave  answer  or  regard ;  for  so  had 
Diabolus  commanded.  So  the  trumpeter  returned 
to  his  captain,  and  told  him  what  he  had  done,  and 


1  To  alarm  and  to  persuade  are  the  two  principal  means  by 
which  the  devil  tempts  men ;  and  it  is  not  uncommon  among 
Christians  to  fed  the  influence  of  both  on  one  occasion.  Now, 
as  two  things  so  dissimilar  are  not  likely  to  arise  out  of  the 
self-same  mind,  is  not  this  an  evidence  of  the  power  of  some 
foreign  and  infernal  influence  over  the  human  heart?  Let  us, 
then,  be  always  awake  to  a  sense  of  our  danger,  and  put  on 
the  whole  armour  of  God. —  (Mason.) 


also  how  he  had  sped.  Whereat  the  captain  was 
grieved,  but  bid  the  trumpeter  go  to  his  tent. 

Again  Captain  Boanerges  sendeth  his  trumpeter 
to  Eargate,  to  sound,  as  before,  for  a  a  second  sum- 
hearing.  But  they  again  kept  close,  monsrepulsed. 
came  not  out,  nor  would  they  give  him  an  answer, 
so  observant  were  they  of  the  command  of  Diabolus 
their  king.2 

Then  the  captains,  and  other  field-officers,  called 
a  council  of  war,3  to   consider  what 

e      .,  iii  r      ,i  •    •  A  council  of  war. 

further  was  to  be  done  for  the  gaming 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and,  after  some  close  and 
thorough  debate  upon  the  contents  of  their  commis- 
sions, they  concluded  yet  to  give  to  the  town,  by 
the  hand  of  the  fore-named  trumpeter,  another 
summons  to  hear ;  but  if  that  shall  be  refused, 
said  they,  and  that  the  town  shall  stand  it  out 
still,  then  they  determined,  and  bid  the  trumpeter 
tell  them  so,  that  they  would  endeavour,  by  what 
means  they  could,  to  compel  them  by  force  to  the 
obedience  of  their  King.   Lu.  xiv.  23. 

So  Captain  Boanerges  commanded  his  trum- 
peter to  go  up  to  Eargate  again,  and,  a  third  sum- 
in  the  name  of  the  great  King  Shaddai,  IU0I1S- 
to  give  it  a  very  loud  summons,  to  come  down  with- 
out delay  to  Eargate,  there  to  give  audience  to 
the  King's  most  noble  captains.  So  the  trumpeter 
went  and  did  as  he  was  commanded.  He  went  up 
to  Eargate  and  sounded  his  trumpet,  and  gave  a 
third  summons  to  Mansoul ;  he  said,  moreover, 
that  if  this  they  should  still  refuse  to  do,  the  cap- 
tains of  his  Prince  would  with  might  come  down 
upon  them,  and  endeavour  to  reduce  them  to  their 
obedience  by  force,   is.  km.  1. 

Then  rttood  up  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  who  was 
the  governor  of  the  town;  this  Will-  The  Lord  will.be. 
be-will  was  that  apostate   of  whom    will:  his  speech 

,      !     »  i.i         to  the  trumpeter. 

mention  was  made  before,  and  the 
keeper  of  the  gates  of  Mansoul.  He,  therefore, 
with  big  and  ruffling  words,  demanded  of  the 
trumpeter  who  he  was,  whence  he  came,  and 
what  was  the  cause  of  his  making  so  hideous  a 
noise  at  the  gate,  and  speaking  such  insufferable 
words  against  the  town  of  Mansoul  ? 

The  trumpeter  answered,  '  I  am  servant  to  the 
most  noble  captain,  Captain  Boanerges, 

,  r  .  ^  .1  x  r.  The  trumpeter. 

general  of  the  forces  of  the  great  King 
Shaddai.  against  whom  both  thyself,  with  the  whole 
town  of  Mansoul,  have  rebelled,  and  lift  up  the  heel; 
and  my  master,  the  captain,  hath  a  special  mes- 


2  '  Faith  cometh  by  hearing ;'  but,  alas  1  how  ofteu,  at  the 
instigation  of  Satan,  is  the  ear  shut  against  the  messages  of 
grace.  The  Christian  inquirer's  duty  is  to  hear  and  search  all 
things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.— (Ed.) 

3  The  knowledge  which  Banyan  displays  upon  all  subjects 
is  very  surprising.  He  had  an  opportunity,  when  in  the  army, 
of  hearing  about  councils  of  war,  at  which,  in  that  day,  captains 
may  have  assisted ;  but  now  a  captain  is  not  called  '  a  field- 
otlicer.' — (Kd.) 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


573 


sage  to  tliis  town,  and  to  thee  as  a  member  thereof; 
tlie  which,  if  you  of  Mansoul  shall  peaceably  hear, 
so;1  and  if  not,  you  must  take  what  follows.' 

Then  said  the  Lord  Will-be-will,  '  I  will  carry 
Will-be-will.  *ny  words  to  my  lord,  and  will  know 
what  he  will  say.'-'  But  the  trumpeter 
The  trumpeter.  S00I)  rCp|;ctit  saying,  *  Our  message  is 
not  to  the  giant  Diabolus,  but  to  the  miserable 
town  of  Mansoul.  Nor  shall  we  at  all  regard  what 
answer  by  him  is  made,  nor  yet  by  any  for  him. 
We  are  sent  to  this  town  to  recover  it  from  under 
his  cruel  tyranny,  and  to  persuade  it  to  submit,  as 
in  former  times  it  did,  to  the  most  excellent  King 
Shaddai.' 

Then  said  the  Lord  Will-be-will,  'I  will  do  your 
Wiii-be-wiii.  erran^  to  the  town.'  The  trumpeter 
then  replied,  '  Sir,  do  not  deceive  us, 
The  trumpeter.  ]est  Jn  so  doing>  }.QU  <jeCeive  yourselves 
much  more.'  He  added,  moreover,  'For  we  are 
resolved,  if  in  peaceable  manner  you  do  not  sub- 
mit  yourselves,  then  to  make  a  war  upon  you,  and 
to  bring  you  under  by  force.  And  of  the  truth 
of  what  1  now  say,  this  shall  be  a  sign  unto  you: 
you  shall  see  the  black  {lag,  with  its  hot-burning 
thunder-bolts,  set  upon  the  mount  to-morrow,  as  a 
token  of  defiance  against  your  prince,  and  of  our 
resolutions  to  reduce  you  to  your  Lord  and  rightful 
King.' 

So  the  said  Lord  Will-be-will  returned  from  off 

The  trumpeter  ^ie  wa^'  ant*  *'ie  trumpeter  came  into 
returns  to  the   the  camp.      When  the  trumpeter  was 

camp.  .     *       ,  .  *  . 

come  into  the  camp,  the  captains  and 
officers  of  the  mighty  King  Shaddai  came  together 
to  know  if  he  had  obtained  a  hearing,  and  what 
was  the  effect  of  his  errand.  So  the  trumpeter 
told,  saying,  '  When  I  had  sounded  my  trumpet,3 
and  had  called  aloud  to  the  town  for  a  hearing, 
my  Lord  Will-be-will,  the  governor  of  the  town, 
and  he  that  hath  charge  of  the  gates,  came  up, 
when  he  heard  me  sound,  and  looking  over  the 
wall,  he  asked  me  what  I  was,  whence  I  came, 
and  what  was  the  cause  of  my  making  this  noise  ? 
So  I  told  him  my  errand,  and  by  whose  authority 
I  brought  it.  Then,  said  he,  I  will  tell  it  to  the 
governor  and  to  Mansoul;  and  then  1  returned  to 
my  Lords.' 

Then  said  the  brave  Boanerges,  '  Let  us  yet  for 

a  while  lie  still  in  our  trenches,  and  see  what  these 

,     rebels  will  do.'     Now   when  the  time 

Carnal        snuls      ,  ...  ,.  ,        ,  r 

make  a  wrong  drew  nigh  that  audience  by  Mansoul 
S*XdeZi    must  be  given  to  the  brave  Boanerges 

of  a  gospel  anj  jj|s  companions,  it  was  commanded 
ministry.  r  » 

that  all  the  men  of  war,  throughout 
the  whole  camp  of  Shaddai,  should  as  one  man 

1  'So;'  let  it  be  so;  let  it  be  in  that  manner.  'There  is 
Percy;  if  your  lather  will  do  me  any  honour,  so  ;  if  not,  let 
him  kill  the  next  Percy  himself.' — Shak.;  Imp.  Lie— (Ed.) 

2  How  wretchedly  are  poor  siuuers  enslaved  to  the  devil, 
VOL.  III. 


stand  to  their  arms,  and  make  themselves  ready, 

if  the  town  of  Mansoul  shall  hear,  to  receive  it 
forthwith  to  mercy,  hut  if  not,  to  force  a  subjec- 
tion. So  the  day  being  come,  the  trumpeters 
Bounded,  and  that  throughout  the  whole  camp, 
that  tlie  men  of  war  might  be  in  a  readiness  for 
that  which  then  should  be  the  work  of  the  day. 
But  when  they  that  were  in  the  town  of  Mansoul 
heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpets  throughout  the 
camp  id'  Shaddai,  and  thinking  no  other  but  that 
it  must  lie  in  order  to  storming  the  corporation, 
they  at  first  were  put  to  great  consternation  of 
spirit;  but  after  they  were  a  little  settled  again, 
they  also  made  what  preparation  they  could  for  a 
war,  if  they  did  storm,  else  to  secure  themselves. 
Well,  when  the  utmost  time  was  come,  Boan- 
erges was  resolved  to  hear  their  answer;  where- 
fore he  sent  out  his  trumpeter  again,  to  summons 
Mansoul  to  a  hearing  of  the  message  that  they 
had  brought  from  Shaddai.  So  he  went  and 
sounded,  and  the  townsmen  came  up,  but  made 
Eargate  as  sure  as  they  could.  Zee.vii.li.  Now 
when  they  were  come  up  to  the  top  of  the  wall, 
Captain  Boanerges  desired  to  see  the    „ 

r        i  ■»«  i  t        it  ii-         Boanerges   re- 

Lord  Mayor,  but  my  Lord  Incredulity     fuses  to  make 

was  then  Lord  Mayor,  for  he  came  in    judge o!  what 

the  room  of  my  Lord  Lustings.      So     |^Hdtoto  td£ 
Incredulity  he  came  up   and    showed     Gunon*  town 

,  .  ,<•  i  u        i  i  i  of  Mansoul. 

himself  over  the  wall ;  but  when  the 
Captain  Boanerges  had  set  his  eyes  upon  him,  he 
cried  out  aloud,  '  This  is  not  he,  where  is  my  Lord 
Understanding,  the  ancient  Lord  Mayor  of  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  for  to  him  I  would  deliver  my 
message  ?' 

Then  said  the  giant — for  Diabolus  was  also 
come  down — to  the  captain,  '  Mr.  Captain,  you 
have  by  your  boldness  given  to  Mansoul,  at  least, 
four  summons  to  subject  herself  to  your  King,  by 
wdiose  authority  I  know  not,  nor  will  I  dispute 
that  now;  I  ask,  therefore,  what  is  the  reason  of 
all  this  ado,  or  what  would  you  be  at,  if  you  knew 
yourselves  ?' 

Then  Captain  Boanerges,  whose  was  the  black 

colours,  and  whose  escutcheon  was  the    Boanerges    ob- 

three  burning  thunder-bolts,  taking  no    t:u"s  a  '"  in"- 

notice  of  the  giant  or  of  his  speech,  thus  addressed 

himself  to  the  town  of  Mansoul:   '  Be 

~         ,  i  nil  speech. 

it  known  unto  you,  (J  unhappy  and  re- 
bellious  Mansoul,   that   the   most   gracious   King, 
the  great  King  Shaddai,  my  master,  hath  sent  me 
unto  you  with  commission,'  and  so  he  showed  to 
the   town   his    broad  seal,   *  to  reduce  you   to  his 


Med  captive  by  him  at  his  will,'  and  not  daring  to  listeu   to 
God  without  his  [the  devil's]  leave.— (Barder.J 

3  The  trumpeters  are  the  ministers  of  the  everlasting  gospel 
of  peace;  they  proclaim  the  dad  tidings  of  salvation  tlinraajB 

the  blood-she'ddlug  and  finished  work  of  the  *ou  of  G.-l — 
(Masou.) 


274 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


obedience.  And  he  hath  commanded  me,  in  case 
you  yield  upon  my  summons,  to  carry  it  to  you  as 
if  you  were  my  friends,  or  brother ;  but  he  also 
hath  bid,  that  if  after  summons  to  submit,  you 
still  stand  out  and  rebel,  we  should  endeavour  to 
take  you  by  force.' 

Then  stood  forth  Captain  Conviction,  and  said 

The  speech  of  — mS  was  *'ie  Pa^e  c°l°urs>  an(^  f°r  an 
Captain  Con-  escutcheon,  he  had  the  book  of  the 
law  wide  open  [from  whence  issued  a 
flame  of  fire] — '  Hear,  0  Mansoul  !  Thou,  0 
Mansoul,  wast  once  famous  for  innocency,  but  now 
thou  art  degenerated  into  lies  and  deceit.  Ro.  in.  3, 
io-23 ;  xvi.  17,  is.  Thou  hast  heard  what  my  brother 
the  Captain  Boanerges  hath  said ;  and  it  is  your 
wisdom,  and  will  be  your  happiness,  to  stoop  to, 
and  accept  of,  conditions  of  peace  and  mercy  when 
offered ;  especially  when  offered  by  one  against 
whom  thou  hast  rebelled,  and  one  who  is  of  power 
to  tear  thee  in  pieces,  for  so  is  Shaddai  our  King; 
nor,  when  he  is  angry,  can  anything  stand  before 
•him.  Ps.  l.  21,  22.  If  you  say  you  have  not  sinned, 
nor  acted  rebellion  against  our  King,  the  whole  of 
your  doings,  since  the  day  that  you  cast  off  his 
service — and  there  was  the  beginning  of  your  sin- 
will  sufficiently  testify  against  you.  What  else 
means  your  hearkening  to  the  tyrant,  and  your 
receiving  him  for  your  king  ?  What  means  else 
your  rejecting  of  the  laws  of  Shaddai,  and  your 
obeying  of  Diabolus  ?  Yea,  what  means  this  your 
taking  up  of  arms  against,  and  the  shutting  of 
your  gates  upon  us,  the  faithful  servants  of  your 
King  ?  Be  ruled  then,  and  accept  of  my  brother's 
invitation,  and  overstand  not  the  time  of  mercy, 
but  agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly.  Lu.  xii.  58,  59. 
Ah,  Mansoul,  suffer  not  thyself  to  be  kept  from 
mercy,  and  to  be  run  iuto  a  thousand  miseries,  by 
the  flattering  wiles  of  Diabolus.  Perhaps  that 
piece  of  deceit  may  attempt  to  make  you  believe 
thai,  we  seek  our  own  profit  in  this  our  service  ;l 
but  know,  it  is  obedience  to  our  King,  and  love  to 
your  happiness,  that  is  the  cause  of  this  under- 
taking of  ours. 

'  Again,  I  say  to  thee,  0  Mansoul,  consider  if  it 
be  not  amazing  grace  that  Shaddai  should  so 
humble  himself  as  he  doth.  Now,  he  by  us  reasons 
with  you,  in  a  way  of  entreaty  and  sweet  persua- 
sions, that  you  would  subject  yourselves  to  him. 
Has  he  that  need  of  you,  that  we  are  sure  you 
have  of  him  ?  No,  no ;  but  he  is  merciful,  and 
will  not  that  Mansoul  should  die,  but  turn  to  him 
and  live.'  2  Co.  v.  is— 21. 

Then  stood  forth  Captain  Judgment,  whose  was 


1  Godly  ministers  cannot  be  too  careful  in  their  conduct  to 
guard  against  the  appearance  of  preferring  the  fleece  to  the 
flock.  The  worldling  has,  alas,  continual  proofs  that  many 
are  influenced  by  their  own  profit  instead  of  love  to  immortal 
bonis. — (En.) 


the  red  colours,  and  for  an  escutcheon  he  had  the 
burning  fiery  furnace,  and  he  said,  *  0  Ca  tain  Jli(]^ 
ye,  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Man-  ment,his  speech 
soul,  that  have  lived  so  long  in  rebel- 
lion and  acts  of  treason  against  the  King  Shaddai; 
know  that  we  come  not  to-day  to  this  place,  in 
this  manner,  with  our  message  of  our  own  minds, 
or  to  revenge  our  own  quarrel ;  it  is  the  King,  my 
master,  that  hath  sent  us  to  reduce  you  to  your 
obedience  to  him,  the  which  if  you  refuse  in  si 
peaceable  way  to  yield,  we  have  commission  to 
compel  you  thereto.  And  never  think  of  your- 
selves, nor  yet  suffer  the  tyrant  Diabolus  to  per- 
suade you  to  think,  that  our  King,  by  his  power, 
is  not  able  to  bring  you  down,  and  to  lay  you 
under  his  feet ;  for  he  is  the  former  of  all  things, 
and  if  he  touches  the  mountains,  they  smoke. 
Nor  will  the  gate  of  the  King's  clemency  stand 
always  open ;  for  the  day  that  shall  burn  like  an 
oven  is  before  him,  yea,  it  hasteth  greatly,  it  sluni- 
bereth  not.  Mai.  iv.  1.  2  Pe.  a.  3. 

'  0  Mansoul  !  Is  it  little  in  thine  eyes  that 
our  King  doth  offer  thee  mercy,  and  that,  after  so 
many  provocations  ?  Yea,  he  still  holdeth  out  his 
golden  sceptre  to  thee,  and  will  not  yet  suffer  his 
gate  to  be  shut  against  thee.  Wilt  thou  provoke 
him  to  do  it?  If  so,  consider  of  what  I  say:  — 
To  thee  it  is  opened  no  more  for  ever.  Job  xxxvi.  14. 
If  thou  sayest  thou  shalt  not  see  him,  yet  judgment 
is  before  him  ;  therefore  trust  thou  in  him.  Yea, 
"because  there  is  wrath,  beware  lest  he  take  thee 
away  with  his  stroke ;  then  a  great  ransom  cannot 
deliver  thee."  ver.  is.  Will  he  esteem  thy  riches  ? 
No;  not  gold,  nor  all  the  forces  of  strength.  "He 
hath  prepared  his  throne  for  judgment."  Ps.  ix.  7. 
For  "  he  will  come  with  fire,  and  with  his  chariots 
like  a  whirlwind,  to  render  his  anger  with  fury, 
and  his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire."  is.  lxvi.  15. 
Therefore,  0  Mansoul,  take  heed,  lest  after  thou 
hast  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the  wicked,  justice 
and  judgment  should  take  hold  of  thee.' 

Now,  while  the  Captain  Judgment  was  making 
of  this  oration  to  the  town  of  Mansoul,  it  was  ob- 
served by  some  that  Diabolus  trembled.2  But  he 
proceeded  in  his  parable,  and  said,  '  0  thou  woful 
town  of  Mansoul !  wilt  thou  not  yet  set  open  thy 
gate  to  receive  us,  the  deputies  of  thy  King,  and 
those  that  would  rejoice  to  see  thee  live  ?  "Can 
thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong, 
in  the  days  that  he  shall  deal"  in  judgment  "  with 
thee?"  Eze.  xxii.  14.  I  say,  canst  thou  endure  to 
be  forced  to  drink,  as  one  would  drink  sweet  wine, 
the  sea  of  wrath  that  our  King  has  prepared  for 
Diabolus  and  his  angels  ?  Consider  betimes,  con- 
sider.' 

2  '  The  devils  believe  and  tremble ;'  so  when  Paul  reasoned 
of  righteousness,  temperauce,  and  judgment  to  come,  Felix 
trembled.     Alas !  many  tremble  who  never  turn. — (Burder.) 


T1TE  HOLY   WAR. 


275 


Then  stood  forth  the  fourth  captain,  the  noblo 
,    .   Captain  Execution,  and  said:  *0  town 

The  speech  of  ' 

Captain    Exe-    01    Mansoul!     0I1CC    FamOUS,    out   now 

like  the  fruitless  hough ;  once  the  de- 
light of  the  high  ones,  hut  now  a  den  for  Diabolus: 
hearken  also  to  me,  and  to  the  words  that  I  shall 
speak  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  great  Shaddai. 
Behold  "  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees: 
therefore  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good 
fruit,  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the'  fire."  Jiut.iii.7-io. 

'Thou,  0  town  of  Mansoul!  hath  hitherto  been 
this  fruitless  tree;  thou  bearest  nought  hut  thorns 
and  briars.  Thy  evil  fruit  fore-bespeaks  thee  not 
to  he  a  good  tree.  Thy  "grapes  are  grapes  of 
gall,  thy  elusters  are  bitter."  De.  xxxii.  32.  Thou  hast 
rebelled  against  thy  King,  and  lo!  we,  the  power 
and  force  of  Shaddai,  are  the  axe  that  is  laid  to 
thy  roots.  What  sayest  thou,  wilt  thou  turn?  I 
say  again,  tell  me  before  the  first  blow  is  given, 
wilt  thou  turn?  Our  axe  must  first  he  laid  to  thy 
root,  before  it  be  laid  at  thy  root;  it  must  first  he 
laid  to  thy  root  in  a  way  of  threatening,  before  it 
is  laid  at  thy  root  by  way  of  execution ;  and  be- 
tween these  two  is  required  thy  repentance,  and 
this  is  all  the  time  that  thou  hast.  What  wilt 
thou  do?  wilt  thou  turn,  or  shall  I  smite?  If  I 
fetch  my  blow,  Mansoul,  down  you  go;  for  I  have 
commission  to  lay  my  axe  at,  as  well  as  to  thy 
roots,  nor  will  anything  hut  yielding  to  our  King 
prevent  doing  of  execution.  What  art  thou  fit 
for,  0  Mansoul,  if  mercy  preventeth  not,  but  to  be 
hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire  and  burned? 

'0  Mansoul!  patience  and  forbearance  do  not 
act  for  ever;  a  year  or  two,  or  three,  they  may; 
but  if  thou  provoke  by  a  three  years'  rebellion — 
and  thou  hast  already  done  more  than  this — then 
what  follows  but  cut  it  down?  Nay,  "after  that 
thou  shalt  cut  it  down."  Lu.  xm.  9.  And  dost  thou 
think  that  these  are  but  threatenings,  or  that  our 
King  has  not  power  to  execute  his  words?  0 
Mansoul!  thou  wilt  find  that  in  the  words  of  our 
King,  when  they  are  by  sinners  made  little  or  light 
of,  there  is  not  only  threatening,  but  burning  coals 
of  fire.  Thou  hast  been  a  cumber-ground  1  long 
already,  and  wilt  thou  continue  so  still?  Thy  sin 
has  brought  this  army  to  thy  walls,  and  shall  it 
bring  it  in  judgment  to  do  execution  into  thy  town? 
Thou  hast  heard  what  the  captains  have  said,  but 
as  yet  thou  shuttest  thy  gates  ;  speak  out,  Mansoul, 
wilt  thou  do  so  still,  or  wilt  thou  accept  of  con- 
ditions of  peace?' 2 

These  brave  speeches  of  these  four  noble  captains 
the  town  of  Mansoul  refused  to  hear,  yet  a  sound 


1  'Cut  it  down;  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground?'  La.  xiii.  7. 
'  A  cumber-ground  professor  is  not  only  a  provocation  to  God, 
»  stumbling-block  to  the  world,  and  a  blemish  to  religion,  but 
a  snare  to  his  own  soul  aLso.' — Bunvan's  Barren  iiy  Dee, 
Preface.— (Ed.) 


thereof  did  beat  against  Eargate,  though  the 
force  thereof  could  not  break  it  open.  In  fine,  the 
town  desired  a  time  to  prepare  their 

,.  ]  i  ,..,  MatiMuldcfire* 

answer  to  these  demands.     The  ca 
tains  then   told   them,  'That   if   they 
would  throw  out  to  them  one   Illpause,   that  was 
in  the  town,  that  they  might  reward  him  accord- 
ing to   his  WOFks,  then  they  would  give  their,  time 
to  consider;  hut  if  they  would  not  east  (•.„„,  ,, 
him  to  them  over  the  wall  of  Mansoul, 
then  they  would  give  them  none  ;   for,'    them  time.  c 
said    they,    '  we    know  that  so   long   as    Illpause 
draws   breath  in   Mansoul,  all  good   consideration 
will  be  confounded,  and  nothing  hut  mischief  will 
come  thereon.' 

Then  Diabolus,  who  was  there  present,  being 
loth  to  lose  his  Illpause,  because  he    I)j:ili, : 

was  his  orator,  (and  yet  be  sure  he     nipt* 

,     ,         1,1  .      i         i  •  i    i    •       a,1(l  g(-'ts   I"- 

had,  could  the  captains  have  laid  their     credu 

fingers  on  him,)  was  resolved  at  this  a"s*crll'c'»- 
instant  to  give  them  answer  by  himself;  but  then, 
changing  his  mind,  he  commanded  the  then  Lord 
Mayor,  the  Lord  Incredulity,  to  do  it,  saying, 
'  My  Lord,  do  you  give  these  runagates  an  answer; 
and  speak  out,  that  Mansoul  may  hear,  and  under- 
stand you.' 

So  Incredulity,  at  Diabolus's  command,  began 
and  said:  'Gentlemen,  you  have  here, 
as  we  do  behold,  to  the  disturbance  of 
our  prince,  and  the  molestation  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  camped  against  it:  but  from  whence  you 
come  we  will  not  know,  and  what  you  are  we  will 
not  believe.  Indeed,  you  tell  us  in  your  terrible 
speech  that  you  have  this  authority  from  Shaddai ; 
but  by  what  right  he  commands  you  to  do  it,  of 
that  we  shall  yet  be  ignorant.  You  have  also,  by 
the  authority  aforesaid,  summoned  this  town  to 
desert  her  lord ;  and  for  protection,  to  yield  up 
herself  to  the  great  Shaddai,  your  King  ;  flatter- 
ingly telling  her,  that  if  she  will  do  it,  he  will  pass 
by,  and  not  charge  her  witli  her  past  oifeiices. 
Further,  you  have  also,  to  the  terror  of  the  town 
of  Mansoul,  threatened,  with  great  and  sore  de- 
structions, to  punish  this  corporation,  if  she  con- 
sents not  to  do  as  your  wills  would  have  her. 

'  Now,  captains,  from  whencesoever  von  come, 
and  though  your  designs  be  never  so  right,  yet 
know  ye,  that  neither  my  lord  Diabolus,  nor  I  his 
servant  Incredulity,  nor  yet  our  brave  Mansoul, 
doth  regard  either  your  persons,  message,  or  the 
King  that  you  say  hath  sent  you:  his  power,  his 
greatness,  his  vengeance,  we  fear  not;  nor  will  we 
yield  at  all  to  your  summons. 


His  speech. 


2  There  is  much  energy  in  this  speech  ;  po 
to  the  conscience  are  on  en  G  d  to  the  conTer 

souls.     0  sinner  I  consult  not  flesh  and  blood-  • 
old  Illpause;  nor  let  prwsrastination  or  'a  more  convenient 
6casou'  destroy  thy  soul.— (Ed.) 


276 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


•  As  for  the  war  that  you  threaten  to  make  upon 
us,  we  must  therein  defend  ourselves  as  well  as  we 
can ;  and  know  ye,  that  we  are  not  without  where- 
withal to  bid  defiance  to  you.  And,  in  short,  for 
I  will  not  he  tedious,  I  tell  you  that  we  take  you 
to  be  some  vagabond  runagate  crew,  that,  having 
shaken  off  all  obedience  to  your  King,  have  gotten 
together  in  tumultuous  manner,  and  are  ranging 
from  place  to  place  to  see  if,  through  the  flatteries 
you  are  skilled  to  make  on  the  one  side,  and  threats 
wherewith  you  think  to  fright  on  the  other,  to 
make  some  silly  town,  city,  or  country,  to  desert 
their  place  and  leave  it  to  you ;  but  Mansoul  is 
none  of  them.  To  conclude,  we  dread  you  not,  we 
fear  you  not,  nor  will  we  obey  your  summons :  our 
gates  we  keep  shut  upon  you,  our  place  we  will 
keep  you  out  of;  nor  will  we  long  thus  suffer  you  to 
sit  down  before  us.  Our  people  must  live  in  quiet; 
your  appearance  doth  disturb  them  (lu.  %i  21.); 
wherefore  arise  with  bag  and  baggage,  and 
begone,  or  we  will  let  fly  from  the  walls 
against  you. '  * 

This  oration,  made  by  old  Incredulity,  was 
seconded  by  desperate  Will-be-will,  in  words   to 

this  effect :  '  Gentlemen,  we  have  heard 
the  Lord  Will-   your  demands,  and  the  noise  of  your 

threats,  and  have  heard  the  sound  of 
your  summons,  but  we  fear  not  your  force ;  we  re- 
gard not  your  threats,  but  will  still  abide  as  you 
found  us.  And  we  command  you,  that  in  three 
days'  time  you  cease  to  appear  in  these  parts,  or 
you  shall  know  what  it  is  once  to  dare  offer  to 
rouse  the  lion  Diabolus,  when  asleep  in  his  town 
of  Mansoul.' 

The  Recorder,  whose  name  was  Forget-good,  he 
_  ,     ,  also  added  as  followeth  :  'Gentlemen, 

The    speech    of 

lor-jet-itood the  my  Lords,  as  you  see,  have,  with 
mild  and  gentle  words,  answered  your 
rough  and  angry  speeches  ;  they  have,  moreover, 
in  my  hearing,  given  you  leave  quietly  to  depart 
as  you  came.  Wherefore,  take  their  kindness,  and 
begone.  We  might  have  come  out  with  force  upon 
you,  and  have  caused  you  to  feel  the  dint  of  our 
swords ;  but  as  we  love  ease  and  quiet  ourselves, 
so  we  love  not  to  hurt  or  molest  others.'2 

Then  did  the  town  of  Mansoul  shout  for  joy ;  as 
The  town  re-  if,  by  Diabolus  and  his  crew,  some 
stand  the"cap-  great  advantage  had  been  gotten  of 
tains.  tiie   captains.       They   also   rang    the 


1  Thus  reasons  the  flesh — We  will  not  know ;  we  will  not 
believe  ;  we  v/ill  not  submit ;  we  must  not  be  disturbed;  there- 
fore begone  ye  faithful  teachers,  or  we  will  persecute  you. — 
(Border.) 

2  If  the  Holy  Spirit  would  let  sinners  sleep  on,  all  mankind 
would  lie  in  carnal  security  until  pi  untied  into  destruction  and 
perdition.  '  Go  into  the  highways  and  compel  them  to  come  in,' 
is  the  command  of  Divine  mercy  and  irresistible  grace. — (Ed.) 

3  How  admirably  is  that  great  enemy  'Prejudice'  pictured ; 
old,  angry,  ill-conditioned,  with  Deafness  under  his  command. 
—(Ed.) 


bells,  and  made  merry,  and  danced  upon  the  walls. 
Diabolus  also  returned  to  the  castle,  and  the  Lord 
Mayor  and  Recorder  to  their  place ;  but  the  Lord 
Will-be-will  took  special  care  that  the  gates  should 
be  secured  with  double  guards,  double  bolts,  and 
double  locks  and  bars.  And  that  Eargate  espe- 
cially might  the  better  be  looked  to — for  that  was 
the  gate  in  at  which  the  King's  forces  sought 
most, to  enter — the  Lord  Will-be-will  made  one  old 
Mr.  Prejudice,  an  angry  and  ill-conditioned  fellow, 
captain  of  the  ward  at  that  sate,  and   m      .     _ 

v         ,       .  .  .  „     ,     The    band     ot 

put  under  his  power  sixty  men,  called  deafmensetto 
Deafmen  ;  3  men  advantageous  for  eep  arga  e" 
that  service,  forasmuch  as  they  mattered  no  words 
of  the  captains,  nor  of  their  soldiers.* 

[Chapter  V.] 

[Contents  : — The  captains  resolve  to  give  them  battle — The 
town  resolutely  resists,  and  the  captains  retire  to  wintt  r 
quarters — Tradition,  Human-wisdom,  and  Man's-inven- 
tion  enlist  under  Boanerges,  but  are  taken  prisoners,  and 
carried  to  Diabolus ;  they  are  admitted  soldiers  for  him, 
under  Captain  Anything — Hostilities  are  renewed,  and 
the  town  much  molested — A  famine  and  mutiny  in  Man- 
soul— The  town  sounds  a  parley — Propositions  made  and 
rejected — Understanding  and  Conscience  quarrel  with 
Incredulity — A  skirmish  ensues,  and  mischief  is  done  on 
both  sides.] 

Now,  when  the  captains  saw  the  answer  of  the 
£reat   ones,  and   that   they  could  not   m 

,  iii.  n    The  captains  re- 

get  a  hearing  from  the  old  natives  or     solved  to  give 

the  town,  and  that  Mansoul  was  re-  thembattle- 
solved  to  give  the  King's  army  battle,  they  pre- 
pared themselves  to  receive  them,  and  to  try  it  out 
by  the  power  of  the  arm.  And  first,  they  made 
their  force  more  formidable  against  Eargate ;  for 
they  knew  that  unless  they  could  penetrate  that, 
no  good  could  be  done  upon  the  town.  This  done, 
they  put  the  rest  of  their  men  in  their  places ; 
after  which  they  gave  out  the  word,  which  was, 
'Ye  must  be  born  again.'5  Then 
they  sounded  the  trumpet ;  then  they 
in  the  town  made  them  answer,  with  shout  against 
shout,  charge  against  charge,  and  so  the  battle 
began.  Now  they  in  the  town  had  planted  upon  the 
tower  over  Eargate,  two  great  guns,  two  gvms  planted 
the  one  called  Highmind,  and  the  «P<>nEaigate. 
other  Heady.      Unto  these  two  guns  they  trusted 


The  battle  be?un. 


4  How  often  do  poor  mistaken  sinners  rejoice  in  their  sins 
and  misery — glorying  in  their  shame.  Small  cause  for  joy 
have  they  who  reject  the  counsel  of  God  against  themselves. 
Miserable  is  the  state  of  that  man  whose  ears  are  shut  again- 1 
the  gospel  of  salvation ;  who  is  deaf  to  all  the  calls  of  God. — 
(Burder.) 

5  As  our  Lord  began  with  Nieodemus,  so  it  behoves  his 
followers  to  commence  with  sinners.  How  startling  the  cry, 
Ye  must  be  born  again,  or  perish  everlastingly.  *  If  thou  has* 
anything  less  than  regeneration,  believe  me,' thou  canst  nevi  r 
see  heaven.  There  is  no  hope  of  heaven  till  then,  till  thou  ait 
born  again.'— (Archbishop  Usher's  Sermons.)— (Ed.) 


THE    HOLY    AVAR. 


277 


much  ;  they  were  east  in  the  castle  by  Diabolus's 
founder,  whose  name  was  Mr.  Puffup;  and  mis- 
chievous pieces  they  were.1  But  so  vigilant  and 
watchful,  when  the  captains  saw  them,  were  they, 
that  though  sometimes  their  shot  would  go  by  their 
ears  with  a  whiz,  yet  they  did  them  do  harm. 
By  these  two  guns  the  towns-folk  made  no  ques- 
tion hut  greatly  to  annoy  the  camp  of  Shaddai, 
and  well  enough  to  Becure  the  gate,  but  they  had 
not  much  cause  to  hoast  of  what  execution  they 
did,  as  hy  what  follows  will  be  gathered. 

The  famous  Man  soul  had  also  some  other  small 
pieces  in  it,  of  the  which  they  made  use  against 
the  camp  of  Shaddai. 

They  from  the  camp  also  did  as  stoutly,  and 
with  as  much  of  that  as  may  in  truth  he  called 

The  sentence  valoUr»  Iet  %  as  fast  at  thc  town  iU"1 
and  power  of    at  Eargate:   for  they  saw  that  unless 

the  Word.  .  ,  ,     t  i  -n 

they  could  break  open  Eargate,  it 
would  he  hut  in  vain  to  hatter  the  wall.  Now  thc 
King's  captains  had  brought  with  them  several 
slings,  and  two  or  three  battering-rams  ;  with  their 
slings,  therefore,  they  battered  thc  houses  and 
people  of  the  town,  and  with  their  rams  they  sought 
to  break  Eargate  open. 

The  camp  and  the  town  had  several  skirmishes, 
and  brisk  encounters,  while  the  captains,  with  their 
engines,  made  many  brave  attempts  to  break  open, 
or  beat  down,  the  tower  that  was  over  Eargate, 
and  at  the  said  gate  to  make  their  entrance.  But 
Mansoul  stood  it  out  so  lustily,  through  the  rage 
The  town  stoutly  of  Diabolus,  the  valour  of  the  Lord 
stands  out,  and  Will-be-will,  and  the  conduct  of  old 

the  captains  re-  ...  ,       , . 

turn    to   their  Incredulity,  the  Mayor,  and  Mr.  for- 

winte, quarters.  get.good>     the      Recorder,     that      the 

charge  and  expense  of  that  summer's  wars,  on  the 
King's  side,  seemed  to  be  almost  quite  lost,  and 
the  advantage  to  return  to  Mansoul.  But  when 
the  captains  saw  how  it  was,  they  made  a  fair 
retreat,  and  intrenched  themselves  in  their  winter 
quarters.  Now  in  this  war,  you  must  needs  think 
there  was  much  loss  on  both  sides,  of  which  he 
pleased  to  accept  of  this  brief  account  follow- 
ing:—3 

The  King's  captains,  when  they  marched  from 
An  account    of    tllC  C0UFt  t0  COnle  UP  aga»,st  MaUSOul 

this  war,  with  to  war,  as  they  came  crossing  over 
reference      to    ,,  ,,  "      ,  .    .      ,.    ,  . 

the  loss  onboth    the   country,  they  happened  to    light 

s"lc9,  upon  three  young  fellows  that  had  a 

mind  to  go  for  soldiers  ;  proper  men  they  were, 

and   men   of   courage   and    skill,    to   appearance. 

Three  new  sol-    Their  names  were  Mr.  Tradition,  Mr. 

diuls-  Human-wisdom,  and  Mr.  Man's-inven- 


1  Pride  and  vain  conceit  puff  up  multitudes  in  even 
society.     My  soul,  art  thou  thus  puffed  U(>,  or  hast  thou  ('alien 
into  the  arms  of  Divine  mercy?     Almighty  grace  can  bring  the 
mountain  low,  and  exalt  the  valley.     A  learned  persecuting 
Saul  may  become  a  chosen  vessel. — (Ed.) 


tion.  So  they  came  up  to  the  captains,  and  prof- 
fered   their    services    to    Shaddai.      The    captains 

then  told  them  of  their  design,  and  bid  them  not 
to  be  rash  in  their  offers;  but  the  young  men  told 
them  they  had  considered  the  thing  before,  and 
that  hearing  they  were  upon  their  march  for  Mich 
B  design,  came  hither  on  purpose  to  meet  them, 
that  they  might  be  listed  under  their  excellencies. 
Then  Captain  Boanerges,  for  that  they  were  men 
of  courage,  listed  them  into  his  company,  and  BO 
away  they  went  to  the  war. 

Now  when  the  war  was  begun,  in  one  of  the 
briskest  skirmishes,  so  it  was,  that  a  company  of 
the  Lord  Will-be-will's  men  sallied  out  at  the 
sally-port,  or  postern  of  the  town,  and  fell  in  upon 
the  rear  of  Captain  Boanergcs's  men,  where  these 

three  fellows  happened  to  be,  SO  they  They  are  taken 
took  them  prisoners,  and  away  they  prisoners, 
carried  them  into  the  town;  where  they  had  not 
lain  long  in  durance,  but  it  began  to  be  noised 
about  the  streets  of  the  town  what  three  notable 
prisoners  the  Lord  Will-be-will's  men  had  taken, 
and  brought  in  prisoners  out  of  the  camp  of  Shad- 
dai. At  length  tidings  thereof  were  carried  to 
Diabolus  to  the  castle,  to  wit,  what  my  Lord  Will- 
be-will's  men  had  done,  and  whom  they  had  taken 
prisoners. 

Then  Diabolus  called  for  Will-be-will,  to  know 
the  certainty  of  this  matter.  So  he  asked  him, 
and  he  told  him  ;  then  did  the  giant  ^  ,miii„,it 

send    for    the    prisoners,  who,  when     beam  D 

r  .  and  are   content 

they  were  come,  demanded  of  them  to  fight  under  his 
who  they  were,  whence  they  came, 
and  what  they  did  in  the  camp  of  Shaddai ;  and 
they  told  him.  Then  he  sent  them  to  ward  again. 
Not  many  days  after,  he  sent  for  them  to  him 
again,  and  then  asked  them  if  they  would  be  willing 
to  serve  him  against  their  former  captains.  They 
then  told  him  that  they  did  not  so  much  live  by 
religion,  as  by  the  fates  of  fortune ;  and  that  since 
his  lordship  was  willing  to  entertain  them,  they 
should  be  willing  to  serve  him.  Now  while  things 
were    thus    in   hand,   there    was    one 

n  •       a  i  •  i*i  Anythii.^. 

Captain  Anything,  a  great  doer  in  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  and   to  this   Captain  Anything 
did  Diabolus  send  these  men,  with  a  note  under 
his  hand  to  receive  them  into  his  com-    He     l 
pany ;    the   contents  of  which  letter     ^'",; 

were  thus:—  a  letter/' 

'  Anything,  my  darling,  the  three  men  that  aro 
the  bearers  of  this  letter  have  a  desire  to  sen 
in  the  war,  nor  know  I  better  to  whose  conduct 
to  commit  them  than  to  thine  ;  receive  them,  there- 
fore, in  my  name,  and,  as  need  shall  require,  make 


2  The  opposition  of  a  raging  devil  and  inbred  lusts  would 
had  the  most  able  ministers  to  despair  of  sue 

,  '1  am  with  you  always;' and  'All  that  the  I 

giveth  me  suall  come  to  me.' — (B 


'  7S 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


use  of  them  against  Shaddai  and  his  men.  Fare- 
Anything receives  wel1'*'  So  they  came,  and  he  received 
them  into  hisser-  them;  and  he  made  of  two  of  them 
6erjeants,  hut  he  made  Mr.  Man's- 
invention  his  armour-hearer.  But  thus  much  for 
this,  and  now  to  return  to  the  camp.1 

They  of  the  camp  did  also  some  execution  upon 
The  roof  of  old  the  town,  for  they  did  heat  down  the 
l"useUUltCat  roof  of  the  old  Lord  Mayor's  house, 
do«n.  anc|  so  ]a;j  h^  more  open   than   he 

was  before.  They  had  almost,  with  a  sling,  slain 
my  Lord  Will-he-will  outright;  hut  he  made  a 
shift  to  recover  again.  But  they  made  a  notable 
slaughter  among  the  aldermen,  for  with  one  only 
Six  aldermen  sbot  they  cut  off  six  of  them;  to  wit, 
sIlim-  Mr.     Swearing,    Mr.    Whoring,    Mr. 

Fury,  Mr.  Stand-to-lies,  Mr.  Drunkenness,  and 
Mr.  Cheating.2 

They  also  dismounted  the  two  ''guns  that  stood 
Thetwogreatguns  upon  the  tower  over  Eargate,  and 

dismounted.         kid    them  flafc    Jn    the    dirt#3       T    toJd 

you  before,  that  the  King's  noble  captains  had 
drawn  off  to  their  winter  quarters,  and  had  there 
intrenched  themselves  and  their  carriages,  so  as 
■with  the  best  advantage  to  their  King,  and  the 
greatest  annoyance  to  the  enemy,  they  might  give 
seasonable  and  warm  alarms  to  the  town  of  Man- 
soul.  And  this  design  of  them  did  so  hit,  that,  I 
may  say,  they  did  almost  what  they  would  to  the 
molestation  of  the  corporation. 

For  now  could   not  Mansoul   sleep  securely  as 

Continual  alarms  before,  nor  could  they  now  go  to 
gnen  to  Mansoul.  their  debaucheries  with  that  quiet- 
ness as  in  times  past.  For  they  had  from  the 
camp  of  Shaddai  such  frequent,  warm,  and  terri- 
The  effects  of  fjing  alarms;  yea,  alarms  upon  alarms, 

flwugh0  "com-   first  at  one  gate,  and  then  at  another, 

mon^'abiding.     an(1    aga;n    at    &]J    ^    g.ates    at   mce> 

that  they  were  broken  as  to  former  peace.  Yea, 
they  had  their  alarms  so  frequently,  and  that  when 
the  nights*  were  at  longest,  the  weather  coldest, 
and  so  consequently  the  season  most  unseasonable; 
that  that  winter  was  to  the  town  of  Mansoul  a 
winter  by  itself.  Sometimes  the  trumpets  would 
sound,  and  sometimes  the  slings  would  whirl  the 
The  town  much  stones  into  the  town.  Sometimes  ten 
molested.       thousand  of  the  King's  soldiers  would 


1  Tradition,  Human  Wisdom,  and  Man's  Invention  have  too 
often  been  enlisted  into  the  service  of  religion,  but  they  are  in 
1  heir  element  when  engaged  on  the  contrary  side.  Let  Diabo- 
li;s  and  his  Captain  Anything  have  them,  and  welcome;  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  needs  no  such  services. — (Burder.) 

-  It  is  curious  to  note  the  order  in  which  open  profanity 
hides  its  ugly  heads  under  the  powerful  alarms  of  conscience. 
Outward  reformation  gives  up  very  gross  sins,  but  change  of 
heart  abhors  them  all. — (Ed.) 

3  Called  '  Highmiud  and  Heady,'  founded  by  Mr.  Puffup. 
-(Ed.) 

4  Under  awful  convictions  of  sin,  Bunyan  suffered  alarms  in 
the  night. — See  Grace  Abounding,  No.  139. — (Ed.) 


be  running  round  the  walls  of  Mansoul  at  midnight, 
shouting,  and  lifting  up  the  voice  for  the  battle. 
Sometimes,  again,  some  of  them  in  the  town  would 
be  wounded,  and  their  cry  and  lamentable  voice 
would  be  heard,  to  the  great  molestation  of  the 
now  languishing  town  of  Mansoul.  Yea,  so  dis- 
tressed with  those  that  laid  siege  against  them 
were  they,  that,  I  dare  say,  Diabolus  their  king 
had,  in  these  days,  his  rest  much  broken. 

In  these  days,  as  I  was  informed,  new  thoughts, 
and  thoughts  that  began  to  run  counter  Chall(re  of 
one  to  another,  began  to  possess  the  thoughts  in 
minds  of  the  men  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul. Some  would  say,  '  There  is  no  living  thus ;' 
others  would  then  reply,  '  This  will  be  over  shortly.' 
Then  would  a  third  stand  up  and  answer,  '  Let  us 
turn  to  the  King  Shaddai,  and  so  put  an  end  to 
these  troubles.'  And  a  fourth  would  come  in  with 
a  fear,  saying,  '  I  doubt  he  will  not  re-  conscience 
ceive  us.'5  The  old  gentleman  too,  the  speaks. 
Recorder,  that  was  so  before  Diabolus  took  Man- 
soul, he  also  began  to  talk  aloud ;  and  his  words 
were  now  to  the  town  of  Mansoul  as  if  they  were 
great  claps  of  thunder.  No  noise  now  so  terrible 
to  Mansoul  as  was  his,  with  the  noise  of  the  sol- 
diers, and  shoutings  of  the  captains. 

Also,  things  began  to  grow  scarce  in  Mansoul ; 
now  the  things  that  her  soul  lusted  a  famine  in 
after  were  departing  from  her.  Upon  MaasouL 
all  her  pleasant  things  there  was  a  blast,  and 
burning  instead  of  beauty.  Wrinkles  now,  and 
some  shows  of  the  shadow  of  death,  were  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  Mansoul.6  And  now,  0  how  glad 
would  Mansoul  have  been  to  have  enjoyed  quiet- 
ness and  satisfaction  of  mind,  though  joined  with 
the  meanest  condition  in  the  world  ! 7 

The  captains  also,  in  the  deep  of  this  winter, 
did  send,  by  the  mouth  of  Boanerges's  T1  are  sum_ 
trumpeter,  a  summons  to  Mansoul  to  moneda^ainto 
yield  up  herself  to  the  King,  the  great  5 
King  Shaddai.  They  said  it  once,  and  twice,  and 
thrice ;  not  knowing  but  that  at  sometimes  there 
might  be  in  Mansoul  some  willingness  to  surrender 
up   themselves  unto  them,  might   they  but  have 


6  Six  aldermen,  or  great  vices,  slain ;  Heady  and  Highmiud 
dismounted,  or  pride  laid  in  the  dirt ;  conscience  withiu  and  a 
faithful  ministry  without,  shaking  Mansoul  with  terror  upon 
terror.  How  plainly  is  all  this  exhibited  in  Bunyan's  startling 
experience,  published  in  Grace  Abounding.  Poor  sold,  mercy 
will  prevail  over  all  thy  stubbornness. — (Ed.) 

6  A  famine  in  Mansoul ;  the  pleasures  of  sin  fail ;  the  pro- 
digal would  be  glad  of  the  meanest  service  in  his  father's  house; 
the  dreary  winter  of  affliction  succeeds  the  summer  of  gaiety ; 
the  messages  of  mercy  are  renewed,  but  unbelief  yet  prevails. 
-(Ed.) 

7  '  Now  was  I  both  a  burden  and  a  terror  to  myself,  weary 
of  life,  afraid  to  die ;  gladly  would  I  have  been  anything  but  a 
man.'  '  I  counted  the  state  of  a  dog  and  toad  far  better  than 
miue.' — Grace  Abounding,  No.  104  and  149.  Painful  and 
most  distressing  were  the  feelings  of  Bunyan,  but  it  was  '  the 
bitter  before  the  sweet,  to  make  the  sweet  the  sweeter.' — (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY   AVAR. 


279 


the  colour  of  an  invitation  to  do  it  under.  Yea, 
so  far  as  I  could  gather,  the  town  had  hcen  sur- 
rendered up  to  them  before  now,  had  it  not  hcen 
for  the  opposition  of  old  Incredulity,  and  the  fickle- 
ness of  the  thoughts  of  my  Lord  Will-he-will. 
Diaholus  also  began  to  rave,  wherefore  Mansoul, 
as  to  yielding,  was  noi  yet  all  of  one  mind,  there- 
Mansnni  India-  fore,  they  still  Laydiatressedundertheae 
tress.        perplexing  fears.1 

I  told  you  hut  now  that  they  of  the  King's  army 
had  this  winter  sent  three  times  to  Mansoul,  to 
suhmit  herself. 

First,  The  first  time  the  trumpeter  went,  he  went 
_  .     .   with  words  of  peace,  telling  of  them, 

The  content*  of  .  i  ,i 

the  fint  sum-    '  That  the  captains,  the  noble  captains 

of  Shaddai,  did  pity  and  bewail  the 

misery  of  the  now  perishing  town  of  Mansoul;  and 
was  troubled  to  see  them  so  much  to  stand  in  the 
way  of  their  own  deliverance.'  lie  said,  moreover, 
'  That  the  captains  hid  him  tell  them,  that  if  now 
poor  Mansoul  would  humble  herself,  and  turn,  her 
former  rebellions  and  most  notorious  treasons 
should,  by  their  merciful  King,  be  forgiven  them, 
yea,  and  forgotten  too.'  And  having  bid  them 
'  beware  that  they  stood  not  in  their  own  way, 
that  they  opposed  not  themselves,  nor  made  them- 
selves their  own  losers,'  he  returned  again  into  the 
camp. 

Second.  The  second  time  the  trumpeter  went, 
.    .  he  did  treat  them  a  little  more  roughly. 

The  contents  of  ,  i  i  i 

ihe  second  For  after  sound  of  trumpet,  he  told 
them,  '  That  their  continuing  in  their 
rebellion  did  hut  chafe  and  heat  the  spirit  of  the 
captains,  and  that  they  were  resolved  to  make  a 
conquest  of  Mansoul,  or  to  lay  their  bones  before 
the  town  walls.' 

Third.  He  went  again  the  third  time,  and  dealt 
The  contents  of  *ith  them  yet  more  roughly;  telling 
the  third  sum-  of  them,  '  That  now,  since  they  had 
been  so  horribly  profane,  he  did  not 
know — not  certainly  know — whether  the  captains 
were  inclined  to  mercy  or  judgment;  only,'  said 
lie,  '  they  commanded  me  to  give  you  a  summons 
to  open  the  gates  unto  them.'  So  he  returned, 
and  went  into  the  camp. 

These  three  summons,  and  especially  the  two 
last,  did  so  distress  the  town,  that  they  presently 
called  a  consultation  ;  the  result  of  which  was  this, 
The  town  sounds  that  my  Lord  Will-he-wiU  should  go 
fur  a  naney.  Up  to  Fargate,  and  there,  with  sound 
of  trumpet,  call  to  the  captains  of  the  camp  for  a 
parley.  Well,  the  Lord  Will-he-will  sounded  upon 
the  wall,  so  the  captains  came  up  in  their  harness, - 
with  their  ten  thousands  at  their  feet.    The  towns- 


men then   told   the   captains   that   th.y  had    beard 

and    considered    their   summons,   and    ,n  , 

lhev  propound 
would   come    to    an    agreement    With      oonditioiw    ol 

them,  and  with  their  King  Shaddai, 
Upon  such  certain  terms,  articles,  and  propositions 
as,  with  and  by  the  order  of  their  Prince,  thej  to 
them  were  appointed  to  propound — to  wit,  they 
would  agree  upon  these  grounds  to  be  one  people 
with  them. 

*  1.  If  that  those  of  their  own  company,  as  the 
now  Lord  Mayor,  and  their  Mr.  For-  proposition  the 
get-good,  with  their  brave  Lord  Will-  lirst- 

be-will,  might,  under  Shaddai,  he  still  the  governors 
of  the  town,  castle,  and  gates  of  Mansoul.  2.  Pro- 
vided that  no  man  that  now  serveth  proposition  the 
under  their  great  giant  Diabolus,  be  acco"a- 
by  Shaddai  cast  out  of  house,  harbour,  or  the 
freedom  that  he  hath  hitherto  enjoyed  in  the  fam- 
ous town  of  Mansoul.  3.  That  it  shall  be  granted 
them,  that  they  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  proposition  the 
shall  enjoy  certain  of  their  rights  and  third- 
privileges — to  wit,  such  as  have  formerly  been 
granted  them;  and  that  they  have  long  lived  in  the 
enjoyment  of,  under  the  reign  of  their  king  L)ia- 
bolus,  that  now  is,  and  long  has  been,  their  only 
lord,  and  great  defender.  4.  That  no  proposition  the 
new  law,  officer,  or  executioner  of  law  fourth. 
or  office,  shall  have  any  power  over  them,  without 
their  own  choice  and  consent. 

'  These  be  our  propositions  or  conditions  of  peace ; 
and  upon  these  terms,'  said  they,  '  we  will  submit  to 
your  King.'3 

But  when  the  captains  had  heard  this  weak  and 
feeble  offer  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  their  high 
and  bold  demands,  they  made  to  them  again,  by 
their  noble  captain,  the  Captain  Boanerges,  this 
speech  following: — 

'  0  ye  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  when 
I  heard  your  trumpet  sound  for  a  par-  Boanerges,  his 
ley  with  us,  I  can  truly  say  I  was  answer, 
glad  ;  but  when  you  said  you  were  willing  to  sub- 
mit yourselves  to  our  King  and  Lord,  then  I  was 
yet  more  glad.  But  when  by  your  silly  provisoes, 
and  foolish  cavils,  you  lay  the  stumbling-block  of 
your  iniquity  before  your  own  faces,  then  was  my 
gladness  turned  into  sorrows,  and  my  hopeful  be- 
ginnings of  your  return  into  languishing,  fainting 
fears. 

'  I  count  that  old  Illpause,  the  ancient  enemy 
of  Mansoul,  did  draw  up  those  proposals  that  now 
you  present  us  with  as  terms  of  an  agreement, 
but  they  deserve  not  to  he  admitted  to  sound  in 
the  ear  of  any  man  that  pretends  to  have  service 
for  Shaddai.     We  do,  therefore,  jointly,  and  that 


''O  the  unth ought  ofimaginations,  frights,  fears,  and  terrors, 
that  are  effected  by  a  thorough  application  of  guilt,  yielding  to 
desperation.' — Grace  Abounding,  .No.  180. —  (Ed.) 

2  Harness,  warlike  equipments,  and  accoutrements. —  (Ed.) 


3  Sinners,  when  alarmed  by  the  fears  of  hell,  arc  willing  to 
M  ly,  provided  they  may  retain  their 
lordly  lasts :  they  are  ready  to  assume  the  form  of  godliness, 
but  dislike  its  power.— (Burdcx.) 


280 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


with  the  highest  disdain,  refuse  and  reject  such 
things  as  the  greatest  of  iniquities.1  a  Ti.  ii.  19. 

'But,  0  Mansoul !  If  jou  will  give  yourselves  into 
our  hands,  or  rather  into  the  hands  of  our  King  ; 
and  will  trust  him  to  make  such  terms  with,  and 
for  you,  as  shall  seem  good  in  his  eyes — and  I  dare 
say  they  shall  he  such  as  you  shall  find  to  be  most 
profitable  to  you — then  we  will  receive  you,  and  be 
at  peace  with  you.  But  if  you  like  not  to  trust 
yourselves  in  the  arms  of  Shaddai  our  King,  then 
things  are  but  where  they  were  before,  and  we 
know  also  what  we  have  to  do.' 

Then  cried  out  old  Incredulity,  the  Lord  Mayor, 
Old  Incredu-  an(l  9aKh  '  And  wno>  being  out  of  the 
lay's  reply.  hands  of  their  enemies,  as  you  see  we 
are  now,  will  be  so  foolish  as  to  put  the  staff  out 
of  their  own  hands,  into  the  hand  of  they  know  not 
who  ?  I,  for  my  part,  will  never  yield  to  so  unlimited 
a  proposition.  Do  we  know  the  manner  and  tem- 
per of  their  King  ?  It  is  said  by  some,  that  he 
will  be  angry  witli  his  subjects  if  but  the  breadth 
,y  .  ..  .  of  a  hair  they  chance  to  step  out  of 

Unbelief  never  < *  L 

u  profitable  in  the  way  ;  and  of  others,  that  he  re- 
ways  'speaks  quireth  of  them  much  more  than  they 
mischievously.  CJm  perform<  Wherefore  it  seems,  0 
Mansoul,  to  be  thy  wisdom,  to  take  good  heed  what 
thou  dost  in  this  matter;  for  if  you  once  yield,  you 
give  up  yourselves  to  another,  and  so  you  are  no 
more  your  own  !  Wherefore  to  give  up  yourselves 
to  an  unlimited  power,  is  the  greatest  folly  in  the 
world.  For  now  you  indeed  may  repent;  but  can 
never  justly  complain.  But  do  you  indeed  know, 
when  you  are  his,  which  of  you  he  will  kill,  and 
which  of  you  he  will  save  alive;  or  whether  he 
will  not  cut  off  every  one  of  us,  and  send  out  of  his 
own  country,  another  new  people,  and  cause  them 
to  inhabit  this  town  ?'2 

This  speech  of  the  Lord  Mayor  undid  all,  and 
This  speech  un-  threw  flat  to  the  ground  their  hopes  of 
d'd  pieuse'the  an  accord.  Wherefore  the  captains 
devil.  returned   to   their  trenches,   to   their 

tents,  and  to  their  men,  as  they  were;  and  the 
Mayor  to  the  castle,  and  to  his  king. 

Row  Diabolus  had  waited  for  his  return,  for  he 
had  heard  that  they  had  been  at  their  points.  So 
when  he  was  come  into  the  chamber  of  state, 
Diabolus  saluted  him  with  'Welcome,  my  lord,  how 
went  matters  betwixt  you  to  day  V  So  the  Lord 
Incredulity,  with  a  low  con^e,3  told  him  the  whole 
of  the   matter,   saying,  Thus  and  thus  said   the 


Captains  of  Shaddai,  and  thus  and  thus  said  T. 
The  which  when  it  was  told  to  Diabolus,  he  was 
very  glad  to  hear  it,  and  said,  '  My  Lord  Mayor, 
my  faithful  Incredulity,  I  have  proved  thy  fidelity 
above  ten  times  already,  but  never  yet  found  thee 
false.  I  do  promise  thee,  if  we  rub  over  this  brunt, 
to  prefer  thee  to  a  place  of  honour,  a  place  far 
better  than  to  be  Lord  Mayor  of  Mansoul.  I  will 
make  thee  my  Universal  Deputy,  and  thou  shalt, 
next  to  me,  have  all  nations  under  thy  hand ;  yea, 
and  thou  shalt  lay  bands  upon  them  that  they  may 
not  resist  thee,  nor  shall  any  of  our  vassals  walk 
more  at  liberty,  but  those  that  shall  be  content  to 
walk  in  thy  fetters.' 

Now  came  the  Lord  Mayor  out  from  Diabolus, 
as  if  he  had  obtained  a  favour  indeed ;  wherefore 
to  his  habitation  he  goes  in  great  state,  and  thinks 
to  feed  himself  well  enough  with  hopes,  until  the 
time  came  that  his  greatness  should  be  enlarged. 

But  now,  though  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Diabolus 

did  thus  well  agree,  yet  this  repulse  to  the  brave 

captains  put  Mansoul  into  a  mutiny.     For  while 

old  Incredulity  went  into  the  castle  to  congratulate 

his  lord  with  what  had  passed,  the  old  Lord  Mayor 

that  was  so  before  Diabolus  came  to  the  town,  to 

wit,   my    Lord    Understanding:,    and    m  .. 

'        J  .      °  The         under- 

the  old  Recorder  Mr.  Conscience,  get-     standing   and 

.    ,    ,,.  e     1     .  1      1  1      ,       conscience  be- 

ting intelligence  or  what  had  passed  at     g|u  to  receive 

Eargate,  for  you  must  know  that  they     g^^S 

ight  not  be  suffered  to  be  at  that     soul     iu     a 

11  i  1  1111  1  hubbub. 

debate,  lest  they  should  then  have 
mutinied  for  the  captains.  But,  I  say,  they  got 
intelligence  what  had  passed  there,  and  were  much 
concerned  therewith,  wherefore,  they,  getting  some 
of  the  town  together,  began  to  possess  them  with 
the  reasonableness  of  the  noble  captains'  demands, 
and  with  the  bad  consequences  that  would  follow 
upon  the  speech  of  old  Incredulity,  the  Lord  Mayor 
— to  wit,  how  little  reverence  he  showed  therein, 
either  to  the  captains,  or  to  their  King ;  also,  how 
he  implicitly  charged  them  with  unfaithfulness,  and 
treachery :  for  what  less,  quoth  he,  could  be  made 
of  his  words,  when  he  said  he  would  not  yield  to 
their  proposition,  and  added,  moreover,  a  supposi- 
tion that  he  would  destroy  us  when  before  he 
had  sent  us  word  that  he  would  show  us  mercy.4 
The  multitude  being  now  possessed  with  the  con- 
viction of  the  evil  that  old  Incredulity  had  done, 
began  to  run  together  by  companies  in  A  mutiny  in 
all  places,  and  in  every  corner  of  the       Mansoul. 


1  In  l lie  uproar  which  soon  after  followed,  upon  Lord  Under- 
standing's speech,  we  find  a  plain  declaration  of  the  third  of 
these  terms  of  peace;  it  was,  that  Mansoul  should  still  live 
iu  all  lewdness  and  vauity.  '1  his  occasioned  Boanerges,  with 
the  highest  disdain,  to  give  his  decided  refusal,  referring  to 
2  Ti.  ii.  1<J.— (Kd.) 

2  Unbelief  ever  suggests  hard  thoughts  of  God,  and  repre- 
sents his  service  as  an  intolerable  burden.  This  is  hateful  to 
Gud,  but  pleaseth  the  devil. — (liurder.) 


3  '  A  low  conge,'  a  low  nattering  servile  salutation  or  bow; 
thus,  in  the  Pilgrims  Progress,  when  Byeends  meets  Hold- 
the-world  and  Moneylove,  he  made  them  a  very  low  conge, 
and  they  also  gave  him  a  compliment.' — (Ed.) 

4  Unbelief  slanders  the  gospel,  as  though  it  proclaimed  nothing 
but  wrath,  whereas,  while  it  denounces  destruction  to  the  ob- 
stinately rebellious,  it  proclaims  free,  sovereign,  boundless 
mercy  and  everlasting  love,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  sensible 
returning  siuuers. —  (Jlason.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


281 


streets  of  Mansoul;  and  first  they  began  to  mutter, 
then  to  talk  openly,  and  alter  that  they  run  to  and 
fro,  and  cried  as  they  run,  '  0  the  brave  captains 
of  Sliaddai !  Would  we  were  under  the  government 
of  the  captains,  and  of  Shaddai  their  Kin-:.'1 
When  the  Lord  Mayor  had  intelligence  that  Man- 
soul  was  in  an  uproar,  down  ho  conies  to  appease 
the  people,  and  thought  to  have  quashed  their  heat 
with  the  bigness  and  the  Bhow  of  his  countenance. 
But  when  they  saw  him,  they  came  running  upon 
him,  and  had  doubtless  done  him  a  mischief,  had 
he  not  betaken  himself  to  house.  However,  they 
strongly  assaulted  the  house  where  he  was,  to  have 
pulled  it  down  ahout  his  cars  ;  hut  the  place  was 
too  strong,  so  they  failed  of  that.  So  he  taking 
some  courage  addressed  himself,  out  at  a  window, 
to  the  people  in  this  manner:  — 

•  Gentlemen,  what  is  the  reason  that  there  is 
here  such  an  uproar  to  day?' 

UND.   Then  answered  my  Lord  Understanding  : 

Incredulity  seeks  '  U  is  eVe"  beCaUSe  ?hat  t!l0U  anJ  ^ 

toquiet  the  pco- master  have  carried  it  not  rightly,  and 
Understanding  as    you   should,    to    the    captains    of 

answers  him.       ShaJdai  .    for  [u  tliree  th;ngs    you  are 

faulty: — First,  In  that  yon  would  not  let  Mr. Con- 
science and  myself  be  at  the  hearing  of  your  dis- 
course. Secondly,  In  that  you  propounded  such 
terms  of  peace,  to  the  captains,  that  by  no  means 
could  be  granted,  unless  they  had  intended  that 
their  Sliaddai  should  have  been  only  a  titular 
prince,  and  that  Mansoul  should  still  have  had 
power  hy  law,  to  have  lived  in  all  lewdness  and 
vanity  before  him,  and  so  by  consequence  Diaholus 
should  still  here  be  king  in  power,  and  the  other 
only  King  in  name.  Thirdly,  For  that  thou  didst 
thyself,  after  the  captains  had  showed  us  upon  what 
conditions  they  would  have  received  us  to  mercy, 
even  undo  all  again  with  thy  unsavoury,  and  un- 
seasonable, and  ungodly  speech.' 

Lncked.   When  old  Incredulity  had  heard  this 
sin    and    the   speech,  he  cried  out,  '  Treason,  trea- 
son at  odds.       gon  .    rpQ   yQUJ.  arms>  to   y0ur  arms>   0 

ye,  the  trusty  friends  of  Diaholus  in  Mansoul. '- 

L\nd.  '  Sir,  you  may  put  upon  my  words  what 
meaning  you  please,  but  I  am  sure  that  the  cap- 
tains of  such  a  high  Lord  as  theirs  is,  deserves  a 
better  treatment  at  your  hands.' 

Ixcred.  Then  said  old  Incredulity,  '  This  is  but 

They  chide  on   little  better.   But  Sir,' quoth  he, 'what 

both  sides.      j  spake,  I  spake  for  my  prince,  for  his 

government,  and  the  quieting  of  the  people,  whom 


1  See  Grace  Abounding,  No.  4G.  '  I  was  never  out  of  the 
Bible,  either  by  reading  or  meditation,  still  crying  out  to  God, 
that  I  might  know  the  truth,  and  way  to  heaven  and  glory.' — 
(Ed.) 

2  This  i9  a  blessed  mutiny ;  unbelief  is  opposed  and  the 
hope  of  pardoning  mer ■■;■  en  as  the  margin  says, 
'  Siu  and  the  soul  are  at  odds.' — (Border.) 

vol.  m. 


hy  your  unlawful  actions  you  have  this  day  set  to 
mutiny  against  us.' 

Cons.  Then  replied  the  old  Recorder,  whose 
name  was  Mr.  Conscience,  and  said,  'Sir.  you 
ought  not  thus  to  retort  upon  what  my  Lord  I  a- 
der.standing  hath  said.  It  is  evident  enough  that 
he  hath  spoken  the  truth,  and  that  you  arc  an 
enemy  to  Mansoul ;  he  convinced,  then,  of  the  evil 
of  your  saucy  and  malapert  language,  and  of  the 
grief  that  you  have  put  the  captains  to;  yea,  and 
of  the  damages  that  you  have  done  to  Mansoul 
thereby.  Had  you  accepted  of  the  conditions,  the 
sound  of  the  trumpet  and  the  alarm  of  war  had 
now  ceased  ahout  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  but  that 
dreadful  sound  abides,  and  your  want  of  wisdom 
in  your  speech  has  been  the  cause  of  it.' 

Inched.  Then  said  old  Incredulity :  '  Sir,  If  I 
live  I  will  do  your  errand  to  Diaholus,  and  there 
you  shall  have  an  answer  to  your  words.  Mean- 
while we  will  seek  the  good  of  the  town,  and  not 
ask  council  of  you.' 

Und.  '  Sir,  your  prince  and  you  are  both  foreign- 
ers to  Mansoul,  and  not  the  natives  thereof.  And 
who  can  tell  but  that  when  you  have  brought  U3 
into  greater  straits,  when  you  also  shall  see  that 
yourselves  can  he  safe  by  no  other  means  than  hy 
flight,  you  may  leave  us  and  shift  for  yourselves, 
or  set  us  on  fire,  and  go  away  in  the  smoke,  or  by 
the  light  of  our  burning,  and  so  leave  us  in  our 
ruins.' 

Incred.  '  Sir,  you  forget  that  you  are  under  a 
governor,  and  that  you  ought  to  demean  yourself 
like  a  subject,3  and  know  ye,  when  my  Lord  the 
King  shall  hear  of  this  day's  work,  he  will  give 
you  but  little  thanks  for  your  labour.' 

Now  while  these  gentlemen  were  thus  in  their 
chiding  words,  doAvn  come,  from  the  walls  and 
gates  of  the  town,  the  Lord  Will-be-  Men  of  arms 
will,  Mr.  Prejudice,  Old  Illpause,  and  «"»e<^«i. 
several  of  the  new-made  aldermen  and  burgesses, 
and  they  asked  the  reason  of  tho  hubbub  and 
tumult.  And  with  that  every  man  began  to  tell 
bis  own  tale,  so  that  nothing  could  be  heard  dis- 
tinctly. Then  was  a  silence  commanded,  and  the 
old  fox  Incredulity  began  to  speak.  'My  Lord,' 
quoth  he,  •  here  are  a  couple  of  peevish  gentle- 
men, that  have,  as  a  fruit  of  their  bad  disposi- 
tions, and,  as  I  fear,  through  the  advice  of  one  Mr. 
Discontent,  tumultuously  gathered  this  company 
inst  me  this  day;  and  also  attempted  to  run 
the  town  into  acts  of  rebellion  against  our  prince.' 


3  This  is  the  true  language  of  antichrist  to  this  day  ;  when 
governors  or  laws  infringe  upon  the  rights  of  consci 
matters  of  the  soul's  health,  and  salvation";  it  is  the  CI 
duty  to  resist  such  wicked  statutes.  The  answer  is,  '  It  is  the 
law,  and  whether  right  or  wrong,  if  it  even  lead  your  souls  to 
perdition,  you  must  obey;  "demean  yourself  like  a  subject."' 
—(Ed.) 

SO 


282 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


Then  stood  up  all  the  Diabolonians  that  were 
A  great  confu-  present,  and  affirmed  these  things  to 
sion-  he  true. 
Now  when  they  that  took  part  with  my  Lord 
Understanding,  and  with  Mr.  Conscience,  perceived 
that  they  were  like  to  come  to  the  worst,  for  that 
force  and  power  was  on  the  other  side,  they  came 
in  for  their  help  and  relief.  So  a  great  company 
was  on  both  sides.1  Then  they  on  Incredulity's 
side  would  have  had  the  two  old  gentlemen  pre- 
sently away  to  prison ;  but  they  on  the  other  side 
said  they  should  not.  Then  they  began  to  cry  up 
parties  again;  the  Diabolonians  cried  up  old  In- 
credulity, Forget-good,  the  new  aldermen,  and 
their  great  one  Diabolus ;  and  the  other  party, 
they  as  fast  cried  up  Shaddai,  the  captains,  his 
laws,  their  mercifulness,  and  applauded  their  con- 
ditions and  ways.  Thus  the  hickerment  went  a 
They  fall  from  while,  at  last  they  passed  from  words 
words  to  blows.  t0  bl0WS)  ancl  „o\v  there  were  knocks 
on  both  sides.  The  good  old  gentleman,  Mr.  Con- 
science, was  knocked  down  twice  by  one  of  the 
Diabolonians,  whose  name  was  Mr.  Benumming. 
And  my  Lord  Understanding  had  like  to  have 
been  slain  with  a  harquebus,  but  that  he  that 
shot  wanted  to  take  his  aim  aright.  Nor  did  the 
other  side  wholly  escape,  for  there  was  one  Mr. 
Rashhead,  a  Diabolonian,  that  had  his  brains 
beaten  out  by  Mr.  Mind,  the  Lord  Will-be-will's 
servant ;  and  it  made  me  laugh  to  see  how  old 
Mr.  Prejudice  was  kicked  and  tumbled  about  in 
the  dirt.  For  though  a  while  since 
he  was  made  captain  of  a  company  of 
the  Diabolonians,  to  the  hurt  and  damage  of  the 
town  ;  yet  now  they  had  got  him  under  their  feet; 
and  I  will  assure  you  he  had  by  some  of  the  Lord 
Understanding's  party  his  crown  soundly  cracked 
to  boot.  Mr.  Anything  also,  he  became  a  brisk 
man  in  the  broil,  but  both  sides  were  against  him, 
because  he  was  true  to  none.  Yet  he  had  for  his 
malapertness  one  of  his  legs  broken,  and  he  that 
did  it  wished  it  had  been  his  neck.  Much  harm 
Harm  done  on  more  was  done  on  both  sides,  but  this 
both  sides.  must  not  be  forgotten,  it  was  now  a 
wonder  to  see  my  Lord  Will-be-will  so  indifferent 
as  he  was ;  he  did  not  seem  to  take  one  side  more 
than  another,  only  it  was  perceived  that  he  smiled 
to  see  how  old  Prejudice  was  tumbled  up  and  down 
in  the  dirt.  Also  when  Captain  Anything  came 
halting  up  before  him,  he  seemed  to  take  but  little 
notice  of  him.2 


A  hot  skirmish. 


[Chapter  VI.] 

[Contents  : — Lord  Understanding  and  Mr.  Conscience  impri- 
soned as  authors  of  the  disturbance — A  conference  of  the 
besieging  officers,  who  agree  to  petition  Shaddai  for  further 
assistance — The  petition  approved  at  court — Emmanuel, 
the  King's  son,  is  appointed  to  conquer  the  town — 
Marches  with  a  great  army  and  surrounds  Mansoul, 
which  is  strongly  fortified  against  him.] 

Now  when  the  uproar  was  over,  Diabolus  sends 

for  my  Lord  Understanding,  and  Mr.    r^    two    old 

Conscience,  and  claps  them  both  up     gentlemen  put 

i  .  i     In   Pnso,,»  as 

in    prison,    as    the    ring-leaders    and     the  authors  of 

~   A,  .  .   ,  .    ,  this  revel  rout. 

managers  of  this  most  heavy  riotous 
rout  in  Mansoul.  So  now  the  town  began  to  be 
quiet  again,  and  the  prisoners  were  used  hardly ; 
yea,  he  thought  to  have  made  them  away,  but 
that  the  present  juncture  did  not  serve  for  that 
purpose,  for  that  war  was  in  all  their  gates.3  But 
let  us  return  again  to  our  story.  The  captains, 
when  they  were  gone  back  from  the  gate,  and 
were  come  into  the  camp  again,  called   The     captains 

•  i      o  i.       i     .  call  a  council 

a  council  of  war,  to  consult  what  was  aud  consujt 
further  for  them  to  do.  Now  some  w'1:»ttodo. 
said,  Let  us  go  up  presently  and  fall  upon  the 
town,  but  the  greatest  part  thought  rather  better 
it  would  be  to  give  them  another  summons  to 
yield;  and  the  reason  why  they  thought  this  to  be 
best  was,  because,  that  so  far  as  could  be  per- 
ceived, the  town  of  Mansoul  now  was  more  inclin- 
able than  heretofore.  And  if,  said  they,  while 
some  of  them  are  in  a  way  of  inclination,  we  should 
by  ruggedness  give  them  distaste,  we  may  set  them 
further  from  closing  with  our  summons,  than  we 
would  be  willing  they  should.4 

Wherefore  to  this  advice  they  agreed,  and  called 
a  trumpeter,  put  words  into  his  mouth, 

The    result    is 

set  him  his  time,  and  bid  him  God  they  send  an- 
speed.  Well,  many  hours  were  not  ex-  *h£  «£ 
pired  before  the  trumpeter  addressed  tl.ieldtown  t0 
himself  to  his  journey.  Wherefore, 
coming  up  to  the  wall  of  the  town,  he  steereth  his 
course  to  Eargate,  and  there  sounded,  as  he  was 
commanded.  They,  then,  that  were  within  came 
out  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  and  the  trumpeter 
made  them  this  speech  following: — 

1  0  hard-hearted,  and  deplorable  town  of  Man- 
soul, how  long  wilt  thou  love  thy  sin-  The  summons 
ful,    sinful    simplicity,    and    ye   fools        Ibd£ 
delight  in  your  scorning?     As  yet  despise  you  the 
offers  of  peace,  and  deliverance  ?     As  yet  will  ye 


1  See  this  solemn  inward  struggle  faithfully  narrated  in 
Grace  Abounding,  No.  86. 

2  No  small  advantage  is  gained  when  sinful  ras/iness  is  de- 
stroyed, prejudice  thrown  down  into  the  dirt,  and  indifference 
about  religion  is  discarded;  while  the  will,  that  before  was 
wholly  on  the  part  of  Satan,  begins  rather  to  take  the  other 
side. — (Burder.) 

3  The  efforts  of  an  enlightened  understanding  aud  a  renewed 


conscience  are  offensive  to  Satan,  as  threatening  to  subvert  his 
authority  in  the  soul,  and  he  would  kill  them  if  he  could,  but 
where  the  good  work  of  grace  is  begun,  they  canuot  be  de- 
stroyed.—  (Burder.) 

4  Ministers  should  deal  gently  with  awakened  sinners. 
Their  great  Master  'will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,'  nor 
should  they.  Koughness  discourages — gentleness  attracts. — 
(Burder.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


233 


refuse  the  golden  offers  of  Shaddai,  anil  trust  to 
the  lies  and  falsehoods  of  Diaholus?  Think  you 
when  Shaddai  should  have  conquered  you,  that 
the  remembrance  of  these  your  carriages  towards 
him,  will  yield  you  peace  and  eomfort;  or  that,  by 
ruffling  language,  you  can  make  him  afraid  as  a 
grasshopper?  Doth  ho  entreat  you,  for  fear  of 
you?  Do  you  think  that  you  are  stronger  than 
he?  Look  to  the  heavens,  and  hehold,  and  con- 
sider the  stars,  how  high  are  they  ?  Can  you  stop 
the  sun  from  running  his  course,  and  hinder  the 
moon  from  giving  her  light?  Can  you  count  the 
number  of  the  stars,  or  stay  the  bottles  of  heaven? 
Can  you  call  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  cause 
them  to  cover  the  face  of  the  ground?  Can  you 
hehold  every  one  that  is  proud,  and  abase  him, 
and  bind  their  faces  in  secret?1  Yet  these  are 
some  of  the  works  of  our  King,  in  whose  name, 
this  day,  we  come  up  unto  you,  that  you  may  be 
brought  under  his  authority.  In  his  name,  there- 
fore, I  summon  you  again,  to  yield  up  yourselves 
to  his  captains.' 

At  this  summons  the  Mansoulians  seemed  to  be 
The  town  at  a  &t  a  stand,  and  knew  not  what  answer 
stand.  to  make .  wherefore  Diaholus  forth- 
with appeared,  and  took  upon  him  to  do  it  himself, 
and  thus  he  begins,  but  turns  his  speech  to  them 
of  Mansoul:  — 

'  Gentlemen,'  quoth  he, '  and  my  faithful  subjects, 
Diabolus  makes  ^  ^  *s  *rue  *na*;  *his  summoner  hath 
a  speech  to  the   sajj  concerning  the  greatness  of  their 

town;  and  eu-  •        ,  .  •,,       , 

devours  to  King,  by  Ins  terror  you  will  always 
the"  greatness  he  kept  in  bondage,  and  so  be  made 
of  God.  j0   sneak#      Yea,  how  can  you   now, 

though  he  is  at  a  distance,  endure  to  think  of  such 
a  mighty  one?  And  if  not  to  think  of  him,  while 
at  a  distance,  how  can  you  endure  to  be  in  his 
presence?  I,  your  prince,  am  familiar  with  you, 
and  you  may  play  with  me  as  you  would  with 
a  grasshopper.  Consider,  therefore,  what  is  for 
your  profit,  and  remember  the  immunities  that  I 
have  granted  you.  Farther,  if  all  be  true  that 
this  man  hath  said,  how  comes  it  to  pass  that  the 
subjects  of  Shaddai  are  so  enslaved  in  all  places 
where  they  come?  None  in  the  universe  so  un- 
happy as  they,  none  so  trampled  upon  as  they.2 
Consider,  my  Mausoul.  Would  thou  wert  as  loth 
to  leave  me,  as  I  am  loth  to  leave  thee!  But  con- 
sider, I  say,  the  ball  is  yet  at  thy  foot;  liberty  you 
have,  if  you  know  how  to  use  it ;  yea,  a  king  you 
have  too,  if  you  can  tell  how  to  love  and  obey  him.' 

1  Most  of  this  language  is  from  the  book  of  Job. — (Ed.) 

2  This  old  slander  of  the  father  of  lies  was  well  answered  by 
the  poor  boy,  while  sweeping  a  chimney,  who  sung — 

•The  sorrow  of  the  mind. 
Be  banish'd  Irom  tl.is  place, 
Beligii  d  never  was  designed, 
Tu  make  our  pleasure  3 

'This  is  exemplified  in  Btmyan's  experience.    *  By  the  strong 


Upon  this  speech,  the  town  of  Mansoul  did  again 

harden  their  hearts  vet  more  agaiust    „    ,  . 

•     mi      ii        He  dnvei  M;, ii- 
tne  captains  ol  Miaddai.    i  be  thoughts     boh]  iuto  de- 

of  his  greatness  did  quite  quash  them,     bl''ur' 

and    the   thoughts    of  his   holiness   sunk   them   in 

despair.3     Wherefore,  after  a  short  consultation, 

they,   of  the  Diabolonian  party  they  were,   sent 

back  this  word  by  the  trumpeter,  '  That,  for  their 

parts,  they  were  resolved  to  stick  to    Man?oul  ^ 

their    king:    but   never    to    yield    to     worse       and 

.   ,  .  .  .  worse. 

Shaddai.'  So  it  was  but  in  vain  to 
give  them  any  further  summons,  for  they  had 
rather  die  upon  the  place  than  yield.  And  now 
things  seemed  to  be  gone  quite  back,  and  Man- 
soul  to  be  out  of  reach  or  call ;  yet  the  captains, 
who  knew  what  their  Lord  could  do,  would  not 
yet  be  beat  out  of  heart.  They  therefore  send 
them  another  summons,  more  sharp  and  severe 
than  the  last ;  but  the  oftener  they  were  sent  to, 
to  be  reconciled  to  Shaddai,  the  further  off  they 
were.  'As  they  called  them,  so  they  went  from 
them : '  yea,  '  though  they  called  them  to  the  most 
High.'   Ho.  xi.  2,  7. 

So  they  ceased  that  way  to  deal  with  them  any 
more,  and  inclined  to  think  of  an-  The  captains 
other  way.     The  captains,  therefore,    leave    olt    to 

..  .  .  J  .  ,x  ,  summons,   and 

did  gather  themselves  together,  to  betake  tliem- 
have  free  conference  among  them-  SL'Nesl0Pra>er- 
selves,  to  know  what  was  yet  to  be  done  to  gain 
the  town,  and  to  deliver  it  from  the  tyranny  of 
Diabolus.  And  one  said  after  this  manner,  and 
another  after  that.  Then  stood  up  the  right  noble, 
the  Captain  Conviction,  and  said,  '  My  brethren, 
mine  opinion  is  this:  — 

*  First.  That  we  continually  play  our  slings  into 
the  town,  and  keep  it  in  a  continual  alarm,  molest- 
ing of  them  day  and  night ;  by  thus  doing  we  shall 
stop  the  growth  of  their  rampant  spirit.  For  a 
lion  may  be  tamed  by  continual  molestations.4 

'Second.  This  done,  I  advise  that,  in  the  next 
place,  we,  with  one  consent,  draw  up  a  petition  to 
our  Lord  Shaddai ;  by  which,  alter  we  have  showed 
our  King  the  condition  of  Mansoul,  and  of  affairs 
here,  and  have  begged  his  pardon  for  our  no  better 
success,  we  will  earnestly  implore  his  Majesty's 
heip,  and  that  he  will  j. lease  to  send  us  more  force 
and  power ;  and  some  gallant  and  well-spokeu 
commander  to  head  them  ;  that  so  his  Majesty  may 
not  lose  the  benefit  of  these  his  good  beginnings, 
but  may  complete  his  conquest  upon  the  town  of 
Mansoul.  's 


and  unusual  assaults  of  the  tempter  was  my  sold  like  a 
vessel,  driven  as  with  the  wind,  and  tossed  sometimes  headlong 
into  despair.' — Grace  Abounding,  A'o.  185. — (Eu.) 

4  This  is  exemplified  in  Grace  Abounding,  No.  139  and  140. 
— (Ed.) 

6  Paul  may  plant  and  Apollos  water,  but  God  alone  c 
the  increase.     To  him,  therefore,  they  wisely  apply  for  further 
assistauce. — (Burder.) 


284 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


To  this  speech  of  the  nohle  Captain  Conviction, 

they,  as  one  man,  consented ;  and  agreed  that  a 

petition   should   forthwith  he  drawn  up,  and  sent 

fit  man,  away  to  Shaddai  with  speed.      The 

contents  of  the  petition  were  thus:  — 

'  Most  gracious  and  glorious  King,  the  Lord  of 
the  best  world,  and  the  builder  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul:  We  have,  dread  Sovereign,  at  thy  com- 
mandment, put  our  lives  in  jeopardy,  and  at  thy 
bidding  made  a  war  upon  the  famous  town  of 
111.  When  we  went  up  against  it,  we  did, 
according  to  our  commission,  first  offer  conditions 
of  peace  unto  it.  But  they,  great  King,  set  light 
by  our  counsel,  and  would  none  of  our  reproof. 
Mat  wii.  5.  rr.  i.  23-so.  Zee.  i.  li,  12.  They  were  for 
shutting  of  their  gates,  and  for  keeping  us  out  of 
the  town.  They  also  mounted  their  guns,  they 
sallied  out  upon  us,  and  have  done  us  what  damage 
they  could  ;  hut  we  pursued  them,  with  alarm  upon 
alarm,  requiting  of  them  with  such  retribution  as 
was  meet,  and  have  done  some  execution  upon  the 
town.  Diaholus,  Incredulity,  and  Will-be-will  are 
the  great  doers  against  us ;  now  we  are  in  our 
winter  quarters,  hut  so  as  that  we  do  yet  with  an 
high  hand  molest  and  distress  the  town.  Once, 
as  we  think,  had  we  had  hut  one  substantial  friend 
in  the  town,  such  as  would  but  have  seconded  the 
sound  of  our  summons  as  they  ought,  the  people 
might  have  yielded  themselves.  But  there  were 
none  but  enemies  there,  nor  any  to  sneak  in  behalf 
of  our  Lord  to  the  town ;  wherefore,  though  we 
have  done  as  we  could,  yet  Mansoul  abides  in  a 
state  of  rebellion  against  thee.1  Now,  King  of 
kings,  let  it  please  thee  to  pardon  the  unsuccess- 
fulness  of  thy  servants,  who  have  been  no  more 
advantageous  in  so  desirable  a  work  as  the  con- 
quering of  Mansoul  is  ;  and  send,  Lord,  as  we  now 
desire,  more  forces  to  Mansoul,  that  it  may  be 
subdued ;  and  a  man  to  head  them,  that  the  town 
may  both  love  and  fear.  We  do  not  thus  speak 
because  we  are  willing  to  relinquish  the  wars— for 
we  are  for  laying  of  our  bones  against  the  place — 
hut  that  the  town  of  Mansoul  may  be  won  for  thy 
ty.  We  also  pray  thy  Majesty  for  expedi- 
tion in  this  matter,  that,  after  their  conquest,  we 
may  he  at  liberty  to  be  sent  about  other  thy  gra- 
cious designs.     Amen.' 

The  petition  thus  drawn  up  was  sent  away  with 
Who      carried    haste  to  the  King,  by  the  hand  of  that 
thi. petition.     good  manj  Mr>  Love-to-mansoul. 

When  this  petition  was  come  to  the  palace  of 

Towhomitvas    the  King,  who  should  it  be  delivered 
delivered.        to  but  ^  fchfl  King,fl  g(m<    go  ^  ^ 


1  Bishop  YVilkins,  in  his  Gift  of  Prayer,  gives  an  awful 
picture  of  man's  total  depravity  ami  departure  from  God  by 
tiie  fall.  '  What  a  world  of  mischief,'  says  he,  '  is  there  in  our 
Bereral  parts  !  our  wills,  our  affections,  our  tongue 
And  yet  all  these  are  hut  as  little  rivulets:  the 


it  and  read  it,  and  because  the  contents  of  it  pleased 
him  well,  he  mended,  and  also  in  some  things, 
added  to  the  petition  himself.  So  after  he  had 
made  such  amendments  and  additions  as  he  thought 
convenient,  with  his  own  hand,  he  carried  it  in 
to  the  King ;  to  whom  when  he  had  The  Kjn[r  re_ 
with  obeisance  delivered  it,  he  put  on  ccives  it  with 
authority,  and  spake  to  it  himself.2 

Now  the  King,  at  the  sight  of  the  petition,  was 
glad;  but  how  much  more  think  you,  when  it  was 
seconded  by  his  Son  ?  It  pleased  him  also  to  hear 
that  his  servants  that  camped  against  Mansoul 
were  so  hearty  in  the  work,  and  so  steadfast  in 
their  resolves,  and  that  they  had  already  got  some 
ground  upon  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul. 

Wherefore  the  King  called  to  him  Emmanuel 
his    Son,  who  said,  Here  am  I,  my 
Father.     Then  said  the  King,  Thou     his  Son,  and 
knowest,  as  I  do  myself,  the  condition     heeUsshali"go'to 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  what  we     conquer     the 

*  town  of  Man- 

have  purposed,  and  what  thou  hast     soul,  and  he  is 

done  to  redeem  it.    Come  now,  there- 
fore, my  Son,  and  prepare  thyself  for  the  war,  for 
thou   shalt  go   to   my  camp  at   Mansoul.     Thou 
shalt  also  there  prosper,  and  prevail,  and  conquer 
the  town  of  Mansoul. 

Then  said  the  King's  Son,  Thy  law  is  within 
my  heart.  I  delight  to  do  thy  will.  Hesolacethhim- 
iie.x.  This  is  the  day  that  I  have  £gitsofS 
longed  for,  and  the  work  that  I  have  W0lk- 
waited  for  all  this  while.  Grant  me,  therefore, 
what  force  thou  shalt  in  thy  wisdom  think  meet, 
and  I  will  go,  and  will  deliver  from  Diaholus,  and 
from  his  power,  thy  perishing  town  of  Mansoul. 
My  heart  has  been  often  pained  within  me  for  the 
miserable  town  of  Mansoul ;  but  now  it  is  rejoiced, 
but  now  it  is  glad.  And  with  that  he  leaped  over 
the  mountains  for  joy ;  saying,  I  have  not,  in  my 
heart,  thought  anything  too  dear  for  Mansoul ; 
the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine  heart  for  thee,  my 
Mansoul ;  and  glad  am  I  that  thou,  my  Father, 
hast  made  me  the  Captain  of  their  salvation. 
He.  ii.  10.  And  I  will  now  begin  to  plague  all  those 
that  have  been  a  plague  to  my  town  of  Mansoul, 
and  will  deliver  it  from  their  hand. 

When  the  King's  Son  had  said  thus  to  his  Fa- 
ther, it  presently  flew  like  lightning  round  about 
at  court ;  yea,  it  there  became  the  only  talk  what 
Emmanuel  was  to  go  to  do  for  the  famous  town  of 
Mansoul.  But  you  cannot  think  how  Thehighest peer 
the  courtiers  too  were  taken  with  this  coveuS°un 
design  of  the  Prince.  Yea,  so  affected     tkis  desls"- 


rather  the  sea,  that  feeds  them,  is  our  corrupted  nature.' — ■ 
(Mason.) 

2  Jesus  Christ  is  our  great  advocate  above.     He  receives, 
..  ,  amends,  and  presents  our  prayers ;  and  those  petitions  which 
S  our  affections,  our  tongues,  and  eyes!     have  the  glory  of  God  for  their  object,  cannot  but  be  acceptable 
fountain,  or  ,  to  hiin.— (Burder.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


ess 


were  tliey  with  this  work,  and  with  the  justness  of 
tlic  war,  that  the  highest  lord  and  greatest  peer 
of  the  kingdom  did  covet  to  have  commissions 
under  Emmanuel,  to  go  to  help  to  recover  again  to 
Shaddai  the  miserable  town  of  Mansoul.1 

Then  was  it  concluded  that  some  should  go  and 
carry  tidings  to  the  camp  that  Emmanuel  was  to 
oome  to  recover  Mansoul,  and  thai  he  would  bring 
along  with  him  bo  mighty,  so  impregnable  a  force, 
that  lie  could  not  he  resisted.  Bui  <>,  how  ready 
were  the  high  ones  at  court  to  run  like  lackeys  to 
cany  these  tidings  to  the'  camp  that  was  at  Man- 
soul !  Now  when  the  captains  perceived  that  the 
King  would  send  Emmanuel  his  Son,  and  that  it 
also  delighted  the  Son  to  he  Bent  on  this  errand 
by  the    great  Shaddai,  his   Father,    they  also,  to 

The  camp  shouts  show  how  thev  were  pleased  at  the 
for    joy    when     ,1  1  .         c  i  •  •  , 

tiny    hear    the     thoughts  Ot  IllS  COllllUg,  gave  a  SllOllt 

tidings.  t]iat  ni;uie  t]ie  earth  rend  at  the  sound 

thereof.  Yea,  the  mountains  did  answer  again  by 
echo,  and  Diaholus  himself  did  totter  and  shake. 

For  you  must  know,  that  though  the  town  of 
Mansoul  itself  was  not  much,  if  at  all,  concerned 
with  the  project — for,  alas  for  them,  they  were 
wofully  hesotted,  for  they  chiefly  regarded  their 
Diaholus  afraid    pleasure  and  their  lusts— yet  Diabo- 

at  the  news  of  his  their  governor  was  ;  for  he  had  his 
spies  continually  abroad,  who  brought 
him  intelligence  of  all  things,  and  they  told  him 
what  was  doing  at  court  against  him,  and.  that 
Emmanuel  would  shortly  certainly  come  with  a 
power  to  invade  him.  Nor  was  there  any  man  at 
court,  nor  peer  of  the  kingdom,  that  Diaholus  so 
feared  as  he  feared  this  Prince.  For  if  you  re- 
member, I  showed  you  before  that  Diaholus  had 
felt  the  weight  of  his  hand  already.  So  that,  since 
it  was  he  that  was  to  come,  this  made  him  the 
more  afraid.  Well,  you  see  how  I  have  told  you 
that  the  King's  Son  was  engaged  to  come  from 
the  court  to  save  Mansoul,  and  that  his  Father 
had  made  him  the  Captain  of  the  forces.  The 
The  Trincc  ad-    time,  therefore,  of  his  setting  forth 

ftThtahiio^   being  now  expired,  he  addressed  him- 

IK>-  self  fur  his  march,  and  taketh  with 


1  How  honourable  a  work  is  it  to  make  known  the  gospel! 
Every  Bainl  is  thus  honoured,  it  by  his  walk  and  converse  lie 
wins  souls  t.>  Christ;  ;  priests  under  the  new 
covenant;  they  are  made  '  Kings  and  priests  unto  God.'  The 
angels  desire  to  look  into  these  things.     '  I 

in  heaven  covets  to  go  on  this  design.'  How  does  God  ho- 
nour his  saints!  The  pious  D  .  or  servant,  the 
godly  artizan  or  mechanic,  the  humble  Christian  merchant 
Or  nobleman   'that  turn   many 

the  stars  fur  ever  and  ever?'  Can  we  wonder  that  some  proud 
nun  should  vainly  boast  themselves  as  possessing  a  monopoly 
of  this  glory  ?— (Ed.) 

2  The  powerful  influences,  giftsand  graces,  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
Faith,  Hope,  Charity,  Innocence,  and  Patience,  under  the  im- 
mediate command  of  Christ,  lead  on  the  new  covenant  forces 
to  conqi  fter  il  had  been  convinced  and  alarmed 
by  the  terrors  of  the  laws. — (En.) 


him,  for  his  power,  five  noble  captains  and   their 

The  first  was  that  famous  captain,  the  i 
Captain  Credence.     Bis  were  the  red  coloui 
Mr.  Promise  bore  them,  and  for  a  scutcheon  In- 
had  the  holy  lamb  and  golden  shield.    And  he  had 

ten  thousand  men  at   I  29,    Bp,  u.  18. 

The  set 1  was  that  famous  captain,  thi 

tain  Goodhope.  His  were  the  blue  colours,  his 
Btandard-bearer  was  Mr.  Expectation,  and  for  a 
scutcheon  he  had  the  three  golden  anchors.8  And 
he  had  ten  thousand  men  at  his  feet,  Bt.vi.19. 

The  third  captain  was  thai  valiant  captain,  the 

Captain  Charity.  His  standard-hearer  was  Mr. 
Pitiful,  his  were  the  green  colours,  and  for  his 
scutcheon  he  had  three  naked  orphan-  embraced 
in  the  bosom.  And  he  bad  ten  thousand  men  at 
bis  feet.  1  c0.  xin. 

The  fourth   was  that  gallant   command* 
Captain  Innocent.     His  Btandard-bearer  was  Mr. 
Harmless,  his  were  the  white  colours,  and   for  his 
scutcheon  he  had  the  three  golden  doves.  He.  x.  16. 

The  fifth  was   the  truly  loyal  and   well-bi 
captain,    the    Captain     Patience.       His    standard- 
bearer   was   Mr.    Suffer-long,  his   were    the   black 
colours,  and  for  a  scutcheon  he  had  three  arrows 
through  the  golden  heart.   lie.  vi.  12. 

These  were  Emmanuel's  captains,  these  their 
standard-bearers,  their  colours,  and  their  scut- 
cheons,4 and  these  the  nun  under  their  command. 
So,  as  was  said,  the  brave  Prince  took  his  march 
to  go  to  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Cap-  ia;ti,  and  Patience 
tain  Credence  led  the  van,  and  Cap-  dolhc  work- 
tain  Patience  brought  up  the  rear.  So  the  other 
three,  with  their  men,  made  up  the  main  body; 
the  Prince  himself  riding  in  his  chariot  at  the  head 
of  them.5 

But  when  they  set  out  for  their  march,  I 
the  trumpets  sounded,  their  armour  glittered,  and 
how  the  colours  waved  in  the  wind  !     The  Prince's 
armour  was  all  of  gold,  and  it  shone 
like  the  sun  in  the  firmament.     The 
captains'  armour  was  of  proof,  and  was  in  appear- 
ance like  the  glittering  stars.     There  were  also 


3  '  The  three  golden  anchors.'  When  Christiana 
the  house  of  the  Interpreter,  she  had  a  golden  ami.,  r  - 
her,  for,  said  they,  you  shall  have  it  with  you,  for  it 

lute  necessity  that  you  may  lay  hold  of  that  within  the  veil,  :.nd 
stand  steadfast  in  turbulent  weather,     .loci  iii.  16;   II'  . 
Here  we  find  two  golden  anchors,  hut  where  is  the  third? — (  En.) 

4  These  standards  are  all  scriptural:   Faith  in  the  I.. 
that  was  slain  ;    : 

Chanty  and  the  orphan   Innocent  with  the  1 

and  his  arrows  in  the  heart.  1'-.  wwm.  -'.     Bunju 

the  use  of  standards  in  the  civil  war. — (Ed.) 

'•  When  Jesus  comes  to  effect   the  conquest  of  the  human 
soul,   he  is    gloriously  attended    with    ' 
faith,  hope,  love,   innocence,  and  pal 

van;   patience  brings  up  the  n    ' 

tion,  In.  ■ 

je-ty,  conquering  uud  to  conquer.— (iiuruer. ) 


2S6 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


some  from  the  court  that  rode  reformades,1  for 
the  love  that  they  had  to  the  King  Shaddai,  and 
for  the  happy  deliverance  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul.2 

Emmanuel  also,  when  he  had  thus  set  forward 
to  go  to  recover  the  town  of  Mansoul,  took  with 
_.  noIvBil))e  him,  at  the  commandment  of  his  Fa- 
containing  (j«  ther,  forty-four  battering  rams,  and 
twelve  slings,  to  whirl  stones  withal. 
Every  one  of  these  was  made  of  pure  gold;  and 
these  they  carried  with  them  in  the  heart  and  body 
of  their  army,  all  along  as  they  went  to  Mansoul. 

So  they  marched  till  they  came  within  less  than 
a  league  of  the  town.  And  there  they  lay  till  the 
first  four  captains  came  thither,  to  acquaint  him 
with  matters.  Then  they  took  their  journey  to  go 
to  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  unto  Mansoul  they 
came.     But  when  the  old  soldiers  that  were  in  the 

Tlie      forces     camP   saAV  tnat  tney  ^la(^  new  forces   to 

joined  with  join  with,  they  again  gave  such  a  shout 
before  the  walls  of  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
that  it  put  Diabolns  into  another  fright.  So  they 
sat  down  before  the  town,  not  now  as  the  other 
four  captains  did,  to  wit,  against  the  gates  of  Man- 
Mansoui  be-  sou^  on^ »  Dut  tneJ  enyironed  it  round 
leaenered  on  every  side,  and  beset  it  behind  and 
before ;  so  that  now,  let  Mansoul  look 
which  way  it  will,  it  saw  force  and  power  lie  in 
siege  against  it.  Besides,  there  were  mounts  cast 
up  against  it. 

The  Mount  Gracious  was  on  the  one  side,  and 
Mounts  east  up   Mount  Justice  was  on  the  other;  fur- 

againstit.         ^ej.^  tnere  were    several    sma]}    banks 

and  advance-ground — as  Plaintruth  Hill,  and  No- 
sin  Banks — where  many  of  the  slings  were  placed 
against  the  town.  Upon  Mount  Gracious  were 
planted  four,  and  upon  Mount  Justice  were  planted 
as  many ;  and  the  rest  were  conveniently  placed 
in  several  parts  round  about  the  town.  Five  of 
the  best  battering  rams — that  is,  of  the  biggest 
of  them— were  placed  upon  Mount  Hearken°;  a 
mount  cast  up  hard  by  Eargate,  with  intent  to 
break  that  open.4 

Now,  when  the  men  of  the  town  saw  the  mul- 
titude of  the  soldiers  that  were  come  up  against 
the  place,  and  the  rams  and  slings,  and  the  mounts 
on  which  they  were  planted,  together  with  the 
glittering  of  the  armour  and  the  wavino-  0f  their 


1  'Reformades,1   angel  volunteer  officers,  not  attached  to 
any  troop  or  company. — (Ed.) 

2  No  Bigh,  no  murmur,  his  elect  shall  hear, 
Prom  ev'ry  face  he'll  wipe  oil'  ev'ry  tear; 
In  adamantine  chains  shall  death  be  bound, 
And  hell's  grim  tyrant  l'eel  th'  eternal  wound. 

[Messiah,) 
8  The  text  states  forty-four  battering-rams  and  twelve  dings, 
which  the  margin  interprets  to  mean  the  si.rly-six  books  of  the 
Holy  Bible.  Jt  would  be  a  task  for  Aquiims  to  discover  which 
are  rams  and  which  the  slings.  The  whole  of  this  paragraph 
.8  omitted  in  the  second  edition,  1084,  but  is  re-inserted  in 


colours,  they  were  forced  to  shift  and  shift,  and 
a<rain    to    shift   their   thoughts,  but  they  hardly 


The    heart     of 


changed  for  thoughts  more  stout,  but 

rather  for  thoughts  more  faint.     For    Mansuuibegins 

though  before  they  thought  themselves 

sufficiently  guarded,  yet  now  they  began  to  think 

that  no  man  knew  what  would  be  their  hap  or  lot. 

When  the  good  Prince  Emmanuel  had  thus 
beleaguered  Mansoul ;  in  the  first  place  he  hangs 
out  the  white  flag,  which  he  caused  to  The  white  flag 
be  set'  up  among  the  golden  slings  that  huu°  out 
were  planted  upon  Mount  Gracious.  And  this  he 
did  for  two  reasons:  1.  To  give  notice  to  Mansoul 
that  he  could  and  would  yet  be  gracious  if  they 
turned  to  him.  2.  And  that  he  might  leave  them 
the  more  without  excuse,  should  he  destroy  them, 
they  continuing  in  their  rebellion. 

So  the  white  flag,  with  the  three  golden  doves 
on  it,  was  hanged  out  for  two  days  together,  to 
give  them  time  and  space  to  consider.  But  they, 
as  was  hinted  before,  as  if  they  were  unconcerned, 
made  no  reply  to  the  favourable  signal  of  the 
Prince.  Then  he  commanded,  and  The  red  flag 
they  set  the  red  flag  upon  that  mount  hun°  out-  " 
called  Mount  Justice.  It  was  the  red  flag  of  Cap- 
tain Judgment,  whose  scutcheon  was  the  burning 
fiery  furnace,  and  this  also  stood  waving  before 
them  in  the  wind  for  several  days  together.  But 
look  how  they  carried  it  under  the  white  flag  when 
that  was  hanged  out,  so  did  they  also  when  the 
red  one  was,  and  yet  he  took  no  advantage  of 
them. 

Then  he  commanded  again  that  his  servants 
would  hang  out  the  blaek  flag  of  defi-  The  Mack  flag 
ance  against  them,  whose  scutcheon  huugout. 
was  the  three  burning  thunder-bolts.  But  as  un- 
concerned was  Mansoul  at  this  as  at  those  that 
went  before.  But  when  the  Prince  saw  that  neither 
mercy,  nor  judgment,  nor  execution  of  judgment, 
would  or  could  come  near  the  heart  of  Mansoul, 
he  was  touched  with  much  compunction,  and  said, 
'  Surely  this  strange  carriage  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul doth  rather  arise  from  ignorance  of  the  manner 
and  feats  of  war,  than  from  a  secret  Christ  raaije3 
defiance  of  us,  and  abhorrence  of  their     not  war  as  the 

!■  t,i         i  ,i  world  does. 

own  lives;  or,  if  they  know  the  manner 
of  the  war  of  their  own,  yet  not  the  rites  and  cere- 
monies  of  the   wars  in  which  we  are  concerned, 
when  I  make  wars  upon  mine  enemy  Diabolus.' 


later  copies.  In  one  printed  at  Edinburgh,  1742,  the  text  is 
altered  to  '  fifty-four  battering-rams,'  and  this  emendation  is 
contained  in  all  the  modern  editions.  Perhaps  the  error  was 
in  the  printer  mistaking  Mr.  Bunyan's  figures,  22  for  12.  This 
would  make  the  39  books  of  the  Old"  Testament  with  the 
Gospels  and  Acts,  the  44  battering-rams,  and  the  22  Epistles 
and  Revelations  the  slings.  Mighty  weapons  for  pulling  down 
the  strong  holds  of  the  devil. — (Ed.) 

4  The  Lord,  the  eternal  Spirit,  must  first  give  the  hearing 
ear,  and  the  understanding  heart,  ere  any  saving  work  can  be 
begun.— (Mason.) 


THE    HOLY    AVAR. 


2S7 


Therefore,  lie  sent  to  the  town  of  Mansoul,  to  let 
them  know  what  he  meant  by  those  signs  and 
He  >enda  to  ceremoniea  of  the  flag,  and  also  to 
would "  have  know  of  them  whioh  of  the  things 
nwrcyorjuatice.  they  would  choose,  whether  grace  and 
mercy,  or  judgment  and  the  execution  of  judg- 
ment. All  this  while  they  kept  their  gates  shut 
with  locks,  bolts,  and  bars,  as  fast  as  they  could; 
their  guards,  also,  wore  doubled,  and  their  watch 
made  as  strong  as  they  could.     Diaholus  also  did 

pluck  up  what  heart  he  could  to  encourage  the  town 
to  make  resistance. 

The  townsmen  also  made  answer  to  the  Prince's 
messenger,  in  suhstance,  according  to  that  which 
follows  :— 

'Great  Sir,  as  to  what  hy  your  messenger  you 
The  townsfolk's    nave    signified    to  US,  whether  we  will 

"*""'  accept  of  your  mercy  or  fall  hy  your 
justice,  we  are  hound  hy  the  law  and  custom  of 
this  place,  and  can  give  you  no  positive  answer. 
For  it  is  against  the  law,  government,  and  the 
prerogative  royal  of  our  king,  to  make  either 
peace  or  war  without  him.  But  this  we  will  do, 
we  will  petition  that  our  prince  will  come  down  to 
the  wall,  and  there  give  you  such  treatment  as  he 
shall  think  fit,  and  profitable  for  us.' 

When  the  good  Prince  Emmanuel  heard  this 
answer,  and  saw  the  slavery  and  bondage  of  the 
people,  and  how  much  content  they  were  to  abide 
v     „„.    .     ,  in  the  chains  of  the  tyrant  Diaholus, 

tmmnnuelzneved  •> 

folly  of  it  grieved   him   at  the  heart.     And, 

indeed,  when  at  any  time  he  perceived 
that  any  were  contented  under  the  slavery  of  the 
giant,  he  would  he  affected  with  it. 

But  to  return  again  to  our  purpose.  After  the 
town  had  carried  this  news  to  Diaholus,  and  had 
told  him,  moreover,  that  the  Prince  that  lay  in  the 
leaguer1  without  the  wall,  waited  upon  them  for 
an  answer,  he  refused,  and  hulled  as 
well  as  he  could,  but  in  heart  he  was 
afraid.  Then,  said  he,  I  will  go  down  to  the  gates 
myself,  and  give  him  such  an  answer  as  I  think 
fit.  So  he  went  down  to  Motithgate,  and  there 
addressed  himself  to  speak  to  Emmanuel,  but  in 
such  language  as  the  town  understood  not,  the 
contents  whereof  were  as  follows:  — 

1  0  thou  great  Emmanuel,  Lord  of  all  the  world, 
iils  fprech  to  I  know  thee  that  thou  art  the  Sou  oi 
the  Prince.  t]ie  (^reat  Shaddai  !  Wherefore  art 
thou  come  to  torment  me,  and  to  cast  me  out  of 
my  possession?  This  town  of  Mansoul,  as  thou 
very  well  knowest,  is  mine,  and  that  by  twofold 
right.  1.  It  is  mine  by  right  of  conquest,  I  won  it  in 
the  open  field.  And  shall  the  prey  lie  taken  from 
the  mighty,  or  the  lawful  captive  be  delivered?   2. 


M;uismiiI. 


l->i.ili"lus  afraid. 


1  '  Leaguer,' the  camp  and  treuches  in  wl 
ermy  are  sheltered. — (Lo.) 


besieging 


This  town  of  Mansoul  is  mine  also  by  their  subjec- 
tion. They  have  opened  the  gates  of  their  town  unto 
me,  they  have  sworn  fidelity  to  me,  and  have  openly 
chosen  me  to  be  their  king.    They  bavi 

their  castle  into  my  hand--;  yea,  they 
have  put  the  whole  strength  of  Man- 
soul under  me.  Moreover,  this  town  of  Mansoul 
hath  disavowed  thee;  yea,  they  have  cast  thy  law, 
thy  name,  thy  image,  and  all  that  is  thine,  behind 
their  hack,  and  have  accepted,  and  set  up  in  their 
room,  my  law,  my  name,  mine  image,  and  all  that 

ever  is  mine.     Ask  else  thy  captains,  and  they  will 

tell  thee  that  Mansoul  hath,  in  answer  to  all  their 
BUmmonS,  shown  love  and  loyally  to  me;  but  al- 
ways disdain,  despite,  contempt,  and  Bcorn  to  thee 
and  thine.  Now  thou  art  the  .lust  One,  and  tho 
Holy,  and  shouldest  do  no  iniquity;  depart  then,  1 

pray  thee,  therefore,  from  me,  and  leave  me  to  my 
just  inheritance,  peaceably.' 

This  oration  was  made  in  tho  language  of  Dia- 
holus himself.  For  although  be  can,  to  every  man, 
speak  in  their  own  language — else  he  could  not 
tempt  them  all  as  he  does — yet  he  has  a  lam. 
proper  to  himself,  and  it  is  the  language  of  the 
infernal  cave,  or  black  pit. 

Wherefore  the  town  of  Mansoul,  poor  hcart3, 
understood  him  not,  nor  did  they  see  how  he 
crouched  and  cringed,  while  he  stood  before  Em- 
manuel their  prince.  Yea,  they  all  this  while  took 
him  to  bo  one  of  that  power  and  force  that  by  no 
means  Could  be  resisted.      Wherefore,  while  he  WM 

thus  intreating  that  he  might  yet  have  bis  residence 
there,  and  that  Emmanuel  would  not  take  it  from 
him  by  force,  the  inhabitants  boasted  even  of  his 
valour,  saying,  'Who  is  able  to  make  war  with  bun?' 

Well,  when  this  pretended  king  had  made  an 
end  of  what  he  would  say,  Emmanuel,  the  golden 
Prince,  stood  up  and  spake,  the  contents  of  whose 
words  follow  :  — 

'Thou  deceiving  one,'  said  he,  'I  have  in  my 
Father's  name,  in  mine  own  name,  :ymm,um.v,,u. 
and  on  the  behalf  and  for  the  good  of  »«>/  tuDfcbot- 
this  wretched  town  of  Mansoul,  some- 
what to  say  unto  thee.  Thou  pretended  a  right,  a 
lawful  right,  to  the  deplorable  town  of  Mansoul,  when 
it  is  most  apparent  to  all  my  Father's  court,  that  the 
entrance  which  thou  hast  obtained  in  at  the  gates  of 
Mansoul  was  through  thy  lies  and  falsehood.  Thou 
beliedst  my  Father,  thou  beliedst  his  law,  and  so 
deceivedst  the  people  of  Mansoul.    Thou  pn  ■ 

that    the  people  have  accepted  thee  for  their  king, 
their  captain,  and   right   liege-h,rd,  but   thai 
was  by  the  exercise  of  deceit  and  guile. 
if  lying  wiliness,  sinful  craft,  and  all  mai 
horrible  hypocrisy,  will  go  in  my  Father's  court 
for  equity  and  right,  in  which  curt  thou  most  be 
tried,  then  will  1  confess  unto  thee  that  thou  bast 
made  a  lawful  conquest.      But   alas   what  thief, 


2SS 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


what  tyrant,  wliat  devil  is  there  that  may  not  con- 
quer after  this  sort?  But  I  can  make  it  appear,  0 
Diabolus,  that  thou,  in  all  thy  pretences  to  a  con- 
quest of  Mansoul,  hast  nothing  of  truth  to  say. 
Thinkest  thou  this  to  be  right,  that  thou  didst  put 
the  lie  upon  my  Father,  and  madest  him,  to  Man- 
soul,  the  greatest  deluder  in  the  world.  And  what 
sayest  thou  to  thy  perverting,  knowingly,  the  right 
purport  and  intent  of  the  law?  Was  it  good  also 
that  thou  madest  a  prey  of  the  innocency  and  sim- 
plicity of  the  now  miserable  town  of  Mansoul? 
Yea,  thou  didst  overcome  Mansoul  by  promising  to 
them  happiness  in  their  transgressions  against  my 
Father's  law,  when  thou  kuewest,  and  couldest 
not  but  know,  hadst  thou  consulted  nothing  but 
thine  own  experience,  that  that  was  the  way  to 
undo  them.  Thou  hast  also  thyself — 0  thou 
master  of  enmity,  of  despite — defaced  my  Father's 
image  in  Mansoul,  and  set  up  thy  own  in  its  place, 
to  the  great  contempt  of  my  Father,  the  heighten- 
ing of  thy  sin,  and  to  the  intolerable  damage  of  the 
perishing  town  of  Mansoul.  Thou  hast,  moreover 
— as  if  all  these  were  but  little  things  with  thee — 
hot  only  deluded  and  undone  this  place,  but,  by  thy 
lies  and  fraudulent  carriage  hast  set  them  against 
their  own  deliverance.  How  hast  thou  stirred  them 
up  against  my  Father's  captains,  and  made  them  to 
fight  against  those  that  were  sent  of  him  to  deliver 
them  from  their  bondage !  All  these  things  and 
very  many  more  thou  hast  done  against  thy  light, 
and  in  contempt  of  my  Father  and  of  his  law ;  yea, 
and  with  design  to  bring  under  his  displeasure  for 
ever  the  miserable  town  of  Mansoul.  I  am  there- 
fore come  to  avenge  the  wrong  that  thou  hast  done 
to  my  Father,  and  to  deal  with  thee  for  the  blas- 
phemies wherewith  thou  hast  made  poor  Mansoul 
blaspheme  his  name.  Yea,  upon  thy  head,  thou 
prince  of  the  infernal  cave,  will  I  require  it. 

*  As  for  myself,  0  Diabolus,  I  am  come  against 
thee  by  lawful  power,  and  to  take,  by  strength  of 
hand,  this  town  of  Mansoul  out  of  thy  burning 
lingers.  For  this  town  of  Mansoul  is  mine,  0 
Diabolus,  and  that  by  undoubted  right,  as  all  shall 
see  that  will  diligently  search  the  most  ancient 
and  most  authentic  records,  and  I  will  plead  my 
title  to  it,  to  the  confusion  of  thy  face. 

'First.  For  the  town  of  Mansoul,  my  Father 
built  and  did  fashion  it  with  his  hand.  The  palace 
also  that  is  in  the  midst  of  that  town,  he  built  it 
fur  his  own  delight.  This  town  of  Mansoul  there- 
fore  is  my  Father's,  and  that  by  the  best  of  titles  ; 
and  he  that  gainsays  the  truth  of  this  must  lie 
against  his  soul. 

*  Second.  0  thou  master  of  the  lie,  this  town  of 
Mansoul  is  mine. 

1  1.  For  that  I  am  my  Father's  heir,  his  first- 
born, and  the  only  delight  of  his  heart.  I  am 
therefore  come  up  against  thee  in  mine  own  right, 


'  even  to  recover  mine  own  inheritance  out  of  thine 

I  hand.  He.  i.  2  ;  Jn.  xvi.  15. 

'  2.  But  further,  as  I  have  a  right  and  title  to 
Mansoul,  by  being  my  Father's  heir,  so  I  have 
also  by  my  Father's  donation.  His  it  was,  and  he 
o-ave  it  me  (Jn.  xvii.)  •,  nor  have  I  at  any  time  offended 
1  my  Father,  that  he  should  take  it  from  me  and 
give  it  to  thee.  Nor  have  I  been  forced  by  play- 
ing the  bankrupt  to  sell,  or  set  to  sale  to  thee,  my 
beloved  town  of  Mansoul.  is.  1. 1.  Mansoul  is  my 
desire,  my  delight,  and  the  joy  of  my  heart.     But, 

*  3.  Mansoul  is  mine  by  right  of  purchase.  I 
have  bought  it,  0  Diabolus,  I  have  bought  it  to 
myself.  Now,  since  it  was  my  Father's  and  mine, 
as  I  was  his  heir;  and  since  also  I  have  made  it 
mine  by  virtue  of  a  great  purchase,  it  followeth, 
that  by  all  lawful  right  the  town  of  Mansoid  is 
mine,  and  that  thou  art  an  usurper,  a  tyrant,  and 
traitor,  in  thy  holding  possession  thereof.  Now, 
the  cause  of  my  purchasing  of  it  was  this :  Man- 
soul had  trespassed  against  my  Father ;  now  my 
Father  had  said,  that  in  the  day  that  they  broke 
his  law  they  should  die.  Now  it  is  more  possible 
for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass  away,  than  for  my 
Father  to  break  his  word.  Mat.  v.  is.  Wherefore, 
when  Mansoul  had  sinned  indeed  by  hearkening  to 
thy  lie,  I  put  in  and  became  a  surety  to  my  Father, 
body  for  body,  and  soul  for  soul,  that  I  would 
make  amends  for  Mansoul's  transgressions;  and  my 
Father  did  accept  thereof.  So  when  o  sweet  Prince, 
the  time  appointed  was  come,  I  gave  Emmanuel 
body  for  body,  soul  for  soul,  life  for  life,  blood 
for  blood,  and  so  redeemed  my  beloved  Mansoul. 

'  4.  Nor  did  I  do  this  to  the  halves  ;  my  Father's 
law  and  justice  that  were  both  concerned  in  the 
threatening  upon  transgression,  are  both  now  satis- 
fied, and  very  well  content  that  Mansoul  should  be 
delivered. 

'  5.  Nor  am  I  come  out  this  day  against  thee 
but  by  commandment  of  my  Father;  it  was  he  that 
said  unto  me,  Go  down  and  deliver  Mansoul. 

'  Wherefore,  be  it  known  unto  thee,  0  thou 
fountain  of  deceit,  and  be  it  also  known  to  the 
foolish  town  of  Mansoul,  that  I  am  not  come 
against  thee  this  day  without  my  Father. 

'  And  now, '  said  the  golden-headed  Prince,  '  1 
have  a  word  to  the  town  of  Mansoul ; ' 

.       .  A    word    from 

but  as  soon  as  mention  was  made  that  .Emmanuel  to 
he  had  a  word  to  speak  to  the  besotted  '  anso 
town  of  Mansoul,  the  gates  were  double  guarded, 
and  all  men  commanded  not  to  give  him  audience, 
so  he  proceeded,  and  said,  '  0  unhappy  town  of 
Mansoul,  I  cannot  but  be  touched  with  pity  and 
compassion  for  thee.  Thou  hast  accepted  of  Dia- 
bolus for  thy  king,  and  art  become  a  nurse  and 
minister  of  Diabolonians  against  thy  Sovereign 
Lord.  Thy  gates  thou  hast  opened  to  him,  but 
hast  shut  them  fast  against  me ;  thou  hast  given 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


«:  - '.' 


him  a  hearing,  hut  hast  Btopped  thine  ears  nt  mj 
cry;  he  brought  to  thee  thy  destruction,  and  thou 
didst  receive  both  him  and  it:  I  am  come  to  thee 
bringing  salvation,  but  thou  regardest  me  not. 
Besides,  thou  hast,  as  with  sacrilegious  hands, 
taken  thyself  with  all  that  was  mini.'  in  thee,  and 
hast  given  all  to  mv  too,  and  to  the  greatest  enenaj 
my  Father  has.     You  haw  bowed  and  subjected 

yourselves  to  him;  you  have  VOWed  and  sworn 
yourselves  to  he  his.  Poor  Mansoul!  what  shall 
I  do  unt  i  thee?  Shall  1  Bave  tine'  shall  I  de- 
stroy thee?  What  shall  1  do  unto  thee?  Bholl  1 
fall  upon  thee  and  grind  thee  to  powder,  or  make 
thee  a  monument  of  the  richest  grace?  What 
shall  I  do  unto  thee!1  Hearken,  therefore,  thou 
town  of  Mansoul,  hearken  to  my  word,  and  thou 
shalt  live.  1  am  merciful,  Mansoul,  and  thou 
shalt  find  me  so;  shut  me  not  out  of  thy  gates. 
C*.  v.  •>. 

*  0  Mansoul,  neither  is  my  commission,  nor  in- 
clination, at  all  to  do  thee  any  hurt  ;  why  fliest 
thou  so  fast  from  thy  friend,  and  stiekest  so  close 
to  thine  enemy  ?  Indeed,  1  would  have  thee,  be- 
cause it  becomes  thee,  to  he  sorry  for  thy  sin ;  but 
do  not  despair  of  life,  this  great  force  is  not  to 
hurt  thee,  but  to  deliver  thee  from  thy  bondage, 
and  to  reduce  thee  to  thy  obedience.  Lu.  ix.  56.  Jn.  xii.  47. 

'  My  commission,  indeed,  is  to  make  a  war  upon 
Diabolus  thy  king,  and  upon  all  Diabolonians  with 
him ;  for  he  is  the  strong  man  armed  that  keeps 
the  house,  and  1  will  have  him  out;  his  spoils  1 
must  divide,1  his  armour  I  must  take  from  him, 
his  hold  I  must  cast  him  out  of,  and  must  make 
it  an  habitation  for  myself.  And  this,  0  Mansoul, 
shall  Diabolus  know,  when  he  shall  be  made  to 
follow  me  in  chains,  and  when  Mansoul  shall  re- 
joice to  see  it  so. 

'  I  could,  would  I  now  put  forth  my  might,  cause 
that  forthwith  he  should  leave  you  and  depart ; 
but  I  have  it  in  my  heart  so  to  deal  with  him,  as 
that  the  justice  of  the  war  that  I  shall  make  upon 
him  may  be  seen  and  acknowledged  by  all.  lie 
hath  taken  Mansoul  by  fraud,  and  keeps  it  by 
violence  and  deceit;  and  I  will  make  him  bare  and 
naked  in  the  eyes  of  all  observer-.  All  my  words 
are  true,  1  am  mighty  to  save,  and  will  deliver  my 
Mansoul  out  of  Ins  hand.' 

This  speech  was  intended  chiefly  for  Mansoul, 
but    Mansoul   would   not    have    the   hearing   of  it. 


1  This  reference  to  Is.  liii.  12  must  not  be  misunderstood 
by  our  youthful  readers.  It  does  not  mean  that  Emmanuel 
would  divide  the  spoil  with  Diabolus,  but  that  he  would  take 
it  all  from  hi  in,  and  divide  it  at  his  (Emmanuel's)  pleasure.— 
(Ed.) 

-  Here  Emmanuel  discovers  the  true  character  of  Satan — a 
liar,  a  deceiver,  a  blasphemer,  an  usurper,  the  malicii 
of  God  and  man.  Emmanuel  claims  the  human  soul  as  his 
own,  his  workman-hip,  his  delight,  his  inheritance,  In-  pur- 
chase. How  well  docs  this  gracious  address  deserve  the  mo.-t 
cordial  acceptation! — (Border.) 
VOL.  J  J  I. 


They  shut   up  Eargate,  thej  barricaded  it  up, 

they  kept  it  lucked    and    bolted  J    thev  BC(  a  guard 

thereat,    and    commanded  that   no   Mansoulonian 
should  go  out  tu  him,  nor  that  any  from  the  eamp 

should    be    admitted    into  the.  town  ;    all    this    tln-v 

did,  so  horribly  bad   Diabolus  enchanted  them  to 
do,  and  seek  to  do  for  him,  against  their  rightful 

Lord  and  l'tinee  ;  win  rcfore  no  man,  nor  voice,  tmr 
sound  of  man  that  belonged    to  the  gluriou- 
was  to  come  into  the  town.8 


[Chapteb  VII.  I 

'  is:  -  -Emmanuel  prepares  to  make  war  upon  x! 

—  Diaboku  sendi  Mr.  Loth-to-stoop  with  proposals  for 
propoa  ill  being  dishonourable  to  Emmanni !. 

are  all  rejected — Again  Diabolus  proposes  to  patch  up  ;i 
peace  by  reformation,  offering  to  become  Emmanuel's 
deputy  in  that,  business — This  proposal  also  raja 
New  preparations  n 

to  be  obliged  to  abandon  the  town,  does  much  mi 
— Eargate,  violently  assaulted  by  the  bai' 

ih  gives  way,  and  is  broken  to  pieces— -ftniaannd's 
forces  enter  the  town,  and  take  possession  of  the  Eb  t 
house — Several  mischievous  Diabokmiaos  are  killed. j 

So  when  Emmanuel  saw  that  Mansoul  was  thus 
involved  in  sin,  be  calls  bis  army  to-  r..„m:muei  pr(. 
gether,  since  now  also  his  words  were 
despised,  and  gave  out  a  command-  5,ul- 
ment  throughout  all  his  host  to  be  ready  a»ainst 
the  time  appointed.  Now,  forasmuch  as  there  was 
no  way  lawfully  to  take  the  town  of  Mansoul,  but 
to  get  in  by  the  gates,  and  at  Eargate  as  the 
chief,  therefore  he  commanded  his  captains  and 
commanders  to  bring  their  rams,  their  slinks,  and 
their  men,  and  place  them  at  Eyegate  and  Ear- 
gate,  in  order  to  his  taking  the  town. 

When  Emmanuel  had  put  all  things  in  readiness 

to  give  Diabolus  battle,  be  sent  again  to  know  of 

the  town  of  Mansoul   if  in  peaceable  manner  they 

would   yield  themselves,  or  whether  tliev  \\.  r 

resolved   to  put  him   to  try  the  utmost  extremity. 

Then    they  together,   with    Diabolus   ^.^  ^ 

their  king,    called    a   council   ot    war,      bj    I 

...  ,    .  cii  his  servant, 

and  resolved  upon  certain  propositions     Mr. 
that  should  be  offered  to   Emmanuel. 

if  he  will  accept  thereof,  so  they  agreed; 

■  iiiii       "  i: 

and   then  the  next  was  Who  should  be 

sent  on   this  errand.      Now  there  was   in   the  town 

of  Mansoul  an   old  man,   a   Diaboloniau,  and    his 

name   was    Mr.  Loth-to-stoop,   a   stiff  man    in   bis 

way.  and   a   great  doer   \'^r    Diabolus;    him   therc- 

3  Infatuated  sinners!  rejecting  th<    counsel 
themselves.     Reader,  is  this  tl 
Remember '  feith  cometh  by  hearing.'    Hear, 
soul  shall  live.— (B 

4  These  terms  may  be  found  ;  '■  ':'■  No.  in. 

-   to  reform  'mv  virions  life; 
a  day,  and 

-  life.'— (En.) 

31 


290 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


fore  they  sent,  and  put  into  his  mouth  what  he 
should  say.  So  he  went,  and  carue  to  the  camp  to 
Emmanuel ;  and  when  he  was  come,  a  time  was 
appointed  to  give  him  audience.  So  at  the  time 
lie  came,  and  after  a  Diabolonian  ceremony  or  two, 
he  thus  began,  and  said,  '  Great  Sir,  that  it  may 
be  known  unto  all  men  how  good-natured  a  prince 
my  master  is,  he  hath  sent  me  to  tell  your  Lord- 
ship that  he  is  very  willing,  rather  than  to  go  to 
1  war,  to  deliver  up  into  your  hands 
one-half  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Tit. 
i.  16.  I  am  therefore  to  know  if  your  Mightiness 
will  accept  of  this  proposition.' 

Then  said  Emmanuel,  'The  whole  is  mine  by  gift 

and  purchase,  wherefore  I  will  never  lose  one-half.' 

Then  said  Mr.  Loth-to-stoop,  '  Sir,  my  master 

hath  said,  that  he  will  be  content  that 

you  shall  be  the  nominal  and  titular 

Lord  of  all,  if  he  may  possess  but  a  part.'  Lu.  xiiL  25. 

Then  Emmanuel  answered,  'The  whole  is  mine 

really;  not  in  name  and  word  only:   wherefore  I 

will  be  the  sole   Lord  and  possessor  of  all,  or  of 

none  at  all  of  Mansoul.' 

Then  Mr.   Loth-to-stoop  said  again,  •  Sir,  be- 
hold the  condescension  of  my  master ! 
He  says  that  he  will  be  content,  if  he 
may  but  have  assigned  to  him  some  place  in  Man- 
soul as  a  place  to  live  privately  in,  and  you  shall 
be  Lord  of  all  the  rest.'  Ac.  v.  i— ;. 

Then  said  the  golden  Prince,  '  All  that  the 
Father  giveth  me,  shall  come  to  me ;  and  of  all 
that  he  hath  given  me  I  will  lose  nothing,  no,  not 
a  hoof,  nor  a  hair.  1  will  not  therefore  grant  him, 
ii",  not  the  least  corner  in  Mansoul  to  dwell  in,  I 
will  have  all  to  myself.' 

Then  Loth-to-stoop  said  again,  '  But,  Sir,  sup- 
,.  ,   u.        Pose  tnat  my  l01"d  should  resign  the 

Mark  this.       l  ,     ,  J  ,         .  ,        ° 

whole  town  to  you,  only  with  this  pro- 
viso, that  he  sometimes,  when  he  comes  into  this 
country,  may,  for  old  acquaintance  sake,  be  enter- 
tained as  a  way-faring  man  for  two  days,  or  fen 
days,  or  a  month,  or  so ;  may  not  this  small  matter 
be  granted?  ' 

Then  said  Emmanuel,  '  No:  he  came  as  a  way- 
faring man  to  David,  nor  did  he  stay  long  with 
him,  and  yet  it  had  like  to  have  cost  David  his 
soul.  3  sa.  xii.  1-&  I  will  not  consent  that  he  ever 
should  have  any  harbour  more  there.' 

Then  said  Mr.  Loth-to-stoop,  '  Sir,  yon  seem  to 

be  very  hard.      Suppose  my  master  should  yield  to 

all  that  your  Lordship  hath  said,  provided  that  his 

bn.s  and  caruui   friends  and  kindred  in  Mansoul  may 

[juta-  have  liberty  to  trade  in  the  town,  and 


1  Mark  this.  A  cold,  lifeless  jiroitssion,  without  possessing 
('hrist,  the  hope  of  glory,  is  uot  Christianity ;  an  almost 
Christian  is  a  very  infidel.  We  cannot  serve  two  masters,  God 
;ind  Mammon.  Jesus  is  worthy  of  all  our  Jove  and  service; 
in  him  are  treasured  np  every  needful  blessing  for  time  and 
eternity. — (Mason.) 


to  enjoy  their  present  dwellings;  may  not  that  be 
granted,  Sir  ? ' 

Then  said  Emmanuel.  '  Xo:  that  is  contrary  to 
my  Father's  will ;  for  all,  and  all  maimer  of  Dia- 
bolonians  that  now  are,  or  that  at  any  time  shall 
be  found  in  Mansoul,  shall  not  only  lose  their 
lands  and  liberties,  but  also  their  lives.'  Eo.  vi  13. 

Oa.  v.  24.    Col.  iii.  5. 

Then  said  Mr.  Loth-to-stoop  again,  '  But,  Sir, 
may  not  my  master,  and  great  lord, 

,      V  <  XJ  t   °        ••,.  Mark  this. 

by  letters,  by  passengers,  by  accidental 
opportunities,  and   the  like,  maintain,  if  he  shall 
deliver  up  all  unto  thee,  some  kind  of  old  friend- 
ship with  Mansoul.'  Jn.  s.  s. 

Emmanuel  answered,  'Xo,  by  no  means  ;  foras- 
much as  any  such  fellowship,  friendship,  intimacy, 
or  acquaintance  in  what  way,  sort  or  mode  soever 
maintained,  will  tend  to  the  corrupting  of  Mansoul, 
the  alienating  of  their  affections  from  me,  and  the 
endangering  of  their  peace  with  my  Father.' 

Mr.  Loth-to-stoop  yet  added  further  ;  saying, 
'  But,  great  Sir,  since  my  master  hath 

?.        ,  ,     .  J  ,  ,  Mark  this. 

many  friends,  and  those  that  are  dear 
to  him  in  Mansoul,  may  he  not,  if  he  shall  depart 
from  them,  even  of  his  bounty  and  good  nature, 
bestow  upon  them,  as  he  sees  fit,  some  tokens  of 
his  love  and  kindness,  that  he  had  for  them,  to 
the  end  that  Mansoul,  when  he  is  gone,  may  look 
upon  such  tokens  of  kindness  once  received  from 
their  old  friend,  and  remember  him  who  was  once 
their  King,  and  the  merry  times  that  they  some- 
times enjoyed  one  with  another,  while  he  and  they 
lived  in  peace  together.' 

Then  said  Emmanuel,  'Xo  ;  for  if  Mansoul  como 
to  be  mine,  I  shall  not  admit  of,  nor  consent  that 
there  should  be  the  least  scrap,  shred,  or  dust  of 
Diabolus  left  behind,  as  tokens  or  gifts  bestowed 
upon  any  in  Mansoul,  thereby  to  call  to  remem- 
brance the  horrible  communion  that  was  betwixt 
them  and  him.'     Ro.  vi  12, 13. 

'Well  Sir,'  said  Mr.  Loth-to-stoop,  'I  have  one 
thing  more  to  propound,  and  then  1  am  got  to  the 
end  of  my  commission.      Suppose  that 

.  J  .  j  ivf  Mark  this. 

when  my  master  is  gone  from  Man- 
soul, any  that  yet  shall  live  in  the  town  should 
have  such  business  of  high  concerns  to  do,  that 
if  they  be  neglected  the  party  shall  be  undone  ; 
and  suppose,  Sir,  that  nobody  can  help  in  that 
case  so  well  as  my  master  and  lord  ;  may  not  now 
my  master  be  sent  for  upon  so  urgent  an  occasion 
as  this  ?  Or  if  he  may  not  be  admitted  into  the 
town,  may  not  he  and  the  person  concerned  meet 
in  some  of  the  villages  near  Mansoul,  and  there 
lay  their  heads  together,  and  there  consult  of 
matters  ?  '2     2  Ki.  i.  3,  6,  7. 

2  The  proud  heart  of  man  is  loth  to  stoop  to  that  absolute 
submission  ami  entire  obedience  to  Christ  which  he  justly  re- 
quires.    They  will  allow  him  to  be  a  lord  in  name,  but  not  in 


THE    HOLY    WVR. 


291 


Tliis  was  the  last  of  tin  m  ensnaring  propositions 
that  Mr.  Loth-to-etoop  had  tu  propound  to  l"m- 
roanuel  on  behalf  of  his  master  Diabolus  ;  but 
Emmanuel  would  not  grant  it,  for  he  said,  'There 
can  be  no  case,  or  thing,  or  matter,  fall  out  in 
Mansoul,  when  thy  master  shall  be  gone,  that  may 
not  be  salved1  by  my  Father  :  besides,  it  will  be  a 
great  disparagement  to  my  Father's  wisdom  and 
skill  to  admit  an)  from  Mansoul  to  go  out  to  Dia- 
bolus for  advice,  when  they  arc  bid  before,  in  evi  ry« 
thing,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  to  let  their  re- 
quest be  made  known  to  my  Father.  I  3*.  nrlli  15; 
•-'  Ki.  i.  ■.',  :;.  Further,  this,  should  it  be  granted, 
would  be  to  grant  that  a  door  should  he  set  open 
for  1'iabolus  and  the  Diabolonians  in  Mansoul,  to 
hatch,  and  plot,  and  bring  to  pass  treasonable 
designs,  to  the  grief  of  my  Father  and  me,  and  to 
the  utter  destruction  of  Mansoul. '- 

When  Mr.  Loth-to-stoop  bad  beard  this  answer, 
Lolh-to-stoop    ne  to°k  1> is  leave  of  Emmanuel  and 

departs.  departed,  saying,  that  be  would  do 
wend  to  bis  master  concerning  this  whole  affair. 
So  be  departed  and  came  to  Diabolus  to  Mansoul, 
and  told  him  the  whole  of  the  matter,  and  bow 
Emmanuel  would  not  admit,  no,  not  by  any  means, 
that  be,  when  be  was  once  gone  out,  should  for 
ever  have  anything  more  to  do,  eitber  in,  or  with 
any  that  are  of,  the  town  of  Mansoul.  When 
Mansoul  and  Diabolus  bad  beard  tins  relation  of 
tilings,  they  with  one  consent  concluded  to  use 
their  best  endeavour  to  keep  Emmanuel  out  of 
Mansoul,  and  sent  old  Illpause,  of  whom  you  have 
heard  before,  to  tell  the  Prince  and  bis  captains  so. 
So  the  old  gentleman  came  up  to  the  top  of  Ear- 
gate,  and  called  to  the  camp  for  a  bearing  ;  who, 
,    ,«,„    when    they  gave   audience,    be    said, 

A.  speech  of  Old        T     ,  J.     t  .  ' 

Illpause  to  the    '  I    have    in  commandment   irom  my 

high  Lord  to  bid  you  to  tell  it  to  your 
Prince  Emmanuel,  that  Mansoul  and  their  King- 
are  resolved  to  stand  and  fall  together,  and  that 
it  is  in  vain  for  your  Prince  to  think  of  ever  having 
of  Mansoul  in  his  band,  unless  be  can  take  it  by 
force.'  So  some  went  and  told  to  Emmanuel  what 
old  Illpause,  a  Diabolonian  in  Mansoul,  had  said. 
Then  said  the  Prince,  'I  must  try  the  power  of  my 
tword,  for  I  will  not,  for  all  the  rebellions  and  re- 
pulses that  Mansoul  lias  made  against  me,  raise 
my  siege  and  depart,  but  will  assuredly  take  my 
Mansoul,  and  deliver  it  from  the  hand  of  her  enemy. ' 
Ep.  vi  n.  And  with  that  be  gave  out  a  command- 
ment that  Captain  Boanerges,  Captain  Conviction, 

authority.  They  would  serve  Jesus  in  general,  if  permitted 
to  indulge  in  sin  occasionally;  -II  such  partial  submission  is 

rejected."  To  be  only  'almost  a  Christian'  is  to  be  no  Chris- 
tian at  all.  To  show  the  importance  of  this,  the  author  re- 
peatedly gives  a  marginal  note,  '.Murk  this.' — (Burder.) 

'  The  word  'salved,'  as  used  in  Bunyau's  time,  means  helped, 
remedied,  saved,  healed,  rescued.  Thus,  in  his  Come  and 
if'elcome,  he  says,  '  Such  questions  would  have  been,  I 


Thcymmtfyht. 


Judgment,  and  Captain  Execution,  should 
forthwith  march  up  to  Eargate  with 
trumpets  Bounding,  colours  flying,  and 
with  shouting  for  the  battle.  Abo  he  would  that 
Captain  Credence  should  join  himself 
with  them.  Emmanuel,  moreover,  gave 
order  that  Captain  Goodhope  ami  Captain  Charity 
should  draw  themselves  up  before  Eyegate.  He 
bid  also  that  the  rest  of  his  Captains,  and  their 
nun,  should  plan-  themselves  for  the  Inst  of  their 

advantage  against  the  enemy,  round  about  the 
town,  ami  all  was  dune  as  he  had  commanded. 
Then  he  bid  that  the  word  should  he  given  forth, 
and  the  word  was  at  that  time  'Emmanuel'.     Then 

was  an  alarm  sounded,  and  the  battering-raftu 

played,    and    the    slings   did    whirl  stones  into  the 
town    amain,    and    thus    the    halt!.'    began.       NoW 
Diabolus  himself  did  manage  the  townsmen  in  the 
war,  and  that  at  every  gate  ;  wherefore  their  I 
ance  was  the  more  forcible,  hellish,  and  offensive 
to  Emmanuel.     Thus  was  the  good  Prince  BO 
and    entertained    by    Diabolus    s    d    Bfansoul    f<  r 
several  days  together.      And  a  Bight  worth 
it  was,  to  behold  bow  the  captains  of  Shaddai  be- 
haved themselves  in  this  war. 

And  first  for  Captain  Boanerges,  not  to  under- 
value  the   rest,   be  made  three  most 
fierce  assaults,  one  after  another,  upon       *■  """■ 
Eargate,    to    the    shaking   of   the   posts    thereof. 
Captain  Conviction,  lie  also  nun','  up  a-  fist  with 
Boanerges  as  possibly  be  could,  and  both  discern- 
ing that  the  gate  began  to  yield,  they  commanded 
that   the   rams   should   still   be   played   against  it. 
Now   Captain    Conviction   going   up   very   near   to 
the  gate,  was  with  great  force  driven     0mtUttm 
back,  and  received  three  wounds  in  the      *< 
mouth.      And  those  that  rode   Refor- 
rnades,  they  went  about  to  ene 
the  captain-. 

For  the  valour  of  the  two  captains  made  mention 
of  before,  the  Prince  sent  for  them  t  i  his  pavilion, 
and  commanded  that  a  while  they  should  rest  theni- 
.  and  that  with  somewhat  they  should  be 
refreshed.  Care  also  was  taken  for  Captain  Con- 
viction, that  he  should  be  healed  of  his  wound-. 
The  Prince  also  gave  to  each  of  them  a  chain  of 
gold,  and  hid  them  yet  be  of  g  Nor 

did    Captain    Goodhope    nor  Captain    Goodimpc  ami 
Charity    come    behind    in    this    most      ,t|1',' 
desperate  fight,  for  they  so  well  did 
behave    themselves   at  Eyegal 

babbles  about,  instead  of  a  sufficient  s.' 

tion.'     Now,  the  word  wived  would  I 
-  Reader, 'mark' these  proposals  of  Loth-to- 

uncouverted  cherUh  this  evi]  spirit  ;  call  to  n 
i  the  time  when  you  felt  its  infill  ''   &'■'» 

;  Christ;   nor  would  you  ever  ! 
j  your  love  of  sill,  bu't  tl  Spirit  conquer.  .  . 

his  love  and  mercy.-    I 


292 


THE   HOLY  WATL 


almost  broken  it  quite  open.1  These  also  had  a 
reward  from  their  Prince,  as  also  had  the  rest  of 
the  captains,  because  they  did  valiantly  round 
about  tho  town.2 

In  this  engagement  several  of  the  officers  of 
Diabolus  were  slain,  and  some  of  the  townsmen 
wounded.  For  the  officers,  there  was  one  Captain 
Captain  Boast-  Boasting  slain.  This  Boasting  thought 
iug  slam.  t],at  nobody  could  have  shaken  the 
posts  of  Eargate,  nor  have  shaken  the  heart  of 
Diaholus.  Next  to  him  there  was  one  Captain 
Captain  Secure  Secure  slain  ;  this  Secure  used  to  say 
slain.  that  the  blind  and  lame  in  Mansoul 

wore  able  to  keep  the  gates  of  the  town  against 
Emmanuel's  army.  2Sa.  v.  6.  This  Captain  Secure 
did  Captain  Conviction  cleave  down  the  head  with 
a  two-handed  sword,  when  he  received  himself 
three  wounds  in  his  mouth.  Besides  these,  there 
Captain  RraS-  was  one  Captain  Bragman,  a  very  des- 
man  slam.  perate  fellow,  and  he  was  captain  over 
a  band  of  those  that  threw  fire-brands,  arrows,  and 
death  ;  he  also  received,  by  the  hand  of  Captain 
Goodhope  at  Eyegate,  a  mortal  wound  in  the 
breast. 

There  was,  moreover,  one  Mr.  Feeling,  but  he 
was  no  captain,  but  a  great  stickler  to  encourage 
Mr.  Feeling  Mansoul  to  rebellion,  he  received  a 
hurt.  wound  in  the  eye  by  the  hand  of  one 
of  Boanerges'  soldiers,  and  had  by  the  captain 
himself  been  slain,  but  that  he  made  a  sudden 
retreat. 

But  I  never  saw  Will-be-will  so  daunted  in  all 
my  life  :  he  was  not  able  to  do  as  he  was  wont ; 

Wiii-be-wiii  a"d  some  say  that  he  also  received  a 
nut.  wound  in  the  leg,  and  that  some  of 
the  men  in  the  Prince's  army  have  certainly  seen 
him  limp,  as  he  afterwards  walked  on  the  wall.3 

I  shall  not  give  you  a  particular  account  of  the 
names  of  the  soldiers  that  were  slain  in  the  town, 
Many  of  the  sol-  ^or  many  were  maimed  and  wounded, 
diers  in  Muu-  and  slain  ;  for  when  they  saw  that 
the  posts  of  Eargate  did  shake,  and 
Eyegate  was  well  nigh  broken  quite  open  ;  and 
also  that  their  captains  were  slain,  this  took  away 
the  hearts  of  many  of  the  Diabolonians  ;  they  fell 
also  by  the  force  of  the  shot  that  were  sent  by 


1  'The  serpents  that  bit  the  people  of  old  were  types  of  guilt 
and  sin.  Now  these  were  fiery  serpents,  and  such  as,  I  think, 
could  fly.  Is.  xiv.  29.  Wherefore,  in  my  judgment,  they  stung 
the  people  about  their  faces,  and  so  swelled  up  their  eyes,  which 
made  it  the  more  difficult  for  them  to  look  up  to  the  brazen 
serpent,  which  was  the  type  of  Christ.'  Jn.  iii  14. — (Bun van 
ou  Justification,  vol.  i.  p.  320.)  How  fitly  are  Goodhope  and 
Charity  qualified  to  gain  such  a  post. — (Ed.) 

2  It  is  worthy  of  notid',  that,  while  warnings  and  convictions 
attack  the  ear,  hope  and  love  are  exhibited  to  the  eye.  This 
was  Bunyan's  mode  of  proclaiming  the  gospel,  and  it  is  well 
worthy  of  universal  imitation  by  preachers  of  all  denomina- 
tions.— (Ed.) 

3  The  will  may  be  called  the  feet  of  the  soul ;  because  by 


the  golden  slings  into  the  midst  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul.4 

Of  the  townsmen  there  was  one  Love-no-good, 
he  was  a  townsman,  but  a  Diabolonian,    Love-no-good 
he  also  received  his  mortal  wound  in     w°unded. 
Mansoul,  but  he  died  not  very  soon.     Mr.  Illpause 
also,  who  was  the  man  that  came  along  with  Dia- 
bolus  when  at  first  he  attempted  the  taking  of 
Mansoul,  he  also  received  a  grievous      nipanse 
wouod  in  the  head,  some  say  that  his      wounded, 
brain-pan  was  cracked  ;  this  I  have  taken  notice 
of,  that  he  was  never  after  this  able  to  do  that 
mischief  to  Mansoul  as  he  had  done  in  times  past. 
Also  old  Prejudice  and  Mr.  Anything  fled.5 

Now  when  the  battle  was  over,  the  Prince  com- 
manded that  yet  once  more  the  white  The  white  flag 
flag  should  be  set  upon  Mount  Gra-  huD? out  asain' 
cious,  in  sight  of  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  to  show 
that  yet  Emmanuel  had  grace  for  the  wretched 
town  of  Mansoul. 

When  Diabolus  saw  the  white  flag  hanging  out 
again,  and  knowing  that  it  was  not  Diabolus's  new 
for  him,  but  Mansoul,  he  cast  in  his  prauk< 
mind  to  play  another  prank,  to  wit,  to  see  if 
Emmanuel  would  raise  his  siege  and  be  gone, 
upon  promise  of  a  reformation.8  So  he  comes 
down  to  the  gate  one  evening,  a  good  while  after 
the  sun  was  gone  down,  and  calls  to  speak  with 
Emmanuel,  who  presently  came  down  to  the  gate, 
and  Diabolus  saith  unto  him  : 

•  Forasmuch  as  thou  makest  it  appear  by  thy 
white  flag,  that  thou  art  wholly  given    nis  speech  to 
to  peace  and  quiet  ;  I  thought  meet    Emmanuel. 
to   acquaint    thee   that   we    are  ready  to  accept 
thereof  upon  terms  which  thou  mayest  admit. 

'  I  know  that  thou  art  given  to  devotion,  and  that 
holiness  pleases  thee ;  yea,  that  thy  great  end  in 
making  a  war  upon  Mansoul  is  that  it  may  be  an 
holy  habitation.  Well,  draw  off  thy  forces  from 
the  town,  and  I  will  bend  Mansoul  to  thy  bow. 

'  [Thus]  I  will  lay  down  all  acts  of  hostility 
against  thee,  and  will  be  willing  to  Diabolus  would 
become  thy  deputy,  and  will,  as  I  have    beEnmiannei's 

J         *■       •>.  deputy,  and  he 

formerly  been  against  thee,  now  serve    would      turn 
thee  in  the  town  of  Mansoul.     And    retonuer' 
more  particularly — 1.  I  will  persuade  Mansoul  to 


that  the  soul,  yea,  the  whole  man,  is  carried  hither  and  thither, 
or  else  held  back,  and  kept  from  moving.  While  my  Lord 
Will-be-will  was  so  active  iu  the  service  of  Diabolus,  he  is, 
very  properly,  '  wounded  iu  the  leg.' — (Ed.) 

1  Portions  of  the  Word,  probably  from  the  sacred  epistles  of 
the  New  Testament. — (Ed.) 

6  Prejudice  and  Anything  have  fled ;  Illpause  has  his  brain- 
pan cracked — there  can  be  no  more  procrastination ;  Love-no- 
good  is  slain — the  will  is  wounded ;  the  feeling  is  painfully 
wounded  ;  Bragman  and  cr.rual  security  are  slain ;  Mansoul 
troubles ;  and  in  great  mercy  the  white  flag  is  hung  out  iu 
token  of  grace,  but  the  heart  does  not  yet  surrender. — (Ed.) 

ti  This  is  exemplified  by  Bunyan's  experience,  iu  Grace 
Abounding,  Nos.  30-36. 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


2'.):} 


receive  thee  for  their  Lord,  and  I  know  that  they 
will  do  it  the  Booner  when  they  shall  understand 
that  I  am  thy  deputy.  -.  I  will  show  them  where- 
in they  have  erred,  and  that  transgression  stands 
in  the  way  to  life.  •">.  I  will  show  them  tho  holy 
law  unto  which  tluy  must  conform,  even  that  which 
they  have  broken.  4.  I  \\ill  press  upon  them  the 
necessity  of  a  reformation  according  to  thy  law. 
5.  And,  moreover,  thai  none  of  these  things  may 
fail,  I  myself,  at  my  own  proper  cost  and  charge, 
will  set  up  and  maintain  a  sufficient  ministry,  he- 
sides  lecturers,  in  Mansoul.1  •  >.  Thou  Bhalt  receive, 
as  a  token  of  our  subjection  to  thee  continually, 
year  by  year,  what  thou  Bhalt  think  tit  to  lay  and 
levy  upon  us,  in  token  of  our  subjection  to  thee.'8 
Then  said  Emmanuel  to  him,  '  0 
full  of  deceit,  how  movable  are  thy 
ways  !  How  often  hast  thou  changed  and  re- 
changed,  if  so  be  thou  mightest  still  keep  possession 
of  my  Mansonl,  though,  as  has  been  plainly  de- 
clared before,  I  am  the  right  heir  thereof?  Often 
hast  thou  made  thy  proposals  already,  nor  is  this 
last  a  whit  better  than  they.  And  failing  to  deceive 
when  thou  showedst  thyself  in  thy  black,  thou  hast 
now  transformed  thyself  into  an  angel  of  light,  and 
wouldest,  to  deceive,  be  now  as  a  minister  of  righ- 
teousness.  2  Co.  xi.  14. 

'  But  know  thou,  0  Diabolus,  that  nothing  must 
be  regarded  that  thou  canst  propound,  for  nothing 
Diabolus  has  no  is  done  by  thee  but  to  deceive  ;  thou 
eXnorVe  "either  hast  conscience  to  God,  nor 
to  liansoui.  iove  to  tiie  town  0f  Mansoul ;  whence 
then  should  these  thy  sayings  arise,  but  from  sinful 
craft  and  deceit  ?  He  that  can  of  list  and  will 
propound  what  he  pleases,  and  that  wherewith  he 
may  destroy  them  that  believe  him,  is  to  be  aban- 
doned with  all  that  he  shall  say.  But  if  righteous- 
ness be  such  a  beauty-spot  in  thine  eyes  now, 
how  is  it  that  wickedness  was  so  closely  stuck  to 
by  thee  before.  But  this  is  by  the  by.  Thou 
talkest  now  of  a  reformation  in  Mansoul,  and  that 
thou  thyself,  if  I  will  please,  will  be  at  the  head  of 
that  reformation,  all  the  while  knowing  that  the 
greatest  proficiency  that  man  can  make  in  the  law, 
and  the  righteousness  thereof,  will  amount  to  no 
more  for  the  taking  away  of  the  curse  from  Man- 
soul than  just  nothing  at  all ;  for  a  law  being 
broken  by  Mansoul,  that  had  before,  upon  a  suppo- 
sition of  the  breach  thereof,  a  curse  pronounced 
against  him  for  it  of  God,  can  never,  by  his  obey- 
ing of  the  law,  deliver  himself  therefrom.  To  say 
nothing  of  wdiat  a  reformation  is  like  to  be  set  up 

1  Reader,  the  devil  offers  to  sit  up  ministers  and  lecturers ! 
Take  heed  what  ye  hear. —  (Kb.; 

2  How  common  is  it  with  sinners,  under  conviction  and  the 
fear  of  hell,  to  be  content  with  mending  theix  lives;  they  are 
willing  to  he  reformed,  but  not  to  be  justified  and  saved  by 
grace. — (Border.) 


in  Mansonl,  when  tin?  devil  is  become  the  cor;. 

of  rice.     Thou  knoweat  that  all  that 

thou    hast  now  said   in  this  matter   is     ,;  rtwilldoao 

nothing  hut  guile  and  deceit ;  and  is, 

as  it  was  the  fir  ;.  -  is  it  the  last  card    GSh 

that  thou   hast  to   play.      Many  there     "oul" 

ho  that  do  soon  discern  thee  when  th 

them  thy  cloven  foot;  hut  in  thy  white,  thy  light, 
and  in  thy  transformation  thou  art  seen  hat  of 
But  thou  shalt  not  do  thus  with  my  Mansoul,  <> 
Diabolus,  for  I  do  still  love  my  Man-mil. 

'Besides,  I  am  not  come  to  put  M 
works  to  live  thereby — Bhould  I  do  bo,  I  should  I" 
like  unto  thee — but  I  am  come  that  by  me,  and  by 

what  I  have  and  shall  do  for  Mansoul,  they  mav  t<> 
my  Father  he  reconciled,  though  by  their  sin  they 
have  provoked  him  to  anger,  and  though  by  tie. 
law  they  cannot  obtain  mi 

'Thou  talkest  of  subjecting  of  this  town  to  good, 
when  none  desireth   it  at  thy  hands,    mthfc 
I  am  sent  by  mv  Father  to  possess  it     l"-     < 

ii*  i  •  i      ■     i         i         ,-i^i         Mansoul. 

myself,  and  to  guide  it  hy  the  skilful- 
ness  of  my  hands  into  such  a  conformity  to  him  as 
shall  be  pleasing  in  his  sight,  1  will  therefore 
possess  it  myself,  I  will  dispossess  and  cast  1 1 m ■  ■ 
out:  I  will  set  up  mine  own  standard  in  the  midst 
of  them :  I  will  also  govern  them  by  new  laws,  new 
officers,  new  motives,  and  new  ways.  Yea,  I  will 
pull  down  this  town,  and  build  it  again,  and  it  shall 
be  as  though  it  bad  not  been,  and  it  shall  then  b 
the  glory  of  the  whole  universe.'8 

When  Diabolus  heard  this,  and  perceived  that 
he  was  discovered  in  all  his  deceits,  i  /-,.„..  con- 
he  was  confounded  and  utterly  put  found.. i. 
to  a  non-plus;  but  having  in  himself  the  foun- 
tain of  iniquity,  rage  and  malice  against  both 
Shaddai  and  his  Son,  and  the  beloved  town  of 
Mansoul,  what  doth  he  hut  strengthen  himself  what 
he  could,  to  give  fresh  battle  to  the  noble  Prince 
Emmanuel?  So  then,  now  we  must  have  another 
fight  before  the  town  of  Mansoul  is  taken, 
up  then  to  the  mountains  you  that  love  to  see  mili- 
tary actions,  and  behold  hy  both  sides  how  the 
fatal  hlow  is  given:  while  one  seeks  to  hold,  and 
the  other  seeks  to  make  himself  master  of  the 
famous  town  of  Mansoul. 

Diabolus,  therefore,  having  withdrawn   himself 
from  the  wall  to  his  force  that  was  in    >,-,.»• 
the   heart   of  the   town   of  Mansoul. 
Emmanuel  also  returned  to  the  camp;  and  b 
them,  after  their  divers  ways,  put  th<  I 
a  posture  fit  to  bid  battle  one  to  another. 

3  What  a  volume  of  evangelical  In  Lfa 
words!     Old  things  must  paaa  away,  all  most 
we  must  be  buried  with  Christ  in  ba]  I 

■ 
in  aim  the  hope  of  glory.     We  musl  ' 
his  righti  '••ill  love  constrain  him  I 

In  Christ  he  becomes  the 


294 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


Diabolus,  as  filled  with  despair  of  retaining  in 
DiaMua  dcs-  his  hands  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul, 
pain  of holding   rcsolved  to  do  what  mischief  he  could, 

<jf      Mansoul, 

and  therefore  if  indeed  he  could  do  any,  to  the  army 
itwkatmisclrief  of  the  Prince,  and  to  the  famous  town 
he  can.  Qf  ^[ansoui ;  fopf  alas  !  it  was  not  the 

happiness  of  the  silly  town  of  Mansoul  that  was 
designed  hy  Diabolus,  hut  the  utter  ruin  and  over- 
throw thereof  ;  as  now  is  enough  in  view.  "Where- 
fore he  commands  his  officers  that  they  should  then, 
when  they  see  that  they  could  hold 
-^-^  the  town  do  longer,  do  it  what  harm 
and  mischief  they  could ;  rending  and  tearing  of 
men,  women,  and  children.  Mar.  ix.  2«,  27.  For,  said 
he,  we  had  better  quite  demolish  the  place,  and 
leave  it  like  a  ruinous  heap,  than  so  leave  it  that  it 
may  be  an  habitation  for  Emmanuel.1 

Emmanuel  again,  knowing  that  the  next  battle 
would  issue  in  his  being  made  master  of  the  place, 
gave  out  a  royal  commandment  to  all  his  officers, 
high  captains,  and  men  of  war,  to  be  sure  to  show 
themselves  men  of  war  against  Diabolus,  and  all 
Diabolonians;  but  favourable,  merciful,  and 
■^"**  meek  to  all  the  old  inhabitants  of  Mansoul. 
Bend,  therefore,  said  the  noble  Prince,  the  hottest 
front  of  the  battle  against  Diabolus  and  his  men. 

So  the  day  being  come,  the  command  was  given, 
and  the  Prince's  men  did  bravely  stand  to  their 
arms ;  and  did,  as  before,  bend  their  main  force 
against  Eargate,  and  Eyegate.  The  word  was 
The  battle  **nen>  '  Mansoul  is  won,'  so  they  made 
joined,  ami  their  assault  upon  the  town.  Diabolus 
totn  ''  .-ides  also,  as  fast  as  he  could  with  the  main 
fiercely.  ()f  ^jg  power,   made  resistance  from 

within,  and  his  high  lords  and  chief  captains  for  a 
time  fought  very  cruelly  against  the  Prince's  army. 
But  after  three  or  four  notable  charges  by  the 
broken    Prince,  and  his  noble  captains,  Ear- 
open.  gate  was  ]jroken  open,  and  the  bars 
and  bolts  wherewith  it  was  used  to  be  fast  shut  up 
against  the  Prince,  were  broken  into  a  thousand 
pieces.     Then  did  the  Prince's  trumpets  sound, 
the  captains  shout,  the  town  shake,  and  Diabolus 
retreat   to   his    hold.     Well,   when  the    Prince's 
forces  had  broken  open  the  gate,  himself  came  up 
and  did  set  his  throne  in  it;  also  he  set  his  stand- 
ard thereby,  upon  a  mount,  that  before 

The       Prince's     ,       ,  •  ,  , 

ftandard  set  by  Ins  men  was  cast  up  to  place  the 
sim.'sa"d  are  eighty  slings  thereon.-  The  mount 
li^castie'11  at  was  callcd  M°unt  Dearwell ;  there, 
therefore,  the  Prince  abode,  to  wit,  hard 
by  the  going  in  at  the  gate.      He  commanded  also 


that  the  golden  slings  should  yet  be  played  upon 
the  town,  especially  against  the  castle,  because  for 
shelter  thither  was  Diabolus  retreated.  Now  from 
Eargate  the  street  was  strait,  even  to  the  house 
of  Mr.  Recorder  that  so  was  before  Diabolus  took 
the  town,  and  hard  by  his  house  stood  the  castle, 
which  Diabolus  for  a  long  time  had  made  his  irk- 
some den.  The  captains,  therefore,  did  quickly 
clear  that  street  by  the  use  of  their  slings,  so  that 
way  was  made  up  to  the  heart  of  the  town.  Then 
did  the  Prince  command  that  Captain  Boanerges, 
Captain  Conviction,  and  Captain  Judgment  should 

forthwith  march    up -the    town    to    the    *     Conscience. 

old  gentleman's*  gate.  Then  did  the  gKK 
captains  in  most  warlike  manner  enter  ,,ouse- 
into  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  marching  in  with 
flying  colours,  they  came  up  to  the  Recorder's 
house,  and  that  was  almost  as  strong  as  was  the 
castle.  Battering  rams  they  took  also  with  them, 
to  plant  against  the  castle-gates.  When  they  were 
come  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Conscience,  they  knocked 
and  demanded  entrance.  Now  the  old  gentleman, 
not  knowing  as  yet  fully  their  design,  kept  his 
gates  shut  all  the  time  of  this  fight.  Wherefore 
Boanerges  demanded  entrance  at  his  They  demand 
gates,  and  no  man  making  answer,  he  entrance. 
gave  it  one  stroke  with  the  head  of  a  ram,  and  this 
made  the  old  gentleman  shake,  and  his  house  to 
tremble  and  totter.  Then  came  Mr.  Recorder 
down  to  the  gate,  and,  as  he  could,  with  quiver- 
ing lips,  he  asked  who  was  there.  Boanerges 
answered,  We  are  the  captains  and  commanders  of 
the  great  Shaddai,  and  of  the  blessed  Emmanuel 
his  Son,  and  we  demand  possession  of  your  house 
for  the  use  of  our  noble  Prince.  And  with  that 
the  battering-ram  gave  the  gate  another  shake;  this 
made  the  old  gentleman  tremble  the  more,  yet 
durst  he  not  but  open  the  gate.  Then 
the  King's  forces  marched  in,  namely, 
the  three  brave  captains  mentioned  before.  Now 
the  Recorder's  house  was  a  place  of  much  con- 
venience  for  Emmanuel,  not  only  because  it  was 
near  to  the  castle,  and  strong,  but  also  because  it 
was  large,  and  fronted  the  castle,  the  den  where 
now  Diabolus  was :  for  he  was  now  afraid  to  come 
out  of  his  hold.  As  for  Mr.  Recorder,  They  do  keep 
the  captains  carried  it  very  reservedly  ^"ed^^rom 
to  him ;  as  yet  he  knew  nothing  of  tiie  Recorder. 
the  great  designs  of  Emmanuel ;  so  that  he  did  not 
know  what  judgment  to  make,  nor  what  would  be 
the  end  of  such  thundering  beginnings.     It  was 


They  go  in. 


1  When  Satan  can  no  longer  keep  his  dominion  over  the 
soul,  lie  will  endeavour  to  ruin  it  by  temptations  to  despair,  ot- 
to some  abominable  vices;  as  the  poor  trembling  creature  in 
the  gospel,  desirous  of  approaching  Christ,  'as  he  was  yet  a 
Cuming,  the  devil  threw  him  down  and  tare  him.'  Lu.  ix.  42. 
— (.Btu-der.) 


2  Thus  was  the  promise  fulfilled,  *  In  that  day  shall  the  deaf 
hear  the  words  of  the  book,'  Is.  xxix.  IS;  and,  'The  cars  of 
the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped/  xxxv.  5.  What  a  blessing  to  be 
able  to  say,  '  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth.'  The  way 
is  strait  from  Largate  to  Conscience,  the  house  of  the  Recorder, 
and  to  the  Heart,  the  castle.     '  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 

|  him  hear.'     May  God  bestow  '  the  hearing  ear  '  upon  every 

l  reader. — (liurder.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR 


295 


also  presently  noised  in  the  town,  how  the  Recor- 
der's house  was  possessed,  his  rooms  taken  up,  and 
His  house   the    n's  palace  made  tin:  seat  of  the  war; 

seat  of  war.     ;Ullj  tto  sooner  was  it  noised  abroad, 

hut  they  took  the  alarm  as  warmly,  and  gave  it 
out  to  others  of  his  friends,  and  you  know  as  a 
snow-hall  loses  nothing  by  rolling,  so  in  little  time 
the  whole  town  was  possessed  that  they  must 
expect  nothing  from  the  Prince  but  destruction ; 
and  the  ground  ot*  the  business  was  this.  The 
Recorder  was  afraid,  the  Recorder  trembled,  and 
the  captains  carried  it  strangely  to  the  Recorder, 
SO  many  came  to  see;  hut  when  they  with  their 
own  eyes  did  behold  the  captains  in  the  palace,  and 
their  battering  rams  ever  playing  at  the  castle- 
gates  to  heat  them  down,    they  were  riveted  in 

Theofflceofton-  their  fears»  aml  !t  made  thom  lls  '" 
science  when  amaze.  And,  as  I  said,  the  man  of 
lie  is  awakened.      ,       .  ...  ,,     .  . 

the  house  would  increase  all  this,  tor 

whoever  came  to  him,  or  discoursed  with  him,  no- 
thing would  he  talk  of,  tell  them,  or  hear,  hut  that 
death  and  destruction  now  attended  Mansoul.1 

'For,' quoth  the  old  gentleman,  '  ycu  are  all  of 
you  sensible  that  we  all  have  been  traitors  to  that 
once  despised,  hut  now  famously  victorious  and 
glorious  Prince  Emmanuel,  For  he  now,  as  you 
see,  doth  not  only  lie  in  close  siege  about  us,  but 
hath  forced  Ins  entrance  in  at  our  gates ;  more- 
over, Diabolus  flees  before  him,  and  he  hath,  as  you 
behold,  made  of  my  house  a  garrison  against  the 
castle,  where  he  is.  I,  for  my  part,  have  trans- 
gressed greatly,  and  he  that  is  clean  it  is  well  for 
him.  But,  I  say,  I  have  transgressed  greatly  in 
keeping  of  silence  when  I  should  have  spoken,  and 
in  perverting  of  justice  when  I  should  have  exe- 
cuted the  same.  True,  I  have  suffered  something 
at  the  hand  of  Diabolus,  tor  taking  part  with  the 
laws  of  King  Shaddai ;  but  that,  alas!  what  will 
that  do?  Will  that  make  compensation  for  the 
rehellions  and  treasons  that  1  have  done,  and  have 
suffered  without  gainsaying,  to  be  committed  in 
the  town  of  Mansoul?  0,  I  tremble  to  think  what 
will  be  the  end  of  this  so  dreadful  and  so  ireful  a 
beginning!' 

Now,  while  tWse  brave  captains  were  thus  busy 
in  the  house  of  the  old  Recorder,  Captain  Execu- 
tion was  as  busy  in  other  parts  of  the 
The    wave   ex-  .  r  .       ,    *  , 

ploita  of  Cap-  town,  in  securing  the  back  streets, 
tainExecution.    ^    ^  wajj8       Hfl   a,sy   hunteJ   the 

Lord  WitUbe-will  sorely;  he  suffered  him  not  to 

1  WJien  the  soul  listens  to  the  threateninga  of  the  holy  law, 
conscience  fears  and  quakes;  and  till  enlightened  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  gospel,  and  the  gracious  designs  of  God,  it 
can  think  and  talk  of  nothing  but  'death  and  destruction.' — 

(Burder.)  See  this  part  of  the  Holy  War,  in  Bunyan's  ex- 
perience, recorded  in  Grace  Abounding,  Noa.  84-88. —  (En.) 

2  Bunyan's  relief  from  a  state  of  intense  ini?ery  was  by  an 
assault  on  Eargate.      It  »as  under  a  sermon  upon   I 

line — 'Thou  art  lair.  D  y  love  ;'  then  was  old  Prejudice  slain,  | 


Tr.:u.  In  I 


rest  in  any  corner.  lie  pursued  him  so  hard,  that 
he  drove  his  men  from  him,  and  made  him  glad  to 
thrust  his  head  into  a  hole.  Also,  this  mighty 
warrior  did  cut  three  of  the  Lord  Will-be-wilTs 
officers  down  to  the  ground  j  one  was  ou  1.l,JIHiltl. 
old  Mr.   Prejudice,  he  that  had  his 

crown  cracked  in  the  mutiny;    this  man  was  made 

by  Lord  Will-he-will  keeper  of  Margate,  and  fell 

by   the   band   of  Captain    Execution.      There   was 

also   one    Mr.    Backward- to- all- but- 

,  ill  ,i    Backward,  to- 

naught,  and    lie  also  was  one  ot    Lord     all-bnt-naugut 

Will-be-wiU's  officers,  and  was  the  "*""• 
captain  of  the  two  guns  that  once  were  mounted 
on  the  top  of  Bargate,  be  also  was  cut  down  to 
the  ground  by  the  hands  of  Captain  Execution. 
Besides  these  two  there  was  another,  a  third,  and 
his  name  was  Captain  Treacherous, 
a  vile  man  this  was,  but  one  that 
Will-be-will  did  put  a  great  deal  of  confidence  in; 
but  him  also  did, this  Captain  Execution  CUt  down 
to  the  ground  with  the  rest." 

Ile  also  made  a  very  great  slaughter  among  my 
Lord  Will-bc-will's  soldiers,  killing  many  that  were 
stout  and  sturdy,  and  wounding  of  many  that  for 
Diabolus  were  nimble  and  active.  But  all  these 
were  Diabolonians  ;  there  was  not  a  man,  a  native 
of  Mansoul,  hurt.* 

Other  feats  of  war  were  also  likewise  performed 
by  other  of  the  captains,  as  at  Eyegate,4  where 
Captain  Goodhope  and  Captain  Charity  had  a 
charge,  was  great  execution  done  ;  for  the  Captain 
Goodhope,  with  his  own  hands,  slew  Captain  Good- 
one  Captain  Blindfold,  the  keeper  of  SSbiS 
that  gate;  this  Blindfold  was  captain  ,oM- 
of  a  thousand  men,  and  they  were  they  that  fought 
with  mauls;  he  also  pursued  his  men,  slew  many, 
and  wounded  more,  and  made  the  rest  hide  their 
heads  in  corners. 

There  was  also  at  that  gate  Mr.  Illpau 
whom  you  have  heard  before;  he  was  an  old  man, 
and  had  a  beard  that  reached  down  to  his  girdle: 
the  same  was  he  that  was  orator  to 
Diabolus;  he  did  much  mischief  in  *"*  "M  lllpuU*;- 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  fell  by  the  hand  of 
Captain  Goodhope. 

What  shall  I  say,  the  Diabolonians  in  these 
days  lay  dead  in  every  corner,  though  too  many 
yet  were  alive  in  Mansoul.  ' 


and  his  officers;  although  other  rears  afterwards  terrified  him, 

yet  Prejudice  was  slain.    Head  tin-  narrative  in  Grace  A 
ing,  No-.  b'J-'.»2.— (Ed.) 

■  No  faculty  or  power  >>f  the  sonl  can  be  injured  by  a  death 
unto  sin  and  a  lite  unto  holm,--.  Peace  >  I  hap] 
crease  as  we  live  near  to  God!  My  young  friends,  if  Satan 
tells  you  that  religion  is  a  dull  or  melancholy  thin,',  call  to 
mind  the  happiness,  nay,  ecstacies  of  Paul  and  David  when 
living  under  its  holy  influences. — (Ed.) 

'  sei   Gi  ■     Abounding,  No.  113. —  (Ed.) 

'Conversion  proceeds.    The  carnal  will  !>;.-:  ,  ••■-•■   pr  . 
jndice  is  slain;  Arersio 


2l?G 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


[CHAPfEIl   VIII.] 

[CONTENTS: — The  principal  inhabitants  hold  a  conference,  and 
agree  to  petition  the  Prince  for  their  lives — The  castle 
Lratcs  broken  open — Emmanuel  marches  into  Mansoul — 
Diabolus  is  made  prisoner,  and  bound  in  chains — The  in- 
habitants, greatly  distressed,  petition  again  and  again — 
At  length  a  free  pardon  is  obtained,  and  universal  joy 
succeeds.] 
Now  the  old  Recorder,  and  my  Lord  Understand- 
ing, with  some  others  of  the  chief  of  the 

The  old  towns-        °  .  ,  . 

men  meet  aud  town,  to  wit,  such  as  knew  they  must 
consult-  stand  and  fall  with  the  famous  town 

<>f  Mansoul,  came  together  upon  a  day,  and  after 
consultation  had,  did  jointly  agree  to  draw  up  a 
petition,  and  to  send  it  to  Emmanuel,  now  while 
The  town  does  he  sat  in  the  gate  of  Mansoul.  So  they 
petition,    and   jrew  un  their  petition  to  Emmanuel, 

are    answered  ^  r 

with  silence,  the  contents  whereof  were  this,  That 
they,  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  now  deplorable 
town  of  Mansoul,  confessed  their  sin,  and  were 
sorry  that  they  had  offended  his  princely  Majesty, 
and  prayed  that  he  would  spare  their  lives.1 

Upon  this  petition  he  gave  no  answer  at  all,  and 
that  did  trouble  them  yet  so  much  the  more. 
Now  all  this  while  the  captains  that  were  in  the 
Recorder's  house  were  playing  with  the  battering- 
rams  at  the  gates  of  the  castle,  to  beat  them  down. 
So  after  some  time,  labour,  and  travail,  the  gate 
The  castle  gates  °f  the  castle  that  was  called  Impreg- 
inoke  open.  nable  was  beaten  open,  and  broken 
into  several  splinters ;  and  so  a  way  made  to  go 
up  to  the  hold  in  which  Diabolus  had  hid  himself.2 
Then  was  tidings  sent  down  to  Eargate,  for 
Emmanuel  still  abode  there,  to  let  him  know  that 
a  way  was  made  in  at  the  gates  of  the  castle  of 
Mansoul.  But  0  !  how  the  trumpets  at  the  tidings 
sounded  throughout  the  Prince's  camp,  for  that 
now  the  war  was  so  near  an  end,  and  Mansoul 
itself  of  being  set  free.3 

Then  the  Prince  arose  from  the  place  where  he 
Emmanuel  was»  ana<  to°k  with  him  such  of  his 
marches   into   men  of  war  as  were  fittest  for  that 

Mmisoul. 

expedition,  and  marched  up  the  street 
of  Mansoul  to  the  old  Recorder's  house. 

Now  the  Prince  himself  was  clad  all  in  armour 
■  if  gold,  and  so  he  marched  up  the  town  with  his 
standard  borne  before  him ;  but  he  kept  his  coun- 
tenance much  reserved  all  the  way  as  he  went,  so 
that  the  people  could  not  tell  how  to  gather  to 


that  most  dangerous  foe  to  the  soul,  old  lllpause,  with  his 
traditions,  antiquity  and  longbeard,  are  slain.  All  these 
were  Diaboloniaus,  not  one  native  power  of  the  soul  was 
injured. — (Burder.) 

J  '  Behold  he  prayeth.'  Prayer  is  the  first  sign  of  spiritual 
life;  Emmanuel  was  in  Mansoul;  the  answer  may  be  deferred, 
but  praying  breath  was  never  spent  in  vain. — (Ed.) 

-'  W  hen  the  conscience  is  alarmed,  and  sends  its  battering- 
rams  against  the  heart  or  affections,  the  castle,  and  so  the 
whole  soul,  will  be  quickly  reduced,  uud  fall  into  the  arms  of 
Divine  mercy. — (Ed.) 


themselves  love  or  hatred  by  his  looks.  Now  as 
he  marched  up  the  street,  the  townsfolk  came  out 
at  every  door  to  see,  and  could  not  but  be  taken 
with  his  person,  and  the  glory  thereof,  but  wondered 
at  the  reservedness  of  his  countenance ;  for  as  yet 
he  spake  more  to  them  by  his  actions  and  works, 
than  he  did  by  words  or  smiles.  But  also  poor 
Mansoul,  as  in  such  cases  all  are  apt  to  do,  they 
interpreted  the  carriages  of  Emmanuel 

i  tit  i  »     i         i  i  •       How  they  lnter- 

to  them,  as  did  Joseph  s  brethren  his  pret  fcuimaim- 
to  them,  even  all  the  quite  contrary  e1'3  carriases- 
way.  For,  thought  they,  if  Emmanuel  loved  us, 
he  would  show  it  to  us  by  word  or  carriage ;  but 
none  of  these  he  doth,  therefore  Emmanuel  hates 
us.  Now  if  Emmanuel  hates  us,  then  Mansoul 
shall  be  slain,  then  Mansoul  shall  become  a  dung- 
hill. They  knew  that  they  had  transgressed  his 
Father's  law,  and  that  against  him  they  had  been 
in  with  Diabolus  his  enemy.  They  also  knew  that 
the  Prince  Emmanuel  knew  all  this  ;  for  they  were 
convinced  that  he  was  as  an  Angel  of  God,  to 
know  all  things  that  are  done  in  the  earth.  And 
this  made  them  think  that  their  condition  was 
miserable,  aud  that  the  good  Prince  would  make 
them  desolate. 

And,  thought  they,  what  time  so  fit  to  do  this 
in  as  now,  when  he  has  the  bridle  of  Mansoul  in 
his  hand.  And  this  I  took  special  notice  of,  that 
the  inhabitants,  notwithstanding  all  this,  could 
not ;  no,  they  could  not,  when  they  see  him  march 
through  the  town,  but  cringe,  bow,  bend,  and  were 
ready  to  lick  the  dust  of  his  feet.  They  also 
wished  a  thousand  times  over,  that  he  would  be- 
come their  Prince  and  Captain,  and  would  be- 
come their  protection.  They  would  also  one  to 
another  talk  of  the  comeliness  of  his  person,  and 
how  much  for  glory  and  valour  he  outstript  the 
great  ones  of  the  world.  But,  poor  hearts,  as  to 
themselves  their  thoughts  would  change,  and  go 
upon  all  manner  of  extremes ;  yea,  through  the 
working  of  them  backward  and  forward,  Mansoul 
became  as  a  ball  tossed,  and  as  a  rolling  thing  be- 
fore the  whirlwind.4  is.  xviL  13 ;  xxii.  18. 

Now  when  he  was  come  to  the  castle  gates,  he 
commanded  Diabolus  to  appear,  and  He  comes  up  to 
to  surrender  himself  into  his  hands,     the  castle,  and 

n         s\  i    i  ii  ii  commands  Dia- 

but  0 !  how  loth  was  the  beast  to  bolus  to  sur- 
appear!  How  he  stuck  at  it!  how  reuderhiraseif- 
he  shrunk!  aye,  how  he  cringed!  Yet  out  he 
came  to  the  prince.  Then  Emmanuel  commanded, 
and  they  took   Diabolus  and  bound  him  fast  in 


3  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  the  repenting  sinner.  The 
heart,  which  was  deemed  impregnable,  is  taken  by  invincible 
grace. — (Burder.) 

4  Bunyan  was  for  seven  or  eight  weeks  in  this  painful  state. 
Peace  in  and  out  twenty  times  a  day;  comfort  now,  and  trouble 
presently ;  peace  now,  and  before  I  could  go  a  furlong  as  full 
of  fear  and  guilt  as  ever  heart  could  hold. —  Grace  Abounding, 
No.  205— (En.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


21)7 


>r  his  enemy 
stripping,  th. 


chains,  the  better  to  reserve  Lira  to  the  judgment 

that  he   had   appointed   fur   him.     But    Diaholua 

stood  up  to  entreat  for  himself,  that  Emmanuel 

would  not  send  him  into  the  deep,  but  suffer  him 

t.p  depart  cut  of  Mansoul  in  peace. 

When  Emmanuel  had  taken  him  and  hound  him 

.,      .  in  chains,  he  led  him  into  the  market- 

He     la     taken 

mmi  bouud  iu  place,    anil    there,    before    Mansoul, 

stripped  him  of  his  armour  iu  which 
he  "boasted  so  much  before.  This  qow  was  one  of 
the  acts  of  triumph  of  Emmanuel  ov 
and  all  the  while  that  the  pant  was 

trumpets  of  the  golden  Prince  did  sound  amain; 
the  captains  also  shouted,  and  the  soldiers  did 
sing  for  joy.  Then  was  Mansoul  called  upon  t<> 
Manaoni  must  behold  the  begiuning  of  Emmanuel's 
beliuld  it.  triumph  over  him    iu    whom    they    BO 

much  had  trusted,  and  of  whom  they  so  much 
had  boasted  in  the  days  when  he  flattered  them. 

Thus  having  made  Diabolus  naked  in  the  eve, 
if  Mansoul,  and  before  the  commanders  of  the 
,,  Prince,  in  the  next  place  he  commands 

lie    is     bound  '.  *1  . 

to  his  chariot    that   Diabolus   should    he   bound  with 

chains  to  bis  chariot-wheels.  Then 
leaving  of  some  of  his  forces,  to  wit,  Captain 
Boanerges,  and  Captain  Conviction,  as  a  guard 
for  the  castle  gates,  that  resistance  might  he  made 
on  bis  behalf,  if  any  that  heretofore  followed 
Tlie  Prince  riii.-s  Diabolus  should  make  an  attempt  to 
lumTufe's^ia  Possess  't.  lie  did  »de  in  triumph  over 
■  it  Mimsoui.  him  quite  through  the  town  of  Man- 
soul, and  so  out  at,  and  before  the  gate  called 
Eyegate,  to  the  plain  where  bis  camp  did  lie.  Bp.  iv. 
But  you  cannot  think  unless  you  bad  been  there, 
us  I  was.  what  a  shout  there  was  in  Emmanuel's 
camp  when  they  saw  the  tyrant  hound  by  the 
band  of  their  noble  Prince,  and  tied  to  bis  chariot- 
wheels!  And  they  said.  He  hath 
led  captivity  captive  ;  he  bath  spoiled 
principalities  and  power-:  Diabolus  is  subjected 
to  the  power  of  his  sword,  and  made  the  object  of 
all  derision  !  ' 

Those  also  that  rode  Reformades,  and  that  came 
The  Refoimadcs-  down  to  see  the  battle,  they  shouted 
J"--  with  that  greatness  of  voice,  and  sung 
with  such  melodious  notes,  that  they  caused  them 
that  dwell  in  the  highest  orbs  to  open  their  win- 
dows, put  out  their  beads,  and  look  down  to  see 
the  cause  of  that  glory.   Lu.  r?.  7— io.'- 

The   townsmen   also,    so  rnanv  of  them   a 


They 


1  At  our  Lord's  ascension,  when  lie  triumphed  over  all  the 
force  of  death  and  hell,  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  in, 
aud  received  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  for  his  el 
their  number  is  accomplished.     Then  will  be  the  everlasting 
triumph. — (Mason.) 

-  By  the  Refomiades  we  are  to  understand  the  angel  volun- 
teers, who  desire  to  look  into  the  wonders  of  salvation,  aud 
who  rejoice  over  every  sinner  who  iiuds  salvation  iu  Christ. 
It  is  here  very  strikingly  and  beautifully  expressed.— (Ed.) 
VOL.  III. 


hut   all    thinfi 


this  sight,   v  were,  while  they  I 

betwixt  the  earth  and  the  heavens.     Tru 

could  not  tell  what  would  he  the 
of  things    a,    to    them, 

were  clone  in  Buch  excellent  methods 

and  1  cannol  1. 1!  how,  hut  things  in  the  mat 

incut  of  them  seemed  to  cast  a  Bmile  towards  the 

town,  so  that  their  eyes,  their  heads,  their  heart-, 
and  their  minds,  and  all  that  they  had,  were  taken 

and  held,  while  they  observed  Emmanuel's  order.' 

So  v. Inn  the  brave  Prince  had  finished  this  part 

of  hi.  triumph  over  Diabolus  his  toe,  he  turned 

him    up    in    the   midst  of  hi.-  contempt  and  sham-, 

having  giv<  n  him  a  charge  no  more  to  be 

if  Mansoul,    Then  went  he  from  Emmanuel, 

and    out    of  the    mid  •  amp    to  inherit  the 

parched  places  in  a  salt  land,  seeking   rest   hut 

finding  none.    Mat  ill    i  1. 

Now  Captain  Boanerges  and  Captain  Con 
were  both  of  them  men  of  very  great  majesty,  tln-ir 
faces  were  like  tic  far.-  of  lions,  [in   di  -.  and 

their  words  like  the  roaring  of  the  sea 
and  they  still  quartered  in  .Mr.  Conscience's 
of  whom  mention  was  made  before.      When  there- 
fore the  high  and  mighty   Prince   had  thus  far 
finished  bis  triumph  over  Diabolus,  the  townsmen 
had  more  leisure  to  view  and  to  behold  the  action 
of  these  noble  captains.      But  the  captains  carried 

it  with   that  terror  and   dread   in   all 
-     ,    ,,  ,.  ,  ,  ,  The  carnage  of 

that  they  did,  and  you  may  be  sure     Boam , 

that  they  had  private  instruct] 

to  do,  that  thev  kept  the  town  under 

continual  heart-aching,  and  caused,  in 

their  apprehension,  the  well-being  of  Mansoul  for 

the  future,  to  hang  iu  doubt  before  them,  bo  that, 

for  some  considerable  time,  thev  neither  knew  what 

rest,  or  ease,  or  peace,  or  hope  meant.1 

Nor  did  the  Prince  himself,  as  vet,  abide  in  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  hut  in  his  royal  pavillion  in  the 
camp,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  Father's  I 
So  at  a  time  convenient,  he  sent  Bpecial  Old 
Captain  Boanerges  to  summons  Mansoul,  the  whole 
of  the  townsmen,  into  the  ca-th-yard,  and  then 
and  there,  before  their  face?,  to  take  my  Lord  Un- 
derstanding, Mr.  Conscience,  and  that 

ii  it         i  iiT-11   i  ii  i     TliePrinrroini- 

notable  one  the  Lord  \\  ill-be-WJ  I.  and     m , 
put   them   all  tin 
they  should    set   : 

them  there,  until  his  pleasure  concern- 
ing them  were  further  known.      The  which  i 
when    the   captains    had    put    them    iu    execution, 
made  no  small  addition  to  th-  f.  an  I  f  'he  I 
Mansoul  ;    for  now,    to   their  thinking,  were   their 

3  Compare  this,  and  tin'  two  following  paragrapha,  ■ 
Grace  Aboundi,,*,,  Nos.  L89-192. — (J  0 

4  Sin-sick  soul,  Christ  is  an  aU-snfl 
follow  his  advice,  and  the 

Ho.  vi.  3.— Mason.) 


trong  guard  U] 


Sfl 


•29S 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


former  fears  of  the  ruin  of  Mansoul  confirmed. 
Now,  what  death  they  should  die,  and  how  long 
they  should  he  in  dying,  was  that  which  most  per- 
plexed their  heads  and  hearts.  Yea,  they  were 
afraid  that  Emmanuel  would  command  them  all 
into  the  deep,  the  place  that  the  prince  Diaholus 
was  afraid  of;  for  they  knew  that  they  had  de- 
served it.  Also  to  die  hy  the  sword  in  the  face 
of  the  town,  and  in  the  open  way  of  disgrace,  from 
the  hand  of  so  good  and  so  holy  a  Prince,  that, 
Mm.snui  crrcatly  too,  trouhled  them  sore.  The  town 
distressed.  ,vas  ais0  greatly  trouhled  for  the  men 
that  were  committed  to  ward,  for  that  they  were 
their  stay  and  their  guide,  and  for  that  they  be- 
lieve! that  if  those  men  were  cut  off,  their  execu- 
tion would  he  hut  the  beginning  of  the  ruin  of  the 
town  of  Mansoul.1  Wherefore  what  do  they,  but 
,  ^  rc.  together  with  the  men  in  prison,  draw 
tition  to  Dm-   Up  a  petition  to  the  Prince,  and  sent 

niHiiuel,  tiytlie    .l         L.  ,    ,         ,       .         ,      „   ,T 

t  Mr.  it  to  Emmanuel  hy  the  hand  or  Mr. 
Wouldliw.  Wouldlive.  So  he  went  and  came  to 
the  Prince's  quarters,  and  presented  the  petition; 
the  sum  of  which  was  this:  — 

'  Great  and  wonderful  potentate,  victor  over 
Diaholus,  and  conqueror  of  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
We,  the  miserable  inhabitants  of  that  most  woful 
corporation,  do  humbly  beg  that  we  may  find 
favour  in  thy  sight,  and  remember  not  against  us 
former  transgressions,  nor  yet  the  sins  of  the  chief 
of  our  town,  but  spare  us  according  to  the  great- 
ness of  thy  mercy,  and  lef,  us  not  die,  but  live  in 
thy  sight ;  so  shall  we  be  willing  to  he  thy  serv- 
ants, and  if  thou  shalt  think  fit,  to  gather  our 
meat  under  thy  table.2     Amen.' 

So  the  petitioner  went  as  was  said  with  his  peti- 
tion to  the  Prince,  and  the  Prince  took  it  at  his 
They   arc   an-   nan(l,  but  sent  him  away  with  silence. 

i,K-e     "'"'   Tllis  stiU  afflictecl  tlie  town  of  Man- 
soul, but  yet  considering  that  now  they 
must  cither  petition,  or  die — for  now  they  could 
not  do   anything  else — therefore   they  consulted 
again,  and  sent  another  petition,  and  this  petition 
was  much  after  the  form  and  method  of  the  former. 
But  when  the  petition  was  drawn  up,  by  whom 
should   they  send  it  was  the  next  question;    for 
fchey  would  not  send  this  by  him  hy  whom  they 
Bent  the  first,  for  they  thought  that  the  Prince  had 
taken  some  offence  at  the  manner  of  bis  deport- 
Thcy petition   ment  before  him;  so  they  attempted 
il- ""         to  make  Captain  Conviction  their  mes- 
senger  with  it,  but  he  said  that  he  neither  durst, 
nor  would  petition  Emmanuel  for  traitors;  nor  be 


1  It  is  common  with  convinced  sinners,  before  they  obtain 
clear  views  of  the  gospel,  to  remain  in  tenor  and  alarm".  They 
feel  themselves  condemned  by  the  faithful  preaching  of  the 
Word;  but  all  will  be  well — will  issue  in  fervent  prayer  and 
happy  peace. — (Border.) 

-  Neither  the  bearer  of  this  petition,  nor  the  prayer  itself,  can 
be  acceptable.     It  is  the  language  of  those  who  have  been 


to  the  Prince  an  advocate  for  rebels.  Yet  withal, 
said  he,  our  Prince  is  good,  and  you  TlieycaunotteI1 
may  adventure  to  send  it  by  the  hand  by  whom  to 
of  one  of  your  town,  provided  he  went 
with  a  rope  about  his  bead,  and  pleaded  nothing 
but  mercy.3 

Well,  they  made,  through  fear,  their  delays  as 
long  as  they  could,  and  longer  than  delays  were 
good ;  but  fearing  at  last  the  dangerousness  of 
them,  they  thought,  but  with  many  a  fainting  in 
their  minds,  to  send  their  petition  by  Mr.  Desires- 
awake  ;  so  they  sent  for  Mr.  Desires-awake.  Now 
he  dwelt  in  a  very  mean  cottage  in  Mansoul,  and 
he  came  at  his  neighbours'  request.  So  they  told 
him  what  they  bad  done,  and  what  they  would  do 
concerning  petitioning,  and  that  they  did  desire  of 
him  that  he  would  go  therewith  to  the  Prince. 

Then  said  Mr.  Desires-awake,  why  should  not 
I  do  the  best  I  can  to  save  so  famous  Mr  Desires- 
a  town  as  Mansoul  from  deserved  de-     awake      goes 

mi  <»  j  T  i      Wltu  t'ie  peti- 

struction ;  1  hey  therefore  delivered  tion  to  the 
the  petition  to  him,  and  told  him  how  imce" 
he  must  address  himself  to  the  Prince,  and  wished 
him  ten  thousand  good  speeds.  So  he  comes  to 
the  Prince's  pavilion,  as  the  first,  and  asked  to 
speak  with  his  Majesty ;  so  word  was  carried  to 
Emmanuel,  and  the  Prince  came  out  to  the  man. 
When  Mr.  Desires-awake  saw  the  Prince,  he  fell 
flat  with  his  face  to  the  ground,  and  cried  out,  0 
that  Mansoul  might  live  before  thee!  and  with  that 
he  presented  the  petition.  The  which  when  the 
Prince  had  read,  he  turned  away  for  a  while  and 
wept,  but,  refraining  himself,  he  turned  His  entertain- 
again  to  the  man,  who  all  this  while  ment 
lay  crying  at  his  feet  as  at  the  first,  and  said  to 
him,  Go  thy  way  to  thy  place,  and  I  will  consider 
of  thy  requests. 

Now  you  may  think  that  they  of  Mansoul  that 
had  sent  him,  what  with  guilt,  and  what  with  fear, 
lest  their  petition  should  be  rejected,  could  not  but 
look  with  many  a  long  look,  and  that  too  with 
strange  workings  of  heart,  to  see  what  would  be- 
come of  their  petition.  At  last,  they  His  return>  a]id 
saw  their  messenger  corning;  back  ;  so,     answer  tothem 

,  ,  °  ,  i      -i    i  •  that  sent  him. 

wlien  he  was  come,  they  asked  him 
how  he  fared,  what  Emmanuel  said,  and  what 
was  become  of  the  petition.  But  he  told  them  that 
he  would  be  silent  till  he  came  to  the  prison  to  my 
Lord  Mayor,  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  and  Mr.  Re- 
corder. So  he  went  forwards  towards  the  prison- 
house,  where  the  men  of  Mansoul  lay  bound.     But 


conquered  by  terror  and  power,  and  not  by  love;  thus  it  ends 
with  the  words  of  Adonibezek,  relative  to  the  seventy  kings 
that  he  had  brought  down  to  slavery.  Ju.  i.  7. — (fin.) 

3  Heady  and  Highmind  are  long  since  slain — Mansoul  feels 
her  misery.  As  a  condemned  malefactor,  expecting  execution, 
what  can  she  sue  for  but  mercy  ?  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner.'  Tor  the  ropes  about  their  heads,  see  1  Xi.  xx.  31. — 
(Ed.) 


THE    HOLY   WAR. 


299 


0!  what  a  multitude  flocked  after  to  hoar  what 
the  messenger  said.  So  when  ho  was  come  and 
had  shown  himself  at  the  grate  of  the  prison,  my 
Lord  Mayor  himself  looked  as  white  as  a  clout, 
the  Recorder  also  did  quake;  but  they 
and  said,  Come,  good  Sir,  what  did  the  great 
Prince  say  to  you?  Then  Baid  Mr.  Desires-awake, 
when  1  came  to  my  Lord's  pavilion,  1  failed,  and 
lie  came  forth;  so  1  fell  prostrate  at  his  feet,  and 
delivered  to  him  my  petition,  for  the  greatness  of 
his  person,  and  the  glory  of  his  countenance  would 
not  sutler  me  to  Btand  upon  m\  legs.  Now  as  he 
received  the  petition,  1  cried,  0  that  Mansoul 
might  live  before  thee!  So  when  for  a  while  he 
had  looked  thereon,  he  turned  him  about  ami  Baid 
to  his  servant,  Go  thy  way  to  thy  place  again,  and 
1  will  consider  of  thy  requests.  The  messenger 
added  moreover,  and  said,  The  Prince  to  whom 
you  sent  me  is  sueh  a  one  for  beauty  and  glory, 
that  whoso  sees  him  must  hoth  love  and  fear  him  ; 
1,  for  my  part,  can  do  no  less;  hut  I  know  not 
what  will  he  the  end  of  these  things.1  At  this 
Mansoul  con.  ai)SW<^  they  were  all  at  a  stand  ;  hoth 
founded  at  the  they  in  prison,  and  they  that  followed 
answer.  ,  i  •  i  i  i 

the   messenger    thither    to    hear    the 

news;  nor  knew  they  what  or  what  manner  of  in- 
terpretation to  put  upon  what  the  Prince  had  said. 
Now,  when  the  prison  was  cleared  of  the  throng, 
the  prisoners  among  themselves  began  to  com- 
ment upon  Emmanuel's  words.  My  Lord  Mayor 
The  prisoners'  said  that  the  answer  did  not  look 
Ite^ftS  with  a  rugged  face ;  but  Will-be-will 
answer.  s&[&  jt  betokened  evil ;    and  the  Re- 

corder, that  it  was  a  messenger  of  death.  Now, 
they  that  were  left,  and  that  stood  behind,  and  so 
could  not  so  well  hear  what  the  prisoners  said,  some 
of  them  catehed  hold  of  one  piece  of  a  sentence,  and 
some  on  a  bit  of  another ;  some  took  hold  of  what 
the  messenger  said,  and  some  of  the  prisoners' 
Misgiving  judgment  thereon;  so  none  had  the 
.SStata  "gkt  understanding  of  things;  but 
MausouL  y0U  cannot  imagine  what  work  these 

people  made,  and  what  a  confusion  there  was  in 
Mansoul  now.2 

For  presently  they  that  had  heard  what  was 
said,  Hew  about  the  town;  one  crying  one  thing, 
and  another  the  quite  contrary,  and  both  were 
sure  enough  they  told  true,  for  they  did  hear,  they 
said,  with  their  ears  what  was  said,  and  therefore 
could  not  be  deceived.  One  would  say,  We  must 
all  be  killed;  another  would  say,  We  must  all  he 
saved  ;    and   a   third  would    say  that   the  Prince 


1  It  is  a  token  of  true  conversion  when  the  soul  can,  a-  it 
were,  with  one  eye,  behold  its  total  defilement  by  sin,  ami  abhor 
itself  in  dust  and  ashes;  and  with  the  other  be  struck  with 
the  glory  and  excellency  of  Cbl  d  work,  and  the 

ell-sufficiency  of  his  salvation. —  M 

"See  Grace  ALountJi,:n,  No.  Ibo.—  [V.v.) 


would  not  be  concerned  with  Mansoul ;  and  a  fourth 
that  the  prisoners  must  he  suddenly  put  to  death. 
And  as  I  Baid,  •  rery  one  Btood  to  it  that  he  told 
his  tale  the  tightest,  and  that  all  others  hut  be 
wore  out.  Wherefore  Mansoul  had  now  molesta- 
tion upon  molestation,  not  COuld  any  man  know 
on  what  to  rest  the  Sole  of  hi-  foot  ;  fir  on,,  would 
go  by  now,  and  as  he  went,  if  he  heard  his  neigh- 
bour tell  his  tale,  to  be  suit  he  would  till  the 
quite  contrary,  and  both  would  stand  in  it  that  lie 
told    the    truth.       Nay,  BOme  of   them  hail  got  this 

Bton  by  'he  end,  that  tin-  Prince  did  intend  tn 
put  M. "isoid  to  the  sword.  And  now  it  began  to 
be  dirk  ;  wherefore  poor  Mansoul  wai 

in   sad    perplexity  all  that  night  until        1" 
the  morning.' 

But,  bo  far  as  1  could  gather,  by  the  best  infor- 
mation that    1  could  get,  all  this  hubbub  came 
through  the  words  that  the  Recorder  said,  when 
he  told  them  that  in  his  judgment  the   Pri 
answer   was   a   messenger  of  death.      It   v. 
that   hied   the   town,  ami   that   began    Whal    i 
the  fright  in  Mansoul,  for  Mansoul,  in  do* 

former  times,  did  use  to  count  that  Mr.  I!' 
was  a  seer,  and  that  his  sentence  v. a-  equal  to  the 
best  of  oracles,  and  thus  was  Mansoul  a  tenor  to 
itself. 

And  now  did  they  begin  to  feel  what  was  the 
effects  of  stubborn  rebellion,  and  unlawful  resist- 
ance against  their  Prince.  1  say  they  now  began 
to  feel  the  effects  thereof  by  guilt  and  fear,  that 
now  had  swallowed  them  up,  and  who  more  in- 
volved in  the  one,  but  they  who  were  most  in  the 
other;   to  wit,  the  chief  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

To  be  brief,  when  the  fame4  of  the  frigl 
out  of  the  town,  and  the  prisoners  had  a  little  r<  - 
covered  themselves,  they  take  to  tbemselvi 
heart,  and  think  to  petition  the  Prince    xbej  i 
for  life  again.      So  they  did  draw  up    V** 
a  third  petition,  the  contents  whereof  were  this:  — 

•  Prince  Emmanuel  the  Great,  Lord  of  all  worlds, 

and  master  of  mercy,  We,  thy  poor,        . 
;     ,        .         ,  ,       i  .  e  T1"  r 

wretched,   miserable,   dying    town    ot 

Mansoul,  do  confess  unto  thy  great  and  glorious 

majesty  that  we  have  sinned  against  thy  Father 

and  thee,  and  are  no  more  worthy  to  he  called  thy 

Mansoul,  but   rather  to  be  cast   into  the  pit.      If 

thou  wilt   slay  us,  we   have   deserved   it.      If  thou 

wilt  condemn  us  to  the  deep,  we  cannot   L 

thou  art  righteous.    We  cannot  complain,  whatever 

thou  dost,  or  however  thou  carries!  it  towai 

But  0:    let  mercy  reign;   and   let   it   he  extended 


z  No  unconverted  person  can  imagine  with  ^^'-  rapidity 

these  ideas  ]u-iss  through  the  mind  of  tl 
the  detraction  and  misery  of  such  a 
taiatv.    The  recollection  of  theae  feeling*  i*  ' 
the  forty-aecond  Psalm.     'Deep  calletl  <J1  iby 

iid  thy  billows  are  gone  "vtr  me.'— (Ed.) 
'  ■  J  mi.e,''or  rumour,  or  public  report ;  tJius,  Ge.  i: 


soo 


THE  HOLY   WAR. 


to  us.'  0  let  mercy  take  hold  upon  us,  and  free 
us  from  our  transgressions,  and  we  will  sing  of  thy 
mercy  and  of  thy  judgment.      Amen.' 

This  petition,  when  drawn  up,  was  designed  to 
rraver attended  be  sent  to  the  Prince  as  the  first,  but 
with  difficulty.  wll0  ghould  carry  it,  that  was  the 
question.  Some  said.  Let  him  do  it  that  went  with 
the  first;  hut  others  thought  not  good  to  do  that, 
and  that  because  he  sped  no  better.  Now  there 
was  an  old  man  in  the  town,  and  his  name  was 
Mr.  Gooddeed ;  a  man  that  bare  only  the  name, 
but  had  nothing  of  the  nature  of  the  thing.  Now 
some  were  for  sendincr  of  him,  but  the 

Old     Gooddeed  ,  ,  °  c        .,     . 

propounded  as  Recorder  was  by  no  means  tor  that, 
euhiPtheSpnet!°  for,  said  he,  we  now  stand  in  need  of, 
tjon;  the  old    antj  are  pleading  for  mercy,  wherefore 

Jtecorder    op-  l  ...  <•  1  • 

noses  it,  and   to  send  our  petition  by  a  man  ot  his 
is  reject.    name  wjj|  seem  to  cross  the  petition 
itself.     Should  we  make  Mr.  Gooddeed  our  mes- 
senger when  our  petition  cries  for  mercy? 

'  Besides,'  quoth  the  old  gentleman,  '  should  the 
Prince  now,  as  he  receives  the  petition,  ask  him 
and  say,  What  is  thy  name?  as  nobody  knows  but 
he  will,  and  he  should  say,  Old  Gooddeed,  what, 
think  you,  would  Emmanuel  say  but  this,  Aye! 
is  old  Gooddeed  yet  alive  in  Mansoul,  then  let  old 
Gooddeed  save  you  from  your  distresses?  And  if 
he  says  so,  I  am  sure  we  are  lost ;  nor  can  a  thou- 
sand of  old  Gooddeeds  save  Mansoul.'1 

After  the  Recorder  had  given  in  his  reasons  why 
old  Gooddeed  should  not  go  with  this  petition  to 
Emmanuel,  the  rest  of  the  prisoners  and  chief  of 
Mansoul  opposed  it  also,  and  so  old  Gooddeed  was 
laid  aside,  and  they  agreed  to  send  Mr.  Desires- 
awake  again  ;  so  they  sent  for  him,  and  desired 
him  that  he  would  a  second  time  go  with  their 
petition  to  the  Prince,  and  he  readily  told  them  he 
would.  But  they  bid  him  that  in  any  wise  he 
would  take  heed  that  in  no  word  or  carriage  he 
gave  offence  to  the  Prince,  for  by  doing  so,  for 
ought  we  can  tell,  you  may  bring  Mansoul  into 
utter  destruction,  said  they. 

Now  Mr.  Desires-awake,  when  he  saw  that  he 
must  go  of  this  errand,  besought  that  they  would 
Mr    Desire*-;.-   STaut  l'iat  Mr.  Weteyes  might  go  with 

wake  goes  a-    hjra<      Now  this  Weteyes  was  a  near 

-am,  and  takes  .  ■* 

one  Weteyes  neighbour  of  Mr.  Desires,  a  poor  man, 
wit  im.  fl  man  o£  a  broken  spirit,  yet  one  that 
could  speak  well  to  a  petition.  So  they  granted 
that  he  should  go  with  him.  Wherefore  they 
address  themselves  to  their  business.  Mr.  Desires 
put  a  rope  upon  his  head,  and  Mr.  Weteyes  went 


1  Although  the  spirit  of  prayer  prevails,  yet  what  a  clinging 
is  there  to  old  Gooddeeds.  O  you  that  hope  for  salvation  in 
>»me  supposed  good  deeds,  listen  to  the  answer  which  naturally 
suggests  itself,  '  Let  good  works  save  thee  ;'  what  need  of  grace. 
If  solvation  be  attainable  by  the  law,  then  the  death  of  Christ 
wis  needless. —  (En.) 


with  hands  wringing  together.2     Thus  they  wenl 
to  the  Prince's  pavilion. 

Now  when  they  went  to  petition  this  third  time, 
they  were  not  without  thoughts  that  by  often  com. 
ing  they  might  be  a  burden  to  the  Prince.  Where- 
fore, when  they  were  come  to  the  door   __  .         , 

J  .       Their     apology 

of  his  pavilion,  they  first  made  their  tor  their  com- 
apology  for  themselves,  and  for  their  s  giU"' 
coming  to  trouble  Emmanuel  so  often ;  and  they 
said  that  they  came  not  hither  to-day  for  that 
they  delighted  in  being  troublesome,  or  for  that 
they  delighted  to  hear  themselves  talk,  but  for 
that  necessity  caused  them  to  come  to  his  Majesty ; 
they  could,  they  said,  have  no  rest  day  nor  night, 
because  of  their  transgressions  against  Shaddai, 
and  against  Emmanuel  his  Son.  They  also  thought 
that  some  misbehaviour  of  Mr.  Desires-awake  the 
last  time,  might  give  distaste  to  his  Highness, 
and  so  caused  that  he  returned  from  so  merciful 
a  Prince  empty,  and  without  countenance.  So 
when  they  had  made  this  apology,  Mr.  Desires- 
awake  cast  himself  prostrate  upon  the  ground 
as  at  the  first,  at  the  feet  of  the  mighty  Prince, 
saying,  0  that  Mansoul  might  live  before  thee! 
And  so  he  delivered  his  petition.  The  Prince  then 
having  read  the  petition,  turned  aside  a  while,  as 
before,  and,  coming  again  to  the  place  where  the 
petitioner  lay  on  the  ground,  he  de-  The  Prince  taik- 
manded  what  his  name  was,  and  of  eth  Wlth  them- 
what  esteem  in  the  account  of  Mansoul ;  for  that 
he,  above  all  the  multitude  in  Mansoul,  should 
be  sent  to  him  upon  such  an  errand.  Then 
said  the  man  to  the   Prince,   '  0  let   „  _   .    ,. 

Mr.  Desires  fret 

not  my  Lord  be  angry ;  and  why  speech  to  the 
inquirest  thou  after  the  name  of  such 
a  dead  dog  as  I  am?  Pass  by,  I  pray  thee, 
and  take  no  notice  of  who  I  am,  because  there  is, 
as  thou  very  well  knowest,  so  great  a  dispropor- 
tion between  me  and  thee.  Why  the  townsmen 
chose  to  send  me  on  this  errand  to  my  Lord,  is 
best  known  to  themselves,  but  it  could  not  be  for 
that  they  thought  that  I  had  favour  with  my  Lord. 
For  my  part,  I  am  out  of  charity  with  myself;  who 
then  should  be  in  love  with  me  ?  Yet  live  I  would, 
and  so  would  I  that  my  townsmen  should,  and 
because  both  they  and  myself  are  guilty  of  great 
transgressions,  therefore  they  have  sent  me,  and  1 
am  come  in  their  names  to  beg  of  my  Lord  for 
mercy.  Let  it  please  thee  therefore  to  incline  to 
mercy,  but  ask  not  what  thy  servants  are.' 

Then  said  the  Prince,  '  And  what  is  he  that  is 
become  thy  companion  in  this  so  weighty  a  matter?' 
So  Mr.  Desires  told  Emmanuel  that  he  was  a  poor 


*  How  humbling  to  human  pride  is  this !  But  unless  our 
desires  for  mercy  be  accompanied  with  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
spirit,  they  will  be  rejected;  hut  the  broken  heart  God  will 
not  despise.  Ps.  sxxiv.  18;  li.  17.  Is.  lvii.  15.  'He  will  re- 
gard the  prayer  of  the  destitute.'  Ps.  cii.  17. — (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


neighbour  of  his,  ami  one  of  his  most  intimate 
associates,  ami  his  name,  said  be,  may  it  please 
your  most  excellent  Majesty,  is  Weteyes,  of  the 
town  of  Munsoul.  I  know  that  there 
•*•  are  many  of  tliat  name  that  arc  naught, 

hut  1  hope  it  will  be  no  offence  to  my  Lord  that 
I  have  brought  my  poor  neighbour  with  me. 

Then  Mr.  Wet-eyes  fell  on  bia  face  to  the 
ground,  and  made  this  apology  for  bia  coming  with 
his  neighbour  to  his  Lord:  — 

4  0  my  Lord,'  quoth  he,  '  what  I  am  1  know  not 
Mr.  WeteyM*  myself,  nor  whether  my  name  he 
";!!',;  feigned  or  true,  especially  when  I 
hit  neighbour,  begin  to  think  what  some  have  said, 
namely,  that  this  name  was  given  me  because 
Mr.  Repentance  was  my  father.  Good  men  have 
had  children,  and  the  sincere  do  oftentimes  beget 
hypocrites.  My  mother  also  called  me  by  this 
name  from  my  cradle,  but  whether  because  of  the 
moistness  of  my  brain,  or  because  of  the  softness 
of  my  heart,  I  cannot  tell.  I  see  dirt  in  mine  own 
tears,  and  filthiness  in  the  bottom  of  my  prayers.' 
But  I  pray  thee' — and  all  this  while  the  gentleman 
wept — '  that  thou  wouldest  not  remember  against 
us  our  transgressions,  nor  take  offence  at  the  un- 
qualifiedness  of  thy  servants,  but  mercifully  pass 
by  the  sin  of  Mansoul,  and  refrain  from  the  glory  - 
fying  of  thy  grace  no  longer.'2 

So  at  his  bidding  they  arose,  and  both  stood 
trembling  before  him,  and  he  spake  to  them  to  this 
purpose:  — 

•  The  town  of  Mansoul  hath  grievously  rebelled 
The  Prince's  an-    against  my  Father,  in  that  they  have 

answer.  rejected  him  from  being  their  king, 
and  did  choose  to  themselves  for  their  captain  a 
liar,  a  murderer,  and  a  runagate  slave.  For  this 
Diabolus,  and  your  pretended  prince,  though  once 
so  highly  accounted  of  by  you,  made  rebellion 
against  my  Father  and  me,  even  in  our  palace  and 
highest  court  there,  thinking  to  become  a  prince 
The  original  of  and   king.     But   being   there  timely 

Dmboius.  discovered  and  apprehended,  and  for 
his  wickedness  bound  in  chains,  and  separated  to 
the  pit  with  those  who  were  his  companions,  he 
offered  himself  to  you,  and  you  have  received  him. 

*  Now  this  is,  and  for  a  long  time  hath  been  an 
high  affront  to  my  Father,  wherefore  my  Father 
sent  to  you  a  powerful  army  to  reduce  you  to  your 
obedience.  But  you  know  how  those  men,  their 
captains,  and  their  counsel-,  were  esteemed  of  you. 


1  This  language  i»  peculiarly  strikiug;  there  ma)  be  a  mix- 
ture of  pride  in  our  deepest  humility,  and  sin  mingled  with 

our  holiest  duties. —  (Eu.) 

-  \\  ill-be-will  is  brought  low;  Boastings,  Bragman,  Ill- 
pause  are  dead;  the  soul  is  humbled,  ;■  id  osea  such  strikiui; 
but  just  terms,  'I  see  dirt  in  mine  own  tears.'  Redemption 
draws  Ditrh.  13everidjr'c  Bays,  '  Repentance  nerds  to  be  re- 
pented, our  tears  want  washing,  and  the  very  washing  of  these 
tears  needs  still  to  be  washed  over  ;.  .1  of  the 

Redeemer.' — (Fd.) 


and  what  thej  received  at  your  hand.     Yon 
belled  against  them,  you  shut  your  gates  upon 

them,  you  hid  them  battle,  you    fought    them,  and 

fought  for  Diabolus  againsl  them.  So  they  sent 
to  my  Father  for  more  power,  aid  1  with  mi  men 
are  come  to  subdue  you.     But  a-  you  treated  the 

servants,  so  you  treated  their  Lord.     You  st 1 

up  in  hostile  manner  against  me,  you  -hut  up 
gates  against  me,  you  turned  the  deaf  ear  to  me, 
and  resisted  as  long  as  you  could  ;  hut  now  1  bave 
made  a  conquest  >.f  you.  Did  you  cry  me  mercj 
so  long  as  you  had  hopes  that  you  might  prevail 
against  me?8  But  now  I  have  taken  the  town, 
you  cry.  But  why  did  you  not  cry  before,  wh( 
white  flag  <d'  my  mercy,  the  red  flag  of  justice,  and 

the  black  flag  that  threatened  execution,  were  set 

up  to  cite  you  to  it '.     Now  I  have  conquered  your 

Diabolus,  you  conn-  to  me  for  favour,  hut  why  did 

you  not  help  me  against  the  mighty?  Vet  I  will 
consider  your  petition,  and  will  answi  r  it  so  •• 
will  be  for  my  glory. 

'(Jo,  hid  Captain  Boanerges  and  Captain  Con- 
viction bring  the  prisoners  not  to  me  into  the 
camp  to-morrow,  and  say  you  to  Captain  .lodg- 
ment and  Captain  Execution,  Stay  you  in  the 
castle,  and  take  good  heed  to  yourselves  thai 
keep  all  quiet  in  Mansoul  until  you  hear  further 
from  me.'  And  with  that  he  turned  himself  froi  I 
them,  and  went  into  his  royal  pavilion  again.4 

So  the  petitioners  having  received  this  ;.. 
from  the  Prince,  returned  as  at  the  first   to 
their  companions;  again.      But  they  had   not 
far,  but  thoughts  began    to   work   in   their  minds 
that  no  mercy  as  yet  was  intended   by  the   I 
to  Mansoul;   so  they  went  to  the  place  where  the 
prisoners  lay  bound  ;   but  these  workings  of  mind 
about  what  would   become  of  Mansoul,   had    such 
strong  power  over  them,  that  by  that   tb<  • 
come  unto  them  that  sent   them,  they  were 
able  to  deliver  their  message. 

But  they  came  at  length  to  the  gates  of  the 
town — now   the   townsmen   with  earnestness   we] 
waiting  for  their   return — where    many  met   then:, 
to  know  what  answer  was  made   to   the   petition, 
Then  they  cried  out  to  those  that  were  sent,  What 
news  from  the  Prince,  and  what  hath  Emmanuel 
said  \      But   they  said   that    they  mufi  . 
go  up  to  the  prison,  and  then-  dtliv.  r  their  m< 
So  away  they  went  to  the  prison,  with    of  inn 


a    multitude    at    their   heels 


Now, 


when  they  were  come  to  the  gn 


a  AH  converted  souls  will  confess  that  if  God  the  Spirit  bad 
not  arrested  and  stopped  them  in  thi  ir  mad  career,  tl 
have  lived,  died,  and  perished  tor  ever  in  theii  - 

4  How  much  must  thia  have  deep 
The  law  enters  that  sin  n 
ceedingly  sinful,  and  ren 

,  ie  recollection  of  roch  dreadful  mspa  -■ 


S02 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


they  told  the  first  part  of  Emmanuel's  speech  to 
the  prisoners ;  to  wit,  how  he  reflected  upon  their 
The  messengers,  disloyalty  to  his  Father  and  himself, 

&£8j?S  and  bow  they  had  chose  and  closed 

prisoners.  with  Diabolus,  .had   fought   for  him, 

hearkened  to  him,  and  been  ruled  by  him,  but  had 
despised  him  and  his  men.  This  made  the  prisoners 
look  pale;  but  the  messengers  proceeded,  and  said, 
He,  the  Prince,  said,  moreover,  that  yet  he  would 
consider  your  petition,  and  give  such  answer  thereto 
as  would  stand  with  his  glory.  And  as  these 
words  were  spoken,  Mr.  Weteyes  gave  a  great 
sigh.  At  this  they  were  all  of  them  struck  into 
their  dumps,  and  could  not  tell  what  to  say.  Fear 
also  possessed  them  in  a  marvellous  manner ;  and 
death  seemed  to  sit  upon  some  of  their  eyebrows.1 
Now,  there  was  in  the  company  a  notable  sharp- 
witted  fellow,  a  mean  man  of  estate, 

Old  Inquisitive.  ,     ,  .  ii     t         •   v 

and  his  name  was  old  Inquisitive. 
This  man  asked  the  petitioners  if  they  had  told 
out  every  whit  of  what  Emmanuel  said.  And  they 
answered,  Verily,  no.  Then  said  Inquisitive,  I 
thought  so,  indeed.  Pray,  what  was  it  more  that 
he  said  unto  you  ?  Then  they  paused  awhile ; 
but  at  last  they  brought  out  all,  saying,  The  Prince 
did  bid  us  bid  Captain  Boanerges  and  Captain 
Conviction  bring  the  prisoners  down  to  him  to-mor- 
row ;  and  that  Captain  Judgment  and  Captain 
Execution  should  take  charge  of  the  castle  and 
town  till  they  should  hear  further  from  him.  They 
said  also  that  when  the  Prince  had  commanded 
them  thus  to  do,  he  immediately  turned  his  back 
upon  them,  and  went  into  his  royal  pavillion. 

But  0  how  this  return,  and  especially  this  last 
clause  of  it,  that  the  prisoners  must  go  out  to  the 
Prince  into  the  camp,  brake  all  their  loins  in 
pieces  !  Wherefore,  with  one  voice,  they  set  up  a 
cry  that  reached  up  to  the  heavens.2  This  done, 
each  of  the  three  prepared  himself  to  die  ;  and  the 
.  Recorder*  said  unto  them,  This  was 
the  thing  that  I  feared  ;  for  they  con- 
cluded that  to-morrow,  by  that  the  sun  went 
down,  they  should  be  tumbled  out  of  the  world. 
The  whole  town  also  counted  of  no  other  but  that, 
in  their  time  and  order,  they  must  all  drink  of  the 
same  cup.  Wherefore  the  town  of  Mansoul  spent 
that  night  in  mourning,  and  sackcloth,  and  ashes. 
Tht  prisoners  also,  when  the  time  was  come  for 
them  to  go  down  before  the  prince,  dressed  them- 
selves in  mourning  attire,  with  ropes  upon  their 
heads.'1  The  whole  town  of  Mansoul  also  showed 
themselves   upon  the  wall,  all   clad   in  mourning 


weeds,    if,    perhaps,  the   Prince,  with    the   sight 
thereof,  might  be  moved  with  compassion.     But 

0  how  the  busybodies*  that  were  in  *  Vilin 
the  town  of  Mansoul  did  now  concern  thoughts. 
themselves  !  They  did  run  here  and  there  through 
the  streets  of  the  town  by  companies,  crying  out 
as  they  ran  in  tumultuous  wise,  one  after  one 
manner,  and  another  the  quite  contrary,  to  the 
almost  utter  distraction  of  Mansoul. 

Well,  the  time  is  come  that  the  prisoners  must 
go  down  to  the  camp,  and  appear  before  the  Prince. 
And  thus  was  the  manner  of  their  The  prisoners 
going  down.  Captain  Boanerges  went  Lud  t0  triaL 
with  a  guard  before  them,  and  Captain  Conviction 
came  behind,  and  the  prisoners  went  down  bound 
in  chains  iu  the  midst ;  so,  I  say,  the  prisoners 
went  in  the  midst,  and  the  guard  went  with  flying- 
colours  behind  and  before,  but  the  prisoners  went 
with  drooping  spirits. 

Or,  more  particularly,  thus: 

The  prisoners  went  down  all  in  mourning ;  they 
put  ropes    upon   themselves  ;    they 

1  r  .r.  ,  How  they  went 

went  on  smiting  of  themselves  on 
the  breasts,  but  durst  not  lift  up  their  eyes  to 
heaven.  Thus  they  went  out  at  the  gate  of  Man- 
soul, till  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  Prince's 
army,  the  sight  and  glory  of  which  did  greatly 
heighten  their  affliction.  Nor  could  they  uow 
longer  forbear,  but  cry  out  aloud,  0  unhappy 
men  !  0  wretched  men  of  Mansoul  !  Their  chains 
still  mixing  their  dolorous  notes  with  the  cries  of 
the  prisoners,  made  noise  more  lamentable.4 

So,  when  they  were  come  to  the  door  of  the 
Prince's  pavilion,  they  cast  themselves  prostrate 
upon  the  place.  Then  one  went  in  and  told  his 
Lord  that  the  prisoners  were  come  down.  The 
Prince  then  ascended  a  throne  of  state,  and  sent 
for  the  prisoners  in  ;  who  when  they  came,  did 
tremble  before  him,  also  they  covered  their  faces 
with  shame.  Now  as  they  drew  near  T]  faU  down 
to  the  place  where  he  sat,  they  threw  prostrate  be- 
themselves  down  before  him.  Then 
said  the  Prince  to  the  Captain  Boanerges,  Bid  the 
prisoners  stand  upon  their  feet.  Then  they  stood 
trembling  before  him,  aud  he  said,  Are  you  the 
men  that  heretofore  were  the  servants  They  are  upon 
of  Shaddai?  And  they  said,  Yes,  their  trial. 
Lord,  yes.  Then  said  the  Prince  again,  Are  you 
the  men  that  did  suffer  yourselves  to  be  corrupted 
and  defiled  by  that  abominable  one  Diabolus  ?  And 
they  said,  We  did  more  than  suffer  it,  Lord ;  for 


1  See  Grace  Abounding,  No.  210-212— (En.) 
-  '  0 !  how  gladly  now  would  1  have  been  anybody  but 
myself,  anything  but  a  man,  and  iu  any  coudition  but  my  own ; 
for  there  was  noihiug  did  pass  more  frequently  over  my  mind 
than  that  it  was  impossible  lor  me  to  be  forgiven  my  trans* 
gression,  and  to  be  saved  from  wrath  to  come.' — Grace  Abound: 
inn,  No.  149;  see  also  No.  110.—  (Ed.) 


3  1  thought  also  of  Beuhadad's  servants,  who  went  with 
ropes  upon  their  heads  to  their  enemies  for  mercy.  1  Ki.  xx.  31. 
— Grace  Abounding,  No.  251. — (Ed.) 

4  This  godly  sorrow  was  a  prelude  to  joy  unspeakable  and 
full  of  glory.  This  sort  of  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night, 
but  joy  coineth  in  the  morning.  They  went  forth  weeping, 
beariug  precious  seed,  but  were  soon  to  return  with  joy,  bring- 
ing their  sheaves  with  them. —  (Burder.) 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


103 


we  chose  it  of  our  own  miml.  The  Prince  asked 
further,  saying.  Could  you  have  been  content  that 
vour  slavery  should   have   continued   under  his 

tyranny  as  long  aa  you  had  lived  '.  Then  said  the 
prisoners,  Yes,  Lord,  yes  ;  for  his  ways  were 
pleasing  to  our  flesh,  and  we  were  grown  aliens 
to  a  better  state.  Ami  did  you,  said  he,  when  1 
came  up  against  this  town  of  MaOSOul,  heartily 
wish  that    I  might  not  have  the  victory  over  you  ? 

yes,  Lord,  yes,  Baid  they.    Then  said  the  Prince, 

And  what  punishment  is  it,  think  you,  tl 
deserve  at  my  hand  for  these  and  other  vour  high 
and   mighty    sins  \      And    they    said,    Both   death 
and  the  deep,1  Lord  ;  for  we  have  deserved  i 
He    asked   again    if    they  had    ought   to   say  for 
Ives,  why  the  sentence  that  they  confessed 

that  they  had  deserved  should  QOt  he  passed  upon 

Hiey condemn     them?      And  they  said.  We   ean   say 

themselves.        nothing,  Lord;    thou   art  just,  for  we 

have  sinned.  Then  said  the  Prince,  And  for  what 
are  those  ropes  on  your  heads  ?  The  prisoners 
answered,  these  ropes*  are  to  hind  us 
withal  to  the  place  of  execution,  if 
mercy  be  not  pleasing  in  thy  sight.  So  he  further 
asked,  if  all  the  men  in  the  town  of  Mansoul  were 
in  this  confession  as  they  ?  And  they  answered, 
,  p  ...      All  the  natives,*  Lord;  but  for  the 

rowers  of  tlie 

soul.        Diabolonians  t  that  came  into  our  town 
<■  Corruption*      when  the  tyrant  got  possession  of  us, 

and  lusts.  .1  •         r       ,,  •> 

we  can  say  nothing  tor  them. 
Then    the    Prince    commanded    that    a    herald 
A  victory      should  be  called,  and  that  he  should, 

proclaimed.      ;n     t]lQ     m\^U     anj     throughout     the 

camp  of  Emmanuel,  proclaim,  and  that  with  sound 
of  trumpet,  that  the  Prince,  the  Son  of  Shaddai, 
had,  in  his  Father's  name,  and  for  his  Father's 
glory,  gotten  a  perfect  conquest  and  victory  over 
Mansoul,  and  that  the  prisoners  should  follow  him, 
and  say.  Amen.  So  this  was  done  as  he  had  com- 
Joy  for  the  manded.  And  presently  the  music 
victory.  that  was  in  the  upper  region  sounded 
melodiously.  The  captains  that  were  in  the  camp 
shouted,  and  the  soldiers  did  sing  songs  of  triumph 
to  the  Prince,  the  colours  waved  in  the  wind,  and 
great  joy  was  everywhere,  only  it  was  wanting  as 
vet  in  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Mansoul.'5 


1  'Death  and  the  deep;'  or  bottomless  pit. — (Ed.) 

2  The  distinction  between  inbred  siusaad  th 

of  the  enemy  is  very  difficult  to  be  drawn.  The  gold,  silver, 
and  precious  stones  will  be  purified  and  polished;  while  the 
wood,  hay,  and  stubble  will  be  burned  up.  1  Co.  iii.  12,  13. 
The  natives  or  powers  of  the  soul  are  pardoned,  while  the  cor- 
inil  lu^s  are  to  be  en  r,  Ibis  is  solemn, 

searching  heart-work. — (Ed.) 

3  The  work  1  the  heart  taken  ; 
the  victory  of  Emmanuel  over  Man-  oed;  the 
heavenly  host  rejoices;  Diabolus  is  driven  from  the  town,  but 
the  Kiim  of  glory  has  not  yet  entered — his  gracious  | 

1-  not  yet  felt  in  the  Bonl  j  the  gates  are  open  ;  he  will  enter, 
and  will  not  tarry.     Is  this  to  show  that  Heart  Castle  is  to  be- 


Then  the  Prince  called  for  the 
and  to  Btand  again  before  him,  and 

they  came  and  b1 1  trembling.    And    ' 

be   said   unto  them,  The 

.  iniquities,  that  you,  wit!  ■      "> 

whole  town   of  Mai  from 

time  to  time  commi  r  and 

me,    I   have  power  and  commandment  from  rnj 

father  tO  fol  il  ;    and  do 

forgive  you  accordingly.  And  having  so  said,  he 
gave  them  written  in  parchment,  and 
seven  seal-,  a  \m-^v.  and  general  pardon,  com- 
manding both  my  Lord  Mayor,  my  Lord  Will-be- 
will,  and  Mr.  Recorder,  to  proclaim,  and  cause  it 
to  be  proclaimed  to-morrow  by  that  the  sun  is 
up,  throughout  the  whole  town  of  Mansoul, 

Moreover,  the  Prince  stripped  the  prisoners  of 
their  mourning  weeds  and  cave 
'beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  iov  for 
mourmnj  irmenf  of  praise 

for  the  spirit  of  heaviness'  u.  hi.  .;. 

Then   he  gave   to  each  of  the  three 
gold,   and  preeious   stones,   and    tool. 
away  their  ropes,   and   put  chains  of 
gold  about  their  necks,  and  ear-rings  in  theii 
Now  the  prisoners,  when  they  did  hear  the  gi 
words  of  Prince   Emmanuel,  and   had  beheld  all 
that  was   done   unto   them,    fainted    almo-t 
away;  for  the  grace,  the  benefit,  the  pardoi 
sudden,  glorious,  and  so  big,  that  they  were  not 
able,   without  staggering,  to  stand   up   under  it.1 
Yea,  my  Lord  Will-he-will  swooned  outright;   but 
the  Prince  stepped  to  him,  put  his  everlasting 
under  him,  embraced  him,  kissed  him,  and  bid  him 
be  of  good  cheer,  for  all  should  be  p 
cording  to  his  word.  lie  al 

and  smile  upon  the  other  two  that  were  Will-be- 
will's  companions,  saying,  Tak  Further 

tokens  of  my  hive,  favour,  and  compassion  to  you  ; 
and  I  charge  you,  that  you,  Mr.  tell  in 

the  town  of  Mansoul  what  you  have  heard  and 

Then    were    their  fetters   broken   to   pieci 

fore    their   faces,    and    cast    into    the 

...  -  ,  .      Their  ?uilt. 

air.    and    their   slips'    were    enlarged 

under  them.      Then   they  fell   down  at   the    f 

the  Prince,  and  kissed  his  feet,  and  wetted  them 


prepared   for   bitii,   after  it   has  been  occupied   by   in 
'The  preparation  of  the  heart  1-  with  bun,'  a 

4  1  had  Mich  strange  apprehenaiona  of  the  . 
I  could  hardly  bear  up  under  it;   it  was  BO  out  of  I 
amazing,  when  1    thought  it  could  reach  me,  that  I  d 
if  that  Bense  of  it  had  abode  long  npon  me,  it  ••■ 
me  incapable  of  I 

ining  of 'their 
xviii.  36,  and  Pr.  iv.  12.    It  is  here  m 

and  walks 

full  of  bi  Lv-> 


304 


THE   HOLY    WAR 


with  tears;  also  they  cried  out  with  a  mighty 
strong  voice,  saying,  '  Blessed  he  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  from  this  place.'  E%.  Hi.  12.  So  they  were  hid 
rise  up,  and  go  to  the  town,  ami  tell  to  Mansoul 
what  the  Prince  had  done.  He  commanded  also 
,,,,  .    that  one  with  a  pipe  and  tabor  should 

Jliev   are    Bent  , 

home  with  pipe   go  and  play  hefore  them  all  the  way 

into  the  town  of  -Mansoul.     Then  was 

fulfilled  what  they  never  looked  for,  and  they  were 

made  to  possess  that  which  they  never  dreamed  of.1 

.    _   .        The  Prince  also  called  for  the  noble 

l  aptain  Credence  .       „       ,  .  .     , 

guards  th.-m      Captain   Credence,   and  commanded 

that    he    and   some    of    his   officers 

should    march   hefore  the   noblemen    of   Mansoul 

with  Hying  colours  iuto  the  town.      He  gave  also 

unto  Captain  Credence  a  charge,  that 
pardon  meet  about  that  time  that  the  Recorder  did 
mem'and'exu-  read  *^e  general  pardon  in  the  town 
"""m,  (l,'P:'<-<  of  Mansoul,  that  at  that  very  time  he 
from  the  heart      ,,,.,„•  i  1     • 

should  with  flying  colours  march  m 

at  Eyegate  with  his  ten  thousands  at  his  feet,  and 
that  he  should  go  until  he  came  by  the  high  street 
of  the  town,  up  to  the  castle  gates,  and  that  him- 
self should  take  possession  thereof  against  his 
Lord  came  thither.  He  commanded,  moreover, 
that  he  should  bid  Captain  Judgment  and  Captain 
Execution  to  leave  the  strong  hold  to  him,  and  to 
withdraw  from  Mansoul,  and  to  return  into  the 
camp  with  speed  unto  the  Prince. 

And  now  was  the  town  of  Mansoul  also  delivered 
from  the  terror  of  the  first  four  captains  and  their 
men.2 

[Chapter  IX.] 

[(Jon  i  ents  : — The  liberated  prisoners  return  to  Mansoul,  where 
they  are  received  with  great  joy— The  inhabitants  request 
Emmanuel  to  take  up  his  residence  among  them — He 
consents — .Makes  a  triumphal  entry  amid  the  shouts  of 
the  people — The  town  is  new  modelled,  and  the  image  of 
Shaddai  erected.] 

Well,  I  told  you  before  how  the  prisoners  were 
entertained  by  the  noble  Prince  Emmanuel,  and 
how  they  behaved  themselves  hefore  him,  aud  how 
he  sent  them  away  to  their  home  with  pipe  and 
tabor  going  before  them.  And  now  you  must 
think  that  those  of  the  town  that  had  all  this  while 
waited  to  hear  of  their  death,  could  not  but  be 
exercised  with  Badness  of  mind,  and  with  thoughts 
that  pricked  like  thorns.  Nor  could  their  thoughts 
be  kept  to  any  one  point  ;  the  wind  blew  with  them 


J  What  a  change  !  '.When  the  Lord  turned  again  the  cap- 
tivity of  Zion,  we  were  like  them  that  dream.  Then  was  our 
month  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue  with  singing;  then 
said  they  among  the  heathen,  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things 
for  them.  Who  is  like  uuto  thee,  pardoning  iniquity,  trans- 
gression, and  siu?  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  for- 
given, whose  siu  is  covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the 
Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity.  Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  God 
imputeth  rLjhteousuess  without  works.'  Ho.  iv.  5. — (Burder) 


all  this  while  at  great  uncertainties,  yea,  their 
hearts  were  like  a  balance  that  had  been  disquieted 
with  a  shaking  hand.  But  at  last,  as  they  with 
many  a  long  look  looked  over  the  wall  of  Mansoul, 
they  thought  that  they  saw  some  returning  to  the 
town  ;  and  thought  again,  Who  should  they  be  too, 
who  should  they  be  !  At  last  they  discerned  that 
they  were  the  prisoners ;  but  can  you  imagine  bow 
their  hearts  were  surprised  with  wonder,  especially 
when  they  perceived  also  in  what  equipage  aud  with 
what  honour  they  were  sent  home  ?  They  went 
down  to  the  camp  in  black,  but  they  came  back  to 
the  town  in  white;  they  went  down  a  strange  alter- 
to  the  camp  in  ropes,  they  came  back  all0n- 
in  chains  of  gold ;  they  went  down  to  the  camp 
with  their  feet  in  fetters,  but  came  back  with  their 
steps  enlarged  under  them ;  they  went  also  to  the 
camp  looking  for  death,  but  they  came  back  from 
thence  with  assurance  of  life ;  they  went  down  to 
the  camp  with  heavy  hearts,  but  came  back  again 
with  pipe  and  tabor  playing  before  them.  So,  so 
soon  as  they  were  come  to  Eyegate,  the  poor  and  tot- 
tering town  of  Mansoul  adventured  to  give  a  shout, 
and  they  gave  such  a  shout  as  made  the  captains 
in  the  Prince's  army  leap  at  the  sound  thereof. 

Alas  for  them,  poor  hearts  !  who  could  blame 
them,  since  their  dead  friends  were  come  to  life 
again  ?  for  it  was  to  them  as  life  from  the  dead, 
to  see  the  ancients  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  to 
shine  in  such  splendour.  They  looked  for  nothing 
but  the  axe  and  the  block ;  but  behold,  joy  and 
gladness,  comfort  and  consolation,  and  such  melo- 
dious notes  attending  of  them  that  was  sufficient 
to  make  a  sick  mau  well.  So  when  they  came  up, 
they  saluted  each  other  with  Welcome  !  welcome  ! 
and  blessed  be  he  that  has  spared  you.  is.  ssndii.  24. 
They  added  also,  We  see  it  is  well  with  you,  but 
how  must  it  go  with  the  town  of  Mansoul  ?  and, 
Will  it  go  well  with  the  town  of  Mansoul  ?  said 
they.  Then  answered  them  the  Re-  conscience.  The 
corder  and  my  Lord  Mayor,  0  tidings !  understanding. 
glad  tidings  !  good  tidings  of  good  and  of  great 
joy  to  poor  Mansoul  !  Then  they  gave  another 
shout  that  made  the  earth  to  ring  again.  After 
this  they  inquired  yet  more  particularly  how  things 
went  in  the  camp,  and  what  message  they  had  from 
Emmanuel  to  the  town,  So  they  told  them  all 
passages  that  had  happened  to  them  at  the  camp, 
and  everything  that  the  Prince  did  to  them.  This 
made  Mansoul  wonder  at  the  wisdom  and  grace  of 
the  Prince  Emmanuel.  Then  they  told  them  what 
they  had  received  at  his  bands  for  the  whole  town 


-'  'There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ 
Jesus.'  The  four  captains  no  longer  deuouuee  the  wrath  of 
God  ;  the  end  of  their  ministry  is  accomplished,  aud  their 
awful  speeches  are  no  more  heard.  This  is  well  expressed  in 
the  margio.  When  faith  and  pardon  meet  together,  judgment 
and   leentiou  depart  from  the  heart. — (Burder.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


SO  3 


of  Mansoul ;  and  the  Recorder  delivered  it  in  tbeee 
o  n.e  fa*  of  words — Pabooh,  Pardon,  Pardon  for 
parUoaof.mi  Mansoul ;  aud  thisshall  Mansoul  know 
to-morrow.  Then  ho  commanded,  and  they  wont 
and  summoned  Mansoul  to  meet  together  in  the 
market-place  to-morrow,  there  to  hear  their  general 
pardon  read. 

But  who  ean  think  what  a  turn,  what  a  change, 
what  an  alteration  this  hint  of  things  did  make 
in  the  countenance  of  the  town  of  Mansoul!  No 
man  of  Mansoul  could  sleep  that  night  for  joy  j1 
to  every  house  there  was  joy  ami  music,  singing 
T.Hvn-taiurtv-  end  making  merry,  telling  aud  hearing 
"i  of  Mansoul's  happiness,  was  then  all 
that  Mansoul  had  to  do;  and  this  was  the  burden 
of  all  their  song — 0,  more  of  this  at  the  rising  of 
the  sun  !  more  of  this  to-morrow  !  Who  thought 
vesterday,  would  one  say,  that  this  day  would  have 
been  such  a  day  to  us  ?  And  who  thought,  that 
saw  our  prisoners  go  down  in  irons,  that  they  would 
have  returned  in  chains  of  gold  !  yea,  they  that 
judged  themselves  as  they  went  to  he  judged  of 
their  judge,  were  by  his  mouth  acquitted,  not  for 
that  they  were  innocent,  but  of  the  Prince's  mercy, 
and  sent  home  with  pipe  and  tabor.  But  is  this  the 
common  custom  of  princes  ?  do  they  use  to  show 
such  kind  of  favours  to  traitors  ?  No !  this  is  only 
peculiar  to  Shaddai,  and  unto  Emmanuel  his  Son.- 

Now  morning  drew  on  apace,  wherefore  the  Lord 
Mayor,  the  Lord  Will-be-will,  and  Mr.  Recorder 
came  down  to  the  market-place  at  the  time  that 
the  Prince  had  appointed,  where  the  townsfolk 
were  waiting  for  them  ;  and  when  they  came,  they 
came  in  that  attire  and  in  that  glory  that  the 
Prince  had  put  them  into  the  day  before,  and  the 
street  was  lightened  with  their  glory.  So  the 
Mayor,  Recorder,  and  my  Lord  Will-he-will  drew 
down  to  Mouthgate,  which  was  at  the  lower  end 
of  the  market-place,  because  that  of  old  time  was 
the  place  where  they  used  to  read  public  matters. 
Thither  therefore  they  came  in  their  robes,  and 
their  tabret  went  before  them.  Now  the  eager- 
ness of  the  people  to  know  the  full  of  the  matter 
was  great. 

Then  the  Recorder  stood  up  upon  his  feet,  and 
_n  ,   first   beckoning  with  his  hand  for  a 

The  manner  of  °  . 

.-eating      tlie    silence,  he  read  out  with  loud  voice  the 
pardon.      But  when  he  came  to  these 


1  Reader,  have  you  experienced  this  holy  joy,  '  unspeakable, 
mi  I  full  of  gloryr  What  can  we  render  to  ftod  for  Mich  a 
Our  light  afflictions,  which  -rriuJ  ui  to  the  earth, 
are  but  for  a  moment  in  comparison  with  'an  eternal  weight 
of  glory.'  'The  inhabitants  shall  not  say,  I  an  sick;'  there  is 
no  cause  of  sickness  or  pain,  for  they  are  'forgiven  their  ini- 
quity.'  Is.  xxxiii.  '24. — (Erf) 

'  Man  bestows  favours  ou  the  most  worthy,  but  Coil  extends 
mercy  to  enemies,  rebels,  and  beggars;  whom  he  strips  of 
their  filthy  rags  of  pride  and  self-righteousm  S3,  blots  out  their 
sins  by  the  blood  of  his  cross,  aud  arrays  with  the  best  robe  of 
salvatiou. — (Mason.) 

VOL.  III. 


words,  'The   Lord,   tho   Lord  God,  mercifu 
gracious,  pardoning   iniquity,  transgression,  and 
Sin,    Bz.zxzir.6i   and    to  these,    'all  manner  of  sin 
and   blasphemy  shall   he   forgiven,'  it 
they  could  not  forbear  but  leap  for  joy.     For  this 
vou  must  know,  that  there  was  conjoined  herewith 
every  man's  name   in   Mansoul;    also   tac- 
tile pardon  made  a  brave  show.8 

When  the  Recorder  had  made  an  end  of  readin  ' 
the  pardon,  the  townsmen  ran  up  upon    >•„„  . 
the  walls  of  the  town,  and  leaped  am!      L'" '" 
skipped    thereon    for  joy;   and    hov.ed   themselves 

.-even  times  with  their  faces  towards  Emmanuel's 

pavilion,  and  shouted  out  aloud  for  joy,  and  .-aid, 
Let  Emmanuel  live  for  ever!  Then  order  was 
given  to  the  young  men  in  Mansoul,    Urelrtadwira 

that  they  should  ring  the  hells  for  j-y.         l!l 
So  the   hells  did   ring,  and    the    people    sing, 

the  music  l;o  in  every  house  in  Mansoul.4 

When  the  Prince  had  sent  home   the  three  pri- 
soners of  Mansoul  with  joy,  and  pipe,  and  tabor; 
he  commanded   his  captains,  with  all    . 
the  field-officers  and  soldiers  through-        Uweamp. 
OUt  his  army,  to  he  ready  in  that  morning  that  the 
Recorder  should   read  the   pardon   in   Mansoul,  to 
do   his  further  pleasure.      So  the  morning,  as  I 
have  showed,  being  come,  just  as  the  Recorder 
had  made  an  end  of  reading  the  pardon,  Emman- 
uel commanded  that  all  the  trumpets  in  the  camp 
should  sound,  that  the  colours  should  be  displayed, 
half  of  them  upon  Mount  Gracious,  and  half  of 
them  upon  Mount  Justice.5     He  commanded  also 
that  all  the  captains  should  show  themselves  in  all 
their  harness,  and  that  the  soldiers  should  shout 
for  jov.      Nor  was  Captain  Credence, 
though  in  the  castle,  silent  in  such  a 
day,  hut  he,  from  the  top  of  the  hold,      b,w'J- 
showed  himself  with  sound  of  trumpet  to  Mansoul, 
and  to  the  Prince's  camp. 

Thus  have  1  showed  you  the  manner  and  way 
that  Emmanuel  took  to  recover  the  town  of  Man- 
soul from  under  the  hand  and  power  of  the  tyrant 
Diabolus. 

Now  when  the  Prince  had  completed  these,  the 
outward  ceremonies  of  his  joy,  he  again  commanded 
that  his  captains  and  soldiers  should    T|  <¥  ft 
show  unto  Mansoul  some  teats  of  war. 


So   they  presently  addressed  thei 

selves  to  this  work.      But  0,  with   what  agility, 


3 'Sealed  with  the  Holy  Spirit'  to  the  .lay  of  redemption, 
to  show  forth  faith  by  works  'with  meekness 
brave  show;   see  Ep.  i".  13;  iv.  3U.  Ja.  ii.  Is;  iii.  18*- 

4  O  pardoned  smner,  how  can  yon  snfficil    ' 
exceeding  riches  Of  Divi  vain  the  soul  attempt- 

to  measure  the  breadth  and  length,  tl 
the  love  of  Christ;  it  rarpasseth  know     -■■■.  -(BurdarJ 

*  Duriug  the  siege,  the  fl^gg  were  unfurhd  one  a? 
beginning  with  merry,  and  ending  m    i  '  :*t  now 

md  truth  are  met  together,  rurhteomaeai  and  peace 
ied  each  otfer.  J'-.  Ixuv.  1  >.— (E°J 

ftfi 


305 


THE  HOLY   WAR. 


nimhleness,  dexterity,  and  bravery  did  these  mili- 
tary men  discover  their  skill  in  feats  of  war  to  the 
now  gazing  town  of  Mansoul  ! 

They  marched,  they  counter-marched,  they 
opened  to  the  right  and  left,  they  divided  and  sub- 
divided, they  closed,  they  wheeled,  made  good 
their  front  and  rear  with  their  right  and  left  wings, 
and  twenty  things  more,  with  that  aptness,  and 
...    then  were  all  as  they  were  as;ain,  that 

1  hey  are  ravished  .   ,      ,      F      , 

at  the  sight  of  they  took,  yea,  ravished  the  hearts 
that  were  in  Mansoul  to  behold  it. 
But  add  to  this,  the  handling  of  their  arms,  the 
managing  of  their  weapons  of  war,  were  marvel- 
lous taking  to  Mansoul  and  me.1 

When  this  action  was  over,  the  whole  town  of 
Mansoul  came  out  as  one  man  to  the  Prince  in  the 
camp  to  thank  him,  and  praise  him  for  his  abun- 
dant favour,  and  to  beg  that  it  would  please  his 
Thev  ,      that   grace  to  come  unto  Mansoul  with  his 

the  Princeana  men,  and  there  to  take  up  their  quar- 
his    men   will  .  *■   .         ,.,    • 

dwell  with  ters  tor  ever.  And  this  they  did  m 
-hem  or  ever.  most  iiura|,;e  manner,  bowing  them- 
selves seven  times  to  the  ground  before  him.  Then 
said  he,  All  peace  be  to  you.  So  the  town  came 
nigh,  and  touched  with  the  hand  the  top  of  his 
golden  sceptre,  and  they  said,  0  that  the  Prince 
Emmanuel,  with  his  captains  and  men  of  Avar, 
would  dwell  in  Mansoul  for  ever  ;  and  that  his 
battering  rams  and  slings  might  be  lodged  in  her 
for  the  use  and  service  of  the  Prince,  and  for  the 
help  and  strength  of  Mansoul.  'For,'  said  they,  'we 
have  room  for  thee,  we  have  room  for  thy  men,  we 
have  also  room  for  thy  weapons  of  war,  and  a  place 
to  make  a  magazine  for  thy  carriages.  Do  it, 
Say,  and  hold  to  Emmanuel,  and  thou  shalt  be  King 
it,  ManaouL  an(j  Captain  in  Mansoul  for  ever.  Yea, 
govern  thou  also  according  to  all  the  desire  of  thy 
soul,  and  make  thou  governors  and  princes  under 
thee  of  thy  captains  and  men  of  war,  and  we  will 
Income  thy  servants,  and  thy  laws  shall  be  our 
direction.' 

They  added,  moreover,  and  prayed  his  Majesty 
to  consider  thereof;  '  for,'  said  they,  '  if  now,  after 
nil  this  grace  bestowed  upon  us  thy  miserable  town 
of  Mansoul,  thou  shouhlest  withdraw,  thou  and 
thy  captains  from  us,  the  town  of  Mansoul  will 
die'-'  Yea,'  said  they,  '  our  blessed  Emmanuel,  if 
thou  shouhlest  depart  from  us  now  thou  hast  done 
so  much  good  for  us,  and  showed  so  much  mercy 
unto  us;  what  will  follow  but  that  our  joy  will  be 
as  if  it  had  not  been,  and  our  enemies  will  a  second 
time  come  upon  us  with  more  rage  than  at  the 


1  'And  mi','  shows  tin:  personal  interest  of  the  author  in 
this  soul's  conflict  with  the  prince  of  darkness.  The  war  is  to 
be  carried  on,  therefore  must  Mansoul  learn  the  art  of  war, 
and  see  the  King  in  his  beauty,  gl"ry,  and  [lower,  (hat  he  may 
have  confidence  in  him.  Christ,  by  faith,  dwells  in  the  heart, 
and  all  is  rapture  and  ecstacy  ;  and  they,  for  a  time,  see  nothing 
of  the  l'iaboloniaus  who  yet  lurked  in  their  walls. — (Ed.) 


first.  Wherefore,  we  beseech  thee,  0  thou  the 
desire  of  our  eyes,  and  the  strength  and  life  of  our 
poor  town,  accept  of  this  motion  that  now  we  have 
made  unto  our  Lord,  and  come  and  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  us,  and  let  us  be  thy  people.  Besides, 
Lord,  we  do  not  know  but  that  to  this 
day  many  Diabolonians  may  be  yet 
lurking  in  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  they  will 
betray  us  when  thou  shalt  leave  us,  into  the  hand 
of  .Diabolus  again ;  and  who  knows  what  designs, 
plots,  or  contrivances  have  passed  betwixt  them 
about  these  things  already ;  loth  we  are  to  fall 
again  into  his  horrible  hands.  Wherefore,  let  it 
please  thee  to  accept  of  our  palace  for  thy  place  of 
residence,  and  of  the  houses  of  the  best  men  in 
our  town  for  the  reception  of  thy  soldiers,  and 
their  furniture.'  3 

Then  said  the  Prince,  'If  I  come  to  your  town, 
will  you  suffer  me  further  to  prosecute     T1     p 
that  which  is  in  mine  heart  against      question  to 

.  .,.  Mansoul. 

mine  enemies  and  yours,  yea,  will  you 
help  me  in  such  undertakings?' 

They  answered,  '  We  know  not  what  we  shell 
do ;  we  did  not  think  once  that  we 
should  have  been  such  traitors  to 
Shaddai  as  we  have  proved  to  be  ;  what  then  shall 
we  say  to  our  Lord?  Let  him  put  no  trust  in  his 
saints,  let  the  Prince  dwell  in  our  castle,  and  make 
of  our  town  a  garrison,  let  him  set  his  noble  cap- 
tains, and  his  warlike  soldiers  over  us.  Yea,  let 
him  conquer  us  with  his  love,  and  overcome  us 
with  his  grace,  and  then  surely  shall  he  be  but 
with  us,  and  help  us,  as  he  was,  and  did  that 
morning  that  our  pardon  was  read  unto  us,  we 
shall  comply  with  this,  our  Lord,  and  with  his 
ways,  and  fall  in  with  his  word  against  the 
mighty. 

'  One  word  more,  and  thy  servants  have  done, 
and  in  this  will  trouble  our  Lord  no  more.  We 
know  not  the  depth  of  the  wisdom  of  thee  our 
Prince.  Who  could  have  thought  that  had  been 
ruled  by  his  reason,  that  so  much  sweet  as  we  do 
now  enjoy  should  have  come  out  of  those  bitter 
trials  wherewith  we  were  tried  at  the  first?  but, 
Lord,  let  light  go  before,  and  let  love  come  after ; 
yea,  take  us  by  the  hand,  and  lead  us  by  thy 
counsels,  and  let  this  always  abide  upon  us,  that 
all  things  shall  be  for  the  best  for  thy  servants, 
and  come  to  our  Mansoul,  and  do  as  it  pleaseth 
thee.      Or,  Lord,  come  to  our  Mansoul,  do  what 


*  This  is  the  fear  which  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  arising 
from  a  sense  of  total  dependence  upon  the  Lord  for  spiritual 
strength  ;  a  fear  of  losing  his  presence.  '  Hold  up  my  goings 
that,  my  footsteps  slip  not.'  Ps.  xvii.  5.— (Ed.) 

3  '  Furniture,'  as  au  old  military  term,  means  warlike  equip- 
ments. 

'  To  deedes  of  armes  and  proof  of  chivalric, 
Tiiey  £un  tliemselucs  addresse,  lull  rich  a^uiz'd, 
Aj  each  one  had  hU  furniture  deviz'd.'— Sncnccr.— vEa.) 


THE    HOLY    WAR 


801 


thou  wilt,  so  thou  kccpest  us  from  sinning,  and 
makest  us  serviceable  to  thy  majesty.'1 

Then  said  the  Prince  to  the  town  of  Maneoul 
again,  'tin,  return  to  your  houses  in 

ITe    ronscntcth       °  T       ...       ....       ,.*.,.  , 

io    dwell    in    peace,  1  will  willingly  m    tins  comply 

JrSti,  "to    ™th  your  deBireB.      I  will  remove  my 

'"    ''"    royal    pavilion,    I    will    draw    up    my 
morrow,  •  ■         '  ' 

forces  before  Eyegate  to-morrow,  and 

so  will  march  forwards  into  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

1  will  possess  myself  of  your  castle  of  Mansoul, 

and  will  set  my  Boldiers  over  you  ;   yea,  1  will  yet 

do  things  in  Mansoul  that  cannot  be  paralleled  in 

any  nation,  country  or  kingdom  under  heaven.' 

Then  did  the  men  of  Mansoul  give  a  shout,  and 
returned  unto  their  houses  in  peace;  they  also  told 
to  their  kindred  and  friends  the  good  that  Em- 
manuel had  promised  to  Mansoul.  And  to-mor- 
row,  said  they,  he  will  march  into  our  town,  and 
take  up  his  dwelling,  he  and  his  men  in  Mansoul. 
Then  went  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
ManamT,  pre-  Mansoul  with  haste  to  the  green  trees, 
•or  and  to  the  meadows,  to  gather  boughs 
Lis  n ception.  .     ,,  .  .  ,  ,, 

and   flowers,   therewith    to  strew    the 

streets  against  their  Frince,  the  Son  of  Shaddai, 
should  come ;  they  also  made  garlands,  and  other 
fine  works,  to  betoken  how  joyful  they  were,  and 
should  be  to  receive  their  Emmanuel  into  Mansoul ; 
yea,  they  strewed  the  street  quite  from  Eyegate 
to  the  Castle-gate,  the  place  where  the  Prince 
should  be.  They  also  prepared  for  his  coming 
what  music  the  town  of  Mansoul  would  afford,  that 
they  might  play  before  him  to  the  palace,  his 
habitation. 

So,  at  the  time  appointed,  he  makes  his  approach 
to  Mansoul,  and  the  gates  were  set  open  for  him, 
there  also  the  ancients  and  elders  of  Mansoul  met 
him,  to  salute  him  with  a  thousand  welcomes. 
Then  he  arose  and  entered  Mansoul,  he  and  all  his 
servants.  The  elders  of  Mansoul  did  also  go 
dancing  before  him  till  he  came  to  the  castle  gates. 
And  this  was  the  manner  of  his  going 
Mmi"    up  thither.     He  was  clad  in  his  golden 

soul,  and  how.    ^^  ^  ^  ^    ^    ^  ^^ 

the  trumpets  sounded  about  him,  the  colours  were 
displayed,  his  ten  thousands  went  up  at  his  feet, 
and  the  elders  of  Mansoul  danced  before  him. 
And  now  were  the  walls  of  the  famous  town  of 
Mansoul  filled  with  the  tramplings  of  the  inhabi- 
tants thereof,  who  went   up  thither  to  view  the 

1  This  i*  the  language  of  first  love  \  bot  let  the  caution  in 
(he  margin  be  noticed,  'Say,  and  hold  to  it,  Mansoul."  Happy, 
indeed,  are  those  who  continue  in  this  good  mind  all  their  days  I 
Alas!  the  sequel  of  the  story  shows  how  changeable  a  (-nature 
is  man.— (Burder.)  Without  Christ  we  can  Jo  nothing.  Jn. 
xv.  5. — (.Mason.) 

*   When  the  glory  of  Christ's  person  and  Work   It 
manifested,  the  renewed  soul,  transported  with  joy  at  the  sight, 
finds  him    to  be    the  fairest    among  tea  thousand  fair,    and 
altogether  lovely.— (M, .son.) 


He  enters  the 
town  oi 


approach  of  the  blessed  Prince, 

Also  the  caBementB,  windows,  baloonie  ,  and 

of  the   houses  were  all    now  filled  with    , 
all  sorts  to  behold  how  their  town  was  to   fo 
with  good.8 

Now  when  be  was  come  so  far  into  the  town  a 
to  the  Recorder's  bouse,  he  commanded  thai 
should  go  i"  Captain  Credence,  to  know  whether 
the  castle  of  Mansoul  was  prepared  I 
his  Royal  Presence,  for  the  preparation  of  that 
fl  to  that  Captain,  and  word  was  brought 
that  it  was  '  tax?.*.     Then  was  Captain  Cn 
commanded  also  to  come  forth  with  his  power  I  i 
meet  the  Prince,  the  which  was,  as  be  bad 
manded,  done,  and  he  conducted  him  inf 
castle.4  Ep.  i.i.  n.     This  done,  the  Prince  that  night 
did  lodge  in  the  castle  with  his  mighty  captaius 

and  men  of  v.ar,  to  the  joy  of  the  tOWO  of  Mai 

Now  the  next  care  of  the  townsfolk  was  how 

ptains    and    soldiers   of   the   Prince's 
should  be  quartered  among  them,  and  the  CSJ 

not  how  they  should  shut  their  hands 

/•    i  ii  i  ill  en     i     •       T||C   '' 

of  them,  hut  how  they  Should  fill  then- 
houses  with  them;   for  every  man   in 
Mansoul  now  had  that  esteem  of  Em-     "•■*  * 
manuel   and   his    men,    that    nothing 
grieved  them  more   than  because  the; 
enlarged  enough,  every  one  of  them  to  receit 
whole  army  of  the  Prince,  yea,  they  counted    it 
their  glory  to  be  waiting  upon  them,  and  would  in 
those  days  run  at  their  bidding  like  lacqueys.     At 
last  they  came  to  this  result:  — 

1.  That  Captain  Iunocency  should  quarter  at 
Mr.  Reason's.      2.    That  Captain  Pa-    How  ■ 
tience  should  quarter  at  Mr.  Mind's.     ^ 
This  Mr.  Mind  was  formerly  the  Loi  1 
Will-he-will's  clerk,  in  time  of  the  late  rebellion. 
3.   It   was   ordered   that   Captain    Charity 
quarter  at  Mr.  Affection's  house.     4.  That  Cap- 
tain Goodhope  should  quarter  at  my  Lord  Mayor  a 
Now  for  the  house   of  the   Recorder,  himself  d  - 
sired,  because   his   house  was   next   to   the 
and  because  from  him  it  was  ordered  by  the  Prince, 
that,    if   need    he,    the   alarm    should    he   given   to 
Mansoul;    it  was,  I  say.  desired  by  him  that  Cap- 
tain   Boanerges   and    Captain   Conviction    should 
take  up  their  quarters  with  him,  even  they  and  all 
their    men.      5.    As   for    Captain    Judgment, 
Captain    Execution,    my    Lord    Will-be-will    took 
them,  and   their  men   to   him,  because  he    ■ 
rule  under  the  Prince  for  the  good  of  the  town  ol 


3  Well  may  the  soul  rejoice  when  .)■  - 
'If  a  man  love  me,  lie  will  keep  mj 
will  love  l.iiu,  auu  we  "ill  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode 
with  him.'  Jn.  mv.  23. — (Border.)  ,  . 

*  Throughout  this  war, 
of.     Here  we  have  exemplified  the  seriptun 
i  brisl  ma]  dwell  in  your  bearti  ■  - 
fving  yonr  hearts  bj  faith.  Ac.  xv.  9.— (En»J 


308 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


Mansoul  now.  as  lie  had  before,  under  the  tyrant 
Diabolua  for  the  hurt  and  damage  thereof,  ito.  vi.  19. 
Ep  iii.  17.  6.  And  throughout  the  rest  of  the  town 
were  quartered  Emmanuel's  forces,  but  Captain 
Credence  with  his  men  abode  still  in  the  castle. 
So  the  Prince,  his  captains,  and  his  soldiers  were 
lodged  in  the  town  of  Mansoul.1 

Now  the  ancients  and  elders  of  the  town  of 
Huwral  in-  Mansoul  thought  that  they  never 
8SSfd  ivinrc  should  have  enough  of  the  Prince 
Emmanuel.  Emmanuel;  his  person,  his  actions, 
Lis  words,  and  behaviour,  were  so  pleasing,  so 
taking,  so  desirable  to  them.  Wherefore,  they 
prayed  him,  that  though  the  castle  of  Mansoul 
was  his  place  of  residence,  and  they  desired  that 
he  might  dwell  there  for  ever,  yet  that  he  would 
often  visit  the  streets,  houses,  and  people  of  Man- 
soul. For,  said  they,  dread  Sovereign,  thy  pre- 
sence, thy  looks,  thy  smiles,  thy  words,  are  the  life, 
and  strength,  and  sinews  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.2 

Besides  this,  they  craved  that  they  might  have, 
They  have  ac-  without  difficulty  or  interruption,  con- 
cess  unto  him.  i\naa\  access  unto  him,  so  for  that 
very  purpose  he  commanded  that  the  gates  should 
stand  open,  that  they  might  there  see  the  manner 
of  his  doings,  the  fortifications  of  the  place,  and 
the  royal  mansion-house  of  the  Prince.  When  he 
Hiey  lcam  of  spake  they  all  stopped  their  mouths, 
him-  and    gave    audience  ;    and    when    he 

walked,  it  was  their  delight  to  imitate  him  in  his 
goings. 

Now  upon  a  time  Emmanuel  made  a  feast  for 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  upon  the  feasting-day 
the  townsfolk  were  come  to  the  castle  to  partake 
of  his  banquet.  And  he  feasted  them  with  all 
manner  of  outlandish  food,  food  that  grew  not  in 
the  fields  of  Mansoul,  nor  in  all  the  whole  kingdom 
of  Universe.  It  was  food  that  came  from  his 
Promise    after   Father's  court,  and  so  there  was  dish 

I  ■",mse-  after  dish  set  before  them,  and  they 
were  commanded  freely  to  eat.  But  still  when  a 
fresh  dish  was  set  before  them,  they  would  whis- 
peringly  say  to  each  other,  What  is  it?3  Ex.  xvi.  15. 
For  they  wist  not  what  to  call  it.  They  drank 
also  of  the  water  that  was  made  wine ;  and  were 
Erave     enter-   very  merry   with    him.      There    was 

Um.nent.  mus;e  ajs()  all    the  whi]e  afc    ^   ^^ 

1  .Much  judgment  is  displayed  in  this  distribution  of  the 
bi  Idiers,  particularly  in  quartering  Boanerges  aod  Conviction  in 

I  te  In. use  of  Conscience. —  (Burder.) 

-  The  convert's  anxious  desire  is,  that  Emmanuel  should  not 
only  reign  in  the  heart  or  castle,  but  also  visit  and  govern  the 
head  or  judgment,  and  all  the  powers  of  the  soul. — (Ed.) 

y  '  What  is  it;'  the  meaning  of  the  word  manna,  put  in  the 
margin  of  the  Bible. — (Ed.) 

4  These  sweet  views  of  Christ,  and  the  comforts  of  his  Spirit, 
are  not  uncommon  at  the  soul's  espousals  to  him  after  conver- 
sion, when  he  brings  her  into  his  banqueting-house ;  and  his 
banner  over  her  is  love.  Ca.  ii.  4. — (Mason.) 

0  This  is  the  gospel  feast— a  feast  of  fat  things,  meat  ind<  ed, 


and  man  did  eat  angels'  food,  and  had  honey  given 
him  out  of  the  rock.  So  Mansoul  did  eat  the  food 
that  was  peculiar  to  the  court,  yea,  they  had  now 
thereof  to  the  full.4  Ps.  lxxviii.  24,  25. 

I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you  that  as  at  this 
table  there  were  musicians,  so  they  were  not  those 
of  the  country,  nor  yet  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  ; 
but  they  were  the  masters  of  the  songs  that  were 
sung  at  the  court  of  Shaddai.5 

Now  after  the  feast  was  over,  Emmanuel  was 
for  entertaining  the  town  of  Mansoul 

.  ,  °.  .,„  »  Kiddles. 

with  some  curious  riddles  01  secrets 
drawn  up  by  his  Father's  secretary,  by  the  skill 
and  wisdom  of  Shaddai ;  the  like  to  these  there  is 
not  in  any  kingdom.  These  riddles  The  Holy  Scrip- 
were  made  upon  the  King  Shaddai  tures- 
himself,  and  upon  Emmanuel  his  Son,  and  upon 
his  wars  and  doings  with  Mansoul. 

Emmanuel  also  expounded  unto  them  some  of 
those  riddles  himself,  but  0  how  they  were  light- 
ened !  They  saw  what  they  never  saw,  they  could 
not  have  thought  that  such  rarities  could  have  been 
couched  in  so  few  and  such  ordinary  words.  I 
told  you  before  whom  these  riddles  did  concern ; 
and  as  they  were  opened,  the  people  did  evidently 
see  it  was  so.  Yea,  they  did  gather  that  the 
things  themselves  were  a  kind  of  portraiture,  and 
that  of  Emmanuel  himself ;  for  when  the}'  read  in 
the  scheme  where  the  riddles  were  writ,  and  looked 
in  the  face  of  the  Prince,  things  looked  so  like  the 
one  to  the  other  that  Mansoul  could  not  forbear 
but  say,  This  is  the  Lamb,  this  is  the  Sacrifice, 
this  is  the  Rock,  this  is  the  Red  Cow,  this  is  the 
Door,  and  this  is  the  way ;  with  a  great  many 
other  things  more.6 

And  thus  he  dismissed  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
But  can  you  imagine  how  the  people  of  the  cor- 
poration were  taken  with  this  entertainment?  0 
they  were  transported  with  joy,  they  The  end  of  that 
were  drowned  with  wonderment,  while  banquet. 
they  saw  and  understood,  and  considered  what 
their  Emmanuel  entertained  them  withal,  and  what 
mysteries  he  opened  to  them  ;  and  when  they  were 
at  home  in  their  houses,  and  in  their  most  retired 
places,  they  could  not  but  sing  of  him,  and  of  his 
actions.  Yea,  so  taken  were  the  townsmen  now 
with  their  Prince,  that  they  would  sing  of  him  in 
their  sleep. 


and  drink  indeed ;  not  of  nature,  but  from  heaven.  The  mnsic 
is  such  as  saints  and  angels  sing  before  the  throne ;  the  word 
of  Christ,  in  psalms,  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs. — (Burder.) 

6  Buuyan  was  fond  of  introducing  spiritual  riddles  in  godly 
company,  and  it  must  have  been  a  very  profitable  pastime.  The 
types  of  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament  are  excellent  riddles. 
So  when  the  Pilgrims  are  entertained  by  Gaius,  nuts  and  riddle* 
are  introduced. 

'  Hard  texts  are  nuts  (I  will  not  call  them  cheater^. 
Whose  shells  do  keep  their  kernels  from  the  eatei-. 
Ope  then  the  shells,  and  you  shall  have,  the  meat, 
They  here  are  brought  for  you  to  crack  and  eat.' 
Care  being  taken  not  to  spoil  tender  teeth  in  cracking  their.. 


THE    HOI.Y    WAR. 


too 


Now  it  was  in  the  heart  of  the  Prince  Emmanuel 
to  new  model  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and 

Mnnsoul    must  .     .  ...  .    , 

be  new  model-    to  put  it  into  such  a  condition  as  might 

be  more  pleasing  to  him,  ami  that 

might  best  stand  with  the  profit  and  security  of 

the  now  flourishing  town  of  Mansoul.     He  provided 

also  against  insurrections  at  home,  and  in. 

from  abroad  ;  Buch  love  had  be  For  the  famous  town 

of  Mansoul.     Wherefore  he  first  of  all  commanded 

TheinstrnmeaU   that  the  great  slings  that  were  brought 

From  hia  Father's  court,  when  became 

to  the  war  of  -Mansoul,  should  be  mounted,  some 

upon  the  battlements  of  the  castle,  some  upon  the 

towers,  fur  there  were  towers  in  the  town  of  Man- 
soul,  towers  new  built  by  Emmanuel  sine,  be  came 
thither.1  There  was  also  an  instrument  invented 
A  nameless  ter-  by  Emmanuel,  that  was  to  throw 
"u-ift  inkLan-  stones  from  the  castle  of  Mansoul,  out 
*°uL  at   Mouthgate;    an   instrument   that 

could  not  be  resisted,  nor  that  would  miss  of  execu- 
tion; wherefore  for  the  wonderful  exploits  that  it 
did  when  used,  it  went  without  a  name,  and  it  was 
committed  to  the  care  of,  and  to  be  managed  by 
the  brave  captain,  the  Captain  Credence,  in  case 
of  war,-' 

This  done,  Emmanuel  called  the  Lord  Will-be- 
J.urd  Will-be-  "iH  to  him,  and  gave  him  in  command- 
will  promoted.  mentl  to  take  care  of  the  gates,  the 
wall,  and  towers  in  Mansoul.  Also  the  Prince 
gave  him  the  militia  into  his  hand  ;  and  a  special 
charge  to  withstand  all  insurrections  and  tumults 
that  might  be  made  in  Mansoul,  against  the  peace 
of  our  Lord  the  King,  and  the  peace  and  tranquillity 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  He  also  gave  him  in 
commission,  that  if  he  found  any  of  the  Diaboloni- 
ans  lurking  in  any  corner  in  the  famous  town  of 
Mansoul,  he  should  forthwith  apprehend  them,  and 
stay  them,  or  commit  them  to  safe  custody,  that 
they  may  be  proceeded  against  according  to  law. 

Then  he  called  unto  him  the  Lord  Understand- 
My  Lord  Mayor  big,  who  was  the  old  Lord-mayor,  he 
put  into  place.  tjjat  was  j,ut  out  0f  p]ace  WDen  Dia- 
bolus  took  the  town,  and  put  him  into  his  former 
office  again,  and  it  became  his  place  for  his  life- 
time, lie  bid  him  also  that  he  should  build  him 
a  palace  near  Eyegatc,  and  that  he  should  build 
it  in  fashion  like  a  tower  for  defence.  He  bid  him 
also  that  he  should  read  in  the  revelation  of  mys- 
teries8 all  the  days  of  his  life,  that  he  might  know 


1  The  slinks  are  books  of  Scripture  ;  see  the  margin 
probably    referring  to    the    epistles    of   the   New   'I  > 

These  arc  powerful  instruments,  both  defensive  and  offensive, 
when  properly  inouuttd  upon  a  renewed  heart  and  mental 
powers. — (Ed  ) 

2  Does  this  nameless  engine  at  Montbgate  mean  prayer? 
The  unseen  prayer  of  faith  has  performed  wonderful  exploits. 
The  siknt  ejaculations  ot'  the  heart,  the  '  groaning*  which  can- 
not be  uttered.' — (En.) 

5  The  Bible,  the  only  guide  to  all,  but  especially  to  my  Lord 
Mayor,  'the  understanding.' — (En.j 


how  to  perform  his  office  aright,     lie  also 
Mr.  Knowledge  the  Recorder;  not  of  Mr.  k 

apt  to  old  Mr.  Conscience)  who 
had  been  Recorder  before;  but  for  that  it  n 
his  princely  mind  to  confer  upon  Mr.  ' 
another  employ  ;  of  which  he  told  the  old  gentle- 
man be  should  know  more  hereafter. 

Then  he  commanded  that  the  image  of  Di 
should  be  taken  down  from  the  place  where  it  wa 

set  up,  and    that   they  should  destroy    tbelmag 
it  utterly,  beating  of  it  into  powder, 

•  I  •      i  •   i  -   sel  up 

and  easting  it  unto  the  Wind,  without      again  in  M.m- 
the  town-wall ;    and  that  the   b 
of  Shaddai  hie  Father  should  b<  q,  with 

his  own,  upon  the  castle  gates,  and  that  it  should 
be  more  fairly  drawn  than  ever ;  forasmuch  a 

bis   Father  and    himself    were  come  to  Mao 
more   grace  and   mercy  than   heretofore,    i  ■ 

iid  also  that  his  name  should  be  fairly  en- 
graven upon  the  front  of  the  town,  and  that  it 
should  be  done  in  the  best  of  gold,  for  the  honour 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul.4 

[Chapter  X.] 

[Contents  : — The  strongholds  of  Diabolus  d< 

dulity,  Forget-good,  Lustings,  and  other  Diaboloni 
prehended,  tried,  and  executed,  to  the  great  joy  of  Man- 
soul.] 

After  this  was  done,   Emmanuel   gave  out  a 

commandment  that  those  three  great  Diaboloniane 
should  be  apprehended  ;  namely,  the  two  late  Lord 
Mayors  ;  to  wit,  Mr.  Incredulity.  Mr.  Lustings,  and 
Mr.    Forget-good   the   Recorder.      Besides   I 
there   were    some   of   them   that   Diaholus    made 
burgesses    and    aldermen  in   Mansoul,   thai 
committed  to  ward  by  the  hand  of  the  now  valiant, 
and  now  right  noble,  the  brave  Lord  Will-1 
And  these  were  their  names,  Alder- 
man   Atheism,    Alderman   HardL  ommitted 
and  Alderman  Falsepeace.    The  bur- 
were  Mr.  Notruth,  Mr.  Pitili  as,     _';;";, 'r"an  ,l,r 
Mr.   Haughty,  with   the  lil 
were  committed  to  close  custody;  and  the  j 
name   was   Mr.  Trueman  ;   this   Trueman  was  one 
of  those  that  Emmanuel   brought  with  him  from 
his  Father's  court,  when   at   the   first  he  t., 
war  upon  Diabolus  in  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

After  this,  the  Prince  gave  a  charge  tb  I  I 
three  strong  holds,  that  at  the  •      -  ..,,„.-. 

mand    of  Diabolus    the    Dkbolonians 

j  U:  'i  U  UuWII. 

built  in  Mansoul,  should  be  demolish  d, 

and  utterly  pulled  down  ;    of  which  holds  and  the  r 
names,  with  their  captains  and  g  '  reed 


*  Theund.rMandin-'i-.hirl'.ha.i-trated.nvle.lbyf 

of  the  Scripture*,   knowledge  ot  God  in  Chi 
sway,  another  othoe  being  appointed  I  r< 

is  to  be  utterly  destroyed,  am 
in  the  bouL— (Bn 


310 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


The     prisoners 
brought  to  tin 


a  little  before.  But  this  was  long  in  doing,  because 
df  the  largeness  of  the  places,  and  because  the 
stones,  the  timber,  the  iron,  and  all  rubbish,  was 
to  be  carried  without  the  town.1 

When  this  was  done,  the  Prince  gave  order  that 
,    ,     the    Lord    Mayor  and    Aldermen    of 

A    court   to  be  •>  m 

calledtotrythe    Mansoul   should  call   a  court  of  judi- 
cature for  the  trial   and  execution  of 
\]\e  Diabolonians  in  the  corporation,  now  under  the 
charge  of  Mr.  True  man  the  jailer. 

Now  when  the  time  was  come,  and  the  court 
set,  commandment  was  sent  to  Mr. 
e  Trneman  the  jailer,  to  bring  the 
prisoners  down  to  the  bar.  Then  were 
the  prisoners  brought  down,  pinioned,  and  chained 
together,  as  the  custom  of  the  town  of  Mansoul 
was.  So  when  they  were  presented  before  the 
Lord  Mayor,  the  Recorder,  and  the  rest  of  the 
honourable  bench,  first,  the  jury  was  impanelled, 
The  jury  im-   and  then  the  witnesses  sworn.     The 

!£?&££  names  of  t1ie  JU17  were  these?  Mr- 
s«oni.  Belief,  Mr.  Trueheart,  Mr.  Upright, 

Mr.  Hatebad,  Mr.  Lovegod,  Mr.  Seetruth,  Mr. 
Heavenly-mind,  Mr.  Moderate,  Mr.  Thankful,  Mr. 
Woodwork,  Mr.  Zeal-for-God,  and  Mr.  Humble.2 
The  names  of  the  witnesses  were  Mr.  Knowall, 
Mr.  Tclltrue,  Mr.  Hatelies,  with  my  Lord  Will- 
be-will  and  his  man,  if  need  were. 

So  the  prisoners  were  set  to  the  bar ;  then  said 
Dori"ht  the    Mr.    Doright,  for  he  was    the  town- 
Clerk.       c]erk,  Set  Atheism  to  the  bar,  jailer. 
So  he  was  set  to  the  bar.      Then  said  the  clerk, 
Atheism  set  to   Atheism,  h°ld  up  thy  hand.     Thou  art 
the  bar;  hi-  in-    here  indicted  by  the  name  of  Atheism, 
an  intruder  upon  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
for  that  thou  hast  perniciously  and  doultishly  taught 
and  maintained  that  there  is  no  God ;  and  so  no 
heed  to  be  taken  to  religion.      This  thou  hast  done 
against  the  being,  honour,  and  glory  of  the  King, 
nnd  against  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul.     What  sayest  thou,  art  thou  guilty  of 
this  indictment,  or  not? 
ins  plea.     Atheism.  Not  guilty. 

Crier.  Call  Mr.  Knowall,  Mr.  Telltrue,  and  Mr. 
Hatelies,  into  the  court.  So  they  were  called,  and 
they  appeared. 

Clerk.  Then  said  the  Clerk,  You,  the  witnesses 
fir  the  King,  look  upon  the  prisoner  at  the  bar ;  do 
you  know  him? 

Know.  Then  said  Mr.  Knowall,  Yes,  my  Lord, 
we  know  him,  his  name  is  Atheism ;  he  has  been 


1  What  a  work  of  labour  and  time  is  here  set  to  Mansoul. 
The  strongholds  of  Satan  are  to  be  pulled  down,  and  all  the 
materials  of  which  they  were  constructed  arc  to  be  clean  rc- 
moved  out  of  the  town.  This  can  only  be  effeeted  by  the  in- 
d.welling  of  Christ  in  the  soul,  lie  conies  to  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil  to  pull  down  his  strong-holds,  and  to  purify  the 
soul  —  (Kd.) 


a  very   pestilent  fellow  for  many  years    in   the 
miserable  town  of  Mansoul. 

Clerk.  You  are  sure  you  know  him. 
Know.  Know  him !  Yes,  my  Lord  ;  I  have  here- 
tofore too  often  been  in  his  company,  to  be  at  this 
time  ignorant  of  him.  He  is  a  Diabolonian,  the 
son  of  a  Diabolonian,  I  knew  his  grandfather,  and 
his  father. 

Clerk.  Well  said.  He  standeth  here  indicted 
by  the  name  of  Atheism,  &c,  and  is  charged  that 
he  hath  maintained  and  taught  that  there  is  no 
God,  and  so  no  heed  need  be  taken  to  any  religion. 
What  say  you,  the  King's  witnesses,  to  this?  Is 
he  guilty,  or  not? 

Know.  My  Lord,  I  and  he  were  once  in  Villains' 
Lane  together,  and  he  at  that  time  did  briskly  talk 
of  diverse  opinions,  and  then  and  there  I  heard  him 
say  that  for  his  part  he  did  believe  that  there 
was  no  God.  But,  said  he,  I  can  profess  one,  and 
be  as  religious  too,  if  the  company  I  am  in,  and 
the  circumstances  of  other  things,  said  he,  shall 
put  me  upon  it. 

Clerk.  You  are  sure  you  heard  him  say  thus. 
Know.   Upon  mine  oath  I  heard  him  say  thus. 
Then  said  the  Clerk,  Mr.   Telltrue,  What  say 
you  to  the  King's  judges,  touching  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar  ? 

Tell.  My  Lord,  I  formerly  was  a  great  com< 
panion  of  his,  for  the  which  I  now  repent  me,  and 
I  have  often  heard  him  say,  and  that  with  very 
great  stomachfulness,  that  he  believed  there  was 
neither  God,  angel,  nor  spirit. 

Clerk.   Where  did  you  hear  him  say  so  ? 
Tell.  In  Blackmouth  Lane,  and  in  Blasphemers' 
Row,  and  in  many  other  places  besides. 

Clerk.  Have  you  much  knowledge  of  him? 
Tell.  I  know  him  to  be  a  Diabolonian,  the  son 
of  a  Diabolonian,  and  a  horrible  man  to  deny  a 
Deity ;  his  Father's  name  was  Never-be-good,  and 
he  had  more  children  than  this  Atheism.  I  have 
no  more  to  say. 

Clerk.  Mr.  Hatelies,  look  upon  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar;  do  you  know  him? 

Hate.  My  Lord,  this  Atheism  is  one  of  the 
vilest  wretches  that  ever  I  came  near,  or  had  to 
do  with  in  my  life.  I  have  heard  him  say  that 
there  is  no  God ;  I  have  heard  him  say  that  there 
is  no  world  to  come,  no  sin,  nor  punishment  here- 
after ;  and  moreover,  I  have  heard  him  say  that  it 
was  as  good  to  go  to  a  whore-house  as  to  go  to 
hear  a  sermon. 

Clerk.  Where  did  you  hear  him  say  theso 
things  ? 


2  A  jury  of  good  men  and  true.  What  a  contrast  between 
them  and  Judge  Lord  Hategood,  with  the  jury  who  tried 
Faithful—  Blindman,  Nogood,  Malice,  Lovclust,  Liveloose, 
Heady  llighmiud,  Enmity,  Liar,  Cruelty,  liatelight,  and 
Implacable.-— (Ed.) 


TITE    HOLY    WK\l 


3I1 


liU  pie 


Hate.  In  Drunkards'  Row,  just  at  Rascal  Lano'a 
end,  at  a  house  in  which  Mr.  Impiety  lived.1 
Lnstings  set  to         CLERK.    Sot  him  hv,  jailer,  and  set 

lh"''M-       Mr.  Lustinga  to  the 'bar. 
Mr.   Lustings,   Thou   art   here   indicted  by  the 
„.  .  ,.  oame  of  Lustiness,  an  intruder  upon 

His  indictment.      ,  .   ,,  .     e         ,  ' 

the  town  <it  Qlansoul,  For  that  thou 
hast  devilishly  ami  traitorously  taught,  by  practice 
and  filthy  words,  that  it  is  lawful  and  profitable  to 

man  tO  give  way  to  his  carnal  dc-ares  •  and  that 
thou,  for  thy  part,  hast  not,  nor  never  wilt  deny 
thyself  of  any  sinful  delight,  as  long  as  thy  name 
is  Lustings.     How  Bayest  thou,  art  thou  guilty  of 

this  indictment  or  not  \ 

LUST.  Then  said  Mr.  Lusting-,  My  Lord,  I  am 
a  man  of  high  birth,  and  have  been 
used  to  pleasures  and  pastimes  of 
greatness.  1  have  not  been  wont  to  be  snubbed 
for  my  doings,  hut  have  been  left  to  follow  my 
will  as  if  it  were  law.  And  it  seems  strange  to 
me  that  I  should  this  day  be  called  into  question 
for  that,  that  not  only  I,  but  also  all  men  do  either 
secretly  or  openly  countenance,  love,  and  ap- 
prove of. 

Clerk.  Sir,  we  concern  not  ourselves  with  your 
greatness,  though  the  higher  the  better  you  should 
have  been,  but  we  are  concerned,  and  so  are  you 
now,  about  an  indictment  preferred  against  you. 
How  say  you,  are  you  guilty  of  it,  or  not  ? 

Lust.   Not  guilty. 

CLERK.  Crier,  Call  upon  the  witnesses  to  stand 
forth,  and  give  their  evidence. 

CRIER.  Gentlemen,  you  the  witnesses  for  the 
King,  come  in,  and  give  in  your  evidence  for  our 
Lord  the  King,  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar. 

Clerk.  Come,  Mr.  Knowall,  look  upon  the  pri- 
soner at  the  bar;  do  you  know  him? 

Know.  Yes,  my  Lord,  I  know  him. 

Clerk.   What  is  his  name  ? 

Know.  His  name  is  Lustings;  he  was  the  son 
of  one  Beastly,  and  his  mother  bare  him  in  Flesh 
Street ;  she  was  one  Evil-concupiscence's  daughter. 
I  knew  all  the  generation  of  them. 

Clekk.  Well  said.  You  have  here  heard  his  in- 
dictment, what  say  you  to  it,  is  he  guilty  of  the 
things  charged  against  him  or  not  '. 

KNOW.  My  Lord,  he  has,  as  he  saith,  been  a 
great  man  indeed  ;  and  greater  in  wickedness  than 
by  pedigree,  more  than  a  thousand  fold. 

Cleuk.  But  what  do  you  know  of  his  particular 
actions,  and  especially  with  reference  to  his  indict- 
ment ? 

Know.  I  know  him  to  be  a  swearer,  a  liar,  a 
sabbath-breaker;    I  know  him  to  be  a  fornicator, 

1  Christian,  is  it  possible  that  thoughts  so  desperately 
ricked  were  ever  injected  by  Satan  into  yew  heart P     How 

:h;iiikiiil  will  jou  be  to  have  them  tried  and  destroyed;  see 
Urate  Abounding,  No.  101. — (En.) 


and  an  unclean   person;    I  know  him  to  be  guilty 
of  abundant f  evils.     He  has  been  to  my  know. 

ledge  a  very  filthy  man. 

Clerk.  But   where  di  1  he  use  to  oommit  l   i 
wickednesses,  in  some  private  comers,  or 
opt  n  and  shamelessly  \ 

Know.  All  the  town  over,  my  Lord. 

Clerk.  Come,  Mr.  Telltrue,  whit 
say  for  our  Loid  the  Rang  against  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar  \ 

Tell.  My  Lord,  all  that  the  first  tritne 

said    1    know    to   be   true,   and   a  great   deal 
he-ides. 

CleuK.    Mr.  Lustings,  do   you    hear  what 

.'•  • 

Lust.   I  was  ever  of  opinion  that  the  happiest 
life  thai  a  man  could  live  on  earth, 
was  to  keep  himself  back  from  nothing     """* 
that  he  desired  in  the  world  ;  nor  have  1  !>■ ,  n  Pali 
at  any  time  to  this  opinion  of  mine,  hut  have  li\.  ■! 
in  the  love  of  my  notions  all    my  days,      X 
1  ever  so  churlish,  having  found  tness  in 

them   myself,    as    to   keep   the    commendations   of 
them  from  others.' 

Court.  Then  said  the  court,  There  hath  pro- 
ceeded enough  from  his  own  mouth  to  lay  him  open 
to  condemnation,  wherefore  set  him  by,  jailer,  and 
set  Mr.  Incredulity  to  the  bar. 

Incredulity  set  to  the  bar. 

Clerk.  Mr.  Incredulity,  Thou  art  here  indictc  I 
by  the  name  of  Incredulity,  an  in-  i,ir:, 
truder  upon  the  town  of  Mansoul,  for  to  the  bar. 
that  thou  hast  feloniously  and  wickedly,  and  that 
when  thou  wert  an  officer  in  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
made  head  against  the  captains  of  the  great  King 
Shaddai,  when  they  came  and  demanded  possession 
of  Mansoul  ;    yea,  thou   didst   bid  de- 

„  .,      '  •  ,  II n  mditlnwnv 

fiance  to  the  name,  forces,  and  c 
of  the  King,  and   did.-t   also,  ftS   did   ;' 
captain,  stir  up  and  encourage  the  town  of  Man- 
soul   to    make   head    against,   and   resist   the  said 
force  of  the  King.      What  Bayest  thou  to  this  in- 
dictment?    Art  thou  guilty  of  it,  or  not? 

Then    said    Incredulity,  I    know    not   Shaddai,  I 
love  my  old  prince,  I  thought  it  my 
duty  tO  be  true  to  my  trust,  and  to  d  > 
what  I  could  to  possess  the  minds  of  the  men  "r 
Mansoul,  to  do  their  utmost  to  resist  Strang'  I 
foreigners,  and  with  might  to  fight  against  them. 
Nor   have    I,    nor   shall    I    change  my   opin 
fear  of  trouble,  though  you  at  pi 
of  place  and  power. 

Court.  Then  said  the  court,  the  man,  ■ 
see,  is  incorrigible,  he  is  for  maintaining  his  vil- 


*  The  sit.ner  is  not  satisfied  with  ! 
is  ever  leading  •  I 
ing  plague,  the  unconverted  hi 


31 J 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


lainics  by  stoutness   of  words,   and  his  rebellion 
with  impudent  confidence  ;  and,  therefore,  set  him 
by,  jailer,  and  set  Mr.  Forget-good  to  the  bar. 
Forget-good  set  to  the  bar. 
Clerk.  Mr.  Forget-good,  thou  art  here  indicted 
5 i  set   by  the  name  of  Forget-good,  an  in- 
to the  bur.       tl.lKier  Up0n  the  town  of  Mansoul,  for 
His  indictment.    t)iat  thou,  when  the  whole  affairs  of 
tlie  town  of  Mansoul  were  in  thy  hand,  didst  ut- 
terly forget  to  serve  them  in  what  was  good,  and 
didst  fall    in   with    the    tyrant   Diabolus   against 
Shaddai  the  King,  against  his  captains,  and  all 
his  host,  to  the  dishonour  of  Shaddai,  the  breach 
of  his  law,  and  the  endangering  of  the  destruction 
of  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.    What  sayest  thou 
to  tli is  indictment  ?    Art  thou  guilty,  or  not  guilty  ? 
Then  said  Forget-good,  Gentlemen,  and  at  this 
time  my  judges,  as  to  the  indictment 
by  which  I  stand  of  several  crimes 
accused  before  you,  pray  attribute  my  forgetful- 
ness  to  mine  age,  and  not  to  my  wilfulness  ;  to  the 
craziness  of  my  brain,  and  not  to  the  carelessness 
of  my  mind,  and  then  I  hope  I  may  by  your  charity 
be  excused  from  great  punishment,  though  I  be 
guilty. 

Then  said  the  court,  Forget-good,  Forget-good, 
thy  forgetfulness  of  good  was  not  simply  of  frailty, 
but  of  purpose,  and  for  that  thou  didst  loathe  to 
keep  virtuous  things  in  thy  mind.  What  was  bad 
thou  couldest  retain,  but  what  was  good  thou 
couldest  not  abide  to  think  of;  thy  age,  therefore, 
and  thy  pretended  craziness,  thou  makest  use  of 
to  blind  the  court  withal,  and  as  a  cloak  to  cover 
thy  knavery.  But  let  us  hear  what  the  witnesses 
have  to  say  for  the  King  against  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar — is  he  guilty  of  this  indictment,  or  not? 

Hate.  My  Lord,  I  have  heard  this  Forget-good 
say  that  he  could  never  abide  to  think  of  good- 
ness, no,  not  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 
Clerk.  Where  did  you  hear  him  say  so? 
Hate.   In  Allbase  Lane,  at  a  house  next  door  to 
the  Sign  of  the  Conscience-seared-with-an-hot-iron. 
Clerk.  Mr.  Kuowall,  what  can  you  say  for  our 
Lord  the  King  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar? 

Know.  My  Lord,  I  know  this  man  well,  he  is  a 
Diabolonian,  the  son  of  a  Diabolonian,  his  Father's 
name  was  Lovenaught,  and  for  him,  I  have  often 
heard  him  say  that  he  counted  the  very  thoughts 
of  goodness  the  most  burthensomc  thing  in  the 
world. 

Clerk.  Where  have  you  heard  him  say  these 
words? 

Know.  In  Flesh  Lane,  right  opposite  to  the 
church. 

Then  said  the  clerk,  Come,  Mr.  Tolltrue,  give 
in  your  evidence  concerning  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar  about  that  for  which  he  stands  here,  as  you 
see,  indicted  before  this  honourable  court. 


Tell.  My  Lord,  I  have  heard  him  often  3ay  he 
had  rather  think  of  the  vilest  thing  than  of  what 
is  contained  in  the  holy  Scriptures. 

Clerk.  Where  did  you  hear  him  say  such  griev- 
ous words? 

Tell.  Where?  in  a  great  many  places;  par- 
ticularly in  Nauseous  Street,  in  the  house  of  one 
Shameless,  and  in  Filth  Lane,  at  the  sign  of  the 
Reprobate,  next  door  to  the  Descent-into-the-pit. 

Court.   Gentlemen,  you  have  heard  the  indict- 
ment, his  plea,  and  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses. 
Jailer,  set  Mr.  Hardheart  to  the  bar. 
He  is  set  to  the  bar. 

Clerk.  Mr.  Hardheart,  thou  art  here  indicted 
by  the  name  of  Hardheart,  an  in-  Hardheart  set 
truder  upon  the  town  of  Mansoul,  for  t0  the  bar- 
that  thou  didst  most  desperately  and  wickedly 
possess  the  town  of  Mansoul  with  impenitency  and 
obdurateness,  and  didst  keep  them  from  remorse 
and  sorrow  for  their  evils,  all  the  time  of  their 
apostasy  from,  and  rebellion  against,  the  blessed 
King  Shaddai.  What  sayest  thou  to  this  indict- 
ment?    Art  thou  guilty,  or  not  guilty? 

Hard.  My  Lord,  I  never  knew  what  remorse  or 
sorrow  meant  in  all  my  life  ;  I  am  impenetrable,  I 
care  for  no  man ;  nor  cau  I  be  pierced  with  men's 
griefs,  their  groans  will  not  enter  into  my  heart ; 
whomever  I  mischief,  whomever  I  wrong,  to  me  it 
is  music,  when  to  others  mourning. 

Court.  You  see  the  man  is  a  right  Diabolonian, 
and  has  convicted  himself.      Set   him  by,  jailer, 
and  set  Mr.  Falsepeace  to  the  bar. 
Falsepeace  set  to  the  bar. 

Mr.  Falsepeace,  Thou  art  here  indicted  by  the 
name  of  Falsepeace,  an  intruder  upon  Falsepeace  set 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  for  that  thou  to  the  bar. 
didst  most  wickedly  and  satanically  bring,  hold, 
and  keep  the  town  of  Mansoul,  both  in  her  apos- 
tasy, and  in  her  hellish  rebellion,  in  a  false,  ground- 
less, and  dangerous  peace,  and  damnable  security,1 
to  the  dishonour  of  the  King,  the  transgression  of 
his  law,  and  the  great  damage  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul.  What  sayest  thou?  Art  thou  guilty 
of  this  indictment,  or  not? 

Then  said  Mr.  Falsepeace,  Gentlemen,  and  you, 
now  appointed  to  be  my  judges,  I  ac- 
knowledge that  my  name  is  Mr.  Peace, 
but  that  my  name  is  Falsepeace  I  utterly  deny. 
If  your  honours  will  please  to  send  for  any  that  do 
intimately  know  me,  or  for  the  midwife  that  laid 
my  mother  of  me,  or  for  the  gossips  that  were  at 
my  christening,-  they  will  any,  or  all  of  them  prove 

1  See  the  woeful  end  of  such,  in  Ko.  ii.  5 ;  Je.  vi.  11. — 
(Mason.) 

"  The  gossips  at  a  christening  reminds  me  of  a  singular  cir- 
cumstance that  took  place  at  the  christening  of  a  friend's  child 
about  forty  years  ago.  Our  host  rapped  hard  on  the  table,  and 
said,  '  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  hear  some  talking  politics,  and 
some  religion ;  I  beg  you  to  recollect  that  we  have  nothing  uo»v 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


818 


that  my  name  is  not  Falsepeace,  bat  Peace. 
lie  denies  bis   Wherefore,  1  cannot  plead  to  tbia  in- 

came.  dictment,  forasmuch  as  my  name  is  not 
inserted  therein.  And  as  is  raj  trne  name,  bo  also 
are  my  conditions.  1  was  always  a  man  that  loved 
;  >  live  at  quiet,  and  what  I  loved  myself,  that  I 
thought  others  might  love  also.  Wherefore,  when 
1  saw  any  of  my  neighbours  to  labour  under  a  dis- 
quieted :nind,  I  endeavoured  to  help  them  what  I 
could,  and  instances  of  this  good  temper  of  mine 
many  ]  could  give;   as, 

I.  When  at  the  beginning  our  town  of  Man- 

rieada his  good-   s"l'l  '''''  decline  the  w.ivs  of  Shaddai ; 

ness.         they,  some  of  thrm  afterwards  began 

to  have  disquieting  reflections  npon  themselves  for 
what  they  had  done;  hut  I,  as  one  tri 
them  disquieted,  presently  sought  out  means  to  gel 
them  quiet  again.  2.  When  the  ways  of  the  old 
world  and  of  Sodom  were  in  fashion,  if  anything 
happened  to  molest  those  that  were  for  the  customs 
of  the  present  times,  1  laboured  to  make  them 
quiet  again,  and  to  cause  them  to  act  without 
molestation,  o.  To  come  nearer  home,  when  the 
wars  fell  out  between  Shaddai  and  Piabolus,  if  at 
any  time  1  saw  any  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  afraid 
of  destruction,  I  often  used  by  some  way,  device, 
invention,  or  other,  to  labour  to  bring  them  to  peace 
again,1  Wherefore,  since  I  have  always  been  a 
man  of  so  virtuous  a  temper,  as  some  say  a  peace- 
maker is,  and  if  a  peace-maker  be  so  deserving  a 
man  as  some  have  been  bold  to  attest  be  is,  then 
let  me,  gentlemen,  be  accounted  by  you,  who  have 
a  great  name  for  justice  and  equity  in  Mansoul, 
for  a  man  that  deserveth  not  this  inhuman  way  of 
treatment,  but  liberty,  and  also  a  license  to  seek 
damage  of  those  that  have  been  my  accusers, 
Then  said  the  clerk,  Crier,  make  a  proclamation. 
Ckiicr.  *  0  yes,  forasmuch  as  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar  hath  denied  his  name  to  be  that  which  is 
mentioned  in  the  indictment,  the  court  reqoiretb, 
that  if  there  be  any  in  this  place  that  can  give 
information  to  the  court  of  the  original  and  right 
name  of  the  prisoner,  they  would  come  forth  and 
give  in  their  evidence,  for  the  prisoner  stands  upon 
his  own  innocency.' 

Then  came  two  into  the  court  and  desired  that 
Km  vitneues  tlu-y  might  have  leave  to  speak  what 
comemagaiiwt    tluv  knew  concerning  the  prisoner  at 

the   bar;  the  name   of  the   o 
Searchtruth,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Vouch- 
truth.     So  the  court  demanded  of  these  men  if 
they  knew  the  prisoner,  and  what  they  could  Bay 


th  politics  or  n  I  al  a  christening 

your  glasses.' — (Ed.) 

1  'There  is  do  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  nicked.'  Is.  lvii.  31. 
Till  convinced  oi  1st  becomes  the  sinnei 

there  is  no  peace,  no  mercy,  no  hope,  no  heaven. —  (Mason.) 
Alas!  how  many  slumber  into  hell,  under  the  misguiding  in- 
fluence of  false  peace. —  (El).) 
VOL.   III. 


concerning  him,  for  he  stands,  said  thev,  upon  his 

own  vindication. 

Then  said  Mr.  Searchtruth,  My  Lord,  1 

Court.  Hold,  give  him  his  oath;  then  t1..  j 

him.     So  he  proceeded.9 

Search".  My  Lord,  I   know,  and  have  known 
in  from  a  child,  and  can  attest  thai  his  name 

is    Palsepeace.       I   knew  his   father,  his  name  wns 

Mr.  Flatter, and  his  mother, before  Bhewai  married, 

Mas  called  by  the  name  of  Mrs.  Soothup;  and 

I  \o.  when  they  came  together,  lived  not  long 
without  this  son,  and  when  he  was  ho  in  they  e  llled 
his  name  PalsepOOCe.  I  was  his  playfellow,  only 
1  was  somewhat  older  than  he;  and  when  bis 
mother  did  use  to  call  him  home  from  his  pi  ■ 
used  to  Bay,  Palsepeace,  Palsepeace,  come  home 
quick,  or  I'll  fetch  you.  Yea,  1  knew  him  when 
be  sucked;  and  though  1  was  then  but  littl 
I  can  remember  that  when  bis  mother  did  use  to 
sit  at  the  door  with  him,  or  did  play  with  him  in 
her  arms,  she  would  call  him  twenty  times  together, 
My  little  Palsepeace,  my  pretty  Palsepeace,  and 
0  my  sweet  rogue,  Palsepeace;  and  again,  Omy 
little  bird,  Falsepeace ;  and  how  do  I  love  my 
child!  The  gossips  also  know  it  is  thus,  though 
lie  has  bad  the  face  to  deny  it  in  open  court. 

Then  Mr,  Vouchtruth  was  called  upon  to  speak 
what  he  knew  of  him.  So  they  Bware  him.  Then 
said  Mr.  Vouchtruth,  My  Lord,  all  that  the  former 
witness  hath  said  is  true;  bis  name  is  Falsepeace, 
the  son  of  Mr.  Flatter  and  of  Mrs.  Soothup  hia 
mother.  And  I  have  in  former  time9  seen  hi  a 
angry  with  those  who  have  called  him  anything 
else  but  Falsepeace,  for  he  would  say  that  all 
such  did  mock  and  nickname  him,  but  this  was  in 
the  time  when  Mr.  Palsepeace  was  a  great  man, 
and  when  the  Diabolonians  were  the  brave  men  in 
Mansoul. 

Court.  Gentlemen,  you  have  heard  what  these 
two  men  have  sworn  against  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar.  And  now,  Mr.  Falsepeace,  to  you.  you  have 
denied  your  name  to  be  Palsepeace,  yet    . 

that  these  honest  men  have  sworn  that  this  i- 
name.      As    tO   your   plea,   in    that   you    are    quite 

the  matter  of  your  indictment,  yo  i  b 
by  it  charged  for  evil  doing,  bee  rase  you 
man    of  peace,   or  a   peace-maker  among 
neighbours  ;  but  for  that  you  di  1  wi  -kodly,  and  sa- 
tanically, bring, keep,  and  hold  the  town  of  .Mansoul 
both  under  its  apoatacy  from,  and  in  its  rebellion 
against  its  King,  in  a  raise,  lying,  and  damnable 
peace,  contrary  to  the  law  of  Shad  lai,  and  to  the 
ha/.ird  of  the  destruction  of  the  then  mis 
F  Mansoul.     All  that  you  liav< 


■  \  inuTar  circumstanre,  in  I 
iu  the  examination  of  the  wit., 
testimony  without  heiug 

Bun  van  had  seen  at  the 


314 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


yourself  is.  that  you  have  denied  your  name,  <fcc, 
but  here  you  see  we  have  witnesses  to  prove  that 
you  are  the  man. 

For  the  peace  that  you  so  much  boast  of  making 
among  your  neighbours,  know  that  peace  that  is 
not  a  companion  of  truth  and  holiness,  but  that 
which  is  without  this  foundation,  is  grounded  upon 
n  lie,  and  is  both  deceitful  and  damnable;  as  also 
the  great  Shaddai  hath  said;  thy  plea  therefore 
has  not  delivered  thee  from  what  by  the  indictment 
thou  art  charged  with,  but  rather  it  doth  fasten  all 
upon  thee. 

13ut  thou  shalt  have  very  fair  play,  let  us  call 
the  witnesses  that  are  to  testify  as  to  matter  of 
fact,  and  see  what  they  have  to  say  for  our  Lord 
the  King  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar. 

Clerk.  Mr.  Knowall,  what  say  you  for  our  Lord 
the  King  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar? 

Know.  My  Lord,  this  man  hath  of  a  long  time 
made  it,  to  my  knowledge,  his  business  to  keep  the 
town  of  Mansoul  iu  a  sinful  quietness  in  the  midst 
of  all  her  lewdness,  filthiness  and  turmoils,  and 
hath  said,  and  that  in  my  hearing,  Come,  come, 
let  us  fly  from  all  trouble,  on  what  ground  soever 
it  comes,  and  let  us  be  for  a  quiet  and  peaceable 
life,  though  it  wanteth  a  good  foundation. 

Clerk.  Come,  Mr.  Hate-lies,  what  have  you  to 
say  ? 

Hate.  My  Lord,  I  have  heard  him  say  that 
peace,  though  in  a  way  of  unrighteousness,  is  better 
than  trouble  with  truth. 

CLERK.   Where  did  you  hear  him  say  this  ? 
Hate.   I  heard  him  say  it  in  Folly-yard,  at  the 
house  of  one  Mr.  Simple,  next  door  to  the  sign  of 
the  Self-deceiver.     Yea,  he  hath  said  this  to  my 
knowledge  twenty  times  in  that  place. 

Clekk.  We  may  spare  further  witness,  this  evi- 
Notruth  set  to   dence  is  plain  and  full.      Set  him  by, 
the  bin:.        jailer,  anj  set  Mr>  Notruth  to  the  bar. 
Mr.  Notruth,  thou  art  here  indicted  by  the  name 
...  .  ,.  of  Notruth,  an  intruder  upon  the  town 

ot  Mansoul,  tor  that  thou  hast  always, 
to  the  dishonour  of  Shaddai,  and  the  endangering 
of  the  utter  ruin  of  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul, 
bet  thyself  to  deface  and  utterly  to  spoil  all  the 
remainders  of  the  law  and  image  of  Shaddai  that 
have  been  found  in  Mansoul,  after  her  deep  apostasy 
from  her  King  to  Diabolus,  the  envious  tyrant. 
What  asyest  thou  ?  Art  thou  guilty  of  this  indict- 
ment, or  not? 

lib  ,le*        NOTBOTH.   Not  guilty,  my  Lord. 

Then  the  witnesses  were  called,  and 
Mr.  Knowall  did  first  give  in  his  evidence  against 
him. 

Know.    .My  Lord,  this  man  was  at  the  pulling 
_  down  of  the  image  of  Shaddai ;   yea, 

Witnesses.  ....  ,  ,.  .    .  .  ,     ,  .     " 

this  is  he  that  did  it  with  his  own 
hands.      1  myself  stood  by  and  saw  him  do  it,  and 


he  did  it  at  the  commandment  of  Diabolus.  Yea, 
this  Mr.  Notruth  did  more  than  this,  he  did  also 
set  up  the  horned  image  of  the  beast  Diabolus  in 
the  same  place.  This  also  is  he  that,  at  the  bidding 
of  Diabolus,  did  rend  and  tear  and  cause  to  be  con- 
sumed all  that  he  could  of  the  remainders  of  the 
law  of  the  King,  even  whatever  he  could  lay  his 
hands  on,  in  Mansoul. 

Clerk.   Who  saw  him  do  this  besides  yourself? 

Hate.  I  did,  my  Lord,  and  so  did  many  more 
besides ;  for  this  was  not  done  by  stealth,  or  in  a 
corner,  but  in  the  open  view  of  all,  yea,  he  chose 
himself  to  do  it  publicly,  for  he  delighted  in  the 
doing  of  it. 

Clerk.  Mr.  Notruth,  how  could  you  have  the 
face  to  plead  not  guilty,  when  you  were  so  mani- 
festly the  doer  of  all  this  wickedness  ? 

Notruth.  Sir,  I  thought  I  must  say  something, 
and  as  my  name  is,  so  1  speak.      I  have      r^r 
been  advantaged  thereby  before  now,  and 
did  not  know  but  by  speaking  no  truth  I   might 
have  reaped  the  same  benefit  now. 

Clerk.  Set  him  by,  jailer,  and  set  Mr.  Pityless 
to  the  bar.  Mr.  Pitiless,  thou  art  Pltylesg  set  t0 
here  indicted  by  the  name  of  Pitiless,     the  bar.    His 

.  .  „  A ,  .        indictment. 

an  intruder  upon  the  town  ot  Mansoul, 
for  that  thou  didst  most  traitorously  and  wickedly 
shut  up  all  bowels  of  compassion,  and  wouldest  not 
suffer  Mansoul  to  condole  her  own  misery  when  she 
had  apostatized  from  her  rightful  King,  but  didst 
evade,  and  at  all  times  turn  her  mind  awry  from 
those  thoughts  that  had  in  them  a  tendency  to  lead 
her  to  repentance.  What  sayest  thou  to  this  in- 
dictment?  Guilty,  or  not  guilty? 

Not  guilty  of  pitilessness ;    all    I    did  was    to 
cheer-up,  according  to  my  name,  for 
my  name  is  not  Pitiless,  but  Cheer-         13Pea- 
up ;  and  I  could  not  abide  to  see  Mansoul  incline 
to  melancholy. 

Clerk.  How  !  do  you  deny  your  name,  and  say 
it  is  not  Pitiless  but  Cheerup  ?  Call  for  the  wit- 
nesses.  What  say  you,  the  witnesses,  to  this  plea? 

Know.  My  Lord,  his  name  is  Pitiless;  so  he 
hath  writ  himself  in  all  papers  of  concern  wherein 
he  has  had  to  do.  But  these  Diabolonians  love  to 
counterfeit  their  names;  Mr.  Covetousness  covers 
himself  with  the  name  of  Good-husbandry,  or  the 
like ;  Mr.  Pride  can,  when  need  is,  call  himself 
Mr.  Neat,  Mr.  Handsome,  or  the  like,  and  so  of 
all  the  rest  of  them.1 

Clerk.   Mr,  Telltrue,  what  say  you  ? 

Tell.  His  name  is  Pitiless,  my  Lord  ;  I  have 
known  him  from  a  child,  and  he  hath  done  all  that 
wickedness    whereof  he    stands    charged  in    the 

1  '  With  names  of  virtue  she  deceives 
The  aged  and  the  young ; 
And  while  the  heedless  wretch  believes, 
Jjlic  makes  his  letters  stroDg.' 


THE    HOLY    WiVL 


3 1  5 


indictment ;  but  there  i>  n  company  of  them  that  aro 
not  acquainted  with  the  danger  of  damning,  there- 
fore they  call  all  those  melancholy  that  liave  serious 
thoughts  [as  to]  how  that  state  should  Ite  shunned 
by  theni. 

Clerk.  Set  Mr.  Haughty  to  the  bar,  jailer. 
nudity  set  to  ^r"  1 1 aii!j,l . t  \-,  Thou  art  here  indicted 
the  w.    lis   by  the  name  of  Haughty,  an  intruder 

upon  the  town  oi  Mansoul,  for  that 
thou  didst  most  traitorously  and  devilishly  teach 
the  town  ofMansoul  to  carry  it  loftily  and  Btoutly 
against  the  Bummons  thai  was  given  them  by  the 
captains  of  the  King  Shaddai.  Thou  didst  also 
teach  the  town  of  Mansoul  to  speak  contemptuously 
and  vilifyingly  of  their  great  King  Shaddai;  and 
didst  moreover  encourage,  both  by  words  and  ex- 
ample, Mansoul  to  take  up  arms,  both  against  the 
King  and  his  Son  Emmanuel.  How  sayest  thou? 
Art  thou  guilty  of  this  indictment,  or  not? 

Hatch.  Gentlemen,  I   have   always  been  a  man 

of  courage  and  valour,  and  have  not 

His   l'leiu  ,       ,  ,  ,  .        , 

used  when  under  the  greatest  clouds, 
to  sneak  or  hang  down  the  head  like  a  bulrush  ; 
nor  did  it  at  all  at  any  time  please  roe  to  see  men 
vail  their  bonnets l  to  those  that  have  opposed 
them  ;  yea,  though  their  adversaries  seemed  to 
have  ten  times  the  advantage  of  them.  I  did  not 
use  to  consider  who  was  my  foe,  nor  what  the  cause 
was  in  which  I  was  engaged.  It  was  enough  to 
me  if  I  carried  it  bravely,  fought  like  a  man,  and 
came  off  a  victor. 

Court.  Mr.  Haughty,  you  are  not  here  indicted 

for  that  vou  have  been  a  valiant  man, 

The  court.  -  , 

nor  for  your  courage  and  stoutness  in 
times  of  distress,  but  for  that  you  have  made  use 
of  this  your  pretended  valour  to  draw  the  town  of 
Mansoul  into  acts  of  rebellion,  both  against  the 
great  King  and  Emmanuel  his  Son.  This  is  the 
crime  and  the  thing  wherewith  thou  art  charged 
in  and  by  the  indictment.  But  he  mode  no  answer 
to  that. 

Now  when   the   court   had  thus  far  proceeded 

against  the  prisoners  at  the  bar,   then   they  put 

them  over  to  the  verdict  of  their  jury,  to  whom 

they  did  apply  themselves  after  this  manner:  — 

Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  you  have  been  here,  and 

Ti.e  court  to    have  seen  these  men,  you  have  heard 

the  jury.      t]iejr  indictments, their  pleas,  and  what 

the  witnesses   have  testified   against   them  ;   now 

Tliejun's     what  remains,  is,  that  you  do  forth- 

tharge.       with  withdrawyourselves  tosomeplace, 

where  without  confusion  you  may  consider  of  what 

verdict,  in  a  way  of  truth  and  righteousness,  you 


1  Bonnets  or  paps  were  commonly  worn  by  men.  'To 
vail  the  bonnet '  was  to  take  it  off  and  bow,  can  in  hand — 
equivalent  to  taking  off  the  hat  and  bowing  at  the  present 
day.  '  As  for  vailing  bonnet  before  great  rulers.'—  Holland's 
Pliny,  b.  xxviii. — (Ed.) 


ought  to  bring  in  for  the  King  against  them,  an  1 
s.i  bring  it  in  accordingly. 

Then  the  jury,  to  wit,  Mr.  Belief,  Mr.  True- 
heart,  Mr.  Upright,  Mr.  Hatebad,  Mr.  n„.v  ,  ., 
Lovegod,  Mr.  Seetruth,  Mr.  Heavenly-  UmoteHre* 
mind,  Mr.  Moderate,  Mr.  Thankful,  Mr.  Humble, 
Mr.  Goodwork,  and  Mr.  Zeal-for-God,  withdrew 
themselves  in  order  to  their  work,  Now  when  they 
were  shut  up  by  themselves  they  fell  to  discour  c 

among    themselves,   in    order   tO  the  drawing  up  of 

their  verdict. 

And  thus  Mr.   Belief,  for  he  was  the  foreman, 
began;   Gentlemen,  quoth  he,  for  the  men,  the 
prisoners  at  the  bar,  for  my  part  I   .lv.r  mnf(%r. 
believe  that  they  all  deserve  death.    enoe  among 
Very  right,  said  Mr.  Lrueheart,  I  am 

wholly  of  your  opinion,  0  what  a  mercy  is  it,  said 
Mr.  Hatebad,  that  such  villains  as  tin )B6  are  ap 
prehended  !  Ay,  Ay,  said  Mr.  Lovegod,  this  is  one 
of  the  joyfullest  days  that  ever  1  Baw  in  my  life. 
Then  said  Mr.  Seetruth,  I  know  that  if  we  judge 
them  to  death,  our  verdict  shall  stand  before 
Shaddai  himself.  Nor  do  I  at  all  question  it,  said 
Mr.  Ueavenlymind  ;  he  said  moreover.  When  all 
such  beasts  as  these  are  cast  out  of  Mansoul,  what 
a  goodly  town  will  it  be  then!  Then  said  Mr. 
Moderate,  It  is  not  my  manner  to  pass  my  judg- 
ment with  rashness,  but  for  these,  their  crimes  aro 
so  notorious,  and  the  witness  so  palpable,  that  that 
man  must  be  wilfully  blind  who  saith  the  prisoners 
ought  not  to  die.  Blessed  be  God,  said  Mr.  Thank- 
ful, that  the  traitors  are  in  safe  custody.  And  1 
join  with  you  in  this  upon  my  hare  knees,  said 
Mr.  Humble.  1  am  glad  also,  said  Mr.  Goodwork. 
Then  said  the  warm  man,  and  true-hearted  Mr. 
Zeal-for-God,  Cut  them  off,  they  have  been  the 
plague,  and  have  sought  the  destruction  of  Man- 
sou  1.- 

Thus  therefore  being  all  agreed  in  their  verdict, 
they  come  instantly  into  the  court. 

CLERK.  Gentlemen  of  the  jury  answer  all  to 
your  names;  Mr.  Belief,  one;  Mr.  Tbeyi 
Trueheart,  two;  Mr.  Upright,  three;  Z^'Zu'.l 
Mr.  Hatebad.four;  Mr.  Lovegod,  five;  Hum  in  guilly. 
Mr.  Seetruth,  six;  Mr.  Heavenlymind,  seven;  Mr. 
Moderate,  eight;  Mr.  Thankful,  nine;  Mr.  Hum- 
ble, ten;  Mr.  Goodwork,  eleven  ;  and  Mr.  Zeal-for- 
God,  twelve;  good  men  and  true,  stand  together 
in  your  verdict ;  are  you  all  agreed  ? 

Jury.  Yes,  my  Lord. 

CLERK.    Who  shall  speak  for  you? 

JrjRT.    Our  Foreman. 


2  There  is  in  the  renewed  soal  a  sincere  i 
sin.     As  the  jury  were  unanimous  in  their  rerdict,  - 
Christians  will  moat  cordially  doom  their  I  isti  to  death, 
fes,  wiv  Redeemer,  tbejtuaD  die, 
M\  hear)  I 
iuat  made  my  Sanour  WeeuV— (Uurder.) 


316 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


ClEWC.  You  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  being 
impannelled  for  our  Lord  the  King  to  serve  here 
in  a  matter  of  life  and  death,  have  heard  the  trials 
of  each  of  these  men,  the  prisoners  at  the  bar. 
What  Bay  you,  are  they  guilty  of  that,  and  those 
crimes  fur  which  they  stand  here  indicted,  or  are 
thev  not  guiltv? 
The  verdict.  YoTSBUAN.   Guilty  my  Lord. 

CLEEK.   Look  to  your  prisoners,  jailer. 

This  was  done  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  after- 
noon they  received  the  sentence  of  death  according 
to  the  law. 

The  jailer  therefore  having  received  such  a 
charge,  put  them  all  in  the  inward  prison,  to  per- 
scrve  them  there  till  the  day  of  execution,  which 
was  to  be  the  next  day  in  the  morning. 

Lut  now  to  see  how  it  happened,  one  of  the 
rncu'duii'y  prisoners,  Incredulity  by  name,  in  the 
breaks  prison,  interim  betwixt  the  sentence  and  time 
of  execution,  brake  prison,  and  made  his  escape, 
and  gets  him  away  quite  out  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul,  and  lay  lurking  in  such  places  and  holds  as 
he  might,  until  he  should  again  have  opportunity 
to  do  the  town  of  Mansoul  a  mischief  for  their  thus 
handling  of  him  as  they  did.1 

Now  when  Mr.  Trueman  the  jailer  perceived  that 


his  friend  ;  and  where  should  they  meet  one  another 
but  just  upon  Hell-gate-hill. 

But  0 !  what  a  lamentable  story  did  the  old 
gentleman  tell  to  Diabolus,  concerning  what  sad 
alteration  Emmanuel  had  made  in  Mansoul.4 

As  first,  how  Mansoul  had,  after  some  delays, 

received  a  general  pardon  at  the  hands    IIe  tel]9  Diaboi. 

of  Emmanuel,  and  that  thev  had  in-     «s  what  ti»- 
....  .  .  *'.  ,  manuel  now  is 

vited  mm  into  the  town,  and  that  trey  doing  in  Man- 
had  given  him  the  castle  for  his  pos-  soul' 
ses'sion.  He  said,  moreover,  that  they  had  called 
his  soldiers  into  the  town,  coveted  who  should 
quarter  the  most  of  them ;  they  also  entertained 
him  with  the  timbrel,  song,  and  dance.  But  that, 
said  Incredulity,  that  is  the  sorest  vexation  to  me 
is,  that  he  hath  pulled  down,  0  father,  thy  image, 
and  set  up  his  own ;  pulled  down  thy  officers  and 
set  up  his  own.  Yea,  and  Will-be- will,  that  rebel, 
who,  one  would  have  thought,  should  never  have 
turned  from  us,  he  is  now  in  as  great  favour  with 
Emmanuel  as  ever  he  was  with  thee.  But  besides 
all  this,  this  Will-be-will  has  received  a  special 
commission  from  his  master  to  search  for,  to  ap- 
prehend, and  to  put  to  death  all,  and  all  manner 
of  Diabolonians  that  he  shall  find  in  Mansoul ;  yea, 
and  this  Will-be-will  has  taken  and  committed  to 


he  had  lost  his  prisoner,  he  was  in  a  heavy  taking,  j  prison    already,  eight    of  my  lord's  most  trusty 


because  he,  that  prisoner  was,  to  speak  on,  the 
very  worst  of  all  the  gang  ;  wherefore  first,  he  goes 
and  acquaints  my  Lord  Mayor,  Mr.  Recorder,  and 
my  Lord  Will  be-will  with  the  matter,  and  to  get 
of  them  an  order  to  make  search  for  him  through- 
out the  town  of  Mansoul.     So  an  order 


Ko  Incredulity 

found  in  Man-   lie  got,  and  search  was  made,  but  no 
such  man  could  now  be  found  in  all 
the  town  of  Mansoul.2 

All  that  could  be  gathered  was  that  he  had 
lurked  a  while  about  the  outside  of  the  town,  and 
that  here  and  there  one  or  other  had  a  glimpse  of 
him  as  he  did  make  his  escape  out  of  Mansoul ; 
one  or  two  also  did  affirm  that  they  saw  him  with- 
out the  town,  going  a-pace  quite  over  the  plain.3 
Now  when  he  was  quite  gone,  it  was  affirmed  by 
He  is  gone  to  one  Mr.  Didsee,  that  he  ranged  all  over 
Diabolus.      dry  piacest  till  he  met  with  Diabolus 

1  The  accuracy  with  which  these  criminal  trials  are  narrated 
is  surprising.  The  imprisonment,  indictment,  court,  jury, 
witnesses,  verdict,  sentence— all  is  in  the  same  order  as  if 
written  by  my  Lord  Chief  Justice.  What  a  contrast  is  here 
exhibited  to  the  behaviour  of  the  judge  and  jury  in  the  trial 
of  Faithful,  in  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  1'  That  was  brutal,  as 
the  then  Judge  Jeffries;  this  dignified  aud  constitutional,  as 
the  present  Judge  Campbell.  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  so 
vest  a  reformation,  clearly  foreseen  by  Buuyan. — (Ed.) 

-  \\  hat  a  blessed  season !  no  unbelief  to  be  found  at  that 
time  in  Mansoul.  Christian,  call  to  mind  the  time  when 
Christ  led  you  into  his  banqueting-honse,  and  his  banner  over 
you  was  love ;  you  could  find  no  unbelief  then.  Alas!  the 
troubler  makes  his  appearance  again  quite  soon  enough. — 
(En.) 

3  Unbelief,  that  giant  sin,  was  apprehended  and  condemned 


friends  in  Mansoul.  Nay  further,  my  lord,  with 
grief  I  speak  it,  they  have  been  all  arraigned,  con- 
demned, and,  I  doubt  before  this,  executed  in  Man- 
soul. I  told  my  lord  of  eight,  and  myself  was 
the  ninth,  who  should  assuredly  have  drunk  of  the 
same  cup,  but  that  through  craft,  I,  as  thou  seest, 
have  made  mine  escape  from  them. 

When  Diabolus  had  heard  this  lamentable  story 
he  yelled,  and  snufl'ed  up  the  wind  like  Diab<lus  yells 
a  dragon,  and  made  the  sky  to  look  at  the  news. 
dark  with  his  roaring ;  he  also  sware  that  he  would 
try  to  be  revenged  on  Mansoul  for  this.  So  they, 
both  he  and  his  old  friend  Incredulity,  concluded  to 
enter  into  great  consultation  how  they  mi-ht  get 
the  town  of  Mansoul  again. 

Now  before  this  time,  the  day  was  come  in  which 
the  prisoners  in  Mansoul  were  to  be  executed.  Ro. 
viii.  13.     So  thev  were  brought  to  the  cross,0  and 


— but,  alas !  he  escapes.  This  incident  is  introduced  by  the 
author  with  great  skill.  He  eludes  justice,  and  flies  to  hell, 
to  meditate  new  mischief.  Ah  !  where  is  the  believer  who  is 
at  all  times  wholly  free  from  the  assaults  of  this  arch-rebel  ? 
Where  is  the  Christian  who  has  not  occasion  to  say,  and  that 
with  tears,  'Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  unbelief?' — 
(Burder.) 

4  The  conversion  of  sinners,  which  is  daily  and  hour'y 
creating  joy  among  the  angels  in  heaven  and  saints  on  earth, 
adds  to  the  torments  of  Diabolus  and  his  host  in  hell,  aud  of 
all  his  slaves  in  the  world. —  (Ed.) 

6  The  cross,  in  the  market-place  of  most  towns,  was  the 
place  of  public  proclamations  and  executions.  The  slaying  of 
our  sins  at  the  cross,  denotes  that  they  are  to  be  publicly 
abandoned,  so  that  the  Christian  becomes  a  living  epistle, 
'  known  aud  read  of  all  men.'  2  Co.  iii.  2. — (Ed.) 


the  nc iv  \v.\:i 


817 


that  by  Mansoul,  in  most  solemn  manner.  Bo  ri 
ij-14.  For  the  Prince  said  that  this  should  he 
done  by  the  band  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  that  I 
may  sco,  said  he,  the  forwardness"  of  my  now  re- 
deemed Mansoul  to  keep  my  word,  ami  to  do  my 
commandments;  and  thai  I  may  Mess  Mansoul 
in  doing  this  deed.  Proof  of  sincerity  ; 
me  well;  let  Mansoul.  therefore,  first  lay  their 
hands  upon  these  Diaboloaians  to  destroy  them. 

C.i.  v.  84. 

So  the  town  of  Mansoul  slew  them  Recording  to 

the  word  of  their  Prince  ;  hut  when  the  prisoners 
were  brought  to  die  erf--  to  die,  you  can  hardly 
believe  what  troublesome  work  Mansoul  had  «.f  it 
to  put  the  Diabolonians  to  death  ;  for  the  men 
knowing  that  they  must  die,  and  every  of  them 
baring  implacable  enmity  in  their  heart  to  Man- 
soul, what  did  they  but  took  courage  at  the  cross, 
and  there  resisted  the  men  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  ? 

Tiie  assistance  Wherefore  the  men  of  Mansoul  were 
of  more  grace.   f,,rct.(1    t()  cry  out  for  |,e]p  to  ti,c  cap. 

tains  and  men  of  war.  Now  the  great  Shaddai 
had  a  secretary  in  the  town,  and  he  was  a  great 
lover  of  the  men  of  Mansoul,  and  he  was  at  the 
[dace  of  execution  also ;  so  he  hearing  the  men 
of  Mansoul  cry  out  against  the  smugglings  and 
unruliness  of  the  prisoners,  rose  up  from  his  place, 
and  came. and  put  his  hands  upon  the  hands  of  the 
men  of  Mansoul.1  So  they  crucified 
the  Diabolonians  that  had  been  a 
plague,  a  grief,  and  an  offence  to  the  town  of 
Mansoul.-   Bo.  Mil  l ;.  #1 

[Chapter  XL] 

[Contents  : — Mr.  Experience  is  made  an  officer — The  charter 
of  the  town  renewed,  and  enlarged  with  special  privi- 
leges— '1  lie  ministry  of  the  gospel  regularly  established, 
under  the  direction  of  the  Secretary — Mr.  Conscience 
ordained  a  preacher,  and  his  duty  particularly  specified  — 
Directions  how  to  behave  to  the  ministers — The  inhabi- 
tants clad  in  white,  and  receive  many  other  distinguishing 
favours  from  the  Prince — God's-peace  is  appointed  to 
rule — The  unexampled  felicity  of  the  town.] 

Now  when  this  good  work  was  done,  the  Prince 
Tlie  Prince  came  down  to  see,  to  vi-it,  and  to 
;7^^a°.  speak  comfortably  to  the  men  of  M an- 
latethem.  sou\f  an(]  to  strengthen  their  hands  in 

such  work.  And  he  said  to  them  that  by  this 
act  of  theirs  he  had  proved  them,  and  found  them 
to  be  lovers  of  his  person,  observers  of  his  laws, 
and  such  as  had  also  respect  to  his  honour.      He 

1  This  probably  alludes  to  Elisha  putting  his  hands  npoD 
the  king's  hands,  when  shooting  the  arrow  of  deli\ 

2  Ki  xiii.  10.  The  conquest  and  crucit  d  d  of  rin  can  never 
be  effected  w  ithout  Divme  assistance.  Prayer  brings  the  aid 
of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  thus  wt  are  enabled  to  conquer  our 
sinful  thoughts  and  propensities. — (F.d.) 

2  The  greatest  proof  of  our  attachment  to  Christ  is  the 
destruction  of  our  sins ;  not  suffering  them  to  reign  in  oiir 


Execution  done. 


said,  m  they  bj  thi ■» 

should  not  he  losers,  nor  their  town  weakened  b? 

the   loss   of   them,   that   he   would   make 

another  captain,  and  that  of  one  i  f  ,, 
i  i.ii         i  •  .      ||c  ;ir" 

them  elves,     And   that   this   captain     »»» 

should  be  the  ruler  of  a  thousand, 

for  the  good  and  benefit  of  the  now  P.  turishin  : 

town  of  Mansoul. 

So  be  railed   olic   to  hitn   whoSI 
in'_r.  and  bid  him  go  quickly  up  to  tl  e  I 
and    inquire    there   for  one    Mr.    Experience, 
waitetb  upon  that  noble  captain,  the    , 

Captain  Credence,  and  bid  him  com.' 

hither  to  me.     So  the  nies.-i  nger  that 

waited  upon  the  good  Prii Emmanuel  went  sn'd 

said  as   he   was   commanded.      Now   the  young 
gentleman  was  waiting  to  si  e  the  captain  train  an  1 
muster  his  men   in   tin     castle-yard.       Then    sai  1 
Mr.  Waiting   to   hitn.  Sir,    the    Prince    WOul 
you  Bhould  come  down  to  his  Highness  forthwith. 
So  he  brought  him  down  to  Emmanuel,  and  he 
came  and  made  obi  isai  ce  '"'ore  him.     No 
men  of  the  town  knew  Mr.  Experience  well,  for  ho 
was  born  and  bred  in  the  town  of  I ' 
soul ;  they  also  knew  him  to  be  a  man 
of   conduct,    of  valour,   and   a   ]■• 
prudent  in  matters  ;  he  was  also  a  comely  j 
well  spoken,  and  very  successful  in  his  undertak- 
ings.     Wherefore  the  hearts  of  tie    ii—ii  tat. . 
townsmen  were  transported  with  joy, 
when   they   saw   that    the    Prince  himself   I 
taken   with  Mr.  Experience,  that   he    would 
make  him  a  captain  over  a  hand  of  men. 

So  with  one  consent  they  bowed  the  knee 
Emmanuel,  and  with  a  shout  said.  Let  Emmanoi  1 
live  for  ever.     Then  said  the  Prince  to  the  ] 
gentleman  whose  name  was  Mr.  Experii  ace,  1  bai  • 
thought  good   to  confer  upon  thee  a    ,.,,.  . 
place  of  trust   and   honour  in  this  my      lo  Kr.£rpetv 
town    of    Mansoul  ;    then    the    young 
man    bowed  his  head  and  worshipped.      It  . 
Emmanuel,  that  thou  shouldest  be  a  captain,    i 
captain  over  a  thousand  men  in  my  beloved  town 
of  Mansoul.     Then  said  the  Captain,  Let  tl 
live.     So  the  Prince  gave  out  orders  forthwith  I  > 
the  K  ry,  that  he  shoul  I 

draw  up  for  Mr.  Bxp  rience  a  commis-       ■"'" 
sion,  to  make  him  a  captain  over  a  thousand  men, 
ami  let  it  be  brought  to  me,  said  hi  . 
set  too  my  seal     So  it  was  d  i 
manded.     The  commission  was  drawn  up,  I 
to  Emmanuel,  and  he  Bet  hi-  Beal  then  t  •. 


bodies,  but  crucifying  the  flesh,  witi 

lint,  indeed,  out 

own  native  strength  is  insufficienl  for  I  •     »"« 

Spirit,  therefore,  ia  introduced, 

'  If  ye,  through  the  Spirit,  do  mortify  the  dm 

ye  shall  live.'—  vU;irder.) 


31S 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


by  the  Land  of  Mr.  Waiting,  lie  sent  it  away  to 
the  captain.1 

Now  so  soon  as  the  captain  had  received  his 
commission,  he  soundeth  his  trumpet  for  volun- 
teers, and  young  men  come  to  him  apace,  yea,  the 
greatest  and  chiefest  men  in  the  town  sent  their 
sons  to  be  listed  under  his  command.  Thus  Cap- 
tain Experience  came  under  command  to  Em- 
manuel, for  the  good  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  He 
His  unJer-ofli-  had  for  his  lieutenant  one  Mr.  Skilful, 
cers-  and  for  his  coronet  one  Mr.  Memory. 

His  under-officers  I  need  not  name.  His  colours 
were  the  white  colours  for  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
and  his  escutcheon  was  the  dead  lion  and  dead 
hear."  1  Sa.  xvil  36,  37.  So  the  Prince  returned  to  his 
royal  palace  again. 

Now,  when  he  was  returned  thither,  the  elders 

of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  to  wit,  the  Lord  Mayor, 

,,        f  the  Recorder,  and  the  Lord  Will-be- 

i  lie    eiders    or 

Mansoul  con-  will,  went  to  congratulate  him,  and  in 
special  way  to  thank  him  for  his  love, 
care,  and  the  tender  compassion  which  he  showed 
to  his  ever-obliged  town  of  Mansoul.  So,  after  a 
while,  and  some  sweet  communion  between  them, 
the  townsmen  having  solemnly  ended  their  cere- 
mony, returned  to  their  place  again. 

Emmanuel  also  at  this  time  appointed  them  a 
day  wherein  he  would  renew  their  charter,  yea, 
He rene«-s  their  wherein  he  would  renew  and  enlarge 
charter.  jt)  men(}ing  several  faults  therein,  that 
Mansoul's  yoke  might  be  yet  more  easy.  Mat.  xi.  28- 
3«.  And  this  he  did  without  any  desire  of  theirs, 
even  of  his  own  frankness  and  noble  mind.  So, 
when  he  had  sent  for  and  seen  their  old  one,  he 
laid  it  by,  and  said,  '  Now  that  which  decayeth 
and  waxeth  old,  is  ready  to  vanish  away.'  He.  via. 
15.  He  said,  moreover,  the  town  of  Mansoul  shall 
have  another,  a  better,  a  new  one,  more  steady 
and  firm  by  far.  An  epitome  hereof  take  as 
follows : — 

'  Emmanuel,  Prince  of  peace,  and  a  great  lover 
An  epitome  of  °^  tne  town  °^  Mansoul,  I  do,  in  the 
iheirnewdiar-  name  of  my  Father,  and  of  mine  own 
tcr-  i  ■  ii 

clemency,  give,  grant,   and  bequeath 

to  my  beloved  town  of  Mansoul:  First,  Free,  full, 
and  everlasting  forgiveness  of  all  wrongs,  injuries, 
and  offences  done  by  them  against  my  Father,  me, 
their  neighbour,  or  themselves.  He.viii.12.  Secondlv, 
I  do  give  them  the  holy  law,  and  my  testament, 
with  all  that  therein  is  contained,  for  their  ever- 


1  The  happy  effects  of  a  Christian's  experience  are — a  con- 
viction, by  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  revelation,  of  our  insuf- 
ficiency, and  Christ's  all-sufficiency ;  an  insight  into  gospel 
mysteries;  God's  veracity,  faithfulness,  and  immutability. — 
(Mason.)  It  should  be  noticed,  that  at  this  period  of  the 
Christian's  life,  experience  is  but  a  youvg  gentleman. — 
(Ed.) 

2  David,  having  determined  to  encounter  Goliath,  comforted 
himself  with  his  past  experience.     '  Thy  servant  slew  both  the 


lasting  comfort  and  consolation.3  Jn.  xv.  8.-1 1 
Thirdly,  I  do  also  give  them  a  portion  of  the  self- 
same grace  and  goodness  that  dwells  in  my 
Father's  heart  and  mine.  2  Fe.  i.  4.  2Co.  vii.  l.  i  Jn.  iv.  16. 
Fourthly,  I  do  give,  grant,  and  bestow  upon  them 
freely,  the  world,  and  what  is  therein,  for  their 
good ;  and  they  shall  have  that  power  over  them, 
as  shall  stand  with  the  honour  of  my  Father,  my 
glory,  and  their  comfort ;  yea,  I  grant  them  the 
benefits  of  life  and  death,  and  of  things  present, 
and  things  to  come,  l  Co.  m.  21,  22.  This  privilege, 
no  other  city,  town,  or  corporation,  shall  have  but 
my  Mansoul  only.  Fifthly,  I  do  give  and  grant 
them  leave,  and  free  access  to  me  in  my  palace, 
at  all  seasons,  to  my  palace  above  or  below,  there 
to  make  known  their  wants  to  me.  He.  x.  19,  20.  And 
I  give  them,  moreover,  a  promise  that  I  will  hear 
and  redress  all  their  grievances.  Mat.  vii.  r.  Sixthly, 
I  do  give,  grant  to,  and  invest  the  town  of  Mansoul 
with  full  power  and  authority  to  seek  out,  take, 
enslave,  and  destroy  all,  and  all  man-  Ko  man  to  cie 
ner  of  Diabolonians,  that  at  any  time,  <«r  kiUmgofsin. 
from  whencesoever,  shall  be  found  straggling  in, 
or  about  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Seventhly,  1  do 
further  grant  to  my  beloved  town  of  Mansoul  that 
they  shall  have  authority  not  to  suffer  any  foreigner, 
or  stranger,  or  their  seed,  to  be  free  No  hist  hM  ariy 
in  and  of  the  blessed  town  of  Man-     grant  by  Christ, 

,  .1  ...  „      .       oranylihertyto 

soul,  nor  to  snare  in  the  excellent  actinthetouu 
privileges  thereof.  EP.  iv.  22.  But  that  of  MansouL 
all  the  grants,  privileges,  and  immunities,  that  I 
bestow  upon  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul,  shall  be 
for  those  the  old  natives  and  true  inhabitants 
thereof,  to  them  I  say,  and  to  their  right  seed  after 
them.  Col.  iii.  5-9.  But  all  Diabolonians,  of  what 
sort,  birth,  country,  or  kingdom  soever,  shall  be 
debarred  a  share  therein.' 

So,  when  the  town  of  Mansoul  had  received, 
at  the  hand  of  Emmanuel,  their  gracious  charter, 
which  in  itself  is  infinitely  more  large  than  by 
this  lean  epitome  is  set  before  you,  they  carried 
it  to  audience,  that  is,  to  the  market-place,  and 
there  Mr.  Recorder  read  it  in  the  presence  of  all 
the  people.  2  Co.  ffi.  3.  Je.  xxxi.  33.  This  being  done, 
it  was  had  back  to  the  castle  gates,    „,  . 

,      ,  ...  ,         Their     charter 

anu  there  fairly  engraven  upon  the  set  upon  their 
doors  thereof,  and  laid  in  letters  of  CdSteSdte5- 
gold,  to  the  end  that  the  town  of  Mansoul,  with 
all  the  people  thereof,  might  have  it  always  in 
their  view,  or  might  go  where  they  might  see  what 
a  blessed  freedom  their  Prince  had  bestowed  upon 


lion  and  the  bear :  he  who  delivered  me  from  their  paws,  will 
deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  this  Philistine.'— (En.) 

8  By  '  the  holy  law,'  we  are  not  limited  to  the  ten  com- 
mandments, but  to  the  law  and  testimony — the  whole  revealed 
will  of  God.  It  as  much  embraces  the  new  commandment  as 
the  ten.  What  a  mercy  that  the  soul  in  Christ  finds  in  the 
law  and  covenant  everlasting  comfort  and  consolation. — (Ed.) 


THE   TI01Y    vVAR. 


siy 


them,  that  thoir  joy  might  be  increased  in  them- 
Bclves,  and  their  love  renewed  to  their  great  ami 
good  Emmanuel.  iv.  »ui.  10. 

But  what  joy,  what  comfort,  what  consolation, 
joj  renewed  in   think  you,  did  now  possess  the  hearts 

Manwral-  of  the  men  of  Mansoul!  The  bells 
ringed,  the  minstrels  played,  the  people  danced, 
the  captains  shouted,  the  colours  waved  in  tin- 
wind,  and  the  Bilver  trumpets  Bounded,  and  the 
Diabolonians  now  were  glad  to  hide  their  heads, 
for  they  looked  like  them  that  had  been  Ioiil; 
dead.1  ' 

When  this  was  over  the  Prince  sent  again  for 
the  elders  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  communed 
with  them  about  a  ministry  that  be  intended  to 
establish  among  them,  such  a  ministry  that  might 
open  unto  them,  and  that  might  instinct  them  in 
the  tilings  that  did  concern  their  present  and  future 
state.3 

For,  said  he,  you  of  yourselves,  without  you 
have  teachers  and  guides,  will  not  be  able  to  know, 
and  if  not  to  know,  to  he  sure,  not  to  do  the  will 
of  my  Father.  Je.x.23.  ico  nu. 

At  this  news,  when  the  elders  of  Mansoul 
brought  it  to  the  people,  the  whole  town  came 
The  common  g<  oU   running  together,  for  it  pleased  them 


thoughts.  yreW,  as  whatever  the  Prince  now  did 
pleased  the  people,  and  all  with  one  consent  im- 
plored his  Majesty, that  he  would  forthwith  estab- 
lish such  a  ministry  among  them  as  might  teach 
them  both  law  and  judgment,  statute  and  com- 
mandment, that  they  might  be  documented3  in  all 
good  and  wholesome  things.  So  he  told  them 
that  he  would  grant  them  their  requests,  and  would 
establish  two  among  them,  one  that  was  of  his 
Father's  court,  and  one  that  was  a  native  of 
J I  an  soul. 

lie   that  is  from  the  court,  said  he,  is  a  person 

of  no  less  quality  and  dignity  than  is 

The  HolySpirit.  ,,     ,  ,    |  ,  ,      •    " ,      ,        , 

my  lather  and   1,  and  he  is  the  Lord 

Chief  Secretary  of  my  Father's  house  ;   for  he  is, 

and  always  has    been,   the    chief  dictator   of  all 

my  Father's  laws;  a  person  altogether  well  skilled 

in  all  mysteries,  and  knowledge  of  mysterii 

my   Father,  or  as  myself  is.      Indeed,  he  is  one 

with  us   in    nature,  and   also  as  to   loving  of,  and 

being  faithful  to,  and   in,  the  eternal   concern.-,  of 

the  town  of  Mansoul. 

And   this  is  he,  said   the   Prince,  that  must   be 

your  chief  teacher,  for  it  is  he,  and  lie  onlv,  that 


1  Well  ma]  the  Christian  exult  in  tie  blessings  of  this  Dew 
rid  everlasting  covenant,  ' ordered  in  :ill  things  ;i.  I 
lie  world,  life,  death,  things  present,  and  things  to  come,  all 
is  ours,  if  we  an.-  Christ's.  Tins  charter  was  Bet  upon  the 
castle  gates;  may  it  be  inscribed  in  indelible  characters  on  our 
hearts,  while  every  power  of  the  son]  is  filled  with  joy,  and 
while  sin,  abolished,  shall  hide  its  Ugly  head  1 — (Barder.; 

-  The  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  alone  ean  open  our 
understandings  to  behold  the  wondrous  things  oi  God's  law,  or 


can  teach  you  clearly  in  all  high  and  supernatural 
things.  i  ni.  i.  s,  c.     He  and  be  only  it  is  that  knows 

the  ways  and  methods  of  my  bather  at  court,  DO] 

ean  any  like  him  show  how  thr  heart  ol  iuv  Father 

is  at  all  times,  in  all  things,  upon  all  occasions, 
towards  Mansoul;  for  as  no  man  knows  the  things 

of  B  man,  but  that  spirit  of  a  man  which  \»  in  1  im, 
so  the  things  of  my  bather  knows  no  man  hut  this 

bis  bigh  and  mighty  Secretary.     Nor  ean  any,  ih 

be,  tell    Mansoul    how    and    what   they   shall    do  to 

keep  theiu.-elves  in  the  love  of  niv  Father,     ill 

also  it  is  that  ean  bring  lost  things  to  your  reinem- 

brance,  and  that  ean  tell  you  things  to  come.  This 
teacher  therefore  musl  of  necessity  bave  khi 
eminence  —both  in  your  affections  and  judgment  — 
before  your  other  teacher.  ita.Tiu.S6.  His  personal 
dignity,  the  excellency  of  bis  teaching,  also  the 
great  dexterity  that  be  hath  to  help  you  to  maki 
and  draw  up  petitions  to  my  Father  for  your  help, 
and  to  his  pleasing  Umk-o.  Ep.Yi.18J  must  lay 
obligations  upon  you  to  love  him,  (ear  him,  and  to 
take  heed  that  you  L'liese  bim  not.  h,  a.  ;.  11.  17,  If. 
Ep.  it.  BO. 

This  person  can  put  life  and  vigour  into  all  he 
says,  yea,  and  can  also  put  it  into  your  I 
This  person  can  make  seers  of  you,  and  can 
you  tell  what  shall  he  hereafter.  Ac.  ud.  l".  11.  By 
this  person  you  must  frame  all  your  petitions  to 
my  Father  and  me,  and  without  his  adviee  and 
counsel  first  obtained,  let  nothing  enter  into  the 
town  or  castle  of  Mansoul,  for  that  may  disgust 
and  grieve  this  uoble  person,   is.  butt,  lo. 

Take  heed,  1  say,  that  you  do  not  grieve  this 
minister;  for  if  you  do,  he  may  fighl  against  you  ; 
and  should  he  once  be  moved  by  you,  to  set  him- 
self against  you,  against  yon  in  battle  array,  that 
will  distress  you  more  than  it  twelve  legions  should 
from  my  Father's  court  he  Bent  to  make  war 
upon  you. 

lint,  as  I  said,  if  you  shall  luaikeii  unto  him. 
and  shall  love  him;  if  you  shall  devote  yourselves 
to  his  teaching,  and  shall  seek  to  have  COm 
and  to  maintain  communion  with  him  ;  you  shall 
find  bim  ten  times  better  than  is  the  whole  world 
to  any.  Yea,  he  will  shell  ahl'oad  the  love  of  my 
Father   in    your  hearts,  and    Mansoul    will    he   the 

wisest  and  most  blessed  of  all  people.    i  Co.  xiii.  xIt. 

Da  v.  u 


the  Bible  ;  who  taketh  of  the  things  of  .1.  sua,  an.!  thi  ■ 

unto  us.  '  lie  shall  teach  you  all  things."  .in.  m\.  26.   'flunks 

be  to  God  for  an  omnipresent,  omniscii      (  -(En.) 

■  Here  is  a  proper  display  of  vena 
use  of  the  ministry  is  solely' that  the  people  mi) 
law  and  judgment,  statute  and  commandment;  that  thej 
be  documented  in  all  things,  i.r.  furnished  with  vntlnx  evi- 
i  rtablish  every  d 

*    Mark,    reader,    how    Bunyan,    a-    the    r.  .-..It    el 

leaching,  had-  the  soul  to  enter  direeify  into  common 
Holy  Spirit.     I 
...     0  the  blessedness  of  coma 


820 


THE   KOLY  WAR. 


Then  did  the  Prince  call  unto  him  the  old  gentle- 
nan,  who  afore  had  heen  tlie  Recorder  of  Mansoul, 
Mr.  Conscience  by  name,  and  told  him  that  for- 
asmuch as  he  was  well  skilled  in  the  law  and 
Consciencem.de  government  of  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
a  minister.  an(j  was  a]so  wen  s^okex\,  and  could 
pertinently  deliver  to  them  his  Master's  will  in  all 
terrene  and  domestic  matters,  therefore  he  would 
also  make  him  a  minister  for,  in,  and  to  the  goodly 
town  of  Mansoul,  in  all  the  laws,  statutes,  and 
judgments  of  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  And 
thou  must,  said  the  Prince,  confine 
thyself  to  the  teaching  of  moral  virtues, 
to  civil  and  natural  duties;1  hut  thou  must  not 
attempt  to  presume  to  he  a  revealer  of  those  high 
and  supernatural  mysteries  that  are 
kept  close  in  the  bosom  of  Shaddai  my 
Father,  for  those  things  know  no  man,  nor  can 
i.ny  reveal  them,  hut  my  Father's  Secretary  only. 

Thou  art  a  native  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  but 
the  Lord  Secretary  is  a  native  with  my  Father; 
wherefore,  as  thou  hast  knowledge  of  the  laws  and 
customs  of  the  corporation,  so  he  of  the  things  and 
will  of  my  Father.  Wherefore,  0  !  Mr.  Conscience, 
although  T  have  made  thee  a  ministerand  a  preacher 
in  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  yet  as  to  the  things  which 
the  Lord  Secretary  knoweth,  and  shall  teach  to 
this  people,  there  thou  must  be  his  scholar,  and  a 
learner,  even  as  the  rest  of  Mansoul  are. 

Thou  must,  therefore,  in  all  high  and  supernatural 
things  go  to  him  for  information  and  knowledge; 
for  though  there  he  a  spirit  in  man,  this  person's 
inspiration  must  give  him  understanding.  Jub  xxxiii.  8. 
Wherefore,  0 !  thou  Mr.  Recorder,  keep  low  and 
he  humble,  and  remember  that  the  Liabolonians 
that  kept  not  their  first  charge,  but  left  their  own 
standing,  are  now  made  prisoners  in  the  pit;  be 
therefore  content  with  thy  station.  I  have  made 
thee  my  Father's  vicegerent  on  earth,  in  such 
things  of  which  I  have  made  mention  before.  And 
His  power  in     thou,  take  thou  power  to  teach  them 

Mansoul.  to  Mansoul ;  yea,  and  to  impose  them 
with  whips  and  chastisements,2  if  they  shall  not 
willingly  hearken  to  do  thy  commandments. 


that  cleaveth  closer  than  a  brother !  who  ever  liveth,  and  never 
slumbereth — always  near,  even  in  our  hearts — able  and  willing 
lo  help  and  save  lo  the  uttermost. —  (En.) 

1  Having  shown  Mansoul  that  the  secret  of  being  the  wisest 
and  most  blessed  ot  all  people  is  to  seek  the  teaching  and 
communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart,  he  comes  to  human 
ministry,  and  probably  draws  his  portrait  from  his  pastor 
Mr.  Gilford,  or  from  his  own  conduct.  How  much  is  con- 
tained in  the  words,  '  Moral  virtues,  and  civil  and  natural 
duties  !'  Here  is  love  to  God,  because  he  first  loved  us,  with 
nil  heavenly  blessednesses;  the  whole  armour  of  God, to  fit  us 
for  the  good  fight;  and  the  eternal  reward  of  grace,  and  not 
of  works:  an  inexhaustible  fund  for  Christian  training, — 
(Ep.) 

-  '"Whips  and  chastisements. '  'A  wounded  spirit  who  can 
bear?'  '  Mcthought  1  saw  as  if  the  sub  did  grudge  to  give 
me  light.' — Grace  Aboundina,  No.  187. — (En.) 


And,  Mr.  Recorder,  because  thou  art  old,  and 
through  many  abuses  made    feeble, 
therefore  I  give  thee  leave  and  license       's  '  ery* 
to  go  when  thou  wilt  to  my  fountain,  my  conduit, 
and  there  to  drink  freely  of  the  blood  of  my  grape, 
for  my  conduit*  does  always  run  wine.        * 
Thus  doing,  thou  shalt  drive  from  thy 
heart  and   stomach   all   foul,   gross,    and  hurtful 
humours.      It  will  also  lighten  thine  eyes,  and  will 
strengthen  thy  memory  for  the  reception  and  keep- 
ing of  all  that  the  King's  most  noble  Secretary 
teacheth.  lie.  v.  u. 

When  the  Prince  had  thus  put  Mr.  Recorder 
(that  once  so  was)  into  the  place  and  office  of  a 
minister  to  Mansoul,  and  the  man  had  thankfully 
accepted  thereof,  then  did  Emmanuel  address  him- 
self in  a  particular  speech  to  the  townsmen  them- 
selves— 3 

'Behold,'  said  the  Prince  to  Mansoul,  'my  love 
and  care  towards  you.     1  have  added,    „.       -  .     , 

J  '     The       Princes 

to  all  that  is  past,  this  mercy,  to  ap-  speech  to  Man- 
point  you  preachers ;  the  most  noble 
Secretary  to  teach  you  in  all  high  and  sublime 
mysteries;  and  this  gentleman,'  pointing  to  Mr. 
Conscience,  'is  to  teach  you  in  all  things  human 
and  domestic ;  for  therein  lieth  his  work.  He  is 
not,  by  what  I  have  said,  debarred  of  telling  to 
Mansoul  anything  that  he  hath  heard  and  received 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  High  Secretary  ;  only  he 
shall  not  attempt  to  presume  to  pretend  to  be  a 
revealer  of  those  high  mysteries  himself;  for  the 
breaking  of  them  up,  and  the  discovery  of  them  to 
Mansoul,  layeth  only  in  the  power,  authority,  and 
skill  of  the  Lord  High  Secretary  himself.  Talk 
of  them  he  may,  and  so  may  the  rest  A  licence  to 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul;  yea,  and  may,  Mansoul. 
as  occasion  gives  them  opportunity,  press  them 
upon  each  other,  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole.  These 
things,  therefore,  1  would  have  you  observe  and  do, 
for  it  is  for  your  life,  and  the  lengthening  of  your 
days. 

'  And  one  thing  more  to  my  beloved  Mr.  Recorder, 
and  to  all  the  town  of  Mansoul.  You  must  not 
dwell  in  nor  stay  upon  anything  of  that  which  he 
hath  in  commission  to  teach  you,  as  to  your  trust 
and  expectation  of  the  next  world ;  of 

1  ,  i    t  c       ^  ^  world  to  come 

the  next  world,  1  say,  tor  1  purpose  to     promised     to 
U'ive  another  to  Mansoul,   when  this     idI1S0U- 


3  Reader,  conscience  is  the  teacher  with  authority  as  God's 
only  vicegerent.  Be  guided  by  him  in  all  things ;  swerve  not 
one  jot  or  tittle  from  his  dictates;  especially,  in  your  choice 
of  a  minister,  examine  him  for  yourself  prayerfully  and  care- 
fully by  the  Moid  (1  Tim.  iii.)  There  are  thousands  of  Dia- 
bolouiaus  in  the  world,  under  the  flimsy  disguise  of  apostolical 
descent.  "When  you  have  made  your  choice,  'Esteem  him 
very  highly  in  love  for  his  works'  sake;'  but  do  not  puff  him 
up  with  pride.  One  of  Bunyan's  hearers  said  io  him,  '  What 
an  excellent  sermon  you  have  preached ;'  to  which  he  replied, 
'  The  devil  told  me  so  before  I  left  the  pulpit.'— (Ed.) 


TIIF.    HOLY    WAR. 


:    1 


with  them  is  worn  out,  but  for  that  you  must 
wholly  and  solely  have  recourse  to,  ami  make  stay 
upon  his  doctrine,  that  is  your  teacher  after  the 
iirst  order.  Yea,  Mr.  Recorder  himself  must  not 
look  for  life  from  thai  which  he  himself  revealeth  ; 
his  dependence  for  that  must  ho  founded  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  other  preacher.  Let  Mr.  Recorder 
also  take  heed  thai  he  receive  nol  any  doctrine  or 
point  of  doctrine,  that  are  not  communicated  to  him 
by  his  superior  teacher;  nor  vet  within  the  pre- 
cincts of  his  own  formal  knowledge.'1 

Now,  after  the  Prince  had  thus  settled  things  in 

the  famous  town  of  Mansoul,  he  proceeded  to  give 

to  the  elders   of  the  corporation    a 

lie  girca  ilicm  .  .  r 

caution  about   necessary  caution,  to  wit,   now*  they 

should  carry  it  to  the  high  and  noble 

captains  that  he  had,  from  his  Father's  court,  sent 

or    brought    with    him    to    the    famous    town    of 

Mansoul, 

'These  captains,'  said  he,  '  do  love  the  town  of 

Mansoul,  ami  they  are  picked  men,  picked  out  of 

,,Kr(1    abundance,  as  men  that  best  suit,  and 

from  common  that  will  most  faithfully  serve  in  the 
virtues,  i.   n,      i  1    •  •  i       -rvi 

wars  of  bhaddai  against  the  Diabo- 

lonians,  for  the  preservation  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul. I  charge  you  therefore,  said  be,  0  ye  in- 
habitants of  the  now  flourishing  town  of  Mansoul, 
that  you  cany  it  not  ruggedly  or  untowardly  to 
my  captains,  or  their  men  ;  since,  as  I  said,  they 
are  picked  and  choice  men,  men  chosen  out  of 
many  for  the  good  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  I  say, 
I  charge  you,  that  you  carry  it  not  untowardly  to 
them ;  for  though  they  have  the  hearts  and  faces 
of  lions,  when  at  any  time  they  shall  be  called  forth 
Satan  cannot  to  engage  and  fight  with  the  King's 
^';t.'Tas°"e  foes,  and  the  enemies  of  the  town  of 
ourselves  may.  Mansoul ;  yet  a  little  discountenance 
cast  upon  them  from  the  town  of  Mansoul  will 
deject  and  cast  down  their  faces;  will  weaken  and 
take  away  their  courage.  Do  uot  therefore,  0  my 
beloved,  carry  it  unkindly  to  my  valiant  captains 

and  courageous  men  of  war,  but  love 

Words.  ,  •  i    o  l 

them,  nourish  them,  succour  them,  and 

lay  them  in  your  bosoms,  and  they  will  not  only 

tight  for  you,  but  cause  to  fly  from  you  all  tho.-e 

the  Diabolonians  that  seek,  and  will,  if  possible,  he 

your  utter  destruction. 

1  Admirably  judicious  is  this   chai  -  ce.     Its 

office  is  to  compart;  the  heart  and  walk  of  the  Christian  with 
tin  Word  of  God,  and  so  to  judge  whether  it  be  Rood  or  bad. 
]t  has  do  new  doctrines  to  nveal;  it  is  doI  the  legislator  but 
the  minister  of  the  law,  ever  looking  up  to  the  Holy  Spirit  for 
his  teaching.  The  office  of  conscience  is  one  of  great  purity, 
yet  it  is  Bubjecl  to  defilement,  and  must  be  purified  by  the 
blood  of  Christ.  He.  ix.  14. — (Burder.) 

-'  \\  \  jp  1 1  fir  the  op  Adams, 

and  Burder,  in  their  notes  upon  the  '  Holy  War,'  1  differ  with 
them  as  to  Banyan's  meaning  with  regard  to  thi 
captains.   All  the  eon  mentators  agree  in  interpreting  the  cap- 
tains to  mean  gospel  ministers,  and  so  giving  nine  i 

VOL-   III. 


*  If  therefore  any  of  them  should,  at  anv  time,  be 
s'h  k  or  weak,  and  BO  not  aide  to  perform  that  office 

Of  lOYS  which  with  all  their  hearts  they  an-  willing 
tO  do— and  will  do  also  when  well  and  in  health    - 

Blight  them  net,  in. i-  despise  them,  hut  rath*  r 
strengthen   them,  and   encourage  them,  though 

weak  and  ready  to  die.  Be.  ril  12;   for  th.  v  an 

fence,  and  your  guard,  your  wall,  your  gates,  your 
looks,  and  your  liars.     And  although,  when  they 

are  weak,  they  can  do  but  little,  hut  rather  need 
to  he  helped  by  you,  than  that  you  should  then 
expect  great  things  from  them,  yet  when  well, 
you    know    what    exploits,   what  feats   and    . 

achievements  they  are  able  to  do,  and  will  perform 
for  you. 

'Besides,  if  they  he  weak,  the  town  i  f  M 
cannot  he  strong;    if  they  he  strong,  then  Mansoul 

cannot  he  weak;  your  safety  therefore  doth 'lie  in 

their  health,  ami    in  your  countenancing  of  tin m. 

is.  xxw.  b.     Remember  also  that  if  they  he 

sick,    they  catch    that    disease  of  the  tOWH 
of  Mansoul  itself.2  Be.  to.  •-'.  l.Th.  r.  14 

'These  things  1  have  said  onto  you,  h<  • 
Love  your  welfare,  and  your  honour.    Observe  then  - 

fore,  0  my  Mansoul,  to  be  punctual  in  all  I 
that  1  have  given  in  charge  unto  you,  and  that  in  i 
only  as  a  town  corporate,  and  so  to  your  ol 
and  guard,  and  guides  in  chief,  hut  to  you  as  you 
are  a  people  whose  well-being,  as  single  p<  I 
depends  on  the  observation  of  the  orders  air' 
niandments  of  their  Lord. 

'  Next,  0  my  Mansoul,  1  do  warn  yon  of  that  <  : 
which  notwithstanding  that   reforma- 
tion that  at  present  is  wrought  among 
i  ii  i    ,        ' 

you,  you  nave  need  to  be  warned  about,     remi  i 

Wherefore  hearken  diligently  unto  nie. 
1  am  now  sure,  and  you  will  know  hereafter,  that 
there  are  yet  of  the  Diabolonians  remaining  in  the 
town  of  Mansoul;  Diabolonians  that  are  Bturdy 
and  implacable,  and   that    do   already  while-   I  am 
with  you,  and  that  will  yet  more  when  1  am  from 
you,    study,    plot,    contrive,    invent,    and   jointly 
attempt   to  bring  you   to  desolation,  and   BO  to 
state-far  worse  than  that  of  the  Egyptian  boi 
they  are  the  avowed  friend.-  of  Diabolus,  tin 


(Miy   Christian.     Their  names  arc    Boanerf 
Judgment,  and  Execution,  and,  under  Emmanuel's  n 
incut,  Faith,  Hope,  Charity,  Innocence,  and  I 

u     bj   Emmanuel   from  his  Father's  court      l 
i,  guards,  walls,  gates,  I  i 
Boul.'     If  any  one  of  th 
enter.      If  they  mean  miiiist.  a  ■  I 
trusting  indeed  to  an  arm  of  Qi  - 

they  were  all  popes,  cardinals,  arebbishi 

guard  and  defence   Ii    m 

lull  or  mi  earth.     '  E 
■  labour  iu  vain  that  an 
1  the  city,  the  watchmen 

•U 


322 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


look  about  you  ;  they  used  heretofore  to  lodge  with 
their  prince  in  the  castle,  when  Incredulity  was 
the  Lord  Mayor  of  this  town.  Mar.  vii.  21,  22.  But 
since  my  coming  hither,  they  lie  more  in  the  out- 
sides,  and  walls,  and  have  made  themselves  dens, 
and  caves,  and  holes,  and  strong  holds  therein. 
Wherefore,  0  Mansoul,  thy  work,  as  to  this,  will 
be  so  much  the  more  difficult  and  hard.  Ro.  vii.  is. 
That  is,  to  take,  mortify,  and  put  them  to  death 
according  to  the  will  of  my  Father.  Nor  can  you 
Christ  would  not  utterly  rid  yourselves  of  them,  unless 
have  us  destroy  y0u  should  pull  down  the  walls  of  your 

ourselves, there-  ^  ,,  .  . 

by  to  destroy  town,  the  which  1  am  by  no  means 
our  sins.  •willing  you  should.     Do  you  ask  me, 

What  shall  we  do  then  ?  Why,  be  you  diligent, 
and  quit  you  like  men,  observe  their  holds,  find 
out  their  haunts,  assault  them,  and  make  no  peace 
with  them.  Wherever  they  haunt,  lurk,  or  abide, 
and  what  terms  of  peace  soever  they  offer  you, 
abhor,  and  all  shall  be  well  betwixt  you  and  me. 
And  that  you  may  the  better  know  them  from  those 
that  are  the  natives  of  Mansoul,  I  will  give  you 
this  brief  schedule  of  the  names  of  the  chief  of 
The  names  of  them,  and  they  are  these  that  follow  : 
Soionianlm  The  Lord  Fornication,  the  Lord  Adul- 
Mansoui.  terv>  tne  Lord  Murder,  the  Lord  Anger, 
the  Lord  Lasciviousness,  the  Lord  Deceit,  the  Lord 
Evil-eye,  Mr.  Drunkenness,  Mr.  Revelling,  Mr. 
Idolatry, Mr.  Witchcraft, Mr.  Variance, Mr.  Emula- 
tion, Mr.  Wrath,  Mr.  Strife,  Mr.  Sedition,  and 
Mr.  Heresy.  These  are  some  of  the  chief,  0 
Mansoul,  of  those  that  will  seek  to  overthrow  thee 
for  ever.  These,  I  say,  are  the  skulkers  in  Man- 
soul, but  look  thou  well  into  the  law  of  thy  King, 
and  there  thou  shalt  find  their  physiognomy,  and 
such  other  characteristical  notes  of  them,  by  which 
they  certainly  may  be  known.1 

1  These,  0  iny  Mansoul,  and  I  would  gladly  that 
you  should  certainly  know  it,  if  they  be  suffered  to 
run  and  range  about  the  town  as  they  would,  will 
quickly,  like  vipers,  eat  out  your  bowels,  yea,  poison 
your  captains,  cut  the  sinews  of  your  soldiers, 
break  the  bar  and  bolts  of  your  gates,  and  turn 
your  now  most  flourishing  Mansoul  into  a  barren 
and  desolate  wilderness,  and  ruinous  heap.  Where- 
fore that  you  may  take  courage  to  yourselves  to 
A  commission  to  apprehend  these  villains  wherever  you 
»olSan'se  in  find  them,  I  give  to  you  my  Lord 
Mansoul.  Mayor,  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  and  Mr. 

Recorder,  with  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 


1  '  Physiognomy  '  and  '  characteristical '  are  unusually  hard 
words  for  Bunyan  to  use ;  the  meaning  is  that  those  Diabo- 
lonian  skulkers  cannot  be  so  disguised  as  to  avoid  a  prayerful 
scrutiny.  The  Word  is  the  test.  The  aid  of  the  Spirit  is 
needlid;  therefore  must  our  prayer  he,  'Search  me,  ami  try 
me,'  and  crucify  any  of  these  Diabolonians,  who,  lurking  in  my 
soul,  are  enemies  to  its  peace  and  happiness. — (En.) 

2  Christian,  mark  well  your  duty  not  only  publicly  to  put 
en  Christ,  but  at  the  market-cross  deny  and  crucify  sin.     The 


•*&£ 


Mansoul,  full  power  and  commission  to  seek  out, 
to  take,  and  to  cause  to  be  put  to  death  by  the 
cross,2  all,  and  all  manner  of  Diabolonians,  when 
and  wherever  you  shall  find  them  to  lurk  within, 
or  to  range  without  the  walls  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul. 

'  I  told  you  before,  that  I  had  placed  a  standing 
ministry  among  you,  not  that  you  have  but  these 
with  you,  for  my  four  first  captains   „ 

.  .  .  ,  More  preacher?, 

who  came  against  the  master  and  lord  if  need  be,  for 
of  the  Diabolonians  that  was  in  Man- 
soul, they  can,  and  if  need  be,  and  if  they  be  re- 
quired, will  not  only  privately  inform,  but  publicly 
preach  to  the  corporation  both  good  and  whole- 
some doctrine,  and  such  as  shall  lead  you  in  the 
way.  Yea,  they  will  set  up  a  weekly,  yea,  if 
need  be,  a  daily  lecture  in  thee,  0  Mansoul ;  and 
will  instruct  thee  in  such  profitable  lessons,  that  if 
heeded,  will  do  thee  good  at  the  end.  And 
take  good  heed  that  you  spare  not  the  men 
that  you  have  a  commission  to  take  and  crucify. 

'  Now  as  I  have  set  out  before  your  eyes  the 
vagrants  and  runagates  by  name,  so  I  will  tell  you 
that  among  yourselves  some  of  them 

i     ,.  •        .       i  m  A  caction. 

shall  creep  in   to  beguile  you,   even 
such  as  would  seem,  and  that  in  appearance,  are 
very  rife  and  hot  for  religion.     And  they,  if  you 
watch  not,  will  do  you  a  mischief,  such  an  one  as 
at  present  you  cannot  think  of. 

'  These,  as  I  said,  will  show  themselves  to  you 
in  another  hue  than  those  under  description  before. 
Wherefore,  Mansoul,  watch  and  be  sober,  and  suffer 
not  thyself  to  be  betrayed.'3 

When  the  Prince  had  thus  far  uew  modelled  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  and  had  instructed  them  in  such 
matters  as  were  profitable  for  them  to  know,  then 
he  appointed  another  day,  in  which  he  intended, 
when  the  townsfolk  came  together,  to  bestow  a 
further  badge  of  honour  upon  the  town  Another  ivi_ 
of  Mansoul ;  a  badge  that  should  lege  for  Man- 
distinguish  them  from  all  the  people, 
kindreds,  and  tongues  that  dwell  in  the  kingdom 
of  Universe.  Now  it  was  not  long  before  the  day 
appointed  was  come,  and  the  Prince  and  his  people 
met  in  the  King's  palace,  where  first  Emmanuel 
made  a  short  speech  unto  them,  and  then  did  for 
them  as  he  had  said,  and  unto  them  as  he  had 
promised. 

My  Mansoul,  said  he,  that  which  I  now  am  about 
to  do,  is  to  make  you  known  to  the  jjis  speech  to 
world  to  be  mine,  and  to  distinguish       Mansoul. 


drunkard,  in  the  presence  of  his  companions,  is  to  deny  him- 
self, and  to  denounce  the  misery  of  his  former  indulgences ; 
and  so  of  every  class  or  grade  of  sinners. 

'  I'm  not  ashamed  to  own  my  Lord.' — (Ed.) 
3  How  needful  a  caution  is  this,  lest  we  should  be  deceived 
by  spiritual  pride,  self-righteousness,  self-seeking,  and  super- 
stition ! — (Burder.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


32  3 


you  also  in  your  own  eves,  from  all  false  traitors 

that  may  creep  in  among  you. 

Then  he  commanded  that  those  that  waited  upon 

him  should  go  and  bring  forth  out  of  his  treasury 

those-  white  and  Blistering  robea   that 

White  rol.es.  B  6 

1,  said  be,  have  provided  and  laid  up 
in  store  for  my  Mansoul.  So  the  white  garments 
were  fetched  out  of  his  treasury,  and  laid  forth  to 
the  eyea  of  the  people.     Moreover,  it  was  granted 

to  them  that  they  should  take  them  and  put  them 
On,  according,  said  he,  to  your  Bias  and  stature. 
So  the  people  were  put  into  white,  into  tine  linen, 
white  and  clean.    B*  xit  8. 

Then  said  the  Prince  unto  them,  This,  0  Man- 
soul,  is  my  livery,  and  the  badge  by  which  mine 
arc  known  from  the  servants  of  others.  Yea,  it 
is  that  which  I  grant  to  all  that  are  mine,  and 
without  which  no  man  is  permitted  to  see  my  face. 
Wear  them  therefore  for  my  sake  who  gave  them 
unto  you;  and  also  if  you  would  he  known  by  the 
world  to  he  mine. 

But  now!  can  you  think  how  Mansoul  shone? 
It  was  fair  as  the  sun,  clear  as  the  moon,  and 
terrible  as  an  army  with  banners,  ca.  vi. 

The  Prince  added  further,  and  said,  No  prince, 
That  which  dis-  potentate,  or  mighty  one  of  Universe, 
M'Situ,  S'iveth  this  livery  but  myself;  behold 
other  people,  therefore,  as  I  said  before,  you  shall 
he  known  by  it  to  be  mine 

And  now,  said  he,  I  have  given  you  my  livery, 
let  me  give  you  also  in  commandment  concerning 
them  ;  and  be  sure  that  you  take  good  heed  to  my 
words.  First,  Wear  them  daily,  day  by  day,  lest 
you  should  at  sometimes  appear  to  others  as  if 
you  were  none  of  mine.  Secondly,  Keep  them 
always  white,  for,  if  they  be  soiled,  it  is  dishonour 
to  me.  Ec.  ix.  8.  Thirdly,  Wherefore  gird  them  up 
from  the  ground,  and  let  them  not  lag  with  dust 
and  dirt.  Fourthly,  Take  heed  that  you  lose  them 
not,  lest  you  walk  naked,  and  they  see  your  shame.1 
Re.  Ui.  2.  Fifthly,  But  if  you  should  sully  them,  if 
you  should  defile  them — the  which  1  am  greatly 
unwilling  you  should,  and  the  prince  Diabolua 
would  he  glad  if  you  would — then  speed  you  to  do 
that  which  is  written  in  my  law,  that  yet  you  may 
stand,  and  not  fall  before  me,  and  before  my 
throne.  Lu.  xxi.  36.  Also  this  is  the  way  to  cause 
that  I  may  not  leave  you  nor  forsake  you  while 
here,  but  may  dwell  in  this  town  of  Mansoul  for 
ever.  lie.  \ii.  is— 17. 

And  now  was  Mansoul,  and  the  inhabitants  of 
it,  as  the  signet  upon  Emmanuel's  right  hand ; 
where  was  there  now  a  town,  a  city,  a  corporation 


i  If  by  siu  we  lose  the  sense  of  being  clothed  with  the  gar- 
ments of  solvation,  how  does  the  Mol  led  its  nakedm m  and 
rileness!  '0  wretched  man!'  is  the  cry;  the  conscience  is 
wounded,   God  dishonoured,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  grieved. — 


that  could  compare  with  Mansoul  —a  town  re- 
deemed   from    die    hand    and   from    the    power   of 

Diabolua— a   tow,,    that    the    i 

Shaddai  loved,  and  that    he  sent  Em-    ' 

manual  to  regain  from  the  prince  of  the  infernal 
cave — yea,  a  town  that  Emmanuel  loved  to  dwell 
in,  and  that  he  ohosc  for  bis  royal  habitation     a 

town  that  he  fortified  for  himself,  and  made  Btron 

by  the  force  of  his  army  '.     What  -hall  I  sav  \  Man- 

soul  has  now  a  most    excellent   Prince,  golden 

captains   and    men    of  war,    weapons    proved,    an  l 

garments  as  white  as  snow.  Nor  are  these  benefita 
io  he  counted  little  hut  great.  Can  the  town  of 
Mansoul  esteem  them  so,  and  improve  them  to  that 
end  and  purpose  for  which  they  are  bestowed  upon 

them  \ 

When  the  l'liin'c  li.nl  thus  completed  the  model- 
ling of  the  town,  to  show  that  he  had  great  delight 
in  the  work  of  his  hands,  and  took  pleasure  in  the 
good   that   he   had    wrought    for   the    famous    and 

flourishing  Mansoul,  he  commanded,  and  t! 

his  standard  upon  the  battlements  of  the  , 
And  then, 

First,  He  gave  them  frequent  visits,  not  a  day 
now  but  the  elders  of  Mansoul  must  come  to  him, 
or  he  to  them,  into  his  palace.      Now  they 
walk  and  talk  together  of  all  the  great  things  that 
he  had  done,  and  yet  further  promised  to  do  for 
the  town  of  Mansoul.  2  Co.  vi.  v:,.     Thus  would  he 
often    do  with   the   Lord-Mayor,  my    ( -,.,.. , 
Lord  Will-he-will,  and  the  honest  Bub-        1!,,;  ""• 
ordinate  preacher  Mr.  Conscience,  and  Mr.  Recor- 
der.    But  0!  how  graciously,  how  lovingly,  bow 
courteously,  and  tenderly  did  this  blessed  prince 
now  carry  it  towards  the  town  of  Mansoul!     In  all 
the  streets,  gardens,   orchards,  and  other  places 
where  he  came,  to   he   sure   the   poor        ,, 
should  have  his  blessing  and  heiicdie-      "'   ' 
tion;   yea,  he  would   ki.-s   them,  and    if  they  wen- 
ill,  he  would  lay  hands   on  them,  and   make  them 
well.     The  captains  also  he  would  daily,  y.  a. 
times    hourly   encourage    with    his    presence    and 
goodly  words.      For  you  must    know  that    a  smile 
from  him  upon  them  would  put  more  vigour,  more 
life  and  stoutness  into  them,  than  would  anything 
else  under  heaven. 

The  Prince  would  now  also  feast  them,  and  with 
them  continually.      Hardly  a  week  would  p 
a  banquet  must  he  had  betwixt  him  and  them. 
1  Co.  v.  8.      You  may  remember  that  B01 
fore  we  made  mention  of  one  feast  that  tie 
together,  but  now  to  feast  them  was  a  thing  mors 
common  ;   every  day  with  Mansoul  wt 
now.      Nor   did   he,  when   they   returned    to  their 


2  '  Blessed  are  thev  which  do  hunger  nnd  thirst  «"■  I 
teousness,  for  they  shall  be  fifled.'     A  HM*    &WB  Jesus  puU 
vigour  and  life  into  thf   > 


324. 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


places,  send   them  empty  away,  either  they  must 
have  a1  ring,  a2gold  chain,  a3bracelet, 


A.  token  of  mar- 
riage.    ['Thy    a    white  stone,  or  something;   so  dear 

Maker  is    tliy 
huslmnd.'] 


was  Mansoul  to  him  now ;  so  lovely 
*Atokenofhon-    was  Mansoul  in  his  eyes.5 
3  a  token  of        Secondly,    When    the    elders    and 

beauty,  t  i 

*  A  token  of  townsmen  did  not  come  to  him,  he 
would  send  in  much  plenty  of  provi- 
sion unto  them,  meat  that  came  from  court,  wine 
and  bread  that  were  prepared  for  his  Father's 
table.  Yea,  such  delicates  would  he  send  unto 
them,  and  therewith  would  so  cover  their  table, 
that  whoever  saw  it  confessed  that  the  like  could 
not  be  seen  in  any  kingdom. 

Thirdly,  If  Mansoul  did  not  frequently  visit  him 

as  he  desired  they  should,  he  would  walk  out  to 

them,  knock  at  their  doors  and  desire  entrance, 

that  amity  might  be  maintained  betwixt  them  and 

The  a.in^er  of    mm*  If  they  did  hear  and  open  to  him, 

wandering       as  commonly  they  would,  if  they  were 

thoughts.  ,  »  J      . ,    ,     J         a      .  . 

at   home,   then   would    he    renew  his 

former  love,  and  confirm   it  too   with  some   new 
tokens   and  signs    of   continued  favour.    Re.  m  20. 

Ga.  v.  2. 

And  was  it  not  now  amazing  to  behold,  that  in 
that  very  place  where  sometimes  Diabolus  had  his 
abode,  and  entertained  his  Diabolonians  to  the 
almost  utter  destruction  of  Mansoul,  the  Prince  of 
princes  should  sit  eating  and  drinking  with  them, 
while  all  his  mighty  captains,  men  of  war,  trumpet- 
ers, with  the  singing-men  and  singing-women  of 
his  Father,  stood  round  about  to  wait  upon  them! 
Now  did  Mansoul's  cup  run  over,  now 

J.'anEoul'sglorv.      , .  .   .  ,    .  x 

did  her  conduits  run  sweet  wine,  now 
did  she  eat  the  finest  of  the  wheat,  and  drink  milk 
and  honey  out  of  the  rock!  Now  she  said,  How 
great  is  his  goodness !  for  since  I  found  favour  in 
his  eyes,  how  honourable  have  I  been  ! 

The  blessed  Prince  did  also  order  a  new  officer 
in  the  town,  and  a  goodly  person  he  was  ;  his  name 
was  Mr.  God's-peace.  Col.  m.  15.  This  man  was  set 
over  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  my  Lord  Mayor,  Mr. 
Recorder,  the  subordinate  Preacher,  Mr.  Mind, 
and  over  all  the  natives  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
Himself  was  not  a  native  of  it,  but  came  with  the 
Prince  Emmanuel  from  the  court.  He  was  a 
great  acquaintance  of  Captain  Credence  and  Cap- 
tain Goodhope;  some  say  they  were  kin,  and  I 
am  of  that  opinion  too.  Bo.  xv.  18.  This  man,  as  I 
said,  was  made  governor  of  the  town  in  general, 
especially  over  the  castle,  and  Captain  Credence 
was  to  help  him  there.      And  I  made  great  obser- 

6  How  blessed  is  the  Christian  who  lives  in  the  holy  enjoy- 
ment of  his  high  and  heavenly  privileges!  Every  day  is" a 
t'east-dav,  bringing  fresh  discoveries  of  grace  and  foretastes  of 
glory.— -(Kd.) 

e  This  is  a  beautiful  representation  of  the  holy  enjoyment 
of  Divine  things,  when  the  soul  is  emancipated  from  sin,  and 
tujoys  a  little   heaven  on  earth.     It   is  in  Bunyan's  Grace 


vation  of  it,  that  so  long  as  all  things  went  in  Man- 
soul as  this  sweet-natured  gentleman  would,  the 
town  was  in  most  happy  condition.  Now  there 
were  no  jars,  no  chiding,  no  interferings,  no  un- 
faithful  doings  in  all  the  town  of  Mansoul,  every 
man  in  Mansoul  kept  close  to  his  own  employment. 
The  gentry,  the  officers,  the  soldiers,  and  all  in 
place  observed  their  order.  And  as  Hoiy  conceptions, 
for  the  women  and  children  of  the  Good  thoughts, 
town,  they  followed  their  business  joyfully,  they 
wouid  work  and  sing,  work  and  sing  from  morning 
till  night ;  so  that  quite  through  the  town  of  Man- 
soul now,  nothing  was  to  be  found  but  harmony, 
quietness,  joy,  and  health.  And  this  lasted  all 
that  summer.0 

[Chapter  XII.] 

[Contents  : — Carnal-secnrity  prevailing  in  the  town,  a  cool- 
ness takes  place  between  the  inhabitants  and  Emmanuel; 
who,  being  greatly  offended,  privately  withdraws — Godly- 
fear,  who  detects  the  cause  of  his  removal,  excites  the 
people  to  destroy  Mr.  Carnal-security — Measures  are  then 
taken  to  induce  Emmanuel  to  return.] 

But  there  was  a  man  in  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
and  his  name  was  Mr.  Carnal-security.7  This 
man  did,  after  all  this  mercy  bestowed  The  story  of  Mr. 
on  this  corporation,  bring  the  town  of  Carnal-security. 
Mansoul  into  great  and  grievous  slavery  and  bond- 
age. A  brief  account  of  him  and  of  his  doings 
take  as  followeth  : — 

When  Diabolus  at  first  took  possession  of  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  he  brought  thither  with  himself 
a  great  number  of  Diabolonians,  men  of  his  own 
condition.  Now  among  these  there  was  one  whose 
name  was  Mr.  Self-conceit,  and  a  not- 

-.,...  ,  ,         .        Mr.Rt'lf-conceit 

able  brisk  man  he  was,  as  any  that  111 
those  days  did  possess  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Dia- 
bolus then  perceiving  this  man  to  be  active  and 
bold,  sent  him  upon  many  desperate  designs,  the 
which  he  managed  better,  and  more  to  the  pleas- 
ing of  his  Lord,  than  most  that  came  with  him 
from  the  dens  could  do.  Wherefore  finding  of  him 
so  fit  for  his  purpose,  he  preferred  him,  and  made 
him  next  to  the  great  Lord  Will-be-will,  of  whom 
we  have  written  so  much  before.  Now  the  Lord 
Will-be-will  being  in  those  days  very  well  pleased 
with  him,  and  with  his  achievements,  gave  him  his 
daughter,  the  Lady  Fear-nothing,  to  wife.  Now 
of  my  Lady  Fear-nothing  did  this  Mr.  Carnal-securi- 
Self-conceit  beget  this  gentleman  Mr.  1>'S  01|slnal- 
Carnal-security.  Wherefore  there  being  then  in 
Mansoul  those  strange  kinds  of  mixtures,  it  was 


Abounding,  No.  2o2 — '  I  had  strange  apprehensions  of  the 
grace  of  God,  so  that  I  could  hardly  bear  up  under  it ;  it  was 
so  out  of  measure  amazing,  that  I  think  if  it  had  abode  long 
upon  me,  it  would  have  made  me  incapable  of  business.' — 
(Ed.) 

7  Carnal  security,   or   comfort  and  security  iu  the  flesh, 
instead  of  livii-g  on  Christ  by  faith.— (En.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


His  qualities. 


hard  for  them  in  some  oases  to  find  out  who  were 
natives,  who  not;  for  Mr.  Carnal-security  sprang 
from  my  Lord  Will-be-will  by  mother's  side,  though 
he  had  for  his  father  a  Diaboloniao  by  nature.1 
"\\  all,  this  Carnal-security  took  much  alter  his 
father  and  mother;  he  was  self-con- 
ceited,  he  feared  nothing,  he  was  also 
a  very  busy  man  ;  nothing  of  news,  nothing  of 
doctrine,  nothing  of  alteration,  or  talk  of  alteration, 
could   at   any  time    he   on   fool  in  Mansoul,  but  be 

Mire  Mr.  Carnal-security  would  be  at  the  head  or 
tail  of  it;  but  to  ho  sure  he  would  decline  those 
Heisahrayslbr  t'iat  M0  deemed  the  weakest,  and 
BtOOd  alwavs  with  them,  in  hit  way  of 
side.  i.  i          i 

Btanding,  that  lie  supposed  was  the 

strongest  side. 

Now  when  Shaddai  the  mighty,  and  Emmanuel 
his  Son  made  war  upon  Mansoul  to  take  it,  this 
Mr.  Carnal-security  was  then  in  town,  and  was  a 
great  doer  among  the  people,  encouraging  them  in 
their  rebellion,  putting  of  them  upon  hardening  of 
themselves  in  their  resisting  of  the  King's  forces; 
but  when  he  saw  that  the  town  of  Mansoul  was 
taken  and  converted  to  the  use  of  the  glorious 
Trir.ee  Emmanuel,  and  when  he  also  saw  what 
was  become  of  Diabolus,  and  how  he  was  nnroosted, 
and  made  to  quit  the  castle  in  the  greatest  con- 
tempt and  scorn,  and  that  the  town  of  Mansoul 
was  well  lined  with  captains,  engines  of  war,  and 
men,  and  also  provision,  what  doth  he  but  slily 
wheel  about  also ;  and  as  he  had  served  Diabolus 
against  the  good  Prince,  so  he  feigned  that  he 
would  serve  the  Prince  against  his  foes. 

And  having  got  some  little  smattering  of 
Emmanuel's  things  by  the  end,"  being  bold,  he 
ventures  himself  into  the  company  of  the  towns- 
men, and  attempts  also  to  chat  among  them.  Now 
I  low  Mr.  Camal-  he  knew  that  the  power  and  strength 
S*E  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  was  great,  and 
MansouL  t]iat  ;t  cou](|  not  ^ut  |jC  pleasing  to  the 

people  if  he  cried  up  their  might  and  their  glory. 
Wherefore  he  beginneth  his  tale  with  the  power 
and  strength  of  Mansoul,  and  affirmed  that  it  was 
impregnable.  Now  magnifying  their  captains,  and 
their  slings,  and  their  rams;  then  crying  up  their 
fortifications,  and  strong  holds;  and  lastly,  the 
assurances  that  they  had  from  their  Prince  that 
Mansoul  should  be  happy  for  ever.      But  when  he 

1  Vices  arc  so  disguised,  that  no  merely  human  vigilance 
or  sagacity  can  detect  them  lurking  in  the  trails  of  .Mansoul ; 
hence  the  necessity  of  the  cry,  'Search  me,  and  trj 
God.'— En.) 

-  1  have  not  been  able  to  find  any  illustration  of  I 
ing.     It  probably  means,  that   without  any  inquiry  into  the 
state  of  Mansoul— its  lost,  helpless,  hopeless,  miserable, 
condition,  ami  its  cry,  Lord,  save,  1  perish!   I 
proud  of  the  elevation  of  .Mansoul,  considered  it  safe,  without 
the  trouble  of  prayer  or  watchfulness  Mai  it  is 

that  we  examine  premises  before  wc  jump  at  conclusions,  or 
take  things  by  the  end!— (Ed.; 


It   is  not  grace 

(.'race    uii|ir»v. 

el,     that     j.).. 

dangers. 


saw  that  some  <  f  the  men  ,,f  (he  (own  were  tickled 
and    taken    with    his    disOOUTSe,    he    makes    it    hi- 

business,  and  walking  from  Btreel  to  street,  house 

t * '    house,    and    man    to   man,    he    at    last   brought 

id   to  dance  after  his  pipe;  and  to  grow 

almost    a.    carnally    secure    as    him   i  | 
talking  they  went   to   feasting,  and   from  I 
t<>  Bporting;  and  so  to  Home  other  matters.     Now 
Emmanuel  was  yet  in  the  town  of  Blansoul,  and 
he  wisely  observed  their  doings.    My  Lord  Mayor, 
my  Lord  Will-he-will,  and  Mr.  Recorder,  were  also 
all  taken  with  the  word-  of  this  tattling  Diabolonian 
gentleman,  forgetting  that  their  Prince  had  given 
them  warning  before  to  take  heed  thai  thi 
not  beguiled  with  any  Diabolonian  Bleight.     11.- 
had  further  told  them  that  the  secur- 
ity  of  the  now   flourishing  town   of 
Mansoul,  did   not   so  much  lie  in  her 
present    fortifications   and  force,  as  in 
her  so  using  of  what  she  had,  as  might 
oblige  her  Emmanuel  to  abide  within  her  c 
for  the  right  doctrine  of  Emmanuel 
town  of  Mansoul  should  take  heed  that  they  forget 
not  his  father'.-  love  and  his;  also  that  they  should 
so  demean  themselves  as  to  continue  to  keep  them- 
selves therein.      Now  this  was  not  the  way  to  <l«. 
it,  namely,  to   fall   in  love  with  one  <>f  t! 
bolonians,  and  with  such  an  one  too  as  Mr.  Carnal- 
security  was,  and  to  he  led  up  and  down  by  the 
nose   by   him.4      Tiny    should    have    hear.; 
Prince,  feared  their  Prince,  loved  their  Prim 
have  stoned  this  naughty  pack  to  death,  and  to  •!; 
care  to  have  walked  in  the  ways  of  their  Prince's 
prescribing,  for  then  should  their  peace  bs 
as  a  river,  when  their  righteousness  had  1  ■  • 
the  waves  of  the  sea. 

Xowwhen  Emmanuel  perceived  that,throu 
policy  of  Mr.  Carnal-security,  the  heait       : 
of  .Mansoul  were  chilled,  and  abated  in  their  practical 
love  to  him  ;;'  first,  he  bemoans  them,  and  e 
their  state  with  the  Secretary,  saying,  0  that  my 
people  had  hearkened   unto  me,  and   j.,,,,,  ,. 
that  Mansoul  had  walked  in  myways! 

I  would  have  feil  them  with  the  finest  of  the 
andwithhoneyout  of  the  rock  would  1  bavesusl 
them.    1%.  IxxxL  L&      This  done,  he  said  in  his  heart. 


■  Carnal-security,  the  offspring  of  Self-conceit  ai  I 
nothing,  is  one  of  cur  must  subtle  enemies,  and  net 

mi  our  fortifications,  or  the  doe. 
;   grace,  is  our  duty  and  privilege;  but  all  our  trust 
must  be  iu  our  living  anion  to  our  ever-living  ii 

4  '  Ix;d  by  the  nose ;'  t<>  disc 
be  led  with  t  inquiring  thi 

•'  A  child  in  religion  would  aainrallj  i    | 

the  time  that  be  leal  rendered  h 
jury  could  have  been  found  in  I 
ways  are   not   as  our   v. 

Thus  'the  bitter  comes  before  the  n 
!-  r.'— (Ed.) 


326 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


I  will  return  to  the  court  and  go  to  my  place, 
till  Mansoul  shall  consider  and  acknowledge  their 
offence.  And  he  did  so,  and  the  cause  and  man- 
ner of  his  going  away  from  them  was  thus — 
The  cause  was,  for  that  Mansoul  declined  him, 
as  is  manifest  in  these  particulars, 

ThewavotMan-  .  * 

soul's  backslid-  1.  They  left  on  their  former  way  ot 
visiting  of  him,  they  came  not  to  his 
royal  palace  as  afore.  2.  They  did  not  regard, 
nor  yet  take  notice  that  he  came,  or  came  not  to 
visit  them.  3.  The  love-feasts  that  had  wont  to 
be  between  their  Prince  and  them,  though  he  made 
them  still,  and  called  them  to  them,  yet  they 
neglected  to  come  at  them,  or  to  be  delighted  with 
them.  4.  They  waited  not  for  his  counsels,  but 
began  to  be  headstrong  and  confident  in  them- 
selves, concluding  that  now  they  were  strong  and 
invincible,  and  that  Mansoul  was  secure,  and  be- 
yond all  reach  of  the  foe,  and  that  her  state  must 
needs  be  unalterable  for  ever.1 

Now,  as  was  said,  Emmanuel  perceiving  that 
by  the  craft  of  Mr.  Carnal-security,  the  town  of 
Mansoul  was  taken  off  from  their  dependence  upon 
him,  and  upon  his  Father  by  him,  and  set  upon 
what  by  them  was  bestowed  upon  it;  he  first,  as 
I  said,  bemoaned  their  state,  then  he  used  means 
to  make  them  understand  that  the  way  that  they 
went  on  in  was  dangerous.  For  he  sent  my  Lord 
High  Secretary  to  them,  to  forbid  them  such  ways  ; 
but  twice  when  he  came  to  them  he  found  them  at 
dinner  in  Mr.  Carnal-security's  parlour,  and  per- 
ceiving also  that  they  were  not  willing  to  reason 
about  matters  concerning  their  good, 

J  hey  grieve  the  °  &         ' 

Holy  Ghost  and  he  took  grief  and  went  his  way.  The 
which  when  he  had  told  to  the  Prince 
Emmanuel,  he  took  offence,  and  was  grieved  also, 
and  so  made  provision  to  return  to  his  Father's 
court. 

Now  the  methods  of  his  withdrawing,  as  I  was 
saying  before,  were  thus,  1.  Even  while  he  was 
,,.  .  .       ...       vet  with   them  in  Mansoul,  he  kept 

Christ     with-      J  \  r 

drws  not  all  himself  close,  and  more  retired  than 
formerly.  2.  His  speech  was  not  now, 
if  he  came  in  their  company,  so  pleasant  and  fa- 
miliar as  formerly.  3.  Nor  did  he,  as  in  times  past, 
send  to  Mansoul  from  his  table  those  dainty  bits 
which  he  was  wont  to  do.  4.  Nor  when  they  came 
to  visit  him,  as  now  and  then  they  would,  would 
he  be  so  easily  spoken  with  as  they  found  him  to 
be  in  times  past.  They  might  now  knock  once, 
The  working  of  ye&  twice,  but  he  would  seem  not  at 
their  affectum.  aU  to  regar(i  tiiem  .  whereas  formerly, 
at  the  sound  of  their  feet,  he  would  up  and  run, 
and  meet  them  half  way,  and  take  them  too,  and 
lay  them  in  his  bosom. 


1  0  Christian,  beware  of  the  first  step  in  backsliding! 
While  you  seek  the  Saviour's  face,  and  walk  humbly  with 
God,  you  are  safe. — (Ed  ) 


But  thus  Emmanuel  carried  it  now,  and  by  his 
his  carriage  he  sought  to  make  them  bethink  then*- 
selves  and  return  to  him.  But,  alas!  they  did  not 
consider,  they  did  not  know  his  ways,  they  re- 
garded not,  they  were  not  touched  with 
these,  nor  with  the  true  remembrance 
of  former  favours.  Wherefore  what  does  he  but 
in  private  manner  withdraw  himself,  first  from  his 
palace,  then  to  the  gate  of  the  town,  and  so  away 
from  Mansoul  he  goes,  till  they  should  acknowledge 
their  offence,  and  more  earnestly  seek  his  face, 
no.  v.  15.  Mr.  God's-peace  also  laid  down  his  com- 
mission, and  would  for  the  present  act  no  longer 
in  the  town  of  Mansoul.2  Eze.  xi  21. 

Thus  they  walked  contrary  to  him,  and  he  again 
by  way  of  retaliation,  walked  contrary  to  them. 
Le.  xxvi.  21-24.  But,  alas !  by  this  time  they  were  so 
hardened  in  their  way,  and  had  so  drunk  in  the 
doctrine  of  Mr.  Carnal-security,  that  the  depart- 
ing of  their  Prince  touched  them  not,  nor  was  he 
remembered  by  them  when  gone ;  and  so,  of  con- 
sequence, his  absence  not  condoled  by  them.  Je.ii.  32. 
Now  there  was  a  day  wherein  this  old  gentleman 
Mr.  Carnal-security  did  again  make  a  Atrick- put  upon 
feast  for  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  »**.  GodljMaar. 
there  was  at  that  time  in  the  town  one  Mr.  Godly- 
fear,  one  now  but  little  set  by,  though  formerly  one 
of  great  request.  This  man  old  Carnal- security 
had  a  mind,  if  possible,  to  gull  and  debauch,  and 
abuse  as  he  did  the  rest,  and  therefore  He  goes  to  the 
he  now  bids  him  to  the  feast  with  his  g*  afktisl  a 
neighbours;  so  the  day  being  come  st'a»ger. 
they  prepare,  and  he  goes  and  appears  with  the 
rest  of  the  guests ;  and  being  all  set  at  the  table, 
they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  were  merry  even  all 
but  this  one  man.  For  Mr.  Godly-fear  sat  like  a 
stranger,  and  did  neither  eat,  nor  was  merry.  The 
which  when  Mr.  Carnal-security  perceived,  he  pre- 
sently addressed  himself  in  a  speech  thus  to  him : 
Carn.  Mr.  Godly-fear,  are  you  not  well  ?  you 
seem  to  be  ill  of  body  or  mind,  or  both.  Talk  betwixt 
I  have  a  cordial  of  Mr.  Forget-good 's  ^t^fe 
making,  the  which,  Sir,  if  you  will  take  Godly-fear, 
a  dram  of,  I  hope  it  may  make  you  bonny  and 
blithe,  and  so  make  you  more  fit  for  we  feasting 
companions. 

Godly.  Unto  whom  the  good  old  gentleman 
discreetly  replied,  Sir,  I  thank  you  for  all  things 
courteous  and  civil,  but  for  your  cordial  I  have  no 
list  thereto.  But  a  word  to  the  natives  of  Man- 
soul— you  the  elders  and  chief  of  Mansoul,  to  me 
it  is  strange  to  see  you  so  jocund  and  merry,  when 
the  town  of  Mansoul  is  in  such  woful  case. 

Carn.  Then  said  Mr.  Carnal-security,  You  want 
sleep,  good  Sir,  I  doubt.  If  you  please  lie  down 
and  take  a  nap,  and  we,  meanwhile,  will  be  merry. 

2  Christ  and  the  Spirit,  and  consequently  peace,  withdraw 
from  the  carnally  secure. — (Masou.) 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


817 


Godly.  Then  said  the  good  man  as  follows,  Sir, 
if  you  were  not  destitute  of  an  honest  heart,  you 
could  not  do  as  you  have  dune,  and  do. 

CARN.    Then  said  Mr.  Carnal-security,  Why  ? 

Godly.  Nay,  pray  interrupt  DM  not.  It  is  true 
the  town  of  Mansoul  was  Btrong,  and.  with  a  pro- 
viso, impregnable;  hut  you,  the  townsmen,  have 
weakened  it,  and  it  now  lies  obnoxious  to  its  foes; 

nor  is  it  a  time  to  Batter,  or  be  silent.      It  is  you, 

Mr.  Carnal-security,  that  have  wilily  stripped  Man- 
soul,  and  driven  her  glory  from  her;   you  have 

pulled  down  her  towers,  you  have  broken  down  her 
gates,  you  have  spoiled  her  locks  and  hars. 

And  now  to  explain  myself.  From  that  time  that 
my  Lords  of  Mansoul  and  you.  Sir,  grew  so  great, 
from  that  time  the  strength  of  Mansoul  has  been 
offended,  and  now  he  is  arisen  and  is  gone.1  If 
any  shall  question  the  truth  of  my  words,  1  will 
answer  him  by  this,  and  such  like  questions: 
Where  is  the  Prince  Emmanuel  i  When  did  a  man 
or  woman  in  .Mansoul  see  him  i  When  did  you  hear 
from  him,  or  taste  any  of  his  dainty  bits  ?  You  are 
now  a  feasting  with  this  Diabolonian  monster,  but 
he  is  uot  your  prince.  I  say,  therefore,  though 
enemies  from  without,  had  you  taken  heed,  could 
not  have  made  a  prey  of  you,  yet  since  you  have 
sinned  against  your  Prince,  your  enemies  within 
have  been  too  hard  for  you. 

Carx.  Then  said  Mr.  Carnal-security,  Fie,  fie, 
Mr.  Godly-fear,  fie ;  will  you  never  shake  off  your 
timorousness  ?  Are*you  afraid  of  being  sparrow- 
blasted  ?'J  Who  hath  hurt  you  ?  Behold  I  am  on 
your  side,  only  you  are  for  doubting,  and  I  am  for 
being  confident.3  Besides,  is  this  a  time  to  be  sad 
in  ?  A  feast  is  made  for  mirth ;  why  then  do  ye 
now,  to  your  shame  and  our  trouble,  break  out  into 
such  passionate  melancholy  language,  when  you 
should  eat,  aud  drink,  and  be  merry  ? 

Godly.  Then  said  Mr.  Godly-fear  again,  I  may 
well  be  sad,  for  Emmanuel  is  gone  from  Mansoul. 
1  say  again,  he  is  gone,  and  you,  Sir,  are  the  man 
that  has  driven  him  away  ;  yea  he  is  gone  without 
so  much  as  acquainting  the  nobles  of  Mansoul  with 
bis  going,  and  if  that  is  not  a  sign  of  bis  anger  1 
am  not  acquainted  with  the  methods  of  godliness.' 
His  speech  to  And  now»  mv  'ori^s  aU(^  gentlemen — 
11 '•  elders  oJ  for  my  speech  is  still  to  you — yourfrra- 
dual  declining  from  him  did   provoke, 


1  '  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  be- 
forestall.*  Pr.  xvL  18.— (Ed.) 

-'  This  is  an  obsolete  term,  alluding  to  a  man  being  as  much 
alarmed  at  the  twitter  of  a  sparrow,  as  at  the  blast  of  a  trum- 
pet urging  him  to  deeds  of  war. — (Ed.) 

'■'■  <  'arnal-security  has  got  into  the  scorner's  seat — a  fearful 
state.     Lord  Erskine  said,  '  1  r  ye   Dalton's  doubts 

more  than  some  men's  certainties.'  The  late  venerable  Row- 
land Hill,  when  appealed  to  by  one  of  those  carnally-secure 
professors,  said  to  him,  '  Sir,  as  you  have  no  doubts,  then  I 
shall  both  doubt  if  you  and  far  you.'  Doubts  of  the  merits 
or  willingness  of  Christ  to  save  arc  very  sinful,  and  there  are 


him  gradually  to  deport  from  you,  the  which  ho 
did  for  some  time,  if  perhaps  you  would  ban 
loade.  sensible  thereby,  and  have  been  renewed  by 
humbling  of  yourselves;  hut  when  be  saw  that  Done 
would  regard,  nor  lay  these  tearful  beginnin 
his  anger  and  judgment  to  heart,  be  weal  awaj 

from    this    place,    and    this    I    saw  with    mini 
Wherefore  now,  while    you  boast,  your  Strength  i- 
gOne,  you  are  like  the  man  that  had  |osl   hlE 
that   before  did  wave   about  his  should'  I  -  V     . 

may  with  this  lord  ofyOUT  feast  shake  yoUFSelvt  I, 

aud  conclude  to  do  as  at  other  times;  but  since 
without  him  you  can  do  nothing,  and  he  is  depart*  I 
from  you,  turn  your  feast  into  a  sigh,  and  your 
mirth  into  lamentation.' 

Then  the  subordinate  Preacher,  old  Mr.  Con- 
science by  name,  he  that  of  old  WM    Eb  -    . 
corderof  Mansoul,  being  startled  at  what 
was  said,  began  to  second  it  tl. 

Con.  Indeed,  my  brethren,  quoth  he,  i  fear  that 
Mr.  Godly-fear  tells  us  true:  1,  for  my  part,  have 
not  seen  my  Prince  a  long  season.  1  cannot  re- 
member the  day  for  my  part.  Nor  can  [answer 
Mr.  Godly-fear's  question.  I  doubt,  I  am  afraid 
that  all  is  naught  with  Mansoul. 

Godly.  Nay,  1  know  that  you  shall  not  find  him 
in  Mansoul,  for  he  is  departed  and  gone  ;  yea,  and 
gone  for  the  faults  of  the  elders,  and  for  that 
they  rewarded  his  grace  with  unsufferable  unkind- 
nesses. 

Then  did  the  subordinate  Preacher  look  as 
would  fall  down  dead  at  the  table,  also    They  are  all 
all  there  present,  except  the  man  of  the       »&"»»'• 
house,    began    to   look    pale   and   wan.      But   hav- 
ing a  little  recovered  themselves  and  jointly  .. 
ing  to  believe  Mr.  Godly-fear  and  bis  Bayings,  they 
began   to  consult  what  was   be.-t   to   be  done  (now 
Mr.  Carnal-security  was  gone  into  bis  withdrawing 
room,  for  he  liked   not  such  dumpish  doings)  both 
to  the  man  of  the  bouse  for  drawing  them  into  evil, 

and  also  to  recover  Kminanuel's  love. 

And  with  that,  that  saving  of  their  PrinOt 
very  hot   into    their   minds,  which    he    had    bidden 

them  do  to  Buch  as  were  i\d?<'  prophets  that  should 

arise  to  delude   the  town  of  Mansoul.    Ike*      ooemlt 
So   they  took    Mr.   Carnal- security,    i','.',1,, . 
concluding  that  he  must  be  he,  and 


seasons  when  the  Christian  rises  above  all  doubts;  but  while 
we  have  a  sinful  heart  of  unbelief,  doubts,  like  clouds,  »nl 
arise  to  obscure  the  Sun  of  righteousness. — (Kw.) 

4  Sin  grieves  the  llolv  .si>irit,  and  ■ 
hk  lace,     lu  humhi.-,  close  walking  n  th  God,   -  ■ 
comfort,  and  peace ;  but  departing  from  the  L  u 

'  Samson  :  Bee  .lu.  xvL 

'   lly-fear  cannot  be  stupiued  with  Ponjei  -" ri 

He  is  not' like  the  man  who  'lost  hi-  ■ 
•  So  Samson,  when  hii  hail  »  ■- 
Met  Uii 

Shook  hil  vain  limb*  ■ 

ilade  rseUle  hglil,  «nJ  l"»t  l»»  <J 


228 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


burned  his  house  upon  him  with  fire,  for  he  also 
was  a  Diabolonian  by  nature. 

So  when  this  was  past  and  over,  they  hespeed 
themselves  to  look  for  Emmanuel  their  Prince,  and 
they  sought  him,  but  they  found  him  not.  Cant.  v.  6. 
Then  were  they  more  confirmed  in  the  truth  of  Mr. 
Godly-fear's  sayings,  and  began  also  severely  to 
reflect  upon  themselves  for  their  so  vile  and  un- 
godly doings ;  for  they  concluded  now  that  it  was 
through  them  that  their  Prince  had  left  them. 

Then  they  agreed  and  went  to  my  Lord  Secre- 
riiey  apply  them-  tary,  him  whom  before  they  refused 

<Tuon!  taTiel'I  to  aear» liim  whom  tney  nad  grievecl 

grieved,  &c.  -\vith  their  doings,  to  know  of  him,  for 
he  was  a  seer  and  could  tell  where  Emmanuel  was, 
and  how  they  might  direct  a  petition  to  him.  But 
the  Lord  Secretary  would  not  admit  them  to  a  con- 
ference about  this  matter,  nor  would  admit  them 
to  his  royal  place  of  abode,  nor  come  out  to  them 
to  show  them  his  face,  or  intelligence,   is.  bdii.  10. 

Ep.  iv.  30.    1  Th.  v.  13. 

And  now  wa3  it  a  day,  gloomy  and  dark,  a  day 
of  clouds  and  of  thick  darkness  with  Mansoul. 
Now  they  saw  that  they  had  been  foolish,  and  be- 
gan to  perceive  what  the  company  and  prattle  of 
Mr.  Carnal-security  had  done,  and  what  desperate 
damage  his  swaggering  words  had  brought  poor 
Mansoul  into.  But  what  further  it  was  like  to  cost 
them,  that  they  were  ignorant  of.  Now  Mr.  Godly- 
fear  began  again  to  be  in  repute  with  the  men  of 
the  town:  yea,  they  were  ready  to  look  upon  him 
as  a  prophet. 

Well,  when  the  Sabbath-day  was  come,  they 
went  to  hear  their  subordinate  Preacher ;  but  0 
how  he  did  thunder  and  lighten  this  day  !  His  text 
was  that  in  the  prophet  Jonah,  '  They  that  observe 
lying  vanities  forsake  their  own  mercies.'  ii.  8.  But 
A    thundering   there  was  then  such  power  and  author- 

sernioii.  jty  m  ^hat  sermon,  and  such  a  dejec- 
tion seen  in  the  countenances  of  the  people  that 
day,  that  the  like  hath  seldom  been  heard  or  seen. 
The  people,  when  sermon  was  done,  were  scarce 
able  to  go  to  their  homes,  or  to  betake  themselves 
to  their  employs  the  week  after,  they  were  so  ser- 
mon-smitten, and  also  so  sermon-sick  by  being 
smitten,  that  they  knew  not  what  to  do.  Ho.  v.  13. 
lie  did  not  only  show  to  Mansoul  their  sin,  but 


1  The  sermon  and  its  effects  remind  us  strongly  of  Bunyan's 
Barren  Fig-tree.     '  Cut  it  down  !     Fetch  out  the  axe !     The 

Lord  shakes  the  sinner,  aud  whirls  him  upon  a  sick-bed. 
Heath,  fetch  him  away  to  the  fire — fetch  this  barren  professor 
to  hell !  Death  and  hell  are  at  his  bed-side,  with  grim  looks, 
staring  him  in  the  face.'  This  passage  in  the  'Holy  War' 
probably  led  the  author,  two  years  after,  to  preach  and  pub- 
lish that  smart  sermon,  so  full  of  thunder  and  lightning,  from 
the  text  put  into  the  mouth  of  Boanerges. — (Ed.) 

-  How  does  a  carnal  careless  walk  obscure  the  eye  of  faith, 
whose  evidences  become  weaker,  until  revived  by  the  Word 
and  Spirit  of  God! — (Mason.)  '1  could,  for  whole  days  to- 
gether, feel  my  very  body,  as  well  as  ray  mind,  to  shake  and 


did  tremble  before  them,  under  the  sense  of  his 
own,  still  crying  out  of  himself,  as  he  m      v    ,. 

,      ,  ,    °       TT   ,  ,  The  subordinate 

preached  to  them,  Unhappy  man  that  Preacher  doth 
I  am  !  that  I  should  do  so  wicked  a  fffcSXd 
thing  !   That   I  !   a  preacher !   whom    bewailsnis'com- 

o  i  pnance       Willi 

the  Prince  did  set  up  to  teach  to  Man-  Mr.  Caroal-se- 
soul  his  law,  should  myself  live  sense-  LU"  y' 
less,  and  sottishly  here,  and  be  one  of  the  first 
found  in  transgression.  This  transgression  also 
fellwithiu  my  precincts,  I  should  have  cried  out 
against  the  wickedness,  but  I  let  Mansoul  lie  wal- 
lowing in  it,  until  it  had  driven  Emmanuel  from  its 
borders.  With  these  things  he  also  charged  all 
the  lords  aud  gentry  of  Mansoul,  to  the  almost 
distracting  of  them.   ps.  ixxxvffl. 

About  this  time  also  there  was  a  great  sickness 
in  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  most  of  Agreatsickness 
the  inhabitants  were  greatly  afflicted;  m  Mansoul. 
yea,  the  captains  also,  and  men  of  war,  were  brought 
thereby  to  a  languishing  condition,  and  that  for  a 
long  time  together ;  so  that  in  case  of  an  invasion, 
nothing  could  to  purpose  now  have  gin  doth  cange 
been  done,  either  by  the  townsmen  or  to  be  weak. 
field  officers.  0  how  many  pale  faces,  Soui!  °  '  aud 
weak  hands,  feeble  knees,  and  stagger-  graces- 
ing  men  were  now  seen  to  walk  the  streets  of  Man- 
soul.1 Here  were  groans,  there  pants,  and  yonder 
lay  those  that  were  ready  to  faint.'2  He.xii.  12, 13.  Ee.iii.  •->. 

The  garments  too  which  Emmanuel  had  given 
them  were  but  in  a  sorry  case ;  some  were  rent, 
some  were  torn,  and  all  in  a  nasty  condition;  some 
also  did  hang  so  loosely  upon  them,  that  the  next 
bush  they  came  at  was  ready  to  pluck  them  off. 

Is.  iii.  u. 

After  some  time  spent  in  this  sad  and  desolate 
condition,  the  subordinate  Preacher  called  for  a 
day  of  fasting,  and  to  humble  themselves  for  being 
so  wicked  against  the  great  Shaddai,  and  his  Son ; 
and  he  desired  that  Captain  Boanerges  would 
preach.3  So  he  consented  to  do  it,  and  the  day 
was  come,  and  his  text  was  this,  'Cut  it  down,  why 
cumbereth  it  the  ground?'  and  a  very  Boanerges  doth 
smart  sermon  he  made  upon  the  place,  preachto  Man- 
First,  he  showed  what  was  the  occa- 
sion of  the  words,  to  wit,  because  the  fig-tree  was 
barren ;  then  he  showed  what  was  contained  in  the 
sentence,  to  wit,  repentance,  or  utter  desolation. 
He  then  showed  also  by  whose  authority  this  sen- 
tence was  pronounced,  and  that  was  by  Shaddai 


totter  under  a  sense  of  the  dreadful  judgment  of  God.' — (Grace. 
Abounding,  No.  164.)  A  miserable  state  for  a  warrior  snr- 
ronuded  by  active  enemies. — (Ed.) 

3  Preaching  captains  were  not  uncommon  in  Bunyan's 
time;  even  Queen  Elizabeth  permitted  lay  preachers.  Sir  J. 
Cheke,  the  High  Sheriff  of  Oxford,  preached  in  his  sheriff's 
gown  and  gold  chain,  in  St.  Mary's  pulpit,  at  Oxford  Univer- 
sity. If  men  of  similar  piety  and  talent  would  volunteer,  it 
would  not  be  a  bad  example  for  our  gracious  Victoria  to  follow. 
-(Ed.) 


THE   HOLY   WAPu 


323 


himself.     And  lastly,  he  showed  the  reasons  of  the 

point,  and  then  concluded  his  sermon.    But  he  was 

very  pertinent  in  the  application,  iuso- 

ThcmenofMan-  ,        ,  ,  i  i,  , 

Bonl  much  af-  much  that  he  made  poor  Mansoul 
fected.  tremhle.     For  this  sermon,  as  well  as 

the  former,  wrought  much  upon  the  hearts  of  the 
men  of  Mansoul ;  yea  it  greatly  helped  to  keep 
awake  those  that  were  roused  hy  the  preaching  that 
went  before.  So  that  now  throughout  the  whole 
town  there  was  little  or  nothing  to  he  heard  or  seen 
but  sorrow  and  mourning,  and  woe.1 

Now  after  sermon  they  got  together  and  con- 

Tbey  consult     suited  what  was  best  to  be  done.    But, 

what  to  do.      sai(j  tj10  subordinate  Preacher,  I  will 

do  nothing  of  mine  own  head,  without  advising  with 

my  neighbour  Mr.  Godly-fear. 

For  if  he  had  afore,  and  understood  more  of  the 
mind  of  our  Prince  than  we,  I  do  not  know  but 
he  also  may  have  it  now,  even  now  we  are  turning 
again  to  virtue.  So  they  called  and  sent  for  Mr. 
Godly-fear,  and  he  forthwith  appeared ;  then  they 
desired  that  he  would  further  show  his  opinion 
Mr.  Godly-fear's  about  what  they  had  best  to  do.  Then 
adnce-  said  the  old  gentleman  as  follovveth  : 
It  is  my  opinion  that  this  town  of  Mansoul  should, 
in  this  day  of  her  distress,  draw  up  and  send  an 
humble  petition  to  their  offended  Prince  Emman- 
uel, that  he  in  his  favour  and  grace  will  turn  again 
unto  you,  and  not  keep  anger  for  ever. 

When  the  townsmen  had  heard  this  speech,  they 
did  with  one  consent  agree  to  his  advice ;  so  they 
did  presently  draw  up  their  request,  and  the  next 

They  send  the  was»  "^ut  wno  sna^  carry  it?  at  last 
Lord  Mayor  to  they  did  all  agree  to  send  it  by  my 
Lord  Mayor.  So  he  accepted  of  the 
service,  and  addressed  himself  to  his  journey ;  and 
went  and  came  to  the  court  of  Shaddai,  whither 
Emmanuel  the  Prince  of  Mansoul  was  gone.  But 
the  gate  was  shut,  and  a  strict  watch  kept  thereat 
so  that  the  petitioner  was  forced  to  stand  with- 
out for  a  great  while  together.  La.  m.  8.  Then  he 
desired  that  some  would  go  in  to  the  Prince  and 
tell  him  who  stood  at  the  gate,  and  what  his  busi- 
ness was.  So  one  went  and  told  to  Shaddai,  and 
to  Emmanuel  his  Son,  that  the  Lord  Mayor  of  the 
town  of  Mansoul  stood  without  at  the  gate  of  the 
King's  court,  desiring  to  be  admitted  into  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Prince,  the  King's  Son.  He  also  told 
what  was  the  Lord  Mayor's  errand,  both  to  the 
King  and  his  Son  Emmanuel.  But  the  Prince 
would  not  come  down,  nor  admit  that  the  gate 
should  be  opened  to  him,  but  sent  him  an  answer 
to  this  effect: — They  have  turned  the  back  unto 
me,  and  not  their  face,  but  now  in  the  time  of 

1  Mansoul  had  withdra^Ti  from  a  faithful  ministry,  and  sat 
under  the  preaching  of  milder  and  unfaithful  meii,  but  bucUy- 
fear  having  roused  them  to  burn  Carnal-security's  house,  they 
tlock  to  the  awakening  alarms  of  a  faithful  Boanerges. — (En.) 

VOL.  III. 


their  trouble  they  say  to  me,  Arise  and  save  us. 
La.  iii.  44.  But  can  they  not  now  go  to  Mr.  Carnal- 
security,  to  whom  they  went  when  they  turned 
from  me.  and  make  him  their  leader,  their  lord, 
and  their  protection,  now  in  their  ^  iircadfui 
trouble?  Why  now  in  their  trouble  answer, 
do  they  visit  me,  since  in  their  prosperity  they 
went  astray.  Je.  u.  27,  2& 

This  answer  made  my  Lord  Mayor  look  black 
in  the  face ;  it  troubled,  it  perplexed,  it  rent  him 
sore.  La.  w.  7,  8.  And  now  he  began  again  to  sec 
what  it  was  to  be  familiar  with  Diabolonians,  such 
as  Mr.  Carnal-security  was.  When  he  saw  that 
at  court,  as  yet,  there  was  little  help  to  be  ex- 
pected, either  for  himself,  or  friends  in  Mansoul, 
he  smote  upon  his  breast  and  returned  The  Lord  Mayor 
weeping,  and  all  the  way  bewailing  the  retums,anduow. 
lamentable  state  of  Mansoul.  Well,  when  he  was 
come  within  sight  of  the  town,  the  elders,  and  chief 
of  the  people  of  Mansoul  went  out  at  the  gate  to 
meet  him,  and  to  salute  him,  and  to  know  how  he 
sped  at  court.  But  he  told  them  his  tale  in  so 
doleful  a  manner,  that  they  all  cried  The  state  of  Man- 
out,  and  mourned,  and  wept.  Where-  soul  now. 
fore  they  threw  ashes  and  dust  upon  their  heads, 
and  put  sackcloth  upon  their  loins,  and  went  cry- 
ing out  through  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  the  which 
when  the  rest  of  the  townsfolk  saw,  The  whole  towa 
they  all  mourned  and  wept.  This,  cast  dowa- 
therefore,  was  a  day  of  rebuke  and  trouble,  and 
of  anguish  to  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  also  of 
great  distress. 

After  some  time,  when  they  had  somewhat  re- 
frained themselves,  they  came  together    xiey  consult 
to  consult  again  what  by  them  was  yet        agan1, 
to  be  done ;  and  they  asked  advice,  as  they  did 
before,  of  that  Rev.  Mr.  Godly-fear,  who  told  them, 
that  there  was  no  way  better  than  to  Mr.  Godly-fear's 
do  as  they  had  done,  nor  would  he         advlCe. 
that  they  should  be  discouraged  at  all  with  what 
they  had  met  with  at  court ;  yea,  though  several 
of  their  petitions  should  be.  answered  with  nought 
but  silence  or  rebuke ;  for,  said  he,  it  is  the  way 
of  the  wise  Shaddai  to  make  men  wait  and  to 
exercise  patience,  and  it  should  be  the  way  of  them 
in  want  to  be  willing  to  stay  his  leisure.2 

Then  they  took  courage,  and  sent  again,  and 
again,  and  again,  and  again  ;  for  there  See  now  what 
was  not  now  one  day,  nor  an  hour  that  £  l  backSding 
went  over  Mansoul's  head,  wherein  a  Baint awakened, 
man  might  not  have  met  upon  the  road  one  or 
other  riding  post,  sounding  the  horn  from  Mansoul 
to  the  court  of  the  King  Shaddai ;  and  ail  with 
letters  petitionary  in  behalf  of,  and  for         ... 

r  J  Groaning  deure:;. 

the  Prince  s  return  to  Mansoul.     ilie 


2  See  Ps.  xxv.  3;  xxvii.  14;  xxxvii.  7,  LxLL  5.  La.  iii.  20. 
Io.  xii.  6.— ^Lu.) 

42 


"30 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


road,  I  say,  was  now  full  of  messengers,  going  and 
returning,  and  meeting  one  another ;  some  from 
the  court,  and  some  from  Mansoul,  and  this  was 
the  work  of  the  miserable  town  of  Mansoul  all  that 
long,  that  sharp,  that  cold,  and  tedious  winter.1 
Now,  if  you  have  not  forgot,  you  may  yet  re- 
member that  I  told  you  before  that 
after  Emmanuel  had  taken  Mansoul, 
yea,  and  after  that  he  had  new  modelled  the  town, 
there  remained  in  several  larking  places  of  the 
corporation  many  of  the  old  Diabolonians,  that 
either  came  with  the  tyrant  when  he  invaded  and 
took  the  town,  or  that  had  there,  by  reason  of 
unlawful  mixtures,  their  birth  and  breeding,  and 
bringing  up.  And  their  holes,  dens,  and  lurking 
places  were  in,  under,  or  about  the  wall  of  the 
town.  Some  of  their  names  are,  the  Lord  Forni- 
cation, the  Lord  Adultery,  the  Lord  Murder,  the 
Lord  Anger,  the  Lord  Lasciviousness,  the  Lord 
Deceit,  the  Lord  Evil-eye,  the  Lord  Blasphemy, 
and  that  horrible  villain  the  old  and  dangerous 
Lord  Covetousness."  These,  as  I  told  you,  with 
many  more,  had  yet  their  abode  in  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  and  that  after  that  Emmanuel  had  driven 
their  prince  Diabolus  out  of  the  castle.3 

Against  these  the  good  Prince  did  grant  a  com- 
mission to  the  Lord  Will-be-will  and 

Mansoul  heeded  ,  ,  ,     .  „-r 

notber Prince's  others  ;  yea,  to  the  whole  town  ot  Man- 
put  his  c™-   soub  to  seek,  take,  secure,  and  destroy 

mission  mto  a„y  or  a\\  t},at  tbey  C0UjJ  lay  lianJs 
execution.  .      <• 

of;  for  that  they  were  Diabolonians 

by  nature,  enemies  to  the  Prince,  and  those  that 
sought  to  ruin  the  blessed  town  of  Mansoul.  But 
the  town  of  Mansoul  did  not  pursue  this  warrant, 
but  neglected  to  look  after,  to  apprehend,  to  secure, 
and  to  destroy  these  Diabolonians.  Wherefore, 
what  do  these  villains,  but  by  degrees  take  courage 
to  put  forth  their  heads,  and  to  show  themselves 
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  town ;  yea,  and  as  I  was 
told,  some  of  the  men  of  Mansoul  grew  too  familiar 
with  some  of  them,  to  the  sorrow  of  the  corpora- 
tion, as  you  yet  wiH#hear  more  of  in  time  and 
place.4 


1  When  roused  from  carnal  security  by  godly  fear,  the  soul 
feels,  more  than  ever,  the  value  and  essential  importance  of 
prayer.  Ko  poor  harassed  sinner  had  experienced  this  dread 
state  of  uncertainly  more  than  Bunyan  ;  a  suspense  like  a 
sharp,  a  cold,  a  tedious  winter  to  a  poor  man  destitute  of  com- 
mon comforts.  All  these  feelings  are  remarkably  displayed  in 
the  Grace  Abounding — '  1  felt  also  such  a  clogging  and  heat 
at  my  stomach,  by  reason  of  my  terror,  that  1  was,  especially 
at  some  times,  as  if  my  breast  hone  would  have  split  asunder.' 
—No.  164.  'It  was  like  the  mark  that  the  Lord  God  did 
set  on  Cain,  even  continual  fear  and  trembling.  Thus  did  1 
wind,  and  twine,  and  shrink  under  the  burden  that  was  upon 
me.'— No.  165.— (Ed.) 

2  The  apostle  calls  covctousuess  'idolatry.'  Ep.  v.  5.  Col. 
iii.  5.  It  is  a  worshipping  of  mammon,  and  justly  deserves 
the  stigma  which  Bunyan  puts  on  it — 'That  horrible  villain, 
the  old  and  dangerous  Lord  Covctousuess.'  His  vigour  in- 
creases with  his  age,  contrary  to  other  vices. — (LuJ 


[Chapter  XIII.] 

[Contents: — The  Diabolonians  take  courage  from  the  depar- 
ture of  Emmanuel,  and  plots  are  formed  in  hell  for  a 
counter-revolution  in  Mansoul — Covetousuess,  Lascivi- 
ousness, and  Anger,  by  changing  their  names,  are  intro- 
duced into  respectable  families,  where  they  corrupt  their 
masters,  and  do  incredible  mischief — An  army  of  twenty 
thousand  doubters  raised  to  surprise  the  town.] 

Well,  when  the  Diabolonian  lords  that  were 
left,  perceived  that  Mansoul  had,  through  sinning, 
offended  Emmanuel  their  Prince,  and  iheDiabolonians 
that  he  had  withdrawn  himself  and  Plot- 
was  gone,  what  do  they  but  plot  the  ruin  of 
the  town  of  Mansoul.  So  upon  a  time  they  met 
together  at  the  hold  of  one  Mr.  Mischief,  who  also 
was  a  Diabolonian,  and  there  consulted  how  they 
might  deliver  up  Mansoul  into  the  hand  of  Dia- 
bolus again.  Now  some  advised  one  way,  and 
some  another,  every  man  according  to  his  own 
liking.  At  last,  my  Lord  Lasciviousness  pro- 
pounded whether  it  might  not  be  best,  in  the  first 
place,  for  some  of  those  that  were  Diabolonians  in 
Mansoul,  to  adventure  to  offer  themselves  for  serv- 
ants to  some  of  the  natives  of  the  town.  For,  said 
he,  if  they  so  do,  and  Mansoul  shall  accept  of  them, 
they  may  for  us,  and  for  Diabolus  our  Lord,  make 
the  taking  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  more  easy  than 
otherwise  it  will  be.  But  then  stood  up  the  Lord 
Murder,  and  said,  This  may  not  be  done  at  this 
time,  for  Mansoul  is  now  in  a  kind  of  rage ;  be- 
cause by  our  friend  Mr.  Carnal-security  she  hath 
been  once  ensnared  already,  and  made  to  offend 
against  her  Prince ;  and  how  shall  she  reconcile 
herself  unto  her  Lord  again,  but  by  the  heads  of 
these  men  ?  Besides,  we  know  that  they  have  in 
commission  to  take  and  slay  us  wherever  they  shall 
find  us ;  let  us  therefore  be  wise  as  foxes ;  when 
we  are  dead  we  can  do  them  no  hurt,  but  while 
we  live  we  may.  Thus  when  they  had  tossed  the 
matter  to  and  fro,  they  jointly  agreed  that  a  let- 
ter should  forthwith  be  sent  away  to  Diabolus  in 
their  name;  by  which  the  state  of  the  Tiay  send  token 
town  of  Mansoul  should  be  showed  lur  advice- 
him,  and  how  much  it  is  under  the  frowns  of  their 
Prince ;  we  may  also,  said  some,  let  him  know  our 
intentions,  and  ask  of  him  his  advice  in  the  case.5 


3  Converted  persons  have  still  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil  to  cope  with — enemies  without  and  within,  lurking  in 
the  walls,  in  holes,  and  dens  in  Mansoul;  but  the  Lord  has 
promised  to  give  grace  and  glory.  Ps.  lxxxiv.  11. — (Mason.) 

4  Emmanuel  gives  a  strict  charge  to  destroy  all  Diabolo- 
nians, but  this  was  neglected,  and  the  consequence  was  that 
they  became  to  Mansoul  what  the  Canaanites  were  to  Israel. 
'If  ye  will  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  laud  from 
before  you,  then  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  these  which  ye  let 
remain  of  them  shall  be  pricks  hi  your  eyes,  and  thorns  in 
your  sides,  aud  shall  vex  you  in  the  land  wherein  ye  dwell.' 
Nu.  xxxiii.  55. — (Burder.) 

6  Thus  poor  sinners  are  in  league  with  hell  against  tick 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


331 


jzy* 


So  a  letter  was  presently  framed,  the  contents 
of  which  was  this — 

4  To  our  great  Lord,  the  Prince  Diabolus,  dwelling 

bebiv  in  the  Injernal  Cave. 

'  0  great  Father,  and  mighty  Prince  Diaholus, 

We,  the  true  Diabolonians,  yet  remaining  in  the 

rebellious  town  of  Mansoul,  having  received  our 

The  copy  of  their  beings  from  thee,  and  our  nourishment 

letter.         at  jjjy  hands,  cannot  with  content  and 

quiet  endure  to  behold,  as  we  do  this  day,  how  thou 

art  dispraised,  disgraced,  and  reproached  among 

the  inhabitants  of  this  town ;   nor   is   thy  long 

absence  at  all  delightful  to  us,  because  greatly  to 

our  detriment. 

'The  reason  of  this  our  writing  unto  our  Lord 
is,  for  that  we  are  not  altogether  without 
hope  that  this  town  may  become  thy  habita- 
tion again  ;  for  it  is  greatly  declined  from  its  Prince 
Emmanuel,  and  he  is  up-risen,  and  is  departed 
from  them ;  yea,  and  though  they  send,  and  send, 
and  send,  and  send  after  him  to  return  to  them,  yet 
can  they  not  prevail,  nor  get  good  words  from  him. 
'  There  has  been  also  of  late,  and  is  yet  remain- 
ing, a  very  great  sickness  and  faintings  among  them, 
and  that  not  only  upon  the  poorer  sort  of  the  town, 
but  upon  the  lords,  captains,  and  chief 
gentry  of  the  place ;  we  only,  who  are  of 
the  Diabolonians  by  nature,  remain  well,  lively,  and 
strong,  so  that  through  their  great  transgression 
on  the  one  hand,  and  their  dangerous  sickness  on 
the  other,  we  judge  they  lay  open  to  thy  hand  and 
power.  If  therefore  it  shall  stand  with  thy  hor- 
rible cunning,  and  with  the  cunning  of  the  rest  of 
the  Princes  with  thee,  to  come  and  make  an  at- 
tempt to  take  Mansoul  again,  send  us  word,  and 
we  shall  to  our  utmost  power  be  ready  to  deliver 
it  into  thy  hand.  Or,  if  what  we  have  said,  shall 
not  by  thy  fatherhood  be  thought  hest,  and  most 
meet  to  be  done,  send  us  thy  mind  in  a  few  words, 
and  we  are  all  ready  to  follow  thy  counsel,  to  the 
hazarding  of  our  lives,  and  what  else  we  have. 

'Given  under  our  hands  the  day  and  date  above 
written,  after  a  close  consultation  at  the  house 
of  Mr.  Mischief,  who  yet  is  alive,  and  hath 
his  place  in  our  desirable  town  of  Mansoul.' 

When  Mr.  Profane — for  he  was  the  carrier — 
Mr.  Profane  is    was  come  with  his  letter  to  liell-gate- 

carrier,  and  he    .....       .  ,      ,      ,      ,        , 

brings  the  let-  hill,  he  knocked  at  the  brazen  gates 
gaUuii.  Hand  for  entrance.  Then  did  Cerberus,1 
there  presents   t]ie  porter — for  he  is  the  keeper  of  that 

it  to  Cerberus,  r  * 

the  porter.        gate — open  to  Mr.  Profane,  to  whom 


*s- 


own  souls.     May  the  Lord,  by  his  Word  and  Spirit,  break  the 
horrid  confederacy  ! — (Mason.) 

1  The  gate-keeper  of  Pluto's  palace  in  hell,  with  three  heads, 
every  hair  being  a  snake ;  supposed  by  some  to  represent  the 
word,  flesh,  and  devil ;  or  the  consumer  of  mankind. —  (Ed.) 


he  delivered  his  letter  which  he  had  brought  from 
the  Diabolonians  in  Mansoul.  So  he  carried  it  in 
and  presented  it  to  Diabolus  his  lord,  and  said, 
Tidings,  my  lord,  from  Mansoul,  from  our  trusty 
friends  in  Mansoul. 

Then  came  together  from  all  places  of  the  den 
Beelzebub,  Lucifer,  Apollyon,  with  the  rest  of 
the  rabblement  there,  to  hear  what  news  from 
Mansoul.  So  the  letter  was  broken  up  and  read, 
and  Cerberus  he  stood  by.  When  the  letter  was 
openly  read,  and  the  contents  thereof  spread  into 
ail  the  corners  of  the  den,  command  Dcadlnail,8 ^ 
was   given  that,   without  let  or  stop,     w>d    how    to 

o  went. 

Deadnran's  bell  should  be  rung  for  joy. 
So  the  bell  was  rung,  and  the  princes  rejoiced  that 
Mansoul  was  like  to  como  to  ruin.  Now  the  clap- 
per of  the  bell  went,  The  town  of  Mansoul  is  com- 
ing to  dwell  with  us,  make  room  for  the  town  of 
Mansoul.  This  bell,  therefore,  they  did  ring, 
because  they  did  hope  that  they  should  have  Man- 
soul again." 

Now,  when  they  bad  performed  this  their  hor- 
rible ceremony,  they  got  together  again  to  consult 
what  answer  to  send  to  their  friends  in  Mansoul, 
and  some  advised  one  thing,  and  some  another; 
but,  at  length,  because  the  business  required  haste, 
they  left  the  whole  business  to  the  Prince  Diabolus, 
judging  him  the  most  proper  lord  of  the  place.  So 
he  drew  up  a  letter  as  he  thought  fit,  in  answer  to 
what  Mr.  Profane  had  brought,  and  sent  it  to  the 
Diabolonians  that  did  dwell  in  Mansoul,  by  the 
same  hand  that  had  brought  theirs  to  him,  and 
this  was  the  contents  thereof — 

'  To  our  offspring,  the  high  and  migldy  Diabo- 
lonians, that  yet  dwell  in  the  town  of  Mansoiu, 
Diabolus,  the  great  Prince  of  Mansoul,  toisheth 
a  prosperous  issue  and  conclusion  oftliose  'many 
brave  enterprises,  conspiracies,  and  designs, 
that  you  of  your  love  and  respect  to  our  honour, 
have  in  your  hearts  to  attempt  to  do  against 
Mansoul. 

*  Beloved  children  and  disciples,  my  Lord  For- 
nication, Adultery,  and  the  rest,  we  have  here,  in 
our  desolate  den,  received,  to  our  highest  joy  and 
content,  your  welcome  letter,  by  the  hand  of  our 
trusty  Mr.  Profane,  and  to  show  how  acceptable 
your  tidings  were,  we  rung  out  our  bell  for  glad- 
ness, for  we  rejoiced  as  much  as  we  could,  when 
we  perceived  that  yet  we  had  friends  in  Mansoul, 
and  such  a.s  sought  our  honour  and  revenge  in  the 
ruin  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  We  also  rejoice  to 
hear  that  they  are  in  a  degenerated  condition,  and 
that  they  have  offended  their  Prince,  and  that  lie 


-  As  there  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repentet,,, 
so  likewise  is  there  joy  in  hell  over  one  backsliding  saint. 
But  almighty  grace  must  prevail.  O  for  watchfulness  unto 
prayer ! — (.\Jason.) 


S32 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


is  gone.  Their  sickness  also  pleaseth  us,  as  doth 
also  your  health,  might,  and  strength.  Glad  also 
would  we  be,  right  horribly  beloved,  could  we  get 
this  town  into  our  clutches  again.  Nor  will  we  be 
sparing  of  spending  our  wit,  our  cunning,  our  craft, 
and  hellish  inventions,  to  bring  to  a  wished  conclu- 
sion this  your  brave  beginning,  in  order  thereto. 

'  And  take  this  for  your  comfort,  our  birth  and 
our  offspring,  that  shall  we  again  surprise  it  and 
take  it,  we  will  attempt  to  put  all  your  foes  to  the 
sword,  and  will  make  you  the  great  lords  and  cap- 
tains of  the  place.  Nor  need  you  fear,  if  ever  we 
get  it  again,  that  we  after  that  shall  be  cast  out 
any  more,  for  we  will  come  with  more  strength, 
aud  so  lay  far  more  fast  hold  than  at  the  first  we 
did.  Besides,  it  is  the  law  of  that  Prince  that 
now  they  own,  that  if  we  get  them  a  second  time 
they  shall  be  ours  for  ever.  Mat.  xii.  43-45. 

'  Do  you  therefore,  our  trusty  Diabolonians,  yet 
more  pry  into,  and  endeavour  to  spy  out,  the  weak- 
ness of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  We  also  would  that 
you  yourselves  do  attempt  to  weaken  them  more 
and  more.  Send  us  word  also  by  what  means 
von  think  we  had  best  to  attempt  the  regaining 
thereof;  to  wit,  whether  by  persuasion  to  a  vain 
and  loose  life,  or  whether  by  tempting  them  to 
doubt  and  despair,  or  whether  by  blowing  up  of  the 
town  by  the  gunpowder  of  pride  and  self-conceit. 
Do  ye  also,  0  ye  brave  Diabolonians  and  true  sons 
of  the  pit,  be  ye  always  in  a  readiness  to  make  a 
most  hideous  assault  within,  when  we  shall  be 
ready  to  storm  it  without.  Now  speed  you  in  your 
project,  and  we  in  our  desires,  the  utmost  power 
of  our  gates,  which  is  the  wish  of  your  great  Dia- 
bolus,  Mansoul's  enemy,  and  him  that  trembles 
when  he  thinks  of  judgment  to  come!1  All  the 
blessings  of  the  pit  be  upon  you,  and  so  we  close 
up  our  letter. 

•  Given  at  the  pit's  mouth,  by  the  joint  consent 
of  all  the  princes  of  darkness,  to  be  sent  to 
the  force  and  power  that  we  have  yet  remain- 
ing in  Mansoul,  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Profane. 
— By  me,  Diabolus.' 

This  letter,  as  was  said,  was  sent  to  Mansoul,  to 

the  Diabolonians  that  yet  remained  there,  and  that 

yet  inhabited  the  wall,  from  the  dark 

dungeon  of  Diabolus,  by  the  hand  of 

Mr.  Profane,  by  whom  they  also  in  Mansoul  sent 

Profane  comes   theirs  to  the  pit.     Now  when  this  Mr. 

home  again.      profane  had  made  his  return,  and  was 

1  Satan  renews  his  temptations  with  double  force ;  while 
lasciviousness,  murder,  aud  mischief  unite  with  him  in  cunniug 
devices  to  ruin  the  soul.  Three  means  of  destruction  are 
proposed  in  hell : — 1.  A  vicious  life ;  2.  Despair  of  mercy ; 
3.  Prevailing  pride.  Either  of  these  would  prove  our  ruin, 
did  not  grace  prevent. — (Burder.)  Beware,  (5  believer,  lest  a 
moment's  want  of  watchfulness  produce  the  bitter  fruits  of 
repentance  1 — (Ed.) 


-m 


come  to  Mansoul  again,  he  went  and  came  as  he  was 
wont  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Mischief,  for  there  was  the 
conclave,  and  the  place  where  the  contrivers  were 
met.  Now  when  they  saw  that  their  messenger 
was  returned  safe  and  sound,  they  were  greatly 
gladed  thereat.  Then  he  presented  them  with  his 
letter  which  he  had  brought  from  Diabolus  for 
them,  the  which,  when  they  had  read  and  con- 
sidered, did  much  augment  their  gladness.  They 
asked  him  after  the  welfare  of  their  friends,  as 
how  their  Lord  Diabolus,  Lucifer,  and  Beelzebub 
did,  with  the  rest  of  those  of  the  den.  To  which 
this  Profane  made  answer,  Well,  well,  my  lords, 
they  are  well,  even  as  well  as  can  be  in  their  place. 
They  also,  said  he,  did  ring  for  joy  at  the  reading 
of  your  letter,  as  you  will  perceive  by  this  when 
you  read  it. 

Now,  as  was  said,  when  they  had  read  their 
letter,  and  perceived  that  it  encouraged  them  in 
their  work,  they  fell  to  their  way  of  contriving 
again,  to  wit,  how  they  might  complete  their  Dia- 
bolonian  design  upon  Mansoul.  And  the  first  thing 
that  they  agreed  upon  was,  to  keep  all 
things  from  Mansoul  as  close  as  they 
could.2  Let  it  not  be  known,  let  not  Mansoul  be 
acquainted  with  what  we  design  against  it.  The 
next  thing  was,  how,  or  by  what  means,  they 
should  try  to  bring  to  pass  the  ruin  and  overthrow 
of  Mansoul,  and  one  said  after  this  manner,  and 
another  said  after  that.  Then  stood  up  Mr.  Deceit, 
and  said,  My  right  Diabolonian  friends,  our  lords, 
and  the  high  ones  of  the  deep  dungeon,  do  pro- 
pound unto  us  these  three  ways — 

1.  Whether  we  had  best  to  seek  its  ruin  by 
making  of  Mansoul  loose  and  vain  ?  2.  Or  whether 
by  driving  them  to  doubt  and  despair?  3.  Or 
whether  by  endeavouring  to  blow  Takeheed.Man- 
them  up  by  the  gunpowder  of  self-  60ul! 

conceit? 

Now,  I  think,  if  we  shall  tempt  them  to  pride, 
that  may  do  something ;  and  if  we  tempt  them  to 
wantonness,  that  may  help.  But,  in  my  mind,  if 
we  could  drive  them  into  desperation,  that  would 
knock  the  nail  on  the  head,  for  then  we  should 
have  them,  in  the  first  place,  question  the  truth  of 
the  love  of  the  heart  of  their  Prince  towards  them, 
and  that  will  disgust  him  much.  This,  if  it  works 
well,  will  make  them  leave  off  quickly  their  way  of 
sending  petitions  to  him ;  then  farewell  earnest 
solicitations  for  help  and  supply,  for  then  this  con- 
clusion lies  naturally  before  them,  As  good  do 
nothing  as  do  to  no  purpose.  So  to  Mr.  Deceit 
they  unanimously  did  consent. 

Then  the  next  question  was,  But  how  shall  we 

*  Ignorance  and  carnal  security,  or  idleness,  are  the  strong- 
holds of  sin  in  the  sold.     The  more  we  study  to  become  ac- 
quainted with  Divine  truth,  and  labour  to  show*  forth  the  glory 
1  of  God,  the  safer  and  happier  we  must  become. —  (Ed.) 


THE    HOLY    WAR. 


c>oo 


do  bring  this  our  project  to  pass?  And  it  was 
Take  heed,  Man-  answered  by  the  same  gentleman  that 
*oM  tins  might  bo  the  best  way  to  do  it : 

Even  let,  quoth  he,  so  many  of  our  friends  as  are 
willing  to  venture  themselves  for  the  promoting  of 
their  prince's  cause,  disguise  themselves  with  ap- 
parel, change  their  names,  and  go  into  the  market 
like  far-countrymen,  and  proffer  to  let  themselves 
for  servants  to  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul,  and 
let  them  pretend  to  do  for  their  masters  as  benefi- 
cially as  may  be,  for  by  so  doing  they  may,  if 
Mansoul  shall  hire  them,  in  little  time  so  corrupt 
and  defile  the  corporation,  that  her  now  Prince 
shall  be  not  oidy  further  offended  with  them,  but 
in  conclusion  shall  spew  them  out  of  bis  mouth. 
And  when  this  is  done,  our  prince  Diabolus  shall 
Take  heed,  Man-  prey  upon  them  with  ease ;  yea,  of 
soul!  themselves    they  shall   fall    into   the 

mouth  of  the  eater.  Na.  Ui.  12. 

This  project  was  no  sooner  propounded  but  was 
as  highly  accepted,  and  forward  were  all  Diabol- 
onians  now  to  engage  in  so  delicate  an  enterprise; 
but  it  was  not  thought  fit  that  all  should  do  thus, 
wherefore  they  pitched  upon  two  or  three,  namely, 
the  Lord  Covetousness,  the  Lord  Lasciviousness, 
and  the  Lord  Anger.  The  Lord  Covetousness 
called  himself  by  the  name  of  Prudent-thrifty,  the 
Take  heed,  Man-  Lord  Lasciviousness  called  himself  by 
soul!  the  name  of  Harmless-mirth,  and  the 

Lord  Anger  called  himself  by  the  name  of  Good- 
zeal.1 

So  upon  a  market-day  they  came  into  the  mar- 
ket-place— three  lusty  fellows  they  were  to  look  on — 
and  they  were  clothed  in  sheeps'-russet,2  which  was 
also  now  in  a  manner  as  white  as  were  the  white 
Take  heed,  Jian-  robes  of  the  men  of  Mansoul.  Now 
soul!  the  men  could  speak  the  language  of 

Mansoul  well.  So,  when  they  were  come  into  the 
market-place,  and  had  offered  to  let  themselves  to 
the  townsmen,  they  were  presently  taken  up,  for 
they  asked  hut  little  wages,  and  promised  to  do 
their  masters  great  service. 

Mr.  Mind  hired  Prudent-thrifty,  and  Mr.  Godly- 
fear  hired  Goodzeal.  True,  this  fellow  Harmless- 
mirth  did  hang  a  little  in  hand,  and  could  not  so 
soon  get  him  a  master  as  the  other  did,  because 
the  town  of  Mansoul  wa3  now  in  Lent ; 3  but  after 
a  while,  because  Lent  was  almost  out,  the  Lord 
Will-be-will  hired  Harmless-mirth  to  be  both  his 
Take  heed,  Man-  waiting-man  and  his  lacquey,  and  thus 
suuJ  1  t}jey  g0t  them  masters. 


These  villains  now  being  got  thus  far  into  the 
houses  of  the  men  of  Mansoul,  quickly  began  to 
do  great  mischief  therein  ;  for  being  filthy,  arch, 
and  sly,  they  quickly  corrupted  the  families  where 
they  were;  yea,  they  tainted  their  masters  much, 
especially  this  Prudent-thrifty,  and  him  they  call 
Harmless-mirth.  True,  he  that  went  under  the 
vizor  of  Goodzeal,  was  not  so  well  liked  of  his 
master,  for  he  quickly  found  that  he  was  but  a 
counterfeit  rascal  ;4  the  which  when  the  fellow  per- 
ceived, with  speed  he  made  his  escape  from  the 
house,  or  I  doubt  not  but  his  master  had  hanged 
him. 

Well,  when  these  vagabonds  had  thus  far  car- 
ried on  their  design,  and  had  corrupted  the  town 
as  much  as  they  could,  in  the  next  place  they  con- 
sidered with  themselves  at  what  time  their  prince 
Diabolus  without,  and  themselves  within  the  town, 
should  make  an  attempt  to  seize  upon  Mansoul ; 
and  they  all  agreed  upon  this,  that  a  market-day 
would  be  best  for  that  work.  For  why?  a  day  of  worldly 
Then  will  the  townsfolk  be  busy  in  cu,nl)er- 
their  ways.  And  always  take  this  for  a  rule, 
When  people  are  most  busy  in  the  world,  they 
least  fear  a  surprise.5  We  also  then,  said  they, 
shall  be  able  with  less  suspicion  to  gather  ourselves 
together  for  the  work  of  our  friends  and  lords ; 
yea,  and  in  such  a  day,  if  we  shall  attempt  our 
work,  and  miss  it,  we  may,  when  they  jake  heed,  Man- 
shall  give  us  the  rout,  the  better  hide  sou11 
ourselves  in  the  crowd,  and  escape. 

These  things  being  thus  far  agreed  upon  by 
them,  they  wrote  another  letter  to  Diabolus,  and 
sent  it  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Profane,  the  contents 
of  which  were  this — 

'  The  Lords  of  Looseness  send  to  the  great  and 

ldrjh  Diabolus,  from  our  dens,  caves,  Look  t0  jt>  Man- 

holes,  and  strong-holds,  in  and  about         60uil 

the  wail  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  greeting : 

'  Our  great  lord,  and  the  nourisher  of  our  lives, 

Diabolus ;   how  glad  we  were  when  we  heard  of 

your  fatherhood's  readiness  to  comply  with  us,  and 

help  forward  our  design  in  our  attempts  to  ruin 

Mansoul !     None  can  tell  but  those  who,  as  we 

do,  set  themselves  against  all  appearance  of  good, 

when  and  wheresoever  we  find  it.  Ro.  vii  21.  Ga.  v.  17. 


1  "Well  may  our  pious  author  reiterate  the  caution — 'Take 
heed,  Mansoul !'  Vices  in  the  disguise  of  virtues  are  espe- 
cially dangerous.  So  when  the  pilgrims  were  led  astray,  aud 
entangjed  in  a  net,  by  a  black  man  in  white  raiment,  they 
said,  '  We  did  not  imagine  that  this  fine-spoken  man  had  been 
the  flatterer.'  P.  151.— (Ed.) 

2  Coarse,  home-spun,  brown  woollen  cloth. —  (Ed.) 

3  Bunyau  does  not  pretend  to  fast  forty  days;    aud  he 


shows  the  evils  of  Lent,  because,  after  so  long  a  fast,  there 
was  a  need  of  mirth ;  aud  thus  Lord  Laeiviousness,  alias 
Harmless-mirth,  is  hired,  and  soon  produces  great  mischief. 
"Who  can  tell  the  miseries  that  have  followed  E;:ster  festivities, 
after  Lenten  hypocrisies  ? — (Ed.) 

4  A  reckless,  profligate  fellow;  under  the  disguise  of  good 
zeal. —  (Ed.) 

6  By  a  market-day  is  meant  any  time  when  the  affairs  of 
this  world  most  occupy  the  mind:  a  honey-moon,  birthdays, 
or  other  periods  of  rejoicing— as  Christmas  or  Twelfth-day  ; 
and  on  times  when  deeply  occupied  with  the  cares  of  lift . 
These  are  the  times  for  Satan's  attacks.  Take  heed  then, 
Mansoul;  while  diligent  in  business,  be  fervent  in  spirit, 
watching  unto  prayer.— (Ed.) 


83* 


THE   HOLY   WAll. 


«  Touching  the  encouragement  that  your  great- 
ness is  pleased  to  give  us  to  continue  to  devise, 
contrive,  and  study  the  utter  desolation  of  Man- 
soul,  that  we  are  not  solicitous  about,  for  we  know 
right  well  that  it  cannot  but  be  pleasing  and  pro- 
fitable to  us  to  see  our  enemies,  and  them  that 
seek  our  lives,  to  die  at  our  feet  or  fly  before  us. 
We  therefore  are  still  contriving,  and  that  to  the 
best  of  our  cunning,  to  make  this  work  most  facde 
and  easy  to  your  lordships,  and  to  us. 

•First,  we  considered  of  that  most  hellishly- 
Look  to  it,  Mail-  cunning,  compacted,  threefold  project, 

S(juJ!  that  by  you  was  propounded  to  us  in 

your  last ;  and  have  concluded,  that  though  to  blow 
them  up  with  the  gunpowder  of  pride  would  do 
well,  and  to  do  it  by  tempting  them  to  be  loose 
and  vain  will  help  on  ;  yet  to  contrive  to  bring  them 
into  the  gulf  of  desperation,  we  think,  will  do  best 
of  all.  Now  we,  who  are  at  your  beck,,  have 
thought  of  two  ways  to  do  this: — First,  we,  for 
our  parts,  will  make  them  as  vile  as  we  can ;  and 
then  you  with  us,  at  a  time  appointed,  shall  be 
ready  to  fall  upon  them  with  the  utmost  force. 
And,  of  all  the  nations  that  are  at  your  whistle, 
we  think  that  an  army  of  Doubters  may  be  the 
most  likely  to  attack  and  overcome  the  town  of 
Take  heed,  Mau- Mansoul.1  Thus  shall  we  overcome 
these  enemies  ;  else  the  pit  shall  open 
her  mouth  upon  them,  and  desperation  shall  thrust 
them  down  into  it.  We  have  also,  to  effect  this 
so  much  by  us  desired  design,  sent  already  three 
of  our  trusty  Diabolonians  among  them ;  they  are 
disguised  in  garb,  they  have  changed  their  names, 
and  are  now  accepted  of  them ;  to  wit,  Covetous- 
ness,  Lasciviousness,  and  Anger.  The  name  of 
Covetousness  is  changed  to  Prudent-thrifty ;  and 
him  Mr.  Mind  has  hired,  and  is  almost  become  as 
bad  as  our  friend.  Lasciviousness  has  changed 
his  name  to  Harmless-mirth,  and  he  is  got  to  be 
the  Lord  Will-be-will's  lacquey,  but  he  has  made 
his  master  very  wanton.  Anger  changed  his  name 
into  Goodzeal,  and  was  entertained  by  Mr.  Godly- 
fear,  but  the  peevish  old  gentleman  took  pepper 
in  the  nose,  and  turned  our  companion  out  of  his 
house.2  Nay,  he  has  informed  us  since  that  he 
ran  away  from  him,  or  else  his  old  master  had 
hanged  him  up  for  his  labour. 

'  Now  these  have  much  helped  forward  our  work 
Look  to  it,  Man-  and   design  upon  Mansoul ;    for  not- 
80Ul1  withstanding   the   spite  and   quarrel- 

some temper  of  the  old  gentleman  last  mentioned, 


1  This  scheme  is  contrived  with  consummate  skill.  First 
let  the  Christian  be  drawn  into  a  light,  vain,  worldly  walk — 
'  .Make  him  as  vile  as  you  can;'  and  then  assanlt  him  with 
doubts  and  fears  about  his  salvation. — (Burder.)  '  Look  to  it ; 
tiike  heed,  Mausoull' — (Ld.) 

2  'Took  pepper  iu  the  nose.'  Godly-fear  was  easily  excited, 
and  quickly  saw  the  disguise  which  Anger  had  put  on,  and 


'  the  other  two  ply  their  business  well,  and  are  like 
to  ripen  the  work  apace 

'  Our  next  project  is,  that  it  be  concluded  that 
you  come  upon  the  town  upon  a  market-day,  and 
that  when  they  are  upon  the  heat  of  Take  heed,  Man- 
their  business  ;  for  then  to  be  sure  they  souU 
will  be  most  secure,  and  least  think  that  an  assault 
will  be  made  upon  them.  They  will  also  at  such 
a  time  be  less  able  to  defend  themselves,  and  to 
offend  you  in  the  prosecution  of  our  design.  And 
we,  your  trusty,  and  we  are  sure  your  beloved 
ones,  shall,  when  you  shall  make  your  furious 
assault  without,  be  ready  to  second  the  business 
within.  So  shall  we,  iu  all  likelihood,  be  able  to 
put  Mansoul  to  utter  confusion,  and  to  swallow 
them  up  before  they  can  come  to  themselves.  If 
your  serpentine  heads,  most  subtle  dragons,  and 
our  highly  esteemed  lords  can  find  out  a  better 
way  than  this,  let  us  quickly  know  your  minds. 

'  To  the  Monsters  of  the  Infernal  Cave,  from  the 
house  of  Mr.  Mischief  in  Mansoul,  by  the  hand 
of  Mr.  Profane.' 

Now  all  the  while  that  the  raging  runagates, 
and  hellish  Diabolonians  were  thus  contriving  the 
ruin  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  they,  to  wit,  the  poor 
town  itself,  was  in  a  sad  and  woeful  The  sad  state  of 
case;  partly  because  they  had  so  Mansoul 
grievously  offended  Shaddai  and  his  Son,  and 
partly  because  that  the  enemies  thereby  got 
strength  within  them  afresh,  and  also  because 
though  they  had  by  many  petitions  made  suit  to 
the  Prince  Emmanuel,  and  to  his  Father  Shaddai, 
by  him,  for  their  pardon  and  favour,  yet,  hitherto, 
obtained  they  not  one  smile ;  but  contrariwise, 
through  the  craft  and  subtlety  of  the  domestic 
Diabolonians,  their  cloud  was  made  to  grow  blacker 
and  blacker,  and  their  Emmanuel  to  stand  at 
further  distance. 

The  sickness  also  did  still  greatly  rage  in  Man- 
soul, both  among  the  captains  and  the  inhabitants 
of  the  town ;  their  enemies  and  their  enemies  only 
were  now  lively  and  strong,  and  like  to  become 
the  head,  whilst  Mansoul  was  made  the  tail.3 

By  this  time,  the  letter  last  mentioned,  that  was 
written  by  the  Diabolonians  that  yet  lurked  in  the 
town  of  Mansoul,  was  conveyed  to  Diabolus  in  the 
black  den,  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Pro-  pr0fane  arrives 
fane.  He  carried  the  letter  by  Hell-  at  Uell-gate-hilL 
gate-hill,  as  before,  and  conveyed  it  by  Cerberus 
to  his  lord. 


turned  him  out  neck  and  crop.     This  proverb  was  often  used 
in  Banyan's  time ;  thus — 

'  For  every  man  takes  pepper  i'  the  nose 
For  the  waggynge  of  a  straw  e,  God  knowse. 
With  every  wavervnge  wynd  that  blowese.' 

(Elderten's  Lenten  Stuffe,  1570.)— (Ed.) 

3  Backsliding  from  God  naturally  produces  clouds  that  grow 
blacker  and  blacker  as  corruptions  grow  stronger  and  stronger ; 
grace  in  the  sold  becomes  sick  and  weakly. —  (Burder.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


33! 


But  when  Cerberus  and  Mr.  Profane  did  meet, 
they  were  presently  as  great  as  beggars,  and  tints 
they  fell  into  discuur.se  about  Mansoul,  and  about 
the  project  against  her. 

Cerb.  Ah !  old  friend,  quoth  Cerberus,  art  thou 
come  to  Hell-gate-hill  again!  By  St.  Mary,1  1  am 
glad  to  see  thee. 

Prof.  Yes,  my  lord,  I  am  come  again  about  the 
concerns  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
Talk     between        CERB.   Prithee,   tell   me   what  con- 
Irim  and  (At-    dition  is  that  town  of  Mansoul  in  at 
present  ? 

Prof.  In  a  brave  condition,  my  lord,  for  us,  and 
for  my  lords,  the  lords  of  this  place  I  trow,  fur 
they  are  greatly  decayed  as  to  godliness,  and  that 
is  as  well  as  our  heart  can  wish;-'  their  Lord  is 
greatly  out  with  them,  and  that  doth  also  please 
us  well.  We  have  already  also  a  foot  in  their 
dish,"  for  our  Diabolonian  friends  are  laid  in  their 
bosoms,  and  what  do  we  lack  but  to  be  masters 
of  the  place. 

Besides,  our  trusty  friends  in  Mansoul  are  daily 
plotting  to  betray  it  to  the  lords  of  this  town  ;  also 
the  sickness  rages  bitterly  among  them,4  and  that 
which  makes  up  all,  we  hope  at  last  to  prevail. 

Cerb.  Then  said  the  Dog  of  Ilellgate,  No  time 
like  this  to  assault  them  ;  1  wish  that  the  enterprise 
be  followed  close,  and  that  the  success  desired  may 
be  soon  effected.  Yea,  I  wish  it  for  the  poor  Dia- 
bolonians'  sakes,  that  live  in  the  continual  fear  of 
their  lives  in  that  traitorous  town  of  Mansoul. 

Prof.  The  contrivance  is  almost  finished,  the 
lords  in  Mansoul  that  are  Diabolonians  are  at  it 
day  and  night,  and  the  other  are  like  silly  doves, 
they  want  heart  to  be  concerned  with  their  state, 
and  to  consider  that  ruin  is  at  hand.  Besides,  you 
may,  yea,  must  think,  when  you  put  all  things 
together,  that  there  are  many  reasons  that  prevail 
with  Diabolus  to  make  what  haste  he  can. 

Cerb.  Thou  hast  said  as  it  is,  I  am  glad  things 
are  at  this  pass.  Go  in,  my  brave  Profane,  to  my 
lords,  they  will  give  thee  for  thy  welcome  as  good 
a  coranto  s  as  the  whole  of  this  kingdom  will  afford. 
1  have  sent  thy  letter  in  already. 

Then  Mr.  Profane  went  into  the  den,  and  his 
Profane'?  enter-    Lord  Diabolus  met  him,  and  saluted 

tamment.  liim  with,  Welcome,  my  trusty  servant, 
I  have  been  made  glad  with  thy  letter.  The  rest 
of  the  lords  of  the  pit  gave  him  also  their  saluta- 
tions.   Then  Profane,  after  obeisance  made  to  them 

1  This  is  one  of  those  shrewd  hits  which  abound  in  Bunyan's 
works.  The  devil  swears  by  the  mother  ot  God, '  Saint  Mary ' 
— a  singular  mode  of  connecting  his  Satanic  majesty  and 
Popery,  by  his  using  a  common  popish  oath. — (Ln.) 

-  In  the  same  proportion  as  siu  is  encouraged,  the  ordin- 
ances, ways,  and  will  of  God  will  be  neglected. — (Mason.) 

8  To  get  a  loot  iu,  or  footing,  is  to  gain  admittance.  '  A 
foot  in  their  dish '  is  the  further  familiarity  of  eating  aud 
drinking  together. — (Ln.) 


all,  said,  Let  Mansoul  be  given  to  my  Lord  Dia- 
bolus, and  let  him  be  her  king  for  ever.  And  with 
that  the  hollow  belly  and  yawning  gorge  of  hell 
gave  so  loud  and  hideous  a  groan — for  that  is  the 
music  of  that  place — that  it  made  the  mountains 
about  it  totter,  as  if  they  would  fall  in  pieces. 

Now  after  they  had  read  and  considered  the 
letter,  they  consulted  what  answer  to  return,  and 
the  first  that  did  speak  to  it  was  Lucifer. 

LUCIF.   Then  said  he,  The  first  project  of  the 
Diabolonians  in  Mansoul  is  like  to  be    They     consult 
lucky,  and  to  take;   to  wit,  that  they     J^urSE 
will  by  all  the  ways  and  means  they     letter- 
can,  make  Mansoul  yet  more  vile  and  filthy;   n<> 
way  to  destroy  a  soul  like  this;   this  is  probation 
est.     Our  old  friend  Balaam  went  this  way  and  pro- 
spered many  years  ago;  let  this  therefore  stand 
with  us  for  a  maxim,  and  be  to  Dia- 
bolonians  for    a    general   rule   in    all 
ages,  for  nothing  can  make  this  to  fail  but  grace, 
in  which  1  would  hope  that  this  town  has  no  share. 
Nu.  x.wi.  ie.  Ke.  ii.  u.     But  whether  to  fall  upon  them 
on  a  market-day,  because  of  their  cum-    ctunbermenta 
ber  in  busiuess,  that  I  would  should  be    "■  ^lw™^- 
under  debate.    And  there  is  more  reason  why  this 
head   should   be  debated,    than  why   some   other 
should  ;  because  upon  this  will  turn  the  whole  of 
what  we  shall  attempt.     If  we  time  not  our  busi- 
ness well,  our  whole  project  may  fail.    Our  friends 
the  Diabolonians  say  that  a  market-day  is  best, 
for  then   will  Mansoul  be  most  busy,   and  have 
fewest  thoughts  of  a  surprise.     But  what  if  also 
they  should    double  their  guards  on    xiicv  bad  need 
those  days — and  methinks  nature  and  ll° lL 

reason  should  teach  them  to  do  it — and  what  it 
they  should  keep  such  a  watch  on  those  days  as 
the  necessity  of  their  present  case  doth  require  I 
Yea,  wdiat  if  their  men  should  be  always  in  arms 
on  those  days?  Then  you  may,  my  lords,  be  dis- 
appointed in  your  attempts,  and  may  bring  our 
friends  in  the  town  to  utter  danger  of  unavoidable 
ruin. 

Beel.  Then  said  the  great  Beelzebub,  There  is 
something  in  what  my  lord  hath  said,  but  his  con- 
jecture may  or  may  not  fall  out.  Nor  hath  my 
lord  laid  it  down  as  that  which  must  not  be  re- 
ceded from,  for  I  know  that  he  said  it  only  to 
provoke  to  a  warm  debate  thereabout.  Therefore 
we  mutt  understand,  if  we  can,  whether  the  town 


4  The  immoral  contagion  had  spread;  evil  thoughts  abounded. 
'  For  this  cause  many  are  sickly  among  you.'  1  Co.  ri.  30. — 
(Ed.) 

0  A  swift  and  lively,  but  disorderly  dance.  The  prospect 
of  the  misery  and  destruction  of  -Mansoul  set  all  the  devils 
a-daucing. 

'  Wherein  that  dancer  greatest  praise  liatli  won 
Which  with  best  order  can  all  order  shun. 

— (su-  J.il.n  Danes.) 

Where  could  Bunyan  have  picked  up  this  very  expressive  but 
rare  word?— (Kd*^ 


336 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


of  Mansoul  have  sucli  sense  and  knowledge  of  her 

A  lesson  for    decayed  state,  and  of  the  design  that 

Christians.  we  }iave  on  f00t  against  her,  as  doth 
provoke  her  to  set  watch  and  ward  at  her  gates, 
and  to  double  them  on  market-days.  But  if,  after 
inquiry  made,  it  shall  he  found  that  they  are  asleep, 
then  any  day  will  do,  but  a  market-day  is  best; 
and  this  is  my  judgment  in  this  case. 

Diab.  Then  quoth  Diabolus,  How  should  we 
know  this  ?  And  it  was  answered,  Inquire  about 
it  at  the  mouth  of  Mr.  Profane.  So  Profane  was 
called  in  and  asked  the  question,  and  he  made  his 
answer  as  follows — 

Pkof.  My  lords,  so  far  as  I  can  gather,  this  is 
iYofane's  descrip-  at  present  the  condition  of  the  town 
St*****  of  Mansoul.  They  are  decayed  in 
Mansoui.  their  faith  and  love  ;  Emmanuel  their 

Prince  has  given  them  the  back  ; x  they  send  often 
by  petition  to  fetch  him  again,  but  he  maketh  not 
haste  to  answer  their  request,  nor  is  there  much 
reformation  among  them. 

Diab.  I  am  glad  that  they  are  backward  to  a 
reformation,  but  yet  I  am  afraid  of  their  petition- 
ing. However,  their  looseness  of  life  is  a  sign 
that  there  is  not  much  heart  in  what  they  do,  and 
without  the  heart  things  are  little  worth.  But  go 
on,  my  masters,  I  will  divert  you,  my  lords,  no 
longer. 

Beel.  If  the  case  be  so  with  Mansoul,  as  Mr. 
Profane  has  described  it  to  be,  it  will  be  no  great 
matter  what  day  we  assault  it ;  not  their  prayers 
nor  their  power  will  do  them  much  service. 

Apoll.  When  Beelzebub  had  ended  his  oration, 
then  Apollvou  did  begin.  My  opinion,  said  he, 
concerning  this  matter  is,  that  we  go  on  fair  and 
softly,  not  doing  things  in  a  hurry.  Let  our 
friends  in  Mansoul  go  on  still  to  pollute  and  defile 
it,  by  seeking  to  draw  it  yet  more  into  sin,  for 
there  is  nothing  like  sin  to  devour  Mansoul.2  If 
Dreadful  advice  tms  De  done,  and  it  takes  effect,  Man- 
agamst  Man-   soul  of  itself  will  leave  off  to  watch,  to 

60UL  .    .  ' 

petition,  or  anything  else  that  should 
tend  to  her  security  and  safety  ;  for  she  will  forget 
her  Emmanuel,  she  will  not  desire  his  company, 
and  can  she  be  gotten  thus  to  live,  her  Prince  will 
not  come  to  her  in  haste.  Our  trusty  friend, 
Mr.  Carnal-security,  witli  one  of  his  tricks,  did 
drive  him  out  of  the  town,  and  why  may  not  my 
Lord  Covetousness,  and  my  Lord  Lasciviousness, 
by  what  they  may  do,  keep  him  out  of  the  town  ? 
And  this  I  will  tell  you,  not  because  you  know  it 
not,  that  two  or  three  Diabolonians,  if  entertained 
and  countenanced  by  the  town  of  Mansoul,  will  do 

1  To  back  a  friend,  is  to  support  Li m.  To  turn  the  back 
upon  him,  or  give  him  the  back,  is  to  desert  him. — (Ed.) 

3  Although  Satan  is  the  father  of  lies,  he  certainly  speaks 
truth  here.  Sin  will  do  more  hurt  to  the  sold  than  a  leiiion 
of  devils. — (Burder.) 


more  to  the  keeping  of  Emmanuel  from  them,  and 
towards  making  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  your  own, 
than  can  an  army  of  a  legion  that  should  be  sent 
out  from  us  to  withstand  him. 

Let,  therefore,  this  first  project  that  our  friends  in 
Mansoul  have  set  on  foot,  be  strongly   _     .,  ,   ,  . 

.  °  J     Dreadful  advice 

and  diligently  carried  on  with  all  cun-  against  Man- 
ning and  craft  imaginable  ;  and  let 
them  send  continually,  under  one  guise  or  another, 
more  and  other  of  their  men  to  play  with  the  people 
of" Mansoul;  and  then,  perhaps,  we  shall  not  need 
to  be  at  the  charge  of  making  a  war  upon  them ; 
or  if  that  must  of  necessity  be  done,  yet  the  more 
sinful  they  are,  the  more  unable,  to  be  sure,  they 
will  be  to  resist  us,  and  then  the  more  easily  we 
shall  overcome  them.  And  besides,  suppose — and 
that  is  the  worst  that  can  be  supposed — that  Em- 
manuel should  come  to  them  again,  why  may  not 
the  same  means,  or  the  like,  drive  him  from  them 
once  more  ?  Yea,  why  may  he  not  by  their  lapse 
into  that  sin  again,  be  driven  from  them  for  ever, 
for  the  sake  of  which  he  was  at  the  first  driven 
from  them  for  a  season  ?  And  if  this  should  hap- 
pen, then  away  go  with  him  his  rams,  his  slings, 
his  captains,  his  soldiers,  and  he  leaveth  Mansoul 
naked  and  bare.  Yea,  will  not  this  town,  when 
she  sees  herself  utterly  forsaken  of  her  Prince,  of 
her  own  accord  open  her  gates  again  Dreadful  advice 
unto  you,  and  make  of  you  as  in  the  against  Man- 
days  of  old  ?  But  this  must  be  done 
by  time  ;  a  few  days  will  not  effect  so  great  a  work 
as  this.3 

So  soon  as  Apollyon  had  made  an  end  of  speak- 
ing, Diabolus  began  to  blow  out  his  own  malice, 
and  to  plead  his  own  cause ;  and  he  said,  My  lords 
and  powers  of  the  cave,  my  true  and  trusty  friends, 
I  have  with  much  impatience,  as  becomes  me, 
given  ear  to  your  long  and  tedious  orations.  But 
my  furious  gorge  and  empty  paunch  so  lusteth 
after  a  repossession  of  my  famous  town  of  Mansoul, 
that,  whatever  comes  out,  I  can  wait  no  longer  to 
see  the  events  of  lingering  projects.  I  must,  and 
that  without  further  delay,  seek  by  all  means  I  can 
to  fill  my  insatiable  gulf  with  the  soul  and  body 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul.4  Therefore,  Look  to  it, 
lend  me  your  heads,  your  hearts,  and  Mansoul. 
your  help,  now  I  am  going  to  recover  my  town  of 
Mansoul. 

When  the  lords  and  princes  of  the  pit  saw  the 
flaming  desire  that  was  in  Diabolus  to  devour  the 
miserable  town  of  Mansoul,  they  left  off  to  raise 
any  more   objections,  but   consented  to  lend  him 


3  Here  again  we  have  Satan  telling  truth. — (Ed.)  Apos- 
tacy  is  generally  a  gi  adual  affair ;  a  sure  poison,  but  slow. — 
(Burder.) 

4  Satan's  malice  is  like  a  throat  and  stomach — '  insatiable.' 
He  seeks  to  fill  it  with  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men ;  but  his 
torment  is,  that  it  is  a  gulf  bottomless  and  for  ever  insatiable. 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


337 


what  strength  they  could  ;  though,  had  Apollyon's 
advice  hcen  taken,  they  had  far  iuore  fearfully 
distressed  the  town  of  Mansoul.  But,  I  say,  they 
were  willing  to  lend  him  what  strength  they  could, 
not  knowing  what  need  they  might  have  of  him, 
when  they  should  engage  for  themselves,  as  he. 
Wherefore,  they  fell  to  advising  ahout  the  next 
thing  propounded,  to  wit,  what  soldiers  they  were, 
and  also  how  many,  with  whom  Diabolus  should 
go  against  the  town  of  Mansoul  to  take  it ;  and 
after  some  dehate,  it  was  concluded,  according  as 
in  the  Utter  the  Diaholonians  had  suggested,  that 
none  was  more  fit  for  that  expedition  than  an  army 
of  terrible  Doubters.1  They,  therefore,  concluded 
to  send  against  Mansoul  an  army  of  sturdy  Doubt- 
ers.  The  number  thought  fit  to  he  employed  in 
that  service  was  hetween  twenty  and  thirty  thou- 
sand. So  then,  the  result  of  that  great  council 
of  those  high  and  mighty  lords  was,  that  Diabolus 
should  even  now,  out  of  hand,  beat  up  his  drum 
An  armyof Doubt-  for  men  in  the  land  of  Doubting, 
nta^e  um  which  land  lieth  upon  the  confines  of 
ofManEoui.  t]ie  j,]ace  ca]]e(i  Hell-gate-hill,  for 
men  that  might  be  employed  by  him  against  the 
miserable  town,  Mansoul.  It  was  also  concluded 
that  these  lords  themselves  should  help  him  in  the 
•m«  „  •,  ..    f  war,  and  that  they  would,  to  that  end, 

Die  princes  of  '  J  >  * 

the  pit  go  with  head  and  manage  his  men.  So  they 
drew  up  a  letter  and  sent  back  to  the 
Diabolonians  that  lurked  in  Mansoul,  and  that 
waited  for  the  back-coming  of  Mr.  Profane,  to  sig- 
nify to  them  into  what  method  and  forwardness 
they  at  present  had  put  their  design.  The  con- 
tents whereof  now  followeth— 


'  From  the  dark  and  horrible  Dungeon  of  Hell, 
Diabolus,  v:ith  all  the  Society  of  the  Princes 
Another  letter  °f  Darkness,  sends  to  our  trusty 
from  Diauoius  ones,  in  and  about  the  walls  of 

tothe  Malolu-      ,  .    ,,.  .  •* 

Diana  in  Man-  the  town  of  Mansoul,  now  impa- 
tiently icaitingfor  our  most  devilish 
answer,  to  their  venomous  and  most  poisonous 
design  against  the  toicn  of  Mansoul. 

'  Our  natives  ones,  in  whom  from  day  to  day  wc 
boast,  and  in  whose  actions  all  the  year  long  we 
do  greatly  delight  ourselves,  we  received  your 
welcome,  because  highly-esteemed,  letter,  at  the 
hand  of  our  trusty  and  greatly  beloved,  the  old 
gentleman,  Mr.  Profane  ;  and  do  give  you  to 
understand  that  when  we  had  broken  it  up,  and 
had  read  the  contents  thereof,  to  your  amazing 
memory  be  it  spoken,  our  yawning  hollow-bellied 
place,  where  we  are,  made  so  hideous  and  yelling  a 


1  Doubts  are  dangerous  and  potent,  as  well  as  numberless 
enemies  ;  they  are  dishonourable  to  God's  free,  sovereign, 
unasked,  1:1111  e  riled,  aud  everlasting  love  and  mercy  in  plirist 
Jesus. — (Mason.) 

vol.  nr. 


noise  for  joy,  that  the  mountains  that  stand  round 
about  Hell-gate-hill  had  like  to  have  been  shaken 
to  pieces  at  the  sound  thereof. 

'  We  could  also  do  no  less  than  admire  your  faith- 
fulness to  us,  with  the  greatness  of  that  subtlety 
that  now  hath  showed  itself  to  be  in  your  heads  to 
serve  us  against  the  town  of  Mansoul.  For  you 
have  invented  for  us  so  excellent  a  method  for  our 
proceeding  against  that  rebellious  people ;  a  more 
effectual  cannot  be  thought  of  by  all  the  wits  of 
hell.  The  proposals,  therefore,  which  now  at  last 
you  have  sent  us,  since  we  saw  them,  we  have 
done  little  else  but  highly  approved  and  admired 
them. 

'Nay,  wc  shall,  to  encourage  you  in  the  pro- 
fundity of  your  craft,  let  you  know,  that,  at  a  full 
assembly  and  conclave  of  our  princes,  and  princi- 
palities of  this  place,  your  project  was  discoursed, 
and  tossed  from  one  side  of  our  cave  to  the  other, 
by  their  mightinesses ;  but  a  better,  and  as  was 
by  themselves  judged,  a  more  fit  and  proper  way 
by  all  their  wits  could  not  be  invented,  to  surprise, 
take,  and  make  our  own,  the  rebellious  town  of 
Mansoul. 

'  Wherefore,  in  fine,  all  that  was  said  that  varied 
from  what  you  had  in  your  letter  propounded,  fell 
of  itself  to  the  ground,  and  yours  only  was  stuck 
to  by  Diabolus  the  prince ;  yea,  his  gaping  gorge 
and  vaunting  paunch  was  on  fire  to  put  your  inven- 
tion into  execution. 

•  We,  therefore,  give  you  to  understand  that  our 
stout,  furious,  and  unmerciful  Diabolus,  is  raising 
for  your  relief,  and  the  ruin  of  the  rebellious  town 
of  Mansoul,  more  than  twenty  thousand  Doubters 
to  come  against  that  people.  They  are  all  stout 
aud  sturdj'  men,  and  men  that  of  old  have  been 
accustomed  to  war,  and  that  can  therefore  well 
endure  the  drum.  I  say,  he  is  doing  of  this  work 
of  his  with  all  the  possible  speed  he  can ;  for  his 
heart  and  spirit  is  engaged  in  it.  We  desire, 
therefore,  that  as  you  have  hitherto  stuck  to  us, 
and  given  us  both  advice  and  encouragement  thus 
far ;  that  you  still  will  prosecute  our  design,  nor 
shall  you  lose,  but  be  gainers  thereby ;  yea,  we 
intend  to  make  you  the  lords  of  Mansoul. 

'  One  thing  may  not  by  any  means  be  omitted, 
that  is,  those  with  us  do  desire  that  every  one  of 
you  that  are  in  Mansoul  would  still  use  all  your 
power,  cunning,  and  skill,  with  delusive  persuasions, 
yet  to  draw  the  town  of  Mansoul  into  more  sin  and 
wickedness,  even  that  sin  may  be  finished  and 
bring  forth  death. 

'For  thus  it  is  concluded  with  us,  that  the  more 
vile,  sinful,  and  debauched  the  town  of  Mansoul  is, 
the  more  backward  will  be  their  Emmanuel  to  come 
to  their  help,  either  by  presence,  or  other  relief; 
yea,  the  more  sinful,  the  more  weak,  and  so  the 
more  unable  will  they  be  to  make  resistance  when 

43 


THE   HOLY  WAE. 


we  shall  make  our  assault  upon  them  to  swallow 
Takeheed.Man-   them  up.     Yea,  that  may  cause  that 
soul-  their  mighty  Shaddai  himself  may  cast 

them  out  of  his  protection ;  yea,  and  send  for  his 
captains  and  soldiers  home,  with  his  slings  and 
rams,  and  leave  them  naked  and  hare,  and  then 
the  town  of  Mansoul  will  of  itself  open  to  us,  and 
fall  as  the  fig  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater.  Na.  m.  12. 
Yea,  to  be  sure  that  we  then  with  a  great  deal  of 
ease  shall  come  upon  her  and  overcome  her. 

•  As  to  the  time  of  our  coming  upon  Mansoul,  we 
as  yet  have  not  fully  resolved  upon  that,  though  at 
present  some  of  us  think  as  you,  that  a  market-day, 
or  a  market-day  at  night,  will  certainly  be  the  best.1 
However  do  you  be  ready,  and  when  you  shall  hear 
our  roaring  drum  without,  do  you  be  as  busy  to 
make  the  most  horrible  confusion  within.  1  re.  v.  8. 
So  shall  Mansoul  certainly  be  distressed  before  and 
behind,  and  shall  not  know  which  way  to  betake 
herself  for  help.  My  Lord  Lucifer,  my  Lord 
Beelzebub,  my  Lord  Apollyon,  my  Lord  Legion, 
with  the  rest  salute  you,  as  does  also  my  Lord  Dia- 
bolus,  and  we  wish  both  you,  with  all  that  you  do 
or  shall  possess,  the  very  self-same  fruit  and  suc- 
cess for  their  doing,  as  we  ourselves  at  present  en- 
joy for  ours. 

'  From  our  dreadful  confines  in  the  most  fearful 
Pit,  we  salute  you,  and  so  do  those  many 
legions  here  with  us,  wishing  you  may  be  as 
hellishly  prosperous  as  we  desire  to  be  our- 
selves.    By  the  Letter-carrier,  Mr.  Profane.' 

Then  Mr.  Profane  addressed  himself  for  his  re- 
turn to  Mansoul,  with  his  errand  from  the  horrible 
pit  to  the  Diabolonians  that  dwelt  in  that  town. 
So  he  came  up  the  stairs  from  the  deep  to  the 
mouth  of  the  cave  where  Cerberus  was.  Now  when 
Cerberus  saw  him,  he  asked  how  matters  did  go 
below,  about,  and  against  the  town  of  Mansoid. 

Prof.  Things  go  as  well  as  we  can  expect. 
More  talk  be-  ^ne  letter  that  I  carried  thither  was 
2So5ST  hisMy  approved,  and  well  liked  by  all 
my  lords,  and  I  am  returning  to  tell 
our  Diabolonians  so.  I  have  an  answer  to  it  here 
in  my  bosom,  that  I  am  sure  will  make  our  masters 
that  sent  me  glad ;  for  the  contents  thereof  is  to 
encourage  them  to  pursue  their  design  to  the  ut- 
most, and  to  be  ready  also  to  fall  on  within,  when 
they  shall  see  my  Lord  Diabolus  beleaguering  of 
the  town  of  Mansoul. 


1  At  the  season  when  the  affairs  of  the  world  fill  the  heart, 
beware  of  beiug  « overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and  drunken- 
ness, and  earcs  of  this  world.'  Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  O  my 
soul;  attend  to  the  author's  repeated  warning,  'Take  heed 
Mansoul!' — (Ed.) 

2  Some  may  imagine  this  to  be  an  incredible  number  of 
doubts,  but  when  the  nine  divisions  of  this  army  are  presently 
enumerated,  it  will  be  readily  acknowledged  that  our  doubts 
arc  innumerable. — (En.) 


Cerb.  But  does  he  intend  to  go  against  them, 
himself. 

Prof.  Does  he  !  Ay,  and  he  will  take  along 
with  him  more  than  twenty  thousand,   The  land  from 
all    sturdy    Doubters,2   and   men   of    g^rtS*  ^ 
war,  picked  men,  from  the  land  of    come- 
Doubting,  to  serve  him  in  the  expedition. 

Cerb.  Then  was  Cerberus  glad,  and  said,  And 
is  there  such  brave  preparations  a-making  to  go 
against  the  miserable  town  of  Mansoul;  and  would 
I  might  be  put  at  the  head  of  a  thousand  of  them, 
that  I  might  also  show  my  valour  against  the  fam- 
ous town  of  Mansoul.3 

Prof.  Your  wish  may  come  to  pass ;  you  look 
like  one  that  has  mettle  enough,  and  my  lord  will 
have  with  him  those  that  are  valiant  and  stout. 
But  my  business  requires  haste. 

Cerb.  Ay,  so  it  does.  Speed  thee  to  the  town 
of  Mansoul  with  all  the  deepest  mischiefs  that  this 
place  can  afford  thee.  And  when  thou  shalt  come 
to  the  house  of  Mr.  Mischief,  the  place  where  the 
Diabolonians  meet  to  plot,  tell  them  that  Cerberus 
doth  wish  them  his  service,  and  that  if  he  may,  he 
will  with  the  army  come  up  against  the  famous 
town  of  Mansoul. 

Prof.  That  I  will.  And  I  know  that  my  lords 
that  are  there  will  be  glad  to  hear  it,  and  to  see 
you  also. 

So  after  a  few  more  such  kind  of  compliments, 
Mr.  Profane  took  his  leave  of  his  friend  Cerberus, 
and  Cerberus  again,  with  a  thousand  of  their  pit- 
wishes,  bid  him  haste  with  all  speed  to  his  masters. 
The  which  when  he  had  heard,  he  made  obeisance, 
and  began  to  gather  up  his  heels  to  run.4 

Thus  therefore  he  returned,  and  went  and  came 
to  Mansoul,  and  going  as  afore  to  the  house  of  Mr. 
Mischief,  there  he  found  the  Diabolonians  as- 
sembled, and  waiting  for  his  return.  Now  when 
he  was  come,  and  had  presented  himself,  he  also 
delivered  to  them  his  letter,  and  adjoined  this  com- 
pliment to  them  therewith :  My  Lords  from  the 
confines  of  the  pit,  the  high  and  mighty  princi- 
palities and  powers  of  the  den  salute  you  here,  the 
true  Diabolonians  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Wish- 
ing you  always  the  most  proper  of  their  benedic- 
tions, for  the  great  service,  high  at-  ProfBneTeturn. 
tempts,  and  brave  achievements  that  ed  again  to 
you  have  put  yourselves  upon,  for  the 
restoring,  to  our  prince  Diabolus,  the  famous  town 
of  Mansoul. 

This  was  therefore  the  present  state  of  the  miser- 


3  According  to  Milton,  Cerberus  was  the  parent  of  Melan- 
choly, a  fit  leader  of  Doubters. 

'  Hence,  loathed  Melancholy, 
Of  Cerherus  and  blackest  Midnight  born, 
Iu  Stygian  caves  forlorn, 

'Mougst  horrid  shapes,  and  shrieks,  and  sights  unholy !' 
L'Allegro.— (Ed.) 

4  To  *  gather  up  the  heels,'  or  '  take  to  the  heels,'  implies 
great  haste.— (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


S39 


able  town  of  Mansoul :  she  had  offended  her  Prince, 
and  he  was  gone ;  she  had  encouraged  the  powers 
of  hell,  by  her  foolishness,  to  conic  against  her,  to 
seek  her  utter  destruction. 


True,  the  town  of  Mansoul  wi 


rhat 


sensible  of  her  sin,  but  the  Diabolonians  were  got- 
ten into  her  bowels ;  she  cried,  but  Emmanuel  was 
gone,  and  her  cries  did  not  fetch  him  as  yet  again. 
Besides  she  knew  not  now  whether  ever  or  never 
he  would  return  and  come  to  his  Mansoul  again,  nor 
did  they  know  the  power  and  industry  of  the  enemy, 
nor  how  forward  they  were  to  put  in  execution  that 
plot  of  hell  that  they  had  devised  against  her. 

They  did  indeed  still  send  petition  after  petition 
to  the  Prince,  but  he  answered  all  with  silence. 
They  did  neglect  reformation,  and  that  was  as 
Diabolus  would  have  it,  for  he  knew,  if  they  re- 
garded iniquity  in  their  heart,  their  King  would 
not  hear  their  prayer ;  they  therefore  did  still  grow 
weaker  and  weaker,  and  were  as  a  rolling  thing 
before  the  whirlwind.  They  cried  to  their  King 
for  help,  and  laid  Diabolonians  in  their  bosoms,1 
what  therefore  should  a  King  do  to  them  ?  Yea, 
there  seemed  now  to  be  a  mixture  in  Mansoul,  the 
Diabolonians  and  the  Mansoulians  would  walk  the 
streets  together.  Yea,  they  began  to  seek  then- 
peace,  for  they  thought  that  since  the  sickness  had 
been  so  mortal  in  Mansoul,  it  was  in  vain  to  go  to 
handy-gripes2  with  them.  Besides,  the  weakness 
of  Mansoul  was  the  strength  of  their  enemies;  and 
the  sins  of  Mansoul  the  advantage  of  the  Diabo- 
lonians. The  foes  of  Mansoul  did  also  now  begin 
to  promise  themselves  the  town  for  a  possession ; 
there  was  no  great  difference  now  betwixt  Man- 
soulians and  Diabolonians,  both  seemed  to  be  mas- 
ters of  Mansoul.  Yea,  the  Diabolonians  increased 
Good  thoughts,  and  grew,  but  the  town  of  Mansoul 
nous,  andgood  diminished  greatly.  There  was  more 
desires.  than  eleven  thousand  of  men,  women, 

and  children  that  died  by  the  sickness  in  Mansoul.3 

[Chapter  XIV.] 

[Contents  : — The  plot  discovered  by  Mi.  Prywell — Prepara- 
tions made  for  defence — More  Diabolonians  executed — 
The  army  of  Doubters  approach  the  town— An  assault 
made  upon  Eargate,  which  is  repelled — The  drummer 
beats  a  parley,  which  is  disregarded — Diabolus  attempts 
to  deceive  by  flattery,  but  is  answered  by  the  Lord  Mayor 
— Jolly  and  Griggish,  two  young  Diabolonians,  executed 
— Gripe  and  Rakeall  hanged — Anything  and  Loosefoot 
imprisoned.] 

But  now,  as  Shaddai  would  have  it,  there  was 
cue  whose  name  was  Mr.  Prywell,  a  great  lover 
of  the  people  of  Mansoul.     And  he,  as  his  manner 

1  This  is  an  awful  state,  when  we  encourage  evil  thonghts 
and  propensities  in  the  heart,  and  pray  to  God  against  them. 
'  If  1  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  nut  hear  we' 
Ps.  lxvi.  18.— (En.) 

2  Hand-to-hand  combat;  wrestling. — (Ed.) 


was,  did  go  listening  up  and  down  in  Mansoul  to 
sec,  and  to  hear,  if  at  any  time  he  might,  whether 
there  was  any  design  against  it  or  no.  The  Rtoi  . 
For  he  was  always  a  jealous  man,  and  Ml-  I'm'wiL 
fcarcd  some  mischief  sometime  would  befal  it,  either 
from  the  Diabolonians  within,  or  from  some  power 
without.  Now  upon  a  time  it  so  happened  as  Mr. 
Prywell  went  listening  here  and  there,  that  he 
lighted  upon  a  place  called  Vilchill  in  Mansoul, 
where  Diabolonians  used  to  meet;  so  hearing  a 
muttering — you  must  know  that  it  was  in  the  night 
— he  softly  drew  near  to  hear;  nor  had 
he  stood  long  under  the  house-end,  for  plotdiieomod, 
there  stood  a  house  there,  but  he  heard  and  by  whom- 
one  confidently  affirm  that  it  was  not  or  would 
not  be  long  before  Diabolus  should  possess  himself 
again  of  Mansoul,  and  that  then  the  Diabolonians 
did  intend  to  put  all  Mansoulians  to  the  sword,  and 
would  kill  and  destroy  the  King's  captains,  and 
drive  all  his  soldiers  out  of  the  town.4 

lie  said,  moreover,  that  he  knew  there  were 
about  twenty  thousand  fighting  men  prepared  by 
Diabolus  for  the  accomplishing  of  this  design,  and 
that  it  would  not  be  months  before  they  all  should 
see  it.  When  Mr.  Prywell  had  heard  this  story, 
he  did  quickly  believe  it  was  true,  wherefore  ho 
went  forthwith  to  my  Lord  Mayor's  house,  and  ac- 
quainted him  therewith;  who,  sending  for  the  subor- 
dinate Preacher,  brake  the  business  to  him,  and 
he  as  soon  gave  the  alarm  to  the  town  Understanding. 
— for  he  was  now  the  chief  preacher  in  Conscience. 
Mansoul — because  as  yet  my  Lord  Secretary  was 
ill  at  ease.     And  this  was  the  way  that 

,,  ,        ..  T-,  .  ..  ,        ,  The  subordinate. 

the  subordinate  1 readier  did  take  to  Preacher  awa- 
alarm  the  town  therewith ;  the  same 
hour  he  caused  the  Lecture-bell  to  be  rung,  so  the 
people  came  together;  he  gave  them  then  a  short 
exhortation  to  watchfulness,  and  made  Mr.  Pry- 
well's  news  the  argument  thereof.  For,  said  he, 
an  horrible  plot  is  contrived  against  Mansoul,  even 
to  massacre  us  all  in  a  day;  nor  is  this  story  to  be 
slighted,  for  Mr.  Prywell  is  the  author  thereof. 
Mr.  Prywell  was  always  a  lover  of  Mansoul,  a 
soher  and  judicious  man,  a  man  that  is  no  tattler, 
nor  raiser  of  false  reports,  but  one  that  loves  to 
look  into  the  very  bottom  of  matters,  and  talks 
nothing  of  news  but  by  very  solid  arguments. 

I  will  call  him,  and  you  shall  hear  him  your  own- 
selves  ;  so  he  called  him,  and  he  came 
and  told  his  tale  so  punctually,  and     haTnero  to 
affirmed  its  truth   with  such   ample     u™^- 


3  Awftd  is  the  state  of  that  soul,  when  it  is  difficult,  by  the 
conduct,  to  know  whether  it  is  a  professor  or  one  of  the  pro- 
fane. Alas,  how  common  a  case  !  Eleven  thousand  acts  of 
piety,  holy  thoughts,  and  aspirations  after  God,  were  lost  by 
the  wretched  backslider. — (El).) 

4  Mr.  Prywell  represents  holy  jealousy  and  careful  self- 
exan. ination  ;  which,  when  prayerfully  used,  is  sure  to  detect 
the  plots  of  Satan. — (Ed.) 


340 


THE   HOLY   WAR 


grounds,  that  Mansoul  fell  presently  under  a  con- 
viction of  the  truth  of  what  he  said.  The  Preacher 
did  also  hack  him,  saying,  Sirs,  it  is  not  irrational 
for  us  to  helieve  it,  for  we  have  provoked  Shaddai  to 
ano-er,  and  have  sinned  Emmanuel  out  of  the  town  ; 
we  have  had  too  much  correspondence  with  Dia- 
bolonians,  and  have  forsaken  our  former  mercies  ; 
no  marvel  then  if  the  enemy,  "both  within  and  with- 
out, should  plot  our  ruin ;  and  what  time  like  this 
to  do  it  ?  The  sickness  is  now  in  the  town,  and  we 
have  been  made  weak  thereby.     Many 

Good  desires.  ,  •  •      i       1  1  xi 

a  good  meaning  man  is  dead,  and  the 
Diabolonians  of  late  grow  stronger  and  stronger. 

Besides,  quoth  the  subordinate  Preacher,  I  have 
received  from  this  good  truth-teller  this  one  ink- 
ling1 further,  that  he  understood  by  those  that  he 
overheard,  that  several  letters  have  lately  passed 
between  the  Furies  and  the  Diabolonians,  in  order 
to  our  destruction.  When  Mansoul  heard  all  this, 
and  not  hemp;  able  to  gainsay  it,  they 

They  take  alarm.    ...  -     .      °.  i  A      *W     t> 

lift  up  their  voice  and  wept.  Mr.  Pry- 
well  did  also,  in  the  presence  of  the  townsmen, 
confirm  all  that  their  subordinate  Preacher  had 
said.  Wherefore  they  now  set  afresh  to  bewail 
their  folly,  and  to  a  doubling  of  petitions  to  Shaddai  j 

The      tell    the    alK^    ^"S    ^0n#       ^•ney    a^S0    ura^e    tue 

thing  to  the  business  to  the  captains,  high  corn- 
cap  am  rnanders,  and  men  of  war  in  the  town 
of  Mansoul,  entreating  of  them  to  use  the  means 
to  be  strong,  and  to  take  good  courage,  and  that 
they  would  look  after  their  harness,2  and  make 
themselves  ready  to  give  Diabolus  battle,  by  night 
and  by  day,  shall  he  come,  as  they  are  informed 
lie  will,  to  beleaguer3  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

When  the  captains  heard  this,  they  being  always 
true  lovers  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  what  do  they, 
They  come  to-  ^llt  ^e  so  many  Samsons,  they  shake 
gethcr  to  con-  themselves,  and  come  together  to  con- 
sult and  contrive  how  to  defeat  those 
bold  and  hellish  contrivances  that  were  upon  the 
wheel,  by  the  means  of  Diabolus  and  his  friends, 
against  the  now  sickly,  weakly,  and  much  im- 
poverished town  of  Mansoul ;  and  they  agreed  upon 
these  following  particulars — 

1.  That  the  gates  of  Mansoul  should  be  kept 
Their  agree-  shut,  and  made  fast  with  bars  and 
mcut-  locks  ;  and  that  all  persons  that  went 
out,  or  came  in,  should  be  very  strictly  examined 
by  the  captains  of  the  guards,  lCo.xvi.13;  to  the 
end,  said  they,  that  those  that  are  managers  of 
the  plot  amongst  us  may  either,  coming  or  going, 
be  taken ;  and  that  we  may  also  find  out  who  are 
the    great    contrivers    amongst    us    of    our    ruin. 

Lam.  iii  40. 


1  A  hint  or  intimation. — (Ed.) 

"  Military  dress  anil  equipments. — (Ed.) 

s  To  beseige  or  environ  with  troops.— (Ed.) 


Header, 


2.  The  next  thing  was,  that  a  strict  search  should 
;  be  made  for  all  kind  of  Diabolonians  throughout 

the  whole  town  of  Mansoul ;  and  every  man's 
house,  from  top  to  bottom,  should  be  looked  into, 
and  that  too,  house  by  house,  that  if  possible  a 
further  discovery  might  be  made  of  all  such  among 
;  them  as  had  a  hand  in  these  designs.  lie.  xii.  15,  ic. 

3.  It  was  further  concluded  upon,  that  where- 
soever or  with  whomsoever  any  of  the  Diabolonians 
were  found,  that  even  those  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul that  had  given  them  house  and  harbour,  should 
to  their  shame,  and  the  warning  of  others,  take 
penance  in  the  open  place.  Je.  u.  34 ;  v.  26.  Eze.  xvi.  52. 

4.  It  was  moreover  resolved  by  the  famous  town 
of  Mansoul,  that  a  public  fast,  and  a  day  of  humi- 
liation should  be  kept  throughout  the  whole  cor- 
poration, to  the  justifying  of  their  Prince,  the 
abasing  of  themselves  before  him  for  their  trans- 
gressions against  him,  and  against  Shaddai  his 
Father.  Joel  i.  14  j  ii.  15, 16.  It  was  further  resolved, 
that  all  such  in  Mansoul  as  did  not  on  that  day 
endeavour  to  keep  that  fast,  and  to  humble  them- 
selves for  their  faults,  but  that  should  mind  their 
worldly  employs,  or  be  found  wandering  up  and 
down  the  streets,  should  be  taken  for  Diabolonians, 
and  should  suffer  as  Diabolonians  for  such  their 
wicked  doings. 

5.  It  was  further  concluded  then,  that  with 
what  speed,  and  with  what  warmth  of  mind  they 
could,  they  would  renew  their  humiliation  for  sin, 
and  their  petitions  to  Shaddai  for  help ;  they  also 
resolved  to  send  tidings  to  the  court  of  all  that 
Mr.  Prywell  had  told  them.  Je.  xxxvii.  4,  5. 

6.  It  was  also  determined  that  thanks  should 
be  given  by  the  town  of  Mansoul  to  Mr.  Prywell 
for  his  diligent  seeking  of  the  welfare  Mr.  Prywell  Ls 
of  their  town;  and  further,  that  for-  J^r.^; 
asmuch  as  he  was  so  naturally  inclined     ral- 

to  seek  their  good,  and  also  to  undermine  their 
foes,  they  gave  him  a  commission  of  Scout-master- 
general,  for  the  good  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.4 

When  the  corporation,  with  their  captains,  had 
thus  concluded,  they  did  as  they  had  said ;  they 
shut  up  their  gates,  they  made  for  Diabolonians 
strict  search,  they  made  those  with  whom  any 
were  found  to  take  penance  in  the  open  place. 
They  kept  their  fast,  and  renewed  their  petitions 
to  their  Prince,  and  Mr.  Prywell  managed  his 
charge,  and  the  trust  that  Mansoul  had  put  in  his 
hands,  with  great  conscience,  and  good  Mr.  Prywell 
fidelity;  for  he  gave  himself  wholly  g<*»  "cuutiug. 
up  to  his  employ,  and  that  not  only  within  the 
town,  but  he  went  out  to  pry,  to  see,  and  to  hear. 

And  not  many  days  after,  he  provided  for  his 


follow  them.  Examine  all  things  watchfully ;  search  out  evil 
diligently.  If  evil  thoughts  have  been  harboured,  let  sincere 
penitence  drive  them  out.     Be  humble,  prayerful,  thankful ; 


how  wise  are  these  regulations  1  seek  earnestly  to    and  you  will  be  safe  and  happy.— (Ed.) 


TIIE  HOLY  WAR. 


S41 


journey,  and  went  towards  ndl-gate-hill,  into  the 
country  where  the  Doubters  were,  where  ho  heard 
of  all  that  had  been  talked  of  in  Mansoul,  and  he 
perceived  also  that  Diabolus  was  almost  ready  for 
his  march.  So  he  came  back  with  speed,  and 
calling  the  captains  and  elders  of  Mansoul  to- 
gether, he  told  them  where  he  had  been,  what  he 
He  returns  with   had  heard,   and  what  he   had   seen. 

great  news.  Particularly,  he  told  them  that  Dia- 
bolus was  almost  ready  for  his  march,  and  that  ho 
had  made  old  Mr.  Incredulity,1  that  once  brake 
prison  in  Mansoul,  the  general  of  his  army ;  that 
his  army  consisted  all  of  Doubters,  and  that  their 
number  was  above  twenty  thousand.  He  told, 
moreover,  that  Diabolus  did  intend  to  bring  with 
him  the  chief  princes  of  the  infernal  pit,  and  that 
he  would  make  them  chief  captains  over  his 
Doubters.  He  told  them,  moreover,  that  it  was 
certainly  true  that  several  of  the  black-den  would 
with  Diabolus  ride  Reformades2  to  reduce  the 
town  of  Mansoul  to  the  obedience  of  Diabolus  their 
prince. 

He  said,  moreover,  that  he  understood  by  the 
Doubters,  among  whom  he  had  been,  that  the 
reason  why  old  Incredulity  was  made  general  of 
the  whole  army,  was  because  none  truer  than  he 
to  the  tyrant ;  and  because  he  had  an  implacable 
spite  against  the  welfare  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
Besides,  said  he,  he  remembers  the  affronts  that 
Mansoul  has  given,  and  he  is  resolved  to  be  re- 
venged of  them.  But  the  black  princes  shall  be 
made  high  commanders,  only  Incredulity  shall  be 
over  them  all,  because,  which  I  had  almost  forgot, 
he  can  more  easily,  and  more  dexterously  beleaguer 
the  town  of  Mansoul  than  can  any  of  the  princes 
besides.  He.  xii.  1. 

Now  when  the  captains  of  Mansoul,  with  the 
elders  of  the  town,  had  heard  the  tidings  that 
Mr.  Prywell  did  bring,  they  thought  it  expedient, 
without  further  delay,  to  put  into  execution  the 
laws  that,  against  the  Diabolonians,  their  Prince 
had  made  for  them,  and  given  them  in  command- 
ment to  manage  against  them.  Wherefore,  forth- 
with a  diligent  and  impartial  search  was  made  in 
all  houses  in  Mansoul  for  all  and  all  manner  of 
Some  Diaboion-   Diabolonians.     Now  in  the  house  of 

iana  taken  in   Mr.  Mind,  and  in  the  house  of  the 

Mansoul    and  *       __.„  .  ... 

committed  to   great    Lord    Will-be-will    were     two 

Diabolonians  found.     In  Mr.  Mind's 

house  was  one  Lord  Covetousness  found,  but  he 


1  Incredulity  is  general-in-chief  of  all  the  Doubters,  to  show 
that  incredulity,  or  unbelief,  is  the  source  of  all  the  doubts 
and  fears  that  distress  the  Christian. — (Ed.) 

3  Volunteers. — (Ed.) 

*  If  e\il  thoughts  are  subdued  and  kept  in  irons,  i.e.,  checked 
instantly  when  they  appear,  they  will  die  in  such  a  prison. 
The  idea  was  naturally  suggested  to  the  author  by  the  number 
of  pious  persons  who  perished  in  prison,  in  Bunyan's  time,  for 
conscience  sake.  The  Quakers  aloue  have  a  list  of  about  lour 
hundred  of  their  Society  who  thus  perished. — (Ed.) 


had  changed  his  name  to  Prudent-thrifty.  In  my 
Lord  Will-be-will's  house,  one  Lasciviousness  was 
found ;  but  ho  had  changed  his  name  to  llarmless- 
mirth.  These  two  the  captains  and  elders  of  the 
town  of  Mansoul  took,  and  committed  them  to 
custody  under  the  hand  of  Mr.  Trueman  the  jailer; 
and  this  man  handled  them  so  severely,  and  loaded 
them  so  well  with  irons,  that  in  time  they  both 
fell  into  a  very  deep  consumption,  and  died  in  the 
prison-house;3  their  masters  also,  ac-  The  Lord  Win. 
cording  to  the  agreement  of  the  cap-  j^hSwpmi 
tains  and  elders,  were  brought  to  take  aucc- 
penance  in  the  open  place  to  their  shame,  and  for 
a  warning  to  the  rest  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

Now  this  was  the  manner  of  penance  in  those 
days.     The  persons  offending,  being 
made  sensible  of  the  evil  of  their  do- 
ings, were  enjoined  open  confession  of  their  faults, 
and  a  strict  amendment  of  their  lives.4 

After  this,  the  captains  and  elders  of  Mansoul 
60ught  yet  to  find  out  more  Diabolonians,  wher- 
ever they  lurked,  whether  in  dens,  caves,  holes, 
vaults,  or  where  else  they  could,  in,  or  about  the 
wall  or  town  of  Mansoul.  But  though  they  could 
plainly  see  their  footing,  and  so  follow  them,  by 
their  tract  and  smell,  to  their  holds,  even  to  the 
mouths  of  their  caves  and  dens,  yet  take  them, 
hold  them,  and  do  justice  upon  them,  they  could 
not,  their  ways  were  so  crooked,  their  holds  so 
strong,  and  they  so  quick  to  take  sanctuary  there. 

But  Mansoul  did  now  with  so  stiff  a  hand  rule 
over  the  Diabolonians  that  were  left,  that  they 
were  glad  to  shrink  into  corners.  Time  was  when 
they  durst  walk  openly,  and  in  the  day,  but  now 
they  were  forced  to  embrace  privacy,  and  the  night 
— time  was  when  a  Mansoulian  was  their  com- 
panion, but  now  they  counted  them  deadly  enemies. 
This  good  change  did  Mr.  Prywell's  intelligence 
make  in  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.5 

By  this  time  Diabolus  had  finished  his  army, 
which  he  intended  to  bring  with  him  for  the  ruin 
of  Mansoul ;  and  had  set  over  them  captains,  and 
other  field-officers,  such  as  liked  his  furious  sto- 
mach best.  Himself  was  lord  paramount,  Incre- 
dulity was  general  of  his  army.  Their  highest 
captains  shall  be  named  afterwards,  but  now  for 
their  officers,  colours,  and  escutcheons. 

1.  Their  first  captain  was  Captain  Rage,  he  was 
captain   over  the   Election-doubters ; 

A  Dubolus'sarmy. 

his  were  the  red  colours,  his  stanuam- 


4  This  must  not  be  mistaken  for  Popish  or  Protestant  con- 
fessions, penances,  or  absolutions.  The  narrative  is  entirely 
spiritual  and  internal.  Conscience,  not  man,  acenses;  the 
open  confession  is  unreservedly  to  God,  accompanied  by  godly 
sorrow,  watchfulness,  and  prayer,  with  fruits  meet  for  repent- 
ance.—(Ed.) 

6  How  subtle  and  insidious  is  sin!  in  what  holes  and 
corners  it  conceals  itself  I  breaking  out  occasionally  when  we 
thought  ourselves  near  to  perfection,  and  making  us  cry  out, 
'  O  wretched  mau  that  I  am  1  who  shall  deliver  me  ?*— (Ed.) 


342 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


bearer  was  Mr.   Destructive,   and  the  great  red 
dragon  he  had  for  his  escutcheon.  Re.  xiL  s,  4,  is-17. 

2.  The  second  captain  was  Captain  Fury,  he  was 
captain  over  the  Vocation-doubters ;  his  standard- 
bearer  was  Mr.  Darkness,  his  colours  were  those 
that  were  pale,  and  he  had  for  his  escutcheon  the 
fiery  flying  serpent.  So.  xxi. 

3.  The  third  captain  Avas  Captain  Damnation, 
he  was  captain  over  the  Grace-doubters ;  his  were 
the  red  colours,  Mr.  Nolife  bare  them,  and  he 
had  for  his  escutcheon  the  black  den.  Mat.  xxii.  13. 

Ke.  i.t.  1. 

4.  The  fourth  captain  was  the  Captain  Insa- 
tiable, he  was  captain  over  the  Faith-doubters  ;  his 
Avere  the  red  colours,  Mr.  Devourer  bare  them,  and 
he  had  for  an  escutcheon  the  yaAvning  jaAvs.  Pr. 

sxvii.  20.  Ps.  xi.  6. 

5.  The  fifth  captain  was  Captain  Brimstone,  he 
was  captain  over  the  Perseverance-doubters;  his 
also  Avere  the  red  colours,  Mr.  Burning  bare  them, 
and  his  escutcheon  was  the  blue   and  stinking 

flame.    Ps.  xi.  6.  Re.  xiv.  11. 

6.  The  sixth  captain  was  Captain  Torment,  he 
was  captain  over  the  Resurrection-doubters ;  his 
colours  Avere  those  that  Avere  pale,  Mr.  Gnaw  was 
his  ancient-bearer,  and  he  had  the  black  worm  for 
his  escutcheon.  Mar.  ix.  44-43. 

7.  The  seventh  captain  was  Captain  Noease, 
he  Avas  captain  over  the  Salvation-doubters;  his 
Avere  the  red  colours,  Mr.  Restless  bare  them,  and 
his  escutcheon  Avas  the  ghastly  picture  of  death. 

Re.  vi.  8. ;   xiv.  11. 

8.  The  eighth  captain  was  the  Captain  Sepulchre, 
he  Avas  captain  over  the  Glory-doubters  ;  his  also 
Avere  the  pale  colours,  Mr.  Corruption  Avas  his 
ancient-bearer,  and  he  had  for  his  escutcheon  a 
scull,  and  dead  men's  bones.1  Je.  v.  ig.;  ii.  25. 

9.  The  ninth  captain  Avas  Captain  Pasthope, 
he  was  captain  of  those  that  are  called  the  Feli- 
city-doubters; his  ancient-bearer  was  Mr.  Despair, 
his  also  Avere  the  red  colours,  and  his  escutcheon 
Ava.s  the  hot  iron  and  the  hard  heart.1  1  Tim.  iv.  2. 
Ro.  ii.  5. 

These  Avere  his  captains,  and  these  Avere  their 
forces,  these  Avere  their  ancients,  these  Avere  their 
colours,  and  these  Avere  their  escutcheons.  Now, 
over  these  did  the  great  Diabolus  make  superior 
captains,  and  they  Avere  in  number  seven,  as, 
namely,  the  Lord  Beelzebub,  the  Lord  Lucifer, 


the  Lord  Legion,  the  Lord  Apollyon,  the  Lord 
Python,  the  Lord  Cerberus,  and  the  Lord  Belial ; 
these  seven  he  set  over  the  captains,  and  Incredu- 
lity was  lord-general,  and  Diabolus  was  king. 

The  Reformades  also,  such  as  were  like  them- 
selves, were  made  some  of  them  cap-  DiaMus  his  at- 
tains of  hundreds,  and  some  of  them  my  completed, 
captains  of  more,  and  thus  was  the  army  of  In- 
credulity completed. 

So  they  set  out  at  Hell-gate-hill,  for  there  they 
had  their  rendezvous,  from  whence  they  came  with 
a  straight  course  upon  their  march  toward  the 
town  of  Mansoul.  Noav,  as  was  hinted  before,  the 
toAvn  had,  as  Shaddai  would  have  it,  receiAred  from 
the  mouth  of  Mr.  Prywcll  the  alarm  of  their  com- 
ing before.  Wherefore  they  set  a  strong  watch 
at  the  gates,  and  had  also  doubled  their  guards, 
they  also  mounted  their  slings  in  good  places, 
where  they  might  conveniently  cast  out  their  great 
stones,  to  the  annoyance  of  the  furious  enemy. 

Nor  could  those  Diabolonians  that  were  in  the 
toAvn  do  that  hurt  as  was  designed  they  should,  for 
Mansoul  was  noAV  aAvake.  But,  alas  !  poor  people, 
they  Avere  sorely  affrighted  at  the  first  appearance 
of  their  foes,  and  at  their  sitting  down  before  the 
town,  especially  Avhen  they  heard  the  roaring  of 
their  drum.2  iPe.  v.  8.  This,  to  speak  truth,  was 
amazingly  hideous  to  hear;  it  frighted  all  men 
seven  miles  round,  if  they  Avere  but  awake  and 
heard  it.3  The  streaming  of  their  colours  were 
also  terrible  and  dejecting  to  behold. 

When  Diabolus  Avas  come  up  against  the  town, 
first  he  made  his  approach  to  Eargate  He  makes  an 
and  gave  it  a  furious  assault,  suppos-  e^1^  £$£ 
ing,  as  it  seems,  that  his  friends  in  spelled. 
Mansoul  had  been  ready  to  do  the  Avork  within ; 
but  care  Avas  taken  of  that  before,  by  the  vigilance 
of  the  captains.  Wherefore,  missing  of  the  help 
that  he  expected  from  them,  and  finding  of  his 
army  Avarmly  attended  Avith  the  stones  that  the 
slingers  did  sling — for  that  I  will  say  for  the  cap- 
tains, that  considering  the  Aveakness  that  yet  Avas 
upon  them,  by  reason  of  the  long  sickness  that  had 
annoyed  the  town  of  Mansoul,  they  did  gallantly 
behave  themselves — he  Avas  forced  to  He  retreats  and 
make  some  retreat  from  Mansoul,  and  eitfreraaesiim- 
to  intrench  himself  and  his  men  in  the 
field,  Avithout  the  reach  of  the  slings  of  the  town. 

Ja.  iv.  7. 


1  We  are  here  presented  with  a  very  curious,  but  accurate, 
division  into  classes  of  all  our  doubts  aud  fears,  each  under 
the  most  appropriate  captain,  ancient-bearer,  or  ensign,  and 
Standard.  As  all  Christians  are  more  or  less  subject  to  their 
painful  visits,  it  will  be  useful  to  scrutinize  our  doubts ;  and, 
having  ascertained  their  nature  or  class,  then  prayerfully  to 
com]  are  them  with  the  sacred  Oracles,  aud  find  that  key  which 
opens  a'l  the  gates  in  Doubting  Castle. —  (Ed.) 

-  '  The  roaring  of  the  drum,'  alluding  to  that  roaring  lion 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  The  roaring  of  a  lion  is  a 
terrific  noise  in  the  night ;  but  Satan  has  no  more  power  to 


hurt  the  saints  of  God  than  has  the  noise  of  a  drum.  It  may 
annoy,  terrify,  and  drive  us  to  the  bosom  of  Christ,  but  it 
cannot  destroy. — (Ed.)  'It  is  for  want  of  hope  (a  sound 
scriptural  hope,  arising  from  faith,  and  its  purifying  effects 
upon  the  soul),  that  so  many  brisk  professors,  that  have  so 
boasted  and  made  brags  of  their  faith,  have  not  been  able  to 
endure  the  drum  in  the  day  of  alarm  and  affliction.' — (Bunyan's 
Israel's  Hope  Encouraged,  vol.  i.  p.  580.) 

3  'Those  tumultuous  thoughts,  that,  like  masterless  hell- 
hounds, roar  and  bellow,  and  make  a  hideous  noise  within 
me.' — Grace  Abounding,  No.  174. — (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY   WATl. 


343 


Now,  having  intrenched  himself,  lie  did  cast  up 
„        ,  four  mounts  a  gainst  the  town,  the  first 

He    casts    up  o  ... 

mounts  agaiust  he  called  Mount  Diabolus,  putting  his 
own  name  thereon,  the  more  to  affright 
the  town  of  Mansoul;  the  other  three  he  called 
thus,  Mount  Alecto,  Mount  Megoera,  and  Mount 
Tisiphone ;  for  these  are  the  names  of  the  dreadful 
furies  of  hell.1  Thus  he  began  to  play  his  game 
with  Mansoul,  and  to  serve  it  as  doth  the  lion 
his  prey,  even  to  make  it  fall  before  his  terror. 
But,  as  I  said,  the  captains  and  soldiers  resisted 
so  stoutly,  and  did  so  much  execution  with  their 
stones,  that  they  made  him — though  against  sto- 
mach— to  retreat,  wherefore  Mansoul  began  to 
take  courage. 

Now,  upon  Mount  Diabolus,  which  was  raised 
p.  ..         . .     on  the  north  side  of  the  town,  there 

standard  set  did  the  tyrant  set  up  his  standard, 
and  a  fearful  thing  it  was  to  behold,  for 
he  had  wrought  in  it  by  devilish  art,  after  the  man- 
ner of  an  escutcheon,  a  flaming  flame,  fearful  to 
behold,  and  the  picture  of  Mansoul  burning  in  it. 
When  Diabolus  had  thus  done,  he  commanded 
that  his  drummer  should  every  night  approach  the 
He  bids  his  drum-  walls  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  so 

mer  to  beat  his  to  beat  a  parley ;  the  command  was 

drum.  A  . 

to  do  it  at  a-nights,  for  in  the  day- 
time they  annoyed  him  with  their  slings,  for  the 
tyrant  said  that  he  had  a  mind  to  parley  with  the 
now  trembling  town  of  Mansoul,  and  he  commanded 
that  the  drum  should  beat  every  night,  that  through 
weariness  they  might  at  last — if  possibly  at  the 
first  they  were  unwilling,  yet — be  forced  to  do  it. 
So  his  drummer  did  as  commanded,  he  arose 
Mansoul       and  did  beat  his  drnm.     But  when 
noise  'of  his   ^s  drum  did  go,  if  one  looked  towards 
drum.  the  town  of  Mansoul,  behold  darkness 

and  sorrow,  and  the  light  was  darkened  in  the 
heaveu  thereof.  No  noise  was  ever  heard  upon 
earth  more  terrible,  except  the  voice  of  Shaddai 
when  he  speaketh.  But  how  did  Mansoul  tremble ! 
It  now  looked  for  nothing  but  forthwith  to  be 
swallowed  up.2  is.  v.  so. 

When  this  drummer  had  beaten  for  a  parley,  he 
made  this  speech  to  Mansoul :  My  master  has  bid 
me  tell  you,  that  if  you  willingly  submit,  you  shall 
have  the  good  of  the  earth,  but  if  you  shall  be 
stubborn,  he  is  resolved  to  take  you  by  force.  But 
by  that  the  fugitive  had  done  beating  of  his  drum, 
the  people  of  Mansoul  had  betaken  themselves  to 
the  captains  that  were  in  the  castle,  so  that  there 
was  none  to  regard,  nor  to  give  this  drummer  an 


1  Bunyan's  general  knowledge  is  truly  astonishing.  Where 
could  he  have  scraped  acquaintance  with  the  names  of  the 
furies?  These  names  are,  however,  most  appropriately  applied 
to  such  objects  of  terror. — (Ed.) 

2  '  Often,  after  I  had  spent  this  and  the  other  day  in  sin,  I 
have  in  my  bed  been  greatly  afflicted,  when  asleep,  with  the 
apprehensions  of  devils,  and  wicked  spirits,  who  laboured  to 


answer,  so  he  proceeded  no  further  that  night,  but 
returned  again  to  his  master  to  the  camp. 

When  Diabolus  saw  that,  by  drumming,  ho 
could  not  work  out  Mansoul  to  his  will,  the  next 
night  he  sendeth  his  drummer  without  Diabolus  calls 
his  drum,  still  to  let  the  townsmen  •»<*  his  dru.u. 
know,  that  he  had  a  mind  to  parley  with  them. 
But  when  all  came  to  all,  his  parley  was  turned 
into  a  summons  to  the  town  to  deliver  up  them- 
selves, but  they  gave  him  neither  heed  nor  hear- 
ing, for  they  remembered  what  at  first  it  cost  them 
to  hear  him  a  few  words.3 

The  next  night  he  sends  again,  and  then  who 
should  be  his  messenger  to  Mansoul  but  the  ter- 
rible Captain  Sepulchre;  so  Captain  Sepulchre 
came  up  to  the  walls  of  Mansoul,  and  made  this 
oration  to  the  town— 

0  ye   inhabitants    of  the    rebellious   town   of 

Mansoul!  I  summon  you,  in  the  name   jransoul   gnni. 

of  the  Prince  Diabolus,  that  without     iuoncd  by  ca|>- 
,  x1  tain  Sepulchre, 

any  more  ado  you  set  open  the  gates 

of  your  town,  and  admit  the  great  lord  to  come  in. 

But  if  you  shall  still  rebel,  when  we  have  taken 

to  us  the  town  by  force,  we  will  swallow  you  up 

as  the  grave;  wherefore,  if  you  will  hearken  to  my 

summons,  say  so,  and  if  not,  then  let  me  know. 

The  reason  of  this  my  summons,  quoth  he, 
is,  for  that  my  lord  is  your  undoubted  prince  and 
lord,  as  you  yourselves  have  formerly  owned.  Nor 
shall  that  assault  that  was  given  to  my  lord,  when 
Emmanuel  dealt  so  dishonourably  by  him,  prevail 
with  him  to  lose  his  right,  and  to  forbear  to 
attempt  to  recover  his  own.  Consider  then,  0 
Mansoul,  with  thyself,  wilt  thou  show  thyself 
peaceable  or  no  ?  If  thou  shalt  quietly  yield  up 
thyself,  then  our  old  friendship  shall  be  renewed, 
but  if  thou  shalt  yet  refuse  and  rebel,  then  expect 
nothing  but  fire  and  sword. 

When  the  languishing  town  of  Mansoul  had 
heard  this  summoner  and  his  sum-  They  answer 
mons,  they  were  yet  more  put  to  their  «*«*""* 
dumps,  but  made  to  the  captain  no  answer  at  all, 
so  away  he  went  as  he  came.* 

But  after  some  consultation  among  themselves, 
as  also  with  some  of  their  captains,  they  applied 
themselves  afresh  to  the  Lord  Secretary  for  coun- 
sel and  advice  from  him,  for  this  Lord  They  address 
Secretary  was  their  chief  preacher,  as  theirgpodLord 
also  is  mentioned  some  pages  before,     Secretary. 

draw  me  away  with  them ;  of  which  I  could  never  be  rid.' 
— Grace  Abounding,  No.  5.  Here  we  see  the  drum  of  Diabo- 
lus.—(Ed.) 

3  The  Christian's  motto  should  be—'  No  parley  with  the 
tempter ;  not  for  a  moment.'  Never  forget  the  fatal  parley 
he  had  with  Eve—  (Ed.) 

4  A  season  of  doubt  and  fear  encourages  the  assaults  of 
death  and  hell.  How  often  has  Captain  Sepulchre  put  Man- 
soul  to  its  dumps !  It  is  a  blessing  when  it  excites  to  prayer 
and  examination. — (En.) 


344 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


only  now  he  was  ill  at  ease,   and  of  him  they 
beefed  favour  in  these  two  or  three  things — 

1.  That  he  would  look  comfortably  upon  them, 
and  not  to  keep  himself  so  much  retired  from  them 
as  formerly.  Also  that  he  would  be  prevailed 
with  to  give  them  a  hearing,  while  they  should 
make  known  their  miserable  condition  to  him. 
But  to  this  he  told  them  as  before,  that  as  yet  he 
was  but  ill  at  ease,  and  therefore  could  not  do  as 
he  had  formerly  done. 

2.  The  second  thing  that  they  desired  was,  that 
he  would  be  pleased  to  give  them  his  advice  about 
their  now  so  important  affairs,  for  that  Diabolus 
was  come  and  set  down  before  the  town  with  no 
less  than  twenty  thousand  Doubters.  They  said, 
moreover,  that  both  he  and  his  captains  were  cruel 
men.  and  that  they  were  afraid  of  them.  But  to 
this  he  said,  You  must  look  to  the  law  of  the 
Prince,  and  there  see  what  is  laid  upon  you  to  do.1 

3.  Then  they  desired  that  his  Highness  would 
help  them  to  frame  a  petition  to  Shaddai,  and  unto 
Emmanuel  his  Son,  and  that  he  would  set  his  own 
hand  thereto,  as  a  token  that  he  was  one  with 
them  in  it ;  for,  said  they,  my  lord,  many  a  one 
have  we  sent,  but  can  get  no  answer  of  peace,  but 
now,  surely  one  with  thy  hand  unto  it  may  obtain 
good  for  Mansoul. 

But  all  the  answer  that  he  gave  to  this   was 

„,.  „.     that   they   had    offended   their   Em- 

The  cause  of  his  J  _ 

being   ill    at   manuel,  and  had  also  grieved  himself, 
and  that  therefore  they  must  as  yet 
partake  of  their  own  devices. 

This  answer  of  the  Lord  Secretary  fell  like  a 
millstone  upon  them,  yea,  it  crushed  them  so  that 
they  could  not  tell  what  to  do,  yet  they  durst  not 
The  sad  straits  comply  with  the  demands  of  Diabolus, 
of  Mansoul.  nor  -\Vitli  the  demands  of  his  captain. 
So  then,  here  were  the  straits  that  the  town  of 
Mansoul  was  betwixt  when  the  enemy  came  upon 
her,  her  foes  were  ready  to  swallow  her  up,  and 
her  friends  did  forbear  to  help  her.2  Lam.  i.  3. 

Then  stood  up  my  Lord  Mayor,  whose  name 
Acomnentupon  was  my  Lord  Understanding,  and  he 
the  Lord  secrc-  began  to  pick  and  pick,  until  he  had 

tary  s speech.         •    1      1  ~ 

picked  comfort  out  of  that  seem- 
ingly bitter  saying  of  the  Lord  Secretary,  for  thus 
he  descanted  upon  it:  First,  said  he, 
this  unavoidably  follows  upon  the  say- 
ing of  our  Lord  that  we  must  yet  suffer  for  our 
sins.  Second.  But,  quoth  he,  the  words  yet  found 
as  if  at  last  wc  should  be  saved  from  our  enemies 
and  that  after  a  few  more  sorrows  Emmanuel  will 


m- 


1  Rely  not  upon  frames,  feelings,  or  experience,  but  go 
prayerfully  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony ;  that  alone  should 
be  'a  lamp  to  our  feet,  and  a  light  to  our  path.' — (Ed.) 

2  '  When  I  cried  to  God  for  mercy,  this  would  come  in — 
It  is  too  late,  I  am  lost;  God  hath  let  me  fall,  not  to  my  cor- 
rection, but  mv  condemnation.' — Grace  Abounding,  .No.  103. 
-(Ed.) 


come  and  be  our  help.  Now  the  Lord  Mayor  was 
the  more  critical  in  his  dealing  with  the  Secretary's 
words,  because  my  Lord  was  more  than  a  prophet, 
and  because  none  of  his  words  were  such  but  that 
at  all  times  they  were  most  exactly  significant,  and 
the  townsmen  were  allowed  to  pry  into  them,  and 
to  expound  them  to  their  best  advantage.3 

So  they  took  their  leaves  of  my  Lord,  and  re- 
turned, and  went,  and  came  to  the  captains,  to 
whom  they  did  tell  what  my  Lord  High  Secretary 
had  said,  who  when  they  had  heard  it,  were  all 
of  the  same  opinion  as  was  my  Lord  Mayor  him- 
self;  the  captains  therefore  began  to  take  some 
courage  unto  them,  and  to  prepare  to  make  some 
brave  attempt  upon  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  and 
to  destroy  all  that  were  Diabolonians,  with  the 
roving  Doubters  that  the  tyrant  had  brought  with 
him  to  destroy  the  poor  town  of  Mansoul. 

So  all  betook  themselves  forthwith  to  their 
places,  the  captains  to  theirs,  the  The  town  , 
Lord  Mayor  to  his,  the  subordinate  Mansoul  in 
Preacher  to  his,  and  my  Lord  Will- 
be-will  to  his.  The  captains  longed  to  be  at  some 
work  for  their  Prince,  for  they  delighted  in  war- 
like achievements.  The  next  day,  therefore,  they 
came  together  and  consulted,  and,  after  consulta- 
tion had,  they  resolved  to  give  an  answer  to  the 
captain  of  Diabolus  with  slings,  and  so  they  did 
at  the  rising  of  the  sun  on  the  morrow ;  for  Dia- 
bolus had  adventured  to  come  nearer  again,  but 
the  sling-stones  were,  to  him  and  his,  like  hornets. 
Zee.  ix.  is.  For  as  there  is  nothing  to  the  town  of 
Mansoul  so  terrible  as  the  roaring  of  Diabolus's 
drum,  so  there  is  nothing  to  Diabolus  so  terriblo 
as  the  well  playing  of  Emmanuel's  Wonl8«  applied 
slings.  Wherefore  Diabolus  was  forced  against  him  by 
to  make  another  retreat,  yet  further 
off  from  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  Then  did 
the  Lord  Mayor  of  Mansoul  cause  the  bells  to  be 
rung,  and  that  thanks  should  be  sent  to  the  Lord 
High  Secretary  by  the  mouth  of  the  subordinate 
Preacher ;  for  that  by  his  words  the  captains  and 
elders  of  Mansoul  had  been  strengthened  against 
Diabolus. 

When  Diabolus  saw  that  his  captains  and 
soldiers,  high  lords,  and  renowned,  were  frightened, 
and  beaten  down  by  the  stones  that  came  from  the 
golden  slings  of  the  Prince  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul, he  bethought  himself,  and  said,  I  will  try  to 
catch  them  by  fawning,  I  will  try  to  flatter  them 
into  my  net.5  Re.  xii.  10. 

3  A  personal  prying  into  the  Scriptures  is  a  most  important 
duty.  As  the  reader  will  presently  see,  these  golden  slings 
beat  down  aul  frightened  the  high  lords  and  soldiers,  the 
renowned  Doubters  under  Uiabjlus. — (Ed.) 

*  '  Words,'  or  texts  of  Holy  Writ.— (E».) 

s  Satan  has  various  modes  of  attack.  If  he  succeed  not  as 
the  roaring  lion,  he  will  assume  the  er.ifty  serpent;  if  he  pre- 
1  vad  not  by  fear,  he  will  resort  to  flattery.—  (Border.) 


THE  ITOLY  WAK. 


315 


Wherefore  after  a  while  he  came  down  again  to 
DMiolnsctomgea  the  wall,  not  now  with  his  drum,  nor 

bis  way.  ^j,  captaui  Sepulchre,  but  having  so 
all  besugared  his  lips,  he  seemed  to  be  a  very 
sweet-inoothed,  peaceable  Prince,  designing  nothing 
for  humour's  sake,1  nor  to  be  revenged  on  Man- 
soid  for  injuries  by  them  done  to  him,  but  the 
welfare,  and  good,  and  advantage  of  the  town  and 
people  therein,  was  now,  as  he  said,  his  only 
design.  Wherefore,  after  he  had  called  for  au- 
dience, and  desired  that  the  townsfolk  would  give 
it  to  him,  he  proceeded  in  his  oration:  And  said, 

1  0  !  the  desire  of  my  heart,  the  famous  town  of 
Mansoul  !  How  many  nights  have  I  watched,  and 
how  many  weary  steps  have  I  taken,  if,  perhaps, 
I  might  do  thee  good,  l  re.  v.  8.  Far  he  it,  far  he 
it  from  me,  to  desire  to  make  a  war  upon  you,  if 
ye  will  but  willingly  and  quietly  deliver  up  your- 
selves unto  me.  You  know  that  you  were  mine 
of  old.  Mat.  iv.  8,  9.  Lu.  iv.  c,  7.  Remember  also,  that 
so  long  as  you  enjoyed  me  for  your  lord,  and  that 
I  enjoyed  you  for  my  subjects,  you  wanted  for 
nothing  of  all  the  delights  of  the  earth,  that  I, 
Satan  roads  all  your  lord  and  prince,  could  get  for 
backwards.  yOU  .  or  t]iat  j  could  invent  to  make 
you  bonny  and  blithe  withal.  Consider,  you  never 
had  so  many  hard,  dark,  troublesome,  and  heart- 
afflicting  hours,  while  you  where  mine,  as  you  have 
had  since  you  revolted  from  me  ;  nor  shall  you  ever 
have  peace  again  until  you  and  I  become  one  as 
before.2  Be  but  prevailed  with  to  embrace  me 
Take  heed  Man-  again,  and  I  will  grant,  yea,  Marge 
your  old  charter  with  abundance  of 
privileges  ;  so  that  your  licence  and  liberty  shall 
be  to  take,  hold,  enjoy,  and  make  your  own,  all 
that  is  pleasant  from  the  east  to  the  west.3  Nor 
shall  any  of  those  incivilities  wherewith  you  have 
offended  me,  be  ever  charged  upon  you  by  me,  so 
long  as  the  the  sun  and  moon  endureth.  Nor  shall 
any  of  those  dear  friends  of  mine,  that  now,  for 
the  fear  of  you,  lie  lurking  in  dens, 
and  holes,  and  caves  in  Mansoul,  be 
hurtful  to  you  any  more ;  yea,  they  shall  be  your 
servants,  and  shall  minister  unto  you  of  their  sub- 
stance, and  of  whatever  shall  come  to  hand.  I 
need  speak   no  more,  you  know  them,  and  have 

The  pleasure    some  time  since  been  much  delighted 
ot  sm-        in   their   company,   why  then    should 
we  abide  at  such  odds?     Let  us  renew  our  old 
acquaintance  and  friendship  again.4 


1  For  whim,  caprice,  petulance,  or  peevishness. — (Ed.) 

2  'Gladly  would  I  have  been  in  the  condition  of  a  dog  or 
horse,  for  1  knew  they  had  no  souls  to  perish  under  the  ever- 
lasting weight  of  hell  or  sin,  as  mine  was  like  to  do.' — Grace 
Abounding,  No.  104. —  (Ed.) 

3  '  All  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them  ;' 
'all  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and 
worship  me.'  Mat.  iv.  8. — (Ed.) 

*  The  infernal  liar  promises  great  things,  which  he  is  nei- 


*  Bear  with  your  friend;  I  take  the  liberty  at  this 
time  to  speak  thus  freely  unto  you.    n„  no  no-  not 

The  love  that   I  have  to  you  presses 

me  to  do  it,  as  also  does  the  zeal  of    u""- 

my  heart  for  my  friends   with  yon  ;    put  mo  not 

therefore    to    further    trouble,    nor    yourselves   to 

further  fears  and  frights.      Have  you  I  will,  in  a 

way  of  peace  or  war;  nor  do  you  flatter  yourselves 

with  the  power  and  force  of  your  captains,  or  that 

your  Emmanuel  will  shortly  come  in  to  your  help, 

for  such  strength  will  do  you  no  pleasure. 

'  1  am  come  against  you  with  a  stout  and  valiant 
army,  and  all  the  chief  princes  of  the  den,  are 
even  at  the  head  of  it.  Besides,  my  captains  are 
swifter  than  eagles,  stronger  than  lions,  and  more 
greedy  of  prey  than  are  the  evening-wolves.  What 
is  Og  of  Bashan!  What  is  Goliah  of  Oath!  And 
what  is  a  hundred  more  of  them  to  one  of  the  least 
of  my  captains !  How  then  shall  Mansoul  think 
to  escape  my  hand  and  force  ?  '  5 

Diabolus  having  thus  ended  his  flattering,  fawn- 
ins;,  deceitful,  and  lying  speech  to  the  famous  town 
of  Mansoul,  the  Lord  Mayor  replied  upon  him  as 
follows: — 

'  0  Diabolus,  prince  of  darkness,  and  master  of 
all  deceit ;  thy  lying  flatteries  we  have  a-,ie  Tj01.,1 
had  and  made  sufficient  probation  of,  Mayor"* answer. 
and  have  tasted  too  deeply  of  that  destructive  cup 
already ;  should  we  therefore  again  hearken  unto 
thee,  and  so  break  the  commandments  of  our  great 
Shaddai,  to  join  in  affinity  with  thee ;  would  not 
our  Prince  reject  us,  and  cast  us  off  for  ever;  and 
being  cast  off  by  him,  can  the  place  that  he  has 
prepared  for  thee,  be  a  place  of  rest  for  us?  Be- 
side, 0  thou  that  art  empty  and  void  of  all  truth, 
we  are  rather  ready  to  die  by  thy  hand,  than  to 
fall  in  with  thy  flattering  and  lying  deceits.' 

When  the  tyrant  saw  that  there  was  little  to  be 
got  by  parleying  with  my  Lord  Mayor,  he  fell  into 
a  hellish  rage,  and  resolved  that  again,  with  his 
army  of  Doubters,  he  would  another  time  assault 
the  town  of  Mansoul. 

So  he  called  for  his  drummer,  who  beat  up  for 
his  men  (and  while  he  did  beat.  Mansoul  did  shake), 
to  be  in  a  readiness  to  give  battle  to  the  corpora- 
tion ;  then  Diabolus  drew  near  with  his  army,  and 
thus  disposed  of  his  men.  Captain  Cruel,  and 
Captain  Torment,  these  he  drew  up  and  placed 
against    Feelgate,    and    commanded  them  to  sit 

ther  able  nor  willing  to  perform.  Wonderful  liberty  meaning 
frightful  slavery;  all  sensual  gratifications,  hut  does  not  hint 
thai  they  are  destructive  to  body  and  soul;  perfect  freedom 
from  religious  fears  and  straits,  hut  does  not  add  thai  after  all 
this  comes  a  portion  in  the  burning  lake. — (En.) 

6  I  much  doubt  whether  human  ingenuity  ever  invented  a 
speech  so  worthy  of  the  terms  'flattering,  fawning,  deceitful 
and  lying.'  It  'is  worthy  the  mouth  of  the  god  of  this  world, 
the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.  It  is  a  marvellous  in- 
of  an  unlettered  mechanic,  presenting  itself  to  the. 
imagination  with  all  the  force  and  power  of  reality. — (Ed.) 

41- 


346 


THE  HOLY  WAT?. 


down  there  for  the  war.1     And  he  also  appointed, 

that  if  need  were,  Captain  Noease  should 

come  in  to  their  relief. 

At  Nosegate  he  placed  the  Captain  Brimstone, 

and  Captain  Sepulchre,  and  bid  them 

•      |oo|,  wey  ^0  their  ward,  on  that  side 

of  the  town   of  Mansoul.     But   at   Eyegate    lie 

placed  that  grim-faced  one  the  Cap- 

3  ""'  tain  Pasthope,  and  there  also  now  he 

did  set  up  his  terrible  standard: 

Now  Captain  Insatiable  he  was  to  look  to  the 
carriage  of  Diabolus,  and  was  also  appointed  to 
take  into  custody,  that,  or  those  persons  and 
things  that  should  at  any  time  as  prey  be  taken 
from  the  enemy. 

Now  Mouthgate  the  inhabitants  of  Mansoul  kept 

for  a  sally-port,  wherefore  that  they 

kept  strong,  tor  that  was  it,  by,  and 

out  at  which  the  towns-folk  did  send  their  petitions 

to  Emmanuel  their  Prince;  that  also  was  the  gate 

from  the  top  of  which  the  captains  did  play  their 

slings  at  the  enemies,  for  that  gate  stood  somewhat 

ascending,  so  that  the  placing  of  them  there,  and 

the  letting  of  them  fly  from  that  place,  did  much 

The  use  of     execution  against  the  tyrant's  army  ; 

Mouthgate.     wlierefore  for  these  causes,  with  others, 

Diabolus  sought,  if  possible,  to  land  up  Mouthgate 

with  dirt." 

Now  as  Diabolus  was  busy  and  industrious  in 
preparing  to  make  his  assault  upon  the  town  of 
Mansoul  without,  so  the  captains  and  soldiers  in 
the  corporation  were  as  busy  in  preparing  within ; 
they  mounted  their  slings,  they  set  up  their  ban- 
ners, they  sounded  their  trumpets,  and  put  them- 
selves in  sucb  order  as  was  judged  most  for  the 
annoyance  of  the  enemy,  and  for  the  advantage  of 
Mansoul,  and  gave  to  their  soldiers  orders  to  be 
ready  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  for  war.  The 
The  Lord  Will-  Lord  Will-be- will  also,  he  took  the 
be-wiii    plays   charge  of  watching  against  the  rebels 

the  mau  .  ° 

within,  and  to  do   what  he  could  to 

take  th<^i  while  without,  or  to  stifle  them  within 

their  caves,  dens,  and  holes,  in  the  town-wall  of 

Mansoul.  ■•   And  to  speak   the  truth  of  him,  ever 

since  he  took  penance  for  his  fault,  he  has  showed 

as  much  opnesty  and  bravery  of  spirit  as  any  he 

JoUey  anil  ,._.,.    in  Mansoul  ;   for  he  took  one  Jolley, 

gish  taken  and    and  his  brother  Grigish,  the  two  sons 
executed.  ....  TT  , 

of  Ins  servant  llarmlcss-mirth,3  for  to 
that  day,  though  the  father  was  committed  to 
ward,  the  sons  had  a  dwelling  in  the  house  of  my 


1  The  intention  of  Diabolus  is  to  fill  the  soul  with  doubts, 
and,  if  possible,  with  despair,  lie  places  his  forces  at  Feel- 
gate;  that  is,  lie  would  had  the  soul  to  doubt  by  trusting  to 
his  religious  frames  and  feeliugs,  instead  of  looking  only  to 
Jesus. — (Burder.) 

2  So  valuable  to  the  soul  is  prayer,  that  Diabolus  attempts 
to  prevent  it,  by  rendering  Mouthgate  impassible.  Nothing 
can  be  more  expressive  than  the  terms,  '  to  laud  up,'  or  block- 


lord.  I  say  he  took  them,  and  with  his  own  hands 
put  them  to  the  cross.  And  this  was  the  reason 
why  he  hanged  them  up,  after  their  father  was 
put  into  the  hands  of  Mr.  Trueman  the  jailer  ; 
they  his  sons  began  to  play  his  pranks,  and  to  be 
ticking  and  toying  with  the  daughters  of  their 
lord  ;  nay,  it  was  jealoused  that  they  were  too 
familiar  with  them,  the  which  was  brought  to  his 
lordship's  ear.  Now  his  lordship,  being  unwilling 
unadvisedly  to  put  any  man  to  death,  did  not  sud- 
denly fall  upon  them,  but  set  watch  and  spies  to 
see  if  the  thing  was  true  ;  of  the  which  he  was 
soon  informed,  for  his  two  servants,  whose  names 
were  Findout,  and  Tellall,  catched  them  together 
in  uncivil  manner  more  than  once  or  twice,  and 
went  and  told  their  lord.  So  when  my  Lord  Will- 
be-will  had  sufficient  ground  to  believe  the  thing- 
was  true,  he  takes  the  two  young  Diabolonians, 
for  such  they  were,  for  their  father  was  a  Diabo- 
lonian  born,  and  has  them  to  Eyegate,  where  he 
raised  a  very  high  cross  just  in  the  face  of  Dia- 
bolus, and  of  his  army,  and  there  he  The  place  of 
hanged  the  young  villains  in  defiance  tluur  esecutum- 
to  Captain  Pasthope,  and  of  the  horrible  standard 
of  the  tyrant. 

Now  this  Christian  act  of  the  brave  Lord  Will- 
be-will  did  greatly  abash  Captain  Pasthope,  dis- 
courage the  army  of  Diabolus,  put  fear  into  the 
Diabolonian  runagates  in  Mansoul,  and  put 
strength  and  courage  into  the  captains  that  be- 
longed to  Emmanuel  the  Prince;  for 

°       .  ,.  Mortification  of 

they  without  did  gather,  and  that,  by  sin  is  a  sign  of 
this  very  act  of  my  lord,  that  Mansoul  upe  ot 
was  resolved  to  fight,  and  that  the  Diabolonians 
within  the  town  could  not  do  such  things  as  Dia- 
bolus had  hopes  they  would,  Nor  was  this  the 
only  proof  of  the  brave  Lord  Will-be-will's  honesty 
to  the  town,  nor  of  his  loyalty  to  his  Prince,  as 
will  afterwards  appear. 

Now  when  the  children  of  Prudent-thrifty,  who 
dwelt  with  Mr.  Mind,  for  Thrift  left  children  with 
Mr.  Mind,  when  he  was  also  committed  Ml..  jfiliu  plays 
to  prison,  and  their  names  were  Gripe  tlie  man- 
and  Rake-all ;  these  he  begat  of  Mr.  Mind's  bas- 
tard-daughter, whose  name  was  Mrs.  Hold-fast- 
bad,  I  say,  when  his  children  perceived  how  the 
Lord  Will-be-will  had  served  them  that  dwelt  with 
him,  what  do  they  but,  lest  they  should  drink  of 
the  same  cup,  endeavour  to  make  their  escape  ? 
But  Mr.  Mind  being  wary  of  it,  took  them  and  put 

up,  '  the  way  with  dirt,'  so  as  to  prevent  the  sotd's  approach 
to  a  pure  and  holy  God.' — (Ed.) 

3  To  really  harmless  mirth,  to  be  merry  and  wise,  there 
cau  be  no  objection. 

'  Religion  never  was  designed 
To  make  our  pleasures  less.' 

But  Ware  of  Jolley  and  Grigish.  If  mirth  produces  them, 
be  sure  that  it  is  not  harmless,  and  at  once  put  them  to  the 
cross.- -(Ed.) 


THE   HOLY    WAR. 


347 


them  in  hold  in  his  house  till  morning,  for  this  was 
done  over  night,  and  remembering  that  by  the  law 
of  Mansoul,  all  Diaboloniana  were  to  die,  and  to  he 
sure  they  were  at  least  by  father's  side  such,  and 
some  say  by  mother's  Bide  too,  what  does  he  hut 
takes  them  and  puts  them  in  chains,  and  carries 
them  to  the  self-same  place  where  my  lord  hanged 
his  two  before,  and  there  he  hanged  them. 

The  townsmen  also  took  great  encouragement 

Mansoul  set  -i     at  tn's  act  °*  ^'"-  Mind,  an0"  (Ul'  w'iat 
they  could  to  have  taken  some  more  of 
these  Diabolonian  troublers  of  Man- 
soul; hut  at  that  time  the  rest  lay  so  quat1  and 
close  that  they  could  not  be  apprehended  ;  so  they 
;  :11st  them  a  diligent  watch,  and  went  every 
man  to  his  place. 

I  told  you  a  little  before  that  Diabolus  and  his 
army  were  somewhat  abashed  and  discouraged  at 
the  sight  of  what  my  Lord  Will-be-will  did,  when 
Diabolus.  His  he  hanged  up  those  two  young  Dia- 
ed^uto^furious  holonians ;  but  his  discouragement 
111  4ness-  quickly  turned  itself  into  furious  mad- 

ness and  rage  against  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and 
fight  it  be  would.  Also  the  townsmen,  and  cap- 
tains within,  they  bad  their  hopes  and  their  expec- 
tations heightened,  believing  at  last  the  day  would 
he  theirs,  so  they  feared  them  the  less.  Their 
subordinate  Preacher  too  made  a  sermon  about  it, 
and  he  took  that  theme  for  his  text,  '  Gad,  a  troop 
shall  overcome  him  ;  but  he  shall  overcome  at  the 
last. '  Ge.  xiix.  ]9.  Whence  he  showed  that  though 
Mansoul  should  be  sorely  put  to  it  at  the  first,  yet 
the  victory  should  most  certainly  be  Mansoul's  at 
the  last. 

So  Diabolus  commanded  that  his  drummer  should 
beat  a  charge  against  the  town,  and  the  captains 
also  that  were  in  the  town  sounded  a  charge  against 
them,  but  they  had  no  drum,  they  were  trumpets 
of  silver  with  which  thev  sounded  against  them. 
Then  they  which  were  of  the  camp  of  Diabolus  came 
With  heart  and  down  to  the  town  to  take  it,  and  the 
month,  captains  in  the  castle,  with  the  sling- 
ers  at  Mouthgate  played  upon  them  amain.  And 
now  there  was  nothing  heard  in  the  camp  of  Dia- 
holus but  horrible  rage  and  blasphemy;  but  in  the 
town  good  words,  prayer,  and  singing  of  psalms. 
The  enemy  replied  with  horrible  objections,  and 
the  terribleness  of  their  drum;  but  the  town  made 
answer  with  the  slapping  of  their  slings,  and  the 
melodious  noise  of  their  trumpets.  And  thus  the 
fight  lasted  for  several  days  together,  only  now  and 
then  they  had  some  small  intermission,  in  the  which 


1  'Quat,'  now  spelt  'squat/  to  lie  or  sit  close,  still,  or 
lurking — 

Hilton. 
Iu  a  Glasgow  edition,  1720,  it  is  altered  to  'quiet.'    In  1732, 
it  is  '  lay  so  close.' — (Kn  ) 

-  Stinking  and  loathsome  is  sin  in  the  sight  of  God.     May 
we  be  sensible  of  the  hiihiness  of  sin,  as  David  was: — 'Mine 


the  townsmen  refreshed  themselves,  and  the  cap- 
tains made  ready  for  another  assault. 

The  captains  of  Emmanuel  were  (dad  in  silver 
armour,  and  the  soldiers  in  that  which  was  of  proof; 
the  soldiers  of  Diabolus  were  clad  in  iron,  which 
was  made  to  give  place  to  Emmanuel's  engine-shot. 
Ill  the  town  some  were  hurt,  and  some  were  great- 
ly wounded.  Now  the  worst  on  it  was,  a  surgeon 
was  scarce  in  Mansoul,  for  thai  Emmanuel  at  pre- 
sent was  absent.  Howbeit,  with  the  leaves  of  a 
tree  the  wounded  were  kept  from  dying;  yet  their 
wounds  did  greatly  putrify,  and  some  did  grievously 
stink."  Re,  wii.  2.  Ps.  ixxviii.  5.  Of  these  were  wounded, 
to  wit, 

My  Lord  Reason,  he  was  wounded  in  the  head. 

Another  that  was  wounded  was  the  whoofMansoul 
brave  Lord  Mayor,  he  was  wounded  in  warewonnded. 
th6  Eye. 

Another  that  was  wounded  was  Mr.  Mind,  he 
received  his  wound  about  the  Stomach.3 

The  honest  subordinate  Preacher  also,  he  re- 
ceived a  shot  not  far  oil'  the  heart,  but  none  of  these 
were  mortal. 

Many  also  of  the  inferior  sort  were  not  only 
wounded,  but  slain  outright.  Hopeful 

Now  in  the  camp  of  Diabolus  were      thougbts. 
wounded  and  slain  a  considerable  number.      For 
instance. 

Captain  Rage  he  was  wounded,  and  so  was  Cap- 
tain Cruel.  Whointhecamp 

Captain  Damnation  was  made  to  re-  °.er(,  J,',',',,'^",] 
treat,  and  to  intrench  himself  further  a"d  slaiu- 
off  of  Mansoul;  the  standard  also  of  Diabolus  was 
beaten  down,  and  his  standard-bearer  Captain  Much- 
hurt,  had  his  brains  beat  out  with  a  sling-stone,  to 
the  no  little  grief  and  shame  of  his  prince  Diabolus. 

Many  also  of  the  Doubters  were  slain  outright, 
though  enough  of  them  are  left  alive  to  make  Man- 
soul shake  and  totter.    Now  the  victory    Tli(.  ,.: 

that  dav being  turned  to  Mansoul,  did     »cn 

,  .  ,  ,       to  Mansoul. 

put  great  valour  into  the  townsmen  and 
captains,  and  did  cover  Diabolus's  camp  with  a 
cloud,  but  withal  it  made  them  far  more  furious.  So 
the  next  day  Mansoul  rested,  and  commanded  that 
the  bells  should  be  rung;  the  trumpets  also  joyfully 
sounded,  and  the  captains  shouted  round  the  town. 
My  Lord  Will-be-will  also  was  not  idle,  hut  did 
notable  service  within  against  the  do-  Mv  Ioi,]  Wl :I. 
mestics,  or  the  Diaboloniana  that  were     1m>' 

one  Anything, 

in  the  town,  not  onlv  bv  keeping  of    andon 

them  in  awe,  for  he  lighted  on  one  at     mitteth    them 
last  whose  name  was  Mr.  Anything,4     toward- 

iniquities  are  gone  over  my  head;  my  wounds  stink  and  are 
3S.1  Ps.  xxxviii.  4,  5. — (Ed.) 
\  curious  idea,  but  folly  borne  out   both  by  reason  and 
Scripture.     Gluttony  or  drunkenness  injures  the  mind.    Peter 
says,  '  Add  to  knowledge  temperance.1  2  Pe.  i.  6.— (Ed.) 

religion,  a  conformity 
or  opposition  to  it,  a-  convenience  requires.— -(Burder.) 


313 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


a  fellow  of  whom  mention  was  made  before  ;  for  it 
was  be,  if  you  remember,  that  brought  the  three  fel- 
lows to  Diabolus,  whom  the  Diabolonians  took  out 
of  Captain  Boanerges' company;  and  that  persuaded 
them  to  list  themselves  under  the  tyrant,  to  fight 
against  the  army  of  Shaddai;  my  Lord  Will-be-will 
did  also  take  a  notable  Diabolonian,  whose  name 
was  Loosefoot;1  this  Loosefoot  was  a  scout  to  the 
vagabonds  in  Mansoul,  and  that  did  use  to  carry 
tidings  out  of  Mansoul  to  the  camp,  and  out  of  the 
camp  to  those  of  the  enemies  in  Mansoul ;  both 
these  my  lord  sent  away  safe  to  Mr.  Trueman  the 
jailer,  with  a  commandment  to  keep  them  in  irons; 
for  he  intended  then  to  have  them  out  to  be  cruci- 
fied, when  it  would  be  for  the  best  to  the  corpora 
tion,  and  most  for  the  discouragement  of  the  camp 
of  the  enemies. 

My  Lord  Mayor  also,  though  he  could  not  stir 
The  captains  about  so  much  as  formerly,  because  of 
consult  to  fail   t^    wounfi  tnafc  ue  lately  received,  yet 

upon  the  ene-  ■>  '  J 

my-  gave  he  out  orders  to  all  that  were  the 

natives  of  Mansoul  to  look  to  their  watch,  and 
stand  upon  their  guard,  and,  as  occasion  should 
offer,  to  prove  themselves  men. 

Mr.  Conscience  the  preacher,  he  also  did  his 
utmost  to  keep  all  his  good  documents2  alive  upon 
the  hearts  of  the  people  of  Mansoul. 

[Chapter  XV.] 

[Contents  : — The  inhabitants  of  Mansoul  make  a  rash  sortie 
on  the  enemy  by  night,  but  are  repulsed  with  loss — Dia- 
bolus makes  a  desperate  attack  upon  Feelgate,  which, 
being  weak,  he  forces ;  and  his  army  of  Doubters  possess 
the  town,  and  do  incredible  mischief — The  inhabitants, 
sorely  aggrieved,  determine  on  a  new  application  to  Em- 
manuel, and  procure  the  assistance  of  the  Secretary  in 
preparing  the  petition,  which  is  presented  by  Captain 
Credence — He  is  favourably  received,  and  appointed 
Lord  Lieutenant  over  all  the  forces.] 

Well,  a  while  after  the  captains  and  stout  ones 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul  agreed  and  resolved  upon 
a  time  to  make  a  sally  out  upon  the  camp  of  Dia- 
bolus, and  this  must  be  done  in  the  night,3  and 
there  was  the  folly  of  Mansoul,  for  the  night  is 
always  the  best  for  the  enemy,  but  the  worst  for 
Mansoul  to  fight  in;  but  yet  they  would  do  it,  their 
courage  was  so  high  ;  their  last  victory  also  still 
stuck  in  their  memories. 

So  the  night  appointed  being  come,  the  Prince's 
Tliev  fight  in  the  brave  captains  cast  lots  who  should 
m.'hi,  who  do    lead  the  van  in  this  new  and  desner- 

leud  the  van.  ...  .  _.   ,     ,         r 

ate  expedition  against  Diabolus,  and 
against  his  Diabolonian  army,  and  the  lot  fell  to 


1  Loosefoot  may  signify  a  careless  walk  and  conversation. — 
(Border,) 

2  The  books,  chapters,  or  verses  of  holy  Writ. — (Ed  ) 

3  Night,  or  a  time  of  desertion,  was  the  best  for  the  ene- 
my; for  then  self-coulideuce  prevailed,  the  soul  depended  upon 


Captain  Credence,  to  Captain  Experience,  and  to 
Captain  Goodhope  to  lead  the  Forlorn  Hope.  This 
Captain  Experience  the  Prince  created  such  when 
himself  did  reside  in  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  so,  as 
I  said,  they  made  their  sally  out  upon  Uow  they  fall 
the  army  that  lay  in  the  siege  against  ou- 

them;  and  their  hap  was  to  fall  in  with  the  main 
body  of  their  enemies.  Now  Diabolus  and  his  men 
being  expertly  accustomed  to  night  work,  took  the 
alarm  presently,  and  were  as  ready  to  give  them 
battle,  as  if  they  had  sent  them  word  of  their  com- 
ing. Wherefore  to  it  they  went  amain,  and  blows 
were  hard  on  every  side ;  the  hell-drum  also  was 
beat  most  furiously,  while  the  trumpets  of  the 
Prince  most  sweetly  sounded.  And  thus  the  battle 
was  joined,  and  Captain  Insatiable  looked  to  the 
enemies  carriages,4  and  waited  when  he  should  re- 
ceive some  prey. 

The  Prince's  captains  fought  it  stoutly,  beyond 
what  indeed  could  be  expected  they  TUey  figUt 
should ;  they  wounded  many ;  they  bravely. 
made  the  whole  army  of  Diabolus  to  make  a  re- 
treat. But  I  cannot  tell  how,  but  the  brave  Cap- 
tain Credence,  Captain  Goodhope,  and  Captain 
Experience,  as  they  were  upon  the  pursuit,  cutting 
down,  and  following  hard  after  the  enemy  in  the 
rear,  Captain  Credence  stumbled  and  captain  Cre- 
fell,  by  which  fall  he  caught  so  great  dence  hurt 
a  hurt  that  he  could  not  rise  till  Captain  Experience 
did  help  him  up,  at  which  their  men  were  put  in 
disorder ;  the  captain  also  was  so  full  of  pain  that 
he  could  not  forbear  but  aloud  to  cry  The  rest  of  the 
out;  at  this  the  other  two  captains  ^^bssbk^ 
fainted,  supposing  that  Captain  Cre-  TIAL- 

dence  had  received  his  mortal  wound :  their  men 
also  were  more  disordered,  and  had  no  list  to  fight. 
Now  Diabolus  being  very  observing  though  at  this 
time  as  yet  he  was  put  to  the  worst,  perceiving 
that  a  halt  was  made  among  the  men  that  were  the 
pursuers,  what  does  he  but  taking  it  Diabolus  takes 
for  granted  that  the  captains  were  courage. 
either  wounded  or  dead;  he  therefore  makes  at  first 
a  stand,  then  faces  about,  aud  so  comes  up  upon 
the  Prince's  army  with  as  much  of  his  fury  as  hell 
could  help  him  to,  and  his  hap  was  to  fall  in  just 
among  the  three  captains,  Captain  Credence,  Cap- 
tain Goodhope,  and  Captain  Experience,  aud  did 
cut,  wound,  and  pierce  them  so  dread-  ThePrince'sfor- 
fully,  that  what  through  discourage-  ces  beateu- 
nient,  what  through  disorder,  and  what  through 
the  wounds  that  now  they  had  received,  and  also 
the  loss  of  much  blood,  they  scarce  were  able, 
though  they  had  for  their  power  the  three  best 
bands  in  Mansoul,  to  get  safe  into  the  hold  again. 

a  fancied  inherent  strength  of  its  own,  which  is  perfect  weak- 
ness. In  the  Lord  alone  have  we  righteousness  aud  strength 
for  the  battle. — (Mason.) 

4  Behaviour,  deportment. —  (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


349 


Now,  when  the  body  of  the  Prince's  army  saw 

Satan    some-     D0W    ^686    three    C;l]itaill.S    Were    }Ult    to 

tdmee makes   the  worst,  they  thought  it  their  wisdom 

saints      eat  '         ■»  ° 

tlieii     own    to  make  as  sale  una   good  a   retreat    as 

they   could,  and    so   returned   by   the 

Bally-port  again,  and   so   there  was  an  end  of  this 
...  ,  ,     ,   ,   ,    present  action.1     But  Diabolus  was 

Diabolus  flushed.    l 

so  Hushed  with  this  night's  work,  that 

he  promised  himself,  in   few  days,    an  easy   and 

complete    conquest   over    the    town    of    Mansoul ; 
Hedemandflthe    wherefore,   on   tlie   day   following-,  lie 
1"'W1-  comes   up   to   the  sides    thereof    with 

great    boldness,    and   demands   entrance,  and   that 
forthwith  they  deliver  themselves  up  to  h i.s  govern- 
ment. The  Diaholonians  too,  that  were  within,  they 
began   to   be   somewhat  brisk,  as    we    shall    show  , 
alter  ward. 

But  the  valiant  Lord  Mayor  replied  that  what  , 
UteleraSfayort  '1C  »ot  he  mus*  ge*  '\V  force,  for  as 
answer.  ]ong  as  Emmanuel  their  Prince  was 
alive,  though  be  at  present  was  not  so  with  them 
as  they  wished,  they  should  never  consent  to  yield 
Mansoul  up  to  another. 

And  with  that  the  Lord  Will-be-will  stood  up 
Brave  Wiii-be-  and  said,  "  Diabolus,  thou  master  of  the 
Mill's  speech,  ^en>  ailj  enemy  to  all  that  is  good, 
we,  poor  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  are 
too  well  acqaiuted  with  thy  rule  and  government, 
and  with  the  end  of  those  things  that  for  certain 
will  follow  submitting  to  thee,  to  do  it.2  Where- 
fore, though  while  we  were  without  knowledge  we 
suffered  thee  to  take  us,  as  the  bird  that  saw  not 
the  snare  fell  into  the  bands  of  the  fowler,  yet, 
since  we  have  been  turned  from  darkness  to  light, 
we  have  also  been  turned  from  the  power  of  Satan 
to  God.  And  though,  through  thy  subtilty,  and 
also  the  subtilty  of  the  Diaholonians  within,  we 
have  sustained  much  loss,  and  also  plunged  our- 
selves into  much  perplexity,  yet  give  up  ourselves, 
lay  down  our  arms,  and  yield  to  so  horrid  a  tyrant 
as  thou,  we  shall  not,  die  upon  the  place  we  choose 
rather  to  do.  Besides,  we  have  hopes  that  in  time 
deliverance  will  come  from  court  unto  us,  and 
therefore  we  yet  will  maintain  a  war  against  thee.' 

This  brave  speech  of  the  Lord  Will-be-will,  with 
Tbe  captains  that  also  of  the  Lord  Mayor,  did  some- 
encouraged.  wl,.u  abate  the  boldness  of  Diabolus, 
though  it  kindled  the  fury  of  his  rage.  It  also 
succoured  the  townsmen  and  captains,  yea,  it  was 
as  a  plaster  to  the  brave  Captain  Credence's 
wound  ;    for  you  must   know,  that  a  brave  speech 


1  The  night  of  darkness  and  desertion  was  nol  a  proper 
season  for  this  effort,  it  seems  intended  to  show  the  effects 
of  the  prevalence  of  a  self-confidenl  spirit,  which  cannot  issue 
well:  lbr  faith,  hope,  and  experience  were  wounded. —  Burder.) 

a  Misery  without  rented)  and  without  end;  eternal  death; 
the  being  cut  off  from  God,  the  rout  and  fountain   ol 
uess. — (Mason.) 

3  If  this  word  was  coined  bj  Banyan,  he  could   I 


now,  when  the  captains  of  the  town  with  their  men 
of  war  came  home  routed,  and  when  the  enemy 
took  courage  and  boldness  at  the  success  that  he 
had  obtained,  to  draw  up  to  the  walls  and  demand 
entrance  as  he  did,  was  in  season,  and  also  ad- 
vantageous. 

The  Lord  "Will-be-will  also  did  play  the  man 
within,  for  while  the  captains  and  soldiers  were  in 
the  field,  he  was  iii  arms  in  the  town,  and  wher- 
ever by  him  there  was  a  Diabolonian  found,  they 
were  forced  to  feel  the  weight  of  his  heavy  band, 
and  also  the  edge  of  his  penetrating  sword;  many 
therein  re,  of  the  Diaholonians  he  wounded,  as  the 
Lord  Cavil,  the  Lord  Brisk,  the  Lord  Pragmatic, 
and  the  Lord  Murmur,  several  also  of  the  meaner 
sort  he  did  sorely  maim,  though  there  cannot  at 
this  time  an  account  be  given  you  of  any  that  he 
slew  outright.  The  cause,  or  rather  the  advan- 
tage, that  my  Lord  Will-be-will  bad  at  this  time 
to  do  thus,  was,  for  that  the  captains  were  gone 
out  to  light  the  enemy  in  the  field.  Lor  now, 
thought  the  Diaholonians  within,  is  our  time  to 
stir  and  make  an  uproar  in  the  town  ;  what  do  they 
therefore  but  quickly  get  themselves  into  a  body, 
and  fall  forthwith  to  hurrieaning  in  Mansoul, ;;  as  if 
now  nothing  but  whirlwind  and  tempest  should  be 
there,  wherefore,  as  I  said,  be  takes 
this  opportunity  to  fall  in  among  them  -&& 
with  bis  men,  cutting  and  slashing  wffl-be-will's 
with  courage  that  was  undaunted,  at  gallantry. 
which  the  Diaholonians  with  all  haste  dispersed 
themselves  to  their  holds,  aud  my  lord  to  his  place 
as  before. 

This  brave  act  of  my  lord  did  somewhat  revenge 
the  wrong  done  by  Diabolus  to  the  captains,  and 
also  did  let  them  know  that  Mansoul    jfothi__     lik 

was  not  to  be  parted  with  for  the  loss      faith  to  crush 

„  .  i  o  i  Diabolus. 

ot   a   victory  or   two ;    wherefore   the 
wing  of  the  tyrant  was  clipped  again — as  to  boast- 
ing 1  mean — in  comparison  of  what  be  would  have 
done  if  the  Diaholonians  had  put  the  town  to  the 
same  plight  to  which  he  had  put  the  captains. 

Well,  Diabolus  yet  resolves  to  have  the  other 
bout. with  Mansoul;  for,  thought  be,  since  I  beat 
them  once,  1  may  beat  them  twice ;  wherefore  he 
commanded  his   men   to   be  ready  at    2Ic  trics  what 

such  an  hour  of  the  night,  to  make  a     becandoupoii 

.  tlie  sense  ami 

fresh  assault   upon  the   town,  and  he     feeling  of  the 

it  gave  out  in  special  that  they  should 

bend  all  their  force  against  Feelgate,4  and  attempt 

introduced  anything  more  appropriate.  No  word  in  common 
use  coidd  convey  an  idea  of  the  wretchedly  uneasy  state  of  the 
soul  in  such  a  siege.  Evil  thoughts  and  imaginations  are 
hurrieaning  within  him  ;  it  is  a  tempest  rushing  upon  him  at 
once  from  all  quarters;  like  Bunyan's  feelings,  as  described  in 
•/.  No.  187. — (En.) 
_  in  Diabolus  determines  to  attack  Mansoul  by  Feel- 
gate.  The  cry  was  incessantly  to  be  H  :  ■ .'  fl 
Christian,  depend  nut  upon  yuur  frames  or  feelings,  but  unou 


350 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


to  break  into  the  town  through  that;  the  word  that 
then  he  did  give  to  his  officers  and  soldiers,  was 
Hell-fire.  And,  said  he,  if  we  break  in  upon  them, 
as  I  wish  we  do,  either  with  some,  or  with  all  our 
force,  let  them  that  break  in  look  to  it,  that  they 
forget  not  the  word.  And  let  nothing  be  heard 
in  the  town  of  Man  soul  but  Hell-fire,  Hell-fire, 
II ell-fire!  The  drummer  was  also  to  beat  without 
ceasing,  and  the  standard-bearers  were  to  display 
their  colours,  the  soldiers  too  were  to  put  on  what 
courage  they  could,  and  to  see  that  they  played 
manfully  their  parts  against  the  town. 

So  the  night  was  come,  and  all  things  by  the 
tyrant  made  ready  for  the  work;  he  suddenly  makes 
Feelgate  but  his  assault  upon  Feelgate,  and  after 
weak.  ]ie  iiac]  a  while  struggled  there,  he 
throws  the  gates  wide  open.  For  the  truth  is, 
those  gates  were  but  weak,  and  so  most  easily 
made  to  yield.  When  Diabolus  had  thus  far  made 
his  attempt,  he  placed  his  captains,  to  wit,  Tor- 
ment and  Noease  there,  so  he  attempted  to  press 
forward,  but  the  Prince's  captains  came  down  upon 
him,  and  made  his  entrance  more  difficult  than  he 
desired.  And,  to  speak  the  truth,  they  made  what 
resistance  they  could,  but  the  three  of  their  best 
and  most  valiant  captains  being  wounded,  and  by 
When      these    their  wounds  made  much  incapable  of 

three  captains  doinjrthe  town  that  service  the v  would, 
are    disabled,  °  .  / 

what  can  the  and  all  the  rest  having  more  than  their 
town  of°Man-  hands  full  of  the  Doubters,  and  their 
so,ll?  captains  that  did  follow  Diabolus,  they 

were  overpowered  with  force,  nor  could  they  keep 
them  out  of  the  town.  AVhcrefore  the  Prince's 
men  and  their  captains  betook  themselves  to  the 
castle,  as  to  the  strong  hold  of  the  town,  and  this 
they  did  partly  for  their  own  security,  partly  for 
the  security  of  the  town,  and  partly,  or  rather 
chiefly,  to  preserve  to  Emmanuel  the  prerogative- 
royal  of  Mansoul,  for  so  was  the  castle  of  Mansoul.1 
The  captains  therefore  being  fled  into  the  castle, 
the  enemy,  without  much  resistance,  possess  them- 
selves of  the  rest  of  the  town,  and  spreading 
themselves  as  they  went  into  every  corner,  thev 
cried  out  as  they  marched,  according  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  tyrant,  Hell-lire,  Hell-fire,  Hell-fire!  so 
that  nothing  for  a  while,  throughout  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  could  be  heard  but  the  direful  noise  of 
llell-fire,  together  with  the  roaring  of  Diabolus's 
The  sad  fruits  drum."  And  now  did  the  clouds  hang 
ofapostacy.  uacjc  ovcr  Mansoul,  nor  to  reason  did 
anything  but  ruin  seem  to  attend  it.  Diabolus 
also  quartered  his  soldiers  in  the  houses  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the   town   of  Mansoul.      Yea,   the 


the  immutable  and  unchangeable  Word  of  God.  The  terrors 
of  hell  will  get  hold  upon  him  who  trusts  to  bis  experience, 
instead  of  fixing  all  his  hopes  in  the  Lord  Jehovah. — (Ed.) 

1  The  heart.     It  is  a  blessed  presage  when  thai   is  rigid 
with  God;  then  may  the  sold,  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord, 


subordinate  Treacher's  house  was  as  full  of  these 
outlandish  Doubters  as  ever  it  could  hold;  and  so 
was  my  Lord  Mayor's,  and  my  Lord  Will-be-will's 
also.  Yea,  where  was  there  a  corner,  a  cottage, 
a  barn,  or  a  hog-stye,  that  now  were  not  full  of 
these  vermin?  yea,  they  turned  the  men  of  the 
town  out  of  their  houses,  and  would  lie  in  their 
beds,  and  sit  at  their  tables  themselves.  Ah>  poor 
Mansoul !  Now  thou  feelest  the  fruits  of  sin,  and 
what  venom  was  in  the  flattering  words  of  Mr. 
Carnal-security !  They  made  great  havoc  of  what- 
ever they  laid  their  hands  on ;  yea, 
they  fired  the  town  in  several  places, 
many  young  children  also  were  by  them  dashed 
in  pieces,  yea,  those  that  were  yet  Good  and  tender 
unborn  they  destroyed  in  their  mother's  thoughts, 
wombs  ;  for  you  must  needs  think  that  it  could  not 
now  be  otherwise ;  for  what  conscience,  what  pity, 
what  bowels  of  compassion  can  any  expect  at  the 
hands  of  out-landish  Doubters  ;  many  Holy  concep- 
in  Mansoul  that  were  women,  both  *"»»  of  good, 
young  and  old,  they  forced,  ravished,  and  beast- 
like abused,  so  that  they  swooned,  miscarried, 
and  many  of  them  died,  and  so  lay  at  the  top 
of  every  street,  and  in  all  by-places  of  the 
town. 

And  now  did  Mansoul  seem  to  be  nothing  but  a 
den  of  dragons,  an  emblem  of  hell,  and  a  place  of 
total  darkness.  Now  did  Mansoul  lie  almost  like 
the  barren  wilderness,  nothing  hut  nettles,  briars, 
thorns,  weeds,  and  stinking  things  seemed  now  to 
cover  the  face  of  Mansoul.  1  told  you  before  how 
that  these  Diaholonian  Doubters  turned 
the  men  of  Mansoul  out  of  their  beds ; 
and  now  I  will  add,  they  wounded  them,  they 
mauled  them,  yea,  and  almost  brained  many  of 
them.  Many,  did  I  say,  yea^  most,  if  not  all  of 
them ;  Mr.  Conscience  they  so  wounded,  yea,  and 
his  wounds  so  festered,  that  he  could  gau  work  amoug 
have  no  ease  day  nor  night,  but  lay  as  the  townsmen 
if  continually  upon  a  rack;  but  that  Shaddai  rules 
all,  certainly  they  had  slain  him  outright.  My 
Lord  Mayor  they  so  abused  that  they  almost  put 
out  his  eyes,  and  had  not  my  Lord  Will-be-will 
got  into  the  castle,  they  intended  to  have  chopped 
him  all  to  pieces,  for  they  did  look  upon  him,  as 
his  heart  now  stood,  to  be  one  of  the  very  worst 
that  was  in  Mansoul  against  Diabolus  Satan  has  a  par- 
and  his  crew.  And  indeed  he  hath  agahMtasanc- 
showed  himself  a  man,  and  more  of  fcfiedwill. 
his  exploits  you  will  hear  of  afterwards. 

exult  and  say,  'Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy;    for 
when  1  fall,  I  shall  rise  again.' — (Mason.) 

-  '  I  could  neither  eat  my  food,  stoop  for  a  pin,  chop  a 
stick,  or  cast  mine  eye  to  look  on  this  or  that,  but  still  the 
temptation  would  come,  Sell  Christ  for  this,  or  sell  Christ  for 
that;  sell  him,  sell  him.' — Grace  Abounding,  No.  135.  None 
but  the  experienced  Christian  knows  the  terror  of  Diabolus's 
drum. — (Ed.) 


I'lIR    HOLY   WAR. 


351 


Thoughts. 


Now  a  man  might  have  walked  For  days  together 
Mansoul,  and  scarce  have  seen  one 
the  town  thai  Looked  Like  a  religious 

man.  0  the  fearful  state  of  Mansoul  now!  Now 
every  corner  swarmed  with  out-landish  Doubters; 

The  soul  n,n  of  red-coats  and  black-coats  '  walked  the 
S  thou$£  town  by  clusters,  and  filled  up  all  the 
phemies.  houses  with  hideous  noises,  vain  Bongs, 
Lying  stories,  and  blasphemous  Language  against 
Shaddai  and  his  Son.-'  Now.  also,  those  Diabo- 
lonians  that  lurked  in  the  walls  and  dens  and 
hides  that  were  in  the  town  of  Mansoul,  came  forth 
and  showed  themselves,  yea,  walked  with  open 
face  in  company  with  the  Doubters  that  were  in 
Mansoul.  Yea,  they  had  more  boldness  now  to 
walk  the  streets,  to  haunt  the  houses,  and  to  show 
themselves  abroad,  than  had  any  of  the  honest 
inhabitants  of  the  now  woful  town  of  Mansoul.8 

But  Diabolus  and  his  out-landish  men  were  not 
at  peace  in  Mansoul,  for  they  were  not  there  en- 
tertained as  were  the  captains  and  forces  of  Em- 
manuel ;  the  townsmen  did  browbeat  them  what 
they  could;  nor  did  they  partake  or  make  stroy4 
of  any  of  the  necessaries  of  Mansoul,  but  that 
which  they  seized  on  against  the  townsmen's  will; 
what  they  could  they  hid  from  them,  and  what 
they  could  not  they  had  with  an  ill-will.  They, 
poor  hearts,  had  rather  have  had  their  room  than 
their  company,  but  they  were  at  present  their 
captives,  and  their  captives  for  the  present  they 
were  forced  to  be.  r.o.  vii.  But,  I  say,  they  dis- 
countenanced them  as  much  as  they  were  able,  and 
showed  them  all  the  dislike  that  they  could.5 

The  captains  also  from  the  castle  did  hold  them 
in  continual  play  with  their  slings,  to  the  chasing 
and  fretting  of  the  minds  of  the  enemies.  True, 
Mr.  Godly-fear  Diabolus  made  a  great  many  attempts 
ofmufeekSe  t0  mive  broken  open  the  gates  of  the 
sates-  castle,  but  Mr.  Godly-fear  was  made 

the  keeper  of  that;  and  he  was  a  man  of  that  cour- 
age, conduct  and  valour,  that  it  was  in  vain,  as  long- 
as  life  lasted  within  him,  to  think  to  do  that  work 
though  mostly  desired,  wherefore  all  the  attempts 

1  How  hard  but  just  a  blow  is  this  to  the  pompous  pride 
both  of  the  military  and  clerical  orders.  In  Buuyan's  time, 
both  these  professions  were  filled  with  the  friendsand  followers 
nf  ]  liabolus.  The  black  coats  are,  in  our  day,  much  reformed. 
—(Ed.) 

-  Such  is  the  dreadful  nature  of  unbelief!    It  is  the  minister 
of  confusion,  lying,  vanity,  and  blaspheming  against  thi 
fulness  of  a  covenant  God. — (Masou.) 

3  Imagine  a  poor  harassed  soul,  a  member  of  a  I 
church,  in  this  lamentable  state.  What  would  thi 
ciders,  and  church  do  with  him?  How  would  somi 
lie  is  a  disgrace  to  us,  ami  ought  to  be  cast  out  !     Alas  1  pi 


that  Diabolus  made  against  him  were  fruitless.     I 

have  wished  sometimes  that   that  man  had  had  the 
whole  rule  of  the  town  of  .Mansoul.'1 

Well,  this  was  the  condition  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul for  about  two  years  and  an  hall'; 
the  body  of   tin:  town  was  the   scat  of     MhmouT1  the 
war;7    the    people   of   the    town    were     "  ""' "*• 
driven  into  holes,  and  tie-   glory  of  Mansoul  was 
laid  in  the  dust;  what  rest  then  could  be  to  the  in- 
habitants,   what    peace   could    .Mansoul    have,    and 
what  sun  could  shine  upon  it  I  had  the  enemy  lain 
so  Long  without  in  the  plain  against  the  town,  it 
had  been  enough  to  have  famished  them;  but  now 
when  they  shall  he  within,  when  the  town  shall  ho 
their  tent,  their  trench,  and  fort  against  the  castle 
that  was  in  the  town  when  the  town  shall  he  against 
the  town,  and    shall  serve  to    be   a  defence    to   the 
enemies  of  her  strength  and  life:  1  say,  when  they 
shall  make  use  of  the  forts,  and  town-holds,  to  se- 
cure themselves  in,  even  till  they  shall 
take,  spoil,   and    demolish    the    castle, 
this  was  terrible;    and   yet  this  was   now  the  state 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul.8 

After  the  town  of  Mansoul  had  been  in  thi-,  sad 
and  lamentable  condition  for  so  Long  a  time  as  I 
have  told  you,  and  no  petitions  that  they  presented 
their  Prince  with,  all  this  while,  could  prevail;  the 
inhabitants  of  the  town,  to  wit,  the  elders  and  chief 
of  Mansoul  gathered  together,  and  after  some  time 
spent  in  condoling  their  miserable  state,  and  this 
miserable  judgment  coming  upon  them,  they  agreed 
together  to  draw  up  yet  another  pe-  M|.(  ( 
tition,  and  to  send  it  away  to  Em- 
manuel for  relief.  But  Mr.  Godly-fear  a  petition  to 
stood  up,  and  answered,  that  lie  knew  tLu  Prmce- 
that  his  Lord  the  Prince  never  did,  nor  ever  would 
receive  a  petition  for  the.se  matters  from  the  hand 
of  any  whoever,  unless  tne  Lord  Secretary's  hand 
was  to  it;  and  this,  quoth  he,  is  the  reason  that 
ymt  prevailed  not  all  this  while.  Then  they  said, 
they  would  draw  up  one,  and  get  the  Lord  Secret- 
ary's hand  to  it.!j     But  Mr.  Godly-fear  answered 


5  This  is  an  awful  representation  of  the  state  of  a  soul  over- 
whelmed with  distressing  doubts  of  God's  love,  and  fear  of 
eternal  destruction.  'Torment'  and  'Noease'  take  possession 
of  the  feelings.  The  understanding  is  darkened,  and  the  con- 
science wounded ;  while  a  crowd  of  ii  I  vanities, 
and  blasphemies  increase  the  confusion  and  dismay. — (En.) 

"  Pot  and  admirable  trt  atise 

on  the  '  Tear  of  God,'  see  Bunyan's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  437- — 
(En.) 

•   'Nothing  now,  for  two  years  together,  would  abide  with 
me,  bul  damnation,  and  an  expectation  of  damnation.' — Grace 
ivg,  No.  142.— (Ed.) 
In  the  midst  of  all  this  misery,  the  i  or,  in 


bouI,  he  would  get  rid  of  the  doubters  if  he  could.     While  (be  rt  remains  right   with  God,  G 


fear  of  God  is  in  his  heart,  pray  for  him,  cherish  him,  but  cast 
him  not  out. —  (Ed.) 
1  '  Stroy,'  obsolete,  me 

Some  tin  brenne.' 

It  was  altered,  in  1707,  to  'make  destruction.'— (Ed.) 


per  of  it.     In  many  a  sou]  wh<  re  distressing 

perhaps  for  years,  yet  the  fear  nf  God  is  in  the 

heart,  so  that  it  still  cleavi  -  to  him  and  o]  pi  si  s  sin. —  (Burder.) 

;|  Prayer  nam   be  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the 

understanding  also,     faith  makes  it  availing  in  the  name  of 


352 


THE   HOLT  WAT?, 


The 

employed     to    vnn  ? 
draw  up  a  pe- 
tition for  Man- 
soul. 


again,  that  he  knew  also  that  the  Lord  Secretary 
would  not  set  his  hand  to  any  petition  that  himself 
had  not  a  hand  in  composing  and  drawing  up;  and 
besides,  said  he,  the  Prince  doth  know  my  Lord 
Secretary's  hand  from  all  the  hands  in  the  world; 
wherefore  he  cannot  he  deceived  by  any  pretence 
whatever ;  wherefore  my  advice  is,  that  you  go  to 
my  Lord,  and  implore  him  to  lend  you  his  aid. 
Now  he  did  yet  abide  in  the  castle  where  all  the 
captains  and  men  at  arms  were. 

So  they  heartily  thanked  Mr.  Godly-fear,  took 
his  counsel,  and  did  as  he  had  bidden  them  ;  so 
they  went  and  came  to  my  Lord,  and  made  known 
the  cause  of  their  coming  to  him,  to  wit,  that  since 
Mansoul  was  in  so  deplorable  a  condition,  his  high- 
ness would  be  pleased  to  undertake  to  draw  up  a  pe- 
tition for  them  to  Emmanuel,  the  Son  of  the  mighty 
Shaddai,  and  to  their  King  and  his  Father  by  him. 

Then  said  the  Secretary  to  them,  What  petition  is 

Secretary     lt  tnat  y0U  wou^  nave  me  draw  up  for 

you?  But  they  said,  Our  Lord  knows 
best  the  state  and  condition  of  the  town 
of  Mansoul ;  and  how  we  are  back- 
slidden and  degenerated  from  the  Prince;  thou  also 
knowest  who  is  come  up  to  war  against  us,  and 
how  Mansoul  is  now  the  seat  of  war.1  My  Lord 
knows,  moreover,  what  barbarous  usages  our  men, 
women,  and  children  have  suhered  at  their  hands, 
and  how  our  home-bred  Diabolonians  do  walk  now 
with  more  boldness  than  dare  the  townsmen  in  the 
streets  of  Mansoul.  Let  our  Lord,  therefore,  ac- 
cording to  the  wisdom  of  God  that  is  in  him,  draw 
up  a  petition  for  his  poor  servants  to  our  Prince 
Emmanuel.  Well,  said  the  Lord  Secretary,  I  will 
draw  up  a  petition  for  you,  and  will  also  set  my  hand 
thereto.  Then  said  they,  But  when  shall  we  call 
for  it  at  the  hands  of  our  Lord  ?  but  he  answered, 
Yourselves  must  be  present  at  the  doing  of  it. 
Yea,  you  must  put  your  desires  to  it.  True,  the 
hand  and  pen  shall  be  mine,  but  the  ink  and  paper 
must  be  yours,  else  how  can  you  say  it  is  your  pe- 
tition ?  nor  have  I  need  to  petition  for  myself,  be- 
cause I  have  not  offended. 

lie  also  addeth  as  followeth,  No  petition  goes 
from  me  in  my  name  to  the  Prince,  and  so  to  his 
Father  by  him,  but  when  the  people  that  are 
chiefly  concerned  therein  do  join  in  heart  and  soul 
in  the  matter,  for  that  must  be  inserted  therein.2 


Christ.  See  Buuynn's  admirable  treatise  on  '  Praying  in  the 
Spirit,'  vol.  i.  ]).  621. —  (Kp  ) 

1  The  Christian's  life  is  a  warfare  against  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil;  but  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  is  that  spirit- 
ual Goliath  which  we  should  constantly  intreat  the  Captain 
of  oni  salvation  to  subdue. — (Mason.) 

-  This  is  an  illustration  of  that  text,  'The  Spirit  helpeth 
our  infirmities,  for  we  know  no!  what  we  should  pray  tor  as 
we  ought.'  l>'o.  viii.  20.  And  blessed  be  God,  'He  will  give 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him.'  l,u.  \i.  13. —  (Burder.) 

3  '  I\'ow  hell  rageth,  the  devil  warretb,  and  all  the  world 
reaolveth  to  do  the  best  they  can  to  bring  the  soul  into  bond- 


So  they  did  heartily  agree  with  the  sentence  of 
the  Lord,  and  a  petition  was  forthwith  drawn  up 
for  them.     But  now  who  should  carry 
it,  that  was  next.      But  the  Secretary     d^wn^'and 
advised  that  Captain  Credence  should     scnt  7,  E"'" 

*  rnanuel  by  tlie 

carry  it,  for  he  was  a  well-spoken  man.  hand  of  "Cap- 
They,  therefore,  called  for  him,  and 
propounded  to  him  the  business.  Well,  said  the 
captain,  I  gladly  accept  of  the  motion  ;  and  though 
I  am  lame,  I  will  do  this  business  for  you  with  as 
much  speed,  and  as  well  as  I  can. 

The  contents  of  the  petition  were  to  this  purpose — 

'  0  our  Lord  and  Sovereign  Prince  Emmanuel, 
the  potent,  the  long-suffering  Prince:  The  contents  of 
grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips,  and  to  their  Petition- 
thee  belongs  mercy  and  forgiveness,  though  we 
have  rebelled  against  thee.  We  who  are  no  more 
worthy  to  be  called  thy  Mansoul,  nor  yet  fit  to 
partake  of  common  benefits,  do  beseech  thee,  and 
thy  Father  by  thee  to  do  away  our  transgressions. 
We  confess  that  thou  mightest  cast  us  away  for 
them,  but  do  it  not  for  thy  name's  sake ;  let  the 
Lord  rather  take  an  opportunity  at  our  miserable 
condition,  to  let  out  his  bowels  and  compassions  to 
us;  we  are  compassed  on  every  side,  Lord,  our  own 
backslidings  reprove  us  ;  our  Diabolonians  within 
our  town  fright  us,  and  the  army  of  the  angel  of  the 
bottomless  pit  distresses  us.  Thy  grace  can  be  our 
salvation,  and  whither  to  go  but  to  thee  we  knownot. 

'  Furthermore,  0  gracious  Prince,  we  have  weak- 
ened our  captains,  and  they  are  discouraged,  sick, 
and  of  late  some  of  them  grievously  worsted  and 
beaten  out  of  the  field  by  the  power  and  force  of 
the  tyrant.  Yea,  even  those  of  our  captains  in 
whose  valour  we  did  formerly  use  to  put  most  of 
our  confidence,  they  are  as  wounded  men.  Besides, 
Lord,  our  enemies  are  lively,  and  they  are  strong, 
they  vaunt  and  boast  themselves,  and  do  threaten 
to  part  us  among  themselves  for  a  booty.  They 
are  fallen  also  upon  us,  Lord,  with  many  thousand 
Doubters,  such  as  with  whom  we  cannot  tell  what 
to  do ;  they  are  all  grim-looked,  and  unmerciful 
ones,  and  they  bid  defiance  to  us  and  thee.3 

4  Our  wisdom  is  gone,  our  power  is  gone,  because 
thou  art  departed  from  us,  nor  have  we  what  we  may 
call  ours  hut  sin,  shame,  and  confusion  of  face  for 
sin.4  Take  pity  upon  us,  0  Lord,  take  pity  upon 
us,  thy  miserable  town  of  Mansoul,  and  save  us  out 
of  the  hands  of  our  enemies.      Amen.' 

age  and  ruin.  Also,  the  soul  shall  not  want  enemies  in  its 
own  heart's  lust— as  covetousness,  adultery,  blasphemy,  unbe- 
lief, hardness  of  heart,  coldness,  ignorance;  with  an  innumei- 
able  company  of  attendants  hanging  at  its  heels,  ready  to  sink 
it  into  the  lire  of  hell  every  moment.' — Bunyan's  Law  and 
Grace,  vol.  i.  p.  54G.  Who  can  number  his  thoughts.,  even 
his  evil  thoughts,  that,  like  legions,  war  against  the  soul's 
peace? — (Ed.) 

"'  '  "W  Inch  burden  also  did  so  oppress  me,  that  I  could  neither 
stand,  nor  go,  nor  lie,  either  at  rest  or  quiet.' — Grace  Abo und- 
imj,  No.  165. —  (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


S53 


This  petition  as  was  touched  afore,  was  handed 
by  the  Lord  Secretary,  and  carried  to  the  court  hy 
the  brave  and  most  stout  Captain  Credence.  Now 
he  carried  it  out  at  Mouthgate,  for  that,  as  I  said, 
was  the  sally-port  of  the  town ;  and  he  went  and 
came  to  Emmanuel  with  it.  Now  how  it  came  out, 
I  do  not  know,  hut  for  certain  it  did,  and  that  so 
far  as  to  reach  the  ears  of  Diabolus.  Thus  I  con- 
clude, because  that  the  tyrant  had  it  presently  by 
the  end,  and  charged  the  town  of  Mansoul  with  it, 
saying,  Thou  rehellious  and  stubborn-hearted  Man- 
Satan  cannot  S0UW  I  will  make  thee  to  leave  oil 
abide  prayer,  petitioning ;  art  thou  yet  for  petition- 
ing ?  I  will  make  thee  to  leave.  Yea,  he  also  knew 
who  the  messenger  was  that  carried  the  petition 
to  the  Prince,  and  it  made  him  both  to  fear  and 
rage. 

Wherefore  he  commanded  that  his  drum  should 
be  beat  again,  a  thing  that  Mansoul  could  not 
abide  to  hear ;  but  when  Diaholus  will  have  his 
drum  beat,  Mansoul  must  abide  the  noise.  Well, 
the  drum  was  beat,  and  the  Diabolonians  were 
gathered  together. 

Then  said  Diabolus,  0  ye  stout  Diabolonians, 
be  it  known  unto  you  that  there  is  treachery 
hatched  against  us  in  the  rebellious  town  of  Man- 
soul ;  for  albeit  the  town  is  in  our  possession,  as 
you  see,  yet  these  miserable  Mansoulians  have  at- 
tempted to  dare,  and  have  been  so  hardy  as  yet  to 
send  to  the  court  to  Emmanuel  for  help.  This  I 
give  you  to  understand,  that  ye  may  yet  know  how 
to  carry  it  to  the  wretched  town  of  Mansoul. 
Wherefore,  0  my  trusty  Diabolonians,  I  command 
that  yet  more  and  more  ye  distress 
this  town  of  Mansoul,  and  vex  it  with 
your  wiles,  ravish  their  Avomen,  deflower  their  vir- 
gins, slay  their  children,  brain  their  ancients,  lire 
their  town,  and  what  other  mischief  you  can  ;  and 
let  this  be  the  reward  of  the  Mansoulians  from  me, 
for  their  desperate  rebellions  against  me.1 

This  you  see  was  the  charge,  but  something 
stepped  in  betwixt  that  and  execution,  for  as  yet 
there  was  but  little  more  done  than  to  rage. 

Moreover,  when  Diabolus  had  done  thus,  he  went 
the  next  way  up  to  the  castle-gates,  and  demanded 
that,  upon  pain  of  death,  the  gates  should  he 
opened  to  him,  and  that  entrance  should  be  given 
him  and  his  men  that  followed  after.  To  whom 
Mr.  Godly-fear  replied — for  he  it  was  that  had  the 


1  When  temptations  beset,  sin  invades,  lusts  rage,  evil 
tempers  arise,  and  wc  are  in  danger  of  falling,  then  is  the  time 
to  look  up  and  cry,  Lord  save,  or  I  perish. — (Mason.)  These 
vexations  are  the  holy  thoughts  and  feelings,  which  Diaholus 
and  his  crew  prevent  or  suppress.  Tins  is  explained  in  the 
margin,  p.  350. — (Ed.) 

2  Alluding  to  the  sufferings  of  Christian  and  Hopeful  in 
the  dungeon  of  Giant  Despair,  ia  Doubting  Castle. — (Ed.) 

3  When  the  shield  of  faith  is  wanting,  the  sold  is  exposed 
to  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  '  This  is  the  victory, 
even,  our  faith.' — (Mason.)    . 

VOL.  III. 


charge  of  that  gate— that  the  gate  should  not  bo 
opened  unto  him,  nor  to  the  men  that  followed 
after  him.  He  said,  moreover,  that  Mansoul,  when 
she  had  suffered  awhile,  should  be  made  perfect, 
strengthened,  settled,  l  re.  v.  10. 

Then  said  Diabolus,  Deliver  mo  then  the  men 
that  havo  petitioned  against  me,  espe-   Sat.in     cannot 
cially  Captain  Credence  that  carried  it      a',ulc  faitl1- 
to  your  Prince;  deliver  that  varlet  into  my  hand.-;, 
and  I  will  depart  from  the  town. 

Then  up  starts  a  Diabolonian,  whoso  name  was 
Mr.  Fooling,  and  said,  My  lord  offer- 
eth  you  fair,  it  is  better  for  you  that 
one  man  perish,  than  that  your  whole  Mansoul 
should  be  undone. 

But  Mr.  Godly-fear  made  him  this  replication. 
How  long  will  Mansoul  be  kept  out  of  the  dungeon, - 
when  she  hath  given  up  her  faith  to  Diabolus?  As 
good  lose  the  town  as  lose  Captain  Credence ;  for 
if  one  be  gone,  the  other  must  follow.3  But  to 
that  Mr.  Fooling  said  nothing. 

Then  did  my  Lord  Mayor  reply,  and  said,  0  thou 
devouring  tyrant,  be  it  known  unto  thee,  wo  shall 
hearken  to  none  of  thy  words ;  we  are  resolved  to 
resist  thee  as  long  as  a  captain,  a  man,  a  sling, 
and  a  stone  to  throw  at  thee,  shall  be  found  in  the 
town  of  Mansoul.  But  Diabolus  answered,  Do  ytm 
hope,  do  you  wait,  do  you  look  for  help 
and  deliverance  ?  You  have  sent  to 
Emmanuel,  but  your  wickedness  sticks  too  close  in 
your  skirts,  to  let  innocent  prayers  come  out  of  your 
lips.4  Think  you  that  you  shall  be  prevailers  and 
prosper  in  this  design?  You  will  fail  in  your  wish, 
you  will  fail  in  your  attempts ;  for  it  is  not  only  I, 
but  your  Emmanuel  is  against  you.  rs.  xlfL  to.  Yea, 
it  is  he  that  hath  sent  me  against  you  to  subdue 
you ;  for  what  then  do  you  hope,  or  by  what  means 
will  you  escape  ? 

Then  said  the  Lord  Mayor,  We  have  sinned  in- 
deed, but  that  shall  be  no  help  to  thee, 
for  our  Emmunuel  hath  said  it,  and  crtspeechjiut 
that  in  great  faithfulness:  'And  him  ^Um.  ft 
that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  Captain  Cre- 
cast  out.'  He  hath  also  told  us,  0 
our  enemy,  that  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy 
shall  be  forgiven  to  the  sons  of  men.  Therefore 
we  dare  not  despair,  but  will  look  for,  wait  for, 
ami  hope  for  deliverance  still.0 

Now  by  this  time  Captain  Credence  was  returned 
and  come  from  the  court  from  Emmanuel  to  the 


Diabolus  ra?e». 


4  How  true  is  this  remark  of  the  enemy  of  souls !  Onr 
holiest  services  must  he  sanctified  in  the  name  of  the  iicdeenier. 
Diabolus  can  tell  truth  when  it  is  to  his  purpose,  in  distra  sing 
a  saint,  or  destroying  a  sinner. — (Ed.) 

6  Portions  of  Scripture  were  the  weapons  with  which  our 
Lord  conquered  Satan,  when  tempted  in  the  wilderness.  Poor 
tried  soul,  you  may  rely  with  the  must  perfect  confidence  on 
the  Scriptures  for  support  in  the  most  trying  hour.  'Though 
it  tarry,  wait  for  it ;  because  it  will  surely  come.'  Hab.  ii.  3. 
Any  ether  support  is  but  like  a  broken  reed. —  (Ed.) 


854 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


castle  of  Mansoul,  and  he  returned  to  them  with  a 
packet.  So  my  Lord  Mayor  hearing  that  Captain 
Credence  was  come,  withdrew  himself  from  the 
noise  of  the  roaring  of  the  tyrant,  and  left  him  to 
yell  at  the  wall  of  the  town,- or  against  the  gates 
of  the  castle.  So  he  came  up  to  the  captain's 
lodgings,  and  saluting  him,  he  asked  him  of  his 
welfare,  and  what  was  the  best  news  at  court  ? 
But  when  he  asked  Captain  Credence  that,  the 
water  stood  in  his  eyes.  Then  said  the  captain, 
Cheer  up,  my  Lord,  for  all  will  be  well  in  time ; 
and  with  that  he  first  produced  his  packet,  and  laid 
A  sign  of  good-  &  Dv>  Dut  that  the  Lord  Mayor  and  the 
uess-  rest  of  the  captains  took  for  a  sign  of 

good  tidings.  Now  a  season  of  grace  being  come, 
he  sent  for  all  the  captains  and  elders  of  the  town 
that  were  here  and  there  in  their  lodgings  in  the 
castle,  and  upon  their  guard,  to  let  them  know  that 
Captain  Credence  was  returned  from  the  court,  and 
that  he  had  something  in  general,  and  something 
in  special  to  communicate  to  them.  So  they  all 
came  up  to  him,  and  saluted  him,  and  asked  him 
concerning  his  journey,  and  what  was  the  best  news 
at  the  court  ?  And  he  answered  them  as  he  had 
done  the  Lord  Mayor  before,  that  all  would  be  well 
at  last.  Now  when  the  captain  had  thus  saluted 
The  packet  them,  he  opened  his  packet,  and 
opened.  thence  did  draw  out  his  several  notes 
for  those  that  he  had  sent  for.  And  the  first  note 
was  for  my  Lord  Mayor,  wherein  was  signified : 

That  the  Prince  Emmanuel  had  taken  it  well 
A  note  for  my  that  my  Lord  Mayor  had  been  so  true 
Lord  Mayor.  anci  trusty  in  his  office,  and  the  great 
concerns  that  lay  upon  him  for  the  town  and 
people  of  Mansoul ;  also  he  bid  him  to  know  that 
he  took  it  well  that  he  had  been  so  bold  for  his 
Prince  Emmanuel,  and  had  engaged  so  faithfully 
in  his  cause  against  Diabolus.  He  also  signified 
at  the  close  of  his  letter,  that  he  should  shortly 
receive  his  reward. 

The  second  note  that  came  out  was  for  the  noble 
\  note  for  the  Lord  Will-be-will,  wherein  there  was 
Lord  Will-be-  signified,  That  his  Prince  Emmanuel 
did  well  understand  how  valiant  and 
courageous  he  had  been  for  the  honour  of  his  Lord, 
now  in  his  absence,  and  when  his  name  was  under 
contempt  by  Diabolus.  There  was  signified  also 
that  his  Prince  had  taken  it  well  that  he  had  been 
so  faithful  to  the  town  of  Mansoul  in  his  keeping 
of  so  strict  a  hand  and  eye  over,  and  so  strict  a 
rem  upon  the  necks  of  the  Diabolonians  that  did 
still  lie  lurking  in  their  several  holes  in  the  famous 
town  of  Mansoul. 

He  signified,  moreover,  how  that  he  understood 
that  my  lord  had  with  his  own  hand  done  great 
execution  upon  some  of  the  chief  of  the  rebels 
there,  to  the  great  discouragement  of  the  adverse 
party,  and  to  the  good  example  of  the  whole  town 


of  Mansoul,  and  that  shortly  his  lordship  should 
have  his  reward. 

The  third  note  came  out  for  the  subordinate 
Preacher,  wherein  was  signified,  That  A  note  fo_  tlie 
his  Prince  took  it  well  from  him  that  subordinate 
he  had  so  honestly  and  so  faithfully 
performed  his  office,  and  executed  the  trust  com- 
mitted to  him  by  his  Lord  while  he  exhorted,  re- 
buked, and  fore-warned  Mansoul  according  to  the 
laws  of  the  town.  He  signified  moreover,  that  he 
took  well  at  his  hand  that  he  called  to  fasting,  to 
sackcloth  and  ashes,  when  Mansoul  was  under  her 
revolt.  Also  that  he  called  for  the  aid  of  the  Cap- 
tain Boanerges  to  help  in  so  weighty  a  work,  and 
that  shortly  he  also  should  receive  his  reward. 

The  fourth  note  came  out  for  Mr.  Godly-fear 
wherein  his  Lord  thus  signified,  That  A  note  for  Mr. 
his  Lordship  observed  that  he  was  the  Godiy-iear. 
first  of  all  the  men  in  Mansoul  that  detected  Mr. 
Carnal-security,  as  the  only  one  that  through  his 
subtilty  and  cunning  had  obtained  for  Diabolus,  a 
defection  and  decay  of  goodness  in  the  blessed  town 
of  Mansoul.  Moreover,  his  Lord  gave  him  to  un- 
derstand that  he  still  remembered  his  tears  and 
mourning  for  the  state  of  Mansoul.  It  was  also 
observed  by  the  same  note,  that  his  Lord  took 
notice  of  his  detecting  of  this  Mr.  Carnal-security, 
at  his  own  table  among  his  guests,  in  his  own 
house,  and  that  in  the  midst  of  his  jolliness,  even 
while  he  was  seeking  to  perfect  his  villainies 
against  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Emmanuel  also  took 
notice  that  this  reverend  person,  Mr.  Godly-fear, 
stood  stoutly  to  it  at  the  gates  of  the  castle,  against 
all  the  threats  and  attempts  of  the  tyrant,  and 
that  he  had  put  the  townsmen  in  a  way  to  make 
their  petition  to  their  Prince,  so  as  that  he  might 
accept  thereof,  and  as  that  they  might  obtain  an 
answer  of  peace;  and  that  therefore  shortly  he 
should  reeeive  his  reward. 

After  all  this,  there  was  yet  produced  a  note 
which  was  written  to  the  whole  town  A  note  foi.  t]ie 
of  Mansoul,  whereby  they  perceived  town  of  ffisa- 
that  their  Lord  took  notice  of  their  so 
often  repeating  of  petitions  to  him,  and  that  they 
should  see  more  of  the  fruits  of  such  their  doings 
in  time  to  come.  Their  Prince  did  also  therein 
tell  them,  That  he  took  it  well,  that  their  heart 
and  mind  now  at  last  abode  fixed  upon  him  and 
his  ways,  though  Diabolus  had  made  such  inroads 
upon  them,  and  that  neither  flatteries  on  the  one 
hand,  nor  hardships  on  the  other,  could  make  them 
yield  to  serve  his  cruel  designs.  There  was  also 
inserted  at  the  bottom  of  this  note,  That  his  Lord- 
ship had  left  the  town  of  Mansoul  in  the  hands  of 
the  Lord  Secretary,  and  under  the  conduct  of  Cap- 
tain Credence,  saying,  Beware  that  you  yet  yield 
yourselves  unto  their  governance,  and  in  due  time 
I  you  shall  receive  your  reward. 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


S55 


So  after  the  brave  Captain  Credence  had  dc- 

_    .*.      r      livered  his  notes  to  those   to  whom 
Captain      Cre-  .  _  , 

dence   retirrs   they  belonged,  he  retired  lnmself  to 

to    the    Lord  T       j     o  »      1   J    •  1 

Secretary's     my   Lord   Secretary  s  lodgings,    and 
lodgings.  there  spends  time  in  conversing  with 

him;  for  they  two  were  very  great  one  with  another, 
and  did  indeed  know  more  how  things  would  go 
with  Mansoul  than  did  all  the  townsmen  besides. 
The  Lord  Secretary  also  loved  the  Captain  Cre- 
dence dearly ;  yea,  many  a  good  bit  was  sent  him 
from  my  Lord's  table;  also  he  might  have  a  show 
of  countenance  when  the  rest  of  Mansoul  lay  un- 
der the  clouds;  so  after  some  time  for  converse  was 
spent  the  Captain  betook  himself  to  his  chambers 
to  rest.  But  it  was  not  long  after  but  my  Lord  did 
scud  for  the  captain  again.  So  the  captain  came 
to  him,  and  they  greeted  one  another  with  usual 
salutations.  Then  said  the  captain  to  the  Lord 
Secretary,  What  hath  my  Lord  to  say  to  his  ser- 
vant ?  So  the  Lord  Secretary  took  him,  and  had 
him  a-to-side,1  and  after  a  sign  or  two  of  more 
favour,  he  said,  I  have  made  thee  the 
dencemadethe  Lord's  lieutenant  over  all  the  forces  in 
SSSSS  Mansoul,  so  that  from  this  day  for- 
forces  in  Man-  vvard,  all  men  in  Mansoul  shall  be  at 
thy  word,  and  thou  shalt  be  he  that 
shall  lead  in,  and  that  shalt  lead  out  Mansoul. 
Thou  shalt  therefore  manage,  according  to  thy 
place,  the  war  for  thy  Prince,  and  for  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  against  the  force  and  power  of  Diabolus, 
and  at  thy  command  shall  the  rest  of  the  captains 
be. 

Now  the  townsmen  began  to  perceive  what  in- 
terest the  captain  had,  both  with  the  court,  and 
also  with  the  Lord  Secretary  in  Mansoul ;  for  no 
man  before  could  speed  when  sent,  nor  bring  such 
good  news  from  Emmanuel  as  he.  Wherefore  what 
do  they,  after  some  lamentation  that  they  made  no 
more  use  of  him  in  their  distresses,  but  send  by 
their  subordinate  Preacher  to  the  Lord  Secretary, 
to  desire  him  that  all  that  ever  they  were  and  had, 
might  be  put  under  the  government,  care,  custody, 
and  conduct  of  Captain  Credence.2 

So  their  preacher  went  and  did  his  errand,  and 

received  this  answer  from  the  mouth 

MMsoulcnwes   of  his  Lord,  that  Captain  Credence 

unlrurcon-     should    be    the    great    doer    in   a11    thc 

duct  of  Captain  King's  army,  against  the  King's  ene- 
mies, and  also  for  the  welfare  of  Man- 
soul. So  he  bowed  to  the  ground,  and  thanked  his 
Lordship,  and  returned  and  told  his  news  to  the 
townsfolk.     But  all  this  was  done  with  all  imagffi- 


1  '  A-to-side,'  obsolete,  aside,  in  private,  or  out  of  hearing. 
—(Ed.) 

2  The  design  of  this  is  to  show  that  the  soul  is  to  live  by 
faith,  and  not  by  sense.  The  Spirit  of  God  puts  honour  upon 
faith,  and  makes  him  chief-captain  of  the  town.  This  is  a 
prelude  to  victory  over  the  Doubters. — (Binder.) 


able  secrecy,  because  the  foes  had  yet  great 
strength  in  thc  town.  But,  to  return  to  our  story 
again : 

[Chapter  XVI.] 

[Contents  : — A  new  plot  is  laid  to  ruin  thc  town  by  riche3 
and  prosperity — Emmanuel,  according  to  his  pr 
appears  in  thc  field,  to  assist  the  forces  of  Mansoul, 
whereby  thc  whole  army  of  Doubters  is  completely  ranted 
— Emmanuel  enters  the  town  amidst  the  joyful  acclama- 
tions of  the  inhabitants.] 

When  Diabolus  saw  himself  thus  boldly  con- 
fronted by  thc  Lord  Mayor,  and  perceived  the 
stoutness  of  Mr.  Godly-fear,  he  fell 
into  a  rage,  and  forthwith  called  a 
council  of  war,  that  he  might  be  revenged  on  Man- 
soul. So  all  thc  princes  of  the  pit  came  together, 
and  "old  Incredulity  in  the  head  of  them,  with  all 
the  captains  of  his  army.  So  they  consult  what 
to  do.  Now  the  effect  and  conclusion  of  thc  council 
that  day,  was  how  they  might  take  the  castle;  be- 
cause they  could  not  conclude  themselves  masters 
of  the  town,  so  long  as  that  was  in  the  possession  of 
their  enemies.  So  one  advised  this  way,  and  another 
advised  that ;  but  when  they  could  not  agree  in 
their  verdict,  Apollyon,  that  president  of  the  coun- 
cil, stood  up,  and  thus  he  began:  My  brotherhood, 
quoth  he,  I  have  two  things  to  propound  unto  you; 
and  my  first  is  this;  let  us  withdraw  ourselves  from 
the  town  into  the  plain  again,  for  our  presence 
here  will  do  us  no  good,  because  the  castle  is  yet 
in  our  enemy's  hands ;  nor  is  it  possible  that  we 
should  take  that  so  long  as  so  many  brave  captains 
are  in  it,  and  that  this  bold  fellow  Godly-fear  is 
made  the  keeper  of  the  gates  of  it. 

Now  when  we  have  withdrawn  ourselves  into  the 
plain,  they,  of  their  own  accord,  will  he  glad  of 
some  little  ease ;  and  it  may  be,  of  their  own  ac- 
cord, they  again  may  begin  to  be  remiss;8  and  even 
their  so  being,  will  give  them  a  bigger  Loot toit,  Man- 
blow  than  we  can  possibly  give  them  souJ- 
ourselves.  But  if  that  should  fail,  our  going  forth 
of  the  town  may  draw  the  captains  out  after  us, 
and  you  know  what  it  cost  them,  when  we  fought 
them  in  the  field  before.  Besides,  can  we  but  draw 
them  out  into  the  field,  we  may  lay  an  ambush  be- 
hind thc  town,  which  shall,  when  they  arc  come 
forth  abroad,  rush  in,  and  take  possession  of  the 
castle.  But  Beelzebub  stood  up,  and  replied, 
saying,  It  is  impossible  to  draw  them  all  off  from 
the  castle;  some  you  may  be  sure  will  lie  there  to 
keep  that ;  wherefore  it  will  be  but  b  vain  thus  to 
attempt,  unless  we  were  sure  that  they  will  all  come 
out.  lie  therefore  concluded  that  what  was  done, 
must  be  done  by  some  other  means.    And  the  most 


3  A  state  of  spiritual  case  and  prosperity  has  its  dangers ; 
we  must,  by  the  Word  and  Spirit,  in  the  strength  of  Jesus, 
fight  every  inch  of  our  way  to  heaven  and  glory. — (Mason.) 


THE  HOLY   WAS. 


likely  means  that  the  greatest  of  their  heads  could 
invent,  was  that  which  Apollyon  had  advised  to 
Look  to  it,  Man-   hefore,  to  wit,  to  get  the  townsmen 

soul.  again  to  sin.     For,  said  he,  it  is  not 

our  being  in  the  town,  nor  in  the  field,  nor  our  fight- 
ing, nor  our  killing  of  their  men,  that  can  make  us 
the  masters  of  Mansoul ;  for  so  long  as  one  in  the 
town  is  able  to  lift  up  his  finger  against  us,  Em- 
manuel will  take  their  parts ;  and  if  he  shall  take 
their  parts,  we  know  what  time  a-day,  it  will  be 
with  us.1  Wherefore,  for  my  part,  quoth  he,  there 
is,  in  my  judgment,  no  way  to  bring  them  into 
bondage  to  us,  like  inventing  a  way  to  make  them 
sin.  2  Pc,  ii.  is— 21.  Had  we,  said  he,  left  all  our 
Doubters  at  home,  Ave  had  done  as  well  as  we  have 
done  now,  unless  we  could  have  made  them  the 
masters  and  governors  of  the  castle ;  for  Doubters 
Looktoit.Man-   at  a  distance,  are  but  like  objections 

soul  refelled  with  arguments.     Indeed  can 

we  but  get  them  into  the  hold,  and  make  them 
possessors  of  that,  the  day  will  be  our  own.  Let 
us  therefore  withdraw  ourselves  into  the  plain  (not 
expecting  that  the  captains  in  Mansoul  should 
follow  us),  but  yet,  I  say,  let  us  do  this,  and  before 
we  so  do,  let  us  advise  again  with  our  trusty  Dia- 
bolonians  that  are  yet  in  their  holds  of  Mansoul, 
and  set  them  to  work  to  betray  the  town  to  us ; 
for  they  indeed  must  do  it,  or  it  will  be  left  undone 
for  ever.  By  these  sayings  of  Beelzebub — for  I 
think  it  was  he  that  gave  this  counsel — the  whole 
Look  to  it,    conclave  was  forced  to  be  of  his  opinion, 

Mansoul.       to  AyJt>  fa^  tJie  way  to  get  tJle  castle  Was 

to  get  the  town  to  sin.  Then  they  fell  to  invent- 
ing by  what  means  to  do  this  thing.2 

Then  Lucifer  stood  up  and  said,  The  counsel 
of  Beelzebub  is  pertinent ;  now  the  way  to  bring 
this  to  pass,  in  mine  opinion,  is  this :  Let  us  with- 
draw our  force  from  the  town  of  Mansoul,  let  us  do 
this  and  let  us  terrify  them  no  more,  either  with 
summons  or  threats,  or  with  the  noise  of  our  drum, 
or  any  other  awakening  means.  Only  let  us  lie  in 
the  field  at  a  distance,  and  be  as  if  we  regarded 
them  not ;  for  frights  I  see  do  but  awaken  them, 
and  make  them  stand  more  to  their  arms.  I  have 
also  another  stratagem  in  my  head:  You  know 
Mansoul  is  a  market  town ;  and  a  town  that  de- 
lights in  commerce ;  what  therefore  if  some  of  our 
Diabolonians  shall  feign  themselves  far  country- 
men, and  shall  go  out  and  bring  to  the  market  of 
Mansoul  some  of  our  wares  to  sell;  and  what  matter 
at  what  rates  they  sell  their  wares,  though  it  be 

1  '  Satan  trembles  when  lie  sees 

The  meanest  saint  upon  his  knees.' 

2  The  great  object  of  Satan  is  to  allure  Mansoul  to  sin. 
He  can  never  win  the  heart,  or  castle,  unless  sin  opens  the 
gates. — (Ed.) 

3  '  Penny-wise  and  pound-foolish '  is  a  well-known  proverb, 
showing  the  folly  of  those  who  lose  a  pound  to  gain  a  penny. 
1  Get  i'  th'  hundred  and  lose  i'  th'  slure '  is  an  obsolete  proverb, 


but  for  half  the  worth.  Now,  let  those  that  thus 
shall  trade  in  their  market,  be  those  that  are  witty 
and  true  to  us,  and  I  will  lay  my  crown  to  pawn  it 
will  do.  There  are  two  that  are  come  to  my 
thoughts  already,  that  I  think  will  be  arch  at  this 
work,  and  they  are  Mr.  Penny-wise-pound-foolish, 
and  Mr.  Get-i'th' -hundred- and-lose-i'th '-shire  ;3 
nor  is  this  man  with  the  long  name  at  all  inferior 
to  the  other.  What  also  if  you  join  with  them  Mr. 
Sweet- world,  and  Mr.  Present-good;  they  are  men 
that  are  civil  and  cunning,  but  our  true 
friends  and  helpers.  Let  these  with 
as  many  more  engage  in  this  business  for  us,  and 
let  Mansoul  be  taken  up  in  much  business,  and  let 
them  grow  full  and  rich,  and  this  is  the  way  to  get 
ground  of  them ;  remember  ye  not  that  thus  we 
prevailed  upon  Laodicea,  and  how  many  at  present 
do  we  hold  in  this  snare  ?  Re.  iii.  17.  Now  when  they 
begin  to  grow  full,  they  will  forget  their  misery, 
and  if  we  shall  not  affright  them  they 
may  happen  to  fall  asleep,  and  so  be 
got  to  neglect  their  town-watch,  their  castle-watch, 
as  well  as  their  watch  at  the  gates. 

Yea,  may  we  not  by  this  means  so  cumber  Man- 
soul with  abundance,  that  they  shall  be  forced  to 
make  of  their  castle  a  warehouse  instead  of  a  gar- 
rison fortified  against  us,  and  a  receptacle  for  men 
of  war.4  Thus  if  we  get  our  goods,  and  commo- 
dities thither,  I  reckon  that  the  castle  is  more  than 
half  ours.  Besides,  could  we  so  order  it,  that  it 
should  be  filled  with  such  kind  of  wares,  then  if  we 
made  a  sudden  assault  upon  them,  it  would  be 
hard  for  the  captains  to  take  shelter  there.  Do 
you  know  that  of  the  parable,  The  deceitfulness 
of  riches  choke  the  word.  Lu.  vm.  14.  And  again, 
When  the  heart  is  overcharged  with  surfeiting  and 
drunkenness,  and  the  cares  of  this  life,  all  mischief 
comes  upon  them  at  unawares.  Lu.  xxi.  34-3G. 

Furthermore,  my  lords,  quoth  he,  you  very  well 
know  that  it  is  not  easy  for  a  people  to  be  filled 
with  our  things,  and  not  to  have  some  of  our  Dia- 
bolonians as  retainers  to  their  houses  and  services. 
Where  is  a  Mansoulian  that  is  full  of  this  world, 
that  has  not  for  his  servants,  and  waiting-men, 
Mr.  Profuse,  or  Mr.  Prodigality,  or  some  other  of 
our  Diabolonian  gang,  as  Mr.  Voluptuous,  Mr. 
Pragmatical,  Mr.  Ostentation,  or  the  like  ?  Now 
these  can  take  the  castle  of  Mansoul,  or  blow  it  up, 
or  make  it  unfit  for  a  garrison  for  Em-  Look  to  it,  Man- 
manuel ;   and  any  of  these  will  do.  souI- 

Yea,  these,  for  aught  I  know,  may  do  it  for  us 
sooner  than  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  men. 


meaning  that  as  a  shire  or  county  contains  many  divisions 
called  hundreds,  it  would  be  foolish  to  lose  a  county  for  the 
sake  of  gaining  a  small  part  of  a  county  called  a  huudrcd. — 
(Ed.) 

4  Great  is  the  danger  when  the  heart,  here  called  the 
castle,  which  should  be  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  is  turned  into 
a  warehouse. — Border. 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


357 


Wherefore,  to  end  as  I  began,  my  advice  is,  that 

•\ve  quietly  withdraw  ourselves,  not  offering-  any 

farther  force,  or  forcible  attempts  upon  the  castle, 

at  least  at  this  time,  and  let  us  set  on  foot  our  new 

project,  and  lets  see  if  that  "will  not  make  them 

destroy  themselves.1 

This  advice  was  highly  applauded  by  them  all, 

and  was  accounted  the  very  master-piece  uf  hell ; 

to  wit,  to  choke  Mansoul  with  a  fulness  of  this 

world,  and  to  surfeit  her  heart  with  the  good  things 

^^_         thereof.     But  see  how  things  meet  to- 

J  gethcr;  just  as  this  Diabolonian  coun- 

Cnptain  Crc.  ci\  was  broken  u«  Captain  Credence 
dence  receives  x '        i 

that  from  his   received  a  letter  from  Emmanuel,  the 

he  understand-  contents  of  which  was  this,  That  upon 
ettinot  tne  t]m.ti  Qay  jlc  wouicl  mc(jt  jlim   ju 

the  field  in  the  plains  about  Mansoul.  Meet  me  in 
the  held !  quoth  the  captain,  what  meaneth  my 
Lord  by  this  ?  I  know  not  what  he  meaneth  by 
meeting  of  me  in  the  field.  So  he  took  the  note 
in  his  hand,  and  did  carry  it  to  my  Lord  Secretary, 
to  ask  his  thoughts  thereupon ;  for  my  Lord  was  a 
seer  in  all  matters  concerning  the  King,  and  also 
for  the  good  and  comfort  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
So  he  showed  my  Lord  the  note,  and  desired  his 
opinion  thereof:  for  my  part,  quoth  Captain  Cre- 
dence, I  know  not  the  meaning  thereof.  So  my 
Lord  did  take  and  read  it,  and  after  a  little  pause  he 
said,  The  Diabolonians  have  had  against  Mansoul 
a  great  consultation  to-day;  they  have,  I  say,  this 
day  been  contriving  the  utter  ruin  of  the  town;  and 
the  result  of  their  council  is,  to  set  Mansoul  into 
such  a  way,  which,  if  taken,  will  surely  make  her 
destroy  herself.  And  to  this  end  they  are  making 
ready  for  their  own  departure  out  of  the  town,  in- 
tending to  betake  themselves  to  the  field  again, 
and  there  to  lie  till  they  shall  see  whether  this  their 
project  will  take  or  no.  But  be  thou  ready,  with 
the  men  of  thy  Lord,  for  on  the  third  day  they  will 
be  in  the  plain;  there  to  fall  upon  the  Diabolonians; 
for  the  Prince  will  by  that  time  be  in  the  field ; 
The  riddle  ex-  yea,  by  that  it  is  break  of  day,  sun- 
cap?amd  c£  "sing,  or  before,  and  that  with  a 
deuce.  mighty  force  against  them.      So  he 

shall  be  before  them,  and  thou  shalt  be  behind 
them,  and  betwixt  you  both  their  army  shall  be 
destroyed. 

When  Captain  Credence  heard  this,  away  goes 
he  to  the  rest  of  the  captains,  and  tells  them  what 
_       .  .  a  note  he  had  a  while  since  received 

The  captains  are  , 

gladded       to   from  the  hand  of  Emmanuel.      And, 

said  he,  that  which  was  dark  therein, 

has  my  Lord,  the  Lord  Secretary,  expounded  unto 


1  Well  may  Bunyan  say,  'Look  to  it,  Mansoul  P  How 
rarely  do  men  grow  rich  and  prosperous  without  entertaining 
these  Diabolonians — profusion,  prodigality,  pride,  &C.I  These 
are  more  destructive  to  the  soul  than  an  army  of  external  foes. 
— (Burder.) 


me.  lie  told  them  moreover,  what  by  himself, 
and  by  them,  must  be  done  to  answer  the  mind  of 
their  Lord.  Then  were  the  captains  glad,  and 
Captain  Credence  commanded  that  all 

.i        tr-       >     .  ,  ill  i    Curious    music 

the  iving  s  trumpeters  should  ascend  made  by  the 
to  the  battlements  of  the  castle,  and  trBBpetm' 
there  in  the  audience  of  Diabolus,  and  of  the  whole 
town  of  Mansoul,  make  the  best  music  that  heart 
could  invent.  The  trumpeters  then  did  as  they 
were  commanded.  They  got  themselves  up  to  the 
top  of  the  castle,  and  thus  they  began  to  sound ; 
then  did  Diabolus  start,  and  said,  What  can  be  the 
meaning  of  this,  they  neither  sound  boot  and  saddle, 
nor  horse  and  away,  nor  a  charge?  What  do  these 
mad  men  mean,  that  yet  they  should  bo  so  merry 
and  glad  ?  Then  answered  him  one  of  themselves 
and  said,  This  is  for  joy  that  their  Prince  Emmanuel 
is  coming  to  relieve  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  that  to 
this  end  he  is  at  the  head  of  an  army,  and  that  this 
relief  is  near. 

The  men  of  Mansoul  also  were  greatly  concerned 
at  this  melodious  charm  of  the  trumpets.  They 
said,  yea,  they  answered  one  another,  saying,  This 
can  be  no  harm  to  us ;  surely  this  can  be  no  harm 
to  us.     Then  said  the  Diabolonians,    _.  .  , 

Diabolus    with« 

What  had  we  best  to  do  ?  And  it  was  drawafromthe 
answered,  It  was  best  to  quit  the  town ; 
and  that,  said  one,  Ye  may  do  in  pursuance  of  your 
last  council,  and  by  so  doing,  also  be  better  able 
to  give  the  enemy  battle,  should  an  army  from 
without  come  upon  us.  So  on  the  second  day  they 
withdrew  themselves  from  Mansoul,  and  abode  in 
the  plains  without ;  but  they  encamped  themselves 
before  Eyegate,  hi  what  terrene  and  terrible"  manner 
they  could.  The  reason  why  they  would  not  abide 
in  the  town,  besides  the  reasons  that  were  debated 
in  their  late  conclave,  was,  for  that  they  were  not 
possessed  of  the  stronghold,  and  because,  said 
they,  we  shall  have  more  convenience  to  fight,  and 
also  to  fly,  if  need  be,  when  wo  are  encamped  in  the 
open  plains.  Besides,  the  town  would  have  been  a 
pit  for  them  rather  than  a  place  of  defence,  had  the 
Prince  come  up,  and  enclosed  them  fast  therein. 
Therefore  they  betook  themselves  to  the  field,  that 
they  might  also  be  out  of  the  reach  of  the  slings,1' 
by  which  they  were  much  annoyed  all  the  while 
that  they  were  in  the  town. 

Well,  the  time  that  the  captains  were  to  fall 
upon  the  Diabolonians  beini;  come,    _,,     .. 

i  o  *     Hie  time   com' 

they  eagerly  prepared  themselves  for     forthei 
J  j-       n     x  ■      n     i  ti      to  fight  them. 

action ;    for   Captain   Credence    had 

told  the  captains  over  night  that  they  should  meet 
their  Prince  in  the  field  to-morrow.  This  there- 
fore made  them  yet  far  more  desirous  to  be  engag- 
ing the  enemy,  for,  You  shall  see  the  Prince  in  the 

2  'Terrene  and  terrible,'  dreadful  to  mortals. — (Ed.) 

3  Portions  from  the  Bible,  probably  meaning  the 
of  the  New  Testament. — (En.) 


S5S 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


field  to-morrow,  was  like  oil  to  a  flaming  fire ;  for 
of  a  long  time  they  had  been  at  a  distance,  they 
therefore  were  for  this  the  more  earnest  and 
desirous  of  the  work.  So,  as  I  said,  the  hour 
being  come,  Captain  Credence,  with  the  rest  of 
They  draw  out  the  men  °f  war>  drew  out  their  forces 
into  the  field.  ^efore  it  were  day  by  the  sally-port  of 
the  town.  And  being  all  ready,  Captain  Credence 
went  up  to  the  head  of  the  army,  and  gave  to  the 
rest  of  the  captains  the  word,  and  so  they  to  their 
under-officers  and  soldiers.  The  word 
was,  The  sword  of  the  Prince  Em- 
manuel, and  the  shield  of  Captain  Credence,  which 
is,  in  the  Mansoulian  tongue,  The  word  of  God  and 
faith.  Then  the  captains  fell  on,  and  began  roundly 
to  front,  and  flank,  and  rear  Diabolus's  camp.1 

Now  they  left  Captain  Experience  in  the  town, 
because  he  was  yet  ill  of  his  wounds  which  the 


Captain      Expe- 


Diabolonians  had  given  him  in  the 


rience  will  ti-ht  ]ast  fifldit.     But  when  he  perceived 

lor   lus    Prmce  •?  .  l. 

upon  his  that  the  captains  were  at  it,  what 
does  he,  but,  calling  for  his  crutches 
with  haste,  gets  up,  and  away  he  goes  to  the 
battle,  saying,  Shall  I  lie  here  when  my  brethren 
are  in  the  fight?  and  when  Emmanuel  the  Prince 
will  show  himself  in  the  field  to  his  servants  ?  But 
when  the  enemy  saw  the  man  come  with  his 
crutches,  they  were  daunted  yet  the  more;  for, 
thought  they,  what  spirit  has  possessed  these 
Mansoulians  that  they  fight  us  upon  their  crutches! 
Well,  the  captains,  as  I  said,  fell  on,  and  did 
bravely  handle  their  weapons,  still  crying  out  and 
shouting,  as  they  laid  on  blows,  The  sword  of  the 
Prince  Emmanuel,  and  the  shield  of  Captain 
Credence.2 

Now  when  Diabolus  saw  that  the  captains  were 
come  out  and  that  so  valiantly  they  surrounded  his 
men,  he  concluded,  that  for  the  present,  nothing 
from  them  was  to  be  looked  for  but  blows,  and  the 
dints  3  of  their  two-edged  sword. 

Wherefore  he   also  falls  on  upon  the  Prince's 
army  with  all  his  deadly  force.     So  the  battle  was 
joined.     Now  who  was  it  that  at  first 
Diabolus  met  with  in  the  fight,  but 
Captain  Credence  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Lord 
Wiii-be-wiu      Will-be-will  on  the  other ;  now  Will- 
engaged,       -be-will's  blows  were  like  the  blows  of 
a  giant,  for  that  man  had  a  strong  arm,  and  he 
fell  in  upon  the  Election-doubters — for  they  were 
the  life  guard  of  Diabolus— and  he  kept  them  in 
play  a  good  while,  cutting  and  battering  shrewdly. 
Credence       Now  when  Captain  Credence  saw  my 

engaged.  Lor(1  ^gag^  ]le  J^    stoutlj  f&U  ^ 

1  How  heartily,  or,  as  Bunyan  says,  '  roundly,'  can  we  fight 
our  implacable  foes,  when  thus  armed  with  'the  Word  of  God, 
the  sword  of  Emmanuel,  and  faith' — the  shield  of  Credence! 
These  are  invincible  weapons  when  the  Holy  Spirit  enables  us 
to  use  them. — (Ed.) 


The  bat  tie  joined. 


on  the  other  hand,  upon  the  same  company,  also ; 
so  they  put  them  to  great  disorder.4     Now  Cap- 
tain Goodhope  had  engaged  the  Voca-       Goodiwpe 
tion-doubters,  and  they  were  sturdy       engaged. 
men,  but  the  captain  was  a  valiant  man.     Captain 
Experience  did  also  send  him  some  aid,  so  he  made 
the  Vocation-doubters  to  retreat.     The  rest  of  the 
armies  were  hotly  engaged,  and  that  on  every  side, 
and  the  Diaholonians  did  fight  stoutly.  Then  did  my 
Lord  Secretary  command  that  the  slings  from  the 
castle  should  be  played,  and  his  men   The  Lord  Secre- 
could  throw  stones  at  anhair's breadth.     tary  engaged. 
But  after  a  while;  those  that  were  made  to  fly 
before  the  captains  of  the  Prince  did  begin  to  rally 
again,  and  they  came  up  stoutly  upon      The  tattle 
the  rear  of  the  Prince's  army,  where-       renewed, 
fore  the  Prince's  army  began  to  faint,  but  remem- 
bering that  they  should  see  the  face  of  their  Prince 
by  and  by,  they  took  courage,  and  a  very  fierce 
battle  was  fought.      Then  shouted  the  captains, 
saying,  The  sword  of  the  Prince  Em- 
manuel and  the  shield  of  Captain  Cre- 
dence, and  with  that  Diabolus  gave  back,  thinking 
that  more  aid  bad  been  come.     But  no  Emmanuel 
as  yet  appeared ;  moreover,  the  battle  did  hang  in 
doubt,  and  they  made  a  little  retreat 

1,1.1  -kt  •        i  f  They  both  retreat, 

on  both  sides.  Now,  in  the  time  ot  and,  in  the  time 
respite,  Captain  Credence  bravely  en-  ^n'^Credent 
courao-ed  his  men  to  stand  to  it,  and    ™a';es  a  sreech 

ta-         i  t  i      i       ti  ii  i         to  his  soldiers. 

Diabolus  did  the  like  as  well  as  he 

could.    But  Captain  Credence  made  a  brave  speech 

to  his  soldiers,  the  contents  whereof  here  follow — 

Gentlemen  soldiers,  and  my  brethren  in  this 
design,  it  rejoiceth  me  much  to  see  in  the  field  for 
our  Prince  this  day,  so  stout  and  so  valiant  au 
army,  and  such  faithful  lovers  of  Mansoul.  You 
have  hitherto,  as  hath  become  you,  shown  your- 
selves men  of  truth  and  courage  against  the  Dia- 
bolonian  forces,  so  that,  for  all  their  boast,  they 
have  not  yet  much  cause  to  boast  of  their  gettings. 
Now  take  to  yourselves  your  wonted  courage,  and 
show  yourselves  men  even  this  once  only,  for  in  a 
few  minutes  after  the  next  engagement  this  time, 
you  shall  see  your  Prince  show  himself  in  the  field, 
for  we  must  make  this  second  assault  upon  this 
tyrant  Diabolus,  and  then  Emmanuel  comes. 

No  sooner  had  the  captain  made  this  speech  to 
his  soldiers,  but  one  Mr.  Speedy  came  post  to  the 
captain  from  the  Prince,  to  tell  him  that  Em- 
manuel was  at  hand.  This  news,  when  the  cap- 
tain had  received,  he  communicated  to  the  other 
field-officers,  and  they  again  to  their  soldiers  and 

2  '  Kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation.' 
1  Pe.  i.  5.— (Ed.) 

3  '  Dints,'  blows  or  strokes. — (Ed.) 

4  Election-doubters  are  the  devil's  life-guard.  When  the 
will,  strengthened  by  faith,  attacks  them,  they  are  put  into 
disorder,  but  not  destroyed.     These  doubts  are  first  attacked, 

[  for  uutil  they  are  routed  the  soul  has  no  peace. — (Ed.) 


THE  HOLY  WAK. 


359 


inen  of  war.  Wherefore,  like  men  raised  from  the 
dead,  so  the  captains  and  their  men  arose,  made 
up  to  the  enemy,  and  cried  as  before,  The  sword 
of  the  Princo  Emmanuel,  and  the  shield  of  Captain 
Credence. 

The  Diaholonians  also  bestirred  themselves  and 
made  resistance  as  well  as  they  could,  hut  in  this 
last  engagement  thcDiabolonianslost  their  courage, 
and  many  of  the  Doubters  fell  down  dead  to  the 
ground.  Now  when  they  had  been  in  heat  of 
battle  about  an  hour  or  more,  Captain  Credence 
lift  up  his  eyes  aud  saw,  and  behold  Emmanuel 
came,  and  he  came  with  colours  flying,  trumpets 
sounding,  and  the  feet  of  his  men  scarce  touched 
the  ground,  they  hasted  with  that  celerity  towards 
When  the  enemy  tllc  captains  that  were  engaged. 
is  betwixt  ciinr-t    Then   did  Credence  wind  with  his 

and    faith,  tlicn  ,  ,  , 

down  they  go  to  men  to  the  townward,  and  gave  to 
Diabolus  the  field.  So  Emmanuel 
came  upon  him  on  the  one  side,  and  the  enemies 
place  was  betwixt  them  both,  then  again  they  fell 
to  it  afresh,  and  now  it  was  but  a  little  while  more 
but  Emmanuel  and  Captain  Credence  met,  still 
trampling  down  the  slain  as  they  came. 

Put  when  the  captains  saw  that  the  Prince  was 
CGme,  and  that  he  fell  upon  the  Diaholonians  on 
the  other  side,  and  that  Captain  Credence  and  his 
Highness  had  got  them  up  betwixt  them,  they 
shouted,  they  so  shouted  that  the  ground  rent 
again,  saying,  The  sword  of  Emmanuel  and  the 
shield  of  Captain  Credence.  Now  when  Diabolus 
saw  that  he  and  his  forces  were  so  hard  beset  by 
the  Prince  and  his  princely  army,  what  does  he, 
and  the  lords  of  the  pit  that  were  with  him,  but 
The  victory  fails  make  their  escape  and  foresake  their 
andEtoh™i  army,  and  leave  them  to  fall  by  the 
who  slay  all.  hand  of  Emmanuel,  and  of  his  noble 
Captain  Credence ;  so  they  fell  all  down  slain 
before  them,  before  the  Prince,  and  before  his 
royal  army ;  there  was  not  left  so  much  as  one 
doubter  alive,  they  lay  spread  upon  the  ground 
dead  men,  as  one  would  spread  dung  upon  the 
land.1 

When  the  battle  was  over  all  things  came  into 
order  in  the  camp;  then  the  captains  and  elders  of 
Mansoul  came  together  to  salute  Emmanuel,  while 
without  the  corporation  ;  so  they  saluted  him  and 
welcomed  him,  and  that  with  a  thousand  welcomes, 

.Mansoul    salutes    SoBg  viii-  *>  *°r  tllat  lie  WaS  COm0  t0  tIlC 
the  Prince  with-  borders  of  Mansoul  again  ;  sohesmiled 

out;  headdresses  .  .       .  .  ~,  , 

himseii  togointo  upon  them  and  said,  Peace  be  to  you, 
lht  lm  "•  [jn,  a.  19.]  Then  they  addressed  them- 


1  The  presence  of  the  Lord  decides  the  contest.  Doubts 
and  fears  cannot  stand  before  the  gracious  manifestation  of 
himself  to  the  soul. 

'  But  if  Emmanuel's  face  appear, 

My  hope,  my  joy  begins; 
ITis  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 
ilis  grace  removes  my  sins.' — (Border.) 


selves  to  go  to  the  town,  they  went  then  to  go  up 
to  Mansoul,  they,  the  Prince,  with  all  the  new- 
forces  that  now  he  had  brought  with  him  to  the 
war.  Also  all  the  gates  of  the  town  \. 
for  his  reception,  so  glad  were  they  of  his  bl< 
return.  And  this  was  the  manner  and  order  of 
this  going  of  his  into  Mansoul. 

First,  as  I  said,  all  the  gates  of  the  town  were 
set  open,  yea  the  gates  of  the  castle  also  ;  the 
elders  too  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  placed  them- 
selves at  the  gates  of  the  town  to  salute  him  at 
his  entrance  thither;  and  so  they  did,  The  maimer  of 
for  as  he  drew  near  and  approached  °"  ' ' 
towards  the  gates,  they  said,  '  Lift  up  your  heads, 
0  ye  gates  ;  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors; 
and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in.'  And  they 
answered  again,  'Who  is  the  King  of  glory?' 
and  they  made  return  to  themselves,  '  The  Lord 
strong  aud  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle. 
Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates ;  even  lift  tliem  up 
ye  everlasting  doors.'  rs.  xxiv.  7-9. 

Secondly,  It  was  ordered  also  by  those  of  Man- 
soul, that  all  the  way  from  the  town-gates  to  those 
of  the  castle,  his  blessed  Majesty  should  he  enter- 
tained with  the  song,  by  them  that  had  could  best 
skill  in  music  in  all  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  then  did 
the  elders  and  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Mansoul 
answer  one  another  as  Emmanuel  entered  the 
town,  till  he  came  at  the  castle-gates,  with  songs 
and  soimd  of  trumpets,  saying,  *  They  have  seen 
thy  goings,  0  God,  even  the  goings  of  my  God, 
my  King,  in  the  sanctuary.'  So  'the  singers 
went  before,  the  players  on  instruments  followed 
after  ;  among  them  were  the  damsels  playing  with 
timbrels.'  Fa.  lxviiL  25. 

Thirdly,  Then  the  captains — for  I  would  speak 
a  word  of  them — they  in  their  order  waited  on 
the  Prince  as  he  entered  into  the  gates  of  Man- 
soul. Captain  Credence  went  before,  and  Cap- 
tain Goodhope  with  him ;  Captain  Charity  came 
behind  with  other  of  his  companions,  and  Captain 
Patience  followed  after  all,  and  the  rest  of  the 
captains — some  on  the  right  hand,  some  on  the  left 
— accompanied  Emmanuel  into  Mansoul.  And  all 
the  while  the  colours  were  displayed,  the  trumpets 
sounded,  and  continual  shoutings  were  among  the 
soldiers.  The  Prince  himself  rode  into  the  town  in 
his  armour,  which  was  all  of  beaten  gold,  and  in 
his  chariot,  the  pillars  of  it  were  of  silver,  the 
bottom  thereof  of  gold,  the  covering  of  it  was  of 
purple,  the  midst  thereof  being  paved  with  love 
for  the  daughters  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

Fourthly,  When  the  Prince  was  come  to  the 
entrance  of  Mansoul,  he  found  all  the  streets 
strewed  with  lilies  and  flowers,  curiously  decked 
with  houghs  and  branches  from  the  Good  and  joyful 
green  trees  that  stood  round  about  thoughts. 
the  town.     Every  door  also  was  filled  with  persons 


360 


:iIE  HOLY  WAR. 


who  had  adorned  every  one  their  fore-part  against 
their  house,  •with  something  of  variety  and  singular 
excellency  to  entertain  him  withall  as  he  passed  in 
the  streets ;  they  also  themselves,  as  Emmanuel 
passed  hy,  did  welcome  him  with  shouts  and  ac- 
clamations of  joy,  saying,  Blessed  be  the  Prince 
that  cometh  in  the  name  of  his  Father  Shaddai.1 

Fifthly,  At  the  castle-gates  the  elders  of  Man- 
soul,  to  wit,  the  Lord  Mayor,  the  Lord  Will-be- 
will,  the  subordinate  Preacher,  Mr.  Knowledge, 
Mr.  Mind,  with  other  of  the  gentry  of  the  place, 
saluted  Emmanuel  again.  They  bowed  before 
him,  they  kissed  the  dust  of  his  feet,  they  thanked, 
they  blessed,  and  praised  his  Highness  for  not 
taking  advantage  against  them  for  their  sins,  but 
rather  had  pity  upon  them  in  their  misery,  and 
returned  to  them  with  mercies,  and  to  build  up 
their  Mansoul  for  ever.  Thus  was  he  had  up 
straightway  to  the  castle  ;  for  that  was  the  royal 
palace,  and  the  place  where  his  honour  was  to 
dwell;  the  which  was  ready  prepared  for  his 
Highness  by  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Secretary 
and  the  work  of  Captain  Credence.2  So  he  entered 
in. 

Sixthly,  Then  the  people  and  commonalty  of 
the  town  of  Mansoul  came  to  him  into  the  castle 
to  mourn,  and  to  weep,  and  to  lament  for  their 
wickedness  by  which  they  had  forced  him  out  of 
the  town.  So  they,  when  they  were  come,  bowed 
themselves  to  the  ground  seven  times,  they  also 
wept,  they  wept  aloud,  and  asked  forgiveness  of 
the  Prince,  and  prayed  that  he  would  again,  as 
ef  old,  confirm  his  love  to  Mansoul. 

To  the  which  the  great  Prince  replied,  "Weep 
not,  but  '  go  your  way,  eat  the  fat  and  drink  the 
sweet,  and  send  portions  unto  them  for  whom 
nought  is  prepared  -  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is 
your  strength.'  Ne.  vm.  10.  I  am  returned  to 
Mansoul  with  mercies,  and  my  name  shall  be  set 
up,  exalted,  and  magnified  by  it.  He  also  took 
these  inhabitants  and  kissed  them,  and  laid  them 
in  his  bosom. 

Moreover,  he  gave  to  the  elders  of  Mansoul,  and 
,r.     .  ,  to  each  town-officer,  a  chain  of  e;old 

Hie    holy  con-  .  »  °    . 

<-eptions     uf  and  a  signet.     He  also  sent  to  their 

wives,     ear-rings,    and    jewels,    and 

Young  and  ten-  bracelets,  and  other  things.     He  also 

dcr         holy   bestowed  upon  the  true-born  children 


thoughts* 


of  Mansoul  many  precious  things. 


1  How  gladly  is  Jesus  received  1  None  but  those  who 
have  experienced  it  cau  tell  how  delightful  and  welcome  is  his 
presence  to  the  soul  that  has  long  been  vexed  with  an  army  of 
doubts.  O  let  us  beware  of  siu  and  unbelief,  which  caused 
him  to  withdraw  and  the  doubts  to  enter.  Well  may  the  soul 
be  humbled  in  the  dust  in  the  recollection  of  its  backsliding. 
— (Burder.)  Strewing  the  streets  with  flowers,  and  decorating 
the  fronts  of  the  houses,  was  customary,  in  Euuyan's  time,  in 
all  royal  processions. — (Ed.) 

-  '  Giving  them  the  rlolv  Ghost;  -  purifying  their  hearts 
by  faith.'  Ac.  xv.  8,  9.— (Ed.) 


When  Emmanuel  the  Prince  had  done  all  these 
things  for  the  famous  town  of  Mansoul,  then  he 
said  unto  them,  first,  Wash  your  garments,  then 
put  on  your  ornaments,  and  then  come  to  me  into 
the  castle  of  Mansoul.  Ex.  ix.  8.  So  they  went  to 
the  fountain  that  was  set  open  for  Judah  and  Jer- 
usalem to  wash  in,  Zee.  xiii.  i,  and  there  they  washed, 
and  there  they  made  their  garments  white,  and 
came  again  to  the  Prince  into  the  castle,  and  thus 
they  stood  before  him.  He.  vii.  14, 15. 

.  And  now  there  was  music  and  dancing  through- 
out the  whole  town  of  Mansoul,  and  that  because 
their  Prince  had  again  granted  to  them  his  pre- 
sence and  the  light  of  his  countenance,  the  bells 
also  did  ring,  and  the  sun  shone  comfortably  upon 
them  for  a  great  while  together,4 

The  town  of  Mansoul  did  also  now  more  throughly 
seek  the  destruction  and  ruin  of  all  remaining  Dia- 
bolonians  that  abode  in  the  walls  and  the  dens  that 
they  had  in  the  town  of  Mansoul,  for  there  was  of 
them  that  had  to  this  day  escaped  with  life  and 
limb  from  the  hand  of  their  suppressors  in  the 
famous  town  of  Mansoul.5 

But  my  Lord  Will-be-will  was  a  greater  terror 
to  them  now  than  ever  he  had  been 

i     n  f.  -i  1  •      i  Will-be-will        a 

beiore  ;  forasmuch  as  Ins  neart  was     greater  terror  to 

yet  more  fully  bent  to  seek,  contrive,     ^thmhehad 

and  pursue  them  to  the  death ;  he     been'  ia  former 

pursued  them  night  and  day,  and  did 

put  them  now  to  sore  distress,  as  will  afterwards 

appear. 

After  things  were  thus  far  put  into  order  in  the 
famous  town  of  Mansoul,  care  was  taken  and  order 
given  by  the  blessed  Prince  Emmanuel,  that  the 
townsmen  should,  without  further  delay,  appoint 
some  to  go  forth  into  the  plain  to  bury  0:der5givenout 
the  dead  that  were  there — the  dead  to  bury  the 
that  fell  by  the  sword  of  Emmanuel 
and  by  the  shield  of  the  Captain  Credence — lest 
the  fumes  and  ill  savours  that  would  arise  from 
them  might  infect  the  air,  and  so  annoy  the  famous 
town  of  Mansoul.  This  also  was  a  reason  of  this 
order,  to  wit,  that  as  much  as  in  Mansoul  lay,  they 
might  cut  off  the  name,  and  being,  and  remembrance 
of  those  enemies  from  the  thought  of  the  famous 
town  of  Mansoul  and  its  inhabitants. 

So  order  was  given  out  by  the  Lord  Mayor — 
that  wise  and  trusty  friend  of  the  town  of  Mansoul 
— that  persons  should   be   employed  about   this 


3  The  side  notes  are  Banyan's  key  to  the  text,  which,  he 
says, 

'Lieth  there  in  the  window.' 

See  last  lines  of  his  address  '  To  the  Reader.' — (Ed.) 

4  Though  comforts  are  cheering,  let  not  the  believer  rest  in 
them,  neither  be  high-minded,  but  fear  ;  looking  to  Jesus  for 
strength  and  grace  to  persevere. —  (Mason.) 

6  '  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength.'  "When  this  is 
possessed,  there  will  be  a  double  diligence  in  searching  out 
aud  destroying  our  sins. — (Border.) 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


3G1 


necessary  business;  and  Mr.  Godly-fear  and  one  Mr. 
Upright  were  to  be  overseers  about  this  matter ;  so 
persons  were  put  under  them  to  work  in  the  fields 
and  to  bury  the  slain  that  lay  dead  in  the  plains. 
And  these  were  their  places  of  employment — some 
were  to  make  tho  graves,  some  to  bury  the  dead, 
and  some  were  to  go  to  and  fro  in  the  plains,  and 
also  round  ahout  the  borders  of  Mansoul,  to  seo  if 

Not  a  skull,  or  a  *  slal11'  0r  *  b°UC»  or  *  PicCG  °f  a 
bone,  or  a  piece  bono  of  a  Doubter  was  VCt  to  be 
t i    b  bone  of  a  ,  ,  , 

Doubter  to  be  left  seen  above  ground  anywhere  near 
unbuned.  ^  corp0ration ;    and  if  any  were 

found,  it  was  ordered  that  tho  searchers  that 
searched  should  set  up  a  mark  thereby,  and  a 
sign,  that  those  that  were  appointed  to  bury  them 
might  find  it,  and  bury  it  out  of  sight,  tliat  the 
name  and  remembrance  of  a  Diabolonian  Doubter 
might  be  blotted  out  from  under  heaven.  And 
that  the  children,  and  they  that  were  to  bo  born 
in  Mansoul,  might  not  know,  if  possible,  what  a 
skull,  what  a  boue,  or  a  piece  of  a  bone  of  a 
Doubter  was. 

So  the  buriers,  and  those  that  were  appointed 
for  that  purpose,  did  as  they  were  commanded, 
they  buried  the  Doubters,  and  all  the  skulls  and 
bones,  and  pieces  of  bones  of  Doubters  wherever 
they  found  them,  and  so  they  cleansed  the  plains. 
Now  also  Mr.  God's-peace  took  up  his  commission 
and  acted  again  as  in  former  days. 

Thus  they  buried,  in  the  plains  about  Mansoul, 
the  Election-doubters,  the  Vocation-doubters,  the 
Grace-doubters,  the  Perseverance-doubters,  the 
Resurrection-doubters,  the  Salvation-doubters,  and 
the  Glory-doubters,  whose  captains  were  Captain 
Rage,  Captain  Cruel,  Captain  Damnation,  Captain 
Insatiable,  Captaiu  Brimstone,  Captain  Torment, 
Captain  Noease,  Captain  Sepulchre,  and  Captain 
Pasthope,  and  old  Incredulity  was  under  Diabolus 
their  general ;  there  were  also  the  seven  heads  of 
their  army,  and  they  were  the  Lord  Beelzebub,  the 
Lord  Lucifer,  the  Lord  Legion,  the  Lord  Apollyon, 
the  Lord  Python,  the  Lord  Cerberus,  and  the  Lord 
Belial.  But  the  princes  and  the  captains,  with  old 
Incredulity  their  general,  did  all  of  them  make 
their  escape,  so  their  men  fell  down  slain  by  the 
power  of  the  Prince's  forces,  and  by  the  hands  of 
the  men  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.     They  also  were 


1  Thus  was  the  victory  completed,  and  by  this  we  are  taught 
that  doubts  of  the  love  of  Christ,  contrary  to  the  declarations 
of  his  Word,  should  be  utterly  suppressed,  as  being  infinitely 
dishonourable  to  our  faithful  covenant  God,  and  unspeakably 
pernicious  to  our  own  souls. —  (Burder.)  Still  we  are  not  to 
forget  the  danger  of  their  rising  from  the  tomb  again  to  dis- 
tress us,  unless  we  are  found  constantly  watchful  and  prayerful. 
When  Greatheart  and  the  Pilgrims  had  killed  Despair,  and 
destroyed  Doubting  Castle,  and  are  rejoicing  over  the  ruins, 
Bunyau  thus  warns  them — 

'Though  Doubting  Castle  be  demolished, 
Ai.d  the  Giant  Despair  hath  lost  his  head, 
Sin  can  rebuild  the  castle,  make  it  remain, 
And  make  Despair,  the  giant,  live  again.'— (Ed.) 
VOL.  III. 


buried  as  before  related,  to  the  exceeding  great  joy 
of  the  now  famous  town  of  Mansoul.  They  that 
buried  them,  buried  also  with  them  their  arms, 
which  were  cruel  instruments  of  death,  their  wea- 
pons were  arrows,  darts,  mauls,  fire- 
brands, and  the  like;  they  buried  also  wmour buried 
their  armour,  their  colours,  banners,  WItlltlll!m- 
Avith  tho  standard  of  Diabolus,  and  what  else 
soever  they  could  find  that  did  but  smell  of  a 
Diabolonian  Doubter.1 

[Chapter  XVII.] 

[Contents:— A  new  army  of  Bloodmen,  or  persecutors,  at- 
tack the  town,  but  are  surrounded  by  the  Mausoulians, 
headed  by  Faith  and  Patience — The  examination  of  some 
of  the  leaders — Evil-questioning  entertains  some  of  the 
Doubters,  but  is  discovered  by  Diligence — The  principal 
Doubters  tried,  convicted,  and  executed.] 

Now  when  the  tyrant  was  arrived  at  Ilell-gate- 
hill,  with  his  old  friend  Incredulity,  they  im- 
mediately descended  the  den,  and  having  there, 
with  their  fellows,  for  a  while  condoled  their  mis- 
fortune and  great  loss  that  they  sustained  against 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  they  fell  at  length  into  a 
passion,  and  revenged  they  would  be  for  the  loss 
that  they  sustained  before  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
wherefore  they  presently  call  a  council  The  tyrant  rc- 
to  contrive  yet  further  what  was  to  bo  SS&  with 
done  against  the  famous  town  of  Man-  MsmsouL 
soul ;  for  their  yawning  paunches  could  not  wait 
to  see  the  result  of  their  Lord  Lucifer's  and  their 
Lord  Apollyon's  counsel  that  they  had  given  before, 
for  their  raging  gorge  thought  every  day  even  as 
long  as  a  short-for-ever,  until  they  were  filled  with 
the  body  aud  soul,  with  the  flesh  and  bones,  and 
with  all  the  delicates  of  Mansoul.  They  therefore 
resolve  to  make  another  attempt  upon  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  and  that  by  an  army  mixed,  and  mado 
up,  partly  of  Doubters  and  partly  of  Bloodmeu.'"' 
A  more  particular  account  now  take  of  both. 

The  Doubters  are  such  as  have  their  name  from 
their  nature,  as  well  as  from  the  lord    , 

.  An      army     of 

and  kingdom  where  they  are  born;  Doubters  ami 
their  nature  is  to  put  a  question  upon  00  meL' 
every  one  of  the  truths  of  Emmanuel,  and  their 
country  is  called,  The  Land  of  Doubting,  and  that 
land  lieth  off,  and  furthest  remote  to  the  north, 
between  the  Land  of  Darkness  and  that  called  the 

-  Poor  Mansoul,  having  by  grace  overcome  his  doubts  and 
fears,  having  died  to  sin  and  risen  again  to  newness  of  life,  is 
now  fit  to  comfort  his  brethren  in  church  fellowship.  As  the 
Pilgrim  was  frighted  by  the  lions  before  the  house  Beautiful, 
to  prevent  his  entering  into  communion  witli  a  church, 
they  suffer  persecution  from  these  lions,  here  called  '  Blood, 
men,'  and  an  appropriate  title  it  is  for  all  persecutors.  All 
those  who  enforce  human  laws  to  compel  our  presence  at,  or 
support  to,  any  form  of  worship,  are  bloodmen.  Bless  God 
that  they  can  only  scratch  us  now;  but  if  tiny  had  the  power, 
the  same  spirit  that  now  scratches  would  devour  the  saints  of 
God— (Ed.) 

46 


362 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death.  For  though  the 
Land  of  Darkness,  and  that  called  the  Land  of 
of  the  country  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  he  sometimes 

KSESSJ  calIed  as  if  theJ  ™e  on<>  ^  the 

where  they  he.  self-same  place;  yet  indeed  they  are 
two,  lying  hut  a  little  way  asunder,  and  the  Laud 
of  Doubting  points  in,  and  lieth  between  them. 
This  is  the  Land  of  Doubting,  and  these  that  came 
with  DiaLolus  to  ruin  the  town  of  Mansoul  are  the 
natives  of  that  country. 

The  Bloodmen  are  a  people  that  have  their 
name  derived  from  the  malignity  of  their  nature, 
and  from  the  fury  that  is  in  them  to  execute  it  upon 
the  town  of  Mansoul ;  their  land  lieth  under  the 
Dog-star,  and  by  that  they  are  governed  as  to 
their  intellectuals. 

The  name  of  their  country  is  the  Province  of 
Loath-good,  the  remote  parts  of  it  are  far  distant 
from  the  Laud  of  Doubting,  yet  they  do  both  but 
and  bound  upon  the  hill  called  Hell-gate-hill. 
These  people  are  always  in  league  with  the 
Doubters,  for  they  jointly  do  make  question  of  the 
faith  and  fidelity  of  the  men  of  the  town  of  Man- 
soul, and  so  are  both  alike  qualified  for  the  service 
of  their  prince. 

Now  of  these  two  countries  did  Diabolus,  by  the 
The  number  of  his  beating  of  Ids  drum,  raise  another 

new  army.  army  agafogt   the  town    of  Mansoul, 

of  five  and  twenty  thousand  strong.  There  were 
ten  thousand  Doubters  and  fifteen  thousand  Blood- 
men,  and  they  were  put  under  several  captains  for 
the  war,  and  old  Incredulity  was  again  made 
general  of  the  army. 

As  for  the  Doubters,  their  captains  were  five 
of  the  seven  that  were  heads  of  the  last  Diabo- 
lonian  army,  and  these  are  their  names,  Captain 
Beelzebub,  Captain  Lucifer,  Captain  Apollyon, 
Captain  Legion,  and  Captain  Cerberus,  and  the 
captains  that  they  had  before  were  some  of 
them  made  lieutenants,  and  some  ensigns  in  the 
army. 

But  Diabolus  did  not  count  that  in  this  expedi- 
tion of  his,  these  Doubters  would  prove  his  principal 
His  chief  strength  mcn>  for  theil'  manhood  had  been 
lies  in  theBlood-  tried  before,    also   the  Mansoulians 

men.  .      .  , 

had  put  them  to  the  worst,  only  he 
did  bring  them  to  multiply  a  number,  and  to  help, 
if  need  was,  at  a  pinch;  but  his  trust  he  put  in 
his  Bloodmen,  fur  that  they  were  all  rugged  vil- 
lains, and  he  knew  that  they  had  done  feats  here- 
tofore.1 

As  for  the  Bloodmen,   they  also  were  under 


1  The  Bloodmen,  or  persecutors,  are  all  rugged  villains; 

strengthened  by  new  doubts  arising  from  persecution 

for  Christ's  sake.    From  Fu.vs  Martyrs  Banyan  had  obtained 

a  good  estimate  of  their  character.     Persecutor,  read  your 

l- — a  rugged  villain,  a  mastiiF  who  would  fasten  upon 

relative,  prince,  and  even  the  Prince  of  princes. — (Ed.) 


command,  and  the  names  of  their  captains  were, 
Captain  Cain,  Captain  Nimrod,  Cap-  The  captains  of 
tain  Ishmacl,  Captain  Esau,  Captain  "»•  Blooda**. 
Saul,  Captain  Absalom,  Captain  Judas,  and  Cap- 
tain Pope. 

1.  Captain  Cain  was  over  two  bands,  to  wit, 
the  zealous  and  the  angry  Bloodmen ;  his  standard- 
bearer  bear  the  red  colours,  and  his  escutcheon  was 
the  murdering  club.   Ge.  iv.  8. 

2.  Captain  Nimrod  was  captain  over  two  bands, 
to  Avit,  the  tyrannical  and  encroaching  Bloodmen ; 
his  standard-bearer  bare  the  red  colours,  and  his 
escutcheon  was  the  great  blood-hound.  Ge.  x.  s. 

3.  Captain  Ishmacl  was  captain  over  two  bands, 
to  wit,  over  the  mocking  and  scornful  Bloodmen ; 
his  standard-bearer  bare  the  red  colours,  and  his 
escutcheon  was  one  mocking  at  Abraham's  Isaac. 

Ge.  xxi.  9,  10. 

4.  Captain  Esau  was  captain  over  two  bands, 
to  wit,  the  Bloodmen  that  grudged  that  another 
should  have  the  blessing,  also  over  the  Bloodmen 
that  are  for  executing  their  private  revenge  upon 
others  ;  his  standard-bearer  bare  the  red  colours, 
and  his  escutcheon  was  one  privately  lurking  to 
murder  Jacob.   Ge.  xtwL  42— 15. 

5.  Captain  Saul  was  captain  over  two  bands,  to 
wit,  the  groundlessly  jealous,  and  the  devilishly 
furious  Bloodmen;  his  standard-bearer  bear  the 
red  colours,  and  his  escutcheon  was  three  bloody 
darts  cast  at  harmless  David.  1  sa.  win.  10 ;  adx.  10 ;  xs.  zi. 

6.  Captain  Absalom  was  captain  over  two 
bands,  to  wit,  over  the  Bloodmen  that  will  kill  a 
father  or  a  friend  for  the  glory  of  this  world,  also 
over  those  Bloodmen  that  will  hold  one  fair  in 
hand  with  words,  till  they  shall  have  pierced  him 
with  their  swords ;  his  standard-bearer  did  bare 
the  red  colours,  and  his  escutcheon  was  the  son 
a-pursuing  his  father's  blood.  2  Sa.  xv.,  xvi.,  xvii. 

7.  Captain  Judas  was  over  two  bands,  to  wit, 
the  Bloodmen  that  will  sell  a  man's  life  for  money, 
and  those  also  that  will  betray  their  friend  Avith  a 
kiss ;  his  standard-bearer  bare  the  red  colours,  and 
his  escutcheon  was  thirty  pieces  of  silver  and  the 
halter.  Mat.  xxvi.  it-iG. 

S.  Captain  Pope  was  captain  over  one  band,  for 
all  these  spirits  are  joined  in  one  under  him ;  his 
standard-bearer  bare  the  red  colours,  and  his 
escutcheon  was  the  stake,  the  flame,  and  the  good 

man  in  it.    Re.  xiii.  7,  S.    Da.  xi.  OS. 

Now  the  reason  why  Diabolus  did  so  soon  rally 
another  force  after  he  had  been  beaten  out  of  the 
field  was,  for  that  he  put  mighty  confidence  in  his 
army  of  Bloodmen,  for  he  put  a  great  deal  of 
more  trust  in  them  than  he  did  before  ^j  conijitions 
in  his  army  of  Doubters,  though  they  <£Jht  B^°j- 
had  also  often  done  great  service  for  stoutness  and 
him  in  the  strengthening  of  him  in  his 
kingdom.     But  these   Bloodmen  he  had  proved 


THE  HOLY  WATu 


303 


lliem  often,  and  their  sword  did  seldom  return 
empty.  Besides,  lie  knew  that  these,  like  mas- 
tiffs, would  fasten  upon  any,  upon  father,  mother, 
brother,  sister,  prince,  or  governor,  yea,  upon  the 
Prince  of  princes.  And  that  which  encouraged 
him  the  more,  was  for  that  they  once  did  force 
Emmanuel  out  of  the  kingdom  of  Universe,  and 
why,  thought  he,  may  they  not  also  drive  him  from 
the  town  of  Mansoul?1 

So  this  army  of  live  and  twenty  thousand  strong, 
They  sit  down    WM>  Mf    t!uIr    Scncral    tllc    Lord    In- 

Man-  credulity,  led  up  against  the  town  of 
soul.  Now  Mr.  1'rywell,  the  scout- 
master-general, did  himself  go  out  to  spy,  and  lie 
did  bring  Mansoul  tidings  of  their  coming ;  where- 
fore they  shut  up  their  gates  and  put  themselves 
in  a  posture  of  defence  against  these  new  Diabo- 
lonians  that  came  up  against  the  town. 
So  Diabolus  brought  up  his  army  and  beleaguered 


IIow  they  d 


the  town  of  Mansoul ;    the  Doubters 


them-    were  placed  about  Federate,  and  the 

selves. 

and  Eargate. 

Now  when  this  army  had  thus  encamped  them- 
selves, Incredulity  did,  in  the  name  of  Diabolus, 
his  own  name,  and  in  the  name  of  the  Bloodmen  and 

They    summon    tUC  leSt    ^iat   W6Fe    AV*tn   n™'  SenC*    a 

n  rath  summons  as  hot  as  a  red  hot  iron  to 
='  Mansoul  to  yield  to  their  demands, 
threatening  that  if  they  still  stood  it  out  against 
them,  they  would  presently  burn  down  Mansoul 
with  fire.  For  you  must  know,  that  as  for  the 
Bloodmen,  they  were  not  so  much  that  Mansoul 
should  be  surrendered,  as  that  Mansoul  should  be 
destroyed  aud  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living.2 
True,  they  send  to  them  to  surrender,  but  should 
they  so  do,  that  would  not  stanch  or  quench  the 
thirsts  of  these  men.  u.  lix.  ?.  They  must  have 
blood,  the  blood  of  Mansoul,  else  they  die ;  and  it 
is  from  hence  that  they  have  their  name.  rs.  xx\i. 
9, 10.  is.  lis.  7.  Je.  xxii.  it.  Wherefore  these  Bloodmen 
he  reserved  while  now  that  they  might,  when  all 
his  engines  proved  ineffectual,  as  his  last  and  sure 
card,  be  played  against  the  town  of  Mansoul. 

Now  when  the  townsmen  had  received  this  red 
hot  summons,  it  begat  in  them  at  present  some 
changing  and  interchanging  thoughts,  but  they 
jointly  agreed,  in  less  than  half  an  hour,  to  carry 
the  summons  to  the  Prince,  the  which  they  did 
when  they  had  writ  at  the  bottom  of  it,  Lord,  save 
Mansoul  from  bloody  men.  Vs.  lis.  2. 

So  he  took  it  and  looked  upon  it,  and  considered 


1  0  the  folly  of  this  lying  Diabolus !  He  tried  his  Blood- 
men upon  Christ.  They,  by  patting  him  to  death,  crushed 
I  of  Satan,  shook  his  power,  and  will  annihilate  it,  and 
£11  he!l  with  fresh  torments.  He  pannes  the  same  course 
with  the  saints  of  God,  and  their  blood  and  groans  become  the 
fruitful  seed  of  the  church.  So  does  Satan  aid  in  destroying 
himself.— (Ed.) 


it,  and  took  also  notice  of  that  short  petition  that 
the  men  of  Mansoul  had  written  at  the  bottom  of 
it,  and  called  to  him  the  noble  Captain  Cr. 
and  bid  him  go,  and  take  Captain  Patience  with 
him,  and  go  and  take  care  of  that  side  of  Mansoul 
that  was  beleaguered  by  the  Bloodmen.  He.  vi.  13,  is. 
So  they  went  and  did  as  they  were  commanded, 
the  Captain  Credence  went  and  took  C 
Patience,  and  they  both  secured  that  side  of  Man- 
soul that  was  besieged  by  the  Bloodmen. 

Then  he  commanded  that  Captain  Groodhope  and 
Captain  Charity,  and  my  Lord  Willbe-will,  should 
take  charge  of  the  other  side  of  the  town,  and  I, 
said  the  Prince,  will  set  my  standard  upon  the 
battlements    of  your   castle,   and    do   yon 
watch  against  the  Doubters.     This  done,  he  again 
commanded  that  the  brave  captain,  the  Captain 
Experience,  should  draw  up  his  men  in  the  m 
place,  and  that  there  he  should  exercise  them  day 
by  day  before  the  people  of  the  town  of  Mansoul. 
Now  this  siege  was  long,  and  many  a  fierce  at 
did  the  enemy,  especially  those  called  the  I 
men,  make  upon  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  many 
d  shrewd  brush  did  some  of  the  townsmen  meet 
with  from    them,   especially  Captain   Self-denial, 
who,    1  should  have  told  you  before,   was   com- 
manded to  take  cara  of  Eargate  and  Eyegate  now 
against  the  Bloodmen.       This  Captain  Self-denial 
was  a  young  man,  but   stout,  and  a 
townsman    of   Mansoul,    as    Captain 
Experience    also    was.        And    Em- 
manuel, at  his  second  return  to  Man- 
soul,   made    him    a    captain    over    a 
thousand   of  the  Mansoulians,   for  the   good    of 
the  corporation.     This  captain,  therefore,  being  a 
hardy  man,  and  a  man  of  great  courage,  and  will- 
ing to  venture  himself  for  the  good  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul,  would  now   and  then  sally 
out  upon  the  Bloodmen  and  give  them 
many  notable  alarms,  and  entered  several  brisk 
skirmishes  with  them,  and  also  did  some  execution 
upon  them  ;  but  you  must  think  that  this  could 
not  easily  be  done,  but  he  must  meet   Hu    si_.n<   0. 
with  brushes  himself,  for  he  carried       man 
several  of  their  marks  in  his  face ;  yea,  and  some 
in  some  other  parts  of  his  body.3 

So,  after  some  time  spent  for  the  trial  of  the 
faith,  and  hope,  and  love  of  the  town  of  Mansoul, 
the  Prince  Emmanuel   upon  a  day   -,  . 

■t  J     Emmanuel     prc- 

calls  his  captains  and  men  of  war 

together,  and  divides  them  into  two     ifoT'he  orde; 

companies;  this  done,  he  commands 


Captain  Self- 
denial,  the  last 
of  those  that 
were  put  in 
ollioe  in  the 
town  of  Man- 


bis 


-  Satan's  uniform  aim  is  to  destroy  body  and  soul  in  hc'l 
for  ever.     But  blessed  be  God,  he  shall  not  be  able  I 
the  feeblest  lamb  out  of  the  embraces  of  coveuaut  love. — 
(Mason.) 

3  Faith,  Patience,  and  Self-denial  arc  admirably  placed   in 
opposition  to  the  Bloodmen,  persei  U  they 

behaved  in  the  time  of  our  pilgrim  fathers  is  well  known;  and 


3G4 


THE  HOLY  WAR. 


them  at  a  time  appointed,  and  that  in  the  morning 
very  early,  to  sally  out  upon  the  enemy,  saying, 
Let  half  of  you  fall  upon  the  Doubters,  and  half 
of  you  fall  upon  the  Bloodmen.  Those  of  you 
that  go  out  against  the  Doubters,  kill  and  slay, 
and  cause  to  perish  so  many  of  them  as  by  any 
means  you  can  lay  hands  on,  but  for  you  that  go 
out  against  the  Bloodmen,  slay  them  not,  but  take 
them  alive.1 

bo,  at  the  time  appointed,  betimes  in  the  morn- 
The  captains  go  inS  tDe  captains  went  out,  as  they 
out*  were  commanded,  against  the  enemies; 

Captain  Goodhope,  Captain  Charity,  and  those 
that  were  joined  with  them,  as  Captain  Innocent 
and.  Captain  Experience,  went  out  against  the 
Doubters;  and  Captain  Credence  and  Captain 
Patience,  with  Captain  Self-denial,  and  the  rest 
that  were  to  join  with  them,  went  out  against  the 
Bloodmen. 

Now  those  that  went  out  against  the  Doubters 
The  Doubters  drew  up  into  a  body  before  the  plain, 
put  to  flight.  and  marc]ie(i  on  to  ^id  them  battle; 
but  the  Doubters,  remembering  their  last  success, 
made  a  retreat,  not  daring  to  stand  the  shock,  but 
fled  from  the  Prince's  men,  wherefore  they  pur- 
sued them,  and  in  their  pursuit  slew  many,  but 
they  could  not  catch  them  all.  Now  those  that 
escaped  went  some  of  them  home,  and  the  rest,  by 
fives,  nines,  and  seventeens,2  like  wanderers,  went 
straggling  up  and  down  the  country,  where  they, 
The  unbeliever  llPou  the  barbarous  people,  showed 
sever     fights   and  exercised  many  of  their  Diabo- 

the  Doubters.     .      .  .  J  ,. ,     , 

Ionian  actions ;  nor  did  these  people 
rise  up  in  arms  against  them,  but  suffered  them- 
selves to  be  enslaved  by  them.3  They  would  also 
after  this  show  themselves  in  companies  before 
the  town  of  Mansoul,  but  never  to  abide  it,  for  if 
Captain  Credence,  Captain  Goodhope,  or  Captain 
Experience  did  but  show  themselves,  they  fled. 

Those  that  went  out  against  the  Bloodmen  did 
The  Bloodmen  as  ^1  were  commanded,  they  forbore 
are  taken,  and  to  slay  any,  but  sought  to  compass 

them  about.  But  the  Bloodmen,  when 
they  saw  that  no  Emmanuel  was  in  the  field,  con- 
cluded also  that  no  Emmanuel  was  in  Mansoul, 
wherefore  they,  looking  upon  what  the  captains 
did,  to  be,  as  they  called  it,  a  fruit  of  the  extrava- 
gancy of  their  wild  and  foolish  fancies,  rather 
despised  them  than  feared  them ;    but  the   cap- 


in  our  happier  times  they  are  invaluable  guards  to  support  us 
in  the  loss  of  friends  or  property. — (Ed.) 

1  '  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good 
to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them  which  despitefully 
use  you,  and  persecute  you.'  This  is  the  imperative  command 
of  Emmanuel  to  his  followers,  set  forth  in  his  sermon  on  the 
mount.  Your  lusts  must  be  crucified,  your  doubts  destroyed, 
your  persecutors  pitied  and  prayed  for. — (Ed.) 

-  '  Fives,  nines,  and  seventeens.'  "Why  these  odd  uumbcrs 
sire  given  would  not  be  a  bad  riddle  to  give  our  young  friends. 
live  infernal  spirits  were  the  leaders  of  the  Satanic  armv. 


~0£ 


tains,  minding  their  business,  at  last  did  compass 
them  round,  they  also  that  had  routed  the  Doubters 
came  in  amain  to  their  aid ;  so  in  fine,  after  some 
little  struggling — for  the  Bloodmen  also  would  have 
run  for  it,  only  now  it  was  too  late — for  though 
they  are  mischievous  and  cruel  where 
they  can  overcome,  yet  all  Bloodmen 
are  chicken-hearted  men  when  they  once  come  to 
see  themselves  matched  and  equalled — so  the  cap- 
tains took  them,  and  brought  them  to  the  Prince. 
Now  when  they  were  taken,  had  before  the 
Prince,  and  examined,  he  found  them  T, 
to  be  of  three  several  counties,  though     brought  to  the 

xi  11  t>  1       i  Prince,       and 

tney  all  came  out  ot  one  land.  found  to  be  of 

1.  One  sort  of  them  came  out  of    threesorts- 
Blindmanshire,  and  they  were  such  as  did  ignor- 
antly  what  they  did.  l  tl  i.  13-15.  Mat.  v.  44. 

2.  Another  sort  of  them  came  out  of  Blindzeal- 
shire,  and  they  did  superstitiously  what  they  did. 
Lu.  vi.  22. 

3.  The  third  sort  of  them  came  out  of  the  town 
of  Malice  in  the  county  of  Envy,  and  they  did  what 
they  did  out  of  spite  and  implacableness.4  Jn.  xvi.  2. 

•  Eor  the  first  of  these,  to  wit,  they  that  came  out 
of  Blindmanshii-e,  when  they  saw  where  they  were, 
and  against  whom  they  had  fought,  they  trembled, 
and  cried  as  they  stood  before  him ;  and  as  many 
of  these  as  asked  him  mercy,  he  touched  their  lips 
with  his  golden  sceptre.  Ac.  ix.  5-c. 

They  that  came  out  of  Blindzealshire,  they  did 
not  as  their  fellows  did,  for  they  pleaded  that  they 
had  a  right  to  do  what  they  did,  because  Mansoul 
was  a  town  whose  laws  and  customs  were  diverse 
from  all  that  dwelt  thereabouts.  Very  few  of  these 
could  be  brought  to  see  their  evil ;  but  those  that 
did,  and  asked  mercy,  they  also  obtained  favour. 

Jn.  viii.  40. 

They  that  came  out  of  the  town  of  Malice,  that 
is  in  the  county  of  Envy,  they  neither  wept  nor 
disputed,  nor  repented,  but  stood  gnawing  of  their 
tongues  before  him  for  anguish  and  madness,  be- 
cause they  could  not  have  their  will  upon  Mansoul. 
Re.  ix.  20,  21.  Now  these  last,  with  all  those  of  the 
other  two  sorts  that  did  not  unfeignedly  ask  par- 


It  consisted  of  nine  companies  of  Doubters,  and  eight  of  Blood- 
men, or  persecutors.  Eirst,  five  fallen  angels;  second,  nine 
classes  of  doubts ;  and  if  this  was  not  enough  to  enslave  the 
soul,  they  were  to  be  aided  by  eight  classes  of  persecutors. 
This  may  account  for  the  grouping  of  these  dangerous  enemies 
in  fives,  nines,  and  seventeens. — (Ed.) 

3  Many  are  led  captive  by  Satan  at  his  will,  blinded  to 
their  misery  and  fate  by  the  god  of  this  world,  in  whose  delu- 
sive arms  many  of  them  sleep  till  death  and  judgment  awake 
them  to  behold  their  awful  and  remediless  state.  Lord,  pity 
them !— (Mason.) 

4  These  are  the  three  grades  of  Bloodmen,  but  all  are  influ- 
enced by  hatred  to  Christianity  and  a  love  of  plunder.  God 
hates  robbery  for  offerings,  yet  some  blind  fanatics  will  seize 
their  neighbour's  goods  to  save  their  own  pockets  in  adorning 
their  temples.  May  God  in  mercy  convert  them,  as  he  did 
Saul  of  Tarsus.— (Ed.) 


THE   HOLY  WAR, 


365 


(Ion  for  their  faults,  those  he  made  to  enter  into 
The  Bioodmen  sufficient  bond  to  answer  for  what  the}' 
are  bound  over   ]iaa>  (ionc  against  Mansoul  and  against 

to  answer  tor  °  .       °  . 

what  they  have  her  King,  at  the  great  and  general 
sizet'the  day  assizes  to  ho  holden  for  our  Lord  the 
of  judgment.      King>  where  ll0  himseif  sh0uld  appoint 

for  the  country  and  kingdom  of  Universe. 

So  thev  became  bound,  each  man  for  himself,  to 
come  in  when  called  upon,  to  answer  before  our 
Lord  the  King  for  what  they  had  done  as  be- 
fore.1 

And  thus  much  concerning  this  second  army 
that  were  sent  by  Diabolus  to  overthrow  Mansoul. 

But  there  were  three  of  those  that  came  from 
the  land  of  Doubting,  who,  after  they 

T'uyc  or  four  of    .      ,  .         .  .     °  ,     -  J 

the  Doubters  had  wandered  and  ranged  the  countrv 
Ionise  enter!  awhUe,  and  perceived  that  they  had 
tamed,  and  by    escaped,  were  so  hardy  as  to  thrust 

whom.  *  J 

themselves,  knowing  that  yet  there 
were  in  the  town  Diabolonians — I  say  they  were  so 
hardy  as  to  thrust  themselves  into  Mansoul  among 
them.  Three,  did  I  say?  I  think  there  were  four. 
Now,  to  whose  house  should  these  Diabolonian 
Doubters  go,  but  to  the  house  of  an  old  Diabolon- 
ian in  Mansoul,  whose  name  was  Evil-questioning: 
a  very  great  enemy  he  was  to  Mansoul,  and  a 
great  doer  among  the  Diabolonians  there.  Well, 
to  this  Evil-questioning's  house,  as  was  said,  did 
these  Diabolonians  come — you  may  be  sure  that 
they  had  directions  how  to  find  the  way  thither ; 
so  he  made  them  welcome,  pitied  their  misfortune, 
and  succoured  them  with  the  best  that  he  had  in 
his  house.  Now,  after  a  little  acquaintance,  and 
it  was  not  long  before  they  had  that,  this  old  Evil- 
questioning  asked  the  Doubters  if  they  were  all  of 
a  town — he  knew  that  they  were  all  of  one  king- 

....  .        .     ,  dom.     And  they  answered,  no,  nor  not 

M  hat    sort    of  J  ' 

uoubters  they  of  one  shire  neither;  for  I,  said  one, 
am  an  Election-doubter;  I,  said  an- 
other, am  a  Vocation-doubter ;  then,  said  the  third, 
I  am  a  Salvation-doubter ;  and  the  fourth  said  he 
was  a  Grace-doubter.  Well,  quoth  the  old  gen- 
tleman, be  of  what  shire  you  will,  I  am  persuaded 
that  you  are  down  boys  ;2  you  have  the  very  length 
of  my  fooV  are  one  with  my  heart,  and  shall  be 
welcome  to  me.  So  they  thanked  him,  and  were 
glad  that  they  had  found  themselves  a  harbour  in 
Tidkbetwixtthe  Mansoul.1  Then  said  Evil-questioning 
Mf-o^!  to  them,  How  many  of  your  company 
tioniiig.  might  there  be  that  came  with  you 


1  Persecutors,  who  die  in  impenitence,  must  appear  at  the 
day  of  judgment,  when  these  ungodly  men  shall  be  judged  of 
all  their  ungodly  deeds,  and  all  their  hard  speeches  against 
Christ  in  his  members.  Jude  15. —  (Ed.) 

2  'Down  boys,'  deep,  knowing,  determined  fellows;  as 
'  down  bout,'  a  tough  battle,  a  set  to  at  hard  drinking.  In 
1G96,  it  was  altered  to  'town  boys;'  an  unmeaning  name. 
This  was  continued  in  1707;  but  was  restored  to  'down  boys' 
in  1720— (Ed.) 


to  the  siege  of  Mansoul?  And  they  answered. 
There  were  but  ten  thousand  Doubters  in  all,  for 
the  rest  of  the  army  consisted  of  fifteen  thousand 
Bioodmen.  These  Bioodmen,  quoth  they,  border 
upon  our  country  ;  but,  poor  men,  as  we  hear,  they 
were  every  one  taken  by  Emmanuel's  forces.  Ten 
thousand!  quoth  the  old  gentleman,  I'll  promi 
you  that  is  a  round  company.  But  how  came  it  to 
pass,  since  you  were  so  mighty  a  number,  that  yo  i 
fainted,  and  durst  not  fight  your  foes?  Our  gen- 
eral, said  they,  was  the  first  man  that  did  run  for 
it.  Fray,  quoth  their  landlord,  who  was  that  your 
cowardly  general?  He  was  once  the  Lord  Mayor 
of  Mansoul,  said  they.  But,  pray,  call  him  nut  a 
cowardly  general ;  for  whether  any,  from  the  east 
to  the  west,  has  done  more  service  for  our  prince, 
Diabolus,  than  has  my  Lord  Incredulity,  will  be  a 
hard  question  for  you  to  answer.  But  had  they 
catched  him,  they  would  for  certain  have  hanged 
him ;  and  we  promise  you  hanging  is  but  a  bad 
business.5  Then,  said  the  old  gentleman,  I  would 
that  all  the  ten  thousand  Doubters  were  now  well 
armed  in  Mansoul,  and  myself  in  the  head  of  them, 
I  would  see  what  I  could  do.  Ay,  said  they,  that 
would  be  well  if  we  could  see  that ;  but  wishes, 
alas!  what  arc  they?  And  these  words  were 
spoken  aloud.  Well,  said  old  Evil-questioning, 
take  heed  that  you  talk  not  too  loud  ;  you  must  be 
quatG  and  close,  and  must  take  care  of  yourselves 
while  you  are  here,  or,  I'll  assure  you,  you  will  bo 
snapt. 

Why?  quoth  the  Doubters. 

Why  ?  quoth  the  old  gentleman ;  why,  because 
both  the  Prince  and  Lord  Secretary,  and  their 
captains  and  soldiers,  are  all  at  present  in  town  ; 
yea,  the  town  is  as  full  of  them  as  ever  it  can  hold. 
And,  besides,  there  is  one  whose  name  is  Will-be- 
will,  a  most  cruel  enemy  of  ours,  and  him  the 
Prince  has  made  keeper  of  the  gates,  and  has 
commanded  him  that,  with  all  the  diligence  he  can, 
he  shoidd  look  for,  search  out,  and  destroy  all  and 
all  manner  of  Diabolonians. 

And  if  he  lighteth  upon  you,  down  you  go, 
though  your  heads  were  made  of  gold.' 

And  now  to  see  how  it  happened.      One  of  the 
Lord   Will-be-will's   faithful   soldiers,    Thev  are  ovcr. 
whose  name  was  Mr.  Diligence,  stood     heard- 
all  this  while  listening  under  old  Evil-questioning's 
eaves,  and  heard  all  the  talk  that  had  been  betwixt 


3  'Length  of  my  foot,'  a  proverb  meaning  similarity  of  dis- 
position.— (Ed.) 

4  In  our  best  estate  we  are  too  prone  to  question  the  truth 
of  God's  Word  and  his  faithfulness;  we  believe  Mm  able,  but 
harbour  doubts  as  to  his  willingness  to  save  us.    Loi  I, 

our  faith! — (Mason.) 

6  Hanging  is  a  bad  business;  it  d  '»  from 

crime,  but  the  sight  of  it  hardens  them  in  iniquity.— <&>.) 

6  Cowering,  stooping,  squat. — (Ed.) 

7  No  bribe  can  save  them. — Q  oj 


SCO 


THE  HOLY   WAR. 


?  am  and  the  Doubters  that  be  entertained  under 
hia  roof. 

The  soldier  was  a  man  that  my  Lord  had  much 
confidence  in,  and  that  he  loved  dearly ;  and  that 
both  because  he  was  a  man  of  courage,  and  also  a 
man  that  was  unwearied  in  seeking  after  Diabol- 
onians  to  apprehend  them. 

Now  this  man,  as  I  told  you,  heard  all  the  talk 
They  are  Ois-  tnat  was  between  old  Evil-questioning 
covered.  and   these  Diabolonians ;    wherefore, 

what  does  he  but  go  to  his  Lord,  and  tells  him 
what  he  had  heard.  And  sayest  thou  so,  my 
trusty?  quoth  my  Lord.  Ay,  quoth  Diligence, 
that  I  do  ;  and  if  your  Lordship  will  be  pleased  to 
go  with  me,  you  shall  find  it  as  I  have  said.  And 
are  they  there  ?  quoth  my  Lord  ;  I  know  Evil- 
questioning  well,  for  he  and  I  were  great  in  the 
time  of  our  apostacy.  But  I  know  not  now  where 
he  dwells.  But  I  do,  said  his  man;  and,  if  your 
Lordship  will  go,  I  will  lead  you  the  way  to  his 
den.  Go!  quoth  my  Lord,  that  I  will.  Come, 
my  Diligence,  let  us  go  find  them  out.  So,  my 
Lord  and  his  man  went  together  the  direct  way  to 
■  his  house.  Now,  his  man  went  before  to  show  him 
his  way,  and  they  went  till  they  came  even  under 
old  Mr.  Evil-questioning's  wall.  Then  said  Dili- 
gence, Hark !  my  Lord  ;  do  you  know  the  old  gen- 
tleman's tongue  when  you  hear  it?  Yes,  said  ray 
Lord,  I  know  it  well ;  but  I  have  not  seen  him 
many  a  day.  This  I  know;  he  is  cunning.  I 
wish  he  doth  not  give  us  the  slip.  Let  me  alone 
for  that,  said  his  servant,  Diligence.  But  how 
shall  we  find  the  door?  quoth  my  Lord.  Let  me 
alone  for  that,  too,  said  his  man.  So  he  had  my 
Lord  Will-be-will  about,  and  showed  him  the  way 
to  the  door  Then  my  Lord,  without  more  ado, 
broke  open  the  door,  rushed  into  the  house,  and 
caught  them  all  five  together,  even  as  Diligence, 
Tiicy  arc  aprvc-  his  man,  had  told  him.  So,  my  Lord 
commrtted^to  apprehended  them  and  led  them  away, 
prison.  an(i  committed  them  to  the  hand  of 

Mr.  Trueman,  the  jailer,  and  commanded,  and  he 
did  put  them  in  ward.1  This  done,  my  Lord  Mayor 
was  acquainted  in  the  morning  with  what  my  Lord 
TlicLord  Mayor  Will-be-will  had  done  over-night,  and 
is  glad  at  n.  Lis  Lordship  rejoiced  much  at  the 
news,  not  only  because  there  were  Doubters  appre- 
hended, but  because  that  old  Evil-questioning  was 
taken ;  for  he  had  been  a  very  great  trouble  to 
Mansoul,  and  much  affliction  to  my  Lord  Mayor 
himself.  He  had  also  been  sought  for  often,  but  no 
hand  could  ever  be  laid  upon  him  till  now. 

Well,  the  next  thing  was  to  make  preparation 
to  try  these  five  that  by  my  Lord  had  been  appre- 
hended, and  that  were  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  True- 


man,  the  jailer.  So  the  day  was  set,  and  the 
court  called  and  come  together,  and  They  are  brought 
the  prisoners  brought  to  the  bar.  My  t0  tnal- 
Lord  Will-be-will  had  power  to  have  slain  them 
when  at  first  he  took  them,  and  that  without  any 
more  ado ;  but  he  thought  it  at  this  time  mere  for 
the  honour  of  the  Prince,  the  comfort  of  Mansoul, 
and  the  discouragement  of  the  enemy,  to  bring 
them  forth  to  public  judgment. 

But,  I  say,  Mr.  Trueman  brought  them  in  chains 
to  the  bar,  to  the  town-hall,  for  that  was  the  place 
of  judgment.  So,  to  be  short,  the  jury  was  pan- 
nelled,  the  witnesses  sworn,  and  the  prisoners  tried 
for  their  lives.  The  jury  was  the  same  that  tried 
Mr.  Notruth,  Pityless,  Haughty,  and  the  rest  of 
their  companions. 

And  first  old  Questioning  himself  was  set  to  the 
bar ;  for  he  was  the  receiver,  the  entertainer,  and 
comforter  of  these  Doubters,  that  by  nation  were 
outlandish  men  ;2  then  he  was  bid  to  hearken  to  his 
charge,  and  was  told  that  he  had  liberty  to  object, 
if  he  had  ought  to  say  for  himself.  So  his  indict- 
ment was  read;  the  manner  and  form  here  follows — 
Mr.  Questioning,  Thou  art  here  indicted  by  the 
name  of  Evil-questioning,  an  intruder  ,. 
upon  the  town  of  Mansoul,  for  that 
thou  art  a  Diabolonian  by  nature,  and  also  a  hater 
of  the  Prince  Emmanuel,  and  one  that  hast  studied 
the  ruin  of  the  town  of  Mansoul.  Thou  art  also 
here  indicted  for  countenancing  the  King's  ene- 
mies, after  wholesome  laws  made  to  the  contrary : 
For,  1.  Thou  hast  questioned  the  truth  of  her  doc- 
trine and  state.  2.  In  wishing  that  ten  thousand 
Doubters  were  in  her.  3.  In  receiving,  in  enter- 
taining, and  encouraging  of  her  enemies  that  came 
from  their  army  unto  thee.  What  sayest  thou  to 
this  indictment,  Art  thou  guilty,  or  not  guilty  ? 

My  Lord,  quoth  he,  I  know  not  the  meaning  of 
this  indictment,  forasmuch  as  I  am 
not  the  man  concerned  in  it ;  the  man 
that  standeth  by  this  charge,  accused  before  this 
bench,  is  called  by  the  name  of  Evil-questioning, 
which  name  I  deny  to  be  mine,  mine  being  Honest- 
inquiring.3  The  one  indeed  sounds  like  the  other ; 
but  I  trow,  your  Lordships  know,  that  between 
these  two  there  is  a  wide  difference ;  for  I  hope 
that  a  man,  even  in  the  worst  of  times,  and  that 
too  amongst  the  worst  of  men,  may  make  an  honest 
inquiry  after  things,  without  running  the  danger 
of  death. 

Will.  Then  spake  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  for  he 
was  one  of  the  witnesses :  *  My  Lord,  The  Lovd  wiU_ 
and  you  the  honourable  bench,  and  be-witt's  testi- 
mamstrates  of  the  town  of  Mansoul, 


Ills  plea. 


1  Thus  believers,  by  the  almighty  power  of  grace,  arc  en- 
abled to  take  those  captives  whose  captives  they  were.  Is. 
xlv.  2,  3.— (Mason.) 


2  Enemies  to  faith,  hope,  and  love.  The  soul,  by  reason  of 
its  depravity,  is  subject  to  many  doubts  and  unbelieving  tears, 
which  Adam,  before  the  fall,  was  a  stranger  to. — (Mason.) 

"  How  common  it  is  for  vice  to  disguise  itself  under  the 


:he  holy  war. 


567 


you  all  have  heard  with  your  cars,  that  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  has  denied  his  name,  and  so  thinks  to 
shift  from  the  charge  of  the  indictment.  But  I 
know  him  to  he  the  man  concerned,  and  that  his 
proper  name  is  Evil-questioning.  I  have  known 
him,  my  Lord,  ahove  this  thirty  years;  for  he  and 
I,  a  shame  it  is  for  me  to  i  peak  it,  were  great 
acquaintance,  when  Diabolus,  that  tyrant,  had  the 
government  of  Mansoul  ;  and  I  testify  that  he  is  a 
Diaholonian  hy  nature,  and  enemy  to  our  Prince, 
and  a  hater  of  the  hlcssed  town  of  Mansoul.  lie 
has,  in  times  of  rehcllion,  heen  at,  and  lain  in  my 
house,  my  Lord,  not  so  little  as  twenty  nights 
together;  and  we  did  use  to  talk  then,  for  the 
substance  of  talk,  as  he,  and  his  Doubters  have 
talked  of  late;  true  I  have  not  seen  him  many 
o-day.  I  suppose  that  the  coming  of  Emmanuel 
to  Mansoul  has  made  him  to  change  his  lodgings, 
as  this  indictment  has  driven  him  to  change  his 
name;  hut  this  is  the  man,  my  Lord.' 

Then  said  the  court  unto  him,  Hast 

The  court.        .  .  ,  o 

tliou  any  more  to  say  i 

".  Yes,  quoth  the  old  gentleman,  that  I  have; 

for    all    that    as    yet    has    been   said 

against  me,  is  but  by  the  mouth  of 

one  witness,  and  it  is  not  lawful  for  the  famous 

towu  of  Mansoul,  at  the  mouth  of  one  witness  to 

put  any  man  to  death. 

Dilig.  Theu  stood  forth  Mr.  Diligence,  and  said, 

Mr.  Diligence's   '  My  Lord,  as  I  was  upon  my  watch 

testimony.        g^    a    njgllt>    at    t]ie    ]leaj    0f    £a(j 

Street  in  this  town,  I  chanced  to  hear  a  muttering 
■within  this  gentleman's  house ;  then  thought  I 
what  is  to  do  here?  So  I  went  up  close,  but  very 
softly  to  the  side  of  the  house,  to  listen,  thinking, 
as  indeed  it  fell  out,  that  there  I  might  light  upon 
some  Diabolonian  conventicle.1  So,  as  I  said,  I 
drew  nearer  and  nearer,  and  when  I  was  got  up 
close  to  the  wall,  it  was  but  a  while  before  I 
perceived  that  there  were  outdandish  men  in  the 
house ;  but  I  did  well  understand  their  speech,  for 
I  have  been  a  traveller  myself.  Now  hearing  such 
language  in  such  a  tottering  cottage  as  this  old 
gentleman  dwelt  in,  I  clapt  mine  ear  to  a  hole 
iu  the  window,  and  there  heard  them  talk  as  fol- 
loweth.  This  old  Mr.  Questioning  asked  these 
Doubters  what  they  were,  whence  they  came,  and 
what  was  their  business  in  these  parts  ?  And  they 
told  2  him  to  all  these  questions,  yet  he  did  enter- 


II  is  pica. 


name  of  virtue  !  To  understand  the  difi'ertnee  between  Evil- 
questioning  and  Ilonest-inquir,  I  solemn  import- 
ance. Honest  inquiry  is  the  ei  f  every  Christian. 
Leaving  all  human  auls,  our  hopes  of  salvation  depend  upon 
oar  seeking  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  1 
we  may  understand  the  Sacred  Scriptures ;  i 

to  the  knowledge  and  obedience  of  him  who  is  the  V\ 
Truth,  and  the  Life.     Evil  questioning  is  ;>  trusting 

own  perverted  reason;  bringing  to  the  proud  bar  of  our  de- 


tain them.  He  also  asked  what  mi: 
were  of  them,  and  they  told  him  ten  thousand  men, 
He  then  asked  them  why  they  made  no  more 
manly  assault  upon  Mansoul?  And  they  told  him; 
mi  be  called  their  general  coward  for  marching 
off  when  he  should  have  fought  for  his  Prince. 
Further,  this  old  Evil-questioning  wished,  and  1 
heard  him  wish,  Would  all  the  ten  thousand 
Doubters  were  now  in  Mansoul,  and  himself  in 
the  head  of  them.  He  bid  them  also  to  tal. 
and  lie  quat,  for  if  they  were  taken  they  must  die, 
although  they  had  heads  of  gold. 

Then  said  the  court,  Mr.  Evil-questioning, 
is  now  another  witness   against   you, 
and  his  testimony  is  full :  1 .  lie  swears 
that  you  did  receive  these  men  into  your  house, 
aad  that  you  did  nourish  them  there,  though  yotl 
knew  that  they  were  Diabolonians,  and  the  King's 
enemies.     2.   He   swears   that  you  did  wish    ten 
thousand  of  them  in  Mansoul.      3.  He  swears  that 
you  did  give  them  advice  to  be  quat  and  close  lest 
they  were  taken  by  the  King's  servants.    All  which 
manifesteth  that  thou  art  a  Diabolonian  ;  for  had  I 
thou  been  a  friend  to  the  King,  thou  wouldest  have 
apprehended  them. 

Fa-;'.  Then  said  Evil-questioning,  To  the  first  of 
these  I  answer,  the  men  that  came  into 
mine  house  wrerc  strangers,  and  I  took 
them  in,  and  is  it  now  become  a  crime  in  Mi 
for  a  man  to  entertain  strangers?  That  I  did  also 
nourish  them  is  true,  and  why  should  my  charity 
be  blamed?  As  for  the  reason  why  I  wished  ten 
thousand  of  them  in  Mansoul,  I  never  told  it  to  the 
witnesses,  nor  to  themselves.  I  might  wish  them 
to  be  taken,  and  so  my  wish  might  mean  well  to 
Mansoul,  for  aught  that  any  yet  knows.  I  did 
also  bid  them  take  heed  that  they  fell  not  into  the 
captain's  hands ;  but  that  might  be  because  I  am 
unwilling  that  any  man  should  be  slain ;  and  not 
because  I  would  have  the  King's  enemies  as  such 
escape. 

My  Lord  Mayor  then  replied,  That  though  it 
was  a  virtue  to  entertain   strangers,   yet   it  was 
treason  to  entertain  the  King's  enemii 
what  else  thou  bast  said,  thou  dost  by  werds  but 
labour  to  evade,  and  defer  the  execution  of  judg- 

But  could  there  be  no  more  pi 
thee  hut  that  thou  art  a  Diaholonian,  thou  must 
for   that  the  the  death  hy  the  law;  but  to  be  a 


prayed  judgment  the  troths  of  revelation,  wn 
;  them  to  our  i  «  d  dei  tructi  >n.     Chi  i 
your  duty  is  perfectly  clei  c — you  must  make  honest  ■ 
without  evil  questioning.— 

1  'Conventicle,'  —  from  'co  ;-'r — * 

term  of  reproach  given  to  meetings  of  (  oris 

I  i  unite  with  the  i  a  more 

private  manner,  as  our  Lord  and 
Ac.  i.  13,  14.— (Kd.) 

-  Narrated,  ma  le  Liown  their  treasonable  d 


36S 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


receiver,  a  nourlslier,  a  countenancer,  and  a  har- 
bourer  of  others  of  them,  yea,  of  outlandish  Dia- 
bolonians;  yea,  of  them  that  came  from  far,  on 
purpose  to  cut  off  and  destroy  our  Mansoul ;  this 
must  not  he  borne. 

,  .  Then  said   Evil-questioninff,  I  see 

II:s  conclusion.      .  .,  ...    1         T  ,.     - 

how  the  game  will  go ;  I  must  die  for 
my  name,  and  for  my  charity.  And  so  he  held 
his  peace. 

Then  they  called  the  outlandish  Doubters  to  the 
bar ;  and  the  first  of  them  that  Avas  arraigned  was 
the  Election-doubter;  so  his  indictment  was  read, 
The  Election-     and  because  he  was  an  outlandish  man, 

doubter  tried.      the  SUDstance  0f  it  >vas  told  Jlim  by  an 

interpreter ;  to  wit,  That  he  was  there  charged  with 
being  an  enemy  of  Emmanuel  the  Prince,  a  hater 
of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  and  an  opposer  of  her  most 
wholesome  doctrine.1 

Then  the  judge  asked  him  if  he  would  plead  ? 

_.    ,         But  he  said  only  this,  That  he  con- 

ilisplea.         „  .        .  ,     ^  _,,        . 

lessed  that  he  was  an  Election- 
-  doubter,  and  that  that  was  the  religion  that  he 
had  ever  been  brought  up  in.  And  said,  moreover, 
If  I  must  die  for  my  religion,  I  trow,  I  shall  die 
a  martyr,2  and  so  I  care  the  less. 

Judge.  Then  it  was  replied,  To  question  election, 
is  to  overthrow  a  great  doctrine  of  the 

The  Court.  .  .         °  .      . 

gospel ;  to  wit,  the  omniscience,  and 
power,  and  will  of  God ;  to  take  away  the  liberty 
of  God  with  his  creature ;  to  stumble  the  faith  of 
the  town  of  Mansoul;  and  to  make  salvation  to 
depend  upon  works,  and  not  upon  grace.  It  also 
belied  the  word,  and  disquieted  the  minds  of  the 
men  of  Mansoul ;  therefore,  by  the  best  of  laws  he 
must  die. 

Then  was  the  Vocation-doubter  called,  and  set 
The  Vocation-  to  the  bar ;  and  his  indictment  for  sub- 
doubter  tried.  stance  y^g  the  same  with  the  other, 
only  he  was  particularly  charged  with  denying  the 
calling  of  Mansoul. 

he  judge  asked  him  also  what  he  had  to  say 
for  himself? 

So  he  replied  that  he  never  believed  that  there 
was  any  such  thing  as  a  distinct  and  powerful  call 
of  God  to  Mansoul ;  otherwise  than  by  the  general 
voice  of  the  Word ;  nor  by  that  neither,  otherwise 
than  as  it  exhorted  them  to  forbear  evil,  and  to 


1  Though  ignorant  persons  cavil  and  object,  we  are  bold  to 
affirm,  that  election  by  free  grace  is  consonant  to  the  whole 
icuor  of  Scripture ;  a  comfortable  doctrine,  exciting  to  obedi- 
ence. 'We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us.'  1  Jn.  iv.  19. 
— (Mason.) 

-  '  A  martyr '  is  a  witness,  generally  applied  among  Chris- 
tians to  those  who  seal  with  their  blood  a  testimony  of  love  to 
Christ,  and  are  put  to  death  for  their  attachment  to  the  gos- 
pel ;  not  like  the  Jesuits  under  Elizabeth,  they  came  to  poison 
or  destroy  her,  and  to  overturn  the  Government,  and  were  put 
to  death  as  traitors.  But  if  auy  Christian  was  put  to  death 
for  doubting  the  doctrine  of  election,  he  would  be  entitled  to 
the  crown  of  martyrdom, — (Ed.) 


do  that  which  is  good,  and  in  so  doing,  a  promise 
of  happiness  is  annexed. 

Then  said  the  Judge,  Thou  art  a  Diabolonian ; 
and  hast  denied  a  great  part  of  one  of  the  most 
experimental  truths  of  the  Prince  of  the  town  of 
Mansoul ;  for  he  has  called,  and  she  has  heard  a 
most  distinct  and  powerful  call  of  her  Emmanuel, 
by  which  she  has  been  quickened,  awakened, 
and  possessed  with  heavenly  grace  to  desire  to 
have  communion  with  her  Prince,  to  serve  him, 
and  do  his  will,  and  to  look  for  her  happiness 
merely  of  his  good  pleasure.4  And  for  thine  ab- 
horrence of  this  good  doctrine,  thou  must  die  the 
death. 

Then  the  Grace-doubter  was  called,  and  his  in- 
dictment was  read;  and  he  replied  The  Grace-doubt- 
thereto,  That  though  he  was  of  the  er  tried- 
land  of  Doubting,  his  father  was  the  offspring  of 
a  Pharisee,  and  lived  in  good  fashion  among  his 
neighbours,  and  that  he  taught  him  to  believe, 
and  believe  it  I  do,  and  will,  that  Mansoul  shall 
never  be  saved  freely  by  grace. 

Then  said  the  Judge,  Why,  the  law  of  the 
Prince  is  plain:  1.  Negatively,  Not  of  works. 
2.  Positively,  By  grace  you  are  saved.  Eo.  ili.  Ep.  ii. 
And  thy  religion  settleth  in  and  upon  the  works 
of  the  flesh  ;  for  the  works  of  the  law  are  the  works 
of  the  flesh.  Besides,  in  saying  as  thou  hast  done, 
thou  hast  robbed  God  of  his  glory,  and  given  it  to 
a  sinfid  man ;  thou  hast  robbed  Christ  of  the 
necessity  of  his  undertaking,  and  the  sufficiency 
thereof,  and  hast  given  both  these  to  the  works  of 
the  flesh.  Thou  hast  despised  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  hast  magnified  the  will  of  the 
flesh,  and  of  the  legal  mind.  Thou  art  a  Dia- 
bolonian, the  son  of  a  Diabolonian ;  and  for  thy 
Diabolonian  principles  thou  must  die. 

The  court  then  having  proceeded  thus  far  with 
them,  sent  out  the  jury,  who  forthwith  brought 
them  in  guilty  of  death.  Then  stood  up  the  Re- 
corder, and  addressed  himself  to  the  prisoners: 
You,  the  prisoners  at  the  bar,  you  Their  sentence 
have  been  here  indicted,  and  proved  todie- 
guilty  of  high  crimes  against  Emmanuel  our  Prince, 
and  against  the  welfare  of  the  famous  town  of  Man- 
soul ;  crimes  for  which  you  must  be  put  to  death  ; 
and  die  ye  accordingly.5 


3  Those  who  deny  election  deny,  though  perhaps  unwittingly, 
the  omniscience  and  sovereignty  of  God ;  and  unavoidably  as- 
sert, sometimes  without  perceiving  it,  that  salvation  is  not  of 
grace  but  of  works. — (Burder.) 

4  The  great  mass  of  mankind  in  Christendom,  because  they 
were  baptized  in  infancy,  call  themselves  Christians,  and  find 
shelter  under  these  pleas  from  the  necessity  of  persoual  prayer- 
ful investigation.  They  never  knew  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth, 
nor  the  cry,  'What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?'  or,  'Lord,  save, 
1  perish !'  It  is  a  most  extensive  and  most  fatal  error,  in 
which  myriads  of  souls  have  met  their  doom. — (Ed.) 

_  °  Thus  we  are  to  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  every  beset- 
ting sin,  He.  xii.  12— whatsoever  does  not  tend  to  promote 


THE  HOLY  AVAR. 


3C9 


So  they  were  sentenced  to  the  death  of  the  cross ; 

She  places   or  ^°  place  assigned  them  for  execution 

their  death  as-    was  that  where  Diaholus  drew  up  his 

sigued.  ,  ,_  ,  A      , 

last  army  against  Mansoul ;  save  only 

that  old  Evil-questioning  was  hanged  at  the  top  of 
Bad-street,  just  over  against  his  own  door.1 

[Chapter  XVIII.] 

[Contents  : — More  Diaboloniaus  tried  and  condemned — The 
Work  concludes  with  an  admirable  speech  of  Emmanuel, 
reciting  his  gracious  nets,  and  informing  his  people  of 
his  intention  to  rebuild  the  town  with  the  greatest  splen- 
dour, and  recommending  a  suitable  conduct  in  the  mean- 
time.] 

When  the  town  of  Mansoul  had  thus  far  rid 
themselves  of  their  enemies,  and  of  the  trouhlers 
of  their  peace ;  in  the  next  place,  a  strict  com- 
mandment was  given  out,  that  yet  my  Lord  Will- 
he-will  should,  with  Diligence,  his  man,  search  for, 
and  do  his  hest  to  apprehend  what  town-Diabolon- 
ians  were  yet  left  alive  in  Mansoul.  The  names  of 
several  of  them  were — Mr.  Fooling,  Mr.  Let-good- 
slip,  Mr.  Slavishfear,  Mr.  Xolove,  Mr.  Mistrust, 
Mr.  Flesh,  and  Mr.  Sloth.  It  was  also  commanded 
that  he  should  apprehend  Mr.  Evil- 
granted  out  a-  questioning's  children  that  he  left  be- 
5reuSto!'CE^:  llill(1  ^m,  and  that  they  should  demol- 
w'th i0th"-'  1S^  *"s  nouse*  ^ne  children  that  he 
left  behind  were  these — Mr.  Doubt, 
and  he  was  his  eldest  son ;  the  next  to  him  was 
Legal-life,  Unbelief,  Wrong -thoughts -of- Christ, 
Clip-promise,  Carnal-sense,  Live-by-feeling,  Self- 
love.  All  these  he  had  by  one  wife,  and  her  name 
was  Nohope.  She  was  the  kinswoman  of  old  In- 
credulity ;  for  he  was  her  uncle,  and,  when  her 
father,  old  Dark,  was  dead,  he  took  her,  and 
brought  her  up  ;  and,  when  she  was  marriageable, 
he  gave  her  to  this  old  Evil-questioning  to  wife. 

Now,  the  Lord  Will-be-will  did  put  into  execu- 
wm-be-wiiiputs  tion  llis  commission,  with  great  Dili- 
lus  warrant  in-   gence,  his  man.     lie  took  Fooling  in 
the   streets,   and   hanged  him  up   in 
Want-wit-alley,  over  against  his  own  house.     This 
Fooling  was  he  that  would  have  had 
the  town  of  Mansoul  deliver  up  Cap- 
tain Credence  into  the  hands  of  Diabolus,  provided 
that  then  he  would  have  withdrawn  his  force  out 
Lct-good-slip   of  the  town.     He  also  took  Mr.  Let- 
taken,        good-slip  one  day  as  he  was  busy  in 
the  market,  and  executed  him  according  to  law. 


the  glory  of  God,  and  our  progress  in  the  Divine  life  of  faith. 
—  (Mason.) 

1  The  reader  must  keep  in  mind  that  the  sentence  and  exe- 
cution is  not  against  the  persons  who  held  these  errors,  but 
allegoric-ally  the  errors  themselves  must  be  eradicated  or  de- 
stroyed from  the  soul  of  the  believer. — (En.) 

2  Great  is  the  advantage  of  meditation ;  a  practice,  alas ! 
in  which  Christians  in  general  are  too  backward.  Much  is 
lost  by  letting  the  Word  slip,  which  ought  to  be  laid  up  and 

VOL.  III. 


Now  there  was  an  honest  poor  man  in  Mansoul, 
and  his  name  was  Mr.  Meditation,  one  of  no  great 
account  in  the  days  of  apostacy,  but  now  of  repute 
with  the  best  of  the  town.  This  man  therefore 
they  were  willing  to  prefer;  now  Mr.  Let-good-.slm 
had  a  great  deal  of  wealth  heretofore  in  Mansoul, 
and  at  Emmanuel's  coming  it  was  sequestered  to 
the  use  of  the  Prince,  this  therefore  was  now  given 
to  Mr.  Meditation,  to  improve  for  the  common  good, 
and  after  him  to  his  son  Mr.  Thinkwcll  ;  tlii3 
Thinkwcll  he  had  by  Mrs.  Fiety  his  wife,  and  she 
was  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Recorder.3 

After  this  my  Lord  apprehended  Clip-promise, 
now  because  he  was  a  notorious  villain,  cUp-promiae 
for  by  his  doings  much  of  the  King's  Ulkt"- 
coin  was  abused,  therefore  he  was  made  a  public 
example,  lie  was  arraigned  and  judged  to  be 
first  set  in  the  pillory,  then  to  be  whipt  by  all  the 
children  and  servants  in  Mansoul,  and  then  to  be 
hanged  till  he  was  dead.  Some  may  wonder  at 
the  severity  of  this  man's  punishment,  but  those 
that  are  honest  traders  in  Mansoul,  are  sensible  of 
the  great  abuse  that  one  clipper  of  promises  in 
little  time  may  do  to  the  town  of  Mansoul.  And 
truly  my  judgment  is,  that  all  those  of  his  name 
and  life  should  be  served  even  as  he.3 

He  also  apprehended  Carnal-sense,  and  put  him 
in  hold,  but  how  it  came  about  I  can-  carnaiseuse 
not  tell,  but  he  brake  prison  and  made  takeu- 
his  escape.  Yea,  and  the  bold  villain  will  not  yet 
quit  the  town,  but  lurks  in  the  Diabolonian  dens  a 
days,  and  haunts  like  a  ghost  honest  men's  houses 
a  nights.  Wherefore  there  was  a  proclamation  set 
up  in  the  market-place  in  Mansoul,  signifying  that 
whosoever  should  discover  Carnal-sense,  and  ap- 
prehend him  and  slay  him,  should  be  admitted 
daily  to  the  Prince's  table,  and  should  be  made 
keeper  of  the  treasure  of  Mansoul.  Many  there- 
fore did  bend  themselves  to  do  this  thing,  but  take 
him  and  slay  him  they  could  not,  though  often  he 
was  discovered.4 

But  my   Lord  took  Mr.  Wrong -thoughts -of - 
Christ,  and  put  him  in  prison,  and   Wrong-thciishU- 
he   died   there,  though  it  was  long   ot-Chxatiaken. 
first,  for  he  died  of  a  lingering  consumption. 

Selflove  was  also  taken  and  committed  to  cus- 
tody, but  there  were  many  that  were 

ii.    3         i-       •      tit  ,  ,•     •     i         Selflove  taken. 

allied  to  him  in  Mansoul,  so  his  judg- 
ment was  deferred,  but  at  last  Mr.   Self-denial 
stood  up  and  said,  if  such  villains  as  these  may  be 


pondered  in  the  heart.     This  is  the  way  to  become  spiritually 
rich. — (Burder.) 

3  The  cruelty  of  these  punishments  breathes  the  spirit  of  the 
times  in  which  our  author  lived.     Every  painful  Ceding,  how- 
ever, is  dissipated  by  the  rctlection  that  it  is  an  e 
representing  how  these  Diabolonian  sinful  thoughts  ought  to 
be  exterminated.     To  clip  the  promises  is  certainly  U 
crime  as  clipping  the  current  coin. — (Ed.) 

4  How  closely  does  carnality  cleave  to  U3  throughout   our 

47 


370 


THE   HOLY   WAR. 


winked  at  in  Mansoul,  I  will  lay  down  my  com- 
mission. He  also  took  him  from  the  crowd,  and 
had  him  among  his  soldiers,  and  there  he  was 
brained.  But  some  in  Mansoul  muttered  at  it, 
though  none  durst  speak  plainly,  because  Em- 
manuel was  in  town.  But  this  brave  act  of  Cap- 
tain Self-denial  came  to  the  Prince's  ears,  so  he 


s  j.    sent  for  him,  and  made  him  a  Lord 
denial  made  a  in  Mansoul.1     My  Lord  Will-be-will 
also  obtained  <2*reat  commendations  of 


Lord. 


Emmanuel,  for  wbat  he  had  done  for  the  town  of 
Mansoul. 

Then  my  Lord  Self-denial  took  courage,  and  set 
to  pursuing  of  the  Diabolonians  with  my  Lord 
Live-by-feeling  Will-be-will ;  and  they  took  Live-by- 
taken,  feeling,  and  they  took  Legal-life,  and 
put  them  in  hold  till  they  died.  But  Mr.  Unbe- 
lief was  a  nimble  jack,  him  they  could  never  lay 
hold  of,  though  they  attempted  to  do  it  often.  He 
therefore,  and  some  few  more  of  the  subtilest  of 
the  Diabolonian  tribe,  did  yet  remain  in  Mansoul, 
to  the  time  that  Mansoul  left  off  to  dwell  any 
longer  in  the  kingdom  of  Universe.  But  they 
kept  them  to  their  dens  and  holes;  if  one  of  them 
did  appear  or  happen  to  be  seen  in  any  of  the 
streets  of  the  town  of  Mansoul,  the  whole  town 
would  be  up  in  arms  after  them,  yea  the  very 
children  in  Mansoul  would  cry  out  after  them  as 
after  a  thief,  and  would  wish  that  they  might  stone 
them  to  death  with  stones.  And  now  did  Mansoul 
The  peace  of  arrive  to  some  good  degree  of  peace 
mmdsJUl'  her  and  quiet,  her  Prince  also  did  abide 
trade.  within  her  borders,  her  Captains  also, 

and  her  soldiers  did  their  duties,  and  Mansoul 
minded  her  trade  that  she  had  with  the  country 
that  was  afar  off;  also  she  was  busy  in  her  manu- 
facture.2  Is.  xxiiii.  17.    Phi.  iii.  20.    Tr.  xxxi. 

When,  the  town  of  Mansoul  had  thus  far  rid 
themselves  of  so  many  of  their  enemies,  and  the 
troublers  of  their  peace ;  the  Prince  sent  to  them, 
and  appointed  a  day  wherein  he  would  at  the 
market-place  meet  the  whole  people,  and  there 
give  them  in  charge  concerning  some  further  mat- 
ters, that  if  observed  would  tend  to  their  further 
safety  and  comfort,  and  to  the  condemnation  and 
destruction  of  their  home-bred  Diabolonians.  So 
the  day  appointed  was  come,  and  the  townsmen 
met  together;  Emmanuel  also  came  down  in  his 


pilgrimage !  Even  the  apostle  complained  of  this  foe — •  I  am 
carnal.'  The  grave  is  the  only  secure  prison  in  which  he  can 
be  for  ever  shut  up.  He  will  never  break  prison  from  thence. 
-(Ed.) 

1  Self-love  and  self-denial  can  no  more  live  together  in  the 
soul,  than  can  the  service  of  God  and  mammon.  Reader,  if  a 
thought  of  self-love  interferes  with  love  to  Christ,  drag  it  to 
self-denial,  and  it  will  be  brained  without  the  formality  of  a 
trial,  and  God  will  approve  the  execution. — (En.) 

2  Self-denial  must  be  opposed  to  self-love.  'If,  through  the 
Spirit,  we  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  we  shall  live;'  and 
shall  also  happily  experience  that  '  to  be  spiritually-minded  is 


chariot,  and  all  his  captains  in  their  state  attend- 
ing of  him  on  the  right  hand,  and  on  the  left. 
Then  was  an  0  yes  made  for  silence,  and  after 
some  mutual  carriages  of  love,  the  Prince  began, 
and  thus  proceeded — 

You  my  Mansoul,  and  the  beloved  of  mine  heart, 
many  and  great  are  the  privileges  that  Emmanuel.s 
I  have  bestowed  upon  you;  I  have  speech  to 
singled  you  out  from  others,  and  have 
chosen  you  to  myself,  not  for  your  worthiness,  but 
for  mine  own  sake.  I  have  also  redeemed  you, 
not  only  from  the  dread  of  my  Father's  law,  but 
from  the  hand  of  Diabolus.  This  I  have  done 
because  I  loved  you,  and  because  I  have  set  my 
heart  upon  you  to  do  you  good.  I  have  also, 
that  all  things  that  might  hinder  thy  way  to  the 
pleasures  of  paradise  might  be  taken  out  of  the 
way,  laid  down  for  thee,  for  thy  soul,  a  plenary 
satisfaction,  and  have  bought  thee  to  myself;  a 
price  not  of  corruptible  things  as  of  silver  and  gold, 
but  a  price  of  blood,  mine  own  blood,  which  I  have 
freely  spilt  upon  the  ground  to  make  thee  mine. 
So  I  have  reconciled  thee,  0  my  Mansoul,  to  my 
Father,  and  intrusted  thee  in  the  mansion-houses 
that  are  with  my  Father  in  the  royal  city  where 
things  are,  0  my  Mansoul,  that  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive. a 
Besides,  0  my  Mansoul,  thou  seest  what  I  have 
done,  and  how  I  have  taken  thee  out  of  the  hands 
of  thine  enemies  ;  unto  whom  thou  hast  deeply  re- 
volted from  my  Father,  and  by  whom  thou  wast 
content  to  be  possessed,  and  also  to  be  destroyed. 
I  came  to  thee  first  by  my  law,  then  by  my  gospel 
to  awaken  thee,  and  show  thee  my  glory.  And 
thou  knowest  what  thou  wast,  what  thou  saidst, 
what  thou  didst,  and  how  many  times  thou  re- 
belledst  against  my  Father  and  me;  yet  I  left  thee 
not ;  as  thou  seest  this  day,  but  came  to  thee,  have 
borne  thy  manners,  have  waited  upon  thee  and  after 
all  accepted  of  thee,  even  of  my  mere  grace  and 
favour;  and  would  not  suffer  thee  to  be  lost,  as 
thou  most  willingly  wouldst  have  been.  I  also 
compassed  thee  about,  and  afflicted  thee  on  every 
side,  that  I  might  make  thee  weary  of  thy  ways, 
and  bring  down  thy  heart  with  molestation  to  a 
willingness  to  close  with  thy  good  and  happiness. 
And  when  I  had  gotten  a  complete  conquest  over 
thee,  I  turned  it  to  thy  advantage.4 

life  and  peace.'     But,  after  all,  that  villain  Unbelief,  the  wor,  t 
of  all  the  gang,  still  lurks  secretly  in  the  soid,  yet  is  uniformly 
opposed  whenever  he  dares  to  appear. — (Border.) 
3  'There  I  shall  bathe  my  weary  soul 
In  seas  of  heavenly  rest, 
And  not  a  wave  of  trouble  roll 

Across  my  peaceful  breast.' — [Watts.) 
'  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly!' — (Ed.) 

4  Thus  completely  is  boasting  excluded.  *By  grace  are  ye 
saved,  through  faith ;  and  that  "not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift 
of  God.'  Ep.^ii.  8.— (Ed.) 


THE  HOLY   WAK. 


171 


TIiou  seest  also  what  a  company  of  my  Father's 
host  I  have  lodged  within  thy  horders,  captains 
and  rulers,  soldiers  and  men  of  war,  engines  and 
excellent  devices  to  suhduo  and  bring  down  thy 
foes  ;  thou  knowest  my  meaning,  0  Mnnsoul.  And 
they  are  my  servants,  and  thine  too,  Man  soul. 
Yea,  my  design  of  possessing  of  thee  with  them, 
and  the  natural  tendency  of  each  of  them  is  to 
defend,  purge,  strengthen,  and  sweeten  thee  for 
myself,  0  Mansoul,  and  to  make  thee  meet  for  my 
Father's  presence,  Messing,  and  glory;  for  thou, 
my  Mansoul,  art  created  to  he  prepared  unto  these. 

Thou  seest  moreover,  my  Mansoul,  how  I  have 
passed  hy  thy  backsliding?,  and  have  healed  thee. 
Indeed  I  was  angry  with  thee,  hut  I  have  turned 
mine  anger  away  from  thee,  hecause  I  loved  thee 
still,  and  mine  anger  and  mine  indignation  is  ceased 
in  the  destruction  of  thine  enemies,  0  Mansoul. 
Nor  did  thy  goodness  fetch  me  again  unto  thee, 
after  that  I  for  thy  transgressions  have  hid  my 
face,  and  withdrawn  my  presence  from  thee.  The 
way  of  backsliding  was  thine,  but  the  way  and 
means  of  thy  recovery  was  mine.  I  invented  the 
means  of  thy  return  ;  it  was  I  that  made  an  hedge 
and  a  wall,  when  thou  wast  beginning  to  turn  to 
things  in  which  I  delighted  not.  It  was  I  that 
made  thy  sweet,  bitter;  thy  day,  night;  thy  smooth 
ways  thorny;  and  that  also  confounded  all  that 
sought  thy  destruction.  It  was  I  that  set  Mr. 
Godly-fear  to  work  in  Mansoul.  It  was  I  that 
stirred  up  thy  conscience  and  understanding,  thy 
will  and  thy  affections,  after  thy  great  and  woful 
decay.  It  was  I  that  put  life  into  thee,  0  Man- 
soul, to  seek  me,  that  thou  mightest  find  me,  and 
in  thy  finding,  find  thine  own  health,  happiness, 
and  salvation.  It  was  I  that  fetched  the  second 
time  the  Diabolonians  out  of  Mansoul ;  and  it  was 
I  that  overcame  them,  and  that  destroyed  them 
before  thy  face. 

And  now,  my  Mansoul,  I  am  returned  to  thee 
in  peace,  and  thy  transgressions  against  me,  are 
as  if  they  had  not  been.  Nor  shall  it  be  with  thee 
as  in  former  days,  but  I  will  do  better  for  thee 
than  at  thy  beginning.  For  yet  a  little  while,  0 
my  Mansoul,  even  after  a  few  more  times  are  gone 
over  thy  head,  I  will,  but  be  not  thou  troubled  at 
what  1  say,  I  will  take  down  this  famous  town  of 
Mansoul,  stick  and  stone  to  the  ground.  icu.  *xix.  so. 
And  will  carry  the  stones  thereof,  and  the  timber 
thereof,  and  the  walls  thereof,  and  the  dust  thereof, 
and  the  inhabitants  thereof,  into  mine  own  country, 
even  into  the  kingdom  of  my  Father;  and  will 
there  set  it  up  in  such  strength  and  glory,  as  it 
never  did  see  in  the  kingdom  where  now  it  is 


1  For  a  most  admirable  treatise  on  the  resurrection  of  the 
body,  and  its  re-union  with  the  soul  in  bliss  unspeakable  and 
eternal,  see  vol.  ii.  p.  S3. — (Ed.) 


placed.1  I  will  even  there  set  it  up  for  my  Father's 
habitation,  for,  for  that  purpose  it  was  at  first 
erected  in  the  kingdom  of  universe;  and  there  will 
I  make  it  a  spectacle  of  wonder,  a  monument  of 
mercy,  and  the  admirer  of  its  own  mercy.  There 
shall  the  natives  of  Mansoul  see  all  that  of  which 
they  have  seen  nothing  here ;  there  shall  they  be 
equal  to  those  unto  whom  they  have  been  inferior 
here.  And  there  shall  thou,  0  my  Mansoul,  have 
such  communion  with  me,  with  my  Father,  and 
with  your  Lord  Secretary,  as  is  not  possible  here 
to  be  enjoyed,  nor  ever  could  be,  shouldest  thou 
live  in  universe  the  space  of  a  thousand  years.2 

And  there,  0  my  Mansoul,  thou  shalt  be  afraid 
of  murderers  no  more;  of  Diabolonians,  and  their 
threats  no  more.  There,  there  shall  be  no  more 
plots,  nor  contrivances,  nor  designs  against  thee, 
0  my  Mansoul.  There  thou  shalt  no  more  hear 
the  evil  tidings,  or  the  noise  of  the  Diabolonian 
drum.  There  thou  shalt  not  see  the  Diabolonian 
Standard-bearers,  nor  yet  behold  Diabolus  his 
standard.  No  Diabolonian  mount  shall  be  cast  up 
against  thee  there,  nor  shall  there  the  Diabolonian 
standard  be  set  up  to  make  thee  afraid.  There 
thou  shalt  not  need  captains,  engines,  soldiers,  and 
men  of  war.  There  thou  shalt  meet  with  no  sor- 
row, nor  grief,  nor  shall  it  be  possible  that  any 
Diabolonian  should  again,  for  ever,  be  able  to  creep 
into  thy  skirts,  burrow  in  thy  walls,  or  be  seen 
again  within  thy  borders  all  the  days  of  eternity. 
Life  shall  there  last  longer,  than  here  you  are  able 
to  desire  it  should,  and  yet  it  shall  always  be  sweet 
and  new,  nor  shall  any  impediment  attend  it  for 
ever. 

There,  0  Mansoul,  thou  shalt  meet  with  many 
of  those  that  have  been  like  thee,  and  that  have 
been  partakers  of  thy  sorrows  ;  even  such  as  1  have 
chosen,  and  redeemed  and  set  apart  as  thou  for 
my  Father's  court  and  city  royal.  All  they  will 
be  glad  in  thee,  and  thou,  when  thou  seest  them, 
shall  be  glad  in  thine  heart. 

There  are  things,  0  Mansoul,  even  things  of  thy 
Father's  providing  and  mine,  that  never  were  seen 
since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  they  are 
laid  up  with  my  Father,  and  sealed  up  among  his 
treasures  for  thee,  till  thou  shalt  come  thither  to 
enjoy  them.  I  told  you  before  that  I  would  re- 
move my  Mansoul,  and  set  it  up  elsewhere,  and 
where  I  will  set  it,  there  are  those  that  love  thee, 
and  those  that  rejoice  in  thee  now,  but  how  much 
more  when  they  shall  see  thee  exalted  to  honour. 
My  Father  will  then  send  them  for  you  to  fetch 
you  ;  and  their  bosoms  are  chariots  to  put  you  in. 
And  you,  0  my  Mansoul,  shall  ride  upon  tlie  wings 

2  'Blessings  abound  where'er  he  reigns, 
The  prisoner  leaps  to  lose  his  chaius, 
The  weary  lind  eternal  rest, 
And  all  the  sons  of  want  are  blest.' — (W'atts.) 


372 


THE   HOLY  WAR. 


of  the  wind.  They  will  come  to  convey,  conduct, 
and  bring  you  to  that,  when  your  eyes  see  more, 
that  will  be  your  desired  haven.   Ps.  toiii.  17. 

And  thus,  0  my  Mansoul,  I  have  showed  unto 
thee  what  shall  be  done  to  thee  hereafter,  if  thou 
canst  hear,  if  thou  canst  understand ;  and  now  I 
will  tell  thee  what  at  present  must  be  thy  duty  and 
practice,  until  I  shall  come  and  fetch  thee  to  my- 
self, according  as  is  related  in  the  Scriptures  of 
truth. 

First,  I  charge  thee  that  thou  dost  hereafter 
keep  more  white  and  clean  the  liveries  which  I 
gave  thee  before  my  last  withdrawing  from  thee. 
Do  it,  I  say,  for  this  will  be  thy  wisdom.  They 
are  in  themselves  fine  linen,  but  thou  must  keep 
them  white  and  clean.1  This  will  be  your  wisdom, 
your  honour,  and  will  be  greatly  for  my  glory. 
When  your  garments  are  white,  the  world  will 
count  you  mine.  Also  when  your  garments  are 
white,  then  I  am  delighted  in  your  ways ;  for  then 
your  goings  to  and  fro  will  be  like  a  flash  of  light- 
ning, that  those  that  are  present  must  take  notice 
of,  also  their  eyes  will  be  made  to  dazzle  thereat. 
Deck  thyself  therefore  according  to  my  bidding, 
and  make  to  thyself  by  my  law  straight  steps  for 
thy  feet,  so  shall  thy  King  greatly  desire  thy 
beauty,  for  he  is  thy  Lord,  and  worship  thou  him.2 
Now  that  thou  mayest  keep  them  as  I  bid  thee, 
I  have,  as  I  before  did  tell  thee,  provided  for  thee 
an  open  fountain  to  wash  thy  garments  in.  Look 
therefore  that  thou  wash  often  in  my  fountain,  and 
go  not  in  defiled  garments ;  for  as  it  is  to  my  dis- 
honour and  my  disgrace,  so  it  will  be  to  thy  dis- 
comfort, when  you  shall  walk  in  filthy  garments. 
Ze.  iiL  3,  4.  Let  not  therefore  my  garments,  your 
garments,  the  garments  that  I  gave  thee,  be  defiled 
or  spotted  by  the  flesh.  Jude  23.  Keep  thy  garments 
always  white,  and  let  thy  head  lack  no  ointment. 
My  Mansoul,  I  have  oft-times  delivered  thee 
from  the  designs,  plots,  attempts,  and  conspiracies 
of  Diabolus,  and  for  all  this  I  ask  thee  nothing, 
"but  that  thou  render  not  to  me  evil  for  my  good, 
but  that  thou  bear  in  mind  my  love,  and  the  con- 
tinuation of  my  kindness  to  my  beloved  Mansoul, 
so  as  to  provoke  thee  to  walk,  in  thy  measure, 
according  to  the  benefit  bestowed  on  thee.  Of  old 
the  sacrifices  were  bound  with  cords  to  the  horns 
of  the  golden  altar.  Consider  what  is  said  to  thee, 
0  my  blessed  Mansoul. 

0  my  Mansoul,  I  have  lived,  I  have  died,  I  live, 
and  will  die  no  more  for  thee.     1  live  that  thou 


mayest  not  die.  Because  I  live  thou  shalt  live 
also.  I  reconciled  thee  to  my  Father  by  the  blood 
of  my  cross,  and  being  reconciled  thou  shalt  live 
through  me.  I  will  pray  for  thee,  I  will  fight  for 
thee,  I  will  yet  do  thee  good. 

Nothing  can  hurt  thee  but  sin;  nothing  can 
grieve  me  but  sin ;  nothing  can  make  thee  base 
before  thy  foes  but  sin;  Take  heed  of  sin,  my 
Mansoul.3 

And  dost  thou  know  why  I  at  first,  and  do  still 
suffer  Diabolonians  to  dwell  in  thy  walls,  0  Man- 
soul ?  It  is  to  keep  thee  wakening,  to  try  thy  love, 
to  make  thee  watchful,  and  to  cause  thee  yet  to 
prize  my  noble  captains,  their  soldiers,  and  my 
mercy. 

It  is  also  that  yet  thou  mayest  be  made  to  re- 
member what  a  deplorable  condition  thou  once  wast 
in.  I  mean  when,  not  some,  but  all  did  dwell,  not 
in  thy  walls,  but  in  thy  castle,  and  in  thy  strong 
hold,  0  Mansoul! 

0  my  Mansoul,  should  I  slay  all  them  within, 
many  there  be  without  that  would  bring  thee  into 
bondage ;  for  were  all  those  within  cut  off,  those 
without  would  find  thee  sleeping,  and  then  as  in  a 
moment  they  would  swallow  up  my  Mansoul.  I 
therefore  let  them  in  thee,  not  to  do  thee  hurt,  the 
which  they  yet  will,  if  thou  hearken  to  them,  and 
serve  them;  but  to  do  thee  good,  the  which  they 
must,  if  thou  watch  and  fight  against  them.  Know 
therefore  that  whatever  they  shall  tempt  thee  to, 
my  design  is  that  they  should  drive  thee,  not 
further  off,  but  nearer  to  my  Father,  to  learn  thee 
war,  to  make  petitioning  desirable  to  thee,  and  to 
make  thee  little  in  thine  own  eyes.  Hearken 
diligently  to  this,  my  Mansoul. 

Show  me  then  thy  love  my  Mansoul,  and  let  not 
those  that  are  within  thy  Avails,  take  thy  affections 
off  from  him  that  hath  redeemed  thy  soul.  Yea, 
let  the  sight  of  a  Diabolonian  heighten  thy  love  to 
me.  I  came  once,  and  twice,  and  thrice  to  save 
thee  from  the  poison  of  those  arrows  that  would 
have  wrought  thy  death;  stand  for  me,  thy  friend, 
my  Mansoul,  against  the  Diabolonians,  and  I  will 
stand  for  thee  before  my  Father,  and  all  his  court. 
Love  me  against  temptation,  and  I  will  love  thee 
notwithstanding  thine  infirmities. 

0  my  Mansoul,  remember  what  my  captains, 
my  soldiers,  and  mine  engines  have  done  for  thee. 
They  have  fought  for  thee,  they  have  suffered  by 
thee,  they  have  born  much  at  thy  hands  to  do  thee 


1  Holiness  of  heart  and  life  are  indispensable  of  true  disciple- 
ship  to  the  holy  Jesus ;  not  to  justify  us,  but  to  evidence  our 
election  to  eternal  life.  '  As  he  which  hath  called  you  is  holy, 
so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation.'  1  Pe.  i.  15.  A 
holy  walk  preserves  communion  with  our  Lord,  who  is  our 
righteousness  and  strength. — (Mason.) 

2  How  blessed  are  those  who  are  kept  unspotted  from  the 
world  1  who  live  in  the  laud  of  Beuluh,  waiting  to  be  trans- 


lated to  the  celestial  city ;  and  who,  if  defiled,  are  enabled  to 
apply  to  the  fountain  opened,  and  wash  away  their  stains. 
'Blessed  are  the  people  that  are  in  such  a  case.' — (Ed.) 

3  Sin  hurled  the  angels  out  of  heaven ;  sin  deprived  man  of 
paradise  and  the  favour  of  God  ;  sin  crucified  the  Lord  of  life 
and  glory ;  sin  will  confine  myriads  of  devils  and  men  in  the 
bottomless  pit  of  misery  for  ever.  May  we  hate  it  with  a 
perfect  hatred ;  aud  the  grace  of  Jesus  eradicate  the  love,  and 
destroy  the  dominion  of  it,  iii  our  hearts. — (Mason.) 


THE  HOLY   WAR. 


373 


JO" 


good,  0  Mansoul.  Hadst  thou  not  had  them  to 
help  thee,  Diabolus  had  certainly  made  a  hand  of 
thee.1  Nourish  them,  therefore,  my  Mansoul.  When 
thou  dost  well,  they  will  be  well ;  when  thou  dost 
ill,  they  will  be  ill,  and  sick,  and  weak.  Make 
not  my  captains  sick,  0  Mansoul,  for  if  they 
be  sick,  thou  canst  not  be  well ;  if  they  bo 
weak,  thou  canst  not  be  strong  ;  if  they  be  faint, 
thou  canst  not  be  stout  and  valiant  for  thy  King, 
0  Mansoul.  Nor  must  thou  think  always  to  live 
by  sense,  thou  must  live  upon  my  Word.  Thou 
must  believe,  0  my  Mansoul,  when  I  am  from  thee, 

1  'To  make  a  hand  on,'  to  waste,  spoil,  or  destroy. —  Ilalli- 
well.— (Ed.) 

-  In  this  truly  evangelical  speech,  the  Lord  Jesns  is  repre- 
sented as  recapitulating  his  gracious  dealings  with  the  souls  of 
his  people.  Salvation  is  uniformly  ascribed  to  the  free  mercy 
of  the  Father,  and  the  precious  blood  of  the  Son.  Every 
gracious  soul  will  cordially  say,  '  Not  unto  me,  not  unto  me, 
0  Lord,  but  to  thy  name  be  all  the  glory.'     Emmanuel  then 


that  yet  I  love  thee,  and  bear  thee  upon  mine  heart 
for  ever. 

Remember  therefore,  0  my  Mansoul,  that  thou 
art  beloved  of  me;  as  I  have  therefore  taught  thee 
to  watch,  to  fight,  to  pray,  and  to  make  war 
against  my  foes,  so  now  I  command  thee  to  believe 
that  my  love  is  constant  to  thee.  0  my  Mansoul, 
how  have  I  set  my  heart,  my  love  upon  thee,  watch. 
Behold,  I  lay  none  other  burden  upon  thee,  than 
what  thou  hast  already,  hold  fast  till  I  come.9 


informs  them  of  his  intention  to  take  down  the  present  town 
of  Mansoul,  and  to  rebuild  it  in  a  more  glorious  manner;  in 
other  words,  to  remove  the  believer  to  glory,  and  raise  up  his 
mortal  body  to  everlasting  honour  and  happiness,  when  sin, 
sorrow,  and  temptation  shall  never  more  be  known.  Till  this 
event  takes  place,  he  directs  his  people  to  keep  their  garments 
white  and  clean — that  is,  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conver- 
sation and  godliness ;  to  watch  carefully  against  sin,  which  is 
the  only  thing  that  can  hurt  them  ;  and  to  live  every  day  [in 
holiness  and  good  works]  by  faith  in  the  Word  of  God. — 
(Border.) 


AN  ADVERTISEMENT  TO  THE  EEADER. 


Soite  say  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  not  mine, 

Insinuating  as  if  I  would  shine 

In  name  and  fame  by  the  'worth  of  another, 

Like  some  made  rich  by  robbing  of  their  brother. 

Or  that  so  fond  I  am  of  being  sire, 

I'll  father  bastards ;  or,  if  need  require, 

I'll  tell  a  be  in  print  to  get  applause. 

I  scorn  it :  John  such  dirt-heap  never  was, 

Since  God  converted  hiin.     Let  this  suffice 

To  show  why  I  my  Pilgrim  patronize. 

It  came  from  mine  own  heart,  so  to  my  head, 
And  thence  iuto  my  fingers  trickled ; 
Then  to  my  pen,  from  whence  immediately 
On  paper  I  did  dribble  it  daintily. 

Manner  and  matter  too  was  all  mine  own, 
Nor  was  it  unto  any  mortal  known, 


'Till  I  had  done  it.     Nor  did  any  then 
By  books,  by  wits,  by  tongues,  or  hand,  or  pen, 
Add  five  words  to  it,  or  write  half  a  hue 
Thereof :  the  whole,  and  every  whit,  is  mine. 

Also,  for  this  thine  eye  is  now  upon, 
The  matter  in  this  manner  came  from  none 
But  the  same  heart,  and  head,  fingers,  and  pen, 
As  did  the  other.     Witness  ah  good  men ; 
Por  none  in  all  the  world,  without  a  lie, 
Can  say  that  this  is  mine,  excepting  I. 

I  write  not  this  of  any  ostentation, 
Nor  'cause  I  seek  of  men  their  commendation ; 
I  do  it  to  keep  them  from  such  surmise, 
As  tempt  them  will  my  name  to  scandalize. 
Witness  my  name,  if  anagram' d  to  thee, 
The  letters  make,  Nu  /ion?/  in  a  B. 

John  Buni-an. 


THE   HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN 


A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  MAN  THAT  GETS  TO  HEAVEN: 

TOGETHER  WITn  THE  WAY  HE  RUNS  IN,  THE  BAKES  HE  GOES  BY ;  ALSO.  SOME  DIRECTIONS  HOW  TO 

RUN  SO  AS  TO  OBTAIN. 


1  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  had  brought  them  forth  abroad,  that  he  said,  Escape  for  thy  life ;  look  not  behind  til 
neither  stay  thou  in  all  the  plain:  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  l/tou  be  consumed.' — Gen.  six.  17. 

Loudon:  Printed  for  John  Marshall,  at  the  Bible  in  Graccehurch  Street,  lC'JS. 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY  THE   EDITOR. 


About  forty  years  ago  a  gentleman,  in  whose  com- 
pany I  had  commenced  my  pilgrimage,  and  who 
had  joined  me  in  communion  with  a  Baptist  church, 
about  four  years  previously,  came  to  my  house  one 
Monday  morning,  greatly  delighted  with  the  sermon 
which  our  pastor  had  preached  on  the  previous  day, 
while  I  was  engaged  in  superintending  the  Sunday 
school.  It  had  caused  a  very  remarkable  sensation, 
which,  if  properly  followed  up,  hid  fair  to  occasion 
an  extraordinary  revival  of  religion  iu  the  neigh- 
bourhood. He,  with  the  deacons,  had  begged  of 
our  minister  to  fill  up  his  outline,  and  prepare  the 
sermon  for  publication,  to  which  he  had  consented. 
He  wished  to  ascertain  from  me,  as  a  publisher, 
the  expense  of  printing  five  thousand  copies,  being 
sure  that  the  sale  of  it  would  be  unprecedented, 
not  only  throughout  the  kingdom,  but  as  far  as 
the  English  language  was  spoken.  In  about  a 
week,  the  copy  fairly  written  was  left  with  me. 
The  text  was  neb.  xiL  l,  '  Let  us  run  with  patience 
the  race  that  is  set  before  us.'  After  the  intro- 
duction that  all  men  desire  heaven,  but  all  do 
not  rim  for  it — the  word  run  was  explained  as  a 
flying,  pressing,  persevering.  Then  seven  reasons, 
and  nine  directions,  were  followed  by  nine  motives 
and  nine  uses.  This,  and  the  striking  ideas  and 
language  of  the  sermon,  brought  Bunyan  to  my  re- 
collection, and,  on  comparison,  it  proved  to  be  the 
Heavenly  Footman,  with  very  slight  alterations. 
Having  then  very  recently  purchased  a  neat  edition 
of  the  book,  at  a  very  low  price,  my  inquiry  was, 
whether  they  would  not  prefer  having  the  book  in 
its  genuine  state,  especially  as  it  was  ready  for 
delivery.  I  need  not  add,  that  all  thoughts  of 
circulating  the  sermon  was  at  once  abandoned. 
In  conversation  with  my  excellent  pastor,  who 
afterwards  for  many  years  bore  the  honour  of  a 
D.D.,  he  acknowledged  his  obligation  to  me  for 
detecting  the  plagiarism  before  the  sermon  was 
published,  and  explained  to  me  that,  when  very 


young,  he  had  read  Bunyan's  Heavenly  Footman 
with  intense  interest,  and  made  a  full  analysis  of  it, 
in  the  shape  of  notes,  which,  having  committed  to 
memory,  he  preached  to  a  very  delighted  and  deeply 
impressed  congregation  ;  that  after  a  lapse  of  many 
years,  looking  over  the  outlines  of  his  early  ser- 
mons, he  was  struck  with  it,  and  believing  it  to  be 
his  own  composition,  had  again  used  it  with  such 
extraordinary  success,  as  led  his  deacons  and  mem- 
bers to  request  him  to  print  it.  Doubtless  Bunyan 
being  dead  has  often  similarly  spoken — may  his 
voice  never  be  lost  in  sdencc  or  be  forgotten. 

The  title  of  '  Heavenly  Footman '  was  probably 
suggested  by  the  words  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah, 
'  If  thou  hast  run  with  the  footmen,  and  they  have 
wearied  thee,  then  how  canst  thou  contend  with 
horses?  And  in  the  land  of  peace  thou  trustedst, 
then  how  wdt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan  ? ' 
>:ii.  o,  and  '  Let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that 
is  set  before  us.'  Heb.  xii.  1.  The  word  footman 
does  not  refer  to  that  class  of  servants  who  are 
badged  and  dressed  in  livery  to  gratify  the 
of  their  masters,  nor  to  that  description  of  foot- 
soldiers  or  infantry,  whose  business  is  designated 
by  the  blood-stained  colour  of  their  clothes.  But 
it  refers  to  those  who  are  travelling  on  foot  to  a 
distant  country,  engaged  on  a  pilgrimage  from 
earth  to  heaven.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the 
whole  of  the  children  of  God,  of  every  age  and 
clime,  class  aud  kindred,  the  richest  and  the 
poorest,  all  are  upon  terms  of  perfect  equality  in 
/  the  race  set  before  them.  Xo  wealth,  nor 
grade,  can  procure  a  horse  to  carry  them,  or  a  car- 
riage to  ride  in  ;  all  must  run  on  foot.  The  only 
carriage  for  the  foot-sore,  weary  pilgrim,  is  the 
bosom  of  Christ;  he  carries  the  lambs  in  his 
bosom,  and  there  is  room  enough  for  all  ;  the 
poorest  labourer  and  the  noblest  aristocrat  meet 
there  upon  a  level  with  each  other; 
first  class  for  the  rich,   and  parliamentary  train 


376 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


for  the  poor.  It  is  all  first  class.  In  the 
varied  adventures  of  Christian  and  his  associates, 
and  of  Christiana,  her  children,  and  her  lovely 
friend  Mercy,  they  never  ride.  The  little  one 
is  led  hy  the  hand  up  the  steep  and  rough  hill 
Difficulty,  hut  his  own  feet  carry  him  throughout 
the  wearisome  road.  The  only  carriage  was 
the  fiery  chariot  which  carried  the  soul  of  the 
martyred  Faithful  to  the  Celestial  City;  there  is 
no  riding  to  heaven  while  in  the  hody.  Wealth 
may  procure  many  pleasures  to  clog  the  sovd  in  its 
journey.  It  may  purchase  indulgencies ;  it  may 
incline  some  disciples  to  look  at  sinful  imperfec- 
tions through  the  wrong  end  of  the  telescope ;  it 
may  purchase  prayers — hut  devotional  exercises, 
bought  by  gold,  will  freeze  the  soul.  It  is  the 
poor  disciple  that  receives  the  faithful  admonitions 
of  his  equally  poor  fellow-saints.  The  rich  have 
more  ceremony,  while  the  labourer  enjoys  more 
richly,  more  free  from  restraint,  the  warm  out- 
pourings of  a  devotional  spirit.  Still  there  is  no- 
thing to  prevent  the  greatest  nobleman  or  monarch 
from  running  to  heaven  in  company  with  the  dis- 
ciples of  our  lowly  Master.  If  he  refuses  this  road 
and  this  company,  he  must  pursue  his  downward 
course  to  destruction. 

The  order  in  which  the  allegorical  works  of 
Bunyan  were  written,  very  naturally  suggest  itself 
from  his  own  narratives,  and  from  the  dates  of 
their  publication.  It  was  thus,  while  suffering  his 
tedious  and  dangerous  imprisonment  for  Christ's 
sake,  he  was  led  to  write  an  account  of  the  deal- 
ings of  God  with  his  soul,  which  work  he  published 
in  1666,  under  the  title  of  Grace  Abounding  to  the 
Chief  of  Sinners.  While  engaged  in  writing  this 
remarkable  narrative,  the  almost  unbounded  alle- 
gorical powers  of  his  mind  were  brought  into 
exercise — 

'  And  thus  it  was :  I  writing  of  the  way 
And  race  of  saints,  in  this  our  gospel-day, 
Tell  suddenly  into  an  allegory 
Ahout  their  journey,  and  the  way  to  glory.' 

Having  finished  his  Grace  Abounding,  he  allowed 
his  fertile  imagination  its  full  scope,  and  again  wrote 
the  result  of  his  experience  in  the  form  of  an  alle- 
gorical narrative,  called  the  Pilgrim'' s  Progress  from 
this  World  to  that  which  is  to  Come.  At  first  the 
thoughts  pressed  upon  him  as  fast  as  he  could  write 
them,  yet  he  says — 

* I  did  not  think 

To  show  to  all  the  world  my  pen  and  ink 

In  such  a  mode.' 

And  it  was  several  years  before  he  ventured  to 
publish  his  beautiful  allegory.  He  was  released 
from  prison  in  1672,  having  been  chosen  in  the 
previous  year  to  be  the  pastor,  or  ministering  elder 
of  the  church  at  Bedford.  His  time  was  then 
much  occupied  in  re-organizing  the  church,  after 


years  of  tempest  and  fiery  persecution.  At  length, 
having  overcome  his  own  and  his  friends'  reluctance 
to  publish  so  solemn  a  work  on  the  conversion  of 
a  sinner  and  his  way  to  heaven,  in  the  form  of  an 
allegory,  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  printed  in 
1678.  The  wonderful  popularity  of  this  book,  and 
the  great  good  it  produced,  led  him  again  to  turn 
his  Grace  Abounding  into  a  different  form  of  narra- 
tive, in  the  more  profound  allegory  of  the  Holy 
War;  this  was  published  in  1682,  and  in  two 
years  afterwards  he  completed  the  Pilgrim  by  a 
delightful  second  part.  His  long  incarceration, 
followed  by  sudden  and  great  activity,  probably 
brought  clown  his  robust  constitution ;  and  as  the 
end  of  his  course  drew  nigh,  he  was  doubly  diligent, 
for  in  1688,  before  his  death-day,  which  was  in 
August,  he  published  six  important  treatises,  and 
had  prepared  fourteen  or  fifteen  others  for  the 
press.  Among  these  were  his  final  and  almost 
dying  instructions  to  the  pilgrim,  under  the  title 
of  Tfie  Heavenly  Footman,  the  man  whom  he 
describes  in  the  poetical  apology  to  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  as  he  that 

'Runs  and  runs, 


Till  he  unto  the  gate  of  glory  comes.' 

This  treatise  sheds  a  lustre  over  the  latter  days  of 
our  immortal  allegorist.  It  is  evidently  the  pro- 
duction of  a  mind  expanded  and  chastened  with 
the  rich  experience  of  sanctified  age.  In  it  we 
are  reminded  of  those  important  directions  to 
heavenly  footmen,  contained  in  his  most  admired 
books.  Is  there  a  Slough  of  Despond  to  be  passed, 
and  a  hill  Difficulty  to  be  overcome?  Here  the 
footman  is  reminded  of  '  many  a  dirty  step,  many 
a  high  hill,  a  long  and  tedious  journey  through  a 
vast  howling  wilderness ;'  but  he  is  encouraged, 
'  the  land  of  promise  is  at  the  end  of  the  way.' 
p.  382.  Must  the  man  that  would  win  eternal 
glory  draw  his  sword,  put  on  his  helmet,  and 
fight  his  way  into  the  temple — the  heavenly  foot- 
man must  press,  crowd,  and  thrust  through  all 
that  stand  between  heaven  and  his  soul.  p.  ssi. 
Did  Ignorance,  who  perished  from  the  way,  say 
to  the  pilgrims,  •  You  go  so  fast,  I  must  stay 
awhile  behind?'  He  who  runs  to  heaven  is 
told  that  the  heavy-heeled,  lazy,  wanton,  and 
foolish  professor  'will  not  attain  the  prize,  p.  382. 
The  wicket-gate,  at  the  head  of  the  way,  is  all- 
important  ;  none  can  get  to  heaven  unless  they 
enter  by  Christ,  the  door  and  way,  so  the  footman 
is  reminded  that  it  matters  not  how  fast  he  runs,  he 
can  never  attain  the  prize,  if  he  is  in  the  wrong  road, 
p.  382.  Did  the  pilgrims  so  severely  suffer  from  en- 
tering upon  Byepath-meadow,  and  even  after  that 
bitter  experience  were  they  again  misled  into  a  bye 
path,  by  a  black  man  clothed  in  white  raiment  ?  Our 
footman  is  warned — Beware  then  of  bye  and  crooked 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY   THE  EDITOR. 


377 


paths  that  lead  to  death  and  damnation  ;  the  way  to 
heaven  is  one,  still  there  are  many  well-heaten  byc- 
paths  that  hutt  or  shoot  down  upon  it,  and  which 
lead  to  destruction,  p.  884.  To  prevent  vain  and 
foolish  company  from  calling  you  out  of  the  path, 
or  from  loitering  in  it,  say,  I  am  in  haste,  I  am 
running  for  a  prize;  if  I  win  I  am  made,  I  win  all; 
if  I  lose  I  lose  all,  and  am  undone,  p.  886.  So  it 
was  with  Faithful  when  even  Christian,  who  saw 
him  before,  cried  Ho  ho,  so  ho.  Faithful  answered, 
'  No,  I  am  upon  my  life,  the  avenger  of  hlood  is 
behind  me.'  In  the  same  way  the  pilgrims  refused 
the  invitations  of  Demas  with  his  silver  mine.  No, 
says  the  heavenly  footman,  I  am  running  for 
heaven,  for  my  soul,  for  God,  for  Christ,  from  hell 
and  everlasting  damnation,  p.  ssg.  Did  the  poor 
pilgrims  go  grunting,  puffing,  and  sighing,  one 
tumhlcth  over  a  bush,  another  sticks  fast  in  the 
dirt,  one  cries  out,  I  am  down,  and  another,  IIo ! 
where  are  you ?  Pilgrims  Progress,  p.  286.  So  the 
footman  is  told  that  he  will  '  meet  with  cross,  pain, 
and  wearisomeness  to  the  flesh,  with  briars  and 
quagmires,  and  other  encumbrances,'  through  all 
which  he  must  persevere.  p.3S7.  Did  Formalist  and 
Hypocrite  turn  off  into  bye-ways  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill  Difficulty,  and  miserably  perish  ?  Did  Mistrust 
and  Timorous  run  back  for  fear  of  the  persecuting 
lions,  Church  and  State?  So  the  man  that  runs 
for  heaven  is  cautioned — '  Some  when  they  come 
at  the  cross  can  go  no  further,  but  back  again  to 
their  sins  they  go,  stumble  and  break  their  necks, 
or  turn  aside  to  the  left  or  to  the  right,  and  perish.' 
p.  388.  Be  not  ready  to  halt,  nor  run  hobbling  and 
halting,  but,  like  my  Lord  Will-be-will  in  the  Holy 
War,  when  fighting  against  Diabolus,  get  thy  will 
tipt  with  heavenly  grace,  and  go  full  speed  for 
heaven.  These  quotations  tend  to  prove  that  this 
invaluable  treatise  is  a  summary  of  the  guide  books 
which  Bunyan  had  before  written.  It  was  doubt- 
less one  of  the  last  productions  of  his  prolific  pen. 

Two  passages  in  the  Heavenly  Footman  appear 
to  favour  the  idea,  that  a  period  in  life  is,  in  some 
cases,  fixed,  beyond  which  there  is  no  repentance ; 
thus  in  p.  373,  in  a  solemn  warning  against  procras- 
tination he  says,  '  Dost  thou  know  whether  the  day 
of  grace  will  last  a  week  longer  or  no  ?  For  the 
day  of  grace  is  past  with  some  before  their  life  is 
ended ;'  and  p.  382,  '  sometimes  sinners  have  not 
heaven  gates  open  to  them  so  long  as  they  suppose ; 
and  if  they  be  once  shut  against  a  man,  they  are 
so  heavy  that  all  the  men  in  the  world,  nor  all  the 
angels  in  heaven,  can  open  them.  Francis  Spira 
can  tell  thee  what  it  is  to  stay  till  the  gate  of 
mercy  be  quite  shut.'  It  becomes  an  interesting 
inquiry  as  to  who  Bunyan  means  by  the  '  some'  of 
whom  he  says,  '  that  the  day  of  grace  is  past  be- 
fore their  life  is  ended.'  This  cannot  refer  to  those 
who,  neglecting  the  Saviour,  are  iu  a  perishing  con- 

vol.  in. 


dition.  No  minister  felt  a  more  ardent  desire  to 
rouse  them  to  a  sense  of  their  danger  and  to  guard 
them  against  despair  than  John  Bunyan.  In  his 
Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved  he  thus  argues  '  Why  des- 
pair ?  thou  art  yet  in  the  land  of  the  living.'  « It 
is  a  sin  to  begin  to  despair  before  one  sets  bis  foot 
over  the  thrcshhold  of  hell  gates.'  «  What,  despair 
of  bread  in  a  land  that  is  full  of  corn  ?  Despair  of 
mercy  when  our  God  is  full  of  mercy,  thou  scrupu- 
lous fool ;  despair  when  we  have  a  redeeming  Christ 
alive.  Let  them  despair  that  dwell  where  there  is 
no  God,  and  that  are  confined  to  those  chambers  of 
death  which  can  be  reached  by  no  redemption.  In 
Banyan's  Come  and  Welcome,  he  proves  that  it  would 
be  '  high  blasphemy  and  damnable  wickedness'  to 
imagine  that  Christ  would  cast  out  any  that  come  to 
God  by  him.  lie  cannot  mean  the  backslider,  for 
Bunyan  was  such.  David  also,  to  an  awful  extent, 
and  Peter  to  the  denial  of  his  Lord.  No,  he  may 
mean  those  who,  while  neglecting  the  Saviour,  are 
overtaken  by  madness,  or  more  probably  to  such  as 
Judas,  Spira,  and  others  who  sell  their  Master,  or 
renounce  him.  If  a  man  abandons  the  Saviour, 
there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  whereby  he  can 
be  saved ;  '  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for 
sin;'  he  is  a  despiser  of  God's  way  of  salvation,  and 
tramples  under  foot  the  Son  of  God.  While  such 
a  career  continues,  fiery  indignation  must  be  his 
wretched  destiny.  They  who  contemn  the  heavenly 
gift — the  Holy  Ghost — the  word  of  God — the  powers 
of  the  world  to  come — if  they  persevere  unto  death 
in  such  sentiments,  the  day  of  grace  is  past.  There 
have  been  some  who,  like  Esau,  having  sold  their 
birthright,  sought  repentance  even  with  tears,  but 
found  it  not — they  sought  it  not  in  God's  appointed 
way.  All  hope  depends  upon  such  sinners  coming 
unto  Christ,  humbled  and  broken-hearted.  He  is 
willing,  He  is  able  to  save  even  then  to  the  utter- 
most, but  they  will  not.'  He  has  promised,  and 
will  perform  his  word,  '  him  that  cometh  to  me  I 
will  in  nowise  cast  out.'  The  volume  of  inspira- 
tion is  crowned  at  its  close  with  the  same  cheering 
encouragement,  '  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say, 
Come.  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And 
whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
freely.'  I  cannot  imagine  that  any  man  would 
have  sung  with  greater  pleasure  than  Bunyan  that 
hymn  of  Dr.  Watts' — 

'  Life  is  the  time  to  serve  the  Lord, 

The  time  to  insure  the  great  reward  ; 

And  while  the  lamp  holds  out  to  barn, 

The  vilest  sinner  may  return.' 
They  only  who  reject  the  counsel  and  mercy  of 
God,  shut  heaven's  gates  against  their  own  souls, 
and  rush  upon  Jehovah's  bncklerlikeJndas,  or  Spira, 
or  like  one  of  Bunyan's  early  friends,  John  Childs, 
who  apostatized  for  fear  of  persecution,  an. 1  perish)  A 
by  his  own  hand.     To  such  only  the  day  of  grace 

48 


378 


EHSTLE  TO   SLOTHFUL   AND   CARELESS   PEOPLE. 


is  past ;  they  have  set  themselves  in  the  scorner's 
seat,  from  which  they  will  he  hurled  into  unutter- 
ahle  wretchedness. 

Bunyan  well  knew  that  idleness  engenders 
poverty  and  crime,  and  is  the  parent  of  every  evil; 
and  he  exhorts  his  runner  to  the  greatest  diligence, 
not  to  '  fool  away  his  soul '  in  slothfulness,  which 
induces  carelessness,  until  the  sinner  is  remedyless. 
Our  first  care  is  to  get  into  the  right  way,  and  then 
so  to  rim  that  '  the  devil,  who  is  light  of  foot,'  may 
not  overtake  and  trip  us  up.  Running  to  heaven 
does  not  prevent  the  true,  the  real  enjoyment  of 
earthly  blessings,  hut  sanctifies  and  heightens  them. 
The  great  impetus  in  our  course  is  love  to  the 
prize — to  Christ,  to  heaven;  •  having  our  affections 
set  upon  things  above.'  Looking  unto  Jesus.  His 
righteousness  imputed  unto  us  by  the  shedding  of 
his  blood,  marks  all  the  road,  and  while  we  keep 
that  in  sight  we  cannot  err.  In  all  earthly  things 
we  anticipate  too  much — but  in  the  glories  of 
heaven,  our  anticipations  are  feeble  indeed,  com- 
pared with  eternal  realities.     Could  the  saints  in 


glory  impart  to  us  a  sense  of  their  indescribable 
happiness,  with  what  activity  and  perseverance  we 
should  run.  The  case  of  Lot,  when  flying  from 
destruction,  is  put  by  Bunyan  with  peculiar  force 
— he  dared  not  to  look  back  even  to  see  what  had 
become  of  his  wife,  lest  death  should  overtake  his 
own  soul.  p.  394.  0,  my  reader,  may  we  be  stimulated 
so  to  run  as  to  obtain  that  crown  of  glory  which  is 
imperishable,  immortal,  and  eternal. 

•Charles  Doe,  one  of  Bunyan's  personal  friends, 
having  purchased  the  copyright  of  this  work,  kept 
it  for  some  years,  in  hope  of  publishing  it  with  other 
treatises,  as  a  second  folio  volume,  to  complete  his 
works;  but  failing  in  this  object,  he  printed  it  separ- 
ately in  1698,  and  appended  an  interesting  list  of 
Bunyan's  works,  with  thirty  cogent  reasons  why 
these  invaluable  labours  should  be  preserved  and 
handed  down,  to  bless  succeeding  ages. 

Aii  earnest  desire  to  preserve,  in  their  perfect 
integrity,  all  the  treatises  as  they  were  originally 
published,  will  induce  me,  at  the  end  of  the  works, 
to  reprint  those  interesting  additions. 

Geo.  Ofpor. 


ffl  EPISTLE  TO  ALL  THE  SLOTHFUL  AND  CAEELESS  PEOPLE. 


Friends, 

Solomon  saith,  that  'The  desire  of  the  slothful 
killeth  him  ;'  and  if  so,  what  will  slothfulness  itself 
do  to  those  that  entertain  it?  Pr.  xxi.  25.  The  pro- 
verb is,  '  He  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  is  a  son  that 
causeth  shame.  Pr.  x.  s.  And  this  I  dare  be  bold  to 
say,  no  greater  shame  can  befal  a  man,  than  to  see 
that  he  hath  fooled  away  his  soul,  and  sinned  away 
eternal  life.  And  I  am  sure  this  is  the  next  way 
to  do  it ;  namely,  to  be  slothful ;  slothful,  I  say,  in 
the  work  of  salvation.  The  vineyard  of  the  sloth- 
ful man,  in  reference  to  the  things  of  this  life,  is 
not  fuller  of  briars,  nettles,  and  stinking  weeds, 
than  he  that  is  slothful  for  heaven,  hath  his  heart 
full  of  heart-ehoaking  and  soul-damning  sin. 

Slothfulness  bath  these  two  evils:  First,  To 
neglect  the  time  in  which  it  should  be  getting  of 
heaven ;  and  by  that  means  doth,  in  the  Second 
place,  bring  in  untimely  repentance.  I  will  war- 
rant you,  that  he  who  shall  lose  his  soul  in  this 
world  through  slothfulness,  will  have  no  cause  to 
be  glad  thereat  when  he  comes  to  hell. 

Slothfulness  is  usually  accompanied  with  care- 
lessness, and  carelessness  is  for  the  most  part  be- 
gotten by  senselessness ;  and  senselessness  doth 
again  put  fresh  strength  into  slothfulness,  and  by 
this  means  the  soul  is  left  remediless. 

Slothfulness  shutteth  out  Christ ;  slothfulness 
shameth  the  soul.  Ca.v.  2-4.  Pr.  xffl.  4. 

Slothfulness,  it  is  condemned  even  by  the  feeblest 


of  all  the  creatures.  '  G  o  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard, 
consider  her  ways  and  be  wise.  Pr.  vi.  e.  The  slug- 
gard will  not  plow  by  reason  of  the  cold ;'  xs.  4 ; 
that  is,  he  will  not  break  up  the  fallow  ground  of 
his  heart,  because  there  must  be  some  pains  taken 
by  him  that  will  do  it;  'therefore  shall  he  beg  in 
harvest,'  that  is,  when  the  saints  of  God  shall  have 
their  glorious  heaven  and  happiness  given  to  them ; 
but  the  sluggard  shall  'have  nothing,'  that  is,  be 
never  the  better  for  his  crying  for  mercy,  according 
to  that  in  Mat.  xxv.  10-12. 

If  you  would  know  a  sluggard  in  the  things  of 
heaven,  compare  him  with  one  that  is  slothful  in 
the  things  of  this  world.  As,  1 .  He  that  is  sloth- 
fid  is  loth  to  set  about  the  work  he  should  follow : 
so  is  he  that  is  slothful  for  heaven.  2.  He  that  is 
slothful  is  one  that  is  willing  to  make  delays :  so  is 
he  that  is  slothful  for  heaven.  3.  He  that  is  a 
sluggard,  any  small  matter  that  cometh  in  between, 
he  will  make  it  a  sufficient  excuse  to  keep  him  oft* 
from  plying  his  work :  so  it  is  also  with  him  that 
is  slothful  for  heaven.  4.  He  that  is  slothful  doth  his 
work  by  the  halves  ;  and  so  it  is  with  him  that  is 
slothful  for  heaven.  He  may  almost,  but  he  shall 
never  altogether  obtain  perfection  of  deliverance 
from  hell ;  he  may  almost,  but  he  shall  never,  with- 
out he  mend,  be  altogether  a  saint.  5.  They  that 
are  slothful,  do  usually  lose  the  season  in  which 
things  are  to  be  done :  and  thus  it  is  also  with  them 
that  are  slothful  for  heaven,  they  miss  the  season 
!  of  grace.     And  therefore,  6.  They  that  are  sloth- 


EPISTLE  TO   SLOTHFUL   AND   CARELESS   PEOPLE. 


379 


fill  have  seldom  or  never  good  fruit :  so  also  it  will 
be  with  the  soul-sluggard.  7.  They  that  are  sloth- 
ful they  are  chid  for  the  same :  so  also  will  Christ 
deal  with  those  that  are  not  active  for  him.  Thou 
wicked  or  slothful  servant,  out  of  thine  own  mouth 
will  I  judge  thee  ;  thou  saidst  I  was  thus,  and  thus, 
wherefore  then  gavest  not  thou  my  money  to  the 
bank?  &c.  Lu.  xix.  -.'2.  Take  the  unprofitable  ser- 
vant, and  east  him  into  utttT  darkness,  where  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  Mat.  xxv.  m-BBu 

What  shall  I  say  ?  Time  runs ;  and  will  you 
be  slothful  ?  Much  of  your  lives  arc  past ;  and 
will  you  be  slothful?  Your  soids  are  worth  a 
thousand  worlds ;  and  will  you  be  slothful?  The 
day  of  death  and  judgment  is  at  the  door ;  and  will 
you  be  slothful?  The  curse  of  God  hangs  over 
your  heads;  and  will  you  be  slothful?  Besides, 
the  devils  are  earnest,  laborious,  and  seek  by  all 
means  every  day,  by  every  sin,  to  keep  you  out  of 
heaven,  and  hinder  you  of  salvation ;  and  will  you 
be  slothful  ?  Also  your  neighbours  are  diligent  for 
things  that  will  perish  ;  and  will  you  be  slothful  for 
things  that  will  endure  for  ever  ?  Would  you  be 
willing  to  be  damned  for  slothfulness  ?  Would 
you  be  willing  the  angels  of  God  should  neglect  to 
fetch  your  soids  away  to  heaven  when  you  lie  a- 
dying,  and  the  devils  stand  by  ready  to  scramble 
for  them  ?  *  Was  Christ  slothful  in  the  work  of  your 
redemption  ?  Are  his  ministers  slothful  in  tendering 
this  unto  you?  And,  lastly,  If  all  this  will  not 
move,  I  tell  you  God  will  not  be  slothful  or  negli- 
gent to  damn  you — whose  damnation  now  of  along 
time  slumbereth  not — nor  the  devils  will  not  ne- 
glect to  fetch  thee,  nor  hell  neglect  to  shut  its 
mouth  upon  thee. 

Sluggard,  art  thou  asleep  still?  art  thou  resolved 
to  sleep  the  sleep  of  death ?  Wilt  neither  tidings 
from  heaven  or  hell  awake  thee  ?  Wilt  thou  say 
still,  'Yet  a  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber,'  and  'a 
little  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep?'  Pr.  vi.  10.  Wilt 
thou  yet  turn  thyself  in  thy  sloth,  as  the  door  is 
turned  upon  the  hinges?  0  that  I  was  one  that 
was  skilful  in  lamentation,  and  had  but  a  yearning 
heart  towards  thee,  how  would  I  pity  thee !  How 
would  I  bemoan  thee!  0  that  I  could  with  Jere- 
miah let  my  eyes  run  down  with  rivers  of  water  for 
thee!  Poor  soul,  lost  soul,  dying  soul,  what  a 
hard  heart  have  I  that  I  cannot  mourn  for  thee ! 


*  It  was  the  commonly  received  opinion  that,  at  the  mo- 
ment of  death,  the  angels  and  devils  strove  to  carry  away  the 
soul.  If  the  dying  man  had  received  the  eousecrated  wafer, 
the  devils  were  scared  at  it,  and  lost  their  victim.  Hence  the 
prayer — '  From  lightning,  battle,  murder,  and  sudden  death, 
good  Lord,  deliver  us;'  a  curious  coutrast  to,  'Thy  will  be 
done !'  Were  they  sinners  above  all  men  upon  whom  the 
tower  in  Siloam  fell  and  slew  them  ?  Lu.  xiii.  4.  O  that  men 
would  rely  upon  the  righteousness  of  Christ  stimulating  them 
to  ran  for  glory,  as  heavenly  footmen,  and  not  upon  the  nos- 
trums of  Antichrist ! — Ed. 


If  thou  shouldst  lose  but  a  limb,  a  child,  or  a 
friend,  it  would  not  be  so  much,  but  poor  man  it 
is  TOY  SOUL ;  if  it  was  to  lie  in  hell  but  for 
but  for  a  year,  nay,  ten  thousand  years,  it  would 
(in  comparison)  be  nothing.     But  0  it  is  lor 

0  this  cutting  ever  !  What  a  soul-amazing  word 
will  that  be,  which  saith,  'Depart  from  me,  r« 
cursed,  into  everlasting  fire'!  &c.t 

Object.  But  if  1  should  set  in,  and  run  as  you 
would  have  me,  then  I  must  run  from  all  my  friends ; 
for  none  of  them  are  running  that  way. 

Answ.  And  if  thou  dost,  thou  wilt  run  into  t\a 
bosom  of  Christ  and  of  God,  and  then  what  hai  i 
will  that  do  thee? 

Object.  But  if  I  run  this  way,  then  I  must  run 
from  all  my  sins. 

Answ.  That  is  true  indeed  ;  yet  if  thou  dost  not, 
thou  wilt  run  into  hell-fire. 

Object.  But  if  I  run  this  way,  then  I  shall  be 
hated,  and  lose  the  love  of  my  friends  and  rela- 
tions, and  of  those  that  I  expect  benefit  from,  or 
have  reliance  on,  and  I  shall  be  mocked  of  all  my 
neighbours. 

Answ.  And  if  thou  dost  not,  thou  art  sure  to 
lose  the  love  and  favour  of  God  and  Christ,  the 
benefit  of  heaven  and  glory,  and  be  mocked  of  God 
for  thy  folly,  'I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity; 

1  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh ;'  and  if  thou 
wouldst  not  be  hated  and  mocked,  then  take  heed 
thou  by  thy  folly  dost  not  procure  the  displeasure 
and  mockings  of  the  great  God;  for  his  mocks  and 
hatred  will  be  terrible,  because  they  will  fall  upon 
thee  in  terrible  times,  even  when  tribulation  and 
anguish*  taketh  hold  on  thee ;  which  will  be  when 
death  and  judgment  comes,  when  all  the  men  in 
the  earth,  and  all  the  angels  in  heaven,  cannot  help 

thee.   Pr.  i.  20-23. 

Object.  But  surely  I  may  begin  this  time  enough, 
a  year  or  two  hence,  may  I  not? 

Answ.  1.  Hast  thou  any  lease  of  thy  life  ?  Did 
ever  God  tell  thee  thou  shalt  live  half  a  year,  or 
two  months  longer  ?  nay,  it  may  be  thou  mayst  not 
live  so  long.  And  therefore,  2.  Wilt  thou  be  so 
sottish  and  unwise,  as  to  venture  thy  soul  upon  a 
little  uncertain  time?  3.  Dost  thou  know  whether 
the  day  of  grace  will  last  a  week  longer  or  no? 
For  the  day  of  grace  is  past  with  some  before  their 
life  is  ended:    and  if  it  should  be  so  with  thee, 


f  In  a  very  beautifully  ornamented  Liturgy  of  the  Church 
of  England,  prior  to  the  Reformation,  after  the  Salisbury  use, 
printed  in  1526  (in  the  Editor's  library),  is  this  direction — 
'  These  iii.  prayers  be  wrytten  in  the  chapel  of  the  hoi] 
in  Rome,  who  that  dcuoutly  say  them  they  shall  ob:  ; 
hundred  thousand  years  of  pardon  for  deadly  sins  gran  I 
oure  holy  father  Jhon  xxii  pope  of  Rome.'     The  three  prayers 
only  occupy  twenty-six  short  lines,  and  may  be  grm 
peated  in  two  minutes.     Such  was  aud  is  Papery  ! ! 
the  end  of  all  this  promised  pardon  ft*  a  million  of  years-- 
what  then?     Will  eternal  1  nenceP — : Ed. 


380 


THE   CONTENTS   OF  THIS   BOOK. 


wouldst  thou  not  say,  0  that  I  had  hegua  to  run 
hefore  the  day  of  grace  had  heen  past,  and  the 
gates  of  heaven  shut  against  me.  But,  4.  If  thou 
shouldst  see  any  of  thy  neighbours  neglect  the 
making  sure  of  either  house  or  land  to  themselves, 
if  they  had  it  proffered  to  them,  saying,  Time  enough 
hereafter,  when  the  time  is  uncertain  ;  and  besides, 
they  do  not  know  whether  ever  it  will  be  proffered 
to  them  again,  or  no:  I  say,  Wouldst  thou  not 
then  call  them  fools  ?  And  if  so,  then  dost  thou 
think  that  thou  art  a  wise  man  to  let  thy  immor- 
tal soul  hang  over  hell  by  a  thread  of  uncertain 
time,  which  may  soon  be  cut  asunder  by  death? 

But  to  speak  plainly,  all  these  are  the  words  of 
a  slothful  spirit.  Arise  man,  be  slothful  no  longer ; 
set  foot,  and  heart,  and  all  into  the  way  of  God, 


and  run,  the  crown  is  at  the  end  of  the  race  ;  there 
also  standeth  the  loving  fore-runner,  even  Jesus, 
who  hath  prepared  heavenly  provision  to  make  thy 
soul  welcome,  and  he  will  give  it  thee  with  a  will- 
inger  heart  than  ever  thou  canst  desire  it  of  him. 
0  therefore  do  not  delay  the  time  any  longer,  but 
put  into  practice  the  words  of  the  men  of  Dan  to 
their  brethren,  after  they  had  seen  the  goodness  of 
the  land  of  Canaan:  'Arise,'  say  they,  <fcc,  'for 
we  have  seen  the  land,  and  behold  it  is  very  good ; 
and  are  ye  still,'  or  do  you  forbear  running?  'Be 
not  slothful  to  go,  and  to  enter  to  possess  the  land.' 
Ju.  xviii.  9.     Farewell. 

I  wish  our  souls  may  meet  with  comfort  at  the 
journey's  end. 

John  Bcnyan. 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  WHOLE  OF  THIS  BOOK. 


I.  Doctrine. — After  the  words  are  opened,  this  doc- 

trine is  laid  down,  namely,  that  they  that  will  have 
heaven,  they  must  run  for  it, 

II.  After  that,  the  word  RUN  is  opened  by  three 

other  Scripture  expressions — 
1.  Flying.     2.  Pressing.     3.  Continuing,     . 

III.  After  which  is  laid  down  several  reasons  for 

THE  CLEARING  OF  THE  DOCTRINE 

1.  Because  every  one  that  runneth  doth  not  obtain. 
2.  Because  if  they  do  not  obtain,  then  will  they  lose 
their  running  also.  3.  Because  the  way  is  long. 
4.  Because  the  time  is  uncertain.  5.  Because  the 
devil,  sin,  hell,  and  the  law  runs  after  them.  6.  Be- 
cause heaven's  gates  may  be  shut  shortly.  7.  Be- 
cause if  they  lose,  they  lose  all  ;  even  God,  Christ, 
their  souls,  &c, 


IV 


381 


3  VI 


.  Directions. — In  the  fourth  place,  I  come  to  give 
some  directions  how  to  run  so  as  to  obtain;  and  they 
in  all  are  nine — 

1.  To  get  into  the  way, 

2.  To  ponder  the  path  of  thy  feet, 

3.  To  strip  thyself  of  incumbrances  that  may  hang  on 
thee,  like  weights  to  hinder  thee,     . 

4.  To  shun  bye-paths,  .... 

5.  To  take  heed  of  gazing  and  staring  about  thee,  on 
things  that  do  not  concern  thy  running, 

6.  Not  to  let  thy  ear  be  open  to  every  one  that  calleth 
after  thee, 

7.  Not  to  be  daunted  with  the  enemies  thou  art  like 
to  meet  with    between  this  and  the  kingdom  of 


8.  To  take  heed  of  stumbling  at  the  cross, 

9.  To  cry  hard  to  God  for  an  enlightened  heart  and 
willing  mind, 


386 
386 


V.  Motives. — The  motives  are  nine — 

1.  To  consider  there  is  no  way  but  this,  thou  must 
either  win  or  lose.     If  thou  win,  thou  wiunest  all ; 

if  thou  lose,  thou  losest  all,  .         .         .         .389 

2.  The  devil  and  sin  do  the  best  they  can  to  make 
thee  lose, 390 


TAO» 

3.  If  they  get  the  better  of  thee,  thou  shalt  lose,       .    390 

4.  Now  the  gates  of  heaven,  and  the  heart  of  Christ, 

are  both  open  to  thee,  ....         390 

5.  Therefore  keep  thy  eye  upon  the  prize,         .         .    390 

6.  Think  much  of  them  that  are  gone  before.  (1.)  How 
really  they  got  in.  (2.)  How  safe  they  are, 
now  they  are  there, 390 

7.  Do  but  set  to  the  work,  and  when  thou  hast  run 
thyself  down  weary,  Christ  will  carry  thee  in  his 
bosom,     ........    391 

8.  Or  else  convey  new  strength  to  thee,        .         .         391 

9.  Let  the  very  industry  of  the  devil  and  wicked  men 
(I  say,  let  the  consideration  of  their  diligence  to 
bring  their  designs  to  pass)  provoke  thee,     .         .    391 

VI.  The  uses  are  nine  also — 

1.  To  examine  thyself  whether  thou  art  in  the  way 

or  no,  .......         391 

2.  The  danger  they  are  in,  that  grow  weary  before 
they  come  to  their  journey's  end,         .         .         .    392 

3.  The  sad  estate  of  them  that  are  running  quite  back 
again, 392 

4.  Their  woe  also  that  to  this  day  sit  still,  and  run 

not  at  all, 392 

5.  This  doctrine  calleth  out  to  them  that  began  but 

a  while  since  to  mend  their  pace,     .         .         .         393 

6.  That  old  professors  should  not  let  young  striplings 
outrun  them,  393 

7.  They  behave  themselves  basely  that  count  they  run 
fast  enough,  if  they  keep  company  with  the  hind- 
most and  laziest  professors,     ....         393 

8.  That  lazy  professors  are  apt  to  keep  others  besides 
themselves  out  of  heaven,   .         .         .         .         .393 

9.  The  conclusion,  or  last  use ;  wherein,  to  provoke 
thee,  thou  hast  the  heavenly  carriage  of  Lot  as  he 
went  from  Sodom,  and  the  fearful  doom  of  his  wife,  393 

VII.  Provocation. — Also  to  consider,  if  thy  soul  be 
lost,  it  is  thy  own  loss,  and  thou  onlt  wilt  feel  the 
smart  thereof, 394 

VIII.  A  short  expostulation,         ....    394 

These  be  the  contents  of  this  little  book  ; 
If  thou  wilt  see  further,  then  thorow  it  look. 


THE  HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN. 


381 


THE    HEAVENLY    FOOTMAN. 


'SO  RUN,  TIUT  YE  MAT  OBTAIN.' — 1  COR.  IX.  24. 

Heaven  and  happiness  is  that  which  every  one  de- 
sireth,  insomuch  that  wicked  Balaam  could  say, 
'  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my 
last  end  he  like  his.'  Nn.  xxilL  10.  Yet  for  all  this, 
there  are  hut  very  few  that  do  obtain  that  ever-to- 
he-desired  glory,  insomuch  that  many  eminent  pro- 
fessors drop  short  of  a  welcome  from  God  into  his 
pleasant  place. 

The  apostle,  therefore,  because  he  did  desire  the 
salvation  of  the  souls  of  the  Corinthians,  to  whom 
he  writes  this  epistle,  layeth  them  down  in  these 
words,  such  counsel,  which  if  taken,  would  be  for 
their  help  and  advantage.  First,  Not  to  be  wicked, 
and  sit  still,  and  wish  for  heaven ;  but  to  run  for 
it.  Second,  Not  to  content  themselves  with  every 
kind  of  running ;  but,  saith  he,  '  So  RUN,  that  ye 
may  obtain.'  As  if  he  should  say,  Some,  because 
they  would  not  lose  their  souls,  they  begin  to  run 
betimes,  Ec.  xii.  l,  they  run  apace,  they  run  with 
patience,  He.  xii.  l,  they  run  the  right  way.  Mat.  xiv.  26. 
Do  you  so  run?  Some  run  from  both  father  and 
mother,  friends  and  companions,  and  thus,  that 
they  may  have  the  crown.  Do  you  so  run?  Some 
run  through  temptations,  afflictions,  good  report, 
evil  report,  that  they  may  win  the  pearl.  iCo.  iv.  13. 
2 Co.  vi.  Do  you  so  run?  'So  run  that  ye  may 
obtain.' 

These  words,  they  are  taken  from  men's  running 
for  a  wager:  a  very  apt  similitude  to  set  before 
the  eyes  of  the  saints  of  the  Lord.  'Know  ye  not 
that  they  which  run  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one  re- 
ceiveth  the  prize ?  So  run,  that  ye  may  obtain.' 
That  is,  do  not  only  run,  but  be  sure  you  win  as 
well  as  run.      'So  run,  that  ye  may  obtain.' 

I  shall  not  need  to  make  any  great  ado  in  open- 
ing the  words  at  this  time,  but  shall  rather  lay 
down  one  doctrine  that  I  do  find  in  them ;  and  in 
prosecuting  that,  I  shall  show  you,  in  some  mea- 
sure, the  scope  of  the  words. 

[I.  The  Doctrine  of  the  Text.] 

The  doctrine  is  this:  They  that  will  have 
heaven,  must  run  for  it  ;  I  say,  they  that  will 
have  heaven,  they  must  run  for  it.  I  beseech  you 
to  heed  it  well.  '  Know  ye  not  that  they  which  run 
in  a  race  run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize  ?  So 
run  ye.'  The  prize  is  heaven,  and  if  you  will  have 
it,  you  must  run  for  it.  You  have  another  scrip- 
ture for  this  in  the  12th  of  the  Hebrews,  the  1st, 
2d,  and  3rd  verses :  '  Wherefore  seeing  we  also,' 
saith  the  apostle,  '  are  compassed  about  with  so 
great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  lay  aside  every 


weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us, 
and  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  Bet 
before  us.'  And  let  is  run,  saith  he.  Again, 
saith  Paul,  'I  therefore  so  run,  not  as  uncertainly, 
so  fight  I,'  See. 

[II.  The  word  RUN  opened.] 

But  before  I  go  any  further,  observe, 
First — Flying — That  this  running  is  not  an  or- 
dinary, or  any  sort  of  running,  but  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood of  the  swiftest  sort  of  running  ;  and  therefore 
in  the  Gth  of  the  Hebrews  it  is  called  'a  fleeing  ;' 
that  'we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who  have 
fled  for  refuge,  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before 
us.'  Mark,  'who  have  fled.'  It  is  taken  from 
that  20th  of  Joshua,  concerning  the  man  that  was 
to  flee  to  the  city  of  refuge,  when  the  avenger  of 
blood  was  hard  at  his  heels,  to  take  vengeance  on 
him  for  the  offence  he  had  committed ;  therefore 
it  is  a  running  or  flying  for  one's  life.  A  run- 
ning with  all  might  and  main,  as  we  use  to  say. 
So  run ! 

Second — Pressing — This  running  in  another 
place  is  called  a  pressing.  'I  press  toward  the 
mark;'  Ph.  m.  14;  which  signifieth,  that  they  that 
will  have  heaven,  they  must  not  stick  at  any  diffi- 
culties they  meet  with ;  but  press,  crowd,  and 
thrust  through  all  that  may  stand  between  heaven 
and  their  soids.     So  run ! 

Third — Continuing — This  running  is  called  in 
another  place,  'a  continuing  in  the  way  of  life.  If 
ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded,  and  settled,  and 
be  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel '  of 
Christ.  Col.  i.  23.  Not  to  run  a  little  now  and  then, 
by  fits  and  starts,  or  half-way,  or  almost  thither ; 
but  to  run  for  my  life,  to  run  through  all  difficul- 
ties, and  to  continue  therein  to  the  end  of  the  race, 
which  must  be  to  the  end  of  my  life.  'So  run, 
that  ye  may  obtain.' 

[III.  Several  Reasons  for  Clearing  rais 
Doctrine.] 

And  the  reasons  for  this  point  arc  these, 
First.  Because  all  or  every  one  that  runneth  doth 
not  obtain  the  prize ;  there  be  many  that  do  run, 
yea,  and  run  far  too,  who  yet  miss  of  the  crown 
that  standeth  at  the  end  of  the  race.  You  know 
that  all  that  run  in  a  race  do  not  obtain  the  victory  ; 
they  all  run,  but  one  wins.  And  so  it  is  here ;  it 
is  not  every  one  that  runneth,  nor  every  one  that 
seeketh,  nor  every  one  that  strivcth  for  the  mas- 
tery, that  hath  it.  Lu.  *iii.  Though  a  man  do  strive 
for' the  masterv,  saith  Paul,  'yet  he  is  not  crowned, 
except  he  strive  lawfully;'   that  is,  unless  he  bo 


382 


THE   HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN. 


run,  and  so  strive,  as  to  have  God's  approbation. 
:>Tim.  ii.  5.  What,  do  you  think  that  every  heavy- 
heeled  professor  will  have  heaven  ?  What,  every 
lazy  one  ;  every  wanton  and  foolish  professor,  that 
will  be  stopped  by  anything,  kept  back  by  any- 
thing, that  scarce  runneth  so  fast  heaven-ward  as  a 
.mail  creepeth  on  the  ground  ?  Nay,  there  are  some 
professors  do  not  go  on  so  fast  in  the  way  of  God 
as  a  snail  doth  go  on  the  wall ;  and  yet  these  think, 
that  heaven  and  happiness  is  for  them.  But  stay, 
there  are  many  more  that  run  than  there  be  that 
obtain ;  therefore  ho  that  will  have  heaven  must 
run  for  it. 

Second,  Because  you  know  that  though  a  man 
do  ruu,  yet  if  he  do  not  overcome,  or  win,  as  well  as 
run,  what  will  he  be  the  better  for  his  running  ?  He 
will  get  nothing.  You  know  the  man  that  runneth, 
lie  doth  do  it  that  he  may  win  the  prize ;  but  if 
he  doth  not  obtain,  he  doth  lose  Ms  labour,  spend 
his  pains  and  time,  and  that  to  no  purpose ;  I  say, 
lie  getteth  nothing.  And  ah !  how  many  such  run- 
ners will  there  be  found  at  the  day  of  judgment ! 
Even  multitudes,  multitudes  that  have  run,  yea, 
run  so  far  as  to  come  to  heaven  gates,  and  not  able 
to  get  any  further,  but  there  stand  knocking,  when 
it  is  too  late,  crying,  Lord,  Lord,  when  they  have 
nothing  but  rebukes  for  their  pains.  Depart  from 
me,  you  come  not  here,  you  come  too  late,  you  run 
too  lazily;  the  door  is  shut.1  'When  once  the 
master  of  the  house  is  risen  up,'  saith  Christ,  'and 
hath  shut  to  the  door,  and  ye  begin  to  stand  with- 
out, and  to  knock  at  the  door,  saying,  Lord,  Lord, 
open  unto  us,  I  will  say,  I  know  ye  not,  Depart,' 
&c.  Lu.  xiii.  25.  0  sad  will  the  estate  of  those  be 
that  run  and  miss ;  therefore,  if  you  will  have 
heaven,  you  must  run  for  it;  and  'so  run  that  ye 
may  obtain.' 

Tliird,  Because  the  way  is  long  (I  speak  meta- 
phorically), and  there  is  many  a  dirty  step,  many 
a  high  hill,  much  work  to  do,  a  wicked  heart,  world, 
and  devil,  to  overcome ;  I  say,  there  are  many  steps 
to  be  taken  by  those  that  intend  to  be  saved,  by 
running  or  walking,  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of 
our  father  Abraham.  Out  of  Egypt  thou  must  go 
through  the  Red  Sea ;  thou  must  run  a  long  and 
tedious  journey,  through  the  vast  howling  wilder- 
ness, before  thou  come  to  the  land  of  promise. 

Fourth,  They  that  will  go  to  heaven  they  must 
run  for  it ;  because,  as  the  way  is  long,  so  the  time 
in  which  they  are  to  get  to  the  end  of  it  is  very  un- 


1  How  awfully  is  this  pictured  to  the  soul  in  that  solemn 
account  of  the  day  of  death  and  judgment  in  Mat.  xxv.;  and 
how  strikingly  applied  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  in  the  char- 
acter of  Ignorance. — (En.) 

2  'When  the  bell  be-ins  io  toll, 
Lord  have  mercy  on  the  soul.' 

The  Papists  imagine  that  there  is  an  extraordinary  power  in 
the  bell  hallowed  by  baptism  to  drive  away  the  spirits  of  dark- 
m-ss,  so  that  the  departing  soul  may  take  its  journey  without 


certain ;  the  time  present  is  the  only  time ;  thou 
hast  no  more  time  allotted  thee  than  that  thou  now 
enjoyest.  '  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,  for  thou 
knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth. '  r>r.  xxvii.  i. 
Do  not  say,  I  have  time  enough  to  get  to  heaven 
seven  years  hence ;  for  I  tell  thee,  the  bell  may  toll 
for  thee  before  seven  days  more  be  ended ; 2  and 
when  death  comes,  away  thou  must  go,  whether 
thou  art  provided  or  not ;  and  therefore  look  to  it ; 
make  no  delays  ;  it  is  not  good  dallying  with  things 
of  so  great  concernment  as  the  salvation  or  dam- 
nation of  thy  sold.  You  know  he  that  hath  a  great 
way  to  go  in  a  little  time,  and  less  by  half  than  he 
thinks  of,  he  had  need  kdn  for  it. 

Fifth,  They  that  will  have  heaven  they  must  run 
for  it ;  because  the  devil,  the  law,  sin,  death,  and 
hell,  follow  them.  There  is  never  a  poor  soul  tbat 
is  going  to  heaven,  but  the  devil,  the  law,  sin, 
death,  and  hell,  make  after  that  soul.  '  Your  ad- 
versary, the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour.'  1  Pe.  v.  8.  And  I 
will  assure  you,  the  devil  is  nimble,  he  can  run 
apace,  he  is  light  of  foot,  he  hath  overtaken  many, 
he  hath  turned  up  their  heels,  and  hath  given  them 
an  everlasting  fall.  Also  the  law,  that  can  shoot 
a  great  way,  have  a  care  thou  keep  out  of  the 
reach  of  those  great  guns,  the  ten  commandments. 
Hell  also  hath  a  wide  mouth ;  it  can  stretch  itself 
further  than  you  are  aware  of.  And  as  the  angel 
said  to  Lot,  Take  heed,  '  look  not  behind  thee, 
neither  tarry  thou  in  all  the  plain,'  that  is,  any 
where  between  this  and  heaven,  'lest  thou  be  con- 
sumed. '  3  Ge.  xix.  17.  So  say  I  to  thee,  Take  heed, 
tarry  not,  lest  either  the  devil,  hell,  death,  or  the 
fearful  curses  of  the  law  of  God,  do  overtake  thee, 
and  throw  thee  down  in  the  midst  of  thy  sins,  so  as 
never  to  rise  and  recover  again.  If  this  were  well 
considered,  then  thou,  as  well  as  I,  wouldst  say, 
They  that  will  have  heaven  must  run  for  it. 

Sixth,  They  that  will  go  to  heaven  must  run  for 
it ;  because  perchance  the  gates  of  heaven  may  be 
shut  shortly.  Sometimes  sinners  have  not  heaven- 
gates  open  to  them  so  long  as  they  suppose ;  and 
if  they  be  once  shut  against  a  man,  they  are  so 
heavy,  that  all  the  men  in  the  world,  nor  all  the 
angels  in  heaven,  are  not  able  to  open  them.  I 
shut,  'and  no  man  openeth,'  saith  Christ.  And 
how  if  thou  shouldst  come  but  one  quarter  of  an 
hour  too  late?  I  tell  thee,  it  will  cost  thee  an 
eternity  to  bewail  thy  misery  in.  Francis  Spira 
can  tell  thee  what  it  is  to  stay  till  the  gate  of  mercy 


molestation ! !  It  was  also  intended  to  rouse  the  faithful  to 
pray  for  the  dead  person's  soul.  This,  and  other  superstitious 
practices,  were  suspended  during  the  Protectorate  in  some 
parishes,  if  not  generally,  but  were  revived  at  the  Restoration, 
because  the  omission  injured  the  revenues  of  the  church. — 
See  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities. — (Ed.) 

3  This  quotation,  probably  made  from  memory,  is  a  mixture 
of  the  Genevan  and  the  present  version. — (Ed.) 


THE   HEAVENLY  EOOTMAN. 


C:3 


bo  quite  shut;  or  to  run  so  lazily,  that  they  Lc 
shut  before  thou  get  within  then.1  What,  to  be 
shut  out!  -what,  out  of  heaven!  Sinner,  rather 
than  lose  it,  run  fur  it;  yea,  and  'so  run  thattbou 
mayst  obtain.' 

Seventh,  Lastly,  Because  if  thou  lose,  thou  losest 
all,  thou  losest  soul,  God,  Christ,  heaven,  ease, 
peace,  <fcc.  Besides,  thou  layest  thyself  open  to 
all  the  shame,  contempt,  and  reproach,  that  either 
God,  Christ,  saints,  the  world,  sin,  the  devil,  and 
all,  can  lay  upon  thee.  As  Christ  saith  of  the 
foolish  builder,  so  will  I  say  of  thee,  if  thou  be 
such  a  one  who  runs  and  missest ;  I  say,  even  all 
that  go  by  will  begin  to  mock  at  thee,  Baying, 
This  man  began  to  run  well,  but  was  not  able  to 
finish.  Lu.  xiv.  2S-30.     But  more  of  this  anon. 

Quest.  But  how  should  a  poor  sold  do  to  run? 
For  this  very  thing  is  that  which  afflicteth  me  sore, 
as  you  say,  to  think  that  I  may  run,  and  yet  fall 
short.  Methinks  to  fall  short  at  last,  0,  it  fears 
me  greatly.  Pray  tell  me,  therefore,  how  I  should 
run. 

Answ.  That  thou  mightest  indeed  be  satisfied  in 
this  particular,  consider  these  following  things. 

[IV.  Nine  Directions  now  to  Bun.] 

The  First  Direction. — If  thou  wouldst  so  run  as 
to  obtain  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  then  be  sure  that 
thou  get  into  the  way  that  leadeth  thither.  For  it 
is  a  vain  thing  to  think  that  ever  thou  shalt  have 
the  prize,  though  thou  runnest  never  so  fast,  un- 
less thou  art  in  the  way  that  leads  to  it.  Set  the 
case,  that  there  should  be  a  man  in  London  that 
was  to  run  to  York  for  a  wager ;  now,  though  he 
run  never  so  swiftly,  yet  if  he  run  fidl  south,  he 
might  run  himself  quickly  out  of  breath,  and  be 
never  the  nearer  the  prize,  but  rather  the  further 
off.  Just  so  is  it  here ;  it  is  not  simply  the  runner, 
nor  yet  the  hasty  runner,  that  winneth  the  crown, 
unless  he  be  in  the  way  that  leadeth  thereto.2  I 
have  observed,  that  little  time  which  I  have  been 
a  professor,  that  there  is  a  great  rmrning  to  and 
fro,  some  this  way,  and  some  that  way,  yet  it  is 
to  be  feared  most  of  them  are  out  of  the  way,  and 


1  Francis  Spirn,  in  15-4S,  being  a  lawyer  iu  great  repute  in 
Italy,  professed  gospel  priueiplcs,  but  afterwards  relapsed  into 
Popery,  aud  became  a  victim  cf  black  despair.  The  man  in 
the  iron  cage,  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  probably  referred  to 
Spira.  The  narrative  of  his  fearful  state  is  preceded  by  a 
poem: — 

'  Here  see  a  soul  that's  all  despair,  a  man 
All  hell,  a  spirit  all  wounds.     V. . 

A  wounded  spirit  bear  ? 
P.eader,  wouldst  see  what  you  may  nev<  , 

:,  racks,  torments,  whips  c,i 
Heboid  tins  man,  this  furnace,  in  whose  heart 
Sin  hath  created  hell.     0  !  in  each  part 

What  flames  appear? 
His  thoughts  all  stings;  words,  swords; 

Brimstone  his  breath  j 
His  eye?,  flames  ;  wishes,  curses ;  life,  o 
A  thousand  deaths  live  in  him,  he  not  dead — 
A  breathing  corpse  in  living  scalding  lead.— (Ed.) 


then,  though  they  run  as  swift  as  tho  eagle  can  fly, 
they  are  benefitted  notlung  at  all. 

Ilere  is  oue  runs  a-quaking,  another  a-ranting; 
one  again  runs  after  the  Baptism,  and  another 
after  the  Independency.  Here  is  one  for  free-will, 
and  another  for  Presbytery ;  and  yet  possibly  most 
of  all  these  sects  run  quite  tho  wrong  way,  and 
yet  every  one  is  for  his  life,  his  soid,  cither  for 
heaven  or  hell.3 

If  thou  now  say,  Which  is  the  way  ?  I  tell  thee 
it  is  Christ,  TriE  Son  op  Make,  tiik  Son  o?  God 
Jesus  saith,  '  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the 
life;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me.' 
.in.  xiv.  c.  So  then  thy  business  is,  if  thou  wouldst 
have  salvation,  to  see  if  Christ  be  thine,  with  all 
his  benefits ;  whether  he  hath  covered  thee  with 
his  righteousness,  whether  he  hath  showed  thee 
that  thy  sins  are  washed  away  with  his  heart-blood, 
whether  thou  art  planted  into  him,  and  whether 
thou  have  faith  in  him,  so  as  to  make  a  lift;  out  of 
him,  and  to  conform  thee  to  him.  That  is,  such 
faith  as  to  conclude  that  thou  art  righteoi 
cause  Christ  is  thy  righteousness,  and  so  constrained 
to  walk  with  him  as  the  joy  of  thy  heart,  bceau-r 
he  saveth  thy  soul.  And  for  the  Lord's  sake  take 
heed,  and  do  not  deceive  thyself,  and  think  thou 
art  in  tho  way  upon  too  slight  grounds  ;  for  if  thou 
miss  of  the  way,  thou  wilt  miss  of  the  prize  ;  and 
if  thou  miss  of  that,  I  am  sure  thou  wilt  lose  thy 
soul,  even  that  soul  which  is  worth  more  than  the 
whole  world. 

But  I  have  treated  more  largely  on  this  in  my 
book  of  the  two  covenants,  and  therefore  shall  pass 
it  now ;  only  I  beseech  thee  to  have  a  care  of  thy 
soul,  and  that  thou  mayest  so  do,  take  this  coun- 
sel :  Mistrust  thy  own  strength,  and  throw  it  away  ; 
down  on  thy  knees  in  prayer  to  the  Lord  f 
spirit  of  truth  ;  search  his  word  for  direction  ;  fly  se- 
ducers' company  ;  keep  company  with  the  Bonnde  I 
Christians,  that  have  most  experience  of  Christ ; 
and  be  sure  thou  have  a  care  of  Quakers,  Ranters, 
Freewillers ;  also  do  not  have  too  much  company 
with  some  Anabaptists,  though  I  go  under  that 
name  myself.3     I  tell  thee  this  is  such  a  scrior.^ 


2  How  plain  and  important  is  this  direction.     Saul  the  per- 
secutor ran  fast,  but  the  faster  he  ran  in  his  murder 
the  further  he  ran  from  the  prize.    Let  every  stauuch  B 
examine  prayerfully  his  way,  especially  if  the  sect  he 
to  is  patronized  by  princes,  popes,  or  potentates,  and 
with  worldly  honours.     He  may  be  ruuniug//c//,j  aud  not  to 
heaveu. — (Ed.) 

c  He  that  trusts  in  the  sect  to  which  he  bch'i 
in  the  wrong  way,  whether  it  be  the  Church  of 
land,  Quaking,  Ranting,  Baptists,  or  Independents.     I 
Christ  must  be  all  in  a)L  Rrst  be  IN  Chris 
looking  unto  Christ.     Keep  fellowship  with  those  who 
purest,  and  run  fastest  in  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel  which 
are  revealed  in  the  Word.     Follow  no  hum:... 
craft,  seek  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  fur  yourse 
you  may  he  led  into  all  truth,  then  you  wiil 
obtain. — (Ed.) 


:3Si 


THE   HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN. 


matter,  and  I  fear  thou  wilt  so  little  regard  it,  that 
the  thoughts  of  the  worth  of  the  thing,  and  of  thy 
too  light  regarding  of  it,  doth  even  make  my  heart 
ache  whilst  I  am  writing  to  thee.  The  Lord  teach 
thee  the  way  by  his  Spirit,  and  then  I  am  sure 
thou  wilt  know  it.     So  run. 

Only  by  the  way,  let  me  bid  thee  have  a  care  of 
two  things,  and  so  I  shall  pass  to  the  next  thing. 

I.  Have  a  care  of  relying  on  the  outward  obe- 
dience to  any  of  God's  commands,  or  thinking  thy- 
self ever  the  better  in  the  sight  of  God  for  that. 
2.  Take  heed  of  fetching  peace  for  thy  soul  from 
any  inherent  righteousness  ;  but  if  thou  canst  be- 
lieve that  as  thou  art  a  sinner,  so  thou  art  justified 
freely  by  the  love  of  God,  through  the  redemption 
that  is  in  Christ ;  and  that  God  for  Christ's  sake 
hath  forgiven  thee,  not  because  he  saw  any  thing 
done,  or  to  be  done,  in  or  by  thee,  to  move  him 
thereunto  to  do  it ;  for  that  is  the  right  way ;  the 
Lord  put  thee  into  it,  and  keep  thee  in  it. 

The  Second  Direction. — As  thou  shouldst  get  into 
the  way  so  thou  shouldst  also  be  much  in  studying 
and  musing  on  the  way.  You  know  men  that 
would  be  expert  in  any  thing,  they  are  usually 
much  in  studying  of  that  thing,  and  so  likewise  is 
it  with  those  that  quickly  grow  expert  in  any  way. 
This  therefore  thou  shouldst  do  ;  let  thy  study  be 
much  exercised  about  Christ,  which  is  the  way; 
what  he  is,  what  he  hath  done,  and  why  he  is  what 
he  is,  and  why  he  hath  done  what  is  done ;  as, 
why  '  He  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,' 
why  he  '  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men. '  rh.  ii.  7. 
Why  he  cried ;  why  he  died ;  why  he  bear  the  sin 
of  the  world ;  why  he  was  made  sin,  and  why  he 
was  made  righteousness ;  why  he  is  in  heaven  in 
the  nature  of  man,  and  what  he  doth  there?  2C0. 
v.  21.  Be  much  in  musing  and  considering  of  these 
things ;  be  thinking  also  enough  of  those  places 
which  thou  must  not  come  near,  but  leave  some  on 
this  hand,  and  some  on  that  hand ;  as  it  is  with 
those  that  travel  into  other  countries,  they  must 
leave  such  a  gate  on  this  hand,  and  such  a  bush  on 
that  hand,  and  go  by  such  a  place,  where  standeth 
such  a  thing.  Thus,  therefore,  thou  must  do  : 
Avoid  such  things  which  are  expressly  forbidden 
in  the  Word  of  God.  « Withdraw  thy  foot  far  from 
her,  and  come  not  nigh  the  door  of  her  house,  for 
her  steps  take  hold  on  hell,  going  down  to  the  cham- 
bers of  death.'  Pr.  v.,  vii.  And  so  of  every  thing 
that  is  not  in  the  way,  have  a  care  of  it,  that  thou 
go  not  by  it ;  come  not  near  it,  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it.      So  run. 

The  Third  Direction. — Not  only  thus,  but,  in  the 
next  place,  thou  must  strip  thyself  of  those  things 
that  may  hang  upon  thee  to  the  hindering  of  thee 
in  the  way  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  covetous- 
ness,  pride,  lust,  or  whatever  else  thy  heart  may 
be  inclining  unto,  which  may  hinder  thee  in  this 


heavenly  race.  Men  that  run  for  a  wager,  if  they 
intend  to  win  as  well  as  run,  they  do  not  use  to 
encumber  themselves,  or  carry  those  things  about 
them  that  may  be  a  hinderance  to  them  in  their 
running.  'Every  man  that  striveth  for  the  mas- 
tery is  temperate  in  all  things,'  1  Co.  ix.  25,  that  is, 
he  layeth  aside  every  thing  that  Avould  be  any 
ways  a  disadvantage  to  him ;  as  saith  the  apostle, 
'  Let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which 
doth  so  easily  beset  us,  and  let  us  run  with  patience 
the  race  that  is  set  before  us.'  He.  xii.  1.  It  is  but 
a  vain  thing  to  talk  of  going  to  heaven,  if  thou  let 
thy  heart  be  encumbered  with  those  things  that 
would  hinder.  Would  you  not  say  that  such  Io- 
nian would  be  in  danger  of  losing,  though  he  run, 
if  he  fill  his  pockets  with  stones,  hang  heavy  gar- 
ments on  his  shoulders,  and  great  lumpish  shoes 
on  his  feet?1  So  it  is  here  ;  thou  talkest  of  going 
to  heaven,  and  yet  fillest  thy  pocket  with  stones, 
i.e.,  fillest  thy  heart  with  this  world,  lettest  that 
hang  on  thy  shoulders,  with  its  profits  and  plea- 
sures. Alas,  alas,  thou  art  widely  mistaken!  If 
thou  intendest  to  win,  thou  must  strip,  thou  must 
lay  aside  every  weight,  thou  must  be  temperate  in 
all  things.     Thou  must  so  run. 

The  Fourth  Direction. — Beware  of  by-paths ; 
take  heed  thou  dost  not  turn  into  those  lanes  which 
lead  out  of  the  way.  There  are  crooked  paths, 
paths  in  which  men  go  astray,  paths  that  lead  to 
death  and  damnation,  but  take  heed  of  all  those, 
is.  lix.  8.  Some  of  them  are  dangerous  because  of 
practice;  Pr.  vii.  25;  some  because  of  opinion,  but 
mind  them  not ;  mind  the  path  before  thee,  look 
right  before  thee,  turn  neither  to  the  right  hand 
nor  to  the  left,  but  let  thine  eyes  look  right  on, 
even  right  before  thee.  Pr.  Hi.  17.  '  Ponder  the  path 
of  thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established. 
Turn  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left.  Re- 
move thy  foot  far  from  evil.'  Pr.  iv.  26,  27.  This 
counsel  being  not  so  seriously  taken  as  given,  is  the 
reason  of  that  starting  from  opinion  to  opinion, 
reeling  this  way  and  that  way,  out  of  this  lane  into 
that  lane,  and  so  missing  the  way  to  the  kingdom. 
Though  the  way  to  heaven  be  but  one,  yet  there 
are  many  crooked  lanes  and  by-paths  shoot  down 
upon  it,  as  I  may  say.  And  again,  notwithstand- 
ing the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  the  biggest  city,  yet 
usually  those  by-paths  are  most  beaten,  most  tra- 
vellers go  those  ways ;  and  therefore  the  way  to 
heaven  is  hard  to  be  found,  and  as  hard  to  be  kept 
in,  by  reason  of  these.     Yet,  nevertheless,  it  is  in 


1  How  plain  is  this  direction,  and  how  does  it  commend 
itself  to  our  common-sense ;  lumpish  shoes,  and  pockets  lilled 
willi  stones,  how  absurd  for  a  man  who  is  running  a  race ! ! 
Stop,  my  dear  reader,  have  you  cast  away  all  useless  encum- 
brances, and  all  easily  besetting  sins  ?  Is  your  heart  full  of 
mammon,  or  pride,  or  debauchery  ?  if  so,  you  have  110  particle 
of  strength  to  run  for  heaven,  but  are  running  upon  swift 
perdition. — (Ed.) 


THE   HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN. 


335 


this  case  as  it  was  with  the  harlot  of  Jericho ;  she 
had  one  scarlet  thread  tied  in  her  window,  hy  which 
her  house  was  known.  Jo.  ii.  18.  So  it  is  here,  the 
scarlet  streams  of  Christ's  hlood  run  throughout 
the  way  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven ; 1  therefore 
mind  that,  see  if  thou  do  find  the  besprinkling  of 
the  blood  of  Christ  in  the  way,  and  if  thou  do,  he 
of  good  cheer,  thou  art  in  the  right  way  ;  but  have 
a  care  thou  beguile  not  thyself  with  a  fancy,  for 
then  thou  mayst  light  into  any  lane  or  way ;  but 
that  thou  mayst  not  be  mistaken,  consider,  though 
it  seem  never  so  pleasant,  yet  if  thou  do  not  find 
that  in  the  very  middle  of  the  road  there  is  writing 
witli  the  heart-blood  of  Christ,  that  he  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  that  we  are  justified, 
though  we  are  ungodly ;  shun  that  way ;  for  this 
it  is  which  the  apostle  meaneth  when  he  saith,  We 
have  'boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way  which  he  hath 
consecrated  for  us,  through  the  vail,  that  is  to  say, 
his  flesh.'  rie.  x.  19,  20.  How  easy  a  matter  is  it  in 
this  our  day,  for  the  devil  to  be  too  cunning  for 
poor  souls,  by  calling  his  by-paths  the  way  to  the 
kingdom!  If  such  an  opinion  or  fancy  be  but 
cried  up  by  one  or  more,  this  inscription  being  set 
upon  it  by  the  devil,  '  This  is  the  way  of  God,'  how 
speedily,  greedily,  and  by  heaps,  do  poor  simple 
souls  throw  away  themselves  upon  it ;  especially 
if  it  be  daubed  over  with  a  few  external  acts  of 
morality,  if  so  good.2  But  this  is  because  men  do 
not  know  painted  by-paths  from  the  plain  way  to 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  They  have  not  yet  learned 
the  true  Christ,  and  what  his  righteousness  is, 
neither  have  they  a  sense  of  their  own  insufficiency ; 
but  are  bold,  proud,  presumptuous,  self-conceited. 
And  therefore, 

The  Fifth  Direction.  Do  not  thou  be  too  much 
in  looking  too  high  in  thy  journey  heavenwards. 
You  know  men  that  run  in  a  race  do  not  use  to 
stare  and  gaze  this  way  and  that,  neither  do  they 
use  to  cast  up  their  eyes  too  high,  lest  happily,3 
through  their  too  too  much  gazing  with  their  eyes 
after  other  things,  they  in  the  meantime  stumble 
and  catch  a  fall.  The  very  same  case  is  this ;  if 
thou  gaze  and  stare  after  every  opinion  and  way 
that  comes  into  the  world ;  also  if  thou  be  prying 
overmuch  into  God's  secret  decrees,  or  let  thy  heart 
too  much  entertain  questions  about  some  nice 
foolish  curiosities,  thou  mayst  stumble  and  fall,  as 
many  hundreds  in   England  have  done,   both   in 


1  This  is  one  of  those  beautiful  ideas  which  so  abound  in  all 
Bunyan's  works.  Our  way  to  the  kingdom  is  consecrated  by 
the  cross  of  Christ,  and  may  be  known  throughout  by  the 
sprinkling  of  his  blood,  his  groans,  his  agonies.  All  the  doc- 
trines that  put  us  in  the  way  are  sanctified  by  the  atonement ; 
all  the  spurs  to  a  diligent  running  in  that  way  are  powerful  as 
motives,  by  our  being  bought  with  that  precious  price,  the 
death  of  Emmanuel.  0!  my  soul,  be  thou  found  looking  unto 
Jesus,  he  is  the  way,  the  only  way  to  heaven. — (En.) 
VOL.  III. 


Ranting  and  Quakery,  to  their  own  eternal  over- 
throw ;  without  the  marvellous  operation  of  God's 
grace  be  suddenly  stretched  forth  to  bring  them 
back  again.  Take  heed  therefore,  follow  not  that 
proud  and  lofty  spirit,  that,  devil-like,  cannot  be 
content  with  his  own  station.  David  was  of  an 
excellent  spirit  where  he  saith,  '  Lord,  my  heart 
is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes  lofty,  neither  do  1 
exercise  myself  in  great  matters,  or  in  things  too 
high  for  me.  Surely  I  have  behaved  and  quieted 
myself  as  a  child  that  is  weaned  of  his  mother  : 
my  soul  is  even  as  a  weaned  child.'  i*s.  cxxxL  i,  2. 
Do  thou  so  RON. 

The  Sixth  Direction.  Take  heed  that  you  have 
not  an  ear  open  to  every  one  that  calleth  after  you 
as  you  are  in  your  journey.  Men  that  run,  you 
know,  if  any  do  call  after  them,  saying,  I  would 
speak  with  you,  or  go  not  too  fast,  and  you  shall 
have  my  company  with  you,  if  they  run  for  some 
great  matter,  they  use  to  say,  Alas,  I  cannot  stay, 
I  am  in  haste,  pray  talk  not  to  me  now ;  neither 
can  I  stay  for  you,  I  am  running  for  a  wager :  if  I 
win  I  am  made,  if  I  lose  I  am  undone,  and  there- 
fore hinder  me  not.  Thus  wise  are  men  when  they 
run  for  corruptible  things,  and  thus  should  thou 
do,  and  thou  hast  more  cause  to  do  so  than  they, 
forasmuch  as  they  run  but  for  things  that  last  not, 
but  thou  for  an  incorruptible  glory.  I  give  thee 
notice  of  this  betimes,  knowing  that  thou  sbalt 
have  enough  call  after  thee,  even  the  devil,  sin,  this 
world,  vain  company,  pleasures,  profits,  esteem 
among  men,  ease,  pomp,  pride,  together  with  an 
innumerable  company  of  such  companions;  one  cry- 
ing, Stay  for  me  ;  the  other  saying,  Do  not  leave 
me  behind ;  a  third  saying,  And  take  me  along 
with  you.  What,  will  you  go,  saith  the  devil, 
without  your  sins,  pleasures,  and  profits  ?  Are 
you  so  hasty  ?  Can  you  not  stay  and  take  these 
along  with  you  ?  Will  you  leave  your  friends  and 
companions  behind  you  ?  Can  you  not  do  as  your 
neighbours  do,  carry  the  world,  sin,  lust,  pleasure, 
profit,  esteem  among  men,  along  with  you  ?  Have 
a  care  thou  do  not  let  thine  ear  now  be  open  to 
the  tempting,  enticing,  alluring,  and  soul-entang- 
ling flatteries  of  such  sink-souls4  as  these  are. 
4  My  son,'  saith  Solomon,  '  if  sinners  entice  thee, 
consent  thou  not. '  Pr.  i.  10. 


2  Strange  infatuation,  desperate  pride,  that  man  should  reject 
the  humbling  simplicity  of  Divine  truth,  and  run  so  anxiously, 
greedily,  and  in  hosts,  in  the  road  to  ruin,  because  pricstcrait 
calls  it  'The  way  of  God;'  preferring  the  miserable  sophistry 
of  Satan  and  his  emissaries  to  the  plain  directions  of  Holy 
Writ.  01  reader,  put  not  your  trust  in  man,  but.  while  God 
is  ready  to  direct  you.  rely  solely  on  his  Holy  Word. — (Ei>.) 

3  '  Happily,'  or  haply,  were 'formerly  used  to  express  the 
same  meaning. — (Ed.) 

4  'Sink-souls'  is  one  of  Bunyan's  strong  Saxqtusms,  full  of 
meaning.    'Sink'  is  that  in  which  filth  or  foulness  is  deposited. 

'  She  poured  forth  out  of  her  hellish  sink 
Iler  fruitful  cursed  spawn.'— Speuccr.— (F.D.) 

49 


386 


THE   HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN. 


You  know  what  It  cost  the  young  man  which 
Solomon  speaks  of  in  the  7th  of  the  Proverbs,  that 
was  enticed  by  a  harlot,  '  With  her  much  fair 
speech  she '  won  him,  and  *  caused  him  to  yield, 
with  the  flattering  of  her  lips  she  forced  him,'  till 
he  went  after  her  'as  an  ox  to  the  slaughter,  or  as 
a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks;'  even  so  far, 
•  till  the  dart  struck  through  his  liver,  and  knew 
not  that  it  was  for  his  life.  Hearken  unto  me  now 
therefore,'  saith  he,  '  0  ye  children,  and  attend  to 
the  words  of  my  mouth,  let  not  thine  heart  decline 
to  her  ways,  go  not  astray  in  her  paths,  for  she 
hath  cast  down  many  wounded,  yea,  many  strong 
men  have  heen  slain  by  her,'  that  is,  kept  out  of 
heaven  by  her,  'her  house  is  the  way  to  hell, 
going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death.'  Soul,  take 
this  counsel  and  say,  Satan,  sin,  lust,  pleasure, 
profit,  pride,  friends,  companions,  and  everything 
else,  let  me  alone,  stand  off,  come  not  nigh  me, 
for  I  am  running  for  heaven,  for  my  soul,  for  God, 
for  Christ,  from  hell  and  everlasting  damnation:  if 
I  win,  I  win  all,  and  if  I  lose,  I  lose  all ;  let  me 
alone,  for  I  will  not  hear.      So  run. 

The  Seventh  Direction.  In  the  next  place,  be 
not  daunted  though  thou  meetest  with  never  so 
many  discouragements  in  thy  journey  thither. 
That  man  that  is  resolved  for  heaven,  if  Satan 
cannot  win  him  by  flatteries,  he  will  endeavour  to 
weaken  him  by  discouragements;  saying,  thou  art 
a  sinner,  thou  hast  broke  God's  law,  thou  art  not 
elected,  thou  comest  too  late,  the  day  of  grace  is 
past,  God  doth  not  care  for  thee,  thy  heart  is 
naught,  thou  art  lazy,  with  a  hundred  other  dis- 
couraging suggestions.  And  thus  it  was  with 
David,  where  he  saith,  « I  had  fainted,  unless  I 
had  believed  to  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the 
land  of  the  living.'  p3.  xxvii.  13, 14.  As  if  he  should 
say,  the  devil  did  so  rage  and  my  heart  was  so 
base,  that  had  I  judged  according  to  my  own  sense 
and  feeling,  I  had  been  absolutely  distracted;  but 
I  trusted  to  Christ  in  the  promise,  and  looked  that 
God  would  be  as  good  as  his  promise,  in  having 
mercy  upon  me,  an  unworthy  sinner;  and  this  is 
that  which  encouraged  me,  and  kept  me  from 
fainting.  And  thus  must  thou  do  when  Satan,  or 
the  law,  or  thy  own  conscience,  do  go  about  to 
dishearten  thee,  either  by  the  greatness  of  thy  sins, 
the  wickedness  of  thy  heart,  the  tediousness  of 
the  way,  the  loss  of  outward  enjoyments,  the 
hatred  that  thou  wilt  procure  from  the  world,  or 
the  like;  then  thou  must  encourage  thyself  with 
the  freeness  of  the  promises,  the  tender-hearted- 
ness of  Christ,  the  merits  of  his  blood,  the  freeness 
of  his  invitations  to  come  in,  the  greatness  of  the 
sin  of  others  that  have  been  pardoned,  and  that 
the  same  God,  through  the  same  Christ,  holdeth 
forth  the  same  grace  free  as  ever.  If  these  be 
not  thy  meditations,  thou  wilt  draw  very  heavily 


in  the  way  to  heaven,  if  thou  do  not  give  up  all 
for  lost,  and  so  knock  off  from  following  any  far- 
ther; therefore,  I  say,  take  heart  in  thy  journey, 
and  say  to  them  that  seek  thy  destruction,  '  Re- 
joice not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy,  when  I  fall 
I  shall  arise,  when  I  sit  in  darkness  the  Lord  shall 
be  a  light  unto  me.'  Mi.  vii.  8.     So  run. 

The  EigUh  Direction.  Take  heed  of  being 
offended  at  the  cross  that  thou  must  go  by,  before 
thou  come  to  heaven.  You  must  understand,  as  I 
have  already  touched,  that  there  is  no  man  that 
goeth  to  heaven  but  he  must  go  by  the  cross.  The 
cross  is  the  standing  way-mark  by  which  all  they 
that  go  to  glory  must  pass  by.  •  We  must  through 
much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.' 
Ac.  xiv.  22.  •  Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution.'  2Ti.  iii.  12.  If 
thou  art  in  the  way  to  the  kingdom,  my  life  for 
thine  thou  wilt  come  at  the  cross  shortly — the 
Lord  grant  thou  dost  not  shrink  at  it,  so  as  to 
turn  thee  back  again.  '  If  any  man  will  come 
after  me,'  saith  Christ,  '  let  him  deny  himself,  and 
take  up  his  cross  daily,  and  follow  me.'  Lu.  ix.  23. 
The  cross  it  stands,  aud  hath  stood,  from  the  be- 
ginning, as  a  way-mark  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.1 
You  know  if  one  ask  you  the  way  to  such  and  such 
a  place,  you,  for  the  better  direction,  do  not  only 
say,  this  is  the  way,  but  then  also  say,  you  must 
go  by  such  a  gate,  by  such  a  style,  such  a  bush, 
tree,  bridge,  or  such  like.  Why,  so  it  is  here;  art 
thou  inquiring  the  way  to  heaven?  Why,  I  tell 
thee,  Christ  is  the  way;  into  him  thou  must  get, 
into  his  righteousness,  to  be  justified;  and  if  thou 
art  in  him,  thou  wilt  presently  see  the  cross,  thou 
must  go  close  by  it,  thou  must  touch  it,  nay,  thou 
must  take  it  up,  or  else  thou  wilt  quickly  go  out 
of  the  way  that  leads  to  heaven,  and  turn  up  some 
of  those  crooked  lanes  that  lead  down  to  the  cham- 
bers of  death. 

How  thou  mayest  know  the  cross  by  these  six 
things.  1.  It  is  known  in  the  doctrine  of  justifi- 
cation. 2.  In  the  doctrine  of  mortification.  3.  In 
the  doctrine  of  perseverance.  4.  In  self-denial. 
5.  Patience.     6.   Communion  with  poor  saints. 

1.  In  the  doctrine  of  justification;  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  the  cross  in  that:  a  man  is  forced  to 
suffer  the  destruction  of  his  own  righteousness  for 
the  righteousness  of  another.  This  is  no  easy 
matter  for  a  man  to  do;  I  assure  to  you  it  stretch- 
eth  every  vein  in  his  heart  before  he  will  be  brought 
to  yield  to  it.     What,  for  a  man  to  deny,  reject, 


1  This  is  one  of  Bunyan's  most  deeply  expressive  directions 
to  the  heaven-ward  pilgrim;  may  it  sink  into  our  hearts. 
Christ  is  the  way,  the  cross  is  the  standing  way-mark  through- 
out the  road,  never  out  of  sight.  In  embracing  the  humbling 
doctrines  of  grace,  in  sorrow  for  sin,  in  crucifying  self,  in  bear- 
ing each  other's  burdens,  in  passing  through  the  river  that 
will  absorb  our  mortality — from  the  new  birth  to  our  inherit- 
ance— the  cross  is  the  way-mark. — (Ed.) 


THE   HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN. 


3S7 


Abhor,  and  throw  away  all  his  prayer?,  tears,  alms, 
keeping  of  sabbaths,  hearing,  reading,  with  the 
rest,  in  the  point  of  justification,  and  to  count  them 
accursed;1  and  to  be  willing,  in  the  very  midst  of 
the  sense  of  his  sins,  to  throw  himself  wholly  upon 
the  righteousness  and  obedience  of  another  man, 
abhorring  his  own,  counting  it  as  deadly  sin,  as 
the  open  breach  of  the  law;  I  say,  to  do  tbis  in 
deed  and  in  truth,  is  the  biggest  piece  of  the  cross; 
and  therefore  Faul  calleth  tbis  very  thing  a  suffer- 
ing; where  he  saith,  *  And  I  have  BUFFERED  the 
loss  of  all  things,'  which  principally  was  his 
righteousness,  'that  I  might  win  Christ,  and  be 
found  in  him,  not  having,'  but  rejecting,  'mine 
own  righteousness.'  rhi.  Hi.  8,  ».     That  is  the  first. 

2.  In  the  doctrine  of  mortification  is  also  much 
of  the  cross.  Is  it  nothing  for  a  man  to  lay  hands 
on  his  vile  opinions,  on  his  vile  sins,  of  his  bosom 
sins,  of  his  beloved,  pleasant,  darling  sins,  that 
stick  as  close  to  him,  as  the  flesh  sticketh  to  the 
bones  ?  What,  to  lose  all  these  brave  things  that 
my  eyes  behold,  for  that  which  I  never  saw  with 
my  eyes  ?  What,  to  lose  my  pride,  my  covetous- 
ness,  my  vain  company,  sports,  and  pleasures,  and 
the  rest  ?  I  tell  you  this  is  no  easy  matter;  if  it 
were,  what  need  all  those  prayers,  sighs,  watch- 
ings  ?  What  need  we  be  so  backward  to  it  ?  Nay, 
do  you  not  see,  that  some  men,  before  they  will 
set  about  this  work,  they  will  even  venture  the  loss 
of  their  souls,  heaven,  God,  Christ,  and  all  ?  What 
means  else  all  those  delays  and  put-offs,  saying, 
Stay  a  little  longer,  I  am  loth  to  leave  my  sins 
while  I  am  so  young,  and  in  health  ?  Again, 
what  is  the  reason  else,  that  others  do  it  so  by  the 
halves,  coldly  and  seldom,  notwithstanding  they 
are  convinced  over  and  over;  nay,  and  also  pro- 
mise to  amend,  and  yet  all's  in  vain  ?  I  will  assure 
you,  to  cut  off  right  hands,  and  to  pluck  out  right 
eyes,  is  no  pleasure  to  the  flesh. 

3.  The  doctrine  of  perseverance  is  also  cross  to 
the  flesh;  which  is  not  only  to  begin,  but  for  to 
hold  out,  not  only  to  bid  fair,  and  to  say,  Would 
I  had  heaven,  but  so  to  know  Christ,  to  put  on 
Christ,  and  walk  with  Christ  as  to  come  to  heaven. 
Indeed,  it  is  no  great  matter  to  begin  to  look  for 
heaven,  to  begin  to  seek  the  Lord,  to  begin  to 
shun  sin.  0  but  it  is  a  very  great  matter  to  con- 
tinue with  God's  approbation !  '  My  servant 
Caleb,'  saith  God,  is  a  man  of  '  another  spirit,  he 
hath  followed  me,'  followed  me  always,  he  hath 
continually  followed  me,  '  fully,  he  shall  possess 
the  land.'  Xu.  xiv.  24.  Almost  all  the  many  thou- 
sands of  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  generation, 

1  Our  holiest,  happiest  duties,  if  they  interfere  with  a  simple 
and  exclusive  reliance  upon  Christ  for  justification,  must  be 
accursed  in  our  esteem ;  while,  if  they  are  fulfilled  in  a  proper 
spirit  of  love  to  him,  they  become  our  most  blessed  privileges. 
Kaader,  be  jealous  of  jour  motives. — (Ed.) 


fell  short  of  perseverance  when  they  walked  from 
Egypt  towards  the  land  of  Canaan.  Indeed  thej 
went  to  the  work  at  first  pretty  willingly,  but  tiny 
were  very  short-winded,  they  were  quickly  out  of 
breath,  and  in  their  hearts  they  turned  back  again 
into  Egypt. 

It  is  an  easy  matter  for  a  man  to  run  bard  fur 
a  spurt,  for  a  furlong,  for  a  mile  or  two;  0,  but  to 
hold  out  for  a  hundred,  for  a  thousand,  I'm-  ten 
thousand  miles:  that  man  that  doth  this,  he  must 
look  to  meet  with  cross,  pain,  and  wearisomeness 
to  the  flesh,  especially  if  as  he  goeth  he  meeteth 
with  briars  and  quagmires,  and  other  incum- 
brances, that  make  his  journey  so  much  the  more 
painfullcr. 

Nay,  do  you  not  see  with  your  eyes  daily,  that 
perseverance  is  a  very  great  part  of  the  cross? 
why  else  do  men  so  soon  grow  weary?  I  could 
point  out  a  many,  that  after  they  have  followed  the 
ways  of  God  about  a  twelvemonth,  others  it  may 
be  two,  three,  or  four,  some  more,  and  some  less 
years,  they  have  been  beat  out  of  wind,  have 
taken  up  their  lodging  and  rest  before  they  have 
got  half-way  to  heaven,  some  in  this,  and  some  in 
that  sin ;  and  have  secretly,  nay,  sometimes  openly 
said,  that  the  way  is  too  strait,  the  race  too  long, 
the  religion  too  holy,  and  cannot  hold  out,  I  can 
go  no  farther. 

4,  5,  6.  And  so  likewise  of  the  other  three,  to 
wit,  patience,  self-denial,  communion,  and  commu- 
nication with  and  to  the  poor  saints.  How  hard 
are  these  things?  It  is  an  easy  matter  to  deny 
another  man,  but  it  is  not  so  easy  a  matter  to 
deny  one's  self;  to  deny  myself  out  of  love  to  God, 
to  his  gospel,  to  his  saints,  of  this  advantage,  and 
of  that  gain;  nay,  of  that  which  otherwise  I  might 
lawfully  do,  were  it  not  for  offending  them.  That 
scripture  is  but  seldom  read,  and  seldomer  put  in 
practice,  which  saith,  '  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while 
the  world  standeth,  if  it  make  my  brother  to  offend. 
1  Co.  viii.  13.  Again,  '  We  that  are  strong  ought  to 
bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please 
ourselves.'  no.  xv.  1.  But  how  froward,  how  hasty, 
how  peevish,  and  self-resolved  are  the  generality 
of  professors  at  this  day !  Also,  how  little  con- 
sidering the  poor,  unless  it  be  to  say,  Be  thou 
warmed  and  filled!  But  to  give  is  a  seldom  work; 
also  especially  to  give  to  any  poor.  Ga.  iL  10.  I  tell 
you  all  things  are  cross  to  flesh  and  blood;  and 
that  man  that  hath  but  a  watchful  eye  over  the 
flesh,  and  also  some  considerable  measure  of 
strength  against  it,  he  shall  find  his  heart  in  these 
things  like  unto  a  starting  horse,  that  is  rid  with- 
out a  curbing  bridle,  ready  to  start  at  everything 
that  is  offensive  to  him;  yea,  and  ready  to  run 
away  too,  do  what  the  rider  can. 

It  is  the  cross  which  kcepeth  those  that  are 
kept  from  heaven.     I  am  persuaded,  were  it  not 


338 


THE   HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN. 


for  the  cross,  where  we  have  one  professor,  we 
should  have  twenty;  but  this  cross,  that  is  it  which 
spoileth  all. 

Some  men,  as  I  said  before,  when  they  come  at 
the  cross  they  can  go  no  farther,  but  back  again 
to  their  sins  they  must  go.  Others  they  stumble 
at  it,  and  break  their  necks;  others  again,  when 
they  see  the  cross  is  approaching,  they  turn  aside 
to  the  left  hand,  or  to  the  right  hand,  and  so  think 
to  get  to  heaven  another  way;  but  they  will  be 
deceived.  '  Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus  shall,'  mark,  shall  be  sure  to  '  suffer 
persecution.'  2Ti.  m.  12.  There  are  but  few  when 
they  come  at  the  cross,  cry,  '  Welcome  cross,  as 
some  of  the  martyrs  did  to  the  stake  they  were 
burned  at.  Therefore,  if  thou  meet  with  the  cross 
in  thy  journey,  in  what  manner  soever  it  be,  be 
not  daunted,  and  say,  Alas,  what  shall  I  do  now! 
But  rather  take  courage,  knowing,  that  by  the 
cross  is  the  way  to  the  kingdom.  Can  a  man 
believe  in  Christ  and  not  be  hated  by  the  devil? 
Can  he  make  a  profession  of  this  Christ,  and  that 
sweetly  and  convincingly,  and  the  children  of  Satan 
hold  their  tongue  ?  Can  darkness  agree  witb 
light  ?  or  the  devil  endure  that  Christ  Jesus  should 
be  honoured  both  by  faith  and  a  heavenly  conversa- 
tion, and  let  that  soul  alone  at  quiet  ?  Did  you  never 
read,  that  *  the  dragon  persecuteth.  the  woman  V 
He.  s'n.  And  that  Christ  saith,  '  In  the  world  ye 
shall  have  tribulation.'  Jn.  xvi.  33. 

Tlie  Ninth  Direction.  Beg  of  God  that  he  would 
do  these  two  things  for  thee:  First,  Enlighten 
thine  understanding.  And,  Second,  Inflame  thy 
will.  If  these  two  be  but  effectually  done,  there 
is  no  fear  but  thou  wilt  go  safe  to  heaven. 

{First,  Enlighten  thine  understanding.]  One  of 
the  great  reasons  why  men  and  women  do  so  little 
regard  the  other  world,  it  is  because  they  see 
so  little  of  it.1  And  the  reason  why  they  see  so 
little  of  it  is  because  they  have  their  understand- 
ings darkened.  And  therefore,  saith  Paul,  do  not 
you  believers  '  walk  as  do  other  Gentiles,  even  in 
the  vanity  of  their  minds,  having  the  understand- 
ing darkened,  being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God 
through  the  ignorance,'  or  foolishness  '  that  is  in 
them,  because  of  the  blindness  of  their  heart.' 
Ep.  iv.  n,  is.  Walk  not  as  those,  run  not  with  them : 
alas,  poor  souls,  they  have  their  understandings 
darkened,  their  hearts  blinded,  and  that  is  the 
reason  they  have  such  undervaluing  thoughts  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  salvation  of  their 
souls.     For  when  men  do  come  to  see  the  things 


1  This  is  a  very  solemn  warning.  But  is  it  asked  how  are 
we  to  see  that  that  is  invisible,  or  to  imagine  bliss  that  is  past 
our  understanding?  The  reply  is,  treasure  up  iu  your  heart 
those  glimpses  of  glory  contained  in  the  Word.  Be  daily  in 
communion  with  the  world  of  spirits,  and  it  may  be  your  lot, 
with  Paul,  to  have  so  soul-ravishing  a  sense  of  eternal  realities, 
as  scarcely  to  know  whether  you  are  in  the  body  or  not. — (Ed.) 


of  another  world,  what  a  God,  what  a  Christ,  what 
a  heaven,  and  what  an  eternal  glory  there  is  to  bo 
enjoyed;  also  when  they  see  that  it  is  possible  for 
them  to  have  a  share  in  it,  I  tell  you  it  will  make 
them  run  through   thick   and    thin  to    enjoy  it. 
Moses,  having  a  sight  of  this,  because  his  under- 
standing was  enlightened,  he  feared  not  the  wrath 
of  the  king,  but  chose  '  rather  to  suffer  affliction 
with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  plea- 
sures of  sin  for  a  season.'   He  refused  to  be  called 
the  son  of  the  king's  daughter;  accounting  it  won- 
derful riches  to  be  counted  worthy  of  so  much  as 
to  suffer  for  Christ,  with  the  poor  despised  saints; 
and  that  was  because  he  saw  him  who  was   in- 
visible, and  '  had  respect  unto  the  recompence  of 
the  reward.'  He.  xi.  24-27.     And  this  is  that  whicb 
the  apostle  usually  prayeth  for  in  his  epistles  for 
the  saints,  namely,  '  That  they  might  know  what 
is  the  hope  of  God's  calling,  and  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints.'  ep.  i.  18.  And 
that  they  might  '  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all 
saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth, 
and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  which 
passeth  knowledge.'   ep.  iu.  is,  19.     Pray   therefore 
that  God  would  enlighten  thy  understanding:  that 
will  be  very  great  help  unto  thee.      It  will  make 
thee  endure  many  a  hard  brunt  for  Christ;  as  Paul 
saith,  '  After  ye  were  illuminated,  ye  endured  a 
great  fight  of  afflictions.     You  took  joyfully  the 
spoiling  of  your  goods,  knowing  in  yourselves  that 
ye  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  an  enduring  sub- 
stance.' He.  x.  32-34.     If  there  be  never  such  a  rare 
jewel  lie  just  in  a  man's  way,  yet  if  he  sees  it  not, 
he  will  rather  trample  upon  it  than  stoop  for  it, 
and  it  is  because  he  sees  it  not.     Why,  so  it  is 
here,  though  heaven  be  worth  never  so  much,  and 
thou  hast  never  so  much  need  of  it,  yet  if  thou  see 
it  not,  that  is,  have  not  thy  understanding  opened 
or  enlightened  to  see  it,  thou  wilt  not  regard  at 
all:    therefore   cry  to    the   Lord  for   enlightening 
grace,  and  say,  Lord,  open  my  blind  eyes:   Lord, 
take   the  vail   off  my  dark  heart,   show  me  the 
things  of  the  other  world,  and  let  me  see  the  sweet- 
ness, glory,  and  excellency  of  them  for  Christ  his 
sake.     This  is  the  first. 

[Second.  Inflame  thy  ivill.]  Cry  to  God  that  he 
woidd  inflame  thy  will  also  with  the  things  of  the 
other  Avorld.  For  when  a  man's  will  is  fully  set  to 
do  such  or  such  a  thing,  then  it  must  be  a  very  hard 
matter  that  shall  hinder  that  man  from  bringing 
about  his  end.  When  Paul's  will  was  set  resolvedly 
to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  though  it  was  signified  to 
him  before  what  he  should  there  suffer,  he  was  not 
daunted  at  all ;  nay,  saith  he,  '  I  am  ready,'  or 
willing,  '  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  at 
Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.'  Acxxi.  13. 
His  will  was  inflamed  with  love  to  Christ?  and 
therefore  all  the  persuasions  that  could  be  used 


THE   HEAVENLY  EOOTilAN. 


389 


wrought  nothing  at  all.  Your  self-willed  people 
nobody  knows  what  to  do  with  them  ;  we  used  to 
say,  He  will  have  his  own  will,  do  all  what  you 
can.  Indeed  to  have  such  a  will  for  heaven,  is  an 
admirable  advantage  to  a  man  that  undertaketh 
the  race  thither ;  a  man  that  is  resolved,  and  hath 
his  will  fixed,  saith  he,  I  will  do  my  best  to  ad- 
vantage myself;  I  will  do  my  worst  to  hinder  my 
enemies  ;  I  will  not  give  out  as  long  as  I  can  stand  ; 
I  will  have  it  or  I  will  lose  my  life ;  '  though  lie 
slay  me  yet  will  I  trust  in  him.'  Jobxiii.  15.  '  I  will 
not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me.'  Ge.  xxxii.  26. 
I  will,  I  will,  I  will,  0  this  blessed  inflamed  will 
for  heaven !  What  is  like  it  ?  If  a  man  be  will- 
ing, then  any  argument  shall  be  matter  of  encour- 
agement ;  but  if  unwilling,  then  any  argument 
shall  give  discouragement ;  this  is  seen  both  in 
saints  and  sinners ;  in  them  that  are  the  children 
of  God,  and  also  those  that  are  the  children  of  the 
devil.     As, 

1.  The  saints  of  old,  they  being  willing  and 
resolved  for  heaven,  what  could  stop  them?  Could 
fire  or  faggot,  sword  or  halter,  stinking  dungeons, 
whips,  bears,  bulls,  lions,  cruel  rackings,  stoning, 
starving,  nakedness,  &c.  iie.xi.  'Nay,  in  all  these 
things  they  were  more  than  conquerors,  through 
him  that  loved  them  ;'  Ro.  viiL  37.  who  had  also  made 
them  '  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power.' 

2.  See  again,  on  the  other  side,  the  children  of 
the  devil,  because  they  are  not  willing  [to  run  to 
heaven],  how  many  shifts  and  starting-holes  they 
will  have.  I  have  married  a  wife,  I  have  a  farm, 
I  shall  offend  my  landlord,  I  shall  offend  my 
master,  I  shall  lose  my  trading,  I  shall  lose  my 
pride,  my  pleaures,  I  shall  be  mocked  and  scoffed, 
therefore  I  dare  not  come.  I,  saith  another,  will 
stay  till  I  am  older,  till  my  children  are  out  of 
sight,  till  I  am  got  a  little  aforehand  in  the  world, 
till  I  have  done  this  and  that,  and  the  other  busi- 
ness ;  but  alas,  the  thing  is,  they  are  not  willing  ; 
for  were  they  but  soundly  willing,  these,  and  a 
thousand  such  as  these,  would  hold  them  no  faster 
than  the  cords  held  Samson  when  he  broke  them 
like  burned  flax.  Ju.  xv.  u.  I  tell  you  the  will  is  all : 
that  is  one  of  the  chief  things  which  turns  the 
wheel  either  backwards  or  forwards ;  and  God 
knoweth  that  full  well,  and  so  likewise  doth  the 
devil ;  and  therefore  they  both  endeavour  very  much 

to  strengthen  the  will  of  their  ser- 

[Lord  Will-be-will.]  ri     ,     ,        .      ,.  i  •  c 

vants.      God,  he  is  lor  making  ot 

his  a  willing  people  to  serve  him ;  and  the  devil, 
he  doth  what  he  can  to  possess  the  will  and  affec- 
tion of  those  that  are  his,  with  love  to  sin ;  and 
therefore  when  Christ  conies  close  to  the  matter, 
indeed,  saith  he,  '  Ye  will  not  come  to  me.'  Jn.v.40. 
4  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  you  as  a  hen 
doth  her  chickens,  and  ye  would  not.'  Lu.  xm.  34. 
The  devil  had  possessed  their  wills,  and  so  long 


[Lord  Will-lie-will.] 


he  was  sure  enough  of  them.  0  therefore  crv 
hard  to  God  to  inflame  thy  will  for  heaven  and 
Christ:  thy  will,  I  say,  if  that  be  rightly  set  for 
heaven,  thou  wilt  not  be  beat  off  with  discourage- 
ments ;  and  this  was  the  reason  that,  when  Jacob 
wrestled  with  the  angel,  though  he  lost  a  limb,  as 
it  were,  and  the  hollow  of  his  thigh  was  put  out 
of  joint,  as  ho  wrestled  with  him,  yet,  saith  he, 
'  I  will  not,'  mark,  '  I  will  not  let  thee  go  except 
thou  bless  me.'  Ge.  xxxii.  24-26.  Get  thy  will  tipt 
with  the  heavenly  grace,  and  resolution  against 
all  discouragements,  and  then  thou  goest  full  speed 
for  heaver. ;  but  if  thou  falter  in 
thy  will,  and  be  not  found  there, 
thou  wilt  run  hobbling  and  halting  all  the  way 
thou  runnest,  and  also  to  be  sure  thou  wilt  fall 
short  at  the  last.  The  Lord  give  thee  a  will  and 
courage ! 

Thus  have  I  done  with  directing  thee  how  to 
run  to  the  kingdom  ;  be  sure  thou  keep  in  memory 
what  1  have  said  unto  thee,  lest  thou  lose  thy  way. 
But  because  I  would  have  thee  think  of  them,  take 
all  in  short  in  this  little  bit  of  paper. 

1.  Get  into  the  way.  2.  Then  study  on  it. 
3.  Then  strip,  and  lay  aside  everything  that  would 
hinder.  4.  Beware  of  bye-paths.  5.  Do  not  gaze 
and  stare  too  much  about  thee,  and  be  sure  to  pon- 
der the  path  of  thy  feet.  6.  Do  not  stop  for  any 
that  call  after  thee,  whether  it  be  the  world,  the 
flesh,  or  the  devil ;  for  all  these  will  hinder  thy 
journey,  if  possible.  7.  Be  not  daunted  with  any 
discouragements  thou  meetest  with  as  thou  goest. 
8.  Take  heed  of  stumbling  at  the  cross.  9.  Cry 
hard  to  God  for  an  enlightened  heart,  and  a  willing 
mind,  and  God  give  thee  a  prosperous  journey. 
Yet  before  I  do  quite  take  my  leave  of  thee,  let 
me  give  thee  a  few  motives  along  with  thee.  It 
may  be  they  will  be  as  good  as  a  pair  of  spurs  to 
prick  on  thy  lumpish  heart  in  this  rich  voyage.1 

[V.  Nine  motives  to  urge  us  on  in  the  way.] 

The  First  Motive.  Consider  there  is  no  way  but 
this,  thou  must  either  win  or  lose.  If  thou  win- 
nest,  then  heaven,  God,  Christ,  glory,  ease,  peace, 
life,  yea,  life  eternal,  is  thine ;  thou  must  be  made 
equal  to  the  angels  in  heaven ;  thou  shalt  sorrow 
no  more,  sigh  no  more,  feel  no  more  pain ;  thou 
shalt  be  out  of  the  reach  of  sin,  hell,  death,  the 
devil,  the  grave,  and  whatever  else  may  endeavour 
thy  hurt.  But  contrariwise,  and  if  thou  lose,  then 
thy  loss  is  heaven,  glory,  God,  Christ,  ease,  peace, 


1  How  characteristic  of  Banyan  is  this  sentence,  '  the  rich 
voyage.'  God  environing  us  about  with  his  presence  in  time, 
and  eternal  felicity  in  the  desired  haven  :  '  the  lumpish  heart ' 
at  times  apparently  indifferent  to  the  glorious  harvest:  'a  pair 
of  spurs'  to  prick  us  on  in  the  course.  The  word  voyage 
(from  via,  a  way)  was  in  Bunyan's  time  equally  used  for  a 
journey  by  sea  or  laud,  it  is  now  limited  to  travelling  by  sea. 
-(Ed.) 


300 


THE   HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN. 


and  whatever  else  which  tendeth  to  make  eternity 
comfortable  to  the  saints ;  besides,  thou  procurest 
eternal  death,  sorrow,  pain,  blackness,  and  dark- 
ness, fellowship  with  devils,  together  with  the 
everlasting  damnation  of  thy  own  soul. 

The  Second  Motive.  Consider  that  this  devil, 
this  hell,  death  and  damnation,  followeth  after  thee 
as  hard  as  they  can  drive,  and  have  their  commis- 
sion so  to  do  by  the  law,  against  which  thou  hast 
sinned ;  and  therefore  for  the  Lord's  sake  make 
haste. 

The  Third  Motive.  If  they  seize  upon  thee  be- 
fore thou  get  to  the  city  of  Refuge,  they  will  put 
an  everlasting  stop  to  thy  journey.  This  also  cries, 
Run  for  it. 

Tlie  Fourth  Motive.  Know  also,  that  now 
heaven  gates,  the  heart  of  Christ,  with  his  arms, 
are  wide  open  to  receive  thee.  0  methinks  that 
this  consideration,  that  the  devil  followeth  after  to 
destroy,  and  that  Christ  standeth  open-armed  to 
receive,  should  make  thee  reach  out  and  fly  with 
all  haste  and  speed  !     And  therefore, 

The  Fifth  Motive.  Keep  thine  eye  upon  the  prize; 
be  sure  that  thy  eyes  be  continually  upon  the  pro- 
fit thou  art  like  to  get.  The  reason  why  men  are 
so  apt  to  faint  in  their  race  for  heaven,  it  lieth 
chiefly  in  either  of  these  two  things : 

1.  They  do  not  seriously  consider  the  worth  of 
the  prize ;  or  else  if  they  do,  they  are  afraid  it  is 
too  good  for  them ;  but  most  lose  heaven  for  want 
of  considering  the  price  and  the  worth  of  it.  And 
therefore,  that  thou  mayst  not  do  the  like,  keep 
thine  eye  much  upon  the  excellency,  the  sweetness, 
the  beauty,  the  comfort,  the  peace,  that  is  to  be 
had  there  by  those  that  win  the  prize.  This  was 
that  which  made  the  apostle  run  through  anything; 
good  report,  evil  report,  persecution,  affliction, 
hunger,  nakedness,  peril  by  sea,  and  peril  by  land, 
bonds  and  imprisonments.  Also  it  made  others 
endure  to  be  stoned,  sawn  asunder,  to  have  their 
eyes  bored  out  with  augurs,  their  bodies  broiled  on 
gridirons,  their  tongues  cut  out  of  their  mouths, 
boiled  in  cauldrons,  thrown  to  the  wild  beasts, 
burned  at  the  stakes,  Avhipped  at  posts,  and  a 
thousand  other  fearful  torments,  'while  they  looked 
not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,'  as  the  things  of 
this  world,  'but  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen; 
for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal ;  but 
the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  eternal.'  2  Co.iv.is. 
0  this  word  'eternal,'  that  was  it  that  made 
them,  that  when  they  might  have  had  deliverance, 
they  would  not  accept  of  it ;  for  they  knew  in  the 
world  to  come  they  should  have  a  better  resurrec- 
tion.   He.  xi.  35. 

2.  And  do  not  let  the  thoughts  of  the  rareness 
of  the  place  make  thee  say  in  thy  heart,  This  is 
too  good  for  me;  for  I  tell  thee,  heaven  is  prepared 
for  whosoever  will  accept  of  it,  and  they  shall  be 


entertained  with  hearty  good  welcome.  Consider, 
therefore,  that  as  bad  as  thou  have  got  thither  ; 
thither  went  scrubbed,*  beggarly  Lazarus,  <fcc. 
Nay,  it  is  prepared  for  the  poor:  'Hearken,  my 
beloved  brethren,'  saith  James,  take  notice  of  it, 
*  Hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  rich 
in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  ?'  Ja.  ii.  5. 
Therefore  take  heart  and  run,  man.     And, 

The  Sixth  Motive.  Think  much  of  them  that 
are  gone  before.  First,  How  really  they  got  into 
the  kingdom.  Secondly,  How  safe  they  are  in 
the  arms  of  Jesus ;  would  they  be  here  again  for 
a  thousand  worlds  ?  Or  if  they  were,  would  they 
be  afraid  that  God  would  not  make  them  welcome  ? 
Thirdly,  What  would  they  judge  of  thee  if  they 
knew  thy  heart  began  to  fail  thee  in  thy  journey, 
or  thy  sins  began  to  allure  thee,  and  to  persuade 
thee  to  stop  thy  race  ?  would  they  not  call  thee  a 
thousand  fools  ?  and  say,  0,  that  he  did  but  seo 
what  we  see,  feel  what  we  feel,  and  taste  of  the 
dainties  that  we  taste  of!  0,  if  he  were  here  ono 
quarter  of  an  hour,  to  behold,  to  see,  to  feel,  to 
taste  and  enjoy  but  the  thousandth  part  of  what 
we  enjoy,  what  would  he  do  ?  What  would  he  suf- 
fer ?  What  would  he  leave  undone  ?  Would  he 
favour  sin  ?  Would  he  love  this  world  below  ? 
Would  he  be  afraid  of  friends,  or  shrink  at  the 
most  fearful  threatenings  that  the  greatest  tyrants 
could  invent  to  give  him  ?  Nay,  those  who  have 
had  but  a  sight  of  these  things  by  faith,  when  they 
have  been  as  far  off  from  them  as  heaven  from 
earth,  yet  they  have  been  able  to  say  with  a  com- 
fortable and  merry  heart,  as  the  bird  that  sings  in 
the  spring,  that  this  and  more  shall  not  keep  them 
from  running  to  heaven.  Sometimes,  when  my 
base  heart  hath  been  iuclining  to  this  world,  and 
to  loiter  in  my  journey  towards  heaven,  the  very 
consideration  of  the  glorious  saints  and  angels  in 
heaven,  what  they  enjoy,  and  what  low  thoughts 
they  have  of  the  things  of  this  world  together, 
how  they  would  befool  me  if  they  did  but  know 
that  my  heart  was  drawing  back ;  [this]  hath 
caused  me  to  rush  forward,  to  disdain  these  poor, 
low,  empty,  beggarly  things,  and  to  say  to  my 
soul,  Come,  soul,  let  us  not  be  weary ;  let  us  see 
what  this  heaven  is  ;  let  us  even  venture  all  for  it, 
and  try  if  that  will  quit  the  cost.  Surely  Abraham, 
David,  Paul,  and  the  rest  of  the  saints  of  God, 
were  as  wise  as  any  are  now,  and  yet  they  lost  all 
for  this  glorious  kingdom.  0  !  therefore,  throw 
away  stinking  lusts,  follow  after  righteousness, 
love  the  Lord  Jesus,  devote  thyself  unto  his  fear, 
I'll  warrant  thee  he  will  give  thee  a  goodly  recom- 
pense. Reader,  what  sayst  thou  to  this  ?  Art 
[thou]  resolved  to  follow  me  ?    Nay,  resolve  if  thou 


7  '  Scrubbed ;'  worthless,  vile,  insignificant  in  the  sight  of 
man,  who  judges  from  the  outward,  temporal  condition ;  but, 
in  the  case  of  Lazarus,  precious  in  the  sight  of  God. — (Ed.) 


THE   HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN. 


301 


canst  to  get  before  nic.  '  So  run,  that  ye  may  ob- 
tain.' 

The  Seventh  Motive.  To  encourage  thee  a  little 
farther,  set  to  the  work,  ami  when  thou  hast  run 
thyself  down  weary,  then  the  Lord  Jesus  will  take 
thee  up,  ami  carry  thee.  Is  not  this  enough  to 
make  any  poor  soul  begin  his  race  ?  Thou,  per- 
haps, criest,  0  hut  I  am  feeble,  I  am  lame,  <fcc.  : 
well,  but  Christ  hath  a  bosom;  consider,  therefore, 
when  thou  hast  run  thy  .-ell'  down  weary,  he  will  put 
thee  in  his  bosom:  'lie  shall  gather  the  lambs 
with  his  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom,  and 
shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young.'  is.xl.il. 
This  is  the  way  that  fathers  take  to  encourage 
their  children,  saying;  Run,  sweet  babe,  while  thou 
art  weary,  and  then  I  will  take  thee  up  and  carry 
thee.  '  lie  will  gather  his  lambs  with  his  arm, 
and  carry  them  in  his  bosom.'  When  they  are 
weary  they  shall  ride.1 

The  Eighth  Motive.  Or  else  he  will  convey  new 
strength  from  heaven  into  thy  soul,  which  will  be 
as  well — '  The  youths  shall  faint  and  be  weary, 
and  the  young  men  shall  utterly  fall ;  but  they  that 
wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength;  they 
shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles ;  they  shall 
run  and  not  be  weary,  they  shall  walk  aud  not 
faint.'  is.  sL  so,  31.  What  shall  I  say  besides  what 
hath  already  been  said  ?  Thou  shalt  have  good 
and  easy  lodging,  good  and  wholesome  diet,  the 
bosom  of  Christ  to  lie  in,  the  joys  of  heaven  to  feed 
on.  Shall  I  speak  of  the  satiety  and  of  the  dura- 
tion of  all  these  ?  Verily  to  describe  them  to  the 
height  it  is  a  work  too  hard  for  me  to  do.'2 

The  Ninth  Motive.  Again  methinks  the  very 
industry  of  the  devil,  and  the  industry  of  his  serv- 
ants, ic,  should  make  you  that  have  a  desire  to 
heaven  and  happiness  to  run  apace.  Why,  the 
devil,  he  will  lose  no  time,  spare  no  pains,  also 
neither  will  his  servants,  both  to  seek  the  destruc- 
tion of  themselves  and  others :  and  shall  not  we  be 
as  industrious  for  our  own  salvation?  Shall  the 
world  venture  the  damnation  of  their  souls  for  a 
poor  corruptible  crown ;  and  shall  not  we  venture 
the  loss  of  a  few  trifles  for  an  eternal  crown  ? 
Shall  they  venture  the  loss  of  eternal  friends,  as 
God  to  love,  Christ  to  redeem,  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
comfort,  heaven  for  habitation,  saints  and  angels 
for  company,  and  all  this  to  get  and  hold  com- 
munion with  sin,  and  this  world,  and  a  few  base, 
drunken,  swearing,  lying,  covetous  wretches,  like 
themselves  ?     And  shall  not  we  labour  as  hard, 


1  What  an  inexhaustible  source  of  comfort  is  contained  in 
this  passage.  Blessed  carriage,  in  which  the  poorest,  weakest 
ul'  Christ's  tlock  shall  ride.  Millions  of  gold  could  uot  purchase 
the  privilege  thus  to  ride  in  ease  and  safety,  supported  and 
guarded  by  Omnipotence,  and  guided  by  Omniscience. — (Ed.) 

2  Summed  up  by  the  Psalmist,  '  Happy  is  that  people  that 
is  in  such  a  case.  Happy  is  that  people  whose  God  is  the 
Lord.'  l's.  cxliv.  15. — (En.) 


run  as  fast,  seek  as  diligently,  nay,  a  hundred  times 
more  diligently,  for  the  company  of  these  glorious 
eternal  friends,  though  with  the  loss  of  such  as 
these,  nay,  with  the  loss  of  ten  thousand  times 
better  than  these  poor,  low,  base,  contemptible 
things  ?  Shall  it  be  said  at  the  last  day,  that 
wicked  men  made  more  haste  to  hell  than  you  did 
make  to  heaven  ?3  That  they  spent  more  hours, 
days,  and  that  early  and  late,  for  hell,  than  you 
spent  for  that  which  is  ten  thousand  thousand  of 
thousands  times  better  ?  0  let  it  not  be  so,  but 
run  with  all  might  and  main. 

Thus  you  see  I  have  here  spoken  something, 
though  but  little.  Now  I  shall  come  to  mako 
some  use  and  application  of  what  hath  been  said, 
and  so  conclude. 

[VI.  Nine  Uses  of  this  Subject.] 

TJie  first  use.  You  see  here,  that  he  that  will 
go  to  heaven,  ho  must  run  for  it ;  yea,  and  not 
only  run,  but  SO  run,  that  is,  as  1  have  said,  to 
run  earnestly,  to  run  continually,  to  strip  off  every 
thing  that  would  hinder  in  his  race  with  the  rest. 
Well  then,  do  you  so  run  ?  And  now  let  us  examine 
a  little. 

1.  Art  thou  got  into  the  right  way?  Art  thou 
in  Christ's  righteousness?  Do  not  say  yes  in  thy 
heart,  when  in  truth  there  is  no  such  matter.  It 
is  a  dangerous  thing,  you  know,  for  a  man  to 
think  he  is  in  the  right  way,  when  he  is  in  the 
wrong.  It  is  the  next  way  for  him  to  lose  his 
way,  and  not  only  so,  but  if  he  run  for  heaven,  as 
thou  sayst  thou  dost,  even  to  lose  that  too.  0 
this  is  the  misery  of  most  men,  to  persuade  them- 
selves that  they  run  right,  when  they  never  had 
one  foot  in  the  way !  The  Lord  give  thee  under- 
standing here,  or  else  thou  art  undone  for  ever. 
Prithee,  soul,  search  when  was  it  thou  turned  out 
of  thy  sins  and  righteousness  into  the  righteous- 
ness of  Jesus  Christ.  I  say,  dost  thou  see  thyself 
in  him?  and  is  he  more  precious  to  thee  than  the 
whole  world  ?  Is  thy  mind  always  musing  on 
him  ?  Dost  thou  love  to  be  talking  of  him — and  also 
to  be  walking  with  him?  Dost  thou  count  his 
company  more  precious  than  the  whole  world? 
Dost  thou  count  all  things  but  poor,  lifeless,  empty, 
vain  things,  without  communion  with  him?  Doth 
his  company  sweeten  all  things — and  his  absence 
imbitter  all  things  ?  Soul,  I  beseech  thee,  be 
serious,  aud  lay  it  to  heart,  and  do  not  take  things 
of  such  weighty  concernment  as  the  salvation  or 
damnation  of  thy  soul,  without  good  ground. 

3  How  severe  and  cutting,  but  how  just,  is  this  reflection 
upon  many,  that  wicked  men,  for  the  gratification  of  destruc- 
tive propensities,  should  evince  greater  zeal  and  perseverance 
to  light  up  the  fire  of  hell  in  their  consciences,  than  some  pro- 
fessing  Christians  do  in  following  after  peace  and  I. 
'Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard,  consider  her  ways  aud  be  wise. 
-(Ed.) 


392 


THE  HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN. 


2.  Art  thou  unladen  of  the  things  of  this  world, 
as  pride,  pleasures,  profits,  lusts,  vanities  ?  What ! 
dost  thou  think  to  run  fast  enough  with  the  world, 
thy  sins  and  lusts  in  thy  heart  ?  I  tell  thee,  soul, 
they  that  have  laid  all  aside,  every  weight,  every 
sin,  and  are  got  into  the  nirnhlest  posture,  they 
find  work  enough  to  run;  so  to  run  as  to  hold 
out.  To  run  through  all  that  opposition,  all  these 
jostles,  all  these  rubs,  over  all  these  stumbling- 
blocks,  over  all  the  snares  from  all  these  intangle- 
ments,  that  the  devil,  sin,  the  world,  and  their 
own  hearts,  lay  before  them ;  I  tell  thee,  if  thou 
art  agoing  heavenward,  thou  wilt  find  it  no  small 
or  easy  matter.  Art  thou  therefore  discharged 
and  unladen  of  these  things?  Never  talk  of  go- 
ing to  heaven  if  thou  art  not.  It  is  to  be  feared 
thou  wilt  be  found  among  the  many  that  '  will 
seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able.'  Lu.  xiii.  24. 

The  second  use.  If  so,  then,  in  the  next  place, 
what  will  become  of  them  that  are  grown  weary 
before  they  are  got  half  way  thither?  Why,  man, 
it  is  he  that  holdeth  out  to  the  end  that  must  be 
saved ;  it  is  he  that  overcometh  that  shall  inherit 
all  things;  it  is  not  every  one  that  begins.  Agrippa 
gave  a  fair  step  for  a  sudden,  he  steps  almost  into 
the  bosom  of  Christ  in  less  than  half  an  hour. 
Thou,  saith  he  to  Paul,  hast  'almost  persuaded 
me  to  be  a  Christian.'  Ac.  xxvi.  26.  Ah!  but  it  was 
but  almost;  and  so  he  had  as  good  have  been 
never  a  whit;  he  stept  fair  indeed,  but  yet  he 
stept  short ;  he  was  hot  while  he  was  at  it,  but  he 
was  quickly  out  of  wind.  0  this  but  almost !  I 
tell  you,  this  but  almost,  it  lost  his  soul.  Methinks 
I  have  seen  sometimes  how  these  poor  wretches 
that  get  but  almost  to  heaven,  how  fearfully  their 
almost,  and  their  but  almost,  will  torment  them 
in  hell ;  when  they  shall  cry  out  in  the  bitterness 
of  their  souls,  saying,  I  was  almost  a  Christian. 
I  was  almost  got  into  the  kingdom,  almost  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  devil,  almost  out  of  my  sins,  almost 
from  under  the  curse  of  God  ;  almost,  and  that 
was  all  ;  almost,  but  not  altogether.  0  that  I 
should  be  almost  at  heaven,  and  should  not  go 
quite  through  !  Friend,  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  sit 
down  before  we  are  in  heaven,  and  to  grow  weary 
before  we  come  to  the  place  of  rest;  and  if  it  should 
be  thy  case,  I  am  sure  thou  dost  not  so  run  as  to 
obtain.     But  again, 

Tlie  third  use.  In  the  next  place,  What  then 
will  become  of  them  that  some  time  since  were 
running  post-haste  to  heaven,  insomuch  that  they 
seemed  to  outstrip  many,  but  now  are  running  as 
fast  back  again?  Do  you  think  those  will  ever 
come  thither?  What,  to  run  back  again,  back 
a^ain  to  sin,  to  the  world,  to  the  devil,  back  again 
to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  ?  0 !  '  It  had  been  better 
for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteous- 
ness, than  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn,'  to 


turn  back  again,  '  from  the  holy  commandment.' 
2  Pe.  ii.  22.  Those  men  shall  not  only  be  damned 
for  sin,  but  for  professing  to  all  the  world  that 
sin  is  better  than  Christ;  for  the  man  that  runs 
back  again,  he  doth  as  good  as  say,  'I  have  tried 
Christ,  and  I  have  tried  sin,  and  I  do  not  find  so 
much  profit  in  Christ  as  in  sin.'1  I  say,  this  man 
declareth  this,  even  by  his  running  back  again. 
0  sad!  what  a  doom  they  will  have,  who  were 
almost  at  heaven-gates,  and  then  run  back  again. 
'  If  any  draw  back,'  saith  Christ  [by  his  apostle], 
'my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him.'  He.  x.  38. 
Again,  '  No  man  having  put  his  hand  to  the 
plough,'  that  is,  set  forward,  in  the  ways  of  God, 
'  and  looking  back,'  turning  back  again,  'is  fit  for 
the  kingdom  of  God.'  Lu.  ix.  62.  And  if  not  fit  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  then  for  certain  he  must 
needs  be  fit  for  the  fire  of  hell.  And  therefore, 
saith  the  apostle,  those  that  '  bring  forth '  these 
apostatizing  fruits,  as  '  briars  and  thorns,  are 
rejected,  and  nigh  unto  cursing,  whose  end  is  to 
be  burned.'  He.  vi.  8.  0  there  is  never  another 
Christ  to  save  them  by  bleeding  and  dying  for 
them !  And  if  they  shall  not  escape  that  neglect, 
then  how  shall  they  escape  that  reject  and  turn 
their  back  upon  '  so  great  a  salvation  ? '  He.  ii.  3. 
And  if  the  righteous,  that  is,  they  that  run  for  it, 
will  find  work  enough  to  get  to  heaven,  '  then 
where  will  the  ungodly'  backsliding  'sinner  ap- 
pear?' or  if  Judas  the  traitor,  or  Francis  Spira 
the  backslider,2  were  but  now  alive  in  the  world  to 
whisper  these  men  in  the  ear  a  little,  and  tell 
them  what  it  hath  cost  their  souls  for  backsliding, 
surely  it  would  stick  by  them  and  make  them 
afraid  of  running  back  again,  so  long  as  they  had 
one  day  to  live  in  this  world. 

The  fourth  use.  So  again,  fourthly,  how  unlike 
to  these  men's  passions3  will  those  be  that  have  all 
this  while  sat  still,  and  have  not  so  much  as  set 
one  foot  forward  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Surely 
he  that  backslideth,  and  he  that  sitteth  still  in 
sin,  they  are  both  of  one  mind ;  the  one  he  will 
not  stir,  because  he  loveth  his  sins,  and  the  things 
of  this  world ;  the  other  he  runs  back  again,  be- 
cause he  loveth  his  sins,  and  the  things  of  this 
world :  is  it  not  one  and  the  same  thing  ?  They 
are  all  one  here,  and  shall  not  one  and  the  same 
hell  hold  them  hereafter!  He  is  an  ungodly  one 
that  never  looked  after  Christ,  and  he  is  an  un- 


1  How  awful  a  warning  is  this  to  the  backslider.  A  wicked 
professor  is  a  practical  atheist  and  a  contemptible  hypocrite. 
But  the  backslider  is  worse,  he  proclaims,  in  his  downward 
course,  the  awful  blasphemy  that  '  sin  is  better  than  Christ ;' 
'  hell  is  preferable  to  heaven.'  O  !  that  some  poor  bewildered 
backslider  may,  by  a  Divine  blessing  upon  the  voice  of  Bunyan, 
be  arrested  in  his  mad  career. —  (Ed.) 

2  See  the  Note  on  Francis  Spira  on  page  383. 

3  '  Passions ;'  the  old  English  term  for  sufferings.  It  is 
used  in  Acts  i.  emphatically,  to  express  the  last  sufferings  of 
the  Saviour;  as  also  in  what  is  called  'passion  week.' — (Ed.) 


THE   HEAVENLY   FOOTMAN. 


393 


godly  one  that  did  once  look  after  him  and  then 
ran  quite  back  again ;  and  therefore  that  word 
must  certainly  drop  out  of  the  mouth  of  Christ 
against  them  both,  •  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels.'     Mat.  xxv.  41. 

The  fifth  use.     Again,  here  you  may  see,  in  the 
next  place,  that  is,  they  that  will  have  heaven  I 
must  run  for  it;    then  this  calls  aloud  to  those  j 
who  began  but  a  while  since   to  run,  I  say,  for  j 
them  to  mend  their  pace  if  they  intend  to  win ; 
you  know  that  they  which  come  hindmost,  had 
need  run  fastest.     Friend,  I  tell  thee,  there  be 
those  that  have  run  ten  years  to  thy  one,  nay,  ' 
twenty  to  thy  five,  and  yet  if  thou  talk  with  them, 
sometimes   they  will    say  they  doubt  they  shall 
come  late  enough.     How  then  will  it  be  with  thee? 
Look  to  it  therefore  that  thou  delay  no  time,  not 
an  hour's  time,  but  speedily  part  with  all,  with 
everything  that  is  an  hinderance  to  thee  in  thy 
journey,   and   run ;    yea,   and   so  run  that  thou 
mayest  obtain. 

T/ie  sixth  use.  Again,  sixthly,  You  that  are  old 
professors,  take  you  heed  that  the  young  striplings 
of  Jesus,  that  began  to  strip  but  the  other  day, 
do  not  outrun  you,  so  as  to  have  that  scripture 
fulfilled  on  you,  '  The  first  shall  be  last,  and  the 
last  first;'  which  will  be  a  shame  to  you,  and  a 
credit  for  them.  What,  for  a  young  soldier  to  be 
more  courageous  than  he  that  hath  been  used  to 
wars!  To  you  that  are  hindmost,  I  say,  strive 
to  outrun  them  that  are  before  you ;  and  you  that 
are  foremost,  I  say,  hold  your  ground,  and  keep 
before  them  in  faith  and  love,  if  possible ;  for  in- 
deed that  is  the  right  running,  for  one  to  strive  to 
outrun  another ;  even  for  the  hindmost  to  endea- 
vour to  overtake  the  foremost,  and  he  that  is  be- 
fore should  be  sure  to  lay  out  himself  to  keep  his 
ground,  even  to  the  very  utmost.      But  then, 

T/ie  seventh  use.  Again,  How  basely  do  they 
behave  themselves,  how  unlike  are  they  to  win, 
that  think  it  enough  to  keep  company  with  the 
hindmost?  There  are  some  men  that  profess 
themselves  such  as  run  for  heaven  as  well  as  any; 
yet  if  there  be  but  any  lazy,  slothful,  cold,  half-  ! 
hearted  professors  in  the  country,  they  will  be 
sure  to  take  example  by  them ;  they  think  if  they 
can  but  keep  pace  with  them  they  shall  do  fair ; 
but  these  do  not  consider  that  the  hindmost  lose 
the  prize.  You  may  know  it,  if  you  will,  that  it 
cost  the  foolish  virgins  dear  for  their  coming  too 
late — '  They  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him, 
and  the  door  was  shut.  Afterward,'  mark,  'after- 
ward came  the  other,'  the  foolish,  'virgins,  say- 
ing, Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us ;  but  he  answered, 
and  said,'  Depart,  '  I  know  you  not.'  Mat.  m,  10-12. 
Depart,  lazy  professors,  cold  professors,  slothful 
professors.     0 !   methinks  the  Word  of  God  is  so 

VOL.  IIT. 


plain  for  the  overthrow  of  your  lazy  professors, 
that  it  is  to  be  wondered  men  do  take  no  more 
notice  of  it.  How  was  Lot's  wife  served  for  runn- 
ing lazily,  and  for  giving  but  one  look  behind  her, 
after  the  things  she  left  in  Sodom?  How  was 
Esau  served  for  staying  too  long  before  he  came 
for  the  blessing?  And  how  were  they  served  that 
are  mentioned  in  the  13th  of  Luke,  'for  staying 
till  the  door  was  shut?'  Also  the  foolish  virgins; 
a  heavy  after-groan  will  they  give  that  have  thus 
staid  too  long.  It  turned  Lot's  wife  into  a  pillar 
of  salt.  Ge.  xix.  26.  It  made  Esau  weep  with  an 
exceeding  loud  and  bitter  cry.  He.  xii.  17.  It  made 
Judas  hang  himself:  yea,  and  it  will  make  thee 
curse  the  day  in  which  thou  wast  born,  if  thou 
miss  of  the  kingdom,  as  thou  wilt  certainly  do,  if 
this  be  thy  course.     But, 

The  Eighth  Use.  Again,  How,  and  if  thou  by 
thy  lazy  running  shouldst  not  only  destroy  thy- 
self, but  also  thereby  be  the  cause  of  the  damna- 
tion of  some  others,  for  thou  being  a  professor 
thou  must  think  that  others  will  take  notice  of 
thee ;  and  because  thou  art  but  a  poor,  cold,  lazy 
runner,  and  one  that  seeks  to  drive  the  world  and 
pleasure  along  with  thee :  why,  thereby  others  will 
think  of  doing  so  too.  Nay,  say  they,  why  may 
not  we  as  well  as  he?  He  is  a  professor,  and  yet 
he  seeks  for  pleasures,  riches,  profits;  he  loveth 
vain  company,  and  he  is  proud,  and  he  is  so  and 
so,  and  professeth  that  he  is  going  for  heaven; 
yea,  and  he  saith  also  he  doth  not  fear  but  he  shall 
have  entertainment ;  let  us  therefore  keep  pace 
with  him,  we  shall  fare  no  worse  than  he.  0  how 
fearful  a  thing  will  it  be,  if  that  thou  shalt  be  in- 
strumental of  the  ruin  of  others  by  thy  halting  in 
the  way  of  righteousness !  Look  to  it,  thou  wilt 
have  strength  little  enough  to  appear  before  God, 
to  give  an  account  of  the  loss  of  thy  own  soul  ; 
thou  needest  not  have  to  give  an  account  for  others: 
why,  thou  didst  stop  them  from  entering  in.  How 
wilt  thou  answer  that  saying,  You  would  not  enter 
in  yourselves,  and  them  that  would  you  hinder; 
for  that,  saying  will  be  eminently  fulfilled  on  them 
that  through  their  own  idleness  do  keep  themselves 
out  of  heaven,  and  by  giving  of  others  the  same 
example,  hinder  them  also. 

The  Ninth  Use.  Therefore,  now  to  speak  a 
word  to  both  of  you,  and  so  I  shall  conclude. 

1.  I  beseech  you,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  none  of  you  do  run  so  lazily  in  the 
way  to  heaven  as  to  hinder  either  yourselves  or 
others.  I  know  that  even  he  which  runs  laziest, 
if  he  should  see  a  man  running  for  a  temporal  life, 
if  he  should  so  much  neglect  his  own  well-being 
in  this  world  as  to  venture,  when  he  is  a-running 
for  his  life,  to  pick  up  here  and  there  a  lock  of 
wool  that  hangeth  by  the  way-side,  or  to  step  now 
and  then  aside  out  of  the  way  for  to  gather  up  a 

5U 


394, 


THE  HEAVENLY  FOOTMAN. 


straw  or  two,  or  any  rotten  stick,  I  say,  if  he 
should  do  this  when  he  is  a-running  for  his  life, 
thou  wouldest  condemn  him;  and  dost  thou  not 
condemn  thyself  that  dost  the  very  same  in  effect, 
nay  worse,  that  loiterest  in  thy  race,  notwithstand- 
ing thy  soul,  heaven,  glory,  and  all  is  at  stake. 
Have  a  care,  have  a  care,  poor  wretched  sinner, 
have  a  care. 

2.  If  yet  there  shall  he  any  that,  notwithstand- 
ing this  advice,  will  still  he  flaggering  and  loiter- 
ing in  the  way  to  the  kingdom  of  glory,  he  thou 
so  wise  as  not  to  take  example  hy  them.  Learn 
of  no  man  further  than  he  followeth  Christ.  But 
look  unto  Jesus,  who  is  not  only  '  the  author  and 
finisher  of  faith,'  hut  who  did,  '  for  the  joy  that 
was  set  before  him,  endured  the  cross,  despising 
the  shame,  and  is  now  set  down  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.'  lie,  xii.2.  I.  say,  look  to  no  man  to  learn 
of  him  no  further  than  he  followeth  Christ.  '  Be 
ye  followers  of  me,'  saith  Paul,  '  even  as  I  also 
am  of  Christ.'  1  Co.  xi.  i.  Though  he  was  an  emi- 
nent man,  yet  his  exhortation  was,  that  none 
should  follow  him  any  further  than  he  followed 
Christ. 

VII.  Provocation.    [To  run  with  the  foremast.] 

Now  that  you  may  be  provoked  to  run  with  the 
foremost,  take  notice  of  this.  When  Lot  and  his 
wife  were  running  from  cursed  Sodom  to  the  moun- 
tains, to  save  their  lives,  it  is  said  that  his  wife 
looked  back  from  behind  him,  and  she  became  a 
pillar  of  salt;  and  yet  you  see  that  neither  her 
practice,  nor  the  judgment  of  God  that  fell  upon 
her  for  the  same,  would  cause  Lot  to  look  behind 
him.  I  have  sometimes  wondered  at  Lot  in  this 
particular;  his  wife  looked  behind  her,  and  died 
immediately,  but  let  what  would  become  of  her, 
Lot  would  not  so  much  as  look  behind  him  to  see 
her.  We  do  not  read  that  he  did  so  much  as  once 
look  where  she  was,  or  what  was  become  of  her; 
his  heart  was  indeed  upon  his  journey,  and  well  it 
might:  there  was  the  mountain  before  him,  and 
the  fire  and  brimstone  behind  him;  his  life  lay  at 
stake,  and  he  had  lost  it  if  he  had  but  looked  be- 
hind him.  Do  thou  so  run:  and  in  thy  race  re- 
member Lot's  wife,  and  remember  her  doom;  and 
remember  for  what  that  doom  did  overtake  her; 
and  remember  that  God  made  her  an  example  for 
all  lazy  runners,  to  the  end  of  the  world:  and  take 
heed  thou  fall  not  after  the  same  example.  But, 
if  this  will  not  provoke  thee,  consider  thus, 

I.  Thy  soul  is  thy  own  soul,  that  is  either  to  be 
saved  or  lost;  thou  shalt  not  lose  my  soul  by  thy 
laziness.      It  is  thy  own  soul,  thy  own  ease,  thy 


own  peace,  thy  own  advantage,  or  disadvantage. 
If  it  were  my  soul  that  thou  art  desired  to  be  good 
unto,  methinks  reason  should  move  thee  somewhat 
to  pity  it.  But  alas,  it  is  thy  own,  thy  own  soul. 
'  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  shall  gain  the 
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?'  Mar.  viii.  36. 
God's  people  wish  well  to  the  souls  of  others,  and 
wilt  not  thou  wish  well  to  thy  own  ?  And  if  this 
will  not  provoke  thee,  then  think  again, 

2.  If  thou  lose  thy  soul,  it  is  thou  also  that 
must  bear  the  blame.  It  made  Cain  in  a  spiritual 
stark  mad  to  consider  that  he  had  not  seuse- 
looked  to  his  brother  Abel's  soul.  How  much 
more  will  it  perplex  thee  to  think,  that  thou  hadst 
not  a  care  of  thy  own  ?  And  if  this  will  not  pro- 
voke thee  to  bestir  thyself,  think  again, 

3.  That  if  thou  wilt  not  run,  the  people  of  God 
are  resolved  to  deal  with  thee  even  as  Lot  dealt 
with  his  wife,  that  is,  leave  thee  behind  them.  It 
may  be  thou  hast  a  father,  mother,  brother,  <fcc, 
going  post-haste  to  heaven,  wouldst  thou  be  will- 
ing to  be  left  behind  them  ?      Surely  no.      Again, 

4.  Will  it  not  be  a  dishonour  to  thee  to  see  the 
very  boys  and  girls  in  the  country  to  have  more 
wit  than  thyself?  It  may  be  the  servants  of  some 
men,  as  the  horsekeeper,  ploughman,  scullion,  <fcc, 
are  more  looking  after  heaven  than  their  masters. 
I  am  apt  to  think  sometimes,  that  more  servants 
than  masters,  that  more  tenants  than  landlords, 
will  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  is  not 
this  a  shame  for  them  that  are  such?  I  am  per- 
suaded you  scorn,  that  your  servants  should  say 
that  they  are  wiser  than  you  in  the  things  of  this 
world;  and  yet  I  am  bold  to  say,  that  many  of 
them  are  wiser  than  }rou  in  the  things  of  the  world 
to  come,  which  are  of  greater  concernment. 

VIII.  A  SHORT  EXPOSTULATION. 

Well  then,  sinner,  what  sayest  thou?  Where  is 
thy  heart  ?  Wilt  thou  run  ?  Art  thou  resolved  to 
strip  ?  Or  art  thou  not  ?  Think  quickly,  man,  it 
is  no  dallying  in  this  matter.  Confer  not  with  flesh 
and  blood ;  look  up  to  heaven,  and  see  how  thou 
likest  it;  also  to  hell — of  which  thou  mayst  under- 
stand something  by  my  book,  called,  A  few  SigJis 
from  Hell;  or  the  Groans  of  a  damned  Soul;  which 
I  wish  thee  to  read  seriously  over — and  accordingly 
devote  thyself.  If  thou  dost  not  know  the  way, 
inquire  at  the  Word  of  God.  If  thou  wantest  com- 
pany, cry  for  God's  Spirit.  If  thou  wantest  en- 
couragement, entertain  the  promises.  But  be  sure 
thou  begin  by  times ;  get  into  the  way ;  run  apace 
and  hold  out  to  the  end;  and  the  Lord  give  thea 
a  prosperous  journey.     Farewell. 


THE      HOLY     CITY: 


THE    NEW    JERUSALEM: 

•WHEREIN  ITS  GOODLY  LIGHT,  WALLS,  GATES,  ANOELS,  AND  THE  MANNER  OF  THEIR  STANDING,  ARE 
EXPOUNDED:  ALSO  HER  LENGTH  AND  BREADTH,  TOGETHER  WITH  THE  GOLDEN  MEASURING-REED 
EXPLAINED.:     AND    THE    GLORY    OP    ALL    UNFOLDED. 

AS  ALSO  THE  NU1IEKOUSNESS  OF  ITS  INHABITANTS;    AND  WHAT  THE  TREE  AND  WATER  OF  LIFE  ARE,  BY  WHICH 

THEY  ARE  SUSTAINED. 


Glorious  tilings  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city  of  God. — Psal.  lxxxvii.  3. 

And  t/ie  name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  he,  THE  LORD  IS  THERE.'— Ezc\.  xlviii. 

Loudon :  Printed  in  the  year  1665. 


ADVERTISEMENT   EY  TIIE  EDITOR. 


Reader,  it  will  require  the  utmost  effort  of  your 
powers  of  faith  in  perfectly  well  authenticated  his- 
tory to  believe  an  almost  incredible  fact,  but  which 
certainly  took  place  in  England,  under  the  re- 
formed church  in  1665.  It  is,  however,  true,  that 
a  number  of  eminently  pious,  loyal,  sober,  indus- 
trious citizens  were  immured,  by  the  forms  of  law, 
within  the  walls  of  a  small  prison  on  Bedford 
Bridge,  over  the  river  Ouse,  for  refusing  to  attend 
the  parish  church  or  join  in  the  service  prescribed 
by  Acts  of  Parliament,  according  to  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer.  The  Fader  of  the  universe  deigned 
to  approve  their  conduct,  and  to  visit  these  prisoners 
with  his  peculiar  approbation.  He  made  their  prison 
a  Bethel,  the  house  of  God,  and  the  very  gate  of 
heaven — thus  richly  blessing  their  souls  for  refusing 
to  render  unto  man  the  thiugs  that  are  God's. 

On  the  Lord's  day  they  were  in  the  habit  of 
uniting  in  Divine  worship.  Tlieir  prison  chamber 
had  received  no  prelatic  consecration,  but  God  was 
in  their  midst  to  bless  them.  It  happened  one 
morning  that  it  came  to  the  turn  of  a  poor  itine- 
rant tinker,  of  extraordinary  ability,  to  address  his 
fellow-prisoners — he  had  neither  written  nor  even 
prepared  a  sermon,  and  felt,  for  a  time,  at  a  loss 
for  a  text  or  subject.  At  length,  while  turning- 
over  the  sacred  pages,  his  eye  was  directed  to  the 
description  of  the  Holy  City — New  Jerusalem, 
which  in  the  latter  day  will  gloriously  descend  from 
heaven.  His  soul  was  enlarged  and  enlightened 
with  the  dazzling  splendour  of  that  sacred  city — 
his  heart,  which  had  felt  '  empty,  spiritless,  and 
barren,'  was  baptized  into  his  subject — 'with  a 
few  groans,  he  carried  his  meditations  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  for  a  blessing,  which  he  did  forthwith  grant 
according  to  his  grace,  and  then  the  preacher  did 
set  before  his  brethren  the  spiritual  meat,  and  they 
did  all  eat  and  were  well  refreshed.     While  dis- 


tributing the  truth,  it  did  so  increase  in  his  hand, 
that  of  the  fragments  he  gathered  up  a  basket  full, 
and  furnished  this  heavenly  treatise.'  Such,  in 
substance,  is  the  author's  interesting  account  of 
the  circumstances  under  which  he  wrote  this  book. 
He  adds,  with  humility,  that  the  men  of  this  world 
would  laugh,  in  conceit,  that  one  so  low,  con- 
temptible, and  inconsiderable  should  busy  himself 
with  so  hard  and  knotty  a  subject,  but  humbly 
hopes,  that  though  but  a  babe  in  Christ,  these 
truths  were  revealed  to  him.  To  the  real  followers 
of  the  lowly  Jesus,  the  poor  carpenter's  son,  'who 
had  not  where  to  lay  his  head' — of  whom  the  Jews 
said,  'Howknoweth  this  man  letters,  having  never 
learned  V  Jn.  vii.  is — despised  by  princes,  prelates, 
scribes,  and  pharisees — to  such,  the  poverty,  the 
occupation,  and  the  want  of  book-learning  of  our 
author  needs  no  apology.  It  is  all-sufficient  to 
know  that  he  was  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,  and 
deeply  taught  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  These  are  the 
only  sources  of  information  relative  to  the  New 
Jerusalem;  and  in  this  treatise  the  author  has 
richly  developed  the  treasures  of  the  Bible  in  re- 
ference to  this  solemn  subject.  To  the  same  prison 
discipline  to  which  we  are  indebted  for  the  Pil- 
grim's Progress,  we  owe  this,  and  other  of  the 
labours  of  that  eminent  servant  of  Christ,  John 
Bunyan.  Little  did  the  poor  tyrants  wrho  sent 
him  to  jail  think  that,  in  such  a  place,  he  would 
have  this  blessed  vision  of  the  heavenly  city,  or 
that  his  severe  sufferings  would  materially  aid  in 
destroying  their  wicked  craft. 

The  subject  is  one  of  pure  revelation.  The  philo- 
sopher— the  theologian — the  philologist — the  his- 
torian, and  the  antiquarian,  are  utterly  unable  to 
grapple  with  that  which  is  here  so  admirably 
handled  by  a  poor  unlettered  prisoner  for  Chri.-t, 
who, 'from  the  inexhaustible  storehouse  of  God's 


896 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


Word,  brings  forth  things  new  and  old  to  comfort 
the  pilgrim,  whether  in  a  prison  or  a  palace,  and 
to  enliven  his  prospects  on  his  way  to  this  celestial 
city.     The  New  Jerusalem  is  a  sublime  object,  and 
we  are  bound  humbly  to  adore  that  majestic  mercy 
which  has  condescended  to  give  us  such  a  glimpse 
of  the  glory  which,  in  its  unbounded  extent,  passeth 
all  the  powers  of  our  earth-bound  souls  to  conceive. 
It  is  a  city  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God — 
perfect  as  his  infinite  wisdom — strong  as  his  omni- 
potence— eternal  as  his  existence.    Who  by  search- 
ing can  find  out  the  perfections  of  the  Almighty — 
they  can  only  be  traced  by  his  revealed  will,  and 
with  our  poor  powers,  even  then  but  faintly.     No 
man  ever  possessed  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of 
the  Bible,  nor  greater  aptitude  in  quoting  it  than 
Bunyan:  he  must  have  meditated  in  it  day  and 
night;  and  in  this  treatise  his  biblical  treasures 
are  wisely  used.     He  begins  with  the  foundation 
of  the  walls,  and  shows  that  they  are  based  upon 
the  truths  taught  to  the  twelve  tribes,  and  by  the 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.     All  these  truths  are 
perfectly  handed  down  to  us  in  holy  Writ,  alike  im- 
mutable and  unalterable.     Cursed  are  they  that 
add  to  that  book,  either  by  tradition  or  by  the  im- 
position of  creeds,  rites,  and  ceremonies,  and  not 
less  cursed  are  they  that  take  from  it.     These  solid 
foundations  support  walls  and  gates  through  which 
nothing  can  enter  that  defileth.      It  is  a  pattern  to 
the  church  on  earth,  into  which  none  should  be 
admitted  but  saints,  known  from  their  conversation 
as  living  epistles.     '  Not  common  stuif,  not  raked 
out  of  the  dunghills  and  muck  heaps  of  this  world, 
and  from  among  the  toys  of  antichrist,  but  spiritual, 
heavenly  and  glorious  precious  stones.'' l     This  city 
has  but  one  street,  showing  the  perfect  unity  among 
all  its  inhabitants,  and  it  is  only  under  the  per- 
sonal reign  of  Christ  that  uniformity  can  exist. 
The  divisions  among  Christians  arise,  as  Bunyan 
justly  concludes,  from  '  antichristian  rubbish,  dark- 
ness, and  trumpery.'     The  cause  of  all  the  confu- 
sion is  the  lust  of  man  for  domination  over  con- 
science, the  government  of  which  is  the  sole  pre- 
rogative of  God,  and  this  is  strengthened  by  the 
hope  of  passing  through  time  in  idleness,  luxury, 
and  honour,  under  the  false  pretence  of  apostolic 
descent  transmitted  through  ceremonies  worse  than 
childish.      In   our   Lord's  days  there  was    union 
among  his  disciples,  as  there  must  be  under  his 
personal  reign  in  the  New  Jerusalem.     But  in  the 
times  of  the  apostles  the  disciples  were  divided — 
one  was  of  Paul — another  of  Apollos,  and  others 
of  Cephas.     The  Holy  Ghost  issued  laws  to  regu- 
late the  church  in  their  disputes — not  an  act  of 
uniformity,   but  an   injunction  to  the  exercise  of 
mutual  forbearance,   '  Who  art  thou  that  judgest 


another  man's  servant.'     '  Let  every  man  be  fully 
persuaded  in  his  own  mind.'   Ro. xiv.  4, 5. 

After  viewing  the  spiritual  unity  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  this  wonderful  city,  we  are  introduced  to 
its  temple.     How  vast  the  edifice,  to  contain  the 
millions  on  millions  of  worshippers — every  inha- 
bitant being  present  in  the  general  assembly  and 
church  of  the  first-born !     Utterly  beneath  our  no- 
tice are  the  most  magnificent  temples  raised  by 
human  ingenuity  and  vanity,  when  compared  with 
that  of  the  Holy  City.     Its  foundation,  the  immu- 
tability of  God — its  extent,  his  divine  immensity — 
its  walls,  the  omnipotence  of  Jehovah — its  trea- 
sury, the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ — its  wor- 
shippers, the  countless  myriads  of  the  nations  of 
those  that  are  saved — its  duration,  ETERNITY. 
It  is  the  inheritance  of  the  Son  of  God,  Jehovah 
Jesus,  and  is  worthy  of  HIS  inconceivable  majesty. 
In  all  the  multitude  not  one  hypocrite  will  be  found 
— not    one   sleeping  worshipper — no    wandering 
thought — no  fear  of  sin  or  of  Satan  and  his  perse- 
cuting agents — death  itself  will  be  dead  and  swal- 
lowed up  in  life  and  immortality — all  are  pure — 
clothed  in  white  robes — the  palm  of  victory  in  their 
hands — singing  the  glorious  anthems  of  heaven. 
0  my  soul!   who  are  they  that  are  thus  unspeak- 
ably blessed?     Shall  I  be  a  citizen  of  that  city? 
God  has  told  us  who  they  are — not  those  who  have 
been  cherished  by  the  state — clothed  with  honour, 
who  have  eaten  the  bread  of  idleness.    No.    '  These 
are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation.' 
Re.  vii.  H.     From  all  kindreds,  nations,  sects,  and 
parties — they  who  obeyed  God  and  not  man  in  all 
matters  of  faith  and  holiness — those  who  submitted 
to  the  Saviour,  and  have  washed  their  robes  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.    How 
vile  is  that  sectarian  spirit  which  in  cold  blood 
consigns  all  but  its  own  sect  to  eternal  misery. 
How  strange  the  calculation  of  that  Jewish  Rabbi,2 
who,  dooming  to  miserable  and  eternal  slavery  all 
but  his  own  little  party,  gives  to  every  Jew  two 
thousand  eight  hundred  souls  to  be  tormented  and 
tyrannically  used  as  slaves.     The  bitter  sectarian 
who  thus  judges  that  all  not  of  his  own  party  shall 
be  destroyed,  will  do  well  to  listen  to  the  voice  of 
truth,  •  With  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  shall  be 
judged.'     All  these  absurd  and  wicked  feelings 
are  fast  wearing  away  before  the  advancing  spirit 
of  Christianity.     When  the  leaven  of  Divine  truth 
shall  have  spread  over  the  whole  earth,  antichrist 
will  finally  fall — then  shall  this  New  Jerusalem 
descend  from  heaven,  and  become  the  glory  of  the 
earth.     How  distant  soever  that  period  may  seem, 
it  is  irresistibly  hastening  on.     Since  Bunyan 's 
days,  persecution  has  hid  its  ugly  head — North 
America,  which  was  then  a  land  of  darkness,  is 


See  page  435. 


Solomon  Jarchi.     See  Allen's  Modem  Judaism,  p.  275. 


EPISTLE  TO   FOUR  SORTS   OF   READERS. 


897 


now  widely  covered  with  gospel  blessings — slavery 
is  coming  to  an  end — India,  the  islands  of  the 
Pacific,  and  the  vast  territories  of  Australia,  are 
yielding  their  increase.  A  few  more  centuries  of 
progression,  increasing  in  its  ratio  as  time  draws 
to  a  close,  will  hasten  on  the  coming  uf  our  Lord. 
The  growth  in  grace  of  every  Christian  goes  on 
thus  gradually.  Bunyan  draws  a  beautiful  picture 
of  this  from  Eze.  xlvii.  3—13.  It  is  so  slow  as  scarcely 
to  be  perceptible,  and  one  proof  of  its  growth  in  our 
hearts  is  a  doubt  as  to  whether  we  are  progressing 
at  all.  The  more  the  light  of  heaven  breaks  in  upon 
us,  the  more  clearly  it  displays  our  sinful  follies. 
According  to  the  prophet,  the  waters  rise  higher 
and  higher,  but  so  slowly  as  to  elude  observation, 
until  we  find  that  they  have  risen  from  the  ancles 
to  the  knees,  and  at  length  they  rise  and  leave  no 
standing  for  the  feet — the  earth  recedes  with  time, 
and  the  soul  enters  upon  the  ocean  of  eternal 
grace  and  glory.  The  time  is  coming  when  we 
shall  no  longer  worship  in  temples  made  with 
hands,  neither  in  the  mountains  of  Samaria,  nor 
in  the  temples  of  Jerusalem,  or  Rome,  or  London. 
'  The  cloud-capt  towers — the  gorgeous  palaces — 
the  solemn  temples — yea,  the  great  globe  itself, 
shall  dissolve,  and,  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a 
vision,  leave  not  a  wreck  behind.'  Or  in  language 
far  more  solemn  and  striking,  because  they  are  the 
unerring  words  of  truth,  •  The  heavens  shall  pass 


away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall 
melt  with  fervent  heat;  the  earth  also,  and  the 
works  that  are  therein,  shall  be  burned  up.'  Then 
shall  the  Holy  City — the  New  Jerusalem — descend 
from  heaven,  and  all  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord 
shall  find  in  it  a  glorious  and  everlasting  habitation. 
Bunyan  published  this  Book  in  a  very  small  8vo 
of  294  pages.  It  was  never  reprinted  separately 
from  his  other  works,  and  even  in  them  it  suffered 
from  serious  omissions  and  errors.  It  is  now  ac- 
curately printed  from  his  original  edition.  The 
copy  in  Dr.  Williams'  Library,  Redcross  Street,  is 
remarkably  fine  and  clean,  a  present,  most  prob- 
ably, in  the  first  instance,  from  the  author,  having 
an  inscription  on  the  flyleaf,  apparentlyinBunyan's 
autograph,  '  This  for  my  good  and  dearly  beloved 
frend  mistris  Backcraft.'  It  has  a  false  title,  bear- 
ing the  imprint  of  '  London,  Printed  for  Francis 
Smith,  at  the  Elephant  and  Castle  without  Temple 
Barr,  1 GG9.'  The  editor's  copy,  soiled  and  tattered, 
cost  him  twenty  shillings,  a  striking  proof  of  its 
rarity.  This  has  the  original  title,  with  the  real 
date,  1GG5,  but  without  a  printer's  or  publisher's 
name — from  which  it  may  be  inferred  that  no  one 
dared  to  patronize  the  labours  of  the  poor  prisoner 
— a  circumstance  tending  to  make  the  book  more 
prized  by  the  lovers  of  Christian  liberty.  The 
four  dedications  are  singular,  and  truly  Bunyanish. 
Geo.  Offor. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  FOUR  SORTS  OF  READERS. 


I.  To  the  Godly  Reader. 

Friend, — Though  the  men  of  this  world,  at  the 
sight  of  this  book,  will  not  only  deride,  but  laugh 
in  conceit,  to  consider  that  one  so  low,  contempt- 
ible, and  inconsiderable  as  I,  should  busy  myself 
in  such  sort,  as  to  meddle  with  the  exposition  of 
so  hard  and  knotty  a  Scripture  as  here  they  find 
the  subject  matter  of  this  little  book ;  yet  do  thou 
remember  that  '  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish 
things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,  and 
things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things 
that  are.'  lCo.LS7, 2&  Consider  also,  that  even  of 
old  it  hath  been  his  pleasure  to  '  hide  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  to  reveal  them 
unto  babes.'  Mat.  xi.  25;xxi.  15,16.  I  tell  you  that  the 
operation  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God,  without 
depending  upon  that  idol,1  so  much  adored,  is  suf- 

1  By  '  idol'  is  here  meant  human  wisdom  and  school  learn- 
ing, which  the  men  of  this  world  adore,  and  laugh  in  conceit 
at  the  attempt  of  one  who  did  not  possess  it  to  expound  the 
mysteries  of  the  Revelations — forgetting  that  they  can  only  be 
spiritually  discerned. — (Ed.) 


ficient  of  itself  to  search  out  '  all  things,  even  the 
deep  things  of  God.'  l  Co.  u.  10. 

The  occasion  of  my  first  meddling  with  this 
matter  was  as  followeth: — Upon  a  certain  first- 
day,  I  being  together  with  my  brethren  in  our 
prison  chamber,  they  expected  that,  according  to 
our  custom,  something  should  be  spoken  out  of  the 
Word  for  our  mutual  edification ;  but  at  that  time 
I  felt  myself,  it  being  my  turn  to  speak,  so  empty, 
spiritless,  and  barren,  that  I  thought  I  should  not 
have  been  able  to  speak  among  them  so  much  as 
five  words  of  truth  with  life  and  evidence ;  but  at 
last  it  so  fell  out  that  providentially  I  cast  mine  eye 
upon  the  eleventh  verse  of  the  one  and  twentieth 
chapter  of  this  prophecy;  upon  which,  when  I  had 
considered  a  while,  methought  I  perceived  some- 
thing of  that  jasper  in  whose  light  you  there  find 
this  holy  city  is  said  to  come  or  descend ;  where- 
fore having  got  in  my  eye  some  dim  glimmerings 
thereof,  and  finding  also  in  my  heart  a  desire  to 
see  farther  thereinto,  I  with  a  few  groans  did  carry 
my  meditations  to  the  Lord  Jesus  for  a  blessing, 
which  he  did  forthwith  grant   according  to   his 


393 


EPISTLE  TO   FOUR  SORTS   OF  READERS. 


grace ;  and  helping  me  to  set  hefore  my  brethren, 
we  did  all  eat,  and  were  well  refreshed ;  and  be- 
hold also,  that  while  I  was  in  the  distributing  of 
it,  it  so  increased  in  my  hand,  that  of  the  frag- 
ments that  we  left,  after  we  had  well  dined,  I 
gathered  up  this  basketful.  Methought  the  more 
I  cast  mine  eye  upon  the  whole  discourse,  the 
more  I  saw  lie  in  it.  Wherefore  setting  myself 
to  a  more  narrow  search,  through  frequent  prayer 
to  God,  what  first  with  doing,  and  then  with  un- 
doing, and  after  that  with  doing  again,  I  thus  did 
finish  it. 

But  yet,  notwithstanding  all  my  labour  and 
travel  in  this  matter,  I  do  not,  neither  can  I  ex- 
pect that  every  godly  heart  should  in  every  thing- 
see  the  truth  and  excellency  of  what  is  here  dis- 
coursed ;  neither  would  I  have  them  imagine  that 
I  have  so  thoroughly  viewed  this  holy  city,  but 
that  much  more  than  I  do  here  crush  out  is  yet 
left  in  the  cluster.  Alas !  I  shall  only  say  thus,  I 
haved  crushed  out  a  little  juice  to  sweeten  their 
lips  withal,  not  doubting  but  in  a  little  time  more 
large  measures  of  the  excellency  of  this  city,  and 
of  its  sweetness  and  glory,  will  by  others  be  opened 
and  unfolded ;  yea,  if  not  by  the  servants  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  yet  by  the  Lord  himself,  who  will 
have  this  city  builded  and  set  in  its  own  place. 

But,  I  say,  for  this  discourse,  if  any  of  the  saints 
that  read  herein  think  they  find  nought  at  all  but 
words,  as  many  times  it  falleth  out  even  in  their 
reading  the  Scriptures  of  God  themselves,  I  beg,  I 
say,  of  such,  that  they  read  charitably,  judge 
modestly,  and  also  that  they  would  take  heed  of 
concluding  that  because  they  for  the  present  see 
nothing  in  this  or  that  passage,  that  therefore 
there  is  nothing  in  it:  possibly  from  that  which 
thou  mayest  cast  away  as  an  empty  bone,  others 
may  pick  both  good  and  wholesome  bits,  yea, 
and  also  out  of  that  suck  much  nourishing  marrow. 
You  find  by  experience,  that  that  very  bit  that 
will  not  down  with  one,  may  yet  not  only  down, 
but  be  healthful  and  nourishing  to  another.  Babes 
are  more  for  milk  than  strong  meat,  though  meat 
will  well  digest  with  those  that  are  of  riper  years. 
Wherefore  that  which  thy  weakness  will  not  suffer 
thee  to  feed  on,  leave;  and  go  to  the  milk  and 
nourishment  that  in  other  places  thou  shalt  find. 

II.  To  the  Learned  Reader. 

My  second  word  is  to  my  wise  and  learned  reader. 
Sir, — I  suppose,  in  your  reading  of  this  dis- 
course, you  will  be  apt  to  blame  me  for  two 
things :  First,  Because  I  have  not  so  beautified  my 
matter  with  acuteness  of  language  as  you  could 
wish  or  desire.  Secondly,  Because  also  1  have  not 
given  you,  either  in  the  line  or  in  the  margent,  a 
cloud  of  sentences  from  the  learned  fathers,  that 


have,  according  to  their  wisdom,  possibly,  handled 
these  matters  long  before  me. 

To  the  first  1  say,  the  matter  indeed  is  excel- 
lent and  high ;  but  for  my  part  I  am  weak  and 
low;  it  also  deserveth  a  more  full  and  profound 
discourse  than  my  small  parts  will  help  me  to  make 
upon  the  matter.  But  yet  seeing  the  Lord  looketh 
not  at  the  outward  appearance,  but  on  the  heart, 
neither  regardeth  high-swelling  words  of  vanity, 
but  pure  and  naked  truth  ;  and  seeing  also  that  a 
widow's  mite  being  all,  even  heart  as  well  as  sub- 
stance, is  counted  more,  and  better,  than  to  cast 
in  little  out  of  much,  and  that  little  too  perhaps  the 
worst,  I  hope  my  little,  being  all,  my  farthing,  see- 
ing I  have  no  more,  may  be  accepted  and  counted 
for  a  great  deal  in  the  Lord's  treasury.  Besides, 
Sir,  words  easy  to  be  understood  do  often  hit  the 
mark,  when  high  and  learned  ones  do  only  pierce 
the  air.  He  also  that  speaks  to  the  weakest,  may 
make  the  learned  understand  him ;  when  he  that 
striveth  to  be  high,  is  not  only  for  the  most  part 
understood  but  of  a  sort,  but  also  many  times  is 
neither  understood  by  them  nor  by  himself. 

Secondly,  The  reason  why  you  find  me  empty  of 
the  language  of  the  learned,  I  mean  their  sen- 
tences and  words  which  others  use,  is  because  I 
have  them  not,  nor  have  not  read  them:  had  it 
not  been  for  the  Bible,  I  had  not  only  not  thus 
done  it,  but  not  at  all. 

Lastly.  I  do  find  in  most  such  a  spirit  of  whore- 
dom and  idolatry  concerning  the  learning  of  this 
world,  and  wisdom  of  the  flesh,  and  God's  glory  so 
much  stained  and  diminished  thereby ;  that  had  I 
all  their  aid  and  assistance  at  command,  I  durst 
not  make  use  of  ought  thereof,  and  that  for  fear 
lest  that  grace,  and  these  gifts  that  the  Lord  hath 
given  me,  should  be  attributed  to  their  wits,  rather 
than  the  light  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God : 
Wherefore  '  I  will  not  take'  of  them  '  from  a  thread 
even  to  a  shoe-latchet,  -  lest  they  should  say,  We 
have  made  Abram  rich.'  Ge.  xiv.  '23. 

Sir,  What  you  find  suiting  with  the  Scriptures 
take,  though  it  should  not  suit  with  authors;  but 
that  which  you  find  against  the  Scriptures,  slight, 
though  it  should  be  confirmed  by  multitudes  of 
them.  Yea,  further,  where  you  find  the  Scrip- 
tures and  your  authors  jump,1  yet  believe  it  for 
the  sake  of  Scripture's  authority.  I  honour  the 
godly  as  Christians,  but  I  prefer  the  Bible  before 
them ;  and  having  that  still  with  me,  I  count  my- 
self far  better  furnished  than  if  I  had  without  it 
all  the  libraries  of  the  two  universities.  Besides, 
I  am  for  drinking  water  out  of  my  own  cistern  ;2 


1  Where  the  Bible  and  uninspired  authors  agree,  believe  the 
truth  simply  for  the  Bible's  sake.  How  properly  jealous  was 
Bunyan  as  to  the  supremacy  of  God's  authority. — (Ed.) 

2  See  Isa.  xsxvi.  16.  The  fountain  of  living  waters,  and 
not  the  broken  cisterns  alluded  to  in  Je.  ii.  13. — (Ed.) 


THE    HOLY   CITY,  OR  THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


399 


■what  God  makes  mine  by  the  evidence  of  his  Word 
r.nd  Spirit,  that  I  dare  make  bold  with.  Where- 
fore seeing,  though  I  am  without  their  learned 
lines,  yet  well  furnished  with  the  words  of  God,  I 
mean  the  Bible,  I  have  contented  myself  with  what 
I  there  have  found,  and  having  set  it  before  your 
eyes, 

T  pray  read  and  take,  Sir,  what  you  like  best ; 

And  that  which  you  like  not,  leave  for  the  rest. 

III.  To  the  Captious  Reader. 

My  third  icord  is  to  the  captious  and  ivraivjling 
reader. 
Friend, — However  thou  earnest  by  this  book,  I 
will  assure  thee  thou  wast  least  in  my  thoughts 
when  I  writ  it ;  I  tell  thee,  I  intended  this  book  as 
little  for  thee  as  the  goldsmith  iotendeth  his  jewels 
and  rings  for  the  snout  of  a  sow.  Wherefore  put 
on  reason,  and  lay  aside  thy  frenzy ;  be  sober,  cr 
lay  by  the  book.  Mat,  vii.  6. 

IV.  To  the  Mother  of  Harlots,  etc. 
My  fourth  tvord  is  to  the  lady  of  kingdoms,  the  ivell- 

f avowed  harlot,  tlie  mistress  of  ivitchcrafts,  and 

the  abominations  of  the  earth. 

Mistress, — I  suppose  I  have  nothing  here  that 
will  either  please  your  wanton  eye  or  go  down  with 
your  voluptuous  palate.  Here  is  bread  indeed,  as 
also  milk  and  meat ;   but  here  is  neither  paint  to 


adorn  thy  wrinkled  face,  nor  crutch  to  uphold  or 
undershore  thy  shaking,  tottering,  staggering  king- 
dom of  Rome ;  but  rather  a  certain  presage  of  tliy 
sudden  and  fearful  final  downfall,  and  of  the  exal- 
tation of  that  holy  matron,  whose  chastity  thou 
dost  abhor,  because  by  it  she  reproveth  and  con- 
demneth  thy  lewd  and  stubborn  life.  Wherefore, 
lady,  smell  thou  mayest  of  this,  but  taste  thou 
wilt  not:  I  know  that  both  thy  wanton  eye,  with 
all  thy  mincing  brats  that  are  intoxicated  with  thy 
cup  and  enchanted  with  thy  fornications,  will,  at 
the  sight  of  so  homely  and  plain  a  dish  as  this, 
cry,  Fob  i  snuff,  put  the  branch  to  the  nose,1  and 
say,  Contemptible !  Mai.  i.  12,  13.  Eze.  viii.  17.  '  But 
wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children.'  Mat.  xi.  19. 
'  The  virgin  the  daughter  of  Zion  hath  despised 
thee,  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn ;  Jerusalem  hath 
shaken  her  head  at  thee,'  is.xuvii.  22;  yea,  her  God 
hath  smitten  his  hands  at  thy  dishonest  gain  and 
freaks.  Eze.  xxu.  7-it,  <tc.  '  Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusa- 
lem, and  be  glad  for  her,  all  ye  that  love  her ;  re- 
joice for  joy  with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn  for  her ; 
that  ye  may  suck  and  be  satisfied  with  the  breasts 
of  her  consolations,  that  ye  may  milk  out  and  be 
delighted  with  the  abundance  of  her  glory.'  is. 
uvi.  10, 11.  John  Bukyan. 


1  Commentators  differ  as  to  the  meaning  of  '  put  the  branch 
to  the  nose,'  Eze.  viii.  17,  but  all  agree  it  was  some  well  known 
mode  of  expressing.contempt  for  God  and  his  worship. — (Ed.) 


THE  HOLY  CITY;   OR,  THE  NEW  JERUSALEM. 


Revelation  xxi.  10-27;  xxu.  1-4. 

10  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  to  a  great  and  high 
mountain,  and  showed  me  that  great  city,  the  holy  Jeru- 
salem, descending  out  of  heaven  from  God,  n  Having 
the  glory  of  God:  and  her  light  was  like  unto  a  stone 
most  precious,  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal: 
12  And  had  a  wall  great  and  high,  and  had  twelve  gates, 
and  at  the  gates  twelve  angels  and  names  written  there- 
on, which  are  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  13  On  the  east  three  gates,  on  the 
north  three  gates,  on  the  south  three  gates,  and  on  the 
west  three  gates.  H  And  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve 
foundations,  and  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles 
of  the  Lamb.  15  And  he  that  talked  with  me  had  a 
golden  reed  to  measure  the  city,  and  the  gates  thereof 
and  the  wall  thereof.  10  And  the  city  lieth  four-square, 
and  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth:  and  he  mea- 
sured the  city  with  the  reed,  twelve  thousand  furlongs: 
the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal. 
17  And  he  measured  the  wall  thereof,  an  hundred  and 
forty  and  four  cubits,  according  lo  the  measure  of  a  man, 
that  is  of  the  angel.  18  And  the  building  of  the  wall  of 
it  was  of  jasper,  and  the  city  was  pure  gold,  like  unto 
clear  glass.  19  And  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the 
city  icere  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones. 
The  first  foundation  was  jasper;  the  second,  sapphire;  the 


third,  a  chalcedony;  the  fourth,  an  emerald;  20  The  fifth, 
sardonyx;  the  sixth,  sardius;  the  seventh,  chrysolite;  the 
eighth,  beryl;  the  ninth,  a  topaz;  the  tenth,  a  chryso- 
prasus;  the  eleveuth,  a  jacinth;  the  twelfth,  an  amethyst. 
21  And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls,  every  several 
gate  was  of  one  pearl ;  and  the  &'  reet  of  the  city  was  pure 
gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass.  -2  And  I  saw  no 
temple  therein:  for  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  and  the 
Lamb,  are  the  temple  of  it.  23  And  the  city  had  no  need 
of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon  to  shine  in  it :  for  the 
glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light 
thereof.  u  And  the  nations  of  them  which  are  saved, 
shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it:  and  the  kings  of  the  earth 
do  bring  their  glory  and  honour  into  it.  2A  And  the  gates 
of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day:  for  there  shall  be  no 
night  there.  -6  And  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and 
honour  of  the  nations  into  it:  27  And  there  shall  in  no 
wise  enter  iuto  it  auy  thing  that  derileth,  neither  whatso- 
ever worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie:  but  they 
which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life. 
22.  1  And  he  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear 
as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb.  2  In  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it,  and  on 
either  side  of  the  river,  was  there  the  tree  of  life,  which 
bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  yielded  her  fruit  every 
mouth:  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the  healing  of 


400 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  OR 


the  nations.  s  And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse:  but 
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it;  and 
his  servants  shall  serve  him.  4  And  they  shall  see  his 
face,  and  his  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads. 

In  my  dealing  with  this  mystery,  I  shall  not  meddle 
where  I  see  nothing,  neither  shall  I  hide  from  you 
that  which  at  present  I  conceive  to  he  wrapt  up 
therein ;  only  you  must  not  from  me  look  for  much 
enlargement,  though  I  shall  endeavour  to  speak  as 
much  in  few  words,  as  my  understanding  and  capa 
city  will  enable  me,  through  the  help  of  Christ. 

In  this  description  of  this  holy  city,  you  have 
these  five  general  heads : 

First,  The  vision  of  this  city  in  general.  Second, 
A  discovery  of  its  defence,  entrances,  and  fashion, 
in  particular.  Third,  A  relation  of  the  glory  of 
each.  Fouiitb",  A  discovery  of  its  inhabitants,  their 
quality  and  numerousness.  Fifth,  A  relation  of 
its  maintenance,  hy  which  it  continueth  in  life,  ease, 
peace,  tranquillity,  and  sweetness  for  ever.  To  all 
which  I  shall  speak  something  in  their  proper 
places,  and  shall  open  them  before  you. 

But  hefore  I  begin  with  any  of  them,  I  must 
speak  a  word  or  two  concerning  John's  qualifica- 
tion, whereby  he  was  enabled  to  behold  and  take  a 
view  of  this  city;  which  qualification  he  relateth  in 
these  words  following: 

Verse  10.  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit 
to  a  great  and  high  mountain,  and  showed  me  that 
great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of 
heaven  from  God. 

The  angel  heing  to  show  this  holy  man  this  great 
John  qualified  an(l  glorious  vision,  he  first,  by  quali- 
for  tins  vision.  fy}ng  0f  him,  puts  him  into  a  suitable 
capacity  to  behold  and  take  the  view  thereof;  '  He 
carried  me  away  in  the  spirit.'  When  he  saith, 
He  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit,  he  means  he  was 
taken  up  into  the  Spirit,  his  soul  was  greatly  spiri- 
tualized. Whence  take  notice,  that  an  ordinary 
frame  oi  spirit  is  not  able  to  comprehend,  nor  yet 
to  apprehend  extraordinary  things.  Much  of  the 
Spirit  discerneth  much  of  God's  matters  ;  but  little 
of  the  Spirit  discerneth  hut  little  of  them  :  '  I  could 
not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto 
carnal,  even  as  unto  "babes  in  Christ ;  I  have  fed 
you  with  milk,  and  not  with  meat ;  for  hitherto  ye 
were  not  able  to  bear  it,  neither  yet  now  are  ye 

able.'  1  Co.  iii.  2. 

'  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit,'  <fcc. 
Thus  it  was  with  the  saints  of  old,  when  God  had 
either  special  work  for  them  to  do,  or  great  thino-s 
for  them  to  see.  Ezekiel,  when  he  had  the  vision 
of  this  city  in  the  old  law,  in  the  captivity  at 
Babylon,  he  must  be  first  forefitted  with  a  compe- 
tent measure  of  the  Spirit.  Eze.  xi.  %  John  also, 
when  he  had  the  whole  matter  of  this  prophecy  re- 
vealed unto  him,  he  must  he  in  the  Spirit ;  '  I  was 
(saith  he)  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,   and 


heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet ' 
talking  with  me,  kc.  Re.  i.  10,  n.  Whence  note 
again,  that  when  God  calls  a  man  to  this  or  that 
work  for  him,  he  first  fits  him  with  a 
suitable  spirit.  Ezekiel  saith,  when  for  work  he  fits 
God  hid  him  stand  upon  his  feet,  that  for  work- 
the  Spirit  entered  into  him,  and  set  him  upon  his 
feet.   Eze.  ii.  1,  2. 

'  And  he  carried  me  away,'  &c.  Mark,  And  he 
carried  me  [away]  »fec.  As  a  man  must  have  much 
of  the  Spirit  that  sees  much  of  God,  and  his  good- 
ly matters;  so  he  must  be  also  carried  away  with  it; 
he  must  by  it  he  taken  off  from  things  carnal  and 
earthly,  and  taken  up  into  the  glory  of  things  that 
are  spiritual  and  heavenly.  The  Spirit  loveth  to  do 
what  it  doth  in  private ;  that  man  to  whom  God  in- 
tendeth  to  reveal  great  things,  he  takes  him  aside 
from  the  lumber  and  cumber  of  this  world,  and  car- 
rieth  him  away  in  the  solace  and  contemplation  of 
the  things  of  another  world  ;  •  And  when  they  were 
alone,  he  expounded  all  things  to  his  disciples.'  Mar. 
iv.  3-t.  Mark,  and  when  they  were  alone  ;  according 
to  that  of  the  prophet,  '  Whom  shall  he  teach  know- 
ledge, and  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  doc- 
trine ?  them  that  are  weaned  from  the  milk,  and 
drawn  from  the  breasts.'  is.  xxviii. 9.  Whence  observe 
also,  he  is  the  man  that  is  like  to  know  most  of 
God,  that  is  oftenest  in  private  with  him.  Lu.  ii.  25-38. 
He  that  oheyeth  when  God  saith,  Come  up  hither, 
he  shall  see  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  For 
'  through  desire  a  man  having  separated  himself, 
seeketharadintermeddieth  with  all  wisdom.'  Pr.xviii.l. 
'  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  to  a  great 
and  high  mountain.'  Thus  having  showed  his 
frame,  and  inward  disposition  of  spirit,  he  now 
comes  to  tell  us  also  of  the  place  or  stage  on  which 
he  was  set ;  to  the  end  that  now  being  fitted  by  il- 
lumination, he  might  not  be  hindered  of  his  vision 
by  ought  that  might  intercept.  He  carried  me 
away  in  the  Spirit  to  a  great  and  high  mountain. 
Thus  did  God  of  old  also;  for  when  he  showed  to 
Moses  the  patterns  of  the  heavenly  things,  he  must 
ascend  to  the  Mount  Sinai.  Ex.  xix.  3.  He  must  into 
the  mount  also,  when  he  hath  the  view  of  the  Holy 
Land,  and  of  that  goodly  mountain  Lebanon.  De. 
xxxii.  49.  Whence  we  may  learn  that  the  things  of 
God  are  far  from  man,  as  he  is  natural ;  and  also 
that  there  are  very  great  things  between  us  and  the 
sight  of  them :  none  can  see  them  but  such  as  are 
carried  away  in  the  Spirit  and  set  on  high. 

' ...  To  a  great  and  high  mountain.'  This 
mountain  therefore  signifieth  the  Lord  Christ,  on 
which  the  soul  must  be  placed,  as  on  a  mighty  hill, 
whereby  he  may  be  able,  his  eyes  being  anointed 
with  spiritual  eye-salve,  to  see  over  the  tops  of 
those  mighty  corruptions,  temptations,  and  spiri- 
tual enemies,  that  like  high  and  mighty  towers  are 
built  by  the  wicked  one,  to  keep  the  view  of  God's 


THE  NEW  JERUSALEM. 


401 


things  from  the  sight  of  our  souls.  2Co.x.6,6. 
Wherefore  Christ  is  called  the  Mountain  of  the 
Lord's  house,  or  that  on  which  the  house  of  God 
is  placed ;  he  is  also  called  the  Rock  of  ages,  and 
the  Rock  that  is  higher  than  we.  '  The  hill  of 
God  is'  an  high  hill,  as  Bashan;  'an  high  hill,  as 
the  hill  of  Bashan. '  pt.  lxviii.  15.  This  is  the  hill  from 
whence  the  prophet  Ezekiel  had  the  vision  of  this 
city;  Eze.xl.2.  '  And  upon  this  rock  (saith  Christ) 
I  will  build  my  church,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail  against  it.'  Mat.  xvi.  is. 

[FIRST.  Tiie  Vision  op  the  Holt  City  in 

GENERAL.] 

*  And  he  carried  me  away  in  the  spirit  to  a 

great  and  high  mountain,  and  showed  me  that  great 

citv,  the    holy  Jerusalem.'      Having 

Jerusalem   eon-      .  ■, «  ,  . 

sideied  in  ge-  thus  told  us  how,  and  with  what  he 
was  qualified,  he  next  makes  relation 
of  what  he  saw,  which  was  that  great  city,  the 
holy  Jerusalem. 

Jerusalem,  in  the  language  of  the  Scripture,  is 
to  be  acknowledged  for  the  church  and  spouse  of 
the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  is  to  be  considered  either 
generally  or  more  particularly.  Now  as  she  is  to 
be  taken  generally,  so  she  is  to  be  understood  as 
being  '  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth, '  Ep. 
5ii.  15 ;  and  as  she  is  thus  looked  upon,  so  she  is  not 
considered  with  respect  to  this  or  that  state  and 
condition  of  the  church  here  in  the  world,  but 
simply  as  she  is  the  church :  therefore  it  is  said, 
when  at  any  time  any  are  converted  from  Satan  to 
God,  that  they  •  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and 
unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem ;  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels ; 
to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born 
which  are  written  in  heaven;  to  God  the  judge  of  all, 
and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect;  and  to 
Jesus,  -  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling.'  He.  xii.  22,  24. 

But  again,  as  Jerusalem  is  thus  generally  to  be 
Jerusalem  is  to  understood,  so  also  she  is  to  be  con- 
itreCOpS  sidcred  more  particularly:  1.  Either 
lar'y-  as  she  relates  to  her  first  and  purest 

state ;  or,  2.  As  she  relates  to  her  declined  and 
captivated  state;  or,  3.  With  reference  to  her  being 
recovered  again  from  her  apostatized  and  captiv- 
ated condition.  Thus  it  was  with  J  erusalem  in  the 
letter ;  which  threefold  state  of  this  city  shall  he 
most  exactly  answered  by  our  gospel  Jerusalem,  by 
our  New  Testament  church.  Her  first  state  was  in 
the  days  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  and  answereth 
to  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Solomon ;  her  second 
state  is  in  the  days  of  antichrist,  and  answereth  to 
the  carrying  away  of  the  Jews  from  their  city  into 
Babylon ;  and  her  third  state  is  this  in  the  text, 
and  answereth  to  their  return  from  captivity,  and 
rebuilding  their  city  and  walls  again :  all  which  will 
be  fully  manifest  in  this  discourse  following, 

VOL.  III. 


[This  city  is  the  gospel  church  reluming  out  of 
antlchristlan  cajrtivity.  ] 

Besides,  that  this  holy  city  that  here  you  read 
of  is  the  church,  the  gospel  church,  returning  out 
of  her  long  and  antichristian  captivity ;  consider, 

First,  She  is  here  called  a  city,  the  very  name 
that  our  primitive  church  went  under,  Ep.  ii.  19 ; 
which  name  she  loseth  all  the  while  of  her  aposta- 
tizing and  captivity  under  antichrist ;  for  observe, 
I  say,  all  the  while  she  is  under  the  scourge  of  the 
dragon,  be?.st,  and  the  woman  in  scarlet,  &c, 
Re.  xiii.,  she  goeth  under  the  name  of  a  woman,  a 
woman  in  travail,  a  woman  flying  before  the  dragon, 
a  woman  flying  into  the  wilderness,  there  to  con- 
tinue in  an  afflicted  and  tempted  condition,  and  to 
be  glad  of  wilderness  nourishment,  until  the  time 
of  her  enemies  were  come  to  an  end.  Re.  xii. 

Now  the  reason  why  she  lost  the  title  of  city  at 
her  going  into  captivity  is,  because  then  she  lost 
her  situation  and  strength ;  she  followed  others 
than  Christ,  wherefore  he  suffered  her  enemies  to 
scale  her  walls,  to  break  down  her  battlements ; 
he  suffered,  as  you  see  here,  the  great  red  dragon, 
and  beast  with  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  to  get 
into  her  vineyard,  who  made  most  fearful  work 
both  with  her  and  all  her  friends ;  her  gates  also 
were  now  either  broken  down  or  shut  up,  so  that 
none  could,  according  to  her  laws  and  statutes, 
enter  into  her ;  her  charter  also,  even  the  Bible 
itself,  was  most  grossly  abused  and  corrupted,  yea, 
sometimes  burned  and  destroyed  almost  utterly ; 
wherefore  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  take  away  from 
her  the  title  of  city,  and  leaveth  her  to  be  termed 
a  wandering  woman,  as  aforesaid.  '  The  court 
which  is  without  the  temple  (saith  the  angel)  leave 
out,  and  measure  it  not,  for  it  is  given  unto  the 
Gentiles  ;  and  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under 
foot  forty  and  two  months. '  Re.  xi.  2.  '  The  holy 
city  shall  they  tread  under  foot;'  that  is,  all  the 
city  constitutions,  her  forts  and  strength,  her  laws 
and  privileges  for  a  long  time,  shall  be  laid  aside 
and  slighted,  shall  become  a  hissing,  a  taunt,  and 
a  byeword  among  the  nations.  And  truly  thus  it 
was  in  the  letter,  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
by  the  king  of  Babylon  and  his  wicked  instruments, 
by  whose  hands  the  city  was  broken  up,  the  walls 
pulled  down,  the  gates  burned,  the  houses  rifled, 
the  virgins  ravished,  and  the  children  laid  dead  in 
the  top  of  every  street.  2  Ch.  xxxvi.  17—21.  Je.  lii.  La.  i. 
ii.  iii.  iv.  Now  was  Zion  become  a  ploughed  field, 
and  Jerusalem  turned  to  heaps  ;  a  place  of  briars 
and   thorns,    and   of  wasteless    and   desolation. 

Mic.  iii.  12.  Is.  vii.  23,  24. 

Second,  The  phrase  also  that  is  joined  with 
this  of  city  doth  much  concern  the  point ;  she  is 
here  called  '  the  new  and  holy  city,'  which  words 
are  explained  by  these,  '  prepared  as  a  bride  and 


402 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  OR 


adorned  for  her  husband.'  The  meaning  is,  that 
she  is  now  got  into  her  form,  fashion,  order,  and 
privileges  again ;  she  is  now  ready,  adorned,  pre- 
pared, and  put  into  her  primitive  state ;  mark, 
though  she  was  in  her  state  of  affliction  called  a 
woman,  yet  she  was  not  then  either  called  a  city 
or  a  woman  adorned ;  hut  rather  a  woman  robbed 
and  spoiled,  rent  and  torn  among  the  briars  and 
thorns  of  the  wilderness,  is.  v.  6 ;  xiu.  22 ;  xxxii.  13,  14. 
Wherefore  this  city  is  nothing  else  but  the  church 
returned  out  of  captivity  from  under  the  reign  of 
antichrist,  as  is  yet  farther  manifest,  because, 

Tfiird,  We  find  no  city  to  answer  that  which 
was  built  after  the  Jews'  return  from  captivity  but 
this ;  for  this,  and  only  this,  is  the  city  that  you 
find  in  this  prophecy  that  is  nominated  as  the  anti- 
type of  that  second  of  the  Jews ;  wherefore  John 
hath  no  relation  of  her  while  towards  the  doom  of 
antichrist,  and  no  description  of  her  in  particular 
until  antichrist  is  utterly  overthrown  ;  as  all  may 
see  that  wisely  read.  Ee.  xvu.— sc 

[  Why  the  church  is  called  a  city.] 

'And  showed  me  that  great  city.'     The  Holy 

Ghost  is  pleased  at  this  time  to  give 

at  tins  day  is   the  church  the  name  of  a  city,  rather 

uameofbadty!   tnan  any  other  name,  rather  than  the 

rather  than  a   nanie  0f  spouse,  woman,  temple,  and 

woman,    tcm-      ....         r.  ,      .  .   r         , 

pie,  house,  or  the  like — though  he  giveth  us  her 
under  the  name  of  a  woman  also,  to 
help  us  to  understand  what  he  means ;  but,  I  say, 
the  name  of  a  city  is  now  the  name  in  special, 
under  which  the  church  must  go,  and  that  for 
special  reasons. 

First.  To  show  us  how  great  and  numerous  a 
people  will  then  be  in  the  church ;  the  church  may 
be  a  woman,  a  temple,  a  spouse,  when  she  is  but 
few,  a  handful,  but  two  or  three ;  but  to  be  a  city, 
and  that  in  her  glory,  it  bespeaks  great  store  of 
members,  inhabitants,  and  citizens ;  especially 
when  she  goeth  under  the  name  of  a  great  city,  as 
here  she  does.     He  '  showed  me  that  great  city. ' 

Second.  She  goeth  rather  under  the  name  of  a 
city,  than  temple  or  spouse,  to  show  us  also  how 
plentifully  the  nations  and  kingdoms  of  men  shall 
at  that  day  traffic  with  her,  and  in  her,  for  her 
goodly  merchandize  of  grace  and  life ;  to  show  us, 
I  say,  Avhat  wonderful  custom  the  church  of  God 
at  this  day  shall  have  among  all  sorts  of  people, 
for  her  heavenly  treasures.  It  is  said  of  Tyrus 
and  Babylon,  that  their  merchandize  went  unto  all 
the  world,  and  men  from  all  quarters  under  heaven 
came  to  trade  and  to  deal  with  them  for  their 
wares,  r.ze.  xxvii.  Re.  zviii.  2,  3.  Why  thus  it  will  be  in 
the  latter  day  with  the  church  of  God;  the  nations 
shall  come  from  far,  from  Tarshish,  Pul,  Lud, 
Tubal,  Javan,  and  the  isles  afar  oil*.  They  shall 
come,  saith  God,  out  of  all  nations  upon  horses 


and  mules,  and  upon  swift  beasts,  to  my  holy 
mountain  Jerusalem.  •  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
that  from  one  new  moon  to  another,  and  from  one 
sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship 
before  me,  saith  the  Lord.'  is.  lxn.  19-23.  Alas,  the 
church  at  that  day  when  she  is  a  woman  only,  or 
a  temple  either,  may  be  without  that  beauty,  trea- 
sure, amiableness,  and  affecting  glory  that  she 
will  be  endowed  with  when  she  is  a  prosperous  city. 
His  marvellous  kindness  is  seen  *  in  a  strong  city. ' 
rs.  xxxi.  21.  In  cities,  you  know,  are  the  treasures, 
beauty,  and  glory  of  kingdoms;  and  it  is  thither 
men  go  that  are  desirous  to  solace  themselves  there- 
with. '  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God 
hath  sinned.'  Ps.  1. 2. 

Tldrd.  It  is  called  a  city,  rather  than  a  woman 
or  temple,  to  show  us  how  strongly  and  securely  it 
will  keep  its  inhabitants  at  that  day.  '  In  that  day 
shall  this  song  be  sung,  -  We  have  a  strong  city, 
salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks.' 
is.  xxvi.  1.  And  verily  if  the  cities  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  strength  of  their  bars,  and  gates,  and  walls 
did  so  shake  the  hearts,  yea,  the  very  faith  of  the 
children  of  God  themselves,  how  secure  and  safe 
will  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  be,  even  the  in- 
habitants of  that  city  which  God  himself  will  build, ' 

he.  De.  ix.  1,  2.  Nu.  xiii.  28. 

[Fourth.]  But  lastly,  and  more  especially,  the 
church  is  called  here  a  city,  chiefly  to  show  us  that 
now  she  shall  be  undermost  no  longer.  Babylon 
reigned,  and  so  shall  Jerusalem  at  that  day.  'And 
thou,  0  tower  of  the  flock,  the  stronghold  of  the 
daughter  of  Zion,  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even 
the  first  dominion,  the  kingdom  shall  come  to  the 
daughter  of  Jerusalem.'  Mi.  iv.  8.  Now  shall  she, 
when  she  is  built  and  complete,  have  a  complete 
conquest  and  victory  over  all  her  enemies ;  she 
shall  reign  over  them  ;  the  law  shall  go  forth  of 
her  that  rules  them,  and  the  governors  of  all  the 
world  at  that  day  shall  be  Jerusalem  men.  '  And 
the  captivity  of  this  host  of  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  2)0ssess  that  of  the  Canaanites,  even  unto 
Zarephath ;  and  the  captivity  of  Jerusalem  which 
is  in  Sepharad  shall  possess  the  cities  of  the  south. 
And  saviours  shall  come  up  on  mount  Zion,  to 
judge  the  mount  of  Esau,  and  the  kingdom  shall 
be  the  Lord's.'  Ob.  20, 21.1  ■  For  the  law  shall  go 
forth  of  Zion,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jer- 
usalem. -  And  he  shall  judge  among  many  people, 
and  rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off,  and  they  shall 
beat  their  swords  into  plough-shares,  and  their 
spears  into  pruning-hooks :   nation  shall  not  lift  up 


1  The  note  upon  this  passage  in  the  Genevan  or  Puritan 
version,  with  which  Bunyan  was  familiar,  is,  '  God  will  raise 
up  in  his  church  such  as  shall  rule  and  govern  for  the  defence 
of  the  same,  and  instruction  of  his  enemies,  under  Messiah, 
whom  the  prophet  calleth  here  the  Lord  and  Head  of  this 
kingdom.' — (Ed.) 


THE  NEW  JERUSALEM. 


403 


a  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn 
war  any  more.'  Mi.  iv.  l— 3.  There  brake  he  '  the 
ships  of  Tarshish  with  an  east  wind.  As  we  have 
heard,  so  have  we  seen  in  the  city  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  in  the  city  of  our  God;  God  will  establish 
it  for  ever.'  Ps.  xiviii.  l— s.  For  observe  it,  Christ 
hath  not  only  obtained  the  kingdom  of  heaven  for 
those  that  arc  his,  when  this  world  is  ended,  but 
hath  also,  as  a  reward  for  his  sufferings,  the  whole 
world  given  into  his  hand ;  wherefore,  as  all  the 
kings,  and  princes,  and  powers  of  this  world  have 
had  their  time  to  reign,  and  have  glory  in  this 
world  in  the  face  of  all,  so  Christ  will  have  his 
time  at  this  day,  to  show  who  is  '  the  only  Poten- 
tate -  and  Lord  of  lords.'  l  Ti.  ri.  is.  At  which  day 
he  will  not  only  set  up  his  kingdom  in  the  midst 
of  their  kingdoms,  as  he  doth  now,  but  will  set  it 
up  even  upon  the  top  of  their  kingdoms ;  at  which 
day  there  will  not  be  a  nation  in  the  -world  but 
must  bend  to  Jerusalem  or  perish,  is.  be  12.  For 
'  the  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the  greatness  of 
the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given 
to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose 
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  all  do- 
minions shall  serve  and  obey  him.'  Da.  vii.  27.  'And 
his  dominion  sluxll  be  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the 
river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.'  Zee.  is.  10.  0  holi- 
ness, how  shall  it  shine  in  kings  and  nations,  when 
God  doth  this  ! 

[This  city  descends  out  of  heaven  from  God.] 

•  He  showed  me  that  great  city,  the  holy  Jeru- 
salem, descending  out  of  heaven  from  God.'  In 
these  words  we  are  to  inquire  into  three  things. 
First.  What  he  here  should  mean  by  heaven. 
Second.  What  it  is  for  this  city  to  descend  out  of 
it.  Third.  And  wh)r  she  is  said  to  descend  out  of 
it  from  God. 

First.  For  the  word  heaven,  in  Scripture  it  is 
variously  to  be  understood,  but  generally  either 
materially  or  metaphorically ;  now  not  materially 
here,  but  metaphorically;  and  so  is  generally,  if 
not  always,  taken  in  this  book. 

Now  that  it  is  not  to  be  taken  for  the  material 
heavens  where  Christ  in  person  is,  consider,  that 
the  descending  of  this  city  is  not  the  coming  of 
glorified  saints  with  their  Lord ;  because  that  even 
after  the  descending,  yea  and  building  of  this  city, 
there  shall  be  sinners  converted  to  God ;  but  at  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  from  heaven  with  his 
saints,  the  door  shall  be  shut ;  that  is,  the  door  of 
grace,  against  all  unbelievers.  Lu.  xiii.  25.  Mat.  xxv.  10. 

Therefore  heaven  here  is  to  be  taken  metaphor- 
ically, for  the  church ;  which,  as  I  said  before,  is 
frequently  so  taken  in  this  prophecy,  as  also  in 
many  others  of  the  holy  scriptures.   lie.  xi.i5;xii.l— 3, 

7,  8, 10,  13  ;    xiii  6 ;    xix.  1,  14.   Je.  li.  48.    Mat.  xxv.  1,  &c.       And 

observe  it,  though  the  church  of  Christ  under  the 


tyranny  of  antichrist,  loseth  the  title  of  a  standing 
city,  yet  in  the  worst  of  times  she  loseth  not  the 
title  of  heaven.  She  is  heaven  when  the  great  red 
dragon  is  in  her,  and  heaven  when  the  third  part 
of  her  stars  are  cast  unto  the  earth  ;  she  is  heaven 
also  when  the  beast  doth  open  his  throat  against 
her,  to  blaspheme  her  God,  his  tabernacle,  and 
those  that  dwell  in  her. 

Second.  Now,  then,  to  show  you  what  we  are  to 
understand  by  this,  that  she  is  said  to  descend  out 
of  heaven  ;  for  indeed  to  speak  properly,  Jerusalem 
is  always  in  the  Scriptures  set  in  the  highest  ground, 
and  men  arc  said  to  descend,  when  they  go  down 
from  her,  but  to  ascend,  or  go  up  when  they  arc  go- 
ing thitherwards.  Eze.iii.l.Ne.xii.  1.  Mat.  xx.  17, 18.  Lu.xix.28; 

x.  30.  But  yet  though  this  be  true,  there  must  also 
be  something  significant  in  this  word  descending ; 
wherefore  when  ho  saith,  he  saw  this  city  to  de- 
scend out  of  heaven,  he  would  have  us  understand, 

1.  That  though  the  church  under  antichrist  be 
never  so  low,  yet  out  of  her  loins  shall  they  come 
that  yet  shall  be  a  reigning  city.  He.  vii.  6, 13,  u. 
Generation  is  a  descending  from  the  loins  of  our 
friends ;  he  therefore  speaks  of  the  generation  of 
the  church.  Wherefore  the  meaning  is,  That  out 
of  the  church  that  is  now  in  captivity,  there  shall 
come  a  complete  city,  so  exact  in  all  things,  accord- 
ing to  the  laws  and  liberties,  privileges  and  riches 
of  a  city,  that  she  shall  lie  level  with  the  great 
charter  of  heaven.  Thus  it  was  in  the  type,  the  city 
after  the  captivity  was  builded,  even  by  those  that 
once  were  in  captivity,  especially  by  their  seed 
and  offspring,  u.  xiv. ;  and  thus  it  shall  be  in  our 
New  Testament  New  Jerusalem  ;  '  Tliey  that  shall 
he  of  thee,'  saith  the  prophet,  that  is,  of  the  church 
of  affliction,  they  '  shall  build  the  old  waste  places; 
thou  shalt  raise  up  the  foundations  of  many  gen- 
erations; and  thou  shalt  be  called,  The  repairer  of 
the  breach,  The  restorer  of  paths  to  dwell  in.' 
is.  iviii.  12;  and  again,  they  that  sometimes  had 
ashes  for  gladness,  and  the  spirit  of  heaviness  in- 
stead of  the  garment  of  praise,  •  they  shall  build 
the  old  wastes,  they  shall  raise  up  the  former  de- 
solations, and  they  shall  repair  the  waste  cities, 
the  desolations  of  many  generations  ;  for  your 
shame  ye  shall  have  double,  and /or  confusion  they 
shall  rejoice  in  their  portion,'  &c.  is.  lxi.  3,  ■*,  7. 
Thus  therefore  by  descending  we  may  understand 
that  the  church's  generation  shall  be  this  holy 
city,  and  shall  build  up  themselves  the  tower  of 
the  flock.  Mi.  iv.  8. 

2.  When  he  saith,  This  holy  city  descended 
out  of  heaven,  he  would  have  us  understand  also 
what  a  blessing  and  happiness  this  city  at  her  re- 
building will  be  to  the  whole  world.  Never  were 
kind  and  seasonable  showers  more  profitable  to 
the  tender  new-mown  grass  than  will  this  city  at 
this  day  be,  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  world ;  they 


404 


THE   HOLY  CITY;,  OR 


will  come  as  a  blessing  from  heaven  upon  them. 
As  the  prophet  saith,  '  The  remnant  of  Jacob  shall 
be  in  the  midst  of  many  people,  as  a  dew  from  the 
Lord;  as  the  showers  upon  the  grass,  that  tarrieth 
not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  men.' 
ML  v.  7.  0  the  grace,  the  light  and  glory  that  will 
strike  with  spangling  beams  from  this  city,  as 
from  a  sun,  into  the  farthest  parts  of  the  world ! 
1  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  as  the  new  wine  is  found  in 
the  cluster,  and  one  saith,  Destroy  it  not,  for  a 
blessing  is  in  it:  so  will  I  do  for  my  servants'  sake, 
that  I  may  not  destroy  them  all:  I  will  bring  forth 
a  seed  out  of  Jacob,  and  out  of  Judah  an  inheritor 
of  my  '  holy  *  mountains :  and  mine  elect  shall  in- 
herit it,  and  my  servants  shall  dwell  there.  And 
Sharon  (where  the  sweet  roses  grew,  Ca,  ii.  l),  shall 
be  a  fold  for  flocks,  and  the  valley  of  Achor  a 
place  for  the  herds  to  lie  down  in,  for  my  people 
that  have  sought  me. '  is.  ixv.  8-io.  '  In  that  day 
shall  Israel  be  the  third  with  Egypt  and  with 
Assyria,  even  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  land.' 
is.  xk.  24.  '  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  as  ye 
were  a  curse  among  the  heathen,  0  house  of 
Judah,  and  house  of  Israel;  so  will  I  save  you, 
and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing.  Fear  not,  but  let  your 
hands  be  strong.'  Zee.  viu.  13.  'As  the  dew  of  Her- 
mou  that  descended  upon  the  mountains  of  Zion, 
for  there  the  Lord  commanded  the  blessing,  even 
life  for  evermore.'   rs.  exesffi.  3. 

[Third.]  And  now  for  the  third  particular, 
namely,  What  it  is  to  descend  out  of  heaven  from 
God. 

1.  To  descend  out  of  heaven,  that  is,  out  of  the 
church  in  captivity,  'from  God,'  is  this:  The 
church  is  the  place  in  which  God  doth  beget  all 
those  that  are  the  children  of  him ;  wherefore  in 
that  they  are  said  to  descend  out  of  heaveu  '  from 
God,'  it  is  as  if  he  had  said,  the  children  of  the 
church  are  heaven-born,  begotten  of  God,  and 
brought  forth  in  the  church  of  Christ.  For  '  Jeru- 
salem which  is  above  is  the  mother  of  us  all.' 
Oa.  iv.  26.  '  The  Lord  shall  count  when  he  writeth 
up  the  people,  that  this  man  was  born  there.' 

Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5,  6. 

2.  When  he  saith  he  saw  this  Jerusalem  come 
out  of  heaven  from  God,  he  means  that  those  of 
the  church  in  captivity  that  shall  build  this  city, 
they  shall  be  a  people  peculiarly  fitted  and  quali- 
fied for  this  work  of  God.  It  was  not  all  the 
children  of  Israel  that  had  their  hand  in  building- 
Jerusalem  after  the  captivity  of  old;  '  their  nobles 
put  not  their  necks  to  the  work  of  the  Lord.' 
Ne.  iii.  5.  Also  there  were  many  of  Judah  that  were 
sworn  to  Tobiah,  the  arch-opposer  of  the  building 
of  the  city,  because  of  some  kindred  and  relation 
that  then  was  between  them  and  him.  Ne.  vi.  17-19. 
And  as  it  was  then,  so  we  do  expect  it  will  be  now; 
some  will  bo  even  at  the  beginning  of  this  work, 


in  Babylon,  at  that  time  also  some  will  be  cow- 
ardly and  fearful,  yea,  and  even  men  hired  to 
hinder  the  work.  Ne.  vi.  10-12.  Wherefore  I  say, 
those  of  the  church  that  at  that  day  builded  the 
city,  they  were  men  of  a  particular  and  peculiar 
spirit,  which  also  will  so  be  at  the  building  of  New 
Jerusalem.  They  whose  light  breaks  forth  as  the 
morning,  they  that  are  mighty  for  a  spirit  of 
prayer,  they  that  take  away  the  yoke,  and  speak- 
ing vanity,  and  that  draw  out  their  soul  to  the 
hungry ;  they  that  the  Lord  shall  guide  continu- 
ally, that  shall  have  fat  bones,  and  that  shall  be 
as  a  watered  garden,  whose  waters  fail  not,  &e. 
is.  iviii.  8— 14.  Of  them  shall  they  be  that  build  the 
old  wastes,  and  that  raise  up  the  foundations  of 
many  generations,  &c.  It  was  thus  in  all  ages, 
in  every  work  of  God,  some  of  his  people,  some  of 
his  saints  in  special  in  all  ages,  have  been  used  to 
promote,  and  advance,  and  perfect  the  work  of 
their  generations. 

3.  This  city  descends  or  comes  out  of  heaven 
from  God,  that  is,  by  his  special  working  and 
bringing  to  pass ;  it  was  God  that  gave  them  the 
pattern  even  when  they  were  in  Babylon  ;  it  was 
God  that  put  it  into  their  hearts  while  there,  to 
pray  for  deliverance ;  it  was  God  that  put  it  into 
the  hearts  of  the  kings  of  the  Medes  and  Persians 
to  give  them  liberty  to  return  and  build;  and  it 
was  God  that  quailed  the  hearts  of  those  that  by 
opposing  did  endeavour  to  hinder  the  bringing  the 
work  to  perfection;  yea,  it  was  God  that  did  in- 
deed bring  the  work  to  perfection;  wherefore  she 
may  well  be  said  to  descend  '  out  of  heaven  from 
God:'  as  he  also  saith  himself  by  the  prophet,  I 
will  cause  the  captivity  of  Judah,  and  the  captivity 
of  Israel  to  return,  and  I  will  build  them  as  at  the 

first.  Ezr.  iv.  1—4  ;  vii.  27.  Ne.  ii.  S— IS  ;  iv.  15  ;  vi.  15,  16.  Je. 
sxxiii.  7  ;  xxxii.  44.  Eze.  xxxvi.  33—37 ;  xxxvii.  11—15.  Am.  ix.  11. 

Lastly,  When  he  saith  he  saw  her  descend  from 
God  out  of  heaven,  he  may  refer  to  her  glory, 
which  at  her  declining  departed  from  her,  and 
ascended  to  God,  as  the  sap  returns  into  the  root 
at  the  fall  of  the  leaf;  which  glory  doth  again  at 
her  return  descend,  or  come  into  the  church,  and 
branches  of  the  same,  as  the  sap  doth  arise  at  the 
spring  of  the  year,  for  indeed  the  church's  beauty 
is  from  heaven,  and  it  either  goeth  up  thither  from 
her,  or  else  comes  from  thence  to  her,  according 
to  the  natures  of  both  fall  and  spring.  Ca.  u. 

Thus  you  see  what  this  heaven  is,  and  what  it 
is  for  this  city  to  descend  out  of  it ;  also  what  it 
is  for  this  city  to  descend  out  of  it  from  God. 

[This  city  has  the  glory  of  God.] 

Ver.  11.  'Having  the  glory  of  God.'  These 
last  words  do  put  the  whole  matter  out  of  doubt, 
and  do  most  clearly  show  unto  us  that  the  descend- 
ing of  this  city  is  the  perfect  return  of  the  church 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


405 


out  of  captivity ;  the  church,  when  she  began  at 
first  to  go  into  captivity,  her  glory  began  to  depart 
from  her;  and  now  she  is  returning  again,  she 
receiveth  therewith  her  former  glory,  '  having  the 
glory  of  God.'  Thus  it  was  in  the  type,  when 
Jerusalem  went  into  captivity  under  the  King  of 
Babylon,  which  was  a  figure  of  the  captivity  of  our 
New  Testament  church  under  Antichrist,  it  is  said 
that  then  the  glory  of  God  departed  from  them, 
and  went,  by  degrees,  first  out  of  tho  temple  to 
the  threshold  of  the  house,  and  from  thence  with 
the  cherubims  of  glory,  for  that  time,  quite  away 
from  the  city.   Ezc.  x.  4-18;  xL  22,  23.  &c. 

Again,  As  the  glory  of  God  departed  from  this 
city  at  her  going  into  captivity,  so  when  she 
returned  again,  she  had  also  then  returned  to  her 
the  glory  of  God ;  whereupon  this  very  prophet 
that  saw  the  glory  of  God  go  from  her  at  her  going 
into  captivity,  did  see  it,  the  very  same ;  and  that 
according  as  it  departed,  so  return  at  her  deliver- 
ance. '  He  brought  me  to  the  gate,'  saith  he — 
that  is,  when  by  a  vision  he  saw  all  the  frame  and 
patterns  of  the  city  and  temple,  in  the  state  in 
which  it  was  to  be  after  the  captivity.  '  He 
brought  me  to  the  gate  -  that  looketh  toward  the 
east,  and  behold  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel 
came  from  the  way  of  the  east ' — the  very  same 
way  that  it  went  when  it  departed  from  the  city. 
Eze.  xi.  23.  '  His  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many 
waters,  and  the  earth  shined  with  his  glory.  It 
was  according  to  the  appearance  of  the  vision 
which  I  saw,  even  according  to  the  vision  which  I 
saw  when  I  came  to  destroy  the  city,  and  the 
visions  were  like  the  vision  that  I  saw  by  the  river 
Chebar ;  and  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  came  into  the  house  by  the  way  of  the 
gate  whose  prospect  is  toward  the  east ;  so  the 
Spirit  took  me  up,  and  brought  me  into  the  inner 
court,  and  behold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the 

house.'    Eze.  xliii.  1-5. 

Thus  you  see  it  was  in  the  destruction  and  re- 
storation of  the  Jews'  Jerusalem,  by  which  God 
doth  plainly  show  us  how  things  will  be  in  our 
gospel  church ;  she  was  to  decline  and  lose  her 
glory,  she  was  to  be  trampled — as  she  was  a  city 
— for  a  long  time  under  the  feet  of  the  unconverted 
and  wicked  world.  Again,  she  was  after  this  to 
be  builded,  and  to  be  put  into  her  former  glory ; 
at  which  time  she  was  to  have  her  glory,  her  for- 
mer glory,  even  the  glory  of  God,  returned  to  her 
again.  'He  showed  me,'  saith  John,  'that  great 
city,  the  holy  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven 
from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God.'  As  he  saith 
by  the  prophet,  '  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with 
mercies,  my  house  shall  be  built  in  it.'  ze.i.i6.  And 
again,  '  I  am  returned  unto  Zion,  and  will  dwell  in 
the  midst  of  Jerusalem.'  Ze  via.  3. 

•  Having  the  glory  of  God.'    There  is  the  grace 


of  God,  and  the  glory  of  that  grace;  there  is  tho 
power  of  God,  and  the  glory  of  that  power;  and 
there  is  the  majesty  of  God,  and  tho  glory  of  that 
majesty.  ep.  i.  c.  2Th.  i.  9.  is.  u.  13. 

It  is  true  God  doth  not  leave  his  people  in  some 
sense,  even  in  the  worst  of  times,  and  in  their  most 
forlorn  condition,  Jn.  xiv.  18,  as  he  showeth  by  his 
being  with  them  in  their  sad  state  in  Egypt  and 
Babylon,  and  other  of  their  states  of  calamity. 
Da.  m.  25.  As  he  saith,  '  Although  I  have  cast  them 
far  off  among  the  heathen,  and  although  I  have 
scattered  them  among  the  countries,  yet  will  I  be 
to  them  a  little  sanctuary  in  the  countries  where 
they  shall  come.'  Ezc.  ii  16.  God  is  with  his  church, 
even  in  her  greatest  adversity,  both  to  limit,  bound, 
measure,  and  to  point  out  to  her  her  quantity  and 
quality,  her  beginning  and  duration  of  distress 
and  temptation.  Is.  xxvii.  7—9.  Re.  ii.  10.  But  yet  I  say 
the  glory  of  God,  in  the  notion  of  Ezekiel  and 
John,  when  they  speak  of  the  restoration  of  this 
city,  that  is  not  always  upon  his  people,  though 
always  they  are  beloved  and  counted  for  his  pecu- 
liar treasure.  She  may  then  have  his  grace,  but 
not  at  the  same  time  the  glory  of  his  grace ;  his 
power,  but  not  the  glory  of  his  power ;  she  may 
also  have  his  majesty,  but  not  the  glory  thereof; 
God  may  be  with  his  church,  even  then  when  the 
glory  is  departed  from  Israel. 

The  difference  that  is  between  her  having  his 
grace,  power,  and  majesty,  and  the  glory  of  each, 
is  manifest  in  these  following  particulars  ; — grace, 
power,  and  majesty,  when  they  are  in  the  church 
in  their  own  proper  acts,  only  as  we  are  considered 
saints  before  God,  so  they  are  invisible,  and  that 
not  only  altogether  to  the  world,  but  often  to  the 
very  children  of  God  themselves ;  but  now  when 
the  glory  of  these  do  rest  upon  the  church,  accord- 
ing to  Ezekiel  and  John ;  why  then  it  will  be 
visible  and  apparent  to  all  beholders.  '  When  the 
Lord  shall  build  up  Zion,  he  shall  appear  in  his 
glory,'  Ps.  cii.  16,  as  he  saith  also  in  another  place, 
'  The  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  his  glory 
shall  be  seen  upon  thee.'  is.  lx.  l— 2. 

Now,  then,  to  speak  a  word  or  two,  in  particular 
to  the  glory  of  God,  that  at  this  day  will  be  found 
to  settle  upon  this  city. 

First.  Therefore,  at  her  returning,  she  shall  not 
only  have  his  grace  upon  her,  bid  the  very  glory  of 
his  grace  shall  be  seen  upon  her ;  the  glory  of  par- 
doning grace  shall  now  shine  in  her  own  soul,  and 
grace  in  the  glory  of  it  shall  appear  in  all  her 
doings.  Now  shall  both  our  inward  and  outward 
man  be  most  famously  adorned  and  beautified  with 
salvation ;  the  golden  pipes  that  are  on  the  head 
of  the  golden  candlestick,  shall  at  this  day  convey, 
with  all  freeness,  the  golden  oil  thereout,  into  our 
golden  hearts  and  lamps.  Zec.iv.2.  Our  wine  shall 
be  mixed  with  gall  no  longer,  we  shall  now  drink 


406 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  OR 


the  pure  blood  of  the  grape ;  the  glory  of  pardon- 
ing and  forgiving  mercy  shall  so  show  itself  at  this 
day  in  this  city,  and  shall  so  visibly  abide  there 
in  the  eyes  of  all  spectators,  that  all  shall  be  en- 
flamed  with  it.  '  For  Zion?s  sake  will  I  not  hold 
my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  rest, 
until  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as  bright- 
ness, and  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  that 
burneth.  And  the  Gentiles  shall  see  thy  righte- 
ousness, and  all  kings  thy  glory ;  and  thou  shalt 
be  called  by  a  new  name,  which  the  mouth  of  the 
Lord  shall  name.'  Is. hdi. l, 2.  And  again,  'The 
Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of 
all  the  nations,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall 
see  the  salvation  of  our  God.'  is.  liL  10.  Ps.  xcyiii.  2.  At 
that  day,  the  prophet  tells  us,  there  shall  be  holiness 
upon  the  very  horses'  bridles,  and  that  the  pots  in 
the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before 
the  altar,  and  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  shall  be 
holiness  unto  the  Lord.  Zee.  xiv.  20,  21.  The  mean- 
ing of  all  these  places  is,  that  in  the  day  that  the 
Lord  doth  turn  his  church  and  people  into  the 
frame  and  fashion  of  a  city,  and  when  he  shall 
build  them  up  to  answer  the  first  state  of  the 
church,  there  will  such  grace  and  plenty  of  mercy 
be  extended  unto  her,  begetting  such  faith  and 
holiness  and  grace  in  her  soul,  and  all  her  actions, 
that  she  shall  convince  all  that  are  about  her  that 
she  is  the  city,  the  beloved  city,  the  city  that  the 
Lord  hath  chosen  ;  for  after  that  he  had  said  be- 
fore, he  would  return  to  Zion,  and  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem,  Zee.  vm.  3,  he  saith,  moreover, 
that  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  a  city  of  truth,  and 
the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  holy  moun- 
tain. '  And  all  the  people  of  the  earth  shall  see 
that  thou  art  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and 
they  shall  be  afraid  of  thee.'  De.  xxviii.  10. 

Second.  As  the  glory  of  the  grace  of  God  will, 
at  this  day,  be  wonderfully  manifest  in  and  over 
his  city ;  so  also  at  that  day  will  be  seen  the  glory 
of  his  power,  '  0  my  people,'  saith  God,  'that 
dwellest  in  Zion,  be  not  afraid  of  the  Assyrian  ;  he 
shall  smite  thee  with  a  rod,  and  shall  lift  up  his 
staff  agaiust  thee,  after  the  manner  of  Egypt,' 
that  is,  shall  persecute  and  afflict  thee,  as  Pharaoh 
served  thy  friends  of  old;  but  be  not  afraid,  *  For 
yet  a  very  little  while,  and  the  indignation  shall 
cease,  and  mine  anger  in  their  destruction :  and 
the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  stir  up  a  scourge  for  him, 
according  to  the  slaughter  of  Midian  at  the  rock 
of  Oreb :  and  as  his  rod  was  upon  the  sea,  so  shall 
he  lift  it  up  after  the  manner  of  Egypt.'  is.  vii; 
x.  24-2G.  The  sum  is,  God  will,  at  the  day  of  his 
rebuilding  the  New  Jerusalem,  so  visibly  make 
bare  his  arm,  and  be  so  exalted  before  all  by  his 
power  towards  his  people,  that  no  people  shall  dare 
to  oppose — .or  stand,  if  they  do  make  the  least 
attempt  to  hiuder — the  stability  of  this  city.      '  1 


will  surely  (gather,  or)  assemble,  0  Jacob,  all  of 
thee,'  saith  God:  'I  will  surely  gather  the  rem- 
nant of  Israel  -  as  the  sheep  of  Bozrah,  as  the 
flock  in  the  midst  of  the  fold ;  they  shall  make 
great  noise  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  men.  The 
breaker  is  come  up  before  them,  they  have  broken 
up  (the  antichristian  siege  that  hath  been  laid 
against  them),  they  have  passed  through  the  gate, 
and  are  gone  out  by  it,  and  their  king  shall  pass 
before  them,  and  the  Lord  on  the  head  of  them.' 
Mi.  ii.  12,  is.  '  Like  as  the  lion  and  the  young  lion 
roaring  on  his  prey,  when  a  multitude  of  shepherds 
are  called  forth  against  him,  he  will  not  be  afraid 
of  their  voice,  nor  abase  himself  for  the  noise  of 
them :  so  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  come  down  to 
fight  for  Mount  Zion,  and  for  the  hill  thereof.' 
Is.  xxxi.  i.  '  The  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty 
man,  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war ; 
he  shall  cry,  yea,  roar;  he  shall  prevail  against 
his  enemies.'  is.  ±m.  13.  But  'not  by  might,  nor 
yet  by  power,'  that  is,  the  power  and  arm  of  flesh, 
but  by  the  power  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God, 
which  will  prevail,  and  must  prevail,  to  quash  and 

Overturn  all  Opposition.  Zee.  xii.  8.  Zep.  iii.  8.  Joel  iii.  1G. 
Zee.  iv.  6. 

Third.  [The  glory  of  his  majesty.']  When  God 
hath  thus  appeared  in  the  glory  of  his  grace,  and 
the  glory  of  his  power,  to  deliver  his  chosen,  then 
shall  the  implacable  enemies  of  God  shrink  and 
creep  into  holes  like  the  locusts  and  frogs  of  the 
hedges,  at  the  appearance  of  the  glory  oftlie  majesty 
of  God.  Now  the  high  ones,  lofty  ones,  haughty 
ones,  and  the  proud,  shall  see  so  evidently  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  towards  his  servants,  and  his 
indignation  towards  his  enemies,  that  '  they  shall 
go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  and  into  the  caves 
of  the  earth,  -  and  into  the  tops  of  the  ragged 
rocks,  for  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  glory 
of  his  majesty,  when  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly 
the  earth.'  is.  u.  19,  21. 

Where  the  presence  of  the  Lord  doth  so  appear 
upon  a  people,  that  those  that  are  spectators  per- 
ceive and  understand  it,  it  must  need  work  on 
those  spectators  one  of  these  two  things ; — either 
first  a  trembling  and  astonishment,  and  quailing  of 
heart,  as  it  doth  among  the  implacable  enemies, 
Jos.  ii.  8-13,  or  else  a  buckling  and  bending  of  heart, 
and  submission  to  his  people  and  ways.  Jos.  ix.  22-25. 
As  saith  the  prophet,  '  The  sons  also  of  them  that 
afflicted  thee  shall  come  bending  unto  thee,  and 
all  they  that  despised  thee  shall  fall 1  down  at  the 
soles  of  thy  feet;  and  they  shall  call  thee  The 
city  of  the  Lord,  the  Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel.'  is.  be.  14.  As  Moses  said  to  the  children  of 
Israel,  '  The  Lord  your  God  shall  lay  the  fear  of 
you,  and  the  dread  of  you,  upon  all  the  land  that 

x  From  the  Genevan  or  Puritan  version. 


THE   NEW  JERUSALEM. 


407 


ye  shall  tread  upon,  as  he  hath  said  unto  you.' 

De.  xi.  25. 

At  this  day  the  footsteps  of  the  Lord  will  he 
so  apparent  and  visible  in  all  his  actions  and  dis- 
pensations in  and  towards  liis  people,  this  holy  city, 
that  all  shall  see,  as  I  have  said,  how  gracious, 
loving,  kind,  and  good  the  Lord  is  now  towards 
his  own  children ;  such  glory,  I  say,  will  he  over 
them,  and  upon  them,  that  they  all  will  shine 
hefore  the  world;  and  such  tender  bowels  in  God 
towards  them,  that  no  sooner  can  an  adversary 
peep,  or  lift  up  his  head  against  his  servants,  hut 
his  hand  will  be  in  the  neck  of  them ;  so  that  in 
short  time  he  will  h?ve  brought  his  church  into 
that  safet}-,  and  her  neighbours  into  that  fear  and 
submission,  that  they  shall  not  again  so  much  as 
dare  to  hold  up  a  hand  against  her,  no,  not  for  a 
thousand  years.  Re.  xx.  3.  '  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
Behold  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob's 
tents,  and  have  mercy  on  his  dwelling-places ;  and 
the  city  shall  be  builded  on  her  own  heap,  and  the 
palace  shall  remain  after  the  manner  thereof.  And 
out  of  them  shall  proceed  thanksgiving,  and  the 
voice  of  them  that  make  merry ;  and  I  will  multi- 
ply them,  and  they  shall  not  be  few ;  and  I  will 
also  glorify  them,  and  they  shall  not  be  small: 
Their  children  also  shall  be  as  aforetime,  and  their 
congregation  shall  be  established  before  me,  and  I 
will  punish  all  that  oppress  them.'  Je.  xxx.  18— 20. 

[The  light  of  this  city.] 

Having  the  glory  of  God.  '  And  her  light  was 
like  unto  a  stone  most  precious,  even  like  a  jasper 
stone,  clear  as  crystal.'  Having  thus  told  us  of 
her  glory,  even  of  *  the  glory  of  God,'  how  it  at 
this  day  will  rest  upon  this  city,  he  now  comes  to 
touch  a  second  thing,  to  wit,  '  her  light,'  and  that 
in  which  she  descends,  and  by  whicb,  as  with  the 
light  of  the  sun,  she  seeth  before  her,  and  behind 
her,  and  on  every  side.  This  therefore  is  another 
branch  of  her  duty ;  she  in  her  descending  hath 
'  the  glory  of  God,'  and  also  '  the  light  of  a  stone 
most  precious.' 

Ezekiel  tells  us,  that  in  the  vision  which  he  saw 
Avhen  he  came  to  destroy  the  city — which  vision 
was  the  very  same  that  he  saw  again  at  the  restor- 
ing of  it — he  saith,  1  say,  that  in  this  vision,  among 
many  other  wonders,  he  saw  a  fire  enfolding  itself, 
and  a  brightness  about  it,  and  that  '  the  fire  also 
was  bright,  and  that  out  of  it  went  forth  lightning;' 
that  '  the  likeness  of  the  firmament  upon  tbe  -  Hv- 
iug  creatures,  was  as  the  colour  of  the  terrible 
crystal;' that  the  throne  also,  upon  which  was 
placed  the  likeness  of  a  man,  was  like,  or  '  as  the 
appearance  of  a  sapphire-stone.'  Eze.  i.  4, 13,  u,  ;g>  u. 
All  which  words,  witli  tbe  nature  of  their  light  and 
colour,  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  in  the  vision  of  John 
comprise,  and  placeth  within  the  colour  of  tbe  jas- 


per and  the  crystal-stone.  And  indeed,  though 
the  vision  of  John  and  Ezekiel,  touching  the  end 
of  the  matter,  be  hut  one  and  tbe  same,  yet  thev 
do  very  much  vary  and  differ  in  terms  and  manner 
of  language ;  Ezekiel  tells  us  that  the  man  that 
he  saw  come  to  measure  the  city  and  temple,  had 
in  his  hand  'a  line  of  flax,'  ch.  iL  ?,,  which  line 
John  calls  a  golden  reed ;  Ezekiel  tells  us  that  the 
river  came  out  of,  or  '  from  under  the  threshold  of 
the  house  ;'  ch.  xML  i ;  but  John  saith  it  came  out 
of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  Ezekiel 
tells  us  that  on  either  side  of  this  river  grew  all 
trees  for  food ;  ran  12 ;  John  calls  these  all  trees 
but  one  tree,  and  tells  us  that  it  stood  on  both 
sides  of  this  river.  The  like  might  also  be  showed 
you  in  many  other  particulars ;  as  here  you  see 
they  differ  as  touching  the  terms  of  the  light  and 
brightness  that  appears  upon  this  city  at  her  re- 
building, which  the  Holy  Ghost  represents  to  John 
under  the  light  and  glory  of  the  jasper  and  crystal- 
stone;  for  indeed  the  end  of  Ezekiel's  vision  was 
to  show  us,  that  as  when  the  glory  of  God  departed 
from  tbe  city,  it  signified  that  he  would  take  away 
from  them  the  light  of  his  Word,  and  their  clear- 
ness of  worship,  suffering  them  to  mourn  for  the 
loss  of  the  one,  and  to  grope  for  the  want  of  the 
other ;  so  at  his  return  again  he  would  give  them 
both  their  former  light  of  truth,  and  also  the 
clearness  of  spirit  to  understand  it,  which  also 
John  doth  show  us  shall  last  for  ever. 

'.  .  .  And  her  light  loas  like  unto  a  stone  most 
precious.  .  .  .'  This  stone  it  is  to  represent  unto 
us  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  whose  light  and  clear- 
ness this  city  comes  out  of  Babylon ;  for,  as  he 
saith,  she  hath  the  glory  of  God,  that  is,  his  visible 
hand  of  grace,  power,  and  majesty,  to  bring  her 
forth ;  so  she  comes  in  the  light  of  this  precious 
stone,  which  terms,  I  say,  both  the  prophet  Isaiah 
and  the  apostle  Peter  do  apply  to  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  none  else ;  the  one  calling  him  '  a  precious 
corner-sfo?*e,'  the  other  calling  him  the  'chief 
corner-stone,  elect  and  precious.'  is.  xxviu.  is.  ipe. u.c. 
Now  then  when  he  saith  this  city  hath  the  light 
of  this  stone  to  descend  in,  he  means  that  she 
comes  in  the  shining  wisdom,  knowledge,  under- 
standing, and  influences  of  Christ,  out  of  her 
afflicted  and  captivated  state  ;  and  observe  it,  she 
is  rather  said  to  descend  in  the  light  of  this  stone, 
than  in  the  light  of  God,  though  both  be  true, 
because  it  is  the  man  Christ,  the  stone  which  the 
builders  rejected,  '  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  trea- 
sures of  wisdom  and  knowledge,'  of  whose  fulness 
we  do  all  receive,  and  grace  for  grace;  'for  it 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness 

dwell. '     CoL  ii.  3.  Jn.  i.  16.  Col.  i.  13.  See  also  Ac.  ii.  30.  and 

Ep.  It.  10-13. 

This  showeth  us,  then,  these  two  things — 
First.  That  the  time  of  the  return  of  the  saints 


408 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


to  build  the  ruinous  city  is  near,  yea,  very  near, 
when  the  light  of  the  Lord  Jesus  begins  to  shine 
unto  perfect  day  in  her.  God  will  not  bring  forth 
his  people  out  of  Babylon,  especially  those  that 
are  to  be  the  chief  in  the  building  of  this  city, 
The  light  of  the  without  their  own  judgments.  'They 
church  skill  be  shall  see  eye  to  eye,  when  the  Lord 

according  to  the      i     -n    i     •  .     '„•        ,  a 

purity  of  the  shall  bring  again  Zion.  is.  Hi.  8.  As 
Word-  he  saith  also  in  another  place,  '  The 

light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun, 
and  the  light  of  the  sun  shall  be  sevenfold,  as  the 
light  of  seven  days,  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  bindeth 
up  the  breach  of  his  people,  and  healeth  the  stroke 
of  their  wound. '  is.  xxx.  26.  '  And  the  eyes  of  them 
that  see  shall  not  be  dim,  and  the  ears  of  them 
that  hear  shall  hearken.  The  heart  also  of  the 
rash  shall  understand  knowledge,  and  the  tongue 
of  the  stammerers  shall  be  ready  to  speak  plainly. ' 
Is.  xxxii.  3, 4.  The  Lord  shall  be  now  exalted,  and  be 
very  high,  for  he  will  fill  Zion  with  judgment  and 
righteousness,  and  wisdom  and  knowledge  shall  be 
the  stability  of  thy  times,  is.  xxxiii.  5,  6.  When  Israel 
went  out  of  Egypt,  they  wanted  much  of  this, 
they  went  out  blindfolded,  as  it  were,  they  went 
they  knew  not  whither ;  wherefore  they  went  not 
in  the  glory  of  that  which  this  city  descendeth  in; 
as  Moses  said,  '  The  Lord  hath  not  given  you  an 
heart  to  perceive,  nor  eyes  to  see,  nor  ears  to  hear, 
unto  this  day.'  De.  xxix.  4.  But  these  shall  see  every 
step  they  take ;  they  shall  be  like  the  beasts  that 
had  eyes  both  before  and  behind:  they  shall  see 
how  far  they  are  come  out  of  Antichrist,  and  shall 
see  also  how  far  yet  they  have  to  go,  to  the  com- 
plete rebuilding  and  finishing  of  this  city. 

Second.  This  showeth  us  how  sweet  and  plea- 

The  way  out  of    Sant  the  WaJ  °^  ^11S  cnurc^  ^^  De  at 

Babylon  a  plea-  this  day  before  them.  Light,  know- 
ledge, and  judgment  in  God's  matters 
doth  not  only  give  men  to  see  and  behold  all  the 
things  with  which  they  are  concerned,  but  the 
things  themselves  being  good,  they  do  also  by  this 
means  convey  very  great  sweetness  and  pleasant- 
ness into  the  hearts  of  those  that  have  the  know- 
ledge of  them.  Every  step,  I  say,  that  now  they 
take,  it  shall  be  as  it  were  in  honey  and  butter. 
•  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and  come 
to  Zion  with  songs,  and  everlasting  joy  [see  ver.  2.] 
upon  their  heads;  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  glad- 
ness, and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away.' 
Is.  xxxv.  10.  As  he  saith,  '  Again  I  will  build  thee, 
and  thou  shalt  be  built ;  0  virgin  of  Israel,  thou 
shalt  again  be  adorned  with  tabrets,  and  shall  go 
forth  in  the  dances  of  them  that  make  merry. — 
For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Sing  with  gladness  for 
Jacob,  and  shout  among  the  chief  of  the  nations : 
publish  ye,  praise  ye,  and  say,  0  Lord,  save  thy 
people,  the  remnant  of  Israel.  Behold,  I  will 
bring  them  from  the  north  country,  and  gather 


them  from  the  coasts  of  the  earth,  and  with  them 
the  blind  and  the  lame,  the  woman  with  child,  and 
her  that  travaileth  with  child  together ;  a  great 
company  shall  return  thither.'  Je.  xxxi.  4,  7,  s. 

By  these  words,  the  blind  and  the  lame,  the 
woman  with  child,  and  her  that  travaileth,  he 
would  have  us  understand  thus  much — 

1.  That  the  way  of  God  shall,  by  the  illumin- 
ating grace  of  Christ,  be  made  so  pleasant,  so 
sweet,  and  so  beautiful  in  the  souls  of  all  at  that 
day,  that  even  the  blindest  shall  not  stumble 
therein,  neither  shall  the  lame  refuse  it  for  fear  of 
hurt;  yea,  the  blind,  the  lame,  the  woman  with 
child,  and  her  that  travaileth  shall,  though  they 
be  of  all  in  most  evil  case  to  travel,  and  go  the 
journey,  yet,  at  this  day,  by  reason  of  the  glorious 
light  and  sweetness  that  now  will  possess  them, 
even  forget  their  impediments,  and  dance,  as  after 
musical  tabrets. 

2.  This  city,  upon  the  time  of  her  rebuilding, 
shall  have  her  blind  men  see,  her  halt  and  lame 
made  strong ;  she  also  that  is  with  child,  and  her 
that  travaileth,  shall  jointly  see  the  city-work  that 
at  this  day  will  be  on  foot,  and  put  into  form  and 
order,  yet  before  the  end.  •  Behold,  at  that  time 
I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  thee,'  saith  the  Lord  to 
his  people,  *  and  I  will  save  her  that  halteth,  and 
gather  her  that  was  driven  out,  and  I  will  get 
them  praise  and  fame  in  every  land  where  they 
have  been  put  to  shame.  At  that  time  will  I 
bring  you  again,  even  in  the  time  that  I  gather 
you,  for  I  will  make  you  a  name  and  a  praise 
among  all  people  of  the  earth,  when  I  turn  back 
your  captivity  before  your  eyes,  saith  the  Lord.' 

Zep.  iii.  19,  20. 

•  And  her  light  teas  like  unto  a  stone  most  pre- 
cious.' In  that  he  saith  her  light  is  like  unto  '  A 
stone  most  precious,  '  he  showeth  us  how  welcome, 
and  with  what  eagerness  of  spirit  this  light  will  at 
this  day  be  embraced  by  the  Lord's  people.  •  Truly 
the  light  is  sweet, '  saith  Solomon,  '  and  a  pleasant 
thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun.'  Ec.  xi.  7. 
And  if  so,  then  how  beautiful,  desir-  Welcomewinbe 
able,  and  precious  will  that  light  be,     that  light  that 

,  .  r        ,       .  .  i    p  doth  show  us 

that  is  not  only  heavenly,  and  from  the  way  out  of 
Christ,  but  that  will  be  universal  Babyloil- 
among  all  saints,  to  show  them  the  same  thing, 
and  to  direct  them  to  and  in  the  same  work.  The 
want  of  this  hath,  to  this  day,  been  one  great 
reason  of  that  crossness  of  judgment  and  persua- 
sion that  hath  been  found  among  the  saints,  and 
that  hath  caused  that  lingeriug  and  disputing  about 
the  glorious  state  of  the  church  in  the  latter  days ; 
some  being  for  its  excellency  to  consist  chiefly  in 
outward  glory ;  and  others,  swerving  on  the  other 
side,  conclude  she  shall  not  have  any  of  this :  some 
conceiving  that  this  city  will  not  be  budt  until  the 
Lord  comes  from  heaven  in  person ;  others  again 


THE  NEW  JERUSALEM. 


409 


concluding  that  when  ho  comes,  then  there  shall 
he  no  longer  tarrying  here,  but  that  all  shall  forth- 
with, even  all  the  godly,  he  taken  up  into  heaven: 
with  divers  other  opinions  in  these  matters.  And 
thus  many  'run  to  and  fro,'  hut  yet,  God  he 
thanked,  knowledge  does  increase,  though  the 
vision  will  he  sealed,  even  to  the  time  of  the  end. 
Da.  xii.  4.  But  now,  I  say,  at  the  time  of  the  end, 
the  Spirit  shall  he  poured  down  upon  us  from  on 
high,  is.  xwii.  15;  now  'they  also  that  erred  in  spirit 
shall  come  to  understanding,'  Ig.xxSi.34;  the  city 
shall  descend  in  the  light  of  a  stone  most  precious. 
The  sun  will  ho  risen  upon  the  earth,  when  Lot 
goeth  from  Sodom  unto  Zoar.  Ge.  xix.  23. 

Now  there  shall  be  an  oneness  of  judgment  and 
understanding  in  the  hearts  of  all  saints ;  they 
shall  he  now  no  more  two,  but  one  in  the  Lord's 
hand.  Eze.  xxxvii.  19-21.  Alas  !  the  saints  are  yet 
but  as  an  army  routed,  and  are  apt  sometimes 
through  fear,  and  sometimes  through  forgetfulness, 
to  mistake  the  word  of  their  captain-general,  the 
Son  of  God,  and  are  also  too  prone  to  shoot  and 
kill  even  their  very  right-hand  man  ;  but  at  that 
day  all  such  doing  shall  be  laid  aside,  for  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the 
earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  is.xi.  9, 13.  Which 
knowledge  shall  then  strike  through  the  heart  and 
liver  of  all  swerving  and  unsound  opiuions  in 
Christ's  matters ;  for  then  shall  every  one  of  the 
Christians  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and 
that  with  one  pure  lip  or  language,  '  to  serve  him 
with  one  consent.'  Zep.  ia.  9.  It  is  darkness,  and 
not  light,  that  keepeth  God's  people  from  knowing- 
one  another,  both  in  their  faith  and  language;  and 
it  is  darkness  that  makes  them  stand  at  so  great 
a  distance  both  in  judgment  and  affections,  as  in 
these  and  other  days  they  have  done.  But  then, 
saith  God,  '  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness,'  that 
is,  in  the  church  that  is  now  bewildered,  '  the 
cedar,  the  shittah  tree,  the  myrtle,  and  the  oil  tree; 
I  will  set  in  the  desert  the  fir  tree,  the  pine,  and 
the  box  tree  together ;  that  they  may  see  and 
know,  and  consider  and  understand  together,  that 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  done  this,  and  the  holy 
One  of  Israel  hath  created  it.'  is.  xiL  19, 20.  And 
again,  *  The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come  unto 
thee,  the  fir  tree,  and  the  pine  tree,  and  the  box 
together,'  to  beautify  the  house  of  my  glory,  and 
to  '  make  the  place  of  my  feet  glorious.'  is.  be.  13. 

Never  was  fair  weather  after  foul — nor  warm 
weather  after  cold — nor  a  sweet  and  beautiful 
spring  after  a  heavy,  and  nipping,  and  terrible 
winter,  so  comfortable,  sweet,  desirable,  and  wel- 
come to  the  poor  birds  and  beasts  of  the  field,  as 
this  day  will  be  to  the  church  of  God.  Darkness! 
it  was  the  plague  of  Egypt :  it  is  an  empty,  for- 
lorn, desolate,  solitary,  and  discomforting  state; 
wherefore  light,  even  the  illuminating  grace   of 

VOL.  III. 


God,  especially  in  the  measure  that  it  shall  he 
communicated  unto  us  at  this  day,  it  must  needs 
be  precious.  In  light  there  is  warmth  and  plea- 
sure ;  it  is  by  the  light  of  the  sun  that  the  whole 
universe  appears  unto  us  distinctly,  and  it  is  by 
the  heat  thereof  that  everything  groweth  ami 
flourisheth  ;  all  which  will  now  be  gloriously  and 
spiritually  answered  in  this  holy  and  new  Jerusa- 
lem. 2  Th.  ii.  0  how  clearly  will  all  the  spiders, 
and  dragons,  and  owls,  and  foul  spirits  of  Anti- 
christ at  that  day  be  discovered  by  the  light  here- 
of! Re.  xviii.  1-4.  Now  also  will  all  the  pretty  robins 
and  little  birds  in  the  Lord's  field  most  sweetly 
send  forth  their  pleasant  notes,  and  all  the  flowers 
and  herbs  of  his  garden  spring.  Then  will  it  be 
said  to  the  church  by  her  Husband  and  Saviour, 
1  Rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away ; 
for  lo,  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and 
gone,  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth,  the  time  of 
the  singing  of  birds  is  come,  and  the  voice  of  the 
turtle  is  heard  in  our  land ;  the  fig  tree  putteth 
forth  her  green  figs,  and  the  vines  with  the  tender 
grape  give  a  good  smell.'  Ca.  a.  10-13.  You  know 
how  pleasant  this  is,  even  to  be  fulfilled  in  the 
letter  of  it,  not  only  to  birds  and  beasts,  but  men; 
especially  it  is  pleasant  to  such  men  that  have  for 
several  years  been  held  in  the  chains  of  affliction. 
It  must  needs,  therefore,  be  most  pleasant  and 
desirable  to  the  afflicted  church  of  Christ,  who 
hath  lain  now  in  the  dungeon  of  Antichrist  for 
above  a  thousand  years.  But,  Lord,  how  will  this 
lady,  when  she  gets  her  liberty,  and  when  she  is 
returned  to  her  own  city,  how  will  she  then  take 
pleasure  in  the  warm  and  spangling  beams  of  thy 
shining  grace  !  and  solace  herself  with  thee  in  the 
garden,  among  the  nuts  and  the  pomegranates, 
among  the  lillies  and  flowers,  and  all  the  chief 

Spices.  Ca.  vii.  11-13. 

4  Even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal.' 
These  words  are  the  metaphor  by  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  pleased  to  illustrate  the  whole  business. 
Indeed  similitudes,  if  fitly  spoke  and  applied,  do 
much  set  off  and  out1  any  point  that  either  in  the 
doctrines  of  faith  or  manners,  is  handled  in  the 
churches.  Wherefore,  because  he  would  illustrate, 
as  well  as  affirm,  the  glory  of  this  Jerusalem 
to  the  life,  therefore  he  concludes  his  general  de- 
scription of  this  city  with  these  comparisons: — 
I  saw,  saith  he,  the  holy  city,  the  Lamb's  wife  ; 
I  saw  her  in  her  spangles,  and  in  all  her  adorning, 
but  verily  she  was  most  excellent.  She  was 
shining  as  the  jasper,  and  as  pure  and  clear  as 
crystal.  The  jasper,  it  seems,  is  a  very  beautiful 
and  costly  stone,  inasmuch  as  that,  above  all  the 
precious  stones,  is  made  use  of  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  show  us  the  glory  and  shining  virtues  of  the 


1  '  Set  out :'  render  prominent,  plain,  or  conspicuous. — Ed, 

52 


410 


THE   HOLY  CITY,  OR 


Lord  Jesus  in  this  New  Jerusalem ;  and  yet,  be- 
hold, the  jasper  is  too  short  and  slender  to  do  the 
business,  there  must  another  stone  be  added,  even 
like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal.  Yea,  saith 
the  Lord  Jesus,  her  cheeks  are  like  rows  of  jewels, 
and  so  are  the  joints  of  her  thighs ;  even  like  the 
jewels  that  are  '  the  work  of  the  hands  of  a  cun- 
ning workman.'  Ca.  i.  9,  io;  and  vii.  1. 

The  crystal  is  a  stone  so  clear  and  spotless,  that 
even  her  greatest  adversaries,  in  the  midst  of  all 
their  rage,  are  not  able  justly  to  charge  her  with 
the  least  mote  or  spot  imaginable;  wherefore  when 
he  saith,  that  this  city  in  her  descending  is  even 
like  the  jasper  for  light,  and  like  the  crystal  for 
clearness ;  he  would  have  us  further  learn,  that  at 
the  day  of  the  descending  of  this  Jerusalem,  she 
shall  be  every  way  so  accomplished  with  innocency, 
sincerity,  and  clearness  in  all  her  actions,  that 
none  shall  have  from  her,  or  her  ways,  any  just 
occasion  given  unto  them  to  slight,  contemn,  or 
oppose  her.     For, 

First,  As  she  descends,  she  meddleth  not  with 
any  man's  matters  but  her  own ;  she  comes  all 
along  by  the  King's  highway;  that  is,  alone  by 
the  rules  that  her  Lord  hath  prescribed  for  her  in 
hia  testament.  The  governors  of  this  world  need 
not  at  all  to  fear  a  disturbance  from  her,  or  a 
diminishing  of  ought  they  have.  She  will  not 
meddle  with  their  fields  nor  vineyards,  neither  will 
she  drink  of  the  water  of  their  wells :  only  let  her 
go  by  the  King's  highway,  and  she  will  not  turn 
to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  until  she  hath 
passed  all  their  borders.  No.  xx.  is,  19;  xxi.  22.  It  is 
a  false  report  then  that  the  governors  of  the  na- 
tions have  received  against  the  city,  this  New 
Jerusalem,  if  they  believe,  that  according  to  the 
tale  that  is  told  them,  she  is  and  hath  been  of  old 
a  rebellious  city,  and  destructive  to  kings,  and  a 
diminisher  of  their  revenues.  I  say,  these  things 
are  lying  words,  and  forged  even  in  the  heart  of 
'  Bishlam,  Mithredath,  Tabeel,  and  the  rest  of 
their  companions.'  Eze.  iv.  7.  For  verily  this  city, 
in  her  descending,  is  clear  from  such  things,  even 
as  clear  as  crystal.  She  is  not  for  meddling  with 
anything  that  is  theirs,  from  a  thread  even  to  a 
shoe-latchet.  Her  glory  is  spiritual  and  heavenly, 
and  she  is  satisfied  with  Avhat  is  her  own.1  It  is 
true,  the  kings  and  nations  of  this  world  shall 
one  day  bring  their  glory  and  honour  to  this  city ; 
but  yet  not  by  outward  force  or  compulsion  ;  none 
shall  constrain  them  but  the  love  of  Christ  and 


1  In  Bunyan's  days,  a  few  fanatics  from  among;  the  Fifth 
Monarchy  men  conceived  that  the  millenium  had  arrived,  and 
that  it  was  their  duty  to  take  possession  of  the  kingdom  for 
Jesus.  They  were  mad  enough,  like  the  late  Mr.  Couitnay, 
to  imagine  that  their  bodies  were  invulnerable,  and  they 
marched  out  to  seize  London.  A  few  of  the  trained  bands 
soon  encountered  them,  some  were  shot  and  the  rest  were 
punished,  and  this  absurd  attempt  was  at  an  end  in  a  few 


the  beauty  of  this  city.  '  The  Gentiles  shall  come 
to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the  bright-  See  raore  of  this 
ness  of  thy  rising.'  is.  lx  3.  The  light  hereafter. 
and  beauty  of  this  city,  that  only  shall  engage 
their  hearts,  and  overcome  them.  Indeed,  if 
any  shall,  out  of  mistrust  or  enmity  against  this 
city  and  her  prosperity,  bend  themselves  to  disap- 
point the  designs  of  the  eternal  God  concerning 
her  building  and  glory,  then  they  must  take  what 
followeth.  Her  God  in  the  midst  of  her  is  mighty, 
he  will  rest  in  his  love,  and  rejoice  over  her  with 
singing,  and  will  UNDO  all  that  afflict  her.  Zep.  m. 
17-19.  Wherefore,  '  associate  yourselves,  0  ye 
people,  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces ;  and  give 
ear,  all  ye  of  far  countries;  gird  yourselves,  and  ye 
shall  be  broken  in  pieces;  gird  yourselves,  and  ye 
shall  be  broken  in  pieces.  Take  counsel  together, 
and  it  shall  come  to  naught ;  speak  the  word  and 
it  shall  not  stand ;  for  God  is  with  us.'  is.  via.  9, 10. 

What  work  did  he  make  with  Og  the  king  of 
Bashan,  and  with  Sihon,  king  of  the  Amorites, 
for  refusing  to  let  his  people  go  peaceably  by  them, 
when  they  were  going  to  their  own  inheritance. 
Nu.  xxi.  22-35.  God  is  harmless,  gentle,  and  pitiful; 
but  woe  be  to  that  people  that  shall  oppose  or  gain- 
say him.  He  is  gentle,  yet  a  lion  ;  he  is  loth  to 
hurt,  yet  he  will  not  be  crossed ;  '  Fury  is  not  in 
me,'  saith  he;  yet  if  you  set  the  briars  and  thorns 
against  him,  He  '  will  go  through  them,  and  burn 
them  together. '  is.  xxvii.  4.  Jerusalem  also,  this  be- 
loved city,  it  will  be  beautiful  and  profitable  to 
them  that  love  her;  but  a  cup  of  trembling,  and 
a  burthensome  stone  to  all  that  burden  themselves 
with  her ;  '  all  that  burthen  themselves  with  it, 
shall  be  cut  in  pieces,  though  all  the  people  of  the 
earth  be  gathered  together  against  her. '  Zee.  xiL  2,  3. 

Again,  she  will  be  clear  as  crystal  in  the  ob- 
servation of  all  her  turns  and  stops,  in  her  jour- 
neying from  Egypt  to  Canaan,  from  Babylon  to 
this  Jerusalem  state.  She  will,  I  say,  observe 
both  time  and  order,  and  will  go  only  as  her  God 
cloth  go  before  her ;  now  one  step  in  this  truth, 
and  then  another  in  that,  according  to  the  dispen- 
sation of  God,  and  the  light  of  day  she  lives  in. 
As  the  cloud  goes,  so  will  she;  and  when  the 

cloud  Stays,  SO  will  she.  Be.  xiv.  4  ;  Ex.  xl.  36-38.      She 

comes  in  perfect  rank  and  file,  'terrible  as  an  army 
with  banners. '  Ca.  vi.  10.  No  Balaam  can  enchant  her ; 
she  comes  'out  of  the  wilderness  like  pillars  of 
smoke,  perfumed  with  myrrh  and  frankincense, 
witli  all  spices2  of  the  merchants.'   Ca.  hi.  6.     Still 


hours.  This  gave  the  enemies  of  true  religion  a  pretext, 
which  they  eagerly  seized,  of  charging  these  absurd  notions 
upon  all  who  feared  God,  and  a  severe  persecution  followed. 
To  deprecate  and  counteract  these  reports,  Bunyan  is  very 
esplicit  in  noting  the  difference  between  a  spiritual  and  a  tem- 
poral kingdom. — En. 

-  '  Spices'  is  from  the  Genevan  version;   our  authorized 
text  has  '  powders.' — Ed. 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


411 


'leaning  upon  her  beloved.'  Ca.\iii.  c.  The  return  of 
Zion  from  under  the  tyranny  of  her  afflictors,  and 
her  recovery  to  her  primitive  purity,  is  no  head- 
strong brain-sick  rashness  of  her  own,  but  the 
gracious  and  merciful  hand  and  goodness  of  God 
unto  her,  therefrom  to  give  her  deliverance.  'For 
thus  saith  the  Lord,  That  after  seventy  years  be 
accomplished  at  Babylon  (that  is,  the  time  of  the 
reign  of  Antichrist,  and  his  tyranny  over  his 
church)  I  will  visit  you,  and  perform  my  good 
■word  toward  you,  in  causing  you  to  return  to  this 
place.'  Je.  xxix.  10.  'Therefore  they  shall  come  and 
sing  in  the  height  of  Zion,  and  shall  flow  together 
to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  for  (spiritual)  wheat, 
and  for  wine,  and  for  oil,  and  for  the  young  of  the 
Hock  and  of  the  herd ;  and  their  soul  shall  be  as 
a  watered  garden  ;  and  they  shall  not  sorrow  any 
more  at  all.'  is.  ML  11 ;  Je.  xxxi.  12. 

[SECOND.     A  Discovery  of   its   Defence, 
Entrances,  and  Fashion  in  Particular.] 

Verse  12.  'And  had  a  wall  great  and  high,  and 
had  twelve  gates,  and  at  the  gates  twelve  angels, 
and  names  written  thereon,  which  are  the  names 
of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel.' 
These  words  do  give  us  to  understand,  that  this 
holy  city  is  now  built,  and  in  all  her  parts  com- 
plete, they  give  us  also  to  understand  the  manner 
of  her  strength,  he. 

'  And  had  a  wall.'  Having  thus,  I  say,  given 
us  a  description  of  this  city  in  general, 

Of  her  defence.    .  .   r  .  J         ° 

he  now  descends  to  tier  strength  and 
frame  in  particular:  her  frame  and  strength,  I 
say,  as  she  is  a  city  compact  together:  as  also  of 
her  splendour  and  beauty. 

And  observe  it,  that  of  all  the  particulars  that 
you  read  of,  touching  the  fence,  fashion,  or  frame 
of  this  city,  and  of  all  her  glory,  the  first  thing 
that  ho  presenteth  to  our  view  is  her  safety  and 
security;  she  'had  a  wall.'  A  wall,  you  know, 
is  for  the  safety,  security,  defence,  and  preserva- 
tion of  a  place,  city,  or  town;  therefore  it  is  much 
to  the  purpose  that  in  the  first  place  after  this 
general  description,  he  should  fall  upon  a  dis- 
covery of  her  security  and  fortification;  for  what  of 
all  this  glory  and  goodness,  if  there  be  no  way  to 
defend  and  preserve  it  in  its  high  and  glorious 
state?  If  a  man  had  in  his  possession  even  moun- 
tains of  pearl  and  golden  mines,  yet  if  he  had  not 
■wherewith  to  secure  and  preserve  them  to  himself, 
from  those  that  with  all  their  might  endeavour  to 
get  them  from  him,  he  might  not  only  quickly 
lose  his  treasure,  and  become  a  beggar,  but  also 
through  the  very  fear  of  losing  them,  even  lose 
the  comfort  of  them,  while  yet  in  his  possession. 
To  speak  nothing  of  the  angels  that  fell,  and  of 
the  glory  that  they  then  did  lose,  I  may  instance 


to  you  the  state  of  Adam  in  his  excellency ;  Adam, 
you  know,  was  once  so  rich  and  wealthy,  that  he 
had  the  garden  of  Eden,  the  paradise  of  pleasure, 
yea,  and  also  the  Avhole  world  to  boot,  for  his  in- 
heritance ;  but  mark,  in  all  his  glory,  he  was 
without  a  wall ;  wherefore  prcseutly,  even  at  the 
very  first  assault  of  the  adversary,  he  was  not 
only  worsted  as  touching  his  person  and  standing, 
but  even  stripped  of  all  his  treasure,  his  paradise 
taken  from  him,  and  he  in  a  manner  left  so  poor, 
that  forthwith  he  was  glad  of  an  apron  of  fig- 
leaves  to  cover  his  nakedness,  and  to  hide  his 
shame  from  the  face  of  the  sun.  Ge.  m.  7.  Where- 
fore, I  say,  John  speaks  to  the  purpose  in  saying 
she  hud  a  wall;  a  wall  for  defence  and  safety,  for 
security  and  preservation.  Now  then  she  shall  lie 
no  longer  like  blasted  bones  in  an  open  field  or 
valley ;  that  was  her  portion  in  the  days  of  her 
affliction.  Ezc.  nxrii  1, 2. 

[77ie  ivall  ofllie  city.] 

'  And  had  a  wall.'  It  is  said  of  old  Jerusalem, 
that  she  had  a  wall  and  a  wall,  two  walls  for  her 
defence  and  safety:  Je.xxxix.4; Jc. m. 7;  which  two,  in 
my  judgment,  did  hold  forth  these  two  things. 
The  one,  their  eternal  preservation  and  security 
from  the  wrath  of  God,  through  the  benefits  of 
Christ ;  and  the  other,  that  special  protection  and 
safeguard  that  the  church  hath  always  had  from 
and  by  the  special  providence  of  her  God  in  the 
midst  of  her  enemies,  Wherefore  one  of  these  is 
called  by  the  proper  name  of  salvation,  which  sal- 
vation I  take  in  special  to  signify  our  fortification 
and  safety  from  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  curse 
and  power  of  the  law  and  sin.  Is.  xxvi.  l ;  Ac.  iv.  12. 
The  other  is  called,  A  wall  of  fire  round  about 
her ;  and  alludeth  to  the  vision  that  the  prophet's 
servant  was  made  to  see  for  his  comfort,  when  he 
was  put  in  fear,  by  reason  of  the  great  company 
of  the  enemies  that  were  bending  their  force 
against  the  life  of  his  master.  Eze.  ii.  5 ;  2  Ki.  vi.  it. 

But  now  in  those  days,  though  there  were  for 
the  defence  of  the  city  those  two  walls,  yet  they 
stood  a  little  distance  each  from  other,  Thc  reason  o{ 
and  had  a  ditch  between  them,  which  two  walls. 
was  to  signify  that  though  then  they  had  the 
wall  of  salvation  about  them,  with  reference  to 
their  eternal  state,  yet  the  wall  of  God's  providence 
and  special  protection  was  not  yet  so  nearly  joined 
thereto  but  that  they  might,  for  their  foolishness, 
have  that  broken  down,  aud  they  suffered  to  fall 
into  the  ditch  that  was  between  them  both.  is.  xs& 
10-12.  And  so  he  saith  by  the  prophet,  'I  will  tell 
you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard  (that  is,  to 
this  city  for  the  wickedness  thereof),  I  will  take 
away  the  hedge  thereof,  and  it  shall  be  eaten  up ; 
and  break  down  the  wall  thereof,  and  it  shall  be 
trodden  down.'  is.  v.  5-7.     Which  hedge  and  wall 


412 


THE   HOLY  CITY,  OR 


could  not  be  that  of  eternal  salvation,  for  that 
stood  sure,  though  they  should  he  scattered  among 
the  nations  '  as  wheat  is  sifted  in  a  sieve.'  Am.  ir.  o. 
It  must  therefore  he  the  wall  of  her  special  pre- 
servation in  her  outward  peace  and  happiness, 
which  wall  was  often  in  those  days  hroken  down, 
and  they  made  havoc  of,  of  all  that  dwelt  ahout 
them. 

But  now  touching  the  safety  of  New  Jerusalem, 
the  city  of  which  I  here  discourse,  she  is  seen  in 
Two  wails  made   tne  vision  by  John  to  have  hut  one 
one.  on]y  wa]]  .    to    signify    that    at    this 

day  the  wall  of  her  eternal  salvation,  and  of  God's 
special  providence  to  protect  and  defend  her,  in 
her  present  visible  and  gospel  glory,  shall  be  so 
effectually  joined  together,  that  now  they  shall  be 
no  more  two,  that  is,  at  a  distance,  with  a  ditch 
between,  but  one  sound  and  enclosing  wall  ;  to 
show  us  that  now  the  state  of  this  Jerusalem, 
even  touching  her  outward  glory,  peace,  and  tran- 
quillity, will  be  so  stable,  invincible,  and  lasting, 
that  unless  that  part  of  the  wall  which  is  eternal 
salvation,  can  be  broken  down,  the  glory  of  this 
city  shall  never  be  vailed  more.  Wherefore  the 
prophet,  when  he  speaks  with  reference  to  the 
happy  state  and  condition  of  this  city,  he  saith, 
„  ,      '  Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in 

The  reason  why 

they  both  are  thy  land,  wasting  nor  destruction 
within  thy  borders  ;  but  thou  shalt 
call  thy  walls  salvation,  and  thy  gates  praise,' 
is.lx.  18;  as  he  saith  also  in  another  place,  'Thine  eye 
shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation,  a  tabernacle 
that  shall  not  be  taken  down,  not  one  of  the  stakes 
thereof  shall  ever  be  removed,  neither  shall  any 
of  the  cords  thereof  be  broken.'  is.  xxxiii.  20.  The 
walls  are  now  conjoined,  both  joined  into  one ;  the 
Father  hath  delivered  up  the  great  red  dragon 
into  the  hand  of  Christ,  who  hath  shut  him  up 
and  sealed  him  down,  even  down  for  a  thousand 
years.  Re.  xx.  1-3.  Wherefore  from  the  Lord  shall 
there  be  '  upon  every  dwelling-place  of  Mount 
Zion,  and  upon  her  assemblies  a  cloud  and  smoke 
by  day,  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night; 
for  upon  all  her  glory  shall  be  a  defence.'  Is.iv.  5. 
And  '  in  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung :  We 
have  a  strong  city,  salvation  will  God  appoint  for 
walls  and  bulwarks.'  is.  xxvi.  1,  2.  The  same  in 
effect  hath  our  prophet  John,  saying  'I  saw  the 
holy  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,'  descending  out  of 
heaven  from  God,  'prepared  as  a  bride  adorned 
for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out 
of  heaven,  saying,  -  The  tabernacle  of  God  is  with 
men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them :  -  and  God  him- 
self shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.  And 
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes; 
and  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow, 
nor  crying;  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain; 
for  the  former  things  are  passed  away.'  Re.  xxi.  1-4. 


'And  had  a  wall  great  and  high.'  These 
words,  great  and  high,  are  added  for  Thewaiiis  great 
illustration,  to  set  out  the  matter  to  and  ^ 
the  height ;  and  indeed  the  glory  of  a  wall  lieth  in 
this,  that  it  is  great  and  high ;  the  walls  of  the 
Canaanites  were  terrible  upon  this  account,  and 
did  even  sink  the  hearts  of  those  that  beheld  them. 
De.  i.  28.  Wherefore  this  city  shall  be  most  certainly 
in  safety,  she  hath  a  wall  about  her,  a  great  wall: 
a  wall  about  her,  an  high  wall.  It  is  great  for 
compass,  it  incloseth  every  saint ;  it  is  great  for 
thickness,  it  is  compacted  of  all  the  grace  and 
goodness  of  God,  both  spiritual  and  temporal;  and 
for  height,  if  you  count  from  the  utmost  side  to 
the  utmost,  then  it  is  higher  than  heaven,  who  can 
storm  it  ?  He.  vii.  2G.  and  for  depth,  it  is  lower  than 
hell,  who  can  undermine  it?  Jobxi.  s. 

Great  mercies,  high  mercies,  great  preservation, 
and  a  high  arm  to  defend,  shall  con-  The  i,eight  0f 
tinually  at  this  day  encamp  this  city :  the  waU" 
God  himself  will  be  a  continual  life-guard  to  this 
city;  '  I  will  encamp,'  saith  he,  '  about  mine  house, 
because  of  the  army,  because  of  him  that  passeth 
by,  and  because  of  him  that  returneth ;  and  no 
oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any  more;  for 
now  have  I  seen  with  mine  eyes.'  zee.  ix.  s. 

\Tlxe  gates  of  the  city.] 

'  And  had  twelve  gates.'  Having  thus  showed 
us  her  wall,  he  now  comes  to  her  The  gates  of  the 
gates;    it  had  gates,  it  had  twelve  Clty- 

gates.  By  gates  in  this  place  we  are  to  under- 
stand the  way  of  entrance ;  gates,  you  know,  are 
for  coming  in,  and  for  going  out,  Je.  rvii.  19,  20 ;  and 
do  in  this  place  signify  two  things.  First,  An 
entrance  into  communion  with  the  God  and  Saviour 
of  this  city.  Secondly,  Entrance  into  what  the  gates 
communion  with  the  inhabitants  and  srgnrfy- 
privileges  of  this  city;  in  both  which  the  gates  do 
signify  Christ:  for  as  no  man  can  come  to  the 
knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  the  God,  and  glorious 
Saviour,  but  by  and  through  the  Lord  Christ;  so 
no  man  can  come  into  true  and  spiritual  com- 
munion with  these  inhabitants,  but  by  him  also: 
'  I  am  the  way,'  saith  he,  *  and  the  truth,  and  the 
life;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me:' 
and  again,  '  I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man 
enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and  shall  go  in  and 
out,  and  find  pasture.'  Jn.  x.  1-9 ;  xiv.  6. 

'  And   had   twelve   gates.'     In  that   he   saith 
twelve  gates,  he  alludeth  to  the  city 
of  Jerusalem  that  was  of  old,  which 
had  just  so  many,  Ke.  ffi.  xii.  37-39;  and  are  on  pur- 
pose put  into  the  number  of  twelve,  to  answer  to 
the  whole  number  of  the  elect  of  God,  which  are 
comprehended  within  the  number  of    why  twelve 
the  twelve  tribes,  whether  they  are         gates- 
natural  Jews  or  Gentiles ;    for  as  all  the  godly 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


413 


Jews  are  the  seed  of  Abraham  after  the  flesh, 
though  not  godly,  because  they  are  the  children  of 
the  flesh  of  Abraham;  so  all  the  godly  Gentiles 
are  the  children  of  Abraham  after  the  spirit,  though 
not  by  that  means  made  the  children  of  the  flesh 
of  Abraham.  They  both  meet  then  in  the  spirit 
and  faith  of  the  gospel,  as  God  saith  to  the  Jews, 
1  When  a  stranger  shall  sojourn  with  thee,  and 
will  keep  the  passover  to  the  Lord,'  that  is,  become 
godly,  and  receive  the  faith  of  Christ,  let  all  his 
males  be  circumcised,  and  then  let  them  come 
near,  and  beep  it,  «fcc.  Ex.  xii.  4S.  For  they  that 
are  of  faith,  are  the  children  of  faithful  Abraham, 
who  is  called  the  very  father  of  us  all.  Ga.  ill.  7. 
iio.  iv.  lc.  Thus  you  see  all  the  godly  come  under 
the  title  of  the  children  of  Abraham,  and  of  the 
Jews;  and  so  under  the  denomination  also  of  being 
The  twelve  gates  Pcrsons  belonging  to  the  tribes,  the 
do  answer  the  twelve  tribes,  who  answer  to  those 
twelve  gates.  Wherefore  the  Psalmist 
minding  this,  speaking  indefinitely  of  all  the  godly, 
under  the  name  of  the  tribes  of  Israel;  saying, 
'  Our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  Jerusa- 
lem. Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  that  is  com- 
pact together,  whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes 
of  the  Lord,  unto  the  testimony  of  Israel,  to  give 
thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord.'  Ps.  cxxH.  2-4. 

But  again,  though  I  am  certain  that  all  the 
Gentiles  that  are  at  any  time  converted,  are 
reckoned  within  the  compass  of  some  of  the  tribes 
of  Israel,  to  which  the  gates  of  this  city  may  truly 
be  said  to  answer;  yet  the  gates  are  here  in  a 
special  manner  called  by  the  name  of  twelve,  to 
answer  to  the  happy  return  and  restoration  of  those 
poor  distressed  creatures  the  twelve  tribes  of  the 
Jews  that  are  scattered  abroad,  and  that  are,  and 
for  a  long  time  have  been  to  our  astonishment  and 
their  shame,  as  vagabonds  and  stragglers  among 
the  nations,  Ho.  ix.  17,  there  to  continue  '  many  days, 
without  a  king,  and  without  a  prince,  and  without 
a  sacrifice,  and  without  an  ephod.'  Ho.  an.  That 
is,  without  the  true  God,  the  true  Saviour,  and  the 
true  word  and  ordinances  ;  after  which,  saith  the 
same  prophet,  they  shall  even  in  the  latter  days, 
that  is,  when  this  city  is  builded,  return  and  seek 
the  Lord  their  God,  and  David  their  king,  and 
shall  then  '  fear  the  Lord  and  his  goodness.'  Ho.m.5. 
This  the  apostle  also  affirmeth,  when  he  telleth 
the  believing  Gentiles  that  blindness  in  part  is 
happened  to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gen- 
tiles be  come  in:  which  Israel  in  this  place  cannot 
by  any  means  be  taken  for  the  Gentiles  that  are 
converted,  for  this  Israel  must  be  rejected  until 
the  bulk  of  the  elect  Gentiles  be  converted ;  be- 
sides he  callcth  this  Israel  by  the  name  of  Israel, 
even  while  unconverted ;  but  the  converted  Gen- 
tiles still  Gentiles,  even  when  converted:  he  calls 
this  Israel  the  natural  branches,  but  the  Gentiles 


wild  branches;  and  tells  us  further,  that  when 
they  are  converted,  they  shall  be  grafted  into  their 
own  olive  tree ;  but  when  the  Gentiles  arc  con- 
verted, they  must  be  cut  off  of  their  own  stock 
and  tree:  read  Ro.  xi.  throughout.  Wherefore,  I 
say,  the  gates  are  called  twelve,  to  answer  the.1-:,: 
poor  creatures,  who  at  this  day  shall  be  awakened, 
and  enlightened,  and  converted  to  the  faith  of 
Jesus.  These  gates  in  another  place  are  called  a 
way,  and  these  Jews,  the  kings  of  the  east ;  and 
it  is  there  said  also,  tbat  at  present  this  way  doth 
want  preparing;  Avhich  is  as  much  as  to  say  this 
city  wants  setting  up,  and  the  gates  want  setting 
in  their  proper  places.  Wherefore,  saith  John, 
the  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great 
river  Euphrates,  that  is,  destroyed  the  strength 
and  force  of  the  Roman  antichrist — for  the  river 
Euphrates  was  the  fence  of  literal  Babylon,  the 
type  of  our  spiritual  one — which  force  and  fence, 
when  it  is  destroyed  or  dried  up,  then  the  way  of 
the  kings  of  the  east  will  be  prepared,  or  made 
ready  for  their  journey  to  this  Jerusalem.  Re.  xvi.12. 
Of  this  the  prophets  are  full,  crying,  '  Cast  ye  up, 
cast  ye  up,  prepare  the  way,  take  up  the  stumbling 
block  out  of  the  way  of  my  people.'  is.  Mi.  14.  And 
again,  '  Go  through,  go  through  the  gates,  pre- 
pare ye  the  way  of  the  people ;  cast  up,  cast  up 
the  high  way ;  gather  out  the  stones,  lift  up  a 
standard  for  the  people.  Behold,  the  Lord  hath 
proclaimed  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  Say  ye  to 
the  daughter  of  Zion,  Behold  thy  salvation  cometh; 
behold  his  reward  is  with  him,  and  his  work  be- 
fore him.  And  they  shall  call  them,  The  holy 
people,  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  :  and  thou  shalt 
be  called,  Sought  out;  A  city  not  forsaken.'  is. 
lxii.  10-12.  All  which  doth  most  especially  relate  to 
the  conversion  of  the  Jews  in  the  latter  day,  who 
in  great  abundance  shall,  when  all  things  are 
made  ready,  come  flocking  in  to  the  Son  of  God, 
and  find  favour,  as  in  the  days  of  old. 

\The  angels  at  the  gales,  what  they  are.] 
*  And  at  the  gates  twelve  angels. '  By  angels 
in  this  place,  we  are  to  understand  The  angels,  aud 
the  messengers  and  ministers  of  the  what  they  aie* 
Lord  Jesus,  by  whom  the  mystery  of  eternal  life 
and  felicity  is  held  forth  and  discovered  before  the 
sons  of  men;  and  thus  this  word  angel  is  fre- 
quently taken  in  this  prophecy.  Re.  L  20 ;  u.  1,  8, 12, 18; 

iii.  1.  7  ;    xiv.  C. 

'  And  at  the  gates  twelve  angels  ' — 
In  these  words,  then,  there  are  two  things  to  be 
considered.      First.   Why  they  should   be  called 
twelve.     And,  Second.  Why  they  are  said  to  stand 
at  the  twelve  gates  of  this  new  and  holy  city. 

First.  They  are  called  twelve,  to  signify  two 
things.  1.  The  truth  of  their  doc-  ™>y  *?d™^ 
trine.    And,  2.  The  sufficiency  of  their     twelve. 


414 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  OR 


doctrine  and  ministry  for  the  converting  of  the 
twelve  tribes  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  privileges 
of  this  city. 

1.  For  the  truth  of  their  doctrine:  for  by  twelve 
here  he  would  have  us  to  understand  that  he  hath 
his  eye  upon  the  twelve  apostles,  or  upon  the  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve,  the  apostolical  doctrine.  As 
if  he  should  say,  This  city,  the  New  Jerusalem, 
shall  be  every  way  accomplished  with  beauty  and 
glory;  she  shall  have  a  wall  for  her  security,  and 
twelve  gates  to  answer  the  twelve  tribes;  yea,  and 
also  at  these  gates  the  twelve  apostles,  in  their 
own  pure,  primitive,  and  unspotted  doctrine.  The 
Romish  beasts  have  corrupted  this  doctrine  by 
treading  it  down  with  their  feet,  and  have  muddied 
this  water  with  their  own  dirt  and  filthiness.1  Eze. 
xxxiv.  17,  is.  But  at  this  day,  this  shall  be  recovered 
from  under  the  feet  of  these  beasts,  and  cleansed 
also  from  their  dirt,  and  be  again  in  the  same 
glory,  splendour,  and  purity,  as  in  the  primitive 
times.  It  is  said  that  when  Israel  was  passed 
out  of  Egypt,  beyond  the  sea,  they  presently  came 
to  Elim,  where  were  twelve  wells  of  water,  &c, 
and  that  they  encamped  by  the  waters.  Ex.  xv.  27. 
Which  twelve  wells  did  figure  forth  the  doctrine 
of  the  twelve  apostles,  out  of  which  the  church,  at 
her  return  from  captivity,  shall  draw  and  drink, 
as  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation.  Now  shall  the 
wells  of  our  father  Abraham,  which  the  Philistines 
have  for  a  great  while  stopped ;  now,  I  say,  shall 
they  again  be  opened  by  our  Isaac,  his  son;  and 
shall  be  also  called  after  their  own  names.  Ge.xxvi.is. 
This  is  generally  held  forth  by  the  prophets,  that 
yet  again  the  church  shall  be  fed  upon  the  moun- 
tains of  Israel,  and  that  they  '  shall  lie  down  in  a 
good  fold,  and  a  fat  pasture;'  yea,  'I  will  feed 
my  flock,  and  I  will  cause  them  to  lie  down,  saith 
the  Lord  God.'  Eze.  xxxiv.  14, 15. 

2.  As  by  these  twelve  we  are  to  understand 
the  truth  and  purity  of  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve, 
so  again,  by  this  word  twelve,  we  are  to  understand 
the  sufficiency  of  that  doctrine  and  ministry  to 
bring  in  the  twelve  tribes  to  the  privileges  of  this 
city.  Mark,  for  the  twelve  tribes  there  are  twelve 
gates,  for  every  tribe  a  gate ;  and  at  the  twelve 
gates,  twelve  angels,  at  every  gate  an  angel.  '  0 
Judah,'  saith  God,  '  he  hath  set  an  harvest  for 
thee,  when  I  returned  the  captivity  of  thy  people.' 
So.  vi.  11.  And  so  for  the  rest  of  the  tribes ;  before 
Ephraim  and  Benjamin,  and  Manasseh,  he  will 
stir  up  his  strength  to  save  them.  p3.  kxx.  2.  •  I  will 
hiss  for  them,'  saith  God,  '  and  gather  them,  for 


1  Referring  to  the  attempts  made  in  Bunyan's  days  to  in- 
troduce Popery.  It  is  admirably  shown  in  the  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, p.  193 — 'This  is  the  spring  that  Christian  drank  of; 
then  it  was  clear  and  good,  hut  now  it  is  dirty  with  the  feet 
of  some  that  are  not  desirous  that  pilgrims  here  should  quench 
their  thirst.' — (Ed.) 


1  have  redeemed  them  ;  and  they  shall  increase  as 
they  have  increased :  and  I  will  sow  them  among 
the  people,  and  they  shall  remember  me  in  far 
countries,  and  they  shall  live  with  their  children, 
and  return  again  ;  I  will  bring  them  again  also  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  gather  them  out  of  As- 
syria, and  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Gilead 
and  Lebanon,  and  place  shall  not  he  found  for- 
th em.'  Zee.  x.  s-10. 

[Second.]  But  to  come  to  the  second  question, 
that  is,  Why  these  twelve  angels  are  Why  the  twelve 
said  to  stand  at  the  gates  ?  which  may  ^fh  st^l 
be  for  divers  reasons.  satea. 

1.  To  show  us  that  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve 
is  the  doctrine  that  letteth  in  at  these  gates,  and 
that  also  that  shutteth  out.  '  Whosesoever  sins 
ye  remit,  they  are  remitted,'  saith  Christ,  'and 
whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained.' 
Jn.  xx.  23.  Mat.  xviii.  is.  And  hence  it  is  that  the  true 
ministers,  in  their  right  administration,  are  called 
porters ;  because  as  porters  stand  at  the  gate,  and 
there  open  to,  or  shut  upon,  those  that  make  an 
attempt  to  enter  in,  Mar.  xiii.  34 ;  so  the  ministers  of 
Christ,  by  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve,  do  both  open 
to  and  shut  the  gates  against  the  persons  that  will 
be  attempting  to  enter  in  at  the  gates  of  this  city. 

2  Ch.  xxiii.  19. 

2.  But  again,  they  are  said  to  stand  at  the 
gates  for  the  encouraging  and  persuading  of  the 
tempted  and  doubting  Jews,  who  at  the  beginning 
of  their  return  will  be  much  afflicted  under  the 
sight  and  sense  of  their  own  wretchedness.  'Alas! 
were  it  not  for  some  to  stand  at  the  gates  of  this 
city  for  instruction,  and  the  encouragement  of  those 
that  will  at  that  day  in  earnest  be  looking  after 
life,  they  might  labour  as  in  other  things  for  very, 
very  vanity ;  and  might  also  be  so  grievously  beat 
out  of  heart  and  spirit,  that  they  might  die  in  de- 
spair. But  now  to  prevent  this  for  those  that  are 
in  the  way  to  Zion  with  watery  eyes,  and  wetted 
cheeks,  here  stand  the  angels,  continually  sounding 
with  their  golden  gospel-trumpets,  •  Enter  into  his 
gates  with  thanksgiving,  and  into  his  courts  with 
praise ;  be  thankful  unto  him,  and  bless  his  name. 
For  the  Lord  is  good,  and  his  mercy  is  everlasting, 
and  his  truth  endureth'  for  ever,  even  '  to  all  gen- 
erations.' Ps.  c.  4, 5.  As  he  saith  again,  'And  it 
shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  tliat  the  great 
trumpet  shall  be  blown,  and  they  shall  come  which 
were  ready  to  perish  in  the  laud  of  Assyria,  and 
the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  shall  wor- 
ship the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem.' 
Is.  xxvii.  13. 

[TJie  names  written  on  the  gates.] 

•  And  at  the  gates  twelve  angels,  and  names 
written  thereon,  which  are  the  names  of  the  twelve 
tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel.     Thus  it  was  in 


THE   NEW  JERUSALEM. 


415 


the  vision  of  the  prophet,  when  he  was  taking  a 
view  of  the  pattern  of  this  city:  '  And  the  gates 
of  the  city,'  saith  the  angel  to  him,  'shall  be  after 
the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.'  Eze.  xkiii.  31. 
Which  saying  John  doth  hero  expound,  saying, 
the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of 
Israel  were  writ  or  set  upon  them. 

This  being  thus,  it  cleareth  to  you  what  I  said 
but  now,  to  wit,  that  the  gates  are  called  twelve, 
to  answer  the  twelve  tribes,  for  their  names  are 
written  thereon.  This  must  therefore,  without  all 
doubt,  be  a  very  great  encouragement  to  this  de- 
spised people ;  I  say  great  encouragement,  that 
notwithstanding  all  their  rebellion,  blasphemy,  and 
contempt  of  the  glorious  gospel,  their  names  should 
be  yet  found  recorded  and  engraved  upon  the  very 
gates  of  New  Jerusalem.  Thus  then  shall  the 
Jews  be  comforted  in  the  latter  days ;  and  truly 
they  will  have  but  need  hereof ;  for  doubtless,  at 
their  return,  when  they  are  thoroughly  sensible  of 
the  murder  they  have  committed,  not  only  upon  the 
bodies  of  the  prophets  and  apostles,  but  of  the  Son 
of  God  himself,  I  say  this  must  needs,  together 
with  the  remembrance  of  the  rest  of  their  villainous 
actions,  exceedingly  afflict  and  distress  their  bleed- 
ing souls.  For  '  the  children  of  Israel  shall  come, 
they  and  the  children  of  Judah  together,  going 
and  weeping ;  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  Lord  their 
God.  They  shall  ask  the  way  to  Zion,  with  their 
faces  thitherward.'  Je.  1.  4,  5.  Mark,  'going  and 
weeping;'  there  will  not  be  a  step  that  these  poor 
people  will  take  in  the  day  of  their  returning,  but 
will  be  watered  with  the  tears  of  repentance  and 
contrition,  under  the  consideration  of  the  wicked- 
ness that,  in  the  days  of  their  rebellion,  they  have 
committed  against  the  Lord  of  glory.  As  he  saith 
also  by  another  prophet,  '  I  will  pour  upon  the 
house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jer- 
usalem, the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications ; 
and  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitter- 
ness for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his 
firstborn.  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great 
mourning  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  mourning  of  Hadad- 
rimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon,  and  the  land 
shall  mourn.'  Zee.  xii.  10-12. 

Wherefore,  I  say,  they  both  have  and  also  will 
have  need  of  twelve  gates,  and  on  them  the  names 
of  their  twelve  tribes,  with  an  angel  at  each,  to 
encourage  them  to  enter  this  holy  and  goodly  city; 
and  to  tell  them  that  yet  he  counts  them  his  friends 
in  whose  house  he  received  the  wounds  in  his  hands. 

Zee  xiii.  G. 

But  again,  As  by  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes 
written  on  the  gates,  we  may  see  what  encourage- 
ment the  Jews  will  have,  at  their  return,  to  enter 
in  at  them  ;  so  we  may  also  understand  that  by 


the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  here  written,  God 
would  have  us  to  perceive  how  all  must  be  qualified 
that  from  among  the  Gentiles  at  this  day  do  enter 
in  at  these  gates;  namely,  those,  and  those  only, 
that  be  cut  out  of  their  own  wild  olive  tree,  and 
transplanted  among  the  children  of  Israel,  into 
their  good  olive  tree.  Such  as  are  Jews  inwardlj , 
the  Israel  of  God,  according  to  the  new  creature, 
they  shall  enter,  for  the  holy  Gentiles  also,  by 
virtue  of  their  conversion,  are  styled  the  children 
of  Abraham,  Jews,  the  chosen  generation,  the 
peculiar  people,  the  holy  nation ;  and  so  are  spirit- 
ually, though  not  naturally  by  carnal  generation, 
of  the  twelve  tribes  whose  names  are  written  upon 
the  gates  of  the  city.  Ga.  m.  7.  Ro.  u.  28.  1  Ve.  a.  9, 10. 
'  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,'  saith  the  prophet, 
1  tloat  in  what  tribe  the  stranger,'  that  is,  the  Gen- 
tile 'sojourneth,  there  shall  ye  give  himhis  inherit- 
ance, saith  the  Lord  God.'  Ezc.  xivii.  23.  Thus  the 
Jews  and  Gentiles  shall  meet  together  in  the  spirit 
of  the  gospel,  and  so  both  become  a  righteous 
nation ;  to  both  which  the  gates  of  this  city  shall 
stand  continually  open ;  at  which  also  they  may 
with  boldness  demand,  by  the  faith  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  their  entrance,  both  for  communion  with 
the  God,  grace,  and  privileges  of  this  city,  accord- 
ing to  that  which  is  written,  '  Open  ye  the  gates, 
that  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth  the  truth 
may  enter  in.'  is.  x-wi.  2.  Thus  much  of  the  num- 
ber of  the  gates,  and  now  to  proceed  to  the  order 
of  them. 

[Tlie  order  of  the  gates.] 

Ver.  13.  'On  the  east  three  gates,  on  the  north 
three  gates,  on  the  south  three  gates,  and  on  the 
west  three  gates.'  I  shall  not  speak  anything  to 
the  manner  of  his  repeating  of  the  quarters  towards 
which  the  gates  do  look ;  why  he  should  be^in  at 
the  east,  then  to  the  north,  afterwards  crossing  to 
the  south,  and  last  to  the  west ;  though  I  do  verily 
think  that  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  something  to  show 
us,  wherefore  he  doth  thus  set  them  forth.  And 
possibly  he  may  set  them  thus,  and  the  west  last, 
not  only  because  the  west  part  of  the  world  is  that 
which  always  closeth  the  day,  but  to  signify  that 
the  west,  when  Jerusalem  is  rebuilded,  wdl  be  the 
last  part  of  the  world  that  will  be  converted,  or 
the  gate  that  will  be  last,  because  longest,  occupied 
with  the  travels  of  the  passengers  and  wayfaring 
men  in  their  journey  to  this  Jerusalem.  But  1 
pass  that. 

From  the  order  of  their  standing,  I  shall  inquire 
into  two  things.  Fird.  Why  the  gates  should 
look  in  this  manner  every  way,  both  east,  west, 
north,  and  south  ?  Second.  Why  there  should  bo 
three,  just  three,  on  every  side  of  this  city?  'On 
the  east  three,  on  the  north  three,  on  the  south 
three,  and  on  the  west  three.' 


416 


THE  HOLY   CITY,  OR 


First.  For  the  first,  the  gates  by  looking  every 
Why  the  gates  way,  into  all  quarters,  may  signify  to 
look"  every  way,  us  thus  much,  that  God  hath  a  people 
in  every  corner  of  the  'world.  And  also,  that 
grace  is  to  he  carried  out  of  these  gates  by  the 
angels  in  their  ministry  into  every  place,  to  gather 
them  home  to  him.  As  it  is  said  of  the  living 
creatures,  '  Whither  the  head  looked  they  followed 
it,  they  turned  not  as  they  went,'  Eze.  x.  U;  so 
whithersoever  the  gates  look,  thither  the  ministers 
go,  and  carry  the  Word,  to  gather  together  the 
elect.  He  '  sent  them  two  and  two  before  his  face, 
into  every  city  and  place  whither  he  himself  would 

Come.'  Ln.  x.  1.  Mat.  xxviii.  19.  Jn.  xi.  52. 

Again,  the  gates,  by  their  thus  looking  every 
way,  do  signify  to  us,  that  from  what  quarter  or 
part  of  the  world  soever  men  come  for  life,  for  those 
men  there  are  the  gates  of  life,  even  right  before 
their  doors.  Come  they  from  the  east,  why  thither 
look  the  gates  ;  and  so  if  they  come  from  north,  or 
west,  or  south.  No  man  needs  at  all  to  go  about 
to  come  at  life,  and  peace,  and  rest.  Let  him 
come  directly  from  sin  to  grace,  from  Satan  to 
Jesus  Christ,  and  from  this  world  to  New  Jerusa- 
lem. The  twelve  brazen  oxen  that  Solomon  made 
to  bear  the  molten  sea,  l  EL  vii.  23-25,  they  stood 
just  as  these  gates  stand,  and  signify,  as  I  said 
before,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve  apostles 
should  be  carried  into  all  the  world,  to  convert — 
as  in  the  primitive  times,  so  now  at  the  building 
of  New  Jerusalem — and  to  bring  in  God's  sheep 
to  the  fold  of  his  church.  Now,  I  say,  as  the 
Word  is  carried  every  way,  so  the  gates,  the  open 
gates,  look  also  into  all  corners  after  them,  to 
signify  that  loving  reception  that  shall  be  given  to 
every  soul  that  from  any  corner  of  the  whole  world 
shall  unfeignedly  close  in  with  grace,  through  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Thus,  therefore,  men  •  shall 
come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from 
the  north,  and  from  the  south,  and  shall  sit  down 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.'  Lu.  xiii.  29.  Ps.  cvii.  1-3. 

[Second.]  '  On  the  east  three  gates,  on  the  north 
three  gates,  on  the  south  three  gates,  and  on  the 
west  three  gates.'  Having  thus  showed  you  in  a 
word,  why  they  stand  thus  looking  into  every 
corner  or  quarter  of  the  world,  I  now  come  to 
show  you  why  there  must  be  just  three  looking  in 
this  manner  every  way.     < 

1.  Then,  there  may  be  three  looking  every  way, 
Why  there  is  to  signify  that  it  is  both  by  the  con- 
gjgL  f^y  sent  of  the  three  persons  in  the  Trinity, 
way.  °  that  the  gospel  should  thus  every  way 

go  forth  to  call  men,  and  also  to  show  you  that 
both  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  are  willing  to 
receive  and  embrace  the  sinner,  from  whatsoever 
part  or  corner  of  the  earth  he  cometh  hither  for 
life  and  safety.  Come  they  from  whence  they 
will,  the  Father  is  willing  to  give  them  the  Son, 


and  so  is  the  Son  to  give  them  himself,  and  so  is 
the  Spirit  to  give  them  its  help  against  whatever 
may  labour  to  hinder  them  while  they  are  here. 

Jn.  iii.  16.  Re.  xxi.  G ;  xxii.  17. 

2.  In  that  three  of  the  gates  look  every  way,  it 
may  be  also  to  show  us  that  there  is  none  can 
enter  into  this  city,  but  by  the  three  offices  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Christ  by  his  priestly  office  must 
wash  away  their  sins ;  and  by  his  prophetical 
office  he  must  illuminate,  teach,  guide,  and  refresh 
them ;  and  by  his  kingly  office,  rule  over  them  and 
govern  them  with  his  Word.  He.  vii.  5.  Jn.  xiii.  8.  Ac. 

iii.  22-24.  Is.  xl.  10,  11 ;  ix.  6,  7.  Ps.kxvi.  1—3;  ex.  3. 

3.  Or,  by  three  gates,  may  be  signified  the 
three  states  of  the  saints  in  this  life ;  an  entrance 
into  childhood,  an  entrance  into  a  manly  state,  and 
an  entrance  into  the  state  of  a  father  of  the  church. 
1  Jn.  ii.  12-14.  Or,  lastly,  the  three  gates  may  sig- 
nify the  three-fold  state  we  pass  through  from 
nature  to  glory ;  the  state  of  grace  in  this  life,  the 
state  of  felicity  in  paradise,  and  our  state  in  glory 
after  the  resurrection :  or  thus,  the  state  of  grace 
that  possesseth  body  and  soul  in  this  life,  the  state 
of  glory  that  possesseth  the  soul  at  death,  and  the 
state  of  glory  that  both  body  and  soul  shall  be 
possessed  with  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord  and 
Saviour.  This  was  figured  forth  by  the  order  of 
the  stairs  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  which  was 
first,  second,  and  third,  by  which  men  ascended 
from  the  lowest  to  the  uppermost  room  in  the 
house  of  God  ;  as  he  tells  us,  '  They  went  up  with 
winding  stairs  '  from  the  first  into  the  second  story, 
and  from  thence  by  them  into  the  third.  1  KL  vi.  s. 
Thus  much  for  the  wall  and  gates  of  New  Jeru- 
salem. 

[Tlie  foundations  of  the  wall.] 

Ver.  14.  •  And  the  wall  of  this  city  had  twelve 
foundations,  and  in  them  the  names  The  foundations 
of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.'  °f bewail 
In  these  words  we  have  two  things  considerable : — 
First.  That  the  city-wall  hath  twelve  foundations. 
Second.  That  in  these  twelve  are  the  names  of  the 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb. 

First.  It  hath  twelve  foundations.  This  argueth 
invincible  strength  and  support.  That  wall  that 
hath  but  one  foundation,  how  strongly  doth  it 
stand,  if  it  be  but  safely  laid  upon  a  rock,  even  so 
strongly  that  neither  wind  nor  weather,  in  their 
greatest  vehemency,  are  able  to  shake  or  stir  it  to 
make  it  fall.  But  I  say,  how  much  more  when  a 
city  hath  foundations,  twelve  foundations,  and  those 
also  laid  by  God  himself;  as  it  is  said  concerning 
the  worthies  of  old,  they  '  looked  for  a  city  which 
hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God.' 

He.  xi.  10. 

•  And  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundations, 
and  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 


THE  NEW  JERUSALEM 


417 


the  Lamb.'  The  wall,  you  know,  I  told  you,  is 
the  wall  of  salvation,  or  the  safety  of  the  church 
by  Jesus  Christ,  to  which  is  adjoined,  as  the  effect 
of  that,  the  special  providence  and  protection  of 
God.  Now  this  wall,  saith  the  Holy  Ghost,  hath 
twelve  foundations,  to  wit,  to  bear  it  up  for  the 
continuation  of  the  safety  and  security  of  those 
that  are  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  ;  a  foundation 
is  that  which  beareth  up  all,  and  that  upon  which 
the  stress  of  all  must  lie  and  abide.  Now,  to 
speak  properly,  the  foundation  of  our  happiness  is 
but  one,  and  that  one  none  hut  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
1  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay,  than  that 
is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.'  l  Co.  in.  11.  So  then, 
when  he  saith  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve 
foundations,  and  that  in  them  also  are  written  the 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb,  he  doth 
not  mean  that  this  wall  had  twelve  Christs  for  its 
..  .  ..     ,   , .       support,  but  that  the  doctrine  of  the 

It  is  the  doctrine          x  \  . 

of  the  twelve  a-   twelve  apostles  is  that  doctrine  upon 

upS  the  walls"  of   which  both  Christ,  and  grace,  and 

la^enf ew  Jeru"    a^  happiness  staudeth  firm  and  sure 

for  ever.     And  to  signify  also,  that 

neither  Christ   nor   any  of   his   benefits    can   be 

profitable  unto  thee,  unless  thou  receive  him  alone 

upon  the  terms  that  they  do  hold  him  forth  and 

offer  him  to  sinners  in  their  word  and  doctrine.     If 

'  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other 

gospel  unto  you,'  saith  Paul,   'than  that  which 

we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be  accursed. 

As  we  said  before,  so  say  I  now  again,  if  any 

man   preach    any   other   gospel    unto   you,   than 

that  ye  have  received,  let  him  be  accursed.'  Ga. 

i.  8,  9. 

[Second.]  'And  in  them  the  names  of  the 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.'  '  And  in  them  their 
names. '  This  makes  it  manifest  that  by  the  found- 
ations of  this  wall,  we  are  to  understand  the  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lord  Christ,  for 
their  names  are  to  it,  or  found  engraved  in  the 
foundations.  Thus  it  was  with  the  doctrine  which 
was  the  foundation  of  the  Jewish  church ;  the  first 
pattern  being  delivered  by  the  man  Moses,  his 
name  was  always  so  entailed  to  that  doctrine,  that 
at  last  it  became  common,  and  that  by  Divine 
allowance,  to  call  that  doctrine  by  the  name  of 
Moses  himself.  '  There  is  one  that  accuseth  you, ' 
saith  Christ,  '  even  Moses  in  whom  ye  trust.'  Jn.  v.  45. 
And  again,  '  For  Moses  of  old  hath  in  every  city 
them  that  preach  him.'  Ac.  xv.  21.  The  same  liberty 
of  speech  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  here  use  in  speaking 
of  the  foundations  of  this  wall,  which  is  the  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve.  And  in  that  he  calleth 
the  doctrine  by  the  name  of  foundations,  and 
leaveth  it  only  with  telling  us  the  names  of  the 
twelve  apostles  are  engraven  in  it;  he  expects 
that  men  should  be  wise  that  read  him,  and  that 
they  should  be  skilful  in  the  word  of  righteous- 

VOL.  III. 


ness,  if  they  come  up  clearly  to  the  understanding 
of  him. 

'  And  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles 
of  the  Lamb.' 

Thus  you  see  that  the  twelve  apostles,  above  all 
the  servants  of  Christ,  arc  here  owned  The  doctrine  of 
to  be  the  foundations  of  this  wall ;  and  j,^"^1^ 
good  reason,  for  they,  above  all  other,  othcr- 
are  most  clear  and  full  in  the  doctrine  of  grace, 
and  all  doctrines  pertaining  to  life  and  holiness. 
•In  other  ages,'  saith  Paul,  it  '  was  not  made 
known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  revealed 
to  the  holy  apostles  and  prophets  by  the  Spirit.' 
EP.  iii.  5.  Moses  was  not  fit  for  this,  for  his  was  a 
more  dark  and  veiled  administration  ;  while  Moses 
is  read,  the  veil  is  over  the  heart,  said  Paul.  2  Cor. 
iii.  13-15.  Neither  was  any  of  the  prophets  fit  for 
this,  for  they  were  all  inferior  to  Moses,  and  were, 
as  it  were,  his  scholars.  Nu.  xii.  c,  7.  Nay,  John  the 
Baptist  is  here  shut  out ; — for  the  '  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he.'   Mat.  xi.  n. 

The  apostles,  above  all  other,  were  the  men  that 
were  with  the  Lord  Jesus  all  the  time,  from  the 
baptism  of  John,  even  until  the  time  he  was  taken 
up  into  heaven;  they  saw  him,  heard  him,  and 
discoursed  with  him,  and  were  beholders  of  all  the 
wondrous  works  that  he  did ;  they  did  eat  and 
drink  with  him  after  his  passion,  and  saw,  after  he 
was  risen,  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  the  spear  with 
which  he  was  pierced,  when  he  died  for  our  sins. 
Lu.  xxiv.  39, 40.  And  because  they  had  seen,  felt,  and 
at  such  a  rate  experienced  all  things  The  twelve  went 
from  the  very  first,  both  touching  his  JPS^egS 
doctrine,  miracles,  and  life,  therefore  ence- 
he  said  unto  them  in  chief,  Ye  shall  be  witnesses 
unto  me,  both  in  Jerusalem  and  all  Judea,  and  in 
Samaria,  and  unto  the  utmost  parts  of  the  earth. 

Ac.  i.  8,  21 ;  xiii.  31;  x.  39;  li.  32.  1  Jn.  i.  1—3. 

Further,  The  apostles  were  in  that  marvellous 
manner  endued  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  they 
out-stript  all  the  prophets  that  ever  went  before 
them ;  neither  can  I  believe  that  in  the  best  of 
times  there  should  be  any  beyond  them ;  yet  if  it 
should  so  fall  out  that  a  dispensation  should  come 
in  which  they  should  have,  as  to  the  pouring  forth 
of  the  Spirit,  their  equals,  yet  it  could  not  follow, 
that  therefore  the  gospel  should  be  offered  in  other 
terms  than  they  at  first  have  offered  it,  especially 
besides  what  hath  been  said  of  them,  if  you  con- 
sider to  them  it  was  said,  '  Whatsoever  ye  shall 
bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven;  and 
whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed 
in  heaven.'  Mat.  xvm.  is.  They,  as  to  their  doctrine, 
were  infallible,  it  was  impossible  they   _.    ,     ... 

»  .,,.-,  The  foundation 

should  err;  he  that  despised  their  doc-     may  not  heal- 

trine,  despised  God  himself.     Besides, 

they  have  given  in  commandment  that  all  should 

write  after  their  copy,  and  that  we  should  judgo 

53 


41 S 


THE   HOLY  CITY,  OR 


both  men  and  angels  that  did,  or  would  do  other- 
wise.   1  Th.  iii.  S.    Ga.  i.  S. 

Timothy  must  have  his  rule  from  Paul,  and  so 
must  holy  Titus.  All  which,  if  we  consider  it,  the 
Holy  Ghost  speaks  to  the  purpose,  in  saying  that 
in  the  twelve  foundations  are  found  the  names  of 
the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  They  are  called 
the  chief,  and  such  as  have  laid  the  foundation, 
and  others  build  thereon,  and  that  as  no  men  have 
laid  the  foundation  but  they,  so  none  can  lay  even 
that  foundation  otherwise  than  they  afore  have  laid 

it.    1  Cor.  xii.  28.  Ep.  iv.  11,  12.  1  Cor.  iii.  6-11.  He.  vi.  1-3. 

[Consideration  from  these  ivords.]  '  Aud  in  them 
the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.' 
These  words,  then,  teach  us  two  things  worthy  of 
our  Christian  consideration. 

First.  That  God  hath  given  to  every  man  a 
certain  and  visible  mark  to  aim  at  for  his  salva- 
tion, or  to  build  his  soul  upon,  namely,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  For  in 
that  he  saith  their  names  are  in  the  foundations, 
it  is  better  for  us,  all  things  considered,  than  if 
he  had  said  in  them  was  the  name  of  God  himself; 
that  is,  it  is  more  easy  to  see  this  way,  through 
the  mist  of  our  carnality,  what  the  mystery  of  his 
will  should  be,  which  is,  that  we  receive  Christ 
The  names  of  the  according  to  their  doctrine,  words, 
broad6  seals '  of  writings,  epistles,  letters,  <fcc,  their 
heaven.  names,  I  say,  being  there,  God  counts 

it  as  the  broad  seal  of  heaven,  which  giveth 
authority  to  all  that  doctrine  whereunto  by  them- 
selves they  are  prefixed  and  subscribed  ;  not  where 
they  are  writ  by  others,  but  by  themselves.  I 
say,  as  the  token  of  every  epistle,  and  of  their 
doctrine  for  truth,  the  which  Paul  insinuates,  when 
he  saith  that  his  hand  is  the  token  of  every  epistle. 
2  Th.  iii.  17.  Ga.  vi.  ii.  As  he  saith  again,  Am  I  not 
an  apostle  ?  l  Co.  be.  l.  And  again,  Behold,  I  Paul, 
have  written  unto  you ;  I  Paul,  Ga.  v.  2.  1,  an 
apostle,  I,  a  wise  master-builder,  I,  who  am  in  my 
doctrine  one  of  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  sal- 
vation, I  have  written  unto  you.  lCor.xi.  5.  And, 
as  I  said  before,  there  is  reason  it  should  be  thus: 
for  as  he  who  was  the  foundation  of  the  Jewish 
church,  even  Moses,  received  the  pattern  of  all  his 
order  from  the  mouth  of  the  angel  in  Mount  Sinai, 
so  the  twelve  received  their  doctrine  of  faith  and 
manners,  the  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament,  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Son  of  God  himself,  as  from  the 
mouth  of  tho  angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  on 
the  mountain  of  Zion.  Ac.  vfi.  gs;  i.3.  Mat.  xxviiL  19. 

Second.  In  that  he  saith  the  names  of  the  twelve 


1  All  authority  iii  the  church  is  strictly  limited  to  the 
written  Word.  Throw  away  then  to  the  owls  and  the  bats  all 
tradition,  aud  the  power  of  the  church  to  decree  rites  aud  cerc- 
mouies.  It  is  treason  against  God  to  suppose  that  he  omitted 
anything  from  his  Bible  that  his  church  ought  to  do,  or  com- 
manded that  which  may  be  neglected,  although  human  laws 
may  authorize  such  deviation. — (Co.) 


are  in  the  foundations,  this  shows  us  the  reason  of 
the  continual  standing  of  this  Jerusalem ;  it  is 
built  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 
the  Lamb,  and  standeth  there.  For,  observe,  so 
long  as  he  sees  this  holy  city,  he  sees  her  standing 
upon  these  foundations ;  but  he  saw  the  city  till 
she  was  taken  up,  therefore  she  continued  as  being 
settled  for  ever  upon  them.  Indeed,  the  primitive 
city,  or  first  churches,  was  built  upon  these  found- 
ations, and  had  also,  so  long  as  they  there  con- 
tinued, sufficient  supportation  and  upholding  by 
that  means.  ep.  ii.  20-22.  But  then,  as  I  have 
showed  you,  the  wall  of  her  salvation,  and  the  wall 
of  God's  special  protection,  stood  at  a  distance 
each  from  other,  and  were  not  so  conjoined  as  now 
they  will  be.  Wherefore  they  then,  to  answer  the 
type,  did  fall  into  the  ditch  that  was  between,  and 
through  their  foolishness  provoked  God  to  remove 
the  wall  of  his  outward  protection  and  safeguard 
from  them,  whereupon  the  wild  beast,  Antichrist, 
got  into  his  vineyard,  making  havoc  of  all  their 
dainties.  But  mark,  this  city  is  not  so,  the  walls 
are  now  conjoined,  and  for  ever  fastened  upon  the 
foundations,2  therefore  it  abides  for  ever,  and 
ascends  higher  and  higher;  yet  not  from  the 
foundations,  but  by  them  into  heaven :  '  Behold,' 
saith  God,  '  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of 
my  hands,  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me.' 

Is.  xlU.  1G. 

[How  we  are  to  understand  the  word  twelve.] 

'  And  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostle.-? 
of  the  Lamb. '  This  word  twelve  must  be  warily 
understood,  or  else  the  weak  will  be  ready  to  stumble 
and  take  offence ;  wherefore,  to  prevent  this,  con- 
sider, 

First.  The  twelve  must  be  them  twelve  that  were 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  baptism   How       arc  t0 

of   John  until  the  day  in  which  our     nnderstandthc 

T       .  .  °  word  twelve. 

Lord  was  taken  up.  Ac.  i.  22. 

Second.  These  twelve  are  not  neither  to  be  con- 
sidered simply  as  twelve  Christians,  or  twelve  dis- 
ciples ;  but  as  their  witness  of  the  Lord  Jesus — 
they  being  with  him  from  first  to  last — were  a 
twelve-fold  witness  of  him  in  all  his  things ;  a 
twelve-fold  seeing  with  their  eyes,  a  twelve-fold 
hearing  with  their  ears,  a  twelve-fold  handling  also 
with  their  hands,  and  feeling  of  the  Son  of  God. 
As  one  of  them  said,  '  That  which  was  from  the 
beginning,  which  we  have  heard,  which  we  have 
seen  with  our  eyes,  -  and  our  hands  have  handled 
of  the  word  of  life :  -  that  which  we  have  seen  and 
heard,  declare  we  unto  you,  that  ye  also  may  have 
fellowship  with  us,'  kc.  1  Jn.  i.  l,  3.  Now  this  being 
thus,  it  folio  we  th  that  the  doctrine  of  the  other 


2  The  walls  do  not  go  from  or  leave  the  foundations,  but, 
resting  upon  them,  they  gradually  ascend  to  perfection. — (Ed.) 


THE   NEW  JERUSALEM. 


419 


apostles,  as  of  Paul  and  Barnabas,  was  still  but 
the  doctrine  of  the  twelve ;  their  doctrine,  1  say, 
and  no  other.  Wherefore,  as  Ephraira  and  Man- 
asseh  were  dissolved  into  the  twelve  tribes,  so  these 
two,  with  all  other  the  apostles  of  Christ,  are  dis- 
solved into  the  number  of  the  twelve,  because  their 
doctrine  is  only  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve ;  for 
they  centre  in  their  doctrine ;  their  length,  and 
breadth,  and  depth,  and  height  being  the  doctrine 
of  the  twelve.  So,  then,  the  names  of  the  twelve 
being  found  in  the  foundations  of  this  wall,  it  argu- 
eth  that  that  doctrine  is  only  true  that  is  the  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve  eye-witnesses  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
And  again,  that  at  the  day  of  Antichrist's  fall, 
this  doctrine  shall  be  in  its  former  purity,  and  bear 
the  sway,  and  for  ever  hold  up  the  wall  of  safety 
for  the  inhabitants  of  New  Jerusalem.  And  indeed 
this  doctrine,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve  is  that 
upon  which  eternal  safety  is  built  and  stands,  is  so 
true,  that  it  must  not  be  varied  from  upon  pain  of 
eternal  damnation.  Here  centered  Luke  the  Evan- 
gelist, here  centered  Judc,  here  centered  the  author 
to  the  Hebrews,  yea,  here  centered  Paul  himself, 
with  all  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  The  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve  must  be  the  opener,  expounder, 
and  limiter  of  all  doctrines ;  there  also  must  all 
men  centre,  and  ground,  and  stay.  A  man  may 
talk  of,  yea,  enjoy  much  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  but 
yet  the  twelve  will  have  the  start  of  him ;  for  they 
both  bad  the  Spirit  as  he,  and  more  than  he. 
Besides,  they  together  with  this,  did  feel,  see, 
handle,  and  receive  conviction,  even  by  their  very 
carnal  senses,  -which  others  did  not ;  besides,  then- 
names  also  are  found  in  the  foundations  of  this 
saving  wall,  as  being  there  engraved  by  God  him- 
self; Avhich  putteth  all  out  of  doubt,  and  giveth  us 
infallible  ground  that  their  doctrine  is  only  true, 
and  all  men's  false  that  do  not  keep  within  the 
bounds  and  limits  of  that.  La.  i.  2.  Jude  3, 17.  He.  ii.  3,  i. 
1  Co.  xv.  1-9  ;  he  1.  Ga.  i.  1,  2.  Ep.  iii.  5.  1  Co.  iv.  0. 

To  conclude,  here  are  yet  two  things  worthy  of 
noting  —  The  first  [consideration]  is,  that  by  the 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  being  in  the  founda- 
tions of  this  wall,  and  the  names  of  the  twelve 
tribes  being  upon  the  gates  of  this  city,  it  giveth 
us  to  consider,  that  at  the  time  of  the  building  of 
this  city  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  shall  be  united 
together,  and  become  one  body ;  which  very  con- 
sideration must  needs  be  to  the  Jews  a  great 
encouragement  to  have  in  mind  at  their  conver- 
sion. Ro.  xi.  l  re.  i.  l.  For  it  plainly  signifieth  that 
our  New  Testament  preachers  shall  carry  in  their 
mouths  salvation  to  the  Jews,  by  which  means 
they  shall  be  again  reconciled  and  made  one  with 

the  Lord  JesUS.  Ja.  i.  1.  Ac.  xiii.  Ifi,  26.  Ro.  i.  1G  ;  ii.  10. 

The  second  consideration  is,  that  at  the  day  of 
New  Jerusalem,  there  shall  he  no  doctrine  ac- 
cepted, nor  no  preachers  regarded,  but  the  doc- 


trine, and  the  preaching  of  the  doctrino  of  the 
twelve ;   for  in  that  he  saith  that  in  „ 

>> "  preacher  now 

them  are  found  the  names  of  the  allowed  bat  be 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb,  he  doth  the  do" 
implicitly  exclude  all  other,  of  what-  tlietudvt- 
ever  tribe  they  pretend  themselves.  It  shall  not 
be  then  as  now,  a  Popish  doctrine,  a  Quaker's 
doctrine,  a  prclatieal  doctrine,  and  the  Presbyter, 
Independent,  and  Anabaptist,1  thus  distinguished, 
and  thus  confounding  and  destroying.  But  the 
doctrine  shall  be  one,  and  that  one  the  doctrine, 
where  you  find  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 
the  Lamb.  'If  any  man  teach  otherwise,  and  con- 
sent not  to  wholesome  words,  even  the  words  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  doctrine  that  is 
according  to  godliness,  he  is  proud,  knowing- 
nothing.'    1  Ti.  vi.  3,  4. 

Thus  you  see  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve  is  that 
which  lettcth  souls  into  this  city ;  and  that  the 
same  doctrine  is  the  doctrine  that  keepeth  up  the 
wall  of  their  salvation  about  them,  when  they  arc 
entered  in  within  the  gates. 

\Tlie  measuring  line,  or  golden  reed:  wJud  it  is.] 

Ver.  15.  '  And  he  that  talked  with  me  had  a 
golden  reed  to  measure  the  city,  and  the  gates 
thereof,  and  the  wall  thereof. ' 

Now,  having  passed  the  relation  of  the  wall, 
gates,  and  foundations,  he  comes  to  the     A  s<Mm 
measuring  line,  to  see  how  all  things  lie        retid- 
and  agree  with  that.     Under  the  law,  I  find  that 
all  things  pertaining  to  the  worship  of  God  were  to 


],y 


rule,  and  measure,  even  to  th 


tacks  and  loops  of  the  curtains  of  the  tabernacle. 
Now  the  rule  or  line  by  which  all  things  were  then 
squared,  it  was  the  laws,  statutes,  and  ordinances 
which  were  given  to  Moses  by  the  Lord  in  the 
Mount  Sinai,  for  thither  he  went  to  receive  his 
orders  ;  and  according  to  the  pattern  there  showed 
him,  so  he  committed  all  things  by  writing  to  them 
that  were  to  be  employed  in  the  workmanship  of 
the  holy  things  pertaining  to  the  rise  and  com- 
pleting of  the  tabernacle,  and  all  its  instruments. 

Ex.  xx.  21;   xxiv.  1;   xxv.  40.    De.  xxx.  10;   xxxi.  20-20. 

Now,  when  this  rule  was  thus  received,  then 
whosoever  observed  not  to  do  it,  he  was  to  fall 
under  the  penalty  that  by  the  same  law  also  was 
prescribed  against  the  offenders  and  transgressors. 
Nu.  xv.  so,  31.  I  find  also,  that  when  the  temple  was 
built  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  all  things  were  then 
done  according  to  the  writing  that  David  made, 
when  the  hand  of  God  was  upon  him,  when  he 
made  him  understand  all  the  work  of  this  pattern. 

2  Oh.  iii.,  iv.  1  Ch.  xxix.  3-7  ;  xxriii.  10. 

Thus  arrain,  when  Josiah  went  about  to  bring  to 


1  Anabaptist  was  the  name  given  to  those  who  submitted 
to  be  baptized  upon  a  profession  of  faith,  because,  having  been 
christened  when  infants,  it  was  called  re-baptizing.— (Ed.) 


420 


THE  HOLY   CITY,  OR 


pass  the  reformation  of  the  church  of  the  Jews, 
and  their  instruments  of  worship,  after  their  re- 
volting, he  goeth  to  the  law  of  God,  and  hy  that 
understanding  what  was  out  of  order,  and  how  to 
put  all  things  into  order,  he  so  did  reduce  them  to 
their  former  manner.  The  same  way  also  went 
Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  at  the  rebuilding  of  the 
temple  and  city  after  the  captivity.  2  Ki.  xxii.  8-13. 
Ezr.  vii.  14 ;  viii.  34.  From  all  which  I  conclude,  that 
,    the  reed,  the  erolden  reed,  that  here 

This  froldrn  reed  '        .    °  ,.  .       ,  , 

is  the  Word  of  you  read  01,  it  is  nothing  else  but  the 
God*  pure  and  unspotted  Word  of  God ; 

hy  which  both  the  city,  gates,  and  wall  of  this 
Jerusalem  are  regulated.  Which  word,  by  the 
holy  prophet,  is  also  compared  to  gold,  and  is  said 
to  be  above  '  much  fine  gold.'  Ps.  xii.  6 ;  xix.  10. 

I  find  in  the  vision  of  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  that 

the  ano-el  that  there  is  said  to  measure  the  city, 

which  was  a  type  of  our  Jerusalem,  he  appeared 

with  a  line  of  flax  in  his  hand,  to  measure  the 

pattern  withal,  Eze.  xi.  3 ;  which  very  phrase   doth 

show  us  that  this  was  but  the  type,  and  an  Old 

Testament  business ;  but  John  hath  his  in  a  New 

Testament  style,  and  that  in  the  most  excellent 

manner  of  language,  to  signify  that  his  city,  or  the 

city  that  he  hath  the  vision  of,  is  to  be  the  end  of 

all  types  and  shadows,  and  the  very  perfection  of 

them  all.     Wherefore  he  tells  us  also, 

sunn-1Hn'eieof  that  the  line  or  reed  by  which  this 

j^speSkfa  city  is  builded  and  squared,  it  is  not 

called  a  golden  now  a  \\ne  0f  fjax,  but  a  reed  of  gold, 

a  golden  reed ;  to  signify  not  a  word 

of  the  law  and  letter  that  had  to  do  with  shadows, 

but  the  New  Testament,  and  ministration  of  the 

Spirit,  which  hath  to  do  with  substance,  and  the 

heavenly  things  themselves.  He.  ix.  23. 

[The  city  measured.] 

'  A  golden  reed  to  measure  the  city,'  &c.  I  told 
you  at  the  first  that  this  city  was  the  church  of  God 
that  should  be  in  the  latter  days ;  but  yet  not  the 
church  disorderly  and  confusedly  scattered  here  and 
there,  without  all  visible  order  and  discipline,  but 
the  church  brought  into  exact  form  and  order, 
lying  every  way  level  and  square  with  the  rule  and 
golden  reed  of  the  New  Testament  of  Christ;  where- 
fore he  calleth  it  a  city,  a  city  under  rule.  Thus  it 
was  in  the  type;  for  when  Solomon's  temple  was  to 
be  builded,  and  the  city  in  after  times,  it  was  not 
enough  that  they  had  stones  and  timber,  but  every 
one  of  them  must  be  such  stones,  and  such  timber, 
and  must  also  come  under  the  rule  and  square  of 
the  workman ;  and  so  being  fitted  by  hewers, 
saws,  axes,  and  squares,  they  were  fitly  put  into 
the  building.  1  Ki.  v.  17, 18;  vii.  9-12.  1  ch.  xxii.  2.  By 
this,  then,  we  may  see  with  what  a  holy,  exact 
line,  rule,  and  order,  this  church  and  city,  at  this 
day,  will  be  compact  and  built ;  the  members  must 
be  all  such  as  shall  be  made  fit  for  the  city  of  God 


by  the  hewing  words  of  the  prophets.  Ho.  vi.  5.  They 
must  join  in  Christian  communion  also  according 
to  the  golden  reed  of  the  New  Testament,  and 
ministration  of  the  Spirit.  Indeed,  all  the  time  of 
the  reign  of  Antichrist,  the  church,  as  she  was  a 
holy  temple  in  the  Lord,  so  she  was  measured 
with  reference  to  the  truth  of  her  grace,  and  in- 
visible condition,  Re.  xi.  i,  2 ;  but  as  she  is  to  be  a 
city,  so  she  then  is  to  be  trodden  down,  and  to  lie 
without  all  form  and  order ;  but  when  Antichrist 
is  dead,  she  shall  again  come  into  mind,  be  con- 
sidered, reared,  built  by  measure,  and  inhabited. 
And  observe  it,  as  the  rule  of  the  carpenter  is  of 
use  in  building,  from  the  first  appearance  of  the 
laying  of  a  stone  in  order,  even  till  it  be  in  every 
point  and  part  complete,  so  the  golden  reed  with 
which  the  angel  is  here  said  to  measure  the  city, 
&c,  is  to  be  of  use  from  the  first  foundation  even 
to  the  laying  of  the  last  stone  thereof;  as  was  also 
fore-showed  by  the  man  that  is  said  to  measure  the 
pattern  of  this,  in  Ezekiel.  Eze.  xxx.-xiviii. 

'  And  he  measured  the  city.'  That  is,  he  mea- 
sured the  church  in  her  constitution  and  fellowship. 
Now  when  God  is  said  to  measure,  he  is  said  to 
measure  sometimes  in  judgment,  and  sometimes  in 
mercy ;  sometimes  to  throw  down,  and  sometimes 
to  build  up  and  establish.  Sometimes,  I  say,  he 
is  said  to  measure  in  judgment,  with  intention  to 
throw  down  and  destroy.  Thus  he  measured  the 
city  before  she  went  into  captivity,  and  the  ten 
tribes  before  they  were  carried  away  beyond  Baby- 
lon, because  they  lay  cross  to  his  word,  and  had 
perverted  that  which  was  right,  <fcc.  is.  xxviii.  17,  is. 
Am.  vii.  7-9.  But  when  he  is  said  to  measure  the 
city  in  this  place,  it  is  that  she  might  be  built  and 
set  up.  Wherefore,  as  I  said,  the  line  or  golden 
reed  that  is  now  stretched  forth  to  measure  this 
city,  it  is  to  the  end  that  all  things  may  be  in 
right  form  and  order,  '  fitly  joined'  and  knit  'to- 
gether, -  by  that  which  every  joint  supplieth,  ac- 
cording to  the  effectual  working  in  the  measure  of 
every  part,  making  increase  of  the  body,  unto  the 
edifying  of  itself  in  love.'  Ep.  iv.  16.  Col.  u.  19. 

Again,  By  measuring  the  city,  he  would  have 
us  to  understand  that  all  her  limits  and  bounds 
were  now  apparent,  that  all  things,  even  the  church 
and  all  the  world,  were  made  to  see  their  own 
compass.  For  as  God  in  the  days  when  temple- 
worship  only  was  on  foot,  would  not  lose  a  form 
or  ordinance  of  all  the  forms  and  ordinances  of  his 
temple ;  so  when  city-work  comes  up,  he  will  not 
lose  an  inch  of  the  limits,  and  bounds,  and  com- 
pass of  his  city,  she  shall  be  full  as  large,  and  of 
as  great  a  compass  every  way,  as  is   *  This  is  that 

,     °      .       ,     ».r  i  -xi    i       xi  which  a  little 

determined  of  her ;  as  he  saith  by  the     before  is  called 
prophet,  «  All  the  land,  saith  he,  shall    Jj  aX  £eew 
be  turned  as  a  *  plain  ;'  that  is,  there     earth- 
shall  be  a  smooth   face   upon  the  whole  earth, 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


421 


all  snugs,  and  hubs,1  and  hills,  and  holes,  shall 
now  he  taken  away,  even  '  from  Geba  to  Rim- 
mon,  south  of  Jerusalem:  and  it  (the  city)  shall 
be  lifted  up  and  inhabited  in  her  place,  from 
Benjamin's  gate  unto  the  place  of  the  first  gate, 
unto  the  corner  gate,  and  from  the  tower  of  Ha- 
naniel,  unto  the  king's  wine  presses.'  Zee.  rfv.  10. 
The  four  places  here  mentioned  in  this  verse,  they 
do  seem  to  he  the  four  corners  of  the  city  of  old ; 
at  which  places  the  city  bounds  were  set ;  and  in 
which  very  circle  the  prophet  tells  us,  but  with 
gospel  language,  she  shall  be  settled  again. 

[ The  gates  measured.] 

4  And  he  measured  the  city,'  and  the  gates 
The  gates  mea-  thereof.  This  was  figured  forth  by 
sured-  the  vision  in  Ezekiel,  for  in  it  he  saw 
the  angel  go  from  gate  to  gate,  and  saw  him  take 
the  exact  and  distinct  measure  of  every  one  thereof; 
nay,  not  only  of  them  in  a  general  way,  but  of  the 
thresholds,  the  porch,  the  posts,  and  the  faces  of 
their  entrances ;  he  measured  also  every  little 
chamber  that  was  above  upon  the  gates,  with  all 
the  spaces  that  were  between.  Eze.  xL 

Now  by  gates,  I  told  you,  we  are  to  understand 
the  Son  of  God,  as  he  is  the  way  to  the  Father, 
and  to  the  privileges  of  this  city.  Wherefore 
when  he  saith  he  measured  the  gates,  it  is  as  if  he 
had  said,  he  measured  the  entrance,  strength,  and 
goodly  countenance  of  him,  with  the  mansions  of 
glory  that  are  to  be  enjoyed  by  every  one  that 
entereth  in  hereby;  for  the  porch,  posts,  face,  en- 
trance, and  chambers  of  the  gate  in  Ezekiel,  they 
signify  the  entrance,  strength,  shining  countenance, 
and  resting  places  that  every  one  shall  find  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  that  entereth  in  by  him ;  and  to  mea- 
sure all  these,  it  is  in  substance  but  this,  to  set 
them  forth,  and  out,  in  their  full  force,  glory, 
largeness,  beauty,  and  profitableness,  in  the  view 
of  all;  for  I  told  you  at  the  first,  the  golden  reed 
is  the  Word  of  God.  Now  the  city  and  the  gates 
thereof,  are  said  to  be  measured  by  this  golden 
reed:  which,  I  say,  can  be  nothing  else  but  an 
opening  of  all  the  excellencies  of  Christ,  as  he  is 
the  gate  of  the  sheep,  even  by  the  full  sway, 
power,  majesty,  and  clearness  of  the  Word.  The 
Lord  help  us !  Christ,  as  he  is  the  door  to  God, 
and  to  all  gospel-privileges,  is  now  strangely 
handled,  and  so  hath  been  of  a  long  time  among 
the  sons  of  men ;  some  of  them  making  him  the 
very  in-let  to  all  the  vile  and  abominable  crew  in 
the  world,  counting  all  that  are  pliant  to  their  un- 
godly humours,  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  and 
Christ  the  door  and  gate  through  whom  they  have 
right  to  enter;  and  to  whom  belong  the  delicates 
of  the  precious  things  of  God,  even  those  which  he 


1  '  Hub;'  an  obstruction,  a  thick  square  sod,  the  mark  or 
stop  at  the  game  of  quoits. —  (Ed.) 


hath  most  choicely  laid  up  and  rescrveth  for  none 
but  those  that  unfeignedly  turn  from  iniquity,  and 
walk  with  him  in  the  newness  of  the  Spirit. 
Others  again  do  shut  up  the  gates  against  tho 
godly,  labouring  with  might  and  main  to  hinder 
those  that  labour  to  enter,  that  fain  would  do  it 
unfeignedly.2  Mat.  niii.  14.  2  Ch.  nU.  7.  Others  again 
do  labour  all  that  in  them  lies  to  deface  the  gates, 
to  take  away  their  beauty:  like  him  that  took  tho 
gold  from  off  the  doors  and  gates  of  the  temple. 
2  Ki.  .wiii.  ig.  Rendering  Christ  a  low  and  carnal 
business,  &c.  But  at  the  measuring-day,  at  the 
day  when  the  golden  reed  shall  be  the  alone  rule: 
then  you  shall  see  this  city,  and  her  gates  dis- 
covered in  their  own  glory,  holiness,  and  beauty. 
For  though  in  our  affliction  under  antichrist,  our 
temple  and  instruments  of  worship,  with  the  city, 
wall,  gates,  and  the  like,  have  been  much  defaced, 
even  our  doctrine  of  faith  and  worship,  and  have 
been  much  trod  and  trampled  under  the  foot  of  the 
uncircumcised,  yet  all  shall  be  recovered  and 
brought  into  order  again  by  the  golden  reed  of  the 
word  of  God.  Which  thing  was  figured  forth  to 
us  by  the  good  man  Ezra  the  scribe,  who  at  the 
restoring  of  Jerusalem  took  review  of  all  the  things 
pertaining  to  the  city,  both  touching  its  breaches 
and  deformity,  and  also  how  to  set  all  things  in 
order,  and  that  by  the  law  of  God  which  was  in 
his  hand,  even  according  to  the  writing  thereof. 

Ezr.  vii.  14  ;  viii.  34.  Ne.  viii.  9.      And  whosoever  doth  but 

read  the  history  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  through- 
out, they  shall  find  that  by  the  Word  of  God  they 
brought  all  things  to  pass ;  all  the  ordinances  of 
the  house  and  city  of  God  into  their  right  and  holy 
order.  And  indeed  the  measuring  of  the  city  and 
of  the  gates  thereof,  which  is  Christ  the  way,  it 
can  be  nothing  else  but  a  bringing  of  them  by  the 
right  understanding  and  opening  of  the  Word  into 
their  proper  places  and  excellencies,  both  for 
comers  in,  and  goers  out,  according  to  the  com- 
mandment. Eze.  3d.  4;  xiui.  7-12.  For,  to  speak  pro- 
perly, Christ  in  his  love,  grace,  merits,  and  large- 
ness of  heart,  to  let  souls  into  communion  with 
God  and  all  happiness,  is  in  all  these  things  un- 
searchable, and  passing  knowledge,  being  tilled 
with  these  things  beyond   thought,   and  without 

measure.    Ep.  iii.  S,  18,  19.  Col.  L  9.  Jn.  iii.  34. 

[  The  wall  measured.  ] 

And  he  measured  the  city,  the  gates  thereof, 
and  the  wall  thereof.    In  that  he  saith,    The  wall  mea- 
he  measured  the  wall   also,  it  is   to         sured' 
show  us  that  all  things  now  are  according  to  the 
rule  of  the  Word:   the  inhabitants  are  according  to 


2  These  observatious  apply  to  such  churches  as  admit  to 
the  Lord's  table  unconverted  persons,  because  they  have  passed 
through  certain  outward  ceremonies ;  and  to  those  who  refused 
to  admit  the  most  godly  saints,  because  they  had  not  submitted 
to  an  outward  ceremony. — (Ed. J 


422 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  Git 


the  Word,  the  entrance  is  according  to  the  Word, 
yea,  and  so  is  the  safety  of  it  also,  even  a  fence  to 
fence  them  from  their  enemies:  even  a  fence  on 
every  side,  that  they  may  be  at  ease  and  rest,  and 
he  no  more  a  tossing  to  and  fro.  '  0  thou  afflicted, 
tossed  with  tempest,'  saith  he,  '  and  not  com- 
forted, (I  will  do  many  good  things  for  thee)  -  In 
righteousness  shalt  thou  be  established:  thou  shalt 
be  far  from  oppression ;  for  thou  shalt  not  fear ; 
and  from  terror,  for  it  shall  not  come  near  thee.' 

Is.  liv.  11-14. 

Touching  the  wall,  what  it  is,  I  have  spoken 
already;  therefore  here  I  speak  only  to  the  mea- 
sure of  it,  which  measure  is  only  the  fulfilling  all 
those  promises  and  engagements  of  God  that  are 
made  to  New  Jerusalem,  for  her  safety  and  con- 
tinual defence;  and  that  not  only  in  her  own  eyes, 
but  in  the  eyes  of  all  her  beholders.  Then  shall 
that  saying  be  with  gladness  in  the  mouths  of  all 
the  inhabitants  of  this  Jerusalem,  '  We  were  bond- 
men, yet  our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our 
bondage,  but  hath  extended  mercy  unto  us  in  the 
sight  of  the  kings  of  Persia,  to  give  us  a  reviving 
to  set  up  the  house  of  our  God,  and  to  repair  the 
desolations  thereof,  and  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Judah 
and  in  Jerusalem.'  Ezr.  ix.  9.  Which  wall,  I  say, 
shall  be  so  conspicuous  to  all  the  adversaries  of 
this  holy  and  beloved  city,  that  the  greatest  of 
them  shall  not  once  dare  to  peep  or  mutter1  against 
her  any  more.  '  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for 
a  refuge.  For,  lo,  the  kings  were  assembled,  they 
passed  by  together,  they  saw  it,  and  so  they  mar- 
velled ;  they  were  troubled,  and  hasted  away. 
Fear  took  hold  upon  them  there,  and  pain,  as  of  a 
woman  in  travail. '  Ps.  xlviii.  l— s.  As  it  is  said  of 
the  building  of  the  wall  after  the  captivity:  when 
the  enemies  and  all  the  heathen  saw  it  was  finished, 
'they  were  much  cast  down  in  their  own  eyes.' 

Ne.  vi.  15,  1G. 

The  regulating  of  this  city  by  this  golden  reed, 
and  the  measuring  the  gates  and  wall  by  this  word, 
when  finished,  will  then  cause  all  that  have  skill 
in  singing  the  Lord's  songs,  and  of  lifting  up  the 
praises  of  God  in  this  city,  to  gather  themselves 
together  to  sing,  and  to  praise,  and  to  say,  Bless 
ye  the  name  of  the  Lord,  for  his  mercies  endure 
for  ever:  for  then  will  they  purify  the  people,  this 
city,  with  the  gates  and  wall  thereof.  Ne.  xii.  27—47. 

Wherefore  in  the  mean  time,  between  this  and 
the  building  of  this  city,  let  Jerusalem  come  into 
your  mind,  and  walk  about  her,  '  go  round  about 
her,'  inquire  by  the  Word  what  God  hath  said  of 
her  state,  strength,  safety,  ease,  peace,  and  blessed 
tranquillity  in  the  latter  days,  '  tell  the  towers 
thereof.     Mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her 


1  See  Is,  viii.  19.  '  To  peep  and  mutter,'  as  pretended  sor- 
cerers or  magicians  attempting  their  incantations  a»aiust  the 
truth.— (Ed.) 


palaces,  that  ye  may  tell  it  to  the  generations  fol- 
lowing.'   Vs.  xlviii.  12,  13. 

[The  form  and  measure  of  (lie  city.'] 
Ver.  16.  'And  the  city  lieth  four  square,  and 
the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth:  and  he 
measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  twelve  thousand 
furlongs,  the  length,  and  the  breadth,  and  height 
of  it  are  equal.' 

'  And  the  city  lieth  four  square.'  These  words 
do  open  unto  you  the  matter  yet  more,  to  wit, 
that  now  both  the  city,  gates,  and  wall  were  ex- 
actly in  their  visibility  according  to  the  Word, 
lying  even  every  way  with  that  golden  reed:  for 
by  four  square  you  are  to  understand  perfection, 
or  an  answering  the  figures  that  of  old  did  figure 
to  us  the  completeness  and  perfection  of  the  New 
Testament  order. 

For  if  you  search  the  Scriptures,  you  will  find 
that  especially  the  great  and  principal  instruments 
of  God's  worship  in  and  under  the  law,  their  per- 
fection was  what  here  you  read  to  be  the  perfection 
of  this  city,  even  a  four  square.  As  for  instance, 
The  breastplate  of  judgment,  on  which  were  en- 
graved the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel,  its 
exact  point  of  perfection  was  to  be  a  right  four 
square.  The  ten  bases  also,  that  were  to  be  for 
bearers  to  the  lavers  in  the  temple,  they  were  to 
be  four  square:  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings  like- 
wise, with  the  altar  of  incense,  their  perfect  pattern 
was  that  they  should  be  four  square.  The  inward 
court,  and  outward  court,  with  the  posts  of  the 
temple,  and  tables  on  which  they  were  to  slay  the 
sacrifices,  they  were  all  four  square.  Yea,  the 
city  in  the  type,  in  the  vision  of  Ezekicl,  was  seen 
to  be  of  the  same  frame  and  fashion  every  way, 
having  just  twelve  gates,  and  on  each  of  the  four 
sides  three  gates.  Wherefore,  when  he  saith  the 
city  lieth  four  square,  it  is  as  if  he  had  said  she 
lieth  even  with  the  pattern  or  golden  reed  of  the 
Word;  even,  I  say,  both  in  her  members,  doctrine, 
worship,  and  manners:  for  the  things  afore  hinted 
unto  you  do  hold  forth  all  these  particulars.  Ex. 

xxviii.  15,  16  ;  xxxix.  8,  9  ;  xxvii.  1 ;  xxxviii.  1 ;  xxrvii.  1.  1  KL  vii. 
27,  28.  Eze.  xliii.  13—18;  xl.  j  xli.  21 ;  xlviii.  30-31. 

'  And  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth.' 
This  explaineth  the  matter  yet  more  fully  and 
distinctly ;  for  as  to  the  things  that  I  made  men- 
tion of  before,  though  they  were  to  be  made  four 
square,  and  that  their  perfection  lay  exactly  in 
that  form,  yet  these  squares  did  not  lie  in  their 
height  and  depth,  but  in  their  length  and  breadth, 
just  as  you  read  here  of  the  square  of  this  city. 
As  to  instance :  The  altars,  though  they  were  five 
cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  broad,  yet  but  three 
high.  Ex,  xxvii.  l ;  xxxiii.  i.  i  Ki.  vii.  So  the  bases,  they 
Avcre  a  cubit  and  an  half  broad,  and  a  cubit  and 
an  half  long,  yet  but  half  a  cubit  high  ;  the  tables 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


423 


also  on  which  they  slew  the  sacrifices,  they  were 
a  cubit  and  a  half  long,  and  a  cubit  aud  a  half 
broad,  yet  but  one  cubit  high.  Eze.  xi.  i-2.  Which 
things  being  thus,  you  see  the  reason  of  bis  say- 
ing '  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth.' 

Now  by  length  and  breadth  here,  we  may  yet 
observe  another  mystery  held  forth  unto  us ;  for 
by  the  breadth  is  held  forth  tho  perfection  of 
the  rule,  or  law  to  which  all  Christians  ought  to 
yield  their  hearty  obedience :  his  commandment  is 
exceeding  broad.  Fs.  exix.  w.  The  breadth  of  which 
By  breadth  is  to  is  signified,  I  say,  by  the  breadth  of 
he     understood   ti103e  things  that  before  you  see  to 

tho  perfection  ot  °  J  " 

the  Word,  and  by    be  the  instruments  of  the  worship  of 

length  the  com-     _,     .        -T 

pletenees  of  the   God.     JNow,  as  by  breadth  we  are 

saiuts'obedicucc.     tQ    lmderstan(1    the     pcrfccfc    latitudc 

and  compass  of  the  commandment ;  so  by  length 
we  arc  to  understand  the  answcrablcness  of  the 
obedience  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  ;  for  indeed 
the  perfection  of  Christian  obedience  lietli  in  an 
answcrableness  to  the  will  of  God;  as  it  is  said  of 
the  father  and  mother  of  John  the  Baptist,  they 
walked  in  all  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 
blameless.  la  i.  6.  And  of  Anna,  that  she  con- 
tinued without  ceasing  in  the  service  of  God  in  the 
temple  day  and  night.  Lu.  a  37.  This  is  to  be  as 
long  in  our  obedience,  as  the  law  is  broad  in  com- 
manding. The  law  commands  right  obedience,  and 
the  Christian  giveth  it ;  the  law  commands  continual 
obedience,  and  the  Christian  giveth  it ;  the  law  com- 
mands universal  obedience,  and  the  Christian  giveth 
it.  He  giveth  it  all  these  sorts  of  obedience,  1.  By 
the  person  of  Christ,  for  he  is  his  righteousness, 
l  Co.  i.  so.  He  giveth  it  all  these,  2.  With  the  con- 
sent of  the  mind.  Eo.  vfi.  ig.  And  3.  He  giveth  it 
all  these  obediences  in  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  which 
the  apcstle  calleth  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  that  is, 
an  answering  the  breadth  of  its  command  by  the 
length  of  obedience.  Bo.  xiii.  10.  Wherefore  when 
he  saith  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth,  he 
would  have  us  understand  how  perfect  in  holiness 
these  blessed  souls  will  be  at  this  day ;  and  indeed, 
this  is  it  that  is  by  God  expected  to  be  in  this  city 
at  this  day.  As  the  angel  with  his  measuring- 
line  said  to  Zcchariah,  I  am  going  '  to  measure 
Jerusalem,  to  see  what  is  the  breadth  thereof,  and 
what  is  the  length  thereof.'  Zee.  ft  ?.  To  see 
whether  their  doctrine  be  pure,  and  whether  their 
obedience  be  answerable. 

•  And  he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  twelve 
A  second  mea-  thousand  furlongs.'  These  latter 
sure.  Words  do  refer  us  to  a  distinct  mea- 
sure from  that  which  went  before ;  the  former 
measure  pointing  at  the  breadth  of  her  command- 
ment and  the  length  of  her  obedience,  but  this  at 
the  glory  and  fulness  of  her  mansions  and  por- 
tions ;  for  after  he  had  said  the  city  lieth  four- 
square,   and  that  the  length  is  as  large  as   the 


breadth,  which  is  the  full  and  complete  effect  of 
that  first  measure,  he  comes  over  again  with  an- 
other measuring,  saying,  •  And  he  measured  the 
city,  -twelve  thousand  furlongs ;'  as  who  should 
say,  he  measured  the  city,  gates  and  wall  first,  and 
found  them  all  exact,  and  according  to  the  golden 
reed ;  and  after  he  had  so  done,  he  measured  the 
city  with  the  reed  twelve  thousand  furlongs. 

'  He  measured  the  city  with  the  reed ;'  that  is, 
he  measured  out  to  the  city,  he  mea-    .        . 

J  A  portion  mea- 

sured  for    the   city,    for   its   lot   and     wired  out  for 

portion,  twelve  thousand  furlongs. 
Which  very  thing  you  find  in  the  vision  of  the 
prophet  Ezekiel;  for  after  he  had  measured  the 
city,  the  vessels,  with  the  instruments  of  worship, 
I  say,  when  he  had  done  this,  he  come3  again 
with  an  afterwards,  to  measure  the  city,  her  por- 
tions and  mansions.  Eze.  xivii.  l,  &c.  Wherefore  I 
say,  these  words  do  refer  to  her  portion  that  she 
is  to  enjoy  of  her  God,  as  the  former  referrcth  to 
her  duty  and  obedience. 

Now  that  which  maketh  me  conclude  that  this 
latter  measure  is  a  measure  distinct  from  the  for- 
mer, and  that  it  relateth  neither  to  the  exactness 
of  rule,  nor  the  completeness  of  obedience,  but  only 
to  the  largeness  of  the  portions  that  God  will  allot 
for  thy  sons  and  daughters,  thou  city  of  God ;  it  is, 

First,  Because  this  is  the  biggest  measure.  For 
I  find,  by  considering  the  Scripture,  that  as  the 
persons  and  things  pertaining  to  the  worship  of 
God  were  to  go  according  to  the  rule  of  this  golden 
reed,  so  also  the  portions  that  pertained  to  the 
persons  worshipping  were  to  go  by  rule  and  mea- 
sure also,  as  here  he  saith  he  measured  also  the 
city,  or  to  it,  with  the  reed,  twelve  thousand  fur- 
longs. And  hence  it  is  that  our  grace  is  called 
the  measure  of  grace,  and  that  our  glory  is  called 

a  weight  of  glory.    Eo.  xii.  3.  Ep.  it.  7.  2  Co.  IV.  17. 

Now  I  say,  I  find  that  our  portions  do  go  always 
under  the  biggest  measure ;  the  spoons,  cups, 
flagons,  snuffers,  basons,  candlesticks,  and  pans, 
which  were  the  instruments  of  worship,  were  not 
so  large  as  the  chambers  in  the  temple,  and  the 
compass- of  the  holy  land,  which  were  the  mansions 
and  [the]  portions  of  the  church.   See  Jos.  xv.—wl 

Jn.  xiv.  1 — 3. 

Secondly,  I  take  the  twelve  thousand  furlongs  to 
signify  portions,  rather  than  worship  or  worship- 
pers ;  because,  as  to  the  nature  of  it,  it  most 
exactly  agrees  with  the  portions  that  are  measured 
out  to  this  city  by  the  angel  before  Ezekiel,  which 
is  a  measuring  forth  so  much  land  for  the  portion 
of  the  prince,  so  much  for  the  portion  of  the  priest, 
and  so  much  for  the  portion  of  the  twelve  tribes. 
Yea,  the  very  phrase,  twelve  thousand  furlongs, 
also  implieth  such  a  compass  of  ground,  by  which 
we  find  the  holy  land  hath  been  measured.  Eze.  ilr. 

slvi.  slvii.  Lu.  xxiv.  13.  Jn.  xi.  18. 


424 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  OR 


Lastly,  I  talce  it  to  be  tins  also ;  because  I  find 
not  in  all  this  description  of  this  holy  city  that 
any  place  doth  give  us  that  ground  to  speak  to 
her  measure  of  portion  as  this ;  and  it  would  seem 
strange  to  me  that  the  description  of  this  city 
given  by  Ezekiel  should  be  more  complete  than 
this  that  is  given  by  our  prophet  John ;  for  Eze- 
kiel doth  most  amply  set  forth  her  portions,  even 
distinctly,  for  prince,  priest,  and  the  tribes  in  par- 
ticular. This  therefore  is  to  be  understood  of  the 
portions  of  the  city  which  John  did  see  were  mea- 
sured out  unto  her  immediately  after  he  saw  the 
breadth  of  her  rule  and  the  length  of  her  obe- 
dience. Only  consider  that  Ezekiel  measureth  by 
reeds,  not  counting  by  furlongs  ;  but  John,  though 
he  measureth  by  reeds,  yet  counteth  by  furlongs. 

But  now,  though  the  Holy  Ghost  is  thus  pleased 
to  speak  of  the  portions  of  the  saints  in  the  New 
Jerusalem,  as  if  he  intended  chiefly  that  their 
portion  should  consist  in  outward  happiness,  and 
in  the  enjoyment  of  such  and  such  a  portion  or 
compass  of  ground :  yet  consider  that  these  are 
but  metaphorical  and  borrowed  expressions,  spoken 
to  our  capacities,  under  which  is  indeed  included 
the  nature  of  our  blessed  and  spiritual  food  and 
nourishment.  You  know  it  is  usual  for  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  Scripture  to  call  the  saints  sheep,  lambs, 
heifers,  cows,  rams,  doves,  swallows,  pelicans,  and 
the  like ;  and  also  to  call  their  food,  their  spiritual 
and  heavenly  food,  grass,  provender,  wheat,  wine, 
oil,  grapes,  apples,  figs,  nuts,  and  the  like  also ; 
all  which  are  but  skadowish  and  figurative  expres- 
sions,  even  as  this  of  the  measure  of  the  twelve 

thousand  furlongs.  Jn.  x.  15,  16.  Am.  iv.  3.  Je.  xxxi.  18.  Ca. 
ii.  ro.  Eze.  xxxiv.  14.  Zee.  x.  1.  Is.  xxx.  24.  Mi.  iv.  i.  And  ob- 
serve it,  that  which  John  saith  here  is  twelve 
thousand  furlongs,  Ezekiel  tells  us  it  lieth  on  this 
side  and  on  that  side  of  the  bank  of  the  river  of 
the  water  of  life.  Eze.  xivii.  8,  9.  Now  I  think  there 
is  none  so  much  void  of  understanding  as  to  think 
this  water  of  life  is  anything  else  but  the  precious 
grace  of  God,  in  and  through  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Wherefore  the  ground  or  measure  for  portions,  it 
is  nothing  else  but  our  spiritual  and  heavenly 
food,  even  spiritual  grace,  and  gifts,  and  com- 
forts, that  the  holy  ones  of  this  city  shall  most 
plentifully  partake  of  and  enjoy.  And  so  in- 
deed the  prophet  also  saith,  speaking  of  the 
portions  of  the  holy  land  for  this  city.  *  The 
increase  thereof,'  saith  he,  '  shall  be  for  food  unto 
them  that  serve  the  city,  and  they  that  serve  the 
city  shall  serve  it  out  of  all  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel.'  Eze.  xiviii.  is,  13.  Out  of  the  twelve  tribes, 
that  is,  out  of  the  twelve  thousand  furlongs, 
which  is  the  portion  of  the  tribes.  This  is  accord- 
ing to  the  saying  of  the  prophet  David,  '  He 
maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures,  he  lead- 
eth  me  beside  the  still  waters.'   Ps.  xxiii.  2.     And 


again,  •  For  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto 
living  fountains  of  waters.'  Re.  vii.  17.  'For  your 
shame,  ye  shall  have  double ;  and  for  confusion, 
they  shall  rejoice  in  their  portion:  therefore  in 
their  land  they  shall  possess  the  double ;  everlasting 
joy  shall  be  unto  them.'  is.  ixi.  7. 

Thus  you  see  the  measure  of  the  city,  gates, 
and  wall,  and  the  effect  of  that ;  and  thus  you  see 
also  the  measure  of  the  portion  for  the  city,  with 
what  it  is:  wherefore  it  remaineth  that  we  see 
what  is  to  be  the  effect  of  that  also. 

'  And  he  measured  the  city  with  a  reed,  twelve 
thousand  furlongs,  the  length  and  the  breadth  and 
the  height  of  it  are  equal.'  Before  he  told  us 
that  the  length  was  as  large  as  the  breadth,  which 
I  then  told  you  did  signify  the  nature  of  her  rule 
and  the  measure  of  her  obedience.  But  now  he 
adds  and  saith,  that  both  in  length  and  breadth 
and  in  height  she  is  equal.  Wherefore  in  that  he 
adds  at  last  a  squareness  of  height  to  her  squareness 
of  length  and  breadth ;  and  also  in  that  he  adds  it 
not  before  he  had  told  us  of  the  measure  of  her 
portions,  he  would  have  us  to  understand  that  as 
the  rule  in  which  this  city  shall  walk  shall  be  com- 
plete, and  as  her  obedience  to  that  rule  shall  be 
complete,  so  her  enjoyment  of  God  and  his  grace 
at  that  day  shall  be  proportionable  also.  She  is 
square  in  her  rule,  square  in  her  obedience,  and 
square  in  her  enjoyment  of  God  and  his  goodness : 
the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it 
are  equal.  Indeed  the  Scripture  saith,  that  in 
keeping  his  commandments  there  is  great  reward. 
Ps.  xix.  11.  And  again,  '  This  man  shall  be  blessed 
in  his  deed. '  Ja.  i.  25.  This  showeth  unto  us  then 
what  glorious  days  these  will  be  to  the  house  and 
city  of  God,  even  days  in  which  saints  shall  see 
the  mind  of  God  clearly,  have  hearts  to  do  it  com- 
pletely, and  have  continually  the  answerable  en- 
joyment of  God  and  spiritual  happiness.  Now  will 
his  paths  drop  fatness  with  a  witness !  Ps.  lxv.  11. 
And  now  will  he  meet  *  him  that  rejoiceth  and 
worketh  righteousness,  tlwse  that  remember  thee 
in  thy  ways. '  is.  lxiv.  5.  And  the  length  and  the 
breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal.  Where- 
fore the  prophet  in  the  vision  of  the  measures  of 
the  portions  doth  observe  that  there  was  a  square- 
ness in  them,  as  well  as  in  their  ordinances  and 
obedience:  and  hence  it  is  that  he  tells  us  that 
every  little  chamber  was  one  reed  broad  and  one 
reed  long.  Eze.  xl.  7.  And  again,  the  oblation,  that 
is,  the  portion  for  the  tribes,  shall  be  five  and 
twenty  thousand.  Eze.  xiviii.  20.  By  five  and  twenty 
thousand  ye  shall  offer  the  holy  oblation  four 
square,  with  the  portion  of  the  city. 

Again,  In  that  he  saith  the  length  and  the  breadth, 
and  the  height  of  it  are  equal,  he  showeth  us  how 
fit  this  city  at  this  day  will  be  even  for  the  king- 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


42E 


dom  of  heaven  and  glory.  For  observe,  that  as 
the  rule,  obedience,  and  comforts  of  God,  do  make 
this  city  a  square  city,  both  in  height,  and  length, 
and  breadth;  so  the  holiest  of  all,  which  was  a 
type  of  heaven,  lie.  u.  24.,  was  of  the  same  fashion 
also.  It  was  twenty  cubits  bigb,  and  twenty 
cubits  long,  and  twenty  cubits  broad :  the  lengtb, 
and  tho  breadth,  and  the  height  of  it  were  equal. 

1  Ki.  vi.  20  ;  2  Ch.  iii.  8  ;  Eze.  xli.  4. 

"Wherefore,  as  now  the  will  of  God  will  be  done, 
according  to  the  petition,  *  on  earth  as  it  is  in 
heaven;'  Mat.vi.  io;  so  will  this  city  be  at  this  day  fit 
to  enter  into  the  holiest  place ;  even  as  fit  as  one 
four  square  is  to  shut  into  another.  Here  is  a 
four  square  city  for  a  four  square  heaven;  and  the 
length  and  the  breadth  of  it  are  equal.  Where- 
fore it  is  upon  this  account  that  this  city,  at  her 
appearing,  is  said  to  be  adorned  and  prepared  as 
a  bride  is  for  her  husband,  which  we  all  know  is 
the  most  perfect  and  completest  attire  that  is  pos- 
sible to  be  got.  And  therefore  it  is,  again,  that  at 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  those  that  go  in  with  him 
to  the  marriage  are  said  to  be  ready  beforehand. 

He.  xxi.  2  ;  Mat.  xxv.  10. 

Verse  17.  'And  he  measured  the  wall  thereof, 

an   hundred   and  forty  and  four  cubits.'     This 

measure  of  the  wall  that  here  he  maketh  mention 

of  is   also  distinct  from  the  former 

A  third  measure.  ,  ,       .  .  ,   , 

measure,  where  he  is  said  to  measure 
the  city,  gates,  and  wall ;  and  it  refers  to  such  a 
wall,  or  to  such  a  part  of  the  wall  in  such  a  place. 
For  I  find  that  though  the  wall  of  this  city  in 
general  is  that  which  shall  encompass  the  New 
Jerusalem  round,  yet  this  Avail  is  in  some  place, 
and  for  some  reason,  of  another  manner  and  mea- 
sure than  the  wall  is  in  general,  as  it  compasseth 
round  the  city,  which  part  of  the  wall  is  called  the 
broad  wall,  the  wall  upon  which  even  half  of  the 
people  might  walk  complete  at  once.  Ke.  iii.  8;  xii.  38. 
But  to  trace  out  the  business  in  the  type,  and 
so  to  come  to  its  answer  in  the  antitype ;  I  find 
that  a  little  distance  from  Jerusalem  there  was  a 
place  called  Tophet,  which  place  was  counted  pro- 
fane, unholy,  or  defiled.  2  Ki.  xxiii.  io.  I  find  also 
that  this  unclean,  unholy  place,  was  a  figure  of 
hell  itself,  is.  xxx.  33.  Now  mark,  I  find  by  the 
Scripture  that  against  this  Tophet,  this  unholy 
A  i»road  wall  and  profane  place,  was  the  broad  wall 

tTke'ep^the  °f  the  CltJ  f°r  the  ^feilCe  of  the  sane- 
sanctuary,  tuary  erected,  and  reared  up.  He 
measured,  saith  the  prophet,  by  the  four  sides, 
and  it  had  a  wall  round  about,  five  hundred  reeds 
long,  and  five  hundred  reeds  broad,  '  To  make  a 

SEPARATION     BETWEEN     THE     SANCTUARY     AND     THE 

profane  place.'  Eze.  xUi.  20.  "Which  wall  could  not 
be  that  wall  which  compasseth  the  city,  because  it 
was  but  five  hundred  reeds  long:  for  take  the 
measure  of  this  wall  in  its  largest  measure,  and  it 

VOL.  III. 


is,  if  you  count  a  reed  for  that  which  we  count  a 
pole,  but  twelve  furlongs,  which  compass  will 
scarce  go  round  many  market  towns;  especially 
if,  together  with  this,  you  consider  the  breadth  of 
the  wall,  whose  breadth  is  as  large  as  its  length ; 
wherefore  now  there  is  not  room  enough  for  a  city 
so  big  as  a  cottage  to  stand  in  the  midst  thereof. 
I  speak  this,  to  show  you  that  the  wall  in  this 
place  is  not  tho  wall  that  goeth  round  about  the 
city,  but  the  Avail  that  is  placed  just  between  the 
sanctuary  and  Tophet,  or  hell  itself.  Now  though 
Ezekiel  and  John  do  differ  touching  their  count 
about  the  thickness  of  this  Avail,  it  is  not  so  much 
to  signify  the  Avails  are  not  one  and  the  same,  as 
to  show  us  that  the  one,  to  Avit,  Ezekiel's  Avail, 
Avas  to  encompass  a  Avorldly  sanctuary,  but  John's 
to  encompass  a  spiritual  and  heavenly ;  Avherefore 
Ezekiel's  must  be  of  so  many  reeds  long  to  go 
round  about  the  material  sanctuary,  as  a  type ; 
but  John  comes  more  to  the  spirit  of  the  matter, 
and  showeth  us  Avhat  the  sanctuary,  wall,  and  the 
like  should  mean ;  for  by  sanctuary  avc  are  to 
understand,  even  in  the  Old  Testament,  a  place  of 
safety  and  security,  which  Avas  a  type  of  Christ. 
Eze.  xi.  16;  He.  vi.  18.  Now  in  that  Tophet  did  stand 
against  the  sanctuary  in  the  letter,  it  signifies  that 
hell  itself  is  bent  against  all  those  that  take  shelter 
in  Christ ;  but  to  no  purpose,  for  in  the  very  face 
of  Tophet,  even  between  it  and  our  place  of  sanc- 
tuary, is  fixed  an  invincible  and  impregnable 
mighty  wall,  to  keep  in  safety  those  that  have  fled 
to  Christ  for  shelter.  Noav  I  say,  in  that  John  tells 
us  this  wall  is  an  hundred  and  forty-   ___  „ . 

„  .  .  .  .  ,  J       Why  this   wall 

four  cubits,  and  Avaives  the  manner  is  said  to  be 
of  the  measure  of  Ezekiel,  it  is  to 
show  us  that  this  Avail  is  for  the  safety  of  the 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  that  have  taken 
sanctuary  in  Christ,  that  is,  all  the  holy  and  truly 
gracious  souls  that  are  Avith  him  on  the  Mount 
Zion,  having  his  Father's  name  written  in  their 
foreheads,  Re.  vii ;  xiv.  l— 3.  Both  numbers,  I  say, 
being  twelve  times  twelve,  implying  a  sufficient 
safety  for  all  that  are  sincerely  and  truly  gra- 
cious. 

And  iioav  to  bring  doAvn  the  matter  to  our  New 
Jerusalem  state:  for  though  it  be  true  in  all  ages, 
that  there  is  between  those  that  have  taken  sanc- 
tuary in  Christ,  and  the  bottomless  pit,  an  invin- 
cible and  mighty  wall  of  grace  and  heavenly 
power,  and  of  the  merits  of  Christ,  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  all  and  every  one  that  are  thus  fled 
to  him  for  safety,  He.  vii.  25, 26,  yet  there  is  some- 
thing in  it  more  than  this,  for  those  that  come 
into  the  days  and  state  of  the  2\ew  Jerusalem. 
For,  I  say,  this  wall  being  it  that  makes  a  sepa- 
ration between  the  sanctuary  and  the  profane 
place  in  general,  and  yet  being  spoken  of  as  a 
thing  extraordinary,  and  accompanying  the  state 

54 


426 


TPIE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


of  this  new  city  only,  it  implieth  that  at  this  day 
The  profit  of  the  tue  saints  shall  have  that  fhclter  by 

broad  wall.       {$&    wa]l    from    aU    the    force    Qf   j^ 

and  the  damned  spirits  that  now  from  Tophet  afflict 
them,  that  they  never  had  before.  And  therefore 
you  find  at  the  beginning-  of  the  thousand  years, 
which,  as  I  conceive,  is  the  time  of  the  building 
of  this  city,  a  mighty  angel  is  said  to  come  down 
from  heaven  to  lay  hold  of  the  dragon,  that  old 
serpent,  called  the  devil  and  Satan,  and  to  bind 
him  a  thousand  years ;  which  done,  he  casts  him 
into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  there  shuts  him  up, 
to  the  eud  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more. 
Be.  xx.  1—3.  The  effect  of  which  will  he  not  only  a 
delivering  of  the  saints  from  outward 

Fntan  bound  as  ?       _     „      ,        ,  ,     . 

deceiver,  per-  persecution,  but  also  from  being  any 
?empterr  ^to  more  assailed  with  either  wicked  and 
hlaspfeemjand   erroneous  doctrine,  or  fierce  and  fiery 

unbelief.  J 

darts  from  the  prince  of  darkness, 
which  now  many  of  them  are  so  much  annoyed 
and  afflicted  with;  now  the  church  will  be  free 
from  those  hellish  suggestions  to  blaspheme,  to 
despair,  and  the  like,  that  her  members  do  yet 
most  dreadfully  and  sadly  meet  with.  For  observe, 
this  old  tempter  is  said  to  be  tied  up,  or  to  be  cast 
into  the  bottomless  pit,  first  as  he  is  a  dragon, 
under  which  name  he  goeth  in  this  book,  in  his 
persecuting  the  church.  Rev.  xii.  Secondly,  he  is 
said  to  be  shut  up,  as  he  goeth  under  the  name 
of  a  serpent,  under  which  name  he  went  when  he 
fomented  his  devilish  and  damning  seducing  doc- 
trine to  our  first  parents;  the  which  the  Spirit 
expressly  seems  to  relate  unto,  and  therefore  calls 
him  that  old  serpent;  that  old  serpent  that  de- 
ceived us  at  the  first.  Ge.iii.  l— 5.  Thirdly,  he  is 
said  to  he  shut  up  also,  as  he  goeth  under  the 
name  of  the  devil,  and  Satan,  under  which  name 
he  goeth  commonly  in  the  New  Testament,  when 
he  provoketh  and  stirreth  up  our  lusts,  and  when 
he  labours  to  drive  us  into  all  manner  of  unbelief, 
distrust,  despair,  and  so  consequently  into  mur- 
murings  and  blasphemy  against  God.  Mat.  iv.  1,  5,  s ; 
i.u.  iv.  ->-c ;  Ac.  v.  1-3 ;  Ep.  vi.  ii ;  2  Cor.  ii.  7,  ii.  Wherefore, 
I  say,  that  at  the  day  that  this  wall  is  set  up  in 
all  its  glory,  and  when  it  performs  every  part  and 
piece  of  its  office  to  the  full,  then  shall  Satan  be 
bruised  under  our  feet  indeed,  and  then  shall 
Jerusalem  be  called  the  joyous  city,  and  her 
people  a  joy;  for  her  former  sorrows  shall  be  past 

and  forgot.    Ho.  xvi.  20  ;  He.  xxi.  4. 

If  thou  still  objectest:   But  I  have  yet  an  evil 

heart,  and  therefore  if  I  be  not  rid  of  that  at  that 

.  day,  should  I  live  till  then,  why  though 

Objection.         ,  i        i  i    ,  .,  J    "uuoxi 

there  should  be  no  devil  to  afflict  me, 

I   shall  feel  and   meet,  with   sorrow  and  trouble 

enough.     I  answer  thee  :  First,  I  dare 

not  say  that  at  this  day  thou  shalt 

be  in  every  sense  without  thy  evil  heart  in  the 


midst  of  all  this  glory,  tempted  soul.     Yet  I  say 
thus  much  to  thee — 

First.  Where  there  is  no  devil  to  tempt,  though 
the  saints  will  }ret  be  imperfect,  and  The  benefit  of 
come  short  of  a  glorified  state,  yet  fiSfft  ft 
they,  by  his  absence,  will  be  delivered  "S- 
from  many  dreadful,  vexing,  and  burning,  and  hellish 
darts,  that  will  otherwise  confound  and  afflict  the 
soul  like  arrows  whose  heads  are  poisoned.  Chris- 
tians have  a  great  deal  of  ease,  when  God  doth, 
even  at  this  day,  withhold  the  devil  for  a  season, 
though  yet  they  have  their  own  lusts,  over  they 
have  when  the  devil  and  their  own  lusts  are  suffered 
to  meet  and  work  together.  Yea,  the  Lord  Jesus 
himself,  who  had  no  sin,  yet  in  the  temptation  was 
fearfully  handled  and  afflieted  with  the  devil,  though 
all  the  while,  I  say,  he  kept  him  at  staves  end,1  and 
did  not  suffer  him  in  the  least  to  annoy  his  person; 
and  therefore  it  is  said  that  when  he  was  in  the 
wilderness,  in  the  conflict,  the  angels  came  to 
minister  to  him.  Mar.  i.  12, 13.  Col.  ii.  14, 15.  At  the 
time  of  his  agony  also — in  which  agony,  doubtless, 
Satan  had  a  great  hand  to  afflict  him — you  see  his 
complaint,  how  that  he  was  sore  amazed,  and 
exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death,  being  so 
laden  with  heaviness  and  sorrow  that  he  was 
scarce  able  to  stand  or  wag  under  the  burden  of 
it.  Ln.  xxiii.  44.  Mar.  xiv.  33,  34.  Satan,  even  from  him- 
self, besides  the  workings  of  our  own  lust,  doth  do 
us  wonderful  injury,  and  hits  our  souls  with  many 
a  fiery  dart  that  we  think  comes  either  from  our- 
selves, or  from  heaven,  and  God  himself;  but  now 
by  this  wall,  this  broad  wall,  this  sorrow  will  be 
cut  off.- 

Secondly.  Again,  when  Satan  is  thus  tied  up, 
we  shall,  together  with  this  mercy,  receive  such  a 
plentiful  pouring  forth  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that 
though  there  will  remain  in  us  still  Covruptions  shall 
remainders  of  our  corruptions,  yet,  HwaWbegnafr 
by  the  plentiful  indwelling  of  the  3  w  ' 
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  joy  and  peace  and  heavenly 
sweetness  thereof,  these  things  shall  lie  like  lean, 
withered,  blasted  things.  The  reason  of  that  power 
and  that  strength,  that  our  lusts  have  to  this  day 
in  our  hearts,  it  is  because  they  are  so  lean,  and 
thin,  and  weak  in  the  things  of  God.  Strong  grace 
makes  corruptions  weak,  and  strikes  them  thorough, 
laying  them  at  the  point  of  death,  always  gasping 
for  life.  Thus  it  was  with  Moses,  he  had  such  grace 
in  his  soul,  and  such  communion  with  God,  that 
though  he  had  yet  a  body  of  sin  within  him,  it 
was  a  rare  thing  for  him  to  see  his  wretchedness ; 
Xu.  xi.  14, 15;  that  is,  to  sec  it  pert,  lively,  and 
powerful  in  him.  Indeed  God  saith,  that  upon 
the  land  of  his  people  shall  come  up  briars  and 


1  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  ancient  English  pastime  of 
comhat,  called  quarterstaff. — (Ed.) 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


427 


thorns ;  '  yea,  upon  all  the  houses  of  joy  in  the 
joyous  city ;  hecause  the  palaces  shall  be  forsaken, 
the  multitude  of  the  city  shall  bo  left,  the  forts 
and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever,  a  joy  of  wild 
asses,  a  pasture  of  flocks;  until  the  Spirit  be 
poured  upon  us  from  ou  high,  and  the  wilderness 
be  a  fruitful  field,'  &c.  fc.xaoii.B-*.  And  then 
'the  Lord  shall  defend  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa- 
lem, and  he  that  is  feeble  among-  them  at  that  day 
shall  be  as  David,  and  the  house  of  David  shall  be 
as  God,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them.' 
Zee.  xii.  s.  '  The  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am 
sick;  the  people  that  dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven 
their  iniquity.'   fc.  xaSL  U. 

'  And  he  measured  the  wall  thci'eof,  an  hundred 
and  forty  and  four  cubits,  according  to  the  measure 
of  a  man,  that  is,  of  the  angel.'  'According  to 
the  measure  of  a  man.'  The  man  Christ  Jesus. 
For  the  measure  of  this  city,  or  the  golden  reed 
with  which  this  city  is  thus  measured,  it  is  his, 
his  word  and  law  of  the  New  Testament.  All 
judgment  is  committed  into  the  hand  of  the  Son ; 
and  God  '  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute 
judgment    also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man.' 

Jn.  v.  27  ;  xii.  48. 

1  According  to  the  measure  of  a  man,  that  is,  of 
the  angel.'  This  angel  is  one  of  the  seven  that 
had  the  seven  last  plagues  to  execute  upon  the 
man  of  sin,  Re.  xxi.  9,  and  yet  he  saith  the  measure 
is  accordiug  to  the  measure  of  a  man ;  the  meaning 
is  that  the  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  is  to  be  built 
according  to  the  word  of  Christ ;  but  yet  by  his 
word  as  it  is  in  the  hand  of  his  angels,  that  is,  his 
messengers  and  servants ;  of  which  servants,  the 
chief  will  be  those  that  are  his  instruments  to  pour 
forth  the  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues 
upon  the  Antichristian  harlot.  For  they,  with 
their  plagues,  will  both  destroy  what  standeth  in 
implacable  opposition,  and  will  subject  the  rest, 
and  bring  them  into  a  correspondency  with  the 
word  and  will  of  God,  as  I  have  showed.  Whence 
note,  that  they  of  his  servants  that  God  shall  use 
to  pour  forth  his  last  and  most  dreadful  plagues 
upon  the  whore,  they  are  they  that  God  will  use 
to  show  us  the  pattern  of  this  holy  city.  Or  thus, 
they  that  can  tell  how  to  plague  the  whore,  they 
can  tell  how  to  measure  this  city.  '  The  righteous 
men,  they  shall  judge  them,'  that  is,  the  Anti- 
christian harlot,  witli  her  wicked  and  adulterous 
daughters,  '  after  the  maimer  of  adulteresses,  aud 
after  the  manner  of  women  that  shed  blood;  be- 
cause they  arc  adulteresses,  and  blood  is  in  their 
hands.'  Eze.  iiia.  45. 

Thus  much  touching  the  frame  of  this  city,  its 
walls,  gates,  and  foundations,  with  the  measure  of 
each.  And  now  it  remains  that  I  speak  of  the 
glory  of  them. 


[THIRD.       A    RELATION'    OF    THE    GLORY    OF    THE 
CITY,   ITS  WALLS,  GATES,  AND  FOUNDATION'S.] 

Ver.  ]  S.  '  And  the  building  of  the  Avail  of  it 
was  of  jasper;  and  the  city  vns  pure  gold,  like 
unto  clear  glass.' 

[Tlic  glory  of  the  toalls.] 

In  these  words  you  have  a  discovery  cf  the 
glory,  both  of  the  wall  and  city  itself;  The  glory  of  the 
and  that,  as  you  see,  under  the  notion  u',lls- 

of  two  choice  metaphors.  The  wall  is  jasper,  the 
chief  of  stones ;  and  the  city  is  gold,  the  chief  of 
metals.  *  And  the  building  of  the  wall  of  it  was 
of  jasper,  and  the  city  was  pure  gold.' 

This  jasper  is  that  stone,  in  the  light  of  which 
this  city  is  said  to  descend,  as  in  the  light  of  a 
stone  most  precious.  Now,  as  there  he  saith  she 
descended  in  the  light  of  this  stone,  so  here  he 
saith  this  stone  is  the  wall  thereof.  ■  And  the 
building  of  the  wall  of  it  was  of  jasper.' 

This  therefore  confirmeth  unto  you  what  I  said 
of  the  wall  before,  to  wit,  that -it  was  the  salvation 
of  God  through  Christ;  wherefore,  learn  this  by 
the  way,  that  this  city  shall  not  be  at  this  day  in 
her  own  keeping,  but  in  the  keeping  of  Jesus  Christ. 
He  with  his  benefits  doth  compass  her  round,  and 
by  him  alone  she  lieth  down  in  safety.  Where- 
fore it  is  from  this  consideration  that  God  doth  say 
by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  I  will  give  them 
within  my  house,  and  within  my  walls,  '  a  place  and 
a  name  better  than  that  of  sons  and  of  daughters  ; 
I  will  give  them  an  everlasting  name  that  shall  not 
be  cut  off. '    Is.  Ivi.  5. 

'  And  the  building  of  the  wall,'  <5:c.  By  this 
word  building,  we  are  to  understand  both  the 
materials  of  the  wall,  the  manner  of  their  placing, 
and  the  instruments  that  God  will  use  for  the  set- 
ting up  thereof.  Now,  to  speak  properly,  this 
wall  being  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  in  his 
precious  merits,  benefits,  and  offices,  the  builder 
hereof  must  needs  be  God  himself,  for  he  it  is  that 
hath  made  this  Christ  for  us  a  safeguard  and 
defence,  by  making  of  him  our  wisdom,  righteous- 
ness, sanctification,  and  redemption,  by  which  he 
doth  encompass  us  round  on  every  side,  and  that 
at  every  moment  to  deliver  us  from  the  power  and 
destruction  both  of  sin,  death,  the  devil,  and  hell. 

1  Cor.  i.  00.  He.  xi.  10 ;  iii.  4. 

But  again,  the  building  here  spoken  of  is  a 
building  of  this  wall  after  the  destruction  of  Anti- 
christ, and  so  long  after  Christ  was  sent,  and  made 
these  things  in  his  own  person,  to  his  beloved  and 
blessed  church.  Wherefore  the  build-  The  building  of 
ing  of  this  wall  that  is  here  spoken  of, 
it  must  be  understood  of  the  recovering  again  tho 
purity  of  those  doctrines,  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus, 
with  all  his  benefits,  is  found  and  made  ours,  for 


428 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


our  everlasting  defence  and  safety.  For  we  find 
that  the  king  of  Babylon,  who  was  a  type  of  our 
Antichrist,  when  he  came  up  against  Jerusalem, 
the  type  of  our  primitive  church,  he  brake  down 
their  city,  destroyed  their  walls,  rifled  their  houses, 
and  killed  their  children ;  whose  steps,  I  say,  our 
Antichrist  follows  to  a  hair,  in  treading  down  the 
primitive  church,  corrupting  her  doctrines — which 
are  her  safeguard  and  wall — also  robbing  and 
spoiling  the  houses  of  God,  and  killing  his  chil- 
dren with  a  thousand  calamities ;  turning  all  the 
heavenly  frame  and  order  of  church  government 
into  a  heap  of  rubbish,  and  a  confused  dunghill. 

Ps.  lxxiv.  4—7. 

Wherefore  the  building  again  of  this  wall  is  to 
be  understood  of  the  recovering,  and  settling,  and 
fastening  the  doctrines  of  Christ,  as  afore,  in 
which  doctrines  lie  in  all  his  benefits  is  wrapped 
and  held  fast  for  ever.  I  say,  a  recovering  of 
them,  and  setting  him  up  again  in  his  primitive 
and  pure  glory,  of  being  our  priest,  prophet,  and 
king  in  his  church,  and  a  giving  unto  these  offices 
their  own  proper  length,  breadth,  height,  and 
depth,  letting  them  rule  in  all  their  force,  glory, 
and  majesty,  and  authority,  for  then  will  be  golden 
days,  and  not  till  then;  then,  I  say,  when  the 
several  offices  of  the  Lord  Jesus  do  rule  in  their 
own  nature  and  largeness  of  authority,  both  in  the 
church  and  in  the  world.  Zee.  ix.  i,  s ;  xiv.  9.  Re.  xi.  15. 

Alas !  this  wall  is  yet  unbuilt,  the  offices  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  do  not  yet  shine  in  that  purity,  nor  so 
stand  in  their  proper  places  as  they  shall  do  at  the 
coming  in  of  New  Jerusalem.  The  wall  lies  yet 
but  as  a  heap  of  rubbish ;  the  offices  of  the  Lord 
Christ  are  to  this  day  by  many  preachers  con- 
founded, and  removed  to  and  fro,  even  like  loose 
and  rolling  stones.  These  offices,  also,  are  by  others 
attributed  to  Antichrist,  and  his  children  of  iniquity ; 
but  at  this  day  the  nations  shall  know  themselves 
to  be  but  men,  and  the  doctrines  of  Christ  shall  be 
set  again  in  their  own  places.  Eze.xxviii.  2,  3.  2  Th.  a.  4. 
Now  shall  every  going  into  this  city,  and  every 
The  names  and   £°"lug  out  thereof,  stand  where  it 

t3Suf&  ou°llt '  and  no,v  shaU  eveiT  tower 
theunversofthis  and  fortress  on  this  wall  be  placed 
as  in  the  days  of  old  ;  which  towers 
and  fortresses  are  the  glorious  names  and  attributes 
of  the  Father  and  Christ;  for  the  name  of  the  Lord 
is  a  strong  tower,  the  righteous  flee  into  it,  and 
are  safe.  And  again,  thou  hast  been  a  shelter 
to  me,  and  a  strong  tower  from  the  enemy.  Where- 
fore now,  I  say,  shall  the  name  of  God,  as  Lord 
of  all,  and  Father  of  his  church,  with  the  names  of 
the  Son,  as  Head,  Saviour,  and  King  of  kino-s,  be 
as  the  bulwarks  to  this  city,  Ca.  i.  10.  to  which  shall 
be  added  all  the  promises,  consolations,  encourage- 
ments, <fcc,  in  the  blessed  book  of  God,  out  of 
which  this  city  continually  shall  suck  the  milk  and 


nourishment  of  the  unsearchable  grace  of  God  to 
them.  lPe.ii.i,  2.  To  all  which  shall  be  added 
many  new  pieces  of  timber  in  the  wall,  for  so  it 
was  in  the  type  at  the  rebuilding  of  the  city.  Ne.ii.8. 
By  which  new  pieces  I  gather,  that  the  special 
providence  of  God,  and  his  protection,  shall  be  at 
this  day  so  fastened  in  this  wall  for  the  complete 
delivering  of  this  city,  both  from  hell  and  earth, 
that  she  shall  stand  in  full  force,  safety,  and  peace, 
even  till  the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  be  no 
more.  Now,  when  this  wall  is  thus  set  up,  even 
every  truth  and  office  of  Christ  in  its  own  true 
natural  force,  about  this  city,  and  when  God,  in 
his  special  and  most  endeared  affections,  shall 
engage  himself,  even  everlastingly,  to  keep  this 
city  safe  from  all  storms  and  tempests,  and  trouble, 
and  sorrow,  then  shall  these  citizens,  as  a  sign  of 
their  conquest  both  of  hell  and  the  world,  even  set 
up  their  banners  on  the  several  towers  of  this  wall, 
and  the  standards  that  belong  to  the  tribes  thereof; 
then,  I  say,  *  we  will  rejoice  in  thy  salvation,'  0 
Lord,  '  and  in  the  name  of  our  God  will  we  set  up 
our  banners.'  Ps.  xx.  5.  And  then  The  saints  shall 
shall  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  Sn»  J^tiS 
both  wondering  and  tremblingly  say,  t°«'ers. 
'  Who  is  she  that  looketh  forth  as  the  morning, 
fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as 
an  army  with  banners  ? '  Ca.  vi.  10.  0  the  names  of 
God,  of  Christ,  of  his  offices,  and  the  power  of  his 
grace  and  promises !  How  will  they  shine  ?  In 
what  glory  will  they  appear?  They  will  be  even  as 
a  wall  of  fire  round  about  Jerusalem;  and  will  not 
be,  as  now,  in  the  mind  and  thought  of  the  people  as 
the  white  of  an  egg  in  the  mouth,  without  taste ; 
but  shall  be,  and  appear  in  their  own  brightness, 
sweetness,  and  grace.  '  For  how  great  is  his 
goodness,  and  how  great  is  his  beauty  ?  corn  shall 
make  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine  the 
maids.'  Zee. ix.  10.  'In  that  day  thou  shalt  say,  0 
Lord,  I  will  praise  thee ;  though  thou  wast  angry 
with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou 
comfortest  me.  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation ;  I 
will  trust  and  not  be  afraid ;  for  the  Lord  Jehovah 
is  my  strength,  and  my  song,  he  also  is  become 
my  salvation.'  is.  xii.  1,  2. 

For  the  workman,  I  am  sure,  God  is  the  prin- 
cipal, as  I  said  before ;  but  yet  he  will  do  it  by 
instruments,  through  the  guidance  of  his  Spirit. 
The  building  of  the  wall  of  old  was  of  God ;  but 
so  as  that  he  did  it  by  the  hand  of  Nehemiah  and 
his  companions.  I  do  observe,  in  the  completing 
of  the  city  of  Jerusalem  of  old,  that  there  was  first 
altar-work,  then  temple-work,  and  after  that  the 
building  of  the  wall  and  completing  the  city. 
Altar-work,  I  say,  was  the  first  which  Altar.work(  tem- 
was  reared,  and  on  which  there  were    pie-work,    und 

'  iii        city-work. 

offered,  according  to  the  law  and  holy 

custom,  the  sacrifices  and  offerings  bothmorning  and 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


429 


evening,  as  every  day  required.  '  T>ut  the  foundation 
of  the  temple  of  the  Lord  was  not  yet  laid.'  Ear.  m. 
i-c.  These  altar-nicn  were  those  also  that  after- 
ward built  the  temple  ;  hut  yet  by  them  was  first 
of  all  repaired  the  altar,  to  signify  that  the  first 
What  altar-  work  that  will  be  on  foot  at  the  begin- 
work  is.  tang  0f  t]ie  retum  of  the  Christians  from 
out  of  Antichristian  Babylon,  it  will  be  to  find  out 
altar-work,  that  is,  the  priestly  office  of  Christ, 
and  to  offer  by  him  the  prayers  and  supplications 
of  the  church  continually.  Ac.  xbt  9.  Wherefore 
these  altar-men,  or  these  men  in  their  altar-work, 
did  figure  out  for  us  our  famous  and  holy  worthies, 
that  before  us  have  risen  up  in  their  place,  and 
shook  off  those  relics  of  Antichrist  that  intrenched 
upon  the  priestly  office  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
even  worthy  Wickliff,  Huss,  Luther,  Melancthon, 
Calvin,  and  the  blessed  martyrs  in  Queen  Mary's 
days,  etc.,  with  the  rest  of  their  companions. 
These,  in  their  days,  were  stout  and  valiant  cham- 
pions for  God  according  to  their  light,  and  did 
upon  the  altar  of  God,  which  is  Christ  our  Lord, 
offer  up  many  strong  cries,  with  groans  and  tears, 
as  every  day  required,  for  the  complete  recovering 
of  the  church  of  God ;  the  benefit  of  whose  offering 
we  have  felt  and  enjoyed  to  this  day ;  but  by  this 
the  foundation  of  the   temple  was  not  yet  laid. 

Ezr.  iii.  6. 

Now  after  these  arise  another  people,  not  an- 
other with  respect  to  Christianity,  but  with  respect 
to  further  light.1  These  men,  though  they  keep 
the  continual  offerings  upon  the  altar,  as  the  other 
did,  yet  they  are  men  also  that  are  for  temple- 
work  ;  wherefore  these  begin  to  search  out  the 
foundations  of  the  temple  of  God,  that  they  may 
rear  up  the  house,  as  well  as  build  up  the  altar. 
These  be  they  that  are  for  having  the  church  a 
select  company  of  visible  believers,  walking  in  the 
faith  and  holiness  of  the  gospel,  which  believers 
are  for  separating  from  the  unconverted  and  open 
profane,  and  for  building  up  one  another  an  holy 
temple  in  the  Lord,  through  the  Spirit,  l  Co.  xh\  13. 

1  say,  a  temple,  or  house,  or  church,  separate  and 
distinct  from  that  confused  heap  of  rubbish  and 
carnal  gospellers  that  everywhere,  like  locusts  and 
maggots,  crawl  up  and  down  the  nations.    Ro.  i.  7. 

2  Co.  Ti.  14-16.  Ac.  ii.  40.  Ep.  ii.  21,  22.  1  Co.  v.  11-13.       These 

were  figured  forth  by  Zerubbabel,  Joshua,  and  all 


1  Bunyan  most  accurately  traces  the  pedigree  of  God's 
fearers,  who,  at  the  expense  of  life,  maintained  the  spirituality 
of  Divine  worship.  He  commences  with  our  early  Reformers, 
Wickliff  and  Huss,  to  the  later  ones  who  suffered  under  Mary; 
continues  the  line  of  descent  through  the  Puritans  to  Bunyan's 
brethren,  the  Nonconformists.  All  these  were  bitterly  perse- 
cuted by  the  two  lions — Church  and  State.  The  carnal  gos- 
pellers, that  confused  heap  of  rubbish  that  crawled  up  and 
down  the  nation  like  locusts  and  maggots,  refers  to  the  mem- 
bers of  a  hierarchy  which  were  ready  to  go  from  Popery  to 
Protestantism,  and  back  again  to  Popery,  or  to  any  other  sys- 
tem, at  the  bidding  of  an  Act  of  Parliament. — (Ed.) 


the  people  of  the  land  that  are  for  working  and 
labouring  in  this  service  of  temple-work.  Hog.  L  12; 

ii.  1-5. 

Again,  As  there  is  thus  altar-work  and  temple- 
work  to  be  done  by  the  saints  when  they  are  coming 
out  of  spiritual  Sodom  and  Egypt ;  so,  at  the  end 
of  these,  there  will  bo  city-work  on  foot  also. 
Which  city-work  will  chiefly  consist  in  setting  up 
the  wall  and  gates  for  defence,  and  of  building 
themselves  houses  or  mansions  of  rest  and  refresh- 
ment after  all  their  hard  usage  under  the  tyranny 
of  the  man  of  sin,  that  son  of  perdition,  is.  Uv.  19-21. 
Which  city  work  will  be  then  completed,  when  the 
church  of  Christ  hath  obtained  a  complete  conquest 
and  victory  over  the  world,  and  hath  got  her  ene- 
mies and  them  that  hate  her,  to  lie  at  her  feet,  and 
to  lick  the  dust  of  tho  soles  thereof,  is.  lx.  14  For, 
as  I  have  told  you  already,  temple-work,  yea, 
when  that  is  complete  in  the  work,  yet  there  may 
be  great  havoc  made  of  the  church  of  Christ. 
Re.  xi.  1—3.  At  which  time  also,  city-work  may  be 
trampled  under  the  feet  of  the  wicked  and  uncir- 
cumcised  Gentiles  ;  but  when  the  city  is  built,  then  1 
Zion  is  become  a  stronghold,  and  about  all  her 
glory  shall  be  a  defence,  is.  iv.  5.  Then  she  cither 
draweth  and  allure th  her  adversaries  to  entreat  her 
kindly,  and  to  count  it  their  honour  to  be  under 
her  protection,  as  did  the  Gibeonites ;  or  else  she 
breaks,  and  bruises,  and  subjects  them  to  her  by 
her  power  and  authority.  Jos.  ix.  '  The  daughter 
of  Tyre  shall  be  there  with  a  gift,  even  the  rich 
among  the  people  shall  entreat  thy  favour.'  Ps.  xiv.  12. 
'  In  the  last  days,'  saith  the  prophet,  '  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  that  the  mountain  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills ;  and 
people  shall  flow  unto  it.  And  many  nations  shall 
come  and  say,  -  Let  us  go  up  unto  the  mouutain 
of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob, 
and  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will  walk 
in  his  paths :  for  the  law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.  And 
he  shall  judge  among  many  people,  and  rebuke 
strong  nations  afar  off;  and  they  shall  beat  their 
swords  into  plough-shares,  and  their  spears  into 
pruning-hooks;'  that  force  and  power  that  they 
used  formerly  to  destroy  the  church  of  God,  now 
they  shall  use  it  to  do  her  service,  even  to  break 
up  the  clods  of  the  hearts  of  sinners,  and  to  prune 
and  dress  the  house  of  God,  and  vineyard  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  '  nation  shall  not  lift  up  a  sword  against 
nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  anymore;'  for 
the  word  of  the  kingdom  of  peace  shall  bear  sway. 
1  And  thou,  0  tower  of  the  flock,  the  stronghold  of 
the  daughter  of  Zion,  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even 
the  first  dominion ;  the  kingdom  shall  come  to  the 
daughter  of  Jerusalem.'  Mi.  iv.  1-3,  8.  This  is  city- 
work,  and  as  to  the  glory,  peace,  and  deliverance 


430 


THE  HOLY   CUT,  OK 


of  the  church,  it  is  the  chiefest  of  all  other,  because 
it  is  not  only  most  excellent  for  concourse  and 
multitude,  hut,  I  say,  for  preservation  and  safety ; 
and  that  not  only  to  keep  the  worshippers,  if  they 
keep  their  order,  hut  to  keep  the  order  and  wor- 
shippers both  in  order  and  continual  safety,  that 
they  may  be  for  ever  in  the  purest  order.  But 
now,  though  at  the  completing  of  this  wall,  and 
the  building  its  towers,  when  they  are  finished 
there  will  be  great  peace ;  yet  all  the  time  that 
these  things  are  doing,  before  they  be  done,  let  the 
workmen  look  for  opposition,  taunts,  underminers, 
and  a  thousand  tricks  for  the  hinderance  of  it. 
Be.  iv.  i-ii ;  vi.  l-H.  For  the  streets  of  the  city  shall 
be  built,  and  the  wall,  'even  in  troublous  times.' 

Da.  ix.  25. 

'  And  the  building  of  the  wall  of  it  was  of 
jasper.'  Of  jasper  only;  for  as  by  building  is 
showed  unto  us  the  manner  of  the  work,  so  by 
jasper  is  showed  unto  us  the  matter  itself;  the 
matter  therefore  must  be,  jasper,  Christ  only,  his 
AVord,  offices,  and  glorious  brightness  only ;  for 
indeed,  whatever  the  special  grace,  protection,  and 
providence  of  God  will  at  this  day  be  over  this  city, 
yet  it  shall  be  every  whit  of  it  according  to  Christ ; 
that  is,  both  of  him,  for  him,  and  by  him,  as  the 
fruits  and  effects  of  his  suffering,  bloodshed,  and 
merits.  'Therefore,'  saith  God,  'will  I  divide 
him  a  portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide 
the  spoil  with  the  strong ;  because  he  hath  poured 
out  his  soul  unto  death :  and  was  numbered  with 
the  transgressors. '  is.  Hi.  12.  0  holiness,  how  will 
it  shine  both  in  kings  and  nations,  when  God  doth 
this! 

[Tlie  glory  of  the  city.'] 

*  And  the  city  was  pure  gold.'     Having  thus 
The  glory  of  the   given  us  a  discovery  of  the  glory  of  the 
CIty-  wall,  he  now  comes  to  show  us  the 

glory  of  the  city  that  is  within  the  wall.  The  city, 
saith  he,  is  gold,  it  is  pure  gold.  This  was  figured 
out  by  the  golden  candlesticks  belonging  to  the 
tabernacle  and  temple  among  the  Jews,  which 
candlesticks  did  then  present  unto  us  the  worth 
and  use  of  the  church  of  Christ.  Ex.  xxv,  31-36.  '  The 
seven  candlesticks  are  the  seven  churches,'  saith 
the  Lord  Christ  himself.  Re.  i.  20.  Now  the  city 
here  spoken  of  is  the  church  in  her  highest  and 
greatest  glory.  Its  state  was  also  figured  out  by 
the  temple  itself,  whose  beams,  posts,  walls,  doors, 
and  the  like,  were  most  famously  covered  over  with 
gold.  2  Ch.  Hi.  5-7.  It  was  also,  though  but  leanly, 
represented  to  us  by  the  golden  state  of  old  Jeru- 
salem in  the  days  of  Solomon  the  king,  in  which 
state  gold  was  so  plentiful  in  the  midst  thereof, 
that  silver  was  nothing  counted  of  among  the 
citizens  there  in  those  days,  but  was  as  common  as 
the  stones  in  the  street  of  the  city.  2ci1.ix.13— 22,27. 


■  And  the  city  icas  pure  gold.'  I  find  by  the 
search  of  the  Scriptures,  that  there  are  divers 
sorts  of  gold  in  the  world  ;  there  is  the  gold  of  the 
land  of  Havilah,   Ge.  ii.  11 ;    the  gold  of  Parvaim, 

2  Ch.  iii.  C ;    the  gold  of  Ophir,  Joh  xxii.  24 ;    the  gold  of 

Sheba,  Fs.  lssH.  15 ;  and  the  gold  of  Uphaz.  Je.  x.  3: 
Now  seeing  he  saith  the  city  is  gold,  yet  not  dis- 
tinguishing what  gold,  or  which,  we  may  suppose 
in  this  place  he  means  gold  of  all  these  sorts;  and 
jndeed  it  is  most  agreeable  to  this  text  thus  to 
judges.  For  the  church  at  this  day  shall  be  made 
up  of  the  twelve  tribes  that  are  scattered  abroad, 
and  of  the  Gentile  nations  both  far  and  near;  who, 
as  they  now  lie,  are,  for  ought  I  can  learn,  at  as 
great  a  distance,  and  as  remote  from  one  another, 
not  only  in  knowledge  and  affections,  but  touching 
the  places  of  their  abode,  as  are  the  golden  mines 
out  of  which  the  gold  that  I  spake  of  before  is 
digged  and  fetched.  Thus  shall  gold,  the  golden 
saints  of  God,  at  this  day  be  gathered  out  of  the 
several  golden  mines  of  the  world,  and  be  brought 
to  King  Solomon,  the  Son  of  David,  our  Lord 
Jesus,  to  Jerusalem,  with  which  he  will  build  him 
a  golden  shining  city,  the  joy  of  all  the  world. 

'  And  the  city  was  pure  gold.'  Gold  is  the 
choice  and  chief  of  all  metals,  both  for  worth, 
colour,  and  virtue;  wherefore,  when  he  saith, 
'  The  city  is  gold,'  you  may  conceive  how  rich  and 
shining,  and  virtuous1  this  city  will  be  ;  the  riches 
of  the  whole  world  will  be  here,  the  beauty  of  the 
whole  world  will  be  here,  and  the  virtue1  of  the 
whole  world  will  be  here ;  I  mean  spiritual  riches, 
beauty,  and  health.  Wherefore  the  rest  of  the 
world  at  this  day  will  be  but  as  a  crushed  hunch 
of  herbs  in  which  is  no  virtue ; x  or  like  a  furnace 
full  of  dross,  out  of  which  the  gold  is  taken ;  or 
like  an  old,  crazy,  and  ruinous  house,  from  which 
is  departed  all  health  and  happiness ;  and  indeed 
much  like  to  this  is  that  saying  of  the  prophet,  to 
wit,  that  at  this  day  the  whole  circumference  of 
the  world  that  is  without  the  walls  and  privileges 
of  this  city,  it  shall  be  but  like  an  old  ruinous 
house,  in  which  dwells  nothing  but  cormorants, 
bitterns,  owls,  ravens,  dragons,  satyrs,  the  screech- 
owl,  the  great  owl,  the  vulture,  and  the  like  most 
doleful  birds.  All  their  princes  shall  be  nothing, 
saith  the  prophet,  and  when  they  call  their  nobles 
to  the  kingdom,  none  shall  be  there.  In  their  very 
palaces  shall  be  thorns,  and  nettles,  and  brambles ; 
for  all  among  them  that  are  princes  and  nobles 
indeed,  will  have  packed  up,  and  be  gone  for  Jeru- 
salem, is.  xxxiv.  10-17.  So  that  the  world,  I  say,  will 
be  left  empty,  void,  and  stripped  both  of  treasure, 
beauty,  and  health,  at  the  day  of  Jerusalem's 
building  again.  But  0  how  melancholy  a  forlorn, 
beautiless  world  will  this  be  at  this  day!      It  will 

1  'Virtue;'  strength,  efficacy,  power. — (Ed.) 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


431 


be  only  the  place  of  '  clogs,  and  sorcerers,  and 
whoremongers,  and  murderers,  and  idolaters,  and 
whosoever  lovcth  and  makcth  a  lie.'  IU.  xxii.  1.1.  It 
will  now  be  the  very  emblem  of  hell,  as  the  church 
at  this  day  will  be  the  emblem  of  heaven.  Where- 
fore, as  the  church,  as  I  showed  you  before,  will 
be  most  fit  for  her  putting  on  of  immortality  and 
incorruption,  so  the  world  will  at  this  day  he  most 
fit  to  be  swallowed  up  of  the  lake  and  bottomless 
gulf.  All  things  that  are  good  and  worth  anything 
shall  at  this  clay  be  found  only  in  the  city  of  God. 
The  gold  will  be  in  Jerusalem.   Bra  xiv.  M  Ke.  win. 

Again,  In  that  this  city  is  here  called  by  the 
Dame  of  gold  it  is  to  show  us  how  great  pains, 
and  travel,  and  charge  the  Lord  Christ  hath  been 
at  to  get  so  great  a  treasure  together.  Gold  is 
fetched  from  a  far  country,  and  that  with  great 
pains,  charge,  and  difficulty.  2ck.ix.10.  The  gold 
wherewith  King  Solomon  made  his  drinking  vessels, 
it  cost  a  three  years'  journey  to  obtain  it.  So  the 
saints  also,  those  golden  vessels  wdierewith  is  made 
this  golden  city,  they  cost  Christ  a  three  days' 
travel  in  the  beart  of  the  earth,  even  sweatingly 
under  the  wrath  of  God,  to  obtain  them,  and  thus 
to  build  this  city  with  them.    Lu.  xxii.  44.  Mar.  xii.  40. 

Further,  In  that  he  saith  this  city  is  gold,  he 
would  have  ns  to  consider  what  the  state  of  the 
church  was  before  she  came  into  this  happy  con- 
dition, to  wit,  an  afflicted,  tempted,  and  tried  con- 
dition. Gold,  as  it  comes  from  the  mine,  it  cometh 
commixed  with  its  dust  and  ore;  wherefore  the 
goldsmith  hath  a  burning  furnace  wherein  he  hav- 
ing put  it,  doth  with  the  fire  purge  and  take  away 
the  dross  and  dust  from  among  the  metal  itself; 
into  which  furnace  he  puts  it  once,  twice,  thrice, 
and  again  to  the  end  it  may  at  length  be  thoroughly 
cleansed  and  purified  from  its  dross.  ISow  all  this 
befalleth  the  people  of  God;  they  are  thrown  into 
the  burning  fiery  furnace  of  affliction  and  tempta- 
tion, and  there  they  are  tried,  purged,  and  purified. 
Is.  xxxi.  o.  As  the  Lord  also  saith  by  the  prophet, 
1 1  will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried,  and  will  refine 
them  as  silver  is  refined.'  Zee.  xiii.  o.  Yea,  '  I  will 
melt  them  and  try  them,  for  how  shall  I  do  for  the 
daughter  of  my  people.'   Je.  ix.  i. 

Lastly,  When  he  saith  this  city  is  gold,  he  also 
thereby  insinuates  how  invincible  and  unconquer- 
able a  spirit  the  people  of  God  are  possessed  with. 
Gold  is  a  metal  so  invincible  and  unconquerable, 
that  no  fire  can  consume  it;  it  may  burn  it  indeed, 
and  melt  it ;  the  dross  indeed  doth  consume  and 
give  wray  to  the  power  of  the  fire,  but  the  gold  re- 
mains, and  holds  its  ground ;  yea,  it  gets  ground 
even  of  the  furnace  and  fire  itself;  for  the  more  it 
is  burned  and  melted,  the  more  it  recovers  its 
colour,  and  the  more  it  shakes  off  its  dross  and 
dishonour.  Just  thus  it  is  with  the  people  of  God, 
and  hath  been  so  even  from  the  beginning:   the 


more  they  oppressed  them,  the  more  they  grew. 
Ex.  i.  IS  The  truth  of  which  v.  ill  be  proved  with 
a  witness,  when  God  comes  to  set  up  this  city 
Jerusalem:  his  church  hath  been  now  for  many 
hundred  years  in  the  king  of  Babylon's  furnace; 
all  which  time  she  bath  most  gloriously  endured 
and  withstood  the  heat ;  and  at  last  when  the  fire 
bath  done  its  worst  against  her,  behold  there  comes 
out  a  city  of  gold.  A  type  of  which  was  the  state 
of  the  three  children,  who  though  they  were  cast 
into  the  lire  bound  and  in  disgrace ;  yet  came  out 
in  the  liberty  and  grace  of  the  Son  of  God.  Da.  iii. 
2J— 2G.  Wherefore  let  her  be  bold  to  say,  even 
before  she  comes  out  of  the  fire,  When  I  am  tried, 
'  I  .-hall  come  forth  as  gold.'  Job xxiii.  10. 

'And  the  city  was  PURE  gold.'  These  words, 
pure  gold,  clear  up  what  I  said  already.  Pure 
gold,  or  gold  upon  which  the  fire  hath  clone  its 
work.  The  church  in  the  fire  of  persecution  is 
like  Esther  in  the  perfuming  chamber,  but  making 
fit  for  the  presence  of  the  king ;  which  fire,  when 
it  hath  clone  its  work,  then  she  comes  into  his 
presence  in  clothing  all  of  gold.  Bb.  ii.  10.  '  The 
king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within,  her  clothing 
is  of  wrought  gold.'  And  again,  *  At  thy  right 
hand  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  Ophir.'  Ps.  xlv. 
o,  13.  Wherefore  he  means  by  pure  gold,  gold  out 
of  the  fire,  gold  on  which  the  fire  of  persecution 
and  temptation  hath  clone  its  fidl  and  complete 
work. 

'  And  the  city  teas  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear 
glass.'  By  glass,  in  this  place,  we  are  to  under- 
stand the  Word  of  God,  as  both  James  and  Paul 
do  testify.  Ja.  i.  22—25.  2  Co.  iii.  is.  l  Co.  xiii.  12.  By  clear 
glass  then,  we  are  to  understand  the  Word  in  its 
own  nature  and  purity,  without  the  corruptions 
and  traditions  of  men.  Wherefore,  when  he  saith 
this  golden  city  was  like  unto  clear  glass,  it  is  as 
if  he  had  said  she  is  even  with  the  Word  and  law 
of  her  goldsmith,  in  all  her  matters.  The  Word  is 
a  golden  reed,  this  city  a  golden  city;  and  that,  a 
golden  city,  taken  out  of  the  furnace  of  affliction, 
and  therefore  like  to  the  golden  reed.  '  And  the 
city  was  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass.5 

[The  glory  of 'the foundations. ,] 

Yer.  19,  20.  'And  the  foundations  of  the  wall 
icere  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones. 
The  first  foundation  was  jasper ;  the  second, 
sapphire ;  the  third,  a  chalcedony ;  the  fourth,  an 
emerald;  the  fifth,  sardonyx;  the  sixth,  sardiu3; 
the  seventh,  chrysolite ;  the  eighth,  beryl ;  the 
ninth,  a  topaz ;  the  tenth,  a  cbrysoprasus ;  the 
eleventh,  a  jacinth;  the  twelfth,  an  amethyst.' 

Thus  having  showed  us  the  glory  of  the  wall, 
and  of  the  city,  he  now  comes  to  show  The  giorv  of  tbc 
us  the  glory  of  the  foundations.     The     6™"**** 
foundations  you  know,  I  told  you  before,  they  arc 


432 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


the  twelve  apostles  in  their  doctrine,  or  the  primi- 
tive doctrine  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb. 

Now  the  great  business  in  this  place  will  be  to 
show  you  the  garnishing  of  these  foundations,  and 
also  the  mystery  and  order  of  the  lying  of  the 
foundations,  for  their  glory  lieth  in  both. 

As  for  the  garnishing  of  these  foundations,  it  is, 

The  glory  of  the    and  wiU    be  at   the  da7  °f  NeW  JerU" 

foundationa  salem,  two-fold,  and  the  first  is  with 
beautiful  gifts  and  grace.  Thus  were 
the  apostles  of  old  adorned,  and  thus  shall  their 
doctrine  again  be  garnished.  I  know  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  twelve  hath  been  always  accom- 
panied with  goodly  gifts  and  grace,  from  the  first 
churches  quite  down,  that  is,  according  to  the 
measure  of  light  they  appeared  in,  and  according 
to  the  dispensations  of  God  in  the  times  of  anti- 
christ. But  yet  the  glory  that  this  doctrine  had 
in  these  latter  days,  I  mean  since  the  apostacy,  it 
Avas  nothing  in  comparison  of  the  glory  and  splen- 
dour that  will  be  in  them  in  the  day  when  this 
city  is  built  and  complete.  Wherefore  you  find, 
that  though  all  along  in  antichrist's  reign,  the 
gospel  of  grace  hath  shone,  and  given  light  to  the 
saints  and  people  of  God  in  all  their  travels  and 
The  gospel  dark-  afflictions;  yet  the  shining  of  it  at  that 
smoke  of  auti-  day  was  much  opposed  and  eclipsed 
christ.  by  the  smoke  of  the  bottomless  pit: 

as  he  saith,  '  There  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit, 
as  the  smoke  of  a  great  furnace,  and  the  sun  and 
the  air  were  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of 
the  pit. '  Re.  ix.  2.  In  which  days,  I  say,  abundance 
of  the  light,  heat,  and  operation  of  the  gospel  was 
diminished  and  taken  off,  so  that  but  little  of  the 
power  or  glory  of  it  hath  been  either  felt  or  seen 
from  that  time  to  this  very  day.  This  is  that 
God  spake  of  by  the  prophet  Amos,  saying,  •  I 
will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noou,  and  I  will 
darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  day;  and  I  will  turn 
your  feasts  into  mourning,  and  all  your  songs  into 
lamentation  ;  and  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth  upon 
all  loins,  and  baldness  upon  every  head  ;  and  I 
will  make  it  as  the  mourning  of  an  only  son,  and 
the  end  thereof  as  a  bitter  day.'  All  which  he 
explaineth  in  the  next  words,  for  « Behold  the  days 
come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I  will  send  a  fa- 
mine in  the  land,  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a 
thirst  for  water,  but  of  hearing  the  words  of  the 
Lord ;  and  they  shall  wander  from  sea  to  sea,  and 
from  the  north  even  to  the  east ;  they  shall  run  to 
and  fro  to  seek  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  shall 
not  find  it.'  Am.  viii.  9-12.  In  those  days  Eli's  sons 
were  become  varlets.  1  Sa.  ii.  12—15.  Indeed  there 
was  here  and  there  a  little  child,  like  Samuel  in 
his  minority,  that  now  and  then  woidd  speak  most 
goodly  things.  But  '  the  word  of  the  Lord  was 
precious  in  those  days,  there  was  no  open  vision.' 
l  Sa,  in.  1.     This  is  that  which  David  in  the  Spirit 


of  prophecy  complaineth  of,  saying,  '  They  know 
not,  neither  will  they  understand;  they  walk  on 
in  darkness:  all  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are 
out  of  course.'  Ps.  lxxxii.  5.  Thus  in  the  days  of  the 
eclipsing  of  the  glory  of  these  foundations.  But 
now,  behold,  they  recover  their  light,  and  put  on, 
as  of  old,  their  former  glory,  and  are  again  gar- 
nished as  in  the  former  days.  Now  will  all  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  spangle  and  sparkle ;  out 
of  every  text  will  the  ministers  of  God  make  to 
issue  exceedingly  most  precious  and  heavenly  fire; 
for  these  stones  are  indeed  the  stones  of  fire.  Eze. 
xxviii.  16.  And  in  them  is  contained  that  which 
would  set  the  whole  world  on  a  flame  with  love 
and  delight  in  the  things  of  God  and  another 
world,  had  but  men  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  and  the 
authority  of  God  in  their  ministry,  as  the  apostles 
and  the  primitive  Christians  had.  Well  this  doc- 
trine of  the  twelve  shall  be  again  adorned  with 
gifts  and  grace  as  in  the  days  of  old:  by  which  it 
shall  also  be  made  to  shine,  and  to  cast  forth  its 
golden  rays  before  the  nations  to  their  salvation. 
Behold,  saith  God,  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair 
colours,  that  is,  thy  apostolical  doctrines  shall 
again  be  garnished  as  at  the  first,  is.  liv.  11.  Truth 
shall  appear  in  it3  old  and  mature  colours,  and  as 
such  shall  be  embraced,  and  lived  and  delighted 
in,  both  by  Jews  and  Gentiles,  as  I  have  showed. 
But  secondly,  The  twelve  foundations  that  here 
you  read  of,  they  are  the  same  with  If  you  corapare  the 
those  twelve  stones  that  long  be-     stones  you  will  fhui 

„  >ii  in     them,  someof  them, 

tore  were  set  in  the  breastplate  of    to  differ  in  name, 

•    j  ,     •         1  •   i  but  know  it  is  usual 

judgment,  in  which  were  engraven  for  one  stone  to  go 
the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  and^Me^the 
the  children  of  Israel,  the  names  Greek  doth '  give 
of  which  tribes  did  comprehend  the  names  than  doth 
whole  body  of  the  house  of  their  the  Heteew  text- 
fathers.  Ex.  xxviii.  16— 21,  29 ;  xxxk.  14.  Now  then,  see- 
ing these  twelve  are  the  same  with  thoso  on  the 
breastplate  of  judgment;  and  seeing  also,  that 
those  on  the  breastplate  did  comprehend  the  whole 
of  the  twelve  tribes,  I  conclude  that  for  these 
foundations  to  be  garnished  with  all  manner  of 
precious  stones,  it  is  as  much  as  to  say,  they  shall 
be  garnished  with  abundance  of  converts  ;  multi- 
tudes, and  that  of  all  sorts,  both  of  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, Moors,  Tartars,  Turks,  and  those  in  the 
utmost  parts  of  the  world,  shall  now  Converts  the 
be  entangled  with  the  light  and  truth,  f^xanis  1™^"- 
with  the  glory  and  goodness  of  the  tl0us- 
doctrine  of  the  twelve.  And  I  the  rather  take  it 
thus,  1.  Because,  as  the  foundations  themselves 
are  said  to  be  precious  stones ;  so  also  the  saints 
in  general,  they  go  under  'the  same  names  too. 
As  Jeremiah  saith,  the  precious  stones  of  the 
sanctuary  are  the  precious  sons  of  Zion.  La.  iv,  1— 3. 
As  Peter  also  saith,  in  alluding  to  the  precious 
stones  of  the  temple;  the  saints  are  lively,  or  living 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


433 


precious  stones,  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  &c. 
iPe.  ii.  5.  And  the  foundations  of  the  wall  were 
garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones.  1  cu. 
xxix.  2.  That  is,  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve  was 
garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  souls;  that 
is,  converted  by  it,  by  which  they  become  a  glory 
and  a  garnishing-  to  it.  2.  I  take  it  to  be  the 
conversion  of  the  precious  ones  of  God;  because 
that  thus  to  understand  it,  is  most  like  the  phrase 
of  the  apostle  Paul  himself,  saying,  '  What  is  our 
hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are  not  even 
ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his 
coming?  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy.'  i  Th. ii.  19,20. 
Mark,  in  the  text  he  saith,  The  foundations  were 
garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones,  and 
here  those  precious  stones,  Paul  accounts  to  be 
those  that  are  converted  by  the  Word:  for  what  is 
our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown?  are  not  even  ye  that 
have  been  converted  by  us?  Ye  are  our  joy,  ye 
are  our  crown,  ye  are  our  glory ;  it  is  with  you 
that  we  shall  be  crowned,  adorned,  and  garnished 
in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Mark,  John 
saith,  They  are  garnished,  Paul  saith,  they  are 
crowned ;  John  saith,  they  are  garnished  with 
precious  stones,  and  Paul  saith,  they  are  crowned 
with  the  conversion  of  sinners.  Thus  therefore  as 
God  will  lay  these  stones  with  fair  colours,  so  also 
he  will  lay  these  foundations  with  sapphires.  is.iiv.  11. 
That  is,  as  he  will  beautify  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve 
with  its  former  glory,  sweetness,  and  authority;  so 
he  will  crown  and  garnish  it  with  the  conversion  of 
many  sinners.  The  elect  are  the  jewels  of  God, 
and  this  is  the  day  of  his  binding  them  up,  even 
then  when  the  antichrist  falls,  and  the  gospel 
breaks  out  in  its  primitive  glory.  Mai.  iii.  16— 18. 

And  the  foundations  of  the  wall  icere  garnished 
with  all  manner  of  precious  stones. '  In  these 
words,  there  are  yet  two  things  considerable. 

First  Consideration.  That  all  who  go  to  the 
adorning  of  these  foundations,  they  must  he  precious 
stones,  not  a  common  stone  shall  here  be  owned. 
And  indeed  what  should  pebbles  do  among  the 
pearls  and  the  diamonds  of  New  Jerusalem;  or  the 
stones  of  blackness  and  emptiness,  among  the  saints 
of  light.  JobxxviiL3.  I  tell  you,  that  those  which 
God  doth  reckon  the  adorning-stones,  they  are  all 
and  every  one,  precious  stones ;  they  must  be  all 
lively,  glistering,  and  curious  stones,  though  stones 
of  divers  colours.  1  Pe.  ii.  6.  1  Ch.  xxix.  2.  Antichrist 
counts  anything  sufficient  enough  to  garnish  his 
apostles  with,  even  the  empty  stones  of  confusion, 
the  sinners  that  have  no  more  grace  in  their  souls 
then  there  is  sap  in  a  post  that  hath  been  this 
twenty  years  without  either  sap  or  water,  is  xxxiv.  11. 
But  God  will  not  count  such  for  the  beauty  of  his 
word,  nor  for  the  garnishing  and  beautifying  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  twelve,  they  are  garnished  with 
Precious  Stones. 

vol.  111. 


Second  Consideration.  As  he  saith  the  founda- 
tions are  garnished  with  precious  stones  only,  so 
lie  saith  it  is  with  All  Manner  of  precious  stones: 
by  which  he  would  have  us  understand  that  all 
saints  have  not  the  same  degree  either  of  precious 
grace  or  gifts  and  virtue  in  them.  There  are  some 
that  excel  and  differ  from  the  rest,  even  as  one 
star  dilfereth  from  another  in  glory.  lCo.fiv.lft. 
Some  saints,  as  they  have  both  more  grace  and 
also  gifts  than  others;  so  too  they  are  more  labori- 
ous and  painful  in  the  work  of  God  than  their  fel- 
lows, and  therefore  he  saith,  All  Manner  of  pre- 
cious Stones.    Pr.  xxxi.  29.  1  Co.  xv.  10,  41. 

[  The  Foundations,  what  they  are,  with  tlceir  order  of 
placing.} 

Verse  20.  'The  first  foundation  icas  jasper;  the 
second,  sapphire;  the  third,  a  chalcedony;  the 
fourth,  an  emerald;  the  fifth,  sardonyx:  the  sixth, 
sardius;  the  seventh,  chrysolite;'  (fee.  Thus  having 
showed  you  the  garnishing  and  beautifying  of  the 
twelve  foundations,  he  now  comes  to  discover  the 
foundations  themselves,  with  reference  to  their  order 
of  placing  and  lying. 

[Tlie  First  Foundation.]  Touching  which  order, 
he  saith  the  first  and  bottom  foundation  is  a  jasper. 

I  have  hitherto  said  that  this  jasper  in  both  the 
two  afore-mentioned  places,  both  as  to  The  ^pn  doM 
the  light  of  this  city,  and  also  of  the     represent  the 

ii      •  t  >ti     •  ™     •        -i        Lord       Christ 

wall,  it  was  Jesus  Christ:  Christ  a-  upou  several 
luminating,  and  Christ  defending. 
But  here  the  jasper  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  twelve 
foundations,  even  one  of  those  foundations  in  which 
are  writ  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the 
Lamb,  which  one  would  think  did  put  this  jasper 
now  into  another  state,  even  to  be  a  representation 
of  one  of  the  twelve  apostles,  and  not  of  the  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  himself.  To  which  I 
shall  yet  say,  that  the  jasper  here  in  the  order  of 
the  foundations,  is  to  be  understood  of  Christ,  as 
well  as  in  the  other  two  places  in  this  discourse ; 
I  say  it  is  yet  to  be  understood  of  representing  the 
Lord  Jesus,  though  it  also  doth  bear  the  name  of 
one  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  And  in 
this  very  thing  there  is  an  infolding  mystery 
wrapped  up  and  inclosed.      For, 

First.  In  that  the  name  of  an  apostle  is  writ  in 
this  stone,  and  yet  that  this  jasper 

.        ,,  /-.i     •  -ii      Tht;  first  accom.t. 

should  represent  Christ,  it  showeth 
uuto  us  the  agreement  that  is  between  the  doctrine 
of  the  apostles  and  Christ  himself,  to  wit,  that 
they  are  one  and  the  very  same ;  and  hence  it  is 
that  the  apostle  saith,  ■  We  preach  Christ  crucified.' 
l  Co.  i.  23, 21.  Christ  in  all  his  benefits  is  the  very 
marrow,  life,  and  sum  of  all  their  teaching.  '  Other 
foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which 
is  Jesus  Christ. '  l  Co.  iii.  11.  Wherefore  the  doctrine 
of  the  apostles  being  Christ  itself,  no  marvel  though 


43-i 


THE  HOLY   CITY,  OR 


the  name  of  an  apostle  be  writ  upon  this  jasper; 

and  again,  no  marvel  though  this  jasper  go  yet 

under  that  name  that  represents  him. 

Second.  In  that  it  is  said  the  names  of  the  twelve 

The  second  ac-   are  in  these  twelve  foundations,  and 
count.        yet  t]iat  the  first  of  them  ghouid  be 

the  jasper,  Christ;  it  argueth  also,  that  whosoever 
receiveth  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve,  they  must  needs 
with  that  receive  the  Lord  Christ  himself.  Receive 
the  doctrine  of  the.  gospel,  as  it  is  held  forth  by  the 
twelve  in  the  word,  and  thou  canst  not  miss  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself;  he  will  be  found  in  the 
bottom  of  their  doctrine.  Ye  '  are  built  upon  the 
foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus 
Christ   himself    being    the    chief    corner    stone.' 

Ep.  i.  19,  20. 

Third.  In  that  he  saith  in  these  twelve  stones 
The  third  ac-  are  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles, 
count-  and  yet  that  the  first  should  be  the 
jasper,  Christ;  it  argueth  also  that  wherever  the 
doctrine  of  the  twelve  is  preached,  there  is  there- 
with the  presence  of  Christ:  the  presence  of  his 
Spirit  to  teach  and  enlighten  the  ignorant  and 
blind  hearts  of  the  unconverted ;  the  presence  also 
of  his  power  to  overcome  them,  and  to  make  them 
fall  under  the  glory  and  truth  of  his  heavenly  Avord. 
'  Lo,'  saith  he,  '  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world.'  «  And  they  went  forth  and 
preached  everywhere,  the  Lord  working  with  them, 
and  confirming  the  word  with  signs  following.' 
Mat.  xxviii.  20.  Mar.  xvi.  20. 

Fourth.  In  that  he  saith  the  names  of  the  twelve 
The  fourth  ac-    are  m  the  foundations,  and  yet  that 

count.  Christ  should  be  one  of  the  twelve  him- 
self; it  showeth  to  us  the  union  that  is  between 
Christ  and  his  holy  people.  Mark  in  the  twelve 
foundations  are  placed  all,  even  all  manner  of  pre- 
cious stones.  Again,  in  the  twelve  is  placed  the 
jasper,  Christ ;  by  which  we  may  see  the  nearness 
that  is  between  Christ  and  his  whole  body.  '  I  in 
them,  and  thou  in  me,'  saith  Christ,  'that  they 
may  be  made  perfect  in  one.'  Jn.  xvii.23.  Christ  and 
his  saints  make  but  one  temple,  one  man  ;  being 
but  one  flesh,  one  nature,  <fcc.  l  Co.  xii.  12. 

Fifth.  In  that  this  jasper  is  said  to  be  one  of 
The  fifth  ac-  the  foundations,  and  that  too  the  first 
count.  anti  undermost;  he  showeth  farther, 
that  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  them  before  God, 
that  are  the  foundation  of  him  before  men.  The 
twelve  do  bear  up  Christ  before  the  world,  as  the 
twelve  brazen  oxen  did  hold  up  the  molten  sea  in 
the  temple.  lKLvii.  23.  And  Christ  doth  bear  up 
the  twelve  before  bis  Father,  as  the  high  priests 
did  carry  the  twelve  stones  on  their  breast-plate 
of  judgment,  when  they  went  to  make  an  atone- 
ment for  the  sins  of  the  people,  into  the  holiest. 

Ex.  xxviii.  29. 

Sixth.  It  showeth  us  further,  that  though  the 


apostles  shall  be  adorned  with  the  conversion  of 
those  that  they  shall  win  to  the  Lord  The  sixth  ac- 
Christ ;  yet  they  will  never  be  able  to  count- 
stand  under  that  glory  and  honour  unless  they  are 
supported  and  upheld  by  Christ,  as  their  founda- 
tion. Sirs,  as  Christ  is  the  strength  of  his  people 
in  their  work  for  him  in  this  world,  so  be  must  be 
their  strength  by  which  they  must  stand  under  tho 
reward  they  shall  have  for  their  labour  when  this 
world  is  ended.  And  hence  it  is,  that  the  prophet 
saith,  '  They  shall  hang  upon  him  all  the  glory  of 
his  Father's  house,  the  off-spring  and  the  issue ; 
all  vessels  of  small  quantity,  from  the  vessels  of 
cups,  even  to  all  the  vessels  of  flagons,'  is. xxii. 2*. 
and  again,  '  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord, 
and  he  shall  bear  the  glory. '  Zee.  vi.  13.  He  shall 
bear  the  glory  of  our  salvation  from  sin,  preserva- 
tion in  the  midst  of  all  temptations,  and  of  our  go- 
ing to  glory ;  also  he  shall  bear  the  glory  of  our 
labour  in  the  gospel,  of  our  gifts  and  abilities,  of 
making  our  labour  and  work  effectual  to  the  saving 
of  sinners,  '  that  in  all  things  he  might  have  the 
pre-eminence.'  Col.  i.  18. 

Seventh.  In  that  the  foundations  are  twelve,  and 
Christ  the  undermost  of  them  ;  it  sig-  The  seventh  ac- 
nifieth,  that  all  that  are  converted  by  count 
the  twelve,  as  they  shall  be  for  the  garnishing  of 
the  twelve,  so  also  both  the  twelve,  with  all  that 
they  are  garnished  with,  shall  be  for  garnishing  of 
Christ.  We  shall  stick  like  pearls  in  the  crowns 
of  the  twelve  apostles,  and  they  again  with  all  their 
glory  shall  stick  in  the  crown  of  Christ.  And 
hence  it  is  that  you  find  the  four  and  twenty 
elders,  which  four  and  twenty  do,  as  I  conceive, 
hold  forth  the  twelve,  both  in  the  first  and  second 
Jerusalem.  I  say,  hence  it  is  that  you  find  them 
take  their  crowns  from  off  their  heads,  and  cast 
them  down  before  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb,  crying,  '  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory 
and  power  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.'  Re.iv.  9— 11 ; 
v.  11— 14. 

Eiglith.  One  thing  more  of  this  goodly  jasper, 
and  then  to  the  rest;  which  thing  is  TIie  ejgi,tu  iic. 
this,  that  jasper  that  here  you  find  to  count- 
be  the  first  in  the  twelve  foundations,  even  that 
jasper  you  find  to  be  the  last  of  all  among  the 
stones  in  the  breast-plate  of  judgment.  Ex.  xxviii.  20. 
From  whence  you  may  note,  1.  That  Christ,  as  he 
is  to  be  the  author,  or  first  of  our  faith,  so  also  he 
is  to  be  the  finisher,  or  last  of  our  faith.  He.  xii.  2. 

2.  That  as  he  is  to  be  the  captain  and  leader  of  his 
people,  so  he  is  to  be  the  rereward  and  bringer 
up  of  his  people.  He.  ii.  10.  is.  m.  12.  He  is  to  go  be- 
fore them  to  lead  them  the  way ;  and  to  come  be- 
hind them  to  bring  them  all  up.  Is.  lviii.  8.  Ex.  xiv.  19. 

3.  Again,  forasmuch  as  he  is  said  to  be  last  before 
he  is  first :  that  is,  last  in  Exodus,  and  after  that, 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


435 


first  in  the  Revelation?,  it  may  be  to  show  us,  that 
Christ  was  first  to  be  least,  lowest,  and  last,  and 
then  to  be  greatest,  highest,  and  first.  He  first 
humbled  himself  to  the  death,  even  to  the  shame- 
ful death  of  the  cross ;  and  then  was  by  God  his 
Father  exalted  and  placed  above  every  name ;  as 
he  also  himself  doth  witness,  saying,  '  Ought  not 
Christ  to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter 
into  his  glory?'  Lu.  x.\iv.  26.  Phi.  ii.  8— 11. 

[The  other  foundations.]  '  The  first  foundation 
was  jasper;  the  second,  sapphire;  the  third,  a  chal- 
cedony; the  fourth,  an  emerald;  the  fifth,  sardonyx; 
the  sixth,  sardius;  the  seventh,  chrysolite;  the  eighth, 
heryl;  the  ninth,  a  topaz,'  <tc.  Touching  the 
jasper  you  see  what  I  have  said.  Now  all  I  have 
to  say  to  the  rest  of  them,  it  is  in  general  these 
three  things. 

First,  In  that  the  foundations  are  all  and  every 
Toudiine  the  one  °^  tnem  precious  stones,  it  signi- 
rest    of    the   fieth  that  all  the  doctrines  of  the  New 

foundations.         T  .  ...    ,  ,         , 

Jerusalem  will  be  only  the  precious 
doctrine  of  the  twelve  apostles,  not  common  stuff, 
not  raked  out  of  the  dunghills  and  muck-heaps  of 
this  world,  and  from  among  the  toys  of  antichrist, 
but  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  glorious.  He  that 
hath  his  word  shall  then  speak  it  faithfully,  for 
'  what  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  saitli  the  Lord.' 

Je.  xxiii.  28,  32. 

Second,  In  that  they  are  called  after  the  names 
of  precious  stones,  it  signifieth  also  that  at  that 
day  none  shall  be  used  or  put  into  the  ministry 
but  those  that  have  received  spiritual  and  heavenly 
gifts  from  above.  It  is  not  every  babbling  fel- 
low, not  those  that  look  for  their  abilities  from 
the  rudiments  of  the  world,  that  then  shall  be  of 
any  value  or  account.  He  must  be  a  costly  stone, 
a  stone  about  which  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  bestowed 
the  cost  of  his  heavenly  abilities,  even  he  whom 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  appear  unto  for  that  very 
purpose,  to  make  him  a  minister.  He  shall  be  a 
minister,  and  none  else  at  that  day.  The  other 
shall  be  ashamed  every  one  of  his  vision  ;  yea,  and 
shall  in  those  days  be  so  contemptible,  that  their 
father  and  their  mother  shall  reprove  them,  and 
count  them  liars ;  yea,  and  shall  be  ready  to  run 
them  through  while  they  are  prophesying  iu  their 
rough  garments  to  deceive.  Zee.  xiii.  3—5. 

Third.  In  that  these  precious  stones  are  not  all 
The  differing  na-    of  one   and  the   same   nature,    but 

turc  and   opera.  e    .  ,  ... 

tious  of  these  everyone  of  them  several,  and  diverse 
fonhSthe0diffe^    one  froin  another;  it  argueth  that 

ences ol  adminis,-  lue  rr\fts  0f  tne  apostles,  and  SO  of 
tratiuns  and  one-  °  .    .  r 

rations  that  was  the  ministers  of  the  r*ew  Jerusalem, 
among  untrue  shall  be  differing  one  from  another 
?eDras  ofu.JZd  in  Slor7  and  operation ;  yet  mark, 
*<--sus.  as  in  these  stones,   so  in  every  one 

of  them  shall  be  perfect  glory,  according  to  the 
nature   of  God's   working  by  his  Spirit;    as   the 


nature  of  the  jasper  is  perfect  in  his  kind,  and  the 
nature  of  the  sapphire  is  perfect  in  his.  These 
stones,  some  of  them  are  of  greater  light  and 
clearness  than  others ;  and  so  some  of  the  apostles 
are  chiefest.  2  Co.xi.  5.  Some  of  these  stones,  again, 
they  are  of  a  more  fiery  and  burning  colour  than 
others,  they  being  bright  also,  but  of  a  more  mild 
brightness.  Therefore  some  of  the  ministry  are 
called  the  sons  of  thunder,  when  others  are  styled 
by  the  name  of  the  sons  of  consolation.  Mar.  W.  n.  Ac. 
It.  36.  The  gifts  are  differing,  being  diverse,  their 
administrations  are  differing,  and  the  operations 
of  them  also  are  differing,  though  all  those  things 
are  from  that  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit,  work- 
ing in  every  one  severally  as  he  pleases.  Ro.  xii.  6. 
lCo.xii.4-6.  All  these  things  will  spangle  in  the 
New  Jerusalem,  and  carry  their  full  breadth  and 
sway  as  in  the  days  of  old. 

To  conclude  this,  in  that  he  here  saith,  that 
the  foundations  of  the  wall  are  these  twelve  stones, 
he  doth  it  to  show  that  now  also  the  former  minis- 
tration that  was  in  the  apostles'  days  will  be  the 
same  and  in  full  force  again.  For  their  gifts  of 
knowledge,  judgment,  and  authority,  they  are  such 
as  have  to  this  day  lain  buried,  as  it  were  with  the 
apostles  themselves.  But  now  they  shall  show 
themselves  again,  even  these  foundation-stones, 
stones  that  are  great  stones,  stones  of  ten  cubits, 
and  stones  of  eight  cubits,  l  Ki.  vii.  10.  Thus  much 
of  the  glory  of  the  foundations. 

[The  glory  of  the  gates.] 

Ver.  21,  *  And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve 
pearls,  every  several  gate  was  of  one  pearl ;  and 
the  street  of  the  city  was  pure  gold,  as  it  were  trans- 
parent glass.'  Having  thus  showed  us  the  glory 
of  this  city,  wall,  and  foundations,  he  now  comes 
to  show  us  the  glory  of  the  gates  and  of  the  street 
of  the  city. 

'  And  the  twelve  gates  are  twelve  pearls.'  The 
gates,  I  told  you  before,  they  signify  The  glory  of  the 
Christ,  both  as  he  is  the  way  to  com-  &***• 

amnion  with  the  God  of  this  city,  and  with  the 
inhabitants  thereof,  that  so  they  may  have  a  share 
in  the  privileges  of  the  same.  I  told  you  also 
then,  that  though  he  tells  us  exactly  of  the  mea- 
sure botli  of  city  and  wall,  yet  he  tells  us  nothing 
of  the  measure  of  these  twelve  gates  and  goings  in 
thereat,  and  the  reason  is,  because  Christ,  as  he 
is  the  way  to  grace,  he  is  beyond  all  measure  both 
as  to  fulness  and  freeness.  £p.  hi.  8.  And  now 
again  he  puts  us  to  the  same  plunge  with  the  un- 
searchable riches  of  the  Lord  Christ;  for  who  can 
count  the  worth  of  pearl  as  big  as  the  gates  of  a 
city  ?  As,  indeed,  when  Christ  himself  doth  speak 
of  the  parable  of  the  pearl  in  the  field,  he  only 
telleth  us  that  there  is  such  a  one,  but  never 
valueth  the  worth  thereof,  only  he  saith,   a  pearl 


436 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


of  great  price,    and    so  leavetli  it.  Mat.  xiii  35, 36. 
Now,  when  he  saith  that  the  gates  are  pearls,  he 
thereby  insinuates  several  things.     As, 

First.  To  show  us  how  rich  a  treasure  Christ 
Christ  a  rich   Jesus  our  Lord  is,  and  will  be  to  all 

thaf*    ^nter    those     that    bv    bim      slia11     enter    '" 

tore.  through   the    gates    into    this   city, 

•  riches  and  honour  are  with  me,'  saith  he,  even 
'  durable  riches  and  righteousness.  My  fruit  (or 
the  fruit  of  entering  in  by  me)  is  better  than  gold, 
and  my  revenue  than  choice  silver.  I  lead  in  the 
way  of  righteousness,  in  the  midst  of  the  paths  of 
judgment;  that  I  may  cause  those  that  love  me  to 
iuherit  substance,  and  1  will  fill  their  treasures.' 

Pr.  viii.  18-21.  Ep.  iii.  8. 

Christ  is  rich  indeed,  both  in  his  blood,  resur- 
rection, intercession,  and  all  his  offices,  together 
with  his  relations  and  all  his  benefits ;  all  which 
he  bestoweth  upon  every  one  that  receiveth  him, 
and  maketh  them  unspeakably  wealthy. 

Second.  The  pearl,  as  it  is  rich,  and  so  worth 

much,  so    again    it  is  beautiful   and 
Christ  is  beauti-  ...  °     ,      ,    .        .  r     n 

tui  to  all  that  amiable,  even  to  take  the  eyes  or  all 
Bere  do  enter.     beholders_       It   hath>    r    8ay?    a    vcry 

sweet  and  sparkling  light  and  glory  in  it,  enough 
to  take  the  eye  and  affect  the  heart  of  all  those 
that  look  upon  it.  And  thus  is  Christ  to  all  that 
come  to  him,  and  by  him  to  the  Father,  <fcc. 
•  My  beloved,'  saith  she,  *  is  white  and  ruddy,  the 
chiefest  among  ten  thousand.'  '  His  mouth  is 
most    sweet,   yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely.'   Ca. v. 

10,  16. 

The  mother  of  harlots  had  some  knowledge  of 
the  beauty  and  glory  of  this  stone,  and  knew  that 
it  had  a  very  taking  and  drawing  glory  in  it,  and 
therefore  she  gets  it  for  some  time  to  adorn  her- 
self withal ;   she  was  decked  with  gold  and  pre- 
cious stones  and  pearls,  Ez.xvi.17,  and  was  therefore 
called  'the  well-favoured  harlot.'  Na.  iii.  4.  Re. xviii. 4. 
By  which  means  she  hath  drawn  into  her  lewdness 
the  kings  and  kingdoms  of  the  world ;  who  have 
in  such  sort  been  entangled  with  her  beauty,  and 
with  her  fornication,   that  they  have  been  adul- 
terated from  God  and  their  own  salvation.      For 
indeed  she  used  this  pearl  but  for  to  get  them  to 
drink  of  her  fornication,   that  they  might  drink 
and  spew,  and  fall  and  never  rise  more.     But  now 
when  he  saith,  the  gates  are  pearl,  it  is  as  if  he 
had  said,  this  woman  is  stript  of  her  beauty  and 
delicate  ornaments  ;   the  pearl  is  taken  from  her, 
and  is  set  in  its  right  place,  even  to  be  for  the 
gates  of  Jerusalem.  Re.  xviii.  12,  22,  23.     Wherefore  it 
is  to  be  expected,  that  many  should  be  taken  with 
the  way  of  entrance  into  this  beloved  city  in  the 
day  that  she  shall  be  set  up  and  appear  in  her 
heavenly  beauty.  Pr.  viu.  35 ;  ill.  35.    The  glory  of  that 
city  must  needs  be  great  whose  wall  is  jasper  and 
gates  are  pearl.  1  Co.  u.  9.  Jn.  xvii.  21. 


*  And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls.'  Not 
pearls  and  other  precious  stones  com-  Christ  only  can 
mixed,  but  pearl  only.  To  signify  [he privileges 
that  Christ  only  can  let  in  souls  into  of  his  church, 
this  city,  that  they  may  partake  of  the  goodness 
and  privileges  thereof.  It  is  not  he  and  saints 
together,  neither  is  it  all  the  saints  and  angels  in 
heaven  without  him,  he  alone  '  hath  the  key  of 
David,  and  that  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth ; 
and  that  shutteth,  and  no  roan  openeth.'  Re.m.7;xxiH2. 

Secondly,  As  he  saith,  the  several  gates  are 
each  of  them  pearls,  so  be  saith  that  every  several 
gate  was  of  one  pearl,  of  one  entire  pearl.  By 
which   he  would   have   us   to   under- 

.       As    none     cm 

stand  also,  that  as  none  can  enter  111     enterinbutby 

■,      .     1        r,i     •    .  •  Christ,  so  none 

but  by  Christ,  so  none  can  enter  in  cau  euter  in 
but  by  whole  Christ.  Christ  must  be  £^syTWH0LB 
helpful  to  thee  every  way,  or  he  will 
be  helpful  to  thee  no  way  ;  thou  must  enter  in  by 
every  whit  of  Christ,  or  thou  shalt  enter  in  by 
never  a  whit  of  him.  Wherefore  look  not  to  have 
him  thy  Saviour,  if  thou  take  him  not  for  king  and 
prophet ;  nay,  thou  shalt  not  have  him  in  any  one, 
if  thou  dost  not  take  him  in  every  one  of  these. 
Wherefore  the  prophet  saith,  '  He  shall  build  the 
temple  of  the  Lord  (that  is,  by  his  prophetical 
office)  -  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne,  and 
he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne,  and  the 
counsel   of  peace   shall  be  between  them   both.' 

Zee.  vi.  13. 

[  Tlie  glory  of  the  street.  ] 

*  And  the  street  of  the  city  was  pure  gold,  as  it 
were  transparent  glass.'  In  these  words  there 
are  four  things  to  be  enquired  into.  First.  What 
this  street  is?  Second.  Why  he  saith  of  the  glory  of 
not  streets,  but  street,  as  of  one?  thestrea. 
Third.  Why  this  street  is  called  by  the  term  of 
pure  gold  ?  Fourth.  And  why  it  should  look  like 
transparent  glass.     For  the 

First,  A  street  ordinarily  is  the  place  of  common 
concourse,  and  the  place  of  continual  open  saluta- 
tion, and  taking  acquaintance  one  of  another ;  and 
as  touching  this  street,  we  are  also  to  understand  it 
of  the  open  and  common  place  or  way  of  God's  wor- 
ship, in  which  saints  salute  each  other  and  acquaint 
themselves  together ;  also  here  the  world  are  con- 
verted, saints  built  up  and  edified,  be.  'Wisdom 
crieth  without;  she  uttereth  her  voice  in  the  streets,' 
saith  Solomon ;  '  she  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of 
concourse,  in  the  openings  of  the  gates ;  in  the 
city  she  uttereth  her  words.'  Pr.  i.  20,  21.  That  is, 
in  the  public  and  righteous  ordinances  what  is  meant 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  he  hath  or-  bystreet> 
dained  in  his  church,  for  men  to  travel  and  trade 
in,1  for  the  good  and  wholesome  merchandize  of 


To  travel  aud  trade,'  means  to  pursue  or  labour  in  aa 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


437 


heaven,  as  the  men  of  this  world  do  for  the  things 
thereof  in  the  streets  and  open  places  of  their  cities 
and  places  of  privilege,   rr.  vill  1— ;s ;  ix.  i-u. 

Thus  it  was  in  the  figure  when  the  city  Jeru- 
salem was  built  after  the  captivity,  as  ours  shall  be 
at  and  after  the  overthrow  and  downfall  of  anti- 
christ, for  then  it  is  said  that  the  people,  to  hear 
the  law,  were  gathered  together  in  the  street,  even 
in  the  water  street ;  there  they  heard  the  sense 
given,  and  there  they  were  convinced  of  their 
wickedness ;  also  there  they  received  the  know- 
ledge of  God's  goodness  to  them,  and  there  they 
received  power  to  eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet, 
to  eat  and  drink  and  be  merry,  and  to  cast  away 
sadness  and  fear.  Ne.  viii.  This,  by  way  of  allegory, 
is  called  the  way  for  the  wayfaring  men,  even  the 
way  of  holiness,  over  which  the  unclean  shall  not 
in  anywise  pass.  The  way  in  which  they  learn 
to  know  God  and  themselves,  and  the  way  of  new- 
ness of  life,  in  which  every  one  walks  that  cntereth 
in  by  the  gates  of  New  Jerusalem.  And  it  is 
most  suitable  to  the  matter  that  went  before  to 
understand  the  street  to  be  the  way  of  God,  the 
way  of  holiness  and  newness  of  life  ;  because  as  it 
is  natural  for  the  stranger,  so  soon  as  ever  he  is 
entered  the  gates  of  a  city,  to  have  his  feet  in  the 
streets  of  the  city,  so  it  is  natural  for  the  sinner, 
so  soon  as  ever  he  is  entered  into  the  church  by 
Christ,  to  have  his  feet  treading  in  the 
way  and  paths  of  holiness.  Wherefore 
it  is  usual  in  the  Holy  Scripture  to  call  the  trans- 
formation of  the  sinner  from  Satan  to  God  a  holy 
way,  and  also  to  admonish  him  that  is  so  trans- 
formed to  walk  in  that  way,  saying,  Walk  in  the 
faith,  love,  spirit,  and  newness  of  life,  and  walk  in 
the  truth,    ways,  statutes,  and  judgments  of  God. 

t's.  lxxxvi.  11;  cxliii.  8.  Eze.  xi.  20;  xxxvii.  24.  Ga.  v.  25.  Ro.iv.12. 

lie  that  entereth  not  by  these  gates  into  the 
city,  he  cannot  walk  in  newness  of  life;  but  he 
that  entered  in  by  them,  he  cannot  but  walk  in 
newness  of  life.  The  next  thing  then  that  a  man 
passeth  into  when  he  is  entered  into  the  New 
Jerusalem,  is  to  walk  in  the  Strket  thereof,  the 
way  of  holiness,  even  the  way  in  which  men  learn 
to  fear  God,  and  to  believe  in  and  love  the  Lord 

JeSUS,    &C.    Ep.  v.  1,  2.  2  Jn.  4.  Ro.  vi.  4 

Second.  Now  this  street  or  way  of  holiness,  it  is 

Why  this  street  is     0n  Pu!Tose  Called  not  manJ"»  but  0ne> 

called  nut  many,  to  show  us  the  perfection  of  light, 
grace,  faith,  and  spiritual  comfort, 
that  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  shall  then  enjoy. 
Daniel  also  calleth  it  one  street,  to  signify  the 
same  thing.  Da.  ix.  2.3.  Wherefore  from  hence  I 
gather,  that  then  all  saints  shall  walk — as  before 
1  have  made  appear — even  in  one  street,  in  one 


way,  and  in  one  light.  Tt  is  Antichrist  that  hath 
brought  in  all  those  crossings,  bye-lanes,  and  odd 
nooks,  that  to  this  day  many  an  honest  heart  doth 
greatly  loso  itself  in  ;  but  at  this  day  they  shall 
be  otherwise  minded,  that  is,  made  all  to  savour 
one  thing,  and  to  walk  one  way,  not  biting  and 
devouring  each  other  as  now.  And  indeed  there 
is  all  reason  it  should  be  thus,  for  the  street  itself 
is  but  one.  There  is  but  one  God,  one  Lord 
Jesus,  one  Spirit,  ONE  faith,  ONE  baptism,  even  as 
we  are  also  called  in  one  hope  of  our  calling.  Ep.  iv. 
5,  g.  Ac.  ii.  27,  32,  33.  Ph.  i.  27.  Ro.  xv.  6.  Now,  therefore, 
when  saints  have  the  rubbish  of  antichristian 
darkness  and  trumpery  removed,  then  they  shall 
have,  as  they  also  had  of  old,  but  one  heart,  one 
soul,  one  judgment,  one  mind,  and  shall  with  one 
heart  and  mouth  glorify  God.  The  which  also 
shall  be  prayed  for  of  all  the  saints,  even  of  all 
that  have  received  the  pure  language  before  these 
things  come  to  pass.  They  shall  '  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord  '  with  One  lip,  '  to  serve  him 
with  One  consent.'  Zep.  iii.  9.  0 !  the  heavenly 
spiritual  harmony  that  will  be  in  the  city  of  God 
in  those  days,  when  the  trumpeters  and  singers 
shall  be  a3  one,  to  make  one  sound,  then  the 
house  shall  be  filled  with  a  cloud.'2  2  Ch.  v.  13. 

'flvird.  When  he  saith  that  the  street  of  the 
city  was  pure  gold,  he  alludes  to  the  why  the  street 
floor  in  Solomon's  temple,  which  was  "called gold. 
overlaid  with  gold.  1  Ki.  vi.  30.  He  alludes  to  Solo- 
mon's chariot  also,  whose  bottom  was  paved  with 
love,  and  overlaid  with  gold.  Ca.  iii.  10.  By  the 
floor  of  the  temple,  we  are  to  understand  the  way 
of  holiness  j  and  by  the  chariot  of  Solomon,  tho 
triumphant  glory  of  that  way.  Again,  in  that  ho 
saith  this  street  is  gold,  he  would  have  us  to 
understand  the  worth  and  treasure  that  is  laid  up 
in  the  ways  of  God,  and  of  a  truly  gracious  heart. 
First  for  the  worth  and  treasure  that  is  laid  up  iu 
the  ways  of  God.  They  beget  light,  Pa.  cxix.  130, 
they  change  the  heart,  they  lead  from  death,  the 
devil,  and  hell,  to  life,  God,  and  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  rs.  cxix.  9.  Pr.  ii.  In  them  God  walks,  and 
those  that  walk  there  also  are  sure  to  meet  with 
him.  is.  lxiv.  5.  0  this  way,  it  is  the  way  which  'no 
fowl  knoweth,  and  which  the  vulture's  eye  hath  not 
seen  ;'  *  It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall 
lver  be  weighed  for  the  price  thereof.  -  The  gold 


habitual  course,  exercise,  or  custom,  as,  '  Thy  siu's  not  acci 
dental  but  a  trade.'— Hhaksjjeart.     Or,  trade  wind. —  (,Eu.; 


1  The  perfect  unity  of  the  Christian  world  is  not  likely  to 
take  place  before  the  glorious  meeting  in  the  holy  city,  under 
the  personal  reign  of  Christ.  The  divisions  among  Christians 
arise,  as  Bunyan  justly  says,  from  antichristian  rubbish,  dark- 
ness, and  trumpery  ;  the  great  evil  arising  from  difference  01 
opinion,  is  that  lust  of  domination  over  the  faith  of  others 
which  naturally  leads  to  bitterness  and  persecution.  In  the 
earliest  days  one  was  of  Paul,  another  of  Apollos,  and  another 
of  Cephas.  The  exercise  of  Christian  forbearance  was  not  an 
act  of  uniformity,  but  a  declaration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  '  Who 
ait  thou  that  judgest  auother  man's  servant ?'  '  Let  every  man 
be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  miud.'  Ro.  xiv.  4,  5.  —  (Ed.) 


43S 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


and  the  crystal  cannot  equal  It ;  and  the  exchange 
of  it  shall  not  be  for  jewels  of  fine  gold.  No  men- 
tion shall  be  made  of  coral  or  of  pearls  ;  for  the 
price  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies.'  Job  xxvui.  7, 15—18, 28. 
All  the  ways  of  God  they  are  pleasantness,  and  all 
his  paths  are  peace,  and  ought  to  be  preferred 
before  our  necessary  food.  Pr.  iii.  17. 

Again,  as  the  ways  of  God  are  thus  rich,  and  so 
far  above  the  gold  and  rubies  of  the  world,  so  also 
is  that  sanctified  and  gracious  heart,  without  which 
no  man  can  walk  in  this  golden  street.  It  is  not 
every  clown  with  his  clumping  dirty  shoes  that  i3 
admitted  into  kings'  privy-chambers  and  private 
palaces ;  neither  doth,  or  will  God,  at  the  day  of 
New  Jerusalem,  suffer  any  to  trace  about  this 
golden  street,  but  such  as  have  golden  feet,  and 
that  beautified  with  goodly  shoes.  For  as  for  this 
street,  all  that  walk  in  it,  they  must  be  golden 
men,  with  golden  Itearts,  and  with  graces  that  are 
'  much  more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth.' 
Ca.  viL  1.  1  Pe.  i.  7.  Re.  iii.  18. 

Further,  in  that  he  saith  this  street  is  gold, 
'pure  gold,'  he  giveth  us  to  understand  also  what 
great  delight  and  pleasure  the  Lord's  people  will 
take  in  his  ways  and  ordinances  in  that  day.  There 
will  not  then  be  that  backwardness  to  do  good,  and 
to  receive  God,  as  there  is  in  these  more  dry  and 
empty  days  of  the  gospel.  As  gold  is  pleasing 
to  the  covetous  man  and  worldling,  so  shall  the 
ways  of  God  be  to  the  saints  and  godly  at  that 
day.  Now  we  have  strong  corruptions  and  weak 
grace,  but  then  we  shall  have  strong  grace  and 
weak  withered  corruptions.  You  that  are  spiritual, 
you  know  what  an  high  and  goodly  lifting  up  of 
heart  one  small  gale  of  the  good  Spirit  of  God  will 
make  in  your  souls,  how  it  will  make  your  lusts  to 
languish,  and  your  souls  to  love,  and  take  pleasure 
in  the  Lord  that  saves  you.  You  know,  I  say, 
what  a  flame  of  love,  and  bowels,  and  compassion, 
and  self-denial,  and  endeared  affection  to  God  and 
all  saints,  it  will  beget  in  the  soul.  0!  it  is  good 
to  be  here,  saith  the  gracious  heart.  Well,  and 
so  thou  shalt  be  always,  if  thou  live  to  see  New 
Jerusalem  settled  in  her  own  place,  is.  lxv.  17— 25. 

[Fourth.]  '  And  the  street  of  the  city  was  pure 
What  is  meant  by    gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass.' 
b'lass  Mark,  a  street  of  gold  like  glass,  a 

street  of  gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass.  By 
glass  here,  as  also  in  ver.  18,  we  are  to  understand 
the  Word.  Ja.i.23— 25.  Wherefore,  when  he  saith 
the  street,  the  golden  street,  was  like  unto  glass, 
he  means,  that  the  walking  and  carriage  of  the 
saints  at  this  day  shall  be  like  unto,  or  according 
to,  the  Word,  the  life  of  the  saints  answering  the 
life  of  the  Word  and  rule  of  the  Lord  Christ. 

Again,  in  that  he  doth  add  to  glass  the  word 
transparent,  he  would  have  us  to  understand 
thereby  these  two  things. 


1.  That  the  walking  and  ways  of  holiness  of  the 
saints  shall  be  more  in  the  power  and  ™      „   , 

Ml  •  Tlle      fi'"St      reaSf>n 

spirit  of  the  Word,  than  all  along  in  why  transparent 
the  reign  of  Antichrist  they  have  gass' 
been.  For  transparent  glass,  it  is  the  most  clear 
and  excellent  glass,  and  goeth  as  far  beyond  other 
sorts  of  glass,  as  he  that  walks  iu  the  spirit  and 
power  of  the  commandment  goes  beyond  him  that 
only  walks  in  the  letter  and  outward  word  thereof. 
Alas,  the  churches  of  Christ,  at  their  first  assem- 
bling, will  be  like  the  coming  together  of  Ezekiel's 
bones,  clothed  much  with  flesh  and  sinews,  but 
greatly  void  of  spirit  and  life.  Ez.  xxxvii.  7,  8.  Where- 
fore the  spirit,  power,  holiness,  and  majesty  that 
now  will  appear  in  the  church,  it  will  greatly 
transcend  and  go  beyond  the  spirit,  power,  and 
holiness  that  hath  accompanied  her  in  former  days. 
Then  shall  the  sun  be  ashamed,  and  the  moon 
confounded,  when  the  Lord  shall  reign  in  Mount 
Zion,  &c.  is.  xxiv.  23.  Then  shall  the  sun  be 
ashamed,  that  is,  then  shall  that  little  light  and 
understanding  of  the  Word,  that  hath  been  in  the 
church  in  the  days  when  a  third  part  of  the  glory 
of  the  gospel  was  hid  by  the  smoke  of  the  pit,  be, 
as  it  were,  laid  aside  and  be  useless.  Re.  viu.i2;  ix.2. 
Every  saint  shall  be  under  the  light  of  a  sun  that 
shines  seven-fold  brighter,  even  as  the  light  of 
seven  days.  We  see  it  is  so  in  some  measure  at 
this  day ;  what  light,  and  with  what  clearness  do 
the  saints  in  this  day  see  the  things  pertaining  to 
the  kingdom  of  God,  beyond  what  the  holy  and 
goodly  martyrs  and  saints  did  in  the  days  that 
were  before  us;  Huss,  Bilney,  Ridley,  Hooper,  Cran- 
mer,  with  their  brethren,  if  they  were  now  in  the 
world,  would  cry  out  and  say,  Our  light  and  know- 
ledge of  the  word  of  the  Testament  of  Christ  was 
much  inferior  to  the  light  that  at  this  day  is  broken 
forth,  and  that  will  yet  daily,  in  despite  of  men  and 
devils,  display  its  rays  and  beams  amongst  the  sons 


of 


When  the  children  of  Israel  were  to 


depart  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  Lord  made  known 
himself  to  them  otherwise  than  ever  he  made 
known  himself  either  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  or  Jacob, 
their  fathers.  Ex.vi.  3.  The  book  also,  at  the 
recovering  the  church  from  under  Antichrist,  is 
to  be  unlocked  and  unsealed  gradually,  first  one 
seal  and  afterwards  another,  and  last  of  all  the 
seventh,  before  which  time  the  book  will  never 
quite  be  opened.  Re.  v.  and  vi.  According  to  that 
of  the  angel,  '  Go  thy  way,  Daniel ;  for  the  words 
are  closed  up,  and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  end. 
Da  xii.  9.  In  which  time  (which  is  the  time  of  New 
Jerusalem)  they  shall  be  opened,  and  men  shall 


1  As  the  leaven  goes  on  ini]iercq)tibly  until  tin;  whole  is 
leavened,  so  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  must  increase.  How 
extraordinary  has  been  the  progress  of  Divine  truth  since 
Banyan's  days !  and  who  can  predict  what  it  will  be  in  another 
century  ? — (Ed.) 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


439 


consider  it  perfectly.'  Je.  xxx.  2i;  xxin.  sol  Where- 
fore, 

2.    It  must  needs  be  that  the  church  return  to 

TI     „„    ,  ,         her  ohl  and  primitive  love.  For  what 

a  he  second  reason  r 

why  transparent  is  the  cause  of  the  want  of  love  to 
Christ  and  one  another  now,  hut  our 
want  of  light  in  the  things,  mysteries,  and  privi- 
leges of  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God? 
Wherefore  this  being  come,  then  love  will  reign, 
and  have  her  perfect  work  among  the  godly.  Love 
is  the  very  quintessence  of  all  the  graces  of  the 
gospel,  and  is  as  transparent  to  them  ;  '  the 
greatest  of  these  is  charity.'  lCo.xffi.ia.  It  is  the 
'fulfilling  of  the  law,'  'the  bond  of  perfectness,' 
and  the  most  '  excellent  way.'  1  Co.  xii.  31.  Ro.  xiii.  10. 
1  Co.  xvi.  14.  Col.  Hi.  li.  Wherefore  the  Holy  Ghost  doth 
mean,  by  this  word  transparent  glass,  that  the 
height  of  light,  and  the  height  of  love,  will  be 
found  in  this  city;  all  their  things  shall  be  done 
without  confused  smoke  and  darkness,  and  also 
without  spiritual  pride  and  desire  of  vain-glory: 
then  shall  they  indeed  do  all  their  things  in  charity, 
and  in  the  feeling  bowels  and  fellowship  of  the 
gospel.  '  Then  shall  the  offering  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  be  pleasant  unto  the  Lord,  as  in  the 
days  of  old,  and  as  in  former  years.'  Mai.  iii.  4. 

Alas !  though  now  through  grace  the  saints  of 
God  have  attained  to  more  light  and  knowledge  in 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God  than  here- 
tofore they  had,  yet  their  light  is  far  inferior  to 
that  which  will  be  when  this  city  is  built.  Our 
spiritual  union  and  fellowship  in  the  very  bowels 
of  the  grace  and  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
also  is  yet  greatly  defective.  It  is  said  that  '  no 
man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple '  of  God, 
'  till  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were 
fulfilled.'  Re.  xv.  8.  But  when  the  seven  last  plagues 
are  spent,  and  when  all  the  adversaries  of  the 
church,  which  caused  terror  in  the  land  of  the 
living,  shall  be  laid  with  the  uncircumcised  in  the 
pit,  then  look  for  golden  days,  and  not  till  then. 
Eze.  xxxii.  18.  Then  shall  this  golden  street  be  finished ; 
that  is,  then  shall  the  light,  faith,  love,  and  holi- 
ness of  the  gospel  be  walked  in  and  embraced 
in  a  transparent  and  transcending  way.  '  He 
shall  cause  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  root ; 
Israel  shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of 
the  world  with  fruit.'  Is.  xxvu.  G. 

[  The  city  has  no  temple.] 
Ver.  22.   •  And  I  saw  no  temple  therein ;   for 
The   time   when   the  Lord    God   Almighty   and  the 
this    city   shall    Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it.'     These 

have  no  temple.  r 

words  do,  in  my  present  light,  point 
at  the  end  of  the  days  of  this  Jerusalem  here  in 
this  world  :  and  in  so  doing  they  signify  to  us, 
that  when  she  is  built,  she  shall  stand  and  continue 
in  this   her  glorious  state  afore-mentioned,  even 


until  that  glory  bo  swallowed  up  of  that  which  doth 
excel.  That  they  do  point  at  the  end  of  her  day  in 
this  world,  I  do  gather  from  these  particulars: 

First.  Because  they  are  the  last  words  of  the 
description  of  her  glory, — that  is,  these  and  the 
words  ensuing,  which  is  but  one  and  the  same 
continued  speech  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  conclude  that 
John,  in  this  description  of  this  city,  doth,  from 
first  to  last,  even  from  the  first  appearing  of  her 
as  she  cometh  out  of  Babylon  till  she  be  perfect  in 
glory,  give  us  the  relation  of  it.  First,  I  say, 
showing  us  her  descending,  then  her  building,  and 
afterward  the  glory  of  that  building  ;  at  the  end  of 
which  also  he  showeth  to  us  with  what  glory  he 
will  crown  this  glory,  even  by  swallowing  of  her  up 
with  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory. 

Second,  Because  in  these  words  he  doth  abso- 
lutely cut  otf  all  and  every  whit  of  her  outward 
and  external  glory ;  that  is,  as  to  outward  ordin- 
ances and  temple-worship,  which  yet  was  to  be 
most  famous  for  a  long  time  in  this  new  and  goodly 
city ;  which  he  verifies  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of 
this  prophecy,  which  chapter  is  a  summary  col- 
lecting of  the  church  in  her  fall  and  rise  under 
Antichrist,  which  church  there  in  her  rise  is  this 
city  here  in  her  glory  in  this  world.  He  tells  us 
there,  I  say,  that  when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world 
were  become  the  kingdoms  of  the  Lord,  and  of 
his  Christ,  that  'then  the  temple  of  God  wa9 
opened  in  heaven ;'  that  is,  temple-worship  under 
the  gospel  recovered  into  its  former  and  primitive 
state  and  purity,  in  which  it  was  before  the  com- 
ing in  of  the  man  of  sin.  Re.  xi.  15— 19,  compared  with  xv.  8. 

Which  temple  he  here  utterly  shutteth  out,  saying, 
'  I  saw  no  temple  therein  ;'  in  the  room  of  which 
he  setteth  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
God  his  Father,  making  them  to  stand  and  be  in 
the  room  of  temple  and  gospel-worship,  in  that 
manner  as  it  is  used  while  we  here  live  in  the  flesh. 
'  For  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are 
the  temple  of  it.'  It  is  true,  the  Lord  God  Al- 
mighty and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  this 
church  in  her  lowest  condition,  therefore  much 
more  when  she  is  brought  into  the  condition  that 
she  is  in  at  her  rebuilding;  but  yet,  neither  in  her 
low  estate,  nor  yet  in  her  highest,  is  it  proper  to 
say,  that  so  long  as  she  is  in  this  world,  God  will 
be  a  temple  to  her,  in  opposition  to  her  temple 
and  gospel-worship,  in  outward  and  New  Testa- 
ment administrations.  Wherefore  when  he  saith 
He  'saw  no  temple  therein,'  and  that  from  this 
reason,  because  'the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the 
Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it ;'  he  must  needs  aim  at 
a  state  to  which  the  church  cannot  attain  until 
her  Lord  comes.  For  then  will  that  which  is  per- 
fect be  come,  and  that  which  is  in  part  be  done 
away.    1  Cor  xiii.  iu. 


410 


THE   HOLY    CITY,  OR 


Now  that  the  temple  In  this  place  excluded,  can 
signify  nothing  else  but  the  outward 

What   this    ei-        °      f  %  n     f>  1  •  i  •   l 

eluded  temple  orderly  way  of  God  s  worship,  winch 
signifies.  ^  gamts  0Ught  with  conscience,   in 

faith,  to  he  found  in  till  their  Lord  comes,  con- 
sider that  our  New  Testament  doth  use  the  word 
'temple  '  three  several  ways:  1,  For  the  outward 
order  and  worship  or  discipline  of  the  Gospel, 
lie.  xi.  1-3.  2.  For  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  his 
church,  <fec.  3.  And  lastly,  For  the  Lord  God 
Almighty  and  the  Lamb,  which  here  are  said  to  be 
the  temple  of  this  city. 

Now  then,  when  he  saith  he  saw  '  No  temple 
therein,'  he  cannot  exclude  the  Lord  God  Almighty 
and  the  Lamb,  for  they  are  here  said  to  be  '  the 
temple  of  it.'  Neither  can  he  shut  out  the  church, 
which  is  the  body  of  Christ,  for  that  is  the  city 
itself;  yea,  and  the  church  shall  be  God's  temple, 
and  God  and  Christ  the  temple  of  the  church  for 
ever  and  ever.  lie  must  therefore  by  this  word 
'no  temple,'  exclude  only  the  outward  way  of 
gospel-worship,  in  which  the  saints  in  the  times  of 
the  New  Testament  both  meet  and  edify  each 
other,  and  also  meet  their  God,  and  are  blessed 
and  refreshed  by  him.  Again,  that  this  outward 
gospel-worship  should  be  laid  aside  while  the 
church  is  in  this  world,  before  her  Lord  doth 
come  to  be  enjoyed  by  her,  as  touching  his  per- 
sonal presence ;  it  looks  too  like  ranting  opinions, 
and  contradiction  to  Scripture,  for  me  to  believe. 
l  Cor.  xi.  26.  For  when  he  comes,  but  not  till  then, 
shall  these  things  be  laid  aside. 

Besides,  that  which  yet  confirms  me  more  fully 
in  this  opinion,  is  because  herein  this  New  Jeru- 
salem doth  most  exactly  answer  the  city  and 
temple,  which  was  built  after  the  captivity;  which 
city  and  temple  being  once  built,  it  stood  till 
Christ  our  Lord  did  visit  them  in  his  own  per- 
sonal coming  the  first  time ;  as  the  prophets  also 
said  it  should.  'The  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,'  saith 
one,  *  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple,  even  the 
messenger  of  the  covenant,  whom  ye  delight  in  ; 
behold,  he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts.' 
Mai.  iii.  i.  And  again,  '  I  will  shake  all  nations, 
and  the  desire  of  all  nations  shall  come ;  and  I 
will  fill  this  house  with  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of 
Hosts.'  Wherefore  'the  glory  of  this  latter  house 
shall  be  greater  than  [that]  of  the  former,  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts:  and  in  this  place  will  I  give 
peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts.'  Hag.  ii.  7,9. 

Now  observe,  that  from  the  time  of  the  build- 
ing of  the  second  temple  to  the  coming  of  Christ, 
the  worship  of  the  temple  order  was  to  be  by  all 
most  devoutly  and  continually  observed.  But 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  was  come,  and  had  estab- 
lished his  own  more  honourable  and  New  Testa- 
ment dispensation,  then  all  the  former  temple- 
worship  fell  to  the  ground,  and  became,  with  all 


the  instruments  of  worship  that  thereunto  belonged, 
null  and  void.  Yea,  and  it  was  a  derogation  to 
his  gospel  to  offer  to  uphold  that  former  way  of 
worship,  after  he  had  by  his  own  personal  pre- 
sence and  Spirit  brought  in  that  other  dispensa- 
tion. All  which,  I  say,  will  be  answered  by  our 
second  and  New  Testament  New  Jerusalem.  For 
as  the  Old  Jerusalem  was  built  after  the  Jews 
were  come  out  of  literal  Babylon,  so  is  our  New 
Jerusalem  built  after  our  coming  out  of  the  auti- 
christian  oppression  of  spiritual  Babylon.  Again, 
as  that  city  did  after  she  was  built  continue  and 
retain  her  temple-worship,  until  the  personal  ap- 
pearing of  Christ  the  first  time,  so  New  Jerusalem 
shall  retain  and  hold  her  outward  New  Testa- 
ment worship  till  He  comes  in  person  the  second 
time.  After  all  which,  as  the  second  temple  was 
swallowed  up  of  a  more  heavenly  and  spiritual 
dispensation  by  the  personal  presence  of  Christ, 
so  shall  also  the  New  Jerusalem  temple-worship 
be  swallowed  up  by  the  glory  of  the  appearing  of 
the  person  of  Christ  the  second  time ;  as  Paul 
saith,  for  he  speaks  in  the  person  of  Christ,  'Till 
I  come,  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  exhortation, 
to  doctrine,'  <fcc.  ITim.  iv.13. 

Thus  then,  when  this  holy  city  doth  once  again 
appear  upon  the  stage,  and  in  her  own  situation, 
and  when  she  hath  been  showed  in  the  attire  of  a 
queen  before  the  face  of  all  nations,  and  their 
kings ;  and  when  she  hath  by  the  glory  of  the 
light  of  her  New  Testament  temple,  gathered,  as 
with  a  net,  the  number  of  God's  elect;  then  she  is 
taken  into  her  husband's  privy  chamber,  where 
she  and  he  alone  shall  be  in  that  blessed  fellow- 
ship and  communion  that  shall  not  again  be  once 
eclipsed,  or  in  the  least  interrupted  to  eternity. 

Thus  have  I  showed  you  my  present  light  into 
this  portion  of  the  Holy  Scripture.  If  any  can 
give  me  further,  I  hope  I  shall  not  refuse  it.  But 
as  yet,  methinks  this  should  be  the  genuine  sense 
of  this  place,  and  is  the  very  track  of  John  him- 
self. For  after  he  had  seen  the  wall  for  present 
safety,  the  foundations  for  continuation,  the  gates 
for  entrance,  and  the  like,  then  he  comes  to  tell 
us  of  the  glory  of  all,  and  of  the  street  itself  at 
last;  which  indeed  is  the  last  and  end  of  all  the 
order  of  God,  and  to  continue  till  an  end  be  put 
to  it  by  mortality's  being  swallowed  up  of  life. 
As  is  yet  more  fully  showed  you  in  the  next  verse 
of  this  description. 

[  Tito  city  needs  not  tlie  light  of  sun  or  moon.] 
Verse  23.  '  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun, 

neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it :  for  the  glory 

of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light 

thereof.' 

♦  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun.'     That 

is,  after  temple-worship  is  over:  this  verse  is  added 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


441 


therefore  for  further  clearing  up  and  illustrating 
of  that  which  he  said  before.  There  he  tells  us 
this  city  had  'no  temple,'  and  here  he  tells  us  she 
needed  neither  the  light  of  the  sun  or  moon. 
There  he  said,  '  The  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the 
Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it;'  and  here  he  saith, 
they  are  the  light  thereof.  The  substance  of 
which,  in  the  language  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  this: 
the  reason  why  temple-worship  is  now  gone  and 
over,  it  is  because  there  is  now  no  need  in  this 
city  of  the  light  of  the  sun  and  the  moon;  and  the 
reason  why  she  hath  now  no  need  of  them,  is  be- 
cause the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are 
to  it  instead  of  both  temple  and  light.  '  For  the 
Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple 
of  it.'  '  For  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and 
the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.'  Whereby  we  may 
note,  that  though  the  light  in  which  she  descended, 
being  the  purity  of  temple-worship,  was  glorious, 
yet  this  city  shall,  when  she  is  once  built,  so 
advance  from  glory  to  glory,  that  at  the  last  she 
shall  he  more  happy  without  the  help  of  that  light, 
without  which  she  had  been  for  ever  unbuilt,  than 
she  was  by  it  in  the  midst  of  the  fulness  of  it. 

'  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,'  <kc. 
The  word  sun  is  in  Scripture  taken  divers  wa\  s ; 
sometimes  for  the  true  and  natural  sun  in  the  fir- 
mament; sometimes  again  for  persecution,  and 
the  rage  of  the  enemy,  <fcc.  Jos.  x.  12.  Mat.xifi.6.  But. 
1  take  'sua'  here  not  to  be  any  of  these,  but  for 
the  good  and  pure  word  of  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
unfolded,  opened,  and  explained  by  the  servants 
of  Christ ;  which  sun  is  the  same  that  before  you 
tind  to  be  darkened  by  the  Antichristian  fog  and 
mist,  which  was  darkened,  I  say,  even  to  a  third 
part  of  it.  Re.  viii.  12;  ix.  2.  This  sun,  or  word  of  the 
gospel,  Paul  saith  it  is  shadowed  forth  even  by 
that  which  shineth  in  the  firmament  of  heaven, 
because  as  that  by  its  light  and  shining,  giveth  to 
those  that  have  eyes,  to  see  the  glory  and  excel- 
lency of  this  world  ;  so  by  the  shining  and  light 
of  the  gospel  is  given  'the  light  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,' 
and  a  view  of  the  excellency  of  the  things  of  the 
world  to  come.  2  Cor.  iv.  3—6.  Now,  I  say,  though 
while  the  church  is  in  this  world,  and  on  this  side 
the  state  of  glory,  she  cannot  live  and  flourish 
without  the  shining  of  this  sun,  but  would  be  life- 
less and  lightles3,  and  without  all  heat  and  com- 
fort— for  it  is  the  entrance  of  the  law  that  giveth 
light  here,  and  that  lighteneth  the  eyes,  'making 
wise  the  simple.'  Ps.  xix.  7,8;  cxix.  130 — yet  at  the  day 
ef  the  coming  of  her  Lord  in  person  she  shall  see 
far  more  clearly  without  the  thus  shining  of  the 
sun  than  ever  she  did  or  could  see  with  and  by 
it.  '  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun.'  For 
when  by  the  light  of  it  the  whole  body  of  the 
elect  have  found  out  the  way   to  this  city,  and 

vol.  in. 


when  they  have  also  by  this  light  accomplished 
and  fulfilled  all  their  work;  yea,  when  the  Lord 
himself  is  come,  and  doth  immediately  communi- 
cate far  more  glorious  light  to  this  city  without  it 
than  ever  he  did  by  it;  what  need  is  there  then  ot 
the  light  of  this  sun?  for  that  is  to  be  of  use  but 
for  the  time  present,  even  until  the  whole  of  the 
body  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  come  to  the  perfect 
measure,  even  'to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ.'  Ep.  iv.  10— 12.  So  then,  when 
the  body  of  Christ  is  in  every  sense  completed  in 
this  life  by  the  light  of  the  sunshine  of  his  holy 
gospel,  what  need  of  this  sun?  And  hence  it  is 
that  the  word  of  the  gospel  is  called  '  the  word  of 
reconciliation,'  'the  word  of  faith.'  and  'the  words 
of  this  life.' 2  Cor.  v.  19.  Ko.  x.  8.  Ac.  v.  20.  Wherefore, 
I  say,  it  ceaseth  when  there  is  no  more  to  be 
reconciled,  and  when  faith  in  all  is  perfected,  and 
when  this  life  is  put  an  end  unto  by  the  coming  in 
of  another.  For  '  when  that  which  is  perfect  is 
come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done 
away.'   1  Co.  xiii.  8— 10. 

The  ministers  of  the  gospel  are  of  use  so  long 
as  there  is  either  elect  to  be  converted,  or  any  con- 
verted soul  to  be  perfected  by  that  measure  of  per- 
fection that  God  hath  appointed  on  this  side  glory; 
but  when  this  work  is  done,  their  ministry  ceaseth. 
Wherefore,  though  like  the  widow's  sons,  they  are 
busy  to  borrow  vessels  for  the  oil  so  long  as  it  is 
running,  and  emptying  itself  out  of  the  great  and 
principal  barrel ;  yet  when  it  ceaseth,  as  it  will  do, 
when  there  are  no  more  vessels  to  be  found,  then 
let  them  sit  down  as  they,  and  receive  of  the 
fruits  of  their  labour,  for  the  reward  of  their  work 
is  then  only  to  be  enjoyed  by  them.  2KL  iv.  l-c. 

'  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither 
of  the  moon  to  shine  in  it.'  This  word  moon  also, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  sun,  is  to  be  taken  divers 
ways  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth ;  sometimes  for  the 
natural  one,  sometimes  for  the  world  and  persecu- 
tors, itc.  Jos.  x.  13.  Re.  xii.  1.  Vs.  exxi.  6.     Lut  moon  here 

is  to  be  taken  for  the  church  of  God,  with  refer- 
ence to  her  life,  conversation,  duties,  and  exem- 
plary behaviour,  in  which  she  is  conversant  on  this 
side  glory  ;  according  to  that  of  the  Song,  '  Who 
is  she  that  looketh  forth  as  the  morning,  fair  as  the 
moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army 
with  banners?'  Ca.  vi.io.  When  he  saith,  then,  that 
at  this  day  there  shall  be  here  no  need  of  the 
shining  light  of  the  moon,  he  means  that  this  citj 
at  this  day,  in  the  state  she  is  in  when  she  hath 
the  person  of  the  Lamb  in  her,  then  she  shall  have 
no  need  of  the  growth  of  Christianity,  for  they 
shall  be  all  perfect ;  nor  no  need  of  mortification, 
for  there  shall  he  no  sin.  They  shall  not  need  now, 
as  in  time  past,  to  exhort  and  encourage  one  an- 
other to  stick  fast  to  the  promise,  for  they  shall 
be  swallowed  up  of  life  and  open  vision.  2  Co.  v.  4. 

56 


442 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OK 


Here  shall  be  no  need  either  of  prayer,  of  repent- 
ance, of  faith,  or  of  good  works,  as  afore.  '  And 
the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the 
moon  to  shine  in  it.' 

Now,  I  say,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  pleased  to  bring 
in  here  the  shining  virtues  of  the  church  under  the 
notion  of  a  shining  moon,  because,  as  the  church 
herself  is  compared  to  the  moon,  so  her  virtues  are 
as  naturally  compared  to  a  shining  light;  as  Christ 
saith,  '  Let  your  light  so  shine,'  Mat.  v.  16;  and 
again,  '  Let  your  loin3  be  girded  about,  and  your 
lights  burning. '  Lu.  xii.  35.  Phi.  ii.  15.  For,  indeed,  while 
The  light  of  the  we  are  here»  that  church  and  congre- 
pimrcu  compared  Ration  of  the  Lord  doth  most  shine, 

tu   the    light   of  °  ' 

the  moon,  upon  a  and  most  send  forth  the  golden  rays 
and  pleasant  beams  of  Christianity, 
that  is  most  in  the  exercise  of  the  afore-mentioned 
virtues.  Take  away  the  moon,  and  the  night  is 
doubtful ;  or  though  the  moon  be  in  the  firmament, 
if  she  hath  lost  her  light,  the  night  is  not  thereby 
made  more  comfortable.  And  thus,  I  say,  it  is 
first  with  the  world,  where  here  there  is  no  church 
to  shine,  or  where  there  is  a  church  that  doth  not 
so  shine  that  others  may  see  and  be  lighted.  For 
while  the  day  of  time  doth  last,  even  the  world 
itself  hath  need  of  the  shining  of  the  church  ;  but 
at  this  day  this  time  will  be  no  longer,  because  the 
day  of  eternity  will  break,  and  by  that  means  cause 
the  world  that  now  is,  even  the  world  of  the  un- 
godly, to  cease  to  have  a  being  here  any  longer. 
Therefore  now  no  need  of  the  moon,  or  of  the  light 
thereof,  to  shine  before  that  which  is  not.1 

Second.  Again,  as  the  church  is  iu  her  light 
before  men  as  the  moon  is  in  her  light  in  the  night 
to  the  world,  so,  as  I  said  before,  this  city  which 
is  called  also  heaven,  she,  even  she,  shall  have  no 
need  of  these  things,  for  she  shall  be  taken  up  in 
open  vision,  and  shall  be  completely  delivered  from 
all  imperfection ;  she  shall  not  need  now  the  light 
of  her  children  to  provoke  her  and  to  stir  her  up 
to  this  or  the  other  act  of  holiness ;  all  shall  be 
done,  all  shall  be  complete,  the  Lord  himself  is 
come.  Indeed,  while  Christ  is  absent  as  touching 
his  person,  and  while  the  work  of  God  is  not  yet 
completely  done  in  the  church,  there  will  be  need 
both  of  the  light  of  sun  and  moon,  but  when  the 
work  is  done,  and  he  come,  then  these  things  will 
be  out  of  use.  Thus  '  the  path  of  the  just  is  as 
the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto 
the  perfect  day.'  rr.  iv.  is. 

'For  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the 
Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.'  This  is  rendered 
as  the  reason  why  at  this  day  both  the  light  of  the 
sun  and  moon  are  needless ;  it  is  because  '  the 
glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,'  and  because  '  the 
Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.'     Now  the  glory  of  God 


There  being  no  night  there  but  perpetual  day. — (En.) 


must  be  understood  in  this  place,  not  of  that  glory 
that  doth  attend  the  church  in  this  world,  for  that 
glory  doth  attend  the  church  upon  the  account  of 
her  purity  of  worship,  of  temple-worship,  and  doth 
either  abide  on  her,  or  withdraw  itself,  according 
to  her  exact  observing  the  rule,  or  declining  from 
it,  as  I  have  showed  you  in  the  be<rin-   ,  „    „ 

'  •'.  a  *  See  the  expo- 

ning  of  this  discourse.*  But  the  glory  sitinn  of  the 
that  here  you  read  of,  it  is  a  glory  that 
supplieth  this  city  without  those  ordinances  ;  yea, 
therefore,  those  ordinances,  as  the  temple  and  the 
light  of  the  sun  and  moon,  do  cease  because  of  the 
glory  of  this  glory  that  now  is  come  into  this  city. 
'  The  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the 
moon  to  shine  in  it,'  mark,  '  for  the  glory  of  God 
did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.' 

Wherefore,  I  say,  this  glory  that  now  he  speaks 
of,  it  is  the  glory  that  shall  possess  this  city  at  the 
end  of  her  glory  in  this  world ;  wherefore,  as  saith 
the  Holy  Ghost  by  Isaiah  the  prophet,  from  this 
day  forward,  '  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light 
by  day,  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give 
light  unto  thee ;  but  the  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee 
an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory. '  is.  lx.  iy. 

'For  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,'  &c.  Thus 
it  was  at  the  finishing  of  the  tabernacle  in  the 
wilderness,  and  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem ;  both 
which  were  figures,  in  their  finishing,  of  the  finishing 
of  the  state  of  the  church  in  this  world ;  and  it  is 
said  of  them,  that  in  the  day  when  they  in  all 
things  were  accomplished,  according  to  the  fashion 
that  was  revealed  before  concerning  their  order 
and  accomplishment,  that  then  the  glory  of  God 
so  appeared  upon  them,  that  neither  Moses  nor 
Aaron  was  able  to  enter  in,  or  to  stand  therein, 
because  of  the  cloud,  and  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
that  at  that  time  filled  the  house.  Ex.  xl.  33,  34.  l  Ki. 
viii.  io,  ii.  Thus  you  see  this  city  descends  in  one 
measure  of  glory,  and  is  consummate  in  another 
measure  of  glory.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  was 
upon  the  mount  Sinai  while  the  pattern  of  the 
tabernacle  was  giving,  but  it  rested  on  the  taber- 
nacle when  the  work  thereof  was  finished ;  to  sig- 
nify, I  say,  that  the  glory  of  God  will  rest  in  his 
ordinances,  and  in  his  church  by  them,  so  long  as 
ordinances  are  in  use  ;  but  when  they  are  needless, 
then  it  will  rest  in  the  church  without  them,  and 
that  more  gloriously  than  ever  it  therein  did  rest 
by  them. 

'  For  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the 
Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.'  Mark,  though  now 
there  shall  be  no  need  of  temple,  sun,  or  moon, 
yet  Christ  the  Lamb,  or  the  Man  who  was  offered 
in  sacrifice  for  our  redemption,  shall  be  of  use  and 
benefit ;  '  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and 
the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.'  Wherefore,  all 
that  we  who  are  the  saved  shall  enjoy  of  glory  and 
sweetness  in  another  world,  though  we  shall  not 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


4+3 


enjoy  it  from  God  through  Christ,  by  and  in  the 
ordinances,  yet  we  shall  enjoy  it  through  Christ  the 
Lamb  without  them  ;  '  for  the  Lamb  is  the  light 
of  it.'  By  this  word  Lamb,  he  would  have  us 
understand  that  when  we  are  in  glory,  the  blood, 
death,  and  bloody  conquest  that  the  man  Christ  did 
get  over  our  infernal  enemies,  will  be  of  eternal 
use  to  us ;  because  that  benefit  of  Christ  shall  not 
only  for  ever  be  the  foundation  of  our  eternal  feli- 
city, but  the  burden  of  our  song  of  glory  in  all  our 
raptures  among  the  angels.  Re.  v.  a.  It  will  be  the 
blood,  the  blood,  the  redeeming  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
*  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power  be 
unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto 
the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.'  Re.  v.  13.  It  is  he  in 
whom  will  be  found  the  seven  eyes,  the  seven  spirits 
of  God,  in  whose  light  we  shall  see  the  heights 
and  depths  of  those  springs  and  everlasting  foun- 
tains and  depths  of  glory  for  ever;  and,  indeed, 
the  conceit  of  the  contrary  is  foolish.  Zec.iii.o.  Re.v.c 
Is  not  Christ  the  head,  and  we  the  members?  and 
do  not  the  members  receive  their  whole  light,  guid- 
ance, and  wisdom  from  it  ?  Is  not  he  also  the 
price,  the  ground,  and  bottom  of  our  happiness, 
both  in  this  world  and  that  which  is  to  come  ? 
And  is  it  possible  it  should  be  forgotten,  or  that, 
by  it,  our  joy,  light,  and  heaven  should  not  be 
made  the  sweeter  to  all  eternity  ?  Our  soul  is 
now  bound  up  in  him,  as  in  a  bundle  of  life.  1  sa. 
xxv.  29.  And  when  we  come  thither,  he  is  still  the 
Christ,  our  life ;  and  it  is  by  our  being  where  he 
is  that  we  shall  behold  his  glory  and  our  glory, 
because  he  is  glorified.  Col.  m.  3,  4.  Jn.  xviL  24.  •  For 
the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is 
the  light  thereof.'  As  he  said,  'Ye  now  therefore 
have  sorrow;  but  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your 
heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from 

yOU.'  Jn.  xvi.  22. 

Thus  much  of  this  city,  her  descending,  her 
fashion,  her  glory,  and  of  her  wading  through 
glory,  from  glory  to  glory. 

[FOCRTH.    THE  INHABITANTS  OF  TIIE  CITY,  TnEIIt 
QUALITY,  AND  NUMEROUSNESS.] 

Ver.  24.  •  And  the  nations  of  them  which  are 
saved  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it ;  and  the  kings 
of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory  and  honour  into 
it.'  After  this  long  and  pleasant  description  of 
this  holy  and  new  Jerusalem,  the  Holy  Ghost  now 
falleth  upon  a  relation  of  the  people  that  shall  be 
the  inhabitants  of  this  city,  and  of  their  numerous- 
ness  and  quality. 

'And  the  nations,'  etc.  The  nations  of  the 
world,  both  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles. 

Every  one  knoweth  what  the  nations  are,  where- 
fore I  need  not  stay  upon  the  explication  of  that, 
f  >r  it  doth  in  general  include  the  multitude  of  the 


sinners  of  the  world.  Ep.  ii.  1-3.  1  Co.  vL  0-11.  Tit.  iii.  x 
Therefore,  when  he  saith,  the  nations  shall  walk 
in  the  light  of  this  city,  it  is  as  if  he  had  said, 
that  at  this  day,  when  she  is  here  in  her  tranquillity, 
the  sinners  and  disobedient  among  the  sons  of  men 
shall  by  multitudes  and  whole  kingdoms  come  in 
and  close  with  the  church  and  house  of  God. 
These  spiders  shall  take  hold  with  their  hands,  and 
be  in  kings'  palaces.  i*r.  m.  23. 

1  And  the  nations,'  &c.  For  this  word,  •  the 
nations,'  is  a  great  word,  and  it  com-  Howthenatioiu 
prehendeth  much ;  mark,  it  doth  not  k"w  talis!? 
say  a  nation,  or  some  nations,  neither  lem- 
doth  it  say  few  or  small  nations,  but  indefinitely, 
the  nations,  many  nations,  strong  nations,  all 
nations,  the  nations  in  general ;  only  he  ties  them 
up  with  this  limit,  the  nations  of  them  that  are 
saved,  is.  m.  15 ;  u.  22 ;  IL  2.  Which  yet  is  not  so  much 
spoken  to  clip  off  the  multitude  that  we  suppose 
may  then  be  converted,  as  to  show  us  their  quali- 
fications and.  happiness  ;  as  he  saith  by  the  prophet 
in  another  place,  Thy  children  shall  be  all  holy, 
or  righteous,  '  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy 
children.'  is.  Uv.  13;  he,  21.  'And  the  nations  of  them 
which  are  saved  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it.' 
Surely  the  Holy  Ghost  would  never  have  spoken  at 
such  a  rate  as  this,  if  he  had  not  intended  to  show 
us  that  at  the  day  of  the  setting  up  of  this  Jeru- 
salem, a  great  harvest  of  sinners  shall  be  gathered 
by  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  But  the  truth  is,  the 
Scriptures  go  with  open  arms  towards  the  latter 
end  of  the  world,  even  as  if  they  would  grasp  and 
compass  about  almost  all  people  then  upon  the  face 
of  the  whole  earth  with  the  grace  and  mercy  of 
God.  'The  earth,'  saith  God,  'shall  be  full  of 
the  knowledge'  of  the  glory  'of  the  Lord,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea.'  Is.  xi.  9.  Hai>.  ii.  14  As  he  saith, 
also,  for  the  comfort  of  the  church  in  another  place, 
'  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of 
my  hands,  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me. 
Thy  children  shall  make  haste  ;  thy  destroyers  and 
they  that  made  thee  waste  shall  go  forth  of  thee. 
Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  behold :  all 
these  gather  themselves  together,  and  come  to 
thee.  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  surely 
clothe  thee  with  them  all,  as  with  an  ornament, 
and  bind  them  on  thee,  as  a  bride  doeth.  For  thy 
waste  and  thy  desolate  places,  and  the  land  of  thy 
destruction,  shall  even  now  be  too  narrow  by  reason 
of  the  inhabitants,  and  they  that  swallowed  thee 
up  shall  be  far  away.  The  children  which  tbou 
shalt  have,  after  thou  hast  lost  the  other,  shall 
say  again  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  to  strait  for 
me;  give  place  to  me,  that  I  may  dwell.  Then 
shalt  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  Who  hath  begotten 
me  these,  seeing  I  have  lost  my  children,  and  am 
desolate,  a  captive  and  removing  to  and  fro?  and 
who  hath  brought  up  these?      Behold,  I   was  left 


444 


THE   HOLY  CITY,  OR 


alone,  these,  where  had  they  been?'  Is.xlfc.l6— 21. 
Thus  the  multitudes  of  the  nations  shall  at  this  day 
be  converted  to  the  Lord,  and  be  made  the  inhabi- 
tants of  this  Jerusalem  ;  as  he  saith  again,  '  The 
kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of 
our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ.'  Re.  xi.  15.  And  again, 
'  The  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the  greatness  of 
the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given 
to  tbe  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose 
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  all  do- 
minions shall  serve  and  obey  him.'  Da  vfi.27. 

And  observe  it,  these  promises  are  to  be  fulfilled 
in  the  last  days,  at  the  time  of  the  pouring  forth 
of  the  last  vial,  which  is  the  time  of  the  sounding 
of  the  last  of  the  seven  trumpets ;  for  then  this 
city  shall  be  built,  and  Lucifer  fallen  from  heaven; 
then  the  prisoners  shall  be  set  at  liberty,  and  the 
people  be  gathered  together,  '  and  the  kingdoms 
to  serve  the  Lord.'  is. a.  1, 2;  «v. 4— 6.  Ps.  cii.  20— 22.  Re. 
xi.  15—17.  '  Rejoice,  0  ye  nations,  with  his  people, 
for  he  will  avenge  the  blood  of  his  servants,  and 
will  render  vengeance  to  his  adversaries,  and  will 
be  merciful  unto  his  land,  and  to  his  people.'  De. 
xxxii.  a.  Alas  !  it  is  now  towards  the  end  of  the 
world,  and  therefore  now  all  is  going,  if  the  Lord 
steps  not  in  with  the  riches  of  his  grace.  Where- 
fore now  at  last,  before  all  be  turned  into  fire  and 
ashes,  behold  the  Lord  casts  the  net  among  the 
multitude  of  fish,  and  the  abundance  of  the  sea 
shall,  without  fail,  be  converted  to  Jerusalem. 
Is.  lx.  5.  Though  Satan  and  Antichrist  have  had 
their  day  in  the  world,  and  by  their  outrage  have 
made  fearful  havoc  of  the  souls  of  sinners  from 
time  to  time,  yet  now  at  length  God  will  strike  in 
for  a  share  with  them,  and  his  Son  '  shall  divide 
the  spoil  with  the  strong.'  is.iiii.  12.  Wherefore  he 
now  sets  up  this  city,  puts  the  glory  of  heaven 
upon  her,  provides  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth 
for  her  situation,  Is.  lxvi.  22;  drives  profaneness  into 
the  holes  and  dens  of  the  earth  ;  giveth  righteous- 
ness authority  to  reign  in  the  world,  2  Pe.  iii.  13;  and 
takes  off  the  veil  from  all  faces,  that  none  may 
hereafter  be  for  ever  beguiled  by  blindness  and 
ignorance,  is.  xxv.  7.  Now  shall  they  make  merry 
with  the  things  of  God ;  now  shall  all  eat  the  fat 
and  drink  the  sweet.  1  Ki.  iv.  20.  Ke.  \-hi.  10, 12.  For  '  in 
this  mountain  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto 
all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of  wines  on 
the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on 
the  lees  well  refined.'  is.  xxv.  6. 

1  And  the  nations  of  them  which  are  saved  shall 
walk  in  the  light  of  it.'  They  '  shall  walk  in  the 
light  of  it.'  That  is,  in  the  light  that  is  in  it 
while  it  is  in  its  purity  in  this  world,  and  in  the 
glory  of  it  when  it  is  in  its  perfection  and  immor- 
tality in  another.  Whence  note  by  the  way,  that 
in  the  midst  of  all  this  glory,  or  while  the  glorious 
light  of  the  gospel  shall  thus  shine  in  the  world, 


yet  even  then  there  will  be  some  also  that  will  not 
see  and  rejoice  in  the  glory  hereof.  But  as  for 
those,  whoever  they  are,  they  are  excluded  from  a 
share  in  the  blessed  and  goodly  privileges  of  this 
city.  '  The  nations  of  them  which  are  saved  shall 
walk  in  the  light  of  it.' 

'And  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glorv 
and  honour  into  it.'  By  these  words  are  great 
things  held  forth.  He  told  us  before  that  the 
nations  of  them  that  are  saved  shall  walk  in  the 
light  of  it;  and  here  he  tells  us  that  Howthekinosof 
even  their  kings  also,  the  kings  of  the  fikT*  jg 
earth,  do  bring  their  honour  and  glory  Jerusalem. 
to  it.  The  people  of  the  nations  they  are  but  like 
to  single  pence  and  halfpence,  but  their  kings  like 
gold  angels  and  twenty-shilling  pieces.1  Where- 
fore, when  he  saith  that  the  kings  of  the  earth  do 
bring  their  glory  and  honour  unto  it,  it  argueth 
that  the  gospel  and  the  grace  of  God,  when  it  is 
displayed  in  its  own  nature,  and  seen  in  it3  own 
complexion,  even  then  they  that  have  most  of  the 
honour  and  glory  of  the  world  will  yet  stoop  their 
top-gallant2  unto  it.  *  Because  of  thy  temple 
which  is  at  Jerusalem,  shall  kings  bring  presents 
unto  thee.'  Ps.  ixviii.  29.  is.  xiix.  22,  23.  'The  kings  of 
Tarshish,  and  of  the  isles,  shall  bring  presents'  to 
thee:  '  the  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer 
gifts.  Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him ; 
all  nations  shall  serve  him.'  Ps.  lxxii.  10, 11.  The  kings 
shall  see  and  arise,  and  '  princes  also  shall  wor- 
ship because  of  the  Lord,'  <fcc.  is.  xiix.  7.  The  kings 
shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  princes  to  the  bright- 
ness of  thy  rising,  is.  lx.  1—5.  '  The  Gentiles  shall 
see  thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  thy  glory.' 
is.  ixii.  2.  Yea,  'that  which  had  not  been  told  them 
shall  they  see,  and  that  which  they  have  not  heard 
shall  they  consider.'  is.  lii.  15.  •  All  the  kings  of  the 
earth  shall  praise  thee,  0  Lord,  when  they  hear 
the  words  of  thy  mouth.  Yea,  they  shall  sing  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord :  for  great  is  the  glory  of  the 
Lord.'  Ps.  cxxxviii.  4, 5.  Thus,  we  see,  that  though  in 
the  first  day  of  the  gospel,  the  poor,  the  halt,  the 
lame,  and  the  blind  are  chief  in  the  embracing  of 
the  tenders  of  grace,  yet  in  the  latter  day  thereof 
God  will  take  hold  of  kings. 

'  And  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory 
and  honour  into  it.'  Into  it;  that  is,  to  Jeru- 
salem. Wherefore  this  city  must  be  built  before 
they  all  of  them  will  fall  in  love  with  her.  Indeed, 
I  do  conceive  that  some  of  them  will  lay  their  hand 
to  help  forward  the  work  of  this  city,  as  did  Hiram 


1  A  'gold  angel'  was  an  early  English  coin,  valued  at  one- 
third  of  a  pound,  afterwards  increased  to  ten  shillings.  The 
'  twenty-shilling  piece'  was  the  old  sovereign.  The  compari- 
son between  them  and  the  silver  pence  and  halfpennies  was 
made  by  Bunyan  in  respect  to  their  rarity  and  not  their  purity. 
—(Ed.) 

-  '  To  stoop  or  lower  the  top  gallant'  is  a  mode  of  saluta- 
tion aud  respect  shown  by  ships  at  sea  to  each  other. —  (Ed.) 


THE  NEW   JERUSALEM. 


415 


•vritli  Solomon,  and  Darius,  Cyrus,  and  Artaxerxes, 
with  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  at  the  building  and  re- 
pairing the  city,  in  the  letter,  in  the  days  of  old. 
2  cii.  ii.  n-15.  Ear.  i.  i  -4-,  vi.  i-3;  vii.  21.  But  yet,  I  say, 
the  great  conquest  of  the  kings  will  ho  by  tlie 
beauty  and  glory  of  this  city,  when  she  is  built. 
'Thou  shalt  arise,'  0  Lord,  'and  have  mercy  upon 
Zion  ;  for  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea,  the  set  time 
is  come.  For  thy  servants  take  pleasure  in  her 
stones,  and  favour  the  dust  thereof.  So  the  hea- 
then shall  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  all  kings 
thy  glory.'  Pa. cii. IS— 15.  And,  indeed,  before  this 
city  is  set  up,  and  established  in  her  own  place, 
most  of  the  kings  and  great  ones  of  the  earth  will 
be  found  employed  and  taken  up  in  another  work, 
than  to  fall  in  love  with  Mount  Zion,  and  with  the 
hill  thereof.  They  will  be  found  in  love  with  mis- 
tress Babylon,  the  mother  of  harlots,  the  mistress 
of  witchcrafts,  and  abominations  of  the  earth. 
Re.  xvii.  2, 12—U;  xviii.  3,  9.  They  will,  I  say,  be  com- 
mitting fornication  with  her,  and  will  he  as  the  i 
horns  upon  the  heads  of  the  beast,  to  defend  the  | 
riding  lady  from  the  gunshot  that  the  saints  con-  j 
tinually  will  be  making  at  her  by  the  force  of  the 
Word  and  Spirit  of  God.  They  will  be  shaking 
the  sharp  end  of  their  weapons  against  the  Son  of 
God,  continually  labouring  to  keep  him  out  of  his 
throne,  and  from  having  that  rule  in  the  church, 
and  in  the  world,  as  becomes  him  who  is  the  head 
of  the  body,  and  over  all  principality  and  power. 
'  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb.'  Re.  xvii.  u. 
But,  I  say,  it  shall  so  come  about  at  the  last,  by 
the  illuminating  grace  of  God,  and  by  the  faithful 
and  patient  enduring  of  the  saints,  together  with 
the  glory  that  everywhere  shall  now  be  abiding  on 
the  church  and  congregation  of  Jesus,  that  they 
shall  begin  to  receive  a  man's  heart,  and  shall 
consider  things  that  have  not  been  told  them ;  \ 
wherefore  at  last  they  shall  withdraw  themselves 
from  the  love  of  this  mistress,  and  shall  leave  her 
to  scrape  for  herself  in  the  world,  and  shall  come 
with  repentance  and  rejoicing  to  Zion  ;  nay,  not 
only  so,  but  to  avenge  the  quarrel  of  God,  and  the 
vengeance  of  his  temple ;  and  to  recompense  her 
also  for  the  delusions  and  enchantments  wherewith 
she  hath  entangled  them.  '  These  shall  hate  her, 
and  they  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked,  and 
shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  fire.'  Re.xvii.16. 
Now,  madam,  what  sayest  thou  ?  The  kings 
must  come  to  Jerusalem,  Jezebel.  Thy  chamber 
companions  will  shortly,  notwithstanding  thy  painted 
face,  cast  thee  down  headlong  out  at  the  windows. 
Yea,  they  shall  tread  thee  in  pieces  by  the  feet  of 
their  prancing  horses,  and  with  the  wheels  of  their 
jumping  chariots.  2  Ki.  ix.  30—33.  They  shall  shut  up 
all  bowels  of  compassion  towards  thee,  and  shall 
roar  upon  thee  like  the  sea,  and  upon  thy  fat  ones 
like  the  waves  thereof.  Je.  l.  41, 42.     Yea,  when  they 


begin,  they  will  also  make  an  end,  and  will  leave 
thee  so  harbourless  and  comfortless,  that  now  there 
will  be  found  for  thee  no  gladness  at  all,  no,  not 
so  much  as  one  piper  to  play  thee  one  jig.  The 
delicates  that  thy  soul  lusted  after,  thou  shalt  find 
them  no  more  at  all.  Re  xviii.  12—22.  '  Babylon  tho 
glory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees' 
excellency,  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah.  It  shall  never  be  inhabited,  neither 
shall  it  be  dwelt  in  from  generation  to  generation; 
neither  shall  the  Arabian  pitch  tent  there,  neither 
shall  the  shepherds  make  their  fold  there.  But 
wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie  there,  and  their 
houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures.  And  owls 
shall  dwell  there,  and  satyrs*  shall  »  That  jg  flie 
dance  there.  And  the  wild  beasts  of  hotoMiM,  or 
the  islands  shall  cry  in  their  desolate 
houses,  and  dragons  in  their  pleasant  palaces;  and 
her  time  is  near  to  come,  and  her  days  shall  not 
be  prolonged.'  is.  xiii.  19— 2:5.  Thus  wilt  thou  come 
down  wonderfully.  For  '  in  thee  have  they  sec 
light  by  father  and  mother ;  in  the  midst  of  thee 
have  they  dealt  by  oppression  with  the  stranger : 
in  thee  have  they  vexed  the  fatherless  and  the 
widow.  In  thee  are  men  that  carry  tales  to  shed 
blood:  and  in  thee  they  eat  upon  the  mountains, 
in  the  midst  of  thee  they  commit  lewdness.'  Ezc. 
xxii.  6—10.  God  hath  smitten  his  hands  at  thy  dis- 
honest gain,  and  all  the  blood  which  hath  been  in 
the  midst  of  thee ;  God  will  be  avenged  of  thee, 
but  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  man.  is.  xivii.  1— 3.  You 
1  have  cast  lots  for  my  people,'  saith  God  :  you 
'  have  given  a  boy  for  a  harlot,  and  sold  a  girl  for 
wine,  that  they  might  drink.'  You  have  made 
havoc  of  my  young  converts  to  satisfy  your  lusts  ; 
therefore,  '  What  have  ye  to  do  with  me,  0  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  and  all  the  coast  of  Palestine?  Will 
ye  render  me  a  recompence  ?  And  if  ye  recom- 
pence  me  swiftly  and  speedily,  will  I  return  your 
recompence  upon  your  own  head.'  Joel m.  1-4.  1 
will  throw  it  as  dirt  in  your  face  again.  And 
never  talk  of  what  thou  wast  once,  for  though  thou 
wast  full  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in  beauty,  though 
thou  hast  been  in  Eden,  the  garden  of  God,  yea, 
though  every  precious  stone  for  some  time  was  thy 
covering,  and  thou  the  very  anointed  cherub  that 
covereth,  walking  upon  the  mountain  of  God,  and 
in  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire,  yet  because — by 
reason  of  the  multitude  of  thy  merchandise — thou 
hast  sinned,  and  art  filled  with  violence.  'There- 
fore God  will  cast  thee,  as  profane,  out  of  the 
mountain  of  God,  and  will  destroy  thee,  0  covering 
cherub,  from  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire;'  yea, 
he  will  cast  thee  to  the  ground,  and  lay  thee  before 
kings,  that  they  may  behold  thee.  And  'all  they 
that  know  thee  among  the  people  shall  be  aston- 
ished at  thee :  thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  and  never 
slialt  thou  be  any  more.'  Eze.  xxviii.  12-19.    '  And  tvhen 


UQ 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


iliou  art  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do?  Though  thou 
clothest  thyself  with  crimson,  though  thou  deckest 
thee  with  ornaments  of  gold  ;  though  thou  rentest 
thy  face  with  painting,  in  vain  shalt  thou  make 
thyself  fair,  thy  lovers  will,  despise  thee,  they  will 
seek  thy  life.'  Je.  iv.  30. 

1  And  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  hring  their 
glory  and  their  honour  into  it.'  Mark,  they  do 
not  only  forsake  the  crimson  harlot,  neither  do  they 
content  themselves  with  eating  her  flesh  and  burn- 
ing her  with  fire,  but  they  come  over,  they  come 
over  to  Jerusalem ;  they  are  conquered  by  the 
grace  of  Christ  and  wisdom  of  the  Son  of  God. 
They  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  but  the 
Lamb  shall  overcome  them,  for  he  is  King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  and  those  that  are  with 
him  are  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful.  Now 
they  shall  all  give  way  to  the  government  of  the 
King  of  kings,  the  governor  of  the  Jews,  Ezr.  vl  7. 
and  shall  with  gladness  delight  to  see  him  rule  his 
spouse  with  his  own  law,  rules,  and  testament; 
they  shall  play  the  pranks  of  Jeroboam  no  longer, 
in  making  calves  to  keep  the  people  from  going 
up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship.  Now,  they  shall 
count  him  also  king  of  nations,  as  well  as  king  of 
saints ;  and  he  shall  wear  the  crowns,  and  they  shall 
seek  to  him.  Re.  xix.  12, 15.  Je.  x.  7.  is.  m.  15.  2  Ch.  Lc  23. 

[  T7ie  city  secure,  the  gates  always  open.  ] 

Ver.  25.  '  And  the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut 
at  all  by  day  for  there  shall  be  no  night  there.' 

This  is  the  effect  of  what  you  read  before, 
namely,  of  the  coining  in  of  the  kings  and  great 
ones  of  the  earth  to  this  Jerusalem.  For  when 
the  whore  is  made  desolate  and  naked,  and  burned 
with  fire,  and  when  the  kings  also  that  loved  her, 
and  that  maintained  her,  are  come  in,  and  have 
closed  with  the  glory  and  beauty  of  this  city,  then 
what  need  is  there  to  shut  the  gates  ?  Alas,  all  the 
injuries  that  the  kings  and  great  ones  of  the  earth 
have  done  to  the  church  and  spouse  of  Christ  in 
these  days  of  the  New  Testament,  it  hath  been 
through  the  instigation  and  witchcraft  of  this  mis- 
tress of  iniquity.  '  The  horseman  lifteth  up  both 
the  bright  sword  and  the  glittering  spear.'  Na.  iii.  3,  4, 
against  the  saints  of  God,  by  reason  of  the  multi- 
tudes of  the  whoredoms  of  the  well-favoured  harlot, 
the  mistress  of  witchcrafts,  who  selleth  nations 
through  her  whoredoms,  and  families  through  her 
witchcrafts.  Wherefore  I  say,  this  gentlewoman 
being  laid  in  her  grave,  and  all  her  fat  ones  gone 
down  to  the  sides  of  the  pit,  these  kings  will 
change  their  mind,  and  fall  in  love  with  the  true 
and  chaste  matron,  and  with  Christ  her  Lord. 
Now  when  this  is  thus,  this  city  must  needs  be 
safely  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls,  and  as  a 
place  near  to  which  there  is  neither  thief  nor 
ravenous  beast,  is.  a.  4.  Je.  xx.xw.  16.  Zee.  u.  4;  xiv.  11. 


Persecutors,  while  they  remain  in  their  spirit  of 
outrage  against  the  church  and  people  of  God, 
they  are  frequently  in  the  Scripture  compared  to 
the  venomous  dragons,  fierce  lions,  and  ravenous 
wolves.  Je.  li.  34,  37.  All  which  at  this  day  shall  be 
driven  out  of  the  world,  that  is,  so  out,  as  never 
to  molest  the  church  again,  or  to  cause  a  gate  of 
this  city  to  be  shut,  through  fear,  against  them  ; 
as  he  saith  by  the  prophet,  '  In  the  habitation  of 
dragons  where  each  lay,  shall  be  grass,  with  reeds 
and  rushes.'  is.  xxxv.  7.  In  the  habitation  of  dragons, 
that  is,  even  in  the  places  of  persecutors,  where 
each  lay,  shall  be  food  for  the  flock  of  Christ.  The 
dragon  is  a  venomous  beast,  and  poisoneth  all 
where  he  lieth!  He  beats  the  earth  bare,  and 
venoms  it,  that  it  will  bear  no  grass,  as  do  the 
persecutors  where  they  inhabit  and  lie.  But 
behold,  the  days  do  come  in  which  these  dragons 
shall  be  removed,  and  the  ground  where  they  lay 
be  made  fruitful  and  flourish,  so  that  even  there 
shall  he  places  for  the  flocks  to  lie  down  in.  '  In 
the  habitation  of  dragons,  where  each  lay,  shall 
be  grass,  with  reeds  and  rushes.  No  lion  shall  be 
there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  thereon  ; 
but  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  walk  there,  and 
the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return  and  come 
to  Zion  with  songs,  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their 
heads;  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and 
sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away.'  is.  xxxv.  7— 10. 
According  to  that  of  Moses,  the  Lord  '  will  give 
peace  in  the  land,  and  ye  shall  lie  down,  and  none 
shall  make  you  afraid.'  For  '  he  will  rid  evil 
beasts  out  of  the  land,'  and  the  sword  shall  not 
go  through  it  more.  Le.  xxvi.  6.  '  And  my  people 
shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  habitation,  and  in  sure 
dwellings  and  in  quiet  resting-places.'  is.  xxxii.  18. 

'  And  the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by 
day,  for  there  shall  be  no  night  there.'  This 
word  day  we  may  understand  two  ways ;  either 
for  the  day  of  bringing  in  to  fill  this  city,  or  for 
the  day  of  her  perfection  and  fulness.  Now  if  you 
take  it  with  reference  to  the  day  in  which  her 
converts  are  coming  in,  as  indeed  it  ought,  why 
then,  the  gates  shall  not  be  shut  at  all.  •  Thy 
gates  shall  be  open  continually,  they  shall  not  be 
shut  day  nor  night,  that  men  may  bring  unto  thee 
the  forces  of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  their  kings  may 
be  brought.'  Is.  be.  11. 

But  again,  this  day  of  grace,  and  of  conversion 
of  sinners,  it  must  be  looked  upon  either  as  the 
church  is  in  captivity  and  persecution,  or  as  she 
is  out.  Now,  as  she  is  in  captivity,  so  her  long- 
est day  is  usually  accompanied  with  a  black  and 
doubtful  night  of  temptation  and  affliction.  Where- 
fore this  day  here  being  spoken  of,  it  is  the  day 
of  grace  that  she  shall  have  even  when  she  is  ab- 
solutely delivered  from  the  rage  of  the  beast,  false 
prophet,  and  whore.    Wherefore  he  is  not  content 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


447 


to  say,  the  gates  shall  not  he  shut  at  nil  by  day, 
but  adds  withal,  •  for  there  shall  be  no  night 
there;'  as  who  should  say,  I  know  that  com- 
monly in  the  day  of  the  church's  affliction  she  is 
accompanied  with  nights  as  well  as  days,  but  it 
shall  not  he  so  here ;  '  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go 
down,  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself;  for 
the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light,  and  the 
days  of  thy  mourning  shall  bo  ended.'  is.  lx.  20. 

Wherefore  John,  considering  this,  doth  quite 
exclude  the  night,  saying,  '  There  shall  be  no  night 
there.'  Indeed  after  this  New  Jerusalem  hath 
had  her  golden  day  in  this  world,  I  say,  just 
towards  the  ending  thereof,  she  will  yet  once  again 
be  beset  with  raging  Gog  and  Magog,  which  ene- 
mies will,  after  the  long  safety  and  tranquillity  of 
this  city,  through  the  instigation  of  the  devil  come 
upon  the  breadth  of  the  earth,  and  encamp  about 
this  holy  city.  Eze.  xxviii.,  xxix.  But  behold  in  the 
midst  of  this  intention  to  swallow  her  up,  the  Lord 
rains  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven  and  destroys 
them  all ;  so  that  Gog,  I  say,  though  he  may 
bring  one  only  evening  upon  this  holy  city  after 
her  long  peace  and  rest  among  the  sons  of  men, 
yet  he  shall  not  bring  one  night  upon  her,  nor 
cause  a  gate  thereof  to  be  shut  for  ever.  The 
sun  shall  now  stand  still  in  the  midst  of  heaven, 
aud  this  night  shall  be  thus  prevented  by  this 
marvellous  judgment  of  God.  Jos.  x.  As  another 
prophet  saith,  '  At  evening  time  it  shall  be  light.' 
Zee.  xiv.  7.  That  is,  though  her  enemies  will  at  last 
still  make,  through  their  enmity,  one  only  attempt 
to  swallow  up  all  in  everlasting  oblivion,  yet  they 
themselves  shall  fall  down  dead  upon  the  moun- 
tains of  Israel,  and  be  a  prey  to  this  Jerusalem. 
Thus  there  will  be  only  day  accompanying  the 
inhabitants  of  this  city,  '  For  there  shall  be  no 
night  there.' 

[  TJie  glory  and  honour  of  the  nations  brought  into  it.  ] 

Ver.  2G.  '  And  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and 
honour  of  the  nations  into  it.'  This,  as  I  said 
before,  is  to  show  us  how  heartily,  and  how  un- 
feignedly,  both  the  nations  and  their  kings  shall 
now  come  over  to  New  Jerusalem.  They  come 
hand  in  hand,  not  the  people  without  their  prince, 
nor  the  prince  without  his  people,  though  it  will, 
and  must  be  so,  in  the  times  of  persecution ;  but 
now,  together  '  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and 
honour  of  the  nations  to  it.' 

Again,  I  told  you  before  that  the  Jews  shall  at 
this  day  be  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,  and 
shall  have  a  great  name  and  much  of  heaven  upon 
them  in  this  city.  For,  indeed,  they  are  the 
first-born,  the  natural  branches,  and  the  like. 
Now  when  he  saith,  they  shall  bring  the  glory 
and  honour  of  the  nations  to  it,  I  cannot  think 
that  by  this  should  we  understand  only,  or  yet 


principally,  the  outward  pomp  and  treasure  of  the 
world,  but  that  rather  by  honour  and  glory  we  are 
here  to  understand  the  heavenly  treasure  and  glory 
that  the  saints  shall  continually  pour  forth  into  one 
another's  bosoms  in  this  city.  In  this  city,  I  say, 
for  at  this  day,  as  I  have  formerly  showed  you, 
there  will  be  found  no  treasure  any  where  but  at 
Jerusalem  ;  every  saint  shall  be  here,  every  grace 
shall  be  here,  the  precious  stones  of  the  sanctuary, 
the  precious  sons  of  Zion  shall  not  then,  as  now, 
lie  scattered,  some  in  the  world,  and  some  in  mis- 
tress Babylon's  lap ;  neither  shall  any  thing  per- 
taining to  the  church's  privileges  be  found  in  her 
at  all  for  ever.  There  shall  be  heard  no  more 
at  all  in  her  any  harpers,  trumpeters,  pipers,  or 
any  other  heavenly  music  in  her;  neither  shall 
there  be  any  more  the  sound  of  a  millstone  to 
grind  us  bread,  nor  the  light  of  a  candle  to  guide 
us  in  the  house,  nor  yet  the  voice  of  the  bride- 
groom, Christ,  nor  of  the  bride  his  wife,  to  tempt 
or  allure  any  that  are  seeking  the  way  of  life,  to 
stay  with  her.  Re.  rrifl.  22,  23.  All  these  things  shall 
be  brought  to  Jerusalem.  2  Ch.  xxxvi.  7.  Christians, 
you  must  understand  that  there  is  a  time  when  all 
the  treasures  of  the  church  are  to  be  found  in 
Babylon,  as  in  the  days  of  old;  but  at  this  day, 
when  this  city  is  built,  not  any  of  them  shall  be 
found  there,  but  all  shall  be  brought  and  delivered 
up  to  Jerusalem  again,  as  was  also  foreshown  in 
the  type;  and  all  places  shall  be  void  of  the 
treasure  of  heaven,  but  Jerusalem.  Ezr.vi.i-6;vii.i3-i6. 

Wherefore  by  the  glory  and  honour  of  the 
nations  in  this  place,  I  understand  that  all  the 
treasures  of  the  church,  and  all  the  graces  that  at 
this  day  lie  scattered  here  and  there,  some  in  one 
place  and  some  in  another,  they  shall  be  found  no 
where  at  that  day  but  in  this  city,  in  the  church 
that  walks  according  to  rule.  Now  the  reasons 
why  I  take  this  honour  and  glory  to  be  meant  of 
these  things  are  — 

First.  Because  thus  it  was  in  the  time  of  the 
building  of  Jerusalem  after  the  captivity,  the 
treasure  of  the  Jews,  which  was  become  the 
treasures  of  the  provinces  of  Babylon,  was  again 
restored  and  brought  to  Jerusalem,  as  you  may  see 
by  the  scriptures  now  cited. 

Second.  Because  I  find  indeed,  that  the  milk 
and  honey  of  the  land  of  Canaan — which  are,  in 
our  gospel  language,  the  gifts,  graces,  and  treasures 
of  the  church — it  is  called,  '  The  glory  of  all  lands.' 
Eze.  xx.  c.  Now,  I  say,  seeing  the  milk  and  honey, 
which  are  the  comforts  of  the  church  and  her 
treasure,  is  called  '  The  glory  of  all  lands,'  I  take 
glory  and  honour  in  this  place  to  signify  the  same 
thing  also.  Ca.  iv.  11. 

Third.  Because  also  I  find,  by  comparing  the 
prophets,  that  the  Christian's  glory  and  honour 
lieth  mostly,   even  principally,   in   heavenly  and 


us 


THE  HOLY  CITY,  OR 


spiritual  things ;  as  in  faith,  love,  experience  of 
God,  of  grace,  of  Christ,  and  spiritual  life.  I  read 
that,  at  the  building  of  this  city,  the  Jews  and 
Gentiles  shall  meet  together,  and  that  at  that  day 
they  shall  mutually  he  partakers  of  each  other's 
glory.  The  Gentiles  '  shall  milk  out,  and  be 
delighted  in  the  abundance  of  the  glory  '  of  the 
Jews :  and  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  shall  be  again 
extended  unto  the  Jews  like  a  mighty  flowing 
stream,  is.  lxvi.  10-13.  But  I  say  that  this  glory  and 
honour  should  consist  in  outward  things,  or  that 
the  glory  that  is  merely  carnal  should  be  princi- 
pally here  intended,  I  confess  it  grates  too  near 
the  ground  for  me  to  believe  or  rejoice  in  it.  Alas, 
I  find  that  those  souls  that  have  not  now  the  tenth 
part  of  the  spirit  and  life  of  heavenly  things  that 
shall  then  be  poured  forth  ;  I  say,  I  find  that  these 
are  trampling  on  the  world,  and  disdain  the  thoughts 
of  being  taken  with  its  glory.  Wherefore  much 
less  will  it  be  esteemed  in  that  day,  when  the  glory 
and  goodness  of  God  shall  in  that  manner  break 
forth.  Again,  can  it  be  imagined  that  the  chief 
of  the  glory  that  the  Gentiles  should  bring  to  the 
Jews  after  a  sixteen  hundred  years  warming  in  the 
hosom  of  Christ;  I  say,  is  it  imaginable  that 
the  great  crop  of  all  they  have  reaped  should  con- 
sist in  a  little  outward  trumpery  ?  Or  if  it  should, 
would  it  be  a  suitable  medicine  in  the  least  to  pre- 
sent to  the  eyes  of  a  broken  and  wounded  people, 
as  the  Jews  will  be  at  that  day?  Or  if  the  glory 
that  the  Gentiles  at  that  day  shall  suck  from  the 
Jews  were  such  as  this,  would  it  at  all  be  as  life 
from  the  dead  to  them  in  a  gospel  sense.  The 
church  of  the  Gentiles  shall  be  a  wall  to  the  Jews 
at  their  return ;  hut  such  a  wall  as  will  chiefly 
consist  in  spiritual  and  heavenly  safeguard,  and  in 
outward,  because  of  that.  Ro.  xi.  13—15.  I  am  a  wall, 
saith  she,  and  my  breasts  are  towers,  on  which  the 
Jews  will  build  upon  her  a  palace  of  silver.  Ca.  viii. 
8—10.  But  must  this  wall,  I  say,  consist  chiefly  in 
outward  glory,  in  the  glory  of  earthly  things?  or 
must  this  silver  palace  be  of  that  nature  either? 
No  verily,  but  when  God  hath  built  the  city  Jeru- 
salem, and  put  his  church  into  such  a  state,  that 
upon  all  her  glory  shall  be  a  defence  of  heaven, 
then  shall  the  Jews,  by  their  coming  into  this  city, 
build,  by  their  experience,  a  palace  for  spiritual 
and  heavenly  pleasure,  to  solace  and  comfort  their 
brethren  withal.  In  a  word,  then,  by  glory  and 
honour  in  this  place,  we  are  chiefly  to  understand 
the  spiritual  and  heavenly  things  of  this  city,  which, 
in  the  times  of  the  reign  of  Antichrist,  have  lain, 
some  among  the  potsherds  of  the  earth,  some  a<-ain 
under  the  stairs,  some  under  this  abuse,  and  some 
under  that.  rs.  lxi.  3.  Ca.  ii.  11.  All  which  shall  be 
brought  by  the  souls  that  shall  be  converted,  forth- 
with to  this  city,  the  church,  where  will  be  the 
treasury  of  God,  into  which  every  one  at  that  day 


shall  throw  in  of  their  abundance ;  but  as  for  the 
glory  of  the  world,  the  saints  shall  be  above  it,  it 
shall  be  with  them  as  silver  and  wood  was  in  the 
days  of  Solomon,  even  as  little  worth  as  the  stones 
in  the  street  in  their  account,  is.xxvii.13.  1  Ki.  x.  21. 

[None  but  visible  saints  shall  enter.] 

Ver.  27.  '  And  there  shall  in  nowise  enter  into  it 
anything  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh 
abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie:  but  they  which  are 
written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.' 

I  am  not  yet  convinced  that  the  highest  church- 
state  that  ever  was,  or  ever  will  be  in  this  world, 
could  possibly  be  so,  all  of  them,  the  elect  of  God, 
but  that  there  would  get  in  among  them  some  that 
had  not  saving  grace ;  the  same  also  I  believe 
touching  the  state  of  this  Jerusalem.  But  yet 
this  I  do  believe  again,  that  the  right  and  gospel- 
pattern  is,  that  none  be  admitted  into  church 
communion  but  such  who  are  visible  saints  by 
calling.  1  Co.  i.  1.  2  Co.  i.  i.  Ep.  i.  12.  Ph.  i.  i.  The  sub- 
stance of  which  these  words  import,  *  There  shall 
not  enter  into  it  any  thing  that  defiletii,  or  that 
worketh  abomination,  or  that  maketh  a  lie.'  Which 
words  do  principally  strike  at  a  people  that  appear 
to  be  loose,  wicked,  or  ungodly ;  of  which  sort 
indeed,  not  one  shall  here  at  any  time,  no,  not  in 
any  wise,  be  admitted  entrance.  For  now  shall 
all  the  forms,  and  all  the  ordinances,  and  all  the 
forms  of  the  goings  out  of  the  church  of  God,  and 
the  comings  into  it,  be  so  exactly  opened  to  these 
people,  and  they  so  punctual  and  distinct  in  the 
observation  of  them,  that  it  will  not  be  possible 
that  a  Canaanite  should  be  here  for  ever  again 
found  any  more.  Eze.  xliii.  io,  11 ;  xiiv.  6,  a  '  This  is 
the  law  of  the  house  upon  the  top  of  the  mountain 
— the  whole  limit  thereof  shall  be  most  holy.  Be- 
hold, this  is  the  law  of  the  house.'  Eze.  xliii  12.  Joel 

iii.  17.    Zee.  xiv.  21. 

And  as  there  shall  at  this  clay  be  none  admitted 
here,  but  such  as  are  in  truth  visible  saints,  so 
none  must  here  continue,  but  they  that  continue 
such.  If  any  of  those  stones  that  are  put  in  for 
building  into  the  house  of  God,  shall  afterwards 
have  the  plague  found  on  them,  then  the  priest 
shall  command  that  such  stones  be  taken  away  and 
cast  into  the  unclean  place  that  is  without  the  city. 
Le.  xiv.  40.  And  observe  it,  that  congregation  on 
earth  that  admits  only  of  such  persons  as  are  visible 
saints  by  calling  and  profession — though  possibly 
some  of  them,  as  in  the  case  of  Judas  and  Demas, 
may  be  known  to  God  to  be  non-elect — yet  that 
church    is  holy  round   about  the  limits   thereof. 

Nu.  xix.  22.  Ep.  v.  11.  He.  xii.  15.  2  Th.  iii.  6,  14.  1  Co.  v.  6,  11-13. 

Provided,  also,  that  if  at  any  time  after  that  the 
plague  appears,  they  ordinarily  proceed  to  deal  with 
them,  as  here  things  will  be  done  to  a  tittle  and  a 
hair's  breadth.     Now  the  reason  why  the  church 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


449 


may  be  said  to  have  some  within  her  that  arc  nou- 
clect,  and  yet  be  counted  holy  still,  it  is  because 
the  cburch  is  to  judge  of  persons  by  tbcir  words 
and  lives;  they  know  not  the  heart  absolutely,  and 
therefore  if  in  word  and  life  a  man  be  as  he  ought, 
he  is  to  be  accounted  a  visible  saint,  and  orderly 
ought  to  be  received  of  the  church  as  such.  So 
that  I  say,  as  I  said  before,  these  words  of  barring 
out  sinners  out  of  the  church,  they  are  not  to  be 
understood  as  if  they  intended  that  those  should 
be  debarred  visible  communion  that  in  word  and 
life  appeared  visible  saints,  that  are  so  judged  by 
the  rules  of  Christ's  testament ;  but  that  such 
should  be  from  it  shut  out  that  appeared  visible 
sinners.  Those  that  are  defilers,  workers  of 
abomination,  and  makers  of  lies,  none  of  these 
shall  enter. 

But '  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book 
of  life.'  These  words  explain  the  matter:  those, 
and  those  only,  shall  enter  here,  that  are  found 
written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  Now,  by  book 
of  life  we  are  to  understand  two  things  in  the 
scriptures  of  truth.  First,  either  the  book  of 
God's  eternal  grace  and  mercy  through  Christ,  in 
which  all  the  elect  are  recorded  for  ever.  Or, 
Secondly,  that  book  of  life  in  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  hath  all  recorded  that  are  visible  saints  by 
calling  ;  for,  for  both  these  there  is  a  book  of  life. 
For  the  first  of  these,  I  judge  these  scriptures  do 

Suit.     Lu.  i.  20.   2  Ti.  ii.  19.    Phil.  iv.  3.         And     for    the 

second,  these  with  that  in  the  text.  Ex.  xxni.  32,  33. 

He.  ixii.  19. 

Now  the  book  of  life  in  this  place  must  not  be 
so  strictly  taken  as  if  it  included  those  only  that 
were  elect  of  God  to  eternal  life,  but  must  be  un- 
derstood of  that  book  whereiu  are  recorded  the 
rules  and  bounds  of  visible  church-communion;  and 
so  all  those  that,  through  the  gifts  and  operations 
of  special  or  common  grace,  do  fall  within  the 
compass  of  those  rules  and  bounds.  Thus  it  was 
in  the  type  at  the  return  out  of  captivity,  none 
were  to  be  admitted  entrance  into  the  church  but 
those  that  could  show  their  privileges  by  genea- 
logy and  the  records  of  the  church  ;  and  to  others 
it  was  said  that  they  had  neither  portion,  nor  lot, 
nor  memorial,  in  Jerusalem.  Ezr.  ii.  62,  63.  Ne.  vii.  64,  65; 

ii.  20. 

Now  that  by  book  of  life  in  this  place  we  are  to 
understand  that  book  that  hath  in  it  the  bounds 
and  liberties  of  this  city,  and  so  every  one  that 
falleth  within  the  compass  of  these  bounds  and 
privileges  visibly ;  consider, 

First.  They  that  are  visible  matter  for  visible 
church-communion,  they  shall  be  found  within  this 
city,  and  yet  there  shall  not  enter  any,  but  those 
that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life. 

Second.  Now  visible  church-communion  doth  not 
absolutely  call  for  only  invisible  saints,  neither  can 

VOL.  III. 


it ;  for  if  the  church  were  to  join  with  none  but 
those  whom  they  knew  to  be  the  very  elect  of  God 
— as  all  invisible  saints  are — then  she  must  join 
with  none  at  all ;  for  it  is  not  possible  that  any 
church  should  be  so  infallible  to  judge  in  that 
manner  of  the  elect,  as  to  discern  them  always, 
and  altogether,  from  the  non-elect,  which  cannot 
be  an  invisible  saint. 

Third.  By  book  of  life  therefore,  in  this  place, 
we  are  to  understaud,  I  say,  that  book  that  hath 
written  in  it  every  visible  saint,  whether  they  be 
elect  or  not ;  and  so  such  a  book  that  is  capable 
of  receiving  in  a  man  at  one  time,  and  of  blotting 
of  him  out  again,  as  occasion  doth  require,  at 
another.  Which  thing  is  oidy  applicable  to  that 
book  which  binds  and  looses  on  the  account  of  a 
man's  being  a  visible  saint  or  a  visible  apostate. 
Which  thing  is  only  applicable  to  the  visible  rules 
of  receiving  or  shutting  out  of  visible  church-com- 
munion ;  which  rules  being  the  rules  of  Christ's 
New  Testament,  it  is  proper  to  call  it  the  book  of 
life;  and  is  about  the  matter  of  going  in  or  going 
out  of  this  very  city  so  called.  '  If  any  man  shall 
take  away  from  the  words  of  the  book  of  this  pro- 
phecy, God  shall  take  away  his  part  out  of  the 
book  of  life,  and  out  of  the  holy  city,  and  from  the 
things  which  are  written  in  this  book. '  He.  xxii.  18,  io. 
0  how  happy  is  he  who  is  not  only  a  visible,  but 
also  an  invisible  saint!  Re.  iii.  5.  He,  he  shall  not 
be  blotted  out  the  book  of  God's  eternal  grace  and 
mercy,  when  others  are  liable  to  loose  a  share,  not 
only  in  heaven,  but  to  be  for  ever  blotted  out  of  the 
book  that  approveth  of  visible  believers  also. 

Fourth.  But  again,  to  explain  the  matter  yet 
more:  in  the  visible  church  there  are  not  only 
sons,  but  servants — that  is,  not  only  those  that 
are  truly  elect,  but  such  as  have  received  a  gift  for 
the  perfecting  of  the  church  under  Christ,  in  his 
service  here  in  this  world.  Eze.  xlvi.  ig,  17.  Now,  I 
say,  the  servant  for  the  time  present  hath  his  place 
in  the  church  as  well  as  the  son,  though  not  the 
place  of  a  son,  but  of  a  servant,  even  a  place  of 
service,  as  of  preaching,  prophesying,  administer- 
ing the  ordinances  that  are  given  to  the  church, 
and  the  like.  1  Co.  xii.  7.  Ep.  iv.  11, 12.  All  which  a 
man  that  hath  not  grace  may  do,  and  that  by  the 
appointment  of  Christ;  thus  was  Judas,  Demas, 
Hymeneus,  Phyletus,  and  others,  who  sometimes 
were  the  servants  of  Christ  in  the  church,  and  did 
minister  for  him  to  them  ;  yet  themselves,  notwith- 
standing, such  as  were  all  that  time  strangers  and 
aliens  to  the  life  and  power  and  saving  operations 
of  the  justifying  and  preserving  grace  of  the  gos- 
pel. 1  Co.  xiii.  1—4.  Mat.  xxv.  14-18.  As  he  saith  also  by 
the  prophet  Isaiah,  '  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed 
your  flocks,  and  the  sons  of  aliens  shall  be  your 
ploughmen,  and  your  vine-dressers.'  Is.Lxi.  5.  For 
verily  Christ  will  give  to  those  that  have  not  hii 

57 


450 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


saving  grace,  yet  great  knowledge  and  understand- 
ing in  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
will  also  make  them  for  profit  and  advantage  in 
his  church,  to  feed  their  flocks,  to  plough  up  the 
fallow  ground  of  their  hearts,  and  to  dress  their 
tender  vines.  Yet,  I  say,  they  themselves  shall 
not  he  everlastingly  saved,  for  they  want  his  sav- 
ing grace.  As  Christ  saith,  '  The  servant  ahideth 
not  in  the  house  for  ever,  but  the  son  ahideth  for 
ever.'  Jn.  riii.35.  As  he  saith  again  in  another  pro- 
phet, « If  the  prince  give  a  gift  unto  any  of  his 
sons,  the  inheritance  thereof  shall  be  his  sons,  it 
shall  be  their  possession  by  inheritance  ;  but  if  he 
give  a  gift  of  inheritance  to  one  of  his  servants, 
then  it  shall  be  his  to  the  year  of  liberty,  after  it 
shall  return  to  the  prince ;  but  his  inheritance  shall 
be  his  sons  for  them.'  Ezcxivi.  16  17.  Some  indeed  have 
grace  as  well  as  gifts ;  now  they  that  are  such  the 
profit  of  their  gifts  shall  be  rewarded  by  virtue  of 
their  grace ;  but  as  for  them  that  have  only  a  gift, 
when  the  work  of  a  gift  is  done,  then  they  cease 
to  be  any  longer  of  use  in  the  church,  and  there- 
fore are  forthwith  shut  out  of  the  same,  but  the 
son  abideth  for  ever.  Thus  you  see  that  as 
visible  church-communion  doth  not  absolutely  call 
for  the  elect  only,  but  admits,  and  that  by  the 
book  of  rules,  all  that  are  visible  and  open  saints 
by  calling,  so  also  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  doth, 
and  will  use  some  in  his  church  as  his  officers  and 
servants,  that  yet  in  a  strict  sense  are  neither  his 
sons  nor  members,  who  yet  are  within  the  bounds 
of  that  book  of  life  that  here  he  speaks  of,  as  is 
evident,  because  with  Christ's  allowance  they  are 
admitted  into  communion  with  his  church,  and  by 
him  also  furnished  with  gifts  and  abilities  to  profit 
and  edify  withal.  Now  observe,  such  a  one  is 
admitted,  though  but  a  servant,  yet  not  by  the 
church,  because  but  such  a  one.  The  church 
receiveth  no  man  upon  the  account  of  gifts  alone, 
but  upon  the  account  of  the  appearance  of  grace, 
as  of  gospel-repentance,  of  the  confession  of  faith, 
and  of  a  conversation  suitable  to  the  same ;  all 
which  a  man  that  is  not  elect  may  have  the  notion 
of,  yea,  the  power,  though  not  the  saving  power. 

He.  vL  4,  5. 

FiJVi.  Further,  this  which  I  have  said  about 
the  visible  church-communion,  and  so  consequently 
about  the  book  of  life,  it  must  needs  be  a  gospel- 
truth:  yea,  a  thing  for  truth  in  this  New  Jeru- 
salem: because,  besides  what  hath  been  said,  there 
will  be  found  in  this  city,  even  at  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  which  coming  of  his  will  not  be 
for  some  time  after  the  building  and  setting  of  it 
up,  I  say,  there  will  be  then  found  among  them 
foolish  virgins,  and.  such  who  have  not  the  saving 
grace  of  God  in  their  souls.  But  yet,  1.  These 
very  souls  shall  be  counted  by  the  church,  yea,  by 
Christ  himself,  for  virgins ;  that  is,  such  as  had 


not  defiled  their  profession.  2.  And  will  be  such 
virgins  as  have,  and  hold  every  one  her  lamp, 
even  as  the  wise  themselves.  3.  Such  virgins  as 
were,  every  one  of  them  gone  forth  from  the  pol- 
lutions of  this  evil  world.  4.  And  so  such  as  con- 
tinued visible  saints,  even  till  the  bridegroom  came. 
Mat  xxv.  1-10.  For  then,  it  is  said  in  the  margin, 
they  cried,  Our  lamps  are  going  out.  These,  I 
say,  be  those  gifted  people  that  will  have  place  in 
the  church,  and  so  place  in  the  book  of  life  here 
mentioned,  which  yet  will,  though  they  continue 
hid  from  the  church,  be  discovered  in  the  day  of 
the  Lord  to  be  such  as  had  only  a  gift,  but  not 
grace,  and  shall  for  their  secret  sins  be  cut  off  and 
cast  away,  notwithstanding  they  were  visible  saints 
all  their  days. 

To  conclude  then:  If  the  Scripture  saith,  that 
none  that  defileth,  or  that  worketh  abomination, 
or  maketh  a  lie,  shall  enter  into  this  holy  city 
which  yet  is  but  the  church  on  earth,  with  what 
face  can  dcfilers  think  and  say  they  shall  possess 
a  part  among  the  church  which  is  in  heaven? 
Again,  If  many  that  have  received  gifts  from  God, 
and  that  may  be  serviceable  in  his  house,  shall  yet 
be  put  out  of  doors  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord, 
what  will  they  do  that  have  been  and  yet  continue 
both  giftless  and  graceless,  as  visibly  as  the  light 
that  shineth?  And  that  instead  of  being  the 
ploughmen  and  vine-dressers  of  the  church,  prove 
thieves,  robbers,  persecutors,  and  the  like !  Yea, 
if  many  that  are  within  the  bounds  of  that  book 
of  life  that  hath  the  records  and  rules  of  a 
rightly  constituted  visible  church  may  yet  perish, 
what  will  become  of  them  that  never  were  so 
much  as  written  therein?  Must  they  not  perish 
rather  ?  •  And  whosoever  was  not  found  written 
in  the  book  of  life,  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.' 
Rev.  xx.  15. 

Rev.  xxii.  1. — 'And  he  showed  me  a  pure  river 
of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of 
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb. ' 


[Fifth.  The  provision  and  maintenance  of  the 
city,  by  which  it  continueth  in  life,  ease, 
peace,  tranquillity,  and  sweetness  for  ever.] 

Having  thus  showed  us  this  city,  her  fashion, 
glory,  inhabitants,  and  the  like,  he  now  comes  to 
show  us  her  provision  and  maintenance,  where- 
with she  is  kept  in  safety,  life,  peace,  and  comfort, 
&c. 

[Its  drink  the  river  of  life.] 

*  And  he  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of 
life. '  This  water  of  life  is  nothing  else  but  the 
manifold  grace  of  God  in  Christ  let  forth  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  Jerusalem,  wherewith  she  is 
watered  and  replenished,  as  the  earth  with  rain 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


451 


from  heaven,  for  the  good  of  those  that  drink 
thereof.  For  hoth  the  word  water  and  that  of 
life,  they  are  hut  metaphorical  sayings,  under 
which  is  held  forth  some  hetter  and  more  excellent 
thing.  And  indeed  it  is  frequent  with  God  in 
Scripture  to  speak  of  his  grace  and  mercy  under 
the  notion  of  waters,  of  a  fountain,  a  sea,  and  the 
like.  Zee.  xiii.  1;  Mio.  to.  18, 19. 

[It  is  called  water.]  Now  it  is  called  water, 
First,  Because  no  soul  can  he  cleansed,  or  effec- 
tually washed  from  its  guilt  and  filth,  hut  hy  the 
grace  of  God.  Ep.  i.  7.  '1  washed  thee  with  water, 
yea,  I  thoroughly  washed  away  thy  blood  from 
thee,'  'and  thou  hecamest  mine.'  Eze.xvi.8,9.  Second, 
It  is  called  water,  hecause  it  also  quencheth  the 
spiritual  thirst  of  them  that  by  faith  do  drink 
thereof,  is.  xii.  18.  I  will  give,  saith  Christ,  to  him 
that  is  a-thirst,  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life 
freely.  Re. xxii.  17.  And  again,  'He  that  drinketh  of 
the  water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  never  thirst.' 
Jn.  iv.  14 

[  Water  of  life.]  Further,  As  it  is  called  water, 
so  it  is  called  'the  water  of  life,'  and  that  upon  a 
diverse  account.  First,  Because  it  is  that  which 
recovereth  the  soul  that  drinketh  thereof  from  the 
death  of  sin  and  the  curse  of  God,  to  a  principle 
of  life  and  heavenly  blessing.  'And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  that  every  thing  that  liveth,  which  moveth 
whithersoever  the  rivers  shall  come,  shall  live.' 
Eze. xML 9.  Second,  It  is  called  'the  water  of  life,' 
because  that  from  it  comes  all  those  heavenly  and 
spiritual  quickenings  and  revivings, 
that  (like  aqua  vita?)*  do  fetch  again, 
and  cheer  up  the  soul  that  was  sinking  and  giving 
up  the  ghost  in  this  world.  '  Tliere  is  a  river,  the 
streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God.' 
Ps.  xivi.4.  Third,  It  is  called  'the  water  of  life,' 
hecause  it  healeth  the  soul  of  all  its  spiritual  infir- 
mities and  diseases,  wherewith  by  reason  of  the 
remainders  of  sin,  the  creature  is  most  sadly  an- 
noyed and  infected.  'Aud  there  shall  be  a  very 
great  multitude  of  fish,'  of  men  he  meaus,  MaUv.  19, 
'  because  the  waters  shall  come  thither;  for  they,' 
these  fish,  '  shall  be  healed,  and  every  thing  shall 
live  whither  the  river  cometh.'  Eze.  xivii.  9.  Fourth, 
and  lastly,  It  is  called  'the  water  of  life,'  because 
that  whosoever  doth  effectually  drink  thereof,  shall 
die  no  more,  but  the  water  that  Christ  shall  give 
him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water,  springing  up 
in  him  to  eternal  life ;  wherefore  he  calleth  it  in 
another  place,  '  the  living  water,'  because  the 
quality  and  nature  of  it  is  to  beget,  to  increase,  to 
maintain,  and  preserve  life.  Jn.  iv.  10-14. 

[Water  of  life  clear  and  pure  as  crystal.] 
1  Aud  he  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life, 
clear  as  crystal,'  &c.  Mark,  it  is  water,  water  of 
life,  pure  water  of  life,  and  clear  as  crystal.  These 
wjrds,  'pure'  and  'clear,'  aud  that  as  'crystal,' 


Water  of  life. 


they  are  added  upon  a  double  account.  First,  To 
show  you  that  it  is  grace  alone  that  saveth  the 
sinner  ;  and,  Second,  To  show  you  that  at  this 
day  the  doctrine  of  this  grace  will  be  by  itself  alone 
without  the  commixture  of  that  dirt  and  trash  that 
for  a  long  time,  even  to  this  day,  hath  been  thrown 
into  it. 

First,  It  showetn  us  that  it  is  grace  alone  that 
saveth  the  sinner,  pure  grace,  grace  that  admits 
of  nothing  of  ours  to  be  in  the  least  a  helper  in 
the  matter  of  our  happiness;  we  are  'justified  freely 
by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.'  As  he  saith  by  the  prophet,  'I  will 
pour  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be  clean, 
and  from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you.' *  Eze.  xxxvi. 
25.  '  Not  for  your  sakes  do  1  this,  saith  the  Lord. 
Be  ye  ashamed  and  confounded  for  all  your  own 
evil  ways,  0  house  of  Israel,'  ver.  32,  33.  It  is  clean 
water,  indeed — it  is  clear  in  the  nature  of  it,  clear 
in  the  gift  of  it,  and  clear  in  the  working  of  it. 
It  washeth  freely,  thoroughly,  and  perfectly. 
'From  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you,'  ver.  25;  xvta. 

Re.  xxi.  8. 

Second,  This  word  pure,  and  clear  as  crystal,  it 
also  showeth  us  that  at  the  day  of  New  Jerusalem, 
the  doctrine  of  grace  shall  be  cleansed  from  all 
those  dirty  and  muddy  inventions  that  sin,  Satan, 
and  the  wisdom  of  this  world  hath  thrown  into 
this  river,  and  into  its  goodly  crystal  streams ;  I 
say  at  this  day  they  shall  not  come  near  it,  neither 
shall  the  rubbish  they  have  already  cast  into  it 
any  more  be  there  for  ever.  '  I  will  destroy  all 
the  beasts  thereof  (the  beastly  men  he  means)  from 
beside  the  great  waters,  neither  shall  the  foot  of 
man  trouble  them  any  more,  nor  the  hoofs  of  beasts 
trouble  them.  Then  will  I  make  their  waters  deep, 
and  cause  the  rivers  to  run  like  oil,  saith  the  Lord 

God.'  Eze.  xxxii.  13,  14. 

'  And  he  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of 
life,  clear  as  crystal,'  &c.  in  that  he  saith  he 
saw  this  river,  he  giveth  us  in  a  mystery  also  to 
understand  how  openly  and  plainly  this  river  shall 
in  all  its  crystal  streams  aud  currents  be  appre- 
hended and  seen  by  the  children  of  this  city ;  for 
in  this  vision  he  doth  as  it  were  represent  in  his 
person  the  children  of  New  Jerusalem ;  as  God 
said  to  Ezekiel  in  another  case,  'Thou  shalt  be  a 
sign,'  'and  they  shall  do  as  thou  hast  done,' 
xxiv.  22, 27.  So  here,  I  saw,  saith  John,  a  pure  river 
of  water  of  life.  I  am  in  this  a  sign  to  the  house 
of  the  Israel  of  God,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  this 
city ;  they  shall  do  as  I  have  done,  aud  shall  also 
see  as  I  have  seen.  As  saith  the  church  and 
people  of  this  city,  'As  we  have  heard,  so  have  we 

1  This  quotation  is  taken  from  that  excellent  translation  of 
the  Bible  made  by  the  reformers  at  Geneva,  aud  which  was 
much  used  in  Buuyan's  time.  He  preferred  the  word  pour 
to  that  of  sprinkle,  used  in  the  present  version.— (Ed.) 


452 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


seen,  in  the  city  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Ps.xlviii.  8. 
And  hence  it  is  called  an  open  fountain,  because 
it  shall  be  no  more  shut  up  or  kept  close  for  ever. 

Zee.  xiii.  1,  2. 

[Whither  this  water  goes  and  its  extension.] 

'And  he  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of 
life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne 
of  God.'  This  word,  proceeding,  hath  also  in  it 
two  things:  First,  An  implicit  declaration  whither 
it  goes  ;  and,  Second,  A  discovery  of  its  gradual 
extension  to  those  to  whom  it  goes. 

First.  Touching  to  whom,  or  whither  it  goes,  it 
is  let  out  both  to  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  indiffer- 
ently ;  and  so  it  never  yet  was  since  the  foundations 
of  the  Jewish  church ;  for  in  the  time  of  the  Old 
Testament  it  did  run  to  the  Jews  in  special,  and 
in  the  times  of  the  New  Testament,  hitherto,  unto 
us  the  Gentiles  in  special.  0 !  but  now  it  shall  in 
this  manner  be  extended  to  sinners  no  longer;  not 
now  to  the  Jews  without  the  Gentiles,  nor  again 
to  them  without  the  Jews,  but  equally  aud  alike 
to  both,  and  on  them  both  it  shall  work  alike 
effectually.  '  It  shall  be  in  that  day,'  saith  the 
prophet,  '  that  living  waters  shall  go  out  from 
Jerusalem ;  half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea, 
and  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea.'  Zee.  xiv.  8. 
By  'living  waters'  here,  you  are  to  understand  the 
same  with  this  in  the  text;  by  'the  former  sea,' 
the  people  of  the  Jews,  for  they  were  God's  former 
people ;  and  by  '  hinder  sea,'  the  people  of  the 
Gentiles,  for  they  are  the  younger  son.  And 
because  the  whole  world  consisteth  of  these  two 
people,  therefore  Ezekiel  in  his  vision  puts  them 
both  together,  calling  them  the  fish  of  one  great 
sea,  to  which  this  water  of  life  shall  run,  and  upon 
whose  fish  it  shall  have  a  like  operation,  even  to 
heal  them,  and  make  them  live,  without  respect 
either  to  this  or  that  party.  '  It  shall  come  to 
pass  that  the  fishers,'  that  is,  the  gospel  ministers, 
'shall  stand  upon  it,'  the  rivers,  'from  En-gedi 
even  to  En-eglaim;  they  shall  be  a  'place  to  spread 
forth  nets ;  their  fish  shall  be  according  to  their 
kinds,  as  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  exceeding 
many.'  Eze.  xivii.  10.  As  another  prophet  saith, 
*  The  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted  to 
thee. '  is.  lx.  5.  Thus  much  touching  whither  this 
water  goes. 

[Second.]  And  now  to  come  to  the  manner  of 
the  extension  of  it,  in  the  way  of  its  proceeding.  A 
thing  that  proceeds,  it  doth  what  it  doth  gradu- 
ally, that  is,  by  degrees.  First,  it  comes  or  goes 
so  far,  and  then  further,  and  afterwards  further 
than  that,  till  at  last  it  ascends  to  the  height  and 
uppermost  degree  that  is  allotted  for  its  perfection. 
All  which  the  Holy  Ghost  would  have  us  gather 
out  of  this  word,  'it  proceedeth,'  or  that  John  saw 
this  holy  water  'proceeding.'     The  which  the  pro- 


phet Ezekiel  in  a  mystery  unfoldeth  to  us,  saying, 
the  first  time  he  passed  over  this  water  it  was  up 
but  to  his  ankles ;  the  second  time  he  passed 
through,  it  proceeded  to  his  knees  ;  the  third  time, 
to  his  loins  ;  and  last  of  all,  became  a  river  to  swim 

in.  Eze.  xlvii.  1-3. 

1.  It  is  but  up  to  the  ankles,  that  is,  but  shal- 
low ;  and  signifies  that,  first,  the  soul  is  but  a  little 
child  in  God's  things,  such  as  the  apostle  calls 
babes,  children,  '  little  children,'  1  Jn.  ii.  12. 

2.  Then  from  the  ankles  it  proceeds  to  the  knees, 
that  is,  somewhat  higher  than  the  ankles ;  and 
signifieth  that  the  Christian  groweth  from  a  child 
to  a  young  and  strong  man,  one  that  is  now  gotten 
deeper  into  the  things  of  God,  and  that  is  able  to 
tug  with  and  overcome  the  wicked  ones.  1  Jn.  ii.  13. 

3.  After  this  it  proceeds  higher,  even  up  to  the 
loins ;  this  signifies  that  as  grace  makes  men 
children  of  God,  and  his  young  men,  so  also  it 
maketh  them  fathers  and  ancients  in  his  church ; 
it  makes  them  grave,  knowing,  solid  guides,  and 
unfolders  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom ;  these 
are  such  as  are  instructed  into  the  kingdom  of  God, 
and  that  can  bring  out  of  their  treasury  things  new 
and  old. 

4.  It  yet  proceeds  higher,  even  to  be  above  the 
head,  a  river  to  swim  in,  and  that  such  a  river  as 
can  by  no  means  be  passed  over.  This  signifieth 
our  launching  into  eternity;  our  being  beyond  all 
heights,  depths,  lengths,  and  breadths  in  the  open 
vision  and  enjoyments  of  grace.  '  For  there  the 
glorious  Lord  shall  be  unto  us  a  place  of  broad 
rivers  and  streams,  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with 
oars,  neither  shall  gallant  ships  pass  thereby.'  Is. 
xxxiii.  21.  Thus  we  begin  children,  and  wade  up  to 
the  ankles  in  the  things  of  God ;  and  being  once 
in,  it  riseth  and  proceeds  to  come  up  to  our  knees, 
then  to  our  loins,  and  last  of  all  to  be  a  river  to 
swim  in ;  a  river  so  wide,  so  deep,  and  every  way 
so  large,  that  it  can  in  no  wise  be  passed  over.1 

[  Whence  and  from  xohom  this  water  comes.  ] 
'  And  he  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life, 
clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of 
God,  and  of  the  Lamb.'  Having  thus  spoken  to 
the  water  what  it  is,  as  also  to  whom  it  extends 
itself,  and  how  it  proceeds,  he  now  comes  to  show 
us  from  whence  and  from  whom  it  duth  come.  It 
proceeds,  saith  he,  '  from  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb.'  Out  of  the  throne  of  God;  this 
throne  of  God,  it  is,  in  another  place,  called  the 
mercy-seat,  and  throne  of  grace,  from  which,  as 
always,  so  now  in  a  special  manner  he  will  issue 

1  How  beautifully  is  the  Christiau's  growth  in  grace  here 
pictured  by  Buuyan  from  Eze.  xlvii.  3-12.  60  imperceptibly 
by  Divine  power,  without  the  aid  of  man,  that  the  partaker 
olten  doubts  his  own  growth.  The  water  rises  higher  aud 
higher,  until  at  length  there  is  no  standing  for  his  feet — the 
earth  and  time  recedes,  aud  he  is  plunged  into  the  oceau  of 
eternal  grace  and  glory. —  (Kd.) 


THE   NEW   JERUSALEM. 


453 


forth  of  himself  in  the  glory  of  the  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  city.  Ex.  xxv.  22.  He.  It.  ic.  When 
he  saith,  therefore,  that  it  doth  proceed  out  of  the 
throne  of  God,  it  is  as  if  he  had  said,  I  saw  that 
from  the  yearning  howels  of  the  great  God  did 
flow  continually  the  living  streams  of  the  everlasting 
fountains  of  grace,  and  that  not  only  to,  hut  in  the 
midst  of  this  city,  wherewith  her  inhabitants  are 
continually  watered,  and  their  pastures  kept  always 
green  and  flourishing.  '  Ho,  everyone  that  thirsteth, 
come  ye  to  the  waters.'  is.  lv.  1. 

'  Proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb.'  In  that  this  water  of  life  is  said  to 
proceed  not  only  out  of  the  throne  of  God,  but  also 
of  the  Lamb,  it  signitieth  and  holdeth  forth  unto  us 
two  special  things : 

First.  That  the  throne  of  God  is  also  made  the 
throne  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  upon  which  he, 
as  a  reward  of  his  sufferings  and  victory  over  sin, 
Satan,  and  all  evils,  is  set  down,  and  upon  which 
he  sits  and  rules  as  Lord  and  Chief  of  all  worlds. 
He  is  set  down  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high ;  as  he  saith, 
•  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with 
me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am 
set  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne. '  Re.  iii.  21. 
This  being  thus,  it  signifieth  that  this  city  shall 
have  her  enjoyments  of  life,  peace,  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  by  virtue  of  the  kingship  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  as  well  as  by  the  virtue  of  his  priestly 
and  prophetical  office.  The  church  doth  in  our 
days  know  a  little  what  joy,  peace,  and  life  is  to 
be  enjoyed  from  Christ,  even  through  that  dark 
and  glimmering  sight  that  she  hath  of  the  offices 
of  Christ  in  a  mist ;  but  she  feels  not  yet  what 
joy  she  shall  have,  and  what  peace  she  shall  enjoy 
when  her  Lord,  in  all  his  offices,  is  manifest  before 
her,  and  when  he  in  the  glory  of  them  doth  reign 
in  the  midst  of  this  Jerusalem.  There  are  none 
of  the  offices  of  the  Lord  Jesus  yet  upon  the  throne 
in  his  church  on  earth,  though  they  be  all  upon  the 
throne  in  heaven.  0 !  but  the  day  is  coming  that 
they  shall  be  all  upon  the  throne  in  the  church  on 
earth ;  when  they  shall,  each  of  them  in  its  full 
length,  breadth,  height,  and  depth,  bear  sway 
among  his  people,  and  before  all  men.  '  Then 
the  moon  shall  be  confounded,  and  the  sun  ashamed, 
when  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  Mount  Zjon, 
and  in  Jerusalem,  and  before  his  ancients  gloriously.' 

Is.  xxw.  28. 

'  0  that  thou  wouldest  rend  the  heavens,  that 
thou  wouldest  come  down,  that  the  mountains 
might  flow  down  at  thy  presence!'  is.  l.viv.  1.  0 
that  the  day  were  come  that  the  smoke  should  go 
forth  of  the  temple  of  God,  that  men  might  enter 
into  it,  and  there  meet  with  God  upon  the  throne, 
and  with  Jesus  in  him  upon  the  throne  in  all  his 


offices  !      It  will  be  thus,  thou  Zion,  shortly,  •  and 
great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children.'  is.  Ut.  18. 

[Second.]  The  second  thing  observable  is,  that 
as  all  grace  comes  from  out  of  the  throne  of  God, 
so  it  also  proceeds  or  comes  out  of  the  throne  of 
the  Lamb  ;  that  is,  no  grace  comes  to  any  but 
through  the  victory  and  conquest  of  the  Lord  Christ. 
We  are  'justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the 
redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.'  no.  m.  24.  And 
again,  '  We  have  redemption  through  his  blood,' 
even  '  the  forgiveness  of'  our  '  sins,  according  to 
the  riches  of  his  grace.'  Ep.  i.  7.  By  which  we  may 
gather  that  when  these  things  come  to  be  in  their 
own  purity  among  us — that  is,  when  grace  runs 
clear  without  the  dirt  and  mud  of  the  traditions  of 
men  commixed  therewith — then  will  all  that  hold 
up  false  and  erroneous  opinions  be  washed  away. 
For  this  river  will  not  only  wasli  away  the  sins 
and  filthiness  of  those  that  arc  truly  gracious;  but 
it  will  also  destroy  the  heretic  and  erroneous  per- 
son ; x  it  will  be  to  them  at  that  day  as  the  Red 
Sea  was  to  the  Egyptians  of  old ;  which  sea, 
though  it  was  a  wall  on  this  hand  and  on  that  to 
the  children  of  Israel,  yet  it  destroyed  the  Egyp- 
tians that  assayed  to  go  through  it  as  Israel  did. 
He.  xi.  29.  The  reason  also  why  we  are  at  this  day 
in  such  confusion  in  matters  of  religion,  it  is  for 
want  of  the  clear  and  pure  streams  of  this  river  of 
water  of  life  ;  all  which  will  be  mended  when  there 
is  but  one  river  to  water  this  city,  and  that  too 
the  pure  river  of  the  water  of  life,  in  all  its  streams 
as  clear  as  crystal ;  then  shall  all  drink  in  all 
things  into  one  Spirit,  and  be  watered  with  the 
same  dews  of  heaven. 

Thus  much  of  the  water  of  life  that  belongeth 
to  this  Jerusalem. 

[Its  food  the  tree  of  life.] 

Verse  2.  And  '  in  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it, 
and  on  either  side  of  the  river,  ivas  there  the  tree 
of  life,  which  bear  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and 
yielded  her  fruit  every  month ;  and  the  leaves  of 
the  tree  were  fur  the  healing  of  the  nations.'  This 
tree  of  life  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  that  he 
is  here  called  a  tree,  rather  than  by  other  of  his 
names,  it  is  to  show  us  how  fruitful  and  exceeding 
advantageous  he  in  all  his  benefits  will  be  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  city.  This  is  that  tree  under 
whose  branches  the  fowls  of  heaven  shall  now  most 
safely  lodge,  and  find  relief  from  the  hot  and 
fainting  beams  of  the  persecuting  sun  of  this  world, 
as  the  Word  doth  there  inform  us.  Mat.  xiii.  si,  82. 

[  The  situation  of  this  tree  in  the  midst  of  the  city.  ] 
Now  before  I  come  to  speak  to  this  tree,  touching 
the  manner  of  its  fruit,  and  its  often  bearing,  with 


1  'To  the  ouc,  the  savour  of  death  unto  death  ;  and  to  the 
other,  the  savour  of  life  uuto  life.'  2  Cor.  ii.  16.— vr>u.) 


454 


THE   HOLY  CITY,  OR 


the  efficaciousness  of  its  leaves,  which  here  he  saith 
doth  heal  the  nations  ;  1  will  take  notice  of  one  or 
two  general  things  that  lie  before  me,  from  the 
standing  of  the  tree  in  the  midst  of  ihe  street  of 
this  city. 

First  then,  In  that  he  saith  this  city  hath  a  tree 
of  life  in  it,  he  alludes  to  the  garden  of  Eden,  the 
pleasant  paradise  that  God  began  the  world  withal; 
whereby  he  signifieth  that  as  the  world  began  with 
a  paradise,  so  also  it  shall  end  with  a  paradise, 
when  sin  and  Satan  have  done  their  worst.  This 
New  Jerusalem  shall  be  the  wind  up  of  the  world, 
nnd  in  it  shall  stand  the  tree  of  life,  as  well  as  there 
stood  one  in  the  goodly  garden,  which  was  the 
beginning  thereof.  In  which  paradise  there  shall 
be  no  tree  of  knowledge,  or  the  law  of  works,  to 
bear  sway,  and  to  cause  that  the  sons  of  God  shall 
be  thrust  out  thence  for  their  eating  of  its  for- 
bidden fruits ;  no,  the  tree  of  life  alone  shall  here 
bear  sway  and  rule,  whose  fruit  is  only  healthful, 
and  the  leaves  thereof  for  medicine. 

[1.]  Now  this  tree  of  life  being  in  the  midst  of 
this  city,  it  signifieth  that  the  inhabitants  of  it 
shall  be  sweetly  shadowed,  refreshed,  and  defended 
with  its  coolness,  and  also  sweetly  nourished  and 
comforted  with  its  dainties.  And  hence  it  is  that 
tbe  Scriptures  do  hold  him  forth  in  his  benefits  to 
his  church  under  these  very  notions.  '  As  the 
apple-tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,  so  is  my 
beloved  among  the  sons.  I  sat  down  under  his 
shadow  with  great  delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet 
to  my  taste.' Ca.  ii.  3.  Indeed  the  shadow  of  this 
tree  of  life,  as  always  it  is  refreshing  to  the  tempted 
and  weary,  so  now  it  will  be  far  more.  '  They 
that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall  return ;  they 
shall  revive  as  the  corn,  and  grow  as  the  vine; 
the  scent  thereof  shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon.' 
iiab.  xiv.  7.  Mark,  (1.)  His  shadow  will  make  us 
return,  that  is,  to  our  first  love ;  to  the  days  of 
our  youth,  to  our  young,  fresh,  tender,  and  flour- 
ishing faith,  love,  and  self-denial,  that  we  received 
in  the  days  of  our  espousals.  (2.)  As  it  will  make 
us  return  to  these,  so  it  will  make  us  revive  in 
these;  they  shall  return  and  revive,  they  shall 
revive  as  the  corn ;  as  the  corn  doth  when,  in  the 
heat  of  summer,  after  long  scorching,  it  is  covered 
with  cool  clouds,  and  watered  with  the  bottles  of 
heaven.  (3.)  As  it  shall  make  them  return  and 
revive,  so  it  shall  make  them  grow ;  they  shall 
grow  as  the  vine,  that  is,  speedily,  fruitfully,  and 
spreadingly.  (4.)  This  is  not  all,  but  the  smell  of 
saints  in  those  days  shall  be  excellent:  'They 
shall  revive  as  the  corn,'  they  shall  'grow  as  the 
vine,'  and  shall  send  forth  their  scent  '  as  the  wine 
of  Lebanon.'  This  tree  is  a  perfuming  tree,  and 
makes  them  also  that  abide  under  the  shadow 
thereof  to  smell  as  sweet-smelling  myrrh;  it  makes 
them  smell  as  the  wine  of  thy  grace,  0  Lord,  and 


as  the  fragrant  ointments  of  heaven.  When  the 
spouse  did  but  touch  where  her  Lord  had  touched 
afore  her,  it  made  her  *  hands  drop  with  myrrh, 
and  her  fingers  ivith  sweet-smelling  myrrh.'  Ca.  v.  5. 
0  they  will  be  green,  savoury,  reviving,  flourishing, 
growing  Christians,  that  shall  walk  the  street  of 
New  Jerusalem!  '  I  am,'  saith  he,  'like  a  green 
fir  tree.     From  me  is  thy  fruit  found.'  Ho.  xiv.  8. 

[2.]  But  again,  As  he  shall  be  thus  profitable  to 
hjs  people  for  shadow  and  reviving,  so  he  will  be 
in  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it  for  food,  for  refresh- 
ing and  replenishing  that  way.  '  I  sat  down  under 
his  shadow  with  great  delight,'  said  she,  '  and  his 
fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste.'  Ezekiel  tells  us 
that  this  tree  is  all  trees ;  and  on  the  bank  of  the 
river,  on  this  side,  and  on  that,  were  all  trees  for 
meat.  Eze.  xlvii.  12.  Indeed  Christ  is  all  trees  ;  yea, 
there  is  more  to  be  found  in  him  for  the  food  of 
the  soul,  than  there  can  be  on  all  trees  for  the  food 
of  the  body.  He  is  a  fir-tree  for  tallness,  green- 
ness and  strength;  he  is  an  olive  for  fatness,  a 
vine  for  sweetness  and  goodness,  for  therewith  is 
refreshed  the  heart  both  of  God  and  man.  Ho.  xiv.  8. 
Eo.  xi.  17.  Jn.  xv.  i,  2.  What  shall  I  say,  He  is  the 
almond-tree,  the  fig-tree,  the  apple-tree,  all  trees ; 
The  tree  of  life  also  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of 

God.  Ca.  ii.  13. 

To  conclude. — Seeing  Christ  is  said  to  be  in  the 
midst  of  the  street  of  this  city,  it  showeth  unto  us 
with  what,  at  all  occasions,  the  actions  of  the 
saints  of  this  city  shall  be  seasoned.  The  street, 
you  know  I  told  you,  is  the  way  of  holiness  in  this 
city,  the  place  of  spiritual  recreation  and  solace. 
Now  in  the  very  midst  of  this  street  there  stands 
this  tree,  which  being  thus,  it  showeth  us  how 
wonderfully  Christ,  as  a  tree  of  life,  will  be  in  all 
the  words  and  deeds  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  Jeru- 
salem ;  they  will  walk  in  Christ,  they  will  talk  in 
Christ,  they  will  do  all  they  do  in  Christ,  or  rather 
Christ  will  be  found  in  all  their  ways ;  even  as  the 
tree  of  life  is  found  in  the  midst  of  the  street  of 
this  city :  '  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  his 
name,  saith  the  Lord.'  Zee  x.  12. 

Again,  In  that  this  tree  is  said  to  stand  in  the 
midst  of  the  street,  it  showeth  unto  us  how  com- 
mon and  free  his  benefits  will  now  be  also.  The 
plumbs,  and  figs,  and  grapes,  and  apples  of  this 
tree,  will  be  open  to  every  passenger :  not  a  boy  nor 
a  girl,  that  now  shall  play  in  thy  street,  0  Jeru- 
salem, but  shall  eat  of  the  fruits  of  the  tree  that 
stands  in  the  midst  of  thee,  as  of  common  things. 

Je.  x.vxi.  4,  5. 

[Second.]  'And  in  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it, 
and  on  either  side  of  the  river  was  there  the  tree 
of  life. '  As  this  tree  doth  stand  in  the  midst  of 
the  street  of  this  city,  so  it  also  standeth  on  each 
side  of  the  river  of  the  water  of  life,  of  which  you 
have  heard  before.     Now  when  he  saith,  the  tree 


THE  NEW   JERUSALEM. 


455 


is  on  either  side  of  the  river;  whence  by  the  way 
note  yet  again,  that  both  the  water  of  life,  and  also 
the  tree  of  life,  they  are  both  to  be  enjoyed  by  the 
inhabitants  of  this  city  in  the  way  of  holiness;  the 
tree  is  in  the  midst  of  the  street,  and  the  river  runs 
through  or  between  tho  very  tables  of  the  heart 
of  this  tree  of  life ;  on  either  side  of  the  river  was 
there  the  tree  of  life. 

Again,  In  that  it  is  said  that  this  tree  of  life  is 
on  either  side  of  the  river;  it  argueth  that  they 
who  come  at  any  time  at  this  river  for  water  to 
quench  their  thirst,  and  to  make  them  live,  they 
must  come  to  it  by  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  Christ. 
In  more  easy  terms,  read  it  thus :  There  is  none 
can  partake  of  the  grace  of  God  but  by  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  which  is  this  tree  of  life.  Col.  ii.  3,  9. 
For  this  tree,  this  Christ,  doth  stand  on  either  side 
of  the  river,  to  signify  that  all  grace  to  us  comes 
through  his  bloody  wounds,  death  and  victory. 
Jn.  i.  ii3.  'I  am  the  way,'  saith  Christ,  '  and  the 
truth,  and  the  life ;  no  man  corneth  to  the  Father 
but  by  me.'  Jn.  xiv.  g. 

•  And  on  either  side  of  the  river  was  there  the 
tree  of  life.'  Mark,  but  one  tree,  and  yet  such  a 
tree  whose  body  reached  as  far  as  the  river  reached: 
indeed  Ezekiel  saith  this  tree  is  all  trees  for  meat, 
yet  not  to  show  that  there  are  more  trees  of  life 
than  one,  but  to  show  that  all  that  can  be  thought 
of  that  is  good  for  soul-nourishment,  is  to  be  fouud 
in  this  one,  that  is,  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  it  is 
further  evident  that  though  he  saith  all  trees,  as 
if  he  meant  many,  yet  he  spake  but  metaphorically, 
to  show  thereby  the  fulness  of  Christ;  because 
John  doth  understand  him  so,  calling  it  one  tree, 
to  wit,  '  the  tree  of  life.'  But  mark  again,  so  far 
as  the  river  goes,  so  far  the  tree  goes,  so  that 
where  you  cannot  find  the  tree  of  life,  be  sure  there 
is  none  of  the  water  of  life.  No  Christ,  no  grace. 
'  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  but  he  that  hath 
not  the  Son  of  God,  shall  not  see  life,  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him. '  Jn.  hi.  36.  l  Jn,  v.  12.  For 
'  on  either  side  of  the  river  was  there  the  tree  of 
life. 

[  Tlie  fruits  of  this  tree.  ]  *  Which  bare  twelve  man- 
ner of  fruits.  '  This  word  fruits,  it  may  be  taken 
two  ways — either  as  it  relates  to  God,  or  as  it  re- 
lates to  man,  for,  as  I  said  before,  the  fruit  of  this 
tree  refreshes  the  heart  both  of  God  and  man.  Ju. 

ix.  9, 14. 

[L]  Now  if  it  be  taken  with  reference  to  God, 
then  it  signifieth  the  complete  satisfaction  that  by 
the  worthiness  of  the  fruits  of  the  passion  of  Christ 
is  given  to  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  church; 
this  city  of  God.  Da.  ix.  21, 26.  He  suffered  to  finish 
transgression,  to  make  an  end  of  sin,  and  to  bring 
in  everlasting  righteousness ;  by  this,  I  say,  is  the 
heart  of  God  refreshed,  and  in  this  doth  it  rest. 
Mat  Hi.  17. 


[2.]  If  fruit  here  be  taken  with  reference  to  men, 
then  it  signifieth  the  happiness  and  glory  that  those- 
for  whom  he  died  and  rose  again  should  receive 
by  this  means.  His  fruit,  I  have  showed  you,  is 
sweet  to  tho  taste  of  his  church,  which  fruit  is  the 
effect  of  his  undertaking  for  sinners  and  the  com- 
fortable savour  of  it  in  the  soul. 

[The  variety  of  the  fruits.]  *  Which  bare  twelve 
manner  of  fruits.'  In  that  he  saith  the  fruits  aro 
twelve,  he  herein  alludetli, 

1.  To  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  Israel  of  God;  for 
which  twelve  tribes  here  will  be  found  a  suitable 
measure  of  food,  healing  food:  '  I  will  multiply  tho 
fruit  of  the  tree,'  saith  God,  and  also  '  the  increase 
of  the  field,  that  ye  shall  receive  no  more  reproach 
of  famine  among  the  heathen.'  F.ze.  xxxvi.  so. 

Again,  These  that  John  calleth  '  twelve  manner 
of  fruits,'  the  prophet  Ezekiel  calleth  'all  manner 
of  fruit  for  meat.'  For  indeed,  as  I  showed  before, 
there  is  that  to  be  found  in  Christ,  both  for  fulness 
and  variety,  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  heaven  and 
earth  beside.  Here  is  fruit  for  body,  fruit  for  soul, 
fruit  for  babes,  fruit  for  strong  men,  fruit  for  fathers, 
yea,  for  glorified  saints  and  angels.  Fruits,  variety 
of  fruits,  even  twelve  manner  of  fruits. 

2.  By  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  he  doth  also  al- 
lude to  the  apostles,  who  are  called  twelve,  and  arc 
those  who  have  made  provision  for  the  house  of 
God,  according  to  the  twelve-fold  manner  of  the 
dispensation  of  God  unto  them,  and  of  the  twelve- 
fold manner  of  operation  of  that  holy  Spirit  which 
wrought  in  every  one  of  them  severally  as  ho 
pleased.  Which  twelve  were  before  figured  unto 
us  by  the  twelve  officers  of  king  Solomon,  the  type 
of  Christ,  which  twelve  were  to  make  provision  for 
the  house  of  the  king,  according  to  the  season  of 
the  year,  and  each  man  his  month  in  the  year, 
l  kl  iv.  7.  Which  very  thing  the  Holy  Ghost  also 
doth  here  cast  his  eye  upon,  and  that  makes  him 
bring  in  the  words  of  ■  every  month. '  saying,  it  yields 
its  fruit  '  every  month.'  For  indeed,  whatever  you 
read  of  concerning  this  city,  in  this  description  of 
John,  you  find  something  or  other  in  the  writings 
of  the  prophets  that  giveth  ground  for  such  expres- 
sions. Wherefore  seeing  the  officers  of  Solomon 
were  twelve,  and  the  apostles  of  Christ  twelve  also; 
and  seeing  the  officers  of  Solomon  made  provision 
for  his  house,  each  man  his  month  in  a  year,  and 
the  fruits  of  this  tree  of  life  are  called  twelve  man- 
ner of  fruits,  I  do  take  the  twelve  manner  of  fruits 
here  to  be  signified  by  the  provision  of  Solomon's 
officers,  according  to  the  twelve  seasons  of  the  year, 
and  they  a  type  of  the  twelve-fold  doctrine  of  the 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lord  Cbrist,  for  it  is  their 
doctrine  that  is  the  bread  of  the  church,  yea,  the 
milk  for  the  babe,  and  the  strong  meat  for  men. 

1  Th.  ii.  7.    1  Co.  iii.  2.    He.  v.  11-14. 

[The  abundance  of  the  fruits.]  'And  yielded  her 


456 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


fruit  every  month.'  As  this  confinneth  what  I 
have  said  before,  so  it  further  showeth  us  these 
three  things.  First,  That  the  effectual  fruits  of 
Christ  for  the  saving  of  the  world,  they  are  to  he 
had  especially  at  certain  seasons.  It  '  yielded  her 
fruit  every  month.'  Second,  It  showeth  also  that 
at  the  building  of  this  Jerusalem,  these  seasons 
will  be  very  thick  and  quick ;  she  yielded  her  fruit 
'every  month.'  Iliird,  It  showeth  us  also  the 
abundance  of  provision  that  this  holy  city  shall  then 
enjoy  from  the  tree  of  life,  even  all  manner  of  fruit 
every  month. 

First,  For  the  first,  that  the  gospel  hath  and 
will  be  especially  effectual  at  certain  seasons  for 
the  saving  of  the  sons  of  men ;  it  is  showed  us  by 
the  descending  of  the  angels  into  the  pool  of 
Bethesda  to  trouble  the  water,  which  as  it  was  at 
certain  seasons,  so  he  that  in  those  seasons  first 
stepped  in,  he  only  was  made  whole  of  whatsoever 
disease  he  had.  Jn.  v.  4.  It  is  showed  us  also  in  that 
parable  of  the  Lord's  hiring  men  to  work  in  his 
vineyard ;  which  time  of  hiring,  though  it  lasteth 
in  general  from  the  first  hour  to  the  eleventh,  yet 
so  as  that  there  were  vacant  seasons  between  hir- 
ing-times  and  hiring-times,  quite  through  the  whole 
day ;  he  went  out  at  the  first,  third,  sixth,  ninth 
and  eleventh  hour,  and  not  at  every  hour,  to  hire 
labourers.  Mat.  xx.  1-6.  For  as  God  hath  appointed 
out  beforehand  the  number  of  his  elect,  so  also  he 
hath  determined  in  his  good  pleasure  the  day  of 
their  bringing  in,  and  will  then  have  them  as  cer- 
tainly as  the  wild  ass  is  found  in  her  month.  Ga.i.  15, 
16.  H0.vi.11.  Je.ii.24.  Of  which  times  and  seasons,  be- 
cause men  are  ignorant,  therefore  they  should  with 
all  faithfulness  wait  upon  God  in  all  the  seasons 
of  his  grace  for  their  souls,  even  as  he  did  for  his 
body;  who  because  he  would  be  there  at  all  seasons, 
brought  thither  his  bed  and  couch  to  rest  there. 

Jn.  v.  8. 

Second,  As  by  the  fruit  of  this  tree  being  yielded 
at  certain  seasons,  we  may  gather  that  there  are 
certain  seasons  in  which  the  word  in  an  especial 
manner  shall  be  blessed  and  made  successful  to 
the  salvation  of  many  souls.  So  again,  in  that 
he  saith  this  fruit  is  yielded  every  month,  it  signi- 
fieth  that  in  the  days  of  the  building  of  the  city, 
the  New  Jerusalem,  these  seasons  will  be  very 
thick  and  quick.  '  Lift  up  thine  eyes,'  saith  God 
to  this  city,  '  all  they  gather  themselves  together, 
they  come  to  thee ;  thy  sons  shall  come  from  far, 
and  thy  daughters'  from  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
'  All  the  flocks  of  Kedar  shall  be  gathered  together 
unto  thee '  so  that  thou  wonderingly  shalt  sav, 
'  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  the 
doves  to  their  windows  ! '  is.  lx.  4,  7,  8.  For  '  I  will 
make  all  my  mountains  a  way,  and  my  highways 
shall  be  exalted.  Behold  these  shall  come  from 
far ;  and  lo  these  from  the  north,  and  from  the 


west,  and  those  from  the  land  of  Sinim.'  Ij.  ilit 
11, 12 

Third,  In  that  she  is  said  to  yield  not  only  fruit, 
but  all  manner  of  fruit;  and  that  not  only  one 
manner  of  fruit  now,  and  another  then,  but  all 
manner  of  fruit,  and  that  every  month;  it  argueth 
also  that  at  this  day  Jerusalem  shall  have  abun- 
dance of  heavenly  and  spiritual  provision,  and  of 
variety  of  dainties  for  her  solace  and  refreshment; 
always  new,  I  say,  and  immediately  from  the  tree. 
The  fruits  of  the  vine  shall  at  that  day  be  upon  the 
mountains  of  Samaria,  and  shall  be  eaten  'as  com- 
mon things,' saith  the  prophet.  Je.  xxxi.  5.  *  Fear 
not,  0  land,  be  glad  and  rejoice;  for  the  Lord  will 
do  great  things.  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the 
field,  for  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness  do  spring: 
for  the  tree  beareth  her  fruit;  the  fig-tree  and  the 
vine  do  yield  their  strength.  Be  glad,  then,  ye 
children  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  your  God; 
for  he  hath  given  you  the  former'  and  the  latter 
'rain  moderately,  and  he  will  cause  to  come  down 
for  you  the  rain,  the  former  rain  and  the  latter 
rain  in  the  first  month ;  and  the  floors  shall  be  full 
of  wheat,  and  the  fats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and 
oil.  And  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the 
locust  hath  eaten,  the  canker-worm  and  the  cater- 
pillar, and  the  palmer-worm'  hath  eaten.  'And 
ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied,  and  praise 
the  name  of  the  Lord. '  Joel  n.  21-25.  And  then 
shall  every  one  not  only  sit  under  his  own  vine, 
and  under  his  own  fig-tree,  but  from  thence  they 
shall  call  each  to  other,  to  give  to  each  other 
their  dainties,  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid. 

Zee.  iii.  10. 

[77je  virtue  of  the  leaves.]  '  And  the  leaves  of 
the  tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.'  By 
leaves  here,  we  may  understand  the  blessed  and 
precious  promises,  consolations,  and  encourage* 
ments,  that  by  virtue  of  Christ's  undertaking  for 
us,  we  have  everywhere  growing  upon  the  new 
covenant;  which  promises  and  encouragements 
they  are  and  will  be  most  freely  handed  to  the 
wounded  conscience  that  will  be  tossed  upon  the 
restless  waves  of  doubt  and  unbelief,  as  was  the 
olive  leaf  by  the  dove  brought  home  to  Noah,  when 
he  was  tossed  upon  the  waves  of  that  outrageous 
flood  that  then  did  drown  the  world.  Ge.  vm. 

But  again,  by  this  word,  the  leaves,  you  may 
conceive  that  still  he  hath  his  eye  to  the  paradise 
in  which  at  first  God  placed  Adam  and  his  com- 
panion, for  it  was  to  leaves  they  fled  for  covering 
after  they  had  transgressed  against  their  Maker. 
Ge.  iii.  7.  Now  then,  in  his  saying  the  leaves  are  for 
healing ;  it  is  as  if  he  had  said,  the  paradise  that 
will  be  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  world  will  far 
outstrip  the  paradise  that  first  was  planted  in  the 
beginning  thereof;  for  as  the  tree  of  life,  which  is 
the  Christ  and  Saviour,  shall  stand  where  did  the 


THE  NEW  JERUSALEM. 


57 


tree  of  tlie  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  which  is 
the  old  covenant  and  law  of  works:  so  the  leaves 
of  this  tree  shall  he  for  healing,  and  for  covering 
the  nakedness  of  poor  transgressors,  though  the 
leaves  that  Adam  found  in  the  first  paradise,  do 
what  he  could,  did  leave  him  naked. 

Christ's  leaves  are  better  than  Adam's  aprons. 
Ezekiel  saith  that  these  leaves  are  for  medicine, 
\ivii.  is,  that  is,  they  are  for  healing,  saith  John ; 
the  which  may  most  fitly  he  applied  to  tho  hlessed 
promise  of  grace.  For  as  a  leaf  for  medicine,  when 
applied  to  a  sore  in  the  hody,  doth  supple,  mollify, 
and  heal  the  wound;  so  the  word  of  promise,  when 
rightly  applied  to  the  soul,  it  doth  supple,  mollify, 
and  heal  the  wounded  conscience.  'He  sent  his 
word  and  healed  them,  and  delivered  them  from 
their  destructions.  0  that  men  would  praise  the 
Lord y*or  his  goodness,  and  for  his  wonderful  works 
to  the  children  of  men !'  rs.  cvii.  20,  21. 

1  And  the  leaves,'  <fec.  There  is  yet  another 
mystery  lieth  in  these  words. 

He  doth  not  say,  and  the  fruits  thereof  are  for 
the  healing  of  the  nations,  but  the  leaves,  by  which 
he  would  have  us  to  understand  that  all  the  bene- 
fits and  privileges  that  we  do  receive  from  Christ, 
they  are  as  inferior  to  the  glory  we  shall  have  from 
him  when  we  come  to  heaven,  as  inferior,  I  say, 
as  the  leaves  are  to  the  fruit.  Again,  the  comfort 
and  sweetness  that  at  any  time  we  receive  from  the 
Lord,  it  is  not  before  but  after  a  promise  is  suitably 
applied,  even  as  the  fruit  of  the  tree  with  which 
the  body  is  comforted  is  not  before  but  after  the 
leaves  have  put  forth  themselves.  Wherefore 
Christ  might  well  say  to  Nathaniel,  and  that  after 
he  had  received  some  refreshments  from  a  leaf, 
'Thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  these,'  Jn.i.50; 
and  Paul,  that  yet  'a  far  more  exceeding  and 
eternal  weight  of  glory'  is  laid  up  for  all  believers. 
2  Cor.  iv.  17.  For  indeed,  indeed,  the  glory  that  God 
hath  prepared  for  us  against  the  day  of  God,  it 
doth  and  will  more  outstrip  the  most  high  enjoy- 
ment of  the  highest  saint  in  New  Jerusalem,  not- 
withstanding their  enjoyment  will  be  so  eminent, 
than  doth  the  sweetest  fruit  outstrip  the  leaf  that 
hangeth  on  that  tree.  'And  the  leaves  of  the  tree 
■were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.'  If  the  leaves 
be  so  good,  0  Lord,  let  us  enjoy  the  fruit;  and  not 
a  little,  or  earnest,  but  the  whole  harvest  thereof 
in  thy  kingdom.  Thus  much  touching  this  water 
and  tree  of  life. 

[The  ease,  peace,  and  tranquhl'dy  of  the  ci'y.] 

Ver.  3.  'And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse:  but 
the  throne  of  God  -  shall  be  in  it;  and  his  servants 
shall  serve  him.'  This  is  the  conclusion  of  the 
whole  discourse,  and  it  showeth  unto  us  the  blessed 
effect  of  the  blessed  recovering  of  this  city  to  her 
first  and  primitive  state.     These  words,  therefore, 


they  are  only  applicable  to  this  state  of  the  church. 
For  there  hath  no  state  of  the  church  been  yet  in 
the  world  but  that  state  hath  been  liable  to  a  curse; 
but  this  state,  to  wit,  the  state  she  will  be  in  at 
her  building  again,  will  be  a  state  without  parallel, 
a  state  properly  her  own. 

•  And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse.'  By  curse 
in  thi3  place  we  are  chiefly  to  understand,  not  the 
taking  away  of  the  curse,  the  eternal  curse  which 
separates  between  God  and  the  soul  for  ever — for 
so  the  curse  in  this  sense  hath  always  been  taken 
away  by  virtue  of  the  terms,  the  general  terms  of 
the  new  covenant,  and  that  in  common  for  every 
saint  in  all  ages.  Ga.  Hi.  13. — but  by  curse  here  we 
are  to  understand  that,  or  those  curses  that  do, 
and  have  frequently  befallen  the  church  for  her  sin 
and  apostasy;  as  namely,  the  giving  up  his  people 
to  their  own  darkness  and  ignorance;  his  suffering 
them  to  swerve  from  his  true  worship  and  ordin- 
ances :  his  giving  them  up  into  the  hand  of  those 
that  hate  them,  to  become  among  them  a  hissing, 
a  taunt,  a  reproach,  and  a  by-word,  as  it  is  at  this 

day.   Zep.  i.  12-17.    Ps.  xliii.  28.    Je.  xxix.  18;  xliv.  8,  12.       His 

taking  away  from  them  the  means,  to  wit,  the  out- 
ward word  of  the  gospel,  and  suffering  them  to  be 
even  at  the  point  to  famish  for  the  want  thereof. 
Amos viii.  9-13.  These  and  other  things  are  the  curses 
that  he  here  saith  shall  be  no  more  among  his 
people ;  for  indeed  they  shall  not,  because  the 
gospel-pattern  shall  never  be  removed  more,  nor 
their  light  to  see,  nor  their  love  to  practise,  never 
be  diminished  more.  Their  defence,  also,  'shall  be 
the  munition  of  rocks;  bread  shall  be  given  them, 
and  their  waters  shall  be  sure.'  is.  xxxiii.  16.  As  here, 
you  find  the  tree  and  river  of  the  water  of  life  are 
fixed  now  in  the  midst  of  this  city.  Wherefore 
now  the  church,  as  1  have  all  along  showed  you. 
shall  have  her  sun  at  the  height,  her  light  as  the  light 
of  seven  days,  and  shall  go  no  more  down  for  ever. 
Also  she  shall  never  be  pulled  down.  She  shall 
be  a  tabernacle  that  shall  never  be  pulled  down, 
neither  shall  one  of  the  cords  thereof  be  loosed, 
or  one  of  her  stakes  again  removed,  is.  xxxiii.  20. 

'  There  shall  be  no  more  curse  :  but  the  throne 
of  God  shall  be  in  it.'  Indeed,  here  lieth  the 
reason  of  all  blessedness  to  any  people,  even  the 
presence  of  God.  Now  the  presence  of  God  is 
with  his  people,  either  at  times  or  seasons,  or  all 
together.  He  will  not  be  to  this  city  a  God  of 
times  and  seasons,  even  like  a  way-faring  man  that 
tarries  but  for  a  night,  as  he  used  to  be  to  his 
people  of  old,  but  here  he  will  abide,  rest,  and 

dwell.   Zep.iii.  17.    Je.xiv.8,9.    Zee.  ii.  10, 11.      I  will  dwell 

in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  my  house  shall  be 
built  in  it,  saith  the  Lord.  And,  again,  '  I  will 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem  for  ever.'  Ezc.  xliii.  9. 
Wherefore  John  considering  this,  he  saith,  there 
shall  be  here  no  more  any  curse,  but  the  throne  of 

58 


453 


THE   HOLY   CITY,  OR 


God.  God  will  now,  when  he  returneth  to  Jeru- 
salem, bring  his  seat  with  him  to  signify  his  sit- 
ting down  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  to  be  their 
company-keeper  for  ever. 

[Import  of  the  word  throne.]  '  But  the  throne 
of  God  -  shall  be  in  it.'  By  this  word  '  throne,'  we 
are  to  understand  yet  further  these  particular 
things  — 

First.  How  blessed  a  state  this  city  will  be  in 
at  all  times  for  the  answer  of  prayer !  Tbe  throne 
of  God  will  be  in  the  midst  of  them ;  the  throne  of 
grace,  tbe  mercy-seat,  tbey  will  be  open  now  to  all 
the  inhabitants  of  this  city ;  yea,  the  fame  thereof 
shall  so  spread  that  it  shall  be  rumoured  among  all 
the  nations  that  in  Jerusalem  God  will  be  found 
speedily ;  that  in  Jerusalem  the  God  of  heaven  and 
eternal  mercy  is  found  at  all  times  by  them  that 
seek  his  face.  *  Mine  house,'  said  he,  '  shall  be 
called  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  people.'  is.  w.  7. 
Yea,  many  people,  aud  strong  nations,  shall  at  that 
day  come  to  seek  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem,  and  to 
pray  before  the  Lord.  And  at  that  day  the  very 
fasts  of  the  house  of  God  '  shall  be  to  the  house 
of  Judah  joy  and  gladness,  and  cheerful  feasts ; 
therefore,  love  the  truth  and  peace.'  Zee.  via.  19-22. 

Second.  The  throne  of  God  being  now  established 
in  this  city,  what  a  government,  what  rule,  what 
a  life  of  holiness  and  godliness,  what  dread  and 
majesty  will  now  be  in  the  hearts  of  all  the  sons 
of  this  city!  How  to  a  hair's-breadth  will  he 
command  and  guide  them  with  his  eye  at  all  times, 
when  they  should  either  turn  to  the  right  hand  or 
to  the  left.  What  wisdom,  I  say,  what  holiness, 
what  grace  and  life  will  be  found  in  all  their  words 
and  actions?  is.  xlvijl  17.  The  throne  of  God  is 
among  them,  from  which  there  will  come  continual 
influence,  light,  and  splendour,  into  all  their  hearts. 
'  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  0  ye  nations,  and 
declare  it  in  the  isles  afar  off,  and  say,  He  that 
scattereth  Israel  will  gather  him  and  keep  him,  as 
a  shepherd  doth  his  sheep.  For  the  Lord  hath 
redeemed  Jacob,  and  ransomed  him  from  the  hand 
of  him  that  was  stronger  than  he.  Therefore  they 
shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Zion,  and  shall 
flow  together  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  for 
wheat,  and  for  wine,  and  for  oil,  and  for  the  young 
of  the  flock,  and  of  the  herd,  and  their  soul  shall 
be  as  a  watered  garden,  aud  they  shall  not  sorrow 
any  more  at  all.'  Je.  xxxi.  10-12. 

Thhd.  The  throne  of  God  being  in  this  city, 
there  is  also  thereby  discovered  what  sway  and 
commanding  an  authority  this  city  will  have  at 
this  day,  as  I  have  already  showed  you,  over  all 
the  earth,  is.  a.  9, 10.  '  The  Lord  also  shall  roar 
out  of  Zion  and  utter  his  voice  from  Jerusalem,  and 
the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  shake,  but  the 
Lord  will  be  the  hope  of  his  people,  and  the 
strength  of  the  children  of  Israel.'  Jociiii.  16.    This 


was  figured  forth  by  the  throne  of  Solomon,  in  the 
clays  when  that  city  was  in  its  prosperity  ;  which 
throne,  to  show  the  majesty  and  commanding 
awe  that  then  that  city  had  over  all,  both  far  and 
near,  it  had,  for  the  bearers  of  the  steps,  twelve 
lions,  six  on  this  side,  and  six  on  that  side  of  the 
throne.  1  Ki.  10, 18-20.  This  city  shall  then  be  the 
head  and  chief,  but  the  tail  and  reproach  no  more. 
'  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city  of  God.' 

Ps.  lxxxvii.  3. 

''And  his  servants  shall  serve  him.''  That  is, 
niM  only.  Indeed  his  servants  serve  him  always, 
but  yet  withal  they  do  too  too  often  serve  with  the 
wills  and  lusts  of  men,  even  in  their  service  and 
worshipping  God ;  that  is,  they  serve  him  in  much 
affliction,  temptation,  fear,  and  persecution ;  but 
then  they  shall  serve  him  without  any  of  these. 
Yea,  '  they  shall  take  them  captives,  whose  cap- 
tives they  were,  and  they  shall  rule  over  their 
oppressors.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  day 
(0  city)  that  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy 
sorrow,  -  and  from  the  hard  bondage  wherein  thou 
wast  made  to  serve,'  is.  xiv.  2,  3,  and  thou  shalt  serve 
the  Lord  thy  God  '  without  fear,  in  holiness  and 
righteousness  before  him  all  the  days  of  thy  life.' 

Lu.  i.  74,  75. 

*  And  they  shall  see  his  face. '  This  also  argueth 
a  very  great  dispensation  of  grace  and  mercy  to 
this  Jerusalem.  When  God  did  deliver  up  his 
people  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  he 
said  it  should  be  done  in  fury  and  in  anger,  and  that 
for  their  wickedness  he  would  hide  his  face  from 
his  city.  De.  xxxi.  17.  Je.  xxxiii.  5.  Wherefore,  by  the 
sight  of  his  face  here,  we  are  to  understand  that 
glorious  visible  appearance  of  God  that  then  will 
be  for  this  city  and  people  in  the  face  of  all  the 
wrorld.  1  Pe.  iii.  12.  For  by  the  face  of  God  we  are 
to  understand  the  discovery  of  his  severity,  provi- 
dences, and  wonderful  outgoings  among  the  sons 
of  men.  Job  vi.  s— 13.  As  also  the  glorious  breaking 
forth  of  grace,  mercy,  and  forgiveness  through 
Christ  Jesus,  all  which  the  people  of  God  shall 
then  most  marvellously  see  and  behold.  He.  i.  1-3. 

2  Co.  iv.  6. 

First.  They  shall  see  his  severity  and  judgments 
upon  the  whore. 

Second.  They  shall  see  how  God,  by  his  strange 
judgments  and  works  of  wonder,  hath  brought 
this  about.  '  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord, 
and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy :  for 
all  nations  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee,  for 
thy  judgments  are  made  manifest.'  Re.  *v.  i.  '  Tliey 
that  are  delivered  from  the  noise  of  archers  in  the 
places  of  drawing  water,  there  shall  they  rehearse 
the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord,  even  the  righteous 
acts  towards  the  inhabitants  of  his  villages  in  Israel.' 

Ju.  V.  11. 

Tliird.  And  as  for  his  mercy,  they  shall  see  that 


THE   NEW  JERUSALEM. 


459 


their  horn  is  exalted,  and  that   they  are  near  to 
him.     '  Praise  ye  the  Lord.'   rs.  bzItIU,  14, 

'  And  his  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads. ' 
And  ■  Ins  name.'  That  is,  his  fear  and  image,  it 
shall  appear  in  all  their  doings.  Sometimes  he 
saitli  he  will  write  his  fear  and  law  in  their  hearts 
and  minds.  Which  fear  and  law  is  all  one  with 
that  which  in  this  place  he  calleth  his  name  in 
their  foreheads.  The  forehead  of  a  man  is  the 
place  above  all  parts  of  the  hody  that  is  most 
naked  and  plain  to  be  beheld  of  all  that  pass  by ; 
wherefore,  when  he  saith  their  Father's  name  shall 
be  in  their  foreheads,  it  is  as  if  he  had  said,  the 
profession  of  my  people  shall  now  be  open,  and  the 
beauty  of  it  apparent  to  all  beholders;  '  I  will  make ' 
them,  saith  God,  '  a  name  and  a  praise  among  all 
people  of  the  earth,  when  I  turn  back  your  cap- 
tivity before  your  eyes.'  Zep.  m.  20.  Every  face 
shall  then  shine  with  oil,  as  well  as  every  heart  be 
replenished  with  milk  and  wine.  This  was  held 
forth  by  the  memorial  that  the  Israelites  were  to 
wear,  at  God's  command,  between  their  eyes; 
which  memorial  was  the  doctrine  of  unleavened 
bread  and  of  the  paschal  lamb,  the  doctrine  of 
faith  and  holiness.  Ex.  xiii.  c-9.  1  Co.  v.  8.  Wherefore, 
by  name  here,  he  means  the  faith  and  holiness  of 
the  gospel,  which  in  those  days  shall  walk  openly 
with  honour,  with  reverence,  and  esteem  before 
all  men.  At  this  day  the  world  will,  as  I  have 
said,  be  so  far  off  from  opposing  and  persecuting, 
that  they  shall  wonder,  and  tremble,  and  fear  before 
this  people ;  yea,  be  taken,  affected,  and  pleased 
with  the  welfare  of  this  beloved.  '  The  mountains 
and  the  hills  shall  break  forth  before  her  into  sing- 
ing, and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap  their 
hands. '  is.  lv.  12.  '  All  nations  shall  call  them 
blessed,  for  they  shall  be  a  delightsome  land,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts.'  Mai.  ill  12.  The  waters  of  Noah 
shall  now  be  no  more,  the  tumultuous  multitudes 
shall  now  be  gone,  and  there  will  be  no  more  sea. 
Is.  liv.  9.  Ps.  lxv.  7;  ixxxix.  9.  Re.  xxL  1,  2.  Now  therefore  the 
doves  may  be  gathering  their  olive-branches,  and 
also  find  rest  for  the  soles  of  their  feet,  while  the 
ark    shall  rest  upon    the    mountains    of   Ararat. 

Ge.  viii.  4,  5. 

'  The  wolf  also  shall  (now)  dwell  with  the  lamb, 
and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid ;  the 


calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the  fading  together, 
and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them.  -  The  lion  shall 
eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And  the  suckling  shall 
play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child 
shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den.  They 
shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain, 
saith  the  Lord.'  is.  xi.  6—9 ;  ivi.  2—5. 

Blessed  is  he  whose  lot  it  will  be  to  see  this  holy 
city  descending  and  lighting  upon  the  place  that 
shall  bo  prepared  for  her  situation  and  rest!  Then 
will  be  a  golden  world  ;  wickedness  shall  then  be 
ashamed,  especially  that  which  persecutes  the 
church.  Holiness,  goodness,  and  truth,  shall  then, 
with  great  boldness,  countenance,  and  reverence, 
walk  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth.  '  From  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  even  unto  the  going  down  of  the 
same,  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles  ; 
and  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  my 
name,  and  a  pure  offering:  for  my  name  shall  be 
great  among  the  heathen,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.' 
MaLi.  11.  It  will  be  then  always  summer,  always 
snnshine,  always  pleasant,  green,  fruitful,  and 
beautiful  to  the  sons  of  God.  '  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  in  that  day  thai  the  mountains  shall  drop 
down  new  wine,  and  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk, 
and  all  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters, 
and  a  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  shall  water  the  valley  of  Shittim.  -  And 
Judah  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusalem  from 
generation  to  generation.'  Joel  iu.  is,  20.  'And  the 
name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  be,  The  Lord 
is  there.'  Eze.  xivin.  35.  0  blessedness!  'And  he 
said  unto  me,  These  sayings  are  faithful  and  true : 
and  the  Lord  God  of  the  holy  prophets  sent  his 
angel  to  show  unto  his  servants  the  things  that 
must  shortly  be  done.'  Re.  xxii.  6. 

I  conclude  therefore  with  that  earnest  groan  of 
Moses,  the  man  of  God,  '  0  satisfy  us  early  with 
thy  mercjr,  that  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all 
our  days.  -  Make  us  glad  according  to  the  days 
■wherein  thou  hast  afflicted  us,  and  the  years  where- 
in we  have  seen  evil.  Let  thy  work  appear  unto 
thy  servants,  and  thy  glory  unto  their  children. 
And  let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon 
us;  and  establish  thou  the  work  of  our  hands  upon 
us ;  yea,  the  work  of  our  hands  establish  thou  it.' 
i's.  xc.  14—17.     Amen. 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE  SPIRITUALIZED; 

OR, 

GOSPEL  LIGHT  FETCHED  OUT  OE  THE  TEMPLE  AT  JERUSALEM, 

TO  LET   US   MORE   EASILY   INTO   THE   GLORY   OF   NEW   TESTAMENT  TRUTHS. 


TIiou  son  of  man,  shew  the  house  to  the  house  of  Israel ;  -  shewthem  the  form  of  the  house,  and  the  fashion  thereof,  and 
the  goings  out  thereof,  and  the  comings  in  thereof,  and  all  the  forms  thereof,  and  all  the  ordinances  thereof,  and  all  the 
forms  thereof,  and  all  the  laws  thereof.' — Ezek.  xliii.  10,  11. 

London:  Printed  for,  and  sold  by  George  Larkin,  at  the  Two  Swans  without  Bishopgate,  16SS. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


Of  all  the  wonders  of  the  world,  the  temple  of 
Solomon  was  beyond  comparison  the  greatest  and 
the  most  magnificent.  It  was  a  type  of  that 
temple  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens, 
of  that  city  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,  and 
which,  at  the  consummation  of  all  things,  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  gates  of  pearl  and  street 
of  pure  gold  as  shining  glass,  and  into  which  none 
but  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  enter.  Jesus, 
the  Lamb  of  God,  shall  be  its  light  and  glory  and 
temple ;  within  its  walls  the  Israel  of  God,  with 
the  honour  of  the  Gentiles,  shall  be  brought  in  a 
state  of  infinite  purity.  No  unclean  thing  will  be 
able  to  exist  in  that  dazzling  and  refulgent  bright- 
ness Avhich  will  arise  from  the  perfection  of  holiness 
in  the  immediate  presence  of  Jehovah  ;  and  of  this, 
as  well  as  of  the  whole  Christian  dispensation,  the 
temple  of  Solomon  was  a  type  or  figure.  It  would 
have  been  impossible  for  the  united  ingenuity  of 
all  mankind,  or  the  utmost  stretch  of  human  pride, 
to  have  devised  such  a  building,  or  to  have  con- 
ceived the  possibility  of  its  erection.  The  plan, 
the  elevation,  the  whole  arrangement  of  this 
gorgeous  temple,  proceeded  from  the  Divine  Archi- 
tect. He  who  created  the  wondrous  universe  of 
nature  condescended  to  furnish  the  plan,  the  detail, 
the  ornaments,  and  even  the  fashion  of  the  utensils 
of  this  stately  building.  '  David  gave  to  Solomon 
his  son  the  pattern  of  the  porch,  and  of  the  houses 
thereof,  and  of  the  treasuries  thereof,  and  of  the 
upper  chambers  thereof,  and  of  the  inner  parlours 
thereof,  and  of  the  place  of  the  mercy  seat,  and 
the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  Spirit,  of 
the  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  of  all 
the  chambers  round  about,  of  the  treasuries  of  the 
house  of  God,  and  of  the  treasuries  of  the  dedicated 
things.'  l  Ch.  xxviii.  n,  12.  '  Now,  behold  I  have  pre- 
pared for  the  house  of  the  Lord  an  hundred  thou- 
sand  talents   of  gold,   and  a  thousand  thousand 


talents  of  silver ;  brass  and  iron  without  weight, 
timber  and  stone  also,  and  all  manner  of  cunning 
workmen. '  l  Ch.  xxii.  And  lest  his  heart  should 
fail  before  a  work  so  vast,  '  David  said  to  Solo- 
mon, Be  strong  and  of  good  courage,  and  do  it; 
fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed :  for  the  Lord  God,  even 
my  God,  will  be  with  thee ;  he  will  not  fail  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,  until  thou  hast  finished  all  the 
work  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.' 
xxviii.  20.  Thus  furnished  with  wisdom  from  above, 
with  materials  and  with  cunning  workmen,  and, 
above  all,  with  the  approbation  and  protection  of 
his  God,  Solomon  commenced,  and  eventually 
finished,  this  amazing  structure,  and  fitted  it  to 
receive  the  sacred  implements,  all  of  which,  to  the 
minutest  particular,  had  beeu  made  by  Moses, 
'  after  their  pattern,  which  was  shewed  him  in  the 

mount.'    Ex.  xxv.  40. 

Every  part  of  the  building,  including  the  foun- 
dation, its  altar,  its  courts,  the  holy  of  holies,  all 
the  utensils,  and  the  ark,  were  types  of  that  more 
glorious  system  which,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  ap- 
peared as  the  antitype,  and  perfected  the  Divine 
revelation.  The  temple  becomes  therefore  an 
object  of  our  special  attention  as  a  light  to  guide 
us  while  searching  into  gospel  truths. 

Under  the  peculiar  aid  of  Divine  guidance  and 
protection,  this  sumptuous  structure  was  finished, 
and  most  deeply  impressive  were  the  ceremonies 
on  the  day  of  its  consecration.  Solomon  had 
made  to  himself  an  everlasting  name,  and  it  would 
be  natural  to  expect  that  in  such  a  scene  of  splen- 
did triumph  he  would  have  felt  exalted  to  the 
proudest  height  that  human  nature  was  capable  of 
attaining.  But  Solomon  had  not  only  heard  of 
God  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  by  internal 
communion  had  seen  and  conversed  with  him.  He 
could  say  with  Job,  when  he  had  been  restored 
from  the  deepest  abasement  to  an  elevated  posi- 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY   THE   EDITOR. 


461 


tion,  ■  Mine  eye  seeth  thee,  wherefore  I  ahhor 
myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes.'  Thus,  in 
Solomon's  heautiful  prayer  on  the  dedication  of 
this  gorgeous  temple,  he  humbly  inquires,  '  Will 
God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth? 
behold,  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  thee;  how  much  less  this  house  that  I 
have  built?'  8Ch.vi.ia  Thus  was  completed  the 
most  perfect,  splendid,  and  magnificent  building 
that  was  ever  erected  by  human  hands.  Still  it 
was  only  a  typo  of  that  infinitely  more  glorious 
antitype,  the  Christian  dispensation.  '  Most  stately 
and  magnificent  is  the  fabric  of  God's  house, 
yielding  admirable  delight  to  such  whom  free 
grace  has  vouchsafed  to  give  spiritual  eyes  to  dis- 
cern it ;  far  surpassing  the  splendour  of  its  ancient 
type,  the  temple  of  Solomon,  which  was  once  the 
wonder  of  the  world. u  '  A  greater  than  Solomon 
is  here.'  *  The  Branch  he  shall  build  the  temple 
of  the  Lord' — the  more  glorious,  spiritual,  eternal 
temple.   Zee.  vi.  12. 

In  a  few  hundred  years  after  the  temple  of 
Solomon  was  finished,  this  sumptuous  structure 
was  doomed  to  destruction,  like  all  the  fading 
handiwork  of  man.  Sin  enervated  the  nation  which 
should  have  protected  it ;  while  the  immensity  of 
its  riches  excited  the  cupidity  of  a  neighbouring 
royal  robber.  It  was  plundered,  and  then  set  on 
fire ;  the  truth  of  the  declaration  made  by  Job 
upon  the  perishable  works  of  man  was  eminently 
displayed — '  For  man  to  labour  he  is  born,  and 
the  sons  of  the  burning  coal  they  mount  up  flut- 
tering.'2 In  a  few  days  the  labour  of  j'ears,  aided 
by  unbounded  wealth  and  resources,  was  reduced 
to  a  heap  of  ashes.  And  now,  after  a  lapse  of 
about  twenty-five  centuries,  accompanied  by  John 
Bunyan,  '  a  cunning  workman,'  as  our  guide,  we 
are  enabled  to  contemplate  the  account  given  us 
of  this  amazing  edifice  recorded  in  the  volume  of 
truth,  and  to  compare  that  utmost  perfection  of 
human  art,  aided  from  heaven,  with  the  infinitely 
superior  temple  in  which  every  Christian  is  called 
to  worship — to  enter  by  the  blood  of  the  everlast- 
ing covenant  into  the  holiest  of  all,  the  way  con- 
secrated by  the  cross  and  sufferings  of  Christ — 
without  the  intervention  of  priest  or  lordly  prelate 
— without  expensive  victims  to  offer  as  a  type  of 
expiation — without  limit  of  time,  or  space,  or 
place,  the  poorest  and  most  abject,  with  the 
wealthiest — the  humbled  beggar  and  the  humbled 
monarch  have  equal  access  to  the  mercy  seat, 
sacrificing  those  sinful  propensities  which  are  the 
cause  of  misery,  and  pleading  the  Saviour's  merits 
before  the  eternal  Jehovah.  Christ  has  conse- 
crated the  way,   and  we  enter  into  the  holiest  of 


1  Lee's  Solomon's  Temple  portrayed  by  Scripture  Light. 
Dedication. 

-  Job  v.  7,  literally  translated  from  the  Hebrew. 


all  not  only  without  fear,  but  with  solemn  joy. 
The  cost  of  Solomon's  temple  has  been  estimated 
at  eight  hundred  thousand  millions  of  money:  if 
this  is  true,  still  how  infinitely  inferior  is  that  vast 
sum  to  the  inconceivable  cost  of  the  eternal  temple, 
with  its  myriads  of  worshippers,  for  which  the  Son 
of  God  paid  the  ransom,  when  he  made  the  atone- 
ment for  transgression,  and  built  that  imperish- 
able temple  which  neither  human  nor  satanic 
malevolence  can  ever  destroy,  and  in  which  every 
spiritual  worshipper  will  be  crowned  with  an  ever- 
lasting weight  of  glory. 

While  «re  cannot  doubt  but  that  the  temple  and 
its  services  contained  many  types  highly  illustrative 
of  the  Christian  dispensation,  incautious  attempts 
to  find  them  may  lead  to  fanciful  interpretations 
which  tend  to  cloud,  rather  than  to  elucidate  gospel 
truths.  Bunyan  very  properly  warns  his  readers 
against  giving  the  reins  to  their  imaginations  and 
indulging  in  speculations  like  those  fathers,  who  in 
every  nail,  pin,  stone,  stair,  knife,  pot,  and  in  al- 
most every  feather  of  a  sacrificed  bird  could  discern 
strange,  distinct,  and  peculiar  mysteries.3  The 
same  remark  applies  to  the  Jewish  rabbies,  who  in 
their  Talmud  are  full  of  mysterious  shadows.  From 
these  rabbinical  flints  some  have  thought  to  extract 
choice  mystical  oil  to  supple  the  wheels  of  their 
fancy — to  use  a  homely  expression.  Such  Jewish 
rabbies  and  Christian  fathers  limped  and  danced 
upon  one  learned  leg,  to  the  amazement  of  all  be- 
holders, but  not  to  their  edification;  their  lucubra- 
tions may  amuse  those  who  have  patience  to  read 
them,  but  they  afford  no  instruction.  Even  the 
learned  Samuel  Lee,  whose  work  on  the  temple 
abounds  with  valuable  information,  has  strongly 
tinctured  it  with  pedantry.  It  is  seldom  that  a  more 
curious  jumble  is  found  than  in  the  following  para- 
graph:— 'The  waxen  comb  of  the  ancient  figures 
and  typical  eels  is  fully  matted  and  rolled  up  in 
shining  tapers,  to  illuminate  temple  students  in 
finding  out  the  honey  that  couches  in  the  carcass 
of  the  slain  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.'  There  is 
no  fear  of  Bunyan's  indulging  his  readers  with  the 
vagaries  of  the  Jewish  rabbies  or  Christian  fathers 
— his  converse  was  limited  to  the  prophets  and 
apostles.  His  object  is  to  make  us  familiar  with 
those  types  exhibited  in  the  temple  and  alluded  to 
by  the  inspired  writers  of  the  New  Testament ;  to 
use  a  Puritan  expression,  he  would  enable  us  to 
plough  with  our  spiritual  Samson's  heifer  to  ex- 
pound the  riddle,  and  thus  discover  the  dark  patterns 
of  heavenly  things.  lie.  ix.  23,  24.  Among  the  many 
striking  objects  to  which  Bunyan  directs  our  won- 
dering eyes,  a  few  should  excite  our  deeper  atten- 
tion while  we  accompany  him  in  viewing  this  mar- 
vellous temple. 


Lee's  Solomons  Temple,  p.  173. 


Ibid.  p.  ICO. 


462 


TO  THE   CHRISTIAN   READER. 


1.  All  the  materials  that  were  used  required  pre- 
paration. The  stones  must  be  quarried,  squared, 
and  fitted  for  the  building  with  many  a  hard  knock 
and  cutting  of  the  chisel.  So  must  you  and  I,  my 
readers,  pass  through  the  new  birth,  and  be  prepared 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  fit  us  for  the  spiritual  build- 
ing composed  of  living  stones ;  and  if  not  made 
meet  for  that  building,  we  shall  be  eventually  found 
lifting  up  our  eyes  in  torment. 

2.  Very  solemn  is  the  consideration  insisted  on 
by  our  author — that  all  sons  are  servants  to  assist 
in  building  this  spiritual  edifice,  but  all  servants 
are  not  sons  to  inherit  a  place  in  it;  an  awful 
thought,  that  there  have  been  and  now  are  servants 
employed  in  the  conversion  of  sinners,  and  in  build- 
ing up  the  saints,  who  never  did  nor  never  will 
worship  in  that  temple.  Let  us  examine  ourselves 
before  we  enter  that  dreary  abode,  to  which  we  are 
hastening;  'for  there  is  no  work  nor  device,  nor 
knowledge,  nor  wisdom  in  the  grave,  whither  thou 
goest.'   Ec.  ix.  10. 

3.  Are  we  zealously  affected  to  forward  the  work, 
be  careful  then  as  to  the  materials  we  use,  '  living 
stones  '  not  wood,  hay,  or  stubble.  May  all  our 
persuasions  be  constantly  used  to  bring  poor 
thoughtless  sinners  to  repentance  but  introduce 
them  not  as  members  of  that  house  until  you  have 
a  scriptural  hope  that  they  have  passed  from  death 
unto  life — that  they  are  believers  in  Jesus,  and  have 
brought  forth  fruit  meet  for  repentance. 

4.  All  the  foundation,  the  superstructure,  the 
furniture,  must  be  according  to  the  written  word 


of  the  prophets  and  apostles,  Jesus  Christ  being 
the  chief  corner  stone.  Reject  all  the  inventions 
of  man  and  all  human  authority  in  the  worship 
of  God. 

5.  The  temple  was  so  built  that  the  worshippers 
looked  to  the  west  toward  the  holy  of  holies.  All 
the  superstitions  and  idolatrous  notions  of  man  lead 
him  to  turn  to  the  east,  to  worship  the  rising  sun. 
'  The  heathen  made  the  chief  gates  of  their  temples 
towards  the  west,  that  these  stupid  worshippers, 
drawing  nigh  to  their  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb  deities, 
might  have  their  idols  rising  upon  them  out  of  the 
east.'1  The  temple  as  a  type,  and  Christianity  as 
the  antitype,  run  counter  to  such  idolatrous  absur- 
dities and  folly. 

6.  Christian,  be  content  with  whatever  may  be 
your  lot,  however  humble  your  place  in  the  church 
and  world.  Soon  will  it  be  changed  for  the  better. 
In  this  world  we  are  working  men,  and  must  be 
content  to  be  clad  and  fed  as  such,  that  we  may 
be  fitted  for  our  solemn  and  joyful  change.  Soon 
we  shall  put  on  our  church-going  holiday  suit  and 
partake  all  the  dainties  of  the  heavenly  feast,  the 
glories  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  Reader,  these  are 
samples  of  the  prominent  truths  which  will  occupy 
your  attention,  while  accompanying  Bunyan  iu 
your  interesting  visit  to  Solomon's  Temple.  May 
you  richly  enjoy  your  survey  of  that  astonishing 
building,  under  so  trusty  and  experienced  a  guide. 

Geo.  Offor. 


1  Lee's  Solomon's  Temple,  p.  232. 


TO    THE    CHRISTIAN    EEADEK. 


Courteous  Christian  Reader, 

I  have,  as  thou  by  this  little  book  mayest  see,  ad- 
ventured, at  this  time,  to  do  my  endeavour  to  show 
thee  something  of  the  gospel-glory  of  Solomon's 
temple :  that  is,  of  what  it,  with  its  utensils,  was 
a  type  of;  aud,  as  such,  how  instructing  it  was  to 
our  fathers,  and  also  is  to  us  their  children.  The 
which,  that  I  might  do  the  more  distinctly,  I  have 
handled  particulars  one  by  one,  to  the  number  of 
threescore  and  ten ;  namely,  all  that  of  them  I 
could  call  to  mind;  because,  as  I  believe,  there  was 
not  one  of  them  but  had  its  signification,  and  so 
something  profitable  for  us  to  know. 

For,  though  we  are  not  now  to  worship  God  in 
these  methods,  or  by  such  ordinances,  as  once  the 
old  church  did :  yet  to  know  their  methods,  and 
to  understand  the  nature  and  signification  of  their 
ordinances,  when  compared  with  the  gospel,  may, 
even  now,  when  themselves,  as  to  what  they  once 


enjoined  on  others,  are  dead,  may  minister  light  to 
us.  And  hence  the  New  Testament  ministers,  as 
the  apostles,  made  much  use  of  Old  Testament 
language,  and  ceremonial  institutions,  as  to  their 
signification,  to  help  the  faith  of  the  godly  in  their 
preaching  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

1  may  say  that  God  did  in  a  manner  tie  up  the 
church  of  the  Jews  to  types,  figures,  and  simili- 
tudes; I  mean,  to  be  butted  and  bounded2  by  them 
in  all  external  parts  of  worship.  Yea,  not  only 
the  Levitical  law  and  temple,  but,  as  it  seems  to 
me,  the  whole  land  of  Canaan,  the  place  of  their 
lot  to  dwell  in,  was  to  them  as  ceremonial,  or  a 
figure.  Their  land  was  a  type  of  heaven,  their 
passage  over  Jordan  into  it  a  similitude  of  out- 
going to  heaven  by  death.  He.  iii.  5— 10.  The  fruit  of 
their  land  was  said  to  be  uncircumcised.   Le.  xix.  23. 

2  Legal  terms  to  define  the  boundaries  of  an  estate,  butted 
upon  a  common  or  high  road  or  river,  aud  bounded  by  the 
property  of  another  person. — (Ed.) 


TO   THE   CHRISTIAN   READER. 


463 


As  being  at  their  first  entrance  thither  unclean. 
Ex.  xiL  15.  In  which  their  land  was  also  a  figure  of 
another  thing,  even  as  heaven  was  a  type  of  sin 
and  grace.1  Le.  vi  17 ;  xxm.  i:. 

Again,  the  very  land  itself  was  said  to  keep  Sab- 
bath, and  so  to  rest  a  holy  rest,  even  then  when 
she  lay  desolate,  and  not  possessed  of  those  to  whom 
she  was  given  for  them  to  dwell  in.  Le.  xxvi.  34,  3.3. 

Yea,  many  of  the  features  of  the  then  church  of 
God  were  set  forth,  as  in  figures  and  shadows,  so 
by  places  and  tilings,  in  that  land.  1.  In  general, 
she  is  said  to  be  beautiful  as  Tirzah,  and  to  be 
comely  as  Jerusalem.  ca.  vi  4.  2.  In  particular, 
her  neck  is  compared  to  the  tower  of  David,  builded 
for  an  armoury.  Ca.  iv.  4.  Her  eyes  to  the  fish-pools 
of  Ileshbon,  by  the  gate  of  Bethrabbim.  Her  nose 
is  compared  to  the  tower  of  Lebanon,  which  look- 
eth  towards  Damascus.  Ca  *il  4.  Yea,  the  hair  of 
her  head  is  compared  to  a  flock  of  goats,  which 
come  up  from  mount  Gilead  ;  and  the  smell  of  her 
garments  to  the  smell  of  Lebanon.  Ca.  iv.  1, 11. 

Nor  was  this  land  altogether  void  of  shadows, 
even  of  her  Lord  and  Saviour.  Hence  he  says  of 
himself,  '  1  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  lily  of 
the  valleys.'  Ca.  u.  1.  Also,  she,  his  beloved,  saith 
of  him,  '  His  countenance  is  as  Lebanon,  excellent 
as  the  cedars.'  Ca.  v.  15.  What  shall  I  say  ?  The 
two  cities  Sion  and  Jerusalem,  were  such  as  some- 
times set  forth  the  two  churches,  the  true  and  the 
false,  and  their  seed  Isaac  and  Ishmael.  Ga.  iv. 

I  might  also  here  show  you,  that  even  the  gifts 
and  graces  of  the  true  church  were  set  forth  by  the 
spices,  nuts,  grapes,  and  pomegranates,  that  the 
land  of  Canaan  brought  forth;  yea,  that  hell  itself 
was  set  forth  by  the  valley  of  the  sons  of  Hinnom 
and  Tophet,  places  in  this  country.  Indeed,  the 
whole,  in  a  manner,  was  a  typical  and  a  figurative 
thing. 

But  I  have,  in  the  ensuing  discourse,  confined 
myself  to  the  temple,  that  immediate  place  of  God's 
worship;  of  whose  utensils,  in  particular,  as  I  have 
said,  1  have  spoken,  though  to  each  with  what 
brevity  I  could,  for  that  none  of  them  are  without 
a  spiritual,  and  so  a  profitable  signification  to  us. 
And  here  we  may  behold  much  of  the  richness  of 
the  wisdom  and  grace  of  God ;  namely,  that  he, 
even  in  the  very  place  of  worship  of  old,  should 
ordain  visible  forms  and  representations  for  the 
worshippers  to  learn  to  worship  him  by;  yea,  the 
temple  itself  was,  as  to  this,  to  them  a  good  in- 
struction. 

But  in  my  thus  saying,  I  give  no  encourage- 
ment to  any  now,  to  fetch  out  of  their  own  fancies 
figures  or  similitudes  to  worship  God  by.     What 

1  Heaven  is  a  type  of  sin  and  grace.  Had  there  been  no 
sin,  we  should  have  been  limited  to  an  earthly  paradise ;  but 
sin  and  the  grace  of  a  Saviour's  purchase  opeus  heaven  to  our 
wondering  hearts. —  (En.) 


God  provided  to  be  an  help  to  the  weakness  of  Ins 
people  of  old  was  one  thing,  and  what  they  in- 
vented without  his  commandment  was  another 
For  though  they  had  his  blessing  when  they  wor- 
shipped him  with  such  types,  shadows,  and  figures, 
which  he  had  enjoined  on  them  for  that  purpose, 
yet  he  sorely  punished  and  plagued  them  when 
they  would  add  to  these  inventions  of  their  own. 

Ex.  xxxii.  35.  2  Ki.  xvii.  10— 18.  Ac.  vii.  38—13.     Yea,  lie,  ill  the 

very  act  of  instituting  their  way  of  worshipping 
him,  forbade  their  giving,  in  any  thing,  way  to 
their  own  humours  or  fancies,  and  bound  them 
strictly  to  the  orders  of  heaven.  '  Look,'  said  God 
to  Moses,  their  first  great  legislator,  '  that  thou 
make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed 
to  thee  in  the  mount.'  Ex.  xxv.  40.  He.  viii.  5.  Nor  doth 
our  apostle  but  take  the  same  measures,  when  he 
saith,  « If  any  man  think  himself  to  be  a  prophet, 
or  spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge  that  the  things 
that  I  write  unto  you  are  the  commandments  of 
the  Lord.'  iCo.  xiv.  37. 

When  Solomon  also,  was  to  build  this  temple 

j  for  the  worship  of  God,  though  he  was  wiser  than 
all  men,  yet  God  neither  trusted  to  his  wisdom  nor 

!  memory,  nor  to  any  immediate  dictates  from  heaven 
to  him,  as  to  how  ho  would  have  him  build  it. 
No;  he  was  to  receive  the  whole  platform  thereof 
in  writing,  by  the  inspiration  of  God.  Nor  would 
God  give  this  platform  of  the  temple,  and  of  its 
utensils,  immediately  to  this  wise  man,  lest  per- 
haps by  others  his  wisdom  should  be  idolized,  or 
that  some  should  object,  that  the  whole  fashion 
thereof  proceeded  of  his  fancy,  only  he  made  pre- 
tensions of  Divine  revelation,  as  a  cover  for  his 
doings. 

Therefore,  I  say,  not  to  him,  but  to  his  father 
David,  was  the  whole  pattern  of  it  given  from 

I  heaven,  and  so  by  David  to  Solomon  his  son,  in 
writing.  'Then  David,'  says  the  text,  'gave  to 
Solomon  his  son  the  pattern  of  the  porch,  and  of 
the  houses  thereof,  and  of  the  treasuries  thereof, 
and  of  the  upper  chambers  thereof,  and  of  the 
inner  parlours  thereof,  and  of  the  place  of  the 
mercy-seat,  and  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had 
by  the  spirit,  of  the  courts  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  of  all  the  chambers  round  about,  of  the 
treasuries  of  the  house  of  God,  and  of  the  trea- 
suries of  the  dedicated  things:  also  for  the  courses 
of  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  and  for  all  the  work 
of  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  for  all 
the  vessels  of  service  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.' 

1  Ch.  xxviii.  11-13. 

Yea,  moreover,  he  had  from  heaven,  or  by  Divine 
revelation,  what  the  candlesticks  must  be  made  of. 
and  also  how  much  was  to  go  to  each ;  the  same 
order  and  commandment  lie  also  gave  for  the 
making  of  the  tables,  flesh-hooks,  cups,  basons, 
altar  of  incense,  with  the  pattern  for  the  chariot 


464 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS   BOOK. 


of  the  cherubirus,  <fcc.  ver.  14-19.  •  All  this,  said 
David,  the  Lord  made  me  understand  in  writing 
by  his  hand  upon  me,  even  all  the  work  of  this 
pattern.'  ver.  19.  So,  I  say,  he  gave  David  the 
pattern  of  the  temple,  so  David  gave  Solomon  the 
pattern  of  the  temple ;  and  according  to  that  pat- 
tern did  Solomon  build  the  temple,  and  no  other- 
wise. 

True,  all  these  were  but  figures,  patterns,  and 
shadows  of  things  in  the  heavens,  and  not  the  very 
image  of  the  things ;  but,  as  was  said  afore,  if  God 
was  so  circumspect  and  exact  in  these,  as  not  to 
leave  any  thing  to  the  dictates  of  the  godly  and 
wisest  of  men,  what !  can  we  suppose  he  will  now 
admit  of  the  wit  and  contrivance  of  men  in  those 
things  that  are,  in  comparison  to  them,  the 
heavenly  things  themselves  ?  He.  vHi.  5 ;  ix.  s-10, 23 ;  x.  1. 

It  is  also  to  be  concluded,  that  since  those 
shadows  of  things  in  the  heavens  are  already  com- 
mitted by  God  to  sacred  story;  and  since  that 
sacred  story  is  said  to  be  able  to  make  the  man  of 
God  perfect  in  all  things — 2  Ti.  iii.  15—17. — it  is  duty 
to  us  to  leave  off  to  lean  to  common  understand- 
ings, and  to  inquire  and  search  out  by  that  very 
holy  writ,  and  nought  else,  by  what  aud  how  we 
should  worship  God.  David  was  for  inquiring  in 
his  temple.'  P*.  xxvii.  4. 

And,  although  the  old  church-way  of  worship  is 
laid  aside  as  to  us  in  New  Testament  times,  yet 
since  those  very  ordinances  were  figures  of  things 
and  methods  of  worship  now ;  we  may,  yea,  we 
ought  to  search  out  the  spiritual  meaning  of  them, 
because  they  serve  to  contirm  and  illustrate  matters 
to  our  understandings.  Yea,  they  show  us  the 
more  exactly  how  the  New  and  Old  Testament,  as 


to  the  spiritualness  of  the  worship,  was  as  one  and 
the  same;  only  the  old  was  clouded  with  shadows, 
but  ours  is  with  more  open  face. 

Features  to  the  life,  as  we  say,  set  out  by  a 
picture,  do  excellently  show  the  skill  of  the  artist. 
The  Old  Testament  had  the  shadow,  nor  have  we 
but  the  very  image ;  both  then  are  but  emblems  of 
what  is  yet  behind.  We  may  find  our  gospel 
clouded  in  their  ceremonies,  and  our  spiritual 
worship  set  out  somewhat  by  their  carnal  ordi- 
nances. 

Now,  because,  as  I  said,  there  lies,  as  wrapt 
up  in  a  mantle,  much  of  the  glory  of  our  gospel 
matters  in  this  temple  which  Solomon  builded; 
therefore  I  have  made,  as  well  as  I  could,  by  com- 
paring spiritual  things  with  spiritual,  this  book 
upon  this  subject. 

I  dare  not  presume  to  say  that  I  know  I  have 
hit  right  in  every  thing;  but  this  I  can  say,  I 
have  endeavoured  so  to  do.  True,  I  have  not  for 
these  things  fished  in  other  men's  waters ;  my 
Bible  and  Concordance  are  my  only  library  in  my 
writings.  Wherefore,  courteous  reader,  if  thou 
findest  any  thing,  either  in  word  or  matter,  that 
thou  shalt  judge  doth  vary  from  God's  truth,  let 
it  be  counted  no  man's  else  but  mine.  Pray  God, 
also,  to  pardon  my  fault.  Do  thou,  also,  lovingly 
pass  it  by,  aud  receive  what  thou  findest  will  do 
thee  good. 

And  for  the  easier  finding  of  any  particular  in 
the  book,  I  have  in  the  leaves  following  set  before 
thee  the  chief  heads,  one  by  one ;  and  also  in  what 
page  of  the  book  thou  mayest  find  them. 
Thy  servant  in  the  gospel, 

John  Bunyan. 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOK. 


PAOB 

1.  Where  the  temple  was  builded,     .         .         .         .465 

2.  "Who  built  the  temple, — 

3.  How  the  temple  was  built, .....    466 

4.  Of  what  the  temple  was  built, ....  — 

5.  Who  was  to  fell  the  trees,  aud  to  dig  the  stones  with 
whicli  the  temple  was  built,    ....  — 

6.  In  what  condition  the  timber  and  stones  were  when 

brought  to  be  laid  in  the  building  of  the  temple,        467 

7.  Of  the  foundation  of  the  temple,  .  .      — 

8.  Of  the  richness  of  the  stones  which  were  laid  for  the 
foundation  of  the  temple,   .....     468 

9.  "Which  way  the  face  of  the  front  of  the  temple  stood,      — 

10.  Of  the  courts  of  the  temple 469 

11.  Of  the  great  brazen  altar  that  stood  in  the  inner 

court  of  the  temple,  ......     — 

12.  Of  the  pillars  which  were  before  the  porch  of  the 

temple, 470 

13.  Of  the  height  of  these  pillars  that  thus  stood  before 

the  porch  of  the  door  of  the  temple,    .         .         .471 


14.  Of  the  chapiters  of  the  pillars  of  the  temple,       .         471 

15.  Of  the  pomegranates  adjoining  to  the  nets  on  the 

chapiters,      .......         472 

16.  Of  the  chains  that  were  upon  these  pillars  that  stood 
before  the  temple,  .....  — 

17.  Of  the  lily-work  which  was  upon  the  chapiters  that 
were  upon  these  pillars  of  the  temple,       .         '  — 

18.  Of  the  fashion  of  the  temple,        .         .         .         .473 

19.  Of  the  outward  glory  of  the  temple,  .         .         474 

20.  Of  the  porch  of  the  temple,  .      — 

21.  Of  the  ornaments  of  the  porch  of  the  temple,     .         475 

22.  Of  the  ascent  by  which  they  went  up  into  the  porch 

of  the  temple, — 

23.  Of  the  gate  of  the  porch  of  the  temple,  .         .     476 

24.  Of  the  pinnacles  of  the  temple,         ...  — 

25.  Of  the  porters  of  the  temple,        ....     477 

26.  Of  the  charge  of  the  porters  of  the  temple  more 

particularly,      .......      — 

27.  Of  the  doors  of  the  temple,      ....         478 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


465 


Of  the  leaves  of  this  gate  of  the  temple,        .        .  478 

What  the  doors  of  the  temple  were  made  of,       .  479 

How  the  doors  of  the  temple  were  adorned,  .         .  — 

Of  the  wall  of  the  temple 4S0 

Of  the  garnishing  of  the  temple  with  precious  stones,  481 

Of  the  windows  of  the  temple,  ...  — 

Of  the  chambers  of  the  temple,    ....  482 

Of  the  stairs  by  which  they  went  up  into  the  cham- 
bers of  the  temple     ......  — 

Of  the  molten  sea  which  was  in  the  temple,        .  4S3 

Upon  what  the  molten  sea  stood  in  the  temple,      .  — 

Of  the  lavers  of  the  temple,     .         .         .         .  4S1 

Of  the  tables  in  the  temple,  ....  4S3 

Of  the  instruments  wherewith   the   sacrifices  were 
slain,  and  of  the  four  tables  they  were   laid  ou  in 

the  temple — 

Of  the  candlesticks  of  the  temple,  .         .         .  480 

Of  the  lamps  belongiug  to  the  caudlesticks  of  the 

temple, 487 

Of  the   shew-bread   on   the   golden   table   in   the 

temple,         .......  — 

Of  the  snuffers  belonging  to  the   candlesticks  and 

lamps  of  the  temple, 488 

Of  the  snuff  dishes  that  were  with  the  snuffers  of  the 

temple, 489 

Of  the  golden  tongs  belonging  to  the  temple,         .  — 

Of  the  altar  of  incense  in  the  temple,         .         .  490 

Of  the  golden  censers  belonging  to  the  temple,      ,  491 


1401 

Of  the  golden  spoons  of  the  temple,  .         .         4(52 

Of  the  bowls  and  bason9  belonging  to  the  temple,       493 
Of  the  flagons  and  cups  of  the  temple,       .         .         4<J4 

Of  the  chargers  of  the  temple — 

Of  the  goings  out  of  the  temple,       .  .  .  4'J5 

Of  the  singers  belonging  to  the  temple,  .         .     49G 

Of  the  union  of  the  holy  and  most  holy  temple,  497 

Of  the  holiest  or  inner  temple — 

Of  the  vail  of  the  temple,         ....         498 

Of  the  doors  of  the  inner  temple,  ...      — 

Of  the  golden  nails  of  the  inner  temple,     .         .         499 
Of  the  floors  and  walls  of  the  inner  temple,   .         .     500 
Of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  was  placed  in  the 
inner  temple,    .......     501 

Of  the  placing  of  the  ark  iu  the  holiest  or  inner 

temple, 502 

Of  the  mercy-seat,  and  how  it  was  placed  in  the  holy 

temple, 503 

Of  the  living  waters  of  the  inner  temple,  .         .         504 
Of  the  chains  which  were   in   the   oracle  or  inner 
temple,         .......  — 

Of  the  high-priest,   and  of  his  office  in  the  inner 
temple,         .......         505 

Of  the  high-priest's  going  into  the  holiest  alone,    .     506 
Of  the  high-priest's  going  in  thither  but  once  a  year,     507 
Of  the  cherubims,  and  of  their  being  placed  over  the 
mercy-seat  in  the  inner  temple,        .         .         .         508 
Of  the  figures  that  were  upon  the  walls,  .      — 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE  SPIRITUALIZED. 


'  THOU  SON  OF  MAN,  SHEW  THE  HOUSE  TO  THE  HOUSE 
OF  ISRAEL,  -  SHEW  THEM  THE  FORM  OF  THE  HOUSE, 
AND  THE  FASHION  THEREOF,  AND  THE  GOINGS  OUT 
THEREOF,  AND  THE  COMINGS  IN  THEREOF,  AND  ALL 
THE  FORMS  THEREOF,  AND  ALL  THE  ORDINANCES 
THEREOF,  AND  ALL  THE  FORMS  THEREOF,  AND  ALL 
THE  LAWS  THEREOF.' — EZEK.  XLIII.  10,  11. 

I.  Where  the  Temple  was  built. 

The  temple  was  built  at  Jerusalem,  on  Mount 
Moriah,  in  the  threshing-floor  of  Arnon  the  Jebu- 
site  ;  whereabout  Abraham  offered  up  Isaac ;  there 
where  David  met  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  when  he 
came  with  his  drawn  sword  in  bis  hand,  to  cut  off 
the  people  at  Jerusalem,  for  the  sin  which  David 
committed  in  his  disorderly  numbering  the  people. 

Ge.  xxiL  3-5.  1  Ch.  xxi.  15;  xxi.  12.  Ch.  iii.  1. 

There  Abraham  received  his  Isaac  from  the 
dead ;  there  the  Lord  was  entreated  by  David  to 
take  away  the  plague,  and  to  return  to  Israel  again 
in  mercy ;  from  whence,  also,  David  gathered  that 
tliere  God's  temple  must  be  built.  ■  This,'  saith 
he,  is  the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and  this  is  the 
altar    of  the  burnt-offering  for  Israel,  l  Ch.  xxi.  28; 

xxii.  1:  iii.  1. 

This  Mount  Moriah,  therefore,  was  a  type  of 

VOL.  III. 


the  Son  of  God,  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house, 
the  rock  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  cannot 
prevail. 

II.  Who  built  the  Temple. 

The  temple  was  builded  by  Solomon,  a  man 
peaceable  and  quiet ;  and  that  in  name,  by  nature, 
and  in  governing.  For  so  God  had  before  told 
David,  namely,  that  such  a  one  the  builder  of  the 
temple  should  be.  '  Behold,'  saith  he,  'a  son  shall 
be  born  to  tbee,  who  shall  be  a  man  of  rest ;  and 
I  will  give  him  rest  from  all  his  enemies  round 
about ;  for  his  name  shall  be  Solomon,  and  I  will 
give  peace  and  quietness  unto  Israel  in  his  days. 
He  sball  build  an  house  for  my  name,  and  he  shall 
be  my  son,  and  I  will  be  his  father.'  l  Ch. xxii.  o,  lo. 

Ps.  lxxii.  1-4. 

As,  therefore,  Mount  Moriah  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  as  the  foundation,  so  Solomon  was  a  type 
of  him,  as  the  builder  of  his  church.  The  mount 
was  signal,1  for  that  thereon  the  Lord  God,  before 
Abraham  and  David,  did  display  his  mercy.  And 
as  Solomon  built  this  temple,  so  Christ  dotli  build 
hi3  house  ;  yea,  he  shall  build  the  everlasting 
temple,  *  and  he  shall  bear  the  glory. '  Zee.  vi.  12, 13. 


One  of  the  types  or  signs.— (Ed.) 


59 


4K6 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


lie.  iu.  3,4.  And  in  that  Solomon  was  called  peace- 
able, it  was  to  show  with  what  peaceable  doctrine 
and  ways  Christ's  house  and  church   should   he 

built.    Is.  ix.  6.  Mi.  iv.  2-4. 

III.  How  the  Temple  icas  built. 

The  temple  was  built,  not  merely  by  the  dictates 
of  Solomon,  though  he  was  wiser  than  Etben,  and 
Heman,  and  Chalcol,  and  Darda,  and  all  men. 
l  Ki.  iv.  31.  But  it  was  built  by  rules  prescribed  by, 
or  in  a  written  word,  and  as  so  delivered  to  him 
by  his  father  David. 

For  when  David  gave  to  Solomon  his  son  a 
charge  to  build  the  temple  of  God,  with  that  charge 
he  gave  him  also  the  pattern  of  all  in  writing ;  even 
a  pattern  of  the  porch,  house,  chambers,  treasuries, 
parlours,  <fcc,  and  of  the  place  for  the  mercy-seat; 
which  pattern  David  had  of  God  ;  nor  would  God 
trust  his  memory  with  it.  '  The  Lord  made  me,' 
said  he,  '  understand  in  writing,  by  his  hand  upon 
me,  even  all  the  works  of  this  pattern.'  Thus, 
therefore,  David  gave  to  Solomon  his  son  the  pat- 
tern of  all ;  and  thus  Solomon  his  son  built  the 
house  of  God.    1  Ch.  xxviii.  9-20. 

And  answerable  to  this,  Christ  Jesus,  the  builder 
of  his  own  house,  whose  house  are  we,  doth  build 
his  holy  habitation  for  him  to  dwell  in  ;  even  ac- 
cording to  the  commandment  of  God  the  Father. 
For,  saith  he,  '  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself,  but 
the  Father  which  sent  me.  He  gave  me  a  com- 
mandment what  I  should  speak.'  And  hence  it  is 
said,  God  gave  him  the  revelation  ;  and  again, 
that  he  took  the  book  out  of  the  hand  of  him  that 
sat  on  the  throne  ;  and  so  acted,  as  to  the  building 

up  of  his  church.    Ju.  xii.  49,  50.  Re.  i.  1 ;  v.  5. 

IV.  Of  what  the  Temple  was  built. 

The  materials  with  which  the  temple  was  built, 
were  such  as  were  in  their  own  nature  common  to 
that  which  was  left  behind  ;  things  that  naturally 
were  not  fit,  without  art,  to  be  laid  on  so  holy  a 
house.  And  this  shows  that  those  of  whom  Christ 
Jesus  designs  to  build  his  church,  are  by  nature 
no  better  than  others.  But  as  the  trees  and  stones 
of  which  the  temple  was  built,  were  first  hewed 
and  squared  before  they  were  fit  to  be  laid  in  that 
house,  so  sinners,  of  which  the  church  is  to  be 
built,  must  first  be  fitted  by  the  word  and  doctrine, 
and  then  fitly  laid  in  their  place  in  the  church. 

For  though,  as  to  nature,  there  is  no  difference 
betwixt  those  made  use  of  to  build  God's  house 
with,  yet  by  grace  they  differ  from  others  ;  even 
as  those  trees  and  stones  that  are  hewed  and 
squared  for  building,  by  art  are  made  to  differ 
from  those  which  abide  in  the  wood  or  pit. 

The  Lord  Jesus,  therefore,  while  he  seeketh 
materials  wherewith  to  build  his  house,  he  findeth 
them  the  clay  of  the  same  lump  that  he  rejecteth 


and  leaves  behind.  'Are  we  better  than  they? 
No,  in  no  wise.'  Ro.  iii.  9.  Nay,  I  think,  if  any  be 
best,  it  is  they  which  are  left  behind.  '  lie  came 
not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance.' 
Mar.  ii.  17.  And.  indeed,  in  this  he  doth  show  both 
the  greatness  of  his  grace  and  workmanship ;  his 
grace  in  taking  such  ;  and  his  workmanship  in 
that  he  makes  them  meet  for  his  holy  habitation.1 
This  the  current  of  Scripture  maketh  manifest ; 
wherefore  it  is  needless  now  to  cite  particulars: 
only  we  must  remember,  that  none  are  laid  in  this 
building  as  they  come  out  of  the  wood  or  pit,  but 
as  they  first  pass  under  the  hand  and  rule  of  this 
great  builder  of  the  temple  of  God. 

V.    IVIw  was  to  fell  tJwse  trees,  and  to  dig  those 
stones,  with  which  Solomon  built  the  Temple. 

As  the  trees  were  to  be  felled,  and  stones  to  be 
digged,  so  there  was  for  that  matter  select  work- 
men appointed. 

These  were  not  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  nor  of  the 
house  of  Israel ;  they  were  the  servants  of  Hiram, 
king  of  Tyre,  and  the  Gibeonites,  namely,  their 
children  that  made  a  league  with  Joshua,  in  the 
day  that  God  gave  the  land  of  Canaan  to  his 

people.   Jos.  ix.  22-27.  1  Ki.  v.  1  Ch.  xxviii ;  xxix. 

And  these  were  types  of  our  gospel  ministers, 
who  are  the  men  appointed  by  Jesus  Christ  to 
make  sinners,  by  their  preaching,  meet  for  the 
house  of  God.  Wherefore,  as  he  was  famous  of 
old  who  was  strong  to  lift  up  his  axe  upon  the 
thick  boughs  to  square  wood  for  the  building  of 
the  temple  ;  so  a  minister  of  the  gospel  now  is  also 
famous,  if  much  used  by  Christ  for  the  converting 
of  sinners  to  himself,  that  he  may  build  him  a 
temple  with  them.  Ps.  viL  4-6.  Ro.  xvi. 

But  why,  may  some  say,  do  you  make  so  homely 
a  comparison ' 


I  answer,  because  I  believe  it 


true;  for  it  is  grace,  not  gifts,  that  makes  us  sons, 
and  the  beloved  of  God.  Gifts  make  a  minister ; 
and  as  a  minister,  one  is  but  a  servant  to  hew  wood 
and  draw  water  for  the  house  of  my  God.  Yea, 
Paul,  though  a  son,  yet  counted  himself  not  a  son 
but  a  servant,  purely  as  he  was  a  minister.  A 
servant  of  God,  a  servant  of  Christ,  a  servant  of 
the  church,  and  your  servants  for  Jesus'  sake.  Tit. 

i.  1.     Ro.  i.  1.     Co.  iv.  5. 

A  man  then  is  a  son,  as  he  is  begotten  and  born 
of  God  to  himself,  and  a  servant  as  he  is  gifted  for 
work  in  the  house  of  his  Father;  and  though  it  is 
truth  the  servant  may  be  a  son,  yet  he  is  not  a 
son  because  he  is  a  servant.  Nor  doth  it  follow, 
that  because  all  sons  may  be  servants,  that  there- 


1  How  uuiversal  is  this  feeling  among  Christians !  'Why 
was  I  made  to  hear  thy  voice,'  while  so  many  more  amiable 
and  less  guilty  '  make  a  wretched  choice  ? '  All  are  equally 
encouraged — '  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
freely.' — (Ed.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


407 


fore  all  servants  are  sons;  no,  all  the  servants  of 
God  are  not  sons  ;  and  therefore  when  time  shall 
come,  he  that  is  only  a  servant  here,  shall  certainly 
he  put  out  of  the  house,  even  out  of  that  house 
himself  did  lielp  to  build,  '  The  servant  abideth 
not  in  the  house  for  ever,'  the  servant,  that  is,  he 

that  is  Only  SO.  Eze.  xlvi.  16,  17.     Jo.  viii.  35. 

So  then,  as  a  son,  thou  art  an  Israelite ;  as  a 
servant,  a  (Jibeonite.  The  consideration  of  this 
made  Paul  start ;   he  knew  that  gifts  made  him 

not  a  SOU.   1  Co.  di.  28-31  ;  xiii.  1,  2. 

The  sum  then  is,  a  man  may  he  a  servant  and 
a  son ;  a  servant  as  he  is  employed  by  Christ  in 
his  house  for  the  good  of  others;  and  a  son,  as  he 
is  a  partaker  of  the  grace  of  adoption.  But  all 
servants  are  not  sons ;  and  let  this  be  for  a  cau- 
tion, and  a  call  to  ministers,  to  do  all  acts  of  ser- 
vice for  God,  and  in  his  house  with  reverence  and 
godly  fear;  and  with  all  humility  let  us  desire  to 
be  partakers  ourselves  of  that  grace  we  preach  to 
others,  i  Co.  ix.  25. 

This  is  a  great  saying,  and  written  perhaps  to 
keep  ministers  humble:  '  And  strangers  shall  stand 
and  feed  your  flocks,  and  the  sons  of  the  alien  shall 
be  jour  ploughmen,  and  your  vine-dressers.'  is.lxi.  5. 
To  be  a  ploughman  here  is  to  be  a  preacher ;  and 
to  be  a  vine-dresser  here  is  to  be  a  preacher.  Lu  ix. 

59-62.    1  Co.  ix.  27.    Hat.  xx.  1-4,  S ;  xxi.  28.    1  Co.  ix.  7.      And 

if  he  does  this  work  willingly,  he  has  a  reward;  if 
not,  a  dispensation  of  the  gospel  was  committed  to 
him,  and  that  is  all.  1  Co.  ix.  17. 

VI.  Li  what  condition  the  timber  and  stones  were, 
when  brought  to  be  laid  in  die  building  of  the  temple. 

The  timber  and  stones  with  which  the  temple 
was  built,  were  squared  and  hewed  at  the  wood  or 
pit;  and  so  there  made  every  way  fit  for  that  work, 
even  before  they  were  brought  to  the  place  where 
the  house  should  be  set  up :  ■  So  that  there  was 
neither  hammer,  nor  axe,  nor  any  tool  of  iron  heard 
in  the  house  while  it  was  in  building.'   1  Ki. n. 7. 

And  this  shows,  as  was  said  hefore,  that  the 
materials  of  which  the  house  was  built  were,  be- 
fore the  hand  of  the  workman  touched  them,  as 
unfit  to  be  laid  in  the  building  as  were  those  that 
were  left  behind;  consequently  that  themselves, 
none  otherwise  but  by  the  art  of  others,  were  made 
fit  to  be  laid  in  this  building. 

To  this  our  New  Testament  temple  answers. 
For  those  of  the  sons  of  Adam  who  are  counted 
worthy  to  be  laid  in  this  building,  are  not  by  na- 
ture, but  by  grace,  made  meet  for  it;  not  by  their 
own  wisdom,  but  by  the  Word  of  God.  Hence  lie 
saith,  '  1  have  hewed  them  by  the  prophets.'  And 
again,  ministers  are  called  God's  builders  and 
labourers,  even  as  to  this  work.  Ho.  vi.  5.  1  Co.  iii.  10; 
2  Co.  vi  1.    Col.  i.  28. 

.No  man  will  lay  trees,  as  they  come  from  the 


wood,  for  beams  and  rafters  in  his  house;  nor 
stones,  as  digged,  in  the  walls.  No;  the  stones 
must  be  hewed  and  squared,  and  the  trees  sawn 
and  made  tit,  and  so  be  Laid  in  the  house.  Yea, 
they  must  be  so  sawn,  and  so  squared,  that  in 
coupling  they  may  be  joined  exactly;  else  the 
building  will  not  he  good,  nor  the  workman  have 
credit  of  his  doings. 

Hence  our  gospel-church,  of  which  the  temple 
was  a  type,  is  said  to  he  fitly  framed,  and  that 
there  is  a  fit  supply  of  every  joint  for  the  securing 
of  the  whole.  1  Pa.  1L  &  Kp.  ii.S0.91  ;  iv.  16,  Ool  ii.  19.  As 
they  therefore  build  like  children,  that  build  with 
wood  as  it  comes  from  the  wood  or  forest,  and 
with  stones  as  they  come  from  the  pit,  even  so  do 
they  who  pretend  to  build  God  a  house  of  uncon- 
verted sinners,  unbowed,  unsquared,  unpolished. 
Wherefore  God's  workmen,  according  to  God's 
advice,  prepare  their  work  without,  and  make  it 
fit  for  themselves  in  the  field,  and  afterwards  build 
the  house.  Pr.  xxiv.  27. 

Let  ministers  therefore  look  to  this,  and  take 
heed,  lest  instead  of  making  their  notions  stoop  to 
the  Word,  they  make  the  Scriptures  stoop  to  their 
notions. 

VII.  Of  the  foundation  of  the  Temple. 

The  foundation  of  the  temple  is  that  upon  which 
it  stood;  and  it  was  twofold:  First,  the  hill  Moriah, 
and  then  those  great  stones  upon  which  it  was 
erected.  This  hill  Moriah,  as  was  said  afore,  did 
more  properly  typify  Christ.  Hence  Moriah  is 
called  '  The  Mountain  of  the  house,'  it  being  the 
rock  on  which  it  was  built.  Those  great  stones, 
called  foundation-stones,  were  types  of  the  prophets 
and  apostles.  Mat.  xvi.  is.  Ep.  ii.  20,  21.  He.  xi.  10.  Where- 
fore these  stones  were  stones  of  the  biggest  size, 
stones  of  eight  cubits,  and  stones  of  ten  cubits. 
1  Ki.  ill  10. 

Now,  as  the  temple  had  this  double  foundation, 
so  we  must  consider  it  respectively  and  distinctly ; 
for  Christ  is  the  foundation  one  way,  the  prophets 
and  apostles  a  foundation  another.  Christ  is  the 
foundation  personally  and  meritoriously ;  but  the 
prophets  and  apostles,  by  doctrine,  ministerially. 
The  church  then,  which  is  God's  New  Testament 
temple,  as  it  is  said  to  be  built  on  Christ  the  found- 
ation ;  so  none  other  is  the  foundation  but  he.  1  Co. 
Hi.  11, 12.  But  as  it  is  said  to  be  built  upon  the 
apostles,  so  it  is  said  to  have  twelve  foundations, 
and  must  have  none  but  they.  He.  xxi.  14. 

What  is  it  then  ?  Why,  we  must  be  builded 
upon  Christ,  as  he  is  our  priest,  sacrifice,  prophet, 
king,  and  advocate;  and  upon  the  other,  as  they 
are  infallible  instructors  and  preachers  of  him;  not 
that  any  may  be  an  apostle  that  so  shall  esteem  of 
himself,  nor  that  any  other  doctrine  be  administered 
but  what  is  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve;  for  they  are 


468 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


set  forth  as  the  chief  and  last.  These  are  also 
they,  as  Moses,  which  are  to  look  over  all  the 
building,  and  to  see  that  all  in  this  house  he  done 
according  to  the  pattern  showed  to  them  in  the 

mount.  Ex.  xxxix.  43.    Jn.  xx.  21-23.     1  Co.  iii.  9  ;   iv.  9. 

Let  us  then  keep  these  distinctions  clear,  and  not 
put  an  apostle  in  the  room  of  Christ,  nor  Christ  in 
the  place  of  one  of  those  apostles.  Let  none  but 
Christ  be  the  high-priest  and  sacrifice  for  your 
souls  to  God ;  and  none  but  that  doctrine  which  is 
apostolical,  be  to  you  as  the  mouth  of  Christ  for 
instruction  to  prepare  you,  and  to  prepare  materials 
for  this  temple  of  God,  and  to  build  them  upon 
this  foundation. 

VIII.  Of  the  richness  of  (lie  stones  which  were  laid 
for  the  foundations  of  the  Temple. 

These  foundation  stones,  as  they  were  great,  so 
they  were  costly  stones ;  though,  as  I  said,  of 
themselves,  of  no  more  worth  than  they  of  their 
nature  that  were  left  behind.  Their  costliness 
therefore,  lay  in  those  additions  which  they  re- 
ceived from  the  king's  charge 

First,  In  that  labour  which  was  bestowed  upon 
them  in  sawing,  squaring,  and  carving.  For  the 
servants,  as  they  were  cunning  at  this  work,  so 
they  bestowed  much  of  their  art  and  labour  upon 
them,  by  which  they  put  them  into  excellent  form, 
and  added  to  their  bigness,  glory,  and  beauty,  fit 
for  stones  upon  which  so  goodly  a  fabric  was  to  be 
built 

Secondly,  These  stones,  as  they  were  thus 
wrought  within  and  without,  so,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
they  were  inlaid  with  other  stones  more  precious 
than  themselves.  Inlaid,  I  say,  with  stones  of 
divers  colours.  According  as  it  is  written,  I  *  will 
lay  thy  foundations  with  sapphires.'  is.  liv.  n.  Not 
that  the  foundations  were  sapphires,  but  they  were 
laid,  inlaid  with  them ;  or,  as  he  saith  in  another 
place,  They  were  adorned  with  goodly  stones  and 

gifts.'    Lu.  xxi.  5. 

This  is  still  more  amplified,  where  it  is  written 
of  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  is  still  the  New  Tes- 
tament church  on  earth,  and  so  the  same  in  sub- 
stance with  what  is  now.  '  The  foundations  of  the 
wall  of  the  city,'  saith  he,  '  were  garnished  with  all 
manner  of  precious  stones.'  Re.  xxi.  19.  True,  these 
there  are  called  '  The  foundations  of  the  wall  of 
the  city,'  but  it  has  respect  to  the  matter  in  hand; 
for  that  which  is  before  called  a  temple,  for  its 
comparative  smallness,  is  here  called  a  city,  for  or 
because  of  its  great  increase :  and  both  the  foun- 
dations of  the  wall  of  the  city,  as  well  as  of  the  tem- 
ple, are  '  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.'  Re. xxi.  14. 

For  these  carvings  and  inlayings,  with  all  other 
beautifications,  were  types  of  the  extraordinary 
gifts  and  graces  of  the  apostles.  Hence  the  apostle 
calls  such  gifts  signs  of  apostleship.  Ro.  xv.  19.  2  Co. 


xii.  12.  He.  ii.  4.  For  as  the  foundation  stones  of  the 
temple  were  thus  garnished,  so  were  the  apostles 
beautified  with  a  call,  gifts,  and  graces  peculiar  to 
themselves.  Hence  he  says,  •  First  apostles  ;'  for 
that  they  were  first  and  chief  in  the  church  of 
Christ.  1  Co.  xii.  28. 

Nor  were  these  stones  only  laid  for  a  foundation 
for  the  temple;  the  great  court,  the  inner  court,  as 
also  the  porch  of  the  temple,  had  round  about  them 
three  rows  of  these  stones  for  their  foundation.  IE. 
vii!  12.  Signifying,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  more 
outward  and  external  part,  as  well  as  that  more 
internal  worship  to  be  performed  to  God,  should 
be  grounded  upon  apostolical  doctrine  and  appoint- 
ments. 1  Co.  iii.  10-12.    2  Th.  ii.  15  ;   iii.  6.    He.  vi.  1-4. 

IX.  Which  way  the  face  or  front  of  the  Temple  stood. 

1 .  The  temple  was  built  with  its  face  or  front 
towards  the  east,  and  that,  perhaps,  because  the 
glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  to  come  from  the 
way  of  the  east  into  it.  Eze.  xim.  1-4  j  xlvii.  1.  Where- 
fore, in  that  its  front  stood  toward  the  east,  it  may 
be  to  show  that  the  true  gospel  church  would  have 
its  eye  to,  and  expectation  from,  the  Lord.  We 
look,  said  Paul,  but  whither?  We  have  'our  con- 
versation,' said  he,  '  in  heaven,'  from  whence  our 

expectation  is.  2  Co.  iv.  18.    Phi.  Hi.  20.    Ps.  lxii.  5. 

2.  It  was  set  also  with  its  face  towards  the  east, 
to  keep  the  people  of  God  from  committing  of 
idolatry ;  to  wit,  from  worshipping  the  host  of 
heaven,  and  the  sun  whose  rising  is  from  the  east. 
For  since  the  face  of  the  temple  stood  toward  the 
east,  and  since  the  worshippers  were  to  worship  at, 
or  with  their  faces  towards  the  temple,  it  follows 
that  both  in  their  going  to,  and  worshipping  God 
towards  that  place,  their  faces  must  be  from,  and 
their  backs  towards  the  sun.1  The  thus  building 
of  the  temple,  therefore,  was  a  snare  to  idolaters, 
and  a  proof  of  the  zeal  of  those  that  were  the  true 
worshippers ;  as  also  to  this  day  the  true  gospel- 
instituted  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  is.  Hence  he  is 
said,  to  idolaters,  to  be  a  snare  and  trap,  but  to 
the  godly  a  glory,  is.  viii.  u;  lx.  19. 

3.  Do  but  see  how  God  catched  the  idolatrous 
Jews,  by  this  means,  in  their  naughtiness :  '  And 
he  brought  me,'  saith  the  prophet,  'into  the  inner 
court  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  behold  at  the  door 
of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  between  the  porch  and 
the  altar,  were  about  five  and  twenty  men  with 
their  backs  toward  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and 
their  faces  towards  the  east.'  Eze.  viii.  16.  It  was 
therefore,  as  I  said,  set  with  its  face  towards  the 
east,  to  prevent  false  worship,  and  detect  idolaters.1 


1  To  oppose  the  customs  of  heatheus,  who  made  their  chief 
gates  towards  the  west,  that  these  stupid  worshippers,  drawing 
nigh  to  their  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb  deities,  might  have  their 
idols,  as  it  were,  arising  upon  them  out  of  the  east.' — (Lee  s 
Solomons  Temple,  p.  242.)— (En.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE    SPIRITUALIZED. 


4fi9 


4.  From  the  east  also  came  the  most  blasting 
winds,  winds  that  are  destructive  to  man  and 
beasts,  to  fruit  and  trees,  and  ships  at  sea.  Ex.x.  18. 

Job  xxvii.  21.    Eze.  xvii.  10  ;    xix.  IS.    Ps.  xlviii.  7.     Eze.  xxvii.  2G. 

I  say,  the  east  wind,  or  that  which  comes  from 
thence,  is  the  most  hurtful;  yet  you  see,  the  temple 
hath  set  her  face  against  it,  to  show  that  the  true 
church  cannot  be  blasted  or  made  turn  back  by 
any  affliction.  It  is  not  east  winds,  nor  none  of 
their  blastings,  that  can  make  the  temple  turn 
about.  Hence  he  saith  that  Jacob's  face  shall 
not  wax  pale.  And  again,  '  I  have  made  thy  face 
strong  against  their  faces,'  and  that  '  the  gates  of 
hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.'  is.  xxix.  23.  Eze.  iii.  s. 

Mat,  xvi.  IS. 

5.  It  might  be  also  built  with  its  face  towards 
the  east,  to  show  that  the  true  church  looketh,  as 
afore  I  hinted,  for  her  Lord  and  King  from  heaven; 
knowing,  that  at  his  coming  he  will  bring  healing 
in  his  wings;  for  from  the  east  he  will  appear  when 
he  comes  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salva- 
tion, of  which  the  sun  gives  us  a  memento  in  his 
rising  there  every  morning.  '  For  as  the  lightning 
cometh  out  of  the  east,  and  shineth  even  unto 
the  west,  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of 

man  be.'  Mat.  xxiv.  27.  Mali?.  2.  lie.  ix.23.  Col.  iii.  i.  2  re. 
iii.  11-14. 

6.  Christ,  as  the  north  pole,  draws  those  touched 
with  the  load-stone  of  his  word,  with  the  face  of 
their  souls  towards  him,  to  look  for,  and  hasten  to 
his  coming.  And  this  also  is  signified  by  the 
temple  standing  with  its  face  towards  the  east. 

X.  Of  the  courts  of  the  Temple. 

I  perceive  that  there  were  two  courts  belonging 
to  the  temple.     The  first  was  called  the  outward 

COUrt.  Eze.  xL  7  ;    xlvi.  21. 

1.  This  was  that  into  which  the  people  of  neces- 
sity first  entered,  when  they  went  to  worship  in  the 
temple  ;  consequently  that  was  it,  in  and  by  which 
the  people  did  first  show  their  desires  to  be  the 
worshippers  of  God.  And  this  answers  to  those 
badges  and  signs  of  love  to  religion,  that  people 
have  in  face,  or  outward  appearance.  Mat.  xxiii.  27. 
2  Co.  x  7. 

2.  In  this,  though  there  may  sometimes  be  truth, 
yet  oftener  lies  and  dissimulation  :  wherefore  com- 
monly an  outward  appearance  is  set  in  opposition 
to  faith  and  truth,  as  the  outward  is  in  opposition 
to  the  inner  court,  and  outward  to  the  inner  man; 
and  that  is,  when  it  is  by  itself,  for  then  it  profits 

nothing,  Ito.ii.  28.    1  Co.  xiii.  1-3.    2  Co.  v.  12. 

3.  Hence,  though  the  outward  court  was  some- 
thing to  the  Jews,  because  by  outward  bodies  they 
were  distinguished  from  the  Gentiles;  yet  to  us  it 
is  little,  for  now  •  he  is  not  a  Jew  who  is  one  only 
outwardly.'  Therefore  all  the  time  of  the  Beast's 
reign,  this  court  is  given  to  be  trodden  under  foot; 


for,  as  I  said,  outward  show  will  avail  nothing, 
when  the  beast  comes  to  turn  and  toss  up  profes- 
sors with  his  horns.  Re.  xi.  10-12. 

4.  But  as  there  was  an  outward,  so  there  was  an 
inner  court,  a  court  that  stood  nearer  the  temple; 
and  so  to  the  true  practical  part  of  worship,  than 

that  OUtward  COUrt  did.  Eze.  x.  3;   xlvi  l.    I  Ki.  vi.  3C. 

5.  This  inner  court  is  that  which  is  called  'tin- 
court  of  the  priests,'  because  it  was  it  in  which 
they  boiled  the  trespass-offerings,  and  in  which 
they  prepared  the  sin-offering  for  the  people.  2  Ch. 

iv.  9.  Eze.  xlvi.  20. 

G.  This  court,  therefore,  was  the  place  of  prac- 
tice and  of  preparation  to  appear  before  God,  Which 
is  the  first  true  token  of  a  sincere  and  honest  mind. 
Wherefore  here,  and  not  in  the  outward  court,  stood 
the  great  brazen  altar,  which  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
by  whom  alone  the  true  worshippers  make  their 
approach  with  acceptance  unto  God.  Also  here 
stood  the  great  brazen  scaffold,  on  which  the  king 
kneeled  when  he  prayed  for  the  people,  a  type  of 
Christ's  prayers  for  his  when  he  was  in  the  world. 

2  CI),  vi.  13.    Jn.  xvii. 

7.  Wherefore  this  court  was  a  type  of  practical 
worship,  and  so  of  our  praying,  hearing,  and  eat- 
ing, before  God.  There  belonged  to  this  court 
several  gates,  an  east,  a  south,  and  a  north  gate ; 
and  when  the  people  of  the  land  went  into  this 
court  to  worship,  they  were  not  to  go  out  at  that 
gate  by  which  they  came  in,  but  out  of  the  gate 
over  against  it,  to  show  that  true  Christians  should 
persevere  right  on,  and  not  turn  back,  whatever 
they  meet  with  in  the  way.  •  He  that  entereth  in 
by  the  way  of  the  north  gate  to  worship,  shall  go 
out  by  the  way  of  the  south  gate  ;  and  he  that  en- 
tereth in  by  the  way  of  the  south  gate,  shall  not 
return  by  the  way  of  the  gate  whereby  he  came  in, 
but  shall  go  forth  over  against  it.'  Eze.  xlvi.  9. 

8.  These  courts  were  places  of  great  delight  to 
the  Jews,  as  both  feigned  and  sincere  profession  is 
to  those  that  practice  therein.  Wherefore,  when 
the  Jews  did  enter  into  these,  they  did  use  to  do  it 
with  praise  and  pipe,  as  do  both  hypocrites  and 
sincere  ones.  So  then,  when  a  man  shall  tread  in 
both  these  courts,  and  shall  turn  what  he  seems  to 
be,  into  what  he  should  be  in  reality ;  then,  and 
not  till  then,  he  treads  them  as  he  should  ;  for  then 
he  makes  the  outward  court,  and  his  treacling 
there  but  a  passage  to  that  which  is  more  inward 
and  sincere.  But  he  that  stays  in  the  outward 
one  is  but  such  an  one  as  pleases  not  God,  for 
that  he  wants  the  practice  of  what  he  professes 
with  his  mouth. 

XI.  Of  the  great  brazen  altar  tliat.  stood  in  the  inner 
court  of  the  Temple. 
1.  In  the  inner  court  stood  tho  great  brazen 
altar  which  Solomon  made.     This  is  evident;  fur 


470 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


that  when  lie  kr.eeled  upon  the  scaffold   there  to 
pray,  he  kneeled  before  this  altar.     See  Ex.  xi.  6,  29. 

2  Ch.  vi.  13.  2  Ki.  xvi.  14.  Joel  ii.  17. 

2.  This  altar  seems  to  he  placed  about  the 
middle  of  this  court  over  against  the  porch  of  the 
house;  and  between  it  and  the  temple  was  the  place 
where  Zechariah  was  slain.  This  altar  was  called 
'  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,'  and  therefore  it  was 
a  type  of  Christ  in  his  divinity.  For  Christ's  body 
was  our  true  burnt-offering,  of  which  the  bodies  of 
the  sacrificed  beasts  were  a  type  ;  now  that  altar 
upon  which  his  body  was  offered  was  his  Divinity  or 
Godhead ;  for  that,  and  that  only,  could  bear  up 
that  offering  in  the  whole  of  its  suffering ;  and  that 
therefore,  and  that  only,  was  to  receive  the  fat, 
the  glory.  Hence  it  is  said  he,  '  through  the 
eternal  Spirit,  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God.' 
He.  ix.  14 

3.  For  Christ  is  priest,  and  sacrifice,  and  altar, 
and  all.  And  as  a  priest  he  offered,  as  a  sacrifice 
he  suffered,  and  as  God  he  supported  his  humanity, 
in  that  suffering  of  all  the  pains  it  underwent.    Ga. 

i.  4  ;  ii.  20.  1  Pe.  iii.  18.  He.  ix.  14. 

4.  It  was  then  Christ's  Godhead,  not  the  tree, 
that  was  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  or  that  by 
which  Christ  offered  himself  an  offering  and  a 
sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour. 

5.  That  it  was  not  the  tree,  is  evident,  for  that 
could  not  sanctify  the  gift,  to  wit,  his  body ;  but 
Christ  affirmeth,  '  that  the  altar  sanctifieth  the 
gift.'  And  by  so  saying,  he  affirmeth  that  the 
altar  on  which  he  offered  his  offering  was  greater 
than  the  offering  itself.  Mat  xriii.  19.  Now  the  body 
of  Christ  was  the  gift;  for  so  he  saith,  I  give  my 
flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world.   Jn.  vi. 

But  now,  what  thing  is  that  which  is  greater 
than  his  body,  save  the  altar,  his  Divinity  on  which 
it  was  offered?  The  tree  then  was  not  the  altar 
which  sanctified  this  gift,  to  make  it  of  virtue 
enough  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity.  Jn.  vi. 
Bl5  xvii.  19.  He.  ix.  it  Col.  i.  19—21.  Now,  since  this  altar 
of  burnt-offering  was  thus  placed  in  the  inner  court, 
it  teaches  us  several  things : 

First,  That  those  that  GOine  only  into  the  out- 
ward court,  or  that  rest  in  a  bare  appearance  of 
Christianity,  do  not,  by  so  doing,  come  to  Jesus 
Christ ;  for  this  altar  stands  not  there.  Hence 
John  takes  notice  only  of  the  temple  and  this  altar, 
and  them  that  worship  therein,  and  leaves  out  the 
outward  court,  and  so  thein  that  come  no  farther. 
Ke.  xi.  l,  2. 

Second.  This  teaches  us  also  that  we  are  to 
enter  into  that  temple  of  God  by  blood.  The 
altar,  this  altar  of  burnt-offering,  stood  as  men 
went  into  the  temple ;  they  must  go  by  it ;  yea, 
there  they  must  leave  their  offering,  and  so  go  in 
and  worship,  even  as  a  token  that  they  came  thither 
by  sacrifice  and  by  hlood. 


Third.  Upon  this  altar  Solomon,  at  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  temple,  offered  thousands,  both  of  oxen 
and  of  sheep,  to  signify,  surely,  the  abundant  worth 
and  richness  that  would  be  in  the  blood  of  Christ 
to  save  when  it  should  be  shed  for  us.  For  his 
blood  is  spoken  of  with  an  '  how  much  more.'  '  For 
if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of 
an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the 
purifying  of  the  flesh,  how  much  more  shall  the 
blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit 
offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your 
conscience  from  dead  works,  to  serve  the  living 

God  !  '    ne.  ix.  13,  14  ;  x.  i.  12.  2  Ch.  vii.  5-3. 

Let  us  then  not  dare  to  stop  or  stay  in  the  out- 
ward court,  for  there  is  not  this  altar.  Nor  let  us 
dare,  when  we  come  into  this  court,  to  be  careless 
whether  we  look  to  this  altar  or  no.  For  it  is  by 
hlood  we  must  enter ;  '  for  without  shedding  of 
blood  is  no  remission.'  Let  us  always  then,  when 
we  come  hither,  wash  our  hands  in  innocency,  and 
so  compass  this  holy  altar :  for  that  by  Christ,  who 
is  the  altar  indeed,  we  are  reconciled  to  God.  This 
is  looking  to  Jesus  ;  this  is  coming  to  God  by  him, 
of  whom  this  altar  and  the  sacrifice  thereon  was  a 
type. 

XII.  Of  the  pillars  that  were  before  the  'porch  of 
tlie  Temple. 

There  were  divers  pillars  belonging  to  the  tem- 
ple ;  but  in  this  place  we  are  confined  to  speak  of 
only  two ;  namely,  those  which  stood  before  the 
temple. 

These  pillars  stood  before  the  porch  or  entrance 
into  the  temple,  looking  towards  the  altar,  the 
court,  and  them  that  were  the  worshippers  there ; 
also  they  were  a  grace  and  beauty  to  the  front  of 
the  house. 

1.  These  pillars  stood,  one  on  the  right  hand 
and  the  other  on  the  left,  at  the  door  of  the  porch 
of  the  temple,  and  they  had  names  given  them, 
you  may  be  sure,  to  signify  something.  The  name 
of  that  on  the  right  hand  was  called  Jachin,  he 
[God]  shall  establish  ;  and  the  name  of  that  on 
the  left  hand  was  Boaz,  in  it  is  strength,   l  Ki.  vii. 

21.  2  Ch.  iii.  17. 

2.  These  two  pillars  were  types  of  Christ's 
apostles;  of  the  apostles  of  circumcision,  and  of 
the  uncircumcision.  Therefore  the  apostle  Paul 
also  calleth  them  pillars,  Ga.  ii.,  and  saith  that  that 
pillar  on  the  right  hand  was  a  type  of  himself  and 
his  companions,  who  were  to  go  to  the  uncircum- 
cised,  and  teach  the  Gentiles  the  way  of  life.  When 
James,  Cephas,  and  John,  saith  he,  '  who  seemed 
to  be  pillars,  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given 
unto  me,  they  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right 
hand  of  fellowship,  that  we  should  go  unto  the 
heathen,  and  they  unto  the  circumcision.'  Ga.ii.9. 
So  then,  these  two  pillars  were  types  of  these  two 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE    SPIRITUALIZED. 


471 


orders  of  the  apostles  in  this  their  divers  service 
for  God.1 

3.  And  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  signified 
by  tbose  on  tbe  right  band,  to  wit,  to  be  the 
apostles  of  tbe  Gentiles,  he  sboweth  again,  where 
be  saith,  I  am  '  tbe  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  tbe 
Gentiles,  ministering  tbe  gospel  of  God,  that  tbe 
offering  up  of  tbe  Gentiles  might  be  acceptable, 
being  sanctified  by  tbe  Holy  Ghost.'  Ro.  xi.  13;  xv.  16. 

4.  And  since  tbe  name  of  this  pillar  was  Jachin, 
God  shall  establish,  as  it  sboweth  that  opposition 
shall  attend  it;  so  also,  that  God  would  bless  bis 
word  preached  by  them  to  the  Gentiles,  to  tbe 
conversion  of  numbers  of  them,  maugre  tbe  opposi- 
tion of  the  enemy. 

5.  This  is  further  implied,  for  that  they  were 
made  of  brass ;  as  he  saith  of  tbe  prophet,  I  have  j 
made  thee  a  fenced  brazen  wall,  an  iron  pillar  ;  and  | 
their  fighting  against  thee  shall  nothing  at  all  pre- 
vail. Je.  xv.  20.  Wherefore  Paul  says  of  himself,  '  I 
am  set  for  tbe  defence  of  the  gospel,'  'that  tbe 
truth  thereof  might  continue  with  you.'  pw.  i.  17. 

Ga.  ii.  5. 

XIII.  Of  the  height  of  tliese  pillars  that  thus  stood 
before  the  porch  of  tlie  door  of  the  Temple. 

The  pillars  were  eighteen  cubits  high  a-piece, 
and  that  is  as  high,  yea,  as  high  again  as  the 
highest  giant  that  ever  we  read  of  in  the  Word; 
for  the  highest  of  which  we  read  was  but  six  cubits 
and  a  span.  True,  tbe  bedstead  of  Og  was  nine 
cubits  long,  but  I  trow  the  giant  himself  was 
shorter.  De.  iii.  11.  2  ch.  iii.  is.2  But  put  the  longest 
to  the  longest,  and  set  tbe  one  upon  the  shoulders 
of  the  other,  and  yet  each  pillar  was  higher  than 
they. 

We  have  now,  as  I  know  of,  but  few  that  remain 
of  the  remnant  of  tbe  giants ;  and  though  they 
boast  as  if  they  were  higher  than  Agag,  yet  these 
pillars  are  higher  than  they.  These  pillars  are  the 
highest;  you  may  equal  them;  and  an  inch  above 
is  worth  an  ell  below.  The  height  therefore  of 
these  pillars  is,  to  show  us  what  high  dignity  God 
did  put  upon  tbose  of  his  saints  whom  he  did  call 
to  be  apostles  of  tbe  Lamb :  for  their  office  and  call 
thereto  is  the  highest  in  tbe  church  of  God.  These 
men,  I  say,  were  made  thus  high  by  their  being 
cast  in  such  a  mould.  Of  that  which  added  yet 
farther  to  their  height  we  will  speak  anon :   we 


1  'There  were  two  pillars,  which  some  resemble  to  the  two 
states  of  the  chinch— Jewish  and  Christian  ;  others  understand 
magistracy  and  ministry.' — (Lee's  Z'cw/j/V,  1059,  p.  281.) — (Ed.) 

-  The  height  of  these  pillars  was  thirty-five  cubits  each, 
including  the  base  aud  chapiter.  The  base,  ornamented  with 
lines  or  net-work,  twelve  cubits;  the  column  eighteen  cubits, 
and  the  chapiter  five  cubits,  making  the  height  thirty-five 
cubits;  while  the  column  or  pillar,  cast  by  itself,  was  only 
eighteen.  This  reconciles  the  apparent  discrepancy  between 
1  Ki.  vii.  15  and  2  Ch.  iii.  ]5. —  (Ed.) 


only  speak  now  of  the  high  call  by  which  they,  and 
only  they,  were  made  capable  of  apostolic  authority. 
The  apostles  were  sent  immediately,3  their  call  was 
extraordinary,  their  office  was  universal ;  they  bad 
alike  power  in  all  churches,  and  their  doctrine  was 

infallible.    Ac.  xxvi.  lC.  1  Co.  ix.  1.  Ga.  i.  1.  1  Jn.  i.  1-3.  Ju.  ii.  23. 

And  what  can  our  pretended  giants  do  or  say  in 
comparison  of  these?  The  truth  is,  all  other  men 
to  these  are  dwarfs,  arc  low,  dark,  weak,  and 
beneath,  not  only  as  to  call  and  office,  but  also  as 
to  gifts  and  grace.  This  sentence,  4  Paul,  an 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,'  drowneth  all !  What  now 
are  all  other  titles  of  grandeur  and  greatness,  when 
compared  with  this  one  sentence? 

True,  the  men  were  but  mean  in  themselves  ;  for 
what  is  Paul  or  what  Apollos,  or  what  was  James 
or  John?  Yet  by  their  call  to  that  office  they  were 
made  highest  of  all  in  the  church.  Christ  did  raise 
them  eighteen  cubits  high  ;  not  in  conceit ;  for  so 
there  are  many  higher  than  they,  but  in  office,  and 
calling,  and  Divine  authority. 

And  observe  it,  these  stand  at  the  door,  at  the 
entering  into  the  temple  of  God,  at  which  they 
enter  that  go  in  thither  to  worship  God,  to  shew 
that  all  right  worship,  and  that  which  will  be 
acceptable  to  God,  is  by,  or  according  to,  their 
doctrine. 

XIV.  Of  the  chapiters  (capitals)  of  the  pillars  of 
the  Temple. 

There  were  also  two  chapiters  made  for  the  pil- 
lars of  the  temple ;  for  each,  one ;  and  they  were 
five  cubits  high  apiece.  These  were  for  tbe  adorn- 
ing of  the  pillars,  and  therefore  were  types  and 
shadows  of  that  abundance  of  grace  which  God  did 
put  upon  the  apostles  after  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord.  Wherefore,  as  he  saith  here,  the  chapiters 
were  upon  tbe  pillars ;  so  it  saith  that  great  grace 
was  upon  all  the  apostles.  Ac.  iv.  33. 

These  chapiters  had  belonging  to  them  a  howl 
made  pummil-fashion,4  and  it  was  placed  upon  the 
head  of  them,  perhaps  to  signify  their  aptness  to 
receive,  and  largeness  to  contain  of  tbe  dew  of 
heaven  ;  "that  shadow  of  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel; 
which  doctrine  the  apostles,  as  the  chief,  were  to 
receive  and  hold  forth  to  the  world  for  their  con- 
version. Hence,  as  the  bowls  were  capable  to 
receive  tbe  dew  of  heaven,  tliese  are  said  to  receive 
'grace  and  apostlesbip  for  obedience  to  the  faith 
among  all  nations,  for  his  name.'  Eo.L5.  1KLvu.16,4». 

2  Ch.  iv.  13.  De.  x.\xii.  10.  Ro.  xv.  d9. 

There  was  also  upon  these  chapiters  a  net-work, 
or  nets  like  unto  chequer- work,  which  still  added 
to  their  lustre.  These  nets  were  they  which  shewed 
for  what  intent  tbe  apostolical  office  was  ordained  ; 

8  Immediately,  or  by  Christ  himself. -(Ed.) 

4  Puinmil,  or  pommel,  round  like  an  apple.— (Ed.) 


472 


SOLOMON'S   TEMFLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


namely,  that  by  their  preaching  they  might  bring 
many  souls  to  God.  And  hence  Christ  calls  them 
fishermen,  saying,  '  Ye  shall  catch  men.'  Mat.iv.i9. 
Mar.  i.  17.  Lu.  v.  io.  2  Co.  xii.  16.  The  world  is  compared 
to  a  sea,  men  to  fishes,  and  the  gospel  to  a  net. 
Eze.  xhii.  10—12.  Mat.  xiii.  47—50.  As  therefore  men 
catch  fish  with  a  net,  so  the  apostles  caught  men 
by  their  word,  which  word,  as  I  told  you,  to  me  is 
signified  by  this  net-work  upon  the  top  of  these 
pillars.  See  therefore  the  mystery  of  God  in  these 
things. 

XV.  Of  the  pomegranates  adjoined  to  these  nets  on 
the  chapiters. 

There  were  also  joined  to  these  nets  upon  the 
top  of  the  pillars  pomegranates  in  abundance;  four 
hundred  for  the  net-work.  Pomegranates,  you 
know,  are  beautiful  to  look  on,  pleasant  to  the 
palate,  comfortable  to  the  stomach,  and  cheering  by 

their  juice.    1  K.L  vii.  42.  Ca.  iv.  3;  viii.  2;  iv.  13;  vi.  11 ;  vii.  12, 

There  were  to  be  two  rows  of  these  pomegranates 
for  one  net-work,  and  so  two  rows  of  them  for  the 
other. 

And  this  was  to  show  that  the  net  of  the  gospel 
is  not  an  empty  thing ;  but  is  sufficiently  baited 
with  such  varieties  as  are  apt  to  allure  the  world  to 
be  catched  by  them.  The  law  is  but  a  sound  of 
words,  but  the  gospel  is  not  so ;  that  is,  baited 
with  pomegranates ;  with  variety  of  excellent 
things.  Hence  it  is  called  '  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom,'  and  '  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,' 
because  it  is,  as  it  were,  baited  with  grace  and 
glory,  that  sinners  may  be  allured,  and  may  be 
taken  with  it  to  their  eternal  salvation.  Mat.  xxiv.  u. 

Ac.  xx.  21. 

Grace  and  glory,  grace  and  glory !  these  are  the 
pomegranates  with  which  the  word  of  the  gospel  is 
baited,  that  sinners  may  be  taken  and  saved  there- 
by. The  argument  of  old  was  '  milk  and  honey;' 
that  was,  I  say,  the  alluring  bait,  with  which  Moses 
drew  six  hundred  thousand  out  of  Egypt,  into  the 
wilderness  of  old.  Ex.  m.  8.  But  behold  we  have 
pomegranates,  two  rows  of  pomegranates ;  grace 
aud  a  kingdom,  as  the  bait  of  the  holy  gospel;  no 
wonder,  then,  if,  when  men  of  skill  did  cast  this 
net  into  the  sea,  such  numbers  of  fish  have  been 
catched,  even  by  one  sermon.  Ac.  a.  They  baited 
their  nets  with  taking  things,  things  taking  to  the 
eye  aud  taste. 

Nets  are  truly  instruments  of  death,  but  the  net 
of  the  gospel  doth  catch  to  draw  from  death;  where- 
fore this  net  is  contrary ;  life  and  immortality  is 
brought  to  light  through  this.  No  marvel,  then,  if 
men  are  so  glad,  and  that  for  gladness  they  leap 
like  fishes  in  a  net,  when  they  see  themselves 
catched  in  this  drag  of  the  holy  gospel  of  the  Son 
of  God.  They  are  catched  from  death  and  hell, 
catched  to  live  with  God  in  glory ! 


XVI.  Oftlie  chains  that  were  upon  these  p>ittoirs  that 

stood  before  the  Temple. 

As  there  were  nets  to  catch,  and  pomegranates 
to  bait,  so  there  were  chains  belonging  to  these 
chapiters  on  these  pillars.  '  And  he  made  chains, 
as  in  the  oracle,  and  put  them  upon  the  head  of 
the  [pillars],'  or  chapiters.   2  Ch.  Hi.  io. 

But  what  were  these  chains  a  type  of  ?  I 
answer,  they  were,  perhaps,  a  type  of  those  bonds 
which  attend  the  gospel,  by  which  souls  taken  are 
tied  fast  to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  Gospel  grace, 
and  gospel  obligations,  are  ties  and  binding  things ; 
they  can  hold  those  that  are  entangled  by  the 
word.  *  Love  is  strong  as  death  ;'  bands  of  love, 
and  the  cords  of  a  man,  and  chains  take  hold  on 
them  that  are  taken  by  the  gospel.  Ho.  xi.   Ca.  viii.  6. 

But  this  strength  to  bind  lieth  not  in  outward 
force,  but  in  a  sweet  constraint,  by  virtue  of  the 
displays  of  undeserved  love.  '  The  love  of  Christ 
coustraineth  us.'  2  Co.  v.  14.  Wherefore  as  you  find 
the  nets,  so  the  chains  had  pomegranates  on  them. 
'  And '  he  '  made  an  hundred  pomegranates,  and 
put  them  upon  the  chains.'  2  Ch.  m.  16.  The  chains 
then  had  baits,  as  well  as  the  nets,  to  show  that 
the  bands  of  the  gospel  are  unresistible  goodnesses; 
such  with  which  men  love  to  be  bound,  and  such 
as  they  pray  they  may  be  held  fast  by.  He  binds 
his  foal  to  the  vine ;  his  saint  unto  this  Saviour. 

Ge.  xlix.  11. 

By  these  chains  there  is  therefore  showed  what 
strength  there  is  in  gospel-charms,  if  once  the 
adder  doth  but  hear  them.  Never  man  yet  was 
able  to  resist  them  that  well  did  know  the  mean- 
ing of  them.  They  are  mighty  to  make  poor  men 
obedient,  and  that  in  word  and  deed.  These  chains 
were  such  as  were  in  the  oracle,  to  show  that  gospel 
bonds  are  strong  as  the  joys  of  heaven,  and  as  the 
glories  there;  can  make  them  chains  as  in  the 
oracle,  as  in  the  most  holy  place.  It  is  heaven 
that  binds  sinners  on  earth  to  the  faith  and  hope 
of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

XVII.  Of  the  lily  work  which  was  upon  the  chapi- 
ters, that  were  upon  these  pillars  of  the  Temple. 

These  pillars  were  also  adorned  with  lily  work, 
as  well  as  with  pomegranates  and  chains.  •  The 
chapiters  that  were  upon  the  top  of  the  pillars 
were  of  lily  work  ;'  '  so  was  the  work  of  the  pillars 
finished.'  1  Ki.  vii.  19-22. 

This  lily  work  is  here  put  in  on  purpose,  even 
to  show  us  how  far  off  those  that  were  to  be  the 
true  apostles  of  the  Lamb  should  be  from  seeking 
carnal  things,  or  of  making  their  prevailing1  a 
stalking-horse  to  worldly  greatness,  and  that  pre- 


1  In  all  the  editions  of  this  boot  published  since  the  author's 
death,  these  words  are  altered  to  'their  prsachiug.' — (Ed.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SHIilTUALIZED. 


473 


ferment.  There  was  lily  work  upon  them;  that 
is,  they  lived  upon  the  bounty  and  care  of  God, 
and  were  content  with  that  glory  which  he  had  put 
upon  them.  'The  lilies,'  saith  Christ,  'they  toil 
not,  neither  do  they  spin,  and  yet  -  Solomon  in  all 
his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  ono  of  these.'  Mat. 
vi.  28,  29.  Lu.  xii.  27-29.  Thus,  therefore,  these  pillars 
show,  that  as  the  apostles  should  be  fitted  and 
qualified  for  their  work,  they  should  be  also  freed 
from  cares  and  worldly  cumber;  they  should  be 
content  with  God's  providing  for  them,  even  as  the 
goodly  lilies  are.  And  as  thus  prepared,  they  were 
set  in  the  front  of  the  house,  for  all  ministers  to 
see  and  learn,  and  take  example  of  them  how  to 
behave  themselves  as  to  this  world  in  the  per- 
forming of  their  office. 

And  that  which  gives  us  further  light  in  this  is, 
t!iat  this  lily  work  is  said,  by  divine  institution,  to 
be  placed  '  over  against  the  belly,'  the  belly  of  the 
pillars,  a  type  of  ours.  1  Ki.  vii.  20.  The  belly  is  a 
craving  thing;  and  these  things,  saith  the  text, 
were  placed  over  against  the  belly,  to  teach  that 
they  should  not  humour,  but  put  check  unto  the 
havings  and  cravings  of  the  belly;  or  to  show  that 
they  need  not  do  it,  for  that  he  that  calls  to  his 
work  will  himself  provide  for  the  belly.  It  is  said 
of  the  church,  that  'her  belly  is  like  a  heap  of 
wheat  set  about  with  lilies.'  Ca.  vii.  2.  To  show  that 
she  should  without  covetousness  have  sufficient,  if 
she  would  cast  all  her  care  upon  God,  her  great 
provider.  This  the  apostles  did,  and  this  is  their 
glory  to  this  day. 

'  So  was  the  work  of  the  pillars  finished.'  To 
live  lily  lives,  it  seems,  is  the  glory  of  an  apostle, 
and  the  completing  of  their  office  and  service  for 
God.  But  this  directly  opposite  to  the  belly,  over 
against  the  belly,  and  this  makes  it  the  harder 
work.  But  yet,  so  living  is  the  way  to  make  all 
that  is  done  sweet-scented,  to  those  that  be  under 
this  care.  Covetousness  makes  a  minister  smell 
fro  wish,1  and  look  more  like  a  greedy  dog,  than 
an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  Judas  had  none  of 
this  lily  work ;  so  his  name  stinks  to  this  day. 
'  He  that  grows  like  the  lily  shall  cast  forth  his 
scent  like  Lebanon,  his  branches  shall  spread,  and 
his  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell 
as  Lebanon.  Ho.  xiv.  6.  Thus  lived  Christ,  first ; 
and  thus  the  apostles,  next;  nor  can  any  other  as 
to  this,  live  like,  or  be  compared  to  them.  They 
coveted  no  man's  silver  or  gold,  or  apparel.  They 
lived  like  lilies  in  the  world,  and  did  send  forth 
their  scent  as  Lebanon. 

Thus  you  see  of  whom  these  pillars  were  a 
shadow,  and  what  their  height,  their  chapiters, 


1  Frowish,  or  frowzy,  fetid,  musty.  Alas!  how  many  mini- 
sters there  are  who  are  afflicted  with  this  unsavoury  smell. 
-(En.) 

VOL.  III. 


their  bowls,  their  nets,  their  chains,  their  pome- 
granates, and  their  lily  work  did  signify,  and  how 
all  was  most  sweetly  answered  in  the  antitype. 
These  were  men  of  the  first  rate;  the  apostles,  I 
mean,  were  such. 

XVIII.  Of  the  fashion  of  the  Temple. 

Of  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  temple  I  shall 
say  nothing;  but  as  to  the  height  thereof,  there 
methinks  I  see  something.  The  temple  was  higher 
than  the  pillars,  and  so  is  the  church  than  her 
officers ;  I  say,  consider  them  singly  as  officers, 
though  inferior  as  to  gifts  and  office;  for,  as  I  said 
before  of  ministers  in  general,  so  now  I  say  the 
same  of  the  apostles,  though  as  to  office  they  were 
the  highest,  yet  the  temple  is  above  them.  Gifts 
and  office  make  no  men  sons  of  God ;  as  so,  they 
are  but  servants,  though  these  were  servants  of 
the  highest  form.  It  is  the  church,  as  such,  that 
is  the  lady,  a  queen,  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife; 
and  prophets,  apostles,  and  ministers,  &c\,  are  but 
servants,  stewards,  labourers  for  her  good.  Pa.  xiv.  0. 
ite.  six.  7.  1  Co.  iii.  5;  iv.  i,  2.  As  therefore  the  lady  is 
above  the  servant,  the  queen  above  the  steward, 
or  the  wife  above  all  her  husband's  officers,  so  is 
the  church,  as  such,  above  these  officers.  The 
temple  was  higher  than  the  pillars. 

Again,  as  the  temple  was  highest,  so  it  enlarged 
itself  still  upward ;  for  as  it  ascended  in  height,  so 
it  still  was  wider  and  wider ;  even  from  the  lowest 
chambers  to  the  top. 

The  first  chambers  were  but  five  cubits  broad, 
the  middle  ones  were  six,  but  the  highest  were 
seven  cubits.  1  Ki.  vi.  5,  6.  The  temple  therefore  was 
round  about  above  some  cubits  wider  than  it  was 
below;  for  'there  was  an  enlarging  and  winding 
about  still  upward  to  the  side  chambers,  for  the 
winding  about  -  went  still  upward  round  about  the 
house;  therefore  the  breadth  of  the  house  was  still 
upward,  and  so  increased  from  the  lowest  chambers 
to  the  highest,  by  the  midst.  Eze.  xli.  7. 

And  this  was  to  show  us  that  God's  true  gospel 
temple,  which  is  his  church,  should  have  its  en- 
largedness  of  heart  still  upward,  or  most  for 
spiritual  and  eternal  things:  wherefore  he  saith, 
'  Thy  heart  shall  fear  and  be  enlarged,'  that  is,  be 
most  affected  with  things  above,  '  where  Christ 
sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.'  is.  lx.  5.  CoL  iii  1. 
Indeed  it  is  the  nature  of  grace  to  enlarge  itself 
still  upward,  and  to  make  the  heart  widest  for  the 
things  that  are  above.  The  temple  therefore  was 
narrowest  downwards,  to  show  that  a  little  of  earth, 
or  this  world,  should  serve  the  church  of  God. 
And  having  food  and  raiment,  let  us  be  therewith 
content. 

But  now,  upwards,  and  as  to  heavenly  things, 
we  are  commanded  to  be  covetous,  as  to  them,  and 
after  them  to  enlarge  ourselves,  both  by  the  fashion 

SO 


474 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


of  the  temple,  as  by  express  words,  l  Ki.  iv.  29.  is.  lx.  5. 

Phi.  iii.  14.  1  Co.  xii.  31.  1  Ti.  vL  8.  Fs.  cxix.  32. 

Since,  then,  the  temple  was  widest  upward,  let 
us  imitate  it,  and  have  our  conversation  in  heaven. 
Let  our  eyes,  our  ears,  our  hands,  and  hearts,  our 
prayers,  and  groans,  be  most  for  things  above. 
Let  us  open  our  mouths,  as  the  ground  that  is 
chapt  doth  for  the  latter  rain,  for  the  things  that 
are  eternal.  Job  xxix.  23.  Ps.  lxxxi.  10. 

Observe  again,  that  the  lowest  parts  of  the 
temple  were  the  narrowest  part  of  the  temple ;  so 
those  in  the  church  who  are  nearest,  or  most  con- 
cerned with  earth,  are  the  most  narrow-spirited  as 
to  the  things  of  God.  But  now  let  even  such  a 
one  be  taken  up  higher,  to  above,  to  the  upper- 
most parts  of  the  temple,  and  there  he  will  be  en- 
larged, and  have  his  heart  stretched  out.  For  the 
temple,  you  see,  was  widest  upwards ;  the  higher, 
the  more  it  is  enlarged.  Paul  being  once  caught 
up  into  paradise,  could  not  but  be  there  enlarged. 

2  Co.  xii. 

One  may  say  of  the  fashion  of  the  temple,  as 
some  say  of  a  lively  picture,  it  speaks.  I  say,  its 
form  and  fashion  speaks;  it  says  to  all  saints,  to 
all  the  churches  of  Christ,  open  your  hearts  for 
heaven,  be  ye  enlarged  upwards! 

I  read  not  in  Scripture  of  any  house,  but  this 
that  was  thus  enlarged  upwards;  nor  is  there  any- 
where, save  only  in  the  church  of  God,  that  which 
doth  answer  this  similitude.  All  other  are  widest 
downward,  and  have  the  largest  heart  for  earthly 
things.  The  church  only  is  widest  upward,  and 
has  its  greatest  enlargements  towards  heaven. 

XIX.  Of  the  outward  glory  of  the  Temple. 

I  do  also  think,  that  as  to  this,  there  was  a 
great  expression  in  it ;  I  mean,  a  voice  of  God,  a 
voice  that  teacheth  the  New  Testament  church  to 
carry  even  conviction  in  her  outward  usages  that, 
I  say,  might  give  conviction  to  the  world.  And 
besides  this  of  its  enlarging  upwards,  there  was 
such  an  outward  beauty  and  glory  put  upon  it,  as 
was  alluring  to  beholders.  The  stones  were  curi- 
ously carved,  and  excellently  joined  together;  its 
outward  show  was  white  and  glittering,  to  the 
dazzling  of  the  eyes  of  the  beholders ;  yea,  the 
disciples  themselves  were  taken  with  it,  it  was  so 
admirable  to  behold.  Hence  it  is  said,  they  came 
to  Christ  to  show  him  the  building  of  the  temple. 
'  Master,'  said  they,  '  see  what  manner  of  stones, 
and  what  buildings  are  here.'  lint. raw.  1.  Mar. xui.  1. 
l<u.  xxi.  5.  And  hence  it  is  said,  that  kings,  and  the 
mighty  of  the  earth,  were  taken  with  the  glory  of 
it.  'Because  of  thy  temple  at  Jerusalem,  shall 
kings   bring  presents  unto  thee ;'     as  it  is.     Ps. 

lxviii.  29,  31. 

Kings,  Gentile  kings,  they  shall  be  60  taken 
with  the  sight  of  the  outward  glory  of  it ;  for  they 


were  not  suffered  to  go  into  it ;  no  uncircumcised 
were  admitted  in  thither.  It  was  therefore  the 
outward  glory  of  it  with  which  the  beholders  were 
thus  taken. 

Her  enlarging  upward,  as  that  was  to  show  us 
what  the  inward  affections  of  Christians  should  be, 
so  her  curious  outward  adorning  and  beauty  was  a 
figure  of  the  beauteous  and  holy  conversation  of 
the  godly.  Col.  Hi.  1—3.  And  it  is  brave,  when  the 
world  are  made  to  say  of  the  lives  and  conversa- 
tions of  saints,  as  they  were  made  to  say  of  the 
stones  and  outward  building  of  the  temple,  Behold, 
what  Christians,  and  what  goodly  conversations 
are  here!  I  say  it  is  brave  when  our  light  so 
shines  before  men,  that  they  seeing  our  good 
works  shall  be  forced  to  glorify  our  Father  which 
is  in  heaven.  Mat.  v.  16. 

Hence  this  is  called  our  adorning  wherewith  we 
adorn  the  gospel,  and  that  by  which  we  beautify 
it.  Tit.  a.  10.  This,  I  say,  is  taking  to  beholders, 
as  was  this  goodly  outside  of  the  temple.  And 
without  this,  what  is  to  be  seen  in  the  church  of 
God?  Her  inside  cannot  be  seen  by  the  world, 
but  her  outside  may.  Now,  her  outside  is  very- 
homely,  and  without  all  beauty,  save  that  of  the 
holy  life;  thi3  only  is  her  visible  goodliness.  This 
puts  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men.  This 
allureth  others  to  fall  in  love  with  their  own  sal- 
vation, and  makes  them  full  in  with  Christ  against 
the  devil  and  his  kingdom. 

XX.  Of  the  porch  of  the  Temple. 

We  come  next  to  the  porch  of  the  temple  that 
is  commonly  called  Solomon's.  1 .  This  porch  was 
in  the  front  of  the  house,  and  so  became  the  com- 
mon way  into  the  temple.  1  Ki.  vi.  3.  2  ch.  Hi.  4.  2. 
This  porch  therefore  was  the  place  of  reception  in 
common  for  all,  whether  Jews  or  religious  prose- 
lytes, who  came  to  Jerusalem  to  worship.  Ac.  m.  11 ; 
v.  12.  3.  This  porch  had  a  door  or  gate  belonging 
to  it,  but  such  as  was  seldom  shut,  except  in  de- 
clining times,  or  when  men  put  themselves  into  a 
rage  against  those  better  than  themselves.  2Ch. 
xxix.  7.  Ac.  xxi.  23-30.  4.  This  gate  of  this  porch  was 
called  Beautiful,  even  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the 
temple,  and  was  that  at  which  the  lame  man  lay, 
to  beg  for  an  alms  of  them  that  went  in  thither  to 
worship.  Ac  Hi.  l,  2,  lo. 

Now  then,  since  this  porch  was  the  common 
place  of  reception  for  all  worshippers,  and  the 
place  also  where  they  laid  the  beggars,  it  looks  as 
if  it  were  to  be  a  type  of  the  church's  bosom  for 
charity.  Here  the  proselytes  were  entertaiued, 
here  the  beggars  were  relieved,  and  received  alms. 
These  gates  were  seldom  shut ;  and  the  houses  of 
Christian  compassion  should  be  always  open.  This 
therefore  beautified  this  gate,  as  charity  beautifies 
any  of  the  churches.     Largeness  of  heart,  ftiid 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


475 


tender  compassion  at  the  church-door,  is  excellent; 
it  13  the  bond  of  perfectness.    l  Co.  dL  81j  nil.  l—t.  He. 

xiii.  1—3.  Jn.  v.  6,  7.  Col.  i.i.  14 

The  church-porch  to  this  day  is  a  coming  in  for 
beggars,  and  perhaps  this  practice  at  first  was 
borrowed  from  the  beggars  lying  at  the  temple- 
gate.  This  porch  was  large,  and  so  should  the 
charity  of  the  churches  be.  It  was  for  length  the 
breadth  of  the  temple,  and  of  the  same  size  with 
'the  Holiest  of  all.'  l  Ki.  vi.  3.  2  Oh.  in.  4.  The  first 
might  he  to  teach  us  in  charity  we  should  not  be 
niggardly,  but,  according  to  the  breadth  of  our 
ability,  we  should  extend  it  to  all  the  house;  and 
that  in  our  so  doing,  the  very  emblem  of  heaven 
is  upon  us,  of  which  the  holiest  was  a  figure.  'As 
we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto 
all,'  &c.   Ga.  vi.  10. 

It  is  a  fine  ornament  to  a  true  church  to  have 
a  large  church-porch,  or  a  wide  bosom,  for  recep- 
tion of  all  that  come  thither  to  worship.1  This 
was  commanded  to  tlie  Jews,  and  their  glory  shone 
when  they  did  accordingly:  'And  it  shall  come  to 
pass,  t/iat  in  what  tribe  the  stranger  sojourneth, 
there  shall  ye  give  him  his  inheritance,  saith  the 

Lord  God.'    Eze.  xlvii.  23. 

This  porch  was,  as  I  said,  not  only  for  length 
the  breadth  of  the  temple,  and  so  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  holiest;  but  it  was,  if  I  mistake 
not,  for  height  far  higher  than  them  both:  for  the 
holy  place  was  but  thirty  cubits  high,  and  the  most 
holy  but  twenty;  but  the  porch  was  in  height  an 
hundred  and  twenty  cubits.  This  beautiful  porch, 
therefore,  was  four  times  as  high  as  was  the 
[oracle  in]  temple  itself.   1  Ki.  vi.  2,  20.  2  Ch.  iii.  4. 

One  excellent  ornament,  therefore,  of  this  temple 
was,  for  that  it  had  a  porch  so  high,  that  is,  so 
famous  for  height;  hence  he  says,  '  This  house 
that  is  so  high,'  that  is  so  famous  for  height.  So 
high  as  to  be  seen  afar  off.  Charity,  if  it  be  rich, 
runs  up  from  the  church  like  a  steeple,  and  will 
be  seen  afar  off;  I  say,  if  it  be  rich,  large,  and 
abounds.  Christ's  charity  was  blazed  abroad;  it 
was  so  high  no  man  could  hide  it:  and  the  charity 
of  the  churches  will  be  seen  from  church  to  church, 
yea,  and  will  be  spoken  of  to  their  commendations 
in  every  place,  if  it  be  warm,  fervent,  and  high. 

Mar.  vii.  S6-44.   2  Co.  viii.  21 ;  ix  2,  13,  14. 

XXI.  Of  the  ornaments  of  the  porch  of  the  Temple. 

There  were  three  things  belonging  to  the  porch, 
besides  its  height,  that  were  ornaments  unto  it. 
1.   It  was  overlaid  within  with  gold.     2.   It  had 


1  This  is  a  valuable  lesson  to  the  ministers  and  members  of 
churches,  to  be  ever  ready  to  welcome  the  returning  prodigal. 
The  porch  is  never  to  be  shut  against  the  poor  fugitive ;  and 
the  only  proper  inquiry  as  to  opening  the  door  of  the  church, 
is,  '  If  thou  belies  est  with  all  thine  heart,  thou  mayest  freely 
eater.' — (Eu.) 


the  pillars  adjoined  unto  it.  3.  It  was  the  inlet 
into  the  temple. 

First.  It  was  overlaid  with  gold.  Gold  ofttimes 
was  a  type  of  grace,  and  particularly  of  the  grace 
of  love.  That  in  Solomon's  chariot  called  gold  is 
yet  again  mentioned  by  the  name  love.  Ca.  iii.  9, 10. 
As  it  is  in  the  church,  the  grace  of  love  is  as  gold. 
It  is  the  greatest,  the  richest  of  graces,  and  that 
which  abides  for  ever.  Hence  they  that  show 
much  love  to  saints  are  said  to  be  rich,  l  TL  vi.  17— 19. 
And  hence  charity  is  called  a  treasure,  a  treasure 
in  the  heavens.  Lu.  xii.  33, 84.  Love  is  a  golden  grace; 
let  then  the  churches,  as  the  porch  of  the  temple 
was,  be  inlaid  with  love,  as  gold. 

Second.  It  had  the  pillars  adjoined  to  it,  the 
which,  besides  their  stateliness,  seem  to  be  there 
typically  to  example.  For  there  was  seen,  by  the 
space  of  four  cubits,  their  lily-work  in  the  porch. 
1  Ki.  vii.  19.  Of  their  lily-work  I  spake  before.  Now 
that  they  were  so  placed  that  they  might  be  seen 
in  the  porch  of  the  house,  it  seems  to  be  for  ex- 
ample, to  teach  the  church,  that  she  should  live 
without  worldly  care,  as  did  the  apostles,  the  first 
planters  of  the  church.  And  let  ministers  do  this; 
they  are  now  the  pillars  of  the  churches,  and  they 
stand  before  the  porch  of  the  house;  let  them  also 
show  their  lily-work  to  the  house,  that  the  church 
may  learn  of  them  to  be  without  carefulness  as  to 
worldly  things,  and  also  to  be  rich  in  love  and 
charity  towards  the  brethren.  A  covetous  minister 
is  a  base  thing,  a  pillar  more  symbolizing  Lot's 
wife  than  an  holy  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ;  let  them, 
since  they  stand  at  the  door,  and  since  the  eyes  of 
all  in  the  porch  are  upon  them,  be  patterns  and 
examples  of  good  works.  1  Ti.  vi.  10—12,  Tit.  ii.  7. 

Third.  Another  ornament  unto  this  porch  was, 
that  it  was  an  inlet  into  the  temple.  Charity  is  it 
which  receiveth  orphans,  that  receiveth  the  poor 
and  afflicted  into  the  church.  Worldly  love,  or 
that  which  is  carnal,  shuts  up  bowels,  yea,  and 
the  church-doors  too,  against  the  poor  of  the  flock; 
wherefore  look  that  this  kind  of  love  be  never 
countenanced  by  you.  Crave  that  rather  which  is 
a  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  0  churches,  let  your  mini- 
sters be  beautified  with  your  love,  that  they  may 
beautify  you  with  their  love ;  and  also  be  an  orna- 
ment unto  you,  and  to  that  Gospel  they  minister 
to  you,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 

XXII.  Of  the  ascent  by  which  they  went  up  into 
the  porch  of  tlie  Temple. 

1.  This  porch  also  had  certain  steps,  by  which 
they  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.  I  know 
not  directly  the  number  of  them;  though  Ezekiel 
speaks  something  about  it.  Eze.  xi.  38, 39.  Hence, 
when  men  went  to  worship  in  the  temple,  they 
were  said  to  go  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

Is.  xxiviii.  22. 


476 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


These  steps,  which  were  the  ascent  to  the 
temple,  were  so  curiously  set,  and  also  so  finely 
wrought,  that  they  were  amazing  to  behold. 
Wherefore,  when  the  queen  of  Sheba,  who  came 
to  prove  Solomon's  wisdom,  saw  *  the  house  which 
lie  had  built,  -  and  his  ascent  by  which  he  went 
up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  she  had  no  more 
spirit  in  her.'  She  was  by  that  sight  quite  drowned, 
and  overcome.  1  Ki.  x.  4,  5. 

2.  These  steps,  whether  cedar,  gold,  or  stone, 
yet  that  which  added  to  their  adornment  was  the 
wonderment  of  a  queen.  And  whatever  they  were 
made  of,  to  be  sure  they  were  a  shadow  of  those 
steps  which  we  should  take  to  and  in  the  house  of 
God.  Stepsof  God.  rs.ixxxv.i3.  Steps  ordered  by 
ldm.  iv  xxxvii.  23.  Steps  ordered  in  his  word.  Ps. 
cxix.  133.  Steps  of  faith.  Ro.  iv.  12.  Steps  of  the 
Spirit.  2  Co.  xii.  18.  Steps  of  truth.  3  Jn.  4.  Steps 
washed  with  butter.  Job.  xxix.  6.  Steps  taken  before, 
or  in  the  presence  of,  God.  Steps  butted  and 
bounded  by  a  divine  rule.  These  are  steps 
indeed. 

3.  There  are  therefore  no  such  steps  as  these 
to  be  found  any  where  in  the  world.  A  step  to 
honour,  a  step  to  riches,  a  step  to  worldly  glory, 
these  are  everywhere ;  but  what  are  these  to  the 
steps  by  which  men  do  ascend  or  go  up  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord! 

He  then  that  entereth  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord  is  an  ascending  man ;  as  it  is  said  of  Moses, 
lie  went  up  into  the  mount  of  God.  It  is  ascend- 
ing to  go  into  the  house  of  God.  The  world  he- 
lieve  not  this;  they  think  it  is  going  downward  to 
go  up  to  the  house  of  God;  but  they  are  in  a  hor- 
rible mistake. 

The  steps  then  by  which  men  went  up  into  the 
temple  are,  and  ought  to  be,  opposed  to  those 
which  men  take  to  their  lusts  and  empty  glories. 
Hence  such  steps  are  said  not  only  to  decline  from 
God,  but  to  take  hold  of  the  path  to  death  and 

hell.   Ps.  xliv.18.    Pr.  ii.  18;   v.  5;   vii.  25— 27. 

The  steps,  then,  by  which  men  went  up  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  were  significative  of  those  steps 
which  men  take  when  they  go  to  God,  to  heaven, 
and  glory :  for  these  steps  were  the  way  to  God, 
to  God  in  his  holy  temple. 

But  how  few  are  there  that,  as  the  queen  of  the 
Fouth,  are  taken  with  these  goodly  steps!  Do  not 
most  rather  seek  to  push  away  our  feet  from  taking 
hold  of  the  path  of  life,  or  else  lay  snares  for  us 
in  the  way?  But  all  these  notwithstanding,  the 
Lord  guide  us  in  the  way  of  his  steps:  they  are 
goodly  steps,  they  are  the  best. 

XXIII.  Of  the  gate  of  the  porch  of  the  Temple. 

1 .  The  porch,  at  which  was  an  ascent  to  the 
temple,  had  a  gate  belonging  to  it.  This  gate, 
according  to  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  was  six  cubits 


wide.  The  leaves  of  this  gate  were  double,  one 
folding  this  way,  the  other  folding  that.  Eze.  xi.  48. 

Now  here  some  may  object,  and  say,  Since  the 
way  to  God  by  these  doors  were  so  wide,  why  doth 
Christ  say  the  way  and  gate  is  narroAv? 

Answ.  The  straitness,  the  narrowness,  must  not 
be  understood  of  the  gate  simply,  but  because  of 
that  cumber  that  some  men  carry  with  them,  that 
pretend  to  be  going  to  heaven.  Six  cubits !  What 
is  sixteen  cubits  to  him  who  would  enter  in  here 
with  all  the  world  on  his  back  ?  The  young  man 
in  the  gospel,  who  made  such  a  noise  for  heaven, 
might  have  gone  in  easy  enough;  for  in  six  cubits 
breadth  there  is  room:  but,  poor  man,  he  was  not 
for  going  in  thither,  unless  he  might  carry  in  his 
houses  upon  his  shoulder  too,  and  now  the  gate 
was  strait.  Mar.  x.  17-27.  Wherefore  he  that  will 
enter  in  at  the  gate  of  heaven,  of  which  this  gate 
into  the  temple  was  a  type,  must  go  in  by  himself, 
and  not  with  his  bundles  of  trash  on  his  back  51 
and  if  he  will  go  in  thus,  he  need  not  fear  there  is 
room.  '  The  righteous  nation  that  keepeth  the 
truth,  they  shall  enter  in.'  is.  xxvi.  2. 

2.  They  that  enter  in  at  the  gate  of  the  inner 
court  must  be  clothed  in  fine  linen:  how  then  shall 
they  go  into  the  temple  that  carry  the  clogs  of  the 
dirt  of  this  world  at  their  heels  ?  '  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God ;  No  stranger  uncircumcised  in  heart, 
nor  uncircumcised  in  flesh,  shall  enter  into  my 
sanctuary.'  Eze.  xiiv.  9. 

3.  The  wideness  therefore  of  this  gate  is  for  this 
cause  here  made  mention  of,  to  wit,  to  encourage 
them  that  would  gladly  enter  thereat,  according  to 
the  mind  of  God,  and  not  to  flatter  them  that  are 
not  for  leaving  of  all  for  God. 

4.  Wherefore  let  such  as  would  go  in  remember 
that  here  is  room,  even  a  gate  to  enter  in  at  six 
cubits  wide.  We  have  been  all  this  while  but  on 
the  outside  of  the  temple,  even  in  the  courts  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  to  see  the  beauty  and  glory  that 
is  there.  The  beauty  hereof  made  men  cry  out, 
and  say,  '  How  amiahle  are  thy  tabernacles,  0 
Lord  of  hosts !  my  soul  longeth,  yea,  even  fainteth 
for  the  courts  of  the  Lord ;'  and  to  say,  •  a  day  in 
thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand.'  Ps.  UsxW. 
1,  2,  Ac. 

XXIV.  Of  the  pinnacles  of  the  Temple. 

1.  There  were  also  several  pinnacles  belonging 
to  the  temple.  These  pinnacles  stood  on  the  top 
aloft  in  the  air,  and  were  sharp,  and  so  difficult  to 
stand  upon :  what  men  say  of  their  number  and 
length  I  wave,  and  come  directly  to  their  signifi- 
cation. 

1  Wealth  and  honours,  when  sanctified,  are  valuable  aids  to 
Christian  usefulness;  but  unutterable  woes  will  fall  upon  him 
who  attempts  to  enter  heaven  with  temporal  or  ecclesiastical 
pomps  vain -gloriously  carried  upon  his  shoulders. —  (l£n.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   Sri  RITUALIZED. 


477 


2.  I  therefore  take  those  pinnacles  to  he  types 
of  those  lofty  airy  notions  with  which  some  men 
delight  themselves,  while  they  hover,  like  hirds, 
above  the  solid  and  godly  truths  of  Christ.  Satan 
attempted  to  entertain  Christ  Jesus  with  this  type, 
and  antitype,  at  once,  when  he  set  him  on  one  of 
the  pinnacles  of  the  temple,  and  offered  to  thrust 
him  upon  a  false  confidence  in  God,  by  a  false 
and   unsound  interpretation  of  a  text.    Mat.  iv.  5,  & 

Lu  iv.  9-11. 

3.  You  have  some  men  cannot  be  content  to 
worship  in  the  temple,  but  must  be  aloft;  no  place 
will  serve  them  but  pinnacles,  pinnacles;  that  they 
may  be  speaking  in  and  to  the  air,  that  they 
may  be  promoting  their  heady  notions,  instead  of 
solid  truth;  not  considering  that  now  they  are  where 
the  devil  would  have  them  be ;  they  strut  upon 
their  points,  their  pinnacles ;  but  let  them  look  to 
it,  there  is  difficulty  standing  upon  pinnacles;  their 
neck,  their  soul,  is  in  danger.  We  read,  God  is 
in  his  temple,  not  upon  these  pinnacles.  Ps.  xi.  4. 

ILib.  it  20. 

4.  It  is  true,  Christ  was  once  upon  one  of 
these ;  but  the  devil  set  him  there,  with  intent  to 
have  dashed  him  in  pieces  by  a  fall;  and  yet  even 
then  told  him,  if  he  would  venture  to  tumble  down, 
he  should  he  kept  from  dashing  his  foot  against  a 
stone.  To  be  there,  therefore,  was  one  of  Christ's 
temptations;  consequently  one  of  Satan's  strata- 
gems ;  nor  went  he  thither  of  his  own  accord,  for 
he  knew  that  there  was  danger  ;  he  loved  not  to 
clamber  pinnacles. 

5.  This  should  teach  Christians  to  be  low  and 
little  in  their  own  eyes,  and  to  forbear  to  intrude 
into  airy  and  vain  speculations,  and  to  take  heed 
of  being  puffed  up  with  a  foul  and  empty  mind.1 

XXV.  Of  the  porters  of  the  Temple. 

1.  There  were  porters  belonging  to  the  temple. 
In  David's  time  their  number  was  four  thousand 
men.  l  Ch.  xxm.  5. 

2.  The  porters  were  of  the  Levites,  and  their 
work  was  to  watch  at  every  gate  of  the  house  of 
the  Lord ;  at  the  gate  of  the  outer  court,  at  the 
gates  of  the  inner  court,  and  at  the  door  of  the 
temple  of  the  Lord.  2  ch.  xx.w.  la, 

3.  The  work  of  the  porters,  or  rather  the  reason 
of  their  watching,  was  to  look  that  none  not  duly 
qualified  entered  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.  'He 
set,'  saith  the  text,  '  the  porters  at  the  gates  of 
the  house  of  the  Lord,  that  none  which  was  un- 
cLan  in  any  thing  should  enter  in.'  %  Ch.  xxih.  19. 

4.  The  excellency  of  the  porters  lay  in  these 
three   things,    their   watchfulness,   diligence,   and 


1  Every  Christian  pilgrim,  if  he  journeys  aright,  must  be 
entirely  guided  by  prayerful  personal  inquiries  at  the  holy 
oracles  as  to  his  way  to  heaven.  How  do  sin  and  Satan  strive 
to  nrslead  him  in  this  essential  duty. — (Ed.) 


valour,  to  make  resistance  to  those  that,  as  unfit, 
would  attempt  to  enter  those  courts  and  the  house 

of  God.   1.  Ch.  xxvi.  6.    Mar.  xiii.  34. 

5.  These  porters  were  types  of  our  gospel 
ministers,  as  they  are  set  to  be  watchmen  in  and 
over  the  church,  and  the  holy  things  of  God. 
Therefore  as  Christ  gives  to  every  man  in  the 
church  his  work,  so  he  commands   *  the  porter  to 

Watch.'  Is.  xxi.  11.     Eze.  ii:.  17;  xx.xiii.  7.    Ac.  xx.  27-31.     2  Ti. 
iv.  5.    Re.  ii.  2,  :!. 

6.  Sometimes  every  awakened  Christian  is  said 
to  be  a  porter,  and  such  at  Christ's  first  knock 
open  unto  him  immediately.  Lu.  xii.  35—40. 

7.  The  heart  of  a  Christian  is  also  sometimes 
called  the  porter;  for  that  when  the  true  shepherd 
comes  to  it,  to  him  this  porter  openeth  also. 
Jn.  x.  3. 

8.  This  last  has  the  body  for  his  watch-house  ; 
the  eyes  and  cars  for  his  port-holes ;  the  tongue 
therewith  to  cry,  Who  comes  there  ?  as  also  to 
call  for  aid,  when  anything  unclean  shall  attempt 
with  force  and  violence  to  enter  in,  to  defile  the 
house. 

XXVI.  Of  the  charge  of  the  porters  of  the  Temple 
more  particularly. 

1.  The  charge  of  the  porters  was,  to  keep  their 
watch,  in  four  square,  even  round  about  the  tem- 
ple of  God.  Thus  it  was  ordained  by  David,  be- 
fore him  by  Moses,  and  after  him  by  Solomon  his 

Son.    1  Ch.  ix.  24.    Nu.  iii.    2  Ch.  xxiii.  19  ;  xxxv.  15. 

2.  The  porters  had  some  of  them  the  charge  of 
the  treasure-chambers  ;  some  of  them  had  the 
charge  of  the  ministering  vessels,  even  to  bring 
them  in  and  out  by  tale ;  also  the  opening  and 
shutting  of  the  gates  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
was  a  part  of  their  calling  and  office. 

3.  I  told  you,  the  porters  were  types  of  our . 
gospel  ministers,  as  they  are  watchmen  in  and 
over  the  house  of  God ;  and  therefore  in  that  they 
were  thus  to  watch  round  about  the  temple,  what 
is  it  but  to  show  how  diligent  Satan  is,  to  see  if 
he  may  get  in  somewhere,  by  some  means,  to  defile 
the  church  of  God ;  he  goes  round  and  round  and 
round  us,  to  see  if  he  can  find  a  hog-hole  for  that 
purpose. 

4.  This  also  showeth  that  the  church  of  itself, 
without  its  watchmen,  is  a  weak,  feeble,  and  very 
helpless  thing.  What  can  the  lady  or  mistress  do 
to  defend  herself  against  thieves  and  sturdy  vil- 
lains, if  there  be  none  but  she  at  home?  It  is 
said,  when  the  shepherd  is  smitten,  the  sheep  shall 
be  scattered.  What  could  the  temple  do  without 
its  watchmen? 

5.  Again,  in  that  the  porters  had  charge  of  the 
treasure-chambers  as  it  is,  l  Ch.  ix.  2G,  it  is  to  inti- 
mate, that  the  treasures  of  the  gospel  are  with  the 
ministers  of  our  God,  and  that  the  church,  next  to 


478 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


Christ,  should  seek  them  at  their  mouth.  '  We 
have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,'  saith  Paul, 
and  they  are  'stewards  of  the'  manifold  'mysteries 

of  God.'    1  Co.  iv.  1.    2  Co.  iv.  7.    1  Pe.  iv.  10.    Ep.  iv.  11-13. 

6.  These  are  God's  true  scribes,  and  bring  out 
of  their  treasury  things  new  and  old ;  or,  as  he 
saith  in  another  place,  'At  our  gates,'  that  i3, 
where  our  porters  watch,  '  are  all  manner  of  plea- 
sant fruits,  which  I  have  laid  up  for  thee,  0  my 

beloved.'    Ca.  viL  13.     Mat.  xiii.  52. 

7.  Further,  some  of  them  had  charge  of  the 
ministering  vessels,  and  they  were  to  bring  them 
in  and  out  by  tale.  1  Ch.  ix.  28.  (1 .)  If  by  minister- 
ing vessels  you  understand  gospel  ordinances,  then 
you  see  who  has  the  charge  of  them,  to  wit,  the 
watchmen  and  ministers  of  the  word.  Lu.  i.  12.  2Th. 
u.  15.  2Ti.  ii.  2.  (2.)  If  by  ministering  vessels  you 
mean  the  members  of  the  church,  for  they  are 
also  ministering  vessels,  then  you  see  who  has  the 
care  of  them,  to  wit,  the  pastors,  the  gospel  min- 
isters. Therefore  'obey  them  that  have  the  rule 
over  you  -  for  they  watch  for  your  souls,  as  they 
that  must  give  account  ;  that  they  may  do  it 
with  joy,  and  not  with  grief,  for  that  is  unprofit- 
able for  you.'    He.  xiii.  17. 

8.  The  opening  of  the  gates  did  also  belong  to 
the  porters,  to  show  that  the  power  of  the  keys, 
to  wit,  of  opening  and  shutting,  of  letting  in  and 
keeping  out  of  the  church,  doth  ministerially  be- 
long to  these  watchmen.   Mat.  rvi.  19.  He.  xii.  35. 

9.  The  conclusion  is,  then  let  the  churches  love 
their  pastors,  hear  their  pastors,  be  ruled  by  their 
pastors,  and  suffer  themselves  to  be  watched  over, 
and  to  be  exhorted,  counselled,  and  if  need  be, 
reproved,  and  rebuked  by  their  pastors.1  And  let 
the  ministers  not  sleep,  but  be  watchful,  and  look 
to  the  ordinances,  to  the  souls  of  the  saints,  and 
the  gates  of  the  churches.  Watchman,  watch- 
man, watch! 

XXVII.  Of  the  doors  of  the  Temple. 

Now  we  are  come  to  the  gate  of  the  temple ; 
namely,  to  that  which  let  out  of  the  porch  into  the 
holy  place. 

1.  These  doors  or  gates  were  folding,  and  they 
opened  by  degrees.  First,  a  quarter,  and  then  a 
half,  after  that  three  quarters,  and  last  of  all  the 
whole.  These  doors  also  hanged  upon  hinges  of 
gold,  and  upon  posts  made  of  the  goodly  olive- 
tree.    1  Ki.  vi.  33,  84.  Eze.  xli.  23,  24. 

2.  These  doors  did  represent  Christ,  as  he  is 
the  way  to  the  Father,  as  also  did  the  door  of  the 


1  The  simple-minded  nature  of  Bunyan  here  appears  con- 
spicuously, lie  measures  others  hy  his  own  bushel,  as  it'  every 
pastor  had  as  single  an  eye  to  the  welfare  of  their  flocks  as  he 
had  over  the  Church  at  Bedford.  How  tenderly  ought  the 
churches  of  Christ  to  cherish  such  pastors  as  Buuyau,  while 
they  prayerfully  watch  over  their  ministrations. — (Ed.) 


tabernacle,  at  which  the  people  were  wont  to  stand 
when  they  went  to  inquire  of  God.  Wherefore, 
Christ  saith,  '  I  am  the  door,'  alluding  to  this,  '  by 
me  if  any  man  enter  he  shall  be  saved,  and  shall 
go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture.'  Ex.  xxxiii.  9, 10 ;  xxxviii. 

8  ;  xl.  12.  Le.  i.  3,  4  ;  viii.  3,  4,  33 ;  xv.  14.  Nu.  vi.  13,  18  ;  x.  3 ;  xxv. 
6;xxvii.  2.    1  Sa.  ii.  22.    Jn.  x.  9.       (1.)    'I    am    the    door.' 

The  door  into  the  court,  the  door  into  the  porch, 
the  door  into  the  temple,  the  door  into  the  holiest, 
the  door  to  the  Father.  But  now  we  are  at  the 
door  of  the  temple.  (2.)  And  observe  it,  this  door 
by  Solomon  was  not  measured  as  the  door  of  the 
porch  was:  for  though  the  door  into  the  court, 
and  the  door  into  the  porch  were  measured,  to 
show  that  the  right  to  ordinances  and  the  inlet 
into  the  church  is  to  be  according  to  a  prescript 
rule,  yet  this  door  was  not  measured;  to  show  that 
Christ,  as  he  is  the  inlet  to  saving  grace,  is  beyond 
all  measure,  and  unsearchable.  Hence  his  grace 
is  called  *  unsearchable  riches,'  and  that  above  all 
we  can  ask  or  think,  for  that  it  passeth  knowledge. 

Ep.iii.  8,  19,  20. 

3.  It  is,  therefore,  convenient  that  we  put  a  note 
upon  this,  that  we  may  distinguish  rule  and  duty 
from  grace  and  pardoning  mercy;  for  as  I  said, 
though  Christ,  as  the  door  to  outward  privileges, 
is  set  forth  by  rule  and  measure ;  yet,  as  he  is  the 
door  to  grace  and  favour,  never  creature,  as  yet, 
did  see  the  length  and  breadth  of  him.  Ep.  Hi  17, 19.2 

4.  Therefore,  I  say,  this  gate  was  not  measured ; 
for  what  should  a  rule  do  here,  where  things  are 
beyond  all  measure? 

5.  This  gate  being  also  to  open  by  degrees,  is 
of  signification  to  us ;  for  it  will  be  opening  first 
hy  one  fold,  then  by  another,  and  yet  will  never 
be  set  wide,  wide  open,  until  the  day  of  judgment. 
For  then,  and  not  till  then,  will  the  whole  of  the 
matter  be  open.  '  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass, 
darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face:  now  I  know  in  part, 
but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known.' 

1  Co.  xiii.  12. 

XXVIII.  Of  the  leaves  of  this  gate  of  the  Temple. 

The  leaves  of  this  gate  or  door,  as  I  told  you 
before,  were  folding,  and  so,  as  was  hinted,  has 
something  of  signification  in  them.  For  by  this 
means  a  man,  especially  a  young  disciple,  may 
easily  be  mistaken ;  thinking  that  the  whole  pass- 
age, when  yet  but  a  part  was  open ;  whereas,  three 
parts  might  be  yet  kept  undiscovered  to  him.  For 
these  doors,  as  I  said  before,  were  never  yet  set 
wide  open ;  I  mean,  in  the  anti-type ;  never  man 
yet  saw  all  the  riches  and  fulness  which  is  in 
Christ.  So  that  I  say,  a  new  comer,  if  he  judged 
by  present  sight,  especially  if  he  saw  but  little, 

2  This  is  one  of  those  beautiful  gems  which  sparkle  all 
through  Bunyau's  works,  '  As  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of 
the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God ! ' — (Ed  ; 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


479 


might  easily  be  mistaken ;  -wherefore  such,  for  the 
most  part,  are  most  horribly  afraid  that  they  shall 
never  get  in  thereat.  How  sayest  thou,  young 
comer,  is  not  this  the  ease  with  thy  soul?  So  it 
seems  to  thee  that  thou  art  too  big,  being  so 
great,  so  tun-bellied  a  sinner.  But,  0  thou  sinner, 
fear  not,  the  doors  aro  folding-doors,  and  may  lie 
opened  wider,  and  wider  again  after  that;  wherefore, 
when  thou  comest  to  this  gate,  and  imaginest  there 
is  not  space  enough  for  thee  to  enter,  knock,  and 
it  shall  be  wider  opened  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
be  received,  La.  4. 9.  Jr.  vi  87.  So,  then,  whoever 
thou  art  that  art  come  to  the  door,  of  which  the 
temple  door  was  a  type,  trust  not  to  thy  first  con- 
ceptions of  things,  but  believe  there  is  grace  abun- 
dant. Thou  knowest  not  yet  what  Christ  can  do, 
the  doors  are  folding-doors.  He  can  '  do  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.' 
Ep.  iii.  20. 

The  hinges  on  which  these  doors  do  hang  were, 
as  1  told  you,  gold  ;  to  signify  that  they  both  turned 
upon  motives  and  motions  of  love,  and  also  that 
the  openings  thereof  were  rich.  Golden  hinges 
the  gate  to  God  doth  turn  upon, 

The  posts  on  which  these  doors  did  hang  were 
of  the  olive-tree,  that  fat  and  oily  tree,  to  show 
that  they  do  never  open  with  lothness  or  sluggish- 
ness, as  doors  do  whose  hinges  want  oil.  They 
are  always  oily,  and  so  open  easily  and  quickly  to 
those  who  knock  at  them.  Hence  you  read,  that 
he  that  dwells  in  this  house  gives  freely,  loves 
freely,  and  doth  us  good  with  all  his  heart.  *  Yea,' 
saith  he,  '  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them 
good,  and  I  will  plant  them  in  this  land  assuredly 
with  my  whole  heart,   and  with  my  whole  soul. 

Je.  iii.  12,  14,  22  ;  xxxii.  41.    Re.  xxi.  6  ;   xxii.  17.        Wherefore, 

the  oil  of  grace,  signified  by  this  oily  tree,  or 
these  olive-posts,  on  which  these  doors  do  hang, 
do  cause  that  they  open  glibly  or  frankly  to  the 
soul. 

XXIX.  What  the  doors  of  the  Temple  were  made  of. 

1.  The  doors  of  the  temple  were  made  of  fir; 
that  is  so  sweet  scented,  and  pleasant  to  the  smell. 

1  KL  vi.  34. 

2.  Mankind  is  also  often  compared  to  the  fir- 
tree.    As  Is.  xli.  19  ;  Iv.  13 ;  lx.  13-17  ;  xiv.  8. 

3.  Now,  since  the  doors  of  the  temple  were 
made  of  the  same,  doth  it  not  show  that  the  way 
into  God's  house,  and  into  his  favour,  is  by  the 
same  nature  which  they  are  of  that  thither  enter, 
even  through  the  veil,  his  flesh  ?  He.  x.  20.  For 
this  door,  I  mean  the  anti-type,  doth  even  say  of 
himself,  '  /  am  like  a  green  fir-tree,  from  me  is 
thy  fruit  found.'  Ho.  xiv.  8. 

4.  This  fir-tree  is  Christ ;  Christ  as  man,  and 
so  as  the  way  to  the  Father.  The  doors  of  the 
temple  arc  also,  as  you  see  here,  made  of  the  fir- 


tree  ;  even  of  that  tree  which  was  a  type  of  the 
humanity  of  Jesus  Christ.     Consider  iieb.  ».  u. 

5.  The  fir-tree  is  also  the  house  of  the  stork, 
that  unclean  bird,  even  as  Christ  is  a  harbour  and 
shelter  for  sinners.  As  for  the  stork,  saith  the 
text,  the  fir-tree  is  her  house ;  and  Christ  saith  to 
the  sinners  that  see  their  want  of  shelter,  '  Come 
unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.'  He  is  a  re- 
fuge for  the  oppressed,  a  refuge  in  time  of  trouble. 

I)e.  xiv.  19.  Le.  xi.  19.  Ps.  civ.  17;  lxxxiv.  2,  3.  Mat.  xi.  27,  28.  lie.  vi. 

17—20.  He  is.  as  the  doors  of  fir  of  the  temple, 
the  inlet  to  God's  house,  to  God's  presence,  and 
to  a  partaking  of  his  glory.  Thus  God  did  of  old. 
by  similitudes,  teach  his  people  his  way. 

XXX.  How  tlte  doors  of  die  Temple  were  adorned. 

And  Solomon  carved  upon  the  doors  4  cheru- 
bims,  and  palm  trees,  and  open  flowers,  and  covered 

them  with  gold. '    1  Ki.  vi.  35.  E*e.  xli.  25. 

Fird.  He  carved  cherubims  thereon.  These 
cherubims  were  figures  or  types  of  angels,  and 
forasmuch  as  they  were  carved  here  upon  the 
door,  it  was  to  show, 

1.  What  delight  the  angels  take  in  waiting  upon 
the  Lord,  and  in  going  at  his  bidding,  at  his  beck. 
They  are  always  waiting  like  servants  at  the  door 
of  their  Lord's  house. 

2.  It  may  be  also  to  show  how  much  pleased 
they  are  to  be  where  they  may  see  sinners  come 
to  God.  For  '  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,'  and 
comes  to  God  by  Christ  for  mercy.  Lu.  xv.  10. 

3.  They  may  be  also  placed  here  to  behold  with 
what  reverence  or  irreverence  those  that  come 
hither  to  worship  do  behave  themselves.  Hence 
Solomon  cautions  those  that  come  to  God's  house 
to  worship,  that  they  take  heed  to  their  feet,  be- 
cause of  the  angels.  Paul  also  says,  Women 
must  take  heed  that  they  behave  themselves  in  the 
church  as  they  should,   and  that  because  of  the 

angels.    Ec.  v.  1,  2,  G.  1  Co.  xi.  5,  G,  10. 

4.  They  may  also  be  carved  upon  the  temple 
doors,  to  show  us  how  ready  they  are,  so  soon  as 
any  poor  creature  comes  to  Christ  for  life  to  take 
the  care  and  charge  of  its  conduct  through  this 
miserable  world.  '  Are  they  not  all  ministering 
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall 
be  heirs  of  salvation  V  He.  i.  u. 

5.  They  ma}'  also  be  carved  here,  to  show  that 
they  are  ready,  at  Christ's  command,  to  take 
vengeance  for  him  upon  those  that  despise  his 
people  and  hate  his  person.  Hence  he  bids  the 
world  take  heed  what  they  do  to  his  '  little  ones,' 
for  '  their  angels  do  always  behold  the  face  of  their 
Father  which  is  in  heaven,'  and  are  ready  at  the 
door  to  run  at  his  bidding.   Mat.  xviii.  10. 

6.  Or  lastly,  they  may  be  carved  upon  these 
doors,   to  show  that  Christ  Jesus  is  the  very  sup- 


4S0 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


porter  and  upholder  of  angels,  as  well  as  the 
Saviour  of  sinful  man.  For  as  he  is  before  all 
things,  so  by  him  all  things  consist ;  angels  stand 
by  Christ,  men  are  saved  by  Christ,  and  therefore 
the  very  cherubim s  themselves  were  carved  upon 
these  doors,  to  show  they  are  upheld  and  subsist 

by  him.    1  Co.  viiL  6.  Col.  i.  17.  lie.  i.  3. 

Second.  Again,  as  the  cherubims  are  carved 
here,  so  there  were  palm  trees  carved  here  also. 
The  palm  tree  is  upright,  it  twisteth  not  itself 
awry.  Je.  x.  5. 

1.  Apply  this  to  Christ,  and  then  it  shows  us 
the  uprightness  of  his  heart,  word,  and  ways  with 
sinners.  '  Good  and  upright  is  the  Lord,  there- 
fore will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  way;'  in  at  the 

door  tO  life.    Ps.  xxv.  8;  xcii.  15. 

2.  The  palm  or  palm  tree  is  also  a  token  of  vic- 
tory ;  and  as  placed  here,  it  betokeneth  the  con- 
quest that  Christ,  the  door,  should  get  over  sin, 
death,  the  devil,  and  hell  for  us.   Ro.  vii.  24;  viii.  37.  l 

Co.  xv.  54—57.  Re.  vii.  9—11. 

3.  If  we  apply  the  palm  tree  to  the  church,  as  we 
may,  for  she  also  is  compared  thereto,  Ca.  vii.  8— 10, 
then  the  palm  tree  may  be  carved  here  to  show, 
that  none  but  such  as  are  upright  of  heart  and  life 
shall  dwell  in  the  presence  of  God.  *  The  hypo- 
crite,' says  Job,  '  shall  not  come  before  him.' 
'  The  upright,'  says  David,  '  shall  not  dwell  in  thy 
presence.'  Job  xhi.  16.  Ps.  cxi.  13.  They  are  they  that 
are  clothed  in  white  robes,  which  signifies  upright- 
ness of  life,  that  stand  before  the  Lamb  with 
'palms  in  their  hands.'  Re. vii.  9. 

Third.  There  were  also  carved  upon  these  doors 
open  flowers ;  and  that  to  teach  us  that  here  is  the 
sweet  scent  and  fragrant  smell;  and  that  the  coming- 
soul  will  find  it  so  in  Christ,  this  door.  '  I  am,' 
saith  he,  '  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  lily  of  the 
valleys.'  And  again,  '  His  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of 
spices,  as  sweet  flowers  :  his  lips  like  lilies,  dropping 
sweet  smelling  myrrh. '  Ca.  a,  l ;  v.  is.  Open  flowers. 
Open  flowers  are  the  sweetest,  because  full  grown, 
and  because,  as  such,  they  yield  their  fragrancy 
most  freely.  Wherefore,  when  he  saith  upon  the 
doors  are  open  flowers,  he  setteth  Christ  Jesus  forth 
in  his  good  savours,  as  high  as  by  such  similitudes 
he  could ;  and  that  both  in  name  and  office.  For 
open  flowers  lay,  by  their  thus  opening  themselves 
before  us,  all  their  beauty  also  most  plainly  before 
our  faces.  There  are  varieties  of  beauty  in  open 
flowers,  the  which  they  also  commend  to  all  ob- 
servers. Now,  upon  these  doors,  you  see,  are  open 
flowers,  flowers  ripe,  and  spread  before  us,  to  show 
that  his  name  and  offices  are  savoury  to  them  that 
by  him    do    enter   his  house  to  God  his  Father. 

Ca.  L  1-4. 

'  All  these  were  overlaid  with  fine  gold.'  Gold 
is  the  most  rich  of  all  metals  ;  and  here  it  is  said 
the  doors,  the  cherubims,  the  palm  trees,  and  open 


flowers,  were  overlaid  therewith.  And  this  shows, 
that  as  these  things  are  rich  in  themselves,  even  so 
they  should  be  to  us.  We  have  a  golden  door  to 
go  to  God  by,  and  golden  angels  to  conduct  us 
through  the  world:  we  have  golden  palm  trees  as 
tokens  of  our  victory,  and  golden  flowers  to  smell 
on  all  the  way  to  heaven. 

XXXI.  Of  the  wall  of  the  TemjAe. 

The  wall  of  the  temple  was  '  ceiled  with  fir  tree, 
which  he  overlaid  with  fine  gold,  and  set  thereon 
palm  trees  and  chains.'  2  Ch.  m.  5-7. 

The  walls  were  as  the  body  of  the  house,  unto 
which  Christ  alluded  when  he  said,  '  Destroy  this 
temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up.'  Jn.  ii. 
19.  Hence  to  be,  and  worship  in  the  temple,  was 
a  type  of  being  in  Christ,  and  worshipping  God  by 
him.  For  Christ,  as  was  said,  i3  the  great  temple 
of  God,  in  the  which  all  the  elect  meet,  and  in 
whom  they  do  service  to  and  for  his  Father. 

Hence  again  the  true  worshippers  are  said  to  be 
in  him,  to  speak  in  him,  to  walk  in  him,  to  obey  in 
him.  2  Co.  a.  14 ;  xiL  19.  Coi.  ii.  6.  For,  as  of  old,  all 
true  worship  was  to  be  found  at  the  temple,  so  now 
it  is  only  found  with  Christ,  and  with  them  that  are 
in  him.  The  promise  of  old  was  made  to  them 
that  worshipped  within  these  walls.  '  Unto  them,' 
saith  he,  '  will  I  give  in  my  house,  and  within  my 
walls,'  to  them  that  worship  there  in  truth,  *  a 
place,  and  a  name,  better  than  of  sons  and  of 
daughters.'  is.  ivi  5. 

But  now,  in  New  Testament  times,  •  all  the  pro- 
mises of  God  in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him,  amen 
unto  the  glory  of  God  by  us.'  2  Co.  i.  20.  This  is 
yet  further  hinted  to  us  in  that  it  is  said  these  walls 
are  ceiled  with  fir  ;*  which,  as  was  showed  before, 
was  a  figure  of  the  humanity  of  Jesus  Christ. 

A  wall  is  for  defence,  and  so  is  the  humanity  of 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is,  was,  and  will  be,  our  defence 
for  ever.  For  it  was  that  which  underwent  and 
overcame  the  curse  of  the  law,  aud  that  in  which 
our  everlasting  righteousness  is  found.  Had  he 
not  in  that  interposed,  we  had  perished  for  ever. 
Hence  we  are  said  to  be  reconciled  to  God  in  the 
body  of  his  flesh  through  death.  Col.i.19,20.  Ro.v.8-10. 

Now,  this  wall  was  overlaid  with  fine  gold.  Gold 
here  is  a  figure  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  by 
which  we  are  justified  in  the  sight  of  God.  There- 
fore you  read,  that  his  church,  as  justified,  is  said 
to  stand  at  his  right  hand  in  cloth  of  gold.  '  Upon 
thy  right  hand  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of 
Opliir.'  And  again,  '  Her  clothing  is  of  wrought 
gold.'  Ps.  xiv.  9, 13.  This  the  wall  was  overlaid  with  ; 
this  the  body  of  Christ  was  filled  with.     Lien,  whilo 

1  Ceiled  is  now  only  used  with  reference  to  the  top  of  a 
room — the  ceiling.  It  is  an  old  English  word,  and  means 
overlaid  or  lined  with  wood,  wainscot,  or  plank,  either  root', 
sides,  or  floor. — (Ed.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


4S1 


in  tlie  temple,  were  clothed  with  gold,  even  with 
the  gold  of  the  temple ;  and  men  in  Christ  are 
clothed  with  righteousness,  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.  Wherefore  this  consideration  doth  yet 
more  illustrate  the  matter.  In  that  the  palm  trees 
were  set  on  this  wall,  it  may  be  to  show  that  the 
elect  are  fixed  in  Jesus,  and  so  shall  abide  for  ever. 

Chains  were  also  carved  on  these  walls,  yea,  and 
they  were  golden  chains ;  there  were  chains  on  the 
pillars,  and  now  also  we  find  chains  upon  the  walls, 
i  hi.  i.  12,  13.  1.  Chains  were  used  to  hold  one  cap- 
tive, and  such  Paul  did  wear  at  Rome,  but  he 
called  them  'his  bands  in  Christ.'  2.  Chains 
sometimes  signify  great  afflictions,  which  God  lays 
on  us  for  our  sins.  rs.  cvii.  s-ll.  La.  i.  U;  iii.  7.  3. 
Chains  also  may  be  more  mystically  understood, 
as  of  those  obligations  which  the  love  of  God  lays 
upon  us,  to  do  and  suffer  for  him.  Ac. «.  22  4. 
Chains  do  sometimes  signify  beauty  and  comely 
ornaments.  '  Thy  neck,'  saith  Christ  to  his  spouse, 
'is  comely  with  chains  of  gold.'  And  again,  '  I 
put  bracelets  upon  thy  hands,  and  a  chain  on  thy 
neck.'  Ca.  i.  10.  Eze.  xvi.  8— ll.  Pr.  i.  9.  5.  Chains  also 
do  sometimes  denote  greatness  and  honour,  such  as 
Daniel  had  when  the  king  made  him  the  third  ruler 
in  the  kingdom.  Da.  v.  7, 16, 29. 

Now  all  these  are  temple-chains,  and  are  put 
upon  us  for  good ;  some  to  prevent  our  ruin,  some 
to  dispose  our  minds  the  better,  and  some  to  dignify 
and  to  make  us  noble.  Temple-chains  are  brave 
chains.  None  but  temple-worshippers  must  wear 
temple-chains. 

XXXII.  Of  the  garnishing  of  the  Temple  with 
precious  stones. 

'  And  he  garnished  the  house  with  precious 
stones  for  beauty.'  2  Ch.  iii.  c,  7.  1.  This  is  another 
ornament  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord ;  wherefore, 
as  he  saith,  it  was  garnished  with  them  ;  he  saith 
it  was  garnished  with  them  for  beauty.  The  line 1 
saith,  garnished ;  the  margin  saith,  covered.  2. 
Wherefore,  I  think,  they  were  fixed  as  stars,  or  as 
the  stars  in  the  firmament,  so  they  were  set  in  the 
ceiling  of  the  house,  as  in  the  heaven  of  the  holy 
temple.  3.  And  thus  fixed,  they  do  the  more  aptly 
tell  us  of  what  they  were  a  figure ;  namely,  of  the 
ministerial  gifts  and  officers  in  the  church.  For 
ministers,  as  to  their  gifts  and  office,  are  called 
stars  of  God,  and  are  said  to  be  in  the  hand  of 
Christ.  Re.  i.  20.  4.  Wherefore,  as  the  stars  glit- 
ter and  twinkle  in  the  firmament  of  heaven,  so 
do  true  ministers  in  the  firmament  of  his  church. 

1  Ch.  xxix.  2.  Jn.  v.  35.  Da.  xii.  3.        5.     So    that     it     is     said 


1  The  line  means  the  test.  The  marginal  reading  agrees 
with  the  puritan  version  '  overlayed.'  Tyndale  renders  it, 
'And  he  paved  the  house  with  precious  stones  goodly.'  Cover- 
dale,  'And  overlayed  the  house  with  precious  stones  to  beautify 
it'— (Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


again  these  gifts  come  down  from  above,  as  signi- 
fying they  distil  their  dew  from  above.  And 
hence,  again,  the  ministers  are  said  to  be  set  over 
us  in  the  Lord,  as  placed  in  the  firmament  of  his 
heaven  to  give  a  light  upon  his  earth.  '  There  is 
gold  and  a  multitude  of  rubies,  but  the  lips  of 
knowledge  are  a  precious  jewel.'  Pr.  xx.  is. 

Verily,  it  is  enough  to  make  a  man  in  this  house 
look  always  upward;  since  the  ceiling  above  head 
doth  thus  glitter  with  precious  stones.  Precious 
stones,  all  manner  of  precious  stones,  stones  of  all 
colours.  For  there  are  divers  gifts,  differences  of 
administrations,  and  diversities  of  operations,  *  but 
it  is  the  same  God  which  workcth  all  in  all.'  l  Co. 
xii.  4-g.  Thus  had  the  ceiling  of  this  house  a 
pearl  here,  and  there  a  diamond;  here  a  jasper, 
and  there  a  sapphire;  here  a  sardius,  and  there  a 
jacinth;  hero  a  sardonyx,  and  there  an  amethyst. 
*  For  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word  of 
wisdom,  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge  ;'  to  one 
the  gift  of  healing,  to  another  faith  ;  to  this  man 
to  work  miracles,  to  that  a  spirit  of  prophecy;  to 
another  the  discerning  of  spirits,  to  another  divers 
kinds  of  tongues,   i  Co.  xii.  8— ll. 

He  also  overlaid  the  house,  beams,  posts,  walls, 
doors,  &c,  and  all  with  gold.  0  what  a  beautiful 
house  the  temple  was;  how  full  of  glory  was  it! 
And  yet  all  was  but  a  shadow,  a  shadow  of  things 
to  come,  and  which  was  to  be  answered  in  the 
church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of 
truth,  by  better  things  than  these. 

XXXIII.  Of  Hie  'windows  of  the  Temple. 

'  And  for  the  house,  he  made  windows  of  narrow 
lights.'  l  Ki.  vi.4.  There  were  windows  of  this  house, 
windows  for  the  chambers  and  windows  round 
about.  Eze.  xi.  16, 22— 25,  29, 33, 36.  These  windows  were 
of  several  sizes,  but  all  narrow,  narrow  without, 
but  wide  within ;  they  also  were  finely  Avrought, 
and  beautified  with  goodly  stones,  is.  liv.  12. 

1.  Windows,  as  they  are  to  a  house  an  orna- 
ment, so  also  to  it  they  are  a  benefit.  '  Truly  the 
light  is  sweet,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the  eyes 
to  behold  the  sun.'  Ec.  xi.  7.  The  window  is  that 
which  Christ  looks  forth  at,  the  window  is  that 
which  the  sun  looks  in  at.  Ca.iL 9. 

2.  By  the  light  which  shines  in  at  the  window 
we  also  see  to  make  and  keep  the  house  clean,  and 
also  to  do  what  business  is  necessary  there  to  be 
done.  '  In  thy  light  shall  we  see  light;'  light  to 
do  our  duty,  and  that  both  to  God  and  man. 

3.  These  windows  therefore  were  figures  of  the 
written  word,  by  and  through  which  Christ  shows 
himself  to  his,  and  by  which  we  also  apprehend 
him.  And  hence  the  Word  of  God  is  compared  to 
a  glass  through  which  the  light  doth  come,  and  by 
which  we  see  not  only  the  beams  of  the  sun,  but 
our  own  smutches  also.  2  Ch.  isx.  is.  Ja.  i.  23-2--.. 

CI 


432 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


4.  The  lights  indeed  were  narrow,  wherefore 
we  see  also  through  their  antitype  hut  darkly 
and  imperfectly  '  Now  we  see  through  a  glass 
darkly,'  or,  as  in  a  riddle,1  now  we  know  hut  in 
part,  l  Co.  xiii  12. 

5.  Their  windows  and  their  light  are  hut  of  little 
service  to  those  that  are  without ;  the  world  sees 
hut  little  of  the  beauty  of  the  church  by  the  light 
of  the  written  Word,  though  the  church,  hy  that 
light,  can  see  the  dismal  state  of  the  world,  and 
also  how  to  avoid  it. 

XX XIV.  Of  the  chambers  of  the  Temple. 

In  the  temple  Solomon  made  chambers,  l  Ki.  vi.  5. 

1.  The  chambers  were  of  several  sizes;  some 
little,  some  large;  some  higher,  some  lower;  some 
more  inward,  and  some  outward. 

2.  These  chambers  were  for  several  services ; 
some  were  for  rests,  some  to  hide  in,  some  to  lay 
up  treasure  in,  and  some  for  solace  and  delight. 

2  Ch.  iii.  9.  Eze.  xl  7;  xli.  5,  9—11.  2  Ch.  xxxi.  11, 13.     They  were 

for  resting-places.  Here  the  priests  and  porters 
were  wont  to  lodge.  They  were  for  hiding-places. 
Here  Jehoshabeath  hid  Joash  from  Athaliah  the 
term  of  six  years.  2  Ki.  ri.  3.  They  were  also  to  lay 
the  temple  treasure,  or  dedicated  things  in,  that 
they  might  be  safely  kept  there  for  the  worship- 
pers. Ezr.  viii.  29.  And  some  of  them  were  for 
solace  and  delight ;  and,  I  must  add,  some  for 
durable  habitation.  Wherefore  in  some  of  them 
some  dwelt  always,  yea,  their  names  dwelt  there 
when  they  were  dead. 

(1.)  Those  of  them  which  were  for  rest,  were 
types  of  that  rest  which  by  faith  we  have  in  the 
Son  of  God,  and  of  that  eternal  rest  which  we 
shall  have  in  heaven  by  him.  Mat.  xi.28.  He.iv.  3.  (2.) 
Those  chambers  which  were  for  hiding  and  se- 
curity, were  types  of  that  safety  which  we  have  in 
Christ  from  the  rage  of  the  world.  Is.  xxvi.  20.  (3.) 
Those  chambers  which  were  for  the  reception  of 
the  treasures  and  dedicated  things  were  types  of 
Christ,  as  he  is  the  common  store-house  of  be- 
lievers. '  For  it  pleased  the  Father,  that  in  him 
should  all  fulness  dwell;'  'and  of  his  fulness  we 
all  receive,  and  grace  for  grace.'  Ju.  i.  16.  Col.  i.  19. 
(4.)  Those  chambers  that  were  for  solace  and  de- 
light, were  types  of  those  retirements  and  secret 
meetings  of  Christ  with  the  soul,  where  he  gives  it 
his  embraces,  and  delights  her  with  his  bosom  and 
ravishing  delights.  '  He  brought  me,'  said  she, 
'  into  his  chambers, '  '  into  the  chamber  of  her  that 
conceived  me,'  and  there  he  gave  her  his  love. 

Ca.  i.  i;  iii.  4. 

The  chambers  which  were  for  durable  dwelling- 
places  were  types  of  those  eternal  dwelling-places 
which  are  in  the  heavens,  prepared  of  Christ  and 


2  See  margiu  of  1  Co.  xiii.  12,  Gr.,  'in  a  riddle.' — (Ed.) 


the  Father,  for  them  that  shall  be  saved.  Jn.  xiv-.  J—u 
2  Cor.  v.  l—  t.  This  it  is  to  'dwell  on  high,'  and  t  > 
be  safe  from  fear  of  evil !  Here  therefore  vou  see 
are  chambers  for  rest,  chambers  for  safety,  cham- 
bers for  treasure,  chambers  for  solace,  and  cham- 
bers for  durable  habitations.  0  the  rest  and  peace 
that  the  chambers  of  God's  high  house  will  yield 
to  its  inhabitants  in  another  world !  Here  they 
will  *  rest  from  their  labours,'  '  rest  in  their  beds,' 
rest  with  God,  rest  from  sin,  temptation,  and  all 
sorrow.  Re.  xiv.  13.  Is.  lvii.  l,  2.  2  Hi.  i.  7.  God  therefore 
then  shall  wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes,  even  when 
he  comes  out  of  his  chamber  as  a  bridegroom,  to 
fetch  his  bride,  his  wife  unto  him  thither,  to  the 
end  they  may  have  eternal  solace  together.  0 
these  are  far  better  than  the  chambers  of  the 
south ! 

XXXV.   Of  the  stairs  by  luhich  they  went  up  into 
the  chambers  of  the  Temple. 

There  were  stairs  by  which  men  went  up  into 
these  chambers  of  the  temple,  and  they  were  but 
one  pair,  and  they  went  from  below  to  the  first, 
and  so  to  the  middle,  and  thence  to  the  highest 
chambers  in  the  temple.  1  Ki.  vi.  8.  Eze.  xli.  7. 

1.  These  stairs  were  winding;  so  that  they 
turned  about,  that  did  go  up  them.  So  then,  he 
that  assayed  to  go  into  these  chambers,  must  turn 
with  the  stairs,  or  he  could  not  go  up,  no,  not  into 
the  lowest  chambers. 

2.  These  stairs  therefore  were  a  tyrpe  of  a  two- 
fold repentance.  That  by  which  we  turn  from 
nature  to  grace,  and  that  by  which  we  turn  from 
the  imperfections  which  attend  a  state  of  grace  to 
glory.  Hence  true  repentance,  or  the  right  going 
up  these  turning  stairs,  is  called  repentance  to 
salvation;  for  true  repentance  stoppeth  not  at  the 
reception  of  grace;  for  that  is  but  a  going  up  these 
stairs  to  the  middle  chambers.  2  Co.  vii.  10. 

Thus,  therefore,  the  soul,  at  its  going  up  the:-e 
stairs,  turns  and  turns,  till  it  enters  the  doors  of 
the  highest  chambers.  It  groans,  though  in  a 
state  of  grace,  because  that  is  not  the  state  of  glory. 
I  count  then,  that  from  the  first  to  the  middle 
chambers  may  be  a  type  of  turning  from  nature  to 
grace.  But  from  the  middle  to  the  highest,  these 
stairs  may  signify  a  turning  still  from  the  imper- 
fections and  temptations  that  attend  a  state  of 
grace,  to  that  of  immortality  and  glory.    2  Co  v.  1—9. 

For  as  there  are  turning  stairs,  from  the  lowest 
to  the  middle  chambers,  so  the  stairs  from  thence 
still  turn,  and  so  will  do,  till  you  come  to  the  high- 
est chambers.  I  do  not  say  that  they  that  have 
received  grace,  do  repent  they  received  grace;  but 
I  say  they  that  have  received  grace,  are  yet  sorry 
that  grace  is  not  consummate  in  glory;  and  hence 
they  are  for  going  up  thither  still,  by  these  turning- 
stairs;  yea,  they  cannot  rest  below,  as  they  would, 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE    SPIRITUALIZED. 


483 


till  they  ascend  to  the  highest  chambers.  '  0 
■wretched  man  that  I  am!'  And  '  in  this  we  groan 
earnestly,'  is  the  language  of  gracious  souls.  Ro. 
vii.  24.  2  Co.  v.  1—3.  True,  every  one  doth  not  do  thus 
that  conies  into  the  temple  of  God;  many  rest 
below  stairs,  they  like  not  to  go  turning  upward. 
Nor  do  I  believe  that  all  that  bid  fair  for  ascend- 
ing to  the  middle  chambers,  get  up  to  the  highest 
stories,  to  his  stories  in  the  heavens.  Many  in 
churches,  who  seem  to  be  turned  from  nature  to 
grace,  have  not  the  grace  to  go  up,  turning  still; 
but  rest  in  that  show  of  things,  and  so  die  below 
a  share  in  the  highest  chambers. 

All  these  things  are  true  in  the  anti-type,  and, 
as  I  think,  prefigured  by  these  turning  stairs  to 
the  chambers  of  the  temple.  But  this  turning, 
and  turning  still,  displeases  some  much;  they  say 
it  makes  them  giddy;  but  I  say,  there  is  no  way 
like  this,  to  make  a  man  stand  steady;  stedfast  in 
the  faith,  and  with  boldness  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. For  he  has  this  seated  in  his  heart ;  I 
went  up  by  the  turning  stairs,  till  I  came  to  the 
highest  chambers.  A  strait  pair  of  stairs  are  like 
that  ladder  by  which  men  ascend  to  the  gallows ; 
they  are  the  turning  ones  that  lead  us  to  the 
heavenly  mansion-houses.  Look,  therefore,  you  that 
come  into  the  temple  of  God  to  worship,  that  you 
stay  not  at  the  foot  of  these  turning  stairs,  but  go 
up  thence;  yea,  up  them,  and  up  them,  and  up 
them,  till  you  come  to  the  view  of  the  heavens ; 
yea,  till  you  are  possessed  of  the  highest  chambers! 
How  many  times  has  God,  by  the  Scripture,  called 
upon  you  to  turn,  and  told  you,  you  must  turn  or 
die!  and  now  here  he  has  added  to  his  call  a 
figure,  by  placing  a  pair  of  turning  stairs  in  his 
temple,  to  convict  your  very  senses,  that  you  must 
torn",  if  you  mean  to  go  up  into  his  holy  chambers, 
and  so  into  his  eternal  mansion-houses ;  and  look 
that  you  turn  to  purpose ;  for  every  turning  will 
not  serve.  Some  turn,  but  not  to  the  Most  High; 
and  so  turn  to  no  purpose. 

XXXVI.  Of  the  molten  sea  that  was  in  the  Temple. 

There  was  also  a  molten  sea  in  the  temple ;  it 
was  made  of  brass,  and  contained  three  thousand 
baths.1  2  Ch.  w.  2— in.  This  sea  was  for  the  priests 
to  wash  in  when  they  came  into  the  temple  to  ac- 
complish the  service  of  God;  to  wash  their  hands 
and  feet  at,  that  they  might  not,  when  they  came 
thither,  die  for  their  unpreparedness.  The  laver 
also  which  was  in  the  wilderness  was  of  the  same 
use  there.  Ex.  xxx. 

1.  It  was,  as  may  be  supposed,  called  a  sea,  for 
that  it  was  large  to  contain ;  and  a  sea  of  brass, 
for  that  it  was  made  thereof.     It  is  called  in  Re- 


1  A  bath  was  a  Hebrew  measure  containing  about  seven 
gallons  and  a  half. — (Ed.j 


velations  a  sea  of  glass,  alluding  to  that  in  the 
wilderness,  which  was  made  of  the  brazen  looking- 
glasses  of  women  that  came  to  worship  at  the  door 
of  the  tabernacle.  Re.  iv.  g;  xv.  2.  Ex.  xxxviii.  8. 

2.  It  was  also  said  to  be  molten,  because  it  was 
made  of  that  fashion,  by  fire;  and  its  anti-type 
therefore  is  said  to  be  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with 
fire.  Re.  xv.  2.  (1.)  This  sea  was  a  figure  of  the 
word  of  the  gospel,  in  the  cleansing  virtue  of  it ; 
which  virtue  then  it  has  when  mingled  with  the 
fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  to  this  Christ  alludes, 
when  he  saith,  '  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the 
word  which  1  have  spoken  unto  you.'  Jn.  xv.  s.  (2.) 
It  was  a  figure  of  the  word,  without  mixture  of 
men's  inventions;  hence  it  is  called  '  pure  water.' 
Having  your  'bodies  washed  with  pure  water.' 
And  again,  He  sanctifies  and  cleanseth  his  church 
♦  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word.'  Bp.  v.  26. 
Tit.  iii.  s.  All  these  places  are  an  allusion  to  the 
molten  sea,  at  which  of  old  they  washed  when 
they  went  into  the  temple  to  worship.  Therefore, 
saith  he,  being  washed,  let  us  draw  near  to  God. 

He.  x.  22. 

3.  This  sea  from  brim  to  brim  was  complete  ten 
cubits ;  perhaps  to  show  that  there  is  as  much  in 
the  word  of  the  gospel  to  save,  as  there  is  in  the 
ten-  words  to  condemn. 

4.  From  under  this  sea  round  about  appeared 
oxen,  ten  in  a  cubit  did  compass  it  round  about. 
2  cu.  iv.  3.  Understand  by  these  oxen  ministers,  for 
to  them  they  are  compared  in  l  Co.  ix.  8— 10.  And 
then  we  are  taught  whence  true  ministers  come ; 
to  wit,  from  under  the  power  of  the  gospel,  for 
this  sea  breeds  gospel  ministers,  as  the  waters 
breed  fish. 

5.  It  is  also  said  in  the  text,  that  these  oxen 
were  cast  when  the  sea  was  cast;  insinuating  that 
when  God  ordained  a  word  of  grace  to  save  us,  he 
also  in  his  decree  provided  ministers  to  preach  it 
to  us  to  that  end.  Paul  tells  us,  that  he  was  made 
a  minister  of  the  gospel,  •  according  to  God's  eter- 
nal purpose  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our 

Lord.'     Ep.  iii.  9—11.  Col.  i.  25. 

6.  This  sea  is  said  to  have  a  brim  like  the  brim 
of  a  cup.  To  invite  us  as  well  to  drink  of  its  grace, 
as  to  wash  in  its  water.  For  the  word  and  Spirit 
when  mixed,  has  not  only  a  cleansing,  but  a  saving 
quality  in  it.    2  Ch.  iv.  1—5.  l  Cor.  xv.  l,  2. 

7.  This  brim  was  wrought  with  lilies,  or  was  like 
a  lily  flower;  to  show  how  they  should  grow  and 
flourish,  and  with  what  beautiful  robes  they  should 
be  adorned,  who  were  washed,  and  did  drink  of 
this  holy  water.  Yea,  that  God  would  take  care 
of  them,  as  he  also  did  of  lilies,  and  would  not  fail 
to  bestow  upon  them  what  was  necessary  for  the 
body,  as  well  as  for  the  soul.  Mat.  vi  28-84. 


The  moral  law  often  commandments.— (Ed.) 


484 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


XXXVII.   Upon  ivhat  the  molten  sea  stood  in  the 
Temple. 

1.  This  molten  sea  stood  upon  the  backs  of 
twelve  brazen  bulls  or  oxen.  2  ch.  iv.  4. 

2.  These  oxen,  as  they  thus  stood,  looked  three 
towards  the  north,  three  towards  the  west,  three 
towards  the  east,  and  three  towards  the  south. 

3.  These  twelve  oxen  were  types  of  the  twelve 
apostles  of  tho  Lamb,  who,  as  these  beasts,  stood 
looking  into  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  and  were 
bid  to  go  preach  the  gospel  in  all  the  world. 

4.  They  were  compared  to  oxen,  because  they 
were  clean ;  for  the  ox  was  a  clean  beast.  Hence 
the  apostles  are  called  holy.  They  were  compared 
to  oxen,  because  the  ox  is  strong;  and  they  also 
were  mighty  in  the  word.   rr.  xiv.  4.  2  Co.  xii.  12. 

5.  The  ox  will  not  lose  what  he  has  got  by 
drawing ;  he  will  not  let  the  wheels  go  back  ;  so 
the  apostles  were  set  to  defend,  and  not  let  that 
doctrine  go  back,  which  they  had  preached  to 
others ;  nor  did  they,  they  delivered  it  pure  to  us. 

6.  One  of  the  cherubs  of  which  you  read  in  the 
vision  had  a  face  like  an  ox,  to  show  that  the 
apostles,  these  men  of  the  first  order,  are  most 
like  the  angels  of  God.  Eze.  i.  10. 

7.  In  that  they  stood  with  their  faces  every  way, 
it  was,  as  I  said,  to  show  how  the  apostles  should 
carry  the  gospel  into  all  the  world.  Mat.  xxvHL  19, 20. 

Mar.  xvi.  15—18. 

8.  And  observe,  just  as  these  oxen  were  placed 
looking  in  the  temple  every  way,  even  so  stand 
open  the  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem  to  receive 
those  that  by  their  doctrine  should  be  brought  into 
it.  'And  they  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from 
the  west,  and  from  the  north,  and  from  the  south, 
and  shall  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God.'  Lu.xiii.20. 

Re.  xxi.  13,  14. 

9.  These  oxen  bear  this  molten  sea  upon  their 
hacks,  to  show  that  they  should  be  the  foundation 
workmen  of  the  gospel,  and  that  it  ought  not  to 
be  removed,  as  was  the  molten  sea  of  old,  from 
that  basis  to  another. 

1U.  It  is  also  said  concerning  those  oxen  that 
thus  did  bear  this  molten  sea,  that  all  their  hinder 
parts  were  inwards,  that  is,  covered  by  that  sea 
that  was  set  upon  their  backs  ;  their  hinder  parts, 
or,  as  the  apostle  has  it,   'our  uncomely  parts.' 

1  Co.  xiii.  23,  24. 

11.  And,  indeed,  it  becomes  a  gospel  minister 
to  have  his  uncomely  parts  covered  with  that  grace 
which  by  the  gospel  he  preacheth  unto  others.  As 
Paul  exhorts  Timothy  to  take  heed  unto  himself, 
and  to  his  doctrine,  l  Ti.  iv.  6. 

12.  But  alas!  there  are  too,  too  many  who,  can 
they  but  have  their  heads  covered  with  a  few  gospel 
notions,  care  not  though  their  hinder  parts  are  seen 
of  all  the  world.    But  such  are  false  ministers;  the 


prophet  calls  them  'the  tail.'  *  The  prophet  that 
speaketh  lies,  either. by  word  or  with  his  feet,  he 
is  the  tail.'  Is.  ix.  15.  Pr.  vi.  12,  13. 

13.  But  what  a  shame  is  it  to  hide  his  head 
under  this  molten  sea,  while  his  hinder  parts  hang- 
out. Such  an  one  is  none  of  Christ's  oxen ;  for 
they,  with  honour  to  their  Master,  show  their  heads 
before  all  the  world,  for  that  their  hinder  parts  are 
inward,  covered. 

14.  Look  to  thy  hinder  parts,  minister,  lest, 
while  thy  mouth  doth  preach  the  gospel,  thy  naked- 
ness and  shame  be  seen  of  those  which  hear  thee. 
For  they  that  do  not  observe  to  learn  this  lesson 
themselves,  will  not  teach  others  to  believe  the 
Word,  nor  to  live  a  holy  life ;  they  will  learn  of 
them  to  show  their  shame,  instead  of  learning  to 
be  holy. 

XXXVIII.  Of  the  lavers  of  the  Temple. 

Besides  this  molten  sea,  there  were  ten  lavers  in 
the  temple ;  five  of  which  were  put  on  the  right 
side,  and  five  also  on  the  left.  2  ch.  iv.  6. 

1.  Of  their  fashion  and  their  furniture,  you  may 
see.  iKi.  vii.  38.  These  lavers,  as  the  molten  sea, 
were  vessels  which  contained  water ;  but  they  were 
not  of  the  same  use  with  it.  True,  they  were 
both  to  wash  in ;  the  sea  to  wash  the  worshippers, 
but  the  lavers  to  wash  the  sacrifice.  '  He  made 
the  ten  lavers  to  wash  in  them  such  things  as  they 
offered  for  the  burnt-offering,  but  the  sea  was  for 
the  priests  to  wash  in.'  2  cu.  iv.  6.  2.  The  burnt- 
offering  was  a  type  of  the  body  of  Christ,  which  he 
once  offered  for  our  sins  ;  and  the  fire  on  which  the 
sacrifice  was  burned,  a  type  of  the  curse  of  the  law 
which  seized  on  Christ  when  he  gave  himself  a  ran- 
som for  us.  For,  therefore,  that  under  the  law 
was  called  the  burnt-offering,  because  of  the  burning 
upon  the  altar.  Le.  vi.  9. 

But  what,  then,  must  we  understand  by  these 
lavers,  and  by  this  sacrifice  being  washed  in  them, 
in  order  to  its  being  burned  upon  the  altar  ? 

I  answer,  Verily,  I  think  that  the  ten  lavers 
were  a  figure  of  the  ten  commandments ;  in  the 
purity  and  perfection  of  Christ's  obedience  to  which 
he  became  capable  of  being  made  a  burnt-offering, 
acceptable  to  God  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Christ 
was  made  under  the  law,  and  all  his  acts  of  obe- 
dience to  God  for  us  were  legal,  and  his  living  thus 
a  perfect  legal  life  was  his  washing  his  offering  in 
these  ten  lavers,  in  order  to  his  presenting  it  upon 
the  altar  for  our  sins.  The  lavers  went  upon  wheels, 
to  signify  walking  feet ;  and  Christ  walked  in  the 
law,  and  so  became  a  clean  offering  to  God  for  us. 
The  wheels  were  of  the  very  same  as  were  the 
lavers,  to  show  that  Christ's  obedience  to  the  law 
I  was  of  the  same,  as  to  length  and  breadth,  with 
its  commands  and  demands  to  their  utmost  tittle 
i  and  extent.     The  inwards  and  legs  of  the  burnt- 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


4^; 


offering  were  to  Le  washed  in  these  lavers,  Lc.  i.  9,  ! 
13.  sch.iv.6;  to  show  that  Christ  should  he  pure  J 
and  clean  in  heart  and  life. 

We  know  that  obedience,  whether  Christ's  or 
ours,  is  called  '  a  walking  in  the  way,'  typified  by 
the  lavers  walking  upon  their  wheels.  But  I  mean 
not  hy  Christ,  his  washing  of  his  offering,  that  he 
had  any  filtbinesa  cleaving  to  his  nature  or  ohe- 
dience; yet  this  I  say,  that  so  far  as  our  guilt  laid 
upon  him  could  impede,  so  far  he  wiped  it  off  by 
washing  in  these  lavers.  For  his  offering  was  to 
he  without  blemish,  and  without  spot  to  God. 
Hence  it  is  said,  he  sanctified  himself  in  order  to 
his  suffering.  '  And  being  made  perfect,  he  be- 
came the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them 
that  obey  him.'  Jn.  xvii.  19.  lie.  v.  g— lo. 

For  albeit  he  came  holy  into  the  world,  yet  that 
holiness  was  but  preparatory  to  that  by  which  he 
sanctified  himself,  in  order  to  his  suffering  for  sin. 
That,  then,  which  was  his  immediate  preparation 
for  his  suffering  was  his  obedience  to  the  law,  his 
washing  in  these  lavers.  lie,  then,  first  yielded 
complete  obedience  to  the  law  on  our  behalf,  and 
then,  as  so  qualified,  offered  his  washed  sacrifice 
for  our  sins  without  spot  to  God.  Thus,  therefore, 
he  was  our  burnt-offering  washed  in  the  ten  lavers, 
that  he  might,  according  to  law,  be  accepted  of 
the  Lord. 

And  he  set  five  of  the  lavers  on  the  right  side 
of  the  house,  and  five  of  them  on  the  left.  Thus 
were  the  ten  divided,  as  the  tables  of  the  law,  one 
showing  our  duty  towards  God,  the  other  our  duty 
towards  our  neighbour ;  in  both  which  the  burnt- 
offering  was  washed,  that  it  might  be  clean  in  both 
respects.  They  might  also  be  thus  placed,  the 
better  to  put  the  people  in  mind  of  the  necessity  of 
the  sanction  of  Christ  according  to  the  law,  in  order 
to  his  offering  of  himself  an  offering  to  God  for  us. 

XXXIX.  Of  the  talks  in  the  Temple. 

'  lie  made  also  ten  tables,  and  placed  them  in 
the  temple,  five  on  the  right  hand,1  and  five  on  the 

left. '  2  Cli.  iv.  8. 

Some,  if  not  all  of  these  tables,  so  far  as  I  can 
see,  were  they  on  which  the  burnt-offering  was  to 
be  cut  in  pieces,  in  order  to  its  burning. 

These  tables  were  made  of  stone,  of  hewn  stones, 
on  which  this  work  was  done.  Eze.  ri.  40—43.  Now, 
since  the  burnt-offering  was  a  figure  of  the  body 
of  Christ,  the  tables  on  which  this  sacrifice  was 
slain  must  needs,  I  think,  be  a  type  of  the  heart, 
the  stony  heart,  of  the  Jews.  For  had  they  not 
had  hearts  hard  as  an  adamant,  they  could  not 
have  done  that  thing. 

Upon  these  tables,  therefore,  was  the  death  of 


1  This  is  from  the  Genevan  or  puritan  versiou.     Our  trans- 
lation has  '  on  the  right  side.'—  (LvD.) 


Christ  contrived,  and  this  horrid  murder  acted ; 
even  upon  these  tables  of  stone.  In  that  they  are 
called  tables  of  hewn  stone,  it  may  be  to  show  that 
all  this  cruelty  was  acted  under  smooth  pretences, 
for  hewn  stones  are  smooth.  The  tables  were 
finely  wrought  with  tools,  even  as  the  heart  of  the 
Jews  were  with  hypocrisy.  But  alas,  they  were 
stone  still ;  that  is,  hard  and  cruel ;  else  they  could 
not  have  been  an  anvil  for  Satan  to  forge  such 
horrid  barbarism  upon.  The  tables  were  in  number 
the  same  with  the  lavers,  and  were  set  by  them  to 
show  what  are  the  fruits  of  being  devoted  to  the  law, 
as  the  Jews  were,  in  opposition  to  Christ  and  his 
holy  gospel.  There  flows  nothing  but  hardness  and 
a  stony  heart  from  thence.  This  was  showed  in  its 
first  writing;  it  was  writ  on  tables  of  stone,  figures 
of  the  heart  of  man ;  and  on  the  same  tables,  or 
hearts,  was  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  compassed. 

One  would  think  that  the  meekness,  gentleness, 
or  good  deeds  of  Jesus  Christ  might  have  procured 
in  them  some  relentings  when  they  were  about  to 
take  away  his  life ;  but  alas,  their  hearts  were 
tables  of  stone !  What  feeling  or  compassion  can 
a  stone  be  sensible  of  ?  Here  were  stony  hearts, 
stony  thoughts,  stony  counsels,  stony  contrivances, 
a  stony  law,  and  stony  hands ;  and  what  could  be 
expected  hence  but  barbarous  cruelty  indeed?  *  If 
I  ask  you,'  said  Christ,  'ye  will  not  answer  me, 
nor  let  me  go. '  Lu.  \x\\.  68. 

In  that  these  stony  tables  were  placed  about  the 
temple,  it  supposeth  that  they  were  temple-men, 
priests,  scribes,  rulers,  lawyers,  <fcc,  that  were  to 
be  the  chief  on  whose  hearts  this  murder  was  to 
be  designed,  and  by  them  enacted  to  their  own 
damnation  without  repentance. 

XL.   Of  the  instruments  wherewith  this  sacrifice  teas 

slain,  and  of  the  four  tables  they  icere  laid  on  in 

the  Temple. 

The  instruments  that  were  laid  upon  the  tables 
in  the  temple  were  not  instruments  of  music,  but 
those  with  which  the  burnt-offering  was  slain. 
'  And  the  four  tables  were  of  hewn  stone  for  the 
burnt-offering :  whereupou  also  they  laid  the  instru- 
ments wherewith  they  slew  the  burnt-offering  and 
the  sacrifice.'  Eze.  xi.  42,  43. 

Here  we  are  to  take  notice  that  the  tables  are 

the  same,  and  some  of  them  of  which  we  spake 

before.     That  the  instruments   with  which   they 

slew  the   sacrifice  were  laid  upon  these    tables. 

;  The  instruments  with  which  they  slew  the  sacri- 

!  fices,  what  were  they  but  a  bloody  axe,  blood/ 

knives,   bloody   hooks,  and   bloody  hand-;  ?     For 

j  these  we  need  no  proof ;  matter  of  fact  declares  it. 

But  what  were  those  instruments  a  type  of  ? 

Answ.  Doubtless  they  were  a  type  of  our  sins. 
They  were  the  bloody  axe,  the  knife,  and  bloody 
hands  that  shed  his  precious  blood.     They  we  10 


4SG 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


the  meritorious  ones,  without  which  he  could  not 
have  died.  When  I  say  ours,  I  mean  the  sins  of 
the  world.  Though,  then,  the  hearts  of  the  Jews 
were  the  immediate  contrivers,  yet  they  were  our 
sins  that  were  the  bloody  tools  or  instruments 
which  slew  the  Son  of  God.  •  He  was  wounded 
for  our  transgressions,  he  died  for  our  sins.'  is.liiL 

1  Co.  xv.  Ga.  i. 

0  the  instruments  of  us  churls,  hy  which  this 
poor  man  was  taken  from  off  the  earth!  is.  xxxii.  7. 
Pr.  xxx.  14.  The  whip,  the  buffetings,  the  crown  of 
thorns,  the  nails,  the  cross,  the  spear,  with  the 
vinegar  and  gall,  were  all  nothing  in  comparison 
of  our  sins.  '  For  the  transgression  of  my  people 
was  he  stricken.'  is.  mi.  8.  Nor  were  the  flouts, 
taunts,  mocks,  scorns,  derisions,  &c,  with  which 
they  followed  him  from  the  garden  to  the  cross, 
such  cruel  instruments  as  these.  They  were  our 
sins  then,  our  cursed  sins,  hy,  with,  and  for  the  sake 
of  which  the  Lord  Jesus  became  a  bloody  sacrifice. 

But  why  must  the  instruments  be  laid  upon  the 
tables  ? 

1.  Take  the  tables  for  the  hearts  of  the  mur- 
derers, and  the  instruments  for  their  sins,  and  what 
place  more  fit  for  such  instruments  to  be  laid  upon? 
It  is  God's  command  that  these  things  should  be 
laid  to  heart,  and  he  complains  of  those  that  do  not 

do  it.   Is.  xlii.  25;  Mi.  11. 

2.  Nor  are  men  ever  like  to  come  to  good,  until 
these  instruments  with  which  the  Son  of  God  was 
slain  indeed  be  laid  to  heart.  And  they  were 
eminently  laid  to  heart  even  by  them  soon  after  ; 
the  effect  of  which  was  the  conversion  of  thousands 

of  them.  Ac  ii.  36,  37. 

3.  Wherefore  when  it  says  these  instruments  must 
be  laid  upon  the  stony  tables,  he  insinuates,  that 
God  would  take  a  time  to  charge  the  murder  of  his 
Son  home  upon  the  consciences  of  them  that  did 
that  murder,  either  to  their  conversion  or  condem- 
nation. And  is  it  not  reason  that  they  who  did 
this  horrid  villany,  should  have  their  doings  laid 
before  their  faces  upon  the  tables  of  their  heart  ? 
That  they  may  look  upon  him  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  mourn.  Zee.  xii.  10.  Re.  i.  7. 

4.  But  these  instruments  were  laid  but  upon 
some  of  the  tables,  and  not  upon  all  the  ten,  to 
.•-how  that  not  all,  but  some  of  those,  so  horrid, 
should  find  mercy  of  the  Lord. 

5.  But  we  must  not  confine  these  tables  only  to 
the  hearts  of  the  bloody  Jews  ;  they  were  our  sins 
for  the  which  he  died.  Wherefore  these  instru- 
ments should  be  laid  upon  our  tables  too,  and  the 
Lord  lay  them  there  for  good,  that  we  also  may 
see  our  horrid  doings,  and  come  bending  to  him 
for  forgiveness  ! 

6.  These  instruments  thus  lying  on  the  tables  in 
the  temple,  became  a  continual  motive  to  God's 
people  to  repentance ;  for  so  oft  as  they  saw  these 


bloody  and  cruel  instruments,  they  were  put  in 
mind  how  their  sins  should  be  the  cause  of  the 
death  of  Christ. 

7.  It  would  be  well  also,  if  these  instruments 
were  at  all  times  laid  upon  our  tables,  for  our  more 
humbling  for  our  sins  in  every  thing  we  do,  espe- 
cially upon  the  Lord's  table,  when  we  eome  to  eat 
and  drink  before  him.  I  am  sure  the  Lord  Jesus 
cloth  more  than  intimate,  that  he  expects  that  we 
should  do  so,  where  he  saith,  When  ye  eat  that 
bread,  and  drink  that  cup,  do  this  in  remembrance 
of  me.  In  remembrance  that  I  died  for  your  sins, 
and  consequently  that  they  were  the  meritorious 
cause  of  the  shedding  of  my  blood. 

To  conclude.  Let  all  men  remember,  that  these 
cruel  instruments  are  laid  upon  the  table  of  their 
hearts,  whether  they  see  them  there  or  no.  '  The 
sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  and 
with  the  point  of  a  diamond  -  upon  the  table  of 
their  heart.'  Je  xvii.  l  A  pen  of  iron  will  make  let- 
ters upon  a  table  made  of  stone,  and  the  point  of 
a  diamond  will  make  letters  upon  glass.  Where- 
fore in  this  saying,  God  informs  us  that  if  we  shall 
forbear  to  read  these  lines  to  our  conversion,  God 
will  one  day  read  them  agaiust  us  unto  our  condem- 
nation. 

XL1.  Of  the  candlesticks  of  the  Temple. 

'  And  he  made  ten  candlesticks  of  gold,  accord- 
ing to  their  form,  and  set  them  in  the  temple,  five 
on  the  right  hand,  and  five  on  the  left.'  sch.iv.  7. 

These  candlesticks  were  made  of  gold,  to  show 
the  worth  and  value  of  them.  They  were  made 
after  the  form,  or  exact,  according  to  rule,  like 
those  that  were  made  in  the  tabernacle,  or  accord- 
ing to  the  pattern  which  David  gave  to  Solomon 
to  make  them  by.  Observe,  there  was  great  ex- 
actness in  these ;  and  need  there  was  of  this  hint, 
that  men  might  see  that  every  thing  will  not  pass 
for  a  right  ordered  candlestick  with  God.  Ex.  xxv. 

31—10.   1  Ch.  xxviii.  15. 

These  candlesticks  are  said  sometimes  to  be  ten, 
sometimes  seven,  and  sometimes  one ;  ten  here ; 
seven,  Re.  i.  12, 13,  and  one  in  Zee.  iv.1  Ten  is  a  note 
of  multitude,  and  seven  a  note  of  perfection,  and 
one  a  note  of  unity.  Now,  as  the  precious  stones 
with  which  the  house  was  garnished  were  a  type 
of  ministerial  gifts,  so  these  candlesticks  were  a 
type  of  those  that  were  to  be  the  churches  of  the 
New  Testament;  wherefore  he  says,  '  The  candle- 


1  The  candlesticks  mentioned  in  2  Ch.  iv.  7,  Zee.  iv.,  aud 
Re.  i.,  appeal-  to  have  been  of  one  pattern.  A  stein,  with  a 
howl  bearing  a  centre  and  six  branches — three  ou  each  side. 
Of  these  there  were  ten  in  the  temple.  The  prophets  Zechar- 
iah  and  John,  in  their  holy  visions,  saw  but  one,  with  its  seven 
lamps  secretly  supplied  by  living  olive  trees.  These  lights 
'are  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  which  run  to  and  fro  through  tho 
whole  earth  ;'  the  seven  lamps  '  are  the  seven  churches.'  Whiit 
a  source  for  reflection  is  here  opened. — (Ed.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE    SPIRITUALIZED. 


[■S7 


sticks  which  thou  sawest  arc  the  seven  cliurehes.' 

Be.  i.  12-20. 

1.  The  candlesticks  were  here  in  number  ten,  to 
show  that  Christ  under  the  New  Testament  would 
have  a  many  gospel-churches.  '  And  I,  if  I  he 
lifted  up  from  the  earth,'  saith  he,  'will  draw  all 
men  unto  me;'  that  is,  abundance.  For  the  chil- 
dren of  the  desolate,  that  is,  of  the  New  Testament 
church,  shall  be  many  more  than  they  of  the  Jews 

were.  Jn.  xii.  32.  Ga.  iv.  27. 

2.  In  that  the  candlesticks  were  set  by  the  lavers 
and  stony  tables,  it  might  be  to  show  us,  tiiat 
Christ's  churches  should  be  much  in  considering, 
that  Christ,  though  he  was  righteous,  yet  died  for 
our  sins  ;  though  his  life  was  according  to  the  holy 
law,  yet  our  stony  hearts  caused  him  to  die.  Yea, 
and  that  the  candlesticks  are  placed  there,  it  is  to 
show  us  also,  that  we  should  be  much  in  looking 
on  the  sins  by  which  we  caused  him  to  die ;  for 
the  candlesticks  were  set  by  those  tables  whereon 
they  laid  the  instruments  with  which  they  slew  the 
sacrifice. 

3.  These  candlesticks  being  made  according  to 
form,  seem  not  only  to  be  exact  as  to  fashion,  but 
also  as  to  work.  For  that  in  Exodus,  with  its  fur- 
niture, was  made  precisely  of  one  talent  of  gold, 
perhaps  to  show,  that  Christ's  true  spouse  is  not 
to  he  a  grain  more,  nor  a  dram  less,  but  just  the 
number  of  God's  elect.  This  is  Christ's  complete- 
ness, his  fulness;  one  more,  one  less,  would  make 
his  body  a  monster. 

4.  The  candlestick  was  to  hold  the  light,  and  to 
show  it  to  all  the  house ;  and  the  church  is  to  let 
her  light  so  shine  that  they  without  may  see  the 

light.   Mat.  v.  15,  16.   Ln.viii.l65  xi.  33;   xii.  35. 

5.  To  this  end  the  candlesticks  were  supplied 
with  oil-olive,  a  type  of  the  supply  that  the  church 
hath,  that  her  light  may  shine,  even  of  the  spirit 
of  grace. 

Xlill.  Of  the  lamps  belonging  to  the  candlesticks 
of  the  Temple. 

To  these  candlesticks  belonged  several  lamps, 
with  their  flowers  and  their  knops.  Ex.xxv.33.  2Ch.iv.2l. 

1.  These  lamps  were  types  of  that  profession 
that  the  members  of  the  church  do  make  of  Christ, 
whether  such  members  have  saving  grace  or  not. 

Mat.  xxv.  1-7. 

2.  These  lamps  were  beautified  with  knops  and 
flowers,  to  show  how  comely  and  beautiful  that 
professor  is,  that  adorns  bis  profession  with  a  suit- 
able life  and  conversation. 

3.  We  read  that  the  candlestick  in  Zechariah 
had  seven  lamps  belonging  to  it,  and  a  bowl  of 
golden  oil l  on  the  top ;  and  that  by  golden  pipes 


1  Oil  called  golden,  from  its  representing  that  which  is 
Letter  than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver.  So  pure  that,  in 
the  golden  bowl,  it  would  look  like  liquid  gold.— (Ed.) 


this  golden  oil  emptied  itself  into  the  lamps,  and 
all,  doubtless,  that  the  lamps  might  shine.  Zea.  iv.3,  IS, 

4.  Christ,  therefore,  who  is  the  hi^h-priest,  and 
to  whom  it  belongs  to  dress  the  lamps,  doth  dress 
them  accordingly.  But  now  there  are  a  lamp- 
carriers  of  two  sorts  ;  such  as  have  only  oil  in  their 
lamps,  and  such  as  have  oil  in  their  lamps  and 
vessels  too,  and  both  these  belong  to  the  church, 
and  in  both  these  Christ  will  be  glorified:  and  they 
should  have  their  proper  places  at  last.  They  that 
have  the  oil  of  grace  in  their  hearts,  as  well  as  a 
profession  of  Christ  in  their  hands,  they  shall  go 
in  with  him  to  the  wedding;  but  they  who  only 
make  a  profession,  and  have  not  oil  in  their  vessels, 
will  surely  miscarry  at  last.  Mat.  xxv. 

5.  Wherefore,  0  thou  professor !  thou  lamp-car- 
rier !  have  a  care  and  look  to  thyself;  content  not 
thyself  with  that  only  that  will  maintain  thee  in  a 
profession,  for  that  may  be  done  without  saving 
grace.  But  I  advise  thee  to  go  to  Aaron,  to  Christ, 
the  trimmer  of  our  lamps,  and  beg  thy  vessel  full 
of  oil  of  him — that  is,  grace — for  the  seasoning  of 
thy  heart,  that  thou  mayest  have  wherewith,  not 
only  to  hear  thee  up  now,  but  at  the  day  of  the 
bridegroom's  coming,  when  many  a  lamp  will  go 
out,  and  many  a  professor  be  left  in  the  dark;  for 
that  will  to  such  be  a  woeful  day.  Le.  xxiv.  2.  Mat.  xxv. 

Some  there  are  that  are  neither  for  lamps  nor  oil 
for  themselves ;  neither  are  they  pleased  if  they 
think  they  see  it  in  others.  But  they  that  have 
lamps  and  they  that  have  none,  and  they  which 
would  blow  out  other  folk's  light,  must  shortly 
appear  to  give  an  account  of  all  their  doings  to 
God".  And  then  they  shall  see  what  it  is  to  have 
oil  in  their  vessels  and  lamps :  and  what  it  is  to  be 
without  in  their  vessels,  though  it  is  in  their  lamps; 
and  what  a  dismal  thing  it  is  to  be  a  malignant2  to 
either;  but  at  present  let  this  suffice. 

XLIII.  Of  the  sheic-bread  on  tJie  golden  table  in  the 
Temple. 
There  was  also  shew-brcad  set  upon  a  golden 
table  in  the  temple.  lKi.vii.48.  The  shew-bread 
consisted  of  twelve  cakes  made  of  fine  flour,  two 
tenth  deals3  were  to  go  to  one  cake,  and  they  were 
to  be  set  in  order  in  two  rows  upon  the  pure  table. 

Le.  xxiv.  5—9. 

1.  These  twelve  loaves  to  me  do  seem  to  be  a 
type  of  the  twelve  tribes  under  the  law,  and  of  the 
children  of  God  under  the  gospel,  as  they  present 
themselves  before  God,  in  and  by  his  ordinances 
through  Christ.     Hence  the  apostle  says,  '  For  we 


2  A  malignant  was  a  term  of  reproach  given  to  those  who, 
in  the  civil  wars,  opposed  Divine  truth,  and  promoted  popery 
and  arbitrary  domination.  Clarendon  calls  it  '  a  term  imposed 
upon  those  that  the  puritans  wished  to  render  odious  to  the 
people.' — (Ed.) 

8  A  tenth  deal  is  the  tenth  part  of  a  Hebrew  measure, 
called  the  ephah,  containing  about  a  bushel. —  (Ed  ) 


488 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


being  many  are  one  bread,'  &c.  1  Co.  x.  17.  For  so 
were  the  twelve  cakes,  though  twelve ;  and  so  are 
the  gospel-saints,  though  many ;  for  '  we,  being 
many,  are  one  body  in  Christ.'  Ro.  xii.  5. 

2.  But  they  were  a  type  of  the  true  church,  not 
of  the  false.  For  Ephraim,  who  was  the  head  of 
the  ten  tribes  in  their  apostacy,  is  rejected,  as  '  a 
cake  not  turned.'  Indeed  he  is  called  a  cake,  as  a 
false  church  may  be  called  a  church :  but  he  is 
called  'a  cake  not  turned,'  as  a  false  church  is  not 
prepared  for  God,  nor  fit  to  be  set  on  the  golden 
table  before  him.  Ho.  vii.  8. 

3.  These  cakes  or  shew-bread  were  to  have 
frankincense  strewed  upon  them,  as  they  stood 
upon  the  golden  table,  which  was  a  type  of  the 
sweet  perfumes  of  the  sanctifications  of  the  Holy 
Ghost;  to  which  I  think  Paul  alludes,  when  he 
says,  '  The  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might  be 
acceptable '  to  God,  '  being  sanctified  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.'  Ro.  xv.  16. 

4.  They  were  to  be  set  upon  the  pure  table,  new 
and  hot;  to  show  that  God  delighted  in  the  com- 
pany of  new  and  warm  believers.  '  I  remember 
thee,  the  kindness  of  thy  youth:'  'when  Israel  was 
a  child,  then  I  loved  him.'  Je.u. 2.  Ho.  xi.  1.  Men  at 
first  conversion  are  like  to  a  cake  well  baked,  and 
new  taken  from  the  oven;  they  are  warm,  and  cast 
forth  a  very  fragrant  scent,  especially  when,  as 
warm,  sweet  incense  is  strewed  upon  them. 

5.  When  the  shew-bread  was  old  and  stale,  it 
was  to  be  taken  away,  and  new  and  warm  put  in 
its  place,  to  show  that  God  has  but  little  delight 
in  the  service  of  his  own  people  when  their  duties 
grow  stale  and  mouldy.  Therefore  he  removed 
his  old,  stale,  mouldy  church  of  the  Jews  from  be- 
fore him,  and  set  in  their  rooms  upon  the  golden 
table  the  warm  church  of  the  Gentiles. 

6.  The  shew-bread,  by  an  often  remove  and  re- 
newing, was  continually  to  all  them  before  the  Lord  \ 
in  his  house,  to  show  us,  that  always,  as  long  as 
ordinances  shall  be  of  use,  God  will  have  a  new, 
warm,  and  sanctified  people  to  worship  him. 

7.  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  to  eat  the  old  shew- 
bread,  to  show  that  when  saints  have  lived  in  the 
world  as  long  as  living  is  good  for  them,  and  when 
they  can  do  no  more  service  for  God  in  the  world, 
they  shall  yet  be  accepted  of  Jesus  Christ;  and 
that  it  shall  be  as  meat  and  drink  to  him  to  save 
them  from  all  their  unworthinesses. 

8.  The  new  shew  bread  was  to  be  set  even  on 
the  Sabbath  before  the  Lord,  to  show  with  what 
warmth  of  love  and  affections  God's  servants 
should  approach  his  presence  upon  his  holy  day. 

XLIV.  Of  Ike  snuffers  belonging  to  the  candlesticks 
and  lamjos  of  the  Temple. 

As  there  were  candlesticks  and  lamps,  so  there 
were  snuffers  also  prepared  for  these  in  the  temple 


of  the  Lord.  '  And  the  snuffers  were  snuffers  of 
gold.'  1  Ki.  vii.  50.  1.  Snuffers.      The  use  of  snuf- 

fers is  to  trim  the  lamps  and  candles,  that  their 
lights  may  shine  the  brighter.  2.  Snuffers,  you 
know,  are  biting,  pinching  things ;  but  use  them 
well,  and  they  will  prove  not  only  beneficial  to 
those  within  the  house,  but  profitable  to  the  lights. 

Snuffers,  you  may  say,  of  what  were  they  a 
type? 

Answ.  If  our  snuffs  are  our  superfluities  of 
riaughtiness,  our  snuffers  then  are  those  righteous 
reproofs,  rebukes,  and  admonitions,  which  Christ 
has  ordained  to  be  in  his  house  for  good ;  or,  as 
the  apostle  hath  it,  for  our  edification ;  and  per- 
haps Paul  alludes  to  these  when  he  bids  Titus  to 
rebuke  the  Cretians  sharply,  that  they  might  be 
sound  in  the  faith.  Tit.  i.  12, 13.  As  who  should  say, 
they  must  use  the  snuffers  of  the  temple  to  trim 
their  lights  withal,  if  they  burn  not  well.  These 
snuffers  therefore  are  of  great  use  in  the  temple 
of  God ;  only,  as  I  said,  they  must  be  used  wisely. 
It  is  not  for  every  fool  to  handle  snuffers  at  or 
about  the  candles,  lest  perhaps,  instead  of  mend- 
ing the  light,  they  put  the  candle  out.  And 
therefore  Paul  bids  them  that  are  spiritual  do  it. 
Ga.  vi.  1.  My  reason  tells  me,  that  if  I  use  these 
snuffers  as  I  should,  I  must  not  only  endeavour  to 
take  the  superfluous  snuff  away,  but  so  to  do  it, 
that  the  light  thereby  may  be  mended ;  which 
then  is  done  if,  as  the  apostle  saith,  I  use  sharp- 
ness to  edification,  and  not  for  destruction.   1  Co.  v. 

4,  5.  2  Co.  xiii.  10. 

Are  not  the  seven  churches  in  Asia  called  by 
name  of  candlesticks?  And  why  candlesticks,  if 
they  were  not  to  hold  the  candles  ?  And  candles 
must  have  snuffers  therewith  to  trim  the  lights. 
And  Christ,  who  is  our  true  Aaron,  in  those  re- 
bukes which  he  gave  those  churches,  alluding  to 
these  snuffers,  did  it  that  their  lights  might  shine 
the  brighter.  Re.  ii.  iii.  Wherefore,  as  he  used  them, 
he  did  it  still  with  caution  to  their  light,  that  it 
might  not  be  impaired.  For  as  he  still  thus 
trimmed  these  lamps,  he  yet  encouraged  what  he 
saw  would  shine  if  helped.  He  only  nipt  the  snuff 
away. 

Thus,  therefore,  he  came  to  them  with  these 
snuffers  in  his  hand,  and  trimmed  their  lamps  and 
candlesticks.  Re.  fi.  4, 20j  iii.  2, 15.  This  should  teach 
ministers,  to  whom  it  belongs  under  Christ  to  use 
the  snuffers  well.  Strike  at  the  snuff,  not  at  the 
light,  in  all  your  rebukes  and  admonitions  ;  snuff 
not  your  lamps  of  a  private  revenge,  but  "of  a  de- 
sign to  nourish  grace  and  gifts  in  churches.  Thus 
our  Lord  himself  says  he  did,  in  his  using  of  these 
snuffers  about  these  candlesticks.  'As  many,' 
saith  he,  'as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten;  be 
zealous  therefore,  and  repent.'  Re. iiL19. 

To  conclude ;   Watchman,   watch,   and   let   not 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


439 


your  snuffs  be  too  long,  nor  pull  them  off  with  j 
your  fingers,  or  carnal  reasonings,  hut  with  godly  ! 
admonitions,  &c.      Use  your  snuffers  graciously, 
curb   vice,  nourish  virtue ;  so  you  will  use  them 
well,  and  so  your  light  will  shine  to  the  glory  of 
God.1 

XLV.  O/tlie  snvff-duslies  that  were  with  the  snuffers 
in  the  Temple. 

As  there  were  snuffers,  so  there  were  also  snuff- 
dishes  in  the  temple ;  '  and  they  were  also  made 

of    gold.'     Ex.   xxv.  38;  xxxvii.  -j:!.    Nu.  iv.  9.        The     Sliuff- 

dishes  were  those  in  which  the  snuffs  were  put 
when  snuffed  off,  and  by  which  they  were  carried 
forth  of  the  temple.  They  therefore,  as  the  snuf- 
fers are,  are  of  great  use  in  the  temple  of  God. 
1.  By  them  the  golden  floor  of  the  temple  is  kept 
from  being  daubed  by  the  snuffs.  2.  By  them 
also  the  clean  hands  of  those  that  worship  there 
are  kept  from  being  defiled.  3.  By  them  also  the 
stinks  of  the  snulfs  are  soonest  suppressed  in  the 
temple  ;  and  consequently  the  tender  noses  of  them 
that  worship  there  preserved  from  being  offended. 

Snuffs,  you  know,  are  daubing  things,  stinking 
things,  nauseous  things ;  therefore  we  must  take 
heed  that  they  touch  not  this  floor  on  which  we 
walk,  nor  defile  the  hands  which  we  lift  up  to  God, 
when  we  come  to  worship  him.  But  how  must 
this  be  done,  but  as  we  take  them  off  with  the 
snuffers,  and  put  them  in  these  snuff-dishes?  Some 
are  for  being  at  the  snuffs  with  their  fingers,  and 
will  also  cast  them  at  their  feet,  and  daub  the  floor 
of  God's  holy  house  ;  but  usually  such  do  burn  as 
well  as  defile  themselves.  But  is  it  not  a  shame 
for  a  man  to  defile  himself  with  that  vice  which  he 
rehuketh  in  another?  Let  us  then,  while  we  are 
taking  away  the  snuffs  of  others,  hate  even  the 
garment  spotted  by  the  flesh,  and  labour  to  carry 
such  stink  with  the  snuff  dishes  out  of  the  temple 
of  God. 

Snuff-dishes,  you  may  say,  what  are  they? 

I  answer,  If  sins  are  the  snuffs,  and  rebukes 
and  admonitions  the  snuffers ;  then,  methinks,  re- 
pentance, or,  in  case  that  be  wanting,  the  censures 
of  the  church,  should  be  the  snuff-dishes.  Hence, 
repentance  is  called  a  church-cleansing  grace,  and 
the  censures  of  the  church  a  purging  out  of  the 
old  leaven,  and  making  it  a  new  lump,  l  Co.  v.  2. 
2  Co.  vii.  n. 

Ah!  were  these  snuff-dishes  more  of  use  in  the 
churches,  we  should  not  have  this  man's  snuff 
defile  that  man's  fingers  as  it  doth.      Nor  would 


1  Daniel  Bunress  published  a  curious  sermon,  iu  1 697,  on 
the  golden  snuffers,  showing  that  they  are  a  type  or  emblem 
of  spiritual  snuffing  or  reproving ;  and  of  pure  gold,  to  show 
that  reprovers  shuiild  be  holy  and  unblameable.  His  direc- 
tions and  cautions  are  valuable,  but  Bun  van  says  much  more 
in  his  few  lines  than  Burgess  does  in  his  eighty  pages. —  (En.) 

VOL.  III. 


the  temple  of  God  be  so  besmeared  with  these 
snuffs,  and  be  daubed  as  it  is. 

Ah!  snuffs  pulled  off,  lie  still  in  the  temple- 
floor,  and  there  stink,  and  defile  both  feet  and 
fingers,  both  the  callings  and  conversations  of 
temple-worshippers,  to  the  disparaging  of  religion, 
and  the  making  of  religious  worship  hut  of  low 
esteem  with  men;  and  all,  I  say,  for  want  of  the 
due  use  of  these  snuffers,  and  these  snuff-dishes, 
there.  Nay,  are  not  whole  churches  now  defiled 
with  those  very  snuffs,  that  long  since  were  plucked 
off,  and  all  for  want  of  the  use  of  these  snuff- 
dishes,  according  to  the  Lord's  commandment. 
For  you  must  know,  that  reproof  and  admonitions 
are  but  of  small  use,  where  repentance,  or  church- 
censures,  are  not  thereto  annexed.  When  mini- 
sters use  the  snuffers,  the  people  should  hold  the 
snuff-dishes. 

Round  reproofs  for  sin,  when  they  light  upon 
penitent  hearts,  then  brave  work  is  in  the  church: 
then  the  snuff  is  not  only  pulled  away,  but  carried 
out  of  the  temple  of  God  aright,  <fcc.  And  now 
the  worship  and  worshippers  shine  like  gold.  'As 
an  ear-ring  of  gold,  and  an  ornament  of  fine  gold, 
so  is  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obedient  ear.'  Pr.  xxv.  12. 

Ministers,  it  appertains  to  you  to  use  the  snuffers, 
and  to  teach  the  people  to  hold  the  snuff-dishes 
right.  Ac.  xx.  20,  81.  2  Ti.  iv.  2.  We  must  often  be  snuffed 
with  these  snuffers,  or  our  light  will  burn  but 
dimly,  our  candle  will  also  waste.  Pray,  therefore, 
0  men  of  God,  look  diligently  to  your  people. 
Snuff  them  as  you  see  there  is  need;  but  touch 
not  their  snuff  with  your  white  fingers ;  a  little 
smutch  on  YOU  will  be  seen  a  great  way.  Re- 
member also  that  you  leave  them  nowhere,  but 
with  these  snuff-dishes,  that  the  temple  may  be 
cleared  of  them.  Do  with  the  snuff  as  the  neat 
housewife  doth  with  the  toad  which  she  finds  in 
her  garden.  She  takes  the  fork,  or  a  pair  of  tongs, 
and  therewith  doth  throw  it  over  the  pales.  Ca>t 
them  away,  I  say,  with  fear,  zeal,  care,  revenge, 
and  with  great  indignation,  and  then  your  church, 
your  conversation,  your  fingers,  and  all,  will  be 
kept  white  and  clean.    2  Co.  vii.  11. 

XL  VI.  Of  the  golden  tongs  belonging  to  the  Temple. 

There  were  also  tongs  of  gold  used  in  the  temple 
of  old.  1  Ki.  vii.  49.  1.  These  tongs  were  used  about 
the  altar,  to  order  the  fire  there.  2.  They  were 
used  too  about  the  candlestick,  and  are  therefore 
called  His  tongs.  3.  Perhaps  there  were  tongs 
for  both  these  services ;  hut  of  that  the  word  is 
silent. 

But  what  were  they  used  about  the  candlestick 
to  do? 

Answ.  To  take  holy  fire  from  off  the  altar  to 
light  the  lamps  withal.  For  the  fire  of  the  temple 
was  holy  fire,  such  as  at  first  was  kindled  from 


490 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


heaven,  and  when  kindled,  maintained  by  the 
priests,  and  of  that  the  lamps  were  lighted.  Le.ix.34. 
2  Ch.  vii.  l.  Nor  was  there,  upon  pain  of  death,  any 
other  fire  to  be  used  there.  Lc  x.  l,  2.  These  tongs, 
therefore,  were  used  to  take  fire  from  off  the  altar 
to  light  the  lamps  and  candlesticks  withal.  For 
to  trim  the  lights,  and  to  dress  the  lamps,  was 
Aaron's  work  day  by  day.  He  shall  light  and 
order  the  lamps  upon  the  pure  candlestick  before 
the  Lord,  and  Aaron  did  so.  He  lighted  the  seven 
lamps  thereof,   as  the   Lord   commanded  Moses. 

Ex.  x.  24,  25.  Le.  xxiv.  2,  3.  Nu.  viii.  3.      What   is   a    lamp    or 

candlestick  to  us,  if  there  be  not  light  thereon; 
and  how  lighted  without  fire,  and  how  shall  we 
take  up  coals  to  light  the  lamps  withal,  if  we  have 
not  tongs  prepared  for  that  purpose?  With  these 
tongs  fire  also  was  taken  from  off  the  altar,  and 
put  into  the  censers  to  burn  sweet  incense  with, 
before  the  Lord.  The  tongs  then  were  of  great 
use  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord. 

But  what  were  the  tongs  a  type  of? 

The  altar  was  a  type  of  Christ;  the  fire  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  and  these  tongues  were  a  type  of  that 
holy  hand  of  God's  grace,  by  which  the  coals,  or 
several  dispensations  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
are  taken  and  given  to  the  church,  and  to  her 
members,  for  her  work  and  profit  in  this  world. 

Tongs,  we  know,  are  used  instead  of  fingers; 
wherefore  Aaron's  golden  tongs  were  a  type  of 
Christ's  golden  fingers.  Ca  v.  14.  Isaiah  saith  that 
one  of  the  seraphims  flew  to  him  with  '  a  live  coal 
in  his  hand,  which  he  had  taken  with  the  tongs 
from  off  the  altar.'  Here  the  type  and  antitype, 
to  wit,  tongs  and  hand,  are  put  together,  is.  vi.  c. 
But  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  treating  of  like  matters, 
quite  waives  the  type,  the  tongs,  and  speaketh  only 
of  this  holy  hand ;  '  And  he  spake  unto  the  man 
clothed  with  linen,  and  said,  Go  in  between  the 
wheels  under  the  cherub ' — where  the  mercy-seat 
stood,  Avhere  God  dwelt,  Ex.  xxv.  rs.  lxxx.  1 ; — '  and 
fill  thy  hand  with  coals  of  fire  from  between  the 
cherubims.'  Eze.  x.  2. 

Thus  you  see  our  golden  tongs  are  now  turned 
into  a  golden  hand ;  into  the  golden  hand  of  the 
man  clothed  in  linen,  which  is  Jesus  Christ,  who 
at  his  ascension  received  of  God  the  Father  the 
Spirit  in  all  fulness,  to  give,  as  his  divine  wisdom 
knew  was  best,  the  several  coals  or  dispensations 
thereof  unto  his  church,  for  his  praise,  and  her 
edification.  Mat.  iiL  n.  Ac.  ii.  It  is  by  this  hand  also 
that  this  holy  fire  is  put  into  our  censers.  It  is 
this  hand  also  that  takes  this  coal,  therewith  to 
touch  the  lips  of  ministers,  that  their  words  may 
warm  like  fire ;  and  it  is  by  this  hand  that  the 
Spirit  is  given  to  the  churches,  as  returns  of  their 

holy  prayers.    Lu.  xi.  9-13.  Ko.  viii.  26.  Re.  viii.  5. 

It  was  convenient  that  the  fire  in  the  temple 
should  be  disposed  of  by  golden  tongs ;  but  the 


Holy  Ghost,  by  the  golden  hand  of  Christ's  grace, 
for  that  can  wittingly  dispose  of  it,  according  as 
men  and  things  are  placed,  and  to  do  and  be  done 
in  the  churches;  wherefore  he  adds,  'And  one 
cherub  stretched  forth  his  hand  from  between  the 
cherubims,  unto  the  fire  that  was  between  the 
cherubims,  and  took  thereof,  and  put  ii  into  the 
hands  of  him  that  was  clothed  with  linen,  who  took 
it  and  went  out.'  Eze.  x.  7. 

By  this  hand,  then,  by  this  Man's  hand,  the 
coals  of  the  altar  are  disposed  of,  both  to  the 
lamps,  the  candlesticks,  the  censers,  and  the  lips 
of  ministers,  according  to  his  own  good  pleasure. 
And  of  all  this  were  the  tongs  in  the  temple  a  type. 

XLVII.  Of  the  altar  of  incense  in  the  Temple. 

The  alter  of  incense  was  made  first  for  the 
tabernacle,  and  that  of  shittim  wood  ;  but  it  was 
made  for  the  temple  of  cedar,  and  it  was  to  be 
set  before  the  veil,  that  is,  by  the  ark  of  the  tes- 
timony, before  the  mercy-seat;  that  is,  at  the 
entering  of  the  holiest,  but  not  within.  And  the 
priest  was  to  approach  it  every  morning,  which, 
as  to  the  holiest,  he  might  not  do.  Besides,  when 
he  went  in  to  make  an  atonement,  he  was  to  take 
fire  from  off  that  altar  to  burn  his  incense  within 
the  holy  place.  Ex.  xxx.  l— in.   Le.  xvi.  18. 

1.  It  was  called  the  golden  altar,  because  it  was 
overlaid  with  pure  gold.  This  altar  was  not  for 
burnt-offering,  as  the  brazen  altar  was ;  nor  for 
the  meat-offering,  nor  the  drink-offering,  but  to 
burn  incense  thereon.  Ex.  xxx.  7.  Which  sweet 
incense  was  a  type  of  grace  and  prayer.  Ps.  cxU.  ii. 

2.  Incense,  or  that  called  incense  here,  was  not 
a  simple  but  a  compound,  made  up  of  sweet  spices 
called  stacle,  onycha,  and  galhanmn ;  and  these 
three,  may  answer  to  these  three  parts  of  this 
duty,  to  wit,  prayer,  supplication,  and  intercession. 

Ex.  xxx.  34—37 ;  xxxvii.  29.    1  Ti.  ii.  1. 

3.  This  incense  was  to  be  burned  upon  the  altar 
every  morning ;  upon  that  altar  which  was  called 
the  altar  of  incense,  which  was  before  the  veil;  to 
show  that  it  is  our  duty  every  morning  to  make 
our  prayer  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ  before  the 
veil ;  that  is,  before  the  door  of  heaven,  and  there 
to  seek,  knock,  and  ask  for  what  we  need,  accord- 
ing to  the  word.   Lu.  xi.  9—13. 

4.  This  incense  was  to  be  kindled  every  morn- 
ing, to  show  how  He  continueth  interceding  for 
us,  and  also  that  all  true  praise  of  men  to  God  is 
by  the  work,  the  renewed  work,  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
upon  our  hearts.  Ko.  viii.  26. 

5.  Incense,  as  you  see,  was  made  of  sweet 
spices,  such  as  were  gummy,  and  so  apt  to  burn 
with  a  smoke,  to  show,  that  not  cold  and  flat,  but 
hot  and  fervent,  is  the  prayer  that  flows  from  the 
spirit  of  faith  and  grace.   Zee.  xii.  10.  Je.  v.  16. 

6.  The  smoke  of  this  incense  was  very  sweet 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


491 


nud  savoury,  lite  pleasant  perfume,  to  show  how 
delightful  and  acceptable  the  very  sound  and  noise 
of  right  prayer  is  unto  the  nostrils  of  the  living 
God,  because  it  comes  from  a  broken  heart,   rs.  n. 

17.    Ca.  ii.  14. 

7.  This  incense  was  to  be  offered  upon  the 
golden  altar,  to  show  us  that  no  prayer  is  accepted 
but  what  is  directed  to  God  in  the  name  of  his 
holy  and  blessed  Son  our  Saviour.  iPe.  ii.  5.  He.  xlil.  15. 

8.  They  were  commanded  to  burn  incense  every 
morning  upon  this  altar,  to  show  that  God  is  never 
weary  of  the  godly  prayers  of  his  people.  It  also 
showeth  that  we  need  every  day  to  go  to  God  for 
fresh  supplies  of  grace  to  carry  us  through  this 
evil  world. 

9.  This  altar,  though  it  stood  without  the  veil, 
to  teach  us  to  live  by  faith,  and  to  make  use  of 
the  name  of  Christ,  as  we  find  it  recorded  in  the 
first  temple,  yet  was  placed  so  nigh  unto  the 
holiest,  that  the  smell  of  the  smoke  might  go  in 
thither ;  to  show  that  it  is  not  distance  of  place 
that  can  keep  the  voice  of  true  prayer  from  our 
God,  the  God  of  heaven;  but  that  he  will  be  taken 
with  what  we  ask  for  according  to  his  word.  It 
stood,  I  say,  nigh  the  veil,  nigh  the  holiest;  and 
he  that  burnt  incense  there,  did  make  his  approach 
to  God.  Hence  the  Psalmist,  when  he  spake  of 
praying,  saith,  '  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to 

God.'  Ps  lxxiii.  28.    He.  x.  22. 

10.  This  altar  thus  placed  did  front  the  ark 
within  the  veil ;  to  put  us  in  mind  that  the  law  is 
kept  therein  from  hurting  us ;  to  let  us  know  also 
that  the  mercy-seat  is  above,  upon  the  ark,  and 
that  God  doth  sit  thereon,  with  his  pardon  in  his 
hand  to  save  us.  0 !  what  speaking  things  are 
types,  shadows,  and  parables,  had  we  but  eyes  to 
see,  had  we  but  ears  to  hear  !  He  that  did  ap- 
proach the  altar  with  incense  of  old  aright — and 
then  he  did  so  when  he  approached  it  by  Aaron, 
his  high-priest — pleased  God  ;  how  much  more 
shall  we  have  both  person  and  prayers  accepted, 
and  a  grant  of  what  we  need,  if  indeed  we  come 
as  we  should  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  But  take 
heed  you  approach  not  to  a  wrong  altar  ;  take 
heed  also  that  you  come  not  with  strange  fire;  for 
they  are  dangerous  things,  and  cause  the  worship- 
pers to  miss  of  what  they  would  enjoy.  But  more 
of  this  in  the  next  particular. 

XLVIII.   Of  the  golden  censers  belonging  to  the 
Temple. 

There  were  also  golden  censers  belonging  to  the 
temple,  and  they  were  either  such  as  belonged  to 
the  sons  of  Levi  in  general,  or  that  were  for  Aaron 
and  his  sons  in  special.  No.  *vi  c,  n.is.  The  censers 
of  the  Levites  were  a  type  of  ours ;  but  the  censer 
of  Aaron  was  a  type  of  Christ's.  The  censers,  as 
was  hinted  before,  were  for  this  use  in  the  temple, 


namely,  to  hold  the  holy  fire  in,  on  which  incense 
was  to  be  burned  before  the  Lord.  Le.  x.  l,  2. 

These  censers  then  were  types  of  hearts.  Aaron's 
golden  one  was  a  type  of  Christ's  golden  heart, 
and  the  censers  of  the  Levites  were  types  of  other 
worshippers'  hearts.  The  fire  also  which  was  put 
therein  was  a  type  of  that  Spirit  by  which  we  pray, 
and  the  incense  that  burnt  thereon,  a  type  of  our 
desires.  Of  Christ's  censer  we  read,  Revelations 
the  eighth,  which  is  always  filled  with  much  in- 
cense ;  that  is,  with  continual  intercessions,  which 
he  offereth  to  God  for  us  ;  and  from  whence  also 
there  always  goes  a  cloud  of  sweet  savour,  cover- 
ing the  mercy-seat.   Le.nri.lS.    He.vii.26.    Re.viii.  3,4. 

But  to  speak  of  the  censers,  and  fire,  and  in- 
cense of  the  worshippers;  for  albeit  they  were  all 
put  under  one  rule,  that  is,  to  be  according  to  law, 
yet  oftentimes,  as  were  the  worshippers,  such  were 
the  censers,  fire,  and  incense.  1.  Hence  the  two 
hundred  and  fifty  censers  with  which  Korah  and 
his  company  offered,  are  called  the  censers  of  sin- 
ners ;  for  they  came  with  wicked  hearts  then  to 
burn  incense  before  the  Lord.  Nu.  xvi.  17, 37.  2. 
Again,  as  the  censers  of  these  men  were  called  the 
censers  of  sinners,  showing  they  came  at  that  time 
to  God  with  naughty  hearts,  so  the  fire  that  was 
in  Nadab  and  Abihu's  censers  is  called  strange 
fire,  which  the  Lord  commanded  them  not.  Le.  x.  1. 
3.  This  strange  fire  was  a  type  of  that  strange 
spirit  opposed  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  and  by 
which,  notwithstanding,  some  adventure  to  perform 
worship  to  God.  4.  Again,  as  these  censers  are 
called  the  censers  of  sinners,  and  this  fire  called 
strange  fire,  so  the  incense  of  such  is  also  called 
strange,   and  is  said  to  be  an  abomination  unto 

God.  Ex.  xxx.  9.     Is.  i.  13 ;  lxvi.  3. 

Thus  you  see  that  both  the  censers,  fire,  and 
incense  of  some  is  rejected,  even  as  the  heart, 
spirit,  and  prayer  of  sinners  are  an  abomination 

UlltO  God.  Ho.  vii.  14  ;  iv.  12  ;  v.  4.     Pr.  xxviii.  9. 

But  there  were  besides  these  true  censers,  holy 
fire  and  sweet  incense  among  the  worshippers  in 
the  temple,  and  their  service  was  accepted  by 
Aaron  their  high-priest;  for  that  was  through  the 
faith  of  Christ,  and  these  were  a  type  of  our  true 
gospel  worshippers,  who  come  with  holy  hearts, 
the  holy  spirit,  and  holy  desires  before  their  God, 
by  their  Redeemer.  These  are  a  perfume  in  hid 
nose.  '  The  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight.' 
Pr.  xv.  8.  Their  prayers  went  up  like  'incense,  and 
the  lifting  up  of  their  hands  as  the  evening  sacri- 
fice.' Ps.  c.\li.  2. 

Let  them  then  that  pretend  to  worship  before 
God  in  his  holy  temple  look  to  it,  that  both  their 
censers,  fire,  and  incense,  heart,  spirit,  and  desires, 
be  such  as  the  word  requires ;  lest,  instead  of  re- 
ceiving of  gracious  returns  from  the  God  of  heaven, 
their  censers  be  laid  up  against  them;    lest  the 


493 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


fire  of  God  devours  them,  and  their  incense  become 
an  abomination  to  him,  as  it  happened  to  those 
made  mention  of  before. 

But  it  is  said  the  censers  of  Korah  and  his  com- 
pany "was  hallowed. 

Answ.  So  is  God's  'worship,  which  is  so  his  by 
his  ordination,  yet  even  that  very  worship  may  be 
spoiled  by  man's  transgression.  Prayer  is  God's 
ordinance,  but  all  prayer  is  not  accepted  of  God. 
We  must  then  distinguish  between  the  thing  com- 
manded, and  our  using  of  that  thing.  The  temple 
was  God's  house,  but  was  abused  by  the  irreverence 
of  those  that  worshipped  there,  even  to  the  demol- 
ishing of  it. 

A  golden  censer  is  a  gracious  heart,  heavenly 
fire  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sweet  incense  the  effec- 
tual fervent  prayer  of  faith.  Have  you  these  ? 
These  God  expects,  and  these  you  must  have  if 
ever  your  persons  or  performances  be  of  God 
accepted. 

XLIX.  Of  the  golden  spoons  of  the  Temple. 

1.  The  golden  spoons  belonging  to  the  temple 
were  in  number,  according  to  Moses,  twelve ; 
answering  to  the  twelve  tribes.  Nu.  vii.  86.  But 
when  the  temple  was  built,  I  suppose  they  were 
more,  because  of  the  number  of  the  basons. 

2.  The  spoons,  as  I  suppose,  were  for  the  wor- 
shippers in  the  temple  to  eat  that  broth  -withal, 
wherein  the  trespass-offerings  were  boiled :  for 
which  purpose  there  were  several  cauldrons  hanged 
in  the  corners  of  that  court  called  the  priest's  to 

boil  them  in.    1  Sa.  ii.  13,  14.     Eze.  xlvi.  19,  20. 

3.  Now,  in  that  he  saith  here  were  spoons, 
what  is  it  but  that  there  are  also  babe3  in  the 
temple  of  the  Lord.  There  was  broth  for  babes 
as  well  as  meat  for  men,  and  spoons  to  eat  the 
broth  withal. 

4.  True,  the  gospel  being  more  excellent  than 
the  law,  doth  change  the  term,  and  instead  of 
broth,  saith,  There  is  milk  for  babes.  But  in  that 
he  saith  milk,  he  insinuates  there  are  spoons  for 
children  in  the  church. 

5.  'I  could  not,'  saith  Paul  to  them  at  Corinth, 
'  speak  to  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal, 
even  as  unto  babes  in  Christ.  I  have  fed  you  with 
milk  and  not  with  meat ;  for  hitherto  ye  were  not 
able  to  bear  it,  neither  yet  now  are  ye  able.'  l  Co. 

iii.  1,  2. 

6.  See,  here  were  need  of  spoons,  milk  is  spoon 
meat ;  for  here  were  those  which  could  not  feed 
themselves  with  milk,  let  them  then  that  are  men 
eat  the  strong  meat.  •  For  every  one  that  useth 
milk  is  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteousness,  for 
he  is  a  babe.  But  strong  meat  belongeth  to  them 
that  are  of  full  age,  even  those  who,  by  reason  of 
use,  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both 
good  and  evil.'  He.  v.  iu,  i*. 


7.  Spoons,  you  know,  are  to  feed  us  with  weak 
and  thin  food,  even  with  that  which  best  suitetli 
with  weak  stomachs,  or  with  a  babyish  temper. 
Hence,  as  the  strong  man  is  opposed  to  the  weak, 
so  the  milk  is  opposed  to  the  strong  meat. 

8.  So  then,  though  the  babe  in  Christ  is  weaker 
than  the  man  in  Christ,  yet  is  he  not  by  Christ  left 
unprovided  for;  for  here  is  milk  for  babes,  and 
spoons  to  eat  it  with.  All  this  is  taught  us  by 
the  spoons;  for  what  need  is  there  of  spoons  where 
there  is  nothing  to  eat  but  strong  meat  ? 

9.  Babes,  you  know,  have  not  only  babyish 
stomachs,  but  also  babyish  tricks,  and  must  be 
dealt  withal  as  babes;  their  childish  talk  and 
frompered  carriages  must  be  borne  withal. 

10.  Sometimes  they  cry  for  nothing,  yea,  and 
count  them  for  their  foes  which  rebuke  their 
childish  toys  and  ways.  All  which  the  church 
must  bear,  because  they  are  God's  babes;  yea, 
they  must  feed  them  too :  for  if  he  has  found  them 
milk  and  spoons,  it  is  that  they  may  be  fed  there- 
with, and  live :  yea,  grown  ministers  are  God's 
nurses,  wherefore  they  must  have  a  lap  to  lay  them 
in,  and  knees  to  dandle  them  upon,  and  spoons  to 
feed  them  with.1 

11.  Nor  are  the  babes  but  of  use  in  the  church 
of  God  ;  for  he  commands  that  they  may  be  brought 
to  cry  with  the  congregation  before  the  Lord  for 
mercy  for  the  land.  Joel  u.  18. 

12.  Incense,  I  told  you,  was  a  type  of  prayers, 
and  the  spoons,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  were  pre- 
sented at  the  temple  full  of  it.  Perhaps  to  show 
that  God  will,  with  the  milk  which  he  has  provided 
for  them,  give  it  to  them  as  a  return  of  their  crying 
to  him,  even  as  the  nurse  gives  the  child  the  teat 
and  milk. 

13.  You  know  the  milk  is  called  for  when  the 
child  is  crying,  as  we  say,  to  stop  its  mouth  with 
it.  0  babes !  did  you  but  cry  soundly,  God  would 
give  you  yet  more  milk. 

14.  But  what  were  these  golden  spoons  a  type 
of?  I  answer,  if  the  milk  is  the  juice  and  con- 
solations of  the  Word,  then  the  spoons  must  be 
those  soft  sentences  and  golden  conclusions  with 
which  the  ministers  feed  their  souls  by  it.  '  I  have 
fed  you,'  saith  Paul,  '  with  the  milk  of  the  Word;' 
saith  Peter,  '  even  as  you  have  been  able  to  bear 
it.'     Compare  these  two  or  three  texts — iPe.ii.i-3. 

1  Co.  iii  2.  1  Th.  ii.  7. 

15.  And  this  is  the  way  to  strengthen  the  weak 


1  Great  was  the  fatherly  care  felt  by  Bunyan  for  his  own 
children,  especially  for  his  blind  Mary;  and  judging  by  the 
lessons  he  draws  from  the  temple  spoons,  those  feelings  ex- 
teuded  to  his  church.  It  must  be  a  severe  trial  to  a  minister's 
temper,  when  teased  with  babes  in  religion  at  three  score  and 
ten  years  of  age,  especially  if  they  are  old  professors.  Thus 
Bunyan,  in  addressing  the  readers  of  his  emblems,  says — 

'  We  now  have  boys  with  beards,  and  girls  that  be 
'  Huge  as  old  women  wanting  gravity.' — (Ed.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


493 


Viands,  and  to  confirm  the  feeble  knees.  This  is 
the  way  to  make  them  grow  to  he  men  who  now 
are  hut  as  infants  of  days.  '  Thus  a  littlo  one 
shall  become  a  thousand,  and  a  small  one  a  strong 
nation.'  Yea,  thus  in  time  you  may  make  a  little 
child  to  jostle  it  with  a  leopard  ;  yea,  to  take  a 
lion  by  the  beard ;  yea,  thus  you  may  embolden 
him  to  put  his  hand  to  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  to 
play  before  the  den  of  the  cockatrice.  l9.xi.G-8;  u.22. 
Who  is  most  stout  was  once  a  babe ;  he  that 
can  now  eat  meat  was  sometimes  glad  of  milk, 
and  to  be  fed  with  the  spoon.  Babes  in  Christ, 
therefore,  must  not  be  despised  nor  overlooked ; 
God  has  provided  them  milk  and  spoons  to  eat 
it  with,  that  they  may  grow  up  to  be  men  before 
him. 

L.  Of  the  bowls  and  basons  belonging  to  the  Temple. 

As  there  were  spoons,  so  there  were  bowls  and 
basons  belonging  to  the  temple.  Some  of  these 
were  of  gold,  and  some  of  silver ;  and  when  they 
were  put  together,  their  number  was  four  hundred 
and  forty.  These  you  read  of,  Ezr.  i.  10.  The  bowls 
or  basons  were  not  to  wash  in,  as  was  the  sea  and 
lavers  of  the  temple ;  they  were  rather  to  hold  the 
messes  in,  which  the  priests  at  their  holy  feasts  did 
use  to  set  before  the  people.  This  being  so,  they 
were  types  of  that  proportion  of  faith  by  which,  or 
by  the  measure  of  which,  every  man  received  of 
the  holy  food  for  the  nourishment  of  his  soul.  For, 
as  a  man,  had  he  a  thousand  messes  set  before 
him,  he  eating  for  his  health,  cannot  go  beyond 
what  his  stomach  will  bear ;  so  neither  can  the 
child  of  God,  when  he  comes  to  worship  in  the 
temple  of  God,  receive  of  the  good  things  that  are 
there,  beyond  the  '  proportion  of  his  faith.'  Ro.xii.6. 
Or,  as  it  is  in  another  place,  according  to  '  the 
ability  which  God  giveth.'  1  Pe.  iv.  11.  And  hence 
it  is,  at  the  self-same  ordinance,  some  receive  three 
times  as  much  as  others  do ;  for  that  their  bowl, 
I  mean  their  faith,  is  able  to  receive  it.  Yea, 
Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  as  big  as  was  the 
mess  of  any  of  his  brethren  ;  and  so  it  is  with  some 
saints  while  they  eat  with  their  brother  Joseph  in 
the  house  of  the  living  God. 

There  are  three  go  to  the  same  ordinance,  and 
are  all  of  them  believers ;  who,  when  they  come 
home,  and  compare  notes,  do  find  their  receivings 
are  not  of  the  same  quantity.  One  says,  I  got 
but  little ;  the  other  says,  It  was  a  pretty  good 
ordinance  to  me ;  the  third  says,  I  was  exceeding 
well  there.  Why,  to  be  sure,  he  that  had  but 
little  there,  had  there  but  little  faith ;  for  great 
faith  in  him  would  have  received  more.  He  had 
it  then  according  to  the  largeness  of  his  bowl,  even 
according  to  his  faith, '  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every 
man  the  measure  of  faith.'  Ro.  x\l  3.  Mark,  faith  is 
a  certain  measure,  and  that  not  only  as  to  its  de- 


gree, but  for  that  it  can  receive,  retain,  or  hold 
what  is  put  into  it. 

So  then,  here  it  is  no  matter  how  much  milk  or 
holy  broth  there  is;  but  how  big  is  thy  bowl,  thy 
faith.  Little  bowls  hold  but  little,  nor  canst  thou 
receive  but  as  thy  faith  will  bear ;  I  speak  now  of 
God's  ordinary  dealing  with  his  people,  for  so  he 
saith  in  his  Word,  '  According  to  your  faith  be  it 
unto  you.'  Mat.  ix.  29.  If  a  man  goeth  to  the  ocean 
sea  for  water,  let  him  carry  but  an  egg-shell  with 
him,  and  with  that  he  shall  not  bring  a  gallon 
home.  I  know,  indeed,  that  our  little  pots  have  a 
promise  of  being  made  like  the  bowls  of  the  altar; 
but  still  our  mess  must  be  according  to  our  mea- 
sure, be  that  small,  or  be  it  great.  The  same 
prophet  saith  again,  the  saints  shall  be  '  filled  like 
bowls,  and  as  the  corners  of  the  altar;'  which, 
though  it  supposes  an  enlargement,  yet  it  must  be 
confined  to  that  measure  of  faith  which  is  provided 
for  its  reception.  Zee.  ix.  35;  xiv.  20.  And  suppose 
these  bowls  should  signify  the  promises,  though 
the  saints,  not  the  promises,  are  compared  to  them, 
because  they,  not  promises,  are  the  subjects  of 
faith  ;  yet  it  is  the  promise  by  our  measure  of  faith 
in  that,  that  is  nourishing  to  our  souls. 

When  Ahasuerus  made  a  feast  to  his  subjects, 
they  drank  their  wine  in  bowls.  They  did  not 
drink  it  by  the  largeness  of  the  vessel  whence  they 
drew  it,  but  according  to  their  health,  and  as  their 
stomachs  would  so  receive  it.  Es.  i.  7,  s.  Thy  faith, 
then,  is  one  of  the  bowls  or  basons  of  the  temple, 
by,  or  according  to  which,  thou  receivest  thy  mess, 
when  thou  sittest  feasting  at  the  table  of  God. 
And  observe,  all  the  bowls  were  not  made  of  gold, 
as  all  faith  is  not  of  a  saving  sort.  It  is  the  golden 
faith  that  is  right ;  the  silver  bowls  were  of  an 
inferior  sort.  ne.  iii.  is. 

Some,  I  say,  have  golden  faith ;  all  faith  is  not 
so.  Wherefore  look  to  it,  soul,  that  thy  bowl,  thy 
faith,  be  golden  faith,  or  of  the  best  kind.  Look, 
I  say,  after  a  good  faith,  and  great,  for  a  great 
faith  receives  a  great  mess.  Of  old,  beggars  did 
use  to  carry  their  bowls  in  their  laps,  when  they 
went  to  a  door  for  an  alms.1  Consequently,  if 
their  bowls  were  but  little,  they  ofttimes  came  off 
by  the  loss,  though  the  charity  of  the  giver  was 
large.  Yea,  the  greater  the  charity,  the  larger  the 
loss,  because  the  beggar's  bowl  was  too  little. 
Mark  it  well,  it  is  ofttimes  thus  in  the  matters  of 
:,  a  beggar  at  God's 

1  The  degraded  state  of  the  poor,  when  the  religious  houses 
(so  called)  distributed  food  to  all  comers,  was  long  felt  at'U-r  tin- 
suppression  of  those  hot-beds  of  vice,  from  the  encouragement 
they  gave  to  idleness,  pauperism,  and  the  most  vicious  habits. 
Even  in  Bunyan's  days  the  beggar,  carrying  a  bowl  to  receive 
the  fruit  of  their  industrious"  neighbours'  toil,  was  still  re- 
membered. At  intervals,  plague  and  famine  swept  away  the 
helpless  wretches,  to  the  terror  of  all  classes.  How  severely 
is  this  curse  still  felt  in  Ireland.— (Ed.) 


494 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


door,  be  sure  thou  gettest  a  great  bowl ;  for  as  thy 
bowl  is,  so  will  be  thy  mess.  '  According  to  your 
faith,'  saith  he,  '  be  it  unto  you.'  Mat.  ix.  29. 


LT.  Of  the  flagons  and  cups  of  the  Temple. 
The  next  thing  to  be  considered  is  the  flagons 
and  cups  of  the  temple ;  of  these  we  read,  1  ch. 
xxviii.  17.  Je.  Hi.  19.  is.  xxii.  24.  These  were  of  great 
uso  among  the  Jews,  especially  on  their  feasting 
days ;    as  of  their  sabbaths,  new-moons,  and  the 

like.    Le.xxiii.  13.  Nu.  xxviii.  7.   1  Ch.xvi.  3.  Is.  xxv.  6;  Ixii.  8,  9. 

For  instance,  the  day  that  David  danced  before 
the  ark,  'he  dealt  among  all  the  people,  even  among 
the  whole  multitude  of  Israel,  as  well  to  the  women 
as  men,  to  every  one  a  cake  of  bread,  and  a  good 
piece  of  flesh,  and  a  flagon  of '  itine.''  2Sa  vi.19.  iCh.xvi.3. 
•In  this  mountain,'  that  is,  in  the  temple  typically, 
saith  the  prophet,  •  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make 
unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of 
wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of 
wines  on  the  lees  well  refined.'  Is.  xxv.  6. 

These  are  feasting  times  ;  the  times  in  which  our 
Lord  used  to  have  his  spouse  into  his  wine-cellar, 
and  in  which  he  used  to  display  with  delight  his 
banner  over  her  head  in  love.  Ca.  ii.  4,  5.  The  church 
of  Christ,  alas!  is  of  herself  a  very  sickly  puely 
thing ;  a  woman  ;  a  weaker  vessel ;  but  how  much 
more  must  she  needs  be  so  weak,  when  the  custom 
of  women  is  upon  her,  or  when  she  is  sick  of  love? 
Then  she  indeed  has  need  of  a  draught,  for  she 
now  sinks,  and  will  not  else  be  supported.  '  Stay 
me  with  flagons,'  saith  she,  '  and  comfort  me  with 
apples,  for  I  am  sick  of  love.'  Ca.  ii.  5. 

These  flagons,  therefore,  were  types  of  those 
feastings,  and  of  those  large  draughts  of  Divine 
love,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  draweth  for  and  giveth 
to  his  spouse  in  those  days  that  he  feasteth  with 
them.  For  then  he  saith,  •  Drink,  yea,  drink 
abundantly,  0  beloved.'  This  he  does  to  cheer  her 
up  under  her  hours  of  sadness  and  dejection ;  for 
now  new  'com  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful, 
and  new  wine  the  maids. '  Pr.  xxxi.  c,  7.  Ps.  cxvl  13.  Je.  xvi.  7. 

Ca.  v.  Zee.  ix.  17. 

As  there  were  flagons,  so  there  were  cups;  and 
they  are  called  cups  of  consolation,  and  cups  of 
salvation,  because,  as  I  said,  they  were  they  by 
which  God  at  his  feastings  with  his  people,  or  when 
he  suppeth  with  them,  giveth  out  the  more  large 
draughts  of  his  love  unto  his  saints,  to  revive  the 
spirits  of  the  humble,  and  to  revive  the  hearts  of 
the  contrite  ones.  At  these  times  God  made 
David's  cup  run  over.  For  we  arc  now  admitted, 
if  our  faith  will  bear  it,  to  drink  freely  into  this 
grace,  and  to  be  merry  with  him.  Ps.  xxiii.  5.  Lu.  xv.  22 

-24.  Ca.  v.  1;  vii.  11,  12.  Jn.  xiv.  23.  He.  iii.  20.        This    is  that 

to  which  the  apostle  alludeth,  when  he  saith,  •  Be 
not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess,  but  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit;    speaking  to  yourselves  in 


psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs,  singing 
and  making  melody  in  your  heart  unto  the  Lord.' 
Ep.  v.  18, 19. 

For  the  cups,  as  to  their  use  in  the  general, 
understand  them  as  of  the  bowls  made  mention  of 
before.  For  assurances  are  the  blooms  and  flowers 
of  faith,  not  always  on  it,  though  usually  on  feast- 
ing days  it  is  so.  So  the  degree  of  the  one  is  still 
according  to  the  measure  of  the  other.  Ja.v.  ito.xv.  13. 

LII.  Of  the  chargers  of  the  Temple. 

In  the  tabernacle  they  had  but  twelve  of  them, 
and  they  were  made  of  silver;  but  in  the  temple 
they  had  in  all  a  thousand  and  thirty.  The  thirty 
were  made  of  gold,  the  rest  were  made  of  silver. 
Ezr.  \.  9.  Nu.  vii.  84.  These  chargers  were  not  for  uses 
common  or  profane,  but,  as  I  take  it,  they  were 
those  in  which  the  passover,  and  other  meat-offer- 
ings, were  drest  up,  when  the  people  came  to  eat 
before  God  in  his  holy  temple.  The  meat,  you 
know,  I  told  you,  was  opposite  to  milk ;  and  so  are 
these  chargers  to  the  bowls,  and  cups,  and  flagons 
of  the  temple. 

The  meat  was  of  two  sorts,  roast  or  boiled.  Of 
that  which  was  roasted  was  the  passover,  and  of 
that  which  was  boiled  were  the  trespass-offerings. 
Wherefore,  concerning  the  passover,  he  saith,  '  Eat 
not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at  all  with  water,  but 
roast  with  fire ;  his  head  with  his  legs,  and  with 
the  purtenance  thereof.'  Ex.  xii.  9.  This  roast  meat 
was  a  type  of  the  body  of  Christ  as  suffering  for 
our  sins,  the  which,  when  it  was  roast,  was,  and  is 
as  dressed  up  in  chargers,  and  set  before  the  con- 
gregations of  the  saints. 

But  what  were  the  chargers  a  type  of?  I  also 
ask,  in  what  charger  our  gospel  passover  is  now 
dressed  up  and  set  before  the  people?  Is  it  not 
in  the  four  evangelists,  the  prophets,  and  epistles 
of  the  apostles?  They  therefore  are  the  chargers 
and  the  ordinance  of  the  supper ;  in  these  also  are 
the  trespass-offerings,  with  what  is  fried  in  pans, 
mystically  prepared  for  the  children  of  the  Highest. 

And  why  might  they  not  be  a  type  of  gospel 
sermons? 

I  answer,  I  think  not  so  fitly  ;  for,  alas!  the  best 
of  sermons  in  the  world  are  but  as  thin  slices  cut 
out  of  those  large  dishes.  Our  ministers  are  the 
carvers,  good  doctrine  is  the  meat,  and  the  chargers 
in  which  this  meat  is  found  are  the  holy  canonical 
Scriptures,  <fcc,  though,  as  I  said,  most  properly 
the  New  Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ. 

In  these  is  Christ  most  truly,  lively,  and  amply 
set  before  us  as  crucified,  or  roasted  at  the  fire  of 
God's  law  for  our  sins,  that  we  might  live  by  him 
through  faith,  feeding  upon  him.  2  Co.  iii.  12.  Ga.  iii.  12. 
Ac.  iii.  18—22 ;  xiii.  2—5 ;  xxvi.  22. 1  Pe.  1. 10.  Ac.  vii.  52;  xv.  15;  xxviii. 
23.  Ro.  xvi.  2(3.  Re.  x.  7. 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


495 


There  is  in  these  chargers  not  only  meat,  but  I 
sauce,  if  you  like  it,  to  eat  the  meat  withal ;  for 
the  passover  there  are  bitter  herbs,  or  sound  re- 
pentance; and  for  other,  as  the  thank-offerings, 
their  is  holy  cheerfulness  and  prayers  to  God  for 
grace.  All  these  are  set  forth  before  in  the  holy 
Scriptures,  and  presented  to  us  thereby,  as  in  the 
gold  chargers  of  the  temple.  lie  that  will  scoff  at 
this,  let  him  scoff.  The  chargers  were  a  t}pe  of 
something;  and  he  that  can  show  a  fitter  antitype 
than  is  here  proposed  to  consideration,  let  him  do 
it,  and  I  will  be  thankful  to  him. 

Christians,  here  is  your  meat  before  you,  and 
get  your  carvers  to  slice  it  out  for  you,  and  this 
know,  the  deeper  you  dip  it  in  the  sauce,  the  better 
it  will  relish.  But  let  not  unbelief  teach  you  such 
manners  as  to  make  you  leave  the  best  bits  behind 
you.  For  your  liberty  is  to  eat  freely  of  the  best, 
of  the  fat,  and  of  the  sweet. 

LIU.  Of  the  goings  out  of  the  Temple. 

As  to  the  comings  into  the  temple,  of  them  we 
have  spoken  already ;  namely,  of  the  outer  and 
inner  court,  as  also  of  the  doors  of  the  porch  and 
temple.  The  coming  in  was  but  one  strait  course, 
and  that  a  type  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  the  goings 
out  were  many.  Jn.  x.  9;  xiv.  e. 

Now,  as  I  said,  it  is  insinuated  that  the  goings 
out  are  many,  answerable  to  the  many  ways  which 
the  children  of  men  have  invented  to  apostatize  in 
from  God.  Christ  is  the  way  into;  but  sin  the 
way  out  of  the  temple  of  God.  True,  I  read  not  of 
a  description  of  the  goings  out  of  this  house,  as  I 
read  of  the  comings  in.  Only  when  they  had 
Athaliah  out  thence,  she  is  said  to  go  out  by  the 
way  by  which  the  horses  come  into  the  king's 
stables,  and  there  she  was  slain,  as  it  were  upon 
the  horse  dung-hill.  2  Ki.  \i.  16.  2  Ch.  xxiii.  15.  When 
Uzziah  also  went  out  of  this  house  for  his  trans- 
gression, he  was  cast  out  of  all  society,  and  made 
to  dwell  in  a  kind  of  a  pest-house,  even  to  the  day 
of  his  death.   2  Ch.  xxvi.  21. 

Thus,  therefore,  though  these  goings  out  are  not 
particularly  described,  the  judgments  that  followed 
them  that  have  for  their  transgressions  been  thrust 
out  thence,  have  been  both  remarkable  and  tremen- 
dous: for  to  die  upon  a  dung-hill,  or  in  a  pest-house, 
and  that  for  wicked  actions,  is  a  shameful,  a  dis- 
graceful thing.  And  God  will  still  be  spreading 
dung  upon  the  faces  of  such ;  no  greatness  shall 
prevent  it.  Mai.  a.  3.  Yea,  and  will  take  them  away 
with  it.  '  I  will  drive  them  out  of  my  house,'  says 
he,  '  I  will  love  them  no  more.'  iio.ix.  is. 

But  what  are  we  to  understand  in  gospel  days, 
by  going  out  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  for  or  by 
sin?  I  answer,  if  it  be  done  voluntarily,  then  sin 
leads  you  out :  if  it  be  done  by  the  holy  compulsion 
of  the  church,  then  it  is  done  by  the  judicial  judg- 


ment of  God;  that  is,  they  arc  cut  off,  aud  cast 
out  from  thence,  as  a  just  reward  fur  their  trans- 
gressions.1   Le.  xx ;  xxii.  8.  Eze.  xiv.  8.  1  Co.  v.  13. 

Well,  but  whither  do  they  go,  that  are  thus  gone 
out  of  the  temple  or  church  of  God  ?  I  answer, 
not  to  the  dunghill  with  Athaliah,  nor  to  the  pest- 
house  with  Uzziah,  but  to  the  devil,  that  is  the 
first  step,  and  so  to  hell,  without  repentance.  But 
if  their  sin  bo  not  unpardonable,  they  may  by  re- 
pentance be  recovered,  and  in  mercy  tread  these 
courts  again.  Now  the  way  to  this  recovery  is  to 
think  seriously  what  they  have  done,  or  by  what 
way  they  went  out  from  the  house  of  God.  Hence 
the  prophet  is  bid  to  show  to  the  rebellious  house, 
first  the  goings  out  of  the  house,  and  then  the 
comings  in.  But,  I  say,  first  he  bids  show  them 
the  goings  out  thereof.  Eze.  xffiL  10,  11.  And  this 
is  of  absolute  necessity  for  the  recovering  of  the 
sinner.  For  until  he  that  has  sinned  himself  out 
of  God's  house  shall  see  what  danger  he  has 
incurred  to  himself  by  this  his  wicked  going  out, 
he  will  not  unfeigncdly  desire  to  come  in  thither 
again. 

There  is  another  thing  as  to  this  point  to  be 
taken  notice  of.  There  is  a  way  by  which  God 
also  doth  depart  from  this  house,  and  that  also  is 
by  sin,  as  the  occasion.  The  sin  of  a  man  will 
thrust  him  out,  and  the  sin  of  men  will  drive  God 
out  of  his  own  house.  Of  this  you  read,  Eze.  xi.  22, 
23.  For  this,  he  saith,  •  I  have  forsaken  mine 
house,  I  have  left  mine  heritage,  I  have  given  the 
dearly  beloved  of  my  soul  into  the  hand  of  her 
enemies.'  Je.  xii.  7.  And  this  also  is  dreadful.  The 
great  sentence  of  Christ  upon  the  Jews  lay  much 
in  these  words,  '  Your  house  is  left  unto  you  deso- 
late;' that  is,  God  has  left  you  to  bare  walls,  and 
to  lifeless  traditions.  Consider,  therefore,  of  this 
going  out  also.  Alas  !  a  church,  a  true  church, 
is  but  a  poor  thing  if  God  leaves,  if  God  forsakes 
it.  By  a  true  church  I  mean  one  that  is  congre- 
gated according  to  outward  rule,  that  has  sinned 
God  away,  as  she  had  almost  quite  done  that  was 
of  Laodicea.  Re.  m. 

He  that  sins  himself  out,  can  find  no  good  in  the 
world;  and  they  that  have  sinned  God  out,  can 


1  How  careful  ought  churches  to  be  in  casting  out  an  offend- 
ing member,  seeing  that  their  sentence  should  be  as  '  the 
judicial  judgment  of  God.'  It  is  not  revenge,  hatred,  malice, 
or  the  mere  exercise  of  power,  that  is  to  lead  to  it;  it  is  tie 
good  of  the  individual  that  is  to  be  pursued  aud  sought. 
While  the  church  endeavours  to  remain  pure,  its  aim  and 
object  should  be  mainly  to  correct  and  reform  the  offender, 
that  his  spirit  may  be  saved.  When  discipline  is  undertaken 
from  any  other  motive  than  this ;  and  when  it  is  pursued  from 
private  pique,  or  rivalship,  or  ambition,  or  the  love  of  power, 
it  is  wrong.  The  salvation  of  the  offender,  and  the  glory  of 
God,  should  prompt  to  all  the  measures  which  should  be 
taken  in  the  ca=,c.  '  Restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness;  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted,' 
Gal.  vi.  1.— Ed. 


496 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


find  no  good  in  the  church.  A  church  that  has 
sinned  God  away  from  it,  is  a  sad  lump  indeed. 
You  therefore  that  are  in  God's  church,  take 
heed  of  sinning  yourselves  out  thence ;  also  take 
heed,  that  while  you  keep  in,  you  sin  not  God 
away,  for  thenceforth  no  good  is  there.  •  Tea, 
woe  to  them  Avhen  I  depart  from  them ! '  saith 
God.  no.  ii.  12. 

LIV.  Of  the  singers  belonging  to  the  Temple. 

Having  thus  far  passed  through  the  temple,  I 
now  come  to  the  singers  there.  The  singers  were 
many,  hut  all  of  the  church,  either  Jews  or  prose- 
lytes ;  nor  was  there  any,  as  I  know  of,  under  the 
Old  Testament  worship,  admitted  to  sing  the  songs 
of  the  church,  and  to  celebrate  that  part  of  worship 
with  the  saints,  but  they  who,  at  least  in  appear- 
ance, were  so.  The  song  of  Moses,  of  Deborah, 
and  of  those  that  danced  before  David,  with  others 
that  you  read  of,  they  were  all  performed,  either 
by  Jews  by  nature,  or  by  such  as  were  proselyted 
to  their  religion.  Ex.  xv.  l.  Jude  v.  i,  2.  i  Sa.  xvm.  c.  And 
such  worship  then  was  occasioned  by  God's  great 
appearance  for  them,  against  the  power  of  the 
Gentiles  their  enemies. 

But  we  are  confined  to  the  songs  of  the  temple, 
a  more  distinct  type  of  ours  in  the  church  under 
the  gospel.  1.  The  singers  then  were  many,  but 
the  chief  of  them,  in  the  days  of  David,  were  David 
himself,  Asaph,  Jeduthun,  and  Ileman,  and  their 
sons.  2.  In  David's  time  the  chief  of  these  singers 
were  two  hundred  fourscore  and  eight,  l  ch.  xxv. 
These  singers  of  old  were  to  sing  their  songs  over 
the  burnt-offering,  which  were  types  of  the  sacri- 
ficed body  of  Christ;  a  memorial  of  which  offering 
we  have  at  the  Lord's  table,  the  consummation  of 
which  Christ  and  his  disciples  celebrated  with  a 
hymn.  Mat  xxvi.  30.  And  as  of  old  they  were  the 
church  that  did  sing  in  the  temple,  according  to 
institution,  to  God,  so  also  they  are  by  God's  ap- 
pointment to  be  sung  in  the  church  by  the  new. 
Hence, 

1.  They  are  said  to  be  the  redeemed  that  sing. 
2.  The  songs  that  tbey  sing  are  said  to  be  the 
4  songs  of  their  redemption. '  Ke.  v.  9, 10.  3.  They 
were  and  are  songs  that  no  man  can  learn  but 
they. 

But  let  us  run  a  little  in  the  parallel. 

1.  They  were  of  old  appointed  to  sing,  that  were 
cunning  and  skilful  in  songs.  And  answerable  to 
that  it  is  said,  That  no  man  could  learn  our  New 
Testatment  songs,  but  the  hundred  and  forty  and 
four  thousand  which  were  redeemed  from  the  earth. 

1  Ch.  xv.  22.  Re.  xiv.  3. 

2.  These  songs  were  sung  with  harps,  psalteries, 
cymbals,  and  trumpets  ;  a  type  of  our  singing  with 
spiritual  joy,  from  grace  in  our  hearts.  1  Ch.  xxv.  u. 

2  Ch.  xxix.  20-28.  Col.  iii.  16. 


3.  The  singers  of  old  were  to  be  clothed  in  fine 
linen ;  which  fine  linen  was  a  type  of  innocency, 
and  an  upright  conversation.  Hence  the  singers 
under  the  New  Testament  are  said  to  be  virgins, 
such  in  whose  mouth  was  no  guile,  and  that  were 
without  'fault  before  the  throne  of  God.'  l  Ch.  xv. 

27.  Re.  xiv.  1—5.  See  also  vii.  9—16.  Ps.  xxxiii.  1. 

4.  The  songs  sung  in  the  temple  were  new,  or 
such  as  were  compiled  after  the  manner  of  repeated 
mercies  that  the  church  of  God  had  received,  or 
were  to  receive.  And  answerable  to  this,  is  the 
church  to  sing  now  new  songs,  with  new  hearts. 

for    new     mercies.     Ps.  xxxiii.  3;  xl.  3;  xcvi.,  cxliv.  9.  Re.  xiv.  3. 

New  songs,  1  say,  are  grounded  on  new  mat- 
ter, new  occasions,  new  mercies,  new  deliver- 
ances, new  discoveries  of  God  to  the  soul,  or  for 
new  frames  of  heart ;  and  are  such  as  are  most 
taking,  most  pleasing,  and  most  refreshing  to  the 
soul. 

5.  These  songs  of  old,  to  distinguish  them  from 
heathenish  ones,  were  called  God's  songs,  the 
Lord's  songs  :  because  taught  by  him,  and  learned 
of  him,  and  enjoined  to  them,  to  be  sung  to  his 
praise.  Hence  David  said,  God  had  put  a  new 
song   in  his  mouth,  'even  praise  unto  our  God.' 

1  Ch.  xxv.  7.    Ps.  xlvii.  6,  7;  cxxxvii.  4;  xl.  3. 

6.  These  songs  also  were  called  '  the  songs  of 
Zion.'  and  '  the  songs  of  the  temple.'  Ps.  cxxxvu.  3. 
Am.viii.3.  And  they  are  so  called  as  they  were  theirs 
to  sing  there ;  I  say,  of  them  of  Zion,  and  the 
worshippers  in  the  temple.  I  say,  to  sing  in  the 
church,  by  the  church,  to  him  who  is  the  God  of 
the  church,  for  the  mercies,  benefits,  and  blessings 
which  she  has  received  from  him.  Sion-songs, 
temple-songs,  must  be  sung  by  Sion's  sons,  and 
temple-worshippers. 

The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and 
come  to  Zion  with  songs,  and  everlasting  joy  upon 
their  heads,  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness ; 
and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  fly  awa}r.  Therefore 
they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height,  or  upon 
the  mountain  of  Zion;  and  shall  flow  together 
thither,  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  '  Break 
forth  into  singing,  ye  mountains,'  and  let  the  in- 
habitants of  the  rock  sing.   Is.  xliv.  23;  xlii.  11;  li.  11. 

To  sing  to  God,  is  the  highest  worship  we  are 
capable  of  performing  in  heaven  ;  and  it  is  much  if 
sinners  on  earth,  without  grace,  should  be  capable 
of  performing  it,  according  to  his  institution,  ac- 
ceptably. I  pray  God  it  be  done  by  all  those  that 
now-a-days  get  into  churches,  in  spirit  and  with 
understanding.1 


1  In  Bunyan's  '  now  a  days,'  it  was  much  debated  whether 
singing  ought  to  be  introduced  in  a  mixed  assembly.  It  was 
contended  that  a  voice  and  talent  for  singing  does  not  accom- 
pany the  new  birth ;  that  it  might  tend  to  hypocrisy  and  vanity ; 
and  that  it  was  not  expressly  commanded.  The  Quakers  re- 
jected it,  but  all  other  sects  adopted  that  delightful  part  of 
public  worship.     See  Reach's  Breach  Repaired. —  (Ed.) 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


497 


J.V.  Of  the  union  of  the  holy  and  most  holy  Temple. 

That  commonly  called  the  temple  of  God  at 
Jerusalem,  considered  as  standing  of  two  parts, 
was  called  the  outward  and  inward  temple,  or,  the 
holy  and  most  holy  place.  They  were  built  upon 
one  and  the  same  foundation;  neither  could  one  go 
into  the  holiest,  but  as  through  the  holy  place. 

1  Ki.  iii.  1;  vi.  1.   2Cli.  v.  1,13;  vii.  2. 

The  first  house,  namely,  that  which  we  have 
been  speaking  of,  was  a  type  of  the  church-mili- 
tant, and  the  place  most  holy  a  type  of  the  church- 
triumphant  ;  I  say,  of  the  church-triumphant,  as 
it  now  is. 

So,  then,  the  house  standing  of  these  two  parts, 
was  a  shadow  of  the  church  both  in  heaven  and 
earth.  And  for  that  they  are  joined  together  by 
one  and  the  same  foundation,  it  was  to  show,  that 
they  above,  and  we  below,  are  yet  one  and  the 
self-same  house  of  God.  Hence  they,  and  we  to- 
gether, are  called,  '  The  whole  family  in  heaven 
and  earth.'  Ep. iii.  14*  15. 

And  hence  it  is  said  again,  that  we  who  believe 
on  earth  '  are  come  unto  mount  Zion,  and  unto  the 
city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  to 
the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born, 
which  are  written  in  heaven,  and  to  God  the  judge 
of  all,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect, 
and  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant, 
and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better 
things  than  that  of  Abel.'  He.  xii.  22— 24. 

The  difference,  then,  betwixt  us  and  them  is, 
not  that  we  are  really  two,  but  one  body  in  Christ, 
iu  divers  places.  True,  we  are  below  stairs,  and 
they  above ;  they  in  their  holiday,  and  we  in  our 
working-day  clothes ;  they  in  harbour,  but  we  in 
the  storm;  they  at  rest,  and  we  in  the  wilderness; 
they  singing,  as  crowned  with  joy ;  we  crying,  as 
crowned  with  thorns.  But,  I  say,  we  are  all  of  one 
house,  one  family,  and  are  all  the  children  of  one 
Father.  This,  therefore,  we  must  not  forget,  lest 
we  debar  ourselves  of  much  of  that  which  other- 
wise, while  here,  we  have  a  right  unto.  Let  us, 
therefore,  I  say,  remember,  that  the  temple  of  God 
is  but  one,  though  divided,  as  one  may  say  into 
kitchen  and  hall,  above  stairs  and  below;  or  holy 
and  most  holy  place.  For  it  stands  upon  the  same 
foundation,  and  is  called  but  one,  the  temple  of 
God  ;  which  is  built  upon  the  Lord  our  Saviour. 

I  told  you  before,  that  none  of  old  could  go  into 
the  most  holy,  but  by  the  holy  place,  even  by  the 
veil  that  made  the  partition  between.  Ex.  xxri.SS  Lo. 
xvi.  2, 12, 15.  He.  ix.  7,  8 ;  x.  19.  Wherefore,  they  are  de- 
ceived that  think  to  go  into  the  holiest,  which  is 
heaven,  when  they  die,  who  yet  abandon  and  hate 
the  holy  place,  while  they  live.  Nay,  Sirs,  the 
way  into  the  holiest  is  through  the  holy  place ; 

VOL.  in. 


the  way  into  heaven  is  through  the  church  on 
earth ;  for  that  Christ  is  there  by  his  word  to  be 
received  by  faith,  before  he  can  by  us  in  person  be 
received  in  the  bcatical  vision.  The  church  on 
earth  is  as  the  house  of  the  women,  spoken  of  in 
the  book  of  Esther,  where  we  must  be  dieted, 
perfumed,  and  made  fit  to  go  into  the  bride- 
groom's chamber,  or  as  Paul  says,  '  made  meet  to 
be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  iu 
light.'   Es.  ii.  CoL  i.  1-'. 

LVI.  Of  the  holiest  or  inner  Temple. 

The  most  holy  place  was,  as  I  said,  a  figure  of 
heaven  itself,  consequently  a  type  of  that  where 
the  most  special  presence  of  God  is,  and  where  his 
face  is  most  clearly  seen,  and  the  gladness  of  his 
countenance  most  enjoyed.  lie.  ix.  23,  24.  Ex.xxv.  22.  No. 

vii.  89. 

The  most  holy  place  was  dark,  it  had  no  windows 
in  it,  though  there  were  such  round  the  chambers; 
the  more  special  presence  of  God,  too,  on  Mount 
Sinai,  was  in  the  thick  darkness  there.  110.  via.  12. 

2  Cli.  vii.  1.  Ex.  xix.  9;  xx.  21. 

1.  This  holiest,  therefore,  being  thus  made,  was 
to  show  that  God,  as  in  heaven,  to  us  on  earth  is 
altogether  invisible,  and  not  to  be  reached  other- 
wise than  by  faith.  For,  I  say,  in  that  this  house 
had  no  windows,  nothing  therein  could  be  seen  by 
the  highest  light  of  this  world.  Things  there  were 
only  seen  by  the  light  of  the  fire  of  the  altar,  which 
was  a  type  of  the  shillings  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  lCo.u. 
And  hence  it  is  said,  notwithstanding  this  dark- 
ness, '  He  dwelleth  in  the  light,  which  no  man  can 
approach  unto;'  none  but  the  high-priest,  Christ. 

1  Ti.  vi.  16.  1  Pe.  iii.  21,  22. 

2.  The  holiest,  therefore,  was  thus  built,  to  show 
how  different  our  state  in  heaven  will  be  from  this 
our  state  on  earth.  We  walk  here  by  ono  light, 
by  the  light  of  a  written  word  ;  for  that  is  now  a 
light  to  our  feet,  and  a  lanthorn  to  our  path.  But 
that  place,  where  there  will  be  no  written  word, 
nor  ordinances  as  here,  will  yet  to  us  shine  more 
light  and  clear,  than  if  all  the  lights  that  are  in  the 
world  were  put  together,  to  light  one  man.  '  For 
God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all.' 
lJn.  i.  5.  And  in  his  light,  and  in  the  light  of  the 
Lamb  immediately,  we  shall  live,  and  walk,  and 
rejoice  all  the  days  of  eternity. 

3.  This  also  was  ordained  thus,  to  show  that  we, 
while  in  the  first  temple,  should  live  by  faith,  as  to 
what  there  was,  or  as  to  what  was  done  in  the 
second.  Hence  it  is  said,  as  to  that,  '  we  walk  by 
faith,  not  by  sight.'  2  Co.  v.  9.  The  things  that  are 
there  we  are  told  of,  even  of  the  ark  of  the  testi- 
mony, and  mercy-seat,  and  the  cherubims  of  glory, 
and  the  presence  of  Christ,  and  of  God  :  we  are,  I 
say,  told  of  them  by  the  word,  and  believe,  and  are 
taken  therewith,  and  hope  to  go  to  them  hereafter; 

03 


493 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


but  otherwise  we  see  them  not.  Therefore  we  are 
said  to  '  look,  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen, 
but  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen;  for  the  things 
which  are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things  which 
are  not  seen  are  eternal.'  2  Co.  iv.  18. 

4.  The  people  of  old  were  not  to  look  into  the 
holiest,  lest  they  died,  save  only  their  high-priest, 
he  might  go  into  it.  Nu.  xvii.13.  To  show  that  we, 
while  here,  must  have  a  care  of  vain  speculations, 
for  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen,  by  us  while  here, 
in  heaven,  otherwise  than  by  faith  in  God's  eternal 
testament.  True,  we  may  now  come  to  the  holiest, 
even  as  nigh  as  the  first  temple  will  admit  us  to 
come ;  but  it  must  be  by  blood  and  faith,  not  by 
vain  imagination,  sense,  or  carnal  reason.  He.  x.  19. 

5.  This  holiest  of  all  was  four  square  every  way, 
both  as  to  height,  length,  and  breadth.  To  be 
thus,  is  a  note  of  perfection,  as  1  have  showed  else- 
where ;  wherefore  it  was  on  purpose  thus  built,  to 
show  us  that  all  fulness  of  blessedness  is  there, 
both  as  to  the  nature,  degree,  and  duration.     So 

*  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that 
which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away.'  l  Co.  xiii.  8-10. 

He.  x.  10—22. 

LVII.  Of  the  veil  of  the  Temple. 

The  veil  of  the  temple  was  a  hanging  made  of 

•  blue  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined 
linen,' and  there  were  cherubims  wrought  thereon. 

Ex.  xxvi.  31. 

1,  This  veil  was  one  partition,  betwixt  the  holy 
and  most  holy  place;  and  I  take  it,  it  was  to  keep 
from  the  sight  of  the  worshippers  the  things  most 
holy,  when  the  high-priest  went  in  thither,  to  ac- 
complish the  Service  of  God.  Ex.  xxvi.  33.  2  Ch.  hi.  u.  He. 
be.  8. 

2.  The  veil  was  a  type  of  two  things. 

(1.)  Of  these  visible  heavens  through  which 
Christ  passed  when  he  went  to  make  intercession 
for  us.  And  as  by  the  veil,  the  priest  went  out  of 
the  sight  of  the  people,  when  he  went  into  the 
holiest  of  all,  so  Jesus  Christ  when  he  ascended, 
was  by  the  heavens,  that  great  and  stretched  out 
curtain,  received  out  of  the  sight  of  his  people 
here.  Also  by  the  same  curtain,  since  it  is  be- 
come as  a  tent  for  him  to  dwell  in,  he  is  still  re- 
ceived, and  still  kept  out  of  our  sight ;  for  now 
we  see  him  not,  nor  shall,  until  these  heavens  be 
rolled  together  as  a  scroll,  and  pass  away  like  a 
thing  rolled  together.  Is.  xL  22.  Ac.  i.  9— 11;  Hi.  19— 21. 
1  Pc.  i.  8. 

(2.)  This  is  that  veil  through  which  the  apostle 
saith,  Jesus  is,  as  a  forerunner  for  us,  entered  into 
the  presence  of  God.  For  by  veil  here  also  must 
he  meant  the  heavens,  or  outspread  firmament 
thereof;  as  both  Mark  and  Peter  say,  He  '  is  gone 
into  heaven,  and  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God.'  Mar. 

xvi.  19.  1  l'e.  iii   22. 


3.  The  veil  of  the  temple  was  made  of  blue, 
the  very  colour  of  the  heaven.  Of  purple  and 
crimson,  and  scarlet  also,  which  are  the  colours  of 
many  of  the  clouds,  because  of  the  reflections  of 
the  sun.      But  again, 

4.  The  veil  was  also  a  type  of  the  body  of 
Christ.  For  as  the  veil  of  the  temple,  when  whole, 
kept  the  view  of  the  things  of  the  holiest  from  us, 
but  when  rent,  gave  place  to  man  to  look  in  unto 
them ;  even  so  the  body  of  Christ,  while  whole, 
kept  the  things  of  the  holiest  from  that  view,  we, 
since  he  was  pierced,  have  of  them.  Hence  we 
are  said  to  enter  into  the  holiest,  by  faith,  through 
the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh.  He.  x.  19-22.  But 
yet,  I  say,  all  is  by  faith ;  and,  indeed,  the  rend- 
ing of  the  veil  that  day  that  Christ  was  crucified, 
did  loudly  preach  this  to  us.  For  no  sooner  was 
the  body  of  Christ  pierced,  but  the  veil  of  the 
temple  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom ; 
and  so  a  -way  was  made  for  a  clearer  sight  of  what 
was  there  beyond  it,  both  in  the  type  and  antitype. 

Mat,  xxvii.  50—53.  lie.  x.  19,  20. 

Thus  you  see  that  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  a 
type  of  these  visible  heavens,  and  also  of  the  body 
of  Christ;  of  the  first,  because  he  passed  through 
it  unto  the  Father ;  of  the  second,  because  we  by 
it  have  boldness  to  come  to  the  Father. 

I  read  also  of  two  other  veils,  as  of  that  spread 
over  the  face  of  Moses,  to  the  end  that  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  should  not  stedfastly  behold;  and  of 
the  first  veil  of  the  tabernacle.  But  of  these  I 
shall  not  in  this  place  speak. 

Upon  the  veil  of  the  temple  there  were  also  the 
figures  of  cherubims  wrought,  that  is,  of  angels ; 
to  show,  that  as  the  angels  arc  with  us  here,  and 
wait  upon  us  all  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage  in  this 
world ;  so  when  we  die,  they  stand  ready,  even  at 
the  veil,  at  the  door  of  these  heavens,  to  come 
when  bid,  to  fetch  us,  and  carry  us  away  into 
Abraham's  bosom.   Lu.xvi.  22. 

The  veil,  then,  thus  understooJ,  teaches  us  first 
where  Jesus  is,  namely,  not  here,  but  gone  into 
heaven,  from  whence  we  should  wait  for  him.  It 
also  teaches  us,  that  if  we  would  even  now  discern 
the  glories  that  are  in  the  holiest  of  all,  we  must 
look  through  Jesus  to  them,  even  through  the  veil, 
'  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh.'  Yea,  it  teaches  us  that 
we  may,  by  faith  through  him,  attain  to  a  kind  of 
a  presence,  at  least  of  the  beauty  and  sweetness  of 
them. 

LVIII.  Of  the  doors  of  the  inner  Tempte. 

1.  Besides  the  veil,  there  was  a  door  to  the  inner 
temple,  and  that  door  was  made  of  olive-tree ; 
'  and  for  the  entering  of  the  oracle,  he  made  doors 
of  olive-tree.  The  two  doors  also  of  olive-tree, 
and  he  carved  upon  them  -  cherubims,  and  palm 
trees,   and   open  flowers,  and  overlaid  them  with 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


499 


gold,  and  spread  gold  upon  the  chcrubiins,  and 
upon  the  palm  trees.'  l  Ki.  \i.  si. 

2.  These  doors  were  a  type  of  the  gate  of  heaven, 
even  of  that  which  lets  into  the  eternal  man- 
sion-house that  is  beyond  that  veil.  I  told  you 
before  that  the  veil  was  a  type  of  the  visible 
heavens,  which  God  has  spread  out  as  a  curtain, 
and  through  which  Christ  went  when  he  ascended 
to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father. 

3.  Now,  beyond  this  veil,  as  I  said,  I  find  a 
door,  a  gate  opening  with  two  leaves,  as  afore  we 
found  at  the  door  of  the  outward  temple.  These 
are  they  which  the  Psalmist  calls  to,  when  he 
saith,  '  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates,  even  lift 
(hem  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King  of 
glory  shall  come  in.'  Ps. uiv. 7,9. 

4.  The  doors  of  the  temple  were  made  of  fir,  but 
these,  as  you  see,  were  made  of  olive :  to  show  us 
by  that  fat  tree,  that  rich  type,  with  what  glory 
we  shall  be  met,  who  shall  be  counted  worthy  to 
enter  at  these  gates.  The  olive  tree  has  its  name 
from  the  oil  and  fatness  of  its  nature,  and  the 
doors  that  let  into  the  holiest  were  made  of  this 
olive  tree.1  Ro.  xi.  16—18. 

5.  Cherubims  were  also  carved  upon  these  doors 
to  show,  that  as  the  angels  met  us  at  the  temple 
door,  and  as  they  wait  upon  us  in  the  temple,  and 
stand  also  ready  at  the  veil,  so  even  at  the  gate  of 
the  mansion-house,  they  will  be  also  ready  to  give 
us  a  welcome  thither,  and  to  attend  us  into  the 
presence  chamber. 

6.  Palm  trees  also,  as  they  were  carved  upon 
the  temple  doors,  so  we  also  find  them  here  before 
the  oracle,  upon  the  doors  that  let  in  thither ;  to 
show,  that  as  Christ  gave  us  the  victory  at  our  first 
entering  into  faith,  so  he  will  finish  that  victory, 
by  giving  of  us  eternal  salvation.  Thus  is  he  the 
author  and  finisher  of  our  faith.  For  as  sure  as  at 
first  Ave  received  the  palm  branch  by  faith,  so  surely 
shall  we  wear  it  in  our  hands,  as  a  token  of  his  faith- 
fulness in  the  heaven  of  heavens,  for  ever.    Re.  yii.  9. 

7.  Open  flowers  are  also  carved  here,  to  show 
that  Christ,  who  is  the  door  to  glory,  as  well  as 
the  door  to  grace,  will  be  precious  to  us  at  our 
entering  in  thither,  as  well  as  at  the  first  step  we 
took  thitherward  in  a  sinful  and  miserable  world. 
Christ  will  never  lose  his  sweet  scent  in  the  nostrils 
of  his  church.  lie  is  most  sweet  now,  will  be  so 
at  death,  and  sweetest  of  all,  when  by  him  we  shall 
enter  into  that  mansion-house  prepared  for  us  in 
heaven. 


1  The  olive  wood  is  used,  with  ivory  and  mother  of  pearl, 
in  oruan  enting  the  most  sumptuous  apartments  in  oriental 
palaces.  It  is  exceedingly  durable  and  elegant.  'The  choosing 
olive  out  ot  every  other  kind  of  wood,  lor  the  adorning  these 
sumptuous  apartments,  shows  the  elegance  and  grandeur  of 
the  taste  in  which  Solomon's  temple  was  built,  where  the  doors 
of  the  oracle,  and  some  other  parts,  were  of  olive  wood.' — 
(ilarmcr,  Scheuzer,  Lady  M.  \V.  Montague.) — (Ed.] 


S.  The  palm  trees  and  open  flowers  may  also  be 
a  type  of  the  precious  ones  of  God,  who  shall  he 
counted  worthy  of  his  kingdom ;  the  one,  of  the 
uprightness  of  their  hearts  ;  the  other,  of  the  good 
favour  of  their  lives.  '  The  upright  shall  dwell  in 
thy  presence  ;  and  to  him  that  ordereth  his  con- 
versation aright,  I  will  show  the  salvation  of  God.' 
l\s.  cxL  13. 

9.  Thus  sweet  on  earth,  sweet  in  heaven;  and 
he  that  yields  the  fruit  of  the  gospel  here,  shall 
find  it  for  himself,  and  his  eternal  comfort,  at  the 
gates  of  glory. 

10.  All  these  were  overlaid  with  gold,  as  you 
may  say,  and  so  they  were  at  the  door  of  the  first 
house.  True,  but  observe  here  we  have  an  addi- 
tion. Here  is  gold  upon  gold.  Gold  laid  on  them, 
and  then  gold  spread  upon  that.  lie  overlaid  them 
with  gold,  and  then  spread  gold  upon  them.  The 
Lord  gives  grace  and  glory.  P«.  Ixxxiv.  11.  Gold  and 
gold.  Gold  spread  upon  gold.  Grace  is  gold  in 
the  leaf,  and  glory  is  gold  in  plates.  Grace  in  thin 
gold,  glory  is  gold  that  is  thick.  Here  is  gold 
laid  on,  and  gold  spread  upon  that:  and  that  both 
upon  the  palm  trees  and  the  cherubims.  Gold 
upon  the  palm  trees,  that  is,  on  the  saints;  gold 
upon  the  cherubims,  that  is,  upon  the  angels.  For 
I  doubt  not  but  that  the  angels  themselves  shall 
receive  additional  glory  for  the  service  which  they 
have  served  Christ  and  his  church  on  earth. 

11.  The  angels  are  God's  harvest  men,  and 
doubtless  he  will  give  them  good  wages,  even  glory 
upon  their  glory  then.  Mat.  xiii.  33, 39;  xxiv.  31.  Jn.  iv.  36. 

12.  You  know  harvest  men  use  to  be  paid  well 
for  gathering  in  the  corn,  and  I  doubt  not  but  so 
shall  these,  when  the  great  ingathering  is  over. 
But  what  an  entrance  into  life  is  here?  Here  is 
gold  upon  gold  at  the  door,  at  our  first  step  into 
the  kingdom. 

LIX.  Of  the  golden  nails  of  the  inner  Temple. 

1  shall  not  concern  myself  with  all  the  nails  of 
the  temple,  as  of  those  made  of  iron,  &c.  l  Ch  xxh.3. 
But  only  with  the  golden  ones,  of  which  you  read, 
where  he  saith,  '  And  the  weight  of  the  nails  was 
fifty  shekels  of  gold.'  2Ch.  iii.  9.  These  nails,  as  I 
conceive,  were  all  fastened  to  the  place  most  holy, 
and  of  form  most  apt  to  that  of  which  they  were  a 
figure. 

1.  Some  of  them  represented  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord  as  fixed  in  his  mediatory  office  in  the  heavens; 
wherefore  in  one  place,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks 
of  Christ,  as  he  sprang  from  Judah  to  be  a  media- 
tor, saith,  'Out  of  him  came  the  corner,'  the  corner 
stone,  'out  of  him  the  nail.'  Zee.  x.  i.  Now,  since 
he  is  compared  to  a  nail,  a  golden  nail,  it  is  to 
show,  that  as  a  nail,  by  driving,  is  fixed  in  his 
place;  so  Christ,  by  God's  oath,  is  made  an  ever- 
lasting priest,   iie.vii.25.     Therefore,   as  he  saith 


500 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


again,  the  nail,  the  Aaronical  priesthood,  that  was 
fastened  in  a  sure  place,  should  he  removed,  be  cut 
down,  and  fall ;  so  he  who  has  the  key  of  David, 
which  is  Christ,  Re.  ill.  7,  shall  by  God,  as  a  nail,  be 
fastened  in  a  sure  place,  and  abide ;  therefore  he 
says  again,  'And  he  shall  be  for  a  glorious  throne,' 
or  mercy-seat,  '  to  his  Father's  house.'  And  more- 
over, That  '  they  shall  hang  upon  him,'  as  on  a 
nail,  '  all  the  glory  of  his  Father's  house,  the  off- 
spring, and  the  issue,  all  vessels  of  small  quantity, 
from  the  vessels  of  cups,  even  to  all  the  vessels  of 
flagons.'  Is. xxii.  20— 25.  According  to  that  which  is 
written,  '  And  they  sang  a  new  song '  to  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain,   'saying,  Thou  art  worthy,'  <fec. 

Re.  v.  9-12. 

And  therefore  it  is  again  that  Christ,  under  the 
similitude  of  a  nail,  is  accounted  by  saints  indeed 
their  great  pledge  or  hope,  as  he  is  in  heaven,  of 
their  certain  coming  thither.  Hence  they  said  of 
old,  God  has  given  us  '  a  nail  in  his  holy  place;'  a 
nail,  says  the  line,  'a  pin,  a  constant  and  sure  abode,' 
says  the  margin.  Ezr.  ix.  8.  Now,  this  nail  in  his 
holy  place,  as  was  showed  before,  is  Christ;  Christ, 
as  possessed  of  heaven,  and  as  abiding,  and  ever 
living  therein  for  us.  Hence  he  is  called,  as  there, 
our  head,  our  life,  and  our  salvation ;  and  also  we 
are  said  there  to  be  set  down  together  in  him. 

Ep.  i.  Col.  iii.  3.  Ep.  ii.  5,  G. 

2.  Some  of  these  nails  were  types  of  the  holy 
words  of  God,  which  for  ever  are  settled  in  heaven. 
Types,  I  say,  of  their  '  yea  and  amen.'  Hence 
Solomon,  in  another  place,  compares  the  words  of 
the  wise  God,  '  to  goads  and  nails,  fastened  by  the 
masters  of  assemblies,  which  are  given  from  one 
shepherd.'   Ec.xii.ll. 

They  are  called  goads,  because,  as  such  prick 
the  oxen  on  in  their  drawing,  so  God's  words  prick 
Christians  on  in  their  holy  duties.  They  are  called 
nails,  to  show,  that  as  nails,  when  fastened  well 
in  a  sure  place,  are  not  easily  removed;  so  God's 
words,  by  his  will,  stand  firm  for  ever.  The  masters 
of  the  assemblies  are  first,  the  apostles.  The  one 
shepherd  is  Jesus  Christ.  Hence  the  gospel  of 
Christ  is  said  to  be  everlasting,  to  abide  for  ever, 
and  to  be  more  stedfast  than  heaven  and  earth. 

Is.  xl.  C-8.    1  Te.  i.  24,  25.    He.  xiii.  20.    Re.  xiv.  6.    Mat.  xxiv.  35. 

The  Lord  Jesus  then,  and  his  holy  words,  are  the 
golden  nails  of  the  temple,  and  the  fixing  of  these 
nails  in  the  temple,  was  to  show  that  Christ  is  the 
same  to-day,  yesterday,  and  for  ever;  and  that  his 
words  abide,  and  remain  the  same  for  ever  and 
ever.  He  then  that  hath  Christ,  has  a  nail  in  the 
holiest;  he  that  hath  a  promise  of  salvation  hath 
also  a  nail  in  heaven,  a  golden  nail  in  heaven ! 

LX.  Of  the  floor  and  walls  of  the  inner  Temple. 
1.  The  floor  of  the   oracle  was  overlaid  with 
cedar,  and  so  also  were  the  walls  of  this  house. 


•  He  built  twenty  cubits  on  the  sides  of  the  house, 
both  the  floor  and  the  walls  with  boards  of  cedar. 
He  even  built  for  it  within,  for  the  oracle,  for  the 
most  holy  place. '  1  Ki.  vi.  16. 

2.  In  that  he  doth  tell  us  with  what  it  was  ceiled, 
and  doth  also  thus  repeat,  saying,  '  for  the  oracle, 
for  it  within,  even  for  the  most  holy  place,'  it  is 
because  he  would  have  it  noted,  that  this  only  is 
the  place  that  thus  was  done. 

3.  Twenty  cubits,  that  was  the  length,  and 
breadth,  and  height  of  the  house;  so  that  by  his 
thus  saying  he  teacheth  that  thus  it  was  built 
round  about. 

4.  The  cedar  is,  if  I  mistake  not,  the  highest  of 
the  trees.  Eze.  xxxi.  3-s.  Now  in  that  it  is  said  the 
house,  the  oracle,  was  ceiled  round  about  there- 
with, it  may  be  to  show,  that  in  heaven,  and  no 
where  else,  is  the  height  of  all  perfections.  Per- 
fection is  in  the  church  on  earth,  but  not  such  as 
is  in  heaven. 

(I.)  There  is  a  natural  perfection,  and  so  a  penny 
is  as  natural  silver  as  is  a  shilling.  (2.)  There  is 
a  comparative  perfection,  and  so  one  thing  may  be 
perfect  and  imperfect  at  the  same  time;  as  a  half- 
crown  is  more  than  a  shilling,  yet  less  than  a 
crown.  (3.)  There  is  also  that  which  we  call  the 
utmost  perfection,  and  that  is  it  which  cannot  be 
added  to,  or  taken  from  him;  and  so  God  only  is 
perfect.  Now,  heavenly  glory  is  that  which  goes 
beyond  all  perfection  on  the  earth,  as  the  cedar 
goes  beyond  all  trees  for  height.  Hence  God, 
when  he  speaks  of  his  own  excellency,  sets  it  forth 
by  its  height.  The  high  God,  the  most  High,  and 
the  high  and  lofty  One;  and  the  Highest.  Ps.xcvii.9; 

cxxxviii.  6.  Ge.  xiv.  19—21.  Da.  iii.  26;  v.  18.  Ps.  xviii.  13;  lxxxvii.  5. 
Lu.  i.  32;  vi.  35.  Is.  lvii.  15.  Ps.  ix.  2;  lvi.  2;  xcii.  1.  Is.  xiv.  14.     These 

terms  also  are  ascribed  to  this  house,  for  that  it 
was  the  place  where  utmost  perfection  dwelt. 

I  take,  therefore,  the  cedar  in  this  place  to  be 
a  note  of  perfection,  even  the  cedar  with  which 
this  house  was  ceiled.  For  since  it  is  the  wisdom 
of  God  to  speak  to  us  ofttimes  by  trees,  gold, 
silver,  stones,  beasts,  fowls,  fishes,  spiders,  ants, 
frogs,  flies,  lice,  dust,  (fee,  and  here  by  wood; 
how  should  we  by  them  understand  his  voice,  if 
we  count  there  is  no  meaning  in  them?  'And 
the  cedar  of  the  house  within  was  carved  with 
knops  and  open  flowers  ;  all  was  cedar ;  there  was 
no  stone  seen.'  l  Ki.  vi.  is. 

Knops  and  flowers  were  they  with  which  the 
golden  candlestick  was  adorned,  as  you  read,  Ex. 
xxv.  33,  35 ;  xxxvii.  io,  21.  The  candlestick  was  a  type 
of  the  church,  and  the  knops  and  flowers  a  type  of 
her  ornaments.  But  what!  must  heaven  be  hanged 
round  about  with  the  ornaments  of  saints!  with 
the  fruits  of  their  graces !  Well,  it  is  certain  that 
something  more  than  ordinary  must  be  done  with 
them,  since  thev  are  admitted  to  follow  them  into 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIIUTUALIZED. 


501 


the  holy  place,  Re.  xW.  is ;  and  since,  it  is  said,  they 
shall  liave  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
of  glory  bestowed  on  them,  for  them  in  the  heavens.' 

2  Co.  iv.  1G,  17. 

'All  ivas  cedar;  there  was  no  stone  seen.*  Take 
stone  in  the  type  for  that  which  was  really  so,  and 
in  the  antitype  for  that  which  is  so  mystically,  and 
then  it  may  import  to  us,  that  in  heaven,  the  anti- 
type of  this  holiest,  there  shall  never  be  anything 
of  hardness  of  heart  in  them  that  possess  it  for 
ever.  All  imperfection  ariseth  from  the  badness 
of  the  heart,  but  there  will  be  no  bad  hearts  in 
glory.  No  shortness  in  knowledge,  no  crossness 
of  disposition,  no  workings  of  lusts,  or  corruptions 
will  be  there ;  no,  not  throughout  the  whole  hea- 
vens. Here,  alas!  they  are  seen,  and  that  in  the 
best  of  saints,  because  here  our  light  is  mixed  with 
darkness ;  but  there  will  be  no  night  there,  nor 
any  stone  seen. 

'  And  the  floor  of  the  house  was  overlaid  with 
gold.'  l  Ki.  vi.  so.  This  is  like  that  of  which  we  read 
of  the  New  Jerusalem  that  is  to  come  from  God 
out  of  heaven ;  says  the  text,  '  The  street  of  the 
city  was  pure  gold;'  and  like  that  of  which  you 
read  in  Exodus,  '  They  saw  the  God  of  Israel,  and 
under  his  feet  as  it  were  a  paved  work  of  a  sapphire 
stone,  and  as  it  were  the  body  of  heaven  in  his 
clearness. '  Re.  xxi.  21.  Ex.  xxiv.  10.  All  the  visions  were 
rich,  but  this  the  richest,  that  the  floor  of  the 
house  should  be  covered  or  overlaid  with  gold. 
The  floor  and  street  are  walking-places,  and  how 
rich  will  our  steps  be  then !  Alas !  here  we  some- 
times fall  into  the  mire,  and  then  again  stumble 
upon  blocks  and  stones.  Here  we  sometimes  fall 
into  holes,  and  have  our  heel  oft  catched  in  a  snare; 
but  there  will  be  none  of  these.  Gold  !  gold !  all 
will  be  gold,  and  golden  perfections,  when  we  come 
into  the  holy  place!  Job  at  best  took  but  his  steps 
in  butter,  but  we  then  shall  take  all  our  steps  in 
the  gold  of  the  sanctuary. 

LXI.  Of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  which  was  placed 
in  the  inner  Temple. 

In  the  Word  I  read  of  three  arks;  to  wit,  Noah's 
ark,  that  in  which  Moses  was  hid,  and  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  of  God.  Ge.  vi.  14.  Ex.  a.  3,  5.  But  it  is 
the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  which  I  shall  now  speak. 
The  ark  was  made  '  of  shittim-wood,  two  cubits 
and  a  half  was  the  length  thereof,  and  a  cubit  and 
a  half  the  breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit  and  a  half 
the  height  thereof.'  It  was  overlaid  '  with  pure 
gold  within  and  without,'  and  '  a  crown  of  gold  ' 
was  made  for  it  *  round  about.'  Ex.  xxv.  10,  n. 

1,  This  ark  was  called  '  the  ark  of  the  covenant, ' 
as  the  first  that  you  read  of  was  called  '  Noah's,' 
because  as  he  in  that  was  kept  from  being  drowned, 
so  the  tables  of  the  covenant  were  kept  in  this 
from  breaking. 


2.  This  ark,  in  this,  was  a  type  of  Christ ;  for 
that  in  him  only,  and  not  in  the  hand  of  Moses, 
these  tables  were  kept  whole.  Moses  brake  then., 
the  ark  keeps  them. 

3.  Not  only  that  wrote  on  two  tables  of  stone, 
but  that  also  called  '  the  ceremonial,'  was  put  into 
the  ark  to  be  kept.  The  two  tables  were  put  into 
the  midst  of  the  ark,  to  answer  to  this — thy  law  is 
within  my  heart  to  do  it.  But  the  ceremonial  vraa 
put  into  the  side  of  the  ark,  to  show  that  out  of 
the  side  of  Christ  must  come  that  which  must  an- 
swer that,  for  out  thence  came  blood  and  water ; 
blood,  to  answer  the  blood  of  the  ceremonies; 
and  water,  to  answer  the  purifyings  and  rinsings 
of  that  law.  Tho  ceremuiiics,  therefore,  were 
lodged  in  the  side  of  the  ark,  to  show  that  they 
should  bo  answered  out  of  the  side  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Ex  xxv.  10,  17.  Do.  x.  5.   Ps.  xl.  8.  Jn.  xix.  34.  He.  Z.  ". 

4.  The  ark  had  the  name  of  God  put  upon  it; 
yea,  it  was  called  the  strength  of  God,  and  his 
glory,  though  made  of  wood.  And  Christ  is  God 
both  in  name  and  nature,  though  made  flesh;  yea 
more,  made  to  be  sin  for  us.    2  Sa.  vi.  2.  i  ch.  xiii.  0. 

2  Ch.  vi.  1.  Jn.  i.  14.   Bo.  ix.  5.  2  Co.  v.  21. 

5.  The  ark  was  carried  upon  men's  shoulders 
this  way  and  that,  to  show  how  Christ  should  be 
carried  and  preached  by  his  apostles  and  ministers 
into  all  parts  of  the  world.  Ex.  xxv.  14.  l  Ch.  xv.  15.  Mat. 

xxviii.  19,  20.  Lu.  xxiv.  4G,  47. 

6.  The  ark  had  those  testimonies  of  God's  pre- 
sence accompanying  it,  as  had  no  other  ceremony 
of  the  law;  and  Christ  had  those  signs  and  tokens 
of  his  presence  with  him,  as  never  had  man  either 
in  law  or  gospel.  This  is  so  apparent  it  needs  no 
proof.      And  now  for  a  few  comparisons  more. 

(1.)  It  was  at  that  that  God  answered  the  people, 
when  they  were  wont  to  come  to  iuquire  of  him  ; 
and  in  these  last  days  God  has  spoken  to  us  by 

his  Son.    1  Ch.  xiii.  3.  1  Sa.  xiv.  18.  lie.  i.  2.  Ju.  xvi.  23,  24. 

(2.)  At  the  presence  of  the  ark  the  waters  of 
Jordan  stood  still  till  Israel,  the  ransomed  of  the 
Lord,  passed  over  from  the  wilderness  to  Canaan; 
and  it  is  by  the  power  and  presence  of  Christ  that 
we  pass  over  death,  Jordan's  antitype,  from  the 
wilderness  of  this  world  to  heaven.  Jus.  iii.  15—17.  in. 

xi.  25.  Ro.  viii.  37—39.  1  Co.  xv.  54—57. 

(3.)  Before  the  ark  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell 
down ;  and  at  the  presence  of  Christ  shall  all  high 
towers,  and  strongholds,  and  hiding  places  for 
sinners   be   razed,   and  dissolved   at  his   coming. 

Jos.  vi.  20.  Is.  xxx.  25;  ii.  10,16.  2  Ye.  iii.  10.  Re  xx.  11-13. 

(4.)  Before  the  ark  Dagon  fell,  that  idol  of  tho 
Philistines;  and  before  Christ  Jesus  devils  fell, 
those  gods  of  all  those  idols.  And  he  must  reign 
till  all  his  enemies  be  put  under  his  feet,  and  until 
they  be  made  his  footstoul.   1  Sb.  v.  1-4.  Mar.  v.  12.  1  Ca 

xv.  25.  He.  x.  13. 

(5.)  The  Philistines  were  also  plagued  for  medd- 


50s 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


Ihitf  with  the  ark,  while  they  abode  uncireumcised; 
and  the  wicked  will  one  day  he  most  severely 
plagued  for  their  meddling  with  Christ,  with  their 
uncireumcised  hearts.  lSa.v.  c— 13.  p*.  l.  6.  Mat.  xxiv.  51; 
xxv.  11, 12.  La.  xiii.  25-29. 

(G.)  God's  blessing  was  upon  those  that  enter- 
tained the  ark  as  they  should;  and  much  more  is, 
and  will  his  blessing  be  upon  those  that  so  embrace 
and  entertain  his  Christ,  and  profess  his  name  sin- 
cerely. 2  8a.  vi.  11.  Ac.  iii.  26.  Ga.  iii.  13, 14.  Mat.  xix.  27—29.  Lu. 
x».ii.  2S,  29. 

(7.)  When  Uzzali  put  forth  his  hand  to  stay  the 
ark,  when  the  oxen  shook  it,  as  despairing  of  God's 
protecting  of  it  without  a  human  help,  he  died  be- 
fore the  Lord ;  even  so  will  all  those  do,  without 
repentance,  who  use  unlawful  means  to  promote 
Christ's  religion,  and  to  support  it  in  the  world. 

I  Ch.  xiii.  9,  10.  Mat  xxvi.  52.  Re.  xiii.  10. 

(8.)  The  ark,  though  thus  dignified,  was  of  it- 
self but  low — but  a  cubit  and  a  half  high ;  also 
Christ — though  he  was  the  glory  of  heaven  and  of 
God — yet  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  was 
found  in  the  likeness  of  a  man.  Ex.  xxv.  10—12.  Phi. 
ii.  6-11. 

(9.)  The  ark  had  a  crown  of  gold  round  about 
upon  it,  to  show  how  Christ  is  crowned  by  his 
saints  by  faith,  and  shall  be  crowned  by  them  in 
glory,  for  all  the  good  he  hath  done  for  them  ;  as 
also  how  all  crowns  shall  one  day  stoop  to  him, 
and  be  set  upon  his  head.  This  is  showed  in  the 
type.  Zec.vi.11,14     And  in  the  antitype.  Re. iv.  10 ;  xix.  12. 

(10.)  The  ark  was  overlaid  with  gold  within  and 
without,  to  show  that  Christ  was  perfect  in  inward 
grace  and  outward  life,  in  spirit  and  in  righteous- 
ness.   Jn.  i.  14  1  ?c  ii.  22. 

(11.)  The  ark  was  placed  under  the  mercy-seat, 
to  show  that  Jesus  Christ,  as  Redeemer,  brings 
and  bears,  as  it  were,  upon  his  shoulders,  the 
mercy  of  God  to  us,  even  in  the  body  of  his  flesh, 
through  death.  Ex.  xxv.  81.  Ep.  iv.  22;  v.  l,  2. 

(12.)  "When  the  ark  was  removed  far  from  the 
people,  the  godly  went  mourning  after  it ;  and 
when  Christ  is  hid,  or  taken  from  us,  then  we 
mourn  in  those  days.  2  Sa.  rii.  2.  Mar.  ii.  19,  20.  Lu.  v.  34,  35. 
Jn.  xvi.  20—22. 

(13.)  All  Israel  had  the  ark  again,  after  their 
mourning-time  was  over;  and  Christ,  after  his 
people  have  sorrowed  for  him  a  while,  will  see 
them  again,    '  and  their  hearts  shall  rejoice.'  Jn. 

xvi.  1-3,  20—22. 

By  all  these  things,  and  many  more  that  might 
be  mentioned,  it  is  most  evident  that  the  ark  of 
the  testimony  was  a  type  of  Jesus  Christ;  and 
take  notice  a  little  of  that  which  follows,  namely, 
that  the  ark  at  last  arrived  to  the  place  most  holy. 
He.  ix.  s,  4.  That  is,  after  its  wanderings  ;  for  the 
ark  was  first  made  to  wander,  like  a  non-inhabi- 
tant, from  place  to  place ;    now  hither,  and  then 


thither;  now  in  the  hands  of  enemies,  and  then 
abused  by  friends  ;  yea,  it  was  caused  to  rove  from 
place  to  place,  as  that  of  which  the  world  was 
weary.  I  need  instance  to  you  for  proof  hereof 
none  other  place  than  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh 
chapters  of  the  first  Book  of  Samuel;  and,  answer- 
able to  this,  was  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  posted  back- 
wards and  forwards,  hither  and  thither,  by  the 
force  of  the  rage  of  his  enemies.  He  was  hunted 
into  Egypt  so  soon  as  he  was  born.  Mat.  a.  Then 
he  was  driven  to  live  in  Galilee  the  space  of  many 
years.  Also,  when  he  showed  himself  to  Israel, 
they  drove  him  sometimes  into  the  wilderness, 
sometimes  into  the  desert,  sometimes  into  the  sea, 
and  sometimes  into  the  mountains,  and  still  in  every 
of  these  places  he  was  either  haunted  or  hunted  by 
new  enemies. 

And  at  last  of  all,  the  Pharisees  plot  for  his  life; 
Judas  sells  him,  the  priests  buy  him,  Peter  denies 
him,  his  enemies  mock,  scourge,  buffet,  and  much 
abuse  him.  In  fine,  they  get  him  condemned,  and 
crucified,  and  buried;  but  at  last  God  commanded, 
and  took  him  to  his  place,  even  within  the  veil,  and 
sets  him  to  bear  up  the  mercy-seat,  where  he  is  to 
this  very  day,  being  our  ark  to  save  us,  as  Noah's 
did  him,  as  Moses'  did  him ;  yea,  better,  as  none 
but  Christ  doth  save  his  own. 

LXII.  Of  the  placing  of  the  ark  in  the  holiest,  or 
inner  Temple. 

1.  The  ark,  as  we  have  said,  and  as  the  text 
declares,  when  carried  to  its  rest,  was  placed  in 
the  inner  temple,  or  in  the  most  holy  place,  '  even 
under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims.'  'And  the  priests 
brought  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  unto 
his  place,  to  the  oracle  of  the  house,  into  the  most 
holy  place,  even  under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims.' 

Ex.  xxvi.  33 ;  xxxix.  35.  1  Ki.  viii.  3.  2  Ch.  v.  7. 

2.  Before  this,  as  was  said  afore,  the  ark  was 
carried  from  place  to  place,  and  caused  to  dwell 
'in  a  tent  under  curtains,  as  all  our  fathers  did;  to 
show  that  Christ,  as  we,  was  made  for  a  time  to 
wander  in  the  world,  in  order  to  his  being  pos- 
sessed of  glory.  2  Sa.  vii.  1,  3,  6.  He.  xi.  9.  Jn.  i.  10 ;  xvi. 
28;  iii.  13. 

3.  But  now,  when  the  ark  was  brought  into  the 
holiest,  it  is  said  to  be  brought  into  its  place. 
This  world  then  was  not  Christ's  place,  he  was 
not  from  beneath,  he  came  from  his  Father's 
house ;  wherefore  while  here,  he  was  not  at  his 
place,  nor  could  until  he  ascended  up  where  he 

was  before.  Jn.  viii.  23;  xvi.  28;  vi.  62;  iii.  13. 

4.  Christ's  proper  place,  therefore,  is  the  holiest. 
His  proper  place,  as  God,  as  Priest,  as  Prophet, 
as  King,  and  as  the  Advocate  of  his  people.  Here, 
with  us,  he  has  no  more  to  do,  in  person,  as  me- 
diator. If  he  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  be  a 
priest,  &c.      His  place  and  work  is  now  above 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


503 


with  Lis  Father,  ami  before  the  angels.  Ac  v.  31. 1  re. 

i:i.  22.    He.  iv.  14;  viii.  4;  ix.  34     1  Jn.  ii.  1,  2.    Re.  i.  4,  5. 

5.  It  is  said  the  ark  was  brought  'to  the  oracle 
of  the  house,'  Solomon  was  not  content  to  say  it 
was  brought  into  the  holiest ;  but  he  saith,  his 
place  was  the  oracle,  the  holy  oracle,  that  is,  the 
place  of  hearing.  For  he,  when  he  ascended,  had 
somewhat  to  say  to  God  on  the  behalf  of  his 
people.  To  the  oracle,  that  is,  to  the  place  of 
revealing.  For  he  also  was  there  to  receive,  and 
from  thence  to  reveal  to  his  church  on  earth, 
something  that  could  not  bo  made  manifest  but 
from  this  holy  oracle.  There  therefore  he  is  with 
the  two  tables  of  testimony  in  his  heart,  as  per- 
fectly kept;  he  also  is  therewith  the  whole  ful- 
filling of  the  ceremonial  law  in  his  side,  showing 
and  pleading  the  perfection  of  his  righteousness, 
and  the  merit  of  his  blood  with  his  Father,  and  to 
receive  and  to  do  lis  good,  who  believe  in  him, 
how  well  pleased  the  Father  is  with  what  he  has 
done  in  our  behalf. 

6.  'Into  the  most  holy  place.'  By  these  words 
is  showed,  whither  also  the  ark  went,  when  it 
went  to  take  up  its  rest.  And  in  that  this  ark 
was  a  type  of  Christ  in  this,  it  is  to  show  or 
further  manifest,  that  what  Christ  doth  now  in 
heaven,  he  doth  it  before  his  Father's  face.  Yea, 
it  intimates,  that  Christ  even  there  makes  his 
appeals  to  God,  concerning  the  worth  of  what  he 
did  on  earth ;  to  God  the  Judge  of  all,  I  say, 
whether  he  ought  not  for  his  suffering-sake  to 
have  granted  to  him  his  whole  desire,  as  Priest 
and  Advocate  for  his  people? 

Wilt  thou,'  said  Festus  to  Paul,  'go  up  to 
Jerusalem,  and  there  be  judged  of  these  things 
before  mo?'  Acxxv.  9.  Why,  this  our  blessed 
Jesus  was  willing,  when  here,  to  go  up  to  Jeru- 
salem to  be  judged;  and  being  misjudged  of  there, 
he  made  his  appeal  to  God,  and  is  now  gone 
thither,  even  into  the  holy  place,  even  to  him  that 
is  Judge  of  all,  for  his  verdict  upon  his  doing; 
and  whether  the  souls  for  whom  he  became  un- 
dertaker, to  bring  them  to  glory,  have  not  by  him 
a  right  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

7.  'Under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims.'  This 
doth  further  confirm  our  words  ;  for  having  ap- 
pealed from  earth  to  heaven,  as  the  ark  was  set 
under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims,  so  he,  in  his 
interceding  with  God  and  pleading  his  merits  for 
us,  doth  it  in  the  presence  and  hearing  of  all  the 
angels  in  heaven. 

And  thus  much  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and 
of  its  antitype.  We  come  next  to  speak  of  the 
mercy-seat. 

LXIII.  0/ the  mercy-seat,  and  how  it  ivas  •placed 
in  the  holy  Temple. 

The  mercy -seat  was  made  in  the  wilderness,  but 


brought  up  by  Solomon,  after  the  temple  was  built, 
with  the  rest  of  the  holy  things.  scii.v.  2— 10. 

The  mercy-seat,  as  I  have  showed  of  the  ark, 
was  but  low.  ■  Two  cubits  and  a  half  was  tho 
length,  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  there- 
of;' but  the  height  thereof  'was  without  measure.' 

1.  The  length  and  breadth  of  the  mercy-seat  is 
the  same  with  that  of  the  ark :  perhaps  to  show 
us,  that  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  mercy  of 
God  to  his  elect,  is  the  same  with  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  merits  of  Christ.  Ex.  xxv.  io,  17.  There- 
fore, we  are  said  to  be  justified  in  him,  blessed  in 
him,  even  according  to  the  purpose  which  God 
purposed  in  him. 

2.  But  in  that  the  mercy-seat  is  without  mea- 
sure, a3  to  height,  it  is  to  show,  that  would  God 
extend  it,  it  is  able  to  reach  even  them  that  fall 
from  heaven,  and  to  save  all  that  ever  lived  on 
earth,  even  all  that  are  now  in  hell.  For  there  is 
not  only  breadth  enough  for  them  that  shall  be 
saved,  but  'bread  enough  and  to  spare.'  Ltlxt.  17- 
'And  thou  shalt,'  says  God,  'put  the  mercy-seat 
above  upon  the  ark.'  Thus  he  said  to  Moses,  and 
this  was  the  place  which  David  assigned  for  it. 
Ex.  xxv.  21.  l  ch.  xxviii.  ll.  Now,  its  being  by  God's 
ordinance  placed  thus,  doth  teach  us  many  things. 

(1.)  That  mercy's  foundation  to  us  is  Christ. 
The  mercy-seat  was  set  upon  the  ark  of  the  testi- 
mony, and  there  it  rested  to  usward.  Justice 
would  not,  could  not  have  suffered  us  to  have  had 
any  benefit  by  mercy,  had  it  not  found  an  ark,  a 
Christ  to  rest  upon.  '  Deliver  him,'  saith  God, 
'  from  going  down  to  the  pit,  I  have  found  a  ran- 
som.' Job.  xxxiii.  24. 

(2.)  In  that  it  was  placed  above,  it  doth  show 
also  that  Christ  was,  of  mercies,  ordaining  a  fruit 
of  mercy.  Mercy  is  above,  is  the  ordainer ;  God 
is  love,  and  sent  of  love  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour 
and  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Jn.  iii.  16.  Un.  iv.  10. 

(3.)  In  that  the  mercy-seat  and  ark  were  thus 
joined  together,  it  also  shows,  that  without  Christ 
mercy  doth  not  act.  Hence,  when  the  priest  came 
of  old  to  God  for  mercy,  he  did  use  to  come  into 
the  holy  place  with  blood  ;  yea,  and  did  use  to 
sprinkle  it  upon  the  mercy-seat,  and  before  it, 
seven  times.  Take  away  the  ark,  and  the  mercy- 
seat  will  fall,  or  come  greatly  down  at  least.  So 
take  away  Christ,  and  the  flood-gate  of  mercy  is 
let  down,  and  the  current  of  mercy  stopped.  This 
is  true,  for  so  soon  as  Christ  shall  leave  off  to 
mediate,  will  come  the  eternal  judgment. 

(4.)  Again,  in  that  the  mercy-seat  was  set  above 
upon  the  ark,  it  teacheth  us  to  know,  that  mercy 
can  look  down  from  heaven,  though  the  law  stand 
by  and  looks  on;  but  then  it  must  be  in  Christ,  as 
kept  there,  and  fulfilled  by  him  for  us.  The  law 
out  of  Christ  is  terrible  as  a  lion  ;  the  law  in  him 
is  meek   as  a  lamb.     The  reason  is,  for  that  it 


504 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


finds  in  him  enough  to  answer  for  all  tlieir  faults, 
that  come  to  God  for  mercy  by  him.  '  Christ  is 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  ;'  and  if  that 
he  true,  the  law  for  that  can  look  no  further  upon 
Avhoever  comes  to  God  by  him.  The  law  did  use 
to  sentence  terribly,  until  it  was  put  into  the  ark 
to  be  kept.1  But  after  it  was  said,  '  It  is  there  to 
be  kept,' we  read  not  of  it  as  afore.  iKi.vm.9.  2Ch. 

v.  10.    Eo.  x.  4. 

(5.)  Let  them  then  that  come  to  God  for  mercy 
be  sure  to  come  to  him  by  the  ark,  Christ.  For 
grace,  as  it  descends  to  us  from  above  the  mercy- 
seat,  so  that  mercy-seat  doth  rest  upon  the  ark. 
Wherefore,  sinner,  come  thou  for  mercy  that  way: 
for  there  if  thou  meetest  with  the  law,  it  can  do 
thee  no  harm ;  nor  can  mercy,  shouldst  thou  else- 
where meet  it,  do  thee  good.  Come,  therefore, 
and  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  this  mercy- 
seat,  thus  borne  up  by  the  ark,  and  'obtain  mercy, 
and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.'  lie. iv.  16. 

Wherefore  the  thus  placing  of  things  in  the 
holiest,  is  admirable  to  behold  in  the  word  of  God. 
For  that  indeed  is  the  glass  by  and  through  which 
we  must  behold  this  glory  of  the  Lord.  Here  we 
see  the  reason  of  things;  here  we  see  how  a  just 
God  can  have  to  do,  and  that  in  a  way  of  mercy, 
with  one  that  has  sinned  against  him.  It  is  be- 
cause the  law  has  been  kept  by  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ;  for  as  you  see,  the  mercy-seat  stands  upon 
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  there  God  acts  in  a 
way  of  grace  towards  us.  Ex.  x.w.  17— 23. 

LXIV.  Of  the  living  v:aters  of  the  inner  Temple. 
Although  in  the  holy  relation  of  the  building  of 
the  temple  no  mention  is  made  of  these  waters, 
but  only  of  the  mount  on  which,  and  the  materials 
with  which  the  king  did  build  it,  yet  it  seems  to 
me  that  in  that  mount,  and  there  too  where  the 
temple  was  built,  there  was  a  spring  of  livino- 
water.  This  seems  more  than  probable,  by  Eze. 
xlvii.  1,  where  he  saith,  'He  brought  me  again 
unto  the  door  of  the  house,  and  behold,  waters 
issued  out  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  bouse 
eastward,  for  the  fore-front  of  the  bouse  stood  to- 
ward the  east,  and  the  waters  came  down  from 
under,  from  the  right  side  of  the  house,  at  the 
south  side  of  the  altar.'  So  again,  'And  a  foun- 
tain shall  come  forth  of  the  house  of  the  Lord, 
and  shall  water  the  valley  of  Shittim.'  Joel  m.  is. 
Nor  was  the  spring,  wherever  was  the  first  appear- 
ance of  these  holy  waters,  but  in  the  sanctuary, 
which  is  the  holiest  of  all,  Eze.  xMi.  12,  where  the 
mercy-seat  stood,  which  in  Revelations  is  called 
'The  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb.'  Re.  xxii.  1,2. 

1  As  the  mercy-seat  covered  the  law  deposited  in  the  ark, 
en  Christ  covers  the  transgressions  of  his  people ;  while  Christ 
Mts  upon  the  mercy-seat,  the  law  cannot  rise  up  in  judgment 
against  them. —  (Jennings.) 


This  also  is  that  which  the  prophet  Zechariah 
means,  when  he  says,  '  Living  waters  shall  go  out 
from  Jerusalem,  half  of  them  toward  the  former 
sea,  and  half  of  them  toward  the  hinder  sea,'  he. 
Zee.  xiv.  s.  They  are  said  to  go  forth  from  Jeru- 
salem, because  they  came  down  to  the  city  from 
out  of  the  sanctuary  which  stood  in  Jerusalem. 
This  is  that  which  in  another  place  is  called  a 
river  of  water  of  life,  because  it  comes  forth  from 
the  throne,  and  because  it  was  at  the  head  of  it, 
as  I  suppose,  used  in  and  about  temple-worship. 
It  was  with  this,  I  think,  that  the  molten  sea  and 
the  ten  lavers  were  filled,  and  in  which  the  priests 
washed  their  hands  and  feet  when  they  went  into 
the  temple  to  do  service ;  and  that  also  in  which 
they  washed  the  sacrifices  before  they  offered  them 
to  God;  yea,  I  presume,  all  the  washings  and 
rinsings  about  their  worship  was  with  this  water. 

This  water  is  said  in  Ezekiel  and  Revelations 
to  have  the  tree  of  life  grow  on  the  banks  of  it, 
and  was  a  type  of  the  word  and  Spirit  of  God,  by 
which,  both  Christ  himself  sanctified  himself,  in 
order  to  his  worship  as  high-priest.  Eze.  xlvii.  Re.  xxii. 
And  also  this  water  is  that  which  heals  all  those 
that  shall  be  saved;  and  by  which,  they  being 
sanctified  thereby  also,  do  all  their  works  of  wor- 
ship and  service  acceptably,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  This  water  therefore  is  said  to  go  forth 
into  the  sea,  the  world,  and  to  heal  its  fish,  the 
sinners  therein ;  yea,  this  is  that  water  of  which 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  saith,  Whosoever  shall 
drink  thereof  shall  live  for  ever.    Eze.  xlvii.  8-10.   Zee. 

xiv.  8.    Jn.  iv.  14. 

LX  V.  Of  the  chains  idhich  were  in  tlie  oracle  or 
inner  Temple. 

As  there  were  chains  on  the  pillars  that  stood 
before  the  porch  of  the  temple,  and  in  the  first 
house;  so,  like  unto  them,  there  were  chains  in 
the  holiest,  here  called  the  oracle.  These  chains 
were  not  chains  in  show,  or  as  carved  on  wood,  he, 
but  chains  indeed,  and  that  of  gold;  and  they  were 
prepared  to  make  a  partition  '  before  the  oracle ' 
within.  1  Ki.  vi.  21.  2  Ch.  ffi.  16. 

I  told  you  before  that  the  holiest  was  called  the 
oracle,  not  because  in  a  strict  sense  the  whole  of 
it  was  so,  but  because  such  answer  of  God  was 
there,  as  was  not  in  the  outward  temple;  but  I 
think  that  the  ark  and  mercy-seat  were  indeed 
more  especially  that  called  the  oracle;  'for  there 
I  will  meet  with  thee,'  saith  God,  and  from  above 
that  'I  will  commune  with  thee.'  Ex.  xxv.  22.  When 
David  said,  'I  lift  up  my  bands  toward  thy  holy 
oracle,'  he  meant  not  so  much  towards  the  holiest 
house,  as  toward  the  mercy-seat  that  was  therein. 
Or,  as  he  saith  in  the  margin,  '  Toward  the  oracle 
of  thy  sanctuary.'  Ps. xxvih.  2. 

When  therefore  he  saith,  'before  the  oracle,'  he 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   Sn RITUALIZED. 


505 


means,  these  chains  wc;e  put  in  the  most  holy 
place,  hefore  the  ark  and  mercy-seat,  to  give  to 
Aaron  and  his  sons  to  understand  that  an  addi- 
tional glory  was  there.  For  the  ark  and  mercy- 
seat  were  preferred  before  that  holy  house  itself, 
even  as  Christ  and  the  grace  of  God  is  preferred 
before  the  highest  heavens.  'The  Lord  is  high 
above  all  nations,  and  his  glory  above  the  heavens.' 

i's.  exiii.  1. 

So  then,  the  partition  that  was  made  in  this 
house  by  these  chains,  these  golden  chains,  was 
not  so  much  to  divide  the  holy  from  the  place  most 
holy,  as  to  show  that  there  is  in  the  holiest  house 
that  which  is  yet  more  worthy  than  it. 

The  holiest  was  a  type  of  heaven,  but  the  ark 
and  mercy-seat  were  a  type  of  Christ,  and  of  the 
mercy  of  God  to  us  by  him;  and  I  trow  any  man 
will  conclude,  if  he  knows  what  he  says,  that  the 
God  and  Christ  of  heaven  are  more  excellent  than 
the  house  they  dwell  in.  Hence  David  said  again, 
'Whom  have  I  in  heaven  buttheeV  For  thou  art 
more  excellent  than  they.  Ps.lxxiii.  25.  For  though 
that  which  is  called  heaven  would  serve  some;  yea, 
though  God  himself  was  out  of  it,  yet  none  but  the 
God  of  heaven  will  satisfy  a  truly  gracious  man:  it 
is  God  that  the  soul  of  this  man  thirsteth  for;  it  is 
God  that  is  his  exceeding  joy.  Ps.xiii.  2;  lxiiil;  cxiiii.C; 

xvii.  15;  xliii.4. 

These  chains  then,  as  they  made  this  partition 
in  the  most  holy  place,  may  teach  us,  that  when 
we  shall  be  glorified  in  heaven,  we  shall  yet,  even 
then,  and  there,  know  that  there  will  continue  an 
infinite  disproportion  between  God  and  us.  The 
golden  chains  that  are  there  will  then  distinguish 
[or  separate]  the  Creator  from  the  creature.  For 
we,  even  we  which  shall  be  saved,  shall  yet  retain 
our  own  nature,  and  shall  still  continue  finite 
beings;  yea,  and  shall  there  also  see  a  dispropor- 
tion between  our  Lord,  our  head,  and  us;  fur  though 
now  we  are,  and  also  then  shall  be  like  him  as  to 
his  manhood;  yea,  and  shall  be  like  him  also,  as 
being  glorified  with  his  glory;  yet  he  shall  tran- 
scend and  go  beyond  us,  as  to  degree  and  splendour, 
as  far  as  ever  the  highest  king  on  earth  did  shine 
above  the  meanest  subject  that  dwelt  in  his 
kingdom 

Chains  have  of  old  been  made  use  of  as  notes  of 
distinction,  to  show  us  who  are  bond  men,  and  who 
free.  Yea,  they  shall  at  the  day  of  judgment  be  a 
note  of  distinction  of  bad  and  good;  even  as  here 
they  will  distinguish  the  heavens  from  God,  and  the 
creature  from  the  Creator.  aPe.ii.4.  Jude6.  Mat.  mi.  18. 

True,  they  are  chains  of  sin  and  wrath,  but  these 
chains  of  gold;  yet  these  chains,  even  these  also 
will  keep  creatures  in  their  place,  that  the  Creator 
may  have  his  glory,  and  receive  those  acknow- 
ledgments there  from  them,  which  is  due  unto  his 
Majesty,    fte.  iv.;  v.  11— u. 

VOL.  III. 


LXV1.  Of  the  high-priest,  and  of  his  office  in  the 
inner  Tni': 

When  tilings  were  thus  ordained  in  the  lion 
'most  holy,'  then  went  the  high-priest  in  thither, 
according  as  he  was  appointed,  to  do  his  office, 
which  was  to  burn  incense  in  his  golden  censer, 
and  to  sprinkle  with  his  finger  the  blood  of  his 
sacrifice,  for  the  people,  upon  and  above  the  mercy- 
seat.    Ex.  xxx.  7-10.  Le.  xvi.  11-14. 

Now  for  this  special  work  of  his,  he  had  pecu- 
liar preparations.  1.  He  was  to  be  washed  in 
water.  2.  Then  he  was  to  put  on  his  holy  gar- 
ments. 3.  After  that  he  was  to  be  anointed  with 
holy  oil.  4.  Then  an  offering  was  to  he  offered  for 
him,  for  the  further  fitting  of  him  for  his  office. 
5.  The  blood  of  this  sacrifice  must  be  put,  some 
of  it  upon  his  right  ear,  some  on  the  thumb  of  his 
right  hand,  and  some  on  the  great  toe  of  his  right 
foot.  This  done,  some  more  of  the  blood,  with  the 
anointing  oil,  must  be  sprinkled  upon  him,  and 
upon  his  garment;  for  after  this  manner  must  he 
be  consecrated  to  his  work  as  high-priest.  Ex.xxbc. 

His  being  washed  in  water  was  to  show  the 
purity  of  Christ's  humanity.  His  curious  robes 
were  a  type  of  all  the  perfections  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness. The  holy  oil  that  was  poured  on  his 
head  was  to  show  how  Christ  was  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  unto  his  work,  as  priest.  The 
sacrifice  of  his  consecration  was  a  type  of  that 
offering  Christ  offered  in  the  garden  when  he  mixed 
his  sweat  with  his  own  blood,  and  tears,  and  cries, 
when  he  prayed  to  him  that  was  able  to  save  him; 
'and  was  heard  in  that  he  feared;'  for  with  his 
blood,  as  was  Aaron  with  the  blood  of  the  bullock 
that  was  slain  for  him,  was  this  blessed  one  be- 
smeared from  head  to  foot,  when  bis  sweat,  as 
great  drops  or  dodders  of  blood,  fell  down  from 
head  and  face,  and  whole  body,  to  the  ground. 

Lu.  xxii.  -14.  He.  x.  20. 

"When  Aaron  was  thus  prepared,  then  he  offered 
his  offering  for  the  people,  and  carried  the  blood 
within  the  veil.  Le.  xvi.  The  which  Christ  Jesus 
also  answered,  when  he  offered  his  own  body  with- 
out the  gate,  and  then  carried  his  blood  into  the 
heavens,  and  sprinkled  it  before  the  mercy-seat. 
He.  xiii.  ll,  12;  ix.  li,  12,24.  For  Aaron  was  a  type  of 
Christ;  his  offering,  a  type  of  Christ's  offering  his 
body;  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  a  type  of  the  blood 
of  Christ;  his  garments,  a  type  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness; the  mercy-seat,  a  type  of  the  throne  of 
grace;  the  incense,  a  type  of  Christ's  praise;  and 
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  upon 
the  mercy-seat,  a  type  of  Christ's  pleading  the 
virtue  of  his  sufferings  for  us  in  the  presence  of 
God  in  heaven.   He.  ix.  10— 28. 

'  Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the 
heavenly  calling,  consider  the  apostle   and  high 

64 


506 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus.'  He.  m.  l. 
•  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  high  priest,  that 
is  passed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God, 
let  us  hold  fast  our  profession.  For  we  have  not 
an  high  priest  which  cannot  he  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  our  infirmities ;  hut  was  in  all  points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  Let  us 
therefore  come  holdly  unto  the  throne  of  grace, 
that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help 
in  time  of  need.  For  every  high  priest  taken  from 
among  men  is  ordained  for  men  in  things  pertain- 
ing to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacri- 
fices for  sins:  who  can  have  compassion  on  the 
ignorant,  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way;  for 
that  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infirmity. 

Ho.  iv.  14-16  ;  v.  1,  '.'. 

This  then  is  our  high  priest ;  and  this  was  made 
so  '  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment, 
but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life.'  For  Aaron 
and  his  sons  were  made  priests  without  an  oath, 
'  but  this  with  an  oath  by  him  that  said  unto  him, 
The  Lord  sware  and  will  not  repent,  Thou  art  a 
priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec.  By 
so  much  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of  a  better  testa- 
ment.' 

1  And  they  truly  were  many  priests,  because 
they  were  not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of 
death.  But  this  man,  because  he  continueth  ever, 
hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood.  Wherefore  he 
is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that 
come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  For  such  an  high 
priest  became  us,  who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners,  and  made  higher  than  the 
heavens;  who  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high 
priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins, 
and  then  for  the  people's:  for  this  he  did  once, 
when  he  offered  up  himself.  For  the  law  maketh 
men  high  priests  which  have  infirmity;  but  the 
word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the  law,  maketh 
the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  evermore.  Now 
of  the  things  which  we  have  spoken  this  is  the 
sum:  We  have  such  an  high  priest,  who  is  set  on 
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  majesty  in  the 
heavens;  a  minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  of  the 
true  tabernacle,1  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not 
man.  For  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer 
gifts  and  sacrifices:  wherefore  it  is  of  necessity 
that  this  man  have  somewhat  also  to  offer.  For 
if  he  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  be  a  priest,  see- 
ing that  there  are  priests  that  offer  gifts  according 
to  the  law:  who  serve  unto  the  example  and  shadow 
of  heavenly  things,  as  Moses  was  admonished  of 
God  when  he  was  about  to  make  the  tabernacle: 
for,  See,  saith  he,  that  thou  make  all  things  ac- 


1  In  Buuyan's  edition  this  is  tailed  the  '  new  tabernacle,' 
a  typographical  error  which  is  corrected  by  restoring  the  true 
reading. — (Ed  ) 


cording  to   the    pattern    showed    to    thee  in   the 

mount.'     He.  vii.  1(5  to  viii.  5. 

'But  Christ  being  come  an  high  priest  of  good 
tilings  to  come,  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect 
tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say, 
not  of  this  building;  neither  by  the  blood  of  goats 
and  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood,  he  entered  in 
once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us.  For  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and 
of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the 
unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh: 
how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without 
spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from  dead 
works  to  serve  the  living  God. 

•  For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places 
made  with  hands,  which  are  the  figures  of  the  true; 
but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  pre- 
sence of  God  for  us:  Nor  yet  that  he  should  offer 
himself  often,  as  the  high  priest  entereth  into  the 
holy  place  every  year  with  blood  of  others;  for 
then  must  he  often  have  suffered  since  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world:  but  now  once  in  the  end  of  the 
world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself.  And  as  it  is  appointed  unto 
men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment:  so 
Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many; 
and  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear 
the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation.'   He.  ix. 

11—14,  24-2S. 

LXVII.  Of  the  high-priest's  going  into  the  Holiest 
alone. 

As  it  was  the  privilege  of  the  high-priest  to  go 
into  the  holiest  alone,  so  there  was  something  of 
mystery  also,  to  which  I  shall  speak  a  little : 
'  There  shall,'  says  God,  '  be  no  man  in  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation,  when  he  [Aaron]  goeth 
in  to  make  an  atonement  in  the  holy  place,  until 
he  come  out,  and  have  made  an  atonement  for 
himself,  and  for  his  household,  and  for  all  the  con- 
gregation of  Israel.'  Le.  xvi.  17.  The  reason  is,  for 
that  Christ  is  mediator  alone;  he  trod  the  wine- 
press alone  ;  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with 
him  to  help  him  there.  Is.  kiii.  3.  1  Ti.  u.  5. 

Of  the  people  there  was  none  to  help  him  to 
bear  his  cross,  or  In  the  management  of  the  first 
part  of  his  priestly  office.  Why  then  should  there 
be  any  to  share  with  him  in  his  executing  of  the 
second  part  thereof?  Besides,  he  that  helps  an 
intercessor  must  himself  be  innocent,  or  in  favour, 
upon  some  grounds  not  depending  on  the  worth  of 
the  intercession.  But  as  to  the  intercession  of 
Christ,  who  can  come  in  to  help  upon  the  accouat 
of  such  innocency  or  worth?  Not  the  highest 
angel ;  for  there  is  none  such  but  one,  wherefore 
he  must  do  that  alone.  Hence  it  is  said,  He  went 
in  alone,  is  there  alone,  and  there  intercedes  alone. 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


507 


Anil  this  is  manifest  not  only  in  the  type  Aaron, 
but  in  the  antitype  Christ  Jesus,    ne.vi.19,  20;  ix. 

7-11,  21,  23,  24. 

I  do  not  say  that  there  is  no  man  in  heaven  hut 
Jesus  Christ ;  hut  1  say,  he  is  there  to  make  in- 
tercession for  us  alone.  Yea,  the  holy  text  says 
more.  '  I  go,'  saith  Christ,  '  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you;  anil  if  I  go  anil  prepare  a  place  for  you, 
I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that 
where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also.'  Jn.xiv.  1-3. 

This  text  seems  to  insinuate  that  Christ  is  in 
the  holiest  or  highest  heavens  alone;  and  that  he 
there  alone  must  be,  until  he  has  finished  his  work 
of  intercession;  for  not  till  then  he  comes  again 
to  take  us  to  himself.  Let  us  grant  Christ  the 
pre-eminency  in  this,  as  also  in  all  other  things; 
for  he  is  intercessor  for  his  church,  and  makes  it 
for  them  in  the  holiest  alone.  It  is  said  he  is  the 
light  that  no  man  can  approach  unto. 

LXVIII.  Of  the  high-priest's  going  in  thitlier  bid 
once  a  year. 

As  the  high-priest  went  into  the  holiest  when 
he  went  in  thither  alone ;  so  to  do  that  work,  he 
went  in  thither  but  once  a  year.  Thou  shalt 
not  come  'at  all  times,'  said  God  to  him,  'into 
the  holy  place,  within  the  veil,  before  the  mercy- 
scat,  which  is  upon  the  ark,  that  thou  die  not.' 

Le.  xvi.  2. 

And  as  he  was  to  go  in  thither  but  'once  a  year,' 
so  not  then  neither,  unless  clothed  and  adorned, 
with  his  Aaronical  holy  robes.  Le.  xvi.  32-34.  Then 
he  was  to  be  clothed,  as  I  hinted  before,  with  the 
holy  robes,  the  frontlet  of  gold  upon  his  forehead, 
the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  upon  his  breast,  and 
the  jingling  bells  upon  the  skirts  of  his  garment  ? 
nor  would  all  this  do,  unless  he  went  in  thither  with 

blood.  Ex.  xxviii.    Le.  xvi. 

Now,  this  once  a  year  the  apostle  taketh  special 
notice  of,  and  makes  great  use  of  it.  '  Once  a 
year,' saith  he,  this  high-priest  went  in  thither: 
once  a  year,  that  is,  to  show,  that  Christ  should 
once  in  the  end  of  the  world,  go  into  heaven  itself, 
to  make  intercession  there  for  us.  For  by  this 
word  'year,'  he  shows  the  term  and  time  of  the 
world  is  meant ;  and  by  '  once  '  in  that  year,  he 
means  once  in  the  end  of  the  world. 

'Not,'  saith  he,  'that  he  should  offer  himself 
often  :  as  the  high-priest  entereth  into  the  holy 
place  every  year  with  blood  of  others.  For  then 
must  he  often  have  suffered  since  the  foundation  of 
the  world:  but  now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world 
hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  hy  the  sacrifice 
of  himself.  He.  ix.  25,  2G. 

And  having  thus  once  offered  his  sacrifice  with- 
out the  veil,  he  is  now  gone  into  the  holiest,  to 
perfect  his  work  of  mediation  for  us.  Not  into  the 
holy  places  made  with  hands,  which  are  the  figures 


of  the  true,  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear 
in  the  presence  of  God  for  us. 

Now  if  our  Lord  Jesus  is  gone  indeed,  now  to 
appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us ;  and  if  this 
now  be  the  once  a  year  that  the  type  speaks  of; 
the  once  in  the  end  of  the  world,  as  our  apostle 
says;  then  it  follows,  that  the  people  of  God  should 
all  stand  waiting  for  his  benediction  that  to  them 
he  shall  bring  with  him  when  he  shall  return  from 
thence.  Wherefore  he  adds,  '  Christ  was  once  of- 
fered to  bear  the  sins  of  many;  and  unto  them  that 
look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the  second  time  with- 
out sin  unto  salvation.'  ver.  28. 

This,  therefore,  shows  us  the  greatness  of  the 
work  that  Christ  has  to  do  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  for  that  he  stays  there  so  long.  He  accom- 
plished all  the  first  part  of  his  priesthood  in  less 
than  forty  years,  if  you  take  in  the  making  of  his 
holy  garments  and  all ;  but  about  this  second  part 
thereof,  he  has  been  above  in  heaven  above  sixteen 
hundred  years,  and  yet  has  not  done. 

This  therefore  calls  for  faith  and  patience  i:i 
saints,  and  by  this  he  also  tries  the  world;  so  that 
they,  in  mocking  manner,  begin  to  say  already, 
'  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ? '  2  Pe.  iii.  4. 
But  I  say  again,  We  must  look  and  wait.  If  the 
people  waited  for  Zacharias,  and  wondered  that  he 
staid  so  long,  because  he  staid  in  the  holy  place 
somewhat  longer  than  they  expected,  no  marvel  if 
the  faith  of  the  world  about  Christ's  coming  is  fled 
and  gone  long  ago,  yea,  and  that  the  children  also 
are  put  to  it  to  wait,  since  a  scripture  '  little  while  ' 
doth  prove  so  long.  For  that  which  the  apostle 
saith,  '  yet  a  little  while,'  doth  prove  to  some  to  be 
a  very  long  little.  Jn.  xvi  16.   ne.  x.  :,:. 

True,  Zacharias  had  then  to  do  with  angels,  and 
that  made  him  stay  so  long.  0  but  Jesus  is  with 
God,  before  him,  in  his  presence,  talking  with  him, 
swallowed  up  in  him,  and  with  hi.s  glory,  and  that 
is  one  cause  he  stays  so  long.  He  is  there  also 
pleading  his  blood  for  his  tempted  ones,  and  inter- 
ceding for  all  his  elect,  and  waits  there  till  all  his 
be  fitted  for,  and  ready  to  enter  into  glory.  I  say, 
he  is  there,  and  there  must  be  till  then  ;  and' this 
is  another  reason  why  he  doth  stay  the  time  we 
count  so  long. 

And,  indeed,  it  is  a  wonder  to  me,  that  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  should  once  think,  now  he  is  there, 
of  returning  hither  again,  considering  the  ill  treat- 
ment he  met  with  here  before.  But  what  will  not 
love  do  ?  Surely  he  would  never  touch  the  ground 
again,  had  he  not  a  people  here  that  cannot  be 
made  perfect  but  by  his  coming  to  them.  He  also 
is  made  judge  of  quick  and  dead,  and  will  get  him 
glory  in  the  ruin  of  them  that  hate  him. 

His  people  are  as  himself  to  him.  Can  a  loving 
husband  abide  to  be  always  from  a  beloved  spouse  ? 
Besides,  as  I  said,  he  is  to  pay  the  wicked  off,  for 


503 


SOLOMON'S   TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


all  their  wickedness,  and  that  in  that  very  plat 
where  they  have  committed  it.  Wherefore  the  day 
appointed  for  this  is  set,  and  he  will,  and  shall 
come  quickly  to  do  it.  For  however  the  time  may 
seem  long  to  us,  yet,  according  to  the  reckoning 
of  God,  it  is  hut  a  little  while  since  he  went  into 
the  holiest  to  intercede.  '  A  thousand  years  with 
the  Lord  is  as  one  day ;'  and  after  this  manner  of 
counting,  he  has  not  heen  gone  yet  full  two  days 
into  the  holiest.  '  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concern- 
ing  his  promise,  as  some  men  count  slackness;' 
'  he  will  come  quickly,  and  will  not  tarry.'  2  Pe.  iii. 
He.  x.  37. 

LXIX.  Of  the  cherubims,  and  of  their  being  placed 
over  the  mercy-seat  in  the  inner  Temple. 

There  were  also  cherubims  in  the  most  holy 
place,  which  were  set  on  high  above  the  mercy- 
seat.     See  i  Ki.  vi.  33—58. 

1 .  These  are  called  by  the  apostles,  '  the  cheru- 
bims of  glory  shadowing  the  mercy-seat.'  He.  ix.  5. 

2.  These  cherubims  were  figures  of  the  angels 
of  God,  as  in  other  places  we  have  proved. 

3.  It  is  said  these  cherubims  were  made  of 
image  work,  and  that  in  such  manner,  as  that  they 
could,  as  some  think,  move  their  wings  by  art  ; 
wherefore  it  is  said,  '  they  stretched  forth  their 
wings  ;'  the  wings  of  the  '  cherubims  spread  them- 
selves;' and  that  the  'cherubims  spread  forth  their 
wings  over  the  place  of  the  ark,  -  and  the  staves 
thereof  above.'  l  Ki.  vi.  27.  2  Ch.  Hi.  13;  v.  8. 

4.  I  read  also  of  these  cherubims,  that  they  had 
chariots  and  wheels ;  by  which  is  taught  us  how 
ready  and  willing  the  angels  are  to  fetch  us  when 
commanded,  unto  the  paradise  of  God ;  for  these 
chariots  were  types  of  the  bosoms  of  the  angels  ; 
and  these  wheels,  of  the  quickness  of  their  motion 
to  come  for  us  when  sent.  '  The  chariots  of  God 
are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands  of  angels;  the 
Lord  is  among  them,  as  in  Sinai,  in  the  holy  place.' 

1  Ch.  xxviii.  18.  Eze.  x.  9,  15, 16,  IS,  19,  20.   2  Ki.  vi.  17.  Ps.  lxviii.  17. 

2  Ki.  ii.  11.  Da.  ix.  2. 

5.  What  difference,  if  any,  there  is  between 
cherubims  and  seraphims,  into  that  I  shall  not  now 
inquire ;  though  I  believe  that  there  are  diverse 
orders  and  degrees  of  angels  in  the  heavens,  as 
there  are  degrees  and  diverse  orders  among  men  in 
the  world.  But  that  these  cherubims  were  figures 
of  the  holy  angels,  their  being  thus  placed  in  the 
holy  oracle  doth  declare ;  for  their  dwelling-place 
is  heaven,  though  they,  for  our  sakes,  are  conver- 
sant in  the  world.  lie.  i. 

G.  It  is  said  that  these  cherubims,  in  this  holy 
place,  did  stand  upon  their  feet,  to  show,  1.  That 
the  angels  of  heaven  are  not  fallen  from  their  sta- 
tion, as  the  other  angels  are.  2.  To  show  also 
that  they  are  always  ready,  at  God's  bidding,  to 
run  with  swiftness  to  do  his  pleasure.     3.  To  show 


also  that  they  shall  continue  in  their  station,  being 
therein  confirmed  by  Jesus  Christ,  •  by  whom  all 
things  consist.'  Col.  i.  17. 

7.  It  is  said  '  their  faces  were  inward,'  looking 
one  to  another,  yet  withal  somewhat  ascendino-,  to 
show  that  the  angels  both  behold  and  wonder  at 
the  mysteries  of  grace,  as  it  is  displayed  to  usward 
from  off  the  mercy-seat.  The  faces  of  the  cheru- 
bims 'shall  look  one  to  another;  towards  the  mercy- 
seat  shall  the  faces  of  the  cherubims  be.'  Ex. xxv.20. 

2  Ch.  iii.  13.    1  Pe.  i.  12.    Ep.  iii.  10. 

(1.)  •  Towards  the  mercy-seat.'  They  are  desir- 
ous to  see  it,  and  how  from  hence,  I  say,  mercy 
doth  look  towards  us. 

(2.)  'They  look  one  towards  another,'  to  show 
that  they  agree  to  rejoice  in  the  salvation  of  our 
souls.  Lu.  xv.  10. 

(3.)  They  are  said  to  stand  above  the  mercy- 
seat,  perhaps  to  show  that  the  angels  have  not 
need  of  those  acts  of  mercy  and  forgiveness  as  we 
have,  who  stand  below,  and  are  sinners.  They 
stand  above  it ;  they  are  holy.  I  do  not  say  they 
have  no  need  that  the  goodness  of  God  should  be 
extended  to  them,  for  it  is  by  that  they  have  been 
and  are  preserved ;  but  they  need  not  to  be  for- 
given, for  they  have  committed  no  iniquity. 

(4.)  They  stand  there  also  with  wings  stretched 
out,  to  show  how  ready,  if  need  be,  the  angels  are 
to  come  from  heaven  to  preach  this  gospel  to  the 
world.'  Lu.  ii.  9—14. 

(5.)  It  is  said  in  this,  that  thus  standing,  their 
wings  did  reach  from  wall  to  wall;  from  one  side 
of  this  holy  house  to  the  other;  to  show  that  all 
the  angels  within  the  boundaries  of  the  heavens, 
with  one  consent  and  one  mind,  are  ready  to  come 
down  to  help  and  serve,  and  do  for  God's  elect  at 
his  command. 

It  is  said,  als@,  that  their  wings  are  stretched 
on  high,  to  show  that  they  are  only  delighted  in 
those  duties  which  are  enjoined  them  by  the  high 
and  lofty  One.  and  not  inclined,  no  not  to  serve  the 
saints  in  their  sensual  or  fleshly  designs.  It  may 
be  also  to  show  that  they  are  willing  to  take  their 
flight  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other,  to  serve 
God  and  his  church  for  good.  Mat.  xiii.  41, 49;  adv.  Sis 
xxv.  31.  2  Th.  i.  7,  8. 

LXX.   Of  the  figures  that  were  upon  (lie  walls  of  the 
inner  Temple. 

The  wall  of  the  inner  temple,  which  was  a  type 
of  heaven,  was,  as  I  have  already  told  you,  ceiled 
with  cedar  from  the  bottom  to  the  top.  Now  by 
the  vision  of  Ezekiel,  it  is  said  this  wall  was  carved 
with  cherubims  and  palm  trees.  'So  that  a  palm 
tree  was  between  a  cherub  and  a  cherub,  and  every 
cherub  had  two  faces  ;  so  that  the  face  of  a  man 
v)as  toward  the  palm  tree  on  the  one  side,  and  the 
face  of  a  young  lion  toward  the  palm  tree  on  the 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE   SPIRITUALIZED. 


500 


other  side.  It  was  made  through  all  tlie  house 
round  about ;  from  the  ground  unto  above  the  door 
were  cherubims  and  palm  trees  made.'  Eze. xli.  18-20. 

1.  As  to  these  cherubims  and  palm  trees,  I  have 
already  told  you  what  I  think  them  to  bo  figures 
of.  The  cherubims  are  figures  of  the  holy  angels, 
and  the  palm  trees  of  upright  ones;  we  therefore 
here  are  to  discourse  only  of  the  placing  of  them 
in  the  heavens. 

2.  Now  you  see  the  palm  trees  in  the  holiest 
are  placed  between  a  cherub  and  a  cherub,  round 
about  the  house,  which  meth'mks  should  be  to  sig- 
nify that  the  saints  shall  not  there  live  by  faith 
and  hope,  as  here,  but  in  the  immediate  enjoyment 
of  God;  for  to  be  placed  between  the  cherubims, 
is  to  be  placed  where  God  dwells;  for  Holy  Writ 
says  plainly,  lie  dwells  between  the  cherubims, 
even  where  here  it  is  said  these  palm  trees,  or  up- 
right ones  are  placed,  l  Sa.  iv.  i.  2  Ki.  rix.  15.  l  Ch.  riii.  6. 
Ps.  lxxx.  l.  is.  xxxvii.  16.  The  church  on  earth  is  called 
God's  house,  and  he  will  dwell  in  it  for  ever;  and 
heaven  itself  is  called  God's  house,  and  we  shall 
dwell  in  it  for  ever,  and  that  between  the  cheru- 
bims. This  is  more  than  grace,  this  is  grace  and 
glory,  glory  indeed. 

3.  To  dwell  between  the  cherubims  may  be  also 
to  show  that  there  we  shall  be  equal  to  the  angels. 
Mark,  here  is  a  palm  tree  and  a  cherub,  a  palm 
tree  and  a  cherub.  Here  we  are  a  little  lower,  but 
there  we  shall  not  be  a  whit  behind  the  very  chief 
of  them.  A  palm  tree  and  a  cherub,  an  upright 
one  between  the  cherubs,  will  then  be  round  about 
the  house  ;  we  shall  be  placed  in  the  same  rank  ; 
'  neither  can  they  die  any  more,  for  they  are  equal 
unto  the  angels.'  Lu.  xx.  36. 

4.  The  palm  trees  thus  placed,  may  be  also  to 
show  us  that  the  elect  of  God  shall  there  take  up 
the  vacancies  of  the  fallen  angels ;  they  for  sin 
were  cast  down  from  the  holy  heavens,  and  we  by 
grace  shall  be  caught  up  thither,  and  be  placed 
between  a  cherub  and  a  cherub.  When  1  say 
their  places,  1  do  not  mean  the  fickleness  of  that 
state,  that  they  for  want  of  electing  love  did  stand 
in  while  in  glory  ;  for  the  heavens,  by  the  blood 
of  Christ,  is  now  to  us  become  a  purchased  pos- 
session ;  wherefore,  as  we  shall  have  their  place 
in  the  heavenlykingdom,  so,  by  virtue  of  redeeming 
blood,  we  shall  there  abide,  and  go  no  more  out ; 
for  by  that  means  that  kingdom  will  stand  to  us 
unshaken.  He.  ix.  12;  xii.  22—  24,  28.  Re.iu.13. 

5.  These  palm  trees,  I  say,  seem  to  take  their 
places  who  for  sin  were  cast  from  thence.  The 
elect  therefore  take  that  place  in  possession,  but  a 
better  crown  fo*  ever.  Thus  '  Israel  possessed  that 
of  the  Canaanites  ;'  and  David,  Saul's  kingdom ; 
and  Matthias,  the  place,  the  apostleship  of  Judas. 

Ac.  i  20-26. 


G.  Nor  were  the  habitations  which  the  fallen 
angels  lost,  excepting  that  which  was  excepted  he- 
fore,  at  all  inferior  to  theirs  that  stood;  for  their 
captain  and  prince  is  called  son  of  the  morning,  for 
he  was  the  antitype  there,  i*.  m.is. 

7.  Thus,  you  see,  they  were  placed  from  the 
ground  up  to  above  the  door;  that  is,  fn.  q 
lowest  to  tho  highest  angel  there.  For  as  there 
arc  great  saints  and  small  ones  in  the  church  on 
earth,  so  there  are  angels  of  divers  degrees  in 
heaven,  some  greater  than  some ;  but  the  smallest 
saint,  when  ho  gets  to  heaven,  shall  have  an  angel  a 
dignity,  an  angel's  place.  From  tho  ground  you 
find  a  palm  tree  between  a  cherub  and  a  cherub. 

8.  And  every  cherub  had  two  faces — so  here ; 
but  1  read  in  Eze.  x.  u,  that  they  had  four  faces 
apiece.  The  first  was  the  face  of  a  cherubim;  the 
second,  tho  face  of  a  man  ;  the  third,  the  face  of 
a  lion  ;  and  the  fourth,  the  face  of  an  eagle. 

9.  They  had  two  faces  apiece ;  not  to  show  that 
they  were  of  a  double  heart,  for  '  their  appearances 
and  themselves' were  the  same,  and  'they  went 
every  one  straight  forward.'  Eze.  x  22.  These  two 
faces,  then,  were  to  show  here  the  quickness  of 
their  apprehension,  and  their  terriblcness  to  exe- 
cute the  mind  of  God.  The  face  of  a  man  signifies 
them  masters  of  reason  ;  the  face  of  a  lion,  the 
terribleness  of  their  presence,    l  Co.  xiii.  12.  ju.  «a.  c. 

In  another  place  I  read  of  their  wheels ;  yea, 
that  themselves,  '  their  whole  bodies,  and  their 
backs,  and  their  hands,  and  their  wings,  and  the 
wheels  were  full  of  eyes  round  about.'  Eze.  i.  13;  x.  12. 
And  this  is  to  show  us  how  knowing  and  quick- 
sighted  they  are  in  all  providences  and  dark  dis- 
pensations, and  how  nimble  in  apprehending  the 
mischievous  designs  of  the  enemies  of  God's  church, 
and  so  how  able  they  are  to  undermine  them.  And 
forasmuch  also  as  they  have  the  face  of  a  lion,  we 
by  that  are  showed  how  full  of  power  they  are  to 
kill  and  to  destroy,  when  God  says,  Go  forth  and 
do  so.  Now,  with  these  we  must  dwell  and  co- 
habit, a  palm  tree  and  a  cherub ;  a  palm  tree  and 
a  cherub  must  be  from  the  ground  to  above  the 
door,  round  about  the  house — the  heavens. 

'So  that  the  face  of  a  man  icas  toward  the  palm 
tree  on  the  one  side,  and  the  face  of  a  young  lion 
toward  the  palm  tree  on  the  other  side.'  By  these 
two  faces  may  be  also  showed  that  we  in  tho 
heavens  shall  have  glory  sufficient  to  familiarize  us 
to  the  angels.  Their  lion-like  looks,  with  which  they 
used  to  fright  the  biggest  saint  on  earth,  as  you 
have  it,  Ge.  xxxii.  30.  Ju.  xiii.  15,  22,  shall  then  be  accom- 
panied with  the  familiar  looks  of  a  man.  Then 
angels  and  men  shall  be  fellows,  and  have  to  do 
with  each  as  such. 

Thus  you  see  something  of  that  little  that  I  hate 
I  found  in  the  temple  of  God. 


A  DISCOURSE 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR 


That  part  of  Palestine  in  which  the  celebrated 
mountains  of  Lebanon  are  situated,  is  the  border 
country  adjoining  Syria,  having  Sidon  for  its  sea- 
port, and  Land,  nearly  adjoining  the  city  of  Da- 
mascus, on  the  north.  This  metropolitan  city  of 
Syria,  and  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Damascus, 
was  strongly  fortified;  and  during  the  border  con- 
flicts it  served  as  a  cover  to  the  Assyrian  army. 
Bunyan,  with  great  reason,  supposes  that,  to  keep 
them  in  check,  Solomon  built  a  tower  house  and 
palace,  well  furnished  with  munitions  of  Avar,  called 
the  house  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon. 

As  the  magnificent  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  the 
seat  of  public  worship  appointed  by  God,  it  was 
considered  typical  of  the  gospel  dispensation,  which 
was  intended  to  supersede  it.  All  its  parts  and 
utensils,  sacrifices  and  services,  have  been  de- 
scribed, in  their  typical  meaning,  in  Solomon  s 
Temple  Spiritualized;  but  as  the  lovely  system  of 
the  gospel  had,  with  slow  and  irresistible  steps,  to 
conquer  the  prejudices,  passions,  and  wickedness 
of  mankind,  those  who  bore  the  brunt  of  this  battle 
were  considered  as  the  church  militant  in  the 
wilderness :  and  Bunyan  has,  in  this  treatise,  en- 
deavoured to  show  that  this  palace  and  fortress 
was  typical  of  the  churches  of  Christ  while  in  a 
state  of  holy  warfare,  defending  their  Divine  dis- 
pensation, and  extending  the  line  of  defence  by 
progressive  spiritual  conquests.  While  the  churches 
are  surrounded  by  enemies,  they  have  inexhaust- 
ible internal  comfort,  strength,  and  consolation. 
Like  the  house  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  they  are 
also  pleasantly,  nay,  beautifully  situated.  If  Mount 
Zion  was  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  the  moun- 
tains of  Damascus  were  a  picture  of  the  earthly 
paradise.  So  beautiful  is  the  scenery,  and  balmy 
the  air,  that  one  part  is  called  Eden,  or  the  gar- 
den of  the  Lord.  It  is  described  by  Arabian  poets 
as  always  bearing  winter  far  above  upon  his  head, 
spring  on  its  shoulders,  and  autumn  in  his  bosom, 
while  perpetual  summer  lies  sleeping  at  his  feet. 
It  was  upon  this  beautiful  spot,  called  by  Isaiah 
*  the  glory  of  Lebanon,'  that  Solomon  built  his 
house  in  the  forest. 

This  is  the  plain  matter  of  fact  which  Bunyan 
establishes  from  the  sacred  Scriptures,  but  he  was, 
as  to  lettered  lore,  an  unlearned  man;  at  all  events, 


no  man  could  say  of  him  that  'much  learning 
has  made  thee  mad.'  Bunyan 's  is  the  plain  com- 
mon-sense scriptural  account  of  this  building;  but 
he  differs  greatly  from  almost  all  our  learned  com- 
mentators— they  imagining  that  this  house  was 
near  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  The  Assembly  of 
Divines,  in  their  valuable  annotations,  suggest  that 
it  was  so  called  '  because  great  store  of  trees,  as 
in  Lebanon,  were  planted  about  it ;  and  gardens, 
orchards,  and  all  manner  of  delightful  things  were 
added  thereto:'  to  aid  this  conjecture,  they  quote 
Ec.  n.  4,  g.  Poole  says  that  it  was  '  a  house  so  called, 
either,  first,  because  it  was  built  in  the  mountain 
and  forest  of  Lebanon,  for  recreation  in  summer 
time;  but  generally  held  to  have  been  near  Jeru- 
salem ;  or  rather,  secondly,  from  some  resemblance 
it  had  with  Lebanon  for  its  pleasant  shades  and 
groves."  Diodati  considers  it  the  same  with  Solo- 
mon's palace,  but  called  the  house  of  Lebanon  by 
reason  of  the  groves  planted  about  it ;  or  of  the 
great  number  of  cedar  columns  brought  from  Leb- 
anon, and  used  in  its  construction.  Even  Bunyan's 
favourite  translation,  made  at  Geneva  by  the  Puri- 
tans, while  it  gives  two  wood-cuts  of  '  The  King's 
house  in  the  wood  of  Lebanon,'  a  marginal  note 
is  added — •  For  the  beauty  of  the  place,  and  great 
abundance  of  cedar  trees  that  went  to  the  building 
thereof,  it  was  compared  to  Mount  Lebanon.' 
Calmet,  in  his  very  valuable  translation,  accom- 
panied by  the  Vulgate  Latin,  gives  the  same  idea : 
'  II  batit  encore  le  palais  appelle  la  maison  du 
Leban,  a  cause  de  la  quantite  prodigeuse  de  cedres 
qui  entroient  dans  la  structure  de  cet  edifice.' 
Bishop  Patrick  places  this  house  in  or  near  to 
Jerusalem,  '  in  a  cool,  shady  mountain,  which 
made  it  resemble  Mount  Lebanon.'  Dr.  Gill  was 
of  opinion  that  this  house  was  near  Jerusalem ; 
because  it  was  a  magazine  of  arms,  and  a  court 
of  judicature,  and  had  its  name  from  being  built 
of  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  and  among  groves  of 
trees.  Josephus,  in  his  Antiquities  of  the  Jews, 
book  vui.  chap.  vi.  s.  5,  states  that  when  the  Queen 
of  Sheba  came  to  Judea,  she  was  amazed  at  the 
wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  surprised  at  the  fineness 
and  largeness  of  his  royal  palace  ;  '  but  she  was 
beyond  measure  astonished  at  the  house  which  was 
called  the  forest  of  Lebanon.'      Matthew  Henry 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


511 


follows  the  opinion  of  Bunyan ;  'I  rather  incline 
to  think  it  was  a  house  built  in  the  forest  of  Leb- 
anon itself,  whither,  though  far  distant  from  Jeru- 
salem, Solomon  having  so  many  chariots  and  horses, 
and  those  dispersed  into  chariot  cities,  which  pro- 
bably were  his  stages,  he  might  frequently  retire 
with  ea^e.'  Express  notice  is  taken  of  Lebanon, 
as  the  place  of  a  warlike  building,  in  2E3.xix.,  and 

ill   Ca.  vii.  -i. 

The  tower  of  Lebanon  is  described  as  looking 
towards  Damascus.  The  ruins  of  this  house  and 
tower,  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  are  probably  those 
seen  by  Benjamin  of  Tudela,  who  describes  the 
stones  of  which  it  was  built  as  twenty  palms  long, 
and  twelve  wide.  Gabriel  Sionita  describes  the 
tower  as  an  hundred  cubits  high,  and  fifty  broad. 
Maundrel  saw  the  ruins  in  the  mountains  of  Leb- 
anon at  a  distance.  The  objections  made  by  our 
commentators  to  the  plain  testimony  of  the  Scrip- 
tures are,  that  Solomon  would  not  have  built  this 
beautiful  house  at  so  great  a  distance  from  the 
(  apital— that  he  would  not  have  risked  so  much 
treasure  nor  the  munitions  of  war  in  a  forest — 
and  that  he  would  not,  on  the  extreme  border  of 
the  kingdom  of  Judea,  have  set  up  a  throne,  or 
seat  of  judgment.  The  answer  to  these  objections 
appears  to  me  to  be  conclusive.  Lebanon  possessed 
the  most  commanding  sites  for  a  border  fortress, 
and  therefore  an  admirable  depot  for  arms,  to  en- 
able the  Jewish  warriors  to  keep  out  their  most 
vigilant  and  dangerous  enemies,  the  Assyrians. 
The  wealth  that  was  deposited  in  this  house  was 
calculated  to  excite  greater  vigilauce  to  protect  so 
important  a  pass,  while  it  would  divert  the  atten- 
tion of  an  enemy  from  the  still  more  wealthy  tem- 
ple and  fortress  at  Jerusalem.  A  throne  of  justice 
was  well  placed  there,  to  save  a  long  journey  to 
the  capital,  for  the  trial  of  offenders,  and  the  settle- 
ment of  disputes  on  the  borders  of  the  empire.  It 
appears  to  me  that  common  sense  and  the  soundest 
evidence  supports  the  view  which  Bunyan  took, 
winch  was  far  in  advance  of  the  age  in  which  he 
lived. 

The  way  in  which  this  building,  with  the  pur- 
poses for  which  it  was  intended,  is  spiritualized,  is 
very  ingenious,  and  admirably  carried  through  in 
the  following  treatise.  Whether  it  was  intended 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  typical,  must  be  left  to 
the  judgment  of  the  impartial  reader.  That  Leb- 
anon is  used  figuratively  by  the  inspired  writers 
there  can  be  no  doubt.  '  Lebanon  is  ashamed  and 
hewn  down,'  must  be  intended  as  a  type  of  the 
church,  when  under  the  malice  of  her  enemies. 
So  also  when  Babylon,  a  type  of  Antichrist,  fell, 
'the  cedars  of  Lebanon  rejoiced;'  doubtless  re- 
ferring to  the  joy  of  God's  saints  when  relieved 
from  the  oppressor.  Whether  the  fine  old  trees, 
or  the  splendid  house  built  as  a  defence  to  pre- 


vent the  approach  of  enemies  to  the  temple,  is 
intended  as  a  type  of  the  Christian  warfare,  is 
left  to  the  impartial  consideration  of  the  reader. 
There  is  very  little  reason  to  doubt  but  that  we 
shall  adopt  Bunyan's  view  ;  if  we  consider  the  tem- 
ple to  be  typical,  we  shall  consider  the  house  in 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  to  be  typical  also. 

It  has  been  said,  by  an  author  of  very  great  re- 
pute (Addison),  that  had  Bunyan  lived  in  the  times 
of  the  Christian  fathers,  he  would  have  been  as 
great  a  father  as  the  bo;t  of  them.  He  stands 
unrivalled  for  most  extraordinary  mental  powers 
for  allegory  and  for  spiritualizing,  but  to  compare 
him  with  the  best  of  the  fathers  is  faint  praise 
indeed.  He  was  as  much  their  superior,  as  the 
blaze  of  the  noon-day  sun  excels  the  glimmer  of  a 
rushlight. 

In  this  treatise  we  find  many  very  admirable 
illustrations  of  two  important  subjects.  One  is,  that 
temporal  governors  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the 
spread  of  vital  godliness:  the  other  is  upon  the 
nature  of  the  strife  and  antipathy  felt  by  the  world 
against  Christ  and  his  spiritual  seed.  They  are 
sweet-scented;  the  fragrant  smell  of  their  graces 
excites  the  enmity  of  Satan  and  his  followers,  who 
would  burn  these  cedars,  because  they  are  pillars 
of,  and  angels  for,  the  truth.  '  Reason,  history, 
and  experience  all  confirm  this  truth;  that  a  people, 
whose  profession  is  directly  in  opposition  to  the 
devil,  and  antichrist,  and  to  all  debauchery,  inhu- 
manity, profaneness,  superstition,  and  idolatry, 'p.  529. 
will  be  hated,  persecuted,  and,  if  possible,  destroyed 
by  Satan  and  his  adherents.  The  secret  is,  that 
the  world  cannot  bear  such  'living  epistles,  known 
and  read  of  all  men,'  which  reflect  so  severely  by 
their  conduct  upon  the  vice  and  profligacy  of  the 
worldling.  This  was  a  stinging  censure  upon 
the  profligate  court  of  Charles  II.,  and  therefore 
the  Nonconformists  were  hated  and  persecuted ; 
while  conformity  to  soul-benumbing  rites  and  cere- 
monies was  cherished  and  rewarded.  To  render 
persecution  perfectly  unjustifiable,  Bunyan  scrip- 
turally  and  plainly  exhibits  the  harmlessness  of 
the  Christian  character  bearing  with  meekness 
the  injuries  heaped  upon  it;  followers  of  him  who, 
when  reviled,  reviled  not  again,  but  suffered  patient- 
ly. It  is  a  grievous  mistake  to  suppose  that  vital 
godliness  caused  the  great  rebellion,  and  conse- 
quent beheading  of  King  Charles  I.  It  was  fright- 
ful and  most  insupportable  tyranny  that  drove  a 
nation,  headed  by  their  parliament,  to  arms.  The 
King  levied  severe  taxes  without  the  consent  of  the 
people's  representatives ;  he  perverted  justice  by 
the  abominable  decisions  of  the  King's  judges  in  the 
court  of  Star  Chamber;  and  attempted  to  introduce 
Popery  through  the  medium  of  the  Queen  and  her 
licentious  court,  composed  principally  of  the  worst 
class  of  foreign   Papists.      And  when   Leightou, 


51: 


THE   HOUSE     OF  THE   FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


Prynne,  Bastwick,  and  some  of  the  most  virtuous  i 
and  enlightened  citizens,  justly  but  firmly  remon- 
strated, they  were  seized  and  tortured  in  a  way 
that  the  heart  sickens  with  the  narrative.  It  was 
an  attempt  to  reduce  the  whole  nation  to  the  most 
abject  slavery  of  both  body  and  soul,  that  roused 
the  spirit  of  the  people  to  resistance.  The  solemn 
league  and  covenant  was  taken,  Cromwell  appeared, 
and  the  country  was,  by  Divine  aid,  saved  from 
utter  desolation.  It  was  not  a  war  of  religious 
sects;  the  Presbyterians,  Independents,  Baptists, 
and  others,  could  never  have  coalesced ;  it  was  a 
war  for  liberty  or  despotism,  and  the  principal  of  the 
warriors  on  both  sides  were  attached  to  the  religion 
that  was  by  law  established.  It  is  true  that  many 
Episcopalians,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  charged 
the  Puritans,  not  only  as  being  the  mainspring,  but 
as  possessing  the  overwhelming  force  in  that  awful 
struggle,  forgetting  that  the  Nonconformists  were 
then  but  a  handful  of  men,  neither  possessed  of 
wealth  nor  influence.  To  attribute  victory  to  so  small 
a  band,  must  refer  it  to  the  immediate  interposition 
of  the  Most  High,  as  in  the  case  of  Gideon  in  his 
victory  over  the  Assyrians.  But  it  was  no  sectarian 
fight,  except  those  two  great  sects  of  freemen  against 
despots.  Bunyau  fully  proves  that  no  state  has 
anything  to  fear  from  religion:  'She  moveth  no  ! 
sedition,  she  abideth  in  her  place ;  let  her  temple- 
worshippers  but  alone,  and  she  will  be  as  if  she 
were  not  in  the  world  ;'  '  neither  she  nor  her  Jesus 
are  for  doing  them  any  hurt."  p.  sig.    '  God's  armour  I 


is  no  burthen  to  the  body,  nor  clog  to  the  mind, 
and  it  being  only  spiritual,  the  slaughter  must  needs 
be  spiritual  also.'  '  All  her  privileges  are  soul 
concerns,  they  make  no  infringement  upon  any 
man's  liberties.  Let  but  faith  and  holiness  walk 
the  streets  without  control,  and  you  may  be  as 
happy  as  the  world  can  make  you.'  'Let  not 
kings,  and  princes,  and  potentates  be  afraid ;  the 
saints  that  are  such  indeed,  know  their  places,  and 
are  of  a  peaceable  deportment  ;  the  earth  God 
hath  given  to  the  children  of  men,  and  his  kingdom 
to  the  sons  of  God.'  p.  516.  The  Christian  is  a 
pilgrim  bound  to  a  far  more  glorious  inheritance : 
with  so  bright  and  glorious  a  prospect,  he  may 
well  apply  the  encouraging  language  of  Bunyan  to 
his  own  soul ;  '  I  have  a  bad  master,  but  I  have 
only  a  year  to  serve  under  him,  and  that  makes 
me  serve  him  with  patience.  I  have  but  a  mile 
to  go  in  this  dirty  way,  and  then  I  shall  have  my 
path  pleasant  and  green,  and  this  makes  me  tread 
the  dirty  way  with  patience.'  p.  537. 

This  treatise  is  one  of  the  ten  '  excellent  manu- 
scripts' which  Bunyan  had  prepared  for  the  press, 
when  his  unexpected  decease  prevented  his  pub- 
lishing them.  It  first  appeared  in  the  folio  volume 
of  his  works,  printed  under  the  care  of  Charles 
Doe,  in  1692.  It  has  since  been  re-published  in 
every  edition  of  Bunyan's  works,  but  with  the  omis- 
sion of  the  Scripture  references,  and  many  errors. 
It  is  now  accurately  corrected  by  the  first  edition. 
Geo.  Offor. 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


CHAP.  I. 

As  Solomon  built  a  house  for  Pharaoh's  daughter, 
and  that  called  the  temple  of  the  Lord  ;  so  he 
built  a  house  in  Lebanon,  called  '  the  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon.'  1  KL  vii.  2. 

Some,  I  perceive,  have  thought  that  this  house, 
called  '  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,'  was 
none  other  than  that  called  the  temple  at  Jerusalem, 
and  that  that  was  called  '  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,'  because  built  of  the  wood  that  grew 
there.  But  that  Solomon  built  another  than  that, 
even  one  in  Lebanon,  called  '  the  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon,'  is  evident,  and  that  from  these 
reasons:— 

First,  That  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon  is  mentioned 
as  another,  besides  that  called  the  temple  of  the 
Lord;  and  that  too  when  the  temple  and  its  finish- 
ing is  spoken  of;  yea,  it  is  mentioned  with  an  '  also,' 
as  an  additional  house,  besides  the  temple  of  the 
Lord. 


'  In  the  fourth  year,'  saith  the  text,  •  was  the 
foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  laid  in  the 
month  Zif  ;x  and  in  the  eleventh  year  in  the  month 
Bui,  which  is  the  eighth  month,  was  the  house 
finished  throughout  all  the  parts  thereof,  and  ac- 
cording to  all  the  fashion  of  it;  so  he  was  seven 
years  in  building  it.'  '  But  Solomon  was  building 
his  own  house  thirteen  years,  and  he  finished  all 
his  house.  He  built  also  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,'  &c.  1  Ki.  vi.  S7,  38 ;  vii.  1,  2. 

Can  there  now  be  any  thing  more  plain  ?  Is 
not  here  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  men- 
tioned as  another  besides  the  temple  ?  he  built  the 
temple,  he  built  his  own  house,  he  built  also  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon. 

Second.  It  is  evident  by  the  difference  of  their 
measures  and  dimensions.  The  length  of  the  temple 
was  threescore  cubits;  but  the  length  of  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  an  hundred  cubits; 

1  The  second  mouth  in  the  Hebrew  calendar  began  April 
7.- (Ed.) 


THE   HOUSE   OF   THE    FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


513 


B*>  that  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lchanon  was  forty 
cubits  more  than  was  that  called  Solomon's  temple: 
The  breadth  of  Solomon's  temple  was  twenty 
cubits,  but  tho  breadth  of  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon  was  fifty  cubits:  And  as  there  is  odds 
between  threescore  and  fivescore,  so  there  is  also 
between  twenty  and  fifty. 

As  to  their  height,  they  were  both  alike ;  but 
equality  in  height  can  no  more  make  them  the 
same,  than  can  a  twenty  years'  age  in  two,  make 
them  one  and  the  same  person. 

Their  porches  also  differed  greatly;  the  porch  of 
the  temple  was  in  length  but  twenty  cubits,  but  the 
length  of  that  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
was  fifty  cubits.  So  that  here  also  is  thirty  odds.1 
The  porch  of  the  temple  was  but  ten  cubits  broad; 
but  the  porch  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
thirty  cubits.  Now,  I  say,  who  that  considereth 
these  disproportions,  can  conclude  that  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  none  other  than  that 
called  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  For  all  this  com- 
pare 1  Ki.  vi.  2,  s,  with  vii.  2,  6. 

Third.  If  you  add  to  these  the  different  makes 
of  the  houses,  it  will  sufficiently  appear  that  they 
were  not  one.  The  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
was  built  upon  four  rows  of  cedar  pillars ;  but  we 
read  of  no  such  pillars  upon  which  the  temple  stood. 
The  windows  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
stood  in  three  rows,  light  against  light ;  but  we 
read  of  no  such  thing  in  the  temple.  The  temple 
had  two  pillars  before  the  door  of  its  porch,  but  we 
read  not  of  them  before  the  door  of  the  porch  of 
the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon.  In  the  sixth 
and  seventh  chapters  of  the  first  book  of  Kings, 
these  two  houses,  as  to  their  make,  are  exactly  set 
forth;  so  that  he  that  listeth  may  search  and  see, 
if  as  to  this  I  have  not  said  the  truth. 


CHAP.   II. 

OF  WHAT  TITE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON 
WAS  A  TYPE. 

That  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a 
house  significant,  I  think  is  clear;  also,  if  it  had 
not,  we  should  not  have  had  so  particular  an  ac- 
count thereof  in  the  holy  Word  of  God  :  I  read  but 
o;  four  buildings  wherein,  in  a  particular  manner, 
the  houses  or  fabrics  are,  as  to  their  manner  of 
building,  distinctly  handled.  The  tabernacle  is  one, 
the  temple  another ;  the  porch  which  he  built  for 
his  throne,  his  throne  for  judgment;  and  this  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  is  the  fourth.  Now  the 
three  first,  to  wit,  the  tabernacle,  the  temple,  the 
porch  and  throne,  wise  men  will  say  are  typical; 
and  therefore  so  is  this. 


1  A  common  expression  for  difference. — '  'What's  the  odds 
between  us?' — [Ed.) 
VOL.   111. 


[First.]  I  will  therefore  take  it  for  granted  that 
the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  is  a  significative 
thing,  yea,  a  figure  of  the  church,  as  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem  was,  though  not  under  the  same  con- 
sideration. The  temple  was  a  figure  of  the  church 
under  the  gospel,  as  she  relateth  to  worship  ;  but 
the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  figure  of 
that  church  as  she  is  assaulted  for  her  worship,  a3 
she  is  persecuted  for  the  same.  Or  take  it  more 
expressly  thus:  I  take  this  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  to  be  a  typo  of  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness, or  as  she  is  in  her  sackcloth  state. 

We  read,  before  this  house  was  built,  that  there 
was  a  church  in  the  wilderness;  and  also,  after  this 
house  was  demolished,  that  there  would  be  a  church 
in  the  wilderness.  Ac.  vii.  88.  Re.xii.  14.  But  we  now 
respect  that  wilderness  state  that  the  church  of 
the  New  Testament  is  in,  and  conclude  that  this 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  type  and 
figure  of  that;  that  is,  of  her  wilderness  state. 
And,  methinks,  the  very  place  where  this  house  was 
built  does  intimate  such  a  thing;  for  this  house  was 
not  built  in  a  town,  a  city,  &c.,  as  was  that  called 
the  temple  of  the  Lord,  but  was  built  in  a  kind 
of  a  wood,  a  wilderness ;  it  was  built  in  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,  unto  which  that  saying  seems  directly 
to  answer.  '  And  to  the  woman,'  the  church, 
'  were  given  two  wings  of  a  great  eagle,  that  she 
might  fly  into  the  wilderness  into  her  place.'  Re. 
xii.  H.  A  wilderness  state  is  a  desolate,  a  tempted, 
an  afflicted,  a  persecuted  state.  Je.  ii.  6.  All  which 
is  more  than  intimated  by  the  witnesses  wearing 
of,  and  prophesying  in  sackcloth,  and  also  expressed 
of  by  that  Re.  xii. 

Answerable  to  this  is  that  of  the  prophet  con- 
cerning this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  where 
he  says,  '  Open  thy  doors,  0  Lebanon  !  that  the 
fire  may  devour  thy  cedars.'  And  again,  '  Howl, 
fir-tree  ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen.'  Zee.  xi.  i,  2.  What 
can  be  more  express  ?  The  prophet  here  knocks  at 
the  very  door  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon, 
and  tells  her  that  her  cedars  are  designed  for 
fire;  unto  which  also  most  plainly  answer  the  flames 
to  which,  so  many  of  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,-  God's 
saints,  I  mean,  for  many  hundred  years,  have  been 
delivered  for  their  profession;   and  by  which,   as 


2  The  churches  of  Christ  have  suffered  under  hitter  perse- 
cution, and  been  in  a  wilderness  state,  from  the  primitive 
times,  through  Popish  days,  and  under  the  relentless  cruelties 
Buffered  by  the  Covenanters  aud  Nonconformists  from  the 
( Ihurch  of  England.  As  the  gospel  spreads,  it  human 
Boftens  the  hearts  even  of  the  rebellious.  The  dread  fire  no 
longer  consumes  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  Still  there  remains 
the  contemptuous  sneer,  the  scorn,  the  malice  of  the  soul, 
against  Christ  and  his  spiritual  seed.  Not  many  years  since 
the  two  daughters  of  an  evangelical  clergyman,  a  D.D.,  came 
out,  from  strong  aud  irresistible  conviction,  and  united  with 
one  of  the  straitest  sects  of  Dissenters- the  Plymouth  Bret  hren. 
The  unhappy  parent  could  not  brook  the  insult  to  his  order, 
aud  died  insane. — (Ed.) 

6a 


514 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


another  prophet  has  it,  for  many  days  they  have 
fallen.  Da.  A  33.  Also  when  the  king  of  Assyria 
came  up  with  his  army  against  Jerusalem,  this  was 
his  vaunting,  '  I  am  come  -  to  the  sides  of  Lebanon, 
and  I  will  cut  down,  the  tall  cedars  thereof.'  ls.xxxvii.24. 

What  was  this  king  of  Assyria  hut  a  type  of 
the  beast  made  mention  of  in  the  New  Testament  ? 
Now,  saith  he,  I  will  cut  down  the  cedars  of  Le- 
banon ;  who  are,  in  our  gospel  times,  the  tall  ones 
of  the  church  of  God.  And  I  say  again,  in  that 
he  particularly  mentions  Lebanon,  he  intends  that 
house  which  Solomon  built  there,  the  which  was 
built  as  a  fortification  to  defend  the  religion  of  the 
temple,  as  the  saints  now  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
people  are  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel.  But 
more  of  this  anon. 

This  house  therefore  was  built  to  make  assaults, 
and  to  be  assaulted,  as  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness is ;  and  hence  the  state  of  this  house  is  com- 
pared to  the  condition  of  a  woman  in  travail, 
struggling  with  her  pains,  as  also  we  find  the  state 
of  the  church  in  the  wilderness  is — '  0  inhabitant  of 
Lebanon,  that  makest  thy  nest  in  the  cedars,  how 
gracious  shalt  thou  be  when  pangs  come  upon 
thee,  the  pain  as  of  a  woman  in  travail! '  Je.  jaii.23. 
And  again,  'Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  That 
ye  shall  weep  and  lament,'  and  have  sorrow,  as  a 
woman  in  travail.  Jn.  xvi.  20-22.  Much  answering 
her  case  who,  in  her  travails,  and  while  '  pained  to 
be  delivered,1  was  said  even  in  this  case  to  stand 
before  the  dragon,  who  with  open  mouth  sought  to 
destroy  her  fruit,  so  'soon  as  it  was  born.'  Re.xii.  l-c. 

Hence,  again,  when  Christ  calls  his  spouse  out 
to  suffer,  he  calls  or  draws  her  out  of  his  house  in 
Lebanon,  to  look  'from  the  lions'  dens,  from  the 
mountains  of  the  leopards,'  to  the  things  that  are 
invisible  ;  even  as  Paul  said  when  he  was  in  afflic- 
tion, '  We  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen.' 
Ca.  iv.  8.  2  Co.  iv.  is.  He  draws  them  out  thence,  1 
say,  as  sheep  appointed  for  the  slaughter;  yea,  he 
goeth  before  them,  and  they  follow  him  thither. 

Also,  when  the  prophet  foretells  the  affliction 
of  the  church,  he  expresses  it  by  the  fall  of  the 
cedars  of  Lebanon,  saying,  The  Lord  shall  cut 
down  the  thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron ;  a  little 
afore  called  the  axe  and  saw.  And  Lebanon  shall 
fall  by  a  mighty  one.  is.  x.  15,  34.  And  again,  '  The 
earth  mourneth  and  languisheth :  Lebanon  is 
ashamed  and  hewn  down.'  is.  xxxm.  9. 

Do  we  think  that  the  prophet  prophesieth  here 
against  trees,  against  the  natural  cedars  of  Le- 
banon ?  No,  no,  it  is  a  prophecy  touching  the 
afflicted  state  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  of 
which  Lebanon,  I  mean  this  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon,  was  a  figure. 

When  God  also  threateneth  the  enemies  of  his 
church  in  the  wilderness  with  his  judgments,  for 
their  cruel  dealing  with  her  in  the  day  of  her  de- 


sertion, he  calls  those  judgments  the  violence  of 
Lebanon.  That  is,  by  way  of  comparison,  such  as 
the  violence  done  to  Lebanon  was.  '  The  violence 
of  Lebanon  shall  cover  thee;  and  the  spoil  of  beasts 
which  made  them  [Lebanon]  afraid,  because  of 
men's  blood,  and  for  the  violence  of  the  land,  of 
the  city,  and  of  all  that  dwell  therein.'  Hat>.  n.  17. 
This  is  like  that,  '  Reward  her,  even  as  she  re- 
warded you,  and  double  unto  her  double  according 
to  her  works.'  Re.  xviii.  6.  This  the  church  doth  by 
her  prayers.  '  The  violence  done  to  me  and  to 
my  flesh  be  upon  Babylon,  shall  the  inhabitant  of 
Ziou  say ;  and  my  blood  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
Chaldea,  shall  Jerusalem  say.'  Je.  n.  35.  And  then 
shall  be  fulfilled  that  which  is  written,  Look  what 
they  did  unto  Lebanon  shall  be  done  unto  them. 

Ob.  15.    Eze.  xxxv.  14,  15. 

God  has  his  time  to  return  the  evil  that  the  ene- 
mies do  to  his  church,  and  he  will  do  it  when  his 
time  is  come  upon  their  own  head;  and  this  return 
is  called  the  covering  of  them  with  the  violence  of 
Lebanon,  or  that  violence  showed  to  her  in  the  day 
of  her  distress.  It  is  yet  further  evident  that, 
this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  type  of 
the  church  in  the  wilderness:  — 

1 .  For  that  she  is  called  a  tower,  or  place  of  for- 
tification and  defence;  the  same  term  that  is  given 
to  the  church  in  a  captivated  state.  Ca.  ril.4.  lfl.iT.  8-m. 
For  as  the  church  in  the  wilderness  is  compared 
to  a  woman  in  travail,  to  show  her  fruitfulness  to 
God-ward  in  her  most  afflicted  condition;  so  she  is 
called  a  tower,  to  show  her  fortitude  and  courage, 
for  God  and  his  truth,  against  antichrist.  1  say 
therefore,  unto  both  these  is  she  compared  in  that 
scripture  last  cited,  the  which  you  may  peruse  if 
you  please.  A  tower  is  a  place  of  receipt  for  the 
afflicted,  and  so  is  the  church  under  the  rage  of 
antichrist;  yea,  and  though  it  is  the  only  place  de- 
signed by  the  enemy  for  ruin  and  destruction,  yet 
it  is  the  only  place  of  safety  in  the  world.1 

2.  This  tower,  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Le- 
banon, it  seems  to  be  so  built  as  to  confront  Dam- 
ascus, the  chief  city  of  the  king  of  Assyria;  and 
in  so  doing  it  was  a  most  excellent  type  of  the 
spirit  and  design  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness, 
who  is  raised  up,  and  built  to  confront  antichrist. 
Hence  Christ  calls  some  of  the  features  of  his 
church,  and  compares  them  to  this.  '  Thy  neck,' 
says  he  '  is  as  a  tower  of  ivory;  thine  eyes  like  the 
fish-pools  in  Heshbon,  by  the  gate  of  Lath-rabbim; 


3  Bunyan  not  ouly  experienced  the  richest  enjoyments  in 
jail,  but  it  is  very  probable  that  his  life  was  saved  for  a  lew- 
years  by  his  having  lain  in  prison  during  the  violent  heat  and 
storm  of  persecution  which  raged  in  the  early  part  of  the  reign 
of  Charles  ii.  Thus  God  mysteriously  restrains  the  wrath  of 
man,  and  makes  it  to  praise  him.  The  damp  unwholesome 
dungeon,  intended  for  his  destruction,  crowned  him  with  pecu- 
liar honour,  because,  as  in  his  Patmos,  he  there  wrote  his 
immortal  book. — (Eu.j 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


515 


thy  nose  is  as  the  tower  of  Lebanon  which  looketh 
toward  Damascus.'  Ca.  vfl.  4. 

Thy  nose,  that  great  ornament  of  thy  lovely  coun- 
tenance, is  as  a  tower  looking  that  way ;  so  set, 
as  Christ  says  of  his,  as  a  flint.  And  this  is  a 
comely  feature  in  the  church,  that  her  nose  stands 
like  a  tower,  or  as  he  says  in  another  place,  like  a 
fenced  brazen  wall  against  Damascus,  the  metro- 
politan of  her  enemy:  'for  the  head  of  Syria  is 
Damascus.'  is.  vu.  s. 

And  as  Christ  thus  compares  his  church,  so  she 
again  returns,  or  compares  the  face  of  her  Lord  to 
the  same,  saying,  '  His  legs  areas  pillars  of  marble, 
set  upon  sockets  of  fine  gold :  his  countenance  is 
as  Lebanon,  excellent  as  the  cedars.'  Co.  v.  is.  Thus 
in  Lebanon,  in  this  brave  house,  is  found  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  church,  and  the  beauty  of  Christ, 
tor  that  they  are  both  as  a  rock,  with  glory  and 
majesty,  bended  against  the  enemies  of  the  truth. 
4  The  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil.' 
Pillars  his  legs  are  here  compared  to,  and  pillars 
were  they  that  upheld  this  house,  this  tower,  which 
thus  bravely  was  built  with  its  face  confronting  the 
enemy's  country. 

Second.  That  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
was  a  type  of  the  church  in  affliction,  yet  further 
appears,  for  that  at  the  fall  of  Babylon  her  cedars 
are  said  to  rejoice  in  special.  '  The  fir-trees  rejoice 
at  thee,  and  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  saying,  Since 
thou  art  laid  down,  no  feller  is  come  up  against  us.' 
u  xiv.  8.  This  is  at  the  destruction  of  Babylon,  the 
type  of  that  called  antichrist. 

But  why  should  Lebanon,  the  cedars  in  Lebanon, 
in  an  especial  manner  here,  be  said  to  rejoice  at 
his  downfall:  doubtless  to  show  that  as  the  enemy 
made  his  inroad  upon  Jerusalem;  so  in  a  particular 
manner  Lebanon,  and  the  house  there,  were  made 
to  smoke  for  it.  Is.  xxxvii.  24.  Je.  xxii.  23.  Zee.  si.  i.       This 

answereth  to  that,  '  Rejoice  over  her  thou  heaven; 
and  ye  holy  apostles  and  prophets,  for  God  hath 
avenged  you  of  her.'  Hence  again,  when  he  speaks 
of  giving  glory  to  his  afflicted  church,  for  all  the 
sorrow  which  she  hath  sustained  in  her  bearing 
witness  for  the  truth  against  antichrist,  he  calls  it 
the  glory  of  Lebanon.  That  is,  as  I  take  it,  the 
glory  that  belongs  to  her,  for  the  afflictions  which 
she  underwent  for  his  name.  '  The  glory  of  Le- 
banon shall  be  given  unto  it.'  Is.  xxxv.  2.  And  again, 
'The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come  unto  thee.'  is. 
be.  is.  These  are  promises  to  the  church  for  her 
suffering  of  affliction,  and  they  are  made  unto  her 
as  she  bears  the  name  of  Lebanon,  who  or  which 
was  her  type  in  those  havocs  made  in  it,  when  the 
enemy,  as  I  said,  assaulted  the  church  of  old. 

Thus  by  these  few  lines  I  have  showed  you  that 
there  was  a  similitude  betwixt  this  house  in  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,  and  our  gospel  church  in  the  wilderness. 
Nor  need  we  stumble  because  this  word  house  is  not 


subjoined  in  every  particular  place,  where  this 
sorrow  or  joy  of  Lebanon  is  made  mention  of;  for 
it  is  an  usual  thing  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  lie 
directs  his  speech  to  a  man,  to  speak  as  if  he 
spake  to  a  tree ;  and  when  he  directs  his  voice  to 
a  king,  to  speak  as  if  he  intended  the  kingdom;  so 
when  he  speaks  of  the  house,  to  speak  as  to  the 
forest  of  Lebanon.    Instances  many  might  be  given. 

CHAP.  III. 

OF  THE  LARGENESS  OF  THE  IIOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST 
OF  LEBANON. 

The  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  forty 
cubits  longer  than  was  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  to 
show  that  the  church  in  the  wilderness  would  in- 
crease more,  and  be  far  larger  than  she  that  had 
peace  and  prosperity.  And  as  it  was  forty  cubits 
longer,  so  it  was  thirty  cubits  wider,  still  showing 
that  every  way  she  would  abound.  Hence  they 
that  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  when  compared 
with  others,  are  said  to  be  a  numberless  number, 
or  a  multitude  which  no  man  could  number,  of  all 
nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues. 
'  These,'  saith  one,  '  are  they  which  came  out  of 
great  tribulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes,  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb;  there- 
fore are  they  before  the  throne  of  God.'  Re.  vii.  14,15. 

The  church,  as  it  respected  temple-worship,  was 
confined  to  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  but  our  New  Tes- 
tament persecuted  one  is  scattered  among*  the 
nations,  as  a  flock  of  sheep  are  scattered  in  a  wood 
or  wilderness.  Hence  they  are  said  to  be  in  '  the 
wilderness  of  the  people,'  fitly  answering  to  this 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon.  Eze.  xx.  35-:;?. 

But  though  the  house  exceeded  in  length  and 
breadth  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  yet  as  to  their 
height  they  were  the  same,  to  show  that  what 
acts  that  in  the  wilderness  doth,  above  what  they 
have  been  capable  to  do,  that  have  not  been  in  that 
condition;  yet  the  nature  of  their  grace  is  the  same. 

Ro.  xv.  27.  1  Pe.  i.  1. 

But,  I  say,  as  for  length  and  breadth,  the  church 
in  the  .wilderness  exceeds  more  than  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  did  that  of  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem,  as  it  is  written ;  '  More  are  the  children 
of  the  desolate  than  the  children  of  the  married 
wife,  saith  the  Lord.'  And  again :  '  Thou  shalt 
break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left;  and 
thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles,  and  make  the 
desolate  cities  to  be  inhabited.'  is.  Br.  1-3.  This  is 
spoken  of  the  church  iu  the  wilderness,  that  was 
made  up  chiefly  of  the  Gentiles,  of  which  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  figure;  and  how  she 
at  last  shall  recover  herself  from  the  yoke  and  tyr- 
anny of  antichrist.  And  then  she  shall  shoulder 
it  with  her  adversary,  saying,  '  Give  place  to  n.e, 
that  I  may  dwell.'  Is.  slut  -u 


51 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


And  I  will  add,  it  was  not  only  thus  magnificent 
for  length  and  breadth,  but  for  terror;  it  was 
compacted  after  the  manner  of  a  castle,  or  strong- 
hold, as  was  said  before.  It  was  a  tower  built  for 
an  armoury,  for  Solomon  put  there  his  two  hundred 
targets  and  three  hundred  shields  of  gold.  s  Ch.  fc. 
10,  in.  This  place  therefore  was  a  terror  to  the 
heathen,  on  that  side  of  the  church  especially, 
because  she  stood  'with  her  nose  so  formidable 
against  Damascus:  no  marvel  therefore  if  the 
implacable  cried  out  against  them,  Help,  'men  of 
Israel,  help!'     And,  'Will  ye  rebel  against  the 

king?'    Ac.  xxi.  2S.  Ne.  ii.  19. 

For  it  is  the  terror,  or  majesty  and  fortitude, 
which  God  has  put  upon  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness, that  makes  the  Gentiles  so  bestir  them  to 
have  her  under  foot.  Besides,  they  misapprehend 
concerning  her,  as  if  she  was  for  destroying  kings, 
for  subverting  kingdoms,  and  for  bringing  all  to 
desolation,  and  so  they  set  themselves  against  her, 
'  crying,  These  that  have  turned  the  world  upside 
down  are  come  hither  also;  whom  Jason  hath 
received :  and  these  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees 
of  C?esar,  saying  that  there  is  another  king,  one 
Jesus.'  Ac.  xvii.  5-7.  Indeed,  the  very  name  of 
Jesus  is  the  very  tower  of  the  Christain  church, 
and  that  by  which  she  frights  the  world,  but  not 
designedly,  but  through  their  misunderstanding; 
for  neither  she,  nor  her  Jesus,  is  for  doing  them 
any  hurt ;  however,  this  is  that  which  renders  her 
yet  in  their  eye  '  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners.' 
Ca.  vi.  io.  How  then  could  she  escape  persecution 
for  a  time,  for  it  was  the  policy  of  Jeroboam.  1  ia. 
xii.  26-28.  And  it  is  yet  the  policy  of  the  nations 
to  secure  themselves  against  this  their  imagined 
danger,  and  therefore  to  use  all  means,  as  Pharaoh 
did,  to  keep  this  people  low  enough,  saying,  'Come  j 
on,  let  us  deal  wisely  with  them,  lest  they  mul-  : 
tiply,  and  it  come  to  pass  that  when  there  falleth 
out  any  war,  they  join  also  to  our  enemies,  and 
fight  against  us,  and  so  get  them  up  out  of  the 
land.'  Ex.  i.  io. 

But  could  the  house  of  Lebanon,  though  a  for- 
tified place,  assault  Damascus?  Could  it  remove 
from  the  place  on  which  God  had  set  it?  It  only 
was  a  place  of  defence  for  Judah,  or  for  the  wor- 
ship of  the  temple.  And  had  the  adversary  let 
the  temple-worship  and  worshippers  alone,  the 
shields  and  targets  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  had  not  been  uncovered,  had  not  been 
made  bare  against  them.  The  same  may  now  be 
said  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  she  moveth 
no  sedition,  she  abideth  in  her  place ;  let  her 
temple-worshippers  but  alone,  and  she  will  be  as  if 
she  were  not  in  the  world ;  but  if  you  afflict  her, 
'  Fire  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth  and  devoureth 
their  enemies;  and  if  any  man  will  hurt  them,  he 
must  in  this  manner  be  killed.'  Re.  xi.  o.     And  so 


die  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  But  because  the 
weapons  of  the  church,  though  none  of  them  are 
carnal,  be  so  talked  of  in  the  world,  the  blind  are 
yet  more  afraid  of  her  than  they  in  this  manner 
are  like  to  be  hurt  by  her,  and  therefore  they  of 
old  have  peeled,1  and  polled,  and  endeavoured  to 
spoil  her  all  along,  sending  their  servants,  and 
saying  to  their  bailiffs  and  sheriffs,  '  Go  -  to  a 
nation  scattered  and  peeled,  to  a  people  terrible 
from  their  beginning,  -  a  nation  meted  out  and 
trodden  down,  whose  land  the  rivers  have  spoiled  !' 
is.  xviii.  2.  But  this  people  shall  prevail,  though  not 
by  worldly  force  ;  her  God  will  deliver  her.  And 
then,  or  at '  that  time,  shall  the  present  be  brought 
to  the  Lord  of  hosts  of  a  people  scattered  and 
peeled,  and  from  a  people  terrible  from  their 
beginning  hitherto;  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden 
under  foot,  whose  land  the  rivers  have  spoiled,  to 
the  place  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the 

Mount  Zioil.'    Is.  xviii.  7. 

Now  thus  did  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
provoke ;  it  was  built  defensively,  it  had  a  tower, 
it  had  armour;  its  tower  confronted  the  enemy's 
land.  No  marvel  then,  if  the  king  of  Assyria  so 
threatened  to  lay  his  army  on  the  sides  of  Lebanon 
and  to  cut  down  the  tall  cedars  thereof,  is.  xxxvii.  24. 

The  largeness,  therefore,  and  prowess  of  the 
church,  by  reason  of  her  inherent  fortitude  and 
the  valorous  acts  that  she  hath  done  by  suffering, 
by  prayer,  by  faith,  and  a  constant  enduring  of 
hardship  for  the  truth,  doth  force  into  the  world  a 
belief,  through  their  own  guilt  and  clamours  of 
conscience  against  them  for  their  debaucheries, 
that  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  will  destroy 
them  all  when  she  shall  be  delivered  from  her  ser- 
vitude. '  Come  now,  therefore,'  saith  Balak  to 
Balaam,  and  'curse  me  this  people,'  if  peradven- 
ture  I  may  overcome  them:  when  he-might  have 
let  them  pass  peaceably  by,  and  they  would  not 
have  lifted  up  a  finger  against  him.  Wherefore, 
from  all  these  things  it  appears  that  the  house  0^ 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  type  of  the  church  iu, 
the  wilderness, 

CHAP.  IV. 

OF  THE  MATERIALS  OF  WHICH  THE  nOUSE  OF  TEE 
FOREST  OF  LEBANON  WAS  MADE. 

The  foundation  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  was  of  the  same  great  stones  which  were 
laid  in  the  foundation  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord. 
1  Ki.  vii.  2-n.  And  this  shows  that  the  church  in 
the  wilderness  has  the  same  foundation  and  sup- 
port as  had  the  temple  that  was  at  Jerusalem, 
though  in  a  state  of  sackcloth,  tears,  and  afflic- 


1  Pill,  to  rob;  poll,  to  exact,  to  extort.     '  The  church 
pilled  and  polled  bv  its  own  flocks.' — (bouth,  Ser.  11.  v.  5.J- 

(Ed.) 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST   OF   LEBANON. 


517 


tion,  the  lot  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness ;  for 
she,  while  there,  is  to  howl.  Zee.  xi.  2.  Now  since 
the  foundation  is  the  same,  what  is  it  but  to  show 
also  that  she,  though  in  an  afflicted  condition,  shall 
certainly  stand ;  '  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  pre- 
vail against  it.'  Mat  xvl  is.  Her  confronting  idola- 
trous nations  is  therefore  a  sign  of  her  troubles, 
not  any  prediction  of  a  fall.  Her  rock  is  stead- 
fast, not  like  the  rock  of  her  adversaries,  the 
enemy  being  judges.  De.xzsii.8i. 

But  that  which  in  special  I  take  notice  of  is, 
that  I  find,  in  a  manner,  in  this  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,  nothing  hut  pillars,  and  beams,  great 
timber,  and  thick  beams,  and  of  those  was  the 
house  budded;. pillars  to  hold  up,  and  thick  beams 
to  couple  together,  and  thus  was  the  house  finished. 
I  read  not  here  of  any  garnishing,  either  of  the 
pillars,  beams,  doors,  posts,  walls,  or  any  part  of 
the  house;  all  was  plain,  without  garnish,  fitly 
representing  the  state  of  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness, which  was  clothed  with  sackcloth,  covered 
with  ashes,  wearing  her  mourning  weeds,  with  her 
tears  upon  her  cheeks,  and  a  yoke  or  band  about 
her  neck.   is.  m.  1, 2 ;  ui.  3. 

By  this  kind  of  description  we  may  also  note 
with  what  kind  of  members  this  house,  this  church 
is  furnished.  Here,  as  I  said,  that  is,  in  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  you  find  pillars,  pillars, 
so  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness.  0  the  mighty 
ones  of  which  this  church  was  compacted!  they 
were  all  pillars,  strong,  bearing  up  the  house 
against  wind  and  weather;  nothing  but  fire  and 
sword  could  dissolve  them.  As  therefore  this 
house  was  made  up  of  great  timber,  so  this  church 
in  the  wilderness  was  made  up  of  giants  in  grace. 
These  men  had  the  faces  of  lions ;  no  prince,  no 
king,  no  threat,  no  terror,  no  torment,  could  make 
them  yield;  they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the 
death.  They  have  laughed  their  enemies  in  the 
face,  they  have  triumphed  in  the  flames. 

They  were  pillars,  they  were  pillars  of  cedar  : 
the  cedar  is  the  highest  tree  in  the  world  ;l  where- 
fore in  that  this  house  was  made  of  cedar,  it  may 
be  to  denote  that  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness, 
however  contemned  by  men,  was  the  highest  per- 
fection of  goodness,  as  of  faith,  love,  prayer,  holy 
conversation,  and  affection  for  God  and  his  truth. 
For  indeed  none  ever  showed  the  like,  none  ever 
showed  higher  cedars  than  those  that  were  in  Leb- 
anon. None  ever  showed  higher  saints  than  were 
they  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness.  Others 
talked,  these  have  suffered  ;  others  have  said,  these 
have  done  ;  these  have  voluntarily  taken  their  lives 
in  their  hands,  for  they  loved  them  not  to  the  death; 


1  Maundrel  measured  a  cedar  which  was  thirty-six  feet  six- 
inches  in  girth,  and  one  hundred  aud  eleven  feet  in  the  spread 
of  its  boughs ;  the  foliage  is  ever  green,  and  it  mounts  up  to 
an  enormous  height. — (En.) 


and  have  fairly,  and  in  cool  blood,  laid  them  down 
before  the  world,  God,  angels,  and  men,  for  the 
confirming  of  the  truth  which  they  have  professed. 
Ac.  xv.  26.  Re.  xiL  H.  These  are  pillars,  these  are 
strong  ones  indeed.  It  is  meet,  therefore,  that 
the  church  in  the  wilderness,  since  she  was  to 
resemble  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  should 
be  furnished  with  these  mighty  ones. 

Cedars !  the  same  that  the  holiest  of  all  in  the 
temple  was  covered  within,  and  that  house  was  a 
figure  of  heaven,  to  show  that  the  church  of  God 
in  the  wilderness,  how  base  and  low  soever  in  the 
judgment  of  the  world,  is  yet  the  only  heaven  that 
God  hath  among  the  children  of  men.  Here  are 
many  nations,  many  kingdoms,  many  countries, 
and  many  cities,  but  the  church  in  the  wilderness 
was  but  one,  and  she  was  the  heaven  that  God  has 
here  ;  hence  she  is  called,  '  Thou  heaven.  Rejoice 
over  her  thou  heaven.'  Re.xviii.20.  And  again, 
when  the  combustion  for  religion  is  in  the  church 
in  the  wilderness  it  is  said  to  be  in  heaven — '  And 
there  was  war  in  heaven.  Michael  and  his  angels 
fought  against  the  dragon  ;  and  the  dragon  fought, 
and  his  angels.'   rte.  xii  7. 

The  church  therefore  loseth  not  all  her  titles  of 
honour,  no,  not  when  at  the  lowest,  she  is  God's 
heaven  still ;  though  she  may  not  be  called  now  a 
crown  of  glory,  yet  she  is  still  God's  lily  amongst 
thorns;  though  she  may  not  be  called  the  church 
of  Jerusalem,  yet  she  may  the  church  in  the  wil- 
derness ;  and  though  she  may  not  be  called  Solo- 
mon's temple,  yet  she  may  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon.  Cedars !  cedars  are  tall  and  sweet, 
and  so  are  the  members  of  the  church  in  the 
wilderness.  0  their  smell,  their  scent,  it  hath 
been  'as  the  wine  of  Lebanon.'  Ho.  riv.  5-7.  They 
that  have  gone  before  have  left  this  smell  still  in 
the  nostrils  of  their  survivors,  as  that  both  fragrant 
and  precious. 

This  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  builded 
'  upon  four  rows  of  cedar  pillars. '  1  Ki.  vii.  2.  These 
four  rows  were  the  bottom  pillars,  those  upon  which 
the  whole  weight  of  the  house  did  bear.  The  Holy 
Ghost  saith  here  four  rows,  but  says  not  how  many 
were  in  a  row.  But  we  will  suppose  them  to  allude 
to  the  twelve  apostles,  or  to  the  apostles  and  pro- 
phets, upon  whose  foundation  the  church  in  the 
wilderness  is  said  to  be  built.  Ep.  a.  20.  And  if  so, 
then  it  shows  that  as  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  stood  upon  these  four  rows  of  pillars,  as 
the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  stood  in  four  rows 
of  precious  stones  upon  Aaron's  breastplate  when 
he  went  into  the  holiest,  so  this  house,  or  church 
in  the  wilderness,  stauds  upon  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets.  Ex.  xxviii.  17 ;  xxxix.  10.  But 
because  it  only  saith  it  stood  upon  four  rows,  not 
specifying  any  number,  therefore  as  to  this  we  may 
say  nothing  certain,  yet  I  think  such  a  conjecture 


518 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


hath  some  show  of  truth  in  it,  however,  I  will  leave 
it  to  wiser  judgments. 

'  And  it  -was  covered  with  cedar  above,  upon  the 
beams  that  lay  on  forty-five  pillars,  fifteen  in  a 
row.'  1  Ki.  vii.  3.  These  pillars,  as  the  others,  are 
such  upon  which  the  house  did  also  bear ;  this  is 
clear,  because  the  beams  that  lay  upon  the  four 
rows  of  pillars  afore-mentioned  lay  also  upon  these 
forty-five. 

It  seems,  therefore,  that  these  four  rows  of  pil- 
lars were  they  that  were  the  more  outside  ones ; 
that  is,  two  rows  on  this  side  of  the  house  and  two 
ix»ws  also  on  that;  and  that  those  forty-five  pillars, 
fifteen  in  a  row,  stood  in  three  rows  more  inward, 
and  so  did  bear  up  with  the  other  the  beams  that 
were  laid  upon  them,  much  like  to  those  inner 
pillars  that  usually  stand  in  our  parish  churches. 
If  so,  then  the  first  four  rows  did  seem  to  be  a 
guard  to  these,  for  that,  as  they  stood  more  to  the 
outsides  of  the  house,  so  more  to  the  weather,  and 
nearer  to  the  first  approach  of  the  enemy. 

And  this  may  show  that  the  apostles  in  their 
doctrine  are  not  only  a  foundation  to  the  forty-five 
pillars,  but  a  protection  and.  defence ;  I  say  a  pro- 
tection and  defence  to  all  the  pillars  that  ever  were 
besides  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness.  And  it 
is  to  be  considered  that  the  four  rows  are  men- 
tioned as  placed  first,  and.  so  were  those  upon 
which  the  thick  beams  that  first  were  for  coupling 
of  the  house  were  laid ;  the  which  most  fitly 
teacheth  that  the  office  and  graces  of  the  apostles 
were  first  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  accord- 
ing to  1  Co.  xii.  lb. 

These  forty-five  pillars  standing  in  the  midst, 
by  the  others,  may  also  be  to  show  that  in  the 
time  of  the  trouble  of  the  church  in  her  wilderness 
*tate,  there  will  be  those  that  will  stand  by  and 
maintain  her  apostolical  doctrine,  though  for  so 
doing  they  bear  the  burthen  of  the  whole.  But  I 
read  of  no  chambers  for  ease  or  rest  in  this  house, 
here  is  no  room  for  chambering.  They  that  were 
for  being  members  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness, 
must  not  look  for  rest  until  their  Lord  shall  come. 

Ro.  xiii.  13,  14.  2  Th.  i.  5-9. 

Here  therefore  was  but  hard  lodging ;  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  not  made  for  tender 
skins  and  for  those  that  cannot  lie  out  of  down 
beds,  but  for  those  that  were  war-like  men,  and 
that  were  willing  to  endure  hardness  for  that  re- 
ligion that  God  had  set  up  in  his  temple,  and  is 
fitly  auwered  by  that  of  the  apostle:  '  Thou,  there- 
fore,' my  son,  'endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier 
of  Jesus  Christ.  No  man  that  warreth  entangleth 
himself  with  the  affairs  of  this  life,  that  he  may 
please  him  who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier.' 
2 Ti.il. 8, 4.  Forty-five  pillars!  It  was  forty-five 
years  that  the  church  was  of  old  in  a  bewildered 
and  warlike  condition  before  she  enjoyed  her  rest 


in  Canaan.  Jos.  xiv.  10.  Now,  as  there  were  forty- 
five  years  of  trouble,  so  here  are  forty-five  pillars 
for  support,  perhaps  to  intimate  that  God  will  have 
in  his  church  in  the  Avilderness  a  sufficient  succes- 
sion of  faithful  men  that,  like  pillars,  shall  bear  up 
the  truth  above  water  all  the  time  of  Antichrist's 
reign  and  rage. 

The  thick  beams  that  lay  over-thwart  to  couple 
this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  together,  did 
bear  upon  these  forty-five  pillars,  to  show  that,  by 
the  burden-bearers  that  have  and  shall  be  in  the 
church  of  God  in  the  wilderness,  the  unity  of  that 
house  is  through  the  Spirit  maintained.  And  in- 
deed, had  it  not  been  for  these  pillars,  the  sufferers, 
these  burden-bearers  in  the  church,  our  house  in 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  or,  more  properly,  our  church 
in  the  wilderness,  had  before  this  been  but  in  a 
poor  condition.  Thus  therefore  this  church,  which 
in  her  time  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of  truth  in 
the  world,  has  been  made  to  stand  and  abide  it. 
'  When  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones  has  been  as 
a  storm  against  the  wall.'  is. xxv.4.  1  Ti. m.  15.  '  Many 
a  time  have  they  afflicted  me  from  my  youth,  may 
Israel  now  say :  many  a  time  have  they  afflicted 
me  from  my  youth :  yet  they  have  not  prevailed 
against  me.'  Ps.  cxxix.  i,  2. 

Thus  you  see  how  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  was  a  type  of  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness ;  and  you  see  also  by  this  the  reason  why  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  had  its  inward  glory 
lying  more  in  great  pillars  and  thick  beams  than 
in  other  ornaments.  And  indeed,  here  had  need 
be  pillars  and  pillars  and  beams  and  beams  too, 
since  it  was  designed  for  assaults  to  be  made  upon 
it,  since  it  was  set  for  a  butt  for  the  marksman, 
and  to  be  an  object  for  furious  heathens  to  spend 
their  rage  against  its  walls. 

The  glory  therefore  of  the  temple  lay  in  one 
thing,  and  the  glory  of  this  house  lay  in  another : 
the  glory  of  the  temple  lay  in  that  she  contained 
the  true  form  and  modes  of  worship,  and  the  glory 
of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  lay  in  her 
many  pillars  and  thick  beams,  by  which  she  was 
made  capable,  through  good  management,  to  give 
check  to  those  of  Damascus  when  they  should 
attempt  to  throw  down  that  worship. 

And  as  I  said  before,  these  pillars  were  sweet- 
scented  pillars,  for  that  they  were  made  of  cedar; 
but  what  cared  the  enemy  for  that,  they  were  of- 
fensive to  him,  for  that  they  were  placed  as  a  for- 
tification against  him.  Nor  is  it  any  allurement 
to  Satan  to  favour  the  mighty  ones  in  the  church 
in  the  wilderness  for  the  fragrant  smell  of  their 
sweet  graces,  nay,  both  he  and  his  angels  are  the 
more  bent  to  oppose  them  because  they  are  so 
sweet-scented.  The  cedars  therefore  got  nothing 
because  they  were  cedars  at  the  hands  of  the  bar- 
barous Gentiles — for  they  would  burn  the  cedars 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


19 


— as  the  angels  or  pillars  got  nothing  of  favour  at 
the  hands  of  Antichrist  hecause  they  are  pillars  of 
and  angels  for  the  truth,  yea,  they  so  much  the 
more  hy  her  are  abhorred.      Well,  hut  they  are 

pillars  for  all  that,  yea,  pillars  to  the  church  in 
the  wilderness,  as  the  others  were  in  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  and  pillars  they  will  abide 
there,  dead  and  alive,  when  the  enemy  has  done 
what  he  can. 

The  pillars  were  set  in  three  rows,  for  so  are 
forty-live  when  they  are  set  fifteen  in  a  row.  And 
they  were  set  in  three  rows  to  bear.  This  manner 
also  of  their  standing  thus  was  also  doubtless  sig- 
nificant. But  again,  they,  these  pillars,  may  he 
set,  or  placed  thus  in  three  rows  in  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  to  show  that  the  three  offices 
of  Christ  are  the  great  things  that  the  church  in 
the  wilderness  must  hear  up  before  the  world. 

The  three  offices  of  Christ,  they  are  his  priestly, 
his  prophetical,  and  his  kingly  offices.  These  are 
those  in  which  God's  glory  and  the  church's  sal- 
vation are  most  immediately  concerned,  and  they 
that  have  been  most  opposed  by  the  devil  and  his 
angels.  All  heresies,  errors,  and  delusions  with 
which  Christ's  church  has  been  assaulted  in  all 
ages,  have  bent  themselves  against  some  one  or 
all  of  these.  Re.  xvi.  13,  16.  Christ  is  a  priest  to 
save,  a  prophet  to  teach,  and  a  king  to  rule  his 
clyarch.  is.  xxxiu.  22.  But  this  Antichrist  cannot 
bear,  therefore  he  attempts  to  get  up  into  the  throne 
himself,  and  to  act  as  if  he  were  one  above  all  that 
is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped.  2  Th.  a.  3,  i. 
Re.  xix.  19-21.  But  behold!  here  are  pillars  in  three 
rows,  mighty  pillars  to  bear  up  Christ  in  these  his 
offices  before  the  world  and  against  all  falsehood 
and  deceit. 

Fifteen  in  a  row,  I  can  say  no  further  than  I 
can  see  ;  what  the  number  of  fifteen  should  signify 
1  know  not,  God  is  wiser  than  man  ;  but  yet  me- 
thinks  their  standing  thus  should  signify  a  reserve: 
as  suppose  the  first  three  that  the  enemy  comes  at 
should  be  destroyed  by  their  hands,  there  are  three 
times  fourteen  behind  ;  suppose  again  that  they 
should  serve  the  next  three  so,  yet  there  is  a 
reserve  behind.  When  that  fine  one,  Jezebel,  had 
done  what  she  could  against  the  afflicted  church 
in  her  time,  yet  there  was  left  a  reserve,  a  reserve 
of  seven  thousand  that  were  true  worshippers  of 

God.    1  Ki.  xix.  18.  Ro.  xi.  4. 

Always  when  Antichrist  made  his  inroads  upon 
the  church  in  the  wilderness,  to  slay,  to  cut  off, 
and  to  kill,  yet  some  of  the  pillars  stood,  they 
were  not  all  burnt  in  the  fire,  nor  cut  down.  They 
said  indeed,  *  Come  and  let  us  cut  them  off  from 
being  a  nation,  that  the  name  of  Israel  may  be  no 
more  in  remembrance.'  Ps.  lxxxiii.  4.  But  what  then  ? 
there  is  a  difference  betwixt  saying  and  doing;  the 
bush   was  not  therefore  consumed  because  it  was 


set  on  fire;  the  church  shall  not  be  consumed 
although  she  be  afflicted.  Ex.  iii.  3.  And  this  reason 
is,  because  God  has  still  his  fifteens  ;  therefore  if 
Abel  falls  by  the  hand  of  Cain,  Seth  is  put  in  his 
place.  Se.lv.  25.  If  Moses  is  taken  away,  Joshua 
shall  succeed  him.  Jos.  i.  2,  3.  And  if  the  devil 
break  the  neck  of  Judas,  Matthias  is  at  hand  to 
take  his  office.  Aci.  la— 20.  God  has,  I  say,  a  suc- 
cession of  pillars  in  his  house  ;  be  has  to  himself  a 
reserve. 

Yet  again,  methinks  that  there  should  lie  forty- 
five  pillars,  and  besides  them  four  rows  of  pillars, 
and  all  this  to  bear  up  an  invisible  burden,  for  we 
read  of  nothing  upon  the  pillars  but  the  In 
and  roof.  It  should  be  to  show  that  it  is  impos- 
sible that  a  carnal  heart  should  conceive  of  the 
weight  that  truth  lays  upon  the  conscience  of  a 
believer.  They  see,  nothing,  alas,  nothing  at  all, 
but  a  beam,  a  truth,  and,  say  they,  are  you  such 
fools  to  stand  groaning  to  bear  up  that,  or  what  is 
contained  therein  ?  They,  I  say,  see  not  the 
weight,  the  glory,  the  weight  of  glory  that  is  in  a 
truth  of  God,  and  therefore  they  laugh  at  them 
that  will  count  it  worth  the  while  to  endure  so 
much  to  support  it  from  falling  to  the  ground.1 
Great  pillars  and  beams,  great  saints  and  great 
truths,  are  in  the  church  of  God  in  the  wilderness; 
and  the  beams  lie  upon  the  pillars,  or  the  truth 
upon  the  saints. 

The  tabernacle  and  ark  formerly  were  to  be 
borne  upon  men's  shoulders,  even  as  these  great 
beams  are  borne  up  by  these  pillars.  And  as  this 
tabernacle  and  ark  were  to  be  carried  hither  and 
thither,  according  to  the  appointment  of  God,  so 
were  these  beams  to  be  by  these  pillars  borne  up, 
that  therewith  the  house  might  be  girt  together, 
kept  uniform,  and  made  to  stand  fast,  notwith- 
standing the  wind  and  storm. 

CHAP.  V. 

OF  TIIE  WINDOWS  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF 
LEBANON. 

The  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  had  many 
windows  in  it ;  '  And  there  were  windows  in  three 
lows,  and  light  WCt8  against  light  in  three  ranks.' 
l  Ki.  vii.  4.  Windows  are  to  let  the  light  in  at,  and 
the  eye  out  at,  to  objects  at  a  distance  from  the 
house,  and  from  those  that  are  therein. 

1  It  is  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  that  the  human  mind  is 
red  by  sin,  that  man  is  by  nature  senseless  lo  the 
sublime  truths  of  Christianity— the  beam,  the  truth  which 
saws  the  world  from  utter  moral  desolation.  What  wonders 
open  before  the  eyes  of  the  yuan-  convert,  streUdunjt  far 
awayinto  that,  heavenly  and  eternal  felicitj  which  had  been 
shut  out  from  his  vision  by  the  gloom  of  death  Life  and  im- 
mortality  is  brought  to  light.  His  life,  and  aU  other  things, 
become  but  dross,  that  he  may  win  Christ,  and  maintain  hu 
cause  in  the  world.— (Ed.) 


520 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE  FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


The  windows  here  are  figures  of  the  Word  of  God, 
by  which  light  the  light  of  life  is  let  into  the  heart; 
through  that,  the  glass  of  these  windows,  the  beams 
of  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shine  into  the  church. 
Hence  the  word  is  compared  to  glass,  through 
which  the  glorious  face  of  Christ  is  seen.  2C0.ni.i8. 
This,  therefore,  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
had;  it  had  windows,  a  figure  of  that  Word  of  God, 
through,  and  by  which,  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness sees  the  mind  of  God,  and  so  what  while  there 
she  ought  to  believe,  do,  and  leave  undone  in  the 
world. 

This  house  had  plenty  of  windows — three  rows 
of  windows  on  both  sides  the  house.  In  three 
rows;  by  these  windows  in  three  rows  perhaps  was 
prefigured  how  into  the  church  in  the  wilderness 
was  to  shine  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity :  yea,  to 
signify  that  she  was  to  be  possessed  with  that  in 
her  most  low  state,  and  when  under  her  greatest 
clouds.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  !  that  is  the 
substance,  that  is  the  ground  and  fundamental  of  all. 
1  Jn.  ii.  22, 23;  iv.  2-4.  2  Jn.  9,  io.  For  by  this  doctrine, 
and  by  this  only,  the  man  is  made  a  Christian;  and 
he  that  has  not  this  doctrine,  his  profession  is  not 
worth  a  button.  You  must  know  that  sometimes  the 
church  in  the  wilderness  has  but  little  light,  but  the 
diminution  of  her  light  is  not  then  so  much  in  or 
as  to  substantials,  as  it  is  as  to  circumstantial 
things ;  she  has  then  the  substantials  with  her,  in 
her  darkest  day,  even  windows  in  three  rows. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  !  You  may  ask  me 
what  that  is  ?  I  answer.  It  is  that  doctrine  that 
showeth  us  the  love  of  God  the  Father,  in  giving 
of  his  Son:  the  love  of  God  the  Son,  in  giving  of 
himself;  and  the  love  of  the  Lord  the  Spirit,  in  his 
work  of  regenerating  of  us,  that  we  may  be  made 
able  to  lay  hold  of  the  love  of  the  Father  by  his 
Son,  and  so  enjoy  eternal  life  by  grace.  This  doc- 
trine was  always  let  in  at  these  windows  into  the 
church  in  the  wilderness,  for  to  make  her  sound  in 
faith,  and  hearty  in  obedience ;  as  also  meek  and 
patient  in  temptation  and  tribulation.  And  as  to 
the  substance  of  Christianity,  this  doctrine  is  suf- 
ficient for  any  people,  because  it  teaches  faith,  and 
produceth  a  good  moral  life.  These  therefore,  if 
these  doctrines  shine  upon  us,  through  these  win- 
dows of  heaven,  so  as  that  we  see  them,  and  re- 
ceive them,  they  make  us  fit  to  glorify  God  here, 
and  meet  to  be  glorified  of,  and  with  him  hereafter. 
These  lights,  therefore,  cause  that  the  inhabitants 
of  this  church  in  the  wilderness  see  their  way 
through  the  dark  pitch  night  of  this  world.  For 
as  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  this  church 
of  Go  1  in  the  wilderness  had  always  her  lights,  or 
windows  in  these  three  rows,  to  guide,  to  solace, 
and  comfort  her. 

This  house  therefore,  is  thus  discriminated  and 
distinguished  from  all  other  houses  in  the  world ; 


|  no  house,  that  we  read  of  in  the  Bible,  was  thus 
adorned  with  light,  or  had  windows  in  three  rows, 
but  this;  and  answerable  hereunto,  no  congregation 
or  church,  but  the  true  church  of  God,  has  the 
true  antitype  thereof.  Light !  windows  !  A  suf- 
ficiency of  windows  was  of  great  use  to  a  people 
that  dwelt  in  a  forest,  or  wood,  as  the  inhabitants 
of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  did.  But 
how  solitary  had  this  house  been,  had  it  had  no 
light  at  all  !  To  be  in  a  wood,  and  that  without 
windows,  is  one  of  the  worst  of  conditions.  This 
also  is  the  relief  that  the  church  in  the  wilderness 
had;  true,  she  was  in  a  wood,  but  had  light,  called 
in  another  place  God's  rod,  or  his  Word,  which  giv- 
eth  instruction.  •  Feed  thy  people  with  thy  rod, 
the  flock  of  thine  heritage,  which  dwell  solitary  in 
the  wood,'  &c.  Mi.  vii.  14. 

To  be,  as  was  said,  in  a  wood,  and  without  light 
too,  is  a  condition  very  desolate  :  the  Egyptians 
found  it  so,  for  all  they  were  in  their  houses.  Ex. 
x.  2i,  23.  But  how  much  more  then  is  that  people's 
case  to  be  lamented  that  are  under  persecution,  but 
have  not  light  in  three  rows  to  guide  them.  But 
this  is  not  the  state  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness; 
she  has  her  windows  in  three  rows,  to  wit,  the  light 
of  the  face  of  the  Father,  the  light  of  the  face  of 
the  Son,  and  the  light  of  the  face  of  the  Holy 
Ghost;  all  shining  through  the  windows  or  glass  of 
the  Word,  to  her  comfort  and  consolation,  thouojh 
now  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon. 

'And  light  was  against  light  in  three  ranks.' 
This  is  an  additional  account  of  the  windows  that 
were  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon.  Be- 
fore he  said  she  had  windows  in  three  rows,  but 
now  he  adds  that  there  was  light  against  light, 
light  opposite  to  light,  and  that  also  in  three  ranks. 
In  that  he  saith  they  were  in  ranks,  he  either 
means  in  order,  or  insinuates  a  military  posture,  for 
in  both  these  ways  is  this  word  taken.  Nu.  ii.  ig,  24. 
1  Ch.  xii.  .33, 38.  Mar.  vi.  40.  Nor  need  any  smile  because 
I  say  the  lights  were  set  in  a  military  posture;  we 
read  of  potsherds  striving  with  potsherds;  and  why 
may  it  not  as  well  be  said,  '  light  was  against  light. ' 

Is.  xlv.  9. 

But  we  will  pursue  our  design.  Here  is  opposi- 
tion insinuated ;  in  the  margin  it  is  '  sight  against 
sight;'  wherefore  the  lights  thus  placed  in  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  give  me  another 
encouragement,  to  think  that  this  house  was  a  type 
of  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  and  that  she  is  the 
seat  of  spiritual  war  also.  Re.  xii.  7.  For  as  this 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  that  which  was 
the  object  of  the  rage  of  the  king  of  Assyria,  be- 
cause it  stood  in  his  way  to  hinder  his  ruining 
Jerusalem ;  so  the  spirit  and  faithfulness  of  the 
church  of  God  in  the  wilderness  stands  in  the  way, 
and  hinders  Antichrist's  bringing  of  the  truth  to 
the  around. 


THE   HOUSE   OF   THE   FOREST   OF   LEBANON. 


521 


And  as  the  enemy  brake  into  Lebanon,  and  did 
set  fire  to  her  cedars,  so  the  boar,  tbe  Antichrist, 
the  dragon,  and  bis  angels,  got  into  tbe  church  in 
tbe  wilderness.  Ps.lxxx.18.  2  Th.  ii  4.  Re.  xii.  7.  This 
being  so,  here  must  needs  be  war ;  and  since  tbe 
war  is  not  carnal  but  spiritual,  it  must  be  made  by 
way  of  controversy,  contention,  disputation,  argu- 
ment, reasonings,  «tc.  winch  were  the  effect  of  op- 
posite apprehensions,  fitly  set  out  in  this  house  of 
tbe  forest  of  Lebanon,  for  that  there  was  '  light 
against  light,'  'sight  against  sigbt, '  in  three  ranks. 
Wherefore  in  that  he  saith  '  light  was  against 
light  in  three  ranks,'  he  suggesteth,  to  the  life,  how 
it  would  be  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness.  And 
suppose  they  were  the  truly  godly  that  made  the 
first  assault,  can  they  be  blamed  ?  For  who  can 
endure  a  boar  in  a  vineyard  ;  a  man  of  sin  in  a 
holy  temple ;  or  a  dragon  in  heaven  ?  What  then 
if  the  church  made  the  first  assault  ?  Who  bid  the 
boar  come  there  ?  What  had  he  to  do  in  God's 
house  ?  The  church,  as  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon,  woidd  have  been  content  with  its  own 
station;  and  bread  and  water  will  serve  a  man,  that 
may  with  peace  enjoy  his  delights  in  other  things. 
But  when  privilege,  property,  life,  delight,  heaven, 
and  salvation,  comes  to  be  intruded,  no  marvel  if 
the  woman,  though  but  a  woman,  cries  out,  and 
set  her  light  against  them;  had  she  seen  the  thief, 
and  said  nothing,  she  had  been  far  worse. 

I  told  you  before  that  by  the  windows  is  meant 
tbe  Word,  which  is  compared  to  glass.  1  Co.  xiu.  12. 
2 Co.  in.  is.  Ja.  i.  23-25.  What,  then,  is  the  Word  against 
the  WTord?  No,  verily,  it  is  therefore  not  the  Word, 
but  opposite  apprehensions  thereabout,  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  now  intends ;  for  he  saith  uot  that 
window  was  against  window,  respecting  the  true 
sense  of  tbe  Word,  but  light  was  against  light,  re- 
specting the  divers  notions  and  apprehensions  that 
men  of  opposite  spirits  would  have  about  the  Word. 
Nor  are  we  to  take  this  word  light,  especially  in 
the  antitype,  in  a  proper  but  in  a  metaphorical 
sense,  that  is,  with  respect  to  the  judgment  of  both 
parties.  Here  is  the  true  church,  and  she  has  the 
true  light ;  here  also  is  the  boar,  the  man  of  sin, 
and  the  dragon ;  and  they  see  by  their  way,  and 
yet,  as  I  said,  all  by  tbe  self-same  windows.  They 
that  are  the  church  do,  in  God's  light,  see  light ; 
but  they  that  are  not,  do  in  their  own  way  see. 
And  let  a  man,  and  a  beast,  look  out  at  the  same 
window,  the  same  door,  the  same  casement,  yet 
the  one  will  see  like  a  man,  and  the  other  but  like 
a  beast.  No  marvel  then,  though  they  have  the 
same  windows,  that  'light  is  against  light,'  and 
sight  against  sight  in  this  house.  For  there  are 
that  know  nothing  but  what  they  know  naturally 

as  brutes.  Ps.  xcii.  G.  Je.  x.  S,  14,  21.  Jude  10. 

No  marvel  then  if  there  is  here  a  disagreement; 
tbe  beast  can  but  see  as  a  beast,  but  the  church  is 
\Dh.  111. 


resolved  not  to  be  guided  by  the  eye  of  a  beast, 
though  he  pretends  to  have  his  light  by  that  verv 
window  by  which  the  church  has  hers.  The  beast 
is  moon-eyed,  and  puts  darkness  for  light,  yea,  and 
bates  the  light  that  is  so  indeed  ;l  but  the  saints 
will  not  hear  him,  for  they  know  the  voice  of  their 
Lord.  Is.  v.  20.  Jn.  iii.  20.  How  then  can  it  be  but 
that  light  should  be  against  light  in  this  bouse,  and 
that  in  a  military  posture  ?  And  bow  can  it  be 
but  that  here  'every  battle  of  the  warrior'  should 
be  '  with  confused  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in 

blood.'  Is.  ix.  5. 

And  in  that  he  saith,  '  light  was  against  light  in 
three  ranks, '  it  shows  their  preparations  one  against 
another;  also  that  they  on  both  sides  are  resolved 
to  stand  by  their  way.  The  church  is  confident, 
the  man  of  sin  is  confident ;  they  both  have  the 
same  windows  to  see  by,  and  so  they  manage  their 
matters  ;  yet  not  so  simply  by  the  windows,  as  by 
their  divers  judgments  they  make  of  that  which 
shinetb  in  at  them.  Each  one  therefore  bath  the 
true  and  false  profession,  will  be  confident  of  his 
own  way ;  he  that  was  right,  knew  he  was  right ; 
and  he  that  was  wrong,  thought  be  was  right,  and 
so  the  battle  began.  '  There  is  a  way  that  seem- 
eth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the 
ways  of  death. '  Pr.  xiv.  12. 

Nor  is  it  in  man  to  help  it;  there  has  been  reason- 
ing, there  has  been  disputing,  there  has  blood  also 
been  spilt  on  both  sides,  through  the  confidence 
that  each  had  of  the  goodness  of  his  own  way ;  but 
no  reconciliation  is  made,  the  enmity  is  set  here  of 
God;  iron  and  clay  cannot  mix.  Ge.  iii.  15.  Da.  ii.  42,4:!. 
God  will  have  things  go  on  thus  in  the  world,  till 
his  words  shall  be  fulfilled :  '  The  deceived,  and 
the  deceiver,  are  his.'  Job  xii.  16.  Things  therefore 
must  have  their  course  in  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
ness, till  the  mystery  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled.  Re. 

xvii.  17. 

Hence  it  is  said  God  will  bring  Gog  against  his 
people  of  Israel,  'as  a  cloud  to  cover  the  laud.' 
Eze.  xxxviiL  16.  But  for  what  cause  ?  Why,  that  he 
may  contend  a  while  with  them,  and  then  fall  by 
their  light  to  the  ground.  Therefore  he  says  also, 
that  he  '  will  give  unto  Gog  a  place  there  of  graves 
in  Israel,  and  it  shall  be  called  the  valley  of  Hamou- 
gOg. '  Ezc.  xxxix.  11. 

God  will  get  himself  great  glory  by  permitting 
the  boar,  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  dragon,  to  revel 
it  in  the  church  of  God;  for  they,  by  setting  up 
and  contending  for  their  darkness  and  calling  of 


1  All  men  have  the  same  Bible,  but  all  have  not  Bought  for 
spiritual  discernmeut.  The  Beast,  whether  of  Rome,  Greece, 
or  England,  that  looks  through  the  Word  to  find  Borne  plaus- 
ible means  of  tyrannising  over  the  soul,  by  preventing  man 
from  using  his  own  eyes  in  seeking  salvation,  whether  it  be  by 
church  cauons  or  acts  of  Parliament  interfering  with  the  exer- 
cise of  private  judgment,  is  an  enemy  to,  and  hater  oi,  the  true 
light.— (Ed.) 


522 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


it  the  light,  and  by  setting  of  it  against  that  light, 
which  is  light  in  very  deed,  do  not  only  prove  the 
power  of  truth  where  it  is,  but  illustrate  it  so  much 
the  more.  For  as  black  sets  off  white,  and  dark- 
ness light,  so  error  sets  off  truth.  He  that  calls 
a  man  a  horse,  doth  in  conclusion  but  fix  the  belief 
of  his  humanity1  so  much  the  more  in  the  appre- 
hension of  all  rational  creatures. 

'  Light  against  light  in  three  ranks.'  The  three 
ranks  on  the  church's  side  signify  her  light  in  the 
Trinity,  as  was  said,  and  in  the  three  offices  of 
Christ ;  and  the  ranks  against  these  three  ranks  be 
to  signify  the  opposite  apprehensions  of  the  enemy. 
They  differ  also  about  the  authority  of  the  Word, 
and  ordinances,  about  the  offices,  officers,  and  exe- 
cutions of  office,  in  the  church,  &c.  There  is  an 
opposition  everywhere,  even  round  about  the  house; 
there  was  'light  against  light  in  three  ranks.' 
This  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  therefore 
a  significative  thing,  wisely  built  and  fit  for  the 
purpose  for  which  it  was  designed,  which  was  to 
show  what  afterward  would  be  the  state  of  the 
church  in  the  wilderness.  Nor  could  anything  in 
the  temple  more  aptly  express  itself  in  a  typical 
way,  as  to  any  of  the  things  concerning  New  Testa- 
ment matters,  than  doth  this  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon,  as  to  the  things  designed  to  be  signified 
thereby.  It  speaks,  can  we  but  hear :  it  points  to 
things,  as  it  were  with  a  finger,  have  we  but  eyes 
to  see. 

It  is  not  therefore  to  be  wondered  at  that  we 
hear  both  parties  plead  so  much  for  their  authority, 
crying  out  against  each  other,  as  those  that  destroy 
religion.  So  doth  the  church,  so  doth  the  man  of 
sin.  The  living  child  is  mine,  saith  one;  nay,  but 
the  dead  child  is  thine,  and  the  living  child  is  mine, 
says  the  other.  And  thus  they  spake  before  the 
king.  1  Ki.  iii.  16-22.  Now  this  could  not  be,  were 
there  not  different  apprehensions  here;  light  against 
light  then  is  the  cause  of  all  this;  and  here  is  'light 
against  light  in  three  ranks;'  and  so  will  be  until 
the  beast  is  dead. 

The  church  will  not  give  place,  for  she  knows 
she  has  the  truth;  the  dragon  and  his  angels,  they 
will  not  give  place,  but  as  beaten  back  by  the  power 
of  the  truth ;  for  thus  it  is  said  of  the  dragon  and 
his  angels,  they  fought  and  prevailed  not.  There- 
fore there  will,  there  must,  there  cannot  but  be  a 
spiritual  warfare  here,  and  that  until  one  of  the 
two  are  destroyed,  and  their  body  given  to  the 
burning  flame.  Da.  vii.  n.  Re.  xix.  20. 


1  Humanity,  in  its  usual  acceptation,  means  the  inferiority 
of  man  to  the  divine  or  angelic  nature,  hut  superiority  to  the 
mere  animal  or  hrute  creation.  '  The  nature  of  man,  wherein 
he  is  lesse  than  God  Almighty,  and  excellynge  not  with- 
standyng  al  other  creatures  in  erth,  is  called  humanitie.' 
— (Sir  T.  Eliot.)  Banyan's  illustration  of  the  word  is 
curious.— (En.) 


CHAP.  VI. 

of  the  doors  and  posts,  and  their  square,  with 
the  windows  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon. 

'  And  all  the  doors  and  posts  were  square,  with 
the  windows.'  The  doors,  they  were  for  entrance, 
the  posts  were  the  support  of  the  doors,  and  the 
windows  were,  as  was  hinted  before,  for  light.  Now 
here  they  are  said  to  be  all  square ;  square  is  a 
note  of  perfection;  but  this  word  square  may  be 
taken  two  ways.  1.  Either  as  to  the  fashion  of 
the  things  themselves ;  or,  2.  With  reference  to 
the  uniform  order  of  the  whole. 

In  the  first  sense  was  the  altar  of  burnt-offering, 
the  altar  of  incense,  and  the  breastplate  of  judg- 
ment, square.  Ex.  xxvii.  1 ;  xxviii.  16 ;  xxx.  2.  And  so  also 
it  is  said  of  our  New  Testament  New  Jerusalem. 
Re.  xxi.  16.  But  the  square  in  the  text  is  not  thus  to 
be  understood,  but  if  I  mistake  not,  as  is  signified 
under  the  second  head,  that  is  for  an  uniform  order. 
The  whole  fabric,  as  the  doors,  posts,  and  windows, 
presented  themselves  to  beholders  in  an  exact  uni- 
form order,  and  so  right  delectable  to  behold. 
Hence  we  may  gather  that  this  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon  was  so  exactly  built,  and  consequently 
so  complete  to  view,  that  it  was  alluring  to  the  be- 
holders ;  and  that  the  more,  for  that  so  pretty  a 
fabric  should  be  found  in  a  forest  or  wood.  A  lily 
among  thorns,  a  pearl  on  a  dunghill,  and  beauty 
under  a  veil,  will  make  one  turn  aside  to  look  on  it. 

Answerable  to  this,  the  church,  even  in  the  wil- 
derness, or  under  persecution,  is  compared  not  only 
to  a  woman,  but  to  a  comely  and  delicate  woman. 
And  who,  that  shall  meet  such  a  creature  in  a  wood, 
unless  he  feared  God,  but  would  seek  to  ravish  and 
defile  her. 

Therefore  I  say,  that  which  is  here  said  to  be 
square,  must  be  understood  to  be  so,  as  to  prospect 
and  view,  or  right  taking  to  the  eye. 

Thus  therefore  they  are  allured,  and  think  to 
defile  her  in  the  bed  of  love;  but  coming  to  her,  and 
finding  of  her  chaste,  and  filled  with  nothing  but 
armour,  and  men  at  arms,  to  maintain  her  chastity, 
nolens  volens — their  fleshly  love  is  turned  into  cruel 
rage,  and  so  they  go  to  variance. 

'I  have  likened,'  says  God,  'the  daughter  of 
Zion  to  a  comely  and  delicate  woman.'  Je.  vi.  2.  But 
where  is  she  ?  0  !  she  is  in  the  field,  in  the  forest 
among  the  shepherds.  But  what  will  they  do  with 
her?  Why,  because  she  complies  not  with  their 
desires,  they  'prepare  war  against  her,'  saying, 
'  Arise,  let  U3  go  up  at  noon.  Arise,  and  let  us  go 
by  night,  and  let  us  destroy  her  palaces.'  Je.  vi.  4,  5. 
Wherefore  the  beauty  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon,  as  well  as  the  fortitude  thereof,  was  a 
temptation  to  the  enemy  to  come  to  take  it  into 
their  possession;  especially  since  it  stood,  as  it  were, 


THE    HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST   OF    LEBANON. 


523 


on  the  borders  of  Israel,  and  so  facet!  tlie  enemy's 
country. 

Thus  the  church,  though  in  her  weeds  of  widow- 
hood, is  become  the  desire  of  the  eyes  of  the  nations; 
for  indeed  her  features  are  such,  considering  who  is 
her  head,  where  mostly  to  the  eye  beauty  lies,  that 
whoso  sees  but  the  utmost  glimpse  of  her,  is  easily 
ravished  with  her  beauties.  See  how  the  prophet 
words  it — '  Many  nations  are  gathered  together 
against  thee,  that  say,  Let  her  be  defiled,  and  let 
our  eye  look  upon  Zion.'  Ml  w.  n. 

The  church,  the  very  name  of  the  church  of  God, 
is  beautiful  in  the  world  ;  and,  as  among  women, 
she  that  has  beauty  has  her  head  desired,  if  it 
might  be,  to  stand  upon  another  woman's  shoulders; 
so  this,  and  that,  and  every  nation  that  beholds 
the  beauty  of  the  church,  would  fain  be  called  by 
that  name.  The  church,  one  would  think,  was  but 
in  a  homely  dress  when  she  was  coming  out  of  cap- 
tivity ;  and  yet  then  the  people  of  the  countries 
desired  to  be  one  with  her.  '  Let  us  (said  they  to 
Zerubbabel,  and  to  the  fathers  of  the  church)  build 
with  you,  for  we  seek  your  God  as  ye  do.'  Ezr.  iv,  3. 

The  very  name  of  the  church,  as  I  said,  is  striven 
for  of  the  world,  but  that  is  the  church  which 
Christ  has  made  so;  her  features  also  remain  with 
herself,  as  this  comely  prospect  of  the  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon  abode  with  it,  whoever  beheld 
or  wished  for  it.  The  beauty  therefore  of  this  house, 
though  it  stood  in  the  forest,  was  admirable ;  even 
as  is  the  beauty  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness, 
though  in  a  bewildered  state. 

Hear  the  relation  that  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  of 
the  intrinsic  beauty  of  the  church,  when  she  was  to 
go  to  be  in  a  persecuted  state ;  she  was  '  clothed 
with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  upon 
her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars.'  Re.  xii.  1.  And 
yet  now  the  dragon  stood  by  her.  Re.  xii.  t.  But 
I  say,  Here  is  a  woman!  let  who  will  attempt  it, 
show  such  another  in  the  world,  if  he  can.1 

They  therefore  that  have  any  regard  to  moral- 
ity, civility,  or  to  ceremonial  comeliness,  covet  to 
be  of  the  church  of  God,  or  to  appropriate  that 
glorious  title  to  themselves.  And  here,  indeed, 
Antichrist  came  in  ;  she  took  this  name  to  herself; 
and  though  she  could  not  come  at  the  sun,  nor  moon, 
nor  stars,  to  adorn  herself  with  them,  yet  she  has 
found  something  that  makes  her  comely  in  her  fol- 
lowers' eyes.  See  how  the  Holy  Ghost  sets  her 
forth.  She  'was  arrn}red  in  purple  and  scarlet 
colour,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious  stones, 
and  pearls,  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand,'  <fec. 


1  A  common  mode  of  picturing  the  virgin  M;iry  tor  tlie 
devotee  of  Popery  to  worship,  is  a  whole  length  beautiful 
woman,  with  rays  as  of  the  sun  shooting  out  all  round  her, 
standing  upon  the  moon,  and  upon  her  head  a  splendid  crown 
ornamented  with  twelve  stars.  Under  such  a  disguise,  who 
would  expect  to  find 'the  well-favoured  harlot  establishing  a 
throue  for  Satan?' — (Ed.) 


Re.  xvii.  4.  Hence  she  is  called,  '  The  well-favoured 
harlot,'  '  the  lady  of  kingdoms,'  <fec.  Na.  in.  4.  u.  xlvli. 
5,7. 

But  because  the  chaste  matron,  the  spouse  of 
Christ,  would  not  allow  this  slut  to  run  away  with 
this  name,  therefore  she  gets  upon  the  back  of  her 
beast,  and  by  him  pushes  this  woman  into  tlie  dirt; 
but  because  her  faith  and  love  to  her  husband  re- 
mains, she  turns  again,  and  pleads  by  her  titles, 
her  features,  and  ornaments,  that  she,  and  she  only, 
is  she  whose  square  answereth  to  tlie  square  of  her 
figure,  and  to  the  characters  which  her  Lord  hath 
given  of  his  own,  and  so  the  game  began.  For  so 
soon  as  this  mistress  became  a  dame  in  the  world, 
and  found  that  she  had  her  stout  abettors,  she  at- 
tempts to  turn  all  things  topsy-turvy,  and  to  set 
them  and  to  make  of  them  what  she  lists.  And 
now  she  will  have  an  altar  like  that  which  was 
Tiglath-pilcser's.  Now  must  the  Lord's  brazen 
altar  be  removed  from  its  place,  the  borders  of  the 
basis  must  be  cut  ofF,  and  the  laver  removed  from 
off  them  ;  the  molten  sea  must  also  now  be  taken 
off  the  backs  of  the  brazen  oxen,  where  Solomon 
set  it,  and  be  set  on  a  pavement  of  stone.  2  Ki. 

xvi.  10-17. 

Solomon !  alas,  Solomon's  nobody  now ;  this 
woman  is  wiser  in  her  own  conceit  than  seven  men 
that  can  render  a  reason.  Now  also  the  covert  for 
the  Sabbath  must  be  turned  to  the  use  of  the  king 
of  Assyria,  (fee.  2  Ki.  xvi.  18.  Thus  has  the  beauty  of 
God's  church  betrayed  her  into  the  hands  of  her 
lovers,  who  loved  her  for  themselves,  for  the  devil, 
and  for  the  making  of  her  a  seat,  a  throne  for  the 
man  of  sin.  And  poor  woman,  all  her  struggling 
and  striving,  and  crying  out  under  the  hands  of 
these  ravishers,  has  not,  as  yet,  delivered  her, 
though  it  has  saved  her  life.   De.  xxii.  25-27. 

But  though  thus  it  has  been  with  Christ's  true 
church,  and  will  be  as  long  as  his  enemy  Antichrist 
reigns,  yet  the  days  will  come  when  her  God  will 
give  her  her  ornaments,  and  her  bracelets,  and  her 
liberty,  and  her  joy,  that  she  had  in  the  day  of  her 
espousals. 

CHAP.  VII. 

OF  THE  REPETITION  OF  LIGHT  AGAINST  LIGHT  IN  THE 
HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON 

To  be  sure  it  was  not  superfluously  done  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  make  repetition  of  these  words, 
'And  light  was  against  light  in  three  ranks,' 
therefore  something  is  intended  in  the  adding  of 
them  again  that  was  not  intended  by  the  first 
mentioning  of  them.   1  Ki.  vii.  4.  5. 

I  have  told  you  what  I  thought  was  intended  by 
the  first  rehearsal  of  them,  namely,  to  show  how 
Antichrist  got  in  with  his  sensuality,  and  opposed  it 
to  the  true  "light  of  the  Word  of  God,  exalting  him- 


524 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


self  above  God,  and  also  above  all  Divine  revela- 
tion; this  was  his  light  against  light.  But,  I  say, 
wby  is  it  repeated?  For  he  saith,  '  Light  was 
against  light  in  three  ranks  '  again.  Truly,  I 
tbink  it  is  repeated  to  show  the  evil  effects  the 
first  anticbristian  opposition  would  have  in  the 
church  of  God,  towards  the  end  of  her  wilderness 
state.  For,  *  light  against  light  '  now,  for  that 
it  is  here  repeated,  is  to  show  us  some  new  thing, 
or,  as  far  as  wood  and  windows  can  speak,  to  let 
us  understand  what  would  be  the  consequence  of 
those  anticbristian  figments x  that  were  brought 
into  the  church  at  first  by  him. 

For  can  it  be  imagined  but  that,  since  so  much 
confusion  was  brought  into  the  church,  some  of 
the  truly  godly  themselves  would  be  much  damni- 
fied thereby?  The  apostle  says,  '  Evil  communi- 
cation corrupts  good  manners. '  l  Co.  xv.  33.  And 
that  'their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker.'  iTi. 
u.  17.  Mischief  therefore  must  needs  follow  this 
ugly  deed  of  the  man  of  sin.  If  a  house  be  on 
fire,  though  it  is  not  burnt  down,  the  smell  of  the 
flame  may  long  remain  there ;  also  we  count  it  no 
wonder  to  see  some  of  the  effects  upon  the  rafters, 
beams,  and  some  of  the  principal  posts  thereof. 
The  calf  that  was  set  up  at  Dan  defiled  that 
people  until  the  captivity  of  the  land.   Ju.  xwu.  30. 

And  I  say  again,  since  light  against  light  was 
so  early  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  and  has 
also  been  there  so  long,  and  again,  since  many  in 
this  church  were  both  born  and  bred  there  under 
these  oppositions  of  light,  it  is  easy  to  conclude 
that  something  of  the  enemy's  darkness  might  be 
also  called  light  by  the  sincere  that  followed  after. 
For  by  antichristian  darkness,  though  they  might 
call  it  light,  the  true  light  was  darkened,  and  so 
the  eye  made  dim,  even  the  eye  of  the  truly  godly. 
Also  the  Holy  Ghost  did  much  withdraw  itself 
from  the  church,  so  the  doctrines,  traditions,  and 
rudiments  of  the  world  took  more  hold  there,  and 
spread  themselves  more  formidably  over  the  face  of 
that  whole  church.  For  after  the  first  angel  had 
sounded,  and  the  star  was  fallen  from  heaven  to  the 
earth,  and  had  received  the  key  of  the  bottomless 
pit,  and  had  opened  the  mouth  thereof,  the  smoke 
came  out  amain.  This  angel  was  one  of  the  first 
dads  of  antichristianism,  and  this  smoke  was  that 
which  they  call  light,  but  it  was  '  light  against 
light.'  'And  he  opened  the  bottomless  pit,  and 
there  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the  pit,  as  the  smoke 
of  a  great  furnace,  and  the  sun  and  the  air  were 
darkened,  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the  pit.'  Re. 
ix.  1,  2. 

The  sun  I  take  to  be  the  gospel  of  God,  and  the 
air  a  type  of  the  breathings  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  smoke  I  take  to  be  the  doctrines  and  tradi- 

1  Inventions,  fictions,  fables.—  (Ed.) 


tions  of  Antichrist ;  that  which  was,  as  I  said 
before,  put  for  light  against  the  true  light  of  the 
Word.  Now,  since  the  sun  and  the  air  were 
darkened  by  this  smoke,  yea,  and  so  darkened  as 
that  the  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars,  nor  day,  nor 
night,  could  shine  for  a  third  part  of  them ;  no 
marvel  though  the  true  worshippers  here  were 
benighted,  or,  at  least,  had  but  little  light  to  walk 
by ;  yea,  I  have  known  some  that  have  been  born 
and  bred  up  in  smoky  holes,  that  have  been  made, 
both  in  smell  and  sight,  to  carry  the  tokens  of  their 
so  being  bred  about  them. 

And  I  say  again,  as  to  what  is  now  under  our 
consideration,  no  marvel  if  they  that  breathed  in 
this  church  in  the  wilderness,  after  the  smoke 
came  out  of  this  pit,  sucked  in  the  smoke  with  the 
air  until  it  became  natural  to  them.  A  house 
annoyed  with  smoke  is  a  great  offence  to  the  eyes, 
whose  light  being  thereby  impaired,  the  judgment 
also,  since  that,  as  to  visibles,  is  guided  by  the 
eye,  must  needs  be  in  danger  of  being  in  part  mis- 
led. And  this  being  the  effect  of  light  against 
light  at  first,  is  the  cause  of  what  to  this  day  we 
see  in  the  church  among  the  true  brotherhood. 
For  as  a  cause  produceth  an  effect,  so  oftentimes 
an  effect  sets  on  foot  another  cause. 

Now,  therefore,  we  have  light  against  light 
among  the  godly,  as  afore  there  was  antichristian 
against  the  Christian  light.  Not  that  light 
against  light  is  now  godly  in  the  all  of  it.  It 
is  antichristian  that  opposes  the  Christian  light 
still.  But,  as  before,  the  darkness  that  opposed 
the  light  Avas  in  the  antichristians,  now  that  dark- 
ness is  got  into  the  Christians,  and  has  set  them 
against  one  another.  Light  therefore  against  light 
now  is  in  the  Christians,  truly  prefigured  by  that 
which  was  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon. 
Witness  the  jars,  the  oppositions,  the  contentions, 
emulations,  strifes,  debates,  whisperings,  tumults, 
and  condemnations  that,  like  cannon-shot,  have  so 
frequently  on  all  sides  been  let  fly  against  one 
another. 

Shall  I  need  to  mention  particularly  contests 
many  years  past,  and  presented  to  us  in  print? 
Words  and  papers  now  in  print,  as  also  the  many 
petty  divisions  and  names  amongst  us,  sufficiently 
make  this  manifest.  Wherefore  light  against  light 
in  this  last  place,  or  where  it  is  thus  repeated, 
cannot,  I  think,  be  more  fitly  applied  than  to  that 
now  under  our  consideration  ;  that  is  to  say,  than 
to  the  opposite  persuasions,  different  apprehensions, 
and  thwart  conclusions,  that  are  constantly  drawn 
from  the  same  texts  to  maintain  a  diverse  practice. 
Though  we  are  to  acknowledge  with  thankfulness 
that  this  opposition  lies  not  so  much  in  fundamen- 
tals as  in  things  of  a  lesser  import. 

The  godly  all  hold  the  head,  for  there  Antichrist 
could  never  divide  them ;  their  divisions  therefore 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST  OF   LEBANON. 


525 


are,  as  I  said,  only  about  smaller  tilings.  I  do  not 
say  that  the  antichristian  darkness  has  clone  no- 
thing in  the  church  as  to  the  hurting  it  in  the  great 
things  of  Hod.  But,  I  say,  it  has  not  been  able 
to  do  that  which  could  sever  their  Head  from  them, 
otherwise  there  appeal's  even  too  much  of  the  efl'ect 
of  his  doings  there.  For  even,  as  to  the  offices  of 
our  Lord,  some  will  have  his  authority  more  large, 
some  more  strait.  Some  confine  his  rules  to  them- 
selves and  to  their  more  outward  qualification,  and 
some  believe  they  are  extended  further.  Some 
will  have  his  power  in  his  church  purely  spiritual, 
others  again  would  have  it  mixed.  Some  count 
his  Word  perfect  and  sufficient  to  guide  in  all 
religious  matters,  others  again  hold  that  an  addi- 
tion of  something  human  is  necessary.  Some  are 
for  confining  of  his  benefits,  in  the  saving  effects 
of  them,  only  to  the  elect,  others  are  for  a  stretch- 
ing of  them  further.  1  might  here  multiply  things, 
but  that  light  against  light  is  now  among  the  godly 
as  light  against  light  was  in  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,  is  not  at  all  to  be  questioned. 

This  therefore  may  stand  for  another  argument 
to  prove  that  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
was  a  type  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness.  As 
to  the  number  here,  that  is  to  say,  in  three  ranks, 
it  is  also,  as  I  think,  to  show  that,  though,  as  was 
said  afore,  this  darkness  could  not  sever  the  true 
church  from  her  Head,  yet  it  has  eclipsed  the  glory 
of  things.  By  two  lights  a  man  cannot  see  this 
or  that  thing  so  exactly  as  by  one  single  light ; 
no,  they  both  make  all  confused  though  they  make 
not  all  invisible.  Mat.  vi.  22,  23. 

As,  for  instance,  sun-light  and  moon-light  to- 
gether, fire-light  and  sun-light  together,  candle- 
light and  moon-light  together,  make  things  more 
obscure  than  to  look  on  them  by  a  single  light. 
The  Word  reflecting  upon  the  understanding,  with- 
out the  interposing  of  man's  traditions,  makes  the 
mind  of  God  to  a  man  more  clear  than  when  at- 
tended with  the  other.  How  much  more  then 
when  light  shall  be  against  light  in  three  ranks? 
Christ  in  his  offices,  blessed  be  God,  is  to  this  day 
known  in  his  church,  notwithstanding  there  is  yet 
with  us  light  against  light  in  three  ranks.  But 
in  these  things  he  is  not  so  distinctly,  fully,  and 
completely  known,  as  he  was  before  the  church 
went  into  the  wilderness.  No,  that  knowledge  is 
lost  to  a  '  third  part '  of  it,  as  was  also  showed 
before.  Re.  viu.  is. 

Things  therefore  will  never  be  well  in  the  church 
of  God  so  long  as  there  is  thus  light  against  light 
therein.  When  there  is  but  one  Lord  among  us 
and  his  name  One,  and  when  divisions,  by  the 
consent  of  the  whole,  are  banished,  I  mean,  not 
persecuted,  but  abandoned  in  all  by  a  joint  con- 
sent, and  when  every  man  shall  submit  his  own 
single  opinion  to  those  truths,  that  by  their  being 


retained  are  for  the  health  of  all,  then  look  for 
good  days,  and  not  until  then.  For  this  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  in  which,  as  you  see,  there 
is  'light  against  light  in  three  ranks,'  was  not 
built  to  prefigure  the  church  in  her  primitive  state, 
but  to  show  us  how  we  should  be  while  standing 
before  the  face  of  the  dragon,  and  while  shifting 
for  ourselves  in  the  wilderness. 

And  although  by  her  pillars,  and  beauty,  and 
tower,  aye,  and  by  her  facing  the  very  metropoli- 
tan of  her  enemies,  she  showeth  that  the  true 
grace  of  God  is  in  her,  and  a  strength  and  courage 
that  is  invincible,  yet  for  that  she  has  also  affixed 
to  her  station  '  Light  against  light  in  three  ranks.' 
It  is  evident  her  eye  is  not  so  single,  and  conse- 
quently that  her  body  is  not  so  full  of  light,  as  she 
will  be  when  her  sackcloth  is  put  off,  and  as  when 
she  has  put  on  her  beautiful  garments.  For  then 
it  is  that  her  moon  is  to  shine  as  the  sun,  and  that 
the  light  of  her  sun  is  to  be  sevenfold,  even  as  the 
light  of  seven  days,  then,  I  say,  '  When  the  Lord 
bindeth  up  the  breach  of  his  people,  and  healeth 
the  stroke  of  their  wound.'  is.  xxx.  26. 

You  know  that  a  kingdom  flourishes  not  so  long 
as  it  is  the  seat  of  war,  but  when  that  is  over  peace 
and  prosperity  flourishes.  This  house,  as  has  been 
hinted,  was  a  type  of  the  church  in  a  wood,  a 
forest,  a  wilderness. 

CHAP.  VIII. 

OF  THE  SHIELDS  AND  TARGETS  THAT  WERE  IN  TnE 
HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 

As  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  that 
which,  in  the  general,  prefigured  the  state  of  the 
church  in  the  wilderness,  so  it  was  accoutered  with 
such  military  materials  as  suited  her  in  such  a 
condition,  that  is  to  say,  with  shields  and  targets; 
consequently  with  other  warlike  things.  '  And 
king  Solomon  made  two  hundred  targets  of  beaten 
gold,  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold  went  to  one  tar- 
get, and  lie  made  three  hundred  shields  of  beaten 
gold ;  [three  pound]  or  three  hundred  shekels  of 
gold  went  to  one  shield.  And  the  king  put  them 
in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon.'  l  Ki.  x.  ic,  17. 

2  Ch.  ix.  15,  16. 

This  supposes  that  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  would  be  attacked  by  the  enemy.  And 
good  reason  there  was  for  such  a  supposition,  since 
it  was  built  for  defence  of  that  worship  that  was 
set  up  in  the  church.  Hence  it  is  said,  when  the 
enemy  used  to  come  with  his  chariots  and  horse- 
men against  them,  that  they  '  did  look  in  that  day 
to  the  armour  of  the  house  of  the  forest.'  is.  xxn.  7,a 
That  was,  to  see  how  they  were  prepared  at  Le- 
banon, to  make  resistance  against  their  foes,  and 
to  secure  themselves  and  their  religion  from  that 
destruction  that  by  the  enemy  was  designed  should 


526 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


be  made  upon  both.  And  thus  again,  or  in  this 
thing,  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  shows 
that  it  was  a  figure  of  the  church  of  the  wilderness; 
for  she  also  is  furnished  with  such  weapons  as  were 
counted  by  the  wisdom  of  God  necessary  for  the 
security  of  the  soul,  and  Christian  religion,  to  wit, 
'the  weapons  of  our  warfare,'  'the  whole  armour 
of  God.'  2  Co.  s.  4. 

For  though  this  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon 
was  a  place  of  defence,  yet  her  armour  is  described 
and  directed  too,  both  as  to  matter  and  to  measure. 
It  was  armour  made  of  gold,  such  armour,  and  so 
much  of  it.  And  it  was  made  by  direction  of  Solo- 
mon, who  was  a  type  of  Christ,  by  the  power  of  whose 
grace  and  working  our  armour  is  also  provided  for 
us,  as  in  the  texts  afore-mentioned  may  appear. 
By  this  description,  therefore,  of  the  armour  of  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  we  are  confined, 
that  being  a  type  to  the  armour  of  God,  in  the 
antitype  thereto  for  the  defence  of  the  Christian 
religion.  We  then  may  make  use  of  none  but  the 
armour  of  God  for  defence  of  our  souls,  and  the 
worship  of  God ;  this  alone  is  the  golden  armour 
provided  by  our  Solomon,  and  put  in  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  or  rather  in  the  church  in 
the  wilderness,  for  her  to  resist  the  enemy  withal. 

Two  hundred  targets.  There  is  but  little  men- 
tion made  of  targets  in  the  Bible,  nor  at  all  ex- 
pressly how  they  were  used,  but  once;  and  that  was 
when  Goliah  came  to  defy  Israel,  he  came,  as  with 
other  warlike  furniture,  so  '  with  a  target  of  brass 
between  his  shoulders.'  lSa.iwi.6.  A  target,  that  is, 
saith  the  margin,  a  gorget.  A  gorget  is  a  thing  wore 
about  the  neck,  and  it  serveth  in  that  place  instead 
of  a  shield.  Wherefore  in  some  of  your  old  Bibles, 
that  which  in  one  place  is  called  a  target,  in  another 
is  called  a  shield.1  A  shield  for  that  part.  This 
piece  of  armour,  I  suppose,  was  worn  in  old  time 
by  them  that  used  spears,  and  it  was  to  guard  the 
upper  part  of  the  back  and  shoulders  from  the 
arrows  of  their  enemies,  that  were  shot  into  the 
air,  to  the  intent  they  might  fall  upon  the  upper 
part  of  the  body. 

The  shields  were  for  them  which  drew  bows,  and 
they  were  to  catch  or  beat  off  those  arrows  that 
were  levelled  at  them  by  the  enemy  before.  '  Asa 
had '  at  one  time  '  an  army  of  men  that  bare  tar- 
gets and  spears,  out  of  Judah  three  hundred 
thousand,  and  out  of  Benjamin  that  bare  shields, 
and  drew  bows,  two  hundred  and  fourscore 
thousand.'  2  Ch.  xiv.  s. 

I  cannot  tell  what  the  target  should  signify  here, 
unless  it  was  to  show  that  those  in  the  type  were 


1  The  Hebrew  words,  UttlS  TrW!  translated  iu  the  author- 
ized version  of  the  Bible,  'And  a  target'  or  gorget  'of 
brass,'  are  rendered,  in  all  the  earlier  versions,  '  And  a  shield  of 
brass.'  Perhaps  a  cuirass;  it  was  evidently  defensive  brass 
armour,  worn  between  the  shoulders.— (En.) 


more  weak  and  faint-hearted  than  those  in  the 
antitype :  for  in  that  this  gorget  was  prepared  for 
some  back  part  of  the  body,  it  supposed  the  wearers 
subject  to  run  away,  to  flee.  But  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  Christian  armour,  we  have  no  provision 
for  the  back;  so  our  men  in  the  church  in  the  wil- 
derness are  supposed  to  be  more  stout.  Their  face 
is  made  strong  against  the  face  of  their  enemies, 
and  their  foreheads  strong  against  their  foreheads. 
Eze.  iu.  8,  o.  The  shield  was  a  type  of  the  Christian 
'faith,  and  so  the  apostle  applies  it.  The  which 
he  also  counteth  a  principal  piece  of  our  Christian 
armour  when  he  saith,  '  Above  all  taking  the  shield 
of  faith,  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked.'  Ep.  vi.  16.  These  tar- 
gets and  shields  were  made  of  gold,  to  show  the 
excellent  worth  of  this  armour  of  God;  to  wit,  that 
it  is  not  carnal  but  spiritual,  not  human  but  divine ; 
nor  common  or  mean,  but  of  an  infinite  value. 
Wherefore  James,  alluding  to  this,  saith,  'Hearken, 
my  beloved  brethren,  Hath  not  God  chosen  the 
poor  of  this  world  rich  in  faith,'  (hath  he  not  given 
them  this  golden  shield)  and  made  them  '  heirs  of 
the  kingdom  which  he  hath  promised  to  them  that 
love  him  V  Ja.  ii.  5. 

Faith  !  Peter  saith,  faith,  in  the  very  trial  of 
it,  is  much  more  precious  than  is  gold  that  perish- 
eth.  If  so,  then  what  is  that  worth,  or  value,  that 
is  in  the  grace  itself?  l  Pe.  i.  7.  This  also  i3  that 
which  Christ  intends  when  he  says,  *  buy  of  me 
gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  be  rich.' 

Re.  iii.  18. 

And  methinks  the  apostles  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  do  in  all  these  places  allude  to  the  shields, 
the  shields  of  gold,  that  Solomon  made,  and  put  in 
the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  ;  which  house, 
as  I  have  showed,  was  that  which  indeed  prefigured 
the  state  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness;  and  these 
shields  a  type  of  faith. 

Obj.  But  here  is  mention  made  of  nothing  but 
shields  aud  targets. 

Answ.  True,  and  that  perhaps  to  show  us  that 
the  war  that  the  church  makes  with  Antichrist  is 
rather  defensive  than  offensive.  Shields  and  tar- 
gets are  weapons  defensive,  weapons  provided  for 
self-preservation,  not  to  hurt  others  with.  A  Chris- 
tian also,  if  he  can  but  defend  his  soul  in  the  sin- 
cere profession  of  the  true  religion,  doth  what  by 
duty,  as  to  this,  he  is  bound.  Wherefore  though 
the  New  Testament  admits  him  to  put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God,  yet  the  whole  and  every  part  there- 
of is  spiritual,  and  only  defensive.  True,  there  is 
mention  made  of  the  sword,  but  that  sword  '  is  the 
Word  of  God.'  Ep.  vi.  17.  A  weapon  that  hurteth 
none,  none  at  all  but  the  devil  and  sin,  and  those 
that  love  it.  Indeed  it  was  made  for  Christians  to 
defend  themselves,  and  their  religion  with,  against 
hell  aud  the  angels  of  darkness.     These  two  pieces 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE    FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


527 


of  armour  then  that  Solomon  the  king  did  put  into  j 
the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  were  types  of 
the  spiritual  armour  that  the  church  in  the  wilder- 
D6S8  should  make  use  of.     And  as  we  read  of  no  I 
more  that  was  put  then',  at  least  to  be  typical,  so  j 
we  read  of,  and  must  use  no  more  tban  we  are  bid 
to  put  on  by  the  apostle,  for  the  defence  of  true 
religion. 

Obj.  But  he  that  shall  use  none  other  than  this, 
must  look  to  come  off  a  loser. 

Answ.  In  the  judgment  of  the  world  this  is  true; 
but  not  in  the  judgment  of  them  that  have  skill, 
and  a  heart  to  use  it.  For  this  armour  is  not 
Saul's,  which  David  refused,  but  God's,  by  which 
the  lives  of  all  those  have  been  secured  that  put  it 
on,  and  handled  it  well.  You  read  of  some  of 
David's  mighty  men  of  valour,  that  their  '  faces 
were  like  the  faces  of  lions,  and'  that  they  •  xoere 
as  swift'  of  foot  *  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains.' 
]  Ch.  xii.  8.  Being  expert  in  handling  spear  and 
shield. 

Why,  God's  armour  makes  a  man's  face  look 
thus,  also  it  makes  him  that  useth  it  more  lively 
and  active  than  before.  God's  armour  is  no  bur- 
den to  the  body,  nor  clog  to  the  mind,  but  ratber 
a  natural,  instead  of  an  artificial,  fortification. 

But  this  armour  comes  not  to  any  but  out  of 
the  king's  hand ;  Solomon  put  these  targets  and 
shields  into  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon.  So 
Christ  distributeth  his  armour  to  his  church. 
Hence  it  is  said  it  is  given  to  his  to  suffer  for  him. 
It  is  given  to  his  by  himself,  and  on  his  behalf. 

Phi.  i.  29. 

That  is,  that  they  might  with  it  fight  those  battles 
which  he  shall  manage  against  Antichrist.  Hence 
they  are  called  the  armies  in  heaven,  and  are  said 
to  follow  their  Lord  *  upon  white  horses  clothed  in 
fine  linen,  white  and  clean.'  But,  as  I  said,  still 
their  war  was  but  defensive.  For  a  little  further 
do  but  observe,  and  you  shall  find  the  beast  fall 
upon  him.  '  And  I  saw  the  beast,  aud  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  and  their  armies  gathered  together, 
to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the  horse, 
and  against  his  army.'  Re.  xix.  u,  19.  It  is  they  that 
fall  on,  it  is  they  that  pick  the  quarrel,  and  give 
the  onset.  Besides,  the  armour,  as  I  said,  is  only 
spiritual ;  wherefore  the  slaughter  must  needs  be 
spiritual  also.  Hence  as  here  it  is  said  the 
Lamb  did  slay  his  enemies,  by  the  sword,  spirit, 
or  breath  of  his  mouth ;  so  his  army  also  slays 
them  by  the  fire  that  proceedeth  out  of  his  mouth. 

Re.  i.  16  ;  xix.  21. 

Here  is  therefore  no  man's  person  in  danger  by 
this  war.  And  I  say  again,  so  far  as  auy  man's 
person  is  in  danger,  it  is  by  wrong  managing  of 
this  war.  True,  the  persons  of  the  Christians  are 
in  danger,  but  that  is  because  of  the  bloody  dispo- 
sition of  an  antichristian  enemy.     But  we  speak 


now  with  reference  to  the  Lamb  and  the  army  that 
follows  him;  and  as  to  them,  no  man's  person  is  in 
danger  simply  as  such.  Wherefore,  it  is  not  men 
but  sin ;  not  men,  but  the  man  of  sin,  that  wicked 
one,  that  the  Son  of  God  makes  war  against,  in 
and  by  his  church.  2  Th.  ii.  8.  lie.  xii.  4. 

Let  us  therefore  state  the  matter  right;  no  man 
needs  be  afraid  to  let  Jesus  Christ  be  chief  in  the 
world,  he  envies  nobody,  he  designs  the  hurt  of 
none:  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,  nor  doth  he 
covet  temporal  matters;  let  but  his  wife,  his  church 
alone,  to  enjoy  her  purchased  privileges,  and  all 
shall  be  well.  Which  privileges  of  hers,  since  they 
are  soul  concerns,  make  no  infringement  upon  any 
mau's  liberties.  Let  but  faith  and  holiness  walk 
the  streets  without  control,  and  you  may  be  as 
happy  as  the  world  can  make  you.  I  speak  now 
to  them  that  contend  with  him. 

But  if  seasonable  counsel  will  not  go  down,  if 
hardness  of  heart  and  blindness  of  mind,  and  so 
perishing  from  the  way,  shall  overtake  you,  it  is  but 
what  you  of  old  have  been  cautioned  of.  '  Be  wise 
now  therefore,  0  ye  kings:  be  instructed,  ye  judges 
of  the  earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  re- 
joice with  trembling.  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath 
is  kindled  but  a  little.  Blessed  are  all  they  that 
put  their  trust  in  him.'  rs.  ii.  10-12. 

Now  let  this  also  that  has  been  said  upon  this 
head,  be  another  argument  to  prove  that  the  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  type  of  the  church 
in  the  wilderness. 

CHAP.  IX. 

OF  THE  VESSELS  WHICH  SOLOMON  PUT  IX  TOE  nODSE 
OF  TOE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 

Solomon  did  also  put  vessels  into  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon.  *  And  all  king  Solomon's 
drinking-vessels  were  of  gold,  and  all  the  vessels 
of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  were  of '  gold, 
•  pure  gold,  none  were  0/  silver ;  it  was  nothing 
accounted  of  in  the  days  of  Solomon.'  1  Ki.  x.  21. 
2  Ch.  ix.  20. 

Since  it  is  not  expressed  what  those  vessels  of 
pure  gold  were  which  Solomon  put  in  the  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  therefore,  as  to  the  affirm- 
ative, no  man  can  be  absolute;  vessels  of  gold, 
vessels  of  pure  gold,  the  Holy  Ghost  says  they 
were,  and  so  leaves  it  to  the  prudent  to  make  their 
conjectures ;  and  although  I  may  not  put  myself 
among  the  number  of  those  prudent  ones,  yet  let 
me  take  leave  to  say  what  I  think  in  the  case. 

First  then,  negatively,  they  were  not  vessels 
ordained  for  Divine  worship,  for  as  tliat  was  con- 
fined to  the  temple,  so  the  vessels  and  materials 
and  circumstances  for  worship  were  there.  I  say, 
the  whole  uniform  worship  of  the  Jews  now  was 


528 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


confined  to  the  temple.  1  Ch.  a.  4;  va.  12, 15,  \g.  Where- 
fore the  vessels  here  mentioned  could  not  be  such 
as  was  in  order  to  set  up  worship  here,  for  to  Jer- 
usalem they  were  to  bring  their  sacrifices ;  true, 
they  had  synagogues  where  ordinary  service  was 
done,  there  the  law  was  read,  and  there  the  priests 
taught  the  people  how  they  should  serve  the  Lord; 
but  for  that  which  stood  in  carnal  ordinances,  as 
sacrificing.1?,  washings,  and  using  vessels  for  that 
purpose,  that  was  performed  at  Jerusalem. 

This  house,  therefore,  to  wit,  the  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon,  was  not  built  to  slay  or  to  offer 
burnt-oiferings  or  sacrifices  in,  but  as  that  altar 
was  which  the  two  tribes  and  an  half,  built  by  Jor- 
dan, when  they  went  each  to  their  inheritance, 
namely,  to  be  a  witness  of  the  people's  resolutions 
to  preserve  true  religion  in  the  church,  to  them- 
selves, and  to  their  posterity.  Jos.  xxii.  21—29.  Since 
this  house  therefore  was  designed  for  defensive 
war,  it  was  not  requisite  that  the  formalities  of 
worship  should  be  there.1 

The  church  in  the  wilderness  also,  so  far  as  she 
is  concerned  in  contention,  so  far  she  is  not  taken 
up  in  the  practical  parts  of  religion,  1  Th.  n.  2  ;  for 
religion  is  not  to  be  practised  in  the  church  in  the 
moments  of  contention.  Let  us  practise  then  our 
religion  in  peace,  and  in  all  peaceable  ways,  and 
vindicate  it  by  way  of  contention,  that  is,  when 
asked  or  required  by  opposites  to  render  a  reason 
thereof.  Phi.  i.  1, 17.  Ac.  xxii.  i.  But  my  contention 
must  be,  not  in  pragmatic  languages  or  in  striv- 
ing about  words  to  no  profit,  but  by  words  of  truth 
and  soberness,  with  all  meekness  and  fear.  Ac.  xxvi. 

24,  25.  Tit.  iii.  1,  2.  1  Pe.  iii.  15. 

To  practise  and  defend  a  practice  you  know  are 
two  things ;  I  practise  religion  in  my  closet,  in  my 
family,  in  the  congregation,  but  I  defend  this 
practice  before  the  magistrate,  the  king,  and  the 
judge.  Now  the  temple  was  prepared  for  the 
practice  of  religion,  and  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon  for  defence  of  the  same.  Re  xi.  1.  So 
far  then  as  the  church  in  the  wilderness  worships, 
so  far  she  is  compared  to  the  temple,  and  so  far  as 
she  defends  that  worship,  so  far  she  is  called  an 
army.  Re.  xix.  u.  An  army  terrible  with  banners. 
Ca.  vi.  4.  For  God  has  given  a  banner  to  them  that 
fear  him,  that  it  may  be  displayed  because  of  the 
truth.  Ps.  is.  4.  Hence  she  says  to  God,  '  We  will 
rejoice  in  thy  salvation,  and  in  the  name  of  our 
God,  we  will  set  up  our  banners.'  rs.  xx.  5.  But 
here  is  in  all  this  no  hurt  to  the  world,  the  kino-- 


dom,  the  worship,  the  war  is  spiritual,  even  as  the 
armour  is.2  I  have  spoken  this  to  distinguish 
worship  from  contending  for  worship,  and  to  make 
way  for  what  is  yet  to  be  said. 

If  the  vessels  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  or  those 
put  in  that  house,  were  not  such  as  related  to 
worship,  to  worship  simply  as  such,  then  it  should 
seem — 

These  vessels  therefore  were  for  some  other  use 
than  for  formal  worship  in  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon.  The  best  way  then,  that  I  know  of, 
to  find  out  what  they  were  is  first  to  consider  to 
what  they  are  joined  in  the  mention  of  them.  Now 
I  find  them  joined  in  the  mention  of  them  with  Solo- 
mon's drinking  vessels,  and  since  as  they  were 
made  of  fine  or  pure  gold,  I  take  them  also  to  be 
vessels  of  the  same  kind,  namely,  vessels  to  drink 
in.  Now  if  we  join  to  this  the  state  of  the  church 
in  the  wilderness,  of  which,  as  we  have  said,  this 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  type,  then 
we  must  understand  that  by  these  vessels  were 
prefigured  such  draughts  as  the  church  has,  when 
in  a  bewildered  or  persecuted  state ;  and  they  are 
of  two  sorts,  either.  First,  Such  as  are  exceeding 
bitter ;  or,  Second,  Such  as  are  exceeding  sweet ; 
for  both  these  attend  a  state  of  war. 

First.  Such  as  are  exceeding  bitter.  These  are 
called  cups  of  red  wine,  signifying  blood;  also,  the 
cup  of  the  Lord's  fury,  the  cup  of  trembling,  the 

CUp  of  astonishment,  &C.  Ps.  Ixxv.  S.  Is.  li.  17,  22.  Je.  xxv. 
15.  Eze.  xxiii.  33. 

Nor  is  there  anything  more  natural  to  the 
church,  while  in  a  wilderness  condition,  than  such 
cups  and  draughts  as  these.  Hence  she,  as  there, 
is  said  to  be  clothed,  as  was  said  afore,  in  sack- 
cloth, to  mourn,  to  weep,  to  cry  out,  and  to  be  in 
pain,  as  is  a  woman  in  travail.  See  the  Lamenta- 
tions and  you  will  find  all  this  verified.     See  also 

Re.  xi.  3 ;  xii.  2. 

And  whoso  considers  what  has  already  been  said  as 
to  what  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  met  with, 
will  find  that  what  is  here  inferred  is  not  foreign 
but  natural.  For,  can  it  be  imagined,  that  when 
the  king  of  Assyria  laid  down  his  army  by  the 
sides  of  Lebanon,  and  when  the  fire  was  to  devour 


1  No  formal  service  such  as  that  of  the  temple.  While  the 
churches  are  iu  the  wilderness,  suffering  under  the  fangs  of  Anti- 
christ, religious  services  must  be  adapted  to  their  circumstances. 
At  times  fervent  silent  prayer,  unheard  on  earth,  but  recorded 
in  heaven;  at  other  times  in  an  upper  chamber  or  a  forest, 
afraid  to  sing,  lest  it  should  bring  the  enemy  upon  them.  How 
ought  we  to  bless  God  for  giving  us  the  full  enjoy  meut  of  public 
worship,  even  while  in  the  wilderness. —  (Ed.) 


*  One  of  the  popular  delusions  of  our  day  is,  that  all  sects 
have  been  iutoleraut  and  persecutors  when  they  had  the  oppor- 
tunity. This  is  a  gross  falsehood.  "Who  can  charge  the  Wal- 
denses,  Albigenses,  or  Lollards  with  that  spirit  of  Antichrist  ? 
Who  dares  charge  the  Quakers  with  a  persecuting  spirit?  They 
had  the  full  opportunity  when  governing  Pennsylvania.  Who 
can  accuse  the  Baptists  with  injuring  those  who  differed  from 
them  when  Eoger  Williams  and  his  Baptist  brethren  obtained 
the  charter  of  Rhode  Island,  with  full  power  to  rule  themselves 
by  any  form  of  government  they  preferred?  His  magna  charta 
concludes  with  these  words,  '  And  let  the  saints  of  the  Most 
High  walk  iu  this  colony  without  molestation,  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah  their  God,  for  ever  and  ever.'  And  it  has  never  been 
violated.-  Persecution  has  never  sullied  its  annals.  Freedom 
to  worship  God  was  the  desire  of  its  founder — for  himself  and 
I  for  all ;  and  he  nobly  endured  till  it  was  accomplished. — En. 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


529 


her  cedars,  also  when  Lehanon  was  to  he  cut  down 
and  languish,  that  these  vessels,  these  cups,  were 
not  then  put  into  her  hand.  And  I  say  again, 
since  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  Lebanon's  anti- 
type, has  heen  so  persecuted,  so  distressed,  so 
oppressed,  and  made  the  seat  of  so  much  war,  so 
much  hlood,  of  so  many  murders  of  her  children 
within  her,  ckc,  can  it  he  imagined  that  she  drank 
of  none  of  these  cups?  Yes,  yes,  she  has  drank 
the  red  wine  at  the  Lord's  hand,  even  the  cup  of 
hlood,  of  fury,  of  trembling,  and  of  astonishment ; 
witness  her  own  cries,  Bighs,  tears,  and  tremblings, 
with  the  cries  of  ayMows,  children,  and  orphans 
within  her.   La.  i.,  ii.,  iv.,  v. 

But  what  do  I  cite  particular  texts,  since  reason, 
histories,  experience,  anything  that  is  intelligible, 
will  confirm  this  for  a  truth  ;  namely,  that  a  people 
whose  profession  is  directly  in  opposition  to  the 
devil  and  Antichrist,  and  to  all  dehauehery,  in- 
humanity, profaneness,  superstition,  and  idolatry, 
when  suffered  to  he  invaded  hy  the  dragon,  the 
beast,  the  false  prophet,  and  whore,  must  needs 
taste  of  these  cups,  and  drink  thereof,  to  their 
astonishment. 

But  all  these  are  of  pure  gold.  They  are  of 
God's  ordaining,  appointing,  filling,  timing,  and 
also  sanctified  hy  him  for  good  to  those  of  his  that 
drink  them.  Hence  Moses  chose  rather  to  drink 
a  brimmer  of  these,  '  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures 
of  sin  for  a  season.'  lie.  xi.  25.  The  sourness,  bit- 
terness, and  wormwood  of  them,  therefore,  is  only 
to  the  flesh  that  loveth  neither  God,  nor  Christ, 
nor  grace.  Ps.  lxxv.  8.  Plu.  i.  28. 

The  afflictions,  therefore,  that  the  church  in  the 
wilderness  hath  met  with,  these  cups  of  gold,  are 
of  more  worth  than  are  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt; 
they  are  needful  and  profitable,  and  praiseworthy 
also,  and  tend  to  the  augmenting  of  our  glory 
when  the  next  world  is  come,  l  Th.  Ui.  3.  Re.  ii.  10.  l  Pe. 
i.  6.  Besides  they  are  signs,  tokens,  and  golden 
marks  of  love,  and  jewels  that  set  off  the  beauty 
of  the  church  in  the  sight  of  God  the  more.  Ga  vL 
17.  Re.  iii.  is.  He.  xii.  6.  They  are  also  a  means  by 
which  men  are  proved  sound,  honest,  faithful,  and 
true  lovers  of  God,  as  also  such  whose  graces  are 
not  counterfeit,  feigned,  or  unsound,  but  true,  and 
such  as  will  be  found  to  praise,  and  honour,  and 
glory,  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ.   Is.  xxvii.  y. 

He.  xii.  7-10.  1  Pe.  ii.  19.  2  Co.  iv.  17,  18.  2  Th.  i.  5. 

And  this  has  been  the  cause  that  the  men  of 
our  church  in  the  wilderness  have  gloried  in  tribul- 
ation, taking  pleasure  in  reproaches,  in  necessities, 
in  persecutions,  and  in  distresses  for  Christ's  sake. 
Ho.  v.  3.  2  Co.  xii.  9,  io.  Yea,  tliis  is  the  reason  why 
they  have  bidden  one  another  rejoice  when  they 
fell  into  divers  temptations,  saying,  Happy  is  the 
man  that  endureth  temptations,  and  behold  we 
count  them  happy  that  endure.  Ja.  i.  2, 12;  v.  n.    And 

VOL.  III. 


again,  '  if  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ, 
happy  are  ye.'  i  Pe.  iv.  u. 

These  therefore  arc  vessels  of  pure  gold,  though 
they  contain  such  bitter  draughts,  and  though  such 
as  at  which  we  make  so  many  wry  faces  before  we 
can  get  their  liquor  down. 

Bo  you  think  that  a  Christian,  having  even  this 
cup  in  his  hand  to  drink  it,  would  change  it  for  a 
draught  of  that  which  is  in  the  hand  of  the  woman 
that  sits  on  the  back  of  the  scarlet-coloured  beast? 
Re.  xvii.  3,  i.  No,  verily,  for  ho  knows  that  her 
sweet  is  poison,  and  that  his  hitter  is  to  purge  his 
soul,  body,  life,  and  religion,  of  death.  2  Ti.  ii.  ii,  12. 

God  sends  his  love  tokens  to  his  church  two 
ways,  sometimes  by  her  friends,  sometimes  hy  her 
enemies.  When  they  come  hy  the  hand  of  a 
friend,  as  by  a  minister,  a  brother,  or  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  then  they  conic  smoothly,  sweetly,  and  are 
taken,  and  go  down  like  honey.  But  when  these 
love  tokens  come  to  them  by  the  hand  of  an 
enemy,  then  they  are  handed  to  them  roughly ; 
Pharaoh  handed  love  tokens  to  them  roughly  ;  the 
king  of  Babylon  handed  these  love  tokens  to  them 
roughly.  They  bring  them  of  malice,  God  sends 
them  of  love  ;  they  bring  them  and  give  them  to 
us,  hoping  they  will  be  our  death ;  they  give  us 
them  therefore  with  many  a  foul  curse,  but  God 
blesses  them  still.  Bid  not  Hainan  lead  Mordecai 
in  his  state  by  the  hand  of  anger? 

Nor  is  this  cup  so  bitter  hut  that  our  Lord  him- 
self drank  deep  of  it  before  it  was  handed  to  his 
church;  he  did  as  loving  mothers  do,  drink  there- 
of himself  to  show  us  it  is  not  poison,  also  to 
encourage  us  to  drink  it  for  his  sake  and  for  our 
endless  health.   Mat.  xx.  22;  xxvi.  39, 43. 

And,  as  I  told  you  before,  1  think  I  do  not  vary 
from  the  sense  of  the  text  in  calling  them  cups ; 
because,  though  there  they  have  no  name,  they 
are  joined  with  king  Solomon's  drinking  vessels, 
and  because  as  so  joined  in  the  type,  so  they  are 
also  joined  here ;  therefore  the  cup  here  is  called 
Christ's  cup.  'Are  ye  able  to  drink  of  the  cup 
that  I  shall  drink  of?'  '  Ye  shall  drink  indeed  of 
my  cup.'  Mat.  xx.  22, 23.  Here  you  see  they  are 
joined  in  a  communion  in  this  cup  of  affliction,  as 
the  cups  in  one  and  the  same  breath  are  joined 
with  those  king  Solomon  drank  in,  which  he  put 
in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lehanon. 

[Second.  Such  as  are  exceeding  sweet.  ] 

But  these  are  not  all  the  cups  that  belong  to  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  or  rather  to  the 
church  in  the  wilderness ;  there  is  also  a  cup,  out 
of  which,  at  times,  is  drunk  what  is  exceeding 
sweet.  It  is  called  the  cup  of  consolation,  the  cup 
of  salvation  ;  a  cup  in  the  which  God  himself  is.  P§. 
cxvi.  13.  Je.  xvi.  7.  As  he  said,  the  Lord  is  the  portion 
of  my  cup.  Or  rather,  '  the  Lord  iff  the  portion  of 
mine  inheritance,  and  my  cup.'  Ps.  rvi  5.     This  cup, 

67 


530 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


they  that  are  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness  have 
usually  for  an  after-draught  to  that  bitter  one  that 
went  before.  Thus,  as  tender  mothers  give  their 
children  plumbs  or  sugar,  to  sweeten  their  palate 
after  they  have  drank  a  bitter  potion,  so  God  gives 
his  the  cups  of  salvation  and  consolation,  after  they 
have  suffered  awhile.  '  For  as  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  abound- 
ed by  Christ.'  2  Co.  i.  5. 

Hence  the  apostle  assureth  himself  concerning 
the  affliction  of  them  at  Corinth;  yea,  and  also 
promiseth  them,  that  as  they  were  partakers  of  the 
sufferings,  so  should  they  be  of  the  consolation. 
2  Co.  i.  7.  Some  of  these  cups  are  filled  until  they 
run  over,  as  David  said  his  did,  when  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death  was  before  him.  '  Thou 
preparest  a  table  before  me,'  said  he,  '  in  the  pres- 
ence of  mine  enemies:  thou  anointest  my  head  with 
oil  ;  my  cup  runneth  over.'  Ps.  xxiii.  5.  This  is  that 
which  the  apostle  calls  exceediug;  that  is,  that 
Avhich  is  beyond  measure.  '  I  am,'  says  he,  '  filled 
with  comfort,  I  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  tri- 
bulation. '  2  Co.  vii.  4. 

Now  he  has  one  answering  the  other.  Thou 
hast  made  summer  and  winter.  Thou  hast  made 
the  warm  beams  of  thy  sun  answerable  to  the  cold 
of  the  dark  night.  This  may  be  also  yet  signified 
by  the  building  of  this  house,  this  type  of  the  church 
in  the  wilderness,  in  so  pleasant  a  place  as  the 
forest  of  Lebanon  was.  Ca.  w.  s.  Lebanon !  Lebanon 
was  one  of  the  sweetest  places  in  all  the  land  of  Ca- 
naan. Therefore  we  read  of  the  fruit  of  Lebanon, 
of  the  streams  from  Lebauon;  the  scent,  the  smell, 
the  glory  of  Lebanon ;  and  also  of  the  wine  and 
flowers  of  Lebanon.   Ps.  ixxti.  16.  m>s.  xiv.  g,  7.  is.  xxxv.  2; 

lx.  13.  Na.  i.  4. 

Lebanon!  That  was  one  thing  that  wrought 
with  Moses  to  desire  that  he  might  go  over  Jordan; 
namely,  that  he  might  see  that  goodly  mountain, 
and  Lebanon.  The  glory  and  excellent  beauty  of 
the  church,  Christ  also  setteth  forth,  by  comparing 
of  her  to  Lebanon.  «  Thy  lips,  0  my  spouse,'  says 
he,  'drop  as  the  honey-comb:  honey  and  milk  are 
uuder  thy  tongue,  and  the  smell  of  thy  garments  is 
like  the  smell  of  Lebanon.'  Ca.  iv.  n,  15.  This  house, 
therefore,  being  placed  here,  might  be  to  show 
how  blessed  a  state  God  could  make  the  state  of 
his  church  by  his  blessed  grace  and  presence,  even 
while  she  is  in  a  wilderness  condition. 

We  will  add  to  this,  for  further  demonstration, 
that  letter  of  that  godly  man,  Pomponius  Algerius, 
an  Italian  martyr;  some  of  the  words  of  which  are 
these: — 

'Let,'  saith  he,  'the  miserable  worldly  man  answer 
me  ;  what  remedy  or  safe  refuge  can  there  be  unto 
him  if  he  lack  God,  who  is  the  life  and  medicine 
of  all  men :  and  how  can  he  be  said  to  fly  from 
death,  when  he  himself  is  already  dead  in  sin.    If 


Christ  be  the  way,  verity,  and  life,  how  can  there 
be  any  life  then  without  Christ? 

'The  sooly1  heat  of  the  prison  tome  is  coldness; 
the  cold  winter  to  me  is  a  fresh  spring-time  in  the 
Lord.  He  that  feareth  not  to  be  burned  in  the 
fire,  how  will  he  fear  the  heat  of  weather?  Or 
what  careth  he  for  the  pinching  frost,  which  burn- 
etii with  the  love  of  the  Lord  ? 

'The  place  is  sharp  and  tedious  to  them  that  be 
guilty;  but  to  the  innocent  and  guiltless  it  is  melli- 
fluous. Here  droppeth  the  delectable  dew ;  here 
floweththe  pleasant  nectar;  here  runneth  the  sweet 
milk ;  here  is  plenty  of  all  good  things.  And  al- 
though the  place  itself  be  desert  and  barren,  yet 
to  me  it  seemeth  a  large  walk,  and  a  valley  of 
pleasure ;  here  to  me  is  the  better  and  more  noble 
part  of  the  world.  Let  the  miserable  worldling 
say,  and  confess,  if  there  be  any  plot,  pasture,  or 
meadow,  so  delightful  to  the  mind  of  man,  as  here. 
Here  I  see  kings,  princes,  cities,  and  people ;  here 
I  see  wars,  where  some  be  overthrown,  some  be 
victors,  some  thrust  down,  some  lifted  up.  Here 
is  Mount  Sion ;  here  I  am  already  in  heaven  itself. 
Here  standeth  first  Christ  Jesus  in  the  front ;  about 
him  stand  the  old  fathers,  prophets,  and  evangelists, 
apostles,  and  all  the  servants  of  God ;  of  whom 
some  do  embrace  and  cherish  me,  some  exhort  me, 
some  open  the  sacraments  unto  me,  some  comfort 
me,  other  some  are  singing  about  me:  and  how  then 
shall  I  be  thought  to  be  alone,  among  so  many, 
and  such  as  these  be,  the  beholding  of  whom  to  me 
is  both  solace  and  example.  For  here  I  see  some 
crucified,  some  slain,  some  stoned,  some  cut  asun- 
der, and  some  quartered,  some  roasted,  some 
broiled,  some  put  in  hot  caldrons,  some  having 
their  eyes  bored  through,  some  their  tongues  cut 
out,  some  their  skin  plucked  over  their  heads,  some 
their  hands  and  feet  chopped  off,  some  put  in  kilns 
and  furnaces,  some  cast  down  headlong,  and  given 
to  the  beasts  and  fowls  of  the  air  to  feed  upon.  It 
would,'  said  he,  'ask  a  long  time,  if  I  should  recite  all. 

'To  be  short,  divers  I  see  with  divers  and  sundry 
torments  excruciate;  yet  notwithstanding,  all  living 
and  all  safe.  One  plaster,  one  salve  cureth  all  their 
wounds,  which  also  giveth  tome  strength  and  life; 
so  that  I  sustain  all  these  transitory  anguishes  and 
small  afflictions  with  a  quiet  mind,  having  a  greater 
hope  laid  up  in  heaven.  Neither  do  1  fear  mine 
adversaries  which  here  persecute  me  and  oppress 
me,  for  he  that  dwelleth  in  heaven  shall  laugh  them 
to  scorn,  and  the  Lord  shall  deride  them.     I  fear 


1  This  word  was  used  by  Fox  in  translating  the  letter  of 
Algerius ;  I  cannot  find  it  in  any  dictionary.  It  probably  refers 
to  this  poor  prisoner  for  Christ  being  confined  in  a  '  soler,'  or 
room,  close  under  the  roof  of  his  prison,  in  which  an  Italian, 
sun  must  have  rendered  the  heat  intense.  The  word  '  sooly' 
may  be  derived  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  '  swool,'  sultry ;  the 
Dutch  use  swoet,  zoel,  and  zoelheicl,  for  heat  and  sultry  heat. 
-(Ed.) 


THE    HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST   OF   LEBANON. 


531 


not  thousands  of  people  which  compass  me  ahout. 
The  Lord  my  God  shall  deliver  me,  my  hope,  my 
supporter,  my  comforter,  who  exalteth  up  my  head. 
He  shall  smite  all  them  that  stand  up  against  mc 
without  cause ;  and  shall  dash  the  teeth  and  jaws 
of  sinners  asunder,  for  he  only  i3  all  hlessedncss 
and  majesty. 

'The  rebukes  for  Christ's  cause  make  us  jocund; 
for  so  it  is  written :  if  ye  be  rebuked  and  scorned 
for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy  bo  you;  for  the  glory 
and  spirit  of  God  resteth  upon  you.  1  Pe.  It.  Be  ye 
therefore  certified  (said  he,  by  this  his  letter  to  his 
friends)  that  our  rebukes,  which  are  laid  upon  us, 
redound  to  the  shame  and  harm  of  the  rebukcrs. 
In  this  world  there  is  no  mansion  firm  to  me  ;  and 
therefore  I  will  travel  up  to  the  New  Jerusalem 
which  is  in  heaven,  and  which  offereth  itself  tome, 
without  paying  any  fine  or  income.  Behold  I  have 
entered  already  in  my  journey,  where  my  house 
standeth  for  me  prepared,  and  where  I  shall  have 
riches,  kinsfolks,  delights,  honours,  never-failing. 

1  As  for  these  earthly  things  here  present,  they 
are  transitory  shadows,  vanishing  vapours,  and 
ruinous  walls.  Briefly  all  is  but  very  vanity  of 
vanities,  whereas  hope,  and  the  substance  of  eter- 
nity to  come,  are  wanting;  which  the  merciful  good- 
ness of  the  Lord  hath  given,  as  companions  to  ac- 
company me,  and  to  comfort  me ;  and  now  do  the 
same  begin  to  work,  and  to  bring  forth  fruits  in  me. 
I  have  travelled  hitherto,  laboured  and  sweat  early 
and  late,  watching  day  and  night,  and  now  my 
travails  begin  to  come  to  effect.  Days  and  hours 
have  I  bestowed  upon  my  studies.  Behold  the 
true  countenance  of  God  is  sealed  upon  me,  the 
Lord  hath  given  mirth  in  my  heart :  and  therefore 
in  the  same  will  I  lay  me  down  in  peace  and  rest. 
Ps.  iv.  And  who  then  shall  dare  to  blame  this  our 
age  consumed ;  or  say  that  our  years  be  cut  off? 
What  man  can  now  cavil  that  these  our  labours  are 
lost,  which  have  followed,  and  found  out  the  Lord 
and  maker  of  the  world,  and  which  have  changed 
death  with  life?  My  portion  is  the  Lord,  saith  my 
soul,  and  therefore  I  will  seek  and  wait  for  him. 

*  Now  then,  if  to  die  in  the  Lord  be  not  to  die 
but  live  most  joyfully,  where  is  this  wretched  world- 
ly rebel,  which  blameth  us  of  folly,  for  giving  away 
our  lives  to  death?  0  how  delectable  is  this  death 
to  me !  to  taste  the  Lord's  cup,  which  is  an  assured 
pledge  of  true  salvation ;  for  so  hath  the  Lord  him- 
self forewarned  us,  saying,  the  same  that  they  have 
done  to  me,  they  will  also  do  unto  you.  Wherefore 
let  the  doltish  world,  with  his  blind  worldlings  (who 
in  the  bright  sunshine,  yet  go  stumbling  in  dark- 
ness, being  as  blind  as  beetles),  cease  thus  unwisely 
to  carp  against  us  for  our  rash  suffering,  as  they 
count  it.  To  whom,  thus,  we  answer  again,  with 
the  holy  apostle,  that  neither  tribulation,  nor  an- 
guish, nor  hunger,  nor  nakedness,  nor  jeopardy,  nor 


persecution,  nor  sword,  shall  be  able  ever  to  separate 
us  from  the  love  of  Christ;  wo  arc  slain  all  the  day 
long;  we  are  made  like  sheep  ordained  to  the  sham- 
bles.   Ro.  viii. 

•Thus,'  saith  he,  'do  we  resemble  Christ  our  Head, 
which  said  that  the  disciple  cannot  be  above  his 
master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  Lord.  The  same 
Lord  hath  also  commanded  that  every  one  shall 
take  up  his  cross  and  follow  him,  Lu.Ix  Rejoice, 
rejoice,  my  dear  brethren  and  fellow-servants,  and 
be  of  good  comfort,  when  ye  fall  into  sundry  tempta- 
tions ;  let  your  patience  be  perfect  in  all  parts. 
For  so  it  is  foreshowed  us  before,  and  is  written, 
that  they  which  shall  kill  you  shall  think  to  do 
God  good  service.  Therefore,  afflictions  and  death 
be  as  tokens  and  sacraments  of  our  election  and 
life  to  come.  Let  us  then  be  glad  ami  sing  unto 
the  Lord,  when  as  we,  being  clear  from  all  just 
accusations,  are  persecuted  and  given  to  death  ;  fur 
better  it  is  that  we  in  doing  well  do  suffer,  if  it  so 
be  the  will  of  God,  than  doing  evil,  l  Pe.  iii.  We 
have  for  our  example  Christ  and  the  prophets  which 
spake  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  whom  the  children 
of  iniquity  did  quell1  and  murder.  And  now  we 
bless  and  magnify  them  that  then  suffered.  Let 
us  be  glad  and  joyous  in  our  innocency  and  upright- 
ness ;  the  Lord  shall  reward  them  that  persecute 
us ;  let  U3  refer  all  revengement  to  him. 

'I  am  accused  of  foolishness,  for  that  I  do  not 
shrink  from  the  true  doctrine  and  knowledge  of 
God,  and  do  not  rid  myself  out  of  these  troubles, 
when  with  one  word  I  may.  0  the  blindness  of 
man,  which  seeth  not  the  sun  shining,  neither  re- 
membereth  the  Lord's  words.  Consider  therefore 
what  he  saith,  you  are  the  light  of  the  world.  A 
city  built  on  the  hill  cannot  be  hid;  neither  do  men 
light  a  candle  and  put  it  under  a  bushel,  but  upon 
a  candlestick,  that  it  may  shine,  and  give  light  to 
them  in  the  house.  And  in  another  place  he  saith 
you  shall  be  led  before  kings  and  rulers.  Fear  ye 
not  them  which  kill  the  body,  but  him  which  killeth 
both  body  and  soul.  Whosoever  shall  confess  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  confess  before  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven  ;  and  he  that  denieth  me  before 
men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  heavenly 
Father. 

'  Wherefore,  seeing  the  words  of  the  Lord  be  so 
plain,  how,  or  by  what  authority,  will  this  wise 
counsellor  then  approve  this  his  counsel  which  he 
doth  give?  God  forbid  that  I  should  relinquish 
the  commandments  of  God  and  follow  the  coun- 
sels of  men.  For  it  is  written,  Blessed  is  the  man 
that  hath  not  gone  in  the  way  of  sinners,  and  hath 
not  stood  in  the  counsels  of  the  ungodly,  and  hath 
not  sit  in  the  chair  of  pestilence.   Ps.  i."     God  for- 


1  The  obsolete  verb,  to  kill.— (En.) 

2  This  is  a  curious  mode  of  expressing  the  awful  gradation 
of  a  biuuer.     1.  To  go  iu  the  waj  of  Binnera.    2.  To  enter 


532 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST   OF  LEBANON. 


bid  that  I  should  deny  Christ  where  I  ought  to 
confess  him ;  I  will  not  set  more  by  my  life  than  by 
my  soul,  neither  will  I  exchange  the  life  to  come 
for  this  world  here  present.  0  how  foolishly 
speaketh  he  which  argueth  me  of  foolishness!' 

And  a  little  farther  he  saith,  '  And  now  let  this 
carnal  politic  counsellor,  and  disputer  of  this  world, 
tell  wherein  have  they  to  blame  me.  If  in  mine 
examinations  I  have  not  answered  so  after  their 
mind  and  affection  as  they  required  of  me,  seeing 
it  is  not  ourselves  that  speak,  but  the  Lord  that 
speaketh  in  us,  as  he  himself  doth  fore-witness, 
saying,  When  you  shall  be  brought  before  rulers 
and  magistrates,  it  is  not  you  yourselves  that 
speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  my  Father  that  shall  be 
in  you.  Mat.  x.  Wherefore,  if  the  Lord  be  true  and 
faithful  of  his  word,  as  it  is  most  certain,  then 
there  is  no  blame  in  me ;  for  he  gave  the  words 
that  I  did  speak,  and  who  was  I  that  could  resist 
his  will? 

'  If  any  man  shall  reprehend  the  things  that  I 
said,  let  him  then  quarrel  with  the  Lord,  whom  it 
pleased  to  work  so  in  me;  and  if  the  Lord  be  not  to 
be  blamed,  neither  am  I  herein  to  be  accused,  which 
did  that  I  purposed  not,  and  that  I  fore-thought 
not  of.  The  things  that  there  I  did  utter  and 
express  [he  means  when  he  was  before  the  magis- 
trates], if  they  were  otherwise  than  well,  let  them 
show  it,  and  then  will  I  say  that  they  were  my 
words,  and  not  the  Lord's.  But  if  they  were  good 
and  approved,  and  such  as  cannot  justly  be  accused, 
then  must  it  needs  be  granted,  spite  of  their 
teeth,  that  they  proceeded  of  the  Lord  ;  and  then 
who  be  they  that  shall  accuse  me — people  of  pru- 
dence? Or  who  shall  condemn  me — just  judges? 
And  though  they  so  do,  yet,  nevertheless,  the  word 
shall  not  be  frustrate,  neither  shall  the  gospel  bo 
foolish  or  therefore  decay,  but  rather  the  kingdom 
of  God  shall  the  more  prosper  and  flourish  unto 
the  Israelites,  and  shall  pass  the  sooner  unto  the 
elect  of  Christ  Jesus,  and  they  which  shall  so  do 
shall  prove  the  grievous  judgment  of  God.  Neither 
shall  they  escape  without  punishment  that  be  per- 
secutors and  murderers  of  the  just. 

•My  well-beloved,'  saith  he,  'lift  up  your  eyes 
and  consider  the  counsels  of  God.  He  showed  unto 
us  a  late  an  image  of  his  plague,  which  was  to 
our  correction ;  and  if  we  shall  not  receive  him  he 
will  draw  out  his  sword  and  strike  with  sword, 
pestilence,  and  famine,  the  nation  that  shall  rise 
against  Christ.' 

This,  as  I  said,  is  part  of  a  letter  writ  by  Pom- 
ponius  Algerius,  an  Italian  martyr,  who,  when  he 
wrote  it,  was  in  prison,  in,  as  he  calls  it,  his  de- 
lectable orchard,  the  prison  of  Leonine,  12  calend. 

into  their  couusels.  3.  To  sit  in  the  scorner's  scat,  here  called 
'  the  chair  of  pestilence.'  This  is  from  the  vulgate  Latin,  which 
renders  a*?b  pesti/enlia.—{Eu.) 


August,  anno  1555.  As  is  to  be.  seen  in  the 
second  volume  of  the  book  of  martyrs.1 

This  man  was,  when  he  wrote  this  letter,  in  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  in  the  church  in 
the  wilderness,  in  the  place  and  way  of  contending 
for  the  truth  of  God,  and  he  drank  of  both  these 
bitter  cups  of  which  I  spake  before,  to  wit,  of  that 
which  was  exceeding  bitter,  and  of  that  which  wa3 
exceeding  sweet,  and  the  reason  why  he  complained 
not  of  the  bitter  was  because  the  sweet  had  over- 
come it — as  his  afflictions  abounded  for  Christ,  so 
did  his  consolations  by  him.  So,  did  I  say?  they 
abounded  much  more. 

But  was  not  this  man,  think  you,  a  giant,  a 
pillar  in  this  house?  Had  he  not  also  now  hold  of 
the  shield  of  faith?  Yea,  was  he  not  now  in  the 
combat  ?  And  did  he  not  behave  himself  valiantly? 
Was  not  his  mind  elevated  a  thousand  degrees  be- 
yond sense,  carnal  reasons,  fleshly  love,  self-con- 
cerns, and  the  desires  of  embracing  temporal 
things?  This  man  had  got  that  by  the  end  that 
pleased  him ;  neither  could  all  the  flatteries,  pro- 
mises, threats,  or  reproaches,  make  him  once  listen 
to  or  desire  to  inquire  after  what  the  world  or  the 
glory  of  it  could  afford.  His  mind  was  captivated 
with  delights  invisible;  he  coveted  to  show  his  love 
to  his  Lord  by  laying  down  his  life  for  his  sake ; 
he  longed  to  be  there  where  there  shall  be  no  more 
pain,  nor  sorrow,  nor  sighing,  nor  tears,  nor 
troubles  ;  he  was  a  man  of  a  thousand.   Ec.  vii.  28. 

But  to  return  again  to  our  text.  You  know  we 
are  now  upon  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,  which,  I  have  told  you,  could  not  be 
vessels  for  worship,  for  that  worship  that  was 
ordained  to  be  performed  at  the  temple  was  also 
confined  to  that,  and  to  the  vessels  that  were  there. 
Therefore  they  must  be,  in  all  probability,  the  ves- 
sels that  I  have  mentioned,  the  which  you  see  how 
we  have  expounded  and  applied.  If  I  am  out  I 
know  it  not;  if  others  can  give  me  better  light  hero 
about  for  it  I  will  be  thankful. 

There  was  also  added  to  this  house  of  the  forest 
of  Lebanon,  store-cities,  chariot-cities,  and  cities 
of  horsemen,  unto  which  king  Jotham  added  castles 
and  towers.  2  ch.  viii.  4-6 ;  xxvH.  3,  4. 

These  might  be  to  signify  by  what  ways   and 


1  Pompoiiius  Algerius,  horn  in  Capua,  a  young  man  of  great 
learning,  was  student  iu  the  University  of  Padua,  where  he, 
not  being  able  to  conceal  the  verity  of  Christ's  gospel  which 
he  learned  by  the  heavenly  teaching  of  God's  grace,  ceased  not, 
both  by  doctrine  and  example  of  life,  to  inform  as  many  as  he 
could  in  the  same  doctrine,  and  to  bring  them  to  Christ;  for 
which  he  was  accused  of  heresy,  and  brought  to  Rome,  where 
he  was  burned  alive,  lie  wrote  this  letter  while  in  prison  at 
Venice. — See  Fox's  Acts  and  Monuments,  edit.  1031.  vol.  ii. 
p.  181. 

Mr.  Southey  thought  that  this  letter  gave  Bunyan  some  germ 
of  his  Pilgrims  Progress  !  !  He  takes  it  from  the  words,  '  In 
this  world  there  is  no  mansion  linn  for  me,  and  therefore  I  will 
travel  up  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  heaven.' — Life  of 
Banyan,  p.  xc. — (&D.) 


THE   HOUSE   OF  THE   FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


533 


means  God  would  at  times  revenue  the  quarrel 
of  his  church,  even  in  this  world,  upon  them 
that,  without  cause,  should,  for  their  faith  and 
worship,  set  themselves  against  them.  For  here 
is  a  face  of  threatening  revenge,  they  were  store- 
houses, chariot-cities,  cities  of  horsemen,  with 
castles  and  towers.  And  they  stood  on  the  same 
ground  that  this  house  was  budded  upon,  even  in 
the  forest  of  Lehanon.  Wo  know  that  in  Israel 
God  stirred  up  kings  who  at  times  suppressed 
idolatry  there,  and  plagued  the  persecutors  too, 
as  Jehu,  Ilezckiah,  Josiah,  &c.  And  ho  has 
promised  that,  even  in  gospel  times,  kings  '  shall 
hate  the  whore,  -  make  her  desolate  and  naked, 
and  shall  eat  her  flesh  and  hum  her  with  fire.' 

He.  xvii.  12,  16. 

Here  now  are  the  store-houses,  chariot-cities, 
cities  of  horsemen,  with  towers  and  castles,  for  the 
help  to  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lehanon,  for  the 
help  of  the  church  in  the  wilderness,  or,  as  you 
have  it  in  another  place,  as  the  serpent  cast  floods 
of  water  out  of  his  mouth  after  the  woman,  '  that 
he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried  away  of  the 
flood.  And  the  earth  helped  the  woman,  and  the 
earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed  up  the 
flood  which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth.' 
Re.  xii.  is,  ig.  Thus  the  Medea  and  Persians  helped 
to  deliver  the  church  from  the  clutches  and  strong 
hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon. 

This  Lebanon,  therefore,  was  a  place  consider- 
able and  a  figure  of  great  things;  the  countenance 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  compared  to  it,  and  so  is  the 
face  of  his  spouse,  and  also  the  smell  of  her  gar- 
ment.   Ca.  iv.  11;  v.  15;  vii.  1. 

CHAP.    X. 

OF  THE  PORCH  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOE  FOREST  OF 
LEBANON'. 

Solomon  also  made  a  porch  to  this  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon,  lie  made  several  porches,  as 
one  for  the  temple,  one  for  the  house  which  he 
dwelt  in,  one  for  the  throne  of  the  kingdom,  and 
this  that  was  for  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon, 
of  all  which  this  last  is  that  mentioned. 

'  And  he  made  a  porch  of  pillars,  the  length 
thereof  was  fifty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  thereof 
thirty  cubits  ;  and  the  porch  ivas  before  them,  and 
the  other  pillars,  and  the  thick  beam  ivere  before 
them.'  l  Ki.  vii.  c  This  porch  was  famous  both  for 
length,  and  breadth,  and  strength,  it  was  able  to 
contain  a  thousand  men.  It  was  like  that  of  the 
tower  of  David,  otherwise  called  the  stronghold, 
the  castle  of  Zion,  which  is  the  city  of  David.  2Sa. 

v.  7.  1  Ch.  xi.  5.  Mi.  iv.  8. 

This  tower  of  David  was  built  for  an  armoury, 
whereon  there  hanged  a  thousand  bucklers,  all 
shields  of  mighty  men.      It  was  fifty  cubits  long 


and  thirty  broad,  a  spacious  place,  a  large  recep- 
tacle for  any  that  liked  to  take  shelter  there.  It 
was  made  of  pillars,  even  as  the  house  within  was, 
or  it  stood  upon  pillars.  The  pillars,  you  know, 
I  told  you  before,  were  to  show  as  what  mighty 
men,  or  what  men  of  mighty  grace,  God  would 
have  in  his  church  in  the  wilderness  furnished  with. 
And  it  is  worth  your  observing  here  also  we  have 
pillars,  pillars.  And  he  made  the  porch  of  pillars, 
that  is,  of  pillars  of  cedar,  as  the  rest  of  the  pillars 
of  the  house  were. 

'And  the  porch  was  before  them.'  That  is,  as 
I  take  it,  an  entering  porch,  less  than  the  space 
within,  so  that  the  pillars,  neither  as  to  number 
nor  bigness,  could  be  seen  without,  until  at  least 
they  that  had  a  mind  to  see  entered  the  mouth 
of  the  porch.  And  by  this  was  fitly  prefigured 
how  unseen  the  strength  of  the  church  under  per- 
secution is  of  all  that  are  without  her.  Alas ! 
they  think  that  she  will  be  run  down  with  a  push, 
or,  as  they  said,  'What  do  these  feeble  Jews? 
Will  they  fortify  themselves?  Will  they  sacrifice  ' 
Will  they  make  an  end  in  a  day?  Will  they  revive 
the  stones  out  of  the  heaps  of  the  rubbish  which 
are  burnt?'  Alas  !  '  if  a  fox  go  up  he  shall  even 
break  down  their  stone  wall.'  He.  Iv.  2,  3. 

But  do  you  think  these  men  saw  the  strength  of 
the  Jews  now?  No,  no,  their  pillars  were  within, 
and  so  were  shadowed  from  their  eyes.  David 
himself  could  not  tell  what  judgment  to  make  of 
the  way  of  the  world  against  the  people  of  God, 
until  he  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God.  Ps.lxxiii.16,17. 

How  then  can  the  world  judge  of  the  condition 
of  the  saints?  Alas,  had  they  known  the  church's 
strength,  surely  they  would  not,  as  they  have,  so 
furiously  assaulted  the  same.  But  what  have  they 
got  by  all  they  have  done,  either  against  the  head 
or  body  of  the  same?  She  yet  has  being  in  the 
world,  and  will  have,  shall  have,  though  all  the 
nations  on  earth  should  gather  themselves  together 
against  it.  Nor  is  it  the  cutting  off  of  many  that 
will  make  her  cease  to  flourish.  Alas,  were  she 
not  sometimes  pruned  and  trimmed  her  boughs 
would  .stand  too  thick.  Those  therefore  that  aro 
taken  away  with  God's  pruning-hooks  are  removed, 
that  the  under  branches  may  grow  the  better.1 
But,  I  say,  to  extinguish  her  it  is  in  vain  for  any 
to  hope  for  that.  She  stands  upon  pillars,  on  rocks, 
on  the  munition  of  rocks;  stand  therefore  she  must, 
whether  the  world  believes  it  or  no. 

'And  the  other  pillars  -  were  before  them,  or, 
as  the  margin  has  it,  'according  to  them.'  Tho 
other  pillars,  that  is,  they  more  inward,  those  that 

1  Thus  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  was  tin-  seedtime  of  the 
church,  and  it  produced  an  abundant  harvest.     Thai  God  Buf- 
fered the  choicest  of  his  saints  to  [kiss  through  such  dreadful 
sufferings  in  their  way  to  -.'lory,  is  a  pro  >f  that  God's  H 
not  our  ways,  but  they' are  infinite  in  wisdom  and  mercy.  —  (En.) 


53t 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


were  in  the  body  of  the  house.  Christ  doth  not, 
as  the  poor  world  doth,  that  is,  set  the  best  leg- 
before  ;  the  pillars  that  were  more  inward  in  the 
house  were  as  good  as  those  in  the  front.  It  is 
true  some  are  appointed  to  death  to  show  to  the 
world  the  strength  of  grace,  not  that  he  can  help 
nobody  to  that  strength  but  they.  The  most 
feeble  of  his  flock,  when  Christ  shall  stand  by 
and  strengthen  them,  are  able  to  do  and  bear 
what  the  strong  have  underwent.  For  so  he 
saith. 

And  '  the  other  pillars  and  the  thick  beams  were1 
according  to  them;  nay,  'before  them.'  Indeed, 
they  that  are  left  seem  weak  and  feeble  if  com- 
pared to  them  that  have  already  been  tried  with 
fire  and  sword  and  all  the  tortures  of  men.  But 
that  grace  by  which  they  were  helped  that  have 
done  such  mighty  acts  already,  can  help  those 
who  seem  more  weak  yet  to  go  beyond  them.  God 
strengthened  '  the  spoiled  against  the  strong,  so 
that  the  spoiled  shall  come  against  the  fortress.' 
Am.  v.  9.  Or,  as  another  scripture  has  it,  '  The 
lame  take  the  prey.'  is.  xxxiii.  23.  So  that  you  see 
here  is  all  substance.  All  here  are  pillars  and 
thick  beams,  both  in  the  house  and  in  the  porch. 
The  conclusion  therefore  is: — The  true  members 
of  the  church  in  the  wilderness  are  strong,  mighty, 
being  made  able  by  the  grace  of  God  for  their 
standing,  and  being  also  coupled  and  compacted 
together  with  the  biggest  bands  or  thickest  beams 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  puts  forth  to  bind  and  hold 
this  church  together.  And  there  is  reason  for  it. 
The  church  is  God's  tower  or  battery  by  which  he 
beateth  down  Antichrist,  or  if  you  will  have  it  in 
the  words  of  the  prophet,  '  Thou  art  my  battle-axe 
and  weapons  of  war;  for  with  thee  (saith  God) 
will  I  break  in  pieces,'  &c.  Je.  u.  19,  20.  Wherefore, 
since  the  church  is  set  for  defence  of  religion,  and 
to  be  as  a  battery  to  beat  down  Antichrist,  it  is 
requisite  that  she  should  be  made  up  of  pillars  of 
strong  and  staunch  materials.1 

The  largeness  of  the  porch  was  commodious ;  it 
was  the  next  shelter,  or  the  place  whereunto  they 
of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  when  pur- 
sued, might  resort  or  retreat  with  the  less  difficulty. 
Thus  the  church  in  the  wilderness  has  her  porch, 
her  place,  her  bosom,  whereunto  her  discouraged 
may  continually  resort,  and  take  up  and  be  re- 
freshed. As  Abiathar  thrust  in  to  David  and  his 
men  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  day  when  Saul  had 
slain  his  father,  and  of  his  brethren,  even  '  four- 
score and  five  persons  that  did  wear  a  linen  ephod.' 

1  Sa.  xxii.  17-23. 

When  the  apostles  were  persecuted  '  they  went 
to   their   own   company,'  because   the   Lord    was. 


there.  Ac  iv,  23.  There  we  find  the  pillars,  and 
have  both  solace  and  example.  There,  as  Pom- 
ponius  said  of  his  person,  stands  Christ  Jesus  in 
the  front  as  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  and  round 
about  him  the  old  fathers,  prophets,  apostles,  and 
martyrs.  This  porch,  therefore,  I  take  to  be  a 
figure  of  those  cordial  and  large  affections  which 
the  church  in  the  wilderness  has  to  all,  and  for 
all  them  that  love  the  truth,  and  that  suffer  and 
are  afflicted  for  the  sincere  profession  thereof. 

•This  porch  was  bigger  than  that  which  belonged 
to  the  temple  by  much,  to  show  that  those  that  are 
made  the  objects  of  the  enemies'  rage  most  are 
usually  most  prepared  with  affection  for  them 
that  are  in  the  same  condition.  Fellow-feeling  is 
a  great  matter.  It  is  said  of  the  poor  afflicted 
people  that  were  in  Macedonia  '  in  a  great  trial  of 
affliction,  the  abundance  of  their  joy  and  their  deep 
poverty  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their  liberality;'" 
for  to  their  power,  -  yea,  and  beyond  their  power,' 
they  showed  their  charity  to  the  destroyed  church 
of  Jerusalem.  2  Co.  vui  1-4. 

And  a  porch  in  a  forest,  or  a  bosom  in  a  wilder- 
ness, is  seasonable  to  them  that  in  the  wilderness 
are  faint  and  weary.  Nabal  shut  up  his  doors 
against  David,  and  therefore  he  died  like  a  beast. 
Poor  David!  thou  wast  bewildered,  but  this  churl 
had  no  compassion  for  thee.  1  Sa.  xxv.  5-13,  25-39. 
Blest  Obadiah,  thou  hadst  a  bosom,  and  bread, 
and  hiding-places  for  the  church,  when  rent  and 
torn  by  the  fury  of  Jezebel,  and  thou  hast  for  it 
thy  reward  in  heaven.  1  Ki.  xvm.  3, 4.  Mat.  x.  42.  Ebed- 
melech,  because  he  had  compassion  on  Jeremiah 
when  he  was  in  the  dungeon,  God  did  not  only 
give  him  his  life  for  a  prey,  but  promised  him  the 
effects  of  putting  his  trust  in  the  Lord.     Je.  xxxviii. 

7-11 ;  xxxix.  15—18. 

And  he  made  a  porch  of  pillars.  The  porch  is 
but  the  entrance  of  the  house,  whither  many  go 
that  yet  step  not  into  the  house,  but  make  their 
retreat  from  thence;  but  it  is  because  they  are 
non-residents,  they  only  come  to  see ;  or  else,  if 
they  pretended  more,  it  was  not  from  the  heart. 
'They  went  out  from  us,'  said  John,  'but  they 
were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us  they 
would,  no  doubt,  have  continued  with  us ;  but  they 
went  out  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that 
they  were  not  all  of  us. '  1  Jn.  il.  19. 

And  forasmuch  as  this  porch  was  fifty  cubits 
long,  men  may  take  many  a  step  straight  forward 


1  Consult  Bnnvan's  admirable  treatise,  Of  Antichrist  and 
huRiua.—  \o\.  il.,  1'.  41. 


2  How  easily  is  tins  riddle  resolved  by  those  who  visit  the 
afflicted.  The  Christian  poor  beat  the  rich  out  and  out  in 
charity.  The  poor  mother  rises  long  before  her  usual  time,  and 
having  fitted  her  own  children  for  school,  runs  to  her  sick 
neighbour  to  do  the  same  for  her  little  ones,  frecmently  sharing 
with  them  her  own  children's  food ;  and  then,  like  an  angel  of 
mercy,  watches  over  and  comforts  her  sick  neighbour.  Such 
is  the  unostentatious  Christian  charity  found  among  the  Chris- 
tian poor.     0  that  it  may  more  and  more  abound. — (En.) 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


535 


therein  ami  l»e  Imt  in  the  porch  yet.1  Even  as  wc 
have  seen  men  go,  as  one  would  think,  till  they 
are  out  of  view  in  the  porch  of  this  church  in  the 
wilderness,  but  presently  you  have  them  without 
the  door  again. 

True,  this  porch  was  made  of  pillars,  and  so  to 
every  one,  at  first  entrance,  it  showed  the  power 
of  the  place ;  the  church  in  the  wilderness  also  is 
so  builded  that  men  may  sec  it  is  ordained  for 
defence.  Men  also,  at  their  first  offer  to  step  over 
the  threshold  there,  with  mouth  profess  that  they 
will  dwell  as  soldiers  there.  But  words  arc  hut 
wind;  when  they  see  the  storm  a-coming  they  will 
take  care  to  shift  for  themselves.  This  house,  or 
church  in  the  wilderness,  must  see  to  itself  for  all 
them. 

As  the  house  therefore  is  a  figure  of  the  church 
in  the  wilderness,  so,  so  great  a  porch  belonging 
to  it  may  be  also  to  show  that  numbers  may  there 
be  entertained  that,  if  need  be,  will  quickly  whip 
out  again.  Although  therefore  the  porch  was 
made  of  pillars,  yet  every  one  that  walked  there 
were  not  such.  The  pillars  was  to  show  them, 
not  what  they  were,  but  what  they  should  be  that 
entered  into  this  house. 

The  church  also  in  the  wilderness,  even  in  her 
porch  or  first  entrance  into  it,  is  full  of  pillars, 
apostles,  prophets,  and  martyrs  of  Jesus.  There 
also  hang  up  the  shields  that  the  old  warriors 
have  used,  and  are  plastered  upon  the  walls  the 
brave  achievements  which  they  have  done.  There 
are  also  such  encouragements  there  for  those 
that  stand,  that  one  would  think  none  that  came 
thither  with  pretence  to  serve  there  would,  for  very 
shame,  attempt  to  go  back  again ;  and  yet,  not  to 
their  credit  be  it  spoken,  they  will  forsake  the 
place  without  blushing,  yea,  and  plead  for  this 
their  so  doing.  But  I  have  done  with  the  explica- 
tory part,  and  conclude  that  from  these  ten  par- 
ticulars thus  handled  in  this  book,  the  house  of  the 
forest  of  Lebanon  was  a  type,  or  figure,  of  the 
church  in  the  wilderness. 

Nor  do  I  know,  if  this  he  denied,  how  so  fitly  to 
apply  sojne  of  these  texts  which  speak  to  the  church, 
to  support  her  under  her  troubles,  of  the  comforts 
that  afterwards  she  shall  enjoy,  since  they  are 
presented  to  her  under  such  metaphors  as  clearly 
denote  she  was  once  in  a  wilderness,  for  instance, 
1.  '  Sing,  0  ye  heavens;  for  the  Lord  hath  done 
it  (that  is,  redeemed  his  servant  Jacob  from  his 
sins  and  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy):  shout,  ye 
lower  parts  of  the  earth  (or  church  once  trampled 
under  feet):  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  mountains, 


1  These  home-thrusts  at  conscience,  so  constantly  met  with 
in  Banyan's  works,  should  have  the  efl'cct  of  exciting  us  to 
solemn  self-examination.  May  we  never  be  contented  with 
the  porch,  but  enter  and  enjoy  the  riches  of  Divine  grace. 
—(Ed.) 


0  forest,  and  every  tree  therein  (bore  is  comfort 
for  the  church  under  the  name  of  a  forest,  that  in 

which  the  house  we  have  been  speaking  of  was 
built):  for  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and 
glorified  himself  in  Israel.'  Is.xlhr.83.  To  what,  I 
say,  can  this  text  more  fitly  be  applied,  than  to 
the  church  in  the  wilderness,  put  here  under  the 
name  of  a  forest  as  well  as  under  the  title  of 
heaven?  Yea,  methinks  it  is  cried  hereto  her, 
'  0  forest,'  on  purpose  to  intimate  to  us  that  the 
house  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon  was  the  figure  of 
the  church  in  this  condition. 

2.  Again,  'Is  it  not  yet  a  very  little  while,  and 
Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful  field,  and 
the  fruitful  field  shall  be  esteemed  as  a  forest? 
And  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words  of 
the  book,  and  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out 
of  obscurity,  and  out  of  darkness.  The  meek  also 
shall  increase  their  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  the  poor 
among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  holy  One  of  Israel. 
For  the  terrible  one  is  brought  to  nought,  and  the 
scorner  is  consumed,  and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity 
are  cut  off.'  Is.  xxix.  17-20.  Lebanon  was  a  forest 
but  now  she  must  be  a  fruitful  field.  What  means 
he  here  by  Lebanon  but  the  church  under  perse- 
cution, and  the  fruitful  field?  Mistress  Babylon 
shall  become  as  a  forest,  that  is,  as  the  church 
under  distress.  But  when  shall  this  be  ?  Why, 
when  the  terrible  one  is  brought  low  and  the 
scorner  is  consumed,  &c. 

What  can  be  more  plain  than  this  to  prove  that 
Lebanon,  even  the  house  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon, 
for  that  is  here  intended,  was  a  figure  of  the  church 
in  the  wilderness,  or  in  a  tempted  and  persecuted 
state.  For  to  be  turned  into  a  fruitful  field  signi- 
fies the  recovering  of  the  afflicted  church  into  a 
state  most  quiet  and  fruitful ;  fruitful  fields  are 
quiet  because  they  are  fenced,  and  so  shall  the 
church  he  in  that  day. 

3.  '  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall 
be  glad  for  them;  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice,  and 
blossom  as  the  rose.'  Is.xxxv.  1. 

What  are  we  to  understand  by  these  words  if 
they  be  not  a  prophecy  of  the  flourishing  state  of 
Christ's  kingdom,  who,  in  the  days  of  her  perse- 
cution, is  compared  to  a  wilderness,  to  a  desert, 
and  to  solitary  places.  And  she  '  shall  be  glad 
for  them;'  for  what?  for  that  she  is  rid  of  the 
dragons,  wild  beasts,  satyrs,  screech  owls,  great 
owl,  and  vulture,  types  of  the  beasts  and  unclean 
birds  of  Antichrist,  is.  xjariv.  13—15. 

She  shall  be  glad  for  them  that  they  are  taken 
away  from  her  and  placed  far  away,  for  then  no 
lion  shall  be  there  nor  any  ravenous  beast ;  yea, 
it  is  the  habitation  of  dragons,  where  each  lay, 
shall  be  grass,  with  reeds  and  rushes,  as  it  is, 
Is.  xxxv.  And  now  '  the  lame  man  shall  leap  as  a 
hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing;  for  in  the 


536 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


wilderness  shall  waters  break  out,  and  streams  in 
the  desert.'     Read  the  whole  chapter. 

For  that  the  desert  and  wilderness  is  thus  men- 
tioned, and  that  to  express  the  state  of  the  church 
in  trouble  by,  it  is  clear  that  Lebanon  is  not  ex- 
cluded, nor  the  thing  that  is  signified  thereby, 
which,  I  say,  is  the  church  in  her  low  estate,  in 
her  forest,  or  wilderness  condition. 

4.  '  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  cedar, 
the  shittah-tree,  and  the  myrtle,  and  the  oil-tree; 
I  will  set  in  the  desert  the  fir-tree,  and  the  pine, 
and  the  box-tree  together.'  is.  xii.  19. 

Can  any  think  that  trees  are  the  things  taken 
care  of  here?  They  are  the  men  that  Antichrist 
has  murdered  in  his  heat  and  rage  against  Christ, 
the  which  God  will  restore  again  to  his  church,  when 
Antichrist  is  dead  and  buried  in  the  sides  of  the 
pit's  mouth.  And  that  you  may  the  better  under- 
stand he  meaneth  so,  he  expresseth  again  the  state 
of  the  church  as  like  to  a  wilderness  condition,  and 
promiseth  that  in  that  very  church,  now  so  like  a 
wilderness,  to  plant  it  again  with  Christians,  flour- 
ishing with  variety  of  gifts  and  graces,  signified  by 
the  various  nature  and  name  of  the  trees  spoken  of 
here. 

5.  '  Behold,  I  will  do  a  new  thing;  now  it  shall 
spring  forth;  shall  ye  not  know  it?  I  will  even 
make  a  way  in  the  wilderness,  and  rivers  in  the 
desert.  The  beast  of  the  field  shall  honour  me,  the 
dragons  and  the  owls  :  because  I  give  waters  in  the 
wilderness,  and  rivers  in  the  desert,  to  give  drink 
to  my  people,  my  chosen.'  is.  xliii.  19, 20.  Here  God 
alludes  to  the  condition  of  the  children  of  Israel 
in  the  wilderness  of  old,  and  implies  they  shall  be 
in  a  wilderness  again  ;  and  as  then  he  gave  them 
water,  and  delivered  them  from  serpents,  cocka- 
trices, vipers,  dragons,  so  he  will  do  now,  now  to 
his  people,  his  chosen. 

G.  '  The  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion  :  he  will  comfort 
all  her  waste  places  ;  and  he  will  make  her  wilder- 
ness like  Eden,  and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of 
the  Lord  ;  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  therein, 
thanksgiving,  and  the  voice  of  melody.'  is.  u.  3. 

See  here  are  Zion's  waste  places,  Zion's  wilder- 
ness, forest,  or  Lebanon.  Next  here  is  a  promise 
that  he  will  comfort  her;  and  what  doth  this  suppose 
but  that  she  was  in  her  wilderness  state,  uncom- 
fortable at  least  as  to  her  outward  peace,  her 
liberty,  and  gospel  privileges  and  beauties?  Then 
here  is  the  comparison,  by  which  he  illustrates  his 
promise  as  to  what  degree  and  pitch  he  will  com- 
fort her.  •  He  will  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden, 
and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord.'  The 
effects  of  all  which  will  be  she  will  have  joy  and 
gladness  ;  she  will  be  thankful,  and  be  melodious  in 
her  voice,  in  her  soul  to  the  Lord.  This,  I  say,  will 
follow  upon  her  deliverance  from  her  desert,  her 
wilderness,  her  desolate,  and  comfortless  state:  all 


which  is  more  fully  expressed  by  her  repeated  halle- 
lujahs. Re.  xix.  1—6.  Which  hallelujahs  there  are  the 
effect  of  her  deliverance  from  the  rage  of  the  beast 
and  great  whore,  of  whose  greatness  and  ruin  you 
read  in  the  two  foregoing  chapters.  Now,  I  say, 
since  the  church  was  to  be  in  a  wilderness  condition 
under  the  gospel ;  and  since  we  have  this  house  of 
the  forest  of  Lebanon  so  particularly  set  forth  in 
the  Scriptures;  and  also  since  this  house,  its  furni- 
ture, its  troubles,  and  state,  do  so  paint  out  this 
church  in  this  wilderness  state,  I  take  it  to  be  for 
that  very  thing  designed,  that  is  to  say,  to  prefigure 
this  church  in  this  her  so  solitary  and  wilderness 
state. 

[Conclusion.] 

We  will  now  therefore  here  make  a  brief  conclu- 
sion of  all. 

First.  This  may  inform  us  of  the  reason  of  the 
deplorable  state  of  a  professing  people.  It  is  allotted 
to  them  in  this  world  to  be  so.  The  world,  and 
men  of  the  world,  must  have  their  tranquillity  here, 
and  must  be  possest  of  all;  this  was  foreshown  in 
Esau,  who  had  of  his  sons  many  that  were  dukes 
and  kings  before  there  was  any  king  in  Israel.  Ge. 
xxxvi.  31.  God  so  disposing  of  things  that  all  may 
give  place  when  his  Son  shall  come  to  reign  in 
Mount  Zion,  and  before  his  ancients  gloriously, 
which  coming  of  his  will  be  at  the  resurrection,  and 
end  of  this  world,  and  then  shall  his  saints  reign 
with  him ;  '  when  Christ,  ivho  is  our  life,  shall  appear, 
then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  him  in  glory.'  Colin.  4. 

Let  not  therefore  kings,  and  princes,  and  poten- 
tates be  afraid  ;  the  saints  that  are  such  indeed, 
know  their  places,  and  are  of  a  peaceable  deport- 
ment ;  '  the  earth  God  hath  given  to  the  children 
of  men,'  and  his  kingdom  to  the  sons  of  God.  Ps. 

cxv.  16.  Mat.  xxv.  34.  Lu.  xii.  32. 

I  know  there  are  extravagant  opinions  in  the 
world  about  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  as  if  it  consisted 
in  temporal  glory  in  part,  and  as  if  he  would  take 
it  to  him  by  carnal  weapons,  and  so  maintain  it  in 
its  greatness  and  grandeur;  but  I  confess  myself 
an  alien  to  these  notions,  and  believe  and  profess 
the  quite  contrary,  and  look  for  the  coming  of  Christ 
to  judgment  personally,  and  betwixt  this  and  that, 
for  his  coming  in  Spirit,  and  in  the  power  of  his 
word  to  destroy  Antichrist,  to  inform  kings,  and  so 
give  quietness  to  his  church  on  earth ;  which  shall 
assuredly  be  accomplished,1  when  the  reign  of  the 

1  The  gradual  spread  of  the  gospel,  like  the  leaven,  must 
eventually  leaven  the  whole.  How  astonishing  has  been  its 
progress  since  Bunyan  entered  the  celestial  city.  If  his  happy 
spirit  hovers  as  a  guardian  angel  about  the  saints  at  Bedford, 
how  must  he  rejoice  in  the  change.  The  iron  hand  of  despotic 
oppression  laid  low  ;  his  old  prison  swept  away ;  the  meetings 
in  dells,  and  woods,  and  barns,  exchanged  for  large  and  com- 
modious places  of  worship.  How  he  must  wonder  at  our  want  of 
gratitude,  and  love,  and  zeal,  in  return  for  such  mercies. — (1£d.) 


THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  FOREST  OF  LEBANON. 


537 


Least,  tlie  whore,  the  false  prophet,  and  of  the  man 

Of    sin    is    OUt.     2T)iC9.  ii.  8.  Is.  xlix.  23;  lu.  15;  lx.  3,  10,  11,  1G; 
lxii.  2.  Re.  xxi.  2t. 

Second.  Let  this  teach  men  not  to  think  that  the 
church  is  cursed  of  God,  because  she  is  put  in  a 
wilderness  state.  Alas,  that  is  hut  to  train  her  up 
in  a  way  of  solitariness,  to  make  her  Canaan  the 
more  welcome  to  her.  Rest  is  sweet  to  the  labour- 
ing man.  Yea,  this  condition  is  the  first  step  to 
heaven  ;  yea.  it  is  a  preparation  to  that  kingdom. 
God's  ways  are  not  as  man's.  *  I  have  chosen  thee,' 
saith  he,  'in  the  furnace  of  affliction.'  When  Israel 
came  out  of  Egypt,  they  were  led  of  God  into  the 
wilderness;  but  why?  That  he  might  have  them 
to  a  land,  that  he  had  espied  for  them,  that  he 
might  bring  them  to  a  city  of  habitation.  Eze.  xx.  6. 

Ts.  cvii.  1-7. 

The  world  know  not  the  way  of  the  Lord,  nor  the 
judgment  of  our  God.  Do  you  think  that  saints 
that  dwell  in  the  world,  and  that  have  more  of  the 
mind  of  God  than  the  world,  would,  could  so  rejoice 
in  God,  in  the  cross,  in  tribulations  and  distresses, 
were  they  not  assured  that  through  many  tribula- 
tions is  the  very  roadway  to  heaven.  Ac.  xiv.  22. 

Let  this  then  encourage  the  saints  to  hope,  and 
to  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,  notwithstand- 
ing present  tribulations.    This  is  our  seed-time,  our 


winter;  afflictions  arc  to  try  us  of  what  mettle  we 
are  made:  yea,  and  to  shake  off  worm-oaten  fruit, 
and  such  as  are  rotten  at  core.  Troubles  for  Christ's 
sake  are  but  like  the  prick  of  an  awl  in  the  tip  of 
the  ear,  in  order  to  hang  a  jewel  there. 

Let  this  also  put  the  saints  upon  patience:  when 
we  know  that  a  trial  will  have  an  end,  we  are  by 
that  knowledge  encouraged  to  exercise  patience. 
I  have  a  bad  master,  but  I  have  but  a  year  to  servo 
under  him,  and  that  makes  me  serve  him  with  pa- 
tience; I  have  but  a  mile  to  go  in  this  dirty  way, 
and  then  I  shall  have  my  path  pleasant  and  green, 
and  this  makes  me  tread  the  dirty  way  with  patience. 
I  am  now  in  my  rags,  but  by  that  a  quarter  of  a 
year  is  come  and  gone,  two  hundred  a  year  comes 
into  my  hand,  wherefore  I  will  wait,  and  exercise 
patience.  Thus  might  I  multiply  comparisons.  Be 
patient  then,  my  brethren;  but  how  long?  to  the 
coming  of  the  Lord.  But  when  will  that  bo?  the 
coining  of  the  Lord  draws  nigh. 

'Be  patient,'  my  brethren,  belong  patient,  even 
'unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Behold,  the  hus- 
bandman waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth, 
and  hath  long  patience  for  it,  until  he  receive  tho 
early  and  latter  rain.  Be  ye  also  patient;  stablish 
your  hearts:  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth 
ni<rh.'   Ja.  v.  7,  8. 


68 


THE    WATER    OF    LIFE; 

OB, 

A  DISCOURSE  SHOWING  THE  EICHNESS  AND  GLORY 

or  THE 

GRACE    AND    SPIRIT    OF    THE    GOSPEL, 
AS  SET  FORTH  IN  SCRIPTURE  BY  TIIIS  TERM,  TTIE  WATER  OP  LIFE. 

By  JOHN    B.UNYAN. 


And  ivhosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.1 — Rev.  xxii.  17. 
Loudon;  Printed  for  Nathanael  Ponder,  at  the  Peacock  in  the  Poultry,  1CS8. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


Often,  and  In  every  age,  the  children  of  God  have 
dared  to  doubt  the  sufficiency  of  Divine  grace ; 
whether  it  was  vast  enough  to  reach  their  condi- 
tion— to  cleanse  them  from  the  guilt  of  all  their 
sins — and  to  fit  their  souls  to  dwell  with  infinite 
holiness  in  the  mansions  of  the  blessed.  To  solve 
these  doubts — to  answer  these  anxious  inquiries, 
Banyan  wrote  many  of  his  works;  for  although 
he  was  a  Boanerges,  or  son  of  thunder,  to  awaken 
the  impenitent,  he  was  eminently  a  Barnabas — a 
son  of  consolation — an  evangelist  to  direct  the 
trembling  inquirer  to  Christ  the  way,  the  truth, 
and  the  life.  He  proclaims  first,  from  his  own  ex- 
perience, that  there  is  'Grace  abounding  to  the 
Chief  of  Sinners;'  then  he  proclaims  '  Good  News 
for  the  Vilest  of  Men,  the  Jerusalem  Sinner  is 
Saved' — «  Christ  is  an  Advocate' — '  Christ  is  a 
complete  Saviour.'  Every  one  is  invited  with  a 
'Come  and  welcome  to  Jesus  Christ.'  There  is 
•Justification  by  his  Righteousness' — 'Salvation 
by  his  Grace.'  '  He  is  a  Throne  of  Grace'  to  which 
all  are  freely  invited.  Even  '  The  Broken  Heart 
is  an  acceptable  sacrifice.'  There  is  '  The  Holy 
City,  New  Jerusalem,' to  receive  such  at  the  end 
of  their  pilgrimage,  and  directions  amply  given  to 
the  pilgrim  to  guide  him  in  his  progress  to  the 
celestial  city;  and  he  now  introduces  us  to  a 
majestic  overflowing  river,  '  The  Water  of  Life,' 
sufficient  for  the  refreshment  and  solace  of  the 
myriads  of  God's  saints  who  have  lived  from  the 
creation,  and  will  live  until  the  final  consummation 
of  all  things,  when  the  prophet  in  holy  vision  saw 
'  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  could  number,  of 
all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  stand  before 
the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb.'  This  work  was 
the  result  of  the  author's  mature  experience,  being 
published  by  him  during  the  last  year  of  his  event- 
ful life.  In  it  he  refers  to  one  of  those  ten  excel- 
lent manuscripts  left  by  him  at  his  decease,  pre- 


pared for  the  press,  and  afterwards  published  by 
Mr.  Doe.  It  is  called,  The  Saint's  Privilege  and 
Profit.  The  way  in  which  he  alludes  to  this,  as  if 
it  had  been  printed,  shows  that  he  had  fully  deter- 
mined to  publish  it  shortly,  and  this,  if  it  was  needed, 
would  confirm  our  confidence  in  those  treatises. 
He  thus  refers  to  it :  *  Because  I  have  spoken  of 
this  thing,  more  particularly  upon  that  text,  "  Let 
us  therefore  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace," 
I  shall  therefore  here  say  no  more.' 

Two  things  are  rather  extraordinary  with  regard 
to  this  valuable  treatise  on  the  Water  of  Life. 
One  is,  that  although  inserted  in  every  list  of 
our  author's  works,  both  published  by  himself  and 
by  his  friends  after  his  decease,  it  escaped  the 
researches  of  Doe,  Wilson,  Chandler,  Whitfield,  and 
others  who  collected  and  published  Bunyan's  works, 
excepting  only  the  edition  with  Mason's  notes, 
printed  for  A.  Hogg  about  1785.  The  other 
singular  circumstance  is,  that  although  the  separate 
treatises  of  Bunyan  were  all  most  wretchedly  and 
inaccurately  printed,  the  Water  of  Life  has  in 
this  respect  suffered  more  than  any  other  of  his 
works.  A  modern  edition  of  this  book,  published 
at  Derby  by  Thomas  Richardson,  is,  without  ex- 
ception, the  most  erroneously  printed  of  all  books 
that  have  come  under  my  notice.  The  Scriptures 
are  misquoted — words  are  altered  so  as  to  pervert 
the  sense — whole  sentences  and  paragraphs,  and 
even  whole  pages  in  three  or  four  places,  and,  in 
one  instance,  four  consecutive  pages,  are  left  out ! ! ! 
I  should  be  grieved  if  more  penal  enactments  were 
added  to  our  statutes,  but  surely  there  should  be 
some  punishment  for  such  a  crime  as  this.  The 
other  editions  are  more  reputable,  but  very  incor- 
rect. One  of  them  bears  the  imprint  of  'London, 
for  James  Bunyan,  1760.'  Another  has  'London, 
sold  by  Baxter,  Doolittle,  <fc  Burkit,'  evidently 
fictitious  names,  adopted  from  those  three  great 


THE   ETTSTLF,   TO   THE   DEADER. 


539 


nuthors.  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  twice  pub- 
lished by  D.  Bunyan,  in  Fleet  Street,  1703  and 
1 708 ;  and  the  Heavenly  Footman,  'London,  sold  by 
J.  Bunyan,  above  the  Monument.'  All  these  are 
wretchedly  printed,  and  with  cuts  that  would  dis- 
grace an  old  Christmas  carol.  Thus  the  public  have 
been  imposed  upon,  and  thus  the  revered  name  of 
Banyan  has  been  sacrificed  to  the  cupidity  of  unprin- 
cipled men.  Had  his  works  been  respectably  printed 
they  would  have  all  been  very  popular  and  useful, 
and  bis  memory  have  been  still  more  venerated. 

To  attract  bis  readers  to  come  personally,  and 
partake  the  blessings  imparted  by  the  water  of 
life,  Bunyan  shows  that,  as  a  medicine,  it  alone 
is  the  specific  to  cure  the  sin-sick  soul — all  other 
applications  must  fail  most  fatally — 'all  other 
remedies  come  from  and  return  to  the  Dead  Sea' — 
while  the  water  of  life  issues  from,  and  leads  the 
soul  to,  the  throne  of  God.  It  clcanseth  from  the 
old  leaven.  The  Divine  Physician  is  ever  ready  to 
administer  to  the  wearied  soul.  Be  not  misled  by 
worhlly-wisemen  to  take  advice  of  the  doctor's  boy, 
but  go  direct  to  Jesus ;  he  is  ready — he  is  willing 
to  cure  and  save  to  the  uttermost.  His  medicine 
may  be  sharp,  but  merely  so  as  to  effect  the  cure 
4  where  bad  humours  arc  tough  and  churlish.'  'It 
revives  where  life  is,  and  gives  life  where  it  is  not. 
Take  man  from  this  river,  and  nothing  can  make 
him  live:  let  him  have  this  water  and  nothing  can 
make  him  die.'  The  river  of  water  of  life  allegori- 
cally  represents  the  Spirit  and  grace  of  God ;  thus 
the  truth  is  mercifully  set  before  us,  for  '  what  is 
more  free  than  water,  and  what  more  beneficial 
and  more  desirable  than  life?'  Vast  and  majestic 
rivers  convey  but  a  faint  idea  of  the  immensity  of 
Divine  grace;  in  comparison  with  which  'the  most 
mighty  mountain  dwindles  into  the  least  ant's  egg 
or  atom  in  the  world.'  p.  553.  A  stream  of  grace 
issued  from  the  same  source  during  the  patriarchal 
dispensation,  and  then  mankind  were  directed  to  it 
by  immediate  revelation,  or  by  the  tradition  of  their 
fathers.  It  extended  under  the  Jewish  or  Levitical 
law,  in  its  course  passing  through  the  temple,  issu- 
ing from  under  the  threshold  of  God's  house,  re- 
vealed by  types,  and  shadows,  and  an  earthly  priest- 


hood, and  then  'grace  ran  but  slowly  bee. hi  e  Jesua 
was  not  glorified.'   p.  548.      Now  it  Hows  like  a  ma- 
jestic river   frmn   the  throne  of  God,  open   to  all, 
without  limit  of  family  or  nation,  revealed  to  every 
creature  by  the  volume  of  inspiration.     This  water 
admits  no  mixture — it  is  pure  and  perfect  as  its 
origin — free  as  the  air  we  breathe  to  sustain  life. 
'There  is  no  grudge,  or  a  piece  of  an  upbraiding 
speech  heard  therein.'      Any  attempt  to  mix    with 
it  human  merits  destroys  all  its  efficacy.    In  it,  and 
in  it  only,  spiritual  life,  exciting  to  works  of  mercy, 
and  giving  sure  hopes  of  immortal  bliss,  is  to  be 
found.     God's  children  can  no  more  live  separated 
from  this  river  than  fish  can  live  out  of  water.    As 
a  fish,  by  natural  instinct,  avoids  foul  and  unwhole- 
some water,  so  a  Christian  has  spiritual  powers  to 
judge  of  the  purity  of  doctrine.      Like  the  manna 
from  heaven,  and  our  daily  bread,  it  must  be  sup- 
plied day  by  day.      No  church  cistern  of  works  of 
supererogation   can  supply  this  pure  water.      All 
such  pretended  supplies  arc  poisonous.      It  must 
come  direct  from  heaven  without  human  interfer- 
ence.    Those  only  who  spiritually  thirst  will  Be  k 
it.      Some  prefer  wine  that  perisheth  in  the  using, 
while  this  water,  once  received,  becomes  a  well- 
spring  of  living  waters,  springing  up  into  everlast- 
ing life.      How  marvellous  that  river  which  swal- 
lows up  all  the  impurities  of  the  myriads  of  the 
redeemed,  so  that  they  are  seen  no  more  for  ever. 
These  are  the  truths  pressed  upon  our  attention  in 
this  treatise.      Well  may  our  venerated  Bunyan 
say,  while  richly  enjoying  the  blessings  of  this 
river  of  grace,  just  before  he  waded  through  the 
black  river  which  absorbs  our  earthly  bodies — '  0 
grace!   0  happy  church  of  God!   all  things  that 
happen  to  thee  are,  for  Christ's  sake,  turned  into 
grace!'  p.  550.     It  is  a  river  that  so  reflects  the 
splendour  of  God,  that  the  first  sight  of  it  was  to 
Paul  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  ;  a  light  that 
did,  by  the  glory  of  it,  make  dark  to  him  all  the 
things  in  the  world. 

Reader,  may  your  soul  and  mine  be  abundantly 
refreshed  from  this  inexhaustible  river,  the  streams 
whereof  make  glad  the  city  cf  God. 

Geo.  Offor. 


TIIE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   READER, 


Courteous  Reader, 

I  have  now  presented  thee  with  something  of  a  dis- 
course of  the  water  of  life  and  its  virtues;  therefore, 
thou  mayest,  if  thou  wilt,  call  this  book  Bunyan's 
Bill  of  his  Master's  Water  of  Life.  True,  I  have 
not  set  forth  at  large  the  excellent  nature  and  qua- 
lity thereof,  nor  can  that  so  be  done  by  the  pen  or 


tongue  of  men  or  angels.  Yet  this  I  have  said, 
and  so  saying,  said  truly,  that  whosoever  shall  drink 
of  this  water  shall  find  it  in  him  a  well  of  water; 
and  not  only  so,  but  a  well  springing  up  in  him  to 
everlasting  life,  let  his  disease  lie  what  it  will. 
And  as  men,  in  their  bills  for  conviction  to  readers, 
do  give  an  account  to  the  country  of  the  persons 
cured,  and  the  diseases  that  have  been  removed  by 


540 


THE  WATER   OF   LIFE. 


liquors  and  preparations,  they  have  made  for  that  ] 
end,  so  could  I,  were  it  not  already*  done  by  an  ' 
»  .    infallible  pen  to  my  hand,  give  you  ; 

y  °  y  "  '  accounts  of  numberless  numbers  that 
have  not  only  been  made  to  live,  but  to  live  for  ever,  ( 
by  drinking  of  this  water,  this  pure  water  of  life.  I 
Many  of  them  indeed  are  removed  from  hence,  and 
live  Avhere  they  cannot  be  spoken  with  as  yet;  but 
abundance  of  them  do  still  remain  here,  and  have 
their  abode  yet  with  men. 

Only,  if  thou  wouldst  drink  it,  drink  it  by  itself, 
and  that  thou  mayest  not  be  deceived  by  that  which 
is  counterfeit,  know  it  is  as  it  comes  from  the  hand 
of  our  Lord,  without  mixture,  pure  and  clear  as  ; 
crystal.  I  know  there  are  many  mountebanks  in 
the  world,  and  every  of  them  pretend  they  have 
this  water  to  sell ;  but  my  advice  is,  that  thou  go  , 
directly  to  the  throne  thyself,  He.  iv.  16;  or  as  thou 
art  bidden  come  to  the  waters,  is.iv.  1 ;  and  there  thou 
Bhalt  he  sure  to  have  that  which  is  right  and  good,  | 


and  that  which  will  certainly  make  thee  well,  let 
thy  disease,  or  trouble,  or  pain,  or  malady,  be  what 
it  will.  For  the  price,  care  not  for  that,  it  is  cheap 
enough,  this  is  to  be  had  without  money  or  price. 
'  I  will  give,'  saith  God  and  the  Lamb,  'unto  him 
that  is  athirst,  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life 
freely. '  Re.  xxi.  6.  Hence  he  says  again,  '  Whoso- 
ever will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.'  Re. 
xxii.  17.  So  that  thou  hast  no  ground  to  keep  back 
because  of  thy  poverty ;  nay,  for  the  poor  it  is 
prepared  and  set  open,  to  the  poor  it  is  offered, 
the  poor  and  needy  may  have  it  of  free  cost.1 

Is.  xli.  17, 18. 

But  let  it  not  be  slighted  because  it  is  offered  to 
thee  upon  terms  so  full,  so  free.  For  thou  art 
sick,  and  sick  unto  death,  if  thou  drinkest  not  of  it, 
nor  is  there  any  other  than  this  that  can  heal  thee, 
and  make  thee  well.  Farewell.  The  Lord  be  thy 
physician  !     So  prays  thy  friend, 

John  Bdnyan. 


THE   WATER   OF   LIFE. 


'  AND  HE  SHOWED  ME  A  PURE  RIVER  OF  WATER  OF 
LIFE,  CLEAR  AS  CRYSTAL,  PROCEEDING  OUT  OF  THE 
THRONE  OF  GOD  AND  OF  THE  LAMB.'     Re.  XXII.  1. 

These  words  are  part  of  that  description  that  one 
of  the  seven  angels,  which  had  the  seven  vials  full 
of  the  seven  last  plagues,  gave  unto  John  of  the 
New  Jerusalem,  or  of  the  state  of  that  gospel  church, 
that  shall  be  in  the  latter  days.  Re.  xxi.  9.  Wherefore 
he  saith,  'And  he  showed  me;  He,  the  angel,  showed 
me  it. 

In  the  text  we  have  these  things  to  consider  of, 
First.  The  matter,  the  subject  matter  of  the 
text,  and  that  is  the  water  of  life.  '  He  showed 
me  the  water  of  life.'  Second.  We  have  also  here 
the  quantity  of  this  water  showed  to  him,  and  that 
is  under  the  notion  of  a  river :  '  He  showed  me  a 
river  of  water  of  life.'  Third.  He  shows  him  also 
the  head,  or  well-spring,  from  whence  this  river  of 
water  of  life  proceeds,  and  that  is,  '  the  throne  of 
God  and  of  the  Lamb. '  '  He  showed  me  a  river  of 
water  of  life,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God, 
and  of  the  Lamb.'  Fourth.  We  have  also  here 
the  nature  and  quality  of  this  water ;  it  is  pure,  it 
is  clear  as  crystal :  '  And  he  showed  me  a  pure 
river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding 
out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 

[toe  water  of  life.] 

[FIRST.]  We  will  begin  with  the  first  of  these, 
to  wit,  with  the  matter,  the  subject  matter  of  the 


text,  which  is,  the  water  of  life.  These  words, 
water  of  life,  are  metaphorical,  or  words  by  which 
a  thing  most  excellent  is  presented  to  and  ampli- 
fied before  our  faces;  and  that  thing  is  the  Spirit  of 
grace,  the  Spirit  and  grace  of  God.  And  the  words, 
water  of  life,  are  words  most  apt  to  present  it  to 
us  by;  for  what  is  more  free  than  water,  and  what 
more  beneficial  and  more  desirable  than  life  ? 
Therefore  I  say  it  is  compared  to,  or  called,  the 
water  of  life.     He  showed  me  the  water  of  life. 

That  it  is  the  Spirit  of  grace,  or  the  Spirit  and 
grace  of  God,  that  is  here  intended:  consider,  First, 
the  Spirit  of  grace  is  in  other  places  compared  to 
water :  and,  Second,  it  is  also  called  the  Spirit  of 
life.  Just  as  here  it  is  presented  unto  us,  '  He 
showed  me  the  water  of  life.' 

First.  The  spirit  of  grace  is  compared  to  water. 
*  Whosoever,'  saith  the  Lamb,  '  drinketh  of  the 
water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  never  thirst;  but 
the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a 
well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life.'  Jn. 
iv.  14.  What  can  here  by  water  be  intended,  but 
the  Spirit  of  grace  that  this  poor  harlot,  the  woman 
of  Samaria,  wanted,  although  she  was  ignorant  of 
her  want,  as  also  of  the  excellency  thereof?  Which 
water  also  is  here  said  to  be  such  as  will  spring 


1  As  God  gave  us  existence,  so,  in  his  inuuificence  and  royal 
bounty,  he  gives  us  his  rich  grace.  We  have  nothing  to  give 
in  return  but  grateful  love.  He  redeems  us  from  the  captivity 
of  sin,  and  death,  and  hell.  '  Every  beast  of  the  forest  is  mine, 
and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills:  the  world  is  mine,  saith 
the  Almighty,  with  the  fulness  thereof.'  O  to  grace  how  great 
a  debtor;  freely  bestowed  to  the  poor  and  needy. —  (Ed.) 


THE   WATER   OF  LTFE. 


541 


up,  in  them  that  have  it,  as  a  well  into  everlasting- 
life. 

Again,  '  In  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the 
feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying,  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink.'  But  of 
what?  Why  of  his  rivers  of  living  waters.  But 
what  are  they!  Why  he  answers,  'This  spake  he 
of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  helieve  on  him  should 
receive.'  Jn.  viL  37-33. 

Yes,  the  prophets  and  servants  of  God  in  the  Old 
Testament,  did  take  this  water  of  life  for  the  Spirit 
of  grace  that  should  in  the  latter  days  he  poured 
out  into  the  church.  Hence,  Isaiah  calls  water 
God's  Spirit  and  hlessing,  and  Zechariah,  (he  Spirit 
of  grace.  •  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is 
thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground:  I  will  pom- 
my Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  aud  my  hlessing  upon  thine 
offspring.'  is.  xiiv.  8.  And  Zechariah  saith,  '  I  will 
pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  sup- 
plication, -  and  they  shall  mourn,'  &c.  Zee.  in.  10. 
Behold,  in  all  these  places  the  Spirit  of  grace  is  in- 
tended, and  for  our  better  understanding  it  is  com- 
pared to  water,  to  a  well  of  water,  to  springs  of 
water,  and  to  floods  of  water. 

Second.  It  is  also  called  the  Spirit  of  life,  [either] 
more  closely,  [or]  more  openly. 

More  closely,  where  it  is  called  'living  water,' 
'that  living  water,'  and  'water  springing  up  into 
everlasting  life.'  Jn.  iv.  10, 11,  14 ;  viL  38. 

Then  more  openly  or  expressly  it  is  called  '  the 
Spirit  of  life.'  '  And  after  three  days  and  an  half, 
the  Spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  them,  and 
they  stood  upon  their  feet.'  Re.  xi.  11. 

From  hence,  therefore,  I  conclude,  that  by  these 
terms,  water  of  life,  is  meant  the  Spirit  of  grace,  or 
the  Spirit  and  grace  of  the  gospel.  And  the  terms 
are  such  as  are  most  apt  to  set  forth  the  Spirit  and 
grace  of  the  gospel  by :  for, 

[First.  The  term  Water.] 

1.  By  this  term, water,  an  opposition  to  sin  is  pre- 
sented unto  us.  Sin  is  compared  to  water,  to 
deadly  waters,  and  man  is  said  to  drink  it,  as  one 
that  drinketh  waters.  '  How  much  more  abomin- 
able and  filthy  is  man,  which  drinketh  iniquity  like 
water?'  Jobxv.  16.  So,  then,  that  grace  and  the  Spirit 
of  grace  is  compared  to  water,  it  is  to  show  what 
an  antidote  grace  is  against  sin ;  it  is,  as  I  may 
call  it,  counter  poison  to  it.  It  is  that  only  thing 
by  the  virtue  of  which  sin  can  be  forgiven,  van- 
quished, and  overcome. 

2.  By  this  term  water,  you  have  an  opposition 
also  to  the  curse,  that  is  due  to  sin,  presented  unto 
you.  The  curse,  is  compared  to  water;  the  remedy 
is  compared  to  water.  Let  the  curse  come  into  the 
bowels  of  the  damned,  saith  the  psalmist,  like  water, 
Pa.  cix.  is.  The  grace  of  God  also,  as  you  see,  is 
compared  to  water.      The  curse  is  burning;   water 


is  cooling:  the  curse  doth  burn  with  hell-fire;  cool- 
ing is  by  the  grace  of  the  holy  gospel:  hut  they 
that  overstand  the  day  of  grace,  shall  not  obtain 
to  cool  their  tongues  so  much  of  this  water  as  will 
hang  on  the  tip  of  one's  finger.1  r.u.  wi.  24,  jr, 

3.  Water  is  also  of  a  spreading  nature,  ami  .-<• 
is  sin:  wherefore  sin  may  for  this  also  bo  compared 
to  water.  It  overspreads  the  whole  man,  and  in- 
fects every  member;  it  covereth  all  as  doth  water. 
Grace  for  this  cause  may  be  also  compared  to  water; 
for  that  it  is  of  a  spreading  nature,  and  can,  if  God 
will,  cover  the  face  of  the  whole  earth;  of  body  and 
soul. 

4.  Sin  is  of  a  fouling,  defiling  nature;  and  grace 
is  of  a  washing,  cleansing  nature;  therefore  grace, 
and  the  Spirit  of  grace,  is  compared  to  water.  '  I 
will,'  saith  God,  'sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you, 
(my  Spirit,  ver.  27)  and  ye  shall  be  clean:  from  all 
your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I  cleans.; 

yOU.'  Ezc.  xxxvi.  25. 

5.  Water;  the  element  of  water  naturally  de- 
scends to  and  abides  in  low  places,  in  valleys  and 
places  which  are  undermost ;  and  the  grace  of  God 
and  the  Spirit  of  grace  is  of  that  nature  also  ;  the 
hills  and  lofty  mountains  have  not  the  rivers  run- 
ning over  the  tops  of  them ;  no,  though  they  may 
run  'among  them.'  But  they  run  among  the 
valleys :  and  '  God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth 
grace  unto  the  humble,'  '  to  the  lowly.'  Ju.  iv.  6.  1  Pe. 

v.  5.  Pr.  iii.  34. 

6.  The  grace  of  God  is  compared  to  water,  for 
that  it  is  it  which  causeth  fruitfulness ;  water 
causeth  fruitfulness,  want  of  water  is  the  cause  of 
barrenness ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  whole 
world  is  so  empty  of  fruit  to  Godward,  even  because 
so  few  of  the  children  of  men  have  the  Spirit  of  grace 
in  their  hearts.      But, 

[Second.   The  term  life.] 

As  there  is  a  great  special  signification  in 
this  term  water,  so  there  is  in  this  term  life, 
water  of  life.  '  He  showed  me  the  water  of  life.' 
In  that,  therefore,  there  is  added  to  this  word 
water,  that  of  life,  it  is,  in  the  general,  to  show 
what  excellent  virtue  and  operation  there  is  in  this 
water.  It  is  aquae  viloz,  water  of  life,  or  water 
that  hath  a  health  aud  life  in  it.  And  this  term 
shows  us, 

1.  That  the  world  of  graceless  men  are  dead; 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Ju.  v.  21, 25.  Ep.  IL  1.  Col. 
u.  13.  Dead,  that  is,  without  life  and  motion  God- 
ward,  in  the  way  of  the  testament  of  his  Son. 

2.  It  also  shows  us  that  there  is  not  any  thing 


1  Water  is  a  curse,  as  in  the  dropsy,  but  essential  to  life 
with  our  food.  Oil  is  valuable,  properly  taken,  but  an  irri- 
tating oil  to  consume  the  bones  is  destructive.  How  awful 
the  case  of  the  rich  man  when  refused  a  drop  of  water  to  cool 

that  lire  which  he  had  created  while  living,  and  into  which  he 
had  irretrievably  plunged  himself. 


542 


THE  WATER   OF   LIFE. 


in  the  world,  or  in  tlie  doctrine  of  the  world,  the 
law,  that  can  make  them  live.  Life  is  only  in  this 
water,  death  is  in  all  other  things.1  The  law,  I 
say,  which  is  that  that  would,  if  anything  in  the 
whole  world,  give  life  unto  the  world,  but  that  yet 
killeth,  condemneth,  and  was  added  that  the  offence 
might  abound ;  wherefore  there  is  no  life  either  in 
the  world  or  in  the  doctrine  of  the  world.  It  is 
only  in  this  water,  in  this  grace  of  God,  which  is 
here  called  the  water  of  life,  or  God's  aqua?  vitce? 

3.  It  is  also  called  the  water  of  life  to  show  that 
by  the  grace  of  God  men  may  live,  how  dead  soever 
their  sins  have  made  them.  When  God  will  say  to 
a  sinner,  '  live,'  though  he  he  dead  in  his  sins,  '  he 
shall  live.'  '  Wlien  thou  wast  in  thy  blood,  I  said 
unto  thee,  Live  ;  yea,  wlien  thou  wast  in  thy  blood, 
I  said,  Live.'  Eze.  xvi.  6.  And  again,  '  The  dead  shall 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  they  that 
hear  shall  live.'  Jn.  v.  25.  That  is,  when  he  speaks 
words  of  grace,  and  mixeth  those  words  with  the 
Spirit  and  grace  of  the  gospel,  then  men  shall  live; 
for  such  words  so  attended,  and  such  words  only, 
are  spirit  and  life.  •  The  words  that  I  speak  unto 
you,'  saith  Christ,  '  tliey  are  spirit,  and  they  are 
life.'   Jn.  vi.  63. 

4.  In  that  this  grace  of  God  is  here  presented 
unto  us  under  the  terms  of  water  of  life,  it  is  to 
show  that  some  are  sick  of  that  disease  that  no- 
thing can  cure  but  that.  There  are  many  diseases 
in  the  world,  and  there  are  also  remedies  for  those 
diseases ;  but  there  is  a  disease  that  nothing  will, 
can,  or  shall  cure,  but  a  dram  of  this  bottle,  a 
draught  of  this  aqua;  vita;,  this  water  of  life.  This 
is  intimated  by  the  invitation,  'let  him  take  the 
water  of  life  freely.'  Ke.  xxii.  17.  And  again,  •  I  will 
give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the 
water  of  life  freely.'  Re.  xxi.  6.  This  is  spoken 
to  the  sick,  to  them  that  are  sick  of  the  disease 
that  only  Christ,  as  a  physician,  with  his  water  of 
life,  can  cure.  Mar.  u.  17.  But  few  are  sick  of  this 
disease,  but  few  know  what  it  is  to  be  made  sick 
of  this  disease.3  There  is  nothing  can  make  sick 
of  this  disease  but  the  law  and  sin,  and  nothing 
can  cure  but  the  grace  of  God  by  the  gospel,  called 
here  the  water  of  life. 


1  liuliauee  upou  an  imperfect  obedience  to  God's  holy  law, 
united  with  a  hope,  through  Christ  or  some  other  means,  of 
forgiveness  for  not  having  kept  some  parts  of  that  law,  is 
'the  doctrine  of  the  world,'  and  of  devils.  It  is  a  refuse  of 
lies,  which  deatli  will  fearfully  sweep  away.  We  must"  rely 
wholly  upou  Christ,  or  perish. — (Ed.) 

2  Aqua  Vita  was  a  cordial-water  well  known  in  Buuyan's 
time,  and  much  used  in  compounding  medicines,  but  now  al- 
most forgotten.  It  was  distilled  from  brewed  beer,  strongly 
hopped,  and  well  fermented.  The  French  have  an  iutoxicatfu"- 
liquour  called  eaa  de  vie;  this  is  distilled  from  the  refuse  of 
the  grapes  after  the  wine  is  made. — (Ed.) 

3  Although  all  mankind  are  fatally  diseased,  they  only  feel 
it  that  are  made  sick  of  sin ;  this  is  the  law  work,"  and  wlien 
it  takes  place,  then  comes  the  new  birth  and  salvation  by  the 
efficacy  of  this  water  of  life. — (Ed.) 


[tiie  greatness  and  abundance  op  the  water  op 

LIFE.] 

[SECOND.]  We  come  now  to  discourse  of  the 
second  thing  with  which  we  are  presented  by  the 
text,  and  that  is,  the  quantity  that  there  is  of  this 
water  of  life.  It  is  a  river — •  He  showed  me  a 
river  of  water  of  life.'  Waters  that  are  cordial, 
and  that  have  in  them  a  faculty  to  give  life  to 
them  that  want  it,  and  to  maintain  life  where  it 
is,  are  rare  and  scarce,  and  to  be  found  only  in 
close  places  and  little  quantities ;  but  here  you 
see  there  is  abundance,  a  great  deal,  a  river,  a 
river  of  water  of  life.  In  my  handling  of  this 
point  I  will  show  you, 

First.  What  a  river  of  water  of  life  this  is. 
Second.  And  then  draw  some  inferences  there- 
from. 

First.  Yf/iat  a  river  this  is,  this  river  of  water  of 
life} 

First.  It  is  a  deep  river.  It  is  a  river  that  is 
not  shallow,  but  deep,  with  an  *  0  the  depth ! '  Ro. 
xi.  33.  '  I  will  make  their  waters  deep,  saith  God.' 
Eze.  xxxii.  H.  And  again,  they  '  have  drunk  of  the 
deep  waters.'  Eze.  xxxiv.  18.  A  river  of  water  of  life 
is  much,  but  a  deep  river  is  more.  Why,  soul- 
sick  sinner,  sin-sick  sinner,  thou  that  art  sick  of 
that  disease  that  nothing  can  cure  but  a  potion  of 
this  river  of  the  water  of  life,  here  is  a  river  for 
thee,  a  deep  river  for  thee.  Those  that  at  first 
are  coming  to  God  by  Christ  for  life,  are  of  no- 
thing so  inquisitive  as  of  whether  there  is  grace 
enough  in  him  to  save  them.  But,  for  their  com- 
fort, here  is  abundance,  abundance  of  grace,  a 
river,  a  deep  river  of  the  water  of  life,  for  them  to 
drink  of. 

Second.  As  this  river  is  deep,  so  it  is  wide  and 
broad.  Ep.  iii.  18.  Job.  xi.  9.  Wherefore,  as  thou  art  to 
know  the  depth,  that  is,  that  it  is  deep,  so  thou 
art  to  know  its  breadth,  that  is,  that  it  is  broad ; 
it  is  broader  than  the  sea,  a  river  that  cannot  be 
passed  over.  Eze.  xhii.  5.  Never  did  man  yet  go 
from  one  side  of  this  river  to  the  other  when  the 
waters  indeed  were  risen  ;  and  now  they  are  risen, 
even  now  they  proceed  out  of  the  throne  of  God 
and  of  the  Lamb  too.  Hence  this  grace  is  called 
'  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.'  Ep.  m.  8.  Sin- 
ner, sick  sinner,  what  sayest  thou  to  this?  Wouldst 
thou  wade?  wouldst  thou  swim?  here  thou  mayest 
swim,  it  is  deep,  yet  fordable  at  first  entrance. 
And  when  thou  thinkest  that  thou  hast  gone 
through  and   through  it,  yet  turn  again  and  try 


4  A  river  inexhaustible,  to  supply  the  pure  and  unmixed 
joys  of  heaven  to  all  the  myriads  of  happy  glorified  souls,  and 
applied  by  the  Spirit  of  grace  to  queuch  the  thirst  of  the  soul 
on  earth.  This  grace  is  fixed  and  permanent,  '  springing  up 
iuto  everlasting  life.'  Blessed  Jesus,  '  give  me  this  water,  that 
I  thirst  not  ever.'— (Ed.) 


THE  WATER   OF  LIFE. 


643 


once  more,  and  thou  slialt  find  it  deeper  than  hell, 
and  a  river  that  cannot  be  passed  over.  If  thou 
canst  swim,  here  thou  mayest  roll  up  and  down  as 
the  fishes  do  in  the  60a.1  Nor  ncedest  thou  fear 
drowning  in  this  river,  it  will  hear  thee  up,  and 
carry  thee  over  the  highest  hills,  as  Noah's  waters 
did  carry  the  ark.      But, 

Third.  As  this  river  of  water  of  life  is  deep  and 
large,  so  it  is  a  river  that  is  full  of  waters.  A 
river  may  be  deep  and  not  full.  A  river  may  be 
broad  and  not  deep.  Aye,  but  here  is  a  river  deep 
and  broad,  and  full  too.  '  Thou  waterest  it;  thou 
greatly  enrichest  it  with  the  river  of  God,  which  is 
i'ull  of  water.'  Pb.Ixt.9.  Full  of  grace  and  truth. 
Fill  the  water-pots,  saith  Christ,  up  to  the  brim. 
The  waters  of  a  full  cup  the  wicked  shall  have ; 
and  a  river  full  of  the  water  of  life  is  provided  for 
those  who  indeed  have  a  desire  thereto. 

Fourth.  As  this  river  is  deep,  broad,  and  full, 
so  it  still  aboundeth  with  water.  The  waters, 
says  the  prophet,  '  were  risen.'  Eze.  xhii.  4.  Hence, 
the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  God  causeth  the  waters  to 
flow.  rs.  cxlvii.  is.  And  again,  '  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  in  that  day  (the  day  of  the  gospel)  that  the 
mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine,  and  the  hills 
shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  the  rivers  of  Judah 
shall  flow  with  waters,  and  a  fountain  shall  come 
forth  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  water  the 
valley  of  Shittim.'  Joel  iu.  is.  When  a  river  over- 
flows it  has  more  water  than  its  banks  can  bound: 
it  has  water.  *  Behold,  he  smote  the  rock,  that 
the  waters  gushed  out,  and  the  streams  overflowed.' 
l's.  lxxviii.  20.  This  river  of  water  of  life,  which  is 
also  signified  by  these  waters,  is  a  river  that 
abounds  and  that  overflows  its  banks  in  an  in- 
finite and  unspeakable  manner.  Thus  much  for 
the  river,  to  wit,  what  a  river  of  water  of  life  it 
is.  It  is  a  river  deep,  broad,  full,  and  abounding 
with  this  water,  with  this  Spirit  and  grace  of  the 
gospel. 

[Inferences  to  be  drawn  from  this  term  river.] 

Second.  Now  I  shall  come  to  draw  some  infer- 
ences from  it,  that  is,  from  this  term,  a  river.  A 
river  of  water  of  life. 

First.  Then,  a  river  is  water  that  is  common, 
common  in  the  streams,  though  otherwise  in  the 
head.  This  river  proceeds  out  of  the  throne,  and 
so,  as  to  its  rise,  it  is  special;  it  is  also  called 
the  water  of  life,  and  as  it  is  such,  it  is  special ; 
but  as  it  is  a  river  it  is  common,  and  of  common 
use,  and  for  common  good.  Hence  the  grace  of 
God   is   called   the   common  salvation,   Jude  3,  for 


1  This  water  of  life  is  as  essential  to  the  spiritual-miudcdness 
of  the  soul,  as  natural  water  is  to  the  life  of  a  fish.  The  grace 
of  God  is  the  element  in  which  only  the  renewed  soul  can  live 
and  enjoy  a  little  of  that  heaven  into  which,  as  an  ocean  of  h\iis, 
this  river  carries  him. — (Ed.) 


that  by  the  word  there  is  no  restraint,  no  denial 
to  or  forbidding  of  any  that  will,  from  receiving 
thereof. 

And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water 
of  life  freely.  Re.  xxii.  n.  What  can  more  fully 
declare  the  commonness  of  a  thing?  Yea,  this 
river  is  called,  at  the  very  head  of  it,  an  •  open 
fountain,' a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David 
and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  Zee.  xiu.  i. 
And  by  David  or  Judah  and  Jerusalem  is  com- 
prehended every  soul  that  would  drink  of  the 
water  of  life  or  living  water.  And  hence  it  is 
that  this  river  is  said  to  •  go  down  into  the  desert 
and  go  into  the  sea,'  where  all  kinds  of  fishes  are. 
Eze.  xhii.  8.  By  sea  is  meant  the  world,  and  by 
fish  the  people,  and  thither  shall  run  this  river  of 
water  of  life.     But, 

Second.  Though  a  river,  in  the  streams  of  it,  i3 
common,  yet  a  river,  as  it  passes  through  a  country 
or  province,  will  choose  its  own  way,  it  will  run  in 
the  valleys,  in  the  plains,  not  over  steeples  "  and 
hills.  It  will  also  fetch  its  compasses  and  circuits; 
it  will  go  about  and  reach  hither  and  thither,  and 
according  to  its  courses  it  will  miss  by  its  turnings 
what  places  and  people  it  lists,  yet  it  is  common, 
for  that  it  lies  open,  yet  it  is  common  for  all  the 
beasts  of  the  field.  There  is,  therefore,  a  differ- 
ence to  be  put  betwixt  the  commonness  of  a  thing 
and  its  presence.  A  thing  may  be  common,  yet 
far  enough  off  of  thee.  Epsom,  Tunbridge  waters, 
and  the  Bath,  may  be  common,  but  yet  a  great 
way  off  of  some  that  have  need  thereof.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  this  river,  it  is  common  in 
the  streams,  but  it  runs  its  own  circuit,  and  keeps 
its  own  water-courses.  '  He  sendeth  the  springs 
into  the  valleys  which  run  among  the  hills. '  Ps.  civ.  10. 
Indeed,  he  openeth  his  river  in  high  places,  in  his 
throne,  and  of  the  Lamb,  but  still  they  run  in  the 
midst  of  the  valleys  to  water  the  humble  and  tho 
lowly.  Wherefore,  they  that  thirst  and  would  drink 
are  bid  to  come  down  to  the  waters — 4  Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that 
hath  no  money,  come  ye,  buy,'  etc.  is.  lv.  l.  And 
again,  '  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me 
and  drink.'  Jn.  vii.  37.  The  waters  are  common, 
but  you  must  come  to  them,  to  them  where  they 
are,  or  you  will  be  nothing  the  better  for  them. 
•  Come  ye  to  the  waters.' 

Third.  This  water  of  life  is  called  a  river,  to  in- 
timate to  you  by  what  store  of  the  same  it  is  sup- 
plied. All  rivers  have  the  sea  for  their  original: 
'  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea,  yet  the  sea  is  not 
full ;  unto  the  place  from  whence  the  rivers  come, 

-  This  is  not  intended  as  a  reflection  upon  those  who  wor- 
shipped God  in  meeting-houses  with  steeples  and  which  arc 
erroneously  called  churches.  The  word  is  used  because  steeples 
were  the  most  elevated  objects  with  which  Ins  hearers  were 
familiar. — (En  ) 


511 


THE   WATER  OF  LIFE. 


thither  they  return  again.'1  Ec.i. ?.  And  so  this 
river  of  water  of  life  is  said  to  proceed  out  of  the 
throne,  as  out  of  a  place  where  it  brcaketh  out, 
but  the  original  is  the  sea,  the  ocean  of  grace, 
which  is  an  infinite  Deity.  'Thou  wilt  cast  all 
their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  into  the  depth 
of  the  sea  of  thy  grace. '  Mic.  vii.  19.  Rivers,  when 
they  are  broken  up,  do  with  their  gliding  streams 
carry  away  a  great  deal  of  the  filth,  which  from 
all  parts  of  the  countries  through  which  they  run, 
is  conveyed  into  them;  and  they  carry  it  away  into 
the  sea,  where  it  is  everlastingly  swallowed  up.2 
And,  0!  the  filth  that  is  cast  into  this  river  of 
God!  and,  0!  how  many  dirty  sinners  are  washed 
white  therein,  for  by  its  continual  gliding  away,  it 
carrieth  that  filth  iuto  the  midst  of  the  sea. 

A  river  will  take  away  the  very  stink  of  a  dead 
dog:  nor  doth  all  the  soil  and  draught  that  is  cast 
into  the  rivers,  cause  that  those  that  can  should  be 
afraid  to  make  use  thereof :  all  that  have  need  do 
betake  themselves  to  this  river  notwithstanding. 
But  how  much  more  virtue  is  there  in  this  sweet 
river  of  grace  that  is  designed,  yea,  opened  on  pur- 
pose, to  wash  away  sin  and  uncleanness  in,  to  carry 
away  all  our  filth,  and  to  remain  as  virtuous  still ! 

Fourth.  It  is  called  a  river,  to  show  that  it  yields 
a  continual  supply,  as  I  may  call  it,  of  new  and 
fresh  grace.  Rivers  yield  continually  fresh  and 
new  water.  For  though  the  channel  or  water- 
course in  which  the  water  runs  is  the  same,  yet 
the  waters  themselves  are  always  new.  That 
water  that  but  one  minute  since  stood  in  this  place 
or  that  of  the  river,  is  now  gone,  and  new  and  fresh 
is  come  in  its  place.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  river 
of  God,  which  is  full  of  water ;  it  yieldeth  continu- 
ally fresh  supplies,  fresh  and  new  supplies  of  grace 
to  those  that  have  business  in  those  waters.  And 
this  is  the  reason  that  when  sin  is  pardoned,  it 
seems  as  if  it  were  carried  away.  Those  waters 
have,  with  their  continual  streams,  carried  away 
the  filth  of  the  sinner  from  before  his  face.  It  is 
not  so  with  ponds,  pools,  and  cisterns ;  they  will 
be  foul  and  stink,  if  they  be  not  often  emptied,  and 
filled  again  with  fresh  water.  We  must  then  put 
a  difference  between  the  grace  that  dwelleth  in  us, 
and  this  river  of  water  of  life.  We  are  but  as 
ponds,  pools,  and  cisterns,  that  can  hold  but  little, 
and  shall  also  soon  stink,  notwithstanding  the  grace 
of  God  is  in  us,  if  we  be  not  often  emptied  from 

1  The  rain  is  taken  from  the  sea  by  water-spouts  or  in  va- 
pour; it  is  wonderfully  distilled,  and  descends  upon  the  earth 
in  fertilizing  showers  which  supply  the  rivers.  In  proportion 
to  the  rain  or  melting  of  the  snow,  is  the  quantity  of  water  in 
the  rivers.  Bunyan  was  taught  all  this  phenomena  of  nature, 
by  a  single  verse  in  the  inspired  volume  which  he  quotes.  How 
wonderful  is  that  Book  ! — (Ed.) 

2  This  is  a  most  astonishing  natural  phenomenon :  that  such 
a  river  as  the  Thames,  receiving  constantly  all  the  filth  of  a 
vast  metropolis,  containing  more  that  two  millions  of  inhabi- 
tants, buries  it  all,  and  yet  purifietb  itself.— (En.) 


vessel  to  vessel,  and  filled  with  fresh  grace  from 
this  river.  Je.  xlriii.  ll.  But  the  river  is  always  sweet, 
nor  can  all  the  filth  that  is  washed  out  of  the  world 
make  it  stink,  or  infect  it :  its  water  runs  with  a 
continual  gliding  stream,  and  so  carries  away  all 
annoyance,  as  was  said,  into  the  depth  of  the  sea. 

Fifth.  The  grace  of  God  is  called  a  river,  to 
show  that  it  is  only  suited  to  those  who  are  capable 
of  living  therein.  Water,  though  it  is  that  which 
every  creature  desireth,  yet  it  is  not  an  element  iu 
which  every  creature  can  live.  Who  is  it  that 
would  not  have  the  benefit  of  grace,  of  a  throne 
of  grace?  But  who  is  it  that  can  live  by  grace  ? 
Even  none,  but  those  whose  temper  and  con- 
stitution is  suited  to  grace.  Hence,  as  the  grace 
of  God  is  compared  to  a  river,  so  those  that 
live  by  grace  are  compared  to  fish  :  for  that  as 
water  is  that  element  in  which  the  fish  liveth,  so 
grace  is  that  which  is  the  life  of  the  saint.  'And 
there  shall  be  a  very  great  multitude  of  fish,  be- 
cause these  waters  shall  come  thither ;  for  they 
shall  be  healed,  and  everything  shall  live  whither 
the  river  cometh.'  Eze.xivii.9.  Art  thou  a  fish,  0 
man,  art  thou  a  fish  ?  Canst  thou  live  in  the 
water ;  eanst  thou  live  always,  and  nowhere  else, 
but  in  the  water?  Is  grace  thy  proper  element  ? 
The  fish  dieth  if  she  be  taken  out  of  the  water, 
unless  she  be  timely  put  in  again  ;  the  saint  dieth 
if  he  be  not  in  this  river.  Take  him  from  this 
river,  and  nothing  can  make  him  live ;  let  him 
have  water,  water  of  life  enough,  and  nothing  can 
make  him  die. 

I  know  that  there  are  some  things  besides  fish, 
that  can  make  a  shift  to  live  in  the  water ;  but  the 
water  is  not  their  proper,  their  only  proper  element. 
The  frog  can  live  in  the  water,  but  not  in  the  water 
only ;  the  otter  can  live  in  the  water,  but  not  in 
the  water  only.  Give  some  men  grace  and  the 
world,  grace  and  sin ;  admit  them  to  make  use  of 
their  lusts  for  pleasure,  and  of  grace  to  remove 
their  guilt,  and  they  will  make  a  pretty  good  shift, 
as  we  say ;  they  will  finally  scrabble  on  in  a  pro- 
fession ;  but  hold  them  to  grace  only,  confine  their 
life  to  grace,  put  them  iuto  the  river,  and  let  them 
have  nothing  but  river,  and  they  die ;  the  word, 
and  way,  and  nature  of  grace,  is  to  them  as  light 
bread,3  and  their  soul  can  do  no  other  but  loath 
it,  for  they  are  not  suited  and  tempered  for  that 
element.  They  are  fish,  not  frogs,  that  can  live 
in  the  river,  as  in  their  only  proper  element. 
Wherefore,  the  grace  of  God,  and  Spirit  of  grace,  ia 
compared  to  a  river,  to  show  that  none  but  those 
can  live  thereby  whose  souls  and  spirits  are  suited 
and  fitted  thereto. 

Sixth.  The  grace,  and  Spirit  of  grace  of  God,  is 

3  Light  bread  is  an  allusion  to  Nu.  xxi.  5 :  '  our  soul  loath- 
eth  this  light  bread.'  The  heavenly  mauua,  like  Christ,  is  de- 
spised and  rejected  of  man.— (En.) 


THE   WATER  OF  LIFE. 


645 


called  or  compared  to  a  river,  to  answer  those  tin- 
satiable  desires,  and  to  wash  away  those  mountain- 
ous doubts  that  attend  those  that  indeed  do  thirst 
for  that  drink.  The  man  that  tliirsteth  with 
spiritual  thirst,  fears  nothing  more  than  that  there 
is  not  enough  to  quench  his  thirst.  All  the  pro- 
mises and  sayings  of  God's  ministers  to  such  a  man 
seem  but  as  thimbles  instead  of  bowls.  r«.  lxiii.  l; 
cxliii.  c  I  mean  so  long  as  his  thirst  and  doubts 
walk  hand  in  hand  together.  There  is  not  enough 
in  this  promise ;  I  find  not  enough  in  that  promise 
to  quench  the  drought  of  my  thirsting  soul.  He  that 
tliirsteth  aright,  nothing  but  God  can  quench  his 
thirst.  'My  soul  tliirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living 
God.'  Vs.  xiu.  2;  ixiii..  l;  cxliii.  6.  Well,  what  shall  be 
done  for  this  man  ?  Will  his  God  humour  him, 
and  answer  his  desires  ?  Mark  what  follows  : 
'  Wlien  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,  and  there 
is  none,'  (and  they  can  find  none,  when  all  the  pro- 
mises seem  to  be  dry,  and  like  clouds  that  return 
after  the  rain),  'and  their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst, 
I,  the  Lord,  will  hear  them.'  Aye,  but  Lord,  what 
wilt  thou  do  to  quench  their  thirst?  '  I  will  open 
rivers,'  saith  he,  '  in  high  places,  and  fountains  in 
the  midst  of  the  valleys.  I  will  make  the  wilder- 
ness a  pool  of  water,  and  the  dry  land  springs  of 
water.'  is. xli.  17, 18.  Behold!  here  are  rivers  and 
fountains,  a  pool,  and  springs,  and  all  to  quench 
the  thirst  of  them  that  thirst  for  God. 

Wherefore,  as  I  said,  such  provision  for  the 
thirsty  intimates  their  fears  of  want  and  the  crav- 
ing appetite  of  their  souls  after  God.  Right  spirit- 
ual thirst  is  not  to  be  satisfied  without  abundance 
of  grace.  And  '  they  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied 
with  the  fatness  of  thy  house,  and  thou  shalt  make 
them  drink  of  the  river  of  thy  pleasures.'  Ps.xxxvi.8. 

Seventh.  The  grace  cf  God  is  compared  to  a 
river,  to  show  the  greatness  of  the  family  of  God. 
He  has  a  family,  a  great  family,  and,  therefore,  it 
is  not  a  little  that  must  be  provided  for  them. 
When  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt,  and  thirsted  by 
the  way,  God  provided  for  them  a  river  ;  he  made 
it  gush  out  of  the  rock ;  for,  alas !  what  less  than 
a  river  could  quench  the  thirst  of  more  than  six 
hundred  thousand  men,  besides  women  and  chil- 
dren ?    Ps.  lxxviii.  20. 

I  say,  what  less  than  a  river  could  do  it?  When 
the  people  lusted  for  flesh,  Moses  said,  '  Shall  the 
flocks  and  the  herds  be  slain  for  them  to  suffice 
them  ?  or  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered 
together  for  them  to  suffice  them  V  Nu.  xi.  22.  Even 
so  could  not  less  than  a  river  sustain  and  suffice 
that  great  people.  Now  his  people  in  gospel  days 
are  not  to  be  diminished,  but  increased  ;  and  if 
then  they  had  need  of  a  river,  surely  now  of  a  sea ; 
but  the  river  is  deep  and  broad,  full,  and  abounds, 
or  rises  with  water,  so  it  will  suffice. 

Eighth.  The  grace  of  God  is  compared  to  a  river, 


perhaps  to  show  of  what  a  low  esteem  it  is  with 
the  rich  and  the  full.  The  destitute  indeed  em- 
brace the  rock  instead  of  a  shelter,  and  the  poor 
and  needy,  they  seek  water  :  but  they  that  can 
drink  Avine  in  bowls,  that  can  solace  themselves 
with,  as  they  think,  better  things,  they  come  not 
to  this  river  to  drink;  they  never  say  they  shall 
die  if  they  drink  not  of  this  water.  It  is,  there- 
fore, for  the  poor  and  needy,  God  will  lead  them 
to  his  'living  fountains  of  waters,'  and  will  '  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes.'  Re.  vii.  17.  And 
thus  I  pass  the  second  and  come  to  the  third  par- 
ticular, and  that  is,  to  show  the  head  and  spring 
from  whence  this  river  proceeds,  or  springs. 

[THE   nEAD   OR   WELL-SPRING   OF   THE    WATER   OF 
LIFE.] 

[THIRD.]  Rivers  have  their  heads  from  whence 
they  rise,  out  of  which  they  spring,  and  so,  accord- 
ingly, we  read  this  river  has;  wherefore  he  saith, 
*  He  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  cical- 
as crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb.' 

[God.]  God  is  here  to  be  taken  for  the  whole 
Godhead,  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  for  that  grace 
proceeds  from  them  all ;  the  grace  of  the  Father, 
the  grace  of  the  Son,  and  the  grace  of  the  Spirit; 
is  here  included.  Hence,  as  the  Father  is  called 
'the  God  of  grace:'  iPe.v.10;  so  the  Son  is  said  to 
be  full  of  grace,  grace  to  be  communicated,  Jn.  i. 
14-ig,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  called  '  the  Spirit  of 
grace. '  He.  x.  29.  So  then  by  this  we  perceive  whence 
grace  comes.  Were  all  the  world  gracious,  if  God 
were  not  gracious,  what  was  man  the  better  ?  If 
the  Father,  or  the  Son,  or  the  Holy  Ghost,  are 
gracious,  if  they  were  not  all  gracious,  what  would 
it  profit  ?  But  now  God  is  gracious,  the  three 
persons  in  the  Godhead  are  gracious,  and  so  long 
they  that  seek  grace  are  provided  for  ;  for  that, 
there  proceeds  from  them  a  river,  or  grace  like  a 
flowing  stream;  indeed  the  original  of  grace  to 
sinners  is  the  good  will  of  God  ;  none  can  imagine 
how  loving  God  is  to  sinful  man.  A  little  of  it  is 
seen,  but  they  that  see  most,  see  but  a  little. 

[The  Lamb.]  But  there  is  added,  '  and  of  the 
Lamb.'  The  Lamb  is,  Jesus  as  sacrificed,  Jesus 
as  man,  and  suffering.  Hence  you  have  the  Lamb, 
at  the  first  vision  of  the  throne,  set  forth  unto  us, 
that  is,  as  slain.  '  And  I  beheld,  and  lo,  in  the. 
midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four  beasts,  and  in 
the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had 
been  slain.'  Re.  v.  e.  Wherefore,  by  this  word 
Lamb,  we  are  to  understand  who,  or  by  what 
means,  grace  doth  now  run  from  the  throne  of  God, 
like  a  river,  to  the  world.  It  is  because  of,  or 
through  the  Lamb.  We  are  'justified  freely  by 
the  grace  of   God   through  the  redemption  that 

69 


546 


THE   WATER  OE  LIFE. 


is  in  Christ  Jesus,  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be 
a  propitiation,  through  faith  in  his  blood.'  Ro.  m.  24. 
And  again,  'We  have  redemption  through  his 
blood,'  even  'the  forgiveness  of  sius,  according  to 
the  riches  of  God's  grace.'  Ep.  i.  7. 

Nor  doth  the  Lamb  of  God,  by  becoming  a 
means,  through  death,  of  the  conveyance  of  grace 
to  us,  at  all  darken  the  nature  or  glory  of  grace, 
but  rather  doth  set  it  off  the  more.  For  wherein 
can  grace  or  love  more  appear  than  in  his  laying 
down  his  life  for  us?  I  speak  now  of  the  grace 
of  the  Son.  And  wherein  could  the  nature  and 
glory  of  grace  of  the  Father  more  appear  than  in 
giving  his  Son  to  death  for  us,  that  grace  might, 
in  a  Avay  of  justice  as  well  as  mercy,  be  bestowed 
upon  the  world?  Wherefore,  as  he  saith  here, 
that  the  river  of  water  of  life  proceedeth  from  God, 
so  he  adds  that  the  Lamb,  because  he  would  have 
us  while  we  are  entangled  and  overcome  with  this 
river  of  God's  pleasure,  not  forget  what  it  cost  the 
Lamb  of  God  that  this  grace  might  come  unto  us. 

For  the  riches  of  grace  and  of  wisdom  are,  that 
grace  comes  to  us  not  only  in  a  way  of  mercy  and 
compassion,  but  in  a  way  of  justice  and  equity; 
but  that  could  be  by  no  other  means  but  by  re- 
deeming blood.  Which  redeeming  blood  came  not 
from  us,  nor  yet  through  our  contrivance  or  advice; 
wherefore,  whatever  it  is  to  the  Lamb,  still  all  is 
of  grace  to  us.  Yea,  the  higher,  the  greater,  the 
richer  is  grace,  by  how  much  the  more  it  cost  the 
Father  and  the  Lamb,  that  we  might  enjoy  it. 
When  a  man  shall  not  only  design  me  a  purse  of 
gold,  but  shall  venture  his  life  to  bring  it  to  me, 
this  is  grace  indeed.  But,  alas !  what  are  a  thou- 
sand such  short  comparisons  to  the  unsearchable 
love  of  Christ. 

The  Lamb,  then,  is  he  from  whom,  by,  or 
through  whom  the  grace  of  God  doth  come  to  us. 
It  proceeds  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb.  And  it  proceeds  from  him  now  as  a  do- 
nator :  from  him,  not  only  as  a  means  of  convey- 
ance, but  as  one  that  has  power  to  give  grace ; 
power,  as  he  is  the  Son  of  Man.  For  as  the  Son 
of  Man  he  is  the  Lamb,  and  as  he  is  the  Lamb  it 
eometh  from  him.  '  The  Son  of  man  hath  power 
on  earth  to  forgive  sins. '  Mat.  &.  e.  And  that  before 
lie  had  actually  paid  to  God  the  price  of  our  re- 
demption. But  how  much  more  now?  Where- 
fore Paul,  in  his  prayer  for  grace  and  peace  for 
saints,  supplicates  both  God  and  the  Lamb— 'Grace 
be  to  you,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.'  Ep.  i.  2.  1  Co.  i.  3.  2  Co.  j.  2.  Ga.  i.  3. 

'  Proceeding  out  of  the  throne.*  Formerly  this 
river  of  water  is  said  to  come  from  under  the 
threshold  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Ezo.  xhn.  1. 
And  it  is,  said  again,  they  '  shall  go  out  from 
Jerusalem,'  that  is,  the  church  or  house  of  God 
still,  zee.  xiv.  s.     In  that  thev  are  said  to  come  out 


from  under  the  threshold,  it  may  be  to  intimate 
that  they  ran  but  low  formerly,  if  compared  to 
what  they  do  now.  Which  might  also  be  signi- 
fied by  this,  that  they  '  issued  out,'  that  that 
issues  out  ordinarily  comes  forth  but  slowly.  Also 
the  prophet  saith,  the  first  time  he  went  through 
the  waters,  they  were  but  up  to  the  ancles.  Eze. 
xivii.  3, 4.  But  what  is  ancle-deep  to  that  which 
followeth  after?  It  is  said  also  to  come  out  from 
Jerusalem,  where,  I  perceive,  were  no  great  rivers, 
to  intimate,  that  as  long  as  the  first  priesthood, 
first  temple,  and  type,  were  in  their  splendour, 
only  the  shadow  of  heavenly  things  were  in  use, 
and  that  then  grace  ran  but  slowly,  nor  would  run 
much  faster,  because  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified. 
For  the  Spirit  and  abundance  of  grace  was  to  be 
given  not  before  but  after  his  ascension. 

Wherefore,  now  Jesus  is  ascended,  now  he  is 
glorified,  now  grace  proceeds  from  the  throne,  not 
from  the  threshold  of  the  house.  '  He  shewed  me 
a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  pro- 
ceeding out  of  the  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb. ' 

The  Throne.  That  of  which  the  mercy-seat 
was  a  type,  that  which  is  called  the  throne  of 
grace.  Ex.  xxv.  17.  He.  iv.  la.  And  it  is  called  the 
throne  of  grace,  even,  therefore,  because  it  is  that 
from  or  out  of  which  proceeds  this  river  of  water 
of  life,  this  overflowing  grace  of  God.  Now,  it 
may  be  asked  what  is  the  throne  of  grace  ?  and  I 
shall  answer  it  is  the  humanity  of  Christ.  He  is 
the  throne,  he  is  the  Jacob  in  which  God  sitteth. 
is.  xxii.  22,  23.  And  he  shall  be  for  a  glorious  throne 
to  his  Father's  house.  Re.  iti.  7.  The  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  dwells  in  him  bodily ;  and  God  was  in 
Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  nor  can 
grace  come  to  men  but  by  Christ,  nor  can  God  rest 
as  to  our  salvation  but  in  him.  But  because  I  have 
spoken  of  this  thing  more  particularly  upon  that 
text,  '  Let  us  therefore  come  boldly  unto  the  throne 
of  grace,'  &c,  I  shall,  therefore,  here  say  no  more. 

Only,  methinks,  it  is  a  glorious  title  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  given  to  the  humanity  of  Christ, 
in  that  he  calls  it  the  throne  of  God;  and  methinks 
he  gives  it  the  highest  preference  in  that  he  saith, 
out  thence  proceeds  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life : 
we  will  a  little,  therefore,  speak  something  to  this 
word — the  throne,  the  throne  of  God. 

First.  A  throne  is  the  seat  of  majesty  and  great- 
ness; it  is  not  for  things  of  an  inferior  quality  to 
ascend  or  assume  a  throne.  Now,  then,  since  this 
river  of  water  of  life  proceeds  from  the  throne,  it 
intimates,  that  in  grace  and  mercy  there  is  great 
majesty;  for  grace,  as  it  proceeds,  has  a  voice  from 
the  throne.  And,  indeed,  there  is  nothing  in 
heaven  or  earth  that  can  so  awe  the  heart  as  the 
grace  of  God.  Ho.  m.  5.  It  is  that  which  makes  a 
man  fear,  it  is  that  which  makes  a  man  tremble, 
it  is  that  which  makes  a  man  bow  and  bend,  and 


THE  WATER  OF  LIFE. 


547 


break  to  pieces.  Jc  xxxii.  o.  Nothing  has  that 
majesty  and  commanding  greatness  in  and  upon 
the  hearts  of  the  sons  of  men  as  has  the  grace  of 
God.  So  that,  I  say,  when  lie  saith  that  this 
river  of  grace  proceeds  out  of  the  throne  of  God, 
it  is  to  show  us  what  a  majesty,  what  a  command- 
ing greatness,  there  is  in  grace.  The  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us. 

When  Moses  went  up  to  the  mount  the  first 
time  to  receive  the  law,  he  did  exceedingly  fear 
and  quake.  Why?  because  of  the  fire  and  smoke, 
thick  darkness  and  thunder,  Arc.  But  when  he 
went  up  the  second  time  thither,  '  he  made  haste 
and  bowed  his  head  toward  the  earth,  and  wor- 
shipped.' But  why?  because  it  was  before  pro- 
claimed that  '  the  Lord  was  merciful  and  gracious, 
long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth; 
keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving  iniquity, 
and  transgression,  and  sin,'  ifec.   Ex.  ncriv.  G-o. 

There  is  nothing  overmastereth  the  heart  like 
grace,  and  so  obligeth  to  sincere  and  unfeigned 
obedience  as  that.  'Examine  me,  0  Lord,'  said 
David,  '  and  prove  me;  try  my  reins  and  my  heart. 
For  thy  loving  kindness  is  before  mine  eyes:  and  I 
have  walked  in  thy  truth.'  rs.  xxvi.2,  3.  Therefore, 
he  saith  again,  0  Lord  our  God,  '  how  excellent  is 
thy  loving  kindness  '  in  all  the  earth !  and  that 
loving  kindness  is  marvellous ;  for  it  has  that 
majesty  and  that  excellent  glory  in  it  as  to  com- 
mand the  heart  and  subdue  sin.  And,  therefore, 
grace  has  given  to  it  the  title  of  sovereignty,  or  of 
one  that  reigns.  The  throne  is  called  '  the  throne 
of  grace,'  lie.  ir.  16,  that  on  which  it  sits  and  reigns, 
as  well  as  that  from  whence  it  proceeds :  '  Grace 
reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.'  ito.  v.  21. 

Second.  As  a  throne  is  a  seat  of  majesty  and 
greatness,  and  so  can  awe,  so  it  is  the  seat  of 
authority  and  legislative  power,  and  so  will  awe ; 
this  is  confirmed  from  what  was  said  but  now, 
'grace  reigns.'  Wherefore  it  is  expected  that 
they  that  hear  the  word  of  God's  grace  should 
submit  thereto,  and  that  at  their  peril.  '  He  that 
believes  not  shall  be  damned,'  is  a  word  of  power, 
of  law,  and  of  authority,  and  the  contemner  shall 
find  it  so.  Grace  proceeds  from  the  throne,  from 
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  Wherefore, 
sinner,  here  is  laid  a  necessity  upon  thee,  one  of 
the  two  must  be  thy  lot ;  either  thou  must  accept 
of  God's  grace,  and  be  content  to  be  saved  freely 
thereby,  notwithstanding  all  thy  undeservings  and 
unworthiness,  or  else  thou  must  be  damned  for 
thy  rebellion  and  for  thy  rejecting  of  this  grace. 
Wherefore,  consider  with  thyself  and  think  what 
is  best  to  be  done.  Is  it  better  that  thou  submit 
to  the  grace  and  mercy  of  God,  and  that  thou 
acceptest  of  grace  to  reign  for  thee,  In  thee,  and 
over  thee,  than  that  thou  shouldst  run  the  hazard 


of  eternal  damnation  because  thou  wouldst  not  be 
saved  by  grace?  Consider  of  tins,  I  say,  for 
grace  is  now  in  authority,  it  reigns  and  proceeds 
from  the  TnitONE.  Now,  you  know,  it  is  danger- 
ous opposing,  rejecting,  despising,  or  disowning  of 
them  in  authority ;  better  speak  against  twenty 
than  against  one  that  is  in  authority.  If  'the 
wrath  of  a  king  is  as  messengers  of  death,'  rr.  xvi. 
14,  if  the  wrath  of  the  king  '  is  as  the  roaring  of  a 
lion,'  what  is  the  wrath  of  God?  Pr.  xix.  12.  And 
you  know,  to  despise  grace,  to  refuse  pardon,  to 
be  unwilling  to  be  saved  from  the  guilt  and 
punishment  due  to  treasons,  the  king's  way,  since 
that  also  is  the  best  way,  how  will  that  provoke  ? 
how  hot  will  that  make  wrath  ?  But  to  accept  of 
grace,  especially  when  it  is  free  grace,  grace  that 
reigns,  grace  from  the  throne,  how  sweet  is  it? 
'  His  favour  is  as  dew  upon  the  grass.' 

This,  therefore,  calls  for  thy  most  grave  and 
sedate  thoughts.  Thou  art  in  a  strait,  wilt  thou  fly 
before  Moses,  or  with  David  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  Lord?  wilt  thou  go  to  hell  for  sin,  or  to  life  b}r 
grace  ?  One  of  the  two,  as  was  said  before,  must 
be  thy  lot:  for  grace  is  king,  is  upon  the  throne, 
and  will  admit  of  no  other  way  to  glory.  In  and 
by  it  thou  must  stand,  if  thou  hast  any  hope,  or 
canst  at  all  'rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.' 
Ro.  v.  2. 

Third.  As  the  throne  is  the  seat  of  majesty  and 
authority,  so  it  is  the  highest  seat  of  authority. 
There  is  none  above  the  throne,  there  is  no  appeal 
from  the  throne.  There  are  inferior  courts  of  judi- 
cature, there  are  under-governors,  and  they  may 
sometimes,  perhaps,  be  faulty ;  wherefore  in  some 
cases  an  appeal  from  such  may  be  lawful  or  per- 
mitted; but  from  the  throne  none  can  appeal.  Now 
grace  is  upon  the  throne,  reigns  upon  the  throne, 
proceeds  from  the  throne.  A  man  may  appeal  from 
the  law  to  the  throne,  from  Moses  to  Christ,  from 
him  that  spake  on  earth  to  him  that  speaks  from 
heaven ;  but  from  heaven  to  earth,  from  Christ  to 
Moses,  none  can  appeal,  Moses  himself  has  forbid 
it.  For  'Moses  truly  said  unto  the  fathers,  A 
prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up  unto  you. 
of  your  brethren  like, unto  me;  him  shall  ye  hear  in 
all  things  whatsoever  he  shall  say  unto  you.  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  soul,  which  will  not 
hear  that  prophet,  shall  be  destroyed  from  among 
the  people.'  Ac.  iiL  22,  23. 

See  here,  this  new  prophet  judges  in  the  highest 
court;  he  is  master  of  grace,  the  throne  by  Which 
grace  reigns;  and  even  Moses  admits  that  from  him- 
self an  appeal  may  be  made  to  this  prophet ;  yea, 
he  allows  that  men  may  flee  from  himself  to  this 
prophet  for  refuge ;  but  there  must  be  no  appeal 
from  him.  Thou  must  hear  him  or  die.  How  shall 
Ave  escape,  '  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speak- 
eth  from  heaven  V  lie.  xii.  25. 


643 


THE  WATER  OF  LIFE. 


This,  therefore,  is  to  he  duly  weighed  and  deeply 
considered  by  us.  It  is  not  a  saint,  nor  a  minister, 
nor  a  prophet,  nor  an  angel  that  speaks,  for  all 
these  are  but  servants,  but  inferiors;  no,  it  is  a 
voice  from  the  throne,  from  authority,  from  the 
highest  authority  ;  it  is  the  Lord  from  heaven. 
This  grace  proceeds  from  the  throne,  and,  there- 
fore, men  must  stand  and  fall  by  what  shall  come 
from  hence.  He  that  comes  not  hither  to  drink 
shall  die  for  thirst.  He  that  refuses  this  water 
now,  shall  not  have  so  much  as  will  hang  upon  the 
tip  of  his  finger,  if  it  would  save  his  soul,  here- 
after. •  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great 
salvation.'  He.  ii.  3. 

Apostates  will,  therefore,  from  hence  find  grip- 
ing pangs  and  burning  coals,  for  they  have  turned 
themselves  away  from  this  throne,  and  from  the 
grace  that  proceeds  therefrom ;  nor  is  it  to  any  pur- 
pose whatever  they  plead  for  themselves.  They 
are  fallen  from  grace,  and  what  can  help  them  ? 
Christ  is  become  of  none  effect  unto  such,  whoso- 
ever is,  that  is,  seeks  to  be,  justified  by  the  law;  they 
'  are  fallen  from  grace.'  Ga.  v.  4. 

Fourth.  The  throne  is  the  seat  of  glory,  '  When 
the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him ;  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  his  glory.'  Mat.  m  si.  And  if  the  throne 
of  judgment  is  the  seat  of  glory,  much  more  the 
throne  of  grace.  We  will  venture  then  to  say  that 
the  throne  of  grace  is  the  throne  of  God's  glory, 
as  the  throne  of  judgment  will  be  the  throne  of 
Christ's  glory,  and  that  grace  proceedeth  from  his 
throne,  that  both  it  and  he  might  have  glory;  glory 
in  a  way  of  mercy. 

1 .  That  it  might  have  glory ;  therefore  has  he 
designed  that  grace  shall  be  effectual  in,  and  to 
the  salvation  of  some,  even  '  to  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace,  wherein  he  hath  made  us  ac- 
cepted in  his  Beloved.'  Ep.  i.  6.  He  has  designed, 
not  the  glory  of  man's  works,  but  the  glory  of  his 
own  grace ;  and,  therefore,  has  put  man's  works, 
as  to  justification  before  God,  under  his  feet,  and 
counts  them  as  filthy  rags  ;  but  has  set  his  grace 
up  above,  has  made  it  a  king,  given  it  authority  to 
reign,  has  provided  for  it  a  throne,  and  called  that 
throne  the  throne  of  grace,  from  whence  it  also  pro- 
ceeds to  its  own  praise  and  glory,  in  and  by  the 
effectual  salvation  of  those  that  receive  it,  and  re- 
ceive it  not  in  vain. 

2.  As  grace  is  exalted,  and  made  to  proceed  out 
of  the  throne,  to  its  own  praise,  to  its  own  glory; 
so  is  it  also  thus  exalted  and  made  flow  to  us  like 
a  river,  that  we  should  be  the  praise  of  the  glory 
of  him  that  hath  exalted  it.  We  that  receive  it, 
and  submit  unto  the  throne  whence  it  proceeds, 
have  thereby  •  obtained  an  inheritance,  being  pre- 
destinated according  to  the  purpose  of  him  who 
worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will, 


that  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  his  glory.'  Ep. 
L  ii,  12.  So  that  this  throne  is  a  throne  of  glory. 
'  A  glorious  high  throne,  from  the  beginning  is  the 
place  of  our  sanctuary. '  Je.  xvii.  12.  Now  what  fol- 
lows from  this,  but  that  they  that  accept  of  this 
grace  give  glory  to  God,  to  his  grace,  and  to  the 
word  of  his  grace ;  such,  I  say,  •  glorify  God  for 
his  mercy.'  ito.  xv.  9.  '  They  glorify  God  for  your 
professed  subjection  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.'  2  Co. 
ix.  13,  which  is  the  gospel  or  good  tidings  '  of  the 
grace  of  God.'  Ac.  xx.  24.  They,  with  Abraham, 
believe,  and  give  glory  to  God.  Bo.  iv.  20.  And  with 
the  Gentiles  they  glorify  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Ac. 

xiii.  43. 

But  to  slight  grace,  to  do  despite  to  the  Spirit  of 
grace,  to  prefer  our  own  works  to  the  derogating 
from  grace,  what  is  it  but  to  contemn  God  ?  to  con- 
temn him  when  he  is  on  the  throne,  when  he  is  on 
the  throne  of  his  glory  ?  I  say,  it  is  to  spit  in  his 
face,  even  then  when  he  commands  thee  to  bow  be- 
fore him,  to  subject  unto  him,  and  to  glorify  the 
grace  of  his  glory,  that  proceeds  from  the  throne 
of  his  glory.  If  men  in  old  time  were  damned  be- 
cause they  glorified  him  not  as  God,  shall  not  they 
be  more  than  damned,  if  more  than  damned  can 
be,  who  glorify  him  not  for  his  grace  ?  And,  to  be 
sure,  none  glorify  him  for  his  grace  but  those  that 
close  in  therewith,  and  submit  themselves  thereto. 
Talkers  of  grace  are  but  mockers  of  God,  but  flat- 
terers of  God.  Those  that  only  talk  highly  of 
grace,  and  submit  not  themselves  unto  it,  are  but 
like  to  those  that  praise  a  look,  or  flatter  him  in 
his  own  conceits.  Grace  God  has  exalted,  has  set  it 
upon  the  throne,  and  so  made  it  a  king,  and  given 
it  authority  to  reign;  and  thou  goest  by,  and  near- 
est thereof,  but  wilt  not  submit  thyself  thereto, 
neither  thy  soul  nor  thy  life;  why,  what  is  this  more 
than  to  flatter  God  with  thy  lips,  and  than  to  lie 
unto  him  with  thy  tongue?  what  is  this  but  to  count 
him  less  wise  than  thyself  ?  while  he  seeks  glory 
by  that  by  which  thou  wilt  not  glorify  him ;  while 
he  displays  his  grace  before  thee  in  the  world  from 
the  throne,  and  as  thou  goest  by,  with  a  nod  thou 
callest  it  a  fine  thing,  but  followest  that  which  lead- 
eth  therefrom  ?  Tremble,  tremble,  ye  sinners,  that 
have  despised  the  richness  of  his  goodness;  the  day 
is  coming  when  ye  shall  behold,  and  wonder,  and 
perish,  if  grace  prevaileth  not  with  you  to  be  con- 
tent to  be  saved  by  it  to  the  praise  of  its  glory,  and 
to  the  glory  of  him  who  hath  set  it  upon  the  throne. 

Ac.  xiii.  38-41. 

Fifth.  The  throne  is  the  seat  of  wisdom.  Hence, 
he  is  called  '  the  Ancient  of  Days,'  that  sits  on  this 
throne,  the  throne  of  God.  Da.  vii.  9.  Infinite  in  wis- 
dom, whose  garments  were  white  as  snow,  and  the 
hair  of  his  head  like  pure  wool.  By  Ancient  of 
Days,  and  in  that  it  is  said  the  hair  of  his  head  is 
like  the  pure  wool,  his  wisdom  is  set  forth  unto  us. 


THE  WATER  OF  LIFE. 


149 


Wherefore,  when  we  read  that  out  of  the  throne 
proceeds  a  river  of  grace  ;  when  we  read  this  pro- 
ceedeth  out  of  the  throne  of  God,  it  is  as  much  as 
to  say  the  wise  God,  who  most  perfectly  knowcth 
all  ways,  countcth,  in  his  wisdom,  that  to  save  men 
by  grace  is  the  best,  most  safe,  and  sure  way: 
'  Therefore  it  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace, 
to  the  end  the  promise  might  he  sure  to  all  the  seed.' 
no.  iv.  10.  And,  again,  forgiveness  is  according  to 
the  riches  of  his  grace,  wherein  he  hath  abounded 
toward  us  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence.  Bp.  i.  7,  s. — 
Wherefore,  to  set  grace  upon  the  throne,  to  let 
grace  proceed  out  of  the  throne  as  a  river,  is  by 
the  wise  God,  the  only  wise  God,  counted  the  best 
way,  the  safest  way,  the  way  that  doth  best  suit 
the  condition  of  a  sinful  man,  and  that  tends  most 
to  the  utter  disappointment  of  the  devil,  and  death, 
and  hell.  Grace  can  justify  freely,  when  it  will, 
who  it  will,  from  wliat  it  will.  Grace  can  continue 
to  pardon,  favour,  and  save  from  falls,  in  falls,  out 
of  falls.  Grace  can  comfort,  relieve,  and  help  those 
that  have  hurt  themselves.  And  grace  can  bring 
the  unworthy  to  glory.  This  the  law  cannot  do, 
this  man  cannot  do,  this  angels  cannot  do,  this  God 
cannot  do,  but  only  by  the  riches  of  his  grace, 
through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Wherefore,  seeing  God  has  set  grace  on  the  throne, 
and  ordered  that  it  should  proceed  from  this  throne 
to  the  world  ;  yea,  seeing  he  has  made  it  king, 
and  granted  to  it,  to  it  only,  the  authority  and  sove- 
reignty of  saving  souls,  he  has  magnified  not  only 
his  love,  but  his  wisdom  aud  his  prudence  before 
the  sons  of  men.  This,  then,  is  his  great  device, 
the  master-piece  of  all  his  witty  inventions;  and, 
therefore,  it  is  said,  as  was  hinted  before,  in  this 
thing  he  hath  proceeded  towards  us  in  all  wisdom 
and  prudence.  2  Sa.  xiv.  14.  rr.  viu.  11, 12. 

So  then,  he  that  comes  to,  and  drinks  of  this 
water,  glorifies  God  for  his  wisdom,  praises  God 
for  his  wisdom.  Such  an  one  saith  that  God  is 
only  wise,  and,  bowing  his  head,  saith  again,  '  to 
God  only  wise,  be  glory  both  now  and  for  ever. 
Amen. '  But  he  that  shall  contemn  this  grace,  con- 
fronts the  highest  wisdom,  even  wisdom  upon  the 
throne;  he  saith  to  himself,  I  am  Miser  than 
Daniel,  than  the  judgment  of  God.  I  could  have 
found  out  a  more  safe  way  to  heaven  myself ;  and 
had  I  been  of  God's  council,  I  would  have  told  him 
so.  All  this,  so  horrible  blasphemy,  naturally  pro- 
ceeds from  him  that  liketh  not  that  grace  should 
be  king  on  the  throne,  and  should  proceed  out 
of  the  throne  to  the  world;  but  'shall  he  that  con- 
tended with  the  Almighty  instruct  him?'  lie  that 
reproveth  God,  let  him  answer  it.  Job  xL  2. 

The  text  says,1  that  this  very  doctrine  to  the 


1  By  '  the  text,'  in  this  and  other  places,  is  meant  the  text  of 
sacred  Scripture;  not  the  particular  passage,  or  text,  on  which 
this  treatise  is  founded. — (Ed.) 


Greeks,  to  the  wise,  is  foolishness,  and  the  preach- 
ing of  it  a  foolish  thing  to  them ;  but  it  will  appear 
even  then,  when  the  conclusion  of  all  things  is  come, 
and  when  these  wise  ones,  by  their  wisdom,  have 
fooled  themselves  to  hell,  that  this  '  foolishness  of 
God  is  wiser  than  men,  aud  the  weakness  of  God 
is  stronger  than  men.'  iCo.i.  21-25. 

Christ  Jesus,  because  he  was  low  in  the  world, 
is  trampled  upon  by  some,  but  ho  is  a  glorious 
throne  to  his  Father's  house  :  for  since  his  hu- 
mility was  the  lowest  of  all,  now  he  is  exalted  to 
be  the  throne  of  God,  yea,  is  made  the  fountain 
whence  grace  continually  flows,  like  the  rivers,  and 
comes  down  to  us  like  a  mighty  stream.  Where- 
fore, I  will  conclude  this  with  both  comfort  and 
caution  :  with  comfort,  and  that  because  of  the 
security  that  they  are  under  that  indeed  have  sub- 
mitted themselves  to  grace  ;  '  sin  shall  not  havo 
dominion  over  you;  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law, 
but  under  grace.'  And  let  it  be  a  caution  to  those 
that  despise.  Take  heed,  it  is  dangerous  affront- 
ing of  the  wisdom  of  God.  Now  here  is  the  wis- 
dom of  God,  even  wisdom  upon  the  throne.  It 
pleased  God,  for  the  glory  of  his  wisdom,  to  make 
this  the  way  :  to  wit,  to  set  up  grace  to  reign.  I 
have  often  thought,  and  sometimes  said,  if  God 
will  be  pleased  with  any  way,  surely  he  will  be 
pleased  with  his  own.  Now  this  is  the  way  of  his 
own  devising,  the  fruit  and  effect  of  his  own  wis- 
dom ;  wherefore,  sinner,  please  him,  please  him  in 
that  wherein  he  is  well  pleased.  Come  to  the 
waters,  cast  thyself  into  them,  and  fear  not  drown- 
ing ;  let  God  alone  to  cause  them  to  carry  thee 
into  his  paradise,  that  thou  mayest  see  his  throne. 
Sixth.  The  throne  is  the  seat  of  faithfulness,  the 
place  of  performing  of  engagements  and  promises. 
'  When  I  shall  receive  the  congregation,'  saith 
Christ,  '  I  will  judge  uprightly,'  that  is  faithfully. 
Ps.  lxxv.  2.  And  now  he  has  received  it,  and  is  made 
head  over  all  things  to  it.  Ep.  i.  22, 23.  And  for  this 
cause  is  he  upon  the  throne,  yea,  is  the  throne, 
from  whence  proceeds  all  this  grace,  that  like  a 
river  doth  flow,  and  glide  from  heaven  into  the 
world.  This  river,  then,  is  nothing  else  but  the 
fulfilling  of  promises ;  the  faithful  fulfilling  of  pro- 
mises. '  If  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not 
come  unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him 
unto  you. '  Jn.  xvi.  7.  '  This  is  that  which  was  spoken 
hy  the  prophet  Joel ;  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
the  last  clays,  saith  God,  I  will  pour  out  of  my 
Spirit  upon  all  flesh,'  &c.  Ac.  ii.  16-18.  Now  this  river 
is  the  Spirit,  the  Spirit  and  grace  of  God,  which 
was  promised  by  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  now 
it  comes  running  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb.  For  '  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  ex- 
alted, and  having  received  of  the  Father  the  pro- 
mise of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed  forth  this 
which  ye  now  see  and  hear.'  Ac.  ii.  S3. 


550 


THE  WATER   OF  LIFE. 


Behold,  then,  how  mindful,  how  careful,  how 
faithful  our  Father  and  the  Lainh  of  God  is !  It 
is  not  exaltation,  nor  glory,  nor  a  crown,  nor  a 
kingdom,  nor  a  throne,  that  shall  make  him  neglect 
his  poor  ones  on  earth.  Yea,  therefore,  even  be- 
cause he  is  exalted  and  on  the  throne,  therefore  it 
is  that  such  a  river,  with  its  golden  streams,  pro- 
ceeds from  the  throne  to  come  unto  us.  And  it 
shall  proceed  to  he  far  higher  than  ever  was  the 
swellings  of  Jordan.  True,  it  runs  not  so  high 
now  as  in  former  days,  because  of  the  curse  of 
God  upon  Antichrist,  by  whose  means  the  land  of 
God's  people  is  full  of  briers  and  thorns,  is.  xxxii. 
is-17.  But  when  the  tide  is  at  the  lowest,  then  it  is 
nearest  the  rising  ;  and  this  river  will  rise,  and  in 
little  time  be  no  more  so  low  as  but  ancle-deep ;  it 
will  be  up  to  the  knees,  to  the  loins,  and  be  a  broad 
river  to  swim  in.  Eze.  xivii.  For  'there  the  glorious 
Lord  wUl  be  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and 
streams.'  is.  xxxffi.  21.  'And  there  shall  be  no  more 
curse'  in  the  church,  'but  the  throne  of  God  and 
cf  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it,  and  his  servants  shall 
serve  him'  without  molestation.'   Re.  xxii.  3-6. 

'  These  sayings  are  faithful  and  true, '  and  in 
faithfulness  shall  they,  from  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb,  be  performed  to  the  church.  Faith- 
fulness in  him  that  rules,  is  that  which  makes  Sion 
rejoice  ;  because  thereby  the  promises  yield  milk 
and  honey.  For  now  the  faithful  God,  that  keep- 
eth  covenant,  performs  to  his  church  that  which  be 
told  her  he  would.  Wherefore,  our  rivers  shall  run, 
and  our  brooks  yield  honey  and  butter.  Job  xx.  17. 
Let  this  teach  all  God's  people  to  expect,  to 
look,  and  wait  for  good  things  from  the  throne. 
But,  0 !  methinks  this  tin-one,  out  of  which  good 
comes  like  a  river!  who  would  not  be  a  subject  to 
it  ?  who  would  not  but  worship  before  it  ?     But, 

Seventh.  A  throne  is  'the  seat  of  justice.' 
'  Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  thy 
throne.'  Ps.  lxxxix.  14.  And  it  is  also  from  justice 
that  this  river  of  grace  flows  to  us  :  justice  to 
Christ,  and  justice  to  those  that  are  found  in  him. 
Bo.iii.24.  God  declares  that  he  can  justly  justify, 
and  justly  forgive,  l  Jn.  i.  9.  Now,  if  he  can  justly 
justify  and  justly  forgive,  then  can  he  give  grace, 
and  cause  that  it  should  proceed  to,  yea,  flow  after 
us  as  a  river,  l  Co.  x.  4.  The  river  that  gushed  out 
of  the  rock  in  the  wilderness  ran  after  the  people 
there,  wherefore  they  wandered  therein.  They 
drank  of  the  rock  that  followed  them ;  the  rock 
was  not  removed  out  of  his  place,  but  the  flood 
followed  them  whither  they  went.  'He  opened 
the  rock  and  the  waters  gushed  out ;  they  ran  in 
the  dry  places  like  a  river.'  Ps.  cv.«.  This  rock, 
saith  he,  was  Christ,  that  is,  figuratively:  and 
this  throne  is  Christ  really :  and  the  water  gush- 
ing out  of  the  rock,  and  following  of  them  in  the 
wilderness,  was  to  show  how,  Avkcn  Christ  became 


a  throne,  grace  and  goodness  should  follow  us  in 
the  wilderness  from  thence  so  long  as  here  we 
abide.  Wherefore  David,  considering  this,  said, 
'  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all 
the  days  of  my  life,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord  for  ever. '  Ps.  xxiii.  6. 

But  whence  must  this  come  ?  The  text  says 
from  the  throne  ;  from  the  throne,  the  seat  of 
justice  ;  for  from  thence,  by  reason  of  what  he 
hath  found  in  Christ  for  us,  he,  in  a  way  of  right- 
eousness and  justice,  lets  out  to  us  rivers  of  his 
pleasures  ;  whose  original  is  that  great  and  wide 
sea  of  mercy  that  flows  in  his  infinite  heart  beyond 
thought. 

All  is  paid  for  both  us  and  grace.  Jn.  vii.  39.  We 
are  bought  with  a  price,  l  Co.  vi.  20.  He  has  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us.  He.  ix.  12.  Yea,  and  as 
we  are  made  his,  and  heaven  made  ours  thus,  so 
this  river  of  grace  has  been  also  obtained  by  him 
for  us.  Jn.  vii.  38.  Wherefore,  all  comes  to  us  in  a 
way  of  justice  and  righteousness.  Hence  we  are 
said  to  obtain  '  faith  through  the  righteousness  of 
God,'  2Pe.  i.  i;  that  is,  through  the  justice  of  God, 
and  of  Jesus  our  Lord.  Mark,  here  is  the  justice 
of  God,  and  the  justice  of  Jesus  our  Lord ;  and  we 
have  our  faith  from  the  justice  of  God,  because  of 
the  righteousness  of  Jesus  our  Lord ;  that  is,  Jesus 
answered  with  works  of  justice  the  demands  of 
justice  ;  and  therefore,  in  a  way  of  justice,  grace 
reigns,  and  comes  to  us  like  a  river,  as  is  signified, 
for  that  it  is  said  to  come  to  us  out  of  the  throne. 

Again,  grace  is  said  '  to  reign  through  right- 
eousness unto  eternal  life.'  Ro.  v.  21.  Through  what 
righteousness?  the  righteousness  or  justice  of  God 
by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  By  Jesus  Christ,  or  for 
his  sake.  For  for  his  sake,  as  I  said,  we  are  for- 
given ;  and  for  his  sake  have  all  things  pertaining 
to  life  and  godliness.  Which  all  things  come  to  us, 
through,  or  down,  the  stream  of  this  river  in  a  way 
of  justice;  and,  therefore,  it  is  said  to  come  from 
the  throne. 

Eighth.  This  throne  is  the  seat  of  grace  and 
mercy  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  called  the  mercy-seat 
and  throne  of  grace.  This  throne  turns  all  into 
grace,  all  into  mercy.  This  throne  makes  all 
things  work  together  for  good.  It  is  said  of  Saul's 
sons,  they  were  not  buried  after  they  were  hanged, 
until  water  dropped  upon  them  out  of  heaven. 
2  Sa.  xxi.  io,  14.  And  it  may  be  said  of  us  there  is 
nothing  suffered  to  come  near  us,  until  it  is  washed 
in  that  water  that  proceeds  from  the  throne  of 
grace.  Hence  afflictions  flow  from  grace,  Ps.cxLx.67; 
persecutions  flow  from  grace;  poverty,  sickness, 
yea,  death  itself  is  now  made  ours  by  the  grace  of 

God  through  Christ.  1  Co.  iii.  22;  Re.  iii.  19;  He.  xii.  5— 7. 
0  grace,  0  happy  church  of  God !  all  things  that 
happen  to  thee  are,  for  Christ's  sake,  turned  into 
grace.     They  talk  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  and 


THE  WATER   OF  LIFE. 


how,  if  one  had  it,  it  would  turn  all  things  into 
gold.  0 !  hut  can  it  turn  all  things  into  grace  ? 
can  it  make  all  things  work  together  for  good  ? 
No,  no,  this  quality,  virtue,  excellency,  what  shall 
I  call  it,  nothing  has  in  it,  hut  the  grace  that 
reigns  on  the  throne  of  grace,  the  river  that  pro- 
ceeds from  the  throne  of  God.  This,  this  turns 
majesty,  authority,  the  highest  authority,  glory, 
wisdom,  faithfulness,  justice,  and  all  into  grace. 
Here  is  a  throne  !  God  let  us  see  it.  John  had 
the  honour  to  see  it,  and  to  sec  the  streams  pro- 
ceeding from  it.  0  sweet  sight !  0  heart-ravish- 
ing sight!  '  He  showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water 
of  life  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God.' 

Indeed,  as  was  hinted  hefore,  in  the  days  of  the 
reign  of  Antichrist  there  are  not  those  visions  of 
this  throne,  nor  of  the  river  that  proceedeth  there- 
from. Now  he  holdeth  hack  the  face  of  his  throne, 
and  spreadeth  a  cloud  upon  it ;  hut  the  preserving, 
saving  benefits  thereof  we  have,  as  also  have  all 
the  saints,  in  the  most  cloudy  and  dark  day.  And 
since  we  can  see  so  little,  we  must  believe  the 
more ;  and  by  believing,  give  glory  to  God.  We 
must  also  labour  for  more  clear  Scripture  know- 
ledge of  this  throne  ;  for  the  holy  Word  of  God  is 
the  perspective  glass  by  which  we  may,  and  the 
magnifying  glass  that  will  cause  us  to  behold, 
'  with  open  face,  the  glory  of  the  Lord.'  2  Co.  m.  is. 

But,  methinks,  I  have  yet  said  nothing  of  this 
throne,  which  is  indeed  none  other  but  the  spot- 
less and  glorified  humanity  of  the  Son  of  God. 
This  throne  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  this  grace  comes 
from  the  Divine  Majesty,  as  dwelling  bodily  in  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Wherefore  let  us  fall  down  before 
the  throne,  and  cast  our  crowns  at  the  foot  of  the 
throne,  and  give  thanks  to  him  that  sits  upon  the 
throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.  0 
how  should  Jesus  be  esteemed  of !  The  throne  of 
the  king  is  a  royal  seat :  it  is  said  of  Solomon's, 
'there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  kingdom.' 
l  Ki.  x.  20.  But  of  this  it  may  be  said  there  is  not 
its  like  in  heaven  and  earth.  At  the  setting  up 
of  this  throne,  the  angels  flocked  round  about  it, 
and  the  beasts  and  the  elders  gathered  together  to 
see  it.  Re.  iv.  When  this  throne  was  set  in  heaven, 
there  was  silence,  all  the  heavenly  host  had  no 
leisure  to  talk  ;  they  were  surprised  with  sight  and 
wonder.  When  this  throne  was  set  in  heaven, 
what  talk  there  was !  it  was  as  the  music  of  the 
trumpet.1 

'  And  behold,'  says  John,  '  a  door  was  opened 


1  The  solemn  silence,  and  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  took 
place  in  quick  succession  when  the  medium  of  prayer  and 
praise,  from  fallen  man,  was  first  exhibited  in  heaven.  Wheu 
Christ  was  revealed  to  John,  as  the  throne  upou  which  God 
received  the  prayers  of  all  his  saints,  awe,  and  wonder,  and 
silence,  was  felt  in  heaven  for  the  space  of  half  an  hour ;  then 
came  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  with  dire  events  to  those  who 
had  refused  to  pray  in  the  name  of  Christ. — (Ed.) 


in  heaven ;  and  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  was, 
as  it  were,  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  me,  which 
said,  Come  up  hither,  and  I  will  show  thee  things 
which  must  be  hereafter.  And  immediately  I  was 
in  the  Spirit,  and  behold  a  throne  was  set  in 
heaven,  and  one  sat  upon  the  throne.' 

This  throne  was  Jesus  Christ  exalted,  set,  that 
is,  lifted  up,  not  as  upon  the  cross  to  the  contempt 
and  scorn  of  his  person,  but,  as  I  said,  to  the 
wonderment  of  the  four  beasts,  and  the  elders,  and 
all  the  angels  in  heaven.  '  A  throne  was  set  in 
heaven,  and  one  sat  upon  the  throne  ;'  that  is,  God. 
And  this  intimates  his  desirable  rest  for  ever :  for 
to  sit  is  to  rest,  and  Christ  is  his  rest  for  ever. 
Was  it  not,  therefore,  well  worth  the  seeing  ? 
Yea,  if  John  had  taken  the  pains  to  go  up  thither 
upon  his  hands  and  knees,  I  say,  to  see  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  a  throne  set  in  heaven,  and  the  glory  of 
God  resting  and  abiding  upon  him,  and  giving  out 
by  him  all  things,  not  only  his  Word,  but  all  his 
dispensations  and  providences,  to  the  end  of  the 
world;  and  this  blessed  thing  among  the  rest, 
even  'a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,' 
[how  richly  would  he  have  been  rewarded  for  his 
pains.] 

[the  nature  and  quality  of  this  water.] 

[FOURTH.]  But  I  leave  this,  and  proceed  to 
the  fourth  and  last  thing,  namely,  to  the  nature 
and  quality  of  this  water.  It  is  said  to  be  pure 
and  clear ;  pure  and  clear  as  crystal.  '  And  he 
showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as 
crystal.'  I  know  that  there  is  a  two-fold  quality 
in  a  thing,  one  with  respect  to  its  nature,  and  the 
other  with  respect  to  its  operation.  The  first  of 
these  is  inherent,  and  remaineth  in  the  subject 
being  as  such,  and  so  for  the  most  part  useless. 
The  other  is  put  forth  then  when  it  meeteth  with 
fit  matter  on  which  it  may  freely  work.  As  to 
instance  aqux  vital,  the  very  metaphor  here  made 
use  of,  hath  a  quality  inherent  in  it,  but  keep  it 
stopped  up  in  a  bottle,  and  then  who  will  may  faint 
notwithstanding ;  but  apply  it,  apply  it  fitly,  and 
to  such  as  have  need  thereof,  and  then  you  may 
see  its  quality  by  the  operation.  This  water,  or 
river  of  grace,  is  called,  I  say,  the  water  of  life, 
and  so,  consequently,  has  a  most  blessed  inherent 
quality ;  but  its  operation  is  seen  by  its  working, 
the  which  it  doth  only  then  when  it  is  administered 
and  received  for  those  ends  for  which  it  is  adminis- 
tered. For  then  it  revives  where  life  is,  and  gives 
life  where  it  is  not.  And  thus  far,  in  the  general, 
have  we  spoken  to  it  already.  We  will,  therefore, 
in  this  place  more  particularly,  though  briefly, 
speak  a  few  words  unto  it. 

[T/ie  operative  quality  of  this  -water. 1 
First.  Then  this  water  of  life  is  the  very  ground- 


552 


THE   WATER   OF  LIFE. 


work  of  life  in  us,  though  not  the  groundwork  of  life 
for  us.  The  groundwork  of  life  for  us  is  the  passion 
and  merits  of  Christ,  this  is  that  for  the  sake  of 
which  grace  is  given  unto  us,  as  it  is  intimated  by 
the  text;  it  proceeds  from  the  throne  of  God,  who 
is  Christ.  Christ  then  having  ohtained  grace  for 
us,  must  needs  he  precedent,  as  to  his  merit,  to 
that  grace  he  hath  so  obtained.  Besides,  it  is  clear 
that  the  Spirit  and  grace  come  from  God  through 
him  ;  therefore,  as  to  the  communications  of  grace 
to  us,  it  is  the  fruit  of  his  merit  and  purchase. 
But,  I  say,  in  us  grace  is  the  groundwork  of  life ; 
for  though  we  may  he  said  before  to  live  virtually 
in  the  person  of  Christ  before  God,  yet  we  are 
dead  in  ourselves,  and  so  must  be  until  the  Spirit 
be  poured  upon  us  from  on  high ;  for  the  Spirit  is 
life,  and  its  graces  are  life,  and  when  that  is  infused 
by  God  from  the  throne,  then  we  live,  and  not  till 
then.  And  hence  it  is  called,  as  before,  living 
water,  the  water  of  life  springing  up  in  us  to  ever- 
lasting life.  The  Spirit,  then,  and  graces  of  the 
Spirit,  which  is  the  river  here  spoken  of,  is  that, 
and  that  only,  which  can  cause  us  to  live ;  that 
being  life  to  the  soul,  as  the  soul  is  life  to  the  body. 
All  men,  therefore,  as  was  said  before,  though 
elect,  though  purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
are  dead,  and  must  be  dead,  until  the  Spirit  of  life 
from  God  and  his  throne  shall  enter  into  them  ; 
until  they  shall  drink  it  in  by  vehement  thirst,  as 
the  parched  ground  drinks  in  the  rain.1 

Now  when  this  living  water  is  received,  it  takes 
up  its  seat  in  the  heart,  whence  it  spreads  itself 
to  the  awakening  of  all  the  powers  of  the  soul. 
For,  as  in  the  first  creation,  the  Spirit  of  God 
moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters,  in  order  to 
putting  of  that  creature  into  that  excellent  fashion 
and  harmony  which  now  we  behold  with  our  eyes; 
even  so  the  new  creation,  to  wit,  the  making  of  us 
new  to  God,  is  done  by  the  overspreading  of  the 
same  Spirit  also.  For  the  Spirit,  as  I  may  so  say, 
sittcth  and  broodelh  upon  the  powers  of  the  soul, 
as  the  hen  doth  on  cold  eggs,  till  they  wax  warm 
and  receive  life.  The  Spirit,  then,  warmeth  us, 
and  bringcth  the  dead  and  benumbed  soul— for  so 
it  is  before  conversion— to  a  godly  sense  and  un- 
derstanding of  states,  of  states  both  natural  and 
spiritual ;  and  this  is  the  beginning  of  the  work  of 


J  Thus  the  Spirit  of  God  in  regeneration  produces  li  'htout 
of  darkness,  makes  the  barren  heart  fruitful,  and  from  con- 
iusiou,  discord,  and  enmity,  brings  order,  harmony,  and  tran- 
quillity. The  renewed  man  is  actuated  by  new  hopes  and  fears  • 
Igment  is  enlightened,  his  will  rectified,  and  his  heart 
transformed;  his  eyes  being  divinely  opened  he  sees  into  eter- 
nity; he  has  a  hope  full  of  immortality  ;  spiritual  appetites 
are  excited  in  his  soul;  his  affections  are  raised  to  God  and 
heaven  ;  his  soul  thirstcth  for  God,  for  the  living  God !  Thus 
the  Spirit  giveth  life  to  the  dead,  eyes  to  the  Wind,  speech  to 
the  dumb,  feet  to  the  lame,  and  the  hand  of  faith  to  lay  hold 
011  Christ  for  complete  salvation. — (Mason.) 


the  Spirit,  by  which  the  soul  is  made  capable  of 
understanding  what  God  and  himself  is. 

And  this  drinking  in  of  the  Spirit  is  rather  as 
the  ground  drinks  in  rain,  than  as  a  rational  soul 
does  through  sense  of  the  want  thereof. 

The  Spirit  also  garnisheth  the  soul  with  such 
things  as  are  proper  for  it,  to  the  making  of  it 
live  that  life  that  by  the  Word  of  God  is  called  for. 

It  implanteth  light,  repentance,  faith,  fear,  love, 
desires  after  God,  hope,  sincerity,  and  Avhat  else 
is. necessary  for  the  making  the  man  a  saint;  these 
things,  I  say,  are  the  fruits  and  effects  of  this 
Spirit  which,  as  a  river  of  water  of  life,  proceedeth 
forth  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 
Hence  the  Spirit  is  called  the  Spirit  of  faith,  the 
Spirit  of  love,  and  the  Spirit  of  a  sound  mind ;  for 
that  the  Spirit  is  the  root  and  original  of  all  these 
things,  by  his  operations  in,  and  upon,  the  face  of 

the  SOul.  2  Co.  iv.  13.  Ga.  v.  22.  2  Ti.  i.  7. 

But,  again,  as  this  living  water,  this  Spirit  and 
the  grace  thereof,  doth  thus,  so  it  also  maintains 
these  things  once  planted  in  the  soul,  by  its  con- 
tinual waterings  of  them  in  the  soul.  Hence  he 
saith,  •  I  will  water  it  every  moment;'  water  it — 
his  vineyard,  the  soul  of  the  church,  the  graces  of 
the  church ;  and  so  the  soul  and  graces  of  every 
godly  man.  is.  ncvii.  3. 

And  because  it  so  happeneth  sometimes,  that 
some  of  those  things  wherewith  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  beautified  the  soul  may  languish  to  a  being, 
if  not  quite  dead,  yet  '  ready  to  die,'  lie.  m.  2,  there- 
fore he  doth  not  only  refresh  and  water  our  souls, 
but  renews  the  face  thereof,  by  either  quickening 
to  life  that  which  remains,  or  by  supplying  of  us 
with  that  which  is  new,  to  our  godly  perseverance 
and  everlasting  life.  Thus  '  thou  visitest  the  earth, 
and  waterest  it ;  thou  greatly  enrichest  it  with  the 
river  of  God.'  Ps.  lxv.  9. 

For  this  must  be  remembered,  that  as  the  herb 
that  is  planted,  or  seed  sown,  needs  watering  with 
continual  showers  of  the  mountains,  so  our  graces, 
implanted  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  grace,  must  also 
be  watered  by  the  rain  of  heaven.  '  Thou  waterest 
the  ridges  thereof  abundantly:  thou  settlest  the 
furrows  thereof:  thou  makestit  soft  with  showers: 
thou  blessest  the  springing  thereof.'  Ps.  lxv.  10. 
Hence  he  says  that  our  graces  shall  grow.     But 


I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel :  he  shall 


grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth  his  roots  as  Leb- 
anon. His  branches  shall  spread,  and  his  beauty 
shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell  as  Leb- 
anon. They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall 
return ;  they  shall  revive  as  the  corn,  and  grow  as 
the  vine :  the  scent  thereof  shall  be  as  the  wine  of 
Lebanon.'  Ho.  xiv.  5-7.  Or,  as  he  saith  in  another 
place,  *  The  Lord  shall  guide  thee  continually,  and 
satisfy  thy  soul  in  drought,  and  make  fat  thy 
bones :    and  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  garden, 


THE   WATER   OF   LIFE. 


553 


and  like  a  spring  of  water,  whose  waters  fail  not.' 

is.  lviii.  11. 

There  is,  besides  this,  another  blessing  that 
conies  to  us  by  this  living  water,  and  that  is,  the 
blessing  of  communion.  All  the  warmth  that  we 
have  in  our  communion,  it  is  the  warmth  of  the 
Spirit:  when  a  company  of  saints  are  gathered 
together  in  the  name  of  Christ,  to  perform  any  spir- 
itual exercise,  and  their  souls  be  edified,  warmed, 
and  made  glad  therein,  it  is  because  this  water, 
this  river  of  water  of  life,  has,  in  some  of  the  streams 
thereof,  run  into  that  assembly.  Je.  xxxi.  12,  id.  Then 
are  Christians  like  those  that  drink  wine  in  bowls, 
merry  and  glad;  for  that  they  have  drank  into  tho 
Spirit,  and  had  their  souls  refreshed  with  the  sweet 
gales  and  strong  wine  thereof.  This  is  the  feast 
that  Isaiah  speaks  of,  when  he  saith,  'In  this  moun- 
tain shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  make  unto  all  people 
a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees, 
of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees 
well  refined.'  is.  xxv.  g.  This  is  called  in  another 
place,  'the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.'  2  Co. 
xiii.  14.  Now  he  warmeth  spirits,  uniteth  spirits,  en- 
lighteneth  spirits ;  revives,  cherisheth,  quickeneth, 
strengtheneth  graces ;  renews  assurances,  brings 
old  comforts  to  mind,  weakens  lusts,  emboldeneth 
and  raiseth  a  spirit  of  faith,  of  love,  of  hope,  of 
prayer,  and  makes  the  Word  a  blessing,  conference 
a  blessing,  meditation  a  blessing,  and  duty  very 
delightful  to  the  sold.  Without  this  water  of  life, 
communion  is  weak,  flat,  cold,  dead,  fruitless,  life- 
less; there  is  nothing  seen,  felt,  heard,  or  under- 
stood in  a  spiritual  and  heart-quickening  way. 
Now  ordinances  are  burdensome,  sins  strong,  faith 
weak,  hearts  hard,  and  the  faces  of  our  souls  dry, 
like  the  dry  and  parched  ground. 

This  drink  also  revives  us  when  tempted,  when 
sick,  when  persecuted,  when  in  the  dark,  and  when 
we  faint  for  thirst.  The  life  of  religion  is  this 
water  of  life:  where  that  runs,  where  that  is  re- 
ceived, and  where  things  are  done  in  this  spirit, 
there  all  things  are  well ;  the  church  thrifty,  the 
soul  thrifty,  graces  thrifty,  and  all  is  well.  And 
this  hint  1  thought  convenient  to  be  given  of  this 
precious  water  of  life,  that  is,  with  reference  to  the 
operative  quality  of  it. 

[T/ie  other  qualities  of  this  icater.] 

Second.  I  shall  come,  in  the  next  place,  to  speak 
of  it,  as  to  the  other  descriptions  which  John  doth 
give  us  of  it.  He  says  it  is,  First,  pure ;  Second, 
clear;  Third,  clear  to  a  comparison:  'And  ho 
showed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as 
crystal.' 

[First.  The  purity  of  this  water.] 

1.  You  read  here  that  this  water  of  life  is  pure, 
that  is,  alone  without  mixture,  for  so  sometimes 
that  word  pure  is  to  be  understood.     As  where  it 

VOL.  III. 


saith,  pure,  'pure  olive  oil.'  Ex.  xxvii.  20.  'Pure 
frankincense.'  Ex.xxx.34.  '  Pure  gold.'  Ex.  xxv.  11, 17. 
'  Pure  blood  of  the  grape,'  De.  xxxii.  u;  and  the  like. 
So  then,  when  he  saith,  *  he  showed  me  a  pure 
river  of  water  of  life,'  it  is  as  if  he  had  said  he 
showed  me  a  river  of  water  that  was  all  living,  all 
life,  and  had  nothing  in  it  but  life.  There  was  no 
death,  or  deadness,  or  flatness  in  it;  or,  as  he 
saith  a  little  after,  '  and  there  shall  be  no  more 
curse.'  A  pure  river.  There  is  not  so  much  as  a 
grudge,  or  a  piece  of  an  upbraiding  speech  found 
therein.  There  is  in  it  nothing  but  heart,  nothing 
but  love,  nothing  but  grace,  nothing  but  life. 
'  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repent- 
ance.'   Ko.  xi.  23. 

2.  Pure  is  sometimes  set  in  opposition  to  show 
or  appearance ;  as  where  he  says,  '  the  stars  aro 
not  pure.'  Job  xxv.  5.  That  is,  not  so  without  mix- 
ture of  darkness,  as  they  seem  to  be :  so  again, 
'  If  thou  wcrt  pure  and  upright,'  Jobviii.  6:  that  is, 
as  thou  seemest  to  be,  or  as  thou  wouldst  have  us 
believe  thou  art. 

Now,  take  pure  in  this  3ense  here,  and  then  the 
meaning  is,  it  is  grace  without  deceit,  without  guile; 
its  show  and  its  substance  are  the  same ;  it  has 
nothing  but  substance  in  it ;  it  is  indeed  what  it 
seems  to  be  in  bulk  ;  it  is  a  river  in  show  and  a 
river  indeed.  It  comes  from  God  and  from  his 
throne  in  appearance,  and  really  it  comes  from  his 
very  heart. 

The  great  fear  of  the  tempted  is,  that  there  is 
not  so  much  grace  in  God,  and  that  he  is  not  so 
free  of  it  as  some  scriptures  seem  to  import.  But 
this  word  pure  is  levelled  against  such  objections 
and  objectors,  for  the  destroying  of  their  doubts, 
and  the  relieving  of  their  souls.  There  is  no  fraud, 
nor  guile,  nor  fable  in  the  business ;  for  though 
God  is  pleased  to  present  us  witli  his  grace  under 
the  notion  of  a  river,  it  is  not  to  delude  our  fancies 
thereby ;  but  to  give  us  some  small  illustration  of 
the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace,  which  as  far,  for 
quantity,  outstrips  the  biggest  rivers,  as  the  most 
mighty  mountain  doth  the  least  ant's  egg  or  atom 
in  the  world. 

3.  But,  again,  this  word  pure  is  set  in  opposition 
to  that  which  is  hurtful  and  destructive :  '  I  am 
pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men,'  that  is,  I  have 
hurt  nobody.  Ac.  xx.  26.  *  The  wisdom  that  is  from 
above  is  first  pure,' it  is  not  hurtful.  Ja.  m.  17.  Do 
you  count  them  pure  with  the  wicked  balances  ? 
how  can  that  be,  since  they  are  hurtful  ?  Mi.  vi  11. 

Now  take  pure  in  this  sense  here,  and  then  it 
intimates,  that  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  doctrine 
of  grace,  is  uot  a  hurtful  thing.  It  is  not  as  wine 
of  an  intoxicating  nature.  If  a  man  be  filled  with 
it,  it  will  do  him  no  harm.  Ep.  v.  is.  The  best  of 
the  things  that  are  of  this  world  are  some  way 
hurtful.  Honey  is  hurtful,  rr.  xxv.  16,  27.  Wine  is 
'  70 


534. 


THE  WATER  OF  LIFE. 


hurtful.  Pr.  xx.  i.  Silver  and  gold  are  hurtful,  but 
•  ••race  is  not  hurtful.  1  Tim.  vi.  10.  Never  did  man 
yet  catch  harm  by  the  enjoyment  and  fulness  of 
the  grace  of  God.  There  is  no  fear  of  excess  or  of 
surfeiting  here.  Grace  makes  no  man  proud,  no 
man  wanton,  no  man  haughty,  no  man  careless  or 
negligent  as  to  his  dut}r  that  is  incumbent  upon 
him,  either  from  God  or  man :  no,  grace  keeps  a 
man  low  in  his  own  eyes,  humble,  self-denying, 
penitent,  watchful,  savoury  in  good  things,  charit- 
able, and  makes  him  kindly  affectionated  to  the 
brethren,  pitiful  and  courteous  to  all  men. 

True,  there  are  men  in  the  world  that  abuse  the 
grace  of  God,  as  some  are  said  to  turn  it  into  wan- 
tonness and  iuto  lasciviousncss.  Jude  4.  But  this  is, 
not  because  grace  has  any  such  tendency,  or  for 
that  it  worketh  any  such  effect ;  but  because  such 
men  are  themselves  empty  of  grace,  and  have  only 
done  as  death  and  hell  hath  done  with  wisdom, 
'heard  the  fame  thereof  with  their  ears. '  Job  xxvui.  22. 
It  is  a  dangerous  thing  for  a  man  to  have  the  no- 
tions of  grace,  while  his  heart  is  void  of  the  spirit 
and  holy  principles  of  grace ;  for  such  a  man  can 
do  no  other  than  abuse  the  grace  of  God.  Alas, 
what  can  be  expected  of  him  that  has  nothing  in 
him  to  teach  him  to  manage  that  knowledge  of 
grace  which  he  has,  but  his  flesh,  his  lusts,  and 
lustful  passions  ?  Can  these  teach  him  to  manage 
his  knowledge  well  ?  Will  they  not  rather  put 
him  upon  all  tricks,  evasions,  irreligious  conse- 
quences and  conclusions,  such  as  will  serve  to 
cherish  sin?  What  Judas  did  with  Christ,  that  a 
graceless  man  will  do  with  grace,  even  make  it  a 
stalking  horse  to  his  fleshly  and  vile  designs ;  and 
rather  than  fail  betray  both  it,  and  the  profession 
of  it,  to  the  greatest  enemies  it  has  in  the  world. 

And  here  I  may  say,  though  grace  is  pure,  and 
not  hurtful  at  all,  yet  one  altogether  carnal,  sinful, 
and  graceless,  having  to  do  with  the  doctrine  of  it, 
by  the  force  of  his  lusts  which  tamper  with  it,  he 
will  unavoidably  bring  himself  into  the  highest 
ruin  thereby.  An  unwary  man  may  destroy  him- 
self by  the  best  of  things,  not  because  there  is  in 
such  things  an  aptness  to  destroy,  but  because  of 
the  abuse  and  misuse  of  them.  Some  know  the 
way  of  life,  the  water  of  life,  by  knowledge  that  is 
naked  and  speculative  only ;  and  it  had  been  better 
for  such  if  they  had  not  known,  than  to  know  and 
turn  from  what  they  know;  than  to  know,  and 
make  that  knowledge  subservient  to  their  lusts. 
2  Pe.  ii.  20-22.  Some  receive  the  rain  of  God,  and  the 
droppings  of  his  clouds,  because  they  continually 
sit  under  the  means  of  his  grace.  But,  alas !  they 
receive  it  as  stones  receive  showers,  or  as  dung- 
hills receive  the  rain ;  they  either  abide  as  hard 
stones  still,  or  else  return  nothing  to  heaven  for  his 
mercy,  but  as  the  dunghills  do,  a  company  of  stink- 
ing fumes.     These  are  they  that  drink  in  the  rain 


that  comes  often  upon  them,  and  that  instead  of 
bringing  forth  herbs  meet  for  the  dresser,  bring 
forth  briers  and  thorns ;  and  these  are  they  who 
are  nigh  unto  cursing,  whose  end  is  to  be  burned. 
He.  vi.  7,  s. 

By  this  word  pure  I  understand  sometimes  the 
chiefest  good,  the  highest  good.  There  are  many 
things  that  may  be  called  good,  but  none  of  them 
are  good  as  grace  is  good.  All  things  indeed  are 
pure,  that  is,  all  creatures  in  themselves  are  good 
arid  serviceable  to  man,  but  they  are  not  so  good 
as  grace,  ao.  xiv.  20.  Ge.  i.  31.  '  There  is  a  generation 
that  are  pure,'  that  are  good  in  their  own  eyes. 
Pr.  xxx.  12.  There  are  good  men,  good  consciences, 
good  works,  good  days,  good  angels,  <fcc,  but  none 
so  good  as  grace,  for  it  is  grace  that  has  made  them 
so.  Grace,  this  water  of  life,  therefore  is  good, 
superlatively  good,  good  in  the  highest  degree,  for 
that  it  makes  all  things  good,  aud  preserveth  them 
good.  And  whatever  it  be  that  this  water  of  life 
washeth  not,  it  is  soil,  and  given  to  the  curse,  as 
the  prophet  intimates  where  he  saith,  '  But  the 
miry  2Haces  thereof,  and  the  marshes  thereof, 
shall  not  be  healed;  they  shall  be  given  to  salt.' 

Eze.  xlvii.  ]. 

But  who  understands  this,  who  believes  it  ?  Its 
goodness  is  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air. 
Men,  most  men,  are  ignorant  of  the  goodness  of  it, 
nor  do  they  care  to  inquire  after  the  enjoyment  of 
this  pure,  this  good  water  of  life.  The  reason  is, 
because  though  it  is  good  in  itself,  good  in  the 
highest  degree,  and  that  which  makes  all  things 
good,  yet  it  is  not  such  a  good  as  is  suited  to  a 
carnal  appetite.  There  is  good ;  and  there  is  suit- 
able good.  Nov/  suitable  good  is  of  two  sorts  : 
either  such  as  is  spiritual,  or  such  as  is  temporal. 
That  which  is  spiritual,  is  desired  only  of  them 
that  are  spiritual ;  for  temporal  good  will  satisfy  a 
carnal  mind.  Now  grace  is  a  spiritual  good ;  this 
river  of  grace  is  the  goodness  of  spiritual  good.  It 
is  the  original  life  of  all  the  grace  in  our  souls. 
No  marvel,  then,  if  it  be  so  little  set  by  of  those 
that  are  carnally  minded.  They  will  serve  a  horse, 
and  mire  will  serve  a  sow ;  so  things  of  this  life 
suit  best  with  the  men  of  this  world  ;  for  their 
appetite  is  gross  and  carnal,  and  they  savour  not 
the  things  that  be  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  '  The 
natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,'  the  things  that  be  of  this  river  of  God; 
'  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him :  neither  can  he 
know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned.' 
1  Co.  ii.  14.  This  is  the  river  of  oil  which  the  pro- 
phet speaks  of,  the  river  of  spirit.  Were  it  a 
river  of  gold  and  silver,  there  would  be  old  fishing 
on  the  banks  thereof.  But  it  is  a  river  that  runs 
'like  oil,  saith  the  Lord  God.'  Eze. xxxii. u.  This 
rock  pours  us  out  'rivers  of  oil,'  Jobxxix.  6 — 'fresh 
oil,'  Ps.  xcii.10 — 'soft  oil,'  Ps.lv.  21 — 'the  oil  of  joy,' 


THE   WATER   OF  LIFE. 


555 


ls.ixi.3 — '  the  oil  of  gladness,'  rs.  xlv.  7 — oil  to  anoint 
the  head  withal,  Ec.  ix.  8 — oil  to  make  the  face  to 
shine,  Ps.  civ.  is — oil  hy  which  thou  wilt  he  made 
able  to  honour  both  God  and  man  in  some  good 
measure  as  becomes  thee.  Ju.  be  9. 

I  might  have  enlarged  upon  this  head,  and  have 
showed  you  many  more  particulars  wherein  this 
term  of  pure  might  serve  for  the  better  setting 
f'ortli  of  the  excelleucy  of  this  water  of  life,  but  I 
shall  proceed  no  further  upon  this,  but  will  come  to 
that  which  remains. 

[Second.  Tlic  clearness  of  this  water  of  life] 
As  this  river  of  water  of  life  is  said  to  be  pure, 
so  it  is  said  to  be  clear.  '  lie  shewed  me  a  pure 
river  of  water  of  life,  clear.'  This  term  has  also 
its  particular  signification,  and,  therefore,  ought  to 
be  heeded. 

1.  Clear  is  set  in  opposition  to  dark;  therefore 
some  are  said  to  be  '  clear  as  the  sun. '  Ca.  vL  10.  And 
again,  '  the  light  shall  not  be  clear  nor  dark.'  Zeo. 
xiv.6.  In  both  these  places,  clear  is  to  be  taken  for 
light,  daylight,  sunlight ;  for,  indeed,  it  is  never 
day  nor  sunshine  with  the  soul,  until  the  streams  of 
this  river  of  water  of  life  come  gliding  to  our  doors, 
into  our  houses,  into  our  hearts.  Hence  the  be- 
ginning of  conversion  is  called  illumination.  He.  x.32. 
Yea,  the  coming  of  this  river  of  water  of  life  unto 
us  is  called  the  day-spring  from  on  high,  through  the 
tender  mercy  of  our  God.  Lu.i.78.  It  is  also  called 
the  dawning  of  the  day.  2  Pc.  i.  19.  And  hence, 
agaiu,  these  men  unto  whom  this  river  of  water  of 
life  comes  not,  are  said  to  be  dark,  darkness.  '  Ye 
were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in 
the  Lord.'  Ep. v.8.  Wherefore,  this  water  is  like 
Jonathan's  honey  ;  it  hath  a  faculty  to  open  the 
eyes,  to  make  them  that  sit  in  darkness  see  a  great 
light,  isa.  xiv.  27.  Mat.  iv.is.  The  light  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  faith  of  Jesus 
Christ  ;  '  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine 
out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts  to  give 
the  light;'  the  Spirit  that  enlighteneth  and  giveth 
the  light,  '  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.'  2  Co.  iv.  6.  This  river 
casteth  beams  where  it  goes,  like  the  beams  of  the 
sun  ;  it  shines,  it  casts  out  rays  of  glory  unto  those 
that  drink  thereof.  The  streams  of  this  grace  were 
they  that  overtook  Saul  when  he  was  going  to  Da- 
mascus ;  they  were  the  waters  of  this  flood  that 
compassed  him  round  about.  And  if  you  will  be- 
lieve him,  he  saith  this  light  from  heaven  was  a 
great  light,  a  light  above  the  brightness  of  the 
sun,  a  light  that  did  by  the  glory  of  it  make  dark 
to  him  all  the  things  in  the  world.  Ac.  ix.  8;  nriL  S; 
xxri.  13. 

2.  Clear  is  set  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  not 
pleasing.  For  to  be  clear  is  to  be  pleasant.  Hence 
it  is  said,  '  truly  the  light  is  sweet,  and  a  pleasant 
thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun.'    Ec  a  7. 


I  read  of  rivers  that  looked  red  as  blood,  that 
stank  like  the  blood  of  a  dead  man,  but  this  is  no 
such  river.  Ex.  vii.  19, 20.  2  Ki.  ;:i.  22,  as.  I  read  of 
rivers  whose  streams  are  like  streams  of  brim- 
stone, fiery  streams,  streams  of  burning  pitch,  but 
this  is  none  of  them.  is.  xxx.  27— 33.  Pa.  vii.  9— 11.  is. 
xxxiv.  9.  '  There  is  a  river '  besides  all  these,  clear 
and  pleasant,  •  the  streams  whereof  shall  make 
glad  the  city  of  God.'  Ps.xlri.4 

There  are  the  waters  that  the  doves  love  to  sit 
by,  because  by  the  clearness  of  these  streams  they 
can  see  their  pretty  selves,  as  in  a  glass.  Ca.  v.  12. 

These  are  the  streams  where  the  doves  wash 
their  eyes,  and  by  which  they  solace  themselves, 
and  take  great  content.  These  streams  are  in- 
stead, as  I  said,  of  a  looking-glass  ;  their  clear- 
ness presents  us  with  an  opportunity  of  seeing  our 
own  features.  As  in  fair  waters  a  man  may  see 
the  body  of  the  sun,  and  of  the  moon,  and  of  the 
stars,  and  the  very  body  of  heaven  ;  so  he  that 
stands  upon  the  bank  of  this  river,  and  that 
washeth  his  eyes  with  this  water,  may  see  the  Son 
of  God,  the  stars  of  God,  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
habitation  that  God  has  prepared  for  his  people. 
And  are  not  these  pleasant  sights?  is  not  this  ex- 
cellent water?  has  not  this  river  pleasant  streams? 

3.  Clear  is  set  in  opposition  to  dirty  water  and 
muddiness.  I  read  of  some  waters  that  are  fouled 
with  the  feet  of  beasts,  and  with  the  feet  of  men, 
yea,  and  deep  waters  too.  Yea,  saith  God  to 
some,  ye  'have  drunk  of  the  deep  waters,'  and 
have  fouled  '  the  residue  with  your  feet ;'  and 
again,  '  As  for  my  flock,  they  eat  that  which  ye 
have  trodden  with  your  feet,  and  they  drink  that 
which  ye  have  fouled  with  your  feet.'  Eze.  xxxiv.  is,  19. 
These  waters  are  doctrines  contained  in  the  text, 
muddied  and  dirtied  by  the  false  glosses  and  slut- 
tish opinions  of  erroneous  judgments,  of  which  the 
poor  sheep  have  been  made  to  drink.  And,  verily, 
this  is  apparent  enough  by  the  very  colour  and 
hue  of  those  poor  souls ;  for  though  the  truth  of 
God  was  in  them,  yet  the  very  stain  of  tradition 
and  superstition  might  be  also  seen  in  their  scales. 
For  as  the  fish  of  the  river  receive,  by  being  there, 
the  changeable  colours  of  the  waters,  so  profes- 
sors, what  doctrine  they  hear  and  drink,  do  look 
like  that.  If  their  doctrines  are  muddy,  their 
notions  are  muddy  ;  if  their  doctrines  are  bloody, 
their  notions  and  tempers  are  bloody:  but  if  their 
doctrines  are  clear,  so  are  their  notions,  for  their 
doctrine  has  given  them  a  clear  understanding  of 
things.1 


1  This  is  an  excellent  commentary  upon  that  part  of  the. 
Pilgrim's  Progress  which  describes  Christiana  and  her  com- 
pany at  the  foot  of  the  hill  Difficulty.  Grealueart  points  out 
the  spring  at  which.  Christian  was  refreshed  before  he  began 
the  arduous  ascent  which  led  him,  in  defiance  of  a  persecuting 
world,  to  join  in  church  fellowship,  allegorically  represented 
by  the  bouse  Beautiful — '  When  Christian  drank  it  was  clear 


550 


THE  WATER  OF  LIFE. 


Now,  here  we  have  a  river  of  water  of  life  that 
is  clear — clear  without  dirt  and  mud — clear  with- 
out the  human  inventions  and  muddy  conceptions 
of  unsanctified  and  uninstructed  judgments ;  yea, 
here  you  have  a  river  the  streams  whereof  lie 
open  to  all  in  the  church,  so  that  they  need  not 
those  instruments  of  conveyance  that  are  foul,  and 
that  use  to  make  water  stink,  if  they  receive  it  to 
bring  it  to  them  that  have  need. 

4.  By  clear  we  sometimes  understand  purga- 
tion ;  or  that  a  thing  has  purged  itself,  or  is  purged 
from  those  soils  and  imputations  of  evil  wherewith 
sometimes  they  have  been  charged.  '  Then  thou 
shalt  be  clear  from  this  my  oath ;'  or,  '  How  shall 
we  clear  ourselves  ? '  Ge.  xxiv.  s-14 ;  xiiv.  is.  Something 
of  this  sense  may  be  in  the  text ;  for  if  men  are 
not  afraid  to  charge  God  with  folly,  which  is  inti- 
mated by  '  that  thou  mightest  be  clear  when  thou 
judgest,'  Ps.  n.  4.  will  they,  think  you,  be  afraid  to 
impute  evil  to  his  Word,  and  grace,  and  Spirit? 
No,  verily;  they  are  bold  enough  at  this  work. 
Nay,  more  than  this,  even  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  men  have  cast  slanders  upon,  and  im- 
puted base  things  unto  the  blessed  grace  of  the 
gospel.  But  not  to  look  so  far  back.  Paul  was 
one  of  the  pipes  through  which  God  conveyed  this 
grace  to  the  world  ;  and  what  was  he  counted  for 
his  so  doing,  but  '  a  pestilent  fclloio,  and  a  mover 
of  sedition  -  throughout  the  world.'  Ac.  xxiv.  5,  6. 
But,  behold,  no  imputation  can  stick  on  the  grace 
of  God — not  stick  long ;  for  that,  like  honey,  will 
purge  itself  of  what  filth  is  put  upon  it,  and  of  all 
bad  imputations  of  evil  men's  springs,  and  rivers 
are  of  a  self-purging  quality,  Now,  here  we  have 
to  do  with  a  river — a  river  of  water  of  life  ;  but  a 
river  more  slandered  than  ever  did  Naaman  the 
Syrian  slander  the  waters  of  Israel  in  preferring 
those  of  Abana  and  Pharpar,  rivers  of  Damascus, 
beyond  them.  2  Ki.  v.  10-12.  But  behold  now,  at 
last,  when  all  the  world  have  done  what  they  can, 
and  cast  what  reproaches  and  slanders  upon  it 
they  are  able,  it  is  a  river  pure  and  clear.  It  has 
purged  itself  before  kings— it  has  purged  itself 
before  princes  and  judges,  and  all  the  Naamans  in 
the  world  ;  it  is  still  a  river — a  river  of  water  of 
life — a  river  of  water  of  life  clear. 

5.  By  clear  we  sometimes  understand  purity 
manifest,  or  innocency  and  goodness  made  known. 
'  In  all  things  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be 
clear  in  this  matter.'  2  Co.  yU.il.  That  is,  you 
have  made  it  appear,  and  stand  upon  your  justifi- 


and  good,  but  now  it  is  dirty ;  and  with  the  feet  of  some  that 
are  not  desirous  that  pilgrims  should  here  quench  their  thirst.' 
After  the  writing  of  the  first  part,  and  before  that  of  the 
second,  the  Act  of  Uniformity  had  spread  its  baleful  influence 
over  England.  To  use  Bunyan's  words — '  The  liomish  beasts 
have  corrupted  the  doctrine  by  treading  it  down  with  their 
feet,  and  have  muddied  this  water  with  their  own  dirt  and 
filthiaess.' — (See  Holy  City) — Ed. 


cation,  and  are  willing  to  be  searched  and  sounded 
to  the  bottom  by  those  that  have  a  desire  to  under- 
take that  work.  So  this  river  of  water  of  life  in 
the  fountain,  and  in  the  streams  thereof,  offer 
themselves  to  the  consideration  and  conscience  of 
all  men.  To  this  end  how  often  doth  God,  the 
head  of  this  river,  and  he  out  of  whose  throne  it 
proceeds,  call  upon  men  to  challenge  him,  if  they 
can,  with  any  evil  or  misdoing  towards  them,  either 
by  presence  or  doctrine;  hence  he  says,  '  Put  me 
in  remembrance;  let  us  plead  together;  declare 
thou,'  if  thou  canst,  'that  thou  mayest  be  justi- 
fied,' and  I  condemned,  is.  xiui.  26.  So  again: 
•  What  iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  me, 
that  they  are  gone  far  from  me,  and  have  walked 
after  vanity,  and  are  become  vain  ? '  Je.  a.  5.  So 
Christ:  'Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin?' 
Ju.viii.46.  And  'If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness 
of  the  evil.'  Jn.xviii. 23.  So  Paul:  We  'have  re- 
nounced the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty,  not  walk- 
ing in  craftiness,  nor  handling  the  Word  of  God 
deceitfully;  but  by  manifestation  of  the  truth 
commending  ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience 
in  the  sight  of  God.'  2  Co.  iv.  2.  All  these  sen- 
tences are  chiefly  to  be  applied  to  doctrine,  and  so 
are,  as  it  were,  an  offer  to  any,  if  they  can,  to 
find  a  speck,  or  a  spot,  or  a  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing  in  this  river  of  water  of  life. 

Some  men  fly  from  it  as  from  a  bear;  and  some 
are  afraid  to  drink  of  it,  for  fear  it  should  be  poison 
unto  them.  Some,  again,  dare  not  take  it  because 
it  is  not  mixed,  and  as  they,  poor  souls,  imagine, 
qualified  and  made  toothsome  by  a  little  of  that 
which  is  called  the  wisdom  of  this  world.  Thus 
one  shucks,1  another  shrinks,  and  another  will 
none  of  God.  Meanwhile,  whoso  shall  please  to 
look  into  this  river  shall  find  it  harmless  and  clear; 
yea,  offering  itself  to  the  consciences  of  all  men  to 
make  trial  if  it  be  not  the  only  chief  good,  the 
only  necessary  waters,  the  only  profitable,  for  the 
health  of  the  soul,  of  all  the  things  that  are  in 
the  world,  and  as  clear  of  mischief  as  is  the  sun 
of  spots. 

[Third. — This  river  is  clear  to  the  most  perfect 
comparison.] 

As  John  saw  this  river  pure  and  clear,  so  he 
saw  it  clear  to  a  comparison.  Clear  to  the  best  of 
comparisons,  clear  as  crystal.  Crystal  is  a  very 
clear  stone,  as  clear  as  the  clearest  glass,  if  not 
clearer ;  one  may  see  far  into  it,  yea,  through  it ; 
it  is  without  those  spots,  and  streaks,  and  smirches 
that  are  in  other  precious  stones.  Wherefore, 
when  he  saith  that  this  river  is  clear  as  crystal,  it- 
is  as  if  God  should  say,  Look,  sinners,  look  to  the 
bottom  of  these  my  crystal  streams.     I  have  heard 

2  '  Shuck,5  to  shake ;  obsolete  as  a  verb,  but  retained  as  a 
noun  to  designate  the  pea-shell,  after  the  peas  have  been  shook 
out. — Ed. 


THE  WATER  OP  LITE. 


557 


of  some  seas  that  are  so  pure  and  clear,  that  a 
man  may  see  to  the  bottom  though  they  may  he 
forty  feet  deep.  I  know  this  river  of  water  of  life 
is  a  deep  river ;  hut  though  it  is  said  to  he  deep, 
it  is  not  said  we  can  see  no  bottom.  Indeed,  as  to 
the  wideness  of  it,  it  is  said  to  he  such  as  that  it 
cannot  be  passed  over ;  but  I  say,  it  is  nowhere 
said  that  we  cannot  see  to  the  bottom ;  nay,  the 
comparison  implies  that  a  man  with  good  eyes 
may  see  to  the  bottom.  It  is  clear,  as  clear  as 
crystal.  So,  then,  we  will  a  little  look  down  to 
the  bottom,  and  see,  through  these  crystal  streams, 
what  is  at  the  bottom  of  all. 

1.  Then  the  bottom  of  all  is,  '  that  we  might 
be  saved.'  Jn.  v.  34.  'These  things  I  say,'  saith 
Christ,  '  that  ye  might  be  saved  ;'  and,  again,  '  I 
am  come  that  you  might  have  life,  and  that  you 
might  have  it  more  abundantly.'  Ju.  x.  10.  This  is 
the  bottom  of  this  great  river  of  water  of  life,  and 
of  its  proceeding  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb :  it  is  that  we  might  be  saved ;  it  is  that 
we  might  live.  What  a  good  bottom  is  here! 
what  a  sound  bottom  is  here !  But  few  deep  rivers 
have  a  good  bottom.  Mud  is  at  the  bottom  of 
most  waters  in  the  world ;  even  the  sea  itself, 
when  it  worketh,  casts  up  mire  and  dirt,  and  so 
do  the  hearts  of  sinners ;  but  the  bottom  of  this 
grace  of  God,  and  of  the  Spirit  and  Word  thereof, 
is  that  we  might  be  saved,  consequently  a  very 
good  bottom. 

2.  As  the  bottom  of  all  is,  '  that  we  may  be 
saved,'  so  that  we  may  be  saved  by  grace,  and 
this  is  a  bottom  sounder  and  sounder.  Our  sal- 
vation might  have  been  laid  upon  a  more  difficult 
bottom  than  this.  It  might  have  been  laid  on  our 
works.  God  might  have  laid  it  there,  and  have 
been  just,  or  he  might  have  left  us  to  have  laid  it 
where  we  would ;  and  then,  to  be  sure,  we  had 
laid  it  there,  and  so  had  made  but  a  muddy  bottom 
to  have  gone  upon  to  life.  But  now,  this  river  of 
water  of  life,  it  has  a  better  bottom ;  the  water  of 
life  is  as  clear  as  crystal,  look  down  to  the  bottom 
and  see,  we  are  'justified  freely  by  his  grace.' 
Ro.  m.  24.  'By  grace  ye  are  saved,'  there  is  the 
bottom.   Ep.  ii.  5,  8. 

Now,  grace,  as  I  have  showed  you,  is  a  firm 
bottom  to  stand  on  ;  it  is  of  grace  that  life  might 
be  sure.  Ro.  w.  ie.  Surely  David  was  not  here,  or 
surely  this  was  not  the  river  that  he  spake  of  when 
he  said,  '  I  sink  in  deep  mire,  where  there  is  no 
standing :  I  am  come  into  deep  waters,  where  the 
floods  overflow  me.  Deliver  me  out  of  the  mire,  and 
let  me  not  sink.'  Ps.  Lxix.2,14.  I  say,  to  be  sure 
this  could  not  be  the  river.  No,  David  was  now 
straggled  out  of  the  way,  was  tumbled  into  some 
pit,  or  into  some  muddy  and  dirty  hole ;  for  as  for 
this  river  it  has  a  good  bottom,  a  bottom  of  sal- 
vation by  grace,  and  a  man  needs  not  cry  out  when 


he  is  here  that  he  sinks,  or  that  he  is  in  danger 
of  being  drowned  in  mud  or  mire. 

3.  The  bottom  of  all  is,  as  I  said,  that  we  might 
be  saved,  saved  by  grace,  and  I  will  add,  '  through 
the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ.'  This  is  still 
better  and  better.  We  read  that,  when  Israel 
came  over  Jordan,  the  feet  of  the  priests  that  did 
bear  the  ark  stood  on  firm  ground  in  the  bottom, 
and  that  they  set  up  great  stones  for  a  memorial 
thereof.  Jos.  Si  17;  iv.  1—3.  But  had  Jordan  so  good 
a  bottom  as  has  this  most  blessed  river  of  water  of 
life,  or  were  the  stones  that  Israel  took  out  thence 
like  this  'tried  stone,'  this  'sure  foundation?'  Is. 
xxviii.  ig.  0  the  throne!  this  river  comes  out  of  the 
throne,  and  we  are  saved  by  grace  through  the 
redemption  that  is  in  him.  We  read  that  there  is 
a  city  that  has  foundations ;  grace  is  one,  Christ 
another,  and  the  truth  of  all  the  prophets  and 
apostles,  as  to  their  true  doctrine,  another,  &c.  He. 
xl  10.  And  again,  all  these  are  the  very  bottom  of 
this  goodly  river  of  the  water  of  life.  Ep.  ii.  19, 20. 

4.  There  is  another  thing  to  be  seen  at  the  bot- 
tom of  this  holy  river,  and  that  is,  the  glory  of 
God;  we  are  saved,  saved  by  grace,  saved  by 
grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  to 
the  praise  and  glory  of  God.  And  what  a  good 
bottom  is  here.  Grace  will  not  fail,  Christ  has 
been  sufficiently  tried,  and  God  will  not  lose  his 
glory.  Therefore  they  that  drink  of  this  river 
shall  doubtless  be  saved ;  to  wit,  they  that  drink 
of  it  of  a  spiritual  appetite  to  it.  And  thus  much 
for  the  explication  of  the  text. 

[the  application  of  the  whole.] 

I  now  come  to  make  some  use  of  the  whole. 

You  know  our  discourse  has  been  at  this  time 
of  the  water  of  life,  of  its  quantity,  head-spring, 
and  quality ;  and  I  have  showed  you  that  its 
nature  is  excellent,  its  quantity  abundant,  its  head- 
spring glorious,  and  its  quality  singularly  good. 

First.  Let  this,  then,  in  the  first  place,  be  a 
provocation  to  us  to  be  more  free  in  making  use  of  this 
water.  '  There  are  many,  now-a-days,  that  are  fo; 
inventing  of  waters,  to  drink  for  the  health  of  the 
body ;  and  to  allure  those  that  are  ill  to  buy,  they 
will  praise  their  waters  beyond  their  worth.  Yea, 
and  if  they  be  helpful  to  one  person  in  a  hundred, 
they  make  as  if  they  could  cure  every  one.  Well, 
here  you  have  the  great  Physician  himself,  with  his 
water,  and  he  calls  it  the  water  of  life,  water  of 
life  for  the  soul:  this  water  is  probation  est.1  It 
has  been  proved  times  without  number ;  it  never 
fails  but  where  it  is  not  taken.  Ac.  xxvi.  is.  is.  v.  4,  5. 
No  disease  comes  amiss  to  it ;    it  cures  blindness, 

1  Probation  est— is  proved— a  scrap  of  Latin  commonly 
used  in  advertising  medical  prescriptions,  in  Eunyaa's  time. 
—Ed. 


558 


THE  WATER  OF  LIFE. 


deadness,  deafness,  dumbness.  It  makes  '  tlie  lips 
of  those  that  are  asleep  to  speak.'  Ca.TO.st  This 
is  the  right  holy  water,1  all  other  is  counterfeit: 
it  -will  drive  away  devils  and  spirits ;  it  will  cure 
enchantments  and  witchcrafts;  it  will  heal  the  mad 
and  lunatic.  Ga.  Hi.  1—3.  Mar.  xvi.  17, 18.  It  will  cure 
the  most  desperate  melancholy;  it  will  dissolve 
doubts  and  mistrusts,  though  they  are  grown  as 
hard  as  stone  in  the  heart.  Eze.  xxxri.  26.  It  will 
make  you  speak  well.  Col.  ir.  6.  It  will  make  you 
have  a  white  soul,  and  that  is  better  than  to  have 
a  white  skin.  Eze.  xxxvi.  25, 26.  It  will  make  you  taste 
well ;  it  will  make  you  disrelish  all  hurtful  meats, 
is.  xxx.  22.  It  will  beget  in  you  a  good  appetite  to 
that  which  is  good ;  it  will  remove  obstructions  in 
the  stomach  and  liver.  It  will  cause  that  what 
you  receive  of  God's  bread  shall  turn  to  good 
nourishment,  and  make  good  blood.  In  a  word,  it 
preserveth  life.  Jn.  iv.  14.  They  that  take  this  water 
shall  live  longer  than  did  old  Methuselah,  and  yet 
he  lived  a  great  while.  Gc.  v.  27- 

V/herefore,  let  me  continue  my  exhortation  to 
you.  Be  more  free  in  making  use  of  this  water ; 
it  is  the  wholesomest  water  in  the  world ;  you  may 
take  it  at  the  third,  sixth,  ninth,  or  eleventh  hour, 
but  to  take  it  in  the  morning  of  your  age  is  best. 
Mat.  xx.  3—5.  For  then  diseases  have  not  got  so  great 
a  head  as  when  they  are  of  long  continuance,  con- 
sequently they  will  be  removed  with  far  more  ease ; 
besides,  those  that  thus  do  will  receive  endless  life, 
and  the  comfort  of  it  betimes ;  and  that,  you  know, 
is  a  double  life  to  one.  Ec.  xi.  1—4. 

This  water  gently  purges,  and  yet  more  effec- 
tually than  any  others.  True,  where  bad  humours 
are  more  tough  and  churlish,  it  will  show  itself 
stronger  of  operation,  for  there  is  no  disease  can 
be  too  hard  for  it.  It  will,  as  we  say,  throw  the 
house  out  of  the  windows  ;  but  it  will  rid  us  of  the 
plague  of  those  most  deadly  infections  -that  other- 
wise will  be  sure  to  make  us  sleep  in  death,  and 
bring  us,  with  the  multitude,  down  to  hell.  But 
it  will  do  no  hurt;  it  only  breaks  our  sleep  in 
security,  and  brings  us  to  a  more  quick  apprehen- 
sion of  the  plague  of  our  heart  and  flesh.  It  will, 
as  I  said  before,  provoke  to  appetite,  but  make  us 
only  long  after  that  which  is  wholesome.  If  any 
ask  why  I  thus  allegorize,  I  answer,  the  text  doth 
lead  me  to  it. 

Second.  I  advise,  therefore,  in  the  next  place, 
that  thou  get  thee  a  di>:elling-place  by  these  waters. 


1  A  Protestant  can  have  but  little  idea  of  the  insane  super- 
stition of  the  Papists  in  respect  to  holy  water.  The  following 
lines,  from  Barnaby  Googe's  Popish  Kingdome,  will  shed  a 
little  light  upon  it : — 

'  Besides,  they  do  beleeue  their  sinnes  to  be  forgiven  quight, 
By  raking  holy  water  here,  whereof  if  there  do  light 
But  one  small  drop,  it  driueth  out  the  hellishc  deuila  a'.l 
Then  which  there  can  no  greater  griefe  vuto  the  feend  befelL' 
— 4to.    1570,  p.  42.    In  the  Editor's  library.— Ed. 


'  The  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety  by 
him,  and  the  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  day  long.' 
r>e.  xxxiii.  12.  If  thou  ask  where  that  dwelling  is,  I 
answer,  in  the  city  of  God,  in  and  among  the 
tabernacles  of  the  Most  High.  This  river  comes 
from  the  throne  to  water  the  city  of  God ;  and  to 
that  end  it  is  said  to  run  •  in  the  midst  of  the  street 
of  it.'  Re.  xxii.  2.  If  ye  will  inquire,  inquire,  return, 
come.  '  The  seed  also  of  his  servants  shall  inherit 
it,  and  they  that  love  his  name  shall  dwell  therein.' 
Ps.  lxix.  36.  Get  thee  a  dwelling  in  Jerusalem,  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  then  thou  wilt  be  seated 
by  this  river. 

In  old  times,  the  ancients  had  their  habitations 
by  the  rivers ;  yea,  we  read  of  Aroer  that  stood 
upon  the  brink  of  the  river  Anion.  Jos.  xih.  9.  Balaam 
also  had  his  dwelling  in  his  city  Pethor,  '  by  the 
river  of  the  laud  of  the  children  of  his  people.' 
Nu.  xxii.  5.  0  !  by  a  river  side  is  the  pleasantest 
dwelling  in  the  world ;  and  of  all  rivers,  the  river 
of  the  water  of  life  is  the  best.  They  that  dwell 
there 'shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst ;  neither  shall 
the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them:  for  he  that  hath 
mercy  on  them  shall  lead  them,  even  by  the  springs 
of  water  shall  he  guide  them.'  is.  xii.v.  10.  Trees 
planted  by  the  rivers,  and  that  spread  out  their 
roots  by  the  rivers,  they  are  the  flourishing  trees, 
they  bring  forth  their  fruit  in  their  season.  Ps.i.3.  Je. 
xvii.  8.  And  the  promise  is  that  men  that  take  up 
their  dwellings  by  this  river  of  water  of  life,  shall 
be  fruitful  as  such  trees. 

If  thou  art  a  Christian,  thou  hast  more  than  an 
ordinary  call  and  occasion  to  abide  by  these  waters; 
thy  things  will  not  grow  but  by  these  waters.  Weeds 
and  the  excellencies  of  most  men  we  may  find  in 
the  barren  wilderness,  they  grow  under  every  hedge; 
but  thine  are  garden,  and  so  choice  things,  and 
will  not  thrive  without  much  water,  no,  without 
the  water  of  God's  river.  Dwell,  therefore,  here  ; 
that  thy  soul  may  be  as  a  watered  garden.  Je.xxxi. 
12.  is.  xii.  l— 3.  And  when  thou  seest  how  those  that 
are  loath  to  die,2  make  provision  at  Tunbridge, 
Epsom,  the  Bath,  and  other  places,  and  what 
houses  they  get  that  they  may  have  their  dwellings 
by  those  waters,  then  do  thou  consider  of  thy  spirit- 
ual disease,  and  how  nothing  can  cure  thee  but 
this  blessed  water  of  life ;  be  also  much  of  desires 
to  have  a  dwelling-place  in  Jerusalem,  that  thou 
mayest  always  be  nigh  to  these  waters.  Be  often 
also  in  watering  thy  plants  with  these  waters.  I 
mean  the  blessed  graces  of  God  in  thy  soid ;  then 
shalt  thou  grow,  and  retain  thy  greenness,  and 
prove  thyself  to  be  a  disciple  indeed.     And  herein 


-  The  infatuatiou,  nay,  madness  of  human  nature,  ia  its 
fallen  state,  is  shown  by  living  to  hasten  the  inroads  of  death , 
and  when  he  appears,  terror-stricken  they  fly  from  it  to  any 
remedy  that  is  within  their  reach.  How  vast  the  number  of 
suicides  by  intemperance ! — Ed. 


THE   WATER  OF  LIFE. 


559 


is  God,  and  thy  Father,  glorified,  that  thou  hear 
much  fruit.  Jn.  w.  s. 

TniRD.  My  third  word  is,  bless  God  for  providing 
for  man  such  icaters.  These  only  can  make  us 
live ;  all  others  come  out  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  do 
kill;  there  is  no  living  water  hut  this.  I  say, 
show  thy  acceptation  of  it  with  thanksgiving ;  if 
we  are  not  to  receive  our  hread  and  cheese  hut 
with  thanksgiving,  how  should  we  hless  God  for 
this  unspeakahle  gift !  2  Co.  ix.  15.  This  is  soul  life, 
life  against  sin,  life  from  sin,  life  against  the  curse, 
life  from  the  curse,  life  beyond  hell,  beyond  de- 
sert, beyond  thought,  beyond  desires.  Life  that 
is  pleasing,  life  that  is  profitable,  life  everlasting. 

0  my  brethren,  bless  God !  who  doth  good  and 
gives  us  such  rain,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and 
gladness.1  When  Moses  would  take  the  heart  of 
Israel,  and  took  in  hand  to  raise  up  their  spirits  to 
thankfulness,  he  used  to  tell  them  that  the  land 
that  they  were  to  go  to  was  a  land  that  God  cared 
for,  and  that  was  watered  with  the  dew  of  heaven. 
Yea,  '  a  land  of  brooks  of  water,  of  fountains  and 
depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills;  a  land 
that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey,  which  is  the  glory 

of  all  lands.'  De.  viii.  7.  Ex.  iii.  8;  xiii.  5.  Le.  xx.  24.  Ku.  xiv.  S. 

But  yet  in  his  description  he  makes  no  mention  of 
a  river  of  water  of  life ;  a  river  the  streams  whereof 
make  glad  the  city  of  God. 

This  river  is  the  running  out  of  God's  heart;  the 
letting  out  of  his  very  bowels,  for  God  is  the  living 
God.  This  is  his  heart  and  soul.  '  Yea,  I  will 
rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good,  and  I  will  plant 
them  in  this  land  assuredly,  with  my  whole  heart, 
and  with  my  whole  soul.'  Je.  xxxfi.  41.  I  say,  if  ever 
God's  heart  aud  soul  appeared,  it  showed  itself  in 
giving  this  water  of  life,  and  the  throne  from  whence 
it  proceeds.  Wherefore  [there  is]  all  the  reason 
of  the  world,  that  in  the  reception  of  it  thy  heart 
and  soul  should  run  out  and  flow  after  him  in 
thanksgivings.  See  how  David  words  it  in  Ps.dn.l-s, 
and  do  likewise. 

Fourth.  By  the  characters  that  are  given  of  this 
water  of  life,  thou  ait  capacitated  to  judge  when  a 
notion,  a  doctrine,  an  opinion,  comes  to  thine  ears, 
whether  it  is  right,  good,  and  wholesome,  or  how. 
This  river  is  pure,  is  clear,  is  pure  and  clear  as 
crystal.  Is  the  doctrine  offered  unto  thee  so  ?  or 
is  it  muddy,  and  mixed  with  the  doctrines  of  men  ? 
Look,  man,  and  see  if  the  foot  of  the  worshippers 


1  Tlie  real  Christian,  and  such  only,  are  in  this  blessed  case 
they  have  the  promise  of  the  life  thai   now  is,  as  well  as  of 
that  which  is  to  come.     Their  Father,  the  Almighty,  supplies 
all  their  wants;  giving  joy  and  peace,  when  heart  aud  flesh 
tremble. — Ed. 


of  Bel  be  not  there,  and  if  the  waters  be  not  fouled 
thereby.  What  water  is  fouled  is  not  the  water 
of  life,  or  at  least  not  the  water  of  life  in  its  clear- 
ness. Wherefore,  if  thou  findest  it  not  right,  go 
up  higher  to  the  spring-head,  for  always  the  nearer 
to  the  spring,  the  more  pure  and  clear  is  the  water. 
Fetch,  then,  thy  doctrine  from  afar,  if  thou  canst 
not  have  it  good  nearer  hand.  Job  xxxvi.  3.  Thy  life 
lies  at  stake;  the  counterfeit  of  things  is  dangerous; 
everybody  that  is  aware,  is  afraid  thereof.  Now 
a  counterfeit  here  is  most  dangerous,  is  most  de- 
structive. Wherefore  take  heed  how  you  hear,  what 
you  hear;  for,  as  I  said  before  of  the  fish,  by  your 
colour  it  will  be  seen  what  waters  yuu  swim  in ; 
wherefore  look  you  well  to  yourselves.2 

Fifth.  Doth  this  water  of  life  run  like  a  river, 
like  a  broad,  full,  and  deep  river;  then  let  no  man, 
be  his  transgressions  never  so  many,  fear  at  all,  bid 
there  is  enough  to  save  his  soul,  and  to  spare. 
Nothing  has  been  more  common  to  many  than  to 
doubt  of  the  grace  of  God;  a  thing  most  unbecom- 
ing a  sinner  of  any  thing  in  the  world.  To  break 
the  law  is  a  fact  foul  enough ;  but  to  question  the 
sufficiency  of  the  grace  of  God  to  save  therefrom, 
is  worse  than  sin,  if  worse  can  be.  Wherefore,  de- 
spairing soul,  for  it  is  to  thee  I  speak,  forbear  thy 
mistrusts,  cast  off  thy  slavish  fears,  hang  thy  mis- 
givings as  to  this  upon  the  hedge;  and  believe  thou 
hast  an  invitation  sufficient  thereto,  a  river  is  be- 
fore thy  face.  And  as  for  thy  want  of  goodness 
and  works,  let  that  by  no  means  daunt  thee ;  this 
is  a  river  of  water  of  life,  streams  of  grace  and 
mercy.  There  is,  as  I  said,  enough  therein  to  help 
thee,  for  grace  brings  all  that  is  wanting  to  the 
sold.  Thou,  therefore,  hast  nothing  to  do,  I  mean 
as  to  the  curing  of  thy  soul  of  its  doubts,  and  fears, 
and  despairing  thoughts,  but  to  drink  and  live  for 
ever. 

Sixtii.  But  what  is  cdl  this  to  the  dead  world — to 
them  that  love  to  be  dead  ?  They  toss  their  vanities 
about  as  the  boys  toss  their  shuttlecocks  in  the  air, 
till  their  foot  slips,  and  themselves  descend  into 
the  pit. 

Let  this  suffice  for  this  time. 


2  In  proportion  to  the  number  of  professed  Christiaus  who 
thus  obey  the  gospel  by  judging  for  themselves,  so  will  be  the 
happiness  of  the  church,  and  the  hastening  on  of  the  kingdom 
of  L'lirist.  No  one  is  a  Christian  that  receives  his  doctrine 
from  a  prelate,  priest,  or  minister,  without  prayerfully  com- 
paring it  with  the  written  "Word.  0  man,  take  not  the  water 
of  life  as  doled  out  by  a  fellow-man ;  go  to  the  river  for  your- 
self—survey yourself  as  reflected  in  those  crystal  streams. 
Christ  does  not  say  to  the  heavy-laden,  sin-burdened  soul,  Go 
to  the  church ;  but,  Come  unto  me,  and  find  rest.  Blessed  is 
he  who  loves  the  river  of  water  unpolluted  by  human  devices, 
forms,  or  ceremonies ;  who  flies  to  the  open  bosom  of  his 
Christ,  and  fiuds  refuge  from  every  storm. — Ed. 


THE   BARREN  FIG-TREE; 

OR, 

THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR : 

SHOWING,    THAT   THE   DAY   OF   GRACE   MAT  BE   PAST   WITH   HIM   LONG  BEFORE   HIS   LIFE   13   ENDED 
THE  SIGNS  ALSO  BY  WHICH  SUCH  MISERABLE  MORTALS  MAY  BE  KNOWN. 

By  JOHN  BUNYAN, 
1  Who  being  dead,  yet  sj>eahet7i.' — Heb.  si.  4. 

London:  Printed  for  J.  Robinson,  at  the  Golden  Lion,  in  St.  Paul's  Churchyard,  1688. 
This  Title  has  a  broad  Black  Bordes, 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOE. 


Tins  solemn,  searching,  awful  treatise,  was  pub- 
lished by  Bunyan  in  1682  ;  but  does  not  appear  to 
have  been  reprinted  until  a  very  few  months  after 
his  decease,  which  so  unexpectedly  took  place  in 
1688.  Although  we  have  sought  with  all  possible 
diligence,  no  copy  of  the  first  edition  has  been  dis- 
covered ;  we  have  made  use  of  a  fine  copy  of  the 
second  edition,  in  possession  of  that  thorough  Bun- 
yanite,  my  kind  friend,  R.  B.  Sherring,  of  Bristol. 
The  third  edition,  1692,  is  in  the  British  Museum. 
Added  to  these  posthumous  publications  appeared, 
for  the  first  time,  '  An  Exhortation  to  Peace  and 
Unity,'  which  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  our 
second  volume.  In  the  advertisement  to  that  trea- 
tise are  stated,  at  some  length,  my  reasons  for 
concluding  that  it  was  not  written  by  Bunyan, 
although  inserted  in  all  the  editions  of  his  collected 
works.  That  opinion  is  now  more  fully  confirmed, 
by  the  discovery  of  Bunyan 's  own  list  of  his  works, 
published  just  before  his  death,  in  1688,  and  in 
which  that  exhortation  is  not  inserted.  I  was  also 
much  pleased  to  find  that  the  same  conclusion  was 
arrived  at  by  that  highly  intelligent  Baptist  minis- 
ter, Mr.  Robert  Robinson.  His  reasons  are  given 
at  some  length,  concluding  with,  *  it  is  evident  that 


Bunyan  never  wrote  this 


piece. 


Why  it  was, 


after  Bunyan's  death,  published  with  his  '  Barren 
Fig-tree,'  is  one  of  those  hidden  mysteries  of  dark- 
ness and  of  wickedness  that  I  cannot  discover. 
The  beautiful  parable  from  which  Bunyan  selected 
his  text,  represents  an  enclosed  ground,  in  which, 
among  others,  a  fig-tree  had  been  planted.  It 
was  not  an  enclosure  similar  to  some  of  the  vine- 
yards of  France  or  Germany,  exclusively  devoted 
to  the  growth  of  the  vine,  but  a  garden  in  which 
fruits  were  cultivated,  such  as  grapes,  figs,  or 
pomegranates.    It  was  in  such  a  vineyard,  thus  re- 

1  General  Doctrine  of  Toleration,  Svo,  1781. 


tired  from  the  world,  that  Nathaniel  poured  out  his 
heart  in  prayer,  when  our  Lord  in  spirit  witnessed, 
unseen,  these  devotional  exercises,  and  soon  after- 
wards rewarded  him  with  open  approbation.  Jn.  L  48. 
In  these  secluded  pleasant  spots  the  Easterns  spend 
much  of  their  time,  under  their  own  vines  or  fig- 
trees,  sheltered  from  the  world  and  from  the  op- 
pressive heat  of  the  sun — a  fit  emblem  of  a  church 
of  Christ.  In  this  vineyard  stood  a  fig-tree — by 
nature  remarkable  for  fruitfulness — but  it  is  bar- 
ren. No  inquiry  is  made  as  to  how  it  came  there, 
but  the  order  is  given,  '  Cut  it  down.'  The  dresser 
of  the  garden  intercedes,  and  means  are  tried  to 
make  it  fruitful,  but  in  vain.  At  last  it  is  cut 
down  as  a  cumber-ground  and  burnt.  This  vine- 
yard or  garden  represents  a  gospel  church ;  the 
fig-tree  a  member — a  barren,  fruitless  professor. 
'  It  matters  not  how  he  got  there,'  if  he  bears  no 
fruit  he  must  be  cut  down  and  away  to  the  fire. 

To  illustrate  so  awful  a  subject  this  treatise  was 
written,  and  it  is  intensely  solemn.  God,  whose 
omniscience  penetrates  through  every  disguise, 
himself  examines  every  tree  in  the  garden,  yea, 
every  bough.  Wooden  and  earthy  professor,  your 
detection  is  sure ;  appearances  that  deceive  the 
world  and  the  church  cannot  deceive  God.  '  He 
will  be  with  thee  in  thy  bed  fruits — thy  midnight 
fruits — thy  closet  fruits — thy  family  fruits — thy 
conversation  fruits.'  Professor,  solemnly  examine 
yourself;  '  in  proportion  to  your  fruitfulness  will 
be  your  blessedness. '  '  Naked  and  open  are  all 
things  to  his  eye.'  Can  it  be  imagined  that  those 
•  that  paint  themselves  did  ever  repent  of  their 
pride  ?  '  '  How  seemingly  self-denying  are  some  of 
these  creeping  things.'  'Is  there  no  place  will 
serve  to  fit  those  for  hell  but  the  church,  the  vine- 
yard of  God  V  '  It  is  not  the  place  where  the 
worker  of  iniquity  cau  hide  himself  or  his  sins 
from  God.'     May  such  be  detected  before  they  go 


THE   BARKEN   FIG-TREE,  ETC. 


501 


hence  to  the  fire.  While  there  is  a  disposition  to 
seek  grace  all  are  invited  to  come ;  but  when  sal- 
vation by  Christ  is  abandoned,  there  is  no  other 
refuge,  although  sought  with  tears.  Reader,  may 
the  deeply  impressive  language  of  Bunyan  sink 
profoundly  into  our  hearts.     We  need  no  splendid 


angel  nor  hideous  demon  to  reveal  to  us  the  reali- 
ties of  the  world  to  come.  '  If  we  hear  not  Moses 
and  the  prophets,'  as  set  forth  by  Bunyan  in  this 
treatise,  '  neither  should  we  be  persuaded  though 
one  rose  from  the  dead' to  declare  these  solemn 
truths.    Lu.  xvi.  3i.  Geo.  Offor. 


TO    THE    READER. 


CourvTEOus  Reader, 


I  have  written  to  thee  now  about  the  Barren  Fig- 
tree,  or  how  it  will  fare  with  the  fruitless  professor 
that  standcth  in  the  vineyard  of  God.  Of  what 
complexion  thou  art  I  cannot  certainly  divine  ;  but 
the  parable  tells  thee  that  the  cumber-ground  must 
be  cut  down.  A  cumber-ground  professor  is  not 
only  a  provocation  to  God,  a  stumbling-block  to  the 
world,  and  a  blemish  to  religion,  but  a  snare  to  his 
own  soul  also.  '  Though  his  excellency  mount  up 
to  the  heavens,  and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds, 
yethe  shall  perish  for  ever,  like  his  own  dung;  they 
which  have   seen  him  shall  say,  Where  is  he  ? ' 

Job  xx.  C,  7. 

Now  '  they  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  the  day- 
time.' But  what  will  they  do  when  the  axe  is 
fetched  out?   2  Pe.  ii.  13,  14. 

The  tree  whose  fruit  withereth  is  reckoned  a 
tree  without  fruit,  a  tree  twice  dead,  one  that  must 
be  '  plucked  up  by  the  roots.'  fade  12. 

0  thou  cumber-ground,  God  expects  fruit,  God 
will  come  seeking  fruit  shortly. 

My  exhortation,  therefore,  is  to  professors  that 
they  look  to  it,  that  they  take  heed. 

The  barren  fig-tree  in  the  vineyard,  and  the 
bramble  in  the  wood,  are  both  prepared  for  the 
lire. 

Profession  is  not  a  covert  to  hide  from  the  eye 
of  God ;  nor  will  it  palliate  the  revengeful  threat- 


ening of  his  justice;  he  will  command  to  cut  it 
down  shortly. 

The  church,  and  a  profession,  are  the  best  of 
places  for  the  upright,  but  the  worst  in  the  world 
for  the  cumber-ground.  He  must  be  cast,  as  pro- 
fane, out  of  the  mount  of  God :  cast,  I  say,  over 
the  wall  of  the  vineyard,  there  to  wither;  thence 
to  be  gathered  and  burned.  '  It  had  been  better 
for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteous- 
ness.' 2Pe.  ii.  2i.  And  yet  if  they  had  not,  they 
had  been  damned ;  but  it  is  better  to  go  to  hell 
without,  than  in,  or  from  under  a  profession. 
These  '  shall  receive  greater  damnation.'  Lu.  xx.  47. 

If  thou  be  a  professor,  read  and  tremble :  if  thou 
be  profane,  do  so  likewise.  For  if  the  righteous 
scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  sin- 
ners appear?  Cumber-ground,  take  heed  of  the 
axe !     Barren  fig-tree,  beware  of  the  fire ! 

But  I  will  keep  thee  no  longer  out  of  the  book. 
Christ  Jesus,  the  dresser  of  the  vineyard,  take  care 
of  thee,  dig  about  thee,  and  dung  thee,  that  thou 
mayest  bear  fruit ;  that  when  the  Lord  of  the  vine- 
yard cometh  with  his  axe  to  seek  for  fruit,  or  pro- 
nounce the  sentence  of  damnation  on  the  barren 
fig-tree,  thou  mayest  escape  that  judgment.  The 
cumber-ground  must  to  the  wood-pile,  and  thence 
to  the  fire.     Farewell. 

Grace  be  with  all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus 
in  sincerity.     Amen. 

John  Bunyan. 


THE   BARREN    FIG-TREE, 

THE   DOOM   AND   DOWNFALL   OF  THE   FRUITLESS   PROFESSOR. 


A  CERTAIN  MAN  HAD  A  FIG-TREE  TLANTED  IN  HIS 
VINEYARD;  AND  HE  CAME  AXD  SOUGHT  FRUIT  THERE- 
ON, AND  FOUND  NONE.  THEN  SAID  HE  UNTO  THE 
DRESSER  OF  niS  VINEYARD,  BEHOLD,  THESE  THREE 
YEARS  I  COME  SEEKING  FRUIT  ON  THIS  FIG-TREE, 
AND  FIND  NONE  :  CUT  IT  DOWN  ;  WHY  CUMBERETH 
IT  THE  GROUND  ?  AND  HE  ANSWERING  SAID  UNTO 
VOL.  II  r. 


HIM,  LORD,  LET  IT  ALONE  THIS  YEAR  ALSO,  TILL  I 
SHALL  DIG  ABOUT  IT,  AND  DUNG  IT  \  AND  IF  IT 
BEAR  FRUIT,  WELL:  AND  IF  NOT,  TBSJT  AFTER  THAT 
THOU  SHALT  CUT  IT  DOWN.' — LUKE  XIII.   6 — 9. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  we  read  how  some 
of  the  Jews  came  to  Jesus  Christ,  to  tell  him  of 
the    cruelty  of   Pontius  Pilate,  in   mingling    the 

71 


562 


THE   BARREN   FIG-TREE,  OR 


blood  of  the  Galileans  with  their  sacrifices.  A 
heathenish  and  prodigious  act  ;  for  therein  he 
showed,  not  only  his  malice  against  the  Jewish 
nation,  but  also  against  their  worship,  and  conse- 
quently their  God.  An  action,  I  say,  not  only 
heathenish,  but  prodigious  also ;  for  the  Lord 
Jesus,  paraphrasing  upon  this  fact  of  his,  teach- 
eth  the  Jews,  that  without  repentance  '  they 
should  all  likewise  perish.'  •  Likewise,'  that  is, 
by  the  hand  and  rage  of  the  Roman  empire. 
Neither  should  they  be  more  able  to  avoid  the 
stroke,  than  were  those  eighteen  upon  M'hom  the 
tower  of  Siloam  fell,  and  slew  them.  Lu.  xin.  1-5. 
The  fulfilling  of  which  prophecy,  for  their  hardness 
of  heart,  and  impenitency,  was  in  the  days  of 
Titus,  son  of  Vespasian,  about  forty  years  after 
the  death  of  Christ.  Then,  I  say,  were  these 
Jews,  and  their  city,  both  environed  round  on 
every  side,  wherein  both  they  and  it,  to  amaze- 
ment, were  miserably  overthrown.  God  gave 
them  sword  and  famine,  pestilence  and  blood,  for 
their  outrage  agaiust  the  Son  of  his  love.  So 
wrath  'came  upon  them  to  the  uttermost.'  1  Th. 
ii.  lc.  * 

Now,  to  prevent  their  old  and  foolish  salvo, 
which  they  always  had  in  readiness  against  such 
prophecies  and  denunciations  of  judgment,  the 
Lord  Jesus  presents  them  with  this  parable,  in 
which  he  emphatically  shows  them  that  their  cry 
of  being  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  of  their 
being  the  children  of  Abraham,  <fcc,  and  their 
being  the  church  of  God,  would  not  stand  them 
in  any  stead.  As  who  should  say,  It  may  be  you 
think  to  help  yourselves  against  this  my  prophecy 
of  your  utter  and  unavoidable  overthrow,  by  the 
interest  which  you  have  in  your  outward  privileges. 
But  all  these  will  fail  you  ;  for  what  think  you  ? 
'  A  certain  man  had  a  fig-tree  planted  in  his  vine- 
yard, and  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  and 
found  none.'  This  is  your  case!  The  Jewish 
land  is  God's  vineyard  ;  I  know  it ;  and  I  know 
also,  that  you  are  the  fig-trees.  But  behold, 
there  wanteth  the  main  thing,  fruit ;  for  the  sake, 
and  in  expectation  of  which,  he  set  this  vineyard 
with  trees.  Now,  seeing  the  fruit  is  not  found 
amongst  you,  the  fruit,  I  say,  for  the  sake  of 
which  lie  did  at  first  plant  this  vineyard,  what  re-  [ 
mains  but  that  in  justice  he  command  to  cut  you  I 


1  This  awful  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  is 
narrated  by  Josephus  in  his  sixth  book  of  the  Jeivish  Wars, 
in  language  that  makes  nature  shudder.  Multitudes  had  as- 
sembled to  celebrate  the  passover  when  the  invading  army 
beleagured  the  city;  a  frightful  famine  soon  filled  it  with 
desolation :  this,  with  fire  and  sword,  miserably  destroyed  one 
million,  three  hundred  and  thirty-seven  thousand,  four  hundred 
and  ninety  Jews,  while  the  Christians  fled  before  the  siege, 
and  escaped  to  the  mountains.  Well  might  the  sun  vail  his 
face  at  that  atrocious  deed,  which  was  so  quickly  followed  by 
such  awful  punishment.— En. 


down  as  those  that  cumber  the  ground,  that  he 
may  plant  himself  another  vineyard  ?  '  Then 
said  he  unto  the  dresser  of  his  vineyard,  Behold, 
these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  on  this 
fig-tree,  and  find  none  ;  cut  it  down,  why  cumber- 
eth  it  the  ground  ? '  This  therefore  must  be  your 
end,  although  you  are  planted  in  the  garden  of 
God ;  for  the  barrenness  and  unfruitfulness  of 
your  hearts  and  lives  you  must  be  cut  off,  yea, 
rooted  up,  and  cast  out  of  the  vineyard. 
'  In  parables  there  are  two  things  to  be  taken 
notice  of,  and  to  be  inquired  into  of  them  that 
read.  First,  The  metaphors  made  use  of.  Second, 
The  doctrine  or  mysteries  couched  under  such 
metaphors. 

The  metaphors  in  this  parable  are,  1.  A  certain 
man  ;  2.  A  vineyard  ;  3.  A  fig-tree,  barren  or 
fruitless  ;  4.  A  dresser  ;  5.  Three  years  ;  6.  Dig- 
ging and  dunging,  <fec. 

T/ie  doctrine,  or  mystery,  couched  under  these 
words  is  to  show  us  what  is  like  to  become  of  a 
fruitless  or  formal  professor.  For,  1.  By  the  man 
in  the  parable  is  meant  God  the  Father.  Lu.xr.ti. 
2.  By  the  vineyard,  his  church,  is.  v.  7.  3.  By  the 
fig-tree,  a  professor.  4.  By  the  dresser,  the  Lord 
Jesus.  5.  By  the  fig-tree's  barrenness,  the  pro- 
fessor's fruitlessness.  6.  By  the  three  years,  the 
patience  of  God  that  for  a  time  he  extendeth  to 
barren  professors.  7.  This  calling  to  the  dresser 
of  the  vineyard  to  cut  it  down,  is  to  show  the  out- 
cries of  justice  against  fruitless  professors.  8.  The 
dresser's  interceding  is  to  show  how  the  Lord 
Jesus  steps  in,  and  takes  hold  of  the  head  of  his 
Father's  axe,  to  stop,  or  at  least  to  defer,  the  pre- 
sent execution  of  a  barren  fig-tree.  9.  The  dresser's 
desire  to  try  to  make  the  fig-tree  fruitful,  is  to  show 
you  how  unwilling  he  is  that  even  a  barren  fig- 
tree  should  yet  be  barren,  and  perish.  10.  His 
digging  about  it,  and  dunging  of  it,  is  to  show  his 
willingness  to  apply  gospel  helps  to  this  barren 
professor,  if  haply  he  maybe  fruitful.  11.  The 
supposition  that  the  fig-tree  may  yet  continue 
fruitless,  is  to  show,  that  when  Christ  Jesus  hath 
done  all,  there  are  some  professors  will  abide  bar- 
ren and  fruitless.  12.  The  determination  upon 
this  supposition,  at  last  to  cut  it  down,  is  a  certain 
prediction  of  such  professor's  unavoidable  and  eter- 
nal damnation. 

But  to  take  this  parable  into  pieces,  and  to  dis- 
course more  particularly,  though  with  all  brevity, 
upon  all  the  parts  thereof. 

*A   certain  man   had  a  fig-tree  planted  in   his 
vineyard.1 

The  man,  I  told  you,  is  to  present  us  with  God 
the  Father;  by  which  similitude  he  is  often  set 
out  in  the  New  Testament. 

Observe  then,  that  it  is  no  new  thing,  if  vou 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


5(53 


find  in  God's  church  barren  fig-trees,  fruitless  pro- 
fessors ;  even  as  here  you  see  is  a  tree,  a  fruitless 
tree,  a  fruitless  fig-tree  in  the  vineyard.1  Fruit  is 
not  so  easily  brought  forth  as  a  profession  is  got 
into ;  it  is  easy  for  a  man  to  clothe  himself  with  a 
fair  show  in  the  flesh,  to  word  it,  and  say,  Be  thou 
warmed  and  filled  with  the  best.  It  is  no  hard 
thing  to  do  these  with  other  things  ;  but  to  he  fruit- 
ful, to  bring  forth  fruit  to  God,  this  doth  not  every 
tree,  no  not  every  fig-tree  that  stands  in  the  vine- 
yard of  God.  Those  words  also,  'Every  branch  in 
nic  that  beareth  not  fruit,  he  takcth  away,'  assert 
the  same  thing.  Jn.  xv.  2.  There  are  branches  in 
Christ,  in  Christ's  body  mystical,  which  is  his 
church,  his  vineyard,  that  bear  not  fruit,  wherefore 
the  hand  of  God  is  to  take  them  away :  I  looked 
for  grapes,  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes,  that 
is,  no  fruit  at  all  that  was  acceptable  with  God. 
is.  3.  4.  Again,  •  Israel  is  an  empty  vine,  he  bring- 
eth  forth  fruit  unto  himself,'  none  to  God;  he  is 
without  fruit  to  God.  Ho.  x.  1.  All  these,  with  many 
more,  show  us  the  truth  of  the  observation,  and 
that  God's  church  may  be  cumbered  with  fruitless 
fig-trees,  with  barren  professors. 

Had  a  Fig-tree. 

Although  there  be  in  God's  church  that  be  barren 
and  fruitless  ;  yet,  as  I  said,  to  see  to,  they  are  like 
the  rest  of  the  trees,  even  a  fig-tree.  It  was  not  an 
oak,  nor  a  willow,  nor  a  thorn,  nor  a  bramble  ;  but 
a  fig-tree.  '  They  come  unto  thee  as  the  people 
coinetk.'  Eze.  xxxiti.  31.  '  They  delight  to  know  my 
ways,  as  a  nation  that  did  righteousness,  and  for- 
sook not  the  ordinance  of  their  God.  They  ask  of 
me  the  ordinances  of  justice,  they  take  delight  in 
approaching  to  God,'  and  yet  but  barren,  fruitless, 
and  unprofitable  professors,  is.ivUi.  2-4.  Judas  also 
Mas  oue  of  the  twelve,  a  disciple,  an  apostle,  a 
preacher,  an  officer,  yea,  and  such  a  one  as  none 
of  the  eleven  mistrusted,  but  preferred  before  them- 
selves, each  one  crying  out,  'Is  it  I?  Is  it  I?' 
Mar.  xiv.  i».  None  of  them,  as  we  read  of,  Jn.  d.  70, 
mistrusting  Judas ;  yet  he  in  Christ's  eye  was  the 
ban-en  fig-tree,  a  devil,  a  fruitless  professor.  The 
foolish  virgins  also  went  forth  of  the  world  with  the 
other,  had  lamps,  and  light,  and  were  awakened 
with  the  other ;  yea,  had  boldness  to  go  forth,  when 
the  midnight  cry  was  made,  with  the  other ;  and 
thought  that  they  could  have  looked  Christ  in  the 
face,  when  he  sat  upon  the  throne  of  judgment,  with 
the  other  ;  and  yet  but  foolish,  but  barren  fig-trees, 
but  fruitless  professors.  'Many,'  saith  Christ,  'will 
say  unto  me  in  that  day,'  this  and  that,  and  will 
also  talk  of  many  wonderful  works ;  yet,  behold, 


1  Reader,  do  not  imagine  that  this  was  peculiar  to  Bunyan's 
ilays ;  look  not  upou  your  neighbours  to  iind  an  example,  but 
starch  your  own  heart — '  Lord,  is  it  I  ?'  and  strive  and  pray 
that  you  may  bring  forth  more  fiuit. —  (Ed.) 


ho  finds  nothing  in  them  but  the  fruits  of  unright- 
eousness. Mat.  vii.  22,  23.  They  wore  altogether  barren 
and  fruitless  professors. 

Had  a  Jig-tree  tlanted. 

This  word  planted  doth  also  reach  far ;  it  sup- 
poseth  one  taken  out  of  its  natural  soil,  or  removed 
from  the  place  it  grew  in  once  ;  one  that  seemed  to 
be  called,  awakened;  and  not  only  so,  but  by  strong 
hand  carried  from  the  world  to  the  church  ;  from 
nature  to  grace ;  from  sin  to  godliness.  '  Thou 
hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  Egypt ;  thou  hast  cast 
out  the  heathen,  and  planted  it.'  Pa  lxxx.  8.  Of  some 
of  the  branches  of  this  vine  were  there  unfruitful 
professors. 

It  must  be  concluded,  therefore,  that  this  pro- 
fessor, that  rcmaineth  notwithstanding  fruitless,  is, 
as  to  the  view  and  judgment  of  the  church,  rightly 
brought  in  thither,  to  wit,  by  confession  of  faith, 
of  sin,  and  a  show  of  repentance  and  regeneration; 
thus  false  brethren  creep  in  unawares !  All  these 
things  this  word  planted  intimateth  ;  yea,  further, 
that  the  church  is  satisfied  with  them,  consents  they 
should  abide  in  the  garden,  and  counteth  them 
sound  as  the  rest.  But  before  God,  in  the  sight 
of  God,  they  are  graceless  professors,  barren  and 
fruitless  fig-trees. 

Therefore  it  is  one  thing  to  be  in  the  church,  or 
in  a  profession ;  and  another  to  be  of  the  church, 
and  to  belong  to  that  kingdom  that  is  prepared  for 
the  saint,  that  is  so  indeed.  Otherwise,  '  Being 
planted,  shall  it  prosper?  shall  it  not  utterly  wither, 
when  the  east-wind  toucheth  it?  It  shall  wither  in 
the  furrows  where  it  grew. '  Eze.  xvii.  10. 

Had  a  Jig -tree  planted  in  his  vineyard. 

In  ins  vineyard.  Hypocrites,  with  rotten  hearts, 
are  not  afraid  to  come  before  God  in  Sion.  These 
words  therefore  suggest  unto  us  a  prodigious  kind 
of  boldness  and  hardened  fearlessness.  For  what 
presumption  higher,  and  what  attempt  more  des- 
perate, than  for  a  man  that  wanteth  grace,  and  the 
true  knowledge  of  God,  to  crowd  himself,  in  that 
condition,  into  the  house  or  church  of  God ;  or  to 
make  profession  of,  and  desire  that  the  name  of 
God  should  be  called  upon  him? 

For  the  man  that  maketh  a  profession  of  the 
religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  man  hath,  as  it  were, 
put  the  name  of  God  upon  himself,  and  is  called 
and  reckoned  now,  how  fruitless  soever  before  God 


2  The  mode  of  admitting  a  member  to  church-fellowship, 
among  the  Baptists,  was  and  now  is  by  introducing  the  trem- 
bling convert  to  a  private  meeting  of  the  whole  church,  that 
they  may  hear  why  the  union  is  sought,  how  the  soul  became 
alarmed,  and  fled  for  refuge  to  Christ,  with  the  grounds  of 
hope;  inquiries  having  been  previously  made  into  Christian 
character  and  godliness,  f  f,  with  all  these  precautious,  a  barren 
professor  gains  admittance,  the  punishment  is  not  upon  the 
garden,  but  upon  the  barren  tree. — (Ed.) 


564 


THE   BARREN   FIG-TREE,  OR 


or  men,  the  man  that  bath  to  do  with  God,  the  man 
that  God  owneth,  and  will  stand  for.  This  man,  I 
say,  by  his  profession,  suggesteth  this  to  all  that 
know  him  to  be  such  a  professor.  Men  merely 
natural,  I  mean  men  that  have  not  got  the  devilish 
art  of  hypocrisy,  are  afraid  to  think  of  doing  thus. 
'  And  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to 
them ;  but  the  people  maguified  them.'  Ac.  v.  is. 
And,  indeed,  it  displeaseth  God.  '  Ye  have  brought, ' 
saith  he,  '  men  uncircumcised  into  my  sanctuary. ' 
Eze.  xiiv.  7.  And  again,  '  When  ye  come  to  appear 
before  me,  who  hath  required  this  at  your  hand,  to 
tread  my  courts  1 '  saith  God.  is.  i.  12.  They  have 
therefore  learned  this  boldness  of  none  in  the  visihle 
Avorld,  they  only  took  it  of  the  devil,  for  he,  and  he 
only,  with  these  his  disciples,  attempt  to  present 
themselves  in  the  church  before  God.  'The  tares 
are  the  children  of  the  wicked  one.'  The  tares, 
that  is,  the  hypocrites,  that  are  Satan's  brood,  the 
generation  of  vipers,  that  cannot  escape  the  damna- 
tion of  hell. 

Had  a  fig-tree  planted  in  his  vineyard. 

He  doth  not  say,  He  planted  a  fig-tree,  but  there 
was  a  fig-tree  there ;  he  had,  or  found  a  fig-tree 
planted  in  his  vineyard. 

The  great  God  will  not  acknowledge  the  barren 
fig-tree,  or  barren  professor,  to  be  his  workmanship, 
or  a  tree  of  his  bringing  in$  only  the  text  saith,  he 
had  one  there.  This  is  much  like  that  in  Mat.  xy.  13 
— '  Every  plant  which  my  heavenly  Father  hath 
not  planted,  shall  he  rooted  up.'  Here  again  are 
plants  in  his  vineyard  which  God  will  not  acknow- 
ledge to  be  of  his  planting;  and  he  seems  to  suggest 
that  in  his  vineyard  are  many  such.  Every  plant, 
or  all  those  plants  or  professors,  that  are  got  into 
the  assembly  of  the  saints,  or  into  the  profession  of 
their  religion,  without  God  and  his  grace,  '  shall 
be  rooted  up. ' 

'  And  when  the  King  came  in  to  seethe  guests, 
he  saw  there  a  man  which  had  not  on  the  wedding- 
garment.  And  he  saith  unto  him,  Friend,  how 
earnest  thou  in  hither,  not  having  a  wedding-gar- 
ment ?  '  Mat.  xxii.  ii,  12.  Here  is  one  so  cunning  and 
crafty  that  he  beguiled  all  the  guests ;  he  got  and 
kept  in  the  church  even  until  the  King  himself  came 
in  to  see  the  guests;  but  his  subtilty  got  him 
nothing ;  it  did  not  blind  the  eyes  of  the  King ;  it 
did  not  pervert  the  judgment  of  the  righteous. 
'  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither?  '  did  overtake 
him  at  last;  even  a  public  rejection;  the  King  dis- 
covered him  in  the  face  of  all  present.  '  How 
earnest  thou  in  hither?'  My  Father  did  not  bring 
thee  hither ;  I  did  not  bring  thee  hither;  my  Spirit 
did  not  bring  thee  hither;  thou  art  not  of  the 
heavenly  Father's  planting.  « How  earnest  thou  in 
hither?'  He  that  '  entereth  not  by  the  door,  but 
climbeth  up  some  other  way,  the  same  is  a  thief 


and  a  robber.'  Jn.  x.  1.  This  text  also  is  full  and 
plain  to  our  purpose ;  for  this  man  came  not  in  by 
the  door,  yet  got  into  the  church ;  he  got  in  by 
climbing ;  be  broke  iu  at  the  windows ;  he  got 
something  of  the  light  and  glory  of  the  gospel  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  his  head ;  and  so,  hardy 
wretch  that  he  was,  he  presumed  to  crowd  himself 
among  the  children.  But  how  is  this  resented? 
What  saith  the  King  of  him?  Why,  this  is  his 
sign,  'the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  robber.'  See  ye 
here  also,  if  all  they  be  owned  as  the  planting  of 
God  that  get  into  his  church  or  profession  of  his 
name. 

'  Had  a  fig-tree.'  Had  one  without  a  wedding- 
garment,  had  a  thief  in  his  garden,  at  his  wedding, 
in  his  house.  These  climbed  up  some  other  way. 
There  are  many  ways  to  get  into  the  church  of 
God,  and  profession  of  his  name,  besides,  and  with- 
out an  entering  by  the  door. 

1.  There  is  the  way  of  lying  and  dissembling, 
and  at  this  gap  the  Gibeonites  got  in.  Jos.  be.  &c. 

2.  There  is  sometimes  falseness  among  some 
pastors,  either  for  the  sake  of  carnal  relations,  or 
the  like ;  at  this  hole  Tobiah,  the  enemy  of  God, 

got  in.  Ne.  xiii.  4-9. 

3.  There  is  sometimes  negligence,  and  too  much 
uncircumspectness  in  the  whole  church  ;  thus  the 
uncircumcised  got  in.  Eze.  xiiv.  7, 8. 

4.  Sometimes,  again,  let  the  church  be  never 
so  circumspect,  yet  these  have  so  much  help 
from  the  devil  that  they  beguile  them  all,  and 
so  get  in.  These  are  of  that  sort  of  thieves  that 
Paul  complains  of, '  False  brethren,  that  are  brought 
in  unawares.'  Ga.  ii.  4.  Jude  also  cries  out  of  these, 
'  Certain  men  crept  in  unawares.'  Jude  4.  Crept  in ! 
What,  were  they  so  lowly  ?  A  voluntary  humility, 
a  neglecting  of  the  body,  not  in  any  humour.1 
Col.  ii.  23.  0 !  how  seemingly  self-denying  are  some 
of  these  *  creeping  things,'  that  yet  are  to  be  held, 
(as  we  shall  know  them)  an  abomination  to  Israel. 

Ie.  xi.  43,  44. 

But  in  a  great  bouse  there  are  not  only  vessels 
of  gold  and  of  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth; 
and  some  to  honour,  and  some  to  dishonour.  2  Ti. 
ii.  20.  By  these  words  the  apostle  seems  to  take  it 
for  granted,  that  as  there  hath  been,  so  there  still 
will  be  these  kind  of  fig-trees,  these  barren  pro- 
fessors in  the  house,  when  all  men  have  done  what 
they  can ;  even  as  in  a  great  house  there  are  always 
vessels  to  dishonour,  as  well  as  those  to  honour 
and  glory ;  vessels  of  wood  and  of  earth,  as  well 
as  of  silver  and  gold.  So,  then,  there  must  be 
wooden  professors  in  the  garden  of  God,  there  must 
be  earthy,  earthen  professors  in  his  vineyard ;  but 
that  methinks  is  the  biting  word,  '  and  some  to 


1  '  Humour,'  the  temper  or  disposition  of  mind.  Not  oiit 
of  love  to  humility,  hut  these  creeping  things  pretend  to  be 
humble,  to  gain  some  sinister  eud. — (En.) 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


1 65 


dishonour.'  Ro..ix.  21, 22.  That  to  the  Romans  is 
dreadful,  but  this  seems  to  go  beyond  it;  that 
speaks  but  of  the  reprobate  in  general,  but  this  of 
such  and  such  in  particular;  that  speaks  of  their 
hardening  but  in  the  common  way,  but  this  that 
they  must  be  suffered  to  creep  into  the  church, 
there  to  fit  themselves  for  their  place,  their  own 
place,  the  place  prepared  for  them  of  this  sort 
only.  Ac.  i.  25.  As  the  Lord  Jesus  said  once  of  the 
Pharisees,  These  'shall  receive  greater  damnation.' 

Lu.  xt.  47. 

Barren  fig-tree,  fruitless  professor,  hast  thou 
heard  all  these  things?  Hast  thou  considered  that 
this  fig-tree  is  not  acknowledged  of  God  to  be  his, 
but  is  denied  to  be  of  his  planting,  and  of  his 
bringing  unto  his  wedding?  Dost  not  thou  see 
that  thou  art  called  a  thief  and  a  robber,  that  hast 
cither  climbed  up  to,  or  crept  in  at  another  place 
than  the  door?  Dost  thou  not  hear  that  there 
will  be  in  God's  house  wooden  and  earthly  profes- 
sors, and  that  no  place  will  serve  to  fit  those  for 
hell  but  the  house,  the  church,  the  vineyard  of 
God?  Barren  fig-tree,  fruitless  Christian,  do  not 
thine  ears  tingle? 

And  he  came  and  sought  f mil  thereon. 

When  a  man  hath  got  a  profession,  and  is 
crowded  into  the  church  and  house  of  God,  the 
question  is  not  now,  Hath  he  life,  hath  he  right 
principles  ?  but,  Hath  he  fruit  ?  He  came  seeking 
fruit  thereon.  It  mattereth  not  who  brought  thee 
in  hither,  whether  God  or  the  devil,  or  thine  own 
vain-glorious  heart;  but  hast  thou  fruit?  Dost 
thou  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God  ?  And,  '  Let  every 
one  that  nameth  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
'  Christ  depart  from  iniquity.'  2  Ti.  ii.  19.  He  doth 
not  say,  And  let  every  one  that  hath  grace,  or  let 
those  that  have  the  Spirit  of  God ;  but,  'Let  every 
one  that  nameth  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
'  Christ  depart  from  iniquity.' 

What  do  men  meddle  with  religion  fur  ?  Why 
do  they  call  themselves  by  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  if  they  have  not  the  grace  of  God,  if  they 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ?  God,  therefore, 
expecteth  fruit.  What  do  they  do  in  the  vineyard  ? 
Let  them  work,  or  get  them  out;  the  vineyard 
must  have  labourers  in  it.  '  Son,  go  work  to-day 
in  my  vineyard.'  Mat. xxi.28.  Wherefore,  want  of 
grace  and  want  of  Spirit  will  not  keep  God  from 
seeking  fruit.  '  And  he  came  and  sought  fruit 
thereon.'  Lu.  xiii.  G;  viii,  s.  He  requireth  that  which 
he  seemeth  to  have.  Every  man  in  the  vineyard 
and  house  of  God  promiseth  himself,  professeth  to 
others,  and  would  have  all  men  take  it  for  granted, 
that  a  heavenly  principle  is  in  him,  why  then  should 
not  God  seek  fruit? 

As  for  them,  therefore,  that  will  retain  the  name 
of  Christians,  fearing  God,  and  yet  make  no  con- 


science of  bringing  forth  fruit  to  him,  he  saith  to 
such,  Away !  •  As  for  you,  -  Go  ye,  serve  ye  every 
one  his  idols,  and  hereafter  also,  if  ye  will  not 
hearken  unto  me,'  <fec.  Ezc.  xx.  3a.  Barren  fig-tree, 
dost  thou  hear?  God  expecteth  fruit,  God  calls 
fur  fruit,  yea,  God  will  shortly  come  seeking  fruit 
on  this  barren  fig-tree.  Barren  fig-tree,  either 
bear  fruit,  or  go  out  of  the  vineyard  ;  and  yet  then 
thy  case  will  be  unspeakably  damnable.  Yea,  let 
me  add,  if  thou  shalt  neither  bear  fruit  nor  depart, 
God  will  take  his  name  out  of  thy  mouth.  Je.xiw.2 
He  will  have  fruit.  And  I  say  further,  if  thou 
wilt  do  neither,  yet  God  in  justice  and  righteous- 
ness will  still  come  for  fruit.  And  it  will  be  in 
vain  for  thee  to  count  this  austerity.  He  will  reap 
where  he  hath  not  sowed,  and  gather  where  he 
hath  not  strewed.  Mat.  xxv.  24-26.  Barren  fig-tree, 
dost  thou  hear? 

Quest.  What  if  a  man  have  no  grace  ? 

Answ.  Yes,  seeing  he  hath  a  profession. 

And  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereof. 

A  church,  then,  and  a  profession,  are  not  places 
where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  themselves 
and  sins  from  God.  Some  of  old  thought  that  be- 
cause they  could  cry,  '  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the 
temple  of  the  Lord!'  that  therefore  they  were  de- 
livered, or  had  a  dispensation  to  do  the  abomina- 
tions which  they  committed,  as  some  in  our  days ; 
for  who,  say  they,  have  a  right  to  the  creatures, 
if  not  Christians,  if  not  professors,  if  not  church 
members?  And,  from  this  conclusion,  let  go  the 
reins  of  their  inordinate  affections  after  pride,  am- 
bition, gluttony;  pampering  themselves  without 
fear,  Jude  12,  daubing  themselves  with  the  lust-pro- 
voking fashions  of  the  times ;  to  walk  with  stretched 
out  necks,  naked  breasts,  frizzled  fore-tops,  wanton 
gestures,  iu  gorgeous  apparel,  mixed  with  gold  and 
pearl,  and  costly  array.1  I  will  not  here  make 
inspection  into  their  lives,  their  carriages  at  home, 
in  their  corners  and  secret  holes ;  but  certainly, 
persons  thus  spirited,  thus  principled,  and  thus  in- 
clined, have  but  empty  boughs,  boughs  that  want 
the  fruit  that  God  expects,  and  that  God  will  come 
down  to  seek. 

Barren  fig-tree,  thou  art  not  licensed  by  thy 
profession,  nor  by  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard,  to 
bear  these  clusters  of  Gomorrah ;  neither  shall  the 
vineyard,  nor  thy  being  crowded  among  the  trees 
there,  shelter  thee  from  the  sight  of  the  eye  of 

1  However  strange  it  may  appear,  it  is  true  that  the 
Ranters,  in  Buuyan's  time,  used  these  arguments,  and  those 
so  graphically  put  into  the  mouth  of  Bye-ends,  iu  the  Pifyrim, 
to  justify  their  nonconformity  to  Christ.  The  tom-fooleries 
and  extravagancies  of  dress  introduced  by  Charles  II.,  ar>; 
here  justly  and  contemptuously  described.  The  ladies'  head- 
dresses, called  '  frizzled  fore-  tops,'  became  so  extravagant,  that 
a  barber  used  high  steps  to  enable  him  to  dre=s  a  lady's  headl 
-(En.) 


566 


THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


God.  Many  make  religion  their  cloak,  and  Christ 
their  stalking-horse,  and  by  that  means  cover 
themselves  and  hide  their  own  wickedness  from 
men ;  but  God  seeth  their  hearts,  hath  his  print 
upon  the  heels  of  their  feet,  and  pondereth  all  their 
goings;  and  at  last,  when  their  iniquity  is  found 
to  be  hateful,  he  will  either  smite  them  with  hard- 
ness of  heart,  and  so  leave  them,  or  awaken  them 
to  bring  forth  fruit.  Fruit  he  looks  for,  seeks, 
and  expects,  barren  fig-tree ! 

But  what!  come  into  the  presence  of  God  to 
sin !  "What !  come  into  the  presence  of  God  to 
hide  thy  sin!  Alas,  man!  the  church  is  God's 
garden,  and  Christ  Jesus  is  the  great  Apostle  and 
High-priest  of  our  profession.  What !  come  into 
the  house  that  is  called  by  my  name !  into  the  place 
where  mine  honour  dwelleth !  Ps.  xxvi  8.  Where 
mine  eyes  and  heart  are  continually !  1  Ki.  ix.  3. 
What !  come  there  to  sin,  to  hide  thy  sin,  to  cloak 
thy  sin !  His  plants  are  an  orchard  with  pleasant 
fruits.  Ca.  iv.  13.  And  every  time  he  goeth  into  his 
garden,  it  is  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  valley,  and  to 
'  see  if  the  vine  flourished,  and  the  pomegranates 
budded.' 

Yea,  saith  he,  he  came  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig- 
tree.  The  church  is  the  place  of  God's  delight, 
where  he  ever  desires  to  be :  there  he  is  night  and 
day.  He  is  there  to  seek  for  fruit,  to  seek  for 
fruit  of  all  and  every  tree  in  the  garden.  Where- 
fore, assure  thyself,  0  fruitless  one,  that  thy  ways 
must  needs  be  open  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord. 
One  black  sheep  is  soon  espied,  although  in  com- 
pany with  many ;  that  is  taken  with"  the  first  cast 
of  the  eye  ;  its  different  colour  still  betrays  it.  I 
say,  therefore,  a  church  and  a  profession  are  not 
places  where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide 
themselves  from  God  that  seeks  for  fruit.  « My 
vineyard,'   saith  God,   '  which  is  mine,  is  before 

me.'  Ca.  via.  12. 

And  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  and  found 
none. 

Barren  fig-tree,  hearken;  the  continual  non- 
bearing  of  fruit  is  a  dreadful  sign  that  thou  art  to 
come  to  a  dreadful  end,  as  the  winding  up  of  this 
parable  concludeth. 

'And  found  none.'  None  at  all,  or  none  to 
God's  liking ;  for  when  he  saith,  '  He  came  seeking 
fruit  thereon,'  he  means  'fruit  meet  for  God,'  plea^ 
saut  fruit,  fruit  good  and  sweet.  He.  vi.  Alas !  it  is 
not  any  fruit  will  serve ;  bad  fruit  is  counted  none. 
♦  Every  tree  which  briugeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is 
hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire.'  Mat.  m.  io. 

First.  There  is  a  fruit  among  professors  that 
withers,  and  so  never  comes  to  be  ripe;  a  fruit  that 
is  smitten  in  the  growth,  and  comes  not  to  matur- 
ity ;  and  this  is  reckoned  no  fruit.  This  fruit  those 
professors  bear  that  have  many  fair  beginnings,  or 


blossoms ;  that  make  many  fair  offers  of  repent- 
ance and  amendment;  that  begin  to  pray,  to  re- 
solve, and  to  break  off  their  sins  by  righteousness, 
but  stop  at  those  beginnings,  and  bring  no  fruit 
forth  to  perfection.  This  man's  fruit  is  withered, 
wrinkled,  smitten  fruit,  and  is  in  effect  no  fruit  at 
all. 

Second.  There  is  a  hasty  fruit,  such  as  is  the 
'corn  upon  the  house-top,'  i*s.  cxxix.6;  or  that  which 
springs  up  on  the  dung-hill,  that  runs  up  suddenly, 
violently,  with  great  stalks  and  big  show,  and  yet 
at  last  proves  empty  of  kernel.  This  fruit  is  to  be 
found  in  those  professors  that  on  a  sudden  are  so 
awakened,  so  convinced,  and  so  affected  with  their 
condition  that  they  shake  the  whole  family,  the 
endship,1  the  whole  town.  For  a  while  they  cry 
hastily,  vehemently,  dolefully,  mournfully,  and  yet 
all  is  but  a  pang,  an  agony,  a  fit,  they  bring  not 
forth  fruit  with  patience.  These  are  called  those 
hasty   fruits   that    '  shall    be    a    fading   flower.' 

Is.  xxviii.  4. 

Third.  There  is  a  fruit  that  is  vile  anil  ill-tasted, 
how  long  soever  it  be  in  growing;  the  root  is 
dried,  and  cannot  convey  a  sufficiency  of  sap  to  the 
branches,  to  ripen  the  fruit.  Je.  xxiv.  These  are  the 
fruits  of  such  professors  whose  hearts  are  estranged 
from  communion  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  fruit 
groweth  from  themselves,  from  their  parts,  gifts, 
strength  of  wit,  natural  or  moral  principles. 
These,  notwithstanding  they  bring  forth  fruit,  are 
called  empty  vines,  such  as  bring  not  fortli  fruit 
to  God.  '  Their  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  bear 
no  fruit;  yea,  though  they  bring  forth,  yet  will 
I   slay  even  the   beloved  fruit  of  their  womb.' 

Ho.  ix.  16. 

Fourth.  There  is  a  fruit  that  is  wild.  '  I  looked 
for  grapes  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes.' is.  v.  4. 
I  observe,  that  as  there  are  trees  and  herbs  that 
are  wholly  right  and  noble,  fit  indeed  for  the  vine- 
yard ;  so  there  are  also  their  semblance,  but  wild ; 
not  right,  but  ignoble.  There  is  the  grape,  and  the 
wild  grape ;  the  vine,  and  the  wild  vine ;  the  rose, 
and  canker  rose ;  flowers  and  wild  flowers ;  the 
apple,  and  the  wild  apple,  which  Ave  call  the  crab. 
Now,  fruit  from  these  wild  things,  however  they 
may  please  the  children  to  play  with,  yet  the  pru- 
dent and  grave  count  them  of  little  or  no  value. 
There  are  also  in  the  world  a  generation  of  pro- 
fessors that,  notwithstanding  their  profession,  are 
wild  by  nature ;  yea,  such  as  were  never  cut  out, 
or  off,  from  the  wild  olive-tree,  nor  never  yet 
planted  into  the  good  olive-tree.  Now,  these  can 
bring  nothing  forth  but  wild  olive  berries,  they 
cannot  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.  Such  are  all 
those  that  have  lightly  taken  up  a  profession,  and 


1  A  word  not  to  be  found  in  our  dictionaries,  being  local 
and  almost  obsolete.  It  means  a  division,  end,  or  border  of  a 
town  or  village. — (Ed.) 


THE  D005I  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


5  0" 


crept  into  the  vineyard  without  a  new  birth,  and 
the  blessing  of  regeneration. 

Fifth.  There  is  also  untimely  fruit:  '  Even  as  a 
fig-tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs.'  Ke.  vL  xiii.  Fruit 
out  of  season,  and  so  no  fruit  to  God's  liking. 
There  are  two  sorts  of  professors  subject  to  bring 
forth  untimely  fruit:  1.  They  that  bring  forth 
fruit  too  soon ;  2.  They  that  bring  forth  fruit  too 
late. 

1.  They  that  bring  forth  too  soon.  They  are 
such  as  at  present  receive  the  Word  with  joy;  and 
anon,  before  they  have  root  downwards,  they  thrust 
forth  upwards  ;  but  having  not  root,  when  the  sun 
ariseth,  they  are  smitten,  and  miserably  die  with- 
out fruit.  These  professors  are  those  light  and 
inconsiderate  ones  that  think  nothing  but  peace 
will  atteud  the  gospel ;  and  so  anon  rejoice  at  the 
tidings,  without  foreseeing  the  evil.  Wherefore, 
when  the  evil  comes,  being  unarmed,  and  so  not 
able  to  stand  any  longer,  they  die,  and  are  withered, 
and  bring  forth  no  fruit.  '  He  that  received  the 
seed  into  stony  places,  the  same  is  he  that  heareth 
the  Word,  and  anon  with  joy  receiveth  it ;  yet 
hath  he  not  root  in  himself,  but  dureth  for  a  while; 
for  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth  because 
of  the  Word,  by  and  by  he  is  offended.'  Mat.  xiii. 
20,  21.  There  is,  in  is.  xxvm.  4,  mention  made  of  some 
'  whose  glorious  beauty  shall  be  a  fading  flower,' 
because  it  is  '  fruit  before  the  summer.'  Both 
these  are  untimely  fruit. 

2.  They  also  bring  forth  untimely  fruit  that  stay 
till  the  season  is  over.  God  will  have  his  fruit  in 
his  season ;  I  say,  he  will  receive  them  of  such 
men  as  shall  render  them  to  him  in  their  seasons. 
Mat.  xxi.  4i.  The  missing  of  the  season  is  danger- 
ous; staying  till  the  door  is  shut  is  dangerous. 
Mat.  xxv.  10,  n.  Many  there  be  that  come  not  till  the 
flood  of  God's  anger  is  raised,  and  too  deep  for  them 
to  wade  through ;  '  Surely  in  the  floods  of  great 
waters  they  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  him.'  Ps. 
xxxii.  6.  Esau  afterwards  is  fearful :  '  For  ye  know 
how  that  afterward,  when  he  would  have  inherited 
the  blessing,  he  was  rejected;  for  he  found  no 
place  of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it  carefully 
with  tears.'  He.m.  w. 

So  the  children  of  Israel,  they  brought  to  God 
the  fruits  of  obedience  too  late  ;  their  '  Lo,  we  be 
here'  came  too  late  ;  Nu.  xiv.  40-42.  their  '  We  will 
go  up'  came  too  late.  Nu.  xiv.  40-44.  The  Lord  had 
sworn  before,  '  that  they  should  not  possess  the 
land.'  Mat.  xxv.  10;  xxvii.  5.  All  these  are  such  as 
bring  forth  untimely  fruit.  He.  xii.  17.  Lu.  xiii.  25—27. 
It  is  the  hard  hap  of  the  reprobate  to  do  all  things 
too  late ;  to  be  sensible  of  his  want  of  grace  too 
late ;  to  be  sorry  for  sin  too  late ;  to  seek  repent- 
ance too  late ;  to  ask  for  mercy,  and  to  desire  to 
go  to  glory  too  late. 

Thus   you   see,    1.  That  fruit  smitten  in  the 


growth,  that  withereth,  and  that  conies  not  to 
maturity,  is  no  fruit.  2.  That  hasty  fruit,  such 
as  '  the  grass  upon  the  house-top,'  withereth  also 
before  it  groweth  up,  and  is  no  fruit.  Ps.  asrix.  8. 
3.  That  the  fruit  that  is  vile,  and  ill-tasted,  is  no 
fruit.  That  wild  fruit,  wild  grapes,  are  no  fruit. 
Re.  vi.  That  untimely  fruit,  such  as  comes  too  soon, 
or  that  comes  too  late,  such  as  come  not  in  their 
season,  are  no  fruit. 

And  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  and  found 
none. 

Nothing  will  do  but  fruit ;  he  looked  for  grapes. 
1  When  the  time  of  the  fruit  drew  near,  he  sent 
his  servants  to  the  husbandmen,  that  they  might 
receive  the  fruits  of  it.'  Mat.  xxi.  34. 

Quest.  But  what  fruit  doth  God  expect? 

Answ.  Good  fruit.  '  Every  tree  that  bringeth 
not  forth  good  fruit,  is  hewn  down.'  Mat.  vii.  10. 
Now,  before  the  fruit  can  be  good,  the  tree  must 
be  good ;  for  good  fruit  makes  not  a  good  tree, 
but  a  '  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit.  Do 
men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles?' 
A  man  must  be  good,  else  he  can  bring  forth  no 
good  fruit ;  he  must  have  righteousness  imputed, 
that  he  may  stand  good  in  God's  sight  from  the 
curse  of  his  law;  he  must  have  a  principle  of 
righteousness  in  his  soul,  else  how  should  he  bring- 
forth  good  fruits?  and  hence  it  is,  that  a  Christ- 
ian's fruits  are  called  '  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
the  fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus 
Christ.'  Ga.  v.  22,  23.  Phi.  i.  11.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
therefore  the  Spirit  must  be  there ;  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  therefore  righteousness  must  first 
be  there.  But  to  particularize  in  a  few  things 
briefly: — 

First.  God  expecteth  fruit  that  will  answer,  and 
be  worthy  of  the  repentance  which  thou  feignest 
thyself  to  have.  Every  one  in  a  profession,  and 
that  hath  crowded  into  the  vineyard,  pretendeth  to 
repentance ;  now  of  every  such  soul,  God  expecteth 
that  the  fruits  of  repentance  be  found  to  attend 
them.  '  Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  meet  for 
repentance,'  or  answerable  to  thy  profession  of  the 
doctrine  of  repentance.  Mat.  iii.  8.  Barren  fig-tree, 
seeing  thou  art  a  professor,  and  art  got  into  the 
vineyard,  thou  standest  before  the  Lord  of  the 
vineyard  as  one  of  the  trees  of  the  garden ;  where- 
fore he  looketh  for  fruit  from  thee,  as  from  the 
rest  of  the  trees  in  the  vineyard ;  fruits,  I  say,  and 
such  as  may  declare  thee  in  heart  and  life  one  that 
hath  made  sound  profession  of  repentance.  By 
thy  profession  thou  hast  said,  I  am  sensible  of  the 
evil  of  sin.  Now  then,  live  such  a  life  as  declares 
that  thou  art  sensible  of  the  evil  of  sin.  By  thy 
profession  thou  hast  said,  I  am  sorry  for  my  sin. 
Why,  then,  live  such  a  life  as  may  declare  this 
sorrow.     By  thy  profession  thou  hast  said,  I  am 


568 


THE  BARREN   FIG-TREE,  OR 


ashamed  of  my  sin ;  yea,  but  live  such  a  life,  that 
men  by  that  may  see  thy  shame  for  sin.  Ps.  xnviii.  is. 
je.  xxxi.  19.  By  thy  profession  thou  sayest,  I  have 
turned  from,  left  off,  and  am  become  an  enemy  to 
every  appearance  of  evil.  lTb.v.  22.  Ah!  but  doth 
thy  life  and  conversation  declare  thee  to  be  such 
an  one?  Take  heed,  barren  fig-tree,  lest  thy  life 
should  give  thy  profession  the  lie.  I  say  again, 
take  heed,  for  God  himself  will  come  for  fruit. 
1  And  he  sought  fruit  thereon,' 

You  have  some  professors,  that  are  only  saints 
before  men  when  they  are  abroad,  but  are  devils 
and  vipers  at  home;  saints  by  profession,  but 
devils  by  practice ;  saints  in  word,  but  sinners  in 
heart  and  life.  These  men  may  have  the  profes- 
sion, but  they  want  the  fruits  that  become  repent- 
ance.1 

Barren  fig-tree,  can  it  be  imagined  that  those 
that  paint  themselves  did  ever  repent  of  their 
pride?  or  that  those  that  pursue  this  world  did 
ever  repent  of  their  covetousness  ?  or  that  those 
that  walk  with  wanton  eyes  did  ever  repent  of 
their  fleshly  lusts  ?  Where,  barren  fig-tree,  is  the 
fruit  of  these  people's  repentance  ?  Nay,  do  they 
not  rather  declare  to  the  world  that  they  have  re- 
pented of  their  profession?  Their  fruits  look  as  if 
they  had.  Their  pride  saith  they  have  repented 
of  their  humility.  Their  covetousness  declareth 
that  they  are  weary  of  depending  upon  God ;  and 
doth  not  thy  wanton  actions  declare  that  thou  ab- 
horrest  chastity?  Where  is  thy  fruit,  barren  fig- 
tree?  Repentance  is  not  only  a  sorrow,  and  a 
shame  for,  but  a  turning  from  sin  to  God ;  it  is 
called  '  repentance  from  dead  works. '  He.  vi.  1.  Hast 
thou  that '  godly  sorrow '  that '  worketh  repentance 
to  salvation,  not  to  be  repented  of?'  2  Co.  vii.  10,11. 
How  dost  thou  show  thy  carefulness,  and  clearing 
of  thyself ;  thy  indignation  against  sin  ;  thy  fear  of 
offending ;  thy  vehement  desire  to  walk  with  God  ; 
thy  zeal  for  his  name  and  glory  in  the  world? 
And  what  revenge  hast  thou  in  thy  heart  against 
every  thought  of  disobedience  ? 

But  where  is  the  fruit  of  this  repentance?  Where 
is  thy  watching,  thy  fasting,  thy  praying  against 
the  remainders  of  corruption  ?  Where  is  thy  self- 
abhorrence,  thy  blushing  before  God,  for  the  sin 
that  is  yet  behind?  Where  is  thy  tenderness  of 
the  name  of  God  and  his  ways?  Where  is  thy 
self-denial  and  contentment  ?  How  dost  thou  show 
before  men  the  truth  of  thy  turning  to  God  ?  Hast 
thou  ■  renounced  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty, 
not  walking  in  craftiness?'     Canst  thou  commend 


1  See  the  character  of  Talkative,  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
p.  122.  '  His  house  is  as  empty  of  religion  as  the  white  of  an 
egg  is  of  savour.  There  is  in  his  house  neither  prayer,  nor 
sign  of  repentance  for  sin.  He  is  the  very  stain,  reproach, 
and  shame  of  religion.  Thus  say  the  common  people  that 
know  him,  A  saint  abroad  and  a  devil  at  home.' — (Ed.) 


thyself  '  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of 
God?'  2  Co.  iv.  2. 

Second.  God  expecteth  fruits  that  shall  answer 
that  faith  which  thou  makest  profession  of.  The 
professor  that  is  got  into  the  vineyard  of  God  doth 
feign  that  he  hath  the  faith,  the  faith  most  holy, 
the  faith  of  God's  elect.  Ah!  but  where  are  thy 
fruits,  barren  fig-tree  ?  The  faith  of  the  Romans 
was  'spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world.'  ito. 
i.  s.  And  the  Thessalonians'  faith  grew  exceed- 
ingly. 2  Th.  ;.  3. 

Thou  professest  to  believe  thou  hast  a  share  in 
another  world :  hast  thou  let  go  this,  barren  fig- 
tree?  Thou  professest  thou  believest  in  Christ: 
is  he  thy  joy,  and  the  life  of  thy  soul  ?  Yea,  what 
conformity  unto  him,  to  his  sorrows  and  sufferings? 
What  resemblance  hath  his  crying,  and  groaning, 
and  bleeding,  and  dying,  wrought  in  thee  ?  Dost 
thou  •  bear  about  in  thy  body  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus?'  and  is  also  the  life  of  Jesus  '  made 
manifest  in  thy  mortal  body  ? '  2  Co.  iv.  10, 11.  Barren 
fig-tree,  *  show  me  thy  faith  by  thy  works. '  '  Show 
out  of  a  good  conversation  thy  works  with  meek- 
ness of  wisdom.'  Ja.  ii.  18;  iii.is.  What  fruit,  barren 
fig-tree,  what  degree  of  heart-holiness?  for  faith 
purifies  the  heart.  Ac.  xv.  9.  What  love  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  ?  for  '  faith  worketh  by  love. '  Ga.  v.  c. 

Third.  God  expecteth  fruits  according  to  the 
seasons  of  grace  thou  art  under,  according  to  the 
rain  that  cometh  upon  thee.  Perhaps  thou  art 
planted  in  a  good  soil,  by  great  waters,  that  thou 
mightest  bring  forth  branches,  and  bear  fruit;  that 
thou  mightest  be  a  goodly  vine  or  fig-tree.  Shall 
he  not  therefore  seek  for  fruit,  for  fruit  answerable 
to  the  means?  Barren  fig-tree,  God  expects  it, 
and  will  find  it  too,  if  ever  he  bless  thee.  '  For 
the  earth  which  drinketh  in  the  rain  that  cometh 
oft  upon  it,  and  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them 
by  whom  it  is  dressed,  receiveth  blessing  from 
God:  but  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briars  is 
rejected,  and  is  nigh  unto  cursing,  Avhose  end  is 
to  be  burned.'  He.  vi.  7, 8. 

Barren  soul,  how  many  showers  of  grace,  how 
many  dews  from  heaven,  how  many  times  have  the 
silver  streams  of  the  city  of  God  run  gliding  by 
thy  roots,  to  cause  thee  to  bring  forth  fruit!  These 
showers  and  streams,  and  the  drops  that  hang  upon 
thy  boughs,  will  all  be  accounted  for;  and  will 
they  not  testify  against  thee  that  thou  oughtest, 
of  right,  to  be  burned  ?  Hear  and  tremble,  0  thou 
barren  professor !  Fruits  that  become  thy  profes- 
sion of  the  gospel,  the  God  of  heaven  expecteth. 
The  gospel  hath  in  it  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  eternal  life ;  but  what 
fruit  hath  thy  profession  of  a  belief  of  these  things 
put  forth  in  thy  heart  and  life  ?  Hast  thou  given 
thyself  to  the  Lord  ?  and  is  all  that  thou  hast  to 
be  ventured  for  his  name  in  this  world?     Dost 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  FROFESSOR. 


169 


thou  walk  like  one  that  is  bought  with  a  price, 
even  with  the  price  of  precious  hlood  ? 

Fourth.  The  fruit  that  God  expecteth  is  such  as 
is  meet  for  himself ;  fruit  that  may  glorify  God. 
God's  trees  are  trees  of  righteousness,  the  planting 
of  the  Lord,  that  he  may  he  glorified  ;  fruit  that 
tasteth  of  heaven,  abundance  of  such  fruit.  For 
1  herein,'  saith  Christ,  '  is  my  Father  glorified,  that 
ye  hear  much  fruit.'  Jn.xv.  8.  Fruits  of  ail  kinds, 
new  and  old  ;  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  in  all 
goodness,  and  righteousness,  and  truth.  Fruits 
before  the  world,  fruits  before  the  saints,  fruits 
before  God,  fruits  before  angels. 

0  my  brethren,  '  what  manner  of  persons  ought 
we  to  be,'  who  have  subscribed  to  the  Lord,  and 
have  called  ourselves  by  the  name  of  Israel?  '  One 
shall  say  I  am  the  Lord's  ;  and  another  shall  call 
himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  ;  and  another  shall 
subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the  Lord,  and  sur- 
name himself  by  the  name  of  Israel. '  is.  xliv.  5.  Barren 
fig-tree,  hast  thou  subscribed,  hast  thou  called  thy- 
self by  the  name  of  Jacob,  and  surnamed  thyself 
by  the  name  of  Israel  ?  All  this  thou  pretendest 
to,  who  art  got  into  the  vineyard,  who  art  placed 
among  the  trees  of  the  garden  of  God.  God  doth 
therefore  look  for  such  fruit  as  is  worthy  of  his 
name,  as  is  meet  for  him  ;  as  the  apostle  saith, 
'  we  should  walk  worthy  of  God  ;'  that  is,  so  as  we 
may  show  in  every  place  that  the  presence  of  God 
is  with  us,  his  fear  in  us,  and  his  majesty  and 
authority  upon  our  actions.  Fruits  meet  for  him, 
such  a  dependence  upon  him,  such  trust  in  his 
word,  such  satisfaction  in  his  presence,  such  a 
trusting  of  him  with  all  my  concerns,  and  such  de- 
light in  the  enjoyment  of  him,  that  may  demon- 
strate that  his  fear  is  in  my  heart,  that  my  soul  is 
wrapped  up  in  his  things,  and  that  my  body,  and 
soul,  and  estate,  and  all,  are  in  truth,  through  his 
grace,  at  his  dispose,  fruit  meet  for  him.  Hearty 
thanks,  and  blessing  God  for  Jesus  Christ,  for  his 
good  word,  for  his  free  grace,  for  the  discovery  of 
himself  in  Christ  to  the  soul,  secret  longing  after 
another  world,  fruit  meet  for  him.  Liberality  to 
the  poor  saints,  to  the  poor  world  ;  a  life  in  word 
and  deed  exemplary  ;  a  patient  and  quiet  enduring 
of  all  things,  till  I  have  done  and  suffered  the  whole 
will  of  God,  which  he  hath  appointed  for  me.  '  That 
on  the  good  ground  are  they  which,  in  an  honest 
and  good  heart,  having  heard  the  word,  keep  it, 
and  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience.'  Lu.  viii.  15.  This 
is  bringing  forth  fruit  unto  God;  having  our  'fruit 
unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life.'  Ro.  vu. 

4 ;  vi.  22  ;  xiv.  S. 

Fifth.  The  Lord  expects  fruit  becoming  the  vine- 
yard of  God.  '  The  vineyard,'  saith  he,  *  in  a  very 
fruitful  hill : '  witness  the  fruit  brought  forth  in  all 
ages.  is.  v.  l.  The  most  barren  trees  that  ever  grew 
in  the  wood  of  this  world,  when  planted  in  this  vine- 

vol.  III. 


yard  by  the  God  of  heaven,  what  fruit  to  God  ward 
have  they  brought  forth  !  «  Abel  offered  the  more 
excellent  sacrifice.'  ne.  xi.  i.  Enoch  walked  with 
God  three  hundred  years,  ne.  xL  5.  Noah,  by  his 
life  of  faith,  '  condemned  the  world,  and  became 
heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith.'  He.  xi.  7. 
Abraham  left  his  country,  and  went  out  after  God, 
not  knowing  whither  he  went.  He.  xi.  8.  Moses  left 
a  kingdom,  and  run  the  hazard  of  the  wrath  of 
the  king,  for  the  love  he  had  to  God  and  Christ. 
What  shall  I  say  of  them  who  had  trials,  '  not  ac- 
cepting deliverance,  that  they  might  obtain  a  bet- 
ter resurrection  ?  They  were  stoned ;  they  were 
sawn  asunder;  were  tempted  ;  were  slain  with  the 
sword ;  they  wandered  about  in  sheep-skins  and 
goat-skins,  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented.' 
He.  xi.  35-37.  Peter  left  his  father,  ship,  and  nets. 
Mat.  ir.  13—20.  Paul  turned  off  from  the  feet  of  Ga- 
maliel. Men  brought  their  goods  and  possessions 
(the  price  of  them)  and  cast  it  down  at  the  apostle's 
feet.  Ac.  xix.  is— 20.  And  others  brought  their  books 
together,  and  burned  them  ;  curious  books,  though 
they  were  worth  fifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver.  I 
could  add  how  many  willingly  offered  themselves 
in  all  ages,  and  their  all,  for  the  worthy  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  to  be  racked,  starved,  hanged, 
burned,  drowned,  pulled  in  pieces,  and  a  thousand 
calamities.1  Barren  fig-tree,  the  vineyard  of  God 
hath  been  a  fruitful  place.  What  dost  thou  there  ? 
What  dost  thou  bear?  God  expects  fruit  accord- 
ing to,  or  becoming  the  soil  of  the  vineyard. 

Sixth.  The  fruit  which  God  expecteth  is  such  as 
becometh  God's  husbandry  and  labour.  The  vine- 
yard is  God's  husbandry,  or  tillage.  '  I  am  the 
true  vine,'  saith  Christ,  'and  my  Father  is  the  hus- 
bandman.' Jn.  xv.  i.  And  again,  'Ye  are  God's 
husbandry,  ye  are  God's  building.'  l  Co.  Hi.  o.  The 
vineyard  ;  God  fences  it,  God  gathereth  out  the 
stones,  God  builds  the  tower,  and  the  wine-press 
in  the  midst  thereof.  Here  is  labour,  here  is 
protection,  here  is  removing  of  hindrances,  here 
is  convenient  purgation,  and  all  that  there  might 
be  fruit. 

Barren  fig-tree,  what  fruit  hast  thou  ?  Hast 
thou  fruit  becoming  the  care  of  God,  the  protection 
of  God,  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  patience  and  hus- 
bandry of  God  ?  It  is  the  fruit  of  the  vineyard 
that  is  either  the  shame  or  the  praise  of  the  hus- 
bandman. 'I  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful,' 
saith  Solomon,  '  and  by  the  vineyard  of  the  man 
void  of  understanding  ;  and  lo,   it  was  all  grown 

1  How  great  is  the  mercy  that  those  horrid  barbarities, 
perpetrated  upon  peaceful  Christians,  are  now  only  heard  of  in 
those  distant  parts  of  Satan's  empire,  China  and  .Madagascar! 
Has  the  enmity  of  the  human  heart  by  nature  changed? 
No ;  but  the  number  of  Christians  has  so  vastly  increased  with 
a  civilizing  influence,  as  to  change  the  face  of  society.  What 
a  paradise  will  this  earth  become  when  Christ  shall  reign  in 
every  heart ! — (Ed.) 

72 


570 


THE   BARREN   FIG-TREE,  OR 


over  with  thorns,  and  nettles  had  covered  the  face 
thereof. '  Pr.  xxxir.  30—32. 

Barren  fig-tree,  if  men  should  make  a  judgment 
of  the  care,  and  pains,  and  labour  of  God  in  his 
church,  by  the  fruit  that  thou  bringest  forth,  what 
might  they  say  ?  Is  he  not  slothful,  is  not  he  care- 
less, is  he  not  without  discretion  ?  0  !  thy  thorns, 
thy  nettles,  thy  barren  heart  and  barren  life,  is  a 
continual  provocation  to  the  eyes  of  his  glory,  as 
likewise  a  dishonour  to  the  glory  of  his  grace. 

Barren  fig-tree,  hast  thou  heard  all  these  things  ? 
I  will  add  yet  one  more. 

'  And  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon.'' 

The  question  is  not  now,  What  thou  thinkest  of 
thyself,  nor  what  all  the  people  of  God  think  of 
thee,  but  what  thou  shalt  be  found  in  that  day 
when  God  shall  search  thy  boughs  for  fruit?  When 
Sodom  was  to  be  searched  for  righteous  men,  God 
would  not,  in  that  matter,  trust  his  faithful  ser- 
vant Abraham  ;  but  still,  as  Abraham  interceded, 
God  answered,  '  If  I  find  fifty,  -  or  forty  and  five 
there,  I  will  not  destroy  the  city. '  Ge.  xviii.  20-2S. 
Barren  fig-tree,  what  sayest  thou  ?  God  will 
come  down  to  see,  God  will  make  search  for  fruit 
himself. 

'  And  he  came  and  sought  fruit  thereon,  and 
found  none.  Then  said  he  unto  the  dresser  of  the 
vineyard,  Behold,  these  three  years  I  come  seeking 
fruit  on  this  fig-tree,  and  find  none  ;  cut  it  down, 
why  cumbereth  it  the  ground  ?' 

These  words  are  the  effects  of  God's  search  into 
the  boughs  of  a  barren  fig-tree  ;  he  sought  fruit, 
and  found  none — none  to  his  liking,  none  pleasant 
and  good.  Therefore,  first,  he  complains  of  the 
want  thereof  to  the  dresser ;  calls  him  to  come,  and 
see,  and  take  notice  of  the  tree  ;  then  signifieth 
his  pleasure :  he  will  have  it  removed,  taken  away, 
cut  down  from  cumbering  the  ground. 

Observe,  The  barren  fig-tree  is  the  object  of 
God's  displeasure ;  God  cannot  bear  with  a  fruit- 
less professor. 

Then  said  he,  <kc. 

Then,  after  this  provocation  ;  then,  after  he  had 
sought  and  found  no  fruit,  then.  This  word,  then, 
doth  show  us  a  kind  of  an  inward  disquietness ;  as 
he  saith  also  in  another  place,  upon  a  like  provo- 
cation. 'Then  the  anger  of  the  Lord,  and  his 
jealousy,  shall  smoke  against  that  man,  and  all  the 
curses  that  are  written  in  this  book  shall  lie  upon 
him,  and  the  Lord  shall  blot  out  his  name  from 
under  heaven.'  De.  sxix,  is— 20. 

Then  ;  it  intimateth  that  he  was  now  come  to  a 
point,  to  a  resolution  what  to  do  with  this  fig-tree. 
'Then  said  he  to  the  dresser  of  this  vineyard,'  that 
is,  to  Jesus  Christ,  '  behold,'  as  much  as  to  say, 
come  hither,  here  is  a  fig-tree  in  my  vineyard,  here 


is  a  professor  in  my  church,  that  is  barren,  that 
beareth  no  fruit. 

Observe,  However  the  barren  professor  thinks 
of  himself  on  earth,  the  Lord  cries  out  in  heaven 
against  him.  '  And  now  go  to,  I  will  tell  you 
what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard  :  I  will  take  away 
the  hedge  thereof,  and  it  shall  be  eaten  up  ;  and 

1  will  break  down  the  wall  thereof,  and  it  shall  be 
trodden  down. '  is.  v.  5. 

''Behold,  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit.' 

Observe,  'These  three  years.'  God  cries  out 
that  this  patience  is  abused,  that  his  forbearance  is 
abused.  Behold,  these  three  years  I  have  waited, 
forborne ;  these  three  years  I  have  deferred  mine 
anger.  '  Therefore  will  I  stretch  out  my  hand 
against  thee,  and  destroy  thee  ;  I  am  weary  with 
repenting.'  Je.  xv.  6.  'These  three  years.'  Ob- 
serve, God  layeth  up  all  the  time  ;  I  say,  a  re- 
membrance of  all  the  time  that  a  barren  fig-tree, 
or  a  fruitless  professor,  misspendeth  in  this  world. 
As  he  saith  also  of  Israel  of  old,  '  forty  years  long 
was  I  grieved  with  this  generation.'  Ps.  xcv.  10. 

'  These  three  years,'  <fce.  These  three  seasons: 
Observe,  God  remembers  how  many  seasons  thou 
hast  misspent :  for  these  three  years  signify  so 
many  seasons.  And  when  the  time  of  fruit  drew 
nigh,  that  is,  about  the  season  they  begin  to  be 
ripe,  or  that  according  to  the  season  might  so  have 
been.  Barren  fig-tree,  thou  hast  had  time,  sea- 
sons, sermons,  ministers,  afflictions,  judgments, 
mercies,  and  what  not ;  and  yet  hast  not  been 
fruitful.  Thou  hast  had  awakenings,  reproofs, 
threatenings,  comforts,  and  yet  hast  not  been  fruit- 
ful. Thou  hast  had  patterns,  examples,  citations, 
provocations,  and  yet  hast  not  been  fruitful.  Well, 
God  hath  laid  up  thy  three  years  with  himself.  He 
remembers  every  time,  every  season,  every  sermon, 
every  minister,  affliction,  judgment,  mercy,  awaken- 
ing, pattern,  example,  citation,  provocation;  he  re- 
members all.  As  he  said  of  Israel  of  old,  'They 
have  tempted  me  now  these  ten  times,  and  have 
not  hearkened  to  my  voice.'  Nu.  xiv.  22.  And  again, 
'I  remember  all  their  wickedness.'  Ho.  vH.  2. 

'  These  three  years,'  &c.  He  seeks  for  the  fruit 
of  every  season.  He  will  not  that  any  of  his  ser- 
mons, ministers,  afflictions,  judgments,  or  mercies, 
should  be  lost,  or  stand  for  insignificant  things ; 
he  will  have  according  to  the  benefit  bestowed. 

2  Ch.  xxxii.  21,  2.3.  He  hath  not  done  without  a  cause 
all  that  he  hath  done,  and  therefore  he  looketh  for 
fruit.  Eze.  xiv.  23.     Look  to  it.  barren  fig-tree.1 


1  In  the  midst  of  these  faithful  admonitions,  we  venture  to 
remark  that,  according  to  Lightfoot,  so  valuable  was  the  fiir- 
tree  that  it  was  never  destroyed  until  means  were  carefully 
used  to  restore  its  fruitfulness,  and  that  the  use  of  these  means 
occupied  a  period  of  three  years.  This  illustrates  the  wisdom 
of  our  Lord  iu  selecting  the  fig-tree  as  the  principal  object 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


571 


I  came  '  seeking  '  fruit. 

Observe,  This  word  '  seeking'  signifies  a  narrow 
search ;  for  when  a  man  seeks  for  fruit  on  a  tree, 
he  goes  round  it  and  round  it ;  now  looking  into 
this  bough,  and  then  into  that;  he  peeks  into  the 
inmost  boughs,  and  the  lowermost  boughs,  if  per- 
haps fruit  may  be  thereon.  Barren  fig-tree,  God 
will  look  into  all  thy  boughs,  he  will  be  with  thee 
in  thy  bed-fruits,  thy  midnight-fruits,  thy  closet- 
fruits,  thy  family-fruits,  thy  conversation-fruits,  to 
see  if  there  be  any  among  all  these  that  are  fit  for, 
or  worthy  of  the  name  of  the  God  of  heaven.  He 
sees  '  what  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  Israel  do 
in  the  dark.'  Eze.  vuL  K.  '  All  things  are  naked  and 
opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have 
to  do.'  lie.  iv.  12, 13. 

Seeking  fruit  on  '  Tins '  fig-tree. 

I  told  you  before,  that  he  keeps  in  remembrance 
the  times  and  seasons  that  the  barren  professor  had 
wickedly  misspent.  Now,  forasmuch  as  he  also 
pointeth  out  the  fig-tree,  this  fig-tree,  it  showeth 
that  the  barren  professor,  above  all  professors,  is  a 
continual  odium  in  the  eyes  of  God.  This  fig-tree, 
'  this  man  Coniah.'  Je.  xxii.  28.  This  people  draw 
nigh  me  with  their  mouth,  but  have  removed  their 
hearts  far  from  me.  God  knows  who  they  are 
among  all  the  thousands  of  Israel  that  are  the 
barren  and  fruitless  professors;  his  lot  will  fall  upon 
the  head  of  Achan,  though  he  be  hid  among  six 
hundred  thousand  men.  'And  he  brought  his 
household,  man  by  man,  and  Achan,  the  son  of 
Carmi,  the  son  of  Zabdi,  the  son  of  Zera,  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  was  taken. '  Jos.  vii.  17,  is.  This  is 
the  Achan,  this  is  the  fig-tree,  this  is  the  barren 
professor  ! 

There  is  a  man  hath  a  hundred  trees  in  his  vine- 
yard, and  at  the  time  of  the  season,  he  walketh  into 
his  vineyard  to  see  how  the  trees  flourish ;  and  as 
he  goes,  and  views,  and  prys,  and  observes  how 
they  are  hanged  with  fruit,  behold,  he  cometh  to 
one  where  he  findeth  naught  but  leaves.  Now  he 
makes  a  stand;  looks  upon  it  again  and  again;  he 
looks  also  here  and  there,  above  and  below;  and  if 
after  all  this  seeking,  he  finds  nothing  but  leaves 
thereon,  then  he  begins  to  cast  in  his  mind,  how 
he  may  know  this  tree  next  year;  what  stands  next 
it,  or  how  far  it  is  off  the  hedge  ?  But  if  there  be 
nothing  there  that  may  be  as  a  mark  to  know  it 
by,  then  he  takes  his  hook,  and  giveth  it  a  private 
mark — 'And  the  Lord  set  a  mark  upon  Cain,' 
Ge.  iv.  saying,  Go  thy  ways,  fruitless  fig-tree,  thou 
hast  spent  this  season  in  vain.     Yet  doth  he  not 

presented  to  view  in  Lis  parable.  It  is  a  most  valuable  tree — 
capable  of  bearing  much  fruit ;  still,  after  every  trial,  if  it  re- 
mains barren,  it  must  be  cut  down  as  a  cumber-ground,  and 
sent  to  the  fire. —  (Ed.) 


cut  it  down,  I  will  try  it  another  year:  may  be  this 
was  not  a  hitting1  season.  Therefore  he  comes 
again  next  year,  to  see  if  now  it  have  fruit;  but  as 
he  found  it  before,  so  he  finds  it  now,  barren,  barren, 
every  year  barren ;  he  looks  again,  but  finds  no 
fruit.  Now  he  begins  to  have  second  thoughts, 
How  !  neither  hit  last  year  nor  this  ?  Surely  the 
barrenness  is  not  in  the  season;  sure  the  fault  is  in 
the  tree ;  however,  I  will  spare  it  this  year  also, 
but  will  give  it  a  second  mark ;  and  it  may  be  he 
toucheth  it  with  a  hot  iron,  because  he  begins  to 
be  angry. 

Well,  at  the  third  season  he  comes  again  for 
fruit,  but  the  third  year  is  like  the  first  and  second; 
no  fruit  yet;  it  only  cumbereth  the  ground.  What 
now  must  be  done  with  this  fig-tree  ?  Why,  the 
Lord  will  lop  its  boughs  with  terror;  yea,  the 
thickets  of  those  professors  with  iron.  I  have 
waited,  saith  God,  these  three  years;  I  have  missed 
of  fruit  these  three  years  ;  it  hath  been  a  cumber- 
ground  these  three  years  ;  cut  it  down.  Precept 
hath  been  upon  precept,  and  line  upon  line,  oue 
year  after  another,  for  these  three  years,  but  no 
fruit  can  be  seen ;  I  find  none,  fetch  out  the  axe  ! 
I  am  sure  this  is  the  fig-tree,  I  know  it  from  the 
first  year;  barrenness  was  its  sign  then,  barrenness 
is  its  sign  now  ;  make  it  fit  for  the  fire  !  Behold, 
'  now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees; 
therefore,  every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 
fruit,  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire.'  Mat. m.  10. 
Observe,  my  brethren,  God's  heart  cannot  stand 
towards  a  barren  fig-tree.  You  know  thus  it  is 
with  yourselves.  If  you  have  a  tree  in  your  orchard 
or  vineyard  that  doth  only  cumber  the  ground, 
you  cannot  look  upon  that  tree  with  pleasure,  with 
complacency  and  delight.  No ;  if  you  do  but  go 
by  it,  if  you  do  but  cast  your  eye  upon  it :  yea,  if 
you  do  but  think  of  that  tree,  you  threaten  it  in 
your  heart,  saying,  I  will  hew  thee  down  shortly ; 
I  will  to  the  fire  with  thee  shortly:  and  it  is  in  vain 
for  any  to  think  of  persuading  of  you  to  show  fa- 
vour to  the  barren  fig-tree;  and  if  they  should  per- 
suade, your  answer  is  irresistible,  It  yields  me  no 
profit,  it  takes  up  room  and  doth  no  good;  a  better 
may  grow  in  its  room. 

Cut  it  down. 

Thus,  when  the  godly  among  the  Jews  made 
prayers  that  rebellious  Israel  might  not  be  cast 
out  of  the  vineyard,  what  saith  the  answer  of  God  I 
Je.  xiv.  17.  '  Though  Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before 
me,  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  people:' 
wherefore  '  cast  them  out  of  my  sight,  and  let  them 
go  forth.'  Je.  xv.  1. 

What  a  resolution  is  here  !     Moses  and  Samuel 


1  A  '  hit,'  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  is  used  to  express 
a  u'ood  crop.  A  '  hitting  season '  means  a  fruitful  season. — 
(En.) 


572 


THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


could  do  almost  anything  with  God  in  prayer. 
How  many  times  did  Moses  hy  prayer  turn  away 
God's  judgments  from  even  Pharaoh  himself  !  yea, 
how  many  times  did  he  hy  prayer  preserve  Israel, 
when  in  the  wilderness,  from  the  anger  and  wrath 
of  God  !  Ps.  cvi.  23.  Samuel  is  reckoned  excellent 
this  way,  vea,  so  excellent,  that  when  Israel  had 
done  that  fearful  thing  as  to  reject  the  Lord,  and 
choose  them  another  king,  he  prayed,  and  the 
Lord  spared,  and  forgave  them,  l  Sa.  xii.  But  yet 
neither  Moses  nor  Samuel  can  save  a  barren  fig- 
tree.  No;  though  Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before 
me,  that  is,  pleading,  arguing,  interceding,  suppli- 
cating, and  beseecbing,  yet  could  they  not  incline 
mine  heart  to  this  people. 

Cut  it  doivn. 

'  Ay,  but  Lord,  it  is  a  fig-tree,  a  fig-tree !'  If  it 
was  a  tborn,  or  a  bramble,  or  a  thistle,  the  matter 
would  not  be  much ;  but  it  is  a  fig-tree,  or  a  vine. 
Well,  but  mark  the  answer  of  God,  '  Son  of  man, 
What  is  the  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree,  or  than 
a  branch  which  is  among  the  trees  of  the  forest? 
Shall  wood  be  taken  thereof  to  do  any  work?  or 
will  men  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any  vessel  there- 
on ?'  Eze.  xv.  2,  s.  If  trees  that  are  set,  or  planted 
for  fruit,  bring  not  forth  that  fruit,  there  is  be- 
twixt them  and  the  trees  of  the  forest  no  better- 
ment at  all,  unless  the  betterment  lieth  in  the  trees 
of  the  Avood,  for  they  are  fit  to  build  withal ;  but  a 
fig-tree,  or  a  vine,  if  they  bring  not  forth  fruit,  yea, 
good  fruit,  they  are  fit  for  nothing  at  all,  but  to 
be  cut  down  and  prepared  for  the  fire ;  and  so  the 
prophet  goes  on,  '  Behold,  it  is  cast  into  the  fire 
for  fuel.'  If  it  serve  not  for  fruit  it  will  serve  for 
fuel,  and  so  '  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  ends  of 
it,  and  the  midst  of  it  is  burnt.' 

Ay,  but  these  fig-trees  and  vines  are  church- 
members,  inhabiters  of  Jerusalem.  So  was  the 
fig-tree  mentioned  in  the  text.  But  what  answer 
hath  God  prepared  for  these  objections?  Why, 
'  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  As  the  vine-tree  among 
the  trees  of  the  forest,  which  I  have  given  to  the 
fire  for  fuel;  so  will  I  give  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem;  and  I  will  set  my  face  against  them, 
they  shall  go  out  from  one  fire,  and  another  fire 
shall  devour  them.'  Eze.  xv.  e,  7. 

Cut  it  down. 
The  woman  that  delighteth  in  her  garden,  if  she 
have  a  slip  there,  suppose,  if  it  was  fruitful,  she 
woidd  not  take  five  pounds  for  it ;  yet  if  it  bear 
no  fruit,  if  it  wither,  and  dwindle,  and  die,  and 
turn  cumber-ground  only,  it  may  not  stand  in  her 
garden.  Gardens  and  vineyards  are  places  for 
fruit,  for  fruit  according  to  the  nature  of  the  plant 
or  flowers.  Suppose  such  a  slip  as  I  told  you  of 
before  should  be  in  your  garden,  and  there  die, 


would  you  let  it  abide  in  your  garden  ?  No ;  awav 
with  it,  away  with  it !  The  woman  comes  into  her 
garden  towards  the  spring,  where  first  she  gives 
it  a  slight  cast  with  her  eye,  then  she  sets  to 
gathering  out  the  weeds,  and  nettles,  and  stones ; 
takes  a  besom  and  sweeps  the  walks ;  this  done, 
she  falls  to  prying  into  her  herbs  and  slips,  to  see 
if  they  live,  to  see  if  they  are  likely  to  grow. 
Now,  if  she  comes  to  one  that  is  dead,  that  she  is 
confident  will  not  grow,  up  she  pulls  that,  and 
makes  to  the  heap  of  rubbish  with  it,  where  she 
despisingly  casts  it  down,  and  valueth  it  no  more 
than  a  nettle,  or  a  weed,  or  than  the  dust  she  hath 
swept  out  of  her  walks.  Yea,  if  any  that  see  her 
should  say,  Why  do  you  so?  the  answer  is  ready, 
It  is  dead,  it  is  dead  at  root ;  if  I  had  let  it  stand 
it  would  but  have  cumbered  the  ground.  The 
strange  slips,  and  also  the  dead  ones,  they  must  be 
'  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief,  and  of  desperate  sor- 


Is.  xvii.  10,  11. 


Cut  it  down. 


There  are  two  manner  of  cuttings  down ;  First. 
When  a  man  is  cast  out  of  the  vineyard.  Second. 
When  a  man  is  cast  out  of  the  world. 

First.  When  a  man  is  cast  out  of  the  vineyard. 
And  that  is  done  two  ways ;  1.  By  an  immediate 
hand  of  God.  2.  By  the  church's  due  execution  of 
the  laws  and  censures  which  Christ  for  that  pur- 
pose has  left  with  his  church. 

1.  God  cuts  down  the  barren  fig-tree  by  an  im- 
mediate hand,  smiting  his  roots,  blasting  his 
branches,  and  so  takes  him  away  from  among  his 
people.  '  Every  branch,'  saith  Christ,  '  that 
bearetli  not  fruit  in  me,  he,'  my  Father,  '  taketh 
away.'  Jn.  xv.  2.  He  taketh  him  out  of  the  church, 
he  taketh  him  away  from  the  godly.  There  are 
two  things  by  which  God  taketh  the  barren  pro- 
fessor from  among  the  children  of  God:  (1.)  Strong 
delusions.     (2.)   Open  profaneness. 

(1.)  By  strong  delusion;  such  as  beguile  tho 
soul  with  damnable  doctrines,  that  swerve  from 
faith  and  godliness,  '  They  have  chosen  their  own 
ways,'  saith  God,  'and  their  soul  delighteth  in 
their  abominations.  1  also  will  choose  their  delu- 
sions, and  will  bring  their  fears  upon  them. '  is.  ixvi. 
3,  4.  I  will  smite  them  with  blindness,  and  hardness 
of  heart,  and  failing  of  eyes ;  and  will  also  suffer 
the  tempter  to  tempt  and  affect  his  hellish  designs 
upon  them.  •  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion, 
that  they  should  believe  a  lie :  that  they  all  might 
be  damned  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had 
pleasure  in  unrighteousness.'  2  Th.  n.  10-12. 

(2.)  Sometimes  God  takes  away  a  barren  pro- 
fessor by  open  profaneness.  There  is  one  hath 
taken  up  a  profession  of  that  worthy  name,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  but  this  profession  is  but  a 
cloak ;  he  secretly  practiseth  wickedness.      He  is 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


573 


a  glutton,  a  drunkard,  or  covetous,  or  unclean. 
Well,  saith  God,  I  will  loose  the  reins  of  this  pro- 
fessor ;  I  will  give  him  up  to  his  vile  affections ;  1 
will  loose  the  reins  of  his  lusts  hcforo  him ;  he  shall 
he  entangled  with  his  beastly  lusts ;  he  shall  he 
overcome  of  ungodly  company.  Thus  they  that 
turn  aside  to  their  own  crooked  ways  ■  the  Lord 
shall  lead  them  forth  with  the  workers  of  iniquity.' 
Pa.  cxxv.  5.  This  is  God's  hand  immediately ;  God 
is  now  dealing  with  this  man  himself.  Barren  fig- 
tree,  hearken !  Thou  art  crowded  into  a  profession, 
art  got  among  the  godly,  and  there  art  a  scandal 
to  the  holy  and  glorious  gospel ;  hut  withal  so  cun- 
ning that,  like  the  sons  of  Zeruiah,  thou  art  too 
hard  for  the  church ;  she  knows  not  how  to  deal 
with  thee.  Well,  saith  God,  I  will  deal  with  that 
man  myself,  '  I  will  answer  that  man  hy  myself. ' 
He  that  sets  up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  and  puts  the 
stumhling-hlock  of  his  iniquity  hefore  his  face,  and 
yet  comes  and  appears  before  me,  '  I  will  set  my 
face  against  that  man,  and  will  make  him  a  sign 
and  a  proverb :  and  I  will  cut  him  off  from  the 
midst  of  my  people ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord.'   Eze.  xiv.  7,  s.      But, 

2.  God  doth  sometimes  cut  down  the  barren  fig- 
tree  by  the  church,  by  the  church's  due  execution 
of  the  laws  and  censures  which  Christ  for  that  pur- 
pose hath  left  with  his  church.  This  is  the  mean- 
ing of  that  in  Mat.  xviii;  ICor.  v:  and  that  in  ITim.  i.  20. 

upon  which  now  I  shall  not  enlarge,  But  which 
way  soever  God  dealeth  with  thee,  0  thou  barren 
fig-tree,  whither  by  himself  immediately,  or  by  his 
church,  it  amounts  to  one  and  the  same ;  for  if 
timely  repentance  prevent  not,  the  end  of  that  soul 
is  damnation.  They  are  blasted,  and  withered,  and 
gathered  hymen,  God's  enemies;  and  at  last  being 
cast  into  the  fire  burning  must  be  their  end.  'That 
which  beareth  thorns  and  briars  is  nigh  uuto  curs- 
ing, whose  end  is  to  be  burned.'  ne.  vi.  s. 

Second.  And,  again,  sometimes  by  'Cut  it  down' 
God  means,  cast  it  out  of  the  world.  Thus  he  cut 
down  Nadab  and  Abihu,  when  he  burned  them  up 
with  fire  from  heaven.  Thus  he  cut  down  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram,  when  he  made  the  earth  to 
swallow  them  up.  Nn.  m.  4 ;  xvi.  31-03.  Thus  he  cut 
down  Saul,  when  he  gave  him  up  to  fall  upon  the 
edge  of  his  own  sword,  and  died.  isa.  xxxi.  4.  Thus 
he  cut  down  Ananias,  with  Sapphira  his  wife,  when 
he  struck  them  down  dead  in  the  midst  of  the  con- 
gregation. Ac.  v.  5, 10.  I  might  here  also  discourse 
of  Absalom,  Ahithophel,  and  Judas,  who  were  all 
three  hanged :  the  first  by  God's  revenging  hand, 
the  others  were  given  up  of  God  to  be  their  own 
executioners.  These  were  barren  and  unprofitable 
fig-trees,  such  as  God  took  no  pleasure  in,  there- 
fore he  commanded  to  cut  them  down.  The 
Psalmist  saith,  •  He  shall  take  them  away  as  with 
a  whirlwind,  both  living,  and  in  his  wrath.'  rs. lviii.  9. 


Barren  fig-tree,  hearken !  God  calls  for  the  axe, 
his  sword ;  bring  it  hither ;  here  is  a  barren  pro- 
fessor.      Cut  him  down,   why  cumbereth  he  the 


Why  cumbereth  it  the  ground  ? 

By  these  words  the  Lord  suggesteth  reasons  of 
his  displeasure  against  the  barren  fig-tree ;  it  cum- 
bereth the  ground.  The  Holy  Ghost  doth  not- 
only  take  an  argument  from  its  barrenness,  but 
because  it  is  a  cumber-ground,  therefore  cut  it 
down ;  wherefore  it  must  needs  be  a  provocation. 
1.  Because,  as  much  as  in  him  lieth,  he  disappoint- 
eth  the  design  of  God  in  planting  his  vineyard ;  I 
looked  that  it  should  bring  forth  fruit.  2.  It  hath 
also  abused  his  patience,  his  long-suffering,  his 
three  years'  patience.  3.  It  hath  also  abused  his 
labour,  his  pains,  his  care,  and  providence  of  pro- 
tection and  preservation:  for  he  hedges  his  vineyard, 
and  walls  it  about.  Cumber-ground,  all  these  things 
thou  abusest !  He  waters  his  vineyard,  and  looks 
to  it  night  and  day  ;  but  all  these  things  thou  hast 
abused. 

Further,  there  are  other  reasons  of  God's  dis- 
pleasure ;  as, 

First.  A  cumber-ground  is  a  very  mock  and  re- 
proach of  religion,  a  mock  aud  reproach  to  the  ways 
of  God,  to  the  people  of  God,  to  the  Word  of  God, 
and  to  the  name  of  religion.  It  is  expected  of  all 
hands,  that  all  the  trees  in  the  garden  of  God  should 
be  fruitful :  God  expects  fruit,  the  church  expects 
fruit,  the  world,  even  the  world,  concludes  that 
professors  should  be  fruitful  in  good  works  ;  I  say. 
the  world  expecteth  that  professors  should  he  better 
than  themselves.  But,  barren  fig-tree,  thou  disap- 
pointest  all.  Nay,  hast  thou  not  learned  the  wicked 
ones  thy  ways  ?  Hast  thou  not  learned  them  to- 
be  more  wicked  by  thy  example  ? — but  that  is  by 
the  by.  Barren  fig-tree,  thou  hast  disappointed 
others,  and  must  be  disappointed  thyself!  'Cut 
it  down,  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground  ? ' 

Second.  The  barren  fig-tree  takes  up  the  room 
where  a  better  tree  might  stand ;  I  say,  it  takes 
up  the  room,  it  keeps,  so  long  as  it  stands  where 
it  doth  ;  a  fruitful  tree  out  of  that  place,  and  there- 
fore it  must  be  cut  down.  Barren  fig-tree,  dost, 
thou  hear?  Because  the  Jews  stood  fruitless  in 
the  vineyard,  therefore,  saith  God,  '  The  kingdom 
of  God  shall  he  taken  from  you,'  and  given  to  a 
nation  that  shall  render  him  their  fruits  in  their 
season.  Mat.  xii.  33-41.  The  Jews  for  their  barren- 
ness were  cut  down,  and  more  fruitful  people  put 
in  their  room.  As  Samuel  also  said  to  barren 
Saul,  '  The  Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom  from 
thee,  and  hath  given  it  to  a  neighbour  of  thine 
that  is  better  than  thou.'  1  Sa.  sv.  2a  The  unprofit- 
able servant  must  be  cast  out,  must  be  cut  down. 

Mat.  xxv.  'J7. 


574 


THE  BARREN   FIG-TREE   01 


Cumber-ground,  how  many  hopeful,  inclinable, 
forward  people,  hast  thou  by  thy  fruitless  and  un- 
profitable life,  kept  out  of  the  vineyard  of  God? 
For  thy  sake  have  the  people  stumbled  at  religion  ; 
by  thy  life  have  they  been  kept  from  the  love  of 
their  own  salvation.  Thou  hast  been  also  a  means 
of  hardening  others,  and  of  quenching  and  killing 
weak  beginnings.  Well,  barren  fig-tree,  look  to 
thyself,  thou  wilt  not  go  to  heaven  thyself,  and  them 
that  would,  thou  hinderest ;  thou  must  not  always 
cumber  the  ground,  nor  always  hinder  the  salvation 
of  others.  Thou  shalt  be  cut  down,  and  another 
shall  be  planted  in  thy  room. 

Tldrcl.  The  cumber  ground  is  a  sucker;  he  draws 
away  the  heart  and  nourishment  from  the  other 
trees.  Were  the  cumber  ground  cut  down,  the 
others  would  be  more  fruitful ;  he  draws  away  that 
fatness  of  the  ground  to  himself,  that  would  make 
the  others  more  hearty  and  fruitful.  '  One  sinner 
destroyeth  much  good.'  Ec.  ix.  is. 

The  cumber  ground  is  a  very  drone  in  the  hive, 
that  eats  up  the  honey  that  should  feed  the  labour- 
ing bee  ;  he  is  a  thief  in  the  candle,  that  wasteth 
the  tallow,  but  giveth  no  light ;  he  is  the  unsavoury 
salt,  that  is  fit  for  nought  but  the  dunghill.  Look 
to  it,  barren  fig-tree ! 

And  he  answering,  said  unto  him,  Lord,  let  it  alone 
iJiis  year  also,  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung 
it ;  and  if  it  bear  fruit,  well ;  and  if  not,  then 
after  that,  thou  shalt  cut  it  down.  vex.  s,  9. 

These  are  the  words  of  the  dresser  of  the  vine- 
yard, who,  I  told  you,  is  Jesus  Christ,  for  he  made 
intercession  for  the  transgressors.  And  they  con- 
tain a  petition  presented  to  an  offended  justice, 
praying,  that  a  little  more  time  and  patience  might 
be  exercised  towards  the  barren  cumber-ground 
fig-tree. 

In  this  petition  there  are  six  things  considerable: 
1.  That  justice  might  be  deferred.  0  that  justice 
might  be  deferred!  'Lord,  let  it  alone,'  &c,  a 
while  longer.  2.  Here  is  time  prefixed,  as  a  space 
to  try  if  more  means  will  cure  a  barren  fig-tree. 
'  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also.'  3.  The  means 
to  help  it  are  propounded,  '  until  I  shall  dig  about 
it,  and  dung  it.'1  4.  Here  is  also  an  insinuation 
of  a  supposition,  that,  by  thus  doing,  God's  expec- 
tation may  be  answered ;  '  and  if  it  bear  fruit,  welV 
5.  Here  is  a  supposition  that  the  barren  fi"--tree 
may  yet  abide  barren,  when  Christ  hath  done  what 
he  will  unto  it ;  '  and  if  it  bear  fruit,'  <fcc.  6.  Here 
is  at  last  a  resolution,  that  if  thou  continue  barren 


1  This  mode  of  infusing  new  vigosr  into  plants  and  trees 
is  thus  described  in  the  Gemura — '  They  lay  dung  in  their 
gardeus,  to  soften  the  earth.  They  dig  about  the  roots  of 
their  trees,  and  sprinkle  ashes,  and  pluck  up  suckers,  and 
make  a  smoke  beneath  to  kill  verinui.'— (Ed.) 


hewing  days  will  come  upon  thee*  '  and  if  it  bear 
fruit,  well ;  and  if  not,  tlwn  after  that  thou  shalt 
cut  it  down. '  But  to  proceed  according  to  my  former 
method,  by  way  of  exposition. 

Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also. 

Here  is  astonishing  grace  indeed!  astonishing 
grace,  I  say,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  should  concern 
himself  with  a  barren  fig-tree;  that  he  should 
s^ep  in  to  stop  the  blow  from  a  barren  fig-tree ! x 
True,  he  stopped  the  blow  but  for  a  time;  but 
why  did  he  stop  it  at  all  ?  Why  did  not  he  fetch 
out  the  axe  ?  Why  did  he  not  do  execution  ?  Why 
did  not  he  cut  it  down?  Barren  fig-tree,  it  is  well 
for  thee  that  there  is  a  Jesus  at  God's  right  hand, 
a  Jesus  of  that  largeness  of  bowels,  as  to  have  com- 
passion for  a  barren  fig-tree,  else  justice  had  never 
let  thee  alone  to  cumber  the  ground  as  thou  hast 
done!  When  Israel  also  had  sinned  against  God, 
down  they  had  gone,  but  that  Moses  stood  in  the 
breach.  '  Let  me  alone,'  said  God  to  him,  'that 
I  may  consume  them '  in  a  moment,  '  and  I  will 
make  of  thee  a  great  nation.'  Ex.  xxxiL  10.  Barren 
fig-tree,  dost  thou  hear?  Thou  knowest  not  how 
oft  the  hand  of  Divine  justice  hath  been  up  to 
strike,  and  how  many  years  since  thou  hadst  been 
cut  down,  had  not  Jesus  caught  hold  of  his  Father's 
axe.  Let  me  alone,  let  me  fetch  my  blow,  or  '  Cut 
it  down,  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground?'  Wilt 
thou  not  hear  yet,  barren  fig-tree  ?  Wilt  thou  pro- 
voke still  ?  Thou  hast  wearied  men,  and  provoked 
the  justice  of  God!  And  '  will  ye  weary  my  God 
also  ? '   Is.  vii.  13. 

Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year. 

Lord,  a  little  longer !  let  us  not  lose  a  soul  for 
want  of  means.  I  will  try,  I  will  see  if  I  can  make 
it  fruitful,  I  will  not  beg  a  long  life,  nor  that  it 
might  still  be  barren,  and  so  provoke  thee.  1  beg, 
for  the  sake  of  the  soul,  the  immortal  soul ;  Lord, 
spare  it  one  year  only,  one  year  longer,  this  year 
also.  If  I  do  any  good  to  it,  it  will  be  in  little 
time.  Thou  shalt  not  be  over  wearied  with  wait- 
ing ;  one  year  and  then. 

Barren  fig-tree,  dost  thou  hear  what  a  striving 
there  is  between  the  vine-dresser  and  the  husband- 
man, for  thy  life  ?  '  Cut  it  down,'  says  one ;  ' Lord, 
spare  it,'  saith  the  other.  It  is  a  cumber-ground, 
saith  the  Father ;  one  year  longer,  prays  the  Son. 
'  Let  it  alone  this  year  also. ' 

Till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it. 

The  Lord  Jesus  by  these  words  supposeth  two 
things,  as  causes  of  the  want  of  fruit  in  a  bar- 
ren fig-tree;  and  two  things  he  supposeth  as  a 
remedy. 

The  things  that  are  a  cause  of  want  of  fruit  are, 
First.   It  is   earth-bound.     Lord,   the  fig-tree  is 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


575 


earth-bound.  Second.  A  want  of  -warmer  means, 
of  fatter  means.  Wherefore,  accordingly,  he  pro- 
pounded to  loosen  the  earth;  to  dig-  about  it. 
And  then  to  supply  it  with  dung. 

'To  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it.  Lord,  let  it 
alone  this  year  also,  until  I  shall  dig  about  it.'  I 
doubt  it  is  too  much  ground-bound.  The  love  of 
this  world,  and  the  deceitfulncss  of  riches  lie  too 
close  to  the  roots  of  the  heart  of  this  professor. 
Lu.  xiv.  The  love  of  riches,  the  love  of  honours,  the 
love  of  pleasures,  are  the  thorns  that  choke  the 
word.  '  For  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride 
of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,'  but  enmity  to  God ; 
how  then,  where  these  things  bind  up  the  heart, 
can  there  be  fruit  brought  forth  to  God?  Un.ii.15,16. 
Barren  fig-tree,  see  how  the  Lord  Jesus,  by  these 
very  words,  suggesteth  the  cause  of  thy  fruitless- 
ness  of  soul!  The  things  of  this  world  lie  too 
close  to  thy  heart ;  the  earth  with  its  things  have 
bound  up  thy  roots;  thou  art  an  earth-bound  soul, 
thou  art  wrapped  up  in  thick  clay.  '  If  any  man 
love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in 
him;'  how  then  can  he  be  fruitful  in  the  vineyard? 
This  kept  Judas  from  the  fruit  of  caring  for  the 
poor.  Jn.  xii.  c.  This  kept  Demas  from  the  fruit  of 
self-denial.  2  Ti.  It.  10.  And  this  kept  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  his  wife  from  the  goodly  fruit  of  sincerity 
and  truth.  Ac.  v.  5, 10.  What  shall  I  say  ?  These 
are  '  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men 
in  destruction  and  perdition;  for  the  love  of  money 
is  the  root  cf  all  evil.'  How  then  can  good  fruit 
grow  from  such  a  root,  the  root  of  all  evil? 
■  Which  while  some  coveted  after,  they  have  erred 
from  the  faith,  and  pierced  themselves  through 
with  many  sorrows.'  1  Ti.  vi.  9, 10.  It  is  an  evil  root, 
nay,  it  is  the  root  of  all  evil.  How  then  can  the 
professor  that  hath  such  a  root,  or  a  root  wrapped 
up  in  such  earthly  things,  as  the  lusts,  and  plea- 
sures, and  vanities  of  this  world,  bring  forth  fruit 
to  God? 

Till  I  shall  '  dig  '  about  it. 

Lord,  I  will  loose  his  roots,  I  will  dig  up  this 
earth,  I  will  lay  his  roots  bare;  my  hand  shall  be 
upon  him  by  sickness,  by  disappointments,  by 
cross  providences ;  I  will  dig  about  him  until  he 
stands  shaking  and  tottering;  until  he  be  ready  to 
fall ;  then,  if  ever,  he  will  seek  to  take  faster  hold. 
Thus,  I  say,  deals  the  Lord  Jesus  ofttimes  with 
the  barren  professor;  he  diggeth  about  him,  he 
smiteth  one  blow  at  his  heart,  another  blow  at  his 
lusts,  a  third  at  his  pleasures,  a  fourth  at  his  com- 
forts, another  at  his  self-conceitedness.  Thus  he 
diggeth  about  him ;  this  is  the  way  to  take  bad 
earth  from  his  roots,  and  to  loosen  his  roots  from 
the  earth.  Barren  fig-tree,  see  here  the  care,  the 
love,  the  labour,  and  way,  which  the  Lord  Jesus, 


the  dresser  of  the  vineyard,  is  fain  to  take  with 
thee,  if  haply  thou  may  est  be  made  fruitful.1 

Till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  «  dung  '  it. 

As  the  earth,  by  binding  the  roots  too  closely, 
may  hinder  the  tree's  being  fruitful,  so  the  want 
of  better  means  may  be  also  a  cause  thereof.  And 
this  is  more  than  intimated  by  the  dresser  of  the 
vineyard;  'Till  I  shall  dig  about  it  and  dung  it.' 
I  will  supply  it  with  a  more  fruitful  ministry,  with 
a  warmer  word;  I  will  give  them  pastors  after 
mine  own  heart;  I  will  dung  them.  You  know 
dung  is  a  more  warm,  more  fat,  more  hearty,  and 
succouring  matter  than  is  commonly  the  place  in 
Avhich  trees  are  planted. 

•  I  will  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it.'  I  will  bring 
it  under  a  heart-awakening  ministry ;  the  means 
of  grace  shall  be  fat  and  good:  I  will  also  visit  it 
with  heart-awakening,  heart-warming,  heart-en- 
couraging considerations ;  I  will  apply  warm  dung 
to  his  roots;  I  will  strive  with  him  by  my  Spirit, 
and  give  him  some  tastes  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and 
the  power  of  the  world  to  come.  I  am  loth  to  lose 
him  for  want  of  digging.  '  Lord,  let  it  alone  this 
year  also,  till  I  shall  dig  about  it  and  dung  it.' 

And  if  it  bear  fruit,  well. 

And  if  the  fruit  of  all  my  labour  doth  make  this 
fig-tree  fruitful,  I  shall  count  my  time,  my  labour, 
and  means,  well  bestowed  upon  it;  and  thou  also, 
0  my  God,  shalt  be  therewith  much  delighted;  for 
thou  art  gracious,  and  merciful,  and  repentest  thee 
of  the  evil  which  thou  threatenest  to  bring  upon  a 
people.  These  words,  therefore,  inform  us,  that  if 
a  barren  fig-tree,  a  barren  professor,  shall  now  at 
last  bring  forth  fruit  to  God,  it  shall  go  well  with 
that  professor,  it  shall  go  well  with  that  poor  soul. 
His  former  barrenness,  his  former  tempting  of 
God,  his  abuse  of  God's  patience  and  long-suffer- 
ing, his  mis-spending  year  after  year,  shall  now  be 
all  forgiven  him.  Yea,  God  the  Father,  and  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  will  now  pass  by  and  forget  all, 
and  say,  '  Well  done,'  at  the  last.  When  I  say 
to  the  wicked,  0  wicked  man,  thou  shalt  surely 
die ;  if  he  then  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right, 
if  he  walk  in  the  statutes  of  life,  without  commit- 
ting iniquity,  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die. 

Eze.  xxxiii. 

Barren  fig-tree,  dost  thou  hear?  the  axe  is  laid 
to  thy  roots,  the  Lord  Jesus  prays  God  to  spare 
thee.  Hath  he  been  digging  about  thee?  Hath 
he  been  dunging  of  thee?  0  barren  fig-tree,  now 
thou  art  come  to  the  point;  if  thou  shalt  now  be- 
come good,  if  thou  shalt,  after  a  gracious  manner, 


1  Among  the  superstitions  of  the  ancients,  Michaelis  states 
that  both  the  Greeks  and  Asiatics  had  a  superstition  that  a 
tree  might  be  rendered  fruitful  by  striking  it,  at  the  interces- 
sion of  a  friend,  three  times  with  the  back  of  au  axe. — (Ed.) 


57! 


THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


suck  in  the  gospel-clung,  and  if  thou  shalt  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  God,  well ;  hut  if  not,  the  fire  is 
the  last !  fruit,  or  the  fire ;  fruit,  or  the  fire,  bar- 
ren fig-tree !      f  If  it  hear  fruit,  loell. n 

And  if  not,  then  after  thai  thou  shalt  ait  it  down. 

The  Lord  Jesus,  by  this  if,  giveth  us  to  under- 
stand that  there  is  a  generation  of  professors  in 
the  world  that  are  incurable,  that  will  not,  that 
cannot  repent,  nor  be  profited  by  the  means  of 
-'•race.  A  generation,  I  say,  that  will  retain  a 
profession,  but  will  not  bring  forth  fruit ;  a  genera- 
tion that  will  wear  out  the  patience  of  God,  time 
and  tide,  threatenings  and  intercessions,  judgments 
and  mercies,  and  after  all  will  be  unfruitful. 

0  the  desperate  wickedness  that  is  in  thy  heart ! 
Barren  professor,  dost  thou  hear?  the  Lord  Jesus 
stands  yet  in  doubt  about  thee;  there  is  an  if 
stands  yet  in  the  way.  I  say,  the  Lord  Jesus 
stands  yet  in  doubt  about  thee,  whether  or  no,  at 
last,  thou  wilt  be  good;  whether  he  may  not 
labour  in  vain ;  whether  his  digging  and  dunging 
will  come  to  more  than  lost  labour;  'I  gave  her 
space  to  repent,  -  and  she  repented  not.'  Re.  ii.  21. 
I  digged  about  it,  I  dunged  it ;  I  gained  time,  and 
supplied  it  with  means ;  but  I  laboured  herein  in 
vain,  and  spent  my  strength  for  nought,  and  in 
vain!  Dost  thou  hear,  barren  fig-tree?  there  is 
yet  a  question,  Whether  it  may  be  well  with  thy 
soul  at  last  ? 

And  if  not,  then  after  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down. 

There  is  nothing  more  exasperating  to  the  mind 
of  a  man  than  to  find  all  his  kindness  and  favour 
slighted;  neither  is  the  Lord  Jesus  so  provoked 
with  anything,  as  when  sinners  abuse  his  means 
of  grace;  if  it  be  barren  and  fruitless  under  my 
gospel ;  if  it  turn  my  grace  into  wantonness,  if 
after  digging  and  dunging,  and  waitiug,  it  yet  re- 
main unfruitful,  I  will  let  thee  cut  it  down. 

Gospel  means,  applied,  is  the  last  remedy  for  a 
barren  professor ;  if  the  gospel,  if  the  grace  of  the 
gospel,  will  not  do,  there  can  be  nothing  expected 
but  cut  it  down.  « Then  after  that  thou  shalt  cut 
it  down.'  '0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that 
killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest  them  which  are 
sent  unto  thee,  hew  often  would  I  have  gathered 
thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not !  ' 
Therefore  'your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate.' 
Mat.  xxiii.  3;,  38.  Yet  it  cannot  be,  but  that  this 
Lord  Jesus,  who  at  first  did  put  a  stop  to  the 
execution  of  his  Father's  justice,  because  he  de- 


1  However  painfully  unpleasant  these  terms  may  appear  to 
eyes  or  ears  polite,  it  is  a  homely  hut  just  representation,  ami 
calculated  to  make  a  lasting  impression  on  every  reader.  Afflic- 
tions, trials,  crosses,  are  used  as  a  means  of  creating  or  reviving 
spiritual  life,  as  manure  is  applied  to  vegetation. —  (Ed.) 


sired  to  try  more  means  with  the  fig-tree ;  I  say, 
it  cannot  be,  but  that  a  heart  so  full  of  compassion 
as  his  is  should  be  touched,  to  behold  this  pro- 
fessor must  now  be  cut  down.  'And  when  he  was 
come  near,  he  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it, 
saying,  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least 
in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy 
peace !   but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes.' 

La.  xix.  41,  42. 

After  tlwt  thou  shalt  cut  it  down. 

When  Christ  giveth  thee  over,  there  is  no  inter- 
cessor, no  mediator,  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin,  all 
is  gone  but  judgment,  but  the  axe,  but  a  'certain 
fearful  looking  for  of  judgment,  aud  fiery  indig- 
nation, which  shall  devour  the  adversaries.'  lie.  s. 

2G,  27. 

Barren  fig-tree,  take  heed  that  thou  comest  not 
to  these  last  words,  for  these  words  are  a  give  up, 
a  cast  up,  a  cast  up  of  a  cast  away ;  '  After  that 
thou  shalt  cut  it  down.'  They  are  as  much  as  if 
Christ  had  said,  Father,  I  begged  for  more  time 
for  this  barren  professor ;  I  begged  until  I  should 
dig  about  it,  and  dung  it.  But  now,  Father,  the 
time  is  out,  the  year  is  ended,  the  summer  is 
ended,  and  no  good  done  !  I  have  also  tried  with 
my  means,  with  the  gospel,  I  have  digged  about 
it ;  I  have  laid  also  the  fat  and  hearty  dung  of 
the  gospel  to  it,  but  all  comes  to  nothing.  Father, 
I  deliver  up  this  professor  to  thee  again ;  I  have 
done ;  I  have  done  all ;  I  have  done  praying  and 
endeavouring ;  I  will  hold  the  head  of  thine  axe 
no  longer.  Take  him  into  the  hands  of  justice  ; 
do  justice ;  do  the  law ;  I  will  never  beg  for  him 
more.  'After  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down.'  'Woe 
also  to  them  when  I  depart  from  them ! '  Ho.  ix.  12. 
Now  is  this  professor  left  naked  indeed ;  naked  to 
God,  naked  to  Satan,  naked  to  sin,  naked  to  the 
law,  naked  to  death,  naked  to  hell,  naked  to 
judgment,  and  naked  to  the  gripes  of  a  guilty 
conscience,  and  to  the  torment  of  that  worm  that 
never  dies,  and  to  that  fire  that  never  shall  be 
quenched.  'See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that 
speaketh.  For  if  they  escaped  not,  who  refused 
him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we 
escape,  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh 
from  heaven. '  He.  xii.  20. 

From  this  brief  pass  through  this  parable,  you 
have  these  two  general  observations  : — First.  That 
even  then  when  the  justice  of  God  cries  out,  I 
cannot  endure  to  wait  on  this  barren  professor  any 
longer,  then  Jesus  Christ  intercedes  for  a  little 
more  patience,  and  a  little  more  striving  with  this 
professor,  if  possible  he  may  make  him  a  fruitful 
professor.  '  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also,  till 
I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it ;  and  if  it  bear 
fruit,  well,'  &c.  Second.  There  are  some  profes- 
sors whose  day  of  grace  will  end  with,  Cut  it  down, 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


577 


with  judgment ;  when  Christ,  by  his  means,  hath 
been  used  for  their  salvation. 

First.  The  first  of  these  observations  I  shall 
pass,  and  not  meddle  at  all  therewith ;  but  shall 
briefly  speak  to  the 

Second,  to  wit,  that  there-  arc  some  professors 
whose  day  of  graco  will  end  with,  Cut  it  down, 
with  judgment,  when  Christ,  by  his  means,  hath 
been  used  for  their  salvation. 

This  tho  apostle  showeth  in  that  third  chapter  of 
his  Epis'le  to  the  Hebrews,  where  he  tells  us  that  the 
people  of  the  Jews,  after  a  forty  years'  patience  and 
endeavour  to  do  them  good  by  the  means  appointed 
for  that  purpose,  their  end  was  to  be  cut  down,  or 
excluded  the  land  of  promise,  for  their  final  incre- 
dulity. *  So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in, 
because  of  unbelief.'  '  Wherefore,'  saith  he,  '  I 
Avas  grieved  with  that  generation,  and  said,  They  do 
alway  err  in  their  heart,  and  they  have  not  known 
my  ways  ;  so  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  They  shall  not 
enter  into  my  rest.'  As  who  should  say,  I  would 
they  should  have  entered  in,  and  for  that  purpose 
I  brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  led  them  through 
the  sea,  and  taught  them  in  the  wilderness,  but 
they  did  not  answer  my  work  nor  designs  in  that 
matter;  wherefore  they  shall  not,  I  swear  they  shall 
not.  '  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  they  shall  not  enter 
into  my  rest.'  Here  is  cutting  down  with  judg- 
ment. So  again,  he  saith,  '  As  I  have  sworn  in  my 
wrath,  if  they  shall  enter  into  my  rest ;  although 
the  works  were  finished  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.'  He.  iv.  4,  5.  This  word  '  if  is  the  same  with 
*  they  shall  not,'  in  the  chapter  before.  And  where 
he  saith,  '  Although  the  works  were  finished  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world,'  he  giveth  us  to  under- 
stand that  what  preparations  soever  are  made  for 
the  salvation  of  sinners,  and  of  how  long  continu- 
ance soever  they  are,  yet  the  God-tempting,  God- 
provoking  and  fruitless  professor,  is  like  to  go 
without  a  share  therein,  '  although  the  works  were 
finished  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.'  'I 
will  therefore  put  you  in  remembrance,  though  ye 
once  knew  this,  how  that  the  Lord  having  saved 
the  people  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  afterward  de- 
stroyed them  that  believed  not.  And  the  angels 
that  kept  not  their  first  estate,  but  left  their  own 
habitation,  he  hath  reserved  in  everlasting  chains 
under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great 
day.'  Jude  5,  c.  Here  is  an  instance  to  purpose,  an 
instance  of  men  and  angels :  men  saved  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  and  in  their  journey  towards  Canaan, 
the  type  of  heaven,  cut  down ;  angeh  created  and 
placed  in  the  heavens  in  great  estate  and  princi- 
pality ;  yet  both  these,  because  uufruitful  to  God 
in  their  places,  were  cut  down — the  men  destroyed 
by  God,  for  so  saith  the  text,  and  the  '  angels  re- 
served in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness,  unto 
the  judgment  of  the  great  day. 

VOL.  III. 


Now,  in  my  handling  of  this  point,  I  shall  dis- 
course of  the  cutting  down,  or  tho  judgment  here 
denounced,  as  it  respecteth  tho  doing  of  it  by 
God's  hand  immediately,  and  that  too  with  respect 
to  his  casting  them  out  of  the  world,  and  not  as  it 
respecteth  an  act  of  the  church,  &c.  And  as  to  this 
cutting  down,  or  judgment,  it  must  be  concluded, 
that  it  cannot  be  before  the  day  of  grace  bo  past 
with  the  fig-tree;  but  according  to  the  observation, 
there  are  some  professors  whose  day  of  grace  will 
end  with,  Cut  it  down;  and  according  to  tho  word.-; 
of  the  text,  •  Then,'  after  that,  '  thou  shalt  cut  it 
down.'  '  After  that,'  that  is,  after  all  my  attempts 
and  endeavours  to  make  it  fruitful,  after  I  have  left 
it,  given  it  over,  done  with  it,  and  have  resolved  to 
bestow  no  more  days  of  grace,  opportunities  of 
grace,  and  means  of  grace  upon  it,  then,  '  after 
that,'  thou  shalt  cut  it  down. 

Besides,  the  giving  up  of  the  fig-tree  is  before 
the  execution.  Execution  is  not  always  presently 
upon  the  sentence  given ;  for,  after  that,  a  conve- 
nient time  is  thought  on,  and  then  is  cutting 
down.  And  so  it  is  here  in  the  text.  The  decree, 
that  he  shall  perish,  is  gathered  from  its  continu- 
ing fruitless  quite  through  the  last  year — from  its 
continuing  fruitless  at  the  end  of  all  endeavours. 
But  cutting  down  is  not  yet,  for  that  comes  with 
an  afterward.  '  Then,  after  that,  thou  shalt  cut  it 
down.' 

So  then,  that  I  may  orderly  proceed  with  the 
observation,  I  must  lay  down  these  two  proposi- 
tions : — Proposition  First.  That  the  day  of  grace 
ends  with  some  men  before  God  takes  them  out 
of  this  world.  And,  Proposition  Second.  The 
death,  or  cutting  down  of  such  men,  will  be 
dreadful.  For  this  '  Cut  it  down,'  when  it  is 
understood  in  the  largest  sense,  as  here  indeed 
it  ought,  it  showeth  not  only  the  wrath  of  God 
against  a  man's  life  in  this  Avorld,  but  his  wrath 
against  him,  body  and  soul;  and  is  as"] much 
as  to  say,  Cut  him  off  from  all  the  privileges 
and  benefits  that  come  by  grace,  both  in  this 
world  and  that  which  is  to  come.  But  to  pro- 
ceed : 

Proposition  First. — The  day  of  grace  ends 
with  some  men  before  God  taketh  them  out  of  the 
world.  I  shall  give  you  some  instances  of  this, 
and  so  go  on  to  the  last  proposition. 

First.  I  shall  instance  Cain.  Cain  was  a  pro- 
fessor, a  sacrificer,  a  worshipper  of  God,  yea,  the 
first  worshipper  that  we  read  of  after  the  fall ;  but 
his  grapes  were  wild  ones.  His  works  were  evil ; 
he  did  not  do  what  he  did  from  true  gospel  mo- 
tives, therefore  God  disallowed  his  work.  Ge.  iv.  3-3. 
At  this  his  countenance  falls,  wherefore  he  envies 
his  brother,  disputes  him,  takes  his  opportunity, 
and  kills  him.  Now,  in  that  day  that  he  did  this 
act  were  the  heavens  closed  up  against  him,  and 

73 


578 


THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


that  himself  did  smartingly  and  fearfully  feel  when 
God  made  inquisition  for  the  hlood  of  Ahel.  '  And 
now  art  thou  cursed,'  said  God,  '  from  the  earth ; 
which  hath  opened  her  mouth  to  receive  thy  bro- 
ther's  hlood  from  thy  hand.,'  &c.  '  And  Cain  said, 
My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  hear.'  Mine 
iniquity  is  greater  than  that  it  may  he  forgiven. 
'  Behold  thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  day  from  the 
face  of  the  earth,  and  from  thy  face  shall  I  be  hid. ' 
Ge.  iv.  9-14.  Now  thou  art  cursed,  saith  God.  Thou 
hast  driven  me  out  this  day,  saith  Cain,  and  from 
thy  face  shall  I  be  hid.  I  shall  never  more  have 
hope  in  thee,  smile  from  thee,  nor  expect  mercy 
at  thy  hand.  Thus,  therefore,  Cain's  day  of  grace 
ended;  and  the  heavens,  with  God's  own  heart, 
were  shut  up  against  him ;  yet  after  this  he  lived 
long.  Cutting  down  was  not  come  yet ;  after  this 
he  lived  to  marry  a  wife,  to  beget  a  cursed  brood, 
to  build  a  city,  and  what  else  I  know  not;  all 
which  could  not  be  quickly  done ;  wherefore  Cain 
might  live  after  the  day  of  grace  was  past  with 
hini  several  hundred  of  years.  Ge.  iv.  10-17. 

Second.  I  shall  instance  Ishmael.  Ishmael  was 
a  professor,  was  brought  up  in  Abraham's  family, 
and  was  circumcised  at  thirteen  years  of  age. 
Ge.  xvi.  12 ;  »nL  25,  26.  But  he  was  the  son  of  the 
bond-woman,  he  brought  not  forth  good  fruit ;  he 
was  a  wild  professor.  For  all  his  religion,  he 
would  scoff  at  those  that  were  better  than  himself. 
Well,  upon  a  day  his  brother  Isaac  was  weaned, 
at  which  time  his  father  made  a  feast,  and  rejoiced 
before  the  Lord,  for  that  he  had  given  him  the 
promised  son  ;  at  this  Ishmael  mocked  them,  their 
son,  and  godly  rejoicing.  Then  came  the  Spirit  of 
God  upon  Sarah,  and  she  cried,  Cast  him  out,  '  cast 
out  this  bond-woman  and  her  son ;  for  the  son  of 
this  bond-woman  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son, 
with  Isaac'  Ge.  xxi.  9-11.  Now  Paul  to  the  Gala- 
tiaus  makes  this  casting  out  to  be,  not  only  a 
casting  out  of  Abraham's  family,  but  a  casting  out 
also  from  a  lot  with  the  saints  in  heaven.  Ga.  iv. 
29-31.  Also  Moses  giveth  us  a  notable  proof  there- 
of, in  saying,  that  when  he  died  he  was  gathered 
to  his  people — his  people  by  his  mother's  side  ;  for 
he  was  reckoned  from  her,  the  son  of  Hagar,  the 
son  of  the  bond-woman.  Ge.  xxv.  17.  Now,  she  came 
of  the  Egyptiaus,  so  that  he  was  gathered  when 
he  died,  notwithstanding  his  profession,  to  the 
place  that  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  gathered 
to,  who  were  drowned  in  the  Pted  Sea ;  these  were 
his  people,  and  he  was  of  them,  both  by  nature 
and  disposition,  by  persecuting  as  they  did.1  Ge. 
xxi.  9.  But  now,  when  did  the  day  of  grace  end 
with  this  man?      Observe,  and  I  will  show  you. 


Ishmael  was  thirteen  years  old  when  he  was  cir- 
cumcised, and  then  was  Abraham  ninety  years  old 
and  nine.  Ge.  xvii.  24-26.  The  next  year  Isaac  was 
born ;  so  that  Ishmael  was  now  fourteen  years  of 
age.  Now,  when  Isaac  was  weaned,  suppose  he 
sucked  four  years,  by  that  account,  the  day  of 
grace  must  be  ended  with  Ishmael  by  that  time  he 
was  eighteen  years  old.  Ge.  xxv.  12,  Ac.  For  that  day 
he  mocked;  that  day  it  was  said,  '  Cast  him  out;' 
and  of  that  casting  out  the  apostle  makes  what  I 
have  said.  Beware,  ye  young  barren  professors ! 
Now,.  Ishmael  lived  a  hundred  and  nineteen  years 
after  this,  in  great  tranquillity  and  honour  with 
men.  After  this  he  also  begat  twelve  princes,  even 
after  his  day  of  grace  was  past. 

Third.  I  shall  instance  Esau.  Ge.  xxv.  27,  &c. 
Esau  also  was  a  professor ;  he  was  born  unto  Isaac, 
and  circumcised  according  to  the  custom.  But 
Esau  was  a  gamesome  professor,  a  huntsman,  a 
man  of  the  field;  also  he  was  wedded  to  his  lusts, 
which  he  did  also  venture  to  keep,  rather  than  the 
birthright.  Well,  upon  a  day,  when  he  came  from 
hunting,  and  was  faint,  he  sold  his  birthright  to 
Jacob,  his  brother.  Now  the  birthright,  in  those 
days,  had  the  promise  and  blessing  annexed  to  it. 
Yea,  they  were  so  entailed  in  this,  that  the  one 
could  not  go  without  the  other ;  wherefore  the 
apostle's  caution  is  here  of  weight.  Take  heed, 
saith  he,  '  lest  there  be  any  fornicator,  or  pro- 
fane person,  as  Esau,  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat 
sold  his  birthright.  For  ye  know  how  that  after- 
ward, when  he  would  have  inherited  the  blessing, 
he  was  rejected;  for  he  found  no  place  of  repent- 
ance, though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears.' 
lie.  xii.  16, 17.  Now,  the  ending  of  Esau's  day  of 
grace  is  to  be  reckoned  from  his  selling  of  his 
birthright;  for  there  the  apostle  points  it,  lest 
there  be  among  you  any  that,  like  Esau,  sells 
his  birthright:  for  then  goes  hence  the  blessing 
also. 

But  Esau  sold  his  birthright  long  before  his 
death.  Twenty  years  after  this  Jacob  was  with 
Laban,  and  when  he  returned  home,  his  brother 
Esau  met  him.  Ge.  sxxi.  41 ;  xxxii.  4.  Further,  after 
this,  when  Jacob  dwelt  again  some  time  with  his 
father,  then  Jacob  and  Esau  buried  him.  I  sup- 
pose he  might  live  above  forty,  yea,  for  ought  I 
know,  above  fourscore  years  after  he  had  sold  his 
birthright,  and  so  consequently  had  put  himself 
out  of  the  <n-ace  of  God.2  Ge.  xxxv.  28,  29. 


1  Mahomet  professed  descent  from  Islimael,  and  that  lie 
came  to  revive  the  religion  which  God  had  revealed  to  Abraham, 
v/ho  taught  it  to  Ishmael.  Mahometanism  is  the  religion  of 
the  outcast  of  God. — (En.) 


-  Bunyan  had  been  haunted  with  the  temptation  '  to  sell 
and  part  with  Christ,'  and,  under  a  fear  that  he  had  fallen  under 
that  temptation,  the  case  of  Esau  made  a  dreadful  impression 
upon  his  soul ;  extreme  horror  and  anguish  seized  upon  his 
spirit;  'he  was  like  a  man  bereft  of  life  and  bound  over  to 
eternal  punishment,'  for  two  years.  At  length,  after  an  awful 
storm,  he  found  peace  in  the  promise,  'his  blood  clcanscth  from 
all  sins,'  and  a  proof  that  he  had  not  sold  Christ. — See  Grace 
Abounding,  No.  139—160. 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OP  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


579 


Three  things  I  would  further  note  upon  these 
three  professors. 

1.  Cain,  aa angry  profeasw ;  Ishmael,  a  mocking 
one;  Esau,  a  lustful,  gamesome  one.  Three  symp- 
toms of  a  barren  professor;  for  he  that  can  be  angry, 
and  that  can  mock,  and  that  can  indulge  his  lusts, 
cannot  bring  forth  fruit  to  God. 

2.  The  day  of  grace  ended  with  these  professors 
at  that  time  when  they  committed  some  grievous 
sin.  Cain's,  when  he  killed  his  brother;  Ishmael's, 
when  he  mocked  at  Isaac;  and  Esau's,  when,  out 
of  love  to  his  lusts,  he  despised  and  sold  his  birth- 
right. Beware,  barren  professor!  thou  mayest  do 
that  in  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  from  the  evil  of 
which  thou  mayest  not  be  delivered  for  ever  and 
ever.1 

3.  Yet  these  three, «after  their  day  of  grace  was 
over,  lived  better  lives,  as  to  outward  things,  than 
over  they  did  before.  Cain,  after  this,  was  lord 
of  a  city.  Ge.  iv.  it.  Ishmael  was,  after  this,  father 
of  twelve  princes.  Gc.  xxv.  ic.  And  Esau,  after  this, 
told  his  brother,  'I  have  enough,  my  brother,  keep 
that  thou  hast  unto  thyself.'  Bte.rtxifi.8,9.  Ease  and 
peace,  and  a  prosperous  life  in  outwards,  is  no  sign 
of  the  favour  of  God  to  a  barren  and  fruitless  pro- 
fessor, but  rather  of  his  wrath  ;  that  thereby  he 
may  be  capable  to  treasure  up  more  wrath  against 
the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God.  Let  this  much  serve  for  the 
proof  of  the  first  proposition,  namely,  That  the  day 
of  grace  ends  with  some  men  before  God  takes 
them  out  of  this  world. 

SIGXS  OF  BEING  PAST  GRACE, 

Now,  then,  to  show  you,  by  some  signs,  how 
you  may  know  that  the  day  of  grace  is  ended,  cr 
near  to  ending,  with  the  barren  professor;  and 
after  that  thou  shaft  cut  it  down.  He  that  hath 
stood  it  out  against  God,  and  that  hath  withstood 
all  those  means  for  fruit  that  God  hath  used  for 
the  making  of  him,  if  it  might  have  been,  a  fruitful 
tree  in  his  garden,  he  is  in  this  danger ;  and  this 
indeed  is  the  sum  of  the  parable.  The  fig-tree 
here  mentioned  was  blessed  with  the  application  of 
means,  had  time  allowed  it  to  receive  the  nourish- 
ment ;  but  it  outstood,  withstood,  ovcrstood  all, 
all  that  the  husbandman  did,  all  that  the  vine- 
dresser did. 

But  a  little  distinctly  to  particularize  in  four  or 
five  particulars. 

First  sign.  The  day  of  grace  is  like  to  be  past, 
when  a  professor  hath  withstood,  abused,  and 
worn  out  God's  patience,  then  he  is  in  danger; 
this  is  a  provocation;  then  God  cries,  'Cut  it  down.' 


1  How  solemn  a  thought!     What  an  appeal  to  perpetual 
watchfulness.      Why   have  I   not  made  shipwreck  of  faith? 
iphaticaliy  may  we  reply,  Because  God  has  sustained 
my  soul. — (Ed.) 


There  are  some  men  that  steal  into  a  profession, 
nobody  knows  how,  even  as  this  fig-tree  was  brought 
into  the  vineyard  by  other  hands  than  God's  ;  and 
there  they  abide  lifeless,  graceless,  careless,  and 
without  any  good  conscience  to  God  at  all.  Perhaps 
they  came  in  for  the  loaves,  for  a  trade,  for  credit,  for 
a  blind ;  or  it  may  be  to  stifle  and  choke  the  checks 
and  grinding  pangs  of  an  awakened  and  disquieted 
conscience.  Now,  having  obtained  their  purpose, 
like  the  sinners  of  Sion,  they  are  at  ease  and  secure; 
saying  like  Agag,  •  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death 
is  past,'  i  Ba.  w.  it;  I  am  well,  shall  be  saved,  and 
go  to  heaven.  Thus  in  these  vain  conceits  they 
spend  a  year,  two,  or  three  ;  not  remembering  that 
at  every  season  of  grace,  and  at  every  opportunity 
of  the  gospel  the  Lord  comes  seeking  fruit.  Well, 
sinner,  well,  barren  fig-tree,  this  is  but  a  coarse 
beginning:    God  comes  for  fruit. 

1.  What  have  I  here?  saith  God;  what  a  fig- 
tree  is  this,  that  hath  stood  this  year  in  my  vine- 
yard, and  brought  me  forth  no  fruit?  I  will  cry 
unto  him,  Professor,  barren  fig-tree,  be  fruitful ! 
I  look  for  fruit,  I  expect  fruit,  I  must  have  fruit ; 
therefore  bethink  thyself !  At  these  the  professor 
pauses ;  but  these  are  words,  not  blows,  therefore 
off  goes  this  consideration  from  the  heart.  When 
God  comes  the  next  year,  he  finds  him  still  as  he 
was,  a  barren,  fruitless  cumber-ground.  And  now 
again  he  complains,  here  are  two  years  gone,  and 
no  fruit  appears ;  well,  I  will  defer  mine  anger. 
•  For  my  name  sake  will  I  defer  mine  anger,  and 
for  my  praise  will  I  refrain  for  thee,  that  I  cut 
thee  not  off,'  as  yet.  is.  xiviii.  9.  I  will  wait,  I  will 
yet  wait  to  be  gracious.  But  this  helps  not,  this 
hath  not  the  least  influence  upon  the  barren  fig-tree. 
Tush,  saith  he,  here  is  no  threatening:  God  is 
merciful,  he  will  defer  his  anger,  he  waits  to  be 
gracious,  I  am  not  yet  afraid,  is.  xxx.  is.  0 !  how 
ungodly  men,  that  are  at  unawares  crept  into  the 
vineyard,  howT  do  they  turn  the  grace  of  our  God 
into  lasciviousness !  Well,  he  comes  the  third  year 
for  fruit,  as  he  did  before,  but  still  he  fiuds  but  a 
barren  fig-tree ;  no  fruit.  Now,  he  cries  out  again, 
0  thou  dresser  of  my  vineyard,  come  hither ;  here 
is  a  fig-tree  hath  stood  these  three  years  in  my 
vineyard,  and  hath  at  every  season  disappointed 
my  expectation;  for  I  have  looked  for  fruit  in  vain; 
'Cut  it  down,'  my  patience  is  woru  out,  I  shall 
wait  on  this  fig-tree  no  longer. 

2.  And  now  he  begins  to  shake  the  fig-tree 
with  his  threatenings :  Fetch  out  the  axe !  Now 
the  axe  is  death ;  death  therefore  is  ealled  for. 
Death,  come  smite  me  this  fig-tree.  And  withal 
the  Lord  shakes  this  sinner,  and  whirls  him  upon 
a  sick-bed,  saying,  Take  him,  death,  he  hath 
abused  my  patience  and  forbearance,  not  remem- 
bering that  it  should  have  led  him  to  repentance, 
and  to  the  fruits  thereof.     Death,  fetch  away  this 


530 


THE   BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


fig-tree  to  the  fire,  fetch  this  harren  professor  to 
hell !  At  this  death  comes  with  grim  looks  into 
the  chamber ;  yea,  and  hell  follows  with  him  to 
the  bedside,  and  both  stare  this  professor  in  the 
face,  yea,  begin  to  lay  hands  upon  him;  one 
smiting  him  with  pains  in  his  body,  with  head- 
ache, heart-ache,  back-ache,  shortness  of  breath, 
fainting,  qualms,  trembling  of  joints,  stopping  at 
the  chest,  and  almost  all  the  symptoms  of  a  man 
past  all  recovery.  Now,  while  death  is  thus  tor- 
menting the  body,  hell  is  doing  with  the  mind  and 
conscience,  striking  them  with  its  pains,  casting 
sparks  of  fire  in  thither,  wounding  with  sorrows, 
and  fears  of  everlasting  damnation,  the  spirit  of 
this  poor  creature.1  And  now  he  begins  to  bethink 
himself,  and  to  cry  to  God  for  mercy ;  Lord,  spare 
me!  Lord,  spare  me!  Nay,  saith  God,  you  have 
been  a  provocation  to  me  these  three  years.  How 
many  times  have  you  disappointed  me  ?  How  many 
seasons  have  you  spent  in  vain  ?  How  many  ser- 
mons and  other  mercies  did  I,  of  my  patience, 
afford  you  ?  but  to  no  purpose  at  all.  Take  him, 
death!  0!  good  Lord,  saith  the  sinner,  spare 
me  but  this  once ;  raise  me  but  this  once.  Indeed 
I  have  been  a  barren  professor,  and  have  stood  to 
no  purpose  at  all  in  thy  vineyard ;  but  spare !  0 
spare  this  one  time,  I  beseech  thee,  and  I  will  be 
better !  Away,  away  you  will  not ;  I  have  tried 
you  these  three  years  already ;  you  are  naught ; 
if  1  should  recover  you  again,  you  would  be  as 
bad  as  you  were  before.  And  all  this  talk  is  while 
death  stands  by.  The  sinner  cries  again,  Good 
Lord,  try  me  this  once ;  let  me  get  up  again  this 
once,  and  see  if  I  do  not  mend.  But  will  you  pro- 
mise me  to  mend  ?  Yes,  indeed,  Lord,  and  vow  it 
too;  I  will  never  be  so  bad  again;  I  will  be  better. 
Well,  saith  God,  death,  let  this  professor  alone  for 
this  time ;  I  will  try  him  a  while  longer ;  he  hath 
promised,  he  hath  vowed,  that  he  will  amend  his 
ways.  It  may  be  he  will  mind  to  keep  his  pro- 
mises. Vows  are  solemn  things ;  it  may  be  he 
may  fear  to  break  his  vows.  Arise  from  off  thy 
bed.  And  now  God  lays  down  his  axe.  At  this 
the  poor  creature  is  very  thankful,  praises  God, 
and  fawns  upon  him,  shows  as  if  he  did  it  heartily, 
and  calls  to  others  to  thank  him  too.  He  there- 
fore riseth,  as  one  would  think,  to  be  a  new  crea- 
ture indeed.  But  by  that  he  hath  put  on  his 
clothes,  is  come  down  from  his  bed,  and  ventured 
into  the  yard  or  shop,  and  there  sees  how  all 
things  are  gone  to  sixes  and  sevens,  he  begins  to 
have  second  thoughts,  and  says  to  his  folks,  What 


1  Bunyan's  tongue  and  pen  arc  here  fired  by  Ids  vivid  ima- 
gination of  eternal  realities.  "With  such  burning  words,  we 
need  no  messenger  from  the  invisible  world  to  alarm  the  con- 
sciences of  sinners.  What  angel  could  arouse  more  powerfully, 
alarmingly,  convincingly,  the  poor  sinner,  than  the  whole  of 
this  chain  of  reasoning. — (Ed.) 


have  you  all  been  doing"  How  are  all  things  out 
of  order?  I  am  I  cannot  tell  what  behind  hand. 
One  may  see,  if  a  man  be  but  a  little  a  to  side, 
that  you  have  neither  wisdom  nor  prudence  to  order 
things.2  And  now,  instead  of  seeking  to  spend 
the  rest  of  his  time  to  God,  he  doubleth  his  dili- 
gence after  this  world.  Alas!  all  must  not  be 
lost;  we  must  have  provident  care.  And  thus, 
quite  forgetting  the  sorrows  of  death,  the  pains  of 
hell,  the  promises  and  vows  which  he  made  to  God 
to  be  better;  because  judgment  was  not  now 
speedily  executed,  therefore  the  heart  of  this  poor 
creature  is  fully  set  in  him  to  do  evil. 

3.  These  things  proving  ineffectual,  God  takes 
hold  of  his  axe  again,  sends  death  to  a  wife,  to  a 
child,  to  his  cattle,  'Your  young  men  have  I  slain, 
-  and  taken  away  your  horses.'  Am.  iv.  9,  jo.  I  will 
blast  him,  cross  him,  disappoint  him,  and  cast  him 
down,  and  will  set  myself  against  him  in  all  that 
he  putteth  his  hand  unto.  At  this  the  poor  barren 
professor  cries  out  again,  Lord,  I  have  sinned; 
spare  me  once  more,  1  beseech  thee.  0  take  not 
away  the  desire  of  mine  eyes ;  spare  my  children, 
bless  me  in  my  labours,  and  I  will  mend  and  be 
better.  No,  saith  God,  you  lied  to  me  last  time, 
I  will  trust  you  in  this  no  longer ;  and  withal  he 
tumbleth  the  wife,  the  child,  the  estate  into  a  grave. 
And  then  returns  to  his  place,  till  this  professor 
more  unfeignedly  acknowledgeth  his  offence.  Ho. 

v.  14,  15. 

At  this  the  poor  creature  is  afflicted  and  dis- 
tressed, rends  his  clothes,  and  begins  to  call  the 
breaking  of  his  promise  and  vows  to  mind;  he 
mourns  and  prays,  and  like  Ahab,  awhile  walks 
softly  at  the  remembrance  of  the  justness  of  the 
hand  of  God  upon  him.  And  now  he  renews  his 
promises :  Lord,  try  me  this  one  time  more ;  take 
off  thy  hand  and  see  ;  they  go  far  that  never  turn. 
Well,  God  spareth  him  again,  sets  down  his  axe 
again.  'Many  times  he  did  deliver  them,  but 
they  provoked  Mm  with  their  counsel,  and  were 
brought  low  for  their  iniquity.'  Ps.  cvi.  43.  Now  they 
seem  to  be  thankful  again,  and  are  as  if  they  were 
resolved  to  be  godly  indeed.  Now  they  read,  they 
pray,  they  go  to  meetings,  and  seem  to  be  serious 
a  pretty  while,  but  at  last  they  forget.  Their  lusts 
prick  them,  suitable  temptations  present  them- 
selves ;  wherefore  they  turn  to  their  own  crooked 
ways  again.  «  When  he  slew  them,  then  they 
sought  him,  and  they  returned  and  inquired  early 
after  God ;'  'nevertheless  they  did  flatter  him  with 


2  This  picture  is  drawn  by  a  master  hand:  the  master  is  laid 
by  for  a  season ;  or,  as  Bunyan  quaintly  expresses  it,  '  a  little 
a  to  side:'  when  raised  from  affliction  earthly  affairs  absorb  his 
attention,  and  he  forgets  his  gcod  resolves.  According  to  the 
old  rhyme : — 

•The  devil  was  sick,  Hie  devil  a  saint  would  be' 
The  devil  got  well,  the  devil  a  saint  was  he.'— Ed. 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


5S1 


their  month,  and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their 
tongue. '  r*.  lxxvUL  m-36. 

4.  Yet  again,  the  Lord  will  not  leave  this  pro- 
fessor, but  will  take  up  his  axe  again,  and  will  put 
him  under  a  more  heart-searching  ministry,  a 
ministry  that  shall  search  him,  and  turn  him  over 
and  over ;  a  ministry  that  shall  meet  with  him,  as 
Elijah  met  with  Ahab,  in  all  his  acts  of  wicked- 
ness, and  now  the  axe  is  laid  to  the  roots  of  the 
trees.  Besides,  this  ministry  doth  not  only  search 
the  heart,  but  presenteth  the  sinner  with  the  golden 
rays  of  the  glorious  gospel ;  now  is  Christ  Jesus 
set  forth  evidently,  now  is  grace  displayed  sweetly; 
now,  now  are  the  promises  broken  like  boxes  of 
ointment,  to  the  perfuming  of  the  whole  room! 
But,  alas!  there  is  yet  no  fruit  on  this  fig-tree. 
"While  his  heart  is  searching,  he  wrangles ;  while 
the  glorious  grace  of  the  gospel  is  unveiling,  this 
professor  wags  and  is  wanton,  gathers  up  some 
scraps  thereof;  'Tastes  the  good  "Word  of  God, 
and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come ;'  '  drinketh 
in  the  rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  him.'  lie.  vi.  3-8. 
Jnde4.  But  bringcth  not  forth  fruit  meet  for  him 
whose  gospel  it  is ;  *  Takes  no  heed  to  walk  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with  all  his  heart.' 
2  Ki.  x.  31.  But  counteth  that  the  glory  of  the  gospel 
consisteth  in  talk  and  show,  and  that  our  obedience 
thereto  is  a  matter  of  speculation ;  that  good  works 
lie  in  good  words ;  and  if  they  can  finely  talk,  they 
think  they  bravely  please  God.  Theythink  the  king- 
dom of  God  consisteth  only  in  word,  not  in  power; 
and  thus  proveth  ineffectual  this  fourth  means  also. 

5.  Well,  now  the  axe  begins  to  be  heaved  higher, 
for  now  indeed  God  is  ready  to  smite  the  sinner ; 
yet  before  he  will  strike  the  stroke,  he  will  try  one 
way  more  at  the  last,  and  if  that  misseth,  down 
goes  the  fig-tree  !  Now  this  last  way  is  to  tug  and 
strive  with  this  professor  by  his  Spirit.  Where- 
fore the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  now  come  to  him;  but 
not  always  to  strive  with  man.  Ge.  vi.  3.  Yet  a  while 
he  will  strive  with  him,  he  will  awaken,  he  will 
convince,  he  will  call  to  remembrance  former  sins, 
former  judgments,  the  breach  of  former  vows  and 
promises,  the  misspending  of  former  days ;  he  will 
also  present  persuasive  arguments,  encouraging 
promises,  dreadful  judgments,  the  shortness  of  time 
to  repent  in ;  and  that  there  is  hope  if  he  come. 
Further,  he  will  show  him  the  certainty  of  death, 
and  of  the  judgment  to  come;  yea,  he  will  pull  and 
strive  with  this  sinner;  but,  behold,  the  mischief 
now  lies  here,  here  is  tugging  and  striving  on  both 
sides.  The  Spirit  convinces,  the  man  turns  a  deaf 
ear  to  God ;  the  Spirit  saith,  Receive  my  instruc- 
tion and  live,  but  the  man  pulls  away  his  shoulder; 
the  Spirit  shows  him  whither  he  is  going,  but  the 
man  closeth  his  eyes  against  it;  the  Spirit  offereth 
violence,  the  man  strives  and  resists ;  they  have 
'  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace.'  He.  x.  29. 


The  Spirit  parlieth  a  second  time,  and  urgeth 
reasons  of  a  new  nature,  but  the  sinner  answereth, 
No,  I  have  loved  strangers,  and  after  them  I  will 
go.  Am.  iv.  6-12.  At  this  God's  fury  comes  up  into 
his  face :  now  he  comes  out  of  his  holy  place,  and 
is  terrible;  now  he  swearcth  in  his  wrath  they  shall 
never  enter  into  his  rest.  Ho.  Hi  11.  I  exercised  to- 
wards you  my  patience,  yet  you  have  not  turned 
unto  me,  saith  the  Lord.  I  smote  you  in  your  per- 
son, in  your  relations,  in  your  estate,  yet  you  have 
not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord.  '  In  thy 
filthiness  is  lewdness,  because  I  have  purged  thee, 
and  thou  wast  not  purged ;  thou  shalt  not  be  purged 
from  thy  filthiness  any  more,  till  I  cause  my  fury 
to  rest  upon  thee.'  Eze.  xxiv.  18.  '  Cut  it  down,  why 
doth  it  cumber  the  ground  ?' 

The  second  sign.  That  such  a  professor  is  almost, 
if  not  quite,  past  grace,  is,  when  God  hath  given 
him  over,  or  lets  him  alone,  and  suffers  him  to  do 
anything,  and  that  without  control,  helpeth  him 
not  either  in  works  of  holiness,  or  in  straits  and 
difficulties.  •  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols ;  let  him 
alone. '  Ho.  iv.  17.  Woe  be  to  them  when  I  depart 
from  them.  I  will  laugh  at  their  calamities,  and 
will  mock  when  their  fear  cometh.  Pr.  i.  21-20. 

Barren  fig-tree,  thou  hast  heretofore  been  digged 
about,  and  dunged;  God's  mattock  hath  heretofore 
been  at  thy  roots;  gospel-dung  hath  heretofore  been 
applied  to  thee  ;  thou  hast  heretofore  been  strove 
with,  convinced,  awakened,  made  to  taste  and  see, 
and  cry,  0  the  blessedness  !  Thou  hast  heretofore 
been  met  with  under  the  word;  thy  heart  hath 
melted,  thy  spirit  hath  fallen,  thy  soul  hath 
trembled,  and  thou  hast  felt  something  of  the  power 
of  the  gospel.  But  thou  hast  sinned,  thou  hast 
provoked  the  eyes  of  his  glory,  thy  iuiquity  is  found 
to  be  hateful,  and  now  perhaps  God  hath  left  thee, 
given  thee  up,  and  lets  thee  alone.  Heretofore 
thou  wast  tender ;  thy  conscience  startled  at  the 
temptation  to  wickedness,  for  thou  wert  taken  off 
from  '  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  through  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.' 
2  Pe.  ii.  20-22.  But  that  very  vomit  that  once  thou 
wert  turned  from,  now  thou  lappest  up — with  the 
dog  in  the  proverb — again;  and  that  very  mire  that 
once  thou  seemedst  to  be  washed  from,  in  that  very 
mire  thou  now  art  tumbling  afresh.  But  to  parti- 
cularize, there  are  three  signs  of  a  man's  being  given 
over  of  God. 

1.  When  he  is  let  alone  in  sinning,  when  the 
reins  of  his  lusts  are  loosed,  and  he  given  up  to 
them.  •  And  even  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain 
God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave  them  over  to  a 
reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not 
convenient:  being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness.' 
Ro.  i.  28, 29.  Seest  thou  a  man  that  heretofore  had 
the  knowledge  of  God,  and  that  had  some  awe  of 
Majesty  upon  him:  I  say,  seest  thou  such  an  one 


532 


THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


sporting  himself  in  his  own  deceivings,  turning  the 
grace  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness,  and  walking 
after  his  own  ungodly  lusts?  Ro.i.30,3i.  His  'judg- 
ment now  of  a  long  time  lingereth  not,  and  his 
damnation  slumbereth  not.'  2Pe.  ii.  13.  Dost  thou 
hear,  barren  professor  ?  It  is  astonishing  to  see 
how  those  that  once  seemed  'sons  of  the  morning,' 
and  were  making  preparations  for  eternal  life, 
now  at  last,  for  the  rottenness  of  their  hearts,  by 
the  just  judgment  of  God,  to  be  permitted,  being 
past  feeling,  to  give  '  themselves  over  unto  lascivi- 
ousness, to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness.' 
Ep.  iv.  is,  19.  A  great  number  of  such  were  in  the 
first  gospel-days ;  against  whom  Peter,  and  Jude, 
and  John,  pronounce  the  heavy  judgment  of  God. 
Peter  and  Jude  couple  them  with  the  fallen  angels, 
and  John  forbids  that  prayer  be  made  for  them, 
because  that  is  happened  unto  them  that  hath 
happened  to  the  fallen  angels  that  fell,  who,  for 
forsaking  their  first  state,  and  for  leaving  '  their 
own  habitation,'  are  'reserved  in  everlasting 
chains  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day.'  Jude 5, c.  2Pe.ii.3-8.  Barren  fig-tree,  dost 
thou  hear?  (1.)  These  are  beyond  all  mercy! 
(2.)  These  are  beyond  all  promises  !  (3.)  These 
are  beyond  all  hopes  of  repentance  !  (4.)  These 
have  no  intercessor,  nor  any  more  share  in  a  sacri- 
fice for  sin  !  (5.)  For  these  there  remains  nothing 
but  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment !  (6.)  Where- 
fore these  are  the  true  fugitives  and  vagabonds, 
that  being  left  of  God,  of  Christ,  of  grace,  and  of 
the  promise,  and  being  beyond  all  hope,  wander 
and  straggle  to  and  fro,  even  as  the  devil,  their 
associate,  until  their  time  shall  come  to  die,  or 
until  they  descend  in  battle  and  perish  ! 

2.  Wherefore  tliey  are  let  alone  in  hearing.  If 
these  at  any  time  come  under  the  word,  there  is 
for  them  no  God,  no  savour  of  the  means  of  grace, 
no  stirrings  of  heart,  no  pity  for  themselves,  no 
love  to  their  own  salvation.  Let  them  look  on  this 
hand  or  that,  there  they  see  such  effects  of  the 
word  in  others  as  produceth  signs  of  repentance, 
and  love  to  God  and  his  Christ.  These  men  only 
have  their  backs  bowed  down  alway.  Ro.  xi.  10.  These 
men  only  have  the  spirit  of  slumber,  eyes  that  they 
should  not  see,  and  ears  that  they  should  not  hear, 
to  this  very  day.  Wherefore  as  they  go  to  the 
place  of  the  Holy,  so  they  come  from  the  place  of 
the  Holy,  and  soon  are  forgotten  in  the  places 
where  they  so  did.  Ec.  via.  10.  Only  they  reap  this 
damage,  '  They  treasure  up  wrath  against  the 
day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God.'  iio.  ii.  c-o.  Look  to  it,  barren 
professor  ! 

3.  If  he  be  visited  after  the  common  way  of 
mankind,  either  with  sickness,  distress,  or  any 
kind  of  calamity,  still  no  God  appeareth,  no  sanc- 
tifying hand  of  God,  no  special  mercy  is  mixed 


with  the  affliction.  But  he  falls  sick,  and  grows 
well,  like  the  beast ;  or  is  under  distress,  as  Saul, 
■who  when  he  wras  engaged  by  the  Philistines  was 
forsaken  and  left  of  God,  'And  the  Philistines 
gathered  themselves  together,  and  came  and 
pitched  in  Shunem,  and  Saul  gathered  all  Israel 
together,  and  they  pitched  in  Gilboa.  And  when 
Saul  saw  the  host  of  the  Philistines  he  was  afraid, 
and  his  heart  greatly  trembled.  And  when  Saul 
inquired  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  answered  him  not, 
neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  by  prophets.' 
i  Sa.  xkvQL  4-6.  The  Lord  answered  him  no  more ; 
he  had  done  with  him,  cast  him  off,  and  rejected 
him,  and  left  him  to  stand  and  fall  with  his  sins, 
by  himself.  But  of  this  more  in  the  conclusion : 
therefore  I  here  forbear. 

4.  These  men  may  go  whither  they  will,  do  what 
they  will ;  they  may  range  from  opinion  to  opinion, 
from  notion  to  notion,  from  sect  to  sect,  but  are 
steadfast  nowhere  ;  they  are  left  to  their  own  un- 
certainties, they  have  not  grace  to  establish  their 
hearts ;  and  though  some  of  them  have  boasted 
themselves  of  this  liberty,  yet  Jude  calls  them 
'  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is  reserved  the  black- 
ness of  darkness  for  ever. '  Jude  13.  They  are  left, 
as  I  told  you  before,  to  be  fugitives  and  vagabonds 
in  the  earth,  to  wander  everywhere,  but  to  abide 
nowhere,  until  they  shall  descend  to  their  own 
place,  with  Cain  and  Judas,  men  of  the  same  fate 
with  themselves.   Ac.  i.  25. 

A  third  sign  that  such  a  professor  is  quite  past 
grace  is,  when  his  heart  is  grown  so  hard,  so  stony, 
and  impenetrable,  that  nothing  will  pierce  it. 
Barren  fig-tree,  dost  thou  consider  ?  a  hard  and 
unpenitent  heart  is  the  curse  of  God !  A  heart 
that  cannot  repent,  is  instead  of  all  plagues  at 
once ;  and  hence  it  is  that  God  said  of  Pharaoh, 
when  he  spake  of  delivering  him  up  in  the  great- 
ness of  his  anger,  '  I  will  at  this  time,'  saith 
he,   '  send  all  my  plagues  upon  thine  heart. '  Ex. 

is.  14. 

To  some  men  that  have  grievously  sinned  under 
a  profession  of  the  gospel,  God  giveth  this  token 
of  his  displeasure ;  they  are  denied  the  power  of 
repentance,  their  heart  is  bound,  they  cannot  re- 
pent ;  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  ever  repent, 
should  they  live  a  thousand  years.  It  is  impos- 
sible for  those  fall-aways  to  be  renewed  again  unto 
repentance,  '  seeing  they  crucify  to  themselves  the 
Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame.' 
He.  vi.  4-6.  Now,  to  have  the  heart  so  hardened, 
so  judicially  hardened,  this  is  as  a  bar  put  in  by 
the  Lord  God  against  the  salvation  of  this  sinner. 
This  was  the  burden  of  Spira's  complaint,  '  I  can- 
not do  it !      0  !  now  I  cannot  do  it ! '  x 


1  This  is  referred  to  in  the  Pilgrim,  at  the  Interpreter's 
house,  by  the  representation  of  a  man  in  an  iron  cage,  who 
says,  'I  cannot  get  out,  0  now  I  cannot  1'    The  awful  account 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


583 


This  man  sees  what  he  hath  done,  what  should 
help  him,  and  what  will  hecomc  of  him ;  yet  he 
cannot  repent;  he  pulled  away  his  shoulder  before, 
he  stopped  his  ears  before,  he  shut  up  his  eyes 
before,  and  in  that  very  posture  God  left  him,  aud 
so  he  stands  to  this  very  day.  I  have  had  a  fancy, 
that  Lot's  wife,  when  she  was  turned  into  a  pillar 
of  salt,  stood  yet  looking  over  her  shoulder,  or 
else  with  her  face  towards  Sodom ;  as  the  judg- 
ment caught  her,  so  it  bound  her,  and  left  her  a 
monument  of  God's    anger  to  after   generations. 

Ge.  sis.  2G. 

We  read  of  some  that  are  seared  witli  a  hot  iron, 
and  that  are  past  feeling ;  for  so  seared  persons  in 
seared  parts  are.  Their  conscience  is  seared.  1  Ti. 
iv.  ■:.  The  conscience  is  the  thing  that  must  be 
touched  with  feeling,  fear,  and  remorse,  if  ever  any 
good  be  done  with  the  sinner.  How  then  can  any 
good  be  done  to  those  whose  conscience  is  worse 
than  that  ?  that  is,  fast  asleep  in  sin.  Ep.  iv.  19.  For 
that  conscience  that  is  fast  asleep,  may  yet  be 
effectually  awakened  and  saved;  but  that  con- 
science that  is  seared,  dried,  as  it  were,  into  a 
cinder,  can  never  have  sense,  feeling,  or  the  least 
regret  in  this  world.  Barren  fig-tree,  hearken, 
judicial  hardening  is  dreadful !  There  is  a  differ- 
ence betwixt  that  hardness  of  heart  that  is  incident 
to  all  men,  and  that  which  comes  upon  some  as  a 
signal  or  special  judgment  of  God.  And  although 
all  kinds  of  hardness  of  heart,  in  some  sense  may 
be  called  a  judgment,  yet  to  be  hardened  with 
this  second  kind,  is  a  judgment  peculiar  only  to 
them  that  perish  ;  a  hardness  that  is  sent  as  a 
pimishment  for  the  abuse  of  light  received,  for  a 
reward  of  apostacy.  This  judicial  hardness  is 
discovered  from  that  which  is  incident  to  all  men, 
in  these  particulars  : — 

1.  It  is  a  hardness  that  comes  after  some  great 
light  received,  because  of  some  great  sin  com- 
mitted against  that  light,  and  the  grace  that  gave 
it.  Such  hardness  as  Pharaoh  had,  after  the  Lord 
had  wrought  wondrously  before  him;  such  hard- 
ness as  the  Gentiles  had,  a  hardness  which  dark- 
ened the  heart,  a  hardness  which  made  their 
minds  reprobate.  This  hardness  is  also  the  same 
with  that  the  Hebrews  are  cautioned  to  beware  of, 
a  hardness  that  is  caused  by  unbelief,  and  a  de- 


of  Spira's  despair  must  have  made  a  strong  impression  upon 
Buiiyau's  mind.     It  commences  with  a  poem. 
'Here  see  a  soul  that's  all  despair;  a  man 
All  hell;  a  spirit  all  wounds  ;  who  cau 

A  wounded  spirit  bear? 
Keader,  would'st  see,  what  may  you  never  feel 
Despair,  racks,  torments,  whips,  <ji  burning  steel  I 
Jiehold,  the  man's  the  furnace,  in  whuse  heart 
bin  hath  created  hell;  0  m  each  part 

What  flknea  appear: 
His  thoughts  all  stings;  words,  swords; 

Brimstone  his  breatli ; 
His  eyes  flames;  wishes  curses,  life  a  death; 
A  thousand  deatiis  live  in  him,  he  not  dead; 
A  breathing  corpse  m  living,  scalding  lead.' 
— fearful  Estate  of  Francis  Hpira. — (Ed.) 


parting  from  the  living  God;  a  hardness  completed 
through  the  deeeitf illness  of  sin.  lie.  m.  7,  4a  Such 
as  that  in  the  provocation,  of  whom  God  sware, 
that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest.  It  was 
this  kind  of  hardness  also,  that  both  Cain,  and 
Ishniael,  and  Esau,  were  hardened  with,  after 
they  had  committed  their  great  transgressions. 

2.  It  is  the  greatest  kind  of  hardness ;  and 
hence  they  arc  said  to  be  harder  than  a  rock,  or 
than  an  adamant,  that  is,  harder  than  Hint :  so 
hard,  that  nothing  can  enter.   Je.  v.  ?,.  Zee.  vii.  13. 

3.  It  is  a  hardness  given  in  much  anger,  and 
that  to  bind  the  soul  up  in  an  impossibility  of  re- 
pentance. 

4.  It  is  a  hardness,  therefore,  which  is  incurable, 
of  which  a  man  must  die  and  be  damned.  Barren 
professor,  hearken  to  this. 

A  fourth  sign  that  such  a  professor  is  quite  past 
grace,  is,  when  he  fortifies  his  hard  heart  against 
the  tenor  of  God's  word.  Job  ix.  4,  &c.  This  is  called 
hardening  themselves  against  God,  and  turning  of 
the  Spirit  against  them.  As  thus,  when  after  a 
profession  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  of  the 
doctrine  that  is  according  to  godliness,  they  shall 
embolden  themselves  in  courses  of  sin,  by  promis- 
ing themselves  that  they  shall  have  life  and  salva- 
tion notwithstanding.  Barren  professor,  hearken 
to  this  !  This  man  is  called,  'a  root  that  beareth 
gall  and  wormwood,'  or  a  poisonful  herb,  such  an 
one  as  is  abominated  of  God,  yea,  the  abhorred  of 
his  soul.  For  this  man  saith,  '  I  shall  have  peace, 
though  I  walk  in  the  imagination  '  or  stubborn- 
ness 'of  mine  heart,  to  add  drunkenness  to  thirst ; ' 
an  opinion  flat  against  the  whole  Word  of  God, 
yea,  against  the  very  nature  of  God  himself. 
De.  sxis.  is,  19.  Wherefore  he  adds,  '  Then  the  anger 
of  the  Lord,  and  his  jealousy,  shall  smoke  against 
that  man,  and  all  the  curses  that  are  written  in 
God's  book  shall  lie  upon  him,  and  the  Lord  shall 
blot  out  his  name  from  under  heaven.'  De.  a*  20. 

Yea,  that  man  shall  not  fail  to  be  effectually  de- 
stroyed, saith  the  text :  '  The  Lord  shall  separate 
that  man  unto  evil,  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel, 
according  to  all  the  curses  of  the  covenant.'  De.  six. 
21.  He  shall  separate  him  unto  evil ;  he  shall  give 
him  up,  he  shall  leave  him  to  his  heart ;  he  shall 
separate  him  to  that  or  those  that  Avill  assuredly  be 
too  hard  for  him. 

Now  this  judgment  is  much  effected  when  God 
hath  given  a  man  up  unto  Satan,  and  hath  given 
Satan  leave,  without  fail,  to  complete  his  destruc 
tion.  I  say,  when  God  hath  given  Satan  leave 
effectually  to  complete  his  destruction  ;  for  all  that 
are  delivered  up  unto  Satan  have  not,  nor  do  not 
come  to  this  end.  But  that  is  the  man  wdiom  God 
shall  separate  to  evil,  and  shall  leave  in  the  hands 
of  Satan,  to  complete,  without  fail,  his  destruction. 

Thus  he  served  Aliab,  a  man  that  sold  himself 


584 


THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE,  OR 


to  work  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  '  And 
the  Lord  said,  Who  shall  persuade  Ahab,  that  he 
may  go  up  and  fall  at  Raraoth-Gilead?  And  one 
said  on  this  manner,  and  another  said  on  that  man- 
ner. And  there  came  forth  a  spirit,  and  stood  before 
the  Lord,  and  said,  I  will  persuade  him.  And  the 
Lord  said  unto  him,  Wherewith  ?  And  he  said,  I 
will  go  forth,  and  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of 
all  his  prophets.  And  he  said,  Thou  shalt  persuade 
him,  and  prevail  also  ;  go  forth,  and  do  so.'  1  KL 
xxi.  25;  xxii.  20-22.  Thou  shalt  persuade  him,  and 
prevail ;  do  thy  will,  I  leave  him  in  thy  hand,  go 
forth,  and  do  so. 

Wherefore,  in  these  judgments  the  Lord  doth 
much  concern  himself  for  the  management  thereof, 
because  of  the  provocation  wherewith  they  have 
provoked  him.  This  is  the  man  whose  ruin  con- 
trivcth,  and  bringeth  to  pass  by  his  own  contriv- 
ance: 'I  also  will  choose  their  delusions'  for  them; 
'  I  will  bring  their  fears  upon  them.'  is.  lxvi.  4.  I 
will  choose  their  devices,  or  the  wickednesses  that 
their  hearts  are  contriving  of.  I,  even  I,  will  cause 
them  to  be  accepted  of,  and  delightful  to  them. 
But  who  are  they  that  must  thus  be  feared  ?  Why, 
those  among  professors  that  have  chosen  their  own 
ways,  those  whose  soul  delighteth  in  their  abomina- 
tions. Because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the 
truth,  that  they  might  be  saved  :  for  this  cause  God 
shall  send  them  strong  delusions,  that  they  should 
believe  a  lie,  that  they  all  might  be  damned,  who 
believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unright- 
eousness. 

'God  shall  send  them.'  It  is  a  great  word! 
Yea,  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusions ;  delu- 
sions that  shall  do :  that  shall  make  them  believe 
a  lie.  Why  so ?  ' That  they  all  might  be  damned,' 
every  one  of  them,  '  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but 
had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness.'  2  Thes.  ii.  10-12. 

There  is  nothing  more  provoking  to  the  Lord, 
than  for  a  man  to  promise  when  God  threateneth ; 
for  a  man  to  be  light  of  conceit  that  he  shall  be  safe, 
and  yet  to  be  more  wicked  than  in  former  days, 
this  man's  soul  abhorreth  the  truth  of  God;  no 
marvel,  therefore,  if  God's  soul  abhorreth  him ;  he 
hath  invented  a  way  contrary  to  God,  to  bring 
about  his  own  salvation ;  no  marvel,  therefore,  if 
God  invent  a  way  to  bring  about  this  man's  damna- 
tion: and  seeing  that  these  rebels  are  at  this  point, 
we  shall  have  peace  ;  God  will  see  whose  word  will 
stand,  his  or  theirs. 

A  fifth  sign  of  a  man  being  past  grace  is,  when 
he  shall  at  this  scoff,  and  inwardly  grin  and  fret 
against  the  Lord,  secretly  purposing  to  continue  his 
course,  and  put  all  to  the  venture,  despising  the 
messengers  of  the  Lord.  '  He  that  despised  Moses' 
law,  died  without  mercy ;  -  of  how  much  sorer  pun- 
ishment, suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy, 
who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God?'  (fee, 


He.  x.  23.  Wherefore,  against  these  despisers  God 
hath  set  himself,  and  foretold  that  they  shall  not 
believe,  but  perish:  'Behold,  ye  despisers,  and 
wonder,  and  perish :  for  I  work  a  work  in  your 
days,  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  nowise  believe, 
though  a  man  declare  it  unto  you.'  Ac. xiiL a. 

After  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  clown. 

Thus  far  we  have  treated  of  the  barren  fig-tree, 
or  fruitless  professor,  with  some  signs  to  know  him 
by ;  whereto  is  added  also  some  signs  of  one  who 
neither  will  nor  can,  by  any  means,  be  fruitful,  but 
they  must  miserably  perish.  Now,  being  come  to 
the  time  of  execution,  I  shall  speak  a  word  to  that 
also  ;   '  After  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down.' 

[Proposition  Second.  The  death  or  cutting 
down  of  such  men  will  be  dreadful.] 

Christ,  at  last,  turns  the  barren  fig-tree  over  to 
the  justice  of  God,  shakes  his  hands  of  him,  and 
gives  him  up  to  the  fire  for  his  unprofitableness. 
'After  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down.' 

Two  things  are  here  to  be  considered: 

First.  The  executioner  ;  thou,  the  great,  the 
dreadful,  the  eternal  God.  These  words,  therefore, 
as  I  have  already  said,  signify  that  Christ  the 
Mediator,  through  whom  alone  salvation  comes, 
and  by  whom  alone  execution  hath  been  deferred, 
now  giveth  up  the  soul,  forbears  to  speak  one  syl- 
lable more  for  him,  or  to  do  the  least  act  of  grace 
further,  to  try  for  his  recovery ;  but  delivereth  him 
up  to  that  fearful  dispensation,  '  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God.'  He.  x.  si. 

Second.  The  second  to  be  considered  is,  The  in- 
strument by  which  this  execution  is  done,  and  that 
is  death,  compared  here  to  an  axe ;  and  forasmuch 
as  the  tree  is  not  felled  at  one  blow,  therefore  the 
strokes  are  here  continued,  till  all  the  blows  be 
struck  at  it  that  are  requisite  for  its  felling :  for 
now  cutting  time,  and  cutting  work,  is  come  ;  cut- 
ting must  be  his  portion  till  he  be  cut  down. 
'  After  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down.'  Death,  I  say, 
is  the  axe,  which  God  often  useth,  therewith  to 
take  the  barren  fig-tree  out  of  the  vineyard,  out  of 
a  profession,  and  also  out  of  the  world  at  once. 
But  this  axe  is  now  new  ground,  it  cometh  well- 
edged  to  the  roots  of  this  barren  fig-tree.  It  hath 
been  whetted  by  sin,  by  the  law,  and  by  a  formal 
profession,  and  therefore  must,  and  will  make  deep 
gashes,  not  only  in  the  natural  life,  but  in  the  heart 
and  conscience  also  of  this  professor:  '  The  wages 
of  sin  is  death,'  '  the  sting  of  death  is  sin.'  Eo.  vi.  23. 
1  Co.  xv.  5G.  Wherefore  death  comes  not  to  this  man 
as  he  cloth  to  saints,  muzzled,  or  without  his  sting, 
but  with  open  mouth,  in  all  his  strength ;  yea,  he 
sends  his  first-born,  which  is  guilt,  to  devour  his 
strength,  and  to  bring  him  to  the  king  of  terrors. 

Job  xviii.  13,  14. 


THE  DOOM  AND  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  FRUITLESS  PROFESSOR. 


585 


But  to  give  you,  in  a  few  particulars,  the  manner 
of  this  man's  dying. 

1.  Now  he  hath  his  fruitless  fruits  beleaguer  him 
round  his  bed,  together  with  all  the  bands  and 
legions  of  his  other  wickeilness.  '  His  own  ini- 
quities shall  take  the  wicked  himself,  and  he  shall 
be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins.'   Pr.  v.  22. 

2.  Now  some  terrible  discovery  of  God  is  made 
out  unto  him,  to  the  perplexing  and  terrifying  of 
his  guilty  conscience.  •  God  shall  cast  upon  him, 
and  not  spare  ;'  and  he  shall  be  afraid  oithat  which 

is  high.'  Job  xxvii.  22.  Ec.  xii.  5. 

3.  The  dark  entry  he  is  to  go  through  will  be  a 
sore  amazement  to  him  ;  for  '  fears  shall  be  in  the 
way.'  Ec.  xii.  5.  Yea,  terrors  will  take  hold  on  him, 
when  he  shall  see  the  yawning  jaws  of  death  to 
gape  upon  him,  and  the  doors  of  the  shadow  of 
death  open  to  give  him  passage  out  of  the  world. 
Now,  who  will  meet  me  in  this  dark  entry?  how 
shall  I  pass  through  this  dark  entry  into  another 
world  ? 

4.  For  by  reason  of  guilt,  and  a  shaking  con- 
science, his  life  will  hang  in  continual  doubt  before 
liim,  and  he  shall  be  afraid  day  and  night,  and 
shall  have  no  assurance  of  his  life.  De.  xxviii.  66,  67. 

5.  Now  also  want  will  come  up  agaiust  him  ;  he 
will  come  up  like  an  armed  man.  This  is  a  terrible 
army  to  him  that  is  graceless  in  heart,  and  fruitless 
iu  life.  This  want  will  continually  cry  in  thine 
ears,  Here  is  a  new  birth  wanting,  a  new  heart, 
and  a  new  spirit  wanting ;  here  is  faith  wanting ; 
here  is  love  and  repentance  wanting ;  here  is  the 
fear  of  God  wanting,  aud  a  good  conversation  want- 
ing :  '  Thou  art  weighed  iu  the  balances,  and  art 
found  wanting.'  Da.  v.  27. 

6.  Together  with  these  standeth  by  the  com- 
panions of  death,  death  and  hell,  death  and  devils, 
death  and  endless  torment  in  the  everlasting  flames 
of  devouring  fire.  '  When  God  cometh  up  unto 
the  people  he  will  invade  them  with  his  troops.' 

11A.,  Ui.  it* 
VOL.  1IL 


But  how  will  this  man  die?  Can  his  heart  now 
endure,  or  can  his  hands  be  strong  ?  Eze.  xxii.  14. 

(1.)  God,  and  Christ,  and  pity,  have  left  him. 
Sin  against  light,  against  mercy,  and  the  long-suf- 
fering of  God,  is  come  up  against  him ;  his  hope 
aud  confidence  now  lie  a-dyiug  by  him,  and  his  con- 
science totters  and  shakes  continually  within  him! 

(2.)  Death  is  at  his  work,  cutting  of  him  down, 
hewing  both  bark  and  heart,  both  body  and  soul 
asunder.  The  man  groans,  but  death  hears  him 
not;  he  looks  ghastly,  carefully, dejectedly ;  he  sighs, 
he  sweats,  he  trembles,  but  death  matters  nothing. 

(3.)  Fearful  cogitations  haunt  him,  misgivings, 
direful  apprehensions  of  God,  terrify  him.  Now 
he  hath  time  to  think  what  the  loss  of  heaven  will 
be,  and  what  the  torments  of  hell  will  be:  now  he 
looks  no  way  but  he  is  frighted. 

(4.)  Now  would  he  live,  but  may  not ;  he  would 
live,  though  it  were  but  the  life  of  a  bed-rid  man, 
but  ho  must  not.  He  that  cuts  him  down  sways 
him  as  the  feller  of  wood  sways  the  tottering  tree; 
now  this  way,  then  that,  at  last  a  root  breaks,  a 
heart-string,  an  eye-string,  sweeps  asunder. 

(5.)  And  now,  could  the  soul  be  annihilated,  or 
brought  to  uothing,  how  happy  would  it  count  it- 
self, but  it  sees  that  may  not  be.  Wherefore  it  is 
put  to  a  wonderful  strait ;  stay  in  the  body  it  may 
not,  go  out  of  the  body  it  dares  not.  Life  is  going, 
the  Llood  settles  in  the  flesh,  and  the  lungs  being  no 
more  able  to  draw  breath  through  the  nostrils,  at 
last  out  goes  the  weary  trembling  soul,  which  is 
immediately  seized  by  devils,  who  lay  lurking  in 
every  hole  in  the  chamber  for  that  very  purpose. 
His  friends  take  care  of  the  body,  wrap  it  up  in  the 
sheet  or  coffin,  but  the  soul  is  out  of  their  thought 
and  reach,  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death. 

I  had  thought  to  have  enlarged,  but  1  forbear. 
God,  who  teaches  man  to  profit,  bless  this  brief  and 
plain  discourse  to  thy  soul,  who  yet  standest  a  pro- 
fessor in  the  land  of  the  living,  among  the  trees  of 
his  garden.     A  men. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN, 


PRESENTED    TO    THE    WORLD    IN 


A  FAMILIAR  DIALOGUE  BETWEEN  MR.  WISEMAN  AND  MR.  ATTENTIVE. 

Br  JOHN  BUNYAN, 
The  Author  of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress.' 

Printed  by  J.  A.  for  Nath.  Ponder,  at  the  Peacock  in  the  Poultry,  near  the  Church,  16S0 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


The  life  of  Bad  man  is  a  very  interesting  descrip- 
tion, a  true  and  lively  portraiture,  of  the  demoral- 
ized classes  of  the  trading  community  in  the  reign 
of  King  Charles  II.  ;  a  subject  which  naturally  led 
the  author  to  use  expressions  familiar  among  such 
persons,  but  which  are  now  either  obsolete  or  con- 
sidered as  vulgar.  In  fact  it  is  the  only  work 
proceeding  from  the  prolific  pen  and  fertile  im- 
agination of  Bunyan,  in  which  he  uses  terms  that, 
in  this  delicate  and  refined  age,  may  give  offence. 
So,  in  the  venerable  translation  of  the  holy  oracles, 
there  are  some  objectionable  expressions,  which, 
although  formerly  used  in  the  politest  company, 
now  point  to  the  age  in  which  it  was  written.  The 
same  ideas  or  facts  would  now  be  expressed  by 
terms  which  could  not  give  offence ;  and  every 
reader  must  feel  great  pleasure  in  the  improvement 
of  our  language,  as  seen  in  the  contrast  between 
the  two  periods,  and  especially  in  the  recollection 
that  the  facts  might  be  stated  with  equal  precision, 
and  reflections  made  with  equal  force,  in  terms  at 
which  the  most  delicate  mind  could  not  be  of- 
fended. 

Those  who  read  the  writings  of  Bunyan  must 
feel  continually  reminded  of  his  ardent  attachment 
to  his  Saviour,  and  his  intense  love  to  the  souls  of 
sinners.  He  was  as  delicate  in  his  expressions  as 
any  writer  of  his  age,  who  addressed  the  openly 
vicious  and  profane— calling  things  by  their  most 
forcible  and  popular  appellations.  A  wilful  untruth 
is,  with  him,  «  a  lie.'  To  show  the  wickedness  and 
extreme  folly  of  swearing,  he  gives  the  words  and 
imprecations  then  commonly  in  use ;  but  which, 
happily  for  us,  we  never  hear,  except  among  the 
most  degraded  classes  of  society.  Swearino-  was 
formerly  considered  to  be  a  habit  of  gentility  ;  but 
now  it  betrays  the  blackguard,  even  when  disguised 
in  genteel  attire.  Those  dangerous  diseases  which 
are  so  surely  engendered  by  filth  and  uncleanness, 
he  calls  not  by  Latin  but  by  their  plain  English 
names.  In  every  case,  the  Editor  has  not  ven- 
tured to  make  the  slightest  alteration;  but   has 


reprinted  the  whole  in  the  author's  plain  and  power- 
ful language. 

The  life  of  Badman  forms  a  third  part  to  the 
Pilgrim's  Progress,  not  a  delightful  pilgrimage  to 
heaven,  but.  on  the  contrary,  a  wretched  downward 
journey  to  the  infernal  realms.  The  author's  ob- 
ject is  to  warn  poor  thoughtless  sinners,  not  with 
smooth  words,  to  which  they  would  take  no  heed ; 
but  to  thunder  upon  their  consciences  the  peril  of 
their  souls,  and  the  increasing  wretchedness  into 
which  they  were  madly  hurrying.  He  who  is  in 
imminent,  but  unseen  danger,  will  bless  the  warn- 
ing voice  if  it  reach  his  ears,  however  rough  and 
startling  the  sound  may  be. 

The  life  of  Badman  was  written  in  an  age  when 
profligacy,  vice,  and  debauchery,  marched  like  a 
desolating  army  through  our  land,  headed  by  the 
king,  and  officered  by  his  polluted  courtiers ;  led 
on  with  all  the  pomp  and  splendour  which  royalty 
could  display.  The  king  and  his  ministers  well 
knew  that  the  most  formidable  enemies  to  tyranny, 
oppression,  and  misgovernment,  were  the  piety  and 
stern  morality  of  the  Puritans,  Nonconformists,  and 
the  small  classes  of  virtuous  citizens  of  other  de- 
nominations ;  and  therefore  every  effort  was  made 
by  allurements  and  intimidation  to  debauch  and 
demoralize  their  minds,  p. 592.  Well  does  Bunyan 
say  that  '  wickedness  like  a  flood  is  like  to  drown 
our  English  world.  It  has  almost  swallowed  up 
all  our  youth,  our  middle  age,  old  age,  and  all  are 
almost  carried  away  of  this  flood.  It  reels  to  and 
fro  like  a  drunkard,  it  is  like  to  fall  and  rise  no 
more.'  p.  593.  '  It  is  the  very  haunts  and  walks 
of  the  internal  spirits.'  'England  shakes  and  makes 
me  totter  for  its  transgressions.' 

The  gradations  of  a  wicked  man  in  that  evil 
age,  from  his  cradle  to  his  grave,  are  graphically 
set  before  the  reader ;  it  is  all  drawn  from  reality, 
and  not  from  efforts  of  imagination.  Every  ex- 
ample is  a  picture  of  some  real  occurrence,  either 
within  the  view  of  the  author,  or  from  the  narra- 
tives of  credible  witnesses.     *  All  the  things  that 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY  THE  EDITOR. 


587 


here  I  discourse  of,  have  been  acted  upon  the  stage 
of  this  world,  even  many  times  before  mine  eyes.' 
Bad  man  is  represented  as  having  had  the  very 
great  advantage  of  pious  parents,  and  a  godly 
master,  but  run  riot  in  wickedness  from  bis  child- 
hood. Lying  and  pilfering  mark  his  early  days ; 
followed  in  after  life  by  swearing,  cheating,  drunk- 
enness, hypocrisy,  infidelity  and  atheism.  His 
conscience  became  hardened  to  that  awful  extent, 
that  he  had  no  bands  in  bis  death.  The  career 
of  wickedness  has  often  been  so  pictured,  as  to 
encourage  and  cherisb  vice  and  profanity — to  ex- 
cite the  unregenerate  mind  •  to  ride  post  by  otber 
men's  sins.'1  Not  so  the  life  of  Badman.  The 
ugly,  wretched,  miserable  consequences  that  as- 
suredly follow  a  vicious  career,  are  here  displayed 
in  biting  words  —  alarming  the  conscience,  and 
awfully  warning  the  sinner  of  his  destiny,  unless 
happily  he  finds  that  repentance  that  needeth  not 
to  be  repented  of.  No  debauchee  ever  read  the 
life  of  Badman  to  gratify  or  increase  his  thirst  for 
sin.  The  tricks  which  in  those  days  so  generally 
accompanied  trading,  are  unsparingly  exposed ; 
becoming  bankrupt  to  make  money,  a  species  of 
robbery,  which  ought  to  be  punished  as  felony ; 
double  weights,  too  heavy  for  buying,  and  light  to 
sell  by,  overcharging  those  who  take  credit,  and 
the  taking  advantage  of  the  necessities  of  others, 
with  the  abuse  of  evil  gains  in  debauchery,  and  its 
ensuing  miseries,  are  all  faithfully  displayed. 

In  the  course  of  the  narrative,  a  variety  of  awful 
examples  of  divine  vengeance  are  introduced;  some 
from  that  singular  compilation,  Clarke's  Looking- 
glass  for  Saints  and  Sinners;  others  from  '  Beard's 
Tlieatre  of  God's  Judgments  ;  and  many  that  hap- 
pened under  the  author's  own  immediate  know- 
ledge. The  faithfulness  of  his  extracts  from  books 
has  been  fully  verified.  The  awful  death  of  Dorothy 
Mately,  of  Ashover,  in  Derbyshire,  mentioned  in 
p.  604,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  testing,  by  the 
aid  of  my  kind  friend,  Thomas  Batcman,  Esq.,  of 
Yolgrave.  lie  sent  me  the  following  extract 
from  the  Ashover  Register  for  1660  : — '  Dorothy 
Mately,  supposed  wife  to  John  Flint  of  this  parish, 
forswore  fierself ;  whereupon  the  ground  opened, 
and  she  sunk  over  head,  March  23,  and  being  found 
dead,  she  was  buried,  March  25.'  Thus  fully  con- 
firming the  facts,  as  stated  by  Bunyan.  (Solemn 
providences,  intended,  in  the  inscrutable  wisdom  of 
God,  for  wise  purposes,  must  not  be  always  called 
'  divine  judgments.'  A  ship  is  lost,  and  the  good 
with  the  bad,  sink  together ;  a  missionary  is  mur- 
dered; a  pious  Malay  is  martyred;  still  no  one  can 
suppose  that  these  are  instances  of  divine  vengeance. 
But  when  the  atrocious  bishop  Bonner,  in  his  old 
age,  miserably  perishes  in  prison,  it  reminds  us  of 

1  Reynolds'  preface  to  God's  Revenge  against  Murder. 


our  Lord's  saying,  *  with  what  measure  ye  mete 
it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again.' 

Bunyan's  pictures,  of  which  the  life  of  Badman 
is  a  continued  series,  are  admirably  painted  from 
life.  The  extraordinary  depths  of  hypocrisy,  used 
in  gaining  the  affections  of  a  pious  wealthy  young 
woman,  and  entrapping  her  iuto  a  marriage,  are 
admirably  drawn,  as  is  its  companion  or  counter- 
part, when  Badman,  in  his  widower-hood,  sufl'ers 
an  infamous  strumpet  to  inveigle  him  into  a  miser- 
able marriage,  as  he  so  richly  deserved.  The 
death-bed  scene  of  the  pious  broken-hearted  Mrs. 
Badman,  is  a  masterpiece.  In  fact  the  whole  is 
a  series  of  pictures  drawn  by  a  most  admirable 
artist,  and  calculated  to  warn  and  attract  the  sin- 
ner from  his  downward  course. 

In  comparison  with  the  times  of  Bunyan,  Eng- 
land has  now  become  wonderfully  reformed  from 
those  grosser  pollutions  which  disgraced  her  name. 
Persons  of  riper  age,  whose  reminiscences  go  back 
to  the  times  of  the  slave  trade,  slavery,  and  war, 
will  call  to  mind  scenes  of  vice,  brutality,  open 
debauchery  and  profligacy,  which,  in  these  peaceful 
and  prosperous  times,  would  be  instantly  repressed 
and  properly  punished.  Should  peace  be  preserved, 
domestic,  social,  and  national  purity  aud  happiness 
must  increase  with  still  greater  and  more  deliH't- 
ful  rapidity.  Civilization  and  Christianity  will 
triumph  over  despotism,  vice,  aud  false  religions, 
and  the  time  be  hastened  on,  in  which  the  divine 
art  of  rendering  each  other  happy  will  engross  the 
attention  of  all  mankind.  Much  yet  remains  to  be 
done  for  the  conversion  of  the  still  numerous  family 
connectious  of  Mr.  Badman  ;  but  the  leaven  of 
Christianity  must,  in  spite  of  all  opposition,  even- 
tually spread  over  the  whole  mass. 

Homely  proverbs  abound  in  this  narrative,  all 
of  which  are  worthy  of  being  treasured  up  in  our 
memories.  Is  nothing  so  secret  but  it  will  be  re- 
vealed ?  we  are  told  that  '  Hedges  have  eyes  and 
pitchers  have  ears.'2  They  who  encourage  evil 
propensities  are  'nurses  to  the  devil's  brats.'  It 
is  said  of  him  who  hurries  on  in  a  career  of  folly 
and  sin,  'The  devil  rides  him  otf  his  legs.'  'As 
the  devil  corrects  vice,'  refers  to  those  who  prelend 
to  correct  bad  habits  by  means  intended  to  pro- 
mote them.  *  The  devil  is  a  cunning  schoolmaster.' 
Satan  taking  the  wicked  into  his  foul  embraces  is 
'  like  to  like,  as  the  devil  said  to  the  collier.' 

In  two  things  the  times  have  certainly  improved. 
Bunyan  describes  all  '  pawnbrokers '  to  have  been 
'  vile  wretches,'  and,  in  extortion,  the  women  to  be 
worse  than  the  men.  p.  638.  Happily  for  our  days, 
good  and  even  pious  pawnbrokers  may  be  found, 
who  are  honourable  exceptions  to  Mr.  Buuyau'a 
sweeping  rule ;  nor  do  our  women  in  any  respect 


See  note  ou  [>.  006. 


688 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


appear  to  be  greater  extortioners  than  our  men. 
Tiie  instructions,  exhortations,  and  scriptural  pre- 
cepts and  examples  to  enforce  honest  dealing,  in- 
terspersed as  reflections  throughout  this  narrative, 
are  invaluable,  and  will,  I  trust,  prove  beneficial  to 
every  reader. 


I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  dividing  this  long- 
continued  dialogue  into  chapters,  for  the  greater 
facility  of  reference,  and  as  periods  in  the  history, 
where  the  reader  may  conveniently  rest  in  his  pro- 
gress through  this  deeply  interesting  narrative. 
Geo.  Offor. 


As  a  curious  and  interesting  illustration  of  the  form  and  manner  in  which  the  Life  of  Badman  was 
first  published,  facsimiles  of  the  five  engravings  that  accompanied  the  first  edition  are  given  on 
this  and  the  following  page.  These  woodcuts  are  accurately  copied  from  a  fine  set  in  the  first 
edition,  in  the  Editor's  library.  Very  few  of  these  rare  volumes  are  found  with  the  cuts,  the 
reverse  of  each  being  blank.  They  are  in  the  later  copies,  with  letter-press  on  the  reverse ; 
excepting  the  folio  editions,  which  have  the  five  engraved  on  one  copper-plate,  the  designs  being 
reversed. — En. 


3  -a  J 
£  O  H 


*    S    c'B 

fl-j  8  3 

111? 

s  i  g! 


590 


THE  AUTHOR  TO  THE  READER. 


THE   AUTHOR   TO   THE   HEADER 


Courteous  Reader, 

As  I  was  considering  with  myself  what  I  had 
written  concerning  the  Progress  of  the  Pilgrim 
from  this  world  to  glory,  and  how  it  had  been 
acceptable  to  many  in  this  nation,  it  came  again 
into  my  mind  to  write,  as  then,  of  him  that  was 
o-oing  to  heaven,  so  now,  of  the  life  and  death  of 
the  ungodly,  and  of  their  travel  from  this  world  to 
hell.  The  which  in  this  I  have  done,  and  have 
put  it,  as  thou  seest,  under  the  name  and  title  of 
Mr.  Badinan,  a  name  very  proper  for  such  a  sub- 
ject. I  have  also  put  it  into  the  form  of  a  dialogue, 
that  I  might  with  more  ease  to  myself,  and  pleasure 
to  the  reader,  perform  the  work.  And  although, 
as  I  said,  I  have  put  it  forth  in  this  method,  yet 
have  I  as  little  as  may  be  gone  out  of  the  road  of 
mine  own  observation  of  things.  Yea,  I  think  I 
may  truly  say  that  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance, 
all  the  things  that  here  1  discourse  of,  I  mean  as 
to  matter  of  fact,  have  been  acted  upon  the  stage 
of  this  world,  even  many  times  before  mine  eyes. 

Here  therefore,  courteous  reader,  I  present  thee 
with  the  life  and  death  of  Mr.  Badman  indeed ; 
yea,  I  do  trace  him  in  his  life,  from  his  childhood 
to  his  death ;  that  thou  mayest,  as  in  a  glass,  be- 
hold with  thine  own  eyes  the  steps  that  take  hold 
of  hell ;  and  also  discern,  while  thou  art  reading 
of  Mr.  Badman's  death,  whether  thou  thyself  art 
treading  in  his  path  thereto.  And  let  me  entreat 
thee  to  forbear  quirking1  and  mocking,  for  that  I 
say  Mr.  Badman  is  dead ;  but  rather  gravely  in- 
quire concerning  thyself  by  the  Word,  whether  thou 
art  one  of  his  lineage  or  no ;  for  Mr.  Badman  has 
left  many  of  his  relations  behind  him ;  yea,  the 
very  world  is  overspread  with  his  kindred.  True, 
some  of  his  relations,  as  he,  are  gone  to  their  place 
and  long  home,  but  thousands  of  thousands  are 
left  behind  ;  as  brothers,  sisters,  cousins,  nephews, 
besides  innumerable  of  his  friends  and  associates. 
1  may  say,  and  yet  speak  nothing  but  too  much 
truth  in  so  saying,  that  there  is  scarce  a  fellowship, 
a  community,  or  fraternity  of  men  in  the  world,  but 
some  of  Mr.  Badman's  relations  are  there ;  yea, 
rarely  can  we  find  a  family  or  household  in  a  town, 
where  he  has  not  left  behind  him  cither  a  brother, 
nephew,  or  friend. 

The  butt2  therefore,  that  at  this  time  I  shoot  at, 
is  wide;  and  it  will  be  as  impossible  for  this  book 


to  go  into  several  families,  and  not  to  arrest  9ome, 
as  for  the  king's  messenger  to  rush  into  a  house 
full  of  traitors,  and  find  none  but  honest  men 
there.3  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  shot  will  light 
upon  many,  since  our  fields  are  so  full  of  this 
game ;  but  how  many  it  will  kill  to  Mr.  Badman's 
course,  and  make  alive  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
that  is  not  in  me  to  determine ;  this  secret  is  with 
the  Lord  our  God  only,  and  he  alone  knows  to 
whom  he  will  bless  it  to  so  good  and  so  blessed 
an  end.  However,  I  have  put  fire  to  the  pan,4  and 
doubt  not  but  the  report  will  quickly  be  heard. 

I  told  you  before  that  Mr.  Badman  had  left 
many  of  his  friends  and  relations  behind  him,  but 
if  I  survive  them,  as  that  is  a  great  question  to  me, 
I  may  also  write  of  their  lives ;  however,  whether 
my  life  be  longer  or  shorter,  this  is  my  prayer  at 
present,  that  God  will  stir  up  witnesses  against 
them,  that  may  either  convert  or  confound  them ; 
for  wherever  they  live,  and  roll  in  their  wickedness, 
they  are  the  pest  and  plague  of  that  country. 
England  shakes  and  totters  already,  by  reason  of 
the  burden  that  Mr.  Badman  and  his  friends  have 
wickedly  laid  upon  it.  Yea,  our  earth  reels  and 
staggereth  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard,  the  trans- 
gression thereof  is  heavy  upon  it. 

Courteous  reader,  1  will  treat  thee  now,  even  at 
the  door  and  threshold  of  this  house,  but  only  with 
this  intelligence,  that  Mr.  Badman  lies  dead  within. 
Be  pleased  therefore,  if  thy  leisure  will  serve  thee, 
to  enter  in,  and  behold  the  state  in  which  he  is 
laid,  betwixt  his  death-bed  and  the  grave.  He  is 
not  buried  as  yet,  nor  doth  he  stink,  as  is  designed 
he  shall,  before  he  lies  down  in  oblivion.  Now  as 
others  have  had  their  funerals  solemnized,  accord- 
ing to  their  greatness  and  grandeur  in  the  world, 
so  likewise  Mr.  Badman,  forasmuch  as  he  deserveth 
not  to  go  down  to  his  grave  with  silence,  has  his 
funeral  state  according  to  his  deserts. 

Four  things  are  usual  at  great  men's  funerals, 
which  we  will  take  leave,  and  I  hope  without 
offence,  to  allude  to,  in  the  funeral  of  Mr.  Badman. 
First.  They  are  sometimes,  when  dead,  pre- 
sented to  their  friends,  by  their  completely  wrought 
images,  as  lively  as  by  cunning  men's  hands  they 
can  be ;  that  the  remembrance  of  them  may  be 
renewed  to  their  survivors,  the  remembrance  of 


1  Quirk,  an  artful  or  subtle  evasion  of  a  truthful  home-thrust. 
-(Ed.) 

2  Butt,  a  mark  set  up  to  shoot  at.  'Some  are  always  exposed 
to  the  wit  aud  raillery  of  their  wellwishers,  pelted  by  friends  aud 
foes,  iu  a  word,  staud  as  butts.' — Spectator,  No.  47. — (Ed.) 


3  The  office  of  a  Christian  minister  is  like  that  of  a  king's 
messenger,  not  only  to  comfort  and  reward  the  king's  friends, 
but  to  arrest  his  enemies.  England  was  then  overrun  with 
the  latter  'game.'  Alas!  there  are  too  many  of  them  now. 
May  the  revival  of  this  shot '  light  upon  many.' — (Ed.) 

4  '  Eire  to  the  pan,'  alluding  to  the  mode  of  using  fire-arms, 
by  applying  a  lighted  match  to  the  pan,  before  the  lire-lock 
was  invented. — (Ed.) 


THE  AUTHOR  TO  THE  READER. 


591 


them  ami  tlicir  deeds  ;  and  this  I  have  endeavoured 
to  answer  in  my  discourse  of  Mr.  Badman,  and 
therefore  I  have  drawn  him  forth  in  his  features 
and  actions  from  his  childhood  to  his  grey  hairs. 
Here  therefore,  thou  hast  him  lively  set  forth  as  in 
cuts  ;  hoth  as  to  the  minority,  flower,  and  seniority 
of  his  age,  together  with  those  actions  of  his  life, 
that  he  was  most  capable  of  doing,  iu  and  under 
those  present  circumstances  of  time,  place,  strength ; 
and  the  opportunities  that  did  attend  him  in  these. 

Second.  There  is  also  usual  at  great  men's  fune- 
rals, those  badges  and  escutcheons  of  their  honour, 
that  they  have  received  from  their  ancestors,  or 
have  been  thought  worthy  of  for  the  deeds  and 
exploits  they  have  done  in  their  life  ;  and  here  Mr. 
Badman  has  his,  but  such  as  vary  from  all  men  of 
worth,  but  so  much  the  more  agreeing  with  the 
merit  of  his  doings.  They  all  have  descended  in 
state,  he  only  as  an  abominable  branch.  His 
deserts  are  the  deserts  of  sin,  and  therefore  the 
escutcheons  of  honour  that  he  has,  are  only  that 
he  died  without  honour,  '  and  at  his  end  became  a 
fool.'  'Thou  shalt  not  be  joined  with  them  in 
burial.'  '  The  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  never  be 
renowned.'  is.  xiv.  20. 

The  funeral  pomp  therefore  of  Mr.  Badman,  is 
to  wear  upon  his  hearse  the  badges  of  a  dis- 
honourable and  wicked  life  ;  since  *  his  bones  are 
full  of  the  sin  of  his  youth,  which  shall  lie  down,' 
as  Job  says,  '  with  him  in  the  dust.'  Nor  is  it  fit 
that  any  should  be  his  attendants,  now  at  his 
death,  but  such  as  with  him  conspired  against  their 
own  souls  in  their  life ;  persons  whose  transgres- 
sions have  made  them  infamous  to  all  that  have 
or  shall  know  what  they  have  done. 

Some  notice  therefore  I  have  also  here  in  this 
little  discourse  given  the  reader,  of  them  who  were 
his  confederates  in  his  life,  and  attendants  at  his 
death ;  with  a  hint,  either  of  some  high  villany 
committed  by  them,  as  also  of  those  judgments 
that  have  overtaken  and  fallen  upon  them  from  the 
just  and  revenging  hand  of  God.  All  which  are 
things  either  fully  known  by  me,  as  being  eye  and 
ear-witness  thereto,  or  that  I  have  received  from 
such  hands,  whose  relation,  as  to  this,  I  am  bound 
to  believe.  And  that  the  reader  may  know  them 
from  other  things  and  passages  herein  contained, 
I  have  pointed  at  them  in  the  margin,  as  with  a 
finger,  thus:  J^j" 

Third.  The  funerals  of  persons  of  quality  have 
been  solemnized  with  some  suitable  sermon  at  the 
time  and  place  of  their  burial ;  but  that  I  am  not 
come  to  as  yet,  having  got  no  further  than  to  Mr. 
Badman' s  death ;  but  forasmuch  as  he  must  be 
buried,  after  he  hath  stunk  out  his  time  before  his 
beholders,  I  doubt  not  but  some  such  that  we  read 
are  appointed  to  be  at  the  burial  of  Gog,  will  do 
this  work  in  my  stead ;  such  as  shall  leave  him 


neither  skin  nor  bone  above  ground,  but  shall  set 
a  sign  by  it  till  the  buriers  have  buried  it  in  the 
valley  of  Hamon-gog.  E?.e.  xxx\x. 

Fourtii.  At  funerals  there  does  use  to  be  mourn- 
ing and  lamentation,  but  here  also  Mr.  Badman 
differs  from  others;  his  familiars  cannot  lament 
his  departure,  for  they  have  not  sense  of  his  dam- 
nable state  ;  they  rather  ring  him,  and  sing  him  to 
hell  in  the  sleep  of  death,  in  which  he  goes  thither. 
Good  men  count  him  no  loss  to  the  world,  his  place 
can  well  be  without  him,  his  loss  is  only  his  own, 
and  it  is  too  late  for  him  to  recover  that  damage 
or  loss  by  a  sea  of  bloody  tears,  could  he  shed  them. 
Yea,  God  has  said  he  will  laugh  at  his  destruction  ; 
who  then  shall  lament  for  him,  saying,  Ah !  my 
brother.  He  was  but  a  stinking  weed  in  his  life ; 
nor  was  he  better  at  all  in  his  death ;  such  may 
well  be  thrown  over  the  wall  without  sorrow,  when 
once  God  has  plucked  them  up  by  the  roots  in  his 
wrath. 

Reader,  if  thou  art  of  the  race,  lineage,  stock, 
or  fraternity  of  Mr.  Badman,  I  tell  thee,  before  thou 
readest  this  book,  thou  wilt  neither  brook  the  author 
nor  it,  because  he  hath  writ  of  Mr.  Badman  as  he 
has.  For  he  that  condemneth  the  wicked  that  dio 
so,  passeth  also  the  sentence  upon  the  wicked  that 
live.  I  therefore  expect  neither  credit  of,  nor 
countenance  from  thee,  for  this  narration  of  thy 
kinsman's  life.  For  thy  old  love  to  thy  friend,  his 
ways,  doings,  &c,  will  stir  up  in  thee  enmity  rather 
in  thy  very  heart  against  me.  I  shall  therefore 
incline  to  think  of  thee,  that  thou  wilt  rend,  burn, 
or  throw  it  away  in  contempt ;  yea,  and  wish  also, 
that  for  writing  so  notorious  a  truth,  some  mischief 
may  befal  me.  I  look  also  to  be  loaded  by  thee 
with  disdain,  scorn,  and  contempt;  yea,  that  thou 
shouldest  railingly  and  vilifyingly  say  I  lie,  and 
am  a  bespatterer  of  honest  men's  lives  and  deaths. 
For  Mr.  Badman,  when  himself  was  alive,  could 
not  abide  to  be  counted  a  knave,  though  his  actions 
told  all  that  went  by,  that  indeed  he  was  such  an 
one.  How  then  should  his  brethren  that  survive 
him,  and  that  tread  in  his  very  steps,  approve  of 
the  sentence  that  by  this  book  is  pronounced  against 
him  ?  Will  they  not  rather  imitate  Koran,  Dathan, 
and  Abiram's  friends,  even  rail  at  me  for  condem- 
ning him,  as  they  did  at  Moses  for  doing  execution  ? 

1  know  it  is  ill  puddling  in  the  cockatrice's  den, 
and  that  they  run  hazards  that  hunt  the  wild  boar 
The  man  also  that  writeth  Mr.  Badman's  life  had 
need  be  fenced  with  a  coat  of  mail,  and  with  the 
staff  of  a  spear,  for  that  his  surviving  friends  will 
know  what  he  doth ;  but  I  have  adventured  to  do 
it,  and  to  play,  at  this  time,  at  the  hole  of  these 
asps ;  if  they  bite,  they  bite ;  if  they  sting,  they 
sting.  Christ  sends  his  lambs  in  the  midst  of 
wolves,  not  to  do  like  them,  but  to  suffer  by  them 
for  bearing  plain  testimony  against  their  bad  deeds. 


592 


THE  AUTHOR  TO  THE  READEK. 


But  had  one  not  need  to  walk  with  a  guard,  and 
to  have  a  sentinel  stand  at  one's  door  for  this? 
Verily,  the  flesh  would  be  glad  of  such  help ;  yea, 
a  spiritual  man,  could  he  toll  how  to  get  it.  Acxxiu. 
But  I  am  stript  naked  of  these,  and  yet  am  com- 
manded to  be  faithful  in  my  service  for  Christ. 
Well  then,  I  have  spoken  what  I  have  spoken,  and 
now  '  come  on  me  what  will.'  Job  xiu.  is.  True,  the 
text  say,  Rebuke  a  scorner  and  he  will  hate  thee ; 
aud  that  he  that  reproveth  a  wicked  man  getteth 
himself  a  blot  and  shame.  But  what  then  ?  Open 
rebuke  is  better  than  secret  love,  and  he  that 
receives  it  shall  find  it  so  afterwards. 

So  then,  whether  Mr.  Badman's  friends  shall 
rage  or  laugh  at  what  I  have  writ,  I  know  that 
the  better  end  of  the  staff1  is  mine.  My  endeavour 
is  to  stop  a  hellish  course  of  life,  and  to  '  save  a 
soul  from  death.'  J  a.  v.  20.  And  if  for  so  doing  1 
meet  with  envy  from  them,  from  whom  in  reason 
I  should  have  thanks,  1  must  remember  the  man 
in  the  dream,2  that  cut  his  way  through  his  armed 
enemies,  and  so  got  into  the  beauteous  palace ;  1 
must,  I  say,  remember  him,  and  do  myself  likewise. 

Yet  four  things  I  will  propound  to  the  consider- 
ation of  Mr.  Badmau'a  friends  before  I  turn  my 
back  upon  them. 

1.  Suppose  that  there  be  a  hell  in  very  deed; 
not  that  I  do  question  it  any  more  than  I  do 
whether  there  be  a  sun  to  shine,  but  I  suppose  it 
for  argument  sake  with  Mr.  Badman's  friends.  I 
say,  suppose  there  be  a  hell,  and  that  too  such  an 
one  as  the  Scripture  speaks  of,  one  at  the  remotest 
distance  from  God  and  life  eternal,  one  where  the 
worm  of  a  guilty  conscience  never  dies,  and  where 
the  tire  of  the  wrath  of  God  is  not  quenched.  Sup- 
pose, I  say,  that  there  is  such  a  hell,  prepared  of 
God — as  there  is  indeed — for  the  body  and  soul  of 
the  ungodly  world  after  this  life  to  be  tormented 
iu ;  I  say,  do  but  with  thyself  suppose  it,  aud  then 
tell  me  is  it  not  prepared  for  thee,  thou  being  a 
wicked  man?  Let  thy  conscience  speak,  I  say, 
is  it  not  prepared  for  thee,  thou  being  an  un- 
godly man?  And  dost  thou  think,  wast  thou 
there  now,  that  thou  art  able  to  wrestle  with  the 
judgment  of  God?  Why  then  do  the  fallen  angels 
tremble  there?  Thy  hands  cannot  be  strong,  nor 
can  thy  heart  endure,  iu  that  day  when  God  shall 
deal  with  thee.  Eze.  xxii.  14. 

2.  Suppose  that  some  one  that  is  now  a  soul  in 
hell  for  sin,  was  permitted  to  come  hither  again 
to  dwell,  and  that  they  had  a  grant  also,  that, 
upou  amendment  of  life,  next  time  they  die,  to 


1  In  the  single  combat  of  quarter-staff,  he  who  held  the 
best  cud  of  the  staff  usually  gained  the  victory. — (Ed.) 

-  L'Uyrims  Progress,  Interpreter's  House,  p.  100.  This 
is  a  remarkable  illustration  of  a  difficult  part  of  the  allegory — 
faithful  admonitions  repaid  by  murderous  revenge,  but  over- 
come by  Christian,  courage. — {El).) 


change  that  place  for  heaven  and  glory.  What 
sayst  thou,  0  wicked  man?  Would  such  an  one, 
thiukest  thou,  run  again  into  the  same  course  of 
life  as  before,  and  venture  the  damnation  that  for 
sin  he  had  already  been  in?  Would  he  choose 
again  to  lead  that  cursed  life  that  afresh  would 
kindle  the  flames  of  hell  upon  him,  and  that  would 
bind  him  up  under  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  ?  0 ! 
he  would  not,  he  would  not ;  Lu.  xvi.  insinuates  it ; 
yea,  reason  itself  awake  would  abhor  it,  and 
tremble  at  such  a  thought. 

3.  Suppose  again,  that  thou  that  livest  and 
rollest  in  thy  sin,  and  that  as  yet  hast  known  no- 
thing but  the  pleasure  thereof,  shouldest  be  by 
an  angel  conveyed  to  some  place,  where,  with  con- 
venience, from  thence  thou  mightest  have  a  view 
of  heaven  and  hell,  of  the  joys  of  the  one  and  the 
torments  of  the  other ;  I  say,  suppose  that  from 
thence  thou  mightest  have  such  a  view  thereof  as 
would  convince  thy  reason  that  both  heaven  and 
hell  are  such  realities  as  by  the  Word  they  are 
declared  to  be ;  wouldest  thou,  thinkest  thou,  when 
brought  to  thy  home  again,  choose  to  thyself  thy 
former  life,  to  wit,  to  return  to  thy  folly  again  ? 
No ;  if  belief  of  what  thou  sawest  remained  with 
thee  thou  wouldest  eat  fire  and  brimstone  first. 

4.  1  will  propound  again.  Suppose  that  there 
was  amongst  us  such  a  law,  and  such  a  magistrate 
to  inflict  the  penalty,  that  for  every  open  wicked- 
ness committed  by  thee,  so  much  of  thy  flesh  should 
with  burning  pincers  be  plucked  from  thy  bones, 
wouldest  thou  then  go  on  iu  thy  open  way  of  lying, 
swearing,  drinking,  and  whoring,  as  thou  with 
delight  doest  now  ?  Surely,  surely,  no.  The  fear 
of  the  punishment  would  make  thee  forbear ;  yea, 
would  make  thee  tremble,  even  then  when  thy 
lusts  were  powerful,  to  think  what  a  punishment 
thou  wast  sure  to  sustain  so  soon  as  the  pleasure 
was  over.  But  0!  the  folly,  the  madness,  the 
desperate  madness  that  is  in  the  hearts  of  Mr. 
Badman's  friends,  who,  in  despite  of  the  threaten- 
ings  of  a  holy  and  sin-revenging  God,  and  of  the 
outcries  and  warnings  of  all  good  men,  yea,  that 
will,  in  despite  of  the  groans  and  torments  of  those 
that  are  now  in  hell  for  sin,  go  on  in  a  sinful  course 
of  life,  yea,  though  every  sin  is  also  a  step  of 
descent  down  to  that  infernal  cave.  Lu.  xvi.  24,  28. 
0  how  true  is  that  saying  of  Solomon,  '  The  heart 
of  the  sons  of  men  is  full  of  evil,  and  madness  & 
in  their  heart  while  they  live,  and  after  that  they 
go  to  the  dead.'  Ec.  ix.  3.  To  the  dead!  that  is,  to 
the  dead  in  hell,  to  the  damned  dead,  the  place  to 
which  those  that  have  died  bad  men  are  gone,  and 
that  those  that  live  bad  men  are  like  to  go  to, 
when  a  little  more  sin,  like  stolen  waters,  hath 
been  imbibed  by  their  sinful  souls. 

That  which  has  made  me  publish  this  book  is, 
1.   For  that  wickedness,  like  a  flood,  is  like  to 


THE  AUTHOR  TO  THE  READER. 


593 


drown  our  English  world.  It  begins  already  to  be 
above  the  tops  of  the  mountains;  it  has  almost 
swallowed  up  all;  our  3011th,  middle  age,  old  age, 
and  all,  are  almost  carried  away  of  this  Hood.  0 
debauchery,  debauchery,  what  hast  thou  done  in 
England!  Thou  hast  corrupted  our  young  men, 
and  hast  made  our  old  men  beasts ;  thou  hast  de- 
flowered our  virgins,  and  hast  made  matrons  bawds. 
Thou  hast  made  our  earth  *  to  reel  to  and  fro  like 
a  drunkard  ;'  it  is  in  danger  to  '  be  removed  like  a 
cottage,'  yea,  it  is,  because  transgression  is  so 
heavy  upon  it,  like  to  fall  and  rise  no  more.  Is. 
xxiv.  20.  0!  that  I  could  mourn  for  England,  and 
for  the  sins  that  are  committed  therein,  even  while 
I  see  that,  without  repentance,  the  men  of  God's 
wrath  are  about  to  deal  with  us,  each  having  his 
'slaughtering  weapon  in  his  hand.'  En.  lx.  1*  2. 
Well,  I  have  written,  and  by  God's  assistance 
shall  pray  that  this  flood  may  abate  in  England  ; 
and  could  I  but  see  the  tops  of  the  mountains 
above  it,  I  should  think  that  these  waters  were 
abating. 

2.  It  is  the  duty  of  those  that  can  to  cry  out 
against  this  deadly  plague,  yea,  to  lift  up  their 
voice  as  with  a  trumpet  against  it,  that  men  may 
be  awakened  about  it,  fly  from  it,  as  from  that 
which  is  the  greatest  of  evils.  Sin  pulled  angels 
out  of  heaven,  pulls  men  down  to  hell,  and  over- 
throweth  kingdoms.  Who,  that  sees  a  house  on 
fire,  will  not  give  the  alarm  to  them  that  dwell 
therein?  Who,  that  sees  the  land  invaded,  will 
not  set  the  beacons  on  a  flame.  Who,  that  sees 
the  devils  as  rearing  lions,  continually  devouring 
souls,  will  not  make  an  out-cry?  But  above  all, 
when  we  see  sin,  sinful  sin,  a  swallowing  up  a 
nation,  sinking  of  a  nation,  and  bringing  its  in- 
habitants to  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal  ruin, 
shall  we  not  cry  out  and  cry,  They  are  druuk,  but 
not  with  wine;  they  stagger,  but  not  with  strong 
drink  ;  they  are  intoxicated  with  the  deadly  poison 
of  sin,  which  will,  if  its  malignity  be  not  by  whole- 
some means  allayed,  bring  soul  and  body,  and 
estate,  and  country,  and  all,  to  ruin  and  destruction? 

3.  In  and  by  this  outcry  I  shall  deliver  myself 
from  the  ruins  of  them  that  perish  ;  for  a  man 
can  do  no  more  in  this  matter — I  mean  a  man  in 
my  capacity — than  to  detect  and  condemn  the 
wickedness,  warn  the  evil  doer  of  the  judgment, 
and  fly  therefrom  myself.  But  0 !  that  1  might 
not  only  deliver  myself!  0  that  many  would  hear, 
and  turn  at  this  my  cry  from  sin!  that  they  may 
be  secured  from  the  death  and  judgment  that 
attend  it. 

Why  I  have  handled  the  matter  in  this  method 
is  best  known  to  myself.  And  why  I  have  con- 
cealed most  of  the  names  of  the  persons  whose 
sins  or  punishments  I  here  and  there  in  this  book 
make  relation  of  is,  (1.)  For  that  neither  the  sins 

vol.  III. 


nor  judgments  were  all  alike  open  ;  the  sins  of 
some  were  committed,  and  the  judgments  executed 
for  them,  only  in  a  corner.  Not  to  say  that  I 
could  not  learn  some  of  their  names,  for  could  I, 
I  should  not  have  made  them  public,  for  this 
reason,  (2.)  Because  I  would  not  provoke  those  of 
their  relations  that  survive  them ;  I  would  not 
justly  provoke  them  ;  and  yet,  as  I  think,  1  should, 
should  I  have  entailed  their  punishment  to  their 
sins,  and  both  to  their  names,  and  so  have  turned 
them  into  the  world.  (3.)  Nor  would  I  lay  them 
under  disgrace  and  contempt,  which  would,  as  I 
think,  unavoidably  have  happened  unto  them  had 
I  withal  inserted  their  uames. 

As  for  those  whose  names  I  mention,  their 
crimes  or  judgments  were  manifest;  public  almost 
as  anything  of  that  nature  that  happeneth  to 
mortal  men.  Such  therefore  have  published  their 
own  shame  by  their  sin,  and  God  his  anger,  by 
taking  of  open  vengeance.  As  Job  says,  God  has 
struck  '  them  as  wicked  men  in  the  open  sight  of 
others.'  Job  xxxiv.  2c.  So  that  I  cannot  conceive, 
since  their  sin  and  judgment  was  so  conspicuous, 
that  my  admonishing  the  world  thereof  should 
turn  to  their  detriment.  For  the  publishing  of 
these  things  are,  so  far  as  relation  is  concerned, 
intended  for  remembrances,  that  they  may  also 
bethink  themselves,  repent  and  turn  to  God,  lest 
the  judgments  for  their  sins  should  prove  heredi- 
tary. For  the  God  of  heaven  hath  threatened  to 
visit  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children, 
if  they  hate  him,  to  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tion.   Ex.  xx.  5. 

Nebuchadnezzar's  punishment  for  his  pride  be- 
ing open — for  he  was  for  his  sin  driven  from  his 
kingly  dignity,  and  from  among  men  too,  to  eat 
grass  like  an  ox,  and  to  company  with  the  beasts — 
Daniel  did  not  stick  to  tell  Bolshazzar  his  son  to 
his  face  thereof;  nor  to  publish  it  that  it  might  be 
read  and  remembered  by  the  generations  to  come. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  Judas  and  Ananias,  &c, 
for  their  sin  and  punishment  were  known  to  all  the 
dwellers  at  Jerusalem.  Ac.  L  19.  Nor  is  it  a  sign  but 
of  desperate  impenitence  and  hardness  of  heart, 
when  the  offspring  or  relations  of  those  who  have 
fallen  by  open,  fearful,  aud  prodigious  judgments, 
for  then-  sin,  shall  overlook,  forget,  pass  by,  or 
take  uo  notice  of  such  high  outgoings  of  God 
against  them  and  their  house.  Thus  Daniel  ag- 
gravates Belshazzars  crime,  fur  that  he  hardened 
his  heart  in  pride,  though  he  knew  that  for  that 
very  sin  aud  transgression  his  father  was  brought 
down  from  his  height,  and  made  to  be  a  companion 
for  asses.  '  And  thou  his  son,  0  Belshazzar,'  says 
he,  'hast  not  humbled  thine  heart,  though  thou 
knewest  all  this.'  Da.  v.  22.  A  home  reproof,  indeed, 
but  home  [reproof]  is  most  fit  for  an  open  and  a 
continued  in  transgression. 

75 


594 


CONTENTS. 


Let  those,  then,  that  are  the  offspring  or  rela- 
tions of  such,  who  by  their  own  sin,  and  the  dread- 
ful judgments  of  God,  are  made  to  become  a  sign, 
Ve.  xvi.  9-12,  having  been  swept  as  dung  from  off  the 
face  of  the  earth,  beware,  lest  when  judgment 
knocks  at  their  door,  for  their  sins,  as  it  did  before 
at  the  door  of  their  progenitors,  it  falls  also  with  as 
heavy  a  stroke  as  on  them  that  went  before  them. 
Nn.  xvi.  38-40.  Lest,  I  say,  they  in  that  day,  instead 
of  finding  mercy,  find  for  their  high,  daring,  and 
judgment-affronting  sins,  judgment  without  mercy. 

To  conclude ;  let  those  that  would  not  die  Mr. 
Badman's  death,  take  heed  of  Mr.  Badman's  ways ; 
ior  his  ways  bring  to  his  end.  Wickedness  will 
not  deliver  him  that  is  given  to  it ;  though  they 
should  cloak  all  with  a  profession  of  religion.  If 
it  was  a  transgression  of  old  for  a  man  to  wear  a 
woman's  apparel,  surely  it  is  a  transgression  now 
for  a  sinner  to  wear  a  Christian  profession  for  a 
cloak.  Wolves  in  sheep's  clothing  swarm  in  Eng- 
land this  day ;  wolves  both  as  to  doctrine,  and  as 
to  practice  too.  Some  men  make  a  profession,  I 
doubt,  on  purpose  that  they  may  twist  themselves 
into  a  trade ;  and  thence  into  an  estate ;  yea,  and 
if  need  be,  into  an  estate  knavishly,  by  the  ruins 
of  their  neighbour.     Let  such  take  heed,  for  those 


that  do  such  things  have  the  greater  damnation. 
Christian,  make  thy  profession  shine  by  a  conver- 
sation according  to  the  gospel ;  or  else  thou  wilt 
damnify  religion,  bring  scandal  to  thy  brethren, 
and  give  offence  to  the  enemies;  and  it  would 
be  better  that  a  millstone  was  hanged  about  thy 
neck,  and  that  thou,  as  so  adorned,  was  cast  into 
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  than  so  to  do.  Christian, 
a  profession  according  to  the  gospel  is,  in  these 
days,  a  rare  thing;  seek  then  after  it,  put  it  on, 
and  keep  it  without  spot,  and,  as  becomes  thee, 
white,  and  clean,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  rare  Christian. 
The  prophecy  of  the  last  times  is,  that  profess- 
ing men,  for  so  I  understand  the  text,  shall  be 
many  of  them  base,  2Ti.  iii;  but  continue  thou  in 
the  things  that  thou  hast  learned,  not  of  wanton 
men,  nor  of  licentious  times,  but  of  the  Word  and 
doctrine  of  God,  that  is,  according  to  godliness ; 
and  thou  shalt  walk  with  Christ  in  white.  Now, 
God  Almighty  gave  his  people  grace,  not  to  hate 
or  malign  sinners,  nor  yet  to  choose  any  of  their 
ways,  but  to  keep  themselves  pure  from  the  blood 
of  all  men,  by  speaking  and  doing  according  to 
that  name  and  those  rules  that  they  profess  to 
know  and  love ;  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 

John  Buxyan. 


CONTENTS. 


Chip.  I.  Badman's  death  and  its  awful  consequences,    .  593 
This  leads  to  the  discourse  of  his  life. 

—  IT.  Badman's  wicked  behaviour  in  childhood,   .       594 

—  III.  Badman's  apprenticeship  to  a  pious  master,  .  605 

—  IV.  He  gets  a  new  master  bad  as  himself,        .       614 

—  V.   Badman  in  business;  the  tricks  of  a  wicked 

tradesman,  .         .         .         .         .         .         .616 

—  VI.  His  hypocritical  courtship  and  marriage  to  a 

pious,  rich,  young  lady,     ....       618 

—  VII.  He  throws  off  the  mask  and  cruelly  treats  his 

wife.     Bunyan's  rules  for  such  as  think  of 
marriage .  620 

—  VIII.  Badman  is  a  bankrupt,  aiul  gets  by  it  hat- 

fuls  of  money,  .....       628 

—  IX.  Badman's  fraudulent  dealings  to  get  money,     633 

—  X.  The  simple  Christian's  views  of  extortion,  .       637 
■ —    XI.  Instructions  for  righteous  trading,        .         .  640 

—  XII.    Badman's   pride,    atheism,    infidelity,    and 

envy, 642 


CnAP.  XIII.  He  gets  drunk  and  breaks  his  log.     God's 

judgments  upon  drunkards,         .         .         .       648 

—  XIV.  His  pretended  repentings  and  promises  of 

reform  when  death  grimly  stares  at  him,         .  649 

—  XV.  Death  leaves  him  for  a  season,  and  he  returns 

to  his  sins,  like  a  sow  that  has  been  washed  to 
her  wallowing  in  the  mire,         .         .         .651 

—  XVI.  His  pious  wife  dies  broken-hearted.      Her 

deathbed  charge  to  her  family,       .         .         .652 

—  XVII.  He  is  tricked  into  a  second  marriage  by  a 

woman  as  bad  as  himself,  .         .         .       654 

—  XVIII.  He  parts  from  his  wife,  diseases  attack  him 

under  Captain  Consumption ;  he  rots  away  and 
dies  in  sinful  security,  ....  C55 

—  XIX.  Future  happiness  not  to  be  hoped  from  a 

quiet,  hardened  death.     Some  remarkable  in- 
stances,   660 

—  XX.  Without  godly  repentance,  the  wicked  man's 

hopes  and  life  die  together,  ....  663 


THE   LTFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


595 


THE   LTFE   A1SID   DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN, 

PBESKNTED   TO  THE   WORLD    IS 

A  FAMILIAR  DIALOGUE  BETWIXT  MR.  WISEMAN  AND  MR.  ATTENTIVE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

[badman's  death  and  its  awful  consequences.] 

Wiseman.  Good  morrow,  my  good  neighbour, 
Mr.  Attentive;  whitlier  are  you  walking  so  early 
this  morning?  Methinks  you  look  as  if  you  were 
concerned  about  something  more  than  ordinary. 
Have  you  lost  any  of  your  cattle,  or  what  is  the 
matter? 

Attentive.  Good  Sir,  good  morrow  to  you,  I 
have  not  as  yet  lost  aught,  but  yet  you  give  a 
right  guess  of  me,  for  I  am,  as  you  say,  concerned 
in  my  heart,  but  it  is  because  of  the  badness  of  the 
times.  And,  Sir,  you,  as  all  our  neighbours  know, 
are  a  very  observing  man,  pray,  therefore,  what  do 
you  think  of  them? 

Wise.  Why,  I  think,  as  you  say,  to  wit,  that 
they  are  bad  times,  and  bad  they  will  be,  until  men 
are  better;  for  they  are  bad  men  that  make  bad 
times;  if  men,  therefore,  would  mend,  so  would  the 
times.  It  is  a  folly  to  look  for  good  days  so  long 
as  sin  is  so  high,  and  those  that  study  its  nourish- 
ment so  many.  God  bring  it  down,  and  those  that 
nourish  it,  to  repentance,  and  then,  my  good  neigh- 
bour, you  will  be  concerned,  not  as  you  are  now ; 
now  you  are  concerned  because  times  are  so  bad, 
but  then  you  will  be  so  because  times  are  so  good ; 
now  you  are  concerned  so  as  to  be  perplexed,  but 
then  you  will  be  concerned  so  as  to  lift  up  your 
voice  with  shouting,  for  I  dare  say,  could  you  see 
such  days,  they  would  make  you  shout. 

Atten.  Ay,  so  they  would ;  such  times  I  have 
prayed  for,  such  times  I  have  longed  for;  but  I 
fear  they  will  be  worse  before  they  bo  better. 

Wise.  Make  no  conclusions,  man  ;  for  he  that 
hath  the  hearts  of  men  in  his  hand  can  change 
them  from  worse  to  better,  and  so  bad  times  into 
good.  God  give  long  life  to  them  that  are  good, 
and  especially  to  those  of  them  that  are  capable  of 
doing  him  service  in  the  world.  The  ornament  and 
beauty  of  this  lower  world,  next  to  God  and  his 
wonders,  are  the  men  that  spangle  and  shine  in 
godliness. 

Now  as  Mr.  Wiseman  said  this,  he  gave  a  great 
sigh. 

Atten.  Amen,  amen.  But  why,  good  Sir,  do 
you  sigh  so  deeply ;  is  it  for  ought  else  than  that 
for  the  which,  as  you  have  perceived,  I  myself  am 
concerned? 

Wise.  I  am  concerned,  with  you.  for  the  badness 
of  the  times;   but  that  was  not  the  causo  of  that 


sigh,  of  the  which,  as  I  see,  you  take  notice.  I 
sighed  at  the  remembrance  of  the  death  of  that 
man  for  whom  the  bell  tolled  at  our  town  yesterday. 
Atten.  Why,  I  trow,  Mr.  Goodman  your  neigh- 
bour is  not  dead.  Indeed  I  did  hear  that  he  had 
been  sick. 

Wise.  No,  no,  it  is  not  he.  Had  it  been  he,  I 
could  not  but  have  been  concerned,  but  yet  not  as  I 
am  concerned  now.  If  he  had  died,  I  should  only 
have  been  concerned  for  that  the  world  had  lost  a 
light ;  but  the  man  that  I  am  concerned  for  now  was 
one  that  never  was  good,  therefore  such  an  one  who 
is  not  dead  only,  but  damned.  He  died  that  he  might 
die,  he  went  from  life  to  death,  and  then  from  death 
to  death,  from  death  natural  to  death  eternal.  And 
as  he  spake  this,  the  water  stood  in  his  eyes.1 

Atten.  Indeed,  to  go  from  a  death-bed  to  hell  is  a 
fearful  thing  to  think  on.  But,  good  neighbour  Wise- 
man, be  pleased  to  tell  me  who  this  man  was,  and 
why  you  conclude  him  so  miserable  in  his  death  ? 
Wise.  Well,  if  you  can  stay,  I  will  tell  you  who 
he  was,  and  why  I  conclude  thus  concerning  him. 
Atten.  My  leisure  will  admit  me  to  stay,  and  I 
am  willing  to  hear  you  out.  And  I  pray  God  your 
discourse  may  take  hold  on  my  heart,  that  I  may 
be  bettered  thereby.  So  they  agreed  to  sit  down 
under  a  tree.  Then  Mr.  Wiseman  proceeded  as 
folio  weth:  — 

Wise.  Tho  man  that  I  mean  is  one  Mr.  Bad- 
man  ;  he  has  lived  in  our  town  a  great  while,  and 
now,  as  I  said,  he  is  dead.  But  the  reason  of  my 
being  so  concerned  at  his  death  is,  not  for  that  he 
was  at  all  related  to  me,  or  for  that  any  good  con- 
ditions died  with  him,  for  he  was  far  from  them, 
but  for  that,  as  I  greatly  fear,  he  hath,  as  was 
hinted  before,  died  two  deaths  at  once. 

Atten.  I  perceive  what  you  mean  by  two  deaths 
at  once;  and  to  speak  truth,  it  is  a  fearful  thing 
thus  to  have  ground  to  think  of  any:  for  although 
the  death  of  the  ungodly  and  sinners  is  laid  to 
heart  but  of  few,  yet  to  die  in  such  a  state  is  more 
dreadful  and  fearful  than  any  man  can  imagine. 
Indeed  if  a  man  had  no  soul,  if  his  state  was  not 
truly  immortal,  the  matter  would  not  be  so  much; 
but  for  a  man  to  be  so  disposed  of  by  his  Maker, 

1  '  The  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.' 
1  Co.  vi.  9.  Instead  of  Christ,  the  Prince  of  peace,  being 
theirs,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  is  theirs ;  instead  of 
the  comforts  of  the  gospel,  the  curses  of  the  law  are  theirs  ; 
instead  of  heaven,  hell  is  theirs,  and  an  exclusion  from  God 
and  happiness  for  ever  I  Sinner,  think  now  on  these  things. 
— (Mason.) 


596 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


as  to  be  appointed  a  sensible  being  for  ever,  and 
for  him  too  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  revenging 
justice,  that  will  be  always,  to  the  utmost  extre- 
mity that  his  sin  deserveth,  punishing  of  him  in 
the  dismal  dungeon  of  hell,  this  must  needs  be 
unutterably  sad,  and  lamentable. 

Wise.  There  is  no  man,  I  think,  that  is  sens- 
ible of  the  worth  of  one  soul,  but  must,  when  he 
hears  of  the  death  of  unconverted  men,  be  stricken 
with  sorrow  and  grief:  because,  as  you  said  well, 
that  man's  state  is  such  that  he  has  a  sensible 
being  for  ever.  For  it  is  sense  that  makes  pun- 
ishment heavy.  But  yet  sense  is  not  all  that  the 
damned  have,  they  have  sense  and  reason  too;  so 
then,  as  sense  receiveth  punishment  with  sorrow, 
because  it  feels,  and  bleeds  under  the  same,  so  by 
reason,  and  the  exercise  thereof,  in  the  midst  of 
torment,  all  present  affliction  is  aggravated,  and 
that  three  manner  of  ways : — 1.  Reason  will  con- 
sider thus  with  himself.  For  what  am  I  thus  tor- 
mented? and  will  easily  find  it  is  for  nothing  but 
that  base  and  filthy  thing,  sin;  and  now  will  vexa- 
tion be  mixed  with  punishment,  and  that  will 
greatly  heighten  the  affliction.  2.  Reason  will 
consider  thus  with  himself.  How  long  must  this 
be  my  state?  And  will  soon  return  to  himself 
this  answer:  This  must  be  my  state  for  ever  and 
ever.  Now  this  will  greatly  increase  the  torment. 
3.  Reason  will  consider  thus  with  himself.  What 
have  I  lost  more  than  present  ease  and  quiet  by 
my  sins  that  1  have  committed?  And  will  quickly 
return  himself  this  answer:  I  have  lost  communion 
with  God,  Christ,  saints,  and  angels,  and  a  share 
in  heaven  and  eternal  life:  and  this  also  must 
needs  greaten  the  misery  of  poor  damned  souls. 
And  this  is  the  case  of  Mr.  Badman. 

Atten.  I  feel  my  heart  even  shake  at  the 
thoughts  of  coming  into  such  a  state.  Hell !  who 
knows  that  is  yet  alive,  what  the  torments  of  hell 
are?     This  word  hell  gives  a  very  dreadful  sound. 

Wise.  Ay,  so  it  does  in  the  ears  of  him  that  has 
a  tender  conscience.  But  if,  as  you  say,  and  that 
truly,  the  very  name  of  hell  is  so  dreadful,  what  is 
the  place  itself,  and  what  are  the  punishments  that 
are  there  inflicted,  and  that  without  the  least  in- 
termission, upon  the  souls  of  damned  men,  for  ever 
and  ever. 

Atten.  Well,  but  passing  this  ;  my  leisure  will 
admit  me  to  stay,  and  therefore  pray  tell  me  what 
it  is  that  makes  you  think  that  Mr.  Badman  is 
gone  to  hell. 

Wise.  I  will  tell  you.  But  first,  do  you  know 
which  of  the  Badmans  I  mean  ? 

Atten.  Why,  was  there  more  of  them  than  one? 

Wise.  0  yes,  a  great  many,  both  brothers  and 
sisters,  and  yet  all  of  them  the  children  of  a  godly 
parent,  the  more  a  great  deal  is  the  pity. 

Atten.  Which  of  them  therefore  was  it  that  died? 


Wise.  The  eldest,  old  in  years,  and  old  in  Bin ; 
but  the  sinner  that  dies  an  hundred  years  old  shall 
be  accursed. 

Atten.  Well,  but  what  makes  you  think  he  is 
gone  to  hell? 

Wise.  His  wicked  life,  and  fearful  death,  espe- 
cially since  the  manner  of  his  death  was  so  corre- 
sponding with  his  life. 

Atten.  Pray  let  me  know  the  manner  of  his 
death,  if  yourself  did  perfectly  know  it. 

■Wise.  1  was  there  when  he  died;  but  I  desire 
not  to  see  another  such  man,  while  I  live,  die  in 
such  sort  as  he  did. 

Atten.   Pray  therefore  let  me  hear  it. 

Wise.  You  say  you  have  leisure  and  can  stay, 
and  therefore,  if  you  please,  we  will  discourse  even 
orderly  of  him.  First,  we  will  begin  with  his  life, 
and  then  proceed  to  his  death:  because  a  relation 
of  the  first  may  the  more  affect  you,  when  you 
shall  hear  of  the  second. 

Atten.   Did  you  then  so  well  know  his  life? 

Wise.  I  knew  him  of  a  child.  I  was  a  man, 
when  he  was  but  a  boy,  and  I  made  special  ob- 
servation of  him  from  first  to  last. 

Atten.  Pray  then  let  me  hear  from  you  an  ac- 
count of  his  life ;  but  be  as  brief  as  you  can,  for  I 
long  to  hear  of  the  manner  of  his  death. 

CHAPTER  I 

[B ADMAN'S  WICKED  BEHAVIOUR  IN  CHILDHOOD.] 

Wise.  1  will  endeavour  to  answer  your  desires, 
and  first,  I  will  tell  you,  that  from  a  child  he  was 
very  bad;  his  very  beginning  was  ominous,  and 
presaged  that  no  good  end  was,  in  likelihood,  to 
follow  thereupon.  There  were  several  sins  that 
he  was  given  to,  when  but  a  little  one,  that  mani- 
fested him  to  be  notoriously  infected  with  original 
corruption;  for  I  dare  say  he  learned  none  of  them 
of  his  father  and  mother ;  nor  was  he  admitted  to 
go  much  abroad  among  other  children  that  were 
vile,  to  learn  to  sin  of  them:  nay,  contrariwise,  if 
at  any  time  he  did  get  abroad  amongst  others,  he 
would  be  as  the  inventor  of  bad  words,  and  an  ex- 
ample in  bad  actions.  To  them  all  he  used  to  be, 
as  we  say,  the  ringleader,  and  master-sinner  from 
a  child. 

Atten.  This  was  a  bad  beginning  indeed,  and 
did  demonstrate  that  he  was,  as  you  say,  polluted, 
very  much  polluted  with  original  corruption.  For 
to  speak  my  mind  freely,  I  do  confess  Original  sin  is 
that  it  is  mine  opinion  that  children  ^^J^ 
come  polluted  with  sin  into  the  world,  S10n- 
and  that  ofttimes  the  sins  of  their  youth,  especially 
while  they  are  very  young,  are  rather  by  virtue  of 
indwelling  sin,  than  by  examples  that  are  set  be- 
fore them  by  others.  Not  but  that  they  learn  to 
sin  by  example  too,  but  example  is  not  the  root, 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


597 


but  rather  the  temptation  unto  wickedness.  The 
root  is  sin  within ;  '  for  from  within,  out  of  the 
heart  of  men,'  proceedeth  sin.   Mar.  vU.  81. 

Wise.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  of  this 
opinion,  and  to  confirm  what  you  have  said  by  a 
few  hints  from  the  Word.  Man  in  his  birth  is 
compared  to  an  asa,  an  unclean  beast,  and  to  a 
wretched  infant  in  its  blood.  Jobxi.  12.  Eze.  xvi.  Be- 
sides, all  the  first-born  of  old  that  were  offered 
unto  the  Lord,  were  to  be  redeemed  at  the  age  of 
a  month,  and  that  was  before  they  were  sinners  by 
imitation.  Ek.xUj.18;  xxxiv.  20.  The  scripture  also 
affirmeth,  that  by  the  sin  of  one,  judgment  came 
upon  all ;  and  renders  this  reason,  '  for  that  all 
have  sinned.'  Ro.  v.  12.  Nor  is  that  objection  worth 
a  rush,  that  Christ  by  his  death  hath  taken  away 
original  sin.  First.  Because  it  is  scriptureless. 
Secondly.  Because  it  makes  them  incapable  of 
salvation  by  Christ ;  for  none  but  those  that  in 
their  own  persons  are  sinners  are  to  have  salvation 
by  him.  Many  other  things  might  be  added,  but 
between  persons  so  well  agreed  as  you  and  I  are, 
these  may  suffice  at  present.  But  when  an  anta- 
gonist comes  to  deal  with  us  about  this  matter, 
then  we  have  for  him  often  other  strong  argu- 
ments, if  he  be  an  antagonist  worth  the  taking 
notice  of. 

Atten.  But,  as  was  hinted  before,  he  used  to 
be  the  ring-leading  sinner,  or  the  master  of  mis- 
chief among  other  children ;  yet  these  are  but 
generals;  pray  therefore  tell  me  in  particular 
which  were  the  sins  of  his  childhood. 

Wise.  I  will  so.  When  he  was  but  a  child,  he 
Bataan addict-  *'aS  S0  dieted  to  lying  that  his 
ed    to    lying   parents  scarce  knew  when  to  believe 

from  a  cluld.       ,  ,  ,  ,  ,   . 

lie  spake  true;  yea,  he  would  invent, 
tell,  and  stand  to  the  lies  that  he  invented  and 
told,  and  that  with  such  an  audacious  face,  that 
one  might  even  read  in  his  very  countenance  the 
symptoms  of  a  hard  and  desperate  heart  this  way. 
.Atten.  This  was  an  ill  beginning  indeed,  and 
argueth  that  he  began  to  harden  himself  in  sin 
betimes.  For  a  lie  cannot  be  knowingly  told  and 
stood  in,  and  I  perceive  that  this  was  his  manner 
of  way  in  lying,  but  he  must  as  it  were  force  his 
own  heart  unto  it.  Yea,  he  must  make  his* 
»  . ,.  ,  heart  hard,  and  bold  to  do  it.     Yea, 

ly  told  demon-    he  must  be  arrived  to  an  exceeding 

Btratesthatlhe       .     .       -       .   ,      .  -  ,          .      ° 

lieart  is  despe-  pitch  Ot  Wickedness  tllUS  to  UO,  Since 
rately  hard.  aU  ^  j)e  jjj  against  t]mfc  g00d  edu- 
cation, that  before  you  seemed  to  hint  he  had 
from  his  father  and  mother. 

Wise.  The  want  of  good  education,  as  you  have 
intimated,  is  many  times  a  cause  why  children  do 
so  easily,  so  soon,  become  bad ;  especially  when 
there  is  not  only  a  want  of  that,  but  bad  examples 
enough,  as,  the  more  is  the  pity,  there  is  in  many 
families ;    by   virtue   of  which   poor  children   are 


trained  up  in  sin,  and  nursed  therein  for  the  devil 
and  hell.  But  it  was  otherwise  with  Mr.  Badman, 
for  to  my  knowledge  this  his  way  of  lying  was  a 
great  grief  to  his  parents,  for  their  hearts  were 
much  dejected  at  this  beginning  of  their  son;  nor 
did  there  want  counsel  and  correction  from  them 
to  him  if  that  would  have  made  him  better.  He 
wanted  not  to  be  told,  in  my  hearing,  and  that 
over  and  over  and  over,  that  '  all  liars  The  liar's  por- 
shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  uon- 

burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone;'  and  that  '  who- 
soever loveth  and  maketh  a  lie,'  should  not  have 
any  part  in  the  new  and  heavenly  Jerusalem.  Re. 
xxi.  8,  27;  xxu.  15.  But  all  availed  nothing  with  him; 
when  a  fit,  or  an  occasion  to  lie  came  upon  him, 
he  would  invent,  tell,  and  stand  to  his  lie  as  sted- 
fastly  as  if  it  had  been  the  biggest  of  truths  that 
he  told,  and  that  with  that  hardening  of  his  heart 
and  face,  that  it  would  be  to  those  who  stood  by, 
a  wonder.  Nay,  and  this  he  would  do  when  under 
the  rod  of  correction,  which  is  appointed  by  God 
for  parents  to  use,  that  thereby  they  might  keep 
their  children  from  hell.  rr.  xxii.  15 ;  xxUi.  13, 14. 1 

Atten.  Truly  it  was,  as  I  said,  a  bad  begin- 
ning, he  served  the  devil  betimes;  yea,  he  became 
nurse  to  one  of  his  brats,*  for  a  spirit  *  The  devil's 
of  lying  is  the  devil's  brat,  '  for  he  is  brat- 

a  liar  and  the  father  of  it.'  Jn.  via.  44. 

Wise.  Right,  he  is  the  father  of  it  indeed.  A 
lie  is  begot  by  the  devil  as  the  father,  and  is 
brought  forth  by  the  wicked  heart  as  the  mother; 
wherefore  another  scripture  also  saith,  '  Why  hath 
Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie,'  <fcc.  Ac.  v.  3, 4.  Yea, 
he  calleth  the  heart  that  is  big  with  a  lie,  an  heart 
that  hath  conceived,  that  is,  by  the  devil.  '  Why 
hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in  thine  heart?  thou 
hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God.'  True,  his 
lie  was  a  lie  of  the  highest  nature,  but  every  lie 
hath  the*  same  father  and  mother  as  .  ^  fat)ier 
had  the  lie  last  spoken  of.  '  For  he  and  mother  of 
is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it.'  A  lie 
then  is  the  brat  of  hell,  and  it  cannot  be  in  the 
heart  t  before  the  person  has  com- 
mitted a  kind  of  spiritual  adultery  with 
the  devil.  That  soul  therefore  that  telleth  a  known 
lie,  has  lien  with,  and  conceived  it  by  lying  with 


1  These  Scriptures  have  often  been  perverted  to  justify  the 
most  cruel  punishments  inflicted  on  helpless  children.  The 
word  isa»,  translated  '  a  rod,'  is  derived  from  the  Hebrew 
verb  '  to  govern,'  and,  as  a  noun,  signifies  a  sceptre,  a  pen, 
or  a  staff,  the  emblems  of  government.  Brutal  punishments, 
as  practised  in  our  army,  navy,  and  schools,  are  not  only  in- 
human and  indecent,  but  have  one  direct  tendency,  that  of 
hardening  the  mind  and  iustilling  a  vindictive  ferocious  dis- 
position. After  bringing  up  a  very  large  family,  who  are  a 
blessing  to  their  parents,  1  have  yet  to  learn  what  part  of  the 
human  body  was  created  to  be  beaten.  There  are  infinitely 
better  modes  of  instructing,  correcting,  and  governing  children, 
than  that  of  bruising  their  flesh,  or  breaking  their  bones,  or 
even  of  a  box  on  the  ear. — (Ed.) 


593 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


the  devil,  the  only  father  of  lies.  For  a  lie  has 
only  one  father  and  mother,  the  devil  and  the 
heart.  No  marvel  therefore  if  the  hearts  that 
hatch  and  bring  forth  lies  be  so  much  of  com- 
plexion with  the  devil.  Yea,  no  marvel  though 
God  and  Christ  have  so  bent  their  word  against 
liars.1     A  liar  is  wedded  to  the  devil  himself. 

Atten.  It  seems  a  marvellous  thing  in  mine 
eyes,  that  since  a  lie  is  the  offspring  of  the  devil, 
and  since  a  lie  brings  the  soul  to  the  very  den  of 
devils,  to  wit,  the  dark  dungeon  of  hell,  that  men 
should  be  60  desperately  wicked  as  to  accustom 
themselves  to  so  horrible  a  thing. 

Wisk.  It  seems  also  marvellous  to  me,  especially 
when  I  observe  for  how  little  a  matter  some  men 
will  study,  contrive,  make,  and  tell  a  lie.  You 
shall  have  some  that  will  lie  it  over  and  over,  and 
that  for  a  penny  profit.  Yea,  lie  and  stand  in  it, 
„  ,...  j.  although  they  know  that  they  lie. 
lietorapeimy  Yea,  you  shall  have  some  men  that 
will  not  stick  to  tell  lie  after  lie, 
though  themselves  get  nothing  thereby.  They 
will  tell  lies  in  their  ordinary  discourse  with  their 
neighbours,  also  their  news,  their  jests,  and  their 
tales,  must  needs  be  adorned  with  lies  ;  or  else 
they  seem  to  bear  no  good  sound  to  the  ear,  nor 
show  much  to  the  fancy  of  him  to  whom  they  are 
told.  But  alas  !  what  will  these  liars  do,  when, 
for  their  lies  they  shall  be  tumbled  down  into  hell, 
to  that  devil  that  did  beget  those  lies  in  their 
heart,  and  so  be  tormented  by  fire  and  brimstone, 
with  him,  and  that  for  ever  and  ever,  for  their 
lies  ? 

Atten.  Can  you  not  give  one  some  example  of 
God's  judgments  upon  liars,  that  one  may  tell 
them  to  liars  when  one  hears  them  lie,  if  perhaps 
they  may  by  the  hearing  thereof,  be  made  afraid, 
and  ashamed  to  lie. 

Wise.  Examples  !  why,  Ananias 2  and  his  wife 
An  example  fur  are  examples  enough  to  put  a  stop, 
ll!U's-  one  would  think,  to  a  spirit  addicted 

thereto,  for  they  both  were  stricken  down  dead  for 
telling  a  lie,  and  that  by  God  himself,  in  the  midst 
of  a  company  of  people.  Ac.  v.  But  if  God's 
threatening  of  liars  with  hell-fire,  and  with  the 
loss  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  will  not  prevail 
with  them  to  leave  off  to  lie  aud  make  lies,  it  can- 
not be  imagined  that  a  relation  of  temporal  judg- 
ments that  have  swept  liars  out  of  the  world 
heretofore,  should  do  it.  Now,  as  I  said,  this 
lying  was  one  of  the  first  sins  that  Mr.  Badman 


1  Peculiarly  awful  are  the  denunciations  of  the  Scriptures 
against  the  crime  of  lying.  The  liar  and  the  murderer  are 
joined  together  to  receive  the  curse.  '  Thou  shult  destroy  them 
that  speak  lies  -  the  man  of  blood  and  of  deceit  are  abhorred 
of  the  Lord,'  Ps.  v.  6. 

2  The  first  edition  has  '  Sapphira  and  his  wife.'  It  is  not 
noticed  in  the  errata,  but  was  corrected  in  the  later  copies. — 
(Ed.) 


was  addicted  to,  and  he  could  make  them  and  tell 
them  fearfully. 

Atten.  I  am  sorry  to  hear  this  of  him,  and  so 
much  the  more,  because,  as  I  fear,  A  spirit  of  lvin5 
this  sin  did  not  reign  in  him  alone  ;  accompanied 
for  usually  one  that  is  accustomed  to 
lying,  is  also  accustomed  to  other  evils  besides  ; 
and  if  it  were  not  so  also  with  Mr.  Badman,  it 
would  be  indeed  a  wonder. 

Wise.  You  say  true,  the  liar  is  a  captive  slave 
of  more  than  the  spirit  of  lying  ;  and  therefore 
this  Mr.  Badman,  as  he  was  a  liar  from  a  child, 
so  he  was  also  much  given  to  pilfer  Bxdman  gtven 
and  steal,  so  that  what  he  could,  as  topiiier. 
we  say,  handsomely  lay  his  hands  on,3  that  was 
counted  his  own,  whether  they  were  the  things  of 
his  fellow-children,  or  if  he  could  lay  hold  of  any- 
thing at  a  neighbour's  house,  he  would  take  it 
away  ;  you  must  understand  me  of  trifles  ;  for 
being  yet  but  a  child,  he  attempted  no  great 
matter,  especially  at  first.  But  yet  as  he  grew  up 
in  strength  and  ripeness  of  wit,  so  he  attempted  to 
pilfer  and  steal  things  still  of  more  value  than  at 
first.  He  took  at  last  great  pleasure  in  robbing 
of  gardens  and  orchards  ;  and  as  he  grew  up,  to 
steal  pullen*  from  the  neighbourhood.  Yea,  what 
was  his  father's  could  not  escape  his  Badman  would 
fingers,  all  was  fish  that  came  to  his  robhisfaUier. 
net,  so  hardened,  at  last,  was  he  in  this  mischief 
also. 

Attent.  You  make  me  wonder  more  and  more. 
What,  play  the  thief  too  !  What,  play  the  thief 
so  soon  !  He  could  not  but  know,  though  he  was 
but  a  child,  that  what  he  took  from  others  was 
none  of  his  own.  Besides,  if  his  father  was  a 
good  man,  as  you  say,  it  could  not  be  but  he 
must  also  hear  from  him  that  to  steal  was  to 
transgress  the  law  of  God,  and  so  to  run  the 
hazard  of  eternal  damnation. 

Wise.  His  father  was  not  wanting  to  use  the 
means  to  reclaim  him,  often  urging,  as  I  have  been 
told,  that  saying  in  the  law  of  Moses,  '  Thou  shalt 
not  steal.'  Ex.  «.  15.  And  also  that,  'This  is  the 
curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  face  of  the  whole 
earth ;  for  every  one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off, ' 
<fcc.  Zec.v.s.  The  light  of  nature  also,  though  he  was 
little,  must  needs  show  him  that  what  he  took 
from  others  was  not  his  own  ;  and  that  he  would 
not  willingly  have  been  served  so  himself.  But 
all  was  to  no  purpose,  let  father  and  conscience 
say  what  they  would  to  him,  he  would  go  on,  he 
was  resolved  to  cro  on  in  his  wickedness. 


3  The  solemn  importance  of  instilling  right  principles  into 
the  mind,  from  the  first  dawn  of  reason,  cannot  be  too  strongly 
enforced.  Many  a  wretched  midnight  burglar  commenced  his 
career  of  vice  and  folly  by  stealing  fruit,  followed  by  thieving 
anything  that  he  could  handsomely.  Pilfering,  unless 
severely  checked,  is  a  hotbed  for  the  foulest  crimes.— (En.) 

4  Poultry.— (Ed.) 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR    BADMAN. 


599 


Atten.  But  his  father  would,  as  you  intimate, 
sometimes  rebuke  him  for  his  wickedness  ;  pray 
how  would  he  carry  it  then  ? 

Wise.  How!  why  like  to  a  thief  that  is  found. 
Je.  IL  26.  He  would  stand  gloating,1  and  hanging 
HnwBa.lm.mdki  down  his  heatI  in  a  sullen,  pouching 
iisu  to  cam  it  nianner;    a  body  might   read,  as  we 

when  Ins  father  '  ,  .  ■,, 

used  to  cimie  used  to  say,  the  picture  of  ill-luck  in 
his  face ;  and  when  his  father  did  de- 
mand his  answer  to  such  questions  concerning  his 
villainy,  he  would  grumble  and  mutter  at  him,  and 
tbat  should  be  all  he  could  get. 

Atten.  But  you  said  that  he  would  also  rob  his 
father,  metbinks  that  was  an  unnatural  thing. 

Wise.  Natural  or  unnatural,  all  is  one  to  a  thief. 
Besides,  you  must  think  tbat  be  had  likewise  com- 
panions to  whom  he  was,  for  the  wickedness  that 
he  saw  in  them,  more  firmly  knit,  than 

Bidman     more       .  ,  _     ,  i  ir  i 

firmly  knit  to   either  to  lather  or  mother.      l  ea,  and 


death  would  have  been,  as  he  would 
have  counted,  great  release  and  liberty  to  him ; 
for  the  truth  is,  they  and  their  counsel  were  his 
bondage ;  yea,  and  if  I  forget  not,  I  have  heard 
some  say  that  when  he  was,  at  times,  among  his 
Badman  «o«id  companions  he  would  greatly  rejoice 
rejoice  to  think  to  think  that  his  parents  were  old,  and 
death  3\vere"ai  could  not  live  long,  and  then,  quoth  he, 
I  shall  be  mine  own  man,  to  do  what 
I  list,  without  their  control. 

Atten.  Then  it  seems  he  counted  that  robbing 
of  his  parents  was  no  crime. 

Wise.  None  at  all ;  and  therefore  he  fell  directly 
under  that  sentence,  '  Whoso  robbeth  his  father  or 
his  mother,  and  saith  it  is  no  transgression,  the 
same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer.'  Pr.  xxviii.  21. 
And  for  that  he  set  so  light  by  them  as  to  their 
persons  and  counsels,  it  was  a  sign  that  at  present 
he  was  of  a  very  abominable  spirit,  and  tbat  some 
judgment  waited  to  take  hold  of  him  in  time  to 

COme.    lSa.ii.25. 

Atten.  But  can  you  imagine  what  it  was,  I  mean, 
in  his  conceit,  for  I  speak  not  now  of  the  sugges- 
tions of  Satan,  by  which  doubtless  he  was  put  on  to 
do  these  things ;  I  say  what  it  should  be  in  his 
conceit,  that  should  make  him  think  that  this  his 
manner  of  pilfering  and  stealing  was  no  great 
matter. 

Wise.  It  was  for  that  the  things  that  he  stole 
were  small ;  to  rob  orchards,  and  gardens,  and  to 

Badman  counted  Steal    Pllllen-    a,ld    tli6    Uke'    theSe    llG 

ins  thieving  no  counted  tricks  of  youth,  nor  would  he 

be  beat  out  of  it  by  all  that  his  friends 

could  say.     They  would  tell  him  that  he  must  not 

covet,  or  desire,  and  yet  to  desire  is  less  than  to 


Gloating,'  staring  sulkily;  or  with  an  evil  eye — (Ed.) 


*mx 


take,  even  anything,  the  least  thing  that  was  his 
neighbour's  ;  and  that  if  he  did,  it  would  be  a  trans- 
gression of  the  law;  but  all  was  one  to  him  ;  what 
through  the  wicked  talk  of  bis  companions,  and 
the  delusion  of  his  own  corrupt  heart,  ho  would  go 
on  in  his  pilfering  course,  and  where  he  thought 
himself  secure,  would  talk  of,  and  laugh  at  it  when 
he  had  done. 

Atten.  Well  I  heard  a  man  once,  when  he  was 
upon  the  ladder  with  the  rope  about 
his  neck,  confess,  when  ready  to  be 
turned  off  by  the  hangman,  that  that  which  had 
brought  him  to  thatend  was  his  accustoming  of  him- 
self, when  young,  to  pilfer  and  steal  small  things. 
To  my  best  remembrance  he  told  us,  that  he  began 
the  trade  of  a  thief  by  stealing  of  pins  and  points  ;2 
and  therefore  did  forewarn  all  the  youth  that  then 
were  gathered  together  to  see  him  die,  to  take  heed 
of  beginning,  though  but  with  little  sins ;  because 
by  tampering  at  first  with  little  ones,  way  is  made 
for  the  commission  of  bigger.3 

Wise.  Since  you  are  entered  upon  The  story  of  old 
stories,  I  also  will  tell  you  one  ;  the  iud- 
which,  though  I  heard  it  not  with  mine  own  ears, 
yet  my  author  I  dare  believe.  It  is  r<rang  thieves 
concerning  one  old  Tod,  that  was  lake  notlce- 
hanged  about  twenty  years  ago,  or  more,  at  Hert- 
ford, for  being  a  thief.      The  story  is  this: — 

At  a  summer  assizes  holden  at  Hertford,  while 
the  judge  was  sitting  upon  the  bench,  - 

comes  this  old  Tod  into  court,  clothed       •^* 
in  a  green  suit,  with  his  leathern  girdle  in  his  hand, 
his  bosom  open,  and  all  on  a  dung  sweat,  as  if  he 
had  run  for  his  life  ;  and  being  come  in,  he  spako 
aloud  as  follows  : — My  lord,  said  he, 

J     ,       '  .  Old  Tod  bcg:an 

here  is  the  veriest  rogue  tbat  breathes  his  «ay  to  tin 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  I  have  SiVA 
been  a  thief  from  a  child.  When  I  *«£  »nJ  tl,e 
was  but  a  little  one,  I  gave  myself  to 
rob  orchards,  and  to  do  other  such  like  wicked 
things,  and  I  have  continued  a  thief  ever  since. 
My  lord,  there  has  not  been  a  robbery  committed 
these  many  years,  within  so  many  miles  of  this 
place,  but  I  have  either  been  at  it,  or  privy 
to  it. 

The  judge  thought  the  fellow  was  mad,  but  after 
some  conference  with  some  of  the  justices,  they 
agreed  to  indict  him  ;  and  so  they  did  of  several 
felonious  actions;    to  all  which  he  heartily  con- 

2  Point,  a  tag  or  metal  point  fixed  on  the  end  of  a  lace.  Fox 
narrates  that  a  martyr,  brought  to  the  stake  iu  his  shirt,  took 
a  point  from  his  hose,  and  trussed  in  his  shirt  between  his  legs. 
-(Ed.) 

8  '  Sin  will  at  first,  just  like  a  beggar,  crave 
One  penny  or  one  halfpenny  to  have : 
And  if  you  grant  its  first  suit,  'twill  aspire 
From  pence  to  pounds,  and  so  will  still  mouut  higher 
To  the  whole  soul.' 
— Bunyan's  Caution  against  Sin,  vol.  II.,  p.  575. 


600 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


fessed  guilty,  and  so  was  hanged,  with  his  wife  at 
the  same  time. 

Atten.  This  is  a  remarkalle  story  indeed,  and 
you  think  it  is  a  true  one. 

Wise.  It  is  not  only  remarkable,  hut  pat  to  our 
purpose.  This  thief,  like  Mr.  Badman,  began  his 
trade  betimes ;  he  began  too  where  Mr.  Badman 
began,  even  at  robbing  of  orchards,  and  other 
such  things,  which  brought  him,  as  you  may  per- 
ceive, from  sin  to  sin,  till  at  last  it  brought  him  to 
the  public  shame  of  sin,  which  is  the  gallows. 

As  for  the  truth  of  this  story,  the  relater  told 
me  that  he  was,  at  the  same  time,  himself  in  the 
court,  and  stood  within  less  than  two  yards  of  old 
Tod,  when  he  heard  him  aloud  to  utter  the  words. 

Atten.  These  two  sins,  of  lying  and  stealing, 
were  a  bad  sign  of  an  evil  end. 

Wise.  So  they  were,  and  yet  Mr.  Badman  came 
not  to  his  end  like  old  Tod ;  though  I  fear  to  as 
bad,  nay,  worse  than  was  that  death  of  the  gallows, 
though  less  discerned  by  spectators ;  but  more  of 
that  by  and  by.  But  you  talk  of  these  two  sins 
as  if  these  were  all  that  Mr.  Badman  was  addicted 
to  in  his  youth.  Alas,  alas,  he  swarmed  with  sins, 
even  as  a  beggar  does  with  vermin,  and  that  when 
he  was  but  a  boy. 

Atten.  Why,  what  other  sins  was  he  addicted 
to,  I  mean  while  he  was  but  a  child? 

Wise.  You  need  not  ask  to  what  other  sins  was 
he,  but  to  what  other  sins  was  he  not  addicted  ;  that 
is,  of  such  as  suited  with  his  age ;  for  a  man  may 
safely  say  that  nothing  that  was  vile  came  amiss  to 
him,  if  he  was  but  capable  to  do  it.  Indeed,  some 
sins  there  be  that  childhood  knows  not  how  to  be 
tampering  with ;  but  I  speak  of  sins  that  he  was 
capable  of  committing,  of  which  I  will  nominate 
two  or  three  more.  And,  First,  He  could  not  en- 
D  ,  ,,   dure  the  Lord's  day,  because  of  the 

Badman    could  «    . 

not  abide  the    holiness  that  did  attend  it ;    the  be- 

y'  ginning  of  that  day  was  to  him  as  if 
he  was  going  to  prison,  except  he  could  get  out 
from  his  father  and  mother,  and  lurk  in  by-holes 
among  his  companions,  until  holy  duties  were  over. 
Reading  the  Scriptures,  hearing  sermons,  godly 
conference,  repeating  0f  sermons  and  prayers,  were 
things  that  he  could  not  away  with ;  and,  there- 
fore, if  his  father  on  such  days,  as  often  he  did, 
though  sometimes,  notwithstanding  his  diligence, 
he  would  be  sure  to  give  him  the  slip,  did  keep 
him  strictly  to  the  observation  of  the  day,  he  would 
plainly  show,  by  all  carriages,  that  he  was  highly 
discontent  therewith.  lie  would  sleep  at  duties, 
would  talk  vainly  with  his  brothers,  and,  as  it  were, 
think  every  godly  opportunity  seven  times  as  long 
as  it  was,  grudging  till  it  was  over. 

Atten.  This  his  abhorring  of  that  day,  was  not, 
I  think,  for  the  sake  of  the  day  itself;  for  as  it  is 
a  day,  it  is  nothing  else  but  as  other  days  of  the 


week.  But  I  suppose  that  the  reason  of  his  loath- 
ing of  it  was  for  that  God  hath  put  sanctity  and 
holiness  upon  it ;  also,  because  it  is  the 
day  above  all  the  days  of  the  week  could  not  abide 
that  ought  to  be  spent  in  holy  devotion,  t^k"*'***- 
in  remembrance  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  from 
the  dead. 

Wise.  Yes,  it  was  therefore  that  he  was  such  an 
enemy  to  it ;  even  because  more  restraint  was  laid 
upon  him  on  that  day,  from  his  own  ways,  than 
were  possible  should  be  laid  upon  him  on  all  others. 

Atten.  Doth  not  God,  by  instituting  of  a  day 
unto  holy  duties,  make  great  proof  how  the  hearts 
and  inclinations  of  poor  people  do  stand  to  holiness 
of  heart,  and  a  conversation  in  holy  duties? 

Wise.  Yes,  doubtless ;  and  a  man  shall  show 
his  heart  and  his  life  what  they  are,  more  by  one 
Lord's  day  than  by  all  the  days  of  Go(1  prove9  the 
the  week  besides.  And  the  reason  heart  what  it  is, 
is,  because  on  the  Lord's  day  there  is  of  the  Lord's 
a  special  restraint  laid  upon  men  as  to  it ^paVto  Ms 
thoughts  and  life,  more  than  upon  service- 
other  days  of  the  week  besides.  Also,  men  are 
enjoined  on  that  day  to  a  stricter  performance  of 
holy  duties,  and  restraint  of  worldly  business,  than 
upon  other  days  they  are ;  wherefore,  if  their  hearts 
incline  not  naturally  to  good,  now  they  will  show 
it,  now  they  will  appear  what  they  are.  The  Lord's 
day  i9  a  kind  of  an  emblem  of  the  heavenly  Sabbath 
above,  and  it  makes  manifest  how  the  heart  stands 
to  the  perpetuity  of  holiness,  more  than  to  be  found 
in  a  transient  duty  does. 

On  other  days,  a  man  may  be  in  and  out  of  holy 
duties,  and  all  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  but  now, 
the  Lord's  day  is,  as  it  were,  a  day  that  enjoins 
to  one  perpetual  duty  of  holiness.  '  Remember 
that  thou  keep  holy  the  Sabbath  day;'  which,  by 
Christ,  is  not  abrogated,  but  changed,  into  the  first 
of  the  week,  not  as  it  was  given  in  particular  to 
the  Jews,  but  as  it  was  sanctified  by  him  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world;  Ge.  ii.  2 ;  Ex.  xxxi.  13-17 ;  Mar. 
xvi.  1 ;  Ac.  xx.  7  ;  I  Co.  xvi.  1,  2  ;  Mar.  ii.  27,  28 ;    Re.  i.  10 ;    and 

therefore  is  a  greater  proof  of  the  frame  and  temper 
of  a  man's  heart,  and  does  more  make  manifest  to 
what  he  is  inclined,  than  doth  his  other  performance 
of  duties.  Therefore,  God  puts  great  difference 
between  them  that  truly  call,  and  walk  in,  this  day 
as  holy,  and  count  it  honourable,  upon  the  account 
that  now  they  have  an  opportunity  to  show  how 
they  delight  to  honour  him  ;  in  that  they  have  not 
only  an  hour,  but  a  whole  day,  to  show  it  in.  is. 
iviii.  13.  I  say,  he  puts  great  difference  between 
these,  and  that  other  sort  that  say,  When  will  the 
Sabbath  be  gone,  that  we  may  be  at  our  worldly 
business?  Am.  via.  5.  The  first  he  calleth  a  blessed 
man,  but  brandeth  the  other  fur  an  unsanctified 
worldling.  And,  indeed,  to  delight  ourselves  in 
God's  service  upon  his  holy  days,  gives  a  better 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MB.  BADMAN. 


601 


proof  of  a  sanctified  nature  than  to  grudge  at  the 
coming,  and  to  be  weary  of  the  holy  duties  of  such 
days,  as  Mr.  Badman  did.1 

Atten.  There  may  be  something  in  what  you 
say,  for  he  that  cannot  abide  to  keep  one  day  holy 
to  God,  to  bo  sure  he  hath  given  a  sufficient  proof 
that  he  is  an  unsanctificd  man ;  and,  as  such,  what 
should  he  do  in  heaven?  That  being  the  place 
where  a  perpetual  Sabbath  is  to  be  kept  to  God  ;  I 
say,  to  be  kept  for  ever  and  ever.  lie.  It.  9.  And,  for 
ought  I  know,  one  reason  why  one  day  in  seven 
hath  been  by  our  Lord  set  apart  unto  holy  duties 
for  men,  may  be  to  give  them  conviction  that  there 
is  enmity  in  the  hearts  of  sinners  to  the  God  of 
heaven,  for  he  that  hateth  holiness,  hateth  God 
himself.  They  pretend  to  love  God,  and  yet  love 
not  a  holy  day,  and  yet  love  not  to  spend  that  day 
in  one  continued  act  of  holiness  to  the  Lord.  They 
had  as  good  say  nothing  as  to  call  him  Lord, 
Lord,  and  yet  not  do  the  things  that  he  says.  And 
this  Mr.  Badinan  was  such  a  one,  he  could  not 
abide  this  day,  nor  any  of  the  duties  of  it.  Indeed, 
when  he  could  get  from  his  friends, 
did  use  to  spend  and  so  spend  it  in  all  manner  of  idle- 
t  e     r  sday.   negg  aQ(j  profanenesS)  then  he  would 

be  pleased  well  enough ;  but  what  was  this  but  a 
turning  the  day  into  night,  or  other  than  taking  an 
opportunity  at  God's  forbidding,  to  follow  our 
callings,  to  solace  and  satisfy  our  lusts  and  de- 
lights of  the  flesh  ?  I  take  the  liberty  to  speak 
thus  of  Mr.  Badman,  upon  a  confidence  of  what 
you,  Sir,  have  said  of  him  is  true. 

Wise.  You  needed  not  to  have  made  that  apology 
for  your  censuring  of  Mr.  Badman,  for  all  that 
knew  him  will  confirm  what  you  say  of  him  to  be 
true.  He  could  not  abide  either  that  day,  or  any- 
thing else  that  had  the  stamp  or  image  of  God 
upon  it.  Sin,  sin,  and  to  do  the  thing  that  was 
naught,  was  that  which  he  delighted  in,  and  that 
from  a  little  child. 

Atten.  I  must  say  again  I  am  sorry  to  hear  it, 
and  that  for  his  own  sake,  and  also  for  tho  sake 
of  his  relations,  who  must  needs  be  broken  to  pieces 
with  such  doings  as  these.  For,  for  these  things' 
sake  comes  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children  of 
disobedience.  Ep.  v.  6.  And,  doubtless,  he  must  be 
gone  to  hell,  if  he  died  without  repentance ;  and 
to  beget  a  child  for  hell  is  sad  for  parents  to 
think  on. 

Wise.  Of  his  dying,  as  I  told  you,  I  will  give  you 
a  relation  anon ;  but  now  we  are  upon  his  life,  and 
upon  the  manner  of  his  life  in  his  childhood,  even 
of  the  sins  that  attended  him  then,  some  of  which 
I  have  mentioned  already ;  and,  indeed,   I  have 


mentioned  but  some,  for  yet  there  are  more  to 
follow,  and  those  not  at  all  inferior  to  what  you 
have  already  heard. 

Attex   Pray  what  were  they? 

Wise.  Why  he  was  greatly  given,  and  that  while 
a  lad,  to  grievous  swearing  and  cursing ;  yea,  he 
then  made  no  more  of  swearing  and 
cursing  than  I  do  of  telling  my  fingers,  toswearingand 
Yea,  ho  would  do  it  without  provoca-  CIUS1"°- 
tion  thereto.  Ho  counted  it  a  glory  to  swear  and 
curse,  and  it  was  as  natural  to  him  as  to  eat,  and 
drink,  and  sleep. 

Atten.  0  what  a  young  villain  was  this !  Hero 
is,  as  the  apostle  says,  a  yielding  of  'members,  as 
instruments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,'  indeed! 
Ho.  vi.  13.  This  is  proceeding  from  evil  to  evil  with 
a  witness.  This  argueth  that  he  was  a  black- 
mouthed  young  wretch  indeed. 

Wise.  He  was  so ;  and  yet,  as  I  told  you,  he 
he  counted  above  all  this  kind  of  swearing  and 
sinning  to  be  a  badge  of  his  honour;  ^m^'b'"^ 
he  reckoned  himself  a  man's  fellow  man's  honour. 
when  he  had  learned  to  swear  and  curse  boldly. 

Attex.  I  am  persuaded  that  many  do  think  as 
you  have  said,  that  to  swear  is  a  thing  that  does 
bravely  become  Ihem,  and  that  it  is  the  best  way 
for  a  man,  when  he  would  put  authority  or  terror 
into  his  words,  to  stuff  them  full  of  the  sin  of 
swearing. 

Wise.  You  say  right,  else,  as  I  am  persuaded, 
men  would  not  so  usually  belch  out  their  blas- 
phemous oaths  as  they  do ;  they  take  a  pride  in  it; 
they  think  that  to  swear  is  gentleman-like ;  and, 
having  once  accustomed  themselves  unto  it,  they 
hardly  leave  it  all  the  days  of  their  lives.2 

Atten.  Well,  but  now  we  are  upon  it,  pray 
show  me  the  difference  between  swear-   _._ 

,  .  n      n  •  tcc         difference    be- 

ing and  cursing  ;  tor  there  is  a  diner-     twixt  swearing 

ence,  is  there  not? 

Wise.  Yes  ;  there  is  a  difference  between  swear- 
ing and  cursing.  Swearing,  vain  swearing,  such 
as  young  Badman  accustomed  himself  -what  swearing 
unto.     Now,  vain  and  sinful  swearing  I3- 

is  a  light  and  wicked  calling  of  God,  <fec,  to  wit- 
ness to  our  vain  and  foolish  attesting  of  things,  and 
those  things  are  of  two  sorts.  1.  Things  that  we 
swear,  are  or  shall  be  done.  2.  Things  so  sworn 
to,  true  or  false. 

1.  Things  that  we  swear,  are  or  shall  be  done. 
Thou  swearest  thou  hast  done  such  a  thing,  that 
such  a  thing  is  so,  or  shall  be  so ;  for  it  is  no 
matter  which  of  these  it  is  that  men  swear  about, 
if  it  be  done  lightly,  and  wickedly,  and  ground- 
lessly,   it  is  vain,  because  it  is  a  sin  against  the 


Christian  assemblies  are  the  life,  food,  and  nourishment  of        2  Profane  swearers  use  the  language  of  hell  before  they 
our  souls ;  consequently  the  forsaking  of  them,  and  the  pro-     arrive  at  their  awful  destination.     Were  God  to  answer  their 
fanation  of  the  Sabbath,  are  usually  the  forerunners  of  apos-  i  imprecations  they  would  be  miserable  beyond  conception, 
tacy. —  (Mason.)  I  cause  of  swearing  the  laud  moarneth.' — (Ed.) 

vol.  in.  76 


Ec- 


602 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


A  man  ma 
is  Bwearii 

the  truth. 


third  commandment,  which  says,  '  Thou  shalt  not 
take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain.'  Ex.xx.  7. 
For  this  is  a  vain  using  of  that  holy  and  sacred 
name,  and  so  a  sin  for  which,  without  sound  re- 
pentance, there  is  not,  nor  can  he  rightly  expected, 
forgiveness. 

Atten.  Then  it  seems,  though  as  to  the  matter 
of  fact,  a  man  swears  truly,  yet  if  he 
AinmsweSingSto  sweareth  lightly  and  groundlessly,  his 
a  trutlu  oath  is  evil,  and  he  hy  it  under  sin. 

Wise.  Yes,  a  man  may  say,  'The  Lord  liveth,' 
and  that  is  true,  and  yet  in  so  saying  '  swear 
falsely;' hecause  he  sweareth  vainly, 
gSto  needlessly,  and  without  a  ground.  Je. 
v.  2.  To  swear  groundedly  and  neces- 
sarily, which  then  a  man  does  when  he  swears  as 
being  called  thereto  of  God,  that  is  tolerated  hy 
the  Word.1  But  this  was  none  of  Mr.  Badman's 
swearing,  and  therefore  that  which  now  we  are 
not  concerned  ahout. 

Atten.  I  perceive  by  the  prophet  that  a  man 
may  sin  in  swearing  to  a  truth.  They  therefore 
must  needs  most  horribly  sin  that  swear  to  con- 
firm their  jests  and  lies ;  and,  as  they  think,  the 
better  to  beautify  their  foolish  talking. 

Wise.  They  sin  with  a  high  *hand  ;  for  they 
presume  to  imagine  that  God  is  as  wicked  as  tkeni- 

Hethat  swears    Selves>  to  wit«  that  he  is  an   avoucher 

to  a  lie,  con-   0f  lies  to  be  true.     For,  as  I  said  be- 

cludes  that  God  . 

is  as  wicked  as  lore,  to  swear  is  to  call  God  to  witness  ; 

himself.  aud  tQ   gwear   t()  a  lie   ig   tQ   caU  God 

to  witness  that  that  lie  is  true.  This,  therefore, 
must  needs  offend ;  for  it  puts  the  highest  affront 
upon  the  holiness  and  righteousness  of  God,  there- 
fore his  wrath  must  sweep  them  away.  Zee.  v.  3.  This 
kind  of  swearing  is  put  in  with  lying,  and  killing, 
and  stealing,  and  committing  adultery  ;  aud  there- 
fore must  not  go  unpunished.  Je.  vH.  o ;  Ho.  iv.  2, 3.  For 
if  God  '  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his 
name  in  vain,'  which  a  man  may  do  when  he  swears 
to  a  truth,  as  I  have  showed  before,  how  can  it  be 
imagined  that  he  should  hold  such  guiltless,  who, 
by  swearing,  will  appeal  to  God  for  lies  that  be 
not  true,  or  that  swear  out  of  their  frantic  and  bed- 
lam madness.  It  would  grieve  and  provoke  a 
sober  man  to  wrath,  if  one  should  swear  to  a  no- 
torious lie,  and  avouch  that  that  man  would  attest  it 
for  a  truth  ;  and  yet  thus  do  men  deal  with  the  holy 
God.  They  tell  their  jestings,  tales,  and  lies,  and 
then  swear  by  God  that  they  are  true.  Now,  this 
kind  of  swearing  was  as  common  with  young  Bad- 


1  Profane  cursing  and  swearing  was  awfully  fashionable  in 
Bunyan's  days.  This  led  many  pious  persons  to  denounce 
oaths  altogether ;  and  the  time  is  fast  coming  when  the  world 
will  agree  with  the  Quakers  that  an  affirmation  is  the  best  test 
of  truth.  It  is  like  the  controversy  of  the  teetotallers ;  some 
who  would  be  ashamed  of  taking  intoxicating  liquors,  except 
as  medicine,  will  soou  throw  such  physics  to  the  dogs  or  ou 
the  dunghill.— (En.) 


man,  as  it  was  to  eat  when  he  was  an  hungered, 
or  to  go  to  bed  when  it  was  night. 

Atten.  I  have  often  mused  in  my  mind,  what  it 
should  be  that  should  make  men  so  common  in  the 
use  of  the  sin  of  swearing,  since  those  that  be  wise 
will  believe  them  never  the  sooner  for  that. 

Wise.  It  cannot  be  anything  that  is  good,  you 
may  be  sure ;  because  the  thing  itself  is  abomin- 
able. 1.  Therefore  it  must  be  from  Six  causes  of 
the  promptings  of  the  spirit  of  the  vain  swearing. 
devil  within  them.  2.  Also  it  flows  sometimes 
from  hellish  rage,  when  the  tongue  hath  set  on  fire 
of  hell  even  the  wThole  course  of  nature.  Ja.  91.  c-9. 
3.  But  commonly,  swearing  flows  from  that  daring 
boldness  that  biddeth  defiance  to  the  law  that  for- 
hids  it.  4.  Swearers  think,  also,  that  by  their 
helching  of  their  blasphemous  oaths  out  of  their 
black  and  polluted  mouths,  they  show  themselves 
the  more  valiant  men.  5.  And  imagine  also,  that 
by  these  outrageous  kind  of  villanies,  they  shall 
conquer  those  that  at  such  a  time  they  have  to  do 
with,  and  make  them  believe  their  lies  to  be  true. 
6.  They  also  swear  frequently  to  get  gain  thereby, 
and  when  they  meet  with  fools  they  overcome  them 
this  way.  But  if  I  might  give  advice  in  this 
matter,  no  buyer  should  lay  out  one  farthing  with 
him  that  is  a  common  swearer  in  his  calling ;  es- 
pecially with  such  an  oath -master  that  endea- 
voureth  to  swear  away  his  commodity  to  another, 
and  that  wrould  swear  his  chapman's  money  into 
his  own  pocket. 

Atten.  All  these  causes  of  swearing,  so  far  as  I 
can  perceive,  flow  from  the  same  root  as  do  the  oaths 
themselves,  even  from  a  hardened  and  desperate 
heart.  But,  pray,  show  me  now  how  wicked  cursing 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  this  kind  of  swearing. 

Wise.  Swearing,  as  I  said,  hath  immediately 
to  do  with  the  name  of  God,  and  it  calls  upon  him 
to  be  witness  to  the  truth  of  what  is   „  .     . 

.  ,       ..        ....  .  How  cursing  13 

said  ;  that  is,  if  they  that  swear,  swear  distinguished 
by  him.  Some,  indeed,  swear  by  idols,  lonisueanng. 
as  by  the  mass,  by  our  lady,  by  saints,  beasts, 
birds,  and  other  creatures  ;2  but  the  usual  way  of 
our  profane  ones  in  England  is  to  swear  by  God, 
Christ,  faith,  and  the  like.  But,  however,  or  by 
■whatever  they  swear,  cursing  is  distinguished  from 
swearing  thus. 

To  curse,  to  curse  profanely,  it  is  to  sentence 
another  or  our  self,  for  or  to  evil ;  or  to  of  cursing,  win! 
wish  that  some  evil  might  happen  to  lt;  ls- 

the  person  or  thing  under  the  curse  unjustly. 


2  This  is  one  of  Bunyan's  home-thrusts  at  Popery.  Class- 
ing the  mass,  our  lady-saiuts,  and  beasts,  among  the  idols  or 
objects  of  divine  worship.  He  omits  an  oath  very  common 
among  Irish  labourers,  which  much  puzzled  me  when  a  boy, 
"  bloodunoons,"  meaning  the  bleeding  wounds  of  the  Saviour. 
How  thankful  ought  we  to  be  that,  in  our  days,  profane  swear- 
ing stamps,  upon  any  oue  who  uses  it,  the  character  of  a  black- 
guard.— CEd.) 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF   JIB.  BADMAN. 


603 


It  is  to  sentence  for  or  to  evil,  that  is,  without 
■  cause.  Thus  Shiraei  cursed  David ;  he  sen- 
tenced him  for  and  to  evil  unjustly,  when  he  said 
to  him,  'Come  out,  come  out,  thou  bloody  man,  and 
thou  man  of  Belial.  The  Lord  hath  returned  upon 
thee  all  the  blood  of  the  house  of  Saul,  in  whose 
stead  thou  hast  reigned,  and  the  Lord  hath  de- 
livered the  kingdom  into  the  hand  of  Absalom  thy 
son ;  and,  behold,  thou  art  taken  in  thy  mischief, 
because  thou  art  a  bloody  man.'  •->  sa.  xvi.  7,  s. 

This  David  calls  '  a  grievous  curse.'  'And  be- 
hold,' saith  he  to  Solomon  his  son,  'thou  hast  with 
thee  Shimei,  -  a  Benjamite,  -  which  cursed  me  with 
a  grievous  curse  in  the  day  when  I  went  to  Maha- 
naim.'  ikl  ii.  &. 

But  what  was  this  curse  ?  Why,  First,  It  was 
a  wrong  sentence  past  upon  David ;  Shimei  called 
him  bloody  man,  man  of  Belial,  when  he  was  not. 
Secondly,  He  sentenced  him  to  the  evil  that  at 
present  was  upon  him  for  being  a  bloody  man,  that 
is,  against  the  house  of  Saul,  when  that  present 
evil  overtook  David  for  quite  another  thing.  And 
we  may  thus  apply  it  to  the  profane  ones  of  our 
times,  who  in  their  rage  and  envy  have  little  else 
„     .,        r      in  their  mouths  but  a  sentence  against 

How  the  profane  ° 

onesofouiumes  their  neighbour  for  and  to  evil  un- 
j  ustly.  Mow  common  is  it  with  many, 
when  they  are  but  a  little  offended  with  one,  to 
cry,  Hang  him,  Damn  him,  Rogue!  This  is  both 
a  sentencing  of  him  for  and  to  evil,  and  is  in  itself 
a  grievous  curse. 

2.  The  other  kind  of  cursing  is  to  wish  that 
some  evil  might  happen  to,  and  overtake  this  or 
that  person  or  thing.  And  this  kind  of  cursing 
Job  counted  a  grievous  sin.  ■  Neither  have  I  suf- 
fered (says  he)  my  mouth  to  sin  by  wishing  a  curse 
to  his  soul ; '  or  consequently  to  body  or  estate. 
Job  xxxi.  39.  This  then  is  a  wicked  cursing,  to  wish 
that  evil  might  either  befall  another  or  ourselves. 
And  this  kind  of  cursing  young  Badman  accustomed 
himself  uuto.  1.  He  would  wish  that  evil  might 
Badman's  way  befall  others ;  he  would  wish  their  necks 
of  cursing.  broken,  or  that  their  brains  were  out, 
or  that  the  pox  or  plague  Avas  upon  them,  and  the 
like ;  all  which  is  a  devilish  kind  of  cursing,  and  is 
become  one  of  the  common  sins  of  our  age.  2.  He 
would  also  as  often  wish  a  curse  to  himself,  say- 
ing, Would  I  might  be  hanged,  or  burned,  or  that 
the  devil  might  fetch  me,  if  it  be  not  so,  or  the  like. 
The  Damn-me-  We  count  the  Damn-me-blades  to  be 
hiade.  great  swearers,  but  when  in  their  hellish 
fury  they  say,  God  damn  me,  God  perish  me,  or 
the  like,  they  rather  curse  than  swear ;  yea,  curse 
themselves,  and  that  with  a  wish  that  damnation 
might  light  upon  themselves  ;  which  wish  and  curse 
of  theirs  in  a  little  time  they  will  see  accomplished 
upon  them,  even  in  hell  fire,  if  they  repent  them 
not  of  their  sins. 


Atten.  But  did  this  young  Badman  accustom 
himself  to  such  filthy  kind  of  language? 

Wise.  I  think  I  may  say  that  nothing  was  more 
frequent  in  his  mouth,  and  that  upon  the  least 
provocation.  Yea,  he  was  so  versed  in  such  kind 
of  language,  that  neither  father,  nor  _  . 

°       °  m  '  Badman    would 

mother,  nor  brother,  nor  sister,  nor  curse  his  fa- 
servant,  no,  nor  the  very  cattle  that 
his  father  had,  could  escape  these  curses  of  his.  I 
say  that  even  the  brute  beasts,  when  he  drove  them 
or  rid  upon  them,  if  they  pleased  not  Baaman  would 
his  humour,  they  must  be  sure  to  par-  «a-se  his  fa- 
take  of  his  curse.  He  would  wish  their 
necks  broke,  their  legs  broke,  their  guts  out,  or 
that  the  devil  might  fetch  them,  or  the  like  ;  and 
no  marvel,  for  he  that  is  so  hardy  to  wish  damna- 
tion or  other  bad  curses  to  himself,  or  dearest  re- 
lations, will  not  stick  to  wish  evil  to  the  silly  beast 
in  his  madness. 

Atten,  Well,  I  see  still  that  this  Badman  was  a 
desperate  villain.  But  pray,  Sir,  since  you  have 
gone  thus  far,  now  show  me  whence  this  evil  of 
cursing  ariseth,  and  also  what  dishonour  it  bring- 
eth  to  God  ;  for  I  easily  discern  that  it  doth  bring 
damnation  to  the  soul. 

Wise.  This  evil  of  cursing  ariseth  in  general 
from  the  desperate  wickedness  of,  the  heart,  but 
particularly  from,  1.  Envy,  which  is.,  as  I  appre- 
hend, the  leading  sin  to  witchcraft.  Four  cauSes  of 
2.  It  also  ariseth  from  pride,  which  cursin&- 
was  the  sin  of  the  fallen  angels.  3.  It  ariseth  too, 
from  scorn  and  contempt  of  others.  4.  But  for  a 
man  to  curse  himself,  must  needs  ari=e  from  des- 
perate madness.  Job.  xv.  Ec.  riL  22. 

The  dishonour  that  it  bringeth  to  God  is  this. 
It  taketh  away  from  him  his  authority,  The  dishonour  it 
in  whose  power  it  is  only  to  bless  and  brins3 10  God- 
curse;  not  to  curse  wickedly,  as  Mr.  Badman, 
but  justly  and  righteously,  giving  by  his  curse, 
to  those  that  are  wicked,  the  due  reward  of  their 
deeds. 

Besides,  these  wicked  men,  in  their  wicked 
cursing  of  their  neighbour,  &c,  do  even  curse  God 
himself  in  his  handiwork.  Ja.  iii.  9.  Man  is  God's 
image,  and  to  curse  wickedly  the  image  of  God  is 
to  curse  God  himself.  Therefore  as  when  men 
wickedly  swear,  they  rend,  and  tear  God's  name, 
and  make  him,  as  much  as  in  them  lies,  the 
avoucher  and  approver  of  all  their  wickedness  ;  so 
he  that  curseth  and  condemneth  in  this  sort  his 
neighbour,  or  that  wisheth  him  evil,  curseth,  con- 
demneth, and  wisheth  evil  to  the  image  of  God, 
and,  consequently  judgeth  and  condemneth  God 
himself.  Suppose  that  a  man  should  say  with  his 
mouth,  I  wish  that  the  king's  picture  was  burned; 
would  not  this  man's  so  saying  render  him  as  an 
enemy  to  the  person  of  the  king?  Even  so  it  is 
with  them  that,   by  cursing,  wish  evil  to  their 


004 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MB.  BADMAN. 


neighbour,  or  to   themselves,  they  contemn  the 
image,  even  the  image  of  God  himself. 

Atten.  But  do  you  think  that  the  men  that  do 
thus,  do  think  that  they  do  so  vilely,  so  abomin- 
ably? 

Wise.  The  question  is  not  what  men  do  believe 
concerning  their  sin,  but  what  God's  Word  says  of 
it.  If  God's  Word  says  that  swearing  and  cursing 
are  sins,  though  men  should  count  them  for  vir- 
tues, their  reward  will  be  a  reward  for  sin,  to  wit, 
the  damnation  of  the  soul.  To  curse  another,  and 
Swearing  and  to  swear  vainly  and  falsely,  are  sins 
SET'S  against  the  light  of  nature.  1.  To 
light  of  nature.  curse  is  so,  because  whoso  curseth 
smother,  knows  that  at  the  same  time  he  would 
not  be  so  served  himself.  2.  To  swear  also  is  a 
sin  against  the  same  law ;  for  nature  will  tell  me 
that  I  should  not  lie,  and  therefore  much  less 
swear  to  confirm  it.  Yea,  the  heathens  have  looked 
upon  swearing  to  be  a  solemn  ordinance  of  God, 
and  therefore  not  to  be  lightly  or  vainly  used  by 
men,  though  to  confirm  a  matter  of  truth.    Ge. 

xxxi.  43—55. 

Atten.  But  I  wonder,  since  cursing  and  swear- 
ing are  such  evils  in  the  eyes  of  God,  that  he  doth 
not  make  some  examples  to  others,  for  their  com- 
mitting such  wickedness. 

Wise.  Alas !  so  he  has,  a  thousand  times  twice 
told,  as  may  be  easily  gathered  by  any  observing 
people  in  every  age  and  country.  I  could  present 
you  with  several  myself;  but  waving  the  abun- 
dance that  might  be  mentioned,  I  will  here  present 

Examples  of  70U  w*tu  two-  ®ne  was  tnat  dreadful 
God's  anger  judgment  of  God  upon  one  N.  P.  at 
that  swear  and  Wimbleton  in  Surrey;  who,  after  a 
curse.  horrible  fit  of  swearing  at  and  cursing 

J^»       of  some  persons  that  did  not  please 
him,  suddenly  fell  sick,  and  in  little 
time  died  raving,  cursing,  and  swearing. 

But  above  all,  take  that  dreadful  story  of 
Dorothy  Mately,  an  inhabitant  of  Ashover,  in  the 
county  of  Derby.  This  Dorothy  Mately,  saith  the 
_^  relater,  was  noted  by  the  people  of 
the  town  to  be  a  great  swearer,  and 
cursor,  and  liar,  and  thief;  just  like  Mr.  Badman. 
And  the  labour  that  she  did  usually  follow  was  to 
wash  the  rubbish  that  came  forth  of  the  lead 
mines,  and  there  to  get  sparks  of  lead  ore ;  and 
her  usual  way  of  asserting  of  things  was  with 
these  kind  of  imprecations :  I  would  I  might  sink 
into  the  earth  if  it  be  not  so;  or,  I  would  God 
would  make  the  earth  open  and  swallow  me  up. 
Now  upon  the  23d  of  March,  1G60,  this  Dorothy 
was  washing  of  ore  upon  the  top  of  a  steep  hill, 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  Ashover,  and  was 
there  taxed  by  a  lad  for  taking  of  two  single  pence 
out  of  his  pocket,  for  he  had  laid  his  breeches  by, 
and  was  at  work  in  his  drawers  ;  but  she  violently 


denied  it ;  wishing  that  the  ground  might  swallow 
her  up  if  she  had  them :  she  also  used  the  same 
wicked  words  on  several  other  occasions  that  day. 

Now  one  George  Hodgkinson,  of  Ashover,  a 
man  of  good  report  there,  came  accidentally  by 
where  this  Dorothy  was,  and  stood  still  awhile  to 
talk  with  her,  as  she  was  washing  her  ore ;  there 
stood  also  a  little  child  by  her  tub-side,  and  another 
a  distance  from  her,  calling  aloud  to  her  to  come 
away;  wherefore  the  said  George  took  the  girl  by 
the  hand  to  lead  her  away  to  her  that  called  her : 
but  behold,  they  had  not  gone  above  ten  yards 
from  Dorothy,  but  they  heard  her  crying  out  for 
help;  so  looking  back,  he  saw  the  woman,  and 
her  tub,  and  sieve  twirling  round,  and  sinking  into 
the  ground.  Then  said  the  man,  Pray  to  God  to 
pardon  thy  sin,  for  thou  are  never  like  to  be  seen 
alive  any  longer.  So  she  and  her  tub  twirled 
round  and  round,  till  they  sunk  about  three  yards 
into  the  earth,  and  then  for  a  while  staid.  Then 
she  called  for  help  again;  thinking,  as  she  said, 
she  should  stay  there.  Now  the  man,  though 
greatly  amazed,  did  begin  to  think  which  way  to 
help  her;  but  immediately  a  great  stone  which 
appeared  in  the  earth,  fell  upon  her  head,  and 
broke  her  skull,  and  then  the  earth  fell  in  upon 
her,  and  covered  her.  She  was  afterwards  digged 
up,  and  found  about  four  yards  within  ground, 
with  the  boy's  two  single  pence  in  her  pocket,  but 
her  tub  and  sieve  could  not  be  found. 

Atten.  You  bring  to  my  mind  a 
sad  story,  the  which  I  will  relate  unto 
you.  The  thing  is  this : — About  a  bow-shot  from 
where  I  once  dwelt,  there  was  a  blind  ale-house,1 
and  the  man  that  kept  it  had  a  son,  whose  name 
was  Edward.  This  Edward  was,  as  it  were,  a 
half  fool,  both  in  his  words  and  manner  of  be- 
haviour. To  this  blind  ale-house  certain  jovial 
companions  would  once  or  twice  a  week  come,  and 
this  Ned,  for  so  they  called  him,  his  father  would 
entertain  his  guests  withal;  to  wit,  by  calling 
for  him  to  make  them  sport  by  his  foolish  words 
and  gestures.  So  when  these  boon  blades  came 
to  this  man's  house,  the  father  would  call  for  Ned. 
Ned,  therefore,  would  come  forth ;  and  the  villain 
was  devilishly  addicted  to  cursing,  yea,  to  cursing 
his  father  and  mother,  and  any  one  else  that  did 
cross  him.  And  because,  though  he  was  a  half 
fool,  he  saw  that  his  practice  was  pleasing,  he 
would  do  it  with  the  more  audaciousness. 

Well,  when  these  brave  fellows  did  come  at 
their  times  to  this  tippling-house,  as  they  call  it, 
to  fuddle  and  make  merry,  then  must  Ned  be  called 
out ;  and  because  his  father  was  best  acquainted 
with  Ned,  and  best  knew  how  to  provoke  him, 


1  Out  of  public  view — obscure,  contemptible.    See  Imperial 
Dictionary. — (Ed.) 


THE  LITE  AND  DEATH  OP  MR.  BADMAN. 


605 


therefore  he  would  usually  ask  him  such  questions, 
or  command  him  such  husiness,  as  would  be  sure 
to  provoke  him  indeed.  Then  would  he,  after  his 
foolish  manner,  curse  his  father  most  bitterly ;  at 
which  the  old  man  would  laugh,  and  so  would  the 
rest  of  the  guests,  as  at  that  which  pleased  them 
best,  still  continuing  to  ask  that  Ned  still  might 
bo  provoked  to  curse,  that  they  might  still  be  pro- 
voked to  laugh.  This  was  the  mirth  with  which 
the  old  man  did  use  to  entertain  his  guests. 

The  curses  wherewith  this  Ned  did  use  to  curse 
his  father,  and  at  which  the  old  man  would  laugh, 
were  these,  and  such  like ;  the  devil  take  you — 
the  devil  fetch  you ;  he  would  also  wish  him  plagues 
and  destructions  many.  Well,  so  it  came  to  pass, 
through  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that  Ned's 
wishes  and  curses  were  in  a  little  time  fulfilled  upon 
his  father ;  for  not  many  months  passed  between 
them  after  this  manner,  but  the  devil  did  indeed 
take  him,  possess  him,  and  also  in  a  few  days  car- 
ried him  out  of  this  world  by  death ;  I  say  Satan 
did  take  him  and  possess  him ;  I  mean,  so  it  was 
judged  by  those  that  knew  him,  and  had  to  do  with 
him  in  that  his  lamentable  condition.  He  could 
feel  him  like  a  live  thing  go  up  and  down  in  his 
body ;  but  when  tormenting  time  was  come,  as  he 
had  often  tormenting  fits,  then  he  would  lie  like  an 
hard  bump  in  the  soft  place  of  his  chest,  I  mean  I 
saw  it  so,  and  so  would  rent  and  tear  him,  and  make 
him  roar  till  he  died  away. 

I  told  you  before  that  I  was  an  ear  and  eye-wit- 
ness of  what  I  here  say ;  and  so  I  was.  I  have 
heard  Ned  in  his  roguery  cursing  his  father,  and 
his  father  laughing  thereat  most  heartily  ;  still 
provoking  of  Ned  to  curse,  that  his  mirth  might 
be  increased.  I  saw  his  father  also,  when  he  was 
possessed,  I  saw  him  in  one  of  his  fits,  and  saw  his 
flesh,  as  it  was  thought,  by  the  devil  gathered  up 
on  a  heap,  about  the  bigness  of  half  an  egg,  to  the 
unutterable  torture  and  affliction  of  the  old  man. 
There  was  also  one  Freeman,  who  was  more  than 
an  ordinary  doctor,  sent  for,  to  cast  out  this  devil ; 
and  I  was  there  when  he  attempted  to  do  it ;  the 
manner  thereof  was  this : — They  had  the  possessed 
into  an  out-room,  and  laid  him  on  his  belly  upon  a 
form,  with  his  head  hanging  over  the  form's  end. 
Then  they  bound  him  down  thereto ;  which  done, 
they  set  a  pan  of  coals  under  his  mouth,  and  put 
something  therein  which  made  a  great  smoke ;  by 
this  means,  as  it  was  said,  to  fetch  out  the  devil. 
There,  therefore,  they  kept  the  man  till  he  was 
almost  smothered  in  the  smoke,  but  no  devil  came 
out  of  him  ;  at  which  Freeman  was  somewhat 
abashed,  the  man  greatly  afflicted,  and  I  made  to 
go  away  wondering  and  fearing.1     In  a  little  time, 


1  Thank  Heaven  such  enormous  brutalities  have  fled  before 
the  benign  enlightening  influence  of  the  gospel.  To  suffocate 
a  man,  iu  order  to  drive  out  an  imaginary  evil  spirit,  was  like 


therefore,  that  which  possessed  the  man,  carried 
him  out  of  the  world,  according  to  the  cursed 
wishes  of  his  son.  And  this  was  the  end  of  this 
hellish  mirth. 

Wise.  These  were  all  sad  judgments. 

Atten.  These  were  dreadful  judgments  indeed. 

Wise.  Ay,  and  they  look  like  the  threatening  of 
that  text,  though  chiefly  it  concerned  Judas,  'As 
he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  come  unto  him ;  as  he 
delighteth  not  in  blessing,  so  let  it  be  far  from  him. 
As  he  clothed  himself  with  cursing,  like  as  with  a 
garment,  so  let  it  come  into  his  bowels  like  water, 
and  like  oil  into  his  bones.'  Ps.  cix.  17,  is. 

Atten.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  for  youth  to  be 
trained  up  in  a  way  of  cursing  and  swearing. 

Wise.  Trained  up  in  them!  that  I  cannot  say 
Mr.  Badman  was,  for  his  father  hath  ofttimes  in 
my  hearing  bewailed  the  badness  of  his  children, 
and  of  this  naughty  boy  in  particular.  I  believe 
that  the  wickedness  of  his  children  made  him,  in 
the  thoughts  of  it,  go  many  a  night  with  heavy 
heart  to  bed,  and  with  as  heavy  a  one  to  rise  in  the 
morning.  But  all  was  one  to  his  graceless  son, 
neither  wholesome  counsel,  nor  fatherly  sorrow, 
would  make  him  mend  his  manners. 

There  are  some  indeed  that  do  train  up  their  chfl- 
dren  to  swear,  curse,  lie,  and  steal,    .    .        .,. 

.  A  srievrms  tiling 

and  great  is  the  misery  of  such  poor  to  bring  up  chit 
children  whose  hard  hap  it  is  to  be 
ushered  into  the  world  by,  and  to  be  under  the 
tuition  too  of  such  ungodly  parents.  It  had  been 
better  for  such  parents  had  they  not  begat  them, 
and  better  for  such  children  had  they  not  been 
born.  0 !  methinks  for  a  father  or  a  mother  to 
train  up  a  child  in  that  very  way  that  leadeth  to 
hell  and  damnation,  what  thing  so  horrible !  But 
Mr.  Badman  was  not  by  his  parents  so  brought  up. 
Atten.  But  methinks,  since  this  young  Badman 
would  not  be  ruled  at  home,  his  father  should  have 
tried  what  good  could  have  been  done  of  him  abroad, 
by  putting  him  out  to  some  man  of  his  acquaint- 
ance, that  he  knew  to  be  able  to  command  him,  and 
to  keep  him  pretty  hard  to  some  employ ;  so  should 
he,  at  least,  have  been  prevented  of  time  to  do  those 
wickednesses  that  could  not  be  done  without  time 
to  do  them  in. 

CHAPTER  III. 
[badman 's  APPRENTICESHIP  to  a  pious  master.] 

Wise.  Alas!  his  father  did  so  ;  he  put  him  out 
betimes  to  one  of  his  own  acquaintance,  B.ldman  put  to 
and  entreated  him  of  all  love  that  he  |*  ;in  appren- 
would  take  care  of  his  son,  and  keep 

the  popular  trial  for  witchcraft.  The  poor  woman,  if  cross,  and 
old,  and  ugly,  her  hands  and  legs  being  tied  together,  was 
thrown  into  deep  water;  if  she  floated,  it  was  a  proof  of  guilt 
to  hang  her,  if  she  sunk  and  was  drowned,  she  was  declared 
to  be  imiocentl! — (Ed.) 


G06 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OE  MR.  BADMAN. 


him  from  extravagant  ways.  His  trade  also  was 
honest  and  commodious ;  he  had  besides  a  full  em- 
ploy therein,  so  that  this  young  Badman  had  no 
vacant  seasons  nor  idle  hours  yielded  him  by  his 
calling,  therein  to  take  opportunities  to  do  badly ; 
but  all  was  one  to  him,  as  he  had  begun  to  be  vile 
in  his  father's  house,  even  so  he  continued  to  be 
when  he  was  iu  the  house  of  his  master. 

Attest.  I  have  known  some  children,  who,  though 
they  have  been  very  bad  at  home,  yet  have  altered 
much  when  they  have  been  put  out  abroad ;  espe- 
cially when  they  have  fallen  into  a  family  where 
the  governors  thereof  have  made  conscience  of 
maintaining  of  the  worship  and  service  of  God 
therein;  but  perhaps  that  might  be  wanting  in 
Mr.  Badman's  master's  house. 

Wise.  Indeed  some  children  do  greatly  mend 
when  put  under  other  men's  roofs ;  but,  as  I  said, 
this  naughty  boy  did  not  so ;  nor  did  his  badness 
continue  because  he  wanted  a  master  that  both 
v      -  ,  could  and  did  correct  it.      For  his 

loungBadman's 

master  and  iris  master  was  a  very  good  man,  a  very 

qualifications.       ■■  ,  ,1     ,    c  ■     i 

devout  person  ;  one  that  frequented 
the  best  soul  means,  that  set  up  the  worship  of  God 
in  his  family,  and  also  that  walked  himself  there- 
after. He  was  also  a  man  very  meek  and  merci- 
ful, one  that  did  never  over-drive  young  Badman  in 
business,  nor  that  kept  him  at  it  at  unseasonable 
hours. 

Attex.  Say  you  so !  This  is  rare.  I  for  my 
part  can  see  but  few  that  can  parallel,  in  these 
things,  with  Mr.  Badman's  master. 

Wise.  Nor  I  neither,  yet  Mr.  Badman  had  such 
A  bad  master  a  an  one;  for,  for  the  most  part,  mas- 
bad  thing.  ter3  arQ  n(W-a-days  such  as  mind 
nothing  but  their  worldly  concerns,  and  if  appren- 
tices do  but  answer  their  commands  therein,  soul 
and  religion  may  go  whither  they  will.  Yea,  I 
much  fear  that  there  have  been  many  towardly  lads 
put  out  by  their  parents  to  such  masters,  that  have 
quite  undone  them  as  to  the  next  world. 

Atten.  The  more  is  the  pity.  But,  pray,  now 
you  have  touched  upon  this  subject,  show  me  how 
many  ways  a  master  may  be  the  ruin  of  his  poor 
apprentice. 

Wise.  Nay,  I  cannot  tell  you  of  all  the  ways, 
yet  some  of  them  I  will  mention.  Suppose,  then, 
that  a  towardly  lad  be  put  to  be  an  apprentice  with 
one  that  is  reputed  to  be  a  godly  man,  yet  that  lad 
may  be  ruined  many  ways ;  that  is,  if  his  master 
be  not  circumspect  in  all  things  that  respect  both 
God  and  man,  and  that  before  his  apprentice. 

1.  If  he  be  not  moderate  in  the  use  of  his  ap- 
How  many  ways  prentice ;  if  he  drives  him  beyond  his 
bVthf  ruiTof  strength  ;  if  he  holds  him  to  work  at 
an  apprentice,  unseasonable  hours ;  if  he  will  not  allow 
him  convenient  time  to  read  the  Word,  to  pray,  &c. 
This  is  the  way  to  destroy  him ;  that  is,  in  those 


tender  beginnings  of  good  thoughts,  and  good  be- 
ginnings about  spiritual  things. 

2.  If  he  suffers  his  house  to  be  scattered  with 
profane  and  wicked  books,  such  as  stir  up  to  lust, 
to  wantonness,  such  as  teach  idle,  wanton,  lascivi- 
ous discourse,  and  such  as  have  a  tendency  to  pro- 
voke to  profane  drollery  and  jesting ;  and  lastly, 
such  as  tend  to  corrupt  and  pervert  the  doctrine  of 
faith  and  holiness.  All  these  things  will  eat  as 
doth  a  canker,  and  will  quickly  spoil,  in  youth,  &c. 
those  good  beginnings  that  may  be  putting  forth 
themselves  in  them. 

3.  If  there  be  a  mixture  of  servants,  that  is,  if 
some  very  bad  be  in  the  same  place,  that  is  a  way 
also  to  undo  such  tender  lads ;  for  they  that  are 
bad  and  sordid  servants  will  be  often,  and  they 
have  an  opportunity  too,  to  be  distilling  and 
fomenting  of  their  profane  and  wicked  words  and 
tricks  before  them,  and  these  will  easily  stick  in 
the  flesh  and  minds  of  youth,  to  the  corrupting  of 
them. 

4.  If  the  master  have  one  guise  for  abroad,  and 
another  for  home ;  that  is,  if  his  religion  hangs  by 
in  his  house  as  his  cloak  does,  and  he  be  seldom  in 
it,  except  he  be  abroad ;  this  young  children  are 
beginners  will  take  notice  of,  and  f^?  of  "what 
stumble  at.  We  say,  hedges  have  clder  folks  do- 
eyes,  and  little  pitchers  have  ears  j1  and,  indeed, 
children  make  a  greater  inspection  into  the  lives  of 
fathers,  masters,  <fcc,  than  ofttimes  they  are  aware 
of.  And  therefore  should  masters  be  careful,  else 
they  may  soon  destroy  good  beginnings  in  their 
servants. 

5.  If  the  master  be  unconscionable  in  his  deal- 
ing, and  trades  with  lying  words  ;  or  if  bad  com- 
modities be  avouched  to  be  good,  or  if  he  seeks 
after  unreasonable  gain,  or  the  like  ;  his  servant 
sees  it,  and  it  is  enough  to  undo  him.  Eli's  sons 
being  bad  before  the  congregation,  made  men  des- 
pise the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord,  l  Sa.  B. 

But  these  things,  by  the  by,  only  they  may  serve 
for  a  hint  to  masters  to  take  heed  that  they  take 
not  apprentices  to  destroy  their  souls.  But  young 
Badman  had  none  of  these  hinder-  Ba(iman  had  ^ 
ances ;  his  father  took  care,  and  pro-  advantages  to 
vided  well  for  him,  as  to  this.  He  had  continued Bad- 
a  good  master,  he  wanted  not  good  manstiU- 
books,  nor  good  instruction,  nor  good  sermons,  nor 
good  examples,  no  nor  good  fellow-servants  neither ; 
but  all  would  not  do. 

1  Parallels  to  these  important  proverbs  are  found  in  all 
languages  derived  from  the  Hebrew.  '  There  is  nothing  hid 
from  God,'  and  '  There  is  nothing  hid  that  shall  not  be  known.' 
Je.  xxxii.  Mat.  x.  In  French,  'Leo  murailles  ont  des  oreilles 
— "Walls  have  ears.'  Shakspeare,  alluding  to  a  servant  bring- 
ing in  a  pitcher,  as  a  pretence  to  enable  her  to  overhear  a 
conversation,  uses  the  proverb,  '  pitchers  have  cars  and  I  have 
many  servants.'  May  that  solemn  truth  be  impressed  upon 
every  heart,  that  however  screened  from  human  observation, 
'  Thou  God  seest  me.' — (Ed.) 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


607 


Atten.  It  is  a  wonder  that  in  such  a  family, 
amidst  so  many  spiritual  helps,  nothing  should  take 
hold  of  his  heart!  What!  not  good  hooks,  nor 
good  instructions,  nor  good  sermons,  nor  good  ex- 
amples, nor  good  fellow-servants,  nor  nothing  do 
him  good ! 

Wise.  You  talk,  he  minded  none  of  these  things  ; 
.„       ,  a  .        nav,  all  these  were  ahominahle  to  him. 

A.l  jood  tliinjs  J'  ..... 

abominable  to  1.  For  good  hooks,  they  might  lie  in 
Badman.  y^  master's  house  till  they  rotted  for 

him,  he  would  not  regard  to  look  into  them ;  hut 
contrariwise,  would  get  all  the  had  and  ahominahle 
hooks  that  lie  could,  as  heastly  romances,  and  hooks 
full  of  ribaldry,  even  such  as  immediately  tended 
to  set  all  fleshly  lusts  on  fire.1  True,  ho  durst  not 
he  known  to  have  any  of  these  to  his  master ;  there- 
fore would  he  never  let  them  he  seen  hy  him,  hut 
would  keep  them  in  close  places,  and  peruse  them 
at  such  times  as  yielded  him  fit  opportunities 
thereto. 

2.  For  good  instruction,  he  liked  that  much  as 
he  liked  good  hooks  ;  his  care  was  to  hear  hut 
little  thereof,  and  to  forget,  what  he  heard  as  soon 
as  it  was  spoken.  Yea,  I  have  heard  some  that 
knew  him  then  say,  that  one  might  evidently  dis- 
cern by  the  show  of  his  countenance  and  gestures 
r„^  ™,  „ci  t     that   c;ood  counsel  was  to  him   like 

Good  counsel  to  » 

Badman  like   little  ease,  even  a  continual  torment 

to  him  ;  nor  did  he  ever  count  himself 

at  liberty  but  when  farthest  off  of  wholesome  words. 

Pr.  xr.  12.     He  would  hate  them  that  rebuked  him, 

and  count  them  his  deadly  enemies.  Pr.  ix.  8. 

3.  For  good  example,  which  was  frequently  set 
him  hy  his  master,  both  in  religious  and  civil 
matters,  these  young  Badman  would  laugh  at, 
and  would  also  make  a  by-word  of  them  when  he 
came  in  place  where  he  with  safety  could. 

4.  His  master  indeed  would  make  him  go  with 
him  to  sermons,  and  that  where  he  thought  the 
best  preachers  were,  but  this  ungodly  young  man, 
what  shall  I  say,  was,  I  think,  a  master  of  art  in  all 
mischief,  he  had  these  wicked  ways  to  hinder  himself 
of  hearing,  let  the  preacher  thunder  never  so  loud. 
Ho^    Badman   1 .  His  way  was,  when  come  into  the 

2imse\°  at'scr-  place  of  hearing,  to  sit  down  in  some 
sons,  corner  and  then  to  fall  fast   asleep. 

2.  Or  else  to  fix  his  adulterous  eyes  upon  some 
beautiful  object  that  was  in  the  place,  and  so  all 
sermon-while  therewith  to  be  feeding  of  his  fleshly 
lusts.  3.  Or,  if  he  could  get  near  to  some  that 
he  had  observed  would  fit  his  humour,  he  would 
be  whispering,  giggling,  and  playing  with  them 
till  such  time  as  sermon  was  done. 


1  No  period  in  English  history  was  so  notorious  for  the 
publication  of  immoral  books,  calculated  to  debauch  the  mirul, 
as  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  It  must  have  been  most  painfully 
conspicuous  to  Bunyan,  who  had  lived  under  the  moral  discipline 
of  the  Commonwealth.— (Ed.) 


Atten.  Why!  he  was  grown  to  a  prodigious 
height  of  wickedness. 

Wise.  He  was  so,  and  that  which  aggravates  all 
was,  this  was  his  practice  as  soon  as  he  was  come 
to  his  master — he  was  as  ready  at  all  these  things 
as  if  he  had,  before  he  camo  to  his  master,  served 
an  apprenticeship  to  learn  them. 

Atten.  There  could  not  but  be  added,  as  you 
relate  them,  rebellion  to  his  sin.  Methinks  it  is  as 
if  he  had  said,  I  will  not  hear,  I  will  not  regard, 
I  will  not  mind  good,  I  will  not  mend,  I  will  not 
turn,  I  will  not  be  converted. 

Wise.  You  say  true,  and  I  know  not  to  whom 
more  fitly  to  compare  him  than  to  Thc  aeBperata 
that  man  who,  when  I  myself  re-      worasaforieH.S., 

.     ,      ,     ,  .  ..  .  ,      ,  .  wlio  once  was  un- 

baked   him   or  his    wickedness,  in      companion.   He 

this  great  huff  replied,  What  would     ^X<* who£ 

the  devil  do  for  company  if  it  was     fflnsead  before. 

not  for  such  as  I  ?  ~-O^T 

Atten.  Why,  did  you  ever  hear 
any  man  say  so? 

Wise.  Yes,  that  I  did,  and  this  young  Badman 
was  as  like  him  as  an  egg  is  like  an  egg.  Alas ! 
the  Scripture  makes  mention  of  many  that  by  their 
actions  speak  the  same,  •  They  say  unto  God, 
Depart  from  us,  for  we  desire  not  the  knowledge 
of  thy  ways. '  Job  xxi.  14.  Again,  '  They  refused  to 
hearken,  and  pulled  away  the  shoulder,  and  stopped 
their  ears.  Yea,  they  make  their  hearts  '  hard  '  as 
an  adamant-stone,  lest  they  should  hear  the  law, 
and  the  words  which  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent.' 
Zee.  vii.  11, 12.  What  are  all  these  but  such  as  Bad- 
man,  and  such  as  the  young  man  but  now  men- 
tioned? That  young  man  was  my  play-fellow 
when  I  was  solacing  myself  in  my  sins ;  I  may 
make  mention  of  him  to  my  shame,  but  he  has  a 
great  many  fellows. 

Atten.  Young  Badman  was  like  him  indeed,  and 
he  trod  Ids  steps  as  if  Ids  wickedness  had  been 
his  very  copy ;  I  mean  as  to  his  desperateness, 
for  had  he  not  been  a  desperate  one  he  would  never 
have  made  you  such  a  reply  when  you  was  rebuking 
of  him  for  his  sin.  But  when  did  you  give  him 
such  a  rebuke? 

Wise.  A  while  after  God  had  parted  him  and  I, 
by  calling  of  me,  as  I  hope,  by  his  grace,  still 
leaving  him  hi  his  sins ;  and  so  far  as  I  could  ever 
gather,  as  he  lived,  so  he  died,  even  as  Mr.  Bad- 
man  did ;  but  we  will  leave  him  and  return  again 
to  our  discourse. 

Atten.  Ha!  poor  obstinate  sinners !  Do  they 
think  that  God  cannot  he  even  with  them? 

Wise.  I  do  not  know  what  they  think,  but  I 
know  that  God  hath  said,  « That  as  he  cried,  aud 
they  would  not  hear;  so  they  cried  and  I  would 
not  hear,  saith  the  Lord.'  Zee.  vii.  18.  Doubtless 
there  is  a  time  coming  when  Mr.  Badman  will  cry 
for  this. 


608 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


Atten.  But  I  wonder  that  he  should  be  so  expert 
in  wickedness  so  soon !  Alas,  he  was  hut  a  strip- 
ling, I  suppose  he  was  as  yet  not  twenty. 

Wise.  No,  nor  eighteen  either;  hut,  as  with 
Ishmael,  and  with  the  children  that  mocked  the 
prophet,  the  seeds  of  sin  did  put  forth  themselves 
betimes  in  him.  Ge.  xxi.  9, 10.  2  m.  ii  23,  24. 

Atten.  Well,  he  was  as  wicked  a  young  man  as 
commonly  one  shall  hear  of. 

Wise.  You  will  say  so  when  you  know  all. 

Atten.  All,  I  think,  here  is  a  great  all ;  but  if 
there  is  more  behind,  pray  let  us  hear  it. 

Wise.  Why  then,  I  will  tell  you,  that  he  had 
not  been  with  his  master  much  above  a  year  and 
Badman's  ac-  a  half,  but  he  came  acquainted  with 
quamtance.  three  young  villains,  who  here  shall 
be  nameless,  that  taught  him  to  add  to  his  sin 
much  of  like  kind,  and  he  as  aptly  received  their 
instructions.  One  of  them  was  chiefly  given  to 
uncleanness,  another  to  drunkenness,  and  the  third 
to  purloining,  or  stealing  from  his  master. 

Atten.  Alas !  poor  wretch,  he  was  bad  enough 
before,  but  these,  I  suppose,  made  him  much 
worse. 

Wise.  That  they  made  him  worse  you  may  be 
sure  of,  for  they  taught  him  to  be  an  arch,  a  chief 
one  in  all  their  ways. 

Atten.  It  was  an  ill  hap  that  he  ever  came 
acquainted  with  them. 

Wise.  You  must  rather  word  it  thus — it  was 
the  judgment  of  God  that  he  did,  tbat  is,  he  came 
A  sign  of  God's   acquainted   with   them   through    the 

anger.  anger  of  God.  He  had  a  good  mas- 
ter, and  before  him  a  good  father;  by  these  he 
had  good  counsel  given  him  for  months  and  years 
together,  but  his  heart  was  set  upon  mischief,  he 
loved  wickedness  more  than  to  do  good,  even  until 
his  iniquity  came  to  be  hateful,  therefore,  from 
the  anger  of  God  it  was  that  these  companions  of 
his  and  be  did  at  last  so  acquaint  together.  Says 
Paul,  '  They  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge;'  and  what  follows?  wherefore  'God 
gave  them  over,'  or  up  to  their  own  hearts'  lusts. 
Ro.i.  28.  And  again,  'As  for  such  as  turn  aside 
unto  their  crooked  ways,  the  Lord  shall  lead  them 
forth  with  the  workers  of  iniquity.'  Ps.  exxv.  5.  This 
therefore  was  God's  hand  upon  him,  that  he  might 
be  destroyed,  be  damned,  « because  he  received  not 
the  love  of  the  truth  that  he  might  be  saved.'  2  Th. 
H.  10.  He  chose  his  delusions  and  deluders  for  him, 
even  the  company  of  base  men,  of  fools,  that  he 
might  be  destroyed.  Pp.  xii.  20. 

Atten.  I  cannot  but  think  indeed  that  it  is  a 
great  judgment  of  God  for  a  man  to  be  given  up 
The  devil's  de-   to  the  company  of  vile  men ;  for  what 

coys-  are  such  but  the  devil's  decoys,  even 

those  by  whom  he  draws  the  simple  into  his  net  ? 
A  whoremaster,  a  drunkard,  a  thief,  what   are 


they  but  the  devil's  baits  by  which  he  catcheth 
others? 

Wise.  You  say  right ;  hut  this  young  Badman 
was  no  simple  one,  if  by  simple  you  mean  one  unin- 
structed;  for  he  had  often  good  counsel  given  him: 
but,  if  by  simple  you  mean  him  that  is  a  fool 
as  to  the  true  knowledge  of,  and  faith  in  Christ, 
then  he  was  a  simple  one  indeed;  for  he  chose 
death  rather  than  life,  and  to  live  in  continual  oppo- 
sition to  God,  rather  than  to  be  reconciled  unto  him; 
according  to  that  saying  of  the  wise  man,  '  The  fools 
hated  knowledge,  and  did  not  choose  the  fear  of 
the  Lord. '  Pr.  i.  29.  And  what  judgment  more  dread- 
ful can  a  fool  be  given  up  to,  than  to  be  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  such  men,  that  have  skill  to  do 
nothing  but  to  ripen  sin,  and  hasten  its  finishing 
unto  damnation?  And,  therefore,  men  should  be 
afraid  of  offending  God,  because  he  can  in  this 
manner  punish  them  for  their  sins.  I  knew  a  man 
tbat  once  was,  as  I  thought,  hopefully  f 

awakened  about  his  condition  ;  yea,  "^^ 
I  knew  two  that  were  so  awakened,  but  in  time 
they  began  to  draw  back,  and  to  incline  again  to 
their  lusts ;  wherefore,  God  gave  them  up  to  the 
company  of  three  or  four  men,  that  This  was  (lone 
in  less  than  three  years'  time,  brought  at  Bedford, 
them  roundly  to  the  gallows,  where  they  were 
hanged  like  dogs,  because  they  refused  to  live  liko 
honest  men. 

Atten.  But  such  men  do  not  believe  that  thus 
to  be  given  up  of  God  is  in  judgment  and  anger  ; 
they  rather  take  it  to  be  their  liberty,  and  do  count 
it  their  happiness ;  they  are  glad  that  their  cord 
is  loosed,  and  that  the  reins  are  on  their  neck  ; 
they  are  glad  that  they  may  sin  without  control, 
and  that  they  may  choose  such  company  as  can 
make  them  more  expert  in  an  evil  way. 

Wise.  Their  judgment  is,  therefore,  so  much 
the  greater,  because  thereto  is  added  blindness  of 
mind,  and  hardness  of  heart  in  a  wicked  way. 
They  are  turned  up  to  the  way  of  death,  but  must 
not  see  to  what  place  they  are  going.  They  must 
go  as  the  ox  to  the  slaughter,  'and  as  a  fool  to  the 
correction  of  the  stocks,  till  a  dart  strike  through 
his  liver,'  not  knowing  'that  it  is  for  his  life.'  Pr. 
vii.  22,23.  This,  I  say,  makes  their  judgment  double; 
they  are  given  up  of  God  for  a  while,  to  sport  them- 
selves with  that  which  will  assuredly  make  them 
'  mourn  at  the  last,  when  their  flesh  and  their  body 
are  consumed.'  rr.  v.  11.  These  are  those  that  Peter 
speaks,  that  shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  cor- 
ruptions ;  these,  I  say,  who  '  count  it  pleasure  to 
riot  in  the  day-time,'  and  that  sport  'themselves 
with  their  own  deceivings,'  are  '  as  natural  brute 
beasts,  made  to  be  taken  and  destroyed.'  2  Pe. 
ii.  12,  13. 

Atten.  Well,  but  I  pray  now  concerning  these 
three  villains    that  were  young   Badman's  com- 


THE  LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


609 


panions  ;  tell  me  more  particularly  how  he  carried 
it  then. 

Wise.  How  he  carried  it?  why,  ho  did  as  they. 
I  intimated  so  much  before,  when  I  said  they  made 
him  an  arch,1  a  chief  one  in  their  ways. 

First,  he  became  a  frequenter  of  taverns  and 
Badman  be-  tippling-houses,  and  would  stay  there 
Sumter a<rf  te-  unt^  ^ie  was  eveu  as  drunk  as  a  beast. 
vems.  And  if  it  was  so  that  he  could  not 

get  out  by  day,  he  would,  be  sure,  get  out  by  night. 
Yea,  he  became  so  common  a  drunkard  at  last, 
that  he  was  taken  notice  of  to  be  a  drunkard  even 
by  all. 

Atten.  This  was  swinish,  for  drunkenness  is  so 
beastly  a  sin,  a  sin  so  much  against  nature,  that 
I  wonder  that  any  that  have  but  the 
J  '  appearance  of  men  can  give  up  them- 

selves to  so  beastly,  yea,  worse  than  beastly,  a 
thing. 

Wise.  It  is  a  swinish  vanity  indeed.  I  will  tell 
you  another  story.  There  was  a  gentleman  that 
A.  story  for  a  had  a  drunkard  to  be  his  groom,  and 
drunkard.  coming  home  one  night  very  much 
abused  with  beer,  his  master  saw  it.  Well,  quoth 
his  master  within  himself,  I  will  let  thee  alone  to 
night,  but  to-morrow  morning  I  will  convince  thee 
that  thou  art  worse  than  a  beast  by  the  behaviour 
of  my  horse.  So,  when  morning  was  come,  he 
bids  his  man  go  and  water  his  horse,  and  so  he  did ; 
but,  coming  up  to  his  master,  he  commands  him 
to  water  him  again ;  so  the  fellow  rode  into  the 
water  the  second  time,  but  his  master's  horse  would 
now  drink  no  more,  so  the  fellow  came  up  and  told 
his  master.  Then,  said  his  master,  thou  drunken 
sot,  thou  art  far  worse  than  my  horse ;  he  will 
drink  but  to  satisfy  nature,  but  thou  wilt  drink  to 
the  abuse  of  nature ;  he  will  drink  but  to  refresh 
himself,  but  thou  to  thy  hurt  and  damage ;  he  will 
drink  that  he  may  be  more  serviceable  to  his  mas- 
ter, but  thou  till  thou  art  incapable  of  serving 
either  God  or  man.  0  thou  beast,  how  much  art 
thou  worse  than  the  horse  that  thou  ridest  on ! 

Atten.  Truly,  I  think  that  his  master  served 
him  right;  for,  in  doing  as  he  did,  he  showed  him 
plainly,  as  he  said,  that  he  had  not  so  much  govern- 
ment of  himself  as  his  horse  had  of  himself;  and, 
consequently,  that  his  beast  did  live  more  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  his  nature  by  far  than  did  his  man. 
But,  pray,  go  on  with  what  you  have  further  to  say. 

Wise.  Why,  I  say,  that  there  are  four  things, 

which,  if  they  were  well  considered,  would  make 

.,      .     drunkenness   to   be    abhorred    in  the 
lour   evils   at- 
tend  drunken-   thoughts  of  the  clnldren  of  men.      1. 

It  greatly  tendeth  to  impoverish  and 

beggar  a  man.     'The  drunkard,'  says  Solomon, 


1  From  ao^ui  chief,  'my  worthy  arch  and  patron.' — King 
Lear;  or  from  the  Teutonic  'anr,'  a  rogue.  It  usually  denotes 
roguish,  knavish,  sly,  artful. — (Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


•  shall  come  to  poverty.'  pr.  xxiii.  21.  Many  that 
have  begun  the  world  with  plenty,  have  gono  out 
of  it  in  rags,  through  drunkenness.  Yea,  manv 
children  that  have  been  born  to  good  estates,  have 
yet  been  brought  to  a  flail  and  a  rake,  through  this 
beastly  sin  of  their  parents.  2.  This  sin  of  drunken- 
ness it  bringeth  upon  the  body  many,  great,  and 
incurable  diseases,  by  which  men  do,  in  little  time, 
come  to  their  end,  and  none  can  help  them.  So, 
because  they  are  overmuch  wicked,  therefore  they 
die  before  their  time.  Ee.  vii.17.  3.  Drunkenness  i3 
a  sin  that  is  oftentimes  attended  with  abundance 
of  other  evils.  'Who  hath  woe?  Who  hath  sorrow  ? 
Who  hath  contentions  ?  Who  hath  babbling  ? 
Who  hath  wounds  without  cause?  Who  hath  red- 
ness of  eyes?  They  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine, 
they  that  go  to  seek  mixed  wine  ;'  that  is,  the 
drunkard.  Pr.  xxiii.  23,  30.  4.  By  drunkenness,  men 
do  oftentimes  shorten  their  days ;  go  out  of  the 
ale-house  drunk,  and  break  their  necks  before  they 
come  home.  Instances,  not  a  few,  might  be  given 
of  this,  but  this  is  so  manifest  a  man  need  say 
nothing. 

Atten.  But  that  which  is  worse  than  all  is,  it 
also  prepares  men  for  everlasting  The  fifth  evil  the 
burnings.  1  Co.  vi.  10.  worsL 

Wise.  Yea,  and  it  so  stupifies  and  besots  the 
soul,  that  a  man  that  is  far  gone  in  drunkenness 
is  hardly  ever  recovered  to  God.  Tell  me,  when 
did  you  see  an  old  drunkard  converted  ?  No,  no, 
such  an  one  will  sleep  till  he  dies,  though  he  sleeps 
on  the  top  of  a  mast ;  let  his  dangers  be  never  so 
great,  and  death  and  damnation  never  so  near,  he 
will  not  be  awaked  out  of  his  sleep.  Pr.  xxiii.  zi,  33. 
So  that  if  a  man  have  any  respect  either  to  credit, 
health,  life,  or  salvation,  he  will  not  be  a  drunken 
man.  But  the  truth  is,  where  this  sin  gets  the 
upper  hand,  men  are,  as  I  said  before,  so  intoxi- 
cated and  bewitched  with  the  seeming  pleasures 
and  sweetness  thereof,  that  they  have  neither  heart 
nor  mind  to  think  of  that  which  is  better  in  itself ; 
and  would,  if  embraced,  do  them  good. 

Atten.  You  said  that  drunkenness  tends  to 
poverty,  yet  some  make  themselves  rich  by  drunken 
bargains. 

Wise.  I  said  so,  because  the  Word  says  so. 
And  as  to  some  men's  getting  thereby,  that  is  in- 
deed but  rare  and  base;  yea,  and  base  An  objection 
will  be  the  end  of  such  gettings.  The  answered. 
Word  of  God  is  against  such  ways,  and  the  curse 
of  God  will  be  the  end  of  such  doings.  An  in- 
heritance may  sometimes  thus  be  hastily  gotten  at 
the  beginning,  but  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be 
blessed.  Hark  what  the  prophet  saith,  '  Woe  to 
him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness,  that  he 
may  set  his  nest  on  high. '  Hab.  ii.  5, 9-12, 15.  Whether 
he  makes  drunkenness,  or  ought  else,  the  engine 
and  decoy  to  get  it ;  for  that  man  doth  but  con- 

77 


610 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH   OE  MR.  BADMAN. 


suit  the  shame  of  his  own  house,  the  spoiling  of 
his  family,  and  the  damnation  of  his  soul ;  for  that 
which  he  getteth  by  working  of  iniquity  is  but  a 
getting  by  the  devices  of  hell ;  therefore  he  can  be 
no  gainer  neither  for  himself  or  family,  that  gains 
by  an  evil  course.  But  this  was  one  of  the  sins 
that  Mr.  Badman  was  addicted  to  after  he  came 
acquainted  with  these  three  fellows,  nor  could  all 
that  his  master  could  do  break  him  off  this  beastly 
sin. 

Atten.  But  where,  since  he  was  but  an  appren- 
tice, could  he  get  money  to  follow  this  practice ; 
for  drunkenness,  as  you  have  intimated,  is  a  very 
costly  sin. 

Wise.  His  master  paid  for  all.  For,  as  I  told 
you  before,  as  he  learned  of  these  three  villains  to 
Badman's  mas-  be  a  beastly  drunkard,  so  he  learned 
for'ShisU1dreunkl  of  them  to  pilfer  and  steal  from  his 
enness.  master.     Sometimes  he  would  sell  off 

his  master's  goods,  but  keep  the  money,  that  is, 
when  he  could ;  also,  sometimes  he  would  beguile 
his  master  by  taking  out  of  his  cash  box ;  and  when 
he  could  do  neither  of  these,  he  would  convey  away 
of  his  master's  wares,  what  he  thought  would  be 
least  missed,  and  send  or  carry  them  to  such  and 
such  houses,  where  he  knew  they  would  be  laid  up 
to  his  use ;  and  then  appoint  set  times  there,  to 
meet  and  make  merry  with  these  fellows. 

Atten.  This  was  as  bad,  nay,  I  think,  worse 
than  the  former ;  for  by  thus  doing  he  did  not  only 
run  himself  under  the  wrath  of  God,  but  has  en- 
dangered the  undoing  of  his  master  and  his  family. 

Wise.  Sins  go  not  alone,  but  follow  one  the 
other  as  do  the  links  of  a  chain ;  he  that  will  be  a 
drunkard,  must  have  money,  either  of  his  own  or 
of  some  other  man's  ;  either  of  his  father's, 
mother's,  master's,  or  at  the  highway,  or  some  way. 

Atten.  I  fear  that  many  an  honest  man  is  un- 
done by  such  kind  of  servants. 

Wise.  I  am  of  the  same  mind  with  you,  but 
A  caution  for   this  should  make  the  dealer  the  more 

masters.        wary  wtat  j^  of  servants  fa  keep3> 

and  what  kind  of  apprentices  he  takes.  It  should 
also  teach  him  to  look  well  to  his  shop  himself; 
also  to  take  strict  account  of  all  things  that  are 
bought  and  sold  by  his  servants.  The  master's 
neglect  herein  may  embolden  his  servant  to  be  bad, 
and  may  bring  him  too  in  short  time  to  rags  and 
a  morsel  of  bread. 

Atten.  I  am  afraid  that  there  is  much  of  this 
kind  of  pilfering  among  servants  in  these  bad  days 
of  ours. 

Wise.  Now  while  it  is  in  my  mind,  I  will  tell 
t^.        you  a  story.     When  I  was  in  prison, 

jAjn  there  came  a  woman  to  me  that  was 
under  a  great  deal  of  trouble.1     So  I  asked  her, 

1  This  is  one  among  a  multitude  of  proofs  of  the  popularity 


she  being  a  stranger  to  me,  what  she  had  to  say 
to  me.  She  said  she  was  afraid  she  should  be 
damned.  I  asked  her  the  cause  of  those  fears. 
She  told  me  that  she  had,  some  time  since,  lived 
with  a  shopkeeper  at  Wellingborough,  and  had 
robbed  his  box  in  the  shop  several  times  of  money, 
to  the  value  of  more  than  now  I  will  say;  and 
pray,  says  she,  tell  me  what  I  shall  do.  I  told 
her  I  would  have  her  go  to  her  master,  and  make 
him  satisfaction.  She  said  she  wa3  afraid;  I 
asked  her,  why?  She  said,  she  doubted  he  would 
hang  her.  I  told  her  that  I  would  intercede  for 
her  life,  and  would  make  use  of  other  friends  too 
to  do  the  like ;  but  she  told  me  she  durst  not  ven- 
ture that.  Well,  said  I,  shall  I  send  to  your  master, 
while  you  abide  out  of  sight,  and  make  your  peace 
with  him,  before  he  sees  you ;  and  with  that  I 
asked  her  her  master's  name.  But  all  that  sho 
said,  in  answer  to  this,  was,  Pray  let  it  alone  till 
I  come  to  you  again.  So  away  she  went,  and 
neither  told  me  her  master's  name  nor  her  own. 
This  is  about  ten  or  twelve  years  since,  and  I  never 
saw  her  again.  I  tell  you  this  story  for  this  cause; 
to  confirm  your  fears  that  such  kind  of  servants 
too  many  there  be ;  and  that  God  makes  them 
sometimes  like  old  Tod,  of  whom  mention  was  made 
before,  through  the  terrors  that  he  lays  upon  them, 
to  betray  themselves. 

I  could  tell  you  of  another,  that  came  to  me  with 
a  like  relation  concerning  herself,  and 
the  robbing  of  her  mistress;  but  at  this 
time  let  this  suffice. 

Atten.  But  what  was  that  other  villain  addicted 
to ;  I  mean  young  Badman's  third  companion. 

Wise.  Uncleanness ;  I  told  you  be-  Badman's  tim-a 
fore,  but  it  seems  you  forgot.  "  companion  ad- 

'  J  o  dieted   to  un- 

Atten.  Bight,  it  was  uncleanness.     cleanness. 
Uncleanness  is  also  a  filthy  sin. 

Wise.  It  is  so ;  and  yet  it  is  one  of  the  most 
reigning  sins  in  our  day.2 

Atten.  So  they  say,  and  that  too  among  those 
that  one  would  think  had  more  wit,  even  among 
the  great  ones. 

Wise.  The  more  is  the  pity ;  for  usually  exam- 
ples that  are  set  by  them  that  are  great  and  chief, 
spread  sooner,  and  more  universally,  sins  of  great 
than  do  the  sins  of  other  men ;  yea,  and  meu  d™s<5ous. 
when  such  men  are  at  the  head  in  transgressing, 
sin  walks  with  a  bold  face  through  the  land.      As 


«=Gt£" 


and  high  esteem  in  which  Bunyan  was  held,  even  while  a 
prisoner  for  Christ's  sake. — (En.) 

-  Reader,  bless  God  that  you  live  in  a  happier  day  than 
that  of  Bunyan.  The  reign  of  Charles  II.  was  pre-eminently 
distinguished  fur  licentiousness  and  debauchery.  Still  there 
were  some  who  crucified  the  flesh,  with  its  lusts,  and  held 
every  obscene  word  in  detestation  and  abhorrence  ;  because  it 
is  written  '  be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy.'  Such  must  have  sorely 
dazzled  the  owls  of  debauchery.  Can  we  wonder  that  they 
tormented  and  imprisoned  them  ? — (Ed.) 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


611 


Jeremiah  saith  of  the  prophets,  so  may  it  be  said 
of  such,  'From  them  is  profancness  gone  forth  into 
all  the  land:'  that   is,    with  bold   and   audacious 

faCC.    Je.  xxiii.  15. 

Attex.  But  pray  lot  us  return  again  to  Mr. 
Badman  and  his  companions.  You  say  one  of  them 
was  very  vile  in  the  commission  of  uncleanness. 

Wtsb.  Yes,  so  I  say;  not  but  that  he  was  a 
drunkard  and  also  thievish,  but  he  was  most  arch 
in  this  sin  of  uuclcanness :  this  roguery  was  his 
masterpiece,  for  he  was  a  ringleader  to  them  all 
in  the  beastly  sin  of  whoredom.  He  was  also  best 
acquainted  with  such  houses  where  they  were,  and 
so  could  readily  lead  the  rest  of  his  gang  unto  them. 
The  strumpets  also,  because  they  knew  this  young- 
villain,  would  at  first  discover  themselves  in  all  their 
whorish  pranks  to  those  that  he  brought  with  him. 

Atten.  That  is  a  deadly  thing:  I  mean,  it  is  a 
deadly  thing  to  young  men,  when  such  beastly 
queens  shall,  with  words  and  carriages  that  are 
openly  tempting,  discover  themselves  unto  them  ; 
it  is  hard  for  such  to  escape  their  snare. 

Wise,  That  is  true,  therefore  the  wise  man's 
counsel  is  the  best :  '  Come  not  nigh  the  door  of 
her  house. '  rr.  v.  a.  For  they  are,  as  you  say,  very 
tempting,  as  is  seen  by  her  in  the  Proverbs.  '  I 
looked,'  says  the  wise  man,  '  through  my  case- 
ment, and  behold  among  the  simple  ones  I  dis- 
cerned a  young  man  void  of  understanding,  passing 
through  the  street  near  her  comer,  and  he  went 
the  way  to  her  house,  in  the  twilight,  in  the  even- 
ing, in  the  black  and  dark  night.  And,  behold, 
there  met  him  a  woman  with  the  attire  of  an  har- 
lot, and  subtle  of  heart ;  she  is  loud 
*  and  stubborn;  her  feet  abide  not  in  her 
house;  now  is  she  without,  now  in  the  streets,  and 
lieth  in  wait  at  every  corner.  So  she  caught  him, 
and  kissed  him,  and,  with  an  impudent  face,  said 
unto  him,  I  have  peace-offerings  with  me;  this  day 
have  I  paid  iny  vows.  Therefore  came  I  forth  to 
meet  thee  diligently  to  seek  thy  face,  and  I  have 
found  thee.  I  have  decked  my  bed  with  coverings 
of  tapestry,  with  carved  works,  with  fine  linen  of 
Egypt.  I  have  perfumed  my  bed  with  myrrh,  aloes, 
and  cinnamon.  Come,  let  us  take  eur  fill  of  love 
until  the  morning;  let  us  solace  ourselves  with 
loves.'  Pr.-v-n.c-is.  Here  was  a  bold  beast.  And, 
indeed,  the  very  eyes,  hands,  words,  and  ways  of 
such,  are  all  snares  and  bands  to  youthful,  lustful 
fellows.  And  with  these  was  young  Badman 
greatly  snared. 

Atten.  This  sin  of  uncleanness  is  mightily  cried 
_  .         out  against  both    by  Moses,  the  pro- 

The  sin  of  nn-  »  J  '  1 

cleanness  cned    ])kets,  Christ,   and  his  apostles ;   and 
yet,  as  we  see,  for  all  that,  how  men 
run  headlong  to  it ! 

Wise.  You  have  said  the  truth,  and  I  will  add, 
that  God,  to  hold  men  back  from  so  filthy  a  sin, 


has  set  such  a  stamp  of  his  indignation  upon  it, 
and  commanded  such  evil  effects  to  follow  it,  that, 
were  not  they  that  use  it  bereft  of  all  fear  of  God, 
and  love  to  their  own  health,  they  could  not  but 
stop  and  be  afraid  to  commit  it.  For  besides  the 
eternal  damnation  that  doth  attend  such  in  the  next 
world,  for  these  have  no  '  inheritance  in  the  king- 
dom of  Christ  and  of  God,'  Eph.  v.  5;  the  evil  effects 
thereof  in  this  world  are  dreadful. 

Atten.  Pray  show  me  some  of  them,  that  as 
occasion  offereth  itself,  I  may  show  them  to  others 
for  their  good. 

Wise.  So  I  will.  1.  It  bringeth  a  man,  as  was 
said  of  the  sin  before,  to  want  and  -what  evils  at- 
poverty ;  •  For  by  means  of  a  whorish  teud  thls  sin- 
Avoman,  a  man  is  brought  to  a  piece  of  bread.'  rr. 
vi.  26.  The  reason  is,  for  that  a  whore  will  not 
yield  without  hire ;  and  men,  when  the  devil  and 
lust  is  in  them,  and  God  and  his  fear  far  away  from 
them,  will  not  stick,  so  they  may  accomplish  their 
desire,  to  lay  their  signet,  their  bracelets,  and  their 
staff  to  pledge,  rather  than  miss  of  the  fulfilling  of 
their  lusts.  Ge.  xxxviii.  is.  2.  Again,  by  this  sin 
men  diminish  their  strength,  and  bring  upon  them- 
selves, even  upon  the  body  a  multitude  of  diseases. 
This  King  Lemuel's  mother  warned  him  of.  '  What, 
my  son?'  said  she,  'and  what  the  son  of  my  womb? 
And  what  the  son  of  my  vows?  Give  not  thy 
strength  unto  women,  nor  thy  ways  to  that  which 
destroyeth  kings.'  Pr.  xxxi.  2,  s.  This  sin  is  destruc- 
tive to  the  body.  Give  me  leave  to  - 
tell  you  another  story.  I  have  heard 
of  a  great  man  that  was  a  very  unclean  a  story  for  un- 
person, and  he  had  lived  so  long  in  that  to  take  notice 
sin  that  he  had  almost  lost  his  sight. 
So  his  physicians  were  sent  for,  to  whom  he  told 
his  disease ;  but  they  told  him  that  they  could  do 
him  no  good,  unless  he  would  forbear  his  women. 
Nay  then,  said  he,  farewell  sweet  sight.  Whence 
observe,  that  this  sin,  as  I  said,  is  destructive  to 
the  body ;  and  also,  that  some  men  be  so  in  love 
therewith,  that  they  will  have  it,  though  it  destroy 
their  body.1 

Atten.  Paul  says  also,  that  he  that  sins  this 
sin,  sins  against  his  own  body.  But  what  of  that  ? 
He  that  will  run  the  hazard  of  eternal  damnation 
of  his  soul,  but  he  will  commit  this  sin,  will  for  it 
run  the  hazard  of  destroying  his  body.  If  young 
Badman  feared  not  the  damnation  of  his  soul,  do 
you  think  that  the  consideration  of  impairing  of  his 
body  would  have  deterred  him  therefrom  ? 

Wise.  You  say  true.     But  yet,  methinks,  there 


1  How  often  is  suicide  committed  without  poison,  suffocation, 
the  knife,  or  firearms.  About  forty  years  ago  oue  of  my  neigh- 
bours «  as  told  by  his  doctor  that,  unless  he  gave  up  the  bottle, 
it  would  send  him  iuto  another  world.  He  called  his  servant 
and  ordered  wine,  Baying,  I  had  rather  die  than  give  up  all  my 
enjoyments.  In  about  sis  months  I  saw  his  splendid  funeral. 
-En.) 


G12 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


are  still  such  bad  effects  follow,  often  upon  the 
commission  of  it,  that  if  men  would  consider  them, 
it  would  put,  at  least,  a  stop  to  their  career 
therein. 

Atten.  What  other  evil  effects  attend  this  sin? 

Wise.   Outward  shame  and  disgrace,  and  that  in 
More  evils  at-   these  particulars : — 
tend  tins  sin.  First,  There  often  follows  this  foul 

sin  the  foul  disease,  now  called  by  us  the  pox. 
A  disease  so  nauseous  and  stinking,  so  infectious 
to  the  whole  body,  and  so  entailed  to  this  sin,  that 
hardly  are  any  common  with  unclean  women,  but 
they  have  more  or  less  a  touch  of  it  to  their 
shame. 

Atten.  That  is  a  foul  disease  indeed !    I  knew 

a  man  once  that  rotted  away  with  it ; 

-^®°*       and  another  that  had  his  nose  eaten 

off,  and  his  mouth  almost  quite  sewed  up  thereby. 

Wise.  It  is  a  disease,  that  where  it  is  it  com- 
monly declares  that  the  cause  thereof  is  unclean- 
ness.  It  declares  to  all  that  behold  such  a  man, 
that  he  is  an  odious,  a  beastly,  unclean  person. 
This  is  that  strange  punishment  that  Job  speaks 
of,  that  is  appointed  to  seize  on  these  workers  of 
iniquity.  Job  xxxi.  1-3. 

Atten.  Then  it  seems  you  think,  that  the  strange 
punishment  that  Job  there  speaks  of  should  be 
the  foul  disease. 

Wise.  I  have  thought  so  indeed,  and  that  for 
this  reason.  We  see  that  this  disease  is  entailed, 
as  I  may  say,  to  this  most  beastly  sin,  nor  is  there 
any  disease  so  entailed  to  any  other  sin  as  this  to 
this.  That  this  is  the  sin  to  which  the  strange 
punishment  is  entailed,  you  will  easily  perceive 
when  you  read  the  text.  'I  made  a  covenant  with 
mine  eyes,'  said  Job,  '  why  then  should  1  think 
upon  a  maid  ?  For  what  portion  of  God  is  there? 
for  that  sin,  'from  above,  and  what  inheritance  of 
the  Almighty  from  on  high  ?'  And  then  he  answers 
himself:  *  Is  not  destruction  to  the  wicked,  and  a 
strange  punishment  to  the  workers  of  iniquity?' 
This  strange  punishment  is  the  pox.  Also,  I  think 
that  this  foul  disease  is  that  which  Solomon  intends 
when  he  saith,  speaking  of  this  unclean  and  beastly 
creature,  '  A  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he  get, 
and  his  reproach  shall  not  be  wiped  away. '  rr.  vi.  33. 
A  punishment  Job  calls  it ;  a  wound  and  dishonour 
Solomon  calls  it;  and  they  both  do  set  it  as  a  remark 
upon  this  sin;  Job  calling  it  a  '  strange  punishment,' 
and  Solomon  a  '  reproach  that  shall  not  be  wiped 
away,'  from  them  that  are  common  in  it. 

Atten.  What  other  things  follow  upon  the  com- 
mission of  this  beastly  sin  ? 

Wise.  Why,  oftentimes  it  is  attended  with 
murder,  with  the  murder  of  the  babe  begotten  on 
the  defiled  bed.  How  common  it  is  for  the  bas- 
tard-getter and  bastard-bearer  to  consent  together 
to  murder  their  children,  will  be  better  known  at 


the  day  of  judgment,  yet  something  is  manifest 
now. 

I  will  tell  you  another  story.  An  ancient  man, 
one  of  mine  acquaintance,  a  man  of  good  credit  in 
our  country,  had  a  mother  that  was  a  r 

midwife,  who  was  mostly  employed  in  "°^*^ 
laying  great  persons.  To  this  woman's  house, 
upon  a  time,  comes  a  brave  young  gallant  on  horse- 
back, to  fetch  her  to  lay  a  young  lady.  So  she 
addresses  herself  to  go  with  him,  wherefore  he 
takes  her  up  behind  him,  and  away  they  ride  in 
the  night.  Now  they  had  not  rid  far,  but  the 
gentleman  litt  off  his  horse,  and,  taking  the  old 
midwife  in  his  arms  from  the  horse,  turned  round 
with  her  several  times,  and  then  set  her  up  again, 
then  he  got  up  and  away  they  went  till  they  came 
at  a  stately  house,  into  which  he  had  her,  and  so 
into  a  chamber  where  the  young  lady  was  in  her 
pains.  He  then  bid  the  midwife  do  her  office, 
and  she  demanded  help,  but  he  drew  out  his  sword, 
and  told  her  if  she  did  not  make  speed  to  do  her 
office  without,  she  must  look  for  nothing  but  death. 
Well,  to  be  short,  this  old  midwife  laid  the  young 
lady,  and  a  fine  sweet  babe  she  had.  Now  there 
was  made  in  a  room  hard  by  a  very  great  fire ;  so 
the  gentleman  took  up  the  babe,  went  and  drew 
the  coals  from  the  stock,  cast  the  child  in  and 
covered  it  up,  and  there  was  an  end  of  that.  So 
when  the  midwife  had  done  her  work  he  paid  her 
well  for  her  pains,  but  shut  her  up  in  a  dark  room 
all  day,  and  when  night  came  took  her  up  behind 
him  again,  and  carried  her  away  till  she  came 
almost  at  home,  then  he  turned  her  round  and 
round  as  he  did  before,  and  had  her  to  her  house, 
set  her  down,  bid  her  farewell,  and  away  he  went, 
and  she  could  never  tell  who  it  was.  This  story 
the  midwife's  son,  who  was  a  minister,  told  me, 
and  also  protested  that  his  mother  told  it  him  for 
a  truth. 

Atten.  Murder  doth  often  follow  indeed,  as  that 
which  is  the  fruit  of  this  sin.  But  sometimes  God 
brings  even  these  adulterers  and  adulteresses  to 
shameful  ends.     I  heard  of  one,  I  think  r 

a  doctor  of  physic,  and  his  whore,  who 
had  three  or  four  bastards  betwixt  them  and  had 
murdered  them  all,  but  at  last  themselves  were 
hanged  for  it,  in  or  near  to  Colchester.  It  came 
out  after  this  manner, — the  whore  was  so  afflicted 
in  her  conscience  about  it  that  she  could  not  be 
quiet  until  she  had  made  it  known.  Thus  God 
many  times  makes  the  actors  of  wickedness  their 
own  accusers,  and  brings  them,  by  their  own 
tongues,  to  condign  punishment  for  their  own  sins. 

Wise.  There  has  been  many  such  instances,  but 
we  will  let  that  pass.  I  was  once  in  the  presence 
of  a  woman,  a  married  woman,  that  lay  sick  of  the 
sickness  whereof  she  died,  and  being  smitten  in 
her  conscience  for  the  sin  of  uncleanness,  which 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


613 


$&• 


she  had  often  committed  with  other  men,  I  heard 
her,  as  she  lay  upon  her  bed,  cry  out 
thus,  I  am  a  whore,  and  all  my  chil- 
dren are  bastards,  and  I  must  go  to  hell  for  my 
sin,  and  look,  there  stands  the  devil  at  my  bed's 
feet  to  receive  my  soul  when  I  die. 

Atten.  These  are  sad  stories,  tell  no  more  of 
them  now,  but  if  you  please  show  me  yet  some 
other  of  the  evil  effects  of  this  beastly  sin. 

Wise.  This  sin  is  such  a  snare  to  the  soul,  that, 
unless  a  miracle  of  grace  prevents,  it  unavoidably 
perishes  in  the  enchanting  and  bewitching  pleasures 
of  it.  This  is  manifest  by  these  and  such  like 
texts — *  The  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the  precious 
life.'  Pr.  vi.  2G.  '  Whoso  committeth  adultery  with  a 
woman  lacketh  understanding.  He  tliat  doeth  it 
destroyeth  his  own  soul. '  Pr.vi.32.  'A  whore  is  a  deep 
ditch,  and  a  strange  woman  is  a  narrow  pit.'  Pr.xxm. 
27.  •  Her  house  inclineth  unto  death,  and  her  paths 
unto  the  dead.  None  that  go  unto  her  return 
again,  neither  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  life.' 
Pr.  H.  is,  19.  '  She  hath  cast  down  many  wounded ; 
yea,  many  strong  men  have  been  slain  by  her. 
Her  house  is  the  way  to  hell,  going  down  to  the 
chambers  of  death. '  Pr.  vii.  26,  27. 

Atten.  These  are  dreadful  sayings,  and  do 
show  the  dreadful  state  of  those  that  are  guilty  of 
this  sin. 

Wise.  Verily  so  they  do.  But  yet  that  which 
makes  the  whole  more  dreadful  is,  that  men  are 
given  up  to  this  sin  because  they  are  abhorred  of 
God,  and  because  abhorred,  therefore  they  shall 
fall  into  the  commission  of  it,  and  shall  live  there. 
1  The  mouth, '  that  is,  the  flattering  lips,  '  of 
strange  women  is  a  deep  pit,  he  that  is  abhorred 
of  the  Lord  shall  fall  therein. '  Pr.  xxu.  14.  There- 
fore it  saith  again  of  such,  that  they  have  none 
'  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God.' 
Ep.  v.  5. 

Atten.  Put  all  together,  and  it  is  a  dreadful 
thing  to  live  and  die  in  this  transgression. 

Wise.  True,  but  suppose  that  instead  of  all 
these  judgments  this  sin  had  attending  of  it  all 
the  felicities  of  this  life,  and  no  bitterness,  shame, 
or  disgrace  mixed  with  it,  yet  one  hour  in  hell  will 
spoil  all.  0!  this  hell,  hell-fire,  damnation  in 
hell,  it  is  such  an  inconceivable  punishment  that, 
were  it  but  thoroughly  believed,  it  would  nip  this 
sin,  with  others,  in  the  head.  But  here  is  the 
mischief,  those  that  give  up  themselves  to  these 
things  do  so  harden  themselves  in  unbelief  and 
atheism  about  the  things,  the  punishments  that 
God  hath  threatened  to  inflict  upon  the  committers 
of  them,  that  at  last  they  arrive  to  almost  an  ab- 
solute and  firm  belief  that  there  is  no  judgment  to 
come  hereafter ;  else  they  would  not,  tbey  could 
not,  no  not  attempt  to  commit  this  sin  by  such 
abominable  language  as  some  do. 


I  heard  of  one  that  should  say  to  his  miss  when 
he  tempted  her  to  the  committing  of  ,r 

this  sin,  If  thou  wilt  venture  thy  body  ™ 

I  will  venture  my  soul.    And  I  myself 
heard  another  say,  when  he  was  tempt-   Dcspcrate  worfs- 
ing  of  a  maid  to  commit  uncleanness  with  him — 
it  was  in  Oliver's   days — that    if  she  did    prove 
with  child  he  would  tell  her  how  she  might  escape 
punishment — and  that  was  then  somewhat  severe 
— Say,  saith  he,  when  you  come  before        r^r 
the  judge,  that  you  are  with  child  by      ""s*5^ 
the   Holy  Ghost.      I  heard  him  say  thus,  and  it 
greatly  afflicted  me ;  I  had  a  mind  to  have  accused 
him  for  it  before  some  magistrate,  but  he  was  a 
great  man,  and  I  was  poor  and  young,  so  I  let  it 
alone,  but  it  troubled  me  very  much. 

Atten.  It  was  the  most  horrible  thing  that  ever 
I  heard  in  my  life.  But  how  far  off  are  these  men 
from  that  spirit  and  grace  that  dwelt  in  Joseph. 

Ge.  xxxix.  10. 

Wise.  Right ;  when  Joseph's  mistress  tempted 
him,  yea,  tempted  him  daily,  yea,  she  of  chaste  Jo- 
laid  hold  on  him  and  said,  with  her  scph" 
whore's  forehead,  Come,  'lie  with  ruie,'  but  he 
refused ;  he  hearkened  not  to  lie  with  her  or  to 
be  with  her.  Mr.  Badman  would  have  taken  the 
opportunity. 

And  a  little  to  comment  upon  this  of  Joseph. 
1.  Here  is  a  miss,  a  great  miss,  the  wife  of  the 
captain  of  the  guard,  some  beautiful  dame  I'll 
warrant  you.  2.  Here  is  a  miss  won,  and  in  her 
whorish  affections  come  over  to  Joseph  without 
his  speaking  of  a  word.  3.  Here  is  her  unclean 
desire  made  known,  Come,  'lie  with  me,'  said  she. 
4.  Here  was  a  fit  opportunity,  there  was  none  of 
the  men  of  the  house  there  within.  5.  Joseph 
was  a  young  man,  full  of  strength,  and  therefore 
the  more  in  danger  to  be  taken.  6.  This  was  to 
him  a  temptation  from  her  that  lasted  days.  7. 
And  yet  Joseph  refused,  (1.)  Her  daily  temptation; 
(2.)  Her  daily  solicitation ;  (3.)  Her  daily  provo- 
cation, heartily,  violently,  and  constantly.  For 
when  she  got  him  by  the  garment,  saying,  '  Lie 
with  me,'  he  left  his  garment  in  her  hand  and  gat 
him  out.  Ay,  and  although  contempt,  treachery, 
slander,  accusation,  imprisonment,  and  danger  of 
death  followed — for  a  whore  careth  not  what  mis- 
chief she  does  when  she  cannot  have  her  end — yet 
Joseph  will  not  defile  himself,  sin  against  God,  and 
hazard  his  own  eternal  salvation. 

Atten.  Blessed  Joseph !  I  would  thou  hadst 
more  fellows ! 

Wise.  Mr.  Badman  has  more  fellows  than 
Joseph,  else  there  would  not  be  so  many  whores 
as  there  are ;  for  though  I  doubt  not  but  that  that 
sex  is  bad  enough  this  way,  yet  I  verily  believe 
that  many  of  them  are  made  whores  at  first  by  the 
flatteries  of  Badman's  fellows.      Alas!    there  is 


6U 


THE  LIFE  A*T)  DEATH  OE  MR.  BADMAN. 


many  a  woman  plunged  into  this  sin  at  first  even 
Mauy  are  made  by  promises  of  marriage.  I  say  by 
protises^  lof  these  promises  they  are  flattered,  yea, 
marriage.  forced  into  a  consenting  to  these 
villainies,  and  so  being  in,  and  growing  hardened 
in  their  hearts,  they  at  last  give  themselves  up, 
even  as  wicked  men  do,  to  act  this  kind  of  wicked- 
ness with  greediness.1  But  Joseph  you  see,  was 
of  another  mind,  for  the  fear  of  God  was  in  him. 

I  will,  before  I  leave  this,  tell  you  here  two 
notable  stories ;  and  I  wish  Mr.  Badman's  com- 
panions may  hear  of  them.  They  are  found 
in  Clark's  Looldng-glass  for  Sinners;  and  are 
these: — Mr.  Cleaver,  says  Mr.  Clark,  reports  of 
ChxVsLooiintj-  one  whom  he  knew  that  had  com- 
nersS.—0ciu'ii.  mitted  the  act  of  nncleanness,  where- 
P- 13-  upon  he  fell  into  such  horror  of  con- 

science that  he  hanged  himself,  leaving  it  thus 
written  in  a  paper: — 'Indeed,'  saith  he,  'I  do 
acknowledge  it  to  be  utterly  unlawful  for  a  man 
to  kill  himself,  but  I  am  bound  to  act  the  magis- 
trate's part,  because  the  punishment  of  this  sin  is 
death.' 

Clark  doth  also,  in  the  same  page,  make  men- 
tion of  two  more,  who,  as  they  were  committing 
adultery  in  London,  were  immediately  struck  dead 
with  fire  from  heaven,  in  the  very  act.  Their 
bodies  were  so  found,  half  burned  up,  and  sending 
out  a  most  loathsome  savour. 

Atten.  These  are  notable  stories  indeed. 

Wise.  So  they  are,  and  I  suppose  they  are  as 
true  as  notable. 

Atte>\  Well,  but  I  wonder  if  young  Badman's 
master  knew  him  to  be  such  a  wretch,  that  he 
would  suffer  him  in  his  house. 

Wise.  They  liked  one  another  even  as  fire  and 

Badman  and  his  water  d?«  YomS  Badman's  ways 
master  abhor  were  odious  to  his  master,  and  his 

one  another.  ,  , 

master  s  ways  were  such  as  young 
Badman  could  not  endure.  Thus,  in  these  two, 
were  fulfilled  that  saying  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  'An 
unjust  man  is  an  abomination  to  the  just ;  and  he 
that  is  upright  in  the  way  is  an  abomination  to  the 
wicked.'  rr.  xxix.  27.  The  good  man's  ways,  Mr. 
Badman  could  not  abide,  nor  could  the  good  man 
abide  the  bad  ways  of  his  base  apprentice.  Yet 
would  his  master,  if  he  could,  have  kept  him,  and 
also  have  learned  him  his  trade. 

Atten.  If  he  could!  Why,  he  might,  if  he 
would,  might  he  not  ? 

Wise.  Alas,  Badman  ran  away  from  him  once 

Young  Badman    and   twice'    aud    WOuld    not   at   *&  be 

runswayiiom  ruled.     So  the  next  time  he  did  run 
away  from  him,  he  did  let  him  go  in- 


1  The  remorse  and  stings  of  conscience  seducers  will  feel 
in  the  next  life,  for  being  the  instruments  of  so  much  wicked- 
ness and  desolation  in  others,  will  prove  to  them  a  thousand 
hells. — (Mason.) 


deed.  For  he  gave  him  no  occasion  to  run  away, 
except  it  was  by  holding  of  him  as  much  as  he 
could,  and  that  he  could  do  but  little,  to  good  and 
honest  rules  of  life.  And  had  it  been  one's  own 
case,  one  should  have  let  him  go.  For  what  should 
a  man  do  that  had  either  regard  to  his  own  peace, 
his  children's  good,  or  the  preservation  of  the  rest 
of  his  servant's  from  evil,  but  let  him  go?  Had 
he  staid,  the  house  of  correction  had  been  most  fit 
for  him,  but  thither  his  master  was  loth  to  send 
him,  because  of  the  love  that  he  bore  to  his  father. 
A  house  of  correction,  I  say,  had  been  the  fittest 
place  for  him,  but  his  master  let  him  go. 

Attex.  He  ran  away,  you  say,  but  vrhither  did 
he  run? 

CHAPTER  IV. 
[he  gets  a  NEW  master  bad  as  himself.] 

Wise.  Why,  to  one  of  his  own  trade,  and  also 

like  himself.    Thus  the  wicked  joined  „ 

•  ll  1  He  §ets  a  new 

hand  in  hand,  and  there  he  served  out    masteriikehim- 

,  .     ,.  self. 

his  time. 

Atten.  Then,  sure,  he  had  his  heart's  desire 
when  he  was  with  one  so  like  himself. 

Wise.  Yes,  so  he  had,  but  God  gave  it  him  in 
his  anger. 

Attex.  How  do  you  mean? 

Wise.  I  mean  as  before,  that  for  a  wicked  man 
to  be  by  the  providence  of  God  turned  A  .  n  of  Gofl,a 
out  of  a  good  man's  doors,  into  a  wicked    anger      npon 

,    ,  Lin-  •  r  .i         young  Badman. 

man  s  house  to  dwell,  is  a  sign  of  the 
anger  of  God.  For  God  by  this,  and  such  judg- 
ments, says  thus  to  such  an  one.  Thou  wicked 
one,  thou  lovest  not  me,  my  ways,  nor  my  people ; 
thou  castest  my  law  and  good  counsel  behind  thy 
back.  Come,  I  will  dispose  of  thee  in  my  wrath ; 
thou  shalt  be  turned  over  to  the  ungodly,  thou  shalt 
be  put  to  school  to  the  devil,  I  will  leave  thee  to 
sink  and  swim  in  sin,  till  I  shall  visit  thee  with 
death  and  judgment.  This  was,  therefore,  another 
judgment  that  did  come  upon  this  young  Badman. 

Attest.  You  have  said  the  truth,  for  God  by 
such  a  judgment  as  this,  in  effect  says  so  indeed ; 
for  he  takes  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  just,  and 
binds  them  up  in  the  hand  of  the  wicked,  and  whi- 
ther they  then  shall  be  carried  a  man  may  easily 
imagine, 

Wise.  It  is  one  of  the  saddest  tokens  of  God's 
anger  that  happens  to  such  kind  of  Demonstration 
persons :  and  that  for  several  reasons,     of  God's  anger 

i      ~,      ,  ,        , ,  .      .     ,  ,      .        towards  him. 

1.  Such  a  one,  by  this  judgment,  is 
put  out  of  the  way,  and  from  under  the  means 
which  ordinarily  are  made  use  of  to  do  good  to  the 
soul.  For  a  family,  where  godliness  is  professed, 
and  practised,  is  God's  ordinance,  the  place  which 
he  has  appointed  to  teach  young  ones  the  way  and 
fear  of  God.  Ge.  »u  is,  19.     Now,  to  be  put  out  of 


THE   LIFE   AXD   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


61! 


such  a  family,  into  a  Lad,  a  wicked  one,  as  Air. 
Badman  was,  must  needs  be  in  judgment,  and  a 
sign  of  the  anger  of  God.  For  in  ungodly  families 
men  learn  to  forget  God,  to  hate  goodness,  and  to 
estrange  themselves  from  the  ways  of  those  that 
are  good.1  2.  In  Lad  families  they  have  continu- 
ally fresh  examples,  and  also  incitements  to  evil, 
and  fresh  encouragements  to  it  too.  Yea,  more- 
over, in  such  places  evil  is  commended,  praised, 
well-spoken  of,  and  they  that  do  it  are  applauded ; 
and  this,  to  he  sure,  is  a  drowning  judgment. 
3.  Such  places  are  the  very  haunts  and  walks  of 
the  infernal  spirits,  who  are  continually  poisoning 
the  cogitations  and  minds  of  one  or  other  in  such 
families,  that  they  may  be  able  to  poison  others. 
Therefore  observe  it,  usually  in  wicked  families, 
some  one  or  two  are  more  arch  for  wickedness  than 
are  any  other  that  are  there.  Now  such  are  Satan's 
conduit  pipes,  for  by  them  he  conveys  of  the  spawn 
of  hell,  through  their  being  crafty  in  wickedness, 
into  the  ears  and  souls  of  then-  companions.  Yea, 
and  when  they  have  once  conceived  wickedness, 
they  travail  with  it,  as  doth  a  woman  with  child, 
till  they  have  brought  it  forth  ;  '  Behold,  he  tra- 
vaileth  with  iniquity,  and  hath  conceived  mischief, 
and  brought  forth  falsehood.'  Ps.  ml  u.  Some  men, 
as  here  is  intimated  in  the  text,  and  as  was  hinted 
also  before,  have  a  kind  of  mystical  but  hellish 
copulation  with  the  devil,  who  is  the  father,  and 
their  soul  the  mother  of  sin  and  wickedness ;  and 
they,  so  soon  as  they  have  conceived  by  him,  finish, 
by  bringing  forth  sin,  both  it  and  their  own  damna- 
tion.   Ja.  i.  15. 

Attex.  How  much  then  doth  it  concern  those 
it  concerns  par-  parents  that  love  their  children,  to  see, 
^tort£  that  if  they  go  from  them,  they  be  put 
good  families.  jnto  g^  families  as  be  good,  that  they 
may  learn  there  betimes  to  eschew  evil,  and  to  fol- 
low that  which  is  good ! 

Wise.  It  doth  concern  them  indeed ;  and  it  doth 
Masters  should  also  concern  them  that  take  children 
what  servants  mto  their  families,  to  take  heed  what 
they  entertam.  cliildi-en  they  receive.  For  a  man  may 
soon,  by  a  bad  boy,  be  damaged  both  in  his  name, 
estate,  and  family,  and  also  hindered  in  his  peace 
and  peaceable  pursuit  after  God  and  godliness  ;  I 
say,  by  one  such  vermin  as  a  wicked  and  filthy  ap- 
prentice. 

Atten.  True,  for  one  sinner  destroyeth  much 
good,  and  a  poor  man  is  better  than  a  liar.  But 
many  times  a  man  cannot  help  it ;  for  such  as  at 
the  beginning  promise  very  fair  are  by  a  little  time 
proved  to  be  very  rogues,  like  young  Badman. 
Wise.  That  is  true  also ;  but  when  a  man  has 


1  Ungodly,  Christless,  prayerlcss  families  are  little  hells — 
filthy  fountains,  whose  waters  east  up  mire  and  dirt ;  they  are 
the  hlind  and  willing  captives  of  sin  and  Satan,  going  down  to 
the  chambers  of  death  and  endless  despair. — (Ed.) 


done  the  best  he  can  to  help  it,  he  may  with  the 
more  confidence  expect  the  blessing  of  God  to  fol- 
low, or  he  shall  have  the  more  peace  if  things  go 
contrary  to  his  desire. 

Atten.  Well,  but  did  Mr.  Badman  and  his 
master  agree  so  well?  I  mean  his  last  master, 
since  they  were  birds  of  a  feather,  I  mean  since 
they  were  so  well  met  for  wickedness. 

Wise.  This  second  master  was,  as  before  I  told 
you,  bad  enough ;  but  yet  he  would   Young  Badman 
often  faU  out  with  young  Badman,  his     ££g  ^ 
servant,  and  chide,  yea  and  sometimes     asree- 
beat  him  too,  for  his  naughty  doings. 

Attex.  What!  for  all  he  was  so  bad  himself! 
This  is  like  the  proverb,  The  devil  corrects  vice. 

Wise.  I  will  assure  you  it  is  as  I  say.  For  you 
must  know  that  Badnian's  ways  suited  not  with 
his  master's  gains.  Could  he  have  done  as  the 
damsel  that  we  read  of,  Ac  zri.  16,  did,  to  wit,  fill 
his  master's  purse  with  his  badness,  he  had  cer- 
tainly been  his  white-boy,  but  it  was  not  so  with 
young  Badman ;  and,  therefore,  though  his  master 
and  he  did  suit  well  enough  in  the  main,  yet  in  this 
and  that  point  they  differed.  Young  Reasons  of  their 
Badman  was  for  neglecting  of  his  ^agreeing, 
master's  business,  for  going  to  the  whore-house, 
for  beguiling  of  his  master,  for  attempting  to  de- 
bauch his  daughters,  and  the  like.  No  marvel 
then  if  they  disagreed  in  these  points.  Not  so  much 
for  that  his  master  had  an  antipathy  against  the 
fact  itself,  for  he  could  do  so  when  he  was  an  ap- 
prentice ;  but  for  that  his  servant  by  his  sin  made 
spoil  of  his  commodities,  &c,  and  so  damnified  his 
master. 

Had,  as  I  said  before,  young  Badman' s  wicked- 
ness had  only  a  tendency  to  his  master's  advan- 
tage, as  coidd  he  have  sworn,  bed,  cozened,  cheated, 
and  defrauded  customers  for  his  master — and  indeed 
sometimes  he  did  so — but  had  that  been  all  that  he 
had  done,  he  had  not  had,  no,  not  a  wry  word  from 
his  master ;  but  this  was  not  always  Mr.  Badnian's 
way. 

ArfEN.  That  was  well  brought  in,  even  the  maid 
that  we  read  of  in  the  Acts,  and  the  distinction  was 
as  clear  betwixt  the  wickedness  and  wickedness  of 
servants. 

Wise.  Alas !  men  that  are  wicked  themselves, 
yet  greatly  hate  it  in  others,  not  simply  because  it 
is  wickedness,  but  because  it  opposeth  their  interest. 
Do  you  think  that  that  maid's  master  would  have 
been  troubled  at  the  loss  of  her,  if  he  had  not  lost, 
with  her,  his  gain?  No,  I'll  warrant  you;  she 
might  have  gone  to  the  devil  for  him ;  but^ '  when 
her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gains  was 
gone,'  then,  then  he  fell  to  persecuting  Paul. 
Ac.  sri.  17-20.  But  Mr.  Badman's  master  did  some- 
times lose  by  Mr.  Badman's  sins,  and  then  Bad- 
man  and  his  master  were  at  odds. 


G1C 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


Atten.  Alas,  poor  Badman!  Then  it  eeems 
thou  couldest  not  at  all  times  please  thy  like. 

Wise.  No,  he  could  not,  and  the  reason  I  have 
told  you. 

Atten.  But  do  not  bad  masters  condemn  them- 
selves in  condemning  the  badness  of  their  servants  ? 

Wise.  Yes ;  in  that  they  condemn  that  in  an- 
other which  they  either  have,  or  do  allow  in  them- 
selves. Ko.  xiv.  22.  And  the  time  will 
demnaS  ^hem-   come  when  that  very  sentence  that  hath 

they  \or  "bad-  gone  out  of  tueir  0Yfn  moutus  against 
ness  beat  their  the  sins  of  others,  themselves  living 
and  taking  pleasure  in  the  same,  shall 
return  with  violence  upon  their  own  pates.  The 
Lord  pronounced  judgment  against  Baasha,  as  for 
all  his  evils  in  general,  so  for  this  in  special,  be- 
cause he  was  'like  the  house  of  Jeroboam  and'  yet 
'killed  him.'  iKi.  xvi.  i.  This  is  Mr.  Badman's 
master's  case ;  he  is  like  his  man,  and  yet  he  beats 
him.  He  is  like  his  man,  and  yet  he  rails  at  him 
for  being  bad. 

Atten.  But  why  did  not  young  Badman  run 
away  from  this  master,  as  he  ran  away  from  the 
other? 

Wise.  He  did  not.  And  if  I  be  not  mistaken, 
the  reason  why  was  this.  There  was  godliness  in 
the  house  of  the  first,  and  that  young  Badman 
could  not  endure.  For  fare,  for  lodging,  for  work, 
and  time,  he  had  better,  and  more  by  this  master's 
allowance,  than  ever  he  had  by  his  last ; 
man  did  not  nm  but  all  this  would  not  content,  because 
SeSouS  godliness  was  promoted  there.  He 
he^  did  beat  could  not  abide  this  praying,  this  read- 
ing of  Scriptures,  and  hearing,  and 
repeating  of  sermons ;  he  could  not  abide  to  be 
told  of  his  transgressions  in  a  sober  and  godly 
manner. 

Atten.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  manner  of 
reproof ;  wicked  men  both  can  and  cannot  abide  to 
hear  their  transgressions  spoken  against. 

Wise.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  difference  indeed. 

This  last  master  of  Mr.  Badman's  would  tell  Mr. 

_  ,         Badman  of  his  sins  in  Mr.  Badman's 

Why     Badman  ,.   .  , 

could  bear  his  own  dialect ;  he  would  swear,  and 
raeproofUbScttet1ei-  curse>  aild  damn,  when  he  told  him  of 
the  fu'st could  his  sins,  and  this  he  could  bear  better, 
than  to  be  told  of  them  after  a  godly 
sort.  Besides,  that  last  master  would,  when  his 
passions  and  rage  were  over,  laugh  at  and  make 
merry  with  the  sins  of  his  servant  Badman ;  and 
that  would  please  young  Badman  well.  Nothing 
offended  Badman  but  blows,  and  those  he  had  but 
few  of  now,  because  he  was  pretty  well  grown  up. 
For  the  most  part  when  his  master  did  rage  and 
swear,  he  would  give  him  oath  for  oath,  and  curse 
for  curse,  at  least  secretly,  let  him  go  on  as  long- 
as  he  would. 

Atten.  This  was  hellish  livincr. 


Badman  out 
lus  time. 


He  goes  home 
to  Ms  father. 


Wise.  It  was  hellish  living  indeed ;  and  a  man 
might  say,  that  with  this  master,  young  By  what  n,eans 
Badman  completed  himself  yet  more  ^eeom  Sd 
and  more  in  wickedness,  as  well  as  in  in  wickedness. 
hi3  trade:  for  by  that  he  came  out  of  his  time, 
what  with  his  own  inclination  to  sin,  what  with  his 
acquaintance  with  his  three  companions,  and  what 
with  this  last  master,  and  the  wickedness  he  saw 
in  him ;  he  became  a  sinner  in  grain.1  I  think  he 
had  a  bastard  laid  to  his  charge  before  he  came 
out  of  his  time. 

Atten.  Well,  but  it  seems  he  did 
live  to  come  out  of  his  time,  but  what 
did  he  then  ? 

Wise.  Why,  he  went  home  to  his 
father,  and  he,  like  a  loving  and  tender- 
hearted father,  received  him  into  his  house. 

Atten.  And  how  did  he  carry  it  there  ? 

Wise.  Why,  the  reason  why  he  went  home,  was. 
for  money  to  set  up  for  himself;  he  stayed  hut  a 
little  at  home,  but  that  little  while  that  Herefrainshim- 
he  did  stay,  he  refrained  himself  as  self  for  money. 
well  as  he  could,  and  did  not  so  much  discover 
himself  to  be  base,  for  fear  his  father  should  take 
distaste,  and  so  should  refuse,  or  for  a  while  for- 
bear to  give  him  money.  Yet  even  then  he  would 
have  his  times,  and  companions,  and  the  fill  of  his 
lusts  with  them,  but  he  used  to  blind  all  with  this, 
he  was  glad  to  see  his  old  acquaintance,  and  they 
as  glad  to  see  him,  and  he  could  not  in  civility  but 
accommodate  them  with  a  bottle  or  two  of  wine,  or 
a  dozen  or  two  of  drink. 

CHAPTER  V. 

[BADMAN  IN  BUSINESS,  THE  TRICKS  0"  A  WICKED 
TRADESMAN.] 

Atten.  And  did  the  old  man  give  him  money  to 
set  up  with  ? 

Wise.  Yes,  above  two  hundred  pounds. 

Atten.  Therein,  I  think,  the  old  man  was  out. 
Had  I  been  his  father,  I  would  have  held  him  a 
little  at  staves-end,  till  I  had  had  far  better  proof 
of  his  manners  to  be  good ;  for  I  perceive  that  his 
father  did  knoAV  what  a  naughty  boy  severity,  what 
he  had  been,  both  by  what  he  used  to  il  ****** t0- 
do  at  home,  and  because  he  changed  a  good  mas- 
ter for  a  bad,  &c.  He  should  not  therefore  have 
given  him  money  so  soon.  What  if  he  had  pinched 
a  little,  and  gone  to  journey-work  for  a  time,  that 
he  might  have  known  what  a  penny  was,  by  his 
earning  of  it  ?  Then,  in  all  probability,  he  had 
known  better  how  to  have  spent  it:  yea,  and  by 
that  time  perhaps,  have  better  considered  with 
himself,  how  to  have   lived  in   the  world.      Ay, 


1  '  In  grain/  material  dyed  before  it  is  manufactured,  so 
that  every  grain  receives  the  colour,  which  becomes  indelible. 
-(En.) 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


617 


and  who  knows  but  he  might  have  come  to  himself 
with  the  prodigal,  and  have  asked  God  and  his 
father  forgiveness  for  the  villainies  that  he  had 
committed  against  them. 

Wise.  If  bis  father  could  also  have  blessed  this 
manner  of  dealing  to  him,  and  have  made  it  effec- 
tual for  the  ends  that  you  have  propounded,  then 
I  should  have  thought  as  you.  But  alas,  alas,  you 
talk  as  if  you  never  knew,  or  had  at  this  present 
We  are  better  forgot  what  the  bowels  and  compas- 
takm™S  good  si°ns  °f  a  father  are.  Why,  did  you 
counsel.  not  serve  y0ur  0Wn  son  so  ?     But  it 

is  evident  enough  that  we  are  better  at  giving  good 
counsel  to  others,  than  we  are  at  taking  good  coun- 
sel ourselves.  But  mine  honest  neighbour,  sup- 
pose that  Mr.  Badman's  father  had  done  as  you 
say,  and  by  so  doing  had  driven  his  son  to  ill 
courses,  what  had  he  bettered  either  himself  or  his 
son  in  so  doing  ? 

Atten.  That  is  true,  but  it  doth  not  follow  that 
This  is  to  be   if  the  father  had  done  as  I  said,  the 

considered.        gon  yy0U\^   have  done  ag  y0U  SUpp0se. 

But  if  he  had  done  as  you  have  supposed,  what  had 
be  done  worse  than  what  he  hath  done  already  ? 

Wise.  He  had  done  bad  enough,  that  is  true. 
But  suppose  his  father  had  given  him  no  money, 
and  suppose  that  young  Bad  man  had  taken  a  pet 
thereat,  and  in  an  anger  had  gone  beyond  sea,  and 
his  father  had  neither  seen  him,  nor  heard  of  him 
more.  Or  suppose  that  of  a  mad  and  headstrong 
stomach,  he  had  gone  to  the  highway  for  money, 
and  so  had  brought  himself  to  the  gallows,  and  his 
father  and  family  to  great  contempt,  or  if  by  so 
doing  he  had  not  brought  himself  to  that  end,  yet 
he  had  added  to  all  his  wickedness  such  and  such 
evils  besides ;  and  what  comfort  could  his  father 
have  had  in  this  ?  Besides,  when  his  father  had 
done  for  him  what  he  could,  with  desire  to  make 
him  an  honest  man,  he  would  then,  whether  his 
son  had  proved  honest  or  no,  have  laid  down  his 
head  with  far  more  peace  than  if  he  had  taken 
your  counsel. 

Atten.  Nay  I  think  I  should  not  have  been  for- 
ward to  have  given  advice  in  the  cause ;  but  truly 
you  have  given  me  such  an  account  of  bis  villainies, 
that  the  hearing  thereof  has  made  me  angry  with 
him. 

Wise.  In  an  angry  mood  we  may  soon  outshoot 
ourselves,  but  poor  wretch  as  he  is,  lie  is  gone  to 
his  place.  But,  as  I  said,  when  a  good  father  hath 
done  what  he  can  for  a  bad  child,  and  that  child 
shall  prove  never  the  better,  he  will  lie  down  with 
far  more  peace,  than  if  through  severity,  he  had 
driven  him  to  inconveniences.1 

I  remember  that  I  have  heard  of  a  good  woman, 
that  had,  as  this  old  man,  a  bad  and  ungodly  son, 


j  and  she  prayed  for  him,  counselled  him,  and  carried 
it  motherly  to  him  for  several  years  A  -ood  woman 
together  ;  but  still  he  remained  bad.  and  a  bad  soa- 
At  last,  upon  a  time,  after  she  had  been  at  prayer, 
as  she  was  wont,  for  his  conversion,  she  comes  to 
him,  and  thus,  or  to  this  effect,  begins  again  to 
admonish  him.  Son,  said  she,  thou  hast  been  and 
art  a  wicked  child,  thou  hast  cost  me  many  a 
prayer  and  tear,  and  yet  thou  remainest  wicked. 
Well,  I  have  done  my  duty,  I  have  done  what 
I  can  to  save  thee ;  now  I  am  satisfied,  that  if  I 
shall  seo  thee  damned  at  the  day  of  judgment,  I 
shall  be  so  far  off  from  being  grieved  for  thee,  that 
I  shall  rejoice  to  hear  the  sentence  of  thy  damna- 
tion at  that  day ;  and  it  converted  him. 

I  tell  you  that  if  parents  carry  it  lovingly  to- 
wards their  children,  mixing  their  mercies  with 
loving  rebukes,  and  their  loving  rebukes  with 
fatherly  and  motherly  compassions,  they  are  more 
likely  to  save  their  children,  than  by  being  chur- 
lish and  severe  towards  them :  but  if  they  do  not 
save  them,  if  their  mercy  do  them  no  good,  yet  it 
will  greatly  ease  them  at  the  day  of  death,  to  con- 
sider ;  I  have  done  by  love  as  much  as  I  could,  to 
save  and  deliver  my  child  from  hell. 

Atten.  Well  I  yield.  But  pray  let  us  return 
again  to  Mr.  Badman.  You  say,  that  his  father 
gave  him  a  piece  of  money  that  he  might  set  up 
for  himself.2 

Wise.  Yes,  his  father  did  give  him  a  piece  of 
money,  and  he  did  set  up,  and  almost  Mr  Badman 
as  soon  set  down  again :  for  he  was  Betanpforhim- 
not  long  set  up,  but  by  his  ill  manag-  fy  runs'  to  'the 
ing  of  his  matters  at  home,  together  laud'3  end- 
with  his  extravagant  expenses  abroad,  he  was  got 
so  far  into  debt,  and  had  so  little  in  his  shop  to 
pay,  that  he  was  hard  put  to  it  to  keep  himself  out 
of  prison.  But  when  his  creditors  understood  that 
he  was  about  to  marry,  and  in  a  fair  way  to  get  a 
rich  wife,  they  said  among  themselves,  We  will 
not  be  hasty  with  him ;  if  he  gets  a  rich  wife  ho 
will  pay  us  all. 

Atten.  But  how  could  he  so  quickly  run  out, 
for  I  perceive  it  was  in  little  time,  by  what  you 
say? 

Wise.  It  was  in  little  time  indeed,  I  think  ho 
was  not  above  two  years  and  a  half  in  doing  of  it; 
but  the  reason  is  apparent,  for  he  be-   „,, 

..  ,  CL  *  The   reason  of 

ing  a  wild  young  man,  and  now  hav-  ins  running 
ing  the  bridle  loose  before  him,  and  °ut' 
being  wholly  subjected  to  his  lusts  and  vices,  he 
gave  himself  up  to  the  way  of  his  heart,  and  to  the 
sight  of  his  eye,  forgetting  that  for  all  these  things 
God  would  bring  him  to  judgment.  Be.  xi.  o.  And 
he  that  doth  thus,  you  may  be  sure,  shall  not  be 


See  the  note  on  p.  591 


VOL.  III. 


3  By  '  a  piece  of  money'  is  here  meant  two  hundred  pounds 
(see  p.  616).  It  probably  means  a  portion  or  piece  of  his  for- 
tune.—(Ed.) 

7S 


618 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


able  long  to  stand  on  his  legs.  Besides  he  had 
now  an  addition  of  new  companions  ;  companions 
New     compa-  you  must  think  most  like  himself  in 

nious.  manners,  and  so  such  that  cared  not 
who  sunk,  if  they  themselves  might  swim.  These 
would  often  he  haunting  of  him,  and  of  his  shop 
too  when  he  was  absent.  They  would  commonly 
egg1  him  to  the  alehouse,  but  yet  make  him  jack- 
pay-for-all ;  they  would  also  be  borrowing  money 
of  him,  but  take  no  care  to  pay  again,  except  it 
was  with  more  of  their  company,  which  also  he 
liked  very  well ;  and  so  his  poverty  came  like  'one 
that  travelleth,  and  his  want  as  an  armed  man.' 
r-r.vi.  11.  But  all  the  while  they  studied  his  temper; 
Mr.   Badman's  he  l°ve(*  to  De  flattered,  praised,  and 

temper.  commended  for  wit,  manhood,  and  per- 
sonage ;  and  this  was  like  stroking  him  over  the 
face.  Thus  they  colleagued  with  him,  and  got 
jet  more  and  more  into  him,  and  so,  like  horse 
leeches,  they  drew  away  that  little  that  his  father 
had  given  him,  and  brought  him  quickly  down, 
almost  to  dwell  next  door  to  the  beggar. 

Atten.  Then  was  the  saying  of  the  wise  man 
fulfilled,  '  He  that  keepeth  company  with  harlots,' 
and  'a  companion  of  fools,  shall  be  destroyed.' 

Pp.  xxix.  3  ;  x'.ii.  20. 

Wise.  Ay,  and  that  too,  '  A  companion  of  riot- 
ous persons  shameth  his  father.'2  Pr.  xxviii.  7.  For 
he,  poor  man,  had  both  grief  and  shame,  to  see 
how  his  son,  now  at  his  own  hand,  behaved  him- 
self in  the  enjoyment  of  those  good  things,  in  and 
under  the  lawful  use  of  which  he  might  have  lived 
to  God's  glory,  his  own  comfort,  and  credit  among 
his  neighbours.  '  But  he  that  followeth  after  vain 
persons,  shall  have  poverty  enough. '  rr.  xxviii.  19. 
The  way  that  he  took,  led  him  directly  into  this 
condition  ;  for  who  can  expect  other  things  of  one 
that  follows  such  courses  ?  Besides,  when  he  was 
in  his  shop,  he  could  not  abide  to  be  doing;  he  was 
naturally  given  to  idleness.  He  loved  to  live  high, 
but  his  hands  refused  to  labour ;  and  what  else  can 
the  end  of  such  an  one  be  but  that  which  the  wise 
man  saith  ?  '  The  drunkard  and  the  glutton  shall 
come  to  poverty,  and  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man 
with  rags.'  rr.  xxiu.  21.3 

Atten.  But  now,  methinhs,  when  he  was  brought 
thus  low,  he  should  have  considered  the  hand  of 
God  that  was  gone  out  against  him,  and  should 
have  smote  upon  the  breast,  and  have  returned. 

Wise.  Consideration,  good  consideration,  was 
far  from  him,  he  was  as   stout  and   proud  now 


man  is  for 
rich  wife. 


1  From  the  Anglo-Saxon  '  Eggian,'  to  incite,  urge. — (Ed.) 

2  The  Genevan  or  Puritan  version  of  this  passage  is  very 
striking:  '  he  that  feedeth  the  gluttons,  shameth  his  father.' 
-(En.) 

3  This  is  one  of  the  numerous  passages  of  Holy  W  rit  which 
are  more  expressive  without  than  with  the  words  supplied  in 
italics :  women  are  not  exempt  from  the  '  rags'  which  must  ever 
follow  drowsiness. — (Ed.) 


as  ever  in  all  his  life,  and  was  as  high  too  in  tho 
pursuit  of  his  sin,  as  when  he  was  in  Hig   ^^ 
the  midst  of  his  fulness  ;  only  he  went    under  Ms  de- 
now  like  a  tired  jade,  the  devil  had     cajs' 
rid  him  almost  off  of  his  legs. 

Atten.  Well,  but  what  did  he  do  when  all  was 
almost  gone? 

Wise.  Two  things  were  now  his  play.  1.  He 
bore  all  in  hand  by  swearing,  and  How  he  covered 
cracking,  and  lying,  that  he  was  as  llls  deca)'s- 
well  to  pass  as  he  was  the  first  day  he  set  up  for 
himself,  yea  that  he  had  rather  got  than  lost;  and 
he  had  at  his  beck  some  of  his  companions  that 
would  swear  to  confirm  it  as  fast  as  he. 

Atten.  This  was  double  wickedness,  it  was  a 
sin  to  say  it,  and  another  to  swear  it. 

Wise.  That  is  true,  but  what  evil  is  that  that 
he  will  not  do,  that  is  left  of  God,  as  I  believe 
Mr.  Badman  was? 

CHAPTER  VI. 

[ms  hypocritical  courtship  and  marriage  to  a 

PIOUS  RICH  YOUNG  LADY.] 

Atten.  And  what  was  the  other  thing? 

Wise.  Why  that  which  I  hinted  before,  he  was 
for  looking  out  for  a  rich  wife :  and  Bad 
now  I  am  come  to  some  more  of  his 
invented,  devised,  designed,  and  abominable 
roguery,  such  that  will  yet  declare  him  to  be  a 
most  desperate  sinner. 

The  thing  was  this:  a  wife  he  wanted,  or  rather 
money;  for  as  for  a  woman,  he  could  have  whores 
enow  at  his  whistle.  But,  as  I  said,  he  wanted 
money,  and  that  must  be  got  by  a  Badman  has  a 
wife  or  no  way;  nor  could  he  so  easily  godly  maid  in 
get  a  wife  neither,  except  he  became 
an  artist  at  the  way  of  dissembling;  nor  would 
dissembling  do  among  that  people  that  could  dis- 
semble  as   well    as    he.      But   there   „      .    .      . 

He  seeks  to  get 

dwelt  a  maid  not  far  from  him,  that     her,  why,  and 

was  both  godly,  and  one  that  had  a 

good  portion,  but  how  to  get  her,  there  lay  all  the 

craft.     Well,  he  calls  a  council  of  some  of  his 

most  trusty  and  cunning  companions,   ne    cal]s    his 

and  breaks  his  mind  to  them;  to  wit,  companions  to- 
il     i      i  -i  ii  gcther,       and 

that  he  had  a  mind  to  marry:  and  he  iheyadviseKm 
also  told  them  to  whom ;  but,  said  he,  hm  t0  get  he*"' 
how  shall  I  accomplish  my  end;  she  is  religious, 
and  I  am  not?  Then  one  of  them  made  reply, 
saying,  Since  she  is  religious,  you  must  pretend  to 
be  so  likewise,  and  that  for  some  time  before  you 
go  to  her.  Mark  therefore  whither  she  goes  daily 
to  hear,  and  do  you  go  thither  also;  but  there  you 
must  be  sure  to  behave  yourself  soberly,  and  make 
as  if  you  liked  the  Word  wonderful  well;  stand 
also  where  she  may  see  you,  and  when  you  come 
home,  be  sure  that  you  walk  the  street  very  so- 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH   OE   MR.  BADMAN. 


619 


berly,  and  go  within  sight  of  her.  This  done  for 
a  while,  then  go  to  her,  and  first  talk  of  how  sorry 
you  are  for  your  sins,  and  show  great  love  to  the 
religion  that  she  is  of,  still  speaking  well  of  her 
preachers  and  of  her  godly  acquaintance,  bewail- 
ing your  hard  hap  that  it  was  not  your  lot  to  be 
acquainted  with  her  and  her  fellow-professors 
sooner;  and  this  is  the  way  to  get  her.  Also  you 
must  write  down  sermons,  talk  of  scriptures,  and 
protest  that  you  came  a-wooing  to  her,  only  be- 
cause she  is  godly,  and  because  you  should  count 
it  your  greatest  happiness  if  you  might  but  have 
such  a  one.  As  for  her  money,  slight  it,  it  will 
be  never  the  further  off,  that  is  the  way  to  come 
soonest  at  it,  for  she  will  be  jealous  at  first  that 
you  come  for  her  money;  you  know  what  she  has, 
but  make  not  a  word  about  it.  Do  this,  and  you 
shall  see  if  you  do  not  entangle  tbe  lass.  Thus 
was  the  snare  laid  for  this  poor  honest  maid,  and 
she  was  quickly  catched  in  his  pit. 

Atten.  Why,  did  lie  take  this  counsel  ? 

Wise.  Did  he!  yes,  and  after  a  while,  went  as 
boldly  to  her,  and  that  under  a  vizard  of  religion, 
Badman  goes  tn  as  if  he  had  been  for  honesty  and 
hiscoZ^daii!  godliness  one  of  the  most  sincere  and 
vadium.  upright-hearted  in  England.  He  ob- 
served all  his  points,  and  followed  the  advice  of 
his  counsellors,  and  quickly  obtained  her  too;  for 
natural  parts  he  had;  he  was  tall,  and  fair,  and 
had  plain,  but  very  good  clothes  on  his  back;  and 
his  religion  was  the  more  easily  attained ;  for  he 
had  seen  something  in  the  house  of  his  father,  and 
first  master,  and  so  could  the  more  readily  put 
himself  into  the  form  and  show  thereof. 

So  he  appointed  his  day,  and  went  to  her,  as 
Badman's  com-  that  he  might  easily  do,  for  she  had 
?y in?" compii-  neither  father  nor  mother  to  oppose, 
meut.  Well,  when  he  was  come,  and  had 

given  her  a  civil  compliment,  to  let  her  understand 
why  he  was  come,  then  he  began  and  told  her 
that  he  had  found  in  his  heart  a  great  deal  of  love 
to  her  person;  and  that  of  all  the  damsels  in  the 
world  he  had  pitched  upon  her,  if  she  thought  fit, 
to  make  her  his  beloved  wife.  The  reasons,  as  he 
told  her,  why  he  had  pitched  upon  her  were  her 
religious  and  personal  excellencies  ;  and  therefore 
entreated  her  to  take  his  condition  into  her  tender 
and  loving  consideration.  As  for  the  world,  quoth 
he,  I  have  a  very  good  trade,  and  can  maintain 
myself  and  family  well,  while  my  wife  sits  still  on 
her  seat;  I  have  got  thus  and  thus  much  already, 
and  feel  money  come  in  every  day,  but  that  is  not 
the  thing  that  I  aim  at ;  it  is  an  honest  and  godly 
wife.  Then  he  would  present  her  with  a  good 
book  or  two,  pretending  how  much  good  he  had 
got  by  them  himself.  He  would  also  be  often 
speaking  well  of  godly  ministers,  especially  of 
those  that  he  perceived  she  liked,  and  loved  most. 


Besides  he  would  be  often  telling  of  her  what  a 
godly  father  he  had,  and  what  a  new  man  he  was 
also  become  himself;  and  thus  did  this  treacherous 
dealer  deal  with  this  honest  and  good  girl,  to  her 
great  grief  and  sorrow,  as  afterward  you  shall 
hear. 

Attex.  But  had  the  maid  no  friend  to  look  after 
her? 

Wise.  Her  father  and  mother  were  dead,  and 
that  he  knew  well  enough,  and  so  she  was  the 
more  easily  overcome  by  his  naughty  lying  tongue. 
But  if  she  had  never  so  many  friends,  she  might 
have  been  beguiled  by  him.  It  is  too  much  the 
custom  of  young  people  now,  to  think  Neriecfcofcoim- 
themselves  wise  enough  to  make  their  ^^da^" 
own  choice;  and  that  they  need  not  ou$- 
ask  counsel  of  those  that  are  older,  and  also  wiser 
than  they ;  but  this  is  a  great  fault  in  them,  and 
many  of  them  have  paid  dear  for  it.  Well,  to  be 
short,  in  little  time  Mr.  Badman  obtains  his  de- 
sire, gets  this  honest  girl  and  her 

°    .  .  °      '  Badman  obtains 

money,  is  married  to  her,  brings  her     Ms  desire,  is 
home,  makes  a  feast,  entertains  her     mamed,&c- 
royally,  but  her  portion  must  pay  for  all. 

Atten.  This  was  wonderful  deceitful  doings,  a 
man  shall  seldom  hear  of  the  like. 

Wise.  By  this  his  doing,  he  showed  how  little 
he  feared  God,  and  what  little  dread  he  had  of  his 
judgments.  For  all  this  carriage,  and  all  these 
words  were  by  him  premeditated  evil;  he  knew  he 
lied,  he  knew  he  dissembled ;  yea,  he  knew  that 
he  made  use  of  the  name  of  God,  of  religion,  good 
men,  and  good  books,  but  as  a  stalking-horse, 
thereby  the  better  to  catch  his  game.    _ 

t        n  *ii  •     i  •        i      •  -  His       carnage 

in  all  this  Ins  glorious  pretence  of  re-  judged  migod- 
ligion,  he  was  but  a  glorious  painted  1>'!md™ked- 
hypocrite,  and  hypocrisy  is  the  highest  sin  that  a 
poor  carnal  wretch  can  attain  unto ;  it  is  also  a 
sin  that  most  dareth  God,  and  that  also  bringeth 
the  greater  damnation.  New  was  he  a  whited 
wall,  now  was  he  a  painted  sepulchre.  Mat.  xxiii.  27. 
Now  was  he  a  grave  that  appeared  not.  Lu.  xi.  a. 
For  this  poor,  honest,  godly  damsel,  little  thought 
that  both  her  peace  and  comfort,  and  estate,  and 
liberty,  and  person,  and  all,  were  go-   _,  .     , 

.    I       i      •  1      1         1  ?       Tlie   sreat  ?J- 

mg  to  her  burial,  when  she  was  going     teration    that 

to  be  married  to  Mr.  Badman;  and     gSfto  Bat 
yet  so  it  was,  she  enjoyed  herself  but     man'3  wife- 
little  afterwards ;  she  was  as  if  she  was  dead  and 
buried  to  what  she  enjoyed  before. 

AlTEJf.  Certainly  some  wonderful  judgment  of 
God  must  attend  and  overtake  such  wicked  men 
as  these. 

Wise.  You  may  be  sure  that  they  shall  have 
judgment  to  the  full,  for  all  these  things,  when 
the  day  of  judgment  is  come.  But  as  for  judg- 
ment upon  them  in  this  life,  it  doth  not  always 
come,  no  not  upon  those  that  are  worthy  thereof. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


•  They  that  tempt  God  are  delivered,  and  they  that 
work  wickedness  are  set  up.'  Mai.  m  15.  But  they 
Expectation  of  are  reserved  to  the  day  of  wrath;  and 
iud^menusfor  then,  for  their  wickedness,  God  will 
repay  them  to  their  faces.  •  The 
wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  destruction ;  tney 
shall  be  brought  forth  to  the  day  of  wrath.  Who 
shall  declare  his  way  to  his  face  ?  and  who  shall 
repay  him  what  he  hath  done?  Yet  shall  he  be 
brought  to  the  grave,  and  shall  remain  in  the 
tomb.'  Job  xxi.  so-32.  That  is,  ordinarily  they 
escape  God's  hand  in  this  life,  save  only  a  few 
examples  are  made,  that  others  may  be  cautioned, 
and  take  warning  thereby.  But  at  the  day  of 
judgment  they  must  be  rebuked  for  their  evil  with 
the  lashes  of  devouring  fire. 

Atten.  Can  you  give  me  no  examples  of  God's 
wrath  upon  men  that  have  acted  this  tragical 
wicked  deed  of  Mr.  Badman. 

Wise.  Yes ;  Hamor  and  Shechem,  and  all  the 
An  example  of  men  of  their  city,  for  attempting  to 
God's  anger  on   make  God  and  religion  the  stalking- 

such  as    have  °  .  & 

heretofore      horse  to  get  J acob  s  daughters  to  wife, 

committed  this  .  .,  n.  •.1,1  1  t? 

sin  of  Mr.  Bad-  were  together  slain  with  the  edge  of 
man-  the  sword.     A  judgment  of  God  upon 

them,  no  doubt,  for  their  dissembling  in  that 
matter.  Ge.  xxxiv.  1.  All  manner  of  lying  and  dis- 
sembling is  dreadful,  but  to  make  God  and  religion 
a  disguise,  therewith  to  blind  thy  dissimulation 
from  others'  eyes,  is  highly  provoking  to  the  Divine 
majesty.  I  knew  one  that  dwelt  not 
■*  far  off  from  our  town,  that  got  him  a 

wife  as  Mr.  Badman  got  his;  but  he  did  not  enjoy 
her  long;  for  one  night  as  he  was  riding  home 
from  his  companions,  where  he  had  been  at  a 
neighbouring  town,  his  horse  threw  him  to  the 
ground,  where  he  was  found  dead  at  break  of  day; 
frightfully  and  lamentably  mangled  with  his  fall, 
and  besmeared  with  his  own  blood. 

Atten.  Well,  but  pray  return  again  to  Mr. 
Badman;  how  did  he  carry  it  to  his  wife,  after  he 
was  married  to  her? 

Wise.  Nay,  let  us  take  things  along  as  we  go. 

He  had  not  been  married  but  a  little  while,  but  his 

creditors  came  upon  him  for  their  money.     He 

deferred  them  a  little  while,  but  at  last  things 

were  come  to  that  point  that  pay  he 

After    Badman  r  L    J 

is  married  his  must,  or  must  do  worse ;  so  he  ap- 
upn'nim'Tnd  pointed  them  a  time,  and  they  came 
!'ionWpaysPfor  for  thei.r  moneJ>  and  he  payed  them 
that  which  his  down  with  her  money,  before  her  eyes, 
feS  with  for  those  goods  that  he  had  profusely 
before  his  mar-  gpent  among  his  whores  long  before, 
besides  the  portion  that  his  father 
gave  him,  to  the  value  of  two  hundred  pounds. 

Atten.  This  beginning  was  bad,  but  what  shall 
I  say  ?  It  was  like  Mr.  Badman  himself.  Poor 
woman !  this  was  but  a  bad  beginning  for  her ;  I 


fear  it  filled  her  with  trouble  enough,  as  I  think 
such  a  beginning  would  have  done  one  perhaps 
much  stronger  than  she. 

Wise.  Trouble,  aye,  you  may  be  sure  of  it,  but 
now  it  was  too  late  to  repent ;  she  should  have 
looked  better  to  herself  when  being  wary  would 
have  done  her  good;  her  harms  may  „ 
be  an  advantage  to  others  that  will  the  fruit  of  he? 
learn  to  take  heed  thereby,  but  for  unadvistfdness- 
herself,  she  must  take  what  follows,  even  such  a 
life  now  as  Mr.  Badman  her  husband  will  lead  her, 
and  that  will  be  bad  enough. 

Atten.  This  beginning  was  bad,  and  yet  I  fear 
it  was  but  the  beginning  of  bad. 

Wise.  You  may  be  sure  that  it  was  but  the  be- 
ginning of  badness,  for  other  evils  Kow  Badman  has 
came  on  apace  ;  as,  for  instance,  it  |°*  ^?-a  W1n* 
was  but  a  little  while  after  he  was     tangs  it  by  as  a 

•     li.ii  i  •  i«    •  thine  out  of  use, 

married,  but  he  hangs  his  religion  &  entertains  Ms 
upon  the  hedge,  or  rather  dealt  °w  companions. 
with  it  as  men  deal  with  their  old  clothes,  who  cast 
them  off,  or  leave  them  to  others  to  wear ;  for  his 
part  he  would  be  religious  no  longer. 

Now  therefore  he  had  pulled  off  his  vizard,  and 
began  to  show  himself  in  his  old  shape,  a  base, 
wicked,  debauched  fellow  ;  and  now  the  poor 
woman  saw  that  she  was  betrayed  indeed,  now 
also  his  old  companions  begin  to  flock  about  him, 
and  to  haunt  his  house  and  shop  as  formerly. 
And  who  with  them  but  Mr.  Badman  ?  And  who 
with  him  again  but  they? 

Now  those  good  people  that  used  to  company 
with  his  wife  began  to  be  amazed  and  discouraged, 
also  he  would  frown  and  glout l  upon   „    ,.  a 

them  as  if  he  abhorred  the  appearance  company  from 
of  them,  so  that  in  little  time  he  drove 
all  good  company  from  her,  and  made  her  sit  soli- 
tary by  herself.  He  also  began  now  He  goes  t0  h;s 
to  go  out  a-nights  to  those  drabs  who  "bores. 
were  his  familiars  before,  with  whom  he  would 
stay  sometimes  till  midnight,  and  sometimes  till 
almost  morning,  and  then  would  come  home  as 
drunk  as  a  swine:  and  this  was  the  course  of  Mr. 
Badman. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

[iIE  THROWS  OFF  THE  MASK  AND  CRCELLY  TREATS 
HIS  WIFE.] 

Now  when  he  came  home  in  this  case,  if  hi3 
wife  did  but  speak  a  word  to  him  about  where  he 
had  been  and  why  he  had  so  abused  himself,  though 
her  words  were  spoken  in  never  so  He  rails  at  his 
much  meekness   and  love,  then  she  Wile" 

was  whore,  and  bitch,  and  jade!   and  it  was  well 
if  she  missed  his  finders  and  heels.     Sometimes 


Glout/  to  pout  or  look  sulky;  obsolete. — (Ed.) 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


621 


also  he  would  bring  his  punks  home  to  his  house, 
and  woe  be  to  his  wife  when  they  were  gone  if  sbe 
did  not  entertain  them  with  all  varieties  possible, 
and  also  carry  it  lovingly  to  them.  Thus  this 
good  woman  was  made  by  Badman,  her  husband, 
to  possess  nothing  but  disappointments  as  to  all 
that  he  had  promised  her,  or  that  she  hoped  to 
have  at  his  hands. 

But  that  that  added  pressing  weight  to  all  her 

ncseekstoforce  sonw  ™as  that<  as  he  hatl  cast  awaJ 
hia  wife  from   all  religion  himself,  so  he  attempted, 

if  possible,  to  make  her  do  so  too. 
He  would  not  sutler  her  to  go  out  to  the  preaching 
of  the  word  of  Christ,  nor  to  the  rest  of  his  ap- 
pointments, for  the  health  and  salvation  of  her 
He  mocks  at  her  sou^  He  would  now  taunt  at  and 
preachers.  reflectingly  speak  of  her  preachers, 
and  would  receive,  yea,  raise  scandals  of  them,  to 
her  very  great  grief  and  affliction. 

Now  she  scarce  durst  go  to  an  honest  neigh- 
hour's  house,  or  have  a  good  book  in  her  hand, 
especially  when  he  had  his  companions  in  his 
house,  or  had  got  a  little  drink  in  his  head.  He 
He  mocks  his  would  a^s0»  when  he  perceived  that 
wife  in  her  de-  she  was  dejected,  speak  tauntingly 
and  mockingly  to  her  in  the  presence 
of  his  companions,  calling  of  her  his  religious  wife, 
his  demure  dame,  and  the  like,  also  he  would 
make  a  sport  of  her  among  his  wanton  ones 
abroad. 

If  she  did  ask  him,  as  sometimes  she  would,  to 
let  her  go  out  to  a  sermon,  he  would  in  a  churlish 
manner  reply,  Keep  at  home,  keep  at  home  and 
He  refuses  to  let  look  to  ?onr  husiness,  we  cannot  live 
her  go  out  to  by  hearing  of  sermons.  If  she  still 
urged  that  he  would  let  her  go,  then 
lie  would  say  to  her,  Go  if  you  dare.  He  would 
also  charged  her  with  giving  of  what  he  had  to 
her  ministers,  when,  vile  wretch,  he  had  spent  it 
on  his  vain  companions  before.  This  was  the  life 
that  Mr.  Badman's  good  wife  lived,  within  few 
months  after  he  had  married  her. 

Atten.  This  was  a  disappointment  indeed. 

Wise.  A  disappointment  indeed,  as  ever  I  think 
poor  woman  had.  One  would  think  that  the  knave 
might  a  little  let  her  have  had  her  will  since  it  was 
nothing  but  to  be  honest,  and  since  she  brought 
him  so  sweet,  so  lumping  a  portion — for  she  brought 
hundreds  into  his  house — I  say,  one  would  think 
he  should  have  let  her  had  her  own  will  a  little, 
since  she  desired  it  only  in  the  service  and  wor- 
ship of  God ;  but  could  she  win  him  to  grant  her 
that  ?  No,  not  a  bit,  if  it  would  have  saved  her 
She  sets  out  ^e*  True,  sometimes  she  would  steal 
sometimes  by   out  when  he  was  from  home,  or  on  a 

stealth.  .  i'ii 

journey,  or  among  his  drunken  com- 
panions, but  with  all  privacy  imaginable;  and, 
poor  woman,  this  advantage  she  had  she  carried 


it  so  to  all  her  neighbours  that,  though  many  of 
them  were  but  carnal,  yet  they  would  not  betray 
her,  or  tell  of  her  going  out  to  the  Word  if  they 
saw  it,  but  would  rather  endeavour  to  hide  it  from 
Mr.  Badman  himself. 

Atten.  This  carriage  of  his  to  her  was  enough 
to  break  her  heart. 

Wise.  It  was  enough  to  do  it  indeed,  yea,  it  did 
effectually  do  it.  It  killed  her  in  time,  yea,  it 
was  all  the  time  a  killing  of  her.  She  Her  repentance 
would  oftentimes,  when  she  sat  by  md  complaint- 
herself,  thus  mournfully  bewail  her  condition: — 
'  Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Meshech,'  and  '  that 
I  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Kedar!  My  soul  hath 
long  dwelt  with  him  that  hateth  peace.'  0  '  what 
shall  be  given  unto  thee,'  thou  '  deceitful  tongue?5 
1  or  what  shall  be  done  unto  thee,  thou  false 
tongue?'  Ps.cxx.  I  am  a  woman  grieved  in  spirit,  my 
husband  has  bought  me  and  sold  me  for  his  lusts. 
It  was  not  me,  but  my  money  that  he  wanted  ; 
0  that  he  had  had  it,  so  I  had  had  my  liberty ! 
This  she  said,  not  of  contempt  of  his  person,  but 
of  his  conditions,1  and  because  she  saw  that,  by  his 
hypocritical  tongue,  he  had  brought  her  not  only 
almost  to  beggary,  but  robbed  her  of  the  Word  of 
God. 

Atten.  It  is  a  deadly  thing,  I  see,  to  be  un- 
equally yoked  with  unbelievers.     If    Theevil  of  beiti„ 

this  Woman  had  had  a  good  llUS-  unequally  yoked 
i         it  i  -l  •    i        i         i  together. 

band,  now  happily  might  they  have 
lived  together!  Such  an  one  would  have  prayed 
for  her,  taught  her,  and  also  would  have  encouraged 
her  in  the  faith  and  ways  of  God ;  but  now,  poor 
creature,  instead  of  this  there  is  nothing  but  the 
quite  contrary. 

Wise.  It  is  a  deadly  thing  indeed,  and  there- 
fore, by  the  Word  of  God,  his  people  are  forbid 
to  be  joined  in  marriage  with  them.  '  Be  ye  not,' 
saith  it,  'unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers: 
for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  un- 
righteousness? and  what  communion  hath  light 
with  darkness?  And  what  concord  hath  Christ 
with  Belial?  or  what  part  hath  he  that  believeth 
with  an  infidel?  and  what  agreement  hath  the 
temple  of  God  with  idols?'  2  Co.  vi.  u-ie.  There 
can  be  no  agreement  where  such  matches  are 
made ;  even  God  himself  hath  declared  the  con- 
trary from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  '  I,'  says 
he,  '  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman, 
and  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed.'  Ge.  iiL  15. 
Therefore  he  saith  in  another  place  they  can  mix 
no  better  than  iron  and  clay.  Da  a.  43.  I  say  they 
cannot  agree,  they  cannot  be  one,  and  therefore 
they  should  be  aware  at  first,  and  not  lightly 
receive    such    into    their    affections.       God    has 


1  This  is  one  of  the  hardest  lessons  a  disciple  has  to  learn 
in  the  school  of  Christ ;  not  to  hate  the  sinner,  but  the  sin  ; 
especially  uuder  circumstances  of  such  cruel  deception. — (Eu.j 


623 


THE  LIFE  AKD  DEATH   OP  ME.  BADMAN. 


often  made  such  matches  bitter,  especially  to  his 
own.  Such  matches  are,  as  God  said  of  Eli's 
sons  that  were  spared,  to  consume  the  eyes  and  to 
grieve  the  heart.  0 !  the  wailing  and  lamentation 
that  they  have  made  that  have  been  thus  yoked, 
especially  if  they  were  such  as  would  he  so  yoked* 
against  their  light  and  good  counsel  to  the  contrary, 

Atten.  Alas!  he  deluded  her  with  his  tongue, 
and  feigned  reformation. 

Wise.  Well,  well,  she  should  have  gone  more 
Good  counsel  to  warily  to  work.  What  if  she  had 
SS  a£S  acquainted  some  of  her  best,  most 
to  marry.  knowing,  and  godly  friends  therewith? 

What  if  she  had  engaged  a  godly  minister  or  two 
to  have  talked  with  Mr.  Badman  ?  Also,  what  if 
she  had  laid  wait  round  about  him,  to  espy  if  he 
was  not  otherwise  behind  her  back  than  he  was 
before  her  face  ?  And  besides  I  verily  think — 
since  in  the  multitude  of  cousellors  there  is  safety 
— that  if  she  had  acquainted  the  congregation  with 
it,  and  desired  them  to  spend  some  time  in  prayer  to 
God  about  it,  and  if  she  must  have  had  him,  to  have 
received  him  as  to  his  godliness  upon  the  judgment 
of  others,  rather  than  her  own — she  knowing  them 
to  be  godly  and  judicious  and  unbiassed  men — she 
had  had  more  peace  all  her  life  after,  than  to 
trust  to  her  own  poor,  raw,  womanish  judgment  as 
she  did.  Love  is  blind,  and  will  see  nothing  amiss 
where  others  may  see  a  hundred  faults.  There- 
fore I  say  she  should  not  have  trusted  to  her  own 
thoughts  in  the  matter  of  his  goodness. 

As  to  his  person,  there  she  was  fittest  to  judge, 
because  she  was  to  be  the  person  pleased,  but  as  to 
his  godliness,  there  the  Word  was  the  fittest  judge, 
and  they  that  could  best  understand  it,  because  God 
A.  caution  to  was  therein  to  be  pleased.  I  wish 
jonng  maidens.  tlmt  all  young.  maidens  will  take  heed 
of  being  beguiled  with  flattering  words,  with  feign- 
ing and  lying  speeches,  and  take  the  best  way  to 
preserve  themselves  from  being  bought  and  sold  by 
wicked  men  as  she  was,  lest  they  repent  with  her, 
when,  as  to  this,  repentance  will  do  them  no  good, 
but  for  their  unadvisedness  go  sorrowing  to  their 
graves. 

Atten.  Well  things  are  past  with  this  poor 
Let   Mr.  Bad-  woman  and  cannot  be  called  back,  let 
w'lvim  )iee   otuers  heware  by  her  misfortunes,  lest 
*"*  e'    they  also  fall  into  her  distress. 

Wise.  That  is  the  thing  that  I  say,  let  them 
take  heed,  lest  for  their  unadvisedness  they  smart, 
as  this  poor  woman  has  done.  And  ah !  methinks, 
that  they  that  yet  are  single  persons,  and  that  are 
tempted  to  marry  to  such  as  Mr.  Badman,  would, 
to  inform  and  warn  themselves  in  this  matter  before 
they  entangle  themselves,  but  go  to  some  that 
already  are  in  the  snare,  and  ask  them  how  it  is 
with  them,  as  to  the  suitable  or  unsuitableness  of 
their  marriage,  and  desire  their  advice.     Surely 


they  would  ring  such  a  peal  in  their  ears  about  the 
unequality,  unsuitableness,  disadvantages,  and  dis- 
quietments,  and  sins  that  attend  such  marriages, 
that  would  make  them  beware  as  long  as  they  live. 
But  the  bird  in  the  air  knows  not  the  notes  of  the 
bird  in  the  snare  until  she  comes  thither  herself. 
Besides,  to  make  up  such  marriages,  Satan  and 
carnal  reason,  and  lust,  or  at  least  inconsiderate- 
ness,  has  the  chiefest  hand  ;  and  where  these  things 
be"ar  sway,  designs,  though  never  so  destructive, 
will  go  headlong  on ;  and  therefore  I  fear  that  but 
little  warning  will  be  taken  by  young  girls  at  Mr. 
Badman's  wife's  affliction. 

Attend  But  are  there  no  dissuasive  arguments 
to  lay  before  such,  to  prevent  their  future  misery  ? 

Wise.  Yes  :  there  is  the  law  of  God,  that  for- 
biddeth  marriage  with  unbelievers.  These  kind 
of  marriages  also  are  condemned  even  by  irrational 
creatures.  1.  It  is  forbidden  by  the  law  of  God, 
both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New.  1.  In 
the  Old.  Thou  shalt  not  '  make  marriages  with 
them  ;  thy  daughter  thou  shalt  not  give  unto  his 
son,  nor  his  daughter  shalt  thou  take  unto  thy  son.' 
De.  vii.  3.  2.  In  the  New  Testament  it  is  forbidden. 
'  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbe- 
lievers,' let  them  marry  to  whom  they  will,  •  only 
in  the  Lord.'  '->  Co.  vi.  i*-i&  1C0.  vii.  39. 

Here  now  is  a  prohibition,  plainly  forbidding 
the  believer  to  marry  with  the  unbe-  Rules  for  those 
liever,  therefore  they  should  not  do  it.  marry? 
Again,  these  unwarrantable  marriages  are,  as  I 
may  so  say,  condemned  by  irrational  creatures,  who 
will  not  couple  but  with  their  own  sort.  Will  the 
sheep  couple  with  a  dog,  the  partridge  with  a 
crow,  or  the  pheasant  with  an  owl  ?  No,  they  will 
strictly  tie  up  themselves  to  those  of  their  own  sort 
only.  Yea,  it  sets  all  the  world  a  wondering,  when 
they  see  or  hear  the  contrary.  Alan  only  is  most 
subject  to  wink  at,  and  allow  of  these  unlawful  mix- 
tures of  men  and  women ;  because  man  only  is 
a  sinful  beast,  a  sinful  bird,  therefore  he,  above  all, 
will  take  upon  him,  by  rebellious  actions,  to  answer, 
or  rather  to  oppose  and  violate  the  law  of  his  God 
and  Creator;  nor  shall  these  or  other  interrog- 
atories, What  fellowship?  what  concord?  what 
agreement  ?  what  communion  can  there  be  in  such 
marriages  ?  be  counted  of  weight  or  thought  worth 
the  answering  by  him, 

But  further,  the  dangers  that  such  do  commonly 
run  themselves  into,  should  be  to  others  a  dissuasive 
argument  to  stop  them  from  doing  the  ify0U  love  your 
like:  for  besides  the  distresses  of  Mr.  sonitakeheei 
Badman's  wife,  many  that  have  had  very  hopeful 
beginnings  for  heaven,  have,  by  virtue  of  the  mis- 
chiefs that  have  attended  these  unlawful  marriages, 
miserably  and  fearfully  miscarried.  Soon  after 
such  marriages,  conviction,  the  first  step  towards 
heaven,  hath  ceased  ;  prayer,  the  next  step  towards 


THE   LIEE  AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


heaven,  liatli  ceased ;  hungerings  and  thirstings 
after  salvation,  anotlicr  step  towards  tbe  kingdom 
of  beaven,  bath  ceased.  In  a  word,  such  marriages 
have  estranged  them  from  the  Word,  from  their 
godly  and  faithful  friends,  and  have  brought  them 
again  into  carnal  company,  among  carnal  friends, 
and  also  into  carnal  delights,  where,  and  with 
whom,  they  have  in  conclusion  both  sinfully  abode, 
and  miserably  perished. 

And  this  is  one  reason  why  God  hath  forbidden 
this  kind  of  unequal  marriages.  '  For  they,'  saith 
he,  meaning  the  ungodly,  '  will  turn  away  thy  son 
from  following  me,  that  they  may  serve  other  gods  ; 
so  will  tbe  anger  of  the  Lord  be  kindled  against 
you,  and  destroy  thee  suddenly.'  De.  vii.  4.  Now 
mark,  there  were  some  in  Israel,  that  would  not- 
withstanding this  prohibition,  venture  to  marry  to 
the  heathens  and  unbelievers.  But  what  followed? 
'  They  served  their  idols,  they  sacrificed  their  sons 
and  their  daughters  unto  devils.  Thus  were  they 
defiled  Avith  their  own  works,  and  went  a  whoring 
with  their  own  inventions ;  therefore  was  tbe  wrath 
of  tbe  Lord  kindled  against  bis  people,  insomuch 
that  he  abhorred  his  own  inheritance. '  Ps.  cvt  3G-40. 

Attex.  But  let  us  return  again  to  Mr.  Badman  ; 
had  he  any  children  by  his  wife  ? 

Wise.  Yes,  seven. 

Attex .  I  doubt  they  were  but  badly  brought  up. 

Wise.  One  of  them  loved  its  mother  dearly,  and 
Baaman'a  chil-   would  constantly  hearken  to  her  voice. 

hSW  Osgood  Now  that  chM  she  had  the  opportunity 
woman.  to  instruct  in  the  principles  of  Chris- 

tian religion,  and  it  became  a  very  gracious  child. 
But  that  child  Mr.  Badman  could  not  abide,  he 
would  seldom  afford  it  a  pleasant  word,  but  would 
scowl  and  froAvn  upon  it,  speak  churlishly  and 
doggedly  to  it,  and  though,  as  to  nature,  it  was 
the  most  feeble  of  tbe  seven,  yet  it  oftenest  felt  the 
weight  of  its  father's  fingers.  Three  of  his  children 
did  directly  follow  his  steps,  and  began  to  be  as 
vile  as,  in  his  youth,  he  was  himself.  The  other 
that  remained  became  a  kind  of  mongrel1  profes- 
sors, not  so  bad  as  their  father,  nor  so  good  as 
their  mother,  but  were  betwixt  them  both.  They 
had  their  mother's  notions,  and  their  father's 
actions,  and  were  much  like  those  that  you  read  of 
in  the  book  of  Nehemiah;  these  children  were  half 
of  Ashdod,  '  and  could  not  speak  in  tbe  Jews'  lan- 
guage,  but  according  to  the  language  of  each 

people.'    Ne.  xiii.  21. 

Aiten.  What  you  say  in  this  matter  is  observ- 
able, and  if  I  take  not  my  mark  amiss,  it  often 
happeueth  after  this  manner  where  such  unlawful 
marriages  are  contracted. 

Wise.  It  sometimes  doth   so,  and  the  reason, 


Mixed,  impure. 

'  'Tis  true,  the  cause  is  in  the  lurch 
Between  tbe  right  aud  mongrel  church.'— Hudibras.— (Ed.) 


with  respect  to  their  parents,  is  this.  Where  the 
one  of  the  parents  is  godly,  and  tho  other  ungodly 
and  vile,  though  they  can  agree  in  begetting  of  chil- 
dren, yet  they  strive  for  their  children  nowthcua<'oa]y 
when  they  are  born.  The  godly  parent  father.oalgoi 
/  ,  ..  ,  . °       J  l  ly   mother   do 

strives  lor  the  child,  and  by  prayers,     strive  for  the 

,  ,  iiii/       children     tint 

counsel,  and  good  examples,  labours  to  God  doth  give 
make  it  holy  in  body  and  soul,  and  so  them' 
fit  for  tbe  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  the  ungodly 
would  have  it  like  himself,  wicked,  and  base,  aud 
sinful ;  and  so  they  both  give  instructions  accord- 
ingly. Instructions  did  I  say?  yea,  and  examples 
too  according  to  their  minds.  Thus  the  godly,  as 
Hannah,  is  presenting  her  Samuel  unto  tbe  Lord: 
but  the  ungodly,  like  them  that  went  before  them, 
are  for  offering  their  children  to  Moloch,  to  an  idol, 
to  sin,  to  the  devil,  and  to  hell.  Thus  one  heark- 
eneth  to  the  law  of  their  mother  and  is  preserved 
from  destruction,  but  as  for  the  other,  as  their 
fathers  did,  so  do  they.  Thus  did  Mr.  Badman 
and  his  wife  part  some  of  their  children  betwixt 
them ;  but  as  for  tbe  other  three  that  were,  as  it 
were,  mongrels,  betwixt  both,  they  were  like  unto 
those  that  you  read  of  in  Kings,  they  feared  the 
Lord,  but  served  their  own  idols.  2  Ki.  xvii.  They 
had,  as  I  said,  then'  mother's  notions,  and  I  will 
add,  profession  too;  but  their  father's  lusts,  and 
something  of  bis  life.  Now  their  father  did  not 
like  them,  because  they  had  their  mother's  tongue; 
aud  the  mother  did  not  like  them  because  they  had 
still  their  father's  heart  and  life ;  nor  were  they 
indeed  fit  company  for  good  or  bad.  The  good 
would  not  trust  them  because  they  were  bad,  the 
bad  would  not  trust  them  because  they  were  good; 
namely,  the  good  would  not  trust  them  because 
they  were  bad  in  their  lives,  and  the  bad  would 
not  trust  them  because  they  were  good  in  then- 
words.  So  they  Avere  forced  Avith  Esau  to  join  in 
affinity  with  Ishmael ;  to  wit,  to  look  out  a  people 
that  Avere  hypocrites  like  themselves,  and  with  them 
they  matched,  and  lived,  and  died. 

Attex.  Poor  woman,  she  could  not  but  have 
much  perplexity. 

Wise.  Yea,  and  poor  children,  that  ever  they 
were  sent  into  the  world  as  the  fruit  of  the  loins, 
aud  under  the  government  of  such  a  father  as  Mr. 
Badman. 

Atten.  You  say  right,  for  such  children  lie  al- 
most uuder  all  manner  of  disadvantages :  but  we 
must  say  nothing,  because  this  also  is  the  sovereign 
will  of  God. 

WISE.  We  may  not  by  any  means  object  against 
God ;  yet  we  may  talk  of  the  advantages  and  dis- 
advantages that  children  have  by  having  for  their 
parents  such  as  are  either  godly  or  the  contrary. 

Atten.  You  say  right,  we  may  so,  and  pray 
now,  since  Ave  are  about  it,  speak  something  in 
brief  unto  it,  that  is,  unto  this:   what  advantage 


624 


THE  LIFE  AM)  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


those  children  have  ahove  others,  that  have  for 
their  parents  such  as  indeed  are  godly? 

Wise.  So  I  will,  only  I  must  first  premise  these 
two  or  three  things.  1.  They  have  not  the  advan- 
The  advantases  taSe  of  election  for  their  fathers'  sakes. 
that  ciiiidfeu  2.  They  are  born  as  others,  the  chil- 
.parents  are  dren  of  wrath,  though  they  come  of 
10  "  r'  godly  parents.  3.  Grace  comes  not 
unto  them  as  an  inheritance,  because  they  have 
godly  parents.  These  things  premised  I  shall  now 
proceed. 

1.  The  children  of  godly  parents  are  the  children  i 
of  many  prayers.      They  are  prayed  for  before, 
and  prayed  for  after  they  are  born;  and  the  prayer  | 
of  a  godly  father  and  godly  mother  doth  much.  [ 
2.    They  have  the   advantage   of  what  restraint  | 
is  possible,  from  what  evils  their  parents  see  them 
inclinable  to,  and  that  is  a  second  mercy.    3.  They 
have  the  advantage  of  godly  instruction,  and  of 
being  told  which  be  and  which  be  not  the  right 
ways  of  the  Lord.     4.  They  have  also  those  ways 
commended  unto  them,  and  spoken  well  of  in  their 
hearing,  that  are  good.     5.  Such  are  also,  what 
may  be  kept  out  of  evil  company,  from  evil  books, 
and  from  being  taught  the  way  of  swearing,  lying, 
and  the  like,  as  sabbath-breaking,  and  mocking  at 
good  men  and  good  things,  and  this  is  a  very  great 
mercy.     6.  They  have  also  the  benefit  of  a  godly 
life  set  before  them  doctrinally  by  their  parents, 
and  that  doctrine  backed  with  a  godly  and  holy 
example.    And  all  these  are  very  great  advantages. 

Xow  all  these  advantages  the  children  of  ungodly 
The  disadvan-  Parents  want;  and  so  are  more  in 
tases  that  the   danger  of  beinp-   carried  away  with 

children  of  un-      .      =  „  .,     °  .  ,      ,      _,         J        ,. 

godly  parents  the  error  oi  the  wicked,  ror  ungodly 
parents  neither  pray  for  their  children, 
nor  do  nor  can  they  heartily  instruct  them;  they  do 
not  after  a  godly  manner  restrain  them  from  evil,  nor 
do  they  keep  them  from  evil  company.  They  are 
not  grieved  at,  nor  yet  do  they  forewarn  their  chil- 
dren to  beware  of  such  evil  actions  that  are  abomina- 
tion to  God  and  to  all  good  men.  They  let  their 
children  break  the  sabbath,  swear,  lie,  be  wicked  ! 
and  vain.  They  commend  not  to  their  children  a 
holy  life,  nor  set  a  good  example  before  then-  eyes. 
No,  they  do  in  all  things  contrarv:  estrano-ino-  of 
their  children  what  they  can,  from  the  love  of  God 
and  all  good  men,  so  soon  as  they  are  bom. 
Therefore  it  is  a  very  great  judgment  of  God  upon 
children,  to  be  the  offspring  of  base  and  ungodly 
men.   Job  iil  s. 

Attes".  Well,  but  before  we  leave  Mr.  Badman's 
wife  and  children,  I  have  a  mind,  if  you  please,  to 
inquire  a  little  more  after  one  thing,  the  which  I 
am  sure  you  can  satisfy  me  in. 

Wise.  What  is  that  ? 

Attest.  You  said  a  while  ago  that  this  Mr.  Bad- 
man woidd  not  suffer  his  wife  to  go  out  to  hear 


such  godly  ministers  as  she  liked,  but  said,  if  she 
did,  she  had  as  good  never  come  home  any  more. 
Did  he  often  carry  it  thus  to  her  ? 

Wise.  He  did  say  so,  he  did  often  say  so.  This 
I  told  you  then,  and  had  also  then  told  you  more, 
but  that  other  things  put  me  out. 

Attest.  Well  said  ;  pray,  therefore,  now  go  on. 

Wise.  So  I  will.  Upon  a  time,  she  was,  on  a 
Lord's  day,  for  going  to  hear  a  sermon,  and  Mr. 
Badman  was  unwilling  she  should  ;  but  she  at  that 
time,  as  it  seems,  did  put  on  more  courage  than 
she  was  wont ;  and,  therefore,  after  she  had  spent 
upon  him  a  great  many  fair  words  and  entreaties, 
if  perhaps  she  might  have  prevailed  by  a  contest  be- 
them,  but  all  to  no  purpose  at  all,  at  ^  andBhL: 
last  she  said  she  would  go,  and  ren-  wife- 
dered  this  reason  for  it:  I  have  a  husband,  but 
also  a  God ;  my  God  has  commanded  me,  and  that 
upon  pain  of  damnation,  to  be  a  continual  wor- 
shipper of  him,  and  that  in  the  way  of  his  own  ap- 
pointments. I  have  a  husband,  but  also  a  soul, 
and  my  soul  ought  to  be  more  unto  me  than  all  the 
world  besides.  This  soul  of  mine  I  will  look  after, 
care  for,  and,  if  I  can,  provide  it  a  heaven  for  its 
habitation.  You  are  commanded  to  love  me,  as 
you  love  your  own  body,  and  so  do  I  love  you ;  but 
I  tell  you  true,  I  prefer  my  soul  before  all  the  world, 
and  its  salvation  I  will  seek.1  Ep.  v.  :*. 

At  this,  first  he  gave  her  an  ugly  wish,  and  then 
fell  into  a  fearful  rage,  and  sware  Now  with  what 
moreover  that  if  she  did  go,  he  would  JETS  Sal 
make  both  her  and  all  her  damnable  *™h  Lis  *»&■ 
brotherhood,  for  so  he  was  pleased  to  call  them,  to 
repent  their  coming  thither. 

Attek.  But  what  should  he  mean  by  that? 

Wise.  You  may  easily  guess  what  he  meant. 
He  meant  he  would  turn  informer,2  and  so  either 
weary  out  those  that  she  loved  from  meeting  to- 
gether to  worship  God,  or  make  them  pay  dearly 
for  their  so  doing,  the  which,  if  he  did,  he  knew  it 
would  vex  every  vein  of  her  tender  heart. 

Attest.  But  do  you  think  Mr.  Badman  would 
have  been  so  base  ? 

Wise.  Truly  he  had  malice  and  enmity  enough 
in  his  heart  to  do  it,  only  he  was  a  tradesman ;  also 
he  knew  that  he  must  live  by  his  neighbours,  and 
so  he  had  that  little  wit  in  his  anrrer,  that  he  re- 


1  Such  were  the  sound  reasons  which  animated  the  martyrs 
to  resist  unjust  human  laws,  interfering  with  or  directing  the 
mode  of  divine  worship;  and  such  are  the  reasons  which  pre- 
vent conformity  to  national  religions,  to  the  payment  of  church 
rates,  and  similar  ungodly  impositions. — (Ed.) 

2  The  Quakers  hraved  the  storm,  met  in  public,  and  appeared 
to  court  persecution.  Not  so  the  Baptists;  they  met  in 
woods  and  caves,  and  with  such  secrecy  that  it  was  cot  possible 
to  detect  them,  unless  by  an  informer.  William  Penn  taunted 
them  in  these  words :  '  they  resolve  to  keep  their  old  haunt  of 
creeping  into  garrets,  cheese-lofts,  coalholes,  and  such  like 
nice  walks.'  And  so  would  I,  rather  than  be  disturbed  by  con- 
stables.—(Ed.) 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH    OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


625 


frained  himself  and  did  it  not.      But,  as  1  said,  he  ! 
had  malice  and  envy  enough  in  his  heart  to  have  , 
made  him  to  do  it,  oidv  he  thought  it 

Mr.      Badman's  ,  ,  .  .       ..."       ,  . 

heart  discover-  would  worst  him  in  his  trade;  Yet  these 
I'ay  *£Z  three  things  he  would  be  doing:  1. 
tiie  frtnds  of  He  would  be  putting  of  others  on  to 
molest  and  abuse  her  friends.  2.  He 
would  be  glad  when  he  heard  that  any  mischief 
befelthem.  3.  And  would  laugh  at  her  when  he 
saw  her  troubled  for  them.  And  now  I  have  told 
you  Mr.  Badmau's  way  as  to  this. 

Attex.  But  was  he  not  afraid  of  the  judgments 
of  God  that  did  fly  about  at  that  time  ? 

Wise.  He  regarded  not  the  judgment  nor  mercy 
of  God,  for  had  he  at  all  done  that  he  could  not 
have  done  as  he  did.  But  what  judgments  do  you 
mean  f 

Atte>\  Such  judgments,  that  if  Mr.  Badman 
himself  had  taken  but  sober  notice  of,  they  might 
have  made  him  a  hung  down  his  ears. 

Wise.  Why,  have  you  heard  of  any  such  per- 
sons that  the  judgments  of  God  have  overtaken. 

Attex.  Yes,  and  so,  I  believe,  have  you  too, 
though  you  make  so  strauge  about  it. 

Wise.  I  have  so  indeed,  to  my  astonishment  and 
wonder. 

Atte.v.  Pray,  therefore,  if  you  please,  tell  me 
what  it  is,  as  to  this, that  you  know;  and  then,  per- 
haps, 1  may  also  say  something  to  you  of  the  same. 

Wise.  Id  our  town  there  was  one  W.  S.,  a  man 
Mark.  of  a  very  wicked  life ;  and  he,  when 
JZ-J"  there  seemed  to  be  countenance  given 
to  it,  would  needs  turn  informer.  Well,  so  he  did, 
and  was  as  diligent  in  his  business  as  most  of  them 
could  be ;  he  would  watch  of  nights,  climb  trees, 
and  range  the  woods  of  days,  if  possible,  to  find 
out  the  meeters,  for  then  they  were  forced  to  meet 
in  the  fields ;  yea,  he  wouid  curse  them  bitterly, 
and  swear  most  fearfully  what  he  would  do  to 
them  when  he  found  them.  Well,  after  he  had 
gone  on  like  a  bedlam  in  his  course  awhile,  and 
had  done  some  mischiefs  to  the  people,  he  was 
stricken  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  that  in  this  man- 
ner :  1 .  Although  he  had  his  tongue  naturally  at 
will,  now  he  was  taken  with  a  faltering  in  his 
speech,  and  could  not  for  weeks  together  speak 
otherwise  than  just  like  a  man  that  was  drunk. 
2.  Then  he  was  taken  with  a  drauling,  or  slabber- 
ing at  his  mouth,  which  slabber  sometimes  would 
hang  at  his  mouth  well  nigh  half-way  down  to  the 
ground.  3.  Then  he  had  such  a  weakness  in  the 
back  sinews  of  his  neck,  that  ofttimes  he  could 
not  look  up  before  him,  unless  he  clapped  his  hand 
hard  upon  his  forehead,  and  held  up  his  head  that 
way,  by  strength  of  hand.  4.  After  this  his  speech 
went  quite  away,  and  he  could  speak  no  more  than 
a  swine  or  a  bear.  Therefore,  like  one  of  them, 
he  would  gruntle  and  make  an  ugly  noise,  accord- 
VOL.  ill. 


ing  as  he  was  offended,  or  pleased,  or  would  have 
anything  done,  kc. 

In  this  posture  he  continued  for  the  space  of  half 
a  year  or  thereabouts,  all  the  while  otherwise  well, 
and  could  go  about  his  business,  save  once  that  ho 
had  a  fall  from  the  bell  as  it  hangs  in  our  steeple, 
which  it  was  a  wonder  it  did  not  kill  him.  But 
after  that  he  also  walked  about,  until  God  had 
made  a  sufficient  spectacle  of  his  judgment  for  his 
sin,  and  then  on  a  sudden  he  was  stricken,  and 
died  miserably ;  and  so  there  was  an  end  of  him 
and  his  doings. 

I  will  tell  you  of  another.  About  four  miles 
from  St.  Xeots,  there  was  a  gentleman  ,^_ 

had  a  man,  and  he  would  needs  be  an  '^•^ 
informer,  and  a  lusty  young  man  he  was.  Well, 
an  informer  he  was,  and  did  much  distress  some 
people,  and  had  perfected  his  informations  so  effect- 
ually against  some,  that  there  was  nothing  further 
to  do  but  for  the  constables  to  make  distress  on  the 
people,  that  he  might  have  the  money  or  goods ; 
and,  as  I  heard,  he  hastened  them  much  to  do  it. 
Now,  while  he  was  in  the  heat  of  his  work,  as  he 
stood  one  day  by  the  fire-side,  he  had,  it  should 
seem,  a  mind  to  a  sop  in  the  pan,  for  the  spit  was 
then  at  the  fire,  so  he  went  to  make  him  one ;  but 
behold,  a  dog,  some  say  his  own  dog,  took  distaste 
at  something,  and  bit  his  master  by  the  leg  ;  the 
which  bite,  notwithstanding  all  the  means  that  wai 
used  to  cure  him,  turned,  as  was  said,  to  a  gan- 
grene ;  however,  that  wound  was  his  death,  and 
that  a  dreadful  one  too.  For  my  relator  said  that 
he  lay  in  such  a  condition  by  this  bite,  as  the  be- 
ginning, untd  his  flesh  rotted  from  off  him  before  he 
went  out  of  the  world.  But  what  neeJ  I  instance 
in  particular  persons ;  when  the  judgment  of  God 
against  this  kind  of  people  was  made  manifest,  I 
think  I  may  say,  if  not  in  all,  yet  in  most  of  the 
counties  in  England  where  such  poor  creatures 
were.  But  I  would,  if  it  had  been  the  will  of  God, 
that  neither  1  nor  anybody  else,  could  tell  you  more 
of  these  stories  ;  true  stories,  that  are  neitl 
nor  romance. 

Atte>\  Well,  1  also  heard  of  both  these  n 
and  of  more  too,  as  remarkable  in  their  kind  as 
these,  if  I  had  any  list  to  tell  them  ;  but  let  us 
leave  those  that  are  behind  to  others,  or  to  the 
coming  of  Christ,  who  then  will  justify  or  condemn 
them,  as  the  merit  of  their  work  shall  require  ;  or 
if  they  repented,  and  found  mercy,  I  shall  be  glad 
when  1  know  it,  for  I  wish  not  a  curse  to  the  Bool 
of  mine  enemy. 

Wise.  There  can  be  no  pleasure  in  the  tell     _ 

such  stories,  though  to  hear  of  them  may  do  us  a 

pleasure.     Thev  mav  put  us  in  mind  that  there  is 

a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth,  and  that  doth  not 

:  always  forget  nor  defer  to  hear  the  cry  of  the  des- 

,  titute  ;   t  -oy  also  carry  along  wi;h  them  both  cau- 


626 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  B ADMAN. 


tion  and  counsel  to  those  that  are  the  survivors  of 
such.  Let  us  tremhle  at  the  judgments  of  God, 
and  he  afraid  of  sinning  against  him,  and  it  shall 
he  our  protection.  It  shall  go  well  with  them  that 
fear  God,  that  fear  before  him. 

Atten.  Well,  Sir,  as  you  have  intimated,  so  I 
think  we  have,  in  this  place,  spoken  enough  about 
these  kind  of  men ;  if  you  please,  let  us  return  again 
to  Mr.  Badman  himself,  if  you  have  any  more  to 
6ay  of  him. 

Wise.  More  !  we  have  yet  scarce  thoroughly 
begun  with  anything  that  we  have  said.  All  the 
particulars  are  iu  themselves  so  full  of  badness, 
that  we  have  rather  only  looked  in  them,  than  in- 
deed said  anything  to  them  ;  but  we  will  pass  them 
and  proceed.  You  have  heard  of  the  sins  of  his 
youth,  of  his  apprenticeship,  and  how  he  set  up, 
and  married,  and  what  a  life  he  hath  led  his  wife ; 
and  now  I  will  tell  you  some  more  of  his  pranks. 
New  discourse  He  had  the  very  knack  of  knavery ; 
oiMr.Baum.rn.  ha(i  he>  a3  i  sai(j  before,  been  bound 
to  serve  an  apprenticeship  to  all  these  things,  he 
could  uot  have  been  more  cunning,  he  could  not 
have  been  more  artificial  at  it. 

Atten.  Nor  perhaps  so  artificially  neither.  For 
as  none  can  teach  goodness  like  to  God  himself, 
so,  concerning  sin  and  knavery,  none  can  teach 
a  man  it  like  the  devil,  to  whom,  as  I  perceive, 
Mr.  Badman  went  to  school  from  his  childhood  to 
the  end  of  his  life.  But,  pray,  Sir,  make  a  be- 
ginning. 

Wise.  Well,  so  I  will.  You  may  remember  that 
I  told  you  what  a  condition  he  was  in  for  money 
before  he  did  marry,  and  how  he  got  a  rich  wife, 
with  whose  money  he  paid  his  debts.  Now,  when 
he  had  paid  his  debts,  he  having  some  money  left, 
he  sets  up  again  as  briskly  as  ever,  keeps  a  great 
shop,  drives  a  great  trade,  and  runs  again  a  great 
way  into  debt ;  but  now  not  into  the  debt  of  one  or 

Mr.       Badman     tWO»  ^Ut  mt0  fc'ie  debt  °*  many»  s0  tnat 

plays  a  new  at  last  he  came  to  owe  some  thousands, 
and  thus  he  went  on  a  good  while. 
And,  to  pursue  his  ends  the  better,  be  began  now  to 
study  to  please  all  men,  and  to  suit  himself  to  any 
company  ;  he  could  now  be  as  they,  say  as  they, 
that  is,  il  he  listed ;  and  then  he  would  list,  when 
he  perceived  that  by  so  doing  he  might  either  make 
them  his  customers  or  creditors  for  his  commodities, 
if  he  dealt  with  honest  men,  as  with  some  honest 
men  he  did,  then  he  would  be  as  they,  talk  as  they, 
seem  to  be  sober  as  they,  talk  of  justice  and  reli- 
gion as  they,  and  against  debauchery  as  they;  yea, 
and  would  too  seem  to  show  a  dislike  of  them  that 
said,  did,  or  were  otherwise  than  honest. 

Again,  when  he  did  light  among  those  that  were 
had,  then  he  would  be  as  they,  but  yet  more  close 
and  cautiously,  except  he  were  sure  of  his  com- 
pany.    Then  he  would  carry  it  openly,  be  as  they, 


say,  damn  them  and  sink  them  1  as  they.  If  they 
railed  on  good  men,  so  could  he ;  if  they  railed  on 
religion,  so  could  he;  if  they  talked  beastly, 
vainly,  idly,  so  would  he ;  if  they  were  Mr.  BadmaiJ>s 
for  drinking,  swearing,  whoring,  or  perfections, 
any  the  like  villainies,  so  was  he.  This  was  now 
the  path  he  trod  in,  and  could  do  all  artificialhy  as 
any  man  alive.  And  now  he  thought  himself  a 
perfect  man,  he  thought  he  was  always  a  boy  till 
now.     What  think  you  now  of  Mr.  Badman  ? 

Atten.  Think !  why  I  think  he  was  an  atheist ; 
for  no  man  but  an  atheist  can  do  this.  I  say  it 
cannot  be  but  that  the  man  that  is  such  as  this 
Mr.  Badman  must  be  a  rank  and  stinking  atheist, 
for  he  that  believes  that  there  is  either  God  or 
devil,  heaven  or  hell,  or  death  and  judgment  after, 
cannot  do  as  Mr.  Badman  did ;  I  mean  if  he  could 
do  these  things  without  reluctancy  and  check  of 
conscience,  yea,  if  he  had  not  sorrow  and  remorse 
for  such  abominable  sins  as  these. 

Wise.  Nay,  he  was  so  far  off  from  reluctances 
and  remorse  of  conscience  for  these  things,  that 
he  counted  them  the  excellency  of  his  attainments, 
the  quintessence  of  his  wit,  his  rare  and  singular 
virtues,  such  as  but  few  besides  himself  could  be 
the  masters  of.  Therefore,  as  for  those  that 
made  boggle  and  stop  at  things,  and  that  could 
not  in  conscience,  and  for  fear  of  death  and  judg- 
ment, do  such  things  as  he,  he  would  call  them 
fools  and  noddies,2  and  charge  them  for  being 
frighted  with  the  talk  of  unseen  bugbears,  and 
would  encourage  them,  if  they  would  be  men  in- 
deed, to  labour  after  the  attainment  of  this  his 
excellent  art.  He  would  oftentimes  please  him- 
self with  the  thoughts  of  what  he  could  do  in  this 
matter,  saying  within  himself,  I  can  be  religious 
and  irreligious,  I  can  be  anything  or  nothing;  I 
can  swear,  and  speak  against  swear-  „  „  -  ] 
ing;  1  can  lie,  and  speak  against  lying;     i»»"  came  to 

T  °  ...  i      v  i  j       eujoy  himseli. 

1  can  drink,  wench,  be  unclean,  and 
defraud,  and  not  be  troubled  for  it.  Now  I 
enjoy  myself,  and  am  master  of  mine  own  ways, 
and  not  they  of  me.  This  I  have  attained  with 
much  study,  great  care,  and  more  pains.  But  this 
his  talk  should  be  only  with  himself,  to  his  wife, 
who  he  knew  durst  not  divulge  it,  or  among  his 
intimates,  to  whom  he  knew  he  might  say  any 
thing 

Atten.  Did  I  call  him  before  an  atheist?  I  may 
call  him  now  a  devil,  or  a  man  possessed  with  one, 
if  not  with  many.  I  think  that  there  cannot  be 
found  in  every  corner  such  a  one  as  this.  True, 
it  is  said  of  kins  Ahaz  that  he  sinned  more  and 


1  Sink  them  is  an  unusual  kind  of  oath,  wishing  that  body 
or  mind  might  be  depressed.  Shakspcare  uses  the  word  in 
reference  to  mental  suffering:  'If  1  have  a  conscience,  let  it 
sink  me.' — (En.) 

2  .Noddy,  a  simpleton  ;  see  Imperial  Dictionary. — (Ed.) 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OP   MR.  BADMAN. 


627 


more.  2  oh.  hvHL  22.  And  of  Ahab,  that  he  sohl 
'himself  to  work  wickedness.'  1  Ki.  xxi.  25.  And  of 
the  men  of  Sodom,  that  they  '  were  sinners  before 
the  Lord  exceedingly.'   Go.  xiii.  18. 

Wise.  An  atheist  he  was  no  doubt,  if  there  be 
such  a  thing  as  an  atheist  in  the  world  ;  but  for 
nil  his  brags  of  perfection  and  security  in  bis 
wickedness,  I  believe  that  at  times  God  did  let 
down  fire  from  heaven  into  his  conscience.  Jobxxi.17. 
True,  I  believe  he  would  quickly  put  it  out  again, 
and  grow  more  wicked  and  desperate  afterward, 
but  this  also  turned  to  bis  destruction,  as  after- 
ward you  may  hear. 

But  I  am  not  of  your  mind  to  think  that  there 
are  but  few  such  in  the  world,  except  you  mean  as 
to  the  degree  of  wickedness  unto  which  he  had 

There  are abund-    attained-       For    Otherwise,  no    doubt, 

ance  like  iir.  there  is  abundance  of  such  as  be ; 
men  of  the  same  mind,  of  the  same 
principles,  and  of  the  same  conscience  too,  to  put 
them  into  practice.  Yea,  I  believe  that  there 
are  many  that  are  endeavouring  to  attain  to  the 
same  pitch  of  wickedness,  and  all  them  are  such 
as  he  iu  the  judgment  of  the  law,  nor  will  their 
want  of  hellish  wit  to  attain  thereto  excuse  them 
at  the  day  of  judgment.  You  know  that  in  all 
science  some  are  more  arch  than  some,  and  so  it 
is  in  the  art  as  well  as  in  the  practice  of  wicked- 
ness, some  are  two-fold  and  some  seven-fold  more 
the  children  of  hell  than  others — and  yet  all  the 
children  of  hell — else  they  would  all  be  masters, 
and  none  scholars  in  the  school  of  wickedness. 
But  there  must  be  masters,  and  there  must  be 
learners;  Mr.  Badman  was  a  master  in  this  art, 
and  therefore  it  follows  that  he  must  be  an  arch 
and  chief  one  iu  that  mystery. 

Atten.  You  are  in  the  right,  for  I  perceive  that 
some  men,  though  they  desire  it,  are  not  so  arch 
in  the  practice  thereof  as  others,  but  are,  as  1  sup- 
pose they  call  them,  fools  and  dunces  to  the  rest, 
tiieir  heads  and  capacities  will  not  serve  them  to 
act  and  do  so  wickedly.  But  Mr.  Badman  wanted 
not  a  wicked  head  to  contrive,  as  well  as  a  wicked 
heart  to  do  his  wickedness. 

Wise.  True,  but  yet  1  say  such  men  shall  at 
the  day  of  judgment  be  judged,  not  only  for  what 
they  are,  but  also  for  what  they  would  be.  For 
if  '  the  thought  of  foolishness  is  sin,'  doubtless  the 
desire  of  foolishness  is  more  sin;  and  if  the  desire 
be  more,  the  endeavour  after  it  must  needs  be 
He  that  would  more  and  more.  l's.  xxiv.  9.  He  then 
be  u^a  is  bad.  t|iat  ;s  not  ail  artificial  atheist  and 
transgressor,  yet  if  he  desires  to  be  so,  if  he  eu- 
deavoureth  to  be  so,  he  shall  be  judged  and  con- 
demned to  hell  for  such  a  one.  For  the  law 
judgeth  men,  as  I  said,  according  to  what  they 
would  be.  He  that  '  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust 
after  her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already 


in  his  heart.'  Mat.  v.  28.  By  tho  same  rule,  he  that 
would  steal  doth  steal ;  he  that  would  cheat,  doth 
cheat;  he  that  would  swear,  doth  swear;  and  he 
that  would  commit  adultery,  doth  do  so.  For 
God  judgeth  men  according  to  the  working  of  their 
minds,  and  saith,  'As  he  thinkcth,  so  is  he.'  Pr.xdiL7. 
That  is,  so  is  he  in  his  heart,  in  bis  intentions,  in 
his  desires,  in  his  endeavours;  and  God's  law,  I 
say,  lays  hold  of  the  desires,  intentions,  and  en- 
deavours, even  as  it  lays  hold  of  the  act  of  wicked- 
ness itself.  Mat.  v.  Ko.  vii.  7.  A  man  then  that  desires 
to  be  as  bad  as  Mr.  Badman,  and  desires  to  be  so 
wicked  have  many  in  their  hearts,  though  ho 
never  attains  to  that  proficiency  in  wickedness  as 
he,  shall  be  judged  for  as  bad  a  man  as  he,  be- 
cause it  was  in  his  desires  to  be  such  a  wicked 
one. 

Atten.  But  this  height  of  wickedness  in  Mr. 
Badman  will  not  yet  out  of  my  mind.  This  hard, 
desperate,  or,  what  shall  I  call  it,  diabolical  frame 
of  heart,  was  in  him  a  foundation,  a  ground-work 
to  all  acts  and  deeds  that  were  evil. 

Wise.  The  heart,  and  the  desperate  wickedness 
of  it,  is  the  foundation  and  ground-work  of  all. 
Atheism,  professed  and  practical,  A  bad  lpart 
spring  both  out  of  the  heart,  yea,  nmkea  a  bud 
and  all  manner  of  evil  besides.  For 
they  be  not  bad  deeds  that  make  a  bad  man,  but 
he  is  already  a  bad  man  that  doth  bad  deeds.  A 
man  must  be  wicked  before  he  can  do  wickedness. 
'  Wickedness  proceedeth  from  the  wicked.'  1  Sa. 
xxiv.  13.  It  is  an  evil  tree  that  bears  evil  fruit. 
Men  gather  no  grapes  of  thorns ;  the  heart  there- 
fore must  be  evil  before  the  man  can  do  evil,  and 
good  before  the  man  doth  good.   Mat.  vii.  16-18. 

Atten.  Now  I  see  the  reason  why  Mr.  Badman 
was  so  base  as  to  get  a  wife  by  dissimulation,  and 
to  abuse  her  so  like  a  villain  when  he  had  got  her, 
it  was  because  he  was  before,  by  a  wicked  heart, 
prepared  to  act  wickedness. 

Wish.  You  may  be  sure  of  it,  '  For  from  with- 
in, out  of  the  heart  of  men,  proceed  evil  thoughts, 
adulteries,  fornications,  murders,  thefts,  covetous- 
ness,  wickedness,  deceit,  lasciviousness,  an  evil  eye, 
blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness:  all  these  things  come 
from  within  and  defile  the  man.'  Mar.  vii.  20-23.  And 
a  man,  as  his  naughty  mind  inclines  him,  makes 
use  of  these,  or  any  of  these,  to  gratify  his  lust, 
to  promote  his  designs,  to  revenge  his  malice,  to 
enrich,  or  to  wallow  himself  in  the  foolish  pleasures 
and  pastimes  of  this  life.  And  all  these  did  Mr. 
Badman  do,  even  to  the  utmost,  if  either  oppor- 
tunity, or  purse,  or  pertidiousuess,  would  help  him 
to  the  obtaining  of  his  purpose. 

Atten.  Purse!  why  be  could  not  but  have  purse 
to  do  almost  what  he  would,  having  married  a  wife 
with  so  much  money. 

Wise.    Hold  you  there;   some  of  Mr.  Badman 's 


628 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


sins  were  costl}',  as  Ills  drinking,  and  whoring,  and 
keeping  other  bad  company  ;  though  he  was  a  man 
that  had  ways  too  many  to  get  money,  as  well  as 
ways  too  many  to  spend  it. 

Attkn.  Had  he  then  such  a  good  trade,  for  all 
he  was  such  a  bad  man?  Or  was  his  calling  so 
gainful  to  him  as  always  to  keep  his  purse's  belly 
full,  though  he  was  himself  a  great  spender? 

Wise.  No,  it  was  not  his  trade  that  did  it, 
though  he  had  a  pretty  trade  too.  He  had  another 
way  to  get  money,  and  that  by  hatfuls  and  pocket- 
fuls  at  a  time. 

Atten.  Why  I  trow  he  was  no  highwayman, 
was  he  ? 

Wise.  I  will  be  sparing  in  my  speech  as  to  that, 
though  some  have  muttered  as  if  he  could  ride  out 
now  and  then,  about  nobody  but  himself  knew 
what,  over  night,  and  come  home  all  dirty  and 
weary  next  morning.  But  that  is  not  the  thing 
I  aim  at. 

Atten.  Pray  let  me  know  it,  if  you  think  it 
convenient  that  I  should. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
[badman  is  a  bankrupt,  and  gets  bt  IT  '  HATFULS 

OF  MONEY.'] 

Wise.  I  will  tell  you;  it  was  this,  he  had  an  art 
to  break,  and  get  hatfuls  of  money  by  breaking. 

jrr.Badmanhad  AtTEN-    But  what  d°  .V0U  mean  hJ 

aa  art  to  break,    Mr.  Badman's  breaking?     You  sneak 

and     to      get  „         ,  ~  l 

money      that   mystically,  do  you  not  i 

way-  Wise.  No,  no,  I  speak  plainly.   Or.  if 

you  will  have  it  in  plainer  language,  it  is  this; — 
when  Mr.  Badman  had  swaggered  and  whored  awav 
most  of  his  wife's  portion,  he  began  to  feel  that  he 
could  not  much  longer  stand  upon  his  legs  in  this 
course  of  life,  and  keep  up  his  trade  and  repute — 
such   as  he  had — in   the   world,  but  by  the  new 

How  he  managed  enSine  of  breaking.  Wherefore  upon 
things  in  order  a  time  he  gives  a  great  and  sudden 

to  his  breaking.  ,     .  °  ,  ,      ,    , 

rush  into  several  men  s  debts,  to  the 
value  of  about  four  or  five  thousand  pounds,  driv- 
ing at  the  same  time  a  very  great  trade,  by  selling 
many  things  for  less  than  they  cost  him,  to  get 
him  custom,  therewith  to  blind  his  creditors'  eyes. 
His  creditors  therefore  seeing  that  he  had  a  great 
employ,  and  dreaming  that  it  must  needs  at  length 
turn  to  a  very  good  account  to  them,  trusted  him 
freely  without  mistrust,  and  so  did  others  too,  to 
the  value  of  what  was  mentioned  before.  Well, 
when  Mr.  Badman  had  well  feathered  his  nest  with 
other  men's  goods  and  money,  after  a  little  time 
he  breaks.  And  by  and  by  it  was 
noised  abroad  that  Mr.  Badman  had 
shut  up  shop,  was  gone,  and  could  trade  no  longer. 
Now  by  that  time  his  breaking  was  come  to  his 
creditors'  ears,  he  had  by  craft  and  knavery  made 


so  sure  of  what  he  had,  that  his  creditors  could  not 
touch  a  penny.  Well,  when  he  had  done,  he  sends 
his  mournful   sugared  letters   to  his   ,,      _  , 

°  Mr.     Badman  9 

creditors,  to  let  them  understand  what     »«gar  words  to 

,11  ■,         ,,•  jj-jh|S  creditors. 

had  happened  unto  him,  and   desired 
them  not  to  be  severe  with  him,  for  he  bore  to- 
wards all  men  an  honest  mind,  and  would  pay  so 
far  as  he  was  able.      Now  he  sends 

,  .     ,    ,,  ,  -    ,  .,,        Badman's  friend. 

Ins  letters  by  a  man  confederate  with 
him,  who  could  make  both  the  worst  and  best  of 
Mr.  Badman's  case;  the  best  for  Mr.  Badman  and 
the  worst  for  his  creditors.  So  when  he  comes  to 
them  he  both  bemoans  them  and  condoles  Mr. 
Badman's  condition,  telling  of  them  that,  without 
a  speedy  bringing  of  thing3  to  a  conclusion,  Mr. 
Badman  would  be  able  to  make  them  no  satisfac- 
tion, but  at  present  he  both  could  and  would,  and 
that  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  and  to  that  end  he 
desired  that  they  would  come  over  to  him.  Well, 
his  creditors  appoint  him  a  time  and  come  over,  and 
he,  meanwhile,  authorizes  another  to  treat  with 
them,  but  will  not  be  seen  himself,  unless  it  was 
on  a  Sunday,  lest  they  should  snap  him  with  a  writ. 
So  his  deputed  friend  treats  with  them  about  their 
concern  with  Mr.  Badman,  first  telling  them  of  the 
great  care  that  Mr.  Badman  took  to  satisfy  them 
and  all  men  for  whatsoever  he  owed,  as  far  as  in 
him  lay,  and  how  little  he  thought  a  while  since  to 
be  in  this  low  condition.  He  pleaded  also  the 
greatness  of  his  charge,  the  greatness  of  taxes, 
the  badness  of  the  times,  and  the  great  losses  that 
he  had  by  many  of  his  customers ;  some  of  which 
died  in  his  debt,  others  were  run  away,  and  for 
many  that  were  alive  he  never  expected  a  farthing 
from  them.  Yet  nevertheless  he  would  show  him- 
self an  honest  man,  and  would  pay  as  far  as  he 
was  able ;  and  if  they  were  willing  to  come  to 
terms,  he  would  make  a  composition  with  them, 
for  he  was  not  able  to  pay  them  all.  W)iat  M|.  ^ 
The  creditors  asked   what  he  would     man  propounds 

„       r.  v     i     tt    ij?  to liis  creditors. 

give  i  It  was  replied,  Half-a-crown 
in  the  pound.  At  this  they  began  to  huff,  and  he  to 
renew  his  complaint  and  entreaty,  but  the  creditors 
would  not  hear,  and  so  for  that  time  their  meeting 
without  success  broke  up.  But  after  his  creditors 
were  in  cool  blood,  and  admitting  of  second 
thoughts,  and  fearing  lest  delays  should  make 
them  lose  all,  they  admit  of  a  second  debate,  come 
together  again,  and,  by  many  words  and  great  ado, 
they  obtained  five  shillings  in  the  pound.  So  the 
money  was  produced,  releases  and  They  at  last 
discharges  drawn,  signed,  and  sealed,  ^idrnHn"^'^* 
books  crossed,  and  all  tilings  con-  »y  breaking, 
firmed  ;  and  then  Mr.  Badman  can  put  his  head 
out  a  doors  again,  and  be  a  better  man  than  when 
he  shut  up  shop,  by  several  thousands  of  pounds.1 


Fraudulent  bankruptcy  is  a  sore  aud  prevailing  evil.     It 


THE  LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


G29 


Atten.  And  did  he  do  thus  indeed  ? 

Wise.  Yes,  once* and  again.  I  think  he  brake 
twice  or  thrice. 

Atten.  And  did  lie  do  it  before  ho  had  need  to 
do  it? 

Wise.  Need  !  What  do  you  mean  by  need  ? 
There  is  no  need  at  any  time  for  a  man  to  play  the 
knave.  lie  did  it  of  a  wicked  mind,  to  defraud 
and  beguile  his  creditors.  He  had  wherewithal  of 
T.  ,      his  father,  and  also  bv  his  wife,  to  have 

I  here  is  no  plea 

lor  his  dis-  lived  upon,  with  lawful  labour,  like  an 
honest  man.  He  had  also,  when  he 
made  this  wieked  break,  though  he  had  been  a 
profuse  and  prodigal  spender,  to  have  paid  his 
creditors  their  own  to  a  farthing.  But  had  he 
done  so,  he  had  not  done  like  himself,  like  Mr. 
Badman ;  had  he,  I  say,  dealt  like  an  honest  man, 
he  had  then  gone  out  of  Mr.  Badman's  road.  He 
did  it  therefore  of  a  dishonest  mind,  and  to  a  wicked 
end;  to  wit,  that  he  might  have  wherewithal,  how- 
soever unlawfully  gotten,  to  follow  his  cups  and 
queans,1  and  to  live  in  the  full  swing  of  his  lusts, 
even  as  he  did  before. 

Atten.  Why  this  was  a  mere  cheat. 

Wise.  It  was  a  cheat  indeed.  This  way  of 
breaking,  it  is  nothing  else  but  a  more  neat  way 
of  thieving,  of  picking  of  pockets,  of  breaking  open 
of  shops,  and  of  taking  from  men  what  one  has 
nothing  to  do  with.  But  though  it  seem  easy,  it 
is  hard  to  learn ;  no  man  that  has  conscience  to 
God  or  mau,  can  ever  be  his  crafts-master  in  this 
hellish  art. 

Atten.  0  !  Sir  !  What  a  wicked  man  was  this  ! 

Wise.  A  wicked  man  indeed.  By  this  art  he 
could  tell  how  to  make  men  send  their  goods  to  his 
shop,  and  then  be  glad  to  take  a  penny  for  that 
which  he  had  promised,  before  it  came  thither, 
to  give  them  a  groat :  1  say,  he  could  make  them 
glad  to  take  a  crown  for  a  pound's  worth,  and  a 
thousand  for  that  for  which  he  had  promised  before 
to  give  them  four  thousand  pounds. 

Atten.  This  argueth  that  Mr.  Badman  had  but 
little  conscience. 

Wise.  This  argued  that  Mr.  Badman  had  no 
conscience  at  all ;  for  conscience,  the  least  spark 
of  a  good  conscience,  cannot  endure  this. 

Atten.  Before  we  go  any  further  in  Mr.  Bad- 
man's  matters,  let  me  desire  you,  if  you  please,  to 
give  me  an  answer  to  these  two  questions.  1.  What 
do  you  find  in  the  Word  of  God  against  such  a  prac- 
tice as  this  of  Mr.  Badman's  is  ?  2.  What  would 
you  have  a  man  do  that  is  in  hi3  creditor's  debt, 
and  can  neither  pay  him  what  he  owes  him,  nor 
go  on  in  a  trade  any  longer  ? 


is  thieving  under  the  protection  of  the  law.     How  many  live 

in  state,  until  their  creditors  get  a  few  shillings  in  the  pound, 

aud  the  bankrupt  gets  the  curse  of  G<>d  upon  his  soul ! — (En.) 

1  Quean,  a  slut,   a  struir.pet;    spp   Imperial  Diet. —  (Ed.) 


Wise.  I  will  answer  you  as  well  as  I  can.  And 
first,  to  the  first  of  your  questions;  An  anSwRr  to 
to  wit,  What  I  find  in  the  Word  of  twofuwtioM. 
God  against  such  a  practice  as  this  of  Mr.  Bad- 
man's  is. 

The  Word  of  God  doth  forbid  this  wickedness; 
and  to  make  it  the  more  odious  in  our  Tlic  fir?t  qneil. 
eyes,  it  joins  it  with  theft  and  robbery.  tl"M  ">*^'vi. 
*  Thou  shalt  not, 'says  God,  'defraud  thy  neighbour, 
neither  rob  him.'  Le.  xix.  is.  Thou  shalt  not  defraud, 
that  is,  deceive  or  beguile.  Now  thus  to  break,  is 
to  defraud,  deceive  and  beguile;  which  is,  as  you  see, 
forbidden  by  the  God  of  heaven:  'Thou  shalt  not 
defraud  thy  neighbour,  neither  rob  him.'  It  is  a 
kind  of  theft  and  robbery,  thus  to  defraud,  and  be- 
guile. It  is  a  vilely  robbing  of  his  shop,  and  picking 
of  his  pocket;  a  thing  odious  to  reason  and  con- 
science, and  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature.  It  is  a 
designed  piece  of  wickedness,  and  therefore  a  double 
sin.  A  man  cannot  do  this  great  wickedness  on  a 
sudden,  and  through  a  violent  assault  Thehdnouaiess 
of  Satan.  He  that  will  commit  this  sin,  of  tlus  sm- 
must  have  time  to  deliberate,  that  by  invention  be 
may  make  it  formidable,  and  that  with  lies  and  high 
dissimulations.  He  that  commits  this  wickedness, 
must  first  hatch  it  upon  his  bed,  beat  his  head  about 
it,  and  lay  his  plot  strong.  So  that  to  the  completing 
of  such  a  wickedness,  there  must  be  adjoined  many 
sins,  and  they  too  must  go  hand  in  hand  until  it 
be  completed.  But  what  saith  the  scripture?  « Let 
no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud  his  brother  in  any 
matter:  because  that  the  Lord  is  the  avenger  of 
all  such.'  l  Thes.  iv.  e.  But  this  kind  of  breaking  is 
a  going  beyond  my  brother;  this  is  a  compassing  of 
him  about,  that  I  may  catch  him  in       . 

,        .,  ■•      Fair  waning. 

my  net ;  and  as  I  said,  an  art  to  rob 
my  brother,  and  to  pick  his  pocket,  and  that  with 
his  consent.  Which  doth  not  therefore  mitigate, 
but  so  much  the  more  greaten,  and  make  odious 
the  offence.  For  men  that  are  thus  wilily  abused, 
cannot  help  themselves;  they  are  taken  in  a  deceit- 
ful net.  But  God  will  here  concern  himself,  he 
will  be  the  avenger,  he  will  be  the  avenger  of  all 
such  either  here,  or  in  another  world. 

And  this,  the  apostle  testifies  again,  where  he 
saith,  •  But  he  that  doeth  wrong,  shall  receive  for 
the  wrong  which  he  hath  done;  and  there  is  no  re- 
spect of  persons.'  CoLiH.  25.  That  is,  there  is  no 
man,  be  he  what  ho  will,  if  he  will  be 
guilty  of  this  sin,  of  going  beyond,  of 
beguiling  of,  and  doing  wrong  to  his  brother,  but 
God  will  call  him  to  an  account  for  it,  and  will  pay 
him  with  vengeance  for  it  too ;  for  « there  is  no  re- 
spect of  persons.' 

I  might  add,  that  this  sin  of  wronging,  of  going 
beyond,  and  defrauding  of  my  neighbour,  it  is  like 
that  first  prank  that  the  devil  played  with  our  first 
parents,  as  the  altar  that  Uriah  built  for  Aliaz, 


630 


THE    LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


was  taken  from  the  fashion  of  that  that  stood  at 
Damascus,  to  be  the  very  pattern  of  it.  The  ser- 
pent beguiled  me,  says  Eve;  Mr.  Badman  beguiles 
his  creditors.  The  serpent  beguiled  Eve  with  lying 
He  that  design-  promises  of  ffain;  and  so  did  Mr.  Bad- 
thlLinTuke  man  beguile"  his  creditors.  The  ser- 
tbe  deviL  pent  sai(\  one  tiling  and  meant  another, 

when  he  beguiled  Eve  ;  and  so  did  Mr.  Badman 
when  he  beguiled  his  creditors. 

That  man  therefore  that  doth  thus  deceive  and 
beguile  his  neighbour,  imitateth  the  devil;  he  tak- 
eth  his  examples  from  him,  and  not  from  God,  the 
Word,  or  good  men;  and  this  did  Mr.  Badman. 

And  now  to  your  second  question ;  to  wit,  what 
The       second    I  would  have  a  man  do  that  is  in  his 

question,  creditor's  debt,  and  that  can  neither 
pay  him,  nor  go  on  in  a  trade  any  longer  ? 

Answ.  First  of  all.  If  this  be  his  case,  and  he 
knows  it,  let  him  not  run  one  penny  further  in  his 
creditors'  debt,  for  that  cannot  be  done  with  good 
conscience.  He  that  knows  he  cannot  pay,  and 
yet  will  run  into  debt ;  does  knowingly  wrong  and 
defraud  his  neighbour,  and  falls  under  that  sentence 
of  the  Word  of  God,  '  The  wicked  borroweth,  and 
,  .  payeth  not  again.'  1's. xxxvii. 21.  Yea, 
ire  bankrupts    worse,  he  borrows,  though  at  the  very 

should        deil  1        1  ,1      .     1  . 

with  their  con-  same  time  lie  knows  that  he  cannot 
sciences.  pay  agajn_     jj0  J0th  also  craftily  take 

away  what  is  his  neighbour's.  That  is  therefore 
the  first  thing  that  I  would  propound  to  such;  let 
him  not  run  any  farther  into  his  creditors'  debt. 
Secondly,  After  this,  let  him  consider,  how,  and 
by  what  means  he  was  brought  into 
such  a  condition  that  he  could  not  pay 
his  just  debts.  To  wit,  whether  it  was  by  his  own 
remissness  in  his  calling,  by  living  too  high  in  diet 
or  apparel,  by  lending  too  lavishingly  that  which 
was  none  of  his  own,  to  his  loss;  or  whether  by  the 
immediate  hand  and  judgment  of  God. 

If  by  searching  he  finds  that  this  is  come  upon 
him  through  remissness  in  his  calling,  extravagan- 
cies in  his  family,  or  the  like;  let  him  labour  for  a 
sense  of  his  sin  and  wickedness,  for  he  has  sinned 
agaiust  the  Lord.  First,  in  his  being  slothful  in 
business,  and  in  not  providing,  to  wit,  of  his  own, 
by  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  or  other  honest  ways, 
for  those  of  his  own  house.  Ho.  xii.  11.  1  Ti.  v.  8.  And, 
secondly,  in  being  lavishing  in  diet  and  apparel  in 
the  family,  or  in  lending  to  others  that  which  was 
none  of  his  own.  This  cannot  be  done  with  o-ood 
conscience.  It  is  both  against  reason  and  nature, 
and  therefore  must  be  a  sin  against  God.  I  say 
therefore,  if  thus  this  debtor  hath  done,  if  ever  he 
would  live  quietly  in  conscience,  and  comfortably 
in  his  condition  for  the  future,  let  him  humble  him- 
self before  God,  and  repent  of  this  his  wickedness. 
For  '  he  that  is  slothful  in  his  work,  is  brother  to 
him  that  is  a  great  waster.'  Pr.  xviii.  9.     To  be  sloth- 


Good  advice. 


ful  and  a  waster  too,  is  to  be  as  it  were  a  double 
sinner. 

But  again,  as  this  man  should  inquire  into  these 
things,  so  he  should  also  into  this,  How  came  I 
into  this  way  of  dealing  in  which  I  have  now  mis- 
carried? Is  it  a  way  that  my  parents  brought  me 
up  in,  put  me  apprentice  to,  or  that  by  providence 
I  was  first  thrust  into?  Or  is  it  a  way  into  which 
I  have  twisted  myself,  as  not  being  contented  with 
my  first  lot,  that  by  God  and  my  parents  I  was 
cast  into?  This  ought  duly  to  be  con-  Good  counsel 
sidered,  and  if  upon  search  a  man  shall  agalu- 
find  that  he  is  out  of  the  place  and  calling  into 
which  he  was  put  by  his  parents,  or  the  providence 
of  God,  and  has  miscarried  in  a  new  way,  that 
through  pride  and  dislike  of  his  first  state  he  has 
chose  rather  to  embrace  ;  his  miscarriage  is  his  sin, 
the  fruit  of  his  pride,  and  a  token  of  the  judgment 
of  God  upon  him  for  his  leaving  of  his  first  state. 
And  for  this  he  ought,  as  for  tho  former,  to  bo 
humble  and  penitent  before  the  Lord, 

But  if  by  search,  he  finds  that  his  poverty  came 
by  none  of  these  ;  if  by  honest  search,    TT     4  .  ._ 

,        _     ,  J  How  to  find  that 

he  finds  it  so,  and   can  say  with  good      thy  decay  came 

conscience,  I  went  not  out  of  ray  place     „^eilC  'or  JGod" 

and  state  in  which  God  by  his  provi-     or  h?  **  1UJS" 

J  r  carriage. 

dence  had  put  me;  hut  have  abode 
with  God  in  the  calling  wherein  I  was  called,  and 
have  wrought  hard,  and  fared  meanly,  been  civilly 
apparelled,  and  have  not  directly  nor  indirectly 
made  away  with  my  creditors'  goods ;  then  has  his 
fall  come  upon  him  by  the  immediate  hand  of  God, 
whether  by  visible  or  invisible  ways.  For  some- 
times it  comes  by  visible  ways,  to  wit,  by  fire,  by 
thieves,  by  loss  of  cattle,  or  the  wickednessr  of  sin- 
ful dealers,  &c.  And  sometimes  by  means  in- 
visible, and  then  no  man  knows  how ;  we  only  see 
things  are  going,  but  cannot  see  by  what  way  they 
go.  Well,  now  suppose  that  a  man,  by  an  im- 
mediate hand  of  God,  is  brought  to  a  morsel  of 
bread,  what  must  he  do  now  ? 

1  answer :  His  surest  way  is  still  to  think,  that 
this  is  the  fruit  of  some  sin,  though  Auoti,er  flllS3. 
possibly  not  sin  in  the  management  of  U(J"' 
his  calling,  yet  of  some  other  sin.  '  God  casteth 
away  the  substance  of  the  wicked.'  Fr.  x.  s.  There- 
fore let  him  still  humble  himself  before  his  God, 
because  his  hand  is  upon  him,  and  say,  What  sin 
is  this,  for  which  this  hand  of  God  is  upon  me  ? 
1  Pe.  v.  6.  And  let  him  be  diligent  to  find  it  out,  for 
some  sin  is  the  cause  of  this  judgment;  for  God 
1  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children 
of  men.'  La.  ui.  33.  Either  the  heart  is  too  much 
set  upon  the  world,  or  religion  is  too  much  neglected 
in  thy  family,  or  something.  There  is  a  snake  in 
the  grass,  a  worm  in  the  gourd  ;  some  sin  in  thy 
bosom,  for  the  sake  of  which  God  doth  thus  deal 
with  thee. 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH    OE  MR.  B ADMAN. 


C31 


Thirdly,  This  thus  done,  let  that  man  again 
Good  advice  consider  thus  with  himself :  perhaps 
again.  goci  is  now  changing  of  my  condition 
and  state  in  the  world  ;  he  has  let  me  live  in  fashion, 
in  fulness,  and  abundance  of  worldly  glory ;  and  I 
did  not  to  his  glory  improve,  as  I  should,  that  his 
good  dispensation  to  me.  But  when  I  lived  in  full 
and  fat  pasture,  I  did  there  lift  up  the  heel.  De. 
xixii.  15.  Therefore  he  will  now  turn  me  into  hard 
commons,  that  with  leanness,  and  hunger,  and 
meanness,  and  want,  I  may  spend  the  rest  of  my 
days.  But  let  him  do  this  without  murmuring 
and  repining ;  let  him  do  it  in  a  godly  manner, 
submitting  himself  to  the  judgment  of  God.  '  Let 
the  rich  rejoice  in  that  he  is  made  low.'  j*.  i :»,  10. 

This  is  duty,  and  it  may  be  privilege  to  those 
that  are  under  this  hand  of  God.  And  for  thy 
encouragement  to  this  hard  work,  for  this  is  a  hard 
work,  consider  of  these  four  things.  1.  This  is 
Consider  four  1'igbt  lying  down  under  God's  hand, 
things.  au(i  ti)e  way  t0  i-,e  exalted  in  God's 
time.  When  God  would  have  Job  embrace  the 
dunghill, he  embraces  it, and  says,  'The  Lord  gave, 
and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord.'  Job  i.  21.  2.  Consider,  that  there 
are  blessings  also  that  attend  a  low  condition,  more 
than  all  the  world  are  aware  of.1  A  poor  condi- 
tion has  preventing  mercy  attending  of  it.  The 
poor,  because  they  are  poor,  are  not  capable  of 
sinning  against  God  as  the  rich  man  does.  Ps.  ilix.  o. 
3.  The  poor  can  more  clearly  see  himself  preserved 
by  the  providence  of  God  than  the  rich,  for  he 
trusteth  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches.  4.  It  may 
be  God  has  made  thee  poor,  because  he  would  make 
thee  rich.  '  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren,  hath 
not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world,  rich  in  faith, 
and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which  God  hath  pro- 
mised to  them  that  love  him?'  Ja.  ii.  5. 

I  am  persuaded  if  men  upon  whom  this  hand  of 
God  is,  would  thus  quietly  lie  down  and  humble 
themselves  under  it,  they  would  find  more  peace, 
yea  more  blessing  of  God  attending  them  in  it, 
than  the  most  of  men  are  aware  of.  But  this  is  a 
hard  chapter,  and  therefore  1  do  not  expect  that 
many  should  either  read  it  with  pleasure,  or  desire 
to  take  my  counsel. 

Having  thus  spoken  to  the  broken  man,  with 
reference  to  his  own  self,  I  will  now  speak  to  him 
Honest  deaiin»  as  ^e  stands  related  to  his  creditors, 
wan  creditor*"   ia  tile  1)ext  piace  therefore,  let  him 


1  Witness  the  shepherd  boy's  song  in  the  Filgrim,  p.200: — 

He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  lull, 

lie  that  13  low,  no  pride  ; 
lie  that  is  humble  ever  shall 

Have  GoU  to  be  bis  jtuide. 

Tjiis  poor  boy,  in  his  very  ineau  clothes,  carried  more  heart's 
ease  111  Ids  bosom,  than  he  that  was  clad  in  silk  and  velvet. — 
(Ed.) 


fall  upon  the  most  honest  way  of  dealing  with  his 
creditors,  and  that  I  think  must  be  this: 

First,  Let  him  timely  make  them  acquainted 
with  his  condition,  and  also  do  to  them  these  three 
things.  1.  Let  him  heartily  and  unfoignedly  ask 
them  forgiveness  for  the  wrong  that  he  has  done 
them.  2.  Let  him  proffer  them  all,  and  the  whole 
all  that  ever  he  has  in  the  world ;  let  him  hide 
nothing,  let  him  strip  himself  to  his  raiment  for 
them ;  let  him  not  keep  a  ring,  a  spoon,  or  any- 
thing from  them.  3.  If  none  of  these  two  will 
satisfy  them,  let  him  proffer  them  his  body,  to  be 
at  their  dispose,  to  wit,  either  to  abide  imprison- 
ment at  their  pleasure,  or  to  be  at  their  service, 
till  by  labour  aud  travel  he  hath  made  them  such 
amends  as  they  in  reason  think  fit,  only  reserving 
something  for  the  succour  of  his  poor  and  distressed 
family  out  of  his  labour,  which  in  reason,  and  con- 
science, and  nature,  he  is  bound  also  to  take  care 
of.  Thus  shall  he  make  them  what  amends  he  is 
able,  for  the  wrong  that  he  hath  done  them  in 
wasting  and  spending  of  their  estates. 

By  thus  doing,  he  submits  himself  to  God's  rod, 
commits  himself  to  the  dispose  of  his  providence  ; 
yea,  by  thus  doing,  he  casteth  the  lot  of  his  pre- 
sent and  future  condition  into  the  lap2  of  his  credi- 
tors, and  leaves  the  whole  dispose  thereof  to  the 
Lord,  even  as  he  shall  order  and  incline  their 
hearts  to  do  with  him.  Pr.  xvi.  33.  And  let  that  be 
either  to  forgive  him,  or  to  take  that  which  he 
hath  for  satisfaction,  or  to  lay  his  body  under 
affliction,  this  way  or  that,  according  to  law ;  can 
he,  I  say,  thus  leave  the  whole  dispose  to  God,  let 
the  issue  be  what  it  will,  that  man  shall  have 
peace  in  his  mind  afterward.  And  the  comforts 
of  that  state,  which  will  be  comforts  that  attend 
equity,  justice,  and  duty,  will  be  more  unto  him, 
because  more  according  to  godliness,  than  can  be 
the  comforts  that  are  the  fruits  of  injustice,  fraud- 
ulency,  and  deceit.  Besides,  this  is  the  way  to 
engage  God  to  favour  him  by  the  sentence  of  his 
creditors ;  for  re  can  entreat  them  to  use  him 
kindly,  and  he  will  do  it  when  his  ways  are  pleasing 
in  his  sight.  Je.  xv.  10,  11.  When  a  man's  ways 
please  the  Lord,  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be 
at  peace  with  him.  Pr.  xvi.  7.  And  surely,  for  a  man 
to  seek  to  make  restitution  for  wrongs  done  to  the 
utmost  of  his  power,  by  what  he  is,  has,  and  enjoys 
in  this  world,  is  the  best  way,  in  that  capacity,  and 
with  reference  to  that  thing,  that  a  man  can  at 
this  time  be  found  active  in. 

But  he  that  doth  otherwise,  abides  in  his  sin, 
refuses  to  be  disposed  of  by  the  providence  of  God, 
chooseth  an  high  estate,  though  not  attained  in 
God's  way  ;  when  God's  will  is  that  he  should 
descend  into  a  low  one.      Yea,  he  desperately  saith 


2  Eor  this  use  of  the  word  lap,  see  Pr.  xvi.  33. — (Ed.) 


632 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


in  his  heart  and  actions,  I  will  be  mine  own  chooser, 
and  that  in  mine  own  way,  whatever  happens  or 
follows  thereupon. 

Atten.  You  have  said  well,  in  my  mind.  But 
suppose  now  that  Mr.  Badman  was  here,  could  he 
not  object  as  to  what  you  have  said,  saying,  Go 
and  teach  your  brethren,  that  are  professors,  this 
lesson,  for  they  as  I  am  are  guilty  of  breaking; 
Alinavybiotupon  )'ea»  I  am  apk  *°  think,  of  that  which 

religion.  y0U  ca\\  my  knavish  way  of  breaking, 
to  wit,  of  breaking  before  they  have  need  to  break. 
But  if  not  so,  yet  they  are  guilty  of  neglect  in 
their  calling,  of  living  higher,  both  in  fare  and 
apparel,  than  their  trade  or  income  will  maintain. 
Besides  that  they  do  break  all  the  world  very  well 
knows,  and  that  they  have  the  art  to  plead  for  a 
composition,  is  very  well  known  to  men  ;  and  that 
is  usual  with  them  to  hide  their  linen,  their  plate, 
their  jewels,  and  it  is  to  be  thought,  sometimes 
money  and  goods  besides,  is  as  common  as  four 
eggs  a  penny.1  And  thus  they  beguile  men,  de- 
bauch their  consciences,  sin  against  their  profession, 
and  make,  it  is  to  be  feared,  their  lusts  in  all  this, 
and  the  fulfilling  of  them  their  end.  1  say,  if  Mr. 
Badman  was  here  to  object  thus  unto  you,  what 
would  be  your  reply  ? 

Wise.  What  ?  Why  I  would  say,  I  hope  no 
good  man,  no  man  of  good  conscience,  no  man  that 
either  feareth  God,  regardeth  the  credit  of  religion, 
the  peace  of  God's  people,  or  the  salvation  of  his 
own  soul,  will  do  thus.  Professors  such,  perhaps, 
there  may  be,  and  who  upon  earth  can  help  it? 
Jades  there  be  of  all  colours.  If  men  will  profess, 
and  make  their  profession  a  stalking-horse  to  be- 
guile their  neighbours  of  their  estates,  as  Mr.  Bad- 
If  knaves  will  man  ^imjse^  did,  when  he  beguiled 
make  profession  ber  that  now  is  with  sorrow  his  wife, 
beviie.who'can  who  can  help  it  ?  The  churches  of  old 
udp  lt*  were  pestered  with  such,  and  therefore 

no  marvel  if  these  perilous  difficult  times  be  so. 
But  mark  how  the  apostle  words  it:  '  Nay,  ye  do 
wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that  your  brethren.  Know 
ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God?  Be  not  deceived,  neither  forni- 
cators, nor  idolators,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate, 
nor  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor 
thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers, 
nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  kiugdom  of  God.' 

1  Co.  vi.  S-10.    2  Ti.  iii.  1—5, 

None  of  these  shall  be  saved  in  this  state,  nor 
shall  profession  deliver  them  from  the  censure  of 
the  godly,  when  they  shall  be  manifest  such  to  be. 

1  In  the  reign  of  Edward  II.  the  price  of  provisions  was  re- 
gulated by  Act  of  Parliament.  Twenty  -four  eggs  were  ordered 
to  be  sold  for  one  penny,  but  the  penny  of  that  period  contained 
as  much  silver  as  the  threepenuy  piece  of  Buuyan's,  and  of  our 
time.  1  have  bought,  within  the  last  forty  years,  the  finest  eggs 
at  four  a  penny  in  Normandy.  — (En.) 


But  their  profession  we  cannot  help.  Ilow  can  we 
help  it,  if  men  should  ascribe  to  themselves  the 
title  of  holy  ones,  godly  ones,  zealous  ones,  self- 
denying  ones,  or  any  other  such  glorious  title  ?  and 
while  they  thus  call  themselves,  they  should  be  the 
veriest  rogues  for  all  evil,  sin,  and  villainy  imagin- 
able, who  could  help  it?  True,  they  are  a  scandal  to 
religion,  a  grief  to  the  honest-hearted,  an  offence  to 
the  world,  and  a  stumbling-stone  to  the  weak,  and 
these  offences  have  come,  do  come,  and  will  come, 
do  what  all  the  world  can  ;  but  woe  be  to  them 
through  whom  they  come.  Mat  xvm.  6-8.  Let  such 
professors  therefore  be  disowned  by  Let  glichbedis. 
all  true  Christians,  and  let  them  be  °w»«l  of  ail 
reckoned  among  those  base  men  of  the 
world,  which,  by  such  actions,  they  most  resemble. 
They  are  Mr.  Badman's  kindred.  For  they  are  a 
shame  to  religion,  I  say,  these  slithy,2  rob-shop. 
pick-pocket  men,  they  are  a  shame  to  religion,  and 
religious  men  should  be  ashamed  of  them.  God 
puts  such  an  one  among  the  fools  of  the  world, 
therefore  let  not  Christians  put  them  among  those 
that  are  wise  for  heaven.  '  As  the  partridge  sit- 
teth  on  eggs,  and  hatcheth  tlieni  not,  so  he  that 
getteth  riches,  and  not  by  right,  shall  leave  them 
in  the  midst  of  his  days,  and  at  his  end  shall  be  a 
fool.'  Jer.  xviL  ii.  And  the  man  under  consideration 
is  one  of  these,  and  therefore  must  look  to  fall  by 
this  judgment. 

A  professor!  and  practice  such  villainies  as 
these !  such  a  one  is  not  worthy  to  bear  that  name 
any  longer.  We  may  say  to  such  as  the  prophet 
spake  to  their  like,  to  wit,  to  the  rebellious  that 
were  in  the  house  of  Israel :  4  Go  ye,  serve  ye  every 
one  his  idols.'  Eze.  xx.  39.  If  ye  will  not  hearken  to 
the  law  and  testament  of  God,  to  lead  your  lives 
hereafter:  *  but  pollute  God's  holy  name  no  more 
with  your  gifts,  and  with  your  idols.' 

Go,  professors,  go;  leave  off  profession,  unless 
you  will  lead  your  lives  according  to  your  pro- 
fession. Better  never  profess,  than  to  make  pro- 
fession a  stalking-horse  to  sin,  deceit,  to  the  devil, 
and  hell.  The  ground  and  rules  of  religion  allow 
not  any  such  thing:  '  receive  us,'  says  the  apostle, 
'  we  have  wronged  no  man,  we  have  corrupted  no 
man,  we  have  defrauded  no  man.'  2  Co.  vii.  -i.  In- 
timating that  those  that  are  guilty  of  wronging, 
corrupting,  or  defrauding  of  any,  should  not  be  ad- 
mitted to  the  fellowship  of  saints,  no,  nor  into  the 
common  catalogue  of  brethren  with  them.  Nor 
can  men  with  all  their  rhetoric,  and  eloquent  speak- 
ing, prove  themselves  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
or  men  of  good  conscience  on  earth.  0  that  godly 
plea  of  Samuel:  'Behold  here  1  am,'  says  he, 
4  witness  against  me,  before  the  Lord,  and  before 


2  'Slither,'  slippery,  deceitful;  obsolete,  except  in  Lincoln- 
shire.—(Ed.) 


THE   LITE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


633 


his  anointed,  whose  ox  have  I  taken?  or  whose  ass 
have  I  taken  ?  or  whom  have  I  defrauded  ?  whom 
have  I  oppressed?'  &c.  1  Sa.  xii.  3.  This  was  to  do 
like  a  man  of  good  conscience  indeed.  Mat.  x.  19. 
And  in  this  his  appeal,  he  was  so  justified  in  the  con- 
sciences of  the  whole  congregation,  that  they  could 
not  but  with  one  voice,  as  with  one  mouth,  break 
out  jointly,  and  say,  '  Thou  hast  not  defrauded  us, 
nor  oppressed  us.'  Mat.  x.  4. 

A  professor,  and  defraud,  away  with  him  !  A 
professor  should  not  owe  any  man  anything  but 
love.  A  professor  should  provide  things,  not  of 
other  men's  but  of  his  own,  of  his  own  honest  get- 
ting, and  that  not  only  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  of 
all  men ;  that  he  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God 
our  Saviour  in  all  things. 

Atten.  But  suppose  God  should  blow  upon  a 
professor  in  his  estate  and  calling,  and 
he  should  be  run  out  before  he  is  aware, 
must  he  be  accounted  to  be  like  Mr.  Badman,  and 
lie  under  the  same  reproach  as  he  ? 

Wise.  No:  if  he  hath  dutifully  done  what  he  could 
to  avoid  it.    It  is  possible  for  a  ship  to 

An  answer.         .    .  .-  ,.  . 

sink  at  sea,  notwithstanding  tlie  most 
faithful  endeavour  of  the  most  skilful  pilot  under 
heaven.  And  thus,  as  I  suppose,  it  was  with  the 
prophet,  that  left  his  wife  in  debt,  to  the  hazarding 
the  slavery  of  her  children  by  the  creditors.  2KUv.i,2. 
He  was  no  profuse  man,  nor  one  that  was  given  to 
defraud,  for  the  text  says  he  feared  God ;  yet,  as 
I  said,  he  was  run  out  more  than  she  could  pay. 

If  God  would  blow  upon  a  man,  who  can  help 
it?  Hag.  i.  9.  And  he  will  do  so  sometimes,  because 
he  will  change  dispensations  with  men,  and  because 

he  will  try  their  graces.      Yea,   also, 


A  question. 


God  does  some-    , 

times      blow    because  he  will  overthrow  the  wicked 
SJe^Ho"    ^itla   his  judgments 


and  all   these 
ihev should  do   things  are  seen  in  Job.     But  then  the 

at  that  time.  ° 

consideration  of  this  should  bid  men 
have  a  care  that  they  be  honest,  lest  this  comes 
upon  them  for  their  sin.  It  should  also  bid  them 
beware  of  launching  further  into  the  world,  than  in 
an  honest  way,  by  ordinary  means,  they  can  god- 
lily  make  their  retreat;  for  the  further  in  the  greater 
fall.  It  should  also  teach  them  to  beg  of  God  his 
blessing  upon  their  endeavours,  their  honest  and 
lawful  endeavours.  And  it  should  put  them  upon 
a  diligent  looking  to  their  steps,  that  if  in  their 
going  they  should  hear  the  ice  crack,  they  may 
timely  go  back  again.  These  things  considered, 
and  duly  put  in  practice,  if  God  will  blow  upon  a 
man,  then  let  him  be  content,  and  with  Job  embrace 
the  dunghill.  Let  him  give  unto  all  their  dues, 
and  not  fight  against  the  providence  of  God,  but 
humble  himself  rather  under  his  mighty  band, 
which  comes  to  strip  him  naked  and  bare  :  for  he 
that  doth  otherwise  fights  against  God  ;  and  de- 
clares that  he  is  a  stranger  to  that  of  Paul ;  '  1 
vol.  ill. 


know  both  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  how  to 
abound ;  everywhere  and  in  all  things  I  am  in- 
structed both  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to 
abound  and  to  suffer  need.'  Phi.  iv.  i>. 

Atten.  But  Mr.  Badman  would  not,  I  believe, 
have  put  this  difference  betwixt  things  feigned  and 
those  that  fall  of  necessity. 

Wise.  If  he  will  not,  God  will,  conscience  will; 
and  that  not  thine  own  only,  but  the  consciences 
of  all  those  that  have  seen  the  way,  and  that  have 
known  the  truth  of  the  condition  of  such  a  one. 

Atten.  Well :  let  us  at  this  time  leave  this  mat- 
ter, and  return  again  to  Mr.  Badman. 

Wise.  With  all  my  heart  will  I  proceed  to  give 
you  a  relation  of  what  is  yet  behiud  of  his  life,  in 
order  to  our  discourse  of  his  death. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

[badman's  fraudulent  dealings  to  get  money.] 

Atten.  But  pray,  do  it  with  as  much  brevity  as 
you  can. 

Wise.  Why,  are  you  weary  of  my  relating  of 
things  ? 

Atten.  No :  but  it  pleases  me  to  hear  a  great 
deal  in  few  words. 

Wise.  I  profess  myself  not  an  artist  that  way, 
but  yet,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  I  will  pass  through 
what  of  his  life  is  behind;  and  again  I  shall  begin 
with  his  fraudulent  dealing,  as  before  I  have 
showed  with  his  creditors,  so  now  with  his  cus- 
tomers, and  those  that  he  had  otherwise  to  deal 
withal. 

He  dealt  by  deceitful  weights  and  measures. 
He  kept  weights  to  buy  b\r,  and 
weights  to  sell  b}7 ;  measures  to  buy 
by,  and  measures  to  sell  by :  those  he 
bought  by  were  too  big,  those  he  sold 
by  were  too  little. 

Besides,  he  could  use  a  thing  called  slight  of 
hand,  if  he  had  to  do  with  other  men's  weights  and 
measures,  and  by  that  means  make  them  whether 
he  did  buy  or  sell,  yea  though  his  customer  or 
chapman  looked  on,  turn  to  his  own  advantage. 

Moreover,  he  had  the  art  to  misreckon  men  in 
their  accounts,  whether  by  weight,  or  measure,  or 
money,  and  would  often  do  it  to  his  worldly  advan- 
tage, and  their  loss.  What  say  you  to  Mr.  Bad- 
man  now  ?  And  if  a  question  was  made  of  his 
faithful  dealing,  he  had  his  servants  ready,  that  to 
his  purpose  he  had  brought  up,  that  would  avouch 
and  swear  to  his  book  or  word.  This  was  Mr. 
Badman's  practice.  What  think  you  of  Mr.  Bad- 
man  now  ? 

Atten.  Think  !  Why  I  can  think  no  other  but 
that  he  was  a  man  left  to  himself,  a  naughty  man; 
for  these,  as  his  other,  were  naughty  things ;  if 
the  tree,  as   iudeed  it  may,  ought   to  be  judged, 

80 


More  of  Mr. 
Badman's  frau- 
dulent dealing. 
He  used  de- 
ceitful weights 
and  scales. 


f,34 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


what  it  is,  by  its  fruit3,  then  Mr.  Badman  must 
needs  be  a  bad  tree.  But  pray,  for  my  farther 
satisfaction,  show  me  now,  by  the  Word  of  God, 
the  evil  of  this  his  practice;  and  first  of  his  using 
false  weights  and  measures. 

Wise.  The  evil  of  that !  Why  the  evil  of  that 
appears  to  every  eye.  The  heathens,  that  live  like 
beasts  and  brutes  in  many  things,  do  abominate 
and  abhor  such  wickedness  as  this.  Let  a  man 
but  look  upon  these  things  as  he  goes  by,  and  he 
shall  see  enough  in  them  from  the  light  of  nature 
to  make  him  loathe  so  base  a  practice,  although 
Mr.  Badman  loved  it. 

Atten.  But  show  me  something  out  of  the  Word 
against  it,  will  you  ? 

Wise.  I  will  willingly  do  it.  And  first,  look 
Of  just  weights  into  the  Old  Testament:  'Ye  shall,' 
and  measures  saith  God  there,  '  do  no  unrighteous- 
ness in  judgment,  in  mete-yard,  in  weight,  or  in 
measure;  just  balances,  just  weights,  a  just  ephah 
and  a  just  bin  shall  you  have.'  Le.  xix.  35,  36.  This 
is  the  law  of  God,  and  that  which  all  men,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  the  land,  ought  to  obey.  So 
again:  'Ye  shall  have  just  balances,  and  a  just 
ephah,'  «kc.  Eze.  xiv.  10. 

Now  having  showed  you  the  law,  I  will  also  show 
you  how  God  takes  swerving  therefrom.  '  A  false 
balance  is  not  good.'  Fr.  zx.23.  'A  false  balance 
is  abomination  to  the  Lord.'  Pr.  xL  1.  Some  have 
The  evil  of  tie-  just  weights,  but  false  balances ;  and 
weStsb,a'aTd  by  virtue  of  these  false  balances,  by 
measures.  their  just  weights,  they  deceive   the 

country.  Wherefore  God  first  of  all  commands 
that  the  balance  be  made  just.  A  just  balance 
shalt  thou  have;  else  they  may  be,  yea  are,  de- 
ceivers, notwithstanding  their  just  weights. 

Now,  having  commanded  that  men  have  a  just 
balance,  and  testifying  that  a  false  one  is  an  abomi- 
nation to  the  Lord,  he  proceedeth  also  unto  weight 
and  measure.  Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag 
divers  weights,  a  great  and  a  small ;  that  is,  one 
to  buy  by,  and  another  to  sell  by,  as  Mr.  Badman 
had.  *  Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thine  house  divers 
measures,  a  great  and  a  small.  (And  these  had 
Mr.  Badman  also.)  JBut  thou  shalt  have  a  perfect 
and  just  weight;  a  perfect  and  just  measure  shalt 
thou  have,  that  thy  days  may  be  lengthened  in  the 
land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.  For  all 
that  do  such  things  (that  is,  that  use  false  weights 
and  measures),  and  all  that  do  unrighteously,  are 
an  abomination  unto  the  Lord.'  De.  xxv.  13-16.  See 
now  both  how  plentiful,  and  how  punctual  the 
Scripture  is  in  this  matter.  But  perhaps  it  may 
be  objected,  that  all  this  is  old  law,  and  therefore 
hath  nothing  to  do  with  us  under  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Not  that  I  think  you,  neighbour,  will  ob- 
ject thus.  Well,  to  this  foolish  objection,  let  us 
make  an  answer.     First,  he  that  makes  this  objec- 


tion, if  he  dotb  it  to  overthrow  the  authority  of 
those  texts,  discovereth  that  himself  is  The  old  and  new 
first  cousin  to  Mr.  Badman.    For  a  iust     kw  commands 

0  ail  men  to  be 

man  is  willing  to  speak  reverently  of  honestandup- 
those  commands.  That  man  therefore  weight?  and 
hath,  I  doubt,  but  little  conscience,  if  ™™™es- 
any  at  all  that  is  good,  that  thus  objecteth  against 
the  text.  But  let  us  look  into  the  New  Testament, 
and  there  we  shall  see  how  Christ  confirmeth  the 
same  ;  where  he  commandeth  that  men  make 
to  others  good  measure,  including  also  that  they 
make  good  weight ;  telling  such  that  do  thus,  or 
those  that  do  it  not,  that  they  may  be  encouraged 
to  do  it :  '  Good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken 
together,  and  running  over,  shall  men  give  into 
your  bosom.  For  with  the  same  measure  that  ye 
mete  withal,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again.' 
in.  vi.  33.  To  wit,  both  from  God  and  man.  For  as 
God  will  show  his  indignation  against  the  false 
man,  by  taking  away  even  that  he  hath,  so  he  will 
deliver  up  the  false  man  to  the  oppressor,  and  the 
extortioner  shall  catch  from  him,  as  well  as  he 
hath  catched  from  his  neighbour;  therefore,  an- 
other scripture  saith,  '  When  thou  shalt  make  an 
end  to  deal  treacherously,  they  shall  deal  treacher- 
ously with  thee.'  is.  xxxm.  1.  That  the  New  Testa- 
ment also  hath  an  inspection  into  men's  trading, 
yea,  even  with  their  weights  and  measures,  is  evi- 
dent from  these  general  exhortations,  'Defraud 
not;'   'lie  not  one  to  another.'      'Let   _.    ,,_.. 

'  Pat    Scriptures 

no  man  go  beyond  his  brother  in  any  iw  our  pur- 
matter,  for  the  Lord  is  the  avenger  of  pos,e 
all  such.'  '  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it  heartily,  as 
to  the  Lord,'  'doing  all  in  his  name,'  'to  his  glory ;' 
and  the  like.  All  these  injunctions  and  command- 
ments do  respect  our  life  and  conversation  among 
men,  with  reference  to  our  dealing,  trading,  and 
so,  consequently,  they  forbid  false,  deceitful,  yea, 
all  doings  that  are  corrupt. 

Having  thus  in  a  word  or  two  showed  you  that 
these  things  are  bad,  I  will  next,  for  where      wSe 
the  conviction  of  those  that  use  them,     ^eS'iu-es   arc- 
show  you  where  God  saith  they  are  to     t0  be  i0UJuL 
be  found. 

1.  They  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  house  of  the 
good  and  godly  man,  for  he,  as  his  God,  abhors 
them  ;  but  they  are  to  be  found  in  the 
house  of  evil  doers,  such  as  Mr.  Bad- 
man's  is.  'Are  there,'  saith  the  prophet,  'yet  tho 
treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked, 
and  the  scant  measure  that  is  abominable ! '  ML  vi.  10. 
Are  they  there  yet,  notwithstanding  God's  forbid- 
ding, notwithstanding  God's  tokens  of  anger  against 
those  that  do  such  things!  0  how  loth  is  a  wicked 
man  to  let  go  a  sweet,  a  gainful  sin,  when  he  hath 
hold  of  it!  They  hold  fast  deceit,  they  refuse  to 
let  it  go. 

2.  These  deceitful  weights  and  measures  are  not 


With  evil  doers 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


635 


to  be  found  in  the  bouse  of  the  merciful,  but  in  the 
house  of  the  cruel ;  in  the  house  of  them  that  love 
With  the  merci-  t0  °PPress-  'The  balances  of  deceit 
less  and  op-   are  in  his  band  ;  he  loveth  to  oppress.' 

pressors.  TT       .  .  . 

Ho.  xii.  7.  He  is  given  to  oppression 
and  cruelty,  therefore  he  useth  such  wicked  things 
in  his  calliug.  Yea,  he  is  a  very  cheat,  and,  as 
was  hinted  before  concerning  Mr.  Badman's  break- 
ing, so  I  say  now,  concerning  his  using  these  de- 
ceitful weights  and  measures,  it  is  as  bad,  as  base, 
as  to  take  a  purse,1  or  pick  a  pocket ;  for  it  is  a 
plain  robbery ;  it  takes  away  from  a  man  that  which 
is  his  own,  even  the  price  of  his  money. 

3.  The  deceitful  weights  and  measures  are  not 
With  such  as  to  ^e  f°uil(l  m  the  house  of  such  as  re- 
wouid  swallow   lieve  the  belly,  and  that  cover  the  loins 

of  the  poor,  but  of  such  as  indeed  would 
swallow  them  up.  '  Hear  this,  0  ye  that  swallow 
up  the  needy,  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to 
fail,  saying,  When  will  the  new  moon  be  gone, 
that  we  may  sell  corn?  and  the  Sabbath,  that  we 
may  set  forth  wheat,  making  the  ephah  small,  and 
the  shekel  great  (making  the  measure  small,  and 
the  price  great),  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  de- 
ceit? That  ye  may  buy  the  poor  for  silver,  and 
the  needy  for  a  pair  of  shoes,  and  sell  the  refuse 
of  the  wheat.  The  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  ex- 
cellency of  Jacob,  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any 
of  their  works.'  Am.  tUL4-8.  So  detestable  and  vile 
a  thing  is  this  in  the  sight  of  God. 

4.  God  abominates  the  thoughts  of  calling  of 
With     impure   those  that  use  false  weights  and  mea- 

oues.  sures,  by  any  other  term   than  that 

they  be  impure  ones,  or  the  like:  'Shall  I  count 
them  pure, '  saitb  he,  '  with  the  bag  of  deceitful 
weights?'  Mi.vi.  n.  No,  by  no  means,  they  are  im- 
pure ones ;  their  hands  are  denied,  deceitful  gain 
is  in  their  houses,  they  have  gotten  what  they 
have  by  coveting  an  evil  covetousness,  and  there- 
fore must  and  shall  be  counted  among  the  impure, 
among  the  wicked  of  the  world. 

Thus  you  see  how  full  and  plain  the  Word  of 
God  is  agaiust  this  sin,  and  them  that  use  it.  And 
therefore  Mr.  Badman,  for  that  he  used  by  these 
things  thus  to  rook  and  cheat  his  neighbours,  is 
rightly  rejected  from  having  his  name  in  aud  among 
the  catalogue  of  the  godly. 

Atten.  But  I  am  persuaded  that  the  using  of 
these  things,  and  the  doing  by  them  thus  deceit- 
fully, is  not  counted  so  great  an  evil  by  some. 

Wise.  Whether  it  be  counted  an  evil  or  a  virtue 
by  men,  it  matteretb  not;  you  see  by  the  Scrip- 
tures the  judgment  of  God  upon  it.  It  was  not 
counted  an  evil  by  Mr.  Badman,  nor  is  it  by  any 
that  still  are  treading  in  his  steps.      But,  I  say,  it 

1  Purses  were  woru,  in  Buuyan's  time,  Imaging  to  the  girdle, 
or  sluug  over  the  shoulder,  as  they  now  are  iu  some  pails  of 
Germany.     A  pickpocket  was  theu  called  '  a  cut-purse.' — (Ei;.) 


is  no  matter  how  men  esteem  of  things,  let  us  ad- 
here to  the  judgment  of  God.  And  the  rather, 
because  when  we  ourselves  have  done  weighing  and 
measuring  to  others,  then  God  will  weigh  aud  mea- 
sure both  us  and  our  actions.  And  when  he  doth 
so,  as  he  will  do  shortly,  then  woe  bo  to  him  to 
whom,  and  of  whose  actions  it  shall  be  thus  said 
by  him,  'Tekel,  thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances, 
and  are  found  wanting.'  Da.  v.  27.  God  will  then 
recompense  their  evil  of  deceiving  upon  their  own 
head,  when  he  shall  shut  them  out  of  his  presence, 
favour,  and  kingdom,  for  ever  and  ever. 

Attsn.  But  it  is  a  wonder,  that  since  Mr.  Bad- 
man's  common  practice  was  to  do  thus,  that  some 
one  or  more  did  not  find  him  out,  and  blame  him 
for  this  his  wickedness. 

Wise.  For  the  generality  of  people  he  went  away 
clever  with  his  knavery.  For  what  with  his  bal- 
ance, bis  false  balance,  and  good  weight,  and  what 
with  his  slight  of  hand  to  boot,  he  beguiled  some- 
times a  little,  and  sometimes  more,  most  that  he 
had  to  deal  with ;  besides,  those  that  use  this 
naughty  trade  are  either  such  as  blind  men  with  a 
show  of  religion,  or  by  hectoring  the  buyer  out  by 
words.  I  must  confess  Mr.  Badman  How  Mr.  Bad- 
was  not  so  arch  at  the  first;  that  ^SfLU 
is,  to  do  it  by  show  of  religion ;  for  '-■'■eating. 
now  he  began  to  grow  threadbare,  though  some  cf 
his  brethren  are  arch  enough  this  way,  yea,  and 
of  his  sisters  too,  for  I  told  you  at  first  that  there 
were  a  great  many  of  them,  and  never  a  one  of 
them  good ;  but  for  hectoring,  for  swearing,  for 
lying,  if  these  things  would  make  weight  aud  mea- 
sure, they  should  not  be  wanting  to  Mr.  Badman's 
customers. 

Atten.  Theu  it  seems  he  kept  good  weights  and 
a  bad  balance ;  well  that  was  better  than  that  both 
should  be  bad. 

Wise.  Not  at  all.  There  lay  the  depth  of  his 
deceit ;  for  if  any  at  any  time  found  fault  that  he 
used  them  hardly,  and  that  they  wanted  their 
weight,  of  things,  he  would  reply,  Why,  did  you 
not  see  them  weighed?  will  you  not  Good  wdghts 
believe  your  own  eyes  ?  if  you  question     and  a  ,,ad  bal- 

.    ,  ,  ,  .   ,  auec     a     deep 

my  weights,  pray  carry  them  whither     piece  of  kaav- 
you  will,  1  will  maintain  them  to  be     eijr" 
good  and  just.      The  same  he  would  say  of  his 
scales,  so  he  blinded  all  by  his  balance. 

Atten.  This  is  cunning  indeed  ;  but  as  you  say, 
there  must  be  also  something  done  or  said  to  blind 
therewith,  and  this  I  perceive  Mr.  Badman  had. 

Wise.  Yes,  he  had  many  ways  to  blind,  but  ho 
was  never  clever  at  it  by  making  a  show  of  religion, 
though  he  cheated  his  wife  therewith ;  for  he  was, 
especially  by  those  that  dwelt  near  him,  too  well 
known  to  do  that,  though  he  would  bungle  at  it  as 
well  as  he  could.  But  there  are  some  that  are  arch 
villains  this  way ;  they  shall  to  view  live  a  whole 


C36 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  B  ADM  AN. 


life  religiously,  and  yet  shall  be  guilty  of  these 
most  horrible  sins.  And  yet  religion  in  itself  is 
never  the  worse,  nor  yet  the  true  professors  of  it. 
But,  as  Luther  says,  in  the  name  of  God  begins 
all  mischief.1  For  hypocrites  have  no  other  way 
to  bring  their  evils  to  maturity  but  by  using  and 
mixing  the  name  of  God  and  religion  therewith. 
Thus  they  become  whited  walls ;  for  by  this  white, 
the  white  of  religion,  the  dirt  of  their  actions  is  hid. 
Mat.  xxiii.  Thus  also  they  become  graves  that  ap- 
A  cloak  of  re-   pear  not,  and  they  that  go  over  them, 

Mr™    ChS's    that   have    t0    d°  *with    them'    are   DOt 

knavery.  aware  of  them,  but  suffer  themselves 

to  be  deluded  by  them.  Yea,  if  there  shall,  as 
there  will  sometimes,  rise  a  doubt  in  the  heart  of 
the  buyer  about  the  weight  and  measure  he  should 
have,  why,  he  suffereth  his  very  senses  to  be  also 
deluded,  by  recalling  of  his  chapman's  religion  to 
mind,  and  thinks  verily  that  not  his  good  chapman 
but  himself  is  out ;  for  he  dreams  not  that  his  chap- 
man can  deceive.  But  if  the  buyer  shall  find  it 
out,  and  shall  make  it  apparent,  that  he  is  be- 
guiled, then  shall  he  be  healed  by  having  amends 
made,  and  perhaps  fault  shall  be  laid  upon  ser- 
vants, <fcc.  And  so  Mr.  Cheat  shall  stand  for  a 
right  honest  man  in  the  eye  of  his  customer,  though 
the  next  time  he  shall  pick  his  pocket  again. 

Some  plead  custom  for  their  cheat,  as  if  that 
s<>mc  plead  cus-   could  acquit  them  before  the  tribunal 

tom  to  cheat.     0f  Go(i>     An(j  othera  say  it  came  to 

them  for  so  much,  and,  therefore,  another  must 
take  it  for  so  much,  though  there  is  wanting  both 
as  to  weight  and  measure ;  but  in  all  these  things 
there  are  juggles  ;  or  if  not,  such  must  know  that 
'that  which  is  altogether  just,'  they  must  do.  De. 
xvi.20.  Suppose  that  I  be  cheated  myself  with  a 
brass  half-crown,  must  I  therefore  cheat  another 
therewith  ?  if  this  be  bad  in  the  whole,  it  is  also 
bad  in  the  parts.  Therefore,  however  thou  art 
dealt  withal  in  thy  buying,  yet  thou  must  deal 
justly  in  selling,  or  thou  sinnest  against  thy  soul, 
and  art  become  as  Mr.  Badman.  And  know,  that 
a  pretence  to  custom  is  nothing  worth.  It  is  not 
custom,  but  good  conscience  that  will  help  at  God's 
tribunal. 

Atten.  But  I  am  persuaded  that  that  which  is 
gotten  by  men  this  way  doth  them  but  little  good. 

Wise.  I  am  of  your  mind  for  that,  but  this  is 
not  considered  by  those  thus  minded.  For  if  they 
can  get  it,  though  they  get,  as  we  say,  the  devil 
and  all,  by  their  getting,  yet  they  are  content,  and 
count  that  their  getting  is  much.2 


1  Many  ecclesiastical  instruments  of  terror,  spoliation,  aud 
death,  began  with,  '  In  the  name  of  God.  Amen.'  That  sacred 
name  has  been,  and  now  is,  awfully  profaned  and  prostituted 
to  the  vilest  purposes. — (Ed.) 

2  This  is  a  sad  mistake  ;  such  getting  is  a  curse :  '  Carsed 
is  the  deceiver  :'  '  I  will  curse  your  blessings,'  saith  Jehovah 
by  his  prophet  Malachi. — (Ed.) 


Little  good  !  why  do  you  think  they  consider 
that  ?  No;  no  more  than  they  consider  what  they 
shall  do  in  the  judgment,  at  the  day  of  God  Al- 
mighty, for  their  wrong  getting  of  what  they  get, 
and  that  is  just  nothing  at  all. 

But  to  give  you  a  more  direct  answer.  This 
kind  of  getting  is  so  far  off  from  doing  them  little 
good,  that  it  doth  them  no  good  at  TheT  tio 

all,;  because  thereby  they  lose  their  Hung  that  co- 
own  souls ;  '  What  shall  it  profit  a 
man  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his 
own  soul  ?'  Mar.  viu.  36.  He  loseth  then,  he  loseth 
greatly  that  getteth  after  this  fashion.  This  is 
the  man  that  is  penny-wise  and  pound-foolish  ; 
this  is  he  that  loseth  his  good  sheep  for  a  half- 
penny-worth of  tar  ;3  that  loseth  a  soul  for  a  little 
of  the  world.  And  then  what  doth  he  get  thereby 
but  loss  and  damage  ?  Thus  he  getteth  or  rather 
loseth  about  the  world  to  come.  But  what  doth  he 
get  in  this  world,  more  than  travail  and  sorrow, 
vexation  of  spirit,  and  disappointment  ?  Men  aim 
at  blessedness  in  getting,  I  mean,  at  temporal 
blessedness ;  but  the  man  that  thus  getteth,  shall 
not  have  that.  For  though  an  inheritance  after 
this  manner  may  be  hastily  gotten  at  the  beginning, 
yet  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be  blessed.  They 
gather  it  indeed,  and  think  to  keep  it  too,  but  what 
says  Solomon  ?  God  casteth  it  away.  '  The  Lord 
will  not  suffer  the  soul  of  the  righteous  to  famish; 
but  he  casteth  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked. ' 

Pr.  x.  3.  Je.  xv.  13 ;  xvii.  3. 

The  time,  as  I  said,  that  they  do  enjoy  it,  it 
shall  do  them  no  good  at  all;  but  long,  to  be  sure, 
they  must  not  have  it.  For  God  will  either  take 
it  away  in  their  lifetime,  or  else  in  the  generation 
following,  according  to  that  of  Job:  'He,'  the 
wicked,  'may  prepare  it,  but  the  just  shall  put  it 
on,  and  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  silver.'  Job 

xxvii.  17. 

Consider  that  also  that  it  is  written  in  the  Pro- 
verbs ;  '  A  good  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to  his 
children's  children,  and  the  wealth  of  the  sinner  is 
laid  up  for  the  just.'  Pr.  xiu.  22.  What  then  doth  he 
get  thereby,  that  getteth  by  dishonest  means?  Why 
he  getteth  sin  and  wrath,  hell  and  damnation,  and 
now  tell  me  how  much  he  doth  get. 

This,  I  say,  is  his  getting ;  so  that  as  David 
says,  we  may  be  bold  to  say  too ;  I  beheld  the 
wicked  in  great  prosperity,  and  presently  I  cursed 
his  habitation ;  for  it  cannot  prosper  with  him.  Pa. 
lxxiii.  Fluster  and  huff,  and  make  ado  for  a  while 
he  may,  but  God  hath  determined  that  both  he  and 
it  shall  melt  like  grease,  and  any  observing  man 
may  see  it  so.  Behold  the  unrighteous  man,  in  a 
way  of  injustice,  getteth  much,  and  loadeth  him- 

3  Modern  editors,  not  so  well  aware  as  Buuyan  of  the  value 
of  tar  as  a  medicine  for  sheep,  altered  the  word  to  ship.  A 
halfpenny  worth  of  tar  will  serve  a  sheep,  but  not  a  ship.— (En.) 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


637 


self  with  thick  clay,  but  anon  it  withereth,  it  de- 
cayeth,  and  even  he,  or  the  generation  following 
decline,  and  return  to  beggary.  And  this  Mr.  Bad- 
man,  notwithstanding  his  cunning  and  crafty  tricks 
to  get  money,  did  die,  nobody  can  tell  whether 
worth  a  farthing  or  no. 

Atten.  He  had  all  the  bad  tricks,  I  think, 
that  it  was  possible  for  a  man  to  have,  to  get 
money ;  one  would  think  that  he  should  have  been 
rich. 

Wise.  You  reckon  too  fast,  if  you  count  these 
More  of  Mr  a^  ms  ^ad  iric^-s  to  get  money ;  for 
Badman'a  bad  he  had  more  besides.  If  his  custom- 
ers were  in  his  books,  as  it  should  go 
hard  but  he  would  have  them  there ;  at  least,  if 
he  thought  he  could  make  any  advantage  of  them, 
then,  then  would  he  be  sure  to  impose  upon  them 
his  worst,  even  very  bad  commodity,  yet  set  down 
for  it  the  price  that  the  best  was  sold  at;  like  those 
that  sold  the  refuse  wheat ;  or  the  worst  of  the 
wheat ;  making  the  shekel  great,  yet  hoisting  up 
the  price.  Am.  vm.  This  was  Mr.  Badman's  way. 
Another  art  to   He  would  sell  goods  that  cost  him  not 

cheat  withal.       tne  frest    ^^  fry  far>  fQr  ag    much  as 

he  sold  his  best  of  all  for.  He  had  also  a  trick  to 
mingle  his  commodity,  that  that  which  was  bad 
might  go  off  with  the  least  mistrust.  Besides,  if 
his  customers  at  any  time  paid  him  money,  let  them 
look  to  themselves,  and  to  their  acquaintances,  for 
he  would  usually  attempt  to  call  for  that  payment 
again,  especially  if  he  thought  that  there  were  hopes 
of  making  a  prize  thereby,  and  then  to  be  sure  if 
they  could  not  produce  good  and  sufficient  ground 
of  the  payment,  a  hundred  to  one  but  they  paid  it 
again.  Sometimes  the  honest  chapman  would  ap- 
peal to  his  servants  for  proof  of  the  payment  of 
money,  but  they  were  trained  up  by  him  to  say  af- 
ter his  mind,  wright  or  wrong;  so  that,  relief  that 
way,  he  could  get  none. 

Atten.  It  is  a  bad,  yea,  an  abominable  thing  for 
a  man  to  have  such  servants.  For  by  such  means 
a  poor  customer  may  be  undone,  and  not  know  how 
to  help  himself.  Alas !  if  the  master  be  so  uncon- 
scionable, as  I  perceive  Mr.  Badman  was,  to  call 
for  his  mouey  twice,  and  if  his  servant  will  swear 
that  it  is  a  due  debt,  where  is  any  help  for  such  a 
man  ?      He  must  sink,  there  is  no  remedy. 

Wise.  This  is  very  bad,  but  this  has  been  a 
Servants  oh-  Practice>  and  that  hundreds  of  years 
But  what  saith  the  Word  of 
God  ?  «  I  will  punish  all  those  that 
leap  on  the  threshold,  which  till  their  masters' 
houses  with  violence  and  deceit.'  Zep.  L  9. 

Mr.  Badman  also  had  this  art ;  could  he  get  a 
man  at  advantage,  that  is,  if  his  chapman  durst 
not  go  from  him,  or  if  the  commodity  he  wanted 
could  not  for  the  present  be  conveniently  had  else- 
where, then   let  him  look  to  himself,  he   would 


s<ore        these    a  (JO 
words. 


surely  make  his  purse-strings  crack;  he  would  ex- 
act upon  him  without  any  pity  or  conscience. 

Atten.  That  was  extortion,  was  it  not  ?  I  pray 
let  me  hear  your  judgment  of  extortion,  what  it  is, 
and  when  committed  ? 

Wise.  Extortion  is  a  screwing  from  men  more 
than  by  the  law  of  God  or  men  is  right; 

,  .    r  ,  .  ,      J?  Of  extortion. 

and  it  is  committed  sometimes  by  them 
in  office,  about  fees,  rewards,  and  the  like:1  but  it 
is  most  commonly  committed  by  men  of  trade,  who 
without  all  conscience,  when  they  have  the  advan- 
tage, will  make  a  prey  of  their  neighbour.  And 
thus  was  Mr.  Badman  an  extortioner;  for  although 
he  did  not  exact,  and  force  away,  as  bailiffs  and 
clerks  have  used  to  do,  yet  he  had  his  opportuni- 
ties, and  such  cruelty  to  make  use  of  them,  that 
he  would  often,  in  his  way,  be  extorting  and  forc- 
ing of  money  out  of  his  neighbour's  pocket.  For 
every  man  that  makes  a  prey  of  his  advantage  upon 
his  neighbour's  necessities,  to  force  from  him  more 
than  in  reason  and  conscience,  according  to  the 
present  prices  of  things  such  commodity  is  worth, 
may  very  well  be  called  an  extortioner,  and  judged 
for  one  that  hath  no  inheritance  in  the  kingdom 
of  God.  1  Co.  vi.  9,  10. 

Atten.  Well,  this  Badman  was  a  sad  wretch. 

CHAPTER  X. 

[THE  SIMPLE  CHRISTIAN'S  VIEWS  OF  EXTORTION.] 

Wise.  Thus  you  have  often  said  before.  But 
now  we  are  in  discourse  of  this,  give  me  leave  a 
little  to  go  on.  We  have  a  great  many  people  in 
the  country  too  that  live  all  their  days  in  the  prac- 
tice, and  so  under  the  guilt  of  extortion ;  people, 
alas  !   that  think  scorn  to  be  so  accounted. 

A  s  for  example:  There  is  a  poor  body  that  dwells, 
we  will  suppose,  so  many  miles  from  who  are  extor- 
the  market;  and  this  man  wants  a  t,oners- 
bushel  of  grist,  a  pound  of  butter,  or  a  cheese  for 
himself,  his  wife,  and  poor  children  ;  but  dwelling 
so  far  from  the  market,  if  he  goes  thither,  he  shall 
lose  his  day's  work,  which  will  be  eightpence  or 
tenpence  damage  to  him,  and  that  is  something  to 
a  poor  man.2  So  he  goeth  to  one  of  his  masters 
or  dames  for  what  he  wanteth,  and  asks  them  to 
help  him  with  such  a  thing ;  yes,  say  they,  you 
may  have  it;  but  withal  they  will  give  him  a  gripe, 


1  This  was  attempted  when  Bnnyan  was  released  from  Ins 
cruel  imprisonment  by  the  King's  pardon,  which  one  instru- 
ment included  the  names  of  nearly  five  hundred  sufferers  ;  and 
because  the  fees  upon  a  pardon  were  twenty  pounds, '  the  covetous 
clerks  did  strive  to  exact  upon  us,'  says  Whitehead,  by  demand- 
ing that  sum  upon  every  name.'  Further  application  to  the  King 
put  an  end  to  this  exaction. —  (Ed.) 

*  When  the  labourer's  wages  were  eightpence  or  tenpence 
per  day,  in  1683,  wheat  averaged  forty-live  shillings  per  quarter. 
How  comparatively  happy  is" the  present  state  ot  our  agricul- 
tural labourers;  and  so  would  be  that  of  the  farmer,  if  rent 
was  as  low  now  as  it  was  at  that  period.— (AD.) 


638 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  B ADMAN. 


perhaps  make  him  pay  as  much  or  more  for  it  at 
home,  as  they  can  get  when  they  have  carried  it 
live  miles  to  a  market,  yea,  and  that  too  for  the 
refuse  of  their  commodity.  But  in  this  the  women 
are  especially  faulty,  in  the  sale  of  their  hutter  and 
cheese,  &c.  Now  this  is  a  kind  of  extortion,  it  is 
a  making  a  prey  of  the  necessity  of  the  poor,  it  is 
a  grinding  of  their  faces,  a  buying  and  selling  of 
them. 

But  above  all,  your  hucksters,  that  buy  up  the 

j     poor  man's  victuals  by  wholesale,  and 

Hucksters.       ^  ^  ^  j^  ag&[n  for  unreasonable 

gains,  by  retail,  and  as  we  call  it  by  piecemeal ; 
they  are  got  into  a  way,  after  a  stinging  rate,  to 
play  their  game  upon  such  by  extortion :  I  mean 
such  who  buy  up  butter,  cheese,  eggs,  bacon,  <fcc. 
by  wholesale,  and  sell  it  again,  as  they  call  it, 
by  pennyworths,  two  pennyworths,  a  halfpenny- 
worth, or  the  like,  to  the  poor,  all  the  week  after 
the  market  is  past. 

These,  though  I  will  not  coudemn  tbem  all,  do, 
many  of  them,  bite  and  pinch  the  poor  by  this  kind 
of  evil  dealing.  These  destroy  the  poor  because 
he  is  poor,  and  that  is  a  grievous  sin.  '  lie  that 
oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase  his  riches,  and  he 
that  giveth  to  the  rich,  shall  surely  come  to  want.' 
Therefore  he  saith  again,  '  Rob  not  the  poor  be- 
cause he  is  poor,  neither  oppress  the  afflicted  in 
the  gate:  for  the  Lord  will  plead  their  cause,  and 
spoil  the  soul  of  them  that  spoiled  them.'  lr.xxii.16, 

22,  23. 

0  that  he  that  gripeth  and  grindeth  the  face  of 
the  poor,  would  take  notice  of  these  two  scriptures ! 
Here  is  threatened  the  destruction  of  the  estate, 
yea  and  of  the  soul  too,  of  them  that  oppress  the 
poor.  Their  soul  we  shall  better  see  where,  and 
in  what  condition  that  is  in,  when  the  day  of  doom 
is  come ;  but  for  the  estates  of  such,  they  usually 
quickly  moulder;  and  that  sometimes  all  men,  and 
sometimes  no  man  knows  how. 

Besides,  these  are  usurers,  yea,  they  take  usury 
for  victuals,  which  thing  the  Lord  has  forbidden. 
De.  xxiii  19.  And  because  they  cannot  so  well  do  it 
on  the  market-day,  therefore  they  do  it,  as  I  said, 
when  the  market  is  over;  for  then  the  poor  fall  into 
their  mouths,  and  are  necessitated  to  have,  as  they 
can,  for  their  need,  and  they  are  resolved  they  shall 
pay  soundly  for  it.  Perhaps  some  will  find  fault 
for  my  meddling  thus  with  other  folks'  matters,  and 
for  my  thus  prying  into  the  secrets  of  their  iniquity. 
But  to  such  1  would  say,  since  such  actions  are 
evil,  it  is  time  they  were  hissed  out  of  the  world. 
For  all  that  do  such  things  offend  against  God, 


1  Hucksters,  or  general  dealers,  were  more  formidable  ene- 
mies to  the  poor  in  former  days,  than  in  the  present  time  of 
competition.  '  A  great  famine  was  caused  by  huckstering  hus- 
bandmen, those  knaves  iu  grain.' — Fuller's  Worthies,  North- 
umberland.—(Ed.) 


wrong  their  neighbour,  and  like  Mr.  Badtnan  do 
provoke  God  to  judgment. 

Atten.  God  knows  there  is  abundance  of  deceit 
in  the  world ! 

Wise.  Deceit !  Ay,  but  I  have  not  told  you  the 
thousandth  part  of  it;  nor  is  it  my  business  now  to 
rake  to  the  bottom  of  that  dunghill.  What  would 
you  say,  if  I  should  anatomize  some  of  those  vile 
wretches  called  pawnbrokers,  that  lend  money  and 
goods  to  poor  people,  who  are  by  necessity  forced 
to  such  an  inconvenience ;  and  will  make,  by  one 
trick  or  other,  the  interest  of  what  they  so  lend 
amount  to  thirty,  forty,  yea  sometimes  fifty  pound 
by  the  year;  notwithstanding  the  principal  is  se- 
cured by  a  sufficient,  pawn  ;  which  they  will  keep 
teo  at  last,  if  they  can  find  any  shift  to  cheat  the 
wretched  borrower. 

Atten.  Say  !  Why  such  miscreants  are  the  pest 
and  vermin  of  the  commonwealth,  not  fit  for  the 
society  of  men ;  but  methinks  by  some  of  those 
things  you  discoursed  before,  you  seem  to  import 
that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  make  the  best 
of  his  own. 

Wise.  If  by  making  the  best,  you  mean  to  sell 
for  as  much  as  by  hook  or  crook  he  whether  it  be 
can  get  for  his  commodity ;  then  I  say     jawfulforaman 

&  J  '  J      to     make,    tlio 

it  is  not  lawful.      And  if  I  should  say     beatofhiaownj 

the  contrary,  I  should  justify  Mr.  Bad-  Eegatwe  i>y 
man  and  all  the  rest  of  that  gang ;  but  c,=ht  ltas0"s- 
that  I  never  shall  do,  for  the  Word  of  God  con- 
demns them.  But  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man 
at  all  times  to  sell  his  commodity  for  as  much  as 
he  can,  I  prove  by  these  reasons ; — 

First,  If  it  be  lawful  for  me  alway  to  sell  my 
commodity  as  dear,  or  for  as  much  as  I  can,  then 
it  is  lawful  for  me  to  lay  aside  in  my  dealing  with 
others  good  conscience  to  them  and  to  God ;  but 
it  is  not  lawful  for  me,  in  my  dealing  with  others, 
to  lay  aside  good  conscience,  &c.  Therefore  it  is 
not  lawful  for  me  always  to  sell  my  commodity  as 
dear,  or  for  as  much  as  I  can.     That  „    , 

'  Good  conscience 

it  is  not  lawful  to  lay  aside  good  con-  must  be  used 
science  in  our  dealings  has  already 
been  proved  in  the  former  part  of  our  discourse ; 
but  that  a  man  must  lay  it  aside  that  will  sell  his 
commodity  always  as  dear,  or  for  as  much  as  he 
can,  is  plainly  manifest  thus. 

1.  He  that  will,  as  is  mentioned  afore,  sell  his 
commodity  as  dear  as  he  can,  must  We  must  not 
sometimes  make  a  prey  of  the  ignor-  0^neigbIbour's 
ance  of  his  chapman.  But  that  he  %FM"» 
cannot  do  with  a  good  conscience,  for  that  is  to 
overreach,  and  to  go  beyond  my  chapman,  and  is 
forbidden,  l  Th.  to.  6.  Therefore  he  that  will  sell  his 
commodity  as  afore,  as  dear,  or  for  as  much  as  he 
can,  must  of  necessity  lay  aside  good  conscience. 

2.  He  that  will  sell  his  commodity  always  as 
dear  as  he  can,  must  needs  sometimes  make  a  prey 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


639 


of  his  neighbour's  necessity  ;  but  that  he  cannot  do 
with  a  good  conscience,  for  that  is  to  go 
i Jour's'13  neles-   beyond  and  defraud  his  neighbour,  con- 
slty-  trary  to  1  Th.  iv.  6.     Therefore  he  that 

will  sell  his  commodity,  as  afore,  as  dear,  or  for 
as  much  as  he  can,  must  needs  cast  off  and  lay 
aside  a  good  conscience. 

3.  He  that  will,  as  afore,  sell  his  commodity  as 
...,.,     dear,  or  for  as  much  as  he  can,  must, 

Nor  of  his  fond-  '  .  . 

nessoiouicom-  if  need  be,  make  a  prey  of  his  neigh- 
bour's fondness ;  but  that  a  man  can- 
not do  with  a  good  conscience,  for  that  is  still  a 
going  beyond  him,  contrary  to  l  Th.  iv.  6.  Therefore, 
he  that  will  sell  his  commodity  as  dear,  or  for  as 
much  as  he  can,  must  needs  cast  off,  and  lay  aside 
good  conscience. 

The  same  also  may  be  said  for  buying;  no  man 

We     must     use  may  alwayS  bu7  a8   cbeaP  aS    he  Can' 
trood conscience  but  must  also  use  good  conscience  in 

buying ;  the  which  he  can  by  no  means 
use  and  keep,  if  he  buys  always  as  cheap  as  he 
can,  and  that  for  the  reasons  urged  before.  For 
such  will  make  a  prey  of  the  ignorance,  necessity, 
and  fondness  of  their  chapman,  the  which  they 
cannot  do  with  a  good  conscience.  When  Abra- 
ham would  buy  a  burying-place  of  the  son3  of 
Heth,  thus  he  said  unto  them :  '  Intreat  for  me  to 
Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar,  that  he  may  give  me 
the  cave  of  Macphelah,  which  he  hath  -  in  the  end 
of  his  field ;  for  as  much  -  as  it  is  worth  '  shall  he 
give  it  me.  Ge.  xxiii.  8, 9.  He  would  not  have  it 
under  foot,  he  scorned  it,  he  abhorred  it ;  it  stood 
not  with  his  religion,  credit,  nor  conscience.  So 
also,  when  David  would  buy  a  field  of  Oman  the 
Jebusite,  thus  he  said  unto  him,  '  Grant  me  the 
place  of  this  thrashing-floor,  that  I  may  build  an 
altar  therein  unto  the  Lord ;  thou  shalt  grant  it 
me  for  the  full  price.'  l  ch.  xxi.  22.  He  also,  as 
Abraham,  made  conscience  of  this  kind  of  dealing, 
lie  would  not  lie  at  catch x  to  go  beyond,  no, 
not  the  Jebusite,  but  will  give  him  his  full  price 
for  his  field.  For  he  knew  that  there  was  wicked- 
ness, as  in  selling  too  dear,  so  in  buying  too  cheap, 
therefore  he  would  not  do  it.2 

There  ought  therefore  to  be  good  conscience 
used,  as  in  selling  so  in  buying ;  for  it  is  also  un- 
lawful for  a  man  to  go  beyond  or  to  defraud  his 
neighbour  in  buying ;  yea,  it  is  unlawful  to  do  it 
in  any  matter,  and  God  will  plentifully  avenge  that 
wrong,  as  I  also  before  have  forewarned  and  tes- 
tilied.     See  also  the  text,  Le.  xxv.  14.     But, 

Secondly.  If  it  be  lawful  for  me  always  to  sell 


1  To  lie  at  catch,  to  watch  for  an  opportunity  to  take  an 
unfair  advantage.  See  the  conversation  between  Faithful  and 
Talkative  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  p.  124. — (Ed.) 

s  Augustine  had  so  strong  a  sense  of  fair  dealing,  that  when 
a  bookseller  asked  for  a  book  far  less  than  it  was  worth,  he,  of 
his  own  accord,  gave  him  the  full  value  thereof  1 1  See  Clark's 
Looking-glass,  p.  121,  edit.  1657.— 'Ed.) 


my  commodity  as  dear,  or  for  as  much  as  I  can, 
then  it  is  lawful  for  me  to  deal  with  my  Qiarity  must  be 
neighbour  without  the  use  of  charity,  used  in  our 
But  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  lay 
aside,  or  to  deal  with  my  neighbour  without  the 
use  of  charity,  therefore  it  is  not  lawful  for  me 
always  to  sell  my  commodity  to  my  neighbour  for 
as  much  as  I  can.  A  man  in  dealing  should  as 
really  design  his  neighbour's  good,  profit,  and 
advantage,  as  his  own,  for  this  is  to  exercise 
charity  in  his  dealing. 

That  I  should  thus  use,  or  exercise  charity  to- 
wards my  neigbour  in  my  buying  and  selling,  <fcc, 
with  him,  is  evident  from  the  general  command — 
'  Let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity. '  1  Co. 
xvi.  14.  But  that  a  man  cannot  live  in  the  exercise 
of  charity  that  selleth  as  afore,  as  dear,  or  that 
buyeth  as  cheap  as  he  can,  is  evident  by  these 
reasons : — 

1.  He  that  sells  his  commodity  as  dear,  or  for 
as  much  money  always  as  he  can,  seeks  himself, 
and  himself  only.  But  charity  seeketh  not  her 
own,  not  her  own  only.  1  Co.  riii.  So  then  he  that 
seeks  himself,  and  himself  only,  as  he  that  sells, 
as  afore,  as  dear  as  he  can,  does,  maketh  not  use 
of,  nor  doth  he  exercise  charity  in  his  so  dealing. 

2.  He  that  selleth  his  commodity  always  for  as 
much  as  he  can  get,  hardeneth  his  heart  against 
all  reasonable  entreaties  of  the  buyer.  But  he 
that  doth  so  cannot  exercise  charity  in  his  dealing; 
therefore  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  sell  his 
commodity,  as  afore,  as  dear  as  he  can. 

3.  If  it  be  lawful  for  me  to  sell  my  commodity, 
as  afore,  as  dear  as  I  can,  then  there  can  be  no 
sin  in  my  trading,  how  unreasonably  soever  I 
manage  my  calling,  whether  by  lying,  swearing, 
cursing,  cheating,  for  all  this  is  but  to  There  may  be 
sell  my  commodity  as  dear  as  I  can.  and*  sin  m 
EP.  iv.  25.     But  that  there  is  sin  in  these 

is  evident,  therefore  I  may  not  sell  my  commodity 
always  as  dear  as  I  can. 

4.  He  that  sells,  as  afore,  as  dear  as  he  can, 
otfereth  violence  to  the  law  of  nature,  for  that 
saith,  Do  unto  all  men  even  as  ye  A  mall)in  t™d- 
would  that  they  should  do  unto  you.  |&"»*£ 
Mat.  vii.  12.  Now,  was  the  seller  a  to  the  law  of 
buyer,  he  would  not  that  he  of  whom 

he  buys  should  sell  him  always  as  dear  as  he  can, 
therefore  he  should  not  sell  so  himself  when  it  is 
his  lot  to  sell  and  others  to  buy  of  him. 

5.  He  that  selleth,  as  afore,  as  dear  as  he  can, 
makes  use  of  that  instruction  that  God  hath  not 
given  to  others,  but  sealed  up  in  his  hand,  to  abuse 
his  law,  and  to  wrong  his  neighbour  withal,  which 
indeed  is  contrary  to  God.  Job  xxxvii.  7.  We  must  not 
God  hath  given  thee  more  skill,  more  ^^^ 
knowledge  and  understanding  in  thy  ^wied^of 
commodity,  than  he  hath  given  to  him 


640 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BAD  MAN. 


that  would  buy  of  thee.  But  what!  canst  thou 
think  that  God  hath  given  thee  this  that  thou 
mightest  thereby  make  a  prey  of  thy  neighbour? 
that  thou  mightest  thereby  go  beyond  and  beguile 
thy  neighbour?  No,  verily,  but  he  hath  given  thee 
it  for  his  help,  that  thou  mightest  in  this  be  eyes 
to  the  blind,  and  save  thy  neighbour  from  that 
damage  tbat  his  ignorance,  or  necessity,  or  fond- 
ness l  would  betray  him  into  the  hands  of.  1  Co. 

x.  13. 

6.  In  all  that  a  man  does  he  should  have  an 
An  eye  to  the   eye  to  the  glory  of  God,  but  that  he 

an' «  Simiid  cannot  have  that  sells  his  commodity 
have.  always  for  as  much  as  he  can,  for  the 

reasons  urged  before. 

7.  All  that  a  mau  does  he  should  do  •  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus '  Christ,  that  is,  as  being 
commanded  and  authorized  to  do  it  by  him.  CoL 
iii.  17.  But  he  that  selleth  always  as  dear  as  he 
can,  cannot  so  much  as  pretend  to  this  without 
horrid  blaspheming  of  that  name,  because  com- 
manded by  him  to  do  otherwise. 

8.  And  lastly,  in  all  that  a  man  does  he  should 
have  an  eye  to  the  day  of  judgment,  and  to  the 
consideration  of  how  his  actions  will  be  esteemed 
of  in  that  day.  Ac.  xxiv.  15, 16.  Therefore  there  is  not 
any  man  can,  or  ought  to  sell  always  as  dear  as  he 
can,  unless  he  will,  yea,  he  must  say  in  so  doing, 
1  will  run  the  hazard  of  the  trial  of  that  day.  'If 
thou  sell  aught  unto  thy  neighbour,  or  buyest  aught 
of  thy  neighbour's  hand,  ye  shall  not  oppress  one 
another.'  he.  xxv.  14. 

Atten.  But  why  do  you  put  in  these  cautionary 
words,  They  must  not  sell  always  as  dear,  nor  buy 
always  as  cheap  as  they  can  ?  Bo  you  not  thereby 
intimate  that  a  man  may  sometimes  do  so? 

Wise.  I  do  indeed  intimate  that  sometimes  the 
seller  may  sell  as  dear,  and  the  buyer  buy  as  cheap 
as  he  can  ;  but  this  is  allowable  only  in  these  cases: 
when  he  that  sells  is  a  knave,  and  lays  aside  all 
good  conscience  in  selling,  or  when  the  buyer  is  a 
knave,  and  lays  aside  all  good  conscience  in  buy- 
ing. If  the  buyer  therefore  lights  of  a  knave,  or 
if  the  seller  lights  of  a  knave,  then  let  them  look 
to  themselves ;  but  yet  so  as  not  to  lay  aside  con- 
science, because  he  that  thou  dealest  with  doth  so, 
but  how  vile  or  base  soever  the  chapman  is,  do 
thou  keep  thy  commodity  at  a  reasonable  price ; 
or,  if  thou  buyest,  offer  reasonable  gain  for  the 
thing  thou  wouldst  have,  and  if  this  will  not  do 
with  the  buyer  or  seller,  then  seek  thee  a  more 
honest  chapman.  If  thou  objectest,  But  1  have 
not  skill  to  know  when  a  pennyworth  is  before  me, 
get  some  that  have  more  skill  than  thyself  in  that 
affair,  and  let  them  in  that  matter  dispose  of  thy 

1  '  Fondness,'  an  inordinate  desire  to  possess.  '  I  Lave  such 
a  fond  tuulaty  of  uiy  own.' — Sir  T.  More.— (En.) 


money.     But  if  there  were  no  knaves  in  the  world 
these  objections  need  not  be  made."-' 

And  thus,  my  very  good  neighbour,  have  I  given 
you  a  few  of  my  reasons  why  a  man  that  hath  it 
should  not  always  sell  too  dear  nor  buy  as  cheap 
as  he  can,  but  should  use  good  conscience  to  God 
and  charity  to  his  neighbour  iu  both. 

Atten.  But  were  some  men  here  to  hear  you,  I 
believe  they  would  laugh  you  to  scorn. 

'Wise.  I  question  not  that  at  all,  for  so  Mr. 
Badman  used  to  do  when  any  man  told  him  of  his 
faults ;  he  used  to  think  himself  wiser  Badman  used  to 
than  any,  and  would  count,  as  I  have  |?,af  toVhj'm 
hinted  before,  that  he  was  not  arrived  of  hi*  faults; 
to  a  manly  spirit  that  did  stick  or  boggle  at  any 
wickedness.  But  let  Mr.  Badman  and  his  fellows 
laugh,  I  will  bear  it,  and  still  give  them  good 
counsel.  La.  xvi.  13-15.  But  I  will  remember  also, 
for  my  further  relief  and  comfort,  that  thus  they 
that  were  covetous  of  old  served  the  Son  of  God 
himself.  It  is  their  time  to  laugh  now,  that  they 
may  mourn  in  time  to  come.  Lu.  vi.  25.  And  I  say 
again,  when  they  have  laughed  out  their  laugh, 
he  that  useth  not  good  conscience  to  God  anil 
charity  to  his  neighbour  in  buying  and  selling, 
dwells  next  door  to  an  infidel,  and  is  near  of  kin 
to  Mr.  Badman. 

Attex.  Well,  but  what  will  you  say  to  this 
question  ?  You  know  that  there  is  no 
settled  price  set  by  God  upon  any  com-  4ues  lon* 
modity  that  is  bought  or  sold  under  the  sun,  but 
all  things  that  we  buy  and  sell  do  ebb  and  flow,  as 
to  price,  like  the  tide ;  how  then  shall  a  man  of  a 
tender  conscience  do,  neither  to  wrong  the  seller, 
buyer,  nor  himself,  in  buying  and  selling  of  com- 
modities? 

CHAPTER  XI. 
[instructions  for  righteous  trading.] 

Wise.  This  question  is  thought  to  be  frivolous 
by  all  that  are  of  Mr.  Badman's  way,  it  is  also 
difficult  in  itself,  yet  I  will  endeavour 
to  shape  you  an  answer,  and  that  first 
to  the  matter  of  the  question,  to  wit,  how  a  trades- 
man should,  in  trading,  keep  a  good  conscience ; 
a  buyer  or  seller  either.     Secondly,  how  he  should 
prepare  himself  to  this  work  and  live  in  the  prac- 
tice of  it.     For  the  first,  he  must  ob- 
serve what  hath  been  said  before,  to     be     a    good 
wit,  he  must  have  conscience  to  God,     dealcI' 
charity  to  his  neighbour,  and,  I  will   add,  much 
moderation  in  dealing.     Let  him  therefore   keep 


2  Cheating,  either  in  quality,  weight,  or  price  of  commodities, 
is  not  common  in  Mahometan  countries,  where  the  punish- 
ment is  very  severe ;  that  of  nailing  the  dealer's  ears  to  his 
door-posts.  It  is  a  foul  disgrace  to  Christian  countries  that 
these  crimes  are  so  common.— (Kd.) 


THE  LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MS.  BADMAN. 


641 


within  the  hounds  of  the  affirmative  of  those  eight 
reasons  that  before  were  urged  to  prove  that  men 
ought  not,  in  their  dealing,  but  to  do  justly  and 
mercifullv  betwixt  man  and  man,  and  then  there 
will  be  no  great  fear  of  wronging  the  seller,  buyer, 
or  himself.  But  particularly  to  prepare  or  instruct 
a  man  to  this  work:  — 

1.  Let  the  tradesman  or  others  consider  that 
there  is  not  that  in  great  gettinga  and  in  abund- 
ance which  the  most  of  men  do  suppose ;  for  all 
that  a  man  has  over  and  above  what  serves  for  his 
present  necessity  and  supply,  serves  only  to  feed 
the  lusts  of  the  eye.  For  '  what  good  is  there  to 
the  owners  thereof,  saving  the  beholding  of  them 
with  their  eyes?'  Ec.  v.  11.  Men  also,  many  times, 
in  getting  of  riches,  get  therewith  a  snare  to  their 
soul.  1  Ti.  vi.  7-9.  But  few  get  good  by  getting  of 
them.  But  this  consideration  Mr.  Badman  could 
not  abide. 

2.  Consider  that  the  getting  of  wealth  dis- 
honestly— as  he  does  that  getteth  it  without  good 
conscience  and  charity  to  his  neighbour — is  a  great 
offender  against  God.  Hence  he  says,  '  I  have 
smitten  mine  hand  at  thy  dishonest  gain  which 
thou  hast  made.'  Eze.  xxii.  13.  It  is  a  manner  of 
speech  that  shows  anger  in  the  very  making  of 
mention  of  the  crime.      Therefore, 

3.  Consider  that  a  little,  honestly  gotten,  though 
it  may  yield  thee  but  a  dinner  of  herbs  at  a  time, 
will  yield  more  peace  therewith  than  will  a  stalled 
ox  ill  gotten.  Pr.xv.  17.  'Better  is  a  little  with 
righteousness,  than  great  revenues  without  right.' 

Pr.  xvi.  S.   1  Sa.  ii.  5. 

4.  Be  thou  confident  that  God's  eyes  are  upon 
all  thy  ways,  and  'that  he  pondereth  all  thy 
goings,'  and  also  that  he  marks  them,  writes 
them  down,  and  seals  them  up  in  a  bag  against 
the  time  to  come.   Pr.  v.  21.  Job  xiv.  17. 

5.  Be  thou  sure  that  thou  rememberest  that 
thou  knowest  not  the  day  of  thy  death.  Remem- 
ber also  that  when  death  comes  God  will  give  thy 
substance,  for  the  which  thou  hast  laboured,  and 
for  the  which  perhaps  thou  hast  hazarded  thy  soul, 
to  one  thou  knowest  not  who,  nor  whether  he  shall 
be  a  wise  man  or  a  fool.  And  then,  '  what  profit 
hath  he  that  hath  laboured  for  the  wind?'  Be  v.  16. 

Besides,  thou  shalt  have  nothing  that  thou 
mayest  so  much  as  carry  away  in  thine  hand. 
Guilt  shall  go  with  thee  if  thou  hast  got  it  [thy 
substance]  dishonestly,  and  they  also  to  whom 
thou  shalt  leave  it  shall  receive  it  to  their  hurt. 
These  things  duly  considered  and  made  use  of  by 
thee  to  the  preparing  of  thy  heart  to  thy  calling 
of  buying  and  selling,  I  come,  in  the  next  place,  to 
show  thee  how  thou  shouldst  live  in  the  practick 
part  of  this  art.      Art  thou  to  buy  or  sell? 

1.  If  thou  sellest,  do  not  commend;  if  thou 
buyest,  do  not  dispraise ;  any  otherwise   but  to 

VOL.  III. 


give  the  thing  that  thou  hast  to  do  with  its  just 
value  and  worth ;  for  thou  canst  not  do  otherwise, 
knowingly,  but  of  a  covetous  and  wicked  mind. 
Wherefore  else  are  commodities  overvalued  by  the 
seller,  and  also  undervalued  by  the  buyer.  '  It  is 
naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer,'  but  when  he 
hath  got  his  bargain  he  boasteth  thereof,  rr.  xx.  u. 
What  hath  this  man  done  now,  but  lied  in  the 
dispraising  of  his  bargain?  and  why  did  he  dis- 
praise it,  but  of  a  covetous  mind  to  wrong  and 
beguile  the  seller? 

2.  Ar'  thou  a  seller,  and  do  things  grow  dear? 
Set  not  thy  hand  to  help  or  hold  them  up  higher ; 
this  cannot  be  done  without  wickedness  neither, 
for  this  is  a  making  of  the  shekel  great.  Am.  vift  5. 
Art  thou  a  buyer,  and  do  things  grow  dear?  use 
no  cunning  or  deceitful  language  to  pull  them 
down,  for  that  cannot  be  done  but  wickedly  too. 
What  then  shall  we  do,  will  you  say?  Why  I 
answer,  leave  things  to  the  providence  of  God,  and 
do  thou  with  moderation  submit  to  his  hand.  But 
since,  when  they  are  growing  dear,  the  hand  that 
upholds  the  price  is,  for  the  time,  more  strong 
than  that  which  would  pull  it  down ;  that  being 
the  hand  of  the  seller,  who  loveth  to  have  it  dear, 
especially  if  it  shall  rise  in  his  hand.  Therefore 
I  say,  do  thou  take  heed  and  have  not  a  hand  in 
it,  the  which  thou  mayest  have  to  thine  own  and 
thy  neighbour's  hurt,  these  three  ways:  — 

1.  By  crying  out  scarcity,  scarcity,  beyond  the 
truth  and  state  of  things ;  especially  take  heed  of 
doing  of  this  by  way  of  a  prognostic  for  time  to 
come.  It  was  for  this  for  which  he  a  judgment  of 
was  trodden  to  death  in  the  gate  of  God- 
Samaria,  that  you  read  of  in  the  second  book  of 
Kings.  2  Ki.  vii.  17.  This  sin  hath  a  double  evil  in 
it.  (1.)  It  belieth  the  present  blessing  of  God 
among  us;  and  (2.)  It  undervalueth  the  riches  of 
his  goodness,  which  can  make  all  good  things  to 
abound  towards  us. 

2.  This  wicked  thing  may  be  done  by  hoarding 
up  when  the  hunger  and  necessity  of  the  poor  calls 
for  it."  Now,  that  God  may  show  his  dislike 
against  this,  he  doth,  as  it  were,  license  the  people 
to  curse  such  a  hoarder  up — '  He  that  withholdeth 
corn,  the  people  shall  curse  him,  but  blessing  shall 
be  upon  the  head  of  him  that  selleth  it.'  rr.  ri.2G. 

3.  But  if  things  will  rise,  do  thou  be  grieved, 
be  also  moderate  in  all  thy  sellings,  and  be  sure 
let  the  poor  have  a  pennyworth,  and  sell  thy  corn 
to  those  in  necessity.  Which  then  thou  wilt  do 
when  thou  showest  mercy  to  the  poor  in  thy  selling 
to  him,  and  when  thou,  for  his  sake  because  he  is 
poor,  undersellest  the  market.  This  is  to  buy  and 
sell  with  good  conscience  ;  thy  buyer  thou  wrongest 
not,  thy  conscience  thou  wrongest  not,  thyself  thou 
wrongest  not,  for  God  will  surely  recompense  thee, 
is.  iviu.  c-8.     I  have  spoken  concerning  corn,  but 

81 


(542 


THE   LTFE   AND  DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


thy  duty  is  to  'let  your  moderation  '  in  all  things 
'be  known  unto  all  men,  the  Lord  is  at  hand.' 


CHAPTER  XII. 

[B ADMAN'S  ritlDE,  ATHEISM,  INFIDELITY,  AND  ENVY.] 

Atten.  Well,  Sir,  now  I  have  heard  enough  of 
Mr.  Badman's  naughtiness,  pray  now  proceed  to 
his  death. 

Wise.  Why,  Sir,  the  sun  is  not  so  low,  we  have 
yet  three  hours  to  night. 

Atten.  Nay,  I  am  not  in  any  great  haste,  but 
I  thought  you  had  even  now  done  with  his  life. 

Wise.  Done!  no,  I  have  yet  much  more  to  say. 

Atten.  Then  he  has  much  more  wickedness 
than  I  thought  he  had. 

Wise.  That  may  be.  But  let  us  proceed. 
Mr.  Badman  a  This  Mr.  Badinan  added  to  all  his 
very  proud  man.  wickedness  this,  he  was  a  very  proud 
man,  a  very  proud  man.  He  was  exceeding  proud 
and  haughty  in  mind;  he  looked  that  what  he  said 
ought  not,  must  not  be  contradicted  or  opposed. 
He  counted  himself  as  wise  as  the  wisest  in  the 
country,  as  good  as  the  best,  and  as  beautiful  as 
he  that  had  most  of  it.  He  took  great  delight  in 
praising  of  himself,  and  as  much  in  the  praises 
that  others  gave  him.  He  could  not  abide  that 
any  should  think  themselves  above  him,  or  that 
„   ., '  .  ,     their  wit  or  personage   should   bv 

Of  pride  in  general.  ^  °  J 

others  be  set  before  his.  He  had 
scarce  a  fellowly  carriage  for  his  equals.  But  for 
those  that  were  of  an  inferior  rank,  he  would  look 
over  them  in  great  contempt.  And  if  at  any  time 
he  had  any  remote  occasion  of  having  to  do  with 
them,  he  would  show  great  height  and  a  very 
domineering  spirit.  So  that  in  this  it  may  be 
said  that  Solomon  gave  a  characteristical  note  of 
him  when  he  said,  '  Proud  and  haughty  scorner  is 
his  name,  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath.'  Pr.  xxi.  -2i. 
He  never  thought  his  diet  well  enough  dressed,  his 
clothes  fine  enough  made,  or  his  praise  enough 
refined. 

Atten.  This  pride  is  a  sin  that  sticks  as  close 
to  nature,  I  think,  as  most  sins.  There  is  un- 
cleanness  and  pride,  I  know  not  of  any  two  gross 
sins  that  stick  closer  to  men  than  they.  They 
have,  as  I  may  call  it,  an  interest  in  nature ;  it 
likes  them  because  they  most  suit  its  lusts  and 
fancies ;  and  therefore  no  marvel  though  Mr.  Bad- 
man  was  tainted  witli  pride,  since  he  had  so  wick- 
edly given  up  himself  to  work  all  iniquity  with 
greediness. 

Wise.  You  say  right ;  pride  is  a  sin  that  sticks 
close  to  nature,  and  is  one  of  the  first  follies  where- 
Pride  sticks  close  "i  it  shows  itself  to  be  polluted.  For 
to  nature.  even  m  childhood,  even  in  little  chil- 
dren, pride  will  first  of  all  show  itself;  it  is  a  hasty, 


an  early  appearance  of  the  sin  of  the  soul.  It, 
as  I  may  say,  is  that  corruption  that  strives  for 
predominancy  in  the  heart,  and  therefore  usually 
comes  out  first.  But  though  children  are  so  in- 
cident to  it,  yet  methinks  those  of  more  years 
should  be  ashamed  thereof.  I  might  at  the  first 
have  begun  with  Mr.  Badman's  pride,  only  I  think 
it  is  not  the  pride  in  infancy  that  begins  to  make 
a  difference  betwixt  one  and  another,  as  did,  and 
do  those  wherewith  I  began  my  relation  of  his  life, 
therefore  I  passed  it  over,  but  now,  since  he  had 
no  more  consideration  of  himself,  and  of  his  vile 
and  sinful  state,  but  to  be  proud  when  come  to 
years,  I  have  taken  the  occasion  in  this  place  to 
make  mention  of  his  pride. 

Atten.  But  pray,  if  you  can  remember  them, 
tell  me  of  some  places  of  scripture  that  speak 
against  pride.  I  the  rather  desire  this  because 
that  pride  is  now  a  reigning  sin,  and  I  happen 
sometimes  to  fall  into  the  company  of  them  that 
in  my  conscience  are  proud,  very  much,  and  I  have 
a  mind  also  to  tell  them  of  their  sin,  now  when  I 
tell  them  of  it,  unless  I  bring  God's  Word  too,  I 
doubt  they  will  laugh  me  to  scorn. 

Wise.  Laugh  you  to  scorn!  the  proud  man  will 
laugh  you  to  scorn  bring  to  him  what  text  you 
can,  except  God  shall  smite  him  in  his  conscience 
by  the  Word.  Mr.  Badman  did  use  to  serve  them 
so  that  did  use  to  tell  him  of  his ;  and  besides, 
when  you  have  said  what  you  can,  they  will  tell 
you  they  are  not  proud,  and  that  you  are  rather 
the  proud  man,  else  you  would  not  judge,  nor 
so  malapertly1  meddle  with  other  men's  mat- 
ters as  you  do.  Nevertheless,  since  you  desire  it, 
I  will  mention  two  or  three  texts ;  they  are  these : 
— *  Pride  and  arrogancy  -  do  I  hate. '  Pr.  via.  13. 
'A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low.'  pr.  xxix.  23. 
'  And  he  shall  bring  down  their  pride.'  is.  xxv.  11. 
'  And  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly, 
shall  be  stubble,  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall 
burn  them  up.'  Mai.  iv.  1.  This  last  is  a  dreadful 
text,  it  is  enough  to  make  a  proud  man  shake. 
God,  saith  he,  will  make  the  proud  ones  as  stubble; 
that  is,  as  fuel  for  the  fire,  and  the  day  that  cometh 
shall  be  like  a  burning  oven,  and  that  day  shall 
burn  them  up,  saith  the  Lord.  But  Mr.  Badmau 
could  never  abide  to  hear  pride  spoken  against, 
nor  that  any  should  say  of  him,  He  is  a  proud 
man. 

Atten.   What  should  be  the  reason  of  that  ? 

Wise.  He  did  not  tell  me  the  reason  ;  but  I  sup- 
pose it  to  be  that  which  is  common  to   „     ,  . 

1  Proud  men  do 

all  vile  persons.     They  love  this  vice,     not  love  to  be 

,      .  .       .  .  „.  called  proud. 

but  care  not  to  bear  its  name.      The 

drunkard  loves  the  sin,  but  loves  not  to  be  called 


:  Malapert,  dexterous  in  evil-speaking.  '  It  is  blasphemous 
to  say  that  God  will  not  hear  us  for  our  presumptuous  ma/a- 
pertiiess  unless  we  invoke  the  saiuts.' — Tyndale. 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH    OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


643 


a  drunkard.  The  thief  loveth  to  steal,  but  cannot 
abide  to  be  called  a  thief;  the  whore  loveth  to 
commit  uncleanness,  but  loveth  not  to  be  called  a 
whore.  And  so  Mr.  Badman  loved  to  be  proud, 
but  could  not  abide  to  be  called  a  proud  man.  The 
sweet  of  sin  is  desirable  to  polluted  and  corrupted 
man,  hut  the  name  thereof  is  a  blot  in  his  escut- 
cheon. l 

Atten".  It  is  true  that  you  have  said ;  but  pray 
how  many  sorts  of  pride  are  there  ? 

Wise.  There  are  two  sorts  of  pride :  pride  of 
Two  sorts  of  spirit,  and  pride  of  body.  The  first  of 
pride.  these  is  thus  made  mention  of  in  the 

scriptures.  '  Every  oue  that  is  proud  in  heart  is 
an  abomination  to  the  Lord.'  Pr.  xvi.  5.  *  A  high 
look,  and  a  proud  heart,  and  the  ploughing  of  the 
wicked,  is  sin.'  Pr.  xxi.  4.  '  The  patient  in  spirit  is 
better  than  the  proud  in  spirit.'  Ee.  vii.  s.  Bodily 
pride  the  Scriptures  mention.  '  In  that  day  the 
Lord  will  take  away  the  bravery  of  their  tinkling 
ornaments  about  their  feet,  and  their  cauls,  and.  their 
round  tires  like  the  moon,  the  chains  and  the 
bracelets,  and  the  mufflers,  the  bonnets,  and  the 
ornaments  of  the  legs,  and  the  headbands,  and 
the  tablets,  and  the  earrings,  the  rings,  and  nose 
jewels,*  the  changeable  suits  of  apparel,  and  the 
mantles,  and  the  wimples,  and  the  crisping  pins, 
the  glasses,  and  the  hue  linen,  and  the  hoods,  and 
the  vails. '  is.  m.  18-23.  By  these  expressions  it  is 
evident  that  there  is  pride  of  body,  as  well  as  pride 
of  spirit,  and  that  both  are  sin,  and  so  abominable 
to  the  Lord.  But  these  texts  Mr.  Badman  could 
never  abide  to  read;  they  were  to  him  as  Micaiah 
was  to  Ahab,  they  never  spake  good  of  him,  but 
evil. 

Atten.  I  suppose  that  it  was  not  Mr.  Badman's 
Wicked  men  do  case  alone  even  to  malign  those  texts 
that '  reawes  tnat  speak  against  their  vices ;  for  I 
then-  vice.  believe  that  most  ungodly  men,  where 
the  Scriptures  are,  have  a  secret  antipathy  against 
those  words  of  God  that  do  most  plainly  and  fully 
rebuke  them  for  their  sins. 

Wise.  That  is  out  of  doubt ;  and  by  that  anti- 
pathy they  show  that  sin  and  Satan  are  more 
welcome  to  them  than  are  wholesome  instructions 
of  life  and  godliness. 

Attex.  Well,  but  not  to  go  off  from  our  dis- 
course of  Mr.  Badman.      You  say  he  was  proud ; 


1  This  is  a  phrase  in  heraldry  to  signify  that  the  armorial 
bearings  are  marked  with  some  sign  of  disgrace.'  Thus  John 
tie  Aveoues  having  reviled  his  mother  in  the  King's  presence, 
be  ordered  that  the  tongue  and  claw  of  the  lion  which  he  bore 
in  his  arms  should  be  defaced.  In  many  cases  a  batou  is  in- 
serted as  a  mark  of  illegitimacy. — (Ed.) 

-  From  a  tine  Persian  drawing  in  the  editor's  cabinet,  it  ap- 
pears tiiat  the  nose  jewel  lies  on  the  right  cheek,  and  is  tixed 
by  a  ring  cut  through  to  form  a  spring  ;  oue  edge  of  the  cut 
going  iuside,  and  the  other  meeting  outside  the  nostril,  so  as 
to  be  readily  removed  as  occasion  required. — (Ed.) 


In  particular. 


but  will  you  show  me  now  some  symptoms  of  one 
that  is  proud  ? 

Wise.  Yes,  that  I  will ;  and  first  I  will  show 
you  some  symptoms  of  pride  of  heart,  signs  of  a  proud 
Pride  of  heart  is  seen  by  outward  1UU"  m  sellt;ral 
things,  as  pride  of  body  in  general  is  a  sign  of 
pride  of  heart ;  for  all  proud  gestures  of  the  body 
flow  from  pride  of  heart ;  therefore  Solomon  saith, 
'  There  is  a  generation,  0  how  lofty  are  their  eyes, 
and  their  eye-lids  are  lifted  up.'  Pr.  xxx.  13.  And 
again,  there  is  'that  exalteth  his  gait,'  his  going. 
Pt.  xvii.  is  Now,  these  lofty  eyes,  and  this  exalt- 
ing of  the  gait,  is  a  sign  of  a  proud  heart ;  for 
both  these  actions  come  from  the  heart.  For  out 
of  the  heart  comes  pride,  in  all  the  visible  appear- 
ances of  it.  Mar.  vii.     But  more  particularly — 

1.  Heart  pride  is  discovered  by  a  stretched-out 
neck,  and  by  mincing  as  they  go.  For 
the  wicked,  the  proud,  have  a  proud 
neck,  a  proud  foot,  a  proud  tongue,  by  which  this 
their  going  is  exalted.  This  is  that  which  makes 
them  look  scornfully,  speak  ruggedly,  and  carry 
it  huffingly  among  their  neighbours.  2.  A  proud 
heart  is  a  persecuting  one.  '  The  wicked  in  his 
pride  doth  persecute  the  poor.'  Ps.  x.  2.  3.  A 
prayerless  man  is  a  proud  man.  Ps.  x.  4.  4.  A  con- 
tentious man  is  a  proud  man.  Pr.  xiii.  10.  5.  The 
disdainful  man  is  a  proud  man.  Ps.  cxix.  61.  6.  The 
man  that  oppresses  his  neighbour  is  a  proud  man. 
Ps.  cxix.  122.  7.  He  that  hearkeneth  not  to  God's 
word  with  reverence  and  fear  is  a  proud  man. 
Je.  xiii.  15, 17.  8.  And  be  that  calls  the  proud  happy 
is,  be  sure,  a  proud  man.  All  these  are  proud  in 
heart,  and  this  their  pride  of  heart  doth  thus  dis- 
cover itself.    Je.  xliii.  2.    Mai.  iii.  15. 

As  to  bodily  pride,  it  is  discovered  that  is  some- 
thing of  it,  by  all  the  particulars 
mentioned  before;  for  though  they 
are  said  to  be  symptoms  of  pride  of  heart,  yet  they 
are  symptoms  of  that  pride,  by  their  showing  of 
themselves  in  the  body.  You  know  diseases  that 
are  within  are  seen  ofttimes  by  outward  and  visible 
signs,  yet  by  these  very  signs  even  the  outside  is 
defiled  also.  So  all  those  visible  signs  of  heart 
pride  are  signs  of  bodily  pride  also.  But  to  come 
to  more  outward  signs.  The  putting  on  of  gold, 
and  pearls,  and  costly  array ;  the  plaiting  of  the 
hair,  the  following  of  fashions,  the  seeking  by 
gestures  to  imitate  the  proud,  either  by  speech, 
looks,  dresses,  goings,  or  other  fools'  baubles,  of 
which  at  this  time  the  world  is  full,  all  these,  and 
many  more,  are  signs,  as  of  a  proud  heart,  so  of 
bodily  pride  also,  l  Ti.  ii.  9.  i  Fe.  iii.  3-5. 

But  Mr.  Badman  would  not  allow,  by  any  means, 
that  this  should  be  called  pride,  but   Mr.     Badman 
rather  neatness,  handsomeness,  come-     haTing™  pnde 
liness,  cleanliness,  <fcc,  neither  would     called  prate. 
he  allow  that  following  of  fashions  was  anything 


Of  outward  pride. 


G44 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  B  ADM  AN. 


else,  but  because  be  would  not  be  proud,  singular, 
and  esteemed  fantastical  by  bis  neighbours. 

Atten.  But  I  have  been  told  that  when  some 
have  been  rebuked  for  their  pride,  they  have  turned 
it  again  upon  the  brotherhood  of  those  by  whom 
they  have  been  rebuked,  saying,  Physician,  heal 
thy  friends,  look  at  home  among  your  brother- 
hood, even  among  the  wisest  of  you,  and  see  if  you 
yourselves  be  clear,  even  you  professors.  For  who 
is  prouder  than  you  professors  ?  scarcely  the  devil 
himself. 

Wise.  My  heart  aches  at  this  answer,  because 
„  .  .„    there  is  too  much  cause  for  it.     This 

Professors  guilty 

of  the  sin  of  very  answer  would  Mr.  Badman  give 
pn  e'  his  wife  when  she,  as  she  would  some- 

times, reprove  him  for  his  pride.  We  shall  have, 
says  he,  great  amendments  in  living  now,  for  the 
devil  is  turned  a  corrector  of  vice  ;  for  no  sin  reign- 
eth  more  in  the  world,  quoth  he,  than  pride  among 
professors.  And  who  can  contradict  him  ?  Let 
us  give  the  devil  his  due,  the  thing  is  too  apparent 
for  any  man  to  deny.  And  I  doubt  not  but  the 
same  answer  is  ready  in  the  mouths  of  Mr  Bad- 
man's  friends ;  for  they  may  and  do  see  pride  dis- 
play itself  in  the  apparel  and  carriages  of  profes- 
sors, one  may  say,  almost  as  much,  as  among  any 
people  in  the  land,  the  more  is  the  pity.  Ay,  and 
I  fear  that  even  their  extravagancies  in  this  hath 
hardened  the  heart  of  many  a  one,  as  I  perceive  it 
did  somewhat  the  heart  of  Mr.  Badman  himself. 
For  my  own  part,  I  have  seen  many  niyself,  and 
those  church  members  too,  so  decked  and  be- 
daubed with  their  fangles1  and  toys,  and  that 
when  they  have  been  at  the  solemn  appointments 
of  God  in  the  way  of  his  worship,  that  I  have 
wondered  with  what  face  such  painted  persons 
could  sit  in  the  place  where  they  were  without 
swooning.  But  certainly  the  holiness  of  God,  and 
also  the  pollution  of  themselves  by  sin,  must  need 
be  very  far  out  of  the  minds  of  such  people,  what 
profession  soever  they  make. 

I  have  read  of  a  whore's  forehead,  and  I  have 
read  of  Christian  shamefacedness.  Je.  iii.  3.  1  Ti.  ii.  &. 
1  have  read  of  costly  array,  and  of  that  which  be- 
cometh  women  professing  godliness,  with  good 
works,  l  Pe.iii.  1-3.  But  if  I  might  speak,  I  know 
what  I  know,  and  could  say,  and  yet  do  no  wrong, 
that  which  would  make  some  professors  stink  in 
their  places  ;  but  now  I  forbear.  jc.  xxiii.  is. 

Atten.  Sir,  you  seem  greatly  concerned  at  this, 
but  what  if  I  shall  say  more  ?  It  is  whispered 
that  some  good  ministers  have  countenanced  then- 
people  in  their  light  and  wanton  apparel,  yea, 
have  pleaded  for  their  gold  and  pearls,  and  costly 
array,  <fec. 


1  An  attempt  at  something  new,  a  foolish  innovation,  gene- 
rally used  with  the  word  new ;  as,  '  In  holiday  gown,  and  my 
mm/angled  hat.' — Cunningham. — (Ed.) 


Wise.  I  know  not  what  they  have  pleaded  for, 
but  it  is  easily  seen  that  they  tolerate,  or  at  least- 
wise, wink  and  connive  at  such  things,  both  in 
their  wives  and  children.  And  so  'from  the  pro- 
phets of  Jerusalem  is  profaneness  gone  forth  into 
all  the  land.'  Je.  xxiii.  15.  And  when  the  hand  of 
the  rulers  are  chief  in  a  trespass,  who  can  keep 
their  people  from  being  drowned  in  that  trespass  ? 

tizr.  ix.  2. 

Atten.  This  is  a  lamentation,  and  must  stand 
for  a  lamentation. 

Wise.  So  it  is,  and  so  it  must.  And  I  will 
add,  it  is  a  shame,  it  is  a  reproach,  it  Prjaei-n  rofes. 
is  a  stumbling  block  to  the  blind;  for  sons  a  shame 
though  men  be  as  blind  as  Mr.  Bad-  block  to  the 
man  himself,  yet  they  can  see  the  w°rld" 
foolish  lightness  that  must  needs  be  the  bottom  of 
all  these  apish  and  wanton  extravagancies.  But 
many  have  their  excuses  ready ;  to  wit,  their  par- 
ents, their  husbands,  and  their  breeding  calls  for 
it,  and  the  like ;  yea,  the  examples  of  good  people 
prompt  them  to  it ;  but  all  these  will  be  but  the 
spider's  web,  when  the  thunder  of  the  word  of  the 
great  God  shall  rattle  from  heaven  against  them, 
as  it  will  at  death  or  judgment ;  but  I  wish  it 
might  do  it  before.  But  alas !  these  excuses  are 
but  bare  pretences,  these  proud  ones  love  to  have 
it  so.  I  once  talked  with  a  maid  by  way  of  re- 
proof for  her  fond  and  gaudy  garment.  But  she 
told  me,  The  tailor  would  make  it  so ; 
when  alas !  poor  proud  girl,  she  gave 
order  to  the  tailor  so  to  make  it.  Many  make 
parents,  and  husbands,  and  tailors,  <kc,  the  blind 
to  others ;  but  their  naughty  hearts,  and  their 
giving  of  way  thereto,  that  is  the  original  cause  of 
all  these  evils. 

Atten.  Now  you  are  speaking  of  the  cause  of 
pride,  pray  show  me  yet  further  why  wb.y  pride  is  in 
pride  is  now  so  much  in  request.  sucl1  reiuest- 

Wise.  I  will  show  you  what  I  think  are  the 
reasons  of  it. 

1.  The  first  is,  because,  such  persons  aro  led  by 
their  own  hearts,  rather  than  by  the 

Word  of  God.  Mar.  vii.  21-23.  I  told  you 
before  that  the  original  fountain  of  pride  is  the 
heart.  For  out  of  the  heart  comes  pride ;  it  is, 
therefore,  because  they  are  led  by  their  hearts, 
which  naturally  tend  to  lift  them  up  in  pride.  This 
pride  of  heart  tempts  them,  and  by  its  deceits  over- 
cometh  them  ;  yea,  it  doth  put  a  bewitching  virtue 
into  their  peacock's  feathers,  and  then  they  are 
swallowed  up  with  the  vanity  of  them.  Oba.  s. 

2.  Another  reason  why  professors  are  so  proud 
for  those  we  are  talking  of  now,  is 

,  ,,  °  ,        Second  reason. 

because  they  are  more  apt   to  take 
example  by  those  that  are  of  the  world,  than  they 
are  to  take  example  of  those  that  are  saints  indeed. 
Pride  is  of  the  world.    '  For  all  that  is  in  the  world, 


-m 


THE  LIFE   AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


645 


the  lust  of  the  flesli,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and 
the  pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father  but  of  the 
world.'  1  Jn.  U.  16.  Of  the  world,  therefore,  professors 
learn  to  be  proud.  But  they  should  not  take  them 
for  example.  It  will  be  objected,  No,  nor  your  saints 
neither,  for  you  are  as  proud  as  others  ;  well,  let 
them  take  shame  that  are  guilty.  But  when  I  say 
professors  should  take  example  for  their  life  by 
those  that  are  saints  indeed,  I  mean  as  Peter  says  ; 
they  should  take  example  of  those  that  were  in  old 
time  the  saints  ;  for  saints  of  old  time  were  the 
best,  therefore  to  these  he  directed  us  for  our  pat- 
tern. Let  the  wives'  conversation  be  chaste  and 
also  coupled  with  fear.  '  Whose  adorning,'  saith 
Peter,  '  let  it  not  be  that  outward  adorning  of 
plaiting  the  hair,  and  of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of 
putting  on  of  apparel ;  but  let  it  be  the  hidden  man 
of  the  heart,  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible,  even 
the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in 
the  sight  of  God  of  great  price.  For  after  this 
manner,  in  the  old  time,  the  holy  women  also  who 
trusted  in  God,  adorned  themselves,  being  in  sub- 
jection to  their  own  husbands.'  l  Pe.  Hi.  1-5. 

3.  Another  reason  is,  because  they  have  forgotten 

the  pollution  of  their  nature.  For  the 
remembrance  of  that  must  needs  keep 
us  humble,  and  heing  kept  humble,  we  shall  be  at 
a  distance  from  pride.  The  proud  and  the  humble 
are  set  in  opposition  ;  '  God  resisteth  the  proud, 
but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble.'  And  can  it  be 
imagined  that  a  sensible  Christian  should  be  a  proud 
one ;  sense  of  baseness  tends  to  lay  us  low,  not  to 
lift  us  up  with  pride  ;  not  with  pride  of  heart,  nor 
pride  of  life.  But  when  a  man  begins  to  forget 
what  he  is,  then  he,  if  ever,  begins  to  be  proud. 
Methinks  it  is  one  of  the  most  senseless  and  ridicul- 
ous things  in  the  world  that  a  man  should  be  proud 
of  that  which  is  given  him  on  purpose  to  cover  the 
shame  of  his  nakedness  with. 

4.  Persons  that  are  proud  have  gotten  God  and 

his  holiness  out  of  their  sight.    If  God 
Fourth  reason.  ,    r        .,  ,       .     ,    ,  •     ,  , ,     • 

was  before  them,  as  he  is  behind  their 

back.      And  if  they  saw  him  in  his  holiness,  as  he 

sees  them  in  their  sins  and  shame,  they  would  take 

but  little  pleasure  in  their  apish  knacks.      The 

holiness  of  God  makes  the  angels  cover  their  faces, 

crumbles  Christians,  when  they  behold  it,  into  dust 

and  ashes.     And  as  his  majesty  is,  such  is  his 

Word.  is.  vi.     Therefore  they  abuse  it  that  bring  it 

to  countenance  pride. 

Lastly.  But  what  can  be  the  end  of  those  that 

are  proud  in  the  decking  of  themselves 

Fifth  reason.        .         xl     .  ,.  °    0      ,xr, 

atter  their  antic  manners      Why  are 

they  for  going  with  their  bull's  foretops,1  with  their 

naked  shoulders,  and  paps  hanging  out  like  a  cow's 


1  A  tuft  of  hair  worn  on  a  man's  forehead,  or  a  projecting 
conspicuous  part  of  the  women's  caps  worn  by  the  fashionables 
of  that  time.— (En.) 


bag?  Why  are  they  for  painting  their  faces,  for 
stretching  out  their  neck,  and  for  putting  of  them- 
selves unto  all  the  formalities  which  proud  fancy 
leads  them  to?  Is  it  because  they  would  honour 
God?  because  they  would  adorn  the  gospel?  be- 
cause they  would  beautify  religion,  and  make  sinners 
to  fall  in  love  with  their  own  salvation  ?  No,  no, 
it  is  rather  to  please  their  lusts,  to  satisfy  their  wild 
and  extravagant  fancies  ;  and  I  wish  none  doth  it 
to  stir  up  lust  in  others,  to  the  end  they  may  com- 
mit uncleanness  with  them.  I  believe,  whatever  is 
their  end,  this  is  one  of  the  great  designs  of  the 
devil ;  and  I  believe  also  that  Satan  has  drawn 
more  into  the  sin  of  uncleanness  by  the  spangling 
show  of  fine  cloths,  than  he  could  possibly  have 
drawn  unto  it  without  them.  I  wonder  what  it 
was  that  of  old  was  called  the  attire  of  a  harlot  ; 
certainly  it  could  not  be  more  bewitching  and 
tempting  thau  are  the  garments  of  many  professors 
this  day. 

Atten.  I  like  what  you  say  very  well,  and  I 
wish  that  all  the  proud  dames  in  England  that 
profess  were  within  the  reach  and  sound  of  your 
words. 

Wise.  What  I  have  said  I  believe  is  true  ;  but 
as  for  the  proud  dames  in  England  that  profess, 
they  have  Moses  and  the  prophets,  and  if  they  will 
not  hear  them,  how  then  can  we  hope  that  they 
should  receive  good  by  such  a  dull-sounding  ram's- 
horn  as  I  am  ?2  However,  I  have  said  my  mind, 
and  now,  if  you  will,  we  will  proceed  to  some  other 
of  Mr.  Badman's  doings. 

Atten.  No ;  pray,  before  you  show  me  anything 
else  of  Mr.  Badman,  show  me  yet  The  enl  effecU 
more  particularlv  the  evil   effects  of    of  tUe  sin  of 

m  .       .        ,       .,     J  pride. 

this  sin  of  pride. 

Wise.  With  all  my  heart  I  will  answer  your  re- 
quest. 

1.  Then  :  It  is  pride  that  makes  poor  man  so 
like  the  devil  in  hell,  that  he  cannot  TO  t    ,  _  t 

.  I  irst  evil  effects. 

in  it  be  known  to  be  the  image  and 
similitude  of  God.  The  angels,  when  they  became 
devils,  it  was  through  their  being  lifted  or  puffed 
up  with  pride,  l  tl  m.  6.  It  is  pride  also  that  lifteth 
or  pufi'eth  up  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  and  so  makes 
him  to  bear  the  very  image  of  the  devil. 

2.  Pride  makes  a  man  so  odious  in  the  sight  of 
God,  that  he  shall  not,  must  not,  come  second  evil  ef- 
nigh  his  majesty.     «  Though  the  Lord  fect- 

be  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly ;  but 
the  proud  he  knoweth  afar  off.'  Ps.  cxxxvm.  6.  Pride 
sets  God  and  the  soul  at  a  distance  ;  pride  will  not 
let  a  man  come  nigh  God,  nor  God  will  not  let  a 


2  No  one,  except  he  has  blown  a  ram's  horn,  or  attended  the 
Jewish  ceremony  of  the  New-year,  Tizri  1  (Sept.),  can  imagine 
the  miserable  sounding  of  a  ram's  horn.  Bunyau,  with  all  his 
powers  and  popularity,  was,  to  an  extraordinary  degree,  '  a 
humble  man.' — (Ed.) 


646 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


Third  evil  effect. 


proud  man  come  nigli  unto  him.  Now  tills  is  a 
dreadful  thing. 

3.  As  pride  sets,  so  it  keeps  God  and  the  soul 
at.  a  distance..  'God  resisteth  the 
proud.'  Ja.  iv.  c.      Resists,   that  is,  he 

opposes  him,  he  thrusts  him  from  him,  he  con- 
temueth  his  person  and  all  his  performances. 
Come  unto  God's  ordinances  the  proud  man  may ; 
hut  come  into  his  presence,  have  communion  with 
him,  or  Messing  from  him,  he  shall  not.  For  the 
high  God  doth  resist  him. 

4.  The  Word  saith  that  '  The  Lord  will  destroy 
Fourth  evil  tf-   the  house  of  the  proud.'  Pr.  xv.  25.     He 

feet.  w;u  destroy  his  house;  it  may  he  under- 

stood he  will  destroy  him  and  his.  So  he  destroyed 
proud  Pharaoh,  so  he  destroyed  proud  Korah,  and 
many  others. 

5.  Pride,  where  it  comes,  and  is  entertained,  is 

a  certain  forerunner  of  some  judgment 

Fifth  evil  effect.      ,         .  -        .     .  .     ,         „.•      °     ., 

that  is  not  tar  behind.  When  pride 
goes  before,  shame  and  destruction  will  follow  after. 
'  When  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  shame.'  Fr.  xi.  2. 
'  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty 
spirit  before  a  fall.'   Fr.  svi.  is. 

6.  Persisting  in  pride  makes  the  condition  of  a 

poor  man  as  remediless  as  is  that  of 

Sixth  evil  effect.      ,,.,.,  ,  ,      , 

the  devils  themselves,  i  TL  m.  u.  And 
this,  I  fear,  was  Mr.  Badman's  condition,  and  that 
was  the  reason  that  he  died  so  as  he  did  ;  as  I  shall 
show  you  anon. 

But  what  need  I  thus  talk  of  the  particular  ac- 
,    ,       tions,  or  rather  the  prodigious  sins  of 

A  general  clia-  '  i  => 

racier  of  Mr.  Mr.  Badman,  when  his  whole  lire,  and 
all  his  actions,  went,  as  it  were,  to  the 
making  up  one  massy  body  of  sin?  Instead  of  be- 
lieving that  there  was  a  God,  his  mouth,  his  life 
and  actions,  declared  that  he  believed  no  such 
thing.1  His  '  transgression  saith  within  my  heart, 
thai  there  was  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes.'  Fs. 

....    .   .      xxxvi  i.      Instead  of  honouring  of  God, 

A  hnef  relation  "  ' 

of   Mr.    Bad-    and  of  giving  glory  to  him  for  any  of 

man's  ways.         ,  .  .  i  c  i  •       ^ 

his  mercies,  or  under  any  of  his  good 
providences  towards  him,  for  God  is  good  to  all, 
and  lets  his  sun  shine,  and  his  rain  fall  upon  the 
unthankful  and  unholy,  he  would  ascribe  the  glory 
to  other  causes.  If  they  were  mercies,  he  would 
ascribe  them,  if  the  open  face  of  the  providence 
did  not  give  him  the  lie,  to  his  own  wit,  labour, 
care,  industry,  cunning,  or  the  like.  If  they  were 
crosses,  he  would  ascribe  them,  or  count  them  the 
offspring  of  fortune,  ill  luck,  chance,  the  ill  man- 
agement of  matters,  the  ill  will  of  neighbours,  or 
to  his  wife's  being  religious,  and  spending,  as  he 
called  it,  too  much  time  in  reading,  praying,  or  the 
like.      It  was  not  in  his  way  to  acknowledge  God, 


1  A  professor  of  Christianity  who  indulges  in  sin,  is  the 
worst  of  Atheists.  Such  conduct  is  practical  hypocrisy  and 
Atheism.— (Ed.) 


that  is,  graciously,  or  his  hand  in  things.  But, 
as  the  prophet  saith,  '  Let  favour  be  showed  to  the 
wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteousness.'  Is. 
xxvi.  io.  And  again,  They  returned  not  to  him  that 
smote  them,  nor  did  they  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
is.  ix.  is.  This  was  Mr.  Badman's  temper,  neither 
mercies  nor  judgment  would  make  him  seek  the 
Lord.  Nay,  as  another  scripture  says,  '  He  would 
not  see  the  works  of  God,  nor  regard  the  opera- 
tions of  his  hands  either  iu  mercies  or  in  judg- 
ments.' Is.  xxvi.  n.  rs.  xxix.  5.  But  farther,  when 
by  providence  he  has  been  cast  uuder  the  best 
means  for  his  soul — for,  as  was  showed  before,  he 
having  had  a  good  master,  and  before  him  a  good 
father,  and  after  all  a  good  wife,  and  being  some- 
times upon  a  journey,  and  cast  under  the  hearing 
of  a  good  sermon,  as  he  would  sometimes  for 
novelty's  sake  go  to  hear  a  good  preacher — he  was 
always  without  heart  to  make  use  thereof.  Pr.  xvu.  6. 
In  this  land  of  righteousness  he  would  deal  un- 
justly, and  would  not  behold  the  majesty  of  the 
Lord.  is.  xxvi.  io. 

Instead  of  reverencing  the  Word,  when  he  heard 
it  preached,  read,  or  discoursed  of,  he  Mr  Badman>s 
would  sleep,  talk  of  other  business,  or  judgment  of 
else  object  against  the  authority,  har- 
mony, and  wisdom  of  the  Scriptures  ;  saying,  How 
do  you  know  them  to  be  the  Word  of  God  ?  How 
do  you  know  that  these  sayings  are  true  ?  The 
Scriptures,  he  would  say,  were  as  a  nose  of  wax, 
and  a  man  may  turn  them  whithersoever  he  lists. 
One  scripture  says  one  thing,  aud  another  says  tho 
quite  contrary  ;  besides,  they  make  mention  of  a 
thousand  impossibilities  ;  they  are  the  cause  of  all 
dissensions  and  discords  that  are  in  the  land. 
Therefore  you  may,  would  he  say,  still  think  what 
you  will,  but  in  my  mind  they  are  best  at  ease 
that  have  least  to  do  with  them. 

Instead  of  loving  and  honouring  of  them  that 
did  bear  in  their  foreheads  the  name,  Good  men  Mr. 
and  in  their  lives  the  image  of  Christ,  Badman's  *™z- 
they  should  be  his  song,  the  matter  of  his  jests, 
and  the  objects  of  his  slanders.  He  would  either 
make  a  mock  at  their  sober  deportment,  their 
gracious  language,  quiet  behaviour,  or  else  des- 
perately swear  that  they  did  all  in  deceit  and 
hypocrisy.  He  would  endeavour  to  render  godly 
men  as  odious  and  contemptible  as  he  could  ;  any 
lies  that  were  made  by  any,  to  their  disgrace, 
those  he  would  avouch  for  truth,  aud  would  not 
endure  to  be  controlled.  He  was  much  like  those 
that  the  prophet  speaks  of,  that  would  sit  and 
slander  his  mother's  son.  Fs.  l  w,  20.  Yea,  he  would 
speak  reproachfully  of  his  wife,  though  his  con- 
science told  him,  and  many  would  testify,  that  she 
was  a  very  virtuous  woman.  He  would  also  raise 
slanders  of  his  wife's  friends  himself,  affirming 
that  their  doctrine  tended  to  lasciviousuess,  and 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAX. 


G47 


that  in  their  assemblies  they  acted  and  did  unbe- 
seeming men  and  women,  that  they  committed  un- 
cleanness,  <fcc.  He  was  much  like  those  that 
affirmed  the  apostle  should  say,  •  Let  us  do  evil 
that  good  may  come.'  Ro.  iii. :,  s.  Or,  like  those  of 
whom  it  is  thus  written  ;  '  Report,  say  they,  and 
we  will  report  it.'  Je.  xx.  10.  And  if  he  could  get 
any  thing  by  the  eud  that  had  scandal  in  it,  if  it 
did  but  touch  professors,  how  falsely  soever  re- 
ported, 0  !  then  he  would  glory,  laugh,  and  be 
glad,  and  lay  it  upon  the  whole  party;  saying,  Hang 
them  rogues,  there  is  not  a  barrel  better  herring 
of  all  the  holy  brotherhood  of  them.  Like  to  like, 
quoth  the  devil  to  the  collier,  this  is  your  precise 
crew.  And  then  he  would  send  all  home  with  a 
curse. 

Atten.  If  those  that  make  profession  of  religion 
be  wise,  Mr.  Badman's  watchings  and  words  will 
make  them  the  more  wary,  and  careful  in  all  things. 
When         the        Wise.  You  say  true.     For  when  we 

GoCd'8d  people   se0  men  ^°  watca  f°r  our  halting,  and 
should        be   rejoice  to  see  us  stumble  and  fall,  it 
should  make  us  so  much  abundantly 
the  more  careful. 

I  do  think  it  was  as  delightful  to  Mr.  Badman 
to  hear,  raise,  and  tell  lies,  and  lying  stories  of 
them  that  fear  the  Lord,  as  it  was  for  him  to  go 
to  bed  when  a  weary.  But  we  will  at  this  time  let 
these  things  pass.  For  as  he  was  in  these  tilings 
bad  enough,  so  he  added  to  these  many  more  the 
like. 

He  was  an  angry,  wrathful,  envious  man,  a 
Badman  an  man  tnat  kQew'  not  what  meekness  or 
angry,  envious  gentleness  meant,  nor  did  he  desire  to 
learn.  His  natural  temper  was  to  be 
surly,  huffy,  and  rugged,  and  worse;  and  he  so  gave 
way  to  his  temper,  as  to  this,  that  it  brought  him 
to  be  furious  and  outrageous  iu  all  things,  espe- 
cially against  goodness  itself,  and  against  other 
things  too,  when  he  was  displeased. 

Atten.  Solomon  saith,  He  is  a  fool  that  rageth, 
Pr.  xiv.  16. 

Wise.  He  doth  so  ;  and  says  moreover,  that 
'  Anger  rcsteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools. '  Ec.  vU  9. 
And,  truly,  if  it  be  a  sign  of  a  fool  to  have  anger 
rest  in  his  bosom,  then  was  Mr.  Badman,  notwith- 
standing the  conceit  that  he  had  of  his  own  abili- 
ties, a  fool  of  no  small  size. 

Atten.  Fools  are  mostly  most  wise  in  their  own 
eyes. 

Wise.  True ;  but  I  was  a  saying,  that  if  it  be  a 
sign  that  a  man  is  a  fool,  when  anger  rests  in  his 
bosom;  then  what  is  it  a  sign  of,  think  you,  when 
malice  and  envy  rests  there  ?  For,  to  my  know- 
ledge Mr.  Badman  was  as  malicious  and  as  envious 
a  man  as  commonly  you  can  hear  of. 

Atten.  Certainly,  malice  and  envy  flow  from 
pride  and  arrogancy,  and  they  again  from  ignor- 


ance, and  ignorance  from  the  devil.  And  I 
thought,  that  since  you  spake  of  the  whence  cnvy 
pride  of  Mr.  Badman  before,  we  should  flows- 

have  something  of  these  before  we  had  done. 

Wise.  Envy  flows  from  ignorance  indeed.  And 
this  Mr.  Badman  was  so  envious  an  one,  where  ho 
set  against,  that  he  would  swell  with  it  as  a  toad, 
as  wo  say,  swells  with  poison.1  He  whom  he 
maligned,  might  at  any  time  even  read  envy  in  his 
face  wherever  he  met  with  him,  or  in  whatever  he 
had  to  do  with  him.  His  envy  was  so  rank  and 
strong,  that  if  it  at  any  time  turned  its  head  against 
a  man,  it  would  hardly  ever  be  pulled  in  again  ; 
he  would  watch  over  that  man  to  do  him  mischief, 
as  the  cat  watches  over  the  mouse  to  destroy  it ; 
yea,  he  would  wait  seven  years,  but  he  would  have 
an  opportunity  to  hurt  him,  and  when  he  had  it, 
he  would  make  him  feel  the  weight  of  his  envy. 

Envy  is  a  devilish  thing,  the  scripture  intimates 
that  none  can  stand  before  it:  'A  stone  is  heavy, 
and  the  sand  weighty;  but  a  fool's  wrath  is  heavier 
than  them  both.  Wrath  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  out- 
rageous ;  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  V 

Yt.  xxvii.  3,  4. 

This  envy,  for  the  foulness  of  it,  is  reckoned 
among  the  foulest  villainies  that  are,  Envy  the  worst 
as  adultery,  murder,  drunkenness,  of  the  tour.3 
revellings,  witchcrafts,  heresies,  seditions,  <fcc. 
Ga.  v.  19,  20.  Yea,  it  is  so  malignant  a  corruption, 
that  it  rots  the  very  bones  of  him  in  whom  it 
dwells.  '  A  sound  heart  is  the  life  of  the  flesh;  but 
envy  the  rottenness  of  the  bones.'  Pr.  xiv.  30. 

Atten.  This  envy  is  the  very  father  and  mother 
of  a  great  many  hideous  and  prodi-  Envy  is  the  fa- 
gious  wickednesses.  I  say,  it  is  the  ^X^ 
very  father  and  mother  of  them;  it  both  wickednesses. 
begets  them,  and  also  nourishes  them  up,  till  they 
come  to  their  cursed  maturity  in  the  bosom  of  him 
that  entertains  them. 

Wise.  You  have  given  it  a  very  right  descrip- 
tion, in  calling  of  it  the  father  and  mother  of  a 
great  many  other  prodigious  wickednesses ;  for  it 
is  so  venomous  and  vile  a  thing  that  it  puts  the 
whole  course  of  nature  out  of  order,  and  makes  it 
fit  for  nothing  but  confusion,  and  a  hold  for  every 
evil  thing:  •  For  where  envying  and  strife  is,  there 
is  confusion,  and  every  evil  work.'  Ja.  iii.  ic.  Where- 
fore, I  say,  you  have  rightly  called  it  the  very 
father  and  mother  of  a  great  many  other  sins. 
And  now  for  our  further  edification,  I  will  reckon 
up  of  some  of  the  births  of  envy.  1.  Some  of  tne 
Envy,  as  I  told  you  before,  it  rotteth    births  of  emy. 


1  The  general  opinion,  to  a  late  period,  was,  that  the  frog 
or  toad  was  poisonous.  Bartolomeus  calls  the  frog  'venomous,' 
and  that  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  his  spots.  Buuyau, 
who  was  far  in  advance  of  his  age,  throws  a  doubt  upon  it,  by 
the  words  '  as  we  say.' — (Ed.) 

-  Pride,  Atheism,  iulidelity,  aud  envy. — (Ex>.) 


648 


THE  LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MK.  BADMAN. 


the  very  bone3  of  him  that  entertains  it.  And, 
2.  As  you  have  also  hinted,  it  is  heavier  than  a 
stone,  than  sand ;  yea,  and  I  will  add,  it  falls  like 
a  millstone  upon  the  head.  Therefore,  3.  It  kills 
him  that  throws  it,  and  him  at  whom  it  is  thrown. 
*  Buvy  slayeth  the  silly  one.'  Job  v.  •.».  That  is,  him 
in  whom  it  resides,  and  him  who  is  its  object. 
4.  It  was  that  also  that  slew  Jesus  Christ  himself; 
for  his  adversaries  persecuted  him  through  their 
envy.  Mat.  xxvii.  18.  Mar.  xv.  io.  5.  Envy  was  that,  by 
virtue  of  which  Joseph  was  sold  by  his  brethren 
into  Egypt.  Ac.  vii.  9. 

6.  It  is  envy  that  hath  the  hand  in  making  of 
variance  among  God's  saints,  is.  xi.  13.  7.  It  is 
envy  in  the  hearts  of  sinners,  that  stirs  them  up 
to  thrust  God's  ministers  out  of  their  coasts.  Ac. 
xiii. so j  xiv. 6.  8.  What  shall  I  say?  It  is  envy 
that  is  the  very  nursery  of  whisperings,  debates, 
backbitings,  slanders,  reproaches,  murders,  &c. 

It  is  not  possible  to  repeat  all  the  particular 
fruits  of  this  sinful  root.  Therefore,  it  is  no  mar- 
vel that  Mr.  Badman  was  such  an  ill-natured  man, 
for  the  great  roots  of  all  manner  of  wickedness 
were  in  him  unmortified,  unmanned,  untouched. 

Atten.  But  it  is  a  rare  case,  even 
in°'      this  of  Mr.  Badman,  that  he  should 
never  in  all  his  life  be  touched  with  remorse  for 
his  ill-spent  life. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

[IIE  GETS  DRUNK  AND  BREAKS  HIS  LEG — GOD's 
JUDGMENTS  UPON  DRUNKARDS.] 

Wise.  Remorse,  I  cannot  say  he  ever  had,  if  by 
Mr.  Badman uu-  remorse  you  mean  repentance  for  his 
trouble  S°nof  evils-  Yet  twice  I  remember  he  was 
miiid.  under  some  trouble  of  mind  about  his 

condition.  Once  when  he  broke  his  leg  as  he  came 
home  drunk  from  the  ale-house ;  and  another  time 
when  he  fell  sick,  and  thought  he  should  die.  Be- 
sides these  two  times,  I  do  not  remember  any  more. 

Atten.  Did  he  break  his  leg  then  ? 

Wise.  Yes ;  once  as  he  came  home  drunk  from 
the  ale-house. 

Atten.  Pray  how  did  he  break  it  ? 

Wise.  Why  upon  a  time  he  was  at  an  ale-house, 
Mr.     Badman   that  wicked  house  about  two  or  three 

breaks  his  leg.     miles    from    \xome^    and    }lavjng    there 

drank  hard  the  greatest  part  of  the  day,  when 

night  was  come,  he  would  stay  no  longer,  but  calls 

for   his   horse,    gets   up   and  like  a  madman,  as 

drunken  persons  usually  ride,   away  he  goes,  as 

hard  as  horse  could  lay  legs  to  the  ground.     Thus 

he  rid,  till  coming  to  a  dirty  place,  where  his  horse 

flouncing  in,  fell,  threw  his  master,  and  with  his 

fall  broke  his  leg.      So  there  he  lay.     But  you 

would  not  think  how  he  swore  at  first. 
IU  swears.        t,  r  i  -i      i 

.But  alter  a  while,  he  coming  to  him- 


self, and  feeling  by  his  pain,  and  the  uselessness 
of  his  leg,  what  case  he  was  in,  and  also  fearing 
that  this  bout  might  be  his  death;  he  began  to  cry 
out  after  the  manner  of  such,  Lord  help  me,  Lord 
have  mercy  upon  me,  good  God  de- 
liver me,  and  the  like.  So  there  he  e  prays" 
lay,  till  some  came  by,  who  took  him  up,  carried 
him  home,  where  he  lay  for  some  time,  before  he 
cpuld  go  abroad  again. 

Atten.  And  then  you  say  he  called  upon  God. 

Wise.  He  cried  out  in  his  pain,  and  would  say, 
0  God,  and,  0  Lord,  help  me.  But  whether  it  was 
that  his  sin  might  be  pardoned,  and  his  soul  saved, 
or  whether  to  be  rid  of  his  pain.  I  will  not  posi- 
tively determine ;  though  I  fear  it  was  but  for  the 
last;  because  when  his  pain  was  gone,  K  has  uo  ^ 
and  he  had  got  hopes  of  mending,  even  effect  upon 
before  he  could  go  abroad,  he  cast  off 
prayer,  and  began  his  old  game ;  to  wit,  to  be  as 
bad  as  he  was  before.1  He  then  would  send  for 
his  old  companions  ;  his  sluts  also  would  come  to 
his  house  to  see  him,  and  with  them  he  would  be, 
as  well  as  he  could  for  his  lame  leg,  as  vicious  as 
they  could  be  for  their  hearts. 

Atten.  It  was  a  wonder  he  did  not  break  his 
neck. 

Wise.  His  neck  had  gone  instead  of  his  leg,  but 
that  God  was  long-suffering  towards  him ;  he  had 
deserved  it  ten  thousand  times  over.  There  have 
been  many,  as  I  have  heard,  and  as  I  have  hinted 
to  you  before,  that  have  taken  their  horses  when 
drunk  as  he ;  but  they  have  gone  from  the  pot  to 
the  grave;  for  they  have  broken  their  _ 

necks  betwixt  the  ale-house  and  home. 
One  hard  by  us  also  drunk  himself  dead;  he  drank, 
and  died  in  his  drink. 

Atten.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  die  drunk. 

Wise.  So  it  is ;  but  yet  I  wonder  that  no  more 
do  so.     For  considering  the  heinous-    TT 

°  How  many  sins 

ness  of  that  sin,  and  with  how  many     do  accompany 

,,  ...  .    ,  .  .        drunkenness. 

other  sins  it  is  accompanied,  as  with 
oaths,  blasphemies,  lies,  revellings,  whorings, 
brawlings,  <£c,  it  is  a  wonder  to  me  that  any  that 
live  in  that  sin  should  escape  such  a  blow  from 
Heaven,  that  should  tumble  them  into  their  graves. 
Besides,  when  1  consider  also  how,  when  they  are 
as  drunk  as  beasts,  they,  without  all  fear  of  dan- 
ger, will  ride  like  bedlams  and  madmen,  even  as 
if  they  did  dare  God  to  meddle  with  them  if  he 
durst,  fur  their  being  drunk.  I  say,  I  wonder  that 
he  doth  not  withdraw  his  protecting  providences 
from  them,  and  leave  them  to  those  dangers  and 
destructions  that  by  their  sin  they  have  deserved, 
and  that  by  their  bedlam  madness  they  would  rush 


1  Outward  reformation  without  inward  grace  is  like  washing 
a  sow,  which  you  may  luake  clean,  but  never  can  make  cleanly  ; 
it  will  soon  return  to  the  mire,  and  delight  in  filth  more  than 
ever. — (Masou.) 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BaDMAN. 


649 


themselves  into.  Only  I  consider  again,  that  he 
has  appointed  a  day  wherein  he  will  reckon  with 
them,  and  doth  also  commonly  make  examples  of 
some,  to  show  that  he  takes  notice  of  their  sin, 
abhors  their  way,  and  will  count  with  them  for  it 
at  the  set  time.  Ac  xviL  80,  si. 

Attent.  It  is  worthy  of  our  remark,  to  take  notice 
how  God,  to  show  his  dislike  of  the  sins  of  men, 
strikes  some  of  them  down  with  a  blow ;  as  the 
breaking  of  Mr.  Badman's  leg,  for  doubtless  that 
was  a  stroke  from  heaven. 

Wise.  It  is  worth  our  remark,  indeed.  It  was 
an  open  stroke,  it  fell  upon  him  while  he  was  in 
the  height  of  his  sin ;  and  it  looks  much  like  to 
that  in  Job — '  Therefore  he  knoweth  their  works, 
and  overturneth  tliem  in  the  night,  so  that  they  are 
destroyed.  He  striketh  them  as  wicked  men  in 
the  open  sight  of  others.'  Or,  as  the  margin  reads 
it,  '  in  the  place  of  beholders.'  Job  xx.viv.  25,  -is.  He 
lays  them,  with  his  stroke,  in  the  place  of  beholders. 
There  was  Mr.  Badman  laid ;  his  stroke  was  taken 
notice  of  by  every  one,  his  broken  leg  was  at  this 
time  the  town  talk.  Mr.  Badman  has 
"e"  broken  his  leg,  says  one.  How  did  he 
break  it  ?  says  another.  As  he  came  home  drunk 
from  such  an  ale-house,  said  a  third.  A  judgment 
of  God  upon  him,  said  a  fourth.  This  his  sin,  his 
shame,  and  punishment,  are  all  made  conspicuous 
to  all  that  are  about  him.  1  will  here  tell  you 
another  story  or  two. 

I  have  read,  in  Mr.  Clark's  Looking-glass  for 
Sinners,  that  upon  a  time  a  certain  drunken 
fellow  boasted  in  his  cups  that  there  was 
neither  heaven  nor  hell ;  also  he  said  he  believed 
that  man  had  no  soul,  and  that,  for  his  own  part, 
he  would  sell  his  soul  to  any  that  would  buy  it. 
Then  did  one  of  his  companions  buy  it  of  him  for 
a  cup  of  wine,  and  preseutly  the  devil,  in  man's 
shape,  bought  it  of  that  man  again  at  the  same 
price;  and  so,  in  the  presence  of  them  all,  laid 
hold  on  the  soul-seller,  and  carried  him  away 
through  the  air,  so  that  he  was  never  more  heard 
of.1 

He  tells  us  also,  that  there  was  one  at  Salisbury, 
in  the  midst  of  his  health,  drinking  and 

Tage  HI.  .  1111 

carousing  in  a  tavern;  and  he  drank  a 
health  to  the  devil,  saying  that  if  the  devil  would 
not  come  and  pledge  him,  he  would  not  believe 
that  there  was  either  God  or  devil.  Whereupon 
his  companions,  stricken  with  fear,  hastened  out 
of  the  room ;  and  presently  after,  hearing  a  hide- 
ous noise,  and  smelling  a  stinking  savour,*  the 
vintner  ran  up  into  the  chamber ;  and  coming  in 
he  missed  his  guest,  and  found  the  window  broken, 


1  Mr.  Clarke  relates  this  singular  story  on  the  authority  of 
■  Disci  de  Temp.'  The  writers  iu  the  Middle  Ages  are  lull  of 
such  narrations;  see  especially  the  first  English  hook  of  homilies 
tailed  The  Festival.— \&D.) 

VOL.  111. 


the  iron  bar  in  it  bowed,  and  all   bloody.     But 
the  man  was  never  heard  of  afterwards. '-' 

Again,  he  tells  us  of  a  bailiff  of  Hedley,  who, 
upon  a  Lord's  day,  being  drunk  at  Mel- 
ford,  got  upon  his  horse,  to  ride  through  lase  149' 
the  streets,  saying  that  his  horse  would  carry  him 
to  the  devil.  And  presently  his  horse  threw  him, 
and  broke  his  neck.  These  things  are  worse  than 
the  breaking  of  Mr.  Badman's  leg ;  and  should  be 
a  caution  to  all  of  his  friends  that  are  living,  lest 
they  also  fall  by  their  sin  into  these  sad  judgments 
of  God. 

But,  as  I  said,  Mr.  Badman  quickly  forgot  all ; 
his  conscience  was  choked  before  his  leg  was 
healed.  And,  therefore,  before  he  was  well  of  the 
fruit  of  one  sin,  he  tempts  God  to  send  another 
judgment  to  seize  upon  him.  And  so  he  did  quickly 
after.  For  not  many  months  after  his  Mr.  Badman 
leg  was  well,  he  had  a  very  dangerous  lalle1'  MCk- 
fit  of  sickness,  insomuch  that  now  he  began  to  think 
he  must  die  in  very  deed. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

[his  pretended  repentixgs  and  promises  of  re- 
form WHEN  DEATH  GRIMLY  STARES  AT  HIM.] 

Atten.  Well,  and  what  did  he  think  and  do 
then? 

Wise.  He  thought  he  must  go  to  hell  ;  this  I 
know,  for  he  could  not  forbear  but  say  His  C()tiscience 
so.  To  my  best  remembrance,  he  lay  is  nou'ldeJ- 
crying  out  all  one  night  for  fear;  and  at  times  he 
would  so  tremble  that  he  would  make  the  very 
bed  shake  under  him.  But  0 !  how  Hecriethautin 
the  thoughts  of  death,  of  hell-fire,  and  ljis  Sltkui==>s- 
of  eternal  judgment,  did  then  wrack  his  conscience. 
Fear  might  be  seen  in  his  face,  and  in  his  tossings 
to  and  fro;  it  might  also  be  heard  in  his  words, 
and  be  understood  by  his  heavy  groans.  He  would 
often  cry,  I  am  undone,  I  am  undone ;  my  vile  life 
has  undone  me! 

Atten.  Then  his  former  atheistical  thoughts  and 
principles  were  too  weak  now  to  support  him  from 
the  fears  of  eternal  damnation. 

Wise.  Ay !  they  were  too  weak  indeed.  They 
may  serve  to  stifle  conscience,  when  a  man  is  in 
the  midst  of  his  prosperity ;  and  to  harden  the 
heart  against  all  good  counsel,  when  a  man  is  left 
of  God,  and  given  up  to  his  reprobate  mind.  But, 
alas,  atheistical  thoughts,  notions,  and  HisatIieisni  ,vlU 
opinions  must  shrink  and  melt  away,  110t  ^P  lum 
when  God  sends,  yea,  comes  with  sick- 
ness to  visit  the  soul  of  such  a  sinner  for  his  sin. 
There  was  a  man  dwelt  about  twelve  miles  oti'  from 
us,  that  had  so  trained  up  himself  in  his  atheistical 


2  Clarke's  authority  for  this  account  is  Beard's  Theatre  cj 
God's  Judgments. —  (L i>.) 

82 


650 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


notions,  that  at  last  he  attempted  to  write  a  book 
against  Jesus  Christ,  and  against  the  Divine  au- 
thority of  the  Scriptures.  But  I  think  it  was  not 
printed.  Well,  after  many  days,  God  struck  him 
with  sickness,  whereof  he  died.  So,  being  sick, 
and  musing  upon  his  former  doings,  the  book  that 
he  had  written  came  into  his  mind,  and  with  it 
such  a  sense  of  his  evil  in  writing  of  it,  that  it  tore 

A  dreadful  ex-  mS  conscience  as  a  ^on  wou^  tear  a 
ampieof  God's  kid.  He  lay,  therefore,  upon  his  death- 
bed in  sad  case,  and  much  affliction  of 
conscience ;  some  of  my  friends  also  went  to  see 
him ;  and  as  they  were  in  his  chamber  one  day, 
he  hastily  called  for  pen,  ink,  and  paper;  which 
when  it  was  given  him,  he  took  it  and  writ  to  this 
purpose : — I,  such  a  one,  in  such  a  town,  must  go 
/^_^      to  hell-fire,  for  writing  a  book  against 

-^**  Jesus  Christ,  and  against  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  And  would  also  have  leaped  out  of 
the  window  of  his  house,  to  have  killed  himself, 
but  was  by  them  prevented  of  that ;  so  he  died  in 
his  bed,  such  a  death  as  it  was.  It  will  be  well  if 
others  take  warning  by  him.1 

Atten.   This  is  a  remarkable  story. 

Wise.  It  is  as  true  as  remarkable.  I  had  it 
from  them  that  I  dare  believe,  who  also  themselves 
were  eye  and  ear  witnesses ;  and  also  that  catched 
him  in  their  arms,  and  saved  him,  when  he  would 
have  leaped  out  of  his  chamber  window,  to  have 
destroyed  himself ! 

Atten.  Well,  you  have  told  me  what  were  Mr. 
Badman's  thoughts  now,  being  sick,  of  his  con- 
dition ;  pray  tell  me  also  what  he  then  did  when 
he  was  sick? 

Wise.  Did!  he  did  many  things  which,  I  am 
sure,  he  never  thought  to  have  done  ;  and  which, 
to  be  sure,  was  not  looked  for  of  his  wife  and 
what  Mr.  Bad-  children.  In  this  fit  of  sickness,  his 
«hen  'he^vas  thoughts  were  quite  altered  about  his 
sick-  wife;  I  say  his  thoughts,  so  far  as 

could  be  judged  by  his  words  and  carriages  to  her. 
For  now  she  was  his  good  wife,  his  godly  wife,  his 
honest  wife,  his  duck  and  dear,  and  all.  Now  he 
told  her  that  she  had  the  best  of  it;  she  having  a 
good  life  to  stand  by  her,  while  his  debaucheries 
and  ungodly  life  did  always  stare  him  in  the  face. 
Now  he  told  her  the  counsel  that  she  often  gave 
him  was  good ;  though  he  was  so  bad  as  not  to 
take  it. 

Now  he  would  hear  her  talk  to  him,  and  he  would 

Great  alteration  ^  Sighing  by  her  while  she  SO  did. 
madu  in  Mr.  Now  he  would  bid  her  pray  for  him, 
that  he  might  be  delivered  from  hell. 
He  would  also  now  consent  that  some  of  her  good 
ministers  might  come  to  him  to  comfort  him ;  and 


1  See  the  account  of  an  Atheist  in  his  pride  in  Filgrih 
Progress  and  notes.     Vol.  iii.,  p.  152. 


he  would  seem  to  show  them  kindness  when  they 
came,  for  he  would  treat  them  kindly  with  words, 
and  hearken  diligently  to  what  they  said  ;  only  he 
did  not  care  that  they  should  talk  much  of  his  ill- 
spent  life,  because  his  conscience  was  clogged  with 
that  already.  He  cared  not  now  to  see  his  old 
companions,  the  thoughts  of  them  were  a  torment 
to  him;  and  now  he  would  speak  kindly  to  that 
child  of  his  that  took  after  its  mother's  steps, 
though  he  could  not  at  all  abide  it  before. 

He  also  desired  the  prayers  of  good  people,  that 
God  of  his  mercy  would  spare  him  a  little  longer ; 
promising  that  if  God  would  but  let  him  recover 
this  once,  what  a  new,  what  a  penitent  man  he 
would  be  toward  God,  and  what  a  loving  husband 
he  would  be  to  his  wife ;  what  liberty  he  would 
give  her,  yea,  how  he  would  go  with  her  himself, 
to  hear  her  ministers,  and  how  they  should  go 
hand  in  hand  in  the  way  to  heaven  together. 

Atten.  Here  was  a  fine  show  of  things ;  I'll 
warrant  you,  his  wife  was  glad  for  this. 

Wise.  His  wife !  ay,  and  a  many  good  people 
besides.  It  was  noised  all  over  the  Thetown.talkof 
town  what  a  great  change  there  was  Mr.  Badman's 
wrought  upon  Mr.  Badman:  how  sorry  °  ange' 
he  was  for  his  sins,  how  he  began  to  love  his  wife, 
how  he  desired  good  men  should  pray  to  God  to 
spare  him ;  and  what  promises  he  now  made  to 
God,  in  his  sickness,  that  if  ever  he  should  raise 
him  from  his  sick  bed  to  health  again,  what  a  new 
penitent  man  he  would  be  towards  God,  and  what  a 
loving  husband  to  his  good  wife.  Well,  ministers 
prayed,  and  good  people  rejoiced,  thinking  verily 
that  they  now  had  gotten  a  man  from  the  devil ; 
nay,  some  of  the  weaker  sort  did  not  stick  to  say 
that  God  had  begun  a  work  of  grace  in  his  heart ; 
and  his  wife,  poor  woman,  you  cannot  His  wife  is  com- 
think  how  apt  she  was  to  believe  it  so;  forted- 
she  rejoiced,  and  she  hoped  as  she  would  have  it. 
But,  alas!  alas!  in  little  time  things  all  proved 
otherwise. 

After  he  had  kept  his  bed  a  while,  his  distemper 
began  to  abate,  and  he  to  feel  himself  Mr.  Badman  re- 
better;  so  he  in  a  little  time  was  so  tarn^hisoui 
finely  mended,  that  he  could  walk  course- 
about,  the  house,  and  also  obtained  a  very  fine 
stomach  to  his  food ;  and  now  did  his  wife  and  her 
good  friends  stand  gaping  to  see  Mr.  Badman 
fulfil  his  promise  of  becoming  new  towards  God, 
and  loving  to  his  wife ;  but  the  contrary  only 
showed  itself.  For,  so  soon  as  ever  he  had  hopes 
of  nfending,  and  found  that  his  strength  began  to 
renew,  his  trouble  began  to  go  ofF  his  heart,  and 
he  grew  as  great  a  stranger  to  his  frights  and 
fears,  as  if  he  never  had  thr  m. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


651 


CHAPTER  XV. 

[death  leaves  him  for  a  season,  and  he  returns 
to  nis  sin  like  a  sow  that  has  been  washed 
to  her  wallowing  in  tne  mire.] 

But  verily,  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  one  reason 
of  liis  no  more  regarding  or  remembering  of  his 
sick-bed  fears,  and  of  being  no  better  for  them,  was 
some  words  that  the  doctor  that  supplied  him  with 
physic  said  to  him  when  he  was  mending.  For 
as  soon  as  Mr.  Badman  began  to  mend,  the  doctor 
comes  and  sits  him  down  by  him  in  his  house,  and 
there  fell  into  discourse  with  him  about  the  nature 
of  his  disease  ;  and  among  other  things  they  talked 
of  Badman's  trouble,  and  how  he  would  cry  out, 
tremble,  and  express  his  fears  of  going  to  hell  when 
his  sickness  lay  pretty  hard  upon  him.  To  which 
Ignorant  nhysi-  the  doctor  replied,  that  those  fears 
while  they  cura  a,Rl  outcries  did  arise  from  the  height 
bodies.  of  his  distemper;  for  that  disease  was 

often  attended  with  lightness  of  the  head,  by  reason 
the  sick  party  could  not  sleep,  and  for  that  the 
vapours  disturbed  the  brain  :  but  you  see,  Sir, 
quoth  he,  that  so  soon  as  you  got  sleep  and  betook 
yourself  to  rest,  you  quickly  mended,  and  your 
head  settled,  and  so  those  frenzies  left  you.  Aud 
it  was  so  indeed>  thought  Mr.  Badman ;  was  my 
troubles  only  the  effects  of  my  distemper,  and  be- 
cause ill  vapours  got  up  into  my  brain?  Then 
surely,  since  my  physician  was  my  saviour,  my 
lust  again  shall  be  my  god.  So  he  never  minded 
religion  more,  but  betook  him  again  to  the  world, 
his  lusts  and  wicked  companions:  and  there  was 
an  end  of  Mr.  Badman's  conversion. 

Atten.  I  thought,  as  you  told  me  of  him,  that 
this  would  be  the  result  of  the  whole;  for  I  dis- 
cerned, by  your  relating  of  things,  that  the  true 
symptoms  of  conversion  were  wauting  in  him,  and 
that  those  that  appeared  to  be  anything  like  them, 
were  only  such  as  reprobates  may  have. 

Wise.  You  say  right,  for  there  wanted  in  him, 
when  he  was  most  sensible,  a  sense  of  the  pollution 
of  his  nature ;  he  only  had  guilt  for  his  sinful 
actions,  the  which  Cain,  and  Pharaoh,  and  Saul, 
and  Judas,  those  reprobates,  have  had  before  him. 

Ge.  iv.  13,  14.  Ex.  ix.  27.  1  Sa.  xv.  24.  Mat.  xxvii.  3-5. 

Besides,  the  great  things  that  he  desired,  were 
The  true  gymp-  t0  be  delivered  from  going  to  hell,  and 
tonu  of  comer-   wn0  would,  willingly  ?  aud  that  his 

siou     wanting  '  =  J 

in  all  Mr.  Bad-  life  might  be  lengthened  in  this  world. 
sin, and  desires  We  find  not,  by  all  that  he  said  or  did, 
uf  mercy.  tnat  jegus  Christ  the  Saviour  was  de- 

sired by  him,  from  a  sense  of  his  need  of  his  right- 
eousness to  clothe  him,  and  of  his  Spirit  to  sanctify 
him.  His  own  strength  was  whole  in  him,  he  saw 
nothing  of  the  treachery  of  his  own  heart :  for  had 
he,  he  would  never  have  been  so  free  to  make 
promises  to  God  of  amendment.     He  would  rather 


have  been  afraid,  that  if  he  had  mended,  he  should 
have  turned  with  the  dog  to  his  vomit,  and  have 
begged  prayers  of  the  saints,  and  assistance  from 
heaven  upon  that  account,  that  he  might  have  been 
kept  from  doing  so.  It  is  true  he  did  beg  prayers 
of  good  people,  and  so  did  Pharaoh  of  Moses  and 
Aaron,  and  Simon  Magus  of  Simon  Peter.  Ex.  ix.  28. 
Ac  viii.  24.  His  mind  also  seemed  to  be  turned  to 
his  wife  and  child  ;  but,  alas !  it  was  rather  from 
conviction  that  God  had  given  him  concerning 
their  happy  estate  over  his,  than  for  that  he  had  any 
true  love  to  the  work  of  God  that  was  in  them.  True, 
some  shows  of  kindness  he  seemed  to  have  for 
them,  and  so  had  rich  Dives  when  in  hell,  to  his 
five  brethren  that  were  yet  in  the  world:  yea.  he 
had  such  love  as  to  wish  them  in  heaven,  that  they 
might  not  come  thither  to  be  tormented.  Lu.  xvi.  27,  28. 

Atten.  Sick-bed  repentance  i3  seldom  good  for 
anything. 

Wise.  You  say  true,  it  is  very  rarely  good  for 
anything  indeed.  Death  is  unwelcome  Of  sick-bed  re- 
to  nature,  and  usually  when  sickness  tbaUt^tobe 
and  death  visit  the  siuner;  the  first  "»P<*tea. 
taking  of  him  by  the  shoulder,  and  the  second 
standing  at  the  bed-chamber  door  to  receive  him ; 
then  the  sinner  begins  to  look  about  him,  and  to 
bethink  with  himself,  these  will  have  me  away  be- 
fore God  ;  and  I  know  that  my  life  has  not  been 
as  it  should,  how  shall  I  do  to  appear  before  God ! 
Or  if  it  be  more  the  sense  of  the  punishment,  and 
the  place  of  the  punishment  of  sinners,  that  also  is 
starting  to  a  defiled  conscience,  now  roused  by 
death's  lumbering  at  the  door.  And  hence  usually 
is  sick-bed  repentance,  and  the  matter  of  it;  to  wit, 
to  be  saved  from  hell,  and  from  death,  and  that 
God  will  restore  again  to  health  till  they  mend, 
concluding  that  it  is  in  their  power  to  mend,  as  is 
evident  by  their  large  and  lavishing  promises  to  do 
it.  I  have  known  many  that,  when  they  have  been 
sick,  have  had  large  measures  of  this  kind  of  re- 
pentance, aud  while  it  has  lasted,  the  noise  aud 
sound  thereof  has  made  the  town  to  ring  again. 
But,  alas  !  how  long  has  it  lasted?  ofttiines  scarce 
so  long  as  until  the  party  now  sick  has  been  well. 
It  has  passed  away  like  a  mist  or  a  vapour,  it  has 
been  a  thing  of  no  continuance.  But  this  kind  of 
repentance  is  by  God  compared  to  the  howling  of 
a  dog.  '  And  they  have  not  cried  unto  me  with 
their  heart,  when  they  howled  upon  their  beds. ' 

no.  vii.  14. 

Atten.  Yet  one  may  see  by  this  the  desperate- 
ness  of  man's  heart;  for  what  is  it  but  A  .  of  the 
desperate  wickedness  to  make  promise     deaperateness 

r  -iii  oi  miiu  s  lieait. 

to  God  of  amendment,  if  he  will  but 
spare  them;  and  yet,  so  soon  as  they  are  recovered, 
or  quickly  after,  fall  to  sin  as  they  did  before,  and 
never  to  regard  their  promise  more. 

Wise.  It  is  a  sign  of  desporateuess  indeed;  yea, 


THE  LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


of  desperate  madness.  De.  i.  34,  35.  For,  surely, 
they  must  needs  think  that  God  took  notice  of 
their  promise,  that  he  heard  the  words  that  they 
spake,  and  that  he  hath  laid  them  up  against  the 
time  to  come ;  and  will  then  bring  out,  and  testify 
to  their  faces,  that  they  flattered  him  with  their 
mouth,  and  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongue,  when 
they  lay  sick,  to  their  thinking,  upon  their  death- 
bed, and  promised  him  that  if  he  would  recover 
them  they  would  repent  and  amend  their  ways. 
Ps.  kiviiL  34-37.  But  thus,  as  I  have  told  you,  Mr. 
Badman  did.  He  made  great  promises  that  he 
would  be  a  new  man,  that  he  would  leave  his  sins 
and  become  a  convert,  that  he  would  love,  &c, 
his  godly  wife,  <fec.  Yea,  many  fine  words  had 
Mr.  Badman  in  his  sickness,  but  no  good  actions 
when  he  was  well. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

[HIS     PIOUS     WIFE      DIES     BROKEN-HEARTED. — TIER 
DEATH-BED  CHARGE  TO  HER  FAMILY.] 

Atten.  And  how  did  his  good  wife  take  it, 
when  she  saw  that  he  had  no  amendment,  but  that 
he  returned  with  the  dog  to  his  vomit,  to  his  old 
courses  again  ? 

Wise.  Why,  it  broke  her  heart,  it  was  a  worse 
Mr  Badman's  disappointment  to  her  than  the  cheat 
wife's  heart  is   that  he  gave   her  in  marriage.     At 

broken.  .        t     ,    B.   . .    ,  ° 

least  she  laid  it  more  to  heart,  and 
could  not  so  well  grapple  with  it.  You  must  think 
that  she  had  put  up  many  a  prayer  to  God  for  him 
before,  even  all  the  time  that  he  had  carried  it  so 
badly  to  her,  and  now,  when  he  was  so  affrighted 
in  his  sickness,  and  so  desired  that  he  might  live 
and  mend;  poor  woman,  she  thought  that  the  time 
was  come  for  God  to  answer  her  prayers;  nay,  she 
did  not  let1  with  gladness,  to  whisper  it  out  amongst 
her  friends,  that  it  was  so:  but  when  she  saw  her- 
self disappointed  by  her  husband  turning  rebel 
again,  she  could  not  stand  up  under  it,  but  falls 
into  a  languishing  distemper,  and  in  a  few  weeks 
gave  up  the  ghost. 

Atten.   Pray  how  did  she  die  ? 

Wise.  Die  !  she  died  bravely;  full  of  comfort 
of  the  faith  of  her  interest  in  Christ,  and  by  him, 
of  the  world  to  come.  She  had  many  brave  ex- 
pressions in  her  sickness,  and  gave  to  those  that 
came  to  visit  her  many  signs  of  her  salvation  ;  the 
thoughts  of  the  grave,  but  especially  of  her  rising 
again,  were  sweet  thoughts  to  her.  She  would 
long  for  death,  because  she  knew  it  would  be  her 
friend.  She  behaved  herself  like  to  some  that  were 
making  of  them  ready  to  go  meet  their  bridegroom. 
Her  Christian  Now»  said  she.  I  am  going  to  rest 
speech.  from  my  sorrows,  my  sighs,  my  tears, 


To  let,  prevent,  or  hinder.     See  Isa.  sliii.  13. — (Ed.) 


my  mournings,  and  complaints:  I  have  heretofore 
longed  to  be  among  the  saints,  but  might  by  no 
means  be  suffered  to  go,  but  now  I  am  going,  and 
no  man  can  stop  me,  to  the  great  meeting,  '  to  the 
general  assembly,  and  church  of  the  firstborn  which 
are  written  in  heaven.'  He.  xiL  22-24.  There  I  shall 
have  my  heart's  desire;  there  I  shall  worship  with- 
out temptation  or  other  impediment;  Her  talk  to  her 
there  I  shall  see  the  face  of  my  Jesus,  friend- 
whom  I  have  loved,  whom  I  have  served,  and  who 
now  I  know  will  save  my  soul.  I  have  prayed 
often  for  my  husband,  that  he  might  be  converted, 
but  there  has  been  no  answer  of  God  in  that  mat- 
ter. Are  my  prayers  lost  ?  are  they  forgotten  ? 
are  they  thrown  over  the  bar  ?  No :  they  are 
hanged  upon  the  horns  of  the  golden  altar,  and  I 
must  have  the  benefit  of  them  myself,  that  moment 
that  I  shall  enter  into  the  gates,  in  at  which  the 
righteous  nation  that  keepeth  truth  shall  enter:  I 
say,  I  shall  have  the  benefit  of  them.  I  can  eay 
as  holy  David  ;  I  say,  I  can  say  of  my  husband, 
as  he  could  of  his  enemies :  '  As  for  me,  when  they 
were  sick,  my  clothing  was  sackcloth;  I  humbled 
my  soul  with  fasting,  and  my  prayer  returned  into 
mine  own  bosom.'  Ps.  xxxv.  13.  My  prayers  are  not 
lost,  my  tears  are  yet  in  God's  bottle ;  I  would 
have  had  a  crown,  and  glory  for  my  husband,  and 
for  those  of  my  children  that  follow  his  steps ;  but 
so  far  as  I  can  see  yet,  I  must  rest  in  the  hope  of 
having  all  myself. 

Atten.  Did  she  talk  thus  openly  ? 

Wise.  No:  this  she  spake  but  to  one  or  two  of 
her  most  intimate  acquaintance,  who  were  permit- 
ted to  come  and  see  her,  when  she  lay  languishing 
upon  her  death-bed. 

Atten.  Well,  but  pray  go  on  in  your  relation, 
this  is  good;  I  am  glad  to  hear  it,  this  is  as  a  cor- 
dial to  my  heart  while  we  sit  thus  talking  under 
this  tree. 

Wise.  When  she  drew  near  her  end,  she  called 
for  her  husband,  and  when  he  was  Her  talk  to  her 
come  to  her  she  told  him  that  now  husband. 
he  and  she  must  part,  and,  said  she,  God  knows, 
and  thou  shalt  know,  that  I  have  been  a  loving, 
faithful  wife  unto  thee;  my  prayers  have  been  many 
for  thee;  and  as  for  all  the  abuses  that  I  have  re- 
ceived at  thy  hand,  those  I  freely  and  heartily  for- 
give, and  still  shall  pray  for  thy  conversion,  even  as 
long  as  I  breathe  in  this  world.  But  husband,  I  am 
going  thither,  where  no  bad  man  shall  come,  and 
if  thou  dost  not  convert,  thou  wilt  never  see  me 
more  with  comfort;  let  not  my  plain  words  offend 
thee  ;  I  am  thy  dying  wife,  and  of  my  faithfulness 
to  thee,  would  leave  this  exhortation  with  thee ; 
break  off  thy  sins,  fly  to  God  for  mercy  while 
mercy's  gate  stands  open  ;  remember  that  the  day 
is  coming,  when  thou,  though  now  lusty  and  well, 
must  lie  at  the  gates  of  death  as  I  do ;  and  what 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


653 


wilt  thou  then  do.  if  thou  shalt  be  found  with  a 
naked  soul,  to  meet  with  the  cherubims  with  their 
flaming  swords  ?  Yea,  what  wilt  thou  then  do,  if 
death  and  hell  shall  come  to  visit  thee,  and  thou 
in  thy  sins,  and  under  the  curse  of  the  law  ? 

Atten.  This  was  honest  and  plain ;  but  what 
said  Mr.  Badman  to  her? 

Wise.  He  did  what  he  could  to  divert  her  talk, 
He  diverts  her    ov  throwing  in  other  things ;  he  also 

discourse.  showed  some  kind  of  pity  to  her  now, 
and  would  ask  her  what  she  would  have  ?  and  with 
various  kind  of  words  put  her  out  of  her  talk ;  for 
when  she  saw  that  she  was  not  regarded,  she  fetched 
a  deep  sigh,  and  lay  still.  So  he  went  down,  and 
then  she  called  for  her  children,  and  began  to  talk 
Her  s  eech  to  to  tnem'  And  first  she  spake  to  those 
her    children   that  were  rude,  and  told  them    the 

that  were  rude.     ,  ?   i    •        t    e        ^i         1      i 

danger  of  dying  before  they  had  grace 

in  their  hearts.     She  told  them  also  that  death 

might  be  nearer  them  than  they  were  aware  of; 

and  bid  them  look  when  they  went  through  the 

churchyard  again,  if  there  were  not  little  graves 

there.      And,  ah  children,  said  she,  will  it  not  be 

dreadful  to  you  if  we  only  shall  meet  at  the  day 

of  judgment,  and  then  part  again,  and  never  see 

each  other  more  ?     And  with  that  she  wept,  the 

children  also  wept:  so  she  held  on  her  discourse. 

Chddren,  said  she,  I  am  going  from  you ;  I  am 

going   to  Jesus  Christ,   and  with   him   there   is 

neither  sorrow,  nor  sighing,  nor  pain,  nor  tears, 

nor  death.  Ke.  vii.  16 ;  xxi.  3,  4.    Thither  would  I  have 

you  go  also,  but  I  can  neither  carry  you  nor  fetch 

you  thither ;   but  if  you  shall  turn  from  your  sins 

to  God,  and  shall  beg  mercy  at  his  hands  by  Jesus 

Christ,  you  shall  follow  me,  and  shall,  when  you 

die,  come  to  the  place  where  I  am  going,  that 

blessed  place  of  rest;  and  then  we  shall  be  for 

ever  together,  beholding  the  face  of  our  Redeemer, 

to  our  mutual  and  eternal  joy.     So  she  bid  them 

remember  the  words  of  a  dying  mother  when  she 

was  cold  in  her  grave,  and  themselves  were  hot  in 

their  sins,  if  perhaps  her  words  might  put  check 

to  their  vice,  and  that  they  might  remember  and 

turn  to  God. 

Then  they  all  went  down  but  her  darling,  to 

wit,  the  child  that  she  had  most  love  for,  because 

it  followed  her  ways.     So  she  addressed  herself  to 

ner  speech  to  that.    Come  to  me,  said  she,  my  sweet 
her  uarhug.      chil(1>  thou  art  the  cllild  0f  my  joy  .  i 

have  lived  to  see  thee  a  servaut  of  God ;  thou  shalt 
have  eternal  life.  I,  my  sweet  heart,1  shall  go 
before,  and  thou  shalt  follow  after,  if  thou  shalt 
1  hold  the  beginning  of  thy  confidence  stedfast  unto 
the  end.'   He.  m.  14.     When   I  am  gone,   do  thou 


1  Terms  of  endearmeut :  thus  Shakspeare,  in  Henry  IV., 
p.  2,  represents  the  hostess  calling  her  maid,  Doll  Tear-sheet, 
sweet-heart.  It  is  now  more  restricted  to  lovers  while  court- 
ing—(Ed.) 


still  remember  my  words.  Love  thy  Bible,  follow 
my  ministers,  deny  ungodlines.s  still,  and  if  trouble- 
some times  shall  come,  set  a  higher  price  upon 
Christ,  his  word,  and  ways,  and  the  testimony  of 
a  good  conscience,  than  upon  all  the  world  be- 
sides.- Carry  it  kindly  and  dutifully  to  thy  father, 
but  choose  none  of  his  ways.  If  thou  mayest  go 
to  service,  choose  that  rather  than  to  stay  at  home  ; 
but  then  be  sure  to  choose  a  service  where  thou 
mayest  be  helped  forwards  in  the  way  to  heaven  ; 
and  that  thou  mayest  have  such  a  service,  speak 
to  my  minister,  he  will  help  thee,  if  possible,  to 
such  a  one. 

I  would  have  thee  also,  my  dear  child,  to  love 
thy  brothers  and  sisters,  but  learn  none  of  their 
naughty  tricks.  '  Have  no  fellowship  with  the 
unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  but  rather  reprove 
them. '  Ep.  v.  11.  Thou  hast  grace,  they  have  none ; 
do  thou  therefore  beautify  the  way  of  salvation 
before  their  eyes,  by  a  godly  life  and  conformable 
conversation  to  the  revealed  will  of  ftod,  that  thy 
brothers  and  sisters  may  see  and  be  the  more 
pleased  with  the  good  ways  of  the  Lord.  If  thou 
shalt  live  to  marry,  take  heed  of  being  served  as 
I  was ;  that  is,  of  being  beguiled  with  fair  words 
and  the  flatteries  of  a  lying  tongue.  But  first  be 
sure  of  godliness,  yea,  as  sure  as  it  is  possible  for 
one  to  be  in  this  world.  Trust  not  thine  own  eyes, 
nor  thine  own  judgment,  I  mean  as  to  that  per- 
son's godliness  that  thou  art  invited  to  marry. 
Ask  counsel  of  good  men,  and  do  nothing  therein, 
if  he  lives,  without  my  minister's  advice.  I  have 
also  myself  desired  him  to  look  after  thee.  Thus 
she  talked  to  her  children,  and  gave  them  counsel ; 
and  after  she  had  talked  to  this  a  little  longer,  she 
kissed  it,  and  bid  it  go  down. 

Well,  in  short,  her  time  drew  on,  and  the  day 
that  she  must  die.  So  she  died,  with  a 
soul  full  of  grace,  a  heart  full  of  com- 
fort, and  by  her  death  ended  a  life  full  of  trouble. 
Her  husband  made  a  funeral  for  her,  perhaps  be- 
cause he  was  glad  he  was  rid  of  ber,  but  we  will 
leave  that  to  be  manifest  at  judgment. 

Atte.v.  This  woman  died  well.  And  now  we 
are  talking  of  the  dying  of  Christians,  I  will  tell 
you  a  story  of  one  that  died  some  time  since  in 
our  town.  The  man  was  a  godly  old  Puritan,  for 
so  the  godly  were  called  in  time  past.  This  man, 
after  a  long  and  godly  life,  fell  sick,  of  the  sick- 
ness whereof  he  died.  And  as  he  lay  drawing  on, 
the  woman  that  looked  to  him  thought  she  heard 
music,  and  that  the  sweetest  that  ever  she  heard 


2  Uncertain  was  the  liberty  occasionally  enjoyed  by  our 
pilgrim  forefathers,  who  were  always  expecting  '  troublesome 
times.'  We  ought  to  be  more  thankful  for  the  mercies  we 
enjoy ;  and  to  pray  that  the  state  may  soon  equally  recognize 
and  cherish  every  good  subject,  without  reference  to  sect,  or 
authorizing  persecution. — (En.) 


654 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


m- 


in  her  life,  which  also  continued  until  he  gave  up 
the  ghost.  Now  when  his  soul  departed  from  him 
the  music  seemed  to  withdraw,  and  to  go 
further  and  further  off  from  the  house, 
and  so  it  went  until  the  sound  was  quite  gone  out 
of  heariug. 

Wise.   What  do  you  think  that  might  be  ? 

Atten.  For  ought  I  know  the  melodious  notes 
of  angels,  that  were  sent  of  God  to  fetch  him  to 
heaven. 

Wise.  I  cannot  say  hut  that  God  goes  out  of 
his  ordinary  road  with  us  poor  mortals  sometimes. 
I  cannot  say  this  of  this  woman,  hut  yet  she  had 
better  music  in  her  heart  than  sounded  in  this 
woman's  ears. 

Atten.  I  believe  so ;  but  pray  tell  me,  did  any 
of  her  other  children  hearken  to  her  words,  so  as 
to  be  bettered  in  their  souls  thereby  ? 
One  of  her  chil-  Wise.  One  of  them  did,  and  be- 
bJenLerUV(ijuig  came  a  very  hopeful  young  man.  But 
words.  fyr  the  rest  i  can  say  nothing. 

Atten.  And  what  did  Badman  do  after  his  wife 
was  dead  ? 

Wise.  Why,  even  as  he  did  before ;  he  scarce 
mourned  a  fortnight  for  her,  and  his  mourning 
then  was,  I  doubt,  more  in  fashion  than  in  heart. 

Atten.  Would  he  not  sometimes  talk  of  his  wife 
when  she  was  dead  ? 

Wise.  Yes,  when  the  fit  took  him,  and  could 
commend  her  too  extremely,  saying  she  was  a 
good,  godly,  virtuous  woman.  But  this  is  not  a 
thing  to  be  wondered  at.  It  is  common  with 
wicked  men  to  hate  God's  servants  while  alive, 
and  to  commend  them  when  they  are  dead.  So 
served  the  Pharisees  the  prophets.  Those  of  the 
prophets  that  were  dead  they  commended,  and 
those  of  them  that  were   alive   they  condemned. 

Mat.  xuii. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

[he  is  tricked  into  a  second  marriage  by  a 
woman  as  bad  as  himself.] 

Atten.  But  did  not  Mr.  Badman  marry  again 
quickly  ? 

Wise.  No,  not  a  good  while  after ;  and  when 
he  was  asked  the  reason  he  would  make  this  slighty 
Mr.   Badman'8   answer,  Who  would  keep  a  cow  of 

base  language.     their   Qwn    that    can    haye    &  ^^    q£ 

milk  for  a  penny  ?  Meaning,  who  would  be  at  the 
charge  to  have  a  wife  that  can  have  a  whore  when 
he  listeth  ?  So  villainous,  so  abominable  did  he 
continue  after  the  death  of  his  wife.  Yet  at  last 
there  was  one  was  too  hard  for  him.  For  gettino- 
He  marries  of  him  to  her  upon  a  time,  and  making 
hfjoithu'S  of  him  sufficiently  drunk,  she  was  so 
Wlle-  cunning  as  to  get  a  promise  of  mar- 

riage of  him,  and  so  held  him  to  it,  and  forced 


him  to  marry  her.    And  she,  as  the  saying  is,  was 

as  oood  as  he  at  all  his  vile  and  rant-    _..  .    . 

°    .  c,  .  wllat  she  wat, 

mg  tricks.      She  had  her  companions     and  how  they 

as  well  as  he  had  his,  and  she  would 

meet  them  too  at  the  tavern  and  ale-house  more 

commonly  than  he  was  aware  of.     To  be  plain, 

she  was   a  very  whore,    and  had   as   great  resort 

came  to  her,  where  time  and  place  was  appointed, 

as  .any  of  them  all.     Ay,  and  he  smelt  it  too,  but 

could  not  tell  how  to  help  it.     For  if  he  began  to 

talk,  she  could  lay  in  his  dish  the  whores  that  she 

knew  he  haunted,  and  she  could  fit  him  also  with 

cursing  and  swearing,  for  she  would  give  him  oath 

for  oath,  and  curse  for  curse. 

Atten.  What  kind  of  oaths  would  she  have  ? 

Wise.  Why,  damn  her,  and  sink  her,  and  the  like. 

Atten.  These  are  provoking  things. 

Wise.  So  they  are  ;  but  God  doth  not  altogether 
let  such  things  go  unpunished  in  this  life.  Some- 
thing of  this  I  have  showed  you  already,  and  will 
here  give  you  one  or  two  instances  more. 

There  lived,  saith  one,  in  the  year  1551,  in  a 
city  of  Savoy,  a  man  who  was  a  mon-  ciark's Looking. 
strous  curser  and  swearer,  and  though  glass'  p- 135- 
he  was  often  admonished  and  blamed  for  it,  yet 
would  he  by  no  means  mend  his  manners.  At 
length  a  great  plague  happening  in  the  city,  he 
withdrew  himself  [with  his  wife  and  a  kinswoman] 
into  a  garden,  where  being  again  admonished  to 
give  over  his  wickedness,  he  hardened  his  heart 
more,  swearing,  blaspheming  God,  and  giving  him- 
self to  the  devil.  And  immediately  the  devil 
snatched  him  up  suddenly,  his  wife  and  kinswoman 
looking  on,  and  carried  him  quite  away.  The 
magistrates,  advertised  hereof,  went  to  the  place 
and  examined  the  women,  who  justified  the  truth 
of  it. 

Also  at  Oster,  in  the  duchy  of  Magalapole,  saith 
Mr.  Clark,  a  wicked  woman  used  in  her  cursing  to 
give  herself  body  and  soul  to  the  devil,  and  being 
reproved  for  it,  still  continued  the  same ;  till,  being 
at  a  wedding-feast,  the  devil  came  in  person,  and 
carried  her  up  into  the  air,  with  most  horrible 
outcries  and  roarings  ;  and  in  that  sort  carried  her 
round  about  the  town,  that  the  inhabitants  were 
ready  to  die  for  fear.  And  by  and  by  he  tore  her 
in  four  pieces,  leaving  her  four  quarters  in  four 
several  highways ;  and  then  brought  her  bowels  to 
the  marriage-feast,  and  threw  them  upon  the  table 
before  the  mayor  of  the  town,  saying,  Behold  these 
dishes  of  meat  belong  to  thee,  whom  the  like  de- 
struction waiteth  for  if  thou  dost  not  amend  thy 
wicked  life. 

Atten.  Though  God  forbears  to  deal  thus  with 
all  men  that  thus  rend  and  tear  his  name,  and  that 
immediate  judgments  do  not  overtake  them,  yet 
he  makes  their  lives  by  other  judgments  bitter  to 
them,  does  he  not  ? 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATII   CF  MR.  BADMAN. 


655 


Wise.  Yes,  yes,  and  for  proof,  I  need  go  no 
farther  than  to  this  Badman  and  bis  wife ;  for 
their  railing,  and  cursing,  and  swearing  ended  not 
in  words.  They  would  fight  and  fly  at  each 
other,  and  that  like  cats  and  dogs.  But  it  must 
be  looked  upon  as  the  hand  and  judgment  of  God 
upon  him  for  his  villainy  ;  he  had  an  honest  woman 
before,  but  she  would  not  serve  his  turn,  and 
therefore  God  took  her  away,  and  gave  him  one 
as  bad  as  himself.  Thus  that  measure  that  he 
meted  to  his  first  wife,  this  last  did  mete  to  him 
again.  And  this  is  a  punishment  wherewith  some- 
times God  will  punish  wicked  men.  So  said  Amos 
to  Amaziah,  '  Thy  wife  shall  be  a  harlot  in  the 
city.'  Am.  vii.  17.  With  this  last  wife  Mr.  Badman 
lived  a  pretty  while  ;  but,  as  I  told  you  before,  in  a 
most  sad  and  hellish  manner.  And  now  he  would 
bewail  his  first  wife's  death  ;  not  of  love  that  he  had 
to  her  godliness,  for  that  he  could  never  abide,  but 
for  that  she  used  always  to  keep  home,  whereas 
this  would  go  abroad;  his  first  wife  was  also 
honest,  and  true  to  that  relation,  but  this  last  was 
a  whore  of  her  body.  The  first  woman  loved  to 
keep  things  together,  but  this  last  would  whirl 
them  about  as  well  as  he.  The  first  would  be 
silent  when  he  chid,  and  would  take  it  patiently 
n  .        . ,   ,    when  he  abused  her :  but  this  would 

lie  is  punished  ' 

in  his  last  wife   give  him  word  for  word,  blow  for  blow, 

lor  his  bad  ear-  „  .,     ,  •««■      -n     i 

nages  towards   curse  for  curse  ;  so  that  now  Mr.  Bad- 
1113  first-  man  had  met  with  his  match.      God 

had  a  mind  to  make  him  see  the  baseness  of  his 
own  life  in  the  wickedness  of  his  wife's.  But  all 
He  is  not  at  all  would  not  do  with  Mr.  Badman,  he 
the  better.  ^^d  j,e  Mr#  Badman  still.  This 
judgment  did  not  work  any  reformation  upon  him, 
no,  not  to  God  nor  man. 

Atten.  I  warrant  you  that  Mr.  Badman  thought 
when  his  wife  was  dead,  that  next  time  he  would 
match  far  better. 

Wise.  What  he  thought  I  cannot  tell,  but  he 
could  not  hope  for  it  in  this  match.  For  here  he 
knew  himself  to  be  catched,  he  knew  that  he  was 
by  this  woman  entangled,  and  would  therefore  have 
gone  back  again,  but  could  not.  He  knew  her,  I 
say,  to  be  a  whore  before,  and  therefore  could  not 
promise  himself  a  happy  life  with  her.  For  he  or 
she  that  will  not  be  true  to  their  own  soul,  will 
neither  be  true  to  husband  nor  wife.  And  he 
knew  that  she  was  not  true  to  her  own  soul,  and 
therefore  could  not  expect  she  should  be  true  to 
him.  But  Solomon  says,  '  A  whore  is  a  deep 
ditch,'  and  Mr.  Badman  found  it  true.  For  when 
she  had  caught  him  in  her  pit,  she  would  never 
leave  him  till  she  had  got  him  to  promise  her  mar- 
riage; and  when  she  had  taken  him  so  far,  she 
forced  him  to  marry  indeed.  And  after  that,  they 
lived  that  life  that  I  have  told  you. 

Atten.    But    did    not    the     neighbours    take 


notice   of  this  alteration   that  Mr.  Badman  had 
made  ? 

Wise.  Yes ;  and  many  of  his  neighbours,  yea, 
many  of  those  that  were  carnal  said,  It  is  a  right- 
eous judgment  of  God  upon  him  for  None  dia  pjty 
his  abusive  carriage  and  language  to     him  for  his  sor'- 

.  .  .  .*        »         i  n  row,  but  looked 

Ins  other  wife:   tor  they  were  all  con-     upon  it  as  a 
vinced  that  she  was  a  virtuous  woman,     jl48t' reward- 
and  that  he,  vile  wretch,  had  killed  her,  I  will  not 
say  with,  but  with  the  want  of  kindness. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
[he  parts  from  his  wife — DISEASES  attack  him 

UNDER  CAPTAIN  CONSUMPTION,  HE  ROTS  AWAY,  AND 
DIES  IN  SINFUL  SECURITY.] 

Atten.  And  how  long,  I  pray,  did  they  live  thus 
together. 

Wise.  Some  fourteen  or  sixteen  years,  even 
until,  though  she  also  brought  some-  Badman  and 
thing  with  her,  they  had  sinned  all  L^t  as  Spoor  as 
away,  and  parted  as  poor  as  howlets.  ".owlets. 
And,  in  reason,  how  could  it  be  otherwise?  he 
would  have  his  way,  and  she  would  have  hers ;  he 
among  his  companions,  and  she  among  hers ;  he 
with  his  whores,  and  she  with  her  rogues ;  and  so 
they  brought  their  1  noble  to  ninepence. 

Atten.  Pray  of  what  disease  did  Mr.  Badman 
die,  for  now  I  perceive  we  are  come  up  to  his 
death? 

Wise.  I  cannot  so  properly  say  that  he  died  of 
one  disease,  for  there  were  many  that  Mr.  Badman's 
had  consented,  and  laid  their  heads  disease*  aI0f 
together  to  bring  him  to  his  end.  He  wkich  he  died- 
was  dropsical,  he  was  consumptive,  he  was  sur- 
feited, was  gouty,  and,  as  some  say,  he  had  a 
tang  of  the  pox  in  his  bowels.  Yet  the  captain  of 
all  these  men  of  death  that  came  against  him  to 
take  him  away,  was  the  consumption,  for  it  was 
that  that  brought  him  down  to  the  grave.2 

Atten.  Although  I  will  not  say  but  the  best 
men  may  die  of  a  consumption,  a  dropsy,  or  a 
surfeit ;  yea,  that  these  may  meet  upon  a  man  to 
end  him ;  yet  I  will  say  again,  that  many  times 
these  diseases  come  through  man's  inordinate  use 
of  things.  Much  drinking  brings  dropsies,  con- 
sumptions, surfeits,  and  many  other  diseases;  and 
I  douht  that  Mr.  Badman's  death  did  come  by  his 
abuse  of  himself  in  the  use  of  lawful  and  unlawful 
things.  I  ground  this  my  sentence  upon  that  re- 
port of  his  life  that  you  at  large  have  given  me. 

Wise.    I  think  verily  that  you  need  not  call 


1  The  noble  was  a  gold  coin  of  Henry  VIII. ;  value  six  shil- 
lings and  eightpence. — (Ed.) 

'l  Bunyan's  allegorical  spirit  appears  in  nearly  all  his  writ- 
ings. Diseases  lay  their  heads  together  to  bring  Badman  to 
the  grave,  making  Consumption  their  captain  or  leader  of  these 
men  of  death. — (Ed.) 


656 


THE  LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


back  your  sentence;  for  it  is  thought  by  many 
that  by  his  cups  and  his  queans1  he  brought  him- 
self to  this  his  destruction:  he  was  not  an  old  man 
when  he  died,  nor  was  he  naturally  very  feeble, 
but  strong  and  of  a  healthy  complexion.  Yet,  as 
I  said,  he  moultered  away,  and  went,  when  he  set 
agoing,  rotten  to  bis  grave.  And  that  which  made 
him  stink  when  he  was  dead,  I  mean,  that  made 
him  stink  in  his  name  and  fame,  was,  that  he  died 
with  a  spice  of  the  foul  disease  upon  him.  A  man 
Avhose  life  was  full  of  sin,  and  whose  death  was 
without  repentance. 

Atten.  These  were  blemishes  sufficient  to  make 
him  stink  indeed. 

Wise.  They  were  so,  and  they  did  do  it.  No 
n  ,      ,  man  could  speak  well  of  him  when  he 

L;idnmn  sname  Tt 

stinks  when  lie  was  gone.  His  name  rotted  above 
ground,  as  his  carcase  rotted  under. 
And  this  is  according  to  the  saying  of  the  wise 
man,  '  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed,  but  the 
name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot.'  Pr.  x.  7. 

This  text,  in  both  the  parts  of  it,  was  fulfilled 
upon  him  and  the  woman  that  he  married  first. 
For  her  name  still  did  flourish,  though  she  had 
been  dead  almost  seventeen  years ;  but  his  began 
to  stink  and  rot  before  he  had  been  buried  seven- 
teen days. 

Atten.  That  man  that  dieth  with  a  life  full  of 
sin,  and  with  a  heart  void  of  repentance,  although 
he  should  die  of  the  most  golden  disease,  if  there 
were  any  that  might  be  so  called,  I  will  warrant  him 
his  name  shall  stink,  and  that  in  heaven  and  earth. 
Wise.  You  say  true ;  and  therefore  doth  the 
name  of  Cain,  Pharaoh,  Saul,  Judas,  and  the 
Pharisees,  though  dead  thousands  of  years  ago, 
stink  as  fresh  in  the  nostrils  of  the  world  as  if 
they  were  but  newly  dead. 

Atten.  I  do  fully  acquiesce  with  you  in  this. 
That  Mr.  Bad-  But,  Sir,  since  you  have  charged  him 
penitent3  ""a   wit3a  dying  impenitent,   pray  let  me 

proved.  gee  J10W  yQn  wjJJ  prove  }(, .    uot  tnat  J 

altogether  doubt  it,  because  you  have  affirmed  it, 
but  yet  I  love  to  have  proof  for  what  men  say  in 
such  weighty  matters. 

Wise.  When  I  said  he  died  without  repentance. 
I  meant  so  far  as  those  that  knew  him  could 
judge,  when  they  compared  his  life,  the  Word,  and 
his  death  together. 

Atten.  Well  said,  they  went  the  right  way  to 
find  out  whether  he  had,  that  is,  did  mauifest  that 
be  bad  repentance  or  no.  Now  then  show  me  how 
they  did  prove  he  had  none. 

Wise.  So  I  will.     And  first,  this  was  urged  to 

First  proof  that  Pr0Ve  iL  He  had  DOt  b  a11  the  time 
he    died   im-   of  his  sickness  a  sisjht  and  sense  of 

penitent.  .  .        .  .  . 

ms  sins,  but  was  as  secure,  and  as 
1  See  note  on  p.  629. 


much  at  quiet,  as  if  he  had  never  sinned  in  all  his 
life. 

Atten.  I  must  needs  confess  that  this  is  a  sign 
he  had  none.  For  how  can  a  man  repent  of  that 
of  which  he  hath  neither  sight  nor  sense?  But  it 
is  strange  that  he  had  neither  sight  nor  sense  of 
sin  now,  when  he  had  such  a  sight  and  sense  of 
his  evil  before ;   I  mean  when  he  was  sick  before. 

Wise.  He  was,  as  I  said,  as  secure  now  as  if 
he  had  been  as  sinless  as  an  angel ;  though  all 
men  knew  what  a  sinner  he  was,  for  he  carried  his 
sins  in  his  forehead.  His  debauched  life  was  read 
and  known  of  all  men  ;  but  his  repentance  was 
read  and  known  of  no  man;  for,  as  I  said,  he  had 
none.  And  for  ought  I  know,  the  reason  why  he 
had  no  sense  of  his  sins  now  was,  because  he  pro- 
fited not  by  that  sense  that  he  had  of  them  before. 
He  liked  not  to  retain  that  knowledge  of  God  then, 
that  caused  his  sins  to  come  to  remembrance. 
Therefore  God  gave  him  up  now  to  a  reprobate 
mind,  to  hardness  and  stupidity  of  spirit;  and  so 
was  that  Scripture  fulfilled  upon  him,  '  He  bath 
blinded  their  eyes.'  is.  vi.  10.  And  that,  'Let  their 
eyes  be  darkened  that  they  may  not  see.'  Ro.  xi.  10. 
0,  for  a  man  to  live  in  sin,  and  to  go  out  of  the 
world  without  repentance  for  it,  is  the  saddest 
judgment  that  can  overtake  a  man. 

ATTEN.  But,  Sir,  although  both  you  and  I  have 
consented  that  without  a  sight  and  Nosenseofsin 
sense  of  sin  there  can  be  no  repent-  no  repentance 
ance,  yet  that  is  but  our  bare  say  so ;  pr°w 
let  us  therefore  now  see  if  by  the  Scripture  we  can 
make  it  good. 

Wise.  That  is  easily  done.  The  three  thousand 
that  were  converted,  Ac.  ii.,  repented  not  till  they 
had  sight  and  sense  of  their  sins.  Paul  repented 
not  till  he  had  sight  and  sense  of  his  sins.  Ac.  ix. 
The  jailer  repented  not  till  he  had  sight  and  sense 
of  his  sins ;  nor  could  they,  Ac.  xvi.  For  of  what 
should  a  man  repent?  The  answer  is,  Of  sin. 
What  is  it  to  repent  of  sin?  The  answer  is,  To  be 
sorry  for  it,  to  turn  from  it.  But  how  can  a  man 
be  sorry  for  it,  that  has  neither  sight  nor  sense  of 
it?  Ps.  xxxviii.  is.  David  did  not  only  commit  sins, 
but  abode  impenitent  for  them,  until  Nathan  the 
prophet  was  sent  from  God  to  give  him  a  sight 
and  sense  of  them;  and  then,  but  not  till  then,  he 
indeed  repented  of  them.  2  Sa.  xii.  Job,  in  order  to 
bis  repentance,  cries  unto  God,  '  Show  me  where- 
fore thou  coutendest  with  me  ?'  Job  x.  2.  And  agaiu, 
'That  which  I  see  not  teach  thou  me,  I  have  borne 
chastisement,  I  will  not  oifend  any  more/  Job 
xxxiv.  32.  That  is,  not  in  what  I  know,  for  I  will 
repent  of  it;  nor  yet  in  what  I  know  not,  when 
thou  shalt  show  me  it.  Also  Ephraim's  repent- 
ance was  after  he  was  turned  to  the  sight  and  sense 
of  his  sins,  and  after  he  was  instructed  about  the 
evil  of  them.  Je.  xxxi.  18-20. 


THE   LIFE  AND  DEATH    OP   MR.  BADMAN. 


657 


Atten.  These  are  good  testimonies  of  this  truth, 
and  do,  if  matter  of  fact,  with  which  Mr.  Badman 
is  charged,  be  true,  prove  indeed  that  ho  did  not 
repent,  but  as  he  lived  so  he  died  in  his  sin.  Job 
xx.  n.  For  without  repentance  a  man  is  sure  to 
die  in  his  sin;  for  they  will  lio  down  in  the  dust 
with  him,  rise  at  the  judgment  with  him,  hang 
about  his  neck  like  cords  and  chains  when  he 
standeth  at  the  bar  of  God's  tribunal.  Pr.  v.  22. 
And  go  with  him,  too,  when  he  goes  away  from 
the  judgment-seat,  with  a  •  Depart  from  me,  ye 
cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels.'  Mat.  xxv.  41.  And  there  shall  fret 
and  gnaw  his  conscience,  because  they  will  be  to 
him  a  never-dying  worm.   Mar.  ix.  44.  is.  lxvi.  24. 

Wise.  You  say  well,  and  I  will  add  a  word  or 
Every  sight  and  two  more  to  what  I  have  said.  Re- 
cannot produce  pentance,  as  it  is  not  produced  without 
repentance.  a  sight  and  sense  of  sin,  so  every  sight 
and  sense  of  sin  cannot  produce  it ;  I  mean  every 
sight  and  sense  of  sin  cannot  produce  that  repent- 
ance, that  is  repentance  unto  salvation;  repentance 
never  to  be  repented  of.  For  it  is  yet  fresh  be- 
fore us,  that  Mr.  Badman  had  a  sight  and  sense 
of  sin,  in  that  lit  of  sickness  that  he  had  before, 
but  it  died  without  procuring  any  such  godly  fruit; 
as  was  manifest  by  his  so  soon  returning  with  the 
dog  to  his  vomit.  Many  people  think  also  that 
repentance  stands  in  confession  of  sin  only,  but 
they  are  very  much  mistaken;  for  repentance,  as 
was  said  before,  is  a  being  sorry  for,  and  returning 
from  transgression  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  Now, 
if  this  be  true,  that  every  sight  and  sense  of  sin 
will  not  produce  repentance,  then  repentance  can- 
not ho  produced  there  where  there  is  no  sight  and 
sense  of  sin.  That  every  sight  and  sense  of  sin 
will  not  produce  repentance,  to  wit,  the  godly  re- 
pentance that  we  are  speaking  of,  is  manifest  in 
Cain,  Pharaoh,  Saul,  and  Judas,  who  all  of  them 
had  sense,  great  sense  of  sin,  but  none  of  them 
repentance  unto  life. 

Now  I  conclude  that  Mr.  Badman  did  die  im- 
penitent, and  so  a  death  most  miserable. 

Atten.  But  pray  now,  before  we  conclude  our 
discourse  of  Mr.  Badman,  give  me  another  proof 
of  his  dying  in  his  sins. 

Wise.  Another  proof  is  this,  he  did  not  desire 
s      a         „f  a   sio-ht  and  sense   of   sins,  that    he 

Second       proof  o  t\- 

that  he  died  might  have  repentance  for  them.  Did 
I  say  he  did  not  desire  it,  I  will  add, 
he  greatiy  desired  to  remain  in  his  security,  and 
that  I  shall  prove  by  that  which  follows.  First, 
he  could  not  endure  that  any  man  now  should  talk 
to  him  of  his  sinful  life,  and  yet  that  was  the  way 
to  beget  a  sight  and  sense  of  sin,  and  so  of  repent- 
ance from  it,  in  his  soul.  But  I  say  he  could  not 
endure  such  discourse.  Those  men  that  did  offer  to 
talk  unto  him  of  his  ill-spent  life,  they  were  as  little 
VOL.  III. 


welcome  to  him,  in  the  time  of  his  last  sickness, 
as  was  Elijah  when  he  went  to  meet  with  Ahab  as 
he  went  down  to  take  possession  of  Nabolh's  vine- 
yard. 'Hast  thou  found  me,'  said  Ahab,  '0 
mine  enemy  V  1  Ki.  xxi.  17-21.  So  would  Mr.  Bad- 
man  say  in  his  heart  to  and  of  those  that  thus  did 
come  to  him,  though  indeed  they  came  even  of 
love  to  convince  him  of  his  evil  life,  that  he  might 
have  repented  thereof  and  have  obtained  mercy. 

Atten.  Did  good  men  then  go  to  see  him  in  his 
last  sickness  ? 

Wise.  Yes.  Those  that  were  his  first  wife's 
acquaintance,  they  went  to  see  him,  and  to  talk 
with  him,  and  to  him,  if  perhaps  he  might  now, 
at  last,  bethink  himself  and  cry  to  God  for  mercy. 

Atten.  They  did  well  to  try  now  at  last  if  they 
could  save  his  soul  from  hell.  But  pray  how  can 
you  tell  that  he  did  not  care  for  the  company  of 
such? 

Wise.  Because  of  the  differing  carriage  that  he 
had  for  them  from  what  he  had  when  his  old  car- 
nal companions  came  to  see  him.  When  his  old 
companions  came  to  see  him  he  would  stir  up  him- 
self as  much  as  he  could,  both  by  words  and  looks, 
to  signify  they  were  welcome  to  him  ;  he  would 
also  talk  with  them  freely  and  look  pleasantly  upon 
them,  though  the  talk  of  such  could  be  none 
other  but  such  as  David  said  carnal  men  would 
offer  to  him  when  they  came  to  visit  him  in  his 
sickness.  '  If  he  come  to  see  me,'  says  he,  '  he 
speaketh  vanity,  his  heart  gathereth  iniquity  to  it- 
self.' Ps.  xii.  6.  But  these  kind  of  talks,  I  say, 
Mr.  Badman  better  brooked  than  he  did  the  com- 
pany of  better  men. 

But  I  will  more  particularly  give  you  a  charac- 
ter of  his  carriage  to  good  men,  and  good  talk, 
when  they  came  to  see  him.  1.  When  they  were 
come  he  would  seem  to  fail  in  his  spirits  at  the 
sight  of  them.  2.  He  would  not  care  to  answer 
them  to  any  of  those  questions  that 

,  J  1  -     ,     How      Badmau 

they  would  at  times  put  to  him,  to  feel  carried  it  to 
what  sense  he  had  of  sin,  death,  hell,  f°°y  "^me'Vo 
and  judgment.  But  would  either  say  ^t^^hia 
nothing  or  answer  them  by  way  of 
evasion,  or  else  by  telling  of  them  he  was  so  weak 
and  spent  that  he  could  not  speak  much.  3.  He 
would  never  show  forwardness  to  speak  to  or  talk 
with  them,  hut  was  glad  when  they  held  their 
tongues.  He  would  ask  them  no  question  about 
his  state  and  another  world,  or  how  he  should 
escape  that  damnation  that  he  had  deserved.  4. 
He  had  got  a  haunt l  at  last  to  bid  his  wife  and 
keeper,  when  these  good  people  attempted  to  come 
to  see  him,  to  tell  them  that  he  was  asleep,  or  in- 
ciinino-  to  sleep,  or  so  weak  for  want  thereof  that 


1  '  Haunt,'  an  Anglo-Norman  word.    Custom,  practice  ;  more 
commonly  used  as  a  verb,  to  haunt,  or  frequently  visit. — (En.) 

83 


658 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH  OF  MR.   BADMAN. 


he  could  not  abide  any  noise.  And  so  they  would 
serve  them  time  after  time,  till  at  last  they  were 
discouraged  from  coming  to  see  him  any  more. 
5.  He  was  so  hardened  now  in  this  time  of  his 
sickness,  that  he  would  talk,  when  his  companions 
came  unto  him,  to  the  disparagement  of  those  good 
men,  and  of  their  good  doctrine  too,  that  of  love 
did  come  to  see  him,  and  that  did  labour  to  convert 
him.  6.  When  these  good  men  went  away  from 
him  he  would  never  say,  Pray,  when  will  you  be 
pleased  to  come  again,  for  I  have  a  desire  to  more 
of  your  company  and  to  hear  more  of  your  good 
instruction  ?  No,  not  a  word  of  that,  but  when 
they  were  going  would  scarce  bid  them  drink,1  or 
say,  Thank  you  for  your  good  company  and  good 
instruction.  7.  His  talk  in  his  sickness  with  his 
companions  would  be  of  the  world,  as  trades, 
houses,  lands,  great  men,  great  titles,  great  places, 
outward  prosperity  or  outward  adversity,  or  some 
such  carnal  thing.  By  all  which  I  conclude  that 
he  did  not  desire  a  sense  and  sight  of  his  sin,  that 
he  might  repent  and  be  saved. 

Atten.  It  must  needs  be  so  as  you  say,  if  these 
things  be  true  that  you  have  asserted  of  him.  And 
I  do  the  rather  believe  them,  because  I  think  you 
dare  not  tell  a  lie  of  the  dead. 

Wise.  I  was  one  of  them  that  went  to  him  and 
that  beheld  his  carriage  and  manner  of  way,  and 
this  is  a  true  relation  of  it  that  I  have  given  you. 

Atten.  I  am  satisfied.  But  pray,  if  you  can, 
show  me  now,  by  the  Word,  what  sentence  of  God 
doth  pass  upon  such  men. 

Wise.  Why,  the  man  that  is  thus  averse  to  re- 
pentance, that  desires  not  to  hear  of  his  sins  that 
he  might  repent  and  be  saved,  is  said  to  be  a  man 
that  saith  unto  God,  *  Depart  from  me,  for  I  desire 
not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways. '  Job  xxi.  14.  He  is 
a  man  that  says  in  his  heart  and  with  his  actions, 
'  I  have  loved  strangers  (sins)  and  after  them  will 
I  go.'  Je.  ii.  25.  He  is  a  man  that  shuts  his  eyes, 
stops  his  ears,  and  that  turneth  his  spirit  against 

God.     Zee.  vii.  11,  12.    Ac.  xxviii.  26,  27.        Yea,    he   is    the 

man  that  is  at  enmity  with  God,  and  that  abhors 
him  with  his  soul. 

Atten.  What  other  sign  can  you  give  me  that 
Mr.  Badman  died  without  repentance  ? 

Wise.  Why,  he  did  never  heartily  cry  to  God 
Third .proof  that  for  mercy  au<  the  time  of  his  affliction, 
hediedimpeni-  True,  when  sinking  fits,  stitches,  or 
pains  took  hold  upon  him,  then  he 
would  say,  as  other  carnal  men  used  to  do,  Lord, 
help  me ;  Lord,  strengthen  me  ;  Lord,  deliver  me, 
and  the  like.  But  to  cry  to  God  for  mercy,  that 
he  did  not,  but  lay,  as  1  hinted  before,  as  if  he 
never  had  sinned. 


1  An  old  tippling  custom,  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than 
in  the  observance. — (Ed.) 


Atten.  That  is  another  bad  sign  indeed,  for 
crying  to  God  for  mercy  is  one  of  the  first  signs  of 
repentance.  When  Paul  lay  repenting  of  his  sin 
upon  his  bed,  the  Holy  Ghost  said  of  him,  «  Behold 
he  prayeth.'  Ac.  ix.  n.  But  he  that  hath  not  the 
first  signs  of  repentance,  it  is  a  sign  he  hath  none 
of  the  other,  and  so  indeed  none  at  all.  I  do  not 
say  but  there  may  be  crying  where  there  may  be 
n6  sign  of  repentance.  '  They  cried,'  says  David, 
'  unto  the  Lord,  but  he  answered  them  not ;'  but 
that  he  would  have  done  if  their  cry  had  been  the 
fruit  of  repentance.  Ps.  xviii.  41.  But,  I  say,  if  men 
may  cry  and  yet  have  no  repentance,  be  sure  they 
have  none  that  cry  not  at  all.  It  is  said  in  Job, 
'  they  cry  not  when  he  bindeth  them,'  Jobxxxvi.  13 ; 
that  is,  because  they  have  no  repentance ;  no  re- 
pentance, no  cries;  false  repentance,  false  cries; 
true  repentance,  true  cries. 

Wise.  I  know  that  it  is  as  possible  for  a  man  to 
forbear  crying  that  hath  repentance,  as  it  is  for  a 
man  to  forbear  groaning  that  feeleth  deadly  pain. 
He  that  looketh  into  the  book  of  Psalms,  where 
repentance  is  most  lively  set  forth  even  in  its  true 
and  proper  effects,  shall  their  find  that  crying, 
strong  crying,  hearty  crying,  great  crying,  and 
incessant  crying,  hath  been  the  fruits  of  repent- 
ance ;  but  none  of  this  had  this  Mr.  Badman,  there- 
fore he  died  in  his  sins. 

That  crying  is  an  inseparable  effect  of  repent- 
ance, is  seen  in  these  scriptures — •  Have  mercy 
upon  me,  0  God  ;  according  unto  the  multitude  of 
thy  tender  mercies,  blot  out  my  transgressions.' 
Ps.  ii.  i.  '  0  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thine  anger, 
neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure.  Have 
mercy  upon  me,  0  Lord,  for  I  am  weak:  0  Lord, 
heal  me,  for  my  bones  are  vexed.  My  soul  is  also 
sore  vexed,  but  thou,  0  Lord,  how  long?     Return, 

0  Lord,  deliver  my  soul:  0  save  me  for  thy  mercies' 
sake. '  Ps.  vi.  1-4.  '  0  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thy 
wrath,  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure  • 
for  thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  me,  and  thy  hand 
presseth  me  sore.  Tliere  is  no  soundness  in  my 
flesh  because  of  thine  anger,  neither  is  there  any 
rest  in  my  bones,  because  of  my  sin.  For  mine 
iniquities  are  gone  over  mine  head ;  as  a  heavy 
burden  they  are  too  heavy  for  me.  My  wounds 
stink  and  are  corrupt,  because  of  my  foolishness. 

1  am  troubled,  I  am  bowed  down  greatly,  I  go 
mourning  all  the  day  long.  My  loins  are  filled 
with  a  loathsome  disease,  and  there  is  no  soundness 
in  my  flesh.  I  am  feeble  and  sore  broken  ;  I  have 
roared  by  reason  of  the  disquietness  of  my  heart.' 

Ps.  xxxviii.  1— S. 

I  might  give  you  a  great  number  more  of  the 
holy  sayings  of  good  men  whereby  they  express 
how  they  were,  what  they  felt,  and  whether  they 
cried  or  no  when  repentance  was  wrought  in  them. 
Alas,  alas,  it  is  as  possible  for  a  man,  when  the 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF  MR.  BADMAN. 


659 


pangs  of  ^uilt  are  upon  him,  to  forbear  praying, 
as  it  is  for  a  woman,  when  pangs  of  travail  are 
upon  her,  to  forbear  crying.  If  all  the  world 
should  tell  me  that  such  a  man  hath  repentance, 
yet  if  he  is  not  a  praying  man  1  should  not  be 
persuaded  to  believe  it. 

Atten.  I  know  no  reason  why  you  should,  for 
there  is  nothing  can  demonstrate  that  such  a  man 
hath  it.  But  pray,  Sir,  what  other  sign  have  you 
by  which  you  can  prove  that  Mr.  Badman  died  in 
his  sins,  and  so  in  a  state  of  damnation? 

Wise.  I  have  this  to  prove  it.     Those  who  were 

Fourth  proof  that  his  old  and  sinful  companions  in  the 
hf  died  mipeiiit-  time  of  his  health,  were  those  whose 
company  and  carnal  talk  he  most 
delighted  in  in  the  time  of  his  sickness.  I  did 
occasionally  hint  this  before,  but  now  I  make  it  an 
argument  of  his  want  of  grace,  for  where  there  is 
indeed  a  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,  that  work 
doth  not  only  change  the  heart,  thoughts,  and 
desires,  but  the  conversation  also ;  yea,  conversa- 
tion and  company  too.  When  Paul  had  a  work 
of  grace  in  his  soul  he  essayed  to  join  himself  to 
the  disciples.  He  was  for  his  old  companions  in 
their  abominations  no  longer.  He  was  now  a  dis- 
ciple, and  was  for  the  company  of  disciples.  '  And 
he  was  with  them  coming  in  and  going  out  at 
Jerusalem.'  Ac.  ix.  27,  28. 

Atten.  I  thought  something  when  I  heard  you 
make  mention  of  it  before.  Thought  I,  this  is  a 
shrewd  sign  that  he  had  not  grace  in  his  heart. 
Birds  of  a  feather,  thought  I,  will  flock  together. 
If  this  man  was  one  of  God's  children  he  would 
herd  with  God's  children,  his  delight  would  be  with 
aud  in  the  company  of  God's  children.  As  David 
said,  '  I  am  a  companion  of  all  them  that  fear  thee, 
aud  of  them  that  keep  thy  precepts.'  Ps.  cxix.  63. 

Wise.  You  say  well,  for  what  fellowship  hath 
he  that  believeth  with  an  infidel  ?  And  although 
it  be  true  that  all  that  join  to  the  godly  are  not 
godly,  yet  they  that  shall  inwardly  choose  the  com- 
pany of  the  ungodly  and  open  profane,  rather  than 
the  company  of  the  godly,  as  Mr.  Badman  did, 
surely  are  not  godly  men,  but  profane.  He  was, 
as  I  told  you,  out  of  his  element  when  good  men 
did  come  to  visit  him ;  but  then  he  was  where  he 
would  be,  when  he  had  his  vain  companions  about 
him.  Alas !  grace,  as  I  said,  altereth  all,  heart, 
life,  company,  and  all ;  for  by  it  the  heart  and  man 
is  made  new.  And  a  new  heart  and  a  new  man 
must  have  objects  of  delight  that  are  new,  and  like 
himself;  'Old  things  are  passed  away;'  why?  For 
'  all  things  are  become  new. '  2  Co.  v.  27.  Now,  if  all 
things  are  become  new,  to  wit,  heart,  mind,  thoughts, 
desires,  and  delights,  it  followeth  by  consequence 
that  the  company  must  be  answerable ;  hence  it  is 
said,  that  they  'that  believed  were  together;'  that 
'  they  went  to  their  own  company  ;'  that  they  were 


'  added  to  the  church;'  that  they  'icere  of  one  heart 
and  of  one  soul ;'  and  the  like.  Ac.  ii.  44-47;  iv.  23,  32. 
Now  if  it  be  objected  that  Mr.  Badman  was  sick, 
and  so  could  not  go  to  the  godly,  yet  he  had  a 
tongue  in  his  head,  and  could,  had  he  had  a  heart, 
have  spoken  to  some  to  call  or  send  for  the  godly  to 
come  to  him.  Yea,  he  would  have  done  so ;  yea, 
the  company  of  all  others,  especially  his  fellow- 
sinners,  would,  even  in  every  appearance  of  them 
before  him,  have  been  a  burden  and  a  grief  unto 
him.  His  heart  and  affection  standing  bent  to 
good,  good  companions  would  have  suited  him  best. 
But  his  companions  were  his  old  associates,  his 
delight  was  in  them,  therefore  his  heart  and  soul 
were  yet  ungodly. 

Atten.  Pray,  how  was  he  when  he  drew  near 
his  end  ;  for,  I  perceive,  that  what  you  say  of  him 
now  hath  reference  to  him  and  to  his  actions  at  the 
beginning  of  his  sickness?  Then  he  could  endure 
company  and  much  talk ;  besides,  perhaps  then  he 
thought  he  should  recover  and  not  die,  as  after- 
wards he  had  cause  to  think,  when  he  was  quite 
wasted  with  pining  sickness,  when  he  was  at  the 
grave's  mouth.  But  how  was  he,  I  say,  when  he 
was,  as  we  say,  at  the  grave's  mouth,  within  a 
step  of  death,  when  he  saw  and  knew,  and  could 
not  but  know,  that  shortly  he  must  die,  and  appear 
before  the  judgment  of  God? 

Wise.  Why,  there  was  not  any  other  alteration 

in  him  than  what  was  made  by  his 
,.  ,  .    ,    ,        „.  .        J  How  Mr.  Bad- 

disease  upon  his  body.      Sickness,  yOU      man  was  when 

know,  will  alter  the  body,  also  pains     near  hls  emL 

and  stitches  will  make  men  groan  ;   but  for  his 

mind  he  had  no  alteration  there.      His  mind  was 

the  same,  his  heart  was  the  same.     He  was  the 

self-same  Mr.   Badman  still.     Not  only  in  name 

but  conditions,  and  that  to  the  very  day  of  his 

death  ;  yea,  so  far  as  could  be  gathered  to  the  very 

moment  in  which  he  died. 

Atten.  Pray,  how  was  he  in  his  death  ?  Was 
death  strong  upon  him  ?  or  did  he  die  with  ease, 
quietly  ? 

Wise.  As  quietly  as  a  lamb.     There  seemed  not 
to  be  in  it,  to  standers  by,  so  much   He  died  like  a 
as  a  strong  struggle  of  nature.     And         lamb- 
as  for  his  mind,  it  seemed  to  be  wholly  at  quiet. 
But,  pray,  why  do  you  ask  me  this  question? 

Atten.  Not  for  mine  own  sake,  but  for  others. 
For  there  is  such  an  opinion  as  this  The  opinion  of 
among  the  ignorant, tli at  if  a  man  dies,  ^out  ttt- 
as  they  call  it,  like  a  lamb,  that  is,  uer  0l  d>ius- 
quietly,  and  without  that  consternation  of  mind 
that  others  show  in  their  death,  they  conclude, 
and  that  beyond  all  doubt,  that  such  a  one  is  gone 
to  heaven,  and  is  certainly  escaped  the  wrath  to 
come. 


6G0 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MR.  B ADMAN. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

[future  happiness  not  to  be  hoped  from  a  quilt 
hardened  death.] 

Wise.  There  is  no  judgment  to  be  made  by  a 
quiet  death,  of  the  eternal  state  of  him  that  so 
dieth.  Suppose  that  one  man  should  die  quietly, 
another  should  die  suddenly,  and  a  third  should 
How  we  must   die  under  great  consternation  of  spirit, 

nien^Te^weU    n0  man  Can  Jn^Ee  °*"  tne'r  eternal  con" 

or  no.  dition  by  the  manner  of  any  of  these 

kinds  of  deaths.  He  that  dies  quietly,  suddenly, 
or  under  consternation  of  spirit,  may  go  to  heaven, 
or  may  go  to  hell;  no  man  can  tell  whether  a  man 
goes,  by  any  such  manner  of  death.  The  judg- 
ment, therefore,  that  we  make  of  the  eternal  con- 
dition of  a  man  must  be  gathered  from  another 
consideration,  to  wit,  Did  the  man  die  in  his  sins? 
did  he  die  in  unbelief?  did  he  die  before  he  was 
born  again?  then  he  has  gone  to  the  devil  and  hell, 
though  he  died  never  so  quietly.  Again,  Was  the 
man  a  good  man?  had  he  faith  and  holiness?  was 
he  a  lover  and  a  worshipper  of  God  by  Christ, 
according  to  his  Word?  Then  he  is  gone  to  God 
and  heaven,  how  suddenly,  or  in  what  consternation 
of  mind  soever  he  died.  But  Mr.  Badman  was 
naught,  his  life  was  evil,  his  ways  were  evil,  evil 
to  his  end.  He  therefore  went  to  hell  and  to  the 
devil,  how  quietly  soever  he  died. 

Indeed  there  is,  in  some  cases,  a  judgment  to 
be  made  of  a  man's  eternal  condition  by  the  man- 
ner of  the  death  he  dieth.  As,  suppose  now  a  man 
should  murder  himself,  or  live  a  wicked  life,  and 

When  we  may  a^ter  tnat  ^'e  ul  utter  despair  ;  these 
jud-eofaman's   men,  without  doubt,  do  both  of  them 

eternal      state  ...  , 

bj  the  maimer  go  to  hell.     And  here  I  will  take  an 

of  his  death.        occasion  tQ  spea].  of  twQ  of  Mr>  Bad. 

man's  brethren,  for  you  know  I  told  you  before 
that  he  had  brethren,  and  of  the  manner  of  their 
death.  One  of  them  killed  himself,  and  the  other, 
after  a  wicked  life,  died  in  utter  despair.  Now,  I 
should  not  be  afraid  to  conclude  of  both  these,  that 
they  went  by  and  through  their  death  to  hell. 

Atten.  Pray  tell  me  concerning  the  first,  how 
he  made  away  with  himself? 

Wise.  Why,  he  took  a  knife  and  cut  his  own 
throat,  and  immediately  gave  up  the  ghost  and 
died.  Now,  what  can  we  judge  of  such  a  man's 
condition,  since  the  Scripture  saith,  'No  murderer 
hath  eternal  life,'  &c,  but  that  it  must  be  con- 
cluded that  such  a  one  is  gone  to  hell.  He  was  a 
murderer,  a  self-murderer;  and  he  is  the  worst 
murderer,  one  that  slays  his  own  body  and  soul.1 


1  The  dialogues  between  Hopeful  and  Christian  in  l)oubting 
Castle  admirably  prove  the  wickedness  of  suicide.  The  unlet- 
tered tinker  triumphs  over  all  the  subtleties  of  the  Dean  of  St. 
Paul's.  See  Pilgrim's  Progress,  p.  140,  and  notes,  compared 
with  the  introduction,  p.  74. —  (Ed.) 


Nor  do  we  find  mention  made  of  any  but  cursed 
ones  that  do  such  kind  of  deeds.  I  say,  no  men- 
tion made  in  Holy  Writ  of  any  others,  but  such 
that  murder  themselves. 

And  this  is  a  sore  judgment  of  God  upon  men, 
when  God  shall,  for  the  sins  of  such,  give  them  up 
to  be  their  own  executioners,  or  rather  to  execute 
his  judgment  and  anger  upon  themselves.  And 
let  me  earnestly  give  this  caution  to  sinners.  Take 
heed,  Sirs,  break  off  your  sins,  lest  God  serves  you 
as  he  served  Mr.  Badman 's  brother  ;  that  is,  lest 
he  gives  you  up  to  be  your  own  murderers. 

Atten.  Now  you  talk  of  this;  I  did  once  know 
a  man,  a  barber,  that  took  his  own  r 

razor  and  cut  his  own  throat,  and  then       '^-^ 
put  his  head  out  of  his  chamber  window,  to  show 
the  neighbours  what  he  had  done,  and  after  a  little 
while  died. 

Wise.  I  can  tell  you  a  more  dreadful  thing  than 
this  ;  I  mean  as  to  the  manner  of  doing  r*~r 
the  fact.  There  was,  about  twelve  years 
since,  a  man  that  lived  at  Brafield,  by  Northampton , 
named  John  Cox,  that  murdered  him-  Tlie  st0TV  o{ 
self;  the  manner  of  his  doing  of  it  was  Joun  Cox- 
thus.  He  was  a  poor  man,  and  had  for  some  time 
been  sick,  and  the  time  of  his  sickness  was  about 
the  beginning  of  hay-time,  and  taking  too  many 
thoughts  how  he  should  live  afterwards,  if  he  lost 
his  present  season  of  work,  he  fell  into  deep  despair 
about  the  world,  and  cried  out  to  his  wife  the  morn- 
ing before  lie  killed  himself,  saying,  We  are  un- 
done. But  quickly  after,  he  desired  his  wife  to 
depart  the  room,  because,  said  he,  I  will  see  if  I 
can  get  any  rest ;  so  she  went  out ;  but  he,  instead 
of  sleeping,  quickly  took  his  razor,  and  therewith 
cut  up  a  great  hole  in  his  side,  out  of  which  he 
pulled  and  cut  off  some  of  his  guts,  and  threw  them, 
with  the  blood,  up  and  down  the  chamber.  But 
this  not  speeding  of  him  so  soon  as  he  desired,  he 
took  the  same  razor  and  therewith  cut  his  own 
throat.  His  wife,  then  hearing  of  him  sigh  and 
fetch  his  wind  short,  came  again  into  the  room  to 
him,  and  seeing  what  he  had  done,  she  ran  out  and 
called  in  some  neighbours,  who  came  to  him  where 
he  lay  in  a  bloody  manner,  frightful  to  behold. 
Then  said  one  of  them  to  him,  Ah!  John,  what 
have  you  done?  Are  you  not  sorry  for  what  you 
have  done  ?  He  answered  roughly,  It  is  too  late  to 
be  sorry.  Then,  said  the  same  person  to  him  again, 
Ah!  John,  pray  to  God  to  forgive  thee  this  bloody 
act  of  thine.  At  the  hearing  of  which  exhortation 
he  seemed  much  offended,  and  in  an  angry  manner 
said,  Pray !  and  with  that  flung  himself  away  to 
the  wall,  and  so,  after  a  few  gasps,  died  desperately. 
When  he  had  turned  him  of  his  back  to  the  wall, 
the  blood  ran  out  of  his  belly  as  out  of  a  bowl,  and 
soaked  quite  through  the  bed  to  the  boards,  and 
through  the  chinks  of  the  boards  it  ran  pouring 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


661 


down  to  the  ground.  Some  said  that  when  tlie 
neighbours  came  to  see  him,  he  lay  groping  with 
his  hand  in  his  bowels,  reaching  upward,  as  was 
thought,  that  he  might  have  pulled  or  cut  out  his 
heart.  It  was  said,  also,  that  some  of  his  liver 
had  been  by  him  torn  out  and  cast  upon  the  boards, 
and  that  many  of  his  guts  hung  out  of  the  bed  on 
the  side  thereof;  but  I  cannot  confirm  all  particu- 
lars; but  the  general  of  the  story,  with  these  cir- 
cumstances above  mentioned,  is  true.  1  had  it 
from  a  sober  and  credible  person,  who  himself  was 
one  that  saw  him  in  this  bloody  state,  and  that 
talked  with  him,  as  was  hinted  before. 

Many  other  such  dreadful  things  might  be  told 
you,  but  these  are  enough,  and  too  many  too,  if 
God,  in  his  wisdom,  had  thought  necessary  to  pre- 
vent them. 

Atten.  This  is  a  dreadful  story.  And  I  would 
to  God  that  it  might  be  a  warning  to  others,  to 
instruct  them  to  fear  before  God,  and  pray,  lest  he 
gives  them  up  to  do  as  John  Cox  hath  done.  For 
surely  self-murderers  cannot  go  to  heaven :  and, 
therefore,  as  you  have  said,  he  that  dieth  by  his 
own  hands,  is  certainly  gone  to  hell.  But  speak 
a  word  or  two  of  the  other  man  you  mentioned. 
Wise  What  ?  of  a  wicked  man  dying  in  despair? 
Atten.  Yes,  of  a  wicked  man  dying  in  despair. 
Wise.  Well  then.  This  Mr.  Badman's  other 
Of  dying  in  de-  brother  was  a  very  wicked  man,  both 
spair.  jjj  heart  anc[  life ;  I  say  in  heart,  be- 
cause he  was  so  in  life,  nor  could  anything  reclaim 
him;  neither  good  men,  good  books,  good  examples, 
nor  God's  judgments.  Well,  after  he  had  lived  a 
great  while  in  his  sins,  God  smote  him  with  a  sick- 
ness, of  which  he  died.  Now  in  his  sickness  his 
conscience  began  to  be  awakened,  and  he  began  to 
roar  out  of  his  ill-spent  life,  insomuch  that  the 
town  began  to  ring  of  him.  Now,  when  it  was 
noised  about,  many  of  the  neighbours  came  to  see 
him,  and  to  read  by  him,  as  is  the  common  way 
with  some ;  but  all  that  they  could  do,  could  not 
abate  his  terror,  but  he  would  lie  in  his  bed  gnash- 
ing of  his  teeth,  and  wringing  of  his 
wrists,  concluding  upon  the  damnation 
of  his  soul,  and  in  that  horror  and  despair  he  died; 
not  calling  upon  God,  but  distrusting  in  his  mercy, 
and  blaspheming  of  his  name. 

Atten.  This  brings  to  my  mind  a  man  that  a 
friend  of  mine  told  me  of.  He  had  been  a  wicked 
liver;  so  when  he  came  to  die,  he  fell  into  despair; 
and  having  concluded  that  God  had 
no  mercy  for  him.  he  addressed  him- 
self to  the  devil  for  favour,  saying,  Good  devil,  be 
good  unto  me 

Wise.  This  is  almost  like  Saul,  who  being  for- 
saken of  God,  went  to  the  witch  of  Endor,  and  so 
to  the  devil  for  help.  1  Sa.  xxviu.  But,  alas,  should 
I  set  myself  to  collect  these  dreadful  stories,  it 


JZT 


SO- 


would  be  easy  in  little  time  to  present  you  with 
hundreds  of  them.  But  I  will  conclude  as  I  be- 
gan ;  they  that  are  their  own  murderers,  or  that 
die  in  despair,  after  they  have  lived  a  life  of 
wickedness,  do  surely  go  to  hell.  And  here  I 
would  put  in  a  caution.  Every  one  that  dieth 
under  consternation  of  spirit;  that  is,  under  amaze- 
ment and  great  fear,  do  not  therefore  die  in  de- 
spair. For  a  good  man  may  have  this  for  his 
bands  in  his  death,  and  yet  go  to  heaven  and  glory. 
Ps.  ixxiiL  4.  For,  as  I  said  before,  he  that  is  a  good 
man,  a  man  that  hath  faith  and  holiness,  a  lover 
and  worshipper  of  God  by  Christ,  according  to  his 
Word,  may  die  in  consternation  of  spirit;  for  Satan 
will  not  be  wanting  to  assault  good  men  upon  their 
deathbed,  but  they  are  secured  by  the  Word  and 
power  of  God ;  yea,  and  are  also  helped,  though 
with  much  agony  of  spirit,  to  exercise  themselves 
in  faith  and  prayer,  the  which  he  that  dieth  in 
despair  can  by  no  means  do.  But  let  us  return  to 
Mr.  Badman,  and  enter  further  discourse  of  the 
manner  of  his  death. 

Atten.  I  think  you  and  I  are  both  of  a  mind; 
for  just  now  I  was  thinking  to  call  you  back  to 
him  also.  And  pray  now,  since  it  is  your  own 
motion  to  return  again  to  him,  let  us  discourse  a 
little  more  of  his  quiet  and  still  death.  Further  ctia- 
Wise.  With  all  my  heart.  You  "KSAJ*" 
know  we  were  speaking  before  of  the  death- 
manner  of  Mr.  Badman's  death;  how  that  he  died 
still  and  quietly ;  upon  which  you  made  observa- 
tion that  the  common  people  conclude,  that  if  a 
man  dies  quietly,  and  as  they  call  it,  like  a  lamb, 
he  is  certainly  gone  to  heaven;  when,  alas,  if  a 
wicked  man  dies  quietly,  if  a  man  that  has  all  his 
days  lived  in  notorious  sin,  dieth  quietly;  his  quiet 
dying  is  so  far  off  from  being  a  sign  of  his  being 
saved,  that  it  is  an  uncontrollable  proof  of  his 
damnation.  This  was  Mr.  Badman's  case,  he  lived 
wickedly  even  to  the  last,  and  then  went  quietly 
out  of  the  world ;  therefore  Mr.  Badman  is  gone 
to  hell. 

Atten.  Well,  but  since  you  are  upon  it,  and 
also  so  confident  in  it,  to  wit,  that  a  man  that  lives 
a  wicked  life  till  he  dies,  and  then  dies  quietly,  is 
gone  to  hell;  let  me  see  what  show  of  proof  you 
have  for  this  your  opinion. 

Wise.  My  first  argument  is  drawn  from  the 
necessity  of  repentance.  No  man  can  1Ie  that  atter  a 
be  saved  except  he  repents,  nor  can     q"^^'^^8 

he  repent  that  sees  not,  that  knows     without     re- 

,     ,  ,      .  .  ,    ,       ,,     .      pentance,  goes 

not  that  he  is  a  sinner;  ana  he  that     t0  bell,    First 

knows  himself  to  be  a  sinner  will,  I     proof' 

will  warrant  him,  be  molested  for  the  time  by  that 

knowledge.      This,   as   it  is   testified   by  all   the 

Scriptures,  so  it  is  testified  by  Christian  experience. 

He  that  knows  himself  to  be  a  sinner  is  molested, 

especially  if  that  knowledge  comes  not  to  him  until 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF  MK.  BADMAN. 


lie  is  cast  upon  his  deathbed ;  molested,  I  say, 
before  he  can  die  quietly.  Yea,  he  is  molested, 
dejected,  and  cast  down,  he  is  also  made  to  cry 
out,  to  hunger  and  thirst  after  mercy  by  Christ, 
aud  if  at  all  he  shall  indeed  come  to  die  quietly,  I 
mean  with  that  quietness  that  is  begotten  by  faith 
and  hope  in  God's  mercy,  to  the  which  Mr.  Bad- 
man  and  his  brethren  were  utter  strangers,  his 
quietness  is  distinguished  by  all  judicious  observers 
by  what  went  before  it,  by  what  it  flows  from,  and 
also  by  what  is  the  fruit  thereof. 

I  must  confess  I  am  no  admirer  of  sick-bed  re- 
Sick-bed      re-   pentance,  for  I  think  verily  it  is  sel- 

SomTod  S  dom  £°od  for  any  thins-   But  J  say> 

anything.  jie  that  hath  lived  in  sin  and  profane- 
ness  all  his  days,  as  Mr.  Badman  did,  and  yet 
shall  die  quietly,  that  is,  without  repentance  steps 
in  betwixt  his  life  and  death,  he  is  assuredly  gone 
to  hell,  and  is  damned. 

Atten.  This  does  look  like  an  argument  indeed; 
for  repentance  must  come,  or  else  we  must  go  to 
hell-fire ;  and  if  a  lewd  liver  shall,  I  mean  that  so 
continues  till  the  day  of  his  death,  yet  go  out  of 
the  world  quietly,  it  is  a  sign  that  he  died  without 
repentance,  and  so  a  sign  that  he  is  damned. 

Wise.  I  am  satisfied  in  it,  for  my  part,  and  that 
from  the  necessity  and  nature  of  repentance.  It 
is  necessary,  because  God  calls  for  it,  and  will  not 
pardon  sin  without  it.  •  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall 
all  likewise  perish?'  Lu.  xiii.  1-7.  This  is  that  which 
God  hath  said,  and  he  will  prove  but  a  fool-hardy 
man  that  shall  yet  think  to  go  to  heaven  and  glory 
without  it.  Repent,  for  '  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the 
root  of  the  trees,  therefore  every  tree  which  bring* 
eth  not  forth  good  fruit,'  but  no  good  fruit  can  be 
where  there  is  not  sound  repentance,  shall  be 
'hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire.'  Mat.  m.  10. 
This  was  Mr.  Badman's  case,  he  had  attending  of 
him  a  sinful  life,  and  that  to  the  very  last,  and  yet 
died  quietly,  that  is,  without  repentance ;  he  is 
gone  to  hell  and  is  damned.  For  the  nature  of 
repentance,  I  have  touched  upon  that  already,  and 
showed  that  it  never  was  where  a  quiet  death  is 
the  immediate  companion  of  a  sinful  life ;  and 
therefore  Mr.  Badman  is  gone  to  hell. 

Secondly.  My  second  argument  is  drawn  from 
that  blessed  word  of  Christ,  While  the 
strong  man  armed  keeps  the  house, 
*  his  goods  are  in  peace,'  till  a  stronger  than  he 
comes.  Lu.  xi.  81.  But  the  strong  man  armed  kept 
Mr.  Badman's  house,  that  is,  his  heart,  aud  soul, 
and  body,  for  he  went  from  a  sinful  life  quietly  out 
of  this  world.  The  stronger  did  not  disturb  by 
intercepting  with  sound  repentance  betwixt  his 
sinful  life  and  his  quiet  death.  Therefore  Mr. 
Badman  is  gone  to  hell. 

The  strong  mau  armed  is  the  devil,  and  quiet- 
ness is  his  security.     The  devil  never  fears  losing 


Second  proof. 


of  the  sinner,  if  he  can  but  keep  him  quiet.  Can 
he  but  keep  him  quiet  in  a  sinful  life,  and  quiet  in 
his  death,  he  is  his  own.  Therefore  he  saith,  '  his 
goods  are  in  peace;'  that  is,  out  of  danger. 
There  is  no  fear  of  the  devil's  losing  such  a  soul, 
I  say,  because  Christ,  who  is  the  best  judge  in 
this  matter,  saith,  'his  goods  are  iu  peace,'  in 
quiet,  and  out  of  danger. 

(  Atten.  This  is  a  good  one  too  ;  for,  doubtless, 
peace  and  quiet  with  sin  is  one  of  „  .  , , 

r  "        .  „  Peace  in  a  sinful 

the    greatest   signs   of    a   damnable     state  is  a  sign 

.  of  damnation. 

state. 

Wise.  So  it  is.  Therefore,  when  God  would 
show  the  greatness  of  his  anger  against  sin  and 
sinners  in  one  word,  he  saith,  They  are  'joined  to 
idols;  let  them  alone.'  Ho.  iv.  17.  Let  them  alone, 
that  is,  disturb  them  not ;  let  them  go  on  without 
control ;  let  the  devil  enjoy  them  peaceably,  let 
him  carry  them  out  of  the  world  unconverted 
quietly.  This  is  one  of  the  sorest  of  judgments, 
and  bespeaketh  the  burning  anger  of  God  against 
sinful  men.  See  also  when  you  come  home,  the 
fourteenth  verse  of  the  fourth  chapter  of  Hosea, 
'  I  will  not  punish  your  daughters  when  they  com- 
mit whoredom.'  I  will  let  them  alone,  they  shall 
live  and  die  in  their  sins.     But, 

Thirdly.  My  third  argument  is  drawn  from  that 
saying  of  Christ,  '  He  hath  blinded 
their  eyes,  and  hardened  their  heart ; 
that  they  should  not  see  with  their  eyes,  nor  un- 
derstand with  their  heart,  and  be  converted,  and  I 
should  heal  them.'  Jn.  sii.  40.  There  are  three 
things  that  I  will  take  notice  of  from  these 
words. 

1.  The  first  is,  that  there  can  be  no  conversion 
to  God  where  the  eye  is  darkened,  and 

the  heart  hardened.  The  eye  must 
first  be  made  to  see,  and  the  heart  to  break  and 
relent  under  and  for  sin,  or  else  there  can  be  no 
conversion.  '  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and 
hardened  their  heart,  lest  they  should  see,  and 
understand  aud'  so  'be  converted.'  And  this  was 
clearly  Mr.  Badman's  case;  he  lived  a  wicked  life, 
and  also  died  with  his  eyes  shut,  and  heart  hard- 
ened, as  is  manifest,  iu  that  a  sinful  life  was  joined 
with  a  quiet  death;  and  all  for  that  he  should  not 
be  converted,  but  partake  of  the  fruit  of  his  sinful 
life  in  hell-fire. 

2.  The  second  thing  that  I  take  notice  of  from 
these  words  is,  that  this  is  a  dispensa- 
tion and  manifestation  of  God's  anger 
against  a  man  fur  his  sin.  When  God  is  angry 
with  men,  I  mean,  when  he  is  so  angry  with  them, 
this  among  many  is  oue  of  the  judgments  that  he 
giveth  them  up  unto,  to  wit,  to  blindness  of  mind, 
and  hardness  of  heart,  which  he  also  suffereth  to 
accompany  them  till  they  enter  in  at  the  gates  of 
death.     And  then,   and  there,  and  not  short   of 


Second  proot 


THE   LIFE   AND  DEATH  OF  MR.    BADMAN. 


C63 


then  and  there,  their  eyes  come  to  be  opened.1 
Hence  it  is  said  of  the  rich  man  mentioned  in 
Luke,  '  He  died,  and  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.' 
Lu.  xvi.  22.  Implying  that  he  did  not  lift  them  up 
before ;  he  neither  saw  what  he  had  done,  nor 
whither  he  was  going,  till  he  came  to  the  place  of 
execution,  even  into  hell.  He  died  asleep  in  his 
soul;  he  died  besotted,  stupified,  and  so  conse- 
quently for  quietness  like  a  child  or  lamb,  even  as 
Mr.  Badman  did.  This  was  a  sign  of  God's  anger; 
he  had  a  mind  to  damn  him  for  his  sins,  and 
therefore  would  not  let  him  see  nor  have  a  heart 
to  repent  for  them,  lest  he  should  convert;  and  his 
damnation,  which  God  had  appointed,  should  be 
frustrate.  '  Lest  they  should  be  converted,  and  I 
should  heal  them.' 

3.  The  third  thing  I  take  notice  of  from  hence 
is,  that  a  sinful  life  and  a  quiet  death 

Third  proof.  .  .     .        .  , '  *    . 

annexed  to  it  is  tlie  ready,  the  open, 
the  beaten,  the  common  highway  to  hell :  there  is 
no  surer  sign  of  damnation  than  for  a  man  to  die 
quietly  after  a  sinful  life.  I  do  not  say  that  all 
wicked  men  that  are  molested  at  their  death  with 
a  sense  of  sin  and  fears  of  hell  do  therefore  go  to 
heaven,  for  some  are  also  made  to  see,  and  are 
left  to  despair,  not  converted  by  seeing,  that  they 
might  go  roaring  out  of  this  world  to  their  place. 
But  I  say  there  is  no  surer  sign  of  a  man's  damna- 
tion than  to  die  quietly  after  a  sinful  life ;  than  to 
sin  and  die  with  his  eyes  shut;  than  to  sin  and  die 
with  an  heart  that  cannot  repent.  '  He  hath 
blinded  their  eyes  and  hardened  their  heart,  that 
they  should  not  see  with  their  eyes,  nor  understand 
with  their  heart.'  jn.  nil  40.  No  not  so  long  as  they 
are  in  this  world,  '  Lest  they  should  see  with  their 
eyes,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  should 
be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them.'    Ac.  xxviii. 

20,  27.  Ro.  ii.  1-5. 

God  has  a  judgment  for  wicked  men  ;  God  will 
be  even  with  wicked  men.  God  knows  how  to  re- 
serve the  ungodly  to  the  day  of  judgment  to  be 
punished.  2  Pe.  ii.  And  this  is  one  of  his  ways  by 
•which  he  doth  it.    Thus  it  was  with  Mr.  Badman. 

4.  Fourthly,  it  is  said  in  the  book  of  Psalms, 
concerning  the  wicked,  '  There  are 
no  bands  in  their  death,  but  their 
strength  is  firm.'  Pa.  lxxiu.  4-6.  By  no  bands  he 
means  no  troubles,  no  gracious  chastisements, 
no  such  corrections  for  sin  as  fall  to  be  the  lot 
of  God's  people  for  theirs  ;  yea,  that  many  times 
falls  to  be  theirs  at  the  time  of  their  death. 
Therefore  he  adds  concerning  the  wicked,  '  They 
are  not  in  trouble  (then)  as  other  men,  neither  are 


they  plagued  like  other  men  ;'  hut  go  as  securely 
out  of  the  world  as  if  they  had  never  sinned  against 
God,  and  put  their  own  souls  into  danger  of  damna- 
tion. '  There  is  no  bands  in  their  death.'  They 
seem  to  go  unbound,  and  set  at  liberty  out  of  this 
world,  though  they  have  lived  notoriously  wicked 
all  their  days  in  it.  The  prisoner  that  is  to  die  at 
the  gallows  for  his  wickedness,  must  first  have  his 
irons  knocked  off  his  legs  ;  so  he  seems  to  go  most 
at  liberty,  when  indeed  he  is  going  to  be  executed 
for  his  transgressions.  Wicked  men  also  have  no 
bands  in  their  death,  they  seem  to  be  more  at  liberty 
when  they  are  even  at  the  wind-up  of  their  sinful 
life,  than  at  any  time  besides. 

Hence  you  shall  have  them  boast  of  their  faith 
and  hope  in  God's  mercy  when  they  lie  upon  their 
death-bed  ;  yea,  you  shall  have  them  speak  as  con- 
fidently of  their  salvation  as  if  they  had  served  God 
all  their  days  ;  when  the  truth  is,  the  bottom  of  this 
their  boasting  is  because  they  have  no  bands  in  their 
death.  Their  sin  and  base  life  comes  not  into  their 
mind  to  correct  them,  and  bring  them  to  repentance; 
but  presumptuous  thoughts,  and  a  hope  and  faith 
of  the  spider's,  the  devil's,  making,  possesseth  their 
soul,  to  their  own  eternal  undoing.  Jobviii.  13,  14. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

[without  godly  repentance,  the  wicked  man's 
hope  and  life  die  togethkr.] 

Hence  wicked  men's  hope  is  said  to  die,  not 
before,  but  with  them ;  they  give  up  the  ghost  to- 
gether. And  thus  did  Mr.  Badman.  His  sins  and 
his  hope  went  with  him  to  the  gate,  but  there  his 
hope  left  him,  because  he  died  there;  but  his  sins 
went  in  with  him,  to  be  a  worm  to  gnaw  him  in 
conscience  for  ever  and  ever. 

The  opinion,  therefore,  of  the  common  people 
concerning  this  kind  of  dying  is  frivol-  A  frivolous  opi- 
ous  and  vain;  for  Mr.  Badman  died  mon 
like  a  lamb,  or,  as  they  call  it,  like  a  chrisom-child,'* 
quietly  and  without  fear.  I  speak  not  this  with 
i  reference  to  the  struggling  of  nature  with  death, 
but  as  to  the  struggling  of  the  conscience  with  the 
!  judgment  of  God.  I  know  that  nature  will  struggle 
with  death.  I  have  seen  a  dog  and  sheep  die  hardly. 
And  thus  may  a  wicked  man  do,  because  there  is 
an  antipathy  betwixt  nature  and  death.  But  even 
while,  even  then,  when  death  and  nature  are  strug- 
gling for  mastery,  the  soul,  the  conscience,  may  be 


1  This  is  the  most  awful  of  all  delusions.  It  is  exemplified 
in  the  character  of  Ignorance,  in  the  Pilgrim  s  Progress,  who 
was  ferried  over  death  by  Vain  Confidence,  but  found  '  that 
there  was  a  wrv  to  hell,  even  from  the  gates  of  heaveft.'  Vol. 
iii.,  p.  166.— (Ed.) 


2  Chrism  is  a  consecrated  unguent,  or  oil,  used  in  the  bap- 
tism of  infants  in  the  Romish  Church.  It  is  prepared  with 
great  ceremony  on  Holy  Thursday.  A  linen  cloth  anointed  with 
this  oil,  called  a  chrisom  cloth,  is 'laid  upon  the  baby's  face.  1 F 
it  dies  within  a  mouth  after  these  ceremonies,  it  was  called  a 
chrisom  child.  These  incantations  and  charms  are  supposed  to 
have  power  to  save  its  soul,  and  ease  the  pains  of  death.  Bishop 
Jeremy  Taylor  mentions  the  phantasms  that  make  a  chrisom 
child  to  smile  at  death.     Holy  Dying,  chap,  i.,  sect.  2. — (En.) 


664 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OE  MR.  BADMAN. 


as  besotted,  as  benumbed,  as  senseless  and  ignorant 
of  its  miserable  state,  as  the  block  or  bed  on  which 
the  sick  lies.  And  thus  they  may  die  like  a  chri- 
som-child  in  show,  but  indeed  like  one  who  by  the 
judgment  of  God  is  bound  over  to  eternal  damna- 
tion ;  and  that  also  by  the  same  judgment  is  kept 
from  seeing  what  they  are,  and  whither  they  are 
going,  till  they  plunge  down  among  the  flames. 

And  as  it  is  a  very  great  judgment  of  God  on 
wicked  men  that  so  die,  for  it  cuts  them  off  from 
when  a  wicked  all  possibility  of  repentance,  and  so  of 
man  dies  in  his   salvation,  so  it  is  as  great  a  judgment 

sins  quietly,  it  '  °      .  °       °   . 

is  a  judgment  upon  those  that  are  their  companions 
his  wicked'be'  that  survive  them,  for  by  the  manner 
holder.  0f  tb.eir  death,  they  dying  so  quietly, 

so  like  unto  chrisoin-children,  as  they  call  it,  they 
are  hardened,  and  take  courage  to  go  on  in  their 
course. 

For  comparing  their  life  with  their  death,  their 
sinful,  cursed  lives,  with  their  childlike,  lamblike 
death,  they  think  that  all  is  well,  that  no  damna- 
tion is  happened  to  them ;  though  they  lived  like 
devils  incarnate,  yet  they  died  like  harmless  ones. 
There  was  no  whirlwind,  no  tempest,  no  band  or 
plague  in  their  death.  They  died  as  quietly  as  the 
most  godly  of  them  all,  and  had  as  great  faith  and 
hope  of  salvation,  and  would  talk  as  boldly  of  sal- 
vation as  if  they  had  assurance  of  it.  But  as  was 
their  hope  in  life,  so  was  their  death ;  their  hope 
was  without  trial,  because  it  was  none  of  God's 
working,  and  their  death  was  without  molestation, 
because  so  was  the  judgment  of  God  concerning 
them. 

But  I  say,  at  this  their  survivors  take  heart  to 
tread  their  steps,  and  to  continue  to  live  in  the 
breach  of  the  law  of  God  ;  yea,  they  carry  it 
stately  in  their  villainies  ;  for  so  it  follows  in  the 
Psalm ;  '  There  are  no  bands  in  their  death,  but 
their  strength  is  firm,'  &c,  'Therefore  pride  com- 
passeth  them,'  the  survivors,  '  about  as  a  chain, 
violence  covereth  them  as  a  garment.'  Ps.  lxxiii.  6. 
Therefore  they  take  courage  to  do  evil,  therefore 
they  pride  themselves  in  their  iniquity.  There- 
fore, wherefore  ?  Why,  because  their  fellows  died, 
after  they  had  lived  long  in  a  most  profane  and 
wicked  life,  as  quietly  and  as  like  to  lambs  as  if 
they  had  been  innocent. 

Yea,  they  are  bold,  by  seeing  this,  -to  conclude 
that  God  either  does  not,  or  will  not,  take  notice 
of  their  sins.  They  '  speak  wickedly,  and  speak 
loftily.'  Ps.  lxxiii.  8.  They  speak  wickedly  of  sin,  for 
that  they  make  it  better  than  by  the  Word  it  is  pro- 
nounced to  be.  They  speak  wickedly  concerning 
oppression  that  they  commend,  and  count  it  a 
prudent  act.  They  also  speak  loftily.  '  They  set 
their  mouth  against  the  heavens,'  &c.  'And  they 
say,  How  doth  God  know?  and  is  there  knowledge  ! 
in  the  Most  High  ?'  p=  tariii.  n.     And  all  this,  so  ! 


far  as  I  can  see,  ariseth  in  their  hearts  from  the 
beholding  of  the  quiet  and  lamb-like  death  of  their 
companions.  '  Behold  these  are  the  ungodly  who 
prosper  in  the  world,'  that  is,  by  wicked  ways; 
'  they  increase  in  riches.'     Ps.  lxxiii.  12. 

This  therefore  is  a  great  judgment  of  God,  both 
upon  that  man  that  dieth  in  his  sins,  and  also  upon 
his  companion  that  beholdeth  him  so  to  die.  He 
sinneth,  he  dieth  in  his  sins,  and  yet  dieth  quietly. 
What  shall  his  companion  say  to  this?  What 
judgment  shall  he  make  how  God  will  deal  with 
him,  by  beholding  the  lamb-like  death  of  his  com- 
panion? Be  sure  ho  cannot,  as  from  such  a  sight, 
say,  Woe  be  to  me,  for  judgment  is  before  him. 
He  cannot  gather  that  sin  is  a  dreadful  and  a  bit- 
ter thing,  by  the  child-like  death  of  Mr.  Badman. 
But  must  rather,  if  he  judgeth  according  to  what 
he  sees,  or  according  to  his  corrupted  reason,  con- 
clude with  the  wicked  ones  of  old,  that  'every  one 
that  doth  evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and 
he  delighteth  in  them ;  or,  Where  is  the  God  of 
judgment  ?'  MaL  ii.  17. 

Yea,  this  is  enough  to  puzzle  the  wisest  man. 
David  himself  was  put  to  a  stand  by  beholding  the 
quiet  death  of  ungodly  men.  '  Verily,'  says  he,  '  I 
have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,  and  washed  my  hands 
in  innocency.'  Ps.  lxxiii.  13.  They,  to  appearance,  fare 
better  by  far  than  1 :  '  Their  eyes  stand  out  with  fat- 
ness,' they  have  more  than  heart  could  wish.  But 
all  the  daylong  have  I  been  plagued,  and  chastened 
every  morning. '  This,  I  say,  made  David  wonder, 
yea,  and  Job  and  Jeremiah  too.  But  he  goeth 
into  the  sanctuary,  and  then  he  understands  their 
end,  nor  could  he  understand  it  before.  '  I  went 
into  the  sanctuary  of  God. '  What  place  was  that  ? 
Why  there  where  he  might  inquire  of  God,  and  by 
him  he  resolved  of  this  matter  ;  '  Then, '  says  he, 
'  understood  I  their  end.'  Then  I  saw  that  thou 
hast  '  set  them  in  slippery  places,'  and  that  '  thou 
castedst  them  down  to  destruction.'  Castedst 
them  down,  that  is,  suddenly,  or,  as  the  next  words 
say.  'As  in  a  moment  they  are  utterly  consumed 
with  terrors  ;'  which  terrors  did  not  seize1  them  on 
their  sick-bed,  for  they  had  '  no  bands'  in  their  death . 
The  terrors,  therefore,  seized1  them  there,  where 
also  they  are  holden  in  them  for  ever.  This  he 
found  out,  I  say,  but  not  without  great  painfulness, 
grief,  and  pricking  in  his  reins ;  so  deep,  so  hard, 
and  so  difficult  did  he  find  it  rightly  to  come  to  a 
determination  in  this  matter. 

And,  indeed,  this  is  a  deep  judgment  of  God  to- 
wards ungodly  sinners ;  it  is  enough  to  stagger  a 
whole  world,  only  the  godly  that  are  in  the  world 
have  a  sanctuary  to  go  to,  where  the  oracle  and 
Word  of  God  is,  by  which  his  judgments,  and  a 


1  Thepe  two  words  are  *  cease'  and  '  ceased'  in  the  first 
edition ;  they  were  corrected  to  '  seize'  and  '  seized'  in  Bunyan's 
second  edition. — (Ed.) 


THE   LIFE   AND   DEATH   OF   MR.  BADMAN. 


665 


reason  of  many  of  them  are  made  known  to,  and 
understood  by  them. 

Atten.  Indeed  this  is  a  staggering  dispensation. 
It  is  full  of  the  wisdom  and  anger  of  God.  And  I 
believe,  as  you  have  said,  that  it  is  full  of  judg- 
ment to  the  world.  Who  would  have  imagined, 
that  had  not  known  Mr.  Badman,  and  yet  had  seen 
him  die,  but  that  he  had  been  a  man  of  an  holy 
life  and  conversation,  since  he  died  so  stilly,  so 
quietly,  so  like  a  lamb  or  a  chrisom-child?  Would 
they  not,  I  say,  have  concluded  that  he  was  a 
righteous  man  ?  or  that  if  they  had  known  him 
and  his  life,  yet  to  see  him  die  so  quietly,  would 
they  not  have  concluded  that  he  had  made  his 
peace  with  God?  Nay  farther,  if  some  had  known 
that  he  had  died  in  his  sins,  and  yet  that  he  had 
died  so  like  a  lamb,  would  they  not  have  concluded 
that  either  God  doth  not  know  our  sins,  or  that  he 
likes  them ;  or  that  he  wants  power,  or  will,  or 
heart,  or  skill,  to  punish  them ;  since  Mr.  Badman 
himself  went  from  a  sinful  life  so  quietly,  so  peace- 
able, aud  so  like  a  lamb  as  he  did  ? 

Wise.  Without  controversy,  this  is  a  heavy 
judgment  of  God  upon  wicked  men  ;  one  goes  to 
hell  in  peace,  another  goes  to  hell  in  trouble  ;  one 
goes  to  hell,  being  sent  thither  by  his  own  hands  ; 
another  goes  to  hell,  being  sent  thither  by  the  hand 
of  his  companion  ;  one  goes  thither  with  his  eyes 
shut,  and  another  goes  thither  with  his  eyes  open  ; 
one  goes  thither  roaring,  and  another  goes  thither 
boasting  of  heaven  and  happiness  all  the  way  he 
goes.  Job  xxL  23.  One  goes  thither  like  Mr.  Badman 
himself,  and  others  go  thither  as  did  his  brethren. 
But  above  all,  Mr.  Badman's  death,  as  to  the 
manner  of  dying,  is  the  fullest  of  snares  and  traps 
to  wicked  men  ;  therefore,  they  that  die  as  he 
are  the  greatest  stumble  to  the  world.  They  go, 
and  go,  they  go  on  peaceably  from  youth  to  old 
age,  and  thence  to  the  grave,  and  so  to  hell, 
without  noise.       '  They  go  as  an  ox  goeth  to  the 

vol.  III. 


slaughter,  or  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the 
stocks;'  that  is,  both  senselessly  and  securely. 
0!  but  being  come  at  the  gates  of  hell.  0!  but 
when  they  see  those  gates  set  open  for  them.  0! 
but  when  they  see  that  that  is  their  home,  and  that 
they  must  go  in  thither,  then  their  peace  and  quiet- 
ness flies  away  for  ever.  Then  they  roar  like  lions, 
yell  like  dragons,  howl  like  dogs,  and  tremble  at 
their  judgment,  as  do  the  devils  themselves.  0! 
when  they  see  they  must  shoot  the  gulf  aud  throat 
of  hell  !  when  they  shall  see  that  hell  hath  shut 
her  ghastly  jaws  upon  them,  when  they  shall  open 
their  eyes  aud  find  themselves  within  the  belly  and 
bowels  of  hell !  Then  they  will  mourn,  and  weep, 
and  hack,  and  gnash  their  teeth  for  pain.  But  this 
must  not  be,  or  if  it  must,  yet  very  rarely,  till  they 
are  gone  out  of  the  sight  and  hearing  of  those  mor- 
tals whom  they  do  leave  behind  them  alive  in  the 
world. 

Attex.  Well,  my  good  neighbour  Wiseman,  I 
perceive  that  the  sun  grows  low,  and  that  you  have 
come  to  a  conclusion  with  Mr.  Badman's  life  and 
death  ;  and,  therefore,  I  will  take  my  leave  of  you. 
Only  first,  let  me  tell  you,  I  am  glad  that  I  have 
met  with  you  to-day,  and  that  our  hap  was  to  fall 
in  with  Mr.  Badman's  state.  I  also  thank  you  for 
your  freedom  with  me,  in  granting  of  me  your  re- 
ply to  all  my  questions.  I  would  only  beg  your 
prayers  that  God  will  give  me  much  grace,  that  I 
may  neither  live  nor  die  as  did  Mr.  Badman. 

Wise.  My  good  neighbour  Attentive,  I  wish  your 
welfare  in  soul  and  body;  and  if  aught  that  I  have 
said  of  Mr.  Badman's  life  and  death  may  be  of 
benefit  unto  you,  I  shall  be  heartily  glad  ;  only  I 
desire  you  to  thank  God  for  it,  and  to  pray  heartily 
for  me,  that  I  with  you  may  be  kept  by  the  power 
of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation. 

Atten.  Amen.      Farewell. 

Wise.  I  wish  you  heartily  farewell. 


84 


A    FEW    SIGHS    FROM    HELL; 

OR, 

THE  GROANS  OF   A  DAMNED  SOUL: 

OR,    AN   EXPOSITION   OF   THOSE    WORDS    IN    THE    SIXTEENTH   OF   LUKE,    CONCERNING 
THE  RICH  MAN  AND  THE  BEGGAR. 

WHEREIN  IS  DISCOVERED  THE  LAMENTABLE  STATE  OF  THE  DAMNED;  THEIR  CRIES,  THEIR  DESIRES  IN  THEIR  DISTRESSES, 
WITH  THE  DETERMINATION  OF  GOD  UPON  THEM.  A  GOOD  WARNING  WORD  TO  SINNERS,  ROTH  OLD  AND  YOUNG,  TO 
TAKE  INTO  CONSIDERATION  BETIMES,  AND  TO  SEEK,  BY  FAITH  IN  JESUS  CHRIST,  TO  AVOID,  LEST  THEY  COME  INTO  THE 
SAME   PLACE   OF  TORMENT. 

Also,  a  Brief  Discourse  touching  the  profitableness  of  the  Scriptures  for  our  instruction  in  the  way  of  righteousness, 
according  to  the  tendency  of  the  said  parable. 

BY  THAT  POOR  AND  CONTEMPTIBLE   SERVANT  OF  JESUS  CHRIST,  JOHN    BUNYAN. 


'  The  icicked  skull  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations  that  forget  God.' — Ps.  ix.  17. 

*  And  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire' — Re,  xx.  15. 


London :  Printed  by  Ralph  Wood,  for  M.  Wright,  at  the  King's  Head  in  the  Old  Bailey,  165S.1 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY   THE   EDITOR. 


How  awful  is  that  cry  of  anguish  which  has  reached 
us  from  heyond  the  tomb,  even  from  the  infernal 
realms,  and  on  which  Banyan,  with  his  singular  and 
rare  ability,  fixes  our  attention.  It  is  the  voice  of 
one  who  had  received  his  good  things  in  this  fleet- 
ing life ;  who  had  fared  sumptuously  every  day, 
without  providing  for  eternity,  and  now  cries  for  a 
drop  of  water  to  cool  his  parched  tongue.  Plunged 
into  unutterable,  inconceivable,  and  eternal  tor- 
ments, he  pleads  that  the  poor  afflicted  beggar, 
who  had  lain  at  his  gate,  might  be  sent  from  the 
dead  to  warn  his  relatives,  that  they  might  escape, 
and  not  aggravate  his  misery,  by  upbraiding  him 
as  a  cause  of  their  destruction,  by  having  neglected 
to  set  them  a  pious  example.  He  knows  that  there 
is  no  hope  for  his  own  wretched  soul,  and  expresses 
no  wish  that  his  family  should  pay  for  masses  to 
ease  his  pangs.  No,  such  tomfooleries  are  limited 
to  this  insane  world.  His  poor  request  is  one  drop 
of  water,  and  a  warning  messenger  to  his  relatives. 
The  answer  is  most  decisive — there  is  a  great,  an 
eternal  gulf  fixed — none  can  pass  between  heaven 
and  hell ;  and  as  to  your  father's  house,  '  They 
have  Moses  and  the  prophets ; '  and  now  it  may  be 
added,  They  have  Jesus  and  his  apostles ;  if  they 
hear  not  them,  '  neither  will  they  be  persuaded 
though  one  rose  from  the  dead.'  No;  if  Isaiah,  with 
his  mighty  eloquence,  again  appeared  among  mor- 
tals, again  would  his  cry  be  heard,  '  Who  hath 
believed  our  report?'  'What!  seek  the  living  among 
the  dead?  To  the  law,  and  to  the  testimony,  saith 
God.' 

Reader,  these  are   solemn    realities.     He  who 


came  from  the  unseen  world — from  the  bosom  of 
the  Father — reveals  them  unto  us.  0 !  that  we 
may  not  mistake  that  voice  for  thunder,  which 
called  upon  a  trembling  world  to  '  hear  him.' 

The  rich  man  personates  all  the  thoughtless  and 
unconverted  who  die  in  their  sins,  his  wealth  can 
neither  bribe  death  nor  hell ;  he  is  stricken,  and 
descends  to  misery  with  the  bitter,  but  unavailing 
regret  of  having  neglected  the  great  salvation.  He 
had  taken  no  personal,  prayerful  pains  to  search 
the  sacred  Scriptures  for  himself;  he  had  disobeyed 
the  gospel,  lived  in  revelry,  and  carelessness  of  his 
soul ;  he  had  ploughed  iniquity  and  sown  wicked- 
ness, and  reaps  the  same.  '  By  the  blast  of  God  he 
perishes,  and  is  consumed  by  the  breath  of  his 
nostrils.'  '  They  have  sown  the  wind,  and  they 
shall  reap  the  whirlwind. 

The  opinion  universally  prevails,  although  the 
voice  of  infinite  wisdom  has  declared  it  false,  that 
miracles,  or  a  messenger  from  the  invisible  world 
could  awake  the  dead  in  sin.  The  world's  eyes  are 
shut,  and  its  ears  are  stopped  from  seeing  and 
hearing  that  most  illustrious  celestial  messenger  of 


1  There  were  nine  editions  of  this  book  published  during 
the  Author's  life;  all  those  subsequent  to  the  first  have  the 
following  title:—'  Sighs  from  Hell,  or  the  Groans  of  a  Damned 
Soul;  discovering  from  the  16th  of  Luke  the  lamentable  state 
of  the  damned :  and  may  fitly  serve  as  a  warning  word  to 
sinners,  both  old  and  young,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  avoid 
the  same  place  of  torment.  With  a  discovery  of  the  useful- 
ness of  the  Scriptures  as  our  safe-conduct  for  avoiding  the 
torments  of  hell.  By  John  Bunyan.  London :  Printed  for 
P.  Smith,  at  the  Elephaut  and  Castle,  without  Temple-bar, 
At  1*.  bound.' 


JOHN  GIFFORD  TO  THE  READER. 


CG7 


mercy — 'God  manifest  in  the  flesh' — who  still 
speaks  to  us  in  his  words.  He  revealed,  and  he 
alone  could  have  revealed,  these  solemn,  these  heart- 
stirring  facts — He  performed  the  most  astonishing 
miracles — His  doctrines  were  truth — He  required 
holiness  of  life  to  fit  the  soul  for  heaven ;  there- 
fore He  was  despised,  tortured,  murdered.  In  the 
face  of  all  this,  the  poor  wretch  cries,  'send  Lazarus.' 
What  refined  cruelty !  He  had  home  the  cross  and 
received  the  crown.  Uncrown  him,  and  send  him 
back  to  lie  at  my  brother's  gate,  and  if  he  dares 
to  tell  him  the  truth,  that  my  soul  was  in  hell,  even 
while  the  splendid  funeral  was  carrying  my  body 
to  the  tomb,  he  will  hurry  him  to  death.  Poor 
fool !  are  not  thy  kindred  as  hardened  as  thou  wast? 
Send  Lazarus  from  the  dead !  That,  as  Bunyan 
justly  says,  would  be  to  make  a  new  Bible,  to  im- 
prove the  finished  salvation.  No,  if  they  will  not 
hear  Moses  and  the  prophets,  our  Lord  and  his 
apostles,  they  must  all  likewise  perish.  This  is  a 
very  meagre  outline  of  this  solemn  treatise ;  it  is 
full  of  striking  illustrations,  eminently  calculated 
to  arouse  the  thoughtless,  and  to  convey  solid 
instruction  to  the  thoughtful. 


This  was  the  third  volume  that  Bunyan  pub- 
lished, and,  with  modest  timidity,  he  shelters  him- 
self under  a  strong  recommendatory  preface  by  his 
pastor,  who,  in  the  Grace  Abounding,  he  calls  '  holy 
Mr.  Gifford.'  So  popular  was  it,  as  to  pass  through 
nine  editions  in  the  author's  lifetime.1  The  pre- 
face, by  John  Gifford,  was  printed  only  with  the 
first  edition.  As  it  gives  a  very  interesting  account 
of  Bunyan,  and  his  early  labours  in  the  ministry, 
which  has  never  been  noticed  by  any  of  his  biogra- 
phers, and  is  extremely  rare,  it  is  here  reprinted 
from  a  fine  copy  in  the  British  Museum,  and  must 
prove  interesting  to  every  admirer  of  John  Bunyan. 
I  close  with  two  short  extracts — may  they  leave  an 
abiding  impression  upon  our  miuds.  '  God  will 
have  a  time  to  meet  with  them  that  now  do  not 
seek  after  him. '  '  0 !  regard,  regard,  for  the  judg- 
ment day  is  at  hand,  the  graves  are  ready  to  fly 
open,  the  trumpet  is  near  the  sounding,  the  sentence 
will  ere  long  be  passed,  and  then,'  it  will  be  seen 
whether  we  belong  to  the  class  of  Dives,  who  pre- 
ferred the  world,  or  to  that  of  Lazarus,  who  pre- 
ferred Christ;  and  then,  0  then!  time  cannot  be 
recalled.  Geo.  Offor. 


PREFACE,  BY  THE  EEV.  JOHN  GIFFORD, 

PASTOR   OF   THE    CHURCH   OF    CHRIST    AT   BEDFORD,    OF    WHICH   JOHN   BUNYAN   WAS   A   MEMBER. 


TO  THE  READER. 

It  is  sad  to  see  how  the  most  of  men  neglect  their 
precious  souls,  turning  their  backs  upon  the  glorious 
gospel,  and  little  minding  a  crucified  Jesus,  when, 
in  the  meanwhile,  their  bodies  are  well  provided 
for,  their  estates  much  regarded,  and  the  things  of 
this  present  life  are  highly  prized,  as  if  the  darling 
was  of  less  value  than  a  clod  of  earth  ;  an  immortal 
soul,  than  a  perishing  body ;  a  precious  Saviour, 
than  unsatisfying  creatures.  Yea,  though  they 
have  been  often  wooed  with  gracious  entreaties, 
glorious  promises,  and  fresh  bleeding  wounds,  to 
make  choice  of  the  better  part,  that  shall  never  be 
taken  from  them;  yet,  alas!  such  influence  hath 
this  world,  and  the  pleasures  of  it,  and  such  is  the 
blindness  of  their  understandings,  that  they  con- 
tinue still  to  hunt  after  those  things  which  cannot 
profit,  nor  be  a  help  to  them  in  the  worst  hour. 
Yea,  that  will  prove  no  better  than  poison  to 
their  souls,  and  refuse  that  would  be  (if  embraced) 
their  happiness  here,  and  their  glory  hereafter. 
Such  a  strange  stupidity  hath  seized  upon  the 
hearts  of  men,  that  they  will  venture  the  loss  of 
their  immortal  souls  for  a  few  dying  comforts, 
and  will  expose  themselves  to  endless  misery  for 
a   moment's   mirth,    and    short-lived    pleasures. 


But,  certainly,  a  barn  well  fraught,  a  bag  well 
filled,  a  back  well  clothed,  and  a  body  well  fed, 
will  prove  but  poor  comforts  when  men  come  to 
die,  when  death  shall  not  only  separate  their  souls 
from  their  bodies,  but  both  from  their  comforts. 
What  will  it  then  avail  them  that  they  have  gained 
much?  Or  what  will  they  give  in  exchange  for 
their  souls?  Be  wise,  then  (0  reader,  to  whose 
sight  this  may  come),  before  it  be  too  late,  and 
thou  repent,  when  repentance  shall  be  hid  from 
thine  ejes ;  also  it  will  be  as  a  dagger  to  thine  heart 
one  day,  to  remember  what  a  Christ,  what  a  soul, 
what  a  heaven  thou  hast  lost  for  a  few  pleasures, 
a  little  mirth,  a  short  enjoyment  of  this  present 
world ;  yea,  and  that  after  many  warnings  against 
many  reproofs,  and,  notwithstanding  the  many  ten- 
ders of  a  full  Christ,  instead  of  those  empty  vani- 
ties which  thy  soul  closed  with,  hunted  after,  and 
would  by  no  means  be  persuaded  to  part  withal. 
No,  but  thou  wouldst  take  thy  time,  and  swim  in 


1  In  the  '  errata'  to  the  first  edition,  Bunyau  says—'  At 
the  first  I  thought  to  put  out  with  this  a  discourse  of  the  two 
covenants,  which  since  I  thought  to  put  forth  in  a  piece  by 
itself.'  This  shows  that  Ms  great  work  on  the  covenants  was 
the  fourth  volume  which  he  wrote.  In  the  second  edition,  the 
author  altered  the  arrangement  of  the  text,  by  placing  in  his 
comment  on  ver.  28  a  considerable  part  of  what  in  the  first 
edition  formed  the  '  use  and  application.' 


668 


JOHN  GIFFORD  TO  THE   READER. 


this  world's  delights,  though  thy  soul  therehy  was 
drowned  iu  perdition  and  destruction.  iTi.vi.o.  True, 
few  there  are  that  will  he  persuaded  that  this  course 
they  take,  though  their  daily  conversations  do  bear 
witness  to  it;  for  how  much  time  is  spent,  and  how 
much  care  is  the  hearts  of  men  filled  withal,  after 
attaining,  keeping,  and  increasing  these  things? 
And  how  seldom  do  they  trouble  their  heads,  to 
have  their  minds  taken  up  with  thoughts  of  the 
better  ?  Cumbering  themselves  with  many  things, 
but  wholly  neglecting  the  one  thing  necessary; 
yea,  whereby  do  they  measure  their  own  or  other 
men's  happiness,  but  by  the  large  incomes  of  this 
world's  good,  accounting  this  the  greatest,  if  not 
the  only  blessedness,  to  have  their  corn,  wine,  and 
oil  increase  in  abundance,  and  reckoning  those 
that  are  most  serious  about,  and  earnest  after  the 
world  to  come,  men  of  foolish  spirits,  giddy  brains, 
and  worthy  to  be  branded  in  the  forehead  for  simple 
deluded  ones.  But  surely  he  is  the  most  fool  that 
will  be  one  at  last ;  and  he  that  God  calls  so  (Lu. 
xii.  20)  will  pass  for  one  in  the  end ;  yea,  within  a 
short  time,  they  themselves  shall  change  their  notes. 
Ask  the  rich  man  spoken  of  in  the  ensuing  treatise, 
who  was  the  fool — he  or  Lazarus?  and  he  will  soon 
resolve  the  question,  that  he  now  sees,  and  by 
woeful  experience  finds  (whatsoever  his  former 
thoughts  were),  that  he,  not  Lazarus,  was  the  silly 
deluded  one ;  for  he,  fool-like,  preferred  the  worse 
things  before  the  better,  and  refused  that  which 
once  might  have  been  had  ;  but  now  he  hath  slipped 
the  time,  it  cannot  be  gained,  when  this  poor  man, 
knowing  the  day  of  his  visitation,  was  making  sure 
of  that  glory  which  he  now  enjoys,  and  shall  enjoy 
for  evermore.  So  that  in  this  parable  (if  1  may 
so  call  it)  thou  shalt  find  that  Scripture  confirmed, 
'That  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  short.'  Job 
xx.  5.  Together  with  that,  '  That  the  temptations 
(or  afflictions)  of  the  righteous,  which  cause  heavi- 
ness, are  but  for  a  season.'  l  Pe.  i.  6.  And  in  this 
treatise,  both  of  these  are  largely  opened  and  ex- 
plained. Behold,  here  a  rich  man  clothed  in  silks, 
fed  with  delicates,  and  faring  deliciously  every  day; 
but  look  a  little  farther,  and  lo!  this  man  clothed 
with  vengeance,  roaring  under  torments,  and  ear- 
nestly begging  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his 
tongue ;  a  sad  change.  On  the  other  hand,  here 
thou  shalt  see  a  poor,  but  a  gracious  man,  with  a 
pinched  belly,  naked  back,  and  running  sores, 
begging  at  the  rich  man's  gate  for  a  morsel  to  feed 
his  belly,  a  sad  state,  yet  but  short ;  for  look 
again,  and  behold  this  beggar  gloriously  carried, 
as  in  a  chariot  of  triumph,  by  the  angels  into 
Abraham's  bosom,  shining  in  glory,  clothed  with 
beautiful  garments,  and  his  soul  set  down  with 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of 
the  Father ;  his  rags  are  gone,  his  sores  healed, 
and  his  soul  filled  with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full 


of  glory;  the  one  carried  not  his  costly  fare,  and  his 
gorgeous  apparel  with  him  into  hell;  nor  the  other 
his  coarse  diet,  mouldy  bread,  filthy  rags,  and 
ulcerous  body  into  heaven ;  but  the  happiness  of 
the  one,  and  the  misery  of  the  other,  took  their 
leaves  at  the  grave  ;  the  worldly  man's  portion  was 
but  for  his  life,  and  the  godly  man's  afflictions  lasted 
no  longer;  •  For  mark  the  perfect,  and  behold  the 
upright,  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace ;  but  the 
end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off.'  Fb.  xxxvii.  37,  38. 
His  present  comforts,  his  future  hopes,  and  his 
cursed  soul  together  ;  yea,  though  he  lives  many 
days,  and  rejoices  in  them  all,  yet  the  days  of  dark- 
ness will  overtake  him,  and  his  eye  shall  see  no 
more  good ;  in  his  life  time  he  enjoyed  his  good 
things,  and,  at  the  hour  of  death,  legions  of  devils 
will  beset  him,  innumerable  evils  will  befal  him ; 
and  then  shall  he  pay  full  dear  for  all  the  pleasures 
of  sin,that  have  carried  away  his  heart  from  closing 
with,  and  following  the  Lord  in  the  day  of  his 
prosperity.  Ungodly  men,  because  they  feel  no 
changes  now,  they  fear  none  hereafter,  but  flatter 
themselves  with  dying  as  the  godly,  though  their 
life  is  consumed  in  wickedness,  and  their  strength 
in  providing  for  and  satisfying  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh.  But  as  it  fared  with  wicked  Balaam,  so 
shall  it  fare  with  these,  and  their  vain  hopes  will 
prove  a  feeding  upon  ashes  through  their  deceived 
heart,  that  hath  turned  them  aside,  is.xiiv.20.  'For 
they  that  sow  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap 
corruption.'  Ga.  vi  s.  '  And  they  that  plough  ini- 
quity, and  sow  wickedness,  shall  reap  the  same.' 
Job  iv.  8.  Ho.  viii.  7.  But  they  that  sow  to  the  Spirit, 
shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting.  Say  ye 
then  to  the  righteous,  'It  shall  go  well  with 
him ;  however  it  goes  with  him  now,  a  few  days 
will  produce  a  happy  change.'  '  It  shall  go  well 
with  him  that  feareth  the  Lord.'  Ec.  viii.  12.  Go 
on  then,  0  soul,  thou  that  hast  set  thy  face  to- 
wards heaven,  though  the  east  wind  beats  upon 
thee,  and  thou  find  trouble  and  sorrow;  these  shall 
endure  but  for  a  night,  joy  will  undoubtedly  come 
in  the  morning;  besides  those  sweet  visits  thou 
shalt  have  from  thy  precious  Saviour,  in  this  thy 
day  of  darkness,  wait  but  a  while,  and  thy  dark- 
ness shall  be  turned  into  light.  '  When  the  light 
of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out,  and  the  spark  of 
his  fire,  wherewith  he  warmed  himself,  shall  not 
shine. '  Job xviu.  5.  'Grudge  not  to  see  the  wicked 
prosper,  aud  their  steps  washed  with  butter,  but 
rather  put  on  bowels  of  mercy  and  pity,  as  the 
elect  of  God,  knowing  that  they  are  set  in  slippery 
places,'  Ps.  UxiiL  is.  And  their  day  is  coming,  when 
fearful  horror  shall  surprise  them,  and  hell  be 
opened  to  receive  them ;  nor  yet  be  disquieted  in 
thy  mind,  that  troubles  and  afflictions  do  beset 
thee  round  ;  for,  as  a  worser  thing  is  reserved  for 
them,  so  a  better  is  prepared  for  thee.     Do  they 


JOHN  GIFFORD  TO   THE   READER, 


669 


dl  ink  wine  in  bowls  ?  and  dost  thou  mingle  thy  tears 
with  thy  drink  ?  Do  they  live  in  pleasures,  and  spend 
their  days  in  wealth?  and  dost  thou  sigh  and  mourn 
in  secret  ?  Well,  there  is  a  cup  for  them  in  the  hand 
of  the  Lord,  the  wiue  whereof  is  red,  and  full  of 
mixture,  which  they  must  drink  up  the  dregs.  Ps. 
Lav.  8.  And  the  Lord  hath  a  hottle  for  thy  tears.  Ps. 
hi.  s.  And  a  book  for  thy  secret  sighs,  and  ere  long 
thy  brinish  tears  shall  be  turned  into  the  sweetest 
wine,  which  thou  shalt  drink  new  in  the  kingdom  of 
the  Father,  and  thy  secret  sighs  into  glorious  praises; 
when  thy  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  laughter,  and 
thy  eyes  see  the  King  in  his  glory. 

Now,  considering  that  these  lines  may  be  brought 
to  the  sight  both  of  the  one  sort  and  the  other,  I 
shall  lay  a  few  things  before  the  thought  of  each; 
and  first  to  the  worser  sort. 

First.  Consider  what  an  ill  bargain  thou  wilt 
make,  to  sell  thy  precious  soul  for  a  short  con- 
tinuance in  thy  sins  and  pleasures.  If  that  man 
drives  but  an  ill  trade,  who,  to  gain  the  world, 
should  lose  his  soul  (Mat.  xvi.  26),  then,  certainly, 
thou  art  far  worse  that  sells  thy  soul  for  a  very 
trifle.  0  it  is  pity  that  so  precious  a  thing 
should  be  parted  withal,  to  be  made  a  prey  for  the 
devouring  lion,  for  that  which  is  worse  than  nothing! 
If  they  were  branded  for  desperate  wretches  that 
caused  their  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  to 
Moloch,  surely  thou  much  more  that  gives  thy 
soul  to  devouring  flames,  to  be  fuel  for  the  ever- 
lasting fire,  upon  so  unfit  terms;  what  meanest 
thou,  0  man,  to  truck  with  the  devils?  Is  there 
no  better  merchandise  to  trade  in  than  what  comes 
from  hell,  or  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth?  and 
to  be  had  upon  no  lower  rates  than  thy  immortal 
soul?  Yes,  surely  the  merchandise  of  wisdom, 
which  is  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver,  and 
the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold  (Pr.  in.  u  -,  via.  19),  is 
exposed  to  sale  (Re.  m.  is),  and  to  be  had  without 
money  or  price ;  and  if  thou  shouldest  part  with 
anything  for  it,  it  is  such  that  it  is  better  to  part 
withal  than  to  keep.  The  wise  merchant  that 
sought  a  goodly  pearl,  having  found  one,  sold  all 
that  he  had,  not  himself,  not  his  soul,  and  all  that 
he  sold  was  in  itself  not  worth  a  farthing,  and  yet 
obtained  the  pearl.  Mat.  xiii.  45, 46.  Paul  made  the 
like  exchange  when  he  threw  away  his  own  right- 
eousness, which  was  but  rags,  yea,  filthy  rags  (is. 
l  :iv.  6),  and  put  on  the  garment  of  salvation,  and 
cast  away  to  the  dunghill  that  which  was  once  his 
gain,  and  won  Christ.  Phi.  iii.  s.  Thou  needest  not 
cast  away  thy  soul  for  puddle  pleasures;  behold 
the  fountain  of  living  water  is  set  open,  and  thou 
invited  to  it,  to  take  and  drink  thy  belly,  thy  soul 
full,  without  price  or  mouey.  is.  iv.  •_». 

Secondly.  Take  a  short  (yet  let  it  not  be  a  slight) 
view  of  the  best  of  the  things  men  prize  so  high, 
that  for  the  love  of,  they  lose  their  souls :   what 


are  they  ?  Even  painted  nothings,  promising  vani- 
ties (like  the  apples  of  Sodom,  fair  to  the  eye,  but 
being  touched,  turn  to  dust ;  or  like  our  mother 
Eve's,  that  had  a  beautiful  look,  but,  being  tasted, 
brings  forth  death),  which,  for  the  most  part,  have 
proved  snares  to  the  owners,  and  always  miserable 
comforters  at  the  parting;  they  cannot  satisfy  in 
life,  for  the  more  of  these  things  are  had,  the  more 
(with  a  disquieted  spirit)  are  they  reached  after, 
and  what  comes  in  serves  but  to  whet  up  the 
greedy  unsatisfied  appetite  after  more.  The  world 
passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof,  l  Jn.  a.  n. 
Though  most  men  content  themselves  with  these, 
yet  it  is  not  in  these  to  satisfy  them,  and  had  they 
but  one  glimpse  of  the  world  to  come,  one  cranny 
of  light  to  discern  the  riches  of  Christ,  and  the 
least  taste  of  the  pleasures  that  are  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  (Ps.  x»l  m,  they  would  be  as  little 
satisfied  without  a  share  in  them,  as  they  are  now 
with  what  of  worldly  things  they  enjoy;  much  less 
can  they  ease  from  pain  at  death.  Clap  a  bag  of 
gold  (as  one  once  did)  to  thy  sinking  spirit,  pained 
body,  and  tormented  conscience,  and  it  can  neither 
cheer  up  the  one,  nor  appease  the  other,  least  of 
all  can  they  deliver  from,  or  yield  comfort  after 
death ;  those  cannot  serve  as  a  bribe  to  death  to 
pass  thee  by,  nor  yet  bring  comfort  to  thy  soul 
when  thou  art  gone.  The  rich  fool's  large  crop 
and  great  increase  could  not  procure  one  night's 
respite,  nor  one  moment's  comfort.  Besides,  God 
regards  them  so  little,  that  frequently  he  gives  the 
largest  share  of  them  to  whom  he  hateth  most 
(Ps.  xvii.  14),  and  the  least  to  them  who  are  the  ex- 
cellent in  the  earth,  in  whom  his  soul  delights, 
although  he  hath  made  them  heirs  of  the  kingdom. 
Ja.  a.  5.  Yet  doth  he  bestow  such  a  small  portion 
of  these  worldly  things  upon  them,  hereby  declaring 
to  all  how  little  he  sets  by  those  things  which  most 
set  so  much  by,  and  to  draw  up  our  hearts,  minds, 
and  affections  to  the  things  above ;  yea,  His  own 
Son  that  he  appointed  heir  of  all  things  (He.  L  2) 
shall  come  forth  neither  of  rich  kindred,  nor  at- 
tended with  gallants,  nor  yet  accoutred  with  the 
world's  glory,  but  in  a  low,  mean,  and  abject 
condition,  at  whoso  birth  a  manger  received  him ; 
and  through  his  life  sorrows,  wants,  and  sufferings 
did  attend,  and  at  the  end  a  shameful  death,  in  the 
world's  esteem,  befals  him,  and  by  all  this  he  shows 
his  contempt  of  the  worldly  man's  darling.  Cast 
not  away  thy  soul  then,  0  man,  in  seeking  after, 
solacing  thyself  in,  and  contenting  thyself  with  this 
present  world ;  fur  though  thou  mayest  make  gold 
thy  hope,  and  put  thy  confidence  in  thy  wealth, 
yet  when  this  thy  hope  shall  fail,  and  thy  confi- 
dence slip  from  thee  (as  sure  it  will  ere  long),  glad 
wouldest  thou  be  of  the  least  drop  of  the  water  of 
life,  and  the  least  filing  of  that  precious  gold  (that 
thou  art  now  called  upon  to  drink  of,  and  to  buy 


670 


JOHN  GIFFORD  TO  THE   READER. 


for  thyself) ;  but,  alas,  tliey  shall  not  be  had.  Then, 
0  then,  what  profit  will  thy  treasures  of  wicked- 
ness yield  thee ;  and  whereto  will  thy  thick  clay 
that  thou  hast  hoarded  up,  and  thy  carnal  plea- 
sures which  thou  hast  drunk  down,  as  the  fish 
drinks  down  water;  whereto,  I  say,  will  they  serve, 
unless  to  weigh  thee  the  deeper  into  hell,  and  in- 
crease the  fire,  when  it  shall  be  kindled  upon  thee? 

Tliirdly.  Look  upon  thy  loss,  too,  which  is  such 
that  ten  thousand  worlds  cannot  repair — thy  soul, 
thy  body,  thy  comforts,  thy  hopes,  thy  share  in  a 
crucified  Jesus,  the  crown  of  life,  and  everlasting 
communion  with  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  blessed 
angels,  and  glorified  saints,  and  a  soul-satisfying, 
soul-saving  Christ,  who  came  from  the  bosom  of 
love,  and  gave  himself  to  open  a  way  to  everlasting- 
glory,  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  to  whom  thou  art 
called,  invited,  and  persuaded  to  come  ;  whose 
heart  is  open,  arms  spread,  and  who  hath  room 
enough  in  his  bosom  to  receive  thee,  grace  enough 
to  pardon  thee,  blood  enough  to  justify  thee,  trea- 
sures enough  to  enrich  thee,  pleasures  enough  to 
delight  thee  (Ps.  xxxvi.  8),  and  glory  enough  to  crown 
thee  ;  in  whom  it  hath  pleased  the  Father  that 
in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell,  Col.  L  19 ;  to  make 
them  perfectly  blessed  that  come  to  him,  so  that 
there  is  no  need  to  seek  happiness  among  the 
creatures,  which  most  do,  and  thereby  lose  true 
happiness,  and  their  souls  too.  Turn  in  hither,  and 
thou  shalt  eat  of  his  bread,  and  drink  of  the  wine 
which  he  hath  mingled.  pr.  ix.  4.  5.  Wouldst  thou 
fare  deliciously  every  day,  and  have  thy  soul  de- 
light itself  in  fatness  ?  is.  lv.  2.  Hearken  diligently, 
and  come  to  the  wedding ;  the  oxen  and  fatlings 
are  killed,  and  all  things  are  ready.  Mat.  «SL  5.  I 
tell  thee,  whatsoever  food  thou  feedest  upon  else, 
will  prove  no  better  to  thee  than  the  prodigal's 
husks.  Lu.  xv.  16.  That  will  starve  thee  whilst  thou 
feedest  on  them;  and  if  thou  drinkest  of  other  wine, 
it  will  prove  as  a  cup  of  wine  mixed  with  poison, 
which  though  it  be  pleasant  to  the  taste,  it  will  be 
the  death  of  thy  soul.  Wilt  thou,  then,  lose  this 
Christ,  this  food,  this  pleasure,  this  heaven,  this 
happiness,  for  a  thing  of  nought?  Wilt  thou 
drink  out  of  a  puddle,  a  broken  cistern  which  leaks 
out  the  water,  and  holds  nothing  but  mud,  and 
refuse  the  fountain  of  living  water,  which,  whoso- 
ever tastes  of,  shall  live  for  ever  ? 

Fourthly.  Beware  of  persuading  thyself  into  a 
conceit  of  the  poor  man's  end,  if  thou  livest  the 
rich  man's  life,  and  diest  his  death.  It  is  strange 
to  see  how  many  run  swift  by  the  very  way  to 
hell,  yet  are  full  of  confidence  of  going  to  heaven, 
though  Scripture  everywhere  shuts  them  out,  and 
Christ  at  last  will  certainly  shut  them  out  for  ever 
hereafter,  living  and  dying  in  their  present  state. 
Let  none,  therefore,  deceive  you,  neither  deceive 
yourselves,  for  none  such  can  enter  into  the  king- 


dom of  heaven.  But  for  these  things'  sake  cometh 
the  wrath  of  God  on  the  children  of  disobedience. 
1  Co.  vi.  9.  Ep.  v.  5,  6.  And  how  sad  will  thy  disap- 
pointment be,  that  goest  on  securely  fearing  no- 
thing, being  fully,  yet  falsely,  persuaded  of  eternal 
life  at  last,  and  then  drop  down  into  the  bottom- 
less pit!  Like  wicked  Hainan,  that  dreamed  of 
greater  honour,  but  behold  a  gallows  ;  or  our 
'mother  Eve,  who  conceited  to  be  as  God,  but  be- 
came a  cursed  creature.  Though  the  devil  may 
persuade  thee  thou  mayest  live  as  in  hell  here,  yet 
in  heaven  hereafter,  believe  him  not,  for  he  en- 
deavours to  keep  thee  in  his  snares,  that  he  may 
drag  thee  to  hell  with  him  ;  and  the  better  to 
effect  his  devilish  design  upon  thee,  he  will  pre- 
sent (and  through  his  cursed  subtlety  knows  how 
to  do  it)  thy  sins  and  this  world  in  as  lovely  and 
taking  a  guise  as  may  be,  but  will  hide  the  evil 
consequences  from  thine  eyes,  that  thou  mightest 
be  inveigled  by  gazing  on  the  one,  and  not  be  af- 
frighted by  beholding  the  other ;  his  bait  shall  be 
pleasant,  but  his  hook  hid,  like  the  strumpet  in  Pr. 
vii,  that  entices  the  simple  with  fair  words,  but  con- 
ceals that  the  way  to  her  house  leads  to  the  chambers 
of  death;  nothing  appears  but  a  bed  richly  furnished, 
and  a  promise  of  solacing  him  with  loves;  but  he  that 
followeth  after  her,  goeth  as  an  ox  to  the  slaughter, 
and  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks. 

Fifthly.  This  is  thy  day  to  prevent  the  loss  of 
the  one,  and  to  get  an  interest  in  the  other ;  this 
is  the  day  of  salvation,  the  accepted  day  of  the 
Lord.  2  Co.  vi.  2.  Let  the  sun  of  this  day  be  set 
before  this  work  be  done,  and  au  everlasting  night 
of  darkness  will  close  thee  in,  wherein  thou,  thou 
shalt  have  time  enough  indeed  to  bemoan  thy  folly, 
but  none  to  learn  to  grow  wiser.  It  is  a  sad  thing, 
especially  in  soul  concernments,  to  be  wise  too  late, 
and  to  cry  out  when  time  is  past,  0  that  I  had 
improved  it  when  it  was  present.  Then  will  the  re- 
membrance of  thy  former  misspent  time,  and  thy 
despair  of  ever  gaining  more,  be  like  poisoned 
arrows  drinking  up  thy  spirit.  Amongst  all  the 
talents  God  hath  entrusted  man  withal,  this  is  not 
the  least,  because  on  it  depends  eternity ;  and 
according  to  the  use  we  make  of  this,  will  our 
eternal  condition  be,  though  the  most  of  men  live 
at  such  a  rate  as  if  it  was  given  them  to  no  other 
end  than  to  waste  in  wickedness,  and  consume 
in  pleasures.  What  means  else  their  spending 
days,  weeks,  months,  years,  yea,  their  whole  life, 
in  whoring,  swearing,  playing,  coveting,  and  ful- 
filling the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  so  that  when  they  come 
to  die,  the  great  work  that  they  were  sent  to  do  is 
then  to  be  done ;  their  souls,  Christ,  eternity,  was 
scarce  thought  on  before  ;  but  now,  when  merciless 
death  begins  to  gripe  them,  then  do  they  begin  to 
bethink  themselves  of  those  things  which  they 
should  have  got  in  readiness  before,  and  that  is 


JOHN  G1FFORD  TO  THE  READER. 


671 


the  reason  why  we  so  often  hear  many  that  lie  upon 
their  death-beds  to  cry  out  for  a  little  longer  time; 
and  no  wonder,  for  they  have  the  salvation  of  their 
souls  to  seek.  0  sad  case!  to  have  their  work 
to  do  when  the  night  is  come,  and  a  Christ  to  seek 
when  death  hath  found  them ;  take  therefore  the 
counsel  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (He.  n\.  7),  '  To-day,  if 
you  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts.' 
Mark,  it  is  the  Spirit's  counsel.  True,  the  devil 
and  thine  own  heart  will  tell  thee  another  tale,  and 
be  ready  to  whisper  in  thine  ears,  Thou  mayest 
have  time  enough  hereafter ;  what  need  of  so  much 
haste,  another  day  may  serve  as  well ;  let  thy  soul 
be  filled  with  pleasure  a  little  longer,  and  thy  bags 
filled  a  little  more  ;  thou  mayest  have  time  for 
this  and  that  too.  0,  hut  this  is  the  suggestion 
of  an  enemy,  that  would  cause  thee  to  defer  so 
long,  that  thy  heart  may  grow  too  hard,  and 
thine  ear  too  heavy  to  hear  at  all ;  but,  certainly, 
this  being  the  greatest  business,  challengeth  the  first 
and  greatest  care.  Mat.  vi.  33.  And  let  this  be  done; 
then,  if  thou  shalt  either  have  so  much  time  to  spare, 
or  a  heart  to  do  it,  take  thy  time  for  the  other. 

Sixthly.  This  day  of  thy  mercy  and  Christ's  im- 
portunity will  not  last  long;  it  is  but  a  day,  and 
that  a  day  of  visitation.  Indeed  it  is  rich  grace  that 
there  should  be  a  day,  but  dally  not  because  it  is 
but  a  day.  Jerusalem  had  her  day,  but  because 
therein  she  did  not  know  the  things  of  her  peace, 
a  pitch  night  did  overtake.  Lu.  xix.  42, 43.  It  is  a 
day  of  patience,  and  if  thou  despisest  the  riches  of 
God's  goodness,  patience,  and  long-suffering  to- 
wards thee,  and  art  not  thereby  led  to  repentance 
(ito.  ii.  5),  a  short  time  will  make  it  a  day  of  venge- 
ance. Though  now  Christ  calls,  because  he  is  will- 
ing to  save  sinners,  yet  he  will  not  always  call ; 
see  then  that  thou  refuse  not  him  that  speaks  from 
heaven  in  this  gospel  day.  He.  xii.  25.  But  seek  him 
while  he  may  be  found,  and  call  upon  him  while  he 
is  near  (is.  lv.  «,  lest  thou  criest  after  him  hereafter, 
and  he  refuse  thee.  It  is  not  crying,  Lord,  Lord, 
when  the  day  of  grace  is  past,  that  will  procure 
the  least  crumb  of  mercy.  Watt.  vii.  21.  No,  if  thou 
comest  not  when  called,  but  stayest  while  supper 
is  ended,  thou  shalt  not  taste  thereof  (Lu.  xiv.  24), 
though  a  bit  would  save  thy  life,  thy  soul ;  if  thou 
drinkest  not  of  the  fountain  while  it  is  opened, 
thou  shalt  not  when  it  is  shut,  though  thou  beggest 
with  tears  of  blood  for  one  drop  to  cool  thy  scorch- 
ing flaming  heart;  thou  that  mightest  have  had 
thy  vessel  full,  and  welcome,  shall  not  now  have 
so  much  as  will  hang  on  the  tip  of  a  finger.  0  ! 
remember,  the  axe  is  laid  to  the  root  of  the  tree. 
Matt.  m.  io.  And  although  three  years'  time  may  be 
granted,  through  the  vine-dresser's  importunity, 
that  will  soon  be  expired,  and  then  the  axe  that  is 
now  laid,  shall  cut  up  the  tree  by  its  roots,  if  it 
bring  not  forth  good  fruit.     Seest  thou  not  that 


many  of  late  have  been  snatched  away,  on  each 
side  of  thee  (by  that  hand  that  hath  been  stretched 
out  and  is  so  still)  ?  and  though  thou  mayest  escape 
a  while,  yet  hast  thou  no  assurance  that  the  de- 
stroying angel  will  long  pass  by  thy  door.  0  then, 
neglect  thy  soul  no  longer,  but  consider  time  is 
short,  and  uncertain,  eternity  long,  thy  work  great, 
thy  soul  immortal,  this  world  vanishing,  Christ 
precious,  hell  hot,  and  heaven  desirable. 

And  if  thou  becst  a  Christian  (to  whom  this  may 
come)  that  hast  not  only  had  a  prize  in  thy  hands, 
but  wisdom  given  thee  from  above  to  make  use  of 
it,  and  art  one  who  (whilst  others  are  seeking  to 
make  this  world  and  hell  together  sure  to  them- 
selves) spendest  thy  time,  and  makest  it  thy  only 
business,  to  make  sure  of  the  one  thing  necessary, 
and  heaven  to  thy  soul,  I  shall  lay  two  or  three 
things  before  thy  thoughts. 

First.  Walk  with  a  fixed  eye  upon  the  world  to 
come.  Look  not  at  the  things  that  are  seen,  that 
are  temporal,  hut  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen, 
that  are  eternal.  2Co.iv.is.  A  Christian's  eye  should 
be  upon  his  journey's  end,  as  our  Lord  Jesus,  who 
for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  endured  the 
cross.  He.  xii.  2.  When  the  stones  flew  about 
Stephen's  ears,  his  eyes  were  lifted  up  to  heaven, 
and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on 
the  right  hand  of  God.  Ac.  vii.  55,  56.  What  though 
thou  at  present  mayest  lie  at  the  rich  man's  gates, 
yet  a  few  clays  will  translate  thee  into  Abraham's 
bosom.  Though  Israel  had  a  sharp  voyage  through 
the  wilderness,  yet  Caleb  and  Joshua,  men  of  excel- 
lent spirits,  had  their  eye  upon  the  good  land  they 
were  going  to.  Though  graceless  souls  are  too  dull 
sighted  to  see  afar  off  (2  Pe.  i.  9).  yet  thou  that  hast 
received  the  unction  from  above,  dost  in  some  mea- 
sure know  what  is  the  hope  of  thy  calling,  and  what 
is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the 
saints. 

Secondly.  Be  satisfied  with  thy  present  condition, 
though  it  be  afflictive,  for  it  shall  not  last  always. 
Thy  sorrows  shall  be  short,  and  thy  joys  long;  roll 
thyself  upon  the  Lord,  for  there  is  a  heaven  will 
pay  for  all ;  Christ  first  endured  the  cross  before 
he  wore  the  crown.  David,  before  he  was  a  king, 
was  a  shepherd.  The  poor  man  spoken  of  in  this 
ensuing  treatise,  before  he  was  carried  into  heaven, 
had  experiences  of  sorrow  and  sufferings  on  earth. 
Let  the  flesh  be  silent  in  passing  judgment  on  the 
dispensations  of  God  towards  thee,  and  the  men  of 
this  world,  in  this  present  life.  David,  by  prying 
too  far  herein  with  his  own  wisdom,  had  almost 
caught  a  fall.  Ps.  lxxiii.  Though  God's  judgments 
may  be  too  deep  for  our  reason  to  dive  into,  yet 
are  they  always  righteous,  and  his  paths  mercy 
and  truth  to  those  that  keep  his  covenants.  Ps.xxv.10. 
When  Jeremiah  would  debate  with  the  Lord  con- 
cerning his  judgments  in  the  wicked's  prosperity, 


672 


JOHN  GIFFORD  TO   THE   READER. 


ho  would  lay  this  down  as  an  indubitable  trutb, 
that  his  judgments  were  righteous.  Je.  xii.  l.  Anil 
his  end  was  not  to  charge  God,  but  to  learn  un- 
derstanding of  him  in  the  way  of  his  judgments; 
and  although  the  ways  of  his  providence  may  be 
dark  to  his  people,  that  they  cannot  discern  his 
footsteps,  yet  are  they  always  consistent  with  his 
everlasting  covenant,  and  the  results  of  the  favour 
he  bears  to  them.  If  the  wicked  flourish  like  the 
grass,  it  is  that  they  should  be  destroyed  for  ever. 
Ps.  xcii.  7.  And  if  the  godly  have  many  a  wave  beat- 
ing upon  them,  yet  will  the  Lord  command  his 
loving-kindness  in  the  day  time.  Ps.  xiu.  7,  s.  And, 
after  a  little  while  being  tossed  to  and  fro  in  these 
boisterous  waves,  they  shall  arrive  at  the  heavenly 
haven,  this  world  being  not  their  resting-place,  but 
there  remains  one  for  them.  He.  iv.  9. 

Tliirdly.  Let  the  faith  and  hopes  of  a  glorious 
deliverance  get  thy  heart  up  above  thy  present 
sufferings,  that  thou  mayest  glory  in  tribulation 
who  hast  ground  of  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory 
of  God.  Ro.  v.  2,  3.  For  whatsoever  thy  present 
grievances  are,  whether  outward  afflictions,  or  in- 
ward temptations,  this  may  be  thy  consolation 
that  a  few  days  will  rid  thee  of  them ;  when  thou 
shalt  sigh  no  more,  complain  no  more,  but  those 
shall  be  turned  into  praises.  Thou  hast  (if  I  may 
so  call  it)  all  thy  hell  here;  let  thy  life  be  expired, 
and  thy  misery  is  ended  ;  thy  happiness  begins, 
where  wicked  men's  end ;  and  when  thine  is  once 
began,  it  shall  have  no  more  end. 

Reader,  I  have  an  advertisement  to  thee  con- 
cerning the  following  discourse,  and  the  author  of 
it.  Thou  hast  in  the  discourse  many  things  of 
choice  consideration  presented  to  thee  in  much 
plainness,  evidence,  and  authority;  the  replications 
are  full,  the  applications  are  natural.  Be  not  of- 
fended at  his  plain  and  downright  language,  it  is 
for  the  discharge  of  the  author's  conscience,  and 
thy  profit,  besides  the  subject  necessarily  leads  him 
to  it.  It  is  a  mercy  to  be  dealt  thoroughly  and 
plaiuly  with  in  the  matters  of  thy  soul.  We  have 
too  many  that  sow  pillows  under  men's  elbows,  and 
too  few  who,  dealing  plainly,  divide  to  every  man 
his  portion.  Read  it  not  to  pick  quarrels  with  it, 
but  to  profit  by  it;  and  let  not  prejudice  either 
against  the  author,  or  manner  of  delivery,  cause 
thee  to  stumble  and  fall  at  the  truth.  Prejudice 
will  both  blind  the  eyes  that  it  shall  not  see  the 
truth,  and  close  it  in  with  it,  and  make  them  too 
quick-sighted,  either  to  make  faults  where  there  is 
none,  or  to  greaten  them  where  they  are  ;  and  so 
cause  the  reader  to  turn  the  edge  against  the 
author  or  his  work,  that  should  be  turned  upon  his 
own  heart.  It  is  marvellous  to  see  how  the  truth 
is  quarrelled  at  that  comes  from  one,  that  would 
be  easily  received  if  it  did  drop  from  another ;  and 
I  doubt  not,  if  this  book  had  some  other  hand  at 


it,  there  is  scarce  any  expression  that  may  be  now 
carpt  at  by  some,  but  would  have  been  swallowed 
without  straining.  We  are  now  fallen  into  such  an 
age  (the  good  Lord  help  us)  that  truth,  upon  its 
own  account,  can  challenge  but  little  acceptance, 
except  the  author  be  liked,  or  his  lines  painted  with 
his  own  wit.  But  certainly  truth  is  of  so  excellent 
a  nature,  of  such  singular  advantage,  and  of  so 
royal  a  descent,  that  it  deserves  entertainment  for 
itself,  and  that  not  in  our  houses  or  heads  only,  but 
in  our  hearts  too.  Whatsoever  the  hand  is  that 
brings  it,  or  the  form  that  it  appears  in,  men  ac- 
count gold  worth  receiving,  whatsoever  the  messen- 
ger is  that  brings  it,  or  the  vessel  that  holds  it. 

If  thou  meetest  (reader)  with  any  passage  that 
seems  doubtful  unto  thee,  let  love  that  thinks  no 
evil  put  the  best  construction  upon  it,  and  do  not 
hastily  condemn  what  thou  canst  not  presently 
yield  to  ;  or  if  any  expression  thou  meetest  with 
may  (haply)  offend  thee,  do  not  throw  aside  the 
whole,  and  resolve. to  read  of  it  no  more;  for  though 
some  one  may  offend  thee,  yet  others  (I  hope)  may 
affect  thee ;  or  if  there  be  that  which  some  may 
call  tautology,  be  not  displeased  at  it;  for  that  word 
that  may  not  fasten  upon  thy  heart  in  one  page, 
may  in  another ;  and  although  it  may  be  grievous 
to  thy  eye  (if  thou  beest  nice  and  curious),  yet  bear 
with  it,  if  it  may  be  profitable  to  thy  soul. 

Concerning  the  author  (whatsoever  the  censures 
and  reports  of  many  are)  I  have  this  to  say,  that 
I  verily  believe  God  hath  counted  him  faithful,  and 
put  him  into  the  ministry;  and  though  his  outward 
condition  and  former  employment  was  mean,  and 
his  human  learning  small,  yet  is  he  one  that  hath 
acquaintance  with  God,  and  taught  by  his  Spirit, 
and  hath  been  used  in  his  hand  to  do  souls  good ; 
for  to  my  knowledge  there  are  divers  who  have 
felt  the  power  of  the  word  delivered  by  him ;  and 
I  doubt  not  but  that  many  more  may,  if  the  Lord 
continue  him  in  his  work ;  he  is  not  like  unto  your 
drones,  that  will  suck  the  sweet,  but  do  no  work. 
For  he  hath  laid  forth  himself  to  the  utmost  of  his 
strength,  taking  all  advantages  to  make  known  to 
others  what  he  himself  hath  received  of  God,  and 
1  fear  this  is  one  reason  why  the  archers  have  shot 
so  sorely  at  him ;  for  by  his  and  others'  industry 
in  their  Master's  work,  their  slothfulness  hath  been 
reproved,  and  the  eyes  of  many  have  been  opened 
to  see  a  difference  between  those  that  are  sent  of 
God  and  those  that  run  before  they  are  sent.  And 
that  he  is  none  of  those  light  fanatic  spirits  that 
our  age  abounds  withal,  this  folio  wing  discourse, 
together  with  his  former,  that  have  been  brought 
to  public  view,  will  testify  ;  for  among  other  things 
that  may  bear  record  to  him  herein,  you  shall  find 
him  magnifying  and  exalting  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
and  largely  showing  the  worth,  excellency,  and 
usefulness  of  them. 


THE  AUTHOR  TO  THE  READER. 


673 


And  yet  surely  if  thou  shalt  (notwithstanding 
this)  stumble  at  his  meanness  and  want  of  human 
learning,  thou  -wilt  declare  thine  unacquaintance 
vrith  God's  declared  method,  who  to  perfect  his 
own  praise,  and  to  still  the  enemy  and  avenger, 
makes  choice  of  babes  and  sucklings,  and  in  their 
mouths  ordaincth  strength,  rs.  via.  2.  Though  men 
that  have  a  great  design,  do,  and  must  make  use 
of  those  that  in  reason  are  most  likely  to  effect  it, 
yet  must  tbe  Lord  do  so  too  ?  Then  instruments 
(not  himself)  Avould  carry  away  the  praise ;  but  that 
no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence,  he  hath  chosen 
the  foolish  things  of  the  world,  to  confound  the 
wise,  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things  that 
are  despised,  hath  God  chosen.  1  Co.  i.  27,  23,  23. 
Cast  thine  eye  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  gospel 
dispensation  (which  surely,  if  at  any  time,  should 
have  come  forth  in  the  wisdom  and  glory  of  the 
world),  and  thou  shalt  see  what  method  the  Lord 
did  take  at  the  first  to  exalt  his  son  Jesus :  he  goes 


not  amongst  the  Jewish  rabbles,  nor  to  the  schools 
of  learning,  to  fetch  out  his  gospel  preachers,  but 
to  the  trades,  and  those  most  contemptible  too;  yet 
let  not  any  from  hence  conceive  that  I  undervalue 
the  gifts  and  graces  of  such  who  have  been,  or  now 
are  endued  with  them,  nor  yet  speak  against  learn- 
ing being  kept  in  its  place ;  but  my  meaning  is, 
that  those  that  are  learned  should  not  despise  those 
that  are  not ;  or  those  that  are  not,  should  not  de- 
spise those  that  are,  who  are  faithful  in  the  Lord's 
work :  and  tberefore  being  about  to  leave  thee,  I 
shall  leave  with  thee  two  Scriptures  to  be  consid- 
ered of.  The  one  is  Ju.  xiii.  20,  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  he  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send 
(mark  whomsoever)  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that  re- 
ceiveth me,  receiveth  him  that  sent  me.  The  other 
is  Lu.  x.  ig,  He  that  heareth  you,  heareth  me ;  and 
he  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  me ;  and  he  that 
despiseth  me,  despiseth  him  that  sent  me. 

I.  G. 


THE   ATJTHOE   TO   THE   READEE. 


Fmexd,  because  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  be  walk- 
ing towards  the  place  of  darkness  and  anguish ; 
and  again,  because  it  is  (notwithstanding)  the 
journey  that  most  of  the  poor  souls  in  the  world 
are  taking,  and  that  with  delight  and  gladness,  as 
if  there  was  the  only  happiness  to  be  found,  I 
have  therefore  thought  it  my  duty,  being  made 
sensible  of  the  danger  that  will  befal  those  that 
fall  therein,  for  the  preventing  of  thee,  0  thou  poor 
man  or  woman!  to  tell  thee,  by  opening  this  par- 
able, what  sad  success  those  souls  have  had,  and 
are  also  like  to  have,  that  have  been,  or  shall  be 
found  persevering  therein. 

We  use  to  count  him  a  friend  that  will  forewarn 
his  neighbour  of  the  danger,  when  he  knoweth 
thereof,  and  doth  also  see  that  the  way  his  neigh- 
bour is  walking  in  doth  lead  right  thereto,  especially 
when  we  think  that  our  neighbour  may  be  either 
ignorant  or  careless  of  his  way.  Why  friend,  it 
may  be,  nay  twenty  to  one,  but  thou  hast  been,  ever 
since  thou  didst  come  into  the  world,  with  thy  back 
towards  heaven,  and  thy  face  towards  hell ;  and 
thou,  it  may  be,  either  through  ignorance  or  care- 
lessness, which  is  as  bad,  if  not  worse,  hast  been 
running  full  hastily  that  way  ever  since.  Why 
friend?  I  beseech  thee  put  a  little  stop  to  thy 
earnest  race,  and  take  a  view  of  what  entertain- 
ment thou  art  like  to  have,  if  thou  do  in  deed  and 
in  truth  persist  in  this  thy  course.  Friend,  thy 
way  leads  'down  to  death,'  and  thy  '  steps  take 
hold  on  hell.'  r*.  v.  5.  It  may  be  the  path  indeed 
is  pleasant  to  the  flesh,  but  the  end  thereof  will  be 

VOL.  III. 


bitter  to  thy  soul.  Hark,  dost  thou  not  hear  tho 
bitter  cries  of  them  that  are  but  newly  gone  before, 
saying,  Let  him  *  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water, 
and  cool  my  tongue ;  for  I  am  tormented  in  this 
flame?'  Lu.xvi.  21.  Dost  thou  not  hear  them  say, 
Send  out  from  the  dead,  to  prevent  my  father,  my 
brother,  and  my  father's  house,  from  coming  '  into 
this  place  of  torment?'  Shall  not  then  these 
mournful  groans  pierce  thy  flinty  heart?  Wilt 
thou  stop  thine  ears,  and  shut  thy  eyes  ?  And  wilt 
thou  not  regard?  Take  warning  and  stop  thy 
journey  before  it  be  too  late.  Wilt  thou  be  like 
the  silly  fly,  that  is  not  quiet  unless  she  be  either 
entangled  in  the  spider's  web,  or  burned  in  the 
candle  ?  Wilt  thou  be  like  the  bird  that  hasteth 
to  the  snare  of  the  fowler  ?  Wilt  thou  be  like  that 
simple  one  named  in  the  seventh  of  Proverbs,  that 
will  be  drawn  to  the  slaughter  by  the  cord  of  a  silly 
lust  ?  0  sinner,  sinner,  there  are  better  things 
than  hell  to  be  had,  and  at  a  cheaper  rate  by  the 
thousandth  part !  0 !  there  is  no  comparison,  there 
is  heaven,  there  is  God,  there  is  Christ,  there  is 
communion  with  an  innumerable  company  of  saints 
and  angels.  Hear  the  message  then  that  God  doth 
send,  that  Christ  doth  send,  that  saints  do  bring, 
nay,  that  the  dead  do  send  unto  thee  :  '  I  pray 
thee,  therefore,  that  thou  wouldest  send  him  to  my 
father's  house  ;'  '  if  one  went  unto  them  from  tho 
dead  they  would  repent.'  'How  long,  ye  simple  ones, 
will  ye  love  simplicity?  And  the  scorners  delight 
in  their  scorning?  And  fools  hate  knowledge?' 
'Turn  you  at  my  reproof:  behold,'  saith  God,  •  I 

85 


674 


A  FEW  SIGHS  FROM  HELL,  OR 


will  pour  out  my  Spirit  unto  you,  I  will  make  known 
my  words  unto  you,'  I  say,  hear  this  voice,  0 
silly  one,  and  turn  and  live,  thou  sinful  soul,  lest  he 
make  thee  hear  that  other  saying,  But,  '  because 
I  have  called,  and  ye  refused,  I  have  stretched  out 
my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded ;  I  also  will  laugh 
at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock  when  your  fear 
cometh.'  pr.  i.  22—20. 

0  poor  soul,  if  God  and  Christ  did  [thus]  with 
thee  for  thine  harm,  it  would  he  another  matter ; 
then  if  thou  didst  refuse,  thou  mightest  have  some 
excuse  to  make,  or  fault  to  find,  and  ground  to 
make  delays.  But  this  is  for  thy  profit,  for  thy 
advantage,  for  the  pardoning  of  thy  sins,  the  sal- 
vation of  thy  soul,  the  delivering  of  thee  from  hell 
fire,  from  the  wrath  to  come,  from  everlasting  burn- 
ings, into  favour  with  God,  Christ,  and  communion 
with  all  happiness,  that  is  so  indeed. 

But  it  may  be  thou  wilt  say,  All  that  hath  been 
spoken  to  in  this  discourse  is  but  a  parable,  and 
parables  are  no  realities.  I  could  put  thee  off  with 
this  answer,  That  though  it  be  a  parable,  yet  it 
is  a  truth,  and  not  a  lie;  and  thou  shalt  find 
it  so  too,  to  thy  cost,  if  thou  shalt  be  found  a 
slighter  of  God,  Christ,  and  the  salvation  of  thy 
own  soul. 

But  secondly,  know  for  certain,  that  the  things 
signified  by  parables  are  wonderful  realities.  0 
what  a  glorious  reality  was  there  signified  by  that 
parable,  '  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a 
net  that  was  cast  into  the  sea,'  &c.  Signifying, 
that  sinners  of  all  sorts,  of  all  nations,  should  be 
brought  into  God's  kingdom,  by  the  net  of  the 
gospel.  And  0 !  how  real  a  thing  shall  the  other 
part  thereof  be,  when  it  is  fulfilled,  which  saith, 
And  '  when  it  was  full  they  drew  to  shore,  and 
gathered  the  good  into  vessels,  but  cast  the  bad 
away.'  Mat.  xm.  47, 48.  Signifying  the  mansions  of 
glory  that  the  saints  should  have,  and  also  the  re- 
jection that  God  will  give  to  the  ungodly,  and  to 
sinners.  And  also  that  parable,  what  a  glorious 
reality  is  there  in  it,  which  saith,  *  Except  a  corn 


of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth 
alone;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit.' 
jn.  xii.  24.  To  signify  that  unless  Jesus  Christ  did 
indeed  spill  his  blood,  and  die  the  cursed  death,  he 
should  abide  alone ;  that  is,  have  never  a  soul  into 
glory  with  him ;  but  if  he  died,  he  should  bring 
forth  much  fruit ;  that  is,  save  many  sinners.  And 
also  how  real  a  truth  there  was  in  that  parable 
concerning  the  Jews  putting  Christ  to  death,  which 
the  poor  dispersed  Jews  can  best  experience  to  their 
cost;  for  they  have  been  almost  ever  since  a 
banished  people,  and  such  as  have  had  God's  sore 
displeasure  wonderfully  manifested  against  them, 
according  to  the  truth  of  the  parable.  Mat,  xxi.  33-41. 

0  therefore,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  do  not  slight 
the  truth,  because  it  is  discovered  in  a  parable! 
For  by  this  argument  thou  mayest  also,  nay,  thou 
wilt  slight  almost  all  the  things  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  did  speak ;  for  he  spake  them  for  the 
most  part,  if  not  all,  in  parables.  Why  should  it 
be  said  of  thee  as  it  is  said  of  some,  These  things 
are  spoken  to  them  that  are  without  '  in  parables, 
that  seeing  they  might  not  see,  and  hearing  they 
might  not  understand  ? '  Lu.  viii.  10.  I  say,  take  heed 
of  being  a  quarreller  against  Christ's  parables,  lest 
Christ  also  object  against  the  salvation  of  thy  soul 
at  the  judgment  day. 

Friend,  I  have  no  more  to  say  to  thee  now.  If 
thou  dost  love  me  pray  for  me,  that  my  God  would 
not  forsake  me,  nor  take  his  Holy  Spirit  from  me ; 
and  that  God  would  fit  me  to  do  and  suffer  what 
shall  be  from  the  world  or  devil  inflicted  upon  me. 

1  must  tell  thee,  the  world  rages,  they  stamp  and 
shake  their  heads,  and  fain  they  would  be  doing ; 
the  Lord  help  me  to  take  all  they  shall  do  with 
patience ;  and  when  they  smite  the  one  cheek,  to 
turn  the  other  to  them,  that  I  may  do  as  Christ 
hath  bidden  me;  for  then  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
of  glory,  shall  rest  upon  me.     Farewell. 

I  am  thine,  if  thou  be  not  ashamed  to  own  me, 
because  of  my  low  and  contemptible  descent  in  the 
world.1  John  Bunyan. 


A  PEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL, 

OR 

THE    GROANS    OF    A    DAMNED    SOUL. 


Luke  xvi.  19—31. 

li  There  was  a  certain  ricli  man  which  was  clothed  in  purple 
and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously  every  day.  20  And 
there  was  a  certain  heggar,  named  Lazarus,  which  was 
laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores,  21  And  desiring  to  he  fed 
with  the  crumbs  which  fell  from  the  rich  man's  table  : 
moreover  the  dogs  came  and  licked  his  sores.  --  And  it 
came  to  pass  that  the  beggar  died,  and  was  carried  by 
the  augels  into  Abraham's  bosom:  the  rich  man  also  died, 


and  was  buried ;  -3  And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  be- 
ing in  torments,  and  sceth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus 
in  his  bosom.  'u  And  he  cried  and  said,  Father  Abraham, 
have  mercy  on  me,  and  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip 
the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue ;  for  I 
am  tormented  in  this  flame.  -s  But  Abraham  said,  Son, 
remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good 


1  In  the  second  and  subsequent  editions,  this  was  altered  to 
I  am  thine  to  serve  in  the  Lord  Jesus.' — (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF  A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


675 


things,  and  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things :  hut  now  he  h 
comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented.     -°  And,  beside  all 
this,  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed ;  so 
that  they  which  would  pass  from  hence  to  you  cannot ; 
neither  can  they  pass  to  us  that  would  come  horn  thence. 
-7  Then  he  said,  I  pray  thee  therefore,  father,  that  thou 
wouldest  send  him  to  my  father's  house;  -8  For  I  have 
five  brethren ;  that  he  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they 
also  come  into  this  place  of  torment.     "s  Abraham  saith 
unto  him,  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets ;  let  them 
hear  them.     SJ  And  he  said,  Nay,  father  Abraham :  but 
if  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead,  they  will  repent. 
S1  And  he  said  unto  him,  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose 
from  the  dead. 
Tms  Scripture  was  not  spoken  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  to  show  you  the   state  of  two  single  per- 
sons   only,   as   some,    through   ignorance  of  the 
drift  of  Christ  in  his  parables,  do  dream  ;  but  to 
show  you  the  state  of  the  godly  and  ungodly  to  the 
world's  end ;  as  is  clear  to  him  that  is  of  an  un- 
derstanding heart.     For  he  spake  them  to  the  end 
that  after  generations  should  take  notice  thereof, 
and  fear,  lest  they  also  fell  into  the  same  condition. 
Now  in  my  discourse  upon  these  words  I  shall  not 
be  tedious ;  but  as  briefly  as  I  may,  I  shall  pass 
through  the    several  verses,    and   lay  you   down 
some  of  the  several  truths  contained  therein.    And 
the  Lord  grant  that  they  may  be  profitable,  and 
of  great  advantage  to  those  that  read  them,  or 
hear  them  read. 

The  19th  and  20th  verses  also,  I  shall  not  spend 
much  time  upon,  only  give  you  three  or  four  short 
hints,  and  so  pass  to  the  next  verses ;  for  they  are 
the  words  I  do  intend  most  especially  to  insist  upon. 
The  19th,  20th,  and  21st  verses  run  thus  : — 
'  There  was  a  certain  rich  man  which  was  clothed 
in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared'  deliciously  or 
■  sumptuously  every  day.  And  there  was  a  cer- 
tain beggar,  named  Lazarus,  which  was  laid  at  his 
gate  full  of  sores.' 

First.  If  these  verses  had  been  spoken  by  Jesus 
Christ,  and  no  more,  all  the  world  would  have  gone 
near  to  have  cast  a  wrong  interpretation  on  them. 
1  say,  if  Jesus  had  said  only  thus  much,  'There  was 
a  certain  rich  man' which  'fared  sumptuously  daily, 
and  a  certain  beggar  laid  at  his  gate  full  of  sores  ;' 
the  world  would  have  made  this  conclusion  of  them 
— the  rich  man  was  the  happy  man;  for,  at  the  first 
view,  it  doth  represent  such  a  thing  ;  but  take  all 
together,  that  is,  read  the  whole  parable,  and  you 
shall  find  that  there  is  no  man  in  a  worse  condition 
than  he ;  as  I  shall  clearly  hold  forth  afterward. 
Second.  Again,  if  a  man  would  judge  of  men  ac- 
cording to  outward  appearance,  he  shall  ofttimes 
take  his  mark  amiss.  Here  is  a  man  to  outward  ap- 
pearance appears  the  only  blessed  man,  better  by 
half  than  the  beggar,  inasmuch  as  he  is  rich,  the 
beggar  poor ;  he  is  well  clothed,  but  peradventure 
the  beggar  is  naked  ;  he  hath  good  food,  but  the 


beggar  would  be  glad  of  dog's  meat.  *  And  de- 
siring to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which  fell  from 
the  rich  man's  table.'  The  rich  man  fares  well 
every  day,  but  the  beggar  must  be  glad  of  a  bit 
when  he  can  get  it.  0  !  who  would  not  be  in  the 
rich  man's  state  ?  A  wealthy  man,  sorts  of  new 
suits  and  dainty  dishes  every  day  ;  enough  to 
make  one  who  minds  nothing  but  his  belly,  and  his 
back,  and  his  lusts,  to  say,  0  that  I  were  in  that 
man's  condition  !  0  that  I  had  about  me  as  that 
man  has  !  Then  I  should  live  a  life  indeed  ;  then 
should  I  have  heart's-ease  good  store  ;  then  I 
should  live  pleasantly,  and  might  say  to  my  soul, 
•Soul,'  be  of  good  cheer,  'eat,  drink,  and  be 
merry.'  Lu.  xii.  10.  Thou  hast  everything  plenty, 
and  art  in  a  most  blessed  condition. 

I  say,  this  might  be,  aye,  and  is,  the  conclusion 
with  them  that  judge  according  to  outward  appear- 
ance. But  if  the  whole  parable  be  well  considered, 
you  will  see,  Lu.xvi.  is,  that  which  is  had  in  high 
estimation  with  men  is  an  abomination  in  the  sight 
of  God.  And  again,  Jn.  xvi.  20-22,  that  condition, 
that  is  the  saddest  condition,  according  to  out- 
ward appearance,  is  ofttimes  the  most  excellent  ; 
for  the  beggar  had  ten  thousand  degrees  the  best 
of  it,  though,  to  outward  appearance,  his  state  was 
the  saddest  j1  from  whence  we  shall  observe  thus 
much  : — 1.  That  those  who  judge  according  to 
outward  appearance,  do  for  the  most  part  judge 
amiss.  Jn.  vii  24.  2.  That  they  who  look  upon  their 
outward  enjoyments  to  be  token  of  God's  special 
grace  unto  them,  are  also  deceived.  Be.  m.  17. 
For  as  it  is  here  in  the  parable,  a  man  of  wealth 
and  a  child  of  the  devil  may  make  but  one  person; 
or  a  man  may  have  abundance  of  outward  enjoy- 
ments,  and  yet  be  carried  by  the  devils  into  eternal 
burnings,  i.u.  xii.  20.  But  this  is  the  trap  in  which 
the  devil  hath  caught  many  thousands  of  poor 
souls,  namely,  by  getting  them  to  judge  according 
to  outward  appearance,  or  according  to  God's  out- 
ward blessings. 

Do  but  ask  a  poor,  carnal,  covetous  wretch,  how 
we  should  know  a  man  to  be  in  a  happy  state,  and 
he  will  answer,  those  that  God  blesseth,  and  giv- 
eth  abundance  of  this  world  unto  ;  when,  for  the 
most  part,  they  are  they  that  are  the  cursed  men. 
Alas  !  poor  men,  they  are  so  ignorant  as  to  think 
that  because  a  man  is  increased  in  outward  things, 
and  that  by  a  small  stock,  therefore  God  doth  love 
that  man  with  a  special  love,  or  else  he  would 
never  do  so  much  for  him,  never  bless  him  so,  and 
prosper  the  work  of  his  hands.  Ah !  poor  sotd, 
it  is  the  rich  man  that  goes  to  hell.  And  'the 
rich  man  died,'  and  in  hell,  mark,  '  in  hell  he  lift 
up  his  eyes,'  itc. 


1  '  Sad'  frequently  occurs  iu  this  treatise  ;  it  is  from  the 
Saxon,  scetan— set,  fixed,  gloomy,  grievous,  mournful.— (Ed.) 


A    FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


Methinks  to  see  how  the  great  ones  of  the  world 
will  go  strutting  up  and  down  the  streets  sometimes, 
it  makes  me  wonder.  Surely  they  look  upon  them- 
selves to  be  the  only  happy  men  ;  but  it  is  because 
they  judge  according  to  outward  appearance ;  they 
look  upon  themselves  to  be  the  only  blessed  men, 
when  the  Lord  knows  the  generality  are  left  out  of 
that  blessed  condition.  '  Not  many  wise  men  after 
the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble  are 
called.'  l  Co.  i.  2G.  Ah  !  did  they  that  do  now  so 
brag,  that  nobody  dare  scarce  look  on  them,  but 
believe  this,  it  would  make  them  hang  down  their 
heads  and  cry,  0  give  me  a  Lazarus'  portion. 

I  might  here  enlarge  very  much,  but  I  shall  not ; 
only  thus  much  I  shall  say  to  you  that  have  much 
of  this  world,  Have  a  care  that  you  have  not  your 
portion  in  this  world.  Take  heed  that  it  be  not 
said  to  you  hereafter,  when  you  would  very  wil- 
lingly have  heaven,  Remember  in  your  lifetime  you 
had  your  good  things ;  in  your  lifetime  you  had 
your  portion.  Fs.  sviL  h. 

And  friend,  thou  that  seekest  after  this  world, 
and  desirest  riches,  let  me  ask  this  question, 
Wouldst  thou  be  content  that  God  should  put 
thee  off  with  a  portion  in  this  life  ?  Wouldst  thou 
be  glad  to  be  kept  out  of  heaven  with  a  back  well 
clothed,  and  a  belly  well  filled  with  the  dainties  of 
this  world  ?  Wouldst  thou  be  glad  to  have  all 
thy  good  things  in  thy  lifetime,  to  have  thy  heaven 
to  last  no  longer  than  while  thou  dost  live  in  this 
world  ?  Wouldst  thou  be  willing  to  be  deprived 
of  eternal  happiness  and  felicity  ?  If  you  say  no, 
then  have  a  care  of  the  world  and  thy  sins ;  have 
a  care  of  desiring  to  be  a  rich  man,  lest  thy  table  be 
made  a  snare  unto  thee.  Ps.  six.  22.  Lest  the  wealth 
of  this  world  do  bar  thee  out  of  glory.  For,  as 
the  apostle  saith,  '  They  that  will  be  rich,  fall  into 
temptation  and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and 
hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and 
perdition.'  iTLvi.9.  Thus  much  in  general;  but 
now  more  particularly. 

These  two  men  here  spoken  of,  as  I  said,  do  hold 
forth  to  us  the  state  of  the  godly  and  ungodly;  the 
beggar  holdeth  forth  the  godly,  and  the  rich  man 
the  ungodly.     •  There  was  a  certain  rich  man.' 

But  why  are  the  ungodly  held  forth  under  the 
notion  of  a  rich  man?  1.  Because  Christ  would 
not  have  them  look  too  high,  as  I  said  before,  but 
that  those  who  have  riches  should  have  a  care 
that  they  be  not  all  their  portion.  ja.  i.  10-12.  1  Ti. 
\i.  17.  2.  Because  rich  men  are  most  liable  to  the 
devil's  temptations ;  are  most  ready  to  be  puffed 
up  with  pride,  stoutness,  cares  of  this  world,  in 
which  things  they  spend  most  of  their  time  in 
lusts,  drunkenness,  wantonness,  idleness,  together 
with  the  other  works  of  the  flesh  ;  for  which  things 
sake,  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children  of 
disobedience.  Col.  in.  6.     3.  Because  he  would  com- 


fort the  hearts  of  his  own,  which  are  most  com- 
monly of  the  poorer  sort ;  but  God  hath  chosen 
the  poor,  despised,  and  base  things  of  this  world. 
1  Co.  i.  26.  Should  God  have  set  the  rich  man  in 
the  blessed  state,  his  children  would  have  con- 
cluded, being  poor,  that  they  had  no  share  in  the 
life  to  come. 

And  again,  had  not  God  given  such  a  discovery 
of  the  sad  condition  of  those  that  are  for  the  most 
part  rich  men,  we  should  have  had  men  concluded 
absolutely  that  the  rich  are  the  blessed  men.  Nay, 
albeit  the  Lord  himself  cloth  so  evidently  declare 
that  the  rich  ones  of  the  world  are,  for  the  most 
part,  in  the  saddest  condition,  yet  they,  through 
unbelief,  or  else  presumption,  do  harden  themselves, 
and  seek  for  the  glory  of  this  world  as  though  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  not  mean  as  he  said,  or  else 
that  he  will  say  more  than  shall  assuredly  come  to 
pass ;  but  let  them  know  that  the  Lord  hath  a  time 
to  fulfil  that  he  had  a  time  to  declare,  for  the 
scripture  cannot  be  broken.  Jn.  x.  33. 

But  again,  the  Lord  by  this  word  doth  not  mean 
those  are  ungodly  who  are  rich  in  the  world,  and 
no  other,  for  then  must  all  those  that  are  poor,  yet 
graceless  and  vain  men,  be  saved  and  delivered 
from  eternal  vengeance,  which  would  be  contrary 
to  the  Word  of  God,  which  saith  that  together 
with  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men, 
and  the  chief  captains,  and  the  mighty  men,  there 
are  bondmen  or  servants,  and  slaves,  that  cry  out 
at  the  appearance  of  the  Almighty  God,  and  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  to  judgment.  Re.  vi.  15. 

So  that  though  Christ  doth  say,  '  There  was  a 
certain  rich  man,'  yet  you  must  understand  he 
meaneth  all  the  ungodly,  rich  or  poor.  Nay,  if 
you  will  not  understand  it  so  now,  you  shall  be 
made  to  understand  it  to  be  so  meant  at  the  day 
of  Christ's  second  coming,  when  all  that  are  un- 
godly shall  stand  at  the  left  hand  of  Christ,  with 
pale  faces  and  guilty  consciences,  with  the  vials  of 
the  Almighty's  wrath  ready  to  be  poured  out  upon 
them.  Thus  much  in  brief  touching  the  19th 
verse.  I  might  have  observed  other  things  from 
it,  but  now  I  forbear,  having  other  things  to  speak 
of  at  this  time. 

Verse  20. — '  And  there  was  a  certain  beggar,  named  Lazarus, 
which  was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores.' 

This  verse  doth  chiefly  hold  forth  these  things ; 
1.  That  the  saints  of  God  are  a  poor  contemptible 
people ;  '  There  was  a  certain  beggar.'  If  you 
understand  the  word  beggar  to  hold  forth  outward 
poverty,  or  scarcity  in  outward  things,  such  are 
saints1  of  the  Lord,  for  they  are  for  the  most  part 
a  poor,  despised,  contemptible  people.     But  if  you 


1  The  first  and  second  editions  have  '  the  saints,'  instead  of 
'  such  are  saints.' — (Ed.) 


THE   C ROANS   OF  A  DAMNED   SOt'L. 


677 


allegorize  it  and  interpret  it  thus,  They  are  such 
as  beg  earnestly  for  heavenly  food ;  this  is  also 
the  spirit  of  the  children  of  God,  and  it  may  he, 
and  is  a  truth  in  this  sense,  though  not  so  na- 
turally gathered  from  this  scripture.  2.  That 
*  he  was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores.'  These 
words  hold  forth  the  distempers  of  believers,  say- 
ing he  was  'full  of  sores,'  which  may  signify  the 
many  troubles,  temptations,  persecutions,  and  afflic- 
tions in  body  and  spirit  which  they  meet  withal 
while  they  are  in  the  world,  but  also  the  entertain- 
ment they  find  at  the  hands  of  those  ungodly  ones 
who  live  upon  the  earth.  Whereas  it  is  said,  he 
was  'laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores.'  Mark,  he 
was  laid  at  his  gate,  not  in  his  house — that  was 
thought  too  good  for  him — but  he  was  laid  at  his 
gate,  full  of  sores.  From  whence  observe,  (1.)  That 
the  ungodly  world  do  not  desire  to  entertain  and  re- 
ceive the  poor  saints  of  God  into  their  houses.  If 
they  must  needs  be  somewhere  near  unto  them,  yet 
they  shall  not  come  into  their  houses ;  shut  them 
out  of  doors ;  if  they  will  needs  be  near  us,  let 
them  be  at  the  gate.  And  he  'was  laid  at  his  gate, 
full  of  sores.'  (2.)  Observe  that  the  world  are  not 
at  all  touched  with  the  afflictions  of  God's  children 
for  all  they  are  full  of  sores ;  a  despised,  afflicted, 
tempted,  persecuted  people  the  world  doth  not 
pity,  no,  but  rather  labour  to  aggravate  their 
trouble  by  shutting  them  out  of  doors ;  sink  or 
swim,  what  cares  the  world?  They  are  resolved 
to  disown  them ;  they  will  give  them  no  entertain- 
ment :  if  the  lying  in  the  streets  will  do  them  any 
good,  if  hard  usage  will  do  them  any  good,  if  to 
be  disowned,  rejected,  and  shut  out  of  doors  by 
the  world  will  do  them  any  good,  they  shall  have 
enough  of  that ;  but  otherwise  no  refreshment,  no 
comfort  from  the  world.  And  he  '  was  laid  at  his 
gate,  full  of  sores.' 

Verse  21. — 'And  he  desired  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which 
fell  from  the  rich  man's  table :  the  dogs  came  also  aud 
licked  his  sores.' 

By  these  words  our  Lord  Jesus  doth  show  us 
the  frame  of  a  Christian's  heart,  and  also  the  heart 
and  carriage  of  worldly  men  towards  the  saints  of 
the  Lord.  The  Christian's  heart  is  held  forth  by 
this,  that  anything  will  content  him  while  he  is  on 
this  side  glory.  And  '  he  desired  to  be  fed  with 
the  crumbs ;'  the  dogs'  meat,  anything.  I  say  a 
Christian  will  be  content  with  anything,  if  he  have 
but  to  keep  life  and  soul  together;  as  we  used  to  say, 
he  is  content,  he  is  satisfied  ;  he  hath  learned — if  he 
hath  learned  to  be  a  Christian — to  be  content  with 
anything ;  as  Paul  saith,  '  I  have  learned  in  what- 
soever state  I  am,  thereivith  to  be  content.'  Phi. 
iv.  n.  He  learns  in  all  conditions  to  study  to  love 
God,  to  walk  with  God,  to  give  up  himself  to  God; 
and  if  the  crumbs  that  fall  from  the  rich  man's 


table  will  but  satisfy  nature  and  give  him  bodily 
strength,  that  thereby  he  may  be  the  more  able  to 
walk  in  the  way  of  God,  he  is  contented.  And  he 
'  desired  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  that  fell  from 
the  rich  man's  table.'1  But  mark,  he  had  them 
not ;  you  do  not  find  that  he  had  so  much  as  a 
crumb,  or  a  scrap  allowed  unto  him.  No,  then 
the  dogs  will  be  beguiled,  that  must  be  preserved 
for  the  dogs.  From  whence  observe  that  the  un- 
godly world  do  love  their  dogs  better  than  the 
children  of  God.2  You  will  say  that  is  strange. 
It  is  so  indeed,  yet  it  is  true,  as  will  be  clearly 
manifested;  as,  for  instance,  how  many  pounds 
do  some  men  spend  in  a  year  on  their  dogs,  when 
in  the  meanwhile  the  poor  saints  of  God  may  starve 
for  hunger?  They  will  build  houses  for  their  dogs, 
when  the  saints  must  be  glad  to  wander,  and  lodge 
in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth.  He.  xi.  ss.  And  if 
they  be  in  any  of  their  houses  for  the  hire  thereof, 
they  will  warn  them  out  or  eject  them,  or  pull 
down  the  house  over  their  heads,  rather  than  not 
rid  themselves  of  such  tenants.3  Again,  some 
men  cannot  go  half  a  mile  from  home  but  they 
must  have  dogs  at  their  heels,  but  they  can  very 
willingly  go  half  a  score  miles  without  the  society 
of  a  Christian.  Nay,  if  when  they  are  busy  with 
their  dogs  they  should  chance  to  meet  a  Christian, 
they  would  willingly  shift  him  if  they  could.  They 
will  go  on  the  other  side  the  hedge  or  the  way  rather 
than  they  will  have  any  society  with  him ;  and  if 
at  any  time  a  child  of  God  should  come  into  a 
house  where  there  are  but  two  or  three  ungodly 
wretches,  they  do  commonly  wish  either  themselves 
or  the  saint  out  of  doors;  and  why  so?  because 
they  cannot  down4  with  the  society  of  a  Christian; 
though  if  there  come  in  at  the  same  time  a  dog, 
or  a  drunken  swearing  wretch,  which  is  worse  than 
a  dog,  they  will  make  him  welcome  ;  he  shall  sit 
down  with  them  and  partake  of  their  dainties. 
And  now  tell  me,  you  that  love  your  sins  and  your 
pleasures,  had  you  not  rather  keep  company  with 
a  drunkard,  a  swearer,  a  strumpet,  a  thief,  nay,  a 
dog,  than  with  an  honest-hearted  Christian?  If 
you  say  no,  what  means  your  sour  carriage  to  the 

1  In  quoting  these  passages,  Mr.  Banyan  has  mixed  the 
Puritan  version  with  that  now  authorized ;  very  probably  quot- 
ing from  memory.  His  text  is  from  the  present  version ;  the 
reader  will  see,  by  comparison,  the  different  words  employed 
in  the  two  translations. — (Ed.) 

2  Solemn  truth !  The  heir  of  heaven  and  immortality  has 
to  trudge  the  street  in  the  foulest  weather,  while  the  sinner's 
lap-dog  is  held  up  to  the  carriage  window,  taken  out  for  an 
airing. — (Ed.) 

3  Reader,  this  feeling  yet  remains.  Christians  have  recently, 
even  in  Scotland,  had  to  meet  in  barns,  or  in  the  open  air,  for 
worship,  because  no  landowner  would  sell  or  let  a  piece  of 
ground  on  which  to  build  a  place  of  worship. — (Ed.) 

4  Cannot  down ;  will  not  receive,  submit  to,  or  feel  pleasure 
in.  '  If  a  boy  is  hungry,  bread  by  itself  will  down.' — Locke 
on  Education.  '  Down  and  beg  mercy  of  the  Duke.' — Shak- 
speare. — (Ed.) 


C7» 


A  FEW  SIGHS  FROM  HELL,  OR 


people  of  God?  Why  do  you  look  on  them  as  if 
you  would  eat  them  up?  Yet  at  the  very  same 
time  if  you  can  but  meet  your  dog,  or  a  drunken 
companion,  you  can  fawn  upon  them,  take  acquaint- 
ance with  them,  to  the  tavern  or  ale  house  with 
them,  if  it  be  two  or  three  times  in  a  week.  But 
if  the  saints  of  God  meet  together,  pray  together, 
and  labour  to  edify  one  anotber,  you  will  stay  till 
doomsday  before  you  will  look  into  the  house  where 
they  are.  Ah  !  friends,  when  all  comes  to  all,  you 
wili  be  found  to  love  drunkards,  strumpets,  dogs, 
anything,  nay,  to  serve  the  devil,  rather  than  to 
have  loving  and  friendly  society  with  the  saints  of 
God. 

Moreover,  '  the  dogs  came  and  licked  his  sores.' 
Here  again  you  may  see,  not  only  the  afflicted  state 
of  the  saints  of  God  in  this  world,  but  also  that 
eveu  dogs  themselves,  according  to  their  kind, 
are  more  favourable  to  the  saints  than  the  sinful 
world  ;  though  the  ungodly  will  have  no  mercy  on 
the  saints,  yet  it  is  ordered  so  that  these  creatures, 
dogs,  lions,  <fcc.  will.  Though  the  rich  man  would 
uot  entertain  him  into  his  house,  yet  his  dogs  will 
come  and  do  him  the  best  good  they  can,  even  to 
lick  his  running  sores.  It  was  thus  with  Daniel 
when  the  world  was  mad  against  him,  and  would 
have  him  thrown  to  the  lions  to  be  devoured,  the 
lions  shut  their  mouths  at  him,  or  rather  the  Lord 
did  shut  them  up,  so  that  there  was  not  that  hurt 
befel  to  him  as  was  desired  by  the  adversaries. 
Da.  vL  And  this  I  am  persuaded  of,  that  would  the 
creatures  do  as  some  men  would  have  them,  the 
saints  of  God  should  not  walk  so  quietly  up  and 
down  the  streets  and  other  places  as  they  do.  And 
as  I  said  before,  so  I  say  again,  I  am  persuaded 
that,  at  the  day  of  judgment,  many  men's  con- 
ditions and  carriages  will  be  so  laid  open,  that  it 
will  evidently  appear  they  have  been  very  merci- 
less and  mad  against  the  children  of  God,  inso- 
much, that  when  the  providence  of  God  did  fall 
out  so  as  to  cross  their  expectation,  they  have 
been  very  much  offended  thereat,  as  is  very  evi- 
dently seen  in  them  who  set  themselves  to  study 
how  to  bring  the  saints  into  bondage,  and  to  thrust 
them  into  corners,  as  in  these  late  years.  Ps.  xxxi.  13. 
And  because  God  hath  in  his  goodness  ordered 
things  otherwise,  they  have  gnashed  their  teeth 
thereat.1  Hence  then  let  the  saints  learn  not  to 
commit  themselves  to  their  enemies ;  •  beware  of 
men.'  Mat.  x.  n.  They  are  very  merciless  men,  and 
will  not  so  much  favour  you,  if  they  can  help  it,  as 
you  may  suppose  they  may.  Nay,  unless  the  over- 
ruling hand  of  God  in  goodness  do  order  things 
contrary  to  their  natural  inclination,  they  will  not 
favour  vou  so  much  as  a  dog. 


1  Alluding  to  the  awful  sufferings  of  Leighton,  and  all  Chris- 
tians of  his  time,  under  that  bigoted  demon  in  human  shape, 
Laud.— (Ed.) 


Verse  22. — '  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the  beggar  died,  and 
was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom :  the 
rich  man  also  died,  and  was  buried.' 

The  former  verses  do  briefly  hold  forth  the  car- 
riage of  the  ungodly  in  this  life  toward  the  saint:-. 
Now  this  verse  doth  hold  forth  the  departure,  both 
of  the  godly  and  ungodly,  out  of  this  life. 

<  Where  he  said,  '  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  the 
beggar  died,  and  was  carried  -  into  Abraham's 
bosom,'  and  •  the  rich  man  also  died ;' — the  beggar 
died,  that  represents  the  godly ;  and  the  rich  man 
died,  that  represents  the  ungodly.  From  whence 
observe,  neither  godly  nor  ungodly  must  live  always 
without  a  change,  either  by  death  or  judgment; 
the  good  man  died  and  the  bad  man  died.  That 
scripture  doth  also  back  this  truth,  that  good  and 
bad  must  die,  marvellous  well,  where  it  is  said, 
'  And  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but 
after  this  the  judgment.'  He.  ix.  'n. 

Mark,  he  doth  not  say  it  is  so  that  men  by  chance 
may  die ;  which  might  beget,  in  the  hearts  of  the 
ungodly  especially,  some  hope  to  escape  the  bitter- 
ness of  it.  But  he  saith  it  is  a  thing  most  certain, 
it  is  appointed ;  mark,  '  it  is  appointed  unto  men 
once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment.'  God 
hath  decreed  it,  that  since  men  have  fallen  from 
that  happy  estate  that  God  at  the  first  did  set 
them  in,  they  shall  die.  Ro.  vi.  23.  Now  when  it  is 
said  the  beggar  died  and  the  rich  man  died,  part 
of  the  meaning  is  they  ceased  to  be  any  more  in 
this  world ;  I  say  partly  the  meaning,  but  not  al- 
together. Though  it  be  altogether  the  meaning 
when  some  of  the  creatures  die,  yet  it  is  but  in 
part  the  meaning  when  it  is  said  that  men,  women, 
or  children  die ;  for  there  is  to  them  something- 
else  to  be  said,  more  than  barely  agoing  out  of  the 
world.  For  if  when  unregenerate  men  and  women 
die  there  were  an  end  of  them,  not  only  in  this 
world  but  also  in  the  world  to  come,  they  would 
be  happy  over  they  will  be  now,  for  when  ungodly 
men  and  women  die  there  is  that  to  come  after 
death  that  will  be  very  terrible  to  them,  namely, 
to  be  carried  by  the  angels  of  darkness  from  their 
death-beds  to  hell,  there  to  be  reserved  to  the 
judgment  of  the  great  day,  when  both  body  and 
soul  shall  meet  and  be  united  together  again,  and 
made  capable  to  undergo  the  uttermost  vengeance 
of  the  Almighty  to  all  eternity.  This  is  that,  I 
say,  which  doth  follow  a  man  that  is  not  born 
again,  after  death,  as  is  clear  from  that  in  1  Pe.  in. 
18, 19,  where,  before  speaking  of  Christ  being  raised 
again,  by  the  power  of  his  eternal  Spirit,  he  saith. 
By  which,  that  is,  by  that  Spirit,  '  he  went  and 
preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison.'  But  what  is 
the  meaning  of  this?  Why,  thus  much,  that  those 
souls  who  were  once  alive  in  the  world  in  the  time 
or  days  in  which  Noah  lived,  being  disobedient  in 


THE   GROANS   OF  A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


679 


their  times  to  the  calls  of  God  by  liis  Spirit  in 
Noah,  for  so  I  understand  it,  was,  according  to 
that  which  was  foretold  by  that  preacher,  deprived 
of  life  and  overcome  by  the  flood,  and  are  now  in 
prison.  Mark,  he  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison; 
he  doth  not  say,  who  were  in  prison,  but  to  them 
m,  that  is,  now  in  prison,  under  chains  of  dark- 
ness, reserved,  or  kept  there  in  that  prison,  in 
which  now  they  are,  ready,  like  villains  in  the 
jail,  to  be  brought  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ  at  the  great  day.  But  of  this  1  shall  speak 
further  by  and  hy. 

Now  if  this  one  truth,  that  men  must  die  and 
depart  this  world,  and  either  enter  into  joy  or  else 
into  prison,  to  be  reserved  to  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, were  believed,  we  should  not  have  so  many 
wantons  walk  up  and  down  the  streets  as  there 
do,  at  least  it  would  put  a  mighty  check  to  their 
filthy  carriages,  so  that  they  would  not,  could  not 
walk  so  basely  and  sinfully  as  they  do.  Belshaz- 
zar,  notwithstanding  he  was  so  far  from  the  fear 
of  God  as  he  was,  yet,  when  he  did  but  see  that 
God  was  offended  and  threatened  him  for  his  wick- 
edness, it  made  him  hang  down  his  head  and  knock 
his  knees  together.  Da.  v.  5,  e.  If  you  read  the 
verses  before  you  will  find  he  was  careless,  and 
satisfying  his  lusts  in  drinking  and  playing  the 
wanton  with  his  concubines.  But  so  soon  as  he 
did  perceive  the  finger  of  a  hand- writing,  '  then, ' 
saith  the  scripture,  '  the  king's  countenance  was 
changed,  and  his  thoughts  troubled  him,  so  that 
the  joints  of  his  loins  were  loosed,  and  his  knees 
smote  one  against  another.'  And  when  Paul  told 
Felix  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment 
to  come,  it  made  him  tremble.  And  let  me  tell 
thee,  soul,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  if  thou  didst 
but  verily  believe  that  thou  must  die  and  come 
into  the  judgment,  it  would  make  thee  turn  over  a 
new  leaf.  But  this  is  the  misery,  the  devil  doth 
labour  by  all  means  as  to  keep  out  other  things 
that  are  good,  so  to  keep  out  of  the  heart,  as  much 
as  in  him  lies,  the  thoughts  of  passing  from  this 
life  into  another  world ;  for  he  knows,  if  he  can 
but  keep  them  from  the  serious  thoughts  of  death, 
he  shall  the  more  easily  keep  them  in  their  sins, 
and  so  from  closing  with  Jesus  Christ;  as  Job 
saith,  '  Their  houses  are  safe  from  fear,  neither  is 
the  rod  of  God  upon  them.'  Which  makes  them 
say  to  God,  '  Depart  from  us,  for  we  desire  not 
the  knowledge  of  thy  ways.'  Jobxxi.  u.  Because 
there  is  no  fear  of  death  and  judgment  to  come, 
therefore  they  do  put  off  God  and  his  ways,  and 
spend  their  days  in  their  sins,  and  in  a  moment, 
that  is,  before  they  are  aware,  go  down  to  the 
grave.  Job  and.  n.  And  thus  it  fared  also  with  the 
man  spoken  of  in  Lu.  x\l  20.  The  man,  instead  of 
thinking  of  death,  he  thought  how  he  might  make 
his  barns  bigger.     But,  in  the  midst  of  his  busi- 


ness in  the  world,  he  lost  his  soul  before  he  was 
aware,  supposing  that  death  had  been  many  years 
off.  But  God  said  unto  him,  '  Thou  fool,'  thou 
troublest  thyself  about  things  of  this  life,  thou 
puttest  off  the  thoughts  of  departing  this  world, 
when  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  taken  from  thee; 
or,  this  night,  they,  that  is,  the  devil,  will  fetch 
away  thy  soul  from  thee.  And  here  it  comes  to 
pass,  men's  not  being  exercised  with  the  thoughts 
of  departing  this  life,  that  they  are,  so  unexpectedly 
to  themselves  and  their  neighbours,  taken  away 
from  the  pleasures  and  profits,  yea,  and  all  the  en- 
joyments they  busy  themselves  withal  while  they 
live  in  this  world.  And  hence  it  is  again,  that 
you  have  some  in  your  towns  and  cities  that  are 
so  suddenly  taken  away,  some  from  haunting  the 
ale-houses,  others  from  haunting  the  whore-houses, 
others  from  playing  and  gaming,  others  from  the 
cares  and  covetous  desires  after  this  world,  unlooked 
for  as  by  themselves  or  their  companions.  Heuce 
it  is  also  that  men  do  so  wonder  at  such  tidings 
as  this.  There  is  such  a  one  dead,  such  a  one  is 
departed ;  it  is  because  they  do  so  little  consider 
both  the  transitoriness  of  themselves  and  their 
neighbours.  For  had  they  but  their  thoughts  well 
exercised  about  the  shortness  of  this  life,  and  the 
danger  that  will  befall  such  as  do  miss  ox  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  it  would  make  them  more  wary  and 
sober,  and  spend  more  time  in  the  service  of  God, 
and  be  more  delighted  and  diligent  in  inquiring- 
after  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  the  deliverer  '  from 
the  wrath  to  come. '  1  Th.  i.  10.  For,  as  I  said  before, 
it  is  evident,  that  they  who  live  after  the  flesh  in 
the  lusts  thereof,  do  not  really  and  seriously  think 
on  death,  and  the  judgment  that  doth  follow  after: 
neither  do  they  indeed  endeavour  so  to  do ;  for  did 
they,  it  would  make  them  say  with  holy  Job,  'All 
the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait  till  my 
change  come.'  Job  xiv.  u.  And  as  I  said  before,  that 
not  only  the  wicked,  but  also  the  godly  have  their 
time  to  depart  this  life.  And  the  beggar  died. 
The  saints  of  the  Lord,  they  must  be  deprived  of 
this  life  also,  they  must  yield  up  the  ghost  into  the 
hands  of  the  Lord  their  God ;  they  must  also  be 
separated  from  their  wives,  children,  husbands, 
friends,  goods,  and  all  that  they  have  in  the  world. 
For  God  hath  decreed  it ;  it  is  appointed,  namely, 
by  the  Lord,  for  men  once  to  die,  and  '  we  must 
all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,'  as 
it  is,  2  Co.  v.  10, 11. 

But  it  may  be  objected,  if  the  godly  do  die  as 
well  as  the  wicked,  and  if  the  saints  must  appear 
before  the  jutlgment-seat  as  well  as  the  sinners, 
then  what  advantage  have  the  godly  more  than  the 
ungodly,  and  how  can  the  saints  be  in  a  better 
condition  than  the  wicked  ? 

Amw.  Bead  the  22d  verse  over  again,  and  you 
will  find  a  marvellous  difference  between  them,  as 


6S0 


A  PEW   SIGHS  FROM  HELL,  OR 


much  as  is  between  heaven  and  hell,  everlasting 
joy  and  everlasting  torments ;  for  you  find,  that 
when  the  beggar  died,  which  represents  the  godly, 
he  was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's 
bosom,  or  into  everlasting  joy.  Ps.  i.  But  the  un- 
godly arc  not  so,  but  are  hurried  by  the  devils  into 
the  bottomless  pit,  drawn  away  in  their  wickedness, 
Pr.  xiv.  32,  for  he  saith,  •  And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his 
eyes.'  When  the  ungodly  do  die,  their  misery 
beginneth,  for  then  appear  the  devils,  like  so  nianv 
lions,  waitiug  every  moment  till  the  soul  depart 
from  the  body.  Sometimes  they  are  very  visible 
to  the  dying  party,1  but  sometimes  more  invisible; 
but  always  this  is  certain,  they  never  miss  of  the 
soul  if  it  do  die  out  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but 
do  hale  it  away  to  the  prison,  as  I  said  before, 
there  to  be  tormented  and  reserved  until  that  great 
and  general  day  of  judgment,  at  which  day  they 
must,  body  and  soul,  receive  a  final  sentence  from 
the  righteous  Judge,  and  from  that  time  be  shut 
out  from  the  presence  of  God  into  everlasting  woe 
and  distress.  But  the  godly,  when  the  time  of 
their  departure  is  at  hand,  then  also  are  the  angels 
of  the  Lord  at  hand ;  yea,  they  are  ready  waiting 
upon  the  soul  to  conduct  it  safe  into  Abraham's 
bosom.  I  do  not  say  but  the  devils  are  ofttimes 
very  busy  doubtless,  and  attending  the  saints  in 
their  sickness :  ay,  and  no  question  hut  they  would 
willingly  deprive  the  soul  of  glory.  But  here  is 
the  comfort,  as  the  devils  come  from  hell  to  devour 
tho  soul,  if  it  be  possible,  at  its  departure,  so  the 
angels  of  the  Lord  come  from  heaven,  to  watch 
over  and  conduct  the  soul,  in  spite  of  the  devil, 
eafe  into  Abraham's  bosom. 

David  had  the  comfort  of  this,  and  speaks  it 
forth  for  the  comfort  of  his  brethren,  Ps.xxxiv.7,  say- 
ing,  '  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about 
them  that  fear  him,  and  delivereth  them.'  Mark, 
the  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about  his 
children,  to  deliver  them.  From  what  ?  From 
their  enemies,  of  which  the  devil  is  not  the  least. 
This  is  an  excellent  comfort  at  any  time,  to  have 
the  holy  angels  of  God  to  attend  a  poor  man  or 
woman ;  but  especially  it  is  comfortable  in  the  time 
of  distress,  at  the  time  of  death,  when  the  devils 
beset  the  soul  with  all  the  power  that  hell  can  af- 
ford them.  But  now  it  may  be,  that  the  glorious 
angels  of  God  do  not  appear  at  the  first,  to  the 


1  It  is  a  very  ancient  and  prevailing  opinion,  that  man  is 
always  attended  by  invisible  spirits,  whose  powers  or  mode  of 
intercourse  with  our  spirits  is  unknown.  These  attendants  arc 
most  active  at  the  hour  of  death.  They  cannot  be  seen  unless 
the  eyes  are  made  to  possess  new  or  miraculous  powers.  It 
may  be  that,  when  dying,  the  spirit,  before  it  entirely  quits  its 
mortal  habitation,  lias  a  glimpse  of  spiritual  existences.  If 
so,  how  awful  for  the  sinner  to  see  the  infernal  demons  ready 
to  drag  away  his  soul ;  but  most  joyful  for  the  Christian  to 
embrace  his  celestial  guides.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  during  Christian's  conflict  at  the  hour  of  death. — 
Vol.  iii.,  p.  103.— (Ed.) 


view  of  the  soul ;  nay,  rather  hell  stands  before  it, 
and  the  devils  ready,  as  if  they  would  carry  it 
thither.  But  this  is  the  comfort,  the  angels  do 
always  appear  at  the  last,  and  will  not  fail  the  soul, 
but  will  carry  it  safe  into  Abraham's  bosom.  Ah 
friends,  consider,  here  is  an  ungodly  man  upon  his 
death-bed,  and  he  hath  none  to  speak  for  him,  none 
to  speak  comfort  unto  him ;  but  it  is  not  so  with 
the  children  of  God,  for  they  have  the  Spirit  to 
comfort  them.  Here  is  the  ungodly,  and  they 
have  no  Christ  to  pray  for  their  safe  conduct  to 
glory ;  but  the  saints  have  an  intercessor.  Jn.  xvii.  o. 
Here  is  the  world,  when  they  die,  they  have  none 
of  the  angels  of  God  to  attend  upon  them ;  but  the 
saints  have  their  company.  In  a  word,  the  uncon- 
verted person,  when  he  dieth,  he  sinks  into  tho 
bottomless  pit ;  but  the  saints,  when  they  die,  do 
ascend  with,  and  by  the  angels,  into  Abraham's 
bosom,  or  into  unspeakable  glory.  Ln.  xxiu.  43. 

Again,  it  is  said,  that  the  rich  man  when  he 
died  was  buried  or  put  into  the  earth ;  but  when 
the  beggar  died,  he  was  carried  by  the  angels  into 
Abraham's  bosom.  The  one  is  a  very  excellent 
style,  where  he  saith  he  was  carried  by  angels 
into  Abraham's  bosom ;  it  denotes  the  excellent 
condition  of  the  saints  of  God,  as  I  said  before ; 
and  not  only  so,  but  also  the  preeiousness  of  the 
death  of  the  saints  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  Ps.  cxvi.  is. 
That  after-generations  may  see  how  precious  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  the  death  of  his  saints  is,  when 
he  saith  they  are  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abra- 
ham's bosom. 

Thus  many  times  the  Lord  adorneth  the  death 
and  departure  of  his  saints,  to  hold  forth  unto 
after-generations,  how  excellent  they  are  in  his 
eyes.  It  is  said  of  Enoch,  that  God  took  him ;  of 
Abraham,  that  he  died  in  a  good  old  age;  of  Moses, 
that  the  Lord  buried  him;  of  Elijah,  that  he  was 
taken  up  into  heaven;  that  the  saints  sleep  in  Jesus; 
that  they  die  in  the  Lord;  that  they  rest  from  their 
labour,  that  their  works  follow  them;  that  they 
are  under  the  altar;  that  they  are  with  Christ;  that 
they  are  in  light ;  that  they  are  to  come  with  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  judge  the  world.  All  which  sayings 
signify  thus  much,  that  to  die  a  saint  is  very  great 
honour  and  dignity.  But  the  ungodly  are  not  so. 
The  rich  or  ungodly  die  and  are  buried;  he  is  carried 
from  Ins  dwelling  to  the  grave,  and  there  he  is 
buried,  hid  in  the  dust ;  and  his  body  doth  not  so 
fast  moulder  and  come  to  nought  there,  but  his 
name  doth  stink  as  fast  in  the  world,  as  saith  the 
holy  scripture :  '  The  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot.' 
Pr.  x.  7.  And  indeed,  the  names  of  the  godly  are 
not  in  so  much  honour  after  their  departure,  but 
the  wicked  and  their  names  do  as  much  rot.  What 
a  dishonour  to  posterity  was  the  death  of  Balaam, 
Agag,  Ahithophel,  Haman,  Judas,  Herod,  with  the 
rest  of  their  companions  ? 


THE   GROANS   OF   A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


est 


Thus  the  wicked  have  their  names  written  in 
the  earth,  and  they  do  perish  and  rot,  and  the 
name  of  the  saints  do  cast  forth  a  dainty  savour  to 
following  generations ;  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
doth  signify  where  he  saith  the  godly  are  'carried 
hy  the  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom;'  and  that 
the  wicked  arc  nothing  worth,  where  he  saith  the 
ungodly  die  and  are  buried. 

Verse  23. — '  Aiul  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  bciti,^  in  torments, 
and  secth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom.' 

The  former  verse  speaks  only  of  the  departure 
of  the  ungodly  out  of  this  life,  together  with  the 
glorious  conduct1  that  the  godly  have  into  the  king- 
dom of  their  Father.  Now  our  Lord  doth  show,  in 
this  verse,  partly  what  doth  and  shall  befal  to  the 
reprobate  after  this  life  is  ended,  where  he  saith, 
•  And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  That  is,  the 
ungodly,  after  they  depart  this  life,  do  lift  up  their 
eyes  in  hell. 

From  these  words  may  be  observed  these  things, 
First.  That  there  is  a  hell  for  souls  to  be  tormented 
in,  when  this  life  is  ended.  Mark,  after  he  was 
dead  and  buried,  'In  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.' 
Second.  That  all  that  are  ungodly,  and  do  live  and 
die  in  their  sins,  so  soon  as  ever  they  die,  they  go 
into  hell :  he  died  and  was  buried ;  '  And  in  hell 
he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  Third.  That  some  are  so 
fast  asleep,  and  secure  in  their  sins,  that  they 
scarce  know  well  where  they  are  till  they  come 
into  hell;  and  that  I  gather  from  these  words,  'In 
hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  He  was  asleep  before, 
but  hell  makes  him  lift  up  his  eyes. 

[First.]  As  I  said  before,  it  is  evident  that  there 
is  a  hell  for  souls,  yea,  and  bodies  too,  to  be  tor- 
mented in  after  they  depart  this  life,  as  is  clear, 
first,  because  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  cannot 
lie,  did  say  that  after  the  sinner  was  dead  and 
buried,  '  In  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.' 

Now  if  it  be  objected  that  by  hell  is  here  meant 
the  grave,  that  I  plainly  deny:  1.  Because  there 
the  body  is  not  sensible  of  torment  or  ease;  but  in 
that  hell  into  which  the  spirits  of  the  damned  de- 
pal  t,  they  are  sensible  of  torment,  and  would  very 
willingly  be  freed  from  it,  to  enjoy  ease,  which  they 
are  sensible  of  the  want  of;  as  is  clearly  discovered 
in  this  parable,  '  Send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip 
the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue.' 
2.  It  is  not  meant  the  grave,  but  some  other  place, 
because  the  bodies,  so  long  as  they  lie  there,  are 
not  capable  of  lifting  up  their  eyes,  to  see  the 
glorious  condition  of  the  children  of  God,  as  the 
souls  of  the  damned  do.  '  In  hell  he  lifted  up  his 
eyes.'  3.  It  cannot  be  the  grave,  for  then  it  must 
follow  that  the  soul  was  buried  there  with  the  body, 


1  Guard,  convoy,  or  escort.      Sec  Pilgrim's  Progress,  the 
entrance  into  the  celestial  city.— (En.) 
VOL.  III. 


which  cannot  stand  with  such  a  dead  state  as  is 
here  mentioned ;  for  he  saith,  '  The  rich  man 
died ;'  that  is,  his  soul  was  separated  from  his 
body.     '  And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.' 

If  it  be  again  objected  that  there  is  no  hell  but 
in  this  life ;  that  I  do  also  deny,  as  I  said  before : 
after  he  was  dead  and  buried,  '  In  hell  he  lifted  up 
his  eyes.'  And  let  me  tell  thee,  0  soul,  whoever 
thou  art,  that  if  thou  close  not  in  savingly  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  lay  hold  on  what  ho 
hath  done  and  is  doing  in  his  own  person  for  sin- 
ners, thou  wilt  find  such  a  hell  after  this  life  is 
ended,  that  thou  wilt  not  get  out  of  again  for  ever 
and  ever.  And  thou  that  art  wanton,  and  dost 
make  but  a  mock  at  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  when 
they  tell  thee  of  the  torments  of  hell,  thou  wilt  find 
that  when  thou  departest  out  of  this  life,  that  hell, 
even  the  hell  which  is  after  this  life,  will  meet  thee- 
in  thy  journey  thither;  and  will,  with  its  hellish 
crew,  give  thee  such  a  sad  salutation  that  thou 
wilt  not  forget  it  to  all  eternity.  When  that  scrip- 
ture comes  to  be  fulfilled  on  thy  soul,  in  is.  xiv.  9,  io, 
'  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  thee 
at  thy  coming :  it  stirreth  up  the  dead  for  thee, 
even  all  the  chief  ones  of  the  earth ;  it  hath  raised 
up  from  their  thrones  all  the  kings  of  the  nations. 
All  they,'  that  is,  that  are  in  hell,  shall  say,  '  Art 
thou  also  become  weak  as  we  ?  art  thou  becomo 
like  unto  us  V  0  sometimes  when  I  have  had  but 
thoughts  of  going  to  hell,  and  consider  the  ever- 
lastingness  of  their  ruin  that  fall  in  thither,  it  hath 
stirred  me  up  rather  to  seek  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  to  deliver  me  from  thence,  than  to  slight  it, 
and  make  a  mock  at  it.  '  And  in  hell  he  lifted  up 
his  eyes.' 

[Second.]  The  second  thing  I  told  you  was  this, 
that  all  the  ungodly  that  live  and  die  in  their  sins, 
so  soon  as  ever  they  depart  this  life,  do  descend  into 
hell.  This  is  also  verified  by  the  words  in  this  para- 
ble, where  Christ  saith,  He  *  died  and  was  buried, 
and  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  As  the  tree  falls, 
so  it  shall  be,  whether  it  be  to  heaven  or  hell.  Ec.  xi.  s. 
And  as  Christ  said  to  the  thief  on  the  cross,  '  To- 
day thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  paradise.'  Even  so 
the  devil  in  the  like  manner  may  say  unto  thy 
soul,  To-morrow  shalt  thou  be  with  me  iu  hell.  See 
then  what  a  miserable  case  he  that  dies  iu  an  un- 
regenerate  state  is  in;  he  departs  from  a  long  sick- 
ness to  a  longer  hell;  from  the  gripings  of  death, 
to  the  everlasting  torments  of  hell.  '  And  in  hell 
he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  Ah  friends  !  If  you  were 
but  yourselves,  you  would  have  a  care  of  your  souls; 
if  you  did  but  regard,  you  would  see  how  mad  they 
are  that  slight  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  0  what 
will  it  profit  thy  soul  to  have  pleasure  in  this  life, 
and  torments  in  hell  ?  Mar.  viiL  36.  Thou  hadst  bet- 
ter part  with  all  thy  sins,  and  pleasures,  and  com- 
panions, or  whatsoever  thou  delightest  in,  than  to 

86 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


have  soul  and  body  to  be  east  into  hell.  0  then 
do  not  now  neglect  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  lest  thou 
drop  down  to  hell.  He.  ii.  3.  Consider,  -would  it  not 
wound  thee  to  thine  heart  to  come  upon  thy  death- 
bed, and  instead  of  having  the  comfort  of  a  well 
spent  life,  and  the  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
together  with  the  comforts  of  his  glorious  Spirit: 
to  have,  first,  the  sight  of  an  ill-spent  life,  thy  sins 
flying  in  thy  face,  thy  conscience  uttering  itself 
with  thunder-claps  against  thee,  the  thoughts  of 
God  terrifying  of  thee,  death  with  his  merciless 
paw  seizing  upon  thee,  the  devils  standing  ready 
to  scramble  for  thy  soul,  and  hell  enlarging  her- 
self, and  ready  to  swallow  thee  up  ;  and  an  eternity 
of  misery  and  torment  attending  upon  thee,  from 
which  there  will  be  no  release.  For  mark,  death 
doth  not  come  alone  to  an  unconverted  soul,  but 
with  such  company,  as  wast  thou  but  sensible  of 
it  would  make  thee  tremble.  I  pray  consider  that 
scripture,  Re.  vi.  8,  '  And  I  looked  and  behold  a 
pale  horse,  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  Death, 
and  hell  followed  with  him.'  Mark,  death  doth 
not  come  alone  to  the  ungodly,  no,  but  hell  goeth 
with  him.  0  miserable  comforters  !  0  miserable 
society  !  Here  comes  death  and  hell  unto  thee. 
Death  goeth  into  thy  body,  and  separates  body  and 
soul  asunder ;  hell  stands  without,  as  I  may  say, 
to  embrace,  or  rather,  to  crush  thy  soul  between 
its  everlasting  grinders.  Then  thy  mirth,  thy  joy, 
thy  sinful  delights  will  be  ended  when  this  comes 
to  pass.  Lo  it  will  come.  Blessed  are  all  those 
that  through  Christ  Jesus  his  merits,  by  faith,  do 
escape  these  soul-murdering  companions.  '  And 
in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.' 

[Third.]  The  third  thing  you  know  that  we  did 
observe  from  these  words  was  this,  That  some  are 
so  fast  asleep,,  and  secui'e  in  their  sins,  that  they 
scarce  know  where  they  are,  until  they  come  into 
hell.  And  that  I  told  you  I  gather  by  these  words, 
'  In  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  Mark,  it  was  in  hell 
that  he  lift  up  his  eyes.  Now  some  do  understand 
by  these  words  that  he  came  to  himself,  or  began 
to  consider  with  himself,  or  to  think  with  himself 
in  what  an  estate  he  was,  and  what  he  was  deprived 
of;  which  is  still  a  confirmation  of  the  thing  laid 
down  by  me.  There  it  is  that  they  come  to  them- 
selves, that  is,  there  they  are  sensible  where  they 
are  indeed.  Thus  it  fares  with  some  men  that  they 
scarce  know  where  they  are,  till  they  lift  up  their 
eyes  in  hell.  It  is  with  those  people  as  with  those 
that  fall  down  in  a  swoon ;  you  know  if  a  man  do 
fall  down  in  a  swoon  in  one  room,  though  you  take 
him  up  and  carry  him  into  another,  yet  he  is  not ' 
sensible  where  he  is  till  he  cometh  unto  himself, 
and  lifteth  up  his  eyes. 

Truly  thus,  it  is  to  be  feared,  it  is  with  many 
poor  souls,  they  are  so  senseless,  so  hard,  so  seared 
in  their  conscience  [i  Ti.  iv.  2],  that  they  are  very 


ignorant  of  their  state ;  and  when  death  comes  it 
strikes  them  as  it  were  into  a  swoon,  especially  if 
they  die  suddenly,  and  so  they  are  hurried  away, 
and  scarce  know  where  they  are  till  in  hell  they 
lift  up  their  eyes :  this  is  he  who  '  dieth  in  his  full 
strength,  being  wholly  at  ease  and  quiet.'  Jobxxi.  23. 
Of  this  sort  are  they  spoken  of  in  rs.  lxxiii.,  where 
he  saith,  '  There  are  no  bands  in  their  death :  but 
their  strength  is  firm.'  '  They  are  not  in  trouble 
as  other  men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like  other 
men.'  And  again,  '  they  spend  their  days  in 
wealth,  and  in  a  moment,'  mark,  •  in  a  moment,' 
before    they  are  aware,   they  '  go    down  to    the 

grave.'    Job  xxi.  13. 

Indeed  this  is  too  much  known  by  woeful  and 
daily  experience ;  sometimes  when  we  go  to  visit 
them  that  are  sick  in  the  towns  and  places  where 
we  live,  0  how  senseless,  how  seared  in  their  con- 
sciences are  they!  They  are  neither  sensible  of 
heaven  nor  of  hell,  of  sin  nor  of  a  Saviour;  speak 
to  them  of  their  condition,  aud  the  state  of  their 
souls,  and  you  shall  find  them  as  ignorant  as  if 
they  had  no  souls  to  regard.  Others,  though  they 
lie  ready  to  die,  yet  they  are  busying  themselves 
about  their  outward  affairs,  as  though  they  should 
certainly  live  here,  even  to  live  and  enjoy  the 
same  for  ever.  Again,  come  to  others,  speak,  to 
them  about  the  state  of  their  souls,  though  they 
have  no  more  experience  of  the  new  birth  than  a 
beast,  yet  will  they  speak  as  confidently  of  their 
eternal  state,  and  the  welfare  of  their  souls,  as  if 
they  had  the  most  excellent  experience  of  any  man 
or  woman  in  the  world,  saying,  '  I  shall  have 
peace.'  De.  xxix.  19.  When,  as  I  said  even  now,  the 
Lord  knows  they  are  as  ignorant  of  the  new  birth, 
of  the  nature  and  operation  of  faith,  of  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit,  as  if  there  were  no  new  birth,  no 
faith,  no  witness  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  any  of 
the  saints  in  the  world.  Nay,  thus  many  of  them 
are,  even  an  hour  or  less  before  their  departure. 
Ah,  poor  souls !  though  they  may  go  away  here 
like  a  lamb,  as  the  world  says,  yet,  if  you  could 
but  follow  them  a  little,  to  stand  and  listen  soon 
after  their  departure,  it  is  to  be  feared,  you  should 
hear  them  roar  like  a  lion  at  their  first  entrance 
into  hell,  far  worse  than  even  did  Korah,  &c, 
when   they  went    down  quick  into    the   ground. 

Nu.  xvi.  31—35. 

Now,  by  this  one  thing  doth  the  devil  take 
great  advantage  on  the  hearts  of  the  ignorant, 
suggesting  unto  them  that  because  the  party  de- 
ceased departed  so  quietly,  without  all  doubt  they 
are  gone  to  rest  and  joy;  when,  alas!  it  is  to  be 
feared  the  reason  why  they  went  away  so  quietly, 
was  rather  because  they  were  senseless  and  har- 
dened in  their  consciences  ;  yea,  dead  before  in 
sins  and  trespasses.  For,  had  they  had  but  some 
awakenings  on  their  death-beds,  as  some  have  had, 


THE   GROANS   OP  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


GS3 


they  would  have  made  all  the  town  to  ring  of  their 
doleful  condition ;  hut  because  they  are  seared 
and  ignorant,  and  so  depart  quietly,  therefore  the 
world  takes  heart  at  grass,1  as  we  use  to  say, 
and  make  no  great  matter  of  living  and  dying 
they  cannot  tell  how  ;  «  therefore  pride  comjwsseth 
(hem  cis  a  chain.''  r-s.  lxxv.  «.  But  let  them  look  to 
themselves,  for  if  they  have  not  an  interest  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  now,  while  they  live  in  the  world,  they 
will,  whether  they  die  raging  or  still,  go  unto  the 
same  place;  '  and  lifted  up  their  eyes  in  hell.' 

0,  my  friends,  did  you  hut  know  what  a  miser- 
ahle  condition  they  are  in  that  go  out  of  this  world 
without  an  interest  in  the  Son  cf  God,  it  would 
make  yousmiteupon  yourthigh,  and  in  the  bitterness 
of  your  souls  cry  out,  '  Men  and  brethren,  what 
shall  we  do  to  be  saved?'  Ac.  xvi.  29-31.  And  not 
only  so,  but  thou  wouldst  not  be  comforted  until 
thou  didst  find  a  rest  for  thy  soul  in  tho  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

Verse  23.  '  And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes, 
being  in  torments,  and  seeth  Abraham  afar  off, 
and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom.' 

Something,  in  brief,  I  have  observed  from  the 
first  part  of  this  verse,  namely,  from  these  words, 
'  And  in  bell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes.'  And,  indeed, 
1  have  observed  but  something,  for  they  are  very 
full  of  matter,  and  many  things  might  be  taken 
notice  of  in  them.  There  is  one  thing  more  that 
I  might  touch  upon,  as  touched  in  this  saying,  and 
that  is  this: — Methinks  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  doth 
hereby  signify  that  men  are  naturally  unwilling  to 
see  or  take  notice  of  their  sad  state,  I  say  by  nature; 
but  though  now  they  are  willingly  ignorant,  yet 
in  hell  they  shall  lift  up  their  eyes.  That  is,  in 
hell  they  shall  see  and  understand  their  miserable 
condition ;  and,  therefore,  to  these  words :  '  In 
hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,'  he  adds,  '  being  in  tor- 
ments.' As  if  he  had  said,  though  once  they 
shut  their  eyes,  though  once  they  were  willingly 
ignorant  (2  Pe.  Hi.  5),  yet,  when  they  depart  into 
hell,  they  shall  be  so  miserably  handled  and  tor- 
mented, that  they  shall  be  forced  to  lift  up  their 
eyes.  While  men  live  in  this  world,  and  are  in  a 
natural  state,  they  will  have  a  good  conceit  of 
themselves,  and  of  their  condition — they  will  con- 
clude that  they  are  Christians,  that  Abraham  is 
their  father,  and  their  state  to  be  as  good  as  the 
best.  Mat.  iii.  7-9.  They  will  conclude  they  have 
faith,  the  Spirit,  a  good  hope,  and  an  interest  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  but  then,  when  they  drop 
into  hell,  and  lift  up  their  eyes  there,  and  behold 
first  their  soul  to  be  in  extreme  torments ;  their 
dwelling  to  be  the  bottomless  pit ;  their  company 
thousands  of  damned  souls ;  also  the  innumerable 

1  This  proverb  was  very  probably  founded  upon  Je.  1.  11  : 
'  Yc  are  crown  fat  as  the  heifer  at  grass,  and  bellow  as  bulls.' 
— (En.) 


company  of  devils;  and  the  hot  scalding  vengeance 
of  God,  not  only  to  drop,  but  to  fall  very  violently 
upon  them ;  then  they  will  begin  to  be  awakened, 
who  all  their  lifetime  were  in  a  dead  sleep.  I  say, 
when  this  comes  to  pass,  lo  it  will ;  then  in  hell 
they  shall  lift  up  their  eyes,  in  the  midst  of  tor- 
ments they  shall  lift  up  their  eyes. 

Again,  you  may  observe  in  these  words,  *  And 
in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments.' 
that  the  time  of  the  ungodly  men's  smarting  for 
their  sins  will  be  in  the  torments  of  hell.  Now 
here  I  am  put  to  a  stand,  when  I  consider  the  tor- 
ments of  hell  into  which  the  damned  do  fall.  0 
unspeakable  torments!  0  endless  torments!  Now 
that  thy  soul  might  he  made  to  flee  from  those 
intolerable  torments  into  which  the  damned  do  go, 
I  shall  show  you  briefly  what  are  tho  torments  of 
hell.  First.  By  the  names  of  it.  Second.  By  the 
sad  state  thou  wilt  be  in,  if  thou  comest  there. 

First.  The  names.  It  is  called  a  never-dying- 
worm,  Mar.  ix.  It  is  called  an  oven  fire,  hot,  Mai  iv.  i. 
It  is  called  a  furnace,  a  fiery-furnace,  .Mat.  si&  It 
is  called  the  bottomless  pit,  the  unquenchable  fire, 
fire  and  brimstone,  hell  fire,  the  lake  of  fire,  de- 
vouring fire,  everlasting  fire,  eternal  fire,  a  stream 

of  fire,  Re.  xxi. 

[Second.  By  the  sad  state  thou  icilt  be  in,  if  thou 
comest  there.] 

1.  One  part  of  thy  torments  will  be  this,  thou 
shalt  have  a  full  sight  of  all  thy  ill  spent  life, 
from  first  to  last ;  though  here  thou  canst  sin  to- 
day and  forget  it  by  to-morrow,  yet  there  thou 
shalt  be  made  to  remember  how  thou  didst  sin 
against  God  at  such  a  time,  and  in  such  a  place, 
for  such  a  thing,  and  with  such  a  one,  which  will 
be  a  hell  unto  thee.  God  will  '  set  ihem  in  order 
before  thine  eyes.'  rs.  u.  21. 

2.  Thou  shalt  have  the  guilt  of  them  all  lie 
heavy  on  thy  soul,  not  only  the  guilt  of  one  or  two, 
but  the  guilt  of  them  all  together,  and  there  they 
shall  lie  in  thy  soul,  as  if  thy  belly  were  full  of 
pitch,  and  set  on  a  light  fire.  Here  men  can 
sometimes  think  on  their  sins  with  delight,  but 
there  with  unspeakable  torment ;  for  that  I  under- 
stand to  be  the  fire  that  Christ  speaketh  of,  which 
shall  never  be  quenched.  Mar.  ix.  43-49.  While  men 
live  here,  0  how  doth  the  guilt  of  one  sin  some- 
times crush  the  soul!  It  makes  a  man  in  such 
plight  that  he  is  weary  of  his  life,  so  that  he  can 
neither  rest  at  home  nor  abroad,  neither  up  nor  in 
bed.-  Nay,  I  do  know  that  they  have  been  so 
tormented  with  the  guilt  of  one  sinful  thought, 
that  they  have  been  even  at  their  wits'  end,  and  have 

-  Banyan  is  here  expressing:  what  he  had  most  acutely  felt. 
'  I  blessed  the  condition  of  the  dog  and  toad,  because  they  bad 
no  soul  to  perish  under  the  everlasting  weight  of  hell.  1  was 
broken  to  pieces,'  until  he  found  refuge  in  Jesus.  See  Grace 
Abounding,  No.  104. — (Ed.) 


CS4 


A  FEW  SIGHS   FROM  HELL.  OR 


hanged  themselves.  But  now  when  thou  comest 
into  hell,  and  hast  not  only  one  or  two,  or  an  hun- 
dred sins,  with  the  guilt  of  them  all  on  thy  soul 
and  body,  hut  all  the  sins  that  ever  thou  didst 
commit  since  thou  earnest  into  the  world,  altogether 
clapped  on  thy  conscience  at  one  time,  as  one  should 
clap  a  red  hot  iron  to  thy  breasts,  and  there  to 
continue  to  all  eternity :  this  is  miserable. 

3.  Again,  then  thou  shalt  have  brought  into 
thy  remembrance  the  slighting  cf  the  gospel  of 
Christ ;  here  thou  shalt  consider  how  willing  Christ 
was  to  come  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  for 
what  a  trifle  thou  didst  reject  him.  This  is  plainly 
held  forth  in  is.  xxviii.,  where,  speaking  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  foundation  of  salvation,  ver.  16, 
he  saith  of  them  that  reject  the  gospel,  that,  when 
the  overflowing  scourge  doth  pass  through  the  earth, 
which  I  understand  to  be  at  the  end  of  the  world, 
then,  saith  he,  it  shall  take  you  morning  by  morning, 
by  day  and  by  night  shall  it  pass  over  you ;  that 
is,  continually,  without  any  intermission.  *  And 
it  shall  be  a  vexation  only  to  understand  the  report.' 
*  A  vexation,*  that  is,  a  torment,  or  a  great  part 
of  hell  only  to  understand  the  report,  to  under- 
stand the  good  tidings  that  came  into  the  world 
by  Christ's  death  for  poor  sinners.  And  you  will 
find  this  verily  to  be  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  if 
you  compare  it  with  is.  mi.  i,  where  he  speaks  of 
men's  turning  their  backs  upon  the  tenders  of 
God's  grace  in  the  gospel,  he  saith,  *  Who  hath 
believed  our  report?'  or  the  gospel  declared  by 
us?  Now  this  will  be  a  mighty  torment  to  the 
ungodly,  when  they  shall  understand  the  goodness 
of  God  was  so  great  that  he  even  sent  his  Son  out 
of  his  bosom  to  die  for  sinners,  and  yet  that  they 
should  be  so  foolish  as  to  put  him  off  from  one 
time  to  another ;  that  they  should  be  so  foolish  as 
to  lose  heaven  and  Christ,  and  eternal  life  in  glory, 
for  the  society  of  a  company  of  drunkards ;  that 
they  should  lose  their  souls  for  a  little  sport,  for 
this  world,  for  a  strumpet,  for  that  which  is  lighter 
than  vanity  and  nothing ;  I  say  this  will  be  a  very 
great  torment  unto  thee. 

4.  Another  part  of  thy  torment  will  be  this  : 
Thou  shalt  see  thy  friends,  thy  acquaintance,  thy 
neighbours  ;  nay,  it  may  be  thy  father,  thy  mother, 
thy  wife,  thy  husband,  thy  children,  thy  brother, 
thy  siiter,  with  others,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  thyself  thrust  out.  Lu.  xia.  2s.  '  There  shall  be 
weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  when  ye  shall  see 
Abraham  (your  father),  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
(together  with  your  brethren),  and  all  the  prophets 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  you  yourselves  thrust 
out.'  Nay,  saith  he,  '  They  shall  come  from  the 
east,  tawAfrom  the  west' — that  is,  those  that  thou 
didst  never  see  in  all  thy  life  before,  and  they  shall 
sit  down  with  thy  friends,  and  thy  neighbours,  thy 
wife  and  thy  children,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 


and  thou,  for  thy  sins  and  disobedience,  shall  bs 
shut,  nay,  thrust  out.     0  wonderful  torment !. 

5.  Again,  thou  shalt  have  none  but  a  company 
of  damned  souls,  with  an  innumerable  company  of 
devils,  to  keep  company  with  thee.  While  thou 
art  in  this  world,  the  very  thoughts  of  the  devils 
appearing  to  thee  makes  thy  flesh  to  tremble,  and 
thine  hair  ready  to  stand  upright  on  thy  head. 
But  0!  what  wilt  thou  do,  when  not  only  the 
supposition  of  the  devils  appearing,  but  the  real 
society  of  all  the  devils  in  hell  will  be  with  thee 
howling  and  roaring,  screeching  and  roaring  in 
such  a  hideous  manner,  that  thou  wilt  be  even  at 
thy  wits'  end,  and  be  ready  to  run  stark  mad  again 
for  anguish  and  torment? 

6.  Again,  that  thou  mightest  be  tormented  to 
purpose,  the  mighty  God  of  heaven  will  lay  as 
great  wrath  and  vengeance  upon  thee  as  ever  he 
can,  by  the  might  of  his  glorious  power.  As  I 
said  before,  thou  shalt  have  his  wrath,  not  by 
drops,  but  by  whole  showers  shall  it  come,  thunder, 
thunder,  upon  thy  body  and  soul  so  fast,  and  so 
thick,  that  thou  shalt  be  tormented  out  of  measure. 
And  go  saith  the  Scripture,  2  Th.  i.  9,  speaking  of 
the  wicked,  '  Who  shall  be  punished  with  everlast- 
ing destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 
from  the  glory  of  his  power,'  when  the  saints  shall 
be  admiring  his  goodness  and  glory.  Again,  this 
thou  shalt  have,  as  I  said  before,  without  any  in- 
termission ;  thou  shalt  not  have  any  ease  so  long 
as  while  a  man  may  turn  himself  round;  thou  shalt 
have  it  always  every  hour,  day  and  night;  for  their 
worm  never  dies,  but  always  gnaws,  and  their  fire 
is  never  quenched  ;  as  it  is  written  in  Mar.  is. 

7.  Again,  in  this  condition  thou  must  be  for 
ever,  and  that  is  as  sad  as  all  the  rest.  For  if  a 
man  were  to  have  all  his  sins  laid  to  his  charge, 
and  communion  with  the  devils,  and  as  much  wrath 
as  the  great  God  of  heaven  can  inflict  unto  him  ; 
I  say,  if  it  were  but  for  a  time,  even  ten  thousand 
years,  and  so  end,  there  would  be  ground  of  com- 
fort, and  hopes  of  deliverance  ;  but  here  is  thy 
misery,  this  is  thy  state  for  ever,  here  thou  must 
be  for  ever :  when  thou  lookest  about  thee,  and 
seest  what  an  innumerable  company  of  howling 
devils  thou  art  amongst,  thou  shalt  think  this 
again,  this  is  my  portion  for  ever.  When  thou 
hast  been  in  hell  so  many  thousand  years  as  there 
are  stars  in  the  firmament,  or  drops  in  the  sea,  or 
sands  on  the  sea-shore,  yet  thou  hast  to  lie  there 
for  ever.  0  this  one  word  ever,  how  will  it  tor- 
ment thy  soul ! 

Friends,  I  have  only  given  a  very  short  touch 
of  the  torments  of  hell.  0  !  I  am  set,  I  am  set, 
and  am  not  able  to  utter  what  my  mind  conceives 
of  the  torments  of  hell.  Yet  this  let  me  say  to 
thee,  accept  of  God's  mercy  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  lest  thou  feel  that  with  thy  con- 


THE   GROANS   OF   A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


085 


science  which  I  cannot  express  with  my  tongue, 
and  say,  I  am  sorely  tormented  in  this  flame. 

'  Ami  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in 
Us  bosom.' 

When  the  damned  are  in  this  pitiful  state,  sur- 
rounded with  fears,  with  terrors,  with  torment  and 
vengeance,  one  thing  they  shall  have,  which  is 
this,  they  shall  see  the  happy  and  blessed  state  of 
God's  children.  He  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and 
Lazarus  in  his  bosom  ;  which,  as  I  said  before,  is 
the  happv  state  of  the  saints  when  this  life  is 
ended.  This  now  shall  be  so  far  from  being  an 
ease  unto  them,  that  it  shall  most  wonderfully 
aggravate  or  heighten  their  torment,  as  I  said  he- 
fore.  There  shall  be  weeping,  or  cause  of  lamen- 
tation, when  they  shall  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  them- 
selves thrust  out. 

1 .  Observe,  Those  that  die  in  their  sins  are  far 
from  going  to  heaven  ;  he  seeth  Abraham  afar  off, 
and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom.  And,  indeed,  it  is  just 
with  God  to  deal  with  them  that  die  in  their  sins 
according  to  what  they  have  done  ;  and  to  make 
them  who  are  far  from  righteousness  now,  to  stand 
far  from  heaven  to  all  eternity.  Hearken  to  this, 
ye  stout-hearted,  that  are  far  from  righteousness, 
and  that  are  resolved  to  go  on  in  your  sins,  when 
you  die  you  will  be  far  from  heaven  ;  you  will  see 
Lazarus,  but  it  will  be  afar  off. 

Again,  he  'seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus 
in  his  bosom.' 

These  are  some  of  the  things  the  damned  do 
behold,  so  soon  as  they  come  into  torment.  Mark, 
and  he  '  seeth  Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom.' 
Lazarus,  who  was  he  ?  Why  even  he  that  was 
so  slighted,  so  disregarded,  so  undervalued  by  this 
ungodly  one  while  he  was  in  the  world,  he  seeth 
Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom. 

From  whence  observe,  That  those  who  live  and 
die  the  enemies  of  the  saints  of  God,  let  them  be 
never  so  great,  or  stout,  let  them  bear  never  so 
much  sway  while  they  are  in  the  world,  let  them 
brag  and  boast  never  so  much  while  they  are  here, 
they  shall,  in  spite  of  their  teeth,  see  the  saints, 
yea,  the  poor  saints,  even  the  Lazaruses  or  the 
ragged  ones  that  belong  to  Jesus,  to  be  in  a  better 
condition  than  themselves.  0 !  who  do  you  think 
was  in  the  best  condition  ?  who  do  you  think  saw 
themselves  in  the  best  condition  ?  He  that  was  in 
hell,  or  he  that  was  in  heaven  ?  He  that  wa3  in 
darkness,  or  he  that  was  in  light  ?  He  that  was 
in  everlasting  joy,  or  he  that  was  in  everlasting 
torments  ?  The  one  with  God,  Christ,  saints, 
angels,  the  other  in  tormenting  flames,  under  the 
curse  of  God's  eternal  hatred,  with  the  devils  aud 
their  angels,  together  with  an  innumerable  com- 
pany of  howling,  roaring,  cursing,  ever-burning 
reprobates  ?      Certainly,  this  observation  will  be 


easily  proved  to  be  true  here  in  this  world,  by  him 
that  looks  upon  it  witli  an  understanding  heart, 
and  will  clear  itself  to  be  true  in  the  world  to 
come,  by  such  as  shall  go  either  to  heaven  or  to 
hell. 

2.  The  second  observation  from  these  words, 
'  And  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his 
bosom,'  is  this  ;  they  that  are  the  persecutors  of 
the  saints  of  the  Lord  now  in  this  world,  shall  see 
the  Lord's  persecuted  ones  to  be  they  that  are  so 
highly  esteemed  by  the  Lord,  as  to  sit  or  to  be  in 
Abraham'0,  bosom,  in  everlasting  glory,  though 
they,  the  enemies  to  the  children  of  God,1  did  so 
lightly  esteem  them,  that  they  scorned  to  let  them 
gather  up  the  dog's  meat  that  falls  under  their 
table.  This  is  also  verified,  and  held  forth  plainly 
by  this  parable.  And  therefore  be  not  grieved, 
0  you  that  are  the  tempted,  persecuted,  afflicted, 
sighing,  praying  saints  of  the  Lord,  though  your 
adversaries  look  upon  you  now  with  a  disdainful, 
surly,  rugged,  proud,  and  haughty  countenance,, 
yet  the  time  shall  come  when  they  shall  spy  you 
in  Abraham's  bosom  ! 

I  might  enlarge  upon  these  things,  but  shall" 
leave  them  to  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  which  can 
better  by  ten  thousand  degrees  enlarge  them  on 
thy  heart  and  conscience,  than  I  can  upon  a  piece 
of  paper.  Therefore,  leaving  these  to  the  blessing 
of  the  Lord,  I  shall  come  to  the  next  verse,  and 
shall  be  brief  in  speaking  to  that  also,  and  so  pass 
to  the  rest. 

Verse  24. — '  And  he  cried,  and  said,  Father  Abraham,  have 
mercy  on  me,  and  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip 
of  his  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue ;  for  I  am  tor- 
mented in  this  ilame.' 

You  know  I  told  you  that  ver.  22  is  a  discovery 
of  the  departure  of  the  godly  and  the  ungodly  out 
of  this  life  ;  where  he  saith  the  beggar  died,  and  the 
rich  man  also  died.  The  23d  verse  is  a  discovery 
of  the  proper  places,  both  of  the  godly  and  the  un- 
godly after  death  ;  one  beiug  in  Abraham's  bosom, 
or  in  glory,  the  other  in  hell.  Now  this  24th  verse 
is  a  discovery  of  part  of  the  too  late  repentance  of 
the  ungodly,  when  they  are  dropped  down  into  hell ; 
'  And  he  cried,  and  said,  Father  Abraham,  have 
mercy  on  me. '  From  these  words,  '  And  he  cried, ' 
we  may  observe, 

First.  What  a  change  the  ungodly  will  have 
when  they  come  into  hell.  'He  cried.'  It  is 
like  he  was  laughing,  jesting,  jeering,  drinking, 
mocking,  swearing,  cursing,  prating,  persecuting 
of  the  godly  in  his  prosperity,  among  his  filthy 
companions.  But  now  the  case  is  otherwise,  now 
he  is  in  another  frame,  now  his  proud,  stout,  cur- 

1  The  first  edition  has,  *and  the  practice  of  the  saints.'  This 
was  left  out  in  all  the  subsequent  editions. — (Ed.) 


635 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM  HELL,  OR 


rish  carriage,  is  come  down  ;  '  And  he  cried.'  The 
laughter  of  the  ungodly  -will  not  last  always,  hut 
will  be  sure  to  end  in  a  cry  ;  '  The  triumphing  of 
the  wicked  is  short.'  Job  xx.  5.  Consider,  you  must 
have  a  change  either  here  or  in  hell.  If  you  be 
not  new  creatures,  regenerate  persons,  new-born 
babes,  in  this  world,  before  you  go  hence,  your 
note  will  be  changed,  your  conditions  will  be 
changed  ;  for  if  you  come  into  hell,  you  must  cry. 
0  did  but  the  singing  drunkards,  when  they  are 
making  merry  on  the  ale  bench,1  think  on  this, 
it  would  make  them  change  their  note,  and  cry, 
What  shall  I  do  ?  Whither  shall  I  go  when  I 
die  ?  But,  as  I  said  before,  the  devil,  as  he 
labours  to  get  poor  souls  to  follow  their  sins,  so 
he  labours  also  to  keep  the  thoughts  of  eternal 
damnation  out  of  their  minds  ;  and,  indeed,  these 
two  things  are  so  nearly  linked  together,  that  the 
devil  cannot  well  get  the  soul  to  go  on  in  sin  with 
delight  unless  he  can  keep  the  thoughts  of  that 
terrible  after  clap  out  of  their  minds. 

But  let  them  know  that  it  shall  not  always  be 
thus  with  them  ;  for  if,  when  they  depart,  they 
drop  down  into  eternal  destruction,  they  shall  have 
such  a  sense  of  their  sins,  and  the  punishment  due 
to  the  same,  that  it  shall  make  them  to  cry;  'And 
he  cried.'  0  what  an  alteration  will  there  be 
among  the  ungodly  when  they  go  out  of  this 
world  ?  It  may  be  a  fortnight,  or  a  month  before 
their  departure,  they  were  light,  stout,  surly, 
drinking  themselves  drunk,  slighting  God's  people, 
mocking  at  goodness,  and  delighting  in  sin,  fol- 
lowing the  world,  seeking  after  riches,  faring  deli- 
ciously,  keeping  company  with  the  bravest  ;  2  but 
now,  they  are  dropped  down  into  hell,  they  cry.  A 
little  while  ago  they  were  painting  their  faces, 
feeding  their  lusts,  following  their  whores,  rob- 
bing their  neighbours,  telling  of  lies,  following  of 
plays  and  sports,  to  pass  away  the  time  ;  but  now 
they  are  hi  hell,  they  do  cry.  It  may  be  last  year 
they  heard  some  good  sermons,  were  invited  to  re- 
ceive heaven,  were  told  their  sins  should  be  par- 
doned if  they  closed  in  with  Jesus  ;  but,  refusing 
his  proffers,  and  slighting  the  grace  that  was  once 
tendered,  they  are  now  in  hell,  and  do  cry. 

Before,  they  had  so  much  time,  they  thought 
that  they  could  not  tell  how  to  spend  it,  unless  it 
were  in  hunting,  and  whoring,  in  dancing,  and 
playing,  and  spending  whole  hours,  yea,  days, 
nay,  weeks,  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  ;  but  when 
they  depart  into  another  place,  and  begin  to  lift 
up  their  eyes  in  hell,  and  consider  their  miserable 
and  irrecoverable  condition,  they  will  cry. 


1  Ale  bench,  in  Bunyan's  time,  was  very  similar  to  a  taproom ; 
more  generally  the  place  of  resort  for  the  idle  tipplers,  but  some- 
times of  refreshment  to  the  weary  traveller. — (Ed.) 

2  Formerly  designated  not  only  a  courageous  man,  but  his 
counterpart,  a  bnurgart,  a  bully,  or  a  dandy.  In  these  latter 
senses  it  is  obsolete. — (Ed.) 


0  what  a  condition  wilt  thou  fall  into,  when  thou 
dost  depart  this  world ;  if  thou  depart  unconverted, 
and  not  born  again,  thou  hadst  better  have  been 
smothered  the  first  hour  thou  wast  born  ;  thou 
hadst  better  have  been  plucked  one  limb  from 
another ;  thou  hadst  better  have  been  made  a  dog, 
a  toad,  a  serpent,  nay,  any  other  creature  in  the 
visible  world,  than  to  die  unconverted  ;  3  and  this 
thou  wilt  find  to  be  true,  when  in  hell  thou  dost 
lift  up  thine  eyes,  and  dost  cry. 

Here  then,  before  we  go  any  further,  you  may 
see  that  it  is  not  without  good  ground  that  these 
words  are  here  spoken  by  our  Lord,  that  when  any 
of  the  ungodly  do  depart  into  hell,  they  will  cry. 
Cry,  why  so  ?  1.  They  will  cry  to  think  that  they 
should  be  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the  living,  never 
more  to  have  any  footing  therein.  2.  They  will 
cry  to  think  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  should  be  so 
often  proffered  them,  and  yet  they  are  not  profited 
by  it.  3.  They  will  cry  to  think  that  now,  though 
they  would  never  so  willingly  repent  and  be  saved, 
yet  they  are  past  all  recovery.  4.  They  will  cry 
to  think  that  they  should  be  so  foolish  as  to  follow 
their  pleasures,  when  others  were  fallowing  of 
Christ.  Ln.  xiii.  28.  5.  They  will  cry  to  think  that 
they  must  be  separated  from  God,  Christ,  and  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  that  for  ever.  6.  To  think 
that  their  crying  will  now  do  them  no  good.  7.  To 
think  that,  at  the  day  of  judgment,  they  must  stand 
at  the  left  hand  of  Christ,  among  an  innumerable 
company  of  the  damned  ones.  8.  They  will  cry 
to  think  that  Lazarus,  whom  once  they  slighted, 
must  be  of  them  that  must  sit  down  with  Christ  to 
judge  ;  or  together  with  Christ,  to  pass  a  sentence 
of  condemnation  on  their  souls  for  ever  and  ever, 
l  Co.  vi.  2,  3.  9.  Cry  to  think  that  when  the  judg- 
ment is  over,  and  others  are  taken  into  the  ever- 
lasting kingdom  of  glory,  then  they  must  depart 
back  again  into  that  dungeon  of  darkness  from 
whence  they  came  out,  to  appear  before  the  terri- 
ble tribunal.  There  they  shall  be  tormented  so 
long  as  eternity  lasts,  without  the  least  intermis- 
sion or  ease. 

How  sayest  thou,  0  thou  wanton,  proud,  swear- 
ing, lying,  ungodly  wretch,  whether  this  be  to 
be  slighted  and  made  a  mock  at.  And  again  tell 
me  now,  if  it  be  not  better  to  leave  sin,  and  to 
close  in  with  Christ  Jesus,  notwithstanding  that 
reproach  thou  shalt  meet  with  for  so  doing,  than 
to  live  a  little  while  in  this  world  in  pleasures  and 
feeding  thy  lusts,  in  neglecting  the  welfare  of  thy 
soul,  and  refusing  to  be  justified  by  Jesus;  and  in 
a  moment  to  drop  down  to  hell  and  to  cry  ?  0  ! 
consider,  I  say,  consider  betimes,  and  put  not  off 
the  tenders  of  the  crace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 


3  These  feelings  appear  in  awful  reality  in  Grace  Aboundiwj, 
Nos.  87  and  104.— (Ed.) 


:IIE   GROANS   OF   A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


687 


lest  you  lift  up  your  eyes  in  hell,  and  cry  for  an- 
guish of  spirit. 

'And  he  cried  and  said,  Father Abraham,  have 
mercy  on  me,  and  send  Lazarus,'  <fcc. 

[Second.]  These  words  do  not  only  hold  forth  the 
lamentable  condition  of  the  damned,  and  their  la- 
mentable howlingand  crying  out  undertheir  anguish 
of  spirit,  but  also  they  do  signify  to  us,  as  I  said 
before,  their  too  late  repentance;  and  also  that  they 
would  very  willingly,  if  they  might,  be  set  at  liberty 
from  that  everlasting  misery  that  by  their  sins  they 
have  plunged  themselves  into.  I  say,  these  words 
do  hold  forth  a  desire  that  the  damned  have,  to  bo 
delivered  from  those  torments  that  they  now  are 
in:  0  '  Father  Abraham,'  saith  he,  'have  mercy 
on  me,  and  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip 
of  his  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue,  for  I 
am  tormented  in  this  flame.'  These  words,  'Father 
Abraham,'  may  have  some  difficulty  in  them.  It 
is  possible  that  some  may  think  them  to  be  meant 
of  Abraham  ;  and  those,  or  him  that  crieth  out 
here,  to  be  the  Jews.  Or  it  may  be  some  may 
understand  it  to  be  God,  or  Jesus  Christ  his  Son, 
which  I  rather  suppose  it  may  be,  that  is  here  cried 
out  unto  ;  because  you  find  the  same  cry  to  him 
as  it  were  uttered  by  the  ungodly  in  other  places 
of  the  Scripture  ;  as  in  Lu.  siii.  26,  K.  Then  shall 
they  say,  '  Lord,  Lord,  we  have  eaten  and  drunk 
in  thy  presence,  and  thouhast  taught  in  our  streets.' 
Nay  more,  '  In  thy  name  have  cast  out  devils,  and 
in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works.'  Mat.  Hi. 
22.  This  was  just  at  their  rejection.  And  again, 
in  Mat.  xxv.  n,  they  cry  again  to  him,  even  to 
Jesus,  'Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us.'  And  he  there 
again  gives  them  a  repulse,  as  also  in  this  parable. 

But  however  or  whosoever  Abraham  is,  yet 
these  truths  may  be  observed  from  the  words. 
1.  That  the  damned,  when  in  an  irrecoverable 
estate,  will  seek  for,  or  desire  deliverance  from 
the  wrath  that  they  are  and  shall  be  in  for  eter- 
nity. '  Surely  in  the  floods  of  great  waters  they 
shall  not  come  nigh  unto  him.'  rs.  xxxii.  6.  2.  That 
they  will  pray,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  earnestly  for 
deliverance  from  their  miserable  estate.  These 
two  things  are  clear  from  the  words.  For  mark, 
he  not  only  said,  'Father  Abraham,  have  mercy  on 
me  ;'  but  '  he  cried,'  and  said, '  Father  Abraham, 
have  mercy  on  me.'  3.  From  whence  take  a  third 
observation  ;  and  that  is.  there  is  a  time  coming 
wherein,  though  men  shall  both  cry  and  pray,  yet 
they  are  like  to  have  no  mercy  at  the  hands  of  God ; 
for  so  was  this  man  served,  as  I  shall  further  show 
by  and  by  when  I  come  to  it. 

Some  people  are  so  deluded  by  the  devil  as  to 
think  that  God  is  so  merciful  as  to  own  or  regard 
anything  for  prayer  ;  they  think  anything  will  go 
for  current  and  good  satisfaction,  while  they  are 
here  in  this  world,  through  ignorance  of  the  true 


nature  of  the  mercy  of  God,  and  the  knowledge  in 
what  way  God  is  satisfied  for  sinners.  Now  I 
say,  through  ignorance  they  think,  that  if  they  do 
but  mutter  over  some  form  of  prayers,1  though 
they  know  not  what  they  say,  nor  what  they  re- 
quest, yet  God  is  satisfied,  yea,  very  well  satisfied 
with  their  doings  ;  when,  alas  !  there  is  nothing 
less.  0  friends,  I  beseech  you  to  look  about  you, 
and  seek  in  good  earnest  for  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
so  to  help  you  now,  to  strive  and  pray,  and  to 
enable  you  to  lay  hold  of  Christ,  that  your  souls 
may  be  caved,  lest  the  time  come  that  though  you 
cry  and  pray,  and  wish  also  that  you  had  laid  hold 
on  the  Lord  Jesus,  yet  you  must  and  shall  be  damned. 

Then  again,  you  may  see  that  though  God  be 
willing  to  save  sinners  at  some  time,  yet  this  time 
doth  not  always  last.  No,  he  that  can  find  in  his 
heart  to  turn  his  back  upon  Jesus  Christ  now, 
shall  have  the  back  turned  upon  him  hereafter, 
when  he  may  cry  and  pray  for  mercy,  and  yet  go 
without  it.  God  will  have  a  time  to  meet  with 
them  that  now  do  not  seek  after  him.  They  shall 
have  a  time,  yea  time  enough  hereafter  to  repent 
their  folly,  and  to  befool  themselves,  for  turning 
their  backs  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  '  I  will 
laugh  at  your  calamity,'  saith  he,  and  '  mock  when 
your  fear  cometh.'  rr.  L  26. 

Again,  this  should  admonish  us  to  take  time 
while  it  is  proffered,  lest  we  repent  us  of  our  un- 
belief and  rebellion  when  we  are  deprived  of  it. 
Ah  friends  !  Time  is  precious,  an  hour's  time  to 
hear  a  sermon  is  precious.  I  have  sometimes 
thought  thus  with  myself,  Set  the  case,  the  Lord 
should  send  two  or  three  of  his  servants,  the  min- 
isters of  the  gospel,  to  hell  among  the  damned, 
with  this  comission  ;  Go  ye  to  hell,  and  preach  my 
grace  to  those  that  are  there.  Let  your  sermon 
be  an  hour  long,  and  hold  forth  the  merits  of  my 
Son's  birth,  righteousness,  death,  resurrection, 
ascension,  and  intercession,  with  all  my  love  in  him, 
and  proffer  it  to  them,  telling  them  that  now  once 
more,  and  but  once,  do  I  proffer  the  means  of  re- 
conciliation to  them.  They  who  are  now  roaring, 
being  past  hope,  would  then  leap  at  the  least  prof- 
fer of  mercy.  0  they  that  could  spend  whole  days, 
weeks,  nay,  years,  in  rejecting  the  Son  of  God, 
would  now  be  glad  of  one  tender  of  that  mercy. 
'  Father,'  saith  he,  '  have  mercy  on  me.' 

Again,  from  these  words  you  may  observe,  that 
mercy  would  be  welcome  when  souls  are  under 
judgment.  Now  his  soul  is  in  the  fire,  now  he  is 
under  the  wrath  of  God,  now  he  is  iu  hell,  there 


1  How  awfully  general  is  this  wretched  delusion.  The  chat- 
tering of  monkeys  or  parrots  is  more  acceptable  than  to  mock 
God  with  a  solemn  sound  upon  a  thoughtless  tongue.  Jews 
gabble  Hebrew,  and  Papists  Latin,  aud.aias  !  others  who  NJiVER 
prayed,  have  been  from  childhood  in  the  habit  of  repeating  or 
reading  a  form  of  words,  called,  with  devilish  subtlety, '  saying 
prayers.'— (Ed.) 


683 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


to  be  tormented  ;  now  he  is  with  the  devils  and 
damned  spirits  ;  now  he  feels  the  vengeance  of 
God.  Now,  0  now,  have  mercy  on  me  !  Here 
you  may  see,  that  mercy  is  prized  by  them  that 
are  in  hell,  they  would  be  glad  if  they  could  have 
it.  Father,  have  mercy  on  me  ;  for  my  poor  soul's 
sake,  send  me  a  little  mercy. 

'  And  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of 
his  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue.' 

[Third.]  These  words  do  not  only  hold  forth  that 
the  ungodly  have  a  desire  of  mercy,  but  what  those 
mercies  are,  what  these  poor  creatures  would  be 
glad  of.  As,  1.  to  have  the  company  of  a  Lazarus 
granted  to  them.  Father  Abraham,  have  mercy 
on  me,  and  send  Lazarus.  Now  Lazarus  was  he 
that  was  beloved  of  God,  and  also  he  that  was 
hated  of  them.  Therefore,  2.  Observe,  that  those 
saints,  that  the  world  in  their  lifetime  could  not 
endure,  now  they  are  departed,  they  would  be  glad 
to  have  society  with  them.  0  now  send  Lazarus! 
Though  the  time  was  when  I  cared  not  for  him, 
yet  now  let  me  have  some  society  with  him. 

Though  the  world  disregard  the  society  of  God's 
children  now,  yet  there  is  a  time  coming  in  which 
they  would  be  glad  to  have  the  least  company  with 
them.  Nay,  do  but  observe,  those  of  the  saints 
that  are  now  most  rejected  by  them,  even  from 
them  shall  they  be  glad  of  comfort,  if  it  might  be. 
Send  Lazarus  ;  he  that  I  slighted  more  than  my 
dogs,  he  that  I  could  not  endure  should  come  into 
my  house,  but  must  lie  at  my  gate,  send  him. 
Now  Lazarus  shall  be  welcome  to  me,  now  do  I 
desire  some  comfort  from  him  ;  but  he  shall  go 
without  it. 

From  whence  again  observe,  that  there  is  a  time 
coming,  0  ye  surly  dogged  persecutors  of  the  saints, 
that  they  shall  slight  you  as  much  as  ever  you 
slighted  them.  You  have  given  them  many  an  hard 
word,  told  many  a  lie  of  them,  given  them  many  a 
blow.  And  now  in  your  greatest  need  and  extremity 
they  shall  not  pity  you,  the  righteous  shall  rather 
4  rejoice  when  he  seeth  the  vengeance'  of  God  upon 
thee.   l's.  lviiL  lo. 

Again,  Send  Lazarus.  From  whence  observe, 
that  any  of  the  saints  shall  then  be  owned  by  you 
to  be  saints.  Now  you  look  upon  them  to  be  the 
sect  with  Hymeneus  and  Philetus,  but  then  you 
shall  see  them  to  be  the  Lazaruses  of  God,  even 
God's  dear  children.  Though  now  the  saints  of 
the  Lord  will  not  be  owned  by  you,  because  they 
are  beggarly,  low,  poor,  contemptible  among  you ; 
yet  the  day  is  coming  that  you  shall  own  them, 
desire  their  company,  and  wish  for  the  least  cour- 
tesy from  them. 

4  Send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his 
finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue  ;  for  I  am  tor- 
mented in  this  flame.' 

Thus  shall  the  souls  that  abide  in  their  sins  cry 


out  in  the  bitterness  of  their  spirits,  with  wonderful 
anguish  and  torment  of  conscience,  without  inter- 
mission ;  '  That  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in 
water,  and  cool  my  tongue.'  That  he,  namely, 
the  man  who  before  I  scorned  should  eat  with  the 
dogs  of  my  flock,  that  before  I  slighted  and  had 
no  regard  of,  that  I  shut  out  of  door  ;  send  him. 
'  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and 
cool  my  tongue.' 

'Now  these  words,  •  that  he  may  dip  the  tip 
of  his  finger  in  water,'  &c,  do  hold  forth  the 
least  friendship  or  favour ;  as  if  he  should  have 
said,  Now  I  would  be  glad  of  the  least  mercy,  now 
I  would  be  glad  of  the  least  comfort,  though  it  be 
but  one  drop  of  cold  water  on  the  tip  of  his  finger. 
One  would  have  thought  that  this  had  been  a 
small  request,  a  small  courtesy — one  drop  of 
water — what  is  that?  Take  a  pail  full  of  it  if 
that  will  do  thee  any  good.  But  mark,  he  is  not 
permitted  to  have  so  much  as  one  drop,  not  so 
much  as  a  man  may  hold  upon  the  tip  of  his  finger; 
this  signifies  that  they  that  fall  short  of  Christ 
shall  be  tormented  even  as  long  as  eternity  lasteth, 
and  shall  not  have  so  much  as  the  least  ease,  no 
not  so  long  as  while  a  man  may  turn  himself 
round,  not  so  much  leave  as  to  swallow  his  spittle, 
not  a  drop  of  cold  water. 

0  that  these  things  did  take  place  in  your 
hearts,  how  would  it  make  you  to  seek  after  rest 
for  your  souls  before  it  be  too  late,  before  the  sun 
of  the  gospel  be  set  upon  you!  Consider,  I  say, 
the  misery  of  the  ungodly  that  they  shall  be  in, 
and  avoid  their  vices,  by  closing  in  with  the  tenders 
of  mercy ;  lest  you  partake  of  the  same  portion 
with  them,  and  cry  out  in  the  bitterness  of  your 
souls,  One  drop  of  cold  water  to  cool  my  tongue. 

•  For  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame.' 

Indeed,  the  reason  why  the  poor  world  does  not 
so  earnestly  desire  for  mercy,  is  partly  because 
they  do  not  so  seriously  consider  the  torment  that 
they  must  certainly  fall  into  if  they  die  out  of 
Christ.  For  let  me  tell  you,  did  but  poor  souls 
indeed  consider  that  wrath,  that  doth  by  right  fall 
to  their  shares  because  of  their  sins  against  God, 
they  would  make  more  haste  to  God  through  Christ 
for  mercy  than  they  do  ;  then  we  should  have  them 
say,  It  is  good  closing  with  Christ  to-day,  before 
we  fall  into  such  distress. 

But  why  is  it  said,  Let  him  '  dip  the  tip  of  his 
finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue?'  Because 
that,  as  the  several  members  in  the  body  have 
their  share  in  sin,  and  committing  of  that,  so  the 
several  members  of  the  body  shall  at  that  time  be 
punished  for  the  same.  Therefore,  when  Christ  is 
admonishing  his  disciples,  that  they  should  not  turn 
aside  from  him,  and  that  they  should  rather  fear 
and  dread  the  power  of  their  God  than  any  other 
power,  he  saith,  *  Fear  him,'  therefore,  that  can 


THE   GROANS   OF  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


G89 


cast  both  body  and  soul  into  hell.  Lu.  xii.  t.  And 
again,  '  Fear  him  which  is  able  to  destroy  both 
soul  and  body  in  hell.'  Mat.  x.  28.  Here  is  not  one 
member  only,  but  all  the  body,  the  whole  body  of 
which  the  hands,  feet,  eyes,  ears,  and  tongue  are 
members.  And  I  am  persuaded,  that  though  this 
may  be  judged  carnal  by  some  now,  yet  it  will 
appear  to  be  a  truth  then,  to  the  geatcr  misery  of 
thoso  who  shall  be  forced  to  undergo  that  which 
God,  in  his  just  judgment,  shall  inflict  upon  them. 
0  then  they  will  cry,  One  dram  of  ease  for  my 
cursing,  swearing,  lying,  jeering  tongue.  Some 
case  for  my  bragging,  braving,  flattering,  threat- 
ning,  dissembling  tongue.  Now  men  can  let  their 
tongues  run  at  random,  as  we  used  to  say ;  now 
they  will  be  apt  to  say,  Our  tongues  are  our  own, 
who  shall  control  them?  Vs.  xii.  4.  But  then  they 
will  be  in  another  mind.  Then,  0  that  I  might 
have  a  little  ease  for  my  deceitful  tongue?  Me- 
thinks  sometimes  to  consider  how  some  men  do 
let  their  tongues  run  at  random,  it  makes  me  mar- 
vel. Surely  they  do  not  think  they  shall  be  made 
to  give  an  account  for  their  offending  with  their 
tongue.  Did  they  but  think  they  shall  be  made 
to  give  an  account  to  him  who  is  ready  to  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead,  surely  they  would  be  more 
wary  of,  and  have  more  regard  unto  their  tongue. 
1  The  tongue,'  saith  James,  '  is  an  unruly  evil, 
full  of  deadly  poison ;'  ■  it  setteth  on  fire  the 
course  of  nature,  and  it  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.'  Ja.  2. 
The  tongue,  how  much  mischief  will  it  stir  up  in  a 
very  little  time!  How  many  blows  and  wounds 
doth  it  cause !  How  many  times  doth  it,  as  James 
saith,  curse  man!  How  oft  is  the  tongue  made 
the  conveyer  of  that  hellish  poison  that  is  in  the 
heart,  both  to  the  dishonour  of  God,  the  hurt  of 
its  neighbours,  and  the  utter  ruin  of  its  own  soul! 
And  do  you  think  the  Lord  will  sit  still,  as  I  may 
say,  and  let  thy  tongue  run  as  it  lists,  and  yet 
never  bring  you  to  an  account  for  the  same?  No, 
stay.  The  Lord  will  not  always  keep  silence,  but 
will  reprove  thee,  and  set  thy  sins  in  order  before 
thine  eyes,  0  sinner.  Yea,  and  thy  tongue,  to- 
gether with  the  rest  of  thy  members,  shall  be 
tormented  for  sinning.  And  I  say,  I  am  very 
confident,  that  though  this  be  made  light  of  now, 
yet  the  time  is  coming  when  many  poor  souls  will 
rue  the  day  that  ever  they  did  speak  with  a 
tongue.  0,  will  one  say,  that  I  should  so  disre- 
gard my  tongue !  0  that  I,  when  I  said  so  and 
so,  had  before  bitten  off  my  tongue !  That  I  had 
been  born  without  a  tongue  !  my  tongue,  my 
tongue,  a  little  water  to  cool  my  tongue,  for  I  am 
tormented  in  this  flame  ;  even  in  that  flame  that 
my  tongue,  together  with  the  rest  of  my  members, 
by  sinning,  have  brought  me  to.  Poor  souls  now 
will  let  their  tongues  say  anything  for  a  little 
profit,  for  two-pence  or  three-pence  gain.     But,  0 

VOL.  III. 


what  a  grief  will  this  be  at  that  day  when  they, 
together  with  their  tongue,  must  smart  for  that 
which  they  by  their  tongues  have  done  while  they 
were  in  this  world.  Then,  you  that  love  your 
souls,  look  to  your  tongues,  lest  you  bind  your- 
selves down  so  fast  to  bell  with  the  sins  of  your 
tongues,  that  you  will  never  be  able  to  get  loose 
again  to  all  eternity.  '  For  by  thy  words  thou 
shalt  be  condemned,'  if  thou  have  not  a  care  of 
thy  tongue.  For  '  I  say  unto  you,  That  every 
idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give 
account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment.'  Mat.  xii.  sc. 

Verse  25. — 'But  Abraham  said,  Son,  remember  that  thou  in 
thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good  things,  and  likewise  La- 
zarus evil  things;  but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art 
tormented.' 

These  words  are  the  answer  to  the  request  of 
the  damned.  The  verse  before,  as  I  told  you,  is 
a  discovery  of  the  desires  they  have  after  they 
depart  this  world.  Here  is  the  answer,  '  Son, 
remember,'  &c. 

The  answer  signifies  this  much,  that,  instead 
of  having  any  relief  or  ease  they  are  hereby  the 
more  tormented,  and  that  by  fresh  recollections, 
or  by  bringing  afresh  their  former  ill-spent  life, 
while  in  the  world,  into  their  remembrance.  Son, 
remember  thou  hadst  good  things  in  thy  lifetime; 
as  much  as  if  he  had  said,  Thou  art  now  sensible 
what  it  is  to  lose  thy  soul ;  thou  art  now  sensible 
what  it  is  to  put  off  repentance ;  thou  art  now 
sensible  that  thou  hast  befooled  thyself,  in  that 
thou  didst  spend  that  time  in  seeking  after  out- 
ward, momentary,  earthly  things,  which  thou 
shouldest  have  spent  in  seeking  to  make  Jesus 
Christ  sure  to  thy  soul;  and  now,  through  thy 
anguish  of  spirit,  in  the  pains  of  hell  thou  wouldest 
enjoy  that  which  in  former  time  thou  didst  make 
light  of;  but  alas!  thou  art  here  beguiled  and 
altogether  disappointed,  thy  crying  will  now  avail 
thee  nothing  at  all;  this  is  not  the  acceptable 
time.  2  Cor.  vi.  2.  This  is  not  a  time  to  answer  the 
desires  of  damned  reprobates ;  if  thou  hadst  cried 
out  in  good  earnest  whilst  grace  was  offered,  much 
might  have  been ;  but  then  thou  wast  careless, 
and  didst  turn  the  forbearance  and  goodness  of  God 
into  wantonness.  Wast  thou  not  told,  that  those 
who  would  not  hear  the  Lord  when  he  did  call, 
should  not  be  heard,  if  they  turned  away  from  him, 
when  they  did  call.  But  contrariwise  he  would 
laugh  at  their  calamity,  and  mock  when  their  fear 
did  come.  Pr.  l  24-2S. 

Now,  therefore,  instead  of  expecting  the  least 
drop  of  mercy  and  favour,  call  into  thy  mind  how 
thou  didst  spend  those  days  which  God  did  permit 
thee  to  live ;  I  say,  remember  that  in  thy  lifetime 
thou  didst  behave  thyself  rebelliously  against  the 
Lord,  in  that  thou  wert  careless  of  his  word  and 

S7 


690 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM  HELL,  OR 


ordinances,  yea,  and  of  the  welfare  of  thine  own 
soul  also.  Therefore,  now  I  say,  instead  of  ex- 
pecting or  hoping  for  any  relief,  thou  must  he 
forced  to  call  to  rememhrance  thy  filthy  ways,  and 
feed  upon  them,  to  thine  everlasting  astonishment 
and  confusion. 

From  these  words,  therefore,  which  say,  '  Re- 
memher  that  thou  in  thy  life-time  receivedst  tut 
good  things,'  there  are  these  things  to  he  taken 
notice  of, 

First.  They  that,  by  putting  off  repentance  and 
living  in  their  sins,  lose  their  souls,  shall,  instead 
of  having  the  least  measure  of  comfort  when  they 
come  into  hell,  have  their  ill-spent  life  always  very 
fresh  in  their  remembrance.  While  they  live  here 
they  can  sin  and  forget  it,  but  when  they  depart 
they  shall  have  it  before  them ;  they  shall  have  a 
remembrance,  or  their  memory  notably  enlightened, 
and  a  clearer,  and  a  continual  sight  of  all  their 
wicked  practices  that  they  wrought  and  did  while 
they  were  in  the  world.  ■  Son,  remember,'  saith 
he;  then  you  will  be  made  to  remember:  1.  How 
you  were  born  in  sin,  and  brought  up  in  the  same. 

2.  Remember  how  thou  hadst  many  a  time  the 
gospel  preached  to  thee  for  taking  away  of  the 
same,  by  him  whom  the  gospel   doth  hold  forth. 

3.  Remember  that  out  of  love  to  thy  sins  and 
lusts,  thou  didst  turn  thy  back  on  the  tenders  of 
the  same  gospel  of  good  tidings  and  peace.  4. 
Remember  that  the  reason  why  thou  didst  lose 
thy  soul,  was  because  thou  didst  not  close  in 
with  free  grace,  and  the  tenders  of  a  loving  and 
free-hearted  Jesus  Christ.  5.  Remember  how 
near  thou  wast  to  turning  at  such  and  such  a 
time,  only  thou  wast  willing  to  give  way  to  thy 
lusts  when  they  wrought ;  to  drunkards  when  they 
called;  to  pleasures  when  they  proffered  them- 
selves ;  to  the  cares  and  incumbrances  of  the 
world,  which,  like  so  many  thorns,  did  choke  that 
or  those  convictions  that  were  set  on  thy  heart. 
6.  Remember  how  willing  thou  wast  to  satisfy 
thyself  with  a  hypocrite's  hope,  and  with  a  notion 
of  the  things  of  God,  without  the  real  power  and 
life  of  the  same.  7.  Remember  how  thou,  when 
thou  wast  admonished  to  turn,  didst  put  off  turn- 
ing and  repenting  till  another  time.  8.  Remem- 
ber how  thou  didst  dissemble  at  such  a  time,  lie 
at  such  a  time,  cheat  thy  neighbour  at  such  a 
time,   mock,   flout,   scoff,  taunt,  hate,  persecute,1 


1  The  intelligent  reader  should  notice  that  these  terms  are 
not  jumbled  together.  Their  selection  and  arrangement  would 
confer  honour  upon  the  most  profound  doctor  of  philology ; 
while  from  Bunyan  they  flowed  from  native  genius,  little  in- 
ferior to  inspiration.  To  show  the  enmity  of  the  unconverted 
to  those  who  bear  the  image  of  Christ,  he  descends  step  by 
step.  They  first  mock,  or  deride  them  by  mimicry ;  second,  flout, 
or  treat  them  with  contemptuous  sneers,  both  by  words  and 
actions ;  third,  scoff  at  them  with  insolent  ridicule,  sometimes 
accompanied  by  a  push  or  blow ;  fourth,  taunt,  revile,  upbraid, 


the  people  of  God  at  such  a  time,  in  such  a  place, 
among  such  company.  9.  Remember  that  while 
others  were  met  together  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
to  seek  him,  thou  wast  met  with  a  company  of  vain 
companions  to  sin  against  him ;  whilst  the  saints 
were  a  praying,  thou  wert  a  cursing ;  while  they 
were  speaking  good  of  the  name  of  God,  thou  wast 
speaking  evil  of  the  saints  of  God.  0  then  thou 
shalt  have  a  scalding  hot  remembrance  of  all  thy 
Sinful  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  from  the  very 
first  to  the  last  of  them  that  ever  thou  didst  com- 
mit in  all  thy  life-time.  Then  thou  wilt  find  that 
scripture  to  be  a  truth,  '  The  Lord  shall  give  thee 
there  a  trembling  heart,  and  failing  of  eyes,  and 
sorrow  of  mind.  And  thy  life  shall  hang  in  doubt 
before  thee,  and  thou  shalt  fear  day  and  night,  and 
shalt  have  none  assurance  of  thy  life.  In  the 
morning  thou  shalt  say,  Would  God  it  were  even  ! 
for  the  fear  of  thine  heart  wherewith  thou  shalt 
fear,  and  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou 
shalt  see.'  De.  xxvm.  65-67.  Nay,  thou  wilt  find 
worse  things  to  thy  woe  than  this  scripture  doth 
manifest.  For,  indeed,  there  is  no  tongue  able  to 
express  the  horror,  terror,  torment,  and  eternal 
misery  that  those  poor  souls  shall  undergo,  without 
the  least  mitigation  of  ease,  and  a  very  great  part 
of  it  shall  come  from  that  quick,  full,  and  continual 
remembrance  of  their  sins  that  they  shall  have. 
And,  therefore,  there  is  much  weight  in  these 
words,  '  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime 
receivedst  thy  good  things.' 

From  these  words  you  see  this  is  to  be  observed, 
That  the  ungodly  shall  remember,  or  have  in  re- 
membrance, the  misspending  their  lives  ;  'Remem- 
ber that  in  thy  lifetime  thou  receivedst  thy  good 
things. '  You  may  take  these  words,  good  things, 
either  simply  for  the  things  of  this  world,  which  in 
themselves  are  called,  and  may  be  called  good 
things  ;  or  else  with  these  words,  namely,  the 
things  of  this  life,  all  the  pleasures,  delights, 
profits,  and  vanities,  which  the  ignorant  people  of 
the  world  do  count  their  good  things,  and  do  very 
much  cheer  themselves  therewith.  Soul,  soul,  eat, 
drink,  and  be  merry  ;  for  thou  hast  much  goods 
laid  up  for  many  years.  Lu.  xii.  id,  20.  Now  I  say, 
God,  according  to  his  glorious  power  and  wisdom, 
will  make  poor  creatures  have  always  in  their 
minds  a  fresh  and  clear  remembrance  of  their  ill- 
spent  life  ;  he  will  say  unto  them,  Remember,  re- 
member, that  in  thy  lifetime  it  was  thus  and  thus 
with  thee,  and  in  thy  lifetime  thy  carriage  was  so 
and  so. 


bully,  and  challenge  them :  all  these  produce,  fifth,  hate,  abhor- 
rence, and  detestation,  leading  inevitably  to,  sixth,  persecution 
— to  pursue  with  malignity — to  afflict,  harass,  and  destroy. 
Such  are  the  gradations  in  the  opposition  of  the  carnal  niiuJ 
to  the  most  excellent  of  the  earth ;  and  such  the  worldly  in- 
heritance of  the  followers  of  our  once  lowly,  but  now  exalted 
Saviour. — (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OE  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


691 


If  sinners  might  have  their  choice,  they  would 
not  have  their  sins  and  transgressions  so  much  in 
the  rememhrance,  as  it  is  evident  by  their  carriages 
here  in  this  world  ;  for  they  will  not  endure  to  en- 
tertain a  serious  thought  of  their  filthy  life,  they 
'put  far  away  the  evil  day,'  Am.vi.3.  Ezc.xii.27;  but 
will  labour  by  all  means  to  put  the  thoughts  of  it 
out  of  their  mind  ;  but  there  they  shall  be  made 
to  remember  to  purpose,  and  to  think  continually 
of  their  ungodly  deeds.  And  therefore  it  is  said, 
that  when  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  to  judg- 
ment, it  will  be  to  convince  the  ungodly  world  of 
their  wicked  and  ungodly  deeds  ;  mark,  '  to  con- 
vince '  them.  Jude  14, 15.  They  will  not  willingly 
take  notice  of  them  now.  But  then  they  shall 
hereafter,  in  spite  of  their  teeth.  And  also,  be- 
tween this  and  then,  these  that  die  out  of  Christ 
shall  be  made  to  see,  acknowledge,  and  confess, 
do  what  they  can,  when  they  lift  up  their  eyes  in 
hell,  and  remember  their  transgressions.  God  will 
be  a  swift  witness  against  tiiem,  [Mai.  iii.  5],  and  will 
say,  Remember  that  thou  didst  in  thy  lifetime,  how 
thou  didst  live  in  thy  lifetime.  Ha,  friend !  if  thou 
dost  not  in  these  days  of  light  ■  temember  the  days 
of  darkness,'  [Ec  x\.  g],  the  days  of  death,  hell,  and 
judgment,  thou  shalt  be  made  in  the  days  of  dark- 
ness, death,  hell,  and  at  the  judgment  too,  to  re- 
member the  days  of  the  gospel,  and  how  thou  didst 
disregard  them  too,  to  thy  own  destruction,  and 
everlasting  misery.  This  is  intimated  in  that  25th 
of  St.  Matthew. 

'  Remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst 
thy  good  things.' 

The  great  God,  instead  of  giving  the  ungodly 
any  ease,  will  even  aggravate  their  torments  ;  first, 
by  slighting  their  perplexities,  and  by  telling  of 
them  what  they  must  be  thinking  of.  Remember, 
saith  he,  0  ye  lost  souls,  that  you  had  your  joy  in 
your  lifetime,  your  peace  in  your  lifetime,  your 
comforts,  delights,  ease,  wealth, health,  your  heaven, 
your  happiness,  and  your  portion  in  your  lifetime. 

0  miserable  state  !  Thou  wilt  then  be  in  a  sad 
condition  indeed,  when  thou  shalt  see  that  thou 
hast  had  thy  good  things,  thy  best  things,  thy 
pleasant  things  ;  for  that  is  clearly  signified  by 
these  words,  '  Remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime 
receivedst  thy  good  things,'  or  all  the  good  things 
thou  art  like  to  have. 

Second.  From  whence  take  notice  of  another 
truth,  though  it  be  a  dreadful  one,  which  is  this ; 
there  are  many  poor  creatures,  who  have  all  their 
good,  sweet,  and  comfortable  things  in  this  life, 
or  while  they  are  alive  in  this  world ;  'Remember,' 
saith  he,  '  that  in  thy  lifetime  thou  receivedst  thy 
good  things.'   Vs.  rrft  14. 

The  wicked's  good  things  will  shortly  have  an 
end  ;  they  will  last  no  longer  with  them  than  this 
life,   or  their  lifetime.     That  scripture  was  not 


written  in  vain  ;  it  is  like  the  crackling  of  thorns 
under  a  pot,  make  a  little  blaze  for  a  sudden,  a 
little  heat  for  a  while  ;  but  come  and  consider  them 
by  and  by,  and  instead  of  a  comfortable  heat,  you 
will  find  nothing  but  a  few  dead  ashes  ;  and  instead 
of  a  flaming  fire,  nothing  but  a  smell  of  smoke. 

There  is  a  time  coining,  that  the  ungodly  would 
be  glad  of  a  better  portion,  when  they  shall  see  the 
vanity  of  this,  that  is,  when  they  shall  see  what  a 
poor  thing  it  is  for  a  man  to  have  his  portion  in 
this  world.  It  is  true,  while  they  are  here  on  this 
side  hell,  they  think  there  is  nothing  to  be  com- 
pared with  riches,  honours,  and  pleasures  in  this 
world  ;  which  makes  them  cry  out,  'Who  will  shew 


us  any 


Pa.  iv.  c     That  is  comparable  to  the 


pleasures,  profits,  and  glory  of  this  world  ?  But 
then  they  will  see  there  is  another  thing  that  is 
better,  and  of  more  value  than  ten  thousand  worlds. 
And  seriously,  friends,  will  it  not  grieve  you, 
trouble,  perplex,  and  torment  you,  when  you  shall 
see  that  you  lost  heaven  for  a  little  pleasure  and 
profit  in  your  lifetime  ?  Certainly,  it  will  grieve 
you  and  perplex  you  exceedingly,  to  see  what  a 
blessed  heaven  you  left  for  a  dunghill-world.  0  ! 
that  you  did  but  believe  this  !  that  you  did  but 
consider  this,  and  say  within  yourselves,  What ! 
shall  I  be  contented  with  my  portion  in  this  world ! 
what !  shall  I  lose  heaven  for  this  world  !  I  say, 
consider  it  while  you  have  day-light,  and  gospel- 
light,  while  the  Son  of  God  doth  hold  out  terms 
of  reconciliation  to  you,  lest  you  be  made  to  hear 
such  a  voice  as  this  is,  '  Son,  remember  that  in  thy 
lifetime  thou  receivedst  thy  good  things  ; '  thy 
comforts,  thy  joys,  thy  ease,  thy  peace,  and  all 
the  heaven  thou  art  like  to  have.  0  poor  heaven ! 
0  short  pleasures  !  What  a  pitiful  thing  it  is  to 
be  left  in  such  a  case  ?  Soul,  consider,  is  it  not 
miserable  to  lose  heaven  for  twenty,  thirty,  or 
forty  years'  sinning  against  God  ?  When  thy  life 
is  done,  thy  heaven  is  also  done  ?  when  death 
comes  to  separate  thy  soul  and  body,  in  that  day 
also  thou  must  have  thy  heaven  and  happiness 
separated  from  thee,  and  thou  from  that.  Con- 
sider these  things  betimes,  lest  thou  have  thy  por- 
tion in  thy  lifetime.  '  For  if  in  this  life  only  we 
have  hojje,'  our  portion,  'we  are  of  all  men  most 
miserable.'  1  Co.  xv.  19.  Again  consider,  that  when 
other  men,  the  saints,  are  to  receive  their  good 
things,  then  thou  hast  had  thine.  When  others 
are  to  enter  into  joy,  then  thou  art  to  leave  and 
depart  from  thy  joy.  WThen  others  are  to  go  to 
God,  thou  must  go  to  the  devil.  0  miserable  ! 
Thou  hadst  better  thou  hadst  never  been  born, 
than  to  be  an  heir  of  such  a  portion  ;  therefore,  I 
say,  have  a  care  it  be  not  thy  condition. 

'Remember  that  thou  receivedst  thy  good  things, 
and  Lazarus  evil  things.' 

These  words  do  not  only  hold  forth  the  misery 


692 


A  FEW  SIGHS  FROM  HELL,  OR 


of  the  wicked  in  this  life,  hut  also  great  consola- 
tion to  the  saints  ;  where  he  saith,  '  And  Lazarus 
evil  things  ; '  that  is,  Lazarus  had  his  evil  things 
in  his  lifetime,  or  when  he  was  in  the  world. 
From  whence  observe, 

1.  That  the  life  of  the  saints,  so  long  as  thej 
are  in  this  world,  is  attended  with  many  evils  or 
afflictions;  which  may  be  discovered  to  be  of  divers 
natures;  as  saith  the  Scripture,  'Many  are  the 
troubles1  of  the  righteous,  but  the  Lord  delivereth 
him  out  of  them  all.'  Vs.  xxxw.  ia 

2.  Take  notice,  that  the  afflictions  or  evils  that 
accompany  the  saints,  may  continue  with  them 
their  lifetime,  so  long  as  they  live  in  this  vale  of 
tears  ;  yea,  and  they  may  be  divers,  that  is,  of 
several  sorts  ;  some  outward,  some  inward,  and 
that  as  long  as  they  shall  continue  here  below,  as 
hath  been  the  experience  of  all  saints  in  all  ages  ; 
and  this  might  be  proved  at  large,  but  I  only  hint 
in  these  things,  although  I  might  enlarge  much 
upon  them. 

3.  The  evils  that  do  accompany  the  saints  will 
continue  with  them  no  longer  than  their  lifetime  ; 
and  here  indeed  lies  the  comfort  of  believers,  the 
Lazaruses,  the  saints,  they  must  have  all  their 
bitter  cup  wrung  out  to  them  in  their  lifetime. 
Here  must  be  all  their  trouble,  here  must  be  all 
their  grief ;  Behold,  saith  Christ,  '  the  world  shall 
rejoice,  but  ye  shall  lament ;  but  your  mourning ' 
shall,  mark,  it  '  shall  be  turned  into  joy.'  Jn.  xvi.  20. 
You  shall  lament,  you  shall  be  sorrowful,  you  shall 
weep  in  your  lifetime;  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned 
into  joy,  and  your  joy  no  man,  let  him  be  what  he 
will,  no  man  shall  take  aAvay  from  you.  Now  if 
you  think,  when  I  say  the  saints  have  all  their 
evil  things  in  their  lifetime,  that  I  mean,  they  have 
nothing  else  but  trouble  in  this  their  lifetime,  this 
is  your  mistake.  For  let  me  tell  you,  that  though 
the  saints  have  all  their  evil  things  in  their  lifetime, 
yet  even  in  their  lifetime  they  have  also  joy  un- 
speakable, and  full  of  glory,  while  they  look  not 
at  the  things  that  are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which 
are  not  seen.  The  joy  that  the  saints  have  some- 
times in  their  heart,  by  a  believing  consideration 
of  the  good  things  to  come,  when  this  life  is  ended, 
doth  fill  them  fuller  of  joy,  than  all  the  crosses, 
troubles,  temptations,  and  evils,  that  accompany 
them  in  this  life  can  fill  them  with  grief.  2  Co.  iv. 

But  some  saints  may  say,  My  troubles  are  such 
as  are  ready  to  overcome  me.  Answ.  Yet  be  of 
good  comfort,  they  shall  last  no  longer  than  thy 
lifetime.  But  my  trouble  is,  I  am  perplexed  with 
a  heart  full  of  corruption  and  sin,  so  that  I  am 
much  hindered  in  walking  with  God.  Answ.  It 
is  like  so,  but  thou  shalt  have  these  troubles  no 
longer  than  thy  lifetime.     But  I  have  a  cross  hus- 


1  '  Troubles.'  see  Puritan  translation. — (Ed.) 


band,  and  that  is  a  great  grief  to  me.  Well,  but 
thou  shalt  be  troubled  with  him  no  longer  than  thy 
lifetime,  and  therefore  be  not  dismayed,  be  not 
discomforted,  thou  shalt  have  no  trouble  longer 
than  this  lifetime.  Art  thou  troubled  with  cross 
children,  cross  relations,  cross  neighbours  ?  They 
shall  trouble  thee  no  longer  than  this  lifetime. 

Art  thou  troubled  with  a  cunning  devil,  with 
unbelief ;  yea,  let  it  be  what  it  will,  thou  shalt 
take  thy  farewell  of  them  all,  if  thou  be  a  believer, 
after  thy  lifetime  is  ended.  0  !  excellent !  '  Then 
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes  ;  and 
there  shall  be  no  more  death  nor  sorrow,  neither 
crying,  nor  any  more  pain  ;  for  the  former  things 
are  passed  away.'  Re. xxi.  4.  But  now  on  the  con- 
trary, if  thou  be  not  a  right  and  sound  believer  ; 
then,  though  thou  shouldest  live  a  thousand  years 
in  this  world,  and  meet  with  sore  afflictions  every 
day,  yet  these  afflictions,  be  they  never  so  great 
and  grievous,  they  are  nothing  to  that  torment 
that  will  come  upon  thee,  both  in  soul  and  in  body, 
after  this  life  is  ended. 

I  say,  be  what  thou  wilt,  if  thou  be  found  in  un- 
belief, or  under  the  first  covenant,  thou  are  sure  to 
smart  for  it  at  the  time  when  thou  dost  depart  this 
world.  But  the  thing  to  be  lamented  is,  for  all 
this  is  so  sad  a  condition  to  be  fallen  into,  yet  poor 
souls  are,  for  the  most  part,  senseless  of  it,  yea,  so 
senseless,  at  some  times,  as  though  there  was  no 
such  misery  to  come  hereafter.  Because  the  Lord 
doth  not  immediately  strike  with  his  sword,  but 
doth  bear  long  with  his  creature,  waiting  that  he 
might  be  gracious.  Therefore,  I  say,  the  hearts 
of  some  of  the  sons  of  men  are  wholly  set  upon  it 
to  do  mischief.  Ec.  vm.  11.  And  that  forbearance 
and  goodness  of  God,  that  one  would  think  should 
lead  them  to  repentance ;  the  devil  hardening  of 
them,  by  their  continuing  in  sin,  and  by  blinding 
their  eyes,  as  to  the  end  of  God's  forbearance  to- 
wards them,  they  are  led  away  with  a  very  hard- 
ened and  senseless  heart,  even  until  they  drop  into 
eternal  destruction. 

But  poor  hearts,  they  must  have  a  time  in  which 
they  must  be  made  sensible  of  their  former  be- 
haviours, when  the  just  judgments  of  the  Lord 
shall  flame  about  their  ears,  insomuch,  that  they 
shall  be  made  to  cry  out  again  with  anguish,  I  am 
sorely  'tormented  in  this  flame.' 

'But  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tor- 
mented.' As  if  he  should  say,  Now  hath  God 
recompensed  both  Lazarus  and  you,  according  to 
what  you  sought  after  while  you  were  in  this  world. 
As  for  your  part,  you  did  neglect  the  precious 
mercy  and  goodness  of  God,  you  did  turn  your 
back  on  the  Son  of  God,  that  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners ;  you  made  a  mock  of  preaching 
the  gospel ;  you  was  admonished  over  and  over,  to 
close  in  with  the  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord,  in 


THE  GROANS   OF  A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


693 


his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  The  Lord  let  you  live 
twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty,  sixty  years  ;  all  which 
time  you,  instead  of  spending  it  '  to  make  your 
calling  and  election  sure,'  [2  re.  i.  10],  did  spend  it  in 
making  of  eternal  damnation  sure  to  thy  soul. 
Job  xxi.  29, 30.  And  also  Lazarus,  he  in  his  lifetime 
did  make  it  his  husiness  to  accept  of  my  grace  and 
salvation  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  thou 
wast  in  the  ale-house,  he  frequented  the  word 
preached ;  when  thou  wert  jeering  at  goodness,  he 
was  sighing  for  the  sins  of  the  times.  Ec.  ix.  4-6. 
While  thou  wert  swearing,  he  was  praying;  in  a 
word,  while  thou  wert  making  sure  of  eternal  ruin, 
he,  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
was  making  sure  of  eternal  salvation.  Therefore, 
'Now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented.' 

Here,  then,  you  may  see,  that  as  the  righteous 
shall  not  be  always  void  of  comfort  and  blessed- 
ness ;  so  neither  shall  the  ungodly  go  always  with- 
out their  punishment.  As  sure  as  God  is  in  heaven, 
it  will  be  thus.  They  must  have  their  several  por- 
tions. And,  therefore,  you  that  are  the  saints  of 
the  Lord,  follow  on,  be  not  dismayed,  forasmuch 
as  ye  know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the 
Lord.  1  Co.  xv.  53.  Your  portion  is  eternal  glory. 
And  you  that  are  so  loth  now  to  close  in  with 
Jesus  Christ,  and  to  leave  your  sins  to  follow  him, 
your  '  day  is  coming,'  r-s.  xxxvii.  13,  in  which  you 
shall  know,  that  your  sweet  morsels  of  sin,  that 
you  do  so  easily  take  down,  Job  xx.  12-14,  and  it 
scarce  troubles  you,  will  have  a  time  so  to  work 
within  you  to  your  eternal  ruin,  that  you  will  be 
in  a  worse  condition  than  if  you  had  ten  thousand 
devils  tormenting  of  you.  Nay,  you  had  better 
have  been  plucked  limb  from  limb  a  thousand  times, 
if  it  could  be,  than  to  be  partakers  of  this  torment 
that  will,  assuredly  without  mercy,  lie  upon  you. 

Verse  26. — '  And  beside  all  this,  between  us  and  you  there  is 
a  great  gulf  filed ;  so  that  they  which  would  pass  from 
hence  to  you  cannot ;  neither  can  they  pass  to  us,  that 
xcould  come  from  thence.' 

These  words  are  still  part  of  that  answer,  that 
the  souls  in  hell  shall  have  for  all  their  sobbings, 
sighings,  grievous  cries,  tears,  and  desires,  that 
they  have,  to  be  released  out  of  those  intolerable 
pains  they  feel,  and  are  perplexed  with.  And  0 ! 
methinks  the  words  at  the  first  view,  if  rightly 
considered,  are  enough  to  make  any  hard-hearted 
sinner  in  the  world  to  fall  down  dead.  The  verse 
I  last  spake  to  was  and  is  a  very  terrible  one, 
and  aggravates  the  torments  of  poor  sinners  won- 
derfully. Where  he  saith,  '  Remember  that  thou 
in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good  things,  and 
Lazarus  evil  things,'  &c.  I  say,  these  words  are 
very  terrible  to  those  poor  souls  that  die  out  of 
Christ.  But  these  latter  words  do  much  more 
hold  out  their  sorrow.     They  were  spoken  as  to 


the  present  condition  then  upon  the  sinner.  These 
do  not  only  back  the  former,  but  do  yet  further 
aggravate  their  misery,  holding  forth  that  which 
will  be  more  intolerable.  The  former  verse  is 
enough  to  smite  any  sinner  into  a  swoon,  but  this 
is  to  make  him  fall  down  dead.  Where  he  saith, 
'  And  beside  all  this.'  There  is  still  something  to 
aggravate  thy  misery  yet  far  more  abundantly.  I 
shall  briefly  speak  to  the  words  as  they  have  rela- 
tion to  the  terror  spoken  of  in  the  verses  before. 
As  if  he  had  said,  Thou  thinkest  thy  present  state 
unsupportable,  it  makes  thee  sob  and  sigh,  it  makes 
thee  to  rue  the  time  that  ever  thou  wert  born. 
Now  thou  findest  the  want  of  mercy ;  now  thou 
wouldst  leap  at  the  least  dram  of  it;  now  thou 
feelest  what  it  is  to  slight  the  tenders  of  the  grace 
of  God  ;  now  it  makes  thee  to  sob,  sigh,  and  roar 
exceedingly  for  the  anguish  that  thou  art  in.  '  But 
beside  all  this,'  I  have  other  things  to  tell  thee  of, 
that  will  break  thine  heart  indeed.  Thou  art  now 
deprived  of  a  being  in  the  world  ;  thou  art  deprived 
of  hearing  the  gospel ;  the  devil  hath  been  too  hard 
for  thee,  and  hath  made  thee  miss  of  heaven  ;  thou 
art  now  in  hell  among  an  innumerable  company  of 
devils,  and  all  thy  sins  beset  thee  round ;  thou  art 
all  over  wrapped  in  flames,  and  canst  not  have  one 
drop  of  water  to  give  thee  any  ease  ;  thou  criest 
in  vain,  for  nothing  will  be  granted.  Thou  seest 
the  saints  in  heaven,  which  is  no  small  trouble  to 
thy  damned  soul ;  thou  seest  that  neither  God  nor 
Christ  takes  any  care  to  ease  thee,  or  speak  any 
comfort  unto  thee.  '  But  beside  all  this,'  there 
thou  art,  and  there  thou  art  like  to  lie,  never  think 
of  any  ease,  never  look  for  any  comfort ;  repent- 
ance now  will  do  thee  no  good,  the  time  is  past, 
and  can  never  be  called  again,  look  what  thou  hast 
now,  thou  must  have  for  ever. 

It  is  true,  I  spoke  enough  before  to  break  thine 
heart  asunder  ;  '  But  beside  all  this,'  there  lie 
and  swim  in  flames  for  ever.  These  words,  '  Be- 
side all  this,'  are  terrible  words  indeed.  I  will 
give  you  the  scope  of  them  in  a  similitude.  Set 
the  case  you  should  take  a  man,  and  tie  him  to 
a  stake,  and  with  red-hot  pinchers,  pinch  off  his 
flesh  by  little  pieces  for  two  or  three  years  to- 
gether, and  at  last,  when  the  poor  man  cries  out 
for  ease  and  help,  the  tormentors  answer,  Nay, 
'but  beside  all  this,'  you  must  be  handled  worse. 
We  will  serve  you  thus  these  twenty  years  to- 
gether, and  after  that  we  will  fill  your  mangled 
body  full  of  scalding  lead,  or  run  you  through  with 
a  red-hot  spit ;  would  not  this  be  lamentable  ?  Yet 
this  is  but  a  flea-biting  to  the  sorrow  of  those  that 
go  to  hell;  for  if  a  man  were  served  so  there 
would,  ere  it  were  long,  be  an  end  of  him.  But 
he  that  goes  to  hell  shall  suffer  ten  thousand  times 
worse  torments  than  these,  and  yet  shall  never  bo 
quite  dead  under  them.     There  they  shall  be  ever 


694 


A  PEW   SIGHS   FROM  I1ELL,  OR 


whining,  pining,  weeping,  mourning,  ever  tormented 
without  ease ;  and  yet  never  dissolved  into  nothing. 
If  the  biggest  devil  in  hell  might  pull  thee  all  to 
pieces,  and  rend  thee  small  as  dust,  and  dissolve 
thee  into  nothing,  thou  wouldst  count  this  a  mercy. 
But  here  thou  mayst  lie  and  fry,  scorch,  and  broil, 
and  burn  for  ever.  For  ever,  that  is  a  long  while, 
and  yet  it  must  be  so  long.  '*  Depart  from  me,  ye 
cursed,'  saith  Christ,  'into  everlasting  fire,'  into 
the  fire  that  burns  for  ever,  'prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels.'  Mat.  xxv.  41.  0  !  thou  that  wast  loth 
to  foul  thy  foot  if  it  were  but  dirty,  or  did  but  rain  ; 
thou  that  was  loth  to  come  out  of  the  chimney- 
corner,  if  the  wind  did  but  blow  a  little  cold ;  and 
was  loth  to  go  half-a-mile,  yea,  half-a-furlong  to 
hear  the  word  of  God,  if  it  were  but  a  little  dark  ; 
thou  that  wast  loth  to  leave  a  few  vain  companions, 
to  edify  thy  soul ;  thou  shalt  have  fire  enough,  thou 
shalt  have  night  enough,  and  evil  company  enough, 
thy  bellyfull,  if  thou  miss  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
'  beside  all  this, '  thou  shalt  have  them  for  ever, 
and  for  ever. 

0  thou  that  dost  spend  whole  nights  in  carding 
and  dicing,  in  rioting  and  wantonness  ;  thou  that 
countest  it  a  brave  thing  to  swear  as  fast  as  the 
bravest,  to  spend  with  the  greatest  spendthrift  in 
the  country  ;  thou  that  lovest  to  sin  in  a  corner 
when  nobody  sees  thee!  0  thou  that  for  bye- 
ends  dost  carry  on  the  hypocrite's  profession,  be- 
cause thou  wouldest  be  counted  somebody  among 
the  children  of  God,1  but  art  an  enemy  to  the  things 
of  Christ  in  thine  heart.  Thou  that  dost  satisfy 
thyself,  either  with  sins,  or  a  bare  profession  of 
godliness,  thy  soul  will  fall  into  extreme  torment 
and  anguish,  so  soon  as  ever  thou  dost  depart  this 
world,  and  there  thou  shalt  be  weeping  and  gnash- 
ing thy  teeth.  Mat.  via;  12.  '  And  beside  all  this,' 
thou  art  like  never  to  have  any  ease  or  remedy, 
never  look  for  any  deliverance,  thou  shalt  die  in 
thy  sins,  and  be  tormented  as  many  years  as  there 
are  stars  in  the  firmament,  or  sands  on  the  sea- 
shore;  'and  beside  all  this,'  thou  must  abide  it 
for  ever. 

'  And  beside  all  this,  between  us  and  you  there 
is  a  great  gulf  fixed,  so  that  they  which  would  pass 
from  hence  to  you,  cannot ;  neither  can  they  pass 
to  us  that  would  come  from  thence.'  '  There  is  a 
great  gulf  fixed.'  You  will  say,  what  is  that? 
Answ.  It  is  a  nice  question ;  therefore, 

1.  Seek  thou  rather  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate, 
than  curiously  to  inquire  what  this  gulf  is.     But, 

2.  If  thou  wouldest  needs  know  if  thou  do  fall 
short  of  heaven,  thou  wilt  find  it  this,  namely,  the 
everlasting  decree  of   God;    that  is,   there   is   a 


1  With  what  searching  truthfulness  is  the  character  of  Bye- 
ends  drawn  in  the  Pilgrims  Progress,  p.  132  :  '  looking  one 
way  and  rowing  another.' — (Ed.) 


decree  gone  forth  from  God,  that  those  who  fall 
short  of  heaven  in  this  world,  God  is  resolved  they 
shall  never  enjoy  it  in  the  world  to  come.  And 
thou  wilt  find  this  gulf  so  deep,  that  thou  shalt 
never  be  able  to  wade  through  it  as  long  as  eter- 
nity lasts.  As  Christ  saith,  '  Agree  with  thine 
adversary  quickly,  whiles  thou  art  in  the  way  with 
him,'  Mat.  v.  25;  '  lest  he  hale  thee  to  the  judge, 
and  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the  officer,  and  thou 
be  cast  into  prison.  I  tell  thee  thou  shalt  by  no 
means  come  out  thence,'  there  is  the  gulf,  the  de- 
cree, '  thou  shalt  not  depart  thence  till  thou  hast 
paid  the'  utmost  farthing,  or  '  very  last  mite.'  Lu. 
xtf.  58,  59.  These  words  therefore,  '  there  is  a  great 
gulf  fixed,'  I  do  understand  to  be  the  everlasting 
decree  of  God.  God  hath  decreed  that  those  who 
go  to  heaven  shall  never  go  from  thence  again  into 
a  worse  place ;  and  also  those  that  go  to  hell,  and 
would  come  out,  they  shall  not  come  out  thence 
again.  And  friend,  this  is  such  a  gulf,  so  fixed 
by  him  that  cannot  lie,  that  thou  wilt  find  it  so, 
which  way  soever  thou  goest,  whether  it  be  to 
heaven  or  hell. 

Here  therefore  thou  seest  how  secure  God  will 
make  those  who  die  in  the  faith ;  God  will  keep 
them  in  heaven ;  but  those  that  die  in  their  sins, 
God  will  throw  them  to  hell  and  keep  them 
there;  so  that  they  that  would  go  from  heaven 
to  hell,  cannot ;  neither  can  they  come  from  hell 
that  would  go  to  heaven.  Mark,  he  doth  not  say, 
they  would  not — for,  0  how  fain  wrould  these  who 
have  lost  their  souls  for  a  lust,  for  two-pence,  for 
a  jug  of  ale,  for  a  strumpet,  for  this  world,  come 
out  of  that  hot  scalding  fiery  furnace  of  God's  eter- 
nal vengeance,  if  they  might — but  here  is  their 
misery,  they  that  would  come  from  you  to  us,  that 
is,  from  hell  to  heaven,  cannot,  they  must  not,  they 
shall  not ;  they  cannot,  God  hath  decreed  it,  and 
is  resolved  the  contrary;  here  therefore  lies  the 
misery,  not  so  much  that  they  are  in  hell,  but  there 
they  must  lie  for  ever  and  ever.  Therefore,  if  thy 
heart  would  at  any  time  tempt  thee  to  sin  against 
God,  cry  out,  No,  for  then  I  must  go  to  hell,  and 
lie  there  for  ever.  If  the  drunkards,  swearers, 
liars,  and  hypocrites  did  but  take  this  doctrine 
soundly  down,  it  would  make  them  tremble  when 
they  think  of  sinning.  But  poor  souls,  now  they 
will  '  make  a  mock  of  sin, '  Pr.  xiv.  9,  and  play  with 
it  as  a  child  doth  play  with  a  rattle ;  but  the  time 
is  coming,  that  these  rattles  that  now  they  play 
with  will  make  such  a  noise  in  their  ears  and  con- 
sciences, that  they  shall  find,  that  if  all  the  devils 
iu  hell  were  yelling  at  their  heels,  the  noise  would 
not  be  comparable  to  it.  Friend,  thy  sins,  as  so 
many  bloodhounds,  will  first  hunt  thee  out,  Na. 
xrxii.  23,  and  then  take  thee  and  bind  thee,  and  hold 
thee  down  for  ever.  Pr.  v.  22.  They  will  gripe  thee 
and  gnaw  thee  as  if  thou  hadst  a  nest  of  poisonous 


THE   GROANS   OF   A   DAMNED  SOUL 


695 


serpents  in  thy  bowels.  Job  u.  14.  And  this  wall  not 
be  for  a  time,  but,  as  I  have  said,  for  ever,  for  ever, 
for  ever. 

Verse  27. — '  Then  he  said,  I  pray  thee  therefore,  father,  that 
thou  wouldest  send  him  to  my  father's  house.' 

The  verses  before,  I  told  yon,  were  spoken  partly 
to  hold  forth  the  desire  that  the  damned  have  to  he 
freed  of  their  endless  misery.  Now  this  verse  still 
holds  forth  the  cries  of  those  poor  souls  very  vehe- 
ment, they  woidd  very  fain  have  something  granted 
to  them,  but  it  will  not  be;  as  will  more  clearly 
appear  afterward. 

'Then  he  said,  I  tray  thee  therefore,  father,' 
&c.  As  if  he  should  say,  seeing  I  have  brought 
myself  into  such  a  miserable  condition,  that  God 
will  not  regard  me,  that  my  exceeding  loud  and 
bitter  cries  will  not  be  heard  for  myself;  seeing  I 
must  not  be  admitted  to  have  so  much  as  one  drop 
of  cold  water,  nor  the  least  help  from  the  poorest 
saints.  And  seeing,  •  beside  all  this,'  here  my  soul 
must  lie  to  all  eternity,  broiling  and  frying ;  seeing 
I  must,  whether  I  will  or  no,  undergo  the  hand  of 
eternal  vengeance,  and  the  rebukes  of  devouring 
fire ;  seeing  my  state  is  such,  that  I  would  not 
wish  a  dog  in  my  condition,  '  send  him  to  my 
father's  house. '  It  is  worthy  to  be  taken  notice 
of,  again,  who  it  is  he  desired  to  be  sent,  namely, 
Lazarus.  0  friend,  see  here  how  the  stout  hearts 
and  stomachs  of  poor  creatures  will  be  humbled, 
as  I  said  before,  they  will  be  so  brought  down, 
that  those  things  that  they  disdained  and  made 
light  of  in  this  world,  they  would  be  glad  of  in  the 
life  to  come.  He  who  by  this  man  was  so  slighted, 
as  that  he  thought  it  a  dishonour  that  he  should 
eat  with  the  dogs  of  his  flock.  What,  shall  I  regard 
Lazarus,  scrubbed,  beggarly  Lazarus !  what,  shall 
I  so  far  dishonour  my  fair,  sumptuous,  and  gay 
house,  with  such  a  scabbed  creep-hedge  as  he  ! 
No,  I  scorn  he  should  be  entertained  under  my 
roof.  Thus  in  his  life-time,  while  he  was  in  his 
bravery ;  but  now  he  is  come  into  another  world, 
now  he  is  parted  from  Lis  pleasures,  now  he  sees 
his  fine  house,  his  dainty  dishes,  his  rich  neighbours 
and  companions,  and  he,  are  parted  asunder ;  now 
he  finds  instead  of  pleasures,  torments ;  iustead  of 
joys,  heaviness ;  instead  of  heaven,  hell ;  instead  of 
the  pleasures  of  sin,  the  horror  and  guilt  of  sin ;  0 
now  send  Lazarus  ! 

Lazarus,  it  may  be,  might  have  done  him  some 
good,  if  he  might  have  been  entertained  in  time 
past,  and  might  have  persuaded  him,  at  least  not 
to  have  gone  on  so  grievously  wicked,  but  he  slights 
him,  he  will  not  regard  him,  he  is  resolved  to  dis- 
own him,  though  he  lose  his  own  soul  fur  so  doing. 
Ay,  but  now  send  Lazarus,  if  not  to  me,  yet  to  my 
father's  house,  and  let  him  tell  them,  from  me, 
that  if  they  run  on  in  sin,  as  I  have  done,  they 


must  and  shall  receive  the  same  wages  that  I  have 
received. 

Take  notice  of  this,  you  that  are  despisers  of 
the  least  of  the  Lazaruses  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ; 
it  may  bo  now  you  aro  loth  to  receive  these  little- 
ones  of  his,  because  they  are  not  gentlemen,  because 
they  cannot,  with  Pontius  Pilate,  speak  Hebrew, 
Greek,  and  Latin.1  Nay,  they  must  not,  shall  not 
speak  to  them,  to  admonish  them,  and  all  because 
of  this. 

Though  now  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
may  be  preached  to  them  freely,  and  for  nothing ; 
nay,  they  are  now  desired  to  hear  and  receive  it ; 
though  now  they  will  not  own,  regard,  or  embrace 
these  Christian  proffers  of  the  glorious  truth  of 
Jesus,  because  they  come  out  of  some  of  the  basest 
earthen  vessels;  yet  the  time  is  coming,  when 
they  will  both  sigh  and  cry,  Send  him  to  my 
father's  house,  l  Co.  i.  20.  I  say,  remember  this,  ye 
that  despise  the  day  of  small  things ;  the  time  is 
coming,  when  you  would  be  glad,  if  you  might 
enjoy  from  God,  from  Christ,  or  his  saints,  one  small 
drop  of  cold  water,  though  now  you  are  unwilling 
to  receive  the  glorious  distilling  drops  of  the  gospel 
of  our  Lord  Jesus. 

Again,  see  here  the  lamentable  state  they  arc 
in,  that  go  to  hell  from  their  fathers,  mothers, 
sisters,  brothers,  <fce.  While  they  are  in  this  world, 
men  delight  to  set  their  children  ill  examples;  and 
also  children  love  to  follow  the  wicked  steps  of 
their  ungodly  parents  ;  but  when  they  depart  this 
life,  and  drop  down  into  hell,  and  find  themselves 
in  irrecoverable  misery,  then  they  cry,  send  some 
body  to  my  father's  house,  to  my  brother's  house. 
Tell  them  my  state  is  miserable,  tell  them  I  am 
undone  for  ever ;  and  tell  them  also,  that  if  they 
will  be  walking  in  these  ungodly  steps  wherein  I 
left  them,  they  will  assuredly  fall  into  this  place 
of  torments. 

'I  pray  thee  -  send  him  to  my  father's  house.' 
Ah,  friends  and  neighbours,  it  is  like  you  little  think 
of  this,  that  some  of  your  friends  and  relations  are 
crying  out  in  hell,  Lord,  send  some  body  to  my 
father's  house,  to  preach  the  gospel  to  them,  lesi 
they  also  come  into  these  torments. 

Here,  men  while  they  live,  can  Avillingly  walk 
together  in  the  way  of  sin,  and  when  they  are  parted 
by  death,  they  that  are  living,  seldom  or  never 
consider  of  the  sad  condition  that  they  that  are 


1  This  is  not  intended  to  convey  any  reflection  upon  human 
learning,  but  to  exhibit  the  contemptuous  spirit  of  learned 
men,  so  generally  manifested  to  the  illilercle.hut  really  learned 
followers  of  the  Lamb.  They  sometimes  meet  their  mate!), 
even  in  worldly  wit.  Thus,  when  three  learned  gentlemen  from 
Oxford  overtook  a  pious  wag-oner,  they  ironically  saluted  hini 
as  Father  Abraham,  Father  Isaac,  and  Father  Jacob  ;  he  replied, 
Gentlemen,  you  are  mistaken  :  J  am  neither  Abraham,  Isaac, 
nor  Jacob,  but  Saul,  the  son  of  Kish,  who  was  sent  to  liud  his 
father's  asses,  and  so  I  have  found  them. —  (Ed.) 


G96 


A.  FEW  SIGHS  FROM  HELL,  OR 


dead  are  descended  into.  But  ye  ungodly  fathers, 
how  are  your  ungodly  children  roaring  now  in  hell? 
And  you  ungodly  children,  how  are  your  ungodly 
parents  that  lived  and  died  ungodly,  now  in  the 
pains  of  hell  also  ?  And  one  drunkard  is  singing 
on  the  ale  hench,  and  another  roaring  under  the 
wrath  of  God,  saying,  0  that  I  was  with  him,  how 
would  I  rebuke  him,  and  persuade  him  by  all 
means  to  leave  off  these  evil  courses.  0  !  that 
they  did  but  consider  what  I  now  suffer  for  pride, 
covetousness,  drunkenness,  lying,  swearing,  steal- 
ing, whoring,  and  the  like.  0  !  did  they  but  feel 
the  thousandth  part  thereof,  it  would  make  them 
look  about  them,  and  not  buy  sin  at  so  dear  a  rate 
as  I  have  done ;  even  with  the  loss  of  my  precious 
soul. 

'Send  him  to  my  father's  house.'  Not  to  my 
father,  but  to  my  '  father's  house. '  It  may  be 
there  is  ungodly  children,  there  is  ungodly  ser- 
vants, wallowing  in  their  ungodliness;  send  him 
therefore  to  my  father's  house.  It  is  like  they 
are  still  the  same  that  I  left  them  ;  I  left  them 
wicked,  and  they  are  wicked  still;  I  left  them 
slighters  of  the  gospel,  saints,  and  ways  of  God, 
and  they  do  it  still; '  send  him  to  my  father's  house,' 
it  is  like  there  is  but  a  little  between  them  and  the 
place  where  I  am;  send  him  to-day,  before  to-mor- 
row, 'lest  they  also  come  into  the  same  place  of 
torment.  I  pray  thee  that  thou  wouldst  send  him.' 
I  beg  it  on  my  bended  knee,  with  crying  and  with 
tears,  in  the  agony  of  my  soul.  It  may  be  they 
will  not  consider,  if  thou  do  not  send  him.  I  left 
them  sottish  enough,  hardened  as  well  as  I  ;  they 
have  the  same  devil  to  tempt  them,  the  same  lusts 
and  world  to  overcome  them,  '  I  pray  thee  there- 
fore, that  thou  wouldest  send  him  to  my  father's 
house;'  make  no  delay,  lest  they  lose  their  souls, 
lest  they  come  hither:  if  they  do,  they  are  like 
never  to  return  again.  0  !  little  do  they  think 
how  easily  they  may  lose  their  souls;  they  are  apt 
to  think  their  condition  to  be  as  good  as  the  best, 
as  I  once  through  ignorance  did ;  but  send  him, 
send  him  without  delay,  '  lest  they  also  come  into 
this  place  of  torment.'  0  that  thou  wouldst  give 
him  commission,  do  thou  send  him  thyself;  the 
time  was  when  I,  together  with  them,  slighted  those 
that  were  sent  of  God ;  though  we  could  not  deny 
but  that  he  spake  the  word  of  God,  and  was  sent 
of  him,  as  our  consciences  told  us ;  yet  we  preferred 
the  calls  of  men  before  the  calls  of  God.  For  though 
they  had  the  one,  yet  because  they  had  not  the 
other  in  that  antichristian  way  which  we  thought 
meet,  we  could  not,  would  not,  either  hear  him  our- 
selves, nor  yet  give  consent  that  others  should. 
But  now  a  call  from  God  is  worth  all.  Do  thou 
'  therefore  send  him  to  my  father's  house.' 

The  time  was,  when  we  did  not  like  it,  except 
it  might  be  preached  in  the  synagogue;  we  thought 


it  a  low  thing  to  preach  and  pray  together  in  houses. 
We  were  too  high-spirited,  too  superstitious ;  the 
gospel  would  not  down  with  us,  unless  we  had  it  in 
such  a  place,  by  such  a  man ;  no,  nor  then  neither 
effectually.  But  now,  0  that  I  was  to  live  in  the 
world  again ;  and  might  have  that  privilege  to  have 
some  acquaintance  with  blessed  Lazarus,  some 
familiarity  with  that  holy  man ;  what  attendance 
would  I  give  unto  his  wholesome  words  !  How 
would  I  affect  his  doctrine,  and  close  in  with  it  ! 
How  would  I  square  my  life  thereby  !  Now  there- 
fore, as  it  is  better  to  hear  the  gospel  under  a  hedge 
than  to  sit  roaring  in  a  tavern,  it  is  better  to  wel- 
come God's  begging  Lazaruses  than  the  wicked 
companions  of  this  world.  It  is  better  to  receive  a 
saint  in  the  name  of  a  saint,  a  disciple  in  the  name 
of  a  disciple,  than  to  do  as  I  have  done.  Ln.  x.  ie. 
0  !  it  is  better  to  receive  a  child  of  God,  that  can 
by  experience  deliver  the  things  of  God,  his  free 
love,  his  tender  grace,  his  rich  forbearance,  and 
also  the  misery  of  man,  if  without  it,  than  to  be 
'daubed  with  untempered  mortar.''  Eze.xm.io.  0!  I 
may  curse  the  day  that  ever  I  gave  Avay  to  the  flat- 
teries and  fawning  of  a  company  of  carnal  clergy- 
men,1 but  this  my  repentance  is  too  late ;  I  should 
have  looked  about  me  sooner,  if  I  would  have  been 
saved  from  this  woeful  place.  Therefore  send  him, 
not  only  to  the  town  I  lived  in,  and  unto  some  of 
my  acquaintance,  but  to  my  father'3  house. 

In  my  lifetime  I  did  not  care  to  hear  that  word 
that  cut  me  most,  and  showed  me  mine  estate 
aright.  I  was  vexed  to  hear  my  sins  mentioned, 
and  laid  to  my  charge ;  I  loved  him  best  that  de- 
ceived me  most — that  said,  Peace,  peace,  when 
there  was  no  such  thing.  Je.  v.  30,  31.  But  now,  0 
that  I  had  been  soundly  told  of  it !  0  that  it  had 
pierced  both  mine  ears  and  heart,  and  had  stuck 
so  fast  that  nothing  could  have  cured  me,  saving 
the  blood  of  Christ!  It  is  better  to  be  dealt  plainly 
with,  than  that  we  should  be  deceived ;  they  had 
better  see  their  lost  condition  in  the  Avorld,  than 
stay  while  they  be  damned,  as  I  have  done. 
Therefore  send  Lazarus,  send  him  to  my  father's 
house.  Let  him  go  and  say  I  saw  your  son,  your 
brother,  in  hell,  weeping  and  wailing,  and  gnashing 
his  teeth.  Let  him  bear  them  down  in  it,  and  tell 
them  plainly  it  is  so,  and  that  they  shall  see  their 
everlasting  misery,  if  they  have  not  a  special  care. 
'  Send  him  to  my  father's  house.' 


1  The  word  'clergy'  is  omitted  from  all  the  editions  published 
after  Bunyan's  death.  These  words  are  calculated  to  fix  upon 
the  mind  the  necessity  of  a  visitation  from  heaven,  of  personal 
examination  of  the  Scriptures,  and  of  solemn,  earnest,  perse- 
vering prayer,  without  which  no  clergyman  can  do  a  sinner 
good.  But  how  inexpressibly  terrible  will  be  the  misery  of 
carnal  clergymen,  who,  by  precept  or  example,  have  led  their 
hearers  to  a  false  hope  of  heaven.  How  will  such  souls  gnash 
their  teeth  in  bitter  auguish,  and  trample  their  devoted  souls 
to  the  hottest  hell!— (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF   A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


697 


Verse  28. — 'For  I  have  five  brethren;  that  he  may  testify 
unto  them,  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  torment.' 

These  words  are,  if  I  may  so  say,  a  reason  given 
by  those  in  hell  why  they  are  so  restless  and  do 
cry  so  loud ;  it  is  that  their  companions  might  be 
delivered  from  those  intolerable  torments  which 
they  must  and  shall  undergo  if  they  fall  short  of 
everlasting,  life  by  Jesus  Christ.  'Send  him  to 
my  father's  house;  for  I  have  five  brethren.' 
Though,  while  they  lived  among  them  in  the  world, 
they  were  not  so  sensible  of  their  ruin,  yet  now 
they  are  passed  out  of  the  world,  and  do  partake 
of  that  which  hefore  they  were  warned  of;  they 
can,  I  say,  then  cry  out,  Now  I  find  that  to  be 
true  indeed,  which  was  once  and  again  told  and 
declared  to  me  that  it  would  certainly  come  to 
pass. 

'  For  I  iiave  five  brethren. '  Here  you  may  see 
that  there  may  be,  and  are,  whole  households  in  a 
damnable  state  and  condition,  as  our  Lord  Jesus 
doth  by  this  signify.  '  Send  him  to  my  father's 
house,'  for  they  are  all  in  one  state,  I  left  all  my 
brethren  in  a  pitiful  case.  People,  while  they  live 
here,  cannot  endure  to  hear  that  they  should  be 
all  in  a  miserable  condition ;  but  when  they  are 
under  the  wrath  of  God  they  see  it,  they  know  it, 
and  are  very  sure  of  it ;  for  they  themselves,  when 
they  were  in  the  world,  lived  as  they  do,  but  they 
fell  short  of  heaven,  and  therefore,  if  they  go  on,  so 
shall  they.  0,  therefore,  send  him  quickly  to  my 
father's  house,  for  all  the  house  is  in  an  undone 
condition,  and  must  be  damned  if  they  continue  so. 

The  thing  observable  is  this,  namely,  that 
those  that  are  in  hell  do  not  desire  that  their  com- 
panions should  come  thither ;  nay  rather,  saith 
he,  send  him  to  my  father's  house,  and  let  him 
testify  to  them  that  are  therein,  lest  they  also 
come,  &c. 

Quest.  But  some  may  say,  What  should  be  the 
reason  that  the  damned  should  desire  not  to  have 
their  companions  come  into  the  same  condition 
that  they  are  fallen  into,  but  rather  that  they 
might  be  kept  from  it,  and  escape  that  dreadful 
state  ? 

Answ.  I  do  believe  there  is  scarce  so  much  love 
in  any  of  the  damned  in  hell  as  really  to  desire 
the  salvation  of  any.  But  in  that  there  is  any 
desire  in  them  that  are  damned,  that  their  friends 
and  relations  should  not  come  into  that  place  of 
torment,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  rather  for  their 
own  ease  than  for  their  neighbour's  good;  for,  let 
me  tell  you,  this  I  do  believe,  that  it  will  aggra- 
vate the  grief  and  horror  of  them  to  see  their 
ungodly  neighbours  in  the  like  destruction  with 
them.  For  where  the  ungodly  do  live  and  die, 
and  descend  into  the  pit  together,  the  one  is  rather 
a  vexation  to  the  other  than  any  thing  else.    And 

VOL.  III. 


it  must  needs  be  so,  because  there  are  no  ungodly 
people  that  do  live  ungodly  together  but  they  do 
learn  ill  examples  one  of  another,  as  thus:  If 
there  live  one  in  the  town  that  i3  very  expert 
and  cunning  for  the  world,  why  now  the  rest  that 
are  of  the  same  mind  with  him,  they  will  labour 
to  imitate  and  follow  his  steps :  this  is  commonly 
seen. 

Again,  if  there  be  one  given  to  drunkenness, 
others  of  the  town,  through  his  means,  run  the 
more  into  that  sin  with  him,  and  do  accustom 
themselves  the  more  unto  it  because  of  his  enticing 
them,  and  also  by  setting  such  an  ill  example  beforo 
them.  And  so  if  there  be  any  addicted  to  pride, 
and  must  needs  be  in  all  the  newest  fashions,  how 
do  their  example  provoke  others  to  love  and  follow 
the  same  vanity;  spending  that  upon  their  lusts 
which  should  relieve  their  own  and  others'  wants. 
Also  if  there  be  any  given  to  jesting,  scoffing, 
lying,  whoring,  backbiting,  junketing,1  wanton- 
ness, or  any  other  sin,  they  that  are  most  expert 
in  these  things  do  ofttimes  entangle  others,  that 
peradventure  would  not  have  been  so  vile  as  now 
they  are,  had  they  not  had  such  an  example,  and 
hence  they  are  called  corrupters,  is.  i.  4. 

Now  these  will,  by  their  doings,  exceedingly 
aggravate  the  condemnation  of  one  another.  He 
that  did  set  his  neighbour  an  ill  example,  and 
thereby  caused  him  to  walk  in  sin,  he  will  be 
found  one  cause  of  his  friend's  destruction,  inso- 
much that  he  will  have  to  answer  for  his  own  sins 
and  for  a  great  part  of  his  neighbour's  too,  which 
will  add  to  his  destruction ;  as  that  scripture  in 
Ezekiel  showeth,  where,  speaking  of  the  watchman 
that  should  give  the  people  warning,  if  he  did  not, 
though  the  man  did  die  in  his  sins,  yet  Jus  blood 
shall  be  required  at  the  ivatchmans  hand.  Ezc.  mffi. 

So  here  let  me  tell  thee  that  if  thou  shouldst  be 
such  a  one,  as  by  thy  conversation  and  practices 
shall  be  a  trap  and  a  stumbling-block  to  cause  thy 
neighbour  to  fall  into  eternal  ruin — though  he  be 
damned  for  his  own  sins — yet  God  may,  nay  ho 
will  charge  thee  as  being  guilty  of  his  blood,  iu 
that  thou  didst  not  content  thyself  to  keep  from 
heaven  thyself,  but  didst  also,  by  thy  filthy  con- 
versation, keep  away  others,  and  cause  them  to 
fall  with  thee.  0,  therefore,  will  not  this  aggra- 
vate thy  torment?  Yea,  if  thou  shouldst  die  and 
go  to  hell  before  thy  neighbour  or  companions, 
besides  the  guilt  of  thine  own  sius,  thou  wouldst 
be  so  loaden  with  the  fear  of  the  damnation 
of  others  to  be  laid  to  thy  charge,  that  thou 
wouldest  cry  out,  0  send  one  from  the  dead  to 
this  companion  and  that  companion  with  whom  I 
had  society  in  my  lifetime,  for  I  see  my  cursed 


1  Making  an  entertainment  by  stealth,  privately  indulging 
in  wickedness. —  (En.) 

S3 


G98 


A    FEW   SIGHS   FROM  HELL,  OR 


carriage  will  be  one  cause  of  his  condemnation,  if 
he  fall  short  of  glory. 

I  left  him  living  in  foul  and  heinous  offences; 
hut  I  was  one  of  the  first  instruments  to  bring  him 
to  them.  0 !  I  shall  he  guilty  both  of  my  own 
and  his  damnation  too !  0  that  he  might  be  kept 
out  hence,  lest  my  torment  be  aggravated  by  his 
coming  hither  ! 

For  where  ungodly  people  do  dwell  together, 
they  being  a  snare  and  stumbling-block  one  to 
another  by  their  practices,  they  must  needs  be  a 
torment  one  to  another,  and  an  aggravation  of  each 
other's  damnation.  0  cursed  be  thy  face,  saith 
one,  that  ever  I  set  mine  eyes  on  thee.  It  was 
long  of  thee.  I  may  thank  thee.  It  was  thee 
that  did  entice  me  and  ensnare  me.  It  was  your 
filthy  conversation  that  was  a  stumbling-block  to 
me.  It  was  your  covetousness,  it  was  your  pride, 
your  haunting  the  ale-house,  your  gaming  and 
whoring.  It  was  long  of  you  that  I  fell  short  of 
life ;  if  you  had  set  me  a  good  example,  as  you  did 
set  me  an  ill  one,  it  may  be  I  might  have  done 
better  than  now  I  do ;  but  I  learned  of  you,  I  fol- 
lowed your  steps,  I  took  counsel  of  you.  0  that 
I  had  never  seen  thy  face!  0  that  thou  hadst 
never  been  born  to  do  my  soul  this  wrong,  as  you 
have  done!  0,  saith  the  other,  and  I  may  as 
much  blame  you,  for  do  not  you  remember  how  at 
such  a  time,  and  at  such  a  time,  you  drew  me  out, 
and  drew  me  away,  and  asked  me  if  I  would  go 
with  you,  when  I  was  going  about  other  business, 
about  my  calling ;  but  you  called  me  away,  you 
sent  for  me,  you  are  as  much  in  the  fault  as  I ; 
though  I  wrere  covetous,  you  were  proud ;  and  if 
you  learned  covetousness  of  me,  I  learned  pride 
This  ian°-ua"e  is  ant^  drunkenness  of  you.  Though  I 
somctimesiieard    learned  you  to  cheat,  vou  learned  me 

at  the  gallows,  "  - 

but,  for  ought  I  to  whore,  to  he,  to  scoff  at  goodness. 
moretobe'heard  Though  I,  base  wretch,  did  stumble 
iu  lidl.  y011  jn  some  things,  yet  you  did  as 

much  stumble  me  in  others.  I  can  blame  you  as 
you  blame  me ;  and  if  I  have  to  answer  for  some 
of  }rour  most  filthy  actions,  you  have  to  answer  for 
some  of  mine.  I  would  you  had  not  come  hither, 
the  very  looks  of  you  do  wound  my  soul,  by  bring- 
ing my  sins  afresh  into  my  mind,  the  time  when, 
the  manner  how,  the  place  where,  the  persons  with 
whom.  It  was  with  you,  you!  Grief  to  my  soul! 
Since  I  could  not  shun  thy  company  there,  0  that 
I  had  been  without  thy  company  here! 

I  say,  therefore,  for  those  that  have  sinned  to- 
gether to  go  to  hell  together,  it  will  very  much 
perplex  and  torment  them  both  ;  therefore  I  judge 
this  is  one  reason  why  they  that  are  iu  hell  do 
desire  that  their  friends  or  companions  do  not  come 
thither  into  the  same  place  of  torment  that  they 
are  in.  And  therefore  where  Christ  saith  that  these 
damned  souls  cry  out,  Send  to  our  companions, 


that  they  may  be  warned  and  commanded  to  look 
to  themselves,  0  send  to  my  five  brethren!  it  is 
because  they  would  not  have  their  own  torments 
heightened  by  their  company ;  and  a  sense,  yea, 
a  continual  sense  of  their  sins,  which  they  did 
cause  them  to  commit  when  they  were  in  the  world 
with  them.  For  I  do  believe  that  the  very  looks 
of  those  that  have  been  beguiled  of  their  fellows, 
I  say  their  very  looks  will  be  a  torment  to  them : 
for  thereby  will  the  remembrance  of  their  own  sins 
be  kept,  if  possible,  the  fresher  on  their  con- 
sciences, which  they  committed  with  them ;  and 
also  they  will  wonderfully  have  the  guilt  of  the 
other's  sins  upon  them,  in  that  they  were  partly 
the  cause  of  his  committing  them,  being  instru- 
ments in  the  hands  of  the  devil  to  draw  them  in 
too.  And,  therefore,  lest  this  come  to  pass,  •  I 
pray  thee  send  him  to  my  father's  house.'  For 
if  they  might  not  come  hither,  peradventure  my 
torment  might  have  some  mitigation ;  that  is,  if 
they  might  be  saved,  then  their  sins  will  be  par- 
doned, and  not  so  heavily  charged  on  my  soul. 
But  if  they  do  fall  into  the  same  place  where  I 
am,  the  sins  that  I  have  caused  them  to  commit 
will  lie  so  heavy,  not  only  on  their  souls,  but  also 
on  mine,  that  they  sink  me  into  eternal  misery, 
deeper  and  deeper.  0  therefore  send  him  to  my 
father's  house,  to  my  five  brethren,  and  let  him 
testify  to  them,  lest  they  come  into  this  place  of 
torment. 

These  words  being  thus  understood,  what  a  con- 
dition doth  it  show  them  to  be  in  then,  that  now 
much  delight  in  being  the  very  ringleaders  of  their 
companions  into  sins  of  all  sorts  whatsoever? 

While  men  live  here,  if  they  can  be  counted  the 
cunningest  in  cheating,  the  boldest  for  lying,  the 
archest  for  whoring,  the  subtilest  for  coveting  and 
getting  the  world ;  if  they  can  but  cunningly  de- 
fraud, undermine,  cross,  and  anger  their  neighbours, 
yea,  and  hinder  them  from  the  means  of  grace,  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  they  glory  in  it,  take  a  pride  in 
it,  and  think  themselves  pretty  well  at  ease,  and 
their  minds  are  somewhat  quiet,  being  beguiled 
with  sin. 

But,  friend,  when  thou  hast  lost  this  life,  and 
dost  begin  to  lift  up  thine  eyes  in  hell,  and  seest 
what  thy  sins  have  brought  thee  to ;  and  not  only 
so,  but  that  thou,  by  thy  filthy  sins,  didst  cause 
others,  devil-like,  to  fall  into  the  same  condemna- 
tion with  thee ;  and  that  one  of  the  reasons  of  their 
damnation  was  this,  that  thou  didst  lead  them  to 
the  commission  of  those  wicked  practices  of  this 
world,  and  the  lusts  thereof;  then,  0  that  some- 
body would  stop  them  from  coming,  lest  they  also 
come  into  this  place  of  torment,  and  be  damned  as 
I  am !  How  will  it  torment  me !  Balaam  could 
not  be  contented  to  be  damned  himself,  but  also  he 
must,  by  his  wickedness,  cause  others  to  stumble 


THE   GROANS   OF  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


CD  9 


and  fall.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  could  not  be 
contented  to  keep  out  of  heaven  themselves,  but 
they  must  labour  to  keep  out  others  too.  Therefore 
theirs  is  the  greater  damnation. 

The  deceived  cannot  be  content  to  be  deceived 
himself  ;  but  be  must  labour  to  deceive  others  also. 
The  drunkard  cannot  be  content  to  go  to  hell  for 
his  own  sins,  but  ho  must  labour  to  cause  others  to 
fall  into  the  same  furnace  with  him.  But  look  to 
yourselves,  for  here  will  be  damnation  upon  damna- 
tion, damned  for  thy  own  sins,  and  damned  for  thy 
being  a  partaker  with  others  in  their  sins;  and 
damned  for  being  guilty  of  the  damnation  of  others. 
0  how  will  the  drunkards  cry  for  leading  their 
neighbours  into  drunkenness !  How  will  the  cove- 
tous person  howl  for  setting  his  neighbour,  his 
friend,  bis  brother,  his  children  and  relations,  so 
wicked  an  example!  by  which  he  hath  not  only 
wronged  his  own  soul,  but  also  the  souls  of  others. 
The  liar,  by  lying,  learned  others  to  lie ;  the 
swearer  learned  others  to  swear  ;  the  whoremonger 
learned  others  to  whore. 

Now  all  these,  with  others  of  the  like  sort,  will 
be  guilty,  not  only  of  their  own  damnation,  but  also 
of  the  damnation  of  others.  I  tell  you,  that  some 
men  have  so  much  been  the  authors  of  the  damna- 
tion of  others,  that  I  am  ready  to  think  that  the 
damnation  of  them  will  trouble  them  as  much  as 
their  own  damnation.  Some  men,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  will  be  found  to  be  the 
authors  of  destroying  whole  nations.  How  many- 
souls  do  you  think  Balaam,  with  his  deceit,  will 
have  to  answer  for  ?  How  many  Mahomet  ?  How 
many  the  Pharisees,  that  hired  the  soldiers  to  say 
the  disciples  stole  away  Jesus?  Mat.  xxvm.  11-15;  and 
by  that  means  stumbled  their  brethren  to  this  day ; 
and  was  one  means  of  hindering  them  from  believing 
the  things  of  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  the  cause 
of  the  damnation  of  their  brethren  to  this  very  day. 

How  many  poor  souls  hath  Bonner  to  answer  for, 
think  you,  and  several  filthy  blind  priests?  How 
many  souls  have  they  been  the  meaus  of  destroy- 
ing by  their  ignorance  and  corrupt  doctrine?  Preach- 
ing, that  was  no  better  for  their  souls  than  ratsbane 
*o  ye  priests  to  *^ie  body,  f°r  ^hy  lucre's  sake.* 
this  word  is  for  They  shall  see,  that  they,  many  of 
them  it  is  to  be  feared,  will  have  whole 
towns  to  answer  for;  whole  cities  to  answer  for. 
Ah,  friend,  I  tell  thee,  thou  that  hast  taken  in  hand 
to  preach  to  the  people,  it  may  be  thou  hast  taken 
in  hand  thou  canst  not  tell  what.  Will  it  not  grieve 
thee  to  see  thy  whole  parish  come  bellowing  after 
thee  to  hell,  crying  out,  This  we  may  thank  thee 
for,  this  is  long  of  thee,  thou  didst  not  teach  us  the 
truth ;  thou  didst  lead  us  away  with  fables,  thou 
wast  afraid  to  tell  us  of  our  sins,  lest  we  should 
4f^lm  not  put  meat  fast  enough  in  thy  mouth. 
■*ar       0  cursed  wretch,  that  ever  thou  shouldst 


beguile  us  thus,  deceive  us  thus,  flatter  us  thus ! 
We  would  have  gone  out  to  hear  the  word  abroad, 
but  that  thou  didst  reprove  us,  and  also  tell  us 
that  that  which  we  see  now  is  the  way  of  God  was 
heresy,  and  a  deccivable  doctrine ;  and  wast  not 
contented,  blind  guide  as  thou  wcrt,  to  fall  into 
the  ditch  thyself,  but  hast  also  led  us  thither  with 
thee.1 

I  say,  look  to  thyself,  lest  thou  cry  out  when  it 
is  too  late,  Send  Lazarus  to  my  people,  my  friends, 
my  children,  my  congregation  to  whom  1  preached, 
aud  beguiled  through  my  folly.  Send  him  to  the 
town  in  which  I  did  preach  last,  lest  I  be  the  cause 
of  their  damnation.  Send  him  to  my  friends  from 
whence  I  came,  lest  I  be  made  to  answer  for  their 
souls  and  mine  own  too.  Eze.  sniii.  i-c. 

0  send  him  therefore,  and  let  him  tell  them,  and 
testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also  come  into  this 
place  of  torment.  Consider  this,  ye  that  live  thu3 
in  the  world,  while  ye  are  in  the  land  of  the  living, 
lest  you  fall  into  this  condition.  Set  the  case  thou 
shouldest  by  thy  carriage  destroy  but  a  soul,  but 
one  poor  soul,  by  one  of  thy  carriages  or  actions, 
by  thy  sinful  works ;  consider  it  now,  I  say,  lest 
thou  bo  forced  to  cry,  '  I  pray  thee  therefore,  that 
thou  wouldst  send  him  to  my  father's  house,  for  I 
have  five  brethren,  that  he  may  testify  unto  them, 
lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  torment.' 

If  so,  then  I  shall  not  only  say  to  the  blind 
guides,  Look  you  to  yourselves,  and  shut  not2  out 
others ;  no,  but  this  doth  reach  unto  all  those  that 
do  not  only  keep  souls  from  heaven  by  preaching 
and  the  like,  but  speaks  forth  the  doom  of  those 
that  shall  any  ways  be  instrumental  to  hinder  others 
from  closing  in  with  Jesus  Christ.  0  what  red 
lines  will  those  be  against  all  those  rich  ungodly 
landlords,  that  so  keep  under  their  poor  tenants 
that  they  dare  not  go  out  to  hear  the  word,  for  fear 
their  rent  should  be  raised,  or  they  turned  out  of 
their  houses !  What  sayest  thou,  landlord,  will  it 
not  cut  thy  soul,  when  thou  shalt  see  that  thou 
couldest  not  be  content  to  miss  of  heaven  thyself, 
but  thou  must  labour  to  hinder  others  also?  Will 
it  not  give  thee  an  eternal  wound  in  thy  heart,  both 
at  death  and  judgment,  to  be  accused  of  the  ruin 
of  thy  neighbour's  soul,  thy  servant's  soul,  thy 
wife's  soul,  together  with  the  ruin  of  thy  own? 
Think  on  this,  you  drunken,  proud,  rich,  and  scorn- 
ful landlords  ;  think  on  this,  you  mad-brained  blas- 
phemous husbands,  that  are  against  the  godly  and 
chaste  conversation  of  your  wives ;  also  you  that 

1  Awful  responsibility  !  1  A  heavy  curse  on  the  souls  of 
those  who  labour  to  prevent  private  judgment,  guided  simply 
by  the  Bible — who  lead  poor  sinners  to  rely  upon  acts  of  uni- 
formity, litm-gies,  articles,  or  creeds,  the  grovelling  inventions 
of  men ;  instead  of  relying  wholly  on  the  revealed  will  of  God, 
which  alone  is  able  to  "make  man  wise  unto  salvation. — (Ed.) 

2  The  word  '  not'  is  omitted  from  most  of  the  editions  pub- 
lished in  Bunyan's  life. — (En.) 


on 


A   TEW   SIGHS   FROM  HELL,  OR 


hold  your  servants  so  hard  to  it  that  you  will  not 
spare  them  time  to  hear  the  word,  unless  it  he 
where  and  when  your  lusts  will  let  you.  If  you 
love  your  own  souls,  your  tenants'  souls, your  wives' 
souls,  your  servants'  souls,  your  children's  souls  ; 
if  you  would  not  cry,  if  you  would  not  howl,  if  you 
would  not  hear  the  burden  of  the  ruin  of  others  for 
ever,  then  I  beseech  you  to  consider  this  doleful 
story,  and  labour  to  avoid  the  soul-killing  torment 
that  this  poor  wretch  groaneth  under,  when  he 
saith,  '  I  pray  thee  therefore,  that  thou  wouldest 
send  him  to  my  father's  house,1 

'  For  I  have  five  brethren,  that  he  may  testify,' 
mark,  '  that  he  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they 
also  come  into  this  place  of  torment.' 

These  words  have  still  something  more  in  them 
than  I  have  yet  observed  from  them ;  there  are  one 
or  two  things  more  that  I  shall  briefly  touch  upon, 
and  therefore,  mark,  he  saith,  '  That  he  may  testify 
unto  them,'  &c.  Mark,  I  pray  you,  and  take  notice 
of  the  word  testify  He  doth  not  say,  And  let 
him  go  unto  them,  or  speak  with,  or  tell  them  such 
and  such  tilings.  No,  but  let  him  testify,  or  affirm 
it  constantly,  in  case  any  should  oppose  it.  '  Let 
him  testify  unto  them.'  It  is  the  same  word  the 
Scripture  uses  to  set  forth  the  vehemency  of  Christ, 
his  telling  of  his  disciples  of  him  that  should  betray 
him.  And  he  testified,  saying,  One  of  you  shall 
betray  me.  And  he  testified,  that  is,  he  spake  it 
so  as  to  dash  or  overcome  any  that  should  have 
said  it  shall  not  be.  It  is  a  word  that  signifies, 
that  in  case  any  should  oppose  the  thing  spoken 
of,  yet  that  the  party  speaking  should  still  continue 
constant  in  his  saying.  And  he  commanded  them 
to  preach,  '  and  to  testify,  that  it  is  he  which  was 
ordained  of  God  to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead.' 
To  testify,  mark,  that  is,  to  be  constant,  irresistible, 
undaunted,  in  case  it  should  be  opposed  and  objected 
against.  So  here,  let  him  testify  to  them,  lest  they 
come  into  this  place  of  torment. 

From  whence  observe,  that  it  is  not  an  easy 
matter  to  persuade  them  who  are  in  their  sins  alive 
in  this  world,  that  they  must  and  shall  be  damned 
if  they  turn  not,  and  be  converted  to  God.  '  Let 
him  testify  to  them,'  let  him  speak  confidently, 
though  they  frown  upon  him,  or  dislike  his  way  of 
speaking.  And  how  is  this  truth  verified  and 
cleared  by  the  carriages  of  almost  all  men  now  in 
the  world  toward  them  that  do  preach  the  gospel; 
and  show  their  own  miserable  state  plainly  to  them, 


1  These  times  of  tyrannizing  oppression  are  fast  passing 
away.  It  was  difficult,  a  few  years  ago,  to  hire  a  room  in  some 
of  the  villages  even  round  London,  for  a  Sunday  school  and 
lecture,  or  to  admit  a  missionary  into  a  workhouse.  A  poor 
baby  has  been  scornfully  driven  from  the  font — the  dead  body 
of  a  dissenter  has  been  refused  Christian  burial — the  cries  of 
poverty  and  distress  have  been  disregarded — from  bitter  secta- 
rianism. The  genial  influence  of  Christianity  is  fast  driving 
these  demoniac  feeliugs  to  the  owls  and  bats. — (Ed.) 


if  they  close  not  with  it?  If  a  man  do  but  indeed 
labour  to  convince  sinners  of  their  sins  and  lost 
condition  by  nature,  though  they  must  be  damned 
if  they  live  and  die  in  that  condition,  0  how  angry 
are  they  at  it!  Look  how  he  judges,  say  they, 
hark  how  he  condemns  us  ;  he  tells  us  we  must  be 
damned  if  we  live  and  die  in  this  state.  We  are 
offended  at  him,  we  cannot  abide  to  hear  him,  or 
any  such  as  he ;  we  will  believe  none  of  them  all, 
but  go  on  in  the  way  we  are  agoing.  '  Forbear, 
why  shouldest  thou  be  smitten,'  said  the  ungodly 
king  to  the  prophet,  when  he  told  him  of  his  sins. 
2  Ch.  xsv.  is. 

I  say,  tell  the  drunkard  he  must  be  damned  if 
he  leaves  not  his  drunkenness,  the  swearer,  liar, 
cheater,  thief,  covetous,  railers,  or  any  ungodly 
persons,  they  must  and  shall  lie  in  hell  for  it,  if 
they  die  in  this  condition ;  they  will  not  believe 
you,  not  credit  you. 

Again,  tell  others  that  there  are  many  in  hell 
that  have  lived  and  died  in  their  conditions,  and  so 
are  they  like  to  be,  if  they  convert  not  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  be  found  in  him,  or  that  there  are 
others  that  are  more  civil  and  sober  men,  who, 
although  we  know  that  their  civility  will  not  save 
them,  if  we  do  but  tell  them  plainly  of  the  empti- 
ness and  unprofitableness  of  that,  as  to  the  saving 
of  their  souls,  and  that  God  will  not  accept  them, 
nor  love  them,  notwithstanding  these  things,  and 
that  if  they  intend  to  be  saved,  they  must  be  better 
provided  than  with  such  a  righteousness  as  this ; 
they  will  either  fling  away,  and  come  to  hear  no 
more,  or  else  if  they  do  come,  they  will  bring  such 
prejudice  with  them  in  their  hearts,  that  the  word 
preached  shall  not  profit  them,  it  being  mixed  not 
with  faith,  but  with  prejudice  in  them  that  hear 
it.  Heb.  iv.  l,  2.  Nay,  they  will  some  of  them  be  so 
full  of  anger  that  they  will  break  out  and  cali, 
even  those  that  speak  the  truth,  heretics  ;  yea,  and 
kill  them.  Lu.  iv.  25-23.  And  why  so?  Because  they 
tell  them,  that  if  they  live  in  their  sins  that  will 
damn  them ;  yet  if  they  turn  and  live  a  righteous 
life,  according  to  the  holy,  and  just,  and  good  law 
of  God,  that  will  not  save  them.  Yea,  because  we 
tell  them  plainly  that  unless  they  leave  their  sins 
and  [self]  righteousness  too,  and  close  in  with  a 
naked  Jesus  Christ,  his  blood  and  merits,  and  what 
he  hath  done,  and  is  now  doing  for  sinners,  they 
cannot  be  saved ;  and  unless  they  do  eat  the  flesh 
of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  they  have 
no  life  abiding  in  them,  they  gravel2  presently,  and 
are  offended  at  it,  as  the  Jews  were  with  Christ  for 
speaking  the  same  thing  to  them.  Jn.  vi.  53,  co.  And 
fling  away  themselves,  their  souls  and  all,  by  quar- 
relling ao-ainst  the  doctrine  of  the  Sou  of  God,  as 


2  Anguish  or  embarrassment  of  mind,  derived  from  the  name 
of  a  most  painful  disease. — (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF   A   DAMXED   SOUL. 


701 


indeed  they  do,  though  they  will  not  believe  they 
do;  and  therefore,  he  that  is  a  preacher  of  the 
Word,  had  need  not  only  tell  them,  but  testify  to 
them,  again  and  again,  that  their  sins,  if  they  con- 
tinue in  them,  will  damn  them,  and  damn  them 
again.  And  tell  them  again,  their  living  honestly 
according  to  the  law,  their  paying  every  one  their 
own,  their  living  quietly  with  their  neighbours, 
their  giving  to  the  poor,  their  notion  of  the  gospel, 
and  saying  they  do  believe  in  Christ,  will  do  them 
no  good  at  the  general  day  of  judgment.  Ha, 
friends !  How  many  of  you  are  there  at  thi3  very 
day,  that  have  been  told  once  and  again  of  your 
lost  undone  condition,  because  you  want  the  right, 
real,  and  saving  work  of  God  upon  your  souls !  I 
say,  hath  not  this  been  told  you,  yea,  testified  unto 
you  from  time  to  time,  that  your  state  is  miserable, 
that  yet  you  are  never  the  better,  but  do  still  stand 
where  you  did ;  some  in  an  open  ungodly  life,  and 
some  drowned  in  a  self-conceited  holiness  of  Chris- 
tianity? Therefore,  for  God's  sake,  if  you  love 
your  souls,  consider,  and  beg  of  God  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake,  that  he  would  work  such  a  work  of 
grace  in  your  hearts,  and  give  you  such  a  faith  in 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  may  not  only  have 
rest  here,  as  you  think,  not  only  think  your  state 
safe  while  you  live  here,  but  that  you  may  be  safe 
indeed,  not  only  here,  but  also  when  you  are  gone, 
lest  you  do  cry  in  the  anguish  and  perplexity  of 
your  souls,  Send  one  to  my  companions  that  have 
been  beguiled,  by  Satan  as  I  have  been,  and  so, 
by  going  on,  come  into  this  place  of  torment  as  I 
have  done. 

Again,  one  thing  more  is  to  be  observed  from 
these  words,  Let  him  '  testify  to  them,  lest  they 

ALSO  COME  INTO  THIS  PLACE  OF  TOUMENT.' 

Mark,  lest  they  come  in.  As  if  he  had  said,  Or 
else  they  will  come  into  this  place  of  torment,  as 
sure  as  I  am  here.  From  whence  observe,  that 
though  some  souls  do  for  sin  fall  into  the  bottom- 
less pit  of  hell  before  their  fellows,  because  they 
depart  this  world  before  them,  yet  the  other,  abid- 
ing in  the  same  course,  are  as  sure  to  go  to  the 
same  place  as  if  they  were  there  already.  How  so  ? 
Because  that  all  are  condemned  together,  they  have 
all  fallen  under  the  same  law,  and  have  all  offended 
the  same  justice,  and  must  for  certain,  if  they  die 
in  that  condition,  drink  as  deep,  if  not  deeper,  of 
the  same  destruction.  Mark,  I  pray  you,  what  the 
Scriptures  say,  '  He  that  believeth  not,  is  con- 
demned already.'  ja.  m.  is. 

He  is  condemned  as  well  as  they,  having  broken 
the  same  law  with  them ;  if  so,  then  what  hinders 
but  they  will  partake  of  the  same  destruction  with 
them  ?  Only  the  one  hath  not  the  law  yet  so 
executed  upon  them,  because  they  are  here ;  the 
other  have  had  the  law  executed  upon  them,  they 
are  gone  to  drink  that  which  they  have  been  brew- 


ing, and  thou  art  brewing  that  in  thi3  life  which 
thou  must  certainly  drink.1  The  same  law,  I  say, 
is  in  force  against  you  both,  only  he  is  executed 
and  thou  art  not.  Just  as  if  there  were  a  companv 
of  prisoners  at  the  bar,  and  all  condemned  to  die ; 
what,  because  they  are  not  all  executed  in  one  day, 
therefore  shall  they  not  be  executed  at  ail  I  Yes, 
the  same  law  that  executed  its  severity  upon  the 
parties  now  deceased,  will  for  certain  be  executed 
on  them  that  are  alive  in  its  appointed  time.  Even 
so  it  is  here,  we  are  all  condemned  by  nature ;  if 
we  close  not  in  with  the  grace  of  God  by  Jesus 
Christ,  we  must  and  shall  be  destroyed  with  the 
same  destruction;  and  'therefore  send  him,'  saith 
he,  'lest,'  mark,  'lest  they  also  come  into  this 
place  of  torment.' 

Again,  'Send  him  to  my  father's  house,'  and 
let  him  '  testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also  come  into 
this  place  of  torment.'  As  if  he  had  said,  It  may 
be  he  may  prevail  with  them,  it  may  be  he  may 
win  upon  them,  and  so  they  may  be  kept  from 
hence,  from  coming  into  this  grievous  place  of 
torment.  Observe  again,  that  there  is  a  possi- 
bility of  obtaining  mercy,  if  now,  I  say,  now  in 
this  day  of  grace,  we  turn  from  our  sins  to  Jesus 
Christ ;  yea,  it  is  more  than  possible.  And  there- 
fore, for  thy  encouragement,  do  thou  know  for 
certain,  that  if  thou  shalt  in  this  thy  day  accept  of 
mercy  upon  God's  own  terms,  and  close  with  him 
effectually,  God  hath  promised,  yea,  made  many 
promises,  that  thy  soul  shall  be  conducted  safe  to 
glory,  and  shall  for  certain  escape  all  the  evils  that 
I  have  told  thee  of ;  aye,  and  many  more  than  I 
can  imagine.  Do  but  search  the  Scriptures,  and 
see  how  full  of  consolation  they  are  to  a  poor  soul 
that  is  minded  to  close  in  with  Jesus  Christ.  •  Him 
that  cometh  to  me,'  saith  Christ,  '  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out.'  Though  he  be  an  old  sinner,  '  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  him  out ;'  mark,  in  no  wise,  though 
he  be  a  great  sinner,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  him  out, 
if  he  come  to  me.  Though  he  have  slighted  me 
never  so  many  times,  and  not  regarded  the  welfare 
of  his  own  soul,  yet  let  him  now  come  to  me,  and 
notwithstanding  this,  '  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  him 
out,'  nor  throw  away  his  soul.  jn.vLs:.  Again, 
saith  the  apostle,  'Now,'  mark  now,  'is  the  ac- 
cepted time,  now  is  the  day  of  their  salvation.' 
Now  here  is  mercy  in  good  store,  now  God's  heart 
is  open  to  sinners  ;  now  he  will  make  you  welcome  ; 
now  he  will  receive  anybody  if  they  do  but  come  to 
Christ.  '  He  that  cometh  to  me,'  saith  Christ,  *  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out.'  And  why?  Because 
'  xow  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  sal- 
vation.' 2Ca.ri.3L     As  if  the  apostle  had  said,  If 

1  This  is  one  of  Banyan's  proverbs,  which,  however  homely, 
is  sore  to  make  a  lasting  impression  on  the  mind.  Sin  breeds 
the  scorpions  which  will  torment  the  sinner,  unless  they  tor- 
mented the  Saviour.     0  for  greater  hatred  of  sin ! — (Ed.) 


[02 


A  FEW   SIGHS    FROM   HELL,  OK 


you  will  have  mercy,  have  it  now,  receive  it  now, 
close  in  with  it  now. 

God  hath  a  certain  day  to  hold  out  his  grace  to 
sinners.  Now  is  the  time,  now  is  the  day.  It  is 
true,  there  is  a  day  of  damnation,  hut  this  is  a  day 
of  salvation.  There  is  a  day  coming,  wherein  sin- 
ners must  cry  to  the  mountains  to  fall  on  them,  to 
the  hills  to  cover  them  from  the  wrath  of  God  ;  but 
now,  now  is  the  day  in  which  he  doth  hold  out  his 
grace.  There  is  a  day  coming,  in  which  you  will 
not  he  admitted  to  have  the  privilege  of  one  drop 
of  water  to  cool  your  tongue,  if  now,  I  say,  if  now 
you  slight  his  grace  and  goodness  which  he  holds 
out  to  you.  Ah,  friends,  consider  there  is  now 
hopes  of  mercy,  but  then  there  will  not ;  now  Christ 
holds  forth  mercy  unto  you,  but  then  he  will  not. 
Mat.  vii.  23.  Now  there  are  his  servants  that  do  be- 
seech you  to  accept  of  his  grace,  but  if  thou  lose 
the  opportunity  that  is  put  into  thine  hand,  thou 
thyself  inayest  beseech  hereafter,  and  no  mercy  be 
given  thee.  '  And  he  cried  and  said,  Father  Abra- 
ham, have  mercy  on  me,  and  send  Lazarus,  that 
he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and  cool 
my  tongue.'  And  there  was  none  given.  There- 
fore let  it  never  be  said  of  thee,  as  it  will  be  said 
of  some,  '  Wherefore  is  there  a  price  in  the  hand  of 
a  fool,  seeing  he  hath  no  heart  to  it  ? '  Seeing  he 
hath  no  heart  to  make  a  good  use  of  it.  Pr.  xvii.  is. 
Consider  therefore  with  thyself,  and  say,  It  is 
better  going  to  heaven  than  hell ;  it  is  better  to  be 
saved  than  damned  ;  it  is  better  to  be  with  saints 
than  with  damned  souls  ;  and  to  go  to  God  is  better 
than  to  go  to  the  devil.  Therefore  •  seek  ye  the 
Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  and  call  ye  upon  him 
wkde  he  is  near.'  is.  iv.  6.  Lest  in  thy  trouble  he 
leave  thee  to  thyself,  and  say  unto  thee  plainly, 
Where  I  am,  thither  'ye  cannot  come.'  Jn. ?iiL  21. 

0  if  they  that  are  in  hell  might  but  now  again 
have  one  such  invitation  as  this,  how  would  they 
leap  for  joy!  I  have  thought  sometimes  should 
God  send  but  one  of  his  ministers  to  the  damned  in 
hell,  and  give  him  commission  to  preach  the  free 
love  of  God  in  Christ  extended  to  them,  and  held 
out  to  them,  if  now  while  it  is  proffered  to  them 
they  will  accept  of  his  kindness ;  0  how  welcome 
would  they  make  this  news,  and  close  in  with  it  on 
any  terms!  Certainly  they  would  say,  we  will 
accept  of  grace  on  any  terms  in  the  world,  and 
thank  you  too,  though  it  cost  life  and  limbs  to  hoot ; 
we  will  spare  no  cost  nor  charge,  if  mercy  may  be 
had.  But  poor  souls,  while  they  live  here  they 
will  not  part  from  sin,  with  hell-bred  devilish  sin. 
No,  they  will  rather  lose  their  souls  than  lose  their 
filthy  sins. 

But,  friend,  thou  wilt  change  thy  note  before  it 
be  long,  and  cry,  0  simple  wretch  that  I  am  that  I 
should  damn  my  soul  by  sin !  It  is  true,  I  have 
had  the  gospel  preached  to  me,  and  have  been  in- 


vited in.  I  have  been  preached  to,  and  have  been 
warned  of  this  ;  but  •  how  have  I  hated  instruction, 
and  my  heart  despised  reproof;  and  have  not 
obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined  mine 
ear  to  them  that  instructed  me.'  r-r.  v.  12, 13.  0 
therefore,  I  say,  poor  soul !  Is  there  hope?  Then 
lay  thine  hand  upon  thy  mouth,  and  kiss  the  dust, 
and  close  in  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  make 
much  of  his  glorious  mercy ;  and  invite  also  thy 
companions  to  close  in  with  the  same  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  lest  one  of  you  do  go  to  hell  beforehand, 
and  expect  with  grief  of  heart  your  companions  to 
come  after ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  with  anguish 
of  heart,  do  sigh  and  say,  0  send  him  to  my  com- 
panions, and  let  him  testify  to  them,  lest  they  also 
come  into  this  place  of  torment. 

[Use  and  x\.pplicatiox 
Of  the  Preceding  portion  of  the  Parable.] 

1  Now  then,  from  what  hath  been  said,  there 
might  many  things  be  spoken  by  way  of  use  and 
application;  but  1  shall  be  very  brief,  and  but 
touch  some  things,  and  so  wind  up.  And,  First,  I 
shall  begin  with  the  sad  condition  of  those  that 
die  out  of  Christ,  and  speak  something  to  that. 
Secondly,  To  the  latter  end  of  the  parable,  which 
more  evidently  concerns  the  Scripture,  and  speak 
somewhat  to  that. 

[First.  I  shall  begin  with  the  sad  condition  of 
those  that  die  out  of  Christ.] 

1.  Therefore  you  see  that  the  former  part  of  the 
parable  contains  a  sad  declaration  of  the  state  of 
one  living  and  dying  out  of  Christ ;  how  that  they 
lose  heaven  for  hell,  God  for  the  devil,  light  for 
darkness,  joy  for  sorrow.  2.  How  that  they  have 
not  so  much  as  the  least  comfort  from  God,  who  in 
the  time  they  live  here  below  neglect  coming  to 
him  for  mercy ;  not  so  much  as  one  drop  of  cold 
water.  3.  That  such  souls  will  repent  of  their  folly, 
when  repentance  will  do  them  no  good,  or  when 
they  shall  be  past  recovery.  4.  That  all  the  com- 
fort such  souls  are  like  to  have,  they  have  it  in  this 
world.  5.  That  all  their  groanings  and  sighs  will 
not  move  God  to  mitigate  in  the  least  his  heavy 
hand  of  vengeance  that  is  upon  them,  for  the 
transgressions  they  have  committed  against  him. 

6.  That  their  sad  state  is  irrecoverable,  or  they 
must  never,  mark,  never  come  out  of  that  condition. 

7.  Their  desires  will  not  be  heard  for  their  ungodly 
neighbours.  From  these  things  then,  I  pray  you 
consider  the  state  of  those  that  die  out  of  Christ 
Jesus ;  yea,  I  say,  consider  their  miserable  state ; 
and  think  thus  with  thyself,    Well,   if  I  neglect 


1  From  this  paragraph  to  the  end  of  the  comment  on  vcr.  28, 
was  placed  by  Banyan,  in  his  first  edition,  as  the  first  part  of 
the  general  use  and  application.  See  the  note  on  p.  722. — 
Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF  A  DAMNED  SOUL. 


703 


coming  to  Christ,  I  must  go  to  tlie  devil,  and  lie 
will  not  neglect  to  fetch  me  away  into  those  into- 
lerable torments. 

Think  thus  with  thyself,  What,  shall  I  lose  a 
long  heaven  for  short  pleasure?  Shall  I  buy  the 
pleasures  of  this  world  at  so  dear  a  rate  as  to  lose 
my  soul  for  the  obtaining  of  that  ?  Shall  I  content 
myself  with  a  heaven  that  will  last  no  longer  than 
my  lifetime  ?  What  advantage  will  these  be  to  me 
when  the  Lord  shall  separate  sold  and  hody  asunder, 
and  send  one  to  the  grave,  the  other  to  hell,  and 
at  the  judgment-day,  the  final  sentence  of  eternal 
ruin  must  be  passed  upon  me  ? 

1.  Consider,  that  the  profits,  pleasures,  and 
vanities  of  this  world  will  not  last  for  ever,  but  the 
time  is  coming,  yea,  just  at  the  doors,  when  they 
will  give  thee  the  slip,  and  leave  thee  in  the  suds,1 
and  in  the  brambles  of  all  that  thou  hast  done. 
And  therefore  to  prevent  this, 

2.  [Consider']  thy  dismal  state,  think  thus  with 
thyself,  It  is  true,  I  do  love  my  sins,  my  lusts 
and  pleasures ;  but  what  good  will  they  do  me  at 
the  day  of  death  and  of  judgment  ?  Will  my 
sins  do  me  good  then  ?  Will  they  be  able  to  help 
me  when  I  come  to  fetch  my  last  breath  ?  What 
good  will  my  profits  do  me  ?  And  what  good  will 
my  vanities  do,  when  death  says  he  will  have  no 
nay?  What  good  will  all  my  companions,  fellow- 
jesters,  jeerers,  liars,  drunkards,  and  all  my  wan- 
tons do  me  ?  Will  they  help  to  ease  the  pains  of 
hell  ?  Will  these  help  to  turn  the  hand  of  God  from 
inflicting  his  fierce  anger  upon  me  ?  Nay,  will  not 
they  rather  cause  God  to  show  me  no  mercy,  to 
give  me  no  comfort ;  but  rather  to  thrust  me  down 
in  the  hottest  place  of  hell,  where  I  may  swim  in 
fire  and  brimstone. 

3.  Consider  thus  with  thyself,  Would  I  be  glad 
to  have  all,  every  one  of  my  sins  to  come  in  against 
me,  to  inflame  the  justice  of  God  against  me  ? 
Would  I  be  glad  to  be  bound  up  in  them  as  the 
three  children  were  bound  in  their  clothes,  and  to 
be  as  really  thrown  into  the  fiery  furnace  of  the 
wrath  of  Almighty  God  as  they  were  into  Nebu- 
chadnezzar's fiery  furnace  ? 

4.  Consider  thus,  Would  I  be  glad  to  have  all, 
and  every  one  of  the  ten  commandments,  to  dis- 
charge themselves  against  my  soul  ?  The  first 
saying,  Damn  him,  for  he  hath  broken  me  ;  the 
second  saying,  Damn  him,  for  he  hath  broken  me, 
<fcc.  Consider  how  terrible  this  will  be,  yea,  more 
terrible  than  if  thou  shouldest  have  ten  of  the  big- 
gest pieces  of  ordnance  in  England  to  be  discharged 
against  thy  body,  thunder,  thunder,  one  after  an- 
other !   Nay,  this  would  not  be  comparable  to  the 


1  A  familiar  phrase,  expressive  of  embarrassment.  '  There 
is  uo  comfort  in  the  house  upon  a  washing  day.'  Suds,  in  this 
sentence,  would  puzzle  a  foreigner.  Johnson's  dictionary  in- 
terprets it,  '  A  lhivium  of  soap  and  water ! ' — (Ed.) 


reports  that  the  law,  for  the  breach  thereof,  will 
give  against  thy  soul ;  for  those  can  but  kill  the 
body,  but  these  will  kill  both  body  and  soul ;  and 
that  not  for  an  hour,  a  day,  a  month,  or  a  year,  but 
they  will  condemn  thee  for  ever. 

Mark,  it  is  for  ever,  for  ever.  It  is  into  everlast- 
ing damnation,  eternal  destruction,  eternal  wrath 
and  displeasure  from  God,  eternal  gnawings  of  con- 
science, eternal  continuance  with  devils.  0  con- 
sider, it  may  be  the  thought  of  seeino;  the  devil 
doth  now  make  thine  hair  to  stand  right  up  on 
thine  head.  0  but  this,  to  be  damned,  to  be  among 
all  the  devils,  and  that  not  only  for  a  time,  as  I 
said  before,  but  for  ever,  to  all  eternity  !  This  is 
wonderfully  miserable,  ever  miserable  ;  that  no 
tongue  of  man,  no,  nor  of  angels,  is  able  to  ex- 
press it. 

5.  Consider  much  with  thyself,  Not  only  my  sins 
against  the  law  will  be  laid  to  my  charge,  but  also 
the  sins  I  have  committed  in  slighting  the  gospel, 
the  glorious  gospel.  These  also  must  come  with 
a  voice  against  me.  As  thus,  Nay,  he  is  worthy  to 
be  damned,  for  he  rejected  the  gospel,  he  slighted 
the  free  grace  of  God  tendered  in  the  gospel ;  how 
many  times  wast  thou,  damned  wretch,  invited, 
intreated,  beseeched  to  come  to  Christ,  to  accept 
of  mercy,  that  thou  mightest  have  heaven,  thy  sins 
pardoned,  thy  soul  saved,  and  body  and  soul  glori- 
fied, and  all  this  for  nothing  but  the  acceptance, 
and  through  faith  forsaking  those  imps  of  Satan, 
which  by  their  embracements  have  drawn  thee  down- 
ward toward  the  gulf  of  God's  eternal  displeasure? 
How  often  didst  thou  read  the  promises,  yea,  the 
free  promises  of  the  common  salvation  !  How  oft 
didst  thou  read  the  sweet  counsels  and  admonitions 
of  the  gospel,  to  accept  of  the  grace  of  God !  But 
thou  wouldst  not,  thou  regardest  it  not,  thou  didst 
slight  all. 

Second.  As  I  would  have  thee  to  consider  the 
sad  and  woeful  state  of  those  that  die  out  of  Christ, 
and  are  past  all  recovery,  so  would  I  have  thee  con- 
sider the  many  mercies  and  privileges  thou  enjoyest 
above  some,  p°radventure,  of  thy  companions  that 
are  departed  to  their  proper  place.     As, 

1.  Consider,  thou  hast  still  the  thread  of  thy 
life  lengthened,  which  for  thy  sins  might  seven 
years  ago,  or  more,  have  been  cut  asunder,  and 
thou  have  dropped  down  amongst  the  flames. 

2.  Consider  the  terms  of  reconciliation  by  faith 
in  Christ  are  still  proffered  unto  thee,  and  thou 
invited,  yea,  entreated  to  accept  of  them. 

3.  Consider  the  terms  of  reconciliation  are  but 
— bear  with  me  though  I  say  but — only  to  believe 
in  Jesus  Christ,  with  that  faith  that  purifies  the 
heart,  and  enables  thy  soul  to  feed  on  him  effec- 
tually, and  be  saved  from  this  sad  state. 

4.  Consider  the  time  of  thy  departure  is  at  hand, 
and  the  time  is  uncertain,  and  also  that  for  ought 


704 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


thou  knowest  the  day  of  grace  may  he  past  to  thee 
before  thou  diest,  not  lasting  so  long  as  thy  uncer- 
tain life  in  this  world.  And  if  so,  then  know  for 
certain  that  thou  art  as  sure  to  be  damned  as  if 
thou  wast  in  hell  already;  if  thou  convert  not  in 
the  meanwhile. 

5.  Consider  it  may  be  some  of  thy  friends  are 
giving  all  diligence  to  make  their  calling  and  elec- 
tion sure,  being  resolved  for  heaven,  and  thou 
thyself  endeavourest  as  fast  to  make  sure  of  hell, 
as  if  resolved  to  have  it ;  and  together  with  this, 
consider  how  it  will  grieve  thee  that  while  thou 
Avast  making  sure  of  hell  thy  friends  were  making 
sure  of  heaven  ;  but  more  of  this  by  and  by. 

6.  Consider  what  a  sad  reflection  this  will  have 
on  thy  soul,  to  see  thy  friends  in  heaven,  and 
thyself  in  hell ;  thy  father  in  heaven,  and  thou  in 
hell ;  thy  mother  in  heaven,  and  thou  in  hell ;  thy 
brother,  thy  sjster,  thy  children  in  heaven,  and 
thou  in  hell.  As  Christ  said  to  the  Jews  of  their 
relations  according  to  the  flesh,  so  may  I  say  to 
thee  concerning  thy  friends,  '  There  shall  be  weep- 
ing and  gnashing  of  teeth,'  when  you  shall  see  your 
fathers  and  mothers,  brethren  and  sisters,  husbands 
and  wives,  children  and  kinsfolk,  with  your  friends 
and  neighbours  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  thou 
thyself  thrust  out.  La.  xffi.  57-23. 

But  again,  because  I  would  not  only  tell  thee  of 
the  damnable  state  of  those  that  die  out  of  Christ, 
but  also  persuade  thee  to  take  hold  of  life,  and  go 
to  heaven,  take  notice  of  these  following  things. 

(1.)  Consider  that  whatever  thou  canst  do,  as 
to  thy  acceptance  with  God,  is  not  worth  the  dirt 
of  thy  shoes,  but  is  all  'as  filthy  rags.'  is.  liv.  6. 

(2.)  Consider  that  all  the  conditions  of  the  new 
covenant,  as  to  salvation,  are  and  have  been  com- 
pletely fulfilled  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
for  sinners. 

(3.)  Consider  that  the  Lord  calls  to  thee,  for  to 
receive  whatsoever  Christ  hath  done,  and  that  on 
free  COSt.   Ke.  xxii.  17. 

(4.)  Consider  that  thou  canst  not  honour  God 
more  than  to  close  in  with  his  proffers  of  grace, 
mercy,  and  pardon  of  sin.  lto.  iv. 

Again,  that  which  will  add  to  all  the  rest,  thou 
shalt  have  the  very  mercy  of  God,  the  blood  of 
Christ,  the  preachers  of  the  word,  together  with 
every  sermon,  all  the  promises,  invitations,  exhor- 
tations, and  all  the  counsels  and  threatenings  of 
the  blessed  word  of  God.  Thou  shalt  have  all  thy 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  together  with  all  thy 
food,  thy  raiment,  thy  sleep,  thy  goods,  and  also 
all  hours,  days,  weeks,  months  and  years,  together 
with  whatsoever  else  God  hath  given  thee.  I  say, 
thy  abuse  of  all  these  shall  come  up  in  judgment 
against  thy  soul;  for  God  will  reckon  with  thee 
for  everything,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  Ec.xii.14. 

(5.)  Nay  further,  it  is  so  unreasonable  a  thing 


for  a  sinner  to  refuse  the  gospel,  that  the  very  devils 
themselves  will  come  in  against  thee,  as  well  as 
Sodom,  that  damned  crew.  May  not  they,  I  say, 
come  in  against  thee,  and  say,  0  thou  simple1  man! 
0  vile  wretch  !  That  had  not  so  much  care  of  thy 
soul,  thy  precious  soul,  as  the  beast  hath  of  its 
young,  or  the  dog  of  the  very  bone  that  lieth  be- 
fore him.  Was  thy  soul  worth  so  much,  and  didst 
thou  so  little  regard  it  ?  Were  the  thunder-claps 
o'f  the  law  so  terrible,  and  didst  thou  so  slight  them  ? 
Besides,  was  the  gospel  so  freely,  so  frequently,  so 
fully  tendered  to  thee,  and  yet  hast  thou  rejected 
all  these  things  ?  Hast  thou  valued  sin  at  a  higher 
rate  than  thy  soul,  than  God,  Christ,  angels,  saints, 
and  communion  with  them  in  eternal  blessedness 
and  glory?  Wast  thou  not  told  of  hell-fire,  those 
intolerable  flames  ?  Didst  thou  never  hear  of  the 
intolerable  roarings  of  the  damned  ones  that  are 
therein  ?  Didst  thou  never  hear  or  read  that  dole- 
ful saying  in  Luke  xvi.,  how  the  sinful  man  cries 
out  among  the  flames,  '  One  drop  of  water  to  cool 
my  tongue?'  Thus,  I  say,  may  the  very  devils, 
being  ready  to  go  with  thee  into  the  burning  fur- 
nace of  fire  and  brimstone,  though  not  for  sins  of 
so  high  a  nature  as  thine,  trembling  say,  0  that 
Christ  had  died  for  devils,  as  he  died  for  man  ! 
And,  0  that  the  gospel  had  been  preached  to  us 
as  it  hath  been  to  thee  !  How  would  we  have  la- 
boured to  have  closed  in  with  it !  But  woe  be  to 
us,  for  we  might  never  have  it  proffered ;  no,  not 
in  the  least,  though  we  would  have  been  glad  of  it. 
But  you,  you  have  it  proffered,  preached,  and  pro- 
claimed unto  you.  Pr.  via.  4.  Besides,  you  have  been 
intreated,  and  beseeched  to  accept  of  it,  but  you 
would  not.  0  simple  fools !  that  might  have 
escaped  wrath,  vengeance,  hell-fire,  and  that  to  all 
eternity,  and  had  no  heart  at  all  to  do  it. 

(6.)  May  not  the  messengers  of  Jesus  Christ 
also  come  in  with  a  shrill  and  terrible  note  against 
thy  soul,  when  thou  standest  at  the  bar  of  God's 
justice,  saying,  Nay,  thou  ungodly  one,  how  often 
hast  thou  been  forewarned  of  this  day?  Did  we 
not  sound  an  alarm  in  thine  ears,  by  the  trumpet 
of  God's  word  day  after  day  ?  How  often  didst 
thou  hear  us  tell  thee  of  these  things?  Did  we 
not  tell  thee  sin  would  damn  thy  soul?  Did  we 
not  tell  thee  that  without  conversion  there  was  no 
salvation?  Did  we  not  tell  thee  that  they  who 
loved  their  sins  should  be  damned  at  this  dark  and 
gloomy  day,  as  thou  art  like  to  be?  Yea,  did  we 
not  tell  thee  that  God,  out  of  his  love  to  sinners, 
sent  Christ  to  die  for  them,  that  they  might,  by 
coming  to  him,  be  saved?  Did  not  we  tell  thee 
of  these  things?  Did  we  not  run,  ride,  labour, 
and  strive  abundantly,  if  it  might  have  been,  for 


1  The  word  '  simple'  is  here  used  as  it  is  by  Solomon  in  the 
Proverbs — silly,  unwise. — (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF   A  DAMNED    SOUL. 


705 


the  good  of  thy  soul,  though  now  a  damned  soul  ? 
Did  we  not  venture  our  goods,  our  names,  our 
lives?  Yea,  did  we  not  even  kill  ourselves  with 
our  earnest  intreaties  of  thee  to  consider  of  thine 
estate,  and  hy  Christ  to  escape  this  dreadful  day? 
0  sad  doom !  When  thou  shalt  be  forced  full  sore 
against  thy  will  to  fall  under  the  truth  of  this 
judgment,  saying,  0  '  How  have  I  hated  instruc- 
tion, and  how  hath  my  heart  despised  reproof!' 
for,  indeed,  J  I  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my 
teachers,  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that 
instructed  me.'  rr.  v.  12,  is. 

(7.)  May  not  thy  father,  thy  mother,  thy  brother, 
thy  sister,  thy  friend,  <fcc,  appear  with  gladness 
against  thee  at  the  terrible  day,  saying,  0  thou 
silly  wretch !  how  rightly  hath  God  met  with  thee ! 
0  how  righteously  doth  his  sentence  pass  upon 
thee!  Remember  thou  wouldst  not  be  ruled  nor 
persuaded  in  thy  lifetime.  As  thou  didst  not 
care  fur  us  and  our  admonitions  then,  so  neither 
do  we  care  for  thy  ruin,  terror,  and  damnation 
now.  No,  but  we  will  stand  on  God's  side  in  sen- 
tencing of  thee  to  that  portion  which  the  devils 
must  be  partakers  of.  '  The  righteous  shall  rejoice 
when  he  seeth  the  vengeance,  he  shall  wash  his  feet 
in  the  blood  of  the  wicked.'  rs.  ivffi.  10.  0  sad!  It 
is  enough  to  make  mountains  tremble,  and  the 
rocks  rend  in  pieces,  to  hear  this  doleful  sound. 
Consider  these  things,  and  if  thou  wouldst  be 
loth  to  be  in  this  condition,  then  have  a  care  of 
living  in  sin  now.  How  loth  wilt  thou  be  to  be 
thrust  away  from  the  gates  of  heaven !  And  how 
loth  wilt  thou  be  to  be  deprived  of  the  mercy  of 
God !  How  unwillingly  wilt  thou  set  foot  forward 
towards  the  lake  of  fire!  Never  did  malefactor 
so  unwillingly  turn  off  the  ladder  when  the  halter 
was  about  his  neck,  as  thou  will  turn  from  God 
to  the  devil,  from  heaven  to  hell,  when  the  sen- 
tence is  passed  upon  thy  soul. 

0  how  wilt  thou  sigh  and  groan!  How  willingly 
wouldst  thou  hide  thyself,  and  run  away  from  jus- 
tice !  But  alas !  as  it  is  with  them  that  are  on 
the  ladder  ready  to  be  executed,  so  it  will  be  with 
thee.  They  would  fain  run  away,  but  there  are 
many  halbcrt-men1  to  stay  them.  And  so  the 
angels  of  God  will  beset  thee  round,  I  say  round 
ou  every  side ;  so  that  thou  mayest  indeed  look, 
but  run  thou  canst  not.  Thou  mayest  wish  thy- 
self under  some  rock,  or  mountain,  Re.  vi.  is,  ig, 
but  how  to  get  under,  thou  knowest  not. 

0  how  unwilling  wilt  thou  be  to  let  thy  father 
go  to  heaven  without  thee!  thy  mother  or  friends, 
<fcc,  go  to  heaven  without  thee  !  Iiow  willingly 
wouldst  thou  hang  on  them,  and  not  let  them  go  ! 


1  Men  nrmed  with  halberts  or  javelins  ;  now  only  used  at 
assizes  in  England,  or  by  officers  attending  meetings  of  magis- 
trates in  Scotland. — (Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


0  father!  cannot  you  help  me?  Mother,  cannot 
you  do  me  some  good?  0  how  loth  am  I  to  burn 
and  fry  in  hell,  while  you  are  singing  in  heaven! 
But  alas!  the  father,  mother,  or  friends  reject 
them,  slight  them,  and  turn  their  backs  upon 
them,  saying,  You  would  have  none  of  heaven  in 
your  lifetime,  therefore  you  shall  have  none  of  it 
now.  You  slighted  our  counsels  then,  and  we 
slight  your  tears,  cries,  and  condition  now.  What 
sayest  thou,  sinner?  Will  not  this  persuade  thine 
heart,  nor  make  thee  bethink  thyself?  This  is  now 
before  thou  fall  into  that  dreadful  place,  that  fiery 
furnace.  But  0  consider  how  dreadful  the  place 
itself,  the  devils  themselves,  the  fire  itself  will  be ! 
And  this  at  the  end  of  all,  Here  thou  must  lie  for 
ever!  Here  thou  must  fry  for  ever,  and  for  ever! 
This  will  be  more  to  thee  than  any  man  with 
tongue  can  express,  or  with  pen  can  write.  There 
is  none  that  can,  I  say,  by  the  ten  thousandth  part, 
discover  the  state  and  condition  of  such  a  soul. 

I  shall  conclude  this,  then,  with  A  few  con- 
siderations OF  ENCOURAGEMENT. 

[First  Encouragement.]  Consider,  for  I  would 
fain  have  thee  come  in,  sinner,  that  there  is  way 
made  by  Jesus  Christ  for  them  that  are  under  the 
curse  of  God,  to  come  to  this  comfortable  and 
blessed  state  of  Lazarus  I  was  speaking  of.  See  Ep.ii. 

[Second  Encouragement.]  Consider  what  pains 
Christ  Jesus  took  for  the  ransoming  of  thy  soul 
from  all  the  curses,  thunder-claps,  and  tempests 
of  the  law;  from  all  the  intolerable  flames  of  hell ; 
from  that  soul-sinking  appearance  of  thy  person, 
on  the  left  hand,  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ 
Jesus,  from  everlasting  fellowship,  with  innume- 
rable companies  of  yelling  and  soul-amazing  devils, 

1  say,  consider  what  pains  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
took  in  bringing  in  redemption  for  sinners  from 
these  things. 

*  In  that  though  he  was  rich,  yet  he  became 
poor,  that  ye,  through  his  poverty,  might  be'  made 
•  rich.'  2  Co.  viii.  9.  He  laid  aside  his  glory,  Jn.  xvH., 
and  became  a  servant,  PM.  u.  7.  He  left  the  com- 
pany of  angels,  and  encountered  with  the  devil. 
Lu.  iv.  Mat.  iv.  He  left  heaven's  ease  for  a  time,  to 
lie  upon  hard  mountains.  Lu.  vi.  12.  jn.viiLi.  In  a 
word,  he  became  poorer  than  they  that  go  with 
flail  and  rake ;  yea,  than  the  very  birds  or  foxes, 
and  all  to  do  thee  good.  Besides,  consider  a  little 
of  these  unspeakable  and  intolerable  slightings  and 
rejections,  and  the  manifold  abuses  that  came  from 
men  upon  him.  How  he  was  falsely  accused, 
being  a  sweet,  harmless,  and  undefiled  lamb.  How 
he  was  undervalued,  so  that  a  murderer  was 
counted  less  wTorthy  of  condemnation  than  he. 
Besides,  how  they  mocked  him,  spit  on  him,  beat 
him  over  the  head  with  staves,  had  the  hair 
plucked  from  his  cheeks.  '  I  gave  my  back  to 
the  smiters,'  saith  he,  'and  my  cheeks  to  tiicm 

S'J 


706 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FUOM   HELL,  OR 


that  plucked  off  the  hair ;  I  hid  not  my  face  from 
shame  and  spitting.'  is.  1.  c.  His  head  crowned 
with  thorns,  his  hands  pierced  with  nails,  and  his 
side  with  a  spear ;  together  with  how  they  used 
him,  scourged  him,  and  so  miserably  misusing  him, 
that  they  had  even  spent  him  in  a  great  measure 
before  they  did  crucify  him ;  insomuch  that  there 
was  another  fain  to  carry  his  cross.     Again, 

[Third  Encouragement.]  Not  only  this,  but  lay 
to  heart  a  little  what  he  received  from  God,  his  dear 
Father,  though  he  were  his  dear  and  tender  Son. 

1.  In  that  he  did  reckon1  him  the  greatest 
sinner  and  rehel  in  the  world.  For  he  laid  the  sins 
of  thousands,  and  ten  thousands,  and  thousands 
of  thousands  of  sinners  to  his  charge,  is.  mi.  And 
caused  him  to  drink  the  terrible  cup  that  was  due 
to  them  all ;  and  not  only  so,  but  did  delight  in  so 
doing.  '  For  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him. ' 
God  dealt  indeed  with  his  son,  as  Abraham  would 
have  dealt  with  Isaac ;  ay,  and  more  terribly  by 
ten  thousand  parts.  For  he  did  not  only  tear  his 
body  like  a  lion,  but  made  his  soul  an  offering  for 
sin.  And  this  was  not  done  feignedly,  but  really — 
for  justice  called  for  it,  he  standing  in  the  room  of 
sinners.  Witness  that  horrible  and  unspeakable 
agony  that  fell  on  him  suddenly  in  the  garden,  as 
if  all  the  vials  of  God's  unspeakable  scalding  ven- 
geance had  been  cast  upon  him  all  at  once,  and 
all  the  devils  in  hell  had  broken  loose  from  thence 
at  once  to  destroy  him,  and  that  for  ever;  insomuch 
that  the  very  pangs  of  death  seized  upon  him  in  the 
same  hour.  For,  saith  he,  '  My  soul  is  exceeding 
sorrowful'  and  '  sore  amazed,'  even  '  unto  death.' 
Man  xiv.  04. 

[2.]  Witness  also  that  strange  kind  of  sweat  that 
trickled  clown  his  most  blessed  face,  where  it  is 
said :  •  And  he  sweat,  as  it  were,  great  drops'  or 
dodders  '  of  blood,'  trickling  '  down  to  the  ground.' 
0  Lord  Jesus!  what  a  load  didst  thou  carry! 
What  a  burden  didst  thou  bear  of  the  sins  of 
the  world,  and  the  wrath  of  God!  0  thou 
didst  not  only  bleed  at  nose  and  mouth  with  the 
pressure  that  lay  upon  thee,  but  thou  Avast  so 
pressed,  so  loaden,  that  the  pure  blood  gushed 
through  the  flesh  and  skin,  and  so  ran  trickling 
down  to  the  ground.  '  And  his  sweat  was  as  it 
were  great  drops  of  blood,'  trickling  or  'falling 
down  to  the  ground.'  Lu.  :,-:;i.  u.  Canst  thou  read 
this,  0  thou  wicked  sinner,  and  yet  go  on  in  sin? 
Canst  thou  think  of  this,  and  defer  repentance  one 
hour  longer?  0  heart  of  flint!  yea,  harder.  0 
miseraule  wretch !  What  place  in  hell  will  be 
hot  enough  for  thee  to  have  thy  soul  put  into,  if 
thou  shalt  persist  or  go  on  still  to  add  iniquity  to 
iniquity. 


1  Modern  editors  have  altered  this  to,  'did  dcrJ  with  him. 
-(to.) 


[3.]  Besides,  his  soul  went  down  to  hell,  and  hie 
body  to  the  bars  of  the  grave.  Ps.  xvi.  10.  Ac.  ii.  81. 
And  had  hell,  death,  or  the  grave,  been  strong 
enough  to  hold  him,  then  he  had  suffered  the  ven- 
geance of  eternal  fire  to  all  eternity.  But,  0 
blessed  Jesus !  how  didst  thou  discover  thy  love 
to  man  in  thy  thus  suffering !  And,  0  God  the 
Father!  how  didst  thou  also  declare  thy  purity 
and  exactness  of  thy  justice,  in  that,  though  it 
was  thine  only,  holy,  innocent,  harmless,  and  un- 
defiled  Son  Jesus,  that  did  take  on  him  our  nature, 
and  represent  our  persons,  answering  for  our  sins, 
instead  of  ourselves !  Thou  didst  so  wonderfully 
pour  out  thy  wrath  upon  him,  to  the  making  of 
him  cry  out,  '  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?'  And,  0  Lord  Jesus !  what  a  glorious 
conquest  hast  thou  made  over  the  enemies  of  our 
souls,  even  wrath,  sin,  death,  hell,  and  devils,  in 
that  thou  didst  wring  thyself  from  under  the  power 
of  them  all !  And  not  only  so,  but  hast  led  them 
captive  which  would  have  led  us  captive  ;  and  also 
hast  received  for  us  that  glorious  and  unspeakable 
inheritance  that '  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, 
neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man'  to 
conceive  ;  and  also  hast  given  thine  some  dis- 
covery thereof  through  thy  Spirit. 

And  now,  sinner,  together  with  this  consider, 

4.  That  though  Jesus  Christ  hath  done  all 
these  things  for  sinners,  yet  the  devils  make  it 
their  whole  work,  and  continually  study  how  they 
may  keep  thee  and  others  from  enjoying  of  these 
blessed  privileges  that  have  been  thus  obtained  for 
sinners  by  this  sweet  Jesus.  He  labours,  I  say, 
(1.)  To  keep  thee  ignorant  of  thy  state  by  nature. 
(2.)  To  harden  thy  heart  against  the  ways  of  God. 
(3.)  To  inflame  thy  heart  with  love  to  sin  and  the 
ways  of  darkness.  And,  (4.)  To  get  thee  to  con- 
tinue herein.  For  that  is  the  way,  he  knows,  to 
get  thee  to  be  a  partaker  with  him  of  flaming  hell- 
fire,  even  the  same  that  he  himself  is  fallen  into, 
together  with  the  rest  of  the  wicked  world,  by 
reason  of  sin.     Look  to  it  therefore. 

[Fourth  Encouragement.]  But  now,  in  the  next 
place,  a  word  of  encouragement  to  you  that  are  the 
saints  of  the  Lord. 

1.  Consider  what  a  happy  state  thou  art  in 
that  hast  gotten  the  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  into 
thy  soul ;  but  be  sure  thou  have  it,  I  say,  how  safe, 
how  sure,  how  happy  art  thou!  For  when  others 
go  to  hell,  thou  must  go  to  heaven ;  when  others 
go  to  the  devil,  thou  must  go  to  God  ;  when  as 
others  go  to  prison,  thou  must  be  set  at  liberty, 
at  ease,  and  at  freedom ;  when  others  must  roar 
for  sorrow  of  heart,  then  thou  shalt  also  sing  for 
the  joy  of  heart. 

2.  Consider  thou  must  have  all  thy  well-spent 
life  to  follow  thee  instead  of  all  thy  sins  and  the 
glorious   blessings   of   the  gospel  instead   of  the 


THE   GROANS   OF   A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


'07 


dreadful  curses  and  condemnations  of  the  law;  the 
blessing  of  the  father,  instead  of  a  fiery  sentence 
from  the  judge. 

3.  Let  dissolution  come  when  it  will,  it  can 
do  thee  no  harm ;  for  it  will  he  hnt  only  a  pas- 
sage out  of  a  prison  into  a  palace  ;  out  of  a  sea  of 
troubles  into  a  haven  of  rest;  out  of  a  crowd  of 
enemies,  to  an  innumerable  company  of  true,  loving, 
and  faithful  friends ;  out  of  shame,  reproach,  and 
contempt,  into  exceeding  great  and  eternal  glory. 

ath  shall  not  hurt  thee  with  his  sting,  nor 
bite  thee  with  his  soul-murdering  teeth ;  but  shall 
be  a  welcome  guest  to  thee,  even  to  thy  soul,  in 
that  it  is  sent  to  free  thee  from  thy  troubles  which 
thou  art  in  whilst  here  in  this  world  dwelling  in 
the  tabernacle  of  clay. 

4.  Consider  however  it  goes  with  friends  and 
relations,  yet  it  will  go  well  with  thee.  Ec  viii.  12. 
However  it  goes  with  the  wiched,  yet  '  surely  I 
know;'  mark,  'yet  surely  I  know,'  saith  he, 
'  that  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God, 
which  fear  before  him.'     And  therefore  let  this, 

(1.)  In  the  first  place,  cause  thee  cheerfully  to 
exercise  thy  patience  under  all  the  calamities, 
crosses,  troubles,  and  afflictions  that  may  come 
upon  thee ;  and,  by  patient  continuance  in  well- 
doing, to  commit  both  thyself  and  thine  affairs 
and  actions  into  the  hands  of  God,  through  Jesus 
Christ,  as  to  a  faithful  Creator,  who  is  true  in  his 
word,  and  loveth  to  give  unto  thee  whatsoever  he 
hath  promised  to  thee. 

(2.)  And,  therefore,  to  encourage  thee  while  thou 
art  here  with  comfort  to  hold  on  for  all  thy  crosses 
in  this  thy  journey,  be  much  in  considering  the 
place  that  thou  must  go  into  so  soon  as  dissolution 
comes.  It  must  be  into  heaven,  to  God  the  judge 
of  all,  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  to 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  to  the  general 
assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born,  whose 
names  are  written  in  heaven,  and  to  Jesus,  to  the 
redeemer,  who  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant, 
and  to  the  blcod  of  sprinkling,  that  speaks  better 
things  for    thee   than   Abel's    did   for   Cain.    He. 

■I  22—  24. 

(3.)  Consider  that  when  the  time  of  the  dead 
that  they  shall  be  raised  is  come,  then  shall  thy 
body  be  raised  out  of  the  grave  and  be  glorified, 
and  be  made  like  to  Jesus  Christ,  rw.  a.  21.  0 
excellent  condition ! 

(4.)  When  Jesus  Christ  shall  sit  on  the  throne 
of  his  glory  you  also  shall  sit  with  him,  even  when 
he  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory.  0  will  not 
this  be  glorious,  that  when  thousands,  and  thou- 
sands of  thousands  shall  be  arraigned  before  the 
judgment-scat  of  Christ,  then  fur  them  to  sit  with 
him  upon  the  throne,  together  with  him  to  pass  the 
sentence  upon  the  ungodly.  1  Co.  vi.  ■:,  8.  Will  it 
not  be  glorious  to  enjoy  those  things  that  eye  hath 


not  seen,  nor  car  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into 
the  heart  of  man  to  conceive? 

Will  it  not  be  glorious  to  have  this  sentence, 
'  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  king- 
dom prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world?'  Will  it  not  be  glorious  to  enter  then  with 
the  angels  and  saints  into  that  glorious  kingdom? 
Will  it  not  be  glorious  for  thee  to  be  in  glory  with 
them,  while  others  arc  in  unutterable  torments? 
0  then,  how  will  it  comfort  thee  to  see  thou  hast 
not  lost  that  glory ;  to  think  that  the  devil  hath 
not  got  thy  soul,  that  thy  soul  should  be  saved, 
and  that  not  from  a  little,  but  from  an  exceeding 
danger  ;l  not  with  a  little,  hut  a  great  salvation. 
0,  therefore,  let  the  saints  be  joyful  in  glory,  let 
them  triumph  over  all  their  enemies.  Let  them 
begin  to  sing  heaven  upon  earth,  triumph  before 
they  come  to  glory,  salvation,  even  when  they  are 
in  the  midst  of  their  enemies,  for  '  this  honour 
have  all  his  saints. '  rs.  exiu.  0. 

Verse  29. — '  Abraham  said  unto  him,  They  have  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  let  them  hear  them.' 

In  the  verses  foregoing  you  see  there  is  a  dis- 
covery of  the  lamentable  state  of  the  poor  soul 
that  dies  out  of  Christ,  and  the  special  favour  of 
God.  And  also  how  little  the  glorious  God  of 
heaven  doth  regard  and  take  notice  of  their  most 
miserable  condition. 

Now  in  this  verse  he  doth  magnify  the  word 
which  was  spoken  to  the  people  by  the  prophets 
and  apostles,  '  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
let  them  hear  them.'  As  if  he  should  say,  thou 
askest  me  that  I  should  send  Lazarus  back  again 
into  the  world  to  preach  to  them  that  live  there, 
that  they  might  escape  that  doleful  place  that 
thou  art  in.  What  needs  that?  Have  they  not 
Moses  and  the  prophets  ?  Have  they  not  had  my 
ministers  and  servants  sent  unto  them  and  coming 
as  from  me?  I  sent  Enoch  and  Noah,  Moses  and 
Samuel.  I  sent  David,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel, 
Daniel,  Hosea,  and  the  rest  of  the  prophets,  to- 
gether'with  Peter,  Paid,  John,  Matthew,  James, 
Jude,  with  the  rest ;  '  Let  them  hear  them.'  What 
they  have  spoken  by  divine  inspiration  I  will  own, 
whether  it  be  for  the  damnation  of  those  that  re- 
ject, or  the  saving  of  them  that  receive  their 
doctrine.  And,  therefore,  what  need  have  they 
that  one  should  be  sent  unto  them  in  another  way? 
'  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear 
them.'  Let  them  receive  their  word,  close  in  with 
the  doctrine  declared  by  them.  I  shall  not  at  this 
time  speak  anything  to  that  word  *  Abraham,' 
having  touched  upon  it  already  ;  but  shall  tell  you 
what  is  to  be  understood  by  these  words,  *  They 


1  Altered  in  the  third  edition  to  '  a  great  exceeding  danger. 
-(Ed.) 


703 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM   IIELL,  OR 


have  Moses  and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear  them.' 
The  things  that  I  shall  observe  from  hence  are 
these: — 

[First.]  That  the  scriptures  spoken  by  the  holy 
men  of  God  are  a  sufficient  rule  to  instruct  to  sal- 
vation them  that  do  assuredly  believe  and  close  in 
with  what  they  hold  forth.  '  They  have  Moses 
and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear  them.'  That  is, 
if  they  would  escape  that  doleful  place,  and  be 
saved  indeed  from  the  intolerable  pains  of  hell-fire, 
as  they  desire,  they  have  that  which  is  sufficient 
to  counsel  them.  '  They  have  Moses  and  the 
prophets;'  let  them  be  instructed  by  them,  *  Let 
them  hear  them. '  For  '  all  scripture  is  given  by 
inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine, 
for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  right- 
eousness;' why?  '  That  the  man  of  God  maybe 
perfect,  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works.' 
2  Ti.  iii.  ig,  17.  Do  but  mark  these  words,  'All  scrip- 
ture is  profitable.'  All;  take  it  where  you  will, 
and  in  what  place  you  will,  'All  is  profitable:' 
For  what?  '  That  the  man  of  God,'  or  he  that  is 
bound  for  heaven,  and  would  instruct  others  in 
their  progress  thither. 

It  is  profitable  to  instruct  him,  in  case  he  be 
ignorant ;  to  reprove  him,  in  case  he  transgress ; 
to  correct  him,  if  he  hath  need  of  it ;  to  confirm 
him,  if  he  he  wavering.  It  is  profitable  for  doc- 
trine, and  all  this  in  a  very  righteous  way — that 
the  poor  soul  may  not  only  be  helped,  hut  tho- 
roughly furnished,  not  only  to  some,  but  to  all  good 
works.  And  when  Paid  would  counsel  Timothy 
to  stick  close  to  the  things  that  are  sound  and  sure, 
presently  he  puts  him  upon  the  scripture,  saying, 
'  From  a  child  thou  hast  known  the  holy  scrip- 
tures, which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto 
salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.' 
The  scripture  holds  forth  God's  mind  and  will,  of 
his  love  and  mercy  towards  man,  and  also  the 
creature's  carriage  towards  him  from  first  to  last; 
so  if  thou  wouldest  know  the  love  of  God  in  Christ 
to  sinners,  then  '  search  the  scriptures,  for  they 
are  they  which  testify  of  him. ' 

Wouldst  thou  know  what  thou  art,  and  what  is 
in  thine  heart  ?  Then  search  the  Scriptures  and 
see  what  is  written  in  them.  Ro.  i.  29-81;  iii.  9-is.  Je. 
xvii.  9.  Ge.  vi.  5;  viii.  2i.  Ep.  iv.  is,  with  many  others. 
The  Scriptures,  I  say,  they  are  able  to  give  a  man 
perfect  instruction  into  any  of  the  things  of  God 
necessary  to  faith  and  godliness,  if  he  hath  but  an 
honest  heart  seriously  to  weigh  and  ponder  the 
several  things  contained  in  them.  As  to  instance 
in  things  more  particular  for  the  further  clearing 
up  of  this.  And  first,  if  we  come  to  the  creation 
of  the  world. 

Wouldst  thou  know  somewhat  concerning  that  ? 
Then  read  Ge.  i.  and  n,  and  compare  them  with  ps. 
xxxiii.  6.;  also  is.  Levi.  2.  Pr.  viii.  towards  the  end. 


Wouldst  thou  know  whether  he  made  them  of 
something  or  nothing?    Read  lie.  xi.  3. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  he  put  forth  any 
labour  in  making  them,  as  we  do  in  making  things  ? 
Read  Ps.  xxxin.  d. 

If  thou  wouldest  know  whether  man  was  made  by 
God  corrupt  or  upright,  read  Ee.vii.29.  Ge.  i.  io,  is,  25,31. 

Wouldst  thou  know  where  God  did  place  man 
after  he  had  made  him?  Read  Ge.  ii.  15. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  that  man  did 
live  there  all  his  time  or  not?  Then  read  Ge.  iii. 
23,  21. 

If  thou  wouldest  know  whether  man  be  still 
in  that  state  by  nature  that  God  did  place  him 
in  ?  Then  read  Ec.  vii,  29.,  and  compare  it  Avith 
Ro.  v.  ig.  Ep.  ii.  1-3.  '  God  made  men  upright,  but 
they  have  sought  out  many  inventions.' 

If  thou  wouldest  know  whether  the  man  were 
first  beguiled,  or  the  woman  that  God  made  an 
help-mate  for  him?     Read  Ge.  m.  6,  and  compare 

with  1  Tim.  ii.  11. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  God  looked  upon 
Adam's  eating  [the  fruit  of]  the  forbidden  tree 
to  be  sin  or  no  ?    Read  Ro.  v.  12-15,  and  compare  it 

with  Ge.  iii.  17. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  it  were  the  devil 
who  beguiled  them,  or  whether  it  was  a  natural 
serpent,  such  as  do  haunt  the  desolate  places? 

Read  Ge.  iii.  13,  with  Re.  xx.  1-3. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  that  sin  be  imputed 
to  us  ?  Read  Ro.  v.  12-15,  and  compare  it  with  Ep.  ii.  2. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  man  was  cursed 
for  his  sin?     Read  Ga.  iii.  10.   Ro.v.  15. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  the  curse  did  fall 
on  man,  or  on  the  whole  creation  with  him?  Com- 
pare Ge.  Hi.  17,  with  Ro.  viii.  20-22. 

Wouldst  thou  know  Avhether  man  be  defiled  in 
every  part  of  him  by  the  sin  he  hath  committed  ? 
Then  read  is.  i.  g. 

Wouldst  thou  know  man's  inclination  so  soon 
as  he  is  born  ?  Read  Ps.  iviii.  3.  '  The  wicked  are 
estranged  from  the  womb ;  they  go  astray  as  soon 
as  they  be  born.' 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  man  once  fallen 
from  God  by  transgression,  can  recover  himself  by 
all  he  can  do  ?     Then  read  Ro.  iii.  20,  23. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  it  be  the  desire  of 
the  heart  of  man  by  nature,  to  follow  God  in  his 
own  way  or  no?  Compare  Ge.  vi.  5,  and  Ge.  via.  2], 
with  Ho.  xi.  7. 

Wouldst  thou  know  how  God's  heart  stood 
affected  toward  man  before  the  world  began? 
Compare  Ep.  i.  4,  with  2  Ti.  i.  9. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  sin  were  sufficient 
to  draw  God's  love  from  his  creatures?      Compare 

Je.  iii.  7,  and  Mi.  vii.  18,  with  Ro.  v.  G-8. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  God's  love  did 
still   abide    towards    his    creatures    for    anything 


THE   GROANS   OF  A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


09 


they  could  do  to  make  him  amends  ?     Then  read 

De.  xi.  5-8. 

Wouldst  thou  know  how  God  could  still  love  his 
creatures,  and  do  his  justice  no  wrong?  Read 
Ro.UL  24-26.  'Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace, 
through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus; 
whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation'  for 
si.i,  'through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his 
righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are 
past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God.  To  declare, 
I  say,  at  this  time  his  righteousness,  that  he 
might  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  which  be- 
lieve th  in  Jesus.' 

That  is,  God  having  his  justice  satisfied  in  the 
blood,  and  righteousness,  and  death  of  his  own  Son 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  sins  of  poor  sinners,  he  can 
now  save  them  that  come  to  him,  though  never  so 
great  sinners,  and  do  his  justice  no  wrong,  because 
it  hath  had  a  full  and  complete  satisfaction  given 
it  by  that  blood,   l  Jn.  i.  7,  s. 

Wouldst  thou  know  who  he  was,  and  what  he 
was,  that  did  out  of  his  love  die  for  sinners,  then 
compare  Jn.  iii.  1C,  17.  Ro.  v.  s,  with  Is.  ix.  6. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  this  Saviour  had 
a  body  of  flesh  and  bones  before  the  world  was, 
or  took  it  from  the  Virgin  Mary  ?  Then  read  6a.  iv.  4. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  he  did  in  that 
body  bear  all  our  sins,  and  where  ?  Then  read 
l  re.  n.  24.  '  Who  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree.' 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  he  did  rise  again 
after  he  was  crucified,  with  the  very  same  body  ? 
Then  read  Lu.  xriv.  3S-41. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  he  did  eat  or  drink 
with  his  disciples  after  he  rose  out  of  the  grave  ? 
Then  read  La.  xxiv.  42,  and  Ac.  x.  41. 

If  thou  wouldst  be  persuaded  of  the  truth  of 
this,  that  that  very  body  is  now  above  the  clouds 
and  stars,  read  Ac.  i.9-11,  and  Lu.  xxiv.  toward  the  end. 

If  thou  wouldst  know  that  the  Quakers  hold  an 
error  that  say  the  body  of  Christ  is  within  them  ;x 
consider  the  same  scripture. 

Wouldst  thou  know  what  that  Christ  that  died 
for  sinners  is  doing  in  that  place  whither  he  is 
gone  ?     Then  read  Heb.  vii.  24. 

Wouldst  thou  know  who  shall  have  life  by  him, 
read  1  Ti.  i.  14,  15,  and  Ro.  v.  6-8,  which  say,  '  Christ 
died  '  for  sinners,  '  for  the  ungodly.' 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  they  that  live  and 
die  in  their  sins  shall  go  to  heaven  or  not?  Then 
read  1  Co.Ti.10.  Re.  xxi.s,27,  which  saith,  'They  shall 


1  Bun  van  published  this  work  before  the  Quakers  were 
formed  into  a  Society.  Many  of  the  wildest  enthusiasts  called 
themselves  Quakers.  Barclay,  in  his  Apology,  very  clearly 
defines  what  the  Society  of  Friends  mean  by,  '  Christ  within, 
the  hope  of  glory.'  '  It  is  a  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  invisible 
principle,  in  which  God,  as  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  dwells  or 
reigns.' — Prop.  V.  and  VI. — (Ed.) 


have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire 
and  brimstone.' 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  man's  obedience  will 
obtain  that  Christ  should  die  for  them,  or  save  them? 
Then  read  Mar.  n.  17.  Ro.  v.  e,  7. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  righteousness,  jus- 
tification, and  sanctification  do  come  through  the 
virtue  of  Christ's  blood?  Compare  Ro.  v.  :>,  with 
Heb.  xii.  12. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  natural  man  can 
abstain  from  the  outward  act  of  sin  against  the  law, 
merely  by  a  principle  of  nature?  Then  compare 
Well  Ro.  ii.  14,  with  Phi.  iii.  6. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  a  man  by  nature 
may  know  something  of  the  invisible  things  of 
God?     Compare  seriously  R0.5. 20,  21,  with  ii.  14, 15. 

Wouldst  thou  know  how  far  a  man  may  go  on 
in  a  profession  of  the  gospel,  and  yet  fall  away? 
Then  read  Heb.  vi.  4-6.  '  They  may  taste  the  good 
Word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.' 
They  may  taste  'the  heavenly  gift,  and  be  partakers 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,'  and  yet  so  fall  as  never  to  bo 
recovered,  or  renewed  again  unto  repentance.     See 

also  Lu.  xiii. 

Wouldst  thou  know  how  hard  it  is  to  go  to 
heaven  ?     Read  Mat.  vii.  13,  14.  Lu.  xiii.  24. 

Wouldst  thou  know  whether  a  man  by  nature 
be  a  friend  to  God,  or  an  enemy?     Then  read  Ro. 

v.  10.    Col.  i.  21. 

Wouldst  thou  know  what,  or  who  they  are  that 
shall  go  to  heaven  ?  Then  read  Jn.  iii.  3-7,  and  2  Co. 
v.  17.  Also,  wouldst  thou  know  what  a  sad  thing 
it  is  for  any  to  turn  their  backs  upon  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ?     Then  read  Heb.  x.  2s,  29,  and  .Mar. 

xvi.  16 

Wouldst  thou  know  what  is  the  wages  of  sin  ? 
Then  read  Ro.  vi.  23.     ['  The  wages  of  sin  is  death.'] 

Wouldst  thou  know  whither  those  do  go  that  die 
unconverted  to  the  faith  of  Christ?     Then  read 

Ps.  ix.  17,  and  Is.  xiv.  9. 

Reader,  here  might  I  spend  many  sheets  of 
paper,  yea,  I  might  upon  this  subject  write  a  very 
great  book,  but  I  shall  now  forbear,  desiring  thee 
to  be  very  conversant  in  the  Scriptures,  '  for  they 
are  they  which  testify  of  Jesus  Christ.'  Jn.  v.  39. 
The  Bereans  were  counted  noble  upon  this  account : 
'These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica, 
in  that  they  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness 
of  mind,  and  searched  the  scriptures  daily,'  <fcc. 
Ac.  xvii.  11.  But  here  let  me  give  thee  one  caution, 
that  is,  have  a  care  that  thou  do  not  satisfy  thyself 
with  a  bare  search  of  them,  without  a  real  applica- 
tion of  him  whom  they  testify  of  to  thy  soul,  lest 
instead  of  faring  the  better  for  thy  doing  this  work, 
thou  dost  fare  a  great  deal  the  worse,  and  thy  con- 
demnation be  very  much  heightened,  in  that  though 
thou  didst  read  so  often  the  sad  state  of  those  that 
die  in  sin,  and  the  glorious  estate  of  them  that 


710 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


close  in  with  Christ,  yet  thou  thyself  shouldest  be 
such  a  fool  as  to  lose  Jesus  Christ,  notwithstand- 
ing- thy  bearing,  and  reading  so  plentifully  of  him. 

'  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets,  let  them 
hear  them.' 

As  if  he  should  say,  what  need  have  they  that 
one  should  be  sent  to  them  from  the  dead?  Have 
they  not  Moses  and  the  prophets  ?  Hath  not  Moses 
told  them  the  danger  of  living  in  sin?  De.  xxvii.  is— as ; 
sxvui.  ls-68 ;  «fat  18-22.  Hath  he  not  there  told  them, 
what  a  sad  state  those  persons  are  in  that  deceive 
themselves  with  the  deceit  of  their  hearts,  saying 
they  shall  have  peace  though  they  follow  their 
sins,  in  these  words :  '  And  when  he  heareth  the 
words  of  this  curse,  he  blesseth  himself  in  his  heart, 
saying,  I  shall  have  peace  though  I '  go  on,  or 
'  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart,  to  add 
drunkenness  to  thirst.  The  Lord  will  not  spare 
him,  but  then  the  anger  of  the  Lord  and  his  jealousy 
shall  smoke  against  that  man,  and  all  the  curses 
that  are  written  in  this  book  shall  lie  upon  him, 
and  the  Lord  shall  blot  out  his  name  from  under 
heaven.' 

Again,  Did  not  Moses  write  of  the  Saviour  that 
was  to  come  afterwards  into  the  world?  De.  xviii.  is. 
Nay,  have  not  all  the  prophets  from  Samuel,  with 
all  those  that  follow  after,  prophesied,  and  foretold 
these  tilings  ?  Therefore  what  need  have  they  that 
I  should  work  such  a  miracle,  as  to  send  one  from 
the  dead  unto  them  ?  '  They  have  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  let  them  hear  them.' 

[Second.]  From  whence  observe  again,  that  God 
doth  honour  the  writings  of  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
as  much,  nay  more,  than  if  one  should  rise  from  the 
dead:  '  Should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God?' 
What,  seek  'for  the  living  among  the  dead?  To 
the  law,  and  to  the  testimony, '  saith  God,  '  if  they 
speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there 
is  no  light  in  them.'  is.  viii.  19, 20.  And  let  me  tell 
you  plainly,  I  do  believe  that  the  devil  knows  this 
full  well,  which  makes  him  labour  to  beget  in  the 
hearts  of  his  disciples  and  followers  light  thoughts 
of  them ;  and  doth  persuade  them,  that  even  a 
motion  from  their  own  beguiled  conscience,  or  from 
his  own  wicked  spirit,  is  to  be  observed  and  obeyed 
before  them.  When  the  very  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ,  though  he  heard  a  voice  from  the  excellent 
glory,  saying,  'This  is  my  beloved  Son,'  &c,  yet 
writing  to  the  churches,  he  commends  the  writing 
of  the  prophets  before  it,  saying,  '  We  have  also  a 
more  sure  word  of  the  prophets,  to  which  ye  do 
well  to  take  heed,'  &c.  2  pe.  i.  17-19.1  Now  if  thou 
doubtest  whether  that  place  be  meant  the  scriptures, 
the  words  of  the  prophets  or  no,  read  but  the  next 
verse,  where  he  acldeth  for  a  certain  confirmation 
thereof,  these  words,  '  Knowing  this  first,  that  no 

1  This  quotation,  probably  made  from  memory,  is  from  the 
Genevan  or  Puritan  version  of  the  Bible— (Ed.)' 


prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  any  private  inter- 
pretation. For  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time 
by  the  will  of  man,  but  holy  men  of  God  spake  as 
they  iccre  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.' 

And  therefore  what  a  sad  thing  is  it  for  those 
that  go  about  to  disown  the  Scriptures  !  I  tell  you, 
however  they  may  slight  them  now,  yet  when  they 
come  into  hell,  they  will  see  their  folly :  '  They  have 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear  them.' 

'  Farther,  who  are  they  that  are  so  tossed  to  and 
fro,  with  the  several  winds  of  doctrine  that  have 
been  broached  in  these  days,  but  such  for  the  most 
part,  as  have  had  a  light  esteem  of  the  scriptures  ; 
for  the  ground  of  error,  as  Christ  saith,  is  because 
they  know  not  them.  Jiar.  xii.  24.  And  indeed,  it  is 
just  with  God  to  give  them  over  to  follow  their  own 
dark  blinded  consciences,  to  be  led  into  errors,  that 
they  might  be  damned  into  hell,  who  did  not  believe 
that  the  things  contained  in  the  Scripture  were 
the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved  and  go  to 
heaven.  I  cannot  well  tell  how  to  have  done  speak- 
ing for,  and  on  the  Scriptures'  side ;  only  this  I 
consider,  a  word  is  enough  to  the  wise  ;  and  there- 
fore I  shall  commit  these  things  into  the  hands  of 
them  that  are  of  God ;  and  as  for  the  rest,  I  shall 
say  to  them,  rather  than  God  will  save  them  from 
hell  with  the  breach  of  his  holy  Word,  if  they  had 
a  thousand  souls  apiece,  God  would  destroy  them 
all ;  for  'the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken.'  Jn.  x.  35. 

Verse  30. — 'And  he  said,  Nay,  Father  Abraham;  but  if  one 
went  unto  them  from  the  dead,  they  will  repent.' 

The  verse  before,  you  know,  as  I  told  you,  it  was 
part  of  an  answer  to  such  as  lose  their  souls ;  so 
it  is  a  vindication  of  the  Scriptures  of  Moses  and 
the  prophets,  '  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
let  them  hear  them.' 

Now  this  verse  is  an  answer  to  what  was  said 
in  the  former;  and  such  an  one  as  hath  in  it  a 
rejection  of  the  former  answer.  '  Nay,  father 
Abraham. '  Nay,  saith  he,  do  not  say  so,  do  not  put 
them  off  with  this;  send  one  from  the  dead,  and 
then  there  will  be  some  hopes.  It  is  true  thou 
speakest  of  the  Scripture,  of  Moses  and  the  pro- 
phets, and  sayest,  '  let  them  hear  them  ;'  but  these 
things  are  not  so  well  as  I  could  wish,  I  had  rather 
thou  wouldst  send  one  from  the  dead.  In  these 
words  therefore,  Nay,  father  Abraham,  there  is  a 
repulse  given ;  nay,  let  it  not  be  so  ;  nay,  I  do  not 
like  of  that  answer.  Hear  Moses  and  the  pro- 
phets, nay.  The  same  expression  is  used  by  Christ, 
Lu.  xiii.  2,  3.  Think  you  that  they  upon  whom  the 
tower  of  Siloam  fell,  were  sinners  above  others? 
*  I  tell  you  nay ;  but  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall 
all  likewise  perish.'  So  here,  Nay,  father  Abra- 
ham, <kc. 

By  this  word  Nay,  therefore,  is  signified  a  reject- 
ing the  first  answer. 


THE   GROANS   OF  A   DAMNED  SOUL. 


711 


Now  observe,  I  pray  you,  the  reason  why  he  says 
Nay,  is,  because  God  doth  put  over  all  those  that 
will  be  saved,  to  observe  and  receive  the  truth  con- 
tained in  Scripture,  and  believe  that.  To  have  a 
high  esteem  of  them,  and  to  love  and  search  them, 
as  Christ  saith,  'Search  the  Scriptures,'  for  •  they 
are  they  which  testify  of  me.'  Jn.  v.  33-.  Hut  the 
damned  say,  Nay;  as  if  he  had  said,  This  is  the 
thing.  To  be  short,  my  brethren  arc  unbelievers, 
and  do  not  regard  the  Word  of  God.  1  know  it 
by  myself,  for  when  I  was  in  the  world,  it  was  so 
with  me  ;  many  a  good  sermon  did  I  hear,  many  a 
time  was  I  admonished,  desired,  entreated,  be- 
seeched,  threatened,  forewarned  of  what  I  now 
suffer;  but  alas!  I  was  ignorant,  self-coneeited, 
surly,  obstinate,  and  rebellious.  Many  a  time  the 
preacher  told  hell  would  be  my  portion,  the  devil 
would  wreck  his  malice  on  me ;  God  would  pour 
on  me  his  sore  displeasure ;  but  ho  had  as  good 
have  preached  to  the  stock,  to  the  post,  to  the 
stones  I  trod  on  ;  his  words  rang  in  mine  ears,  but 
I  kept  them  from  mine  heart.  I  remember  he 
alleged  many  a  Scripture,  but  those  I  valued  not ; 
the  Scriptures,  thought  I,  what  are  they?  A  dead 
letter,  a  little  ink  and  paper,  of  three  or  four  shil- 
lings'price.1  Alas!  What  is  the  Scripture ?  Give 
me  a  ballad,  a  news-book,  George  on  horseback,  or 
Bevis  of  Southampton ;  give  me  some  book  that 
teaches  curious  arts,  that  tells  of  old  fables;2  but 
for  the  holy  Scriptures  1  cared  not.  And  as  it 
was  with  me  then,  so  it  is  with  my  brethren  now, 
we  were  all  of  one  spirit,  loved  all  the  same  sins, 
slighted  all  the  same  counsels,  promises,  encourage- 
ments and  threateniugs  of  the  Scriptures  ;  and  they 
are  still,  as  I  left  them,  still  in  unbelief,  still  pro- 
voking God,  and  rejecting  good  counsel,  so  hardened 
in  their  ways,  so  bent  to  follow  sin,  that  let  the 
Scriptures  be  showed  to  them  daily,  let  the  mes- 
sengers of  Christ  preach  till  their  hearts  ache,  till 
they  fall  down  dead  with  preaching,  they  will  rather 
trample  it  under  foot,  and  swine-like  rend  them, 
than  close  in  with  those  gentle  and  blessed  proffers 
of  the  gospel. 

'Nay,  father  Abraham,  but  if  one  should  rise 
from  the  dead,  they  Avould  repeat.'  Though  they 
have  Moses  and  the  prophets,  the  Scriptures,  they 


1  How  favourable  an  alteration  has  beeu  produced  by  per- 
mitting the  free  publication  of  the  Liible.  In  Banyan's  time, 
under  the  monopoly  of  church  aud  state,  they  were  full  of  t;.  po- 
graphical  errors,  and  at  a  high  price.  When  eggs  wire  four- 
a-peimy,  oue  hundred  and  sixty  must  have  beeu  paid  for  an 
ordinary  copy;  while  now  a  handsome  one,  with  gilt  edges, 
may  be  had  lor  eighteen  or  twenty.  Thanks  to  those  .joudnieu 
who  brought  about  this  wondrous  change.— (Ed.) 

2  The  impri  .  whole  class  of  books  used  by 
children,  since  the  Tract  Society  commenced  its  operations", 
is  almost  incredible.  None  but  antiquarians  have  sen  the 
hooks  which  Banyan  names,  but  they  :  to  Who 
killed  Cock  Robin,  as  that  is  u  Dr.  Watt's  1  '.vine  Sows 
-(Ed.) 


will  not  repent  and  close  in  with  Jesus  Christ, 
though  the  Scriptures  do  witness  against  them. 
If  therefore  there  be  any  good  done  to  them,  they 
must  have  it  another  way.  I  think,  saith  he,  it 
would  work  much  on  them  '  if  one  should  rise  from 
the  dead.'  And  this  truth  indeed  is  so  evident, 
that  ungodly  ones  have  a  light  esteem  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, that  it  needs  not  many  strong  arguments  to 
prove  it,  being  so  evidently  manifested  by  their 
every  day's  practice,  both  in  words  and  actions, 
almost  in  all  things  they  say  and  do.  Yet  for  the 
satisfaction  of  the  reader,  I  shall  show  you  by  a 
scripture  or  two,  though  I  might  show  many,  that 
this  was  and  is  true,  with  the  generality  of  the 
world.  See  the  words  of  Nehemiah  in  his  9th  chap- 
ter concerning  the  children  of  Israel,  who  though 
the  Lord  offered  them  mercy  upon  mercy,  as  it  is 
from  verse  ia-25,  yet  verse  28,  saith  he,  '  Neverthe- 
less they  were  disobedient '  for  all  thy  goodness 
towards  them,  'andrebclledagainstth.ee.'  But 
how  ?  '  And  cast  thy  law  behind  their  backs ;  slew 
thy  prophets  which  testified  against  them,  to  turn 
them  to  thee,  and  they  wrought  great  provocations.' 

Observe,  1.  They  sinned  against  mercy.  And 
then,  2.  They  slighted  the  law,  or  Word  of  God. 
3.  They  slew  the  prophets  that  declared  it  unto 
them.  -1.  The  Lord  counts  it  a  great  provocation. 
See  nvo.  Hi.  10-10.  Zee.  vfi.  n,  12.  '  But  they  refused  to 
hearken,'  saith  he,  there  of  the  wicked,  '  and  pulled 
away  the  shoulder,  and  stopped  their  ears,  that 
they  should  not  hear  '  the  law.  '  Yea,  they  made 
their  hearts  '  hard  as  'an  adamant  stone,  lest  they 
should  hear  the  law,  aud  the  words  which  the  Lord 
of  hosts  hath  sent '  unto  them  '  in  his  Spirit  by  the 
former  prophets,'  &c. 

Mark,  I  pray  you,  here  is  also,  (1.)  A  refusing 
to  hearken  to  the  words  of  the  prophets.  (2.)  That 
they  might  so  do,  they  stopped  their  ears.  (3.)  If 
anything  was  to  be  done,  they  pulled  away  their 
shoulder.  (4.)  To  effect  this,  they  labour  to  make 
their  hearts  hard  as  an  adamant  stone.  (5.)  And 
all  this,  lest  they  should  hear  and  close  in  with 
Jesus,  and  live,  and  be  delivered  from  the  wrath 
to  come.  All  which  things  do  hold  out  an  unwil- 
lingness to  submit  to,  and  embrace  the  words  of 
God,  and  so  Jesus  Christ  which  is  testified  of  by 
them.  Many  other  scriptures  I  might  bring  in 
for  confirmation  of  the  thing,  as  that  in  Am.  vii.  12,13 ; 

also    lSa.ii.2MS.     2  Ch.  xxv.  15,  16.     Jc.  vii.  23-23  ;    xvi  12 

'.'  1  also  seriously  that  saying  in  2  Cfi.  «xvL  15, 
where  he  saith,  '  And  the"  Lord  God  of  their 
fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up 
betimes,  because  he  had  compassion  on  his  people, 
and  on  his  dwelling-place.'  And  did  they  make 
them  welcome?  No,  but  they  mocked  the  mes- 
sengers of  God,  and  despised  his  words.  And  was 
that  all?  No,  they  'misused  his  prophets.'  How 
long  ?     »  Until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose  against 


712 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM  HELL,  OR 


them.     Till  there  was  no  remedy.'     See  also  Je. 

xxix.  19  ;  xxv.  3-7.    Lu.  ad.  49. 

And  besides,  the  conversion  of  almost  all  men 
doth  bear  witness  to  the  same,  both  religious  and 
profane  persons,  in  that  they  daily  neglect,  reject, 
and  turn  their  backs  upon  the  plain  testimony  of 
the  Scriptures.     As, 

First.  Take  the  threatenings  laid  down  in  holy 
writ,  and  how  are  they  disregarded?  There  are 
but  a  few  places  in  the  Bible  but  there  are  threat- 
enings against  one  sinner  or  other;  against 
drunkards,  swearers,  liars,  proud  persons,  strum- 
pets, whoremongers,  covetous,  railers,  extortioners, 
thieves,  lazy  persons.  In  a  word,  all  manner  of 
sins  are  reproved,  and  without  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  there  is  a  sore  punishment  to  be  executed 
on  the  committers  of  them ;  and  all  this  made 
mention  of  in  the  Scriptures. 

But  for  all  this,  how  thick,  and  by  heaps,  do 
these  wretches  walk  up  and  down  our  streets?1 
Do  but  go  into  the  alehouses,  and  you  shall  see 
almost  every  room  besprinkled  with  them,  so  foam- 
ing out  their  own  shame,  that  it  is  enough  to  make 
the  heart  of  a  saint  to  tremble,  insomuch  that  they 
would  not  be  bound  to  have  society  with  them  any- 
long  while  for  all  the  world.  For  as  the  ways  of 
the  godly  are  not  liked  of  by  the  wicked,  even  so 
the  ways  of  the  wicked  '  are  an  abomination  to  the 

just.'    Fr.  xxix.  27.    Ps.  cxx.  5,  6. 

[1.]  The  Scripture  says,  '  Cursed  is  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and 
whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord.'  Je.  xvii.  5. 

And  yet  how  many  poor  souls  are  there  in  the 
world,  that  stand  in  so  much  awe  and  dread  of 
men,  and  do  so  highly  esteem  their  favour,  that 
they  will  rather  venture  their  souls  in  the  hands  of 
the  devil  with  their  favour,  than  they  will  fly  to 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls?  Nay, 
though  they  be  convinced  in  their  souls,  that  the 
way  is  the  way  of  God ;  yet  how  do  they  labour  to 
stifle  conviction,  and  turn  their  ears  away  from  the 
truth,  and  all  because  they  will  not  lose  the  favour 
of  an  opposite  neighbour  ?  0  !  I  dare  not  for  my 
master,  my  brother,  my  landlord,  I  shall  lose  his 
favour,  his  house  of  work,  and  so  decay  my  calling. 
0,  saith  another,  I  would  willingly  go  in  this  way, 
but  for  my  father,  he  chides  and  tells  me  he  will 
not  stand  my  friend  when  I  come  to  want ;  I  shall 
never  enjoy  a  pennyworth  of  his  goods ;  he  will 
disinherit  me.  And  I  dare  not,  saith  another,  for 
my  husband,  for  he  will  be  a  railing,  and  tells  me 
he  will  turn  me  out  of  doors,  he  will  beat  me,  and 


1  Such  was  the  then  state  of  society,  fostered  by  the  Book 
of  Sports  and  Fastimes,  authorized  by  Charles  I.  to  be  used  on 
Sunday,  aud  by  Rupert  and  his  cavaliers  with  the  civil  war, 
notwithstanding  the  restraints  of  the  Commonwealth.  They 
are  very  young,  or  dim-sighted,  or  badly  read,  who  do  not  now 
see  a  wonderful  improvement  in  the  state  of  public  morals  and 
religion. — (Ed.) 


cut  off  my  legs.  But  I  tell  you,  if  any  of  these,  or 
any  other  things  be  so  prevalent  with  thee  now,  as 
to  keep  thee  from  seeking  after  Christ  in  his  ways, 
they  will  also  be  so  prevalent  with  God  against 
thee,  as  to  make  him  cast  off  thy  soul,  because 
thou  didst  rather  trust  man  than  God  ;  and  delight 
in  the  embracing  of  man  rather  than  in  the  favour 
of  the  Lord.2 

,  2.  Again,  the  Scripture  saith,  '  He  that  being 
often  reproved,  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly 
be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy.'  rr.  xxix.  1. 
Yet  many  are  so  far  from  turning,  though  they 
have  been  convinced  of  their  wretched  state  a 
hundred  times,  that  when  convictions  or  trouble  for 
sin  comes  on  their  consciences,  they  go  on  still  in 
the  same  manner  resisting  and  choking  the  same, 
though  remediless  destruction  be  hard  at  their 
heels. 

3.  Again  thou  hast  heard  say,  'Except  a  man 
be  born  again,'  '  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God.'  Jn.  m.  3-7.  And  yet  thou  goest  on  in  a 
natural  state,  an  unregenerate  condition ;  nay,  thou 
dost  resolve  never  to  turn  nor  be  changed,  though 
hell  be  appointed  on  purpose  to  swallow  up  such, 
is.  xiv.  9.  '  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and 
all  the  nations  that  forget  God.'  Ps.  ix.  17. 

4.  Again,  the  Scripture  saith  plainly  that  he 
that  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie  shall  have  his  part 
'  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone.' 
Re.  xxi.  8,  27.  And  yet  thou  art  so  far  from  dreading 
it,  that  it  is  thy  delight  to  jest  and  jeer,  and  lie  for 
a  penny,  or  twopence,  or  sixpence,  again.  And 
also  if  thou  canst  make  the  rest  of  thy  companions 
meny,  by  telling  things  that  are  false,  of  them 
that  are  better  than  thyself,  thou  dost  not  care  a 
straw.  Or  if  thou  hearest  a  lie  from,  or  of  another, 
thou  wilt  tell  it,  and  swear  to  the  truth  of  it,  0 
miserable ! 

5.  Thou  hast  heard  and  read,  that  '  He  that  be- 
lieveth  not  shall  be  damned.'  Mar.  xvi.  16.  And  that 
4  all  men  have  not  faith.'  2  Th.  ffi.  2.  And  yet  thou 
dost  so  much  disregard  these  things,  that  it  is  like 
thou  didst  scarce  ever  so  much  as  examine  seriously 
whether  thou  wast  in  the  faith  or  no  ;  but  dost  con- 
tent thyself  with  the  hypocrite's  hope,  which  at 
the  last  God  will  cut  off,  and  count  it  no  better 
than  the  spider's  web,  Job  via.  13. 1-1,  or  the  house 
that  is  builded  on  the  sands.  Lu.  vi.  49.  Nay,  thou 
perad venture  dost  flatter  thyself,  and  thinkest  that 
thy  faith  is  as  good  as  the  best  of  them  all ;  when, 
alas,  poor  soul,  thou  mayest  have  no  saving  faith 
at  all ;  which  thou  hast  not,  if  thou  be  not  born 
again,  and  made  a  new  creature.  2  Co.  ii.  17. 


a  These  persecutions  are  fast  disappearing.  One  of  my  near 
relatives  was  locked  into  a  lirst  iloor  parlour  in  Whitechapel, 
without  hat  or  shoes,  to  prevent  his  going  to  hear  Mr.  White- 
field  ;  but,  at  the  risk  of  being  turned  out  of  doors  by  his  parents, 
he  escaped  out  of  the  window,  by  clinging  to  the  rain  water- 
pipe,  and  enjoyed  the  public  service  at  the  Tabernacle. — (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF   A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


713 


G.  Thou  hast  heard,  that  he  that  neglects  God's 
great  salvation  shall  never  escape  his  great  dam- 
nation. He.  ii.  3,  compared  with  Lu.  xiv.  24,  and  Re.  xiv. 
19,  20.  And  yet  when  thou  art  invited,  intreated, 
and  beseeched  to  come  in,  thou  wilt  make  any 
excuse  to  serve  the  turn.  Lu.  xiv.  it,  is.  no.  xil.  l.  2  Co. 
v.  19,  20.  Nay,  thou  wilt  be  so  wicked  as  to  put  off 
Christ  time  after  time,  notwithstanding  he  is  so 
freely  proffered  to  thee  ;  a  little  ground,  a  few 
oxen,  a  farm,  a  wife,  a  twopenny  matter,  a  play; 
nay,  the  fear  of  a  mock,  a  scoff  or  a  jeer,  is  of 
greater  weight  to  draw  thee  back,  than  the  salva- 
tion of  thy  soul  to  draw  thee  forward. 

7.  And  thou  hast  heard,  that  whosoever  will  be 
a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God.  Ja.  iv.  4. 
But  thou  regardest  not  these  things,  but  contrari- 
wise ;  rather  than  thou  wilt  be  out  of  the  friendship 
and  favour  of  this  world,  thou  wilt  sin  against 
thine  own  conscience,  and  get  thyself  into  favour 
by  fawning  and  flattering  of  the  world.  Yea, 
rather  than  thou  wilt  go  without  it,  thou  wilt  dis- 
semble, lie,  backbite  thy  neighbour,  and  an  hun- 
dred other  tricks  thou  wilt  have. 

S.  You  have  heard  that  the  day  of  judgment  is 
near,  in  which  you  and  I,  all  of  us,  must  appear 
before  the  tribunal  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  there  be 
made  to  give  an  account  to  him  that  is  ready  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ;  even  of  all  that 
ever  we  did,  yea,  of  all  our  sins  in  thought,  word, 
and  deed,  and  shall  certainly  be  damned  for  them 
too,  if  we  close  not  in  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  what  he  hath  done  and  suffered  for  eternal 
life  ;  and  that  not  notionally  or  traditionally,  but 
really  and  savingly,  in  the  power,  and  by  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  through  faith.  Ec.  xi.  0;  xii.  u.  Ac. 

x.  42;  xvii.  30,  31.  2  Co.  v.  10.  He.  ix.  27.  Re.  xx.  12.       '  And  I 

saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God ; 
and  the  books  were  opened :  and  another  book  was 
opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life,  and  the  dead 
were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  written 
in  the  books.'  There  is  the  book  of  the  creatures, 
the  book  of  conscience,  the  book  of  the  Lord's  re- 
membrance, the  book  of  the  law,  the  book  of  the 
gospel, 1  Ro.  i.  20,  compare  with  Ro.  il  12,  15.  Re.  vi.  17. 
Jn.  xii.  48.  Then  '  he  shall  separate  them  one  from 
another,  as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  on  the 
right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  his  left. '  Mat.  xxv.  30-32. 
'  And  shall  say  to  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come, 
ye  blessed.'  ver.  Si.  But  to  the  other,  go,  or  «  De- 
part, ye  cursed.'  ver.  a.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the 
Scriptures  do  so  plainly  and  plentifully  speak  of 
these  things,  alas  !  who  is  there  that  is  weaned 
from  the  world,  and  from  their  sins  and  pleasures, 
to  fly  from  the  wrath  to  come  ?  Mat.  ui.  7.  Notwith- 
standing the  Scripture  saith  also  that  heaven  and 


1  Eor  an  admirable  and  deeply  impressive  account  of  these 
distinct  books,  see  Eunvan  011  The  Resurrection  of  the  Bead, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  108.— (Ed.) 

VOL.  III. 


earth  shall  pass  away,  rather  than  one  jot,  or  one 
tittle  of  the  word  shall  fail,  '  till  all  be  fulfilled,' 
they  are  so  certain.  Lu.  xxi.  33.  Mat.  v.  is. 

[Second  Promises.]  But  leaving  the  threaten- 
ings,  let  us  come  to  the  PROMISES,  and  speak 
somewhat  of  them,  and  you  may  see  how  light 
men  make  of  them,  and  how  little  they  set  by 
them,  notwithstanding  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  them.     As 

1.  'Turn,'  ye  fools,  ye  scorners,  ye  simple 
ones,  '  at  my  reproof ; '  and  '  behold  I  will  pour 
out  my  Spiiit  unto  you.'  rr.  i.  23.  And  yet  persons 
had  rather  be  in  their  foolishness  and  scorning 
still,  and  had  rather  embrace  some  filthy  lust, 
than  the  holy,  undefiled,  and  blessed  Spirit  of 
Christ,  through  the  promise,  though  by  it,  as 
many  as  receive  it,  '  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  re- 
demption,' Ep.  iv.  so,  and  although  he  that  lives 
and  dies  without  it,  is  none  of  Christ's.  Ro.  viiL  0. 

2.  God  hath  said,  if  thou  do  but  come  to  him  in 
Christ,  '  Though  your  sins  be  as  '  red  as  '  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ; '  and  he  will  by  no 
means  cast  thee  away.  Compare  is.  i.  is,  with  Jn. 
vi.  37.  Yet  poor  souls  will  not  come  to  Christ  that 
they  might  have  life,  Jn.v.40,  but  rather  after  their 
hardness  and  impenitent  heart  treasurest  up  unto 
themselves  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God.  Ro.ii.5. 

3.  Christ  Jesus  hath  said  in  the  Word  of  truth 
that  if  any  man  will  serve  and  follow  him,  where 
he  is,  '  there  shall  also  his  servant  be. '  Jn.  xii.  26. 
But  yet  poor  souls  choose  rather  to  follow  sin, 
Satan,  and  the  world,  though  their  companions  be 
the  devils  and  damned  souls  for  ever.  Mat.  xxv.  41. 

4.  He  hath  also  said,  '  Seek  ye  first  the  king- 
dom of  God,  and  all '  other  '  things  shall  be  added. ' 
But  let  whoso  will  seek  after  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  first  for  them  ;  for  they  will  take  the  first 
time,  while  time  serves  to  get  the  things  of  this 
life.  And  if  it  be  so,  that  they  must  needs  seek 
after  heaven,  or  else  be  damned,  they  will  stay  till 
they  have  more  leisure,  or  till  they  can  better 
attend  to  it ;  or  till  they  have  other  things  hand- 
some about  them,  or  till  they  are  older ;  when  they 
have  little  else  to  do,  or  when  they  come  to  be 
sick,  and  to  die.  Then,  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
them !  though  it  be  ten  thousand  to  one  but 
they  perish  for  ever. 

For  commonly  the  Lord  hath  this  way  to  deal 
with  such  sinners,  who  put  him  off  when  he  is 
striving  with  them,  either  to  laugh  at  their  cala- 
mity, and  mock  when  their  fear  cometh.  rr.  i.  2G,  28. 
Or  else  send  them  to  the  gods  they  have  served, 
which  are  the  devils.  Ju.  x.  13, 11.  Go  to  the  gods 
you  have  served,  and  'let  them  deliver  you,'  saith 
he  ;  compare  this  with  Jn.  via  44. 

5.  He  hath  said,  '  There  is  no  man  that  for- 
sakcth  father,   or  mother,  wife,   or  children,   or 

yo 


714 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,   OR 


lands,  for  liis  sake  and  the  gospel's,  but  shall  have 
a  huudred  fold  in  this  world,  with  persecution,  and 
in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting. '  Mar.  x.  20,  30. 

But  men,  for  the  most  part,  are  so  far  off  from 
believing  the  certainty  of  this,  that  they  will  scarce 
lose  the  earning  of  a  penny  to  hear  the  Word  of 
God,  the  gospel  of  salvation.  Nay,  they  will 
neither  go  themselves,  nor  suffer  others  to  go,  if 
they  can  help  it,  without  threatening  to  do  them  a 
mischief,  if  it  lie  in  their  way.  Nay,  further, 
many  are  so  far  from  parting  from  any  worldly 
gain  for  Christ's  sake,  and  the  gospel's,  that  they 
are  still  striving,  by  hook  and  by  crook,  as  we  say, 
by  swearing,  lying,  cozening,  stealing,  covetous- 
ness,  extortion,  oppression,  forgery,  bribery,  flat- 
tery, or  any  other  way  to  get  more,  though  they 
get  together  with  these,  death,  wrath,  damnation, 
hell,  the  devil,  and  all  the  plagues  that  God  can 
pour  upon  them.  And  if  any  do  not  run  with 
them  to  the  same  excess  of  riot,  but  rather  for  all 
their  threats  will  be  so  bold  and  careless,  as  they 
call  it,  as  to  follow  the  ways  of  God  ;  if  they  can 
do  no  more,  yet  they  will  whet  their  tongues  like 
a  sword  to  wound  them,  and  do  them  the  greatest 
mischief  they  can,  both  in  speaking  against  them  to 
neighbours,  to  wives,  to  husbands,  to  landlords,  and 
raising  false  reports  of  them.  But  let  such  take 
heed  lest  they  be  in  such  a  state,  and  woeful  condi- 
tion as  he  was  in,  who  said,  in  vexation  and  anguish 
of  soul,  One  drop  of  cold  water  to  cool  my  tongue. 

Thus  might  I  add  many  things  out  of  the  holy 
Writ,  both  threatenings  and  promises,  besides  those 
heavenly  counsels,  loving  reproofs,  free  invitations 
to  all  sorts  of  sinners,  both  old  and  young,  rich 
and  poor,  bond  and  free,  wise  and  unwise.  All 
which  have  been,  now  are,  and  is  to  be  feared,  as 
long  as  this  world  lasts,  will  be  trampled  under  the 
feet  of  those  swine,  I  call  them  not  men,  who  will 
continue  in  the  same.  But  take  a  review  of  some 
of  them  :  — 

1.  Counsel. 

What  heavenly  counsel  is  that  where  Christ 
saith,  'buy  of  me  gold  tried  by  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich,  and  white  raiment  that  thou 
may  est  be  clothed,  and  that  the  shame  of  thy 
nakedness  do  not  appear.'  Re.  m.  is.  Also  that, 
'  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the 
waters  ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without 
money  and  without  price.'  is.  Iv.  1.  'Hear,  and 
your  soul  shall  live.'  ver.  3.  'Take  hold  of  my 
strength,  that  you  may  make  peace  with  me,  and 
you  shall  make  peace  with  me.'  is.  xxvii.  5, 

2.  Instruction. 

What  instruction  is  here? 

1  Hear  instruction  and  be  wise,  and  refuse  it  not. 
Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth  me,'  saith  Christ, 
'  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at  the  posts 
of  my  doors.     For  whoso  findeth  me,  findeth  life, 


and  shall  obtain  favour  of  the  Lord.'  Vr.  via.  33-35. 
Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means. 
'  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  but  for 
that  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life.' 
Jn.  vi.  27.  'Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate.' 
Lu.  xiii.  24.  '  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved.'  Ac.  xvi.  31.  'Believe  not  every 
spirit,  but  try  the  spirits.'  '  Quench  not  the 
Spirit.'  '  Lay  hold  on  eternal  life.'  'Let  your 
light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your 
good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven.'  Mat.  v.  is,  Take  heed,  and  beware  of 
hypocrisy  ;  'watch  and  be  sober,'  'learn  of  me,' 
saith  Christ,  '  come  unto  me.' 

3.  Forewarning. 

What  forewarning  is  here  ? 

'Because  there  is  wrath,  beware  lest  he  take  thee 
away  with  his  stroke,  then  a  great  ransom  cannot 
deliver  thee.'  Job  xxxvi.  is.  'Be  ye  not  mockers, 
lest  your  hands  be  made  strong,  for  I  have  heard 
from  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  a  consumption  even 
determined  upon  the  whole  earth.'  is.  xxviu.  22. 
'  Beware,  therefore,  lest  that  come  upon  you  that 
is  written,  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and 
perish.  For  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which 
ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe,  though  a  man  declare 
it  unto  you.'  Ac.  xiii.  40,  41.  '  Let  him  that  thinketh 
he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall.'  1  Co.  x.  12. 
'  Watch  and  pray,  that  you  enter  not  into  tempta- 
tion.' Mat.  xxvi.  41.  '  Let  us  therefore  fear  lest  a 
promise  being'  made,  and  'left  us  of  entering  into 
his  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem  to  come  short  of 
it.'  lie.  iv.  1.  '  I  will  therefore  put  you  in  remem- 
brance, though  you  once  knew  this,  how  that  the 
Lord  having  saved  the  people  out  of  Egypt,  after- 
ward destroyed  them  that  believed  not. '  Jude  5. 
'  Hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take 
thy  crown.'  Re.  m.  11. 

4.  Comfort. 

What  comfort  is  here  ? 

'Him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast 
out.'  Jn.  vi.  37.  '  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour, 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.' 
Mat.  xi.  2s.  '  Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  be  for- 
given thee.'  Mat.  ix.  2.  '  I  will  never  leave,  nor 
forsake  thee,'  for  '  I  have  loved  thee  with  an 
everlasting  love.'  Je.  sbcbi  3.  '  I  lay  down  my  life 
for  the  sheep.'  I  lay  down  my  life  that  they  may 
have  life.  '  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life, 
and  that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly.'  'I 
have  heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted,  and  in  the 
day  of  salvation  have  I  succoured  thee. '  2  Co.  vi.  2. 
'  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as 
white  as  snow,  though  they  be  red  like  crimson, 
they  shall  be  as  wool.'  '  For  I  have  blotted  out 
as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud 
thy  sins ;  return  unto  me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee.' 

Isa.  xliv.  22. 


THE   GROANS   OF  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


5.  Grief  to  those  that  fall  short. 

0  sad  grief ! 

'How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart 
despised  reproof,  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of 
Bay  teachers,  nor  inclined  mine  car  to  them  that 
instructed  inc.'  rr.  v.  M-M.  They  shall  'curse 
their  king  and  their  God,  and  look  upward.  And 
they  shall  look  unto  the  earth,  and  hchold  trouble 
and  darkness,  dimness  of  anguish,  and  they  shall 
be  driven  to  darkness.'  is.  via  '.'i,  «.  '  lie  hath 
dispersed  '  abroad,  '  he  hath  given  to  the  poor,  his 
righteousness  endureth  for  ever.  -  The  wicked  shall 
sec  it,  and  be  grieved,  he  shall  gnash  his  teeth, 
and  melt  away  ;  the  desire  of  the  wicked  shall 
perish.'  rs.  cxii.  9,  10.  'There  shall  he  weeping,  - 
when  ye  shall  sec  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
and  all  the  prophets  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
you  yourselves  thrust  out.'  Lu.  xiii.  28.  All  which 
things  are  slighted  by  the  world. 

Thus  much,  in  short,  touching  this,  That  ungodly 
men  undervalue  the  Scriptures,  and  give  no  credit 
to  them,  when  the  truth  that  is  contained  in  them 
is  held  forth  in  simplicity  unto  them,  but  rather 
cry  out,  Nay,  but  if  one  should  rise  from  the  dead 
then  they  think  something  might  be  done ;  when 
alas,  though  signs  and  wonders  were  wrought  by 
the  hands  of  those  that  preach  the  gospel,  these 
poor  creatures  would  never  the  sooner  convert, 
though  they  suppose  they  should,  as  is  evident  by 
the  carriages  of  their  forerunners,  who  albeit  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  did  confirm  his  doctrine 
by  miracles,  as  opening  blind  eyes,  casting  out  of 
devils,  and  raising  the  dead,  they  were  so  far  from 
receiving  either  him  or  his  doctrine,  that  they  put 
him  to  death  for  his  pains !  Though  he  had  done 
so  many  miracles  among  them,  yet  they  believed 
not  in  him.  Jn.  \\.  37. 

But  to  pass  this,  /  shall  lay  down  some  of  the 
grounds  of  their  rejecting  and  undervaluing  the 
Scriptures,  and  so  pass  on. 

1.  [ Ground.  ]  Because  they  do  not  believe  that 
they  are  the  Word  of  God,  but  rather  suppose  them 
to  be  the  inventions  of  men,  written  by  some  politi- 
cians, on  purpose  to  make  poor  ignorant  people  to 
submit  to  some  religion  and  government.1  Though 
they  do  not  say  this,  yet  their  practices  testify  the 
same ;  as  he  that  when  he  hears  the  words  of  the 
curse,  yet  blesseth  himself  in  his  heart,  and  saith 
he  shall  have  peace,  though  God  saith  he  shall  have 
none.  De.  xxix.  is-io.  And  this  must  needs  be,  for  did 
but  men  believe  this,  that  it  is  the  Word  of  God, 
then  they  must  believe  that  he  that  spake  it  is  true, 
therefore  shall  cverv  word  and  tittle  be  fulfilled. 


1  This  idea  prevails  to  a  vast  extent.  The  splendour,  power, 
and  intolerance  of  national  hierarchies  is  mistaken  for  the  hum- 
ble benignity  of  the  Bible  system  of  Christianity  or  personal 
religion.  Antichrist,  tricked  out  in  robes  and  gewgaws,  is,  by 
perverted  minds,  received  as  Christ. —  (Ed.) 


And  if  they  come  once  to  this,  unless  they  he  stark 
mad,  they  will  have  a  care  how  they  do  throw 
themselves  under  the  lash  of  eternal  vengeance. 
For  the  reason  why  the  Tbessalonians  received  the 
Word,  was,  because  they  believed  it  was  the  Word 
of  God,  and  not  the  word  of  man,  which  did  effec- 
tually work  in  them  by  their  thus  believing.  'When 
ye  received  the  Word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us,' 
saith  he,  'ye  received  it  not  as  the  word  of  man, 
but,  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  Word  of  God,  which  effec- 
tually worketh  also  in  you  that  believe.'  itu.  a.  js. 
So  that  did  a  man  but  receive  it  in  hearing,  or 
reading,  or  meditating,  as  it  is  the  Word  of  God, 
they  would  be  converted.  '  But  the  Word  preached 
did  not  profit,  -  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them 
that  heard  it.'  He.  iv.  -2. 

2.  [Ground.]  Because  they  do  not  indeed  see 
themselves  by  nature  heirs  of  that  exceeding  wrath 
and  vengeance  that  the  Scriptures  testify  of.  For 
did  they  but  consider  what  God  intends  to  do  with 
those  that  live  and  die  in  a  natural  state,  it  would 
either  sink  them  into  despair,  or  make  them  fly  for 
refuge  to  the  hope  that  is  set  before  them.  But  if 
there  be  never  such  sins  committed,  and  never  so 
great  wrath  denounced,  and  the  time  of  execution 
be  never  so  near,  yet  if  the  party  that  is  guilty  be 
senseless,  and  altogether  ignorant  thereof,  he  will 
be  careless,  and  regards  it  nothing  at  all.  And 
that  man,  by  nature,  is  in  this  condition,  it  is  evi- 
dent. For,  take  the  same  man  that  is  senseless, 
and  ignorant  of  that  misery  he  is  in  by  nature,  I 
say,  take  him  at  another  time  when  he  is  a  little 
awakened,  and  then  you  shall  hear  him  roar,  aud 
erv  out  so  long  as  trouble  is  upon  him,  and  a  sense 
of  the  wrath  of  God  hanging  over  his  head,  Good 
sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved? 

Though  the  same  man  at  another  time,  when 
his  conscience  is  fallen  asleep,  and  grown  hard, 
will  lie  like  the  smith's  dog  at  the  foot  of  the  anvil, 
though  the  fire-sparks  fly  in  his  face.  But,  as  I 
said  before,  when  any  one  is  a  little  awakened,  0 
what  work  will  one  verse,  one  line,  nay,  one  word 
of  the  holy  Scriptures  make  in  his  heart.2  lie 
cannot  eat,  sleep,  work,  keep  company  with  his 
former  companions,  and  all  because  he  is  afraid 
that  the  damnation  spoken  of  in  Scripture  will 
fall  to  his  share,  like  Balaam,  who  said,  'I  cannot 
go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord.'  Nn.  xxu.  is.  So 
long  as  he  had  something  of  the  word  of  the  Lord 
with  authority,  severity,  and  power  on  his  heart ; 
but  at  another  time  he  could  teach  *  Balak  to  cast 
a  stumbling-block  before  the  children  of  Israel.' 
Be  U.  14. 

3.  [Ground.]    Because  the    carnal    priests    do 

-  This  is  exemplified  in  Buuyan's  experience,  published  by 
him  in  Grace  Abounding.  'That  scripture  also  did  tear  and 
rend  my  soul,  rs.lvii.22.1  Sec.  104.  'That  scripture  did 
seize  upon  my  soul.  lie.  xii.  10,  1?.'  Sec.  141.— (Ed.) 


716 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


tickle  the  ears  of  their  hearers  -with  vain  philosophy 
and  deceit,  and  therehy  harden  their  hearts  against 
the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  and  Word  of  God,  which 
things  the  apostle  admonished  those  that  have  a 
mind  to  close  in  with  Christ  to  avoid,  saying, 
'  Beware  lest  any  man,'  be  he  what  he  will,  •  spoil 
you  through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the 
traditions  of  men,  and  rudiments  of  the  world,  and 
not  after  Christ. '  Col.  ii.  s.  And  you  who  muzzle 
up  your  people  in  ignorance  with  Aristotle,  Plato, 
and  the  rest  of  the  heathenish  philosophers,  and 
preach  little,  if  anything,  of  Christ  rightly ;  I  say 
unto  you,  that  you  will  find  you  have  sinned  against 
God,  and  beguiled  your  hearers,  when  God  shall,  in 
the  judgment-day,  lay  the  cause  of  the  damnation 
of  many  thousands  of  souls  to  your  charge,  and 
say,  He  will  require  their  blood  at  your  hands. 

Eze.  xxxiii.  G. 

4.  [Ground.]  Another  reason  why  the  carnal 
unbelieving  world  do  so  slight  the  Scriptures  and 
Word  of  God,  is,  because  the  judgment  spoken  of 
in  the  Scripture  is  not  presently  executed  on  the 
transgressors.  '  Because  sentence  against  an  evil 
work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of 
the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil.'  Ec. 
viii.  11.  Because  God  doth  not  presently  strike  the 
poor  wretch  as  soon  as  he  sins,  but  waits,  and  for- 
bears, and  is  patient,  therefore  Sie  world  judging 
God  to  be  unfaithful,  go  to  it  again  and  again,  and 
every  time  grow  harder  and  harder,  till  at  last  God 
is  forced  either  to  stretch  out  his  mighty  power  to 
turn  them,  or  else  send  death,  with  the  devil  and 
hell,  to  fetch  them.  *  Thou  thoughtest,'  saith  God, 
'  that  I  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself,  but 
I  will  reprove  thee,  and  set  them  in  order  before 
thine  eyes.  Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God, 
lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver.' 

Ts.  1.  21,  22. 

5.  [Ground.]  Another  reason  why  the  blind 
world  do  slight  the  authority  of  Scripture,  is, 
because  they  give  ear  to  the  devil,  who,  through 
his  subtilty,  casteth  false  evasions  and  corrupt 
interpretations  on  them,  rendering  them  not  so 
point  blank  the  mind  of  God,  and  a  rule  for  direc- 
tion to  poor  souls,  persuading  them  that  they  must 
give  ear  and  way  to  something  else  besides,  and 
beyond  that;  or  else  he  labours  to  render  it  vile 
and  contemptible,  by  persuading  them  that  it  is  a 
dead  letter,  when  indeed  they  know  not  what  they 
say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm.  For  the  Scripture  is 
not  so  dead  but  that  the  knowledge  of  it  is  able  to 
make  any  man  wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith 
and  love,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  2  Ti.  iii.  15  ;  and 
is  profitable  for  instruction,  reproof,  and  correction 
in  righteousness,  that  the  man  of  God  may  be 
throughly  furnished  to  all  good  works,  ver.  17. 

And  where  it  is  said  the  letter  killeth,he  meaneth 
the  law,  as  it  is  the  ministration  of  damnation,  or 


a  covenant  of  works,  and  so  indeed  it  doth  kill,  and 
must  do  so,  because  it  is  just,  forasmuch  as  the 
party  that  is  under  the  same  is  not  able  to  yield  to 
it  a  complete  and  continual  obedience.  But  yet  I 
will  call  Peter  and  Paul  to  witness  that  the  Scrip- 
tures are  of  a  very  glorious  concernment,  inasmuch 
as  in  them  is  held  forth  to  us  the  way  of  life  ;  and 
also  in  that  they  do  administer  good  ground  of  hope 
to  us.  '  For  whatsoever  things  were  written  afore- 
time  were  written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through 
patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might  have 
hope.'  ito.  xr.  4.  And  again,.  •  Now  to  him  that  is 
of  power  to  stablish  you  according  to  my  gospel, 
and  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  the 
revelation  of  the  mystery,  which  was  kept  secret 
since  the  world  began,  but  now  is  made  manifest, 
and  by  the  Scriptures  of  the  prophets,  according 
to  the  commandment  of  the  everlasting  God,  made 
known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of  faith.' 
Ro.  xvi.  25,  2G.  And  therefore  Avhosoever  they  be  that 
slight  the  Scriptures,  they  slight  that  which  is  no 
less  than  the  Word  of  God ;  and  they  who  slight 
that,  slight  him  that  spake  it ;  and  they  that  do 
so,  let  them  look  to  themselves,  for  God  will  be 
revenged  on  such.  Much  more  might  be  said  to 
this  thing,  but  I  would  not  be  tedious. 

A  word  or  two  more,  so  I  have  done  with  this. 
Consider  the  danger  of  slighting  the  vjords  of  the 
prophets  or  apostles,  whether  they  be  correction, 
reproof,  admonition,  forewarning,  or  the  blessed 
invitations  and  promises  contained  in  them. 

1.  [Consider]  Such  souls  do  provoke  God  to 
anger,  and  to  execute  his  vengeance  on  them. 
'  They  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled  away  the 
shoulder,  and  stopped  their  ears,  that  they  should 
not  hear'  the  law,  and  '  they  made  their  hearts  as 
an  adamant  stone,  lest  they  should  hear  the  law, 
and  the  words  which  the  Lord  of  Hosts  hath  sent 
in  his  Spirit  by  the  former  prophets;  therefore  came 
a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of  Hosts.'  Zee  vn.  11, 12. 

2.  [Consider]  God  will  not  regard  in  their 
calamity.  '  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused; 
I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded; 
but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel,  and 
would  none  of  my  reproof.  I  also  will  laugh  at 
your  calamity,  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh. 
When  your  fear  cometh  as  desolation,  and  your 
destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind.  Then  shall 
they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer;  they 
shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find  me.' 

Pr.  i.  24-28. 

3.  [Consider]  God  doth  commonly  give  up  such 
men  to  delusions,  to  believe  lies.  •  Because  they 
received  not  the  love  of  the  truth  that  they  might 
be  saved,'  therefore  '  God  shall  send  them  strong 
delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie,  that  they 
all  might  be  damned.'  2Th.  ii.  10-12. 

4.  [Consider]  In  a  word,  they  that  do  continue 


THE   GKOANS   OF   A  DAMNED   SOUL. 


717 


to  reject  and  slight  tlic  Word  of  God,  they  are  such, 
for  the  most  part,  as  are  ordained  to  be  damned. 
Old  Eli,  his  sons  not  hearkening  to  the  voice  of 
their  father  reproving  them  for  their  sins,  hut  dis- 
obeying his  voice,  it  is  said,  It  was  '  because  the 
Lord  would  slay  them.'  1  Sa.  ii.  25.  Again  see  in 
9  Ch.  ixv.  is,  16.  Amaziah  having  sinned  against  the 
Lord,  ho  sends  to  him  a  prophet  to  reprove  him; 
but  Amaziah  says,  '  Forbear,  why  shouldest  thou 
be  smitten?'  He  did  not  hearken  to  the  word  of 
God,  *  Then  the  prophet  forbare,  saying,  I  know 
that  God  hath  determined  to  destroy  thee,  because 
thou  hast  -  not  hearkened  unto  my  counsel.'  Read, 
therefore,  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding. 
For  a  miserable  end  will  those  have  that  go  on 
sinning  against  God,  rejecting  his  Word. 

Other  things  might  have  been  observed  from  this 
verse,  which  at  this  time  I  shall  pass  by ;  partly 
because  the  sum  of  them  hath  been  touched  already, 
and  may  be  more  clearly  hinted  at  in  the  following- 
verse  ;  and  therefore  I  shall  speak  a  few  words  to 
the  next  verse,  and  so  draw  towards  a  conclu- 
sion. 

Terse  31. — 'And  he  said  unto  him,  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and 
the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded,  though  one 
rose  from  the  dead.' 

•  And  he  said;'  that  is,  and  God  made  answer 
to  the  words  spoken  in  the  verse  before,  '  And  he 
said  unto  him,  If  they  hear  not  Moses,'  &c.  As 
if  he  had  said,  Moses  was  a  man  of  great  renown, 
a  man  of  worthy  note,  a  man  that  talked  with  God 
face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaketh  to  his  friend.  The 
words  that  Moses  spake  were  such  as  I  commanded 
him  to  speak.  Let  who  will  question  them,  I  will 
own  th'em,  credit  them,  bless  them  that  close  in 
with  them,  and  curse  those  that  reject  them. 

I  myself  sent  the  prophets,  they  did  not  run  of 
their  own  heads,  I  gave  them  commission,  I  thrust 
them  out,  and  told  them  what  they  should  say. 
In  a  word,  they  have  told  the  world  what  my  mind 
is  to  do,  both  to  sinners  and  to  saints ;  '  They  have 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear  them.' 
Therefore  he  that  shall  reject  and  turn  his  back 
either  upon  the  threateniugs,  counsels,  admoni- 
tions, invitations,  promises,  or  whatsoever  else  I 
have  commauded  them  to  speak  as  to  salvation 
and  life,  and  to  directions  therein,  shall  be  sure  to 
have  a  share  in  the  many  curses  that  they  have 
spoken,  and  the  destruction1  that  is  pronounced  by 
them.  Again,  '  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the 
prophets,'  <fcc.  As  if  he  had  said,  Thou  wouldst 
have  me  send  one  from  the  dead  unto  them  ; 
what  needs  that?  They  have  my  mind  already, 
I  have  declared  unto  them  what  I  intend  to  stand 


1  This  word  was,  by  a  typographical  error,  printed' doctrine,' 

in  an  edition  of  1707 ;  this  error  has  been  followed  in  all  the 
later  copies. —  (Ed.) 


to,  both  for  saving  them  that  believe,  and  damning 
them  that  do  not.  That  therefore  which  I  have 
said  I  will  make  good,  whether  they  hear  or  for- 
bear. And  as  for  this  desire  of  yours,  you  had  as 
good  desire  me  to  make  a  new  Bible,  and  so  to 
revoke  my  first  sayings  by  the  mouth  of  my  pro- 
phets. But  I  am  God  and  not  man,  and  my  Word 
is  immutable,  unchangeable,  and  shall  stand  as 
fast  as  my  decrees  can  make  it ;  heaven  and  earth 
shall  pass  away,  but  one  jot  or  tittle  of  my  Word 
shall  not  pass.  Mat.  v.  is.  If  thou  hadst  ten  thou- 
sand brethren,  and  every  one  in  danger  of  losing 
his  soul,  if  they  did  not  close  in  with  what  is  con- 
tained and  recorded  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth,  they 
must  even  every  one  of  them  perish,  and  he  for 
ever  damned  in  hell,  for  the  Scriptures  cannot  be 
broken.  I  did  not  send  them  so  unadvisedly  to 
recall  it  again  by  another  consideration.  No,  for 
I  speak  in  righteousness  and  in  judgment,  is.  uiii. 
1-3,  and  in  much  wisdom  and  counsel.  It  being 
therefore  gone  out  of  my  mouth  in  this  manner, 
it  shall  not  return  in  vain,  until  it  hath  accom- 
plished the  thing  whereto  I  have  sent  it.  is.  iv.  n. 

But  again,  thou  supposest  that  miracles  and 
wonders  will  work  more  on  them,  which  makes 
thee  say,  Send  one  from  the  dead.  But  herein 
thou  art  mistaken,  for  I  have  proved  them  with  that 
once  and  again,  by  more  than  one,  or  two,  or  three 
of  my  servants.  How  many  miracles  did  my  servant 
Moses  work  by  commandment  from  me  in  the  land 
of  Egypt,  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  the  wilderness ! 
Yet  they  of  that  generation  were  never  the  sooner 
converted  for  that;  but,  notwithstanding,  rebelled 
and  lusted,  and  in  their  hearts  turned  back  into 
Egypt.  Ac.  vii.  How  many  miracles  did  Samuel, 
David,  Elias,  Elisha,  Daniel,  and  the  prophets, 
together  with  my  Son,  who  raised  the  dead,  cast 
out  devils,  made  them  to  see  that  wrere  born  blind, 
gave  and  restored  limbs !  Yet  for  all  this,  as  I 
said  before,  they  hated  him,  they  crucified  him. 
I  raised  him  again  from  the  dead,  and  he  appeared 
to  his  disciples,  who  were  called,  and  chosen,  and 
faithful,,  and  he  gave  them  commandment  and 
commission  to  go  and  testify  the  truth  of  this  to 
the  world ;  and  to  confirm  the  same  he  enabled 
them  to  speak  with  divers  tongues,  and  to  work 
miracles  most  plentifully,  yet  there  was  great  per- 
secution raised  against  them,  insomuch  that  but  a 
few  of  them  died  in  their  beds.  And,  therefore, 
though  thou  thinkest  that  a  miracle  will  do  so 
much  with  the  world,  yet  I  say  no.  For  if  they 
will  not  believe  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  should  rise  from 
the  dead. 

From  these  words,  therefore,  take  notice  of  this 
truth,  namely,  that  those  who  reject  and  believe 
not  Moses  and  the  prophets  are  a  very  hard- 
hearted people,  that  will  not  be  persuaded  though 


718 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


one  rise  from  the  dead.  They  that  regard  not 
the  holy  Scriptures  to  turn  to  God,  finding  them 
to  testify  of  his  goodness  and  mercy,  there  is  but 
little  hopes  of  their  salvation ;  for  they  will  not, 
mark,  they  will  not  be  persuaded  though  one  should 
rise  from  the  dead.  This  truth  is  confirmed  by 
Jesus  Christ  himself.  If  you  read  Jn.  v.,  where 
the  Lord  is  speaking  of  himself  that  he  is  the 
very  Christ,  he  brings  in  four  or  five  witnesses 
to  back  what  he  said.  1.  John  Baptist.  2.  The 
works  that  his  Father  gave  him  to  do.  3.  His 
Father  speaking  from  heaven.  4.  The  testimony 
of  the  Scriptures.  When  all  this  was  done,  see- 
ing yet  they  would  not  believe,  he  lays  the  fault 
upon  one  of  these  two  things: — (1.)  Their  regard- 
ino-  an  esteem  among  men.  (2.)  Their  not  believ- 
ing of  the  prophets'  writings,  even  Moses  and 
the  rest.  '  For  had  ye  believed  Moses,'  saith 
he,  '  ye  would  have  believed  me ;  for  he  wrote 
of  me.  But  if  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how 
shall  ye  believe  my  words?' 

Now,  I  say,  he  that  shall  slight  the  Scriptures, 
and  the  testimony  of  the  prophets  in  them  concern- 
ing Jesus  Christ,  must  needs  be  in  great  danger  of 
losing  his  soul,  if  he  abide  in  this  condition;  because 
he  that  slights  the  testimony  doth  also  slight  the 
thing  testified  of,  let  him  say  the  contrary  never  so 
often.    For  as  Jesus  Christ  hath  here  laid  down  the 
reason  of  men's  not  receiving  him,  so  the  apostle 
in  another  place  lays  down  the  reason  again  with 
a  high  and  mighty  aggravation,  l  Jn.  v.  10.   saying, 
'  He  that  bclieveth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the 
witness   in    himself:    he   that    believeth  not  God 
hath  made  him  a  liar,  because  he  believeth  not  the 
record,'  mark,  '  the  record  that  God  gave  of  his 
Son.'     The   record,  you  will   say,  what   is  that? 
Why  even  the  testimony  that  God  gave  of  him  by 
the  mouth  of  all  the  holy  prophets  since  the  world 
began.  Ac  iii.  is-20.     That  is,  God  sending  his  holy 
Spirit  into  the  hearts  of  his  servants,  the  prophets 
and  apostles,  he,  by  his  Spirit  in  them,  did  bear 
witness  or  record  of  the  truth  of  salvation  by  his 
Son  Jesus,  both  before  and  after  his  coming.    And 
thus  is  that  place    also  to   be  understood  which 
saith,  '  There  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  earth, 
the  Spirit,  and  the  water,  and   the  blood.'    That 
is,  the  Spirit  in  the  apostles  which  preached  him 
to  the  world,  as  is  clear  if  you  read  seriously  l  Th. 
iv.  8.     The  apostle,  speaking  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
obedience  to  God  through   him,  saith  thus,  Now 
'  he  that  despiseth,  despiseth  not  man,  but  God.' 
But  it  is  you  that  speak ;  true,  but  it  is  by  and 
through  the  Spirit,  '  He  therefore  that  despiseth, 
despiseth  not  man,  but  God,  who  hath  also  given 
unto  us    his    Holy  Spirit.'     This    is    therefore  a 
mighty  confirmation  of  this   truth,   that  he  that 
slights   the  record  or  testimony  that  God,  by  his 
Spirit  in  his  prophets  and  apostles,  hath  testified 


unto  us,  slights  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  who 
moved  them  to  speak  these  things ;  and  if  so,  then 
I  would  fain  know  how  any  man  can  be  saved  by 
Jesus  Christ  that  slights  the  testimony  concerning 
Christ,  yea,  the  testimony  of  his  own  Spirit  con- 
cerning his  own  self?  It  is  true  men  may  pretend 
to  have  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  and  from  that 
conceit  set  a  low  esteem  on  the  holy  Scriptures  ; 
but  that  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  them  and  teacheth 
them  so  to  do,  it  is  no  better  than  the  spirit  of 
Satan,  though  it  calls  itself  by  the  name  of  the 
Spirit  of  Christ.  'To  the  law,'  therefore,  'and 
to  the  testimony,'  try  them  by  that ;  '  if  they  speak 
not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  tliere  is  no 
light  in  them.' 

The  apostle  Peter,  when  he  speaks  of  the  glo- 
rious voice  that  he  had  from  the  excellent  majesty, 
saying  of  Christ,  'Thisis  my  beloved  Son,  hear  him/ 
saith  thus  to  them  whom  he  wrote  unto,  '  You  have 
also  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy,'  or  of  the  pro- 
phets, for  so  you  may  read  it,  '  unto  which  ye  do 
well  that  ye  take  heed.'  That  is,  though  we  tell 
you  that  we  had  this  excellent  testimony  from  his 
own  mouth  evidently,  yet  you  have  the  prophets. 
We  tell  you  this,  and  you  need  not  doubt  of  the 
truth  of  it;  but  if  you  should,  yet  you  may  not, 
must  not,  ought  not  to  question  them.  Search 
therefore  into  them,  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the 
day-star  arise  in  your  hearts.  That  is,  until  by 
the  same  Spirit  that  gave  forth  the  Scripture  you 
find  the  truth  confirmed  to  your  souls,  which  you 
have  recorded  in  the  Scriptures — that  this  word  of 
prophecy,  or  of  the  prophets,  is  the  Scriptures.  Read 
on  ;  for,  saith  he,  '  knowing  this  first,  that  no  pro- 
phecy of  the  scripture  is  of  any  private  interpreta- 
tion,' (fee.    2  Pe.  i.  '20. 

[Object.]  But,  you  will  say,  What  needs  all 
this  ado,  and  why  is  all  this  time  and  pains  spent 
in  speaking  to  this  that  is  surely  believed  already? 
This  is  a  thing  received  by  all,  that  they  believe 
the  Scriptures  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  that  sure 
Avord  of  prophecy;  and  therefore  you  need  not 
spend  your  time  in  proving  these  things,  and  the 
truth  of  them,  seeing  we  grant  and  confess  the 
truth  of  it  before  you  begin  to  speak  your  judg- 
ment of  them. 

A.isw.  The  truths  of  God  cannot  be  borne  wit- 
ness unto  too  often;  you  may  as  well  say,  1.  You 
need  not  preach  Jesus  Christ  so  much,  seeing  he 
hath  been,  and  is  received  for  the  true  Messias 
already.  2.  Though  many  may  suppose  that  they 
do  believe  the  Scriptures,  yet  if  they  were  but  well 
examined,  you  will  find  them  either  by  word  of 
mouth,  or  else  by  conversation,  to  deny,  reject,  and 
slight  the  holy  Scriptures.  It  is  true,  tliere  is  a 
notional  and  historical  assent  in  the  head.  I  say, 
in  the  head  of  many,  or  most,  to  the  truth  contained 
in  Scripture.     But  try  them,  I  say,  and  you  shall 


THE   GROANS   OF  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


719 


find  but  a  little,  if  an}-,  of  the  faith  of  the  operation 
of  God  in  the  hearts  of  poor  men,  to  believe  the 
Scriptures,  and  things  contained  in  them.  Many, 
yea,  most  men  believe  the  Scriptures  as  they  believe 
a  fable,  a  story,  a  tale,  of  which  there  is  no  cer- 
taintv!  But  alas!  there  are  but  few  do  in  deed 
and  in  truth  believe  the  Scriptures  to  be  the  very 
Word  of  God. 

Object.  But  you  will  say,  This  seems  strange 
to  me. 

Answ.  And  it  seems  as  true  to  me,  and  I  doubt 
not  but  to  make  it  manifest,  that  there  are  but 
few,  yea,  very  few,  that  do  effectually,  for  that  I 
aim  at,  believe  the  Scriptures  and  the  truths  con- 
tained in  and  spoken  of  by  them. 

But  to  make  this  appear,  and  that  to  purpose,  if 
( tod  will,  I  shall  lay  you  down  the  several  operations 
that  the  Scriptures  have  on  them  who  do  effectually 
believe  the  things  contained  in  them. 

First.  He  that  doth  effectually  believe  the  Scrip- 
tures, hath  in  the  first  place  been  killed,  I  say 
killed  by  the  authority  of  the  holy  Scriptures  ; 
struck  stark  dead  in  a  spiritual  sense,  by  the  holy 
Scriptures,  being  set  home  by  that  Spirit,  which 
gave  them  forth,  upon  the  soul.  '  The  letter  kill- 
eth  ;'  the  letter  strikes  men  dead.  2  Co.  m.  g.  And 
this  Paul  witnessed  and  found,  before  he  could  say, 
I  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken.  Where 
he  saith,  '  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once.'  That 
is,  in  my  natural  state,  before  the  law  was  set  on 
my  heart  with  power;  '  But  when  the  command- 
ment came,  sin  revived  and  I  died.'  Eo.  vii.  9.  '  And 
that  law  which  icas  ordained  to  life,  I  found  to  be 
unto  death ;  for  sin,  taking  occasion  by  the  com- 
mandment, deceived  me,  and  by  it  slew  me.'  ver.  11. 
Now  that  which  is  called  'the  letter'  in  2  Cor.,  is 
called  the  law  in  Bo.  vii.,  which  by  its  power  and 
operation,  as  it  is  wielded  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
doth  in  the  first  place  kill  and  slay  all  those  that 
are  enabled  to  believe  the  Scriptures.  I  kill,  saith 
God :  that  is,  with  my  law  I  pierce,  I  wound,  I 
prick  men  into  the  very  heart,  by  showing  them 
their  sins  against  my  law.  De.  xxxi.  20.  Ac  ii.  37.  And 
he  that  is  ignorant  of  this,  is  also  ignorant  of,  and 
doth  not  really  and  effectually  believe  the  Scrip- 
ture. 

But  you  will  say,  How  doth  the  law  kill  and 
strike  dead  the  poor  creatures? 

Answ.  The  letter  or  law  doth  kill  thus.  It  is 
set  home  upon  the  soul,  and  discovers  to  the  soul 
its  transgressions  against  the  law,  and  shows  the 
soul  also,  that  it  cannot  completely  satisfy  the 
justice  of  God,  for  the  breach  of  his  law,  therefore 
it  is  condemned.  Jn.  iii.  is.  Mark,  'He  that  bclieveth 
net,  is  condemned  already.'  To  wit,  by  the  law, 
that  is,  the  law  doth  condemn  him ;  yea,  it  hath 
condemned  him  already  fur  his  sins  against  it ;  as 
it  is  written,  '  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 


not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of 
the  law  to  do  them.'  6a.ffl.lA,  Now  all  men  as 
they  come  into  the  world  are  in  this  condition,  that 
is,  condemned  by  the  law.  Yet  not  believing  their 
condemnation  by  the  law  really,  they  do  not  also 
believe  really  and  effectually  the  law  that  doth  con- 
demn them.  For  as  men  have  but  a  notion  of  the 
one,  that  is,  their  condemnation,  because  of  sins 
against  the  law :  so  they  have  but  a  notion  of  the 
condemning,  killing,  and  destroying  power  of  the 
law.  For,  as  the  one  is,  so  in  these  things  always 
is  the  other.  There  is  no  man  that  doth  really 
believe  the  law  or  gospel,  further  than  they  do  feel 
the  power  and  authority  of  them  in  their  hearts. 
*  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the 
power  of  God.'  Now  this  letter  or  law,  is  not  to 
be  taken  in  the  largest  sense,  but  is  strictly  to  be 
tied  to  the  ten  commandments,  whose  proper  work 
is  only  by  showing  the  soul  its  sin  against  this  law, 
to  kill,  and  there  leaves  him  stark  dead,  not  giving 
him  the  least  life,  or  support,  or  comfort,  but  leaves 
the  soul  in  a  helpless  and  hopeless  condition,  as 
from  itself,  or  any  other  mere  creature. 

It  is  true  the  law  hath  laid  all  men  for  dead,  as 
they  come  into  the  world ;  but  all  men  do  not  see 
themselves  dead,  until  they  see  that  law  that  struck 
them  dead,  striking  in  their  souls,  and  having 
struck  them  that  fatal  blow.  As  a  man  that  is 
fast  asleep  in  a  house,  and  that  on  fire  about  his 
ears,  and  he  not  knowing  of  it  because  he  is  asleep  ; 
even  so,  because  poor  souls  are  asleep  in  sin,  though 
the  wrath  of  God,  the  curse  of  his  law,  and  the 
flames  of  hell  have  beset  them  round  about,  yet 
they  do  not  believe  it,  because  they  are  asleep  in 
sin.  Now,  as  he  that  is  awakened  and  sees  this, 
sees  that  through  this  he  is  a  dead  man ;  even  so 
they  that  do  see  their  state  by  nature,  being  such 
a  sad  condition,  do  also  see  themselves  by  that  law 
to  be  dead  men  naturally. 

But  now,  when  didst  thou  feel  the  power  of  this 
first  part  of  the  Scripture,  the  law,  so  mighty  as  to 
strike  thee  dead  ?  If  not,  thou  dost  not  so  much 
as  verily  believe  that  part  of  the  Scripture  that  doth 
contain  the  law  in  it,  to  be  the  truth  of  God.  Yet 
if  thou  shouldest  have  felt  something,  I  say,  some- 
thing of  the  killing  power  of  the  law  of  God  in 
thine  heart,  this  is  not  an  argument  to  prove  that 
thou  believest  all  the  things  contained  in  Scripture, 
for  there  is  gospel  as  well  as  law,  and  therefore  I 
shall  speak  to  that  also,  that  is,  whether  thou  hast; 
felt  the  power  of  the  gospel,  as  well  as  something 
of  the  power  of  the  law. 

Second.  Then  thou  hast  found  the  power  of  the 
gospel,  and  so  believed  it,  thou  hast  found  it  thus 
with  thy  soul. 

1.  Thou  hast  been  showed  by  the  Word  or  truth 
of  the  gospel,  in  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
that  by  nature  thou  wert  without  the  true  faith  of 


720 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM  HELL,  OR 


tlie  Son  of  God  in  thy  soul.  For  when  He,  the 
Spirit,  is  come,  he  shall  show  men  that  '  they  be- 
lieve not  in  me,'  saith  Christ.  Jn.  xvi.  o.  Mark, 
though  thou  hast,  as  I  said,  before,  felt  somewhat 
of  the  power  of  the  law,  letter,  or  ten  command- 
ments, yet,  as  thou  hast  not  been  brought  to  this, 
to  see  by  the  Spirit  in  the  gospel,  that  thou  art 
without  faith  by  nature,  thou  hast  not  yet  tasted, 
much  less  believed,  any  part  of  the  gospel.  For 
the  gospel  and  the  law  are  two  distinct  covenants. 
And  they  that  are  under  the  law  may  be  convinced 
by  it,  and  so  believe  the  law  or  first  covenant,  and 
yet  in  the  meantime  to  be  a  stranger  to  the  cove- 
nant of  promise,  that  is,  the  gospel,  and  so  have  no 
hope  in  them.  ep.  u.  12.  There  is  not  any  promise 
that  can  be  savingly  believed,  until  the  soul  be  by 
the  gospel  converted  to  Jesus  Christ.  For  though 
men  do  think  never  so  much  that  they  believe  the 
things  or  the  Word  of  the  gospel  of  our  salvation ; 
yet  unless  they  have  the  work  of  grace  in  their 
souls,  they  do  not,  cannot  rightly  believe  the  things 
contained  in  the  Scriptures.     Again, 

2.  As  the  law  killeth  those  that  believe  it, 
even  so  the  promises  contained  in  the  gospel  do, 
through  faith,  administer  comfort  to  those  that 
believe  it  aright.  My  words,  saith  Christ,  My 
words  lthey  are  Spirit,  and  they  are  life.'  Jn.  vi.  63. 
As  if  he  had  said,  the  words  contained  in  the  law 
as  a  covenant  of  works,  they  wound,  they  kill,  they 
strike  dead  those  that  are  under  them.  But  as  for 
mc,  '  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are 
spirit,  and  they  are  life.'  That  is,  whosoever  doth 
receive  them  believingly,  shall  find  them  full  of 
operation,  to  comfort,  quicken,  and  revive  their  soul. 
For  as  I  did  not  come  into  the  world  to  destroy 
men's  lives,  so  the  words  that  I  speak,  as  I  am 
sent  to  preach  the  gospel,  they  have  no  such  ten- 
dency unto  those  that  believe  them.  The  promises 
that  are  in  the  gospel,  0  how  do  they  comfort 
them!  Such  a  promise,  and  such  a  promise,  0 
how  sweet  is  it !  How  comfortable  to  those  that 
believe  them !  Alas !  there  are  many  poor  souls 
that  think  they  believe  the  Scriptures  to  be  the 
Word  of  God,  and  yet  they  never  enjoyed  anything 
of  the  life  and  promises ;  they  come  in  upon  the 
heart  to  quicken,  to  revive  thee,  to  raise  thee  from 
the  sentence  of  death  that  is  passed  on  thee  by  the 
law.  And  through  the  faith  that  is  wrought  in 
thy  soul,  by  the  operation  of  God's  Holy  Spirit, 
though  once  killed  by  the  law  or  letter,  thou  art 
made  alive  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  pre- 
sented to  thy  soul  in  the  promises. 

Third.  Dost  thou  in  deed  and  in  truth  believe 
the  Scriptures  to  be  the  Word  of  God?  Then  the 
things  contained  in  them,  especially  the  things  of 
the  gospel,  are  very  excellent  to  thy  soul;  as  the 
birth  of  Christ,  the  death,  resurrection,  intercession, 
and  second  coming.     0  how  precious  and  excellent 


are  they  to  thy  soul !  insomuch  that  thou  regardest 
nothing  in  comparison  of  them !  0  !  it  is  Christ's 
birth,  death,  blood,  resurrection,  he,  according  to 
the  Scriptures,  that  thou  dost  rejoice  in  exceedingly, 
and  abundantly  desire  after !  '  Whom  having  not 
seen,  ye  love;  in  whom  though  now  ye  see  him 
not,  yet  believing  ye  rejoice,  with  joy  unspeakable, 
and  full  of  glory. '  1  Co.  xv.  i-6,  compared  with  Phi. 

iii.  6-8.    1  Pe.  i.  8. 

'  Fourth.  Dost  thou  believe  the  Scriptures  to  be 
the  Word  of  God  ?  Then  thou  standest  in  awe  of, 
and  dost  much  reverence  them.  Why,  they  are  the 
Word  of  God,  the  true  sayings  of  God ;  they  are 
the  counsel  of  God ;  they  are  his  promises  and  his 
threatenings.  Poor  souls  are  apt  to  think,  if  I 
could  hear  God  speak  to  me  from  heaven  with  an 
audible  voice,  then  sure  I  should  be  serious  and 
believe  it.  But  truly,  if  God  should  speak  to  thee 
from  heaven,  except  thou  wert  converted,  thou 
wouldst  not  regard,  nor  really  believe  him.  But 
if  thou  dost  believe  the  Scriptures,  thou  seest  that 
they  are  the  truth  as  really  as  if  God  should  speak 
to  thee  from  heaven  through  the  clouds,  and  there- 
fore never  flatter  thyself,  foolishly  thinking,  that  if 
it  were  so  and  so,  then  thou  couldst  believe.  I  tell 
thee,  saith  Christ,  If  they  believe  '  not  Moses  and 
the  prophets,  neither  will  they  believe  though  one 
should  rise  from  the  dead.'     But, 

Fifth.  Dost  thou  believe  the  Scriptures  to  be 
the  Word  of  God?  Then,  through  faith  in  Christ, 
thou  endeavourest  to  have  thy  life  squared  accord- 
ing to  the  Scriptures,  both  in  word  and  practice. 
Nay,  this  I  say,  thou  mayest  have  though  thou  do 
not  believe  them  all.  My  meaning  is,  that  if  thou 
believe  none  but  the  ten  commandments,  thy  life 
may  be,  according  to  them,  a  legal  holy  life ;  and 
if  thou  do  believe  the  gospel  too,  then  thy  life  will 
be  the  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  that  is, 
either  thou  wilt  live  in  the  blessed  and  holy  enjoy- 
ment of  what  is  testified  in  the  Scripture  concern- 
ing the  glorious  things  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
or  else  thou  wilt  be  exceedingly  panting  after  them. 
For  the  Scriptures  carry  such  a  blessed  beauty  in 
them  to  that  soul  that  hath  faith  in  the  things 
contained  in  them,  that  they  do  take  the  heart 
and  captivate  the  soul  of  him  that  believeth  them 
into  the  love  and  liking  of  them,  believing  all 
things  that  arc  written  in  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
and  have  hope  towards  God  that  there  shall  be  a 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  un- 
just. '  And  herein  do  I  exercise  myself,  to  have 
always  a  conscience  void  of  otfence  toward  God 
and  toward  men.'  Ac  xxiv.  u-16. 

Sixth.  He  that  believes  the  Scriptures  to  be  the 
Word  of  God,  if  he  do  but  suppose  that  any  one 
place  of  Scripture  doth  exclude  him,  and  shut  him 
out  of,  and  from  a  share  in  the  promises  contained 
in  them,  0  it  will  trouble  him,  grieve  him,  perplex 


THE   GROANS   OF  A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


721 


him.  Yea,  he  will  not  be  satisfied  until  he  be  re- 
solved, and  the  contrary  sealed  to  his  soul ;  for  he 
knows  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  word  of  God, 
all  truth  ;  and  therefore  he  knows  that  if  any  one 
sentence  doth  exclude  or  bar  him  out  for  want  of 
this  or  the  other  qualification,  he  knows  also  that 
not  the  word  alone  shuts  him  out,  but  he  that 
speaks  it,  even  God  himself.  And,  therefore,  he 
cannot,  will  not,  dare  not  be  contented  until  he 
find  his  soul  and  Scripture  together,  with  the 
things  contained  therein,  to  embrace  each  other, 
and  a  sweet  correspondency  and  agreement  between 
them.  For  you  must  know  that  to  him  that  be- 
lieves the  Scriptures  aright,  the  promises,  or 
thrcatcnings,  are  of  more  power  to  comfort  or  cast 
clown,  than  all  the  promises  or  threatenings  of  all 
the  men  in  the  world.  And  this  was  the  cause 
why  the  martyrs  of  Jesus  did  so  slight  both  the 
promises  of  their  adversaries,  when  they  would 
have  overcome  them,  with  proffering  the  great 
things  of  this  world  unto  them,  and  also  their 
threatenings,  when  they  told  them  they  would  rack 
t'nem,  hang  them,  burn  them.  Ac.  xx.  u.  None  of 
these  things  could  prevail  upon  them,  or  against 
them ;  because  they  did  most  really  believe  the 
Scriptures,  and  the  things  contained  in  them,  as 
is  clearly  found,  and  to  be  seen  in  He. «.,  and  also 
in  Mr.  Fox's  records  of  their  brethren. 

Seventh.  He  that  believeth  the  Scriptures  to  be 
the  Word  of  God,  believeth  that  men  must  be  born 
again,  and  also  be  partakers  of  that  faith  which  is 
of  the  operation  of  God,  according  as  he  hath  read 
and  believed,  or  else  he  must  and  shall  be  damned. 
And  he  that  believeth  this  aright  will  not  be  con- 
tented until,  according  as  it  is  written,  he  do  par- 
take of  and  enjoy  the  new  birth,  and  until  he  do 
find,  through  grace,  that  faith  that  is  wrought  by 
the  operation  of  God  in  his  soul.  For  this  is  the 
cause  why  men  do  satisfy  themselves  with  so 
slender  a  conceited  hope  that  their  state  is  good, 
when  it  is  nothing  so,  namely,  because  they  do  not 
credit  the  Scripture ;  for  did  they,  they  would  look 
into  their  own  hearts,  and  examine  seriously 
whether  that  faith,  that  hope,  that  grace  which 
they  think  they  have  be  of  that  nature,  and 
wrought  by  that  spirit  and  power  that  the  Scrip- 
ture speaketh  of.  I  speak  this  of  an  effectual  be- 
lieving, without  which  all  other  is  nothing  unto 
salvation. 

[FIVE  USES  BY  WAT  OF  SELF-EXAMINATION.] 

Now  then,  because  I  would  not  be  too  tedious, 
I  shall  at  this  time  lay  down  no  more  discoveries 
of  such  an  one  as  doth  savingly  believe  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  the  things  contained  in  them,  but  shall 
speak  a  few  words  of  examination  concerning  the 
things  already  mentioned.     As, 

VOL.  III. 


First  Use.  Thou  sayest  thou  dost  in  deed  and  in 
truth  effectually  believe  the  Scriptures:  I  ask,  there- 
fore, wast  thou  ever  killed  stark  dead  by  the  law  of 
works  contained  in  the  Scriptures — killed  by  the 
law  or  letter,  and  made  to  6ee  thy  sins  against  it, 
and  left  in  a  helpless  condition  by  that  law?  For, 
as  I  said,  the  proper  work  of  the  law  is  to  slay 
the  soul,  and  to  leave  it  dead  in  a  helpless  state. 
For  it  doth  neither  give  the  soul  any  comfort  itself 
when  it  comes,  nor  doth  it  show  the  soul  where 
comfort  is  to  be  had;  and  therefore  it  is  called 
'  the  ministration  of  condemnation,'  as  in  i  Co.  hi.  :>, 
*  the  ministration  of  death,'  verse  7.  For  though 
men  may  have  a  notion  of  the  blessed  Word  of  God, 
as  the  children  had,  yet  before  they  be  converted 
it  may  truly  be  said  of  them,  Ye  err,  not  knowing 
the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God.  Mar.  xii.  2t 

Second  Use.  You  say  you  do  believe  the  Scrip- 
tures to  be  the  Word  of  God.  I  say  again,  Examine, 
wast  thou  ever  quickened  from  a  dead  state  by  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  through  the  other 
part  of  the  Scripture  ;  that  is  to  say,  by  the  power 
of  God  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  through  the  cove- 
nant of  promise?  I  tell  thee  from  the  Lord,  if  thou 
hast,  thou  hast  felt  such  a  quickening  power  in  the 
words  of  Christ  (Jn.  vj.)  that  thou  hast  been  lifted 
out  of  that  dead  condition  that  thou  before  wast 
in.  And  that  when  thou  wast  under  the  guilt  of 
sin,  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  the  power  of  the 
devil,  and  the  justice  of  the  great  God,  thou  hast 
been  enabled,  by  the  power  of  God  in  Christ,  re- 
vealed to  thee  by  the  Spirit  through  and  by  the 
Scripture,  to  look  sin,  death,  hell,  the  devil,  and 
the  law,  and  all  things  that  are  at  enmity  with  thee, 
with  boldness  and  comfort  in  the  face,  through 
the  blood,  death,  righteousness,  resurrection,  and 
intercession  of  Christ,  made  mention  of  in  the 
Scriptures.      And, 

Third  Use.  On  this  account,  0  how  excellent 
are  the  Scriptures  to  thy  soul!  0  how  much  vir- 
tue dost  thou  see  in  such  a  promise,  in  such  an 
invitation !  They  are  so  large  as  to  say,  Christ 
will  in  no  wise  cast  me  out!  My  crimson  sins 
shall  be  white  as  snow!  I  tell  thee,  friend,  there 
are  some  promises  that  the  Lord  hath  helped  me 
to  lay  hold  of  Jesus  Christ  through  and  by,  that 
I  would  not  have  out  of  the  Bible  for  as  much  gold 
and  silver  a3  can  lie  between  York  and  London 
piled  up  to  the  stars  ;  because  through  them  Christ 
is  pleased  by  his  Spirit  to  convey  comfort  to  my 
soul.  I  say,  when  the  law  curses,  when  the  devil 
tempts,  when  hell-fire  flames  in  my  conscience,  my 
sins  with  the  guilt  of  them  tearing  of  me,  then  is 
Christ  revealed  so  sweetly  to  my  poor  soul  through 
the  promises  that  all  is  forced  to  fly  and  leave  off 
to  accuse  my  soul.  So  aLo,  when  the  world 
frowns,  when  the  enemies  rage  and  threaten  to  kill 
me,  then  also  the  precious,  the  exceeding  great 

91 


722 


A  FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL,  OR 


and  precious  promises  do  weigh  down  all,  and 
comfort  the  soul  against  all.  This  is  the  effect  of 
believing  the  Scriptures  savingly ;  for  they  that  do 
60  have  by  and  through  theScriptures  good  comfort, 
and  also  ground  of  hope,  believing  those  things  to 
be  its  own  which  the  Scriptures  hold  forth.  Ro.  nr.  4. 
Fourth  Use.  Examine,  Dost  thou  stand  in  awe  of 
sinning  against  God,  because  he  hath  in  the  Scrip- 
tures commanded  thee  to  abstain  from  it?  Dost 
thou  give  diligence  to  make  thy  calling  and  elec- 
tion sure,  because  God  commanded  it  in  Scripture? 
Dost  thou  examine  thyself  whether  thou  be  in  the 
faith  or  no,  having  a  command  in  Scripture  so  to 
do?  Or  dost  thou,  notwithstanding  what  thou 
readest  in  the  Scripture,  follow  the  world,  delight 
in  sin,  neglect  coming  to  Jesus  Christ,  speak  evil 
of  the  saints,  slight  and  make  a  mock  at  the 
ordinance  of  God,  delight  in  wicked  company,  and 
the  like  ?  Then  know  that  it  is  because  thou  dost 
not  in  deed  and  in  truth  believe  the  Scriptures 
effectually.  For,  as  I  said  before,  if  a  man  do 
believe  them,  and  that  savingly,  then  he  stands  in 
awe,  he  looks  to  his  steps,  he  turns  his  feet  from 
evil,  and  endeavours  to  follow  that  which  is  good, 
which  God  hath  commanded  in  the  Scriptures  of 
truth ;  yet  not  from  a  legal  or  natural  principle ; 
that  is,  to  seek  for  life  by  doing  that  good  thing, 
but  knowing  that  salvation  is  already  obtained  for 
him  by  the  blood  of  that  man  Christ  Jesus  on  the 
cross  because  he  believes  the  Scriptures,  therefore, 
mark  I  pray,  therefore,  I  say,  he  labours  to  walk 
with  his  God  in  all  well-pleasing  and  godliness, 
because  the  sweet  power  of  the  loves  of  Christ, 
which  he  feels  in  his  soul  by  the  Spirit,  accord- 
ing to  the   Scriptures,   constrain  him  so   to   do. 

2  Co.  v.  14. 

Fifth  Use.  Examine  again,  Dost  thou  labour 
after  those  qualifications  that  the  Scriptures  do 
describe  a  child  of  God  by?  That  is,  faith,  yea  the 
right  faith,  the  most  holy  faith,  the  faith  of  the  ope- 
ration of  God.  And  also,  dost  thou  examine  whether 
there  is  a  real  growth  of  grace  in  thy  soul,  as  love, 
zeal,  self-denial,  and  a  seeking  by  all  means  to 
attain,  if  possible,  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead? 
That  is,  not  to  satisfy  thyself  until  thou  be  dis- 
solved and  rid  of  this  body  of  death,  and  be  trans- 
formed into  that  glory  that  the  saints  shall  be  in 
after  the  resurrection-day.  And  in  the  meantime 
dost  labour  and  take  all  opportunities  to  walk  as 
near  as  may  be  to  the  pitch,  though  thou  know 
thou  canst  not  attain  it  perfectly.  Yet,  I  say, 
thou  dost  aim  at  it,  seek  after  it,  press  towards  it, 
and  to  hold  on  in  thy  race ;  thou  shunnest  that 
which  may  any  way  hinder  thee,  and  also  closest 
in  with  what  may  any  way  further  the  same ; 
knowing  that  that  must  be,  or  desiring  that  it 
should  be,  thine  eternal  frame,  and  therefore  out 
of  love  and  liking  to  it  thou  dost  desire  and  long 


after  it,  as  being  the  thing  that  doth  most  please 
thy  soul. 

Or  how  is  it  with  thy  soul?  Art  thou  such  an 
one  as  regards  not  these  things,  but  rather  busy 
thy  thoughts  about  the  things  here  below,  follow- 
ing those  things  that  have  no  scent  of  divine  glory 
upon  them  ?  If  so,  look  to  thyself,  thou  art  an  un- 
believer, and  so  under  the  wrath  of  God,  and  wilt 
for  certain  fall  into  the  same  place  of  torment 
that  thy  fellows  have  fallen  into  before  thee,  to 
the  grief  of  thy  own  soul,  and  thy  everlasting 
destruction. 

Consider  and  regard  these  things,  and  lay  them 
to  thy  heart  before  it  be  too  late  to  recover  thy- 
self, by  repenting  of  the  one,  and  desiring  to  close 
in  with  the  other.  0  !  I  say,  regard,  regard, 
for  hell  is  hot.  God's  hand  is  up,  the  law  is  re- 
solved to  discharge  against  thy  soul !  The  judg- 
ment-day is  at  hand,  the  graves  are  ready  to  fly 
open,  the  trumpet  is  near  the  sounding,  the  sen- 
tence will  ere  long  be  passed,  and  then  you  and  I 
cannot  call  time  again. 

[use  and  application.] 

1  But  again,  seeing  they  are  so  certain,  so  sure, 
so  irrevocable  and  firm,  and  seeing  the  saving 
faith  of  the  things  contained  therein,  is  to  reform 
the  soul,  and  bring  it  over  into  the  things  of  God, 
really  conforming  to  the  things  contained  therein, 
both  to  the  point  of  justification,  and  also  an  im- 
partial walking,  and  giving  up  thy  soul  and  body 
to  a  conformity  to  all  the  commands,  counsels,  in- 
structions, and  exhortations  contained  therein ; 
this  then  will  learn  us  how  to  judge  of  those  who 
give  up  themselves  to  walk  in  the  imaginations 
of  their  own  hearts,  who  slight  and  lay  aside 
the  Scriptures,  counting  them  but  empty  and  un- 
certain things,  and  will  live  every  day  in  open 
contradiction  to  what  is  contained,  commanded, 
and  forbidden  therein.     As 

First.  This  will  show  us  that  all  your  drunkards, 
whoremasters,  liars,  thieves,  swearers,  backbiters, 
slanderers,  scoffers  at  goodness,  <fcc.  I  say,  we 
may  see  by  this  that  they  that  live  in  such  things, 
have  not  the  faith  of  these  things  contained  in  their 
hearts,  seeing  they  delight  to  practise  those  things 
that  are  forbidden  by  and  in  them.  And  so,  they 
continuing  living  and  dying  in  this  state,  we  may 
conclude  without  fear  that  these  portions  of  holy 
Scripture  belong  unto  them,  and  shall  for  certain 
be  fulfilled  upon  them  :   '  He  that  believeth  not 


1  A  very  considerable  portion  of  the  use  and  application  as 
found  in  the  first  edition,  was,  in  the  second  and  subsequent 
ones,  removed  to  the  comment  on  ver.  28 ;  from  the  words, 
'  Now  then,  from  what  hath  been  said,'  to  the  end  of  the  com- 
ment on  that  verse.  I  should  have  preferred  Bunyan's  first 
arrangement,  but  dared  not  alter  what  he  had  considered  au 
improvement. — (Ed.) 


THE   GROANS   OF   A   DAMNED   SOUL. 


723 


shall  be  damned.'  Mar.  xvi.  is.  *  The  unrighteous  shall 
not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. '  1  Co.  tL  9, 10.  '  But 
the  abominable,  the  unbelieving,  the  whoremongers, 
and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which 
burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone.'  Ke.  xxi.  8.  'De- 
part, ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for 
the  devil  and  his  angels.'  Mat.  xxv.  41.  Depart,  de- 
part from  me,  for  I  will  not  save  you.  Depart, 
for  my  blood  shall  not  at  all  wash  you.  Depart, 
for  you  shall  not  set  one  foot  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

'Depart,  ye  cursed,'  ye  are  cursed  of  God,  cursed 
of  his  law,  cursed  of  me,  cursed  by  the  saints,  and 
cursed  by  the  angels  ;  cursed  all  over,  nothing  but 
cursed,  and  therefore  depart  from  me  ;  and  whither? 
into  everlasting  fire — fire  that  will  scald,  scorch, 
burn,  and  flame  to  purpose.  '  Fire  that  shall 
never  be  quenched.'  Mar.  ix.  Fire  that  will  last  to 
all  eternity.  And  must  we  be  all  alone  ?  No,  you 
shall  have  company,  store  of  company  with  you. 
Namely,  all  the  raging,  roaring  devils,  together 
with  an  innumerable  company  of  fellow-damned 
sinners,  men,  women,  and  children.  And  if  the 
Scriptures  be  true,  as  they  will  one  day  wonderfully 
appear  to  be,  then  this  must  and  shall  be  thy  por- 
tion, if  thou  live  and  die  in  this  state  ;  and  of  all 
them  who  continue  in  sinning  against  the  truth 
contained  in  the  Scriptures.      As, 

First.  Dost  thou  delight  to  sin  against  plain 
commands  ?     Thou  art  gone. 

Second.  Dost  thou  slight  and  scorn  the  counsels 
contained  in  the  Scriptures,  and  continue  in   so 


doi 


Then  thod  art  gone. 


Third.  Dost  thou  continually  neglect  to  come 
to  Christ,  and  usest  arguments  in  thine  own  heart 
to  satisfy  thy  soul  with  so  doing?  Then  thou  art 

GONE.    Lu.  xiv.  17,  18,  compared  with  ver.24,  and  He.ii.3. 

'  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  sal- 
vation ?'  How  shall  we  escape,  that  is,  there  is 
no  way  to  escape. 

(1.)  Because  God  hath  said  we  shall  not.  He.  xii. 
25.  '  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh. 
For  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused  him  that 
spake  on  earth,'  that  was  Moses,  '  much  more  shall 
not  we  escape  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speak- 
eth from  heaven.' 

(2.)  Because  he  hath  not  only  said  they  shall 
not,  but  also  hath  bound  it  with  an  oath,  saying, 
4  So  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  They  shall  not  enter 
into  my  rest.'  He.  iu.  n.  To  whom  did  he  swear 
that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest  ?  Answer, 
'  to  them  that  believed  not. '  So  we  see,  that  they 
could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief,  ver.  18,  19. 

Second.  This  will  teach  us  what  to  think  and 
conclude  of  such,  who,  though  they  do  not  so  openly 
discover  their  folly  by  open  and  gross  sins  against 
the  law,  yet  will  give  more  heed  to  their  own 
spirits,  and  the  movings  thereof,  though  they  be 


neither  commanded  nor  commended  for  the  same 
in  Scripture  ;  nay,  though  the  Scripture  command 
and  commend  the  contrary,  than  they  will  to  the 
holy  and  revealed  will  of  God.  is.  w.  20.  I  say, 
such  men  are  in  as  bad  a  state  as  the  other  to  the 
full,  being  disobedient  to  God's  will  revealed  in  his 
Word,  as  well  as  they,  though  in  a  different  man- 
ner ;  the  one  openly  transgressing  against  the  plain 
and  well-known  truths  revealed  in  it ;  the  other, 
though  more  close  and  hidden,  yet  secretly  reject- 
ing and  slighting  them,  giving  more  heed  to  their 
own  spirits,  and  the  motions  thereof,  although  not 
warranted  by  the  Scriptures. 

A  few  words  more,  and  so  I  shall  conclude.   And, 

First.  Take  heed  that  you  content  not  your- 
self with  a  bare  notion  of  the  Scriptures  in  your 
heads,  by  which  you  may  go  far,  even  so  far  as  to 
be  able  to  dispute  for  the  truth,  to  preach  the  gos- 
pel, and  labour  to  vindicate  it  in  opposition  to  gain- 
sayers,  and  yet  be  found  at  the  left  hand  of  Christ 
at  the  judgment-day,  forasmuch  as  thou  didst  con- 
tent thyself  with  a  notion  or  traditional  knowledge 
of  them.1 

Second.  Have  a  care  that  thou  own  the  whole 
Scripture,  and  not  own  one  part  and  neglect  another, 
or  slight  it ;  as  thus :  To  own  the  law,  and  slight 
the  gospel ;  or  to  think  that  thou  must  be  saved  by 
thy  good  doings  and  works ;  for  that  is  all  one, 
as  if  thou  didst  thrust  Christ  away  from  thee  ;  or 
else  so  to  own  the  gospel,  as  if  by  it  thou  wert  ex- 
empted from  all  obedience  to  the  ten  command- 
ments, and  conformity  to  the  law  in  life  and  con- 
versation ;  for  in  so  doing  thou  wilt  for  certain 
make  sure  of  eternal  vengeance. 

Third.  Have  a  care  that  thou  put  not  wrong 
names  on  the  things  contained  in  the  Scriptures, 
as  to  call  the  law,  Christ,  and  Christ,  the  law,  for 
some  having  done  so,  in  my  knowledge,  have  so 
darkened  to  themselves  the  glorious  truths  of  the 
gospel,  that  in  a  very  little  time  they  have  been  re- 
solved to  thwart  and  oppose  them,  and  so  have 
made  room  in  their  own  souls  for  the  devil  to  in- 
habit, and  obtained  a  place  in  hell  for  their  own 
souls  to  be  tormented  for  ever  and  ever. 

Against  this  danger  therefore  in  reading  and  re- 
ceiving the  testimony  of  Scripture,  learn  to  distin- 
guish between  the  law  and  the  gospel,  and  to  keep 
them  clear  asunder,  as  to  the  salvation  of  thy  soul. 

1.  And  that  thou  mayest  so  do,  in  the  first  place 
beg  of  God  that  he  would  show  thee  the  nature  of 
the  gospel,  and  set  it  home  effectually  with  life  and 
power  upon  thy  soul  by  faith.  Which  is  this,  that 
God   would   show  thee,  that  as  thou  being  man 


1  Of  all  men  most  miserable  must  be  those  clergymen  and 
religious  teachers,  who,  in  the  great  day,  will  say,  '  Lord,  Lord, 
have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name,'  to  whom  the  Lord  will 
profess,  'I  never  knew  you,  depart,  ye  cursed.' — Mat.  vii  21 
-23.— (Ed.) 


724 


A   FEW   SIGHS   FROM   HELL. 


hast  sinned  against  God,  so  Christ,  being  God-man, 
hath  bought  thee  again,  and  with  his  most  precious 
blood  set  thee  free  from  the  bondage  thou  hast 
fallen  into  by  thy  sins.  And  that  not  upon  coudition 
that  thou  wilt  do  thus  and  thus,  this  and  the  other 
good  work  ;  but  rather,  that  thou,  being  first  justi- 
fied freely  by  mere  grace  through  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
shouldst  also  receive  thy  strength  from  him  who 
hath  bought  thee,  to  walk  before  him  in  all  well- 
pleasing.  Being  enabled  thereto  by  virtue  of  his 
Spirit,  which  hath  revealed  to  thy  soul  that  thou 
art  delivered  already  from  wrath  to  come,  by  the 
obedience,  not  of  thee,  but  of  another  man,  viz., 
Jesus  Christ. 

2.  Then  if  the  law  thou  readest  of,  tell  thee  in 
thy  conscience  thou  must  do  this  and  the  other 
good  work  of  the  law,  if  ever  thou  wilt  be  saved; 
answer  plainly,  that  for  thy  part  thou  art  resolved 
now  not  to  work  for  life,  but  to  believe  in  the 
virtue  of  that  blood  shed  upon  the  cross,  upon 
Mount  Calvary,  for  the  remission  of  sins.  And  yet 
because  Christ  hath  justified  thee  freely  by  his 
grace,  thou  wilt  serve  him  in  holiness  and  right- 
eousness all  the  days  of  thy  life,  yet  not  in  a  legal 
spirit,  or  in  a  covenant  of  works  ;  but  mine  obedi- 
ence, say  thou,  I  will  endeavour  to  have  it  free, 
and  cheerful,  out  of  love  to  my  Lord  Jesus. 

3.  Have  a  care  thou  receive  not  this  doctrine  in 
the  notion  only,  lest  thou  bring  a  just  damnation 
upon  thy  soul,  by  professing  thyself  to  be  freed  by 
Christ's  blood  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  while  thou 
remainest  still  a  servant  to  the  filth  of  sin.  For  I 
must  tell  you,  that  unless  you  have  the  true  and 


saving  work  of  the  faith  and  grace  of  the  gospel 
in  your  hearts,  you  will  either  go  on  in  a  legal 
holiness,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  law ;  or  else 
through  a  notion  of  the  gospel,  the  devil  bewitching 
and  beguiling  thy  understanding,  will,  and  affec- 
tions, thou  wilt,  Ranter-like,  turn  the  grace  of  God 
into  wantonness,  and  bring  upon  thy  soul  double, 
if  not  treble  damnation,  in  that  thou  couldest  not 
be  contented  to  be  damned  for  thy  sins  against  the 
law,  but  also  to  make  ruin  sure  to  thy  soul,  thou 
wouldest  dishonour  the  gospel,  and  turn  the  grace 
of  God,  held  forth  and  discovered  to  men  by  that, 
into  licentiousness.1 

But  that  thou  mightest  be  sure  to  escape  these 
dangerous  rocks  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left, 
see  that  thy  faith  be  such  as  is  spoken  of  in  Scrip- 
ture. And  that  thou  be  not  satisfied  without  that, 
which  is  a  faith  wrought  by  the  mighty  operation 
of  God,  revealing  Christ  to  and  in  thee,  as  having 
wholly  freed  thee  from  thy  sins  by  his  most  pre- 
cious blood.  Which  faith,  if  thou  attain  unto, 
will  so  work  in  thy  heart,  that  first  thou  wilt  see 
the  nature  of  the  law,  and  [secondly]  also  the 
nature  of  the  gospel,  and  delight  in  the  glory  of  it; 
and  also  thou  wilt  find  an  engaging  of  thy  heart 
and  soul  to  Jesus  Christ,  even  to  the  giving  up  of 
thy  whole  man  unto  him,  to  be  ruled  and  governed 
by  him  to  his  glory,  and  thy  comfort,  by  the  faith 
of  the  same  Lord  Jesus. 


1  The  Ranters  were  a  sect  of  the  wildest  enthusiasts.  It 
very  soon  became  extinct.  An  exaggerated  account  of  their 
sentiments  is  to  be  found  in  Ross's  View  of  all  Religions. — 
(Ed.) 


ONE    THING    IS    NEEDFUL; 

OR, 

SERIOUS  MEDITATIONS  UPON  THE  FOUR  LAST  THINGS; 
DEATH,  JUDGMENT,  HEAVEN,  AND  HELL. 

UNTO  WHICH   IS   ADDKD 

EBAL   AND   GERIZZIM,  OR  THE   BLESSING   AND  THE   CURSE. 
WITH    riUSON    MEDITATIONS,    AND    A    CATALOGUE    OF    ALL    TI1IS    AUTHOlt's    DOOKS. 

The  Third  Edition.— By  JOHN   BUNYAN. 

London  :  Printed  for  Nath.  Ponder,  at  the  Peacock  in  the  Poultry,  1688.' 


ADVERTISEMENT   BY  THE   EDITOR. 


According  to  Charles  Doe,  in  that  curious  sheet 
called  Tlie  Straggler  for  the  Preservation  of  Mr.  John 
Banyans  Labours,  these  poems  were  published 
about  the  year  1G64,  while  the  author  was  suffer- 
ing imprisonment  for  conscience  sake,  very  pro- 
bably in  separate  sheets  or  tracts,  to  be  sold  by 
bis  wife  or  children,  to  aid  in  their  humble  main- 
tenance. They  were  afterwards  united  to  form  a 
neat  little  volume,  32mo.  The  editor  is  the  for- 
tunate possessor  of  the  third  edition,  being  the  last 
that  was  printed  during  the  author's  lifetime,  and 
with  his  latest  corrections.  From  this  the  present 
edition  has  been  accurately  reprinted.  The  three 
tracts  are  distinct  as  to  pages;  a  strong  indication 
that  they  were  originally  separate  little  volumes. 
A  copy  of  the  fourth  edition  of  this  extremely  rare 
book,  without  date,  and  somewhat  larger  in  size, 
is  in  the  British  Museum,  in  which  the  pages  are 
continued  throughout  the  volume.  The  third  poem, 
called  Prison  Meditations,  we  have  already  pub- 
lished in  our  first  volume,  as  a  suitable  close  to 
Bunyan's  account  of  his  trying  and  tedious  im- 
prisonment. 

These  poems  are  upon  subjects  the  most  solemn 
and  affecting  to  all  mankind,  and,  like  all  Bunyan's 
other  works,  were  evidently  written,  not  for  dis- 
play, but  to  impress  upon  the  heart  those  searching 
realities  upon  which  depend  our  everlasting  des- 
tiny. Die  we  must ;  yes,  reader,  you  and  I  must 
follow  our  fathers  to  the  unseen  world.  Heaven 
forbid  that  we  should  he  such  mad  fools,  as  to 
make  no  provision  for  the  journey;  no  inquiries 
about  our  prospects  in  that  eternity  into  which  we 
must  so  soon  enter.  True  it  is,  that  unless  Heaven 
stops  us  in  our  mad  career,  we  shall  plunge  into 
irretrievable  ruin. 

In  the  first  of  these  poems,  many  of  the  minute 
circumstances  attendant  on  death  are  pressed  upon 


the  memory.  Very  soon,  as  Bunyan  awfully  ex- 
presses the  thought,  we  must  look  death  in  the 
face,  and  'drink  with  him.'  Soon  some  kind  friend 
or  relative  will  close  our  eyelids,  and  shut  up  our 
glassy  eyes  for  ever;  tic  up  the  fallen  jaw,  and 
prepare  the  corrupting  body  for  its  long,  but  not 
final  resting-place.  Our  hour-glass  is  fast  ebbing 
out;  time  stands  ready  with  his  scytbe  to  cut  us 
down;  the  grave  yawns  to  receive  us.  '  Man  dietb 
and  wasteth  away;  yea,  man  giveth  up  the  ghost, 
and  where  is  he.'  Job  xiv.  10.  The  answer  is  ready, 
sure,  certain — he  goes  to  the  judgment  of  the  great 
day.  There  every  thought  that  has  passed  over 
his  mind,  while  on  earth,  will  be  manifested  and 
scrutinized ;  every  action,  every  sin,  and  every 
supposed  good  work,  however  private,  will  then  be 
published.  It  is  an  awful  thought.  Thousands  of 
works  which  are  thought  good  will  be  weighed  in 
the  unerring  balances  of  truth,  will  be  found  want- 
ing, and  proved  to  be  bad,  not  arising  from  evan- 
gelical motives;  while  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and 
actions  will  appear  in  their  real  colours  tainted  by 
sin.  Those  only  who  are  clothed  in  the  Re- 
deemer's righteousness,  and  cleansed  by  his  purify- 
ing, sanctifying  sufferings,  can  stand  accepted,  and 
will  receive  the  invitation,  Come,  ye  blessed,  in- 
herit the  kingdom  of  your  father,  and  your  God, 
by  adoption  into  his  family;  while  an  innumerable 
multitude  will  be  hurried  away  by  the  voice  of  the 
judge,   Go,  ye  cursed,  into   everlasting  torment. 


1  On  the  reverse  of  the  title-page  is  the  following  singular 
advertisement: — 'This  author  haviug  published  many  books, 
which  have  gone  off  very  well,  there  are  certain  ballad-sellers 
about  Newgate,  and  on  London  Bridge,  who  have  put  the  two 
first  letters  of  this  author's  name,  and  his  effigies,  to  their 
rhymes  and  ridiculous  hooks,  suggesting  to  the  world  as  if 
they  were  his.  Now  know,  that  this  author  publisheth  his 
name  at  large  to  all  his  books;  and  what  you  shall  see  other- 
wise, he  disowns.' — (Ed.) 


26 


ONE   THING   IS   NEEDFUL. 


Solemn  consideration.  Reader,  have  you  fled  for 
refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  you  in  the  gospel? 
Have  you  felt  the  alarm  in  your  soul  under  a  sense 
of  sin  and  judgment?  Were  you  dead,  and  are  you 
made  alive?  0,  then,  while  you  bless  the  Saviour 
for  such  unspeakable  mercies,  seek  with  all  dili- 
gence, as  life  is  prolonged,  to  extend  the  blessing 
to  others.  There  is  no  work  nor  device  in  the 
grave,   whither  we   are   all  hastening,  that  can 


benefit  mortals.  The  great  gulf  will  be  fixed,  and 
our  state  be  finally  decided  for  eternity.  0,  then, 
if  you  have  not  yet  attained  that  good  hope  of 
heavenly  felicity,  sure  and  stedfast — hasten — yes, 

'  Hasten,  O  sinner,  to  be  blest, 

And  stay  not  for  the  morrow's  sun ; 
For  fear  the  curse  should  thee  arrest 
Before  the  morrow  be  begun.' 

Geo.  Offor. 


ONE    THING    IS    NEEDFUL, 

OR 

SERIOUS  MEDITATIONS  UPON  THE  FOUR  LAST  THINGS— DEATH,  JUDGMENT,  HEAVEN,  AND  HELL. 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ENSUING  DISCOURSE. 

1.  These  fines  I  at  this  time  present 

To  all  that  will  them  heed, 
Wherein  I  show  to  what  intent 
God  saith,  Convert*  with  speed. 

2.  For  these  four  things  come  on  apace, 

Which  we  should  know  full  well, 
Both  death  and  judgment,  and,  in  place 
Next  to  them,  heaven  and  hell. 

3.  For  doubtless  man  was  never  born 

For  this  life  and  no  more: 
No,  in  the  resurrection  morn 
They  must  have  weal  or  woe. 

4.  Can  any  think  that  God  should  take 

That  pains,  to  form  a  man 
So  like  himself,  only  to  make 
Him  here  a  moment  stand  ? 

5.  Or  that  he  should  make  such  ado, 

By  justice,  and  by  grace ; 
By  prophets  and  apostles  too, 
That  men  might  see  his  face  ? 

6.  Or  that  the  promise  he  hath  made, 

Also  the  threatenhigs  great, 
Should  in  a  moment  end  and  fade? 
O !  no,  this  is  a  cheat. 

7.  Besides,  who  is  so  mad,  or  worse, 

To  think  that  Christ  should  come 
From  glory,  to  be  made  a  curse, 
And  that  in  sinners'  room, 
S.  If  nothing  should  by  us  be  had 
When  we  are  gone  from  hence, 
But  vanities,  while  here  ?  0  mad 
And  foolish  confidence. 
9.  Again,  shall  God,  who  is  the  truth, 
Say  there  is  heaven  and  hell 

1  '  Convert,'  for  '  be  ye  converted,'  was  a  common  mode  of 
speech  in  Bunyau's  time.  It  is  so  used  in  Ho!v  Writ,  Is.  vi.  10. 
-(Ed.) 


And  shall  men  play  that  trick  of  youth 
To  say,  But  who  can  tell  ? 

10.  Shall  he  that  keeps  his  promise  sure 

In  things  both  low  and  small, 
Yet  break  it  like  a  man  impure, 
In  matters  great'st  of  all  ? 

11.  0,  let  all  tremble  at  that  thought, 

That  puts  on  God  the  he, 
That  saith  men  shall  turn  unto  nought 
When  they  be  sick  and  die. 

12.  Alas,  death  is  but  as  the  door 

Through  which  all  men  do  pass, 
To  that  which  they  for  evermore 
Shall  have  by  wrath  or  grace. 

13.  Let  all  therefore  that  read  my  lines, 

Apply  them  to  the  heart : 
Yea,  let  them  read,  and  turn  betimes, 
And  get  the  better  part. 

14.  Mind  therefore  what  I  treat  on  here, 

Yea,  mind  and  weigh  it  well ; 
'Tis  death  and  judgment,  and  a  clear 
Discourse  of  heaven  and  hell. 


OF    DEATH. 

1.  Death,  as  a  king  rampant  and  stout 

The  world  he  dare  engage ; 
He  conquers  all,  yea,  and  doth  rout 
The  great,  strong,  wise,  and  sage. 

2.  No  king  so  great,  nor  prince  so  strong, 

But  death  can  make  to  yield, 
Yea,  bind  and  lay  them  all  along, 
And  make  them  quit  the  field. 

3.  Where  are  the  victors  of  the  world, 

With  all  their  men  of  might  ? 
Those  that  together  kingdoms  hurl'd, 
By  death  are  put  to  flight. 

4.  How  feeble  is  the  strongest  hand, 

When  death  begins  to  gripe ! 


ONE  THING  IS   NEEDFUL. 


727 


The  giant  now  leaves  off  to  stand, 
Much  less  withstand  and  fight. 

5.  The  man  that  hath  a  lion's  face 

Must  here  give  place  and  bend, 
Yea,  though  his  bones  were  bars  of  brass, 
'Tis  vain  here  to  contend. 

6.  Submit  he  must  to  feeble  ones, 

To  worms  who  will  enclose 
His  skin  and  flesh,  sinews  and  bones, 
And  will  thereof  dispose 

7.  Among  themselves,  as  merchants  do 

The  prizes  they  have  got ; 
Or  as  the  soldiers  give  unto 
Each  man  tho  share  and  lot, 

8.  Which  they  by  dint  of  sword  have  won, 

From  their  most  daring  foe ; 

While  he  lies  by  as  still  as  stone, 

Not  knowing  what  they  do. 

9.  Beauty  death  turns  to  rottenness, 

And  youth  to  wrinkled  face ; 
The  witty  he  brings  to  distress, 
And  wantons  to  disgrace. 

10.  The  wild  he  tames,  and  spoils  the  mirth 

Of  all  that  wanton  are, 
He  takes  the  worldling  from  his  worth, 
And  poor  man  from  his  care. 

11.  Death  favours  none,  he  lays  at  all, 

Of  all  sorts  and  degree ; 
Both  old  and  young,  both  great  and  small, 
Rich,  poor,  and  bound,  and  free. 

12.  No  fawning  words  will  flatter  him, 

Nor  threat' nings  make  him  start; 
He  favours  none  for  worth  or  kin, 
All  must  taste  of  his  dart. 

13.  What  shall  1  say  ?  the  graves  declare 

That  death  shall  conquer  all ; 
There  he  the  skulls,  dust,  bones,  and  there 
The  mighty  daily  fall. 

14.  The  very  looks  of  death  are  grim 

And  ghastly  to  behold ; 
Tea,  though  but  in  a  dead  man's  skin, 
When  he  is  gone  and  cold. 

15.  How  'fraid  are  some  of  dead  men's  beds, 

And  others  of  their  bones ; 
They  neither  care  to  see  their  heads, 
Nor  yet  to  hear  their  groans. 

1 6.  Now  all  these  tilings  are  but  the  shade 

And  badges  of  his  coat ; x 
The  glass  that  runs,  the  scythe  and  spade, 
Though  weapons  more  remote  : 

17.  Yet  such  as  make  poor  mortals  shrink 

And  fear,  when  they  are  told, 
These  things  are  signs  that  they  must  drink 
With  death ;  0  then  how  cold. 


'  Armorial  bearings  as  now  worn  by  heralds  embroidered 
the  tabard  or  coat. — (En.) 


18.  It  strikes  them  to  the  heart !  how  do 

They  study  it  to  shun ! 
Indeed  who  can  bear  up,  and  who 
Can  from  these  shakings  run  ? 

19.  But  how  much  more  then  when  he  comes 

To  grapple  with  thy  heart ; 
To  bind  with  thread  thy  toes  and  thumbs,2 
And  fetch  thee  in  his  cart  ? 

20.  Then  will  he  cut  thy  silver  cord, 

And  break  thy  golden  bowl ; 
Yea,  break  that  pitcher  which  the  Lord 
Made  cabin  for  thy  soul. 

21.  Thine  eyes,  that  now  are  quick  of  sight, 

Shall  then  no  way  espy 
How  to  escape  this  doleful  plight, 
Tor  death  will  make  thee  die. 

22.  Those  legs  that  now  can  nimbly  run, 

Shall  then  with  faintness  fail 
To  take  one  step,  death's  dart  to  shun, 
When  he  doth  thee  assail. 

23.  That  tongue  that  now  can  boast  and  brag 

Shall  then  by  death  be  tied 
So  fast,  as  not  to  speak  or  wag, 

Though  death  lies  by  thy  side. 
2-1.  Thou  that  didst  once  incline  thine  ear 

Unto  the  song  and  tale, 
Shall  only  now  death's  message  hear, 

While  he,  with  face  most  pale, 

25.  Doth  reason  with  thee  how  thy  days 

Hath  hitherto  been  spent ; 
And  what  have  been  thy  deeds  and  ways, 
Since  God  thee  time  hath  lent. 

26.  Then  will  he  so  begin  to  tear 

Thy  body  from  thy  soul, 
And  both  from  life,  if  now  thy  care 
Be  not  on  grace  to  roll. 

27.  Death  puts  on  things  another  face 

Than  we  in  health  do  see : 
Sin,  Satan,  hell,  death,  life  and  grace 
Now  great  and  weighty  be. 

28.  Yea,  now  the  sick  man's  eye  is  set 

Upon  a  world  to  come : 
He  also  knows  too  without  let3 
That  there  must  be  his  home. 

29.  Either  in  joy,  in  bliss  and  light, 

Or  sorrow,  woe,  and  grief ; 
Either  with  Christ  and  saints  in  white, 
Or  fiends,  without  relief. 

30.  But,  0  !  the  sad  estate  that  then 

They  will  be  in  that  die 


2  A  common  custom  when  death  takes  place.  The  two 
great  toes  are  tied  together,  to  make  the  body  look  decent ; 
and  formerly  the  hands  were  placed  with  the  palms  together, 
as  if  in  the  attitude  of  prayer,  and  were  kept  in  that  posture 
by  tying  the  thumbs  together. — (Ed.) 

3  Without  fail,  or  in  spite  of  all  hinderance. — (En.) 


728 


ONE  THING    IS   NEEDFUL. 


Both  void  of  grace  and  life  !  poor  men ! 
How  will  they  fear  and  cry. 

31.  Ha  !  live  I  may  not,  though  I  woidd 

For  life  give  more  than  all ; 
And  die  I  dare  not,  though  I  should 
The  world  gain  by  my  fall. 

32.  No,  here  he  must  no  longer  stay, 

He  feels  his  life  ran  out, 
His  night  is  come,  also  the  day 
That  makes  him  fear  and  doubt. 

33.  He  feels  his  very  vitals  die, 

All  waxeth  pale  and  wan  ; 

Nay,  worse,  he  fears  to  misery 

He  shortly  must  be  gone. 

34.  Death  doth  already  strike  his  heart 

With  his  most  fearful  sting 
Of  guilt,  which  makes  his  conscience  start 
And  quake  at  every  thing. 

35.  Yea,  as  his  body  doth  decay 

By  a  contagious  grief, 
So  his  poor  soul  doth  faint  away 
Without  hope  or  relief. 

36.  Thus  while  the  man  is  in  this  scare, 

Death  doth  still  at  him  lay ; 
Live,  die,  sink,  swim,  fall  foul  or  fair, l 
Death  still  holds  on  his  way. 

37.  Still  pulling  of  him  from  his  place, 

Full  sore  against  his  mind; 
Death  like  a  sprite  stares  in  his  face, 
And  doth  with  links  him  bind. 

38.  And  carries  him  into  his  den, 

In  darkness  there  to  lie, 
Among  the  swarms  of  wicked  men 
In  grief  eternally. 

39.  For  only  he  that  God  doth  fear 

Will  now  be  counted  wise  : 
Yea,  he  that  feareth  him  while  here, 
He  only  wins  the  prize. 

40.  'Tis  he  that  shall  by  angels  be 

Attended  to  that  bliss 
That  angels  have ;  for  he,  0  he, 
Of  glory  shall  not  miss. 

41 .  Those  weapons  and  those  instruments 

Of  death,  that  others  fright : 
Those  dreadful  fears  and  discontents 
That  brings  on  some  that  night. 

42.  That  never  more  shall  have  a  day, 

Brings  this  man  to  that  rest 
Which  none  can  win  but  only  they 
Wliom  God  hath  called  and  blest 

43.  With  the  first  fruits  of  saving  grace, 

With  faith,  hope,  love,  and  fear 
Him  to  offend ;  this  man  his  face 
In  visions  high  and  clear, 


44.  Shall  in  that  light  winch  no  eye  can 

Approach  unto,  behold 
The  rays  and  beams  of  glory,  and 
Find  there  his  name  enroll' d, 

45.  Among  those  glittering  stars  of  light 

That  Christ  still  holdeth  fast 
In  his  right  hand  with  all  Ms  might, 
Until  that  danger's  past, 

46.  That  shakes  the  world,  and  most  hath  dropf 

Into  grief  and  distress, 
O  blessed  then  is  he  that's  wrapt 
In  Christ  his  righteousness. 

47.  This  is  the  man  death  cannot  kill, 

For  he  hath  put  on  arms  ; 
Him  sin  nor  Satan  hath  not  skill 

To  hurt  with  all  their  charms. 
43.  A  helmet  on  his  head  doth  stand, 

A  breastplate  on  his  heart : 
A  shield  also  is  in  his  hand, 

That  blunteth  every  dart. 

49.  Truth  girds  him  round  the  reins,  also 

His  sword  is  on  his  thigh ; 
His  feet  in  shoes  of  peace  do  go 
The  ways  of  purity. 

50.  His  heart  it  groaneth  to  the  Lord, 

Who  hears  him  at  his  call, 
And  doth  him  help  and  strength  afford, 
Wherewith  he  conquers  all. 

51.  Thus  fortified,  he  keeps  the  field 

While  death  is  gone  and  fled  ; 

And  then  lies  down  upon  his  shield 

Till  Christ  doth  raise  the  dead. 


1  Alluding  to  wrestlers.     Some  modes  of  throwing  each 
other  down  are  called  fair,  others  foul  or  unfair. — (Ed.) 


OF   JUDGMENT. 

1.  As  'tis  appointed  men  should  die, 

So  judgment  is  the  next 
That  meets  them  most  assuredly ; 
For  so  saith  holy  text. 

2.  Wherefore  of  judgment  I  shall  now 

Inform  you  what  I  may, 
That  you  may  see  what  'tis,  and  how 
'Twill  be  with  men  that  day. 

3.  This  world  it  hath  a  time  to  stand, 

Which  time  when  ended,  then 
Will  issue  judgment  out  of  hand 
Upon  all  sorts  of  men. 

4.  The  Judge  we  find,  in  God's  record, 

The  Son  of  man,  for  he 
By  God's  appointment  is  made  Lord 
And  Judge  of  all  that  be. 

5.  Wherefore  this  Son  of  man  shall  come 

At  last  to  count  with  all, 
And  unto  them  shall  give  just  doom, 
Whether  they  stand  or  fall. 


ONE  THING  IS  NEEDFUL 


729 


G.  Behold  ye  now  the  majesty 
And  state  that  shall  attend 
This  Lord,  this  Judge,  and  Justice  high 
When  he  doth  now  dcsceud. 

7.  He  comes  with  head  as  white  as  snow, 

With  eyes  like  flames  of  fire  ; 
In  justice  clad  from  top  to  toe, 
Most  glorious  in  attire. 

8.  His  face  is  filled  with  gravity; 

His  tongue  is  like  a  sword ; 
His  presence  awes  both  stout  and  high, 
The  world  shakes  at  his  word. 

9.  He  comes  in  flaming  fire,  and 

With  angels  clear  and  bright, 
Each  with  a  trumpet  in  his  hand, 
Clothed  in  shining  white. 

10.  The  trump  of  God  sounds  in  the  air, 

The  dead  do  hear  his  voice ; 
The  living  too  run  here  and  there, 
Who  made  not  him  their  choice. 

11.  Thus  to  his  place  he  doth  repair, 

Appointed  for  his  throne, 
Where  he  will  sit  to  judge,  and  where 
He'll  count  with  every  one. 

12.  Angels  attending  on  his  hand 

By  thousands  on  a  row ; 
Yea,  thousand  thousands  by  him  stand, 
And  at  his  beck  do  go. 

13.  Thus  being  set,  the  books  do  ope 

In  which  all  crimes  are  writ. 
All  virtues,  too,  of  faith  and  hope, 
Of  love ;  and  every  whit 

14.  Of  all  that  man  hath  done  or  said, 

Or  did  intend  to  do ; 
Whether  they  sinn'd,  or  were  afraid 
Evil  to  come  into. 

15.  Before  this  bar  each  sinner  now 

In  person  must  appear ; 
Under  his  judgment  there  to  bow 
With  trembling  and  with  fear : 

16.  Within  whose  breast  a  witness  then 

Will  certainly  arise, 
That  to  each  charge  will  say  Amen, 
While  they  seek  and  devise 

17.  To  shun  the  sentence  which  the  Lord 

Against  them  then  will  read, 
Out  of  the  books  of  God's  record, 
With  majesty  and  dread. 

18.  But  every  heart  shall  opened  be 

Before  this  judge  most  high ; 
Yea,  every  thought  to  judgment  he 
Will  bring  assuredly. 

19.  And  every  word  and  action,  too, 

He  there  will  manifest ; 
Yea,  all  that  ever  thou  didst  do, 
Or  keep  within  thy  breast, 
vol.  in. 


20.  Shall  then  be  seen  and  laid  before 

The  world,  that  then  will  stand 
To  see  thy  judge  open  ev'ry  sore, 
And  all  thy  evils  scann'd. 

21.  Weighing  each  sin  and  wickedness 

With  so  much  equity, 
Proportioning  of  thy  distress 
And  woful  misery. 

22.  With  so  much  justice,  doing  right, 

That  thou  thyself  shalt  say, 
My  sins  have  brought  me  to  this  plight, 
I  threw  myself  away. 

23.  Into  that  gulph  my  sins  have  brought 

Me  justly  to  possess, 
For  which  I  blame  not  Christ,  I  wrought 

It  out  by  wickedness. 
2£.  But  0 !  how  willingly  would  these 

That  thus  in  judgment  be, 
If  that  they  might  have  help  or  ease, 

Unto  the  mountains  flee. 

25.  They  would  rejoice  if  that  they  might 

But  underneath  them  creep, 
To  hide  them  from  revenging  right, 
Eor  fear  of  which  they  weep. 

26.  But  all  in  vain,  the  mountains  then 

Will  all  be  fled  and  gone ; 
No  shelter  will  be  found  for  men 
That  now  are  left  alone. 

27.  For  succour  they  did  not  regard 

When  Christ  by  grace  did  call 
To  them,  therefore  they  are  not  heard, 
No  mountains  on  them  fall. 

28.  Before  this  Judge  no  one  shall  shroud 

Himself,  under  pretence 
Of  knowledge,  which  hath  made  him  proud, 
Nor  seeming  penitence. 

29.  No  high  profession  here  can  stand, 

Uidess  sincerity 
Hath  been  therewith  commixed,  and 
Brought  forth  simplicity.' 

30.  No  mask  nor  vizor  here  can  hide 

-The  heart  that  rotten  is; 
All  cloaks  now  must  be  laid  aside, 
No  sinner  must  have  bliss. 

3 1 .  Though  most  approve  of  thee,  and  count 

Thee  upright  in  thy  heart ; 
Yea,  though  preferred  and  made  surmount 
Most  men  to  act  thy  part, 

32.  In  treading  where  the  godly  trod, 

As  to  an  outward  show  ; 
Yet  tins  hold  still,  the  grace  of  God 
Takes  hold  on  but  a  few, 


1  Sincerity  is  the  fountain  and  source  of  all  real  inquiries 
after  truth,  holiness,  and  heaven.  It  leads  to  personal  exam- 
ination of  God's  Word,  which  leads  us  from  the  complexity 
of  humau  inventions  to  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel. — (Ed.) 

92 


730 


ONE   THING    IS   NEEDFUL. 


33.  So  as  to  make  thera  truly  such 

As  then  shall  stand  before 
This  Judge  with  gladness ;  this  is  much, 
Yet  true  for  evermore. 

34.  The  tree  of  life  this  paradise 

Doth  always  beautify, 
'Cause  of  our  health  it  is  the  rise 
And  perpetuity. 

35.  Here  stands  the  golden  throne  of  grace 

From  out  of  -which  do  run 
Those  crystal  streams  that  make  this  place 
Far  brighter  than  the  sun. 

36.  Here  stands  mount  Zion  with  her  king 

Jerusalem  above, 
That  holy  and  delightful  thing, 
So  beautified  with  love. 

37.  That,  as  a  mother  succours  those 

Which  of  her  body  be, 
So  she  far  more,  all  such  as  close 

In  with  her  Lord ;  and  she 
33.  Her  grace,  her  everlasting  doors 

Will  open  wide  unto 
Them  all,  with  welcome,  welcome,  poor, 

Rich,  bond,  free,  high  and  low, 

39.  Unto  the  kingdom  which  our  Lord 

Appointed  hath  for  all 
That  hath  his  name  and  word  ador'd  ; 
Because  he  did  them  call 

40.  Unto  that  work,  which  also  they 

Sincerely  did  fulfil, 
Not  shunning  always  to  obey 
His  gracious  holy  will. 

41.  Besides,  this  much  doth  beautify 

This  goodly  paradise, 
That  from  all  quarters,  constantly, 
Whole  thousands  as  the  price 

42.  Of  precious  blood,  do  here  arrive ; 

As  safe  escaping  all, 
Sin,  hell,  and  satan  did  contrive 
To  bring  them  into  thrall. 

43.  Each  telling  his  deliverance 

I'  th'  open  face  of  heaven ; 
Still  calling  to  remembrance 
How  fiercely  they  were  driven 

44.  By  deadly  foe,  who  did  pursue 

As  swift  as  eagles  fiy ; 
Which  if  thou  have  not,  down  thou  must 

With  those  that  then  shall  die 
The  second  death,  and  be  accurs'd 

Of  God.     For  certainly, 

45.  The  truth  of  grace  shall  only  here 

Without  a  blush  'be  bold 
To  stand,  whdst  others  quake  and  fear, 
And  dare  not  once  behold. 

46.  That  heart  that  here  was  right  for  God 

Shall  there  be  comforted : 


But  those  that  evil  ways  have  trod, 

Shall  then  hang  down  the  head. 
47.  As  sore  confounded  with  the  guilt 

That  now  upon  them  lies, 
Because  they  did  delight  in  filth 

And  beastly  vanities. 
4S.  Or  else  because  they  did  deceive 

With  hypocritical 
Disguises,  their  own  souls,  and  leave 

Or  shun  that  best  of  all 

49.  Approved  word  of  righteousness, 

They  were  invited  to 
Embrace,  therefore  they  no  access 
Now  to  him  have,  but  woe. 

50.  For  every  one  must  now  receive 

According  to  their  ways  ; 
They  that  unto  the  Lord  did  cleave, 
The  everlasting  joys. 

51.  Those  that  did  die  in  wickedness, 

To  execution  sent, 
There  still  to  grapple  with  distress, 
Which  nothing  can  prevent. 

52.  Of  which  two  states  I  next  shall  write, 

Wherefore  I  pray  give  ear, 
And  to  them  bend  with  all  your  might 
Your  heart  with  filial  fear. 


OF    HEAVEN. 

1.  Heaven  is  a  place,  also  a  state, 

It  doth  all  things  excel, 
No  man  can  fully  it  relate, 
Nor  of  its  glory  tell. 

2.  God  made  it  for  his  residence, 

To  sit  on  as  a  throne, 
Which  shows  to  us  the  excellence 
Whereby  it  may  be  known. 

3.  Doubtless  the  fabric  that  was  built 

For  this  so  great  a  king, 
Must  needs  surprise  thee,  if  thou  wilt 
But  duly  mind  the  thing. 

4.  If  all  that  build  do  build  to  suit 

The  glory  of  their  state, 
What  orator,  though  most  acute, 
Can  fully  heaven  relate  ? 

5.  If  palaces  that  princes  build, 

Which  yet  are  made  of  clay, 
Do  so  amaze  when  much  beheld, 
Of  heaven  what  shall  we  say  ? 

6.  It  is  the  high  and  holy  place ; 

No  moth  can  there  annoy, 
Nor  make  to  fade  that  goodly  grace 
That  saints  shall  there  enjoy. 

7.  Mansions  for  glory  and  for  rest 

Do  thera  prepared  stand ; 


ONE  THING   IS  NEEDFUL. 


731 


Buildings  eternal  for  the  blest 

Are  there  provided,  and 
S.  The  glory  and  the  comeliness 

By  deepest  thought  none  mar 
With  heart  or  mouth  fully  express, 

Nor  can  before  that  day. 
9.  These  heav'ns  we  sec,  be  as  a  scroll, 

Or  garment  folded  up, 
Before  they  do  together  roll, 

And  we  call'd  in  to  sup 

10.  There  with  the  king,  the  bridegroom,  and 

By  him  are  led  into 
His  palace  chambers,  there  to  stand 
With  his  prospect  to  our  view. 

11.  And  taste  and  smell,  and  be  infiam'd, 

And  ravished  to  see 
The  buildings  he  hath  for  us  fram'd, 
How  full  of  heaven  they  be. 

12.  Its  state  also  is  marvellous, 

Tor  beauty  to  behold ; 
All  goodness  there  is  plenteous, 
And  better  far  than  gold. 

13.  Ado'-n'd  with  grace  and  righteousness, 

While  fragrant  scents  of  love 
O'erflow  with  everlasting  bliss, 
All  that  do  dwell  above. 

14.  The  heavenly  majesty,  whose  face 

Doth  far  exceed  the  sun, 
Trill  there  cast  forth  its  rays  of  grace 

After  this  world  is  done. 
Which  rays  and  beams  will  so  possess 

All  things  that  there  shall  dwell, 
With  so  much  glory,  light,  and  bliss, 

That  none  can  think  or  tell. 
That  wisdom  which  doth  order  all 

Shall  there  be  fully  shown ; 
That  strength  that  bears  the  world  there  shall 

By  every  one  be  known. 
That  holiness  and  sanctity 

Wliici'.  doth  all  thought  surpass, 
Shall  there  in  present  purify 

Outshine  the  crystal  glass. 
18.  The  beauty  and  the  comeliness 

Of  this  Almighty  shall 
Make  amiable  with  lasting  bliss 

Those  he  thereto  shall  call. 
10.  The  presence  of  this  God  will  be 

Eternal  life  in  all, 
And  health  and  gladness,  while  we  sc  a 

Thy  face,  0  immortal ! 

20.  Here  will  the  Lord  make  clear  and  plain 

How  sweetly  did  agree 
His  attributes,  when  Christ  was  slain 
Our  Saviour  to  be. 

21.  How  wisdom  did  find  out  the  way, 

How  strength  did  make  him  ata 


15 


16 


17 


24. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31 


:;•<. 


33 


3  L, 


35. 


How  holiness  did  bear  the  sway, 

And  answer  just  demand. 
How  all  these  attributes  did  bend 

Themselves  to  work  our  life, 
Thorough  the  Christ  whom  God  did  send 

To  save  us  by  his  might. 
All  this  will  sparkle  in  our  eye 

Within  the  holy  place, 
And  greatly  raise  our  melody, 

And  How  our  hearts  with  grace. 
The  largest  thought  that  can  arise 

Within  the  widest  heart 
Shall  then  be  filled  with  surprize, 

And  plcas'd  in  every  part. 
All  mysteries  shall  here  be  seen, 

And  every  knot  unty'd ; 
Electing  love,  that  hid  hath  been, 

Shall  shine  on  every  side. 
The  God  of  glory  here  will  be 

The  life  of  every  one ; 
Whose  goodly  attributes  shall  we 

Possess  them  as  our  own. 
By  wisdom  we  all  things  shall  know, 

By  light  all  things  shall  see, 
By  strength,  too,  all  things  we  shall  do, 

When  we  in  glory  be. 
The  Holy  Lamb  of  God,  also, 

Who  for  our  sakes  did  die, 
The  holy  ones  of  God  shall  know, 

And  that  most  perfectly. 
Those  small  and  short  discoveries 

That  we  have  of  him  here, 
Will  there  be  seen  with  open  eyes, 

In  visions  full  and  clear. 
Those  many  thousand  acts  of  grace 

That  here  we  feel  and  find, 
Shall  there  be  read  with  open  face 

Upon  his  heart  most  kind. 
There  he  will  show  us  how  he  was 

Our  prophet,  priest,  and  king ; 
And  how  he  did  maintain  our  cause, 

.  And  us  to  glory  bring. 
There  we  shall  see  how  he  was  touch'd 

With  all  our  grief  and  pain 
(As  in  his  word  he  hath  avouch'd), 

When  we  with  him  shall  reign ; 
He'll  show  us,  also,  how  he  did 

Maintain  our  faith  and  love, 
And  why  his  face  sometimes  he  hid 

Erom  us,  who  are  his  dove ; 
These  tempting  times  that  here  we  have, 

We  there  shall  see  were  good ; 
Also  that  hidden  strength  he  gave, 

The  purchase  of  his  blood. 
That  he  should  stand  for  us  before 

His  Eather,  thus  we  read, 


732 


ONE   THING    IS   NEEDFUL. 


But  then  shall  see,  and  shall  adore 
Him  for  his  gracious  deed. 

36.  Though  we  are  vile,  he  without  shame 

Before  the  angels  all 
Lays  out  his  strength,  his  worth,  and  name, 
Tor  us,  who  are  in  thrall. 

37.  This  is  he  who  was  mock'd  and  beat, 

Spit  on,  and  crown' d  with  thorns ; 
Who  for  us  had  a  bloody  sweat, 

Whose  heart  was  broke  with  scorns. 
33.  'Tis  he  who  stands  so  much  our  friend, 
As  shortly  we  shall  see, 
With  open  face,  world  without  end, 
And  in  his  presence  be. 

39.  That  head  that  once  was  crown'd  with  thorns, 

Shall  now  with  glory  shine ; 
That  heart  that  broken  was  with  scorns, 
Shall  flow  with  life  divine ; 

40.  That  man  that  here  met  with  disgrace, 

We  there  shaU  see  so  bright ; 
That  angels  can't  behold  his  face 
Tor  its  exceeding  light. 

41.  What  gladness  will  possess  our  heart 

When  we  shall  see  these  things ! 
What  light  and  life,  in  every  part, 
Will  rise  like  lasting  springs ! 

42.  O  blessed  face  and  holy  grace, 

When  shall  we  see  this  day  ? 
Lord,  fetch  us  to  this  goodly  place 
We  humbly  do  thee  pray. 

43.  Next  to  this  Lamb  we  shall  behold 

All  saints,  both  more  and  less, 

With  whit'ned  robes  in  glory  roll'd, 

'Cause  him  they  did  confess. 

44.  Each  walking  in  his  righteousness 

With  shining  crowns  of  gold, 
Triumphing  still  in  heav'nly  bliss, 
Amazing  to  behold. 

45.  Each  person  for  his  majesty 

Doth  represent  a  king ; 
Yea,  angel-like  for  dignity, 
And  seraphims  that  sing. 

46.  Each  motion  of  their  mind,  and  so 

Each  twinkling  of  their  eye ; 
Each  word  they  speak,  and  step  they  go, 
It  is  in  purity. 

47.  Immortal  are  they  every  one, 

Wrapt  up  in  health  and  light, 
Mortality  from  them  is  gone, 
Weakness  is  turn'd  to  might. 

48.  The  stars  are  not  so  clear  as  they, 

They  equalize  the  sun ; 
Their  glory  shines  to  perfect  day, 
Which  day  will  ne'er  be  done. 

49.  No  sorrow  can  them  now  annoy, 

Nor  weakness,  grief  or  pain ; 


No  faintness  can  abate  their  joy, 
They  now  in  life  do  reign. 

50.  They  shall  not  there,  as  here,  be  vex'd 

With  Satan,  men,  or  sin ; 
Nor  with  their  wicked  hearts  perplex' d, 
The  heavens  have  cop'd ]  them  in. 

51.  Thus,  as  they  shine  in  their  estate, 

So,  too,  in  their  degree ; 
Which  is  most  goodly  to  relate, 
And  ravishing  to  see. 

52.  The  majesty  whom  they  adore, 

Doth  them  in  wisdom  place 
Upon  the  tin-ones,  and  that  before 
The  angels,  to  their  grace. 

53.  The  saints  of  the  Old  Testament, 

Eull  right  to  their  degree ; 
Likewise  the  New,  in  excellent 
Maguificency  be. 

54.  Each  one  his  badge  of  glory  wears. 

According  to  his  place; 
According  as  was  his  affairs 
Here,  in  the  tune  of  grace. 

55.  Some  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Lamb, 

Likewise  some  on  the  left, 
With  robes  and  golden  chains  do  stand 
Most  grave,  most  sage,  and  deft.2 

56.  The  martyr  here  is  known  from  him 

Who  peaceably  did  die, 
Both  by  the  place  he  sitteth  in, 
And  by  his  dignity. 

57.  Each  father,  saint,  and  prophet  shall, 

According  to  his  worth, 

Enjoy  the  honour  of  his  call, 

And  plainly  hold  it  forth. 

58.  Those  bodies  which  sometimes  were  torn, 

And  bones  that  broken  were 
Eor  God's  word ;  he  doth  now  adorn 
With  health  and  glory  fair. 

59.  Thus,  when  in  heav'nly  harmony 

These  blessed  saints  appear, 
Adorn'd  with  grace  and  majesty, 
What  gladness  will  be  there  ! 

60.  The  light,  and  grace,  aud  countenance, 

The  least  of  these  shall  have, 

Will  so  with  terror  them  advance, 

And  make  their  face  so  grave, 

61.  That  at  them  all  the  world  will  shake, 

When  they  lift  up  their  head ; 
Princes  and  kings  will  at  them  quake, 
And  fall  before  them  dead. 


1  The  exact  spelling  of  Bunyan  is  here  followed;  but 
whether  he  meant  '  coped,'  '  covered,'  or  '  cooped ' — inclosed, 
or  shut  in — must  be  left  to  the  reader's  judgment.  I  prefer 
the  latter.— (Ed.) 

2  Fit,  convenient.     'Deft'  is  now  obsolete. — (Ed.) 


ONE  THING  IS   NEEDFUL. 


733 


62. 


63. 


64. 


65, 


CC. 


68. 


09. 


70. 


This  shall  we  see,  thus  shall  we  be, 

0  would  the  day  were  come, 
Lord  Jesus  take  us  up  to  thee. 

To  this  desired  home. 
Angels  also  we  shall  behold, 

When  we  on  high  ascend, 
Each  shining  like  to  men  of  gold, 

And  on  the  Lord  attend. 
These  goodly  creatures,  full  of  grace, 

Shall  stand  about  the  throne, 
Each  one  with  lightning  in  his  face, 

And  shall  to  us  be  known. 
These  cherubims  with  one  accord 

Shall  cry  continually, 
Ah,  holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord, 

And  heavenly  majesty. 
These  will  us  in  their  arms  embrace, 

And  welcome  us  to  rest, 
And  joy  to  see  us  clad  with  grace, 

And  of  the  heavens  possess'd. 
This  we  shall  hear,  this  we  shall  see, 

While  raptures  take  us  up, 
"When  we  with  blessed  Jesus  be, 

And  at  bis  table  sup. 
Oh  shining  angels  !  what,  must  we 

With  you  lift  up  our  voice  ? 
We  must ;  and  with  you  ever  be, 

And  with  you  must  rejoice. 
Our  friends  that  lived  godly  here, 

Shall  there  be  found  again  , 
The  wife,  the  child,  and  father  dear, 

With  others  of  our  train. 
Each  one  down  to  the  foot  in  white, 

Eill'd  to  the  brim  with  grace, 
Walking  among  the  saints  in  light, 

With  glad  and  joyful  face. 
Those  God  did  use  us  to  convert, 

We  there  with  joy  shall  meet, 
And  jointly  shall,  with  all  our  heart, 

In  life  each  other  greet. 
A  crown  to  them  we  then  shall  be, 

A  glory  and  a  joy ; 
And  that  before  the  Lord,  when  he 

The  world  comes  to  destroy. 
This  is  the  place,  this  is  the  state, 

Of  all  that  fear  the  Lord ; 
Which  men  nor  angels  may  relate 

With  tongue,  or  pen,  or  word. 
No  night  is  here,  for  to  eclipse 

Its  spangling  rays  so  bright ; 
Nor  doubt,  nor  fear  to  shut  the  lips, 

Of  those  within  this  light. 
The  strings  of  music  here  are  tun'd 

Eor  heavenly  harmony, 
And  every  spirit  here  perfum'd 

With  perfect  sanctity. 


76.  Here  runs  the  crystal  streams  of  life, 

Quite  thorough  all  our  veins. 
And  here  by  love  we  do  unite 
With  glory's  golden  chains. 

77.  Now  that  which  sweet'neth  all  will  be 

The  lasting  of  tins  state  ; 
This  heightens  all  we  hear  or  see 
To  a  transcendant  rate. 

78.  For  should  the  saints  enjoy  all  this 

But  for  a  certain  time, 
O,  how  would  they  their  mark  then  miss, 


And  at  this  thing  repine  i 


?:> 


Yea,  'tis  not  possible  that  they 

Who  then  shall  dwell  on  high, 
Should  be  content,  unless  they  may 

Dwell  there  eternally. 
80.  A  thought  of  parting  with  this  place 

Would  bitter  all  their  sweet, 
And  darkness  put  upon  the  face 

Of  all  they  there  do  meet. 
But  far  from  this  the  saints  shall  be, 

Their  portion  is  the  Lord, 
Whose  face  for  ever  they  shall  see, 

As  saith  the  holy  word. 
And  that  with  everlasting  peace, 

Joy,  and  felicity, 
From  this  time  forth  they  shall  increase 

Unto  eternity. 


81 


83 


OF  HELL,  AND  THE  ESTATE  OF  THOSE  THAT 
PERISH. 

1.  Thus,  having  show'd  you  what  I  see 

Of  heaven,  I  now  will  tell 

You  also,  after  search,  what  be 

The  damned  wights  of  hell. 

2.  And  0,  that  they  who  read  my  lines 

Would  ponder  soberly, 
And  lay  to  heart  such  things  betimes 
As  touch  eternity. 

3.  The  sleepy  sinner  little  thinks 

What  sorrows  will  abound 
Within  him,  when  upon  the  brinks 
Of  Tophet  he  is  found. 

4.  Hell  is  beyond  all  thought  a  state 

So  doubtful '  and  forlorn, 
So  fearful,  that  none  can  relate 
The  pangs  that  there  are  born. 

5.  God  will  exclude  them  utterly 

From  his  most  blessed  face, 
And  them  involve  in  misery, 
In  shame,  and  in  disgrace. 


1  Full  of  fear  and  dread.  Bunyan,  in  his  Holy  War,  brings 
his  immense  armies  of  doubters,  under  General  Incredulity, 
from  Hell-gate  Hill.— (Eu.) 


731 


ONZ   THING   IS   NEEDFUL. 


6.  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  bliss, 

Of  life,  of  light,  and  peace ; 
They  then  must  needs  be  comfortless 
Who  are  depriv'd  of  these. 

7.  Instead  of  life,  a  living  death 

Will  there  in  all  be  found. 

Dyings  will  be  in  every  breath, 

Thus  sorrow  will  abound. 

8.  No  light,  but  darkness  here  doth  dwell; 

No  peace,  but  horror  strange : 

The  fearful  damning  wights  '  of  hell 

In  all  will  make  this  change. 

9.  To  many  things  the  damned's  woe 

Is  liked  in  the  word, 
Aud  that  because  no  one  can  show 
The  vengeance  of  the  Lord. 

10.  Unto  a  dreadful  burning  lake, 

All  on  a  fiery  flame, 
Hell  is  compared,  for  to  make 
All  understand  the  same. 

11.  A  burning  lake,  a  furnace  ho';, 

A  burning  oven,  too, 
Must  be  the  portion,  share,  and  lot, 
Of  those  which  evil  sow. 

12.  This  plainly  shows  the  burning  heat 

With  which  it  will  oppress 
All  hearts,  and  will  like  burnings  eat 
Then;  souls  with  sore  distress. 

13.  This  burning  lake,  it  is  God's  wrath 

Incensed  by  the  sin 
Of  those  who  do  reject  his  path, 
And  wicked  ways  walk  in. 

14.  Which  wrath  will  so  perplex  all  parts 

Of  body  and  of  soul, 
As  if  up  to  the  very  hearts 
In  burnings  they  did  roll. 

15.  Again,  to  show  the  stinking  state 

Of  this  so  sad  a  case, 
Like  burning  brimstone  God  doth  make 
The  hidings  of  his  face. 

16.  And  truly  as  the  steam,  and  smoke, 

And  flames  of  brimstone  smell, 
To  blind  the  eyes,  and  stomach  choke, 
So  are  the  pangs  of  hell. 

17.  To  see  a  sea  of  brimstone  burn, 

Who  would  it  not  affright? 
But  they  whom  God  to  hell  doth  turn 
Are  in  most  woful  plight. 

18.  This  burning  cannot  quenched  be, 

No,  not  with  tears  of  blood  ; 
No  mournful  groans  in  misery 
Will  here  do  any  good. 

19.  0  damned  men !  this  is  your  fate, 

The  day  of  grace  is  done, 


1  Quick,  nimble,  active,  powerful  spirits.     Wight  is  now 
obsolete,  except  in  irony  ;  see  Imperial  Dictionary. — (I£d.) 


Repentance  now  doth  come  too  late, 
Mercy  is  fled  and  gone. 

20.  Your  groans  and  cries  they  sooner  should 

Have  sounded  in  mine  ears, 
If  grace  you  would  have  had,  or  would 
Have  me  regard  your  tears. 

21.  Me  you  offended  with  your  sin, 

Instructions  you  did  slight, 
Your  sins  against  my  law  hath  been, 
Justice  shall  have  his  right. 

22.  I  gave  my  Son  to  do  you  good, 

I  gave  you  space  and  time 
With  him  to  close,  which  you  withstood, 
And  did  with  hell  combine. 

23.  Justice  against  you  now  is  set, 

Which  you  cannot  appease ; 
Eternal  justice  doth  you  let 

Erom  either  life  or  ease. 
21.  Thus  he  that  to  this  place  doth  come 

May  groan,  and  sigh,  and  weep  ; 
But  sin  hath  made  that  place  his  home, 

And  there  it  will  him  keep. 
25..  Wherefore,  hell  in  another  place 

Is  call'd  a  prison  too, 
And  all  to  show  the  evil  case 

Of  all  sin  doth  undo. 
2G.  Which  prison,  with  its  locks  and  bars 

Of  God's  lasting  decree, 
Will  hold  them  fast ;  0  how  this  mars 

All  thought  of  being  free ! 

27.  Out  at  these  brazen  bars  they  may 

The  saints  in  glory  see  ; 
But  this  will  not  their  grief  allay, 
But  to  them  torment  be. 

28.  Thus  they  in  this  infernal  cava 

Will  now  be  holden  fast 
Erom  heavenly  freedom,  though  they  crave, 
Of  it  they  may  not  taste. 

29.  The  chains  that  darkness  on  them  hangs 

Still  ratt'ling  in  their  ears, 
Creates  within  them  heavy  pangs, 
And  still  augments  their  fears. 

30.  Thus  hopeless  of  all  remedy, 

They  dyingly  do  sink 
Into  the  jaws  of  misery, 
And  seas  of  sorrow  drink. 

31.  Eor  being  cop'd "  on  every  side 

With  helplessness  and  grief, 
Headlong  into  despair  they  slide 
Bereft  of  all  relief. 

32.  Therefore  this  hell  is  called  a  pit, 

Prepared  for  those  that  die 
The  second  death,  a  term  most  fit 
To  show  then-  misery. 


'■  See  note  on  verse  fifty  of  the  Meditations  on  Heaven, —  (E  d. 


ONE   THING    IS   NEEDFUL. 


735 


33.  A  pit  that's  bottomless  is  this, 

A  gulf  of  grief  and  woe, 
A  dungeon  which  they  cannot  miss, 
That  will  themselves  undo. 

34.  Thus  without  stay  they  always  sink, 

Thus  faulting  still  they  fail, 

Despair  they  up  like  water  drink, 

These  prisoners  have  no  bail. 

35.  Here  meets  them  now  that  worm  that  gnaws, 

And  plucks  their  bowels  out, 
The  pit,  too,  on  them  shuts  her  jaws; 
This  dreadfid  is,  no  doubt. 

36.  This  ghastly  worm  is  guilt  for  sin, 

Which  on  the  conscience  feeds, 
"With  vipers'  teeth,  both  sharp  and  keen, 
"Whereat  it  sorely  bleeds. 

37.  This  worm  is  fed  by  memory, 

Which  strictly  brings  to  mind, 
All  things  done  in  prosperity, 

As  we  in  Scripture  find. 
3S.  No  word,  nor  thought,  nor  act  they  did, 

But  now  is  set  in  sight, 
Not  one  of  them  can  now  be  hid, 

Memory  gives  them  light. 

39.  On  M-hich  the  understanding  still 

Will  judge,  and  sentence  pass, 
This  kills  the  mind,  and  wounds  the  will, 
Alas,  alas,  alas ! 

40.  0,  conscience  is  the  slaughter  shop, 

There  hangs  the  axe  and  knife, 
'Tis  there  the  worm  makes  all  things  hot, 
And  wearies  out  the  life. 

41.  Here,  then,  is  execution  done 

On  body  and  on  soul ; 
Tor  conscience  will  be  brib'd  of  none, 
But  gives  to  all  their  dole. 

42.  This  worm,  'tis  said,  shall  never  die, 

But  in  the  belly  be 
Of  ail  that  in  the  flames  shall  be, 
0  dreadful  sight  to  see! 

43.  This  worm  now  needs  must  in  them  bve, 

For  sin  will  still  be  there, 
And  guilt,  for  God  will  not  forgive, 
Nor  Christ  their  burden  bear. 

44.  But  take  from  them  all  help  and  stay, 

And  leave  them  to  despair, 
Which  feeds  upon  them  uight  and  day, 
This  is  the  damned's  share. 

45.  Now  will  confusion  so  possess 

These  monuments  of  ire, 
And  so  confound  them  with  distress, 

And  trouble  their  desire. 
4C.  That  what  to  think,  or  what  to  do, 

Or  where  to  lay  their  head, 
They  know  not ;  'tis  the  damned's  woe 

To  Hve,  and  yet  be  dead. 


47.  These  cast-aways  would  fain  have  life, 

But  know,  they  never  shall, 
They  would  forget  their  dreadful  plight, 
But  that  sticks  fast'st  of  all. 

48.  God,  Christ,  aud  heaven,  they  know  aie  best, 

Yet  dare  not  on  them  think, 
The  saints  they  know  in  joys  do  rest, 
While  they  their  tears  do  drin  .. 

49.  They  cry  alas,  but  all  in  vain, 

They  stick  fast  in  the  mire, 
They  would  be  rid  of  present  pain, 
Yet  set  themselves  on  fire. 

50.  Darkness  is  their  perplexity, 

Yet  do  they  hate  the  light, 
They  always  see  their  misery, 
Yet  are  themselves  all  night. 

51.  They  are  all  dead,  yet  live  they  do, 

Yet  neither  bve  nor  die. 
They  die  to  weal,  and  live  to  woe, 
This  is  their  misery. 

52.  Amidst  all  this  so  great  a  scare 

That  here  I  do  relate, 
Another  falleth  to  their  share 
In  this  their  sad  estate. 

53.  The  legions  of  infernal  fiends 

Then  with  them  needs  must  bo, 
A  just  reward  for  all  their  pains, 
This  they  shall  feel  and  see. 

54.  With  yeUings,  howbngs,  shrieks,  and  cries. 

And  other  doleful  noise, 
With  trembling  hearts  and  faibng  eyes, 
These  are  their  helHsh  joys. 

55.  These  angels  black  they  would  obey, 

And  serve  with  greedy  mind, 
And  take  delight  to  go  astray, 
That  pleasure  they  might  find. 

56.  Which  pleasure  now  like  poison  turns 

Their  joy  to  heaviness ; 
Yea,  bke  the  gall  of  asps  it  burns, 
And  doth  them  sore  oppress 

57.  Now  is  the  joy  they  Hved  in 

All  turned  to  brinish  tears, 
And  resolute  attempts  to  sin 

Turn'd  into  helbsh  fears. 
5S.  The  floods  run  trickling  down  their  face, 

Their  hearts  do  prick  and  ache, 
While  they  lament  their  woful  case, 

Their  loins  totter  and  shake. 

59.  0  wetted  cheeks,  with  bleared  eyes, 

How  fully  do  you  show 
The  pangs  that  in  their  bosom  I 
And  grief  they  undergo ! 

60.  Their  dolour  in  their  bitterness 

So  greatly  they  bemoan, 
That  hell  itself  this  to  express 
Doth  echo  with  their  groan. 


736 


ONE  THING  IS  NEEDMJL. 


61.  Thus  broiling  on  the  burning  grates, 

They  now  to  wailing  go, 

And  say  of  those  unhappy  fates 

That  did  them  thus  undo. 

62.  Alas,  my  grief !  hard  hap  had  I 

Those  dolours  here  to  find, 
A  living  death,  in  hell  I  lie, 
Involv'd  with  grief  of  mind. 

63.  I  once  was  fair  for  light  and  grace, 

My  days  were  long  and  good ; 
I  lived  in  a  blessed  place 

Where  was  most  heav'nly  food. 

64.  Bat  wretch  I  am,  I  slighted  life, 

I  chose  in  death  to  Hve; 
0,  for  these  days  now,  if  I  might, 
Ten  thousand  worlds  would  give. 

65.  What  time  had  I  to  pray  and  read, 

What  time  to  hear  the  word ! 
What  means  to  help  me  at  my  need, 
Did  God  to  me  afford! 

66.  Examples,  too,  of  piety 

I  every  day  did  see, 
But  they  abuse  and  slight  did  I, 
0,  woe  be  unto  me. 

67.  I  now  remember  how  my  friend 

Reproved  me  of  vice, 
And  bid  me  mind  my  latter  end, 
Both  once,  and  twice,  and  thrice. 

68.  But  0,  deluded  man,  I  did 

My  back  upon  him  turn ; 
Eternal  life  I  did  not  heed, 
Eor  which  I  now  do  mourn. 

69.  Ah,  golden  time,  I  did  thee  spend 

In  sin  and  idleness, 
Ah,  health  and  wealth,  I  did  you  lend 
To  bring  me  to  distress. 

70.  My  feet  to  evil  I  let  run, 

And  tongue  of  folly  talk ; 

My  eyes  to  vanity  hath  gone, 

Thus  did  I  vainly  walk. 

71.  I  did  as  greatly  toil  and  strain 

Myself  with  sin  to  please, 
As  if  that  everlasting  gain 

Could  have  been  found  in  these. 

72.  But  nothing,  nothing  have  I  found 

But  weeping,  and  alas, 
And  sorrow,  which  doth  now  surround 
Me,  and  augment  my  cross. 

73.  Ah,  bleeding  conscience,  how  did  I 

Thee  check  when  thou  didst  tell 
Me  of  my  faults,  for  which  I  lie 
Dead  while  I  Hve  in  hell. 

74.  I  took  thee  for  some  peevish  foe, 

When  thou  didst  me  accuse, 
Therefore  I  did  thee  buffet  so, 
And  counsel  did  refuse. 


75.  Thou  often  didst  me  tidings  bring, 

How  God  did  me  dislike, 
Because  I  took  delight  in  sin, 
But  I  thy  news  did  slight. 

76.  Ah,  Mind,  why  didst  thou  do  those  things 

That  now  do  work  my  woe  ? 
Ah,  Will,  why  wast  thou  thus  inclin'd 
Me  ever  to  undo  ? 

77.  My  senses,  how  were  you  beguil'd 

When  you  said  sin  was  good  ? 
It  hath  in  all  parts  me  defil'd, 
And  drown'd  me  like  a  flood. 

78.  Ah,  that  I  now  a  being  have, 

In  sorrow  and  in  pain; 
Mother,  woidd  you  had  been  my  grave, 
But  this  I  wish  in.  vain. 

79.  Had  I  been  made  a  cockatrice, 

A  toad,  or  such-like  thing ;' 
Yea,  had  I  been  made  snow  or  ice, 
Then  had  I  had  no  sin ; 

80.  A  block,  a  stock,  a  stone,  or  clot, 

Is  happier  than  I ; 
For  they  know  neither  cold  nor  hot, 
To  live  nor  yet  to  die. 

81.  I  envy  now  the  happiness 

Of  those  that  are  in  light, 
I  hate  the  very  name  of  bliss, 
'Cause  I  have  there  no  right. 

82.  I  grieve  to  see  that  others  are 

In  glory,  life,  and  well, 
Without  all  fear,  or  dread,  or  care, 
While  I  am  racked  in  hell. 

83.  Thus  will  these  souls  with  watery  eyes, 

And  hacking  of  their  teeth, 
With  wringing  hands,  and  fearful  cries, 
Expostulate  their  grief. 

84.  0  set  their  teeth  they  will,  and  gnash, 

And  gnaw  for  very  pain, 
While  as  with  scorpions  God  doth  lash 
Them  for  their  life  so  vain. 

85.  Again,  still  as  they  in  this  muse, 

Are  feeding  on  the  fire, 
To  mind  there  comes  yet  other  news, 
To  screw  their  torments  higher. 

86.  Which  is  the  length  of  this  estate, 

Where  they  at  present  lie ; 
Which  in  a  word  I  thus  relate, 
'Tis  to  eternity. 

87.  This  thought  now  is  so  firmly  fix'd 

In  all  that  comes  to  mind, 

1  This  is  a  common  temptation.  Job  felt  it,  and  murmured  at 
having  been  born,  Job  iii.  3,  and  x.  18,  19.  Jeremiah  passed 
through  the  same  experience,  Je.  xx.  14, 15.  Bunyan  had  the 
same  bitter  feelings,  and  wished  himself  a  dog  or  toad ;  see 
Grace  Abounding,  No.  104.  Colonel  Gardener  was  similarly 
tried.  How  awful  is  the  havoc  that  sin  has  made  with  human 
happiness. — (En.) 


EBAL   AND   GERIZIM. 


737 


And  also  is  so  strongly  mix'd 
With  wrath  of  every  kind. 

88.  So  that  whatever  they  do  know, 

Or  see,  or  think,  or  feel, 
For  ever  still  doth  strike  them  through 
As  with  a  bar  of  steel. 

89.  For  ever  shineth  in  the  fire, 

Ever  is  on  the  chains  ; 
'Tis  also  in  the  pit  of  ire, 
And  tastes  in  all  their  pains. 

90.  For  ever  separate  from  God, 

From  peace,  and  life,  and  rest ; 
For  ever  underneath  the  rod 
That  vengeance  liketh  best. 

91.  0  ever,  ever,  this  will  drown'd 

Them  quite  and  make  them  cry, 
We  never  shall  get  o'er  thy  bound, 
0,  great  eternity ! 

92.  They  sooner  now  the  stars  may  count 

Than  lose  these  dismal  bands ; 
Or  see  to  what  the  motes  '  amount 
Or  number  up  the  sands. 

1  The  finest  particles  or  atoms  of  matter — 
"  As  thick,  as  numberless 
"Aa  the  guy  motes  that  people  the  sunbeams. "— Miltot 


93.  Then  see  an  end  of  tins  their  woe, 

Which  now  for  sin  they  have ; 
O  wantons,  take  heed  what  you  do, 

Sin  will  you  never  save. 
91.  They  sooner  may  drink  up  the  sea, 

Than  shake  off  these  their  fears  ; 
Or  make  another  in  one  day 

As  big  with  brinish  tears ; 
Than  put  an  end  to  misery, 

In  which  they  now  do  roar, 
Or  help  themselves;  no,  they  must  cry, 

Alas,  for  evermore. 
When  years  by  thousands  on  a  heap 

Are  passed  o'er  their  head ; 
Yet  still  the  fruits  of  sin  they  reap 

Among  the  ghostly  dead. 
97.  Yea,  when  they  have  time  out  of  mind 

Been  in  this  case  so  ill, 
For  ever,  ever  is  behind  2 

Yet  for  them  to  fulfil. 


'J  5 


% 


3  How  does  this  remind  us  of  the  awfully  impressive  cries 
,  of  the  man  in  the  iron  cage — "  0,  eternity,  eternity !   how- 
shall   I  grapple  with  the  misery  that  T  must   meet  with  in 
eternity!  "     "A  thousand  deaths  live  in  him,  he  not  dead." 
-(Ed.)     I  —(Ed!) 


EBAL    AND    GEHIZIM, 

OK 

THE   BLESSING  AND  THE   CURSE: 

EEING   A   SHORT   EXHORTATION    TO    SINNERS,  BY   THE   MERCY   AND    SEVERITY   OF   GOD. 


FROM  MOUNT   GERIZIM. 
Besides  what  I  said  of  the  Your  Last  Tilings, 
And  of  the  weal  and  woe  that  from  them  springs  ; 
An  after-word  still  runneth  in  my  mind, 
Which  I  shall  here  expose  unto  that  wind 
That  may  it  blow  into  that  very  hand 
That  needs  it.     Also  that  it  may  be  scann'd 
With  greatest  soberness,  shall  be  my  prayer, 
As  well  as  diligence  and  godly  care  ; 
So  to  present  it  unto  public  view, 
That  only  truth  and  peace  may  thence  ensue. 

My  talk  shall  be  of  that  amazing  love 
Of  God  we  read  of;  which,  that  it  may  prove, 
By  its  engaging  arguments  to  save 
Thee,  I  shall  lay  out  that  poor  help  I  have 
Thee  to  entice  ;  that  thou  wouldst  dearly  fall 
In  love  with  thy  salvation,  and  with  all 
That  dotli  thereto  concur,  that  thou  mayst  be 
As  blessed  as  the  Blessed  can  make  thee, 
Not  only  here  but  in  the  world  to  come, 
In  bliss,  which,  I  pray  God,  may  be  thy  home. 
VOL.  III. 


But  first,  I  would  advise  thee  to  bethink 
Thyself,  how  sin  hath  laid  thee  at  the  brink 
Of  hell,  where  thou  art  lulled  fast  asleep 
In  Satan's  arms,  who  also  will  thee  keep 
As  senseless  and  secure  as  e'er  he  may, 
Lest  thou  shouldst  wake,  and  see't,  and  run  away 
Unto  that  Jesus,  whom  the  Father  sent 
Into  the  world,  for  this  cause  and  intent, 
That  such  as  thou,  from  such  a  thrall  as  this. 
Might' st  be  released,  and  made  heir  of  bbss. 
Now  that  thou  may'st  awake,  the  danger  fly, 
And  so  escape  the  death  that  others  die, 
Come,  let  me  set  my  trumpet  to  thine  ear, 
Be  willing  all  my  message  for  to  hear : 
'Tis  for  thy  life,  O  do  it  not  refuse  ; 
Wo  unto  them  good  counsel  do  abuse. 
Thou  art  at  present  in  that  very  case, 
Winch  argues  thou  art  destitute  of  grace : 
For  he  that  lies  where  sin  hath  laid  him,  lies 
Under  the  curse,  graceless,  and  so  he  dies 
In  body  and  in  soul,  within  that  range, 
If  God  his  heart  in  mercy  doth  not  change 

93 


733 


EBAL   AND    GERIZIM. 


Before  he  goes  the  way  of  all  the  earth, 
Before  he  lose  his  spirit  and  his  breath. 
Repentance  there  is  none  within  the  grave, 
Nor  Christ,  nor  grace,  nor  mercies  for  to  save 
Thee  from  the  vengeance  due  unto  thy  sin, 
If  now  thou  dost  not  truly  close  with  him. 

Thou  art  like  him  that  sleepeth  in  the  sea 
On  broken  hoards,  which,  without  guide  or  stay, 
Are  driven  whither  winds  and  water  will ; 
While  greedy  beasts  do  wait  to  have  their  fill 
By  feeding  on  his  carcass,  when  he  shall 
Turn  overboard,  and  without  mercy  fall 
Into  the  jaws  of  such  as  make  a  prey 
Of  those  whom  justice  drowneth  in  the  sea. 

Thou  art  like  him  that  snoring  still  doth  lie 
Upon  the  bed  of  vain  security, 
Whilst  all  about  him  into  burning  flame 
By  fire  is  turned ;  yea,  and  while  the  frame 
And  building  where  he  lies  consuming  is. 
And  while  himself  these  burnings  cannot  miss. 

Thou  art  like  one  that  hangeth  by  a  thread 
Over  the  mouth  of  hell,  as  one  half-dead ; 
And  O,  how  soon  this  thread  may  broken  be, 
Or  cut  by  death,  is  yet  unknown  to  thee ! 
But  sure  it  is,  if  all  the  weight  of  sin, 
And  all  that  Satan,  too,  hath  doing  been, 
Or  yet  can  do,  can  break  this  crazy  thread, 
'Twill  not  be  long  before,  among  the  dead, 
Thou  tumble  do,  as  linked  fast  in  chains, 
With  them  to  wait  in  fear  for  future  pains. 

What  shall  I  say  ?     Wilt  thou  not  yet  awake  ? 
Nor  yet  of  thy  poor  soul  some  pity  take  ? 
Among  the  lions  it  hood-winked  lies  ; 
O,  that  the  Lord  would  open  once  thine  eyes 
That  thou  might'st  see  it,  then  I  dare  say  thou, 
As  half-bereft  of  wits,  wouldst  cry  out,  How 
Shall  I  escape  ?     Lord  help,  0  !  help  with  speed, 
Reach  down  thy  hand  from  heav'n,  for  help  I  need, 
To  save  me  from  the  lions,  for  I  fear 
This  soul  of  mine  they  will  in  pieces  tear. 

Come,  then,  and  let  us  both  expostulate 
The  case  betwixt  us,  till  we  animate 
And  kindle  iu  our  hearts  that  burning  love 
To  Christ,  to  grace,  to  life,  that  we  may  move 
Swifter  than  eagles  to  this  blessed  prey ; 
Then  shah1  it  be  well  with  us  in  that  day 
The  trump  shall  sound,  the  dead  made  rise,  and  stand5 
Then  to  receive,  for  breach  of  God's  command, 
Such  thunder-claps  as  these,  Depart  from  me 
Into  hell-fire,  you  that  the  wicked  be, 
Prepared  for  the  devil,  and  for  those 
That  with  him  and  his  angels  rather  chose 
To  live  in  filthy  sin  and  wickedness, 
Whose  fruit  is  everlasting  bitterness. 

We  both  are  yet  on  this  side  of  the  grave, 
We  also  gospel-privileges  have ; 


The  word,  and  time  to  pray  ;  God  give  us  hearts, 
That,  like  the  wise  man,  we  may  act  our  parts, 
To  get  the  pearl  of  price ;  then  we  shall  be 
Like  godly  Mary,  Peter,  Paul,  and  we 
Like  Jacob,  too,  the  blessing  shall  obtain ; 
While  Esau  rides  a-hunting  for  the  gain 
Of  worldly  pelf,  which  will  him  not  avail 
When  death  or  judgment  shall  him  sore  assail. 

Now,  to  encourage  us  for  to  begin, 
Let  us  believe  the  kingdom  we  may  win, 
And  be  possess'd  thereof,  if  we  the  way 
Shall  hit  into,  and  then  let  nothing  stay 
Or  hinder  us  ;  the  crown  is  at  the  end, 
Let's  run  and  strive,  and  fly,  and  let's  contend 
With  greatest  courage  it  for  to  obtain ; 
'Tis  life,  and  peace,  and  everlasting  gain. 
The  gate  of  life,  the  new  and  living  way, 
The  promise  holdeth  open  all  the  day, 
Which  thou  by  Jacob's  ladder  must  ascend, 
Where  angels  always  wait,  and  do  attend 
As  ministers,  to  minister  for  those 
That  do  with  God,  and  Christ,  and  glory  close. 

If  guilt  of  sin  still  lieth  at  our  door, 
Us  to  discourage,  let  us  set  before 
Our  eyes  a  bleeding  Jesus,  who  did  die 
The  death,  and  let's  believe,  the  reason  why 
He  did  it,  was  that  we  might  ever  be 
Prom  death  and  sin,  from  hell  and  wrath  set  free. 
Yea,  let's  remember  for  that  very  end 
It  was  his  blessed  Pather  did  him  send ; 
That  he  the  law  of  God  might  here  fulfil, 
That  so  the  mystery  of  his  blessed  will 
Might  be  revealed  in  the  blessedness 
Of  those  that  fly  to  Christ  for  righteousness. 

Now  let  us  argue  with  ourselves,  then,  thus 
That  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  came  to  save  us, 
By  bearing  of  our  sins  upon  his  back, 
By  hanging  on  the  cross  as  on  a  rack, 
While  justice  cut  him  off  on  every  side, 
While  smiles  Divine  themselves  from  him  did  hide, 
While  earth  did  quake,  and  rocks  in  pieces  rent, 
And  while  the  sun,  as  veiled,  did  lament 
To  see  the  innocent  and  harmless  die 
So  sore  a  death,  so  full  of  misery. 

Yea,  let  us  turn  again,  and  say,  All  this 
He  did  and  suffered  for  love  of  his. 
He  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness, 
That  he  might  cover  all  our  nakedness ; 
He  wept  and  wash'd  his  face  with  brinish  tears 
That  we  might  saved  be  from  hellish  fears ; 
Blood  was  his  sweat,  too,  in  his  agony, 
That  we  might  live  in  joyful  ecstasy ; 
He  apprehended  was  and  led  away, 
That  grace  to  us -ward  never  might  decay. 
With  swords,  and  bills,  and  outrage  in  the  night, 
That  to  the  peace  of  heav'n  we  might  have  right. 


EBAL   AND   GERIZIM. 


739 


Condemned  he  was  between  two  thieves  to  die, 

That  we  might  ever  in  his  bosom  lie  ; 

Scourged  with  whips  his  precious  body  were, 

That  we  lashes  of  conscience  might  not  fear ; 

His  head  was  crowned  with  thorns,  that  we  might  be 

Crowned  with  glory  and  felicity ; 

lie  hanged  was  upon  a  cursed  tree, 

That  we  delivered  from  death  might  be ; 

His  Father  from  him  hides  his  smiles  and  face, 

That  we  might  have  them  in  the  heavenly  place  ; 

He  cry'd,  My  God,  why  hast  forsaken  me  : 

That  we  forsaken  of  him  might  not  be. 

Into  his  side  was  thrust  a  bloody  spear, 

That  we  the  sting  of  death  might  never  fear ; 

He  went  into  the  grave  after  all  this, 

That  we  might  up  to  heav'n  go,  and  have  bliss. 

Yea,  rise  again  he  did  out  of  the  earth, 

And  shook  off  from  him  all  the  chains  of  death  ; 

Then  at  his  chariot  wheels  he  captive  led 

His  foes,  and  trod  upon  the  serpent's  head ; 

Riding  in  triumph  to  his  Father's  throue, 

There  to  possess  the  kingdom  as  his  own. 

What  say'st  thou,  wilt  not  yet  unto  him  come  ? 

His  arms  are  open,  in  his  heart  is  room 

To  lay  thee  ;  be  not  then  discouraged, 

Although  thy  sins  be  many,  great,  and  red; 

Unto  thee  righteousness  he  will  impute, 

And  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth  salute 

Thy  drooping  soul,  and  will  it  so  uphold, 

As  that  thy  shaking  conscience  shall  be  bold 

To  come  to  mercy's  seat  with  great  access, 

There  to  expostulate  with  that  justice 

That  bums  like  fiery  flames  against  all  those 

That  do  not  with  this  blessed  Jesus  close ; 

AYhich  unto  thee  will  do  no  harm,  but  good, 

Because  thou  hast  rebance  on  that  blood 

That  justice  saith  hath  given  him  content, 

For  all  that  do  unfeignedly  repent 

Their  ill-spent  life,  and  roll  upon  free  grace, 

That  they  within  that  bosom  might  have  place, 

That  open  is  to  such,  where  they  shall  lie 

In  ease,  and  gladness,  and  felicity, 

World  without  end,  according  to  that  state 

I  have,  nay,  better  than  I,  can  relate. 

If  thou  shalt  still  object,  thou  yet  art  vile, 
And  hast  a  heart  that  will  not  reconcile 
Unto  the  holy  law,  but  will  rebel, 
Hark  yet  to  what  I  shall  thee  farther  tell. 
Two  things  are  yet  behind  that  help  thee  will, 
If  God  should  put  into  thy  mind  that  skill, 
So  to  improve  them  as  becometh  those 
That  would  with  mercy  and  forgiveness  close. 

First,  then,  let  this  sink  down  into  thy  heart, 
That  Christ  is  not  a  Saviour  in  part, 
But  every  way  so  fully  he  is  made 
That  all  of  those  that  underneath  his  shade 


And  wing  would  sit,  and  shroud  their  weary  soul, 
That  even  Moses  dare  it  not  control, 
But  justify  it,  approve  of  't,  and  conclude 
No  man  nor  angel  must  himself  intrude 
With  such  doctrine  that  may  oppose  the  same, 
On  pain  of  blaspheming  that  holy  name, 
Which  God  himself  hath  given  unto  men, 
To  stay,  to  trust,  to  lean  themselves  on,  when 
They  feci  themselves  assaulted,  and  made  four 
Their  sin  will  not  let  them  in  life  appear. 

For  as  God  made  him  perfect  righteousness, 
That  he  his  love  might  to  the  height  express, 
And  us  present  complete  before  the  throne ; 
Sanctiiication,  too,  of  his  own 
He  hath  prepared,  in  which  do  we  stand, 
Complete  in  holiness,  at  his  right  hand. 
Now  this  sanctiiication  is  not 
That  holiness  which  is  in  us,  but  that 
Which  in  the  person  of  this  Jesus  is, 
And  can  inherently  be  only  his. 
But  is  imputed  to  us  for  our  good, 
As  is  his  active  righteousness  and  blood; 
Which  is  the  cause,  though  we  infirm  are  found. 
That  mercy  and  forgiveness  doth  abound 
To  us-ward,  and  that  why  we  are  not  shent1 
And  empty,  and  away  rebuked  sent, 
Because  that  all  we  do  imperfect  is. 
Bless  God,  then,  for  this  holiness  of  his, 
And  learn  to  look  by  faith  on  that  alone, 
When  thou  seest  thou  hast  nothing  of  thine  own ; 
Yea,  when  thy  heart  most  willing  is  to  do 
What  God  by  his  good  word  doth  call  thee  to ; 
And  when  thou  find'st  most  holiness  within, 
And  greatest  power  over  every  sin, 
Yet  then  to  Jesus  look,  and  thou  shalt  see 
In  him  sanctiiication  for  thee, 
Far  more  complete  than  all  that  thou  canst  find 
In  the  most  upright  heart  and  willing  mind, 
That  ever  man  or  angels  did  possess, 
When  most  filled  with  inherent  righteousness. 
Besides,  if  thou  forgettest  here  to  bve, 
And  Satan  get  thee  once  into  his  sieve, 
He  will  so  hide  thy  wheat,  and  show  thy  bruns 
That  thou  wilt  quickly  cry,  I  am  undone. 
Alas,  thy  goodliest  attainments  here, 
Though  bke  the  fairest  blossoms  they  appear, 
How  quickly  will  they  lour  and  decay, 
And  be  as  if  they  all  were  fled  away, 
When  once  the  cast-wind  of  temptations  beat 
Upon  thee,  with  their  dry  and  blasting  heat ! 
Bich  men  will  not  account  their  treasure  lies 
In  crack'd  groats  and  four-pence  half-pennies, a 

1  From  the  Saxon  scendan,   to  violate,  spoil,  revile;  st" 
I  Imperial  Dictionary, — Ed. 

*  Altered  by  poetical  license  from  'bran.'     Chaucer,  in  one 
instance,  spells  it  '  bren,'  to  rhyme  with  men. — En. 
I      a  This  evidently  refers  to  a  coin,  value  tour-pence  half-penny, 


740 


EBAL    AND   GERIZIM. 


But  in  those  bags  they  have  within  their  chests, 
In  staple  goods,  which  shall  within  their  breasts 
Have  place  accordingly,  because  they  see 
Their  substance  lieth  here.     But  if  that  be 
But  shaken,  then  they  quickly  fear,  and  cry, 
Alas,  'tis  not  this  small  and  odd  money, 
We  carry  in  our  pockets  for  to  spend, 
Will  make  us  rich,  or  much  will  stand  our  friend. 
If  famine  or  if  want  do  us  assail, 
How  quickly  will  these  little  pieces  fail ! 
If  thou  be  wise,  consider  what  I  say, 
And  look  for  all  in  Christ,  where  no  decay 
Is  like  to  be ;  then  though  thy  present  frame 
Be  much  in  up-and-down,  yet  he  the  same 
Abideth,  yea,  and  still  at  God's  right  hand, 
As  thy  most  perfect  holiness  will  stand. 
It  is,  I  say,  not  like  to  that  in  thee, 
Now  high,  then  low,  now  out,  then  in,  but  he 
Most  perfect  is,  when  thou  art  at  the  worst 
The  same,  the  very  same ;  I  said  at  first, 
This  helpeth  much  when  ihou  art  buffeted, 
And  when  thy  graces  He  in  thee  as  dead ; 
Then  to  believe  they  are  all  perfect  still 
In  Christ  thy  head,  who  hath  that  blessed  skill, 
Yet  to  present  thee  by  what  is  in  him 
Unto  his  Father,  one  that  hath  no  sin. 
Yea,  this  will  fill  thy  mouth  with  argument 
Against  the  tempter,  when  he  shall  present 
Before  thee  all  thy  weakness,  and  shall  hide 
Proin  thee  thy  graces,  that  thou  mayst  abide 
Under  the  fretting  fumes  of  unbelief, 
Which  never  yielded  Christian  man  rebef. 
Nor  help  thyself  thou  may'st  against  him  thus  : 

0  Satan,  though  my  heart  indeed  be  worse 
Than  'twas  a  while  ago,  yet  I  perceive 
Thou  shalt  me  not  of  happiness  bereave, 
Nor  yet  of  holiness ;  for  by  the  Word 

1  find  that  Jesus  Christ,  our  blessed  Lord, 
Is  made  sanctification  for  me 

In  his  own  person,  where  all  graces  be, 
As  water  in  the  fountain ;  and  that  I, 
By  means  of  that,  have  yet  a  sanctity, 
Both  personal  and  perfect  every  way  ; 
And  that  is  Christ  himself,  as  Paul  doth  say. 
Now,  though  my  crazy  pitcher  oft  doth  leak, 
By  means  of  which  my  graces  are  so  weak, 
And  so  much  spent,  that  one  I  cannot  find 
Able  to  stay  or  help  my  feeble  mind ; 


and,  like  a  cracked  groat,  not  so  much  prized  as  good  coin. 
See  the  note  in  vol.  i.  p.  36.  In  Turner's  Remarkable  Pro- 
vidences, folio,  1697,  page  28,  is  a  very  singular  allusion  to  one 
of  these  coins : — "  Christian,  the  wife  of  R.  Green,  of  Brenham, 
Somersetshire,  in  1663,  made  a  covenant  with  the  devil.  He 
pricked  the  fourth  finger  off  her  right  hand,  between  the  middle 
and  upper  joint,  and  took  two  drops  of  her  blood  on  his  finger, 
giving  her  four-pence  half-penny.  He  then  vanished,  leaving 
a  smell  of  brimstone  behind. — Ed. 


Yet  then  I  look  to  Jesus,  and  see  all 

In  him  that  wanting  is  in  me,  and  shall 

Again  take  courage,  and  believe  he  will 

Present  me  upright  in  his  person,  till 

He  humble  me  for  all  my  foolishness, 

And  then  again  fill  me  with  holiness. 

Now,  if  thou  lovest  inward  sanctity, 

As  all  the  saints  do  most  unfeignedly, 

Then  add,  to  what  I  have  already  said, 

Paith  in  the  promise ;  and  be  not  afraid 

To  urge  it  often  at  the  throne  of  grace, 

And  to  expect  it  in  its  time  and  place. 

Then  he  that  true  is,  and  that  cannot  lie, 

Will  give  it  unto  thee,  that  thou  thereby 

May'st  serve  with  faith,  with  fear,  in  truth  and  love, 

That  God  that  did  at  first  thy  spirit  move 

To  ask  it  to  his  praise,  that  he  might  be 

Thy  God,  and  that  he  might  delight  in  thee. 

If  I  should  here  particulars  relate, 
Methinks  it  could  not  but  much  animate 
Thy  heart,  though  very  listless  to  inquire 
How  thou  may'st  that  enjoy,  which  all  desire 
That  love  themselves  and  future  happiness; 
But  0,  I  cannot  fully  it  express  : 
The  promise  is  so  open  and  so  free, 
In  all  respects,  to  those  that  humble  be, 
That  want  they  cannot  what  for  them  is  good ; 
But  there  'tis,  and  confirmed  is  with  blood, 
A  certain  sign,  all  those  enjoy  it  may, 
That  see  they  want  it,  and  sincerely  pray 
To  God  the  Pather,  in  that  Jesus'  name 
Who  bled  on  purpose  to  confirm  the  same. 

[the  necessity  of  a  new  heart.] 

Now  wouldst  thou  have  a  heart  that  tender  is, 
A  heart  that  forward  is  to  close  with  bliss ; 
A  heart  that  will  impressions  freely  take 
Of  the  new  covenant,  and  that  will  make 
The  best  improvement  of  the  word  of  grace, 
And  that  to  wickedness  will  not  give  place ; 
All  this  is  in  the  promise,  and  it  may 
Obtained  be  of  them  that  humbly  pray. 
Wouldst  thou  enjoy  that  spirit  that  is  free, 
Aud  looseth  those  that  in  their  spirits  be 
Oppressed  with  guilt,  or  filth,  or  unbelief ; 
That  spirit  that  will,  where  it  dwells,  be  chief; 
Which  breaketh  Samson's  cord  as  rotten  thread, 
And  raiseth  up  the  spirit  that  is  dead ; 
That  sets  the  will  at  liberty  to  choose 
Those  things  that  God  hath  promis'd  to  infuse 
Into  the  humble  heart  ?     All  this,  T  say, 
The  promise  holdeth  out  to  them  that  pray. 

[the  spirit  of  prayer.] 

Wouldst  thou  have  that  good,  that  blessed  mind, 
That  is  so  much  to  heavenly  things  inclin'd 


EBAL   AND   GERIZIM. 


741 


Tliat  it  aloft  will  soar,  and  always  be 
Contemplating  on  blest  eternity. 
That  mind  that  never  thinks  itself  at  rest, 
But  when  it  knows  it  is  for  ever  blest; 
That  mind  that  can  be  here  no  more  content, 
Than  he  that  in  the  prison  doth  lament ; 
That  blessed  mind  that  counts  itself  then  free 
When  it  can  at  the  throne  witli  Jesus  be, 
There  to  behold  the  mansions  he  prepares 
Tor  such  as  be  with  him  and  his  co-heirs. 
This  mind  is  in  the  covenant  of  grace, 
And  shall  be  theirs  that  truly  seek  his  face. 

[of  godly  fear.] 

Is  godly  fear  debghtful  unto  thee, 

That  fear  that  God  himself  delights  to  see 

Bear  sway  in  them  that  love  him  ?  then  he  will 

Thy  godly  mind  in  this  request  fulfil. 

By  giving  thee  a  fear  that  tremble  shall, 

At  every  trip  thou  takest,  lest  thou  fall, 

And  him  offend,  or  hurt  thyself  by  sin, 

Or  cause  poor  souls  that  always  blind  have  been 

To  stumble  at  thy  falls,  and  harder  be 

Against  their  own  salvation  and  thee. 

That  fear  that  of  itself  would  rather  choose 
The  rod,  than  to  offend  or  to  abuse 
Iu  anything  that  blessed  worthy  name, 
That  hath  thee  saved  from  that  death  and  shame ; 
That  sin  would  soon  have  brought  thee  to,  if  he 
Had  not  imputed  righteousness  to  thee. 
I  will  love  them,  saith  God,  and  not  depart 
From  them,  but  put  my  fear  within  their  heart, 
That  I  to  them  may  always  lovely  be, 
And  that  they  never  may  depart  from  me. 

[OF  UPRIGHTNESS  AND  SINCERITY'.] 

Wouldst  thou  be  very  upright  and  sincere  ? 

Wouldst  thou  be  that  within  thou  dost  appear, 

Or  seem  to  be  in  outward  exercise 

Before  the  most  devout,  and  godly  wise  ? 

Yea,  art  thou  thus  when  no  eye  doth  thee  see 

But  that  which  is  invisible  ?  and  be 

The  words  of  God  in  truth  thy  prop  and  stay  ? 

And  do  they  in  thy  conscience  bear  more  sway 

To  govern  thee  in  faith  and  holiness, 

Than  thou  canst  with  thy  heart  and  mouth  express  ? 

And  do  the  things  that  truly  are  divine, 

Before  thee  more  than  gold  or  rubies  shine  ? 

And  if,  as  unto  Solomon,  God  should 

Propound  to  thee,  What  wouldst  thou  have  ?  how 

would 
Thy  heart  and  pulse  beat  after  heav'nly  things, 
After  the  upper  and  the  nether  springs  ? 

Couldst,  with  unfeigned  heart  and  upright  lip, 
Cry,  Hold  me  fast,  Lord,  never  let  me  slip, 


Nor  step  aside  from  faith  and  holiness, 
Nor  from  the  blessed  hope  of  future  bliss  ? 
Lord,  rather  cross  me  anywhere  than  here ; 
Lord,  fill  me  always  with  thy  holy  fear, 
And  godly  jealousy  of  mine  own  heart, 
Lest  I,  Lord,  should  at  any  time  depart 
From  thy  most  blessed  covenant  of  grace, 
Where  Jesus  rules  as  King,  and  where  thy  face 
Is  only  to  be  seen  with  comfort,  and 
Where  sinners  justified  before  thee  stand. 

If  these  thy  groanings  be  sincere  and  true, 
If  God  doth  count  thee  one  that  dost  pursue 
The  things  thou  cryest  after  with  thy  heart, 
No  doubt  but  in  them  thou  shalt  have  a  part. 

[HOW  GRACES  ARE  TO  BE  OBTAINED.] 

The  next  word  that  I  would  unto  thee  say, 

Is  how  thou  may'st  attain,  without  delay, 

Those  blessed  graces,  and  that  holiness 

Thou  dost  with  so  much  godly  zeal  express 

Thy  love  to,  and  thy  longing  to  enjoy, 

That  sins  and  weakness  might  thee  less  annoy. 

Know,  then,  as  I  have  hinted  heretofore, 

And  shall  now  speak  unto  a  little  more, 

All  graces  in  the  person  of  the  Son 

Are  by  the  Father  hid,  and  therefore  none 

Can  them  obtain  but  they  who  with  him  close ; 

All  others  graceless  are  but  only  those  ; 

For  of  his  fulness  'tis  that  we  receive, 

And  grace  for  grace  ;  let  no  man  then  deceive 

Himself  or  others  with  a  feigned  show 

Of  holiness,  if  Jesus  they  eschew. 

When  he  ascended  to  his  Father,  then 

It  was  that  he  received  gifts  for  men  ; 

Faith,  hope,  and  love,  true  zeal,  an  upright  heart, 

Right  humbleness  of  mind,  and  every  part 

Of  what  the  word  of  life  counts  holiness, 

God  then  laid  up  in  him,  that  we  redress 

And  help  might  have,  who  do  unto  him  fly 

For  righteousness  and  gospel  sanctity. 

[OF  IMPUTED  RIGHTEOUSNESS.] 

Now,  if  thou  wouldst  inherit  righteousness, 
And  so  sanctification  possess 
In  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  then  thou  must 
To  Jesus  fly,  as  one  ungodly  first ; 
And  so  by  him  crave  pardon  for  thy  sin 
Which  thou  hast  loved,  and  hast  lived  in ; 
For  this  cannot  at  all  forgiven  be, 
For  any  righteousness  that  is  in  thee ; 
Because  the  best  thou  hast  is  filthy  rags, 
Profane,  presumptuous,  and  most  beastly  brags 
Of  flesh  and  blood,  which  always  cross  doth  lie 
To  God,  to  grace,  and  thy  felicity. 

Then  righteousness  imputed  thou  must  have, 
Thee  from  that  guilt  and  punishment  to  save 


742 


EBAL   AND   GERIZKM. 


Thou  liest  under  as  a  sinful  man, 

Throughout  polluted,  and  that  never  can 

By  any  other  means  acquitted  be, 

Or  ever  have  true  holiness  in  thee. 

The  reason  is,  because  all  graces  are 

Only  in  Christ,  and  be  infused  where, 

Or  into  those  whom  he  doth  justify, 

By  what  himself  hath  done,  that  he  thereby 

Might  be  the  whole  of  all  that  happiness 

The  sinner  shall  enjoy  here,  and  iu  bliss. 

Besides,  if  holiness  should  first  be  found 

In  those  whom  God  doth  pardon,  then  the  ground 

Why  we  forgiven  are  would  seem  to  be, 

He  first  found  holiness  in  thee  and  me  ; 

But  this  the  holy  Scriptures  will  refute, 

And  prove  that  righteousness  he  doth  impute 

Without  respect  to  goodness  first  in  man ; 

For,  to  speak  truth  indeed,  no  goodness  can 

Be  found  in  those  that  underneath  the  law 

Do  stand  ;  for  if  God  goodness  in  them  saw, 

Why  doth  he  once  and  twice  say,  There  is  none 

That  righteous  be ;  no,  not  so  much  as  one ; 

None  understandeth,  none  seek  after  God, 

His  ways  they  have  not  known,  but  have  abode 

In  wickedness,  unprofitably  they 

Must  needs  appear  to  be  then  every  way. 

Their  throats  an  open  sepulchre,  also 

Their  mouths  are  full  of  filthy  cursings  too  ; 

And  bitterness,  yea,  underneath  their  lips 

The  asp  hath  poison.     0  how  many  slips 

And  falls  in  sin  must  such  poor  people  have ! 

Now  where's  the  holiness  that  should  them  save, 

Or,  as  a  preparation,  go  before, 

To  move  God  to  do  for  them  less  or  more  ? 

No,  grace  must  on  thee  righteousness  bestow, 

Or,  else  sin  will  for  ever  thee  undo. 

Sweet  Paul  this  doctrine  also  doth  express, 

Where  he  saith,  Some  may  have  righteousness, 

Though  works  they  have  not;  and  it  thus  may  stand, 

Grace  by  the  promise  gives  what  the  command 

Requireth  us  to  do,  and  so  are  we 

Quitted  from  doing,  and  by  grace  made  free. 

[op  holiness  of  life.] 
Now,  then,  if  holiness  thou  would'st  obtain, 
And  would'st  a  tender  Christian  man  remain, 
Keep  faith  in  action,  let  that  righteousness 
That  Christ  fulfilled  always  have  express 
And  clear  distinction  in  thy  heart,  from  all 
That  men  by  Scripture,  or  besides  it,  call 
Inherent  gospel  holiness,  or  what 
Terms  else  they  please  to  give  it ;  for  'tis  that, 
And  that  alone,  by  which  all  graces  come 
Into  the  heart ;  for  else  there  is  no  room 
For  ought  but  pride,  presumption,  or  despair, 
No  love  or  other  graces  can  be  there. 


Received  yon  the  Spirit,  saith  St.  Paul, 

By  hearing,  faith,  or  works  ?  not  works,  and  shall 

No  ways  retain  the  same,  except  you  do 

Hear  faith,  embrace  the  same,  and  stick  thereto. 

[the  operation  of  faith.] 

The  word  of  faith  unto  me  pardon  brings, 

Shows  me  the  ground  and  reason  whence  it  springs : 

To  wit,  free  grace,  which  moved  God  to  give 

His  Son  to  die  and  bleed,  that  I  might  live. 

This  word  doth  also  loudly  preach  to  me, 

Though  I  a  miserable  sinner  be, 

Yet  in  this  Son  of  God  I  stand  complete, 

Whose  righteousness  is  without  all  deceit ; 

'Tis  that  which  God  himself  delighteth  in, 

And  that  by  which  all  his  have  saved  been. 

[of  love  to  god.] 

When  I  do  this  begin  to  apprehend, 
My  heart,  my  soul,  and  mind,  begins  to  bend 
To  God-ward,  and  sincerely  for  to  love 
His  Son,  his  ways,  his  people,  and  to  move 
With  brokenness  of  spirit  after  him 
Who  broken  was,  and  killed  for  my  sin. 
Now  is  mine  heart  grown  holy,  now  it  cleaves 
To  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord,  and  now  it  leaves 
Those  ways  that  wicked  be ;  it  mourns  because 
It  can  conform  no  more  unto  the  laws 
Of  God,  who  loved  me  when  I  was  vile, 
And  of  sweet  Jesus,  who  did  reconcile 
Me  unto  justice  by  his  precious  blood, 
When  no  way  else  was  left  to  do  me  good. 
If  you  would  know  how  this  can  operate 
Thus  on  the  soul,  I  shall  to  you  relate 
A  little  farther  what  my  soul  hath  seen 
Since  I  have  with  the  Lord  acquainted  been. 
The  word  of  grace,  when  it  doth  rightly  seize 
The  spirit  of  a  man,  and  so  at  ease 
Doth  set  the  soul,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
Doth  then  with  might  accompany  the  word ; 
In  which  it  sets  forth  Christ  as  crucified, 
And  by  that  means  the  Father  pacified 
With  such  a  wretch  as  thou,  and  by  this  sight, 
Thy  guilt  is  in  the  first  place  put  to  flight, 
For  thus  the  Spirit  doth  expostulate : 
Behold  how  God  doth  now  communicate 
(By  changing  of  the  person)  grace  to  thee 
A  sinner,  but  to  Christ  great  misery, 
Though  he  the  just  one  was,  and  so  could  not 
Deserve  this  punishment ;  behold,  then,  what 
The  love  of  God  is !  how  'tis  manifest, 
And  where  the  reason  lies  that  thou  art  blest. 
This  doctrine  being  spoken  to  the  heart, 
Which  also  is  made  yield  to  every  part 
Thereof,  it  doth  the  same  with  sweetness  fill, 
And  so  doth  sins  and  wickednesses  kill ; 


EBAL   AND    GERIZIM. 


743 


For  when  the  love  of  God  is  thus  rcveal'd, 

And  thy  poor  drooping  spirit  thereby  seal'd, 

Ajid  when  thy  heart,  as  dry  ground,  drinks  this  in 

Unto  the  roots  thereof,  which  nourish  sin, 

It  smites  them,  as  the  worm  did  Jonah's  gourd, 

And  makes  them  dwindle  of  their  own  accord, 

And  die  away ;  instead  of  which  there  springs 

Up  life  and  love,  and  other  holy  things. 

Besides,  the  Holy  Spirit  now  is  come, 

And  takes  possession  of  thee  as  its  home ; 

By  which  a  war  maintained  always  is 

Against  the  old  man  and  the  deeds  of  his. 

When  God  at  first  upon  mount  Sinai  spake, 
He  made  his  very  servant  Moses  quake ; 
But  when  he  heard  the  law  the  second  time, 
His  heart  was  comforted,  his  face  did  shine. 
What  was  the  reason  of  this  difference, 
Seeing  no  change  was  in  the  ordinance, 
Although  a  change  was  in  the  manner,  when 
The  second  time  he  gave  it  unto  men  ? 
At  first  'twas  given  in  severity, 
In  thunder,  blackness,  darkness,  tempest  high, 
In  fiery  flames  it  was  delivered. 
This  struck  both  Moses  and  the  host  as  dead ; 
But  Moses,  when  he  went  into  the  mount 
The  second  time,  upon  the  same  account 
No  fear,  nor  dread,  nor  shaking  of  his  mind, 
Do  we  in  all  the  holy  Scripture  find ; 
But  rather  in  his  spirit  he  had  rest, 
And  look'd  upon  himself  as  greatly  blest. 
He  was  put  in  the  rock,  he  heard  the  name, 
Which  on  the  mount  the  Lord  did  thus  proclaim  : 
The  Lord,  merciful,  gracious,  and  more, 
Long-suffering,  and  keeping  up  in  store 
Mercy  for  thousands,  pardoning  these  things, 
Iniquity,  transgressions,  and  sins, 
And  holding  guilty  none  but  such  as  still 
Refuse  forgiveness,  of  rebellious  will. 

This  proclamation  better  pleased  him 
Than  all  the  thunder  and  the  light'ning 
Which  shook  the  mount,  this  rid  him  of  his  fear, 
This  made  him  bend,  make  haste,  and  worship  there. 

Jchoshaphat,  when  he  was  sore  opprest 
By  Amnon  and  by  Moab,  and  the  rest 
Of  them  that  sought  his  life,  no  rest  he  found, 
Until  a  word  of  faith  became  a  ground 
To  stay  himself  upon  ;  0,  then  they  fell, 
His  very  song  became  their  passing-bell. 
Then  holiness  of  heart  a  consequence 
Of  faith  in  Christ  is,  for  it  flows  from  thence ; 
The  love  of  Christ  in  truth  constraiucth  us, 
Of  love  sincerely  to  make  judgment  thus  : 
He  for  us  died  that  for  ever  we 
Might  die  to  sin,  and  Clnist  his  servants  be. 
0  !  nothing's  like  to  the  remembrance 
Of  what  it  is  to  have  deliverance 


From  death  and  hell,  winch  is  of  due  our  right, 
Nothing,  I  say,  like  this  to  work  delight 
In  holy  things  ;  this  like  live  honey  ruus, 
And  needs  no  pressing  out  of  honey-combs. 

[love  inducing  christian  conduct.] 

Then  understand  my  meaning  by  my  words, 
How  sense  of  mercy  unto  faith  affords 
Both  grace  to  sanctify,  and  holy  make 
That  soul  that  of  forgiveness  doth  partake. 
Thus  having  briefly  showed  you  what  is 
The  way  of  life,  of  sanctity,  of  bliss, 
I  would  not  in  conclusion  have  you  think, 
By  what  I  say,  that  Christian  men  should  drink 
In  these  my  words  with  lightness,  or  that  they 
Are  now  exempted  from  what  every  day 
Their  duty  is.     No,  God  doth  still  expect, 
Yea,  doth  command,  that  they  do  not  neglect 
To  pray,  to  read,  to  hear,  and  not  dissent 
From  being  sober,  grave,  and  diligent 
In  watching,  self-denial,  and  with  fear 
To  serve  him  all  the  time  thou  livest  here. 
Indeed  I  have  endeavoured  to  lay 
Before  your  eyes  the  right  and  only  way 
Pardon  to  get,  and  also  holiness, 
Without  which  never  think  that  God  will  bless 
Thee  with  the  kingdom  he  will  give  to  those 
That  Christ  embrace,  and  holy  lives  do  choose 
To  live,  while  here  all  others  go  astray, 
And  shall  in  time  to  come  be  cast  away. 


FROM   MOUNT  EBAL. 

Thus  having  heard  from  Gerizzim,  I  shall 
Next  come  to  Ebal,  and  you  tliither  call, 
Not  there  to  curse  you,  but  to  let  you  hear 
How  God  doth  curse  that  soul  that  shall  appear 
An  unbelieving  man,  a  graceless  wretch  ; 
Because  he  doth  continue  in  the  breach 
Of  Moses'  law,  and  also  doth  neglect 
To  close  with  Jesus  ;  him  will  God  reject 
And  cast  behind  lum ;  for  of  right  his  due 
Is  that  from  whence  all  miseries  ensue. 
Cursed,  saith  he,  are  they  that  do  transgress 
The  least  of  my  commandments,  more  or  less. 
Nothing  that  written  is  must  broken  be, 
But  always  must  be  kept  unto  by  thee, 
And  must  fulfilled  be;  for  here  no  man 
Can  look  God  in  the  face,  or  ever  stand 
Before  the  judgment-seat ;  for  if  they  be 
Convict,  condemned  too  assuredly. 
Now  keep  this  law  no  mortal  creature  can, 
For  they  already  do,  as  guilty,  stand 
Before  the  God  that  gave  it ;  so  that  they 
Obnoxious  to  the  curse  he  every  day, 


14 


EBAL  AND   GER1ZIM. 


Which  also  they  must  feel  for  certainty, 

If  unto  Jesus  Christ  they  do  not  fly. 

Hence,  then,  as  they  for  ever  shall  be  blest, 

That  do  by  faith  upon  the  promise  rest, 

So  peace  unto  the  wicked  there  is  none ; 

'Tis  wrath  and  death  that  they  must  feed  upon. 

That  what  I  say  may  some  impression  make 
On  carnal  hearts,  that  they  in  time  may  take 
That  course  that  best  will  prove  when  time  is  done, 
These  lines  I  add  to  what  I  have  begun. 

First,  thou  must  know  that  God,  as  he  is  love 
So  he  is  justice,  therefore  cannot  move, 
Or  in  the  least  be  brought  to  favour  those 
His  holiness  and  justice  doth  oppose. 

For  though  thou  may'st  imagine  in  thy  heart 
That  God  is  this  or  that,  yet  if  thou  art 
At  all  besides  the  truth  of  what  he  is, 
And  so  dost  build  thy  hope  for  life  amiss, 
Still  he  the  same  abideth,  and  will  be 
The  same,  the  same  for  ever  unto  thee. 

As  God  is  true  unto  his  promise,  so 
Unto  his  threat'ning  he  is  faithful  too. 
Cease  to  be  God  he  must,  if  he  should  break 
One  tittle  that  his  blessed  mouth  did  speak. 

Now,  then,  none  can  be  saved  but  the  men 
With  whom  the  Godhead  is  contented  when 
It  them  beholds  with  the  severest  eye 
Of  justice,  holiness,  and  yet  can  spy 
No  fault  nor  blemish  in  them ;  these  be  they 
That  must  be  saved,  as  the  Scriptures  say. 

If  this  be  true,  as  'tis  assuredly, 
Woe  be  to  them  that  wicked  live  and  die ; 
Those  that  as  far  from  holiness  have  been 
All  their  life  long  as  if  no  eye  had  seen 
Their  doings  here,  or  as  if  God  did  not 
At  all  regard,  or  in  the  least  mind  what, 
Wherein,  or  how  they  did  his  law  transgress, 
Either  by  this  or  other  wickedness  ; 
But  how  deceived  these  poor  creatures  are, 
They  then  shall  know  when  they  their  burthen  bear 

Alas,  our  God  is  a  consuming  lire  ; 
So  is  his  law,  by  which  he  doth  require 
That  thou  submit  to  him,  and  if  thou  be 
Not  in  that  justice  found  that  can  save  thee 
From  all  and  every  sentence  which  he  spake 
Upon  mount  Sinai,  then  as  one  that  brake 
It,  thou  the  flames  thereof  shall  quickly  find 
As  scourges  thee  to  lash,  while  sins  do  bind 
Thee  hand  and  foot,  for  ever  to  endure 
The  strokes  of  vengeance  for  thy  life  impure. 

What  I  have  said  will  yet  evinced  be, 
And  manifest  abundantly  to  thee, 
If  what  I  have  already  spoken  to 
Ee  joined  with  these  lines  that  do  ensue. 
Justice  discovers  its  antipathy 
Against  profaneness  and  malignity. 


Not  only  by  the  law  it  gave  to  men, 

And  threatenings  thereunto  annexed  then. 

But  inasmuch  as  long  before  that  day, 

He  did  prepare  for  such  as  go  astray, 

That  dreadful,  that  so  much  amazing  place — 

Hell,  with  its  torments — for  those  men  that  grace 

And  holiness  of  life  slight  and  disdain, 

There  to  bemoan  themselves  with  hellish  pain. 

This  place,  also,  the  pains  so  dismal  be, 
Both  as  to  name  and  nature,  that  in  me 
It  is  not  to  express  the  damning  wights, 
The  hellish  torture,  and  the  fearful  plights 
Thereof;  for  as  intolerable  they 
Must  needs  be  found,  by  those  that  disobey 
The  Lord,  so  can  no  word  or  thought  express 
Unto  the  full  the  height  of  that  distress ; 
Such  miserable  caitiffs,  that  shall  there 
Bebukes  of  vengeance,  for  transgressions  bear. 

Indeed  the  holy  Scriptures  do  make  use 
Of  many  metaphors,  that  do  conduce 
Much  to  the  symbolizing  of  the  place, 
Unto  our  apprehension ;  but  the  case — 
The  sad,  the  woful  case — of  those  that  lie 
As  racked  there  in  endless  misery, 
By  all  similitudes  no  mortals  may 
Set  forth  in  its  own  nature  ;  for  I  say 
Similitudes  are  but  a  shade,  and  show 
Of  those  or  that  they  signify  to  you. 
The  fire  that  doth  within  thine  oven  burn, 
The  prison  where  poor  people  sit  and  mourn, 
Chains,  racks,  and  darkness,  and  such  others,  be 
As  painting  on  the  wall,  to  let  thee  see 
By  word  and  figures  the  extremity 
Of  such  as  shall  within  these  burnings  lie. 

But  certainly,  if  wickedness  and  sin 
Had  only  foolish  toys  and  trifles  been, 
And  if  God  had  not  greatly  hated  it, 
Yea,  could  he  any  ways  thereof  admit, 
And  let  it  pass,  he  would  not  thus  have  done. 
He  doth  not  use  to  punish  any  one 
With  any  place  or  punishment  that  is 
Above  or  sharper  than  the  sin  of  his 
Hath  merited,  and  justice  seeth  due ; 
Read  sin,  then,  by  the  death  that  doth  ensue. 

Most  men  do  judge  of  sin,  not  by  the  fruits 
It  bears  and  bringeth  forth,  but  as  it  suits 
Their  carnal  and  deluded  hearts,  that  be 
With  sensual  pleasures  eaten  up ;  but  he 
That  now  so  judgeth,  shortly  shall  perceive 
That  God  will  judge  thereof  himself,  and  leave 
Such  men  no  longer  to  their  carnal  lusts, 
To  judge  of  wickedness,  and  of  the  just 
And  righteous  punishment  that  doth  of  right 
Belong  thereto  ;  and  will,  too,  in  despite 
Of  all  their  carnal  reason,  justify 
Himself,  in  their  eternal  misery. 


EBAL  AND   GERIZIM. 


7-15 


Then  liell  will  be  no  fancy,  neither  will. 
Men's  sins  be  pleasant  to  them ;  but  so  ill 
And  bitter,  yea,  so  bitter,  that  none  can 
Fully  express  the  same,  or  ever  stand 
Under  the  burden  it  will  on  them  lay, 
When  they  from  life  and  bliss  are  sent  away. 

When  I  have  thought  how  often  God  doth  speak 
Of  their  destruction,  who  his  law  do  break ; 
And  when  the  nature  of  the  punishment 
I  find  so  dreadful,  and  that  God's  intent, 
Yea,  resolution  is,  it  to  inflict 
On  every  sinner  that  shall  stand  convict, 
I  have  amazed  been,  yet  to  behold, 
To  see  poor  sinners  yet  with  sin  so  bold, 
That  like  the  horse  that  to  the  battle  runs, 
Without  all  fear,  and  that  no  danger  shuns, 
Till  down  he  falls.     O  resolute  attempts ! 
O  sad,  amazing,  damnable  events  ! 
The  end  of  such  proceedings  needs  must  be, 
From  which,  0  Lord,  save  and  deliver  me. 
But  if  thou  think  that  God  thy  noble  race 
Will  more  respect,  than  into  such  a  place 
To  put  thee ;  hold,  though  thou  his  offspring  be, 
And  so  art  lovely,  yet  sin  hath  made  thee 
Another  kind  of  creature  than  when  thou 
Didst  from  his  fingers  drop,  and  therefore  now 
Thy  first  creation  stands  thee  in  no  stead ; 
Thou  hast  transgressed,  and  in  very  deed 
Set  God  against  thee,  who  is  infinite, 
And  that  for  certain  never  will  forget 
Thy  sins,  nor  favour  thee  if  thou  shalt  die 
A  graceless  man ;  this  is  thy  misery. 

When  angels  sinned,  though  of  higher  race 
Than  thou,  and  also  put  in  higher  place, 
Yet  them  he  spared  not,  but  cast  them  down 
From  heaven  to  hell ;  where  also  they  lie  bound 
In  everlasting  chains,  and  no  release 
Shall  ever  have,  but  wrath,  that  shall  increase 
Upon  them,  to  their  everlasting  woe. 
As  for  the  state  they  were  exalted  to, 
That  will  by  no  means  mitigate  their  fear, 
But  aggravate  their  hellish  torment  here ; 


For  he  that  liighest  stands,  if  he  shall  fall, 
His  danger  needs  must  be  the  great' st  of  all. 
Now  if  God  noble  angels  did  not  spare 
Because  they  did  transgress,  will  he  forbear 
Foor  dust  and  ashes  ?     Will  he  suffer  them 
To  break  his  law,  and  sin,  and  not  condemn 
Them  for  so  doing  ?     Let  not  man  deceive 
Himself  or  others ;  they  that  do  bereave 
Themselves  bylfcin  of  happiness,  shall  be 
Cut  off  by  justice,  and  have  misery. 
Witness  his  great  severity  upon 
The  world  that  first  was  planted,  wherein  nono 
But  only  eight  the  deluge  did  escape, 
All  others  of  that  vengeance  did  partake ; 
The  reason  was,  that  world  ungodly  stood 
Before  him,  therefore  he  did  send  the  flood, 
Which  swept  them  all  away.     A  just  reward 
For  their  most  wicked  ways  against  the  Lord, 
Who  could  no  longer  bear  them  and  their  ways, 
Therefore  into  their  bosom  vengeance  pays. 
We  read  of  Sodom,  and  Goinorrah  too, 
What  judgments  they  for  sin  did  undergo  ; 
How  God  from  heaven  did  fire  upon  them  rain, 
Because  they  would  not  wicked  ways  refrain ; 
Condemning  of  them  with  an  overthrow, 
And  turned  them  to  ashes.     Who  can  know 
The  miseries  that  these  poor  people  felt 
While  they  did  underneath  those  burnings  melt  ? 
Now  these,  and  many  more  that  I  could  name, 
That  have  been  made  partakers  of  the  flame 
And  sword  of  justice,  God  did  then  cut  off, 
And  make  examples  unto  all  that  scoff 
At  holiness,  or  do  the  gospel  slight ; 
And  long  it  will  not  be  before  the  night 
And  judgment,  painted  out  by  what  he  did 
To  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  fulfilled 
Upon  such  sinners  be,  that  they  may  know 
That  God  doth  hate  the  sin,  and  persons  too, 
Of  such  as  still  rebellious  shall  abide, 
Although  they  now  at  judgment  may  deride. 


VOL.  III. 


94 


A    BOOK    FOR    BOYS    AND    GIRLS; 

OR, 

TEMPORAL    THINGS    SPIRITUALIZED. 
By  JOHN  BUNYAN, 

LICENSED    AND    ENTERED    ACCORDING    TO    ORDER. 

London :  Printed  for,  and  sold  by,  R.  Tookey,  at  his  Printing  House  in  St.  Christopher's  Court,  in  Threadneedle  Street, 
behind  the  Royal  Exchange,  1701. 


This  Title-page  was  afterwards  altered  to— 
DIVINE  EMBLEMS,  OR  TEMPORAL  THINGS  SPIRITUALIZED; 

FITTED    FOR   THE    USE    OF    BOYS    AND    GIRLS. 
ADORNED    WITH    CUTS    SUITABLE    TO    EVERY    SUBJECT. THE    NINTH    EDITION,    WITH    LARGE    ADDITIONS. 

By   JOHN    BUNYAN. 

I^ndon :  Printed  by  S.  Negris,  for  John  Marshall,  at  the  Bible,  in  Gracechurch  Street,  1 724. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITOR. 


Some  degree  of  mystery  hangs  over  these  Divine 
Emblems  for  children,  and  many  years'  diligent 
researches  have  not  enabled  me  completely  to  solve 
it.  That  they  were  written  by  Bunyan,  there  can- 
not be  the  slightest  doubt. 

'  Manner  and  matter,  too,  are  all  his  own.' ' 

But  no  book,  under  the  title  of  Divine  Emblems, 
is  mentioned  in  any  catalogue  or  advertisements  of 
Bunyan's  works,  published  during  his  life :  nor  in 
those  more  complete  lists  printed  by  his  personal 
friends,  immediately  after  his  death.  In  all  these 
lists,  as  well  as  in  many  advertisement,  both  be- 
fore, and  shortly  after  Mr.  Bunyan's  death,  a  little 
book  for  children  is  constantly  introduced,  which, 
judging  from  the  title,  must  have  been  similar  to, 
if  not  the  same  as,  these  Emblems ;  but  the  Editor 
has  not  been  able  to  discover  a  copy  of  the  first 
editiou,  although  every  inquiry  has  been  made  for 
it,  both  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  America.  It 
was  advertised  in  1688,  as  Country  Rhymes  for 
Children,  upon  seventy-four  things?  It  is  also 
advertised,  in  the  same  year,  as  A  Book  for  Boys 
and-  Girls,  or  Country  Rhymes  for  Children,  price  6d3 
In  1692,  it  is  included  in  Charles  Doe's  catalogue 


1  Bunyan's  poem  in  the  Holy  War. 

2  On  the  leaf  following  the  title  to  One  Thing  is  Needful,  &c., 
by  John  Bunyan,  1688.  A  rare  little  32mo,  published  by 
the  author,  in  possession  of  the  Editor. 

3  At  the  end  of  Grace  Abounding,  the  sixth  edition,  and 
also  in  The  Work  of  Jesus  Christ  as  an  Advocate,  bv  Bunyan, 
1688. 


table  of  all  Mr.  Bunyan's  hooks,  appended  to  The 
Strugglerfor  their  preservation,  No.  36  ;  Meditations 
on  seventy-four  things,  published  in  1685,  and  not 
reprinted  during  the  author's  life.  In  Charles 
Doe's  second  catalogue  of  all  Mr.  Bunyan's  books, 
appended  to  the  first  edition  of  the  Heavenly  Foot- 
man, March  1698,  it  is  No.  37.  A  Book  for  Boys 
and  Girls,  or  Country  Rhymes  for  Children,  in  verse, 
on  seventy-four  things.  This  catalogue  describes 
every  work,  word  for  word,  as  it  is  in  the  several 
title  pages.  In  1707  it  had  reached  a  third  edi- 
tion, and  was  'ornamented  with  cuts;'4  and  the 
title  is  altered  to  A  Book  for  Boys  and  Girls,  or 
Temporal  Tilings  Spiritualized,  with  cuts.  In  1720, 
it  was  advertised,  'price,  bound,  6c?.'5  In  Reach's 
Glorious  Lover,  it  is  advertised  by  Marshall,  in 
12mo.  price  Is.  In  1724,  it  assumed  its  present 
title,  and  from  that  time  was  repeatedly  adver- 
tised as  Divine  Emblems,  or  Temporal  Things  Spiri- 
tualized, fitted  for  the  use  of  boys  and  girls,  adorned 
with  cuts. 

By  indefatigable  exertions,  my  excellent  friend 
and  brother  collector  of  old  English  bibles,  James 
Dix,  Esq.,  Bristol,  has  just  discovered  and  pre- 
sented to  me  the  second  edition  of  this  very  rare 
little  volume,  in  fine  preservation,  from  which  it 
appears,  that  in  1701,  the  title  page  was  altered 
from  Country  Rhymes  and  Meditations,  to  A  Book  for 

4  Advertised  in  the  eighth  edition  of  Solomon's  Temple 
Spiritualized. 

6  In  Youth  Directed  and  Instructed — a  curious  little  book 
for  children. 


TO   THE   READER. 


747 


Boys  and  Girls,  or  Temporal  Tilings  Spiritualized. 
It  has  no  cuts,  but,  with  that  exception,  it  contains 
exactly  the  same  subjects  as  the  subsequent  editions 
published  under  the  more  popular  title  of  Divine 
Emblems. 

The  only  difficulty  that  remains  is  to  discover 
seventy-four  meditations  in  the  forty-nine  Emblems. 
This  may  be  readily  done,  if  the  subjects  of  medi- 
tation are  drawn  out.  Thus,  the  first  emblem  con- 
tains meditations  on  two  things,  the  Barren  Fig- 
Tree,  and  God's  Vineyard.  So  the  second  has  a 
meditation  on  the  Lark  and  the  Fowler,  and  an- 
other on  the  comparison  between  the  Fowler  and 
Satan.  Upon  this  plan,  the  volume  contains  exactly 
seventy-four  meditations. 

Under  the  title  of  Divine  Emblems,  it  has  passed 
through  a  multitude  of  editions,  and  many  thousand 
copies  have  been  circulated.  It  was  patronized  in 
those  early  efforts  of  the  Religious  Tract  Society, 
which  have  been  so  abundantly  blessed  in  intro- 
ducing wholesome  food  to  the  young,  instead  of  the 
absurd  romances  which  formerly  poisoned  the  infant 
and  youthful  mind. 

Among  these  numerous  editions,  two  deserve 
special  notice.  The  first  of  these  was  published  in 
1731,  'on  a  curious  paper,  and  good  letter,  with 
new  cuts. '  It  has  a  singular  preface,  signed  J.  D., 
addressed  '  to  the  great  Boys,  in  folio,  and  the  little 
ones  in  coats.'  The  first  eight  pages  are  occupied 
with  a  dissertation  on  the  origin  of  language,  per- 
haps arising  from  a  line  in  the  dialogue  between  a 
sinner  and  spider,  '  My  name  entailed  is  to  my 
creation.'  In  this  preface,  he  learnedly  attempts 
to  prove  that  language  was  the  gift  of  God  by  re- 


velation, and  not  a  gradual  acquirement  of  man  as 
his  wants  multiplied.  The  other  remarkable  edi- 
tion was  published  about  1790.1  It  is,  both  the 
text  and  cuts,  printed  from  copperplate  engravings, 
very  handsomely  executed.  This  is  an  honour 
conferred  upon  very  few  authors;2  nor  was  it  ever 
conferred  upon  one  more  worthy  the  highest  vene- 
ration of  man  than  is  the  immortal  allegorist. 

The  number  of  editions  which  have  been  printed 
of  these  little  engaging  poems,  is  a  proof  of  the 
high  estimation  in  which  they  have  been  held  for 
nearly  one  hundred  and  seventy  years ;  and  the 
great  rarity  of  the  early  copies  shows  the  eager 
interest  with  which  they  have  been  read  by  children 
until  utterly  destroyed. 

The  cuts  were  at  first  exceedingly  coarse  and 
rude,  but  were  much  improved  in  the  more  modern 
copies.  Those  to  Mason's  edition  are  handsome. 
The  engraver  has  dressed  all  his  actors  in  the  cos- 
tume of  the  time  of  George  the  Third  ;  the  women 
with  hooped  petticoats  and  high  head  dresses ; 
clergymen  with  five  or  six  tier  wigs ;  men  with 
cocked  hats  and  queues  ;  and  female  servants  with 
mob  caps.  That  to  Emblem  Fifteen,  upon  the 
sacraments,  is  peculiarly  droll;  the  artist,  forgetting 
that  the  author  was  a  Baptist,  represents  a  baby 
brought  to  the  font  to  he  christened!  and  two 
persons  kneeling  before  the  body  of  our  Lord ! 
Geo.  Offor. 


1  Square  24mo,  by  Bennet,  Gurney,  and  others,  without  date. 

2  Sturt  engraved  the  Book  of  Commo?i  Prayer;  some 
French  artists  elegantly  etched  two  of  their  devotional  books; 
and  Pyne  engraved   the   tests    of  Horace   and   Virgil    with 

beautiful  vignettes. 


TO    THE    READER 


Courteous  Reader, 


The  title  page  will  show,  if  there  thou  look, 
Who  are  the  proper  subjects  of  this  book. 
They're  boys  and  girls  of  all  sorts  and  degrees, 
From  those  of  age  to  children  on  the  knees. 
Thus  comprehensive  am  I  in  my  notions, 
They  tempt  me  to  it  by  their  childish  motions. 
We  now  have  boys  with  beards,  and  girls  that  be 
Big 3  as  old  women,  wanting  gravity. 

Then  do  not  blame  me,  'cause  I  thus  describe  them. 
Flatter  I  may  not,  lest  thereby  I  bribe  them 
To  have  a  better  judgment  of  themselves, 
Than  wise  men  have  of  babies  on  their  shelves.4 


3  Altered  to  'huge'  in  the  Emblems,  1724. 

4  A  familiar  phrase,  denoting  persons  who  have  been  always 
frivolous  and  childish,  or  those  who  have  passed  into  second 


Their  antic  tricks,  fantastic  modes,  and  way, 
Show  .they,  like  very  boys  and  girls,  do  play 
With  all  the  frantic  fopperies  of  this  age, 
And  that  in  open  view,  as  on  a  stage  ? 
Our  bearded  men  do  act  like  beardless  boys ; 
Our  women  please  themselves  with  childish  toys. 

Our  ministers,  long  time,  by  word  and  pen, 
Dealt  with  them,  counting  them  not  boys,  but  men. 
Thunderbolts  they  shot  at  them  and  their  toys, 
But  hit  them  not,  'cause  they  were  girls  and  boys. 
The  better  charg'd,  the  wider  still  they  shot, 
Or  else  so  high,  these  dwarfs  they  touched  not. 
Instead  of  men,  they  found  them  girls  and  boys, 
Addict  to  nothing  as  to  childish  toys. 


■hildhood.      'On   the  shelf   is   a  common  saying   of  ladiea 
when  they  are  too  old  to  get  married.— (En.) 


748 


A    BOOK  FOE    BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


Wherefore,  good  reader,  that  I  save  them  may, 
I  now  with  them  the  very  dotterel '  play; 
And  since  at  gravity  they  make  a  tush, 
My  very  beard  I  cast  behind  a  bush ; 
And  like  a  fool  stand  fing'ring  of  their  toys, 
And  all  to  show  them  they  are  girls  and  boys. 

Nor  do  I  blush,  although  I  think  some  may 
Call  me  a  baby,  'cause  I  with  them  play. 
I  do't  to  show  them  how  each  fingle-fangle 
On  which  they  doting  are,  their  souls  entangle, 
As  with  a  web,  a  trap,  a  gin,  or  snare ; 
And  will  destroy  them,  have  they  not  a  care. 

Paul  seemed  to  play  the  fool,  that  he  might  gain 
Those  that  were  fools  indeed,  if  not  in  grain  ;2 
And  did  it  by  their  things,  that  they  might  know 
Their  emptiness,  and  might  be  brought  unto 
What  would  them  save  from  sin  and  vanity, 
A  noble  act,  and  full  of  honesty. 
Yet  he  nor  I  would  like  them  be  in  vice, 
While  by  their  playthings  I  would  them  entice, 
To  mount  their  thoughts  from  what   are  childish 

toys, 
To  heaven,  for  that's  prepared  for  girls  and  boys. 
Nor  do  I  so  confine  myself  to  these, 
As  to  shun  graver  things  ;  I  seek  to  please 
Those  more  compos'd  with  better  things  than  toys ; 
Though  thus  I  would  be  catching  girls  and  boys. 

Wherefore,  if  men  have  now  a  mind  to  look, 
Perhaps  their  graver  fancies  may  be  took 
With  what  is  here,  though  but  in  homely  rhymes : 
But  he  who  pleases  all  must  rise  betimes. 
Some,  I  persuade  me,  will  be  finding  fault, 
Concluding,  here  I  trip,  and  there  I  halt : 
No  doubt  some  could  those  grovelling  notions  raise 
By  fine-spun  terms,  that  challenge  might  the  bays. 
But  should  all  men  be  forc'd  to  lay  aside 
Their  brains  that  cannot  rearulate  the  tide 


By  this  or  that  man's  fancy,  we  should  have 

The  wise  unto  the  fool  become  a  slave. 

What  though  my  text  seems  mean,  my  morals  be 

Grave,  as  if  fetch'd  from  a  sublimer  tree. 

And  if  some  better  handle 3  can  a  fly, 

Than  some  a  text,  why  should  we  then  deny 

Their  making  proof,  or  good  experiment, 

Of  smallest  things,  great  mischiefs  to  prevent  ? 

Wise  Solomon  did  fools  to  piss-ants  *  send, 
To  learn  true  wisdom,  and  their  lives  to  mend. 
Yea,  God  by  swallows,  cuckoos,  and  the  ass,8 
Shows  they  are  fools  who  let  that  season  pass, 
Which  he  put  in  their  hand,  that  to  obtain 
Which  is  both  present  and  eternal  gain. 

I  think  the  wiser  sort  my  rhymes  may  slight, 
But  what  care  I,  the  foolish  will  delight 
To  read  them,  and  the  foolish  God  has  chose, 
And  doth  by  foolish  things  their  minds  compose, 
And  settle  upon  that  which  is  divine ; 
Great  things,  by  little  ones,  are  made  to  shine. 

I  could,  were  I  so  pleas'd,  use  higher  strains : 
And  for  applause  on  tenters 6  stretch  my  brains. 
But  what  needs  that  ?  the  arrow,  out  of  sight, 
Does  not  the  sleeper,  nor  the  watchman  fright ; 
To  shoot  too  high  doth  but  make  children  gaze, 
'Tis  that  which  hits  the  man  doth  him  amaze. 

And  for  the  inconsiderableness 
Of  things,  by  which  I  do  my  mind  express, 
May  I  by  them  bring  some  good  thing  to  pass, 
As  Samson,  with  the  jawbone  of  an  ass ; 
Or  as  brave  Shamgar,  with  his  ox's  goad 
(Both  being  things  not  manly,  nor  for  war  in  mode), 
I  have  my  end,  though  I  myself  expose 
To  scorn ;  God  will  have  glory  in  the  close.      J.  B. 


1  The  name  of  a  bird  that  mimics  gestures. — (Ed.) 

2  Indelible,  as  when  raw  material  is  dyed  before  it  is  wove, 
every  grain  receives  the  dye. — (En.) 


3  For  this  use  of  the  word  *  handle,'  see  Jer.  ii.  8.     *  They 
that  handle  the  law.' — (Ed.) 

4  This  word,  with  pismire  and  emmet,  has  become  obsolete. 
'Ant'  is  the  term  now  universally  used. — (Ed.) 

5  See  Fs.  lxxxiv.  3 ;  Le.  xi.  16 ;  Nu.  xx. 

6  A  machine  used  in  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  on  which  it 
is  stretched.—  (Ed.) 


A    BOOK    FOR    BOYS    AND    GIRLS,    &o. 

DIVINE   EMBLEMS,  OR  TEMPORAL  THINGS   SPIRITUALIZED,  &c. 


I. 


tTON  THE  BARREN  FIG-TREE  IN  GOD  S  VINEYARD. 

What,  barren  here !  in  this  so  good  a  soil  ? 
The  sight  of  this  doth  make  God's  heart  recoil 
Prom  giving  thee  his  blessing ;  barren  tree, 
Bear  fruit,  or  else  thine  end  will  cursed  be ! 


Art  thou  not  planted  by  the  water-side  ? 
Know'st  not  thy  Lord  by  fruit  is  glorified  ? 
The  sentence  is,  Cut  down  the  barren  tree : 
Bear  fruit,  or  else  thine  end  will  cursed  be. 
Hast  thou  been  digg'd  about  and  dunged  too, 
Will  neither  patience  nor  yet  dressing  do  ? 
The  executioner  is  come,  0  tree, 
Bear  fruit,  or  else  thine  end  will  cursed  be ! 


A    BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


749 


ITc  that  about  thy  roots  takes  pains  to  dig, 
Would,  if  on  thee  were  found  but  one  good  fig, 
Preserve  thee  from  the  axe :  but,  barren  tree, 
Bear  fruit,  or  else  thy  end  will  cursed  be ! 
The  utmost  end  of  patience  is  at  hand, 
'Tis  much  if  thou  much  longer  here  doth  stand. 
O  cumber-ground,  thou  art  a  barren  tree. 
Bear  fruit,  or  else  thine  end  will  cursed  be  ! 
Thy  standing  nor  thy  name  will  help  at  all ; 
When  fruitful  trees  are  spared,  thou  must  fall. 
The  axe  is  laid  unto  thy  roots,  0  tree ! 
Bear  fruit,  or  else  thine  end  will  cursed  be. 

II. 

UPON  TITE  LARK  AND  THE  FOWLER. 

Thou  simple  bird,  what  makes  thou  here  to  play  ? 

Look,  there's  the  fowler,  pr'ythee  come  away. 

Do'st  not  behold  the  net  ?  Look  there,  'tis  spread, 

Venture  a  little  further,  thou  art  dead. 

Is  there  not  room  enough  in  all  the  field 

For  thee  to  play  in,  but  thou  needs  must  yield 

To  the  deceitful  glitt'ring  of  a  glass, 

Flac'd  betwixt  nets,  to  bring  thy  death  to  pass  ? 

Bird,  if  thou  art  so  much  for  dazzling  light, 

Look,  there's  the  sun  above  thee ;  dart  upright ; 

Thy  nature  is  to  soar  up  to  the  sky, 

Why  wilt  thou  come  down  to  the  nets  and  die  ? 

Take  no  heed  to  the  fowler's  tempting  call; 

This  whistle,  he  enchantcth  birds  withal. 

Or  if  thou  see'st  a  live  bird  in  his  net, 

Believe  she's  there,  'cause  hence  she  cannot  get. 

Look  how  he  tempteth  thee  with  his  decoy, 

That  he  may  rob  thee  of  thy  life,  thy  joy. 

Come,  pry'thee  bird,  I  pry'thee  come  away, 

Why  should  this  net  thee  take,  when'scape  thou  may? 

Hadst  thou  not  wings,  or  were  thy  feathers  pull'd, 

Or  wast  thou  blind,  or  fast  asleep  wer't  lull'd, 

The  case  would  somewhat  alter,  but  for  thee, 

Thy  eyes  are  ope,  and  thou  hast  wings  to  flee. 

Remember  that  thy  song  is  in  thy  rise, 

Not  in  thy  fall ;  earth's  not  thy  paradise. 

Keep  up  aloft,  then,  let  thy  circuits  be 

Above,  where  birds  from  fowler's  nets  are  free. 

Comparison. 
This  fowler  is  an  emblem  of  the  devil, 
His  nets  and  whistle,  figures  of  all  evil. 
His  glass  an  emblem  is  of  sinful  pleasure, 
And  his  decoy  of  who  counts  sin  a  treasure. 
This  simple  lark's  a  shadow  of  a  saint, 
Under  allurings,  ready  now  to  faint. 
This  admonisher  a  true  teacher  is, 
Whose  works  to  show  the  soul  the  snare  and  bliss, 
And  how  it  may  this  fowler's  net  escape, 
And  not  commit  upon  itself  this  rape. 


III. 


UrON  THE  VINE-TREE. 


What  is  the  vine,  more  than  another  tree  ? 
Nay  most,  than  it,  more  tall,  more  comely  be. 
What  workman  thence  will  take  a  beam  or  pin, 
To  make  ought  which  may  be  delighted  in  ? 
Its  excellency  in  its  fruit  doth  lie : 
A  fruitless  vine,  it  is  not  worth  a  fly. 

Comparison. 

What  are  professors  more  than  other  men  ? 
Nothing  at  all.     Nay,  there's  not  one  in  ten, 
Either  for  wealth,  or  wit,  that  may  compare, 
In  many  things,  with  some  that  carnal  are. 
Good  are  they,  if  they  mortify  their  sin, 
But  without  that,  they  are  not  worth  a  pin. 

IV. 

MEDITATIONS  UPON  AN  EGG. 
1. 

The  egg's  no  chick  by  falling  from  the  hen ; 
Nor  man  a  Christian,  till  he's  born  again. 
The  egg's  at  first  contained  in  the  shell ; 
Men,  afore  grace,  in  sins  and  darkness  dwell. 
The  egg,  when  laid,  by  warmth  is  made  a  chicken, 
And  Christ,  by  grace,  those  dead  in  sin  doth  quicken. 
The  egg,  when  first  a  chick,  the  shell's  its  prison ; 
So's  flesh  to  the  soul,  who  yet  with  Christ  is  risen. 
The  shell  doth  crack,  the  chick  doth  chirp  and  peep, 
The  flesh  decays,  as  men  do  pray  and  weep. 
The  shell  doth  break,  the  chick's  at  liberty, 
The  flesh  falls  off,  the  soul  mounts  up  on  high. 
But  both  do  not  enjoy  the  self-same  plight; 
The  soul  is  safe,  the  chick  now  fears  the  kite. 


But  chicks  from  rotten  eggs  do  not  proceed, 
Nor  is  a  hypocrite  a  saint  indeed. 
The  rotten  egg,  though  underneath  the  hen, 
If  crack'd,  stinks,  and  is  loathsome  unto  men. 
Nor  doth  her  warmth  make  what  is  rotten  sound ; 
What's  rotten,  rotten  will  at  last  be  found. 
The  hypocrite,  sin  has  him  in  possession, 
He  is  a  rotten  egg  under  profession. 


Some  eggs  bring  cockatrices ;  and  some  men 
Seem  hatch'd  and  brooded  in  the  viper's  den. 
Some  eggs  bring  wild-fowls ;  and  some  men  there  be 
As  wild  as  are  the  wildest  fowls  that  flee. 
Some  eggs  bring  spiders,  and  some  men  appear 
More  venom' d  than  the  worst  of  spiders  are.1 


Spiders  being  venomous  was  a  vulgar  error,  universally 


750 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


Some  eggs  bring  piss-ants,  and  some  seem  to  me 

As  much  for  trifles  as  the  piss-ants  be. 

Thus  divers  eggs  do  produce  divers  shapes, 

As  like  some  men  as  monkeys  are  like  apes. 

But  this  is  but  an  egg,  were  it  a  chick, 

Here  had  been  legs,  and  wings,  and  bones  to  pick. 

V. 

OP  FOWLS  FLYING  IN  THE  AIR. 

Methinks  I  see  a  sight  most  excellent, 
All  sorts  of  birds  fly  in  the  firmament : 
Some  great,  some  small,  all  of  a  divers  kind, 
Mine  eye  affecting,  pleasant  to  my  mind. 
Look  how  they  tumble  in  the  wholesome  air, 
Above  the  world  of  worldlings,  and  their  care. 
And  as  they  divers  are  in  bulk  and  hue, 
So  are  they  in  their  way  of  flying  too. 
So  many  birds,  so  many  various  things 
Tumbling  i'  the  element  upon  their  wings. 

Comparison. 

These  birds  are  emblems  of  those  men  that  shall 

Ere  long  possess  the  heavens,  their  all  in  all. 

They  are  each  of  a  diverse  shape  and  kind, 

To  teach  we  of  all  nations  there  shall  find. 

They  are  some  great,  some  little,  as  we  see, 

To  show  some  great,  some  small,  in  glory  be.1 

Their  flying  diversely,  as  we  behold, 

Do  show  saints'  joys  will  there  be  manifold ; 

Some  glide,  some  mount,  some  flutter,  and  some  do; 

In  a  mix'd  way  of  flying,  glory  too. 

And  all  to  show  each  saint,  to  his  content, 

Shall  roll  and  tumble  in  that  firmament. 


VI. 


UPON  THE  LORD  S  PRAYER. 

Our  Father  which  in  heaven  art, 

Thy  name  be  always  hallowed ; 
Thy  kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done ; 

Thy  heavenly  path  be  followed 

By  us  on  earth  as  'tis  with  thee, 
We  humbly  pray ; 

And  let  our  bread  us  given  be, 
From  day  to  day. 
Forgive  our  debts  as  we  forgive 

Those  that  to  us  indebted  are  : 
Into  temptation  lead  us  not,2 

But  save  us  from  the  wicked  snare. 

believed,  until  modem  discoveries  have  proved  the  contrary, 
excepting  a  few  foreign  species.  —  (Ed.) 

1  This  is  a  scriptural  idea  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven. 
Re.  xi.  8,  saints  '  small  and  great.'  Mat.  xix.  28 :  '  The  Son 
of  man  on  his  throne,  and  the  twelve  apostles  on  their  thrones.' 
Re.  iv.  10 :  '  Four  and  twenty  elders  on  their  thrones.'  Re. 
v.  11 :  'An  innumerable  company  of  worshippers.' — (Ed.) 

'  In  an  ancient   battledore  or  horn-book,  and  in  one  of 


The  kingdom's  thine,  the  power  too, 

We  thee  adore ; 
The  glory  also  shall  be  thine 

For  evermore. 

VII. 

MEDITATIONS  UPON  PEEP  OF  DAY. 

I  oft,  though  it  be  peep  of  day,  don't  know 

Whether  'tis  night,  whether  'tis  day  or  no. 

I  fancy  that  I  see  a  little  light, 

But  cannot  yet  distinguish  day  from  night ; 

I  hope,  I  doubt,  but  steady  yet  I  be  not, 

I  am  not  at  a  point,  the  sun  I  see  not. 

Thus  'tis  with  such  who  grace  but  now 3  possest, 

They  know  not  yet  if  they  be  cursed  or  blest. 

VIII. 

UPON  THE  FLINT  IN  THE  WATER. 

This  flint,  time  out  of  mind,  has  there  abode, 
Where  crystal  streams  make  their  continual  road. 
Yet  it  abides  a  flint  as  much  as  'twere 
Before  it  touched  the  water,  or  came  there 
Its  hard  obdurateness  is  not  abated, 
'Tis  not  at  all  by  water  penetrated. 
Though  water  hath  a  soft'ning  virtue  in't, 
This  stone  it  can't  dissolve,  for  'tis  a  flint. 
Yea,  though  it  in  the  water  doth  remain, 
It  doth  its  fiery  nature  still  retain. 
If  you  oppose  it  with  its  opposite, 
At  you,  yea,  in  your  face,  its  fire  'twill  spit. 

Comparison. 

This  flint  an  emblem  is  of  those  that  He, 
Like  stones,  under  the  Word,  until  they  die. 
Its  crystal  streams  have  not  their  nature  changed, 
They  are  not,  from  their  lusts,  by  grace  estranged. 

IX. 

UPON  THE  FISH  IN  THE  WATER. 
1. 

The  water  is  the  fish's  element ; 
Take  her  from  thence,  none  can  her  death  prevent ; 
And  some  have  said,  who  have  transgressors  been, 
As  good  not  be,  as  to  be  kept  from  sin. 

2. 
The  water  is  the  fish's  element : 
Leave  her  but  there,  and  she  is  well  content. 


Henry  VIII.'s  primers,  both  in  the  editor's  possession,  this 
sentence  is  translated — '  And  let  us  not  be  led  into  tempta- 
tion.'— (Ed.) 

3  When  divine  light  first  dawns  upon  the  soul,  and  reveals 
sin,  O  how  difficult  is  it  to  conclude  that  sia  is  pardoned, 
and  the  sinner  blest ! — (Ed.) 


A  BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


751 


So's  he,  who  in  the  path  of  life  doth  plod, 
Take  all,  says  he,  let  me  but  have  my  God. 


The  water  is  the  fish's  clement, 
Her  sportiugs  there  to  her  are  excellent ; 
So  is  God's  service  unto  holy  men, 
They  are  not  in  their  element  till  then. 

X. 

UrON  THE  SWALLOW. 

This  pretty  bird,  0 !  how  she  flies  and  sings,' 
But  could  she  do  so  if  she  had  not  wings  ? 
Her  wings  bespeak  my  faith,  her  songs  my  peace ; 
When  I  beheve  and  sing  my  doubtings  cease. 

XI. 

UPON  THE  BEE. 

The  bee  goes  out,  and  honey  home  doth  bring, 
And  some  who  seek  that  honey  find  a  sting. 
Now  would' st  thou  have  the  honey,  and  be  free 
From  stinging,  in  the  first  place  kill  the  bee. 

Comparison. 
This  bee  an  emblem  truly  is  of  sin, 
Whose  sweet,  unto  a  many,  death  hath  been. 
Now  would'st  have  sweet  from  sin  and  yet  not  die, 
Do  thou  it,  in  the  first  place,  mortify. 

XII. 

UPON  A  LOWERING  MORNING. 

Well,  with  the  day  I  see  the  clouds  appear, 

And  mix  the  bght  with  darkness  everywhere ; 

This  threatening  is,  to  travellers  that  go 

Long  journeys,  slabby  rain  they'll  have,  or  snow. 

Else,  while  I  gaze,  the  sun  doth  with  his  beams 

Belace  the  clouds,  as  'twere  with  bloody  streams ; 

This  done,  they  suddenly  do  watery  grow, 

And  weep,  and  pour  their  tears  out  where  they  go. 

Comparison. 
Thus  'tis  when  gospel  light  doth  usher  in 
To  us  both  sense  of  grace  and  sense  of  sin ; 
Yea,  when  it  makes  sin  red  with  Christ's  blood, 
Then  we  can  weep  till  weeping  does  us  good. 

XIII. 

UPON  OVER-MUCH  NICENESS. 

'Tis  much  to  see  how  over  nice  some  are 
About  the  body  and  household  affair, 


1  The  swallow  is  remarkably  swift  in  flight;  'their  note  is 
a  slight  twittering,  which  they  seldom  if  ever  exert  but  upon 
the  wing.' — Goldsmith's  Natural  History. — (En.) 


While  what's  of  worth  they  slightly  pass  it  by, 
Not  doing,  or  doing  it  slovenly. 
Their  house  must  be  well  furnished,  be  in  print,* 
Meanwhile  their  soul  lies  ley,3  has  no  good  in't. 
Its  outside  also  they  must  beautify, 
When  in  it  there's  scarce  common  honesty. 
Their  bodies  they  must  have  tricked  up  and  trim. 
Their  inside  full  of  filth  up  to  the  brim. 
Upon  their  clothes  there  must  not  be  a  spot, 
But  is  their  lives  more  than  one  common  blot. 
How  nice,  how  coy  are  some  about  their  diet, 
That  can  their  crying  souls  with  hogs' -meat  quiet. 
All  drest  must  to  a  hair  be,  else  'tis  naught, 
While  of  the  bving  bread  they  have  no  thought. 
Thus  for  their  outside  they  are  clean  and  nice, 
While  their  poor  inside  stinks  with  sin  and  vice. 

XIV. 

MEDITATIONS  UPON   A  CANDLE. 

Man's  like  a  candle  in  a  candlestick, 
Made  up  of  tallow  and  a  little  wick ; 
And  as  the  candle  when  it  is  not  lighted. 
So  is  he  who  is  in  his  sins  benighted. 
Nor  can  a  man  his  soul  with  grace  inspire, 
More  than  can  candles  set  themselves  on  fire. 
Candles  receive  their  light  from  what  they  are  not ; 
Men  grace  from  Him  for  whom  at  first  they  care  not. 
We  manage  candles  when  they  take  the  fire ; 
God  men,  when  he  with  grace  doth  them  inspire. 
And  biggest  candles  give  the  better  light, 
As  grace  on  biggest  sinners  shines  most  bright. 
The  candle  shines  to  make  another  see, 
A  saint  unto  his  neighbour  bght  should  be. 
The  blinking  candle  we  do  much  despise, 
Saints  dim  of  bght  are  high  in  no  man's  eyes. 
Again,  though  it  may  seem  to  some  a  riddle, 
We  use  to  light  our  candles  at  the  middle.4 
True  light  doth  at  the  candle's  end  appear, 
And  grace  the  heart  first  reaches  by  the  ear. 
But  'tis  the  wick  the  fire  doth  kindle  on, 
As  'tis  the  heart  that  grace  first  works  upon. 
Thus  both  do  fasten  upon  what's  the  main, 
And  so  their  bfe  and  vigour  do  maintain. 
The  tallow  makes  the  wick  yield  to  the  fire, 
And  sinful  flesh  doth  make  the  soul  desire 
That  grace  may  kindle  on  it,  in  it  burn ; 
So  evil  makes  the  soul  from  evil  turn.5 

B  'Be  in  print;'  a  proverbial  expression,  to  show  order  and 
regularity  ;  like  type  in  print. — (Ed.) 

3  '  Ley ; '  barren  or  fallow,  uncultivated,  generally  spelt  lea. 
-(Ed.) 

4  This  riddle  is  solved  in  the  fourth  line  following.  The 
light  of  the  fear  and  love  of  God  begins  in  the  middle  of  our 
bodily  frame,  with  the  heart.  Bunyan's  love  of  religious 
riddles  is  seen  in  the  second  part  of  the  Pilgrimage,  when 
Christian  is  resting  at  the  house  of  Gaius. — (Ed.) 

6  Convictions  of  sin  make  the  soul  turn  from  sin. — (Ed.) 


752 


A   BOOK    FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


But  candles  in  tlie  wind  are  apt  to  flare, 

And  Christians,  in  a  tempest,  to  despair. 

The  flame  also  with  smoke  attended  is, 

And  in  our  holy  lives  there's  much  amiss. 

Sometimes  a  thief  will  candle-light  annoy, 

And  lusts  do  seek  our  graces  to  destroy. 

What  brackish  is  will  make  a  candle  sputter ; 

'Twixt  sin  and  grace  there's  oft'  a  heavy  clutter. 

Sometimes  the  light  burns  dim,  'cause  of  the  snuff, 

Sometimes  it  is  blown  quite  out  with  a  puff; 

But  watchfulness  preventeth  both  these  evils, 

Keeps  candles  light,  and  grace  in  spite  of  devils. 

Nor  let  not  snuffs  nor  puffs  make  us  to  doubt, 

Our  candles  may  be  lighted,  though  puffed  out. 

The  candle  in  the  night  doth  all  excel, 

Nor  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars,  then  shine  so  well. 

So  is  the  Christian  in  our  hemisphere, 

Whose  light  shows  others  how  their  course  to  steer. 

When  candles  are  put  out,  all's  in  confusion ; 

Where  Christians  are  not,  devils  make  intrusion. 

Then  happy  are  they  who  such  candles  have, 

All  others  dwell  in  darkness  and  the  grave. 

But  candles  that  do  blink  within  the  socket, 

And  saints,  whose  eyes  are  always  in  their  pocket, 

Are  much  alike ;  such  candles  make  us  fumble, 

And  at  such  saints  good  men  and  bad  do  stumble.1 

Good  candles  don't  offend,  except  sore  eyes, 

Nor  hurt,  unless  it  be  the  silly  flies. 

Thus  none  like  burning  candles  in  the  night, 

Nor  ought 2  to  holy  living  for  delight. 

But  let  us  draw  towards  the  candle's  end : 

The  fire,  you  see,  doth  wick  and  tallow  spend, 

As  grace  man's  life  until  his  glass  is  run, 

And  so  the  candle  and  the  man  is  done. 

The  man  now  lays  him  down  upon  his  bed, 

The  wick  yields  up  its  fire,  and  so  is  dead. 

The  candle  now  extinct  is,  but  the  man 

By  grace  mounts  up  to  glory,  there  to  stand. 

XV. 

UPON  THE  SACRAMENTS. 

Two  sacraments  I  do  bebeve  there  be, 

Baptism  and  the  Supper  of  the  Lord ; 
Both  mysteries  divine,  which  do  to  me, 

By  God's  appointment,  benefit  afford. 
But  shall  they  be  my  God,  or  shall  I  have 

Of  them  so  foul  and  impious  a  thought, 
To  think  that  from  the  curse  they  can  me  save  ? 

Bread,  wine,  nor  water,  me  no  ransom  bought.3 


1  This  character  is  admirably  drawn  in  the  second  part  of 
the  Pilgrims  Progress,  p.  200 — Mr.  Brisk,  a  suitor  to  Mercy. 
-(En.) 

2  Preterite  of  the  verb  '  to  save,'  from  the  Saxon  agan,  to 
be  held  or  bound  by  moral  obligation. — Imperial  Dictionary. 
—(Ed.) 

3  What  fully,  nay,  madness,  for  mau  to  pretend  to  make 


XVI. 

UPON  THE  SUN'S  REFLECTION  UPON  THE  CLOUDS  IN 
A  FAIR  MORNING. 

Look  yonder,  ah  !  methinks  mine  eyes  do  sea 
Clouds  edged  with  silver,  as  fine  garments  be ; 
They  look  as  if  they  saw  that  golden  face 
That  makes  black  clouds  most  beautiful  with  grace. 
Unto  the  saints'  sweet  incense,  or  their  prayer, 
'  These  smoky  curdled  clouds  I  do  compare. 
For  as  these  clouds  seem  edged,  or  laced  with  gold, 
Their  prayers  return  with  blessings  manifold. 

XVII 

UPON  APPAREL. 

God  gave  us  clothes  to  hide  our  nakedness, 
And  we  by  them  do  it  expose  to  view. 

Our  pride  and  unclean  minds  to  an  excess, 
By  our  apparel,  we  to  others  show.* 

XVIII. 

THE  SINNER  AND  THE  SPIDER. 

Sinner. 
What  black,  what  ugly  crawling  tiling  art  thou  ? 

Spider. 
I  am  a  spider 

Sinner. 
A  spider,  ay,  also  a  filthy  creature. 

Spider. 
Not  filthy  as  thyself  in  name  or  feature. 
My  name  entailed  is  to  my  creation, 
My  features  from  the  God  of  thy  salvation. 

Sinner. 
I  am  a  man,  and  in  God's  image  made, 
I  have  a  soul  shall  neither  die  nor  fade, 
God  has  possessed  me 5  with  human  reason, 
Speak  not  against  me  lest  thou  speakest  treason. 
Eor  if  I  am  the  image  of  my  Maker, 
Of  slanders  laid  on  me  He  is  partaker. 

Spider. 
I  know  thou  art  a  creature  far  above  me, 
Therefore  I  shun,  I  fear,  and  also  love  thee. 

God  of  a  little  flour,  or  to  rely  for  forgiveness  of  sin  on  a 
wafer,  a  bit  of  bread,  or  a  little  wine  or  water.  How  de- 
graded is  he  that  pretends  to  believe  such  palpable  absurdities. 
-(Ed.) 

4  This  is  one  of  Bunyan's  keen,  shrewd,  home  thrusts. 
Clothes  professedly  made  to  hide  what  they  studiously  display  ! ! 
-(Ed.) 

6  Possessed  me  with,  or  has  given  me  possession  of. — (Ed.) 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


753 


But  though  thy  God  hath  made  thee  such  a  crea- 
ture, 
Thou  hast  against  him  often  played  the  traitor. 
Thy  sin  has  fetched  thee  down  :  leave  olf  to  boast ; 
Nature  thou  hast  denied,  God's  image  lost. 
Yea,  thou  thyself  a  very  beast  hast  made, 
And  art  become  like  grass,  which  soon  doth  fade. 
Thy  soul,  thy  reason,  yea,  thy  spotless  state, 
Sin  has  subjected  to  th'  most  dreadful  fate. 
But  I  retain  my  primitive  condition, 
I've  all  but  what  I  lost  by  thy  ambition. 

Sinner. 
Thou  venomed  thing,   I   know  not  what  to  call 

thee, 
The  dregs  of  nature  surely  did  befall  thee, 
Thou  wast  made  of  the  dross  and  scum  of  all, 
Man  hates  thee ;  doth,  in  scorn,  thee  spider  call. 

Spider. 
My  venom's  good  for  something,  'cause  God  made  it, 
Thy  sin  hath  spoiled  thy  nature,  doth  degrade  it. 
Of  human  virtues,  therefore,  though  I  fear  thee, 
I  will  not,  though  I  might,  despise  and  jeer  thee. 
Thou  say'st  I  am  the  very  dregs  of  nature, 
Thy  sin's  the  spawn  of  devds,  'tis  no  creature. 
Thou  say'st  man  hates  me  'cause  I  am  a  spider, 
Poor  man,  thou  at  thy  God  art  a  derider ; 
My  venom  tendeth  to  my  preservation, 
Thy  pleasing  follies  work  out  thy  damnation. 
Poor  man,  I  keep  the  rules  of  my  creation, 
Thy  sin  has  cast  thee  headlong  from  thy  station. 
I  hurt  nobody  willingly,  but  thou 
Art  a  self-murderer ;  thou  know'st  not  how 
To  do  what  good  is ;  no,  thou  lovest  evd ; 
Thou  fliest  God's  law,  adherest  to  the  devil.1 

Sinner. 
Ill-shaped  creature,  there's  antipathy 
'Twixt  man  and  spiders,  'tis  in  vain  to  lie ; 
I  hate  thee,  stand  off,  if  thou  dost  come  nigh  me, 
I'll  crush  thee  with  my  foot ;  I  do  defy  thee. 

Sjrider. 
They  are  ill-shaped,  who  warped  are  by  sin, 
Antipathy  in  thee  hath  long  time  been 
To  God;  no  marvel,  then,  if  me,  his  creature, 
Thou  dost  defy,  pretending  name  and  feature. 
But  why  stand  off  ?    My  presence  shall  not  throng 

thee, 
'Tis  not  my  venom,  but  thy  sin  doth  wrong  thee. 
Come,  I  will  teach  thee  wisdom,  do  but  hear  me, 
I  was  made  for  thy  profit,  do  not  fear  me. 


1  Man's  sinfulness,  by  nature  and  practice,  justly,  but  awfullv 
described. — Mason. 
VOL.  III. 


But  if  thy  God  thou  wilt  not  hearken  to, 

"What  can  the  swallow,  ant,  or  spider  do  ? 

Yet  I  will  speak,  I  can  but  be  rejected, 

Sometimes  great  things  by  small  means  are  effected. 

Hark,  then,  though  man  is  noble  by  creation, 

He's  lapsed  now  to  such  degeneration, 

Is  so  besotted  and  so  careless  grown, 

As  not  to  grieve  though  he  has  overthrown 

Himself,  and  brought  to  bondage  everything 

Created,  from  the  spider  to  the  king. 

This  we  poor  sensitives  do  feel  and  see ; 

For  subject  to  the  curse  you  made  us  be. 

Tread  not  upon  me,  neither  from  me  go ; 

'Tis  man  which  has  brought  all  the  world  to  woe. 

The  law  of  my  creation  bids  me  teach  thee; 

I  will  not  for  thy  pride  to  God  impeach  thee. 

I  spin,  I  weave,  and  all  to  let  thee  sec, 

Thy  best  performances  but  cobwebs  be. 

Thy  glory  now  is  brought  to  such  an  ebb, 

It  doth  not  much  excel  the.  spider's  web  ; 

My  webs  becoming  snares  and  traps  for  flies, 

Do  set  the  wile*  of  hell  before  thine  eyes ; 

Their  tangling  nature  is  to  let  thee  see, 

Thy  sins  too  of  a  tangling  nature  be. 

My  den,  or  hole,  for  that  'tis  bottomless, 

Doth  of  damnation  show  the  lastingness. 

My  lying  quiet  until  the  fly  is  catch'd, 

Shows  secretly  hell  hath  thy  rum  hatch'd. 

In  that  I  on  her  seize,  when  she  is  taken, 

I  show  who  gathers  whom  God  hath  forsaken. 

The  fly  lies  buzzing  in  my  web  to  tell 

Thee  how  the  sinners  roar  and  howl  in  hell. 

Now,  since  I  show  thee  all  these  mysteries, 

How  canst  thou  hate  me,  or  me  scandalize  ? 

Sinner. 
Well,  well ;  I  no  more  will  be  a  derider, 
I  did  not  look  for  such  things  from  a  spider. 

Spider. 
Come,  hold  thy  peace ;  what  I  have  yet  to  say, 
If  heeded,  help  thee  may  another  day. 
Since  I  an  ugly  ven'mous  creature  be, 
There  is  some  semblance  'twixt  vile  man  and  me. 
My  wild  and  heedless  runnings  arc  like  those 
Whose  ways  to  ruin  do  their  souls  expose. 
Daylight  is  not  my  time,  I  work  in  th'  night, 
To  show  they  are  like  me  who  hate  the  light. 
The  maid  sweeps  one  web  down,  I  make  another, 
To  show  how  heedless  ones  convictions  smother ; 
My  web  is  no  defence  at  all  to  me, 
Nor  will  false  hopes  at  judgment  be  to  thee. 

Sinner. 
O  spider,  I  have  heard  thee,  and  do  wonder 
A  spider  should  thus  lighten  and  thus  thunder  t 

95 


754 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


Spider. 
Do  but  hold  still,  and  I  will  let  thee  see 
Yet  in  my  ways  more  mysteries  there  be. 
Shall  not  I  do  thee  good,  if  I  thee  tell, 
I  show  to  thee  a  four-fold  way  to  hell ; 
For,  since  I  set  my  web  in  sundry  places, 
I  show  men  go  to  hell  in  divers  traces. 
One  I  set  in  the  window,  that  I  might 
Show  some  go  down  to  hell  with  gospel  light. 
One  I  set  in  a  corner,  as  you  see, 
To  show  how  some,  in  secret  snared  be. 
Gross  webs  great  store  I  set  in  darksome  places, 
To  show  how  many  sin  with  brazen  faces ; 
Another  web  I  set  aloft  on  high, 
To  show  there's  some  professing  men  must  die. 
Thus  in  my  ways  God  wisdom  doth  conceal, 
And  by  my  ways  that  wisdom  doth  reveal. 
I  hide  myself  when  I  for  flies  do  wait, 
So  doth  the  devil  when  he  lays  his  bait ; 
If  I  do  fear  the  losing,  of  my  prey, 
I  stir  me,  and  more  snares  upon  her  lay : 
This  way  and  that  her  wings  and  legs  I  tie, 
That,  sure  as  she  is  catch' d,  so  she  must  die. 
But  if  I  see  she's  like  to  get  away, 
Then  with  my  venom  I  her  journey  stay. 
All  which  my  ways  the  devil  imitates 
To  catch  men,  'cause  he  their  salvation  hates. 

Sinner. 

0  spider,  thou  delight'st  me  with  thy  skill ! 

1  pr'ythee  spit  this  venom  at  me  still. 

Spider. 
1  am  a  spider,  yet  I  can  possess 
The  palace  of  a  king,  where  happiness 
So  much  abounds.     Nor  when  I  do  go  thither, 
Do  they  ask  what,  or  whence  I  come,  or  whither 
I  make  my  hasty  travels ;  no,  not  they ; 
They  let  me  pass,  and  I  go  on  my  way. 
I  seize  the  palace,1  do  with  hands  take  hold 
Of  doors,  of  locks,  or  bolts ;  yea,  I  am  bold, 
When  in,  to  clamber  up  unto  the  throne, 
And  to  possess  it,  as  if  'twere  mine  own. 
Nor  is  there  any  law  forbidding  me 
Here  to  abide,  or  in  this  palace  be. 
Yea,  if  I  please,  I  do  the  highest  stories 
Ascend,  there  sit,  and  so  behold  the  glories 
Myself  is  compassed  with,  as  if  I  were 
One  of  the  chiefest  courtiers  that  be  there. 
Here  lords  and  ladies  do  come  round  about  me, 
"With  grave  demeanour,  nor  do  any  flout  me 
For  this,  my  brave  adventure,  no,  not  they ; 
They  come,  they  go,  but  leave  me  there  to  stay. 


1  See  Pr.  xxx.  20,  and  Pilgrim's  Progress,  p.  185.  There 
is  also  a  very  striking  allusion  to  the  subject  of  this  emblem, 
iu  Bunyan's  Light  in  Darkness,  vol.  i.,  p.  435. 


Now,  my  reproacher,  I  do  by  all  this 

Show  how  thou  may'st  possess  thyself  of  bliss : 

Thou  art  worse  than  a  spider,  but  take  hold 

On  Christ  the  door,  thou  shalt  not  be  controll'd. 

By  him  do  thou  the  heavenly  palace  enter; 

None  chide  thee  will  for  this  thy  brave  adventure ; 

Approach  thou  then  unto  the  very  throne, 

There  speak  thy  mind,  fear  not,  the  day's  thine 

own; 
Nor  saint,  nor  angel,  will  thee  stop  or  stay, 
But  rather  tumble  blocks  out  of  the  way. 
My  venom  stops  not  me ;  let  not  thy  vice 
Stop  thee ;  possess  thyself  of  paradise. 
Go  on,  I  say,  although  thou  be  a  sinner, 
Learn  to  be  bold  in  faith,  of  me  a  spinner. 
This  is  the  way  the  glories  to  possess, 
And  to  enjoy  what  no  man  can  express. 
Sometimes  I  find  the  palace  door  uplock'd, 
And  so  my  entrance  thither  has  upblock'd. 
But  am  I  daunted  ?     No,  I  here  and  there 
Do  feel  and  search ;  so  if  I  anywhere, 
At  any  chink  or  crevice,  find  my  way, 
I  crowd,  I  press  for  passage,  make  no  stay. 
And  so  through  difficulty  I  attain 
The  palace ;  yea,  the  throne  where  princes  reign. 
I  crowd  sometimes,  as  if  I'd  burst  in  sunder ; 
And  art  thou  crushed  with  striving,  do  not  wonder. 
Some  scarce  get  in,  and  yet  indeed  they  enter ; 
Knock,  for  they  nothing  have,  that  nothing  venture. 
Nor  will  the  King  himself  throw  dirt  on  thee, 
As  thou  hast  cast  reproaches  upon  mc. 
He  will  not  hate  thee,  0  thou  foul  backslider ! 
As  thou  didst  me,  because  I  am  a  spider. 
Now,  to  conclude :  since  I  such  doctrine  bring, 
Slight  me  no  more,  call  me  not  ugly  thing. 
God  wisdom  hath  unto  the  piss-ant  given, 
Aud  spiders  may  teach  men  the  way  to  heaven. 

Sinner. 
Well,  my  good  spider,  I  my  errors  see, 
I  was  a  fool  for  railing  upon  thee. 
Thy  nature,  venom,  and  thy  fearful  hue, 
Both  show  what  sinners  are,  and  what  they  do. 
Thy  way  and  works  do  also  darkly  tell, 
How  some  men  go  to  heaven,  and  some  to  hell. 
Thou  art  my  monitor,  I  am  a  fool ; 
They  learn  may,  that  to  spiders  go  to  school. 

XIX. 

MEDITATIONS  UrON  THE  DAY  BEFORE  THE  SUN- 
RISING. 

But  all  this  whde,  where's  he  whose  golden  rays 
Drives  night  away  and  beautifies  our  days  ? 
Where's  he  whose  goodly  face  doth  warm  and  heal, 
And  show  us  what  the  darksome  nights  conceal  ? 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


755 


Where's  he  that  thaws  our  ice,  drives  cold  away  ? 
Let's  have  him,  or  we  care  not  for  the  day. 
Thus  'tis  with  who  partakers  are  of  grace, 
There's  nought  to  them  like  their  Redeemer's  face 

XX. 

OP  THE  MOLE  IN  THE  GROUND. 

Tue  mole's  a  creature  very  smooth  and  slick, 
She  digs  i'  th'  dirt,  but  'twill  not  on  her  stick ; 
So's  he  who  counts  this  world  his  greatest  gains, 
Yet  nothing  gets  but's  labour  for  his  pains. 
Earth's  the  mole's  element,  she  can't  abide 
To  be  above  ground,  dirt  heaps  are  her  pride ; 
And  he  is  like  her  who  the  worldliug  plays, 
Lie  imitates  her  in  her  work  and  ways. 
Poor  silly  mole,  that  thou  should'st  love  to  be 
Where  thou  nor  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars  can  see. 
But  0 !  how  silly's  he  who  doth  not  care 
So  he  gets  earth,  to  have  of  heaven  a  share ! 

XXI. 

OF  THE  CUCKOO. 

Thou  booby,  say'st  thou  nothing  but  Cuckoo  ? 
The  robin  and  the  wren  can  thee  outdo. 
They  to  us  play  thorough  their  little  throats, 
Taking  not  one,  but  sundry  pretty  taking  notes. 
But  thou  hast  fellows,  some  like  thee  can  do 
Little  but  suck  our  eggs,  and  sing  Cuckoo. 
Thy  notes  do  not  first  welcome  in  our  spring, 
Nor  dost  thou  its  first  tokens  to  us  bring. 
Birds  less  than  thee  by  far,  like  prophets,  do 
Tell  us,  'tis  coming,  though  not  by  Cuckoo. 
Nor  dost  thou  summer  have  away  with  thee, 
Though  thou  a  yawling  bawling  Cuckoo  be. 
When  thou  dost  cease  among  us  to  appear, 
Then  doth  our  harvest  bravely  crown  our  year. 
But  thou  hast  fellows,  some  like  thee  can  do 
Little  but  suck  our  eggs,  and  sing  Cuckoo. 
Since  Cuckoos  forward  not  our  early  spring, 
Nor  help  with  notes  to  bring  our  harvest  in ; 
And  since,  while  here,  she  only  makes  a  noise, 
So  pleasing  unto  none  as  girls  and  boys, 
The  Formalist  we  may  compare  her  to, 
For  he  doth  suck  our  eggs,  and  sing  Cuckoo. 


XXII. 

OP  TOE  BOY  AND  BUTTERFLY. 

Behold  how  eager  this  our  little  boy 

Is  for  this  Butterfly,  as  if  all  joy, 

All  profits,  honours,  yea,  and  lastiug  pleasures, 

Were  wrapt  up  in  her,  or  the  richest  treasures, 

Found  in  her,  would  be  bundled  up  together, 

When  all  her  all  is  lighter  than  a  feather. 


He  halloos,  runs,  and  cries  out,  Here,  boys,  here, 
Nor  doth  he  brambles  or  the  nettles  fear. 
He  stumbles  at  the  mole-hills,  up  he  gets, 
And  runs  again,  as  one  bereft  of  wits  ; 
And  all  this  labour  and  this  large  outcry, 
Is  only  for  a  silly  butterfly. 

Comparison. 
This  Utile  boy  an  emblem  is  of  those 
Whose  hearts  are  wholly  at  the  world's  dispose, 
The  butterfly  doth  represent  to  me, 
The  world's  best  things  at  best  but  fading  be. 
All  are  but  painted  nothings  and  false  joys, 
Like  this  poor  butterfly  to  these  our  boys. 
His  runniug  thorough  nettles,  thorns,  and  briar?, 
To  gratify  his  boyish  fond  desires ; 
His  tumbling  over  mole-hills  to  attain 
His  end,  namely,  his  butterfly  to  gain ; 
Doth  plainly  show  what  hazards  some  men  ran, 
To  get  what  will  be  lost  as  soon  as  won. 
Men  seem  in  choice,  than  children  far  more  wu<e, 
Because  they  run  not  after  butterflies ; 
When  yet,  alas !  for  what  are  empty  toys, 
They  follow  children,  like  to  beardless  boys.1 

XXIII. 

OF  THE  FLY  AT  THE  CANDLE. 

What  ails  this  fly  thus  desperately  to  enter 
A  combat  with  the  candle?  Will  she  venture 
To  clash  at  light  ?  Away,  thou  silly  fly ; 
Thus  doing  thou  wilt  burn  thy  wings  and  die. 
But  'tis  a  folly  her  advice  to  give, 
She'll  kill  the  candle,  or  she  will  not  live. 
Slap,  says  she,  at  it ;  then  she  makes  retreat, 
So  wheels  about,  and  doth  her  blows  repeat. 
Nor  doth  the  candle  let  her  quite  escape, 
But  gives  some  little  check  unto  the  ape : 
Throws  up  her  heels  it  doth,  so  down  she  falls, 
Where  she  lies  sprawling,  and  for  succour  calls. 
When  she  recovers,  up  she  gets  again, 
And  at  the  candle  comes  with  might  and  main, 
But  now  behold,  the  candle  takes  the  fly, 
And  holds  her,  till  she  doth  by  burning  die. 

Comparison. 
This  candle  is  an  emblem  of  that  light 
Our  gospel  gives  in  this  our  darksome  night. 
The  fly  a  lively  picture  is  of  those 
That  hate  and  do  this  gospel  light  oppose. 
At  last  the  gospel  doth  become  their  snare, 
Doth  them  with  burning  hands  in  pieces  tear9 


1  He  who,  in  riper  years,  seeks  bappiuess  iu  sensual  grati- 
fication, is  a  child  in  understanding:  he  only  changes  his 
tor/s.—(Ei>.) 

2  '  To  the  one,  a  savour  of  death  unto  death ;  and  to  the 
other,  a  savour  of  life  uuto  life,"  2  Co.  ii.  16. 


756 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


XXIV. 

ON  TOE  RISIXG  OF  THE  SUN. 

Look,  look,  brave  Sol  doth,  peep  up  from  beneath, 
Shows  us  his  golden  face,  doth  on  us  breathe ; 
He  also  doth  compass  us  round  with  glories, 
Whilst  he  ascends  up  to  his  highest  stories. 
Where  he  his  banner  over  us  displays, 
And  gives  us  light  to  see  our  works  and  ways. 
Nor  are  wc  now,  as  at  the  peep  of  light, 
To  question,  is  it  day,  or  is  it  night  ? 
The  night  is  gone,  the  shadows  fled  away, 
And  we  now  most  sure  are  that  it  is  day. 
Our  eyes  behold  it,  and  our  hearts  bebeve  it ; 
Nor  can  the  wit  of  man  in  this  deceive  it. 
And  thus  it  is  when  Jesus  shows  his  face, 
And  doth  assure  us  of  his  love  and  grace. 

XXV. 

UPON  THE  PROMISING  FRUITFULNESS  OF  A  TREE. 

A  comely  sight  indeed  it  is  to  see 
A  world  of  blossoms  on  an  apple-tree : 
Yet  far  more  comely  would  this  tree  appear, 
If  all  its  dainty  blooms  young  apples  were. 
But  how  much  more  might  one  upon  it  see, 
If  all  would  hang  there  till  they  ripe  should  be. 
But  most  of  all  in  beauty  'twould  abound, 
If  then  none  worm-eaten  should  there  be  found. 
But  we,  alas  !  do  commonly  behold 
Blooms  fall  apace,  if  mornings  be  but  cold. 
They  too,  which  hang  till  they  young  apples  are, 
By  blasting  winds  and  vermin  take  despair, 
Store  that  do  hang,  wliile  almost  ripe,  we  see 
By  blust'ring  winds  are  shaken  from  the  tree, 
So  that  of  many,  only  some  there  be, 
That  grow  till  they  come  to  maturity. 

Comparison. 
This  tree  a  perfect  emblem  is  of  those 
Which  God  doth  plant,  which  in  his  garden  grows, 
Its  blasted  blooms  are  motions  unto  good, 
Which  chill  affections  do  nip  in  the  bud. 
Those  little  apples  which  yet  blasted  are, 
Show  some  good  purposes,  no  good  fruits  bear. 
Those  spoiled  by  vermin  are  to  let  us  see, 
How  good  al  tempts  by  bad  thoughts  ruin'd  be. 
Those  which  the  wind  blows  down,  while  they  are 

green, 
Show  good  works  have  by  trials  spoiled  been. 
Those  that  abide,  while  ripe  upon  the  tree, 
Show,  in  a  good  man,  some  ripe  fruit  will  be. 
Behold  then  how  abortive  some  fruits  are, 
Which  at  the  first  most  promising  appear. 
The  frost,  the  wind,  the  worm,  with  time  doth  show, 
There  flows,  from  much  appearance,  works  but  few. 


XXVI. 

CPON  THE  THIEF. 

The  thief,  when  he  doth  steal,  thinks  he  doth  gain ; 
Yet  then  the  greatest  loss  he  doth  sustain. 
Come,  thief,  tell  me  thy  gains,  but  do  not  falter, 
When  summ'd,  what  comes  it  to  more  than  the 

halter  ? 
Perhaps,  thoul't  say,  The  halter  I  defy ; 
'  So  thou  may'st  say,  yet  by  the  halter  die. 
Thou'lt  say,  Then  there's  an  end ;  no,  pr'ythee,  hold, 
He  was  no  friend  of  thine  that  thee  so  told. 
Hear  thou  the  Word  of  God,  that  will  thee  tell, 
Without  repentance  thieves  must  go  to  hell. 
But  should  it  be  as  thy  false  prophet  says, 
Yet  nought  but  loss  doth  come  by  thievish  ways. 
All  honest  men  will  flee  thy  company, 
Thou  hVst  a  rogue,  and  so  a  rogue  will  die. 
Innocent  boldness  thou  hast  none  at  all, 
Thy  inward  thoughts  do  thee  a  villain  call. 
Sometimes  when  thou  best  warmly  on  thy  bed, 
Thou  art  Uke  one  unto  the  gallows  led. 
Bear,  as  a  constable,  breaks  in  upon  thee, 
Thou  art  as  if  the  town  was  up  to  stone  thee. 
If  hogs  do  grunt,  or  silly  rats  do  rustle, 
Thou  art  in  consternation,  think'st  a  bustle 
By  men  about  the  door,  is  made  to  take  thee, 
And  all  because  good  conscience  doth  forsake  thee. 
Thy  case  is  most  deplorably  so  bad, 
Thou  shunn'st  to  think  on't,  lest  thou  shouldstbemad. 
Thou  art  beset  with  mischiefs  every  way, 
The  gallows  groaneth  for  thee  every  day. 
Wherefore,  I  pr'ythee,  thief,  thy  theft  forbear, 
Consult  thy  safety,  pr'ythee,  have  a  care. 
If  once  thy  head  be  got  within  the  noose, 
'Twill  be  too  late  a  longer  life  to  choose. 
As  to  the  penitent  thou  readest  of, 
What's  that  to  them  who  at  repentance  scoff. 
Nor  is  that  grace  at  thy  command  or  power, 
That  thou  should'st  put  it  off  till  the  last  hour. 
I  pr'ythee,  thief,  think  on't,  and  turn  betime ; 
Few  go  to  life  who  do  the  gallows  climb. 

XXVII. 

OF  TOE  CHILD  WITH  THE  BIRD  AT  THE  BUSH. 

My  bttlc  bird,  how  canst  thou  sit 

And  sing  amidst  so  many  thorns  ? 
Let  me  a  hold  upon  thee  get, 

My  love  with  honour  thee  adorns. 
Thou  art  at  present  little  worth, 

Five  farthings  none  will  give  for  thee, 
But  pr'ythee,  bttle  bird,  come  forth, 

Thou  of  more  value  art  to  me. 
'Tis  true  it  is  sunshine  to-day, 

To-morrow  birds  will  have  a  storm ; 


A    BOOK   FOR    BOYS    AND   GIRLS. 


•57 


My  pretty  one  come  thou  away, 

My  bosom  then  shall  kccep  thee  warm. 
Thou  subject  are  to  cold  o'nights, 

When  darkness  is  thy  covering ; 
At  days  thy  danger's  great  by  kites, 

How  can'st  thou  then  sit  there  and  sing? 
Thy  food  is  scarce  and  scanty  too, 

'Tis  worms  and  trash  which  thou  dost  cat ; 
Thy  present  state  I  pity  do, 

Come,  I'll  provide  thee  better  meat. 
I'll  feed  thee  with  white  bread  and  milk, 

And  sugar  plumbs,  if  them  thou  crave. 
I'll  cover  thee  with  finest  silk, 

That  from  the  cold  I  may  thee  save. 
My  father's  palace  shall  be  thine, 

Yea,  in  it  thou  shalt  sit  and  sing ; 
My  little  bird,  if  thou'lt  be  mine, 

The  whole  year  round  shall  be  thy  spring. 
I'll  teach  thee  all  the  notes  at  court, 

Unthought-of  music  thou  shalt  play ; 
And  all  that  thither  do  resort, 

Shall  praise  thee  for  it  every  day. 
I'll  keep  thee  safe  from  cat  and  cur, 

No  manner  o'  harm  shall  come  to  thee ; 
Yea,  I  will  be  thy  succourer, 

My  bosom  shall  thy  cabin  be. 
But  lo,  behold,  the  bird  is  gone ; 

These  charmings  would  not  make  her  yield ; 
The  child's  left  at  the  bush  alone, 

The  bird  flies  yonder  o'er  the  field. 

Comparison. 
Tliis  child  of  Christ  an  emblem  is, 

The  bird  to  sinners  I  compare, 
The  thorns  are  like  those  sins  of  his 

Which  do  surround  him  everywhere. 
Her  songs,  her  food,  and  sunshine  day, 

Are  emblems  of  those  foolish  toys, 
Which  to  destruction  lead  the  way, 

The  fruit  of  worldly,  empty  joys. 
The  arguments  this  child  doth  choose 

To  draw  to  him  a  bird  thus  wild, 
Shows  Christ  familiar  speech  doth  use 

To  make's  to  him  be  reconciled. 
The  bird  in  that  she  takes  her  wing, 
To  speed  her  from  him  after  all, 
Shows  us  vain  man  loves  any  thing 

Much  better  than  the  heavenly  calL 

XXVIII. 

OF  MOSES  AND  niS  WIFE. 

This  Moses  was  a  fair  and  comely  man, 
His  wife  a  swarthy  Ethiopian ; 
Nor  did  his  milk-white  bosom  change  her  skin. 
She  came  out  thence  as  black  as  she  went  in. 


Now  Moses  was  a  type  of  Moses'  law, 
His  wife  likewise  of  one  that  never  saw 
Another  way  unto  eternal  life ; 
There's  mystery,  then,  in  Moses  and  his  wife. 
The  law  is  very  holy,  just,  and  good, 
And  to  it  is  espoused  all  flesh  and  blood ; 
But  this  its  goodness  it  cannot  bestow 
On  any  that  are  wedded  thereunto. 
Therefore  as  Moses'  wife  came  swarthy  in, 
And  went  out  from  him  without  change  of  skin, 
So  he  that  doth  the  law  for  life  adore, 
Shall  yet  by  it  be  left  a  black-a-inore. 

XXIX. 

OF  THE  ROSE-BUSH. 

This  homely  bush  doth  to  mine  eyes  expose 

A  very  fair,  yea,  comely  ruddy  rose. 

This  rose  doth  also  bow  its  head  to  me, 

Saying,  Come,  pluck  me,  I  thy  rose  will  be ; 

Yet  offer  I  to  gather  rose  or  bud, 

Ten  to  one  but  the  bush  will  have  my  blood. 

This  looks  like  a  trapan,1  or  a  decoy, 

To  offer,  and  yet  snap,  who  would  enjoy ; 

Yea,  the  more  eager  on't,  the  more  in  danger, 

Be  he  the  master  of  it,  or  a  stranger. 

Bush,  why  dost  bear  a  rose  if  none  must  have  it, 

Who  dost  expose  it,  yet  claw  those  that  crave  i1  ? 

Art  become  freakish  ?  dost  the  wanton  play, 

Or  doth  thy  testy  humour  tend  its  way  ? 

Comparison. 
Tliis  rose  God's  Son  is,  with  his  ruddy  looks. 
But  what's  the  bush,  whose  pricks,  like  tenter-hooks, 
Do  scratch  and  claw  the  finest  lady's  hands, 
Or  rend  her  clothes,  if  she  too  near  it  stands  ? 
This  bush  an  emblem  is  of  Adam's  race, 
Of  which  Christ  came,  when  he  his  Father's  grace 
Commended  to  us  in  his  crimson  blood, 
While  he  in  sinners'  stead  and  nature  stood. 
Thus  Adam's  race  did  bear  tliis  dainty  rose, 
And  doth  the  same  to  Adam's  race  expose ; 
But  those  of  Adam's  race  which  at  it  catch, 
Adam's  race  will  them  prick,  and  claw,  and  scratch. 

XXX. 

OF  TOE  GOING  DOWN  OF  TnE  SUN. 

What,  hast  thou  run  thy  race,  art  going  down  ? 
Thou  seemest  angry,  why  dost  on  us  frown  ? 
Yea,  wrap  thy  head  with  clouds  and  hide  thy  face, 
As  threatening  to  withdraw  from  us  thy  grace  ? 
O  leave  us  not !     When  once  thou  hid'st  thy  head, 
Our  horizon  with  darkness  will  be  spread. 


trap 


'  Trapan 
-(Ed.) 


the   Saxon  verb  to  ensnare,  modernized  to 


758 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


Tell  who  hath  thee  offended,  turn  again. 
Alas  !  too  late,  intreaties  are  in  vain. 

Comparison. 
Our  gospel  has  had  here  a  summer's  day, 
But  in  its  sunshine  we,  like  fools,  did  play ; 
Or  else  fall  out,  and  with  each  other  wrangle, 
And  did,  instead  of  work,  not  much  but  jangle. 
And  if  our  sun  seems  angry,  hides  his  face, 
Shall  it  go  down,  shall  night  possess  this  place  ? 
Let  not  the  voice  of  night  birds  us  afflict, 
And  of  our  misspent  summer  us  convict.' 

XXXI. 

UPON  THE  FROG. 

The  frog  by  nature  is  both  damp  and  cold, 
Her  mouth  is  large,  her  belly  much  will  hold ; 
She  sits  somewhat  ascending,  loves  to  be 
Croaking  in  gardens,  though  unpleasantly. 

Comparison. 
The  hypocrite  is  like  unto  this  frog, 
As  Like  as  is  the  puppy  to  the  dog. 
He  is  of  nature  cold,  his  mouth  is  wide 
To  prate,  and  at  true  goodness  to  deride. 
He  mounts  his  head  as  if  he  was  above 
The  world,  when  yet  'tis  that  which  has  his  love. 
And  though  he  seeks  in  churches  for  to  croak, 
He  neither  loveth  Jesus  nor  his  yoke. 

XXXII. 

UPON  TH8  WHIPPING  OP  A  TOP. 

'Tis  with  the  whip  the  boy  sets  up  the  top, 
The  whip  makes  it  run  round  upon  its  toe ; 

The  whip  makes  it  hither  and  thither  hop : 
'Tis  with  the  whip  the  top  is  made  to  go. 

Comparison. 
Our  legalist  is  like  unto  this  top, 

Without  a  whip  he  doth  not  duty  do ; 
Let  Moses  whip  him,  he  will  skip  and  hop ; 

forbear  to  whip,  he'll  neither  stand  nor  go. 

XXXIII. 

UPON  THE  PISMIRE. 

Must  we  unto  the  pismire  go  to  school, 
To  learn  of  her  in  summer  to  provide 

For  winter  next  ensuing.  Man's  a  fool, 
Or  silly  ants  would  not  be  made  his  guide. 


1  How  agonizing  will  be  the  cry  of  the  lost  soul — '  The 
harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not  saved,' 
Jer.  viii.  20. — (Ed.)  Upon  the  brittle  thread  of  life  hang 
everlasting  things. 


But,  sluggard,  is  it  not  a  shame  for  thee 

To  be  outdone  by  pismires  ?     Pr'ythee  hear : 
Their  works,  too,  will  thy  condemnation  be 

When  at  the  judgment-seat  thou  shalt  appear. 
But  since  thy  God  doth  bid  thee  to  her  go, 

Obey,  her  ways  consider,  and  be  wise ; 
The  piss-ant  tell  thee  will  what  thou  must  do, 

And  set  the  way  to  life  before  thine  eyes. 

XXXIV. 

UPON  THE  BEGGAR. 

He  wants,  he  asks,  he  pleads  his  poverty, 
They  within  doors  do  him  an  alms  deny. 
He  doth  repeat  and  aggravate  his  grief, 
But  they  repulse  him,  give  him  no  relief. 
He  begs,  they  say,  Begone ;  he  will  not  hear, 
But  coughs,  sighs,  and  makes  signs  he  still  is  there ; 
They  disregard  him,  he  repeats  his  groans ; 
They  still  say  nay,  and  he  himself  bemoans. 
They  grow  more  rugged,  they  call  him  vagrant ; 
He  cries  the  shriller,  trumpets  out  his  want. 
At  last,  when  they  perceive  he'll  take  no  nay, 
An  alms  they  give  him  without  more  delay. 

Comparison. 
This  beggar  doth  resemble  them  that  pray 
To  God  for  mercy,  and  will  take  no  nay, 
But  wait,  and  count  that  all  his  hard  gainsays 
Are  nothing  else  but  fatherly  delays  ; 
Then  imitate  him,  praying  souls,  and  cry : 
There's  nothing  like  to  importunity. 

XXXV. 

UPON  THE  HORSE  AND  HIS  RIDE II. 

There's  one  rides  very  sagely  on  the  road, 
Showing  that  he  affects  the  gravest  mode. 
Another  rides  tantivy,  or  full  trot, 
To  show  much  gravity  he  matters  not. 
Lo,  here  comes  one  amain,  he  rides  full  speed, 
Hedge,  ditch,  nor  miry  bog,  he  doth  not  heed. 
One  claws  it  up-hill  without  stop  or  check, 
Another  down  as  if  he'd  break  his  neck. 
Now  every  horse  has  his  especial  guider ; 
Then  by  his  going  you  may  know  the  rider. 

Comparison. 
Now  let  us  turn  our  horse  into  a  man, 
His  rider  to  a  spirit,  if  we  can. 
Then  let  us,  by  the  methods  of  the  guider, 
Ted  every  horse  how  he  should  know  his  rider. 
Some  go,  as  men,  direct  in  a  right  way, 
Nor  are  they  suffered  to  go  astray ; 
As  with  a  bridle  they  are  governed, 
And  kept  from  paths  which  lead  unto  the  dead. 


A   BOOK   TOR  BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


7,9 


Now  this  good  man  has  his  especial  guidcr, 
Then  by  his  going  let  him  know  his  rider. 
Some  go  as  if  they  did  not  greatly  care, 
Whether  of  heaven  or  hell  they  should  be  heir. 
The  rein,  it  seems,  is  laid  upon  their  neck, 
They  seem  to  go  their  way  without  a  check. 
Now  this  man  too  has  his  especial  guidcr, 
And  by  his  going  he  may  know  his  rider. 
Some  again  run  as  if  resolved  to  die, 
Body  and  soid,  to  all  eternity. 
Good  counsel  they  by  no  means  can  abide; 
They'll  have  their  course  whatever  them  betide. 
Now  these  poor  men  have  their  especial  guidcr, 
Were  they  not  fools  they  soon  might  know  their  rider. 
There's  one  makes  head  against  all  godliness, 
Those  too,  that  do  profess  it,  he'll  distress ; 
He'll  taunt  and  flout  if  goodness  doth  appear, 
And  at  its  countenancers  mock  and  jeer. 
Now  this  man,  too,  has  his  especial  guider, 
And  by  his  going  he  might  know  his  rider. 

XXXVI. 

VPON  TnE  SIGHT  OF  A  POUND  OF  CANDLES  PALLING 
TO  THE  G  HOUND. 

But  be  the  candles  down,  and  scattered  too, 
Some  lying  here,  some  there  ?     What  shall  we  do  ? 
Hold,  light  the  candle  there  that  stands  on  high, 
It  you  may  find  the  other  candles  by. 
Light  that,  I  say,  and  so  take  up  the  pound 
You  did  let  fall  and  scatter  on  the  ground. 

Comparison. 
The  fallen  candles  do  us  intimate 
The  bulk  of  God's  elect  in  their  laps'd  state ; 
Their  lying  scattered  in  the  dark  may  be 
To  show,  by  man's  lapsed  state,  his  misery. 
The  candle  that  was  taken  down  and  lighted, 
Thereby  to  find  them  fallen  and  benighted, 
Is  Jesus  Christ ;  God,  by  his  light,  doth  gather 
Who  he  will  save,  and  be  unto  a  Father. 

XXXVII. 

UrON  A  PENNY  LOAF. 

Tnr  price  one  penny  is  in  time  of  plenty, 
In  famine  doubled,  'tis  from  one  to  twenty. 
Yea,  no  man  knows  what  price  on  thee  to  set 
When  there  is  but  one  penny  loaf  to  get. 

Comparison. 
This  loafs  an  emblem  of  the  Word  of  God, 
A  thing  of  low  esteem  before  the  rod 
Of  famine  smites  the  soul  with  fear  of  death, 
But  then  it  is  our  all,  our  life,  our  breath.1 

1  When  the  Word  of  God  dwells  iu  us  richly  in  all  wisdom, 


XXXVIII. 

THE  BOY  AND  WATCHMAKER. 

This  watch  my  father  did  on  me  bestow, 

A  golden  one  it  is,  but  'twill  not  go, 

Unless  it  be  at  an  uncertainty : 

But  as  good  none  as  one  to  tell  a  lie. 

When  'tis  high  day  my  hand  will  stand  at  nine  ; 

I  think  there's  no  man's  watch  so  bad  as  mine. 

Sometimes  'tis  sullen,  'twill  not  go  at  all, 

And  yet  'twas  never  broke  nor  had  a  fall. 

Watchmaker. 
Your  watch,  though  it  be  good,  through  want  of  skill 
May  fail  to  do  according  to  your  will. 
Suppose  the  balance,  wheels,  and  springs  be  good, 
And  all  things  else,  unless  you  understood 
To  manage  it,  as  watches  ought  to  be, 
Your  watch  will  still  be  at  uncertainty. 
Come,  tell  me,  do  you  keep  it  from  the  dust, 
Yea,  wind  it  also  duly  up  you  must  ? 
Take  heed,  too,  that  you  do  not  strain  the  spring ; 
You  must  be  circumspect  in  every  thing, 
Or  else  your  watch,  were  it  as  good  again, 
Would  not  with  time  and  tide  you  entertain. 

Comparison. 
This  boy  an  emblem  is  of  a  convert, 
His  watch  of  the  work  of  grace  within  his  heart, 
The  watch-maker  is  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
His  counsel,  the  directions  of  his  Word ; 
Then  convert,  if  thy  heart  be  out  of  frame, 
Of  this  watch-maker  learn  to  mend  the  same. 
Do  not  lay  ope'  thy  heart  to  worldly  dust, 
Nor  let  thy  graces  over-grow  with  rust, 
Be  oft'  renewed  in  th'  spirit  of  thy  mind, 
Or  else  uncertain  thou  thy  watch  wilt  find. 

XXXIX. 

UPON  A  LOOKING-GLASS. 

In  this-  see  thou  thy  beauty,  hast  thou  any, 
Or  thy  defects,  should  they  be  few  or  many. 
Thou  may'st,  too,  here  thy  spots  and  freckles  see, 
Hast  thou  but  eyes,  and  what  their  numbers  be. 
But  art  thou  blind  ?     There  is  no  looking-glass 
Can  show  thee  thy  defects,  thy  spots,  or  face. 

Comparison. 
Unto  this  glass  we  may  compare  the  Word, 
For  that  to  man  advantage  doth  afford 
(Has  he  a  mind  to  know  himself  and  state), 
To  see  what  will  be  hid  eternal  fate. 

then  will  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  our  hearts,  and  v\e  shall  be 
sweetly  inclined  to  every  sood  thought,  word,  and  work.— 
(Ed.) 


760 


A    BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


But  without  eyes,  das  !  how  can  he  see  ? 
Many  that  seem  to  look  here,  blind  men  be. 
This  is  the  reason  they  so  often  read 
Their  judgment  there,  and  do  it  nothing  dread. 

XL. 

OF  THE  LOVE  OP  CHRIST. 

The  love  of  Christ,  poor  I !  may  touch  upon ; 

Eut  'tis  unsearchable.     O  !  there  is  none 

Its  large  dimensions  can  comprehend 

Should  they  dilate  thereon  world  without  end. 

When  we  had  sinned,  in  his  zeal  he  sware, 

That  he  upon  his  back  our  sins  would  bear. 

And  since  unto  sin  is  entailed  death, 

He  vowed  for  our  sins  he'd  lose  his  breath. 

He  did  not  only  say,  vow,  or  resolve, 

But  to  astonishment  did  so  involve 

Himself  in  man's  distress  and  misery, 

As  for,  and  with  him,  both  to  live  and  die. 

To  his  eternal  fame  in  sacred  story, 

We  find  that  he  did  lay  aside  his  glory, 

Stepped  from  the  throne  of  highest  dignity, 

Became  poor  man,  did  in  a  manger  lie ; 

Yea,  was  beholden  unto  his  for  bread, 

Had,  of  his  own,  not  where  to  lay  his  head ; 

Though  rich,  he  did  for  us  become  thus  poor, 

That  he  might  make  us  rich  for  evermore. 

Nor  was  this  but  the  least  of  what  he  did, 

But  the  outside  of  what  he  suffered  ? 

God  made  his  blessed  son  under  the  law, 

Under  the  curse,  which,  like  the  lion's  paw, 

Did  rent  and  tear  his  soul  for  mankind's  sin, 

More  than  if  we  for  it  in  hell  had  been. 

His  cries,  his  tears,  and  bloody  agony, 

The  nature  of  his  death  doth  testify. 

Nor  did  he  of  constraint  himself  thus  give, 

Tor  sin,  to  death,  that  man  might  with  him  live. 

He  did  do  what  he  did  most  willingly, 

He  sung,  and  gave  God  thanks,  that  he  must  die. 

But  do  kings  use  to  die  for  captive  slaves  ? 

Yet  we  were  such  when  Jesus  died  to  save's. 

Yea,  when  he  made  himself  a  sacrifice, 

It  was  that  he  might  save  his  enemies. 

And  though  he  was  provoked  to  retract 

His  blest  resolves  for  such  so  good  an  act, 

By  the  abusive  carriages  of  those 

That  did  both  him,  his  love,  and  grace  oppose ; 

Yet  he,  as  unconcerned  with  such  things, 

Goes  on,  determines  to  make  captives  kings  ; 

Yea,  many  of  his  murderers  he  takes 

Into  his  favour,  and  them  princes  makes. 

XLI. 

ON  THE  CACKLING  OF  A  HEN. 

The  hen,  so  soon  as  she  an  egg  doth  lay, 
(Spreads  the  fame  of  her  doing  what  she  may.) 


About  the  yard  she  cackling  now  doth  go, 
To  tell  what  'twas  she  at  her  nest  did  do. 
Just  thus  it  is  with  some  professing  men, 
If  they  do  ought  that  good  is,  like  our  hen 
They  can  but  cackle  on't  where  e'er  they  go, 
What  their  right  hand  doth  their  left  hand  must  know. 

XLII. 

UPON  AN  HOUR-GLASS. 

This  glass,  when  made,  was,  by  the  workman's  skill, 
The  sum  of  sixty  minutes  to  fulfil. 
Time,  more  nor  less,  by  it  will  out  be  spun, 
But  just  an  hour,  and  then  the  glass  is  run. 
Man's  Life  we  will  compare  unto  this  glass, 
The  number  of  his  months  he  cannot  pass ; 
But  when  he  has  accomplished  his  day, 
He,  like  a  vapour,  vanisheth  away. 

XLIII. 

UPON  A  SNAIL. 

See  goes  but  softly,  but  she  goeth  sure, 

She  stumbles  not,  as  stronger  creatures  do. 
Her  journey's  shorter,  so  she  may  endure 

Better  than  they  which  do  much  farther  go. 
She  makes  no  noise,  but  stilly  seizeth  on 

The  flower  or  herb  appointed  for  her  food, 
The  which  she  quietly  doth  feed  upon 

While  others  range  and  glare,  but  find  no  good. 
And  though  she  doth  but  very  softly  go, 

However,  'tis  not  fast  nor  slow,  but  sure ; 
And  certainly  they  that  do  travel  so, 

The  prize  they  do  aim  at  they  do  procure. 

Comparison. 
Although  they  seem  not  much  to  stir,  less  go, 

"For  Christ  that  hunger,  or  from  wrath  that  flee, 
Yet  what  they  seek  for  quickly  they  come  to, 

Though  it  doth  seem  the  farthest  off  to  be. 
One  act  of  faith  doth  bring  them  to  that  flower 

They  so  long  for,  that  they  may  eat  and  live, 
Which,  to  attain,  is  not  in  others  power, 

Though  for  it  a  king's  ransom  they  would  give. 
Then  let  none  faint,  nor  be  at  all  dismayed 

That  life  by  Christ  do  seek,  they  shall  not  fail 
To  have  it ;  let  them  nothing  be  afraid ; 

The  herb  and  flower  are  eaten  by  the  snail.1 

XLIV. 

OF  THE  SPOUSE  OF  CHRIST. 

Who's  this  that  cometh  from  the  wilderness, 
Like  smoky  pillars  thus  pcrfum'd  with  myrrh, 


1  If  the  crawling  snail  finds  food,  wherefore  do  ye  doubt, 
0.!  ye  of  little  faith— (Ed/) 


A   BOOK   FOR   BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


[61 


Leaning  upon  her  dearest  in  distress, 

Led  into's  bosom  by  the  Comforter  ? 
She's  clothed  with  the  sun,  crowned  with  twelve 
stars, 

The  spotted  moon  her  footstool  she  hath  made. 
The  dragon  her  assaults,  fills  her  with  jars, 

Yet  rests  she  under  her  Beloved's  shade, 
But  whence  was  she  ?  what  is  her  pedigree  ? 

Was  not  her  father  a  poor  Amorite  ? 
What  was  her  mother  but  as  others  be, 

A  poor,  a  wretched,  and  a  sinful  Ilittite. 
Yea,  as  for  her,  the  day  that  she  was  born, 

As  loathsome,  out  of  doors  they  did  her  cast ; 
Naked  and  filthy,  stinking  and  forlorn ; 

This  was  her  pedigree  from  first  to  last. 
Nor  was  she  pitied  in  this  estate, 

All  let  her  lie  polluted  in  her  blood : 
None  her  condition  did  commiserate, 

There  was  no  heart  that  sought  to  do  her  good. 
Yet  she  unto  these  ornaments  is  come, 

Her  breasts  are  fashioned,  her  hair  is  grown ; 
She  is  made  heiress  of  the  best  kingdom  ; 

All  her  indignities  away  are  blown. 
Cast  out  she  was,  but  now  she  home  is  taken, 

Naked  (sometimes),  but  now, you  see,  she's  cloth'd; 
Now  made  the  darling,  though  before  forsaken, 

Barefoot,  but  now  as  princes'  daughters  shod. 
Instead  of  filth,  she  now  has  her  perfumes  ; 

Instead  of  ignominy,  her  chains  of  gold  : 
Instead  of  what  the  beauty  most  consumes, 

Her  beauty's  perfect,  lovely  to  behold. 
Those  that  attend  and  wait  upon  her  be 

Princes  of  honour,  clothed  in  white  array ; 
Upon  her  head's  a  crown  of  gold,  and  she 

Eats  wheat,  honey,  and  oil,  from  day  to  day. 
For  her  beloved,  he's  the  high'st  of  all, 

The  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings : 
Angels  and  men  do  liiin  Jehovah  call, 

And  from  him  life  and  glory  always  springs. 
He's  white  and  ruddy,  and  of  all  the  chief : 

His  head,  his  locks,  his  eyes,  his  hands,  and  feet, 
Do,  for  completeness,  out-go  all  belief ; 

His  cheeks   like  flowers   are,    his   mouth  most 
sweet. 
As  for  his  wealth,  he  is  made  heir  of  all; 

What  is  in  heaven,  what  is  on  earth  is  his  : 
And  he  this  lady  his  joint-heir  doth  call, 

Of  all  that  shall  be,  or  at  present  is. 
Well,  lady,  well,  God  has  been  good  to  thee ; 

Thou  of  au  outcast,  now  art  made  a  queen. 
Few,  or  none,  may  with  thee  compared  be, 

A  beggar  made  thus  high  is  seldom  seen. 
Take  heed  of  pride,  remember  what  thou  art 

By  nature,  though  thou  hast  in  grace  a  share, 
Thou  in  thyself  dost  yet  retain  a  part 

Of  thine  own  filthiness ;  wherefore  beware. 
VOL.  111. 


XLV. 

UPON  A  SKILFUL  PLATER  ON  AN  INSTRUMENT. 

He  that  can  play  well  on  an  instrument, 

Will  take  the  ear,  and  captivate  the  mind 
With  mirth  or  sadness  ;  for  that  it  is  bent 

Thereto,  as  music  in  it  place  doth  find. 
But  if  one  hears  that  hath  therein  no  skill, 

(As  often  music  lights  of  such  a  chance) 
Of  its  brave  notes  they  soon  be  weary  will : 

And  there  are  some  can  neither  sing  nor  dance. 

Comparison. 
Unto  him  that  thus  skilfully  doth  play, 

God  doth  compare  a  gospel-minister, 
That  rightly  preacheth,  and  doth  godly  pray, 

Applying  truly  what  doth  thence  infer. 
This  man,  whether  of  wrath  or  grace  he  preach, 

So  skilfully  doth  handle  every  word ; 
And  by  his  saying  doth  the  heart  so  reach, 

That  it  doth  joy  or  sigh  before  the  Lord. 
But  some  there  be,  which,  as  the  brute,  doth  lie 

Under  the  Word,  without  the  least  advance 
Godward  ;  such  do  despise  the  ministry  ; 

They  weep  not  at  it,  neither  to  it  dance. 

XLVI. 

OF  MAN  BY  NATURE. 

From  God  he's  a  backslider, 
Of  ways  he  loves  the  wider ; 
With  wickedness  a  sider, 
More  venom  than  a  spider. 
In  sin  he's  a  considerer, 
A  make-bate  and  divider; 
Blind  reason  is  his  guider, 
The  devil  is  his  rider. 


XLVII. 

UPON  THE  DISOBEDIENT  dllLD. 

Children  become,  while  little,  our  delights  ! 
When  they  grow  bigger,  they  begin  to  fright's. 
Their  sinful  nature  prompts  them  to  rebel, 
And  to  delight  in  paths  that  lead  to  hell. 
Their  parents'  love  and  care  they  overlook, 
As  if  relation  had  them  quite  forsook. 
They  take  the  counsels  of  the  wanton's,  rather 
Than  the  most  grave  instructions  of  a  father. 
They  reckon  parents  ought  to  do  for  them, 
Though  they  the  fifth  commandment  do  contemn 
They  snap  and  snarl  if  parents  them  control, 
Though  but  in  things  most  hurtful  to  the  souL 
They  reckon  they  are  masters,  and  that  we 
Who  parents  are,  should  to  them  subject  be ! 

96 


A   BOOK   FOR  BOYS   AND   GIRLS. 


If  parents  fain  would  have  a  hand  in  choosing, 

The  children  have  a  heart  will  in  refusing. 

They'll  by  wrong  doings,  under  parents  gather, 

And  say  it  is  no  sin  to  rob  a  father. 

They'll  jostle  parents  out  of  place  and  power, 

They'll  make  themselves  the  head,  and  them  devour. 

How  many  children,  by  becoming  head, 

Have  brought  their  parents  to  a  piece  of  bread  ! 

Thus  they  who,  at  the  first,  were  parents'  joy, 

Turn  that  to  bitterness,  themselves  destroy. 

But,  wretched  child,  how  canst  thou  thus  requite 
Thy  aged  parents,  for  that  great  delight 
They  took  in  thee,  when  thou,  as  helpless,  lay 
In  their  indulgent  bosoms  day  by  day  ? 
Thy  mother,  long  before  she  brought  thee  forth, 
Took  care  thou  shouldst  want  neither  food  nor  cloth. 
Thy  father  glad  was  at  his  very  heart, 
Had  he  to  thee  a  portion  to  impart. 
Comfort  they  promised  themselves  in  thee, 
But  thou,  it  seems,  to  them  a  grief  wilt  be. 
How  oft,  how  willingly  brake  they  their  sleep, 
If  thou,  their  bantling,  didst  but  winch  or  weep. 
Their  love  to  thee  was  such  they  could  have  giv'n, 
That  thou  mightst  live,  almost  their  part  of  heav'n. 
But  now,  behold  how  they  rewarded  are  ! 
Tor  their  indulgent  love  and  tender  care ; 
All  is  forgot,  this  love  he  doth  despise. 
They  brought  this  bird  up  to  pick  out  their  eyes. 

XLVIII. 

UPON  A  SHEET  OF  WHITE  PAPER. 

This  subject  is  unto  the  foulest  pen, 
Or  fairest  handled  by  the  sons  of  men. 


'Twill  also  show  what  is  upon  it  writ, 
Be  it  wisely,  or  nonsense  for  want  of  wit, 
Each  blot  and  blur  it  also  will  expose 
To  thy  next  readers,  be  they  friends  or  foes. 

Comparison. 
Some  souls  are  like  unto  this  blank  or  sheet, 
Though  not  in  whiteness.    The  next  man  they  meet, 
If  wise  or  fool,  debauched  or  deluder, 
Or  what  you  will,  the  dangerous  intruder 
May  write  thereon,  to  cause  that  man  to  err 
In  doctrine  or  in  life,  with  blot  and  blur. 
Nor  will  that  soul  conceal  from  who  observes, 
But  show  how  foul  it  is,  wherein  it  swerves. 
A  reading  man  may  know  who  was  the  writer, 
And,  by  the  hellish  nonsense,  the  inditer. 

XLIX. 

UPON    FIRE. 

Who  falls  into  the  fire  shall  burn  with  heat ; 
While  those  remote  scorn  from  it  to  retreat. 
Yea,  while  those  in  it,  cry  out,  0  !  I  burn, 
Some  farther  off  those  cries  to  laughter  turn. 

Comparison. 
While  some  tormented  are  in  hell  for  sin  ; 
On  earth  some  greatly  do  delight  therein. 
Yea,  while  some  make  it  echo  with  their  cry, 
Others  count  it  a  fable  and  a  lie.1 


1  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin.  The  scomer  occupies  a  proud, 
an  elevated  seat,  which  will  sink  under  him,  and  crush  him 
down  to  everlasting  destruction.  The  threatenings  and  pro- 
mises of  God  stand  sure  for  ever. — (Ed.) 


THE    STRUGGLER 


TnE  CHRONOLOGICAL  ORDER  IN  WHICH  MR.  BUNYAN'S  BOOKS  WERE  PUBLISHED,   AND  TnE 
NUMBER  OF  EDITIONS  THEY  PASSED  THROUGH  DURING  HIS  LIFE. 

THIRTY    SEASONS    WHY    CHRISTIAN    PEOPLE   SHOULD    PROMOTE   THEIR   CIRCULATION,    AND    THE    3TUUG.QLER   FOE  THE 
PRESERVATION    OF   THESE    LABOURS. — PUBLISHED    IN    1691. 

Br  CHARLES  DOE,  one  of  Mr.   Bunyan's  personal  friends. 


A  CATALOGUE-TABLE   OF  MR.  BUNYAN'S   BOOKS. 


THEIR    SUCCESSION    IN    PUBLISHING,    MOST   ACCORDING   TO    HIS    OWN    RECKONING. 

Note. — Those  that  are  in  Italic  letter  are  them  that  compose  the  first  folio  :  And  the  rest  are  iatended,  when  time  serves, 

fjr  a  second  folio.* 


1  Gospel  truths  opened,         .... 

2  A  vindication  of  that        .  [sm.  4to] 

3  Sighs  from  Hell  (9  Impressions), 

4  The  2  Covenants  Law  and  Grace, 

5  /  will  pray  with  the  Spirit, 

6  A  map  of  salvation,  &c,  [A  broadside] 

7  The  four  last  things  (3  Impressions), 

8  i  Mount  Ebal  and  Gerizim, 

9  Prison  Meditations,  .... 
10\  The  Holy  City,  dc,         . 

1 1  |  The  Resurrection,  &c.,      .... 

12  Grace  Abounding  (6  Impressions),    . 

13  Justification  by  Jesus  Christ,         [sm.  4to] 

14  j  Confession  of  Faith,  &c, 

15  Difference  in  Judgment,  &c,    . 

16  :  Peaceable  principles,  &c., 

17  ,  Election  and  Reprobation,  &c,      [sm.  ito] 


Light  for  them  in  Parkness 

Christian  Behaviour  (4  I 

Instructions  for  the  Ignorant, 

Saved  by  Grace,      ..... 

The  Strait- Gate, 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress  (12  Impressions), 

The  Fear  of  God, 

Come  and  Welcome  to  Jesus  Christ  (4  Impress.) 


26  J  The  Holy  War  (3  Impressions), 

27  The  Barren  Fig  Tree,       . 

j  The  Greatness  of  the  Soul,  &c, 

j  A  Case  of  Conscience  of  prayer,    [sm.  4to] 

I  Advice  to  Sufferers,         . 


1656 

31 

1657 

32 

[1650] 

33 

34 

1663 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

1665 

40 

1665 

41 

[1666] 

42 

1671 

43 

1672 

44 

1673 

45 

1674 

46 

[No  date] 

47 

48 

49 

1675 

50 

51 

1676 

52 

[1678] 

53 

1679 

54 

55 

1682 

56 

57 

[1633] 

58 

[1683] 

59 

1684 

so 

sheet] 


The  2dpt.  Pilgrim's  Progress  (3  Imp.), 

Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  Badman,f 

Holy  Life  the  beauty  of  Christianity 

The  Pharisee  and  Publican, 

A  caution  against  Sin,        .  [a 

Meditations  on  74  things, 

The  first-day  Sabbath, 

The  Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved, 

Jesus  Christ  an  advocate, 

The  House  of  God, 

The  Water  of  Life, 

Solomon's  Temple  Spiritualized, 

The  Excell.  of  a  broken  heart, 

His  last  Sermon  at  London, 

Exposit.  on  10  first  chap,  of  Genesis, 

Justification  by  Imputed  Righteousness, 

PauVs  departure  and  crown, 

Of  the  Trinity  and  a  Christian, 

Of  the  Law  and  a  Christian,         . 

Israel's  Hope  encouraged, 

Desires  of  the  righteous  granted,   . 

The  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ, 

Christ  Compleat  Saviour  in's  Interest, 

Saint's  Knowledge  of  Christ's  love, 

House  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon,  . 

A  description  of  Antichrist,  . 

1  <fi^ljrlstlaii  JDialngw.t 

(Eljc  Sranrrtlt;  /flntman.  § 

i  fjnrkri  tamrilaiire.i 

£rt  Irrmiitt  nf  Ijis  3mjirisimnient.il 


[1684] 
[1680] 

1685 

[1684] 

1685 
1683 
1688 
1688 
1688 
[1688] 
[1689] 
1888 


12  Manmcrip  ts 
part  of  the 
first  foiio. 
1692 


J 

1 

I  i  Manuscript* 
f  yet  unprmted. 


Here's  sixty  pieces  of  his  labours,  and  he  was  sixty  years  of  age. 
He  was  born  at  Elstow,  nigh  Bedford,  about  1628.    And  about  1652  was,  by  irresistible  grace,  converted :  and 
1 G60  he  had  preached  five  years,  and  then,  for  that,  was  thrown  into  Bedford  Goal ;  and  in  1 671  was  called  to  the  pastoral 
office  at  Bedford,  being  the  11th  of  his  twelve  years  and  an  half's  imprisonment;  and  died  at  London,  Aug.  31,  1688. 

[Where  the  date  is  in  brackets  it  is  supplied  from  original  copies  in  the  Editor's  possession.] 


*  Difficulties  as  to  copyright  prevented  this  second  volume  from  being  published.— See  Editor's  Preface. 

t  A  eood  copy  of  tlds  rare  volume  with  the  wood-cuts,  having  the  reverse  blank,  in  the  editor's  possession,  and  a  fine  copy,  without  the  cuts 
at  Mr.  Pickering's,  a^rei:  as  to  the  date  of  16S0.  It  is  misplaced  in  this  chronological  table;  but  the  date  shows  that  it  w.is  not  intended  a3  a 
third  part  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress;  the  second  part  of  which  was  not  published  for  fjur  years  after  the  life  of  B  idm  in.— Ed. 

t  These  M33 ,  although  diligently  sought,  cannot  he  found.  §  This  was  published  in  a  separate  pocket  volume  by  C.  Dse.  1633. 

Q  Published  from  Mr.  Bunyan's  MS.,  1765. 


7C4 


THE  STRUG  GLER. 


REASONS 

WHY    CHRISTIAN    PEOPLE    SHOULD    PROMOTE    BY   SUBSCRIPTIONS   THE    PRINTING    IN    FOLIO    THE    LABOURS    OP 
MR.  JOHN  BUNYAN,  LATE  MINISTER  OF  THE   GOSPEL,   AND  PASTUR  OF  THE  CONGREGATION  AT  BEDFORD. 


I.  He  was  a  very  able  and  excellent  minister  of  the 
gospel;  viz.,  able  to  express  himself,  and  liad  excellent 
matter  known  to  all  Christians  that  have  heard  him 
preach. 

II.  He  became  thus  able  and  excellent  a  minister  by 
a  great  degree  of  Gospel  Grace  bestowed  upon  his  own 
soul,  more  than  probable  for  that  very  end ;  for  that 
God  wrought  him  from  a  very  great  profane  sinner,  and 
an  illiterate  poor  man,  to  this  profound  understanding 
the  true  or  genuine  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Scriptures, 
whereby  he  could  experimentally  preach  to  souls  with 
power,  and  affection,  and  apostolical  learning,  the  true 
nature  of  the  gospel. 

III.  God's  bestowing  such  great  grace,  to  turn  so 
great  a  sinner,  to  make  such  a  great  gospel  labourer, 
and  thrust  him  into  his  harvest,  argues  there  was  great 
need,  and  therefore  without  question  his  labours  ought 
to  be  preserved. 

IV.  Our  Bunyan  being  so  graciously,  by  the  Lord 
of  the  harvest,  thrust  into  labour,  clearly  shows  to  us, 
(and  may  by  this  preservation  to  future  ages),  that  God 
is  not  bound  to  human  means  of  learned  education 
(though  learning  may  be  useful  in  its  place),  but  can, 
when  he  will,  make  a  minister  of  the  gospel  without 
man's  forecast  of  education,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  men 
in  the  world  that  would  oppose  it,  though  it  be  above 
sixteen  hundred  years  after  the  apostles. 

V.  Many  thousands  had  the  soul  benefit  and  comfort 
of  his  ministry  to  astonishment,  as  if  an  angel  or  an 
apostle  had  touched  their  souls  with  a  coal  of  holy  fire 
from  the  altar. 

VI.  This  excellent  operation  of  the  special  grace  of 
God  in  him,  and  the  gift  of  utterance  when  he  preached, 
confounded  the  wisdom  of  his  adversaries  that  heard 
him,  or  heard  of  him,  he  being,  as  it  is  commonly  called, 
unlearned,  or  had  not  school  education. 

VII.  Tor  all  these  reasons  before-mentioned,  of  the 
spirituality  of  his  preaching,  his  labours  in  writing  de- 
serve preservation  by  printing  as  much  as  any  other 
famous  man's  that  have  writ  since  the  apostles'  time. 

VIII.  Moreover  he  hath  been  a  Christian  sufferer 
for  above  twelve  years,  by  imprisonment,  whereby  he 
sealed  to  the  truth  he  preached. 

IX.  Yet,  for  all  that  imprisonment,  he  preached  then, 
and  there,  and  afterwards  abroad,  as  a  faithful  labourer 
for  the  salvation  of  souls. 

X.  And  he  was  not  a  man  that  preached  by  way  of 
bargain  for  money,  for  he  hath  refused  a  more  plentiful 
income  to  keep  his  station. 

XL  And  his  moderation,  or  desire  of  money,  was  as 
the  apostle  Paul's  practice,  below  his  privilege;  so  that 
he  did  not,  when  he  died,  leave  much  wealth  to  his 
family. 

XII.  And  the  Church  that  wants  such  a  pastor  may 


find  it  long  before  they  get  one,  and  therefore  ought  to 
respect  our  Bunyan's  labours 

XIII.  If  God  had  not  put  it  into  the  heart  of  some 
Christians  or  Church  to  preserve  the  Epistles  of  the 
Apostle  to  the  Romans,  Corinthians,  Galatians,  and 
others,  we  in  this  age  of  the  world  should  in  all  pro- 
bability never  have  known  that  there  ever  were  any 
such  Christians  and  doctrines;  their  names  and  doctrines 
might  have  been  lost,  and  we  might  have  perished,  and 
that  would  have  been  dreadful ;  for  God  mostly  works 
by  second  causes. 

XIV.  And  why  should  any  Christian  people,  that 
have  reason  to  reckon  themselves  obliged  herein,  set 
themselves  aside  from  communicating  to  other  Chris- 
tians and  the  ages  to  come  the  gospel  labours  of  so 
eminent  a  minister  as  God  so  graciously  honoured  and 
assisted  them  with  ? 

XV.  And  if  these  labours  (of,  as  I  may  say,  an 
apostle  of  our  age,  if  we  have  any)  are  not  preserved 
by  printing  thus  in  folio,  most  of  them  in  all  probability 
will  be  lost,  for  there  are  many  of  them  have  been  out 
of  print  many  years,  and  will  never  otherwise  be  printed 
again  because  of  the  charge,  &c. 

XVI.  By  the  late  Act  for  liberty  of  conscience,  it  is 
lawful  now  to  print  the  works  of  dissenters,  though  it 
was  not  so  formerly;  therefore  much  danger  cannot 
plead  excuse. 

XVII.  It  is  a  good  work  without  controversy,  and 
therefore  there  can  be  no  scruple  of  conscience  about 
its  pleasing  God. 

XVIII.  There  is  also  to  the  subscribers  a  further 
benefit  in  this  folio;  for,  whereas  these  twenty  books 
would,  if  bought  single,  cost  nigh  twenty  shillings 
now,  as  printed  in  folio  they  will  have  them  for  about 
twelve  shillings  bound  together  in  one  volume,  which 
conveniency  also  prevents  losing. 

XIX.  These  ten  manuscripts,  which  were  never 
before  printed,  would,  if  printed  in  small  books,  and 
bought  single,  cost  almost  the  money  that  these 
twenty  in  folio  comes  for,  which  is  great  odds. 

XX.  Not  to  preserve  his  labours  and  name,  which 
are  so  great,  is  a  disingenuous  slighting  or  despising 
them,  and  serving  them  no  better  than  a  wicked  man's 
that  rots.  Bunyan  hath  preached,  and  freely  bestowed 
many  a  good  and  gospel-truth,  and  soul-reviving  ex- 
pression; for  which  of  them  doth  any  of  his  friends 
slight  him  ?  Nay,  do  not  they  rather  owe  him  some- 
thing for  his  labour  he  bestowed  on  them,  as  Philemon 
did  to  Paul? 

XXI.  The  price  of  the  first  part  will  be  an  easier 
purchase  than  of  the  whole;  and  all  in  one  volume 
would  be  somewhat  too  big  in  bulk  and  price. 

XXII.  There  is  need  of  printing  these  books  now, 
because  errors  and  superstitions,  like  the  smoke  of  the 


THE   STRUGGLE!!. 


765 


bottomless  pit,  darken  protestants  understanding  the 
purer  truths  of  the  gospel. 

XXIII.  And  when  this  first  part  is  sold  off,  we  shall 
endeavour  to  publish  a  second  part,  whereby  he  that 
is  willing  may  have  the  whole  in  folio. 

XXIV.  This  preservation  will  preserve  the  name  of 
John  Bunyan,  a  champion  of  our  age  to  future  ages  ; 
whereby  it  may  be  said  in  the  pulpit,  The  great  convert 
Bunyan  said  so  and  so. 

XXV.  If  the  labours  of  so  eminent  a  minister  should 
not  be  preserved,  I  know  not  whose  should. 

XXVI.  Antichristian  people  are  diligent  to  preserve 
the  works  of  their  eminent  men;  and  therefore  Chris- 
tians should  be  diligent  to  preserve  theirs. 

XXVII.  The  chief  reasons  we  argue  from  are  not 
common  rules,  that  therefore  every  good  minister's 
endeavours  ought  to  be  printed  in  folio.  But  this  case 
is  extraordinary,  as  an  eminent  minister,  made  so  by 
abundance  of  gospel  grace,  who  has  also  writ  much, 
which  hath  gone  off  well.  I  say  eminent,  though  he 
was,  when  young,  profane,  and  had  not  school  educa- 
tion to  enable  him,  as  is  apparent  to  all  that  knew  him. 


XXVIII.  By  this  printing  in  folio  a  man  may  have 
recourse  for  satisfaction  in  a  case  of  conscience  to  any 
of  these  particular  books  with  the  rest,  which  otherwise 
are  not  to  be  bought ;  and  that  I  have  proved  by  often 
trying  most  London  booksellers,  and  before  that  given 
them  above  twice  the  price  for  a  book;  and  I  know 
not  how  to  get  another  of  those  sorts  for  any  price 
whatsoever. 

XXIX.  All  these  things,  or  half  of  them,  beside; 
many  others  that  might  be  given,  being  considered,  I 
cannot  see  but  it  is  an  absolute  duty. 

XXX.  And  lastly  (pardon  me,  if  I  speak  too  great  a 
word,  as  it  may  seem  to  some  to  be  borne),  all  things 
considered;  that  is,  his  own  former  profaneness,  poverty, 
uulearnedness,  together  witli  his  great  natural  parts, 
the  great  change  made  by  grace,  and  his  long  imprison- 
ment, and  the  great  maturity  in  grace  and  preaching  he 
attained  to,  I  say  our  deceased  Bunyan  hath  not  left 
in  England,  or  the  world,  his  equal  behind  him,  as  I 
know  of.     And  this  is  the  unfeigned  belief  of, 

Your  Christian  brother, 

Charles  Doe. 


THE    STRUGGLER 


(FOR    THE    PRECEDING    PRESERVATION    OF    MR.    JOHN    BUNYAN'S    LABOURS    IN    FOLIO)    THINKS    IT    MAY 
ANSWER   TH3    DESIRES    OF    MANY    TO    GIVE    THE    FOLLOWING    RELATION: 


Christian  Reader, 
I  do  here  as  a  further  duty  presume  to  give  yon, 
according  to  my  understanding,  a  relation  in  three  parts, 
concerning  our  eminent  author,  Mr.  John  Bunyan,  and 
his  labours. 

I.  The  author's  parentage,  imprisonment,  times,  and 
manner  of  his  life  and  death,  &c. 

II.  Relations  and  observations  upon  his  labours,  &c. 

III.  Notes  on  printing  this  folio  and  index,  &c. 
Eirst,  Our  excellent  author,  by  the  abundant  grace 

of  God,  Mr.  John  Bunyan,  was  born  at  Elstow,  a  mile 
side  of  Bedford,  about  the  year  1G28.  His  father  was 
mean,  and  by  trade  a  mender  of  pots  and  kettles,  vul- 
garly called  a  tinker,  and  of  the  national  religion,  as 
commonly  men  of  that  trade  are,  and  was  brought  up 
to  the  tinkering  trade,  as  also  were  several  of  his 
i  As  doth  appear  brothers,  whereat  he  worked  about  that 
by  his  buok  of  country,1  being  also  very  profane  and  poor, 

Ins  conversion,  .  .  .    .    „ 

intituled, Graee  even  when  married,  &c. 

Abounding, &c       But  ifc  pleased  God>  by  Lis  irresistibIe 

grace,  to  work  in  him  some  convictions  and  fears  of 
hell,  and  also  desires  of  heaven,  which  drove  him  to 
reading  and  hearing  of  religious  matters,  so,  controlling 
grace  growing  abundantly,  he  did  not  take  up  religion 
upon  trust,  but  grace  in  him  continually  struggling  with 
himself  and  others,  took  all  advantages  he  lit  on  to 
ripen  his  understanding  in  religion,  and  so  he  lit  on 
ike  dissenting  congregation  of  Christians  at  Bedford, 
and  was,  upon  confession  of  faith,  baptized  about  the 
year  1G51,  or  52,  or  53. 


And  after  a  little  time,  having  a  gift  of  utterance, 
and  love  to  the  conviction  of  sinners,  preached  about 
the  country  the  same  salvation  he  found  by  experience 
himself  stood  in  need  of,  by  faith  and  repentance,  and 
worked  at  his  tinkering  trade  for  a  livelihood,  whereby 
the  reigning  grace  of  God  appeared  the  more  sovereign 
and  glorious  in  this  choice,  even  as  it  shone  in  the 
choice  of  Peter,  a  fisherman,  and  the  rest  of  the 
apostles,  and  others  of  the  eminent  saints  of  old,  most 
of  them  tradesmen,  and  of  whom  most  excellent  things 
are  spoken,  &c. 

In  the  year  1CG0,  being  the  year  king  Charles  re- 
turned to  Endand,  having  preached  about 

„  „  °.  e  i  ■       2  As  in  his  hook 

2  five  years,  the  rage  of  gospel  enemies  intituled,  Grace 
was  so  great  that,  November  12,  they  A1bs£undiu&  8' 
took  him  prisoner  at  a  meeting  of  good 
people,  and  put  him  in  Bedford  jail,  and  there  he  con- 
tinued about  six  years,  and  then  was  let  out  again, 
1GGG,  being  the  year  of  the  burning  of  London,  and,  a 
little  after  his  release,  they  took  him  again  at  a  meeting, 
and  put  him  in  the  same  jail,  where  he  lay  six  years 
more.  s  Before  they  took  him  his  intent  3  As  he  says  iu 
was  to  preach  on  these  words,  *  Dost  thou  J},1*  Colfiessuln 
believe  on  the  Son  of  God?'  Jn.  ix.  35.  of  Faith. 
From  whence  he  intended  to  show  the  absolute  need 
of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  after  he  was  released 
again,  they  took  him  again,  and  put  him  in  prison  the 
third  time,  but  that  proved  but  for  about  half  a  year. 

Whilst  he  was  thus  twelve  years  and  a  half  in 
prison,  he  writ  several  of  his  published  books,  as  by 


766 


THE   STRUGGLED 


many  of  their  epistles  appears,  as  'Pray  by  the  Spirit,' 
'Holy  City,'  'Resurrection,'  'Grace  Abounding,'  and 
others,  also  'The  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  as  himself  and 
many  others  have  said. 

The  pastor  of  Bedford  congregation  died,  and,  after 
some  years'  vacancy,  John  Bunyan,  though  a  prisoner, 
\ras,  by  the  church,  called  to  the  pastoral  office,  De- 
cember 21,  1671,  and  as  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  rule 
the  rage  of  men,  it  proved  in  or  about  the  last  year  of 
his  twelve  years'  imprisonment.  And,  being  out,  he 
preached  the  gospel  publicly  at  Bedford,  and  about  the 
counties,  and  at  London,  with  very  great  success,  being 
mightily  followed  everywhere.  And  it  pleased  the  Lord 
to  preserve  him  out  of  the  hands  of  his  enemies  in  the 
severe  persecution  at  the  latter  end  of  king  Charles  the 
Second's  reign,  though  they  often  searched  and  laid 
wait  for  him,  and  sometimes  narrowly  missed  him. 

In  1688,  he  published  six  books,  being  the  time  of 
king  James  the  Second's  liberty  of  conscience,  and  was 
seized  with  a  sweating  distemper,  which,  after  his  some 
weeks  going  about,  proved  his  death,  at  his  very  loving 
friend's,  Mr.  Strudwick's,  a  grocer,  at  Holborn  Bridge, 
London,  on  August  31,  1688,  and  in  the  60th  year  of 
his  age,  and  was  buried  in  Finsbury  burying-ground, 
where  many  London  dissenting  ministers  are  laid;  and 
it  proved  some  days  above  a  month  before  our  great 
gospel  deliverance  was  begun  by  the  Prince  of  Orange's 
landing,  whom  the  Lord  of  his  continued  blessing  hath 
since  made  our  preserving  king,  William  the  Third. 

And  as  to  his  family,  he  left  his  widow,  Elizabeth, 
and  three  sons,  John,  Thomas,  and  Joseph,  and  three 
daughters,  Elizabeth,  Sarah,  and  Mary;  but  his  blind 
daughter  he  writes  of  in  his  '  Grace  Abounding '  died 
some  years  before  him,  and  his  widow  died  1690-1. 

Secondly,  Concerning  his  labours;  God  did  give  of 
his  extraordinary  grace  of  the  gospel  to  our  author, 
Bunyan,  and  it  is  worthy  our  observation,  for  thereby 
God  may  have  due  honour,  his  people  comfort,  and  ad- 
versaries confuted  in  their  several  corrupt  notions, 
especially  that  of  only  them  that  have  school  education 
are  fitly  qualified  for  ministers  of  the  glorious  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  And  also  hereby  the  superstitious 
man  is  confounded  in  his  way  of  worship,  as  were  his 
predecessors,  the  rulers  of  the  Jews,  in  the  case  of 
Peter  and  John,  saying,  Whence  had  these  men  this 
knowledge,  seeing  they  are  unlearned?  but  there  was 
aud  is  a  reason  beyond  their  false  rules  of  education — 
for  they  had  been  with  Jesus. 

This  is  also  apt  to  convince  sincere-hearted  Christians 
that  God  can,  when  he  will,  make  a  minister  of  his 
gospel,  and  send  him  forth  in  the  power  of  his  Spirit, 
and  defend  him,  nay,  may  I  say,  it  is  God's  prerogative 
to  make  his  gospel-ministers,  and  he  makes  them 
effectual  to  all  the  ends  of  his  gospel,  to  preach,  as  the 
great  apostle  saith,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  to  abase 
aud  abound,  &c.  He  that  cau  make  the  dry  bones  live 
(as  in  Eze.  xxxvii.),  what  can  he  not  do?  yea,  they  shall 
live,  and  become  a  great  host,  and  antichristian  arts 
must  fall;  for  the  Lord  doth  make  his  servants,  as  he 
did  Jeremiah,  as  brazen  walls  against  people  and  priests. 


And  however  some  subtilly  and  vain-gloriously  pre- 
tend to  be  the  only  lawful  successors  of  the  apostles, 
yet  certain  I  am,  from  safer  reasons  of  faith,  that  our 
author  Bunyan  was  really,  sincerely,  and  effectually  a 
lawful  successor  of  the  apostles,  and  as  lawful  as  any 
have  been  above  this  thousand  years.  Nay,  may  I  say, 
he  was  a  second  Paul;  for  that  his  conversion  was  in  a 
great  measure  like  that  great  apostle's,  who,  of  a  great 
enemy  to  godliness,  was,  by  strong  aud  irresistible 
workings  of  sovereign  grace,  made  a  great  minister  of, 
and  sufferer  for,  the  gospel.  Thousands  of  Christians 
in  country  and  city,  can  testify  that  their  comfort  under 
his  ministry  has  been  to  admiration,  so  that  their  joy 
hath  showed  itself  by  much  weeping. 

To  the  eye  of  carnal  reason  it  may  seem  that  the 
great  apostle  Paul's  imprisonment  was  a  contradiction 
to  his  commission  of  effectually  preaching  the  gospel  to 
many  countries  ;  especially  considering  his  commission 
was  strengthened  by  his  miraculous  conversion,  from 
the  glory  and  call  of  the  Lord  Jesus  from  heaven,  for 
the  making  of  him  such  a  great  gospel  preacher.  And 
yet  God  suffered  it  so  to  be,  and  we  have  reason  to  be- 
lieve for  the  best;  because  God  usually  works  those 
seeming  contrary  things  to  his  own  end  and  glory. 
And  the  effect  was,  the  saints  were  strengthened  there- 
by, and  several  epistles  were  written  thereby,  which 
hath  preserved  much  of  the  gospel  in  writing  to  the 
ages  after,  and  even  for  our  very  great  and  needful 
help. 

And  I  reckon  I  shall  not  be  out  of  the  way,  if  I  ob- 
serve and  say — What  hath  the  devil  or  his  agents  gotten 
by  putting  our  great  gospel-minister,  Bunyan,  in  prison? 
for  in  prison,  as  before  mentioned,  he  wrote  many  ex- 
cellent books,  that  have  published  to  the  world  his  great 
grace,  and  great  truth,  and  great  judgment,  and  great  in- 
genuity; and  to  instance  in  one,  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
he  hath  suited  to  the  life  of  a  traveller  so  exactly  and  plea- 
santly, and  to  the  life  of  a  Christian,  that  this  very  book, 
besides  the  rest,  hath  done  the  superstitious  sort  of 
men  and  their  practice  more  harm,  or  rather  good,  as  I 
may  call  it,  than  if  he  had  been  let  alone  at  his  meeting 
at  Bedford,  to  preach  the  gospel  to  his  own  auditory, 
as  it  might  have  fallen  out;  for  none  but  priest-ridden 
people  know  how  to  cavil  at  it,  it  wins  so  smoothly 
upon  their  affections,  and  so  insensibly  distils  the  gos- 
pel into  them,  and  hath  been  printed  in  Prance,  Holland, 
New  England,  and  in  Welsh,  aud  about  a  hundred 
thousand  in  England,  whereby  they  are  made  some 
means  of  grace,  and  the  author  become  famous ;  and 
may  be  the  cause  of  spreading  his  other  gospel-books 
over  the  European  and  American  world,  and  in  process 
of  time  may  be  so  to  the  whole  universe. 

When  Mr.  Bunyan  preached  in  London,  if  there 
were  but  one  day's  notice  given,  there  would  be  more 
people  come  together  to  hear  him  preach  than  the 
meeting-house  would  hold.  I  have  seen  to  hear  him 
preach,  by  my  computation,  about  twelve  hundred  at  a 
morning  lecture,  by  seven  o'clock,  on  a  working  day,  in 
the  dark  winter  time.  I  also  computed  about  three 
thousand  that  came  to  hear  him  one  Lord's-day,  at  Lon- 


THE   STRL'GGLER. 


767 


don,  at  a  town's  end  meeting-house  ;  so  that  half  were 
fain  to  go  back  again  for  want  of  room,  and  then  him- 
self was  fain,  at  a  back  door,  to  be  pulled  almost  over 
people  to  get  upstairs  to  his  pulpit. 

Mr.  Bunt/arts  dispute  with  a  scholar  to  this  effect. 

As  Mr.  Bunyan  was  upon  the  road  near  Cambridge, 
there  overtakes  him  a  scholar  that  had  observed  him  a 
preacher,  and  said  to  him,  How  dare  you  preach,  seeing 
you  have  not.  the  original,  being  not  a  scholar? 

Then  said  Mr.  Bunyan,  Have  you  the  original  ? 

Yes,  said  the  scholar. 

Nay,  but,  said  Mr.  Bunyan,  have  you  the  very  self- 
same original  copies  that  were  written  by  the  penmen 
of  the  scriptures,  prophets  and  apostles  ? 

No,  said  the  scholar,  but  we  have  the  true  copies  of 
those  originals. 

How  do  you  know  that  ?  said  Mr.  Bunyan. 

How  ?  said  the  scholar.  Why,  we  believe  what  we 
have  is  a  true  copy  of  the  original. 

Then,  said  Mr.  Bunyan,  so  do  I  believe  our  English 
Bible  is  a  true  copy  of  the  original. 

Then  away  rid  the  scholar. 

Another  dispute  with  a  scholar. 

As  Mr.  Bunyan  was  preaching  in  a  barn,  and  show-  I 
ing  the  fewness  of  those  that  should  be  saved,  there  j 
stood  one  of  the  learned  to  take  advantage  of  his  I 
words  ;  and  having  done  preaching,  the  schoolman  said 
to  him,  You  are  a  deceiver,  a  person  of  no  charity,  and 
therefore  not  fit  to  preach ;  for  he  that  in  effect  con- 
demneth  the  greatest  part  of  his  heareis  hath  no  cha- 
rity, and  therefore  not  tit  to  preach. 

Then  Mr.  Bunyan  answered — 'The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
preached  in  a  ship  to  his  hearers  on  the  shore,  Mat.  xiii.; 
and  showed  that  they  were  as  four  sorts  of  ground — 
The  high-way,  The  stony,  The  Thorny,  and  The  good 
ground  ;  whereof  the  good  ground  was  the  only  per- 
sons to  be  saved. 

And  your  position  is — That  he  that  in  effect  con- 
demneth  the  greatest  part  of  his  hearers  hath  no  charity, 
and  therefore  not  fit  to  preach  the  gospel. 

But  here  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  so ;  then  your 
conclusion  is — The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  wanted  charity, 
and  therefore  not  fit  to  preach  the  gospel. 

Horrid  blasphemy ;  away  with  your  hellish  logic,  and 
speak  Scripture. 

Then  replied  the  learned  :  'Tis  blasphemy  to  call 
logic  hellish,  which  is  our  reason — the  gift  of  God ;  for 
tiiat  -which  distinguished  a  man  from  a  beast  is  the 
gift  of  God. 

But  Mr.  Bunyan  replied :  Sin  doth  distinguish  a  man 
from  a  beast ;  is  sin  therefore  the  gift  of  God  ?  &c. 

They  parted. 

I  once  asked  hiin  his  opinion  in  a  common  religious 
point,  and  offered  some  arguments  to  prove  my  opinion 
for  the  general  of  it;  but  he  answered,  that  where  the 
Scripture  is  silent  we  ought  to  i'oibear  our  opinions ; 
and  so  he  forebore  to  affirm  either  for  or  against,  the 
Scripture  being  altogether  silent  in  this  point. 


Thirdly,  concerning  this  folio,  &c.  I  have  struggled 
to  bring  about  this  great  good  work ;  and  it  had  suc- 
ceeded in  Mr.  Bunyan's  lifetime,  even  all  his  labours  in 
folio,  but  that  an  interested  bookseller  opposed  it ;  and 
notwithstanding  the  many  discouragements  I  have  met 
with  in  my  struggles  in  this  so  great  a  work,  we  have 
— and  I  may  believe  by  the  blessing  of  the  Lord — got- 
ten about  four  hundred  subscriptions,  whereof  about 
thirty  are  ministers ;  which  also  shows  the  great  esteem 
our  author's  labours  are  in  among  Christian  people. 
Ami  that  the  reasonableness  and  duty  of  the  preserva- 
tion of  his  labours  in  folio,  by  subscription,  may  be  con- 
tinued to  memory,  I  have  also  added  my  reasons,  which 
I  distributed  in  my  late  struggles  to  effect  this  work. 

His  effigies  was  cut  in  copper,*  from  an  original  paint 
done  to  the  life,  by  his  very  good  friend,  a  limner;  and 
those  who  desire  it  single,  to  put  in  a  frame,  may  have 
it  at  this  bookseller's — Mr.  Marshal ;  and  also  the  cata- 
logue-table. The  epistle  is  writ  by  two  ministers,  Mr. 
Wilson  of  Hichin,  in  Hertfordshire,  and  Mr.  Chandler, 
who  succeeds  Mr.  Bunyan  at  Bedford. 

And  Mr.  Burton,  that  writ  the  epistle  to  Some  Gos- 
pel-truths Opened,  being  the  first  book  Mr.  Bunyan  writ, 
was  minister  at  Bedford. 

Note. — I  would  not  charge  the  following  running- 
titles  upon  our  author,  Bunyan;  because  they  were 
added  in  the  proposals,  for  want  of  running  titles  and 
the  knowledge  of  them,  and  the  copies  being  at  Bed- 
ford when  the  proposals  were  drawn  up  at  London ; 
and  also  because,  perhaps,  he  designed  some  other  like 
running-titles  : — 

Paul's  departure  a,id  crown. 

Israel's  hope  encouraged. 

The  saint 's  privilege  and  profit. 

Christ  a  complete  Saviour. 

The  saint's  knowledge  of  Christ's  love. 

Of  the  Trinity  and  a  Christian. 

Of  the  Law  and  a  Christian. 

Notes  upon  the  Index,  J)-c.f 

I  did  intend  to  print  a  complete  table  of  all  the  texts 
of  Scriptures  used  in  our  author's  labours,  that  from 
theuce,  looking  into  his  book,  his  sense  might  be  easily 
found  upon  any  text ;  so  his  labours  might  have  been 
also  in  the  nature  of  an  exposition  upon  the  whole 
Bible ;  but  I  have  delayed  till  some  other  opportunity, 
it  may  be  of  the  next  folio,  and  whenever  it  falls  I  in- 
tend to  give  notice. 

Because  I  and  other  subscribers,  especially  ministers, 
were  willing  this  folio  should  be  commoded  with  an  in- 
dex, I  have,  as  a  Christian,  exposed  myself  and  made 
one,  and  that  without  money  for  my  labour  of  writing 
it,  though  I  confess  it  might  have  seemed  some  other 
men's  duty;  yet  being  ignorant  of  the  man  that  had  the 
opportunity,  and  would  have  done  it,  unless  paid  for  it, 
1  was  necessitated  to  effect  it;  and  if  the  bookseller  had 


*  Alluding  to  the  portrait  published  as  a  frontispiece  to  tin 
folio  volume,  1092-Ed. 

t  The  luiles  accompanying  the  first  folio.— Ed. 


768 


THE   STRUGGLED 


paid  for  it,  he  would  have  lessened  the  number  of  140 
sheets  of  Mr.  Bunyan's  labours  in  this  folio  at  ten  shil- 
lings.    Excuse  this  fault  in  me,  if  it  be  one. 

I  could  have  collected  abundance  more  of  excellent 
matter  in  this  table;  and  I  have  placed  an  Italic-lettered 
word  in  every  paragraph  in  the  table,  to  be  the  guide- 
word  to  the  same  word  in  the  folio,  which  is  a  black- 
lettered  word  in  the  folio,  latter  part ;  that  is,  those 
books  formerly  printed,  where  the  printer  hath  not 
failed  to  make  it  so,  and  also  in  the  manuscript,  fore- 
part, a  guide-word  to  the  same  word  under  which  I 
have  drawn  a  black  line,  in  as  many  folios  as  opportu- 
nity and  time  would  permit  me  to  do,  because  I  had 
not  time  and  convenieney  before  this  folio  was  printed 
to  mark  the  manuscripts  for  to  be  a  black-lettered  word, 
as  I  had  time  for  the  formerly  printed  books*  Also 
note,  the  book,  though  marked,  doth  not  always  refer 
to  the  table,  but  the  table  to  the  book,  is  the  intent ; 
and  because  the  word  in  the  book  doth  not  always, 
though  very  often,  fall  in  alphabetical  order,  therefore 
some  other  like  word  is  put  in  its  place  in  the  table. 

Also  note,  sometimes  many  principal  words  are  in 
one  paragraph,  and  then,  though  the  matter  be  not  to 
be  found  in  the  table  by  the  word,  that  some  perhaps 
may  expect,  yet  it  may  be  found  by  another  word,  be- 
cause several  words  are  so  united  that  one  cannot  well 
part  them ;  and  it  would  be  too  large  a  table  to  put 
them  all  in  severally  in  alphabetical  order — as  soul,  sin- 
ner, saved,  salvation,  justification,  Christ,  God,  &c. 

Also  note.  When  to  the  table-phrase  more  than  oue 
number  is  placed,  then  expect  not  that  the  same  black- 
letter  word  is  always  to  be  found  in  the  book  to  the  last 
number,  as  is  to  the  first  number,  but  it  may  be  some 
other  black  or  marked  word  of  like  meaning ;  as  for 

•  This  is  as  originally  printed.  Mr.  Doe  means,  he  had  not 
time  to  mark  in  the  manuscript  such  words  as  the  printer  should 
put  in  black-letter.— Ed. 


antichrist  the  black-lettered  word  in  some  places  is  har- 
lot, and  for  apostles  the  black-letter  word  sometimes  is 
twelve,  because  the  word  apostle  is  not  in  that  part  of 
the  folio,  though  intended  by  twelve. 

Also  note.  The  phrase  in  the  table  is  not  always  the 
very  same,  word  for  word,  in  the  book,  because  the  de- 
sign of  the  table  is  to  give  matter  in  short  saying,  as 
well  as  most  commonly  a  complete  sentence ;  and,  there- 
fore, they  that  would  have  Mr.  Bunyan's  entire,  com- 
plete, and  full  sense  of  the  matter,  let  them  look  out  of 
the  table  into  the  book,  and  there  take  all  its  connec- 
tion together.  Also,  I  have  to  keep  the  table  as  short 
as  I  well  could;  and  yet,  to  direct  well  to  the  matter 
in  the  book,  placed  one  part  of  the  matter  under  one 
word,  in  alphabetical  order,  and  another  part  of  the 
same  matter  in  another  following  paragraph,  under  an- 
other word  in  the  table ;  so  that,  by  finding  one  word 
in  the  table,  you  may  often  find  in  the  same  paragraph, 
in  the  book,  before  or  after  that  word,  other  matter 
thereto  relating.f 

I  had  but  about  two  years'  acquaintance  with  our 
author,  and,  therefore,  have  said  but  little  of  him,  be- 
cause of  hastening  this  to  the  press;  yet  if  any  more 
comes  to  my  memory,  I  intend  to  put  it  at  the  end  of 
the  index. 

Your  Christian  brother, 

CD. 

t  The  table  to  which  Charles  Doe  here  refers  is  only  to  twenty 
of  Mr  Bunyan's  books.  It  is  diffuse,  and  badly  arranged.  The 
Index  given  with  this  first  complete  edition  of  all  the  admirable 
works  of  our  great  pilgrim  forefather,  is  entirely  new.  It  is  the 
result  of  a  careful  reading  of  every  treatise,  extracting  a  notice  of 
such  things  as  the  editor  conceived  to  be  most  deeply  interesting. 
These  extracts  were  then  arranged,  in  order  to  furnish  a  useful 
index  to  all  the  works  of  Bunyan.  It  has  been  attended  with 
very  great  labour,  and  some  delay  to  the  publication;  but  no 
sacrifice  is  too  great,  in  order  to  render  Bunyan's  works  as  com- 
plete as  possible.  George  Offor. 


THE     INDEX. 


[Articles  marked  with  an  asterisk  refer  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.'] 


Aaron's  defence,  a  pitiful  fumbling  speech,  ii.  435. 

Al el  justified  by  faith,  i.  311. 

Abraham's  faith  counted  righteousness,  i.  309. 

Absolution,  or  the  power  of  the  keys,  i.  38,  and  note. 

Acceptable  sacrifice  a  broken  heart,  i.  689.     See  Heart. 

Adam — Legacy:  a  broken  covenant,  death,  and  putting  out 
the  eyes  of  his  posterity,  i.  505 — Hides  himself,  yet  volun- 
tarily comes  forth,  i.  694 — A  type  of  Christ,  ii.  423 — In 
innocence  inferior  to  a  Christian,  ii.  427 — Ought  to  have 
taught  his  wife,  and  not  to  have  been  her  scholar,  ii.  438 
— Spake  Hebrew,  ii.  500 — Had  before  he  ate  the  fruit, 
ii.  651 — *The  first,  assaults  Faithful— Offers  his  three 
daughters  to  wife — Sells  his  servants  as  slaves — Inscrip- 
tion on  his  forehead — Gave  Faithful  a  deadly  twitch,  iii. 
118. 

Adoption  :  By  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  i.  352 — Kingdom 
of  heaven  is  for  the  heirs,  i.  377 — Christ  the  author,  i. 
406 — Sin  cannot  dissolve  the  relation  of  Father  and  Son, 
i.  453 — Poor  helpless  things  in  this  world  living  upon 
mercy,  i.  602 — Chastisements  a  sign  of  sonship,  ii.  693. 

Adultery  and  uncleanness,  three  signs  of,  ii.  568. 

Advice  to  sufferers,  or  seasonable  counsel,  ii.  691  • 

Afflictions  and  chastisements  are  from  God,  i.  455 — Of  God's 
people  cause  those  who  hate  godliness  to  skip  for  joy,  i. 
477 — And  tribulations,  nine  causes  of,  i.  581 — For  the 
gospel's  sake,  the  saint's  glory,  i.  725 — Needful,  i.  741 — 
Governed  by  God  as  to  time,  number,  nature,  and  mea- 
sure, ii.  476 — Purify  the  church,  iii.  431 — Comforts  in 
affliction :  Have  I  a  bad  master  ?  it  is  only  for  a  short 
time — A  dirty  road?  only  for  a  mile — In  rags?  plenty  will 
visit  me  soon,  iii.  537. 

Agony  of  Christ  solemnly  described,  i.  41 1. 

Algerius,  Pomponius,  an  Italian  martyr's  interesting  letter, 
iii.  530. 

Almost  Christian,  the,  rejected,  iii.  290. 

Alms  given  at  weddings  and  funerals,  an  old  custom,  i.  591. 

Anagram  by  Bunyan  on  his  name,  iii.  374. 

Anecdote  of  a  girl  that  ate  tobacco-pipe  heads,  i.  707. 

Angels  of  glory  visit  the  imprisoned  saints,  i.  47,  and  note — 
Theii  only  peculiar  joy  the  conversion  of  sinners,  i.  79 — 
Carry  the  believer  from  the  grave  to  heaven,  i.  168;  iii. 
680 — Wait  upon  the  saints  on  their  death-bed,  i.  341,  742 ; 
iii.  679 — Eyes  dazzled  at  Christ's  importunity  with  the  sin- 
ner, i.  350— Keepers  of  the  strait  gate,  i.  368 — Not  able 
to  save  simiers,  i.  407 — Their  presence  terrible,  i.  439 — 
Guardians  to  all  God's  fearers,  i.  469,  47U — Examples, 
Obadiah,  Job,  &c,  i.  479— The  sight  of,  dreadful,  i.  58  >— 
*IIelp  the  pilgrims — On  sight  of  the  cross,  iii.  102 — When 
entangled  by  the  flatterer,  iii.  151 — At  Beulah,  iii.  161  — 
At  the  black  river,  iii.  162,  164,  172,  240— *Heavenly 
host  welcome  the  pilgrims  to  the  celestial  city,  iii.  165 — 
*The  angel  Secret  visits  Christiana,  iii.  174 — Joy  when 
Mansoul  is  taken;  they  open  their  windows,  put  out  their 
heads,  and  look  down  to  see  the  cause  of  that  glory,  iii. 
297 — Ready  to  minister  to  the  saints,  iii.  479 — Are  up- 
held and  subsist  by  Christ,  iii.  480 — Different  orders  in 
the  hierarchy  of  heaven,  iii.  508. 

Angels,  fallen— W  i-h  to  be  one  to  torment,  but  not  be  tor- 
mented, i.  6 — Operates  by  despair,  i  9,  No.  25-37 — Quotes 
Scripture,  i.  13 — How  to  distinguish,  i.  18,  250,  251;  iii. 
115 — Suggestions  of  Satan  mistaken  for  Christian's 
thoughts,  i.  18 — Remarkable  temptations  of  Satan,  i.  19 — 
Combat  with,  some  more  than  others,  i.  28;  iii.  113 — 
Dialogue  between  the  devil  and  a  great  convert,  i.  79 — 
His  secret  weapons  and  buffetings,  i.  80— Satan's  rage 
VOL.  III. 


against  Christ,  why?  i.  95 — His  maul  or  club,  a  sense  of 
sin,  i.  96 — Chained  so  as  not  to  follow  us  too  fast,  i.  168  - 
lias  a  suit  with  the  Christian,  i.  175 — Evil  thoughts,  Satan's 
suggestions,  the  fumes  of  his  stinking  breath,  i.  210 — As- 
saults the  best  saints,  i.  214— Ever  trying  to  get  us  into 
his  sieve,  i.  214 — Atheistical  suggestions  of  Satan,  i.  223 — 
Counsellors  attempt  to  murder  souls,  i.  278 — Roar  hideous 
to  keep  us  from  Christ,  i.  284 — That  the  law  is  ti. 
pel,  i.  322 — And  that  ceremonies  are  the  gospel,  i.  323 — 
All  to  ruin  souls,  i.  370,  612;  ii.  33,  132,  133,  134,  540; 
iii.  267,  268,  287,  332,  356— The  doctrine  of  devils,  i. 
423 — The  best  antidote  to  Satan's  devices,  i.  434 — Devil's 
wondrous  siibtilry,  i.  516 — Turned  against  himself, 
— Drum  of  Diabolus,  i.  578 — A  form  of  prayer,  i.  632 — 
To  prevent  prayer,  i.  633 — Flatters  dissembling  hypocrites 
to  make  fine  prayers,  i.  638 — Supernatural  app 
and  shapes  to  gull  poor  mortals  of  life,  i.  683 — Satan's  de- 
vices, sharp-pointed  things  of  that  great  and  dogged  levia- 
than, ii.  5 — Metamorphoses  all  things,  ii.  28,  32 — I  > 
with  the  convinced  sinner,  ii.  37 — Devil  a  mi 
butcher  of  men,  ii.  152 — In  counterfeiting  the  work  of 
grace,  ii.  152 — The  faith  of  devils,  ii.  152 — Especially  the 
new  birth,  ii.  197 — Employs  his  minister-  as  angels  of 
light  to  contend  for  forms  of  divine  worship,  ii.  436 — 
Enmity  of  Satan,  how  manifested,  ii.  436,  4.')7 —  . 
bub's  castle  near  the  wicket-gate,  iii.  96,  181 — *Satan 
cannot  destroy  grace,  iii.  100 — *Apollyon  tempts  Chris- 
tian, iii.  Ill — Theyfight,  iii.  113 — Christian  conquers,  and 
Satan  flies  away  for  a  season,  iii.  113,  120-206 — Chief 
lord  of  Vanity  Fair,  tempts  Christ,  iii.  127— His  dog  frights 
pilgrims  from  worse  to  better,  iii.  181— His  garden  and 
its  poisonous  fruits,  iii.  182,  201,  228— Their  fall,  iii.  256 
— Diabolus,  king  of  the  blacks,  assails  Mansoul,  iii. 
Was  their  fall  after  the  creation  of  man?  iii.  257,  note — 
Beelzebub  one  of  Diabolus's  mightygiants,  iii.  257- 
and  Apollyon  fierce  lords  of  Diabolus,  iii.  257— Lucifer, 
his  advice  for  taking  .Mansoul,  iii.  257 — Dialogue  and  con- 
spiracy, iii.  257 — Tisiphone,  a  fury  of  the  lake,  kills  Cap- 
tain Resistance,  iii.  259— Rhetoric  and  (lattery,  iii.  262— 
Keeps  the  Bible  from  Mansoul,  iii.  266 — Armour  for  Bin- 
ners,  presumption,  hardness  of  heart,  a  blasphemous  tongue, 
unbelief,  and  a  prayerless  spirit,  iii.  268 — Offers  to  set  up 
a  sufficient  ministry  and  lecturers  in  Mansoul  at  his  own 
cost,  iii.  293 — Epistolary  correspondence  between  Satan 
and  Mansoul,  iii.  331,  333,  337— Infernal  conference  or 
ue  of  devils,  iii.  331,  335,  356— Swearing  by  Saint 
Man  "i  ?S5 — Furiao  of  hsll,  their  namfcs:  in  II.;  — 
Devils  stand  by  the  death-bed  of  sinners,  ready  to  scramble 
for  their  souls,  iii.  379,  5S5,  613— Angel  of  the  bottom- 
pit  the  father  of  Antiehri-tiaiii.-m.  iii.  524  —  Baits  to 
catch  souls,  iii.  608— Biding  the  wicked  off  their  li 
618 — Prayed  to  by  a  wicked  man  when  dying,  iii.  661  — 
Death  with  his  merciless  paw  seizeth  thee,  the  devil- 
scramble  for  thee,  and  hell  swallows  thee  up,  iii.  682— 
Devils  and  their  work,  iii.  735. 
Antichrist— Will  go  to  bed  in  the  sides  of  the  pit's  month, 
i.  237  and  note— And  his  ruin,  and  the  slaying  of  thewit- 
5)  ii.  41— A  pretended  friend,  but  real  enemy,  ii.  !.", 
—The  son  of  hell,  several  features  by  which  he  is  known. 
ii.  46— Christ  came  to  destroy  him,  ii.  46— The  church 
tirst  midwifed  this  devil  into  th.'  world,  ii.  A 
changeable  nature,  ii.  47— Howhi»S<  ol  is  to  be  ,1,  : 
ii.  47— The  ordinances  ofantichrist,  ii.  49— < ihrisl  - 
alone  can  destroy  Antichrist,  ii.  50—7000  pompous  titles 
to  be  destroyed,  ii.  51— Lying  legends  and  false  miracles, 
ii.  51— His  body  or  church  to  be  destroyed,  and  how,  ii. 
51— Antichrist's'  ruin,  the  manner  of  it,  ii.  54— A  tenth 

97 


"70 


THE   INDEX. 


part  first,  ii.  55 — And  then  the  other  nine  parts,  ii.  56 — 
Great  Babel  falls,  ii.  57 — Remarkable  proofs  of  this  down 
ward  progress  since  Bunyan's  time;  see  note,  ii.  57 — 
— Gradual,  part  after  part,  until  all  is  destroyed,  ii.  58 — 
Signs  of  its  downfall,  ii.  58 — Spiritual  and  not  carnal 
weapons  will  be  used,  ii.  61 — The  time  only  known  by 
the  signs,  ii.  62 — Near  destruction  when  all  God's  saints 
have  come  out  of  her,  ii.  62 — Gradual,  by  God's  bout 
hammers,  ii.  70 — The  instruments  God  will  use,  ii.  72 — 
His  unscriptural  counsels  and  convocations,  condemning 
the  Bible,  setting  up  his  church,  &c,  ii.  74—  Takes  from 
Christ  his  headship  over  the  church,  ii.  75 — His  seven  sins 
against  the  Holy  Ghost  the  causes  of  his  ruin — Prescribes 
divine  worship,  ii.  75 — A  beast  of  prey;  must  be  de- 
stroyed for  his  outrages  and  murders  upon  the  saints,  ii. 
76  and  note — Church  of  Antichrist  pretends  superiority  to 
the  state,  ii.  79  and  note — Happiness  of  the  saints  when 
he  is  destroyed,  ii.  79 — Hasten  out  of  her,  0  Christian! 
ii.  80— Signs  of  her  fall,  ii.  81—  *The  Monster  [Antichrist] 
propounds  conditions  to  men,  iii.  227 — Obeyed  by  those 
who  love  earth  better  than  heaven — Slew  many — Taught 
children  to  suck  her  whelps — Very  rampant,  but  wounded 
and  likely  to  die,  iii.  227 — Like  a  beautiful  spring  after 
a  nipping  and  terrible  winter,  iii.  409 — A  beast  that  is 
moon-eyed,  putting  darkness  for  light,  iii.  521 — His  doc- 
trines and  traditions  are  the  smoke  of  the  bottomless  pit, 
iii.  524. 

Antinomianism — A  rejection  of  the  law  as  a  means  of  justi- 
fication, i.  303,  308 — Christians  not  under  the  law,  i.  318 
— No  believer  is  under  the  law,  i.  520 — But  under  grace, 
i.  521. 

Apocrypha  not  holy  or  canonical,  i.  14. 

*  Apostasy,  gradations  in,  iii.  161. 

Apostolical  descent:  *A11  true  Christians  descend  from  Stephen 
the  martyr,  iii.  218 — Ignatius,  Polycarp,  and  the  martyrs, 
Christian's  apostolic  descent  from,  iii.  218— Covetousness 
makes  a  minister  more  like  a  dog  than  an  apostle,  iii.  473 
— A  covetous  minister  a  descendant  from  Lot's  wife,  and 
not  from  the  holy  apostles,  iii.  475 — Doe,  in  his  xvth 
reason  for  the  preservation  of  Bunyan's  works,  calls  him 
an  apostle  of  our  age,  if  we  have  any,  iii.  764 — However 
some,  subtilely  and  vain-gloriously,  pretend  to  be  the  only 
lawful  successors  of  the  apostles,  yet  reason  of  faith  shows 
our  Bunyan  to  be  sincerely  and  effectually  a  lawful  suc- 
cessor from  Paul,  iii.  766. 

Apparel:  The  fruit  of  sin — Cover  not  one  shame  with  an- 
other by  pride  in  fine  clothes,  ii.  428 — Immodest,  con- 
demned in  women,  ii.  561 — The  wanton  dress  of  the  times 
described,  iii.  565. 

*Arbouron  the  hill  Difficulty,  iii.  105, 194— On  theEnchanted 
Ground,  iii.  235,  236,  237,  238. 

Armorial  bearings  or  escutcheon,  Three  burning  thunder- 
bolts— The  Book  of  the  Law  wide  open,  from  whence 
issued  a  flame  of  fire — A  burning  fiery  furnace — A  fruit- 
less tree,  with  an  axe  lying  at  the  root  thereof,  iii.  270 — 
"  The  dead  lion  and  dead  bear,"  iii.  318. 

Armour  of  the  Christian  defensive  only,  iii.  526. 

*  Armoury  at  the  house  Beautiful,  iii.  110. 
Artaxerxes1  letter  to  Ezra,  with  a  commentary,  ii.  42. 
Articles  of  the  Church  against  Bishop  Fowler,  ii.  332. 
Ascension  of  Christ.     See  God — Christ. 
Assemblies  for  worship,  a  scriptural  account  of,  ii.  662. 
Assurance:  The  Spirit  of  Christ  the  earnest  of,  ii.  136— By 

faith  in  past  experience,  ii.  481. 

* Atheist  meets  the  pilgrims,  iii.  152. 

Atheistic  doubts—  Most  trying,  i.  50 — Suggestions  of  Satan, 
i.  223. 

Atheists  in  practice,  i.  771 — God  gives  them  breakfast,  din- 
ner, and  supper,  as  our  example,  ii.  739 — Wicked  profes- 
sors practical  Atheists,  iii.  627. 

Atonement.     See  God — Christ. 

Augustine,  the  monk,  a  brat  of  Babel,  ii.  498. 

Awful  sick-bed  scene — Death  and  hell  at  the  bedside, 
iii.  580,  585. 

Awakened  sinners  dare  not  approach  God  but  by  Christ, 
i.  205  —  Their  condition  described,  i.  423  —  Means  of 
awakening,  ii.  111. 


Babylon:  Saints  in  Mrs.  Babylon's  lap,  iii.  447. 

Backslider:  His  return  to  God,  i.  223 — His  difficulties  and 
fears ;  his  new  sins  are  talking  devils,  threatening  devils, 
roaring  devils  ;  they  add  lead  to  his  heels,  i.  224: — The  re- 
turning backslider  is  a  blessing,  i.  224 — The  manner  of  his 
return,  i.  224 — Gives  a  double  testimony  to  the  truth,  i. 

'  224: — Falls  in  coming  to  Christ  recovered,  i.  253 — Encou- 
raged to  return,  i.  267 — Invited  to  Christ,  i.  348 — How 
brought  back,  i.  352 — Under  the  law  never  restored,  but 
under  grace  is  restored,  i.  552,  560 — May  be  restored,  ii. 
190 — The  church  to  be  careful  to  restore  runaways,  ii.  589. 

Backsliding  occasions  awful  evils,  i.  740 — Awful  feelings 
when  Christ  makes  such  a  madman  come  to  himself,  ii.  31 
— Saints  playing  truant  and  lurking  like  thieves,  ii.  31 — 
*Four  reasons  for  sudden  backsliding,  iii.  160— Four 
downward  gradations,  iii.  326 — An  allegorical  description 
of  its  awful  state,  iii.  350— State  of  imminent  danger,  iii. 
392 — Poetically  described,  iii.  740. 

Badman:  The  life  and  death  of  Mr.  Badman,  iii.  586 — The 
embodiment  of  facts  seen  or  known  by  the  author,  iii.  590 
— His  relatives  spread  all  over  society,  iii.  590 — His  pom- 
pous funeral  dishonourable,  iii.  591 — Died  two  deaths  at 
once,  iii.  595 — Has  a  pious  father,  iii.  597 — A  liar,  pil- 
ferer, and  Sabbath-breaker,  iii.  600 — Gloried  in  swearing, 
iii.  601 — Apprenticed  to  a  pious  master,  iii.  606 — Becomes 
a  drunkard,  iii.  609 — Gets  a  new  and  wicked  master,  iii. 
614 — Enters  on  business,  iii.  616 — Hypocritical  courtship, 
iii.  618 — Marriage,  iii.  619 — Bankrupt,  and  gains  by  it  hat- 
fuls  of  money,  iii.  628 — Fraudulent  dealings,  iii.  633 — 
His  pride,  atheism,  infidelity,  and  envy,  iii.  642 — Hates  the 
Bible,  and  mocks  professors,  iii.  646 — Drunk,  and  breaks 
his  leg,  iii.  648 — Pretended  repentance,  and  return  to  sin, 
iii.  651 — Wife  dies  broken-hearted,  iii.  652 — Marries  again, 
iii.  654— Dies  of  consumption,  hardened  in  sin,  iii.  660. 

Bankrupt — How  to  make  amends  to  his  creditors,  iii.  631. 

Bankruptcy,  fraudulent,  to  get  hatfuls  of  money,  iii.  628 — 
A  neat  way  of  thieving  ;  a  designed,  or  double  sin,  iii.  629 
— A  slithy,  rob-shop,  pickpocket,  iii.  632. 

Baptism.     See  Sacraments. 

Baptist,  John  the,  not  permitted  to  see  the  kingdom  of  which 
he  was  the  forerunner,  and  thus  shut  out,  iii.  417. 

Barren  Fig-tree,  the,  why  it  was  cursed,  ii.  305 — Or  the  doom 
and  downfall  of  the  fruitless  professor,  iii.  560 — The  temple 
of  the  Lord  saves  no  barren  professor — The  metaphors  in 
this  parable,  and  the  mysteries  concealed  under  them,  iii. 
562 — The  certain  man ;  the  fig-tree  planted  in  his  vine- 
yard, iii.  563 — Not  planted  of  God,  iii.  564 — Fruitless,  iii. 
565 — Or  bad  fruit,  iii.  566 — Manifested  by  suffering,  iii. 
569 — God  searcheth,  iii.  570 — Has  three  years'  trial,  iii. 
570,  note — Trials  for  improvement,  iii.  571 — Cut  it  down, 
nothing  can  save  it —  Two  ways  to  cast  out,  iii.  572 — Christ's 
plea  for  forbearance — Christ's  plea  even  for  a  barren  fig- 
tree,  iii.  574 — The  means  used,  iii.  575 — Bring  out  the 
axe — Death,  fetch  this  tree  to  the  fire,  iii.  578 — The  cut- 
ting down  dreadful,  iii.  584 — In  God's  vineyard,  a  poem, 
iii.  748. 

Barren  fig-trees,  planted  in  the  church  by  the  devil :  Why  ? 
i.  99. 

* Bats'-Eyes,  Mrs.,  reviles  Christiana,  iii.  177. 

Beast  in  a  preferable  condition  to  a  lost  man,  i.  16 — Grace 
abounding,  Nos.  88,  104,  149 ;  i.  139— Not  defiled,  but 
injured  by  sin,  ii.  486. 

Beaumont,  Mrs.  Agnes,  i.  45,  note. 

Beauty  of  Mansoul  before  the  fall,  iii.  255 — Impregnable 
except  by  treachery,  iii.  256. 

Bed:  They  lie  easy  whose  bed  God  makes,  i.  741. 

Belief.     See  Faith. 

Bell-ringing,  Bunyan's  fondness  for;  lingeringly  given  up 
on  his  conversion,  i.  10. 

Benevolence:  Our  duty  to  give  a  wicked  poor  man  a  penny 
and  a  scripture  to  think  upon,  i.  98. 

*Beulah,  the  happy,  its  celestial  visions,  iii.  161,  240. 

Bible:  Jews  preferred  traditions  to  the,  i.  69 — Must  be  ex- 
amined carefully ;  nice  distinctions  important,  i.  188 — The 
truth  as  it  comes  from  God's  minting  house,  i.  238 — Chris- 
tian's duty  to  make  it  known,  i.  239 — The  only  measure 


THE   INDEX. 


77' 


and  standard  of  truth,  i.  392  ;  ii.  318— Called  the  Fear  of 
God — And  the  Word  of  God,  i.  443 — To  be  revered  and 
obeyed  at  all  hazards,  i.  444 — Standeth  more  sure  than 
heaven  and  earth,  i.  444— To  be  kept  close  to  the  con- 
science, i.  485 — The  scaffold  or  stage  for  Hope  to  play 
his  part  on,  i.  591 — The  test  for  all  things,  i.  596 — The 
revelation  of  God  in  nature  insufficient,  i.  662 — In  con- 
viction, is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion,  piercing  of  a  sword, 
burning  of  fire,  and  as  thunder  and  a  hammer,  i.  694 
— Of  itself  condemns  only,  except  the  voice  of  the  living 
God  is  heard  in  it,  i.  694 — Satan's  efforts  to  have  it 
discredited,  ii.  136 — Our  only  safe  guide,  ii.  482 — The 
Scriptures  of  the  Word  of  God,  ii.  601 — Some  scriptures 
treated  as  if  out  of  date,  ii.  719— *A  study,  iii.  110 — A 
looking-glass,  iii.  231 — *The  Sword  with  "a  true  Jerusa- 
lem blade,  iii.  233 — A  map  of  the  way,  iii.  236 — Word 
magnified,  "  They  have  Moses,"  iii.  707 — Its  treasures  of 
knowledge,  iii.  708 — Why  it  is  slighted,  rejected,  and  de- 
spised, iii.  715 — All  such  in  danger  of  perdition,  iii.  718 
— Its  effects  on  those  who  believe:  they  are  killed,  iii. 
719;  and  made  alive,  iii.  720 — A  true  copy  of  the  original 
text.  iii.  767. 

Birthright  by  regeneration,  essential  to  enable  us  to  enter 
heaven    i.  377. 

Blessed  is  he  that  can  say,  "  The  lord  took  me,"  ii.  426. 

Blessedness  all  arises  from  God's  presence,  iii.  457. 

Blessing  of  God  sometimes  a  snare,  ii.  434. 

*  Blind.     See  delightful  things,  iii.  87. 

Blood  and  fat  not  to  be  eaten,  the  command  spiritualized, 
ii.  488. 

Blood  of  the  saints,  defends,  confirms,  and  preserves  the 
truth,  i.  724 — The  cries  of,  most  fearful,  ii.  450. 

Body,  the,  a  cabinet  to  hold  the  soul,  not  to  be  stuffed  with 
trumpery,  i.  113 — A  tool  for  the  soul  to  work  with,  i.  117 
— Will  be  saved  from  sin,  mortality,  and  the  grave,  and 
glorified  like  Christ's  body,  i.  341 — Vast  difference  be- 
tween a  natural  and  spiritual  body,  ii.  93 — Of  Christ. 
See  God — Christ. 

Boldness,  holy.     See  Assurance  and  Faith. 

Bonner,  that  blood-red  persecutor,  i.  630 — And  his  filthy 
blind  priests,  iii.  699. 

Books  of  the  creatures,  of  Life,  of  Nature.  See  under  Four 
Last  Things,  Judgment. 

Book,  a,  for  boys  and  girls,  or  temporal  things  spiritualized, 
afterwards  published  under  the  title  of  Divine  Emblems 
for  Boys  and  Girls,  iii.  746. 

Books  for  Children,  greatly  improved,  iii.  711. 

Breaking  on  the  wheel,  note,  i.  24. 

Brewing  that  in  this  life  which  we  must  drink  in  the  next, 
iii.  701. 

*  Brisk,  Mr.,  courts  Mercy,  iii.  200. 
Broadway-gate,  leading  to  Dead-man's  Lane,  iii.  14 
Bunyan,  though  of  humble  parentage,  was  put  to  school — 

Under  great  apprehensions  from  devils  and  wicked  spirits, 
i.  6 — Some  time  after  being  married,  and  reading  two 
books  which  his  wife  had  received  from  her  father, 
has  some  desires  of  religion,  i.  7 — While  playing  at  a 
game  called  cat,  a  voice  from  heaven  calls  upon  him  to 
leave  his  sins,  i.  8 — Leaves  off  swearing,  betakes  himself 
to  reading  the  Bible,  and  a  work  of  outward  reformation 
commences,  i.  9 — Conversion  of,  and  the  Bible  now  sweet 
to  him,  i.  10,  11 — Under  strong  temptation,  to  try  his 
faith,  i.  12 — Breaks  his  state  of  mind  to  the  poor  people 
of  Bedford,  who  tell  Mr.  Gifford  of  his  condition,  i.  15 — 
The  ministry  of  Mr.  Gifford,  by  the  grace  of  God,  is 
blessed  to  his  soul,  i.  20 — Breaks  his  state  of  mind  to  an 
ancient  Christian,  but  receives  no  consolation,  and  goes  to 
God,  i.  28 — Is  greatly  troubled  at  the  sin  of  Esau  selling 
his  birthright,  i.  35 — Prays  to  God  in  secrecy  for  the  re- 
covery of  his  wife,  and  she  recovers,  i.  37 — Has  amazing 
apprehensions  of  the  grace  of  God,  i.  38 — Joins  the  church 
at  Bedford,  i.  39 — His  call  to  and  success  in  the  ministry, 
i.  40,  549 — His  chastity,  i.  46 — His  imprisonment — Ar- 
gues with  the  justices  and  lawyers,  i.  50 — Sentenced  to 
imprisonment,  transportation,  and  to  be  hung,  unless  he 
conformed  and  went  to  church,  i.  56 — Mr  Cobb,  the  lawyer, 
tempts  him  in  vain  to  get  released  by  conforming,  i.  57 
— His  wife  petitions  the  House  of  Lords  for  his  release, 


and  pleads  for  him  before  the  judges,  i.  60— His  life;  from 
bis  release  from  prison  until  his  death  ;  written  by  one  of  bis 
persona]  friends,  i.  63— His  dying  sayings,  i.  65— His  deep 
humility:  "A  poor  creature  as  I  am,"  i.  495 "Whatl 

such  a  poor  wretch  as  I,"  i.  549 "  The  biggest  of  all 

fools,"  i.  704 — His  attachment  to  monarchy,  i.  732 — 
"  Such  a  sinner  as  I  am,"  ii.  138— Worked  with  his  hands 
both  for  his  own  and  for  his  family's  living — "  Pour, 
and  of  no  repute  in  the  world,"  ii.  201 — Text  he  was 
about  to  preach  from  when  dragged  from  his  church  and 
family  to  jail,  ii.  593 — His  defence  of  his  poverty  and  de- 
scent, ii.  017 — His  release  from  prison,  iii.  21-  \ 
very  materially  by  Geo.  Whitehead,  the  Quaker,  iii.  25 — 
— Declares  himself  an  Anabaptist,  iii.  383 — "  A  dull- 
sounding  ram's-horn,"  iii.  645 — "  My  low  and  contemptible 
descent,"  iii.  674 — Refuses  "a  more  plentiful  income"  to 
keep  with  his  poor  church,  iii.  767 — Fond  of  children  : 
"  I  think  some  may  call  me  a  baby,  'cause  I  with  them 
play,"  iii.  748. 

Bunyan — Grace  abounding  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  being 
his  spiritual  experience  through  the  agonies  of  the  new 
birth ;  his  being  called  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  and 
his  long  imprisonment  for  refusing  to  attend  the  church  of 
England  service,  i.  6 — Heads  of  an  excellent  sermon  which 
was  blessed  to  him,  i.  16 — His  strong  convictions:  "  I  was 
a  great  sin-breeder,  but  God  took  me  first,  and  when  He 
made  me  sigh,  they  would  hearken,  and  inquiringly  say, 
What's  the  matter  with  John?"  i.  79 — How  he  heard  ser- 
mons, i.  159 — Wrote  all  his  works  from  the  knowledge 
conveyed  to  him  in  the  Bible,  and  borrowed  nothing  from 
libraries,  i.  392 — Importunity  in  prayer,  i.  538 — Notices 
of  his  life,  trials,  and  opinions ;  narrative  of  his  convictions 
and  conversion  in  the  doctrine  of  the  law  and  grace  long 
before  he  published  his  Grace  Abounding,  i.  548 — His 
experience  in  prayer;  difficult  to  keep  his  heart  with  God, 
i.  631,  634 — Humbly  submits  his  book  of  Antichrist  to  the 
judgment  and  correction  of  the  godly,  ii.  79 — The  testi- 
mony of  his  pastor  to  his  great  ability,  faithfulness,  and 
success  in  preaching.  Took  three  heavenly  degrees  :  Union 
with  Christ,  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  and  experience  of  the 
temptations  of  Satan,  ii.  141 — Preached  for  love  to  Christ 
and  of  souls,  and  not  for  hire:  They  that  "  make  merchan- 
dize of  the  people  for  so  much  a-year  for  preaching  to 
them,"  are  "abominable  to  the  Lord,"  ii.  209 — His  full 
assurance  of  hope  :  "  When  I  am  deceased  I  shall  rest  from 
my  labours,  and  be  in  paradise,  as  through  grace  I  com- 
fortably believe,"  ii.  574 — His  confession  of  his  faith,  and 
reason  of  his  practice  as  to  witii  whom  he  would  hold 
church  fellowship,  published  while  he  was  in  prison  :  "  Let 
my  enemies  be  judges  whither  I  savour  anything  of  heresy 
or  rebellion  worthy  almost  twelve  years'  imprisonment,  or 
that  deserveth  to  be  hanged  or  banished  for  ever,  according 
to  their  tremendous  sentence — Pleads  that  his  long  impri- 
sonment was  no  proof  of  crime,  but  for  faith,  holiness,  and 
peace,  ii.  593 — Pictures  the  desperate  wickedness  of  his 
own  heart,  ii.  681 — His  peculiar  qualifications  for  writing 
his  allegories,  iii.  9 — His  doubts  on  the  propriety  of  pub- 
lishing The  Pilgrim's  Progress  ;  seeks  the  advice  of  friends 
— His  apology  for  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  iii.  85 — His 
spiritual  experience  narrated  allegorically  in  The  Pilgrim's 
Progress  and  Holy  War,  iii.  89,  253— Claims  The  Pilgrim 
as  entirely  his  own,  and  makes  an  anagram  of  his  name, 
iii.  374 — "  I  am  for  drinking  water  out  of  my  own  cistern  ; 
what  God  makes  mine  by  the  evidence  of  his  Word  and 
Spirit,  that  I  dare  make  hold  with.  Wherefore,  seeing 
though  I  am  without  their  learned  lines,  yet  well  fur- 
nished with  the  words  of  God,  I  mean  the  Bible,  I  hive 
contented  myself  with  what  I  have  there  found,"  in.  398 
— Wrote  according  to  his  present  light  from  the  Scrip 
tures,  iii.  440 — Divers  have  felt  the  power  of  the  word 
delivered  by  him,  iii.  672. 

Burden  of  sin;  how  constituted,  i.  352;  iii.  89 — On  the 
Christian's  back,  i.  546. 

Burroughs,  the  Quaker,  a  railing  Babshakeh,  answers  Bun- 
yan, ii.  176. 

Burton's  (John)  Epistle  to  Gospel  Truths,  in  which  he  gives 
Bunvan's  character  when  first  he  became  a  preacher,  ii. 
139. 


772 


THE   INDEX. 


^Butcher  killing  a  sheep,  an  emblem  of  Antichrist,  iii.  186. 
Buying  and  selling  to  he  reviewed  at  the  great  day,  iii.  640. 
By-ends  distinguished  from  singleness  of  heart,  i.  464 — *Of 

*Fairspeech,  iii.  132,  224— His  fatal  end,  iii.  137. 
*By-paik  meadow,  iii.  138,  228. 
*By-way  to  hell,  iii.  145,  166,  231,  235. 


Coin,  the  murderer,  a  fugitive,  but  not  put  to  death,  ii.  449. 
Calling,  effectual,  by  Christ,  i.  14;  ii.  433,  434,  599. 
Calls  to  careless  sinners,  i.  718. 
Campian,  the  Jesuit,  and  Fowler,  the  Bishop,  agree,  ii.  332. 

*  Canaan,  language  of,  spoken  by  pilgrims,  iii.  128. 
Candle,  an  emblem  of  the  Christian  life,  iii.  752. 
Carnal  clergymen  a  curse,  iii.  696. 

Carnal  gospiellers,  numerous  in  England,  like  locusts  and 

maggots,  iii.  429. 
Carnal  security  most  dangerous  to  Mansoul,  iii.  324. 
Carriage  in  which  weary  pilgrims  ride  towards  heaven,  iii. 

391. 
Case  of  conscience,  on  women  meeting  for  worship  without 

men,  ii.  658 — A  curious  one,  iii.  610. 
Catechism  for  children  and  the  ignorant,  on  a  new  plan,  ii. 

676. 

*  Catechising  Christiana's  children,  iii.  199. 

Cedars  of  Lebanon,  their  enormous  size,  iii.  517,  and  note. 
Ceremonies  not  commanded — a  yoke  of  antichrist,  i.  358 — 
Set  above  faith  and  love,  ii.  233. 

*  Certificate,  or  sealed  roll  [Eph.  i.  13] — Given  to  Christian, 

iii.  102 — Lost  for  a  season,  iii.  105,  260 — His  evidence, 
iii.  106,  165. 

Charity,  but  not  a  prating  tongue,  will  open  heaven's  gates, 
i.  388 — *A  virgin  examiner,  iii.  108,  199 — *A  delectable 
mountain,  iii.  231 — Like  the  steeple  of  a  church,  iii.  475. 

Child  of  God,  a  pitiful  thing  of  himself,  i.  601. 

Children.  See  Grace  Abounding,  No.  327,  i.  48 — See  Rela- 
tive Duties — Naturally  averse  to  morality,  i.  127 — The 
most  helpless  most  cared  for,  i.  168 — Of  believers  must 
believe  for  themselves  or  perish,  i.  262,  and  note — How  to 
teach  them  to  pray  without  a  form,  i.  635 — How  to  cor- 
rect and  punish,  ii.  559 — Commended  to  God,  iii.  108 — ■ 
*Of  the  spies  tempt  Christian,  iii.  114: — *Blessed  by  reli- 
gious instruction,  iii.  199 — The  necessity  of  preaching  to 
their  understanding,  iii.  747 — Chosen,  or  elect.  See 
Election. 

Chrisom  Child,  meaning  of,  iii.  663,  and  note. 

Christ— God  and  Man— God  and  man,  i.  21,  36— The  City 
of  Eefuge,  i.  34 — The  saints' righteousness,  i.  36 — A  public 
person,  i.  36 — His  ways  to  be  improved  in  dark  hours,  i. 
97 — Carries  his  people  to  the  grave  in  his  bosom,  i.  168 — 
Cannot  desert  his  people,  i.  189 — A  complete  Saviour,  i.203 
— Greatness  of  his  person  and  priesthood,  i.  203 — His  ever 
living  is  our  safety,  i.  231 — Ever  living,  i.  233 — His  wil- 
lingness to  save,  i.  264: — His  power  to  save  and  to  cast 
out,  i.  273 — Sinners  drawn  to,  i.  339 — How  he  who  was 
never  out  of  the  world  should  come  into  it,  i.  398— Called 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  twenty-one  times,  i.  398 — His  perfect 
manhood,  i.  398— Came  to  save,  i.  399— In  the  fulness  of 
time,  i.  400 — Proof  by  miracles  and  the  altar  of  incense, 
i.  401 — The  rock  of  offence,  i.  401 — His  preparation  for 
his  work ;  took  our  flesh,  i.  403 — Incarnation  of,  its  mys- 
tery, i.  404 — Made  under  the  law,  i.  406— Common  mean- 
ing of  the  term,  i.  406,  412  ;  ii.  20,  and  note— Proofs  of 
his  all-conquering  grace,  i.  422 — Doctrines,  peace  and  holi- 
ness, i.  423 — Our  peace,  i.  424 — Encouragements  to  come 
to,  i.  434 — Sinners  keep  from  him,  because  they  cannot  buy 
him,  i.  519 — Weeping  over  Jerusalem,  i.  528 — The  com- 
mon treasure  house,  i.  565 — Our  unmovable  righteous- 
ness, i.  574 — A  sight  of,  shows  our  deformity,  i.  697 — 
Christ  and  a  pitcher  better  than  the  wicked  and  abun- 
dance, i.  701 — His  love  inexpressible,  even  to  wonder- 
ment, ii.  3 — His  humiliation  infinite  as  his  glory,  ii.  19 — 
How  far  a  knowledge  of  his  love  is  attainable  in  this  life, 
ii.  27 — His  love ;  four  helps  to  retain  the  knowledge  of 
it,  ii.  28 — Feels  the  afflictions  of  his  saints,  ii.  30 — His 
humility  in  passing  angels  to  save  man,  ii.  30 — End  of 
his  reign  as  man,  ii.  127 — Took  our  nature,  ii.  142 — Born 


of  a  virgin,  ii.  143 — Necessity  of  his  being  a  man,  ii.  144 — 
Light  of,  new  and  spiritual,  ii.  310 — Not  an  instructor  only, 
but  a  Saviour,  ii.  312 — In  our  flesh,  lived  and  died  for  us, 
ii.  595— *The  wicket-gate,  iii.  90,  96,  107,  [means  Christ, 
see  margin,  177],  179,  222— *Lord  of  the  Hill,  iii.  109— 
*How  revealed  to  the  soul,  iii.  124,  155,  158 — *  Passed 
through  Vanity  Fair,  iii.  127 — The  tree  of  life,  the  cura- 
tive power  of  its  leaves,  iii.  138 — His  righteousnesses, 
iii.  191 — His  country-house  in  the  Valley  of  Humiliation, 
iii.  207- — Loved  and  feared,  can  alone  take  Mansoul,  iii.  214 
— His  heavenly  counsel  and  comfort,  iii.  714 — His  love 
unsearchable,  a  poem,  iii.  760. 

Christ — His  atonement — Made  sin,  or  died  as  a  sinner,  the 
great  mystery,  i.  303 — Common  or  equal  to  all  his  saints  ; 
they  die  and  rise  again  in  him,  i.  305 — Shedding  of  his 
blood  essential  to  salvation,  i.  306,  550 — His  qualifica- 
tions as  a  Saviour,  i.  407 — Takes  our  sins  upon  himself, 
i.  408 — Made  sin  for  us,  i.  409 — Made  a  curse  for  us,  i. 
410 — Had  no  mediator,  i.  410 — Died  millions  of  deaths 
when  he  died  once  for  all,  i.  411— His  death,  its  bitter- 
ness, i.  411 ;  iii.  738 — Objections  to  this  doctrine,  i.  412 
— His  sufferings,  i.  412 — His  death  as  great  a  miracle  as 
any  he  wrought,  i.  414 — Made  satisfaction  for  sinners,  ten 
proofs,  i.  535 — His  power  and  fulness,  i.  537 — Crucified, 
all  our  hope,  i.  561 — Very  God  and  very  man,  i.  561 — 
Satisfaction  by,  for  sin,  i.  563 — His  sufferings,  their  na- 
ture and  extent,  i.  605 — Borne  of  pleasure  and  necessity, 
i.  609 — Must  be  obeyed  as  a  king,  as  well  as  trusted  as  a 
Saviour,  i.  616 — Our  sacrifice,  i.  689 — Preparations  for 
his  sufferings,  ii.  5  9 — A  benefit  to  all  creation,  ii.  486 — A 
ransom  to  save  from  hell,  iii.  705 — His  agony  in  the  gar- 
den, iii.  706. 

Christ — A  sacrifice — His  atonement ;  more  virtue  in  to 
save  than  in  sin  to  damn,  i.  177 — Cross  of,  alone  can  re- 
lieve the  sinner  of  his  burden,  i.  264;  iii.  102 — Only  can 
justify,  i.  323 — Sufferings  when  in  the  flesh,  and  not  in 
us,  i.  323 — Perfect;  why  it  is  infinitely  superior  to  the 
sacrifices  under  the  law,  i.  405 — Endured  hell  torments  in 
his  soul,  i.  412,  529,  530— An  example,  i.  414— Paid  the 
full  price  for  his  elect,  demonstrated,  i.  416 — He  has  the 
keys  of  death  and  of  hell ;  not  delegated  to  any  other,  i. 
417 — Communicates  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  proof  of  his  Mes- 
siahship,  i.  428 — The  perfect  sacrifice  of  the  new  cove- 
nant, i.  528 — Nine  types  fulfilled  in  his  sacrifice,  i.  529 — 
His  garment  covers  all  his  mystical  body,  i.  665 — Im- 
puted right,  i.  665— The  sacrifice  as  well  as  high  priest,  i. 
667 — Willing  and  effectual,  i.  667 — His  resurrection  the 
acceptance  of  his  work,  i.  669 — His  ascension,  its  glory, 
i.  670— Descent  into  hell,  ii.  18;  iii.  706— His  death 
makes  death  our  advantage,  ii.  21 — Glorified  to  bless  his 
saints,  ii.  21 — Buried  and  raised  again,  ii.  156 — His  ascen- 
sion, ii.  158 — Its  blessings,  ii.  307 — Bruises  the  serpent's 
head,  ii.  437. 

Christ — His  offices — Exalted  as  Mediator,  ever  liveth,  i. 
235 ;  ii.  596 — His  entrance  into  heaven  most  glorious, 
i.  418 — His  prophetic  office,  i.  419 — His  kingly  office,  i. 
420 — The  great  high  priest,  i.  642 — He  is  the  throne, 
the  priest,  the  altar,  and  the  sacrifice,  i.  646 — His  altar 
not  the  cross,  i.  651 — His  qualifications  as  high  priest,  i. 
663 — His  robes  or  holy  garments,  i.  665 — His  consecra- 
tion, i.  665— The  altar,  i.  668— Typified,  iii.  519— His 
kingdom  spiritual,  iii.  536 — Judge  of  quick  and  dead, 
iii.  729. 

Christ — His  priestly  office — Who  are  privileged  in  his 
intercession,  i-  202,  216 — For  what  he  intercedes,  i.  204 — 
Inferences  from  it,  i.  205,  212,  236 — Its  benefits  salvation 
to  the  uttermost,  i.  207 — Saved  from  sin,  i.  207 — From 
all  punishment  in  hell,  but  not  from  temporal  trials,  i.  208 
— Saves  from  Satanic  suggestions ;  from  evil  thoughts 
that  haunt  and  hurt  us,  i.  210 — Privilege  of  Christ's  in- 
tercession enjoyed  for  ever,  i.  235 — He  has  been  a  never- 
failing  intercessor  for  5850  years,  and  will  be  to  the  end, 
i.  237 — He  ought  to  wear  the  crown  for  ever,  i.  237 — 
The  great  thing  of  the  gospel,  i.  238 — The  high  priest  of 
the  new  covenant,  i.  530 — Compared  with  the  high  priest, 
i.  531— The  benefits  of  his  intercession,  i.  532  ;  ii.  161  — 
Twenty-one  proofs  of  his  greater  perfection,  i.  533 — As 
high  priest,  continually  intercedes,  i.  649 — To  be  sought 


THE   INDEX. 


773 


in  prayer ;  without  him  there  is  no  acceptance,  i.  650 — 
His  natural  qualifications  as  high  priest,  i.  672-675 — 
Sympathy  between  him  and  his  seed,  i.  673— Tempted  as 
they,  i.  673 — Love  to  his  afflicted  members,  i.  674. 

Christ — The  advocate — A  subject  of  vast  importance;  he 
never  lost  a  cause,  i.  152 — Christians  sin,  and  have  an  ad- 
vocate, i.  154 — Sins  of  men  and  not  of  devils,  i.  155 — 
Before  the  throne  of  God,  where  all  must  stand,  i.  155 — 
Implieth  an  offence  committed,  i.  156 — An  accuser,  sin- 
ning children  unable  to  plead;  Christ  only  is  able,  i.  157 
— Nature  of  the  office  to  plead  according  to  deeds,  i.  158 — 
When  it  is  exercised,  i.  159 — Caution  against  a  fatal  error, 
i.  159 — The  only  advocate,  i.  160 — Pleading  a  bad  cause 
a  mystery,  i.  160,  190 — Takes  the  sin  upon  himself,  and 
pleads  his  merits,  i.  161 — Pleads  against  Satan,  i.  162 — 
Pleads  God's  interest  in  his  people,  i.  163 — That  they  are 
his  spouse,  his  body,  i.  165 — Distinction  between  priest 
and  advocate,  i.  169 — For  his  children  only,  i.  170 — One 
who  is  retained,  i.  171 — Case  must  be  stated,  i.  172 — 
Cause  be  submitted  to  him,  i.  173 — Confidence  established, 
i.  174 — Satan  the  adversary,  i.  175 — Pears  promote  suc- 
cess, i.  1 76 — High  privilege ;  pleads  a  price  paid  by  him- 
self, i.  176 — A  demurrer,  the  law  repealed,  i.  179 — Never 
lost  a  cause ;  interested,  i.  179 — Always  ready,  day  or 
night,  i.  180,  191— Cannot  be  bribed,  i.  181— Is  all  that 
a  suitor  can  need,  i.  182 — He  is  essential,  i.  182 — Under- 
stands our  old  title-deeds,  i.  187 — Christ  the  guardian  for 
his  brethren  under  age,  i.  187 — Moves  court  of  heaven  to 
restore  evidences  when  forfeited,  i.  188 — How  can  we  pay 
his  fee?  i.  190,  and  note— Always  needed,  i.  191 — Exalted, 
i.  191 — Full  of  comfort  to  the  saints,  i.  193 — An  amazing 
instance  of  condescension,  i.  1 94 — Should  strengthen  our 
graces,  i.  196 — If  he  plead  for  us  with  God,  we  should 
plead  for  him  with  men,  i.  198 — Directs  weak  saints  to 
the  advocate,  i.  199 — He  who  has  no  advocate  is  ground 
to  powder,  i.  200 — For  whom  he  is  advocate,  i.  369 — His 
second  coming  to  judge  the  world.  See  Four  last  things 
— Judgment. 

CJirist:  His  school  teaches  hard  lessons,  i.  735 — Within  us, 
ii.  135 — Singular  errors  as  to  "Christ  in  us,"  ii.  147 — 
Not  opposed  to  Christ  without,  ii.  172 — The  man  Christ 
Jesus,  his  people's  life,  ii.  173  —  Within  the  believer 
caused  by,  and  distinct  from,  Christ's  atonement,  ii.  202 — 
All  who  name  him  must  depart  from  iniquity,  ii.  512. 

Christ's  disciples  must  count  the  cost;  what  it  is,  i.  105 — 
Cross  and  crown  inseparable,  i.  106. 

Christ's  love :  The  saints'  knowledge  of  that  which  passeth 
knowledge,  ii.  2 — Reasons  why,  and  fulness  of  its  breadth, 
length,  depth,  and  height,  being  beyond  all  measure,  ii.  3 
— Comparative  knowledge  with  all  saints,  ii.  12 — All 
creation  could  not  discover  it — Reasons  why  it  is  so  un- 
searchable— It  passeth  knowledge,  ii.  23,  32 — How  to  at- 
tain the  knowledge  of,  ii.  29 — Advantages  of  knowing  it, 
ii.  33 — Without  it,  saints  are  pinioned  and  fettered,  ii.  34 
— It  may  be  improved,  ii.  39. 

Christ's  Spouse,  a  poem,  iii.  761. 

Christian  perfections  polluted,  i.  327 — Enemies,  great  and 
many,  swifter  than  eagles,  stronger  than  lions,  i.  602 — In- 
firmities, i.  698 — Life,  its  essence,  ii.  327 — Imitation  of 
Christ,  ii.  329 — Behaviour  the  fruit  of  Christianity, 
teaching  husbands,  wives,  parents,  children,  masters,  and 
servants,  how  to  walk  so  as  to  please  God,  ii.  548 — As  a 
king,  has  dominion  over  himself,  but  not  over  others  ;  he 
is  a  warrior  to  fight  his  own  lusts,  ii.  706 — Miscarriages 
no  argument  against  Christianity,  ii.  708 — Badge  or  livery, 
ii.  715,  and  note — *His  early  view  of  the  promised  laud, 
iii.  91 — ^Humility,  iii.  97 — *Once  called  Graceless,  iii. 
106 — *  Weeps  and  prays  for  his  family,  iii.  108 — "Pray- 
ers answered,  iii.  173. 

*  Christiana  and  sons  follow  Christian  in  pilgrimage,  iii.  177 
— Her  death-bed  scene,  iii.  240. 

Christians  made  alive  by  Christ,  i.  544 — Advantages  of  their 
being  quickened,  i  546 — Are  above  the  world,  i.  729 — 
They  enjoy  present  happiness  as  well  as  future  bliss,  i.  739 
— Are  more  blessed  than  Adam  in  his  innocence,  ii.  266, 
427 — All  descended  from  the  apostles,  iii.  218. 

Christinas  kept  every  day,  ii.  720,  and  note. 

Church:  Mode  of  admission  to,  among  Baptists,  i.  39;  iii. 


107  ;  and  note,  iii.  563— Banyan  set  over  the,  at  Bedford, 
i-  40 — The  judgment  of  the  church  to  be  governed  by  the 
Bible,  i.  59 — The  church  is  an  hospital  of  sick,  wounded, 
and  afflicted  people,  i.  327— Church  fellowship  abused  by 
the  devil,  i.  559— Church  fellowship,  rightly  managed,  is 
the  glory  of  the  world,  i.  757,  and  note — Some  members 
sweeten  others,  ii.  35 — Church  of  England  damaged  by  the 
scandalous  lives  of  some  of  its  clergy,  ii.  328 — Separated 
from  the  world,  ii.  455 — Ungodly  communion  with  the 
world  brought  in  the  flood,  ii.  460 — Church  of  God  in 
England  in  the  furnace,  ii.  483 — Occasioned  the  building 
of  Babel,  ii.  501 — A  house  to  be  governed  in  godly-wise, 
ii.  534 — Church  fellowship  compared  to  a  flower-garden, 
a  lovely  picture,  ii.  550,  570 — Church,  or  house  of  God, 
its  building,  nature,  excellency,  and  government,  ii.  577 
— By  whom  built;  beauty,  conveniences,  ii.  578 — Strength, 
situation;  receiving  its  inhabitants,  ii.  579— Governors, 
ii.  580 — Under-officers,  ii.  581 — Mode  of  government,  ii. 
583— Laws,  ii.  584 — Punishments,  ii.  587— Wifbdraw- 
ment,  or  efforts  to  reclaim,  ii.  589 — Differences  about 
water  baptism  no  bar  to  communion,  ii.  605,  617 — Every 
congregation  a  distinct  church,  as  the  church  of  Itome,  in 
the  house  of  Aquila,  ii.  622 — Terms  of  church  fellowship  : 
all  that  God  receives  into  his  communion  ought  to  be  re- 
ceived by  his  church,  ii.  628,  648 — The  universal,  cannot 
be  visible,  ii.  650 — Unscriptural  terms  of  communion, 
attended  with  seventeen  absurdities,  ii.  653 — Case  of 
conscience  :  May  women  meet  for  worship,  excluding  the 
men,  ii.  658 — Who  has  authority  to  call  the  church  toge- 
ther, ii.  663 — Women  ought  not  to  minister  in  public, 
ii.  664 — Cases  considered:  Miriam,  ii.  666 — Esther,  ii. 
667 — Women  by  the  river  side,  ii.  668 — Every  assembly 
for  worship  a  separate  church,  ii.  671,  and  note — The 
church  in  and  about  Bedford,  ii.  675 — *Church,  a  beau- 
tiful palace — Admission  to  a  Christian  church,  called 
Beautiful,  by  consent  of  the  pastor  [the  porter]  and  of  the 
members  ;  by  the  laws  of  the  house — When  admitted,  they 
are  entertained  and  armed,  iii.  106,  107,  and  note — *Dis- 
cretion  admits  to  the  church — The  comfort  of  pilgrims,  iii. 
107,  197,  214 — *Like  a  garden — *Flowers  an  emblem  of 
church  members,  iii.  186 — The  bath,  iii.  189 — Members 
humble,  iii.  190 — Devoted  to  each  other,  iii.  223 — In  the 
New  Jerusalem,  the  lilies  and  chief  spices,  iii.  409 — Regula- 
tions all  limited  to  the  written  word,  iii.  418 — None  to  be 
admitted  but  visible  saints  by  calling,  iii.  448— Striking 
difference  between  a  son  and  a  servant  in  the  church,  iii. 
449, 466 — The  church  should  have  a  large  porch  to  receive 
converts,  iii.  474 — Excommunication  one  way  out  of  the 
church,  iii.  495,  and  note — A  church  may  sin  God  away, 
iii.  496 — The  church,  however  afflicted,  never  consumed, 
iii.  519 — A  fortress  against  antichrist,  iii.  520 — In  the 
wilderness,  its  beauty  excites  the  hatred  of  the  world,  iii. 
522 — Effects  of  opposition  and  debates  in,  iii.  525 — I  can- 
not injure  the  world,  iii.  527 — The  members  have  their 
bitter  as  well  as  sweet  draughts,  iii.  528 — Must  enter  into 
the  church  by  the  door,  and  not  climb  in,  iii.  564— It  is 
the  garden  of  God,  and  his  delight,  iii.  566 — Its  right  to 
excommunicate,  iii.  573. 

Circumcision  once  laid  aside  forty  years  among  the  Jews,  ii. 
626. 

Cities  of  refuge,  types  of  Christ,  i.  250,  265. 

*  Civility,  son  of  Legality,  iii.  94. 

Clear  views  of  divine  truth  of  great  importance,  i.  750. 

*  Clear,  one  of  the  Delectable  hills,  iii.  145. 

Clergy  not  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  are  blasphemers,  ii. 
22 — Scrambling  for  benefices,  and  running  after  tithe 
cocks,  ii.  178— If  carnal,  their  awful  state  in  eternity,  iii. 
696,  and  note. 

Closet  preferable  to  coffee-house  or  shop,  ii.  537. 

Come  and  welcome  to  Jesus  Christ,  i.  241. 

Comers  to  Christ,  if  sincere,  are  sure  to  speed,  i.  676. 

Coming  to  God— Difficulties  in  the  way,  i.  209,  249,  251 — 
Some  attempt  to  come  not  by  Christ,  i.  216— Three  sorts 
of  people  come  to  Christ,  but  not  to  God  by  him,  i.  217 — 
How  to  come  aright,  i.  218— The  character  of  three  sorts 
of  people  who  come,  i.  218— Four  things  that  hinder  a 
comer,  i.  219— The  comer  must  first  know  God,  i.  221 — 
The  Christian  is  continually  coming  to  Christ,  why?  and  how, 


774 


THE   INDEX. 


i.  225 — Inferences  from  it,  i.  226 — Sincere  comers  certain 
of  salvation,  i.  231 — What  it  is  to  come,  i.  247 — Come 
weeping,  flying,  crying,  pricked  in  heart,  hating  the  world  ; 
guard  against  such  lies  as,  'I  go,  sir,  and  went  not,'  i. 
248 — Christ  and  his  word  honoured  by  our  coming,  i.  249 
— The  door  is  never  shut  while  the  sinner  is  coming ;  they 
would  come  in  haste ;  would  take  a  mile  at  a  step ;  would 
go  full  gallop;  but  the  flesh  will  hardly  trot,  i.  252 — 
Coming  to  Christ  the  power  of  the  promise,  '  shall  come,' 
i.  254 — Objections  to  it  answered,  i.  256 — Import  of  '  to 
me,'  i.  258 — The  promise  is,  '  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,' 
i.  261 — The  coming  sinner  seen  and  encouraged  by  Christ, 
i.  265 — Meaning  of  '  In  no  wise  cast  out,'  i.  269 — Hin- 
derances,  i.  269,  281— What  it  is  to  be  cast  out,  i.  271— 
This  coming  is  not  of  man  but  of  God,  i.  275 — Honour  and 
happiness  of  those  who,  in  truth,  come,  i.  276 — Awful  state 
of  those  who  despise  the  comers,  i.  277 — Signs  and  tokens 
of  a  comer — Often  fear  reception,  i.  279 — Encourage- 
ments, i.  284,  296 — Inferences,  i.  291 — Come  boldly  as 
God  bids  thee,  i.  684. 

Commandments:  ten  under  the  law,  one  under  the  gospel,  iii. 
483. 

Committing  the  soul  to  God,  what  it  is,  ii.  702 — Who  is  in- 
vited to  do  it,  ii.  704 — Its  advantages,  ii.  727. 

Communion  of  saints,  a  blessed  enjoyment,  i.  40;  iii.  323 — 
Or  church  fellowship.  See  Church — With  God,  the  saints' 
desire,  i.  755. 

Conduct  of  man  to  God  the  same  now  as  from  the  beginning, 
i.  444. 

Confession,  if  sincere,  hard  to  be  done — Four  things  essential 
to  right  confession,  ii.  261 — Accompanied  with  repentance 
and  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  ii.  262 — Imploring  mercy,  ii. 
265 — And  forsaking  the  sin,  ii.  327— Of  sin  only  to  God, 
it  being  part  of  divine  worship,  ii.  681. 

Conformists,  cowardly  ones,  punished  of  God,  i.  723. 

Conjurers  and  sorcerers,  i.  536. 

Conscience,  burning  hot,  spurs  the  sinner  to  Cl.rist,  i.  220 — 
Solemn  appeals,  i.  436,  554,  575 — How  it  is  deadened,  ii. 
261 — *Sprinkled  before  it  is  cleansed,  iii.  98 — The  re- 
corder of  Mansoul,  put  out  of  office,  but  sometimes  had 
terrible  fits,  iii.  260,  261. 

Consistency  of  conduct  beautifully  illustrated,  i.  348. 

Consumption,  Captain,  with  all  his  men  of  death,  iii.  755. 

Contentment  in  a  prison,  i.  54. 

Contrast  of  the  wicked  on  earth  and  in  hell,  '  they  cry,'  iii. 
686. 

Conventicle  of  Diabolonians,  iii.  367,  see  note. 

Conversation,  the  word  singularly  used,  i.  336. 

Conversion :  Christian  converse  a  means  of,  i.  10 — By  singu- 
lar means,  i.  278— Of  a  sinner,  all  of  God,  i.  350— Com- 
menced by  lightnings,  and  thunderings,  and  voices,  i.  656 
— Boanerges,  Conviction,  Judgment,  and  Execution,  rough 
hewn  men  fit  to  break  the  ice,  sent  against  Mansoul  by 
Christ,  iii.  270— Their  speeches,  iii.  274. 
nviction:  God  convinces  of  sin,  i.  350 — Slighted  like  a 
wanton  boy  blowing  out  the  maid's  candle,  i.  387 — Extent 
of,  without  conversion,  i.  706 — Judas  under  conviction 
possessed  by  the  devil,  ii.  153— Of  sin,  bitter  days,  nights, 
hours,  thoughts,  smiting  upon  the  breast,  ii.  274 — A  quar- 
rel with  the  heart,  ii.  275— *Conviction  of  sin,  iii.  80,  153, 
173 — The  convinced,  ragged  and  burthened,  strives  to 
alarm  his  family,  reads  the  Bible,  and  prays  in  secret,  iii. 
— 89 — Deeply  distressing,  iii.  278. 

*  Corn-field,  an  emblem,  iii.  186. 

Corruptions,  how  they  are  weakened,  iii.  426. 

Cosmogony:  Time,  the  first  of  all  creation,  then  angels,  hea- 
ven, and  earth,  ii.  417— The  creation  spiritualized,  ii.  418 
— The  stars  a  type  of  saints — The  sun  typifies  Christ — 
The  moon  his  church — Man  not  created  until  his  house 
was  furnished,  ii.  422 — The  mist  typical,  ii.  425 — Of 
creation  repeated  to  omit  Cain,  ii.  455. 

Courtship,  a  hypocritical,  iii.  618. 

Covenant  with  hell,  i.  528 — Of  death,  its  signs,  i.  746. 

Covenant,  new :  Sin  cannot  dissolve  or  alter,  i.  453 — Free 
and  unchangeable,  i.  522 — With  Christ  ar.d  not  with 
Adam  or  Abraham,  i.  523 — Made  before  time,  i.  523 — 
Conditions  of  the  New  Covenant,  i.  524 — Christ  the  surety 
and  messenger,  i.  526— Unchangeable,  i.  538— How  men 


are  brought  into  it,  i.  540 — Its  privileges,  i.  550— And 
promises,  i.  551 — Cannot  be  shaken  or  altered,  i.  552 — Its 
uses :  pardon  and  perseverance,  i.  559 — Full  of  comforts, 
i.  563 — Wraps  up  the  righteous,  i.  746 — Sealed  by  Christ's 
blood,  ii.  142— Everlasting,  ii.  492. 

Covenants,  fulfilled  in  Christ  for  all  his  elect,  i.  304 — The 
Law  not  the  source  of  justification,  i.  309 — Law,  its  con- 

i  demning  power  increaseth  sin,  i.  317 — Are  Christians  under 
the  Law?  i.  318 — Cannot  justify,  i.  318 — Six  things  in- 
clining us  to  seek  justification  by  the  law,  i.  320 — Must 
convince  before  the  gospel  can  convert,  i.  337 — The  Scrip- 
ture, like  the  mouths  of  great  guns,  against  the  wilfully 
ignorant,  i.  389 — Law,  the  end  of  the,  sinless  obedience, 
i.  406 — Law  and  grace — The  doctrine  unfolded,  i.  492— 
study  of  the,  solemnly  important,  i.  493 — Must  begin  the 
work  of  conversion,  i.  495 — Law  condemns,  grace  saves 
— Christians  not  under  the  law,  i.  497 — The  unconverted 
are  under  the  law,  i.  497 — First  given  to  Adam,  but  more 
fully  to  Moses,  i.  498 — Examples  showing  what  the  law  is, 
and  its  punishment,  i.  499 — There  are  only  two — Who  are 
under  the  law,  i.  500 — Its  terrors — Breach  of  one  com- 
mand at  any  time  breaks  the  whole,  i.  501 — Law  requires 
perfection  in  mind  and  deed,  i.  502 — Law  allows  no  re- 
pentance, has  no  mercy,  i.  503 — One  breach  fatal — Men's 
misery  by  the  law,  i.  504 — Sad  state  of  those  under  the 
law,  i.  506 — Cries  of  the  law  against  the  soul,  i.  507 — Curse 
must  abide  on  all  except  the  redeemed,  i.  511 — Its  use  of 
self-examination,  i.  554 — Satan  aids  the  Law  to  take  the 
place  of  Christ,  ii.  29 — The  Pharisees  trusted  in  Moses, 
while  they  crucified  Christ;  so  do  all  who  trust  in  Moses, 
ii.  153 — Its  work  on  the  heart,  ii.  154 — Covenant  of  works 
cannot  give  life,  ii.  442 — *Sinai,  terrible  to  the  awakened 
sinner,  iii.  94,  97 — *Slaves  to  the  Law  cannot  make  others 
free,  iii.  95 — *Cannot  save,  iii.  96 — Cannot  sanctify,  iii.  98 
— Shows  no  mercy — *Moses  knocks  down  Faithful,  iii.  1 18 
— Shown  in  the  map  of  salvation  and  damnation,  iii.  336. 

*  Coveting,  the  county  of,  in  the  north,  iii.  133. 
Covetousness :  The  Lord  abhorreth  the  covetous — He  shall 

not  inherit  heaven,  i.  386 — Casteth  out  the  fear  of  God, 
i.  486 — To  be  abhorred  as  of  the  devil — Eight  notes  of  its 
sinfulness  in  hindering  good  works,  ii.  566 — A  poisonous 
sin — Idolatry — Why  covetousness  is  so  called,  ii.  567 — 
Makes  a  minister  smell  frowish,  and  more  like  a  greedy 
dog  than  an  apostle  [or  a  descendant  of  one],  iii.  473. 

Cox,  John,  of  Brafield,  by  Northampton,  a  dreadful  suicide, 
iii.  660. 

Creation.     See  Cosmogony. 

*  Crooked  lane  from  Conceit,  iii.  146. 

Cross,  the,  not  to  be  worshipped,  i.  668,  and  note — Of  no 
more  value  than  the  wood  by  which  the  sacrifice  was  burnt, 
i.  669 — *Effects  of  a  believing  sight  of  Christ  crucified, 
iii.  102,  107, 190,  192— Is  the  Christian's  way-mark  in  all 
his  journey — Six  directions  how  to  know  the  cross,  iii.  386- 

Crosses  are  tokens  of  God's  love,  i.  735 — They  should  not 
weaken  our  faith,  ii.  439. 

Cuirass,  probably  known  to  the  Old  Testament  warriors,  iii. 
526,  and  note. 

*  Custom  in  worship  not  in  the  Bible,  sinful,  iii.  103. 


Damnation,  a  map  of  the  order  of,  iii.  336. 

Damned — They  will  be  amazed  to  see  preachers  and  profes- 
sors in  hell,  i.  390 — Those  who  despise  Jesus,  i.  419 — 
They  wish  in  vain  for  godly  company,  iii.  688 — Why  they 
are  anxious  for  the  salvation  of  their  families,  iii.  697. 

* Dance  and  music  at  Mrs.  Wanton's,  iii.  1 78 — Of  the  Pilgrims, 
iii.  229. 

Dancing,  given  up  by  Bunyan  on  his  conversion,  i.  10. 

^Danger  and  destruction,  two  bye-roads,  iii.  104 — Stopped 
up,  194. 

Daniel's  seventy  weeks  fulfilled  by  Jesus,  ii.  146. 

Danvers'  controversy  with  Bunyan,  ii.  616. 

Dark  sayings  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  i.  655. 

*DarJc-land  near  destruction,  iii.  233. 

* David's  conflict  with  the  three  thieves,  iii.  149. 

Day  of  Grace — Is  it  the  whole  of  life  ?  or  does  it  in  some 
cases  end  before  the  sinner  dies?  i.  13,  99,  570;  iii.  101, 


THE   INDEX. 


775 


377,  379,  382,  567,  577,  702— Dread  lest  it  had  passed, 
i.  14 — Ishmael's  day — Cain's  day — Signs  that  it  is  not 
passed,  i.  100,  102 — Illustrated  by  the  labourers  in  the 
vineyard  and  the  thief  on  the  cross,  i.  253 — Sometimes  sin- 
ners have  not  heaven's  gates  open  to  them  so  long  as  they 
suppose,  iii.  382 — Or  the  accepted  time,  iii.  456 — Signs  of 
being  past  grace,  iii.  519 — Instances,  iii.  583. 

Dead,  five  Scriptural  meanings  of  the  word,  ii.  86. 

Dead  man's  bell  rung  for  joy,  iii.  331. 

Dead  body  prepared  for  burial  by  tying  toes  and  thumbs,  iii. 
727. 

Dealing,  what  constitutes  fair  dealing;  a  comforting  note  for 
booksellers,  iii.  639. 

Death  swallowing  sinners,  i.  74 — Better  to  die  before  death 
comes — God's  sergeant  or  bailiff,  i.  221 — Hath  no  domi- 
nion over  the  saints,  i.  305 — Day  of  death  time  to  pack  up 
and  be  gone.  i.  678 — Christians  ready  to  die,  i.  727,  728 
— Duty  and  wisdom  of  being  ready,  i.  728 — A  trying  hour 
even  to  the  Christian,  i.  730 — Communion  with  Christ  con- 
quers death,  i.  760 — Death  takes  the  sinner  by  the  throat, 
and  hauls  him  down  stairs,  i.  764 — Spirits  depart  at  death 
to  heaven  or  hell,  ii.  677 — *Quagmire  in  Valley  of  Death, 
iii.  114 — Enoch  and  Elijah  carried  over — An  object  of 
dread,  iii.  163,  243— *The  river  without  a  bridge,  iii.  163, 
175-214,  222,  234—  Crossing  it  bravely  no  proof  of  safety, 
iii.  166— To  the  fearful  less  trying,  iii.  214,  242— The 
black  river,  iii.  235 — *Bitter  to  palate,  but  sweet  when 
down  ;  more  terrible  to  some  than  others,  iii.  240 — Cove- 
nant with  death  and  hell,  iii.  267 — The  axe  with  which 
God  cuts  down  the  hypocrite,  iii.  584 — Without  terror,  no 
proof  of  godliness,  but  sometimes  of  hardness  of  heart,  iii. 
660 — Equally  visits  the  godly  and  ungodly,  iii.  678 — Both 
go  to  judgment,  iii.  679 — A  deliverer  to  the  saint,  iii.  707. 

Death-bed — Trials  of  the  Christian,  i.  340 ;  iii.  163 — Peculiar 
temptations  at  the  dark  entry,  i.  679 — Scenes,  i.  729,  742 
— Longing  to  depart,  pray  that  I  may  be  gone,  ii.  15 — A 
sinful  life  and  a  quiet  death  the  high  road  to  hell,  iii.  166, 
663,  682— Awful  sick-bed  scene,  iii.  580,  585— An  awful 
account  of  one,  iii.  650 — Lovely  one  of  a  pious  woman, 
iii.  652 — Music  heard  at  the  death-bed  of  a  Puritan,  iii.  564. 

*  Deceit,  towers  of,  iii.  118. 

Dejected  souls  should  study  grace — A  cordial  for,  i.  357. 

*  Delectable  mountains,  distant  view,  iii,  110,  143,  230. 
*Demas  and  his  silver  mine,  iii.  136,  228. 

Departing  from  iniquity- — From  what  sins,  ii.  531 — Six  mo- 
tives to  leave  sins,  ii.  532 — Iniquitous  opinions,  ii.  537. 

Desire  of  righteous  contrasted  with  the  fear  of  the  wicked, 
i.  744 — Has  a  long  neck  to  look  into  the  next  world,  i.  750 
— Grapples  with  the  king  of  terrors,  i.  759 — To  be  with 
Christ — Why?  i.  759— After  Christ  fainter  in  some  than 
in  others,  i.  760 — Of  the  Christian,  how  granted,  i.  761- — 
Essential  to  happiness — The  life  of  prayer,  i.  762 — Rises 
to  God  through  all  opposition,  i.  763 — Carries  us  away 
after  God,  even  if  opposed  by  ten  thousand  men — Of  the 
wicked  unheeded,  and  why,  i.  764 — Of  the  hypocrite  come 
to  naught,  i.  765 — Granted  not  always  a  token  for  good, 
i.  767— Sometimes  unlawful,  i.  768 — Sometimes  answer 
received,  although  unknown,  i.  769. 

* Desire  of  Vain- Glory — My  Lord,  iii.  130. 

Despair:  It  tends  to  sin,  i.  9 — It  is  unreasonable — A  sin  if 
this  side  of  hell  gates,  i.  91 — The  devil's  master — Makes 
a  man  flounce  like  a  wild  bull  in  a  net,  i.  92 — Arguments 
against  it,  i.  279 — Quaint  dialogue  against  Despair  between 
Christ  and  the  sinner — Scriptural  instances  and  consent  of 
all  saints  against  despair,  i.  280 — Its  source,  i.  352 — Ten 
antidotes  to  despairing  thoughts — Grace  the  great  remedy 
against,  i.  358— Soul  struggling  with  it  like  a  fly  in  a  spi- 
der's web,  i.  435  ;  iii.  754 — It  shuts  the  mouth  and  hardens 
the  heart,  ii.  263 — *It  cages  a  man  in  iron,  iii.  100,  184— 
*The  giant,  iii.  139 — *Shuts  him  in  a  dungeon,  iii.  142, 
229 — Slain,  but  may  live  again,  iii.  229. 

Desperate  words  of  one  H.  S.,  iii.  607. 

Despond,  Slough  of—  Christian  in  the  slough,  literally,  i.  16 
— *Allegorically,  iii.  92 — *Christiana  escapes,  iii.  178, 
188 — *Fearing  detained  a  month  at  it,  iii.  213. 

^Despondency  and  Much-afraid,  iii.  229 — His  happy  death, 
iii.  242. 

Desponding  ones  comforted,  i.  37. 


*  Destruction,  the  city  of,  iii.  90,  &c. 

Devil.  See  Angels,  fallen — His  touching  doctrines  to  be 
watched  and  carefully  avoided,  ii.  169. 

Diabolonians  who  lurked  about  Mansoul  (the  lord  Fornica- 
tion, Murder,  Deceit,  &c.)  all  to  be  crucified,  iii.  322,  330. 

Dialogue  between  Christ  and  a  wounded  sinner,  i.  280. 

^Difficulty,  the  hill,  iii.  104,  193,  214,  222. 

Difficulties  in  closing  with  Christ,  ii.  252. 

*/tiffidence  the  wife  of  Despair,  iii.  140 — Slain,  iii.  229. 

Diseases  under  Captain  Consumption  kill  Badman,  iii.  655. 

Dissembling  before  God,  what  it  is,  ii.  682. 

Dissent,  not  justified  by  the  evil  lives  of  the  clergy,  ii.  323 
— The  Christian's  duty,  proved  by  the  fiery  furnace  and 
den  of  lions,  ii.  553. 

*Ditch,  dangerous,  in  the  Shadow  of  Death,  iii.  115 — *A 
pitfall  of  Mrs.  Wanton's,  iii.  118. 

Divine  love,  a  sweet  disease,  i.  282. 

^Divorce  between  a  man  and  his  sin,  i.  758 — From  a  wife 
by  crying  at  the  cross,  iii.  201,  and  note. 

Doctrines  to  be  all  alike  received,  not  to  pick  and  choose, 
i.  217 — Receive  and  preserve  souls  in  the  church,  iii.  419 
— Of  the  apostles  not  common  stuff  raked  out  of  the  dun,!.' 
hills  and  muck-heaps  of  this  world  or  of  antichrist,  iii.  435 
— Govern  our  notions  and  dispositions,  iii.  555. 

*Dog  of  Satan  near  the  wicket-gate,  iii.  179,  181. 

Dogs  loved  and  cherished  more  than  the  children  of  God,  iii. 
677. 

^Doubting  Castle  and  its  horrors,  iii.  1 39 — *One  key  opens  all 
its  gates,  iii.  142 — Many  prisoners  perish  there,  iii.  144— 
*In  visible  from  Beulah,  iii.  161 — *  Destroyed,  but  sin  can 
rebuild  it,  iii.  229. 

Doubters  of  election— Their  misery,  i.  332— Stand  under 
Cain's  gibbet,  and  think  they  have  the  halter  of  Judas 
about  their  necks,  i.  595 — Vocation  and  salvation  by  grace 
— condemned,  iii.  368. 

Doubts  forbidden,  i.  289 — Their  operation,  i.  352—  Some  come 
from  Satan,  i.  590 — Hotter  than  fire — a  mountain — clouds 
that  darken  the  sun,  i.  595— Formed  into  a  vast  army— 
The  officers'  names,  iii.  341 — Curiously  arranged  under 
their  captains — Slain  and  buried,  iii.  361 — To  be  destroy- 
ed, while  Bloodmen  or  Persecutors  are  left  to  the  day  of 
judgment,  iii.  365. 

Dreams,  Bunyan  subject  to  fearful,  i.  6,  12 — Sleeping  or 
waking,  if  filthy,  defile  the  flesh — Not  relied  upon  by  God's 
fearers,  i.  476— *Dream,  awful,  iii.  101,  107— *Warning 
to  Christiana,  iii.  173, 188 — *Mercy's  sweet  dream,  iii.  198 
— They  maybe  useful,  iii.  190. 

Drum,  Diabolus  makes  a  hideous  noise  with  his  drum,  iii. 
342. 

Drunkards,  God's  judgments  on,  iii.  648. 

Drunkenness  of  Noah,  the  blot  in  his  scutcheon,  ii.  493— 
Wretchedness,  and  misery  allied,  iii.  609. 

Dry-eyed  Christians  and  their  duties,  i.  82. 

Duns  Scotus  and  his  duncish  sophistry,  i.  408. 

Dust,  a  bit  of,  conquers  principalities,  i.  80. 

Duty.     See  Relative  Duties. 

Dying  bed:  Bunyan 's  dying  sayings,  i.  63 — How  it  is  made 
easy,  i.  741. 


*Ease,  a  delicate  plain,  iii.  136. 

East.  All  worshippers  entering  Solomon's  temple  had  their 
back  to  the  east,  in  contempt  of  sun-worship,  iii.  468. 

Ebal  and  Gerizim,  the  blessing  and  cursing,  i.  742  ;  iii.  727 
— A  voice  from  mount  Ebal,  iii.  743. 

Eber,  a  godly  man,  after  whom  the  Hebrews  were  called,  ii. 
500. 

Election—  Fearful  doubts  of,  i.  13,  284—  Known  by  calling, 
i.  102— They  whom  the  Father  gives  the  Son  receives,  i. 
•241— All  Israel  the  children  of  the  promise,  i.  242,  243. 
262— Of  the  church,  what  it  is,  i.  336— Legions  of  devils 
cannot  kill  one  of  the  elect,  even  before  he  is  called,  i.  3*8 
—An  act  of  the  Father,  i.  344;  ii.  598— Election  and  re- 
probation cannot  be  pleaded  at  the  day  of  judgment,  ii. 
122 — Christ  the  fore-ordained  Saviour  before  creation,  ii. 
140_Not  only  of  persons,  but  of  gifts  and  graces,  ii.  341 
— Illustrate  by  the  animals  saved  in  the  ark,  ii.  467— 


776 


TIi£   INDEX. 


And  departing  from  iniquity  inseparable,  ii.  511  — To 
holiness  of  life.  ii.  512,  and  note — As  Jacob  or  one  of  a 
thousand,  ii.  551 — And  reprobation  in  juxtaposition — See 
Map  of  salvation,  iii.  336. 
Emmanuel  visited,  iii.  143,230 — Engages  tore  conquer  Man- 
soul,  iii.  266,  285 — His  livery  to  be  worn  daily,  iii.  323 — 
Departs  from  Mansoul,  his  four  warnings,  iii.  326 — Gra- 
cious speech  to  Mansoul — His  charge  to  keep  their  liveries 
white  and  clean,  iii.  370. 

*  Emmanuel's  land  seen  from  palace  called  Beautiful,  iii,  111. 
Emblems:  The  world  an  emblem  of  hell — The  church  of 

heaven,  ii.  431 — By  Bunyan  in  verse  first  published  as  a 
book  for  boys  and  girls,  iii.  746. 

*  Enchanted  ground,  pilgrims  warned  of,  iii.  145 — Pass  it, 

iii.  153,  214,  235. 
Enemies  to  the  soul's  salvation,  i.  340. 

Entrances  to  Mansoul,  Ear-gate,  Eye-gate,  Mouth-gate,  Nose- 
gate,  and  Feel-gate,  iii.  256. 

:-.rent  of  hideous  and  prodigious  wickednesses,  iii.  647. 
Errm ',  the  hill  and  its  fearful  sight,  iii.  144. 
Errors  and  delusions,  why  permitted,  ii.  177. 
Eternal  life :   Who  may  have  it,  and  upon  what  terms,  i.  292 
— Not  for  wages  or  money,  i.  292 — In  Christ  promised 
re  creation,  i.  584. 
''an,  attempt  to  wash  him  white  by  Fool  and  Want- 
:.  231. 

list  instructs  Christian,  iii.  90,  94 — And  Faithful, 
iii.  126. 
Evangelists  inferior  to  apostles,  but  above  pastors,  ii.  511. 
I  for  heaven  forfeited  by  foul  offences,  i.  188. 
d  science  the  messenger  of  death,  ii.  434 — Overcome 
with  good,  instances  of,  ii.  719. 
Evil  thoughts,  significant  names  of  Diabolonians,  who  infested 
Mansoul  and  were  convicted,  iii.  369 — Live-by-feeling  and 
Legal-life:  they  die  in  prison,  but  Unbelief,  a  nimhle  jack, 
escapes,  iii.  370. 

■ation  at  the  wicket-gate,  iii.  96,  179 — At  the  inter- 
preter's house,  iii.  98, 184 — At  the  house  called  Beautiful, 
iii.  107,  197— At  heaven's  gate,  iii.  165. 
Example  of  a  godly  man,  if  evil,  causes  awful  mischief,  i.  740. 
'.  singular  mode  of,  iii.  605. 
nee,  a  shepherd,  iii.  144,  232. 

tee,  or  the  internal  conflict,  i.  252 — Infidel  thoughts, 
, — of  saint-  .sometimes  dark  in  the  dying  hour,  i.  455 
— Happy  experience  of  the  Christian,  i.  548 — Lightning 
without  thunder  in  some  cases  tends  to  wantonness,  i.  655 
— Soul's  conflict  with  Satan,  i.  661 — Rich  and  deep,  ii.  6, 
7 — Divers,  ii.  12,  and  note — To  be  carefully  examined, 
ii.  480 — ^Narrated  by  Christian,  iii.  107 — Narrated  by 
Faithful,  iii.  117 — By  Hopeful,  iii.  153 — *Comfort  may 
depend  upon  false  hopes,  iii.  157 — Narrated  by  Mercy,  iii. 
Of  Mr.  Fearing,  iii.  212— By  Feeblemind,  iii.  221 
—By  Valiant-for-truth,  iii.  233— By  Standfast,  iii.  238- 

.  or  making  a  prey  of  others,  its  wickedness,  iii.  637. 
.  vision  explained,  iii.  407. 


*  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt,  three  robbers,  iii.  147. 

Faith  not  shown  by  working  miracles,  i.  12 — And  repent- 
ance essential,  i.  70 — Wild  faith  is  presumption,  i.  92 — 
It  helps  at  a  pinch — The  eye,  the  mouth,  the  hand  of  the 
soul,  i.  97— At  times  a  sore  labour,  i.  189— A  duty,  i.  230 
— Power  of  hell  bent  against  it.  i.  231  — And  doubting  may 
live  together,  L  288— Opposed  by  unbelief  in  twenty  five 
ways,  i.  293 — Sets  the  crown  upon  the  head  of  grace,  i. 
310 — With  its  neck  turned  behind,  i.  326,  and  note— To 
be  sought,  i.  328— To  be  lived  by,  i.  329— To  be  made  a 
matter  of  conscience,  i.  330 — Three  things  in  faith  dis- 
pleasing to  the  wicked  one — And  unbelief  curiously  con- 
trasted, i.  331 — Essential  to  every  step  to  salvation,  i.  339; 
ii.  154 — Ten  signs  of  saving  faith,  i.  385 — The  source  of 
gospel  obedience,  i.  518 — Faith  is  not  the  Saviour,  i.  519 
— A  variety  of  faiths,  i.  510 — The  mother  grace,  from  her 
comes  hope,  and  charity  from  both,  i.  578-— A  source  of 
misery  or  happiness,  ii.  36 — Is  the  gift  of  God,  ii.  134 — 
Five  advantages,  ii.  168 — Motive  is  love  to  God  and  the 
brethren — Leads  to  Chri3t  for  help  in  the  battle,  ii.  253 — 


Must  be  living  faith — Justifying  faith,  ii.  314 — Comes 
before  and  produces  good  works,  ii.  316 — Five  of  its  fruits, 
ii.  326 — Invisible,  only  to  be  seen  in  its  fruits,  ii.  507 — 
And  in  all  good  works,  ii.  550 — Produces  hope  and  re- 
pentance, ii.  600 — In  Christ  a  part  of  God's  worship,  ii. 
682 — Objects  of,  must  be  believed — Thou  must  be  born 
twice  before  thou  canst  truly  believe  once,  ii.  683 — Of 
faiths  that  are  unprofitable,  ii.  684 — *Its  nature,  iii.  155 
—  *Difference  between  false  and  justifying  faith — The 
faith  of  Ignorance,  iii.  158 — The  Lord- Lieutenant  for 
Emmanuel  over  Mansoul,  iii.  355. 

*  Faithful,  the  pilgrim,  passes  palace  called  Beautiful  without 

entering,  iii.  Ill — Christian  overtakes  him,  iii.  116 — Be- 
guiled by  Talkative,  iii.  122 — Forewarned  of  his  martyr- 
dom, iii.  126 — His  sufferings  and  death,  iii.  128. 

Faithful  reproof,  exciting  malice  and  hatred,  iii.  591. 

Fall  of  man:  Nature  and  grace  at  variance,  ii.  14: — Spiri- 
tualized, ii.  428 — Allegorically  represented,  iii.  259 — 
Satan's  mode  of  fortifying  Mansoul  for  himself,  iii.  260 — 
Gradations  from  incredulity  to  atheism,  iii.  264. 

Falling  from  knowledge,  how,  and  why,  i.  392. 

False  Christs,  how  to  be  known,  ii.  1 09. 

Famine — Hunger  making  his  last  meal  of  a  man,  i.  248. 

Fasting  and  fast  days,  i.  41 ;  iii.  328,  340— Pharisees  fast 
twice  a-week  [query,  Wednesday  and  Friday],  ii.  224. 

Fathers — Bible  preferred  to  them  and  to  all  authors,  iii.  398. 

Fear  of  God:  Works  reverence  and  union  to  God,  i.  14 — 
As  a  father,  how  distinguished  from  his  fear  as  the  judge, 
i.  437 — The  salt  that  seasons  every  duty,  i.  438,  477 — 
Divers  kinds — Called  anguish,  i.  445 — Ungodly  fear  of 
God,  how  known,  i.  446,  451, 452,  483 — Prevents  a  simple 
reliance  on  Christ,  i.  447 — Godly  fear  which  lasteth  not 
— Tends  to  cursed  additions  to  the  Bible,  i.  448 — From 
Satan,  by  groundless  confidence  and  ungrounded  fears — 
The  Devil's  paws  to  be  seen  in  it ;  leads  men  to  hide 
their  Lord's  talent,  i.  452 — Devil's  faith  produces  the 
Devil's  fear,  i.  460 — What  it  flows  from,  and  what  flows 
from  it,  i.  462 — However  small  or  young,  greatly  blessed, 
i.  472 — The  darling  grace — Motives  to  fear  God,  i.  479 — 
Gives  a  printely,  mighty,  invincible  spirit,  i.  480 — Means 
of  growth,  i.  483 — Hinderances,  i.  485 — Degrees — The 
pulse  of  the  soul,  i.  489 — Encouragements  to  it,  most  ho- 
nourable and  rich,  i.  490 — Teaches  to  pray  without  book, 
i.  628— Described,  iii.  105, 159,  215,  741. 

Fear  <f  man  where  there  is  no  fear  of  God — Although  re- 
minded of  death  and  judgment,  i.  705 — How  it  works, 
i.  726 — *Ungodly  fear  of  man,  iii.  160. 

-Fearing,  a  timid  pilgrim,  his  troubles,  iii.  212 — Afraid  to 
knock  at  the  gate,  iii.  213 — His  noble  bearing  at  Vanity 
Fair;  his  triumphant  death,  iii.  214. 

Fears  of  the  wieJced,  i.  745. 

mind  rescued  from  Slay-good,  iii.  221 — His  happy 
death,  iii.  242. 

Feel-gate,  the  weakest  part  of  Mansoul,  iii.  350. 

Filth.  Mr.,  an  odious,  nasty,  lascivious  piece  of  beastliness, 
iii.  267. 

Final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  i.  22  [No.  134],  539,  552 — 
If  one  of  his  sheep  be  lost,  Christ  and  his  Father  are  over- 
thrown, i.  234 — Proved  from  the  book  of  life,  iii.  449. 

*Mre  burning,  although  water  is  thrown  on  it,  iii.  100. 

Flaming  sword  kills  all  who  attempt  to  re-enter  Paradise  by 
Adam's  holiness,  ii.  299. 

* Flatterer — Pilgrims  warned  of  him,  iii.  145 — They  fall  into 
his  net,  iii.  151. 

Flood  brought  on  by  mixing  the  world  and  the  church, 
ii.  460,  463 — Typical  of  the  day  of  judgment,  ii.  471  — 
Spiritualized,  ii.  473 — A  type  of  persecuting  times,  ii.  476. 

Flowers  in  God's  garden,  all  double,  i.  596. 

Folly  of  sinners;  man  danceth  about  Hell's  mouth,  ii.  111. 

Fool:  The  greatest  is  he  who  neglects  salvation,  i.  141 — 
Six  signs  of  a,  i.  142. 

Forehead,  name  of  God  in  the  ;  its  meaning,  iii.  459,  103. 

Forgetrgood,  the  recorder,  put  in  Mansoul  by  Diabolus,  iii. 
264, 276. 

*  Forgetful-green,  the  battle-ground  with  Apollyon,  iii.  207. 

*  Formalist  and  Hypocrisy  before  the  wicket-gate  ;  enter  not 

by  the  gate,  iii.  103— To  avoid  the  hill  Difficulty,  take  the 
way  of  Danger  and  Destruction,  and  perish,  iii.  104. 


THE   INDEX. 


777 


Fornication,  its  awful  consequence,  iii.  611.  612. 
Foster,  a  persecuting  justice  of  Bedford,  i.  52. 
Four  Last  Things.     See  vol.  iii.,  p.  726  : — 

Death — Death,  as  a  king,  overcomes  all,  iii.  726 — Irre- 
sistible; we  must  drink  with  death — Who  it  is  he  can- 
not kill,    iii.  727 — The  Christain  raised    a.^ain,   when 
death  hath  no  more  power,  iii.  72S — The  second  death, 
iii.  734.— See  Death. 
Judgment — Appointed  to  take  place  after  death — Christ, 
by  God's  appointment,  to  be  the  Judge,  iii.  72S — All 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  will  be  brought  into  judg- 
ment— No  hiding  from  the  great  Judge  at  that  day,  iii. 
729 — Great  honour  to  the  righteous  after  the  judgment, 
but  misery  to  the  wicked,  iii.  730.     See  Judnment-day. 
IIeavex — A  poetic  description  of  the  glory  of,  iii.  730 — 
The  presence  of  the  Eternal  God  there  will  give  life 
— Great  mysteries  will  be  seen  there,  iii.  731 — Saints 
there  each  wear  a  badge  of  glory,  iii.  732 — Eternal  dura- 
tion oi\  iii.  733.     See  Heaven. 
Hell — The  state  of  those  that  perish,  poetically  described, 
iii.  733— A  sea  of  burning  brimstone,  iii.  734 — Memory 
one  of  hell's  torments,  iii.  735 — Eternity  of  hell's  tor- 
ments, iii.  737.     See  Hell. 
Fourpenee-hal/pennies — A  silver  coin.  i.  36 ;  iii.  739,  and  note. 
Fraudulent  bankruptcy,  how  brought  about,  and  its  villany, 
iii.  628 — Weights,  too  heavy  or  too  light,  tried  bv  the 
Bible,  iii.  633,  634. 
Free-will  follows  after  salvation,  but  not  in  God's  way,  ii.  241 

— Its  liberty,  ii.  312. 
Fruitless  professor  like  a  blinking  candle  when  God  appears 
as  a  mighty  wind,  ii.  572 — The  blinking  candle  we  do 
much  despise,  iii.  751.  752. 
Fruits  of  forgiveness,  iii.  305. 
Fundamentals  and  secondary  fundamentals,  ii.  319. 
Future  rewards  and  punishments,  ii.  594. 


G. 


*Gaius  entertains  the  pilgrims,  iii.  21S — The  curious  dishes, 
iii.  219 — Poetic  riddles,  iii.  220 — Tells  a  story  worth  the 
hearing,  iii.  220. 

Garden  or  Fden — Why  Adam  was  turned  out.  ii.  441. 

Gate — Christ  the.  i.  366 — No  little  pinching  wicket,  i.  366 
— Wide  enough  for  all  the  lovers  of  Christ,  i.  366 — Of 
Paradise,  wide  enough  for  Adam  to  go  out.  but  too  strait 
for  him  to  enter  in.  i.  366 — Why  strait,  i.  367 — The  guard 
to  keep  out  the  polluted  in  sin,  as  well  profane  as  professor, 
i.  367 — The  law,  i.  367 — The  angels  that  guard,  i.  367 — 
Porters  at  the,  i.  367 — Of  Temple  wide  enough  for  clean 
beasts,  but  not  for  the  unclean,  i.  376 — To  turn  away 
from,  like  being  turned  off  the  ladder,  i.  376 — Of  Heaven 
wide  enough  to  admit  the  naked  sinner,  but  not  with  the 
world  upon  his  back,  iii.  475. 

G-  Mm — An  exposition  on  chapters  i.  to  xi.,  ii.  414. 

—Pagan  and  Pope.  iii.  116 — Despair  and  Diffidence, 
iii.  140,  229 — Grim  or  Bloody  Man,  iii.  195 — Maul  the 
sophist,  iii.  210 — Slaygood,  iii.  221. 

.  John,  Mr.  Bunyan's  pa.-tor.f  some  account  of,  i.  15, 
20;  iii.  11 — His  account  of  Bunyan's  earlv  ministry,  iii. 
672. 

Glory  of  saints  as  brides  of  Christ,  ii.  30 — ^Glimpses  of 
eternal  glory,  iii.  145.  161. 

*  Gluttony seldom  repented  of,  i.  474. 

Gexl — Tiumty  ix  UNITY  a  weighty  subject,  with  prepara- 
tions or  rules  for  its  study,  ii.  386,  387,  59  4 — Of  persons 
in  the  Godhead,  ii.  415  —  Absurdities  that  flow  from 
denying  the,  ii.  416 — The  foundation  of  the  truth,  iii.  520. 
—  >.  e  Map  of  salvation,  iii. 

Ge\l — Unchangeable,  i.  28 — A  source  of  terror.i.  29,  30 — No 
respecter  of  persons,  i.  30 — Our  thoughts  known  to.  i.  37 
— Biding  post  with  his  gospel,  i.  S4 — His  goodness,  his 
glory,  i.  210 — His  patience  to  sinners,  i.  351  —  To  approach 
him  boldly,  what  it  is.  i.  360 — Omniscience  of.  i,  -  — 
His  Presence  dreadful,  i.  43S — Even  when  in  his  robes  of 


t  Supposed  to  le  represented  by  Evangelist,  ui  the  Pilgrim. 
VOL.  III. 


salvation,  i.  439— The  brightness  of  his  clorv  covers  us 
with  the  shadow  of  death,  i.  439— His  Name  expresses  his 
nature,  i.  440 — How  described  in  Scripture,  i.  457— His 
love,  what  it  is,  i.  539—  The  believer's  portion  and  hope, 
i.535 — The  source  of  all  happiness,  i.  586— Mkbcx  of,  how 
it  is  named,  i.  595 — Is  manifold,  there  is  no  single  flower 
in  God's  garden,  i.  596— Its  operations  i.  598— Condescen- 
sion and  love,  i.  603— His  thrones,  i.  642;  in  heaven,  ■„ 
earth,  of  judgment,  of  glory,  of  sraee,  upon  which  only 
prayer  can  be  received,  i.  643— His  Commands  imperative, 

•  •  732 — Decrees  unalterable  and  unchangeable,  i.  771 

1'nsearchable.  broader  than  all  sins,  rage  of  men,  or  devils, 
ii.  4 — Ann  reaches  to  the  belly  o(  hell,  ii.  5—1. 
1  tag  arm  to  reach  all,  ii.  5— Deeper  than  hell,  ii.  6— 
than  the  deepest  deep,  ii.  6— Higher  than  all  giants  or  walls, 
ii.  S— His  greatness  our  safety  and  glory,  ii.  14— Fulness 
tilling  his  saints,  who  sweeten  the  churches,  ii.  35 — Able 
to  do  more  than  we  think,  ii.  37 — Seen  in  his  works  by 
carnal  eyes.  ii.  193 — Perfections  infinite,  ii.  414—  1 1 
mands,  our  sole  rule  in  worship,  ii.  465 — Holy  and  just, 
yet  gracious,  through  the  Redeemer,  ii.  594 — One  to  the 
Christian,  ii.  676 — His  attributes,  ii.  676 — How  known, 
ii.  676— False  notions  of,  ii.  630 — The  only  keeper  of  our 
souls,  ii.  695 — Able  to  keep  us,  ii.  699-70*1 — Will  of,  his 
law  and  order,  ii.  7u4 — Our  Creator  our  consolation,  ii.  731 
— His  faithfulness  our  preservation,  ii.  734 — Makes  the 
Christians'  bed,  i.  741— Christ  the  Lamb  and  God  have 
one  throne,  iii.  453. 
Gcd—  The  Father— Giveth  his  elect  to  the  Son.  who  saveth 
them,  i.  243— Called  "Our  Father,"  to  familiarize  his 
children  to  him,  i.  243 — Giveth  his  people  to  his  Son.  i. 
'-44 — Import  of  this  word  giving,  i.  244— His  intent  in 
giving,  i.  245— Gives  and  Christ  saves  two  distinct  per- 
sons, i.  274. 
Gexl — The  Sox — His  sufficiency  incomprehensible,  i.  S7 — 
Has  bags  of  mercy  yet  unsealed,  i.  9S — The  only  Jacob's 
ladder  to  heaven,  i.  103— His  ability  our  safety,'  i.  211— 
All  men  must  be  saved  or  damned  bv.  i.  231— Son's  re- 
ception of  the  Father's  gift,  i.  246— The  extent  of  his 
riches,  i.  344 — How  poor  he  made  himself  to  save  sin- 
ners, i.  345 — Who  he  is:  the  seed  of  David,  bv  promise  ; 
the  Wonderful,  i.  393— The  promised  Messiah,  i.  393— 
Promised  to  every  age.  i.  394 — A  Saviour;  what  it  means, 
i.  395 — His  names  in  the  promises,  i.  395 — Promised  by 
types,  i.  396— All  fulfilled  in  him,  i.  397;  ii.  144 — God  with 
us,  i.  405 — His  name  '  Jesus,"  which  the  devils  hate  and 
tremble  at.  angels  and  saints  bow  the  head,  i.  419 — Why 
he  is  precious,  i.  435 — The  surety  of  the  Covenant,  i.  525 
— The  surety  being  bound,  the  debtor  is  free,  i.  526 — 
The  messenger  of  the  Covenant,  i.  526 — His  r 

i.  527 Must  be  all  our  salvation,  or  we  perish. 

— The  great  deliverer,  i.  710 — The  only  soul-physician. 
i.  711 — The  rounds  of  the  ladder  to  heaven:  the  power  of 
God,  merits  ci  Christ,  help  of  angels,  a  good  conscience  ; 
every  round  fitly  placed,  ii.  9.  10 — His  divinity,  ii.  15,  16, 
24 — His  miracles  of  mercy,  ii.  146 — Co-equal  with  the 
Father,  ii.  14S — The  Creator,  ii.  151 — Alone  can  enable 
man  to  call  Cod  Father,  ii.  192 — His  design  more  than 
to  reproduce  man's  original  righteousness,   ii.  291— His 
holiness  imputed  tons  superior  to  Adam's,   ii.  292,  3'i7. 
427— Being  infinite  and  eternal,  ii.  300— The  high  Cod 
and  the  Redeemer,  ii.  595 — The  mountain  on  which  alone 
we  see  over  Blighty  enemies,  iii.  400 — The  foundation  upon 
which  the  Church  is  fitly  framed,  iii.  434. 
God — The    Holy     SruuT —  His  graces,    i.    346  —  Mu<t 
help  our  infirmities,  or  all  our  prayers  are  vain,  i.  426, 
628 — All  other  prayers  abominable  to  God — Alone  can 
show  us  the  way  to  Cod,  i.  629 — His  influence  essential 
to  ascend,  by  Christ,  to  heaven,  ii.  10 — The  Third  ! 
in  the  Trinity,  ii.  30 — His  comforting  influences,  iii.  138 
—  'His  proverbs  by  the  Interpreter,  iii.  187 — Th 
Spirit  and  conscience  the  ministers  in  Mansoul,  iii. 
M  ill  used  by  Prejudice,  iii.  238; 
Godly  men  may,  by  their  conduct,  send  many  to  everlast- 
ing burnings,  i.  740 — Afraid  of  their  owu  righte.  . 
ii.  242 — Instances,  ii.  243. 
Godly  sorroic,  its  operation,  i. 

98 


778 


THE   INDEX. 


Gods  or  objects  of  worship  many,  but  to  the  Christian  ono 
only,  ii.  676. 

Gold,  pure,  a  figure  of  spiritual  riches,  beauty,  and  health, 
iii.  430 — Made  pure  by  heat,  so  the  saints  by  persecution, 
iii.  431 — As  it  were  transparent  glass,  its  meaning,  iii.  438. 

*  Good-confidence,  the  town  of  Great  Grace,  iii.  147. 
Good-deed  rejected,  and  Wet-eyes  and  Desires-awake  chosen 

to  be  messengers  for  peace  to  Emmanuel,  iii.  300.  ' 

Good  news  for  the  vilest  of  men,  i.  67. 
Good  thoughts  compared  to  blossoms,  iii.  756. 

*  Good-will,  keeper  of  the  wicket-gate,  iii.  96,  179,  213,  222. 
Good  works,  motives  to,  i.  731 ;  ii.  555 — The  most  durable 

riches,  i.  735 — .rewarded  in  heaven,  i.  737 — The  fruits  of 
righteousness  by  Jesus  Christ,  ii.  250 — Flowing  from 
faith,  ii.  315,  549 — Some  costly,  others  cost  nothing,  ii. 
508 — David,  Nathan,  Uzza,  and  Peter,  deceived  as  to, 
ii.  553 — Authorized  by  the  Word — Martha  misplaced 
them,  ii.  554 — In  the  family,  ii.  555 — To  be  carefully 
maintained,  ii.  570. 

Gospel,  the,  a  savour  of  life  or  of  death,  i.  242 — Why  so 
apparently  unsuccessful,  ii.  313. 

Gosj>eUcrs,  meaning  of  the  term,  i.  106,  238,  507,  and  note 
— Carnal,  crawling  like  locusts  and  maggots,  ii.  429. 

Grace,  larger  than  sin,  i.  24 — Slighted,  an  intolerable  recol- 
lection in  eternity,  i.  69 — In  a  great  sinner  shines,  i.  83 — 
What  it  is,  i.  342 — Essential  to  salvation,  as  it  is  in  the 
Father,  i.  343— In  the  Son,  i.  344— And  in  the  Spirit,  i. 
346 — Flows  from  the  Father  in  ten,  from  the  Son  in  thirty- 
six,  and  from  the  Holy  Ghost  in  fifteen  respects,  i.  343- 
347 — Its  unspeakable  riches,  that  make  angels  wonder, 
and  devils  astonished,  i.  346 — Breaks  the  heart  with  joy, 
i.  352,  358— The  only  means  of  salvation,  i.  354— No 
respecter  of  persons,  i.  356 — Saved  Lot,  but  not  his  wife ; 
for  Peter,  but  not  for  Judas,  i.  357,  374 — An  antidote 
against  all  delusions — A  sin-killing  doctrine,  i.  358 — Seek 
to  advance  it  in  the  heart  and  life — A  sea,  a  never-failing 
fountain,  i.  359 — To  be  sought  at  a  God  of  grace,  upon 
a  throne  of  grace,  in  the  name  of  a  gracious  Christ,  aided 
by  the  Spirit  of  grace,  i.  360 — Dangerous  to  the  graceless, 
i.  423 — Meaning  of  the  word,  i.  644 — Eeigns  over  the 
devil,  death,  sin,  hell,  and  the  grave,  for  ever,  i.  646 — 
Pure  and  clear  as  crystal,  i.  653 — New  supplies  essential 
in  every  time  of  need,  i.  679 — What  it  should  teach  us,  i. 
680 — Its  tendency  to  bring  forth  fruit,  i.  730 — Can  never 
be  destroyed,  i.  769 — Humbles — Does  not  exempt  from 
temptations — The  more  grace  the  more  trials,  i.  770 — A 
dram  of  it  worth  all  the  world,  ii.  15 — When  improved, 
increases,  ii.  547 — How  nourished,  iii.  100 — In  the  heart, 
how  discovered,  iii.  124 — Must  be  improved,  as  well  as 
received,  iii.  325 — Growth  in,  imperceptible  at  times,  iii. 
452,  and  note — Never  makes  man  proud,  wanton,  or  care- 
less, iii.  554 — How  to  be  obtained,  iii.  741. 

*  Graceless — Christian's  name  before  conversion,  iii.  10G — A 

town,  two  miles  from  Honesty,  iii.  160. 
Graces — How  to  try,  i.  371. 
Gradations  in  piety  and  wickedness,  i.  744. 
Grave — The  house  and  bed  for  all  living,  i.  221. 

*  Great  Grace — The  king's  champion,  iii.  147 — His  mighty 

Son,  iii.  230. 

*  Great  Heart,  the  pilgrims'  guide  and  protector,  iii.  190,  &c. 
Greek,  knowledge  of,  not  essential,  i.  53. 

8 Gripeman,  a  schoolmaster  at  Love-gain,  in  the  north,  iii. 
133. 

n. 

Hard  commands  of  God  must  be  obeyed,  i.  734. 

Heart,  seven  advantages  of  a  tender,  i.  7,  12 — Corrupt,  i.  50 
— Unweldable,  but  by  Christ,  i.  216— Evil,  i.  316— Six 
reasons  why  it,  rejecteth  the  gospel,  i.  333 — Exceedingly 
sinful — Wanderings  of  that  of  the  saints,  daily,  require 
millions  of  pardons,  i.  353 — Tender,  a  fit  place  for  grace 
to  thrive  in — How  to  soften  it,  i.  486 — Broken,  God  will 
not  despise,  known  by  sighs,  tears,  and  groans,  i.  689 — 
llightly  broken,  proved  to  be  an  excellent  heart — God's 
jewel — Entitled  to  the  cordial  of  heaven — An  object  of 
salvation — God  bin'detb.  it  up — What  it  is,  i.  690,  691, 


692 — By  nature,  described  in  ten  particulars,  i.  693 — 
God's  mode  of  breaking,  i.  693,  694,  787— God  only  can 
break,  by  His  hammer  and  fire,  i.  693,  707 — How  it  is 
made  contented,  i.  694 — Contrite,  its  meanings  and  signs, 
i.  695,  696 — Broken,  feels  its  poverty,  and  depends  on 
Christ — To  what  it  is  compared,  i.  700 — Broken,  the  ne- 
cessity of  a — Trembles  at  the  word,  i.  702 — Unbroken, 
the  devil's  fortress,  i.  703 — Must  be  ripped  up  by  convic- 
tions, i.  704 — Nothing  will  break  but  violence,  i.  705 — 
Eeasons  why  it  must  be  broken — Why  God  esteems  it, 
nine  reasons,  i.  709 — How  to  keep  it  tender,  i.  713— Must 
be  broken,  to  break  its  league  with  hell — Broken,  sorrow- 
ful on  earth,  but  joyful  in  heaven,  i.  715 — How  to  judge 
whether  it  is  broken,  i.  716 — Better  than  all  sacrifice,  i. 
720 — Of  the  wicked,  widest  downward,  i.  767 — Searched 
by  God,  who  cannot  be  deceived,  iii.  570. 

Heaven — Soul,  in  heaven,  will  be  filled  with  all  the  bliss  it 
can  hold,  i.  341 — Its  seven  names,  its  joys,  and  company, 
i.  342,  527 — The  kingdom  of — Its  entrance  a  gate  ;  open 
to  the  wise,  but  shut  to  the  foolish  virgins ;  two  gates, 
one  of  faith  to  heaven  on  earth,  and  another  to  the  very 
heavens  above,  i.  365 — Christ's  house,  into  which  Paul 
was  caught,  i.  366 — Heavenly  things  more  glorious  than 
the  types,  i.  375,  644 — Pleas  to  enter  heaven  that  will  be 
rejected,  i.  376 — All  will  think  it  desirable  at  the  end  of 
the  -world,  i.  378— Few  will  possess  it,  i.  379— The  eternal 
inheritance  of  saints  in  Christ,  i.  428 — On  earth — first- 
fruits  of  that  above  —  Divine  nature  communicated  on 
earth — human  received  into  heaven,  i.  553 — Some  there 
glorious  harpers  who  were  worse  than  thyself,  i.  654 — 
And  as  they  suffered  for  Christ,  the  greater  the  crown, 
i.  725 — Four  sorts  of  people  desire  heaven,  i.  764 — 
Heaven,  high,  Christ  can  reach  it,  Elijah  by  his  chariot, 
but  how  shall  poor  I?  ii.  9 — A  sight  of,  dazed  Saul, 
rejoiced  Stephen,  ii.  12 — The  believer  in  heaven,  while 
on  earth,  ii.  22. — A  sense  of  pardon  will  swallow  up 
the  soul  in  love,  ii.  100 — In  proportion  to  having  enjoyed 
heaven  upon  earth,  ii.  102 — Eternity  of  heaven's  joys 
and  hell's  torments,  ii.  127,  138  ;  iii.  733— Not  to  be 
earned  at  our  fingers'  ends,  ii.  132 — *Its  enjoyments, 
iii.  164— ^Personal  identity  in,  iii.  165,  234—  Wishing 
and  praying  for  it  useless,  unless  it  is  run  for — run  means 
to  fly,  to  press,  to  persevere,  iii.  381 — Race  long  and 
wearisome ;  many  run,  but  few  obtain,  iii.  382 — Provoca- 
tions to  rim  with  the  foremost,  iii.  394 — Heaven  and  hell 
separated  by  a  great  gulf,  iii.  693 — What  this  gulf  is, 
iii.  694. 

Heavenly  footman,  the,  or  a  description  of  the  man  that  gets 
to  heaven,  iii.  375 — Nine  directions  how  to  run,  iii.  383 — 
Nine  motives  to  urge  our  speed,  iii.  389 — Many  run  who 
never  entered  the  way,  iii.  391. 

Hebrew  names,  and  their  meanings,  ii.  496. 

^Heedless  and  Mr.  Too-bold  in  a  fatal  sleep,  iii.  237. 

Heights  of  fallen  angels,  and  heights  in  us  to  plague  us,  ii.  8. 

Heights  and  depths  between  the  convert  and  heaven,  i.  340. 

Hell:  One  hour  there  burns  out  all  the  enjoyments  of  sin  in 
the  world,  i.  14— Torments  described,  i.  120,  136,  137, 
148,  220,  520,  575;  ii.  108,  126— Its  great  sting,  i.  150 
— Drink  tears  mixed  with  burning  brimstone,  i.  230 — How 
called,  i.  272— An  awful  reality,  i.  375 ;  iii.  592— Pre- 
pared of  old,  ii.  106— Death  ever  feeding  on  the  soul,  ii. 
107— Emblems  or  types  of,  ii.  Ill — Recollection  of  lost 
means  of  grace,  ii.  123 — Degrees  of  torment,  the  smallest 
insupportable,  ii.  128—  ^Hell's  mouth,  iii.  115— *Byway 
to  hell,  iii.  145,  166,  231,  235— Eternity  of  hell  torments 
awfully  described,  iii.  379,  684,  694,  702,  723— Torments 
increased  by  reflection,  iii.  596 — A  few  sighs  from,  or  the 
groans  of  a  damned  soul,  iii.  666— Receives  the  wicked  at 
death— Hell  not  in  this  life,  iii.  681— Awful  description, 
iii.  682 — Nature  of  hell  torments,  iii.  683 — The  damned 
earnest  for  deliverance,  but  in  vain,  iii.  687 — Why  the 
tongue  to  be  cooled  more  than  other  members,  iii.  689 — 
Scalding-hot  memory — A  scalding-hot  remembrance  of 
thy  sins,  iii.  690— Sins  press  like  blood-hounds,  iii.  694 — 
Swimming  in  burning  brimstone,  iii.  703— Its  aggrava- 
tions, iii.  704. 

*Heman  and  Hezekiah,  their  conflict  iii.  149. 


THE   INDEX. 


779 


*jH  n  and  chickens  illustrate  the  Christian's  call,  iii.  136. 

Herbert's  (George)  poems  quoted,  ii.  390. 

Heresy,  reason  why  it  is  permitted,  ii.  131. 

Heretics :  Christians  called,  iii.  700. 

High  priest  and  his  office,  iii.  505. 

*Mold-ihe-  World,  Mr.,  iii.  loo — His  sophistry  exposed,  iii. 
136. 

Holiday  saints  shut  out  of  the  strait  jyate,  i.  377. 

Holiness,  gospel,  flows  from  faith  and  tends  to  prayer,  i.  613, 
614—  Importance  of  seeing  its  beauty,  i.  732 — Three 
things  essential — the  Holy  Ghost,  faith,  and  a  new  heart, 
ii.  288 — And  liberty  are  joined  together,  ii.  705. 

Holy  City,  the,  or  New  Jerusalem  unfolded,  iii.  395 — A 
heavenly  mystery,  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  iii.  397 
— Dedicated  to  the  godly,  the  learned,  the  captious,  and  to 
the  Mother  of  Harlots,  "iii.  397,  398,  399— The  vision  of, 
to  John — The  gospel  church  released  from  captivity,  iii. 
401 — Why  the  church  is  called  a  city,  iii.  402 — It  de- 
scends out  of  heaven  from  God,  iii.  403 — It  has  the  glory 
of  God,  iii.  404— The  light  of  this  city,  iii.  407— God,  its 
builder,  iii.  408 — Its  happiness,  iii.  409 — To  call  her  a 
rebellious  city,  are  lying  words,  iii.  410 — Its  walls  and 
defences,  iii.  411 — The  gates  of  the  city,  iii.  412 — At 
the  gates  twelve  angels,  iii.  413 — Twelve  foundations,  iii. 
416 — What  is  meant  by  the  golden  reed  and  measuring  line, 
iii.  419 — Its  glory,  a  wall  of  jasper,  iii.  427 — City,  pure 
gold,  iii.  430— The  glory  of  the  gates  of,  iii.  435— Glory 
of  the  street  of,  iii.  436 — Has  no  temple,  iii.  439 — Needs 
no  sun  nor  moon,  iii.  440 — The  inhabitants  of,  iii.  443 — 
Secure,  with  open  gates,  iii.  446 — The  glory  and  honour 
of  the  nations  brought  into  it,  iii.  447 — None  but  visible 
saints  shall  enter,  iii.  448 — Its  provisions  and  maintenance 
— Its  drink,  the  river  of  life,  iii.  450 — -Pure  as  crystal,  iii. 
451 — Where  it  goes,  iii.  452 — Whence  it  came — Its  food, 
Christ,  the  tree  of  life,  iii.  453 — Perfuming  tree,  no  for- 
bidden tree  of  knowledge  in,  iii.  454— Fruits  for  body, 
and  soul,  babes,  and  strong  men,  iii.  455 — Abundance  of 
food,  iii.  456 — The  ease,  peace,  and  tranquillity  of,  iii.  457 
— Every  face  shall  shine,  and  all  be  known — Blessed  is 
he  that  shall  see  the  golden  world,  iii.  459. 

Holy  life,  the  beauty  of  Christianity,  ii.  511. 

Holy  icalhing  yields  blessed  fruits  in  this  life,  i.  739. 

Holy  war,  a  relation  of  the,  iii.  254. 

Holy  water,  the  real,  as  distinguished  from  the  Popish 
quackery,  iii.  558,  and  note. 

:-hHonest,  Mr.,  an  old  pilgrim,  iii.  211. 

Hope,  all  through  grace,  i.  357 — Of  Israel  encouraged — To 
hope  without  faith,  is  to  see  without  eyes,  i.  577 — The 
cable  to  our  anchor — Nine  distinctions  between  the  wurk 
of  faith  and  hope,  i.  578 — Objects  of,  unutterably  great, 
i.  579 — Hope  against  hope —  Bears  up  the  sufferer  and 
martyr — Encouragements  to,  i.  582 — Ensures  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  thing  hoped  for — Its  motive,  faith  ;  its  means, 
the  Word  ;  its  earnest,  Christ  in  us,  i.  583 — Who  it  is  that 
has  hope,  i.  586 — Prisoners  of,  i.  588 — Requires  daily 
exercise,  i.  590 — A  head  and  governing  grace — Instances, 
i.  591 — Only  that  of  Israel  glad,  i.  592 — *A  golden  an- 
chor given  to  Christiana,  iii.  204. 

^Hopeful  joins  Christian,  iii.  132 — Led  by  him  to  Doubting 
Castle,  iii.  139 — Dissuades  Christian  from  suicide,  iii.  141 
— Narrates  his  experience,  iii.  153 — Assists  Christian  ia 
passing  the  river,  iii.  164. 

*House  for  the  lambs  and  babes,  iii.  228. 

House  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon,  iii.  510 — Distinct  from  the 
temple,  iii.  512 — The  house  in  the  forest  a  type  of  the 
church  under  persecution,  iii.  513,  522 — Of  the  largeness 
of  this  house,  iii.  515 — A  castle  or  stronghold,  iii.  516 — Its 
doors,  posts,  and  windows,  iii.  522 — Military  material,  iii. 
525 — Only  defensive  armour,  iii.  526 — Cups  of  bitterness 
— Of  sweetness,  and  holy  enjoyment,  iii.  530. 

Hurlstcrs,  injurious  to  the  poor,  iii.  638. 

Humble  self-abasement  aspires  to  the  highest  blessings — Par- 
don of  sin,  ii.  266 — Station  more  blessed  than  the  world  is 
aware  of,  iii.  631. 

Humiliation,  of  Christ,  infinite  as  His  glory,  ii.  19. 

*  Humiliation,  Valley  >>t',  its  difficult  descent,  iii.  Ill,  205 — 
Pillar  of  warning — Beautified  with  lilies — The  shepherd- 


boy  and  his  song,  iii.  20G— Our  Lord's  country-house,  iii. 
207— Forgetful  Green,  where  Christian  fought  Apollyon. 
iii.  207,  208. 

SumUity,  a  sign  of  a  contrite  heart,  i.  698— The  convinced 
sinner  sees  himself  a  filthy,  leprous,  polluted,  unfa]  bit  of 
carrion,  ii.  269 — To  see  God  a  consuming  fire,  man  stubble 
fully  dry  ;  stands  afar  off;  ii.  269,  272— Leaves  room  for 
the  Mediator,  ii.  270 — Four  remarkable  instances  of,  ii. 
524 — Arising  from  seeing  the  beauty  of  feltow-pilgrims, 
iii.  190 — There  is  dirt  in  tears,  ami  filthiness  in  prayers, 
iii.  301. 

Hung<  /•  making  his  last  meal  of  the  lepers,  i.  248. 

Husband,  wife,  or  child,  little  in  comparison  with  salvation, 
i.  10. 

Hymenals  and  Philetus,  fatal  error  of,  as  to  the  resurrection 
of  the  body,  iii.  144. 

Hypocrisy  made  Bunyan  tremble  even  when  unconverted,  i. 
6 — To  seek  justification  by  the  law,  i.  315 — A  spreading 
leprosy,  ii.  538 — Five  helps  against  it,  ii.  539 — Drawn  to 
the  life,  iii.  618. 

*  Hypocrisy  and  Formality  climb  over  the  wall,  iii.  103 — 
They  perish,  iii.  104. 

Hypocrites,  although  tricked  out,  and  trimmed  up  with  what 
bravery  they  can,  are  hypocrites  still,  i.  374 — Professors, 
who  want  grace,  i.  382 — Feigned  holiness,  demure  con- 
duet,  and  golden  names,  i.  392 — A  stumbling-block,  i.  482 
— Severely  reproved,  i.  490 — Hope  perishes — Many  pro- 
fessors who  will  come  short  of  heaven,  ii.  120 — And 
Pharisees  trust  in  themselves,  ii.  227 — See  no  need  of 
mercy,  ii.  237 — Like  painted  fire,  flowers,  or  trees,  ii.  550 
— *To  cry  out  against  sin  no  proof  that  it  is  hated,  iii.  123 
— *Iteligion  for  the  world  or  the  bag,  iii.  135 — *Treo 
rotten  at  heart  an  emblem  of — Fit  tinder  for  the  devil's 
tinder-box,  iii.  187  —  Satan's  brood,  creeping  things, 
wooden  and  earthen  professors,  iii.  564 — Injure  the  godly, 
iii.  57-1 — Like  a  frog,  iii.  753. 


"  I  say  unto  you,"  words  of  solemn  import,  i.  373 — From 
God,  i.  374. 

*Idle  life,  one  of  the  slanders  on  professors,  iii.  700. 

Idleness,  dangerous ;  watchfulness  profitable,  i.  736. 

Idolatry,  what  it  is,  i.  586. 

^Ignorance  born  in  the  country  of  Conceit — entered  not  by 
the  gate — His  hope — Shows  himself  a  fool — Method  of 
dealing  with,  iii.  146 — Comes  to  the  river — Ferried  over 
by  Vain-hope — Wants  a  certificate — His  end,  iii.  166. 

* ni-favourcd  ones  of  Christiana's  dream,  iii.  173 — Assault 
her,  iii.  182 — Make  her  cautious,  iii.  188. 

*Ill-icill  pelts  Godly-man,  iii.  230. 

nipause,  his  stinking  breath  kills  Innoceney,  iii.  2C0. 

Image  of  God,  defaced  in  the  heart,  and  that  of  the  Devil 
set  up  in  its  place,  ii.  110 ;  iii.  263. 

*ImmanueVs  land  seen  from  Mount  Beautiful,  iii.  111. 

Immorality  produces  misery  here  and  hereafter,  iii.  756. 

Immortality  of  soul  and  body,  iii.  726. 

Impenitent,  their  awful  state,  i.  429. 

Impiety  living  in  Drunkard's-row,  at  Rascal-Ianc,  iii.  311. 

Imputed  righteousness,  justification  by,  or  no  way  to  heaven 
but  by  Jesus  Christ — A  clear,  quit,  free,  and  saved  condi- 
tion, in  the  approbation  of  God's  h<>ly  law,  i.  301 — As 
actions  flow  from  faith,  they  are  justified — Strictly  limited 
to  that  of  Christ — By  Christ's  obedience  to  the  law,  the 
saints  stand  spotless  in  God's  sight;  He  is  our  righteous- 
ness, i.  302 — Importance  of  the  doctrine — Men  are  justi- 
fied while  sinners  in  themselves,  i.  303,  314,  326 — By  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  i.  305 — All  our  works,  tainted  by 
sin,  justify  not,  i.  308 — Justification  requires  perfect 
righteousness — Illustrated  by  the  types,  i.  311 — Adam's 
fig-leaf  soon  fades — Abel's  sacrifice,  a  fruit  of,  i.  311  — 
Joshua,  accompanied  by  the  non-imputation  of  sin,  i.  312 
— Without  the  law— Essential,  i.  324,  514,  618;  ii.  308, 
317;  iii.  739,741 — Inherent  only  in  Christ,  i.  325 — Denied 
by  some,  i.  326 — Alone  to  be  relied  on,  ii.  229 — Is  unto 
justification,  ii.  248 — The  act  of  God,  ii.  219 — Before 


780 


THE   INDEX. 


sanctification,  ii.  251 — Typified  by  the  coats  of  skins,  ii. 
440— By  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  ii.  597. 

Incantation  for  drawing  out  the  devil,  very  strange,  iii.  605. 

Index  Expurgatorius,  or  prohibited  books  in  family,  ii.  556. 

^Indictment  of  the  pilgrims  at  Vanity  Fair,  iii.  129. 

Indwelling  sin,  the  Diabolonians  in  regenerate  Mansoul,  iii. 
321 — Operates  without  example,  iii.  596. 

Infallibility,  merely  human,  a  pretence,  ii.  76,  and  note — 
Of  the  apostles  the  power  of  the  keys,  iii.  417. 

Infants,  salvation  of  those  who  die,  ii.  710,  and  note. 

Informers,  the  miseries  of  two,  their  awful  death,  iii.  625. 

Iniquity  makes  men  bond-slaves,  seven  proofs — Especially 
hurtful  to  the  Christian,  ii.  512 — Feeds  him  with  gravel, 
gall,  wormwood,  and  the  wine  of  astonishment,  ii.  513 — 
Two  sorts,  inherent  and  apart — Departing  from,  what  it 
is,  ii.  515 — To  withdraw  the  affections — To  withdraw 
from  himself — Not  from  fear  of  punishment,  ii.  516 — A 
life's  work — Nine  helps,  ii.  517 — Four  criterions  of,  ii. 
518 — Four  urgent  arguments,  ii.  526 — Fourteen  helps  to 
depart  from,  ii.  543.     See  Sin. 

Instinct,  special,  led  the  animals  into  Noah's  ark,  ii.  467. 

Instructions  for  the  ignorant,  ii.  675. 

* Interpreter  and  his  house,  iii.  98,  184 — The  picture,  iii. 
98,  184 — Sweeping  the  dusty  parlour,  iii.  98 — Passion 
and  Patience,  iii.  99 — Fire  unquenchable,  iii.  100 — The 
valiant  man — Man  in  the  iron  cage,  iii.  100 — Dread- 
ful dream,  iii.  101 — The  significant  rooms — The  muck- 
rake, iii.  184 — The  spider,  iii.  185 — Hen  and  chickens 
— Butcher  and  Sheep  —  Flower-garden  —  Corn-field,  iii. 
186 — Robin  and  Spider — Wise  sayings — Rotten  tree,  iii. 
187 — Christiana  and  Mercy  relate  their  experience,  iii. 
188 — Bath  of  sanctification — Sealed,  iii.  189 — Clothed  in 
fine  linen,  iii.  190. 

Inventions  in  ivorship  cruel  to  the  saints,  ii.  447 — Muddies 
the  water  of  life,  iii.  555. 

Invitations  of  the  gospel  accepted  by  those  that  sought  them 
not,  i.  315. 

Israel:  who  are  the  Israel  of  God,  or  Jews  inwardly,  i.  587. 

J. 

Jacob's  ladder,  a  type  of  Christ,  ii.  10 — *Seen  by  pilgrims, 

iii.  204. 
James,  the  Epistle  of,  paraphrased  in  verse,  ii.  410. 

*  James,  Christiana's  son,  catechised,  iii.  199 — Sick  in  the 

Valley,  iii.  208— Married,  iii.  233. 
Jeffries,  Judge,  pourtrayed  by  Bunyan,  iii.  73. 
Jerusalem  sinner  saved,  i.  67 — Jerusalem  a  slaughter-shop 

for  saints,  i.  69 — Destroyed  by  Vespasian,  why,  iii.  562. 
Jesse,  Henry,  agrees  with  Bunyan  on  baptism,  ii.  616. 
Jews,  a  monument  to  the  truth  of  Christianity,  ii.  145. 
Job,  a  blessed  book  of  holy  sayings  of  the  ancients,  ii.  425. 
John  the  Baptist,  why  called  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 

iii.  417. 
Jonah's  prophecy  paraphrased  in  verse,  ii.  398. 
Joseph,  life  of,  from  Genesis  xxxvii.  to  1.,  paraphrased  in 

verse,  ii.  400 — His  triumph  over  adultery,  iii.  613. 

*  Joseph,  Christiana's  son,  married  to  Martha  Mnason,  iii. 

226. 

Joy  of  the  loicked,  five  things  to  keep  it  up,  ii.  71. 

Joyful  hearts  united  to  wet  eyes,  i.  33,  No.  207,  244 ;  i.  50, 
440. 

Judas  sold  his  soul  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  i.  698. 

Judgment  drawn  from  outward  appearances,  the  devil's  trap 
to  catch  souls,  iii.  675. 

Judgment-day:  Christ  the  Judge,  i.  21  ;  iii.  729 — Sinners, 
however  great,  without  excuse  at  that  day,  i.  85 — Evi- 
dence at  day  of  judgment,  God  himself,  i.  116 — Conscience 
and  thoughts,  i.  117 — Will  break  up  hidden  things,  i.  223 
— A  solemn  appeal,  i.  334 — Christ's  coming  the  saints' 
hope,  i.  428 — Eight  notices  of,  given  to  man,  i.  705 — 
Very  terrible,  i.  714 — How  his  coming  is  to  be  hastened, 
i.  730 — Judgment,  of  the  just,  ii.  97 — Burning  up  of  his 
wood,  hay,  stubble — Will  expose  superstitious  and  scrip- 
tureless  observances,  ii.  98 — Will  reckon  up  good  actions, 
ii.  100 — Persecutions  for  the  truth  will  be  rewarded,  ii. 
101 — Of  the  wicked — Seven  creature  instincts  will  bear 


witness  against  man,  ii.  108 — Books  opened:  as,  Book  of 
nature — Book  of  God's  remembrance,  ii.  112,  120 — Book 
of  the  law,  ii.  114 — Book  of  life,  what  it  means,  ii.  118; 
iii.  449,  713 — The  sinner's  pleas,  ii.  119 — Private  good 
rewarded  openly,  ii.  122 — Dust  shook  off  the  feet,  ii.  124 
— Sentence  and  punishment  of  the  wicked — '  Depart,'  an 
awfully-irresistible  word,  ii.  125 — Of  quick  and  dead,  ii. 

,  162,  596 — Signs  and  manner  of  his  coming,  ii.  163 — 
What  he  will  do,  ii.  164 — Solemn  admonitions,  ii.  168 — 
Final,  iii.  720. 

Judgments,  unless  sanctified,  harden,  i.  7. 

*Jury,  at  Faithful's  trial,  iii.  131. 

Justification  stands  with  imperfection,  i.  212 — Graces  that 
attend  it,  i.  213 — How  accomplished,  i.  221 — By  faith,  an 
encouragement  to  good  works,  i.  738 — A  mere  pretence, 
unless  evidenced  by  sanctification,  i.  750 — Precedes  sanc- 
tification, ii.  48 — Man's  righteousness  cannot  share  in  it, 
ii.  235 — Fowler's  feigned  design  of  Christianity  erroneous 
and  destructive,  in  forty  particulars,  as  to  justification, 
ii.  280 — Holiness  flows  from,  ii.  281 — Cannot  arise  from 
a  sound  complexion  of  soul,  or  purity  of  motive,  nor  is  it 
an  original  dictate  of  nature — Nature,  impure  and  unholy, 
ii.  282 — Purity,  or  holiness,  only  exists  in  man  as  planted 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  ii.  284 — The  Jesuit,  the  clergyman, 
and  the  Quaker,  agree  erroneously  that  good  works  precede 
justification,  ii.  332 — Of  person  first,  and  their  offering,  ii. 
443— Before  men,  ii.  507— Not  by  works,  iii.  95,  96,  154 
—By  faith  alone,  iii.  190,  199. 

Justified,  the,  need  an  interpreter,  i.  212. 

Justifying  righteousness  solely  of  God,  ii.  254,  597 — The 
first  of  all  blessings — By  suretiship  before  Christ  came, 
ii.  255 — Founded  on  Christ,  the  Rock  of  ages — While  we 
were  sinners  Christ  died  for  us,  ii.  256 — A  man  may  be 
in  legal  possession  of  an  estate,  and  not  know  it  till  the 
rent-day,  ii.  257. 

K. 

Keeling,  Justice,  i.  54. 

*Key  of  promise  fits  every  lock  in  Doubting  Castle,  iii.  142. 

Keys,  Christ  has  the,  of  death  and  hell,  i.  417. 

Kiffrn  opposes  Bunyan  on  communion,  ii.  617. 

*  Kingdom  of  heaven  taken  by  violence,  iii.  100,  107,  184. 

* Knowledge  without  practice  useless — *A  shepherd,  iii.  124. 


Labour,  our  duty  while  we  are  above  ground,  ii.  440. 

Lamentations  over  perishing  sinners,  iii.  379. 

Landlord  raising  rent  of  a  tenant  because  be  went  to  hear 
the  gospel,  iii.  699. 

Latitudinarian,  shut  out  of  heaven,  i.  389 — Like  a  weather- 
cock, ii.  322. 

Lark  and  the  Foicler,  a  poem,  iii.  749. 

Law  and  grace  unfolded.     See  Covenant. 

Law,  the,  work  of;  how  the  soul  is  killed  and  made  alive  by, 
i.  543;  iii.  719— Must  be  obeyed,  not  quarrelled  with, 
i.  600— Christian  dead  to,  i.  612— A  rule ;  Christ's,  in  the 
heart,  Moral,  in  our  members,  ii.  29 — Ceremonial,  not 
moral,  leads  to  Christ,  ii.  190 — Additions  to  both,  sheer 
madness,  ii.  231 — Fulfilled  by  Christ  for  his  body,  the 
church,  ii.  247 — Death  to,  and  married  to  another,  ii.  290 
— Six  rules  to  show  that  Christians  are  released  from  the 
curse  of,  ii.  387. 

Law  terms — Premunire,  i.  542 — Indenture,  i.  543. 

Laws,  wicked,  to  be  disobeyed,  i.  482. 

Lazarus,  with  all  his  sores,  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
i.  341. 

Lean  sotds  desire  to  be  saved  from  hell,  ii.  15. 

Leaves,  Christ's,  are  better  than  Adam's  aprons,  iii.  457. 

Legal  spirit,  dangerous  and  destructive,  i.  557 ;  a  variety  of 
meanings  of  the  word,  i.  589. 

Legalist,  like  a  whipping  top,  iii.  758. 

^Legality,  a  quack,  iii.  94— Exposed  by  Evangelist,  iii.  95. 

Leviathan,  Job's,  illustrative  of  Satanic  power,  ii.  5. 

Leritical  law  of  clean  and  unclean  animals  spiritualised, 
iii.  123. 


THE   INDEX. 


731 


Liars,  heaven  no  place  for,  i.  475 — Nurses  to  the  devil's 
brats,  iii.  597. 

Lie  at  the  catch,  its  meaning,  iii.  639,  and  note. 

Light  for  them  that  sit  in  darkness,  i.  390 — Within,  by 
nature,  a  delusion  of  Satan,  ii.  133 — Its  nature  and  end, 
ii  151,  152,  186  —  Natural,  within,  not  the  spirit  of 
Christ,  ii.  195 — Of  nature,  of  the  law,  of  conscience,  dis- 
tinct from  the  light  of  Christ,  ii.  207 — Of  the  gospel  will 
increase  in  spite  of  men  and  devils — Of  truth  greater  now 
than  in  the  days  of  the  martyrs,  iii.  438 — Light  against 
light,  its  meaning,  iii.  521. 

Lindale,  Dr.,  taunts  Bunyan,  i.  52. 

Line  of  the  visible  church  to  Abraham,  ii.  499. 

Lions,  wicked  people  called,  i.  469. 

*  Little-Faith,  of  the  town  of  Sincere,  robbed,  iii.  147 — re- 

ferred to,  211,217,  232. 
TAttle  things,  if  commanded,  of  great  importance,  ii.  484. 
Livery  of  Christ,  to  be  kept  clean  and  white,  iii.  372. 
Locusts  of  Egypt,  a  type  of  our  graceless  clergy,  ii.  475. 
^Looking-glass,  a  wonderful  one,  iii.  231. 
Lord's  Supper.     See  Sacraments. 
Lording  it  over  the  brethren  is  like  Babel-builders,  ii.  498. 

*  Lot's  Wife,  a  monument,  iii.  137,  228. 

Love  of  Christ,  instances  of  the  wondrous,  ii.  17 — Not  one 
hundred  thousandth  part  of  it  can  be  discovered,  ii.  20 — 
Some  knowledge  of  it  attainable,  ii.  27 — A  short  poem, 
ii.  657. 

Love,  to  Christ,  good  fruits  of,  i.  99 — Unfeigned,  better  than 
offerings,  i.  6S9 — In  us  a  passion  that  ebbs  and  flows,  in 
Christ  essential  to  his  being,  ii.  16 — Of  God,  how  and 
when  discovered,  ii.  142 — The  constraining  influence  to 
good  works,  ii.  190 — Brotherly,  ii.  600— Love,  and  not 
baptism,  the  Christian's  livery,  ii.  638 — First,  a  happy 
state,  iii.  323.     See  Church-fellowship. 

^Love-gain,  a  town  in  the  north,  iii.  133. 

Love-no-light,  the  governor  of  midnight-hold,  iii.  265. 

*  Love-the-flesh,  Mrs.,  iii.  177. 

Loyalty,  a  Christian  duty,  ii.  74 — Becomes  the  Christian, 
ii.  709. 

*  Lucre-hill  and  silver-mine,  iii.  136,  228. 
Lustings,  Lord,  without  ears  or  eyes,  iii.  264. 
*Lute,  played  by  Mercy,  iii.  229. 

Luther  on  the  Galatians,  a  blessing  to  Bunyan,  i.  22. 
Lying,  beware  of,  before  God,  i.  717 — A  master  sin — Liars 
the  devil's  brats,  iii.  597 — Its  awful  punishment,  iii.  598. 
Lying  legends  and  false  miracles,  ii.  51. 

M. 

Ifagistracy  and  rulers  ministers  of  God,  ii.  601. 

JIaids  or  wives  should  not  be  like  parrots,  but  bridle  their 
tongues,  ii.  561. 

Man,  an  enemy  to  his  own  salvation,  i.  351 — By  nature  is  a 
fool  3S  to  spiritual  things,  i.  703 — A  false  believer — Cruel 
to  his  own  soul — A  rebel,  compared  to  a  headstrong  horse, 
i.  705 — A  captive  to  sin,  i.  706 — By  nature  wild,  i.  707 — 
A  lover  of  false  teachers,  i.  708 — Is  what  he  is  at  home, 
ii.  536 — Hung  for  a  jest,  ii.  709,  and  note — His  heart  is 
like  a  dusty  parlour,  iii.  98 — Its  deceitfulness,  iii.  157 — 
Heart  of  man  hard  and  callous,  iii.  286 — He  refuses  to 
hear  the  voice  of  mercy,  iii.  288. 

Mankind  consist  of  only  two  classes,  i.  228 — Most  of  them 
"greatly  mad,"  i.  229 — All  think  each  other  mad,  i.  230. 

Mansoul,  its  beauty  before  the  fall,  iii.  255 — Impregnable, 
iii.  256 — In  extreme  misery,  iii.  298 — In  as  extreme  a 
state  of  holy  enjoyment,  iii.  324. 

2IansouVs  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness,  iii.  327,  329. 

Map,  a,  showing  the  order  and  causes  of  salvation  and  dam- 
nation, on  a  separate  sheet,  iii.  336. 

Mark,  set  on  Cain  as  a  reprobate,  i.  26 — *On  Christian's 
forehead,  iii.  102,  189. 

^Marriage — Mercy  to  Matthew,  James  to  Phebe,  iii.  223 — 
Samuel  to  Grace  Mnason,  Joseph  to  Martha,  iii.  226. 

Marriage,  the  time  of,  has  its  peculiar  temptations,  i.  678 — 
A  mystery,  ii.  427 — The  unequal  yoke  a  deadly  thing, 
iii.  621 — The  scriptural  rule,  iii.  622 — A  miserable  one, 
iii.  654. 


Martha  and  Mary,  a  story,  i.  81. 

^Martyrdom  of  Faithful,  and  its  fruits,  iii.  132,  225— *Tho 
conversion  of  Hopeful  and  others,  iii.  153. 

Martyrs:  their  view  of  Christ,  i.  295— Despised  death  — 
scorning  cruel  torments,  which  Christ  could  not  do,  i.  411 
—  The  frying  of  their  flesh  a  blessing  to  OS,  i.  725 — *Anl 
apostles,  Christian  a  descendant  of  the,  iii.  218. 

*  Marvel,  a  Delectable  Mountain,  iii.  230. 

Mali  ly,  Dorothy,  of  Derbyshire,  her  awful  fate,  iii.  604. 

*  Matthew,  Christian's  son,  eats  forbidden  fruit,  iii.   182 — 

Is  ill,  iii.  201 — Loves  Mercy,  iii.  302  —  Blames    b 
iii.  220. 

*Maul,  the  giant  sophist,  slain,  iii.  210 — Bus  monument, 
iii.  211. 

Mi  diator  essential  to  salvation,  i.  317. 

Mercy,  a  powerful  supply  of,  i.  28 — God's  design  in  showing, 
i.  77 — Of  a  thawing  nature,  i.  78 — Great,  tender,  rich, 
and  in  multitude,  i.  594,  597 — God's  solace  and  delight, 
i.  600,  645 — Is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting— 1 1 
of,  proves  our  helplessness,  i.  601 — Breaks  the  heart,  i. 
615 — God's  resting-place,  i.  644 — Continued  supplies  of, 
essential,  i.  679 — Deeper  than  hell,  ii.  6 — Swallowing 
up  all  misery,  ii.  10 — Not  to  be  had  partly  by  law  and 
partly  by  grace,  but  only  by  Christ,  ii.  233,  234. 

*Mercy,  Miss,  persuaded  to  be  a  pilgrim,  iii.  176 — Received 
at  the  gate,  iii.  180 — Surprised  at  evil  in  the  way.  iii.  183 
— Welcomed  by  the  Interpreter,  iii.  184 — Her  experience, 
iii.  188 — Is  washed  by  sanctifieation,  iii.  189 — Mr.  Brisk 
addresses  her,  iii.  200 — Married  to  Matthew,  iii.  220 — 
Sees  the  by-way  to  hell — Longs  for  and  obtains  a  Bible, 
iii.  231. 

Mercy-seat,  near  the  law,  i.  647 — How  it  was  placed,  iii.  503. 

Merit-monger  despiseth  Christ's  blood,  i.  315. 

Messiah.     See  God — Christ. 

Military  terms  and  tactics,  iii.  306. 

Millennium,  brave  days,  ii.  53 — The  seventh  thousand  year?, 
ii.  456 — Its  happy  state,  iii.  426. 

Mind*,  the  clerk,  to  my  Lord  Will-be-will,  iii.  2C2. 

Ministers,  mode  of  calling  among  Dissenters,  i.  41 — Their 
griefs  and  joys,  i.  43,  44 — If  gifted  but  lifeless,  they  are 
like  a  cymbal  or  fiddle,  i.  44 — Austerity  or  carnal  gran- 
deur unbecoming — Ought  not  to  walk  as  if  they  would 
not  trust  the  poor  with  a  pair  of  tongs,  i.  98 — Take  heed 
who  they  are,  and  what  they  teach — Choose  for  yourself, 
i.  143 — Pastoral  visits  of,  i.  701 — The  ministry  a  solemn 
work,  i.  722 — Authority  from  Christ,  and  not  from  men 
— To  be  faithful  in  the  face  of  murder  and  outrage — 
Cowardly  ministers  punished,  i.  723 — Their  love  to  their 
flocks,  ii.  12 — Affecting  uncouth  expressions  for  applause, 
ii.  22 — Made  by  Christ,  ii.  22 — Reward  of  spangling 
glory,  and  motives,  ii.  201 — His  important  duties,  ii.  556 
— Portrait  of  a  faithful  evangelist,  iii.  98 — Important  ser- 
vices, iii.  197 — Sometimes  only  servants,  not  sons  to  in- 
herit, iii.  449,  406 — Not  to  make  their  work  a  stalking- 
horse  to  greatness,  iii.  472 — Greedy  dogs — Who  covet  no 
man's  silver  or  gold — Like  lilies,  send  forth  scent  as  Le- 
banon, iii.  473 — Covetous  ones  base,  like  Lot's  wife,  iii. 
475 — Their  power  to  admit  to  church-fellow. -hip,  iii.  476 
— Compared  to  musicians,  iii.  761. 

*  Miraculous  roll  of  cloth,  iii.  231. 

*  Mistrust  and  Timorous  run  back  for  fear  of  persecution,  iii. 

105 — *Their  punishment,  iii.  195. 

*  Mnason  of  Cyprus  entertaining  the  pilgrims,  iii.  225. 

*  Mnason,  Grace,  iii.  225 — Marries  Samuel,  iii.  226. 
Modesty  and  bashful  expressions  become  the  godly,  ii.  442. 
Mongrel  professors,  iii.  623. 

*  Morality,  the  village  of  Mr.  Legality,  iii.  94. 

Morals,  public,  greatly  improved,  since  Banyan's  time,  iii. 
712. 

Mortifying  our  members,  a  Christian  duty,  i.  369. 

Moses  and  his  black  wife,  an  emblem,  iii.  757. 

Motives  to  seek  heaven,  i.  333. 

Mouth-gate,  landed  up  with  dirt  by  Diabolus,  iii.  310. 

*MvcJirafraid,  Miss,  iii.  229,  242. 

*Muck-rake,  a,  preferred  to  a  golden  crown,  iii.  184. 

Mysteries  of  salvation  by  Christ,  i.  303 — To  be  learned  gradu- 
ally as  men  study  letters,  words,  and  meanings,  i.  071. 


782 


THE   INDEX. 


Mystery  of  the  law  magnifying  the  gospel,  and  the  gospel 
establishing  the  law,  i.  496. 

H. 

yfames  significant  of  characters  or  qualities  in  the  allego- 
rical works — "Names  of  old  were  given  according  to  the 
nature  and  destiny  of  the  persons  concerned,"  ii.  495 — 
Captain  Absalom,  iii.  362— Lord  Adultery,  322— Mr. 
Affection,  265 — All-base  Lane,  311 — Lord  Anger,  alias 
Good-zeal,  322 — *Mr.  Any-thing  related  to  By-ends,  132 
— *Apostacy,  the  town  of  Turn-away,  146,  232 — *Mr. 
Arrogancy,  119— *Assault  Lane,  222 — Alderman  Athe- 
ism, 309— *Mr.  Atheist,  152— Mr.  Babylon,  447— Mr. 
Backward-to-all-but-naught,  295 — Mr.  Badman's  life  and 
adventures,  586— Bad  Street,  367— *Mrs.  Bat's-eyes,  177 
—Mr.  Beastly,  311— Mr.  Belief,  310— Mr.  Benumming, 
282— Mr.  Blackmouth,  263  — Blackmouth  Lane— Blas- 
phemous Eow,  310  —  Lord  Blasphemy,  330 —  Captain 
Blindfold,  295 — Mr.  Blindman,  131 — Blindmanshire,  364 
Blindzealshire,  364 — Captain  Boanerges,  a  rough-hewn 
man,  270 — Captain  Boasting,  292 — *Miss  Bountiful,  sister 
to  Mercy,  201 — Captain  Bragman,  292 — Captain  Brim- 
stone, 342— *Mr.  Brisk,  200— Lord  Brisk,  349— *Madam 
Bubble,  238— Ensign  Burning,  342— *By-ends  of  Fair- 
speech,  132,  224— *By-path  meadows,  138,  228— Captain 
Cain,  362— *Lord  Carnal-delight,  131— Mrs.  Carnal-lust, 
263 — *The  town  of  Carnal-policy,  93 — Mr.  Carnal-secu- 
rity, 324— Mr.  Carnal-sense,  369— *Caution,  144,  and 
Charity,  Delectable  mountains,  231 — Lord  Cavil,  349 — 
Captain  Charity,  285— *Miss  Charity,  108,  199— Mr. 
Cheating,  264 — Mr.  Cheer-up,  314: — ^Christian,  formerly 
called  Graceless,  106 — *Christiana,  his  wife,  177 — *Mr. 
Civility,  94— *The  hill  Clear,  145— Mr.  Clip-promise, 
369 — *The  country  of  Conceit,  146 — Mrs.  Conscience, 
240 — Sign  of  The  Conscience-seared-with-an-hot-iron,  312 
— Captain  Consumption  kills  Mr.  Badman,  655 — Mr. 
Contrite,  225 — Captain  Conviction,  274 — Ensign  Cor- 
ruption, 342 — *The  county  of  Coveting,  333 — Mr. 
Covetousness,  alias  Mr.  Good-husbandry,  314  —  Lord 
Covetousness,  alias  Prudent  thrifty,  a  horrible  villain, 
333 — Captain  Credence,  285 — *Crooked  Lane,  146 — 
Captain  Cruel,  345— *Mr.  Cruelty,  131 — Captain  Damna- 
tion, 342 — *Danger  and  Destruction,  two  by-roads,  104 — 
*Mr.  Dare-not-lie,  227  — Old  Mr.  Dark,  369  — Ensign 
Darkness,  342— *Dark-land,  233— *Dead-man's-lane,  147 
— Lord  Deceit,  322 — The  sign  of  The  Descent-into-the- 
pit,  312— Mr.  Desire,  300— *My  Lord  Desire-of-vain- 
glory,  130 — Mr.  Desires-awake,  300 — *Giant  Despair, 
139— *Despond,  the  Slough  of,  1,  16,  92,  178— *Mr, 
Despondency,  229 — *City  of  Destruction,  90 — Ensigr 
Destructive,  342 — Ensign  Devourer,  342 — Diabolonians 
317— Mr.  Didsee,  316— *The  hill  Difficulty,  104— *Mrs, 
Diffidence,  140 — Mr.  Diligence,  365 — *AIr.  Discontent, 
119,  224— *Miss  Discretion,  107— Mrs.  Do-right,  310— 
Mrs.  Doubt,  369 — *Doubting  Castle,  139— Doubters,  the 
armies  of,  341 — Drunkards'  Row,  311 — Mr.  Drunkenness, 
322— *Miss  Dull,  193 — Ear-gate,  292— Mr.  Emulation, 
322— -Mr.  Enmity,  131—  *Mr.  Envy,  130— County  of 
Envy,  364: — Captain  Esau,  362 — Mr.  Evil-concupiscence, 
311 — Lord  Evil-eye,  322  —  Mr.  Evil-questioning,  alias 
Honest-inquiring,  365 — Captain  Execution,  270 — *Mr. 
Experience,  144 — Ensign  Expectation,  285 — Eye-gate, 
256— Lady  Fear-nothing,  324—  *Lord  Fornication,  322 
*Mr.  Facing-both-ways,  132—  *Mr.  Faintheart,  a  footpad, 
147 — *Lord  Fair-speech,  132 — Lord  Lieutenant  Faith, 
355— *Mr.  Faithful,  111— Alderman  Falsepeaee,  309— 
*Mr.  Fearing,  212— *Mr.  Feeble-mind,  221— Feel-gate 
350— Mr.  Feeling,  292— *Lady  Feigning,  132— Mr.  Filth 
267—  *Mrs.  Filth,  177— Filth  Lane,  312— Mr.  Find-out, 
346— Mrs.  Flatter,  313— Mr.  Flesh,  369— Flesh  Street 
311— Flesh  Lane,  312— Folly-yard,  314— Mr.  Fooling 
353— *Forgetful-green,  207— Mr.  Forget-good,  265— 
*Mr.  Formalist,  alias  Formality,  103 — Mr.  Fury,  264— 
*Mr.  Gaius,  218 — Mr.  Get-i'-th'-hundred-and-lose-i'-th' 
shire,  356 — Ensign  Gnaw,  342 — Rev.  Mr.  Godly-fear 
329— *Mr.  Godly-man,  230— Mr.  God's-peace,  324— *City 


of  Good-confidence,  147 — Mr.  Good-deed,  300 — Captain 
Good-hope,  292— *Mr.  Good-will,  96— Mr.  Good-work, 
310— Mr.  Good-zeal,  333— *Mr.  Graceless,  160— *Town 
of  Graceless,  160— Mount  Gracious,  286— *Mr.  Great- 
grace,  147 — Mrs.  Griggish,  346 — *Giant  Grim,  or  Bloody 
Man,  195— Mr.Gripe-all,  346— *Mr.Gripeman,  133— *Mr. 
Greatheart,  190— *Mr.  Guilt,  a  footpad,  147— Alderman 
Hardheart,  309 — Ensign  Harmless,  285— Mr.  Hate-bad, 
310—  *Lord  Hate-good,  129— Mr.  Hate-lies,  310  — 
*  Hate-light,  131— Mr.  Hate-reproof,  263— Mr.  Burgess 
Haughty,  309— *Sir  Having-greedy,  130— Mr.  Heady, 
131— Mount  Hearken,  286— Mount  Hear-well,  284— Mr. 
Heavenly  mind,  310 — *Mr.  Heedless,  237— Hell-gate-hill, 
316— *Mr.  Help,  92— Mr.  Heresy,  322— *Mr.  High-mind, 
131 — High-mind  and  Heady,  two  gems  made  by  Mr. 
Puff-up,  277— Mrs.  Hold-fast-bad,  346— *Mr.  Hold- 1  he- 
world,  133— *Mr.  Holy-man,  227— *Mr.  Honest,  211— 
*Mr.  Hopeful,  132  — Mr.  Human-wisdom,  277  — Mr. 
Humble,  310— *Miss  Humble-mind,  197— Mr.  Idolatry, 
322— *Mr.  Ignorance,  146— Mr.  Ill-pause,  260— *Mr.  Ill- 
will,  230— Mr.  Impiety,  311— The  Impregnable  Gate,  296 
— *Mr.  Implacable,  131— Mr.  Impudent,  263— *Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Inconsiderate,  177, 233 — My  Lord  Mayor  Incredulity, 
309— Lord  Innocent,  258— Captain  Innocent,  285— *Miss 
Innocent,  184— *Mount  Innocent,  230 — Old  Mr.  Inquisi- 
tive, 303— Captain  Insatiable,  342—  *The  Interpreter,  9S 
—Captain  Ishmael,  362 — Mr.  Jolly,  346 — Captain  Judas, 
362 — Captain  Judgment,  270 — Ensign  Justice,  270 — 
Mount  Justice,  286— Mr.  Know-all,  310— *Mr.  Know- 
ledge, 144 — *Mrs.  Know-nothing,  176 — Lord  Lascivious- 
ness,  alias  Harmless-mirth,  33:] — *01d  Lord  Lechery,  130 
— *Mr.  Lechery,  177—  *Dr.  Legality,  94— Mr.  Legal-life 
369— Mr.  Let-good-slip,  369  — *Mr.  Liar,  131—  *Mrs. 
Light-mind,  177  —  *Mr.  Linger-after-lust,  193  —  *Mr. 
Little-faith  of  Sincere,  147 — Mr.  Live-by-feeling,  369 — 
*Mr.  Live-loose,  131— Mr.  Lose-foot,  348— Province  of 
Loath-good,  362 — Mr.  Loth-to-stoop,  290 — Mr.  Love- 
naught,  312 — *Mr.  Love-saint,  225 — *Town  of  Lovegain, 
133— Mrs.  Love -flesh,  265— Mr.  Love-God,  310— *Mr. 
Love-lust,  131 — Mr.  Love-no-light,  265 — Mr.  Love-to- 
Mansoul,  284— *Lucre  Hill,  136— *Miss  Lust-of-the-eyes, 
118 — *Miss  Lust-of-the- flesh,  118— Lord  Mayor  Lustings, 
264— *Lord  Luxurious,  130— *Mr.  Malice,  131—  The 
town  of  Malice,  364— Mr.  Man's-invention,  277— *Mouut 
Marvel,  230— *Giant  Maul,  210— Mr.  Meditation,  369— 
Cornet  Memory,  318 — *Mis3  Mercy,  176— Midnight- 
hold,  265— Mr.  Mind,  262— Mr.  Mischief,  330— *Mr. 
Mistrust,  the  footpad,  147— Mr.  Moderate,  310— *Town 
of  Morality,  94 — *Mr.  Money-Love,  133— Mouth-gate, 
25G— *Miss  Much-afraid,  229— Captain  Much-hurt,  347— 
Lord  Murder,  322 — Lord  Murmur,  349 — Nauseous  Street, 
312— Mr.  Never-be-good,  310— Captain  Nimrod,  362 — 
Captain  No-ease,  342— *Mr.  No-good,  131— *Mr.  No- 
heart,  193— Nose-gate,  256— Ensign  No-life,  342— Mr. 
No-love,  369— No-sin  Banks,  286— Mr.  No-truth,  309— 
*Mr.  Not-right,  222— *Mr.  Obstinate,  90— *Lord  Old- 
man,  130— Mrs.  Ostentation,  356— *Giant  Pagan,  116 
— Captain  Past  hope,  342  —  Captain  Patience,  285  — 
*Peace,  a  bed-room,  109  —  *Mr.  Penitent,  227  — Mr. 
Penny-wise-pound-foolish,  356 — *Miss  Piety,  199 — *Mr. 
Pick-thank,  130— Ensign  Pitiful,  285— Mr.  Pitiless,  309— 
Plain-truth-hill,  286— *Mr.  Pliable,  91— *Giant  Pope,  1 16 
—Captain  Pope,  362— Lord  Pragmatic,  349— *Mr.  Prag- 
matic, 233— Mr.  Pragmatical,  356— ^Prating  Eow,  121 — 
Mr.  Present-good,  356— Old  Mr.  Prejudice,  276— Mr. 
Pride,  alias  Mr.  Neat,  alias  Mr.  Handsome,  314 — *Mr. 
Pride,  119— *Miss  Pride,  118— Mr.  Prodigality,  356— 
Mr.  Profane,  331 — Ensign  Promise,  285— Mrs.  Profuse, 
356— *The  key  called  Promise,  142— *Miss  Prudence, 
108  — Mr.  Prudent-thrifty,  333— Mr.  Pry  well,  339  — 
Captain  Page,  341— Mr.  Rake-all,  346— Rascals'  Lane, 
311— Mr.  Rash-head,  282— *Mr.  Ready-to-halt,  223— 
Mr.  Reason,  307 — My  Lord  Reason,  347 — Mr.  Repent- 
ance, father  to  Wet-eyes,  301— The  sign  of  The  Repro- 
bate, 312— Captain  Resistance,  259— Ensign  Restless,  342 
—Mr  Revelling,  322— Miss  Revenge,  263— *Mr.  Saga- 
city, 171— Captain  Saul,  362—  *Mr.  Save-all,  133— *Mr. 


THE   INDEX. 


7S3 


Save-self,  160— *Mr.  Saywell,  121— Mr.  Scorntruth,  2G3 
— Mr.  Searchtruth,  313— *Secret  (an  angel),  174 — Mr. 
Sedition,  322 — Mr.  See-truth,  310 — *Mr.  Self-conceit, 
119— Sign  of  The  Self-deceiver,  314— *Mr.  Self-will,  216 
—Captain  Self-denial,  303— Mr.  Self-love,  369— Captain 
gfepolehte,  342—  *Mr.  Shame,  119— Mr.  Shameless,  312— 
*Mr.  Short-wind,  193— *Mr.  Simple,  103—  *Mr.  Sincere, 
144— "The  town  of  Sincere,  147— *Dr.  Skill,  201— Lieu- 
tenant Skilful,  318— Mr.  Slavish-fear,  369— *  Giant  Slay- 
good,  221— *Mr.  Sleepy-head,  193— Mr.  Slight-God,  263 
— *Mr.  Sloth,  103— *Mr.  Slow-pace,  193— *Mr.  Smooth- 
man,  132 — Mrs.  Soothup,  313 — Ensign  Sorrows,  270— 
Mr.  Speedy,  258— *Mr.  Stand-fast,  238— Mr.  Stand-to- 
lies,  264— Mr.  Strife,  322— *The  town  of  Stupidity,  212 
—Ensign  Suffer-long,  285— *  Mr.  Superstition,  130— Mr. 
Swearing,  264 — Sweet-sin-hold,  265 — Mr.  Sweet-world, 
356  —  *Mr.  Take-heed,  210— Mr.  Takeheed-what-you- 
hear,  272— *Mr.  Talkative  of  Prating  Row,  121— *Mr. 
Taste-that-which-is-good,  the  cook,  and  his  dishes:  A 
heave-shoulder,  a  wave-breast,  butter  and  honey,  219 
—Mr.  Tell-all,  346— *Mr.  Tell-true,  233— *Mr.  Tempo- 
rary, 160— Ensign  Terror,  270— Mr.  Thankful,  310— 
Mr.  Think-well,  369— Ensign  Thunder,  270  —  *Lord 
Timeserver,  132 — *Mr.  Timorous,  105— *Mrs.  Timorous, 
175— *Mr.  Too-bold,  237— Captain  Torment,  342— Mr. 
Tradition,  277— Captain  Treacherous,  295— Mr  True- 
heart,  310  —  Mr.  Trueman,  the  jailor,  309  —  *Lord 
Turn-about,  132— *Mr.  Turn-away,  146— *The  Eev.  Mr. 
Two-tongues,  132  — Mr.  Unbelief,  369  —  *The  town  of 
Uncertain,  222 — The  Lord  Mayor  Understanding,  260 — 
Mr.  Upright,  310  — *Mr.  Vain-confidence,  139— *The 
town  of  Vain-glory,  103— *Mr.  Vain-hope,  166— *Mr. 
Valiant-fortruth,  233— Mr.  Variance,  322— Mr.  Vile- 
affection,  263— Vile  Hill,  339— Villains'  Lane,  310— 
Mr.  Voluptuous,  356— Mr.  Vouch-truth,  313— Mr.  Wait- 
ing, 317— *Mrs.  Wanton,  118— Want-wit  Alley,  369— 
*Mr.  Watchful,  106,  144— Mr.  Wet-eyes,  300  — Mr. 
Whoring,  264— My  Lord  Will-be-will,  262— Mr.  Witch- 
craft, 322— *Mr.  Worldly-glory,  119— *Mr.  Worldly- 
wiseman,  93— Mr.  Would-live,  298— Mr.  Wrath,  322 
—Mr.  Wrong  thoughts-of- Christ,  369— Mr.  Zealfor-God, 
315 — The  army  of  Diabolus  consisted  of  the  Election 
doubters  —  Vocation  doubters — Grace  doubters  —  Perse- 
verance doubters  —  Resurrection  doubters  —  Salvation 
doubters — and  Glory  doubters. 

Naming  the  name  of  Christ,  what  it  means,  ii.  513. 

Nantes,  repeal  of  the  edict  of,  i.  146. 

Narrow  way  wide  enough  for  body  and  soul,  but  not  for  sin, 
i.  13. 

National  churches  will  fall  like  brats  of  Babel,  ii.  49S. 

Negative  holiness  not  righteousness,  ii.  223. 

Neglectors  of  Christ,  their  awful  state,  i.  332. 

New  birth.     See  Regeneration. 

New  Jerusalem.     See  Holy  City. 

Nicoclemus,  the  learned,  ignorant,  ii.  303. 

Nightingale  and  thorn,  i.  733. 

Noah,  God's  promi:>e  to  him  allegorized,  ii.  487. 

Noah's  ark  spiritualized,  ii.  464 — A  type  of  Christ,  ii.  464, 
465 — Flood,  typical,  ii.  466 — Animals  entered  the  ark 
by  special  instinct,  ii.  467 — Seven  precepts ;  those  who 
were  drowned  in  the  flood  now  in  prison,  i.  379 ;  ii. 
327,  and  note. 

Nonconformity  in  outward  ceremonies  no  bar  to  communion, 
ii.  611,  and  note. 

Nose-jewels,  how  worn  in  Persia,  iii.  613  ;  note. 

Notion  of  truth  is  the  shell,  the  power  is  the  kernel,  i.  239. 

Notionist — Notional  religion,  dangerous,  ii.  133. 
^Not-right  killed  with  a  thunder-bolt,  iii.  222. 

Nv  truth  sets  up  Diabolus  instead  of  Shaddai,  iii.  263. 
*JVtttt  for  pilgrims  (pious  riddles),  iii.  219. 


Oath,  i.  232— Of  the  covenant,  i.  526. 

Oil,  why  called  golden,  iii.  487. 

Olive-wood  very  durable  and  elegant,  iii.  499,  and  note. 

One  thing  is  needful,  or  serious  meditations  upon  the  Four 


Last    Tilings — heath,   judgment,   heaven,   and   hell, 

iii.  726. 
Ordinances  (of  the  gospel)  may  be  used  with  a  legal  spirit, 

i.  516 — How  discovered,  i.  517 — Honourable,  i.  517,  nuto 

—Of  God,  delightful,  i.  756— God's  love-letters,  i.  757. 
Original  sin.     Bee  's<". 
Orts — An  obsolete  word,  explained,  i.  699. 
Owen,  Dr.,  a  mighty  armour-bearer,  ii.  649. 

P. 

*  Pagan,  the  dead  giant,  iii.  116. 

* Palace,  guarded  by  armed  men,  an  emblem,  iii.  100,  107 — 
•Beautiful,  iii.  106,  196,214. 

Paper  blinkers,  ox  winkers,  ii.  82,  and  note. 

Parable  of  rich  man  and  Lazarus ;  two  states,  not  individuals, 
iii.  675. 

Parables,  full  of  important  realities,  iii.  674. 

Paradise,  as  the  world  began  so  it  will  end  with,  iii.  45  L 

Pardon  must  be  wrapped  up  in  a  promise,  i.  29 — God  may 
have  thy  pardon  in  his  bosom  while  he  is  breaking  thy  bones, 
i.  730— Regal,  to  a  traitor,  an  emblem  of  the  pardon  of 
sin,  ii.  252 — Produces  amendment  of  life,  ii.  266 — Did 
Christ's  death  put  man  in  a  capacity  for,  or  into  a  personal 
possession  of,  pardon?  The  former  proved  heresy,  the 
latter  truth,  ii.  295— And  forgiveness  by  Christ  alone,  ii. 
298 — Must  be  by  a  New  and  Living  Way,  ii.  299 — ;By 
word  and  deed,  iii.  190 — Fetters  broken  and  cast  into  the 
air  by,  iii.  303 — Joy  arising  from,  iii.  304. 

*  Passion  and  Patience,  an  emblem,  iii.  99. 
Passover,  first  eaten  iu  the  night,  i.  97. 
Pastor.     See  Church. 

Patience  of  Noah  exercised,  ii.  480. 

Paul,  a  chief  apostle,  i.  81 — Departure  and  crown  of,  i.  722 
— Defence  before  the  heathen  magistrate,  ii.  85. 

Paul's,  (Mr.  T.)  controversy  with  Bunyan,  ii.  616. 

Pawnbrokers,  their  character  in  Bunyan's  days,  iii.  G38. 

*Peace,  a  bed-chamber,  called,  iii.  109,  197. 

Peaceable  principles  and  true,  ii.  648. 

* Pearls,  in  an  oyster  or  toad — Apology,  iii.  86. 

Penance,  manner  of  doing,  iii.  341. 

Perfection,  Christian,  not  found  in  this  world,  ii.  525. 

Persecuted,  the  honoured  of  God,  ii.  701,  729— In  many 
cases  suddenly  murdered,  as  John  the  Baptist,  702,  730. 

Persecution,  for  preaching  the  truth,  i.  43, 47 — And  affliction 
for  our  good— Of  Bunyan  by  Church  of  England — Bttnyan 
sent  to  jail,  i.  47 — Supported  under,  even  though  threat- 
ened with  the  gallows,  i.  47,  49;  ii.  13,  and  note- 
Reasons  for  not  seeking,  nor  desiring  to  avoid,  i-  51— — 
Narrative  of  Bunyan's,  i.  56 — For  conscience'  sake,  i.  315 
— Its  effects  on  the  church,  i.  581 — Should  not  deter  us 
from  duty,  i.  723— Word  of  the  Lord  tried  by,  as  silver  in 
a  furnace  of  earth — Made  Stephen's  face  shine  like  an 
angel's—Followed  by  judgments — The  blood  of  Christ 
laid  Jerusalem  in  heaps,  i.  725— Readiness  of  the  Baints 
to  offer  themselves  up  in,  i.  725,  727 — What  it  is  to  be 
ready  to  be  offered  in—  Heartiness  of  enemies  to  resort  to, 
i.  726 — Human  laws  interfering  with  Divine  worship — By 
kings,  ii.  44 — Its  true  cause,  ii.  45 — Laws  and  statutes 
interfering  with  conscience  cannot  be  obeyed — Suggested 
by  Satan,  ii.  437— Its  bitterness,  a  tale  of  past  ages.  ii.  4  15; 
iii.  569 ;  note— Bitter  pills  needed,  although  they  make 
us  wince  and  shuck,  ii.  693 — Sufferer  under,  must  be 
watchful,  ii.  696—  .Sometimes  leaves  the  saint  nothing  but 
his  soul  to  care  for,  ii.  697— Desolating  effects  of,  ii.  O'JS, 
and  note— God  can  make  a  jail  more  beautiful  than  a 
palace,  ii.  700— Christians  suffer  by  consent,  and  for  a 
good  cause,  ii.  711— Of  the  church  for  not  conforming  to 
sumptuous  ceremonies  and  ornaments,  ii.  713— Minister, 
driven  by,  packs  up,  and  takes  his  religion  with  him,  ii. 
715— Flying  from,  warrantable,  ii.  726 — A  Bore  tempta- 
tion, ii.  733— C<  mforts  al  the  goal  or  gibbet  known  only 
to  those  who  have  been  there,  ii.  735— Purgeth  the  church 
from  hypocrites,  ii.  737 — Christians  sewn  in  hear.-"  skins, 
and  torn  t<  '."■  738— *fii  Vanity  Fair,  iii. 

128— *Bya  Monster,  iii.  227— Sometimes  saves  the.  per- 
secuted, iii.  514— For  God's  glory,  although  the  boar,  the 


7S4 


THE   INDEX. 


man  of  sin,  and  the  dragon,  revel  in  the  church,  iii.  521 — 
Contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  true  church,  iii.  528  ;  note 
— Why  the  world  persecutes  the  church,  iii.  529 — Its 
various  appearances,  iii.  712. 

Persecutors — Grim,  the  Giant,  i.  581;  *iii.  195 — Laws  and 
statutes  interfering  with  conscience  called  persecutors' 
teeth,  i.  581 — Are  the  devil's  scarecrows,  i.  G02 — Called 
heasts  of  prey,  i.  726 ;  ii.  422 — As  ready  to  kill  a  saint  as 
a  sheep,  i.  726 — Giants  and  high  walls  to  terrify  the 
saints,  ii.  8— Cain,  a  type  of,  ii.  444,  445 — Blood  shed  by, 
a  strong  cry,  never  ceasing,  ii.  447 — Their  awful  end,  ii. 
451,  739,  and  note— Satan's  tools  to  destroy  the  soul,  ii. 
695 — Objects  of  prayer  and  compassion — God  will  have  a 
full  blow  at,  ii.  739— *  Lions  in  the  way,  iii.  105,  106,  108, 
195,  214 — Or  Bloodmen,  come  against  Mansoul,  iii.  361 — 
Under  eight  captains,  Cain  to  Pope ;  their  standards,  &c, 
iii.  362 — The  Bloodmen  send  a  summons,  hot  as  a  red-hot 
iron,  to  Mansoul,  iii.  363. 

Perseverance,  essential  and  secured,  ii.  339 — A  wonderful 
thing  to  overcome  devils,  hell,  the  world,  and  ourselves, 
i.  340. 

Personal  investigation  essential  to  salvation,  i.  154. 

Persons  accepted  before  offerings,  ii.  296. 

Peter:  His  horrible  revolt  pardoned,  i.  97 — Twice  deceived 
as  to  good  works,  ii.  553 — *Beset  by  Mistrust  and  Co., 
afraid  of  a  sorry  girl,  iii.  149 — Swaggered,  but  foiled, 
iii.  150. 

Pharisee  and  Publican,  picked  men,  their  characters,  ii.  217 — 
Both  meet  in  church,  ii.  218. 

Pharisee,  like  the  dragon,  an  accuser,  ii.  239 — I  am  no  such 
needy  man,  keenly  illustrated,  ii.  240. 

Pharisee's  definition  of  righteousness,  ii.  222 — Righteousness 
all  sinful,  ii.  241. 

Pharisees,  notable  in  forms  and  length  of  prayer,  i.  629 — 
Hearts  of,  in  a  fool's  paradise,  ii.  237,  244 — Ignorant  and 
vain-glorious,  ii.  244. 

*  Physic  to  make  a  pilgrim  live  for  ever,  iii.  202. 
Pictures  of  the  Virgin,  iii.  523,  see  note. 

*  Pilgrim  beggars  made  princes,  iii.  109. 

Pilgrim's  Progress  written  in  prison — Proofs  adduced,  iii.  5 
— Bibliographical  account  of  the  early  editions,  iii.  55 — 
Singular  typographical  errors  in  printing,  iii.  59 — Trans- 
lations into  all  languages,  iii.  60 — Imitations  and  poetic 
versions,  iii.  62 — Opinions  of  great  and  learned  men  on 
the,  iii.  66 — Synopsis  of  the  allegory,  iii.  77. 

Pilgrim's  Progress :  Bunyan  the  sole  and  unassisted  author  of 
the,  iii.  29 — Works  analysed  to  prove  it;  viz.,  The  Pilgrim, 
an  ancient  MS.,  iii.  31 ;  Abbey  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  32  ;  The 
Pylgramage  of  the  Soule,  33  ;  the  Book  of  the  Pylgram- 
age  of  Man,  35 ;  Informatyon  for  Pylgrymes ;  Historie 
of  Graunde  Amoure,  36 ;  Libro  del  Peregrino,  38 ;  The 
Pryke  of  Conscience ;  The  Myrrour  of  Lyfe, ;  Le  Chateau 
DArnour  ;  The  Ladder  of  Perfeccion,  39  ;  The  Pilgrimage 
of  Perfection ;  The  Tonne  of  the  Lyfe  of  Perfection,  40 ; 
Bellanda  Viaggio  Spirituale ;  The  Vision  of  Pierce  Plow- 
man ;  Chaucer's  Pilgrimage;  Erasmus'  Religious  Pilgrim- 
age, 41 ;  Spencer's  Fairy  Queen  ;  The  Wandering  Knight, 
42;  Whitney's  Emblematic  Pilgrimages,  43;  The  Pil- 
grimage to  Paradise;  Benoist  Le  Chevalier  Chretien ;  The 
Pilgrimage  of  Princes ;  The  Plain  Man's  Pathway  to  Hea- 
ven, 44 ;  Raleigh's  Pilgrimage,  a  poem,  45;  Plain  Man's 
Pilgrimage ;  The  Pilgrim,  a  play,  46 ;  The  Pilgrims  Prac- 
tice ;  The  Pilgrim's  Profession ;  The  Pilgrim  of  Casteele ; 
The  Pilgrim  of  Loretto,  47  ;  Lucian's  Hermotemus,  48  ; 
Bernard's  Isle  of  Man,  49 ;  Scudder's  Christian's  Daily 
Walk  ;  Bolswert's  Pilgrimage  of  Duyf kens  and  Willemyn- 
kens,  50  ;  Wholesome  repast  for  the  soule  in  her  pilgrim- 
age ;  Soul's  Progress  to  the  Celestial  Canaan ;  Inventory 
of  the  Goods  of  Superstition ;  The  last  will  of  S.  J.  Pres- 
byter ;  Spiritual  duel  between  a  Christian  and  Satan ;  Pil- 
grim in  his  Conflicts ;  Quarle's  Pilgrim  in  his  Emblems,  51 ; 
Tilcnus,  or  examination  of  the  Triers ;  Herbert's  (Geo.) 
Pilgrimage,  a  poem ;  Pilgrim's  Dialogue  between  Life  and 
Death,  52  ;  Spiritual  Journey,  from  the  Dutch;  Reading's 
Guide  to  the  Holy  City;  Pilgrim's  pass  to  the  New  Jeru- 
salem ;  Pordage's  Progress  of  a  Soul  from  Babylon ;  The 
Devout  Pilgrim  to  the  Virgin  ;  Philothea's  Pilgrimage  to 


Perfection ;  Pilgrim's  Progress  by  Candle-light,  53 ;  Pa- 
trick's Parable  of  the  Pilgrim,  54.  In  the  analysis  of  the 
earlier  of  these  singular  and  rare  books,  will  be  found  an 
accurate  picture  of  Popery,  painted  by  herself. — Bunyan 's 
Pilgrim's  Progress  written  in  the  den  or  cell  of  his  jail, 
like  the  dismal  den  which  he  describes  in  Doubting  Castle, 
iii.  89,  142. 

* Pilgrimage,  objections  against,  iii.  93,  175,  234 — *Two 
'  requisites  for  pilgrims,  iii.  226. 

* Pillar  to  Lot's  wife,  iii.  137,  228— *To  warn  from  Doubt- 
ing Castle,  iii.  143 — *To  the  fight  with  Apollyon,  iii.  206, 
208— *To  the  death  of  Maul,  the  sophist,  iii.  211— *On 
the  death  of  Giant  Despair,  iii.  229. 

Plain-dealing  not  offensive  to  sincere  inquirers,  i.  719 — And 
faithfulness,  ii.  269. 

*  Pliable,  iii.  91— Returns  to  Destruction,  iii.  92,  93,  117. 
Poems,  Scriptural— The  Book  of  Ruth,  ii.  390. 

Poetical  Treatises  and  verses  by  Bunyan,  interspersed  in  his 
works,  excepting  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  i.  63-66,  126; 
ii.  84,  215,  292,  390-412,  575,  576,  578-590,  657  ;  iii. 
253,  374,  399,  588,  589,  726-737,  737-745,  747-762 ; 
and  on  the  copper-plate  map  of  the  Order  and  Causes  of 
Salvation  and  Damnation,  iii.  336. 

*  Poetry  interspersed  in  the  Pilqrim's  Progress: — Part  I.,  un- 

der the  fifteen  cuts,  and  iii.  85-87,  96,  100, 102, 103,  104, 
110,  114,  116,  120,  125,  132,  137,  138,  143,  145,  146, 
150,  151,  153,  159, 167  ;  Part  II.,  preface,  under  two  cuts, 
178,  181,  188,  190,  193,  195,  204,  205,  206,  208,  211, 
215,  219,  220,  223,  229,  230,  232,  235,  239. 

Points  and  Pantables  explained,  ii.  235,  note. 

Polygamy  first  practised  by  the  seed  of  Cain,  ii.  452. 

Pomponius  Algerius,  his  remarkable  experience,  iii.  530. 

Pope,  that  cursed  monster,  ii.  426 — *A  giant,  crazy  and  stiff, 
iii.  116. 

Popery,  the  mother  of  harlots,  iii.  399. 

Popish  penances,  i.  448. 

Portrait  of  a  dishonest  dealer,  iii.  636 — Of  an  extortioner, 
especially  women,  iii.  637. 

Positive  precepts  of  great  importance,  ii.  293. 

*Prating-row,  the  residence  of  Talkative,  iii.  121. 

Prayer — Devil  may  tempt  a  man  to  pray,  i.  23 — For  others, 
i.  28 — Devil  more  usually  tempts  a  man  not  to  pray,  i.  28 
— Importunate,  its  reward,  i.  38,  638  ;  iii.  758 — Boldness 
at  the  throne  of  grace,  i.  360,  642 — Must  be  for  what  God 
has  promised,  i.  426 — Only  in  Christ's  name,  i.  426,  617, 
625,  and  note — Prevails,  as  the  Holy  Spirit  indites,  i.  426, 
627 ;  iii.  351— Mental  and  verbal,  i.  577,  623— Private 
wrestlings,  i.  588 — Boldness  of  access  in,  i.  589 — Real, 
may  be  without  words,  i.  605 — It  urges  on  the  pilgrim, 
i.  614 — An  ordinance  of  God,  to  bring  the  soul  into  holy 
familiarity  with  Him — Opens  the  heart  to  God — Seven 
things  essential  to  —  Must  be  sincere  —  In  the  Spirit, 
i.  623,  626,  627— What  is  spiritually  enlightened,  i.  623, 
632  ;  ii.  225— Must  not  be  by  fits  and  starts— Not  frothy 
and  babbling,  but  sensible,  feeling,  and  affectionate — Lip- 
labour,  not  prayer,  i.  624 — Must  be  the  pouring  out  of  the 
heart— Right  prayer  sees  God  only — Christ  the  only  way 
of  access  to  God  in,  i.  625 — Christ's  union  to  the  soul  in 
— Must  be  guided  by  the  Word — For  the  good  of  the 
Church,  i.  626 — With  humble  submission  to  God's  will — 
Aided  by  the  Spirit,  i.  627 — The  starting  holes  and  back 
lanes  the  heart  hath  in,  i.  630 — Sometimes  cannot  after- 
wards be  expressed — More  groans  than  words — As  Moses, 
when  flying  from  Pharaoh — Must  be  continued  till  we  get 
to  glory,  i.  631 — Public  prayer  must  be  in  our  mother 
tongue,  and  experimental — Praying  and  building  on  our 
faith  inseparable — Must  be  with  the  understanding,  i.  632 
—Forced  by  the  anguish  of  the  soul — Difference  between 
saying  prayers  and  praying,  illustrated  by  the  case  of  two 
beggars — Needs  not  a  bishop  in  a  surplice  to  say,  '  O  Lord, 
I  beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul' — Such  need  no  book,  i. 
633 — Perseverance  in,  as  woman  of  Canaan — Often  uttered 
when  unknown  to  ourselves,  i.  634 — Be  not  content  with 
mere  words  in,  i.  635 — The  great  object  of  prayer  is  for  the 
spirit  of  prayer — All  ought  to  engage  in — Right  prayer  and 
labour  for  the  object  go  together — Five  instructions  to 
— Many  prayers  are  a  mockery  to  God — Sacrifice  of  fools, 


THE  INDEX. 


78! 


L  636 — Long,  for  applause  of  men — By  forms  are  like  a 
painted  man — Sensible  of  a  sense  of  senselessness,  calls  for, 
i.  G37 — Cautions  not  to  throw  off — Encouragements  to, 
i.  638 — Sad  state  of  those  who  never  pray,  i.  639 — Advice 
to  all  that  really  pray,  i.  640— Fall  of  Christians  for  want 
of,  i.  645 — Praying  souls  live  near  the  throne  of  grace, 
5.  647 — Pray,  and  look  up  above  the  ark  to  the  throne, 
i.  648 — Man  mute  as  a  fish  till  God's  thunders  reach  him, 
i.  656 — Hunger  drives  men  to  the  cupboard,  i.  662 — Cries 
for  Christ's  coming  to  destroy  Antichrist,  ii.  81 — The 
Christian  ought  to  pray  always — Encouraged  by  parables, 
ii.  217 — Praise,  the  highest  order  of,  ii.  224— God  heareth 
the  heart  without  the  mouth,  but  not  the  mouth  without 
the  heart — The  Pharisee  prayed  with  himself,  not  with 
God,  ii.  226 — Of  the  Publican  expounded — Humble  not 
one  of  God's  white  boys,  ii.  258 — His  confession,  ii.  259 
— His  birth-privileges  fly  like  chaff — Men  often  tick  and 
toy  with  this  prayer,  ii.  260 — The  Publican's  the  highest 
wisdom — Difficult  under  convictions  of  sin,  ii.  261  —  Many 
pray  who  know  not  God,  ii.  266 — Gesture  in,  of  vital 
importance,  ii.  268 — Must  not  go  too  far,  nor  fall  short, 
ii.  270 — Heart  and  mouth  must  go  together,  with  glory 
and  gravity,  humility  and  sincerity;  flouting  compliments 
and  flattery  must  be  laid  aside,  ii.  271 — A  praying  man 
outstrips  others  as  a  star  does  a  clod,  ii.  276  —  To  be 
made  standing,  kneeling,  walking,  lying,  or  sitting,  ii.  278 
— In  public  attended  with  peculiar  temptations,  ii.  665 — 
What  is  acceptable,  ii.  686  —  *  Persevering,  effectual, 
iii.  155 — The  first  sign  of  spiritual  life,  iii.  296 — The  hand 
and  pen,  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  ink  and  paper,  the  penitent 
— Copy  of  the  petition  of  wounded  Mansoul  to  Emmanuel, 
iii.  352 — Repeating  a  form  of,  or  what  is  called  saying 
prayers,  a  sad  delusion,  iii.  687 — Prayerful  spirit  full  of 
heaven,  iii.  740. 

Prayer,  Book  of  Common,  cannot  teach  us  to  pray,  i.  54,  55, 
627 — Supposed  by  a  J. P.  to  have  been  used  from  the  days 
of  the  apostles,  i.  56 — Not  to  be  touched,  i.  62 — Bunyan's 
sufferings  by,  and  opinion  of — Made  up  of  Popish  scraps 
and  friars'  devices,  i.  624 — Some  are  hot  for  forms,  but 
know  not  the  power  of  prayer,  i.  625 — Paul  and  the 
apostles  could  have  made  a  common  prayer  as  well  as  any 
pope  or  proud  prelate,  but  they  knew  not  how  to  pray 
saving  by  the  Spirit,  i.  627 — Absurdities  of  a  set  form, 
i.  6"2S,  640 — A  thousand  forms  would  not  teach  us  how  to 
pray — Prayers  for  particular  days,  and  minute  directions 
when  to  stand  or  kneel,  contrary  to  the  fear  of  God — Can- 
not open  the  eyes — Not  God's  ordinance — Patched  up,  and 
expressly  forbidden  by  God,  i.  628 — All  the  prayer-books 
in  the  world  cannot  lift  the  heart  to  God,  i.  631 — Stinted 
forms  the  invention  of  man,  i.  634 — Ties  up  the  Spirit  of 
God,  i.  635 — Resisting  the  Spirit  by  a  form  of  man's  in- 
venting— A  very  juggle  of  the  Devil— Awful  state  of 
those  who  persecute  Christians  for  not  using  it — Cursed 
presumption  to  impose  it — A  form  without  the  power — 
Common  prayer  lauded  in  the  alehouse — The  Spirit  of 
prayer  found  in  jail — Traditions  of  men  leading  to  pre- 
tended worship,  Antichristian,  i.  640. 

Prayer,  Forms  of—  Lord's  prayer,  not  a  stinted  form,  i.  625, 
and  note — Arguments  against,  i.  628 — Lord's  prayer  (so 
called),  i.  629 — Solemn  import  of  '  Our  Father  ' — Many 
say  '  thy  kingdom  come,'  who  would  shrink  from  sudden 
judgment,  i.  630 — The  Lord's  prayer  not  used  as  a  form 
by  the  apostles — Not  even  for  children — They  muzzle  up 
the  soul,  i.  635 — Difference  between  saying  prayers  and 
praying,  iii.  6S7 — Lord's  prayer  versified,  iii.  750. 

Prayer-meeting  for  the  choice  of  a  husband,  iii.  622. 

Prayer-meetings  of  women  only,  four  reasons  for,  answered, 
ii.  661. 

Preachers — Some  are  blundering  and  raw-headed,  i.  374 
— Faithful,  cried  out  against  by  the  world,  i.  493 — For 
filthy  lucre's  sake  damned,  iii.  699,  723. 

Preaching  for  hire,  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  ii.  201 — To 
the  spirits  in  prison,  the  meaning  of,  iii.  678. 

Prejudice,  an  angry,  ill-conditioned  fellow,  with  sixty  deaf 
men,  guard  Ear-gate,  iii.  276 — Kicked  and  tumbled  about 
in  the  dirt,  iii.  282 — Slain,  iii.  295. 

'^Prejudice  and  Ill-will  cast  dirt  upon  Godly-man,  iii.  230. 
VOL.  III. 


Presumption  to  hope  without  new  birth — Never  timid  nor 
humble— Satan's  laughing-stock,  but  hates  the  humble, 
i.  93  —  Door  of  mercy  bolted  against,  i.  91— Cautions 
against,  ii.  7— *  Asleep  on  the  road,  iii.  103— *IIanged, 
iii.  192,213. 

Pride— The  greatest  in  dead  men,  i.  704— An  iron  sinew, 
i.  705— Of  a  library,  or  a  closet,  ii.  537 — An  enormous 
evil,  ii.  567 — A  picture  of  it,  sticks  close  to  nature,  iii.  642 
— Reason  why  professors  give  way  to — Its  evil  effects, 
iii.  645. 

Priests  the  biggest  sinners,  yet  objects  of  mercy,  i.  73 — Their 
beastly  single  lives,  ii.  149. 

Principles  and  practice  must  be  in  unison — What  are  right 
ones,  i.  516 — Formed  by  the  Word,  to  be  solemnly  ad- 
hered to,  ii.  593. 

Prison,  with  the  Bible,  a  blessed  school,  i.  47 — Meditations 
to  the  heart  of  suffering  saints  and  reigning  sinners,  i.  67. 

Prisoners  for  conscience'  sake  highly  blessed,  i.  48. 

Private  judgment  essential  to  true  religion — To  neglect  it  is 
to  put  out  my  own  eyes,  and  commit  me  to  the  blind  to 
lead  me,  ii.  594. 

Privileges,  to  go  to  the  extreme  of,  dangerous — Standing  on 
the  brink,  ii.  429. 

Profane,  the,  person  is  a  muck -heap  of  sin,  i.  386. 

^Profession,  worthless  without  works,  iii.  186. 

Professors,  mere  holiday  saints — Many  such  will  seek  to 
enter  into  heaven,  but  will  not  be  able,  i.  372 — Some 
hang  their  religion  up  on  week-days,  to  put  on  on  Sun- 
days, i.  377 — Knowing  ones  miss  of  heaven,  why?  i.  384 
— Bunyan's  trumpet  put  to  the  ears  of — The  kingdom 
swarming  with  tattling,  covetous,  wanton,  formal,  legal, 
temporizing,  ignorant  professors,  all  found  wanting,  and 
full  of  amazement,  i.  388 — May  go  far,  and  yet  perish, 
i.  511 — May  be  members  of  churches,  possess  honour  and 
talent  as  ministers,  and  be  in  a  false  hope,  i.  512 — Sown  in 
the  church  by  the  Devil,  i.  619 — Some  are  running  on 
their  heads,  i.  656 — With  fancies  and  fooleries  catching, 
i.  678 — Causes  of  falling  away,  ii.  522 — Who  depart  not 
from  iniquity  are  a  pest,  the  breath  of  a  dragon,  slay  their 
children  and  themselves,  ii.  530 — Wicked  ones  peculiar 
objects  of  divine  wrath,  ii.  542 — Drown  others  in  perdi- 
tion, ii.  544 — A  scandal  to  religion,  how  to  be  dealt  with, 
iii.  122,  123,  133 — The  heavy-heeled,  lazy,  wanton,  and 
foolish  ones,  will  never  gain  heaven,  iii.  382  —  Those 
who  are  unprofitable,  a  mock  and  reproach  to  religion, 
iii.  573. 

^Promise,  a  key  to  unlock  all  doubts,  iii.  142. 

Promises  must  be  applied  by  divine  power,  i.  15 — Applied 
powerfully,  i.  30-33,  38 — Nature  of  absolute,  and  differ- 
ence of  conditional,  i.  25. 

Prosperity  and  hajijnness  require  double  watchfulness,  iii.  356 
— The  ways  of,  iii.  631. 

Proverbs,  the  book  of,  consists  of  hard,  dark,  and  pithy  sen- 
tences, i.  744. 

Providence,  how  to  be  understood,  ii.  11. 

* Prudence,  Miss,  iii.  108,  199. 

Psalms  of  degrees,  the  supposed  meaning  of,  i.  577. 

Public  worship,  the  Devil  suffers  his  children  to  attend  to 
the  outward  forms  of,  ii.  443 — Why  women  are  covered, 
and  men  uncovered,  during,  ii.  672,  673. 

Publican,  officers  that  served  the  Romans  and  themselves 
too — Like  informers  and  bumbailiffs,  ii.  219 — When  Jews 
they  were  the  scorn  of  the  Pharisees,  but  objects  of  pity  to 
the  Saviour,  ii.  220 — An  open  outside  sinner — The  Pha- 
risee a  filthy  inside  one — To  reject  the  Pharisee  and  to 
receive  the  publican  a  wonderment  to  all,  ii.  222. 

Punishments  for  sin  in  this  world  are  short,  in  hell  they  are 
everlasting,  ii.  678— Of  children,  iii.  597,  and  uoto. 


Q. 

Quakers,  see  Sectarian. 

Qualifications  for  heaven,  i.  377. 

*  Questions  and  answers  profitable  and  curious,  iii.  202 

Quickened  with  Christ,  its  meaning,  ii.  20. 

Quickening  of  the  soul,  i.  546. 


73G 


THE   INDEX. 


H. 


Rainbow,  its  spiritual  meaning,  i.  648,  649  ;  ii.  400. 
Ranters,  see  Sectarian. 

* 'Ready-to-halt,  Sir.,  iii.  223 — *His  happy  death,  iii.  241. 
Reason  insufficient  and  impure,  ii.  286. 
Redeemer  compared  to  the  sun,  iii.  754.  See  God — Christ. 
Redemption,  a  mysterious  act,  i.  303 — Places  us  in  a  bet- 
ter relation  than  Adam  before  the  fall,  i.  415 — By  Christ, 
ten  demonstrations  that  he  paid  the  price,  i.  416  —  Its 
plenteousness,  i.  604 — The  knowledge  of,  i.  611 — Com- 
pelleth  to  good  works,  i.  613 — A  great  encouragement  to 
prayer,  i.  614. 
Reflections  on  Christ  our  light,  i.  431. 
Reform  should  begin  at  home,  ii.  45. 
Reformation  mistaken  for  godliness,  i.  10. 
Regeneration,  or  the  new  birth,  what  it  is,  i.  10,  694,  605 ; 
ii.  712,  729 — Convictions  got  up  the  wrong  way,  harden, 
i.  16 — Its  pangs,  i.  26,  27 — Convictions  of  sin  essential, 
i.  494 — Not  to  be  slighted,  i.  495 — A  trying  work,  as  by 
fire,  i.  706— Of  the  self-righteous,  like  God  driving  a 
camel  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  i.  720 — No  easy  work, 
i.  725 — Devil  counterfeits  the  new  birth  and  the  work  of 
grace,  ii.  153 — Signs  and  evidences,  ii.  166 — Bunyan's 
last  sermon  on  John  i.  13,  ii.  755 — All  new-born  babes 
cry,  ii.  756 — Christ  received  the  new-born  in  a  golden 
garment  of  righteousness — All  have  the  features  of  heaven, 
ii.  757 — Take  of  their  father's  possessions — Obedience  re- 
quired, ii.  758 — *Rags  the  clothing  of  the  unconverted,  iii. 
89 — *  Exchanged  for  fine  raiment,  iii.  102, 190 — *Mark  or 
seal  on  Christian's  forehead,  iii.  102 — The  war-cry  against 
fallen  Mansoul,  iii.  276 — Alderman  Swearing,  Whoring, 
Fury,  Stand-to-lies,  Drunkenness,  and  Cheating,  slain  with 
one  shot,  iii.  278 — Mansoul  must  be  pulled  down  and  re- 
built, iii.  293 — Man  insensible  to  its  importance,  iii.  713 
— Its  necessity,  iii.  740— Illustrated  by  an  egg,  iii.  749. 
Relative  duties,  disobedience  to  parents  strikingly  described 
— Disorderly  servants,  a  house  iniquity  to  be  corrected,  ii. 
535 — Parents  bringing  up  children  for  hell,  ii.  536 — Spi- 
ritual and  temporal — As  Abraham  commanded  his  chil- 
dren,, ii.  555— lieading  the  Word  and  prayer — Masters  of 
families  have  some  pastoral  duties,  ii.  556 — Provide  for 
family — Husband  to  wife,  ii.  557 — To  children,  iL  558 — 
To  servants,  ii.  559 — Wife  to  husband,  ii.  560 — To  an 
unconverted  relative — Children  to  parents,  ii.  562— Ne- 
glect of,  awfully  punished,  as  Ishmael,  Hophni,  Phinehas, 
Absalom,  ii.  563— Servants  to  masters,  ii.  564 — Neigh- 
bours, ii.  565 — Sin  interfering  with ;  covetousness,  pride, 
uncleanness,  ii.  567,  568 — Punishment  of  children,  iii. 
597,  and  note — How  a  master  may  ruin  an  apprentice,  iii. 
606 — Advantage  of  godly  parents,  iii.  164 — Landlord, 
husband,  master,  iii.  699. 
* Reliever  protects  Christiana,  iii.  183. 

^Relics  at  the  Interpreter's;  Eve's  apple,  the  mount  on  which 

Abraham  was  to  have  offered  Isaac,  Jacob's  ladder,  iii.  204. 

Religious  observances,  without  change  of  heart,  rejected,  i.  7, 

No.  16  ;  iii.  289. 
Remission  of  sin:  Christ,  in  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  remits 

or  retains  sin,  iii.  414. 
Repentance,  not  mere  reformation,  i.  9 — Of  Cain  and  Judas 
saved  them  not,  i.  317 — Many  tests  of   true  and  false 
repentance,  i.  384 — In  man  a  change  of  mind,  but  in  God 
a  change  of  dispensations,  ii.  461— Followed  by  doing,  ii. 
573 — True,  arises  from  a  sight  and  sense  of  sin,  ii.  600; 
iii.  656 — Without  it  hope  and  life  die  together,  ii.  663 — 
*Folly  of  deferring,  iii.  217 — Of  sick-bed  only  temporary, 
iii.  580,  649,  650,  662— Denied,   and  the   soul   left   to 
despair,  iii.  582,  and  note. 
Reprobate,  or  cast  out,  i.  271  ;  ii.  201 ;  their  character  in  this 
world,  i.  347 — Will  be  stopped  at  the  gate  of  heaven,  i.  375. 
Reprobates,  Cain  and  Balaam,  ii.  449. 

Ei  probation  asserted,  and  its  opposers  answered,  ii.  336 — 
What  it  is,  ii.  337 — Its  antiquity,  ii.  338— Its  causes,  ii. 
3oJ— Unchangcableness,  ii.  341— Whether  it  is  the  cause 
of  condemnation,  ii.  342 — The  question  answered,  Have 
the  reprobate  cause  to  quarrel  with  God?  ii.  345 — Does  it 
hinder  any  one  from  seeking  salvatiou?  ii.  346 — Ought 


every  creature  to  be  preached  to?  ii.  348— Is  it  possible 
for  the  non-elect  to  receive  the  gospel?  ii.  349 — Why  it  is 
tendered  to  all,  ii.  352 — Placed  in  opposition  to  election, 
see  the  Map  of  Salvation,  iii.  336. 

Resistance,  Captain,  killed  by  Tisiphone,  one  of  the  Furies, 
iii.  259. 

Resurrection,  of  Christ,  sanctifies,  i.  324 — Those  who  rose 
at  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  ascended  with  him,  i.  418— Of 
the  body,  i.  596;  ii.  83 — Some  sleep  away  its  power,  ii.  14 
— First  of  the  just,  because  Christ  is  risen — The  members 
of  the  body — Faith  in  the,  promotes  good  works — Is  an 
undergirder  to  the  soul,  ii.  85 — Meaning  of  the,  ii.  86 — 
The  resurrection  of  the  body  proved  by  its  being  a  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  ii.  87 — Fully  proved  from  seven  par- 
ticulars, ii.  88 — The  manner  of,  ii.  91 — Flesh  and  blood 
shall  not  inherit  heaven,  ii.  93 — Body  sown  a  natural, 
raised  a  spiritual,  ii.  95 — Types  or  mementos  of,  ii.  96 — 
Wood,  hay,  and  stubble  will  be  burned  up,  ii.  98 — 
The  reward  of  the  just,  ii.  101 — Of  the  bodies  of  the 
wicked,  ii.  104 — Because  Christ  is  the  sovereign,  ii.  105 
— The  manner  of,  ii.  106 — Talons  of  a  dreadful  ghost  will 
fasten  on  the  souls  of  the  wicked  at  the,  ii.  107 — Why 
called  the  sure  mercies  of  David,  ii.  306. 

Reversion,  the  Christian's  best  estate,  i.  579. 

Rich,  to  be  wickedly,  an  awful  state,  iii.  674. 

Riches,  a  bone  without  marrow,  fit  only  for  dogs,  i.  735 — 
Reasons  why  they  are  in  many  cases  a  curse,  iii.  676. 

Riddles,  the  second  Adam  was  before  the  first,  i.  524 — 
Christ's  love,  to  comprehend  that  which  cannot  be  com- 
prehended, to  know  that  which  passes  knowledge,  ii.  15 — 
Their  solutions,  iii.  219,  220 — The  Sacrifice,  Lamb,  Rock, 
Cow,  Door,  iii.  308. 

Righteous  man  described,  i.  747,  765 — Twelve  rules  to 
judge  whether  a  man  is  one,  i.  765 — Can  alone  do  righ- 
teousness, ii.  244— His  prayers  alone  acceptable,  ii.  249. 

Righteous  man's  desires,  i.  751 — Pure  in  the  spring,  but 
polluted  in  the  channels,  i.  753 — Run  both  ways,  i.  754 
— Rules  to  know  which  predominates,  i.  755 — To  be  with 
Christ,  i.  758 — He  desires  a  handful,  God  gives  him  a  sea- 
ful,  i.  761— They  carry  us  to  God  on  their  back,  if  ten 
thousand  oppose  it,  i.  763. 

Righteousness,  some  follow,  but  never  obtain,  i.  447.  See 
Self-righteousness — Of  Christ  imputed,  i.  748 — Produces 
its  practice,  i.  749 — Of  Christ,  safe  and  everlasting,  ii. 
138,  142— How  it  is  to  be  obtained,  ii.  170— Twofold, 
upon  and  into,  ii.  246 — Of  man  and  of  God  distinct, 
ii.  286— Thrives  best  in  afflictions,  ii.  720 — Can  only  die 
by  suicide,  ii.  721— ^Fourfold,  iii.  191. 

:kRiver  of  God,  or  water  of  life,  iii.  138,  228,  539— Runs 
through  the  heart  of  the  tree  of  life,  Christ,  iii.  455. 

*Robin  and  the  spider,  an  emblem,  iii.  187. 

Run  for  heaven;  the  devil,  the  law,  sin,  death,  and  hell  are 
after  you,  iii.  382. 

Running,  fear  of  not  running  fast  enough,  i.  235. 

Ruth,  a  poetic  translation,  ii.  290. 

s. 

Sabbath,  Jewish,  abrogated,  and  Christian  enforced,  ii.  361 
—Unknown  by  light  of  nature,  ii.  362 — Sabbath-breaking 
not  known  until  the  law  was  given  on  Sinai— Sabbath- 
keeping  first  commanded  by  Moses,  ii.  363 — To  com- 
memorate Israel's  deliverance  from  Egypt — When  the 
Sabbath  was  given  to  the  Israelites,  were  the  Gentiles 
required  to  keep  it?  ii.  365 — Answered  in  the  negative, 
ii.  366— Whether  the  Saturday  Sabbath  fell  with  other 
Jewish  rites,  or  was  it  re-imposed  on  Christians?  ii.  367 
— The  ceremonies  enjoined  on  its  observation  are  dead — 
a  shadow  of  things  to  come — therefore  it  is  abolished,  ii. 
424;  iii.  369—  Part  of  the  ministration  of  death,  ii.  370 — 
The  first,  or  Lord's  day,  instituted,  ii.  361 ;  iii.  371 — 
Stamped  with  divine  approbation,  ii.  372 — Used  by  New 
Testament  saints,  ii.  383 — Convictions  of  sin  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  for  not  keeping  the  first  day,  a  proof  that  God 
sanctioned  and  sanctifies  it,  ii.  385— A  type  of  Christ  and 
of  the  millennium,  ii.  424— Why  observed— Changed  by 
Christ,  iii.  600. 


THE   INDEX. 


•S7 


Sublath-breaking — Obeying  the  king's  Bool;  of  Sport* — vio- 
lating the  book  of  the  King  of  Kings,  attended  with  >harp 

convictions — Game  of  eat,  or  tip  cat,  authorized  to  be 
played  on  Sunday,  i.  8 — Why  sports  and  plays  authorized 
by  the  Book  of  Sports,  i.  8,  No.  20,  note— Its  effects,  i.  548. 

Sacixloth  of  hair,  i.  733,  and  note. 

Sacraments  are  God's  love-letters  and  love-tokens,  i.  757 — 
Have  no  saving  power,  iii.  752. 

n,  the  symbol  of  regeneration,  to  be  partaken  by  saints, 
i.  386 — In  or  with  water  does  not  make  Christians,  i.546, 
and  note — The  Holy  Spirit  accompanying,  i.  757,  and  note 
— Antichrist  baptizes  with  blasphemy,  ii.  50 — Pompom 
names,  seven  thousand  to  be  destroyed,  ii.  51 — In  Christ, 
not  in  water,  is  a  putting  on  Christ,  ii.  155 — Noah  in  the 
ark  dead  to  the  world,  and  alive  to  God,  a  type  of,  ii.  482 
— By  dipping,  ii.  510,  G27 — Difference  in  judgment  about 
water-baptism  no  bar  to  communion,  ii.  588,  616 — And 
the  supper,  figurative  ordinances,  ii.  604 — Unlike  circum- 
cision, and  not  an  initiatory  ordinance,  ii.  606,  G18 — 
Spiritual  baptism  alone  essential,  ii.  609 — Paul  made  light 
of  water-baptism,  ii.  613 — Eighteen  reasons  why  water- 
baptism  should  not  be  a  bar  to  communion,  or  wall  of 
separation,  ii.  614 — Christening,  if  relied  on,  a  fatal 
error,  ii.  615 — Ten  reasons  why  visible  saints  should 
commune  together,  ii.  616 — Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per perverted  to  afflict  the  church,  ii.  622 — Of  the  Spirit, 
ii.  623 — Of  the  Spirit  the  one  baptism  essential  to  salva- 
tion, that  of  water  is  only  the  outward  sign,  ii.  624 — Of 
Christ  is  better  than  water-baptism,  ii.  625 — An  outward 
show,  ii.  626 — The  wall  of  separation,  ii.  628 — Edification 
greater  than  water  baptism,  ii.  629 — Mr.  Henry  Jesse's  judg- 
ment as  to  its  being  a  wall  of  separation,  ii.  642 — A  mar- 
riage with  Christ,  ii.  653 — Love,  and  not  baptism,  the 
badge  of  Christ,  ii.  653,  715. 

Lord's  Supper,  if  not  attended  to  in  a  right  spirit,  is  used  as 
a  hand  by  Satan,  i.  55S — Terms  of  communion,  ii.  591 — 
AVith  whom  I  dare  or  dare  not  hold  communion  at  the 
Lord's  table,  ii.  602 — Only  with  visible  saints  by  calling, 
605.  615 — A  church  ordinance,  baptism  an  individual 
duty  or  ordinance,  ii.  630. 

Sacrifices  of  a  broken  spirit  acceptable,  i.  689 — Paul  ready 
to  be  offered — Made  by  God's  people,  accepted,  i.  724. 

Safety  of  the  Christian,  i.  598. 

Saffron  blooms,  blossoms,  and  is  ripe  in  a  night,  i.  760. 

Saints'  enjoyments  inexpressible,  i.  48 — Always  in  broils 
ami  suits,  i.  191 — Justified  in  God's  sight  before  conver- 
sion, i.  307 — Their  heart-wanderings  and  miscarriages,  i. 
353 — Triumph  in  Christ,  i.  427 — -Armies  of  heaven  en- 
compass about  them,  i.  409 — Bodies  saved  by  Christ,  i. 
529— Looked  upon  most  falsely  as  turbulent  and  factious, 
i.  630 — How  they  are  described  in  holy  writ — Will  know 
his  love  in  eight  degrees,  ii.  29 — Or  professors,  golden, 
silver,  earthy,  and  wooden,  ii.  518 — The  salt  of  God,  ii. 
5-14 — On  earth  in  working  clothes,  in  heaven  with  a  holi- 
day suit,  iii.  497 — Warlike  men,  that  can  endure  hard- 
ships iii.  518 — Generally  poor  and  despised,  iii.  676 — 
Despised  more  than  dogs,  iii.  677 — hated  in  this  world, 
but  envied  in  eternity,  iii.  688,  695 — They  have  all  their 
evil  things  in  this  life,  iii.  092 — Despised  because  they 
cannot,  like  Pilate,  speak  Hebrew,  Greek  and  Latin,  iii.  695. 

Salvation  sure,  and  certain  to  the  believer,  i.  232 — One  of 
Christ's  lost,  and  Christ  is  overthrown,  i.  234 — By  grace — 
What  it  is  to  be  saved,  what  it  is  to  be  saved  by  grace — 
Who  are  the  saved — Their  evidences — Why  by  grace,  i. 
337 — Hath  many  steps  from  eternity  to  eternity — Before 
calling,  i.  338 — Six  causes  of  salvation,  i.  339 — Perfect, 
the  soul  filled  with  bliss  in  heaven,  i.  341 — Proved — 
Fearful,  dreadful,  soul-astonishing,  and  amazing,  i.  349 — 
Are  there  few  that  be  saved? — None  seek  but  those  who 
are  alarmed,  i.  364  —  Put  man's  righteousness,  God's 
mercy,  and  Christ's  redemption  together,  and  it  will  not 
save  a  man,  though  the  last  two  alone  will  save  to  the 
uttermost,  i.  609— *  The  wall  of,  iii.  102. 

Samsell,  a  village  at  which  Bunyan  preached,  i.  50. 

Samson,  history  of,  <  r  Judges  xiii.-xvi.  paraphrased  in  verse, 
ii.  393. 

*  Sanctif cation,  how  effected,  iii.  98— *Thc  bath,  iii.  189. 


Sanctuary,  the,  specially  defended,  iii.  425. 

*Satan,  suggestions  of,  mistaken  for  our  thoughts— -The 
Imagination  accessible  to,  iii.  115. 

Satisfaction  for  sin,  ii.  294. 

Stated,  what  it  is  to  be  saved,  i.  327 — By  grace,  i.  33G— Six 
canses,  i.  339— -Six  gradations  from  God'adecree  before  tune 
to  glory,  i.  341— In  heaven,  i.  B  12—  Fearers  and  fa 
i.  347,  348 — Character  before  conversion,  i.  849— Still 
comparatively  few  saved,  i. ::;  tpared  to  a  hand- 

ful, gleanings,  jewels,  a  remnant,  i.  380— Small,  as  the  re- 
fined metal  compared  with  the  dross,  i.  382 — Reasons  why 
few  are  sa>ed  and  many  miss  of  heaven,  i.  383- 
countless  number,  i.  65  L 

Saviour:  what  is  included  in  the  word,  i.  402 — Moaning  of 
the  word,  i.  419. 

*  Saying  and  doing,  the  difference  between,  iii.  122. 
&  aadal,  inventor  and  receiver  equally  sinful,  ii.  079. 
Scandals  of  professors,  how  they  arise,  i.  619. 

Sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  how  interpreted  by  th  ■ 
Jews,  ii.  145. 

^Seal  on  Christian's  forehead,  iii.  102 — *On  those  i 
washed,  iii.  189 — *Set  upon  the  pilgrims,  iii.  183,  189. 

Seasonable  counsel  or  advice  to  sufferers,  ii.  691. 

^Secret,  an  angel,  iii.,  174. 

Sectarians:  Ranters'  cursed  sentiments,  i.  11;  ii.  133,  150, 
margin,  182 — Quakers'  errors  of  persons  who  a 
the  name,  i.  21;  ii.  150,  margin,  153,  211,  286— Sects 
severely  reproved,  Quakers,  Ranters,  a  sect  of  foolish 
men,  which  believed  that  Christ's  sufferings  on  earth  were 
merely  typical  of  what  he  suffers  in  his  saints,  i.  323 — 
Conduct  of  Ranters  in  prayer  described,  i.  440 — Ranters 
denied  future  punishment,  ii.  106 — Quakers,  in  1656,  put 
on  a  peculiar  dress,  ii.  153 — Questions  to  Quakers,  ii.  175 
— Banyan's  meaning  of  the  word  sectarian,  ii.  219 — 
Quakers  set  up  humanity  as  gospel,  ii.  313 — Jewish  sects, 
ii.  327,  and  note — William  Peon  and  Jesuit  Campian 
agree  on  justification,  ii.  333 — Sectarian  pride  an  iniquity 
— What  sectarianism  is  to  be  attributed  to,  ii.  538 — 
Titles,  as  Baptist,  Independent,  &c,  whence  they  came, 
ii.  649 — Bunyan  eminently  a  non-sectarian,  iii.  3S3,  and 
note — Ranters  turned  grace  into  wantonness,  iii.  724. 

Secure,  Captain,  iii.  292. 

Self-denial,  the  yoke  and  cross  of  Christ,  i.  734 — What  is 
requisite  to  make  it  acceptable,  ii.  687. 

Self -examination,  motives,  i.  294;  iii.  721 — By  old  cove- 
nant, i.  554— Should  be  daily,  i.  733— Rules  for,  ii.  166 
— Its  advantages,  ii.  1 68 — helps,  ii.  540. 

Self-knowledge,  its  best  source,  i.  432 — Difficult,  ii.  553. 

Self-righteous  go  a  cleaner  way  to  hell  than  their  neigh- 
bours, i.  351 — A  painted  devil  in  fine  clothes,  i.  719 — 
Attempt  to  swim  through  God's  burning  wrath  in  vessels 
of  bulrushes,  ii.  268. 

Self-righteoumieat,  three  awful  evils  in  it,  i.  315 — Earning 
heaven  with  our  lingers '-ends,  ii.  132 — Is  sin,  ii.  200 — A 
damning  transgression,  ii.  231 — Can  only  entitle  to  tem- 
poral, and  not  to  eternal  life — The  seat  of  the  devil,  ii. 
236— Itelcaveth  to  our  nature,  ii.  237. 

Sense  of  senselessness  in  prayer,  i.  637. 

Sermon,  a  smart  one  on  the  barren  fig-tree,  iii.  328. 

Sermon  on  the  Mount  paraphrased  in  verse,  ii.  396. 

Shaddai,  the  founder  of  llansoal,  iii.  255. 

^Shadow  [or  fear]  of  death,  a  dismal  valley,  iii.  114,  161.20S, 
214 — ^Better  to  pass  through  than  reside  in,  iii.  209. 

*Shame,  Mr,  an  impudent  fellow,  iii.  119,  22  1. 

* Shepherds,  at  Lhe  Delectable  Mountains,  entertain  pilgrims, 
iii.  144,  230. 

*S/iei>hrrd's  boy,  his  heart's-ease  and  happy  song,  iii.  206. 

Sick-bed  beset  with  ten  thousand  fears — Suggestions  of  the 
devil — Sight  of  death  and  the  grave,  even  of  hell  itctlf,i.  340. 

*Silvcr-7nine,  dangerous  to  pilgrims,  iii.  136,  228. 

*  Simple  asleep  on  the  road,  iii.  103— Hanged,  iii.  192,  213. 
Simplicity  of  the  gospel  difficult  to  retain,  i.  391 — Described, 

ii.  677. 
Sin,  the  unpardonable,  wilful,  and  malicious,  against  the 
Holy  Ghost,  i.  18,  24,  25,  31,  34,  204,  567— Permitted 
by  God,  i.  24 — Great  sin  draws  out  great  grace,  i.  33 — 
Must  be  seen,  hated,  and  cleansed,  i.  93 — Fears  of  having 


7S8 


THE   INDEX. 


committed  the  unpardonable— 'They  that  would  be  saved 
have  not  committed  it,  i.  102,  155  374 — What  it  is, 
i.  103— Sin  by  the  help  of  the  soul  destroys  it,  i.  129— The 
best  saint  the  most  sensible  of,  i.  160 — The  burden  of, 
i.  210 — A  tang  of,  in  all  our  good  works,  i.  307 — A  debt 
forgiven  when  man  had  nothing  to  pay,  i.  313 — How  to 
be  acknowledged,  i.  327 — Mystical  or  spiritual  ones,  i.  373 
— The  unpardonable  described — Feedeth  upon  some  pro- 
fessors, i.  374,  375.  See  Iniquity — Against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  a  rejection  of  Christ,  i.  392 — The  least  sin  fatal, 
i.  406 — Its  beginning  to  be  avoided,  i.  486 — The  conduit- 
pipe  for  the  devil's  spawn,  i.  505 — A  terrible  soul-drown- 
ing flood  and  destroying  tempest,  i.  516 — Indwelling,  but 
not  reigning  in  saints,  i.  645 — A  fearful  thing,  i.  682 — 
Makes  meu  fools  and  asses — Its  gradations,  i.  683  ;  ii. 
678  ;  iii.  711 — The  great  enemy  to  God  and  to  the  soul, 
i.  684— It  stinketh,  i.  697— Its  hiding  holes,  i.  706— 
Danger  of  indulging  the  least,  i.  713 — It  is  like  blood- 
hounds, i.  742 — As  a  spreading  plague,  has  no  bounds,  ii. 
4 — Its  nature  and  aggravations,  ii.  25 — Tends  to  sacrifice 
its  associates,  even  our  children,  to  devils,  ii.  26 — The 
greater  in  our  view,  the  greater  encouragement  to  seek 
pardon,  ii.  137 — original,  brings  all  under  the  curse,  ii. 
166 — Its  enormous  evils,  ii.  435 — Even  after  remarkable 
deliverances,  as  Noah,  Lot,  Gideon,  ii.  493 — It  stupifies 
and  darkens  the  powers  of  the  soul,  ii.  512 — An  active 
beast,  polluting  and  defiling,  ii.  524 — A  smooth-tongued 
enchanter,  ii.  533 — A  bold,  impudent  beggar,  the  worm 
of  hell — Caution  to  stir  up  to  watch  against,  ii.  575 — 
Confession  of,  to  God  only,  ii.  681 — *The  burthen  of, 
upon  the  awakened  conscience,  iii.  89 — *Weighs  down  in 
the  Slough  of  Despond,  iii.  92 — *Sent  to  Morality  to  get 
rid  of  it,  iii.  94 — *Wishes  relief  at  the  wicket-gate,  iii. 
97— *Falls  off  by  a  sight  of  Christ  crucified,  iii.  102— 
*Indwelling  sin  the  Christian's  plague,  and  its  antidote, 
iii.  108 — *Temptations  and  severe  trials  follow  great 
enjoyments,  iii.  Ill — To  be  as  utterly  rooted  out  as  pos- 
sible, iii.  361 — Christ's  death  does  not  cleanse  all  from 
original  sin,  iii.  597 — Sins  follow  one  another,  like  links 
in  a  chain,  iii.  610 — Makes  the  memory  of  the  dead  to 
rot,  iii.  656. 

*  Sincere,  the  shepherd,  iii.  144 — *The  town  that  Littlefaith 
dwelt  in,  iii.  147. 

Sincerity  and  simplicity  essential,  iii.  729 — And  uprightness 
poetically  described,  iii.  741. 

Sinful  indulgences  a  committing  suicide,  iii.  611. 

Singing  in  public  worship — Sion's  songs  must  be  sung  by 
Sion's  sons,  i.  473,  and  note;  iii.  496,  and  note— How  to 
be  performed,  iii.  496. 

Sinners,  the  greatest  are  the  objects  of  divine  mercy,  i.  71  — 
Shining  monuments — Eeasons  why  the  biggest  should  be 
first  offered  mercy,  i.  73 — Instances,  i.  74 — If  the  big  are 
invited,  the  little  may  surely  come — If  the  door  of  mercy 
is  wide  enough  for  a  giant,  it  is  for  a  dwarf — Sins  may  be 
comparatively  little,  but  sensibly  great,  i.  76,  94 — 
Ephesian  sinners  greatest  among  Gentiles,  and  Jeru- 
salem among  the  Jews,  i.  77 — Great,  when  converted, 
the  best  preachers,  as  the  Samaritan  woman — Biggest 
are  Satan's  colonels  and  captains,  breeders  of  sin,  i.  78 — 
Manasseh,  a  ringleader  in  devilism,  when  converted,  the 
land  reformed  by  him,  i.  79— Little  thanks  from  little 
sinners  saved,  i.  82 — Greatest  invited  first,  i.  89 — Great, 
shoulder  the  devil  out  of  the  way — You  are  called  by 
Christ — Angels  make  a  lane  for  you,  i.  90 — Come  to  God 
in  difficulties,  i.  210 — Publicans,  harlots,  thieves,  pos- 
sessed, and  bedlams,  i.  263 — Great  ones  specially  invited 
to  Christ,  i.  347 — Named  in  Scripture,  i.  348 — Behave 
strangely  to  God,  i.  350 — Would  please  God  with  dainty 
dishes  rather  than  be  converted,  i.  351 — Profane,  searching 
observations  to,  i.  386 — Convinced  who  are  on  the  pot- 
ter's wheel,  i.  387 — Pull  God's  vengeance  upon  them- 
selves, i.  478— Chief  of,  saved,  instances,  i.  536,  563— 
Their  awful  state,  i.  554 — Must  apply  to  Christ  first,  not 
wash  themselves  and  then  apply  to  be  cleansed,  i.  559 — 
Many  are  the  devil's  asses  and  jack-puddings,  i.  683— Eat 
husks  like  swine,  i.  697 — Their  efforts  to  lead  others  into 
sin, iii.  699— The  Sinner  and  the  Spider,  a  dialogue,  iii.  752. 


Singularity  in  godliness,  be  not  ashamed  of,  ii.  545. 
*S7cill,  the  Physician,  iii.  201 — *His  curious  medicine,  iii.  202. 
Slander;  if  you  cannot  speak  good,  speak  not  bad,  i.  279. 
Slanders  and  reproaches,  i.  45 — The  Christian's  ornament, 

i.  46. 
Slavery,  Algerine,  on  white  man,  i.  1 19,  and  note. 
Slaves,  Englishmen  sold  as,  under  Charles  II.,  iii.  256,  and 

,  note. 
Slaying  of  the  witnesses,  ii.  64. 
Sleep  an  emblem  of  death  and  the  grave,  ii.  111. 

*  Sleepy-head  ruined,  iii.  193. 

*Sloth  refuses  deliverance,  iii.  103 — *  Hanged,  iii.  192,  213. 
*SlothfuVs  friend,  an  enchanted  arbour,  iii.  236. 
Slothfulness  shutteth  out  Christ  and  shameth  the  soul,  iii.  37S. 

*  Slow-pace  ruined  by  Simple,  iii.  193. 

* Snares  thickly  set  in  the  dark  valley,  iii.  116. 

Socinian,  an  inconsiderate  and  stupified  rascal,  i.  613. 

Solemn  warnings;  '  fetch  out  the  axe,'  iii.  579. 

Solomon,  a  type  of  Christ  in  building  the  temple,  iii.  465. 

Solomon's  Temple  Spiritualized,  or  gospel  light  out  of 
the  temple  to  open  the  glory  of  New  Testament  truths, 
iii.  460 — A  type  of  gospel  glory,  iii.  462 — Where  built, 
typical,  iii.  465 — How  built,  a  type,  iii.  466 — The  mate- 
rials typical,  iii.  466 — Its  double  foundation,  iii.  467 — 
Front  to  the  east,  to  prevent  sun-worship,  iii.  468 — The 
two  courts  typical,  iii.  469 — The  altar  in  the  inner  court, 
iii.  469 — Jachin  and  Boaz  types  of  the  apostles,  iii..  470 — 
Snuffers,  Snuff-dishes,  types  of  reproof,  iii.  488 — Tongs  for 
the  holy  fire,  iii.  489 — The  altar  of  incense  and  golden 
censers,  iii.  490 — The  flagons  and  chargers,  iii.  494 — The 
holy  and  most  holy,  types  of  the  church  on  earth  and  in 
heaven,  iii.  497 — The  vail,  what  it  typifies,  iii.  498 — The 
ark  of  the  covenant  a  type  of  Christ,  iii.  501 — The  living 
water  flowing  from  under  the  gate,  iii.  504 — The  High 
Priest,  iii.  505 — Figures  on  the  wall,  iii.  509 — Ornaments 
typical,  iii.  471 — Outward  glory  a  type  of  Christian  life, 
iii.  474 — Large  porch  a  type  of  the  church's  bosom  for 
charity,  iii.  474 — The  steps,  gate,  and  pinnacles  typical, 
iii.  476 — Porters  and  watchmen  types  of  ministers,  iii. 
477 — Door,  a  type  of  Christ,  iii.  478 — Windows  a  type  of 
the  Word,  iii.  481 — The  brazen  oxen  a  type  of  ministers, 
iii.  483  —  The  brazen  bulls  type  of  apostles,  484  — 
Lavers,  tables,  and  instruments,  iii.  485 — Golden  candle- 
sticks typical  of  the  church,  iii.  487. 

Solomon's  throne,  a  shadow  or  type,  i.  649— Altar  of  incense, 
a  type,  ii.  649. 

*Sons  of  the  spies,  iii.  114. 

Soul — Its  greatness,  and  unspeakableness  of  its  loss,  i.  105 
— Can  never  be  repaired  if  once  lost,  i.  107— What  it  is, 
i.  107;  ii.  695  —  The  Devil's  drudge  and  slave  —  Its 
powers  and  properties ;  conscience,  the  head ;  affections, 
the  hands  ;  will,  the  feet,  i.  109 — Its  senses ;  sight,  hear- 
ing, tasting,  i.  110 — Its  passions;  love,  hatred,  joy,  fear, 
i.  Ill  —  Grief,  anger,  i.  112  —  Its  greatness ;  has  two 
houses,  the  body,  on  earth,  and  one  eternal  in  the  heavens, 
i.  113 — A  tabernacle — It  is  called  God's  breath,  and  his 
image,  i.  114 — A  vessel  for  grace,  i.  115 — Its  price;  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ;  it  is  immortal,  i.  116 — It  has 
communion  with  invisibles ;  can  ascend  to  heaven  and 
dive  to  hell,  i.  117 — It  bears  pain;  an  awful  poem  on 
Spira,  i.  118,  note — Of  its  loss  ;  becomes  a  slave,  i.  119 
— Subject  to  awful  torments,  i.  120 — A  double  loss,  i.  121 
—A  most  fearful  loss,  i.  123— Everlasting,  i.  124— The 
cause  of  its  loss,  i.  126 — Cannot  purge  itself,  i.  127 — 
Loves  sin,  i.  128 — By  sin  sets  itself  against  God,  i.  130 
— More  sorely  punished  than  the  body,  i.  133 — When  lost 
its  value  felt,  i.  136 — Soul-loser  a  prodigal  waster,  i.  140 — 
The  loser  of  his  soul  the  greatest  fool,  i.  141 — Be  careful 
who  teaches  it,  i.  143 — What  provision  hast  thou  made 
for  it,  i.  144 — One  thing  is  needful,  i.  145 — Sad  state,  of 
the  lost,  i.  147— Pawned  for  a  beastly  lust,  i.  683. 

Spencly,  Richard,  John  Burton,  and  John  Child,  recommend 
Bunyan's  Gospel  Truths,  ii.  181. 

*Spidcr,  an  emblem,  iii.  185. 

Spider  and  Fly,  emblems  of  Satan  and  the  sinner,  i.  435. 

Spira,  Francis,  his  dreadful  story,  i,  26,  118,  and  note — His 
awful  state  of  despair,  iii.  383,  582,  and  note. 


THE  INDEX. 


si) 


Spirits,  otherwise  invisible,  sometimes  seen  by  the  dying. 
i.  1G1 ;  iii.  680 — Of  all  men  will  be  broken  by  mercy  to 
salvation,  or  by  justice  to  damnation,  i.  136. 

Spiritual  and  invisible  things,  how  to  be  discerned,  iii.  400. 

Spiritual  death,  what  it  is,  ii.  677. 

Spiritual  drunkenness  and  adultery,  i.  373. 

Spiritual  lightning  without  thunder  dangerous,  i.  653. 

Spiritual  wonders  in  the  day  of  God's  wrath,  ii.  69-1. 

Spirituality  of  divine  worship,  i.  646.     See  Prayer. 

Spite- God,  Mrs.,  iii.  265. 

Spittle,  peculiarity  in  the  miracle  of  curing  by,  i.  401. 

*Spring  at  the  hill  of  Difficulty,  iii.  101 — *Foilcd  by  the 
enemy,  iii.  193,  and  note. 

Stidking-horse,  i.  733. 

^Standfast  found  on  his  knees,  iii.  23S — *IIis  happy  death, 
iii.  243. 

Stars  falling  from  heaven,  professors  falling  from  the  faith, 
ii.  163. 

State  interfering  with  religion,  the  great  law  of,  ii.  322 — 
Caused  the  flood,  and  again  began  under  Nimrod — To 
destroy  all  opposers,  ii.  497. 

Steps  to  heaven,  iii.  622. 

Stone,  Jew's  stumbling,  i.  401 — Stones  in  the  breast-plate,  and 
in  the  foundation  of  the  holy  city,  are  the  same,  iii.  432. 

Strait  Gate,  a  most  solemn  treatise,  i.  364. 

Strire  to  enter,  applied  to  professors  only,  i.  365  —  How 
to  strive  lawfully,  i.  369;  iii.  381 — Motives  to  avoid 
hell  and  enter  heaven,  i.  369. 

*  Strong  may  mislead  the  weak,  iii.  139. 

Study  the  greatness  of  God's  love  to  man — A  depth  profound 
and  unsearchable — Delightful  here  and  through  eternity, 
ii.  36. 

Suffering  flows  from  hope,  i.  583 — It  is  according  to  God's 
will — A  man  may  be  bound  for  God's  truth,  and  be  none 
of  God's  martyrs,  ii.  704 — Comes  of  God,  and  not  by 
chance,  ii.  721 — For  religion,  tokens  of  God's  love — Only 
bounded  by  the  grave,  ii.  737 — Must  not  produce  turbu- 
lence, ii.  740. 

Suicide  debated  and  condemned,  iii.  141 — Unless  in  madness, 
a  damning  sin,  660. 

Sun,  a  type  of  the  gospel — None  needed  in  heaven,  iii.  441. 

'-Superstition,  Mr.,  a  witness  against  Faithful,  iii.  130. 

* Supper,  what  Christian  had  to  his  supper,  iii.  109 — *Supper 
at  Gaius' — Strange  dishes,  iii.  219. 

Supralapsarianism,  i.  644. 

Swan  Inn,  Bedford,  i.  60. 

Swearer. — God's  curse  upon  swearing,  i.  38C — Judgment 
upon,  iii.  654. 

Swearing,  profane,  what  it  is,  i.  441 — And  cursing,  different 
sins,  iii.  601 — By  idols,  as  by  our  lady,  by  the  mass,  &c, 

.  iii.  602 — Very  commonly  practised,  iii.  603 — God's  judg- 
ment on  N.  P.  at  Dumbleton,  and  Dorothy  Mately  at 
Derby,  iii.  604. 

Sweetheart,  a  general  term  of  endearment,  iii.  653. 

Swine  better  observe  the  law  of  creation  than  fallen  man, 
i.  478. 

Syllogism,  how  to  pick  the  bones  of  a,  ii.  662. 

Syphilis,  a  disease  known  in  Job's  days,  iii.  612. 

T. 

Talic-hecd-wTiat-you-licar,  tho  trumpeter,  summons  Mansoul, 
iii.  272. 

*  Talkative  drawn  to  the  life,  i.  338— *Of  Prating  Kow,  a 
confident  fool,  iii.  121. 

Teaching  for  hire,  a  trick  upon  God,  i.  93. 

*Tdl-true  converts  Valiant-for-the-truth  by  means  of  the 
Pilgrim's  Progress,  iii.  233. 

Temper,  a  compliant,  sometimes  dangerous,  ii.  324. 

Temple,  none  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  iii.  439. 

Temptations,  their  cause  and  use,  i.  37 — Why  they  assail 
God's  people,  i.  287 — Specially  suited  to  the  age,  circum- 
stances, and  acquirements  of  the  Christian,  i.  67C — When 
in,  keep  close  to  the  Word,  ii.  429. 

Tender  rebukes  better  than  churlish  severity,  iii.  617. 

Thanksgiving,  a  prevailing  prayer,  i.  624. 

Thieving,  handsomely — Stealing  fruit  the  first  downward 
step,  iii.  598 — Pilfering  leads  to  the  gallows,  iii.  599. 


Thodcs,  or  whirlwinds,  meaning,  and  derivation  of  the  word, 
ii.  735. 

Throne  of  God,  import  of  the  word,  iii.  458.     See  God. 

Throne  of  grace,  what  it  is,  i.  645 — Where  erected,  i.  646 — 
How  distinguished,  i.  G1H— Its  effects — Who  are.  invited 
to  it.  i.  65C— How  to  approach,  i.  657 — Washed  from  sin, 
i.  658 — Only  by  the  new  and  living  way,  i.  669 — To  come 
to  it  is  man's  privilege,  duty,  and  glory — Unknown  but  to 
the  godly,  i.  661 — Known  only  by  the  Word,  i.  66  — 
Unwillingness  to  come  except  drawn  by  the  Fathei  — 
Motives  to  come  — Glorious,  i.  663 — Turns  all  things 
into  mercies,  iii.  550 — The  spotless  humanity  of  Christ, 
iii.  551. 

Time,  the  first  thing  that  God  made,  ii.  417. 

Time  of  affliction  less  dangerous  than  prosperity,  ii.  494. 

Times;  England  eminent  for  sin  in  Bunyan's  days,  i.  68;  iii. 
712 — Disturbed  state  of  society  under  Charles  II.;  devil 
broke  loose  in  hideous  manners,  i.  81 — Immoral  state,  of 
Bunyan's  times,  i.  99,  105— Decays  in  godliness,  and  foul 
miscarriages  of  professors,  i.  152 — Curious  notice  of  the 
nation's  fears  and  hopes  at  the  Popish  plot,  i.  585 — The 
brethren  suffered  murder  and  outrage,  i.  72:; — Swarms  of 
opinions  darken  the  light,  ii.  27 — In  which  Bunyan  lived, 
as  described  in  his  writings,  ii.  38 — Prisoners  ui  Bunyan's 
time  put  in  iron  before  a  trial,  ii.  107  ;  iii.  366— Tho 
clergy,  the  scribes,  and  the  Pharises  of  this  generation, 
preach  up  low,  carnal,  beggarly,  empty  notions,  ii.  134 — 
The  Quakers  commenced  their  peculiar  dress,  &c.,  in 
1656;  ii.  153 — A  teetotal  movement  in  the  time  of  the 
Commonwealth,  ii.  201 — Ignorance  of  many  state  clergy- 
men, Sir  John's,  ii.  313 — Scandalous  lives  of  the  clergy, 
ii.  323 — Graceless  clergy  like  the  locusts  of  Egypt,  ii.  475 
— The  church  of  God  in  the  furnace,  ii.  482 — The  super- 
fluity of  naughtiness  is  at  this  day  become  no  sin,  ii.  509 — 
Charles  II.  a  pattern  of  iniquity,  517 — Persecution  groaned 
under  in  Bunyan's  time,  ii.  614 — Carnal  gospellers,  like 
maggots,  crawl  up  and  down  the  nation,  iii.  429 — Extra- 
vagancies and  fooleries  of  dress,  iii.  565,  644 — England 
fearfully  demoralized,  iii.  590,  593, 594 — Labourers'  wages 
eightpence  or  tenpence  per  day,  iii.  637,  and  note. 

Times  of  need;  ten  special,  i.  676. 

^Timorous,  Mrs.,  iii.  175 — *Christiana  wishes  her  a  sight  of 
the  cross,  iii.  192. 

* Timorous  and  Mistrust,  iii.  105 — *  Burned  through  the 
tongue,  iii.  195. 

Tinkling  cymbal,  i.  44. 

Tod,  Old,  a  remarkable  story,  iii.  599. 

Toleration  anticipated  by  Bunyan,  ii.  457. 

Tom  of  Bedlam,  i.  9,  and  note. 

*  Tombs,  blind  men  stumbling  among,  iii.  144. 

*  Too-bold  and  Heedless  in  a  fatal  sleep,  iii.  237. 
Trading,  instructions  for  righteous,  iii.  610. 

Tradition,.  Human-wisdom,    and    Man's-invention  join  tho 

church,  but  soon  turn  renegades,  and  enlist  under  Captain 

Any-thing,  iii.  277. 
Transfiguration — Moses  and   Elias   appeared  as  dipped   in 

glory,  i.  760. 
Traveller's  pleasure  in  meeting  friends  in  a  strange  land, 

ii.  600. 
Treasure  in  heaven  for  the  saints,  infinite,  ii.  14. 
Tree  of  life  is  Jesus  Christ — The  tree  of  knowledge  the  law 

of  works,  iii.  453,  454 — The  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life  are 

the  promises,  iii.  456. 
Trencher  chaplains — Their  eloquent  terms  in  prayer  tickle 

the  ears,  i.  637. 
Trial  of  the  Diabolonians,  and  names  of  the  jury  and  witnesses , 

iii.  310. 
Tricks  of  a  wicked  tradesman,  iii.  616. 
Trifles  preferred  to  salvation,  iii.  713. 
Trinity.     See  God. 
1'roublc  of  spirit  under  convictions  not  to  be  put  off  the 

wrong  way,  ii.  137. 
Triumph  of  Emmanuel— Entrance  into  Mansoul— Houses 

and  streets  adomed,  iii.  359. 
Truth  discovered  by  the  persecutions  endured  by  God's  people, 

i.  725 — And  immoral  conduct  cannot  live  in  the  same  heart, 


790 


THE  INDEX. 


*  Turn-away,  Mrs.,  iii.  146— *An  apostate  carried  away  by 

seven  devils,  iii.  147. 

Twelve ;  singular  applications  of  the  word,  iii.  455. 

* Two-tongues,  the  Bcv.  Mr.,  the  parson  of  By-ends'  parish, 
iii.  132. 

TyndaWs,  William,  translation  of  the  Bible  known  to  Bun- 
yan,  i.  695. 

Types;  clean  and  unclean  beasts,  i.  14 — Cities  of  refuge,  types 
of  Christ,  i.  250,  265— Aaron,  Moses,  Samson,  Joshua, 
David,  manna,  the  lamb,  the  red  cow,  types  of  Christ,  i.  396 
— Not  so  glorious  as  the  antitype,  i.  644 — Joseph  drying 
his  tears,  i.  652— Chestnut  rods,  and  red  strakes,  i.  670 — 
Jordan,  of  death  ;  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  of  heaven  and  bell, 
i.  742— Jacob's  ladder,  of  Christ,  ii.  10 — Adam  and  Eve, 
clothed  of  God,  of  imputed  righteousness,  ii.  250 — And 
antitype  of  a  covenant,  ii.  317 — Creation,  a  type  of  conver- 
sion, ii.  418 — The  moon,  of  the  church,  ii.  421 — All  creation 
typical,  ii.  422 — Adam,  of  Christ,  ii.  423 — Tree  of  know- 
ledge, of  the  law,  and  of  the  covenant  of  works,  ii.  425, 
426 — Ministers  typified  by  the  river  of  God,  ii.  426 — Eve, 
of  the  church,  ii.  427 — Fig-leaf  aprons  typical,  ii.  432 — 
— Life,  of  the  millennium,  ii.  456 — Noah's  ark,  of  Christ, 
ii.  464,  465— The  rainbow,  of  Christ,  ii.  490— King  of 
Babylon,  of  Antichrist,  iii.  428 — Precious  stones,  of  pre- 
cious souls,  and  of  precious  doctrines,  iii.  433,435 — Jewish 
knowledge  all  from  types,  iii.  462 — Ark  of  the  covenant,  a 
type  of  Christ,  in  nineteen  particulars,  iii.  5Q1 — House  in 
the  forest  of  Lebanon,  of  the  church's  afflictions,  iii.  515. 

u. 

Unbelief,  its  source,  i.  22 — A  fine-spun  thread,  i.  230 — A 
nimble-jack,  escapes  being  put  to  death,  i.  370 — The  first 
sin  that  entered  the  world,  ii.  431. 

*  Uncertain,  the  town  of  Feeble-mind,  iii.  222. 
Uncleanness,  the  wanton  eye  and  wanton  talk,  ii.  569. 
Understanding,  the  Lord  Mayor  of  Mansoul,  deposed,  and 

bis  house  darkened,  iii.  260. 
Uniformity  and  peace  desirable,  iii.  525. 
Union  of  good  works  and  grace  to  purchase  peace  rejected, 

iii.  279. 
Unworthiness  no  plea  to  prevent  coming  to  Christ,  i.  7 Go. 

Y. 

*  Vain-confidence,  Mr.,  perishes,  iii.  139. 

*  Vain-glory,  the  bane  of  thousands,  i.  33~3 — *Tke  town  of 
Formalist,  iii.  103. 

*  Vain-hope,  the  ferryman,  iii.  166. 

*  Valiant-for-truth,  a  pilgrim—  His  sword  that  cut  through 
flesh,  bones,  soul,  and  spirit,  iii.  233 — *His  happy  death, 
iii.  243. 

Valorous  acts  done  by  suffering,  iii.  516. 

*  Vanity  Fair,  founded  when  sin  entered  the  world,  iii.  127 — 
*  Trial  and  martyrdom  of  Faithful,  iii,  1 30 — *The  means  of 
Hopeful's  conversion,  iii.  132 — *Mr.  Fearing's  courageous 
behaviour  at  the  fair,  iii.  214 — *Much  reformed  when 
Christiana  arrived,  iii.  224. 

Variety  of  birds,  an  emblem  of  variety  of  Christians,  iii.  750. 

Venner  and  the  fifth-monarchy  men,  i.  57. 

Vestiges  of  creation,  its  best  truths  published  by  Bunyan,  ii. 
422,  and  note. 

Vices  under  virtuous  names — Evil  questioning  difficult  to 
distinguish  from  honest  inquiry,  iii.  330,  332,  366,  and 
note. 

Vile-affection  and  Carnal-lust  marry,  and  produce  Impudent, 
Blackmouth,  Hate-reproof,  three  black  boys,  and  Scorn- 
truth,  Slight-God,  and  Revenge,  their  sisters,  iii.  263. 

Vine  of  Sodom,  clusters  of  Gomorrah — Grapes  of  call,  i. 
316. 

*Viol,  a  musical  instrument,  played  by  Christiana,  iii.  229. 

*  Virginals,  a  musical  instrument,  played  by  Prudence,  iii. 
204. 

Virgins,  the  foolish,  who  they  are,  iii.  450. 
Voice  from  heaven,  i.  322. 

w. 

Wages,  kept  back  by  fraud — A  curse,  i.  476. 
Walking  with  God,  its  vast  advantages,  i.  740. 


Wall  of  new  Jerusalem,  great  and  bigh — What  it  teaches, 
iii.  411. 

*  Wanton,  Mrs.,  assaults  Faithful,  iii.  118 — *Her  ball,  iii. 

177 — *Christiana  wishes  her  a  sight  of  the  cross,  iii.  192. 

War,  the  holy,  lasts  for  life,  i.  619 — -Proper  to  turn  an  in- 
truder out,  iii.  521. 

Watch,  an  emblem  of  a  Christian,  i.  480. 

*  Watchful,  the  porter,  at  Beautiful,  iii.  106,   196— *Tha 
,  shepherd,  iii.  144. 

Watchfulness,  its  necessity,  i.  547 — Shown  from  curious 
similes,  i.  619— Nettles  and  thorns  arise  and  scratch  the 
careless,  ii.  544. 

Water  of  life:  Christ  the  conduit-pipe,  i.  651 — Like  Bath 
waters,  only  coveted  by  the  diseased — A  river,  i.  652 — 
Must  not  be  mixed,  i.  653 — Whence  it  comes,  and  whither 
it  goes,  iii.  452 — Bunyan's  account  of  his  Master's,  iii. 
539 — The  Spirit  and  grace  of  God — Not  to  be  taken  from 
mountebanks,  but  from  God,  iii.  540 — Runs  in  valleys  ; 
humble  ones,  iii.  541 — Life  found  only  in  this  water — 
Its  quantity,  a  river  deep  and  wide,  iii.  542 — Its  origin, 
the  ocean  of  grace — Always  fresh — The  Christian's  ele- 
ment, iii.  544 — A  river  to  supply  a  great  family — Whence 
it  flows,  iii.  545 — First  ran  slowly,  iii.  546 — Now  from 
the  throne  gloriously,  548 — Tunis  all  into  grace,  iii.  550 
— Its  nature  and  quality,  iii.  551 — Its  effects,  iii.  552 — 
Quantity  is  as  a  mighty  mountain  compared  to  an  atom  or 
ant's  egg,  iii.  553 — No  possibility  of  surfeiting,  iii.  554 — 
Its  purity,  iii.  555 — Sometimes  muddy  by  man's  inven- 
tions, iii.  556 — The  bottom  of  this  river,  iii.  557 — Use  it 
abundantly — Live  near  it,  iii.  558 — Other  waters  are  from 
the  Dead  sea,  iii.  559. 

Way:  a  dead  way  and  a  living  way,  i.  651. 

Wealth,  the  bone  of,  to  be  thrown  to  the  dogs — No  marrow 
in  it,  i.  735. 

Wedding-garment  essential  to  the  heavenly  feast,  i.  375. 

Weeds  and  barrenness,  the  effects  of  sin,  ii.  439. 

*  Wheel  broken  at  the  cistern — Standfast's  warning,  iii.  243. 
Wicked  joy  at  the  godly  man's  failings,  iii.  625. 

Wiclccd  men  speak  by  their  feet,  i.  706 — Their  awful  fears, 
i.  745 — Their  examination  and  judgment,  ii.  105,  10S. 

*  Wildhead.,  Inconsiderate,  and  Pragmatic,  iii.  233. 
Will,  the,  a  lord  and  governor  in  Mansoul,  iii.  262. 
Wine,  new,  in  old  bottles;  spiritual  meaning,  i.  £18. 
Wisdom  not  good  until  bought,  i.  704. 

Wise,  the,  of  this  world  despise  the  saints,  i.  746. 

Women,  simple  and  weak,  to  be  silent  in  the  church,  ii.  429 
— Easier  tempted  than  men — Their  sorrows  multiplied — 
Subject  to  man,  ii.  438 — *Commended,  iii.  219. 

Wood,  hay,  stubble — Man's  inventions,  carnal  ordinances,  to 
be  burnt,  ii.  98. 

Works,  good,  cannot  justify,  i.  325. 

World  to  come  better  than  this  world  in  seven  respects, 
i.  229 — Cast  behind,  and  not  upon  the  Christian's  back, 
i.  276— Dear  if  bought  with  the  soul,  iii.  703. 

Worldling  like  a  boy  after  a  butterfly,  iii.  755. 

Worldly  employment,  rightly  fulfilled,  a  means  o?  grace, 
i.  371. 

Worldly  glory,  a  love  of,  injurious,  i.  735. 

*  Worldly  Wiseman,  a  dangerous  fellow,  iii.  93 — *Reasons 

why,  iii.  95. 

World's  enmity:  it  will  seek  to  keep  thee  out  of  heaven  with 
mocks,  flouts,  taunts,  threatenings,  jails,  gibbets,  halters, 
I  irnings,  and  a  thousand  deaths,  therefore  strive,  i.  370. 

Worship,  must  be  in  Christ  to  be  accepted,  i.  617 — All  true 
rules  must  be  '  Thus  saith  the  Lord ' — Antichrist  takes 
the  place  of  God,  where  he  orders  how  we  are  to  worship, 
ii.  75 — We  worship  by  faith,  others  by  human  inventions, 
ii.  444.     See  Prayer. 


*  Young  converts,  zealous,  iii.  103,  108,  178. 

*  Youth,  if  cautioned  in  vain,  iii.  182 — It  makes  work  for 

bitter  repentance,  iii.  202. 

z. 

Zeal  for  the  law  betrays  spiritual  ignorance,  i.  315. 


1   1012  01109  0984 


DATE  DUE 

|SN  ■ 

JL'JMI 

WL®5 

GA  VLORO 

MINfEO  IN  U.S.*. 

Ml 


